— -fc-f  • —
StM
?co
'
ft
3  I  7
•3ffl3
V,  1  (o
\A
t -
R.
THE  JESUIT  RELATIONS
AND
ALLIED  DOCUMENTS
VOL.  XVI
The  edition  consists  of  sev-
en hundred and  fifty  sets
all  numbered
No,
All
IWme.  de  la  Peltrie  (Marie  Madeleine  de  Chauvigny).
The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents
Travels  and  Explorations
of  the  Jesuit  Missionaries
in  New  France
1610-1791
THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL-
IAN TEXTS,  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA-
TIONS AND  NOTES  ;  ILLUSTRATED  BY
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES
EDITED  BY
REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES
Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin
Vol.  XVI
Quebec  and  Hurons: 1639

Cleveland. Tlbe  JBurrowg  JBrotbete
Company,  publishers,  mdcccxcviii


Copyright, 1898

BY

The  Burrows  Brothers  Co


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


Th"  Imperial  Press,  Cleveland


EDITORIAL  STAFF


Editor


Translators


Assistant  Editor


Reuben  Gold  Thwaites
Finlow  Alexander
Percy  Favor  Bicknell
William  Frederic  Giese
Crawford  Lindsay
William  Price
Hiram  Allen  Sober
Emma  Helen  Blair


Bibliographical  Adviser Victor  Hugo  Paltsits


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  XVI

Preface  to  Volume  XVI  .  .  i

Document: —

XXXIV.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe  en  la
Novvelle  France,  en  l'annee  1639
[Chapters  ii.-xi.,  completing  Part
I.  of  the  document;  and  Chapters
L,  ii.  of  Part  II.,  being  Lalemant's
Huron  report].  Paul  le  Jeune;  Sil-
lery,  September  4,  1639.  Hierosme
Lalemant;  Ossossane,  June  7, 1639 7

Notes ......  255


ILLUSTRATION  TO  VOL  XVI


Portrait  of  Mme.  de  la  Peltrie  (Marie  Made-
leine de  Chauvigny) ;  photo-engraving  from
an  oil  portrait  in  the  Ursuline  Convent,
Quebec  .  .  .  Frontispiece


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVI


The  preliminary  matter  and  first  chapter  of  the
so-called  Le  Jeune's  Relation  of  1639  (Document
XXXIV.)  were  published  in  Vol.  XV.  We  herewith
give  the  rest  of  Part  I.  (Le  Jeune's  own  portion),  and
the  two  opening  chapters  of  Part  II.,  which  was
Lalemant's  report  to  his  superior,  Le  Jeune,  of  af-
fairs in  the  Huron  country.  Following  is  a  synopsis
of  the  contents  of  the  present  volume :

XXXIV.  Continuing  his  annual  narrative,  Le
Jeune  describes  in  detail  the  foundation  of  the  Ursu-
line  convent  at  Quebec  by  Madame  de  la  Peltrie,  and
the  arrival  of  these  nuns  (August  1,  1639),  with  the
Hospital  sisters  and  a  reinforcement  of  Jesuit  Fathers.
The  nuns  are  taken,  for  a  visit,  to  Sillery;  they
are  overcome  with  joy  to  see  the  Indians  offering
their  devotions  in  the  chapel,  and  still  more  when
children,  both  French  and  Indian,  come  to  the  Ursu-
lines  for  instruction ;  while  the  sick  are  brought  to
the  Hospital  sisters  for  care,  even  before  their  bag-
gage arrives  from  the  ship.  As  aid  in  this  emer-
gency, mattresses  are  loaned  them  by  the  Jesuits.
Madame  de  la  Peltrie  "  cannot  contain  herself;  she
wishes  to  be  everywhere,  wherever  the  Savages  are  in
question ;  and  she  is  already  the  godmother  of  sev-
eral. She  could  not  meet  a  little  Savage  girl  with-
out embracing  and  kissing  her. ' ' The  good  sisters  do


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVI


the  same,  "  without  heeding  whether  or  not  these
little  Savage  children  were  dirty,  and  without  asking
whether  this  were  the  custom  of  the  country."

The  superior  then  praises  in  high  terms  the  devo-
tion and  charity  of  the  Duchess  d'Aiguillon,  foun-
dress of  the  hospital,  and  quotes  one  of  her  letters
showing  her  pious  intentions  in  its  establishment, —
also  a  letter  from  Father  de  Quen,  describing  the
condition  of  the  inmates  of  the  hospital,  and  extol-
ling their  piety.

Le  Jeune  again  explains  the  necessity  of  render-
ing the  savages  stationary ;  and  recounts  the  assist-
ance given  for  this  purpose  by  many  friends  of  the
missions  —  not  only  private  persons,  but  the  Compa-
ny of  New  France.  He  reports  much  progress  in
their  mission,  with  more  conversions  than  in  preced-
ing years.  "  Over  800  Algonkins,  attracted  by  the
report  of  our  faith,  and  by  the  assistance  given  the
sedentary  savages  at  Sillery,  have  come  down  to
Three  Rivers ;  but  they  declare  that  they  come  only
to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  true  God."  The  mis-
sionaries still  have  to  contend  with  the  opposition  of
the  medicine  men,  and  the  Algonkins  "  are  much
diverted  from  the  good  thoughts  that  God  has  given
them,"  by  a  contest  with  their  enemies  and  their
defeat  therein.  Moreover,  they  are  held  in  bondage
to  Satan,  by  their  superstitions  and  by  their  unwill-
ingness to  observe  single  marriage.  The  mission-
aries console  themselves,  however,  with  the  pious
sentiments  and  behavior  of  their  actual  converts,
upon  which  the  superior  dwells  at  much  length.

Discouraging  news  comes  from  Three  Rivers,  of
hostile  feeling  among  the  Indians,  caused  by  the  re-
vival of  the  old  story  that  the  French  had  introduced


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVI


the  smallpox,  then  raging  there.  But  the  aboriginal
families  settled  at  Sillery  are  steadfast  in  their  faith
and  religious  duties.  The  missionaries  are  especial-
ly consoled  by  the  discretion  of  some  Indian  girls,
who  refuse  to  marry  men  that  are  not  baptized,  and
refer  their  suitors  to  the  Fathers  for  answer.  The
baptized  Indians  so  faithfully  observe  fast  days  and
Lent,  that  they  abstain  from  meat  in  the  midst  of
others  who  are  feasting  thereon ;  and  even  pass  two
days  without  eating  any  food,  while  hunting  during
Lent,  rather  than  eat  meat.  The  writer  describes
the  conversions,  baptisms,  pious  acts,  and  family
affairs  of  the  earliest  Indian  settlers  at  Sillery,  most
of  whom  are  now  Christians.  The  missionaries  are
deeply  grieved  at  the  misfortune  which  befalls  these
families  late  in  the  summer  of  this  year  (1639), —  an
attack  of  smallpox ;  the  disease  was  brought  by  some
Indians  who  had  been  trading  with  the  Abenakis  of
Maine.  Francois  Xavier  Nenaskoumat  and  Noel
Negabamat,  the  head  men,  are  both  stricken,  and  re-
moved to  the  hospital  at  Quebec;  while  others  of
their  followers  are  also  afflicted  with  various  diseases.
But  these  trials  appear  only  to  strengthen  the  faith
and  resignation  of  all.

Le  Jeune  relates  the  conversion,  and  the  pious  sen-
timents expressed  by  several  of  his  neophytes.  One
is  a  young  Algonkin,  "  whose  conversion  alone  more
than  sufficiently  repays  all  the  trouble  and  expense
incurred  for  the  salvation  of  the  Savages."  So  full
of  self-abnegation  is  he  that,  in  the  depth  of  winter,
he  goes  in  a  thin,  worn  robe,  refusing  to  wear  the
good  one  given  him  by  the  Fathers,  for  these  rea-
sons: "  I  fear  that  my  body,  if  I  supply  it  with  com-
forts, and  cover  it  warmly,  will  be  always  urging  me


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVI


to  procure  for  it  the  same  good  things;  and,  if  I  can-
not cover  it  by  my  own  skill,  it  will  gradually  lead
me  to  frequent  your  society  for  its  own  special  bene-
fit, rather  than  for  the  salvation  of  my  soul.  This
has  made  me  resolve  not  to  make  use  of  your  pres-
ents. Secondly,  if  I  show  myself  desirous  of  your
gifts,  I  shall  be  continually  importuned  by  a  woman
who  has  very  little  sense,  who  will  urge  me  to  get
from  you  all  that  she  will  think  your  goodness  can
grant  me.  Hence,  I  have  made  a  resolution  to  dis-
regard my  body,  that  I  may  better  reflect  upon  the
welfare  of  my  soul."  A  dearly-loved  sister  of  this
convert  dies  without  baptism ;  he  decides  that,  since
she  has  refused  the  friendship  of  God,  he  will  no
longer  love  her ;  and  presently  he  loses  all  memory
of  her.  Another  neophyte  is  a  chief  who  remains
steadfast  through  both  affliction  and  the  ridicule  of
his  countrymen.  A  third  is  the  "  sorcerer"  or  med-
icine man,  who  had  formerly  so  hindered  the  mis-
sionaries. This  last,  Pigarouich,  had  sought  to  ob-
tain baptism ;  but  he  fell  from  grace,  engaging  in
gambling  and  debauchery,  and  was  refused  by  the
missionaries  until,  at  the  end  of  two  years,  he  shows
that  ' '  the  Faith  has  taken  possession  of  his  soul ;  '
and  after  many  entreaties,  he  is  granted  the  desired
boon.

Le  Jeune  then  relates  the  progress,  during  the  past
year,  of  his  seminaries  for  Indian  boys, —  these  now
include  Montagnais  and  Algonkins,  as  well  as  Hu-
rons.  Among  those  of  the  last-named  tribe,  the  most
satisfactory  results  were  visible  in  a  man  of  fifty
years,  whom  the  Fathers  received  most  reluctantly ;
but  this  convert  was  snatched  from  them  by  death  at
the  time  when  he  gave  most  promise  of  usefulness  to


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XVI


the  mission  cause.  The  Algonkin  and  Montagnais
lads  are  exceedingly  tractable  and  industrious,  and
surprise  their  preceptor  by  their  intellectual  acumen
and  quickness.  There  has  been,  however,  much
illness  among  them;  so  the  missionaries  decide  to
retain  hereafter  only  a  few  of  the  younger  boys.

The  writer  adds  some  interesting  information  in
regard  to  the  superstitious  beliefs  current  among  the
aborigines  —  that  each  man  has  several  souls;  that
the  souls  of  the  dead  must  not  be  allowed  to  enter
the  cabins  of  others ;  that  sickness  may  be  healed  by
a  solemn  gambling  bout.  He  mentions  also  some  of
their  customs  —  those  connected  with  gambling ;  the
resuscitation  of  a  dead  man,  by  conferring  his  name
and  responsibilities  on  another;  and  customs  relat-
ing to  marriage  and  burial.  He  closes  his  part  of
the  Relation  by  mention  of  the  frightful  mortality
caused  among  the  savages  of  his  district  by  the
smallpox  epidemic. — which  has  begun  also  to  attack
the  French, —  and  the  anxieties  and  labors  thus  laid
upon  the  missionaries  and  the  Hospital  nuns,  who
labor  to  relieve  the  prevalent  wretchedness.

The  Relation  of  the  Huron  mission  in  this  year  is
sent  by  Jerome  Lalemant,  who,  in  the  first  two  chap-
ters, given  in  the  present  volume,  describes  the
physical  aspects  of  that  region,  and  the  tribes  dwell-
ing therein;  the  difficulties  attending  the  mission,
and  the  hopeful  prospect.  He  enumerates  the  priests
who  are  laboring  among  the  Hurons,  and  describes
their  daily  occupations,  their  plan  of  work,  and  their
intentions  for  the  near  future.

R.  G.  T.

Madison,  Wis.,  February,  1898.


XXXIV (continued)

Le  Jeune's  Relation,  1639

Paris:  SEBASTIEN  CRAMOISY,  1640


The  preliminary  matter  and  chap.  i.  of  Part  I.  (Le  Jeune's
own  Relation)  were  given  in  Volume  XV.  In  the  present
volume,  Part  I.  (chaps,  ii.-xi.)  is  completed;  and  Part  II.
(Lalemant's  Huron  report)  is  commenced,  the  first  two
chapters  thereof  being  here  presented.  The  six  remaining
chapters  of  Part  II.,  completing  the  document,  will  appear  in
Volume  XVII.


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JE SUITES  [Vol.  16


[17] CHAPT. II.

DES RELIGIEUSES NOUUELLEMENT ARIUEES EN LA
NOUUELLE FRANCE, & DE LEUR EMPLOY.

CJ  A  done  efte  cette  Annee  que  Madame  la  Du-
cheffe  d'Aiguillon  a  drefTe  &  fonde  vne  mai-
fon  a  Dieu en  ce  nouueau  monde,  pendant
que Dieu  luy  en  prepare  vn  autre  dans  les  Cieux. :
Et  il  s'eft  trouue  vne  Amazone  qui  a  conduit  &  efta-
bly  des  Vrfulines  en  ces  derniers  confins  du  monde.
Et  e'eft  chofe  bien  remarquable,  qu'en  mefme  temps
que  Dieu  touchoit  a  Paris  le  cceur  de  madame  la  Du-
cheffe  d'Aiguillon,  &  luy  infpiroit  de  baftir  vn  Hoftel-
Dieu  pour  nos  Sauuages  qui  mouroient  dans  les  bois
abandonnez  de  tout  fecours,  &  qu'elle  iettoit  les  yeux
pour  [18]  ce  deffein  fur  les  Religieufes  Hofpitalieres
de  Dieppe,  il  fufcitoit  en  vn  autre  endroit  de  la  France
vne  honefte  &  vertueufe  Dame,  &  l'infpiroit  d'entre-
prendre  le  Seminaire  des  petites  filles  des  Sauuages,
&  d'en  donner  le  gouuernement  aux  Vrfulines ;  &  a
tellemet  difpose  les  affaires,  que  fans  que  l'vne  fceut
rien  du  deffein  de  1' autre,  il  s'eft  trouue  accomply  en
mefme  temps,  afin  que  ces  bonnes  Religieufes  euffent
la  confolation  de  trauerfer  enfemble  1' Ocean,  &  que  les
Sauuages  receuff ent  en  mefme  temps  ce  double  f eruice
egalement  neceflaire. Ie  ferois  tort  au  defir  raisonable
de  plufieurs,  fi  ie  ne  difois  icy  vn  mot  de  la  conduite
de  cette  honeite  Dame  dans  toute  fon  entreprife,  elle
eft natiue d'Alencon,  & fe  nomme Magdelaine de


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6Sg  9


[17]  CHAPTER  II.

OF  THE  NUNS  RECENTLY  ARRIVED  IN  NEW  FRANCE,
AND  OF  THEIR  OCCUPATION.

IT  was  in  this  Year  that  Madame  the  Duchess  d' Ai-
guillon  erected  and  endowed  a  house  in  honor  of
God  in  this  new  world,  while  God  is  preparing
another  dwelling  for  her  in  Heaven.  And  there  was
found  an  Amazon,  who  has  led  the  Ursulines,  and
established  them  on  these  outer  confines  of  the
world.  It  is  indeed  a  remarkable  fact  that, —  at  the
very  moment  when  God  touched  the  heart  of  ma-
dame  the  Duchess  d'Aiguillon  in  Paris,  and  inspired
her  with  the  idea  of  building  a  Hostel- Dieu1  for  our
Savages  who  were  dying  in  the  forests,  abandoned
and  without  any  assistance,  and  while  she  was  think-
ing [18]  of  the  Hospital  Nuns  of  Dieppe2  for  carry-
ing out  her  project, — he  raised  up,  in  another  part
of  France,  a  modest  and  virtuous  Lady,  and  in-
spired her  to  undertake  the  Seminary  for  the  little
daughters  of  the  Savages,  and  to  confide  its  manage-
ment to  the  Ursulines.  And  he  so  arranged  affairs
that,  without  the  one  knowing  anything  of  the  oth-
er's design,  all  was  accomplished  at  the  same  time,
so  that  these  good  Nuns  might  have  the  consolation
of  crossing  the  Ocean  together,  and  that  the  Savages
might  benefit,  at  the  same  moment,  by  this  double
and  equally  necessary  service.  I  would  offend  the
reasonable  desires  of  many,  if  I  did  not  say  here  a
word  respecting  the  conduct  of  that  virtuous  Lady


10  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

Chauuigny,  fille  de  feu  Monfieur  de  Chauuigny,  fei-
gn eur  de  Vaubegon,  &  Prefidet  des  Eleuz  en  1' Election
d'Alencon:  Des  fon  bas  aage  elle  fit  tout  fon  pofiTble
pour  entrer  en  Religion,  &  comecoit  deflors  a  practi-
quer  les  oeuures  de  piete  &  charite  Chreflienne ;  Mais
monfieur  fon  pere  l'obligea  de  fe  marier  a  vn  hon-
nefte  Gentil-homme  nome  Monfieur  de  la  Pelterie,
qui  la  laiffa  veufue  cinq  ans  &  demy  apres  le  mariage,
&  fans  enfans,  [19]  n'ayant  eu  d'elle  qu'vne  fille,  qui
mourut  incontinet  apres  le  Baptefme:  Si  toft  qu'elle
fe  veit  veufue,  elle  commenga  par  la  ledture  des  Re-
lations que  nous  enuoyons  tous  les  ans  a  penfer  a  bon
efcient  aux  moyens  de  contribuer  a  l'inftrudtion  des
petites  filles  Sauuages,  &  fit  faire  a  cette  intention
quantite  de  prieres:  car  ayant  refolu  de  fe  facrifier
entierement  elle  mefme,  &  tout  ce  qu'elle  pouuoit
legitimement  de  fon  bien  a  la  diuine  Maiefte,  elle
defiroit  fcauoir  de  Dieu  s'il  auroit  agreable  que  ce  fut
a  la  Nouuelle  France ;  comme  elle  eftoit  en  ce  doute,
la  prouidence  de  Dieu  fe  feruit  d'vne  forte  maladie
qui  la  mit  fi  bas  en  peu  de  temps,  que  les  Medecins
defefperans  de  fa  fante,  l'abandonnerent:  comme  elle
fe  veit  en  cet  eftat,  elle  fe  fentit  fortement  infpiree
de  faire  vceu,  de  confacrer  fes  moyens  &  fa  perfonne
a  la  Nouuelle  France  fans  en  rien  communiquer  a  per-
fonne. Vn  peu  apres  le  Medecin  arriuant,  la  trouua
en  bien  meilleur  eftat,  &  fans  fcauoir  ce  qu'elle  ve-
noit  de  faire,  ny  chofe  aucune  de  fon  deffein,  luy  dit;
Madame,  voftre  maladie  eft  allee  en  Canada,  il  par-
loit  mieux  qu'il  ne  croyoit,  &  fit  rire  le  malade,  qui
fut  extrememet  aife  de  voir  [20]  par  cet  effedt  fi
extraordinaire  que  Dieu  acceptoit  fon  facrifice :  Eftant
done  reuenue  en  pleine  fante\  elle  ne  fit  plus  que  pen-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  11

throughout  her  undertaking.  She  is  a  native  of
Alengon;  her  name  is  Magdelaine  de  Chauvigny;
she  is  the  daughter  of  the  late  Monsieur  de  Chauvi-
gny, seigneur  of  Vaubegon,  and  President  of  the
Elected  in  the  Election  of  Alengon.3  From  her
infancy,  she  did  all  in  her  power  to  enter  the  Reli-
gious life,  and  commenced  even  then  the  practice  of
works  of  piety  and  Christian  charity.  But  her  father
obliged  her  to  marry  an  honorable  Gentleman,  named
Monsieur  de  la  Pelterie,  who,  five  and  a  half  years
after  their  marriage,  left  her  a  childless  widow,  [19]
having  had  by  her  only  one  daughter,  who  died  im-
mediately after  Baptism.  As  soon  as  she  became  a
widow,  she  began,  through  the  perusal  of  the  Rela-
tions that  we  send  over  every  year,  earnestly  to
consider  means  of  contributing  to  the  education  of
the  little  Savage  girls.  With  that  intention,  she
caused  many  prayers  to  be  said;  for, —  having  re-
solved to  sacrifice  herself  entirely,  with  all  of  her
fortune  that  she  could  legally  surrender,  to  the  divine
Majesty, —  she  desired  to  learn  from  God  whether  it
would  be  agreeable  to  him  that  she  should  do  so  in
New  France.  While  she  was  in  doubt,  God's  provi-
dence employed  a  violent  illness  which,  in  a  short
time,  brought  her  so  low  that  the  Physicians  de-
spaired of  her  recovery,  and  gave  her  up.  Seeing
herself  in  this  condition,  she  felt  strongly  inspired
to  vow  that  she  would  devote  her  wealth  and  her
person  to  New  France,  without  communicating  aught
of  this  to  any  one.  Shortly  after,  the  Physician
came,  and  found  her  condition  greatly  improved;
and  —  without  knowing  what  she  had  done,  or  hav-
ing any  inkling  of  her  design  —  he  said  to  her:  "  Ma-
dame, your  disease  has  gone  to  Canada." He  spoke


12  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.16

fer  a  l'execution  de  fon  deffein.  Mais  Mr  fon  Pere,
qui  viuoit  encore,  la  preffoit  cependant  de  fe  rema-
rier,  iufques-la  qu'il  la  menaca  a  bon  efcient  de  la
desheriter  fi  elle  ne  luy  obeyffoit:  comme  elle  veit
que  fon  Pere  parloit  a  bon  efcient,  &  qu'a  faute
d'vfer  de  quelque  codefcendance  elle  fe  mettoit  en
danger  de  miner  tout  fon  pieux  deffein ;  elle  prit  refo-
lution  de  feindre  qu'elle  vouloit  fe  remarier,  &  par  ce
moyen  fe  remit  en  la  bonne  grace  de  fon  Pere,  qui
fur  ces  entrefaidtes  paffa  de  cette  vie  a  1 'autre.  Lors
fans  differer,  ayant  partage  fon  bien  auec  fa  foeur,
elle  vint  a  Paris  en  Ianuier,  &  la  ayant  confere  de
fon  entreprife  auec  plufieurs  faints  &  dodtes  perfon-
nages  qui  l'approuuerent,  s'en  alia  a.  Tours,  oil  il  y
auoit  vne  Vrfuline  de  fa  cognoiffance  fort  vertueufe
&  tres-zelee,  qui  depuis  long-temps  foupiroit  apres  la
Nouuelle  France.  II  n'eft  pas  croyable  comme  elle
fut  bien  receue  de  Monfeigneur  rilluftriffime  &
Reuerendiffime  Archeuefque  de  Tours  qu'elle  alia  fa-
liier,  &  luy  declara  naifuement  tout  fon  [21]  deffein.
Ce  venerable  Prelat  tres-affedtionne  au  falut  des
Ames,  admirant  le  courage  &  la  vertu  de  cette  Dame,
&  luy  ayant  fait  paroiftre  les  grandes  affections  qu'il
auoit  pour  les  miffions  de  la  Nouuelle  France,  luy
promit  tout  le  fecours  &  raffiftance  qui  dependoit  de
luy  ?  Les  Vrfulines  d'autre  part  la  receurent  a  bras
ouuerts,  &  paffant  par  deffus  mille  difficultez,  luy
accorderent  la  Religieufe  qu'elle  demandoit,  &  pour
compagne  luy  donerent  vne  autre  Religieufe  pleine
de  courage  &  de  vertu,  fille  de  Monfieur  de  Sauoniere,
Seigneur  de  la  Troche  &  de  Sainct  Germain  en  An-
jou,  qui  ayant  de  premier  abord  refifte  a  ce  choix
qu'on  auoit  fait  de  fa  fille  pour  ce  deffein,  y  dona  par


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  13

better  than  he  knew,  and  made  his  patient  laugh,
who  was  very  happy  to  see  [20]  by  this  so  extraor-
dinary effect,  that  God  accepted  her  sacrifice.  When
her  health  was  fully  restored,  she  thought  of  nothing
but  the  execution  of  her  plan.  But  Monsieur  her
Father,  who  was  still  living,  urged  her  to  marry
again,  and  went  so  far  as  to  threaten,  in  good  earnest,
to  disinherit  her  if  she  would  not  obey  him.  As  she
saw  that  her  Father  spoke  in  earnest,  and  that,  if  she
did  not  show  some  compliance,  she  ran  the  risk  of
completely  ruining  her  pious  plan,  she  resolved  to
feign  that  she  was  willing  to  remarry ;  and,  by  this
means,  she  regained  the  good  graces  of  her  Father,
who  in  the  meantime  passed  from  this  life  to  the
other.  Then,  without  delay,  having  divided  her
property  with  her  sister,  she  went,  in  January,  to
Paris.  Having  there  conferred  about  her  enterprise
with  several  holy  and  learned  persons,  who  approved
it,  she  went  to  Tours,  where  there  was  an  Ursuline
of  her  acquaintance,  very  virtuous  and  very  zealous,
who  had  long  desired  to  go  to  New  France.4  It  is
difficult  to  imagine  the  welcome  she  received  from
Monseigneur  the  Most  Illustrious  and  Most  Reverend
Archbishop  of  Tours,  to  whom  she  paid  her  respects,
and  artlessly  revealed  all  her  [21]  plans.  That  ven-
erable Prelate,  who  took  a  great  interest  in  the  salva-
tion of  Souls, —  admiring  this  Lady's  courage  and
virtue,  and  having  made  known  to  her  his  great
affection  for  the  missions  of  New  France, —  promised
her  all  the  help  and  assistance  in  his  power  to  give.
On  their  part,  the  Ursulines  received  her  with  open
arms,  and,  overcoming  a  thousand  difficulties,  they
granted  her  the  Nun  whom  she  asked  for,  and  gave
her  for  companion  another  Nun,  full  of  courage  and


14  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.16

apres  fon  confentement  auec  Madame  fa  femme,  par
des  lettres  fi  pleines  de  pitie  \sc.  piete] &  de  vertu
Chreftiene,  qu'elles  meriteroient  d'eftre  comuniquees
au  public. Madame  de  la  Pelterie  ayant  obtenu  fi
heureufement  a  Tours  ce  qu'elle  defiroit,  s'en  alia
prendre  conge  de  Monfeigneur  l'Archeuefque,  &  par
fon  commandemet,  luy  amena  les  deux Religieufes
choifies  pour  ce  deffein. Ce  fut  la  qu'il  receut  vne
fmguliere  cofolation,  contemplant  ces  trois  charitables
Ames  comme  [22]  trois  victimes  qui  s'alloient  immo-
ler  a  tant  de  croix  iufques  au  bout  du  monde ; Et
comme  a  raifon  de  fon  infirmite  il  ne  pouuoit  celebrer
la  Saindte  MefTe,  il  voulut  comunier  auec  elles  a  la
Meffe  qu'il  fit  dire  en  fa  Chappelle  particuliere,  &
puis  il  leur  donna  fa  faindte  benediction,  a  laquelle  il
adioufta  vne  courte,  mais  tres  feruente  exhortation,
entremeflee  de  larmes,  pour  leur  recommander  les
vertus  &  la  ferueur  neceffaire  a  cette  entreprife :  la
Nouuelle  France  luy  aura  a  iamais  de  tres-particu-
lieres  obligations. Madame  de  la  Pelterie  bien  con-
tente  s'en  reuient  a  Paris,  emmenant  auec  elles  les
deux  Vrfulines,  ou  eftat  arriuee,  elle  s'efforce  d'ob-
tenir  vne  troifieme  Vrfuline  de  la  Congregation  de
Paris,  qui  differe  vn  peu  de  celle  de  Tours,  afin  de
doner  moyen  aux  vnes  &  aux  autres  de  trauailler  au
falut  des  Sauuages,  &  peut  eftre  commencer  l'vnion
des  deux  Congregations  tant  fouhaittee,  mais elles
ne  peurent  obtenir  ce  qu'elles  defiroient,  nous  n'en
auons  pas  encore  pu  fcauoir  la  caufe,  feulement  fcay-
ie  bien  qui  ne  tint  point  aux  Vrfulines  de  Paris,  qui
depuis  douze  ans  font  dans  vne  ferueur  incroyable
pour  la  Nouuelle France,  &  qui  au  lieu  d'vne  Reli-
gieufe,  [23]  en  euffent  fourny  plufieurs  autres,  &  font


1639]  LE  /EUNE'S  RELATION,  ib39  15


virtue,  the  daughter  of  Monsieur  de  Savoniere,  Sei-
gneur of  la  Troche  and  of  Saint  Germain  in  Anjou.
At  first,  he  opposed  the  selection  of  his  daughter  for
that  object;  but  afterward,  with  Madame  his  wife,
gave  his  consent  by  letters  so  replete  with  piety  and
Christian  virtue  that  they  deserve  to  be  made  public.
Madame  de  la  Pelterie  having  so  fortunately  procured
at  Tours  what  she  desired,  went  to  take  leave  of
Monseigneur  the  Archbishop;  and,  by  his  command,
introduced  to  him  the  two  Nuns  chosen  for  the  en-
terprise. He  thus  received  a  singular  consolation,
in  contemplating  these  three  charitable  Souls  as  [22]
three  victims  who  were  about  to  sacrifice  themselves
to  as  many  crosses,  even  at  the  end  of  the  world.
And  as,  owing  to  his  infirmities,  he  was  unable  to
celebrate  Holy  Mass,  he  wished  to  receive  commun-
ion with  them  at  the  Mass  which  he  caused  to  be
said  in  his  private  Chapel.  Then  he  gave  them  his
holy  blessing,  to  which  he  added  a  short  but  very
fervent  exhortation,  interspersed  with  tears,  com-
mending to  them  the  virtues  and  the  fervor  neces-
sary for  this  undertaking.  New  France  will  ever  be
under  very  special  obligations  to  him.  Madame  de
la  Pelterie,  well  pleased,  returned  to  Paris,  taking
with  her  the  two  Ursulines.  Upon  her  arrival  there,
she  tried  to  obtain  a  third  Ursuline  from  the  Congre-
gation of  Paris,  which  differs  a  little  from  that  of
Tours,  in  order  to  give  both  an  opportunity  of  work-
ing for  the  salvation  of  the  Savages,  and,  perhaps,  to
initiate  the  much-desired  union  of  the  two  Congrega-
tions; but  they  were  unable  to  obtain  what  they  de-
sired. We  have  not  yet  been  able  to  learn  the  rea-
son therefor ;  I  only  know  with  certainty  that  it  did
not  depend  upon  the  Ursulines  of  Paris,  who,  for  the


16  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.16

encore  toutes  preftes  de  les  doner,  auffi  furent  elles
bien  mortifices  fe  voyant  priu6es  de  cefte  occafion
qu'elles  auoiet  fi  long  temps  attendu.  La  bonne
Fondatrice  ne  perd  pas  pourtant  courage,  mais  con-
tinuant dans  le  deffein  qu'elle  auoit  de  mener  vne
Vrfuline  de  la  Congregation  de  Paris,  elle  s'addreffe
a  Monfeigneur  rilluflriffime  &  Reuerendiffime  Arche-
uefque  de  Rouen,  le  follicitant  par  l'entremife,  de
quelque  perfonne  de  vertu  &  de  piete  de  luy  donner
vne  troifiefme  Vrfuline  du  Conuent  de  Dieppe  vny  a
celuy  de  Paris :  ce  qu'il  accorda  auec  mefme  zele  qu'il
auoit  donne  a  Madame  la  Ducheffe  d'Aiguillon  les
trois  Religieufes  Hofpitalieres.  C'eft  vne  double
obligation  que  la  Nouuelle  France  luy  aura  a  iamais.
Ainfi  la  Mere  Cecile  de  la  Croix,  Vrfuline,  fut  choifie
dans  le  Conuent  de  Dieppe  pour  fe  ioindre  aux  deux
autres  qui  en  furent  fort  confolees,  comme  eftant
bien  portees  a  l'vnion  des  deux  Congregations.  Et
pour  monftrer  que  Madame  de  la  Pelterie  n'auoit  pas
plus  d'affedtion  pour  les  vnes  que  pour  les  autres,
elle  n'a  iamais  voulu  contradter  auec  aucune  maifon
d'Vrfuline  de  [24]  France,  mais  feulement  auec  les
Vrfulines  qui  ont  leur  Obedience  pour  la  Nouuelle
France,  &  a  attache  fa  donation  a  l'vnique  maifon  des
Vrfulines  erigee  en  la  Nouuelle  France.  I'aurois
icy  a  dire  beaucoup  de  chofes  de  la  vertu  fignalee,  &
du  zele  incoparable  de  la  perfonne  de  laquelle  s'eft
feruie  cefte  bonne  Dame  pour  la  conduitte  de  toute
fon  entreprife  qui  rauiroit  les  cceurs  de  ceux  qui  le
liroient,  mais  fa  modeftie  ne  me  permet  pas  feule-
ment de  le  faire  cognoiftre,  il  fe  contente  que  Dieu
fe  foit  voulu  feruir  de  luy  pour  affifter  en  fon  deffein
cefte  Dame  incomparable,  qui  feruira  de  modelle  a


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  17

past  twelve  years,  have  displayed  an  incredible  zeal
for  New  France,  and  who,  instead  of  only  one  Nun,
[23]  would  have  supplied  several  others,  and  are  still
in  readiness  to  give  them.  They  were  greatly  mor-
tified, therefore,  when  they  saw  themselves  deprived
of  this  opportunity,  to  which  they  had  so  long  looked
forward.  The  good  Foundress,  however,  did  not
lose  courage;  but,  persisting  in  her  design  to  bring
an  Ursuline  of  the  Congregation  of  Paris,  she  applied
to  Monseigneur  the  Most  Illustrious  and  Most  Rev-
erend Archbishop  of  Rouen,  begging  him  —  through
the  intermediary  of  some  virtuous  and  pious  person  —
to  give  her  a  third  Ursuline  from  the  Convent  of
Dieppe,  which  is  connected  with  that  of  Paris.  This
he  granted  with  the  same  ardor  as  when  he  gave  the
three  Hospital  Nuns  to  Madame  the  Duchess  d'Ai-
guillon.5  This  is  a  double  obligation,  for  which  New
France  will  ever  be  indebted  to  him.  Mother  Cecile
of  the  Cross,  an  Ursuline,  was  therefore  chosen  in
the  Dieppe  Convent  to  join  the  two  others,  who  were
greatly  consoled  thereat,  being  well  disposed  to  the
union  of  the  two  Congregations.  And  to  show  that
Madame  de  la  Pelterie  had  not  more  affection  for  one
than  for  the  other,  she  never  would  contract  with
any  Ursuline  establishment  of  [24]  France,  but  only
with  the  Ursulines,  whose  Obedience  is  for  New
France ;  and  she  has  attached  her  donation  exclusive-
ly to  the  Ursuline  establishment  in  New  France.  I
could  have  much  to  say  here  respecting  the  signal
virtue  and  incomparable  zeal  of  the  person  of  whose
services  this  good  Lady  has  availed  herself  for  the
management  of  the  whole  undertaking, —  which
would  greatly  rejoice  the  hearts  of  whoever  might
read  it. But  his  modestv  does  not  even  allow  me  to


18  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J ^SUITES [Vol.16

tous  ceux  qui  auront  le  courage  de  l'imiter  &  enfuiure.
Reuenons  a  noftre  Hiftoire.

Quand  on  nous  vint  donner  auis  qu'vne  barque  alloit
furgir  a  Kebec,  portant  vn  College  de  Iefuites,  vne
maifon  d'Hofpitalieres,  &  vn  Conuent  dVrfulines;  la
premiere  nouuelle  nous  sebla  quali  vn  fonge,  mais  en
fin  defcendans  vers  le  grad  fleuue,  nous  trouuafmes
que  c'eftoit  vne  verite.  Cette  faindte  trouppe  fortant
du  vaiffeau,  fe  iette  a  deux  genoux,  beny  le  Dieu  du
Ciel,  baifans  la  terre  de  leur  chere  patrie,  c'eft  ainfi
qu'ils  appelloient  ces  contrees,  [25]  tout  le  monde
regardoit  ce  fpedtacle  dans  vn  filence :  On  voyoit  for-
tir  d'vne  prifon  flotante  ces  vierges  confacrees  a  Dieu,
auffi  fraifches  &  auffi  vermeilles,  que  quad  elles  par-
tirent  de  leurs  maif ons :  Tout  1' Ocean  auec  fes  flots
&  fes  tempeftes  n'ayant  pas  altere  vn  feul  petit  brin
de  leur  fante.  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  les  receut
auec  tout  l'accueil  poffible,  nous  le  conduififmes  a  la
Chappelle,  on  chanta  le  Te  Deum  laudamus,  le  Canon
retentit  de  tous  cofkez,  on  beny  le  Ciel  &  la  terre,  &
puis  on  les  conduit  aux  maifons  deftinees  pour  elles,
en  attendant  qu' elles  en  ayent  de  plus  propres  pour
leurs  fondtions.  Le  lendemain  on  les  mene  en  la
Refidence  de  Sillery,  ou  fe  retirent  les  Sauuages.
Quand  elles  veirent  ces  pauures  gens  affemblez  a  la
Chapelle  faire  leurs  prieres,  &  chanter  les  articles  de
noftre  creance,  les  larmes  leur  couloient  des  yeux ;
elles  auoient  beau  f e  cacher,  leur  ioye  f e  trouuant  trop
refferr6e  dans  leur  cceur,  fe  refpandoit  par  leurs  yeux.
Au  fortir  de  la,  ils  vifitet  les  families  arreftees,  &
les  Cabanes  voifines.  Madame  de  la  Pelterie  qui  con-
duifoit  la  bande,  ne  rencotroit  petite  fille  Sauuage
qu'elle  n'ebraffaft  &  ne  baifafl,  auec  des  fignes  d'a-


1--39]  LE  JEUXE'S  RELATION.  163-0  IS

mention  him;5  he  is  satisfied  that  God  should  con-
sent to  employ  him  to  farther  the  plans  of  this
incomparable  Lady,  who  will  serve  as  a  pattern  to  all

who  may  have  the  courage  to  imitate  and  follow  her.
Let  us  return  to  cur  History.

V. "her.  we  were  informed  that  a  bark  was  about  to
arrive  a:  Kebec.  bearing  a  College  of  Jesuits,  an  es-
tablishment of  Hospital  Nuns,  and  a  Convert  of  Ursu-
lines.  the  revs  seemed  at  first  almost  a  dream:  but
at  last,  descending:  towards  the  great  river,  we  found
that  it  was  a  reality.  As  this  holy  barf,  left  the
ship,  they  fell  on  their  knees,  thanked  the  God  of
Heaven  and  kissed  the  soil  :b  their  beloved  country-  —
for  thus  they  called  these  regions.  z\  All  gazed  in
silence  on  this  spectacle.  From  a  floating  prison
were  seen  issuing  these  virgins  consecrated  to  God.
as  fresh  ana  as  rosy  as  when  they  had  departed  from
their  homes.  All  Ocean,  with  its  waves  and  tem-
pests, had  not  imured  their  health  in  the  slightest
degree.  Monsieur  the  Governor  received  them  with
all  possible  honor.  We  led  them  to  the  Chanel :  the
TV  D-um  l.T.i.i '.2 yy.is  was  chanted :  the  Cannon  thun-
dered :n  all  sides.  Heaven  and  earth  were  praised.
an  1  then  we  conducted  them  1:  the  houses  set  anart
for  them  until  snch  time  as  they  should  have  others
more  suitable  for  their  duties.  On  the  following
day.  they  were  taken  to  the  Residence  of  Sillerv.
where  the  Savages  dwell."  When  thev  saw  these
poor  people  assembled  in  the  Chapel,  offering  their
prayers,  and  singing  the  articles  of  our  creed,  the
tears  fell  from  their  eyes.  In  vain  they  tried  to  hide
it. —  their  ;'oy.  too  restrained  within  their  hearts.
showed  itself  in  their  features.  On  going  thence,
thev  visited  the  settled  families  ana  the  neighboring-


20  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16

mour  [26]  fi  doux  &  fi  forts,  que  ces  patmres  barbares
en  reftoient  d'autant  plus  eftonnez  &  plus  edifiez,
qu'ils  font  froids  en  leurs  rencontres;  toutes  ces  bon-
nes filles  faifoient  le  mefme  fans  prendre  garde  fi  ces
petits  enfans  fauuages  eftoient  fales  ou  non,  ny  fans
demander  fi  c'eftoit  la  coutume  du  pays,  la  loy  d'a-
mour  &  de  charite  l'emportoit  par  deffus  toutes  les
confederations  humaines.  On  fait  mettre  la  main  a
l'oeuure  aux  Peres  nouuellement  arriuez ;  on  leur  fait
baptifer  quelques  Sauuages,  Madame  de  la  Pelterie
eft  defia  maraine  de  plufieurs,  elle  ne  fe  pouuoit
cotenir,  elle  fe  vouloit  trouuer  par  tout,  quand  il  s'a-
giffoit  des  Sauuages.  II  luy  arriua  bien-toft  apres
qu'elle  eut  mis  pied  a  terre,  que  fe  voulant  commu-
nier,  elle  ne  veit  a  la  faindte  Table  que  mofieur  le
Gouuerneur,  &  des  Sauuages,  qui  faifoiet  leurs  deuo-
tions  ce  iour-la:  Elle  fe  iette  parmy  eux,  non  fans
larmes  de  confolation,  voyat  la  fimplicite  &  la  deuo-
tion  de  ces  bos  Neophites.  En  effect,  c'eft  vn  doux
plaifir  de  voir  ces  bones  gens  s'approcher  de  Iefus-
Chrift  parmy  nos  Francois.  II  faut  confeffer  que
Dieu  fe  fait  fentir  en  ces  rencontres,  fa  bonte  veut
que  ceux  qui  cooperent  au  falut  des  Sauuages  goutent
quelque  petit  [27]  brin  des  faueurs  qu'il  fait  a  ces
ieunes  plantes  de  fon  Eglife.  Ces  vifites  bien-toft
paffees,  on  dreffe  des  Autels  dans  les  Chappelles  de
leurs  maifons,  on  y  va  dire  la  faindte  Meffe,  &  ces
bones  filles  fe  renfermet  dans  leur  clofture.  Dans
l'Hofpital,  les  trois  Hofpitalieres  enuoy£es  par  Mon-
feigneur  le  Reuerendiffime  Archeuefque  de  Rouen,
tres-zele'  au  falut  des  ames,  &  tres-defireux  de  tefmoi-
gner  a  Madame  d'Aiguillon  les  inclinations  qu'il  a
de  contribuer  de  tout  fon  pouuoir  aux  bonnes  oeuures


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  21

Cabins.  Madame  de  la  Pelterie,  who  led  the  party,
could  not  meet  a  little  Savage  girl  without  embracing
and  kissing  her,  with  marks  of  affection  [26]  so  sweet
and  emphatic  that  these  poor  barbarians  stood  aston-
ished and  edified, — all  the  more  that  they  them-
selves are  cold  in  their  greetings.  All  these  good
women  did  the  same, — without  heeding  whether  or
not  these  little  savage  children  were  dirty,  and
without  asking  whether  this  were  the  custom  of  the
country, —  the  law  of  love  and  charity  overcoming  all
human  considerations.  The  newly  arrived  Fathers
were  set  to  work ;  they  were  called  upon  to  baptize
some  Savages.  Madame  de  la  Pelterie  is  already  the
godmother  of  several.  She  could  not  contain  her-
self; she  wished  to  be  everywhere,  whenever  the
Savages  were  in  question.  It  happened,  soon  after
she  had  landed,  that,  on  going  to  receive  commun-
ion, she  observed  at  the  holy  Table  only  monsieur
the  Governor,  and  some  Savages  who  were  perform-
ing their  devotions  that  day.  She  hastened  into
their  midst,  not  without  tears  of  consolation  on  see-
ing the  simplicity  and  devotion  of  these  good  Neo-
phytes. In  fact,  it  is  a  sweet  pleasure  to  see  these
good  people  approach  Jesus  Christ  amidst  our  French.
It  must  be  confessed  that  God  makes  his  influence
felt  in  these  meetings;  his  goodness  desires  that
those  who  labor  together  for  the  salvation  of  the  Sav-
ages should  enjoy  some  little  [27]  share  of  the  favors
that  he  confers  on  these  young  plants  of  his  Church.
These  visits  being  soon  over,  Altars  were  erected  in
the  Chapels  of  their  houses,  holy  Mass  was  said
there,  and  these  good  women  retired  into  their  seclu-
sion. Into  the  Hospital  went  the  three  Hospital  Nuns
sent  by  Monseigneur  the  Most  Reverend  Archbishop


22  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16

qu'elle  fait,  ne  pouuant  mieux  l'obliger  qu'en  obli-
geat  les  patiures  Sa[u]uages  leur  donant  pour  fecours
vn  des  plus  pretieux  threfors  de  fon  Diocefe ;  Car  ces
bones  filles,  outre  qu'elles  font  tres-exadtes  en  la  dif-
cipline  &  obferuance  reguliere,  font  fans  doute  excel  -
lentes  au  foin  &  traitemet  des  malades,  tant  pour  le
temporel,  que  pour  le  fpirituel.  Les  trois  Vrfulines
fe  retirerent  dans  vne  maifon  particuliere,  apres
s'eftre  mutuellement  embraff£es  les  vnes  &  les  autres*
Bien-toft  apres  nous  fifmes  doner  fix  filles  fauuages
a  Madame  de  la  Pelterie,  ou  aux  Vrfulines;  &  quel-
ques  filles  Fracoifes  commencerent  de  les  aller  voir
pour  eftre  inftruittes:  Si  bien  que  les  [28]  voila  defia
dans  l'exercice  de  leur  inftitut,  mais  fi  iamais  elles
ont  vne  maifon  bie  capable,  &  bien  dequoy  nour-
rir  les  enfans  fauuages,  elles  en  auront  peut-eftre
iufques  a  fe  laffer;  Dieu  veuille  que  les  grands  frais
ne  retardent  leur  deffein,  les  defpences  qu'on  fait  icy-
font  fort  grandes,  mais  Dieu  l'eft  encore  plus.

Pour  l'Hofpital,  les  Religieufes  n'eftoient  pas  en-
core logees,  leur  bagage  n'eftoit  pas  encore  arriuee,
qu'on  leur  amena  des  malades,  il  fallut  prefter  nos
paillaffes  &  nos  mattelats  pour  exercer  cette  premiere
charite.  O  que  i'ay  fouuent  fouhaitte  que  Madame
la  Ducheffe  d'Aiguillon  veift  feulement  pour  trois
iours  ce  qu'elle  a  commence"  d'operer  en  ces  contrees;
les  filles  qu'elle  nous  a  enuoye  ne  fe  pouuoient  con-
tenir  d'aife,  elles  auoient  des  malades,  &  n'auoient
pas  dequoy  leur  donner,  mais  la  charit6  de  Monfieur
noftre  Gouuerneur  eft  rauiflante.  Si  fallut-il  refufer
de  pauures  Sauuages  affligez,  on  ne  petit  pas  tout  du
premier  coup,  nous  efperos  que  Madame  la  Ducheffe
faifant  croiftre  le  fecours,  fera  croiftre  la  mifericorde


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  23

of  Rouen,  who  —  full  of  zeal  for  the  salvation  of  souls
and  very  anxious  to  show  Madame  d'Aiguillon  how
willing  he  was  to  contribute,  to  the  best  of  his  abili-
ty, to  the  good  works  she  had  undertaken  —  could
not  better  oblige  her  than  in  obliging  the  poor  Sav-
ages, by  giving  for  their  aid  one  of  the  most  precious
treasures  of  his  Diocese.  For  these  good  women,
besides  being  very  strict  in  discipline  and  in  regular
observance,  are,  beyond  a  doubt,  excellent  in  the
care  and  treatment  of  the  sick,  both  in  temporal  and
in  spiritual  matters.  The  three  Ursulines  withdrew
to  a  private  house,8  after  having  mutually  embraced
the  other  nuns.  Soon  afterwards,  we  had  six  savage
girls  given  to  Madame  de  la  Pelterie  or  to  the  Ursu-
lines; and  some  French  girls  began  going  to  them
for  instruction;  so  that  they  [28]  already  perform  the
duties  of  their  order.  But  if  ever  they  have  a  house
with  sufficient  accommodation,  and  the  means  to  feed
the  savage  children,  they  will  perhaps  have  so  many
of  these  as  to  weary  them.  God  grant  that  the  heavy
expenses  may  not  thwart  their  designs;  the  outlay
to  be  made  here  is  very  great,  but  God  is  still  greater.
As  for  the  Hospital,  the  Nuns  were  not  yet  lodged,
and  their  baggage  had  not  yet  arrived,  when  sick
people  were  brought  to  them.  We  had  to  lend  our
straw  beds  and  mattresses  that  they  might  perform
this  first  act  of  charity.  Oh,  how  often  I  have  wished
that  Madame  the  Duchess  d'Aiguillon  might  see,
even  for  three  days,  what  she  has  commenced  to
effect  in  these  countries !  The  nuns  whom  she  has
sent  us  could  not  contain  themselves  for  gladness.
They  had  sick  persons  to  nurse  and  had  nothing  to
give  them ;  but  the  charity  of  Monsieur  our  Governor
is  delightful. Even  if  it  is  necessary  to  refuse  some


24  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

enuers  les  patmres  malades  de  fa  maifon,  difons  plu-
tofl  de  la  maifon  de  Dieu.  Si  les  Sauuages  font
[29]  capables  d'eftonnement,  c'eft  icy  qu'ils  le  pren-
nent ;  car  parmy  eux  on  ne  tient  conte  des  malades,
notamment  fi  on  les  iuge  malades  a  la  mort,  on  les
regarde  defia  comme  des  gens  de  l'autre  monde,  auec
qui  on  n'a,  ny  commerce,  ny  paroles.  Or  comme  ils
voyent  les  careffes  &  les  foins  qu'on  a  de  leurs  Com-
patriotes,  cela  leur  fait  conceuoir  vne  grande  eftime
de  celuy  pour  lequel  on  leur  prefle  ces  grands  fecours,
qui  eft  Iesvs-Christ  noftre  Sauueur.

Mais  voyons,  s'il  vous  plaift,  les  deffeins  qu'a  eu
Madame  d'Aiguillon  en  la  fondation  de  cette  maifon.
Yoicy  comme  elle  en  parle  dans  la  lettre  qu'elle  ref-
criuit  a  la  Mere  Superieure  des  Hofpitalieres  qui  sot
icy  paffees :  Ma  bonne  Mere,  ie  loue  Dieu  de  la  refolu-
tion  que  vous  auez  prife  de  paffer  en  la  Nouuelle
France,  dont  ie  vous  fuis  extrememet  obligee,  &  aux
deux  bonnes  fceurs  qui  vous  y  accompagnent.  I'ay
auffi  beaucoup  de  ioye  de  ce  que  Noftre  Seigneur
vous  a  choifie  pour  cela,  ayant  vne  tres-particuliere
eftime  de  voftre  merite,  i'efpere  que  cela  reparera
tous  les  maquements  qu'il  y  a  de  ma  part,  &  que  Dieu
par  fa  bonte  aura  plus  d'egard  a  vos  vertus,  [30]  qu'a
mes  defauts.  Ie  vous  veux  dire  le  deffein  que  i'ay  eu
faifant  cette  fondation,  c'eft  de  dedier  cet  Hofpital
au  Sang  du  Fils  de  Dieu,  refpandu  pour  faire  miferi-
corde  a  tous  les  hommes,  &  pour  luy  demander  qu'il
l'applique  fur  nos  Ames,  &  fur  celles  de  ce  pauure
peuple  barbare.  Ie  vous  fais  part  de  mes  intentiSs,
afin  que  vous  les  offriez  a  noftre  Seigneur,  &  qu'al-
lant  faire  la  fondation,  vous  luy  dediez  felon  cela,  &


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  25

poor  afflicted  Savages,  one  cannot  do  everything  at
the  first  stroke.  We  hope  that  Madame  the  Duchess,
by  increasing  the  aid,  will  cause  increased  pity  to-
ward the  sick  people  of  her  house, — let  us  rather  say,
of  the  house  of  God.  If  the  Savages  are  [29]  capable
of  astonishment,  they  will  experience  it  here;  for
among  them  no  heed  is  paid  to  the  sick,  especially  if
they  are  considered  sick  unto  death ;  they  are  looked
upon  as  beings  of  another  world,  with  whom  is  held
no  intercourse,  no  conversation.  Now,  when  they
witness  the  tender  care  and  attention  that  is  given  to
their  Countrymen,  it  causes  them  to  entertain  a  high
esteem  for  the  person  for  whose  sake  this  great  help
is  given  them,  who  is  Jesus  Christ,  our  Savior.
But,  if  it  please  you,  let  us  consider  what  designs
Madame  d'Aiguillon  had  in  founding  this  institu-
tion. Observe  how  she  speaks  of  it  in  the  letter  that
she  wrote  to  the  Mother  Superior  of  the  Hospital  Sis-
ters who  have  come  hither:  "  My  good  Mother,  I
give  praise  to  God  for  the  resolution  you  have  taken  to
go  over  to  New  France,  for  which  I  am  deeply  obliged
to  you  and  to  the  two  good  sisters  who  accompany
you.  I  also  greatly  rejoice  that  Our  Lord  has  chosen
you  for  this,  as  I  have  a  very  special  esteem  for  your
merit.  I  hope  that  this  will  compensate  for  all  fail-
ings on  my  part  and  that  God,  in  his  kindness,  will
be  more  regardful  of  your  virtues  [30]  than  of  my
imperfections.  I  wish  to  tell  you  of  the  object  that  I
have  had  in  founding  this  institution.  It  is  to  dedi-
cate this  Hospital  to  the  Blood  of  the  Son  of  God,
that  was  shed  in  order  that  mercy  might  be  granted
to  all  men  —  and  to  ask  him  to  apply  it  to  our  Souls,
and  to  those  of  these  poor  barbarous  people.  I  in-
form you  of  my  intentions  so  that  you  may  offer  them


26  LES  RELATIONS  DES JESUITES [Vol.16

que  vous  faciez  mettre  fur  la  porte :  Hofpital  dedie  au
Sang  du  Fils  de  Dieu,  r^pandu  pour  faire  mifericorde
a  tous  les  hommes.  Si  on  ne  trouue  pas  a  propos
que  cefte  Infcription  foit  fur  la  porte,  ie  defire  que
toutes  les  Religieufes  fcachent  que  c'eft-la  mon  in-
tention dans  la  fondation,  &  qu'elles  s'employent  au
feruice  des  pauures  auec  cefte  intention.  Ie  defire
de  plus,  que  le  Preftre  qui  dira  tous  les  iours  la  Meffe
ait  pareille  intention.  I 'ay  bien  du  regret  de  ne  vous
pouuoir  embraffer  &  vos  bonnes  Sceurs  qui  paffent
auec  vous,  &  vous  prier  moy  mefme  de  demander  a
Noftre  Seigneur  qu'il  me  face  mifericorde.  Cem'a
efte*  vne  grade  confolation  de  voir  ces  bonnes  Vrfu-
lines  qui  vont  auffi  a  Kebec  auec  Madame  de  la  Pel-
terie,  on  m'a  [31]  promis  que  vous  ferez  toutes  en
mefme  va[i]ffeau.  (Et  plus  bas)  Affeurez-vous,  ma
Mere,  que  ie  vous  feruiray  en  voftre  particulier  auec
beaucoup  de  paffion,  &  voftre  maifon  nouuelle,  &  que
ie  feray  toute  ma  vie,
Ma  bonne  Mere,

Voftre  tres  affedtionnee  a  vous
faire  feruice,

Dv  Pont.

EN MARGE SONT ESCRITES CES PAROLES.

Ma  bonne  Mere,  obligez  moy  de  prendre  foin  de
faire  demander  aux  Sauuages  que  vous  affifterez  a  la
mort,  le  falut  de  Monfeigneur  le  Cardinal,  celuy  de
quelques  perfonnes  a  qui  i'ay  de  particulieres  obliga-
tions, &  le  mien,  &  que  toutes  vos  Reli[gi]eufes  me
facent  la  mefme  charite.

De  Paris,  ce  10  d' Auril  1639.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  27

to  our  Lord,  and  that,  in  effecting  the  foundation,
you  may  dedicate  it  accordingly,  and  place  on  its
door:  '  Hospital  dedicated  to  the  Blood  of  the  Son  of
God,  shed  in  order  that  mercy  might  be  granted  to
all  men.'  If  it  be  not  deemed  advisable  that  this
Inscription  be  placed  upon  the  door,  I  desire  that  all
the  Nuns  should  know  that  such  is  my  purpose  in
the  foundation,  and  that  they  devote  themselves  to
the  service  of  the  poor  with  that  object.  I  further
desire  that  the  Priest  who  says  Mass  every  day  shall
have  the  same  intention.  I  regret  exceedingly  that
I  cannot  embrace  you,  and  your  good  Sisters  who  are
going  with  you,  and  in  person  entreat  you  to  pray
Our  Lord  to  have  mercy  on  me.  It  was  a  great  con-
solation to  me  to  see  those  good  Ursulines  who  are
also  going  to  Kebec  with  Madame  de  la  Pelterie.  I
was  [31]  promised  that  you  would  all  be  in  the  same
ship."  (And  lower  down)  "  Rest  assured,  my  Moth-
er, that  I  shall  serve  you  personally,  and  your  new
house,  with  eager  affection,  and  that  I  shall  remain
all  my  life,

My  good  Mother,

Yours,  most  delighted  to  render
you  service,

Du  Pont."

IN  THE  MARGIN,  THE  FOLLOWING  WORDS  ARE  WRITTEN  :

' '  My  good  Mother,  oblige  me  by  taking  care  to  ask
the  Savages  whom  you  shall  attend  at  the  hour  of
death,  for  the  salvation  of  Monseigneur  the  Cardinal,
for  that  of  some  persons  towards  whom  I  have  special
obligations,  and  for  mine ;  and  that  all  your  Nuns  do
the  same  act  of  charity  for  me.

Paris,  the  10th  of  April,  1639."


28  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.16

[32]  Les  Letres  dont  il  luy  a  pleu  m'honorer  font
remplies  de  femblables  affections,  ie  n'ay  que  ces
deux  mots  a  luy  dire  pour  Refponfe.

Madame,  que  toute  la  France  vous  honore  pour
cette  belle  Couronne  Ducale  qui  enuironne  voftre
Chef:  ie  vous  affeure  que  tous  les  diamants  qui  l'em-
belliffent  ne  frappent  ny  mon  cceur,  ny  mes  yeux;
leur  efclat  eft  trop  foible  pour  trauerfer  la  gradeur
de  l'Ocean,  mais  ie  vous  confeffe  que  voftre  cceur  qui
honore  puiffamment  le  Sang  de  Iesvs-Christ  me
touche  au  vif,  vous  allez  a  la  fource  de  la  vie,  &  per-
fonne  ne  peut  aimer  Iesvs,  qu'il  n'aime  ceux  qui
cheriffent  &  qui  honorent  fon  Sang.  Saincte  Terefe
ayant  rendu  quelque  feruice  a  Noftre  Seigneur,  ce
bon  Prince  luy  dit  ces  belles  paroles  couchees  a  la  fin
du  liure  de  fa  vie:  Ma  fille,  ie  veux  que  mon  Sang  te
profite,  &  que  tu  n'aye  point  de  peur  que  ma  miferi-
corde  te  manque,  ie  l'ay  refpandu  auec  beaucoup  de
douleurs,  &  tu  en  ioiiis  auec  de  grandes  delices  comme
tu  vois.  Ce  font,  Madame  les  paroles  que  ie  fou-
haitte,  que  ce  Roy  des  cceurs  addreffe  a  voftre  cceur;
feroit-il  bien  poffible  qu'vne  Ame  qui  honore  [33]  fi
amoureufement  le  Sang  de  Iesvs-Christ,  n'en
reffentift  point  les  effects.  O !  mon  Seigneur,  ne  le
permettez  pas Amen,  Amen.

Cefte  grande  Dame  eft  defia  pay£e  de  fes  aumofnes
des  l'heure  que  i'efcris  cecy,  plufieurs  Sauuages  ont
defia  prie  pour  elle  dans  fon  Hofpital,  plufieurs  y
font  defia  morts,  le  premier  auoit  vefcu  comme  vn
Saindt  depuis  fon  Baptefme,  il  y  eft  mort  comme  vn
Sainct.  Ce  bon  homme  regardoit  la  vie  come  vne
prifon,  &  la  mort  comme  vn  paffage  a  la  vraye  liberty.
La  parole  luy  manqua  par  vne  grande  oppreffion  de


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  29

[32]  The  Letters  with  which  she  has  been  pleased  to
honor  me  are  full  of  similar  affectionate  wishes.  I
have  but  these  few  words  to  say  to  her  in  Answer :

"  Madame,  all  France  honors  you  for  that  noble
Ducal  Coronet  that  encircles  your  Brow.  I  assure
you  that  all  the  diamonds  which  embellish  it  have  no
effect  on  either  my  heart  or  my  eyes ;  their  lustre  is
too  weak  to  shine  across  the  vast  extent  of  the  Ocean.
But  I  confess  that  your  heart,  which  so  deeply  honors
the  Blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  touches  me  to  the
quick.  You  go  to  the  source  of  life,  and  no  one  can
love  Jesus  without  loving  those  who  cherish  and
honor  his  Blood.  Saint  Theresa  having  rendered
some  service  unto  Our  Lord,  that  good  Prince  said
these  beautiful  words  to  her,  which  are  inscribed  at
the  end  of  the  book  containing  her  life :  '  My  daugh-
ter, I  desire  that  my  Blood  may  benefit  thee  and  that
thou  mayst  have  no  fear  that  my  mercy  will  fail  thee.
I  have  shed  it  with  much  suffering,  and  thou  enjoy-
est  it  with  much  pleasure,  as  thou  seest.'  Such,  Ma-
dame, are  the  words  I  should  wish  the  King  of  souls
to  say  to  your  soul.  Could  it  be  possible  that  a  Soul
which  so  lovingly  honors  [33]  the  Blood  of  Jesus
Christ,  should  not  feel  the  effects  of  it?  O,  my
Lord,  permit  it  not! Amen,  Amen."

This  excellent  Lady  is  already  repaid  for  her  alms,
at  the  very  moment  that  I  write  these  lines.  Many
Savages  have  already  prayed  for  her  in  her  Hospital ;
several  have  already  died  there.  The  first  one  had
lived  like  a  Saint,  since  his  Baptism ;  he  died  there
like  a  Saint.  This  good  man  looked  upon  life  as  a
prison,  and  upon  death  as  a  transition  to  true  liber-
ty. His  utterance  failed  him,  owing  to  a  great  op-
pression  on his  chest, —  at  least, we could hardly


30  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16


la  poidtrine,  du  moins  on  ne  l'entendoit  quafi  plus:
mais  quand  on  luy  eut  recommande"  de  prier  pour
ceux  qui  le  fecouroient  fi  charitablement,  s'efforca  fi
bien,  qu'il  pria  tout  haut  pour  Mofeigneur  le  Cardi-
nal, &  pour  Madame  la  Ducheffe  d'Aiguillon,  la  mort
luy  couppa  la  parole  du  corps,  mais  ne  put  arrefter  la
priere  de  Tame  qu'il  alia  continuer  dedas  les  Cieux.
Ie  voulois  faire  porter  fon  corps  a  Sillery  comme  vn
pretieux  depoft,  &  comme  vne  Relique,  mais  les  vents
&  la  maree  me  contraignirent  de  le  laiffer  a  Kebec.
Voicy  vn  [34]  mot  de  Lettre  du  P.  de  Quen,  qui  fait
voir  le  bien  qu'on  fait  a  l'Hofpital.

Barnabe  MiftiKoma  s'en  retourne  a  Sillery,  fain
du  corps  &  de  l'ame,  come  ie  croy,  il  s'eft  con-
feffe &  communie  le  matin  en  action  de  grace  de  fa
fante\  cela  eft  venu  de  luy  mefme.  Nous  enterrafmes
hier  l'vn  des  deux  Algonquins  que  ie  baptifay  auant
bier,  c'eft  celuy  qui  auoit  vne  playe  en  la  poidtrine,
fon  compagnon  fe  porte  vn  peu  mieux  qu'a  l'ordi-
naire.  Marie  femme  de  Noel  Negabamat  penfa  mou-
rir  hier  au  foir  d'vne  groffe  colique,  &  d'vne  forte
fieVre  qui  la  trauaille  encor,  ie  l'ay  confeffe  ce  matin
en  intention  de  la  communier,  mais  la  faignee  Ten  a
empefche;  Noel  fon  mary  fe  porte  mieux,  il  s'eft
confeffe"  &  communis,  ie  croy  qu'il  vous  retournera
voir  dans  peu  de  iours.  Eftienne  Pygaroiiich  vou-
lant  aller  a  la  chaffe  aux  Caftors  vous  a  efte  chercher
iufques  a  Sillery  pour  fe  confeffer,  ne  vous  ayant
point  trouu£,  il  m'eft  venu  voir,  ie  l'ay  confeffe  auec
vne  grande  fatisf action  &  contentement  de  mon  ame.
Les  autres  malad^s  vont  a  l'ordinaire,  fouuenez-vous
a  l'Autel  de  celuy  [35]  qui  vous  eft,  &c. Ne  diroit-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  31

hear  him ;  but  when  he  was  requested  to  pray  for
those  who  so  charitably  succored  him,  he  made  such
an  effort  that  he  prayed  aloud  for  Monseigneur  the
Cardinal  and  for  Madame  the  Duchess  d'Aiguillon.
Death  cut  short  his  physical  speech,  but  could  not
stop  the  prayer  of  his  soul,  which  he  went  to  con-
tinue in  Heaven.  I  wished  to  have  his  body  taken  to
Sillery,  as  a  precious  deposit  and  as  a  Relic;  but  the
winds  and  tide  compelled  me  to  leave  it  at  Kebec.
Here  is  [34]  part  of  a  Letter  from  Father  de  Quen,
which  shows  the  good  done  at  the  Hospital :

^T3arnabe  Mistikoman  returns  to  Sillery,  sound
1— 9  in  body  and  soul,  as  I  believe.  He,  of  his
own  accord,  made  his  confession  and  received  com-
munion this  morning,  in  thanksgiving  for  the  restora-
tion of  his  health.  Yesterday,  we  buried  one  of  the
two  Algonquins  whom  I  baptized  the  day  before, —
the  one  who  had  a  wound  in  his  breast ;  his  com-
panion is  doing  a  little  better  than  usual.  Marie,
wife  of  Noel  Negabamat,  nearly  died  last  night  of  a
severe  attack  of  colic  and  a  high  fever  which  still
troubles  her.  I  heard  her  confession  this  morning,
with  the  intention  of  giving  her  the  communion,  but
the  bleeding  administered  to  her  prevented  it.  Noel,
her  husband,  is  better;  he  has  made  confession,  and
received  communion ;  I  think  he  will  return  to  see
you  in  a  few  days.  Estienne  Pygarouich,  wishing
to  go  Beaver  hunting,  went  as  far  as  Sillery,  seeking
you  to  hear  his  confession ;  but,  not  finding  you  there,
he  came  to  me.  I  heard  his  confession  with  great
satisfaction  and  content  in  my  soul.  The  other  sick
persons  are  doing  as  usual.  When  at  the  Altar,
remember  him  [35]  who  is  yours,"  etc. Would  not


32  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

on  pas  que  cet  Hofpital  qui  ne  fait  que  de  naiftre  eft
dreff6  depuis  cent  ans  dans  le  cceur  de  la  Chreftiente\
Si  la  France  voyoit  la  ioye,  la  modeftie,  &  la  charite
des  bonnes  Religieufes  qui  le  gouuernet  dans  vne
parfaidte  clofture  &  regularity,  les  Dames  accoure-
roient  a  leur  fecours :  c'eft  l'exercice  des  Emperieres
&  des  Reines  de  fecourir  les  pauures  de  Iesvs-
Christ.  Or  il  faut  que  ie  dif e  en  paffant  que  voi-
cy  quatre  grands  ouurages  liez  par  enfemble  d'vn
mefme  nceud;  l'arreft  des  Sauuages,  1' Hofpital,  le
Seminaire  de  petits  garcons,  &  le  feminaire  des
petites  filles  Sauuages.  Ces  trois  derniers  dependent
du  premier.  Faites  que  ces  barbares  foient  toufiours
vagabonds,  leurs  malades  mourront  dedans  les  bois,
&  leurs  enfans  n'entreront  iamais  au  feminaire;  ren-
dez  les  fedentaires,  vous  peuplez  ces  trois  maifons
qui  ont  toutes  befoin  d'eftre  puiffamment  fecourues.

Messievrs  de  la  Compagnie  de  la  Nouuelle  Frace,
pour  inciter  les  Sauuages  a  s'arrefter,  ont  ac-
corde  mefme  faueur  en  leur  magazin  aux  Chreftiens
fedentaires,  qu'aux  Francois;  ils  ont  encore  [36]  or-
donne'  qu'on  donneroit  quelques  terres  defrich6es  aux
ieunes  filles  qui  fe  mariroient ;  de  plus  ils  ont  deftine"
tous  les  ans  vne  fomme  d'argent  pour  faire  quelques
prefens  aux  Hurons  Chreftiens  qui  viendront  fe  four-
nir  de  marchandifes  en  leurs  magazins.  Veritable-
ment  ces  adtions  font  loiiables,  &  dignes  d'eftre
honorees  des  hommes  &  des  Anges.

Vn  autre  a  bien  fecouru  le  feminaire  des  petits
garcons,  &  cefte  annee  il  s'eft  trouue"  vne  perfonne
qui  faifant  vne  aumofne  de  cent  efcus,  la  fait  em-
ployer en  etoffes,  &  en  quelques  viures,  qui  femblent


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  33

one  say  that  this  Hospital,  which  is  but  newly
founded,  had  been  erected  for  a  hundred  years  in  the
heart  of  Christianity?  If  France  but  saw  the  joy,
the  modesty,  and  the  charity  of  the  good  Nuns  who
manage  it,  in  perfect  seclusion  and  order,  the  Ladies
would  hasten  to  their  assistance.  To  succor  the  poor
of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  service  of  Empresses  and
Queens.  Now,  I  must  state,  in  passing,  that  here
are  four  great  works  bound  together  by  a  single  tie  —
the  settlement  of  the  Savages,  the  Hospital,  the  Semi-
nary for  little  Savage  boys,  and  the  seminary  for
little  Savage  girls.  These  last  three  depend  upon
the  first.  Let  these  barbarians  remain  always  no-
mads,—  then  their  sick  will  die  in  the  woods,  and
their  children  will  never  enter  the  seminary.  Ren-
der them  sedentary,  and  you  will  fill  these  three
institutions,  which  all  need  to  be  vigorously  aided.

THE  Gentlemen  of  the  Company  of  New  France,
in  order  to  induce  the  Savages  to  settle,  have
granted  the  same  favor  in  their  store  to  the  sedentary
Christians  as  to  the  French.  They  have  also  [36]
ordered  that  some  cleared  land  be  given  to  the  young
girls  who  marry;  they  have,  moreover,  set  apart
every  year  a  sum  of  money  to  make  presents  to  the
Christian  Hurons  who  come  to  supply  themselves
with  goods  at  their  stores.  Verily,  these  are  praise-
worthy actions,  deserving  to  be  honored  by  men  and
by  Angels.

Another  has  greatly  helped  the  seminary  for  little
boys;  and,  this  year,  a  person,  giving  an  alms  of  a
hundred  ecus,  spends  this  sum  in  purchasing  cloth
and  food,  which  seem  to  have  been  sent  this  year  by
a  most  special  providence  of  God.


34  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  16

auoir  efte  enuoyez  cefte  ann6e  par  vne  tres  particu-
liere  prouidence  de  Dieu.

Vne  perfonne  de  merite  &  de  piete  a  fait  donner
cent  efcus  pour  le  mariage  d'vne  ieune  fille  Sauuage
recherchee  d'vn  ieune  homme  Francois  d'vn  fort  bon
naturel.

Meffieurs  de  la  Congregation  de  Noftre  Dame  erigee
a  Paris  donnent  tous  les  ans  pour  la  nourriture  d'vn
Sauuage.  Ainfi  Dieu  va  toufiours  difpofant  quel  que
ame  d'elite  pour  cooperer  a  fon  ouu[r]age.

Ie  ne  dis  rien  de  la  miffion  des  Hurons  &  des  autres
peuples  fedetaires  oil  la  moiffon  [37]  eft  plus  abo-
dante :  Toutes  chofes  viendront  en  leur  temps ;  ny  le
feminaire  des  filles,  ny  des  garcons,  ny  l'Hofpital,
ny  l'arreft  des  Sauuages,  ny  les  miffions  es  nations
plus  efloignez,  ne  manqueront  point  d'affi fiance.
Bien-heureux  ceux  defquels  le  Dieu  du  Ciel  fe  vou-
dra  feruir  pour  ces  grands  ouurages,  foit  y  employat
leurs  perfonnes,  foit  y  contribuant  de  leurs  biens,  ou
procurant  que  d'autres  y  contribuent.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  35

A  worthy  and  pious  person  has  given  a  hundred
ecus  for  the  wedding  of  a  young  Savage  girl  sought
in  marriage  by  a  young  Frenchman  of  very  good
character.

The  Gentlemen  of  the  Congregation  of  Nostre
Dame,  founded  in  Paris,  give  a  sum  every  year  for
the  support  of  a  Savage.  Thus,  God  ever  induces
some  chosen  soul  to  cooperate  with  his  work.

I  say  nothing  concerning  the  mission  of  the  Hu-
rons  and  other  sedentary  nations,  where  the  harvest
[37]  is  more  abundant.  All  things  will  come  in  their
time.  Neither  the  seminary  for  girls,  nor  that  for
boys,  nor  the  Hospital,  nor  the  settlement  of  the  Sav-
ages, nor  the  missions  to  more  distant  nations,  will
fail  to  receive  assistance.  Happy  those  whom  the
God  of  Heaven  shall  choose  to  make  his  instruments
for  these  grand  works, — whether  employed  therein
personally,  or  by  contributing  their  wealth,  or  by
inducing  others  to  contribute.


36  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J ESUITES [Vol.16


CHAPITRE  III.

DES BONNES DISPOSITIONS DES SAUUAGES POUR LA

FOY.

TOVT  ce  que  nous  difmes  l'an  pafse  des  bene-
dictions que  Dieu  donne  a  cefte  nouuelle  Eglife,
s'eft  augmente  fenfiblement  depuis  ce  temps-la
malgre  toutes  les  oppofitions  &  tous  les  obftacles  des
Demons,  &  de  leurs  fuppots.  Nous  auons  baptize
plus  de  Sauuages  que  les  annees  precedentes.  Les
families  Sedentaires  ont  perfeuere  dans  l'exercice  du
Chriftianifme,  [38]  &  en  ont  difpose  d'autre  a  les
imiter :  Les  prieres  f e  font  publiquement  par  tout.
Les  chants  &  les  Tambours  des  forciers  ou  des
-jongleurs  perdent  leur  credit.  Le  Nom  de  Iesvs-
Christ  f e  va  ref pandant  comme  vn  baume  odorif e-
rant,  qui  fe  fait  fentir  bien  loing  dans  ces  vaftes  con-
trees.  Le  bruit  de  noftre  creance,  &  le  fecours  qu'on
a  commence  de  donner  a  ceux  qui  fe  font  arreftez,  a
fait  def cendre  iufques  aux  trois  Riuieres  plus  de  huict.
cens  Algonquins,  lefquels  ont  temoigne  qu'ils  ne
s'approchoient  de  nous  que  pour  entrer  dans  la  co-
gnoiffance  du  vray  Dieu,  fi  bien  que  ie  puis  dire  que
nous  auons  veu  des  Sauuages  de  plus  de  dix  fortes
de  Nations  fl^chir  le  genoiiil  deuant  Iesvs-Christ,
preftans  1'oreille  a  vn  langage  qu'ils  n'auoient  iamais
entendu:  Ie  ne  dy  pas  qu'ils  foient  tous  conuertis,
mais  du  moins  ont-ils  commence  a  rendre  quelque
hommage  a  leur  Dieu,  affiftans  aux  prieres  que  leurs


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  37


CHAPTER  III.

OF THE FAVORABLE DISPOSITIONS OF THE SAVAGES
TOWARDS THE FAITH.

ALL  that  we  said  last  year  of  the  blessings  which
God  grants  to  this  new  Church,  has  been  per-
ceptibly increased  since  that  time,  in  spite  of
all  the  opposition  and  obstacles  of  the  Demons  and
of  their  tools.  We  have  baptized  more  Savages  than
in  previous  years.  The  Sedentary  families  have  per-
severed in  the  practice  of  Christianity,  [38]  and  have
inclined  others  to  imitate  them.  Prayers  are  public-
ly said  everywhere.  The  chants  and  Drums  of  the
sorcerers  or  jugglers  are  losing  their  influence.  The
Name  of  Jesus  Christ  is  spreading  like  a  fra-
grant balm,  making  itself  felt  far  away  in  these  vast
countries.  The  rumor  of  our  faith  and  the  assistance
that  we  have  commenced  to  give  to  those  who  have
become  settled,  have  induced  over  eight  hundred
Algonquins  to  come  down  as  far  as  the  three  Riv-
ers,—  who  have  declared  that  they  approached  us
merely  for  the  purpose  of  acquiring  knowledge  of  the
true  God.  So  indeed  I  may  say  that  we  have  seen
Savages  of  more  than  ten  different  Nations  bend
the  knee  before  Jesus  Christ,  lending  ear  to  a  lan-
guage they  had  never  heard.  I  do  not  say  that  they
are  all  converted,  but,  at  least,  they  have  commenced
to  render  some  homage  to  their  God,  being  present
at  the  prayers  which  their  Countrymen  or  allies  offer
up  into  his  hand. Now,  that  we  may  observe  some


38  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16

Compatriotes  ou  alliez  luy  prefentet  en  fa  main.  Or
afin  de  garder  quelque  ordre,  voyons  premierement
les  obftacles  que  nous  auos  eu  en  1' in  (traction  des  vns
&  des  autres,  &  puis  nous  verrons  le  bien  que  Dieu  en
a  tire.

[39]  II  ne  faut  pas  penfer  que  le  Diable  fe  rende,
ny  fes  fortereffes,  fans  combat.  Quoy  que  les  Sau-
uages  teinoignent  qu'ils  defirent  eftre  inftruidts,  ils
n'ont  pas  tous  vn  mefme  fentiment,  ny  la  volonte"
egalement  bonne.  Les  meilleurs  d'entre  eux  font
preuenus  des  le  berceau  de  beaucoup  d'erreurs,  qui
ne  fe  d^racinent  que  petit  a  petit,  a  proportion  que
la  lumiere  &  la  grace  entrent  dans  leurs  ames.
Comme  ils  ont  efte  amigez  depuis  quelques  annees
de  grandes  maladies,  &  qu'ils  s'imaginent  quafi  tous
qu'ils  ne  meurent  que  par  des  fortileges.  Deux
etourdis  d'entre  eux  voyans  que  tout  le  monde  pre-
ftoit  l'oreille  a  noftre  creance,  s'oppoferent  a  nous,
crians  que  les  prieres  les  faifoit  mourir.  L'vn  deux
vfa  de  menace  enuers  les  Peres  qui  appelloient  les
Sauuages  pour  eftre  inftruidts  en  la  Chappelle.  De-
puis, difoient-ils,  que  nous  prions,  nous  voyons  par
experience  que  la  mort  nous  enleue  par  tout ;  d'autres
adiouftoient  que  les  Francois  eftoient  vindicatifs  au
dernier  poindt,  &  qu'on  nous  auoit  mande  de  France
que  nous  tiraffions  vengeance  par  vne  mort  generale
de  tous  les  pays  de  quelques  Francois  qui  ont  efte"
tuez  par  les  [40]  Sauuage  il  y  a  defia  quelques  annees.

Vn  certain  forcier,  ou  pluftoft  charlatan,  homme
de  quelque  credit  parmy  eux,  voulut  prouuer  par
noftre  doctrine  que  nous  leur  caufions  la  mort :  Les
Francois  enfeignent,  difoit-il,  que  la  premiere  femme
qui  fut  iamais  a  introduit  la  mort  dedans  le  monde,


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63q  39


order,  let  us  consider,  in  the  first  place,  the  obstacles
that  we  have  met  in  the  instruction  of  both  classes,
and  then  we  shall  see  the  benefit  that  God  has  caused
to  be  derived  therefrom.

[39]  It  must  not  be  imagined  that  the  Devil  sur-
renders, either  himself  or  his  fortresses,  without  a
struggle.  Although  the  Savages  declare  that  they
wish  to  be  instructed,  they  are  not  all  animated  by
the  same  spirit,  nor  are  they  all  equally  willing.  The
best  of  them  are  imbued  from  the  cradle  with  many
errors,  which  are  eradicated  only  little  by  little,  in
proportion  as  light  and  grace  enter  into  their  souls.
As  they  have  been  afflicted  for  several  years  with
serious  diseases  and  as  nearly  all  imagine  that  their
deaths  are  due  solely  to  witchcraft,  two  headstrong
fellows  among  them  —  seeing  that  every  one  listened
attentively  to  our  explanation  of  our  belief  —  under-
took to  oppose  us,  publicly  declaring  that  the  pray-
ers caused  death  among  them.  One  of  these  used
threats  against  the  Fathers  who  called  upon  the  Sav-
ages to  receive  instruction  in  the  Chapel.  "  Since
we  pray,"  said  they,  "we  see  by  experience  that
death  carries  us  off  everywhere."  Others  added
that  the  French  were  vindictive  to  the  last  degree,
and  that  we  had  received  orders  from  France  to  take
revenge  —  through  a  general  mortality  among  all  the
people  of  the  country  —  for  some  Frenchmen  who
were  killed  by  the  [40]  Savages  several  years  ago.

A  certain  sorcerer,  or  rather  charlatan,  a  man  of
some  standing  among  them,  sought  to  prove  by  our
doctrine  that  we  caused  their  death.  "  The  French
teach,"  said  he,  "  that  the  first  woman  who  ever  lived
brought  death  into  the  world;  what  they  say  is
true, —  the  women  of  their  land  are  capable  of  such


40  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

ce  qu'ils  difent  eft  vray,  les  femmes  de  leur  pais  font
capables  de  cefte  malice,  &  c'efl  pour  cela  qu'ils  les
font  paffer  en  ces  contrees  pour  nous  faire  perdre  la
vie  a  tous  tant  que  nous  fommes,  fi  le  peu  qu'ils  ont
defia  fait  venir  a  tant  tue  de  monde;  celles  qu'on  at-
ted  perdront  tout  le  refte,  (le  Diable  fentoit  defia  la
venue  des  Hofpitalieres  &  des  Vrfulines.)  Tous  ces
mauuais  bruits  retardet  grandement  la  gloire  de
Noftre  Seigneur,  &  le  falut  de  ces  pauures  peuples,
c'a  toufiours  efte*  le  deffein  du  malin  efprit  de  decrier
tant  qu'il  a  pu  ceux  qui  s'efforcent  de  tirer  les  ames
des  tenebres  &  du  peche.  La  guerre  qui  eft  furue-
nue  lors  que  ces  bruits  fembloient  affoupis,  &  la  de-
faite  des  Algonquins,  a  puifTamment  diuerty  les
efprits  des  bonnes  penfees  que  Dieu  leur  donnoit;
neantmoins  comme  pas  vn  de  ceux  qui  font  baptifez
n'a  efte  pris  ou  tue  [41]  dans  le  combat,  cefte  bene-
diction en  a  confirme  plufieurs  dans  leur  bonne
volonte.

Bref,  le  peche  ou  l'accoutumance  au  vice  eft  vne
chaifne  tres-difficile  a  rompre.  Nous  [en]  entendons
tous  les  iours  qui  nous  difent  que  noftre  doctrine  eft
bonne,  mais  que  la  pratique  en  eft  fafcheufe.  Les
vns  ont  deux  femmes  qu'ils  ayment,  ou  qu'ils  leur
font  vtiles  pour  leur  menage ;  les  autres  font  en  cre-
dit par  quelque  fuperftitio,  qu'il  faudroit  quitter  s'ils
fe  faifoient  baptizer.  Les  ieunes  gens  ne  penfent
pas  pouuoir  perfeuerer  dans  le  mariage  auec  vne
mauuaif e  femme,  ou  auec  vn  mauuais  mary ;  ils  veu-
lent  eftre  libres,  &  fe  pouuoir  repudier  s'ils  ne
s'entr'ayment.  Voila  les  principaux  empechemens
exterieurs  que  nous  auons  eu  dans  l'exercice  de  nos
fonCtions;  Voyons  maintenant  comme  les  forces  des


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  i639  41

wickedness,  and  that  is  why  they  bring  them  into
these  countries  —  to  make  us  all  lose  our  lives.  If
the  few  they  have  already  brought  here  have  killed
so  many,  those  whom  they  expect  will  destroy  all
that  remain."  (The  Devil  was  already  affected  by
the  coming  of  the  Hospital  Sisters  and  the  Ursu-
lines.)  All  these  evil  reports  greatly  retard  the  glory
of  Our  Lord,  and  the  salvation  of  these  unfortunate
peoples.  It  has  ever  been  the  object  of  the  evil
spirit  to  decry,  to  the  best  of  his  power,  those  who
endeavor  to  extricate  souls  from  darkness  and  from
sin.  The  war  that  suddenly  occurred  when  these
rumors  seemed  quieted,  and  the  defeat  of  the  Algon-
quins,  have  greatly  diverted  their  minds  from  the
good  thoughts  that  God  had  bestowed  upon  them ;
nevertheless,  as  not  one  of  those  who  were  baptized
was  taken  or  killed  [41]  in  the  fight,  this  blessing  has
confirmed  many  of  them  in  their  good  intentions.

In  a  word,  sin  or  the  habit  of  vice  is  a  chain,  very
difficult  to  break.  Every  day  we  hear  some  who  tell
us  that  our  doctrine  is  good,  but  that  its  practice  is  dif-
ficult. Some  have  two  wives  whom  they  love,  or  who
are  useful  to  them  in  their  housekeeping ;  others  are
held  in  estimation  on  account  of  certain  superstitions
which  they  would  have  to  abandon  if  they  were  bap-
tized. The  young  people  do  not  think  that  they  can
persevere  in  the  state  of  matrimony  with  a  bad  wife
or  a  bad  husband ;  they  wish  to  be  free  and  to  be
able  to  divorce  the  consort  if  they  do  not  love  each
other.  Such  are  the  chief  outward  impediments  we
have  encountered  in  the  performance  of  our  duties.
Let  us  now  see  how  the  forces  of  the  Demons  are  but
as  straws,  and,  like  thorns,  do  not  prevent  the  bud-
ding of  the  roses.


42  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

Demons  ne  font  que  des  pailles,  &  comme  les  epines
n'empefchent  pas  la  naiffance  des  rofes.

Premierement,  tous  les  Sauuages  qui  ont  efte
iniiruits,  excepte  fort  peu,  ont  vne  grande  opinion  de
noftre  creance:  ils  cr[o]yent  qu'eftre  Chreftien,  &  en-
nemy  des  vices,  c'eft  la  meme  chofe:  C'eft  pourquoy
[42]  quand  on  leur  demande  s'ils  n'ont  point  commis
quelque  mal,  ils  repondent :  ie  prie  Dieu,  &  par  con-
fequent  ie  ne  commets  point  ces  adtions :  s'ils  voyent
quelque  vice  en  vn  Francois,  ils  difent  fort  bien,
qu'il  ne  croit  pas,  &  qu'il  defcendra  dans  les  Enfers.

Ils  viennent  aux  prieres  publiques,  apportent  leurs
enfans  pour  eftre  baptifez,  demandent  ce  Sacrement
auec  affection;  i'entends  ceux  qu'on  enfeigne  plus
particulieremet ;  Bref  on  cognoift  deja  par  leur  de-
portemes  que  la  Foy  opere  dedans  leurs  ames.  Quand
ces  Algonquins  arriuerent  aux  trois  Riuieres  au  nom-
bre  de  plus  de  cent  canots,  ils  eftoient  extrememet
fuperbes  &  arrogans,  notamment  ceux  de  rifle.  Ay-
ans  oiiy  la  doctrine  de  Iesvs-Christ,  on  les  a  veu
tellement  changez,  que  nos  Francois  mefme  s'en
eftonnoient.

Vn  certain  de  la  petite  Nation  des  Algonquins  ay-
ant  afiifte  aux  prieres,  &  oiiy  chanter  les  Letanies  des
attributs  de  Dieu,  s'imprima  cela  fi  bie  dans  l'efprit,
qu'il  les  demanda  par  efcrit;  ce  que  luy  eftant  accor-
de,  il  faifoit  grand  eftat  du  papier  qui  les  contenoit:
arriue  que  ce  bon  homme  retournant  en  fon  pays  fit
naufrage,  toutes  [43]  fes  marchandifes  furent  per-
dues,  luy  &  fes  gens  eurent  la  vie  fauue;  ce  qui  l'at-
triftoit  le  plus,  a  ce  qu'il  dit  par  apres,  eftoit  la  perte
de  fon  papier,  fi  bien  qu'encor  qu'il  fut  grandement
eloigne  de  celuy  qui  luy  auoit  donne,  il  penfa  retour-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  43

In  the  first  place,  the  Savages  who  have  received
instruction  have,  with  very  few  exceptions,  a  very-
high  opinion  of  our  belief ;  they  think  that  to  be  a
Christian  and  a  foe  to  vice  is  one  and  the  same  thing.
Therefore  [42]  when  they  are  asked  whether  they
have  not  done  something  wrong,  they  answer:  "  I
pray  to  God,  and  consequently  I  do  not  commit  those
actions."  If  they  notice  any  vice  in  a  Frenchman,
they  very  properly  say  that  he  does  not  believe,  and
that  he  will  descend  into  Hell.

They  attend  the  public  prayers,  bring  their  chil-
dren to  be  baptized;  ask  for  that  Sacrament  with
affection  —  I  mean  those  who  are  more  thoroughly
instructed.  In  short,  we  know  already  by  their  con-
duct that  the  Faith  is  working  in  their  souls.  When
these  Algonquins  arrived  at  the  three  Rivers  —  to
the  number  of  over  one  hundred  canoes  full  —  they
were  very  haughty  and  arrogant,  notably  those  from
the  Island.  Having  heard  the  doctrine  of  Jesus
Christ,  they  were  seen  to  be  so  changed  that  even
our  Frenchmen  were  astonished.

One  of  the  petite  Nation  of  the  Algonquins, —  hav-
ing been  present  at  the  prayers,  and  heard  the  sing-
ing of  the  Litanies  of  the  attributes  of  God  —  im-
pressed these  so  fully  on  his  mind  that  he  asked  for
them  in  writing.  When  this  was  granted  to  him,
he  highly  valued  the  paper  containing  them.  It
came  to  pass  that,  this  good  man,  in  returning  to  his
own  country,  was  wrecked ;  all  [43]  his  goods  were
lost,  but  he  and  his  people  saved  their  lives.  What
caused  him  the  most  sorrow,  as  he  told  us  afterward,
was  the  loss  of  his  paper, —  so  much  that,  although
he  was  far  distant  from  him  who  had  given  it  to
him,  he  decided  to  retrace  his  steps,  to  ask  him  for


44  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.16

ner  fur  fes  brizees  pour  luy  en  demander  vn  autre ;
mais  il  fut  bien  eftonne  quand  il  vit  ce  papier  tout  fain
&  entier  entre  les  varangues  de  fon  canot  rechappe  du
danger;  il  admiroit  cela  comme  vn  prodige,  &  le
racontoit  comme  vn  miracle  a  fes  gens.  Eftant  de
retour  en  fon  pays,  il  affembloit  tous  les  iours  fes  voi-
fins  dans  vne  grande  cabane,  pendoit  ce  papier  a  vne
perche,  &  tous  fe  mettans  a  l'entour,  chantoient  ce
qu'ils  fcauoient  de  ces  Litanies,  s'efcrians  tous  a  Dieu
Chatferindamatfinan  ayez  pitie  de  nous:  Dieu  prit
plaifir  a  leur  demande ;  car  la  maladie  qui  les  amigeoit
ceffa  entierement.  Ce  pauure  homme  reuenant  voir
nos  Peres  rapporta  ce  papier,  &  puis  fe  retirant  l'hy-
ue^  dans  les  bois  pour  faire  fa  prouifion  d'Elan,  en
demanda  vn  autre  qu'il  refpectoit  en  la  mefme  facon ;
&  comme  il  ne  fcauoit  pas  encor  par  cceur  les  prieres
qu'il  faut  prefenter  a  Dieu,  il  luy  offroi[t]  ce  papier,
&  luy  difoit  auec  tous  fes  gens  [44]  fi  nous  fcauions
ce  qui  eft  dans  ce  papier,  nous  te  le  dirions  tous ;  mais
puifque  nous  fommes  ignorance,  contente  toy  de  nos
cceurs,  &  nous  faits  mifericorde,  toy  qui  eft  noftre
grand  Capitaine.  Eftant  par  apres  de  retour  vers
nos  Peres,  il  leur  dit  que  rien  ne  luy  auoit  manque,
&  que  Dieu  l'auoit  mis  dans  l'abondance.

Le  Sorcier  mefme,  dont  i'ay  parle  cy-deffus,  lequel
au  commencement  crioit  contre  la  venue  des  femmes
Francoifes,  voyat  fa  petite  fille  malade,  n'eut  point
de  recours  a  fon  art,  mais  au  Baptefme,  qu'il  procura
a  fon  enfant ;  &  la  fante  du  corps  luy  eftat  rendue  auec
la  fainc5tete  de  l'ame,  ce  charlatan  ne  ceffoit  de  nous
preconifer,  &  noftre  dodtrine ;  mais  il  faifoit  comme
les  cloches  qui  appellent  le  monde  a  l'Eglife,  &  n'y
entrent  iamais.


1 639]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  i6jg  45

another  one.  But  he  was  greatly  astonished  when
he  saw  the  paper,  quite  sound  and  whole,  under  the
ribs  of  his  canoe,  recovered  from  the  danger.  He
wondered  at  this  as  a  prodigy,  and  related  it  to  his
people  as  a  miracle.  Having  returned  to  his  own
country,  he  assembled  his  neighbors  every  day  in  a
large  cabin,  hung  this  paper  to  a  pole,  and  all  stood
around  it,  singing  what  they  knew  of  these  Litanies,
all  crying  out  to  God:  "  Chawerindamawinan,  have
pity  on  us."  God  took  pleasure  in  their  entreaty,
for  the  disease  that  afflicted  them  entirely  disap-
peared. When  this  poor  man  came  back  to  see  our
Fathers,  he  brought  the  paper  with  him ;  and,  as  he
had  to  spend  the  winter  in  the  woods  to  procure  his
supply  of  Elk  meat,  he  asked  for  another,  which  he
regarded  with  the  same  veneration.  As  he  did  not
yet  know  by  heart  the  prayers  to  be  offered  to  God,
he  offered  him  the  paper,  saying,  with  all  his  people :
[44]  "  If  we  knew  what  is  in  this  paper,  we  would
all  say  it  to  thee ;  but  since  we  are  ignorant,  be  con-
tent with  our  hearts  and  have  pity  on  us,  thou  who
art  our  great  Captain."  Afterward,  when  he  came
back  to  our  Fathers,  he  told  them  that  nothing  had
failed  him,  and  that  God  had  given  him  abundance.

Even  the  Sorcerer, —  whom  I  mentioned  above,
and  who,  at  the  beginning,  exclaimed  against  the
coming  of  the  French  women, —  when  his  little  girl
became  ill,  did  not  have  recourse  to  his  art,  but  to
Baptism,  which  he  obtained  for  his  child ;  and,  bodi-
ly health  having  returned  with  the  holiness  of  the
soul,  this  charlatan  ceased  not  to  extol  us  and  our
doctrine.  But  he  acted  like  the  bells  that  call  the
faithful  to  the  Church,  and  never  enter  it  themselves.

One  incident  in  connection  with  the  arrival  of  these


46  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.16

Vne  chofe  nous  attrifta  a  la  venue  de  ces  Algon-
quins:  Vn  Capitaine  Nipicirinien  venant  auffi  pour  fe
faire  initruire,  tomba  fi  fort  malade  a  la  riuiere  des
Prairies,  enuiron  trete  lieues  au  deffus  des  trois  Ri-
uieres,  qu'il  en  mourut:  deuant  que  de  rendre  Tame,
il  dit  a  fes  gens ;  Vous  direz  aux  Francois  que  ie  les
allois  voir  pour  apprendre  le  chemin  du  Ciel,  ie  fuis
bien  marry  que  ie  [45]  ne  puis  mourir  aupres  d'eux,
ie  me  fuis  prefse  tant  que  i'ay  pu,  mais  la  maladie
ne  me  permet  pas  de  paffer  outre,  pour  vous  ne  laiffez
pas  de  continuer  voftre  deffein  apres  ma  mort.

Vn  autre  Algonquin  entendant  parler  de  Dieu,
s'ecria:  Voila  ce  que  ie  defirois  entendre  il  y  a
long-temps,  &  venant  trouuer  le  Pere,  il  le  pria  de
l'inftruire  plus  particulieremet,  &  pour  ce  faire,  il  ve-
noit  tous  les  iours  a  noftre  maifon.  A  peine  auoit-il
commence  cet  exercice,  que  fon  fils  toba  fort  malade,
cela  ne  l'etonne  point ;  il  luy  pend  au  col  vn  chapelet,
&  venant  voir  le  Pere  qui  l'inftruifoit,  luy  dit:  Ie
n'ay  rien  de  fi  cher  au  monde  que  mes  deux  enfans,
voila  defia  mon  fils  malade,  &  en  danger  de  mort,
quand  luy  &  fa  fceur  mouroient,  ie  ne  quitteray  point
la  refolution  que  i'ay  prife  de  prier  Dieu,  ie  fcay  bien
qu'il  eft  le  Maiftre  de  nos  vies;  Ma  femme  &  mes
enfans,  &  moy,  adiouftoit-il,  eftans  tous  enfemble
tombez  dans  vne  grande  maladie,  il  me  vint  vne  pen-
fee  qu'il  failloit  qu'il  y  eut  quelqu'vn  au  monde  qui
eut  foin  des  hommes,  ie  l'inuoquay  fans  fcauoir  fon
nom,  il  nous  guerit  tous,  quoy  que  nous  ne  le  co-
gnuffions  pas,  maintenant  que  nous  [46]  commencons
a  le  cognoiftre,  il  ne  nous  abandonnera  pas;  en  effedt
fon  fils  guerit  bien  toft  apres,  &  il  fut  baptise  auec
fa petite foeur, & leur grande mere. Ce pauure


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6sg  47

Algonquins  caused  us  sorrow.  A  Nipicirinien  Cap-
tain who  was  also  coming  to  receive  instruction,  fell
so  ill  at  the  river  des  Prairies,  about  thirty  leagues
above  the  three  Rivers,  that  he  died.  Before  giving
up  his  soul,  he  said  to  his  people:  "  Tell  the  French
that  I  was  going  to  see  them  to  learn  the  road  to
Heaven.  I  am  much  grieved  that  I  [45]  cannot  die
near  them ;  I  have  hurried  on  as  fast  as  I  could,  but
illness  does  not  allow  of  my  going  any  further;  as
for  you,  do  not  fail  to  carry  out  your  design  after
my  death."

Another  Algonquin,  on  hearing  God  spoken  of,  ex-
claimed :  ' '  This  is  what  I  have  long  wished  to  hear ; '
and,  seeking  the  Father,  he  begged  him  for  more
special  instruction,  and,  for  that  purpose,  he  came
every  day  to  our  house.  Hardly  had  he  begun  this
practice,  when  his  son  fell  dangerously  ill.  This
did  not  startle  him  ;  he  hung  a  rosary  about  the  boy's
neck,  and  going  to  the  Father  who  was  instructing
him,  he  said:  "  I  have  nothing  so  dear  in  the  world
as  my  two  children ;  here  is  my  son  very  sick,  and
in  danger  of  death ;  even  if  he  and  his  sister  were  to
die,  I  would  not  abandon  the  resolution  I  have  taken
to  pray  to  God.  I  know  well  that  he  is  the  Master
of  our  lives.  My  wife,  my  children,  and  myself,"
added  he,  "having  all  fallen  seriously  ill  together,  it
occurred  to  me  that  there  must  be  some  one  in  the
world  who  had  a  care  for  men.  I  prayed  to  him
without  knowing  his  name ;  he  cured  all  of  us,  al-
though we  knew  him  not.  Now  that  we  [46]  are
beginning  to  know  him,  he  will  not  abandon  us."
In  fact,  his  son  was  cured  soon  afterward,  and  was
baptized  with  his  little  sister  and  their  grandmother.
This  poor  man, seeing  that  he  would  have  to  go


48  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16


homme  voyant  qu'il  falloit  partir  fans  Baptefme,  la
faim  les  preffat  a  caufe  qu'on  ne  leur  pouuoit  vendre
de  viures  au  magazin,  difoit  au  Pere  qui  les  auoit
inftruit,  pourquoy  me  refufez  vous  le  bie  que  vous
auez  accorde"  a  mes  enfans  &  a  ma  mere?  Toutes
chofes  ont  leur  teps,  il  ne  fe  faut  pas  precipiter  en
chofes  de  telle  importance.  Celt  vne  coutume  par-
my  ces  peuples  de  faire  feftin  a  tout  manger  pour  la
guerifon  des  malades:  Or  pour  detourner  petit  a
petit  cefte  fuperftition,  vn  de  nos  Peres  ay  at  preche
contre  ces  feftins,  dit  publiquemet  que  Dieu  les
hai'ffoit,  mais  qu'il  fe  plaifoit  aux  ceuures  de  charite,
&  par  confequent  qu'il  falloit  donner  aux  pauures
veufues  &  orphelins  ce  qu'on  donnoit  aux  jongleurs
&  aux  charlatans.  Vn  vieillard  fe  fouuenat  de  cet
enfeignement,  &  voyant  fa  fille  malade,  dit  a  fon
gendre  qu'il  s'en  allaft  a  la  chaffe,  &  qu'il  demandaft
vn  orignac  a  Dieu  pour  donner  a  manger  aux  pau-
ures, fon  gedre  obei't,  tua  ce  grad  animal ;  le  bon
vieillard  fit  fon  aumofne,  &  fa  fille  guerit.

[47]  Vne  bande  de  Sauuages  nous  quittant  pedant
l'Automne  pour  aller  hyuerner  dedans  les  bois,  nous
racontoit  au  Printemps  comme  Dieu  les  auoit  fecou-
ru.  Nous  le  prions  tous  les  iours,  difoient-ils,  fans
y  manquer,  fi  toft  qu'on  auoit  tue  quelque  animal,  on
Ten  remercioit  fur  la  place  meme,  comme  celuy  qui
nous  l'auoit  donne;  en  effect  il  nous  fembloit  que
nous  tirions  noftre  nourriture  comme  d'vne  depence
piece  apres  piece:  par  exemple,  ayans  trouue  vn
Ours,  nous  eftios  quelque  temps  fans  rien  rencontrer,
l'Ours  eftant  mange,  nous  difions  a  Dieu,  nous  n'a-
uons  plus  rien,  donne-nous  noftre  nourriture,  tu  es
noftre  Pere ;  auffi-toft  nous  trouuions  dequoy  viure,  &


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6jg  49

away  without  Baptism  —  they  were  pressed  by  hun-
ger, because  provisions  could  not  be  sold  to  them  at
the  store  —  said  to  the  Father  who  had  taught  him :
"  Why  do  you  refuse  me  the  gift  that  you  gave  my
children  and  my  mother?"  All  things  have  their
time ;  one  ought  not  to  be  hasty  in  matters  of  such
importance.  It  is  a  custom  among  these  peoples  to
give  for  the  cure  of  the  sick,  a  feast  at  which  all
must  be  eaten.  Now,  to  do  away  gradually  with  this
superstition,  one  of  our  Fathers,  preaching  against
these  feasts,  stated  publicly  that  God  abhorred  them ;
but  that  he  was  pleased  with  charitable  works,  and,
consequently,  that  what  was  given  to  jugglers  and
charlatans  should  be  given  to  poor  widows  and  or-
phans. An  old  man,  remembering  this  precept,  and
seeing  his  daughter  ill,  told  his  son-in-law  to  go  out
hunting  and  to  ask  God  for  a  moose,  so  that  he  might
give  food  to  the  poor.  The  son-in-law  obeyed,  and
killed  the  great  animal ;  the  good  old  man  bestowed
his  alms,  and  his  daughter  was  cured.

[47]  A  band  of  Savages,  who  left  us  in  the  Autumn
to  winter  in  the  woods,  told  us  in  the  Spring  how
God  had  helped  them.  "  We  prayed  to  him  every
day,"  they  said,  "  without  fail.  As  soon  as  we  killed
an  animal,  we  returned  thanks  to  him  on  the  spot,
as  the  being  who  had  given  it  to  us ;  in  fact,  it  seemed
to  us  as  if  we  were  taking  our  food  from  a  store-
house, one  piece  after  the  other.  For  instance,  hav-
ing found  a  Bear,  we  remained  some  time  without
finding  anything ;  the  Bear  being  eaten,  we  said  to
God :  '  We  have  nothing  left ;  give  us  our  food ;  thou
art  our  Father.'  Immediately  we  found  something
to  live  on ;  and  God  kept  us  for  a  long  time  like
that, —  so  that  we  were  astonished,  and  said  that  if


50  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  16

Dieu  nous  a  tenu  fort  long-temps  comme  cela,  de
forte  que  nous  nous  en  6tonnions,  &  difions  que  quad
il  n'y  auroit  plus  rien  dans  nos  facs  que  Dieu  en  fe-
roit  venir.  Si  quelqu'vn  de  nous  faifoit  quelque  mal,
auffi-toft  les  autres  luy  difoient;  Fay  ce  que  tu  vou-
dras,  mais  il  faut  que  les  Peres  fcachent  tout  ce  que
nous  faifons.  De  faidt  quand  ils  furent  arriuez,  ils
nous  declarent  fans  le  demander  tout  le  bien  &  le
mal  qu'ils  auoient  fait,  fe  confeffans  tout  haut  deuant
que  d'eftre  baptifez.

[48]  I'ay  fait  mention  cy-deffus  des  mauuais  bruits
&  de  la  guerre  qui  retardoient  le  cours  de  l'Euangile.
Monfieur  noftre  Gouuerneur  motant  aux  trois  Riuieres
auec  vne  barque,  &  quelques  chalouppes  bien  armies,
leua  ces  obftacles ;  car  encor  bie  que  la  contrariete
des  vents,  &  la  precipitation  des  Sauuages  luy  euffent
ofte  l'occafion  de  deffaire  leurs  ennemis  qu'il  alloit
trouuer,  neantmoins  voyans  la  bone  volonte  qu'vn
homme  d'vn  tel  merite  auoit  pour  eux,  ils  fe  r'affem-
bleret,  &  tindrent  plufieurs  confeils  entr'eux,  dans
lef quels  ils  conclurent  d'embraffer  la  foy  Chreftienne,
&  de  s'habituer  aupres  des  Francois;  en  effedt  ils
firent  de  bonnes  &  longues  cabanes  tout  aupres  de
noftre  habitatio  des  trois  Riuieres,  nous  donans  vne
belle  occafion  de  les  inftruire.  Les  affaires  de  Dieu
font  toufiours  contrariees,  tout  procedoit  heureufemet,
ils  fe  rendoient  affidus  aux  prieres  qu'on  leur  faifoit
faire  a  la  Chappelle,  &  a  l'explication  du  Catechifme
qu'on  faifoit  le  matin  aux  femmes,  &  le  foir  aux
hommes.  Quand  la  famine  les  contraignit  d'aller
chercher  leur  vie,  qui  deca,  qui  dela  dans  les  riuieres
&  dans  les  bois;  le  retardement  des  vaiffeaux  fut
caufe  de  ce  mal-heur. Ce  [49]  nous  fut  vne  douleur


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  51

there  should  be  nothing  left  in  our  pouches,  God
would  put  something  therein.  If  any  of  us  did  any
evil  thing,  the  others  at  once  said  to  him :  '  Do  what
thou  wilt;  but  the  Fathers  must  know  all  we  do.'  "
In  fact,  when  they  arrived  they  told  us,  without  our
asking  them,  all  the  good  and  all  the  evil  they  had
done,  confessing  their  sins  aloud  before  being  bap-
tized.

[48]  I  have  mentioned  above  the  evil  reports  and
the  war  that  delayed  the  course  of  the  Gospel.  Mon-
sieur our  Governor  went  up  to  the  three  Rivers  with
a  bark  and  some  shallops,  well  armed,  and  removed
these  obstacles.  For,  although  contrary  winds  and
the  precipitation  of  the  Savages  robbed  him  of  the
opportunity  of  defeating  their  enemies  against  whom
he  was  proceeding  —  nevertheless,  seeing  the  good
will  which  a  man  of  such  merit  had  for  them,  they
met  and  held  several  councils  among  themselves,  at
which  they  decided  to  embrace  the  Christian  faith
and  to  dwell  near  the  French.  In  fact,  they  erected
good  and  long  cabins  quite  close  to  our  settlement  at
the  three  Rivers,  giving  us  a  fine  opportunity  of
teaching  them.  The  affairs  of  God  are  always  op-
posed. Everything  was  proceeding  happily  and  they
were  assiduous  in  attending  the  prayers  that  they
were  made  to  recite  in  the  Chapel,  and  the  explana-
tions of  the  Catechism, — given  to  the  women  in  the
morning,  and  to  the  men  in  the  evening, — when
famine  compelled  them  to  seek  their  living  here
and  there,  on  the  rivers  and  in  the  woods.  The
delay  in  the  arrival  of  the  ships  was  the  cause  of  this
misfortune.  It  [49]  was  a  sore  grief  for  us  to  see  a
large  number  of  very  well  disposed  persons  depart
from  our  vicinity,  through  inability  to  provide  for


62  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

bien  fenfible  de  voir  partir  d'aupres  de  nous  bon
nombre  d'ames  tres-bien  difpof6es  faute  de  pouuoir
fecourir  leurs  corps.  Enfin  les  vaiffeaux  ayans  paru,
apres  auoir  efte  long-temps  attendus,  ces  pauures
oiiailles  6garees  fe  r'affembleret  petit  a  petit  aupres
de  nous.

Comme  ie  finiffois  ce  Chapitre,  l'vn  des  Peres  de
noftre  Compagnie,  qui  font  aux  trois  Riuieres  m'a
r'£crit  ce  qui  fuit.

LA  perfecution  recommence  contre  nous,  la  petite
verolle,  ou  ie  ne  fcay  quelle  maladie  femblable,
s'eftant  iettee  parmy  les  Sauuages,  le  Diable  leur  fait
dire  que  c'eft  nous  qui  leur  caufons  cefte  cotagion;
ils  difent  tout  haut  que  le  Pere  le  Ieune  eft  infaillible-
ment  l'autheur  de  la  mort  de  Manttfetehimat  qui  ne
luy  voulut  pas  obei'r ;  ils  difent  encor  qu'il  a  fait  mou-
rir  fa  femme.  Ils  font  icy  bon  nombre  de  cabanes,
&  quelques  vnes  bien  affligees,  K8ik&iribabb'gfc!ch  me
preffe  de  le  baptizer  auant  que  de  partir  d'icy,  la
crainte  de  mourir  dans  les  bois  luy  fait  defirer  le
Baptefme,  luy  donneray-ie?  Tous  les  Sauuages  qui
font  icy  difent  que  c'eft  faidt  d'eux,  &  que  pas  vn  ne
verra  le  Printemps,  [50]  Voftre  Reuerence  fera-elle
icy  bien-toft?  les  meres  Hofpitalieres  font-elles  ve-
nues? le  bruit  court  icy  qu'elles  font  arriu^es;  fi  les
malades  des  trois  Riuieres  demandent  d'eftre  portez
a  Kebec,  que  leur  diray-ie?  Pourra  on  fecourir  ceux
de  la  bas,  &  ceux  d'icy  haut  tout  enfemble?  Vn
petit  mot  de  reponfe,  s'il  vous  plaift.

Voila  vne  Lettre  bien  bigarr^e.  D'vn  cofte  on
nous  accufe  de  caufer  la  mort,  &  de  l'autre  on  nous
demande  le  Sacrement  de  vie.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  53

their  bodily  wants.  Finally,  when  the  ships  made
their  appearance  after  having  been  long  expected,
these  poor  scattered  sheep  again  gradually  gathered
around  us.

As  I  was  about  to  close  this  Chapter,  one  of  the
Fathers  of  our  Society  who  is  at  the  three  Rivers,
wrote  me  the  following :

*  <  T^he  persecution  against  us  is  again  commencing ;
I  the  smallpox,  or  some  other  similar  disease
unknown  to  me,  having  broken  out  among  the  Sav-
ages, the  Devil  makes  them  say  that  we  are  the  cause
of  this  contagion.  They  openly  assert  that  Father
le  Jeune  is  certainly  the  author  of  the  death  of  Man-
twetehimat,  who  would  not  obey  him ;  they  also  say
that  he  caused  the  death  of  this  man's  wife.  There
are  a  good  many  cabins  here,  and  some  are  greatly
afflicted.  Kwikwiribabougouch  presses  me  to  bap-
tize him  before  he  leaves  here ;  the  dread  of  dying
in  the  woods  makes  him  desire  Baptism.  Shall  I
grant  it  to  him  ?  All  the  Savages  who  are  here  say
that  all  is  over  with  them,  and  that  not  one  of  them
will  see  the  Spring.  [50]  Will  Your  Reverence  soon
be  here?  Have  the  Hospital  mothers  arrived?  It
is  reported  here  that  they  have  come.  If  the  sick
at  the  three  Rivers  ask  to  be  taken  to  Kebec,  what
shall  I  say  to  them?  Can  those  who  are  there  and
those  who  are  up  here  be  cared  for  all  together?  A
word  in  reply,  if  you  please."

This  is,  indeed,  a  variegated  Letter.  On  the  one
hand,  we  are  accused  of  causing  death ;  and,  on  the
other,  we  are  asked  for  the  Sacrament  of  life.

I  may  say,  in  passing,  that  this  Mantwetchimat
was  a  wicked  Apostate,  to  whom  —  as  he  would  not


54  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

Ie  diray  en  paffant  que  ce  MantfcSetchimat  eftoit  vn
mefchant  Apoftat,  lequel  ne  fe  voulant  pas  ranger  a
fon  deuoir,  ie  luy  dy  que  s'il  s'attaquoit  a  Dieu,  il  ne
f eroit  pas  long-temps  impuny ;  il  me  promit  qu'il  de-
fcendroit  auec  moy  a  Kebec,  car  i'eflois  pour  lors  aux
trois  Riuieres,  ie  croy  qu'il  auoit  quelque  bone  vo-
lonte,  mais  il  ne  tint  pas  faparolle;  a  peine  eftois-je
party  que  luy  &  fa  femme,  qui  eftoit  auffi  baptizee,
&  qui  ne  valoit  pas  mieux  que  fon  mary,  moururent;
cela  fit  dire  aux  Sauuages  que  ie  leur  auois  caufe  la
mort.

II  arriua  quafi  en  mefme  temps  qu'vn  Sorcier  ou
Iongleur  foufnant  vn  malade  fur  les  dix  heures  de
nuidt,  pource  qu'il  ne  l'ofoit  [51]  faire  de  iour,  ie  l'en-
tendy,  i'y  couru  auec  vn  de  nos  Peres,  ie  le  tancay,
&  le  fis  ceffer,  le  menacant  de  la  part  de  Dieu.  De-
uant  qu'il  fut  iour,  ce  miferable  fut  frappe  de  la  co-
tagion  ou  petite  verolle,  qui  le  rendit  fort  horrible;
cela  eftonna  les  Sauuages,  &  fit  croire  a  quelques  vns
que  nous  fouhaittions  leur  mort,  &  que  Dieu  obei'ff oit
a  nos  defirs;  i'auois  beau  leur  dire  que  Dieu  fe  fafche-
roit  contre  nous,  &  nous  puniroit  fi  nous  voulions  mal
a  quelqu'vn.  Quand  vous  tueriez  quelqu'vn  de  nous,
nous  difoient-ils,  Dieu  ne  vous  diroit  rien  car  vous  le
priez  foir  &  matin,  &  a  tout  heure ;  &  nous  autres
nous  ne  le  fcauons  pas  prier,  voila  pourquoy  il  nous
laiffera  mourir.

Pour  ce  qui  touche  l'Hofpital,  ie  refpondy  que
nous  auions  affez  de  malades  a  Kebec,  &  qu'il  falloit
attendre  qu'on  fut  mieux  accommode,  &  qu'on  eut
plus  de  forces  pour  fecourir  tant  de  pauures  mife-
rables.  Au  refte,  toutes  ces  contradictions  font  les
vrays  arguments de la  conuerfion de ces  peuples,


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  55


submit  to  his  duty  —  I  said  that  if  he  attacked  God,
he  would  not  remain  long  unpunished.  He  promised
that  he  would  go  down  to  Kebec  with  me,  for  I  was
then  at  the  three  Rivers.  I  think  that  he  had  some
good  will,  but  he  did  not  keep  his  word.  Hardly
had  I  left  than  he  and  his  wife  —  who  was  also  bap-
tized, and  was  not  much  better  than  her  husband  —
both  died.  This  made  the  Savages  say  that  I  had
caused  their  death.

It  happened,  almost  at  the  same  time,  that  a  Sor-
cerer or  Juggler  was  breathing  on  a  sick  person,  at
about  ten  o'clock  at  night,  because  he  dared  not  [51]
do  it  in  the  daytime.  I  heard  of  it  and,  hastening
there  with  one  of  our  Fathers,  I  upbraided  him  and
made  him  cease,  threatening  him  in  God's  name.
Before  day  broke,  this  miserable  man  was  attacked
by  the  contagion  or  smallpox,  which  rendered  him
horrible  to  look  at.  This  astonished  the  Savages,
and  led  some  of  them  to  think  that  we  wished  their
death  and  that  God  granted  our  wish.  In  vain  I  told
them  that  God  would  be  angry  with  us  and  would
punish  us,  if  we  wished  evil  to  any  one.  '  Even  if
you  killed  one  of  us,"  they  said,  "  God  would  say
nothing  to  you,  for  you  pray  to  him  morning  and
evening,  and  at  all  hours ;  and  we  do  not  know  how
to  pray  to  him;  that  is  why  he  will  leave  us  to  die."

As  regards  the  Hospital,  I  replied  that  we  had
enough  sick  people  at  Kebec  and  that  it  would  be
necessary  to  wait  till  there  were  better  accommoda-
tion and  more  adequate  means  for  succoring  so  many
poor  unfortunates.  However,  all  these  vexations
are  true  proofs  of  the  conversion  of  these  peoples ;
we  are  beginning  to  observe  this  truth  so  often,  that
they  no  longer  cause  us  any  fear. They  are  like  the


56


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  16


nous  commencons  a  fi  bien  remarquer  ceite  verity,
qu'elles  ne  nous  font  plus  trembler:  elles  reffemblent
aux  froidures  &  aux  vents,  qui  font  prendre  [52]  de
bonnes  racines  aux  bleds  &  aux  arbres,  lors  qu  ils
paroiffent  deuoir  tout  rompre  &  tout  perdre.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  57

cold  and  the  winds,  which  cause  [52]  wheat  and  trees
to  throw  out  strong  roots,  while  appearing  about  to
break  and  destroy  everything.


58  LES  RELA  TJONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  16


CHAPT. IV.

DES  CHRESTIENS  OU  SAUUAGES  BAPTISEZ  EN  GENERAL.

NOVS  auons  de  deux  fortes  de  Chreftiens  en  ces
contrees ;  les  vns  ont  efte  baptifez  en  extremi-
ty de  maladie  auec  vne  inftni(5tion  affez  legere,
mais  fuffifante  pour  receuoir  ce  Sacremet  en  cet  eftat,
les  autres  ont  efte  baptifez  en  pleine  fante  apres  auoir
efte  bien  inftruits  es  principaux  &  plus  neceffaires
articles  de  noftre  creance :  les  vns  &  les  autres  montent
iufques  au  nombre  de  quatre  cent  cinquante  ou  enui-
ron,  comprenant  les  Hurons  qui  font  bien  la  plus
grade  partie.  Or  pour  parler  de  ceux  d'icy  bas,  ie
diray  en  premier  lieu  que  ie  n'en  fcay  aucun  de  ceux
qui  ont  efte  baptifez  en  maladie,  qui  meprife  aperte-
met  fon  Baptefme,  il  y  en  a  bien  deux  ou  trois  qui
fe  font  mariez  a  des  femmes  Sauuages  non  [53]  Chre-
ftiennes,  pource  qu'ils  n'en  trouuent  point  de  bapti-
fees  qui  les  vueillent  6poufer,  on  agit  doucement
auec  eux,  on  les  laiffe  venir  aux  prieres,  mais  on  ne
les  recoit  pas  encor  aux  Sacrements :  Lac  potum  vobis
dedi,  on  leur  donne  du  laidt  a  boire  comme  a  des  en-
fans.  L'experience  nous  apprend  qu'il  ne  faut  defef-
perer  de  perfonne.

Pour  tous  les  autres,  c'eft  vne  benedidtion  bien
fenfible  de  les  voir  affifter  aux  prieres  &  aux  inftru-
dtions  qu'on  leur  fait ;  fe  trouuer  a  la  Meffe  les  Feftes,
&  les  Dimanches,  &  quelques-vns  les  iours  ouuriers ;
venir  a  Vefpres  quand  on  les  chante  en  noftre  Chap-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  59


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  THE  CHRISTIANS  OR  BAPTIZED  SAVAGES  IN  GENERAL.

WE  have  two  kinds  of  Christians  in  these  coun-
tries :  some  have  been  baptized  when  very
ill,  after  rather  slight  instruction  but  suffi-
cient to  allow  of  their  receiving  that  Sacrament  in
that  condition ;  the  others  have  been  baptized  in  full
health,  after  having  been  well  instructed  in  the  prin-
cipal and  most  necessary  articles  of  our  creed.  Al-
together, they  number  four  hundred  and  fifty  or
thereabout,  including  the  Hurons,  who  constitute  by
far  the  majority.  Now,  to  speak  of  those  down  here,
I  may  say,  in  the  first  place,  that  I  do  not  know  a
single  one  of  those  baptized  when  ill,  who  openly
scorns  his  Baptism.  There  are  two  or  three  of  them
who  have  married  Savage  women  who  are  not  [53]
Christians,  because  they  were  unable  to  find  any  bap-
tized women  willing  to  marry  them.  We  deal  leni-
ently with  them,  allowing  them  to  come  to  prayers,
but  we  do  not  yet  admit  them  to  the  Sacraments.
Lac  potum  vobis  dedi;  we  give  them  milk  to  drink,  as
unto  babes.  Experience  teaches  us  that  we  should
not  despair  of  any  one.

As  for  all  the  others,  it  is  a  blessing  deeply  felt  to
see  them  attending  prayers  and  the  instructions  that
we  give  them ;  present  at  Mass  on  Festivals  and  Sun-
days, and  some  on  working  days ;  coming  to  Vespers
when  they  are  sung  in  our  Chapel  at  Sillery,  in  the
residence  of  Saint  Joseph ;  chanting  the  Pater  and


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JASUITES [Vol.16

pelle  de  Sillery,  en  la  refidence  de  Saindt  Iofeph,
chanter  le  Pater,  &  le  Credo,  les  Commandemens  de
Dieu,  &  quelques  Hymnes  compofes  en  leur  Langue,
fe  confeffer  auec  vne  candeur  admirable,  fe  commu-
nier  auec  deuotion  &  refpect,  reciter  tous  les  iours
leurs  Chappelets  a  l'honneur  de  la  faindte  Vierge.
C'eft  vne  confolation  bien  fenfible  de  voir  des  Sau-
uages dans  ces  faindts  exercices.  II  y  en  a  qui
viennent  demander  a  Noftre  Seigneur  fa  faindte
benediction  dans  la  Chappelle,  quand  ils  veulent  [54]
entreprendre  quelque  voyage ;  &  au  retour  luy  vien-
nent auffi  rendre  graces  de  les  auoir  conferue\  En  vn
mot,  ie  rei'tere  ce  que  i'ay  dit  cent  fois,  fi  nous  auions
moyen  de  fecourir  fortement  les  Sauuages  &  les
arrefter,  nous  verrions  vne  grande  benedidtion  fur  ces
peuples  beaucoup  plus  dociles  aux  chofes  de  la  Foy,
que  nous  n'euffions  ose  efperer,  comme  on  verra  des
remarques  que  ie  vay  faire.

I'ay  fceu  de  bonne  part  que  quelques  femmes  im-
pudentes  s'approchans  la  nuidt  de  quelques  hommes,
les  ont  follicitez  a  mal  en  fecret,  elles  n'ont  eu  pour
refponfe  que  ces  parolles:  Ie  croy  en  Dieu,  ie  le  prie
tous  les  iours ;  il  defend  ces  actions,  ie  ne  les  fcau-
rois  commettre.

On  loue  tant  la  refponfe  de  cefte  feruante  Chre-
ftienne  de  l'Eglife  de  Lion,  laquelle  inuitee  au  peche-
par  fon  maiftre  encor  Payen,  refpondit;  Chrijiiana
ego  fum,  nihil  fceleris  admittunt  Chrijliani:  Ie  suis
Chreftienne,  les  Chreftiens  ne  commettent  point  de
crimes  fi  enormes.  I'ay  appris  que  quelques  ieunes
femmes  veufues  Sauuages,  &  quelques  filles  tonici-
ties &  preffees  de  j'abandonner  a  des  Sauuages  qui
les  fecouroient  &  aydoient  a  viure,  ont  [55]  refpondu


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  61

the  Credo,  the  Commandments  of  God  and  some
Hymns  composed  in  their  Language ;  making  their
confessions  with  admirable  candor;  receiving  com-
munion with  devotion  and  respect;  reciting  the  Ro-
sary every  day  in  honor  of  the  blessed  Virgin.  It
is  a  heartfelt  consolation  to  us  to  see  Savages  en-
gaged in  these  holy  exercises.  There  are  some  who
come  to  ask  Our  Lord  for  his  holy  blessing  in  the
Chapel,  when  they  wish  [54]  to  undertake  a  journey;
and,  on  their  return,  come  also  to  give  him  thanks
for  having  preserved  them.  In  a  word,  I  repeat
what  I  have  said  a  hundred  times, —  if  we  had  the
means  to  give  considerable  assistance  to  the  Savages,
and  to  induce  them  to  become  sedentary,  we  would
see  a  great  blessing  overspread  these  peoples,  who
are  much  more  docile  in  matters  of  the  Faith  than
we  had  dared  to  expect,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  re-
marks that  I  am  about  to  make.

I  have  heard  on  good  authority  that  some  shame-
less women,  who  had  approached  some  men  at  night
and  solicited  them  to  do  evil  in  secret,  received  for
answer,  only  these  words :  "  I  believe  in  God,  I  pray
to  him  everyday;  he  forbids  such  actions, —  lean-
not  commit  them."

Much  praise  is  given  to  the  answer  of  that  Chris-
tian servant  of  the  Church  in  Lyons,  who,  when
urged to sin by her still Pagan master, replied:

Christiana  ego  sum,  nihil  sceleris  admit tunt  Christiani;
I  am  a  Christian ;  Christians  do  not  commit  so  great
sins."  I  have  heard  that  some  young  widowed  Sav-
age women  and  some  girls,  solicited  and  urged  to
abandon  themselves  to  Savages  who  gave  them
assistance  and  helped  them  to  live,  [55]  replied  that
they  were  baptized  and  never  committed  such of-


62  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

qu'elles  efloient  baptifees,  &  qu'elles  ne  commet-
t[r]oient  iamais  de  telles  offences:  Cela  n'eft-il  pas
£tonant  au  pays  de  la  barbarie  ?

II  y  a  vne  tres-mechante  couftume  parmy  les  Sau-
uages :  Ceux  qui  recherchent  vne  fille  on  vne  f emme
en  mariage,  lny  vont  faire  1' amour  la  nuidt,  il  y  a
bien  du  mal  das  ces  vifites,  mais  non  pas  toufiours,
car  les  femmes  Sauuages  de  ces  quartiers  font  affez
retenues,  craignant  de  ne  point  trouuer  party  fi  elles
fe  rendent  communes.  Or  pour  exterminer  vne  fi
mechante  facon  de  faire,  nous  recommandons  aux
filles  Chreftiennes  de  ne  donner  aucune  refponce  a
ceux  qui  les  recherchent  en  ce  temps-la,  il  s'en  eft
trouue  qui  l'ont  tres-bien  garde,  rebutans  ceux  qui
les  venoient  vifiter,  iufques  a  nous  venir  prier  de
leur  defedre  femblables  vifites,  croyans  que  ces  ieu-
nes  gens  nous  obei'roient  pluftoft  qu'a  elles.  D'au-
tres  leur  dif oient  feulement  ce  peu  de  paroles ;  Allez
vous-en  trouuer  les  Peres,  faites-vous  inftruire,  &
baptifer,  puis  ie  vous  parleray,  non  pas  la  nuidt,  mais
le  iour.  Trois  ieunes  Algonquins  de  l'lfle  extant
defcendus  a.  Kebec,  &  voulat  faire  l'amour  felon  leur
couftume,  [56]  s'adrefferent  a  des  filles  Chreftiennes,
ils  furent  bien  eftonnez  quand  ces  filles  leur  dirent
qu'ils  s'adreffaffent  a  nous  pour  c6t  affaire,  &  qu'elles
ne  concluroiet  rien  fans  noftre  auis.  Ces  bonnes  gens
vindrent  a  la  fin  nous  trouuer,  &  nous  demanderent
fi  nous  gouuernions  les  filles  Sauuages,  au  commence-
ment nous  ne  fcauions  pas  ce  qu'ils  vouloient  dire,
enfin  l'ayant  conceu,  nous  leur  fifmes  entendre  que  ces
vifites  ne  valoient  rien,  &  qu'ils  ne  pouuoient  pas
pretendre  d'epoufer  aucune  fille  Chreftienne  qu'ils
ne  fuffent  baptifez. Si  toutes  auoient  la  retenue  de


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  63

fenses. Is  not  this  astonishing  in  the  land  of  bar-
barism ?

There  is  a  most  evil  custom  among  the  Savages.
Those  who  seek  a  girl  or  a  woman  in  marriage  go
to  her  to  make  love  at  night.  There  is  much  wrong
in  these  visits,  but  not  always,  for  the  Savage  women
of  these  parts  are  sufficiently  reserved,  fearing
that  they  may  not  find  a  husband  if  they  make  them-
selves common.  Now, — in  order  to  extirpate  so  mis-
chievous a  usage, — we  counsel  the  young  Christian
girls  to  give  no  answer  to  those  who  seek  them  at
such  times.  Some  have  followed  this  advice  very
well,  spurning  those  who  came  to  visit  them  and
even  coming  to  beg  us  to  forbid  such  visits  to  them,
thinking  that  the  young  men  would  obey  us  better
than  them.  Others  only  said  these  few  words  to
them :  ' '  Go  and  see  the  Fathers ;  be  instructed  and
baptized;  then  I  will  speak  to  you, —  not  at  night,
but  in  the  daytime. "  Three  young  Algonquins  from
the  Island,  having  come  down  to  Kebec,  and  wish-
ing to  make  love  according  to  their  custom,  [56]
addressed  themselves  to  Christian  girls.  They  were
greatly  astonished  when  these  girls  told  them  to
apply  to  us  about  the  matter,  and  that  they  would
decide  nothing  without  our  advice.  These  good  peo-
ple finally  came  to  us  and  asked  us  if  we  governed
the  Savage  girls.  At  first,  we  did  not  know  what
they  meant ;  but,  having  at  last  comprehended  it,  we
gave  them  to  understand  that  these  visits  were  of  no
avail,  and  that  they  could  not  expect  to  marry  any
Christian  girl  unless  they  were  baptized.  If  all  had
the  reserve  of  those  I  have  just  mentioned,  it  would
be  a  great  consolation ;  but  unfortunately  some  of
them,  when  far  away  from  our  settlements,  marry  at


64  LES  EEL  A  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  16

celles  dont  ie  viens  de  parler,  ce  feroit  vne  grande
confolation ;  mais  le  mal-heur  eft  que  quelques-vnes
eftant  eloignees  de  nos  habitations,  fe  marient  a  la
follicitation  de  leurs  parents,  &  tons  leurs  manages
n'eftans  pas  felon  Dieu,  fe  rompent  auffi  ayfement
qu'ils  ont  efte  legerement  contradtez.

Nous  en  auons  confirme  quelques  vns  dans  leurs
mariages  depuis  leur  Baptefme ;  ceux-la,  comme  nous
efperons,  feront  fermes  &  conftans.  I'entendois  vne
fois  vne  femme  inftruire  fon  raary  fur  la  Confeffion,
i'eftois  confole  de  voir  la  candeur  de  [57]  ces  bons
Neophytes.  Donne-toy  bien  de  garde,  difoit-elle,  de
cacher  aucun  de  tes  pechez,  recherche  les  dans  ta
confcience,  &  les  dy  tous  a  Dieu,  c'eft  a  luy  que  tu
parle,  le  Pere  n'eft  la  que  pour  tenir  fa  place,  a  caufe
que  Dieu  ne  fe  fait  pas  voir  en  terre,  mais  fur  tout
fois  bien  marry  de  l'auoir  offenfe,  car  fi  tu  n'as  dou-
leur  de  tes  offenfes,  il  ne  fe  fera  rien.

Voicy  vn  poindt  qui  m'a  fort  confole.  Les  Hiro-
quois  ayant  paru  proche  des  trois  Riuieres,  les  Sau-
uages  furent  conuoquez  de  tous  coftez :  eftant  r'affem-
blez,  ils  firent  plufieurs  feftins  de  guerre,  oil  il  faut
chanter,  dancer,  hurler,  &  tout  cela  par  fuperftition
pour  auoir  de  l'auantage  fur  leurs  ennemis,  comme
ils  dancent  les  vns  apres  les  autres,  ils  fe  donnent  le
fignal,  choififfant  celuy  qu'ils  veulent  faire  dancer
apres  eux :  II  arriua  que  l'vn  de  ces  danceurs  porta
le  bouquet  ou  le  fignal  a  Francois  Xauier,  vn  de  nos
nouueaux  Chrefliens;  luy  le  reiette,  renoncant  a  ces
dances  fuperftitieuf es :  on  le  pref ente  a  Ignace  Amis-
Ktfape,  il  en  fit  de  mefme :  on  le  pref  ente  a  quelques
autres  Chrefliens,  tous  imiterent  la  hardieffe  de  ces
braues  Athletes,  fe  mocquans  des  badineries  de  [58]


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  65

the  solicitation  of  their  relatives,  and  all  these  mar-
riages, not  being  according  to  God,  are  broken  off
as  easily  as  they  were  heedlessly  contracted.

We  have  confirmed  some  in  their  marriages  since
their  Baptism.  These,  we  hope,  will  remain  firm
and  constant.  I  once  heard  a  woman  instructing  her
husband  upon  Confession.  I  was  comforted  at  seeing
the  candor  of  [57]  these  good  Neophytes.  "  Be  very
careful,"  she  said,  "  not  to  hide  any  of  thy  sins;  seek
for  them  in  thy  conscience,  and  tell  them  all  to  God;
it  is  to  him  that  thou  speakest, —  the  Father  is  there
but  to  take  his  place,  because  God  does  not  make
himself  seen  on  earth.  But,  above  all,  be  very  sorry
for  having  offended  him ;  for,  if  thou  hast  no  sorrow
for  thy  sins,  nothing  will  come  of  it. ' '

Here  is  a  matter  which  has  afforded  me  much  con-
solation. The  Hiroquois  having  made  their  appear-
ance near  the  three  Rivers,  the  Savages  were  gath-
ered from  all  sides.  Having  met  together,  they  made
several  war  feasts,  at  which  they  must  sing,  dance,
and  yell, — all  this  through  superstition,  to  obtain
advantage  over  their  enemies.  As  they  dance,  one
after  another,  they  give  each  a  signal,  selecting  him
whom  they  wish  to  have  dance  after  them.  It  hap-
pened that  one  of  these  dancers  gave  the  bouquet  or
signal  to  Francois  Xavier,  one  of  our  new  Christians,
who  refused  it,  renouncing  these  superstitious  dances.
It  was  tendered  to  Ignace  Amiskwape,  who  did  the
same.  It  was  presented  to  some  other  Christians
who  all  imitated  the  courage  of  these  brave  Athletes,
deriding  the  follies  of  [58]  their  Countrymen  who
placed  their  hopes  in  these  ridiculous  actions.

On  another  occasion,  one  of  our  Fathers  having
been  informed  that  a  great  Feast  of  meat  was  being


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

leurs Compatriottes,  lefquels mettoient  leurs  efpe-
rances  en  ces  adtions  ridicules.

Vne  autrefois  quelqu'vn  de  nos  Peres  ayant  eu
aduis  qu'on  faifoit  vn  grand  Feftin  de  viande  vn  iour
de  Vendredy  dans  vne  cabane,  demanda  aux  femmes
qui  en  fortoient,  fi  les  Chreftiens  n'eftoient  pas  des
conuiez,  elles  refpondirent  qu'ils  en  eftoient  en  effect.,
mais  qu'ils  ne  mangeoiet  point,  qu'ils  fe  trouuoient
la  feulement  pour  s'entretenir  &  difcourir  auec  les
autres.  Le  Pere  entrant  dans  la  cabane  fur  la  fin  du
banquet,  trouua  tous  les  Chrefties  auec  leurs  plats
remplis  de  viands  fans  y  auoir  touche,  ils  la  recoiuent
pour  la  donner  a  ceux  qui  ne  font  pas  encor  baptifez ;
bref,  toute  l'affemblee  pria  le  Pere  de  leur  faire
rendre  graces  a  Dieu,  &  de  leur  declarer  quelques
poindts  de  noftre  creance.

Ayant  quitte  la  Refidence  de  S.  Iofeph  pour  quel-
ques affaires,  le  Pere  a  qui  i'en  laiffay  le  foin,  me
recriuit  en  ces  termes ;

On  cognoift  bien  depuis  voftre  depart  ceux  des
Sauuages  qui  veulent  croire  en  verite,  &  ceux  qui
n'ont  que  de  l'apparence :  Ceux-la  font  affidus  aux  pri-
eres,  [59]  &  ceux-cy  n'y  viennent  quafi  point  depuis
que  vous  eftes  party.  Pour  les  Chreftiens  ils  don-
nent  tres-grande  edification,  ils  ne  manquent  pas  aux
prieres  publiques,  &  quelques- vns  d'eux  affiftent  tous
les  iours  a  la  faindte  Meffe  des  quatre  heures  du
matin;  ce  qui  cofond  &  encourage  nos  Francois  qui
font  icy.

Vne  autre  Pere  laifse  au  mefme  endroit,  me  manda
ces  parolles.

Fay  ce  matin  entendu  de  confeffion  vingt-deux
Sauuages  Chreftiens,  il  aborde  icy  tous  les  iours  des


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  67

held  on  a  Friday  in  a  cabin,  asked  the  women  com-
ing out  of  it  whether  there  were  not  some  Christians
among  the  guests.  They  replied  that,  in  truth,  there
were  some;  but  that  they  were  not  eating,  being
there  only  to  chat  and  converse  with  the  others.  The
Father  entered  the  cabin  towards  the  end  of  the  ban-
quet, and  found  all  the  Christians  with  their  dishes
filled  with  meat  which  they  had  not  touched,  receiv-
ing it  only  to  give  it  to  those  who  were  not  yet
baptized.  In  short,  the  entire  company  asked  the
Father  to  return  thanks  to  God  for  them,  and  to
explain  some  points  of  our  doctrine  to  them.

Having  left  the  Residence  of  St.  Joseph  to  attend
to  some  matters,  the  Father  whom  I  left  in  its  charge
wrote  me  as  follows:

"  We  easily  recognize,  since  your  departure,  those
Savages  who  really  wish  to  believe  and  those  who
only  feign  to  do  so.  The  former  attend  prayers  reg-
ularly [59]  and  the  latter  hardly  come  at  all  since  you
went  away.  As  for  the  Christians,  their  conduct  is
very  edifying;  they  never  fail  to  attend  the  public
prayers,  and  some  of  them  are  present  at  holy  Mass
every  day,  as  early  as  four  o'clock  in  the  morning.
This  rebukes  and  incites  our  French  who  are  here."

Another  Father,  left  at  the  same  place,  wrote  me
the  following  words:

"  This  morning,  I  heard  the  confession  of  twenty-
two  Christian  Savages.  Canoes  put  in  here  every
day.  I  cannot,  alone,  suffice  for  them  all.  Hasten
your  return,  if  you  please,"  etc.

The  Savages  love  their  children  above  all  things.
They  are  like  the  Monkeys, —  they  choke  them  by
embracing  them  too  closely.  They  have,  however,
a  great  fear  of  what  others  may  say  about  them  and


68  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

canots,  ie  ne  puis  moy  feul  fuffir  a  tous,  preffez  voftre
retour,  s'il  votis  plaift,  &c.

Les  Sauuages  ayment  vniquement  leurs  enfans,  ils
reffemblent  an  Cinge,  ils  les  eftouffent  pour  les
embraffer  trop  eflroitement,  ils  ont  encor  vn  grand
refpedt  humain,  n'ofans  donner  leurs  enfans  de  peur
d'eftre  blafmez  de  leurs  Compatriotes.  Voyant  vne
bonne  femme  Chreftienne  proche  de  la  mort ;  ie  luy
demanday  vne  fienne  petite  fille  pour  la  faire  efleuer
chez  les  Reuerendes  Meres  Vrfulines,  dot  nous  auions
eu  nouuelle  de  Tadouffac;  cefte  bonne  femme  me
dit:  Pour  moy  i'en  fuis  bien  contente,  ie  fcay  bien
que  vous  auez  [60]  vn  grand  foin  des  pauures  orphe-
lins;  mais  fcachez  vn  petit  de  fon  Oncle  s'il  en  fera
content:  de  bonne  fortune  cet  Oncle  eftoit  Chreftien,
ie  luy  demanday  s'il  feroit  content  que  nous  fiffions
eleuer  cefte  petite  fille  auec  ces  bonnes  Religieufes,
il  me  repartit  que  c'eftoit  l'enfant  de  fon  propre  frere,
&  qu'il  ne  la  pouuoit  quitter  fans  eflre  blafme  des
fiens.  Alors  ie  luy  repliquay,  que  i'eftois  bien  aife
qu'elle  fufl  auec  luy,  &  qu'il  la  feroit  efleuer  en
la  Foy,  mais  ie  craignois  feulement  que  Dieu  ne
luy  demandaft  compte  de  cet  enfant,  a  raifon  que  fa
femme  ne  la  conferuoit  pas  comme  il  faut,  &  que
pour  moy  ie  m'en  defchargeois  fur  luy:  Ce  bon
homme  eftonne  me  l'a  donna  fur  l'heure  pour  la  pre-
f enter  a  ces  bonnes  Meres  a  leur  arriuee ;  cefte  adtion
me  fit  cognoiftre  que  la  crainte  de  defplaire  a  Dieu
s'enracinoit  dans  l'ame  de  ces  pauures  Neophytes.

Vn  Francois  voulant  faire  trauailler  vn  iour  de
Fefte  vne  femme  Sauuage  Chreftienne  fans  fcauoir
qu'elle  fuft  baptizee,  cefte  bonne  femme  luy  dit:
T'eft-il  permis  de  trauailler  auiourd'huy? Ie  Fran-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j9  69

are  afraid  to  give  their  children,  lest  they  be  blamed
by  their  Countrymen.  Seeing  a  good  Christian  wom-
an at  the  point  of  death,  I  asked  her  for  one  of  her
little  girls,  to  have  her  brought  up  by  the  Reverend
Ursuline  Mothers,  of  whose  arrival  we  had  received
news  from  Tadoussac.  The  good  woman  said  to  me :
V  For  my  part,  I  am  well  pleased  at  this;  I  know
very  well  that  you  take  [60]  great  care  of  poor
orphans;  but  question  her  Uncle  a  little,  whether  he
will  agree  to  it."  By  good  fortune,  this  Uncle  was
a  Christian.  I  asked  him  whether  he  would  be  satis-
fied if  we  had  the  little  girl  brought  up  by  these  good
Nuns.  He  replied  that  she  was  the  child  of  his  own
brother,  and  that  he  could  not  give  her  up  without
being  blamed  by  his  relatives.  I  then  answered  that
I  was  glad  that  she  should  be  with  him,  and  that  he
should  have  her  reared  in  the  Faith ;  but  I  only  feared
that  God  would  require  from  him  an  account  of  the
child  because  his  wife  did  not  take  proper  care  of  her ;
and  that,  for  my  part,  I  transferred  to  him  my  re-
sponsibility. The  good  man  was  astonished  and  gave
her  to  me  at  once,  to  be  handed  over  to  the  good
Mothers  on  their  arrival.  This  incident  showed  me
that  the  fear  of  displeasing  God  was  becoming  rooted
in  the  souls  of  these  poor  Neophytes.

A  Frenchman  wished  to  make  a  Christian  Savage
woman  work  on  a  Feast  day,  not  knowing  that  she
had  been  baptized.  The  good  woman  said  to  him :
"Is  it  permitted  to  thee  to  work  to-day?"  The
Frenchman  having  replied  that  it  was  not,  "  Why
then,"  said  she,  "  dost  thou  wish  to  make  me  work,
since  [61]  I  believe,  and  pray  to  God,  and  wish  to  go
to  Heaven  as  well  as  thou  ? ' '

Non  reguiritur  in  Christ iano  initium,  sed  finis,  a  great


70  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESU1TES [Vol.16

9ois  ayant  refpondu  que  non ;  pourquoy  done,  dit
elle,  me  veux-tu  faire  trauailler  puifque  [61]  ie  croy,
&  que  ie  prie  Dieu,  &  que  i'ay  enuie  d'aller  au  Ciel
auffi  bien  que  toy?

Non  requiritur  in  Chriftiano  initium,  fed  finis,  dit  vn
grand  Saindt,  Ce  n'eft  pas  tout  de  bien  commencer,
tout  gift  a  bien  conclure  le  dernier  periode  de  fa  vie.
I'ay  parle  6s  Relations  precedentes  d'vn  ieune  homme
appelle  Paul  Aniska8askb'fit  deuenu  aueugle  depuis  fon
Baptefme ;  ce  bon  Neophyte  eft  mort  comme  il  auoit
vefcu  depuis  fa  conuerfion,  e'eft  a  dire,  fort  faindte-
ment.  Quand  nous  luy  donnafmes  le  Sacrement  de
l'Extrefme-Ondtion,  il  prenoit  le  Crucifix  qu'on  luy
prefentoit,  le  baifoit,  l'apoftrophoit  tendrement ;  e'eft
toy  qui  m'a  donne  la  vie,  ie  te  la  rends  maintenant,  tu
es  bon,  ayez  pitie  de  mon  ame,  ie  ne  te  demande
point  la  fante,  tu  es  le  maiftre,  fay  comme  tu  voudras.
Ce  pauure  ieune  homme  a  fouffert  auec  la  patience
d'vn  lob  depuis  fon  Baptefme,  &  nous  a  fait  dire  a
fa  mort,  qu'il  n'y  a  cceur  fi  dur,  que  le  feu  du  Ciel
n'amoliffe.

Ie  vay  coucher  icy  le  bout  d'vne  Lettre  qui  nous
apprend  que  la  Foy  a  bien  de  la  force  dans  vn  cceur,
quoy  que  barbare.  L'an  pafse  nous  baptifafmes  vn
ieune  garcon  [62]  aage  d'enuiron  quatorze  ans,  nous
eftions  bien  en  doute  fi  nous  luy  accorderions  cefte
faueur,  car  il  eftoit  affez  peu  inftruidt,  mais  comme
il  s'en  retournoit  en  fon  pays,  ou  fe  retire  la  nation
des  Atikamegues,  nous  le  fifmes  Chreftiens,  il  fut
nome  Iacques;  ce  pauure  ieune  homme  eftat  tombe
malade,  a  inftruit  fon  pere  le  mieux  qu'il  a  pu,  l'a
fait  prier  Dieu,  &  deuant  que  de  rendre  les  derniers
foufpirs,  luy  a  recommand6  de  fe  venir  faire  baptifer


1639]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  71

Saint  has  said.  To  commence  well  is  not  all;  but
everything  consists  in  bringing  the  final  period  of
our  lives  to  a  good  conclusion.  In  the  previous  Rela-
tions I  have  spoken  of  a  young  man  called  Paul  Anis-
kawaskousit,  who  became  blind  shortly  after  his  Bap-
tism. This  good  Neophyte  died  as  he  had  lived
since  his  conversion, — that  is,  in  a  most  holy  man-
ner. When  we  administered  to  him  the  Sacrament
of  Extreme  Unction,  he  took  the  Crucifix  that  was
presented  to  him,  kissed  it,  and  lovingly  addressed  it :
"  It  is  thou  who  hast  given  me  life,  I  now  return  it
to  thee;  thou  art  good,  have  pity  on  my  soul.  I  do
not  ask  thee  for  health ;  thou  art  master ;  thy  will  be
done."  The  poor  young  man  had  suffered  with  the
patience  of  a  Job,  ever  since  his  Baptism,  and,  at  his
death,  caused  us  to  say  that  there  is  no  heart  so  hard
that  Heaven's  fire  does  not  soften.

I  shall  here  insert  the  end  of  a  Letter  which  teaches
us  that  Faith  has  great  power  in  the  heart,  even  of  a
barbarian.  Last  year  we  baptized  a  young  lad,  [62]
about  fourteen  years  of  age.  We  were  in  great  doubt
whether  we  should  grant  him  that  favor,  for  he  was
but  little  instructed;  but,  as  he  was  about  to  return
to  his  own  country,  where  the  nation  of  Atikamegues
takes  refuge,9  we  made  him  a  Christian,  and  he  was
named  Jacques.  This  poor  youth,  falling  ill,  in-
structed his  father  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  made
him  pray  to  God,  and,  before  drawing  his  last  breath,
advised  him  to  go  to  the  three  Rivers  to  be  baptized,
which  he  did.  This  is  what  was  written  to  me
about  it :

"  The  Attikamegues,  or  white  fish  —  such  is  the
name  of  that  nation  —  came  down  to  the  three  Riv-
ers. I  instructed  them  a  little,  and  they  gave  me


72  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.16

aux  trois  Riuieres, ce  qu'il a fait: Voicy  ce  qu'on
m'en  efcrit.

Les  Attikamegues  cm  poiffons  blancs,  c'eft  le  nom
de  ceux  de  cefte  nation,  font  defcendus  aux  trois  Ri-
uieres; ie  les  ay  vn  peu  inftruidts,  ils  m'ont  fort  con-
tentez ;  Vn  vieillard  entre  autres  nous  a  fi  bien  prefse,
que  nous  luy  auons  accorde  le  Baptefme;  c'eft  le
pere  de  Iacques  tfPaffeb'iga,  que  nous  baptifafmes  l'an
pafse,  ce  pauure  garcon  a  perfeuere  en  la  Foy,  encor
qu'il  fut  bien  efloigne  de  nous,  il  a  enfeigne  fon  Pere,
&  fe  voyant  furpris  d'vne  groffe  maladie,  il  luy  re-
commanda  a  la  mort  de  nous  venir  trouuer  pour  fe
faire  inftruire,  il  m'a  efionne ;  il  eftoit  attentif  [63]  a
merueille:  Voila,  difoit-il  par  fois,  ce  que  ie  deuois
fcauoir  il  y  a  long-temps,  iufques  icy  ie  n'ay  pas  vef-
cu,  ie  reffemblois  a  vn  mort,  mon  fils  a  commence  a
me  donner  la  vie ;  hafte  toy  mon  fils,  difoit-il  au  Pere,
de  m'inftruire,  &  de  me  baptifer,  car  ie  ne  veux  pas
aller  dans  le  feu.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  73

much  satisfaction.  An  old  man,  among  others,
pressed  us  so  urgently  that  we  granted  him  Baptism.
He  is  the  father  of  Jacques  Oupassewigan  whom  we
baptized  last  year.  That  poor  boy  persevered  in  the
Faith ;  although  he  was  very  far  away  from  us ;  he
taught  his  Father,  and,  finding  himself  attacked  by  a
serious  illness,  he  advised  him,  on  his  deathbed,  to
go  to  us  to  receive  instruction.  He  surprised  me;
he  was  attentive  [63]  to  a  wonderful  degree.  '  This,'
he  would  sometimes  say,  '  is  what  I  should  have
known  long  ago;  hitherto  I  have  not  lived;  I  was
like  a  dead  man,  my  son  commenced  to  give  me  life.'
•  Hasten  my  son,'  he  would  say  to  the  Father,  '  to
instruct  and  baptize  me,  for  I  do  not  wish  to  go  into
the  fire.'  "


74  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16


CHAPITRE  V.

DES  PREMIERES  FAMILLES  RENDUES  SEDENTAIRES.

CELVY  qui  a  commence  de  donner  fecours  a.  nos
Sauuages  pour  fe  loger,  &  defricher  la  terre,
a  iett£,  comme  nous  efperons,  les  fondemens
d'vne  bourgade  Chreftienne,  qui  eft  toute  remplie  de
benedictions  en  fa  naiffance.  Les  deux  premieres
Families  qui  ont  feruy  de  premieres  pierres  a  cet  edi-
fice, ou  a  cefte  nouuelle  Eglife,  non  feulement  ont
perfeuere  dans  leurs  deffeins,  mais  elles  en  ont  encor
attire  d'autres  qui  commencent  de  les  imiter,  tout
gift  a  les  ayder.  Monfieur  [64]  Gand  home  vrayemet
charitable,  voyant  le  grand  bien  qu'on  opere  dans
leur  ames,  a  augmente  noftre  fecours  de  quelques
hommes  qu'il  a  gage  pour  cefte  annee,  &  la  fuiuante.
II  voit  de  fes  yeux  les  difncultez  du  pays,  le  peu
d'auance  qu'on  fait  dans  la  longueur  &  la  rigueur
des  hyuers,  &  cependant  pour  ioiiir  du  fruidt  qu'on
recueille  de  ces  nouuelles  plantes,  il  faut  de  grands
frais  pour  les  cultiuer.  Voicy  les  premices  des  deux
premieres  Families  qui  fe  font  arreft^es,  &  qui  donne
le  branle  aux  autres:  le  les  dedie  de  bon  cceur  a
celuy  qui  leur  a  donne  le  premier  fecours  &  a  tous
ceux  qui  fauorifent  ce  grand  deffein.

Premierement,  tous  ceux  qui  compofent  ces  deux
Families  font  regenerez  dans  le  Sang  de  Iesvs-
Christ.  Secondement,  quoy  qu'ils  foient  en  bon
nombre  tous  logez  dans  vne  mefme  maifon,  hommes,


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  15


CHAPTER  V.

OF THE FIRST FAMILIES THAT BECAME SEDENTARY.

HE  who  has  begun  to  give  assistance  to  our
Savages  to  enable  them  to  house  themselves
and  to  till  the  soil  has  laid,  we  hope,  the
foundations  of  a  Christian  village  which  is  filled
with  blessings  at  its  birth.  The  first  two  Families
who  served  as  foundation  stones  for  this  edifice  or
this  new  Church,  have  not  only  persevered  in  their
intentions  but  have  also  attracted  others,  who  begin
to  imitate  them.  It  is  all-important  to  help  them.
Monsieur  [64]  Gand,  a  truly  charitable  man,  seeing
what  a  good  effect  we  are  producing  on  their  souls,
has  increased  our  help  by  several  men,  whom  he
engaged  for  this  year  and  for  the  next.  He  sees  for
himself  the  difficulties  of  the  country,  and  the  little
progress  that  can  be  made,  owing  to  the  length  and
severity  of  the  winters;  while,  meantime,  in  order
to  enjoy  the  fruit  we  gather  from  these  new  plants,
great  expense  is  incurred  in  cultivating  them.  Be-
hold the  first  fruits  of  the  first  two  Families  that
have  become  sedentary,  and  that  give  the  impulse  to
the  others.  I  cheerfully  dedicate  them  to  him  who
has  given  them  the  first  assistance,  and  to  all  who
favor  this  great  undertaking.

In  the  first  place,  all  who  compose  these  two  Fami-
lies are  regenerated  in  the  Blood  of  Jesus  Christ.
In  the  second  place,  although  they  are,  to  a  consider-
able number,  all  lodged  in  the  same  house, —  men.


76  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

femmes  &  enfans,  n'ayans  qu'vn  meme  foyer,  &  vne
meme  table,  fi  eft-ce  que  iamais  nous  n'auons  remar-
que  en  eux  aucun  different,  la  paix  qui  loge  fi  pro-
fondement  chez  eux,  nous  eft  vne  marque  affeuree
que  Dieu  n'en  eft  pas  loin:  Factus  est  in  pace  locus
eius.  lis  font  leurs  prieres  [65]  en  particulier,  foir  &
matin  a  genoiiil,  &  ne  laiffent  pas  de  venir  aux  pu-
bliques:  lis  entendent  pour  l'ordinaire  tous  les  iours
la  faindte  Meffe,  &  quelques-vns  des  quatre  heures
du  matin.  lis  frequentent  les  Sacrements  auec  amour
&  refpedt,  &  quelques-vns  d'eux  ont  la  confcience  fi
tendre,  qu'auffi-toft  qu'ils  penfent  auoir  commis  quel-
que  offenfe,  ils  s'en  viennent  accufer  au  Pere  qui  les
gouuerne  auec  vne  candeur  nompareille.

Quelqu'vn  de  nous  fans  eftre  veu  entendoit  vn  iour
les  Chefs  de  ces  deux  Families  fe  donner  courage
l'vn  a  l'autre  d'accomplir  la  Loy  Chreftienne.  Ne
perdons  point  cceur,  difoient-ils,  nous  ne  feront  pas
feuls,  les  principaux  d'entre  nous  veulent  croire  &  de-
meurer  aupres  de  nous,  quittons  nos  anciennes  facons
de  faire  pour  prendre  celles  qu'on  nous  enfeigne  qui
font  meilleures  que  les  noftres.

Ils  fe  trouuerent  bien  en  peine  comme  ils  pour-
roient  garder  1'abftinence  des  viande  les  Vendredis
&  Samedis ;  car  lors  que  nous  f erons  dans  les  bois
pour  faire  noftre  prouifion  d'Elan,  difoient-ils  nous
n'aurons  rien  que  de  la  chair  a  manger,  que  ferons-
nous?  l'autre  refpondit,  nous  voila  [66]  bien  en  peine,
puifqu'il  n'y  a  que  deux  iours  la  fepmaine,  il  les  faut
paffer  fans  rien  manger,  &  par  ce  moyen  nous  garde-
rons  l'abflinence  de  viande:  Ce  confeil  fut  trouue
bon,  mais  non  pas  du  Pere  qui  les  gouuerne,  lequel
les  inftruifit  de  ce  qu'ils  deuoient  faire  en  telle  occa-
sion ;  Defcendons  plus  en  particulier.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  77

women,  and  children,  with  but  one  and  the  same
hearth  and  the  same  table, —  nevertheless,  we  have
never  heard  a  single  dispute  among  them.  The  pro-
found peace  that  dwells  in  their  midst  is,  to  our
minds,  a  sure  indication  that  God  is  not  far  away.
Factus  est  in  pace  locus  ejus.  They  say  their  prayers
[65]  in  private,  evening  and  morning,  on  their  knees,
and  do  not  fail  to  attend  public  prayers.  As  a
rule,  they  hear  holy  Mass  every  day,  and  some  as
early  as  four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  They  receive
the  Sacraments  with  affection  and  respect ;  and  some
have  so  tender  a  conscience  that,  as  soon  as  they
think  they  have  committed  some  sin,  they  come  at
once  to  confess  it,  with  incomparable  frankness,  to
the  Father  who  has  charge  of  them.

One  of  us  heard  one  day,  unseen,  the  Heads  of
these  two  Families  encouraging  one  another  to  ob-
serve the  Christian  Law.  "  Let  us  not  be  disheart-
ened," said  they,  "  we  shall  not  be  alone;  the  lead-
ing men  among  us  wish  to  believe  and  to  dwell  near
us ;  let  us  abandon  our  old  ways  to  adopt  those  which
are  taught  us,  and  which  are  better  than  ours."

They  were  in  great  anxiety  whether  they  could  ob-
serve abstinence  from  meat  on  Fridays  and  Satur-
days. "  For,"  said  one,  "  when  we  shall  be  in  the
woods,  making  our  provision  of  Elk,  we  shall  have
nothing  but  meat  to  eat,  and  what  shall  we  do?"
The  other  replied :  ' '  What  [66]  trouble  we  are
giving  ourselves !  Since  there  are  only  two  days  in
each  week,  we  will  pass  them  without  eating  any-
thing, and  thus  observe  our  abstinence  from  flesh."
This  advice  was  considered  good,  but  not  by  the
Father  in  charge  of  them,  who  taught  them  what
was  to  be  done  in  such  circumstances.  Let  us  enter
into  further  details.


78  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUTTES  [Vol.16

Ces  deux  Families  eftant  partis  pour  aller  chercher
leur  prouifion  de  chair  d'Elan,  Francois  Xauier,  iadis
nomine"  des  fiens  Nanask&mat,  retourna  auec  la  plus
grande  partie  de  fes  gens  deux  iours  auant  la  faindte
Ouarantaine;  comme  il  n'auoit  que  de  la  chair  &  de
l'anguille  boucanee,  nous  ne  luy  parlafmes  point  de
l'abftinence  de  viande  qu'on  garde  en  ce  temps  la,
mais  luy  l'ayant  appris  par  la  communication  de  nos
Francois,  nous  dit  qu'il  delimit  garder  cefte  loy,  puis
qu'il  eftoit  Chreftie;  nous  luy  repondifmes,  que  n 'ay-
ant  ny  pain  ny  pois,  en  vn  mot,  n'ayat  pour  tous  mets
qu'vn  peu  d  anguille  feiche,  qu'il  n'eftoit  pas  oblige
a  cefte  rigueur:  II  repartit,  que  les  mefmes  raifons
qui  nous  induifent  a  ne  point  manger  de  viande,  l'y
obligeoient;  puis  qu'il  n'auoit  qu'vne  meme  crea.ce
auec  nous,  &  qu'il  auoit  affez  de  force  pour  fe  [67]
pouuoir  paffer  a  vn  peu  de  poiffon  fume\  Cefte  re-
pofe  nous  toucha  le  cceur,  &  nous  fit  refoudre  de  le
foulager  luy  &  fa  fille  du  peu  que  nous  auions,  c'eft  a
dire,  d'vn  peu  de  pain  &  de  pois,  &  quelquefois  d'vn
peu  de  molue.  Voila  done  le  pere  &  la  fille  dans  l'ab-
ftinence, &  par  fois  dans  le  ieufne,  pendant  que  le
refte  de  la  Famille  qui  n'eftoit  pas  encor  toute  bapti-
fee,  mangeoit  de  fort  bonne  viande.  Entrant  vn  iour
qu'ils  ieufnoient  dans  leur  chambre,  ie  les  trouuay
tous  deux  retirez  a  part,  faifans  collation  fur  le  foir
auec  vn  peu  de  pain,  puis  me  tournant  de  l'autre
cofte,  i'apperceu  vne  grade  marmite  remplie  de  lan-
gues  &  de  mufles  d'orignac,  qui  rendoient  vne  fort
bonne  odeur,  ces  viandes  les  plus  delicates  de  la  befte
eftoient  preparees  pour  fes  gens:  Ie  vous  confeffe
que  ce  fpedtacle  m'etonna;  en  effect  c'eft  vne  chofe
etonnante  de  voir  vn  homme  chef  de  fa  Famille,  apres


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib39  79

These  two  Families  having  gone  to  secure  their
supply  of  Elk  flesh,  Francois  Xavier,  formerly  called
Nanaskoumat  by  his  friends,  came  back  with  most
of  his  people  two  days  before  holy  Lent.  As  he  had
nothing  but  meat  and  smoked  eels,  we  said  not  a
word  to  him  about  the  abstinence  from  meat  that  is
observed  at  that  time.  But  he,  having  learned  it
through  communication  with  our  Frenchmen,  told
us  that  he  wished  to  observe  the  law,  as  he  was  a
Christian.  We  replied  that,  as  he  had  neither  bread
nor  peas, — in  a  word,  no  food  but  some  dried  eels, —
he  was  not  obliged  to  follow  this  strict  rule.  He
answered  that  the  same  reasons  which  induced  us  not
to  eat  meat  obliged  him  to  do  the  same,  since  he  had
but  one  and  the  same  faith  with  us ;  and  that  he  was
strong  enough  to  [67]  be  able  to  do  with  a  little
smoked  fish.  This  answer  touched  our  hearts,  and
made  us  resolve  to  assist  him  and  his  daughter  out
of  the  limited  supply  we  had, — that  is  to  say,  a  little
bread  and  peas,  and,  sometimes,  a  small  quantity
of  codfish.  Here,  therefore,  were  the  father  and
daughter  observing  abstinence,  and  sometimes  fast-
ing, while  the  remainder  of  the  Family,  who  were
not  yet  all  baptized,  ate  very  good  meat.  Entering
their  room  one  day  while  they  were  fasting,  I  found
both  sitting  apart  from  the  others,  making  a  light
evening  repast  on  a  little  bread.  Then,  turning  to
the  other  side,  I  saw  a  large  pot  filled  with  the
tongues  and  upper  lips  [moujies]  of  moose,  which
gave  out  a  delicious  smell.  These,  the  most  delicate
parts  of  the  animal,  were  being  cooked  for  his  peo-
ple. I  must  confess  that  I  was  greatly  surprised  at
this  sight.  In  fact,  it  is  an  astonishing  thing  to  see
a  man,  the  head  of  the  Family, —  after  having  under-


80  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.16

auoir  bien  peine*  &  fu£  a  tuer  tels  animaux,  en  voir
manger  deuat  fes  yeux  les  plus  frians  morceaux,  &  fe
reduire  au  ieufne  fans  obligation  ny  contrainte ;  &  pour
collation  fe  contenter  d'vn  morceau  de  pain.  Mais  ce
qui  m'eftone  dauantage,  c'eft  qu'vne  ieune  fille  aagee
d'enuiron  dix-huidt  a  vingt  ans,  [68]  imitant  fon  pere
paffe  ces  quarante  iours,  partie  en  ieufne,  &  toufiours
en  abftinece,  &  fort  mal  nourrie  das  l'abondance.
Nous  luy  demandafmes  vne  fois  fi  ce  teps  ne  luy  fem-
bloit  pas  bien  long,  &  fi  elle  n'auoit  pas  beaucoup  de
peine  de  fe  priuer  des  viandes  qu'elle  voyoit  manger
a  fes  copagnes;  elle  nous  confeffa  qu'en  effedt  elle  en
auoit  eu  vn  peu  au  commencement,  mais  que  cela
s'eftoit  bien-toft  paffe.  Vne  autre  fois  come  on  faifoit
vn  bon  feftin  en  leur  maifon  pour  receuoir  quelques
vns  de  leurs  amis,  ie  demanday  a  fon  perc  s"il  n'efloit
pas  tente  de  gouter  vn  peu  de  ce  feftin,  compofe  de
fort  bSnes  pieces  d'Elan,  fur  lefquelles  il  iettoit  les
yeux ;  il  me  refpondit  en  fouriant ;  Nikanis,  au  com-
mencement du  Carefme  ie  mis  mon  coeur  fous  cefte
table,  c'eft  pourquoy  mes  yeux  ont  beau  voir  de  la
chair,  ils  n'en  fouhaittent  pas;  car  ils  n'ot  plus  de
cceur,  &  puis  ne  faut-il  pas  que  nous  fouffrions  vn
petit  auffi  bien  que  les  autres  Chreftiens,  nous  vou-
lons  contenter  Dieu  auffi  bien  que  vous  autres.  O
Dieu  qui  eut  iamais  penfe"  que  ces  paroles  deuffent
f ortir  de  la  bouche  d'vn  barbare !  &  que  cefte  abfti-
nence  eut  deue  eftre  practiquee  par  vn  Sauuage  qui
s'eft  autrefois  repeu  de  chair  [69]  humaine!  Dieu
eft  Dieu,  &  fa  bonte  n'a  pas  de  limites,  elle  fe  r£pand
fur  qui  il  luy  plaift.

Voicy  qui  eft  encor  dans  le  mefme  etonnement:
Ce  bon  homme  s'eftant  engage  trop  auant  dans  fa


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  81

gone  great  hardships  and  fatigue  in  killing  such  ani-
mals,—  witnessing  others  eating  the  choicest  morsels
before  his  eyes,  and  constraining  himself  to  fast
without  being  obliged  or  compelled  thereto,  and  con-
tenting himself  with  a  piece  of  bread  for  his  sole
repast.  But  what  surprised  me  still  more  was  that  a
young  girl  about  eighteen  or  twenty  years  of  age
[68]  should,  in  imitation  of  her  father,  pass  these
forty  days  partly  fasting  and  always  abstaining,  and
ill-fed  in  the  midst  of  abundance.  We  asked  her
once  whether  she  did  not  think  this  time  very  long,
and  whether  she  did  not  find  it  very  difficult  to
deprive  herself  of  the  meat  that  she  saw  her  compan-
ions eating.  She  admitted  that  she  had,  indeed,
found  it  somewhat  difficult  at  first,  but  that  had  soon
passed  away.  On  another  occasion,  as  a  good  feast
was  being  given  in  their  house  in  honor  of  some  of
their  friends,  I  asked  her  father  whether  he  were
not  tempted  to  taste  a  little  of  the  feast  —  consisting
of  very  fine  pieces  of  Elk  meat  —  which  was  before
his  eyes.  He  smilingly  replied:  "  Nikanis,  at  the
beginning  of  Lent,  I  put  my  heart  under  that  table;
that  is  why  my  eyes  see  the  meat  in  vain, — they  do
not  wish  for  any,  because  they  no  longer  have  any
heart.  And  then,  should  we  not  suffer  a  little  as
well  as  the  other  Christians?  We  wish  to  please
God,  as  well  as  you  people."  O  God!  who  would
ever  have  thought  that  such  words  would  issue  from
the  lips  of  a  barbarian,  and  that  such  abstinence  would
be  practiced  by  a  Savage  who  formerly  gorged  him-
self with  human  [69]  flesh!  God  is  God,  and  his
kindness  knoweth  no  bounds ;  it  extendeth  to  whom-
soever pleaseth  him.

Here  is  something  more,  equally  astonishing:  This


82  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16

chaffe,  n'ayant  porte'  qu'vn  peu  de  pain  que  nous  luy
auios  donne\  fe  trouua  fans  autre  viure  que  les  Elans
qu'il  auoit  tue,  il  ayma  mieux  paffer  deux  iours  fans
manger,  que  de  rompre  fon  abftinence  de  viande ;  &
quoy  que  nous  luy  euffions  dit  qu'il  n'eftoit  point
oblige  a  cefte  aufterite,  il  ne  laiffa  pas  vne  autrefois
en  femblable  occafion  de  faire  le  mefme.

Sa  fille  eftant  allee,  fuiuant  la  coufhume  du  pais,
auec  quelques-vnes  de  fes  compagnes  pour  tirer  des
bois  la  viande  des  animaux  que  so  pere  auoit  tue\  fut
retenue  du  mauuais  teps  plus  de  iours  qu'elle  ne  pen-
foit,  fi  bien  qu'ayant  confomme  fa  petite  prouifio  de
Carefme,  elle  fe  trouua  fans  autre  nourriture  que  de
la  viade ;  il  reftoit  encor  enuiro  deux  iours  de  grand
trauail  deuant  que  d'arriuer  a  la  maifon,  il  falloit
tirer  a  viue  force  de  groffes  traifnes  de  chair  delfus
les  neiges;  on  la  preffa  fort  d'en  mager,  mais  cefte
pauure  fille,  fuiuant  l'exemple  de  fon  pere,  n'en  vou-
lut  iamais  goufter.  [70]  Ceux  qui  cognoiffent  plus
particulierement  les  Sauuages,  &  qui  voyet  ces  adtions
font  contraints  de  cofeffer  que  la  grace  eft  plus  forte
que  la  nature.  Quelques-vns  de  nos  Francois  voyans
cefte  couftume,  difoient  que  ft  iamais  ils  repaffoient
en  France,  qu'ils  reprocheroient  cent  &  cent  fois  aux
Heretiques  &  aux  mauuais  Catholiques  que  les  Sau-
uages gardoiet  le  Carefme,  cependat  qu'ils  man-
geoient  de  la  chair  comme  des  chiens.  Au  refte,  ces
pauures  gens  ne  font  nullemet  obligez  aux  loix  du
ieufne,  car  ils  n'ont  le  plus  fouuent  que  du  poifso
tout  feul  fans  pain,  ni  autre  faulce  que  de  l'eau,  ou  de
la  viande  toute  feule,  &  le  plus  fouuent  ils  n'ont  rien
du  tout :  Les  def erts  qu'ils  ont  commence  a  defricher,
les  tireront  auec  le  temps  de  ces  grandes  miferes.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  83

good  man  having  ventured  too  far  during  a  hunt,
and  having  taken  with  him  only  a  small  quantity  of
bread  that  we  had  given  him,  found  that  he  had
nothing  else  to  eat  than  the  flesh  of  the  Elks  that  he
had  killed.  He  preferred  to  remain  two  days  with-
out eating,  rather  than  break  his  abstinence  from
meat;  and,  although  we  had  told  him  that  he  was
not  obliged  to  practice  such  austerity,  he  nevertheless
did  likewise  on  a  subsequent  similar  occasion.

His  daughter  having,  according  to  the  custom  of
the  country,  gone  with  some  of  her  companions  to
bring  out  of  the  woods  the  flesh  of  the  animals  that
her  father  had  killed,  was  detained  by  bad  weather
for  a  longer  time  than  she  expected ;  and  when  she
had  consumed  her  meagre  Lenten  provision,  she
found  herself  with  no  other  food  but  meat.  She  still
had  two  days  of  hard  work  before  reaching  home ;
and  it  was  necessary  to  drag,  by  sheer  strength,
heavy  sleighloads  of  flesh  over  the  snow.  She  was
strongly  urged  to  eat  meat;  but  this  poor  girl,  fol-
lowing her  father's  example,  would  not  taste  it.  [70]
Those  who  especially  understand  the  Savages,  and
who  see  these  acts,  are  constrained  to  admit  that
grace  is  stronger  than  nature.  Some  of  our  French-
men, observing  this  practice,  said  that,  if  ever  they
returned  to  France,  they  would  reproach  Heretics
and  bad  Catholics  a  hundred  times  over  by  telling
them  that  the  Savages  observed  Lent,  while  they  ate
meat  like  dogs.  Besides,  these  poor  people  are  in
nowise  bound  by  the  laws  of  fasting ;  for  they  most
often  have  only  fish  without  bread, — and  with  no
other  sauce  than  water, —  or  only  meat;  and  more
frequently  they  have  nothing  at  all.  The  natural
meadows 10  which  they  have  begun  to  cultivate  will,


84  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16

Ie  ferois  trop  long  fi  ie  voulois  remarquer  toutes
les  bones  qualitez  de  cet  homme  vrayemet  Chreftien :
II  nous  entretient  quelquefois  des  regrets  qu'il  a  de
voir  les  fmiftres  opinios  que  quelques-vns  de  fa  na-
tion ont  de  nous  autres :  II  deplore  la  durete  du  cceur
de  ceux  qui  ne  preftent  point  l'oreille  a  l'Euangile:
Du  refte  il  eft  homme  adroit,  fort  induftrieux,  bien
eloign^  de  la  pareffe  &  de  la  faineantife  naturelle  [71]
aux  Sauuages;  s'il  eftoit  fecond6,  il  fe  tireroit  bien-
toft  de  la  mifere  commune  a  fes  barbares,  mais  il  a
fait  rencotre  d'vne  femme  de  fort  peu  de  coduite,  le
fecours  qu'on  luy  donne  maintenant,  le  fera  reuffir.
II  admire  nos  facons  de  faire.  C'eft  chofe  etrange,
difoit-il  vn  iour,  que  vous  fcachiez  tout  ce  que  vous
deuez  faire  par  le  fon  d'vne  cloche  fans  qu'on  vous
die  rien,  &  fans  vous  parler  les  vns  aux  autres:  Si-
toft  que  vous  entedez  cefte  cloche,  les  vns  fortent,
les  autres  entrent;  les  vns  vont  au  trauail,  les  autres
vont  prier,  elle  vous  fait  leuer  &  coucher,  &  fans
parole  elle  fait  par  vn  mefme  fon  tous  les  commande-
mens  qu'il  faut  faire:  II  n'en  eft  pas  de  mefme  par-
my  nous  autres,  fi  ie  veux  induire  mes  gens  au  trauail,
il  faut  bien  dire  des  paroles,  &  apres  tout  cela  ie  ne
fuis  guieres  obey.

Vn  ieune  homme  de  fa  nation  luy  demandat  fa  fille
en  mariage,  il  luy  dit ;  maintenant  que  ie  fuis  Chre-
ftien, ie  refpedte  Dieu,  ie  luy  veux  obeyr,  or  il  ne
veut  pas  que  ie  donne  ma  fille  fmon  a  vne  perfonne
qui  croye  en  luy,  &  qui  fe  refolue  de  ne  la  quitter
iamais  s'il  l'epoufe :  regarde  fi  tu  as  affez  de  courage
pour  te  refoudre  a  ces  deux  conditions,  le  ieune
homme  repodit,  qu'il  [72]  n'auoit  pas  affez  d'efprit
pour  retenir  tout  ce  que  nous  enfeignons;  &  qu'il


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  85

in  time,  relieve  them  from this  great  destitution.

I  would  be  too  diffuse  were  I  to  point  out  all  the
good  qualities  of  this  truly  Christian  man.  He  some-
times tells  us  of  the  regret  that  he  feels  at  seeing  the
bad  opinion  that  some  of  his  nation  have  of  us.  He
deplores  the  hardness  of  heart  of  those  who  do  not  lis-
ten to  the  Gospel.  Moreover,  he  is  a  dexterous  and
very  industrious  man,  far  from  being  addicted  to  the
sloth  and  idleness  natural  [71]  to  Savages.  If  his
efforts  were  seconded,  he  would  soon  extricate  him-
self from  the  misery  common  to  these  barbarians ;  but
he  happened  to  marry  a  woman  who  has  very  little
executive  ability.  The  help  we  now  give  him  will
enable  him  to  succeed.  He  admires  our  way  of  do-
ing things.  "  It  is  strange,"  he  said  one  day,  "  that
you  should  know  everything  you  have  to  do  by  the
sound  of  a  bell, —  without  anything  being  said  to
you,  and  without  speaking  to  one  another.  As  soon
as  you  hear  the  bell,  some  go  out,  others  enter;  some
go  to  work,  others  to  pray;  it  makes  you  rise  and  go
to  bed;  and  it  gives,  without  a  word,  and  with  the
same  sound,  all  the  commands  that  have  to  be  given.
It  is  different  with  us ;  if  I  wish  to  persuade  my  peo-
ple to  work,  I  must  speak  many  words;  and,  after
all,  they  scarcely  obey  me."

A  young  man  of  his  nation  having  asked  him  for
his  daughter  in  marriage,  he  said  to  him :  ' '  Now
that  I  am  a  Christian,  I  honor  God;  I  desire  to  obey
him.  Well,  he  does  not  wish  me  to  give  my  daugh-
ter to  any  one  but  a  person  who  believes  in  him,  and
who  is  resolved  never  to  leave  her  if  he  marries  her.
Consider  whether  thou  hast  enough  courage  to  fulfill
these  two  conditions. ' '  The  young  man  replied  that
he  [72]  had  not  sufficient  mind  to  retain  all  that  we


86  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16

n'ofoit  quafi  efperer  le  Baptefme.  Le  Neophyte  luy
repartit?  Ce  n'eft  pas  le  defaut  de  ta  memoire  qui
t'empechera  de  ioiiir  de  ce  bonheur ;  an  commence-
ment i'eftois  dans  le  mefme  erreur,  mais  i'ay  recognu
par  apres  que  quand  on  prioit  Dieu,  il  donnoit  de
l'efprit,  &  qu'il  aydoit  a  fcauoir  ce  qui  eft  neceffaire
pour  eftre  baptise :  on  me  dit  auffi  qu'il  n'eftoit  pas
befoin  que  ie  fceuffe  tat  de  chofes,  mais  que  i'euffe
vne  bonne  volonte,  &  vne  grade  affection  de  bien
obei'r  a  Dieu,  &  ne  le  point  offenfer,  Ce  n'eft  pas  le
defaut  d'efprit  que  i'apprehende  en  toy,  mais  la  refo-
lution  de  feruir  Dieu  toute  ta  vie,  &  de  iamais  ne
quitter  ma  fille  pour  en  efpoufer  vn  autre ;  regarde  ft
tu  as  affez  de  conftace  pour  ce  poindt.  Ce  pauure
ieune  homme  feigna  du  nez,  comme  on  dit,  il  ne  put
iamais  fe  refoudre  a  fe  ietter  das  le  lien  d'vn  ma-
nage indiffoluble.  Or  remarquez  que  ce  n'efl  point
le  Neophyte  qui  nous  a  raconte  de  ce  procede,  c'eft
le  ieune  home  mefme,  lequel  a  tache  depuis  de
renoiier  cefte  affaire,  mais  il  n'en  a  encor  pu  venir  a
bout.  O  que  les  manages  des  Sauuages  no9  donne-
ront  de  peine!  C'eft  affez  parle  du  [73]  pere,  difons
deux  mots  de  fes  enfans.  Cet  homme  de  bien  en
auoit  plufieurs,  il  luy  en  eftoit  refte  quatre ;  Dieu  a
pris  pour  foy  cefte  annee  les  deux  plus  ieunes,  ft  bien
qu'il  n'a  plus  qu'vn  fils  age  de  vingt  a  vingt  deux
ans,  &  vne  fille,  dont  nous  venons  de  parler,  aagee
d'enuiron  dix-huicl:  ans.  Ce  ieune  homme  eftant  mote
aux  trois  Riuieres  cet  hyuer  dernier,  pour  aller  a  la
guerre  contre  leur  ennemis,  s'en  alia  tout  droit  loger
chez  nos  Peres,  fans  que  perfonne  luy  eut  donne  ce
confeil ;  II  leur  dit,  que  s'il  fe  retiroit  dans  les  cabanes
des  Sauuages,  il  fe  mettoit  en  danger  d' offenfer  Dieu,


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  87

taught,  and  that  he  hardly  dared  to  hope  for  Bap-
tism. The  Neophyte  replied:  "It  is  not  lack  of
memory  which  prevents  thee  from  enjoying  that  hap-
piness ;  at  first,  I  was  in  the  same  error ;  but  I  after-
wards found  that,  when  one  prays  to  God,  he  gives
understanding,  and  helps  one  to  know  what  is  neces-
sary in  order  to  be  baptized.  I  was  also  told  that
there  was  no  need  of  my  knowing  so  many  things,
but  that  I  must  have  good  will  and  a  great  desire  to
truly  obey  God  and  not  to  offend  him.  It  is  not  want
of  understanding  that  I  fear  in  thee,  but  the  resolu-
tion to  serve  God  all  thy  life,  and  never  to  leave  my
daughter  to  marry  another ;  consider  whether  thou
hast  sufficient  constancy  for  this."  The  poor  young
man  bled  at  the  nose,  as  they  say ;  he  could  never
bring  himself  to  enter  the  bond  of  an  indissoluble
marriage.  Now,  observe  that  it  was  not  the  Neo-
phyte that  related  to  us  this  proceeding,  but  the
young  man  himself,  who  afterwards  sought  to  renew
the  affair,  but  he  has  not  yet  succeeded  therein.  Oh
what  trouble  these  marriages  of  the  Savages  will
give  us!  We  have  said  enough  of  the  [73]  father;
let  us  now  add  a  few  words  about  his  children.  This
worthy  man  has  had  several;  four  remained  to  him.
This  year,  God  has  taken  to  himself  the  two  young-
est,—  so  that  he  now  has  but  one  son,  from  twenty
to  twenty-two  years  of  age,  and  a  daughter,  of  whom
we  have  just  spoken,  aged  about  eighteen.  This
young  man  having  gone  up  to  the  three  Rivers  last
winter,  to  go  to  war  against  their  enemies,  went
straight  to  stay  with  our  Fathers,  without  any  one
having  advised  him  to  do  so.  He  told  them  that  if
he  were  to  dwell  in  the  cabins  of  the  Savages,  he
would  run  the  risk  of  offending  God;  that  the  ex-


88  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16


que  l'exeple  de  la  ieuneffe  fort  diffolue  le  peruertiroit,
&  par  confequent  qu'il  les  fupplioit  de  luy  doner  le
couuert : De  plus  que  deuat  bien-toft  partir  pour  aller
en  guerre  auec  fes  Compatriotes,  il  fouhaittoit  qu'on
luy  conferaft  le  faindt  Baptefme,  pour  ne  mettre  fon
ame  dans  les  dangers  ou  il  alloit  engager  fon  corps.
Nos  Peres  le  receurent  a  bras  ouuerts,  le  trouuerent
bien  inftruit,  &  ayant  confidere  de  pres  fes  deporte-
ments,  iugerent  qu'ils  ne  pouuoient  en  faine  confciece
luy  refufer  ce  Sacrement,  qu'il  demandoit  auec  tant
d'inftance. Le  voila  done  fait  Chreftien,  &  nomme
Vincent;  [74]  fon  pere  en  ayant  eu  la  nouuelle,  s'en
reioiiit  fort,  mais  non  pas  moy;  car  i'auois  refolu  de
ne  le  point  baptifer  qu'il  ne  fuft  marie,  pour  la  diffi-
culte  que  ie  preuoiois,  &  dans  laquelle  ie  le  vois  de
trouuer  vne femme Chreftienne qui  luy  agree,  ou
qui  ne  foit  pas  fa  parente ;  Neantmoins  Dieu  m'a  fait
cognoiftre iufques a maintenant que fa grandeur
paffoit  la  petiteffe  de  mon  coeur,  peut-eftre  trop  etroit
& trop eftrecy  dans ces rencontres; car ce ieune
homme  affifte  des  graces  qu'il  tire  des  Sacrements,  a
perfeuere  dans  la  refolutio  de  n'epoufer  aucune  fille
iufques  a  maintenant  qui  ne  fuft  Chreftiene;  s'il  fe
conferue  dans  la  nettete  de  confeience  que  Dieu  luy
a  donn6e  depuis  fon  Baptefme,  fes  paroles  feront  trou-
uees  veritables : Noftre  Seigneur  luy  en  faffe  la  grace.
Quant  a  l'au'tre  Famille,  dont  le  Chef  fe  nommoit
Negabamat ;  mais  il  porte  maintenant  le  nom  de  celuy
qui  les  a  fecouru,  &  qui  les  fecoure  encor  puiffam-
ment;  il  a  pris  pour  fon Parain  Monfieur  Gand,  en
cefte  confideration  l'a  nomme  Noel,  il  fut  baptise  auec
fa  femme  &  fon  fils  aifne  le  iour de 1  immaculee
Coception  de  la  faindte  Vierge ;  ils  eftoiet  tous  veflus  a


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  89

ample  of  the  young  people,  who  were  very  dissolute,
might  pervert  him ;  and  he  therefore  begged  them
to  give  him  shelter.  Moreover,  as  he  would  soon
leave  to  go  to  war  with  his  Countrymen,  he  wished
to  have  holy  Baptism  conferred  upon  him,  so  that
his  soul  might  not  be  imperilled  by  the  dangers  to
which  his  body  would  be  exposed.  Our  Fathers  re-
ceived him  with  open  arms,  found  him  well  instructed,
and,  after  having  closely  inquired  into  his  conduct,
considered  that  they  could  not  conscientiously  refuse
him  that  Sacrament  for  which  he  asked  so  earnestly.
He  was  therefore  made  a  Christian  and  named  Vin-
cent. [74]  When  his  father  received  the  news,  he
was  greatly  rejoiced, — but  not  so  I,  for  I  had  re-
solved not  to  baptize  him  until  he  was  married,  owing
to  the  difficulty  which  I  foresaw  —  and  which  I  still
see  for  him  —  of  finding  a  Christian  wife  who  will
suit  him  or  who  is  not  related  to  him.  Nevertheless,
God  has,  up  to  the  present,  shown  me  that  his  great-
ness surpasses  the  littleness  of  my  heart,  which  is
perhaps  too  narrow  and  too  contracted  in  such  mat-
ters ;  for  that  young  man,  assisted  by  the  graces  that
he  derives  from  the  Sacraments,  has  thus  far  per-
severed in  the  resolution  not  to  marry  any  girl  who
is  not  a  Christian.  If  he  preserves  the  stainless  con-
science that  God  has  given  him  since  his  Baptism,
his  words  will  be  found  true.  May  Our  Lord  grant
him  this  grace.

As  to  the  other  Family,  its  Head  was  named  Nega-
bamat ;  but  he  now  bears  the  name  of  the  person
who  has  assisted  and  who  still  greatly  aids  them.
He  took  Monsieur  Gand  for  his  Godfather,  and,  on
that  account,  he  was  named  Noel.  He  was  baptized,
with  his  wife  and  his  eldest  son,  on  the  day  of  the


90  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

la  Francoife  des  [75]  liberalitez  de  celuy  qui  les  pre-
fentoit  au  Baptefme;  fa  femme  fut  nommee  Marie,
&  fon  fils  Charles ;  il  auoit  trois  enfans  de  f oy,  &  deux
adoptez ;  tous  ont  efte"  regenerez  en  Iesvs-Christ,
nous  en  parlerons  maintenant.

Cet  homme  eft  bien  fait,  &  d'vn  bon  naturel ;  comme
on  l'interrogeoit  en  fon  Baptefme,  &  fur  tout  qu'on
luy  recommandoit  de  ne  mettre  fon  efperance  qu'en
Dieu,  &  non  pas  au  fecours  temporel  des  homes,  il
repondit  d'vne  voix  haute:  I'ay  paffe  vne  bonne  par-
tie  de  mon  aage,  ie  ne  fuis  pas  pour  viure  long-temps
encemonde:  c'eft  pourquoy  ie  n'appuye  ma  croy-
ance  ny  ne  fonde  mon  efperance  fur  les  hommes  qui
ne  me  fcauroient  prolonger  la  vie,  mais  fur  celuy  qui
a  tout  fait,  lequel  m'en  peut  donner  vne  eternelle.
Quoy  que  les  femmes  foient  naturellemet  honteufes,
la  fienne  ne  parut  iamais  s'etonner,  encor  qu'elle  fe
veit  dans  vn  habit  a  la  Fracoife,  qu'elle  n'auoit  iamais
porte,  la  prefence  de  nos  Francois  qui  rempliffoiet
l'Eglife  ne  l'emeut  point;  elle  repondoit  aux  interro-
gatios  qu'on  luy  faifoit  d'vne  voix  forte,  &  d'vn  vifage
remply  de  ioye:  Nous  luy  demandafmes  par  apres
d'ou  prouenoit  qu'elle  ne  s'etoit  pas  [76]  montree
craintiue  deuant  tant  de  monde,  elle  repondit :  Ie  ne
penfois  pas  du  tout  a  ceux  qui  me  regardoient,  ie
difois  feulement  en  mon  cceur?  Ie  n'iray  pas  en  En-
fer,  i'iray  au  Ciel,  tous  mes  pechez  vont  eftre  pardon-
nez,  &  puis  il  ne  faut  pas,  difoit-elle,  que  ceux  qui
croient  en  Dieu  foient  honteux  de  dire  leurs  creances.
Cette  bonne  femme  a  de  grandes  marques  de  fa  pre-
defhination ;  elle  prie  Dieu  volontiers,  entend  volon-
tiers  fa  parole,  ayme  la  frequetation  des  Sacremens ;
elle  eft  par  fois  retournee  de  bien  loin  tout  expres


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  91

immaculate  Conception  of  the  blessed  Virgin.  They
were  all  clad  in  French  garb  through  the  [75]  gener-
osity of  him  who  presented  them  for  Baptism.  His
wife  was  named  Marie,  and  his  son,  Charles.  He
had  three  children  of  his  own  and  two  adopted  ones ;
all  have  been  regenerated  in  Jesus  Christ.  We
will  now  speak  of  them.

This  man  is  well  built,  and  of  a  good  disposition.
When  he  was  questioned  regarding  his  Baptism,  and
especially  when  he  was  exhorted  to  place  his  trust
in  God  alone,  and  not  in  the  temporal  assistance  of
men,  he  answered  in  a  loud  tone  of  voice:  '  A  good
part  of  my  life  has  passed, —  I  cannot  live  long  in
this  world;  therefore,  I  do  not  rest  my  belief  nor
base  my  hope  on  men,  who  cannot  prolong  my  life,
but  in  him  who  has  made  all,  who  can  grant  me  eter-
nal life."  Although  the  women  are  naturally  bash-
ful, his  wife  never  seemed  surprised,  even  when  she
saw  herself  in  a  French  dress  which  she  had  never
worn.  The  presence  of  our  French,  who  filled  the
Church,  did  not  disturb  her;  to  the  questions  put  to
her,  she  replied  in  a  loud  voice,  and  with  a  face  beam-
ing with  joy.  We  asked  her  afterward  how  it  hap-
pened that  she  was  not  [76]  abashed  before  so  many
people,  and  she  replied:  "  I  did  not  think  at  all  of
those  who  were  looking  at  me.  I  merely  said  in  my
heart:  '  I  shall  not  go  to  Hell,  I  shall  go  to  Heaven;
all  my  sins  are  pardoned;  '  and,"  she  added,  "  those
who  believe  in  God  should  not  be  ashamed  to  say
what  they  believe."  This  good  woman  shows  abun-
dant signs  of  predestination ;  she  prays  to  God  glad-
ly, hears  his  word  with  pleasure,  and  loves  to  receive
frequently  the  Sacraments ;  she  has  sometimes  come
back  from  a  great  distance  for  the  express  purpose


92  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

pour  fe  cofeffer  &  communier,  s'ennuyant  fort  quand
elle  eft  empefchee  d'entendre  la  Meffe.  Eftant  das
les  bois  pour  faire  feicherie  d'Orignac  &  voyat  qu'elle
retardoit  trop  long  temps,  elle  s'en  vint  a  Kebec  pour
communier;  le  Pere  qui  l'entedit  de  Confeffion,  par
megarde,  ou  pour  l'eprouuer,  la  laiffa  la  fans  la  faire
approcher  de  la  faindte  Table:  Cette  pauure  femme
luy  difoit;  le  fuis  venue  de  fi  loin,  &  auec  tat  de
peine,  pour  ioiiir  d'vn  fi  grand  bien,  &  vous  m'en
priuez :  ay-ie  done  fait  quelque  offenfe  qui  merite  ce
chatiment?  Elle  s'en  alia  trouuer  vn  autre  Pere,  &
luy  fit  fes  plaintes  auec  vn  telle  candeur,  qu'il  en  de-
meura  tout  edifie.  II  [77]  faut  confeffer  que  ces  deux
bonnes  ames  m'ot  trop6,  ie  ne  croyois  pas  que  la  Foy
fut  fi  f ortement  enracinee  dans  leurs  cceurs ;  a  peine
eftoient-ils  Chreftiens,  que  Dieu  les  a  vifite  ou  efprou-
ue  fort  rudement.  Ce  nouueau  Chreftien  parlat  vn
iour  a  vn  fien  paret  de  noftre  doctrine,  &  du  fecours
que  nous  donions  aux  Sauuages  pour  les  reduire  dans
vne  bourgade,  luy  dit  que  le  fentiment  commun  de
la  plufpart  de  ceux  de  fa  nation,  eftoit  que  tout  ce
que  nous  en  faifios  n'etoit  qu'vn  voile  pour  couurir
noftre  malice,  &  que  nous  ne  pretendions  que  la  ruine
du  pays,  &  la  mort  de  tous  les  habitans:  Et  qu'ainfi
ne  foit,  dit-il  a  Noel,  tu  verras  bien-toft  tes  enfans
mourir  deuant  tes  yeux,  tu  fuiuras  par  apres,  &  fi
nous  leur  preftons  l'oreille  auffi  bien  que  toy,  nous
pafferons  par  le  mefme  guichet.  Voila  le  bruit  qui
court,  difoit  ce  caufeur.  Noel  me  vint  raconter  tout
cecy  fans  fe  troubler,  m'exhortat  a  precher  fort  &
ferme  contre  cet  erreur.  Or  foit  que  le  Diable  co-
gnut  la  dif pofition  du  corps  de  fes  enfans,  ou  que  Dieu
voulut  tirer  fa  gloire  de  la  foy  &  de  la  coftance  de


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  93

of  making  her  confession  and  receiving  communion,
being  greatly  troubled  when  she  is  prevented  from
hearing  Mass.  Being  in  the  woods,  occupied  in  dry-
ing Moose  flesh,  and  finding  that  she  was  delayed  too
long,  she  came  to  Kebec  to  receive  communion.  The
Father  who  heard  her  Confession  —  either  through
inadvertence,  or  in  order  to  try  her  —  left  her  with-
out having  her  approach  the  holy  Table.  The  poor
woman  said  to  him :  "  I  have  come  from  a  great  dis-
tance, and  with  great  hardships,  to  enjoy  so  great  a
blessing,  and  you  deprive  me  of  it.  Have  I  then
committed  any  sin  that  deserves  such  punishment?"
She  sought  another  Father  and  complained  to  him,
with  such  candor  that  he  was  greatly  edified.  It  [77]
must  be  admitted  that  these  two  good  souls  have  de-
ceived me ;  I  did  not  think  that  Faith  had  so  strong-
ly taken  root  in  their  hearts.  Hardly  had  they  be-
come Christians  when  God  visited  or  tried  them  very
sorely.  This  new  Christian  was  speaking  one  day,
to  a  relative,  of  our  doctrine,  and  of  the  assistance
that  we  gave  the  Savages,  that  we  might  gather  them
into  a  village ;  and  his  friend  told  him  that  the  gen-
eral feeling  of  the  majority  of  his  nation  was  that
all  that  we  were  doing  was  but  a  cloak  to  cover  our
evil  intentions,  and  that  we  desired  nothing  but  the
ruin  of  the  country  and  the  death  of  all  its  inhab-
itants. "  And,"  said  he  to  Noel,  "  rest  assured  of
what  I  say;  thou  wilt  soon  see  thy  children  die
before  thine  eyes;  thou  wilt  follow  afterward,  and,  if
we,  like  thee,  listen  to  them,  we  shall  pass  through
the  same  gate.  Such  is  the  rumor  that  prevails,"
said  this  gossip.  Noel  came  and  told  me  all  this,
without  being  disturbed,  urging  me  to  preach  strong-
ly and  firmly  against that  error. Now, —  whether


94  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J ^SUITES  [Vol.16

ces  nouueaux  Chrefties :  Quoy  que  s'en  foit,  de  cinq
enfans  qu'ils  auoient,  les  voila  quafi  reduidts  a  vn.
Bien-toft  [78]  apres  ce  difcours,  l'vn  de  fes  enfas  fut
pris  d'vne  fiebure  etique  qui  luy  oftera  la  vie  dans
peu  de  iours,  car  il  n'a  plus  que  les  os  qui  luy  percent
la  peau  en  plufieurs  endroicts.  A  quel  que  temps  de
la  vn  autre  qui  eftoit  au  feminaire,  fut  faifi  d'vne
autre  maladie  qui  luy  a  dure  depuis  cinq  mois,  &
pour  le  prefent  on  ne  luy  donne  plus  que  peu  de  iours
de  vie.  Son  fils  aifne,  age  d'enuiron  quatorze  ans,
qui  eftoit  auffi  noftre  Seminarifte,  luy  feruoit  de  con-
folatio  dans  fes  aduerfitez,  car  en  verite  c'eftoit  vn
enfant  bien  fait,  &  d'vn  excellent  efprit :  vne  defluxio
ou  vne  pleurefie  le  faifit  inopin6ment,  &  apres  luy
auoir  fait  fouffrir  de  grandes  douleurs,  l'emporta  dans
peu  de  iours  dans  noftre  Maifon,  ou  on  l'auoit  apporte-
pour  eftre  penfe  plus  commodemet.  Son  pere  ne
bougea  d'aupres  de  luy  tandis  qu'il  fut  malade ;  fa
mere  le  venoit  vifiter  tous  les  iours  de  plus  d'vne
grande  lieue.  C'eft  dans  cette  maladie  que  nous  re-
connufmes  la  foy  du  pere  &  de  l'efant,  la  fievre  eftant
deuenue  fi  chaude  &  fi  violente,  qu'elle  le  faifoit  par
fois  extrauaguer.  Si-toft  que  ce  pauure  enfant  auoit
quelque  relache,  fon  pere  no9  appelloit,  &  nous  prioit
de  luy  parler  de  Dieu  pour  bien  difpofer  [79]  fon
ame  a  la  mort.  Ie  l'ay  veu  par  fois  fe  ietter  a  genoux
aupres  de  so  lidt  pour  prier  Dieu,  &  le  faire  prier  a
fon  fils ;  fa  mere  prioit  de  fon  cofte,  &  tous  deux  firent
vn  vceu  a  Dieu  pour  la  fante"  de  leur  enfant,  mais
auec  vne  tres-grande  refignation  a  la  volonte  de
Dieu:  Ce  n'eft  pas  nous,  difoient-ils,  qui  comman-
dons  a  la  vie,  fi  tu  preuois,  6  grand  Capitaine  du  Ciel,
que  noftre  enfant  venat  fur  l'aage,  ne  te  vueille  pas


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  ib39  95

the  Devil  knew  the  physical  condition  of  his  children,
or  whether  God  wished  to  derive  his  own  glory  from
the  faith  and  constancy  of  these  new  Christians, —  at
all  events,  the  five  children  that  he  had  are  almost
reduced  to  one.  Soon  [78]  after  this  conversation,
one  of  his  children  was  seized  with  a  hectic  fever
which  will  deprive  him  of  life  in  a  few  days, —  for
he  is  but  a  skeleton,  and  his  bones  pierce  through  his
skin  in  many  places.  Some  time  afterward,  another
child,  who  was  at  the  seminary,  was  seized  by  an-
other disease,  which  has  lasted  five  months,  and,  at
present,  he  is  not  expected  to  live  more  than  a  few
days.  His  eldest  son,  about  fourteen  years  old,  who
was  also  a  pupil  of  our  Seminary,  gave  him  consola-
tion in  the  midst  of  his  afflictions,  for  indeed  he  was
a  well-behaved  child,  and  of  an  excellent  mind.  He
was  suddenly  seized  with  a  defluxion  or  pleurisy
which,  after  causing  him  great  suffering,  carried  him
off  in  a  few  days  at  our  House,  where  he  had  been
brought  that  he  might  be  more  conveniently  nursed.
His  father  did  not  stir  from  his  side  while  he  was
sick;  his  mother  came  to  see  him  every  day,  from  a
distance  of  over  a  league.  It  was  during  this  illness
that  we  were  convinced  of  the  faith  of  the  father  and
child.  The  fever  became  so  high  and  so  violent  that
it  sometimes  made  him  delirious.  Whenever  the
poor  child  had  a  little  rest,  his  father  would  call  us,
and  beg  us  to  speak  to  him  of  God,  in  order  suitably
to  prepare  [79]  his  soul  for  death.  Sometimes,  I  saw
him  fall  on  his  knees  near  his  bed  to  pray  to  God,
and  to  have  his  son  pray ;  his  mother  prayed,  on  her
part;  and  both  made  a  vow  to  God  for  the  recovery
of  their  child,  but  with  the  utmost  resignation  to
God's  will. "It  is  not  we,"  said  they,  "who  com-


96  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

obeyr,  nous  ne  te  demandons  point  fa  fante ;  mais
comme  tu  es  bon,  donne  luy  fecotirs,  &  pour  fon  corps
&  pour  fon  ame.  L'enfat  de  fon  cofte"  eftoit  fort  bien
difpofe,  temoignant  qu'il  ne  craignoit  point  la  mort;
il  fe  cofeffa,  receut  le  Corps  de  Noftre  Seigneur,  &
l'Extreme-Ondtion  auec  bon  iugement,  fe  remettant
a  la  volonte"  de  Dieu,  fans  luy  demander  la  vie,  fi  on
ne  luy  faifoit  demader.  Sa  priere  ordinaire  eftoit,
Iesvs  ayez  pitie  de  moy,  fay  moy  mifericorde,  ie
fuis  marry  de  t'auoir  off  enfe :  En  fin  fe  fentant  proche
de  la  mort,  il  nous  dit;  ie  n'en  puis  plus,  tenez,  tou-
chez  mo  corps,  il  eft  defia  froid,  ie  me  meurs;  on  le
fit  confeffer  derechef,  &  l'abfolution  receue,  fa  de-
fluxion  l'etouff  a  tout  d'vn  coup :  Eftat  mort,  i'aduer-
ty  Fracois  Xauier,  qui  fe  trouua  [50  i.e.,  80]  prefent
de  confoler  fon  pere,  craignant  que  ce  coup  ne  l'e-
branlaft,  mais  Francois  me  dit,  Noel  a  le  cceur  bon,
fi  toft  qu'il  a  veu  expirer  fon  fils,  il  m'a  dit  que  pen-
dant qu'il  le  voyoit  fouffrir,  la  trifteffe  aftligeoit  fon
ame,  mais  que  le  voyant  mort,  &  hors  de  tout  fecours
humain,  fon  cceur  s'eftoit  sety  foulage.  En  effect.,  ce
bon  homme  me  vint  trouuer,  &  me  dit;  Nikanis,  tu
diras  a  noftre  Capitaine,  il  parloit  de  Monfieur  le  Gou-
uerneur,  que  ie  le  remercie  de  ce  qu'il  a  vifite  mon
fils  das  fa  maladie,  &  tu  l'affeureras  que  mon  cceur
eft  tout  libre,  &  que  ie  me  fouuiens  bien  de  la  parole
que  i'ay  donne  a  Dieu  de  le  feruir  toute  ma  vie;  ie  ne
fuis  pas  vn  enf at  pour  la  reuoquer ;  ie  le  prieray  tou-
fiours,  c'eft  luy  qui  difpofe  de  nos  vies,  nous  n'en
fommes  pas  les  maiftres.  Ces  paroles  confolerent
grandement  Monfieur  le  Cheualier  de  Montmagny,
que  ie  nommerois  volontiers  le  Cheualier  du  S.  Efprit,


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6jg  97

mand  life.  If  thou  foreseest,  O  great  Captain  of
Heaven,  that  when  our  child  grows  older,  he  will
not  obey  thee,  we  do  not  ask  thee  for  his  restoration
to  health;  but  as  thou  art  good,  grant  him  help  both
for  his  body  and  for  his  soul."  On  his  side,  the
child  was  very  well  disposed,  showing  that  he  did
not  fear  death.  He  made  his  confession,  received
the  Body  of  Our  Lord,  and  Extreme  Unction,  with
full  understanding,  resigning  himself  to  God's  will,
without  asking  for  his  life  unless  he  were  made  to
ask  for  it.  His  usual  prayer  was:  "Jesus  have
pity  on  me,  have  mercy  on  me ;  I  am  sorry  for  hav-
ing offended  thee."  At  last,  feeling  that  he  was
near  death,  he  said  to  us:  "I  have  no  more  strength.
Here,  feel  my  body ;  it  is  already  cold ;  I  am  dying. "
He  made  a  confession  again,  and,  when  he  had  received
absolution,  the  defluxion  suddenly  suffocated  him.
When  he  was  dead,  I  told  Francois  Xavier  who  was
[50  i.e.,  80]  present,  to  console  the  father,  fearing
that  this  blow  might  unsettle  him ;  but  Francois  said
to  me :  "  Noel  has  good  courage.  As  soon  as  he  saw
his  son  expire,  he  told  me  that,  while  he  saw  him
suffering,  his  soul  was  filled  with  sorrow ;  but  that
when  he  saw  him  dead,  and  beyond  human  aid,  his
heart  felt  relieved.  Indeed,  the  good  man  came  to
me  and  said:  "  Nikanis,  thou  shalt  say  to  our  Cap-
tain " — he  spoke  of  Monsieur  the  Governor  —  "  that
I  thank  him  for  having  visited  my  son  during  his
illness,  and  assure  him  that  my  heart  is  quite  free,
and  that  I  remember  well  the  promise  that  I  have
given  to  God,  to  serve  him  all  my  life, —  I  am  not  a
child,  to  recall  it.  I  will  always  pray  to  him ;  it  is
he  who  disposes  of  our  lives ;  we  are  not  masters  of
them." These  words  afforded  much  consolation  to


98  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16

tant  ie  le  vois  porte"  aux  adtions  faindtes  &  courageufes,
&  replies  de  l'efprit  de  Dieu.

Apres  cefte  mort,  il  fe  trotme  que  fa  fille  adoptiue
a  vne  toux  dangereufe,  &  que  fon  plus  petit  fils  s'en
va  mourant :  en  verite  ce  bon  home  peut  bien  dire :
Proba&i  me,  &  cognonisti  me:  C'eft  ce  qu'on  luy  in-
culquoit  [71  i.e.,  81]  fouuent  que  Dieu  vouloit  prou-
uer  fa  foy.  Ces  coups  de  fleches  luy  eftoient  tirees
du  Ciel  par  amour.  Ce  n'eft  pas  tout,  fa  femme
fubfiftoit  parmi  toutes  ces  maladies,  &  fecouroit  fes
enfans:  Dieu  la  voulut  affliger  auffi  bien  que  les
autres,  elle  fut  prife  de  la  petite  verole  qui  couroit,
&  fut  la  premiere  qui  entra  dans  l'Hofpital  nouuelle-
met  etably  a  Kebec.  Deuant  ces  grandes  atteintes,
fon  mary  auoit  defia  receu  quelques  attaques  de  fes
gens:  car  eftant  defcedu  a  Tadouffac,  les  Sauuages
fe  mocquoient  de  luy,  fcachant  qu'il  prioit  Dieu,  di-
fans  qu'il  vouloit  deuenir  Iefuite ;  qu'il  vouloit  pa-
roiflre  auoir  de  l'efprit,  &  que  tout  ce  qu'il  en  faifoit,
n'eftoit  que  pour  viure  long-temps  5a  bas  en  terre,
mais  qu'il  fe  trouueroit  trompe.  Vn  de  fes  Compa-
triotes  luy  dit  vn  iour  ie  ne  fcay  quoy  qu'il  auoit  veu
en  fonge,  luy  enioignant  de  l'executer  s'il  ne  vouloit
bien-toft  mourir;  Cela  ne  l'eftonna  point,  il  repondit
qu'il  demanderoit  au  Pere  qui  le  gouuernoit  ft  la  chofe
eftoit  permife,  qu'en  ce  cas  il  l'accompliroit,  autremet
non.  On  luy  deffendit  de  la  faire,  il  obeit  fans  fcru-
pule,  &  fans  replique:  Voila  ce  qu'opere  la  grace
dans  vn  cceur  qu'on  appelle  barbare,  [82]  difons  plu-
ftoffc  dans  les  enfans  de  Dieu,  puis  qu'ils  font  redus
tels  par  le  Baptefme.

Ie  penfois  finir  le  difcours  de  ces  deux  Families,
mais  puis  que  les  vaiffeaux  me  donnent  encor  loifir


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  99


Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de  Montmagny,  whom  I  would
gladly  call  the  Knight  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  so  ready
do  I  find  him  to  perform  saintly  and  courageous
deeds  and  actions  replete  with  the  spirit  of  God.

After this death, it happens that his adopted
daughter  has  a  dangerous  cough,  and  his  youngest
son  is  dying. In  truth,  the  good  man  may  well  say:
Probasti  me  et  cognovisti  me. This  we  have  often  im-
pressed [71  i.e.,  81]  upon  his  mind  —  that  God  wished
to  try  his  faith. These  arrows  were  shot  at  him  from
Heaven  through  love. This  is  not  all. His  wife
kept  her  strength  throughout  all  these  illnesses,  and
attended  to  her  children. God  wished  to  afflict  her
as  well  as  the  others ;  she  was  taken  ill  with  small-
pox, which  then  prevailed,  and  was  the  first  to  enter
the Hospital  recently  established  at  Kebec. Before
these  heavy  strokes,  her  husband  had  already  suffered
some  attacks  from his people;  for, when  he  went
down  to  Tadoussac,  the  Savages  laughed  at  him, —
knowing  that he  prayed  to  God, —  saying  that  he
would  become  a  Jesuit;  that  he  sought  to  appear
clever,  and  that  all  he  did  it  for  was  to  live  long  on
earth ;  but  that  he  would  find  himself  deceived. One
of  his  Countrymen  one  day  told  him  something  —  I
know  not  what  —  that  he  had  seen  in  a  dream,  and
insisted  that  he  should  do  it,  unless  he  wished  to  die
soon. This  did  not  startle  him ;  he  replied  that  he
would  ask  the  Father  who  was  his  director  whether
the  action  were  permitted,  —  in  which  case,  he  would
perform  it;  otherwise  he  would  not. He  was  for-
bidden to  do  it,  and  he  obeyed  without  hesitation,
and  without  a  reply. Behold  how  grace  operates  in
a  heart  that  is  called  barbarian, —  [82]  or  rather,  let
us  say,  in  God's  children,  since  they  are  rendered
such  by  Baptism.


100  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ESUITES [Vol.16

de  parler,  il  faut  que  la  douleur  &  la  ioye  qui  par-
tagent  maintenant  mon  cceur,  foient  la  conclufion  de
ce  Chapitre.  Quelques  Sauuages  de  l'lfle  retournant
du  pais  des  Abnaquiois,  ont  rapporte  icy  vne  petite
verole  extremement  contagieufe ;  Ce  mal  qui  tue  par
tout  ces  pauures  peuples,  eft  defcendu  iufques  a  Sil-
lery,  c'eft  a  dire,  en  la  Refidence  de  SaincT;  Iofeph,
ou  nous  r'affemblons  les  Sauuages.  Apres  nous  en
auoir  enleue'  quelques-vns,  apres  nous  auoir  rauy  vn
vray  Apoftre  de  ces  contrees,  il  s'eft  iette  fur  les
Chefs  de  ces  deux  premieres  Families  Sedentaires
auec  vne  telle  fureur,  que  nous  n'en  fcauons  pas
encor  le  fuccez.  Fracois  Xauier  iadis  Nenask&mat  a
efte  pris  le  premier,  on  le  fit  incontinent  porter  a
l'Hofpital  pour  y  eftre  promptement  fecouru :  a  peine
y  eftoit-il  entre,  que  Noel  Negabamat  fe  fentit  affail-
ly  du  mefme  mal;  comme  ie  me  difpofois  pour
l'emporter  a  Kebec  dans  vn  canot,  afin  de  le  loger  auec
les  autres  malades,  [83]  on  m'efcriuit  que  Francois
Xauier  me  demadoit,  &  que  fi  ie  le  voulois  voir  pour
la  derniere  fois,  que  ie  me  depefchaffe.  A  mefme
temps,  voicy  quatre  Families  de  Sauuages  qui  arri-
uent  a  Sillery  a  deffein  de  fe  rendre  Sedentaires,  &
de  groffir  noftre  Bourgade  encommencee.  Les  con-
feils  de  Dieu  font  eftranges;  il  ofte,  il  donne,  il  de-
ftruit,  il  baftit ;  en  vn  mot  il  eft  le  Maiftre,  il  fait  ce
qu'il  veut,  qu'il  foit  beny  a  iamais,  s'il  n'euft  afflige'
le  bon  lob,  iamais  ce  grand  flambeau  n'euft  efclair6
le  monde;  s'il  n'euft  fecoiie  les  premieres  Colomnes
de  cefte  nouuelle  Eglife,  &  de  c6t  arreft  ou  reduction
des  Sauuages,  on  n'en  eut  pasveu  la  fermete.  II  me
fallut  ioiier  vn  eflrange  perfonnage,  car  faifant  pro-
feffion  d'arrefter  les  Sauuages,  il  me  fallut  chaffer


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib39  101

I  thought  that  I  had  finished  speaking  of  these
two  Families;  but  —  since  the  ships  still  leave  me
time  to  write  —  the  sorrow  and  joy  which  at  present
divide  my  heart,  must  form  the  conclusion  of  this
Chapter.  Some  Savages  of  the  Island,  on  their  re-
turn from  the  country  of  the  Abnaquiois,11  brought
here  a  very  contagious  epidemic  of  smallpox.  This
disease,  which  kills  off  these  poor  people  everywhere,
has  come  down  as  far  as  Sillery,  that  is,  to  the  Resi-
dence of  Saint  Joseph,  where  we  are  collecting  the
Savages.  After  having  taken  some  of  them  from  us,
after  having  snatched  from  us  a  true  Apostle  for  these
countries,  it  attacked  the  Heads  of  these  first  two  Sed-
entary Families,  with  such  fury  that  we  do  not  yet
know  the  result.  Francois  Xavier,  formerly  Nenas-
koumat,  was  the  first  seized ;  he  was  at  once  carried
to  the  Hospital,  that  he  might  be  promptly  aided
there.  Hardly  had  he  entered  it,  when  Noel  Nega-
bamat  felt  himself  attacked  by  the  same  disease.  As
I  was  preparing  to  take  him  to  Kebec  in  a  canoe,  to
lodge  him  with  the  other  sick,  [83]  I  received  a  let-
ter saying  that  Francois  Xavier  was  asking  for  me,
and  that  I  must  hasten,  if  I  wished  to  see  him  for
the  last  time.  At  the  same  moment,  four  Families
of  Savages  arrived  at  Sillery,  with  the  intention  of
becoming  Sedentary  and  of  increasing  the  popula-
tion of  our  incipient  Village.  The  designs  of  God
are  mysterious;  he  takes  away,  he  gives;  he  de-
stroys, he  constructs;  —  in  a  word,  he  is  the  Master;
he  does  what  he  wills;  may  he  be  forever  blessed.
If  he  had  not  afflicted  the  good  Job,  never  would  that
great  light  have  illumined  the  world.  If  he  had  not
shaken  the  first  Columns  of  this  new  Church,  and  of
this  settlement  or  reduction  of  the  Savages,  we  would


102  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16

ceux  qui  fe  prefentoient.  Allez,  mes  chers  amis,
leur  dis-je,  retirez-vous,  autrement  la  maladie  vous
pourra  efgorger :  1' am  our  que  ie  vous  porte  me  fait
vous  donner  ce  confeil ;  ne  vous  efloignez  pas  neant-
moins  beaucoup,  afin  que  nous  puiffios  auoir  de  vos
nouuelles,  ils  me  promirent  de  m'obeir  de  poindl  en
poind:,  &  la  deffus  fe  r'embarquent  &  s'en  vont,  me
nommant  le  lieu  ou  ils  fe  retireroient.  Cela  [84]  fait,
ie  m'en  vay  dire  a  toutes  les  autres  Families  arreftees
aupres  de  nous,  qu'il  feroit  bon  qu'il  s'efloignaffent
pour  vn  temps ;  Ie  ne  fcay  pas  quels  eftoiet  les  mou-
uemens  de  mon  ame,  mais  ie  fcay  bien  que  Dieu  ne
veut  pas  que  le  cceur  de  1'homme  s'attache  a  quoy  que
ce  foit.  Ayant  done  chafse,  pour  ainfi  dire,  &  ban-
ny  pour  vn  temps  ces  pauures  brebis  bien  defolees,
le  Pere  Vimont  qui  nous  eftoit  venu  voir  a  Sillery,
&  moy  &  vn  ieune  Sauuage,  prenons  noftre  malade
dans  vn  canot,  &  le  portons  en  la  maifon  de  charite
&  de  mifericorde,  e'eft  a  dire,  a  l'Hofpital,  fi  toft  qu'il
fut  place  ie  m'approche  du  lid:  de  Fracois  Xauier,  &
le  voyant  en  vn  tres-pitoyable  eftat,  ie  me  couure  la
face  de  mon  mouchoir,  &  m'appuye  la  tefte  fur  fon
cheuet  fans  luy  pouuoir  parler.

Ceux  qui  trauaillent  au  falut  des  ames,  ont  des  ten-
dreffes  pour  leurs  Neophytes  auffi  bien  que  les  meres
pour  leurs  enfans.  Ce  bon  Sauuage  vrayement  Chre-
ftien,  fe  tournant  vers  moy,  me  dit;  Nikanis,  ne  t'at-
trifte  point,  ie  meurs  fort  volontiers,  ie  ne  crains
point  la  mort,  ie  m'ennuye  fur  la  terre,  i'efpere  que
i'iray  au  Ciel:  Ie  vous  laiffe  a  penfer  fi  ces  paroles
me  percoient  [85]  le  cceur,  le  voyant  fort  opprefse:
ie  prie  nos  Peres  qui  eftoient  prefents  de  luy  apporter
le  faind:  Viatique,  pendant  qu'on  l'alloit  querir, ie


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  103

never  have  seen  the  firmness  thereof.  I  had  to  play
a  strange  part ;  for,  professing  to  render  the  Savages
stationary,  I  had  to  send  away  those  who  presented
themselves.  "  Go,  my  dear  friends, "  I  said  to  them ;
"  withdraw,  for  otherwise  the  disease  may  slay  you;
the  affection  that  I  feel  for  you  leads  me  to  give  you
this  advice;  however,  do  not  go  very  far  away,  so
that  we  may  have  news  of  you."  They  promised  to
obey  me  in  every  particular,  and  thereupon  they
reembarked  and  went  away,  naming  to  me  the  place
whither  they  would  retire.  This  [84]  done,  I  went
to  tell  all  the  other  Families  settled  near  us  that  it
would  be  advisable  for  them  to  go  away  for  a  while.
I  do  not  know  what  were  the  impulses  of  my  soul ;
but  I  know  well  that  God  does  not  wish  man's  heart
to  become  attached  to  anything  whatsoever.  Having
therefore  driven  away,  as  it  were,  and  banished  for  a
while,  these  poor  lambs,  disconsolate  indeed, —  Father
Vimont,  who  had  come  to  see  us  at  Sillery,  and
myself,  with  a  young  Savage,  took  our  sick  man  in  a
canoe  and  carried  him  to  the  house  of  charity  and
mercy,  that  is,  to  the  Hospital.  As  soon  as  he  was
placed  there,  I  approached  the  bed  on  which  Fran-
cois Xavier  lay ;  and,  finding  him  in  a  very  pitiful
condition,  I  covered  his  face  with  my  handkerchief
and  leaned  my  head  on  the  pillow,  unable  to  speak
to  him.

Those  who  labor  for  the  salvation  of  souls  have
as  tender  an  affection  for  their  Neophytes  as  mothers
have  for  their  children.  This  good  and  truly  Chris-
tian Savage,  turning  towards  me,  said:  "  Nikanis,
do  not  grieve ;  I  die  quite  willingly.  I  do  not  fear
death ;  I  am  weary  of  earth ;  I  hope  I  shall  go  to
Heaven." I  leave  you  to  imagine  how  these  words


104  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.16

le  confeffay.  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur,  Monfieur  le
Cheualier  de  l'Ifle,  &  quantite  de  nos  Francis,  fe
trouuerent  prefents  a  cefte  adtion :  Le  malade  ayant
receu  fon  Createur,  ie  priay  encore  qu'on  allaft  que-
rir  les  faindtes  Huiles  pour  luy  donner  l'Extreme-
Ondtion ;  pendant  ces  allees  &  venue's,  ce  bon  Neo-
phyte fit  fon  adtion  de  grace  a  Dieu,  &  comme  ie  luy
eut  declare  qu'vne  Dame  d'eminente  qualite,  Niepce
d'vn  des  plus  grands  du  Royaume,  auoit  enuoye  ces
bonnes  Religieuf es  pour  le  f ecourir  &  tous  les  fiens ;
ie  ne  pouuois  luy  faire  entendre  la  grandeur  de  Mon-
feigneur  le  Cardinal,  &  de  Madame  la  Ducheffe  d'Ai-
guillo  fous  autres  termes,  il  s'ecria:  Vous  qui  auez
tout  fait,  donnez  voflre  Paradis  a  ce  grand  Capitaine,
&  payez  bien  au  Ciel  tous  les  biens  que  nous  fait  fa
Niepce  en  terre.  Vous  eftes  tout  bon,  ayez  encore
pitie  de  celuy  qui  nous  a  loge,  &  tous  nos  enfans.
Apres  qu'il  eut  fait  fes  prieres,  ie  luy  demanday  s'il
fe  fouuenoit  bien  de  cette  grande  veue  du  Paradis,  &
de  l'Enfer,  qu'il  auoit  eu  vn  peu  apres  fon  Baptefme
[86]  il  y  a  plus  d'vn  an:  ie  luy  recommanday  fur  tout
qu'il  fe  donnaft  bien  garde  de  mentir  ayant  l'ame
fur  le  bord  des  leures,  &  noftre  Seigneur  encore  pre-
fent  dans  fon  cceur.  Nikanis,  il  fe  peut  faire  que  ie
n'ay  pas  dit  vray,  me  fit-il,  car  ie  t'ay  dit  que  i'auois
veu  la  demeure  du  grand  Capitaine  du  Ciel ;  ie  ne
fcay  pas  fi  c'eftoit  fa  mais-o,  mais  ce  que  i'ay  veu
eftoit  fi  beau  &  fi  rauiffant,  que  ie  cru  que  c'eftoit  la
fa  demeure,  il  n'y  a  rien  de  femblable  en  terre,  i'ay
encore  cefte  beaute  fi  imprimee  en  l'efprit,  que  ie  ne
croy  pas  en  perdre  iamais  la  memoire.  En  fin  nous
luy  donnafmes  l'Extreme-Ondtion,  qu'il  receut  auec
de  grands reffentimets  de douleur d'auoir offense


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  i639  105

pierced  my  [85]  heart.  Seeing  that  he  was  greatly-
oppressed,  I  begged  the  Fathers  who  were  present
to  bring  him  the  holy  Viaticum ;  and,  while  they
went  for  it,  I  heard  his  confession.  Monsieur  the
Governor,  Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de  l'lsle,  and
many  of  our  Frenchmen  were  present  at  this  rite.
The  sick  man  having  received  his  Creator,  I  again
requested  that  the  holy  Oil  be  brought,  to  adminis-
ter Extreme  Unction  to  him.  During  all  this  going
and  coming,  the  good  Neophyte  said  his  act  of  thanks-
giving to  God ;  and  when  I  told  him  that  a  Lady  of
high  degree,  the  Niece  of  one  of  the  greatest  men  in
the  Kingdom,  had  sent  these  good  Nuns  to  succor
him  and  all  his  people, —  I  could  not  make  him  com-
prehend the  greatness  of  Monseigneur  the  Cardinal
and  of  Madame  the  Duchess  d' Aiguillon  by  any  other
terms, —  he  exclaimed:  "You  who  have  made  all,
give  your  Paradise  to  that  great  Captain,  and  pay
well  in  Heaven  for  all  the  gifts  that  his  Niece  has
bestowed  upon  us  on  earth.  You  are  all  goodness ;
have  likewise  pity  on  him  who  has  lodged  us  and  all
our  children. ' '  After  he  had  said  his  prayers,  I  asked
him  if  he  remembered  well  the  glorious  vision  of
Paradise  and  of  Hell  that  he  had  had  shortly  after
his  Baptism,  [86]  over  a  year  ago.  I  advised  him
above  all  to  be  careful  not  to  tell  a  falsehood,  with
his  soul  hovering  on  his  lips,  and  our  Lord  still  pres-
ent in  his  heart.  "  Nikanis,"  he  said  to  me,  "it
may  be  that  I  did  not  tell  the  truth  when  I  told  thee
that  I  had  seen  the  dwelling  of  the  great  Captain  of
Heaven.  I  do  not  know  whether  it  was  his  house ;
but  what  I  saw  was  so  beautiful  and  so  ravishing
that  I  thought  it  was  his  house.  There  is  nothing
like  it  on  earth. That  beauty  is  still  so  impressed


106  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16


Dieu.  Comme  il  voyoit  bon  nobre  de  nos  Francis
prians  Dieu  pour  luy  a  genoux  a  l'entour  de  fon  lidt,
il  efleua  fa  voix,  &  leur  dit :  Mes  amis,  vous  me  faites
plaifir  de  me  vifiter,  &  de  prier  Dieu  pour  moy ;  ie
vous  affeure  que  fi  ie  vay  au  Ciel,  comme  i'efpere,  ie
le  prieray  pour  vous :  Ces  paroles  &  la  deuotion  de
ce  bon  Sauuage  en  toucha  plufieurs  iuf  ques  aux  larmes,
nous  n'attendions  pas  de  voir  ces  couerfions  de  nos
iours.  Ce  n'eft  pas  tout,  a  quelque  teps  de  la,  il  fit
venir  fes  enfans,  qui  fe  ietterent  [87]  a  genoux  aupres
de  fon  lidt,  luy  demanderent  pardon,  &  le  prierent  de
leur  donner  fa  benediction,  il  leur  donna  de  tres  bons
confeils,  leur  recommanda  la  perfeuerance  en  la  Foy,
leur  enioignit  de  nous  obeir,  comme  a  luy-mefme,
de  viure  en  paix  &  en  amitie  l'vn  auec  l'autre,  &  de
ne  rien  mettre  dans  la  f off e  apres  fa  mort ;  puis  f aifant
le  figne  de  la  Croix  fur  eux,  il  leur  dit:  Adieu  mes
enfans,  ie  prieray  pour  vous  en  Paradis.

Quelque  temps  apres,  come  ie  le  vifitois,  ie  luy
demanday  ce  qu'il  penfoit;  ie  penfe  en  Dieu,  me  fit-il,
mon  cceur  eft  toufiours  en  luy,  ie  tafche  de  faire  come
vous ;  il  me  f emble  que  vous  penf ez  toufiours  en  luy,
ie  veux  faire  le  meme,  quel  fubiedt  de  confufion  a  vn
cceur  lache  comme  le  mien.

A  m6me  temps  que  cecy  fe  paffoit,  fa  femme  accou-
cha  toute  feule  sas  ayde  d'aucune  perfonne,  elle
accoucha  le  matin,  &  fur  le  midy  ie  la  vey  trauailler,
elle  s'eftoit  retiree  fous  vne  mediate  ecorce  qui  ne
l'abrioit  d'aucun  vent;  a  deux  iours  de  la  elle  porta
elle-mefme  fon  enfant  a  Kebec  pour  eftre  baptife,
mais  pour  augmenter  l'afflidtion  de  cefte  Famille,
cefte  pauure  creature  tomba  bien-toft  apres  en  phre-
nefie,  qui  [88]  luy  dura  quelque  temps;  de  l'heure  que


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  107

upon  my  mind  that  I  do  not  think  I  shall  ever  lose
the  recollection  of  it."  Finally,  we  administered
Extreme  Unction,  which  he  received  with  deep  feel-
ings of  regret  for  having  offended  God.  Observing
many  of  our  Frenchmen  praying  to  God  for  him,  on
their  knees  around  his  bed,  he  raised  his  voice  and
said  to  them:  "  My  friends,  you  do  me  a  pleasure  by
visiting  me  and  praying  God  for  me.  I  assure  you
that  if  I  go  to  Heaven,  as  I  hope,  I  will  pray  for
you."  These  words  and  the  devoutness  of  the  good
Savage  moved  many  of  them  to  tears.  We  did  not
expect  to  see  such  conversions  in  our  time.  That  is
not  all;  some  time  afterward,  he  had  his  children
brought;  they  fell  [87]  on  their  knees  by  his  bed,
begged  his  pardon,  and  asked  him  to  give  them  his
blessing.  He  gave  them  very  good  advice;  coun-
seled them  to  persevere  in  the  Faith ;  enjoined  them
to  obey  us  as  they  would  himself,  to  live  in  peace
and  friendship  with  one  another,  and  to  put  nothing
in  his  grave  after  his  death.  Then,  making  the  sign
of  the  Cross  over  them,  he  said:  "  Adieu,  my  chil-
dren; I  will  pray  for  you  in  Paradise."

Some  time  afterward,  when  I  visited  him,  I  asked
him  of  what  he  was  thinking.  "  I  am  thinking  of
God,"  he  said;  "  my  heart  is  ever  with  him.  I  try
to  do  like  you ;  it  seems  to  me  that  you  always  think
of  him;  I  wish  to  do  the  same."  What  a  source  of
confusion  for  a  cowardly  heart  like  mine !

At  the  same  time  that  this  was  occurring,  his  wife
was  delivered  of  a  child,  all  alone,  and  without  the
assistance  of  any  one.  She  was  confined  in  the  morn-
ing, and  at  noon  I  saw  her  working.12  She  had  with-
drawn into  a  miserable  bark  hut,  which  did  not  shel-
ter her  at  all  from  the  wind. Two  days  afterwards,


108  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

i'ecry  cecy,  elle  eft  en  fon  bon  fens,  mais  nous  fommes
encor  dans  1' incertitude  de  la  fante  ou  de  la  mort  de
fon  pauure  mary.

Reuenons  a  noftre  autre  Neophyte  Noel  Negabamat,
fi  toft  qu'il  ne  fe  fentit  frappe"  de  la  maladie,  il  me  dit :
Nikanis,  ie  m'en  vais  a  la  mort  auffi  bien  que  les
autres,  come  ie  l'exhortois  a  diuertir  fon  efprit  de
cefte  penfee,  il  fe  mit  a  rire ;  Cela  feroit  bon,  dit-il,
fi  ie  craignois  la  mort ;  nous  autres  qui  croyons  en
Dieu  ne  la  deuos  pas  craindre :  Tu  fcais  bien,  adioufta-
il,  que  plufieurs  Sauuages  croyent  que  vous  eftes  les
Autheurs  des  maladies  qui  nous  fot  mourir;  fois
affeure  que  ceux  qui  ont  la  foy  n'ont  point  ces  pen-
fees;  fouuiene  toy  feulement  de  tenir  ta  parole,  &
d'auoir  pitie  de  nos  enfans  apres  noftre  mort,  ie  ne
parle  pas  pour  moy,  car  les  miens  font  morts,  ou  peu
s'en  faut,  mais  pour  Francois  Xauier,  il  ne  faut  point
perdre  la  refolutio  que  tu  as  prife  d'arrefter  les  Sau-
uages: La  deffus,  il  me  nomma  vne  Famille,  &  me
dit,  quand  ie  feray  mort,  cefte  Famille  prendra  ma
place.  Pour  les  preses  que  noftre  Roy  no9  a  faits,  le
fils  de  Fragiois  portera  l'habit  de  fon  pere  quand  on  fera
quelques  prieres  publiques  [89]  pour  le  Roy,  &  vn  tel
Sauuage  qu'il  me  nomma  portera  le  mien;  coferue
toufiours  ces  habits,  arm  que  nos  defcedans  fcachet
combien  le  Roy  nous  a  aymez.  Ie  vous  cofeffe  que
ie  fus  bien  etone  quand  i'entendis  tenir  ce  langage  a
ce  pauure  homme;  fa  maladie  n'a  pas  efte  fi  forte  ny
fi  preffante  que  celle  des  autres.  Le  Pere  de  Quen
qui  vifite  fouuentefois  le  iour  les  malades  de  l'Hofpi-
tal,  me  mande  que  ce  bon  Neophyte  s'eft  confeffe  &
communie,  &  qu'on  efpere  qu'il  retournera  bien-toft
en  fa  maifon  a  Sillery,  mais  que  fa  femme  eft  re  torn-


1 639]  LE  JE  UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  i639  1 09

she  herself  carried  her  child  to  Kebec  to  have  it  bap-
tized; but  —  to  increase  the  affliction  of  this  Family  —
the  poor  creature  was  shortly  after  seized  with  a  fren-
zy, which  [88]  lasted  some  time.  As  I  write  this,  she
is  in  her  right  senses,  but  we  are  still  in  uncertainty
regarding  the  health  or  death  of  her  poor  husband.
Let  us  return  to  our  other  Neophyte,  Noel  Nega-
bamat.  As  soon  as  he  felt  himself  attacked  by  the
disease,  he  said  to  me,  "  Nikanis,  I  am  going  to  my
death,  like  the  others."  When  I  urged  him  to  divert
his  mind  from  that  thought,  he  began  to  smile.
"  That  would  do,"  he  said,  "  if  I  feared  death.  We
who  believe  in  God  should  not  fear  it.  Thou  know-
est  well,"  he  added,  "that  many  Savages  believe
that  you  are  the  Authors  of  the  diseases  which  cause
our  death ;  rest  assured  that  those  who  have  faith
have  not  such  thoughts.  Remember  only  to  keep
thy  word,  and  to  have  pity  on  our  children  after  our
death.  I  do  not  speak  for  myself,  because  mine  are
dead  or  nearly  so,  but  for  Francois  Xavier.  Thou
must  not  abandon  the  resolution  thou  hast  taken  to
make  the  Savages  settle. ' '  Thereupon  he  mentioned
to  me  a  Family,  and  said:  "  When  I  am  dead,  that
Family  will  take  my  place.  As  for  the  presents  that
our  King  has  given  us,  the  son  of  Francois  will
wear  his  father's  coat  when  any  public  prayers  are
said  [89]  for  the  King,  and  such  a  Savage  " — whom
he  named — "  will  wear  mine.  Keep  these  garments
always  so  that  our  descendants  may  know  how  much
the  King  has  loved  us."  I  must  confess  that  I  was
indeed  astonished  when  I  heard  the  poor  man  use
this  language.  His  illness  has  not  been  as  severe  or
as  violent  as  that  of  the  others.  Father  de  Quen,
who  visits  the  sick  in  the  Hospital  several  times  a


110  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.15


bee,  &  qu'elle  eft  en  danger  de  mort.  Voila  d'£tranges
epreuues,  mais  pour  vne  marque  affeuree  que,  Non  eft
malum  in  Ciuitate,  quod  non  fecerit  Dominus,  que  Dieu
eft  l'Autheur  de  ces  afflictions:  C'eft  que  la  foy  de
ces  nouueaux  Chrefties  que  nous  penfios  deuoir  eftre
ebralee  dans  les  tempeftes,  a  fait  comme  les  arbres
qui  iettent  de  plus  profondes  racines,  plus  ils  font
combattus  des  vents ;  elle  s'eft  affermie  iufques  a  nous
confoler  fenfiblement  dans  les  plus  viues  fources  de
noftre  douleur.

Enfin  nous  efperons  le  calme  apres  cefte  bourafque,
Dieu  ne  demolit  point  que  pour  mieux  rebaftir.  Vous
diriez  que  ces  calamitez  [90]  attirent  les  Sauuages.
Ie  me  tiens  defia  comme  affeure  que  nous  en  aurons  au
double  &  au  triple  l'an  prochain,  fi  nous  auons  de-
quoy  les  affifter ;  ils  nous  ont  donne  leurs  paroles,  &
defia  quelques-vns  ce  font  r'approchez  en  attedant
que  le  froid  diffipe  le  mauuais  air  que  les  malades
ont  apporte"  auec  eux.  I'efpere  que  deuant  que  les
vaiffeaux  foient  arriuez  en  France,  que  noftre  petit
troupeau  fe  r'affemblera,  &  fe  trouuera  accreu  de
plus  de  perfonnes  qu'il  n'en  eft  mort. Ainu  foit-il.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  111

day,  tells  me  that  this  good  Neophyte  has  made  his
confession  and  received  communion,  and  that  they
hope  he  will  soon  return  to  his  house  at  Sillery ;  but
that  his  wife  has  had  a  relapse,  and  is  in  danger  of
death.  These  are  strange  trials,  but  are  a  sure  proof
that  Non  est  malum  in  Civitate,  quod  non  fecerit  Domi-
nus,  that  God  is  the  Author  of  these  afflictions.  For
the  faith  of  these  new  Christians,  which  we  thought
would  be  shaken  by  storms,  has  been  like  the  trees
which  strike  root  more  deeply,  the  more  they  have
struggled  with  the  winds.  It  has  become  so  firm  as
to  afford  us  much  consolation  in  the  very  sources  of
our  deepest  sorrow.

Finally,  we  hope  for  calm  after  this  storm.  God
demolishes  only  to  rebuild  better  than  before.  One
would  say  that  these  calamities  [90]  attract  the  Sav-
ages. I  am  already  assured  that  we  shall  have  twice
and  three  times  as  many  next  year  if  we  have  the
means  of  assisting  them.  They  have  given  us  their
word,  and  some  have  already  come  nearer  to  us,  wait-
ing till  the  cold  dispels  the  infection  that  the  sick
have  brought  with  them.  I  hope  that,  before  the
ships  reach  France,  our  little  flock  will  be  gathered
together  again,  and  will  be  increased  by  a  larger
number  of  persons  than  have  died. So  may  it  be.


112  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16


[91]  CHAPT.  VI.

DU BAPTESME D*VN IEUNE HOMME ALGONQUIN.

IE  couchay  bien  amplement  dans  la  Relation  de
l'an  paffe  les  grandes  difpofitions  de  ce  ieune
homme,  lequel  n'eftant  encor  que  cathecumene,
ne  paroiffoit  defja  reply  des  graces  bien  particulieres
que  Dieu  accorde  a  ceux  qui  font  lauez  dans  le  fang
de  fon  Fils.  Ie  ne  m'eftonneray  pas  fi  apres  auoir  fi
fouuent  parle  des  grandes  fimplicitez  de  ces  peuples,
ils  fe  trouuent  en  France  quelqu'vn  qui  reuoque  en
doute  les  biens  que  nous  en  publions,  puifque  moy
mefme  qui  voit  les  merueilles  de  mes  yeux,  ne  les
puis  quafi  croire  qu'en  faifant  reflexion  fur  la  gran-
deur de  Dieu,  Qui  non  e&  perfonarum  acceptor,  qui  d'vn
berger  en  fait  vn  grand  Roy  &  vn  grand  Prophete,
d'vn  pecheur  vn  grand  Apoftre,  &  d'vn  Sauuage  vn
Ange  de  fon  Eglife.  Ce  ieune  homme  dont  nous
parlons  voyant  l'A'utomne  pafse  que  nous  retardions
fon  Baptefme,  prit  refolution  de  s'en  aller  auec  [92]
vne  efcoiiade  de  fes  gens  chercher  quelque  prouifion
dans  l'efpaiff eur  de  leurs  grandes  Forefls ;  il  ne  fut
pas  bien  loing,  que  fon  cceur  tranfi  de  crainte,  le  fit
rebrouffer  chemin:  ie  ne  fcaurois  plus,  nous  fit  il,
m'efloigner  de  vous,  que  ie  ne  fois  baptise.  Quand
ie  iette  les  yeux  fur  les  pechez  que  i'ay  commis  de-
puis  que  ie  fuis  au  monde,  &  que  ie  me  reprefente  le
Baptefme  comme  vn  bain  qui  les  doit  lauer,  ie  ne
fcaurois  quitter  ceux  qui  me  doiuent  conferer  vn  fi


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  113


[91]  CHAPTER  VI.

OF THE BAPTISM OF A YOUNG ALGONQUIN MAN.

I  DESCRIBED  very  fully  in  the  Relation  of  last
year  the  excellent  inclinations  of  this  young  man,
who,  as  yet  only  a  catechumen,  seems  already
furnished  with  the  very  special  graces  that  God
grants  to  those  who  are  washed  in  the  blood  of  his
Son.  I  shall  not  be  astonished,  if,  after  having  so
often  spoken  of  the  great  simplicity  of  these  peoples,
there  be  some  one  in  France  who  calls  in  question
the  good  things  that  we  publish  about  them ;  since
I  myself,  who  see  the  wonders  with  my  own  eyes,
can  hardly  believe  them  until  I  reflect  upon  the
greatness  of  God,  Qui  non  est  personarum  acceptor,  who
of  a  shepherd  makes  a  great  King  and  a  great  Pro-
phet, of  a  fisher  a  great  Apostle,  and  of  a  Savage  an
Angel  of  his  Church.  This  young  man  of  whom  we
speak,  when  he  saw  last  Autumn  that  we  delayed  his
Baptism,  decided  to  go  away  with  [92]  a  company  of
his  people  into  the  depths  of  their  great  Forests,  to
seek  for  provisions.  He  had  not  gone  very  far  when
his  heart  was  chilled  with  fear,  which  caused  him  to
retrace  his  steps.  "  I  cannot  leave  you  any  more,"
he  said  to  us,  "  until  I  am  baptized.  When  I  cast
my  eyes  over  the  sins  I  have  committed  since  I  have
been  in  the  world,  and  when  I  represent  to  myself
Baptism  as  a  bath  that  shall  wash  them  away,  I  can-
not leave  those  who  are  to  confer  so  great  a  blessing
upon  me ;  I  have  resolved  to  remain  here  until  you


114  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  16

grand  bien,  i'ay  refolu  de  demeurer  icy  iufques  a  ce
que  vous  m'ayez  ouuert  les  portes  de  l'Eglife.  Nous
le  remifmes  a  la  Fefte  de  tous  les  Saindts.  Dans
cette  attente  comme  il  nous  vifitoit  fouuent,  &  que
par  fois  nous  le  faifions  manger  en  noflre  maifon,  il
nous  tint  vne  fois  ce  difcours.  Mes  compatriotes
s'imagineroit  peut  eftre  que  ie  vous  viens  voir
pour  tirer  de  vous  quelques  commoditez  temporelles,
&  peut  eftre  encor  vous  autres  pourriez  vous  auoir
cette  penf£e,  mais  ie  vous  fupplie  de  croire  que  ie  ne
vous  demande  rien,  &  que  ie  n'atteds  de  vous  que  la
feule  inftruction  de  mon  ame,  11  Dieu  paroiffoit  ca  bas
en  terre,  ie  vous  quitterois  la  pour  Taller  trouuer,  ou
pluftoft  ie  [93]  vous  inuiterois  de  le  venir  recognoiftre
auec  moy,  car  vous  eftes  l'ouurage  de  fes  mains,
comme  tout  le  refle  des  autres  creatures :  mais  puif-
que  Dieu  ne  fe  fait  pas  voir  en  terre,  &  que  nous
n'auons  pas  la  cognoiffance  de  fes  volontez,  il  faut  de
neceffite  que  nous  vifitions  &  que  nous  importunions
ceux  qui  nous  la  peuuent  donner.

Vne  autrefois  il  nous  parla  en  ces  termes:  Mon
cceur  eft  fait  d'vne  autre  facon  qu'il  n'eftoit  il  y  a
quelque  temps,  car  auparauant  que  ie  vous  euife
cogneu,  i'employois  tout  mon  efprit  a  rechercher  les
commoditez  de  cette  vie ;  a  peine  eftois-ie  en  vn  en-
droit,  que  ie  penfois  trouuer  mieux  en  vn  autre;
maintenant  en  quelque  lieu  que  ie  tranfporte  mon
corps,  mon  ame  demeure  toufiours  auec  vous,  elle
n'a  point  de  repos  qu'en  vos  difcours;  iamais  elle  ne
fe  laffe  de  vous  oiiir  parler  de  Dieu,  nos  cabanes  me
femblent  des  maifons  eftranges ;  &  encor  que  ie  f  cache
que  Dieu  eft  par  tout,  neantmoins  il  me  femble  que
ie  fuis  plus  pres  de  luy  quand  ie  ne  fuis  pas  efloigne


1639]  LE  JEUNES  RELATION,  i639  115

have  opened  to  me  the  doors  of  the  Church."  We
put  him  off  until  all  Saints'  Day.  While  thus  wait-
ing, as  he  came  to  see  us  frequently,  and  as  we  some-
times had  him  eat  in  our  house,  he  once  made  this
speech  to  us:  "  My  countrymen  would  imagine,
perhaps,  that  I  visit  you  for  the  sake  of  obtaining
temporal  benefits,  and  it  may  be  that  even  you  have
this  idea ;  but  I  beg  you  to  believe  that  I  ask  nothing
from  you,  and  that  all  I  expect  from  you  is  only  the
instruction  of  my  soul.  If  God  appeared  down  here
on  earth,  I  would  leave  you  straightway  to  go  and
find  him, —  or  rather,  I  [93]  would  invite  you  to  come
with  me  to  acknowledge  him,  for  you  are  the  work
of  his  hands,  as  are  all  other  creatures;  but  as  God
does  not  appear  upon  earth,  and  as  we  have  no
knowledge  of  his  wishes,  we  must  of  necessity  visit
and  importune  those  who  can  give  us  this  knowl-
edge."

Another  time,  he  spoke  to  us  in  these  terms:
' '  My  heart  is  different  now  from  what  it  was  some
time  ago,  for,  before  I  knew  you,  I  employed  all  my
wits  in  seeking  the  comforts  of  this  life ;  I  had  hardly
reached  one  place,  before  I  thought  I  would  be  bet-
ter off  in  another.  Now,  wherever  I  remove  my
body,  my  soul  remains  always  with  you ;  it  has  no
rest  but  in  your  conversation, — it  never  wearies  of
hearing  you  talk  about  God.  Our  cabins  seem  to
me  like  houses  of  strangers;  and  although  I  know
that  God  is  everywhere,  yet  it  seems  to  me  that  I  am
nearer  him  when  I  am  not  far  from  you.  Some  of
my  people  cast  upon  me  the  reproach  that  I  am
becoming  a  Frenchman,  that  I  am  leaving  my  own
nation ;  [94]  and  I  answer  them  that  I  am  neither
Frenchman  nor  savage,  but  that  I  wish  to  be  a  child


116  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16

de  vous.  Quelques-vns  de  mes  gens  me  reprochent
que  ie  deuiens  francois,  que  ie  quitte  ma  nation
[94]  &  ie  leur  refpons,  que  ie  ne  fuis  ny  francois,  ny
fauuage,  mais  que  ie  veux  eftre  enfant  de  Dieu.
Tous  les  Francois  ny  leur  Capitaine  ne  fcauroient
fauuer  mon  ame,  ce  n'eft  pas  en  eux  que  ie  crois,
mais  en  celuy  qui  les  a  fait  eux  mefmes.  II  nous  tint
ces  difcours  en  meilleurs  termes  en  fa  langue,  que  ie
ne  les  rapporte  en  la  noftre.

Le  voyant  tres-mal  couuert  dans  vn  froid  fort
picquant,  ie  luy  demanday  s'il  n'auoit  point  d'autre
robbe  que  celle  qu'il  portoit:  Ton  frere,  me  fit-il,
m'en  a  donne  vne  il  y  a  defia  long-temps,  mais  ie  ne
la  porte  point  pour  deux  raifons.  Premierement  ie
crains  mon  corps,  fi  ie  luy  donne  fes  aifes,  &  que  ie
le  couure  chaudement,  il  me  follicitera  de  luy  procu-
rer toufiours  le  mefme  bien ;  &  fi  ie  ne  le  puis  recou-
urer  \sc.  recouurir]  par  mon  induftrie,  il  m'induira
doucemet  a  vous  frequenter  pluftoft  pour  fon  bien
particulier,  que  pour  le  falut  de  mon  ame,  c'eft  ce
qui  m'a  fait  refoudre  de  ne  me  point  feruir  de  vos
prefens.

Secondement  fi  ie  me  montre  affedtionne  a  vos
dons,  ie  feray  inceffamment  importune  d'vne  femme
qui  n'a  guiere  d'efprit,  laquelle  me  preffera  de  tirer
de  vous  tout  ce  qu'elle  croira  que  voftre  bonte  me
[95]  pourra  accorder.  De  la  vient  que  i'ay  pris  refo-
lution  de  meprifer  mon  corps  pour  mieux  penfer  aux
biens  de  mon  efprit.

Au  commencement,  difoit-il,  que  i'allois  voir  vos
Peres  qui  font  aux  trois  Riuieres;  ie  penfois  a  part
moy,  peut-eftre,  que  ces  gens  cy  s'imaginent  que  ie
les  vient  voir foubs efperance de quelque fecours


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  117

of  God.  All  the  French,  including  their  Captain,
could  not  save  my  soul;  it  is  not  in  them  that  I
believe,  but  in  him  who  has  made  them  themselves."
He  made  this  speech  to  us  in  better  terms  in  his
own  language  than  I  can  report  in  ours.

Seeing  him  very  thinly  clad,  in  the  piercing  cold,
I  asked  him  if  he  had  no  other  robe  than  that  he
wore.  "  Thy  brother,"  he  replied,  "  gave  me  one  a
long  time  ago ;  but  I  do  not  wear  it,  for  two  reasons.
First,  I  fear  that  my  body,  if  I  supply  it  with  com-
forts and  cover  it  warmly,  will  be  always  urging  me
to  procure  for  it  the  same  good  things ;  and  if  I  can-
not cover  it  by  my  own  skill,  it  will  gradually  lead
me  to  frequent  your  society  for  its  own  special  bene-
fit, rather  than  for  the  salvation  of  my  soul.  This
has  made  me  resolve  not  to  make  use  of  your  pres-
ents.

"  Secondly,  if  I  show  myself  desirous  of  your
gifts,  I  shall  be  continually  importuned  by  a  woman
who  has  very  little  sense,  who  will  urge  me  to  get
from  you  all  that  she  will  think  your  goodness  [95]
can  grant  me.  Hence  I  have  made  a  resolution  to
disregard  my  body,  that  I  may  better  reflect  upon
the  welfare  of  my  soul.

"  At  first,  when  I  went  to  see  you  Fathers  at  the
three  Rivers,"  he  continued,  "  I  thought  to  myself,
1  Perhaps  these  people  imagine  that  I  come  to  see
them  in  the  hope  of  some  temporal  help ;  they  are
greatly  mistaken,'  said  I  in  my  heart;  '  it  is  not  my
body  that  brings  me  here,  but  the  desire  of  saving
my  soul.'  I  was  thinking  of  the  good  things  of  the
other  life,  and  not  of  the  comforts  of  this  one  that
we  lead  here  on  earth."  Let  us  speak  of  his  Bap-
tism.


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

temporel ;  ils  fe  trompent  bien,  difois-ie  en  mon  cceur,
ce  n'efl  pas  mon  corps  qui  m'ameine  icy,  mais  le  de-
fir  de  farmer  mon  ame,  ie  penfois  aux  biens  de  l'autre
vie,  &  non  pas  aux  commoditez  de  celle-cy  que  nous
menons  en  terre. Parlons  de  fon  Baptefme.

II  s'y  difpofa  de  longue  main  par  de  grands  defirs
d'eftre  fait  enfant  de  Dieu  &  de  fon  Eglife,  &  par
de  grands  regrets  de  f es  offenf es ;  il  admiroit  les  eff  ets
de  ce  Sacrement  que  nous  luy  auions  expliqu6,  il  fou-
haittoit  d'en  auoir  la  ioiiiffance.  En  fin  le  iour  defti-
ne  s'approchant,  il  ieufna  la  veille,  nous  le  menafmes
a  Kebec  pour  y  receuoir  ce  Sacrement  en  la  prefence
de  nos  Francois.  La  il  fut  nomme  Ignace  par  Mon-
fieur  Gand  fon  Parrain.  Sa  modeftie  accompagnee
d'vne  faincte  liberte  luy  faifoit  refpondre  auec  grace
&  franchife  [96]  a  toutes  les  interrogations  qu'on  luy
fit.  II  fut  baptife  le  Dimanche  dernier  iour  d'O-
ctobre,  &  le  lendemain  iour  confacre  a  l'honneur  de
tous  les  faincts,  il  fe  communia  publiquement  en  la
Chappelle  de  Kebec,  les  occupations  que  nous  auons
en  ce  temps-la  furent  caufe  que  ie  ne  pus  pas  fi-toft
l'interroger  des  fentimens  que  Dieu  luy  auoit  donne
dans  la  reception  de  ces  deux  grands  Sacremens.  Ie
le  fis  deux  iours  apres  par  maniere  de  difcours,  luy
demandant  fi  fon  cceur  n' auoit  point  reflenty  de  ioye
dans  fon  Baptefme:  Sa  face  s'epanouit  a  cefte  de-
mande,  &  fon  ame  gouftant  vne  autrefois  les  contete-
mens  qu'elle  auoit  receue  en  ces  myfteres  facrez,  fit
fortir  ces  paroles  de  fa  bouche.  Eftant  a  la  porte  de
1' Eglife  ou  on  fait  demeurer  les  Cathecumenes  deuant
leur  Baptefme,  il  m'eftoit  a  voir  qu'on  me  tenoit  la
pour  cognoiftre  ma  derniere  volonte\  &  pour  fcauoir
fi  ie  croyois,  &  fi  en  eff edt  ie  voulois  effcre  Chreftien ;


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  119

He  had  been  long  prepared  for  this  through  his
strong  desires  to  be  made  a  child  of  God  and  of  his
Church,  and  through  his  deep  regret  for  his  offenses;
he  admired  the  effects  of  this  Sacrament  that  we  had
explained  to  him,  he  wished  to  have  the  enjoyment
of  it.  In  fine,  the  appointed  day  drawing  near,  he
fasted  on  the  evening  before ;  we  took  him  down  to
Kebec,  that  he  might  there  receive  this  Sacrament  in
the  presence  of  our  French  people.  He  was  then
named  Ignace  by  Monsieur  Gand,  his  Godfather.
His  modesty,  accompanied  by  a  holy  freedom,  made
him  answer  gracefully  and  frankly  [96]  all  the  ques-
tions that  were  put  to  him.  He  was  baptized  on
Sunday,  the  last  day  of  October;  and  the  next  day,
a  day  consecrated  in  honor  of  all  the  saints,  he  took
communion  publicly  in  the  Chapel  of  Kebec.  On
account  of  the  occupations  that  we  had  at  that  time,
I  could  not  immediately  question  him  upon  the  sen-
timents that  God  had  imparted  to  him  in  the  recep-
tion of  these  two  great  Sacraments.  I  did  so  two
days  afterwards,  in  a  sort  of  talk  I  had  with  him,
asking  him  if  his  heart  had  not  experienced  joy  in
his  Baptism.  His  face  brightened  at  this  question ;
and  his  soul,  tasting  once  more  the  delights  it  had
experienced  in  these  sacred  mysteries,  caused  his
lips  to  utter  these  words :  ' '  While  at  the  door  of
the  Church,  where  they  have  the  Catechumens  re-
main before  their  Baptism,  I  could  see  that  they  were
keeping  me  there  in  order  to  learn  my  final  wishes,
and  to  know  whether  I  believed,  and  whether  I
really  wished  to  be  a  Christian.  My  heart  felt  a
strong  impulse  to  enter  quickly  into  the  house  of
God,  as  if  some  one  forcibly  incited  me  to  do  a  thing
to  which  all  my  inclinations  prompted  me.


120  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16

mon  coeur  fentoit  vne  grande  preffe  d'entrer  vifte-
ment  dans  la  maifon  de  Dieu,  comme  fi  quelqu'vn
m'eufl  incite  viuement  a  faire  vne  chofe  a  laquelle
toute  mon  affedtion  efloit  port£e.

[97]  Ie  prenois  vn  fmgulier  plaifir  a  toutes  les  inter-
rogations qu'on  me  faifoit;  Ie  difois  en  moy-mefme,
en  fin  Dieu  a  eu  pitie"  de  moy,  en  fin  la  porte  me  fera
ouuerte,  ie  ferois  bien-toft  de  la  famille  des  croyas,
&  de  la  nation  des  enfans  de  Dieu:  Quand  on  m'im-
primoit  le  figne  de  la  croix  au  front,  il  me  fembloit
que  le  Diable  s'enfuyoit,  &  qu'il  n'auroit  plus  doref-
nauant  de  pouuoir  fur  moy.  Comme  on  me  fit  entrer
en  l'Eglife,  ie  m'eftonnois  comme  ie  ne  defcendois
point  pluftofk  dans  les  enfers,  tous  mes  pechez  fe  re-
prefentans  a  ma  memoire,  mais  ie  prenois  vn  fi  grand
plaifir  qu'ils  s'en  alloient  tous  s'eff acer  en  vn  moment,
que  ie  ne  fgaurois  l'expliquer,  ie  m'eftonnois  comme
Dieu  m'auoit  tant  attendu  pour  me  faire  tant  de  biens
tout  en  vn  coup.  Tout  auffi-tofi  qu'on  eut  verfe  les
eaux  Sacr6es  fur  ma  tefte,  mon  cceur  fe  fentit  tout
change.  En  effedt  il  eft  tout  autre  qu'il  n'eftoit,  car
depuis  ce  temps-la  il  me  femble  qu'il  n 'attend  pas
que  le  peche  vienne  iufques  a  luy  dans  les  occafions
de  mal  faire:  mais  vous  diriez  qu'il  fort  hors  de  moy
pour  aller  au  deuant  des  chofes  mauuaifes,  pour  les
repouffer  &  les  efloigner  auec  vne  telle  [98]  force,
qu'il  m'eft  aduis  que  ce  n'eft,  pas  moy  qui  refifle.  II
me  femble  auffi  que  ie  fuis  deuenu  comme  fourd  &
aueugle,  car  ie  ne  prend  point  garde  a  ce  qui  fe  paffe
deuant  moy.  Hier  il  le  fit  vn  grand  bruit  dans  noftre
cabane,  les  enfans  faifoient  vn  tel  tintamarre  que  tous
mes  gens  s'en  fafcherent,  &  fe  mirent  a  crier  &  faire
plus  de  bruit  que  les  enfans  mefmes,  ie  ne  prenois


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  121

[97]  ' '  I  took  a  singular  pleasure  in  all  the  questions
that  were  asked  me,  saying  to  myself,  '  At  last  God
has  had  pity  on  me ;  at  last  the  door  will  be  open  to
me,  and  I  shall  soon  be  of  the  family  of  believers,
and  of  the  nation  of  the  children  of  God ! '  When
the  sign  of  the  cross  was  pressed  upon  my  forehead,
it  seemed  to  me  that  the  Devil  fled,  and  that  he
would  henceforward  no  longer  have  power  over  me.
When  they  had  me  enter  the  Church,  I  was  aston-
ished that  I  did  not  rather  descend  into  hell,  all  my
sins  again  presenting  themselves  to  my  remem-
brance ;  but  I  took  so  much  pleasure  in  this,  that  they
all  were  to  be  blotted  out  in  a  moment,  that  I  cannot
explain  it ;  I  was  astonished  that  God  had  waited  so
long  to  grant  me  so  many  blessings,  all  at  one
stroke.  At  once,  as  soon  as  they  had  poured  the
Sacred  waters  upon  my  head,  my  heart  felt  itself
completely  changed.  In  fact,  it  is  altogether  differ-
ent from  what  it  was ;  for  since  that  time  it  seems  to
me  that  it  does  not  wait  for  sin  to  come  to  it,  on
occasions  for  wrongdoing, —  but  you  might  say  that
it  leaves  me  to  go  and  meet  evil  things,  to  repulse
and  drive  them  away,  with  such  [98]  force  that  I  am
inclined  to  think  it  is  not  I  who  resist.  It  seems  to
me  also  that  I  have  become  deaf  and  blind,  as  it
were,  for  I  do  not  take  any  notice  of  what  happens
in  my  presence.  Yesterday  there  was  a  great  noise
in  our  cabin, — the  children  made  such  a  din  that  all
my  people  were  angry,  and  began  to  cry  out  and
make  more  noise  than  the  children  themselves;  I
was  not  conscious  of  all  this  until  they  informed  me
of  it.  Indeed,  I  even  began  to  wonder  if  I  were  not
becoming  deaf,  until  I  perceived  clearly  that  my
heart  was  speaking  to  me  so  forcibly  that  I  could  not


122  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  16

point  garde  a  tout  cela,  fi  on  ne  m  en  eut  aduerty ;  fi
bien  qu'il  me  vint  vne  penf6e  fi  ie  ne  deuenois  point
fourd,  mais  ie  m'apperceu  bien  que  mon  cceur  me
parloit  fi  fort  que  ie  n'efcoutois  point  les  creatures.
Magnus  Dominus  &  magnitudinis  eius  noti  eft  finis.  O
que  Dieu  eft  grand,  &  qu'il  eft  bon ;  fi  les  Sauuages
pouuoient  tirer  ces  penfees  &  ces  fentimens  d'vn
autre  endroit  que  du  Liure  viuant,  qui  eft  Iefus-
Chrift,  ie  douterois  s'ils  difent  vray,  mais  ils  n'ont
ny  liure  imprime  ny  efcrit  a  la  main,  &  quand  ils  en
auroient,  ils  n'y  cognoiffent  rien,  ils  n'ont  commerce
auec  aucun  homme  de  la  terre  qui  leur  puiffent  don-
ner  ces  penfees,  c'eft  ce  qui  me  fait  dire  que  cette
diuine  fource  de  lumiere  &  d' amour  verfe  par  foy
mefme,  ou  par  le  miniftere  des  bons  Anges,  ces
faindtes  [99]  penfees,  &  fes  doux  fentimens  dans
des  cceurs  iadis  remplis  de  barbarie,  &  maintenant
poffedez  de  Dieu.

Pour  la  Communion,  comme  on  commenga  de  l'in-
ftruire  fur  ce  myftere  vrayment  adorable,  il  s'ecria
tout  remply  d'etonnemet,  6  Sauuages,  ferez  vous
toufiours  des  chiens;  n'aurez-vous  iamais  d'autre
nourriture  que  celles  des  chiens:  Et  comme  on  luy
recommandoit  de  ne  point  declarer  cette  dodtrine  a
fes  compatriotes,  qui  n'ont  pas  encor  la  Foy :  Non,
non,  fit-il,  ne  craignez  point,  ie  fcay  bien  qu'ils  ne
font  pas  tous  capables  de  ce  que  vous  m'enfeignez:
C'eft  pourquoy  ie  ne  leur  dy  rien  que  ce  qu'il  faut
dire  a  des  fols  pour  les  guerir  de  leur  maladie :  Cette
refponce  non  attendue  nous  fit  rire,  car  il  la  donnoit
auec  affez  de  grace  &  de  candeur.  Comme  il  voulut
s'approcher  de  cette  table,  Monfieur  Gand  le  Parrain
le  conduifant,  Dieu  luy  donna  vn  grand  fentiment


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  123

hear  creatures."  Magnus  Dominus,  et  magnitudinis  ejus
non  est  finis.  Oh,  how  great  is  God,  and  how  good
he  is!  If  the  Savages  could  derive  these  thoughts
and  these  sentiments  from  any  other  source  than
from  the  living  Book,  which  is  Jesus  Christ,  I  would
doubt  if  they  are  speaking  sincerely ;  but  they  have
neither  printed  book  nor  writing  in  their  posses-
sion,—  and,  if  they  had  these,  they  would  understand
nothing  therein,  for  they  have  no  intercourse  with
any  man  on  earth  who  could  give  them  these  ideas.
It  is  this  that  makes  me  say  that  this  divine  fountain
of  light  and  of  love  pours,  of  itself,  or  rather  through
the  ministry  of  good  Angels,  these  holy  [99]  thoughts
and  these  gentle  sentiments  into  hearts  heretofore
filled  with  barbarism,  and  now  possessed  by  God.

As  for  Communion,  when  they  began  to  instruct
him  upon  this  truly  adorable  mystery,  he  cried
out,  in  utter  astonishment,  "  O  Savages,  will  you
always  be  dogs, —  will  you  never  have  any  other
nourishment  than  that  of  dogs  ? '  And  as  he  was
recommended  not  to  declare  this  doctrine  to  his  com-
patriots, who  do  not  yet  possess  the  Faith, — "  No,
no,"  he  replied,  "  do  not  fear,  I  know  very  well  that
they  are  not  all  capable  of  understanding  what  you
teach  me.  Hence  I  say  nothing  to  them,  except
what  must  be  said  to  madmen  to  cure  them  of  their
disease."  This  unexpected  answer  made  us  laugh,
for  he  gave  it  with  considerable  grace  and  candor.
As  he  was  about  to  approach  this  table,  led  by
Monsieur  Gand,  his  Godfather,  God  imparted  to  him
a  deep  sentiment  of  humility.  "  It  seemed  to  me,"
said  he,  "  that  I  was  only  a  poor  little  flea,  and  I  was
surprised  that  so  great  a  Captain  consented  to  enter
the  heart  of  so  insignificant  a  creature. I  felt,  never-


124  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.16

d'humilite:  Ii  me  fembloit,  difoit-il,  que  ie  n'eftois
qu'vne  pauure  petite  puce,  &  ie  m'eftonnois  qu'vn  ft
grand  Capitaine  voulut  entrer  dans  le  cceur  d'vn  fi
petit  animal,  ie  reffentois  neantmoins  vn  fi  grand  de-
fir  de  m'approcher  de  luy,  que  ie  ne  le  [ioo]  fcaurois
declarer.  II  apportoit  cette  comparaifon,  fi  on  rete-
noit  long-temps  vn  homme  dans  vn  pais  eftranger
efloigne  de  fes  parens  &  de  fes  amis,  ft  apres  auoir
efte  bien  tourmente,  il  trouuoit  moyen  d'euader  &
de  retourner  en  fa  patrie,  auec  quelle  affedtion  s'y
porteroit-il,  de  quel  doux  plaifir  ne  ioiiiroit-il  pas  a
la  veue  de  fes  parens  &  de  fes  amis?  Voila  comme
eftoit  mon  ame,  il  me  fembloit  qu'elle  fortoit  d'vne
rude  captiuite,  &  qu'elle  courroit  de  toutes  fes  forces
apres  celuy  qu'elle  alloit  receuoir,  &  nonobftant  toute
fon  ardeur,  il  luy  fembloit  qu'on  la  preffoit  encor
interieurement  de  s'approcher  de  luy  quand  elle  l'eut
receu,  elle  fe  trouua  contente  &  fatisfaite  comme  vne
perfonne  qui  n'a  plus  rien  a  fouhaitter.  Regi  fceculo-
rum  immortali  foil  Deo  honor  &  gloria,  amen.  Quel  le
Dieu  des  Dieux  foit  a  iamais  beny.  Ie  ne  m'atten-
dois  pas  de  voir  le  refte  de  mes  iours  des  effets  11
puiffans  de  fa  grace  dans  le  cceur  d'vn  barbare.
Toutes  les  peines  qu'on  a  prifes,  toutes  les  defpences
qu'on  a  faites  pour  le  falut  des  Sauuages,  font  plus
que  fuffifamment  payez  par  la  conuerfion  de  ce  feul
homme. Paffons  outre.

Depuis  fon  Baptefme,  il  a  mene"  vne  [101]  vie  con-
forme  a  ces  graces,  en  voicy  quelques  preuues.  Les
Algonquins  de  l'lfle  qui  font  fes  compatriotes,  eftans
defcendus  en  grand  nombre  aux  trois  Riuieres,  il  fe
mit  a  les  inftruire  auec  vne  telle  ardeur,  que  fes  gens
le  tindrent  fufpedt,  fi  bien  que  quelques-vns  le  fou-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  125

theless,  so  great  a  desire  to  draw  near  to  him,  that  I
[ioo]  cannot  express  it."  He  made  use  of  this  com-
parison :  "If  a  man  were  kept  for  a  long  time  in  a
strange  country,  far  from  his  relatives  and  friends ;
and  if,  after  having  been  cruelly  tormented,  he  found
means  of  escaping  and  returning  to  his  native  land, —
with  what  delight  would  he  betake  himself  thither,
what  sweet  pleasure  would  he  not  enjoy  at  the  sight
of  his  kindred  and  friends?  Such  was  the  condition
of  my  soul ;  it  seemed  to  me  that  it  emerged  from  a
harsh  captivity,  and  that  it  was  running  with  all  its
might  after  him  whom  it  was  going  to  receive ;  and,
notwithstanding  all  its  ardor,  it  seemed  to  it  that  it
was  still  being  urged  from  within  to  approach  him.
When  it  had  received  him,  it  became  contented  and
satisfied,  like  a  person  who  has  nothing  more  to  wish
for. ' '  Regi  sceculoru-m  immortali  soli  Deo  honor  et  gloria,
amen.  May  the  God  of  Gods  be  forever  blessed.  I
did  not  expect  to  see,  during  the  rest  of  my  days,  so
powerful  effects  of  his  grace  in  the  heart  of  a  bar-
barian. All  the  trouble  that  has  been  taken,  all  the
expenses  that  have  been  incurred  for  the  salvation
of  the  Savages,  are  more  than  sufficiently  repaid  by
the  conversion  of  this  one  man. Let  us  pass  on.

Since  his  Baptism,  he  has  led  a  [101]  life  conform-
able to  these  graces;  of  this,  here  are  some  proofs.
The  Algonquins  of  the  Island,  who  are  his  fellow-
countrymen,  having  come  down  in  great  numbers  to
the  three  Rivers,  he  began  to  instruct  them  with  so
much  zeal,  that  his  people  looked  upon  him  with  sus-
picion,—  so  much,  that  some  suspected  him  of  ally-
ing himself  with  us  to  make  them  die.  They  spied
out  all  his  actions,  and  watched  where  he  went,  ap-
proaching him  only  with  fear,  as  if  he  were  a  Necro-


126  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

pconnerent  de  s'allier  auec  nous  pour  les  faire  mourir.
lis  efpioient  toutes  fes  adtions,  prenoient  garde  ou
il  alloit,  ne  l'abordant  qu'en  crainte,  comme  on  feroit
vn  Negromantien.  On  ne  l'inuitoit  plus  aux  feftins
comme  vntres-mef chant  homme,  dont  ils  fe  defioient,
c'eft  vn  deshonneur  eftans  parmy  eux  que  d'eftre
exclus  de  ces  banquets,  mais  il  ne  s'en  mettoit  guiere
en  peine;  bref  ie  cognoiffois  l'amour  ou  l'auerfio  que
qu'elqu'vn  auoit  de  noftre  creance  par  le  bon  ou
mauuais  vifage  qu'on  luy  portoit,  ayant  cette  confo-
lation  la  plus  douce  qu'vn  homme  puiffe  auoir  en  ce
monde  de  fe  voir  ayme  ou  hay  pour  Iefus-Chrift.
En  fin  les  faux  bruits  que  le  Diable  femoit  contre  la
Dodtrine  de  Iefus-Chrift  fe  diffipans,  ceux  qui  auoient
quelque  defir  de  leur  falut  l'efcoutoient  volontiers.
II  prefchoit  auec  vne  liberte  vrayment  apoftolique,
reprenoit  hardiment  [102]  les  vices  deuant  les  plus
apparens  &  les  plus  orgueilleux  de  fa  nation.

Qui  penfons  nous  eftre,  difoit-il  vn  iour,  voulez-
vous  que  ie  vous  declare  qu'elle  eft  voftre  grandeur?
II  prenoit  vn  pois  chiche  en  fa  main,  &  le  tenant  fuf-
pendu  fur  vn  grand  brafier,  il  s'efcrioit ;  voila  ce  que
nous  fommes  entre  les  mains  de  Dieu.  Si  ce  pois
que  ie  tiens  de  mes  deux  doigts  s'en  orgueillifloit,
s'il  eftoit  capable  de  receuoir  mon  commandement,  &
qu'il  me  refufaft  obei'ffance,  s'il  me  difoit  qu'il  n'a
que  faire  de  moy  qui  le  fouftiens  au  deffus  de  ce  feu,
ne  meriteroit-il  pas  que  ie  le  laiffaffe  tomber  dans  ce
brafier.  Voila  ce  que  nous  deuons  attendre  de  la  main
de  Dieu  qui  nous  fouftient  &  qui  nous  conferue,  fi
nous  refufons  d'embraffer  la  Foy  &  d'obeyr  a  fes
volontez.

II  trauailloit  iour  &  nuidt  pour  la  conuerfion  de  ces


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  127

mancer.  They  no  longer  invited  him  to  the  feasts, —
as  if  he  were  a  very  wicked  man,  whom  they  mis-
trusted. It  is  a  dishonor,  when  one  is  among  them,
to  be  excluded  from  these  banquets;  but  he  gave
himself  very  little  concern  thereat.  In  short,  I  recog-
nized the  love  or  the  aversion  that  people  had  for
our  belief,  by  the  pleasant  or  evil  looks  they  cast
upon  him, —  he  having  this  consolation,  the  sweetest
that  a  man  can  have  in  this  world,  of  seeing  himself
loved  or  hated  for  Jesus  Christ.  Finally, —  the  false
reports  that  the  Devil  scattered  against  the  Doctrine
of  Jesus  Christ,  having  passed  away, — those  who  felt
some  desire  for  their  salvation  listened  willingly.
He  preached  with  a  truly  apostolic  freedom,  boldly
rebuking  [102]  their  vices  before  the  most  prominent
and  the  proudest  of  his  nation.

"Who  do  we  think  we  are?"  he  said  one  day.
"  Do  you  wish  me  to  proclaim  what  your  greatness
is?"  He  took  a  chick-pea  in  his  hand,  and,  holding
it  suspended  over  a  large  brazier,  he  exclaimed,  "  Be-
hold what  we  are  in  the  hands  of  God !  If  this  pea  I
hold  with  my  two  fingers  should  become  full  of
pride, — if  it  were  capable  of  receiving  my  command-
ments, and  should  refuse  to  obey  me ;  if  it  told  me
that  it  had  nothing  to  do  with  me,  who  am  holding  it
over  this  fire, — would  it  not  deserve  that  I  should  let
it  fall  into  this  brazier?  Now  this  is  what  we  must
expect  from  the  hand  of  God  who  sustains  and  pre-
serves us,  if  we  refuse  to  embrace  the  Faith  and  to
obey  his  wishes."

He  worked  day  and  night  for  the  conversion  of
these  poor  people,  he  strove  with  God,  with  us,  and
with  them.  He  offered  tearful  prayers ;  he  went  into
the  depths  of  the  woods, and  there  inflicted  chas-


128  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16

pauures  gens,  il  agiffoit  &  aupres  de  Dieu,  &  aupres
de  nous,  &  aupres  d'eux.  II  faifoit  des  oraifons
pleines  de  larmes,  s'en  alloit  dans  le  fond  du  bois,  &
la  prenoit  vn  chaftiment  fur  fon  corps  auec  des  ronces
pour  attirer  la  mifericorde  de  Dieu,  &  appaifer  fa
colere  contre  fon  peuple.

[103]  II  nous  venoit  auertir  de  ceux  qui  eftoiet
mieux  difpofez,  &  nous  donnoit  aduis  comme  il  fe
falloit  comporter  en  leur  endroit.  Helas,  leur  difoit-
il,  par  fois  s'il  ne  tenoit  qu'a  donner  ma  vie  pour
voftre  f alut,  que  ie  le  f erois  volontiers ;  Quand  il  veit
que  la  neceffite  les  contraignit  de  s'efloigner  de  nous,
les  Nauires  tardans  trop  a  venir,  il  s'efcrioit  auec  vn
grand  f entiment :  II  me  f emble  qu'on  marrache  les
entrailles,  faut-il  que  tant  d'ames  fe  perdent  faute  de
fecours,  le  Diable  qui  ne  les  a  pas  crees  fera-il
toufiours  leur  maiftre ;  Les  Hiroquois  leurs  ennemis
leur  venans  faire  la  guerre,  il  dit  au  Pere  qui  l'auoit
particulierement  inftruit  aux  trois  Riuieres,  qu'il
falloit  faire  paroiftre  que  ceux  qui  eftoient  baptifez
n'eftoient  point  poltrons,  que  Dieu  leur  donnoit  du
courage.  II  fe  confeffa,  puis  alia  recognoiftre  l'enne-
my,  l'approchant  de  fi  pres,  qui  luy  eut  peu  parler.
Iamais  on  ne  le  veit  trouble,  ny  iamais  faifi  de
crainte,  il  leur  reprocha  par  apres  que  le  peu  de  co-
fiance  qu'ils  auoient  eu  en  Dieu  les  auoit  perdu.

Les  Sauuages  font  fort  liberaux  les  vns  enuers  les
autres,  mais  ils  font  leurs  prefens  a  leurs  parens  ou
a  leurs  amis,  ou  a  [104]  ceux  dont  ils  efperent  le  re-
ciproque.  Noftre  Neophyte  ayant  fait  quelque  bonne
chaff  e,  ou  quelque  bonne  pefche,  partage  les  malades
&  les  pauures  neceffiteux  tous  les  premiers.

II  auoit  vne  fceur  qu'il  aymoit  vniquement,  il  taf-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  129

tisement  upon  his  body  with  thorns,  in  order  to  draw-
down the  mercy  of  God,  and  to  appease  his  anger
against  his  people.

[103]  He  came  to  inform  us  of  those  who  were
more  favorably  disposed,  and  to  advise  us  as  to  how
we  should  behave  towards  them.  "  Alas,"  he  some-
times said  to  them,  "  if  it  were  only  a  matter  of  giv-
ing my  life  for  your  salvation,  how  willingly  I  would
do  it!  "  When  he  saw  that  necessity  constrained
them  to  leave  us,  the  Ships  delaying  their  arrival  too
long,  he  exclaimed  with  deep  feeling :  "  It  seems  as
if  my  entrails  were  being  torn  out ;  must  so  many
souls  be  lost  for  lack  of  help?  Will  the  Devil,  who
did  not  create  them,  always  be  their  master?  "  The
Hiroquois,  their  enemies,  coming  to  make  war  upon
them,  he  said  to  the  Father  who  had  especially  in-
structed him  at  the  three  Rivers,  that  he  must  show
that  those  who  were  baptized  were  not  cowards,  that
God  gave  them  courage.  He  confessed,  then  went
to  reconnoitre  the  enemy,  approaching  so  near  them
that  he  might  have  spoken  to  them.  He  was  never
seen  to  be  disturbed,  nor  seized  with  fear;  he  re-
proached them  afterwards,  saying  that  the  little
confidence  they  had  had  in  God  had  ruined  them.

The  Savages  are  very  liberal  to  one  another;  but
they  make  their  presents  to  their  relatives  or  their
friends,  or  to  [104]  those  from  whom  they  expect
reciprocal  favors.  Our  Neophyte,  when  he  is  suc-
cessful in  hunting  or  fishing,  shares,  first  of  all,  with
the  sick  and  needy  poor.

He  had  a  sister  whom  he  singularly  loved.  He
endeavored  to  procure  Baptism  for  her ;  but,  before
this  blessing  could  reach  her,  she  died,  having  gone
away  from  the  place  where  she  could  receive  this


130  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16

choit  de  luy  procurer  le  Baptefme,  mais  deuant  que  ce
bonheur  luy  arriuaft  elle  mourut,  s'eftant  efloignee  du
lieu  ou  elle  peut  receuoir  ce  Sacrement ;  cela  le  troubla
fort  notamment  de  ce  qu'elle  eftoit  morte  deuant  que
fes  pechez  luy  fuffent  pardonnez.  Comme  il  eftoit
dans  cette  angoiffe,  il  s'approcha  de  la  Communion,
&  fortant  de  la  table,  il  eut  cette  penfee,  fi  ma  fceur
eft  damnee  ce  n'eft  pas  la  faute  de  Dieu,  car  il  eft
tout  bon,  &  n'a  pas  manque  de  luy  donner  les  moy-
ens  neceff aires  pour  fe  fauuer,  c'eft  done  elle  qui  a
failly  de  fon  cofte :  or  puis  qu'elle  a  refuse  l'amitie
de  Dieu,  ie  ne  la  veux  plus  aymer,  car  ie  ne  veux
point  auoir  d'autres  amis  que  les  amis  de  Dieu ;  ie
fuis  de  fon  party.  Depuis  ce  temps  il  perdit  entiere-
ment  la  memoire  de  cette  fceur  qu'il  auoit  tant  cherie.
Quelque  iour  apres  cette  mort,  vn  Sauuage  fon  beau
frere  l'abordant,  luy  fit  beaucoup  [105]  de  reproches
de  ce  qu'a  fon  dire  il  ne  luy  faifoit  point  part  des
meubles  de  fa  fceur,  dont  il  penfoit  qu'il  fut  faifi :  Tu
dis,  luy  faifoit-il,  que  tu  crois  en  Dieu,  &  cependant
tu  commets  vne  efpece  d'auarice  ou  de  larcin,  rete-
nant  pour  toy  feul  ce  qu'auoit  ta  fceur,  fi  tu  croyois
comme  tu  le  dis,  tu  ne  comettrois  pas  ces  actions.
Ignace  entendant  ce  difcours,  &  plufieurs  autres  in-
iures  &  reproches  que  cet  homme  luy  fit,  repartit  en
cette  forte  fans  fe  troubler;  Tu  dis  que  ie  croy  en
Dieu,  tu  le  dis  auec  reproche,  mais  ie  croy  auec  ve-
rite,  &  fi  ie  n'y  croyois  pas,  ie  te  ferois  bien  reffentir
les  iniures  que  tu  me  donne,  mais  ie  t'affeure  que
mon  cceur  n'eft  point  altere,  qu'il  ne  te  veut  aucun
mal,  &  qu'il  fouffre  auec  plaifir  tous  ces  reproches
que  tu  m'as  fait;  il  y  a  quelque  temps  que  ie  n'aurois
pas  endure  tes  iniures,  pour  le  prefent  ie  te  donne


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6jg  131

Sacrament.  This  troubled  him  greatly,  especially  as
she  had  died  before  her  sins  could  be  forgiven.  While
he  was  suffering  this  anguish,  he  approached  the
Communion ;  and  upon  leaving  the  table,  this  thought
occurred  to  him,  "  If  my  sister  is  damned,  it  is  not
God's  fault,  for  he  is  altogether  good,  and  has  not
failed  to  give  her  the  means  necessary  to  save  her-
self; it  is,  then,  she  who  has  failed  on  her  part.
Now,  since  she  has  refused  the  friendship  of  God,  I
will  no  longer  love  her,  for  I  will  have  no  other
friends  than  the  friends  of  God ;  I  am  on  his  side. ' '
Since  that  time,  he  is  entirely  losing  the  memory  of
this  sister  whom  he  had  so  greatly  cherished.

A  few  days  after  this  death,  a  Savage,  his  brother-
in-law,  addressed  him,  and  bitterly  [105]  reproached
him  because,  as  he  said,  he  did  not  share  with  him
the  belongings  of  his  sister,  of  which  he  thought  he
had  taken  possession.  "  Thou  sayest,"  he  said  to
him,  "  that  thou  belie  vest  in  God,  and  yet  thou  art
guilty  of  a  sort  of  avarice  or  theft,  keeping  for  thy-
self alone  what  thy  sister  had ;  if  thou  didst  believe
as  thou  sayest,  thou  wouldst  not  do  these  things."
Ignace,  upon  hearing  this  talk,  and  many  other
insults  and  reproaches  that  this  man  uttered  against
him,  replied  in  this  way,  without  any  agitation:
"  Thou  sayest  that  I  believe  in  God,  thou  sayest  it
with  reproaches ;  but  I  do  truly  believe,  and,  if  I  did
not  believe,  I  would  make  thee  answer  for  the  insults
that  thou  offerest  me.  But  I  assure  thee  that  my
heart  is  not  changed, —  that  it  wishes  thee  no  harm,
and  that  it  suffers  with  pleasure  all  these  reproaches
that  thou  hast  uttered.  There  was  a  time  when  I
would  not  have  endured  thy  insults ;  for  the  present,
I  give  thee  my  word  that  I  not  only  do  not  wish  thee


132  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16


parole,  que  non  feulement  ie  ne  te  veux  aucun  mal,
mais  que  ie  prieray  Dieu  pour  toy,  &  que  dans  les
occafions  ie  te  feray  tout  le  plaifir  qui  me  fera  poffible.
Ouand eft du  bagage de  ma foeur,  ie  ne  l'ay  pas,
fcache  ou  elle  l'a  mis  en  depofl,  &  l'emporte,  i'ayme-
rois  mieux  perdre tout  ce  que  i'ay,  que  de  te  voir
offenfer  [106]  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait. II  difoit  par  fois
au  Pere  qui  l'a  inflruit  plus  particulierement ;  Mortifie
moy  en  public  deuant  les  autres,  afin  que  ceux  qui
veulent  eftre  baptifez  fe  perfuadent  qu'il  faut  exercer
la  vertu  quand  on  eft  enfant  de Dieu. Voila  de
grands  effets  de  la  grace. Que Dieu  foit beny a
iamais  des  hommes,  & des  Anges, des  Schytes  \sc.
Scythes]  &  des  Barbares, auffi  bien  que  des  Grecs.
Ainfi  foit-il.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  133

any  harm,  but  that  I  will  pray  to  God  for  thee,  and
that,  when  there  are  opportunities,  I  will  do  thee  all
the  good  in  my  power.  As  to  my  sister's  property,
I  have  it  not ;  find  out  where  she  deposited  it,  and
take  it  away ;  I  would  rather  lose  all  that  I  have,
than  to  see  thee  offend  [106]  him  who  has  made
all."  He  said  sometimes  to  the  Father  who  has
more  particularly  instructed  him,  "  Mortify  me  in
public  before  the  others,  so  that  those  who  wish  to
be  baptized  may  persuade  themselves  that  one  must
exercise  virtue  when  one  is  a  child  of  God. ' '  Behold
the  glorious  effects  of  grace.  May  God  be  forever
blessed  by  men  and  by  Angels,  by  Scythians  and
Barbarians,  as  well  as  by  Greeks. Amen.


134  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16


[107]  CHAPITRE  VII.

DE LA CONUERSION D'VN CAPITAINE, & DE TOUTE

SA FAMILLE.

IL  y  a  de  deux  fortes  de  Capitaines  parmy  les  Sau-
uages,  les  vns  le  font  par  droit  de  naiffance,  les
autres  par  eflection.  Ces  peuples  ne  font  point
fi  barbares  qu'ils  ne  portent  du  refpedt  aux  defcen-
dans  de  leurs  Chefs,  fi  bien  que  fi  le  fils  d'vn  Capitaine
a  quelque  conduite,  fur  tout  s'il  a  quelque  eloquence
naturelle,  il  tiendra  la  place  de  fon  pere  fans  contre-
dit.  Celuy  dont  nous  parlons,  eft  Capitaine  d'ex-
tradtion,  il  eft  d'vn  bon  fens,  homme  de  courage;
mais  comme  il  n'a  pas  le  babil  en  main,  auffi  n'eft-il
pas  dans  la  f ouueraine  gloire  des  Capitaines ;  ces  bar-
bares  font  bien  fouuent  plus  d'etat  d'vn  grand
cauf eur  que  d'vn  homme  de  bon  fens ;  ils  honorent
neantmoins  celuy-cy,  &  l'ont  en  eftime,  luy  deferant
beaucoup  en  leurs  confeils.  Nous  auons  tach6  vn  fort
long-temps  de  le  gagner  a  Dieu,  mais  il  nous  faifoit
toufiours  [108]  de  la  refinance.  Vn  Sauuage  voyant
vn  iour  que  nous  preffions  fort  ce  Capitaine  d'em-
braffer  la  Foy,  nous  dit  par  apres  en  particulier,  fi
celuy-la  vous  donne  fa  parole,  tenez  vous  affeurez
qu'il  croit,  car  il  ne  vous  deguifera  point  fa  penfee :
en  effedt  iamais  il  ne  nous  a  donne  grande  efperance
de  fa  conuerfion,  iufques  a  ce  que  Dieu  l'a  contraint
de  fe  rendre.  Nous  l'auions  deftine  pour  eftre  le
fondement  &  la  bafe  de  la  reduction  de  faindt  Iofeph,


1639]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  135


[107]  CHAPTER  VII.

OF THE CONVERSION OF A CAPTAIN AND OF HIS

ENTIRE FAMILY.

THERE  are  two  kinds  of  Captains  among  the  Sav-
ages,—  those  by  right  of  birth,  and  those  by
election.  These  peoples  are  not  so  barbarous
that  they  do  not  show  respect  to  the  descendants  of
their  Chiefs, —  so  that,  if  the  son  of  a  Captain  has
some  talent  for  leadership,  above  all,  if  he  has
natural  eloquence,  he  will  hold  his  father's  place
without  opposition.  The  one  of  whom  we  speak  is
Captain  by  descent.  He  is  a  man  of  good  sense,  and
courageous ;  but  as  he  is  not  a  ready  speaker,  he  does
not  share  in  the  sovereign  glory  of  the  Captains.
These  barbarians  often  place  more  value  upon  a  great
talker  than  upon  a  man  of  good  sense.  Neverthe-
less, they  honor  this  one  and  hold  him  in  esteem,
deferring  much  to  him  in  their  councils.  We  have
been  trying  a  very  long  time  to  win  him  to  God,  but
he  has  always  offered  us  [108]  resistance.  A  Sav-
age, seeing  us  one  day  earnestly  urging  this  Captain
to  embrace  the  Faith,  said  to  us  afterwards  in  private,
"  If  that  man  gives  you  his  word,  rest  assured  that
he  believes,  for  he  will  not  hide  his  sentiments  from
you."  In  fact,  he  never  gave  us  great  hope  for  his
conversion,  until  God  constrained  him  to  surrender
himself.  We  had  destined  him  to  be  the  foundation
and  base  of  the  reduction  of  saint  Joseph,  believing
that  he  would  stay  in  the  house  that  was  being  built


136  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.16


croyans  qu'il  s'arrefleroit  en  la  maifon  qu'on  y  faifoit
baftir: Nous  luy  promettions  du  fecours  pour  l'aider
a  defricher  la  terre;  il  nous  preftoit  affez  l'oreille,
efcoutoit  volontiers,  notamment  ce  qui  concerne  l'au-
tre  vie,  mais  il  n'auoit  point  de  paroles  pour  nous
repodre : En  fin  nous  luy  auons  demande  depuis  fon
Baptefme  d'ou  venoit  qu'il  faifoit  tant  le  retif ;  peut-
eftre,  luy  difions-nous,  que  tu  croyois  que  nous  eftions
des  menteurs;  non  pas  cela,  repondit-il,  ie  n'ay  point
doute  de  vos  paroles  ny  de  vos  promeffes, mais  ie
vous  diray franchement,  que ie craignois que  mes
gens  me  tinffent  pour  Francois;  c'eft  pourquoy  ie  ne
voulois  point  quitter  les  facons  de  faire  de  ma  nation
pour  embraffer  les  voftres,  quoy  que [109]  ie  les  iu-
geaffe  meilleures. Ie  ne  laiffois  point  de  croire  dans
mon  ame  ce  que  vous  enfeigniez  de  celuy  qui  a  tout
fait. II  faut  auoiier  qu'il  a  donne  fouuent  des  preuues
de  fa  foy. Deuant  qu'il  fuft  Chreftien,  il  apportoit
luy-mefme  fes  enfans  en  la  Chappelle  pour  eftre  bap-
tifez ;  que  s'ils  eftoient  trop  malades,  il  nous  appelloit
en  fa  cabane,  il  a  procure  le  mefme  bien  a  l'vne  de
fes  femmes,  car  il  en  auoit  deux : II  a  veu  iufques  a
quatre  de  fes  enfans  mourir  Chreftiens  deuant  fes
yeux : II  entendoit  les  blafphemes  de  fes  Compatri-
otes  contre  ces  eaux  facrees,  leur  attribuans  la  caufe
de  leur  mort :  &  nonobflant  tout  cela,  pas  vn  des  (lens
n'eft  paffe  en  l'autre  vie  fans  eftre  laue  du  Sang  de
IESVS-CHRIST. Vne  fienne  fille  aagee  d'enuiron
dix-huidt  a  vingt  ans,  preffee  d'vne  forte  maladie  qui
luy  arrachoit  la  vie  par  violence,  ne  vouloit  en  aucune
faeon  oiiir  parler  du  Baptefme,  s'imaginant  que  cefte
medecine  facree  de  nos  ames  n'ayant  point  guery  les
corps  de  fes  freres,  luy  feroit  fatale  &  nuifible ;  fon


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib39  137

there.  We  promised  him  assistance  in  clearing  the
land ;  he  lent  ear  to  us  and  listened  willingly  enough,
especially  to  what  concerns  the  other  life;  but  he
had  no  words  with  which  to  answer  us.  In  fine,  we
have  asked  him  since  his  Baptism  how  it  happened
that  he  showed  so  much  obstinacy.  "  Perhaps,"  we
said  to  him,  "  thou  didst  think  that  we  were  liars."
*l  No,  not  that,"  he  answered,  "  I  did  not  at  all  doubt
your  words  nor  your  promises;  but  I  will  tell  you
frankly  that  I  was  afraid  my  people  would  look  upon
me  as  a  Frenchman,  hence  I  did  not  wish  to  give  up
the  customs  of  my  nation  to  embrace  those  of  yours,
although  [109]  I  considered  them  better.  I  thor-
oughly believed  in  my  soul  what  you  taught  about
him  who  has  made  all."  It  must  be  confessed  that
he  has  often  given  proofs  of  his  faith.  Before  he  be-
came a  Christian,  he  himself  brought  his  children  to
the  Chapel  to  be  baptized ;  if  they  were  too  sick,  he
summoned  us  to  his  cabin.  He  procured  the  same
blessing  for  one  of  his  wives,  for  he  had  two.  He
saw  as  many  as  four  of  his  children  die  Christians
before  his  eyes.  He  heard  the  blasphemies  of  his
Countrymen  against  these  sacred  waters,  attributing
to  these  the  cause  of  their  death.  And  notwithstand-
ing all  this,  not  one  of  his  family  passed  into  the
other  life  without  being  washed  in  the  Blood  of
Jesus  Christ.  One  of  his  daughters,  about  eigh-
teen or  twenty  years  old,  attacked  by  a  serious  mala-
dy which  violently  wrested  her  life  from  her,  was  un-
willing to  hear  about  Baptism  in  any  way  whatever, —
imagining  that  as  this  sacred  medicine  of  our  souls
had  not  cured  the  bodies  of  her  brothers,  it  would  be
fatal  or  injurious  to  her.  Her  poor  father,  seeing  her
in  danger  of  death,  strongly  urged  her  to  receive  it,


138  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  16

pauure  pere  la  voyant  en  danger  de  mort,  la  prelToit
fort  de  la  receuoir,  quoy  qu'il  ne  la  demandaft  point
pour  foy  mefme :  Ne  crains  point,  ma  fille,  luy  difoit-
il,  ce  n'eft  [i  10]  pas  l'eau  qu'on  te  verfera  fur  la  tefte
qui  te  fera  mourir,  en  voila  tant  qui  font  rechappez
apres  le  Baptefme;  c'eft  pour  le  bien  de  ton  ame
qu'on  te  veut  baptifer,  &  non  pour  abreger  tes  iours ;
&  comme  elle  fembloit  vn  peu  condefcendre  a  ces
paroles,  il  nous  preffoit  de  la  baptifer  au  pluftoft.  En
fin  nous  luy  difmes  que  quand  on  la  baptiferoit  cent
fois  pour  vn  iour,  ces  eaux  faindtes  ne  luy  feruiroient
de  rien,  fi  elle  ne  croyoit  en  fon  cceur,  &  fi  elle  n'a-
uoit  regret  d'auoir  offenfe  Dieu,  qu'au  refte  elle  n'en
donnoit  aucune  marque.  Ce  pauure  homme  enten-
dant  cela,  la  preffa  tant,  &  la  catechifa  fi  bien,  qu'a  la
parfin  elle  nous  donna  de  fuffifans  indices  de  fa  bonne
difpofition,  on  la  fit  Chreftienne ;  &  peu  de  temps
apres,  elle  mourut.  Or  comme  la  maladie  continuoit
fes  rauages,  nous  veifmes  toute  la  cabane  de  ce  pau-
ure Capitaine  dans  l'afniction;  nous  baptizafmes  pour
vn  iour  treize  perfonnes  de  fes  parens  &  alliez ;  &
comme  il  fe  trouuoit  mal  auffi  bien  que  les  autres,
enfin  il  fe  refolut  de  prendre  pour  foy  ce  qu'il  auoit
procure  pour  tant  d'autres ;  il  fe  nommoit  en  fa  Lan-
gue  EtinechKab'at,  &  le  nom  de  lean  Baptifte  luy  fut
donne  au  Baptefme.  Ayant  traifne  fort  long-temps
[iii]  dans  fa  maladie,  Noftre  Seigneur  luy  rendit  la
fant6;  il  Ten  vint  remercier  dans  la  Chappelle  de
Kebec,  fi  toft  qu'il  put  marcher;  mais  il  ne  tarda  pas
long-temps  fans  eftre  efprouue" :  Fill  accedens  ad  ferui-
tutem  Dei  Jia  in  iujlitia  &  timore,  &  prcepara  animam
tuam  ad  tentationem :  Ces  paroles  du  Sage  fe  verifient
tous  les  iours  deuant  nos  yeux. Ce  Neophyte  n'auoit


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  139

although  he  did  not  ask  it  for  himself.  "  Do  not
fear,  my  daughter,"  he  said  to  her;  "  it  is  not  [i  10]
the  water  that  they  will  pour  over  thy  head  that  will
make  thee  die, —  see  how  many  there  are  who  have
recovered  after  Baptism ;  it  is  for  the  good  of  thy  soul
that  they  wish  to  baptize  thee,  and  not  to  shorten  thy
days;  '  and,  as  she  seemed  to  yield  a  little  to  these
words,  he  urged  us  to  baptize  her  as  soon  as  possible.
In  fine,  we  told  her  that  if  she  were  baptized  a  hun-
dred times  a  day,  these  holy  waters  would  be  of  no
avail,  if  she  did  not  believe  in  her  heart,  and  if  she
did  not  regret  having  offended  God,  of  which,  more-
over, she  gave  no  evidence.  The  poor  man,  upon
hearing  this,  urged  her  so  strongly  and  catechized
her  so  well  that,  at  the  very  end,  she  gave  us  suffi-
cient indications  of  her  willingness ;  she  was  made  a
Christian ;  and,  a  little  while  afterward,  she  died.
Now,  as  the  sickness  continued  its  ravages,  we  saw
the  whole  cabin  of  this  poor  Captain  plunged  in  afflic-
tion. We  baptized  in  one  day  thirteen  of  his  rela-
tives and  allies;  and,  when  he  became  ill,  as  well  as
the  others,  he  finally  resolved  to  take  for  himself
what  he  had  procured  for  so  many  others.  He  was
called  Etinechkawat  in  his  own  Language,  and  the
name  Jean  Baptiste  was  given  to  him  in  Baptism.
Having  been  prostrated  for  a  very  long  time  [in]  in
his  sickness,  Our  Lord  restored  him  to  health;  he
came  to  thank  him  for  it  in  the  Chapel  of  Kebec,  as
soon  as  he  could  walk.  But  it  was  not  long  before
he  was  tried.  Fill  accedens  ad  servitutem  Dei  sta  in
justitia  ct  timore,  et  prapara  animam  tuatn  ad  tentatio-
nem.  These  words  of  the  Sage  are  verified  every
day  before  our  eyes.  This  Neophyte  had  only  three
children  left,  three  daughters, —  one  married;  one.


140  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16

plus  que  trois  enfans,  c'efloient  trois  filles;  l'vne
mariee,  l'autre  aagee  d'enuiron  trois  ans,  &  l'autre
d'vn  an:  La  plus  agee  eft  morte  fans  enfans  en  la
fleur  de  fon  aage ;  fon  pauure  pere  la  voyant  tref-
paffee,  nous  a  renuoye"  fon  corps  de  quarate  lieues
loing  pour  eftre  mis  au  cimetiere  des  Chrefties.  II
nous  donna  celle  qui  n'auoit  que  trois  ans  pour  eftre
eleuee  chez  quelque  Famille  Fracoife,  &  afin  qu'elle
ne  s'ennuyaft  pas  il  luy  donna  pour  compagne  vne
autre  petite  fille  fa  parente,  dont  Monfieur  Gand,  vray
pere  des  pauures,  prit  le  foin  payant  fa  penfion,
comme  nous  faifons  de  ceux  que  nous  tenons  chez
quelques  Families.  Dieu  a  pris  pour  foy  la  fille  de
ce  Capitaine,  &  a  laifse  l'autre;  fi  bien  qu'il  ne  luy
refte  plus  qu'vn  enfant  qui  eft  encor  a  la  mammelle
d'vn  grand  nobre  que  Dieu  luy  auoit  donn6:  [112]
Au  bout  du  compte  toutes  ces  afflictions  ne  Font  point
efbranle.  Le  Pere  qui  refidoit  a  Sillery,  ou  s'eft  fait
la  Reduction  des  Sauuages,  entrant  vn  iour  dans  fa
cabane,  le  treuua  tenant  &  baifant  vn  petit  Crucifix
qu'on  luy  auoit  donne ;  voyant  le  Pere,  il  luy  dit :  Ni-
kanis,  i'ay  recours  en  mes  afflictions  a  celuy  qui  eft
mort  pour  moy ;  f ois  aff eure  que  ie  croy  en  luy  du
fond  de  mon  cceur ;  ie  ne  vous  ay  point  menty  quand
ie  vous  ay  donne  parole  que  ie  ne  quitterois  point  la
Foy.

Quelques  Sauuages  venus  de  Tadouffac  logez  dans
fa  cabane,  n'auoient  guiere  d'inclination  a  noftre  cre-
ace,  fe  gauffant  quad  on  en  vouloit  parler,  luy,  pour
leur  impofer  filence  dit  tout  haut  qu'il  croyoit  en  Dieu,
&  qu'il  le  vouloit  prier,  inuitant  le  Pere  qui  fe  trouua
la  de  l'inftruire,  &  de  le  venir  voir  tous  les  iours  pour  le
meme  fubiedt ;  le  Pere  prenant  done  la  parole,  deman-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  141

about  three  years  old;  and  the  other,  one  year  old.
The  eldest  died  childless,  in  the  flower  of  her  youth ;
her  poor  father,  seeing  that  she  had  passed  away,
sent  her  body  to  us  from  a  distance  of  forty  leagues,
to  be  placed  in  the  cemetery  of  the  Christians.  He
gave  us  the  one  who  was  only  three  years  old,  to  be
raised  in  some  French  Family;  and,  that  she  might
not  be  lonely,  he  gave  her  as  a  companion  another
little  girl,  a  relative,  of  whom  Monsieur  Gand,  true
father  of  the  poor,  took  charge,  paying  her  board  as
we  do  for  those  whom  we  keep  in  Families.  God
took  to  himself  this  Captain's  daughter,  and  left  the
other  one ;  so  there  only  remains  to  him  one  child,
still  at  the  breast,  of  a  great  many  whom  God  had
given  him;  [1 12]  and  yet,  all  these  afflictions  did  not
make  him  waver.  The  Father  who  resided  at  Sil-
lery,  where  the  Reduction  of  the  Savages  has  been
formed,  upon  entering  his  cabin  one  day,  found  him
holding  and  kissing  a  little  Crucifix  that  had  been
given  him.  When  he  saw  the  Father,  he  said  to
him,  "  Nikanis,  I  have  recourse  in  my  afflictions  to
him  who  has  died  for  me ;  rest  assured  that  I  believe
in  him  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart ;  I  did  not  lie
to  you  when  I  gave  you  my  word  that  I  would  not
abandon  the  Faith."

Some  Savages  who  had  come  from  Tadoussac,  and
who  were  staying  in  his  cabin,  were  not  very  favor-
able to  our  belief,  and  jeered  when  one  began  to
speak  of  it.  He,  to  impose  silence  upon  them,  said
boldly  that  he  believed  in  God,  and  that  he  intended
to  pray  to  him, —  inviting  the  Father  who  happened
to  be  there  to  instruct  him,  and  to  come  and  see  him
every  day  for  the  same  purpose.  Accordingly,  the
Father  began  to  speak,  and  asked  his  new  guests  why


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16

da  a  fes  nouueaux  holies,  pourquoy  Dieu  auoit  cree
le  Soleil,  pourquoy  il  auoit  forme  les  animaux :  Ces
grands  caufeurs,  en  matiere  de  badineries,  n  euret
point  de  refponfe  a  ces  interrogations;  noftre  Neo-
phyte les  voyat  muets,  prit  la  parole,  &  difcourut  fort
bien  de  la  Creation  du  monde,  comme  Dieu  [113]
auoit  fait  le  Soleil  pour  nous  eclairer,  les  animaux
pour  nous  nourrir,  penfant  a  nous  comme  vn  bon
pere  pefe  a  fes  enfans.  Son  difcours  nous  fit  co-
gnoiftre  que  la  Foy  s'eracinoit  tous  les  iours  de  plus
en  plus  dedas  fon  cceur.  II  tientauec  foy  vne  fienne
parente  baptifee  a  l'extremite.  Cefte  femme  eftant
retournee  en  fante  ne  fe  foucioit  guiere  de  fon  ame,
quand  on  luy  parloit  des  Sacrements  elle  fe  gauffoit,
la  Confeffion  luy  feruant  de  rifee,  Noftre  Neophyte
la  reprit  luy  impofant  filence  pour  vn  temps,  mais  il
ne  luy  changea  pas  le  cceur ;  elle  perf eueroit  toufiours
dans  fes  railleries,  fe  riant  notamment  du  Sacrement
de  Penitence :  En  fin  elle  fut  furprif e  tout  en  vn  coup
d'vn  catarre  qui  luy  ferma  quafi  le  conduit  de  la  ref-
piration,  &  luy  ofta  la  parole;  ayant  perdu  la  langue,
Dieu  luy  ouurit  les  oreilles.  Le  Pere  qui  l'inftruifoit
l'allant  vifiter,  l'epouuanta:  En  fin  te  voila  prife  a
la  gorge,  c'eft  a  ce  coup  que  le  Diable  te  veut  empe-
cher  tout  de  bon  de  te  cofeffer,  tu  as  refufe  de  le  faire
eitant  en  fante,  peut-eftre  ne  le  pourras-tu  plus  faire
eftant  malade.  Cefte  pauure  femme  touchee  de  Dieu,
fit  figne  qu'elle  defiroit  decharger  fa  confcience,  &
tout  fur  l'heure,  [114]  &  dans  fa  cabane,  le  Pere  luy
donna  les  fignes  qu'elle  deuoit  faire  aux  interroga-
tions qu'il  luy  feroit.  Comme  elle  auoit  fort  bon
iugement,  non  feulement  elle  les  gardoit,  mais  elle
s'efforca  en  telle  forte  qu'elle  recouura  vn  petit  la


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  143

God  had  created  the  Sun,  why  he  had  formed  ani-
mals. These  fluent  talkers  of  nonsense  had  no  an-
swer to  these  questions.  Our  Neophyte,  seeing  them
mute,  began  to  speak,  and  discoursed  very  well  upon
the  Creation  of  the  world,  how  God  [113]  had  made
the  Sun  to  give  us  light,  the  animals  to  furnish  us
with  food,  thinking  of  us  as  a  good  father  thinks  of
his  children.  His  speech  showed  us  that  the  Faith
was  every  day  taking  deeper  root  in  his  heart.  He
keeps  with  him  one  of  his  relatives,  who  was  bap-
tized at  the  point  of  death.  This  woman,  having
recovered  her  health,  concerned  herself  very  little
about  her  soul.  When  one  spoke  to  her  about  the
Sacraments,  she  ridiculed  them,  the  Confession  ex-
citing her  laughter.  Our  Neophyte  reproved  her,
imposing  silence  upon  her  for  a  time,  but  he  did  not
change  her  heart;  she  persevered  in  her  jesting,
especially  ridiculing  the  Sacrament  of  Penance.  At
last,  she  was  smitten  all  at  once  with  a  catarrh  which
almost  closed  the  respiratory  passage,  and  deprived
her  of  her  speech ;  having  lost  her  tongue,  God
opened  her  ears.  The  Father  who  instructed  her,
going  to  visit  her,  frightened  her.  "  Now  behold
thyself  seized  by  the  throat ;  it  is  at  this  time  that
the  Devil  wishes  to  prevent  thee  in  earnest  from  con-
fessing ;  thou  didst  refuse  to  do  it  when  thou  wert  in
health, —  perhaps  thou  wilt  never  be  able  to  do  it,
now  that  thou  art  sick."  This  poor  woman,  touched
by  God,  made  a  sign  that  she  wished  to  unburden
her  conscience;  and  immediately,  [114]  and  in  her
cabin,  the  Father  indicated  to  her  the  signs  she  was
to  make  to  the  questions  he  should  ask  her.  As  she
was  perfectly  conscious,  she  not  only  observed  these,
but  she  made so strong  an effort that she partly


144  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.16


parole;  bref,  ayat  purine  fon  cosur,  Dieu  l'a  remit  en
fante ;  elle  fe  comporte  maintenant  comme  vne  per-
fonne  qui  croit  en  Dieu,  &  qui  a  volonte  de  luy
obei'r.

Le  gedre  de  noftre  Neophyte  auoit  bien  de  plus
grandes  difpofitions  a  la  Foy  que  cefte  femme:  Ce
bon  homme  retournant  des  bois  pour  fe  confeffer,  le
Pere  auquel  il  s'adreffa  luy  demandant  s'il  ne  prioit
pas  Dieu  en  fa  cabane:  Non,  dit-il,  ie  ne  le  prie  pas,
pource  que  ie  ne  fcay  pas  encore  ce  qu'il  luy  faut
dire ;  mais  ne  penfe-tu  pas  quelquefois  en  luy,  repli-
qua  le  Pere:  Ah,  NiKanis,  repondit-il,  i'y  penfe  in-
ceffamment,  i'ay  affez  de  regret  de  ce  que  ie  ne  fcay
pas  ce  qu'il  faut  dire.  En  quelque  lieu  que  i'aille,
ie  penfe  toufiours  qu'il  me  voit,  i'efpere  toufiours  en
luy,  mon  cceur  veut  toufiours  parler  a  luy,  mais  il  ne
fcait  pas  ce  qu'il  luy  faut  dire.  Le  Pere  fut  bien
confole  voyant  que  ce  bon  homme  faifoit  oraifon  fans
le  recognoiftre.

[115]  La  derniere  perfonne  de  la  Famille  de  noftre
Neophyte,  qui  a  efte  baptifee,  c'eft  fa  femme,  laquelle
eft  bonne  &  fimple,  fe  laiffant  conduire  aisement  au
bien ;  plaife  a  noftre  Seigneur  repandre  fur  elle  fa
faindte  benedidtion,  &  fur  fon  mary,  &  fur  tous  ceux
de  fa  cabane  ou  maifon.

Quelques  Sauuages  ont  voulu  perfuader  a  ce  braue
Capitaine  de  prendre  vne  fecode  femme,  a  quoy  il
fembloit  quafi  oblige  felon  les  loix  ou  les  coutumes
de  fa  Nation ;  la  femme  mefme  Ten  a  follicite,  &  cela
luy  eft  arriue  par  deux  fois  a  l'occafion  de  deux  fem-
mes  qu'on  luy  a  voulu  donner  en  diuers  temps:  mais
il  refpondit  en  ces  termes:  Vous  venez  trop  tard,
i'ay  donne  ma  parole  a  Dieu,  ie  ne  fcaurois  plus  m'en


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  145

recovered  her  speech.  In  short,  having  purified  her
heart,  God  restored  her  to  health ;  she  now  behaves
like  a  person  who  believes  in  God,  and  has  the  will
to  obey  him.

The  son-in-law  of  our  Neophyte  had  much  more
inclination  to  the  Faith  than  had  this  woman.  This
good  man,  returning  from  the  woods  to  confess,  was
asked  by  the  Father  whom  he  addressed  if  he  did
not  pray  to  God  in  his  cabin.  "  No,"  said  he,  "I
do  not  pray  to  him,  because  I  do  not  yet  know  what
I  must  say  to  him."  "  But  dost  thou  not  think  of
him  sometimes?"  replied  the  Father.  "  Ah,  Nika-
nis, "  he  answered,  "  I  am  thinking  of  him  all  the
time,  and  I  am  quite  sorry  that  I  do  not  know  what
ought  to  be  said  to  him.  In  whatever  place  I  may
go,  I  am  always  thinking  that  he  sees  me ;  I  hope
always  in  him.  My  heart  always  desires  to  speak  to
him,  but  it  does  not  know  what  it  ought  to  say."
The  Father  was  greatly  consoled  at  seeing  that  this
good  man  was  offering  prayers  without  knowing  it.

[115]  The  last  person  in  the  Family  of  our  Neo-
phyte to  be  baptized  was  his  wife,  who  is  good  and
simple,  allowing  herself  to  be  easily  led  to  the  right.
May  it  please  our  Lord  to  bestow  his  holy  benedic-
tion upon  her,  upon  her  husband,  and  upon  all  those
of  her  cabin  or  home.

Some  of  the  Savages  have  tried  to  persuade  this
worthy  Captain  to  take  a  second  wife,  which  he
seemed  almost  obliged  to  do,  according  to  the  laws  or
customs  of  his  Nation ;  the  woman  herself  solicited
him,  and  this  happened  twice,  in  regard  to  two
women  whom  they  wished  to  give  him  at  different
times.  But  he  answered  in  these  words :  ' '  You  come
too  late ;  I have given  my  word  to God,  I cannot


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.16


dedire :  Ie  luy  veux  obeir ;  ie  luy  ay  dit ;  ie  t'obei'ray,
ie  le  veux  faire.  Quiconque  a  cognoiffance  de  la
liberte"  des  Satmages,  &  le  befoin  qu'ils  ont  de  plu-
lieurs  femmes  pour  leur  menage,  dira  que  la  grace
eft  bien  forte  qui  renuerfe  les  coutumes  du  pais,
bride  les  loix  de  la  chair,  &  combat  le  propre  intereft.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  147

gainsay  it.  I  will  obey  him ;  I  have  said  to  him,  '  I
will  obey  thee, '  and  I  will  do  it. ' '  Any  one  who  is
acquainted  with  the  license  of  the  Savages,  and  the
need  they  have  of  several  wives  for  their  household,
will  say  that  the  grace  is  very  strong  which  over-
turns the  customs  of  the  country,  bridles  the  laws  of
the  flesh,  and  combats  self-interest.


148  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUTTES [Vol.16


[116]  CHAP.  VIII.

DE LA CONUERSION & DU BAPTESME D'VN SORCIER.

I?  AY  dit  fouuent  qu'on  donoit  icy  le  nom  de  forcier
a  certains  Iogleurs  ou  charlatans  qui  fe  melent
de  chater,  &  de  fouffler  les  malades,  de  confulter
les  Diables,  &  de  tuer  les  hommes  par  leurs  forts.
Ie  me  perfuade  qu'en  effedt  il  y  en  a  quelqu'vn  entre
eux  qui  a  communication  auec  les  Demos;  mais  la
plufpart  ne  font  que  des  tropeurs,  exercans  leurs  ion-
gleries  pour  tirer  quelques  prefens  des  pauures  ma-
lades, &  pour  fe  rendre  recommandables,  ou  pour  fe
faire  craindre.  Celuy  dont  ie  vay  parler  eftoit  de  cefle
cathegorie,  il  eftoit  redoute  de  fes  gens,  &  tenu  pour
vn  m£chant  homme ;  i'en  ay  f ouuent  parle  es  Relations
precedentes,  car  nous  auons  eu  quelques  prifes  auec
luy  en  la  prefence  de  fes  Compatriotes ;  mais  comme
fon  art  eftoit  fonde  fur  le  menfonge,  &  que  nous
eftions  appuyez  [117]  fur  la  verite,  nous  le  batifmes
{i  rudement,  qu'il  fe  rendit.  II  nous  venoit  trouuer  en
particulier  pour  fe  faire  inflruire ;  nous  croyons  au
commencement  qu'il  n'auoit  pas  tant  de  defir  de  nous
auoir  pour  amis,  qu'il  craignoit  de  nous  auoir  pour
ennemis;  mais  Dieu  qui  eft  le  Maiftre  des  cceurs  le
touchoit  interieurement,  &  le  difpofoit  a  vn  bie  qui
furpaffe  notre  cognoiff ance :  Nous  quittant  pour
aller  a  la  guerre,  il  nous  afleura  qu'il  auroit  recours  a
Dieu,  &  qu'il  croyoit  en  luy  fas  f eintife ;  il  cognut  bien
que  nous  prenions  fes  paroles  come  vn  compliment


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  149


[Il6] CHAP. VIII.
OF THE CONVERSION AND BAPTISM OF A SORCERER.

1HAVE  often  said  that  the  name  "  sorcerer"  is
given  here  to  certain  Jugglers  or  charlatans  who
engage  in  singing,  blowing  upon  the  sick,  con-
sulting Devils,  and  killing  men  by  their  charms.  I
am  inclined  to  think  that  there  are,  really,  some
among  them  who  have  communication  with  the  De-
mons ;  but  the  majority  of  them  are  only  impostors,
practicing  their  enchantments  to  obtain  presents  from
the  poor  sick,  to  render  themselves  popular,  or  to
make  themselves  feared.  The  one  of  whom  I  am
about  to  speak  was  in  the  last  category;  he  was
dreaded  by  his  people,  and  looked  upon  as  a  wicked
man.  I  have  often  spoken  of  him  in  preceding
Relations,  for  we  had  some  disputes  with  him  in  the
presence  of  his  Compatriots;  but  as  his  art  was
founded  upon  falsehood,  and  as  we  were  supported
[117]  by  truth,  we  cudgeled  him  so  roughly  that  he
surrendered.  He  came  to  see  us  privately,  in  order
to  be  instructed;  we  believe  that  in  the  beginning
he  did  not  so  much  desire  to  have  us  for  friends,  as
he  feared  to  have  us  for  enemies.  But  God,  who  is
the  Master  of  hearts,  touched  him  inwardly,  and  dis-
posed him  to  a  goodness  that  surpasses  our  under-
standing. When  he  left  us  to  go  to  war,  he  assured
us  that  he  would  have  recourse  to  God,  and  that  he
would  believe  in  him,  without  pretense.  He  knew
very  well  that  we  took  his  words  as  the  compliment


150  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16

de  Sauuage,  qui  ne  fait  pas  difficult^  de  metir;  C'eft
pourquoy  fe  trouuant  par  apres  das  les  difficultez,  &
s'adreffant  a  Dieu,  il  luy  difoit:  Les  Peres  ne  pen-
fent  pas  que  i'aye  recours  a  toy,  &  que  ie  te  prie,
mais  ils  font  trompez ;  ne  laiff e  pas  pourtant  de  me
fecourir.  Or  comme  plufieurs  chofes  luy  font  arri-
uees  l'efpace  de  deux  ans  qu'il  a  pourfuiuy  fon
Baptefme  i'en  rapporteray  fuccindlement  vne  partie:
Voicy  ce  qu'il  nous  a  raconte.

Comme  nous  vous  eufmes  quitte'  pour  aller  a  la
guerre,  ie  dy  a  mes  camarades  fur  le  foir  qu'il  falloit
faire  les  prieres  qu'on  [118]  nous  auoit  enfeigne;  ils
fe  mocquerent  de  moy ;  ce  qui  fut  caufe  que  ie  ne
priois  Dieu  qu'en  mon  cceur.  Quand  nous  fufmes
arriuez  au  pays  de  nos  ennemis,  nous  eftans  iettez
trop  auant,  nous  nous  vifmes  en  vn  inftant  inueftis
de  tous  coftez ;  alors  ie  fis  le  figne  de  la  Croix,  &  dis
a  Dieu :  Tu  es  tout-puiffant,  fecoure  moy,  tu  le  peux
faire:  le  combat  s'anima  tout  a  coup,  les  neches  vo-
loient  par  l'air  comme  grefle  tombe  fur  la  terre,  elles
paffoient  a  l'entour  de  moy  c5me  la  foudre  fans  me
toucher,  ie  voyois  tober  mes  camarades  a  mes  pieds ;
les  vns  tuez,  les  autres  bleffez,  fans  que  ie  receuffe
aucun  domage:  en  fin  trouuat  iour  au  trauers  de
l'enemy,  ie  me  fauue  auec  quelques  vns  de  mes  gens,
&  come  nous  eftios  pourfuiuis,  nous  allions  come  la
tempefte;  ceux  qui  m'accopagnoient,  me  difoient
fouuet  qu'ils  n'en  pouuoient  plus;  pour  moy  leuant
fouuet  mon  cceur  a  Dieu,  il  me  femble  qu'il  me  for-
tifioit  en  forte,  que  ie  ne  fenty  iamais  aucune  debi-
lite,  ny  pour  la  faim,  ny  pour  le  trauail  que  nous  en-
durions;  eftans  arriuez  au  lieu  ou  no9  auios  laifse  nos
canots,  nous  n'auions  rien  du  tout  a  manger;  ie  dy


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6Sg  151

of  a  Savage,  who  does  not  scruple  to  lie ;  hence,  find-
ing himself  afterward  in  trouble,  and  addressing  him-
self to  God,  he  said  to  him,  "  The  Fathers  do  not
think  that  I  have  recourse  to  thee,  and  that  I  pray  to
thee,  but  they  are  mistaken;  do  not  fail,  however,
to  succor  me."  Now,  as  many  events  happened  dur-
ing the  two  years  in  which  he  sought  for  his  Bap-
tism, I  will  concisely  report  a  part  of  them.  See,
then,  what  he  related  to  us:

' '  When  we  left  you  to  go  to  war,  I  told  my  comrades,
towards  evening,  that  we  must  offer  the  prayers  that
[118]  had  been  taught  us;  they  laughed  at  me,  and
this  was  the  reason  why  I  only  prayed  to  God  in  my
heart.  When  we  reached  the  country  of  our  enemies,
having  advanced  too  far,  we  found  ourselves  instant-
ly surrounded  on  all  sides ;  then  I  made  the  sign  of
the  Cross,  and  said  to  God,  '  Thou  art  all-powerful;
help  me, — thou  canst  do  it.'  The  combat  suddenly
grew  fierce ;  the  arrows  flew  through  the  air  as  the
hail  falls  to  the  ground, —  they  flashed  around  me
like  lightning,  without  touching  me ;  I  saw  my  com-
rades fall  at  my  feet, —  some  killed,  others  wound-
ed,—  but  I  received  no  injury.  At  last,  finding  an
opening  through  the  enemy,  I  escaped  with  some  of
my  people,  and  being  pursued,  we  went  like  the
wind.  Those  who  accompanied  me  often  told  me
that  they  could  go  no  farther;  for  myself,  I  often
lifted  up  my  heart  to  God,  and  it  seemed  as  if  he  so
fortified  me  that  I  never  felt  any  weakness, —  either
from  hunger,  or  from  the  hardships  that  we  endured.
Having  reached  the  place  where  we  had  left  our
canoes,  we  had  nothing  at  all  to  eat ;  I  said  again  to
those  who  remained  with  me  [119]  that  we  must  ap-
ply to  God ;  but  they  did  not  give  this  any  considera-


152  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

derechef  a  ceux  qui  efloient  reftez  auec  moy,  [119]
qu'il  fe  falloit  addreffer  a  Dieu ;  mais  ils  n'en  tindrent
conte.  Ie  ne  laiffay  pas  de  l'inuoquer,  luy  prefentant
cefte  priere:  Toy  qui  as  fait  les  oyfeaux,  i'en  ay
befoin,  tu  m'en  peus  donner  fi  tu  veux;  fi  tu  ne  veux
pas,  il  n'importe;  ie  ne  laifferay  pas  de  croire  en  toy.
Ayant  dit  cela,  ie  fay  le  figne  de  la  Croix,  &  me  iette
das  vne  Ifle  pour  chaffer,  ie  n'allay  pas  bien  loing
que  ie  rencontray  vne  vache  fauuage ;  ie  la  fais  faillir
a  l'eau  ou  nous  la  tuafmes,  la  voyant  morte,  ie  remer-
ciay  celuy  qui  nous  l'auoit  donnee ;  &  mes  gens  furent
contraints  de  oonfeffer  que  ce  prefent  venoit  de  fa
bonte.

Apres  nous  eftre  vn  petit  rafraichis,  nous  pourfui-
uifmes  noftre  chemin,  arriuez  que  nous  fufmes  au
grand  fleuue,  nous  defcendifmes  dans  les  Ifles  du  Lac,
ou  nous  trouuafmes  quelques  Sauuages  preffez  de  la
faim;  nos  gens  leur  dirent  qu' ayant  fait  ma  priere  a
Dieu,  il  nous  auoit  donne  a  manger,  ils  me  prefferent
fort  de  le  prier  pour  eux,  voyans  leur  neceffite  &  la
noftre,  car  nous  auions  defia  consome  ce  qui  nous
reftoit  de  chair  de  cefle  vache  fauuage.  Ie  luy  dis
ces  paroles :  Ces  gens  font  a  toy ;  car  tu  as  fait  tous
les  hommes;  ils  ont  faim,  [120]  &  nous  auffi;  donne
nous  a  manger  fi  tu  veux,  tu  peus  tout,  fi  tu  as  de
bonnes  penfees  pour  nous,  nous  en  trouuerons;  finon,
nous  n'en  trouuerons  point,  mais  il  n'importe,  quand
tu  ne  m'en  voudrois  point  donner,  ie  ne  laifferois  pas
de  croire  en  toy :  Ma  priere  finie,  ie  m'en  vay  chaffer,
ie  ne  trouuay  rien,  ie  penfois  a  part  moy,  il  ne  m'en
veut  pas  donner,  mais  il  n'importe : C'eft  luy  qui  eft

le  Maiftre. Comme  ie  remontois  dans  mon  canot,  ie

'

veis  ie  ne  fcay  quoy  flotter  fur  la  riuiere,  ie  penfois


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6jg  153

tion.  I  invoked  him,  nevertheless,  offering  him  this
prayer :  '  Thou  who  hast  made  the  birds,  I  have  need
of  them ;  thou  canst  give  me  some  if  thou  wilt ;  if
thou  wilt  not,  it  does  not  matter ;  I  shall  not  cease  to
believe  in  thee. '  Having  said  this,  I  made  the  sign
of  the  Cross  and  hastened  to  an  Island,  to  do  some
hunting ;  I  had  not  gone  far  when  I  encountered  a
wild  cow,  which  I  drove  into  the  water,  where  we
killed  it.  When  I  saw  that  it  was  dead,  I  thanked
him  who  had  given  it  to  us,  and  my  people  were
obliged  to  confess  that  this  present  came  from  his
goodness.

' '  After  we  were  somewhat  refreshed,  we  continued
on  our  way.  Arrived  at  the  great  river,  we  went
down  to  the  Islands  of  the  Lake,  where  we  found
some  Savages  suffering  from  hunger ;  our  people  told
them  that,  when  I  had  offered  a  prayer  to  God,  he
had  given  us  something  to  eat.  They  strongly  urged
me  to  pray  to  him  for  them ;  seeing  their  need  and
ours,  for  we  had  already  consumed  what  remained
of  the  flesh  of  the  wild  cow,  I  said  these  words  to
him :  '  These  people  belong  to  thee,  for  thou  hast
made  all  men ;  they  are  hungry,  [120]  and  so  are  we;
give  us  something  to  eat,  if  thou  wilt ;  thou  canst  do
all.  If  thou  hast  kind  thoughts  toward  us,  we  shall
find  something;  if  not,  we  shall  find  nothing.  But
it  matters  not, — if  thou  shouldst  not  give  me  any-
thing, I  would  not  abandon  my  belief  in  thee.'  My
prayer  finished,  I  went  hunting,  and  found  nothing;
I  thought  to  myself,  '  He  does  not  wish  to  give  me
anything, —  but  it  does  not  matter;  it  is  he  who  is
the  Master.'  As  I  was  reentering  my  canoe,  I  saw
something,  I  knew  not  what,  floating  upon  the  river ;
I  thought  at  first  it  was  a  piece  of  wood,  but  seeing


154  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

au  commencement  que  ce  fut  vn  bois,  mais  voyant
qu'il  couppoit  le  fil  de  l'eau,  ie  le  pourfuitiy;  ie  trou-
uay  que  c'eftoit  vn  cerf  qui  trauerfoit  d'vne  Ifle  en
vne  autre:  nous  le  mifmes  bien-toft  a  mort,  auec
l'eftonnement  de  mes  gens  qui  en  firent  cur6e  auec
moy.

Au  partir  de  la,  ie  me  retiray  vers  les  Algonquins,
ou  la  contagion  commencoit  defia.  Or  comme  ie  vous
auois  frequente,  on  me  demandoit  fouuent  quelle
eftoit  voftre  creance,  leur  expofant  ce  que  vous  m'a-
uiez  enf eigne1  de  l'autre  vie,  ils  fe  mocquoient  de  moy
[121]  s'eftonnans  que  ie  fuffe  fi  hebete  de  croire  des
chofes  fi  eloignees  des  fens.  Si  ces  Peres  nous
difoient,  faifoient-ils,  croyez  en  Dieu,  &  vous  viurez
long-temps  en  terre ;  vous  ne  ferez  point  malades,  vo9
aurez  tous  les  cheueux  gris  deuat  que  de  mourir;
cette  doctrine  feroit  bonne,  tout  le  monde  les  croiroit,
mais  ils  parlent  d'vne  autre  vie,  &  nous  font  perdre
celle  que  nous  viuons  ca  bas  par  leurs  prieres.  Voila
ce  qui  ne  vaut  rien :  Et  toy-mefme,  me  difoient-ils,
tu  mourras  bien-toft,  puis  que  tu  leur  veux  croire.
Ie  difois  a  part  moy  entendant  ces  difcours,  ie  ne
penfe  pas  que  Dieu  qui  eft  fi  bon,  me  tue  pour  croire
en  luy,  &  pour  luy  vouloir  obeyr :  en  effect,  il  m'a  con-
feru6,  &  tous  ceux  qui  parloient  contre  luy  font  morts.
La  maladie  nous  preffa  fi  fort,  qu'on  laiffoit  les  corps
des  Trepaff  ez  fans  f epulture ;  on  ne  les  of oit  aborder,
&  moy  ie  les  enfeueliffois  &  enterrois  fans  rien  crain-
dre,  priant  Dieu  qu'il  me  conferuaft  ce  qu'il  a  fait.
Voila  ce  que  ce  Neophyte  nous  racontoit.

Quittant  le  pays  des  Algonquins,  il  s'en  vint  aux
trois  Riuieres,  fe  prefente  a  nos  Peres  pour  eftre
inftruit,  ils  le  rebuteret  au  commencement  comme  vn


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  155

it  cross  the  current,  I  pursued  it.  I  found  that  it  was
a  deer  which  was  passing  from  one  Island  to  another ;
we  soon  put  it  to  death,  to  the  astonishment  of  my
people,  who  made  a  meal  of  it  with  me.

"  Upon  going  thence,  I  retreated  towards  the
Algonquins,  where  the  contagion  was  already  begin-
ning. Now,  as  I  had  frequented  your  house,  they
often  asked  me  what  your  belief  was.  When  I
explained  to  them  what  you  had  taught  me  about  the
other  life,  they  mocked  me,  [121]  showing  surprise
that  I  was  so  stupid  as  to  believe  things  so  opposed  to
reason.  '  If  these  Fathers  said  to  us,'  they  declared,
'  "  Believe  in  God,  and  you  will  live  a  long  time
upon  earth;  you  will  not  be  sick,  you  will  all  have
gray  hair  before  you  die,"  this  doctrine  would  be  a
good  one,  everybody  would  believe  it.  But  they
speak  of  another  life,  and,  through  their  prayers,
make  us  lose  this  one  that  we  live  here  below.  Now
this  is  worth  nothing ;  and  thou  thyself, '  they  said  to
me,  '  thou  wilt  soon  die,  since  thou  art  willing  to
believe  them.'  I  said  to  myself,  when  I  heard  this
talk,  '  I  do  not  think  that  God,  who  is  so  good,  will
kill  me  for  believing  in  him,  and  for  trying  to  obey
him ;  '  in  fact,  he  has  preserved  me,  and  all  those
who  spoke  against  him  have  died.  The  disease
pressed  so  hard  upon  us  that  the  bodies  of  the  Dead
were  left  without  burial ;  the  others  did  not  dare
go  near  them,  and  I  wrapped  and  buried  them  with-
out fearing  anything,  praying  God  that  he  would
preserve  me,  which  he  did."  This  is  what  this
Neophyte  related  to  us.

Leaving  the  Algonquin  country,  he  went  to  the
three  Rivers  and  presented  himself  to  our  Fathers  to
be  instructed. They  refused  him,  at  first,  as  a  sor-


156  /  ES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

forcier  qu'ils  [122]  croyoiet  trop  attache  a  fes  badine-
ries,  mais  fa  perfeuerance  l'emporta;  on  l'inftruit  en
particulier,  &  Dieu  l'eprouue  en  public;  fa  femme  &
fes  enfans,  &  fon  frere,  meurent  de  pefte,  il  leur
procure  a  tous  le  Baptefme  fans  s'ebranler.

Vn  Capitaine  le  fait  prier  de  foumer  vn  malade,
luy  offrat  vn  grand  collier  de  porcelaine,  il  renuoye
le  prefent,  &  dit  tout  haut  en  public  que  fon  art  de
forcier  eft  vn  art  de  t[r]ompeur,  &  qu'il  ne  le  veut
plus  faire.

Comme  il  fe  voyoit  molefte  de  fes  gens  aux  trois
Riuieres,  il  defcendit  a  Kebec,  ou  il  fit  des  merueilles
au  commencement;  mais  en  fin  les  femmes  qui  ont
depraue"  le  cceur  de  Salomon  penferent  perdre ;  il  en
voulut  epoufer  vne  a  laquelle  vne  autre  pretendoit,
il  fe  laiffe  emporter  au  ieu ;  bref  il  nous  donna  vn  tel
mecontentement,  que  nous  le  chaffafmes  de  la  maifon
ou  nous  l'auions  loge,  &  luy  fifmes  quitter  l'habit  a
la  francoife  qu'il  portoit.  Comme  il  fe  veit  traite  de
la  forte,  il  ouure  les  yeux  &  parle  au  Pere  qui  l'en-
uoyoit  en  cette  forte.  En  me  chaffant  de  cette  mai-
fon, me  fermez  vous  la  porte  de  l'Eglife;  refufez-vous
de  m'inftruire?  [123]  Le  Pere  luy  repliquant  qu'on
ne  laifferoit  pas  de  l'enf eigner  s'il  vouloit  obei'r :  il
s'efcria;  Voila  qui  va  bien,  ie  ne  craignois  que  ce
poindt,  pour  voftre  maifon  &  voftre  fecours,  &  vos
habits,  c'eft  dequoy  ie  ne  me  mets  pas  en  peine,  dit-
il,  ie  pourray  viure  fans  cela;  mais  i'auois  grand  peur
que  vous  refufaffiez  de  m'enfeigner  le  chemin  du
Ciel :  Ie  voy  bien  que  ie  fais  mal,  mais  ie  ne  veux
pas  perfeuerer  dans  mon  peche.

Comme  nous  crions  certain  iour  contre  leur  facon
de  faire,  il  nous  dit; Efcoutez-moy  a  voftre  tour,  ie


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  157

cerer  whom  they  [122]  considered  too  much  attached
to  his  foolish  ideas,  but  his  perseverance  prevailed ;
he  was  privately  instructed,  and  God  publicly  tried
him ;  his  wife,  his  children,  and  his  brother  died  of
the  pest;  he  procured  Baptism  for  them  all,  without
being  unsettled.

A  Captain  had  some  one  ask  him  to  blow  upon  a
sick  man,  offering  him  a  large  porcelain  collar.  He
sent  back  the  present,  and  said  boldly  in  public  that
his  sorcerer's  art  was  the  art  of  a  deceiver,  and  that
he  would  follow  it  no  more.

As  he  found  himself  molested  by  his  people  at  the
three  Rivers,  he  went  down  to  Kebec,  where  at  first
he  did  wonders ;  but  finally  the  women  who  corrupted
the  heart  of  Solomon  almost  ruined  him.  He  tried
to  marry  one  to  whom  another  laid  claim,  he  gave
himself  up  to  gambling ;  in  short,  he  so  displeased
us  that  we  drove  him  out  of  the  house  where  we  had
been  lodging  him,  and  made  him  give  up  the  French
clothes  he  had  been  wearing.  When  he  found  him-
self treated  thus,  he  opened  his  eyes,  and  spoke  to
the  Father  who  sent  him  away,  in  this  manner :  '  In
driving  me  from  this  house,  do  you  close  the  door  of
the  Church  against  me?  Do  you  refuse  to  instruct
me?"  [123]  The  Father  replying  to  him  that  they
would  not  cease  to  teach  him  if  he  would  obey,  he
exclaimed,  "  Now  that  is  good,  it  was  the  only  point
I  feared;  as  to  your  house,  your  help,  and  your
clothes,"  said  he,  "  I  give  myself  no  concern  about
them, —  I  can  live  without  these  things.  But  I  was
very  much  afraid  that  you  might  refuse  to  teach  me
the  way  to  Heaven.  I  see  clearly  that  I  am  doing
wrong,  but  I  will  not  persevere  in  my  sin.

One  day,  as  we  were  inveighing  against  their  hab-


158  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.16

veux  parler;  fi  vous  n'auiez  non  plus  la  cognoiffance
des  Efcritures  que  nous  autrcs,  fi  Dieu  ne  vous  auoit
pas  enfeigne  dauantage,  fi  vos  anceitres  ne  vous
auoiet  laiffez  que  le  ventre  &  la  guerre  comme  a
nous,  peut  eftre  ne  feriez  vous  pas  plus  gens  de  bien
que  nous.

Vne  autrefois  vn  des  Peres  qui  l'auoit  enfeigne"
paffant  aupres  de  luy  fans  luy  rien  dire,  comme  en  le
mefprifant  pour  auoir  perdu  fa  ferueur,  il  l'arrefta
tout  court,  &  luy  dit  d'vne  voix  haute;  Qui  penfe-tu
que  foit  Pigar^ich?  (c'eft  ainfi  qu'il  fe  nommoit  de-
uant  fon  baptefme)  c'eft  vn  gros  arbre  fortement  en-
racine  dans  la  terre,  crois-tu  [124]  le  ietter  a  bas  tout
d'vn  coup?  Donne,  donne  de  grands  coups  de  hache,
&  continue  long-temps,  &  en  fin  tu  le  renuerf eras ;  il
a  enuie  de  'tober,  mais  il  ne  peut,  fes  racines,  c'eft  a
dire,  fes  mefchantes  habitudes  le  retiennent  malgre
qu'il  en  ait;  Ne  perds  pas  courage,  tu  en  viendras  a
bout.

Au  mefme  temps  que  nous  le  rebutions,  il  fut  fol-
licite  de  retourner  a  fes  iongleries ;  on  luy  fit  des  pre-
fents,  on  luy  promit  que  le  tout  fe  feroit  en  fecret,
cependant  quoy  il  eut  vne  grande  difette  des  chofes
qu'on  luy  prefentoit,  iamais  neantmoins  on  ne  les  vou-
lut  accepter,  ny  repredre  fon  tambour.  En  fin  nous  n'a-
uons  pas  reconnu  qu'il  ait  perdu  la  foy  nonobftant  fes
debauches  ou  fes  libertez :  II  prioit  Dieu  tous  les  iours
foir  &  matin  en  fa  Cabane,  &  par  tout  oil  il  fe  trou-
uoit  il  publioit  noftre  creance  fans  craindre  fes  com-
patriotes.  Le  refpedt  humain  qui  fait  icy  bie  du  mal,
auffi  bie  qu'en  Frace,  ne  l'emp6che  guiere  de  dire  ce
qu'il  penfe;  C'eft  vn  efprit  prompt,  hardy,  que  la
crainte  de  l'enfer  a  retenu  dans  quelque  deuoir  depuis


1639]  LE  JEUNES  RELATION,  i639  159

its,  he  said  to  us,  "  Now  listen  to  me  in  your  turn, —
I  wish  to  speak.  If  you  had  no  more  knowledge  of
the  Scriptures  than  we,  if  God  had  not  taught  you
any  more,  if  your  ancestors  had  left  to  you  only  eat-
ing and  fighting,  as  they  have  to  us,  perhaps  you
would  be  no  better  people  than  we  are. ' '

Another  time,  when  one  of  our  Fathers  who  had
taught  him  passed  near  him  without  speaking  to  him,
as  if  slighting  him  for  having  lost  zeal,  he  stopped
him  short,  and  said  in  a  loud  voice,  "  What  dost  thou
think  Pigarouich  is?"  (This  was  his  name  before
his  baptism.)  "He  is  a  great  tree,  strongly  rooted
in  the  ground;  dost  thou  think  [124]  to  throw  it  down
all  at  once?  Strike,  strike  heavy  blows  of  the  axe,
and  continue  a  long  time,  and  at  last  thou  wilt  over-
throw it.  It  desires  to  fall,  but  it  cannot, — its  roots,
that  is,  its  bad  habits,  hold  it  down,  in  spite  of  itself.
Do  not  lose  courage,  thou  wilt  succeed."

At  the  same  time  that  we  rejected  him,  he  was  so-
licited to  return  to  his  sorceries ;  they  made  him  pres-
ents, they  promised  him  that  everything  should  be
done  in  secret;  however,  although  he  was  in  great
need  of  the  things  they  offered  him,  he  would  never
accept  them,  or  resume  his  drum.  In  fine,  we  did
not  discover  that  he  had  lost  the  faith,  notwithstand-
ing his  debauches  or  his  license.  He  prayed  to  God
every  day,  morning  and  evening,  in  his  Cabin ;  and,
wherever  he  happened  to  be,  he  published  our  belief
without  fear  of  his  countrymen.  Respect  for  what
others  say,  which  does  so  much  harm  here,  as  well
as  in  France,  prevented  him  but  little  from  saying
what  he  thought.  His  is  a  bold  and  active  mind,
which  the  fear  of  hell  restrained,  to  some  extent,
after  the  Faith  took  possession  of  his  soul. Now,


160  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

que  la  Foy  s'eft  emparee  de  fon  ame.  Or  comme  il
voyoit  que  nous  le  renuoyons  de  temps  en  temps  pour
fon  baptefme,  il  nous  a  fort  preffez,  &  par  [225  i.e.,  125]
de  bonnes  raifons.  Puis  que  vous  enfeignez,  difoit-
il,  que  Dieu  fait  mifericorde,  &  efface  les  pechez  de
ceux  qui  croiet  en  luy,  &  qui  font  baptifez,  pourquoy
me  refufez-vous  le  Baptefme,  moy  qui  tefmoigne
publiquement  regret  que  i'ay  de  l'auoir  offese?  Si
vous  hayffez  mes  malices,  baptifez-moy,  &  elles
feront  effacees,  &  vous  n'aurez  plus  dequoy  hair  en
moy.  I'ay  commis  plufieurs  pechez  que  ie  n'aurois
pas  commis  fi  vous  m'euffiez  baptise,  car  i'ay  toufiours
eu  cette  refolution  fi  iamais  ie  le  pouuois  eftre,  que
ie  refpedterois  mon  baptefme,  mais  ne  l'eflant  pas,
ie  fuis  comme  vn  chien,  c'eft  pourquoy  ie  me  laiffe
aller  a  mes  paffions,  auec  regret  neantmoins.  Nous
le  reprifmes  vne  fois  publiquement  d'vne  faute  qu'il
faifoit  en  noftre  prefence,  luy  fans  s'efloner  nous  dit
deuant  tous  fes  gens.  Ie  ne  croyois  pas  que  cette
adtion  fut  mauuaife,  mais  puis  qu'elle  l'eft,  i'ay  re-
gret de  l'auoir  commis,  &  iamais  plus  il  ne  m'aduien-
dra  de  la  commettre.  Et  puis  il  nous  vint  trouuer  en
particulier  pour  fcauoir  la  raifon  pourquoy  nous  con-
damnions  cette  adtion;  luy  ayant  donne,  il  s'accufa
foy  mefme,  s'eftonnant  de  fa  beftife.

[126]  Le  voyans  vn  certain  iour  tout  penfif  &  affli-
ge,  nous  luy  demandafmes  ce  qu'il  auoit;  mon  cceur
eft  trifle,  refpondit-il,  car  il  me  femble  que  Dieu  ne
nous  ayme  pas,  puis  qu'il  nous  commande  des  chofes
que  nous  ne  fcaun'onsgarder:  il  y  a  bien  des  pechez
que  ie  ne  crains  point,  mais  il  y  en  a  qui  me  font
peur.  Ie  ne  crains  point  l'yurongnerie,  ny  les  feflins  a
manger,  ny  la  confulte  des  Demons,  ny  nos  chanteries,


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TJON,  ib3g  161

when  he  saw  that  we  refused  him  from  time  to  time,
in  regard  to  his  baptism,  he  urged  us  strongly  and
with  [225  i.e.,  125]  good  arguments.  "Since  you
teach,"  said  he,  "  that  God  is  merciful,  and  blots  out
the  sins  of  those  who  believe  in  him,  and  who  are
baptized,  why  do  you  refuse  me  Baptism?  —  me,  who
show  publicly  the  regret  I  feel  for  having  offended
him?  If  you  hate  my  wicked  actions,  baptize  me,
and  they  will  be  effaced,  and  you  will  have  nothing
more  to  hate  in  me.  I  have  committed  several  sins
that  I  would  not  have  committed  if  you  had  baptized
me.  For  I  have  always  resolved  that,  if  ever  I  should
be  baptized,  I  would  respect  my  baptism ;  but  as  I
have  not  been,  I  am  like  a  dog,  and  hence  I  give
myself  up  to  my  passions, — nevertheless,  with  re-
gret. ' '  Once  when  we  publicly  rebuked  him  for  a
fault  that  he  committed  in  our  presence,  he,  without
any  embarrassment,  said  to  us  before  all  his  people,
"  I  did  not  think  that  this  act  was  wrong;  but,  since
it  is,  I  am  sorry  to  have  committed  it,  and  I  shall
never  be  guilty  of  it  again."  And  then  he  came  to
see  us  privately  to  find  the  reason  why  we  condemned
this  act;  having  given  it  to  him,  he  accused  himself,
wondering  at  his  own  stupidity.

[126]  Seeing  him  one  day  very  thoughtful  and
downcast,  we  asked  him  what  was  the  matter.  "  My
heart  is  sad,"  he  replied,  "  for  it  seems  to  me  that
God  does  not  love  us,  since  he  gives  us  command-
ments that  we  cannot  keep ;  there  are  many  sins  that
I  do  not  fear,  but  there  are  some  that  make  me  afraid.
I  do  not  fear  drunkenness,  nor  eat-all  feasts,  nor  the
consultation  of  Demons,  nor  our  songs,  nor  pride,
nor  theft,  nor  murder;  but  I  do  fear  women.  God
commands  us  to  marry  but  one  wife,  and,  if  she  leaves


162  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESU1TES [Vol.16

ny  l'orgueil,  ny  le  larcin,  ny  le  meurtre,  mais  ie  crains
les  femmes:  Dieu  no[u]s  commande  de  n'efpoufer
qu'vne  feule  femme,  &  fi  elle  nous  quitte,  de  n'en  point
prendre  d'autre:  me  voila  done  contraint  d'eftre
feul,  car  nos  femmes  n'ont  point  d'efprit.  De  viure
parmy  nous  fans  femme,  e'eft  viure  fans  fecours,
fans  mefnage,  &  toufiours  vagabond.  Nous  luy  de-
mandafmes  s'il  ne  penfoit  pas  auoir  affez  de  force  auec
la  grace  de  Dieu  de  ne  point  quitter  fa  femme  au  cas
qu'il  en  eut  efpoufe  vne  chreftienne:  Ouy  dea,  re-
partit-il,  car  ie  n'ay  pas  enuie  de  l'abandonner.  Or
luy  fifmes  nous,  fi  Dieu  eft  affez  puiffant  pour  te  don-
ner  la  perfeuerance  au  mariage  auec  vne  feule  femme,
pourquoy  ne  [127]  pourra-il  pas  donner  la  mefme
force  a  vne  femme  fi  elle  eft  chreftienne  ?  Vous  auez
raiso,  repliqua-il,  ie  ne  perdray  point  courage,  mon
ef perance  eft  en  luy ;  &  quand  mefme  ie  deurois  eftre
feul  le  refte  de  mes  iours,  la  vie  n'eft  pas  longue.

Le  temps  deftine  pour  fon  Baptefme  s'approchant,
nous  le  fondafmes  plus  particulierement,  nous  luy
difmes  certain  iour  que  s'il  tomboit  malade  eftant
Chreftien,  qu'il  s'imagineroit  que  nous  luy  auions
caufe"  cette  maladie ;  il  eft  vray,  dit-il,  qu'on  vous  croit
les  autheurs  de  la  contagion  qui  recommence,  mais  ie
me  ris  de  tout  cela,  vous  n'eftes  pas  des  Dieux  pour
difpofer  de  la  vie  des  hommes.  Tes  gens  te  diuerti-
ront  de  la  Foy,  luy  difmes-nous,  tu  es  inconftant,  tu
ne  tiendras  point  ferme.  II  eft  bien  vray  que  ie  n'ay
point  d'efprit,  refpondit-il,  mais  quand  tous  les  Sau-
uages  me  diroient,  nous  te  tuerons  fi  tu  te  fais  bapti-
fer,  ie  leur  dirois,  tuez  moy,  il  n'importe,  ie  veux  eftre
baptise ;  puis  que  le  grand  Capitaine  du  Ciel  le  veut
ainfi,  ie  luy  veux  obeyr,  &  non  pas  a  vous  autres  qui


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  163


us,  not  to  take  another;  behold  me,  then,  obliged  to
remain  single,  for  our  women  have  no  sense.  To
live  among  us  without  a  wife  is  to  live  without  help,
without  home,  and  to  be  always  wandering."  We
asked  him  if  he  did  not  think  he  had  enough  strength,
with  the  grace  of  God,  not  to  leave  his  wife  in  case
he  should  marry  a  Christian.  "  Yes,  indeed,"  he
replied,  "  for  I  have  no  desire  to  abandon  her."
"  Well,  then,"  we  rejoined,  "  if  God  is  powerful
enough  to  give  thee  perseverance  in  marriage  with
only  one  woman,  why  [127]  could  he  not  give  the
same  strength  to  a  woman  if  she  is  a  Christian?"
"  You  are  right,"  he  replied,  "  I  will  not  lose  cour-
age, my  hope  is  in  him;  and,  even  if  I  were  to  re-
main single  all  the  rest  of  my  days,  life  is  not  long."
The  time  appointed  for  his  Baptism  drawing  near,
we  sounded  him  more  thoroughly.  We  told  him  one
day  that,  if  he  fell  sick  when  he  became  a  Christian,
he  would  imagine  that  we  had  caused  this  sickness.
"  It  is  true,"  said  he,  "  that  people  believe  you  to  be
the  authors  of  the  contagion  which  is  beginning
afresh;  but  I  laugh  at  all  that, —  you  are  not  Gods,
to  dispose  of  the  lives  of  men."  "  Thy  people  will
divert  thee  from  the  Faith,"  we  said  to  him,  "  thou
art  inconstant,  thou  wilt  not  hold  firm."  "  It  is  very
true  that  I  have  no  mind,"  he  replied;  "  but  if  all
the  Savages  should  say  to  me,  '  We  will  kill  thee  if
thou  hast  thyself  baptized,'  I  would  say  to  them,
*  Kill  me,  it  does  not  matter, —  I  intend  to  be  bap-
tized ;  since  the  great  Captain  of  Heaven  wishes  it  so,
I  intend  to  obey  him,  and  not  you,  who  have  neither
power  nor  influence  over  our  souls.'"  "But  how
does  it  happen,"  we  asked  him,  "  that  thou  art  not
liked  by  thy  Captains?" [128]  "  I  know  only  one


164  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16

n'auez  ny  force  ny  credit  fur  nos  ames.  Mais  d'ou
vient,  luy  difmes-nous,  que  tu  n'eft  pas  ayme  de  tes
Capitaines?  [128]  Ie  n'en  f  cache  qu'vn,  refpondit-il,
qui  me  haiffe,  &  celuy  la  me  decrie  aupres  des  autres,
il  a  depit  de  ce  que  ie  veux  aller  au  Ciel,  voyant  bien
qu'il  ira  en  enfer  s'il  ne  quitte  fes  femmes,  ce  qu'il
ne  fera  iamais;  il  dit  qu'il  veut  eftre  baptife,  mais  ii
vous  ne  le  baptifez  auec  deux  femmes,  il  ne  le  fera
de  long-temps :  Or  comme  il  void  que  ie  fuis  pour
eftre  baptife  deuant  luy,  quoy  que  vous  ayez  com-
mence' de  l'inflruire  deuant  moy,  il  me  porte  enuie
de  ce  que  ie  veux  aller  le  premier  en  Paradis.  Sa
refponce  nous  fit  rire.  Ce  n'eft  pas  neantmoins  la
raifon  pourquoy  il  eft  moins  ayme\  Cela  prouient  de
ce  qu'eftant  libre,  &  d'vne  humeur  hardie  il  paroift
altier.  Or  les  Sauuages  ne  fcauroient  fupporter  en
aucune  facon  ceux  qui  paroiffent  vouloir  prendre  quel-
que  afcendant  fur  les  autres,  ils  mettent  toute  la  ver-
tu  en  vne  certaine  douceur  ou  apathie,  ne  recognoif-
fant  quafi  point  de  peche  plus  enorme  que  la  colere.
En  fin  ce  bon  homme  apres  auoir  frappe  long-temps
a  la  porte,  fut  admis  au  Sacrement  de  Baptefme,  on
luy  fit  porter  le  nom  d'Eftienne  au  fortit  de  ce  bain
Sacre,  il  nous  dit ;  II  me  femble  que  ie  fuis  [129]  autre
que  ie  n'eftois,  que  i'ay  vne  autre  vie  en  moy,  c'eft
tout  de  bon  que  ie  veux  obei'r  a  Dieu.  Nous  luy
fifmes  entendre  qu'il  eftoit  a  propos  qu'il  t£moignaft
a  fes  Compatriotes  fes  bonnes  refolutions.  Ie  l'ay
defia  fait,  repliqua-il,  i'ay  publie  par  tout  que  ie
voulois  quitter  mes  mechantes  habitudes,  &  qu'on
m'auoit  appris  que  les  eaux  du  Baptefme  ne  me  ferui-
roient  de  rien,  fi  ie  ne  voulois  viure  felon  la  Loy  de
Dieu,  &  de  fon  Eglife:  mais  ie  leur  diray  encor  vne


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  165


who  hates  me,"  he  replied,  "and  that  one  brings
me  into  disrepute  with  the  others.  He  is  vexed
because  I  wish  to  go  to  Heaven, — seeing  plainly  that
he  will  go  to  hell  unless  he  gives  up  his  wives,  which
he  will  never  do;  he  says  that  he  wishes  to  be  bap-
tized, but  if  you  will  not  baptize  him  with  two  wives,
he  will  not  be  baptized  for  a  long  time.  Now,  as
he  sees  that  I  am  going  to  be  baptized  before  he  is,
although  you  began  to  instruct  him  before  you  did
me,  he  is  envious  of  me  because  I  shall  go  first  to
Paradise."  His  answer  made  us  smile.  This  is  not
the  reason,  however,  why  he  is  less  liked;  that  arises
from  the  fact,  that,  being  of  a  free  and  bold  disposi-
tion, he  seems  proud.  Now  the  Savages  cannot
endure  in  the  least  those  who  seem  desirous  of  assum-
ing superiority  over  the  others ;  they  place  all  virtue
in  a  certain  gentleness  or  apathy,  recognizing  scarce-
ly any  sin  more  enormous  than  anger.

Finally  this  good  man,  after  having  knocked  at  the
door  for  a  long  time,  was  admitted  to  the  Sacrament
of  Baptism;  he  was  given  the  name  Estienne.  On
emerging  from  this  Sacred  bath,  he  said  to  us,  "  It
seems  to  me  that  I  am  [129]  different  from  what  I
was, —  that  I  have  another  life  in  me;  I  am  in  earn-
est in  intending  to  obey  God."  We  gave  him  to
understand  that  it  was  fitting  for  him  to  make  known
his  good  resolutions  to  his  Countrymen.  "  I  have
already  done  so,"  he  replied;  "  I  have  proclaimed
everywhere  that  I  mean  to  give  up  my  bad  habits,
and  that  I  had  been  taught  that  the  waters  of  Bap-
tism would  be  of  no  avail  if  I  did  not  live  according
to  the  Law  of  God  and  of  his  Church.  But  I  will
tell  them  this  again,  since  you  desire  it ;  I  will  make
a  feast,  and  will  declare  boldly  that  I  am  a  child  of


166  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16


fois  puifque  vous  le  defirez,  ie  leur  feray  feftin,  &  de-
clareray  tout  haut  que  ie  fuis  enfant  de  Dieu,  &  que
ie  veux  garder  tout  ce  qui  me  fera  commande,  renon-
cant  a  toutes  nos  fottifes,  &  foulant  aux  pieds  toutes
nos  vieilles  facons  de  faire.  Dieu  luy  en  faffe  la
grace.

Quelque  temps  apres  fon  baptefme,  nous  l'auons
marie  en  face  de  l'Eglife  a  vne  veufue  chreftienne.
Les  faindtes  ceremonies  que  nous  gardons  en  l'admi-
niftration  des  Sacrements,  fuiuant  l'ordre  ou  le
Rituel  Romain,  rauiffent  &  touchent  ces  bonnes  gens.
Luy  &  fa  femme  frequentent  maintenant  les  Sacre-
ments, i'efpere  que  Dieu  leur  donnera  fa  faincte
benediction. Amen.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6jg  167

God,  and  intend  to  observe  whatever  I  shall  be  com-
manded,—  renouncing  all  our  follies,  and  trampling
under  foot  all  our  old  customs."  May  God  give  him
the  grace  to  do  this.

Some  time  after  his  baptism,  we  married  him,  with
the  rites  of  the  Church,  to  a  Christian  widow.  The
holy  ceremonies  that  we  observe  in  the  administra-
tion of  the  Sacraments,  following  the  Roman  order
or  Ritual,  charm  and  touch  these  simple  people.  He
and  his  wife  now  frequent  the  Sacraments ;  I  trust
that  God  will  give  them  his  holy  benediction. Amen.


168  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16


[30  i.e.,  130]  CHAPITRE  IX.

DU SEMINAIRE DES SAUUAGES.

NOUS  auons  tenu  cette  annee  dans  nos  Seminaires
des  Montagnets,  des  Algonquins,  &  des  Hu-
rons.  Les  Seminariftes  font  de  conditions  bien
differentes  auffi  bien  que  d'aages;  les  vns  nous  font
donnez  pour  toufiours,  &  nous  les  auons  61euez  chez
quelque  families,  a  caufe  de  leur  ieuneffe ;  les  autres
demeuroient  auec  nous  afin  d'eftre  inftruidts  en  la
Foy,  &  es  vertus  chreftiennes :  les  vns  n'ont  refpire
que  la  liberte,  les  autres  fe  font  faits  plainement
inftruire,  &  ont  receu  le  faindt  Baptefme.  Bref,  ie
puis  dire  que  le  Seminaire  s'eft  veu  dans  la  bonace
&  dans  la  tempefte,  dans  la  profperite  &  dans  l'ad-
uerfite : Mais  pour  defcendre  en  particulier.

Celuy  des  Hurons  qui  a  reiiffi  par  excellence,  eftoit
vn  homme  aage  d'enuiron  cinquante  ans,  il  n'y  a
point  d'aage  qui  ne  foit  propre  pour  le  Ciel,  on  a  tant
crie  qu'il  falloit  auoir  foin  particulierement  des  ieunes
plantes,  qu'on  ne  deuoit  efperer  aucun  [131]  fruidt
des  vieilles  fouches,  &  Dieu  nous  fait  fouuent  co-
gnoiftre  le  contraire ;  Ce  bon  homme  ayant  oiiy  par-
ler  de  Dieu  en  fon  pais,  prit  refolution  de  defcendre
a  Kebec,  &  d'y  paffer  vn  hyuer,  afin  d'apprendre  a
le  cognoiftre.  En  chemin  il  rencontra  Iofeph  Tetfa-
tirhon  qui  fortoit  du  Seminaire,  qui  le  confirma  forte -
ment  dans  fon  deffein,  luy  donnant  vn  chappelet
pour  marque  de  fon  amitie : Eftant  arriue  aux  trois


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  169


[30  i.e.,  130]  CHAPTER  IX.

OF THE SEMINARY FOR THE SAVAGES.

THIS  year  we  have  had  Montagnais,  Algonquins,
and  Hurons  in  our  Seminaries.  The  Seminar-
ists are  here  under  very  different  conditions,
and  at  very  different  ages.  Some  were  given  to  us
permanently,  and  these  we  have  reared  with  certain
families,  on  account  of  their  youth ;  others  lived  with
us,  in  order  to  be  instructed  in  the  Faith  and  in  the
Christian  virtues ;  some  have  only  thirsted  for  liber-
ty, others  have  been  fully  instructed  and  have  re-
ceived holy  Baptism.  In  short,  I  can  say  that  the
Seminary  has  found  itself  in  calms  and  in  tempests,
in  prosperity  and  in  adversity.  But  let  us  come  down
to  particulars.

The  one  among  the  Hurons  who  has  preeminently
succeeded  was  a  man  about  fifty  years  old.  There
is  no  age  which  is  not  fit  for  Heaven.  It  has  so  often
been  declared  that  we  must  give  peculiar  care  to  the
young  plants,  and  that  one  should  not  expect  [131]
fruit  from  the  old  stocks, —  and  yet  God  often  makes
the  contrary  appear  to  us.  This  good  man,  having
heard  something  about  God  in  his  own  country,  de-
cided to  go  down  to  Kebec  and  pass  the  winter  there,
that  he  might  learn  to  know  him.  On  the  way,  he
encountered  Joseph  Tewatirhon,  who  was  leaving  the
Seminary,  who  solidly  confirmed  him  in  his  purpose,
and  gave  him  a  rosary  as  a  token  of  his  friendship.
Having  [arrived  at the  three Rivers,  he presented


170  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.16

Riuieres,  il  fe  prefente  pour  eftre  receu,  le  voyant  fi
aage  nous  le  rebutafmes,  les  Sauuages  ne  fe  font  pas
£conduire  trois  fois,  s'ils  n'ont  vne  grande  paffion
d'obtenir  ce  qu'ils  demandent ;  nous  refufafmes  celuy-
cy  plus  de  quatre,  &  cependant  iamais  il  ne  perdit
courage;  il  s'adreffoit  a  nos  Francois  arm  d'auoir
entree  chez  nous  par  leur  moyen,  mais  le  Pere  qui
deuoit  auoir  charge  de  luy  le  voulant  conduire  entie-
rement,  luy  dit  qu'il  etoit  trop  aag£,  &  qu'il  auoit
l'efprittroppefant,  pour  retenir  ce  qu'on  luy  enfeigne-
roit.  De  plus,  qu'ayant  cognoiffance  de  la  Riuiere,
il  s'en  pourroit  enfuir,  &  derober  ce  qu'il  pourroit
attraper  en  noftre  maifon,  come  d'autres  auoient  fait,
&  par  confequent  qu'il  s'en  retournat  en  fon  pays
pour  fe  faire  [132]  inftruire  par  nos  Peres  qui  eftoient
la.  A  tout  cela  il  repartit  auec  iugement :  il  me  fem-
ble,  fit-il,  que  tu  n'as  pas  raifon  de  preferer  des
enfans  a  des  hommes  faits.  Les  ieunes  gens  ne  font
point  ecoutez  en  noftre  pays,  quand  ils  diroient  des
merueilles,  on  ne  les  croiroit  pas;  mais  les  hommes
parlent,  ils  ont  l'efprit  ferme,  oncroit  ce  qu'ils  difent,
c'eft  pourquoy  ie  feray  mieux  mon  rapport  de  voftre
doctrine  etat  de  retour  au  pays,  que  non  pas  les
enfans  que  tu  recherche.  Pour  la  craint  que  tu  as  que
ie  ne  m'enfuye,  &  que  ie  ne  derobbe,  ie  laifferay  des
gages  entre  les  mains  des  Francois  qui  vaudront  bien
ce  que  ie  pourroisemporter,  fi  ie  voulois  eftre  mechant.
Quand  eft  de  me  faire  inftruire  en  noftre  bourgade,
c'eft  chofe  penible  pour  les  diuertiffemets  qui  fur-
uiennent,  tant  d'vn  cofte  des  affaires,  que  de  la  di-
uerfite  des  opinions,  &  des  fentimets  de  mes  Compa-
triotes,  qui  n'ont  pas  la  mefme  volonte  que  moy:
c'eft  ce  qui  m'a  fait  refoudre  de  venir  ca  bas  pour


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  ib39  171

himself  for  reception ;  but,  seeing  how  old  he  was,
we  refused  him.  The  Savages  do  not  allow  them-
selves to  be  thrice  denied,  unless  they  have  a  great
longing  to  obtain  what  they  demand;  we  refused
this  one  more  than  four  times,  and  still  he  never  lost
courage.  He  applied  to  our  Frenchmen,  in  order  to
obtain  admission  to  us  through  their  agency ;  but  the
Father  who  had  to  take  charge  of  him,  wishing  to
get  rid  of  him  entirely,  told  him  that  he  was  too  old,
and  that  his  mind  was  too  dull  to  retain  what  would
be  taught  him, —  that,  moreover,  being  familiar  with
the  River,  he  would  be  able  to  escape,  and  to  steal
what  he  could  get  hold  of  in  our  house,  as  others  had
done;  that,  consequently,  he  should  return  to  his
own  country  to  be  [132]  instructed  by  our  Fathers
who  were  there.  To  all  this  he  replied  shrewdly.
"  It  seems  to  me,"  he  said,  "  that  thou  art  not  right
to  prefer  children  to  grown  men.  Young  people  are
not  listened  to  in  our  country ;  if  they  should  relate
wonders,  they  would  not  be  believed.  But  men
speak, —  they  have  solid  understanding,  and  what
they  say  is  believed;  hence  I  shall  make  a  better
report  of  your  doctrine,  when  I  return  to  my  country,
than  will  the  children  whom  thou  seekest.  As  for
thy  fear  that  I  may  run  away,  and  that  I  may  steal,
I  will  leave  as  pledges  in  the  hands  of  the  French
what  will  be  worth  fully  as  much  as  I  could  take
away,  if  I  were  inclined  to  be  wicked.  As  to  obtain-
ing instruction  in  our  village,  that  is  a  difficult
matter,  on  account  of  the  distractions  that  arise, — ■
both  in  regard  to  business,  and  to  the  diversity  of
opinions  and  sentiments  among  my  Countrymen,  who
have  not  the  same  willingness  that  I  have.  This  is
what  made  me  resolve  to  come  down  here  to  discuss


172  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

traiter  auec  vous  en  paix,  &  hors  du  bruit  d'vne  chofe
de  Q  grande  importance;  fi  bien  que  i'ay  refolu  quand
vous  m'econduiriez  de  chercher  quelque  Francois  qui
me  recoiue  en  fa  maifon,  du  moins  [133]  pour  vn  hy-
uer,  arm  qu'on  m'enfeigne  ce  que  ie  ne  puis  fcauoir
de  moy-mefme.  En  effect,,  comme  ce  bon  home  veit
que  nonobftant  fes  ref  ponces  nous  ne  le  voulions  pas
admettre  au  Seminaire,  il  s'allie  d'vn  francois  qui  le
loge  en  fa  maifon,  auec  deffein  d'aller  tous  les  iours
apprendre  quelque  chofe  de  noftre  creance  chez  vn
truchement  francois.  Cependant  nous  attendios  de
iour  a  autre  qu'il  s'en  iroit,  6tant  homme  defia  aage,
&  qu'il  s'embarqueroit  auec  quelques  vns  de  fes  com-
patriotes  qu'il  voyoit  tous  les  iours  arriuer,  &  s'en
retourner  en  leur  pays,  ayans  leurs  traittes  ou  leurs
marchandifes.  Mais  en  fin  Dieu  l'auoit  choifi  &  ecrit
au  Liure  de  fes  Eleuz.  Comme  nous  veifmes  que  fes
gens  ne  l'ebranloient  point,  nous  le  receufmes,  &
fifmes  defcendre  a  Kebec,  ou  fans  mentir  il  a  fait
paroiftre  vn  naturel  bien  eloigne  de  tout  ce  qu'on  con-
coit  d'vn  Sauuage :  il  a  auffi  donne"  des  indices  d'vne
grace  fi  particuliere,  qu'a  peine  l'aurions  nous  pu.
croire,  fi  nous  ne  l'auions  veu  de  nos  yeux.  II  eftoit
doux,  courtois,  facile,  prompt  a  faire  plaifir  a  qui  que
ce  fut,  iamais  oifif,  il  admiroit  la  beaute  de  noftre
Foy:  &  voyant  nos  veritez  fi  conformes  a  la  raifon,  il
les  [134]  goutoit  auec  plaifir,  fe  voyant  fuffifamment
inflruit  pour  le  Baptefme,  il  le  demandoit  auec  vne
affection  fi  cordiale,  qu'on  ne  luy  put  refufer.  Noftre
Seigneur  nous  donna  vn  beau  fuiet  de  reconnoiftre
fa  conftance.  Quinze  ou  feize  Hurons  de  fes  compa-
triotes  fe  trouuans  engagez  dans  le  commencement
de  l'hyuer  parmy  les  Francois;  &  ne  pouuant  retour-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  173

with  you  in  peace,  and  away  from  quarreling,  a  mat-
ter of  so  great  importance.  So  I  have  resolved  that,
if  you  turn  me  away,  I  will  seek  out  some  French-
man who  will  receive  me  into  his  house,  at  least
[133]  for  one  winter,  so  that  I  may  be  taught  what
I  cannot  learn  myself."  In  fact,  when  this  good
man  saw  that,  notwithstanding  his  replies,  we  were
unwilling  to  admit  him  to  the  Seminary,  he  allied
himself  with  a  Frenchman  who  lodged  him  in  his
house, —  intending  to  go  to  a  French  interpreter
every  day,  to  learn  something  of  our  belief.  Mean-
while, we  were  expecting  from  day  to  day  that  he
would  go  away,  as  he  was  already  an  aged  man,  and
that  he  would  embark  with  some  of  his  compatriots
whom  he  saw  arriving  daily,  and  returning  to  their
country,  having  completed  their  trading  or  made  their
purchases.  But,  in  fine,  God  had  chosen  him  and
written  him  in  the  Book  of  his  Elect.  When  we  saw
that  his  people  did  not  make  him  waver,  we  received
him,  and  had  him  go  down  to  Kebec, —  where,  to
tell  the  truth,  he  showed  a  disposition  far  different
from  all  that  one  imagines  of  a  Savage.  He  also
gave  indications  of  so  singular  a  grace,  that  we  could
scarcely  have  believed  it  if  we  had  not  seen  it  with
our  own  eyes.  He  was  gentle,  courteous,  compliant,
prompt  to  do  a  favor  to  any  one  whomsoever,  never
idle.  He  admired  the  beauty  of  our  Faith,  and,  see-
ing our  truths  so  in  harmony  with  reason,  he  [134]
gladly  approved  them.  Finding  himself  sufficiently
instructed  for  Baptism,  he  asked  for  it  with  so  cor-
dial interest  that  one  could  not  refuse  him.  Our
Lord  gave  us  a  fine  opportunity  for  ascertaining  his
constancy.  Fifteen  or  sixteen  Hurons,  his  compa-
triots, finding  themselves  stranded  among  the  French


174  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~ SUITES  [Vol.16

ner  en  leur  pays,  demeurerent  allez  long-temps  proche
du  Seminaire,  come  la  plufpart  auoient  pluftoft  des
penfees  de  guerre,  cm  ils  vouloient  encor  aller,  &  d'ou
ils  venoient,  que  de  la  paix  Euangelique.  Ils  fe  moc-
quoient  de  noltre  Neophyte,  lequel  leur  donnoit  de
bons  confeils,  auec  vne  prudence  &  vne  dexterite  fort
remarquable :  Mais  voyant  que  fes  paroles  tomboient
a  terre,  il  s'eloignoit  doucement  de  leur  compagnie
pour  n'eftre  participant  de  leurs  fottifes.  Ils  luy  re-
prochoient  qu'il  n'etoit  plus  Huron,  qu'il  auoit  renon-
ce  a  fon  pais;  mais  ce  bon  Cathecumene  ne  fe  fou-
ciant  guiere  de  leur  blafme,  leur  repondoit  doucement
qu'il  ne  fe  depouilloit  pas  de  l'amour  de  fa  nation,
mais  qu'il  en  quittoit  les  vices:  Voicy  comme  en
parle  le  Pere  qui  auoit  foin  du  Seminaire  Huron,  il
reprenoit  fes  compagnons  [135]  de  leurs  fautes  auec
autant  de  prudence  qu'on  auroit  peu  defirer.  Vne
fois  entr'autres,  il  me  demanda  deuant  vn  ieune
Seminarifte  fon  compagnon,  fi  les  enuieux  &  les  men-
teurs  n'alloient  point  en  enfer;  luy  ayant  repondu
que  Dieu  puniff oit  ces  crimes  felon  leur  demerite ;  il
ne  fit  que  ietter  les  yeux  fur  ce  ieune  homme,  lequel
fe  fentit  tellement  repris  de  ce  feul  regard,  qu'il  ne
parut  point  de  tout  le  refte  du  iour  dans  la  maifon.

Ie  l'ay  fouuent  entendu  repeter  durant  la  nuidt  ce
que  ie  luy  auois  enfeigne  pendant  le  iour.  II  portoit
vne  telle  affection  a  noftre  Seigneur,  que  la  plufpart
de  fes  fonges  n'etoient  que  de  luy,  recherchant
mefme  en  dormant  les  moyens  de  luy  plaire.  II  pre-
noit  grand  plaifir,  dit  le  mefme  Pere,  d'affifter  au
feruice  Diuin,  il  ieufnoit  deux  fois  la  fepmaine  en
Carefme,  deuant  qu'il  fut  baptise:  &  comme  on  luy
eut  accorde  le  Baptefme  pour  la  veille  de  Pafques,  il


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  175

in  the  beginning  of  winter,  and  not  being  able  to
return  to  their  own  country,  remained  for  some  time
near  the  Seminary.  As  the  greater  part  of  them
were  thinking  of  war,  where  they  still  wished  to  go,
and  whence  they  had  come,  rather  than  of  Gospel
peace,  they  ridiculed  our  Neophyte,  who  gave  them
good  advice,  with  a  prudence  and  skill  that  were  very
remarkable.  But,  seeing  that  his  words  fell  to  the
ground,  he  quietly  withdrew  from  their  society  so  as
not  to  participate  in  their  follies.  They  reproached
him  with  being  no  longer  a  Huron,  and  with  renounc-
ing his  own  country.  But  this  good  Catechumen,
caring  little  for  their  censure,  mildly  answered  them
that  he  was  not  casting  off  his  love  for  his  nation,
but  that  he  was  giving  up  its  vices.  The  Father
who  had  charge  of  the  Huron  Seminary  thus  speaks
of  him:  "  He  rebuked  his  companions  [135]  for  their
faults,  with  as  much  prudence  as  could  have  been
desired.  On  one  occasion,  among  others,  he  asked  me
before  a  young  Seminarist,  his  companion,  whether
the  envious  and  deceitful  people  would  not  go  to  hell ;
having  been  answered  that  God  punished  such  offenses
according  to  their  demerit,  he  merely  cast  his  eyes
upon  this  young  man,  who  felt  himself  so  rebuked
by  this  single  look  that  he  did  not  appear  in  the
house  again  that  day.

' '  I  have  often  heard  him  repeating  during  the  night
what  I  had  taught  him  during  the  day.  He  felt  so
much  affection  for  our  Lord,  that  most  of  his  dreams
were  about  him  alone, —  seeking  even  in  his  sleep
some  means  of  pleasing  him.  He  took  great  pleas-
ure," says  the  same  Father,  "in  attending  Divine
service ;  he  fasted  twice  a  week  during  Lent,  before
he  was  baptized ;  and  as  they  had  granted  him  his


176  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESU1TES [Vol.  16

voulut  ieufner  toute  la  fepmaine  Saindte,  ie  ne  le  pou-
uois  quafi  contenter,  tant  il  auoit  defir  que  ie  l'entre-
tinffe  des  chofes  de  fon  falut  :  En  fin  il  fut  fait
chreftien,  &  nomme  Pierre  Atei'achias,  &  le  iour
d'apres  fon  baptefme,  il  communia  auec  de  grands
reffentiments  [136]  de  ces  auguftes  myfteres.  Comme
ie  luy  eu  parle  des  oetmres  de  mifericorde,  il  fe  mit  en
deuoir  de  les  pratiquer;  fi  bien  qu'il  donnoit  a  quel-
ques  pauures  le  poiffon  mefme  qu'on  deftinoit  pour
le  difner  de  nos  Seminariftes,  &  Ten  ayant  repris ;  ne
m'auez-vous  pas  dit,  faifoit-il,  que  c'eftoit  bien  fait
d'eftre  charitable;  ne  vous  ay-ie  pas  veu  vous  mefmes
faire  de  femblables  aumofnes,  pourquoy  done  ne  fe-
ray-ie  point  ce  qu'on  m'enfeigne?  II  prenoit  par  fois
vne  hache,  &  s'en  alloit  coupper  du  bois  de  chaufage
pour  quelques  perfonnes  neceffiteufes,  il  fecouroit
tous  ceux  qu'il  pouuoit,  &  auec  vne  telle  demonftra-
tion  d'amour,  que  tout  le  monde  l'aimoit.

Depuis  fon  baptefme,  il  affiftoit  tous  les  iour  a  la
faindte  Meffe,  recitoit  deux  fois  le  iour  fon  chappelet,
vifitoit  fouuent  le  S.  Sacrement  de  l'Autel :  bref,  il
efloit  dans  de  grandes  refolutions  d'eftre  a  iamais
fidelle  a  noftre  Seigneur  quand  il  nous  fut  rauy,  par
vn  miferable  accidet,  felon  les  homes,  &  peut-eftre
par  vn  trait  d'vn  grad  amour,  &  d'vne  douce  proui-
dence  felon  Dieu.  Se  difpofant  pour  s'en  aller  en
fon  pays,  &  choifir  ceux  qu'il  iugeroit  propres  pour
amener  au  Seminaire,  vn  coup  de  vent  [137]  renuerfa
fon  canot,  dans  lequel  il  eftoit  auec  vn  ieune  Algon-
quin :  Celuy-cy  fe  fauua  a  la  nage,  quittant  aisement
fa  robe  qu'il  portoit  volante  a  la  facon  des  Sauuages,
mais  noftre  pauure  Neophyte  eftant  veftu  a  la  fran-
coife,  ne  put  refifter  a  la  tempefte,  fi  bien  qu'il  fut


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  177

Baptism  for  the  vigil  of  Easter,  he  desired  to  fast
during  the  entire  Holy  week.  I  could  hardly  satisfy
him,  so  great  was  his  desire  that  I  should  converse
with  him  of  what  concerned  his  salvation.  He  was
finally  made  a  Christian,  and  named  Pierre  Ateia-
chias;  and,  the  day  after  his  baptism,  he  took  com-
munion with  a  deep  appreciation  [136]  of  these
august  mysteries.  As  I  had  spoken  to  him  of  works  of
mercy,  he  set  about  practicing  them, —  going  so  far
as  to  give  to  some  poor  people  the  very  fish  that  was
intended  for  our  Seminarists'  dinner;  and,  when
we  reproved  him  for  it,  '  Have  you  not  told  me,'
said  he,  '  that  it  is  a  good  deed  to  be  charitable?
Have  I  not  seen  you  yourselves  giving  similar  alms?
Why,  then,  shall  I  not  do  as  I  am  taught?'  He
sometimes  took  a  hatchet  and  went  to  cut  firewood
for  some  needy  persons;  he  helped  all  whom  he
could,  and  with  such  demonstrations  of  affection  that
every  one  loved  him.

"  After  his  baptism,  he  daily  attended  holy  Mass,
said  his  beads  twice  a  day,  often  visited  the  Blessed
Sacrament  of  the  Altar;  in  short,  he  was  living  in  a
firm  determination  to  be  forever  faithful  to  our  Lord,
when  he  was  snatched  from  us  —  by  a  wretched  acci-
dent, according  to  men ;  and  perhaps  by  a  stroke  of
great  love  and  of  a  gentle  providence,  according  to
God.  When  he  was  preparing  to  go  back  to  his  own
country  and  to  choose  those  whom  he  should  judge
fit  to  bring  to  the  Seminary,  a  gust  of  wind  [137]
overturned  his  canoe,  containing  himself  and  a  young
Algonquin.  The  latter  saved  himself  by  swimming,
readily  throwing  off  his  robe,  which  he  wore  loosely,
in  the  manner  of  the  Savages ;  but  our  poor  Neophyte,
being  clothed  in  the  French  way,  could  not  withstand


ITS  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  16

noye*  dans  le  grand  fleuue  qui  a  feruy  de  fepulchre  a
fon  corps:  Pour  fon  ame,  ie  ne  puis  quafi  douter
qu'elle  ne  foit  au  Ciel ;  car  outre  qu'il  eftoit  nouuelle-
ment  baptise,  &  encore  tout  remply  du  S.  Efprit;
vous  euffiez  dit  que  Dieu  le  difpofoit  a  cefte  mort;
car  vn  peu  deuant  que  de  s'embarquer,  le  Pere  le
voulant  faire  dejeuner  pour  ce  qu'il  auoit  trauaille,
il  le  refufa ;  &  comme  le  Pere  le  preffoit,  il  luy  dit :
Pay  pris  refolution  de  ieufner  auiourd'huy  pour  com-
munier  demain;  ce  qu'il  fit:  &  peu  de  temps  apres
Noftre  Seigneur  l'appella  a  foy.

Venons  a  nos  ieunes  Montagnets  &  Algonquins:
Ces  ieunes  enfans  aagez  de  douze  a  quinze  ans  pour
la  plufpart,  nous  ont  appris  deux  belles  veritez ;  l'vne,
que  fi  les  animaux  font  capables  de  difcipline,  beau-
coup  plus  les  ieunes  enfas  Sauuages:  l'autre,  que  la
feule  education  maque  a  ces  pauures  enfans,  ayas
1' efprit  auffi  bon  que  nos  Europeans ;  [138]  come  on
verra  par  ce  que  ie  vay  dire.

Vn  petit  afnon  fauuage  n'eft  pas  ne  dans  vne  plus
grande  liberte  qu'vn  petit  Canadien ;  cependant  quad
ces  enfans  fe  voyent  dans  vn  feminaire,  ils  fe  rangent
doucemet  aux  petits  exercices  qu'on  exige  d'eux :  Ils
font  leurs  prieres  a  deux  genouils  f oir  &  matin ;  cinq
d'entr'eux  eftant  baptifez  affiftoient  tous  les  iours  a
la  Meffe :  Quand  ils  eftoient  au  Seminaire  deuant  le
Baptefme,  ils  ne  l'entendent  que  iufques  apres  l'E-
uangile;  ils  feruent  au  Preftre  a  l'Autel  auec  autant
de  grace  &  de  modeftie,  que  s'ils  auoient  efte  eleuez
dans  vne  academie  bien  reglee.  Ils  fe  trouuent  aux
heures  qu'on  les  inftruis,  s'entr'ayment  les  vns  les
autres ;  mais  auffi  leur  f aut-il  donner  la  liberte  de  fe
recreer;  &  comme  on  ne  les  meine  pas  par  la  crainte,


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  179

the  tempest,  so  he  was  drowned  in  the  great  river,
which  served  as  a  sepulchre  for  his  body.  As  for
his  soul,  I  can  hardly  doubt  that  it  went  to  Heaven;
for,  besides  that  he  had  been  recently  baptized,  and
was  still  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  Holy  Ghost,
you  might  have  said  that  God  was  preparing  him  for
this  death, —  for,  a  little  while  before  embarking,
when  the  Father  wished  to  have  him  take  some
breakfast  because  he  had  been  working,  he  refused
it;  and,  when  the  Father  urged  him,  he  said  to  him,
'  I  have  resolved  to  fast  to-day  in  order  that  I  may
take  communion  tomorrow,'  which  he  did;  and  a
little  while  afterwards  Our  Lord  called  him  to  him-
self."

Let  us  come  to  our  young  Montagnais  and  Algon-
quins.  These  young  lads,  most  of  them  between
twelve  and  fifteen  years  of  age,  have  taught  us  two
admirable  truths, —  one  is,  that  if  animals  are  cap-
able of  discipline,  the  young  Savage  children  are
much  more  so ;  the  other,  that  education  alone  is
wanting  to  these  poor  children,  whose  minds  are  as
good  as  those  of  our  Europeans,  [138]  as  will  be  seen
by  what  I  am  about  to  say.

A  little  wild  ass  is  not  born  into  greater  freedom
than  is  a  little  Canadian ;  yet,  when  these  children
find  themselves  in  a  seminary,  they  proceed  amiably
to  perform  the  little  tasks  that  are  exacted  from  them.
They  say  their  prayers  on  their  knees,  evening  and
morning ;  five  of  them,  having  been  baptized,  attended
Mass  every  day.  When  they  were  in  the  Seminary,
before  Baptism,  they  only  remained  until  after  the
Gospel.  They  wait  upon  the  Priest  at  the  Altar  with
as  much  grace  and  modesty  as  if  they  had  been
brought  up  in  a  well  regulated  academy ;  they  are


180  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  16

il  f ant  prendre  f on  temps  ponr  les  ranger  par  amour ;
a  quoy  ils  font  affez  prompts,  demandans  humble-
ment  conge  a  leur  maiftre  quand  ils  fe  veulent  vn
peu  eloigner  du  logis.  Come  on  fait  le  Catechifme
aux  petits  Fracois  les  iours  de  Dimaches,  ou  le  ma-
tin, ou  bien  apres  Vefpres,  ils  ont  voulu  eftre  de  la
partie ;  fi  bien  qu'on  expliquoit  la  dodtrine  de  Iesvs-
Christ  en  deux  Langues;  [139]  &  nos  Seminariftes
ialoux  de  l'honneur  qu'on  faifoit  aux  petits  Francois,
quand  ils  repondoient  bien ;  leur  vouluret  tenir  tefte,
demandans  mefme  qu'on  leur  donnaft  par  ecrit  quel-
que  poind;  du  Catechifme,  come  ils  voyoiet  qu'on  en
donnoit  aux  autres  pour  l'apprendre  pendant  la  fe-
maine ;  &  en  tout  cela  ils  reiififf oient  auec  autant  de
grace  &  de  gentilleffe  qu'aucun  Francois,  repondans
aux  queftions  qu'on  leur  faifoit  auec  vne  petit  graui-
te,  &  vne  modeftie  qui  gagnoit  le  cceur,  &  attiroit
l'affedtion  des  fpedtateurs.  Ils  fe  confeffoient  affez
fouuent,  &  ceux  qu'on  iugeoit  capables  de  la  faindte
Communion  s'en  approchoient  auec  preparation  &
refpedt.

La  crainte  du  peche  entroit  profondement  dans
leurs  ames ;  deux  ou  trois  d'entre  eux  eftant  allez  voir
ces  Hurons  dont  i'ay  parle  cy-deffus,  ils  leur  prefen-
terent  ie  ne  fcay  quel  potage  ou  fagamite  dans  la-
quelle  il  y  auoit  de  petits  morceaux  de  chair.  Or
comme  c'eftoit  vn  iour  auquel  il  n'etoit  pas  permis
d'en  manger,  &  que  d'ailleurs  c'eft  vne  grande  inci-
uilite  parmy  eux,  &  vne  marque  d'orgueil  ou  d'ini-
mitie  de  refufer  ce  qu'on  prefente ;  ils  prirent  le  bouil-
lon detournant  doucement  les  petits  [140]  morceaux
de  viande  qui  eftoient  dedans:  Neantmoins  eftans
fortis  de  la,  leur  ame  fut  faifie  d'vn  fcrupule,  fi  bien


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  181

found  ready  for  their  lessons  at  the  proper  hours ;
they  love  one  another.  But  also  it  is  necessary  to
give  them  freedom  for  recreation,  and,  as  they  are
not  led  by  fear,  one  must  seize  the  occasion  to  sub-
due them  by  love;  to  this  they  are  very  susceptible,
humbly  asking  leave  of  their  master  when  they  wish
to  go  a  short  distance  from  the  house.  As  the  Cate-
chism is  taught  to  the  little  French  children  on  Sun-
days, either  in  the  morning  or  after  Vespers,  they
desired  to  participate  therein.  So  the  doctrine  of
Jesus  Christ  was  explained  in  two  Languages;
[139]  and  our  Seminarists, — jealous  of  the  honor
shown  to  the  little  French  children  when  they  an-
swered well,  and  wishing  to  cope  with  them, —  even
asked  that  they  should  be  given  in  writing  a  few
points  of  the  Catechism,  as  they  saw  these  were  giv-
en to  the  others  to  learn  during  the  week.  In  all
this  they  succeeded,  with  as  much  grace  and  docility
as  any  of  the  French,  answering  the  questions  put  to
them  with  a  little  gravity,  and  a  modesty  that  won
the  hearts  and  attracted  the  friendly  feeling  of  the
spectators.  They  made  their  confessions  quite  often,
and  those  who  were  regarded  as  fit  for  the  holy  Com-
munion approached  it  with  preparation  and  respect.
The  fear  of  sin  entered  deeply  into  their  souls.
Two  or  three  of  them,  having  gone  to  see  those
Hurons  of  whom  I  have  spoken  above,  were  offered  I
know  not  what  kind  of  soup  or  sagamite,  in  which
there  were  small  pieces  of  meat.  Now, — as  it  was  a
day  upon  which  they  were  not  permitted  to  eat  meat ;
and  as,  besides,  it  is  great  impoliteness  among  them,
and  a  sign  of  pride  or  enmity,  to  refuse  what  is
offered, — they  took  the  soup,  and  quietly  removed
the  little  [140]  morsels  of  meat  that  were  in  it. Nev-


182  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

qu'ils  demanderent  le  foir  au  Pere  qui  auoit  foin  du
Seminaire  Montagnets  &  Algonquins,  s'ils  n'auoient
pas  offense  Dieu  d'auoir  mange  de  ce  bouillon ;  pour
moy,  difoit  l'vn,  ie  n'ay  point  mange  de  chair;  l'autre
difoit  qu'il  en  auoit  aualle  vn  petit  morceau  par  me-
garde:  bref,  ils  temoignerent  que  leur  cceur  n'etoit
pas  content  de  cefte  adtion,  &  prirent  refolution  de  ne
plus  frequenter  ceux  qui  les  pouuoient  porter  au  mal.

Pour  ce  que  ie  difois  de  la  bonte  de  leur  efprit,  i'en
tire  la  preuue  des  interrogations  qu'ils  faifoient  a  leur
maiftre:  En  voicy  quelques-vnes  qu'il  m'a  donne
par  6crit.  Ie  confeffe  que  ces  enfans  font  eueillez,
&  qu'ils  font  paroiftre  beaucoup  d'efprit,  mais  ie
n'euffe  pas  cru  qu'ils  euffent  tant  raifonne,  notam-
ment  en  matiere  de  noftre  creance.  Efcoutons  leurs
demandes:  Vous  nous  dites  que  le  baptefme  eft
abfolument  neceffaire  pour  aller  au  Ciel,  s'il  fe  trou-
uoit  vn  homme  fi  bon,  que  iamais  il  n'eut  offenfe
Dieu,  &  qui  mourut  fans  Baptefme,  iroit-il  en  Enfer,
n'ayant  donne  aucune  fafcherie  a  Dieu,  s'il  va  en
Enfer,  [141]  Dieu  n'ayme  pas  tous  les  gens  de  bien,
puis  qu'il  iette  celuy  la  dans  le  feu.

Vous  nous  enfeignez  que  Dieu  eftoit  auant  la  crea-
tion du  ciel  &  de  la  terre;  s'il  eftoit,  ou  fe  logeoit-il?
puis  qu'il  n'etoit,  ny  au  ciel,  ny  en  la  terre?  Vous
dites  encore  que  les  Anges  ont  efte  crees  au  com-
mencement du  monde,  &  que  ceux  qui  defobei'rent
furent  iettez  en  Enfer:  d'ailleurs,  vous  mettez  l'En-
fer  dans  le  fond  de  la  terre ;  cela  ne  fe  peut  pas  bien
accorder,  car  fi  les  Anges  ont  peche  deuant  la  crea-
tion de  la  terre,  ils  n'ont  pu  eftre  iettez  en  Enfer,  ou
1' Enfer  n'eft  pas  ou  vous  le  placez.

De  plus,  vous  affeurez  que  ceux  qui  vont  en  Enfer


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  183

ertheless,  after  they  departed  thence,  their  souls
were  assailed  by  scruples ;  so,  that  evening  they  asked
the  Father  who  had  charge  of  the  Montagnais  and
Algonquin  Seminary  if  they  had  not  offended  God  in
having  eaten  this  soup.  "  As  for  me,"  said  one,  "  I
did  not  eat  any  meat ;  ' '  the  other  said  he  had  swal-
lowed a  little  piece  unwittingly.  In  short,  they
showed  that  their  hearts  were  not  satisfied  with  this
action,  and  they  determined  no  more  to  associate
with  those  who  could  do  them  harm.

In  regard  to  what  I  said  about  the  excellence  of
their  minds,  I  get  proof  of  it  from  the  questions  they
asked  their  master ;  here  are  some  that  he  has  com-
municated to  me  in  a  letter.  I  confess  that  these
children  are  wide-awake,  and  that  they  evince  a  great
deal  of  intelligence,  but  I  would  not  have  believed
that  they  could  reason  so  well,  especially  in  the  mat-
ter of  our  belief.  Let  us  hear  their  questions.  "  You
tell  us  that  baptism  is  absolutely  necessary  to  go  to
Heaven ;  if  there  were  a  man  so  good  that  he  had
never  offended  God,  and  if  he  died  without  Baptism,
would  he  go  to  Hell,  never  having  given  any  offense
to  God?  If  he  goes  to  Hell,  [141]  God  does  not  love
all  good  people,  since  he  throws  that  one  into  the  fire.

"  You  teach  us  that  God  existed  before  the  crea-
tion of  heaven  and  earth ;  if  he  did,  where  did  he
live,  since  there  was  neither  heaven  nor  earth?  You
say  also  that  the  Angels  were  created  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  world,  and  that  those  who  disobeyed
were  cast  into  Hell ;  elsewhere,  you  put  Hell  in  the
depths  of  the  earth ;  these  statements  cannot  agree
very  well,  for,  if  the  Angels  sinned  before  the  crea-
tion of  the  earth,  they  could  not  be  thrown  into
Hell,  or  Hell  is  not  where  you  place  it.


184  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16

n'en  fortent  point,  &  cependant  vous  nous  racontez
des  Hiftoires  de  quelques  damnez  qui  ont  paru  au
monde,  comment  cela  fe  peut-il  entendre?

Ceux  qui  liront  cecy  en  croiront  ce  qui  leur  plair-
ra ;  mais  il  eft  vray  que  ces  demandes  ont  efte  f aites
par  de  ieunes  Seminarif[t]es  Sauuages  agez  de  douze
a  quinze  ans.  Comme  on  leur  expliquoit  que  les
Diables  n'auoient  pas  de  corps,  &  que  fe  voulant
faire  voir  aux  homes,  ils  fe  couuroient  de  figures
difformes ;  ils  demanderent  fi  quand  [i]ls  paroiffoient
en  forme  d'hommes  ou  d'animal,  [142]  on  ne  les  pou-
uoit  point  tuer :  Ah !  que  ie  les  tuerois  volontiers,
difoit  l'vn  d'eux,  puis  qu'ils  font  tant  de  mal!  Mais
quand  ils  font  faits  comme  des  hommes,  difoient-ils,
&  qu'ils  viennent  parmy  les  hommes,  fentent-ils
encore  le  feu  d'Enfer?  D'ou  vient  qu'ils  ne  fe  repen-
tent  point  d'auoir  offenfe  Dieu?  s'ils  fe  repentoient,
Dieu  ne  leur  feroit-il  pas  mifericorde?  Si  Noftre
Seigneur  a  fouffert  pour  tous  les  pecheurs,  pourquoy
ceux  la  ne  trouuent-ils  pas  de  pardon  aupres  de  luy.
Voila  encore  vne  autre  quefkion  bien  remarquable
pour  des  enfans.  Vous  dites  que  la  Vierge  Mere  de
lESVS-CHRiST,n'efl  pas  Dieu,  &  qu'elle  n'a  iamais
offense  Dieu,  &  que  fon  Fils  a  rachepte  tous  les  hom-
mes, &  paye  pour  tous;  fi  elle  n'a  fait  aucun  mal,  fon
Fils  ne  l'a  pu  rachepter,  ny  payer  pour  elle?  En
verite  toutes  ces  demandes  m'etonnent,  quand  ie  les
confidere  en  la  bouche  d'vn  enfant  qu'on  appelle  Sau-
uage  &  barbare.  Ie  ne  fay  point  mention  des  re-
ponfes  que  leur  donoit  leur  Directeur,  tant  pour
n'efire  trop  long,  que  pour  autant  que  ie  ne  pretends
point  parler  icy  diredtement  de  nos  adtions,  mais  de
celles des Sauuages. Or  comme nos Seminariftes


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  185

"  Moreover,  you  declare  that  those  who  go  to  Hell
do  not  come  out  of  it,  and  yet  you  relate  Stories  of
the  damned  who  have  appeared  in  the  world;  how
is  that  to  be  understood?  "

Those  who  read  this  may  believe  what  they  please,
but  it  is  true  that  these  questions  were  asked  by
young  Savage  Seminarists  between  twelve  and  fif-
teen years  old.  When  it  was  explained  to  them  that
Devils  had  no  bodies,  and  that  when  they  wished  to
make  themselves  visible  to  men,  they  assumed  de-
formed bodies,  they  asked  if,  when  these  appeared
in  the  form  of  men  or  of  animals,  [142]  they  could
not  be  killed.  "  Ah,  how  I  would  like  to  kill  them,"
said  one,  "  since  they  do  so  much  harm!  '  "  But  if
they  are  made  like  men,"  they  said,  "  and  come
among  men,  do  they  still  feel  the  fire  of  Hell?  Why
is  it  that  they  do  not  repent  of  having  offended  God  ?
If  they  did  repent,  would  not  God  be  merciful  to
them?  If  Our  Lord  has  suffered  for  all  sinners,  why
do  not  those  receive  pardon  from  him  ? '  Here  is
still  another  question,  and  a  very  remarkable  one  for
children:  "You  say  that  the  Virgin,  Mother  of
Jesus  Christ,  is  not  God,  and  that  she  has  never
offended  God,  and  that  her  Son  has  redeemed  all
men,  and  atoned  for  all ;  if  she  has  done  nothing
wrong,  her  Son  could  not  redeem  her  nor  atone  for
her."  In  truth,  all  these  queries  astonish  me,  when
I  think  of  them  as  coming  from  the  mouth  of  a  child
who  is  called  a  Savage  and  a  barbarian.  I  do  not
mention  the  answers  given  them  by  their  Director,
both  to  avoid  being  tedious,  and  inasmuch  as  I  do
not  purpose  to  speak  here  directly  of  our  own  actions,
but  of  those  of  the  Savages.  Now,  while  our  Semi-
narists  [145  i.e.,  143]  were  living  in  a  sweet  tran-


186  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  16

[145  i.e.,  143]  viuoient  dans  vne  douce  tranquillity,
s'auancans  de  iour  a  autre  en  la  cognoiffance  de  Dieu,
&  en  l'exercice  des  vertus  proportionees  a  leur  aage,
la  maladie  &  la  mort  vindrent  trembler  noftre  ioye ;
l'vn  deux  traifna  affez  long-temps  d'vne  maladie  fort
languiff ante ;  fes  compagnons  l'auoient  au  commence-
ment en  auerfion :  mais  comme  on  leur  eut  enf eigne
que  Dieu  prenoit  plaifir  aux  adtions  de  charite,  ils  le
vifitoient,  luy  portoient  a  manger,  &  fi  pour  fa  f oibleff e
il  ne  pouuoit  pas  faire  la  benedidtion  deuant  fon
repas,  ils  la  faifoient  pour  luy;  en  fin  la  mort  l'enleua
le  cinquieme  de  Mars:  il  fallut  pour  le  mettre  au
fepulchre  chercher  la  terre  fous  fix  pieds  de  neige,
tant  il  en  eft  tombe  cefte  annee.

Enuiron  fix  fepmaines  ou  deux  mois  apres  fa  mort,
l'vn  des  plus  gentils  &  des  plus  adroits  enfans  du
mefme  Seminaire,  fut  fain  d'vne  fieure  lente  qui  ne
l'a  pas  encore  quitte;  nous  voyos  bien  qu'elle  le
menera  au  tombeau  auffi  bien  que  fon  compagnon.
Quelque  temps  apres,  le  plus  accomply  de  tous,  fut
enleue  de  ce  monde  par  vne  efpece  de  pleurefie,  &  cela
en  moins  de  dix  iours.  Ces  accidens  nous  firent  re-
foudre  de  ne  retenir  auec  nous  que  les  cinq  [144]  ou
fix  plus  petits  qui  ont  encor  efte  attaquez  de  catar-
rhes  &  de  rhumes,  tant  il  eft  difficile  de  faire  fubfister
ces  pauures  Seminariftes  hors  de  la  maifon  ou  des
cabanes  de  leurs  parents.  Le  Diable  voit  bien  le
fruict.  qu'on  en  peut  efperer,  e'eft  pourquoy  il  fait
ioiier  tous  les  refforts  de  fa  malice  pour  renuerf er  cette
faindte  entreprife,  il  n'y  perdra  que  fes  peines.

Outre  ces  enfans,  nous  fecourons  toufiours  quelques
Sauuages  proclies  de  nos  habitations ;  ce  pauure  peu-
ple  eft  le  vray  obiect.  de  la  mifericorde,  il  a  befoin


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  187

quillity,  advancing  from  day  to  day  in  the  knowledge
of  God,  and  in  the  exercise  of  the  virtues  suited  to
their  age,  sickness  and  death  came  to  trouble  our
joy.  One  of  them  wasted  away  for  some  time  with  a
lingering  illness ;  his  companions  at  first  felt  an  aver-
sion for  him,  but  as  they  had  been  taught  that  God
took  pleasure  in  acts  of  charity,  they  visited  him,
carried  him  food,  and,  as  he  could  not  offer  a  bless-
ing before  his  meal  on  account  of  his  weakness,  they
offered  it  for  him;  death  finally  removed  him,  on
the  fifth  of  March.  To  bury  him,  it  was  necessary
to  reach  the  ground  through  six  feet  of  snow,  so
abundantly  did  it  fall  this  year.

About  six  weeks  or  two  months  after  his  death,
one  of  the  prettiest  and  cleverest  children  of  the  same
Seminary  was  attacked  by  a  slow  fever  which  has
not  yet  left  him ;  we  see  clearly  that  it  will  lead  him
to  the  grave  as  well  as  his  companion.  Some  time
afterward,  the  most  accomplished  one  of  all  was  tak-
en from  this  world  by  a  sort  of  pleurisy,  and  that  in
less  than  ten  days.  These  casualties  made  us  re-
solve to  keep  with  us  only  the  five  [144]  or  six  young-
er boys,  who  also  have  been  attacked  by  catarrh  and
colds, — so  difficult  is  it  to  make  these  poor  Seminar-
ists exist  out  of  the  homes  or  cabins  of  their  kindred.
The  Devil  sees  clearly  the  fruit  that  may  be  expected
from  them,  hence  he  employs  all  the  resources  of  his
malice  to  overthrow  this  holy  enterprise;  he  will
only  lose  therein  his  own  labor.

Besides  these  children,  we  always  help  some  Sav-
ages near  our  settlements.  These  poor  people  are
truly  an  object  of  pity,  and  need  to  be  powerfully
aided.  Charity  has  strong  arms ;  I  will  say  only  two
words  to  all  those  who  exercise  it : Date,  et  dabitur


188


LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.16


d'eftre  puiffamment  ayde.  La  charity  a  des  bras
puiffants,  ie  ne  dy  que  deux  mots  a  tous  ceux  qui
s'en  feruent:  Date,  &  dabitur  vobis,  menfuram  bonam
&  confertam,  &  coagitatam,  &  fuperflnentem  dabunt  in
finum  vejlrum.  Donnez  d'vne  main,  &  receuez  de
l'autre;  Iesvs-Christ  y  eft  engag6,  il  verifiera
fes  paroles:  Quiconque  fera  frudtifier  fa  Croix,  &
fon  Sang,  fera  paye  a  bonne  mefure.


1639]  LE  JEUNES  RELATION,  i63g  189

vobis,  mensuram  bonam  et  confertam,  et  coagttatam,  et
superfluentem  dabunt  in  sinum  vestrum.  Give  with  one
hand,  and  receive  with  the  other.  Jesus  Christ
is  pledged  to  this;  he  will  verify  his  words.  Who-
ever will  make  his  Cross  and  his  Blood  bear  fruit,
will  be  repaid  in  good  measure.


190  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16


[145]  CHAPITRE  X.

DE LA  CREANCE DES SUPERSTITIONS,  & DE QUELQUES
COUSTUMES DES SAUUAGES.

LES  Relations  des  annees  precedentes  eftant  rem-
plies  des  f aeons  de  faire  de  nos  Sauuages,  ie
ne  pretends  pas  en  parler  icy  plainement,  mais
bien  coucher  en  peu  de  paroles  ce  que  i'ay  apris  de
nouueau  fur  ce  fuiet :  qui  fi  i'vf e  de  quelques  redites,
e'eft  que  i'ay  perdu  la  memoire  de  ce  que  i'ay  recry
par  cy-deuant.

Premierement,  pour  ce  qui  touche  leur  creance,
quelques-vns  f e  figurent  vn  Paradis  remplis  de  bluets ;
ce  font  petits  fruits  bleus,  dont  les  grains  font  auffi
gros  que  les  plus  gros  grains  de  raifm.  Ie  n'en  ay
point  veu  en  France,  ils  font  d'vn  affez  bon  gouft;
e'eft  pourquoy  les  ames  les  aymet  fort  D'autres
difent  que  les  ames  ne  font  que  dancer  apres  le  de-
part de  cefte  vie ;  il  y  en  a  qui  admettent  la  tranfmi-
gratio  des  efprits,  comme  faifoit  Pythagore,  &  la
plufpart  s'imaginet  que  Tame  eft  ftupide,  ayant
quitt6  le  [146]  corps;  tous  cr[o]yent  pour  l'ordinaire
qu'elle  eft  immortelle.  Ils  diftinguent  plufieurs  ames
das  vn  meme  corps.  Vn  vieillard  nous  difoit  il  y  a
quelque  temps  que  quelques  Sauuages  auoiet  iufqu'a
deux  &  trois  ames,  que  la  fienne  l'auoit  quitte"  il  y
auoit  plus  de  deux  ans  pour  s'en  aller  auec  fes  parets
defundts,  qu'il  n' auoit  plus  que  l'ame  de  fon  corps
qui deuoit  d6cedre  au  tombeau  auec  luy. On co-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib39  191


[145]  CHAPTER  X.

OF THE BELIEF IN SUPERSTITIONS, AND OF SOME
CUSTOMS OF THE SAVAGES.

AS  the  Relations  of  preceding  years  are  filled  with
the  customs  of  our  Savages,  I  do  not  intend  to
speak  of  them  fully  here,  but  rather  to  set
down  in  a  few  words  what  I  have  learned  that  is  new
upon  this  subject.  If  I  indulge  in  some  repetitions,
it  is  because  I  have  forgotten  what  I  have  before
written  thereon.

First,  as  to  what  concerns  their  belief.  Some  of
them  imagine  a  Paradise  abounding  in  blueberries ; 13
these  are  little  blue  fruits,  the  berries  of  which  are
as  large  as  the  largest  grapes.  I  have  not  seen  any
of  them  in  France.  They  have  a  tolerably  good
flavor,  and  for  this  reason  the  souls  like  them  very
much.  Others  say  that  the  souls  do  nothing  but
dance  after  their  departure  from  this  life ;  there  are
some  who  admit  the  transmigration  of  souls,  as  Py-
thagoras did ;  and  the  majority  of  them  imagine  that
the  soul  is  insensible  after  it  has  left  the  [146]  body;
as  a  general  thing,  all  believe  that  it  is  immortal.
They  distinguish  several  souls  in  one  and  the  same
body.  An  old  man  told  us  some  time  ago  that  some
Savages  had  as  many  as  two  or  three  souls ;  that  his
own  had  left  him  more  than  two  years  before,  to  go
away  with,  his  dead  relatives, —  that  he  no  longer  had
any  but  the  soul  of  his  own  body,  which  would  go
down  into  the  grave  with  him. One  learns  from  this


192


LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.16


gnoift  par  la  qu'ils  s'imaginent  que  le  corps  a  vne
ame  propre,  que  quelques-vns  appellent  Tame  de  leur
Nation,  &  qu'en  outre  il  y  en  vient,  d'autres  qu'ils  le
quittent  pluftoft  ou  plus  tard  felon  leur  fantaifie.  En
effedt,  i'en  ay  ouy  quelques-vns  qui  affeuroiet  n'auoir
point  d'ames,  ils  entendoient  parler  de  ces  formes
affiftentes,  dont  ils  fe  perfuadent  par  fois  qu'ils  font
poffedez,  le  Diable  fe  feruat  de  leur  fantaifie,  &  de
leurs  paffios,  ou  de  leur  melacolie,  pour  operer  quel-
ques  effedts  que  leur  paroiff ent  extraordinaires :  Ils
s'imaginet  que  cela  prouient  de  la  diuerfite  de  leurs
ames,  s'ils  ceffent  de  fonger,  ou  d'eftre  pouffez  de
quelque  paffio  non  comune,  ou  de  quelque  Demo,  ils
difent  que  leur  ame  les  a  quitte,  fi  le  Diable  reueille
leur  fantaifie,  leur  ame  eft  de  retour.  Ie  penfe  auoir
defia  remarque  [147]  qu'ils  fe  reprefentent  l'ame
comme  vn  ombre  qui  a  des  pieds  &  des  mains,  vn
corps,  vne  tefte,  des  dents;  auffi  croyent-ils  qu'elle
mange,  ils  ont  trouue  de  la  viande  rongee  par  les
ames,  ils  les  ont  ouy  fifler,  comme  ces  petits  grillets
qu'on  entend  quelquefois  a  la  campagne ;  ils  s'en  trou-
uent  qui  ont  des  penfees  encore  plus  raualees  que
tout  cela  touchant  les  ames;  car  ils  difent  que  le
Diable  fe  repaift  de  leur  ceruelle,  mettant  au  lieu  des
fueilles  d'arbres  f eiches ;  c'eft  pourquoy  ces  pauures
ames  sot  folles  &  etourdies,  n'ayas  point  de  ceruelle.
Voila  les  tenebres  oil  fe  perdent  les  homes  qui  ne  font
point  eclairez  du  flabeau  de  la  Foy.  Ceux  qui  fe
fouuiendront  de  la  creance  des  anciens,  tant  Grecs
que  Romains,  &  de  fottes  opinions  que  ces  Sages  du
monde  ont  eu  touchant  la  Diuinite,  &  touchant  nos
ames,  diront  que  toute  la  fageffe  des  hommes  n'eft
que  folie : Sapientia  huius  mundi  dlultitia  edl  apud  De-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  193

that  they  imagine  the  body  has  a  soul  of  its  own,
which  some  call  the  soul  of  their  Nation ;  and  that,
in  addition  to  this,  others  come,  which  leave  it  sooner
or  later,  according  to  their  fancy.  In  fact,  I  have
heard  some  of  them  assert  that  they  have  no  souls;
they  hear  people  talk  about  these  attendant  forms,
and  sometimes  persuade  themselves  that  they  possess
them, —  the  Devil  employing  their  imagination  and
their  passions,  or  their  melancholy,  to  bring  about
some  results  that  appear  to  them  extraordinary.  They
imagine  that  this  arises  from  the  diversity  of  their
souls.  If  they  cease  to  dream,  or  to  be  urged  on  by
some  unusual  passion,  or  by  some  Demon,  they  say
that  their  soul  has  left  them ;  if  the  Devil  arouses
their  fancy,  their  soul  has  returned.  I  think  I  have
already  remarked  [147]  that  they  represent  the  soul
to  themselves  as  a  shadow  which  has  feet  and  hands,
a  body,  a  head,  and  teeth ;  they  also  believe  that  it
eats.  They  have  found  meat  nibbled  by  the  souls;
they  have  heard  them  whistle  like  those  little  crick-
ets that  one  hears  sometimes  in  the  country.  There
are  some  who  have  thoughts  still  more  debasing  than
all  these,  regarding  the  soul;  for  they  say  that  the
Devil  feeds  upon  their  brains,  and  puts  in  place  of
them  withered  leaves  of  trees ;  hence  these  poor  souls
are  foolish  and  heedless,  having  no  brains.  Behold
the  shadows  in  which  men  lose  themselves  who  have
not  been  enlightened  by  the  torch  of  the  Faith!
Those  who  recall  the  belief  of  the  ancients,  both
Greeks  and  Romans,  and  the  foolish  opinions  that
those  Sages  of  the  world  had  touching  the  Divinity,
and  regarding  our  souls,  will  say  that  all  the  wisdom
of  men  is  only  folly. Sapientia  hujus  mundi  stultitia


]94  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES [Vol.16

urn.  La  Foy  decouure  les  veritez  dii  Ciel  &  de  la
terre.

II  y  a  des  fuperftitios  en  l'ancienne  France  aufii
bien  qu'en  la  nouuelle.  Vne  femme  Francoife  eftant
icy  malade,  vn  autre  femme  luy  dit  qu'elle  gueriroit,
li  on  luy  pendoit  au  col  vn  trouffeau  de  clefs ;  voila
[148]  qui  vient  de  voftre  France,  en  voicy  de  la  noftre.

Quelques  Sauuages  malades  voulans  recognoiflre
d'ou  procedoient  leurs  maladies,  mirent  des  os  de
Caflors  bien  fees  deffous  vne  couuerture,  puis  l'vn  de
la  trouppe  fe  gliffant  deffous,  mifl  le  feu  a  ces  os  auec
des  charbons  bien  allumez ;  cependans  fes  camarades
chatoient  &  hurloient  a  leur  mode :  en  fin  ces  os  re-
duits  en  cendre,  celuy  qui  s'efloit  cache,  fortit,  leua
la  couuerture,  ietta  les  cendres,  &  le  feu  au  vent,
s'efcriant  qu'on  prit  bien  garde  d'ou  venoit  la  mala-
die;  le  Pere  qui  veit  faire  cefte  fuperftition,  demanda
prou  comment  on  pouuoit  recognoiflre  par  cefte
badinerie  d'ou.  leur  mal  procedoit,  mais  on  ne  luy
voulut  pas  apprendre  ce  fecret.

Le  mefme  Pere  voyant  quelques  Algonquins  bie
empefchez,  frappas  fur  leurs  cabanes  auec  des  baftons,
leur  demanda  ce  qu'ils  f  aifoient ;  ils  refpondirent  qu'ils
tafchoient  de  chaffer  Tame  d'vne  femme  trefpaffee  qui
rodoit  la  autour.  On  dit  qu'il  y  en  a  de  fi  fimples
qu'ils  tendent  des  rets  a  l'entour  de  leurs  cabanes,
afin  que  les  ames  de  ceux  qui  trefpaffent  chez  [149]
leurs  voifins  s'y  prennent,  fi  elles  veulent  entrer  das
leurs  demeures.  Les  autres  brulent  quelque  chofe
puate  pour  diuertir  les  ames  par  cefte  odeur,  voire
ils  mettent  fur  leurs  teftes  ce  qui  fent  mal,  afin  que
les  ames  ne  les  abordet.  Vn  Iongleur  brandilloit  vn
iour  fon  6p6e  dedas  l'air,  s'imaginat  qu'il  epouuente-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j9  195


est  apitd  Deum.  Faith  reveals  the  truths  of  Heaven
and  of  earth.

There  are  superstitions  in  old  France  as  well  as  in
the  new.  A  French  woman  being  sick  here,  another
woman  told  her  that  she  would  recover  if  she  would
hang  a  bunch  of  keys  around  her  neck;  there  [148]
is  something  that  comes  from  your  France,  here  is
something  from  ours.

Some  sick  Savages,  wishing  to  ascertain  whence
proceeded  their  diseases,  put  some  well-dried  bones
of  a  Beaver  under  a  blanket ;  then  one  of  the  crowd,
crawling  under,  set  fire  to  these  bones  with  some
glowing  coals;  meanwhile,  his  comrades  sang  and
howled  after  their  fashion.  At  last,  when  these  bones
were  reduced  to  ashes,  the  one  who  had  concealed
himself  came  out,  raised  the  blanket,  threw  the  ashes
and  the  fire  to  the  wind,  crying  out  that  they  should
be  on  the  watch  to  see  whence  came  the  sickness.
The  Father  who  saw  this  act  of  superstition  per-
formed asked  repeatedly  how  one  could  find  out
through  this  nonsense  whence  came  their  sickness,
but  they  would  not  teach  him  this  secret.

The  same  Father,  seeing  some  Algonquins  busily
engaged  in  striking  upon  their  cabins  with  sticks,
asked  them  what  they  were  doing.  They  replied
that  they  were  trying  to  drive  away  the  soul  of  a  dead
woman  which  was  prowling  around  there.  It  is  said
that  there  are  some  so  simple  as  to  stretch  nets  around
their  cabins,  so  that  the  souls  of  those  who  pass  away
at  the  houses  [149]  of  their  neighbors  may  be  caught
therein,  if  they  wish  to  enter  their  dwellings.  Oth-
ers burn  some  ill- smelling  thing  to  turn  away  the
souls  by  this  odor, —  they  even  put  something  with
a  bad  odor  upon  their  heads,  so  that  the  souls  may


196  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.  16

roit  vne  ame  nouuellemet  fortie  de  fon  corps.  lis
ont  grand  peur  que  ces  ames  n'entret  dans  leurs  ca-
banes,  oun'y  faflet  quelque  feiour,  car  elles  emmene-
roiet  quelqu'vn  auec  elles  en  leur  pais.  Vn  certain
ayat  veu'vne  fusee  en  l'air,  &  ne  fcachat  pas  d'ou  elle
etoit  partie,  ne  pouuat  croire  d'ailleurs  que  les  Fran-
501s  puffent  lancer  du  feu  fi  haut,  affeuroit  qu'il  auoit
veu  vne  ame  qui  s'egaroit  dedas  le  iour;  c'eft  ainfi
qu'ils  noment  l'air.  Les  femmes  pendent  au  col  de
leurs  petits  enfans  vn  petit  bout  du  nobril  qu'il
apportet  en  leur  naiffance;  s'ils  le  perdoiet,  leurs  en-
fans  feroient  tous  hebetez  &  fans  efprit,  a  ce  qu'ils
pefent:  Quad  on  marche  dans  les  tenebres,  on  ne
fait  guiere  de  pas  fans  chopper.  I'ay  deja  trop  parle
de  ce  qu'ils  font  pour  la  gueriso  de  leurs  malades,
nous  auons  veu  cefte  annee  vn  ieu  folennel  ou  vn  defy
entre  deux  natios  qui  s'echaufferent  fort  &  ferme
pour  guerir  vn  pauure  [150]  patient.  Les  ioiieurs  &
les  patiens  [sc.  pariens]  s'en  allerent  en  fa  cabane  au  fon
du  tambour,  &  de  l'ecaille  de  tortue,  qu'ils  accompa-
gneret  de  cris  &  de  chants  a  leur  mode.  Ceux  qui  pa-
rioient  ou  qui  gageoient  eftoient  affis  de  part  &  d' autre,
regardas  leurs  ioiieurs,  chacun  fauorisat  so  party  auec
plufieurs  geftes  &  plufieurs  cris  fuiuans  leur  paffion
&  leur  affedtion:  La  conclufion  fut,  que  l'ame  des
deux  nations  perdit  quatite  de  porcelaine,  &  d'autres
chofes  qu'ils  auoient  mis  au  ieu ;  car  pour  le  malade
il  ne  receut  autre  foulagement,  fmon  d'auoir  la  tefte
bien  rompue  de  tout  ce  grand  tumulte.  Apres  que
ces  beaux  Medecins  furet  fortis,  il  enuoia  querir  vn
de  nos  Peres  qui  auoit  commece  de  l'inftruire,  il  luy
demande  le  Baptefme;  le  Pere  le  voulut  tancer  &
rebuter,  voyat  cefte  fotte  fuperftition,  mais  le  pauure


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  197

not  come  near  them.  A  Juggler  one  day  brandished
his  javelin  in  the  air,  imagining  that  he  would  fright-
en a  soul  which  had  recently  left  its  own  body.  They
greatly  fear  that  these  souls  will  enter  their  cabins,  or
will  sojourn  there;  for,  if  they  did,  they  would  take
some  one  away  with  them  into  their  country.  A
certain  man,  seeing  a  rocket  in  the  air,  and  not  know-
ing whence  it  came, —  not  being  able  to  believe,
moreover,  that  the  French  could  throw  fire  so  high, —
asserted  that  he  had  seen  a  soul  wandering  in  the
light;  it  is  thus  they  call  the  air.  The  women  hang
to  the  necks  of  their  little  children  a  small  piece  of
the  navel  that  is  attached  to  them  when  they  are
born ;  if  they  were  to  lose  it,  their  children  would
all  be  dolts  and  lacking  in  sense,  they  think.  When
people  walk  in  the  darkness,  they  take  few  steps
without  stumbling.  I  have  already  said  too  much
about  what  they  do  for  the  recovery  of  their  sick.
This  year  we  have  seen  a  solemn  game  or  challenge
between  two  nations,  who  had  a  fierce  contest  over
the  recovery  of  a  poor  [150]  patient.  The  players
and  the  betters  went  into  his  cabin  at  the  sound  of
the  drum  and  of  the  tortoise  shell,  which  they  accom-
panied with  cries  and  shouts,  in  their  fashion.  Those
who  bet  or  wagered  were  seated  on  either  side,
watching  their  players,  each  favoring  his  own  side
with  many  gestures  and  many  cries,  according  to
their  enthusiasm  and  their  interest.  The  result  was
that  the  soul  of  the  two  nations  lost  a  quantity  of  por-
celain, and  other  things  which  had  been  staked;  but,
as  for  the  sick  man,  he  experienced  no  other  relief
than  that  of  having  his  head  well  broken  by  all  this
great  uproar.  After  these  fine  Physicians  had  left,
he  sent  for  one  of  our  Fathers,  who  had  begun  to  in-


198  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16

patiet  lui  dit :  Ce  n'eft  pas  moy  qui  les  ay  appellez
ma  mere  a  fonge  que  [ie]  guerirois,  ft  on  faifoit  vn
ieu  folennel;  c'eft  pourquoy  elle  m'a  amene  tout
cet  embarras  fas  m'en  rie  dire.

Au  refte  la  creance  &  les  fuperftitions  des  Sau-
uages  n'eft  pas  bien  profondement  enracinee  dans
leur  efprit ;  car  comme  toutes  ces  refueries  ne  font
fondees  que  fur  le  menfonge,  elles  tombent  d'elles
[151]  mefmes,  &  fe  fondent,  ou  fe  diffipent  aux  ray-
ons des  veritez  qu'on  leur  propofe  tres-coformes  a  la
raifon.  Ie  n'ay  veu  que  quelques  vieillards  bien
opiniaftres,  dont  le  cerueau  defeiche  dans  leurs  vielles
maximes,  n'auoit  plus  d'humeur  pour  receuoir  l'im-
preffion  de  noftre  dodtrine,  fi  quelques  vns  retombent
par  fois  en  leurs  badineries,  c'eft  pluftoft  par  habi-
tude que  par  vne  grande  creance  qu'ils  ayent  en  leurs
fuperftitions,  notamment  depuis  qu'on  les  inftruit.

Pour  ce  qui  concerne  leurs  couftumes,  c'eft  vne
affaire  de  plus  grande  haleine,  il  eft  plus  aife  de  ban-
nir  l'erreur  de  l'entendement,  que  d'ofter  les  mau-
uaifes  habitudes  de  la  volonte:  II  n'y  a  pas  beau-
coup  de  peines  a  recognoiftre  &  approuuer  le  bien,
mais  on  en  trouue  a  le  pradtiquer.  Video  meliora  pro-
bdque  deteriora  feqiwr.  II  eft  vray  qu'il  y  a  quelques
couftumes  parmy  les  Sauuages  qui  s'aboliront  ayfe-
ment,  d'autres  non.  En  voicy  de  diuerfes  facons.
La  paffion  du  ieu  eft  violente,  auffi  bien  en  noftre
France,  qu'en  la  voftre.  I'ay  [veu]  vne  femme  Sau-
uage  ayant  perdu  tout  ce  qu'elle  auoit,  fe  ioiier  elle
mefme:  non  pas  [!52]  f°n  honneur,  mais  bien  fon
feruice,  c'eft  a  dire,  qu'elle  euft  efte  comme  efclaue
ou  feruante  du  vainqueur  fi  elle  eut  perdu ;  ils  difent
qu'il  arriue  par  fois  qu'vn homme ou  vne femme


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  199

struct  him;  he  asked  him  for  Baptism.  The  Father
intended  to  chide  and  repulse  him,  upon  seeing  this
foolish  superstition ;  but  the  poor  patient  said  to  him,
' '  It  was  not  I  who  called  them ;  my  mother  dreamed
that  I  would  recover  if  a  solemn  game  were  played ;
this  is  why  she  has  caused  me  all  this  difficulty  with-
out my  having  anything  to  say  about  it."

For  the  rest,  the  belief  and  superstitions  of  the
Savages  are  not  very  deeply  rooted  in  their  minds ;
for,  as  all  these  idle  fancies  are  only  founded  upon
lies,  they  fall  of  themselves,  [151]  and  suddenly
disappear,  or  are  dissipated  by  the  rays  of  the  truths,
entirely  conformable  to  reason,  that  are  proposed  to
them.  The  only  quite  obstinate  ones  I  have  seen
were  a  few  old  men,  whose  brains,  dried  up  in  their
old  maxims,  had  no  longer  any  fluid  in  which  to  re-
ceive the  impression  of  our  doctrine.  If  occasionally
some  of  them  fall  back  into  their  foolish  practices,
it  is  more  through  force  of  habit  than  through  any
profound  belief  they  have  in  their  own  superstitions,
especially  since  they  are  being  instructed.

As  for  what  relates  to  their  customs,  that  is  a  long-
er story.  It  is  easier  to  banish  errors  of  the  under-
standing, than  to  remove  the  bad  habits  of  the  will.
There  is  not  much  difficulty  in  recognizing  and
approving  the  good,  but  one  finds  it  very  hard  to
practice  it.  Video  meliora  proboqae  deter  tor  a  sequor.
True,  there  are  some  customs  among  the  Savages
which  will  be  easily  abolished,  others  not.  Here
are  some,  of  different  kinds:  The  passion  for  gam-
bling is  strong  in  our  France,  as  well  as  in  yours.  I
have  seen  a  Savage  woman  who,  having  lost  all  she
had,  staked  herself, —  not  [152]  her  honor,  but  in-
deed her  services, —  that  is  to  say,  she  would  have


200  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

s'eftans  ioiiez  eux  mefmes,  celuy  qui  les  gagne,  les
retient  vn  ou  deux  ans,  &  les  employe  a  la  peche,  a
la  chaffe,  aux  petites  affaires  domeftiques ;  puis  leur
donne  liberte.  Les  Sauuages  ne  fcauroient  exercer
de  feuerite,  ny  exiger  auec  rudefle  aucun  feruice  de
leurs  Compatriotes.

Vn  Huron  ayant  ioiie-  toutes  fes  richeffes,  mift  fa
perruque  en  jeu,  l'ayant  perdue,  le  vainqueur  le  raza
iufques  au  cuir  de  la  tefte.  On  m'a  dit  qu'il  y  en  a
qui  iouent  iufques  a  leur  petit  doigt  de  la  main,  &
que  l'ayant  perdu,  ils  le  donnent  a  coupper,  fans  mon-
ltrer  aucun  figne  de  douleur.  Ie  croirois  bien  qu'vn
Sauuage  d'vne  Nation  pourroit  bien  coupper  le  doigt
a  vn  Sauuage  d'vn  autre;  mais  ie  ne  fcaurois  me
perfuader  qu'il  exerce  cefte  cruaute  enuers  aucun
homme  de  fon  pais,  ils  fe  refpedtent  ou  fe  craignent
trop  les  vns  les  autres,  pour  les  eftrangers,  ils  les
meprifent  fort.

Pour  conclufion  de  ce  poind:,  ie  puis  dire  [153]  que
les  Sauuages,  quoy  que  paffionnez  pour  le  ieu,  l'em-
portent  par  deffus  nos  Europeans.  Ils  ne  font
quafi  paroiftre  iamais,  ny  de  ioye  pour  leur  gain,  ny  de
trifteffe  pour  leur  perte,  ioiians  auec  vne  tranquilite
exterieure  tres  remarquable,  fideles  au  poffible,  fans
fe  tromper  les  vns  les  autres.  Ie  ne  fcay  fi  i'ay  fait
mention  d'vne  couftume  qu'ont  les  Sauuages,  de  re-
fufciter  ou  faire  reuiure  leurs  amis  trefpaffez,  notam-
ment  s'ils  eftoient  hommes  de  confideration  parmy
eux.  Ils  font  porter  le  nom  du  defundt  a  quelque
autre ;  &  voila  le  mort  refufcite\  &  la  trifteffe  des  pa-
rens entierement  paffee.  Remarquez  que  le  nom  fe
donne  dans  vne  grande  affemblee  ou  feflin,  on  ad-
ioute  vn  prefent  qui  fe  fait  de  la  part  des  parens  ou


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  201

been  as  a  slave  or  servant  of  the  winner,  if  she  had
lost.  They  say  that  it  sometimes  happens  that  when
men  or  women  stake  themselves,  he  who  wins  them
keeps  them  one  or  two  years,  and  employs  them  in
fishing,  hunting,  or  in  minor  household  duties ;  then
he  gives  them  their  liberty.  The  Savages  cannot
exercise  severity,  nor  harshly  exact  a  service  from
their  Countrymen.

A  Huron,  having  played  away  all  his  wealth,  staked
his  hair,  and  having  lost  it,  the  winner  cut  it  off  close
to  the  scalp.  I  have  been  told  that  there  are  some
who  gamble  even  to  the  little  finger  of  the  hand,  and
who,  having  lost  it,  give  it  to  be  cut  off,  without
showing  any  sign  of  pain.  I  would  readily  believe
that  a  Savage  of  one  Nation  could  easily  cut  off  the
finger  of  a  Savage  of  another ;  but  I  cannot  persuade
myself  that  he  exercises  this  cruelty  towards  any  man
of  his  own  country, —  they  respect  or  fear  one  another
too  much.  As  for  strangers,  they  have  a  great  con-
tempt for  them.

To  conclude  this  subject,  I  can  say  [153]  that  the
Savages,  although  passionately  fond  of  gambling,
show  themselves  superior  to  our  Europeans.  They
hardly  ever  evince  either  joy  in  winning  or  sadness  in
losing,  playing  with  most  remarkable  external  tran-
quillity,—  as  honorably  as  possible,  never  cheating
one  another.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  have  men-
tioned a  custom  the  Savages  have,  of  resuscitating  or
bringing  to  life  again  their  departed  friends,  espe-
cially if  they  were  men  of  influence  among  them.
They  transfer  the  name  of  the  dead  to  some  other
man,  and  lo,  the  dead  is  raised  to  life,  and  the  grief
of  the  relatives  is  all  past.  Observe  that  the  name
is  given  in  a  great assembly  or  feast;  a  present  is


202  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~ SUITES [Vol.16

des  amis  de  celuy  qu'on  fait  reuiure,  &  celuy  qui
accepte  le  nom,  &  le  prefent,  s'oblige  d'auoir  foin  de
la  famille  du  defunct.,  fi  bien  que  les  pupils  le  nom-
ment  leur  pere.  Cette  couftume  femble  fort  louable
pour  le  bien  des  pauures  orphelins.

lis  gardent  les  mefmes  ceremonies  quad  quelque
braue  homme  a  efte"  maffacre  par  leurs  ennemis,  s'il
auoit  quelque  Collier  de  porcelaine,  ou  autre  chofe
de  valeur,  fes  [154]  amis  l'offrent  a  quelque  bon  guer-
rier,  ou  luy  font  quelque  prefent  de  leurs  propres
moyens,  fi  cet  homme  les  accepte  auec  le  nom  du
defunct,  qu'on  luy  donne  publiquement,  il  s'oblige
d'aller  a  la  guerre,  d'y  mener  ceux  qu'il  pourra,  &
de  tuer  quelques  ennemis  a  la  place  du  trefpaffe  qui
reuit  en  fa  perfonne.

On  me  dit  encor  que  les  Sauuages  changent  fouuent
de  noms.  On  leur  en  donne  vn  en  leur  naiffance,
ils  le  changent  en  l'aage  viril,  &  en  prenent  vn  autre
en  leur  vieilleffe ;  voire  mefme  fi  quelqu'vn  eft  bien
malade,  s'il  n'echappe  de  cette  maladie,  il  quittera
par  fois  fon  ancien,  nom  comme  s'il  luy  portoit  mal-
heur  pour  en  prendre  vn  autre  de  meilleur  augure.

Si  vn  Sauuage  fe  remarie  deuant  trois  ans  apres  le
decez  de  fa  femme,  il  n'efl  pas  bien  voulu  des  parens
de  la  defundte,  ils  tiennent  cela  comme  vne  efpece  de
mefpris,  cet  homme  faifant  voir  qu'il  n'aimoit  point
leur  parente,  puis  qu'il  s'allie  fi  toft  d'vne  autre.
Que  fi  vne  femme  apres  le  decez  de  fon  mary  en
prend  vn  autre  deuant  ce  terme  fans  le  conge  des
parens  du  trepaffe,  non  feulement  ils  luy  fcauent
mauuais  gre,  mais  ils  pillent  fon  mary  [155]  s'ils  le
rencontrent,  &  cette  couftume  eft  tellement  paffee
pour  loy,  que  nous  l'auons  veu  prattiquer  deuant  nos


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  203

added,  which  is  made  on  the  part  of  the  relatives  or
friends  of  him  who  has  been  brought  back  to  life ;
and  he  who  accepts  the  name  and  the  present  binds
himself  to  take  charge  of  the  family  of  the  deceased,
so  that  his  wards  call  him  their  father.  This  custom
seems  very  commendable  for  the  good  of  poor  or-
phans.

They  observe  the  same  ceremonies  when  some
brave  man  has  been  slain  by  their  enemies.  If  he
had  a  porcelain  Collar,  or  something  else  of  value,
his  [154]  friends  offer  it  to  some  good  warrior,  or
make  him  some  presents  from  their  own  means.  If
this  man  accepts  them,  together  with  the  name  of
the  dead  man,  which  they  publicly  give  him,  he
binds  himself  to  go  to  the  war,  to  take  with  him  such
men  as  he  can,  and  to  kill  some  of  the  enemy,  in
place  of  the  deceased  who  lives  again  in  his  person.

I  am  told  also  that  the  Savages  often  change  their
names.  A  name  is  given  to  them  at  their  birth, —
they  change  it  in  manhood,  and  take  another  in  their
old  age ;  indeed,  if  any  one  is  very  sick,  and  does
not  recover  from  this  sickness,  he  will  sometimes
give  up  his  old  name,  as  if  it  brought  him  ill-luck,
to  take  another  of  better  omen.

If  a  Savage  remarries  within  three  years  after  the
death  of  his  wife,  he  is  not  kindly  regarded  by  the
relatives  of  the  dead  woman ;  they  regard  that  as  a
sort  of  contempt, —  this  man  making  it  apparent  that
he  did  not  love  their  relative,  since  he  allied  himself
so  soon  with  another.  And  if  a  woman,  after  the
decease  of  her  husband,  takes  another  before  this
length  of  time,  without  the  permission  of  the  dead
man's  relatives,  they  not  only  bear  her  ill-will,  but
they  plunder  her  husband [155]  if  they  meet  him ;


204  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16


yeux:  en  forte  que  cehry  qui  s'eftoit  ainfi  marie\  veit
prendre  fes  Colliers  de  Porcelaine,  &  tout  ce  qu'il
auoit,  fans  dire  autre  chofe  finon  que  c'eftoit  luy  qui
fe  faifoit  ce  tort,  pour  auoir  enfraint  leur  couftume.
Quand  vne  fille  ou  vne  femme  agr6e  quelqu'vn  qui
la  recherche,  elle  fe  fait  couper  les  cheueux  a  la  fa-
con  que  les  portent  les  filles  en  France  pendant  deffus
le  front;  ce  qui  a  fort  mauuaife  grace,  tant  en  l'vne
qu'en  1' autre  France,  S.  Paul  defendant  aux  femmes
de  faire  paroiftre  leurs  cheueux.  Les  femmes  portent
icy  leurs  cheueux  en  pacquets  derriere  la  tefte,  en
forme  d'vne  trouffe  qu'ils  ornent  de  Porcelaine  quand
elles  en  ont ;  Si  fe  marians  a  quelqu'vn  elles  le  quit-
tent  mal  a  propos,  ou  fi  s'eftans  promifes,  &  ayans
accepte  quelque  prefent,  elles  ne  tiennent  leur  pa-
rolle,  leur  pretendu  mary  leur  couppe  par  fois  ces
cheueux ;  ce  qui  les  rend  fort  mefprifables,  &  les  em-
pefche  de  trouuer  vne  autre  efpoux.  Cette  couftume
fe  garde  plus  eftroittement  chez  les  Algonquins,  que
parmy  les  Montagnets.  Les  [156]  Sauuages  ne  s'al-
lient  pas  aysement  de  leurs  parens,  ie  ne  fcay  pas
encore  les  degrez  aufquels  ils  fe  peuuent  marier  fans
reproche  de  leurs  Compatriotes,  mais  il  me  femble
qu'ils  font  bien  plus  referues  que  nous  en  certain  cas.
Par  exemple,  fi  vn  pere  a  deux  enfans,  ils  s'appellent
frere  &  fceur,  comme  parmy  nous,  mais  leurs  enfans
fe  nommeront  auffi  freres  &  fceur,  &  les  defcendans
de  ceux-cy  porteront  le  mefme  nom  de  frere  &  de
fceur,  &  iamais  ne  fe  mariront  enfemble,  s'ils  gardent
les  bonnes  couftumes  de  leur  nation;  que  s'ils  les
enfraignent,  on  ne  leur  dit  autre  chofe,  finon  qu'ils
n'ont  point  d'efprit.  Vn  Sauuage  ne  fait  point  de
difficulte  d'efpoufer  deux  foeurs  a  mefme  temps,  ou


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  205

and  this  custom  has  so  passed  for  law  that  we  have
seen  it  practiced  before  our  eyes, — in  such  a  way
that  the  one  who  had  thus  married  saw  his  Porcelain
Collars  and  all  he  had,  taken  without  saying  any-
thing else  except  that  it  was  he  who  had  injured
himself  by  having  infringed  upon  their  custom.

When  a  girl  or  woman  accepts  some  one  who  is
wooing  her,  she  has  her  hair  cut  after  the  fashion  in
which  girls  in  France  wear  it,  hanging  over  the  fore-
head,—  which  is  very  ungraceful,  in  both  the  one
and  the  other  France,  St.  Paul  prohibiting  the  wom-
en from  making  a  show  of  their  hair.  The  women
here  wear  their  hair  fastened  on  the  back  of  their
heads  in  bunches,  which  they  ornament  with  Porce-
lain when  they  have  it.  If  after  marriage,  they  leave
their  husbands  without  cause,  or  if,  having  promised
and  having  accepted  presents,  they  do  not  keep  their
word,  their  intended  husbands  sometimes  cut  off  this
hair, —  this  makes  them  very  despicable,  and  prevents
them  from  finding  another  husband.  This  custom  is
followed  more  closely  among  the  Algonquins  than
among  the  Montagnais.  The  [156]  Savages  do  not
readily  ally  themselves  with  their  relatives.  I  do
not  yet  know  the  degrees  in  which  they  can  marry
without  the  reproach  of  their  Compatriots,  but  it
seems  to  me  they  are  much  more  cautious  than  we
are  in  certain  cases.  For  example,  if  a  father  has
two  children,  they  are  called  brother  and  sister,  as
among  us;  but  their  children  will  also  be  called
brothers  and  sisters,  and  the  descendants  of  these
will  bear  the  same  title  of  brothers  and  sisters,  and
will  never  intermarry,  if  they  follow  the  good  cus-
toms of  their  nation ;  but  if  they  infringe  upon  them,
nothing  more  is  said  to  them  than  that  they  have  no


206  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

s'il  en  a  defia  efpouse*  vne,  il  petit  prendre  l'autre  du
viuant  de  fa  premiere  femme,  car  s'il  attendoit  apres
fa  mort,  il  la  reputeroit  comme  fa  niepce,  &  ne  l'ef-
pouferoit  pas  fans  blafme.  lis  enterrent  leurs  morts
en  forte  que  la  tefte  du  trefpaffe'  regarde  1' Occident,
c'eft  afin  que  l'ame  cognoiffe  le  lieu  ou  elle  doit  aller.
lis  croyent,  comme  i'ay  dit,  qu'elle  s'en  va  oil  le  So-
leil  fe  couche;  c'eft  la  le  pays  des  ames  a  leur  dire.
En  effect  eftans  priuez  du  flambeau  de  la  Foy,  [157]
ils  defcendent,  in  regionem  vmbrce  mortis,  ou  le  Soleil
de  Iuftice  eft  couche  pour  eux  eternellement.

Ils  font  fort  portez  a  croire  les  chofes  extraordi-
naires.  Vn  Sauuage  de  l'lfle  nous  difoit,  il  n'y  a  pas
long-temps  que  le  bruit  eftoit  par  tous  les  pays  plus
hauts  iufques  dans  les  Nipifiriniens,  qu'vn  de  nos
Peres  d'icy  bas  auoit  vefcu  cinq  aages  d'hommes,
que  le  poil  luy  eftoit  tobe  quatre  fois,  qu'il  grifonnoit
pour  la  cinquief me :  la.  deffus  il  luy  demandoit  com-
bien  de  fois  encor  il  retourneroit  en  l'aage  viril  de-
uant  que  de  mourir.


1039]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  207

sense.  A  Savage  has  no  scruples  against  marrying
two  sisters  at  once;  or,  if  he  has  already  married
one,  he  can  take  the  other  during  the  lifetime  of  his
first  wife, —  for  if  he  waited  until  after  her  death  he
must  reckon  her  as  his  niece,  and  could  not  marry
her  without  reproach.  They  bury  their  dead  in  such
a  way  that  the  head  of  the  departed  one  faces  the
West,  in  order  that  the  soul  may  know  the  place
whither  it  is  to  go.  They  believe,  as  I  have  said,
that  it  goes  to  the  place  where  the  Sun  sets, —  this
being  the  country  of  souls,  according  to  them.  In
fact,  being  deprived  of  the  torch  of  Faith,  [157]  they
descend  in  regionem  umbra  mortis,  where  the  Sun  of
Justice  has  set  for  them  forever.

They  are  very  prone  to  believe  things  out  of  the
common  order.  A  Savage  of  the  Island  told  us  not
long  ago  that  the  report  was  current  throughout  all
the  upper  countries,  even  among  the  Nipisiriniens,
that  one  of  our  Fathers  down  here  had  lived  five
lives, —  that  his  hair  had  fallen  four  times,  and  that
he  was  growing  gray  for  the  fifth  time ;  and  then  he
asked  how  many  more  times  the  Father  would  return
to  manhood  before  dying.


208  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol. 16


[158]  CHAP. VIII. [i.e.,xi.]

RAMAS DE DIUERSES CHOSES QUI N'ONT PEU ESTRE
RAPPORTEES SOUS LES CHAPITRES PRECEDENTS.

QVOY  que  les  remarques  que  ie  vay  faire  n'ayent
quafi  point  de  liaifon  les  vns  auec  les  autres,
elles  donneront  neatmoins  toufiours  quelque
iour  &  quelque  lumiere  pour  mieux  recognoiftre  l'ef-
prit  des  Sauuages.  Vn  Capitaine  des  Algonquins  de
l'lfle,  homme  d'efprit  &  bien  eloquent  pour  vn  Sau-
uage,  ayant  eu  quelque  different  auec  vn  autre  Al-
gonquin, receut  vn  coup  de  hache  a  la  tefte  qui  luy
penfa  ofter  la  vie.  Et  en  effect,  il  l'auroit  perdue
n'euft  efte  qu'vn  Sauuage  detournant  le  bras  de  l'ag-
greffeur  empefcha  la  violence  du  coup.  Cet  homme
fe  voyant  tout  baigne  dans  fon  fang,  ne  fe  troubla
point,  il  s'aflit  froidement  dans  la  cabane  de  celuy  qui
l'auoit  frappe,  fans  faire  paroiftre  aucun  mouuement,
ny  de  crainte,  ny  de  vengeance,  celuy  qui  auoit  [159]
fait  le  coup  s'aflit  vn  peu  plus  loing,  ne  paroiffant  nul-
lement  altere.  Vn  de  nos  Peres  aduerty  de  cette
difpute,  s'en  court  droit  a  la  cabane,  entre  dedans,
trouue  tout  le  monde  dans  le  filence  aufli  paifible  &
aufli  froid  que  marbre,  il  n'eut  pas  creu  qu'il  y  eut  eu
aucune  querelle  entre  des  gens  fi  froids,  &  fi  paifibles
en  apparence,  s'il  n'eut  veu  le  fang  ruiffeler  de  la
tefte  de  ce  pauure  miferable ;  il  luy  demande  qui  luy
a  fait  cette  playe,  point  de  refponce,  l'aggreffeur  prit
la  parolle,  &  luy  dit; c'eft  moy  qui  l'ait  fait,  parce


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6jg  209


[158]  CHAP. VIII.  [i.e.,  ad.]

A COLLECTION OF VARIOUS MATTERS WHICH COULD
NOT BE RELATED IN THE PREVIOUS CHAPTERS.

ALTHOUGH  the  remarks  I  am  about  to  make
have  almost  no  connection  with  one  another,
they  will  give,  nevertheless,  some  light  and
some  information  for  the  better  understanding  of  the
minds  of  the  Savages.  A  Captain  of  the  Algonquins
of  the  Island, — a  man  of  intelligence,  and  very  elo-
quent for  a  Savage, — having  had  some  quarrel  with
another  Algonquin,  received  a  hatchet  blow  upon  his
head  that  almost  cost  him  his  life, — and,  in  fact,  he
would  have  lost  it,  had  not  a  Savage,  by  turning
away  the  arm  of  the  aggressor,  lessened  the  violence
of  the  blow.  This  man,  seeing  himself  all  covered
with  his  own  blood,  did  not  trouble  himself  about  it,
but  coolly  sat  down  in  the  cabin  of  him  who  had  struck
him, —  showing  no  emotion,  either  of  fear  or  of  re-
venge. The  man  who  had  [159]  given  the  blow  sat
down  not  far  away,  appearing  in  no  wise  concerned.
One  of  our  Fathers,  being  informed  of  this  dispute,
ran  straightway  to  the  cabin,  entered,  and  found  all
its  people  in  silence,  as  calm  and  as  cold  as  marble.
He  would  not  have  believed  that  there  was  any  quar-
rel between  people  apparently  so  calm  and  peace-
able, if  he  had  not  seen  the  blood  trickling  from  the
head  of  this  poor  wretch.  He  asked  him  who  had
given  him  this  wound;  no  answer.  The  aggressor
began  to  speak,  and  said,  "  It  was  I  who  did  it,  be-


210  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16


qu'il  m'a  fafche.  Cela  dit,  il  fe  teut.  Le  Pere  tafcha
de  les  reconcilier,  en  fin  ce  Capitaine  fortant,  tint  ce
difccrars  a  fes  gens.  Mes  nepueux,  ne  tirez  aucune
vengeance  de  l'iniure  qui  m'a  efte  faidte,  c'eft  affez
que  la  terre  ait  tremble  du  coup  qui  m'a  efte  donne,
ne  la  renuerfez  point  par  voftre  colere.  Quelque
temps  apres,  cet  homme  fuperbe  au  poffible  eftant
guery,  &  voyant  que  les  Francois  vouloient  tirer
quelque  fatisf action  du  Sauuage  qui  auoit  mis  Tan
paff  e  la  corde  au  col  du  Pere  Hierofme  Lallemant ;  cet
homme  rehauffant  fa  voix,  harangua  en  cette  forte:
le  m'eftonne  que  ceux  qui  font  eftat  de  prier  Dieu,
&  qu'ils  [160]  difent  qu'il  faut  pardonner  les  offences,
puifque  Dieu  les  pardonne,  vueillent  tirer  vengeance
d'vne  iniure  qu'on  leur  a  fait  il  y  a  defia  long  temps,
on  cognoift  affez  qui  ie  fuis,  on  fcait  bien  que  c'eft
moy  qui  tient  la  terre  aff ermie  de  mes  bras,  &  cepen-
dant  ay  ant  receu  il  n'y  a  pas  long  temps  vn  coup  qui
me  penfa  diuifer  la  tefte  en  deux  pieces,  ie  ne  m'ef-
meu  point,  ie  ne  conceu  aucun  defir  de  vengeance,
pourquoy  n'imiterez-vous  pas  cet  exemple?  Que  fi  le
loup  eut  fait  fortir  mon  ame  de  fon  corps,  ma  bouche
eut  prononce  ces  dernieres  paroles.  Mes  nepueux,
ne  troublez  point  la  terre  a  l'occafion  de  voftre  oncle
qui  l'a  toufiours  maintenue :  ie  dy  dauantage,  fi  i'euffe
fenty  la  terre  ebranlee,  ie  ma  fuffe  efforce  de  l'ar-
refter,  &  de  la  mettre  en  fon  repos,  auec  les  deux  bras
de  mon  ame;  &  fi  ie  n'euffe  peu  en  venir  a  bout,  ie
me  fuffe  efcrie  tout  eft  perdu,  le  monde  eft  renuerf6.
Ie  ne  me  mefle  plus  d'affaires,  ie  me  fuis  acquitte*  de
mon  deuoir,  i'ay  pardonne  l'iniure  qu'on  m'a  faite,
i'ay  donne"  confeil,  on  n'a  pas  voulu  eftre  fage,  la
faute  n'eft  point  de  mon cofte. Voila, difoit cet


1639]  LE  JEUNES  RELATION,  i63g  211

cause  he  made  me  angry."  This  said,  he  relapsed
into  silence.  The  Father  tried  to  reconcile  them.
Finally,  as  this  Captain  went  out,  he  made  the  fol-
lowing speech  to  his  people:  "  My  nephews,  do  not
take  any  revenge  for  the  injury  that  has  been  done
me ;  it  is  enough  that  the  earth  trembled  at  the  blow
that  was  given  me, —  do  not  overturn  it  by  your
wrath."  Some  time  afterwards  this  man,  as  proud
as  possible, —  having  recovered,  and  seeing  that  the
French  were  trying  to  get  some  satisfaction  from  the
Savage  who  last  year  had  put  the  rope  around  the
neck  of  Father  Hierosme  Lallemant, —  this  man,  rais-
ing his  voice,  harangued  thus:  "  I  am  astonished
that  those  who  boast  of  praying  to  God,  and  who
[160]  say  that  it  is  necessary  to  pardon  offenses,  since
God  pardons  them,  wish  to  obtain  revenge  for  an  in-
jury that  was  done  them  a  long  time  ago.  It  is  well
enough  known  who  I  am, —  it  is  well  known  that  it
is  I  who  hold  the  earth  firmly  in  my  arms ;  and  yet
not  long  ago,  when  I  received  a  blow  that  almost
cleft  my  head  in  twain,  I  was  not  agitated,  I  con-
ceived no  desire  for  revenge ;  why  will  you  not  im-
itate this  example?  But  if  the  wolf  had  caused  my
soul  to  issue  from  its  body,  my  mouth  would  have
pronounced  these  last  words:  '  My  nephews,  do  not
trouble  the  earth  on  account  of  your  uncle,  who  has
always  held  it  up.'  I  say  more,  if  I  had  felt  the
earth  tremble,  I  would  have  tried  to  stop  it,  to
restore  it  to  its  usual  peacefulness  with  the  two  arms
of  my  soul;  and  if  I  could  not  have  succeeded  in
this,  I  would  have  cried  out,  '  All  is  lost,  the  world
is  turned  upside  down.  I  have  nothing  more  to  do
with  it, —  I  have  discharged  my  duty,  I  have  par-
doned the injury  that  was  done  me;  I  have  given


212  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16


homme  plein  de  fafte,  comme  les  hommes  [161]  d'ef-
prit  fe  comportent,  6  que  l'orgueil  a  d'inftruire,  il  ar-
refte  la  colere,  il  femble  donner  de  la  patience;  &  au
bout  du  conte,  il  ne  fait  rien  qui  vaille,  iettant  les
hommes  dans  des  tenebres  plus  f  ombres  que  la  nuidt ;
&  leur  faifant  proferer  des  impertinences  qui  n'ap-
partiennent  qu'a  des  fols,  &  a  des  eceruelez.  Chan-
geons  de  difcours

Les  Hiroquois  ayant  emmene  vne  pauure  vieille
femme  aagee  de  plus  de  foixante  &  dix  ans,  luy  arra-
cherent  les  ongles  des  pieds  &  des  mains,  luy  appli-
querent  des  flambeaux  de  feu  en  plufieurs  endroits
de  fon  corps,  ils  la  menoient  auec  d'autres  prifon-
niers  en  leur  pais;  comme  ils  vindrent  a  paffer  vn
fault  ou  vne  cheute  d'eau  oil  tout  le  monde  met  pied
a  terre ;  cefte  pauure  femme  fans  faire  femblant  de
rien,  ramaffa  vne  coquille  qu'elle  rencontra  fur  la
greue,  la  ferre  fans  mot  dire;  &  la  nuidt  tout  le
monde  eftant  couche,  elle  couppe  doucement  fes  liens
auec  cefte  coquille,  &  s'enfuit  a  la  derobbe  dans  le
bois;  elle  fit  fi  bien,  que  fes  ennemis  ne  la  purent
retrouuer,  elle  arriua  aux  trois  Riuieres  le  fixieme
iour  apres  auoir  quitte  les  Hiroquois  ayant  en  partie
chemine  [162]  tout  ce  temps-la,  en  partie  nauige  toute
feule  dans  vn  mediant  canot  d' Hiroquois  qu'elle
trouua,  &  cela  fans  manger :  En  verite  c'eft  vne  chofe
bien  etonnante  qu'vne  femme  agee  pres  de  quatre-
vingt  ans,  trauerfe  quafi  toute  nue  tant  de  broffailles,
ayant  les  pieds  pleins  de  douleur,  &  les  orteils  fans
ongles,  eftant  toute  brulee  par  les  coftez,  affaillie  de
mille  efquadrons  de  moufquilles,  dont  ces  pais  font
infeflez,  &  paffer  cinq  ou  fix  iours  dans  ces  trauaux
fans  prendre  aucune  nourriture.

Quelque  temps  apres  fon  arriuee,  nous  affemblames


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  213

counsel,  they  would  not  be  wise, —  the  fault  is  not
mine.'  Behold,"  said  this  man,  pompously,  "how
men  [161]  of  intelligence  behave."  Oh,  how  much
pride  needs  to  be  instructed!  It  checks  anger,  it
seems  to  give  patience ;  and  in  the  end  it  does  noth-
ing that  avails,  casting  men  into  a  darkness  more
sombre  than  night,  and  making  them  utter  imperti-
nences which  belong  only  to  fools  and  to  lunatics.
Let  us  change  the  subject.

The  Hiroquois,  having  carried  away  a  poor  old
woman  more  than  seventy  years  old,  tore  out  her
toe-nails  and  finger-nails,  and  applied  burning  torches
to  several  parts  of  her  body;  they  took  her  away
with  other  prisoners  to  their  country.  When  they
came  to  pass  a  rapid  or  waterfall  where  every  one
went  on  shore,  this  poor  woman,  without  seeming  to
take  any  notice,  picked  up  a  shell  that  she  found  on
the  strand,  and  held  it  tight,  not  uttering  a  word.
That  night,  when  all  were  asleep,  she  quietly  cut  her
cords  with  this  shell,  and  fled  stealthily  into  the
woods.  She  succeeded  so  well  that  her  enemies
could  not  find  her  again ;  and  she  reached  the  three
Rivers  on  the  sixth  day  after  having  left  the  Hiro-
quois, having  traveled  —  partly  on  foot,  [162]  and
partly  by  water,  in  a  wretched  Hiroquois  canoe  that
she  found  —  during  all  that  time,  and  this  without
eating.  In  truth,  it  is  really  astonishing  that  a
woman  nearly  eighty  years  old  could  traverse  so
many  thickets, —  almost  entirely  naked,  her  feet
throbbing  with  pain,  her  toes  without  nails,  her  sides
all  burned,  assailed  by  armies  of  thousands  of  mos-
quitoes, with  which  these  countries  are  infested, —
and  endure  these  hardships  for  five  or  six  days  with-
out taking  any  food.


214  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

vne  vingtaine  de  vieilles  femmes,  dot  la  plus  ieune
auoit  pres  de  foixante  &  dix  ans  pour  les  inftruire  en
la  Foy,  fur  le  declin  de  leur  aage;  celle-cy  eftoit  du
nombre,  comme  on  luy  vint  a  decrire  les  feux  d'En-
fer,  encor  vaudroit-il  bie  mieux,  difoit-elle,  eftre
brule  des  Hiroquois,  que  des  Diables.  Pour  conclu-
fion,  elle  fut  baptifee  auec  quelques  autres,  &  nous  fit
dire  que  tous  les  Demons  &  tous  les  hommes  ne  fcau-
roient  detourner  la  bonte  de  Dieu,  quand  il  plaift  a
fa  Diuine  Prouidence  de  mettre  vne  ame  au  nombre
de  fes  eleuz.  Vne  autre  femme  vn  peu  moins  aagee
que  celle-cy,  courut  auffi  grand  rifque  de  fa  vie,  [163]
en  la  defaite  de  fes  gens.  Comme  elle  veit  que  les
Hiroquois  eftoient  aux  prifes  auec  eux,  elle  fe  iette
dans  l'epaiffeur  d'vne  groffe  fapiniere,  d'oii  elle
entendoit  les  cris  &  les  coups  des  combattants ;  &  de
peur  que  fes  pas  ou  fes  veftiges  ne  paruffent,  elle  fe
cache  dedans  des  eaux  fangeufes  &  croupiffantes
qu'elle  rencontra;  comme  elle  n'etoit  pas  loin  du  Fort
des  Hiroquois,  elle  n'ofoit  partir  de  cette  trifle  de-
meure:  En  fin  l'ennemy  eftant  party,  elle  en  fort
deux  iours  apres  le  combat  pour  tirer  vers  1' habita-
tion de  nos  Francois,  elle  n'etoit  pas  bien  loin,  qu'elle
entend  vn  grand  cry,  elle  crut  que  c'eftoient  encore
les  Hiroquois,  fe  va  ietter  dans  fa  taniere,  oil  elle
paff e  encor  vn  iour  entier ;  le  lendemain  penfant  que
tout  eftoit  en  paix,  elle  quitte  ces  eaux  froides  &  bour-
beufes;  mais  comme  elle  approchoit  des  Francois,
elle  entendit  tirer  de  grands  coups  de  canons ;  Cefte
pauure  creature  s'imagina  que  les  Hiroquois  atta-
quoient  le  Fort,  &  qu'on  fe  battoit  fort  &  ferme,  elle
fe  va  replonger  vne  autrefois  dans  la  fange,  &  y  paffer
deux  autres  iours  fuiuans :  Bref ,  la  mifere  la  contrai-
gnant  de  fortir,  elle  s'en  reuint  doucement,  tachant


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  215


Some  time  after  her  arrival,  we  called  a  score  of
old  women,  the  youngest  of  whom  was  nearly  sev-
enty years  old,  to  instruct  them  in  the  Faith  in  their
declining  years ;  this  one  was  among  them.  When
we  came  to  describe  the  fires  of  Hell,  "  It  were  a
great  deal  better,"  said  she,  "to  be  burned  by  the
Hiroquois  than  by  the  Devils."  As  a  result,  she
was  baptized  with  some  others,  which  caused  us  to
say  that  all  the  Demons  and  all  human  creatures
could  not  turn  away  the  goodness  of  God  when  it
pleased  his  Divine  Providence  to  place  a  soul  among
the  number  of  his  elect.  Another  woman,  not  quite
as  old  as  this  one,  seriously  endangered  her  life  [163]
in  the  defeat  of  her  people.  When  she  saw  that  the
Hiroquois  were  fighting  with  them,  she  ran  into  the
depths  of  a  great  clump  of  firs,  where  she  heard  the
cries  and  the  blows  of  the  combatants ;  and,  lest  her
footsteps  or  tracks  should  appear,  she  concealed  her-
self in  some  muddy  and  stagnant  water  that  she
found  there.  As  she  was  not  far  from  the  Hiroquois
Fort,  she  dared  not  leave  this  gloomy  abode.  At  last,
the  enemy  having  departed,  she  emerged  from  it,
two  days  after  the  fight,  to  repair  to  our  French  set-
tlement. She  had  not  gone  far  when  she  heard  a
loud  cry ;  thinking  that  it  was  still  the  Hiroquois,
she  ran  back  into  her  den,  where  she  passed  another
whole  day.  The  next  day,  thinking  that  all  was  at
peace,  she  left  these  cold  and  miry  waters;  but,  as
she  approached  the  French,  she  heard  some  loud  can-
non-shots. This  poor  creature  imagined  that  the
Hiroquois  were  attacking  the  Fort,  and  that  they
were  having  a  fierce  fight.  She  again  plunged  into
the  mud,  and  passed  there  the  two  following  days.
In  brief,  her  misery  compelling  her  to  emerge  there-


216  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16

de  decouurir  a  la  derobbee  [164]  fi  elle  ne  verroit  pas
l'ennemy ;  elle  fut  bien  etonn£e  quand  approchant  de
noftre  demeure,  elle  veit  fes  gens  cabanez  en  affeu-
rance,  elle  les  aborde,  &  leur  conte  fon  defaftre;  &
eux  luy  declarent  comme  les  cris  qu'elle  auoit  entendu
eftoient  des  gens  de  fa  Nation,  &  non  des  Hiroquois;
&  que  le  canon  qu'elle  auoit  oiiy  fe  tiroit  pour  honorer
la  venue  de  Monfieur  noftre  Gouuerneur  aux  trois
Riuieres.  Cet  erreur  eut  efte  capable  de  faire  mourir
vn  homme  bien  robufte,  &  cefte  femme  n'en  receut
autre  mal,  que  celuy  qu'elle  endura  dans  fa  trifle
folitude.  II  faut  que  ie  touche  icy  en  paffant  vn  trait
de  fimplicite  de  quelque  Sauuage :  Comme  on  leur
faifoit  voir  dans  la  Chapelle  vn  tableau  ou  Noftre
Seigneur  eft  reprefente  au  milieu  des  Dodteurs  de  la
Loy;  ils  confideroiet  fa  ieuneffe,  &  la  vieilleffe  de  ces
Dodteurs ;  &  comme  ils  eftoient  tous  peints  auec  vn
liure  en  main,  &  noftre  Seigneur  auffi;  ils  prindrent
garde  que  les  Dodteurs  regardoient  tous  das  leurs
liures,  &  les  tenoient  ouuerts,  &  que  Noftre  Seigneur
ne  regardoit  point  dans  le  fien ;  cela  leur  fit  dire  ces
paroles :  Le  Pere  a  raifon  de  dire  que  ce  ieune  enf at
feauoit  tout ;  tenez,  prenez  garde,  faifoient-ils,  comme
il  ne  iette  [165]  point  les  yeux  fur  fon  liure,  &  ces
vieillards  regardent  les  leur  fort  attentiuement.  La
naifuete  de  ces  bonnes  gens  eft  par  fois  agreable.  II
eft  temps  de  finir.  La  flotte  nous  laiffe  dans  la
trifteffe,  &  dans  la  ioye;  L'Hofpital  eft  charge  de
tant  de  malades,  qu'on  eft  contraint  d'en  loger  dehors
fous  des  cabanes  d'ecorces.  Les  Sauuages  font  gran-
dement  amigez,  on  dit  qu'ils  meurent  en  tel  nombre
es  pays  plus  hauts,  que  les  chiens  mangent  les
corps  morts  qu'on  ne  peut  enterrer. Les  Religieufes


1639 J  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  217

from,  she  returned  cautiously,  trying  to  discover  by
stealth  [164]  whether  the  enemy  were  visible.  She
was  greatly  astonished,  when,  upon  approaching  our
dwelling,  she  saw  her  people  encamped  in  safety.
She  accosted  them,  and  related  her  misfortune;  and
they  explained  to  her  how  the  cries  she  had  heard
were  those  of  the  people  of  her  own  Nation,  and  not
of  the  Hiroquois ;  and  that  the  cannon  she  had  heard
was  discharged  in  honor  of  the  coming  of  Monsieur
our  Governor  to  the  three  Rivers.  This  wandering
would  have  been  enough  to  kill  a  strong  and  healthy
man;  and  this  woman  experienced  no  other  harm
from  it  than  what  she  endured  in  her  gloomy  soli-
tude. I  must  here  note,  in  passing,  a  trait  of  sim-
plicity in  certain  Savages.  As  they  were  being
shown  in  the  Chapel  a  picture  where  Our  Lord  is
represented  in  the  midst  of  the  Doctors  of  the  Law,
they  noticed  his  youth,  and  the  old  age  of  the  Doc-
tors ;  and  —  as  they  were  depicted  each  with  a  book
in  his  hand,  and  our  Lord  also  —  they  observed  that
the  Doctors  were  all  looking  into  their  books,  and
were  holding  them  open,  and  that  Our  Lord  did  not
look  into  his ;  this  caused  them  to  utter  these  com-
ments: "  The  Father  is  right  in  saying  that  this
young  lad  knows  everything.  Look,"  said  they,
"  observe  that  he  does  not  cast  [165]  his  eyes  upon
his  book,  and  those  old  men  look  at  theirs  very  atten-
tively." The  innocence  of  these  simple  people  is
sometimes  amusing.  It  is  time  to  end.  The  fleet
leaves  us  in  sadness,  and  in  joy.  The  Hospital  is
burdened  with  so  many  sick  people,  that  they  are
obliged  to  lodge  some  of  them  outside  in  bark  cabins.
The  Savages  are  sorely  afflicted ;  it  is  said  that  they
are  dying  in  such  numbers,  in  the  countries  farther


218  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16


Hofpitalieres  fe  font  portees  auec  vne  telle  ferueur
dans  ces  preffantes  neceffitez  qu'elles  en  ont  altere
leur  fante.  Ceux  de  nos  Peres  qui  vifitent  &  qui
affiftent  ces  pauures  gens  empeftez,  ne  fe  portent  pas
mieux ;  cefte  contagio  feule  fe  vouloit  gliffer  parmy
nos  Francois.  Quelques  ieunes  femmes  nees  fur  le
pais  en  font  attaqu£es.  Tout  cela  peut  donner  de  la
trifteffe.  La  refignation  de  nos  pauures  Sauuages,
le  recours  qu'ils  ont  au  Baptefme,  le  defir  qu'ont  quel-
ques-vns  d'aller  au  Ciel,  le  mepris  de  la  vie,  la  perfe-
uerance  en  la  Foy  dans  ces  tempeftes,  font  capables
d'effuyer  noftre  douleur.  La  croix  porte  des  fruicts
agreables  en  tout  temps.  Si  iamais  ces  pauures  gens
ont  befoin  [ii6i.e.,  166J  d'eftre  fecourus  de  bonnes
ames  qui  s'intereffent  &  fe  liguent  fainctement  pour
leur  falut,  c'eft  en  ce  temps  de  calamite.  II  faut  que
la  Foy  fe  prouigne  a  la  facon  qu'elle  a  efte  plantee,
c'eft  a  dire,  dansles  calamitez;  &pourcequ'on  ne  voit
point  icy  de  Tyrans  qui  maffacrent  nos  Neophytes;
Dieu  y  pouruoit  d'ailleurs,  tirant  des  preuues  de  leur
conftance  par  des  afflictions  bie  fenfibles,  qu'il  foit
beny  a  iamais.  Nous  fupplions  tous  V.  R.  &  tous
nos  Peres,  &  nos  Freres  de  fa  Prouince,  voire  de
toute  la  France,  &  tant  d'ames  faindtes,  dans  l'affo-
ciation  defquelles  nous  fommes  entrez,  de  prier  pour
ces  pauures  peuples,  &  pour  nous,  &  en  particulier,
pour  celuy  qui  eft  de  toute  fon  affection,
De  V.  R.

Tres-humble  &  tres-obeif-
fant  feruiteur  felon  Dieu,

PAVL  LE  IEVNE.

A  Siller y,  autre  merit  en  la  Refidence
de  Saincl  Iofeph,  en  la  Nouuelle  France,
ce  4.  de  Septembre  1639.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  219


up,  that  the  dogs  eat  the  corpses  that  cannot  be
buried.  The  Hospital  Nuns  perform  their  duties
with  so  much  zeal,  in  these  pressing  needs,  that  they
have  impaired  their  own  health.  Those  of  our  Fa-
thers who  visit  and  assist  these  poor  infected  people
are  in  no  better  condition ;  this  contagion  alone  will
slip  in  among  our  French ;  some  young  women  born
in  this  country  have  been  attacked  by  it.  All  this
may  cause  us  sadness.  The  resignation  of  our  poor
Savages,  the  recourse  they  have  to  Baptism,  the  de-
sire of  some  of  them  to  go  to  Heaven,  their  contempt
for  this  life,  their  perseverance  in  the  Faith  during
these  tempests,  are  capable  of  lightening  our  afflic-
tions. The  cross  bears  pleasant  fruits  at  all  seasons.
If  ever  these  poor  people  have  need  [116  i.e.,  166]
of  being  succored  by  good  souls  who  interest  them-
selves and  form  a  holy  league  for  their  salvation,  it
is  in  this  time  of  calamity.  The  Faith  must  propagate
itself  as  it  has  been  planted, — namely,  in  calamities.
And  because  there  are  here  no  Tyrants  who  massacre
our  Neophytes,  God  provides  for  them  otherwise,
deriving  proofs  of  their  constancy  from  their  afflic-
tions, sore  indeed.  May  he  be  forever  blessed !  We
all  supplicate  Your  Reverence,  and  all  our  Fathers
and  Brethren  of  your  Province,  yea,  of  all  France,
and  the  many  saintly  souls  with  whom  we  have  asso-
ciated ourselves,  to  pray  for  these  poor  peoples,  and
for  us,  particularly  for  him  who  is  with  all  his  heart,
Your  Reverence's

Very  humble  and  very  obe-
dient servant  in  God,
PAUL  LE  JEUNE.

At  Siller y,  otherwise  the  Residence  of
Saint  Joseph,  in  New  France,  this  4th
of  September ,  1639.


220  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JASUITES  [Vol.16


Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'eft  paffe  dans

le  Pays  des  Hvrons,  Pays  de

la Nouuelle France.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  221


Relation  of  Occurrences  in  the  Land
of  the  Hurons,  a  Country
of  New France.


222  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16


[i]  Relation  de  Pemploy  des  Peres  de  la  Com-

pagnie  de  Iesvs,  qvi  font  avx  Hvrons

pais  de  la  Nouuelle  France. Depuis

le  mois  de  Iuin  1638.  iufques

au  mois  de  Iuin  1639.

Adreffie  au  R.  P.  Paul  le  Ieune,  Superieur  des  Mifsions  de  la
Compagnie  de  Iesvs  en  la  Nouuelle  France.

Mon  Reverend  Pere,
Me  voila  done  oblige  de  rendre  compte  a
V.  R.  de  1' employ  des  Relig[i]eux  de  noftre
Compagnie  en  ces  contr6es:  ie  le  [2]  feray  d'autant
plus  volontiers,  vn  peu  plus  au  long  cefle  fois,  qu'e-
ftant  encore  pour  le  prefent  innutile  a  autre  chofe,
ce  ne  me  fera  pas  peu  de  confolation  de  feruir  au
moins  a  declarer  le  bien  que  la  diuine  mifericorde
commence  a  faire  a  ces  peuples  parmy  lefquels  nous
viuons,  par  l'entremife  des  autres  de  nos  Peres  qui
font  icy.  Ie  croy  que  voftre  Reuerence  y  trouuera
de  quoy  benir  Dieu,  &  s'affecftionner  de  plus  en  plus
a  nous  affifter  de  fes  foins  &  charitez,  &  fur  tout  de
fes  S.S.  &  prieres,  que  ie  luy  demande  tres-humble-
ment,  &  a  tous  nos  Peres  &  Freres  de  par  dela,  pour
tous  tant  que  nous  fommes  icy,  &  particulierement
pour  celuy  qui  en  a  le  plus  de  befoin,  e'eft
M.  R.  P.

De la Refid.  de la Cone.  Voftre  tres-humble

de  N.  Dame,  au  B^urg  d 'Ofo-  & tres-obeiffant fer-

fane' aux  Hurons  ce  J .  de  \Jtiin\  uiteur en N. Sei-

1639.  "gneur.

Hierosme  Lalemant


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib39  223


[i]  Relation  of  the  occupations  of  the Fathers

of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  who  are  in  the

Huron  land,  a  country  of  New  France.

From  the  month  of  June,  1638,

to  the  month  of  June,  1639.

Addressed  to  the  Reverend  Father  Paul  le  Jeune,  Superior  of  the
Missions  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  in  New  France.

My  Reverend  Father,
It  is  I  who  must  render  Your  Reverence
an  account  of  the  occupations  of  the  Reli-
gious of  our  Society  in  these  countries.  I  [2]  shall  be
all  the  more  willing  to  make  it  a  little  longer  this
time, — inasmuch  as,  being  still,  for  the  present,
incapable  of  doing  anything  else,  it  will  give  me  no
little  comfort  to  be  useful,  at  least,  in  publishing  the
good  that  the  divine  mercy  is  beginning  to  accom-
plish for  these  peoples  among  whom  we  live,  through
the  instrumentality  of  our  other  Fathers  who  are
here.  I  believe  your  Reverence  will  find  some  cause
herein  to  bless  God,  and  to  devote  yourself  more  and
more  affectionately  to  assisting  us  with  your  atten-
tions and  charities,  and  above  all  with  your  Holy
Sacrifices  and  prayers, —  which  I  ask  of  you  very
humbly,  and  of  all  our  Fathers  and  Brethren  down
yonder,  for  all  of  us  who  are  here,  and  especially  for
him  who  has  the  most  need  of  them,  namely,
My  Reverend  Father,

From the  Residence  of  la Con-  Your  very  hum-

ception  de  Nostre  Dame,  in  the  Vil-  ble  and  very  obe-

lage  of  Ososane",  among  the  Hurons,  dient servant  in

this  7th  of  [June'],  1639.  Our  Lord,

HlEROSME LALEMANT.


224  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  1(5


[3]  CHAPITRE  PREMIER,

DE LA SITUATION DU PAIS, & DU NOM DE

HURON.

MON  deffein  n'eft  pas  de  redire  icy,  ce  qui  fe
peut  trotmer  dans  les  precedentes  Relations,
ou  dans  les  autres  Liures  qui  ont  defia  traidte
de  ce  fuiet :  mais  f eulement  de  f uppleer  au  defaut  de
certaines  circonflances  fur  lefquelles  i'ay  reconnu
qu'on  defiroit  quelque  fatisf action.

Par  le  mot  du  pais  des  Hurons,  fe  doit  entendre  a
proprement  pa[r]ler,  vne  certaine  petite  portion  de
terre  dans  l'Amerique  Septentrionale,  qui  en  lon-
g[u]eur  d'Orient  a  l'Occident,  n'a  pas  plus  de  20.  ou
25.  lieues,  &  en  largeur  de  Septentrion  au  Midy,  n'eft
pas  en  plufieurs  endroidts  confiderable,  &  en  pas  vn
ne  paffe  fept  ou  huidt  lieues.  Son  efleuation  dans  le
coeur  du  pais,  s'eft  trouu^e  de  quarante-cinq  &  demy.
Que  fi  quelques-vns  par  le  paffe"  luy  ont  donne  quel-
que peu  moins;  pour  accorder  les  deux,  il  faut  dire
que  ceux  qui  la  mettent  a  quarante  quatre  &  demy
ou  [4]  enuiron,  l'ont  prife  a  quelque  nations  voifme
plus  Meridionale,  cenfee  du  nombre  des  Huronnes,
comme  nous  dirons  cy-apres.

Quant  a  la  longitude,  on  ne  l'a  pu  encore  eftablir,
felon  le  Regies  de  Geographie  pour  ne  s'eftre  appli-
que" par  accord  en  France,  &  icy,  a  l'exadte  obferua-
tion  des  eclypfes.  On  attend  la  refponfe  des  obfer-
uations qui  en  ont  efte  faictes  l'annee  derniere,  &


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  225


[3]  CHAPTER  FIRST.

OF  THE  SITUATION  OF  THE  COUNTRY,  AND  OF  THE

NAME  HURON.

IT  is  not  my  intention  to  repeat  here  what  can  be
found  in  the  preceding  Relations,  or  in  other
Books  which  have  already  treated  of  this  sub-
ject, but  only  to  supply  the  lack  of  certain  particulars,
regarding  which  I  have  discovered  that  some  infor-
mation is  desired.

By  the  term  ' '  country  of  the  Hurons  ' '  must  be
understood,  properly  speaking,  a  certain  small  por-
tion of  land  in  North  America,  which  is  no  longer
than  20  or  25  leagues  from  East  to  West, —  its  width
from  North  to  South  in  many  places  being  very
slight,  and  nowhere  exceeding  seven  or  eight  leagues.
Its  latitude,  in  the  central  part  of  the  country,  is
found  to  be  forty-five  and  a  half  [degrees] ;  if  some
in  the  past  have  made  it  a  little  less,  to  make  these
two  statements  agree,  it  must  be  said  that  those  who
put  it  at  forty-four  and  a  half,  or  [4]  thereabout,  took
it  in  some  of  the  more  Southerly  neighboring  nations,
reputed  among  the  number  of  the  Hurons,  as  we  shall
relate  hereafter.

As  for  the  longitude,  it  has  been,  as  yet,  impos-
sible to  establish  it  according  to  the  Rules  of  Geog-
raphy, as  they  have  not  been  applied  similarly  in
France,  and  here,  to  the  exact  observation  of  eclipses.
The  results  of  the  observations  made  last  year  are  now
awaited ;  and  meanwhile  we  suppose  ourselves  to  be


226  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  16


cependant  nous  nous  figurons  eflre  efloignez  de
France  d'enuiron  treize  cens  lieues,  tirant  de  la  France
a  nous  en  droite  ligne  vers  l'Occident,  fous  vn  mefme
parellelle  d'efleuation;  &  de  Quebec,  la  principale
demeure  de  nos  Francois  en  la  Nouuelle  France,  de
deux  cent  lieues,  quoy  qu'on  en  faffe  d'ordinaire  plus
de  trois  cet  pour  arriuer  de  la  icy,  a  raifon  des  detours
qu'il  faut  prendre,  pour  euiter  la  rencontre  des  enne-
mis  de  ces  peuples.

Dans  cette  petite  eftendue  de  terre,  fituee  a  l'Eft
quart  de  Suest  d'vn  grand  lac,  appelle  par  quelques-
vns  Mer  douce,  fe  trouue  quatre  Nations,  ou  pluftoft
quatre  diuers  amas  ou  affemblages  de  quelques  Touches
de  families  par  enfemble,  qui  toutes  ayant  commu-
naute  de  langue,  d'ennemis,  [5]  &  de  quelques  autres
interefhs,  ne  font  pref que  diftinguees  que  par  diuerf es
fources  d'ayeuls  &  bifayeuls,  dont  ils  conferuent
cherement  les  noms  &  la  memoire,  elles  s'augmentent
toutesfois  ou  diminuent  par  l'adoption  de  quelques
autres  families,  qui  fe  ioignent  tantoft  auec  les  vnes,
&  tantoft  auec  les  autres,  &  qui  s'en  feparent  auffi
quelquefois  pour  faire  bande  &  nation  a  part.

Le  nom  general  &  commun  a  ces  quatre  Nations,
felon  la  lague  du  pais  eft  (tfendat)  les  noms  particu-
liers  fon[t]  Attignab'antan,  Attigneenongnahac,  Aren-
dahronons,  &  Tohontaenrat.  Les  deux  premiers  font
les  deux  plus  confiderables,  comme  ayant  receu  en
leur  pais  &  adopte  les  autres.  L'vne  depuis  cinquante
ans  en  ca ;  &  l'autre  depuis  trente.  Ces  deux  premiers
parlent  auec  affeurance  des  demeures  de  leurs  An-
ceftres,  &  des  diuerfes,  affietes  de  leurs  bourgades  au
dela  de  deux  cens  ans,  car  comme  il  fe  peut  remar-
quer  dans  le  precedentes  Relations,  ils  font  contraints


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  227

about  thirteen  hundred  leagues  from  France, —  meas-
uring from  France  to  us  in  a  straight  line  towards  the
West,  under  the  same  parallel  of  latitude, —  and  from
Quebec,  the  principal  settlement  of  our  French  peo-
ple in  New  France,  two  hundred  leagues, — although
people  generally  travel  more  than  three  hundred
to  arrive  here  from  that  place,  on  account  of  the  de-
tours that  must  be  made,  to  avoid  an  encounter  with
the  enemies  of  these  tribes.

In  this  small  extent  of  country  —  situated  to  the
East-Southeast  of  a  great  lake,  called  by  some  "  fresh-
water Sea  " — are  to  be  found  four  Nations,  or  rather
four  different  collections  or  assemblages  of  grouped
family  stocks, —  all  of  whom,  having  a  community  of
language,  of  enemies,  [5]  and  of  other  interests,  are
hardly  distinguishable  except  by  their  different  pro-
genitors, grandfathers  and  great-grandfathers,  whose
names  and  memories  they  cherish  tenderly.  They
increase  or  diminish  their  numbers,  however,  by  the
adoption  of  other  families,  who  join  themselves  now
to  some,  now  to  others,  and  who  also  sometimes
withdraw  to  form  a  band  and  a  nation  by  themselves.

The  general  name,  and  that  which  is  common  to
these  four  Nations,  in  the  language  of  the  country
is  Wendat;  the  individual  names  are  Attignawantan,
Attigneenongnahac,  Arendahronons,  and  Tohontaen-
rat.  The  first  two  are  the  two  most  important,  hav-
ing received  the  others  into  their  country,  as  it  were,
and  adopted  them, —  the  one  fifty  years  ago,  and  the
other  thirty.  These  first  two  speak  with  certainty
of  the  settlements  of  their  Ancestors,  and  of  the  dif-
ferent sites  of  their  villages,  for  more  than  two  hun-
dred years  back ;  for,  as  may  have  been  remarked  in
previous  Relations,  they  are  obliged  to  change  their


228  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

de  changer  de  place  au  moins  de  dix  ans  en  dix  ans.
Ces  deux  nations  s'entrequalifient  dans  les  confeils  &
affemblees,  des  noms  de  frere  &  de  fceur.  Elles  font
les  [6]  plus  peuplees  pour  auoir  dans  le  cours  du  temps
adopte  plus  de  families,  &  ces  families  adoptees  rete-
nant  toufiours  les  noms,  &  la  memoire  de  leurs
fouchees,  font  encore  diuerfes  petites  Nations  dans
celles  ou  elles  ont  efte  adoptees,  s'y  conferuant  vn
nom  general,  &  la  communaute  de  quelques  petits
interefts  particuliers  auec  dependance  a  leurs  deux
Capitaines  particuliers,  l'vn  de  guerre,  l'autre  de  con-
feil,  aufquels  fe  rapportent  les  affaires  publiques  de
leur  communaute.

Mais  venons  au  nom  de  Huron,  attribue  originaire-
ment  a  ces  nations  principales  dont  nous  venons  de
parler.

II  y  a  enuiron  quarante  ans  que  ces  peuples  pour
la  premiere  fois  fe  refolurent  de  chercher  quelque
route  affeuree  pour  venir  traiter  eux-mefmes  auec  les
Francois  dont  ils  auoiet  eu  quelque  cognoifsace,
particulierement  par  le  rapport  de  quelques- vns  d'en-
tr'eux,  qui  allans  a  la  guerre  contre  leurs  ennemis,
auoient  donn6  par  occafion  iufques  au  lieu  ou  pour
lors  les  Francois  tenoient  la  traite  auec  les  autres
barbares  de  ces  contrees.  Arriuez  qu'il  furent  aux
Francois,  quelque  Matelot  ou  Soldat  voyant  pour  la
premiere  fois  cette  [7]  forte  de  barbares,  dont  les  vns
portoient  les  cheueux  fillonez;  en  forte  que  fur  le
milieu  de  la  tefte  paroiffoit  vne  raye  de  cheueux  large
d'vn  ou  deux  doigts,  puis  de  part  &  d'autre  autat  de
raze" ;  en  enfuite  vn  autre  raye  de  cheueux  &  d'autres
qui  auoient  vn  cofte  de  la  tefte  tout  raze,  &  l'autre
garny de cheueux  pendants  iufques fur l'efpaule,


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i639  229

locations  at  least  every  ten  years.  These  two  nations
term  each  other  ' '  brother  '  and  ' '  sister, ' '  in  the
councils  and  assemblies.  They  are  the  [6]  most  pop-
ulous, through  having,  in  the  course  of  time,  adopted
more  families ;  and  as  these  adopted  families  always
retain  the  names  and  memories  of  their  founders,
they  are  still  distinct  little  Nations  in  those  where
they  have  been  adopted, —  preserving  thereof  the
general  name,  and  community  of  some  minor  special
interests,  together  with  a  dependence  upon  their  two
special  Captains,  one  of  war  and  the  other  of  council,
to  whom  the  public  affairs  of  their  community  are
reported.

But  let  us  come  to  the  name  "  Huron,"  applied
originally  to  these  principal  nations  of  whom  we  have
just  spoken.

It  is  about  forty  years  since  these  peoples  for  the
first  time  resolved  to  seek  some  safe  route  by  which
to  come  themselves,  and  trade  with  the  French,  of
whom  they  had  some  knowledge, — particularly
through  the  reports  of  some  of  their  number,  who,
going  to  engage  in  war  against  their  enemies,  had
occasionally  been  at  the  place  where  the  French  were
at  that  time  trading  with  the  other  barbarians  of
these  countries.  Arriving  at  the  French  settlement,
some  Sailor  or  Soldier  seeing  for  the  first  time  this
[7]  species  of  barbarians,  some  of  whom  wore  their
hair  in  ridges, — a  ridge  of  hair  one  or  two  fingers
wide  appearing  upon  the  middle  of  their  heads,  and
on  either  side  the  same  amount  being  shaved  off,  then
another  ridge  of  hair;  others  having  one  side  of  the
head  shaved  clean,  and  the  other  side  adorned  with
hair  hanging  to  their  shoulders, —  this  fashion  of
wearing  the  hair  making  their  heads look  to  him


230  LES  RELATIONS  DES JESUITES  [Vol.16


cette  facon  de  cheueux  luy  femblant  des  hures,  cela
le  porta  a  appeller  ces  barbares  Hurons:  &  c'eft  le
nom  qui  depuis  leur  eft  demeure.  Quelques-vns  le
rapportent  a  quelque  autre  femblable  fource,  mais
ce  que  nous  en  venons  de  dire  femble  le  plus  affeure.

Ce  n'eft  done  pas  merueille  fi  dans  les  Autheurs
anciens  il  ne  fe  trouue  rien  du  nom  de  ces  peuples ;
car  pour  ce  nom  Francois,  ils  ne  l'ont  que  depuis  le
commencement  de  ce  fiecle.  Pour  leurs  noms  en  leur
langue,  comme  leur  demeure  eft  bien  auant  dans  les
terres,  y  ayant  plus  de  vingt  iournees  de  leurs  pais
aux  endroits  de  Mer  les  plus  proches,  dot  prefque
les  feuls  riuages  iufques  icy  ont  eft6  conneus  a  nos
Europeans.  Leurs  noms  propres  auffi  bien  que  leurs
perfonnes  &  leurs  pais  ont  efte"  par  le  paffe*  incon-
neus,  particulierement  [8]  eftant  fi  peu  confiderables
en  l'eftedue  de  leur  terre,  &  facon  de  viure  toute  dans
le  commun  des  Sauuage  &  Barbares  de  cette  partie
Septentrionale  de  l'Amerique.  Ces  Sauuages  conti-
nuans  de  venir  tous  les  ans  a  la  traite,  on  s'appriuoifa
bie-toft  auec  eux,  &  prift-on  en  fuite  refolution
d'enuoyer  quelques  Francois  pour  hyuerner  dans  leur
pais,  &  prendre  de  plus  particulieres  cognoiffances  de
ces  peuples,  &  de  leur  langue,  laquelle  ayant  efte
reconnue  conuenir  encore  a  d'autres  nations  voifmes,
de  la  vint  que  dans  la  suite  des  annees,  le  nom  de
Hurons  s'eftendit  dauantage,  &  s'appliqua  encore  aux
peuples  voifins  qui  auoient  communaute  de  langage
auec  les  fufdites  nations,  quoy  qu'elles  fuffent  fepa-
r6es  d'interefts.

Mais  ce  nom  dans  les  id£es  des  Religieux  de  noftre
Compagnie  s'efted  encore  bien  plus  auant,  car  y
ayant  deux  fortes  de  Barbares  dans  ce  tiers  du  nou-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib39  231

like  those  of  boars  [/lures],  led  him  to  call  these  bar-
barians "  Hurons;"  and  this  is  the  name  that  has
clung  to  them  ever  since.  Others  attribute  it  to  some
other,  though  similar  origin ;  but  what  we  have  just
related  seems  the  most  authentic.

It  is,  then,  not  to  be  wondered  at  if  in  the  old  Au-
thors nothing  is  to  be  found  about  the  name  of  these
peoples, —  for,  as  for  this  French  name,  they  have
only  had  it  since  the  beginning  of  this  century.  As
for  their  names  in  their  own  language,  —  since  their
abode  is  far  inland,  it  being  more  than  twenty  days'
journey  from  their  country  to  the  regions  nearest  the
Sea,  of  which  almost  nothing  but  the  coasts  have
thus  far  been  known  to  our  Europeans, — their  proper
names,  as  well  as  their  persons  and  their  country,
have  been  unknown  in  the  past, —  especially  [8]  as
they  are  of  so  little  importance,  on  account  of  the
extent  of  their  territory,  and  because  of  the  fashion  of
living  all  in  common,  followed  by  the  Savages  and
Barbarians  of  this  Northern  part  of  America.  As
these  Savages  continued  to  come  every  year  to  trade,
our  people  soon  became  acquainted  with  them,  and
then  determined  to  send  some  Frenchmen  to  winter
in  their  country,  and  obtain  more  thorough  informa-
tion about  these  tribes  and  their  language.  This
procedure  being  recognized  as  expedient  also  in  the
case  of  other  neighboring  nations,  it  thence  happened
that  in  the  course  of  years  the  name  Huron  extended
farther,  and  was  applied  also  to  the  neighboring
tribes  who  had  a  common  language  with  the  above-
mentioned  nations,  although  they  had  separate  in-
terests.

But  this  name,  in  the  minds  of  the  Religious  of
our  Society,  extends  yet  much  farther. For  as  there


232  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

ueau  monde,  compris  fous  le  nom  de  Nouuelle  France,
fcauoir  les  Erras  &  les  Sedentaires,  noftre  Compagnie
s'eftant  propofe"  la  cormerfion  des  vns  &  des  autres,
elle  y  a  deux  miffions  principales,  l'vne  pour  les  Bar-
bares  Errans  &  vagabonds,  que  Ton  tafche  enfemble
de  [9]  reduire  &  de  faire  Chreftiens;  l'autre  pour  les
peuples  plus  Sedentaires.  La  premiere,  comprend
tous  les  pais  qui  font  depuis  remboucheure  du
fleuue  de  faindt  Laures  dans  la  Mer  Oceane  iufques
a  nous,  ce  qui  faidt  vn  efpace  de  plus  de  trois  ou
quatre  cent  lieues  d'Orient  en  Occident;  fans  par-
ler  de  la  latitude,  particulieremet  du  cofte-  du  Septen-
trion.  Et  la  feconde,  qui  porte  le  nom  de  Million  des
Hurons,  comprend  en  fuite  tous  les  autres  peuples
qui  font  particulierement  vers  1' Occident  &  le  Midy,
tant  que  la  terre  fe  peut  eftedre,  &  au  dela,  s'il  s'y
trouue  des  Ifles  habitees  de  creatures  racheptees  du
Sang  de  Iefus  Chrift,  capables  du  Paradis.

Cela  prefuppofe,  ie  laiffe  a  iuger,  fi  nous  auons
raifon  d'efleuer  les  yeux  &  les  mains  au  Ciel,  pour
prier  le  Maiftre  de  la  moiffon  d'enuoyer  des  Ouuriers
a  fon  champ,  &  fi  nous  n' auons  pas  en  fuite  fujet  de
nous  ef crier  a  qui  il  appartient  fur  terre,  mefeis  quidem
mu  It  a,  operarij  autem  pauci.

Que  fi  on  demande,  quand  eft-ce  que  nous  ferons
venus  a  bout  de  ce  grand  deffein,  veu  qu'a  peine
auons  nous  encore  faidt  vne  demarche,  &  auance"  d'vn
pas  dans  ce  pais  depuis  que  nous  y  fommes,  [10]  A
cela  ie  refpons  premieremet,  que  quand  bien  cela  ne
deut  eftre  accomply,  qu'vn  peu  deuant  la  fin  du
monde,  fi  faut-il  touiours  commencer  deuant  que  de
finir.  En  fecond  lieu  ie  dis,  que  s'il  plaifl  a  Dieu,
donner  autant  de  benedidtion  a  ce  fecond  fiecle  de


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  233

are  two  kinds  of  Barbarians  in  this  third  of  the  new-
world  comprised  under  the  name  of  New  France, —
namely,  the  Wandering  and  the  Sedentary, —  and  as
our  Society  has  undertaken  the  conversion  of  both,
there  are  two  principal  missions, —  one  for  the  Wan-
dering and  nomadic  Barbarians,  whom  we  are  trying
at  the  same  time  to  [9]  communalize  and  to  make
Christians ;  the  other  for  the  more  Sedentary  tribes.
The  first  comprehends  all  the  country  from  the  open-
ing of  the  saint  Lawrence  river  into  the  Ocean  Sea,
up  to  us,  which  is  a  space  of  more  than  three  or  four
hundred  leagues  from  East  to  West,  without  speak-
ing of  its  breadth,  especially  on  the  North.  And  the
second,  which  bears  the  name  of  "Mission  to  the
Hurons,"  consequently  includes  all  the  other  peoples
who  dwell,  especially  towards  the  West  and  South,
as  far  as  the  land  may  extend, —  and  beyond,  if
Islands  are  discovered  there,  inhabited  by  creatures
redeemed  by  the  Blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  qualified
for  Paradise.

That  being  presupposed,  I  leave  you  to  judge
whether  we  have  reason  to  raise  our  eyes  and  hands
to  Heaven,  to  entreat  the  Master  of  the  harvest  to
send  Laborers  to  his  field ;  and  if  we  have  not  there-
fore cause  to  cry  out  to  those  to  whom  it  pertains  on
earth,  messis  quidem  multa,  operarii  autem  pauci.

But  if  some  one  asks  when  we  shall  execute  this
great  plan, —  seeing  that  hardly  have  we  yet  made  a
beginning,  or  advanced  one  step  in  these  countries
since  we  have  been  here, —  [10]  my  answer  to  this
question  is,  first,  that  even  if  this  is  not  to  be  accom-
plished until  shortly  before  the  end  of  the  world,  yet
it  is  always  necessary  to  begin  before  ending.  In
the  second  place,  I  say  that  if  it  please  God  to  give  as


234  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.16

l'aage  de  noftre  Compagnie,  dans  lequel  nous  allons
entrer,  qu'il  en  a  donne"  au  premier;  tel  eft  mainte-
nant  en  vie,  qui  pourra  voir  le  tout  &  l'accompliffe-
ment  de  ce  deffein.  Ie  dis  en  outre,  pour  le  temps
du  progrez  &  aduancement,  qu'il  fera  quand  il  plaira
a  Dieu,  de  qui  feul  depend  le  tout,  puifque  neque  qui
plantat,  neque  qui  rigat  eft  aliquid,  fed  qui  incrementutn
dat  Deus :  &  qui  veut  que  tous  ceux  qui  trauaillent  &
contribuent  a  1'eftablirTement  de  fa  gloire,  efperent
de  la  forte  en  luy,  qu'ils  foient  dans  vne  entiere  refi-
gnation  a  fon  bon  plaifir,  &  dans  vne  genereufe  attente
des  temps  &  des  moments  arreftez  par  fa  fainte  proui-
dence,  fans  branfler  dans  cette  difpofition,  ny  fe  laffer
pour  quelque  retardement  ou  difficulte  qui  arriue,

Ie  croy  toutefois  pouuoir  dire  auec  verit6,  qu'en
ces  4.  ou  cinq  ans  que  Ton  s'eft  applique  affiduement
a  fe  rendre  capable  de  contribuer  a  la  conuerfion  de
ces  Peuples,  [n]  plutoft  qu'a  y  trauailler  effedtiue-
ment,  on  a  plus  faidt  encore  cependant  pour  leur
falut,  qu'en  quelques  autres  endroidts,  ou  on  a  pafle
les  20.  &  trente  ans  deuant  que  d'en  faire  autant:
quand  il  n'y  auroit  que  quelques  centaines  d'enfans,
qu'on  y  a  baptif6,  &  qui  incontinent  apres  le  Baptefme
s'en  font  enuolez  au  Ciel.

Au  refte  ie  ne  penfe  pas  qu'il  fe  rencontre  icy
moins  de  difficultez  capables  d'arrefter  le  cours  de
1 '  Euangile ,  qu '  en  aucun  autre  lieu  du  monde .  Comme
on  poura  facilement  reconoiftre  par  ce  qui  en  a  efte"
dit  dans  les  precedentes  Relations :  la  oil  on  pourra
voir,  que  nous  auons  affaire  a  des  Barbares,  a  qui  on
n'a  encore  iamais  prefche  l'Euangile;  Barbares  fern  -
blables  a  ceux  de  la  Floride,  &  autres  de  l'Amerique
dont  plufieurs  hiftoires  font  mention,  auec  prefque


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  235

many  blessings  to  this  second  century  of  the  ex-
istence of  our  Society,  on  which  we  are  about  to
enter,  as  he  has  given  to  the  first,  there  are  those
now  living  who  may  see  the  entirety  and  the  accom-
plishment of  this  plan.  I  say  besides  that,  as  for  the
time  for  its  progress  and  advancement,  that  will  be
when  it  shall  please  God,  upon  whom  alone  all  de-
pends,—  since  neque  qui  plantat,  neque  qui  rigat  est  ali-
quid,  sed  qui  incrementum  dat  Deus, —  and  who  wishes
all  those  who  labor  and  contribute  to  the  establish-
ment of  his  glory  so  to  hope  in  him,  as  to  be  entirely
resigned  to  his  good  pleasure,  generously  awaiting
the  time  and  moment  fixed  upon  by  his  holy  provi-
dence, without  being  shaken  in  this  frame  of  mind,
nor  becoming  weary  on  account  of  any  delay  or  diffi-
culty that  may  occur.

I  believe  I  can  say  truthfully,  however,  that, — in
the  4  or  five  years  that  we  have  assiduously  studied
how  to  render  ourselves  capable  of  contributing  to
the  conversion  of  these  Peoples,  [n]  rather  than  to
work  effectively  among  them, —  even  more  has  been
done  for  their  salvation  than  in  certain  other  places,
where  20  or  thirty  years  were  spent  before  accom-
plishing as  much,  in  which  time  only  a  few  hundred
children  were  baptized,  who  immediately  after  Bap-
tism flew  away  to  Heaven.

For  the  rest,  I  only  think  that  one  encounters  here
fewer  difficulties  capable  of  arresting  the  progress  of
the  Gospel,  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  world.
This  can  readily  be  understood  from  what  has  been
said  thereon  in  previous  Relations,  where  it  can  be
seen  that  we  have  to  deal  with  Barbarians  to  whom
the  Gospel  has  never  yet  been  preached, —  Barbari-
ans like  those  of Florida,  and  others  in  America,


236  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

vn  general  defe[f]poir  de  potmoir  iamais  rien  profiter
aupres  d'eux  en  faidt  de  Chriftianifme,  fmon  auec
des  affiftances  &  des  procedures  du  tout  extraordi-
naires  qui  font  fouuent  douter  de  la  folidite  de  leur
conuerfion ;  &  cependant  pour  en  venir  a  bout,  nous
n'auos  ny  le  fecours  extraordinaire  du  Ciel  par  le
don  des  langues  &  des  miracles ;  ny  ne  pouuons  auoir,
au  [12]  defaut  de  ce  moyen,  celuy  de  l'efclat,  puif-
fance,  &  Majefte  de  l'Eglife  &  de  noflre  France,  pour
la  grande  &  infurmontable  difficulte  des  chemins,  non
pas  mefme  pour  cette  mefme  raifon,  vn  fecours  &
affiftance  mediocre  pour  fubflfter  dans  cette  barbarie,
ou  nous  fommes  a  tous  coups  menacez  de  mort,  ou  au
moins  de  banniff ement :  de  forte  qu'ayant  les  mefmes
difficultez  que  les  autres,  nous  fommes  deftituez  des
fecours  &  affiftances  ordinaires  &  extraordinaires  pour
les  furmonter.

Apres  tout  ie  ne  fcay  ce  que  c'eft,  ny  ce  que  Dieu
veut  faire,  ny  par  quel  moyen?  mais  nous  fommes
tous  pleins  d'efperace,  qu'auec  patience  &  courage
celuy  a  qui  rien  n'eft  impoffible,  &  qui  de  rien  faidt
tout  ce  qu'il  veut,  fera  plus  que  nous  n'oferions  dire.
Ce  qui  s'eft  paff6  cette  ann£e  nous  donne  plus  de
fujet  que  iamais  de  le  penfer  de  la  forte.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63q  237

who  are  mentioned  in  several  histories,  with  an  al-
most general  despair  of  ever  being  able  to  gain  any-
thing from  them  in  the  matter  of  Christianity,  except
with  aids  and  methods  altogether  extraordinary,
which  often  call  in  doubt  the  soundness  of  their  con-
version. And  yet,  in  order  to  win  success,  we  have
neither  the  extraordinary  help  of  Heaven  in  the  gift
of  languages  and  of  miracles,  nor  can  we  have,  in
[12]  default  of  this  intervention,  that  of  the  splendor,
power,  and  Majesty  of  the  Church  and  of  our  France,
on  account  of  the  great  and  insurmountable  difficul-
ties of  the  roads;  nor  even,  for  this  same  reason,  a
moderate  degree  of  succor  and  assistance  that  we  may
live  in  this  barbarism,  where  we  are  every  moment
threatened  with  death,  or  at  least  with  banishment.
Therefore,  having  the  same  difficulties  as  the  others,
we  are  destitute  of  the  ordinary  and  extraordinary
help  and  assistance  to  surmount  them.

After  all  I  do  not  know  what  it  means,  nor  what
God  intends  to  do,  nor  in  what  way ;  but  we  are  all
full  of  hope  that,  with  patience  and  courage,  he  to
whom  nothing  is  impossible,  and  who  from  nothing
produces  whatever  he  wills,  will  do  more  than  we
would  dare  to  say.  What  has  taken  place  this  year
gives  us  more  reason  than  ever  to  think  so.


238  LES  EEL  A  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  16


[13] CHAP. II.

DE  L'EMPLOY EN  GENERAL  DES  RELIGIEUX  DE  NOSTRE
COMPAGNIE EN CES QUARTIERS.

ARRIUANT  icy  le  26.  d'Aouft  de  l'an  pafle  1638.
i'y  trouuay  fept  Religieux  Preftres  de  noftre
Compagnie  diftribuez  en  deux  maifons  on
Refidences  eftablies  aux  deux  Bourgs  les  plus  confi-
derables  des  deux  principales  Nations,  des  quatre  qui
compofent  les  vrays  Hurons,  ainfi  que  nous  auons  6.6-
duit  au  Chap,  precedent.  Ie  fis  done  le  huidtiefme :
&  enuiron  vn  mois  apres  arriuerent  le  P.  Simon  le
Moyne,  &  le  P.  Francois  du  Peron,  qui  accomplirent
le  nombre  de  dix.  Six  ont  la  plufpart  du  temps
demeure  en  la  Refidence  de  la  Conception  au  Bourg
d'Oflofane,  le  P.  Francois  le  Mercier,  furnomme-  par-
my  les  Sauuages  Chaiiofe.  Le  P.  Antoine  Daniel,
furnomme  Antfennen.  Le  P.  Pierre  Chaftelain  fur-
nomme' Arioo.  Le  P.  Charles  Gamier,  furnomme'
tfracha.  Le  P.  Francois  du  Perron,  furnomme'  Anon-
chiara:  Et  moy  a  qui  on  a  donne  le  nom  d'Achien-
daffe.  [14]  Et  quatre  en  la  Refidence  de  S.  Iofeph
au  bourg,  de  Teanauftaiae.  Le.P.  lean  de  Brebeuf,
furnomm6  Echon.  Le  P.  Ifaac  Iogues,  furnomm6
Ondeffone,  Le  P.  Paul  Ragueneau,  furnomme-  Aon-
dechet6,  &  le  P.  Simon  le  Moyne,  furnomme  8ane.

La  raifon  de  ces  furnoms  vient,  de  ce  que  les  Sau-
uages ne  pouuant  ordinairement  prononcer  ny  nos
noms,  ny  nos  furnoms,  pour  n'auoir  en  leur  langue


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  239


[13] CHAP. II.

OF THE GENERAL OCCUPATION OF  THE RELIGIOUS  OF
OUR SOCIETY IN THESE QUARTERS.

UPON  my  arrival  here,  on  the  26th  of  August  of
last  year,  1638,  I  found  seven  Religious,
Priests  of  our  Society,  distributed  in  two
houses  or  Residences,  established  in  the  two  most
important  Villages  of  the  two  principal  Nations  of
the  four  which  compose  the  real  Hurons,  as  we  have
explained  in  the  preceding  Chapter.  I  made,  then,
the  eighth ;  and  about  a  month  afterwards  there  ar-
rived Father  Simon  le  Moyne  and  Father  Francois
du  Peron,  who  increased  the  number  to  ten.  Six
have  remained,  most  of  the  time,  in  the  Residence
of  la  Conception  in  the  Village  of  Ossosane, —  Fa-
ther Francois  le  Mercier,  surnamed  among  the  Sav-
ages Chauose;  Father  Antoine  Daniel,  surnamed
Anwennen ;  Father  Pierre  Chastelain,  surnamed
Arioo;  Father  Charles  Garnier,  surnamed  Ouracha;
Father  Francois  du  Perron,  surnamed  Anonchiara;
and  I,  to  whom  they  have  given  the  name  Achien-
dasse.  [14]  And  four  are  in  the  Residence  of  St.
Joseph,  in  the  village  of  Teanaustaiae, —  Father  Jean
de  Brebeuf,  surnamed  Echon;  Father  Isaac  Jogues,
surnamed  Ondessone;  Father  Paul  Ragueneau,  sur-
named Aondechete;  and  Father  Simon  le  Moyne,
surnamed  Wane.

The  reason  for  these  surnames  arises  from  the  fact
that  the  Savages,  not  being  ordinarily  able  to  pro-


240  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

l'vfage  de  plufieurs  confonantes  qui  s'y  rencontrent,
ils  font  le  poffible  pour  en  approcher,  que  li  ils  n'en
peuuent  venir  a  bout,  ils  cherchent  en  la  place  des
mots  vfitez;  dans  le  pais  qu'ils  puiffent  facilement
prononcer,  &  qui  ayent  quelque  rapport  ou  a  nos  noms,
ou  a  leur  fignification.  Mais  d'autant  qu'il  arriue
quelquefois  qu'il  rencontrent  affez  mal  a  propos,  la
confirmation  ou  le  changement  des  noms  qu'ils  ont
donne  pendant  le  voyage,  fe  faict  dans  le  pais.  Mais
c'eft  affez  de  ce  fuiet;  venons  a  nos  occupations  ordi-
naires  en  ces  contrees.

Depuis  les  quatres  heures  iufques  aux  huidt  du
matin,  le  temps  eft  employe  aux  Meffes  &  autres
deuotions  particulieres.  Sur  les  huidt  heures  la  porte
de  la  Maifon  [15]  s'ouure  aux  Sauuages  qui  par  le
paffe*  ne  fe  fermoit  plus  iufques  aux  quatre  heures  du
foir,  tant  pour  fe  redimer  de  la  vexation,  que  autre  -
ment  on  apprehendoit,  les  Sauuages  ne  femblant  pas
capables  d'vn  refus  d'entrer,  au  moins  de  iour,  dans
les  cabanes  qui  font  dans  leur  pais,  qui  ne  font  pour
lors  ordinairement  fermees  a  perfonne,  que  pour
prendre  occafion  de  profiter  de  cette  couftume,  car
autant  de  barbares  qui  vous  viennent  voir,  ce  font
autant  de  Maiftres  &  d'efcoliers  qui  nous  vienent  trou-
uer,  &  vous  deliurent  de  la  peine  de  les  aller  cher-
cher.  Maiftres,  dis-ie,  pour  l'vfage  de  la  langue;
Efcoliers,  pour  les  affaires  de  leur  falut  &  du  Chrifti-
anifme.

Toutesfois  l'importunit6  de  ces  Barbares  faineants
au  dernier  point,  deuenant  infupportable,  &  prefque
d'orefnauant  inutile,  depuis  qu'on  a  trouue  le  fecret
de  leur  langue,  on  a  pris  vne  honnefte  liberte  de  n'y
plus  admettre  que  ceux  auec  lefquels  on  efpere  pro-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  241

nounce  either  our  names  or  our  surnames, —  as  they
do  not  have  in  their  language  several  consonants  that
are  found  therein, —  get  as  near  to  them  as  they  can;
but,  if  they  cannot  succeed,  they  seek  instead  words
used  in  their  own  country,  which  they  can  readily
pronounce,  and  which  have  some  connection  either
with  our  names  or  with  their  meaning.  But  inas-
much as  it  sometimes  happens  that  they  make  rather
unsuitable  guesses,  the  confirmation  or  change  of
names  that  they  have  given  during  the  voyage  is
made  when  they  reach  home.  But  enough  of  this
subject ;  let  us  come  to  our  usual  occupations  in  these
countries.

From  four  o'clock  until  eight  in  the  morning,  the
time  is  passed  in  Masses  and  other  special  devotions.
About  eight  o'clock  the  door  of  the  House  [15]  is
opened  to  the  Savages ;  in  the  past,  this  was  not  closed
again  until  four  o'clock  in  the  evening, —  as  much
to  save  themselves  the  annoyance  that  was  other-
wise apprehended, —  the  Savages  not  seeming  able  to
understand  a  refusal  to  enter,  at  least  in  the  daytime,
the  cabins  that  are  in  their  country,  which  are  not
usually  closed  then  to  any  one, — as  to  take  oppor-
tunity to  profit  by  this  custom.  For,  whatever  the
number  of  barbarians  that  come  to  see  you,  they  are
so  many  Masters  and  pupils  visiting  you,  and  saving
you  the  trouble  of  going  to  them, —  Masters,  I  say,
in  the  use  of  the  language ;  Pupils,  as  regards  their
salvation  and  Christianity.

However, —  the  importunity  of  these  Barbarians,
lazy  to  the  last  degree,  becoming  unbearable,  and
henceforward  almost  profitless,  since  we  have  found
the  secret  of  their  language, —  we  have  taken  the  rea-
c iable  liberty  of  no  longer  admitting  any  except


242  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.16

liter.  On  a  eu  vn  peu  de  peine  d'arriuer  a  ce  point,
mais  Dieu  luy-mefme  femble  auoir  conduit  cette
affaire,  de  forte  que  nous  en  fommes  heureufement
en  poffeffion,  auec  vne  confolation  grande  du  dedans
&  dehors  de  nos  maifons,  except^  [16]  peut-eftre  de
quelques-vns  entre  ces  Barbares  qui  ont  l'efprit  plus
mal  fait.

Ceux  de  nos  Peres  qui  font  de  garde,  fe  tiennent  a
leur  tour  a  la  cabane,  &  particulierement  celuy  qui
tient  la  petite  efcole  des  enfans,  des  Chreftiens  &
Cathecumenes :  les  autres  s'en  vont  au  Bourg,  faire  la
ronde  &  les  vifites  de  leur  quartier,  le  Bourg  eftant
diuife  en  autant  de  parties  qu'il  y  a  de  perfonnes
intelligentes  a  la  langue,  &  par  confequent  capables
de  trauailler.  Mais  pour  le  peu  d'ouuriers,  qu'il  y  a
pour  maintenant,  tel  fe  trouue  qui  eft  charge1  de  qua-
rante  cabanes,  dans  plufieurs  defquelles  fe  trouuent
quatre  &  cinq  feux;  c'eft  a  dire,  huidt  ou  dix  families,
ce  qui  leur  tailleroit  beaucoup  plus  de  befongne  qu'ils
n'en  pourroient  expedier;  fi  leur  courage  ne  leur
donnoit  des  forces  pour  cela,  &  au  dela.

Ces  vifites  confiftent  premierement  a  voir,  &  a  faire
que  pas  vn,  foit  enfant,  foit  plus  aage,  malade  ne
meurent  fans  Baptefme,  ou  fans  inftrudtion ;  pour  a
quoy  arriuer  plus  facilement,  on  les  fecoure  &  affifte
temporellement  de  tout  ce  que  Ton  peut,  &  particuli-
erement de  remedes,  &  faignees,  qui  ont  de  fort  bons
effects.  En  2.  [17]  lieu,  on  veille  a  prendre  les  occa-
fions  d'inftruire  ceux  qui  fe  portent  bien,  &  leur
inculquer  fur  tout,  les  matieres  des  dernieres  Cate-
chif mes,  ou  conf eils  a  parler  felon  l'air  du  pais ;  &
les  difpofer  a  l'intelligence  des  fuiuants.  Mais  fur
tout  on  s'applique  a  recognoiilre  les  terres  ou  per-


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6jg  243

those  by  whom  we  hope  to  profit.  It  was  somewhat
difficult  to  bring  this  about;  but  God  himself  seems
to  have  guided  the  affair  so  that  we  have  fortunately
come  out  victorious,  with  great  comfort  inside  and
outside  our  houses, —  except  [16]  perhaps,  in  the  case
of  a  few  of  these  Barbarians,  whose  minds  are  more
perverted.

Those  of  our  Fathers  who  remain  upon  guard  take
turns  in  staying  in  the  cabin,  and  especially  the  one
who  keeps  the  little  school  for  children,  Christians,
and  Catechumens;  the  others  go  to  the  Village  to
make  the  rounds  and  visits  in  their  quarters,  the
Village  being  divided  into  as  many  districts  as  there
are  persons  familiar  with  the  language  and  conse-
quently capable  of  working.  But  on  account  of  the
few  laborers  there  are  now  for  this  purpose,  some  of
us  are  charged  with  forty  cabins, —  in  several  of
which  there  are  four  or  five  fires,  that  is,  eight  or
ten  families, —  which  would  lay  out  for  them  much
more  work  than  they  could  execute,  if  their  courage
did  not  give  them  strength  for  that,  and  even  more.

These  visits  consist,  first,  in  seeing  the  sick,  and
taking  care  that  not  one  of  them,  child  or  adult,  dies
without  Baptism  or  without  instruction, —  to  attain
which  more  easily,  we  give  them  all  the  temporal
relief  and  assistance  possible,  and  especially  reme-
dies and  bleedings,  which  have  very  good  effects.
In  the  2nd  [17]  place,  we  watch  to  seize  opportuni-
ties to  instruct  those  who  are  well,  and  to  inculcate
in  them  especially  the  instruction  at  the  last  Cate-
chisms,—  or  councils,  to  speak  according  to  the  man-
ner of  the  country, —  and  to  prepare  them  for  an  in-
telligent understanding  of  the  next  ones.  But,  above
all,  we  apply ourselves  to discovering  the  soil  or


244  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

fonnes  dans  lefquelles  le  grain  &  la  femence  de  la
parole  de  Dieu  aura  pris  racine,  pour  en  fuite  les  con-
fiderer  &  cultiuer  comme  Catechumenes.

A  quatre  ou  cinq  heures,  felon  la  faifon,  on  fe
retire,  &  les  Sauuages  qui  font  en  noftre  cabane  s'en
vont;  en  fuite  dequoy  on  entre  en  conference,  tantofl
des  empefchemens  &  des  moyens  d'auancer  la  conuer-
fion  de  ces  peuples;  tan  toft  des  cas  qui  regardent
l'eflabliffement  d'vne  nouuelle  Eglife,  &  le  plus  ordi-
nairement  des  preceptes  de  la  langue,  &  des  mots  &
facons  de  parler  qu'on  a  entendu  de  nouueau;  dans
lefquels  exercices,  &  autres  qui  regardent  le  Spirituel
&  le  deuoir  particulier  d'vn  chacun,  le  temps  fe  trouue
fi  court,  qu'encore  qu'il  foit  veritable,  qu'il  y  ait  icy
difette  de  toutes  les  douceurs  qui  font  en  France,  n'y
ayant  que  les  quatre  elemens ;  &  du  refte  pas  plus  [18]
de  nourriture  ordinaire,  &  de  couuert  que  ce  qu'il  en
faut  pour  ne  pas  mourir  de  faim  &  de  froid;  ie  n'y
entens  toutesfois  qu'vne  feule  plainte.  Qu'il  n'y  a
point  de  temps;  &  en  effet  il  n'y  en  a  pas  a  demy.

Les  Catechifmes  publics  fe  font  plufieurs  fois  la
femaine  en  cefte  maniere,  Premierement,  les  iours
de  Dimanche  &  de  Fefte,  eftant  deftinez  pour  l'in-
ftruction  propre  &  particuliere  de  nos  Neophytes  &
nouueaux  Chreftiens,  le  matin  pendant  le  temps  de
la  Meffe,  on  leur  donne  vne  inflrudtion  en  facon  de
profne,  ou  on  a  efgard  a  les  inftruire  de  ce  qu'ils
doiuent  fcauoir,  &  tout  enfemble  former  leur  efprit  a
la  piete  &  deuoti'on  Chreftienne.  L'aprefdine,  apres
des  Vefpres  on  les  nourrit  a  ce  commencement  de  la
pure  parole  de  Dieu,  leur  racomptant  vn  Dimanche
les  hiftoires  &  la  fuite  de  l'ancien  Teftament ;  auec
reflexion  fur  le  profit  qu'ils  en  doiuent  tirer,  &  le


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1639  245

persons  where  the  seed  and  the  germ  of  the  word  of
God  may  have  taken  root,  in  order  to  give  our  atten-
tion to  them  afterwards  and  cultivate  them  as  Cate-
chumens.

At  four  or  five  o'clock,  according  to  the  season,
we  withdraw,  and  the  Savages  who  are  in  our  cabin
go  away;  then  we  have  a  conference,  sometimes  on
the  obstacles  against,  and  means  for  advancing  the
conversion  of  these  peoples;  sometimes  on  matters
incident  to  the  establishment  of  a  new  Church ;  but
generally  upon  the  rules  of  the  language,  and  the
new  words  and  idioms  that  we  have  heard.  In  these
exercises,  and  in  others  that  regard  the  Spiritual  and
the  individual  duties  of  each  one,  the  time  passes  so
quickly,  that  although  it  may  be  true  that  there  is
here  a  dearth  of  all  the  comforts  that  are  found  in
France, —  as  we  have  only  the  four  elements,  and,
besides,  no  more  [18]  of  ordinary  food  and  covering
than  that  necessary  to  keep  us  from  dying  with  hun-
ger and  cold, —  yet  I  have  only  heard  one  complaint,
namely,  that  there  is  not  time  enough.  And  in  fact
there  is  not  enough,  by  half.

Public  Catechisms  are  held  several  times  a  week
in  this  way:  First,  Sundays  and  Feast  days  are  set
aside  for  the  suitable  and  individual  instruction  of  our
Neophytes  and  new  Christians.  In  the  morning,
during  the  Mass,  they  are  given  instruction  in  the
form  of  a  sermon,  in  which  we  are  careful  to  instruct
them  in  what  they  ought  to  know,  and  at  the  same
time  train  their  minds  to  piety  and  Christian  devo-
tion. In  the  afternoon,  after  Vespers,  we  feed  them
in  these  beginnings  with  the  pure  word  of  God, —
relating  to  them  one  Sunday  the  histories  and  the
connection  of the old Testament, with  reflections


246  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.16

Dimanche  fuiuant  on  en  fait  autant  du  Nouueau,  le
tout  pour  fe  conformer  a  ce  qui  eft  efcrit,  Hcec  eft  vita
(Sterna,  vt  cognofcant  te  Deum,  &  quern  mijifti  Ie/um
Chriftum.

On  prend  vn  iour  ouurier  de  la  femaine,  pour
faire  vn  autre  inftruction  publique  [19]  a  tous  indiffe-
remment,  foit  fidelles,  foit  infidelles :  ce  qui  fe  paffe
en  cefte  maniere.  Sur  l'heure  du  Midy  on  s'en  va
crier  par  le  bourg,  ou  auec  la  clochette  inuiter,  dans
les  rue's  &  carrefours,  au  confeil,  mais  au  confeil  des
confeils,  qui  concerne  l'affaire  importante  du  falut.
Au  lieu  ou  il  n'a  point  de  Chappelle,  &  ou  noftre
cabane  eft  trop  petite,  on  le  fa[i]ct  le  plus  que  Ton
peut  au  dehors,  &  lors  que  le  temps  &  la  faifon  ne  le
permettent,  on  le  f  aidt  au  dedans ;  mais  pour  lors  on
n'admet  que  les  hommes  referuant  les  femmes  &  les
enfans  au  lendemain.  Le  monde  eftant  affemble,
apres  l'inuocation  du  faindt  Efprit,  on  dit  ou  Ton
chante  vne  Oraifon  propre  a  cet  exercice  en  langue
Huronne.  Apres  quoy  on  commence  l'inftrudtion,
qui  eft  quelquefois  interrompue  par  1' approbation  ou
obiedtions  des  Sauuages :  a  la  fin  de  laquelle  on  leur
fait  faire  quelques  prieres,  &  entr'autres  vne  petite,
ou  eft  enferme  l'adte  de  contrition.  A  l'iffue  de  cela,
on  fe  met  a  chanter  le  Credo,  les  Commandemens,  le
Pater,  YAue,  &  autres  prieres,  tant  &  fi  peu  qu'on
voit  les  Sauuages  attentifs,  &  en  eftat  d'en  faire  leur
profit.

[20]  Outre  cefte  inftrudtion  commune,  on  en  fait
quelqu'autre  iour  de  la  femaine  vne  moins  generale,
ou  font  inuitees  nommement  les  perfonnes  qu'on
defire  y  affifter,  qui  font  les  Capitaines  &  les  plus
notables  du  Bourg  qui  ont  efte'  recogneus  auoir  quel-


1639]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j9  247

upon  the  profit  they  ought  to  derive  from  them ;  and,
the  next  Sunday,  doing  the  same  thing  from  the
New, —  all,  that  it  may  conform  to  what  is  written,
Hcec  est  vita  aterna,  ut  cognoscant  te  Deum,  et  quern  mi-
sisti  Jesum  Christum.

We  take  one  working-day  of  the  week  to  give  an-
other public  lesson  [19]  to  all  alike, — be  they  believ-
ers or  unbelievers, —  which  takes  place  thus:  At  the
hour  of  Noon,  a  man  goes  calling  aloud  through  the
village,  or  with  the  bell,  in  the  streets  and  public
places,  inviting  to  the  council,  but  to  the  council  of
councils,  which  concerns  the  important  matter  of  sal-
vation. In  a  place  where  there  is  no  Chapel,  and
where  our  cabin  is  too  small,  we  do  this  as  well  as
we  can  outdoors;  and  when  the  weather  and  season
do  not  permit  it,  it  is  done  indoors, — but  then  we
admit  only  the  men,  reserving  the  women  and  chil-
dren for  the  next  day.  The  people  having  assem-
bled, after  the  invocation  of  the  holy  Ghost  we  say
or  chant  a  Prayer  suitable  to  this  service,  in  the
Huron  language.  After  this  we  begin  the  instruction,
which  is  sometimes  interrupted  by  the  approbation
or  objections  of  the  Savages ;  at  the  end  of  this,  we
have  them  say  a  few  prayers,  and,  among  others,
a  little  one  in  which  is  included  the  act  of  contrition.
After  that,  we  engage  in  singing  the  Credo,  the  Com-
mandments, the  Pater,  the  Ave,  and  other  prayers, —
many  or  few,  as  we  see  the  Savages  attentive  and  in
a  condition  to  profit  by  them.

[20]  Besides  this  public  instruction,  on  another  day
in  the  week  we  give  a  less  general  one,  to  which  are
especially  invited  the  people  that  we  wish  to  have
present, —  the  Captains  and  most  notable  men  of  the
Village  who  have  been  recognized  as  having  pious


248  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.16

que  pieufe  affection  &  inclination  au  Chriftianifme,
&  aufquels  il  importe  particulierement  de  faire  bien
entendre  les  myfteres  de  noftre  foy,  &  qu'ils  foient
deuement  informez  de  ce  que  nous  pretendons  en  ce
pais,  par  toutes  ces  fortes  d'affemblees  &  d'appareil.

Outre  tout  ce  que  deffus,  au  lieu  oil  les  Catechu-
menes  ne  peuuent  eftre  fufnfamment  inftruidts  par
des  conferences  particulieres  de  ceux  qui  ont  font  [sc.
foin]  de  leurs  cabanes,  on  les  affemble  tous  les  iours
le  foir,  ou  en  commun  on  leur  donne  l'inftrudtion
que  Ton  iuge  le  plus  a  propos,  touchant  ce  qu'ils
doiuent  fcauoir  deuant  que  d' eftre  baptifez.

On  ne  s'eft  pas  contente  de  trauailler  dans  les
Bourgs  oil  nous  auons  des  refidences;  mais  nous  fen-
tans  vn  peu  plus  forts,  que  par  le  paffe,  d'ouuriers  in-
telligens  en  la  langue,  on  a  entrepris  des  Miffions  par
les  Bourgs  &  villages  du  pais ;  particulierement  [2 1]
pendant  l'Hyuer,  qui  eft  le  feul  temps  propre  a  cela.
Les  Hurons  en  cefte  feule  faifon  faifant  demeure  en
leurs  cabanes,  en  tout  autre  temps  eitants  ou  a  la
guerre,  ou  en  traite,  ou  a  la  chaffe,  ou  a  la  pefche.
On  parcourra  premierement  tout  le  pais  qui  le  pre-
mier nous  a  receu,  puis  on  pouffera  plus  auant;  &
toufiours  de  plus  en  plus,  iufques  a  ce  que  noftre
tafche  foit  accomplie,  qui  comme  nous  auons  deiia
dit,  n'eft  bornee  que  des  limites  du  Soleil  couchant.

Ie  ne  parle  point  icy  du  foin  du  Seminaire  erige  a
Quebec  en  f aueur  de  ces  peuples ;  c£t  article  eftant
eiloigne  de  nous  de  300.  lieues.  C'eft  vn  ouurage
qui  vn  iour  fera  vn  plus  grand  effect  pour  le  feruice
de  Dieu  en  ces  contrees,  que  ne  fe  perfuadent  ceux
que  Dieu  infpire  d'y  contribuer;  quoy  que  peut  eftre
ce  ne  foit  pas  de  la  facon  qu'ils  l'ont  penfe\


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  /6jg  249

tendencies  and  a  leaning  towards  Christianity,  and
whom  it  is  particularly  important  to  make  well  under-
stand the  mysteries  of  our  faith,  and  to  have  them
duly  informed  of  our  intentions  in  this  country
through  all  these  various  meetings  and  preparations.

In  addition  to  all  the  above,  in  a  place  where  the
Catechumens  cannot  be  sufficiently  instructed  through
private  talks  with  those  who  have  charge  of  their
cabins,  they  are  assembled  every  evening  and  are
together  given  the  instruction  considered  most  suit-
able, touching  the  things  they  should  know  before
being  baptized.

We  are  not  satisfied  with  working  in  the  Villages
where  we  have  residences;  but  feeling  ourselves  a
little  stronger,  than  m  the  past,  in  workers  familiar
with  the  language,  we  have  undertaken  Missions  in
the  Villages,  large  and  small,  of  the  country, —  es-
pecially [21]  during  the  Winter,  which  is  the  only
time  suitable  for  this.  The  Hurons  take  up  their
abode  in  their  cabins  at  this  season  only ;  at  all  other
times,  they  are  either  at  war,  or  engaged  in  trading,
hunting,  or  fishing.  We  shall  first  go  all  over  the
country  which  was  the  first  to  receive  us,  then  push
farther  on, —  and  always  on  and  on, —  until  we  have
accomplished  our  task,  which,  as  we  have  already
said,  is  only  bounded  by  the  setting  Sun.

I  say  nothing  here  of  the  care  of  the  Seminary
erected  at  Quebec  for  the  benefit  of  these  peoples,
that  affair  being  300  leagues  away  from  us.  It  is  a
work  that  some  day  will  cause  greater  results  for  the
service  of  God  in  these  countries  than  those  whom
God  inspires  to  contribute  thereto  imagine, —  al-
though it  will  not  be,  perhaps,  in  the  way  they  have
expected  it.


250  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.16

Le  libertinage  des  enfans  en  ces  pays  eft  fl  grand,
&  ils  fe  trouuent  fi  incapables  de  reglement  &  de
difcipline,  Que  tant  s'en  faut  que  nous  puiffions  efpe-
rer  la  conuerfion  du  pays  par  l'inftrudtion  des  enfans ;
qu'il  faut  defefperer  leur  inftrudtion,  fans  la  conuer-
fion des  parens.  Et  par  confequent,  [22]  tout  bien
confidere,  la  premiere  chofe  a  laquelle  nous  deuons
veiller,  c'eft  a  la  ftabilite  des  manages  de  nos  Chre-
ftiens,  qui  nous  donnent  des  enfants,  qui  de  bonne
heure  foient  efleuez  a  la  crainte  de  Dieu,  &  de  leurs
parents.  Voila  le  feul  moyen  de  fournir  les  Semi-
naires  de  ieunes  plantes,  pour  a  quoy  arriuer;
quelques  charitez  f  eroient  merueilleufement  bien  em-
ployees, par  lefquelles  on  pourroit  obuier  aux  difficul-
tezquife  rencontrent  a  1' execution  de  la  ftabilite  des
mariages,  contre  la  couftume  immemoriale  du  pais,
vne  trentaine  de  perfonnes  donnant  vne  fois  pour
toutes,  chacune  vne  douzaine  d'efcus  l'vne  portant
l'autre,  donneroient  icy  cinquante  mariages  ftables,
qui  f eroient,  dans  quelque  temps,  vn  monde  ou  plu-
ftoft  vn  Paradis  tout  nouueau.  Que  s'il  y  auoit  quel-
que fondation  pour  cela;  encore  mieux:  il  en  fera
ce  qu'il  plaira  a  Dieu.

Cependant  le  Seminaire  de  Quebec  pourra  feruir,
pour  y  retirer  les  enfans  de  nos  Chreftiens  qui  fe
trouueront  de  bon  naturel :  il  feruira  en  outre  pour
des  perfonnes  aagees,  qui  defireront  tout  de  bon  eftre
a  loifir  &  plus  en  repos  intimites:  &  [23]  pour  ce  fe
veulent  efloigner  du  pais  pour  quelque  temps.  Aufli
bien  fi  cenx  qui  retournent  du  feminaire,  ne  font
promptement  liez  par  le  mariage,  le  torrent  des  mau-
uaifez  couftumes  &  compagnies  eft  fi  grand,  qu'il  fau-
droit  du  miracle  pour  y  rentier. L'aage  en  outre  de


1639]  LE  /EUNE'S  RELATION,  i63g  251

The  freedom  of  the  children  in  these  countries  is
so  great,  and  they  prove  so  incapable  of  government
and  discipline,  that,  far  from  being  able  to  hope  for
the  conversion  of  the  country  through  the  instruction
of  the  children,  we  must  even  despair  of  their  instruc-
tion without  the  conversion  of  the  parents.  And
consequently,  [22]  all  well  considered,  the  first  mat-
ter to  which  we  should  attend  is  the  stability  of  the
marriages  of  our  Christians,  who  give  us  children
that  may  in  good  time  be  reared  in  the  fear  of  God
and  of  their  parents.  Behold  the  only  means  of  fur-
nishing the  Seminaries  with  young  plants.  To  attain
this,  some  charitable  gifts  would  be  wonderfully  use-
ful, by  means  of  which  we  could  obviate  the  difficul-
ties that  are  encountered  in  bringing  about,  contrary
to  the  immemorial  custom  of  the  country,  the  stabil-
ity of  marriages.  Some  thirty  persons  giving,  once
for  all,  an  average  of  a  dozen  ecus  each,  would  in-
sure fifty  stable  marriages  here,  which  would  after
some  time  form  a  world,  or  rather  a  Paradise,  entire-
ly new, —  and  still  more  if  only  there  were  some
endowment  for  it. That  will  be  as  God  shall  please.

Meanwhile,  the  Seminary  at  Quebec  may  serve  as
a  place  to  receive  the  children  of  our  Christians  who
shall  prove  to  be  of  good  dispositions ;  it  will  serve,
besides,  for  adults  who  shall  desire  in  earnest  to  be
instructed  at  leisure  and  more  quietly,  and  [23]  for
this  purpose  may  wish  to  be  absent  from  their  coun-
try for  a  time.  Indeed,  if  those  who  return  from  the
seminary  are  not  promptly  bound  in  marriage,  the
torrent  of  bad  customs  and  bad  company  is  so  strong,
that  some  miracle  would  be  needed  to  enable  them
to  resist  it.  The  age,  besides,  of  certain  seminarists
will  give  weight  and  authority  to  their  words,  and  to


252  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.16

tels  feminariftes  donnera  &u  poids  &  de  rauthorite"  a
leurs  paroles,  &  au  rapport  de  ce  qu'ils  auront  veu  de
bien  parmy  la  Chreftiente  de  Quebec.

Nous  auons  auffi  penfe  d'appliquer  quelques-vns  a
la  connoiffance  de  nouuelles  langues.  Nous  iettions
les  yeux  fur  trois  autres  des  Peuples  plus  voifins ;  fur
celles  des  Algonquains  efpars  de  tous  coftez,  &  au
Midy;  &  au  Septentrion  de  noflre  grand  Lac:  Sur
celle  de  la  Nation  neutre  qui  eft  vne  maiftreffe  porte
pour  les  pais  Meridionaux ;  fur  celle  de  la  Nation  des
Puants,  qui  eft  vn  pafTage  des  plus  confiderables  pour
les  pais  Occidentaux,  vn  peu  plus  Septentrionaux :
Mais  nous  ne  nous  fommes  pas  trouuez  encore  afTez
forts  pour  conferuer  l'acquis,  &  fonger  enfemble  a
tant  de  nouuelles  conqueftes ;  de  forte  que  nous  auons
iuge  plus  a  propos  de  difTerer  l'execution  de  ce  deflein
encore  [24]  pour  quelque  temps,  &  de  nous  contenter
cependant  de  prendre  l'occafion  que  Dieu  nous  enuoy-
oit  a  noftre  porte,  d'entrer  en  quelque  nation  de  la
langue  des  Neutres,  par  l'arriuee  en  ce  pais  des  8ea-
nohronons,  qui  s'y  font  refugiez,  comme  nous  dirons
cy-apres ;  lef quels  faifoient  vne  des  Nations  afloci^es
a  la  Nation  neutre.

Nous  auons  d'autant  plus  facilement  quitte  la  pen-
fee  de  nous  appliquer  pour  le  prefent,  a  la  langue  des
Algonquains,  que  nos  Peres  de  Quebec  &  des  trois
riuieres  s'y  appliquent  fortement.  Nous  efperons
de  la,  quelque  braue  ouurier,  qui  vienne  icy  rompre
la  glace,  &  nous  donner  entree  &  ouuerture  parmy
ces  peuples  qui  font  autour  de  nous,  &  n'ont  l'vfage
d'autre  langue,  que  de  1'Algonquine.  Plaife  a  la
diuine  Majefte'  donner  benedidtion  a  toutes  ces  pen-
tees  &  entreprifes.


1639]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3g  253

the  report  of  the  good  they  will  have  seen  among
the  Christian  people  of  Quebec.

We  have  also  thought  of  setting  apart  some  for
the  study  of  new  languages.  We  were  considering
three  other  languages,  of  Peoples  that  are  nearest  to
us, —  that  of  the  Algonquains,  scattered  on  all  sides,
both  to  the  South  and  to  the  North  of  our  great
Lake;  that  of  the  neutral  Nation,  which  is  a  main
gateway  for  the  Southern  tribes ;  that  of  the  Nation  of
the  Stinkards,14  which  is  one  of  the  most  important
openings  for  the  Western  tribes,  and  somewhat  more
for  the  Northern.  But  we  have  not  yet  found  our-
selves strong  enough  to  keep  our  acquisitions,  and
at  the  same  time  to  dream  of  so  many  new  conquests ;
so  we  have  judged  it  wiser  to  defer  the  execution  of
this  plan  for  [24]  some  time  longer,  and  to  content
ourselves,  meanwhile,  with  seizing  the  opportunity
that  God  has  sent  to  our  doors, —  that  of  entering  a
nation  of  the  Neutral  language  through  the  arrival
in  this  country  of  the  Weanohronons,15  who  have
taken  refuge  here,  as  we  shall  relate  hereafter,  and
who  formed  one  of  the  Nations  allied  with  the
neutral  Nation.

We  have  the  more  readily  given  up  the  idea  of
applying  ourselves  to  the  Algonquain  language,  that
our  Fathers  at  Quebec  and  the  three  rivers  are
studying  it  diligently.  We  hope  to  get  some  brave
worker  from  that  quarter,  who  will  come  here  to  break
the  ice  and  give  us  entrance  and  opportunity  among
these  tribes  who  are  around  us,  who  are  familiar
with  no  other  language  but  the  Algonquin.  May  it
please  his  divine  Majesty  to  give  his  blessing  to  all
these  ideas  and  enterprises.


NOTES  TO  VOL  XVI

(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  number  of  note,  refer  to  pages

of  English  text.)

i  (p.  9). —  For  sketch  of  the  duchess  d'Aiguillon,  see  vol.  viii.,
note  62.

2  (p.  9). — This  order  of  Hospital  Nuns  (vol.  viii.,  note  64)  was
one  of  the  oldest  of  the  hospital  orders  in  France.  Laroche- Heron,
in  Servantes  de  Dieu  en  Canada  (Montreal,  1855),  p.  17,  says:
"The  mother-house  in  Dieppe  existed  in  France  before  the  year
1250."  De  Launay  states  that  the  order  was  reformed  and  reestab-
lished in  1609,  receiving  its  revised  constitution  in  1636. —  Religieuses
Hospitalieres  de  Saint-foseph  (Paris,  1887),  p.  79.  Le  Jeune  says
(vol.  vii.  of  this  series,  pp.  287,  289)  that  the  Dieppe  hospital  was
"  one  of  the  best  regulated  in  Europe;  "  and  he  quotes  a  letter  from
its  superior,  describing  the  character  and  death  of  a  little  Indian
girl  placed  under  her  care  by  Le  Jeune  in  1634.  The  nuns  who
founded  the  hospital  at  Quebec,  as  related  in  our  text,  were  the  fol-
lowing: Marie  Guenet  de  St.  Ignace  (superior),  aged  29;  Anne  le
Cointre  de  St.  Bernard,  aged  28 ;  and  Marie  Forestier  de  St.  Bona-
venture,  aged  22.  The  duchess  d'Aiguillon  gave  (Aug.  16,  1637),  to
establish  the  Quebec  Hotel-Dieu,  the  sum  of  22,400  livres;  and  again
(Jan.  31,  1640),  for  its  enlargement,  40,500  livres.  For  historical
sketch  of  this  hospital,  see  Laroche-Heron,  ut  supra.

3  (p.  11). —  According  to  Littre,  the  term  "  election  "  was  in  olden
times  applied  to  the  courts  of  first  instance  in  which  were  decided
all  matters  pertaining  to  taxes,  levies,  and  excise ;  also  to  the  dis-
trict under  the  jurisdiction  of  each  court.  The  judges  of  such  court
were  termed  "the  elect,"  because  they  were  originally  chosen  by
election,  for  the  duty  of  imposing  taxes.

4  (p.  13). —  Marie  Guyard  was  born  at  Tours,  France,  Oct.  28,  1599;
her  father  was  either  a  dealer  in  or  a  manufacturer  of  silk,  her
mother  the  descendant  of  a  noble  family.  At  the  age  of  eighteen,
she  married  (though  only  in  obedience  to  her  parents)  Claude  Martin,
a  silk  manufacturer  of  Tours,  who  died  Oct.  19,  1619,  —  leaving  to
his  widow  a  son  (born  in  the  preceding  April),  and  but  the  frag-
ments of  his  fortune,  which  had  been,  shortly  before  his  death,
swept  away  by  unexpected  reverses. Inclined  to  the  religious  life


256  LES  EEL  A  TIONS  DES  J E SUITES

from  her  earliest  childhood,  she  now  not  only  refused  to  marry-
again,  but  resolved  to  become  a  nun.  Love  for  her  child  long  hin-
dered her  from  this  step;  but  finally  (1632)  she  placed  him  in  her
sister's  charge,  and  entered  the  Ursuline  convent  at  Tours,  where
she  made  profession  Jan.  25,  1633,  under  the  name  of  Marie  of  the
Incarnation.  Some  time  during  the  following  year,  it  would  seem,
she  had  a  vision  of  a  strange  and  distant  country,  in  which  the
Virgin  and  Christ  appointed  her  to  labor;  this  was  fulfilled,  as  she
thought,  when  Madame  de  la  Peltrie  (vol.  xi.,  note  4)  invited  her  to
take  charge  of  the  Ursuline  house  that  she  was  about  to  establish  in
Canada.  Another  nun  was  appointed  from  the  convent  at  Tours, —
Marie  de  Savonniere  de  St.  Joseph,  aged  23 ;  a  third,  Cecile  Richer
de  la  Croix,  aged  30,  was  obtained  from  the  Ursulines  of  Dieppe ;
and  a  young  girl  of  nineteen,  Charlotte  Barre,  accompanied  them,
who  after  her  arrival  in  Canada  took  the  veil,  under  the  name  of
Mother  St.  Ignace.  All  these  Ursulines,  with  the  Hospital  Nuns
(note  2,  ante)  and  several  Jesuit  missionaries,  arrived  at  Quebec
Aug.  1,  1639.  The  Ursulines  were  temporarily  lodged  in  a  small
house  near  the  river-bank ;  but  in  1641  they  removed  to  their  own
convent,  built  upon  the  site  still  occupied  by  them.  These  nuns
have  maintained,  since  their  foundation,  a  school  for  girls,  not  only
for  French  and  Canadians,  but  for  Indians  —  these  last  being  for
many  years  the  especial  objects  of  their  care.  For  historical
sketches  of  this  convent,  see  Baunard's  Vie  de  Marie  de  V  Incarna-
tion, pp.  499-506;  and  Laroche-H£ron's  Servantes  de  Dieu.  Marie
of  the  Incarnation  remained  superior  of  this  house  until  her  death
(Apr.  30,  1672),  ruling  it,  amid  many  financial  and  other  embarrass-
ments, with  great  energy  and  wisdom,  and  winning  the  admiration
and  regard  of  all.  Parkman  says  of  her  {Jesuits,  p.  186) :  "  She  car-
ried on  a  vast  correspondence,  embracing  every  one  in  France  who
could  aid  her  infant  community  with  money  or  influence ;  she  har-
monized and  regulated  it  with  excellent  skill;  and,  in  the  midst  of
relentless  austerities,  she  was  loved  as  a  mother  by  her  pupils  and
dependents."  Though  a  woman  of  ardent  zeal  and  enthusiasm,  she
possessed  great  resolution,  fortitude,  and  perseverance,  and  was
gifted  with  unusual  executive  ability.  She  had  also  a  talent  for
languages,  and  is  said  to  have  left  an  Algonkin  dictionary,  and
numerous  other  MSS.  in  that  tongue ;  these  have  disappeared,  and
it  is  supposed  that  they  were  destroyed  with  the  convent,  in  the  fire  of
1686.  Her  correspondence,  however,  furnished  material  for  Lettres
spirituelles  et  historiques,  collected  by  her  son,  and  published  in
168 1 ;  a  new  and  enlarged  edition  has  been  published  by  Richaudeau
(Tournai,  1876).  A  catechism  (in  French),  written  by  her,  was  pub-
lished by  her  son,  in  1684 ;  a  third  edition  appeared  at  Tournai  in  1878.


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XVI  257


This  son,  Claude  Martin,  became  a  Benedictine  priest,  making
his  profession  Feb.  3,  1642.  He  was  a  man  of  great  talent  and
piety,  and  occupied  many  important  and  responsible  positions  in  his
order,  being  finally  appointed  (1668)  an  assistant  to  the  Father  Gen-
eral. He  died  at  Marmoutiers,  Aug.  9,  1696,  leaving  numerous
religious  works  (mostly  in  MS.),  notable  among  which  is  a  biogra-
phy of  his  mother  (Paris,  1677).  Other  lives  of  this  noted  woman
are  those  of  Charlevoix  (Paris,  1724),  Casgrain  (Quebec,  1S64),
Richaudeau  (Paris,  1873;  Tournai,  1874),  Chapot  (Paris,  1892),  and
Baunard  (Paris,  1893).  Marie  was  characterized  by  Bossuet  as  the
"Theresa  of  her  century  and  of  the  New  World."  She  received
beatification,  by  papal  decree,  in  1877.

5  (p.  17). —  Roy  says  {Canada- Fran  cats,  vol.  ii.,  p.  448):  "The
country  of  Canada,  considered  as  a  prolongation  of  France  on  the
other  side  of  the  Atlantic,  was  in  some  sort  annexed  to  the  province
of  Normandy.  It  was  to  the  parliament  of  Rouen  that  belonged
jurisdiction  in  the  earlier  legal  matters  concerning  the  colony ;  and
it  was  from  the  archbishop  of  Rouen  that  the  missionaries  requested
their  credentials  before  embarkation.  That  prelate,  regarding  this
land  as  a  natural  extension  of  his  ecclesiastical  domain,  named  its
grand  vicars. " — Cf.  Biard's  argument  as  to  ownership  by  France
of  lands  across  the  sea  (vol.  iv.  of  this  series,  p.  109) ;  also,  concerning
the  appointment  of  grand  vicars,  Journ.  des  Jesuites,  pp.  185-187.

There  were  many  other  ties  between  New  France  and  Normandy.
From  the  latter  province  had  come  the  majority  of  Canada's  early
settlers;  and  it  was  the  merchants  of  Rouen  and  Dieppe  who  had
the  most  important  commercial  interests  in  New  France.  The  of-
fices of  the  Hundred  Associates  were  established  at  Rouen;  and  the
parliament  of  that  city  was,  for  a  time,  charged  by  the  king  with
jurisdiction  over  the  colonies.  As  for  religious  affairs,  they  were
at  first  ordered  directly  from  Rome ;  later,  the  archbishop  of  Rouen
practically  became  the  spiritual  head  of  the  Canadian  colony, —  the
missionaries  (many  of  whom  came  from  his  diocese),  and  probably
the  secular  priests  as  well,  applying  to  him  for  grant  or  confirma-
tion of  their  spiritual  authority  therein.  Rochemonteix  says  (Je-
sui'tes,  vol.  ii.,  p.  203):  "Thus  the  archbishop  of  Rouen,  Primate
of  Normandy,  became  accustomed,  little  by  little,  to  regard  Canada
as  an  integral  part  of  his  domain.  It  was  Mgr.  de  Harlay,  who
exercised  the  first  act  of  authority  over  New  France ;  and  his  suc-
cessor went  so  far  as  to  maintain  that  the  mere  fact  that  he  had
sent  to  Canada  priests  of  his  diocese,  placed  that  country  under  his
authority."  This  claim  was  the  beginning  (1647)  of  a  conflict  for
ecclesiastical  supremacy  in  Canada,  which  was  finally  ended  only  by
the  peremptory  recall  to  France  (1659),  by  a  royal  lettrc  du  cachet,


258  LES  BEL  A  TIONS  DES  J  A SUITES

of  Abbe  de  Queylus,  "  the  last  ecclesiastical  dignitary  from  Rouen
whom  we  had  in  this  country"  (Roy,  ut  supra).  He  was  suc-
ceeded by  Mgr.  Laval,  the  first  bishop  of  Canada.

6  (p.  19).  —  Reference  is  here  made  to  Jean  de  Bernieres-Louvi-
gny,  who  greatly  aided  Madame  de  la  Peltrie  in  her  Canadian  en-
terprise (vol.  xi.,  note  4),  and  administered  her  affairs  during  her
residence  in  Canada.  He  was  also  a  counselor  and  friend  of  Marie
of  the  Incarnation,  and  of  Laval;  and  founded  the  Hermitage  of
Caen,  a  religious  school  and  retreat  of  ascetic  and  mystical  tenden-
cies. A  sketch  of  Bernieres  and  his  work  is  given  by  Gosselin  in
Henri  de  Bernieres  (Evreux,  1897),  pp.  6-19.  Cf.  Chapot's  Marie
de  l'  Incarnation,  t.  i.,  pp.  433-440;  and  Parkman's  Old  Rdgime,
pp-  88-95.

7  (p.  19). —  For  sketch  of  Noel  de  Sillery,  founder  of  this  Indian
settlement,  see  vol.  xiv.,  note  12.

8  (p.  23). — The  Hospital  Nuns,  upon  their  arrival  at  Quebec,  were
lodged  for  a  time  in  a  new  house  belonging  to  the  Hundred  Associ-
ates, near  Fort  St.  Louis.  In  June,  1640,  they  removed  to  the  dwell-
ing of  Pierre  de  Puyseaux,  at  St.  Michel  de  Sillery,  while  await-
ing the  completion  of  their  convent  there,  which  they  entered  in
the  spring  of  1641.

9  (p.  )7i. —  For  sketch  of  the  Attikamegues,  see  vol.  ix.,  note  20.

10  (p.  83). —  Desert:  The  French  Canadians  apply  this  term  to
an  open  piece  of  arable  land,  on  which  no  trees  are  growing,  to  dis-
tinguish it  from  timbered  land.  These  deserts,  or  natural  mead-
ows, would  in  all  probability  be  the  first  places  selected  for  cultiva-
tion by  the  savages,  who  were  but  ill  provided  with  tools  for  cutting
down  trees.  About  twelve  miles  from  Quebec,  between  Ancienne
Lorette  and  La  Jeune  Lorette,  there  is  a  large  plain  called  Le
Grand  Ddsert;  it  occupies  a  depression  between  the  hills,  appar-
ently the  bed  of  a  former  lake,  and  is  very  fertile. —  Crawford
Lindsay.

The  Wisconsin  River  has  its  rise  in  Lac  Vieux  Desert,  so  named
from  an  island  in  the  lake,  which  was  long  cultivated  by  Indians.

11  (p.  101). —  Abnaquiois:  see  vol.  xii.,  note  22.

12  (p.  107). — Cf.  vol.  iii.,  note  19.

13  (p.  191). —  Bluets:  the  Canada  blueberry,  Vaccinium  Cana-
dense;  described  and  figured  by  Charlevoix  (Amer.  Plantes,^.  52),
who  ascribes  to  it  various  medicinal  properties.  It  is  abundant
throughout  Canada,  and,  according  to  Clapin,  "  most  of  all  in  the
Saguenay  region,  where  every  season  it  is  gathered  in  enormous
quantities."  Champlain  (Voyage  of  161 5)  mentions  this  berry,  with
raspberries  and  other  small  fruits,  as  growing  in  marvelous  abun-
dance along  the  river-banks  in  Western  Canada,  and  as  dried  for


NOTES  TO VOL.  XVI  259

winter  use  by  the  natives.  Josselyn  {New  Eng.  Rarities,  Tucker-
man's  ed.,  p.  197)  says  of  blueberries  (called  by  him  "sky-coloured
bill-berries  ")  and  whortleberries:  "The  Indians  dry  them  in  the  sun,
and  sell  them  to  the  English  by  the  bushell ;  who  make  use  of  them
instead  of  currence  —  putting  of  them  into  puddens,  both  boyled  and
baked,  and  into  water-gruel."  Roger  Williams  {Key  to  Atner.
Lang.,  Narrag.  Club  ed.,  p.  122)  makes  a  similar  statement:  "  Sau-
taash  are  these  currants  dried  by  the  Natives,  and  so  preserved  all
the  yeare,  which  they  beat  to  powder,  and  mingle  it  with  their
parcht  meale,  and  make  a  delicate  dish  which  they  cal  Sautduthig;
which  is  as  sweet  to  them  as  plum  or  spice  cake  to  the  English. ' '
The  Abnakis  styled  July  "  the  berry-month,"  as  the  time  when  the
blueberries  ripened.

14  (p.  253). —  Nation  des  Puants :  the  Winnebago  tribe  (vol.  xv.,
note  7).

15  (p.  253). —  PVeanohronons  {Wenrohronons,  Ahouenrochronons) :
see  vol.  viii. ,  note  34.  This  is  apparently  a  part  of  the  tribe  men-
tioned in  Relation  of  1641,  as  kindly  receiving  the  missionaries  at
Khioetoa  (St.  Michel).  The  village  is  shown  on  Sanson's  map
(1656),  a  little  east  of  the  present  site  of  Sandwich.  In  this  case
the  "more  than  80  leagues  distance"  to  Ossossane  would  refer  to
the  distance  of  the  latter  from  St.  Michel,  rather  than  from  the
first  location  of  the  tribe  "  on  the  borders  of  the  Iroquois." — A.  F.
Hunter.
