j sae ace
wr tee
42,8 88
pe) Be. S
Le D
3
to
SS
8.2).
+
Ur)
4
588
A mR
a et
mH
oar
ie a a
"er hee ri = ae Boe) 28 ae
see 858, 0/828 8, a
PUL a hr lo
Pe eee eG aces Aa hat at et ht : “nt
je Be 8 8 oe Bh ? : ee e(Gcale 8
Le a
a)
; ana'e
il
Pi
7 Cotte
4
eR
ae ele
afc la¢ i 2 55.8
} ; i A
Be iat pet y
eee ¥
Se Ree Bm
bs Bc8

Ne Gi8s 358,

ei ey8 Besa:


Rvs oa ee be eee ee


Digitized by the Internet Archive
‘in. 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation


https://archive.org/details/jesuitrelationsa0028jesu


THE JESU ICRELATIONS


AND


ALLIED DOCUMENTS


VOL. XXVIII


The edition consists of sev-
en hundred and fifty sets
all numbered


3
No. Le Lente


LE BccenrleheSer


————— S|


|


NEW AMSTERDAM (NOW NEW YORK), IN 1670.


[Reduced facsimile of plate in Montanus’s De Nieuwe en Onbekende Weereld,
. Amsterdam, 1671.]


rile leas pkg alae’ 4 het ie ae
\ | ! pot 7 a - 4
Ly aie £ |


4 Lepr Ctnarican |


The Jesuit


Relations and Allied Documents


TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES
IN NEW FRANCE


1610-1701


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL-
IANS TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA-
TIONG AND, (NOTES e. TALDLOUSTRATED: BY
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES


EDITED BY


REUBEN GOLD THWAITES
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin


Property of Vol. XXVIII
HURONS, IROQUOIS, LOWER CANADA a aaa —


CLgA 1645 —1646 (o . RWRBHERS
Please return to f PAST


| i EK ees. 7:
! elope § 9! CS aC oa
| Graduaic B dete ae Lue


) ee hat ey
Union Libtaryeranp: The Burrows Brothers


Company, PUBLISHERS, M DCCC XCVIII
bbo4gy
THrl p


COPYRIGHT, 1898
BY


THE Burrows BroTHERs Co


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


The Imperial Press, Cleveland


PRAY Rhee
BES WBRAEN
/. eo oh


; JORBEIPHS OHURIBH, }


f


EDITORIAL STAFF


Editor : : REUBEN GOLD THWAITES»
( FINLOW ALEXANDER
PERCY FAvoR BICKNELL
Translators . : CRAWFORD LINDSAY
WILLIAM PRICE
HirRAM ALLEN SOBER
Assistant Editor . EMMA HELEN BLAIR


Bibliographical Adviser VicTOR Huco PALTSITS


CONTENTSZOF VOEOXAXVIII


PREFACE TO VOLUME XXVIII
DOCUMENTS :—


Vic


LVI.
EVIL.
ENA


LIX.


cx:


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOLUME XXVIII


NOTES


Relation de ce qvi s’est passé en la Nov-
velle France, és années 1644. & 1645.
[Chap. xii. to close of document. ]
Barthelemy Vimont, Quebec, October
I, 1645; AHzerosme Lalemant, Des
Hurons, May 15, 1645 ‘

Nouum Belgium. Jsaac /Jogues; 3 Ri-
vieres, August 3, 1646

Notice sur René Goupil. J/saac /Jogues;
undated : :

Lettre au R. P. André Castillon. Jsaac
Jogues; Montréal, September 12, 1646

Journal’ des" PP. Jésuites. ~ (Zzerosme
Lalemant; Quebek, January — Decem-
ber, 1646

Relation dé ce-qvi's est: passes 2 <-.en
la Novvelle France, és années 1645.
é& 1046. [(Chaps.1.,/i1-7 Part I.) /7ze-
rosme Lalemant; Quebek, October 28,
1646


21


E142


- 253
eeS


- 313


» A
\
y)
HS


Wily Hh Zs


1
Lad,


II.


Ti.


IV.


«if Ys OK ¢
aS AS


ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. XXVIII


New Amsterdam in 1670; reduced photo-
graphic facsimile from Montanus’s De
Nieuwe en Onbekende Weereld Frontispiece

Photographic facsimile of handwriting of
Isaac Jogues, selected from original MS.
of his Novum Belgium : . Facing 104

Map of New Netherland, etc., in 1630; re-
duced photographic facsimile from De
Laet’s Novus Orbis 3 . Facing 112

Photographic facsimile of title-page, Rela-
tion of 1645 —46 : 250


PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII


Following is a synopsis of the documents contained
in the present volume:

LV. The Relation of 1644-45 consisted of one
part, dated at Quebec, October 1, 1645, written by
Vimont, supplemented by a letter from Jerome Lale-
mant, dated in the Huron country, May 15 previous.
The first eleven chapters of Vimont’s account were
contained in Vol. XXVII. of our series; we now
present the remainder of the document, by both
Vimont and Lalemant.

Chap. xii. is Richard’s account of the Miscou (or
rather Gaspesian) mission. During the year, four-
teen persons have been baptized — six in illness, and
a family of eight. The converts show edifying piety
and obedience; and even the unbelievers have great
respect for baptism. The savages ‘‘ themselves say
that they would all be Christians by this time, were
it not for the liquor that is traded to them; and the
lack of restraint on that pernicious traffic ruins every-
thing.’’ The Indians are fond of singing, and offer
their prayers with great delight since these have
been set to music. Several war parties, passing that
way, are interested in the chapel services; they come
back from their forays, with several prisoners and
scalps, over which they hold rejoicings. The French-
men who winter at the Bay des Chaleurs, and the
sailors on the fishing vessels, also receive spiritual
ministrations from the missionaries. But the liquor


10 PREFACE TO VOL. XXV1II1


traffic is ‘‘the scourge of this region,’’ and only
Heaven can furnish a remedy therefor.

Lalemant’s supplemental letter is addressed to the
provincial, at Paris, and concerns the Huron mis-
sion. In accordance with the latter’s orders, he has
relegated his duties there, as superior, to Ragueneau,
and is about to go down to Quebec. He glances at
the history of the mission since his arrival thereat in
1638, mentioning the calamities that have ‘‘ crowded
upon this poor Church’’— pestilence, famine, and
war. So great are the obstacles to the establishment
of the faith here,— most of all, in the self-will and
unrestrained freedom which prevails among these
savages,—that human judgment alone must consider
the task almost hopeless. There is among them but
little law, and that obeyed only so far as each
pleases; their habits are licentious, and their mar-
riages unstable; and, above all, “superstition has
contaminated nearly all the actions of their lives,”
and they are the slaves of the devil in everything.
For such, the law of God is too heavy a burden.
Moreover, the constant raids of the Iroquois threaten
to ruin the Huron tribes and to break up their trade
with the French; this would compel the abandon-
ment of the missions. But, notwithstanding all
these hindrances, the missionaries trust in God’s
promises and power, and consider nothing impos-
sible to him. Every year secures them a goodly
number of baptisms, and they are comforted by see-
ing the constancy and devotion displayed by their
converts. The progress made during these seven
years has, on the whole, been all that could reason-
ably be expected. Various incidents are related to
show the earnestness and sincerity of these new


PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 11


Christians; and the seven Huron churches are enu-
merated. Lalemant closes with an earnest appeal
for more men and funds to maintain and defend this
important enterprise.

LVI. In his so-called Novum Belgium, Isaac Jogues
gives (August 3, 1646) an account of the Dutch colo-
ny at New Amsterdam (later, New York City), for
which he obtained material during his stay there in
the autumn of 1643. He describes the river, and the
fort and other buildings; the character of the popu-
lation, ‘‘men of eighteen different languages’’ and
of almost as many religious sects,— none of which,
however, save the Calvinists, exercise religious func-
tions; and the inducements offered to colonists by
the West India Company. He mentions the settle-
ments made by various nations, from the Connecticut
to the Delaware,— adding that ‘‘ the English prefer
to have lands among the Dutch, who require nothing
from them, to depending upon English Milords, who
exact rents and like to put on airs of being absolute.”
Jogues describes the land and climate; the dwellings
of the Dutch settlers; their culture of the land, and
trade with the Indians; the savage tribes adjoining
the white settlements; and the recent war between
the Dutch and Indians.

LVII. In this document (always published, how-
ever, in connection with his Movum Belgium), Jogues
gives a biographical sketch of the young physician,
René Goupil (a Jesuit donné), who for a time shared
Jogues’s captivity, and who met death at the hands
of the Iroquois, September 29, 1642. A graphic and
pathetic account is given of the painful journey, the
cruel torture inflicted on the captives, and the young
donné’s murder; still more impressive are the


12 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII


fortitude, patience, and holy resignation exhibited
by Goupil amid his sufferings, and the self-forgetful
altruism which leads him to aid not only his fellow-
captives, but a sick Iroquois. On the journey to the
village of their captors, Goupil takes, under Jogtes’s
direction, the final vows of entrance into the Jesuit
order,— which, in France, he had been unable to do,
on account of his frail health. The Iroquois murder
him,—and often threaten to slay Jogues also,—be-
cause of his praying aloud, and making the sign of
the cross, as they afterward plainly tell the Father.
The latter endeavors at the peril of his own life, but
in vain, to save his follower’s corpse from desecra-
tion.

LVIII. This is a letter from Jogues (September
12, 1646) to André Castillon, a fellow-Jesuit, and is
apparently the last message penned by the martyred
missionary. He gives an account of the journey
made by him and Bourdon, a few months earlier, to
the Iroquois country, whither he is on the eve of
departing for a winter sojourn. He describes the
beneficial results of the peace concluded last year
with the Iroquois; both population and commerce
show a notable increase. He prays for similar bless-
ings in spiritual affairs; and closes with an especial
petition that prayers may be offered in his own
behalf, since he must spend nearly a year away from
the sacraments of the Church. A postscript (dated at
Three Rivers, September 21) adds the information
that he is soon to embark for the Iroquois country.


LIX. The Journal des Jésuites is continued, giv-
ing the record for 1646. The greater part of the
Journal is occupied with descriptions of the manner
in which the various feast days and other functions


BREA CESTOSVOLSEXXQVLLL 13


of the church are celebrated; but many little inci-
dents are related which throw light on social, eco-
nomic, and political conditions in the early days of
Canada; and on the relations existing between the
French and the aborigines. On New Year’s Day,
gifts are exchanged between all the French people
of the colony; those given and received by the Jes-
uits are enumerated in detail. The French settle-
ments above Quebec are doing well, on the whole;
though a quarrel that arises between the Algonkins
at Three Rivers, and some Mohawks sojourning
there, causes temporary apprehension. The Sillery
Indians go (January 15) on their usual hunt for game;
and those left behind, twenty-five in number, are
subsisted by the Jesuits and the Hospital nuns. On
one occasion, a zealous lady undertakes to send, in
array befitting its holy use, the bread for consecra-
tion; she adorns it with ‘‘ a toilet—a crown of gauze
or linen puffs,’”’ and, if she had been allowed, would
gladly have added tapers and golden coins. Vimont,
however, ‘‘ before consecrating the bread, had all
that removed, and blessed it with the same simplicity
that I had observed with the preceding portions, and
especially with that of Monsieur the Governor —
fearing lest this change might occasion Jealousy and
Vanity.’’ Toward the end of January, a disturbance
arises among the petty habitants, headed by Marso-
let and Maheu; they claim that ‘‘ M. des Chastelets,
the general agent, is living too high, etc.’’ One of
Montmagny’s household takes part with the malcon-
tents, ‘‘ whence arose many difficulties, and offensive
words, and dissatisfaction; and pasquinades were
composed. Monsieur the Governor having punished
the guilty, everything became quiet.”


14 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII


On February 12, tidings arrive of Father de Noué’s
death; separated from his companions, while on the
way to Fort Richelieu, he loses his way, and is frozen
to death on the ice. On the 15th, two men are pun-
ished on the chevalet, or ‘‘ wooden horse,’’— one for
blasphemy, the other for assaulting his companion;
and, later, another man is thus punished for glut-
tony. The nuns of both convents send the Jesuits,
during the Shrovetide season, and on other festal
occasions, various delicacies —‘“‘ pastries, Spanish
Wine, etc.;’’ many liberal gifts from Montmagny
are also mentioned.

News is brought from Three Rivers, March 10,
that Cofiture had returned from the Iroquois coun-
try, with Mohawk envoys, and confirmation of the
peace recently negotiated.

April 7, one Master Jaques, ‘‘ surnamed ‘ the her-
mit,’ began his entrance into our service;’’ it would
appear that he became one of the donnés of the
Jesuits. Since the first of February, the savages left
behind at Sillery have been encamped near Quebec,
but they return to their homes after Easter; soon
after, their hunting expedition comes back. Lale-
mant, while on a visit to Sillery, meets there Coii-
ture, ‘‘ whose savage name had been changed at 3
Rivers, at a feast made for him by father buteux,
from Ihandich, which sounds ill in yroquois, to
Achirra,— the name of the late Monsieur Nicolet, —
to the joy of all the Huron, Algonquin, and Anniero-
non savages.’’ At a consultation held on the 26th,
the Fathers decide to send Jogues to the Mohawk
country, and to retain Druillettes in Canada; and
they approve of Cofiture’s proposed marriage. The
opening of the St. Lawrence occurs this year on April


PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 15


17 or 18, and planting is begun a little before that, —
not only by the French, but by the savages whom
the missionaries have colonized at Sillery and else-
where.

During the first part of May, negotiations with the
Iroquois are carried on at Three Rivers; and, on the
16th, Jogues sets out thence on his journey to the
Iroquois. Father Massé dies at Quebec, on the 11th.
Lalemant records various quarrels, occurring among
both the savages and the French. Forest fires have
made great havoc about Quebec; one colonist is
burned out, but receives liberal aid from the others.
During this month, brother Ambroise is engaged in
brewing beer. A gunner at Richelieu, weary of
life, wishes to commit suicide, but is restrained by
his fear of hell. He then accuses himself of a scan-
dalous offense, invented for the occasion,—‘“‘ since,
on the one hand, he would die, which was what he
sought; and, on the other, they would first have him
confess, which would enable him to avoid Hell.”’
Father Du Peron, however, mingles reproof and
comfort in his treatment, and leaves the man ‘“‘ina
good frame of mind.’’ Good news is brought from
Tadoussac, regarding both commercial and religious
matters.

On the 4th of June, it is decided to rebuild the mill
on the Jesuits’ farm at La Vacherie. A marriage
occurs on the 18th, at which five soldiers dance a
ballet. Indians from Tadoussac bring furs to Que-
bec, and make complaints of their treatment by De
Launay, a French trader at Tadoussac. June 23,
St. John’s day is celebrated with cannon shots and
bonfires—lighted by Montmagny himself, while
Lalemant chants prayers. The governor and Lale-


16 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII


mant view the lands along the St. Charles River, in
order to ascertain the boundaries of a grant there to
the Ursulines; but the decision is left till the return
of Bourdon, the surveyor of the colony, from the
Iroquois country. The Jesuits receive an increase
in the lands of La Vacherie, to replace a tract ceded
by them to Quebec. Lalemant here gives interest-
ing information as to the nature of the various land
grants in Canada made to the Jesuits. The grant of
meadow lands made to the Hospital nuns by Vimont,
in the previous year, is retroceded by the nuns, in
consideration of other lands obtained by them. The
Ursulines promise to do the same, when they shall
have secured the lands which they expect to receive.
News comes from Miscou that two Indian families
have been rendered sedentary.

Father Jogues and Bourdon arrive from the Iro-
quois country on July 3. The next day, Abenaki
chiefs come to Quebec, to ask that a ‘‘ black gown’”’
be sent to their tribe, to give them instructions;
Lalemant ‘‘ puts them off till Autumn, in order to
take time to consider the matter.’’ On the 13th, the
Jesuit property at La Vacherie is increased by eight-
een arpents of land.

This year, the fleet from France does not arrive
until August 7; with it comes Father Daran. On
the next day Charles de la Tour, noted in the annals
of Acadia, comes to Quebec for refuge, his fort at
St. John having been captured by his rival D’ Aul-
nay. The Sillery Indians kill a Frenchman’s cow,
which has injured their corn, and are obliged to pay
a fine of six beaver skins. Ataconsultation held on
the 21st, the Fathers decide that they will rent their
Beauport estate and have a clergy-house built; send


PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 17


Dreuillettes to the Abenaki tribes, and Jogues to the
Iroquois; and ask for additional concessions from the
habitants. De la Poterie sends a messenger in haste
to Montmagny, to inform him of a fancied discovery
of gold and copper mines; but the specimens prove
valueless — being probably iron pyrites. Des Gro-
seilliers, the explorer, comes down from the Huron
country, and apparently returns thither soon after.

Early in September, disputes arise concerning the
Jesuit estates at Three Rivers; but they remain for
the’ time unsettled: The Huron fleet this year
numbers 80 canoes; and they carry away ‘‘a dozen
bundles of skins, for want of merchandise.’’ Father
Quentin brings from France several men for the
Jesuit missions. Among these isa young gentleman
of good family, who had professed conversion to the
Catholic faith, and made a vow to go to the Hurons;
but he proves to be a liar and swindler, concerning
whom various scandals are reported. He finally
leaves the colony, after having cheated the Jesuits
out of more than 200 livres.

Lalemant notes the large increase in the habitants’
income from the fur trade, under the new arrange-
ment with the Hundred Associates,—the habitants’
share this year being valued at 320,000 livres. The
Jesuits ask the Council for an increased allowance;
they obtain 1,200 francs additional for each of the
missions, but are compelled to furnish their own
fuel. Several prominent persons return to France
October 31,— Maisonneuve, Giffard, and Tronquet,—
‘all firmly resolved that they would strive to obtain
some regulation for their affairs, each one seeking
his own private Interests.” On another vessel
embarked several young men, sons of the leading


18 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII


colonists,— ‘‘ all rogues, for the most part, who had
played a thousand tricks on the other voyage; and
they all were given high salaries.’’ At this time,
work is begun on the new clergy-house and church
at Quebec, and on a brewery and oven at Sillery.

Mother Marie de St. Ignace, the first superior of
the Quebec hospital, dies November 5. On the 12th,
Marguerite, widow of the explorer Jean Nicolet, is
matried to Nicolas Macard. On the 21st, Madame
de la Peltrie, her maid, Charlotte Barré, and one
Catherine, begin their novitiate with the Ursulines.
The same day, comes news of ‘‘ the greatest disaster
which had yet occurred in Canada,’’—the wreck of
the brigantine which went from Quebec to Three
Rivers, and carried most of the necessary supplies
for the settlers at the latter post. These were lost,
with nine men,—a loss shared by the Jesuits to some
extent, in goods and in the death of a donné, Gaspar
Goiiaut, of Poitiers. Later advices show that much
of the cargo was saved. November 29, Vimont says
mass at the hospital,—in acquittal of the obligation
laid upon the Hospital nuns, by the terms of their
land grants,—for the members of the Hundred Asso-
ciates. The Jesuits owe a like ceremony, ‘‘ for the
deceased associates of the Company; ’’ and Lalemant
adds: “‘I certainly intend to say it, but not to invite
Monsieur the governor to it, in order not to preju-
dice our former rights from Monsieur de Vanta-
dour ”’ (the first Canadian viceroy).

In December, a soldier, named De Champigny,
abjures heresy, and becomes a Catholic; as this man
understands music, and can sing the treble part, the
Jesuits are now able to have in the church a choir of
four voices. On the last day of the year, a dramatic


PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII 19


performance is given at the warehouse, at which is
apparently enacted Corneille’s tragedy of Le Cid.
‘““Our Fathers were present,—in deference to Mon-
sieur the governor, who took pleasure therein, as
also did the savages,—that is, fathers de Quen,
[Gabriel] Lalemant, and defretat; all went well, and
there was nothing which could not edify. I begged
Monsieur the governor to excuse me from attend-
ance.’’ The price of wood is this year placed at
100 sols, and some interested persons secure control
of the market; besides, the wood is of poor quality
and short measure. Hence arise ‘‘ great disorder
and Jealousy,” which are with difficulty quieted.

LX. The Relation of 1645-46 is, like most of its
predecessors, in two parts: the first, by Jerome Lale-
mant, appointed in 1646 to succeed Vimont as supe-
rior of his order in Canada, consists of a preliminary
letter to the provincial, in France (dated Quebek,
October 28, 1646), and ten chapters giving a general
view of the missions, particularly of the lower coun-
try; Part II. isthe Huron report, by Ragueneau, con-
sisting also of a preliminary note to the provincial
(dated Des Hurons, May 1, 1646), and eight chapters
detailing the particulars of the work in Huronia.
We herewith present the first two chapters of Part
I., and will conclude the document in Vols. XXIX.
and XXX.

Lalemant briefly mentions the present prosperous
condition of the French settlements, and the good
work accomplished therein by the religious orders.
The savages are gradually being attracted within
religious influences, and thus encourage the mission-
aries with brighter hopes for their conversion; over
300 baptisms have occurred during the year. The


20 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIII


superior then reverts to the peace recently concluded
with the Mohawks—which, however, unfortunately
does not include the other Iroquois tribes, who are
still hostile. The Sokokis and Mohicans are not
friendly to the French, but, fearing the Mohawks,
are quiet. A detailed account is given of the Mo-
hawk council in which peace with the French was
arranged,— based on the reports of Cofiture, who had
formerly been a captive with that tribe.

In February, 1646, Cotiture returns to Three Riv-
ers, accompanied by seven Mohawk envoys, who
come to ratify the treaty with the French, and ex-
tend it to their Indian allies. This is accomplished
in May following, when Montmagny meets them for
that purpose; the speeches and presents are described
at length.


RieGack:
Mapison, Wis., August, 1898.


LV (concluded)


RELATION OF 1644-45


PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1646


Chaps. i.—xi. were published in Volume XXVII.; here
follows the remainder of the document.


22 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nou 28


(124), CHAPIT RE wa
DE CE QUI S’EST PASSE A MISCOU.


IEU continué fes graces fur nos pauures Sau-
Ll) uages, ils ouurent maintenant les yeux,
defirent le Baptefme, & demandent les inftru-

ctions Chreftiennes: ie ne les ay iamais veu en
meilleure difpofition, dit le P. Richard, nous en auds
baptifé 14. depuis ma derniere, vne famille de huict
perfonnes, & fix en extremité de maladie, qui font
quafi tous morts peu apres, entre lefquels vn ieune
garcon tout plein d’efprit fit paroiftre en fes refponfes
& en fa ferueur que c’eftoit vne ame deftinée pour
le Ciel, pour cette famille elle deuoit eftre baptifée
dés l’an paffé, mais le chef nommé Iariet, ayant fait
quelque excez de boiffon, donna fujet de ce retarde-
ment: fa femme toutefois craignant de mourir dans
fes couches, dont le terme eftoit paffé, difoit-elle,
long-temps y auoit, & fe trouuoit extraordinairement
indifpofée, defira le Baptefme auant noftre départ,
& l’obtint, non feulement 4 raifon du danger ot elle
fe trouuoit, mais auffi pour fes [125] merites, qui la
font paffer aupres d’vn chacun pour la plus honnefte,
la plus fage & modefte de toutes les femmes
Sauuages, on differa les ceremonies au temps du Bap-
tefme de fon mary. Ce fut le 30. de Iuillet qu’on
luy accorda ce bien & a toute fa famille, il fut nom-
mé Denis par Monfieur Preuoft Capitaine pour le
Roy en la marine, commendant le Nauire de S.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 23


[r24) CHAPTER’ XII.
OF WHAT OCCURRED AT MISCOU.


66 OD continues his favors toward our poor
Cs Savages,— they now open their eyes; they
desire Baptism and ask for Christian in-

struction. I have never seen them better disposed,”’
writes Father Richard. ‘‘ We have baptized 14
since my last letter —a family of eight persons; and
six in the extremity of illness, who nearly all died
shortly afterward. Among these, a young man, who
was very intelligent, showed by his answers and his
fervor that his was a soul destined for Heaven. As
to the family, it was to have been baptized last year;
but its head, whose name is Iariet, had been guilty
of intemperance, and this occasioned the delay. His
wife, however, feared that she might die in child-
birth,—for she said that her time had long passed,
and she was exceedingly ill,—and desired Baptism
before our departure. She obtained it, not only on
account of her dangerous condition but also owing
to her own [125] merits, which cause her to pass with
every one for the most virtuous, the wisest, and most
modest of all the Savage women. The administra-
tion of the rites was deferred until the Baptism of
her husband. On the 30th of July, this favor was
granted to him and toall hisfamily. He was named
Denis by Monsieur Prevost, Captain in the King’s
navy, commanding the Ship St. Joseph; and his
wife was named Marguerite. This good woman was


24 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


Iofeph, & fa femme Marguerite. Cette bonne femme
non contente de refpondre a tout auec la deuotion &
les fentimens que le S. Efprit luy infpiroit, aydoit
encor A fon mary 1’exhortoit & luy fuggeroit les ref-
ponces, ils receurent en fuite la benediction Nuptiale
& furent admis A la table de Noftre Seigneur, au
fortir de 14 Denis Iariet me dift: C’eft a cette heure
que tout de bon ie vais prier & feray homme de bien,
i’ay regret de ma vie paff{ée, ie hay le peché ie veux
mener d’orefnauant vne meilleure vie: & tirant peu
apres quantité de Porcelaine ie fuis marry, difoit-il
de me voir fi pauure, ie n’ay ny Orignac, ny Caftor
a prefenter a ces Meffieurs qui nous ont tant obligé a
noftre Baptefme, ie voudrois auoir dequoy recon-
noiftre le bien que nous auons receu, mais puis que
ie n’ay [126] rien autre chofe, ie feray content s’ils
daignent receuoir ce petit prefent de ma part. On
le remercia, & fe contenta-on des tefmoignages de fa
bonne volonté. I1 fe retire donc fort fatisfait, & s’en
retourne 4 Nepegigotiit pour continuer la chaffe de
Caftor, & ayder en ce qu’il pourroit a acheuer le
baftiment que Ml) Abbé de fainte Magdelene &
Meffieurs les Affociez pour Mifkou, ont fait commen-
cer auprés de nous pour luy & pour Iofeph Nepfuget
baptifé lan paffé. Ils font tous deux de bonne intel-
ligence, fe tiennent bonne compagnie, font leur
chaffe enfemble l’Efté & l’Hyuer, ils eurent beau-
coup 4 fouffrir au commencement de l’Hyuer paffé,
& Dieu efprouua leur conftance & courage. [Ils
auoient pris le quartier de leur chaffe bien auant
dans les bois y penfans trouuer mieux leur compte,
ils deuoient faire prouifion de Saulmon mais les
gelées les preuinrent, & fermerent les riuieres, ce qui


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 25


not content to answer all questions with the devotion
and sentiments with which the Holy Ghost inspired
her, but she also assisted her husband,—she ex-
horted him and suggested to him the answers. They
afterward received the Nuptial benediction, and were
admitted to Our Lord’s table. On leaving it, Denis
Iariet said to me: ‘ Now I will pray in earnest, and
will be a good man. I regret my past life; I hate
sin, and wish to lead a better life in future.’ Then,
drawing out a quantity of Porcelain beads, he said:
‘I am sorry that I am so poor; I have neither Moose
nor Beaver to present to those Gentlemen who so
greatly obliged us at our Baptism. I wish that I
had something by which I might acknowledge the
kindness that we have received, but since I have
[126] nothing else, I shall be pleased if they will
deign to accept this little present from me.’ We
thanked him, and were satisfied with this manifesta-
tion of his good will. He therefore withdrew, quite
content, and returned to Nepegigouit to continue the
hunt for Beaver, and to help as much as he could in
completing the building that Monsieur the Abbé of
sainte Magdalene,’ and Messieurs the Associates for
Miskou, have caused to be begun near us for him and
for Joseph Nepsuget, who was baptized last year.
They are on good terms with each other; they are
good comrades, and hunt together in Summer and
in Winter. They had much to suffer at the begin-
ning of last Winter and God tried their constancy and
courage. They had selected their hunting district
very far within the forest, hoping there to meet bet-
ter success. They had intended to lay in a supply
of Salmon; but the frost forestalled them, and closed
the rivers, which quickly reduced them to want.


26 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


les mit defia dans la neceffité, ils roulerent comme
ils peurent iufques aux Aduents, ce fut lors qu’ils
fe trouuerent tout Aa fait dépourueus de viures, ils
cherchent & chaffent par tout fans pouuoir rien trou-
uer que quelques Porcs Efpics & ce fort rarement,
ils font [127] contraints de manger leurs chiens,
leurs cuirs & fouliers, & paffer fouuent plufieurs iours
fans manger, il arriua pendant ce temps-la vne chofe
e{trange 4 vn ieune Francois qui hyuernoit auec eux,
vn iour qu’on auoit tué vn chien pour conferuer la
vie 4 quantité de perfonnes qui languiffoient: ce
garcon n’eftant pas content du peu qu’on luy auoit
donné comme aux autres, fe iette fur le foye de la
befte que 1l’on auoit ietté, le fait cuire & le mange, on
l’aduertit de quitter cette viande, qu’elle luy fera
tort, & tomber la peau, il n’en croit rien, il continué
fon repas, mais a fes defpens, car il luy en coufta la
peau, qui luy tomba toute par grands lambeaux fans
aucune douleur, fi bien qu’en peu de temps il vift fa
peau toute changée, les Sauuages ont l’experience de
cét effet en ceux qui ont vfé de cette viande.

Cette affliction cependant ne defgoufta point nos
gens de la priere, au contraire ils y ont recours dans
leur plus grande foibleffe, & en fortent ace qu’ils
m’ont dit, moins incommodez de la faim, ils attri-
buent ce mal-heur 4 leurs pechez & reconnoiffent
que Dieu les punit pour leurs fautes: il eft vray,
difoit Iofeph Nepfuget, [128] que nous auons donné
{ujet a Dieu de fe fafcher contre nous, mais moy prin-
cipalement par mes choleres & impatiences, par mes
yurognerie paffées, c’eft iuftement qu’il nous punit,
Sus recourons 4 luy, demandons-luy pardon il aura
pitié de nous, il eft noftre Pere, il ne m/’arriuera


1645 — 46] RELATION OF 1644-45 27


They subsisted as best they could until Advent,
when they found themselves completely destitute of
provisions. They searched and hunted everywhere
without finding anything but a few Porcupines, and
that very seldom. They were [127] compelled to
eat their dogs, their skins, and their shoes, and often
passed several days without food. During that time,
a strange thing happened toa young Frenchman who
wintered with them. One day, when a dog had been
killed to save the lives of numerous persons who
were starving, this boy, who was not satisfied with
the little that they had given to him as to the others,
seized the liver of the animal, that had been thrown
away, and cooked and ate it. He was warned to
leave that meat,—that it would do him harm, and
make his skin fall off. He would not believe it, and
continued his repast, but to his regret,—for it cost
him his skin, which fell off in great flakes without
any pain, so that in a short time his skin was entirely
changed. The Savages know by experience this
result on those who have eaten that meat.

‘« This affliction however did not inspire our people
with any distaste for prayer. On the contrary, they
had recourse to it in their greatest weakness; and,
as they told me, they arose therefrom less incon-
venienced by hunger. They attributed the misfor-
tune to their sins, and acknowledged that God pun-
ished them for their offenses. ‘It is true,’ said
Joseph Nepsuget, [128] ‘that we have given God
cause to be angry with us; but I, principally, have
done so by my anger and impatience, and by my
former drunkenness. He punishes us justly. Let
us therefore have recourse to him; let us ask pardon
of him. He will have pity on us; he is our Father.


28 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 28


iamais plus de l’offencer, iamais plus ie ne me laiffe-
ray tranfporter A la cholere, ny a la boiffon, ie veux
contenter Dieu deformais, & eftre homme de bien.
En fuite ils fe mettent en prieres qu’ils contintient
longuement & recommengent fouuent. Enfin Dieu
euft pitié d’eux, & apres les auoir laiffé tremper dans
cette grande famine depuis le huictiéme Decembre
iufques au fixiéme Ianuier ils leur enuoya des viures
abondamment & au triple des autres Sauuages. [Ils
tuerent premierement vn Orignac auec bien de la
peine, car ils eftoient extremement foibles, & a peine
fe pouuoient-ils fouftenir, cette nourriture leur ayant
vn peu fait reuenir les forces & le courage ils fe met-
tent en campagne d’vn cofté & d’autre, & en peu de
temps ils réplirent leur cabane de viade, ils n’en font
pas ingrats, ils remerciét Dieu achaque befte quils
mettent bas, & a la fin de 1’ Hyuer [129] racontent par
tout les biens que Dieu leur a fait, lofeph fe rend
auprés de nous auffi-to{t que les glaces eurent laiffé
les riuieres libres, & Denis peu apres, ils nous font
recit du bien & du mal qu’ils ont eu pendant 1’ Hy-
uer, du foin qu’ils auoient de prier Dieu, de garder
les Dimanches, & fe fouuenir de ce qu’on leur auoit
enfeigné: Pour moy, difoit Denis Iariet pour lors
Catechumene, i’ay veu fouuent par experience que
ie n’aduancois & ne gagnois rien pour chaffer les
Dimanches, mais fi apres auoir chommé ce iour-l&, ie
me mettois le lendemain en deuoir de chaffer ie ne
manquois d’y trouuer du bon-heur, auffi ne feray-je
iamais rien qui y contreuienne. I1 ya de la confola-
tion 4 voir le foucy que ces bonnes gens ont d’ob-
feruer les Feftes & les Dimanches, ils n’auoient pas
eu le loifir de mettre tout leur petit mefnage en ordre,


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 29


I will never offend him again; I will never allow
myself to be overcome by anger or by liquor; I
wish for the future to please God, and to be a good
man.’ After that, they began their prayers which
they continued for a long time, and frequently recom-
menced. Finaliy, God had pity on them; and, after
allowing them to suffer much through famine from the
eighth of December to the sixth of January, he sent
them an abundance of food, and three times as much
as the other Savages had. In the first place, they
killed a Moose with much difficulty, for they were
extremely weak and could hardly stand. This food
restored their strength and courage to some extent;
so they took the field in all directions, and in a short
time they filled their cabin with meat. They were
not ungrateful, but thanked God for every animal
that they killed, and at the end of the Winter [129]
they related everywhere the favors that God had
conferred on them. Joseph came to us as soon as
the ice had left the rivers free, and Denis came short-
ly afterward. They told us of their good and evil
fortunes during the Winter, and of the care they
had taken to pray to God, to observe the Sundays,
and to remember what they had been taught. ‘ For
my part,’ said Denis Iariet, who was then a Catechu-
men, ‘I often found by experience that I derived no
benefit and gained nothing by hunting on Sundays;
but if, after having rested on that day, I went to
hunt on the morrow, I never failed to be successful.
Therefore I will never do anything to transgress
that day.’ It is consoling to see how careful these
good people are to observe the Festivals and Sun-
days. If they had no time to put their few house-
hold effects in order, and to prepare their provisions


30 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


& leurs prouifions en eftat & hors de danger de fe
gafter, fi n’ofoient-ils pourtant y toucher fans auoir
au prealable fceu de nous fi cela eftoit permis: de
mefme pour les Vendredis & iours de ieufnes, ie les
ay fouuent veu beaucoup patir pluto{t que de rien
faire contre l’ab{tinence de ces iours-1a.

[130] Mais quoy nous fommes hommes & les plus
fermes ne font point affurez de demeurer debout.
Ce lofeph dont nous parlons ayant trouué moyen
d’auo[i]r quelque baril de vin fe laiffa emporter a la
boiffon, & en fuite dans vn defordre & vne faute
fcandaleufe. C’eft le mal-heur que nous déplorons
icy ily a long-temps, & la liberté de cette perni-
cieufe traitte ruine tout comme nous auons fouuent
efcrit 4 V. Reuerence,; ils feroient, difent-ils, eux-
mefmes defia tous Chreftiens, n’eftoit la boiffon qu’on
leurtraitte. Ce pauure homme eftant reuenu a foy, fut
fi confus qu’il n’ofoit paroiftre, mais comme fa faute
ef{toit publique, il falloit auffi faire vne fatisfaction
publique, qu’il accepta volontiers, vn Dimanche ma-
tin en la Chappelle en prefence de tous, tant Fran-
cois que Sauuages auec de grands fignes de douleur.
Dieu luy veille continuer fes graces, & fortifier le
courage.

Pour le refte de nos Sauuages, ils font pleins de
bonne volonté & de difpofition. Plufieurs d’entr’eux,
quoy qu’infidelles font foigneux de procurer le Bap-
tefme a leur malades, nous aduertiffent volontiers fi
tof{t qwils voyent quelqu’vn en danger [131] & nous
prient de les aller baptifer, les plus apparents font
gloire d’appeller & faire venir les autres aux prieres:
les affemblent, les haftent & les preffent, quoy qu’ils
n’ayent pour la plufpart befoin d’efperon. Noftre


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 31


so that they might not be spoiled, still they did
not venture to touch them, without previously ascer-
taining from us whether it was permitted to do so.
In the same manner, I often observed that on Fridays
and fast days they suffered much, rather than do
anything contrary to abstinence on those days.

[130] ‘‘ But we are human, and the strongest are
not always sure to remain upright. This Joseph of
whom we speak found means to procure a cask of
wine; he gave himself up to intemperance, and after-
ward to disorder, and committed a scandalous sin.
This is the evil that we have for a long time deplored
here; and the lack of restraint on that pernicious
traffic ruins everything, as we have frequently writ-
ten to Your Reverence. They themselves say that
they would all be Christians by this time, were it not
for the liquor that is traded to them. When this
poor man came to his senses, he was so ashamed that
he did not dare to show himself; but, as his offense
had been public, he also had to make public repara-
tion. This he willingly agreed to, on a Sunday
morning in the Chapel,—in the presence of all, both
French and Savages,— with great manifestations of
sorrow. May God continue to grant him grace and
to strengthen his courage.

‘As for the remainder of our Savages, they are
very willing and well disposed. Many of them,
although they are infidels, are anxious to procure
Baptism for their sick; they promptly inform us as
soon as they see any one in danger, [131] and beg us
to go and baptize them. The principal men among
them glory in calling and bringing the others to
prayers,—they assemble, urge, and press them
though most of them need no spur. Our Chapel is


32 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vo. 28


Chappelle eft fouuent trop petite pour les tenir tous,
il faut faire les prieres A diuerfes fois, & monftrent
bien par leur ferueur & modeftie qu’ils les gouftent.
En effect, depuis que nous auons mis leurs prieres
en chant, ils prennent vn fingulier plaifir d’y affifter,
& fe piquent de bien chanter, auffi y en a-il qui ont
de tres-belles voix, & ceux qui ont veu & demeuré a
Kebec, ne trouuent point nos Sauuages moins loti-
ables que les Montagnets. Deux perfonnes de con-
fideration parmy eux, vinrent vn iour que toutes les
prieres eftoient acheuées demandans qu’on les fift
prier Dieu: Et ot eftiez-vous, leur dit-on, quand on
a fait les prieres? Pourquoy ne vous y eftes-vous
trouué, nous n’en fcatiions rien, dirent-ils, nous
eftions vn peu efloignez & n’en auons rien otiy,
faites-nous prier Dieu, nous fommes triftes d’auoir
manqué a ce deuoir, il les fallut contenter, & apres
auoir fatisfait A leur deuotion, ils tefmoignerent
d’effect & de paroles qu’ils [132] eftoient contens,
mais ce qui eft rauiffant, c’eft de voir aux Catechif-
mes qu’on leur fait, le foin & la peine que les parens
prennent de rédre attentifs leurs enfans & leur incul-
quer ce qu’on leur enfeigne, & aux grands par ce
moyen, ils prendront deuant eux leurs enfans qu’ils
cheriffent tendrement, leur feront faire le Signe de
la Croix, leur repeteront ce que le Reuerend Pere
dit, ’amplifieront vn peu & l’expliqueront en d’au-
tres termes, les exhorteront a bien retenir, & n’ou-
blieront pas de leur ietter l’horreur du peché dans
lame. Vne troupe de Sauuages & des principaux
de 1’Acadie, conduite par vn braue Capitaine nommé
Herout paffa par icy, s’en allant en guerre au Prin-
temps, ils affifterent aux prieres & exhortations qu’on


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 33


often too small to hold them all; the prayers have
to be repeated at various times; and they show by
their fervor and modesty that they relish them. In
fact, since we have set their prayers to music they
take a remarkable pleasure in attending them, and
pride themselves on singing well. Some of them, in
truth, have very fine voices; and those who have
seen and have lived at Kebec, do not find our Sav-
ages less deserving of praise than the Montagnais.
Two persons of rank among them came one day,
when all the prayers were over, to ask that they be
made to pray to God. ‘ And where were you,’ they
were asked, ‘when the prayers were said? Why
were you not there?’ ‘ We knew nothing about it,’
they said; ‘we were at some distance, and heard
nothing of them. Make us pray to God; we are
sorry to have failed in that duty.’ They had to be
satisfied, and, when they had performed their devo-
tions, they showed by deed and by word that they
[132] were pleased. But truly delightful it is to see,
when we teach the Catechism to them, the care and
the trouble that the parents take to make their chil-
dren attentive, and to impress on their minds what
by this means we teach them and the older ones.
They will take before them their children whom they
tenderly love, and have them make the Sign of the
Cross; they will repeat to them what the Reverend
Father says, and then enlarge upon the subject, and
explain it in other words; they will exhort them to
remember it well, and will not forget to instill into
their souls a horror for sin. A band of Savages, of
the chief men of Acadia, led by a brave Captain
named Herout, passed here last Spring, on their
way to war. They attended the prayers and the


34 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — {Wou. 28


faifoit en leur langue dans la Chappelle de cette
habitation, & tous rauis d’entendre des chofes fi belles
& fi nouuelles; Helas, difoient-ils, il y a tant de
temps que nous hantons les habitations Frangoifes
qui font en nos coftez, & iamais on ne nous a enfei-
gné de la facon, nous ne fgauons que c’eft de prier
au moins en noftre langue, on n’inftruit point nos
enfans comme vous faites par deca. Quoy que s’en
foit, ils s’en font retournez [133] dans de bdés fenti-
més, & peut-eftre que cette feméce Diuine portera
fon fruictt en fon temps. Au retour de leur guerre
vne partie paffa par noftre Maifon de Nepegigoiitit,
ot ils fe monftrerent auffi affidus & zelez pour les
prieres qu’ils auoient fait 4 Mifcou, ils venoient fe
conjoiiir auec nos Sauuages des beaux exploicts de
guerre qu’ils auoient fait A Chichedek, Pays des Ber-
fiamites, oti ils auoient tué fept Sauuages & emmené
treize ou quatorze prifonniers la plufpart enfans.
Ceux de cette Baye-cy, qui auoient pris le deuant
dans le mefme deffein de leur guerre, fe monftre-
rent bien plus referuez & n’oferent iamais offenfer
quelques Canots qu’ils rencontrerent de ces quar-
tiers-la fur l’opinion qu’ils céceurent a leur parole
qu’ils prioiét Dieu. Mais ces autres moins affection-
nez a la priere & moins inf{truits, ne fe mirent point
en peine fur cela, ils fe iettent fur la premiere proye
qui leur tombe entre les mains, & s’en reuiennent
victorieux, & defireux d’appaifer par ces maffacres.
Vennuy & la trifteffe de tout le Pays affligé de la
mort de quantité de perfonnes decedées depuis quel-
ques années. Ils iettent d’abord les cheuelures des
pauures maffacrez a terre, [134] & efpandent en
mefme temps la ioye par toutes les cabanes. Ce fut


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 35


exhortations that we addressed to them in their lan-
guage in the Chapel of this settlement, and were
all delighted to hear things so beautiful and so
new. ‘Alas!’ said they, ‘we have so long fre-
quented the French settlements on our shores, and
we have never been taught in that fashion. We know
not what it is to pray, at least in our own lan-
guage; our children are not taught as you teach them
here.’ At all events, they went away [133] inclined
to right sentiments, and perhaps this Divine seed
will bear fruit in its time. On their return from
war, a party of them passed by our House of Nepegi-
gouit where they showed themselves as assiduous and
as zealous for the prayers, as they had been at Mis-
cou. They came to rejoice with our Savages at the
brave exploits of the war that they had performed
at Chichedek, in the Country of the Bersiamites,
where they had killed seven Savages and taken thir-
teen or fourteen prisoners, most of whom were chil-
dren. Those from the Bay here, who had gone
before them with the same purpose of war, showed
themselves much more reserved and never ventured
to attack any Canoes that they met in that quarter,
because they imagined, from their speech, that they
prayed to God. But these others, who have less
love for prayer and are not so well instructed, did
not disturb themselves on that account. They threw
themselves on the first prey that fell into their
hands; they came back victorious, and desired by
these massacres to allay the grief and sorrow of all
the Country, which is afflicted by the death of many
persons who have died during the past few years.
They threw on the shore, at landing, the scalps of
the poor massacred people, [134] and at the same time


36 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 28


A qui d’entre les. femmes fe faifiroit la premiere de
ces Trophées, chanteroit & danferoit le mieux, il n’y
auoit ny pluye ny vent qui les empefcha{t depuis le
matin iufques au foir. C’eft chofe eftrange comme
Vaffiduité & continuation de ces danfes & chanfons
pendant plufieurs iours ne les laffoit ou ennuyoit point;
mais vne fauffe alarme, & le bruit que l’ennemy
auoit paru, interrompit cette ioye, & les ietta dans
les craintes & apprehenfions des mains des Hiro-
quois, & les fift penfer a la fuite: ils fe retirerent
tous 4 Miskou, ot ils continuerent encore long-temps
leurs funeftes chanfons 4 la cadence de ces cheue-
lures.

Voila pour ce qui eft de nos Sauuages: pour les
Francois, Voftre Reuerence fcait bien que nous nous
employons pour les hyuernans en cette habitation, &
pour plufieurs nauires pefcheurs qui viennent tous
les ans & demeurent tout l’Efté a ces Coftes, & ie
puis dire a la gloire de Dieu, que cette Miffion ne
fert pas moins pour le f{pirituel a ceux-cy, qu’a ceux-
la & aux Sauuages du Pays. Les Predications &
Catechifmes, la frequence des [135] Confeffions &
Communions, les differens & les querelles vuidez &
appaifez; mefme entre les principaux qui en eftoient
venus iufques a vn appel, monftrent affez l’impor-
tance de ces excurfions dans lefquelles les Sauuages
ont encore part: Car comme ils font volontiers au-
prés des nauires, nous ne pouuons affifter les vns que
nous n’ayons encore moyen d’ayder les autres. Mais
la boiffon qui s’y traite & debite impunément eft le
fleau de ce quartier: Quand eft-ce que le Ciel y
mettra remede, puis qu’en vain nous l’attendons de
la terre, ce fera par les prieres de V. Reuerence,
aufquelles ie me recommande inftamment.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 37


spread joy throughout the cabins. The women vied
with one another who should first seize these
Trophies, and who should sing and dance the best.
Neither rain nor wind could stop them, from morning
tonight. It is strange that this constant and continued
dancing and singing for several days did not tire or
weary them. But a false alarm, and the rumor that
the enemy had appeared, interrupted their rejoicing,
threw them into fear and apprehension of falling
into the hands of the Hiroquois, and made them
think of flight. They all withdrew to Miskou,
where for a long time they continued their baleful
songs to the cadence of the waving scalps.

‘*So much for our Savages. As for the French,
Your Reverence is aware that we devote ourselves
to those who winter in this settlement, and to sev-
eral fishing ships that come here every year and
spend the Summer on these Coasts; and I may say,
to the glory of God, that this Mission supplies the
spiritual needs not only of the latter but also of the
former, and of the Savages of the Country. Ser-
mons, and the teaching of Catechism; the frequent
[135] Confessions and Communions; the disputes and
quarrels that have been settled and appeased,— even
among the principal persons, who had gone so far as
to challenge each other,—sufficiently show the im-
portance of these excursions in which the Savages also
have a share. For, as they readily remain near the
ships, we cannot assist the one without also having
the means of assisting the other. But liquor, which is
here traded and sold with impunity, is the scourge of
this region. When will Heaven furnish a remedy
therefor, since we await it in vain from earth? It
will be through the prayers of Your Reverence, to
which I earnestly commend myself.”’


38 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


[136] Lettre du P. Hierofme Lalemant, efcrite
des Hurons au R. P. Prouin-
cial de la Compagnie
de IESVS.


ON REUEREND PERE,
Ie fus priué l’an paffé d’vne finguliere


confolation, les lettres que V. R. m’efcriuoit
e{tant tombées entre les mains des Hiroquois nos
ennemis. I’appris toutefois fur la fin de l’Efté, les
ordres qu’elle auoit enuoyé: en fuite defquels i’ay
laiffé le foin de cette Miffion des Hurons au P. Paul
Ragueneau, & me fuis difpofé au depart de ces
contrées plus hautes, pour defcendre 4 Kebec.

Dans l’incertitude de ce qui me peut arriuer en
chemin, i’ay penfé a propos d’efcrire la prefente
auant mon depart, & la laiffer icy pour eftre enuoyée
apres moy, afin qu’en tout cas V. R. puiffe auoir mes
dernieres penfées, & les fentimens que i’ay touchant
la conuerfion de ces Pays, apres y auoir demeuré
quafi fept ans, tefmoin des trauaux des Peres de
no{tre Compagnie; [137] veu les fruicts que le Ciel
en a recueilly, & les efperances que i’y laiffe pour
Vaduenir, fi Dieu continué fes benedictions fur ces
Peuples, comme il a commencé.

Lors que i’arriuay icy dans les Hurons, les mala-
dies contagieufes, qui auoient precedé, auoient don-
né de l’exercice au zele de nos Peres, & les auoient
obligé de baptizer quelques Sauuages dans 1’extre-


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 39


{136] Letter from Father Hierosme Lalemant, writ-
ten from the Huron country to the Rev-
erend Father Provincial of the
Society of JESUS.


-Y REVEREND FATHER,
I was deprived last year of an especial con-


solation, because the letters that Your Rever-
ence had written to me had fallen into the hands of
the Hiroquois, our enemies. I learned, however,
at the end of the Summer, the orders that you had
sent, in accordance with which I have left the care
of this Huron Mission to Father Paul Ragueneau and
have prepared to depart from these upper countries
and go down to Kebec.

In my uncertainty as to what might happen to me
on the way, I have deemed it advisable to write this
letter previous to my departure, and to leave it here
to be sent after me, so that in any case Your Rever-
ence might know my latest thoughts and opinions
concerning the conversion of these Countries,— after
I have dwelt here nearly seven years, witnessed the
labors of the Fathers of our Society, [137] and seen
the fruits that Heaven has reaped from them,—and
the hopes that I leave here for the future, if God
continue to pour his blessings on these Peoples as
he has begun.

When I arrived here in the Huron country, the
contagious diseases that had previously raged there
had given our Fathers an opportunity for showing


40 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


mité de leur mal. Mais vn grand nombre ayans pris
leur party dans le Ciel, mourans heureufement dans
linnocence du Baptefme,; La vie fut mal-heureufe
aux autres, qui abandonnerent & la Foy, & le nom
de Chreftien, quafien mefme temps qu’ils recouure-
rent la fanté: excepté vne ou deux familles, qui a
peine ozoient leuer la tefte, au milieu d’vne terre
infidelle depuis tant de milliers d’années. Mais
neantmoins ce fut vn grain, qui depuis a multiplié au
centuple. Et nonobftant mille perfecutions éleuées
contre nous, quoy que 1’Enfer & fes Demons ayent
excité toute leur rage, la Foy a depuis efté toufiours
croiffant, & en faincteté, & en nombre: elle a paru
auec éclat, & fait gloire de fe voir efprouuée par tout
ce qui eft comme plus redoutable [138] en ce monde,
au moins a ceux qui n’ayans point ce courage in-
domptable, que donne la vraye Foy, craignent moins
Dieu que les miferes. Je veux dire que toutes fortes
de mal-heurs font venus a la foulle fur cette pauure
Eglife, pour l’eftouffer en fon berceau.

Les maladies fe font fuiuies les vnes apres les autres,
& il fembloit qu’elles en vouluffent plus aux Chre-
{tiens qu’aux Infidelles, dépeuplant plus cruellement
leurs familles, & pardonnant le plus fouuent a ceux
qui auoient refufé le Baptefme; en mefme temps que
dans vne mefme cabane, & dans vn mefme lid, la
mort nous rauiffoit les autres qui auoient embraffé la
Foy. Quoy qu’en effet par cette voye Dieu accretit
dans le Ciel le nombre de fes Eleus, pour lefquels
feuls il a voulu que fon fainct Nom foit annoncé a
ces Peuples barbares; toutefois ce n’eftoient pas ce
femble des difpofitions fouhaitables pour rendre
noftre Foy plus aymable, & augmenter le nombre de


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 41


their zeal, and had compelled them to baptize some
Savages in the extremity of their illness. But,
though a great many found their portion in Heaven,
as they fortunately died in the innocence of Baptism,
life was unhappy for the others, who abandoned
both the Faith and the name of Christian almost as
soon as they recovered their health,—with the ex-
ception of one or two families, who hardly dared to
lift their heads in the midst of a land that has been
infidel for so many thousand years. Nevertheless,
this was a seed that has since multiplied a hundred-
fold. And in spite of a thousand persecutions raised
up against us, although Hell and its Demons excited
all their fury, the Faith has since then continued to
increase in godliness and in numbers; it has shone
brilliantly, and has gloried in undergoing trials by
everything that is most to be dreaded [138] in this
world,—at least by those who, not being endowed
with the indomitable courage that is inspired by
true Faith, fear God less than adversity. I mean to
say that all sorts of misfortunes crowded upon this
poor Church, to stifle it in its cradle.

Maladies succeeded one another, until it seemed
as if they singled out the Christians more than the
Infidels, cruelly decimating their families, and more
frequently sparing those who had refused Baptism,—
while at the same time, in the same cabin, and in
the same bed, death snatched others from us who
had embraced the Faith. Although by this means
God indeed increased in Heaven the number of his
Elect, for whose sake alone he has chosen that his
holy Name be announced to these barbarous Peo-
ples, nevertheless it was not, it would seem, a desir-
able preparation for making our Faith more lovable


42 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 28


cette Eglife militante; c’eftoit plufto{t pour en don-
ner de l’auerfion & de l’horreur autant qu’on en a de
la mort.

Les Famines ont eu leur tour; & on a [139] crefi
qu’ayant changé de Maiftre, & que mettant fes con-
fiances pluftoft en Dieu qu’aux Demons de 1’Enfer,
la Foy auoit attiré ces mal-heurs apres foy, & que
celuy qu'elle adoroit, eftoit ou impuiffant 4 nous faire
du bien, ou qu’il manquoit d’amour pour ceux qui
vouloient en auoir pour luy.

Les guerres ont efté plus impitoyables, & quoy
qu’elles ayent efté rauageant dans leur fureur plus
cruellement ce Pays, fans pardonner a aucun fexe, a
aucun aage ny a aucune condition de perfonnes;
toutefois nous pouuons dire en verité, qu'il femble
que Dieu ait voulu moiffonner la fleur de nos Eglifes
par ce glaiue tranchant. Dans le coeur du Pays, &
aux portes des bourgs ou la Foy eftoit le plus dedans
fon regne, les Hiroquois font venus de cent lieués y
maffacrer ceux qui en eftoient le fouftien, & qui par
l’exemple & la faincteté de leur vie, par l’ardeur de
leur zele, & l’efficace des paroles enflammées que le
S. Efprit animoit en leur bouche, auoient defia les
qualitez d’Apoftres de leur patrie, y prefchans plus
puiflamment que nous, les grandeurs de celuy qui
des barbares en fait des Saincts.

[140] C’eftoient des pertes bien fenfibles 4 vne Eglife
qui ne faifoit que de naiftre: mais celles qui ont fuiuy
depuis nos dernieres Relations, ont paru plus fu-
neftes, non feulement pour l’aduancement de la Foy,
mais pour tous ces Pays, qui vont s’affoibliffant de
iour en iour, & tirent ce femble A leur ruine, fi quel-
que bras plus puiffant que les noftres, ou quelque


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 43


and for increasing the number of this Church mili-
tant; it was more fitted to produce aversion therefor,
and to inspire a horror of it as great as of death.

Then Famines had their turn; and the people
[139] thought that, because they had changed Mas-
ters, and had placed their confidence in God rather
than in the Demons of Hell, the Faith had
drawn these misfortunes after it; and that he whom
it adored was either powerless to do us good, or
was wanting in love for those who wished to love
him.

Wars have been more pitiless, and, although they
have ravaged this Country most cruelly, without
sparing any sex, age, or condition of persons, never-
theless we may truly say that it seems as if God had
chosen to reap the flower of our Churches with that
sharp sword. Into the heart of the Country, and to
the doors of the villages where the reign of the Faith
most prevailed, the Hiroquois have come from a
hundred leagues’ distance, to slay those who supported
it and who by the example and holiness of their
lives, by the ardor of their zeal, and the efficacy of
the impassioned words that the Holy Ghost placed
in their mouths, already possessed the qualities of
Apostles of their country, wherein they preached
more powerfully than we the greatness of him who
makes Saints of barbarians.

[140] These were deeply-felt losses for a Church
newly born; but those that have followed since our
last Relations have seemed more disastrous,— not
only to the advancement of the Faith, but also to all
these Countries, which become weaker day by day,
and seem to be drawing near their ruin, if some arm
more powerful than ours or some intervention of


44 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


coup du Ciel n’arrefte l’infolence & la profperité de
leurs Ennemis.

Nos Chreftiens, il y efit vn an 1’ E{té paffé, auoient
fait vne bande d’enuiron cent hommes choifis, fe
ioignans a quelques guerriers Infidelles, pour aller
dreffer des embufches fur les frontieres du Pays
ennemy: ils furent rencontrez par fept ou huit cens
Hiroquois, & apres le combat d’vne foirée, & d’vne
nuit entiere, demeurerent tous fur la place, ou pris
captifs, fans qu’aucun fe ptt efchapper.

Vn mal-heur en attire vn autre, la mefme année
deux bandes de Hurons tomberent entre les mains
d’autres Hiroquois plus voifins de Kebec, qui les atten-
dent au paffage fur la Riuiere qu’ils defcendent pour
aller trouuer les Francois, & traiter auec eux leurs
Caftors & leur pelleterie.

[141] Et l’an paffé, trois autres flottes, la plufpart
des Chreftiens, trouuerent auffi fur le mefme chemin
ou la mort, ou la captiuité: les vns dés leur defpart
des Trois-riuieres, les autres vn peu au deffous de
Ville-Marie, les derniers enuiron foixante lieués plus
haut; car le peril continué cent lieués de chemin,
n’y ayant pas vn feul moment ot on puiffe eftre en
affeurance d’vn ennemy caché dedans des joncs qui
bordent la riuiere, ou dans l’efpaiffeur des forefts
qui les couurent a voftre veué, lors qu’ils vous voyent
venir de quatre, cing ou fix lieués, ayans tous le
loifir de fe difpofer au combat, s’ils vous voyent les
plus foibles; ou de fonger a leur retraite, ou demeu-
rer cachez dans leurs embufches, s’ils vous croyent
les plus forts.

Vne feule bande ayant trauerfé ces dangers, re-
tourna icy a bon port, & nous rendit le Pere Iean de


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 45


Heaven do not arrest the insolence and success of
their Enemies.

A year ago last Summer, our Christians had mus-
tered a band of about a hundred picked men, who
joined some Infidel warriors to go and lay ambushes
on the frontiers of the enemy’s Country. They were
met by seven or eight hundred Hiroquois; and,
after fighting for a whole evening and a whole night,
they were all killed on the field of battle or taken
prisoners, not one effecting his escape.

One misfortune attracts another. In the same
year, two bands of Hurons fell into the hands of
other Hiroquois who are nearer Kebec, and who lay
in wait for them on the River which they descend
to go and see the French, and to trade their Beaver
skins and furs with them.

[141] And last year three other fleets, mostly of
Christians, also met with death or captivity on the
same road,—one, soon after their departure from
Three rivers; another, a little above Ville-Marie;
the last, about sixty leagues higher up. For the
peril continues over a hundred leagues of road.
There is no safety for a moment from an enemy
hidden in the rushes along the banks of the river, or
in the depths of the forest, which screen them from
your sight while they can see you coming from a
distance of four, five, or six leagues,—thus having
time to prepare for a combat, if they see that you
are weaker; or to retreat, or remain hidden in their
ambush, if they consider you the stronger.

A single band, which had passed through these
dangers, reached here safely, and brought to us Father
Jean de Brebeuf, whose absence during three years
had been greatly felt by us, and Fathers Leonard


46 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


Brebeuf, dont l’abfence de trois ans, nous auoit efté
bien fenfible; & les Peres Leonard Gareau, & Noél
Chabanel, venus de nouueau a noftre fecours, dont
l’arriuée nous confola extremement dans les regrets
de la perte que fraifchement nous auions faite du
Pere Breffany tombé entre les mains des Hiroquois.
[142] Cette bande fut efcortée du fecours que Mon-
fieur de Montmagny noftre Gouuerneur nous enuoya
tres-heureufement, non feulement pour la confer-
uation de ces pauures Hurons, qui couroient vn grand
rifque de tomber pareillement dans les embufches
des ennemis,; Mais plus encore pour affermir ce Pays
qui eftoit menacé de voir en Hyuer vne armée d’Hi-
roquois venir rauager leurs bourgades, & traifnant
apres foy vne defolation generale mettre tout 4 feu
& a fang: mais la venué de ce fecours leur a fait
changer de deffein. Que fi cette mefme efcorte de
Soldats Francois, qui eft fur le point de s’en retour-
ner, pour accompagner les Hurons qui defcendront
la riuiere, arriuét auec autant de bon-heur a Kebec,
qu’ils monterent icy l’an paffé: le Ciel aura beny
entierement tous les deffeins de Monfieur noftre Gou-
uerneur. Quoy qu'il en foit, ie prie Dieu de confer-
uer toufiours 4 la Nouuelle France vne perfonne qui
nous doit eftre fi precieufe, car ie ne croy point de-
puis neuf ans qu’il en a le Gouuernement, qu’on euft
peu agir auec vn plus grand zele qu’il en a fait
paroiftre, vne prudence plus dégagée des propres
interefts, vne [143] force d’efprit, & vn courage plus
veritablement Chreftien, dans les difficultez quafi
infurmontables qui fe font rencontrées, & qui euffent
abattu vn coeur moins ferme que le fien.

Mais pour reprendre mon difcours, & dire A voftre
Reuerence les fentimens que i’ay, touchant la con-


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 47


Gareau and Noél Chabanel, who had newly come to
our assistance. Their arrival consoled us exceed-
ingly in our regret for our recent loss of Father
Bressany, who had fallen into the hands of the Hiro-
quois. [142] This band was escorted by the troops
which Monsieur de Montmagny, our Governor, sent
us most opportunely, not only for the preservation
of the poor Hurons, who ran a great risk of also fall-
ing into the ambushes of the enemies, but still more
for strengthening this Country, which was threat-
ened this Winter with the sight of a Hiroquois army
coming to ravage their villages, bringing with it
general desolation, and wasting everything with fire
and sword. But the arrival of this relief made them
alter their plans. And if this same escort of French
Soldiers, which is about to return, in order to accom-
pany the Hurons who are going down the river,
reach Kebec as safely as they came up last year,
Heaven will have fully blessed all the designs of
Monsieur our Governor. In any case, I pray God
ever to preserve for New France a person who should
be so precious to us; for I do not think that, in the
nine years during which he has had the Government
of it, any one could have acted with more zeal than
he has displayed, with more disinterested prudence,
with more [143] strength of mind, and with a more
truly Christian courage, amid the almost insurmount-
able difficulties that have been encountered, and
that would have discouraged a heart less firm than
his.

But to return to our subject, and to tell your Rev-
erence my sentiments respecting the conversion of
this country, I may frankly confess that, if we had
to judge the establishment of the Faith in these


48 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


uerfion de ce pays; ie luy confefferay ingenuément,
que s’il falloit iuger de l’eftabliffement de la Foy en
ces contrées, felon les veués de la prudence humaine,
4 peine croirois-je qu’il y euft lieu au monde plus
difficile A foufmettre aux Loix de IESVS-CHRIST.
Non feulement A caufe qu’ils n’ont aucun vfage de
lettres, aucuns monumens de 1’Hiftoire, & aucune
idée d’vne Diuinité qui ayt creé le monde, & ayt foin
de fon gouuernement: mais plus encore par ce que
ie ne croy pas qu’il y ayt peuples fur la terre, plus
libres que ceux-cy, & moins capables de voir leurs
volontez contraintes 4 quelque puiffance que ce foit:
en forte que les Peres n’ont icy aucun pouuoir fur
leurs enfans, les Capitaines fur leurs fujets & les Loix
du pays fur les vns & les autres, qu’autant qu’il
plaift 4 vn chacun de s’y foufmettre; n’y ayant aucun
chaftiment dont [144] on puniffe les coulpables, &
auctin criminel qui ne foit affeuré que fa vie & fes
biens ne feront en aucun danger, fut-il conuaincu de
trois & quatre meurtres, d’auoir receu penfion des
ennemis pour trahir fa patrie, ou de fon propre mou-
uement d’auoir rompu la paix qu’on auroit arreftée
par vn confentement general de tout le pays: Ce
font crimes que i’ay veu commettre, & dont ie vois
les autheurs en tirer leur gloire, fe vantans que les
guerres qu’ils ont fufcitées rendront leur nom immor-
tel: Ce n’eft pas qu'il n’y ayt des Loix & des puni-
tions proportionnées aux crimes, mais ce ne font pas
les coupables qui en portent la peine, c’eft au public
a fatisfaire pour les fautes des particuliers: en forte
que fi vn Huron auoit tué vn Algonquin, ou quel-
qu’autre Huron, tout le pays s’affemble, on conuient
du nombre de prefens qu’il faut faire A la Nation, ou
aux parens de celuy qui a efté tué, afin d’arrefter la


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 49


countries from the standpoint of human prudence, I
could hardly believe that there is any place in the
world more difficult to subject to the Laws of Jesus
CHRIST. Not only because they have no knowl-
edge of letters, no Historical monuments, and no idea
of a Divinity who has created the world and who
governs it; but, above all, because I do not believe
that there is any people on earth freer than they,
and less able to allow the subjection of their wills to
any power whatever,—so much so that Fathers here
have no control over their children, or Captains over
their subjects, or the Laws of the country over any
of them, except in so far as each is pleased to submit
to them. There is no punishment which [144] is
inflicted on the guilty, and no criminal who is not
sure that his life and property are in no danger, even
if he were convicted of three or four murders, of
having received a reward from the enemy for betray-
ing his country, or breaking off by his own act a
peace, that is decided upon by the general consent
of the whole country. These are crimes that I have
seen committed, the authors whereof have gloried in
them and have boasted that the wars that they had
aroused would make their namesimmortal. It is not
because there are no Laws or punishments propor-
tionate to the crimes, but it is not the guilty who
suffer the penalty. It is the public that must make
amends for the offenses of individuals; so that, if a
Huron has killed an Algonquin or another Huron,
the whole country assembles; and they come to an
agreement respecting the number of presents to be
given to the Tribe or to the relatives of him who
has been killed, to stay the vengeance that they
might take. The Captains urge their subjects to


50 LES RELATIONS DES J/ESUITES [VoL. 28


vangeance qu’ils en pourroient prendre. Les Capi-
taines exhortent leurs fujets 4 fournir ce qui eft
neceffaire; pas vn n’y eft contraint, mais ceux qui
font de bonne volonté apportent publiquement ce
qu’ils veulent y contribuer, & ce femble a l’enuy
[145] l’vn de l’autre, felon qu’ils font plus ou moins
riches, & que le defir de la gloire & de paroiftre
affectionnez au bien public les inuite en femblables
occafions. Or quoy que cette forme de iuftice con-
tienne tous ces peuples, & empefche ce femble plus
efficacement les defordres, que ne fait en France la
punition perfonnelle des criminels; c’eft toutefois vn
procedé qui n’e{t remply que de douceur, & qui laiffe
les particuliers dans cét efprit de liberté, de ne fe
voir iamais foufmis 4 Loix aucunes, & ne fuiure
aucuns mouuemens finon celuy de leur volonté, ce qui
fans doute eft vne difpofition toute contraire 4a l’ef-
prit de la Foy, qui doit foufmettre non feulement
nos volontez, mais noftre efprit, nos iugemens, & tous
les fentimens de !homme 4 vne puiffance inconnué,
a nos fens, a vne Loy qui n’a rien de la terre, & qui
en tout eft oppofée aux loix & fentimens de la nature
corrompué.

Adjouftez a cela que les loix du Pays, qui leur
paroiffent les plus iuftes, combattent en mille chofes
la pureté du Chriftianifme: principalement en ce qui
eft des mariages, dont la diffolution, & en fuite la
liberté de fonger a vn autre party, eft [146] icy plus
frequente & plus libre qu’il n’eft en France a vn
maiftre de prendre vn autre feruiteur, celuy qu'il a
ne luy aggreant pas: en forte qu’a vray dire, en leurs
mariages les plus fermes, & qu’ils eftiment les plus
conformes a la raifon, la foy quils fe donnent
n’a rien de plus qu’vne promeffe conditionelle de


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 51


provide what is needed; no one is compelled to it,
but those who are willing bring publicly what they
wish to contribute; it seems as if they vied [145]
with one another according to the amount of their
wealth, and as the desire of glory and of appearing
solicitous for the public welfare urges them to do on
like occasions. Now although this form of justice
restrains all these peoples, and seems more effectu-
ally to repress disorders than the personal punish-
ment of criminals does in France, it is nevertheless
a very mild proceeding, which leaves individuals in
such a spirit of liberty that they never submit to any
Laws and obey no other impulse than that of their
own will. This, without doubt, is a disposition
quite contrary to the spirit of the Faith, which re-
quires us to submit not only our wills, but our minds,
our judgments, and all the sentiments of man to a
power unknown to our senses, to a Law that is not of
earth, and that is entirely opposed to the laws and
sentiments of corrupt nature.

Add to this that the laws of the Country, which to
them seem most just, attack the purity of the Chris-
tian life in a thousand ways, especially as regards
their marriages,— the dissolution of which, with free-
dom to seek another consort, is [146] more frequent
and easy here than it is in France for a master to
take another servant, when the one he has does not
please him. ‘The result is, truth to tell, that, in the
closest of their marriages, and those which they con-
sider most conformable to reason, the faith that they
pledge each other is nothing more than a conditional
promise to live together so long as each shall con-
tinue to render the services that they mutually expect
from each other, and shall not in any way wound the


52 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


demeurer enfemble, tandis qu’vn chacun continuera
a rendre les feruices qu’ils attendent mutuellement
les vns des autres, & n’offenfera point l’amitié qu’ils
fe doiuent; cela manquant on iuge le diuorce eftre
raifonnable du cofté de celuy qui fe voit offenfé, quoy
qu’on blafme l’autre party qui y a donné occafion.

Mais la plus grande oppofition que nous voyons en
ces Pays 4 l’efprit:-de la Foy, eft en ce que leurs
remedes contre les maladies, leurs plus grandes recre-
ations lors qu’ils font en fanté, leurs pefches, leurs
chaffes & leur trafic, la profperité de leurs champs,
de leurs guerres, & de leurs confeils, tout eft quafi
remply de ceremonies diaboliques. De forte que la
fuper{tition ayant corrépu quafi toutes les actions de
la vie, il femble que pour eftre Chreftien, il faut fe
priuer non feulement des [147] pafle-temps, qui d’ail-
leurs font tout a fait dans l’innocence, & des dou-
ceurs les plus aymables de la vie; mais des chofes
les plus neceffaires, & en vn mot mourir au monde,
en mefme temps qu’on veut prendre la vie de Chre-
{tien.

Non pas qu’ayant examiné leurs fuperftitions de
plus prés, nous voyons que le Diable fe mefle & leur
prefte aucun fecours qui furpaffe l’operation de la
nature, mais toutefois ils ont recours a luy, ils croy-
ent qu'il leur parle en fonge, ils l’inuoquent A leur
ayde, ils luy font des prefens & facrifices, tantoft
pour l’appaifer, tantoft pour fe le rendre fauorable,
ils luy referent leur fanté, leurs guerifons, & tout le
bon-heur de leur vie: en cela d’autant plus mife-
tables qu’ils fe font efclaues du Diable fans rien
gagner 4 fon feruice, non pas mefme en ce monde,
dont il eft appellé le Prince, & femble auoir quelque
pouuoir.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 53


affection that they owe each other. If this fail,
divorce is considered reasonable on the part of the
injured one, although the other party who has given
occasion for it is blamed.

But the greatest opposition that we meet in these
Countries to the spirit of the Faith consists in the
fact that their remedies for diseases; their greatest
amusements when in good health; their fishing,
their hunting, and their trading; the success of their
crops, of their wars, and of their councils,— almost all
abound in diabolical ceremonies. So that, as super-
stition has contaminated nearly all the actions of
their lives, it would seem that to be a Christian, one
must deprive himself not only of [147] pastimes which
elsewhere are wholly innocent, and of the dearest
pleasures of life, but even of the most necessary
things, and, in a word, die to the world at the
very moment that one wishes to assume the life of a
Christian.

Not that, after examining their superstitions more
closely, we find that the Devil interferes and gives
them any help beyond the operation of nature; but
nevertheless they have recourse to him; they believe
that he speaks to them in dreams; they invoke his
aid; they make presents and sacrifices to him, some-
times to appease him and sometimes to render him
favorable tothem; they attribute to him their health,
their cures, and all the happiness of their lives. In
this, they are all the more miserable that they are
slaves of the Devil, without gaining anything in his
service,— not even in this world, of which he is called
the Prince, and wherein he seems to have some
power.

If lesser difficulties have caused trouble in convert-


54 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


Si de moindres difficultez ont donné de la peine a
conuertir des Peuples policez; & s’il a fallu des fiecles
entiers pour y planter la Foy, quoy que Dieu affiftaft
pour lors ceux qui annongoient fa parole d’vne infi-
nité de miracles, du don des guerifons, [148] du don
des langues, des propheties, & de tout ce qui eft
capable d’eftonner la nature, & faire reconnoiftre aux
plus impies le pouuoir & la majefté de celuy dont on
publioit la grandeur. Que doit-on attendre de ces
peuples barbares, n’ayant pas pli a Dieu nous benir
de la frequence des miracles; & leur rendre la Foy
plus aymable par les douceurs qu’elle feroit pleuuoir
du Ciel dés cette vie, fur ceux qui fe foufmettroient
a fes Loix; mais mefme n’ayans pas icy ces aydes
temporels des fecours, des bien-faits & des dons,
dont aux autres contrées du Monde on s’eft feruy
auprés des Sauuages, pour procurer leur conuerfion.
En fin ne pouuans pas auoir icy la force en main, &
le fouftien de ce glaiue tranchant qui fert faincte-
ment a l’Eglife, pour authorifer fes Arrefts, foufte-
nir la Iuftice, & reprimer l’infolence de ceux qui
foulent aux pieds la faincteté de fes Myfteres.

La Foy n’eftant pas naturelle 4 ces peuples, comme
il femble qu’elle foit en France, ot on la fucce auec
le lait, ce n’eft quafi rien fait, d’auoir fait homme
vn Chreftien. Il faut plus de combats, plus de
peines & plus de fueurs, pour le conferuer & [149]
retenir dedans 1l’Eglife, que pour l’auoir gagné A
Dieu. Les tentations leur font connoiftre leur foi-
bleffe,; leur efprit n’eft pas toufiours dans 1a ferueur;
le Ciel n’arrefte pas toufiours leur veué, la terre n’a
pas perdu tous fes attraits pour eux, il eft aifé dans la
fuite de plufieurs années qu’ils tébent dans leur


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 55
a ns


ing civilized Nations, and if it has taken entire cen-
turies to implant the Faith in them, though God
then assisted those who preached his word, with a
multitude of miracles,— with the gift of cures, [148]
the gift of tongues, of prophecies, and everything
that can astonish nature and make even the most
impious acknowledge the power and majesty of him
whose greatness they proclaimed,— what can be ex-
pected from these barbarous nations when it has not
pleased God to bless us with frequent miracles, and
to make the Faith more agreeable to them by the
pleasant things that it would cause Heaven to shower,
even in this life, on those who should submit to his
Laws; and when we have not here even such temporal
aids as the succor, the benefits, and the gifts which
have been employed with the Savages in the other
countries of the World to procure their conversion?
Finally, we cannot here have force at hand, and the
support of that sharp sword which serves the Church
in so holy a manner to give authority to her Decrees,
to maintain Justice, and curb the insolence of those
who trample under foot the holiness of her Mysteries.

As Faith is not natural to these peoples,—as it
seems to be in France, where it is imbibed with one’s
mother’s milk,—it is not a mere trifle to have
made a manaChristian. More contests, more pains,
and more labors are needed to retain and [149] keep
him in the Church than were required to win him to
God. Temptations show them their feebleness; their
minds are not always fervent; Heaven does not
always fix their gaze; earth has not lost all its attrac-
tions for them; it is easy for them in the course of
many years to fall back into their frailties; grace is
but transitory, while nature ever remains; in a


56 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


foibleffe: la grace eft paffagere, la nature demeure
toufiours, en vn mot, ie veux dire que la perfeuerance
dans l’exercice de la Foy, n’eft pas icy moins diffi-
cile, qu’il eft en France a la plufpart de conferuer
leur innocence du Baptefme, & ne point perdre par
le peché la grace, qui nous rend agreables 4 Dieu.

Adjouftez a cela les fureurs d’vn ennemy Hiro-
quois, qui va nous fermant le paffage, qui nous rauit
les neceffitez de la vie, & les fecours qu’on nous peut
enuoyer en vn pays abandonné: qui tué & qui maf-
facre ceux qui viennent a noftre ayde, qui chaque
année va croiffant en fon infolence, qui va dépeuplant
ce pays, & qui fait prendre a nos Hurons, les deffeins
d’abandonner leur commerce auec les Fran¢ois, voy-
ans qu’il leur coufte fi cher, & aymans mieux fe
paffer des marchandifes de 1’ Europe, que de s’expofer
chaque année, non [150] pas a vne mort, qui feule
feroit tolerable, mais a des feux & a des flammes,
dont on a mille fois plus d’horreur.

Or en fuitte que pouuons-nous attendre au milieu
d’vne nation barbare, ott nous n’aurons plus les
fecours de la vie, ot. on n’ofera plus nous enuoyer le
renfort d’ouuriers qui feroient icy neceffaires pour y
auancer les affaires de Dieu; ot tous ceux qui y
re{teront, feront abandonnez & la rage d’vn peuple
defefperé, & qui ne fera plus retenu de nous maffa-
crer tous, par la crainte de perdre leur commerce
auec les Frang¢ois, qu’ils verront leur e{tre impoffible,
& eftre pour eux entierement ruiné. Ou alors les
Chreftiens qui compofent cette Eglife naiffante, fe
verront fans Pafteurs, fans Sacremens, fans Sacri-
fice, & hors des moyens de recourre a ceux, qui feuls
font leur refuge en leurs defolations, leur appuy
dedans leur foibleffe, le nceud facré qui les lie auec


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 57


word, I mean to say that perseverance in the exercise
of Faith is no less difficult here than it is in France
for the majority to retain the innocence of Baptism,
and not to lose through sin the grace that makes us
agreeable to God.

Add to this the fury of a Hiroquois enemy who
closes the way to us; who deprives us of the neces-
sities of life, and of the help that may be sent us in
a forsaken country; who kills and massacres those
who come to our aid; whose insolence grows from
year to year; who depopulates the country, and
makes our Hurons think of giving up the trade with
the French, because they find that it costs them too
dear, and they prefer to do without European goods
rather than to expose themselves every year, not
[150] toa death that would be endurable, but to fires
and flames, for which they have a thousand times
greater horror.

Now, therefore, what can we expect in the midst
of a barbarous nation where we shall no longer have
the necessaries of life; where they will no longer
venture to send us the reinforcement of laborers that
would be required here to promote the affairs of God;
where all who shall remain will be abandoned to the
fury of a desperate people, who will no longer be
restrained from massacring us all by the fear of losing
their trade with the French,— which they will find
impossible to them, and which will be completely
ruined, as far as they are concerned? In that case,
the Christians who compose this nascent Church will
then see themselves without Pastors, without Sacra-
ments, without Sacrifice, and without the means of
having recourse to those who alone are their refuge
in their desolation, their support in their weakness,


58 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 28


Dieu, & le renfort qu’ils ont contre les puiffances
d’Enfer.

Sans doute ce font 14 des craintes raifonnables, des
difficultez capables d’arrefter les efprits, des obftacles
infurmontables A nos foibleffes, & des mal-heurs ce
femble ineuitables, fi la France ne fait des [151]
efforts extraordinaires pour renuerfer cét ennemy
qui va ruinant d’vn mefme coup, & ces Peuples & la
Foy qu’on leur prefche. Et a dire vray, tant de
mal-heurs furuenus l’vn fur l’autre, & des oppofi-
tions fi puiffantes aux deffeins qui nous amenent icy,
nous auroient fait perdre courage, fi nous ne leuions
les yeux plus haut, & fi le Ciel n’eftoit lappuy de
nos confiances. Mais quand nous penfons que ce
font les affaires de Dieu plus que les noftres, que la
Foy n’a efté fondée en aucun lieu du Monde qu’au
milieu des tempeftes, que toufiours Dieu s’eft pleu
de faire paroiftre fon pouuoir ot il y auoit moins de
Vhumain, que fa main n’eft pas racourcie, quand
nous penfons que le Sang de IESVS-CHRISTn’a
pas e{té moins refpandu pour ces peuples que pour
le refte de la terre, & que les fruicts de fon amour
ne font pas épuifez fur ceux qui l’ont defia reconnu
pour leur Sauueur, qu'il doit eftre adoré de tous
les peuples de la terre, & loiié d’autant de langues
qu’il y enadans l’Vniuers. Quand nous voyons des
Peuples qui nous enuironnent de toutes parts, & vn
monde quafi entier ou fon fainct Nom n’a efté iamais
adoré, [152] & ou toutefois il faut que l’Euangile ait
penetré auant la fin des fiecles, puifque Dieu y a en-
gagé fa parole. Quand nous voyons de nos yeux ce
qu il y a defia commencé, & que luy feul y a trauail-
1é plus que nous, qu’il y fait tous les iours des mira-
cles plus grands que ne feroit la creation d’vn Monde


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 59


the sacred tie that binds them to God, and their
succor against the powers of Hell.

Beyond a doubt, these are reasonable fears,— diffi-
culties capable of arresting our minds, obstacles in-
surmountable to our weakness, and misfortunes that
seem inevitable,—if France does not make [151]
extraordinary efforts to overthrow this enemy, who
with one and the same blow destroys these Nations
and the Faith that we preach tothem. To tell the
truth, so many misfortunes that have followed one
another, and so powerful opposition to the designs
that bring us here, would have caused us to lose cour-
age, did we not raise our eyes higher, and if our
confidence were notupheld by Heaven. But when
we think that these are the affairs of God more than
ours; that the Faith has not been founded anywhere
in the World except in the midst of tempests; that
God has always been pleased to manifest his power
where there is least of human strength; that his arm
is not shortened; when we think that the Blood of
Jesus CHRIST has been shed no less for these
nations than for the remainder of the earth, and that
the fruits of his love are not exhausted for those who
have already acknowledged him as their Savior; that
he must be adored by all the peoples of the earth,
and be praised by as many tongues as there are in
the Universe; when we see Nations surrounding us
on all sides and almost an entire world where his
holy Name has never been adored, [152] and where
nevertheless it must be that the Gospel shall have
penetrated before the end of the ages, since God has
pledged his word to it; when we see with our own
eyes what he has already begun there, and that he
alone has worked there more than we have,—that


60 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


tout nouueau, changeant des coeurs de Barbare en
des cceurs de Chreftiens. Enfin quand nous penfons
que Dieu ne laiffe iamais fon ouurage imparfait, qu’il
y va de fa gloire & non pas de la nof{tre: alors nous
ne iugeons rien impoffible, nous efperons contre toute
efperance, nos confiances font auffi fortes que iamais,
& des gages de fon amour par le paffé deffus ces
peuples, & de ce quil y fait maintenant, nous
prenons affeurance qu'il ne leur manquera pas a
Vaduenir.

Car nonobftant tous ces rauages, de peftes, de
famines, & de guerres, quelque oppofition qu’ayent
ces peuples en leur naturel, en leurs loix & en leurs
couftumes A la faincteté de la Foy, quelque Empire
qu’y ayent les Demons, nous n’auons pas laiffé cha-
que année d’en baptifer bon nombre, & encore cette
derniere année plus de cent feptante, & quoy que
Dieu ait difpofé [153] de la plufpart, dont plufieurs
font dans le Ciel, comme nous ations tout fujet de
croire. Nous auons toutesfois la confolation de voir
au milieu de cette barbarie fept petites Eglifes, ot
la main de Dieu a trauaillé bien plus que nous, ot
lEfprit de la Foy y regne, & ne trouue rien de bar-
bare, dans les cceurs qu'il veut s’affujettir, ot. 1’ Inno-
cence fe conferue au milieu de l’impureté. Ce qui
nous fait dire, fans qu’il nous en refte aucun doute,
Digitus Dei eft hic. Or fi Dieu eft pour nous, pour-
rions nous bien craindre au milieu de nos entre-
p[rjifes, fans nous expofer aux reproches que fift le
Sauueur du monde a §S. Pierre: Modice fide quare
dubitafir ?

Mais ie crains qu’on ne craigne par trop pour nous,
& i’ay peur que les deffiances de ceux qui font éloi-
gnez des combats, n’arref{tent le cours des victoires


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 61


he performs every day miracles greater than the cre-
ation of a new World would be, changing the hearts
of Barbarians into Christian hearts; finally, when we
think that God never leaves his work unfinished;
that his glory is at stake and not ours: —then we con-
sider nothing impossible; we hope against all hope;
our confidence is as great as ever; both on account of
the pledges of his love in the past, in favor of these
nations, and of what he does there now, we feel
assured that he will not fail them in the future.

For — notwithstanding all these ravages of plagues,
of famines, and of wars; whatever opposition there
may be in the nature of these peoples, in their laws,
and in their customs, to the holiness of the Faith;
whatever Dominion the Demons may have— we have
not failed each year to baptize a goodly number, and
even this past year more than one hundred and
seventy. And though God has disposed [153] of the
majority,—several of whom are in Heaven as we
have every reason to believe,—we have, neverthe-
less, the consolation of seeing in the midst of this
barbarism seven small Churches, wherein the hand
of God has worked far more than we; wherein the
Spirit of the Faith reigns, and finds nothing barba-
rous in the hearts of those whom it chooses to subdue
to itself; wherein Innocence preserves itself in the
midst of impurity. This induces us to say, without
the shadow of a doubt, Digztus Det est hic. Now,
as God is for us, can we really feel fear amid our
undertakings, without exposing ourselves to the
reproaches addressed by the Savior of the world to
St. Peter: Modice fidet quare dubitasti ?

But Iam afraid that too much fear is felt for us,
and that want of confidence onthe part of those who


62 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Nou. 28


qu’emporte icy la Foy fur l’impieté. Je veux dire
que les doutes qu’on pourroit auoir dans la France de
la conuerfion de ces peuples, ne foit vn des plus
grands empefchemens qu’on y ptt apporter, & que
Dieu ne retire fes faueurs de deffus ces pays infi-
delles, 4 caufe qu’au milieu des tempeftes, on auroit
retiré fes confiances en luy. Car en [154] effet il eft
aifé de defefperer de la conuerfion de ces peuples,
mefme dans ce feul preiugé qu’eftans barbares, a
peine d’aucuns peuuent croire qu'ils foient hommes,
& qu’on puiffe en faire des Chreftiens. Mais ona
tort d’en iuger de la forte, car ie puis dire en verité
que pour l’Efprit ils n’ont rien de moins que les
Europeans, & demeurant dedans la France, ie n’euffe
iamais creu, que fans inftruction la nature euft pti
fournir vne eloquence plus prompte & plus vigou-
reufe, que i’en ay admiré en plufieurs Hurons; ny
de plus clairvoyant dans les affaires, & vne conduite
plus fage dans les chofes qui font de leur vfage.
Pourquoy donc feroient-ils incapables des connoif-
fances d’vn vray Dieu?

Leurs couftumes en mille chofes font en effet bar-
bares; mais apres tout, dans les chofes qui parmy
eux font cenfées au nombre des mauuaifes, & con-
damnées par le public, nous y voyons fans comparai-
fon beaucoup moins de defordre qu’il n’y a dedans
la France, quoy qu’icy la feule honte d’auoir commis
le crime foit la peine du criminel. Quelle feroit
done leur innocence, fi la Foy regnoit parmy eux?

Maintenant nous auons plus grande [1%5] con-
noiffance que iamais de leur langue, de leurs cou-
{tumes, & des moyens qu'il faut tenir pour entrer
dans leur ef{prit, dedans leur coeur, & les gagnant A
nous, les gagner pour le Ciel. Nous trouuons beau-


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 63


are far from the fight will arrest the course of the
victories that the Faith gains here over impiety. I
mean to say that the doubts that may exist in France
with reference to the conversion of these nations is
one of the greatest impediments that can be offered;
and that God may withdraw his favors from these
pagan countries because, in the midst of tempests,
confidence in him has been withdrawn. For, in
[154] truth, it is easy to despair of the conversion of
these nations,— even in this presumption alone, that,
because they are barbarians, some can hardly believe
them to be men, and that we can hardly make Chris-
tians of them. But it is wrong to judge thus; for
I can say in truth that, as regards Intelligence, they
are in no wise inferior to Europeans and to those who
dwellin France. I would never have believed that,
without instruction, nature could have supplied a most
ready and vigorous eloquence, which I have admired
in many Hurons; or more clear-sightedness in affairs,
ora more discreet management in things to which
they are accustomed. Why, then, should they be
incapable of having a knowledge of a true God?

In truth, their customs are barbarous in a thou-
sand matters; but after all, in those practices which
among them are regarded as evil acts and are con-
demned by the public, we find without comparison
much less disorder than there is in France, though
here the mere shame of having committed the crime
is the offender’s punishment. What, therefore,
would their innocence be if the Faith reigned among
them?

At present we have a greater [155] knowledge than
ever of their language, of their customs, and of the
means that must be taken to enter into their minds


64 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


coup de facilité 4 leur expliquer les veritez de noftre
Foy, qui du commencement nous fembloient les plus
ineffables, A caufe de la pauureté de leur langue en
ces matieres, & de l’ignorance dans laquelle ils ont
toufiours vefcu, des chofes qui furpaffent la portée
de la veué & des fens. Ils ne peuuét plus nous
refpondre, quien eitet la, Loyadegl sys. © 1Rs'h,
que nous prefchons eft faincte, mais qu’elle leur eft
impoffible, ayant veu leurs compatriotes nays dans la
barbarie auffi bien qu’eux, éleuez dedans leurs cou-
{tumes, nourris dedans leurs vices, & abyfmez autant
quwils font dedans l’impieté qui inonde tous ces pais,
fe retirer de ce naufrage, defpoiiiller la nature, fe
reue{tir des Vertus les plus fainctes du Chriftianifme,
& n’auoir plus que de l’horreur pour les plaifirs du
monde, ny de l'amour que pour le Ciel. Ils font con-
trains de confeffer que Dieu eft le maiftre des cceurs,
& qu’ila plus de bonté que ne font grades nos ma-
lices, lors qu’ils voyent [156] tous les iours que ceux
qu’y ont eu plus d’auerfion de nos Myfteres, font des
premiers 4 fe rendre a la verité, que la Foy leur
ouure l’Efprit, & que Dieu ayant pris poffeffion de
leur ame ils font plus fortement touchez du bien,
qu’ils n’auoient d’attraits pour le mal.

La conftance & longanimité de nos Peres en vne
vie fi penible, dans vn employ dont la nature & tous
les fens ne peuuent auoir que de l’horreur, en vne
affaire qui n’eft pas noftre, ou au moins dont nos Sau-
uages voyent bien que nous ne retirons aucun profit,
vn courage fi inuincible dans des oppofitions fi puif-
fantes aux deffeins qui nous amenent icy; leur fer-
uent maintenant d’vn tres-puiffant motif, qui leur
rend plus croyables & plus adorables les veritez de
no{tre Foy. En vn mot, ils aduotient qu’il faut fans


1645 — 46] RELATION OF 1644-45 65


and hearts, and, by winning them over to ourselves,
to gain them for Heaven. We find it very easy to
expound to them the truths of our Faith which, at
the beginning, seemed to us the most difficult to
explain, owing to the poverty of their language in
such matters, and the ignorance in which they had
always lived of things beyond the reach of sight and
of the senses. They can no longer reply to us that
indeed the Law of JESUS CHRIST that we preach
to them is holy, but that it is impossible for them;
for they have seen their countrymen — born in bar-
barism as well as they, brought up in their customs,
fed on their vices, and engulfed as much as they in
the impiety that floods all these countries—save
themselves from the wreck, cast off nature, clothe
themselves with the holiest Virtues of Christianity,
and have nothing but horror for earthly pleasures,
and no love but for Heaven. They are compelled to
confess that God is the master of all hearts, and that
his goodness is greater than our evil deeds; when
they see [156] every day that those who had had the
greatest aversion for our Mysteries are the first to
submit to the truth, that Faith opens the Mind; and
that, when God has taken possession of their souls,
they are more strongly affected by good than they
had been attracted by evil.

The constancy and long-suffering of our Fathers
in so laborious a life, in an employment for which
nature and all the senses can feel nothing but aver-
sion, in a matter which is not ours, or, at least, from
which our Savages see very well that we derive no
profit; a courage so invincible in the midst of so
strong opposition to the designs that bring us here,—
these now serve them as a very powerful reason for


66 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


doute que les plaifirs du Ciel furpaffent tous ceux de
la terre, puifque la feule efperance d’y paruenir, fait
méprifer 4 ceux qui viuent en cette Foy, tout ce qu’il
y a de plus doux en la vie, & leur adoucit les amer-
tumes & de la vie & de la mort.

N’auons-nous pas raifon apres cela de releuer nos
confiances plus que iamais? & [157] de croire que
cette main toute-puiffante, qui d’vn rien a produit
ces commencemens, continuera dans fon ouurage,
que le S. Efprit benira cette heureufe femence, &
qu’ayant mis luy-mefme des difpofitions fi aduanta-
geufes a ce qu’on peut efperer de plus, il la rendra
fecondé, *pourtiaire d' vine terre sinrertile, So -d va
monde infidelle, vne terre de faincteté, & vn monde
Chreftien.

Si nous n’auions que les Hurons a conuertir, encore
pourroit-on peut-eftre penfer, que dix & vingt mille
ames ne font pas vne conquefte fi confiderable qu’il
faille s’expofer 4 tant de hazards, & effuyer tant de
perils pour les gagner A Dieu. Mais nous ne fommes
qu’a l’entrée d’vne terre, qui du cofté de 1’Occident
iufques 4 la Chine, eft remplie de Nations plus nom-
breufes que les Hurons: vers le Midy nous voyons
d’autres Peuples innombrables ot on ne peut auoir
accez que par cette porte ot nous fommes. Puis
done que Dieu nous a appellé les premiers pour luy
cultiuer cette vigne, n’eft-ce pas a nous A luy eftre
fidelle, auec cette patience qu’il recommande A fes
Apoftres: Frudium afferet in patientia, attendant que
luy mefme en [158] recueille les fruicts, aux temps
& aux moments qu’il luy plaira. Si nous n’auons
cette confolation en ce fiecle, ce nous fera vne affez
grande recompenfe d’y auoir employé nos efforts,
& quoy qu’il en arriue, au moins nous mourrons


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 67


rendering the truths of our Faith more credible and
more adorable to them. In a word, they admit that
it must, beyond a doubt, be true that Heaven’s pleas-
ures surpass all those of earth, since solely the hope
of gaining it makes those who live in that Faith
despise all that is pleasant in life, and sweetens for
them the bitterness both of life and of death.

After this, are we not right in raising our hopes
more than ever, and [157] in believing that that all-
powerful hand, which out of nothing produced these
beginnings, will continue its work; that the Holy
Ghost will bless this propitious seed; and that, after
having himself inspired dispositions so advantageous
to what we most hope for, he will make it fruitful
and turn an unfertile soil and an infidel world into a
land of holiness and into a Christian world?

If we had but the Hurons to convert, it might even
be thought, perhaps, that from ten to twenty thou-
sand souls are not so great a conquest that one should
expose himself to so many hazards and encounter so
many dangers, to win them to God. But we are
only at the entrance of a land which on the side of
the West, as far as China, is full of Nations more
populous than the Hurons; toward the South, we see
other Peoples beyond number, to whom we can have
access only by means of this door at which we now
stand. Therefore, since God has called us the first
to cultivate this vine for him, should we not be faith-
ful to him with that patience that he recommends
to his Apostles,— Fructum afferet in patientia, waiting
until he himself [158] gathers the fruits thereof at
such time and at such moment as will please him?
If we have not that consolation in this life, it will be
a sufficient reward for us to have devoted our efforts


68 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


volontiers dans la penfée que ces paroles de Noftre
Seigneur s’accompliront en nous: Altus eft qui /eminat,
& altus qui metit; que d’autres entreront dans nos
trauaux, qu’ils jotiyront de la moiffon dont nous
auons ietté les premieres femences, qu’ils cueilliront
les fruicts arroufez de nos fueurs & de noftre fang;
Et qu’enfin Dieu tirera fa gloire & le falut de fes
Efleus, des volontez que nous auons de viure & de
mourir dans ce fainct employ, ot noftre vocation
nous engage fi heureufement, que ie puis dire en
verité que Dieu a furmonté mes efperances, & qu’a-
uant mon départ de ces Pays des Hurons, dont l’obe-
yffance me rappelle, ie voy de mes yeux accomply
au bout de fept ans, ce que ie me fuffe eftimé heu-
reux d’apprendre de bien loin 4 la fin d’vne longue
vie, & que peut-eftre i’euffe eu de la peine A me
perfuader, fi moy-mefme ie n’en auois efté vn témoin
occulaire,

Nos precedentes Relations ont pfi en [159] donner
quelque idée, & peut-eftre qu’elles auront affez fait
connoiftre, que Dieu n’a point acception de perfon-
nes, que fon Amour, ne defdaigne point les Barbares,
que ces douceurs fe font fentir autant a nos pauures
Sautiages, qu’aux peuples les plus policez de la terre,
que les graces du Ciel ne tombent pas fur les pays, a
proportion qu’ils ont les richeffes de la nature, & en
vn mot que nos Hurons ne font pas moins nays pour
le Ciel, que ceux qui ont joiiy des threfors de la Foy,
mille & deux mille ans deuant eux. Or depuis ce
temps-la Dieu n’a pas retiré fes faueurs de deffus ces
petites Eglifes, il eft toufiours leur Pere, & toufiours
riche a l’endroit de ceux qui l’inuoquent.

C’eft en deux lignes auoir dit ce qui feroit capable
de fournir vne Relation toute entiere, fi i’auois pris


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 69


to it; and, whatever happens, at least we will cheer-
fully die in the thought that these words of Our Lord
will be accomplished in us: Adzus est qui seminat, et
alius qui metit; that others will enter into our work;
that they will enjoy the harvest of which we have
sown the first seeds; that they will gather the fruits
watered with our sweat and with our blood; and,
finally, that God will derive his glory and the salva-
tion of his Elect from our willingness to live and to
die in that holy employment to which our vocation
so happily pledges us, that I may say in truth that
God has exceeded our hopes, and that before my
departure from this Huron Country, from which
obedience recalls me, I see with my own eyes accom-
plished in seven years what I would have considered
myself very happy to have learned from afar, at the
end of a long life, and of which perhaps I would have
had some trouble in convincing myself, if I myself
had not been an eyewitness of it.

Our previous Relations may have [159] conveyed
some idea of it, and perhaps they will have suffi-
ciently shown that God makes no distinction of per-
sons; that his Love does not despise Barbarians; that
his kindness makes itself felt as much by our poor
Savages as by the most civilized nations of the earth:
that Heaven’s graces do not fall upon countries in
proportion to the riches bestowed by nature; and, ina
word, that our Hurons are no less born for Heaven
than those who have enjoyed the treasures of the
Faith a thousand and two thousand years before they
have. Now, since that time God has not withdrawn
his favors from those little Churches; he is ever
their Father, and ever liberal to those who invoke
him.


70 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


deffein de defcendre plus en particulier, & fi la brief-
ueté d’vne lettre ne m’obligeoit de fonger a finir la
prefente. Mais toutesfois, pour €uiter vne autre
extremité, & peut-eftre le blafme d’auoir efté trop
court, en des chofes qui font paroiftre les bontez de
Dieu fur ces peuples, & qui nous obligent d’en lotier
fes mifericordes: i’en rapporteray quelques-vnes,
[160] mais fans autre ordre, que celuy que la memoire
confufe que i’en ay me les prefentera.

Vn Chreftien fraifchement échappé de la captiuité,
fe voyant A fon arriuée enuironné de fes parens, qui
venoient pour le confoler, eftonna toute 1’affiftance
dans les paroles qu’il leur tinft. Mes amis, difoit-il,
Dieu ne m’a pas abandoné dans ma captiuité, s’il
faut fouuent fonger en luy dans les profperitez, on
doit fans ceffe le prier au fort de nos miferes. On
entend comme vne voix en foy qui nous refpond,
Que les mal-heurs de cette vie ne font rien, qu’il ya
vn Paradis qui nous attend, & que la mort, qui eft
d’autant moins éloignée de nous, que nous fommes
plus auant dedans les fouffrances, nous mettra bien-
tof{t dans la poffeffion d’vn bon-heur, que nos plus
cruels ennemis ne pourront nous rauir.

C’ef{toient 14, difoit-il, les penfées qui me confo-
loient, au milieu des plus effroyables tourmens, que
les Hiroquois me firent endurer, lors qu’ils appli-
quoient deffus moy les feux & les flammes ardentes.
Alors ie fentois bien que Dieu m’aydoit, qu’il eftoit
dedans moy, & animoit mon [161] coeur: ie ne fcay
comment cela fe pouuoit faire, mais il eft vray que
m6 ame reffentoit des plaifirs ineffables, 4 mefme
temps que mon corps eftoit dans le plus fort de fes
douleurs. Apres ces premieres fouffrances on con-
fulta fi ie ferois deftiné 4 la mort, ou fi on me deuoit


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 71


This is saying in two lines what an entire Relation
could have contained, had I chosen to enter more
into details, and had not the briefness of a letter
compelled me to think of concluding thisone. How-
ever,—to avoid another extreme, and perhaps blame
for having been too brief in matters which show the
goodness of God to these peoples, and which oblige us
to praise his mercies,—I shall relate some of these,
[160] but with no other order than that suggested by
the confused recollection that I have of them.

A Christian who had recently escaped from captiv-
ity, and who saw himself on his arrival surrounded
by his relatives, who came to console him, astonished
all present by the words that he used. ‘‘ My friends,”
he said, ‘‘ God did not abandon me in my captivity.
If we should often think of him in prosperity we
should also pray to him unceasingly in the height of
our troubles. We hear, as it were, a voice within,
replying to us that the evils of this life are noth-
ing, that there is a Paradise awaiting us, and that
death —which is all the less remote from us, the
greater are our sufferings—will soon place us in
possession of a happiness of which our cruelest
enemies cannot deprive us.

‘‘Such,”’ said he, ‘‘ were the thoughts that con-
soled me in the midst of the most frightful tortures
that the Hiroquois made me endure, when they
applied fire and glowing flamesto me. Then I felt
truly that God helped me; that he was within me,
and animated my [161] heart. I know not how it
could have been, but it is true that my soul felt un-
speakable pleasures, at the very time when my body
endured the greatest pain. After these first suffer-
ings, they consulted whether I was destined for


72 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


donner la vie: ie ne fcauois que defirer des deux, &
n’ofois demander & Dieu, finon qu’il m’enuoyaft ou
la vie, ou la mort, felon qu’il le iugeroit pour mon
falut: puifque ie n’eftois qu’vn enfant, & qu'il eftoit
mon Pere, qui feul auoit plus de connoiffance de mon
bien, & plus d’amour pour moy, que ie n’en puis
auoir moy-mefme.

Quafi en mefme temps vn autre Chreftien qui alloit
a la guerre, eftant interrogé comment il fe comporte-
roit, s’il eftoit pris des ennemis. Ie ne puis pas,
refpondit-il, me promettre rien de moy-mefme, con-
noiffant le peu que ie puis pour le bien: mais ily a
plus de fix mois que ie m’interroge moy-mefme, &
que ie fonde la portée de mon coeur; & il me femble
a chaque fois, que chofe au monde ne feroit capable
de me faire oublier du Ciel. Dieu, difoit-il, -m’a
rauy quafi tous mes parens, il m’a defpoiiillé de mes
biens, i’attens maintenant [162] qu’il m’efprouue en
ma propre perfonne, & peut-eftre il permettra que ie
fois pris des ennemis, & que ie brtile dedans leurs
feux, i’en ay peur, il eft vray, mais toutesfois ie me
retiens lors que ie luy fay mes prieres: Ie luy dy
feulement qu'il void bien ce que mon cceur redoute
dauantage, mais que ie n’ofe luy demander qu’il
m’en deliure, fi bien qu’il me conferue dans 1’Efprit
de la Foy, & dans l’efperance du Paradis; me pro-
mettant qu’apres cela ny les feux, ny les flammes
des Hiroquois ne me rauiront pas les defirs que i’ay
de viure & de mourir Chreftien, en quelque eftat
que le me voye.

Vn autre qui cét Efté fuft pris des Hiroquois, &
rompi{t fes liens deux heures auant qu’on le briilaft,
fe fauuant tout nud, a la fuite, A trauers les ronces &
les efpines, par ou les ennemis le pourfuiuirent vne


1645 - 46] RELATION OF 1644-45 73


death, or whether my life should be spared. I knew
not which of the two to desire, and I did not dare to
ask God, except that he might send me either life or
death, as he deemed best for my salvation, since I
was but a child, and he was my Father who alone
knew what was best for me, and loved me more than
I can love myself.”’

Almost at the same time, another Christian, who
was about to go to war, was questioned how he would
behave if he were captured by the enemy. ‘“‘I can-
not,” he replied, ‘‘ promise anything of myself,
knowing the little good that I can do; but for more
than six months I have been questioning myself, and
sounding the depths of my heart, and it seems to me
each time that nothing in the world could make me
forget Heaven. God,” said he, ‘‘has deprived me
of nearly all my relatives; he has stripped me of my
goods. Iam waiting now [162] until he tries me in
my own person; and perhaps he will permit that I
be captured by the enemies and burned in their fires.
I dread this, it is true; but I nevertheless control
myself when I say my prayers to him. I merely say
to him that he sees very well what my heart fears
the most, but that I do not ask him to deliver me
from it so long as he preserves me in the Spirit of
Faith and in the hope of Paradise,— promising my-
self that, after that, neither the fires nor the flames
of the Hiroquois can deprive me of the desire that
I have to live and die a Christian, in whatever situa-
tion I may be.”’

Another, who was taken prisoner by the Hiroquois
this Summer, broke from his bonds two hours before
they were to burn him, escaped quite naked, and
fled through briers and thorns, wherein the enemy


74 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


iournée quafi entiere, trouue qu’ayat éuité vn mal-
heur il eftoit tombé en dix autres. I] fuft errat de-
dans les bois, trois iours fans manger, les moufquites
& nuit & iour luy oftoient le repos, le pergant de
leurs efguillons depuis les pieds iufqu’a la tefte,; tout
fon corps n’eftoit plus qu’vn vicere, & enfin il fe croy-
oit dans le defefpoir de fa [163] vie, fe voyant encor
éloigné plus de foixante lieués de toute habitation,
en vn pays ott les Hiroquois font toufiours a la chaffe
des hommes, & ou A chaque pas qu'il faifoit pour éui-
ter cét ennemy, il craignoit que ce ne fuft celuy qui
le menoit dans leurs embufches. Enfin les forces
luy manquant, & ne pouuant plus auancer, il s’eftoit
refolu de mourir fur vne roche nué, quw il choififfoit
pour fon tombeau, lors que quelques canots Hurons
l’apperceurent heureufement, & le recueillirent des
portes de la mort. Helas! difoit ce bon Chreftien,
ie ne fongeois pas 4 mes maux, ou au moins ils m’e-
{toient fupportables dans la penfée que i’éuitois vn
plus grand mal; Que fi la crainte d’vn feu, qui ne
m’eutft bralé qu’vne nuit, me rendoit quafi infenfible
a tant de miferes, pourrois-ie maintenant, difoit-il,
trouuer le joug de la Foy difficile, & les peines qu’il
faut fubir au feruice de Dieu peuuent-elles nous
paroiftre des peines, fi vraymét nous croyés qu’il y ait
vn Enfer, & qu’il faut fouffrir en ce monde pour ne pas
fouffrir vn iamais?

Lors que ie me trouuay deffous les feux des Hiro-
quois, difoit vn autre Chreftien, qui en auoit efprou-
ué les rigueurs, cette [164] penfée me confoloit, que
Dieu en auoit ainfi ordonné. Mes douleurs eftoient
exceffiues, & toutesfois iene pouuois aucunement me
plaindre de fa bonté, & quelque mal qu’il veiiille
permettre m/’arriuer, ie croy d’orefnauant que ce ne


1645 — 46] RELATION OF 1644-45 75


pursued him almost an entire day. He found that,
after escaping one misfortune, he fell into ten others;
he wandered in the woods for three days without
food; the mosquitoes disturbed his rest night and
day, piercing him with their stings from head to
foot; the whole of his body was but one sore; and
finally he despaired of his [163] life. Finding him-
self still at a distance of more than sixty leagues
from any settlement,—in a country where the Hiro-
quois are ever hunting men, and where every step
that he took to avoid the enemy would, he feared,
lead him into their ambushes,—his strength at last
failed him; and, as he could proceed no farther, he
resolved to die upon a bare rock that he chose for his
tomb, when some Huron canoes fortunately caught
sight of him, and drew him from the gates of death.
‘* Alas!’’ said that good Christian, “‘I thought not
of my misfortunes, or, at least, I could bear them in
the thought that I escaped a greater evil. If dread
of a fire that would have burned me but for one night
made me insensible to so much misery, could I
now,” he said, ‘‘ find the yoke of the Faith a heavy
one, and can the troubles that have to be endured in
God’s service really seem troubles to us, if we truly
believe that there is a Hell, and that we must suffer
in this world in order not to suffer forever?’
‘When I was in the fires of the Hiroquois,” said
another Christian, who had felt their severity, ‘‘ this
[164] thought consoled me, that God had ordered it.
My sufferings were excessive, and yet I could not in
any way complain of his kindness; and, whatever
evil he may allow to happen to me, I hereafter
believe that it can be only through love, since he
has shown it to me by calling me to the Faith, and


76 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 28


peut eftre que par amour, depuis qu’il me l’a fait
paroiftre m’appellant 4 la Foy, & m’ayant ouuert fon
Paradis. Apres cela qu’on me brufle, qu’on me tour-
mente, qu’on me faffe endurer mille morts, on ne
pourra m’empefcher de l’aymer.

Dedans ce me{me fentiment vn bon Vieillard ref-
pondift A des Infidelles qui luy reprochoient que fa
Foy luy eftoit inutile, puifque le Dieu qwil adoroit ne
le gueriffoit point d’vne maladie douloureufe, qui
luy rendoit la vie, non plus vn bien dont il le deuft
remercier, mais vne charge infupportable. Mes
amis, leur refpondift-il, vous condamneriez vos pa-
roles, fi vous leuiez les yeux au Ciel ou ie tafche de
tenir mon cceur attaché. Vous contez les maladies
du corps au nombre des mal-heurs, & en effet elles
font vn mal-heur pour vous, qui ne connoiffez point
d’autre bon-heur qu’en cette vie; mais les Chreftiens
les enuifagent comme vn bien, [165] lors qu’ils
penfent a ce que la Foy nous enfeigne, que Dieu
nous recompenfera dans le Ciel, felon la mefure de
nos douleurs & de nos joyes, pourueu, que nous le
beniffions également des deux, comme en effet il en
ordonne & de l’vn & de l’autre pour noftre bien,
e{tant fans doute qu’il nous ayme dés cette vie, puis
qu’il nous aymera a iamais.

La refponce d’vn autre Vieillard aagé de 70. ans,
n’e{toit pas moins dans 1’ Efprit de la Foy, lors qu’on
luy reprochoit, que Dieu n’auoit aucunement pitié de
luy dedans vne paralyfie qui luy auoit ofté l’vfage
d’vn bras. Hé quoy, refpondift-il, voudriez vous
qu'il n’y euft point d’arbres fecs dans les bois, &
point de branches mortes dans vn arbre qui va vieil-
liffant? pour moy ie prends plaifir 4 voir mes mem-
bres deffecher, & les approches de la mort, ne m’ont


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 17


opening to me his Paradise. After that, they may
burn me, they may torture me, and make me suffer a
thousand deaths; but they cannot prevent my loving
him.”

Animated by the same sentiment, a good Old Man
replied to some Infidels, who reproached him, saying
that his Faith was useless, since the God whom he
adored did not cure him of a painful disease, which
made his life not a blessing for which he should
thank him, but an unbearable burden. ‘‘ My friends,”’
he said to them, ‘‘ you would condemn your own
words if you would raise your eyes to Heaven, to
which I try to keep my heart attached. You count
the diseases of the body in the number of misfor-
tunes; and, in truth, they are a misfortune for you,
who know no other happiness than in this life. But
the Christians look upon them as a blessing, [165]
when they think of what the Faith teaches us,—that
God will reward us in Heaven according to the meas-
ure of our sorrows and of our joys, provided we
thank him alike for both, because he orders both of
them for our good, the reason being, doubtless, that
he loves us even in this life since he will love us
forever:a

The answer of another Old Man, aged 70 years, was
no less inspired by the Spirit of Faith, when the
reproach was cast at him that God had no pity
on him, because of a stroke of paralysis that had
deprived him of the use of an arm. ‘‘ What!”’ he
replied, ‘‘ would you wish that there should be no
dried trees in the woods and no dead branches on a
tree that is growing old? For my part, I take pleas-
ure in seeing my limbs wither; and the approach of
death has not frightened me, since I have the Faith


78 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 28


plus eftonné depuis que i’ay la Foy, qu’vn iour ie
refufciteray pour la gloire, & que ce corps mourant
doit pourrir dans la terre auant qu’il deuienne
immortel.

Le mefme ayant appris qu’vn fien fils vnique, qui
luy reftoit pour le fupport de fa vieilleffe, eftoit tom-
bé entre les mains des ennemis, voyant tout le
monde de fa [166] Cabane dans les pleurs, a l’abord
de cette nouuelle: pour moy, dit-il, ie n’ay point de
larmes pour luy, il m’auoit fuiuy en la Foy, & il m’a
deuancé dans le bon-heur qui nous attend apres la
mort. A ce mefme moment, il vient promptement
en l’Eglife a dix heures du foir, offrir 4 Dieu ce fils
vnique, mais auc vne refignation digne d’vn coeur
vrayment Chreftien. Mon Dieu, s’efcria-il, que la
Foy eft vn don aymable, & qu’elle appaife douce-
ment les efmotions d’vn coeur, qui met fes confiances
en vos promeffes; Vous me l’auiez donné auant que
Veuffe le bon-heur de vous reconnoiftre pour mon
Dieu, & pour mon bien-facteur: depuis que i’ay la
Foy, ie vous l’ay prefenté mille fois, & vous qui pene-
trez le fonds des cceurs, auez connu que mon offrande
n’eftoit point par feintife; Vous m’auez pris au mot,
receuant ce qui eftoit a vous, auant mefme que ie
vous l’euffe offert. Puis ie me plaindray de ce que
vous auez aggrée le don que ie vous auois fait?
Soyez beny, mon Dieu, & fi apres 1’Enfant vous
daignez receuoir le Pere, ie m’offre 4 vous de mefme
coeur que ie vous ay offert mon fils, ayez pitié & de
l’vn & de l’autre. A peine [167] auoit-il acheué fa
priere, qu’vn nouueau Meffager qui s’eftoit trouué
au combat, arriue hors d’haleine, & dit que ce fils,
qu’on auoit creu pour mort, s’eftoit échappé auec
luy, les autres eftant demeurez fur la place. Ce fuft


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 79


that one day I shall rise again in glory, and that this
dying body must rot in the ground before it can
become immortal.”

When the same man heard that his only son, who
remained to him as a support in his old age, had
fallen into the hands of the enemies, and when he
saw all the people in his [166] Cabin weeping at the
news, he said: ‘‘ For my part, I have no tears for
him; he had followed me in the Faith; he has gone
before me to that happiness which awaits us after
death.” At the same time, he came promptly into
the Church at ten o’clock at night, to offer his only
son to God, but with a resignation worthy of a truly
Christian heart. ‘‘ My God,” he exclaimed, ‘‘ what
a precious gift is Faith, and how gently it allays the
emotions of a heart that confides in your promises!
You had given him to me before I had the happiness
of acknowledging you as my God and my benefactor.
Since I have had Faith, I have offered him to you a
thousand times; and you, who penetrate into the
depths of our hearts, have known that my offering
was not a feigned one. You have taken me at my
word, and have received what belonged to you even
before I had offered it to you. Can I complain
because you have accepted the gift that I made you?
Praise be to you, my God; and if after the Child you
deign to receive the Father, I offer myself to you as
willingly as I offered my son. Have pity on both.”
Hardly [167] was his prayer ended, when another
Messenger, who had been present at the fight, arrived,
quite breathless, and reported that his son whom
they thought dead had escaped with him, while the
others had remained on the field. It was like that
Angel who stayed Abraham’s sword, already raised


80 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 28


comme cét Ange qui retint l’épée d’Abraham, defia
leuée fur l’Innocent Ifaac. Mon Dieu, (s’écria ce
bon Pere, continuant fa priere) fi i’ay receu de voftre
main les mauuaifes nouuelles, n’ay-ie pas mainte- ~
nant fujet de vous benir de la vie de mon fils, que
vous me rendez comme vn homme reffufcité au mo-
ment que ie le penfois mort. C’eft vous qui l’auez
retiré du peril; mais ie vous prie que ce foit, afin
que iamais il ne tombe en peché, & faites-moy la
mef{me grace, afin que luy & moy nous vous beniffions
dans le Ciel de cette faueur, & des autres que nous
ne pourrons iamais reconnoiftre icy bas en terre.

La Foy ne trouue point de diftinction entre les
fexes, & tout aage eft meur pour le Ciel. Vne fem-
me Chreftienne parlant vn iour A quelques infidelles,
quelle exhortoit 4 embraffer la Foy. Helas! leur
difoit-elle, quand il n’y auroit point de Paradis apres
la mort, & que noftre Foy [168] nous trompatt, ie
voudrois croire nonob{tant, pour joiiir mefme dés
cette vie d’vne paix & d’vn repos d’efprit, qui eft
inconceuable 4 ceux qui demeurent dans 1’infidelité.
Peftois tous les iours remplie d’inquietudes auant
mon baptefme, les maux prefens me tourmentoient,
les craintes des miferes, qui pouuoient m’arriuer, &
qui peut eftre n’arriueront iamais, ne laiffoient pas
de m’affliger auant leur temps; La nouuelle des maux
paffez renouuelloit en moy les trifteffes, & les larmes
que i’auois defia effuyées, & mefme le fouuenir de
mes anciens plaifirs, me caufoit des regrets, parce
qu’ils n’eftoient plus, & que ie ne pouuois les regar-
der finon comme perdus pour moy. Maintenant rien
de tout cela ne m/’afflige, mais pluto{t ie tire mon
bien de mon mal, parce que chafque fois que les
craintes, les trifteffes ot les malheurs m’acueillent,


1645 - 46] RELATION OF 1644-45 81


over the Innocent Isaac. ‘‘ My God” (exclaimed this
good Father, continuing his prayer), if I have received
evil tidings from your hand, have I not cause now to
bless you for the life of my son whom you give back
to me as one risen from the dead, at the moment
when I thought that he was killed? It is you who
have withdrawn him from the peril; but I beg you
that he may never fall into sin; and confer the same
grace upon me, so that he and I may praise you in
Heaven for this favor and for others, that we can
never acknowledge here on earth.’’

Faith makes no distinction between the sexes, and
all ages are ripe for Heaven. A Christian woman,
while speaking one day to some infidels whom she
exhorted to embrace the Faith, saidtothem: ‘‘Alas!
even if there were no Paradise after death, and if our
Faith [168] should deceive us, I would still believe, in
order to enjoy even in this life a peace and repose of
mind that cannot be conceived by those who remain
ininfidelity. Before my baptism, I was every day full
of anxiety; present ills tormented me; fear of mis-
fortunes that might happen to me, but which perhaps
will never occur, failed not to afflict me before their
time. The tidings of ills that were past renewed my
sorrow, and the tears that I had already dried; and
even the recollection of my former pleasures caused
me regret, because they existed no longer and be-
cause I could look upon them only as lost to me.
Now, nothing of all that afflicts me; but, on the con-
trary, I derive my good from my evil, because when-
ever fears, sorrows, or misfortunes assail me, I think
of the happiness promised to us by the Faith which
is free from any bitterness.”’

* “Not long ago,’’ she added, ‘‘ while I wept for


82 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


ie penfe au bon-heur que nous promet la Foy, qui
n’eft detrempé d’aucune amertume.

Il n’y a pas long-temps, adjouftoit-elle, que ie
pleurois la mort d’vn de mes freres, & d’vn de mes
enfans, ie n’euffe iamais creu que les larmes euffent
tant de douceur, mais en me{me-temps qu’elles [169]
découloient de mes yeux, mon coeur eftoit tout con-
folé dans la penfée, que ceux que ie pleurois eftoient
dedans le Ciel, & qu’vne Eternité nous joindroit en-
femble, fans que la mort nous peuft feparer. Mais,
luy dit-on, que dirois-tu fi ton mary mouroit, luy qui
refufe de fe faire Chreftien? Ie me confolerois,
répondit-elle, dans la penfée, que c’eft Dieu qui doit
difpofer 4 fa volonté de ce qui eft a luy: il fait ce
qui eft pour le mieux, & peut eftre qu’il attend a
l’heure de la mort, a luy faire vne grace dont il fe
rend indigne durant le cours de fa vie.

Vne ieune femme Chreftienne dans fes premieres
couches n’auoit pas témoigné aucun fentiment de
douleur; comme on luy demande fi en effect elle
n’auoit point paty? Helas, répondit-elle, ce font des
douleurs exceffiues, mais i’auois ma penfée en Dieu,
& ie fongeois au bon-heur de la Foy, qui m’a deliuré
d’vn tourment eternel: ie luy offrois en mefme-temps
l’enfant que ie mettois au monde & le priois que plu-
toft il mouruft apres auoir receu le fainc&t Baptefme,
que de permettre qu’il tombaft en vn peché mortel.

Ce n’eft pas que tous nos Chreftiens [170] foient
dans ces fentimens, il y en a qui n’ont pas ce cou-
rage, d’autres tombent dans le peché, & font des
cheutes affez funeftes, quelques-vns perdent coeur au
milieu de leur courfe; tous ne font pas robuftes en
Vefprit de faincteté. Mais ie ne fcay en quel lieu
de la terre nous trouuerons tout le monde parfaict, fi


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 83


the death of one of my brothers and of one of my
children, I would never have believed that tears
could be so sweet; but, while they [169] flowed from
my eyes, my heart was quite consoled by the thought
that those for whom I wept were in Heaven, and that
an Eternity would unite us so that death could not
separate us.” ‘‘But,” they said to her, ‘“what wouldst
thou say if thy husband were to die, he who refuses
to become a Christian?’’ ‘‘ I would console myself,”
she replied, ‘‘ with the thought that God must dis-
pose as he wills of what belongs to him; he knows
what is best, and perhaps he awaits the hour of his
death to grant him a grace of which he renders him-
self unworthy during the course of his life.”

A young Christian woman in her first confinement
betrayed no sign of pain. When she was asked if,
in reality, she had not suffered, she replied: ‘* Alas,
the pains were excessive; but I thought of God and of
the blessing of the Faith, which has delivered me
from eternal torment. I offered him at the same
time the child that I brought into the world, and
begged that he might die after receiving holy Bap-
tism, rather than be permitted to fall into mortal
sin.”

Not all our Christians [170] have such sentiments.
Some have not that courage; others fall into sin, and
have disastrous relapses; some lose heart in the
middle of their career; all are not strong in the spirit
of holiness. But I know not in what spot on earth
we can find every one perfect. If the seed that
Jesus CHRIST himself came to sow on earth fell
sometimes among thorns, sometimes on rocks, and
sometimes in sterile places; and if a good portion
that had fallen on good ground was eaten by the


84 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox 28


la femence que IESVS-CHRIST eftoit venu ietter
luy-mefme en terre, eft tombée tantoft fur les efpines,
tantoft fur des rochers, & en des lieux fteriles; Et fi
vne grande partie qui eftoit tombée en vn terroir
fecond a efté enleuée des oyfeaux, auant que d’auoir
produit les fruicts qu’on en attendoit, il ne faut pas
nous eftonner que le mefme nous arriue icy; (Von
ertt adifcipulus fuper Magifirum. C’eft affez qu’vne
partie vienne a maturité, & c’eft beaucoup qu’en
quelques-vns cette femence fructifie au centuple.
Mais ie ne puis affez le dire, qu’il faut en tout vne
patience 4 l’efpreuue, qui ne fe rebute de rien. Tel
e{t maintenant des plus foibles, qui vn iour fera vn
grand Sainct.

Ie me fouuiens a ce propos d’vne réponce que fift il
y a quelque temps vn bon Chreftien 4 vn de nos Peres,
qui le voyant [171] dans des fentimens d’vne per-
fection éminente, & s’eftonnant des graces que Dieu
luy faifoit, luy demanda depuis quand il eftoit venu
a ce poinct-l4. Vous me mettez autant en peine, ref-
pondit-il, que fi vous me demandiez depuis quand i’en
fuis venu au poinct de la grandeur que i’ay. Comme
mon corps a creu depuis ma naiffance, fans que ie
m’en fois appergeu, de mefme en a-il efté de ma Foy
depuis mon Baptefme. Ie ne feay pas, adjouftoit-il,
ce quil faut faire pour répondre a ces graces, ny
me{me comment il faut prier, mais ce que ie ne puis
me laffer de dire 4 Dieu lors que ie prie, eft, que ie
croy de tout mon coeur, & qu’il m’enuoye plutoft la
mort que le peché.

Vn Capitaine des plus confiderables de tout le
Pays, eftant interrogé auant fon Baptefme, fi vraye-
ment il croyoit les veritez de no{tre Foy. Ma parole,
dit-il, peut tromper, mais ie veux que mes actions &


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 85


birds before producing the fruits that were expected
of it, we must not be astonished if the same thing
happen here. Won erit discipulus super Magistrum. It
is sufficient that a portion comes to maturity, and it
is notable that in some cases this seed brings forth a
hundredfold. But I cannot too often repeat that a
patience is needed which can withstand every trial,
and be discouraged by nothing. He who is now
among the weakest will one day be a great Saint.

Apropos of this, I remember an answer given some
time ago by a good Christian to one of our Fathers,
who, observing in him [171] sentiments of eminent
perfection, and being astonished at the graces that
God gave him, asked him how long it was since he
had attained that degree. ‘‘ You embarrass me as
much,” he replied, ‘‘as if you asked me how long it
is since I have reached my present stature. As my
body has grown since my birth, without my perceiv-
ing it, so has my Faith grown since my Baptism.
I know not,” he added, ‘‘ what I should do to respond
to these graces, or even how to pray; but what I
cannot weary of telling God when I pray to him is
that I believe with all my heart, and that he send me
death rather than sin.”’

A Captain, who is one of the highest in rank in
the whole Country, was asked before his Baptism if
he really believed the truths of our Faith. ‘“ My
words,” he said, ‘‘may mislead; but I wish my
actions and my conduct to reply instead of my
tongue. Wait until Winter comes, until the devils
are unchained, and I am solicited to sin; then you
and I shall be able to see, without being deceived,
whether the Faith reign in my [172] heart.”’ In
fact, since then his actions have not belied his words ;


86 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


mes déportemens vous répondent au lieu de ma
langue. Attendez que 1l’Hyuer foit venu, que les
diables foient déchaifnez, & qu’on me follicite au
peché, c’eft alors que vous & moy pourrons voir fans
ef{tre trompez, fila Foy regne dans mon [172] cceur.
En effet fes actions du depuis n’ont dementy fes
paroles, fa vie a efté fans reproche, & toufiours on a
reconnu fa Foy dedans fes ceuures. Mille fois il s’eft
veu attaqué de médifances & calomnies, fes parens
fe font foufleuez contre luy, fes amis luy ont fait
ouuertement la guerre, & en fecret les beautez qui
autrefois l’auoient vaincu ont entrepris en l’aymant
de le perdre, mais toufiours il a efté luy-mefme, &
en tout armé de la Foy, il s’eft rendu victorieux.
Peu de temps apres fon Baptéme, voyant que felon
le deu de fa charge de Capitaine, on vouloit l’obliger
d’affifter 4a quelques fuperftitions defendués aux
Chreftiens, il fortit de la Compagnie, commande en
{a cabane, qu’on porte ailleurs les marques de fon
authorité, & les prefens publics dont il eftoit chargé;
ce ne font pas des Royautez, & des richeffes immenfes
des Princes de l'Europe, mais c’eft icy ce qu’il ya
de plus éclatant en l’honneur, & les threfors les plus
precieux du Pays. Les Infidelles s’eftonnent de ce
coup, fon pere, fa femme, fes parens, luy demandent
ce qu'il pretend faire? Ie fuis Chreftien, répondit-il,
& fi pour éuiter [173] le peché il faut encore quitter
la vie, mon ame ne tient rien en mon corps. Le
bourg eft en émeute, le confeil s’affemble 1A-deffus:
on luy depute les plus confiderables, qui le prient de
ne pas les abandonner: Ie fuis Chreftien, leur dit-il
pour toute réponce, la Foy m’eft plus chere que
Vhonneur & les biens, on paffe & la nuic& & le iour
pour flechir fon efprit: mais il n’a point de repartie,


1645 - 46] RELATION OF 1644-45 87


his life has been beyond reproach and his Faith has
always been known by his works. He has been
assailed a thousand times by slanders and by calum-
nies; his relatives have risen against him; his friends
have openly made war on him; and in secret the
beauties who formerly had vanquished him have
endeavored to ruin him by loving him; but he has
always been true to himself, and, armed at all points
with Faith, he has been victorious.

Shortly after his Baptism, when he saw that, in
the performance of the duties of his office of Cap-
tain, he was called upon to be present at some super-
stitious ceremonies forbidden to Christians, he left
the Company, and gave orders in his cabin to bear
elsewhere the symbols of his authority and the pub-
lic presents of which he was the custodian. These
are not the Regalia nor the immense riches of Euro-
pean Princes; but they are what is here considered
the most honored and the most precious treasures
of the Country. The Infidels were astonished at
this act; his father, his wife, his relatives asked him
what he meant to do. ‘‘I ama Christian,’’ he re-
plied; ‘‘ and if to avoid [173] sin I must abandon even
life, my soul is not attached to my body.” The
village is in a commotion; the council meets to delib-
erate on the matter; the leading men are deputed
to wait on him, and they beg him not to abandon
them. ‘‘lamaChristian,’’ is his only answer; ‘‘ the
Faith is dearer to me than honor and wealth.’ They
spend the night and day in endeavoring to bend his
will; but his only answer is that he is a Christian.
‘‘'Then,”’ said the Elders, ‘‘ we must resign ourselves
to seeing our Country ruined, since our chief Cap-
tains range themselves on the side of the Faith.


88 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


finon qu'il eft Chreftien. I] faut donc, difent les
Anciens, fe refoudre 4 voir noftre Pais perdu, puif-
que nos premiers Capitaines fe rangent du party de
la Foy, comment empefcherons-nous ce defordre?
Vous y penfez trop tard, leur refpondit-il, il falloit
vous oppofer aux progrez de la Foy, auant qu’elle
entraft dans nos coeurs; Maintenant elle y regnera
mal-gré vous, & plufto{t on nous arrachera l’ame du
corps, que la crainte du feu d’Enfer, & le defir du
bon-heur qui nous attend dedans le Ciel fortent de
noftre efprit. Enfin pour trouuer iour en cette affaire
dont les Anciens craignoient la diffolution de leur
bourg, le premier ou du moins des plus confiderables
qui foient dans les Hurons, & le Confeil refolut qu’il
falloit partager cette charge, dont ce Capitaine [174]
Chreftien vouloit opiniaftrement fe démettre. Que
quelqu’autre prendroit d’orefnauant le foin des chofes
que la Foy deffend, & qu’on le pourroit appeller le
Deputé des Diables: Que le Chreftien continueroit
dans le maniement des affaires publiques, & toufiours
feroit reconnu pour leur vray Capitaine. On le pria
de l’aggréer, puis qu’ainfi le deliurant des chofes qui
luy faifoient horreur, il n’auoit plus dequoy fe plain-
dre, Oiiy bien maintenant, leur dit-il, mais fcachez
vne fois pour toutes, qu’vn vray Chreftien, n’eftime
rien plus precieux que la Foy, & que la terre luy eft
peu de chofe quand il enuifage le Ciel.

Des hommes de la forte font fans doute de puiffants
fupports pour la Foy: mais il femble que Dieu ne
vetiille pas que nous mettions nos confiances en autre
qu’en luy feul. Nos Chreftiens eftant allez en
guerre, auoient attiré auec eux deux Capitaines Infi-
delles des plus belliqueux du pays, & ayant entrepris
de les gagner 4 noftre Foy, les inftruifirent fi


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 89


How can we prevent this disorder?’’ ‘‘ You are
thinking of it too late,’’ he replies; ‘‘ you should
have opposed the progress of the Faith before it had
entered our hearts. Now it will reign there in spite
of you; and it will be easier to tear our souls from
our bodies than to remove from our minds the fear
of Hell-fire, and the desire for the happiness that
awaits usin Heaven.’’ At last, to find a way out of
this difficulty, which the Elders feared would bring
about the dissolution of their village, which is the
largest, or at least one of the largest, in the Huron
country, the Council decided that it was necessary to
divide the office that this Christian Captain [174] so
obstinately persisted in resigning; that some one
else should thereafter take charge of the matters for-
bidden by the Faith, who might be called the Devils’
Deputy; that the Christian should continue to admin-
ister public affairs, and should always be acknowl-
edged as their real Captain. He was begged to
accept, inasmuch as, by thus delivering him from the
things of which he had a horror, he had nothing
more to complain of. ‘‘ Yes, I can do so now,’’ he
replied; ‘‘ but know once for all that a true Chris-
tian considers nothing more precious than the Faith,
and that he thinks little of earth when he looks at
Heaven.”’

Such men are, without doubt, powerful supporters
of the Faith; but it seems that God intends that we
should place our confidence in none other than him.
Our Christians on going to war had taken with them
two Infidel Captains, who were among the most war-
like in the country, and undertook to win them over
to our Faith; they instructed them so successfully,
during the two months that the campaign lasted,


90 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 28


heureufement l’efpace de deux mois qu’ils furent en
campagne, qu’ils fe virent obligez de les baptifer, ne
pouuant refifter aux demandes [175] preflantes qu’en
faifoient ces bons Catechumenes, qui, difoient-ils, ne
pouuoient plus marcher auec courage dans les terres
ennemies, quand ils penfoient que chaque iour feroit
peut-eftre le dernier de leur vie. Que s’ils mouroient
auant que leurs pechez euffent efté noyez dans les
eaux du Baptefme, ils fe voyoient damnez pour vne
eternité, & qu’ainfi chacun de leurs pas les condui-
foit autant a 1’Enfer qu’a la mort.

Il fallut done leur obeir en vne demande fi iufte;
ils fe profternent 4 genoux au riuage du lac des
Hiroquois; Deux Chreftiens qui auoient pris foin de
leur in{truction, les baptizent publiquement, chacun
celuy qu’il auoit eu pour difciple. Ie croy que les
Anges du Ciel prenoient plaifir a confiderer ce
{pectacle de faincteté, en vn lieu ou iamais ils n’a-
uoient veu Dieu adoré: & fans doute que les Anges
tutelaires de ces deux nouueaux baptizez atoient
preffé cette action, preuoyans le moment de leur
bon-heur & de leur mort. Car l’ennemy ne fut pas
long-temps a paroiftre; nos Chreftiens firent incon-
tinent leurs prieres publiques, pour fe difpofer au
combat. Ces deux bons Neophytes fe [176] iettent
a la tefte de leur armée, & fouftinrent long-temps
l’effort de l’ennemy: enfin leur mort fut la perte de
nos Hurons, & laiffa la victoire entiere aux Hiro-
quois, qui eftoient fept contre vn. Mais quoy, fi
nof{tre Eglife a perdu en la mort de ces deux Capi-
taines, & de quantité de Chreftiens, qui y demeure-
rent atiec eux, pas vn feul n’ayant pris la fuite, ce
nous doit eftre affez que Dieu en ait tiré fa gloire,
& que le Ciel foit enrichy de nos defpoiiilles: Mouzt


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 91


that they were obliged to baptize them because they
could not refuse the urgent requests [175] made to
them by these good Catechumens,— who, they said,
could no longer march bravely in the enemies’ coun-
try when they thought that each day would be the
last of their lives, and that, if they died before being
immersed in the waters of Baptism, they would be
damned for eternity; and that, consequently, each
step that they took led them as much toward Hellas
toward death.

So reasonable a request on their part had to be
complied with. They knelt on the shore of the lake
of the Hiroquois. Two Christians, who had taken
charge of instructing them, baptized them publicly,
each baptizing him whom he had had for his disciple.
I think that the Angels of Heaven took pleasure in
watching this holy spectacle in a place where they
had never seen God adored; and that doubtless the
guardian Angels of these two newly-baptized men
had hastened this action, in prevision of their happi-
ness and of their death; for the enemy soon made
his appearance. Our Christians at once said their
public prayers, to prepare themselves for battle.
The two good Neophytes [176] placed themselves at
the head of their army, and long withstood the
assaults of the enemy; finally, their loss caused the
defeat of the Hurons, and left the victory entirely in
the hands of the Hiroquois, who were seven to one.
But, if our Church has lost by the death of those
two Captains and of many Christians who remained
on the field with them, for not one fled, it must suffice
for us that God has derived his glory from it, and
that Heaven has been enriched by our spoils: Movet
Dominus qui sunt ejus. God knows his Elect, and


92 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 28


Dominus qui funt eius. Dieu connoift fes Eleus, &
choifit le moment qu’il faut pour leur ouurir fon
Paradis. En voicy vn exemple qui m’a fait fouuent
adorer fes diuines conduites.

Vn ieune homme Catechumene n’ayant pti obtenir
de nous le Baptefme, 4 caufe que nous ne voyons pas
affez clair en fa Foy, fe refolut d’aller en guerre auec
quelques Chreftiens. Ils font foir & matin les prieres
publiques, le plus ancien des Chreftiens y prefide, &
les Dimanches il les exhorte a paffer plus fainctement
ce facré iour, & puis qu’ils ne peuuent ioiiyr du bon-
heur de la confeffion, au moins qu’ils ayent recours
a Dieu, deteftent leurs pechez, & fe tiennent prefts
pour la mort. [177] Ie ne fgay pas qui preffoit fi
fortement ce ieune Neophyte, mais il fut plus de
feptante iours a folliciter fon Baptefme aupres du
plus ancien de nos Chreftiens, auec tant de ferueur
en fes pourfuites, qu’enfin on luy promit, que le
Dimanche il feroit baptifé. Non, difoit-il, mon ame
ne tef{pire que les eaux facrées du Baptéme, ie detefte
de tout mon cceur les pechez de ma vie paffée, & i’ef-
pere que Dieu aura pitié de moy, parce qu'il a veu
les defirs veritables que i’ay de viure & de mourir
Chreftien. On le baptife donc, chofe eftrange! on
n’auoit pas encor acheué les prieres, que les auant-
coureurs apportent la nouuelle quwils ont apperceu
Vennemy. On court incontinent aux armes, on fe
iette en campagne, l’ennemy prend la fuite, on le
pourfuit fix heures entieres, ce nouueau baptifé laiffe
apres foy fes camarades, & aduance fi puiffamment
qu’il fe trouue engagé luy feul au milieu de trente
Hiroquois, qui le percent a coups d’épée, luy enleuent
fa cheuelure, & continuent dedans leur fuitte, fans
qu’on en peuit atteindre aucun.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 93


chooses the proper moment for opening his Paradise
to them. Here is an example which has often made
me adore his divine ways.

A young man—a Catechumen, who could not ob-
tain Baptism from us because we did not see clearly
enough into his Faith—resolved to go to war with
some Christians. They said their public prayers,
night and morning; the oldest of the Christians pre-
sided at them, and on Sundays he exhorted them to
pass that sacred day in a more holy manner, and,
since they could not enjoy the blessing of confession,
at least to have recourse to God, to detest their sins,
and to keep themselves prepared for death. [177] I
know not what pressed this young Neophyte so
strongly; but, for over seventy days, he kept asking
for Baptism from the oldest of our Christians, with
such fervor in his requests that finally he was prom-
ised that he should be baptized on the Sunday.
‘“No,”’ said he, ‘‘my soul pants but for the sacred
waters of Baptism. I detest with all my heart the
sins of my past life; I hope that God will have pity
on me, because he has witnessed the true desire that
I have to live and die a Christian.’’ He was there-
fore baptized; and, strange to say, the prayers were
not yet ended when the advance guard brought the
news that they perceived the enemy. All immedi-
ately hasten to arms, and take the field; the enemy
flees, and is pursued for six whole hours. The
newly-baptized man leaves his comrades behind, and
advances so far that he finds himself alone, sur-
rounded by thirty Hiroquois, who pierce him with
javelin-thrusts, remove his scalp, and continue their
flight without one of them being caught.

One of the most right-minded men of this Coun-


94 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


Vn des meilleurs efprits de ce Pais, & des mieux
informez de la Foy, auoit fix ans [178] entiers refufé
le Baptefme, nous auoiiant qu’il voyoit bien la veri-
té, mais qu’il ne fentoit pas en foy affez de forces
pour fe refoudre a quitter tout de bon le peché. Vn
iour enfin il vint trouuer vn de nos Peres: mainte-
nant, luy dit-il, ie te prie de me baptifer, mon coeur
me dit que ie porteray dans le Ciel mon innocence
du Baptefme, pourquoy donc differer plus long-
temps? On le baptife au commencement de 1]’Au-
tomne, tout le long de l’Hyuer, les Chreftiens & les
Infidelles admirent en luy la force du Baptéme. [1
fe priue volontairement des feftins, crainte de s’y
voir engagé dans quelque occafion de peché, il s’ab-
fente des compagnies; les femmes qui auoient plus
poffedé fon cceur n’y trouuent plus d’entrées, il n’a
plus d’yeux ny de langue pour elles, le plus doux de
fes entretiens eft en la compagnie du Pere qui
Vinftruit; lE{té venu il s’embarque pour defcendre a
Kebec, & pour dernier Adieu a fa femme & 8 fes
enfans,; Iene fgay, leur dit-il, fi ie ne vay point A la
mort, mais quoy qu'il me puiffe arriuer, feachez que
ie mourray Chreftien: & fi vous me cherchez eftant
party de cette vie, & s’il vous refte quelque amour
pour [179] moy, leuez vos yeux au Ciel, car c’eft 1a
ot. re{pire mon ame, & ot ie croy fans aucun doute
que la Foy me conduit pour vne Eternité: en effect
il fit rencontre des ennemis, & fe deffendant vail-
lament, il auoit defia renuerfé vn de leurs Canots
dedans l'eau, lors qu’vn coup d’arquebuze luy tranf-
perce la tefte de part en part, & le mit dans la iouif-
fance du bon-heur qu’il auoit efperé, puis qu’vne vie
fiinnocente ne pouuoit pas eftre fuiuie que d’vne
faincte mort.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 95


try, and one of the best informed as regards the
Faith, had for six whole years [178] refused Baptism;
he admitted to us that he saw the truth very clearly,
but that he did not feel within himself enough
strength thoroughly to give up sin. Finally, he
came one day to one of our Fathers and said to him:
‘“ Now I beg thee to baptize me. My heart tells me
that I shall bear with me to Heaven the innocence of
my Baptism; why therefore should I defer it any
longer?’”’ He is baptized at the beginning of the
Autumn; and, throughout the Winter, the Christians
and Infidels admire the power of Baptism in him.
He voluntarily abstains from feasts, lest he find
therein some occasion for sin; he keeps away from
company; the women who had formerly most pos-
sessed his heart now find no entrance there,—he has
neither eyes nor tongue for them; the conversations
most agreeable to him are those with the Father who
instructs him. When Summer comes, he embarks
to go down to Kebec, and, for his last Adieu to his
wife and children, he says: ‘‘I know not whether I
am going to death; but, whatever may happen to
me, know that I will die a Christian; and if you seek
me when I have departed this life, and if you retain
any love for [179] me, lift your eyes to Heaven for it
is thither that my soul aspires, and whither I believe
without any doubt that Faith leads me for an Eter-
nity.’ In fact, he met the enemies and defended
himself bravely. He had already overturned one of
their Canoes in the water, when a shot from an
arquebus pierced his head through and through, and
placed him in the enjoyment of the happiness that
he had hoped for, since so innocent a life could only
be followed by a saintly death.


96 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


Nous fommes témoins tous les iours de mille ren-
contres femblables ot nous voyons les bontez de Dieu
fur ces peuples, fon amour fur ces pauures barbares,
& les diuines Prouidences fur fes Efleus, dont pas
vn ne luy fera rauy, quelque oppofition que 1’enfer
& les diables fufcitent contre les progrez de la Foy.

Mais c’eft eftre trop long pour vne fimple lettre,
& le peu que i’ay dit, eft affez pour nous faire raifon-
nablement efperer que le Ciel ne retire pas fes bene-
dictions de deffus cette Eglife naiffante, puis qu’il en
prend vn foin fi amoureux.

Des fept Eglifes que nous auons icy, il y en a fix
a demeure. La premiere en noftre [80 i.e., 180]
Maifon de faincte Marie, les cing autres dans les
cing principales bourgades des Hurons; de la Con-
ception, de fainct Iofeph, de fainct Michel, de fainct
Ignace & de fainct Iean Baptifte. La feptiéme Eglife
dite du fainct Efprit, eft compofée d’ Algonquins, qui
ont hyuerné cette année plufieurs Nations enfemble,
fur le grand Lac de nos Hurons, enuiron & vingt cing
lieués de nous. Ce qui a obligé le Pere Claude
Pijart, & le Pere Leonard Gareau deftinez A leur in-
{truction, de paffer 1’ Hyuer auec eux, auec des peines
& des trauaux inconceuables, mais non pas fans
confolation, lors qu’ils voyent qu’ils vont formant des
Epoufes 4 Iesvs-CHRIsT dedans ces bois, ces lacs &
ces riuieres.

Voila mon Reuerend Pere, vne partie de ce que ie
m’eftois obligé de reprefenter A V. R. en cette lettre,
vne groffiere idée de 1’eftat ot ie laiffe cette Miffion
de noftre Compagnie dans les Hurons; & les fenti-
mens qui m’en reftent auant mon depart, apres y
auoir demeuré fept ans feruiteur inutile. Car fi Dieu


1645 - 46] RELATION OF 1644-45 97


We witness every day a thousand similar events,
in which we see the kindness of God toward these
peoples, his love for these poor barbarians, and the
intentions of his divine Providence, toward his Elect,
not one of whom shall be taken from him, whatever
opposition hell and the devils may excite against the
progress of the Faith.

But this is too long for a mere letter, and the little
that I have said is sufficient to lead us reasonably to
hope that Heaven does not withdraw its blessings
from this nascent Church, since it takes such loving
care of it.

Of the seven Churches that we have here, six are
stationary; the first is at our [80 i.e., 180] House of
sainte Marie, the five others in the principal Huron
villages,—la Conception, saint Joseph, saint Michel,
saint Ignace, and saint Jean Baptiste. The seventh
Church, called that ‘‘ of the holy Ghost,” consists
of Algonquins, several Tribes of whom wintered
together this year on the great Lake of our Hurons,
about twenty-five leagues from us. This compelled
Father Claude Pijart and Father Leonard Gareau
who were appointed for their instruction, to pass the
Winter with them,— with inconceivable trouble and
labors, but not without consolation, when they see
that they prepare Spouses for JESUS CHRIST within
these woods, and amid these lakes and rivers.

This, my Reverend Father, is a portion of what I
had undertaken in order to give Your Reverence in
this letter a general idea of the state in which I leave
this Mission of our Society in the Huron country,
and the opinions that I have concerning it before my
departure, after having lived there, a useless servant,
for seven years. For if God secure his glory in


98 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


tire fa gloire en ces Pais, & s’il y a eu quelque bien
dans les commencemens de la conuerfion de ces
Peuples, il faut aduoiier qu’apres [181] Dieu tout eft
deu aux trauaux de nos Peres, dont Noftre Seigneur
a voulu que i’aye efté témoin, voyant la ferueur de
leur zele, leur courage indomptable, leur patience a
tout fouffrir, leur actiuité Aa tout faire, leur humilité
dans vne vie vrayement cachée en yn monde incon-
nu; perfonnes qui d’ailleurs ne manquent pas pour
la plufpart de qualitez qui les euffent rendus recom-
mandables en France. Quand ie les voy embraffer
la Croix auec plaifir, les fouffrances auec ioye, & les
mépris auec amour, qu’ils portent chaque iour leur
ame entre leurs mains, eftans continuellement expo-
fez & mille dangers de la mort; & que peut-eftre la
plufpart font pour mourir au milieu des feux & des
flammes d’vn ennemy cruel, qui va de iour en iour
rauageant ces Pais: quand ie voy que ces dangers les
animent plutof{t que d’affoiblir le moins du monde
leur courage, il me vient fouuent en penfée que Dieu
vouloit qu’vne vertu fi forte, fi conftante & fi vigou-
reufe, fuppleaft au defaut des miracles, dont il fem-
ble que fa diuine Prouidence ne veuille pas fe feruir
en ces fiecles derniers, pour aduancer la conuerfion
de ces terres infidelles.

[182] Mais quoy, le nombre de ces ouuriers eft trop
petit pour tant de peuple; nous auons befoin de
fecours plus en cela qu’en aucune autre chofe: nous
demandons de l’ayde, & nous efperons que 1’An-
cienne France ne le déniera pas A la Nouuelle. IT
eft vray que les dangers font redoutables, & que qui-
conque voudra venir 4 nous, il doit auoir quitté dés
la France tout l’amour de la vie, pour s’abandonner
fans referue a ce dont la nature peut auoir plus


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 99


these Countries, and if he has obtained any good in
these beginnings of the conversion of these Peoples,
it must be admitted that, after [181] God, all is due
to the labors of our Fathers, of which Our Lord has
chosen that I should be a witness. I have seen the
fervor of their zeal, their indomitable courage, their
patience in enduring everything, their activity in
performing all duties, their humility in a life truly
hidden in an unknown world,—persons moreover,
for the most part, who are not wanting in qualities
that would have rendered them commendable in
France. When I see that they embrace the Cross
with pleasure, sufferings with joy, and scorn with
love; that they each day carry their souls in their
hands, being continually exposed to a thousand
dangers of death, and that perhaps the majority of
them are destined to die in the midst of the fires and
flames of a cruel enemy, who ravages these Coun-
tries from day to day; when I see that these dangers
animate their courage rather than depress it in the
least :— the thought frequently comes to my mind that
God willed that so strong, so constant, and so vigor-
ous a virtue should supply the absence of miracles,
which it seems that his divine Providence does not
consent to employ in these latter ages, to further the
conversion of these pagan lands.

[182] But the number of these laborers is too small
for so many people; we need help in this more than
in anything else; we ask assistance, and we hope that
Old France will not deny it to New France. It is
true that dangers are to be dreaded, and that who-
ever comes to us must have left behind him in France
all love of life, to abandon himself without reserve
to whatever can cause most horror to nature. But


100 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


d’horreur. Mais c’eft ie croy ce qui doit animer vn
bon cceur au defir de venir en ces terres perdués, pour
s’y perdre fainctement foy-mefme, & ne trouuer plus
en ce monde rien d’aymable que Dieu. Si des
perfonnes de merite, dont la vie eft precieufe a vn
Royaume tout entier, s’expofent volontiers a 1’affaut
d’vne bréche, qui fouuent n’eft pas raifonnable; & fi
la mort de ceux qui ont aduancé les premiers, n’ar-
re{te pas vne Nobleffe courageufe, qui la plufpart
n’e{t picquée bien fouuent que des interefts d’vn hon-
neur ou d’vn bien temporel; fans doute que la con-
quefte de tant d’ames, dont chacune eft vn Royaume
a IESVS-CHRIST, la veué d’vne recompenfe eter-
nelle, & les defirs [183] de viure & de mourir au fer-
uice d’vn Dieu, qui le premier eft mort pour nous,
aurons mille fois plus de force pour fouftenir le
courage de ceux que Noftre Seigneur voudra nous
enuoyer au trauers des perils qu’il faut effuyer quoy
qu’il coufte, fi on veut aduancer fa gloire en ces Pais,
oti nous voyons qu’il veut eftre adoré.

C’eft l’vnique demande que ie fais A V. R. en quit-
tant ces Pais, la priant de nous procurer ce fecours,
é& nous enuoyer ceux que Dieu voudra choifir par fon
moyen, & c’eft dans cette efperance que ie finiray la
prefente, la fuppliant de recommander cette Miffion
aux prieres de tous nos Peres & Freres, & s’en
reffouuenir particulierement en fes faincts Sacrifices.
C’eft mon R. Pere,

De Voftre Reuerence,
Des Hurons, ce 15. May 1645.
Le tres-humble & tres-obligé


feruiteur en N. Seigneur,
HIEROSME LALEMANT.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1644-45 101


this I think is what should excite in a good heart the
desire to come to these lost lands; to lose himself here
in a holy manner, and to find in this world nothing
lovable but God. If persons of merit, whose life is
precious to an entire Kingdom, expose themselves
willingly in the assault of a breach, which frequently
is not reasonable; and if the death of those who have
stood in the van does not daunt a brave Nobility,
most of whom are often incited but by interests of a
temporal honor or benefit,—doubtless the conquest
of so many souls, each of whom is a Kingdom for
JESUS CHRIST, the prospect of an eternal reward,
and the desire [183] of living and dying in the
service of a God who was the first to die for us, will
have a thousand times more force to sustain the cour-
age of those whom Our Lord may send us, through
the perils that must be encountered at any cost, if
we wish to advance his glory in these Countries,
where we see that it is his will to be adored.

This is the only request that I make to Your Rev-
erence on leaving these Countries, begging you to
procure that assistance for us, and to send us those
whom God may select through you; and in this hope
I shall conclude the present letter, begging you to
commend this Mission to the prayers of all our
Fathers and Brethren, and to remember it particularly
in your own holy Sacrifices. This, my Reverend
Father, from

Your Reverence’s


From the Huron country, this 15th of May, 1645.


Very humble and greatly obliged
servant in Our Lord,
HIEROSME LALEMANT.


» STATS rsh ae


Wl es


LVI— LIX


MISCELLANEOUS DOCUMENTS, 1646


LVI.—Novum Belgium (1643), par le P. Isaac Jogues; 3
Rivieres, 3 Augusti, 1646
LVII.— Notice sur René Goupil (donné), par le P. Isaac
Jogues ; undated
LVIII.— Lettre du R. P. Jogues au R. P. André Castillon;
Montréal, ce 12 septembre, 1646


LIX.— Journal des PP. Jésuites, en l’année 1646


SOURCES: Docs. LVI. and LVII. are from the original
MSS. thereof, in the archives of St. Mary’s College, Mont-
real. Doc. LVIII. we obtain from Rochemonteix’s /ésuztes
et la Nouvelle-France, ii., pp. 450-452. In republishing
Doc. LIX., we follow the original MS. in the library of Laval
University, Quebec.


104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


Nouum Belgium (1643), par le P. Isaac Jogues.


A Nouuelle Hollande que les Hollandois appel-
‘B lent en Latin Nouum Belgium; en leur langue
Nieuw Nederland ceft a dire Nouueaux pays-
bas eft fituée entre la Virginie et la Nouuelle Angle-
terre. lLr’entrée de la Riviere: que quelques vas
appellent la Riviere Naffau ou la grande Riviere du
Nord pour la difference d’une autre quils appellent
du Zud, quelques cartes ce me femble que iay vi
nouvellem', Riviere Maurice eft a 40 deg. 30 min.
Son canal eft profond et capable des plus gros
nauires, qui montent a Manhattes Ifle quia 7 lieues
de circuit ou eft un fort qui deuoit fervir de com-
mencem!' a une ville qui fe deuoit faire et que 1 on
deuoit appeler Nouueau Am{fterdam.

Ce fort qui eft a la pointe de lifle enuiron 5 ou 6
lieues de lemboucheure sappelle le fort d’Amfter-
dam, ila 4 baf{tions reguliers munis de plufieurs pieces
d’artillerie. Tous ces baftions et les courtines n’e-
{toient en lan 1643 que de teraffes qui la plufpart
etoient tout éboulées et par les quelles on entroit
dans le fort de tous les endroits, il ny auoit point de
foffez, il y auoit pour la garde dudt fort et dun autre
qu ils auoient faict plus loing contre les incurfions
des sauvages leurs ennemis 60 foldats, on commen-
coit a reuétir de pierre les portes et les baftions.
Dans ce fort il y auoit un temple bafty de pierre qui
etoit affez capable—le logis du Gouuerneur qu ils


[ [est UO 9B 21T0D S.A1vW YS JO Soaryoiy 9yj UL peasrasaid pur ‘obgr ut uaIqIM ‘“unF70g MNLOAT SIY JO “SIT TO a8ed ASI WOT] pridatac]


°S ‘SANDOL OVYS] JO ONILIMMGNVH JO ATIWISOVA


ate ; Pe ee ane : idl J


Pe samme all> perry oa] wy te a ae Le
wr ne My MODI WME AO? 7y’ sony? yoray lab py wn yf 4
by


w werd


; fers »y aay ys ae tol cian iahiahy soled fe , :
[@ ‘ AU ne yah rd Say. gd y? guage] i I Nebo vy) wef
; : Me os Ap ot se yba awry VEY, " ywaygnmoit

| wed kvs ou: yy uf aH HYYD byob : pia W¢ oor be
Pe ara oy evr owt ne mere "] anoyf PUN a mot yf
f apued “] yea? = wff ¥AC aayr tt v 4] pete sain yuh Vel
wih Ce Se kd pe ( aui7) oily" TOU

—e “] f? pie dat ] rAVil o wtp ita : : aa) -shoef


Auvznniary : aE Vv LAR aod ATP OK Prot racy [


: ‘) . : MDMA ff, :
‘ Wn Lad 657 : WHOL Mee Vo vy > yy? ?


serena item remem


< ee uP


few U4 a] cay EL. Whe Kee Ay


\


ence


SS


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOVUM BELGIUM 105


Novum Belgium (1643), by Father Isaac Jogues.


EW Holland — which the Dutch call, in Latin,
Novum Belgium; in their own language,
Nieuw Nederland; that is to say, New neth-

erlands—is situated between Virginia and New
England. The entrance to the River, which some
call the River Nassau, or the great River of the
North, to distinguish it from another which they
call South River,—and some charts, I believe, that
I have recently seen, the River Maurice,—is in the
latitude of 40 degrees, 30 minutes.” Its channel is
deep, and navigable by the largest ships, which go
up to Manhattes Island, which is 7 leagues in cir-
cumference; thereon is a fort intended to serve as
nucleus for a town to be built, and to be called New
Amsterdam.

This fort, which is at the point of the island, about
5 or 6 leagues from the river’s mouth, is called fort
Amsterdam; it has 4 regular bastions, provided with
several pieces of artillery. All these bastions and the
curtains were, in the year 1643, merely earthworks,
most of which had quite given way, and through
them the fort could be entered from all sides; there
were no trenches. For the defense of this fort,—
and of another which they had built, farther on,
against the incursions of the savages, their enemies, —
there were 60 soldiers. They were beginning to
case the gates and the bastions with stone. In this


106 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vour. 28


appellent le directeur Gfial bafty de brique affez
gentiment, les magazins et logements des foldats

Il peut bien y avoir en cette Ifle de Manhate et
aux environs 4 a cing cens hommes de differentes
fectes et nations, le Directeur Gfial me difoit qu il y
auoit de dix-huict fortes de langues, ils font répan-
dus de ca et de la riuiere en haut et en bas, felon
que la beauté et commodité des lieux a invité un
chacun a fe placer, quelques artifans neantmoins qui
trauaillent de leur métier font rangez foubs le fort,
touts les autres etants expofez aux incurfions des
Sauuages qui en l’an 1643 comme i’eftois la auoient
bien tué une quarantaine de Hollandois et bruflé
beaucoup de maifons et granges pleines de bled

La Riuiere qui eft fort droituriere et va reglement
Nord et Sud eft large pour le moins d’une lieiie
devant le Fort. Les navires font a l’ancre en vne
baye qui faict 1 autre cofté de l’ifle et elles peuuent
e{tre defendues du Fort

Peu de temps deuant que i’y arrivaffe il y €toit
venu 3 gros navires de 300 tonneaux pour charger
du bled deux auoient eu leur charge le 3°. navoit pt
etre charge a caufe que les sauvages auoient bruflé
vne partie des grains ces navires étoient partis des
Indes Occidentales ou la Compagnie des Weft-indes
entretient d ordinaire dix-fept vaiffeaux de guerre.

Il n’y d’exercice de Religion que de la Caluinifte et
les ordres portent de n’admettre autre perfonne que
Calviniftes, neantmoins cela ne fe garde pas, y ayant
dans cette habitation outre les Calviniftes, Catho-
liques, Puritains d’Angleterre, Lutheriens, Anabap-
tiftes qu’ils appellent Mniftes &c.

Quand quelqutun vient de nouveau po' habiter le


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOVUM BELGIUM 107


fort there was a house of worship, built of stone,
which was quite spacious; the house of the Govern-
or,— whom they call the director General,— built
quite neatly of brick; and the storehouses and sol-
diers’ quarters.

There may be, on the Island of Manhate and in its
environs, about 4 or five hundred men of various
sects and nations,—the Director General told me
that there were men of eighteen different languages;
they are scattered here and there, up and down the
stream, according as the beauty or convenience of
the sites invited each one to settle. Some artisans,
however, who work at their trades, are located under
cover of the fort; while all the others are exposed to
the incursions of the Savages, who, in the year 1643,
when I was there, had actually killed about forty
Hollanders, and burned many houses, and barns full
of wheat.

The River, which is very straight, and flows direct-
ly from North to South, is at least a league wide
before the Fort. The ships are at anchor in a bay
which forms the other side of the island, and they
can be defended by the Fort.

Shortly before I arrived there, 3 large ships of 300
tons had come to load wheat; two had received their
lading, but the 3rd could not be laden, because the
savages had burned a part of the grain. These ships
had sailed from the West Indies, where the West
india Company usually maintains seventeen war
vessels.®

There is no exercise of Religion except the Cal-
vinist, and the orders declare that none but Calvin-
ists be admitted; nevertheless, that point is not ob-
served,— for besides the Calvinists, there are in this


108 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 28


pays on le monte de chevaux vaches &c on luy donne
des viures, il rend tout cela quand il eft accommodé
et pour les terres au bout de dix ans il baille a la
Compag*. de Weft-indes la dixime des biens qu’il
recueille.

Ce pays a pour bornes du cofté de la Nouuelle An-
gleterre vne Riuiere qu ils appellent la Riuiere Fref-
che qui fert de borne entre eux et les Anglois, neant-
moins les Anglois f approchent fort deux aymans
mieux auoir des terres chez les Hollandois qui ne
leur demandent rien que de dependre des Millords
Anglois qui exigent des redeuances et qui veullent
trencher des abfolus. De 1 autre cofté Du sud vers
la Virginie, elle a pour limites La Riuiere qu’ils
appellent du Zud dans laquelle il y a auffi une habita-
tion de Hollandois, mais a l’entrée les Suedois y en
ont une extrem! bien munie de canon et de gens. On
croit que ce font marchands d’Am{terdam qui entre-
tiennent ces Suedois fafches de ce que la Compag*.
des Indes ocidentales a elle feule tou le commerce
de ces contrées. Ceit vers cette Riuiere qu’ona
trouué a ce que l’on dit vne mine d’or.

Voyez dans le liure du §. De Laet D’ Anuers la table
et le difcours de la nouuelle Belgie comme il l’ap-
pelle quelqueffois ou la mappemonde. Noua Anglia,
Nout Belgium et Virginia.

Il y a bien 50 ans que les Hollandois vont en ces
quartiers. Lan 1615 le fort fut commencé depuis
enuiron 20 ans on a commencé a l’habituer et main-
tenant il y deja quelque petit commerce de la Vir-
ginie et de la Nouuelle Angleterre

Les premiers venus y ont trouué des terres toutes
propres defertées autrefois par les fauuages qui y


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOVUM BELGIUM 109


settlement Catholics, English Puritans, Lutherans,
Anabaptists, whom they call Mnistes,‘ etc.

When any one comes for the first time to dwell in
the country, they furnish him horses, cows, etc., and
give him provisions,—all which he repays when he
is well settled; and, as for lands, at the end of ten
years he gives the Company of the West indies a
tenth of the produce that he harvests.®

This country has for limits on the New England
side a River which they call the Fresh River, which
serves as boundary between them and the English; ®
nevertheless, the English approach them very close-
ly,— preferring to have lands among the Dutch, who
require nothing from them, to depending upon Eng-
lish Milords, who exact rents and like to put on
airs of being absolute. On the other side,—the
Southern, toward Virginia,—it has for limits the
River which they call South River, on which there
is also a Dutch settlement; but at its entrance the
Swedes have another, extremely well equipped with
cannon and people. It is believed that these Swedes
are maintained by Amsterdam merchants, incensed
because the Company of the west Indies monopolizes
all the trade of these regions. It is toward this
River that they have found, as is said, a gold mine.”

See in the book of sieur De Laet, of Antwerp, the
table, and the account of new Belgium,’ as he some-
times calls it; or the great map of ‘‘ Nova Anglia,
Novum Belgium, et Virginia.”

During fully 50 years the Dutch have frequented
these regions. In the year 1615, the fort was be-
gun; about 20 years ago, they began to make a
settlement; and now there is already some little
trade with Virginia and New England.


110 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


faifoient leurs champs. ceux qui font venus depuis
ont defriché dans les bois qui font po’ 1 ordinaire des
chefnes, les terres font bonnes. La chaffe des cerfs
vers lautomne abondante. Il y a quelques logis
baf{tys de pierre: ils font la chaux auec des coquilles
d’huiftres dont il y a de grans monceaux faits autre-
fois ples fauuages qui viuent en partie de cette
pefche.

Le climat y eft fort doux comme eftant a 4o, deux
tiers il y a force fruits d Europe comme pommes,
poirls Cerifes. I’y arriué en octobre et i’y trouué
encore quantité de Pefches

Montant le long de la Riuiere iufques aux 43°
degre vous trouuez la 2* habitaon a laquelle le flux
et Reflux monte et ne paffe pas plus auant: les
nauires de 100 et fix vingts y peuuent aborder.

Il y a deux chofes en cette habitation qui s’appelle
Renfelaerfwick comme qui diroit 1 habitaon de Renfe-
laers qui eft un riche marchand d’Am{fterdam. Pre-
mierem'un mefchant petit fort nommé le Fort d’o-
renge bafty de pieux aulec 4 ou 5 pile]ces de canon de
Breteuil et autant de pierriers que la Compag* de
Weit-indes s’eft referué et quelle entretient. ce
fort étoit autreffois dans vne Ifle que faict la Riviére,
maintenant il eft en terre ferme du cofté des Hiro-
quois un peu au deffus de la d'*. Ile Secondemt une
Colonie qu’y a enuoyé ce Renfelaers qui en eft le
Patron. Cette colonie eft compofée d’enuiron cent
perfonnes qui demeurent en 25 ou 30 maifons bafties
le long de la Riuiere felon que chacun a trouué la
commodité. Dans la principale maifon eft logé
celuy qui eft de la part du Patron, le Miniftre a la
fienne a part dans laquelle fe faict le Prefche. Ilya


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOVUM BELGIUM lil


The first comers found lands quite suitable for use,
cleared in former times by the savages, who tilled
their fields there. Those who have come since have
made clearings in the woods, which are commonly of
oak; the lands are good. Deer hunting is abun-
dant toward autumn. There are some dwellings
built of stone: they make the lime with oyster shells,
of which there are great heaps made in former times
by the savages, who partly live by that fishery.

The climate there is very mild; as that region is
Situated at 4o and two-thirds degrees, there are
plenty of European fruits, as apples, pears, Cherries.
I arrived there in October, and even then I found
many Peaches.

Ascending the River as far as the 43rd degree, you
find the 2nd settlement, which the flow and Ebb of
the tide reaches, but extends no further; ships of 100
and a hundred and twenty tons can land there.

There are two items in this settlement, which is
called Renselaerswick,—as if one should say, “‘ the
settlement of Renselaers,’’ who is a wealthy merchant
of Amsterdam: first, a wretched little fort, named
Fort orange,— built of logs, with 4 or 5 pieces of
Breteuil cannon, and as many swivel guns,— which
the Company of the West indies has reserved for
itself, and which it maintains. This fort was for-
merly on an Island formed by the River; it is now
on the mainland on the side of the Hiroquois, a
little above the said Island.? There is, secondly, a
Colony sent thither by that Renselaers, who is its
Patron. This colony is composed of about a hundred
persons, who live in 25 or 30 houses built along the
River, as each has found convenient. In the prin-
cipal house is lodged the Patron’s representative ;


112 LES RELATIONS DES JESVITES [Vo. 28


auffy comme un Baillif qu’ils appellent Senechal qui
a foin de la Iuftice. toutes leurs maifons ne font
que de planches, et font couuertes de chaume. I] ny
encor point de maffonerie finon dans les cheminées.

Les bois portans beaucoup de gros pins, ils font de
planches par le moyen de leurs moulins qu’ils ont a
cet effect

Ilz ont trouué quelques terres toutes propres que
les fauuages auoient autreffois preparées ou ils fement
du bled et de l’avoine p’. la bierre et p*. les chevaux
dont ils ont grande quantité. Il ya peu de teres
ppres pour eftre labourées etans preffez des coftes
qui font mauuaifes terres cela les oblige de fefloi-
gner les vns des autres et tiennent deja deux ou 3
lieties de pays.

La traitte eft libre a tout le monde, ce qui faict que
les fauuages ont toutes chofes a grand marché vn
chacun des Hollandois allant au deffus de fon com-
pagnon et fe contentant pourueu qu il puiffe gangner
quelque petite chofe

Cette habitation n’eft pas éloignée de plus de 20
lieues des Agniehronons, on y va ou par terre ou par
eau la Riuiere fur laquelle font les Iroquois allant
tomber en celle qui paffe aux Hollandois, mais il y a
beaucoup de baffes rapides, et un fault dune petite
demie lieiie ou il faut porter le canot

Il y a plufieurs nations entre les deux habitations
des Hollandois éloignées l’une de lautre de 30 lieues
d’Allemagne c eft a dire de 50 ou 60 lieiies Fran-
coifes. Les Loups que les Iroquois appellent Agot-
faganens font les plus proche de lhabitation Renfe-
laerfwick ou du fort d’orange. Il y a deja quelques
années que la guerre etant entre les Iroquois et les


Nova FRANCI£Z PARS 2%,


QRevier Nawaus


ET VIRGINIA /G® Ne\pr wr":


ZB ke AS eeery
; oe Tepper yk
— Ss = N i x

SS}


A724,


XS


Sr Rn: Bs BE


t
a
| |
5
|
|
|
|
#5) |
u
|
L |
Lf
a
#1 |
a Z,
LU l
1 ff
Bm1e¥F|
[| S
i
Hf
HS
| | S
#2\ |
HAN
i
a
a
i
a
gO
f
w)
:


Pt el zseo ei


Sw
N


Chaunook§ caishir 9?


Weape /meoc
Moratuc (oMusconiad saw


Cl eo ae


IAT ae


i ee eS
S) st
i Et Be
| or
Peed da 3


NEW NETHERLAND, ETC., BY JOHANNES DE LAET, 1630.


[Reduced facsimile, from De Laet’s Novus Orbis, published in 1630-1633, and designated by Winsor as “the first printed map of New Netherland.”


i as a ee Bn a


i Sb a a OY A a me


oo it Ok OD
a :


po
At)
tore


=


==


*


euneee andl
Scene


ee


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOVUM BELGIUM 113


the Minister has his own house apart, in which
Preaching is held. There is also a sort of Bailiff,
whom they call Seneschal, who has charge of Justice.
All their houses are merely of boards, and are
covered with thatch. There is as yet no masonry,
except in the chimneys.

As the forests supply many stout pines, the people
make boards by means of their mills, which they
have for this purpose.

They have found some very suitable lands, which
the savages had formerly prepared, on which they
plant corn and oats, for their beer, and for the horses,
of which they have a great many. There are few
lands fit to be tilled, as they are narrowed by hills,
which are poor soil; that obliges them to separate
from one another, and they already hold two or 3
leagues of territory.

Trade is free to every one, which enables the sav-
ages to obtain all things very cheaply: each of the
Dutch outbidding his companion, and being satis-
fied, provided he can gain some little profit.

This settlement is not more than 20 leagues from
the Agniehronons; there is access to them either by
land or by water,—the River on which the Iroquois
dwell falling into that which passes by the Dutch;
but there are many shallow rapids, and a fall of a
short half-league, past which the canoe must be
carried.

There are several nations between the two Dutch
settlements, which are 30 German leagues apart, —
that is to say, 50 or 60 French leagues. The Wolves,
whom the Iroquois call Agotsaganens, are the near-
est to the settlement of Renselaerswick or to the fort
of orange.” Several years ago, there being a war


114 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


Loups les Hollandois fe Ioignirent a ces derniers
contre les autres, mais 4 ayant éte pris et bruflés
la paix fe fit. Depuis quelques nations proche de
la mer ayans tiié quelques Hollandois de la plus éloi-
gnée habitaon, les Hollandais tuerent 150 fauuages
tant hdes que femmes que petits enfans, eux ayants
tue a diuerfes reprifes 40 Hollandois, bruflé beau-
coup de maifons et faict un dommage eftimé des le
temps que i’eftois la de 200000! deux cens mille
liures on leua des troupes en la Nouuelle Angle-
terre; au commencem! donc de 1 hyver les herbes
etant abbattiies et quelques neiges etants fur terre on
leur donna la chaffe de fix cens hommes y en ayant
toujours deux cens en courfe et fe relayant continu-
ellemt les vns les autres de forte qu’enfermes dans
vne grand Ifle et ne pouuants s’enfuyr leftem' a caufe
des femmes et des enfans il y en eut iufques a feize
cens de tiies compris les femmes et enfans ce qui
obligea la refte des fauuages a faire la paix qui
contintie encor cela arriva en 1643 et 1644.

Des 3 Riuieres en la

Nouuelle France,
3 Auguiti, 1646


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOVUM BELGIUM 115


between the Iroquois and the Wolves, the Dutch
Joined these latter against the others; but, 4 having
been taken and burned, peace was made. Later,
some nations near the sea having slain some Dutch
of the most remote settlement, the Dutch killed 150
Savages,— not only men and women, but little chil-
dren. The savages having, in various reprisals, killed
40 Dutch, burned many houses, and wrought damage
reckoned, at the time when I was there, at 200,000//,—
two hundred thousand livres,—troops were levied
in New England. Accordingly, at the beginning of
winter, the grass being short, and some snow on the
ground, they gave the savages chase with six hun-
dred men, two hundred being always on the march
and one set continually relieving another. The
result was, that, being shut up on a great Island, and
unable to flee easily, because of the women and chil-
dren, there were as many as sixteen hundred killed,
including women and children. This compelled the
remainder of the savages to make peace, which still
continues. That occurred in 1643 and 1644.

From 3 Rivers, in

New France,
August 3, 1646.


116 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 28


Notice sur René Goupil (donné), par le P. Isaac
Jogues.


ENE Goupil étoit Angeuin, qui en la fleur
R de fon Age demanda auec preffe deftre receu
en notre Nouitiat de Paris, ou il demeura
quelques mois auec beaucoup d’edificaon. Ses indif-
pofitions corporelles luy ayant ofté le bonheur de fe
confacrer en la s‘*. Religion, comme il en auoit de
grands defirs, lorfqu’il fe porta mieux il fe tranfporta
en la Nouuelle France pour y feruir la compagnie,
puifqu’il nauoit pas eu le bien de s’y donner dans
l’ancienne. Et pour ne rien faire de fon chef quoy
qu’il fut pleinemt maiftre de fes actions, il fe foub-
mit totalem't a la conduite du superieur de la Miffion
qu’il l’employa deux années entieres aux plus vils
offices de la maifon defquels il s’acquitta auec beau-
coup d humilité et de Charité. On luy donna auffy
le foin de penfer les malades et les bleffés de 1’ hofpi-
tal ce qu’il fit auec autant d’adreffe, étant bien intel-
ligent en la chirurgie que d’affection et d’amour
regardant continuellement N S. en leur perfonne.
Il laiffe une fi douce odeur de fa bonté et de fes
autres vertus en ce lieu, que fa memoire y eft encore
en benediction
Comme nous defcendifmes des Hurons en Iuillet
1642. nous le demandafmes au RP. Vimont pour
l’emmener auec nous, parceque les Hurons avoient
grand befoin d’un Chirurgien. il nous 1l’accorda.


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL Lal


Account of René Goupil (donné), by Father Isaac
Jogues.


ENE Goupil was a native of Anjou, who, in
R ._ the bloom of his youth, urgently requested to
be received into our Novitiate at Paris, where
he remained some months with much edification.
His bodily indispositions having taken from him the
happiness of consecrating himself to God in holy
Religion,—for which he had a strong desire,— he
journeyed, when his health improved, to New France,
in order to serve the society there, since he had not
had the blessing of giving himself to it in old France.
And, in order to do nothing in his own right,—al-
though he was fully master of his own actions,—he
totally submitted himself to the guidance of the
superior of the Mission, who employed him two
whole years in the meanest offices about the house,
in which he acquitted himself with great humility
and Charity. He was also given the care of nursing
the sick and the wounded at the hospital, which he
did with as much skill—for he understood surgery
well—as with affection and love, continually seeing
Our Lord intheir persons. He left so sweet an odor
of his goodness and his other virtues in that place,
that his memory is still blessed there.

When we came down from the Hurons in July,
1642, we asked Reverend Father Vimont to let us
take him with us, because the Hurons had great
need of a Surgeon; he granted our request.


118 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


Il ne fe peut dire la ioye que receut ce bon jeune
homme quand le fup’. luy dit qu il fe preparaft pd. le
voyage. il fcavoit bien neantmoins les grands dan-
gers qu’il y avoit fur la riviere. il fcavoit comme
les Iroquois étoient enragez contre les Frangois.
Neantmoins cela ne fut pas capable qu’au moindre
figne de la volf[on]té de celuy auquel il s eftoit remis
volontairement de tout ce qui le touchoit, il ne fe
mit en chemin pour aller aux 3 Rivieres

Nous en partifmes le 1°. d’aouft le lendemain de la
feftede N.B. P. Le 24. nous rencontrafmes les enne-
mis lefquels divifes en deux bandes nous attendoient
auec 1 auantage que peut avoirun grand nombre de
gens choifis par deffus un petit de toute forte, qui
combattent a terre contre d autres qui font fur l’eau
en diuers canots d’efcorces.

Prefque tous les Hurons s’eftoi[e]nt enfuis dans le
bois et nous ayant laiffé nous fufmes pris. Ce fut la
ou fa vertu parut beaucoup car des qu’il fe vit pris.
O mon pere ce me dit il dieu foit beny, il 1 a permis,
illa voulu, fa st. volonté foit faicte, ie l’aime ie la
veux ie la cheris et ie 1’embraffe de toute l’eftendiie de
mon coeur. Cependant que les ennemis pourfuiui-
rent les fuyarts ie le confeffé et luy donné 1’abfolu-
tion ne fachant pas ce qui nous devoit arriver, en
fuite de notre prife. Les ennemis eftant retournes
de la chaffe fe ietterent fur nous comme des chiens
enragez a belles dents, nous arrachant les ongles
nous escrafans les doigts, ce qu’il enduroit auec
beaucoup de patience et de courage.

Le prefence de fon efprit dans un fi facheufe acci-
dent, parut en ce pri[nci]palemt qu’il m’aydoit non-
obftant la douleur de fes playes en ce quil pouvoit a


1645 — 46] JOGUES’S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 119


I cannot express the joy which this good young
man felt when the superior told him that he might
make ready for the journey. Nevertheless, he well
knew the great dangers that await one upon the
river; he knew how the Iroquois were enraged
against the French. Yet that could not prevent
him—at the least sign of the will of him to whom
he had voluntarily committed all his concerns — from
setting forth for 3 Rivers.

We departed thence on the ist of August,—the
day after the feast of Our Blessed Father. On the
2nd, we encountered the enemies, who, separated
into two bands, were awaiting us with the advan-
tage which a great number of chosen men, fighting on
land, can have over a small and promiscuous band,
who are upon the water in scattered canoes of bark.

Nearly all the Hurons had fled into the woods,
and, as they had left us, we were seized. On this
occasion his virtue was very manifest; for, as soon
as he saw himself captured, he said to me: ‘‘O my
father, God be blessed; he has permitted it, he has
willed it,— his holy will be done. I love it, I desire
it, I cherish it, I embrace it with all the strength of
my heart.’’ Meantime, while the enemies pursued
the fugitives, I heard his confession, and gave him
absolution,— not knowing what might befall us after
ourcapture. The enemies having returned from their
hunt, fell upon us like mad dogs, with sharp teeth, —
tearing out our nails, and crushing our fingers, which
he endured with much patience and courage.

His presence of mind in so grievous a mishap
appeared especially in this, that he aided me, not-
withstanding the pain of his wounds, as well as he
could, in the instruction of the captive Hurons who


120 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


linftruction des Hurons prifonniers qui n’eftoient
pas x{tiens. Comme ie les inftruifois feparemt et
comme ils fe trouvoient, il me fit prendre garde
qu’un pauure vieillard nommé Ondsterraon, pourroit
bien eftre de ceux qu’on feroit mourir fur la place,
leur couftume eftant d’en facrifier toujours quelqu’un
ala chaleur de leur rage. ie l’inftruifis a loifir pen-
dant que les ennemis eftoient attentifs a la diftribu-
tion du pillage de 12 canots, dont une partie ef{toient
chargez des necfessi]tés de nos Peres des Hurons. Le
butin eftant partagé ils tuerent ce pauure vieillard
au mefme moment prefque que ie venois de luy don-
ner une nouvelle naiffance p les eaux falutaires du s‘.
Baptéme. Nous eufmes encor cette confolation du-
rant le chemin que nous fifmes allant au pays enne-
my d’eftre enfemble ou ie fus temoin de beaucoup
de vertus.

Durant le chemin il eftoit toujours occupé dans
Dieu. Ses parolles et les difcours qu il tenoit
eftoient toutes dans une foubmiffion aux ordres de
la D. providence, et une acceptation volontaire de la
mort que dieu luy envoyroit. Il le donnoit a luy en
holocaufte pour eftre reduit en cendres p les feux
des Iroquois que la main de ce bon Pere allumeroit.
il cherchoit les moyens de luy plaire en tout et par
tout. Vn jour il me dit ce fut peu apres notre prife
e{tans encor dans le chemin. Mon Pere Dieu m’a
toujours donné de grands defirs de me confacrer a
fon st. feruice p les voeux de la Religion en fa s*.
compagnie, mes peches m’ont rendu indigne de
cette grace iufques a ceft heure. I’efpere neant-
moins que N S. aura pour agreables l’offrande que
ie luy veux faire maintenant, et faire de la fagon la


1645 - 46] JOGUES’S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 121


were not christians. While I was instructing them
separately, and as they came, he called my attention
to the fact that a poor old man, named Ondouterraon,
was among those whom they would probably kill on
the spot,—their custom being always to sacrifice
some one in the heat of their fury. I instructed this
man at leisure, while the enemies were attending to
the distribution of the plunder from 12 canoes, some
of which were laden with necessaries for our Fathers
among the Hurons. The booty being divided, they
killed this poor old man,—almost at the same mo-
ment in which I had just given him a new birth
through the salutary waters of holy Baptism. We
still had this consolation, during the journey that
we made in going to the enemy’s country, that we
were together; on this journey, I was witness to
many virtues.

Upon the road, he was always occupied with God.
His words and the discourses that he held were all
expressive of submission to the commands of the
Divine providence, and showed a willing acceptance
of the death which God was sending him. He gave
himself to him as a sacrifice, to be reduced to ashes
by the fires of the Iroquois, which that good Father's
hand would kindle. He sought the means to please
him in all things, and everywhere. One day he
said to me,— it was soon after our capture, while we
were still on the way,—‘‘ My Father, God has always
given me a great desire to consecrate myself to his
holy service by the vows of Religion in his holy
society; my sins have rendered me unworthy of this
grace until this hour. I nevertheless hope that Our
Lord will be pleased with the offering which I wish
now to make him, by taking, in the best manner that


122 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


meilleure que ie pourray les veeux de la compagnie
en la prefence de mon dieu et devant vous. luy
ayant accordé il les fit auec beaucoup de devotion.

Tout bleffé qu il eftoit il penfoit les autres bleffes
tant des ennemis qui dans la meflée auoient recu
quelque coup que les prifonniers mefmes. il ouvrit
la veine a un Iroquois malade, et tout cela auec
autant de charité que fil l’euft faict a des perfonnes
fort amies.

Son humilité et 1 obeiffance qu'il rendoit a ceux
qui l’avoient pris me confondoit. Les Iroquois qui
nous menoient tous deux dans leur canot me dirent
que ieuffe a prendre un aviron et nager, ie n’en
voulus rien faire eftant f{uperbe iufques dans la mort.
Ils s’adrefferent a luy quelque temps apres, et tout
incontinent il fe mit A nager et comme ces barbares
par fon exemple me vouloient reduire a en faire au-
tant, luy s’eftant apperceu de cela me demanda par-
don. Ie luy fournis quelques fois durant le chemin
la penfée de s’enfuyr, comme la liberté qu’on nous
donnoit luy en fourniffoit affez d’occaon. car pour
moy ie ne pouuois pas laiffer les francois et 24 ou 25
prifonniers hurons. il ne vouloit jamais le faire fe
remettant en tout a la volonté de N S. qui ne luy
donnoit point de penfée de le faire.

Dans le lac nous rencontrafmes 200 Iroquois qui
vindrent a Richelieu lors qu’on commencoit 4 baftir
le fort, ils nous chargeoient de coups, nous mirent
tout en fang, et nous firent experimenter la rage de
ceux qui font poffedez par le demon. I] endura tous
ces outrages et ces cruautez auec grande patience et
charitéa 1 endroit de ceux qui le mal traitoient.

A labord du premier bourg ou nous fufmes fi cru-


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 123


I can, the vows of the society in the presence of my
God and before you.’”’ This being granted to him,
he uttered the vows with much devotion.

Covered with wounds as he was, he dressed those
of other persons,—the enemies who had received
some blow in the fight, as well as the prisoners
themselves. He opened a vein for a sick Iroquois;
and all that with as much charity as if he had done
it to persons very friendly.

His humility, and the obedience which he rendered
to those who had captured him, confounded me.
The Iroquois who conveyed us both in their canoe
told me that I must take a paddle, and use it; I
would do nothing of the kind, being proud even in
death. They addressed him in the same way, some
time afterward, and immediately he began to paddle;
and when those barbarians tried to drive me, by his
example, to do the like, he, having perceived it,
asked my pardon. I sometimes suggested to him,
along the way, the idea of escaping, since the liberty
which they gave us furnished him sufficient oppor-
tunities for this; but as for myself, I could not leave
the french and 24 or 25 huron captives. He would
never do so,—committing himself in everything to
the will of Our Lord, who inspired him with no
thought of doing what I proposed.

On the lake we met 200 Iroquois, who came to
Richelieu while the French were beginning to build
the fort; these loaded us with blows, covered us
with blood, and made us experience the rage of those
who are possessed by the demon. All these outrages
and these cruelties he endured with great patience
and charity toward those who ill-treated him.

On approaching the first village, where we were


124 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 28


ellemt traités il fit paroiftre une patience et une dou-
ceur tout extraordinaire, eftant tombé fous la grefle
des coups de bafton et de verge de fer dont on nous
chargeoit et ne fe pouuant releuer, il fut apporte
comme demy mort fur l’echafaut ou nous eftions
dej4 au milieu du bourg, mais dans un etat fi pitoy-
able qu’il euft faid@ pitié a la cruauté mefme, il eftoit
tout meurtry de coups et dans le vifage on ne luy
voyoit que le blanc des yeux; mais il étoit d autant
plus beau aux yeux des Anges qu il etoit defiguré et
femblable a celuy duquel il eft dit Vidimus eum quafi
leprofum &c non erat ei fpecies neque decor

A peine auoit il pris un peu d haleine auffy bien
que nous qu’on luy vint donner 3 coups fur les
efpaules d’un gros bafton comme on nous avoit faict
auparavant. Quand on m’euft couppé le poulce
comme au plus apparent, on s adreffe a luy et luy
couppe on le poulce droict a la 1**. joincture difant
inceffament durant ce tourment JIESvS MarRIA
JOSEPH. Durant fix jours que nous fufmes expo-
fez a tous ceux qui nous vouloient faire quelque mal
il fit pareftre une douceur admirable, il euft toute la
poitrine bruflée p les charbons et cendres chaudes que
les ieunes garcons nous iettoient fur le corps, la nuict
eftant lies a plate tere. la nature me fourniffoit plus
d’adreffe qu’a luy pour efquiuer une partie de ces
peines.

Apres qu'on nous eut donné la vie au mefme temps
qu’un peu auparauant on nous avoit avertis de nous
preparer pour eftre bruflez, il tomba malade avec de
grandes incommodites pour tout et nommemt pour
le viure auquel il n’eftoit pas accouftumé, c eft la ou
on pourroit dire plus veritablem' non cibus vtilis


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 126


treated so cruelly, he showed a most uncommon
patience and gentleness. Having fallen under the
shower of blows from clubs and iron rods with which
they attacked us, and being unable to rise again, he
was brought —as it were, half dead—vtpon the scaf-
fold where we already were, in the middle of the
village; but he was in so pitiful a condition that he
would have inspired compassion in cruelty itself.
He was all bruised with blows, and in his face one
distinguished nothing but the whites of his eyes;
but he was so much the more beautiful in the sight
of the Angels as he was disfigured, and similar to
him of whom it is said: Vidimus eum quasi leprosum,
etc. ; on erat et species neque decor.

Hardly had he taken a little breath, as well as we,
when they came to give him 3 blows on his shoul-
ders with a heavy club, as they had done to us be-
fore. When they had cut off my thumb,—as I was
the most conspicuous,—they turned to him and cut
his right thumb at the Ist joint,— while he continu-
ally uttered, during this torment: ‘‘ Jesus, Mary,
JosepH.”’ During six days, in which we were
exposed to all those who wished to do us some harm,
he showed an admirable gentleness; he had his
whole breast burned by the coals and hot cinders
which the young lads threw upon our bodies at
night, when we were bound flat on the earth. Na-
ture furnished more skill to me than to him for avoid-
ing a part of these pains.

After they had given us life,—at the very time
when, a little before, they had warned us to prepare
for being burned,—he fell sick, suffering great
inconveniences in every respect, and especially in
regard to the food, to which he was not accustomed.


126 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


zegro. Ie ne le pouuois foulager eftant auffy bien
malade et n’ayant aucun de mes doigts fain et entier.

Mais ie me preffe pour venir 4 fa mort a laquelle
y ny a rien manqué pour le faire d’un Martyr.

Apres fix femaines que nous eufmes efté dans le
pays comme la confufion ce fut mis dans les confeils
des Iroquois dont une partie vouloit bien qu’on nous
remenat. nous perdifmes l’efperance que ie n’auois
guere grande, de reuoir cette année la les 3 Rivieres.
Nous nous confolions donc 1’un l'autre dans la difpo-
fition divine et nous appreftions a tout ce quelle
ordonneroit de nous. I] n’auoit pas tant de veiie du
danger dans lequel nous eftions, ie le voyois mieux
que luy. ce qui me faifoit fouuent luy dire que nous
nous tinffions prets. Vn jour donc que dans les pei-
nes de notre ef{prit nous eftions fortis hors du Bourg
po prier plus decemmt et auec moins de bruict. Deux
jeunes hommes vinrent apres nous nous dire que
nous euffions a retournera la maifon. I’eus quelque
prefentimt de ce qui devoit arriuer et luy dit Mon
tres cher f. recommandons nous a N.S. et nre bonne
mere la s**. Vierge ces gens ont quelque mauvais
deffein comme ie penfe, nous nous eftions offerts a
N.S. peu autparavant auec beaucoup d’affection, le
fuppliant de receuoir nos vies et nre fang et de les
vnir a fa vie et 4 fon fang pour le falut de ces
pauures peuples. nous nous en retournons donc vers
le Bourg recitant fire chappellet duquel nous auions
deja dit 4 dixaines. Nous eftants arreftés vers la
porte du Bourg pour voir ce qu’on nous voudroit dire
un de ces deux Iroquois tire une hache qu il tenoit
cachée foubs fa couuerture et en donne un coup fur
la tefte de René qui ef{toit devant luy il tombe roide


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 127


In that, one might say most truly, Won cibus utilis
egro. I could not relieve him,—for I was also very
sick, and had none of my fingers sound or entire.

But this urges me to come to his death, at which
nothing was wanting to make him a Martyr.

After we had been in the country six weeks,—as
confusion arose in the councils of the Iroquois, some
of whom were quite willing that we should be taken
back,— we lost the hope, which I did not consider
very great, of again seeing 3 Rivers that year. We
accordingly consoled each other in the divine arrange-
ment of things; and we were preparing for every-
thing that it might ordain for us. He did not quite
realize the danger in which we were,—I saw it bet-
ter than he; and this often led me to tell him that
we should hold ourselves in readiness. One day,
then, asin the grief of our souls we had gone forth
from the Village, in order to pray more suitably and
with less disturbance, two young men came after us
to tell us that we must return home. I had some
presentiment of what was to happen, and said to
him: ‘‘ My dearest brother, let us commend ourselves
to Our Lord and to our good mother the blessed
Virgin; these people have some evil design, as I
think.’’ We had offered ourselves to Our Lord,
shortly before, with much devotion,— beseeching
him to receive our lives and our blood, and to unite
them with his life and his blood for the salvation of
these poor peoples. We accordingly return toward
the Village, reciting our rosary, of which we had
already said 4 decades. Having stopped near the
gate of the Village, to see what they might say to us,
one of those two Iroquois draws a hatchet, which he
held concealed under his blanket, and deals a blow


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


la face fur terre, pronongant le st. nom de IESvS
(fouuent nous nous auertiffions que ce st. nom fer-
ma{t et nre voix et fire vie); au coup ie me tourne et
vois tune hache toute enfanglantée, ie me mets a
genoux pour recevoir le coup qui me devoit joindre a
mon cher compagnon, mais comme ilz tardoient ie
me releue ie cours au moribond qui eftoit tout pro-
che, auquel ils donnerent deux afies coups de hache
fur la tefte et l acheuerent, luy ayant premierem!'
donné l’abfoltion que ie luy donnois depuis fire
captivité touiours de deux jours l’un apres seftre
confeffé.

Ce fut le [deux —afterward erased, in orig.| de Sep-
temb. fefte dest. Michel que cet Ange en innocence et
ce Martyr de I. C. donne fa vie pour celuy qui luy auoit
donné la fienne. On me fit commandemt de me
retourner en ma cabane ou j’attendis le refte du jour
et le lendemain le mefme traitemt. etc eftoit bien la
penfée de touts que ie ne la ferois pas longue puifque
celuy la avoit commencé et en effect ie fus plufieurs
jours quon venoit pour me tuer mais N.S. ne le
permit pas par des voyes qui feroient trop longues a
expliquer. Le lendemain matin ie ne laiffé pas de
fortir, de m’enquefter ou on avoit ietté ce B. corps,
car ie le voulois enterrer a quelque prix que ce futt.
Quelques Iroquois qui avoient eues quelque enuie de
me conferuer me dirent. Tu n’as pas defprit tu
vois qu’on te cherche par tout pour te tuer et tu fors
encor tu veux aller chercher un corps déja demy
greflé qu'on a trainé loin d’icy. ne vois tu pas cette
jeuneffe qui fort, qui te tuera quand tu feras hors
des pieux. Cela ne m’arrefta pas et N. S. me don-
na affez de courage pour vouloir mourir dans cette


1645-46] JOGUES*S NOLL CLASOGRAGOOPIL, 129


with it on the head of René, who was before him.
He falls motionless, his face to the ground, pro-
nouncing the holy name of JESUS (often we admon-
ished each other that this holy name should end
both our voices and our lives). At the blow, I turn
round and see a hatchet all bloody; I kneel down,
to receive the blow which was to unite me with my
dear companion; but, as they hesitate, I rise again,
and run to the dying man, who was quite near.
They dealt him two other blows with the hatchet,
on the head, and despatched him,—but not until I
had first given him absolution, which I had been
wont to give him every two days, since our captiv-
ity; and this was a day on which he had already
confessed.

lt was the [2oth| of September, the feast of st
Michael, when this Angel in innocence, and this
Martyr of Jesus Christ, gave his life for him who
had given him his. They ordered me to return to
my cabin, where I awaited, the rest of the day and
the next day, the same treatment; and it was indeed
the purpose of all that I should not long delay, since
that one had begun. Indeed, I passed several days
on which they came to kill me; but Our Lord did
not permit this, in ways which it would be tedious
to explain. The next morning, I nevertheless went
out to inquire where they had thrown that Blessed
body, for I wished to bury it, at whatever cost. Cer-
tain Iroquois, who had some desire to preserve me,
said to me: ‘‘ Thou hast no sense! Thou seest that
they seek thee everywhere to kill thee, and thou still
goest out. Thou wishest to go and seek a body
already half destroyed, which they have dragged far
from here. Dost thou not see those young men


130 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


office de charité. Ie vais ie cherche et a l’ayde d’un
Algonquin pris atieffois et maintenant vray Iroquois
ie le trouué. Les enfans apres qu’on l’euft tué
l’auoient dépouillé et trainé la corde au col dans vn
torrent qui paffe au pied de leur Bourg. Les chiens
luy avoient deja mangé une ptie des reins. ie ne
pts tenir mes larmes a ce {pectacle ie pris ce corps
et a layde de cet Algonquin ie le mis a fond de l’eau
chargé de groffes pierres affin qu’on ne le vit, fai-
fant mon conte que ie viendrois le lendemain auec
un hoyau lors qu il ny auroit perfonne que ie ferois
vne foffe et que ie l’y mettrois. Ie croiois que ce
corps fut bien caché mais peuteftre quelques uns quj
nous virent pripalem' de la jeuneffe le retirerent.

Le lendemain comme on me cherchoit pour me
tuer ma tante m’envoya a fon champ pour efquiver
comme ie penfe, ce qui fut caufe que ie remis au len-
demain jour auquel il plut toute la nuict, de forte
que ce torrent groffit extraord™™. J’emprunté un
hoyau hors de chez nous pour mieux cacher mon
deffein mais comme iapproche du lieu ie ne trouve
plus ce B. depoft ie me mets a leau qui eftoit deja
bien froide ie vais et viens ie fonds auec mon pied fi
leau n’a point foufleve et entraifné le corps, ie ne
trouué rien. Combien verfé-je de larmes qui tom-
boient iufques dans le torrent chantant comme ie
pouvois des pfeaumes que léglife a couftume de reci-
ter p’. les morts. En fin ie ne trouue rien, et une
femme de ma connoiffance qui paffa p la et me vit
en peine, me dit lorfque ie luy demandé fi elle ne
{cavoit point ce qu’on en avoit faict, qu’on 1 avoit
traine a la riuiere qui eftoit un quart de lieiie de la
et que ie ne connaiffois pas. Cela eftoit faux la jeu-


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 131


going out, who will kill thee when thou shalt be out-
side the stockade?’’ That did not stop me, and Our
Lord gave me courage enough to wish to die in this
act of charity. I go, I seek; and, with the aid of an
Algonquin,— formerly captured, and now a true Iro-
quois,—Ifindhim. The children, after he had been
killed, had stripped him, and had dragged him, with
a rope about his neck, into a torrent which passes at
the foot of their Village. The dogs had already
eaten a part of his loins. I could not keep back my
tears at this sight; I took the body, and, by the aid
of that Algonquin, I put it beneath the water,
weighted with large stones, to the end that it might
not be seen. It was my intention to come the next
day with a mattock, when no one should be there, in
order to make a grave and place the body therein.
I thought that the corpse was well concealed;
but perhaps some who saw us,—especially of the
youths, — withdrew it.

The next day, as they were seeking me to kill me,
my aunt sent me to her field,— to escape, as I think;
this caused me to delay until the morrow, a day on
which it rained all night, so that the torrent swelled
uncommonly. I borrowed a mattock from another
cabin, the better to conceal my design; but, when I
draw near the place, I no longer find that Blessed
deposit. I gointo the water, which was already very
cold; I go and come,—TI sound with my foot, to see
whether the water has not raised and carried away
the body; I find nothing. How many tears did I
shed, which fell into the torrent, while I sang, as
well as I could, the psalms which the church is accus-
tomed to recite for the dead. After all, I find noth-
ing; and a woman of my acquaintance, who passed


132 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES. \ (Nov28


neffe lavoit retire et trainé dans vn petit bois proche
ou l’automne et l’hyuer les Chiens les Corbeaux et les
Renards le mangoient; le Printemps cde on me dit
que c’eftoit la quon lavoit trainé i’y allé plufieurs
fois fans rien trouuer en fin la 4™*. fois ie trouue la
tefte quelques os demy rongés que ienterré dans le
deffein de les emporter fion me remenoit aux 3 R.
cde on en parloit, ie les baiffé bien devotent par
plufieurs fois cde les os d’un martyr de I C.

Ie luy donne ce titre non feulemt par ce qu'il a efté
tué par les ennemis de dieu et de fon Eglife et dans
l’employ d’une ardente charité a lendroit du pro-
chain, fe mettent dans le peril evident p'. 1 amour de
dieu; Mais particulieremt parcequ’il a ef{té tué po* les
prieres et nommemt pour la s** Croix.

Il eftoit dans vne Cabane ou il faifoit prefque tou-
jours des prieres cela ne plaifoit gueres a vn vieillard
fupfticieux qui y étoit. Wn jour voyant un petit
enfant de 3 ou 4 ans de la cabane, par un exces de
devotion et d amour a la Croix, et par une fimplicité
que nous autres qui fommes plus prudents felon la
chair que luy n’euffions pas faicte, ofta fon bonnet le
mit fur la tefte de cet enfant et luy fit un grand figne
de croix fur le corps ce vieillard voyant cela com-
mande 4 vn jeune homme de fa cabane qui devoit
partir: pour, laveuerre de le: tier, (ce. qu ilvexecnta
comme nous avons dit.

La mere mefme de 1’enfant dans un voyage ou ie
me trouué auec elle me dit que c eftoit a caufe de ce
figne de Croix qu il auoit efté tiie, et le vieillard qui
avoit faict le commandem', qu’on le tuaft, un jour
qu’on m’appella dans fa cabane pour manger, comme
ie faifois le figne de la Croix devant, me dit. Voyla


1645-46] SOGCUES S NOTIGLISO RA GO OPLL 133


there and saw me in pain, told me, when I asked her
whether she knew what they had done with him,
that they had dragged him to the river, which was a
quarter of a league from there, and which I was not
acquainted with. That was false: the young men
had taken away the body, and dragged it into a little
wood near by,—where, during the autumn and
winter, the Dogs, Ravens, and Foxes fed uponit. In
the Spring, when they told me that it was there that
they had dragged him, I went thither several times
without finding anything. At last, the 4th time, I
found the head and some half-gnawed bones, which
I buried with the design of carrying them away, if I
should be taken back to 3 Rivers, as they spoke of
doing. I kissed them very devoutly, several times,
as the bones of a martyr of Jesus Christ.

I give him this title not only because he was killed
by the enemies of God and of his Church, and in the
exercise of an ardent charity toward his neighbor,—
placing himself in evident peril for the love of God, —
but especially because he was killed on account of
prayer, and notably for the sake of the holy Cross.

He was in a Cabin where he nearly always said
the prayers,— which little pleased a superstitious old
man who was there. One day, seeing a little child
of 3 or 4 years in the cabin,— with an excess of devo-
tion and of love for the Cross, and with a simplicity
which we who are more prudent than he, according
to the flesh, would not have shown,— he took off his
cap, put it on this child’s head, and made a great
sign of the cross upon its body. The old man, see-
ing that, commanded a young man of his cabin, who
was about to leave for the war, to kill him,— which
order he executed, as we have said.


134 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 28


ce que nous haiffons, voila pourquoy on 4 tué ton
compagnon, et pourquoy on te tiiera. Nos voyfins
les Europeans ne font point cela. Quelques fois auffy
comme ie priois A genoux durant la chaffe, on me
difoit qu’on haiffoit cet facon de faire pour lefquelles
on auoit tué 1 autre Francois, et que pour cette rai-
fon on me tueroit quand ie revenois dans le Bourg.

Ie demande pardon a V.R. de la precipitation
auec laquelle i’efcris cecy et du manque de refpect
que iy commets elle m’excufera s’il luy plaift ie crai-
gnois de manquer a cette occaon a m’aquiter d un
devoir duquel ie deurois m eftre deja aquité ily a
long temps.


1645-46] JOGUES’S NOTICE SUR GOUPIL 135


Even the child’s mother, on a journey in which I
happened to be with her, told me that it was because
of this sign of the Cross that he had been killed;
and the old man who had given the command that
he should be slain,—one day when they called me
to his cabin to eat, when I previously made the sign
of the Cross,—said to me: ‘‘ That is what we hate;
that is why they have killed thy companion, and why
they will kill thee. Our neighbors the Europeans
do not do so.”” Sometimes, also, when I was pray-
ing on my knees during the hunt, they told me that
they hated this way of doing, and on account of it
they had killed the other Frenchman; and that, for
this reason, they would kill me when I came back to
the Village.

I ask Your Reverence’s pardon for the haste with
which I write this, and for the want of respect of
which I am thus guilty. You will excuse me, if you
please; I feared lest I should fail at this opportunity,
to discharge a duty which I ought to have performed
long ago.


136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


[450] Lettre du R. P. Jogues au R. P. André
Castillon, de la Compagnie
de Jésus.


Montréal ce 12 septembre 1646.


ON R. PERE,
M eo.


J'ai recu celle qu’il a plu & votre R. de
m’escrire; elle nous oblige de vous mander quelque
chose de notre nouvelle France et nommément de ce
qui me concerne en particulier.

J’ai passé l’hyver 4 Montréal avec le P. Le Jeune;
a la demy-may, je partis des trois Riviéres en compa-
gnie de M. Bourdon ingénieur de la Nouvelle-France,
pour faire un voyage aux Iroquois, desquels nous
retournames en bonne santé au commencement de
Juillet. Mons. notre Gouverneur fut bien aise qu’il
m’accompagnast affin qu’il connust le pays; nous
fismes une carte assez exacte de ces contrées,! et fus-
mes bien recus tant des Hollandais par lesquels nous
passames que par les sauvages. Les principaux des
Européens ny estoient pas, estant allez 4 l’autre habi-
tation qui est vers la mer et qui est la principale pour
les affaires. Nous ne manquames pas d’exercice en
ce voyage tant sur l’eau que sur terre; nous fismes
pour le moins 100 leues a pied et pour l’ordinaire
bien chargés. Je baptizai dans le bourg ot nous de-
meurasmes quelques jours, quelques enfants malades


'Nous n’avons pu retrouver cette carte.


1645-46] JOGUES TO CASTILLON 137


[450] Letter from the Rev. Father Jogues to the
Rev. Father André Castillon, of
the Society of Jesus.


Montréal, this 12th of September, 1646.


yY REVEREND FATHER,
Pax Christi.


I have received what it has pleased your
Reverence to write me. It obliges us to give you
some information of our new France, and especially
of what concerns me in particular.

I passed the winter at Montréal with Father Le
Jeune. In the middle of May, I departed from three
Rivers in company with Monsieur Bourdon, engineer
of New France," to make a journey to the Iroquois,
from which we returned in good health at the begin-
ning of July. Monsieur our Governor was very glad
to have him accompany me, that he might become
acquainted with the country. We made a tolerably
accurate map of these regions,* and were well re-
ceived both by the Dutch, through whose territory
we passed, and by the savages. The principal Euro-
peans were not there, having gone to the other
settlement, which is toward the sea, and is the chief
one for business. We did not lack exercise in this
journey, either on water or on land; we made at least
100 leagues on foot, and were usually well laden. I
baptized, in the village where we remained a few
days, some sick children who, as I believe, are now


* We have not been able to find this map. [Rochemonteix. ]


138 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


Se eee et ee SS TE a nee


qui sont maintenant devant Dieu, comme je crois; je
confessai des chrestiens Hurons qui y estoient, nous
fismes des présens et en regumes de réciproques. Je
suis sur le point d’y retourner pour y passer l’hyver,
et ne revenir, sz se n'y [451] meurs, qu’au mois de juin
de l’an prochain; l’affaire se traite maintenant aux
3 riviéres, que si on ne m’y envoyait pas maintenant,
ce seroit, Dieu aydant, pour le printemps. Mais je
voys les affaires bien disposées pour partir bientot et
notre R. P. Superieur y est bien porté; il n’y a que
mes lAchetés et mes miséres qui forment de puissants
obstacles au dessein que Dieu a dessus moy et sur ce
pays. Priez le, mon R. P., qu’il me fasse selon ce
qu’il désire, et que je sois un homme selon son cceur,
det mihi dominus latitudinem cordis sicut arenam que est
in littore maris. Qu’il élargisse un peu mon pauvre
coeur qui est si étroit, et que par l’expérience du
passé et des profusions de ses bontés et miséricordes
dessus moi, j’'apprenne 4 me confier totalement en
luy, estant trés assuré qu’il ne se retirera pas pour
me laisser tomber, quand je me jetterai amoureuse-
ment dans les bras de sa divine et paternelle provi-
dence. N.S. nous a fait un beau présent que la
paix; priez sa divine bonté qui nous l’a faite, qu’elle
continue, car c’est d’elle que nous en espérons 1’a-
chévement. Cette paix jointe a la traitte que le pays
a maintenant, fait qu’il change de face notablement,
qu'il croit en nombre d’habitants et que tout s’ad-
doucit. Il ne paroist plus si rude qu’auparavant et
on connoit par expérience qu’il peust porter de bons
bleds et autres commodités pour la vie, principale-
ment cet endroit de Montréal ott nous sommes, qui
est bien plus doux et tempéré que Québec; aussi est-


1645-46] JOGUES TO CASTILLON 139
ee a an eeennnes


with God. I confessed some Huron christians who
were there, to whom we made presents and received
some in return. I am about to go back there to pass
the winter, and not to return, unless I [451] de there,
until the month of June next year. The matter is
now being discussed at 3 rivers; they think that, if I
am not sent there now, I shall be, God helping, in
the spring. But I see considerable preparations made
for an early departure, and our Reverend Father Su-
perior is favorably inclined to it. It is only my own
cowardice and bodily weakness which form powerful
obstacles to the designs God has for me and for this
country. Pray him, my Reverend Father, that he
will make of me what he desires, and that I may be a
man after his own heart, det mihi dominus latitudinem
cordis sicut arenam que est in littore maris. Would
that he would somewhat enlarge my poor heart,
which is so narrow; and that by the experience of
the past, and by the abundance of his goodness and
mercy toward me, I may learn to trust myself entire-
ly to him, being very sure that he will not draw back
and let me fall, when I shall cast myself lovingly
into the arms of his divine and paternal providence.
Our Lord has made us a noble gift in giving us
peace; pray his divine goodness, which has given it
to us, that it may continue, for it is from this good-
ness that we shall hope for the fulfillment of this
prayer. This peace, together with the trade which
the country now has, causes a notable change in its
appearance, an increase in the number of inhabitants,
and greater comfort in all respects. The country
no longer seems as rough as before; and we know
through experience that it can produce good wheat
and other necessaries of life,— especially this locality


140 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 28


Oe a ee


il au milieu du tempérament, savoir est a 45 degrés.
Plus de 80 canots hurons viennent de descendre avec
quantité de pelleteries, ce qui fait espérer une année
encore meilleure que la précédente qui estoit fort
bonne. Je ne sais pas si cela ne donnera pas dans la
veiie de Messieurs de la Compagnie, qui a peine
pouvoient-ils fournir aux embarquements, quand ils
avoient la traitte. C’est un bon rencontre que Dieu
adonné la paix dans ce changement qui est fort
avantageux pour le pays. Dieu la fasse croistre en
bénédictions spirituelles encore plus qu’en tempo-
relles et si Magnificat quictem, magnificet et letitiam,
mais principalement qu’il répande une abondance de
son Saint-Esprit sur ceux qui travaillent au spirituel
de ces contrées. C’est ce dont je supplie V. R. de
prier N.S., et de vous souvenir nommément a l’au-
tel d’un pauvre prestre, qui est 4 la veille d’estre 8
ou g mois sans sacrifice. Ce me sera un surcroit
d’obligation de luy estre plus que [452] jamais, mon
R. Pére, son trés humble et obéissant serviteur selon
Dieu.
Is. JOGUES.


A Montréal ce 12 sept. 1646.


Je partirai dans 2 ou 3 jours pour le voyage des
Iroquois.
Encore pour vie tout en N.S.


2i.sept.aux)3 Rivieres:


1645-46] JOGUES TO CASTILLON 141


of Montréal, where we are, which is much milder
and more temperate than Québec; besides it is in a
middle latitude, namely, 45 degrees. More than 80
huron canoes have just come down bearing a quan-
tity of skins, which gives hopes of a still better year
than the preceding one, which was very good. Ido
not know whether this will catch the eyes of the
Gentlemen of the Company, who could scarcely fur-
nish shipping when they had the trade. It is a for-
tunate occurrence that God has bestowed the peace
with this change, which is very advantageous to the
country. May God make it grow in spiritual bless-
ings even more than in temporal, and if Magnificat
quietem, magnificet et letitiam; but principally may
he bestow an abundance of his Holy Spirit upon those
who labor for the spiritual interests of these coun-
tries. It is this for which I beg Your Reverence to
entreat Our Lord, and especially to remember at the
altar a poor priest, who is about to remain 8 or 9
months without mass. It will be to me an increase
of obligation to be, more than [452] ever, my Rev-
erend Father, your very humble and obedient servant
in God,
IsAAC JOGUES.


Montréal, this 12th of September, 1646.


I shall depart in 2 or 3 days for the Iroquois jour-
ney.
Still, for life, all in Our Lord.
September 21, at 3 Rivers.


Estreines


142 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28
S022) US ee ee eee


Journal des Péres Jésuites, en l’année
1646.


IANUIER 1646.


N salua Mons'. le Gouuerneur scauoir
() la soldatesque auec leur arquebuse, Ité
les Habitans en corps: il nvf preuint

& estoit icy a 7. h. pour saluer tous nos pp.
qu’il demanda les vns apres les autres: ie
l’allé saluer apres la grande messe: (vne autre
fois il le faut preuenir) Mons*. giffar aussy nvf
vint voir & les religieuses enuoyerent les
lettres de grand matin p*. faire leur Compli-
ment; & les Vrsulines force belles estreines
auec bougies, chapelets, crucifix &c. & sur le
disner deux belles pieces de tourtiere. le
leur enuoyé deux Images de S‘. Ignace & de
St. fr. Xauier en email: on donna a Mons*'.
Giffar vn liure du p. bonnet de la vie de fire
Seign’. a Mons’. des Chastelets, vn des petits
tomes de Drexellivf de A®ternit®. a Mons".
bourdon vne lunette de galilée ou il y auoit
vne boussole, & a d’autres des reliquaires
Chapelets Medailles Images &c. on donna vn
Crucifix a celle qui blanchit le linge de 1’E-
glise. 4. mouchoirs a la femme d’Abraha &
a luy vne bouteille d’eau de vie & a d’autres


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 143


Journal of the Jesuit Fathers, in the year
1646.


JANUARY, 1646.


HEY saluted Monsieur the Governor,—
Ap to wit, the soldiery with their arque-
buses; /tem, the Habitans in a body.

He forestalled us, and was here at 7 o’clock
to greet all our fathers, for whom he inquired,
one after another; I went to greet him after
high mass; (another time we must anticipate
him). Monsieur giffar also came to see us, and
the nuns sent letters early in the morning, to
offer their Compliments. The Ursulines also
sent many beautiful New-year’s gifts, with
tapers, rosaries, crucifix, etc.; and, toward
the dinner, two handsome pieces of pastry. I
sent them two Images of St. Ignace and
St. francois Xavier in enamel. We gave
Monsieur Giffar a book of father bonnet’s
about the life of our Lord; to Monsieur des
Chastelets one of the little volumes of Drexel-
lius de 4iternitate; to Monsieur bourdon a
galilean telescope, in which there was a com-
pass; and to others, reliquaries, Rosaries,
Medals, Images, etc. We gave a Crucifix to
the woman who washes the Church linen; 4
handkerchiefs to the wife of Abraham,” and
to him a bottle of brandy; and to others some
little books of devotion: two handkerchiefs to


New-year’s gifts.


Deudons extraordin.


Saluts des Jeudys.


.
&vc


present de mr. be
gouuernr.


Traitem,. des MM.
hospital.


four des roys.


144 DE Sie Peel O INS DEES JESUITES [ Vou. 28


quelques liurets de deudon, deux mouchoirs
a robert hache & puis deux autres qu’il de-
manda. Ie fus voir M. giffar, M. Couillar, &
Madamoys. de repentigny: les Vrsulines
m’enuoyerent prier que ie les allassent voir
deuant la fin de la Iournée, i’y allé & salué
aussy Mad. de la pelleterie qui enuoya Es-
treines ie pense obmettre cela & il n’est pas a
propos de l’obmettre. Ie ne donné rien le
soir d’auparauant aux Litanies, mais le Jour
ie donné a nos pp & ff. ce. que ie peus, & ce
que ie pensé leur pouuoir estre aggreable.
T’auois donné au p. de Quen auparauant p*.
Sillery tout ce qu’il iugea a propos de ce que
i’auois en ma chambre particul. p™. le p. masse.

Pour entretenir la deudon le reste de l’hy-
uer, on declara que les saluts du St. Sacrement
se feroient le Ieudy a la paroisse, & les festes
& Dimanches aux maisons religieuses entre
quatre & cinq: outre la deudon ordinaire des
Samedys a la paroisse; depuis Noel iusques a
la purificaon les Vrsulines faisoient le salut a
lavCresche.

le 3. ou quatre de Ianuier M. le Gouuerneur
enuoya 3. chapons & 6. pigeons.

le 5. au soir M. Giffar donna vne bouteille
d’hypocras, les M. hospitalieres vn gasteau
& 6 Chandeles de Cire & le lendemain elles
enuoyerent vn beau disner.

le 6 Iour des roys il n’y eut point de pain


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 145


robert hache and then two more that he asked
for. I went to see Monsieur giffar, Monsieur
Couillar, and Madamoyselle de repentigny.
The Ursulines sent to beg that I would go to
see them before the end of the Day; I went
thither and also greeted Madame de la pelle-
terie, who sent New-year’s gifts: I came near
omitting that, and it is not proper to omit it.
I gave nothing the evening beforehand, at
the Litany; but on the Day itself I gave to
our fathers and brethren what I could, and
what I thought might be agreeable to them.
I had previously given father de Quen for Sil-
lery everything that he judged suitable, from
what I had in my private room, for father
masse.

To maintain devotion during the remainder
of the winter, it was declared that the bene-
dictions of the Blessed Sacrament should be
on Thursday at the parish church, and on
feasts and Sundays at the religious houses,
between four and five,—besides the ordinary
Saturday devotion at the parish church. From
Christmas until the purification, the Ursu-
lines made the benediction before the Manger.

On the 3rd or fourth of January, Monsieur
the Governor sent 3 capons and 6 pigeons.

At evening on the 5th, Monsieur Giffar gave
a bottle of hippocras; the hospital Mothers, a
cake and 6 Wax Candles; and the next day
they sent a fine dinner.

On the 6th,—the Day of the kings,—there
was no bread consecrated, and not until the
Sunday following. The two churchwardens


Devotions extraordz-
nary.
Thursday benedzc-
tions, etc.


Present from mon-
Sieur the governor.


Entertainment from
the hospital Mothers.


Epiphany.


Nouuelles des habz-
tions d’en haut


brutt & conseil
a’ Importance, qui
aboutit a rien.


146 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


benit, mais seulemt. le Dimanche d’apres,
tous les deux marguillers le firent ensemble,
scauoir M. des Chastelets & M. Giffar; & puis
on le donna a M. Maheu la plvf proche mai-
son sur le Costeau de St. geneuieue p*. conti-
nuer.

le 8 arriua vn Huron nommé Tandihetsi
des 3. riu. qui apporta lettres de Montreal de
richelieu & des 3. riuieres qui contenoient en
substance qu’a Montreal tout se portoit bien,
& qu’il y auoit quatre Cabanes de sauuages.
qu’aux 3. riu. il y en auoit 12. mais que le
meslange des fideles auec des Infideles &
Apostats y estoit tousiours fascheux: que les
Anniehronons qui y estoient en estoient partis
p’. s’en retourner; qu’ils auoient esté poursui-
uis par Vn Algonquain enyuré deau de vie
dont ceux qui l’auoient traitée auoient esté
mis a de grosses amendes, qu’on n’auoit pu
empescher que l’yurongne ne donnast vn coup
de baston a vn Annieronon, qui s’en plei-
gnist encores en partant, les Algonq. les vou-
loient retenir par force iusques au retour de
Cousture, mais nos PP. l’empescherent disant
qu’ils n’estoient point captifs mais libres, &
que le traité de paix ne paroissoit point en-
cores rompu vn d’entr’eux resta qui deuint
comme possedé a ce que 1’on disoit.

Ce huron Tandihetsi ne vint pas expres p*.
apporter des lettres, mais p’. inuiter Atironta
qui hyuernoit icy & estoit logé a l’hospital,


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 147


prepared it together,—to wit, Monsieur des
Chastelets and Monsieur Giffar; and then
they gave it to Monsieur Maheu, the nearest
house on the Costeau de St. genevieve,® to
proceed with it thence.

On the 8th, a Huron named Tandihetsi ar-
rived from 3 rivers; he brought letters from
Montreal, from richelieu and from 3 rivers,
which contained, in substance, that all was
well at Montreal, and that four Cabins of sav-
ages were there; that at 3 rivers there were
12 of these, but that the mingling of the faith-
ful with Infidels and Apostates there was
always injurious. They informed us that
the Anniehronons who were there had gone
away, to return home; that they had been
pursued by An Algonquain, drunken with
brandy for which those who had supplied it
to him had been heavily fined; that they had
not been able to prevent the drunken man
from dealing a blow with a club to an Annie-
ronon, who still complained of it on going
away. The Algonquains wished to detain him
forcibly until Cousture’s return, but our Fa-
thers prevented this, saying that these were
not captives, but free; and that the treaty of
peace was apparently not yet broken. One
of them stayed behind, and became like one
possessed, according to what they said.

This huron Tandihetsi did not come ex-
pressly to bring letters, but to invite Atiron-
ta, who was wintering here, and was lodged
at the hospital, to come to the Council at 3
rivers,—on the part of Annerahwy and of


News from the upper
settlements.


Important rumor
and council, which
ends in nothing.


148 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 28


de venir au Conseil aux 3 riu. de la part d’An-
nerahty & de ceux de sa nation parens d’A-
tironta ou des Arendaer. le suiet du Conseil
fut publié par touts les Algonq. & estoit tel;
les Annier. au nombre de 3. ou 4. s’en retour-
nant parlerent en confiance a Tandihetsi qui
les accompagnoit, & luy dirent le secret de
leur pays scauoir qu’on n’y vouloit point de
paix auec les Atichavata, si bien auec les Hu-
rons & les fran¢ois; que les francois y auoient
consenti, & qu’en suite on n’atendoit plvf que
l’occasion d’exterminer les Aticha¥ata, & que
300. Annier. pouroient bien venir a la my-
febur. p". l’exection de ce dessein.

Tandihetsi ayant quitté les Annier. a riche-
lieu poursuit son chemin iusques a Montreal,
& donne aduis de cecy a Annerahsy qui vint
aux 3. riu. & deputa celuy-cy p*. venir querir
Atironta.

le mesme Tandihetsi adioustoit que M. de
la poterie ayant entendu la Confirm4on de cela
par l’Annier. qui restoit aux 3. riu. il auoit
assemblé le Conseil des Algonq. qui sont la,
& leur auoit declaré le tout affin qu’ils pris-
sent garde a leurs affaires; ce qui estoit admi-
rable la dedans estoit que nos PP. ne nvf
mandoient rien de tout cela.

Mais le plvf considerable estoit qu’erat
fundamenti in re: Vbi enim ista a nobis st.
relata a me silicet & P. de Quen, D. Guberna-
tori, ipse nobis toti negotii aperuit, scilicet


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 149


those of his nation who were kinsmen of Ati-
ronta or of the Arendaeronons. The reason
for the Council was published by all the Al-
gonquains, and was as follows: the Anniero-
nons, to the number of 3 or 4, while return-
ing, spoke in confidence to Tandihetsi, who
was accompanying them, and told him the
secret of their country,—to wit, that no peace
was desired with the Atichawata, but it was
desired with the Hurons and the french; that
the french had consented thereto, and that
consequently nothing but the opportunity
was now awaited for exterminating the Ati-
chawata, and that 300 Annieronons could
certainly come by the middle of february for
the execution of this plan.

Tandihetsi, having left the Annieronons at
richelieu, continued his way as far as Mont-
real, and gave notice of this to Annerahwy,
who came to 3 rivers, and commissioned this
man to come in quest of Atironta.

The same Tandihetsi added that Monsieur
de la poterie, having heard a Confirmation of
that through the Annieronon who remained
at 3 rivers, had assembled the Council of the
Algonquains who are there, and had declared
to them the whole matter, to the end that
they should look to their affairs. What was
surprising therein was that our Fathers sent
us no word of all that.

But the most important was that,— erat
fundamentum in re: Ubt enim ista a nobts sunt
relata, a me sctlicet et Patre de Quen, Domino
Gubernatori, ipse nobis totum negotium aperuit,


depart d’ Atironta


150 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Wox. 28


superiori zstate di venere legati Annier. ct
Cousture tractaturi de pace, cii pala multa
dixissent & fecissent, petierunt dux scil. eor™
cognominatus le crochet vt singulari congressu
sibi liceret D. gub™. alloqui; habebat insig-
ne munvf faciendi D. Gubernat'. vt pro se
ttum. & pro Huronib. pacé vellet, Algong®.
in medio relinqueret: hzc vbi resciuit Onon-
tio ne videre quidé voluit tale munvf nec passvf
é extrahi, & dixit ré non éS possibilé: gra-
uiter tulit hance repulsa le crochet, & pax ex
inde visa é nutare, hec vbi vidit D. gub. & P.
Vimont sup. & p. le Jeune censuerunt rem
mitiganda, & 2°. priuato congressu in quo
sicut & in priori erant ttm. d. gub. le Crochet
& Cousture, dixit d. gub. duo és Algong. g™.
Vni simile nobis Xstiani intelligebantur;
alteri dissimile; sine priorib. nobis certi és
pacé non facere: de posteriorib. ipsos és d7°s
suarti actionai, nec nobis ita esse coniunctos
sicut & priores: vt dicttii a d™° Gub’. Ita &
forte peiori rade [z.e., ratione] relat suis a
legato, qd. ab 6ib. Annier. in sua patria rescité
ab his exeuntib. propalatti €; sed merito a
gallis negatt é.

Atironta partit d’icy le 12. de Ianu. & s’en
alla auec Acharo & Tandihetsi, il laissa sa
femme & son fils a Vhospital, il fut equippé
de toute piece luy & Iaques ils eurent cha-
qu’vn vn Tapabor, des raquettes, victuailles,
&c partie du magasin partie de l’hospital &c.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 151


scilicet: superiori estate, dum venere legatt An-
nieronenses cum Cousture tractaturi de pace, cum
palam multa dixissent.et fecissent, petierunt, dux
scilicet eorum cognominatus ‘le crochet,” ut sin-
gulart congressu stbi liceret Dominum guberna-
torem allogui; habebat insigne munus faciendum
Domino Gubernatori, ut pro se tantum et pro
Huronibus pacem vellet, Algongquinos in medio
relingueret. Hac ubt rescivit Onontio, ne videre
quidem volurt tale munus, nec passus est extrahi,
et dixit rem non esse possibilem. Graviter tulit
hance repulsam le crochet, et pax ex inde visa est
nutare. Hac ubt vidit Dominus gubernator, et
Pater Vimont, superior, et pater le Jeune, censue-
runt rem mitigandam, et 2a0 privato congressu, in
quo sicut et in priori erant tantum dominus guber-
nator, le Crochet, et Cousture, dixit dominus guber-
nator duo esse Algonquinorum genera,—Unum
simile nobis, Christiant intelligebantur,; alterum
adisstmile. Sine prioribus nobis certum esse pacem
non facere,; de posterioribus ipsos esse dominos sua-
rum actionum, nec nobis tta esse conjunctos sicut et
priores. Ut dictum a domino Gubernatore Ita
et forte pejort ratione relatum suis a legato; quod
ab omnibus Anntieronensibus in sua patria rescitum
ab his exeuntibus propalatum est, sed merito a
gallis negatum est.

Atironta left here on the 12th of January,
and went away with Acharo and Tandihetsi;
he left his wife and his son at the hospital.
He was equipped with every requisite; he
and Jaques each had a Storm-cap, snowshoes,
victuals, etc..— partly from the warehouse,
partly from the hospital, etc.


Departure of
A ttronta.


Ll’ Annter. demande
de s’en aller.


Enfant Estouffé


Ssauuages vont ala
chasse.


Nouueaute touchant
le pain benzt


152 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Nou. 28


En ce mesme temps 1’Annierohron qui
restoit demanda son congé, il luy auoit esté
donné p*. s’en retourner a son pays auec son
compagnon des 3. riu. qui le demandoit p*. s’en
retourner de Compagnie, mais le p. de Quen
ayant donné aduis que les Algonq. de Sillery
estoient p'. luy iotier vn mauuais tour passant
par leur quartier, M. le Gouu. trouua bon de
l’arrester & il fut remis ou magazin p’. y de-
meurer la compagnie de la femme d’Atironta
a Vhospital ne pouuant estre que dangereuse.

La nuit du 10. ou 11. de Ianuier fut estouffé
dans le lict vn petit enfant de 4. moys fils de
la niepce de Mathurin gangnon.

depuis le 15. iusques au 21. les sauuages
partirent p*. s’en aller a la chasse resterent a
Sillery enuiron 22. sauuages; que l’hospital &
nvf PP. entreprirent d’assister, ils demeure-
rent partie proche de l’hospital partie a Sille-
ry, & furent assistés de plusieurs endroits
mais sur tout de Sillery & de l’hospital.

le Dimanche deuant la 7¢*. Madame Marso-
let deuant faire le pain benit desira le presen-
ter auec le plvf d’apareil qu’elle pouroit; elle
y fit mettre vne toilete, vne couronne de bouil-
lons de gaze ou de linge a l’entour, elle desi-
roit y mettre des cierges & des quarts d’esevf
aux Cierges au leu d’escu d’or qu’elle eut
bien desiré y mettre, mais voyant qu’on ne
luy vouloit point permettre, elle ne laissa pas


1645-46] /OURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 153


At this same time, the Annierohron who
stayed behind asked for his dismissal; it had
been granted him, in order to return to his
own country with his companion of 3 rivers,
who also asked leave to go, that they might
return in Company. But—father de Quen
having given notice that the Algonquains of
Sillery were intending to play him an evil trick,
while passing through their district Mon-
sieur the Governor found it desirable to stop
him, and he was sent back to the warehouse
to remain there, as the company of Atironta’s
wife at the hospital could only be dangerous.

In the night of the roth or 11th of Janu-
ary, a little child of 4 months was smothered
in bed,—a son of Mathurin gangnon’s niece."

From the 15th to the 21st, the savages de-
parted to go to the chase; there remained at Sil-
lery about 22 savages, whom the hospital and
our Fathers undertook to assist. They lived
partly near the hospital, partly at Sillery, and
were assisted from several quarters, but es-
pecially from Sillery and from the hospital.

On the Sunday before Septuagesima, Ma-
dame Marsolet, having to prepare bread for
consecration, desired to present it with the
greatest possible display; she had it furnished
with a toilet,— a crown of gauze or linen puffs
around it. She wished to add candles, and
quarter-écus at the Tapers, instead of the
gold €cus pieces which she would indeed
have desired to place thereon; but seeing that
we were not willing to allow her this, she
nevertheless had it carried with the toilet and


The Annteronon asks
to go away.


Child Smothered.


Savages go to the
chase.


Innovations regarda-
ing the consecrated
bread.


Pierre boucher.


votage du p. de Quen
chez M. de Chauigny.


retour a’ Atironta


commencemt. de re-
muement entre les
habitans.


154 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 28


de le faire porter auec la toilete & la Coronne
de bouillons; mais deuant que le benir ie fis
tout oster & le benis auc la mesme simplicité
que i’auois fait les precedens & particul. celuy
de M. le Gouuerneur, crainte que ce change-
mt. n’aportast de la Ialousie & de la Vanité.

le 23. arriua Pierre boucher, & Toupin son
beau frere, auec vn Annier. des 3. riu. qui
yenoit voir son compagnon & le venoit querir;
ils aporterent lettres & Confirmoient que tout
ce qu’auoit dit le Huron Tandihetsi estoit
faux au moins pt’. la plvf part.

le 25. partit le P. de Quen p’. aller chez M.
de Chauigny a l’occasion de son seruit". ma-
lade; & en outre p*. leur faire gangner le
Iubilé & assister spirituellem'. la famille; ro-
bert hache accompagna le pere, & vn Chirur-
gien & deux autres soldats y allerent aussy de
Comp*.

le 27. retourna Atironta & Acharo: le
Conseil p™. lequel il estoit allé aboutit a rien,
chaqu’vn nioit auoir esté autheur des bruits &
en reiettoient la faute sur son Compagnon

le dernier de Ianuier retourna le p. de Quen,
qui raporta p’. nouuelle que M. de Chauigny
auoit pensé mourir aussy bien que son serti-
teur a son retour d’icy a faute d’auoir assez
de monde p’. trainer sa traisne.

Sur la fin de ce moys les petits habitans
sembloient se vouloir mutiner contre ceux qui
auoient les charges & offices; on tenoit M.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 155


the Crown of puffs. However, before conse-
crating it, I had all that removed, and blessed
it with the same simplicity that I had observed
with the preceding portions, especially with that
of Monsieur the Governor,— fearing lest this
change might occasion Jealousy and Vanity.

On the 23rd, Prerre boucher 8 arrived, and
Toupin his brother-in-law,— also an Anniero-
non from 3 rivers, who came to see his com-
panion and take him away. They brought
letters and Confirmed the idea that everything
which the Huron Tandihetsi had said was
false,—at least, in the main.

On the 25th, Father de Quen set out to go
to Monsieur de Chavigny’s, on account of his
sick servant,—and, besides, to have them gain
the Jubilee, and to be of spiritual assistance
to the family; robert hache accompanied the
father, and a Surgeon and two others, sol-
diers, also went thither in their Company.

On the 27th, Atironta and Acharo returned;
the Council, for the sake of which he had
gone, ended in nothing; each one denied hav-
ing been the author of the rumors, and cast
back the blame upon his Companion.

On the last of January, father de Quen
returned; he reported, by way of news, that
Monsieur de Chavigny, as well as his servant,
had come near dying upon his return from
here, for want of having enough people to
draw his sledge.

Toward the end of this month, the petty
habitans seemed disposed to rebel against
those who had the public duties and offices;


Pierre boucher.


Father de Quen’s
journey to Monsieur
de Chavigny’ s.


Attronta’s return.


Beginning of a ats-
turbance among the
habitans.


Marsolet et Maheu.


feste de la Chande-
leur.


156 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


Marsolet ‘& surtout la femme & M. Maheu
autheurs de cela; le tout fut apaisé par M. le
Gouuerneur; ces menus habitans auoient tort,
n’y ayant aucun fondement raisonable en leur
pleinte: ils disoient que M. des Chastelets
commis g™! faisoit trop bonne cheire &c. Vn
Ieune homme de chez M. le Gouuerneur nom-
mé M. robineau se porta p’. les mescontens;
de la vinrent bien des peines & des paroles &
des mescdtentemens on fit des pasquains:
Mons’. le Gouverneur ayant fait punion des
coulpables, tout fut apaisé.


FEBURIER. 1646.


A la purificaon on disposa trois pains de
bougie en 115. pieces qui furent benistes auec
6.. chandeles. de, Cire, \.& (deux ciervess des
deux Cierges vn seruit p’. le prestre qui disoit
la messe, l’autre fut porté par vn de nos ff. en
surplis a M'. le Gouuerneur a sa place & apres
que ce frere & vn autre de nos ff qui seruoit
aussy en surplis auec luy eurent pris deux des
chandeles de cire selon les ceremonies des
rubriques; apres donc le Cierge presenté a M.
le Gouuerneur on donna a celuy qui distribue
le pain beny, vn petit panier ou estoient les
115. pieces qui furent distribuées a tout le
monde qui estoit 14; il n’y en eut pas assez,
mais cela fut fort aprouué & alla bien; on les
auertit apres la benediction chantée d’estein-


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 157


Monsieur Marsolet, and especially his wife,
and Monsieur Maheu were accounted the
authors of that; but the whole trouble was
quieted by Monsieur the Governor. These
paltry habitans were in the wrong, having no
reasonable foundation for their complaint;
they said that Monsieur des Chastelets, gen-
eral agent, was living too high, etc. <A
Young man from Monsieur the Governor’s
house, named Monsieur robineau, was on the
side of the malcontents,—thence arose many
difficulties, and offensive words, and dissatis-
factions; and pasquinades were composed.
Monsieur the Governor having punished the
guilty, everything became quiet.


FEBRUARY, 1646.


At the purification, we arranged three cakes
of candle-wax in 115 pieces, which were con-
secrated with 6 Wax candles and two tapers.
Of the two Tapers, one served for the priest
who was saying mass; the other was borne
Dy one of; our brethren; ia. surplice, im the
priest’s place, to Monsieur the Governor.
After this brother and another of our breth-
ren, who also served in surplice with him,
had taken two of the wax candles according to
the ceremonies of the rubrics, and had pre-
sented the Taper to Monsieur the Governor,
we gave to the one who distributes the conse-
crated bread a little basket, in which were
the 115 pieces, which were distributed among
all who were there. There were not enough
of these pieces, but the proceeding was much


MarsoletandMaheu.


Feast of Candlemas.


depart des Annie-
vOnons.


Attronta alachasse.


saluts aux Tours
L£ras.


158 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


dre leurs lumieres & les rallumer pt’. 1’ Euan-
gile & p*. l’Eleudon iusques apres la Comion
du prestre, ce que fut fait. Il é necessaire de
faire comme cela crainte de tomber dans les
Intrigues des preseances & preferences.

le 3°. s’en retournerent les deux Annier.
nommés l’vn soentiakonk qui auoit esté icy
long temps selon qu’il € marqué cy dessus;
Vautre ho,ou‘sta venu des 3. riu. depuis peu,
qui estoit venu querir son Compagnon ils fai-
soient estat de s’en retourner aux 3. riu. mais
on se doutit qu’il dusse passer outre; il y auoit
long temps qui faisoient instance p'. s’en re-
tourner, on eut bien de la peine de les arres-
ter iusques a ce Jour qui partirent enfin bien
aiustés de tout; ils se pleignirent toutesfois
qu’on ne leur auoit point donné de Couuer-
tures; l’vn & l’autre firent les endiablés p*.
se faire donner leur congé, l’vn aux 3. riu.
l’autre icy.

le 6. partit Atironta auec sa femme & son
petit mathieu & Iaques Acharo pt’. la chasse,
ils furent equippés de tout reuint le 16.

le 11. qui estoit le Dimanche gras on fut
aduerti de trois choses au prosne: la 17. qu’il
y auroit salut les 3. Iours de Quaresme
prenant: le Dimanche donc a la paroisse fut
exposé le St. Sacremt. des le commencemt. de
Vespre, & a l’issue on chanta Tanti ergo &c


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 159


approved and went well. They were noti-
fied, after the benediction had been sung, to
put out their lights, and to light them again
for the Gospel and for the Elevation, until
after the Communion of the priest,— which
was done. It is necessary to do thus, for fear
of falling into the Complications of prece-
dences and preferences.

On the 3rd, the two Annieronons returned
homeward,—the one, named soentiakonk,
who had been here for a long time, as was
noted above; the other, ho.ou‘sta, recently
come from 3 rivers, who had come to seek
his Companion. They were professing to
return to 3 rivers, but it was suspected that
they would pass beyond. For a long time
they had been urging that they might return;
it was very difficult to detain them until this
Day when they finally started, well furnished
with everything; they nevertheless com-
plained that no Blankets had been given
them. Both acted as if possessed, in order to
procure their dismissal,—the one at 3 rivers,
the other here.

On the 6th, Atironta left with his wife and
his little mathieu, and Jaques Acharo, for the
chase: they were fully equipped; they came
back on the 16th.

On the 11th, which was the Sunday before
Lent, three things were published at the
sermon: Ist, that there would be benediction
on the 3 Days of Shrovetide. On Sunday,
then, at the parish church the Blessed Sac-
rament was exposed at the beginning of


Departure of the
Annieronons.


Atironta goes hunt-
ng.


Benedictions on the
shrove Days.


SJestes de deudon icy
bas.


Particularités es-


clairczes pr. le Ieusne


du Quaresme.


160 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VOL. 28


& apres l’oraison du St. Sacrem'. quelques orai-
sons de penitence & puis les ordinaires du St.
Esprit, In gratiarii actioné, & pro deuotis ami-
cis: le lendemain entre trois & quatre on fit
le salut a l’hospital les religieuses commence-
rent le pange lingua & le magnificat & la
paroisse disoit l’autre verset, le magnificat fut
chanté en fauxbourdon cela reussit fort bien
la paroisse chanta 1’Antienne o sacri &c le
Mardy le mesme se fit aux Vrsulines excepté
qu’elles chanterent deuant le magnificat 1’ An-
tienne o sacri & nvf apres; pour signal de
partir de sa maison on sonna le 1. coup du
salut a la paroisse & le 2. aux maisons reli-
gieuses. le mardy nos pp. de Sillery vinrent
disner auec nvf, la Iournée é bien pre. p*. les
Inuiter.

la 2°. chose dont on aduertit fut que le mer-
credy des cendres, il n’y auoit point d’obli-
gaon de cesser le trauail, entendre la messe &
prendre des cendres soubs peine de p. m. sed
tantt sub veniali: & que tels Iours comme
encore celuy des morts le Ieudy Vendr. &
samedy st‘. estoient festes de deudon iusques
apres l’office Vbi Consuetudo aliud non In-
duxit, nihil a. aliud hic induxit.

La 3°. fut de satisfaire a toutes les difficul-
tés sur le Ieusne du Quaresme; ce qui se fit
en lisant ce qu’en a le petit bertaut.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 161


Vespers; and at the end was sung the ZJantum
ergo, etc.; and, after the prayer of the Blessed
Sacrament, some penitential prayers, and then
the usual prayers to the Holy Ghost, Jn grati-
arum actionem, and pro devotis amicis. On the
next day, between three and four, the bene-
diction was held at the hospital: the nuns
began the pange lingua and the magnificat, and
the parish said the other verse. The magut-
ficat was sung in faux-bourdon,—that suc-
ceeded very well; the parish sang the Anthem
o sacrum, etc. On Tuesday, the same was
done at the Ursulines’, except that they sang
before the magnificat, the Anthem o sacrum,
and we after it. For signal to leave one’s
house, the ist stroke of the benediction was
rung at the parish church, and the 2nd at
the religious houses. On tuesday, our fathers
at Sillery came to dine with us; the Day was
very appropriate for Inviting them.

The 2nd thing of which they were in-
formed was, that on ash wednesday there
was no obligation to cease from work, to hear
mass, and to take ashes, under penalty of
peccatum mortale, sed tantum sub ventali: and
that such Days—as also that of all souls,
and Thursday, Friday, and saturday in holy
week —were feasts of devotion until after the
office, Ubi Consuetudo aliud non Induxit, nihil
autem aliud hic induxtt.

The 3rd was to satisfy all difficulties about
Fasting in Lent, which was done by reading
what the small manual of bertaut gives on
this subject.


Feasts of devotion
down here.


Details explained
concerning the Lent-
en Fast.


nouuelle de la mort
du p. Anne de note.


162 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


Le 12. retournant du salut de l’hospital, ie
fis rencontre de deux Hurons venant des trois
riuieres; qui rapportoient la nouuelle de la
mort du p. Anne de note: il partit de 3. riu. pt.
s’en aller a richelieu consoler & assister spiri-
tuellemt. la garnison le 30. de Ianuier en
compagnie de deux soldats & d’vn Huron: ils
coucherent a 6. leties au dessus des 3. riu.
mais le P. voyant ses compagnons vn peu pe-
sants & qui alloient difficilem'. a raquettes &
partant qu’ils [ne] pouroient y arriuer a temps
les quitta apres la minuit pour faire venir au
deuant d’eux & les soulager de leur traisne &
se mit en chemin a Ja lieur de la lune. mais
coe il fut auancé, le ciel se chargea & se mit a
neiger, ce qui luy derobant la veiie des Isles
& de tout il s’esgara sans se pouuoir retrou-
uer; ses compagnons qu’il auoit laissé arriués
qu’ils furent le 1%. du moys de febur. a riche-
feu furent bien estonnés de n’y point voir le
Pere, on le suit a la piste de ses raquettes &
en fin on le trouue quatre lieiies au dessvf de
tichelieu, a genoux dans vn creux de neige
les bras en croix & les yeux esleués au Ciel,
son chapeau & ses raquettes proche de luy: il
fut ramené sur vne traisne par vn nommé Ca-
ron, m*. valet p". lors de richelieu qui l’auoit
est€é chercher auec deux Hurons qui se com-
porterent dignem*. en cette occasion, le same-
dy 3°. de febur. & mené aux 3. riu. le 5. ou


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 163


On the 12th, while returning from the News of the death of
benediction at the hospital, I met two Hurons /@/her Anne de noue.
coming from three rivers, who reported the
news of the death of father Anne de notie. He
started from 3 rivers to go to richelieu, to
console and spiritually assist the garrison, on
the 30th of January, in company with two
soldiers anda Huron. They lay down for the
night, 6 leagues above 3 rivers; but the Fa-
ther, seeing that his companions were rather
slow, and with difficulty making their way on
snowshoes, and that, consequently, they could
not reach their destination in time,— left them
after midnight, in order to send people to
meet them and relieve them of their sledge;
and he set forth dy the light of the moon. But,
as he proceeded, the sky became overcast,
and it began to snow; this shutting out from
his sight the Islands and all other objects, he
went astray, without being able to recover his
bearings. His companions whom he had left,
having arrived at richeliew on the 1st of the
month of february, were much astonished not
to see the Father there. They follow him
by the trail of his snowshoes, and at last they
find him, four leagues above richelieu,—
kneeling in a hollow of the snow, with his
arms crossed and his eyes raised to Heaven,
his hat and his snowshoes near him. He was
brought back on a sledge by one Caron,—
master-valet at richelieu just then, who had
gone to seek him on saturday, the 3rd _ of
february, with two Hurons, who conducted
themselves worthily on that occasion,—and


lour des cendres.


predicions du
Caresme


Office des morts py.
le pere de note par
les religzeuses.


164 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


il arriua le 7. & fut enterré le mesme Iour au
Cemetiere:

cette nouuelle donc estant arriués le lundy au
Soir, le mardy nvf dismes nos Messes & a la
fin vn De profundis: au Salut des Vrsulines
vn De profundis aussy:

le 14. Iour des Cendres, on sonna trois
coups p’. la grand Messe le 1°. a 6. h. qui fut
aussy le signal de la 1**. Messe basse of on fit
la benediction des cendres more solito societis.
le dernier a 7. h.; a l’issue de la grand messe
apres la Cénion on donna des Cendres. on
auoit esté auerti qu’elles ne se metroient ny
sur les Calottes ny sur les Coeffes des femmes
mais qu'il falloit presenter les cheueux, on y
manqua, mais il é facile au prestre de supleer
en les mettant dessoubs la Coiffe

Le mesme [our des Cendres on aduertit que
les mercredys il y auoit predicion en Caresme
aux Vrsulines & le Vendredy a l’hospital, &
ce sur les 7% auec la messe en suite: que p*.
ce Iour la predicféon se seroit aux Vrsulines
sur les 3. h. & qu’en suite les religieuses
selon leur deudon diroient solemnellemt. les
vespres des morts & le lendemain vne haute
messe de requiem p*. le p. de noiie; elles desi-
roient faire dauantage & entr’autres de chan-
ter les Vigiles. mais ie ne voulus permettre
sinon de les dire a voix basse: le mesme fut


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 165


on the 5th was taken to 3 rivers, where he
arrived on the 7th, and was buried the same
Day in the Cemetery.

This news, then, having arrived on monday
Evening, on tuesday we said our Masses, and
at the close a De profundis,—also a De profun-
dis during the Benediction at the Ursulines’.

On the 14th, Ash Wednesday, three strokes
were rung for high Mass,—the Ist at 6
o’clock, which was also the signal for the Ist
low Mass, at which the blessing of the ashes
took place, more solito societatis; the last, at 7
o’clock; at the end of high mass, after the
Communion, we gave Ashes. The people
had been notified that these would be placed
neither on the men’s Caps nor on the wom-
en’s Headdresses, but that it was necessary
to present the hair; this was neglected, but
it is easy for the priest to accomplish it by
putting the ashes under the Headdress.

On the same Ash Wednesday, notice was
given that on wednesdays there would be
preaching in Lent at the Ursulines’, and on
Friday at the hospital, and this about ¥% past
7, with mass following; that for this Day the
preaching would take place at the Ursulines’,
about 3 o’clock, and that afterward the nuns,
according to their devotion, would solemnly
say the vespers of the dead, and the next day
a requiem high mass for father de noiie. They
desired to do more, and, among other things,
to sing the Vigils; but I would not allow it,
except to say these in a low tone. The same
decision was made for the Hospital nuns. On


Ash Wednesday.


Lenten sermons.


Office of the dead for
father de note, by
the nuns.


retour des Hurons
aux 3. rtu. & leur
recopéce


baterie


Lustice d’un blas-
phemateur.


166 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vov. 28


arresté p™. les Hospitalieres. les Iours sui-
uans; sur la fin de la predicaon, il y eut quel-
que petit bout d’oraison funebre p*. le p. de
noiie. Ie preschois ce Caresme aux Vrsulines
les Mercredys & Dimanches, & le p. Vimont
les Vendredys a l’hospital & le p. Dendemare
les Dim.

Ce mesme Iour repartirent les Hurons qui
auoient aporté les lettres de la mort du P. de
notie en compagnie de Prerre boucher, & 'Tou-
pin & Gabr. du Clos: Tandihetsi eut vn tapa-
bor tout neuf Avenhas Catecumene de quoy
faire vne paire de chauffes le tout donné par
les Vrsulines & en outre chaqu’vn vn calumet
d’Estain: M. des chastelets Commis gnal au
Magazin leur fournit leur viures.

La nuit du Mardy gras au mercredy des
Cendres quelques hommes de 1’ hospital estant
venus visiter ceux de m. Couillar, vn de chez
m. Couillar nommé Iean le blane prit querelle
auec vn de ceux de l’hospital nommé Iaques
pairieu & apres quelques houspillades s’estant
separés, Iean le blanc accourt apres l’autre &
le pensa assommer sur la place a coups de bas-
ton, il auoit plusieurs trous a la teste. il en
garit, & lean le blanc condamné a la reparaon
du Ciuil; & au Cheualet;

le 15. fut mis sur le Cheualet vn Domesti-
que de M. Couillar blasphemateur public; il
reconnut sa faute, l’auoir bien merité, & vint


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 167


the following Days, toward the end of the
sermon, there was some little passage of
funeral prayer for father de noiie. I preached,
this Lent, to the Ursulines on Wednesdays
and Sundays; and, at the hospital, father Vi-
mont preached on Fridays, and father Dende-
mare on Sundays.

This same Day, the Hurons who had
brought the letters concerning the death of
Father de noiie departed in company with
Prerre boucher and Toupin, and Gabriel du
Clos.” Tandihetsi had a brand-new storm-
cap; Awenhas, a Catechumen, the materials
for making a pair of breeches; all was given
by the Ursulines. Each one had, besides, a
Pewter calumet; and Monsieur des chastelets,
general Agent at the Warehouse, furnished
them their provisions.

On the night of shrove Tuesday to Ash
wednesday, some men from the hospital hav-
ing come to visit those at monsieur Couil-
lar’s, one of monsieur Couillar’s, named Jean
le blanc, began to quarrel with one of those
from the hospital, named Jaques pairieu.
When they had been separated, after some
grappling and struggling, Jean le blanc ran
after the other, and came near beating him
to death on the spot, withaclub. Pairieu had
several gashes on his head, but recovered
from them; and Jean le blanc was sentenced
to make reparation, by the Civil authority,
and to mount the Chevalet.

On the 15th, a Domestic of Monsieur Couil-
lar’s, a public blasphemer, was put on the


Return of the
flurons to 3 rivers,
and thetr reward.


A fight.


Justice to a blas-
phemer.


Liberalités des rele-
Lteuses.


rer, Dim. du
Quaresme.


presens de M le
gouuern’.


Sauuages de Stllery.


Xstiennot sort de nie


Serutce.


retour de Cousture.


168 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


de soy mesme se confesser le soir ou le lende-
main.

Pendant les Iours gras les Vrsulines & par-
ticul. l’hospital nvf enuoyerent plusieurs fois
des pieces de four Vin d’Espagne &c.

le 1. Dimanche de Quaresme fut publiée
l’Indulgence des stations de rome qu’on pou-
uoit gangnera l’Eglise; & la copie des Indul-
gences de cette nature fut letie & affigée.

Simeon & la neigerie nos hommes de Sille-
ry vinrent icy trauailler p’. nvf trois sepmaines
durant ils s’en retournerent le 10. de Mars.

Mons’. le Gouuerneur enuoya pendant le
Quaresme du poisson fraits enuiron deux fois
la sepmaine; on luy enuoya deux fois plein
vn pot de terre d’oliues.

les sauuages de Sillery abandonnerent leur
maisons & toute la demeure des le commence-
m‘'. du moys & s’en vinrent demeurer asses
proche de Quebek.

Enuiron ce temps, Xstiennot Cuisinier aux
3. riuieres quitta nde seruice & fut mis au
fort, & a sa place le pere buteux Sup. aux 3.
riu. choisit qui il voulut de ceux du fort. Ce
Xstiennot fit tant du sol au fort qu’on le mit
sur le Cheualet of il se rompit.


1646. MARS.


Le 10. arriua des trois riuieres vn francois
& vn Huron oatentak apportant lettres &


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 169


Chevalet. He acknowledged his fault, saying
that he had well deserved punishment, and
came of his own accord to confess, that even-
ing or the next day.

During the shrove Days, the Ursulines,
and especially the hospital nuns, often sent
us pastries, Spanish Wine, etc.

On the 1st Sunday in Lent was published
the Indulgence of the stations of rome, which
one might gain at the Church; and the copy
of the Indulgences of this nature was read
and posted.

Simeon and la neigerie, our men at Sillery,
came here to work for us during three weeks;
they returned on the roth of March.

Monsieur the Governor sent fresh fish about
twice a week during Lent; we twice sent him
an earthen jar full of olives.

The savages of Sillery abandoned their
houses and the whole residence, at the begin-
ning of the month, and came to dwell quite
near to Quebek.

About this time, Chrestiennot, Cook at 3
rivers, left our service, and was put in the
fort; and in his place father buteux, Superior
at 3 rivers, chose one to his liking from those
of the fort. This Chrestiennot acted at the
fort as such a glutton, that he was put on the
Chevalet, on which he was ruptured.


1646, MARCH.


On the 1oth, a frenchman and*a Huron,
oatentak, arrived from three rivers, bring-
ing letters and news of the return of Cous-


Liberalities of the
NUNS.


rst Sunday in Lent.


Gafts of Monsieur the
fovernor.


Savages of Sillery.


Chrestiennot leaves
Our Service.


Return of Cousture.


depart d’ Atironta


Titulazre de la
chapelle de I’ hosft-
tal.


Oatentak


Mort de Vincent
Sauuage.


170 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


nouuelles du retour de Cousture auec 7.
Annier. & les Hurons qui estoient partis d’icy.
ils apportoient force presens p*. la Confirmaon
de la paix &c & entr’autres vn desadueu
manifeste des meurtres de l’Automne fait
par les Soriquois ou sokokiois.

Le lendemain qui estoit Dimanche on
exposa le St. Sacrement au Commécemt. de
vespres & dit on le Tanti ergo a la fin p*. le
salut in gratiari actioné.

le 13. partit Atironta & sa famille pr.
s’en retourner aux 3. riu. ils s’en allerent
chargés de biens, ils receurent & donnerent
contentemt. iusques au bout, on leur donna
leur Viatique au magazin, & partout ailleurs
force biens.

le 16. fut beniste la chapelle de l’hospital
au sang du fils de Dieu par le p. Vimont, le
samedy fut posée la pierre de marbre au
dessus de la porte qui en contient l’escriteau ;
& le Dimache de la passion choisy p’. la feste
de la dedicace ou Titulaire: on y alla apres
Vespres dire vn salut de la passion: vexilla,
Antiph. festi Exalt. magnificat, Aue regina &c.

Ce mesme iour partit oatentak & le francois
qui auoient apporté les nouuelles cy dessvf;
oatentak quitta le francois a Sillery.

le 14. mourut sainctem'. Vincent le sauuage
qui en l’Automne auoit esté surpris par les
Souriquois & laissé pour mort en mesme temps


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 171


ture, with 7 Annieronons and the Hurons
who had gone hence. They brought many
gifts for the Confirmation of the peace, etc.,;
and, among others, an explicit disavowal of
the murders in the Autumn, perpetrated by
the Soriquois or the sokokiois.

The next day, which was Sunday, we ex-
posed the Blessed Sacrament at the Begin-
ning of vespers and said the Tantum ergo at
the close, for the benediction i gratiarum
actionem.

On the 13th, Atironta and his family went
away, to return to 3 rivers. They went
away laden with goods; they received and
gave satisfaction even tothe end. Provisions
for the journey were given them at the ware-
house, and, everywhere else, abundance of
good things.

On the 16th, the chapel of the hospital was
blessed, in honor of the blood of the son of
God, by father Vimont; on saturday the
marble slab was put in position above the
door, containing the inscription; and passion
Sunday was chosen for the feast of the dedica-
tion or Titulary patron. We went thither
after Vespers to say a benediction of the pas-
sion,—the verilla, Antiphona festt Exaltationis,
magnificat, Ave regina, etc.

This same day, oatentak and the frenchman
who had brought the aforesaid news went
away; oatentak left the frenchman at Sillery.

On the 14th, piously died Vincent, the sav-
age, who in the Autumn had been surprised
by the Souriquois and left for dead at the


Departure of
Atironta.


Titulary patron of
the hospital chapel.


Oatentak.


Death of Vinceni, a
Savage.


| St. Loseph


172 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 28


qu’vn nommé robert excellent Xstien vn sien
nepueu & vn fils furent tues; la femme du
mesme Vincent eut la cheuelure enleuée, elle
s’en porta bien & assista constament son mary
iusques au bout: Vincent fut enterré au Cime-
tiere de Quebek of son feu Pere, mort aussy
saintem'., scauoir francois boulé vn des pre-
miers & excellens Xstiens auoit esté enterré
5. ou 6. ans auparauant.

le 18. veuille de St. Ioseph (laquelle veuille
tomboit le Dimanche de la passion selon que
dessvf) entre sept & huict du soir se fit le feu
de Ioye de la St. Ioseph; Mons’. le Gouuern’.
nvf vint querir, nv{ soupions. le p. Vimont
y alla qui fit mes excuses sur quelque Incom-
modité que i’auois. Mons’. le Gouuerneur
mit le feu les soldats firent 3 salués, & quatre
coups de Canon furent tirés; il y eut aussy
quelque fusée.

le 19. quand on sonna ]’Angelvf on tira'vn
coup de Canon; & ala messeal’Eleuaon trois
ou quatre auiec quelques salues de mousquets;
la grande messe se commenga sur les 10. h. &
les vespres ensuite; mais M. le Gouuern’. s’en
trouua Incommodé & trouua qu’il eut esté plvf
a propos de separer la messe du Vespres,
dire la messe a l’ordinaire & les vespres sur
les 11. heures: les Complies se dirent entre
deux & trois, le sermon ensuite & puis on alla
aux Vrsulines faire le salut de St. Ioseph, Iste
Confessor, hic vir despiciens, magnificat,


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 178


same time with one robert, an excellent Chris-
tian; his nephew and ason were killed. The
wife of this same Vincent had her scalp torn
off; she bore it well, and steadfastly assisted
her husband, even to the end. Vincent was
buried in the Cemetery of Quebek, where his
late Father, who had also died holily,—to
wit, francois boulé, one of the first and excel-
lent Christians,— had been buried 5 or 6 years
before.”

On the 18th, eve of St. Joseph (which eve
fell on passion Sunday, as above), between
seven and eight in the evening, St. Joseph’s
Bonfire was made. Monsieur the Governor
came to get us; we were at supper; father
Vimont went thither, and made my excuses,
because of some Inconvenience that hindered
me. Monsieur the Governor lit the fire; the
soldiers gave 3 salvos, and four Cannon shots
were fired; there were also some rockets.

On the 19th, when the Angelus was rung,
they fired one Cannon shot, and at the mass, —
at the Elevation,—three or four, with some
salvos of musketry. High mass began about
10 o’clock, and vespers followed; but Mon-
sieur the Governor was Inconvenienced by
this, and thought that it would have been
more suitable to separate mass from Ves-
pers,—to say mass as usual, and vespers
about 11 o’clock. Compline was said between
two and three; the sermon followed; and
then we went to the Ursulines’ to have the
benediction in honor of St. Joseph: Jste Con-
fessor, hic vir despiciens, the magnificat,— alternis


St. Joseph.


Sepmaine Saincte


2’ Annonciaon.


174 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


SP aa a a eee ee eer SES
alternis vocib. les religieuses & la paroisse;
puis le Tanta ergo pendant lequel on descen-
dit le St. Sacremt. & le reste a l’ordinaire

le Dimanche de rameaux qui estoit le 25.
de mars (& par consequent concouroit auec
1’ Annonciation), on ne prescha pas ala grande
messe, mais a l’issue de l’eau beniste, on
donna vn mot d’aduis sur la benediction des
rameaux & la distribfion qui s’alloit faire &
comme il les falloit tenir en main pendant la
passion p’. tesmoigner sa foy que cette mort
& passion n’estoit pas vne victoire par la mort
sur le sauueur du monde, mais plustost du
sauueur du monde sur la mort: ensuite on
chanta au leutrin ce qu’il y auoit a chanter
pendant quoy se fit la benediction du pain
benit & se chanta en suite toute la benedic-
tion des rameaus: la distribtion s’en fit comme
des chandeles a la chandeleur: & puis on
chanta Veni creator: pendant la passion ie
tenois mon rameau a la main gauche, ce qui
ne faut pas quand on la chante.

le soir apres vespres nvf dismes les litanies
de nde Dame en consideraon du Iour qui luy
estoit dedié, son Image fut mise au milieu de
1’Autel vtroqg. choro idé simul respondente.

les Vrsulines & Hospitalieres dirant les
Tenebres sur les 3. heures: les Hospitalieres
vn nocturne & laudes; les Vrsulines toutes
entieres.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 175


vocibus, by the nuns and the parish; then the
Tantum ergo, during which the Blessed Sacra-
ment was taken down; and the rest, as usual.

On palm Sunday, which was the 25th of
march (and consequently coincided with the
Annunciation), there was no sermon at high
mass; but at the end of the asperges we gave
a word of advice concerning the blessing of
the palms, and the distribution of them which
was about to be made, and how they must be
kept in the hand during the passion, in order
to testify one’s faith that this death and pas-
sion was not a victory for death over the
savior of the world, but rather for the savior
of the world over death. Then the choristers
sang what there was to be sung, during which
the blessing of the bread occurred. After
that, the whole blessing of the palms was
sung; the distribution of them took place as
with the candles at candlemas; and then we
sang the Veni creator. During the passion I
held my palm in the left hand, which is not
the rule when that is sung.

At evening, after vespers, we said the litany
of our Lady, in consideration of the Day,
which was dedicated to her; her Image was
placed at the middle of the Altar, utrogue
choro idem simul respondente.

The Ursulines and Hospital nuns said the
Tenebre about 3 o’clock,—the Hospital nuns,
a nocturn and lauds; the Ursulines, the full
office.

On Holy Thursday, the paradises were
made,— with us, at the Corner of the Altar,


floly Week.


The Annunciation.


176 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vov. 28


le Ieudy St. les paradis furent faits; chez
nvf au Coin de 1’Autel du costé de 1’ Epistre,
cela estoit bien: il y eut quelque manque aux
Hospitalieres en ce qu’il estoit en noir.

on commenga icy ce Iour la la messe a 74%
c’eft trop tost ilne 1l’a faut commencer qu’a
dix & demie, tant affin que la paroisse sonne
la derniere que parcequ’il é dauantage con-
forme au commun vsage. elle fut chantée.
il n’y auoit que nos ff. a seruir.

Il n’y eut point de salut chez nvf, c’estoit
assez qu’il y eut pour lors tenebres aux deux
maisons religieuses; peu communierét; il eut
esté souhaitable qu’il y en eut eu dauantage.

Il y eut lauement des pieds a l’hospital of
assista le p. Vimont M. des chastelets & autres
y lauement les pieds a 18. sauuages, qui
furent ensuite regales.

le Vendredy St. le p. Vimont commenca vn
peu apres 7. h. a prescher il finit apres 9. h.
ensuite on fit le seruice off la passion fut
chantée a trois scauoir, de M. de St. Sauueur
Euangeliste, & de M. le prieur qui faisoit la
synag. & de moy: ie pensé pour lors que le
p. de Quen eut mieux fait que M. de St. Sau-
ueur p’. cet article, mais non pas p*. le reste
du seruice: apres 1’ Adordon de la Croix M. de
St. Sauueur & M’. le prieur allerent au lutrein,
i’acheué le seruice auec nos deux ff. a l’Au-
tel; on retira la Croix & la reporta-t-on apres
le seruice: le tout fut fait a 11. h.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 177


on the Epistle side; that was a success.
There was some lack with the Hospital nuns,
as their paradise was in black.

On that Day, we began mass here at %
past 7. This is too soon; it ought not to be
begun till half-past ten,— both so that the
parish church may ring last, and also because
this is more conformable to the common
usage. It was sung; there were only our
brethren to serve it.

There was no benediction with us: it was
enough that there were /enebre at that time
at the two religious houses. Few received
communion: it would have been desirable
that there had been more.

The washing of feet took place at the
hospital, at which father Vimont was present.
Monsieur des chastelets and others washed
the feet of 18 savages there, who were after-
ward regaled with food.

On Good Friday, father Vimont began to
preach a little after 7 o’clock; he finished
after 9 o’clock. Then the service took place
at which the passion was sung by three
voices,—to wit, by Monsieur de St. Sau-
veur, Gospeller; by Monsieur the prior, who
represented the synagogue; and by me. I
thought at the time that father de Quen would
have done better than Monsieur de St. Sau-
veur, in this part, but not for the rest of the
service. After the Adoration of the Cross,
Monsieur de St. Sauveur and Monsieur the
prior went to the lectern; I finished the serv-
ice with our two brethren at the Altar; the


Pasque


salut ala quasi
modo.


178 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


le samedy St. le feu & sa benediction se
firent a la sacristie & le reste auec les mesmes
‘ministres que le Iour precedent; il me sembla
derechef que p". 1’Exultet le p. de Quen l’eut
mieux chanté; on ne parla point de l’Empe-
reur ny le Vendredy ny le Samedy: Ie fus
trouuer M. le Gouuern’. a sa place p*. com-
mencer par luy a donner de l’eau beniste des
fonds de baptesme: Ie manqué a dire vn petit
mot deuant la procession aux fonds pr". inui-
ter a prier Dieu p’. la benediction. on com-
menca vne heure trop tost, c’est assez de com-
mencer a g. heures, on commenga a8. on tira
au gloria plusieurs coups de Canon: les hos-
pitalieres sonnerent sur les 9. h. & hoc male.


1646 AURIL


le 1&. Jour estoit pasque qui fut fort beau:
ie fis ou plustost donné a la messe l’eau beniste
du Iour precedent.

I’Intimé le salut p*. les 3. festes le Iour de
pasque chez nvf, le lundy a Vhospital, & le
mardy aux Vrsulines. le 1°. Coup sonna ala
paroisse a 5. heures: on y chanta les litanies
du nom de Iesvf racourcies de la moitiée: 1’o
filii & regina cceli: apres les litanies ie dis
l’oraison du Iour; & a la fin de regina cceli
l’oraison qui luy est propre.

le 8. on fit le soir le salut en l’honneur de
n6e Dame de 1’Annonciaon de laquelle on


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 179


Cross was removed and carried back after the
service; all this occurred at 11 o’clock.

On Holy saturday the fire was made and its
blessing took place at the vestry, and the rest
with the same ministers as on the preceding
Day; it seemed to me again that, as for the
Exultet, father de Quen would have sung it
better. There was no mention of the Em-
peror, either on Friday or Saturday. I went
to find Monsieur the Governor in his place, in
order to begin with him in giving holy water
from the baptismal fonts. I omitted tosay a
brief word before the procession to the fonts,
to invite them to pray God for the blessing.
We began an hour too soon; it is enough to
begin at 9 o'clock, and we began at 8. At
the glorza several Cannon shots were fired; the
hospital nuns rang at 9 o’clock, et hoc male.


1646, APRIL.


The tst Day was easter, which was very
beautiful: I prepared, or rather gave, at mass
the holy water of the Day before.

I Announced the benediction for the 3
feasts,— on easter Day with us, on monday at
the hospital, and on tuesday at the Ursulines’.
The ist Bell rang at the parish church at 5
o’clock; there we sang the litany of the name
of Jesus, abridged by half, the o fizz, and the
regina celt. After the litany, I said the prayer
for the Day; and, at the end of the regina
cel, the prayer which belongs to it.

On the 8th, we made at evening the bene-
diction in the honor of our Lady of the


Easter.


Benediction at low-
sunday.


Mre. Tagues l’ her-
mite.


Viszte de la Coste
de beauport & de
richelieu


Peintures de


LE glise


Charités de M. le
gouuernr.


180 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo.. 28


faisoit l’office de lendemain; ce salut consista
aux Litanies de nde Dame & au regina Cceli.

Le 7. commenga a entrer a node seruice M.
Iaques surnommé lhermite. il estoit a 1’hos-
pital, il desiroit Instament d’en sortir; il nvf
fit instance par plusieurs fois de le receuoir
chez nvfa telle condition que l’on voudroit,
on le manda au p. buteux qui auoit besoin de
quelqu’vn il l’aggrea; on le retira donc chez
nvf auec l’aggrement de l’hospital iusques au
depart de quelque barque qui allast aux 3.
riu. mais auparauant on luy proposa par plu-
sieurs fois tout ce qu’on desiroit de luy scauoir
le p. de Quen & née f. liegeois il accepta
tout & ne voulut faire aucun marché faisant
profession de ne desirer que sa vie & son
entretien bien petitemt.

Le p. Vimont alla coucher a beauport le
Iour de Pasque & visita toute la coste & en
reuint le Ieudy: le p. buteux a richelictia
pasque fleurie.

La m. de 1l’Incarnaon Vrsuline employa
presque tout le Caresme a peintre deux pieces
d’Architecture pour accompagner le Taber-
nacle de la paroisse: Mons’. bourdon peignit
quelques marches.

Mons". le Gouuerneur ayant enuoyé plvf
que toutes les sepmaines du poisson frais,
Voctaue de pasque ayant receu deux oyes, il
nvf en enuoya vne. Nvf luy enuoyasmes
pendant le Caresme deux pots d’oliues &c.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 181


Annunciation, whose office was on the mor-
tow; this benediction consisted of the Litany
of our Lady, and of the regina Coli.

On the 7th, Master Jaques, surnamed ‘the
hermit,’’ began his entrance into our service.
He was at the hospital, but desired Urgently
to leave it; he repeatedly besought us to re-
ceive him with us on such terms as we chose.
He was referred to father buteux, who had
need of some one, and who received him; he
was then withdrawn to our house, with the
consent of the hospital, until the departure
of some bark bound for 3 rivers; but before-
hand we several times set forth to him all
that we desired of him,—to wit, father de
Quen and our brother liegeois. He accepted
everything, and would make no bargain,—
professing to desire only his living and his
maintenance on a very small footing.

Father Vimont went to stop over night at
beauport, on Easter Day, and visited the
whole coast, and came back on Thursday;
father buteux was at richelieu on palm
sunday.

The Ursuline mothers of the Incarnation
employed nearly the whole of Lent in paint-
ing two pieces of Architecture to match the
Tabernacle of the parish church; Monsieur
bourdon painted some steps.

Monsieur the Governor, who had sent fresh
fish more than once a week, having received
two geese on the octave of easter, sent one of
them to us. During Lent, we sent him two
jars of olives, etc.


Master Jaques the
hermit.


Vistt to the Coast of
beauport, and to
richelieu.


Church Pacntings.


Charities of Mon-
szeur the governor.


Sauuages a Ssllery.


saluts continués


Arriuée du p. p.
pitart & de Cous-
ture.


retour des Sauuages
de la chasse


Consultes


182 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nox. 28


Sauuages retournent loger a Sillery depuis
pasques. | |

Apres pasques on Intima la Continuaon des
saluts du St. Sacremt. les Ieudys iusques a la
feste Dieu; en y changeant l’oraison du St.
Esprit qui se disoit la 2°. en celle pro naui-
gantib. pt. la 3°. In gratiari actioné, & p* la
4®. pro deuotis amicis.

le 15. T’alle a Sillery p*. faire les Exercices,
& la visite de la maison; i’en retourné le 25.
au soir: le p. piiart & Cousture arriuerét 14 le
24. on auoit changé le nom sauuage a Cous-
ture aux 3. riuieres en vn festin que luy fit le
p. le buteux ofi au lieu de son ancien nom
Ihandich qui sonne mal en yroquois, on luy
donna le nom de Achirra le nom de feu M.
Nicolet auec la Ioye de tous les sauuages
hurons Algonq. & Annieronons: ie fis festin a
Sillery aux Chrestiens qui y estoient» le p.
piiart & sa compagnie repartirét le 28. ensui-
uant.

les sauuages retournerent de la chasse sur
le milieu d’Auril & reuinrent assés riches &
chargés.

le 26. Ie tins Consulte p'. le voyage du p.
Iogues aux Annier. les Consulteurs estoient
p. Vimont, p. de quen, p. Dendemare, p. p.
piiart; omnium consensu approbata profectio:
Ité p’. le mariage de Cousture, approbati ité
dium consensu: Ité p’. vn voyage de robert


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 183


_ The Savages return to lodge at Sillery
after easter.

After easter we Announced the Continua-
tion of the benedictions of the Blessed Sacra-
ment on Thursdays even till Corpus Christi, —
changing in them the prayer of the Holy
Ghost, which was said 2nd, to the one pro
navigantibus: for the 3rd, In gratiarum actio-
nem, and for the 4th, pro devotis amicis.

On the 15th, I went to Sillery to perform
the Exercises and the visitation of the house;
I returned thence on the 2sth, in the even-
ing. Father pijart and Cousture arrived there
on the 24th; Cousture’s savage name had
been changed at 3 rivers, at a feast made for
him by father le buteux, when instead of his
former name, Ihandich, which sounds ill in
yroquois, they gave him the name of Achir-
ta,—that of the late Monsieur Nicolet,—to
the Joy of all the huron, Algonquain, and An-
nieronon savages. I gave a feast, at Sillery,
to the Christians who were there. Father
pijart and his company went away again on
the 28th following.

The savages returned from the chase to-
ward the middle of April and came back
quite rich and burdened.

On the 26th, I held a Consultation with ref-
erence to father Jogues’s journey to the Annie-
ronons; the Advisers were father Vimont,
father de quen, father Dendemare, father p.
pijart; omnium consensu approbata profectio.
Item, concerning Cousture’s marriage; appro-
batum item omnium consensu. Item, respecting


Savages at Sillery.


Benedictions con-
tinued.


Arrival of father p.
pyart and of
Cousture.


Return of the sav-
ages from the chase.


Consultations.


Ste Mare


Printemps


veiglemt. de Sillery.


Culture de la terre


UOYALE AUX 5.
riuteres


184 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nox. %


en france; & de la demeure des p. Druilletes par
deca omniii etia consensu approbata illa Oia.

le 25. Iour de St. Marc on ne fit point de
procession p'. n’y auoir encore assés de che-
min honneste p’. le faire; on auoit intimé les
litanies qui ne se chanterent pas par erreur
mais se dirent a voix basse: le p. p. piiart y
officioit qui ne pouuoit pas pouruoira cela:
on mit du Violet ce lour la ce qu’il ne falloit
pas; il le falloit supposé qu’on eut dit la
messe des rogaons.

le 17. ou 18. d’Auril la riuiere fut libre, &
on commenga a semer vn peu auparauant.

sur la fin de ce moys, en suite de la visite
de Sillery, fut fait le reiglement p’. le tempo-
rel; la chose passa par l’aduis du p. Vimont
& du P. Dendemare; & du ‘consentement du
p. de Quen:

Les sauuages se mirent puissament par tout
a trauailler a la terre; ils firent de nouueau a
Sillery plus de 15. arpens de terre: aux 3. riu.
plvf de 30. familles sauuages se mirent a cul-
tiuer; It€é a Montreal: les francois de leur
costé n’en firent pas moins.

1646. MAY.

Le dernier d’ Auril sur les 5. h. nvf partismes
auec le brigantin & deux chaloupes pour les
3. Tiu. of nvf n’arriuasmes que le 5. du moys
de may, il fallut quitter le brigantin & aller


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 185


robert’s voyage to france, and as to father
Druilletes’s continuation on this side; omnium
etiam consensu approbata illa omnia.

On the 25th, St. Mark’s Day, we made no
procession, because there was not, as yet,
enough road suitable for forming it. We had
announced the litany, which, through an
error, was not sung, but recited in a low tone:
father p. pijart was officiating then, and he
could not attend to that. Violet was used on
that Day, which was not proper; it would
have been proper, in case the rogation mass
had been said.

On the 17th or 18th of April, the river was
free, and planting began a little before that.

Toward the end of this month, after the
visitation of Sillery, regulations were made
concerning temporal affairs. The matter
passed by the advice of father Vimont and of
Father Dendemare, and by the consent of
father de Quen.*!

The savages vigorously began everywhere
to till the soil. At Sillery they freshly pre-
pared more than 15 arpents of land; at 3
rivers, more than 30 savage families began
cultivation; J/tem, at Montreal. The french
on their side did no less.


1646, MAY.


On the last of April, about 5 o’clock, we
started with the brigantine and two shallops
for 3 rivers, where we did not arrive till the
5th of the month of may; we had to leave
the brigantine, and proceed with the shallops.


St. Mark.


Spring.


Regulations for
Sillery.


Cultevation of sozt.


Journey to 3 rivers.


depart des veaus pr.


les Hurons.


Mort du p. Masse
premier missre. Du
Canada.


Querelle de sau-
uages trahison


Querelles de
frangots.


186 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Not. 28


auec les chalouppes: le lundy 7. commence-
rent les Conseils dont l’histoire se voira dans
le factum qui é dans les Archiues tit. yro-
quois: nvf en partismes le 17. & arriuasmes
icy le 18. Caron qui menoit des veaux aux
Hurons partit le 11. de May des 3. riu. Le
p. Iogues pt. les yroquois le 16.

I’y trouué le P. Enemond Masse mort la
nuic du 11. au 12. sur la minuit & enterré en
la nouuelle Chapelle non encore acheuée:
compendia vite & mortis eivf sicut & aliori
se trouuera dans les Archiues.

Ité Ie trouué qu’vn Xstien nommé Ignace
yroquois de nation, mais depuis longtemps
habitué icy ayant pris querelle au Ieu auec vn
Abnaquiois, estoit allé par le dehors de sa ca-
bane vis a vis de la place oti il pensoit qu’il
fut pour le transpercer de son espée, mais au
lieu de le trouuer il rencontra vne femme qui
fut transpercée mais toutesfois fauorablemt.
cela fit bien du bruit parmy les sauuages,
& embrouilla fort les affaires de tous costés,
toutesfois celuy qui auoit fait le coup venant
s’excuser aux parens de la femme, presenta
sa teste: on luy donna a étendre qu’on luy
pardonnoit, toutesfois la chose sembloit de-
pendre de l’issue de la blessure.

Ité le trouué que deux hommes des Vrsu-
lines s’estoient apelés & prouoqués & s estoient
alles batre auec leurs espées: ce qu’auoient


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 187


On Monday, the 7th, the Councils began, the
records of which will be seen in the factum
which is in the Archives, titulo yroquois; we
left that place on the 17th, and arrived here
on the 18th. Caron, who was taking some
calves to the Hurons, left 3 rivers on the
1ith of May; father Jogues for the yroquois,
on the 16th.

I found here that Father Enemond Masse
had died on the night of the 11th and 12th,
about midnight, and was buried in the new
Chapel, not yet finished; compendium vite et
mortts ejus sicut et alicrum will be found in the
Archives.”

ltem, 1 found that a Christian named
Ignace,—an yroquois by nation, but long
settled here, having picked a quarrel while
Gambling with an Abnaquiois, had gone to
the outside of the latter’s cabin, to the place
at which he supposed that this man was, in
order to run him through with his javelin;
but, instead of reaching the man, it encoun-
tered a woman, who was wounded, but not
dangerously. That made much commotion
among the savages, and greatly complicated
matters on all sides. Nevertheless, the man
who had dealt the stroke, coming to excuse
himself before the woman’s relatives, offered
his own head; they gave him to understand
that they pardoned him, but the affair seemed
to depend on the result of the wound.

Item, 1 found that two of the Ursulines’
men had challenged and provoked each other,
and had proceeded to fight with their swords.


Calves sent to the
Hlurons.


Death of father
Masse, first mitsston-
ary To Canada.


Quarrel among the
savages, treachery.


Quarrels among
the french.


' degast du feu


Vol


saluts ala pente-
coste.


depart pre Tadoussak


188 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


aussy fait deux soldats aux 3. riu. la groye &
la fontaine pendant que nvf y estions; la groye
fut blessé en deux endroits p*. s’estre com-
porté sagem‘. Xstiennement, ce qui ayant esté
verifié par les sauuages la fontaine fut mis
en vne fosse.

Ité ie trouué que le feu, poussé par vn vent
furieux auoit fait partout vn grand degast &
qu’vn nommé Guill. bance y auoit tout perdu,
sa maison & tout ce qu’il y auoit dedans ayant
esté bruslé: il fut assisté de tous costés &
bientost se trouua sur piéd

Ité Ie trouue qu’on auoit volé & crocheté
vn Coffre ofi on auoit pris tout le pauure butin
d’vn homme montant a plvf de 25. escvf; on
declama fort la contre en chaire comme contre
vn commencemt. de vice qui n’auoit point en-
core esté vn pardega, ofi on alloit sans deffiance.

On-fit salut du “St. Sacrem*™ le Toursdesia
Pentecoste & les deux festes suiuantes cde
a Pasque p'. remercier du succes du voyage
des 3. riu. recomméder le voyage du p. Iogues
& de m‘. bourdon, demander de la pluye &c
aux Hospit. le lundy & aux Vrsul"s. le mar-
dy: le mercredy y commenga a pleuuoir.

Le P. de Quen partit de Quebek p’. Tadous-
sak le 21. de may Mons". de launay Commis
estoit, parti dans vne barque des le 7. lep.


de Qué partit dans vn Canot auec vn frang¢ois


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 189


Two soldiers at 3 rivers had also done the
same,—la groye and la fontaine, while we
were there; la groye was wounded in two
places, for having behaved discreetly, like a
Christian; this having been verified by the
savages, la fontaine was put in a trench.

Item, i found that the fire, driven by a furi-
ous wind, had everywhere made great havoc,
and that a certain Guillaume bance had thus
lost everything, his house and all in it hav-
ing been burned; he was aided on all sides,
and soon found himself on his feet.

Item, 1 found that some one had stolen and
broken open a Chest, from which had been
taken all the man’s poor spoil, amounting to
more than 25 écus; we vigorously denounced
that in the pulpit, as a beginning ina vice
which had not yet been characteristic of this
side, where all went about without distrust.

The benediction of the Blessed Sacrament
was held on the Day of Pentecost and on the
two following feasts, as at Easter,—in order
to give thanks for the success of the journey
to 3 rivers; to recommend the journey of
father Jogues and of monsieur bourdon; to
ask for rain, etc.,—at the Hospital nuns’ on
monday, and at the Ursulines’ on tuesday. On
wednesday it began to rain.

Father de Quen left Quebek for Tadoussak
on the 21st of may; Monsieur de launay,
Agent, had started in a bark, as early as the
7th. Father de Quen left in a Canoe, with a
french blacksmith named Charles, and a sav-
age; his provisions were furnished by the


Havoc by fire.


Theft.


Beneadictions at
pentecost.


Departure for Ta-
doussak.


Profession de foy
a’un huguenot


baptesme de
Arenhston.


on fatt du gru


on commence la
pesche


Chapelle chez M. de
Chautgny & voyage
chez luy.


190 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


forgeron nommé. Charles, & vn sauuage: on
l’assura de sa nouriture par le magazin sur les
lieus; & p’. le voyage on luy offrit du maga-
zin touts les rafraichissemens necessaires, nde
f. liegeois l’auoit aussy fourni

le mesme 21. vn nommé Thomas [blank space]
natif de la rochelle qui iusques alors n’auoit
este qu’aparement Catholique & au fond estoit
Huguenot fit abiuraon & profession de la foy
en particulier entre mes mains en suite de
quoy il fit sa Confession generalle.

le 23. fut baptisé aux Vrsulines vn nommé
Arenhston, Huron & fut nommé rené. M. le
prieur fut son parrain.

nde f Ambroise depuis le 1**. de May iusques
au 20. fut Eploye a faire le gru a nde dame
des Anges & la biaire.

Enuiron le 15. de May on commenga la pes-
che née f. feauté & robert hache au commen-
cem'., puis robert tout seul auec Iaques Iunier
le 17. saulmon fut pris le 11 de Iuin.

le 24. partit nde f Ambroise & M**. Jaques
p’. les 3. riu. dans vn Chaloupe ot estoit Mr’.
de Chauigny qui emporta auec soy la Chapelle
de beauport qui luy fut accordée pour Iusques
a La Toussaints: le p. Vimont en mesme
temps aller iusques chez M. de Chauigny pour
conferer les Ceremonies du baptesme a sa fille.

Sur la fin de May se rencontra la feste du
St. Sacrem'. le St. Sacremt. fut exposé le Iour
de la feste & le Dimanche iusques apres


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 191


warehouse, on the premises; and for the jour-
ney he was offered, from the warehouse, all
the necessary fresh food; our brother liegeois
had also supplied him.

On the same 21st, one Thomas [d/ank space},
a native of la rochelle,—who till that time
had been only in appearance a Catholic, and
in reality was a Huguenot,—abjured heresy
and privately made profession of the faith,
under my direction, after which he made his
general Confession.

On the 23rd, one Arenhouton, a Huron, was
baptized at the Ursulines’, and named rené.
Monsieur the prior” was his godfather.

Our brother Ambroise was employed, from
the 1st of May till the 20th, in preparing barley
at notre dame des Anges, and the beer.

About the 15th of May, the fishing began;
our brother feauté and robert hache were
engaged therein, at first, —then robert alone,
with Jaques Junier. The ist salmon was
taken on the 11th of June.

On the 24th, our brother Ambroise and
Master Jaques started for 3 rivers in a Shal-
lop, in which was Monsieur de Chavigny,
who carried with him the beauport Oratory,
which was granted him Until All Saints. Fa-
ther Vimont at the same time went as far as
Monsieur de Chavigny’s, to confer the Cere-
monies of baptism on his daughter.

Toward the end of May, occurred the feast
of the Blessed Sacrament; the Blessed Sacra-
ment was exposed on the Day of the feast,
and on Sunday till after vespers; and there


A huguenot’s Pro-
Session of fatth.


Baptism of Arenhou-
ton.


The barley ts made
ready.


4


Fishing begins.


Chapel at Monsieur
de Chavigny’s and
journey to his house.


Procession du St.
Sacremt. pr. porter le
Dazz.


le tour en chemin


l’ ordre


192 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


vespres; & il y eut salut tous les Iours de
l’octaue.

Pour la Procession, il fut arresté que M. le
Gouuerneur nommeroit qui il luy plairoit p’.
porter le Daiz de sa part, que les deux mar-
guillers le porteroient aussy, & vn Sauuage:
que les années d’apres les marguillers auec le
Curé aduiseroient a qu’il le faudroit offrir de
le porter la disposition de trois bastons leur
estant laissée libre & la dispdon du 1. a M. le
gouuern’. Ceux qui le porterent cette année
furent M. Tronquet de la part de M. le Gouu.
Mons’. des Chastelets & M. giffar marguil-
liers, & noel negabamat.

Les Hospitalieres ayant representé leur
droit d’ancienneté dans le pays par dessvf les
Vrsulines p’. y auoir fait bastir deux ans au-
parauant elles: It€é a raison que les Hospitaux
sont tousiours priuilegiés & ont les premiers
rangs: le tour de la procession fut par le repo-
soir du fort proche de l’arbre, puis a l’hospi-
tal; puis au reposoir de M. Couillart; puis
aux Vrsulines & de la on reuint a la paroisse.

Deux Clochetes marchoient deuant, puis la
banniere celuy qui la portoit auoit vn chapeau
de fleurs: La Croix suiuoit portée par vn
Ieune garcon de 20. ans en Aube & lisets; a
ses deux costés deux Enfans en surplis &
lisets: Suiuoient les torches 6. en nombre pr’.
laa; fois; vioneadestina -p™ tess porter ales


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 193


was a benediction every Day in the octave.

As for the Procession, it was decided that
Monsieur the Governor should name, on his
part, whomsoever he pleased to bear the Can-
opy; that the two churchwardens should also
bear it, and one Savage: that, in subsequent
years, the churchwardens, with the Curé,
should settle who might properly be invited
to bear it,—the disposition of three staves
being left free to them, and the disposition of
the ist to Monsieur the governor. Those
who carried it this year were Monsieur Tron-
quet, on behalf of Monsieur the Governor;
Monsieur des Chastelets and Monsieur giffar,
churchwardens; and noel negabamat.

The Hospital nuns having represented their
right of seniority in the country over the Ur-
sulines, by virtue of having built in it two
years before the latter,—J/tem, because the
Hospitals are always privileged and have the
first rank,—the course of the procession was
past the temporary altar at the fort, near the
flagstaff; then to the hospital; then to the
temporary altar at Monsieur Couillart’s; then
to the Ursulines; and thence we came back
to the parish church.

Two Bell-ringers marched in front, then
the banner: the one who carried it had a hat
of flowers. The Cross followed, borne by a
Youth of 20 years, in Alb and silk sash,—on
either side of him, two Boys in surplices and
sashes. The torches followed, 6 in number;
for the 1st time we appointed the local crafts
to bear them,—to wit, Carpenters, masons,


Procession of the
Blessed Sacrament;
about bearing the
Canopy.


Line of march.


The order.


Quelgu’un ayant
Jatt souuentr gu il
fallott garder
Lordre de lt honneur
des mestiers noe f
liegois ayant mis
pr. fondement gu’ i
ne fallott potnt auoir
esgard du tout a
L’honneur mats que
au reste ils s accomo-
dassét par entr eux;
guelgu’un ad’ eux
ayant dit gu'zl falloct
donc gue les Peres
menassent les
Enfans, les deux
pluf veux marche-
rent les premiers,
Scauoty Zacherte &
Lean Guyon.


sonnerze


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


metiers du pays, scauoir Charpentiers magons,
matelots, Taillandiers, brasseurs & boulangers ;
ausquels ce coup on enuoya la veuille des
Torches faites par nde Industrie & de nde
Cire, & il les accommoderent de festons, &
Iean guion macon mit vn escusson a la sienne
ott estoient les armes de son metier marteau,
compas & reigle: apres les torches suiuoient
quatre chantres laiques puis M. de S*‘. Sau-
ueur, & M. Nicolet en surplis & estolle puis
le p. Vimont & le p. Dendemare; puis 6.
anges francois, & deux petits sauuages en leur
habit, tous portoient des chandeliers ou des
cierges excepté les deux derniers qui portoient
deux corporaliers, apres eux deux de nos ff
en surplis auec encensoirs fumans; puis soubs
le Daiz aux deux costés du St. Sacrement; le p.
Druilletes faisant le Diacre en Dalmatique &
M. le prieur soubsdiacre en aube & estolle:
noe f liegeois en surplis marchoit le dernier
derriere le St. Sacrement, & faisoit office de
m**. des Ceremonies.

on sonna a la paroisse au sortir, & partout
en atriuant & sortant au reposoir du fort. 3.
coups de Canon; en passant derriere M'. Couil-
lart il y eut vn salue de mousquets & fusils.
Ité a Vhospital; & de rechef au reposoir de
m. Couillart on tira & fit-on vne autre salue;
Ité en repassent deuant le fort vne autre salue
de trois coups de Canon: onsonna a la paroisse
en passant soubs vn Arcade du pont qui estoit


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 195


sailors, Toolmakers, brewers, and bakers; to
whom this time we sent, on the day before,
some Torches made by our Skill and of our
Wax. These they hung with festoons; and
Jean guion, a mason, put an escutcheon on
his, on which were the arms of his trade, ham-
mer, compasses, and rule. After the torches
followed four lay choristers; then Monsieur
de St. Sauveur and Monsieur Nicolet, in
surplice and stole; then father Vimont and
father Dendemare; then 6 french angels, and
two little savages in their costume: all car-
tied candlesticks or tapers, except the last
two, who bore corporal-cases. After these
came two of our brethren in surplices, with
smoking censers; then beneath the Canopy,
on either side of the Blessed Sacrament, father
Druilletes serving as Deacon in Dalmatic, and
Monsieur the prior as subdeacon in alb and
stole: our brother liegeois, in  surplice,
marched last, behind the Blessed Sacrament,
and officiated as master of Ceremonies.

The bell was rung at the parish church at
the end, and everywhere on arriving and
leaving; at the temporary altar of the fort, 3
Cannon shots were fired; on passing behind
Monsieur Couillart’s there was a salute of
muskets and guns. J/tem, at the hospital;
and again, at monsieur Couillart’s tempo-
rary altar, they fired and gave another sa-
lute; /tem, on passing before the fort again,
another salute of three Cannon shots. The
bell at the parish church was rung as they
passed under an Arch of the bridge, which


Some one having
called to mind that
zt was proper to ob-
serve the honorable
order of the trades,
our brother legozs

having laid down the
principle that tt was
not at all requzstite to
consider the matter
of honor, but that
withal they should
arrange themselves
by mutual agree-
ment; some one of
them having said
that the Fathers
ought then to lead
the Sons; the two
Seniors marched
jirst,—to wit, Zach-
erte and Jean Guyon.


Bell-ringing.


Chan


Ze temps.


pm. bestialits. publice
declaratu ab eo, guz
fecerat, vel finxerat


196 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [{Not. 28


tapissée; on fit aussy vne salue aux Vrsulines;
& enfin retournant a l’Eglise vne autre salue
de 3. coups de Canon.

M. de St. Sauueur entretint fort bien le
chan; Aux reposoirs on tascha de faire chan-
ter a deux Enfans quelques articles des lita-
nies du nom de Iesvf 5. ou 6. mais il fallut
que M. le prieur les aydast; puis on chanta
Tanta ergo; ou Ecce panis &c. Yoraison, lau-
date, encensem't. & benediction: aux maisons
religieuses le mesme: le tout alla bien comme
cela, les religieuses y chanterent au lieu des
Enfans.

La grande messe se dit a lordinaire 7%, &
la procession qui se fit apres ne fut finie que
sur les 11. heures; le St. Sacrement fut exposé
ce Iour la & le Dim. iusques apres vespre; le
reste de l’octaue salut a 7% du soir seulemt.
Aux maisons religieuses le St. Sacrem‘. fut
exposé tout le long de l’octaue depuis leur
messe iusques a 5. h. du soir, & le lour de
loctaue on y fit les saluts solemnels.

La veuille de la feste qui estoit le 31. ou
dernier de May on apporta la nouuelle d’vn
malheur arriué a richelieu: vn nommé Dum-
kerke Norman, Canonier & matelot a riche-
lieu aagé de 4o. a 45. ans marié en france, &
demeurant p'. la 3°. année a richelieu, sur la
fin de ce mois parut l’espace de deux ou trois
lours dans vn desespoir, se voulant de luy


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 197


was carpeted; a salute was also given at the
Ursulines’; and finally, on returning to the
Church, another salute of 3 Cannon shots.

Monsieur de St. Sauveur excellently sus-
tained the music. At the temporary altars we
tried to have two Boys sing some clauses of
the litany of the name of Jesus,—5 or 6; but
Monsieur the prior had to aidthem. Then
they sang Zantum ergo, or Ecce panis, etc., fol-
lowed by the prayer J/audate, incense, and
benediction: at the religious houses the same.
All went well in that way; the nuns sang
there instead of the Children.

High mass was said as usual, at Y% past 7,
and the procession which was afterward made
was finished only about 11 0’clock; the Blessed
Sacrament was exposed on that Day, and on
Sunday, till after vespers; for the remainder
of the octave, benediction at % past 7 in the
evening only. At the religious houses the
Blessed Sacrament was exposed throughout
the octave from their mass until 5 o’clock in
the evening; and on the Day of the octave
solemn benedictions were held there.

On the eve of the feast, which was the 31st
or last of May, the news was brought of an
unfortunate affair which happened at riche-
lieu. One Dumkerke, a Norman,—a Gun-
ner and sailor at richelieu, aged between 40
and 45 years, married in france, and living
for the 3rd year at richelieu,— toward the end
of this month appeared for the space of two
or three Days to be in despair,—trying to
destroy and cast himself headlong, and saying


Music.


The time.


Peccatum bestialitatis
publice declaratum
ab eo, qui fecerat, vel
finxerat.


aff. de Tadousak


198 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


mesme perdre & precipiter disant qu’il estoit
perdu & damné interrogé pourquoy il disoit
cela, respondit que depuis le depart des vais-
seaux il auoit eu afaire dix ou douse fois a vne
chienne du fort appelée plate, & que c’estoit
la le suiet de son desespoir: le Capitaine nom-
mé la Crapaudiére se saisit de sa personne, &
de la Chienne, & les fit enfermer: il en escri-
uit au p. buteux aux 3. riu. & a M. le gouu.
a Quebek. le p. buteux y enuoya le p. dupe-
ron: & M. le Gouuern’. ne respondit rien
attendant d’y voir plvf de Iour: on iugea de
premier abord qu’il eut fallu plustost tiier la
chienne que de l’enfermer: & enfin que le
meilleur estoit de declarer & tenir p*. fol
celuy qui auoit dit cela de luy mesme. le p.
duperon de retour raporta qu’a son arriuée, cet
homme luy dit que ce qu’il auoit dit n’estoit
qu’vne feinte affin qu’on le fit mourir, n’ayent
est€é empesché de se desfaire soy mesme que
p*. la crainte de 1’Enfer lequel il pouuoit es-
perer d’euiter, se procurant la mort de la sorte
ptisque d’vn costé il moureroit qui est ce qu’il
cherchoit, & de l’autre on le fairoit Confesser
auparauat ce qui luy fairoit euiter l’Enfer: le
p. duperon l’obligea de declarer publiquemt.
le'tout, puis le Confessa, luy remit Vesprit, &
le laissa en bonne dispéon.

“le Iour mesme du St. Sacrement dernier de
May, vint ‘la nouuelle de Tadoussak qu’il y


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 199


that he was lost and damned. On being
asked why he said that, he answered that since
the departure of the vessels he had ten or
twelve times had intercourse with a bitch of
the fort, called plate; and that that was the
cause of his despair. The Captain, named la
Crapauditre, arrested him in person, and
seized the Bitch, and had them shut up; he
wrote of the matter to father buteux at 3 riv-
ers, and to Monsieur the governor at Quebek.
Father buteux sent father duperon thither,
and Monsieur the Governor answered noth-
ing,— waiting to obtain more Light on the
matter. They thought, at first, that it would
be their duty to kill the bitch rather than
to lock her up; and, finally, that the best plan
was to declare and account as crazy the one
who had said that about himself. Father
duperon on his return reported that, at his
arrival, this man told him that what he had
said was only a feint, to the end that he be
made to die,—having been hindered from
destroying himself only by the dread of Hell,
which he might hope to avoid by procuring
death in this way; since, on the one hand, he
would die, which was what he sought; and,
on the other, they would first have him Con-
fess, which would enable him to avoid Hell.
Father duperon obliged him to declare every-
thing publicly, then heard his Confession,
composed his mind again, and left him ina
good frame of mind.

On the very Day of the Blessed Sacrament,
the last of May, came the news from Tadous-


Matters at Tadou-
sak.


Sauuage de gaspé.


loyer des ouuriers.


Moulin


200 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


auoit dix grandes Cabanes de sauuages en-
tr’autres des bersiamites, 15. Chaloupes; qu’on
y auoit desia traité plvf de cinq poinsons de
Castor & 151. peaus d’orignak: & que iamais
la ferueur & la deudon au Xstianisme n’y fut
plus grande.

Vn sauuage de Gaspé se disent Catecumene
arriua icy sur la fin du moys auec force viande
dont il fit present aux sauuages de Sillery,
qui entr’autres choses luy donnerent du blé;
il s’en retourne auec lettres p'. Tadoussak &
Misk¥ a nos PP. & a Mons". desdasmes de la
part de m. le Gouuerneur; il repartit d’icy en
sa chaloupe le 11. de Iuin

Ence temps il falloit donner 30. & 35. s.a
vn homme p’. sa Iournée & ses despends.


1646. IUIN.


Le 4. entra a nde seruice p*. Charpentier &
ayder au moulin vn nommé Estienne bou-
goust: on se mit premierem* a abatre ce qui
restoit de bois sur les terres de la Vacherie:
puis on delibera de la place oft le metteroit ;
le p. Vimont le p. dendemare & moy nvf nvf
y transportasmes & fut dit qu’on le pouuoit
mettre a vn endroit, oti il y restoit quelque
Inconuenient; mais qu’on croyoit atec le
temps deuoir estre osté; qu'il n’y auoit qu’a
le bien faire: la cause pour laquelle principa-
lemt. on le refaisoit de noutleau estant que


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 201


sak that ten large Cabins of Savages were
there,— among others, some bersiamites, —
and 15 Shallops; that there had already been
traded more than five casks of Beaver, and
151 moose skins; and that fervor and devotion
to Christianity were never greater at that
place.

A savage of Gaspé, calling himself a Cate-
chumen, arrived here about the end of the
month with plenty of meat, of which he made
a present to the savages of Sillery, who,
among other things, gave him some corn.
He returns with letters for Tadoussak and
Miskou, to our Fathers, and to Monsieur des-
dasmes from monsieur the Governor: he set
out again in his shallop on the 11th of June.

At this time it was necessary to give 30 and
35 sols to a man for his Day’s work and his
expenses.


1646, JUNE.


On the 4th, there entered our service one
Estienne bougoust, as Carpenter and to help
at the mill. We first proceeded to fell what
wood remained on the lands of la Vacherie ae
then we deliberated about the site on which
the mill should be placed. Father Vimont,
father dendemare, and I betook ourselves
thither, and we decided that it might be put
in a place in which there was still some
Disadvantage,— which, however, we believed
would be removed in course of time; that the
only question was, that it be well built. The
chief reason why it was rebuilt anew was,


Savage from gaspé.


Workmen's htre.


Mill.


on va secourtr Guill.
banse


separtion des
Jermiers de beauport.


Mariage


Abnagquzois arrtuent


202 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 28


Vautre pour auoir esté mal fait menagoit de
ruine a chaque bout de champ.

Mre, maturin venu pour ce suiet de france
Van passé, & mis cependant au seruice des
Vrsulines fut mis a nde seruice & comméca a
demeurer auec nvfle 11. de Iuin. La neige-
rie commenca a y seruir le 18. il estoit a
Sillery. on demanda par plusieurs fois a M.
le Gouverneur qu’il voulut ou nvf accorder la
place voisine, ou establir qu’elle demeurast en
Commune; il ne voulut ny 1’vn ny l’autre.

le 10. de Iuin qui estoit vn Dimanche, on
publia a la paroisse que qui voudroit le lende-
main Iour de St. barnabé aller ayder a redres-
ser la maison bruslée de Guillaume bance
qu’on en donnoit la permission, & qu’on y
exhortoit; il y alla 15. ouuriers.

Le 11. se fit la separation de nos fermiers
de beauport, boucher s’en alla & Thomas
hayot demeura chargé de tout, ce fut par vn
accord par entr’eux sans que nvf ayons fait
autre chose que d'y coésentir.

le 18. se fit le mariage de Montpellier sol-
dat & Cordonnier auec la fille de seuestre: on
y dansa vne espece de balet; scauoir 5. soldats.

Le 22. arriuerent 3. Canots d’Abnaquiois
qui disoient qu’vne maladie qui faisoit vomir
le sang auoit perdu vne bonne partie de leur


nation: qu’il y auoit en grande guerre entre


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 203


that the other mill, having been ill con-
structed, threatened to fall at any moment.

Master maturin—who had come for this

purpose from france the year before, and had
been placed meanwhile in the service of the
Ursulines— was employed in our service, and
began to live with us on the rth of June.
La neigerie began to serve here on the 18th;
he was at Sillery. We repeatedly asked Mon-
sieur the Governor that he consent either to
grant us the neighboring place, or to decree
that it should remain as Commons; he would
do neither one nor the other.

On the roth of June, which was a Sunday, They go to assist
it was published at the parish church that Gudllaume banse.
whoever would go on the morrow, the Day
of St. barnabas, and help to rebuild the
burned house of Guillaume bance, was given
permission thereto, and that we urged them
to do this; 15 workmen went there.

On the 11th occurred the separation of our Separatzon of the
farmers at beauport,—boucher went away, /07¢7”5 at beauport.
and Thomas hayot” remained in sole charge;
this was by an agreement between them, with-
out our having done aught else than consent
to it.

On the 18th occurred the marriage of Mont- Marriage.
pellier, a soldier and a Shoemaker, to the
daughter of sevestre;* they danced there a
kind of ballet,—to wit, 5 soldiers.

On the 22nd, 3 Canoes of Abnaquiois ar- Some Abnaguiois ,
rived, who said that a malady which caused Ee
vomiting of blood had destroyed a good part
of their nation; that there had been a great


Ceux de Tadssak
arriuent.


Diuorce.


Jeu de la St. lean.


204. LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


les Etechemins & sauuages de gaspé: que les
yroquois ne mentoient point en ce qu’ils auoient
maintenu que ce n’estoit pas eux qui atioient
fait le coup de” cet Automne, mais les Soquo-
quiois on attendoit a scauoir le reste: Ils rame-
nerent le fils de otsatonksi Huron.

Le 23. arriua Etvet & Iabmets Capitaine de
Tadssak Xstiens auec vne Chaloupe pleine de
leur gens, ils firent deux presens de Castors
a M. le gouu. & dans le Conseil firent force
pleintes de la cherté & facons de traiter de M.
de launay: ils estoient Estset sur tous habil-
lés p’. la plus part a la frangoise chemise de
toile de Hollande blanche, vn rabat a dentelle
& Casoque d’Escarlate, qui tachoit d’aller de
pair auec Mr’. le gouuern’. & en tout faisoit le
Souuerain: ie luy donné la Colaon, & vn sac
de bié“d'inde’ & -yneMiuresdespoudre amla
recomm. du p. de Quen.

le 22. se vinrent mettre prisonniers d’eux
mesme vn mary & vn femme Xstienne, qui ne
se poutioient accorder, l’vn dans le Cachot au
fort, l'autre aux Vrsulines; & ce en suite de
leur sentence qui leur fut prononcée a Sillery
sur les pleintes des Capitaines: le facti s’en
trouuera dans les Archiues titulo Sillery.

le 23. se fit le feu de la St. Jean sur les 8%
du soir M. le gouuern'. enuoya M. Tronquet
p’. scauoir si nvf irions; nvf allasmes le


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 205


war between the Etechemins and the savages
of gaspé; that the yroquois did not lie in
what they had maintained,—that it was not
they who had made the attack of last Autumn,
but the Soquoquiois; they were waiting to
know the rest. They brought back the son
of otsatonkwi, a Huron.

On the 23rd, Etwet and Iabmets— Captains
of Tadousak, and Christians—arrived, with
a Shallop full of their people; they made two
presents of Beavers to Monsieur the govern-
or; and in the Council they uttered many
complaints about the high prices and methods
of trading of Monsieur de launay. They
were, Estwet especially, dressed for the most
part in french style, a shirt of white Holland
linen, a neckband of lace, and a Scarlet Cloak.
Etwet was trying to be on an equal footing
with Monsieur the governor, and in every way
acted the Sovereign. I gave him a Luncheon,
a bag of Indian corn, and a pound of powder,
by recommendation of father de Quen.

On the 22nd, there came, to constitute
themselves voluntary prisoners, a husband
and a Christian wife, who could not agree,—
the one to the Dungeon in the fort, the other
to the Ursulines,—and this after their
sentence, which was pronounced on them at
Sillery, upon the complaints of the Captains.
The factum will be found in the Archives,
titulo Sillery.

On the 23rd; the fire for St. John’s day
was made about % past 8 in the evening.
Monsieur the governor sent Monsieur Tron-


Those of Tadousak


arrive.


Divorce.


Fire for St. John’s
day.


voyage au Sault de
la rtutere de St.
Charles pr. les terres
des Vrsulines.


& al Isle d’orleans,


206 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 28


trouuer le p. Vimont & moy dans le fort, nvf
allasmes ensemble au feu, M. le gouu. l’y mit
& lors qu’il le metoit ie chanté le Vt queant
laxis & puis l’oraison: M. de St. Sauueur n’y
estoit point, il l’y faut Inuiter vne autre fois:
on tira 5. coups de Canon & on fit deux ou 3.
fois la decharge de mousquets: nvf en retour-
nasmes entre g. & I0.

Le 22. estant allé voir auec M. le gouu. la
terre de bance au dessv{ du Sault & ayant
visité tout ce qui est entre deux, il me sembla
que les Vrsulines deuoient se tenir a vn ruis-
seau que ie nommé de S*. Vrsule, & descen-
dant vers laques Caulmont tascher a faire que
dans leur concession fut comprise vne petite
prairie qui € entredeux» “Mile gouu. ne me
voulut accorder pour elles que 12. Arpens sur
la riuiere & en profondeur ce qu’il faudroit p*.
parfournir leur 200. Arpens, Si depuis ce ruis-
seau de S'. Vrsule iusques a Caulmont ilya
plvf{ de 12. Arpens, il faut tacher d’auoir ce
surplvf p’. y comprendre au moins la prairie;
s’il y a moins, on prendra le reste au dela du
ruisseau Mons’. le gouu. ne voulut rien resou-
dre, renuoyant le tout au retour de M. bour-
don, qui estoit allé aux yroquois.

le mesme lour le p. Vimont alla a 1’Isle
d’orleans p'. y choisir des prairies pt’. les deux


maisons religieuses, nvf ations esté aupara-


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 207


quet to know whether we would go; we went
to find him, father Vimont and I, in the fort,
and we went together to the fire. Monsieur
the governor set it, and while he lighted it,
I sang the Ut queant laxis and then the
prayer. Monsieur de St. Sauveur was not
there; he must be Invited thither, another
time. 5 Cannon shots were fired, and two or
3 times occurred the discharge of muskets;
we returned thence between g and 10.

On the 22nd, I went with Monsieur the
governor to see the land of bance above the
Sault, and inspected all that lies between
them. It seemed to me that the Ursulines
should confine themselves to the brook that I
call Ste. Ursule, and, descending toward
Jaques Caulmont, endeavor to arrange that
the small meadow between the brook and Caul-
mont’s land be comprised in their concession.
Monsieur the governor would not grant me
for them more than 12 Arpents on the river,
and whatever depth might be necessary to
complete their 200 Arpents. If there be more
than 12 Arpents between the Ste. Ursule
brook and Caulmont’s land, an effort should
be made to obtain that surplus, so that at least
the meadow may be included. If there are
fewer, the remainder will be taken beyond the
brook. Monsieur the governor would decide
nothing,— referring it all to the return of Mon-
sieur bourdon, who had gone to the yroquois.

On the same Day, father Vimont went to
the Isle of orleans, in order to choose some
meadows there for the two religious houses;


Journey to the sault
of the river St.
Charles, on account
of the lands of the
Ursulines,


and to the Isle of
orleans.


Dp dendemare a
Montreat


Promesse de


Laugmentiion des
terres dela Vacherie


n. f. Liegeots


nature de nos
Concessions.


208 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


uant a la longue pointe de l’autre costé p'.
le mesmé dessein le tout se trouuera dans la
Conuention dressée p*. cela.

le 25. partit d’icy le p. Dendemare p*. Mont-
real

le 26. M’. le gouu. me donna assurace de
Yaugmentaon des terres de la Vacherie pt.
remplacer 6. Arpens, que nvf auions cedé a
Quebek; il alla sur sa monture le dire le
mesme lour a née f hegeots, qui trauailloit
en ce quartier-la au moulin:

Il me dit en mesme temps que ny cette adi-
tion ny la Vacherie ne deuoient point estre
prises qu’en roture, qu’il ne le soufriroit iamais
autrem’. & que tout ce qui estoit dans la
banlietie deuoit estre censé de ceste nature.

Cela me donna suiet d’examiner plvf parti-
culierem*. les lettres de nos Concessions, & ie
trouué que celles de nos six cents Arpens de
terre aux 3. riu. données en 1634. estoient a la
perfection sans aucune charge en toute propri-
eté & Seigneurie vt rex concesserat conceden-
tib. Pour les lettres des terres de née Dame
des Anges, beauport & la vacherie de 1637. ie
n’y trouué de charge qu’vne messe par an sans
aucune autre redeuance, & l’adueu de la con-
cession de 20. en 20. ans, mais il n’est fait
mention d’aucune seigneurie. Pour celles de


l'Isle aux ruaux, elles sont aussy fort bien &


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 209


we had previously been at the long point on
the other shore, for the same purpose; it will
all be found in the Agreement drawn up to
that effect.

On the 25th, father Dendemare left here
for Montreal.

On the 26th, Monsieur the governor gave
me assurance of an increase in the lands of la
Vacherie, in order to replace 6 Arpents which
we had ceded to Quebek; he went on horse-
back to mention this on the same Day ¢o our
brother liegeots, who was working in that quar-
ter at the mill.

He told me at the same time that neither
this addition nor la Vacherie should be taken
otherwise than ex roture; that he would never
suffer it otherwise, and that everything in the
banlieue should be deemed of the same nature.

This gave me occasion to examine more
closely the letters patent of our Concessions,
and I found that those of our six hundred
Arpents of land at 3 rivers, granted in 1634,
conferred a perfect title upon us without any
charge, giving us full ownership and all Seign-
iorial Rights, ut rex concesserat concedentibus.
As regards the letters patent for the lands of
nostre Dame des Anges, beauport, and la
vacherie, dated 1637, I found no charge upon
such concessions beyond the saying of a mass
every year—with no other dues—and the
avowal of concession every 20 years; but there
is no mention of any seigniorial right. As
for the titles to those of Isle aux ruaux, they
are also very good, and similar to that of 3


Father dendemare
goes to Montreal.


Promise of an tn-
crease in the lands
of la Vacherze.


Our Brother
Liegeots.


Nature of our
Grants.


prairies pr. les re-
ligzeuses sur nos
Lerres.


Ce gwil y a a donner
a Cens de nos terres.


210 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


comme celle des 3. riuier. PY. l’Isle de Iesvf
il n’y a point de grosse en parchemin, il n’ya
qu’vn seul extrait de l’assemblee g™* & vne
prise de possession par de mons". le gouuern’.
qui fait mention d’vn mandem*. qu'il en a
receu en vertu duquel il nvf met en cette pos-
session, sans qu'il soit faite mention d’aucune
condion.

Celles qui ont esté concedées a Mons*. Gif-
far, des Chastelets &c sont auec plvf de
seigneurie mais aussy auec beaucoup plvf de
charge.

Les plvf{ desaduantageuses sont celles de
Sillery qui n’estant qu’vn transport fait par
mons’. gan ont aussy toutes les charges qu’il
auoit & entr’autres vn denier de cens par
arpen.

Enuiron ce temps les Hospitalieres ayant
rendu l’escrit du p. Vimont par lequel on leur
auoit accordé des prairies sur nos terres pour
6. ans; en suite de ce qu’on leur auoit procu-
ré a la longue pointe & al’Isle d’orleans: le p.
Vimont en aduertit les Vrsulines a ce qu’elles
fissent le mesme: elles y eurent de la peine &
prierent que cela se faisant scauoir de leur
oster nos prairies p’. les donner a fief, qu’elles
fussent preferées ad’autres: la Conclusion fut
que iusques a ce qu’elles fussent assurées de
ce qui leur auoit esté assigné a la longue
pointe & a l’Isle d’orleans nvf reseruerions
15. ou 16. Arpens de terre p'. elles, desquels


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES ~ aur


rivers. As for the Isle de Jesus, there is no
deed on parchment; there is merely an extract
from the proceedings of the general assembly,
and a certificate of taking possession by
monsieur the governor, which mentions a
mandate that he received, in virtue whereof he
so put us in possession, without any mention
being made of any condition.

Those which were conceded to Monsieur
Giffar, des Chastelets, etc., confer more seign-
iorial rights, but are also subject to many
more charges.

The most disadvantageous are those of Sil-
lery —which, being ours only by a transfer
made by monsieur gan, are also subject to all
the charges borne by him, and among others
a rent of a denier an arpent.”

About this time, the Hospital nuns hav-
ing—jin consequence of what had been pro-
cured for them at the long point and at the
Isle of orleans—returned the written agree-
ment of father Vimont, by which they had
been granted some meadows on our lands for
6 years, — father Vimont notified the Ursulines
that they should do the same. They found
it hard to do this, and requested that, in case
that were done,—to wit, taking our meadows
from them, in order to let them out,—they
should be preferred to others. The Conclu-
sion was that, until they had been assured of
what had been assigned to them at the long
point and at the Isle of orleans, we should
reserve for them 15 or 16 Arpents of land,—
which we should dispose of, when they should


Meadows on our
lands for the nuns.


What of our lands
are to be offered for
Rent.


de Miské.


Nouuelles du retour
du p. logues


A la Visttion saluts.


212 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


nvf disposerions lors qu’elles en auroient esté
assurées; & disposerions des autres y en ayant
encore autres 15. ou 16. arpens a donner: en
tout depuis la cabanne aux topiers iusques a la
riuiere de M. giffar, il y ena 47. Arpens; il
en faut reseruer 17. p’. la ferme de beauport,
& donner le reste comme dessvf.

le 28. la barque retournant de Tadousak nvf
aporta nouuelle de misky, le p. laplace estoit
a l’habitaon des francois auec le p. lyonne; le
p- richar auec née f. Iaques ratel a la nouuelle
habitaon de Nepegigsit ofi on a fait vne reduc-
tion de sauuages qui estoient pour lors deux
familles de 15. personnes: ils se portoient bien
& estoient pleins de bonnes esperances: ils
demandoient en france deux ou trois PP. de
renfort.

le 30. nouuelles arriuerent que 2. Algona.
Compagnons de voyage du p. Iogues aux yro-
quois estoient de retour aux 3. riu. que le p.
Iogues n’estoit pas loing auec Mons‘. bour-
don: ils apportoient lettres du p. Iogues. En
effect le p. Iogues estoit arriué le 27. a riche-
lieu le 29. aux 3. riu. & arriua A Quebek auec
M. bourdon le 3. de Iuillet: tout ce qui regarde
son voyage se trouuera aux Archiues titulo
yroquois.

IUILLET. 1646.


le 1%. de Iuillet salut a l’hospital & le
lendemain aux Vrsulines en l’honneur de fa


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 213


have received the above assurance,—and
should dispose of the others, there being still
15 or 16 arpents more to be granted. In all,
from the [river] cabanne-aux-topiers even to
Monsieur giffar’s river, there are 47 Arpents;
17 must be reserved for the farm at beauport,
and the remainder be granted as above.

On the 28th, the bark returning from Ta-
dousak brought us news from miskou; father
laplace was at the french settlement with
father lyonne; father richar, with our brother
Jaques ratel, at the new residence of Nepe-
gigwit, where a settlement of savages has
been formed, consisting at that time of two
families, of 15 persons. Ours were in good
health, and were filled with hope; they re-
quested, from france, two or three Fathers,
as a reinforcement.

On the 30th, news arrived that 2 Algon-
quains, traveling Companions of father Jogues
among the yroquois, were back at 3 rivers;
and that father Jogues was not far away,
with Monsieur bourdon; they brought letters
from father Jogues. Indeed, father Jogues
had arrived on the 27th at richelieu; on the
2gth, at 3 rivers; and he reached Quebek,
with Monsieur bourdon, on the 3rd of July;
all that concerns his journey will be found in
the Archives, ¢ztu/o yroquois.


JULY, 1646.


On the 1st of July, benediction at the hos-
pital, and the next day at the Ursulines’, in
honor of the visitation. The eve of this feast


Of Miskou.


News of father
Jogues’s return.


Benedictions at the
Visztatzon.


Les Abnaguiots de-
mandent une
Mission.


Mort & enterrement
de Charité.


214 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


visitaon: la veuille de cette feste vint vn Di-
manche qui fit qu’a l’hospital p’. le salut on
y chanta les litanies sur les 5. h. & le Iour de la
feste aux Vrsulines on chanta les vespres
depuis l’hymne, a 7. h. du soir.

le 4¢. Deux Capitaines Abnaquiois dont le
principal qui estoit Xstien se nommoit Claude;
auec Noel & Iean bapt. vinrent trouuer M. le
gouu. p’. le prier de faire en sorte qu’vne robe
noire allast aux Abnaquiois pt. les Instruire:
que cela estant vne fois, il ne viendroient plv{f
icy & ne donneroient aucun obrage a M. le
gouu. pour la traite: M. le gouu. me les ren-
uoya & moy ie les remits a 1l’Automne p’.
prendre temps p’. y songer: on leur donna
vn sac de blé d’Inde p*. Viatique, du petun,
du poisson &c & leur fit-on festin, & aux
principaux de Sillery. Jean bapt. & noel en
mesme temps prierent M. le gouu. de leur
donner vn present p’. couurir les morts de
l’Automne p’. empescher leur Ieunes gens
d’aller en guerre: M. le gouu. le fit.

le 8°. mourut vn petite sauuagesse aux Vr-
sulines nommée Charité aagée de 5.% elle fut
enterrée att Cemetiere des francois ofi estoit
son Pere enterré: elle y fut portée par 4.
domestiques des Vrsulines, auec 4. autres por-
tant des torches & 2. filles francoises & deux
sauuagesses tenant les coins du drap. Mt’. le
prieur alloit le premier portant vne croix


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 215


came on Sunday, for which reason at the hos-
pital they sang, for the benediction, the lita-
ny about 5 o’clock; and on the Day of the
feast, at the Ursulines’, they sang vespers
after the hymn, at 7 o’clock in the evening.
On the 4th, two Abnaquiois Captains,—the
principal one of whom, who was a Christian,
was named Claude,—together with Noel and
Jean baptiste, came to find Monsieur the gov-
ernor, in order to beg him to make arrange-
ments for a black gown to go to the Abna-
quiois, to Instruct them. They said that, if
that were once done, they would no longer
come here, and would give no offense to
Monsieur the governor regarding the trade:
Monsieur the governor sent them back to me,
and I put them off till Autumn, in order to
take time to consider the matter. They were
given a bag of Indian corn for a Parting Gift,
some tobacco, some fish, etc.; and we gave
them a feast, and also one to the principal
persons of Sillery. Jean baptiste and noel at
the same time begged Monsieur the governor
to give them a present for covering the dead
of the Autumn,—to stop their Young men from
going to war; Monsieur the governor did so.
On the 8th, a little savage girl named Chari-
té, aged 5%, died at the Ursulines’; she was
inverred at the french, Cemetery, where her
Father was buried. She was borne thither by
4 domestics of the Ursulines, with 4 others
bearing torches, and 2 french girls and two
savage girls holding the corners of the pall.
Monsieur the prior went first, bearing a cross


The Abnaguzozs
request a
Mission.


Death and burial of
Charité.


Arriuée du pere le
Lleune.


Consulte pr. le retour
du pr. logues aux
yroguozs.


depart des beufs pr.
les 3 rtu.


18. Arpens accordés
a la vacherie.


216 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


sans baston & son rituel & moy apres, puis le
corps &c.

Ce mesme iour arriua le p. le Ieune de
montreal, auec nde f Ambroise qui reuenoit
Ces .3 Pill:

leg. Ietins Consulte p'. le retour aux yro-
quois du p. Iogues le p. le Ieune le p. Vimont
& le P. logues y estoient: il fut Conclu que
si autre chose n’arriuoit il n’y iroit point
hyuerner; & se tiendroit a Montreal ou aux 3.
ri. que si quelque oraison [sc. occasion] belle
se presentoit d’y aller, il ne la falloit pas
refuser

le-14. partit. le p. loguesi& le p. Drouillet
auec deux sauuages Xstiens p’. Montreal.

le 13. partit la barque qui portoit des beufs
&e'au p. buteux aux seri

Ce mesme Iour nvf furent accordés par
Mons’. le gouuern’. 18. Arpens de terre en
augmentaon de celles de la Vacherie & ce sur
la representéon de la necessité que nvf auions
p™. le moulin de quelque augmentdon; &
surtout sur la representaon que ps. la occasion
[sc. cession] de 6. arpens de terre que nvf auions
auoient fait autrefois a Quebek, ofi au lieu de
12. quinvf auoient esté accordés, on ne nvf eu
donna que 6. rien ne nvf auoit esté donné les
MM. Vrsulines & Hospitalieres ayant esté
recompencées de 30. Arpens dans la banlieiie.

nvf entrasmes en possession de cela & de


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 217
ne A ME. keno, ean


without staff and his ritual, and I after him;
then the body, etc.

On this same day, father le Jeune arrived
from montreal, with our brother Ambroise,
who was returning from 3 rivers.

On the oth, I held a Consultation about fa-
ther Jogues’s return to the yroquois; father le
Jeune, father Vimont, and Father Jogues were
present. It was Resolved that, if nothing
else happened, he should not go to winter
there, but should stay at Montreal or at 3 riv-
ers; but that, if some excellent opportunity
occurred for going thither, it must not be
refused.

On the 14th, father Jogues and father
Drouillet started, with two Christian savages,
for Montreal.

On the 13th, the bark left which carried
some cattle, etc., to father buteux at 3 rivers.

This same Day, there were granted us by
Monsieur the governor 18 Arpents of land,
as an addition to the lands of la Vacherie,—
and this upon our representation of the neces-
sity that we should have some addition for
the mill; and especially upon our statement
that, for the cession of 6 arpents of land that
we had made formerly at Quebek,— where,
instead of 12, which had been granted us,
they gave us only 6,—nothing had been
given us, the Ursuline and Hospital Mothers
having been compensated by 30 Arpents in
the suburbs.

We entered into possession of that, and of
all our lands of nostre dame des Anges and of


Arrival of father le
Jeune.


Consultation about
father Jogues’s re-
turn to the yroqguozs.


Cattle for 3 rivers
sent away.


18 Arpents granted
at la vacherze.


nouuelle prise de
possession de toutes
nos terres.


procession contre les
chentlles.


Nouuelles d’un
vaisseau basque de
Tadousak


Nouuelles des
Hurons.


Neufuaine


218 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 28


toutes nos terres de nde dame des Anges & de
la Vacherie, par le titre des lettres de Mess.
de la Compi*. le 24°. de Iuillet, & ce Iour en
furent expediés les Actes.

le 15. fut faite procession a l’hospital & aux
Vrsules. a l’issue de vespres apres le benedi-
camvf D*°: il y eut clochetes banniere, Croix
deux chandeliers, deux chantres; puis noe f.
Ambroise & pierre Gontier (qui duo se ipsis
hunc acceperunt loci Inmo & cit opositi Insi-
nuassé quo spiritu nescio, toleraui & dissimu-
laui) puis Mons*. de St. Sauueur & M. le pri-
eur en surplis qui chantoient les litanies: le p.
Vimont & moy auec vn petit reliquaire. Aux
maisons religieuses, on chanta quelques cou-
plets du litanies de nde dame; & en suite les
oraisons Conuenables.

Ce mesme Iour vinrent les nouuelles de
Tadssak d’vn basque qui traitoit dans la riuiere
proche d’eux: il fallut prendre patience; car
& on n’auoit point de forces, & quoyqu’on en
eut, ce ne seroit que perdre son temps, deuant
estre plus tost rendu a son gros que nvf sor-
tis de Quebek.

le 21. me furent rendues les premieres
lettres & nouuelles des Hurons du to. de Iuin
par ceux de la nation d’yroquet.

le 19. nvf commen¢asmes vne neufuaine de
saluts du S‘. Sacrement pour le bon estat &
succes dés affaires surtout p'. les biens de la
terre & retour des vaisseaux.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 219


la Vacherie, by right of the letters given by
Messieurs of the Company, on the 24th of
July; and on this Day the Deeds therefor were
drawn up.

On the 15th, a procession was made to the
hospital and to the Ursulines’, at the end of
vespers, after the denedicamus Domino. There
were bells, banner, Cross, two candlesticks,
two chanters; then came our brother Am-
broise and pierre Gontier (gui duo se ipsis hunc
acceperunt locum, Immo et cum oppositum Insinuas-
sem, quo spiritu nescio, toleravi et dissimulavt),
then Monsieur de St. Sauveur and Monsieur
the prior in surplices, who sang the litany;
and father Vimont and I, with a small reli-
quary. At the religious houses we sang some
couplets of the litany of our lady; and after-
ward the Appropriate prayers.

On this same Day came the news from
Tadousak of a basque who was trading in the
river near them. It was necessary to use pa-
tience, for we had no forces, and, even if we
had some, it would only be a waste of time,
since he would have reached his fleet before
we had set out from Quebek.

On the 21st, the first letters and news from
the Hurons were delivered to me,— dated the
10th of June,—by persons from the yroquet
nation.

On the 19th, we began a novena of benedic-
tions of the Blessed Sacrament for the good
condition and outcome of affairs,— especially
for the fruits of the earth and the return of
the vessels.


New act of possession
Sor all our lands.


Procession against
the caterpillars.


News of a basque
vessel at Tadousak.


News from the
flurons.


Novena.


ir, retour du p. de
gquen


saulmon


La St. Ignace


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


le 29. arriua le p. de Quen de Tadousak p'.
la 1°. fois, ce qu’il y fit se trouuera dans la
relaon: Il y fut fort bien nouri & traité sur le
Commun: on nvf enuoya de la deux barriques
de saulmon outre quatre de nostre pesche, &
vn de M. le gouu. de 1’Isle aux Oyes. on
prit cette année plvf de 200. Saulmons ius-
ques a la fin de ce moys.

A la St. Ignace salut la veuille a la paroisse ;
la grande messe le Jour a 7. heures; Vespres
solemnelles aux Vrsulines, & le sermon a 1’is-
sue; salut le soir a l’hospital: auec resoltion
de faire alternis annis Vespres solemnelles &
le sermon a ces deux maisons religieuses. Le
Dimanche d’auparauant, cette feste fut decla-
rée feste de Deusdon & non d’obligaon. M.
le gouu. me parla de faire tirer le Canon a
lordinaire, ie luy tesmoigné que ie n’y auois
point d’Inclindon: il partit toutesfois d’auec
moy auec la resoltion de le faire; il ne le fit
pas toutesfois, peut estre que la raison que ie
luy en apporté que les vaisseaux n’estant pas
venus cela fairoit rumeur l’arresta. les Vrsu-
lines ce Iour la nvf traiterent magnifique-
ment. Il y eut manquement en ce que tvf
ceux de Sillery estant venus icy ils n’assiste-
rent qu’au disner & point au vespres ny
atl isernion snon--plvf que les; PPPs “lei fas
retenu de l’intimer parceque c’estoit moy qui
faisois la predicaon (ce qui cependant n’en


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 221
Aarts fanaa oh ree


On the 2gth, father de Quen arrived from
Tadousak for the ist time: what he is doing
there will be found in the relation. He was
very well supported and treated there, at the
charge of the Association. There were sent
us thence two kegs of salmon, besides four
from our own fishery; and one from Monsieur
the governor, from the Isle aux Oyes. This
year, more than 200 Salmon were caught, up
to the end of this month.

On St. Ignace’s day, benediction the day
before at the parish church; high mass on
the Day itself, at 7 o’clock; solemn Vespers
at the Ursulines’, and the sermon at the
end; benediction in the evening, at the hospi-
tal,— with the resolution to hold solemn Ves-
pers and deliver the sermon, a/ternis annis, at
these two religious houses. On the preceding
Sunday, this feast was declared a feast of
Devotion, and not of obligation. Monsieur the
governor spoke to me of having the Cannon
fired as usual; I showed him that I had no
Inclination for this. He left me, however,
with the resolve to have it done, yet he did
not do so; perhaps the argument which I
adduced to him—that, as the vessels had not
come, such an act might cause a disturbance —
stopped him. The Ursulines that Day treated
us magnificently. There was a failure in this
respect, that all those of Sillery, having come
here, attended only the dinner, and neither
at vespers nor at sermon, were there other
than the Fathers. I was restrained from call-
ing attention to it, because I was the one who


ist return of father
de quen.


Salmon.


Day of St. Ignace.


Neufuatne nouuelles
au retour des vats-
seaux. le 6. a’ Aoust


seruice pr. M. de
Montmagny frere du
gouuerneur.


Arriuée de M. de le
Tour.


A ssomption de node
dame.


222 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


deuoit pas. empescher) vne autre fois il y
faudra obliger.


AOUST. 1646.


Vne neufuaine commencée bien a propos le
Iour de Ste. Marie aux Neiges: beatvf venter,
& ce pour se preparer a la feste, & pour impe-
trer le retour des nauires; le lendemain
arriuerent les nouuelles: le p. Daran vint
dans vn Canot; & M. de launay dans vne
barque.

Par ces nouuelles ayant apris les nouuelles
de la mort d Mons’. de Montmagny le Con-
seiller, frere de M'. le Gouverneur, on dit vne
grande messe de requiem le lendemain: les
religieuses luy firent compliment des le soir
dirent vespres des morts: & la messe le lende-
main: on en fut aduerti au salut.

le 8. sur le soir parurent le nauire du Capit.
Poullet & le phlibot de M. de la Tour qui se
venoit refugier icy: ils arriuerent icy le lende-
main matin: on tira a l’arriuée du dit S'. dele
Tour & a sa descente il fut logé au fort &
mons’. le’ gouu. le 1%. Iour luy donna le
deuant il l’accepta p*™. le 1°. Iour & puis le
refusa, cde il deuoit.

le 15. se fit la procession les sauuages hom-
mes marchoient apres la Croix; les femmes a
la quetie: i’y portois vne nde dame peinte en
Argent des Vrsulines. il y eut vn reposoir a


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 223


preached the sermon (which, however, should
not have hindered them); another time, it will
be necessary to make attendance obligatory.


AUGUST, 1646.


A novena having a very timely beginning,
on the Day of St. Mary of the Snows,%—
beatus venter; and this in order to prepare for
the feast, and to obtain the return of the
ships. On the next day, the news arrived;
father Daran* came in a Canoe, and Monsieur
de launay in a bark.

Having learned by these advices the tidings
of the death of Monsieur de Montmagny, the
Counselor, brother of Monsieur the Govern-
or, we said a requiem high mass the next
day. The nuns paid him a compliment,—
that evening, they said vespers for the dead,
and mass the next day; notice thereof was
given at the benediction.

On the 8th, about evening, appeared the
ship of Captain Poullet and the flyboat of
Monsieur de la Tour, who was coming to take
refilee here," they attiveds Here, the tiext
morning. <A salute was fired at the Sieur de
le Tour’s arrival and at his landing; he was
lodged at the fort, and monsieur the governor
on the 1st Day gave him the precedence; he
accepted this for the 1st Day, and then refused
it, as was becoming.

On the 15th occurred the procession; the
savage men marched after the Cross, the
women at the rear; I carried an image of our
lady, painted in Silver by the Ursulines.


Novena, news of
the return of the ves-
sels. 6thof August.


Service for Monsieur
de Montmagny, the
governor's brother.


Arrival of Monsieur
de le Tour.


Assumption of our
lady.


deffacte du borgne
del Isle.


Sauuages condamnés
a6. Castors pr. auotr
tué une vache.


Consulte
@ Importace.


224 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


la Croix du mont Carmel ot: les sauuages,
chanteront 1’Aue Maria en leur langue, Les
femmes sauuages y estoient deuant l’arriuée
de la procession.

Enuiron ce temps vint la nouuelle de la
deffaite du borgne, par les oneiochronons; ils
prirent vne femme & tuerent vn homme: puis
se vinrent excuser disans qu’ils pensoient que
ce fussent Hurons. on dit quwil y auoit deux
ou 3. Annieronons en leur Comp*. cela se fit
au dessvf du long Sault: les vainqueurs en s’en
retournant furent deffaits par ceux d’yroquet;
on amena vn prisonnier, & la captiue fut
deliurée.

les sauuages de Sillery tiient vne vache de
m. Nicolas qui auoit esté dans leur blés,
elle fut estimés 7s5if. les sauuages furent
apelés par M. le gouu. p". en faire Iustice &
ordonna qu’ils payeroient 6. Castors ce qui
fut fait: auec assurance que quand ils se plein-
droient on leur fairoit Iustice du tort qu’au-
roient fait les vaches dans leur blés.

Le 21. Ie tins Consulte off estoient les pp.
le Ieune, Vimont, & dequen. 14 il fut arresté

1°. qu’on donneroit les terres de beauport a
cens, dium consensu. 2°. que non obstantib.
quibuscumq. on bastiroit p'. nvf, unvf p. le
Ieune hesitauit in hoc artic. non negauit
neque affirmauit. Depuis le p. le Ieune fut
dedans qu’on bastit: Ité le p. buteux p.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 225


There was a temporary altar at the Cross of
mount Carmel, where the savages sang the
Ave Maria in their own language. The
Savage women were there before the arrival
of the procession.

About this time came the news of the de-
feat of le borgne by the oneiochronons; they
captured a woman and killed a man, then
came to excuse themselves, saying that they
thought that those were Hurons. It is said
that there were two or 3 Annieronons in their
Company. That took place above the long
Sault; the victors, returning, were defeated by
the yroquet people; one prisoner was brought
in, and the captive woman was set free.

The savages of Sillery kill a cow of mon-
sieur Nicolas, which had been in their corn;
she was valued at 75 livres. The savages
were summoned by Monsieur the governor,
to do Justice in this matter, and he ordered
that they should pay 6 Beavers, which was
done,— with the assurance that when they
should complain, Justice would be done them
for the damage which the cows might have
wrought in their corn.

On the 21st, I held a Consultation, at which
were present fathers le Jeune, Vimont, and
dequen; it was there decided:

ist, that the lands at beauport should be
offered for rent, omnium consensu. 2nd, that,
non obstantibus quibuscumque, they should build
for us; unus, pater le Jeune, hesitavit in hoc
articulo, non negavit neque affirmavit. Later,
father le Jeune was in favor of building; /¢em,


Defeat of le borgne
of the Island.


Savages sentenced to
a fine of 6 Beavers
Jor having killed a


cow.


Important Consul-
tation.


Salut a pptinte,


arriuée des Hurons
& voyage aux 3.
YtULeres.


MiNeSe


226 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


Dendemare. [3°] Ité l’hyuernem*. du p. Druil-
letes aux Abnaquiois, & celuy du p. Iogues
aux yroquois.

4°. qu’on demanderoit augmentaon aux
Habitans.

5° pias perpetilité duj salut du St Sacre-
ment, hesitatio fuit, Iudicdo tamen in perpe-
tuitaté: Conclusio mea de continiier sans
engagem!'. iusques ace que Dieu & le temps
nvf y fissent voir plvf clair.

Le 26. d’Aoust arriua Pierrot Cochon des
Hurons of il nvf auoit serui 5. ans il fut
habillé & eut soli. il aporta la nouuelle de
quelques Canots Hurons & de la flotte entiere
qui stiuoit.

le 28. ie partis seul dans vn Canot p’. aller
aux 3. Tiu. ie mené auec moy dans vn Cha-
loupe 2. hommes & vn Enfant. L’vn des
hommes estoit le fils du gobloteur nommé
Guillaume Pelletier, deserteur, scieur de long,
Charpentir, Charbonnier &c. il se donna tout
d’vn coup; on promit toutesfois a ses parens
cent francs p’. sa 1°. année; & on ne laissa pas
de l’habiller tout de neuf.

L’autre estoit Pierre boiiencha Masson a
10oti. de gages son marché par escrit se trou-
uera dans les Archiues.

V’Enfant estoit vn nommé leger qui estoit
marmiton au fort aagé de 15. ans.

Arriuant aux 3. riu. i’y trouué Gilles bacon:
qui Incontinent vint trouuer M. le gouu. a


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 227


father buteux, father Dendemare.” 3rd, /tem,
the wintering of father Druilletes among the
Abnaquiois, and that of father Jogues among
the yroquois.

4th, that we should ask an increase from
the Habitans.

5th, as to the perpetual observance of the
benediction of the Blessed Sacrament, heszta-
tio fut, Judicatio tamen in perpetuitatem; Con-
clusio mea, to continue without binding our-
selves until God and time should enable us to
see more clearly.

On the 26th of August, Pierrot Cochon ar-
rived from the Hurons, where he had served
us 5 years; he was clothed and had 50 livres.
He brought tidings of some Huron Canoes,
and of the whole fleet, which was following.

On the 28th, I started alone in a Canoe to
go to 3 rivers; I took with me, in a Shallop,
2 men and a Boy. One of the men was the
son of the tippler named Guillaume Pelle-
tier,—a deserter, sawyer, Carpenter, Char-
coal-burner, etc. He gave himself up entire-
ly; we nevertheless promised his parents a
hundred francs for his 1st year, and we did not
fail to clothe him quite anew.

The other was Pierre bouencha, a Mason,
at 100 livres in wages; his contract in writ-
ing will be found in the Archives.

The Boy was one leger, who was scullion
at the fort; aged 15 years.

Arriving at 3 rivers, I found Gilles bacon,
who Straightway came to find Monsieur the
governor at Quebek, by order of Monsieur de


Perpetual observ-
ance of the Benedtc-
tion.


Arrival from the
Hlurons, and journey
to 3 rivers.


Mines.


mission aux Abna-
gutozs.


Ceux gui retourne-
rent des Hurons.


Ponfar


disputes pour les
terres des 3. rtu.


228 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


Quebek par ordre de M. de la poterie p*. don-
ner aduis des Mines d’or & de Cuiure qu’il
auoit trouuées, dont il aportoit des pierres.
ily fut renuoyé & on trouua que ce n’estoit
rien qui vaille.

Ayant expedié toutes mes lettres p*. les
Hurons ie reuins a Quebek la veuille de la
Natiuité de nde Dame, & i’en repartis auec M.
le gouuer’. le 11.

le 29. partit seul de francois p*. la mission
de 1’Assomption aux Abnaquiois le p. gabriel
Driiilletes auec deux Canots de sauuages dont
le chef estoit Claude bon Xstien.

Ceux qui retournerent cette année des
Hurons furent Pierrot Cochon, Gilles bacon;
Daniel Carteron, Iean le Mercier, desgrosil-
lers, racine, & Eustache lambert. qui s’estoit
donné, & deuoit remonter; & en effect il re-
monta auec les susdits susnommés; & en outre
il se chargea de deux veaus.

SEPT. FOAG:

le 9. benoist ponfar fit marché auec nvf pour
vn an a Ioolt.

Le 11. Ie partis auec M. le gouu. pr. les 3.
riu. ce qui se passa auec les sauuages se voira
dans les Archiues.

le p. buteux demanda remuement de bornes
& fut refusé de M. le gouu. reciproquemt. il


refusa M. de la poterie p*. d’autres aligne-
mens.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 229


la poterie, so as to give information of the
Mines of gold and Copper that he had found,
of which he brought some ores. He was sent
back, and they found that it was nothing of
value.

Having despatched all my letters for the
Hurons, I came back to Quebek on the eve of
the Nativity of our Lady; I went away again
with Monsieur the governor, on the 11th.

On the 29th father gabriel Driiilletes started
for the mission of the Assumption among the
Abnaquiois,—the only frenchman with two
Canoes of savages, whose chief was Claude, a
good Christian.

Those who returned this year from the
Hurons were Pierrot Cochon, Gilles bacon;
DanielCarteron, Jean le Mercier, desgrosillers,
racine, and Eustache lambert. This last man
had given himself in service and was to go up
again; and he did indeed go up again with
the above-named persons,—and, moreover, he
took charge of two calves.


SEPTEMBER, 1646.


On the oth, benoist ponfar made a contract
with us for one year, at 100 livres.

On the 11th, I started with Monsieur the
governor for 3 rivers: what came to pass with
the savages will be seen in the Archives.

Father buteux requested the moving of
boundaries, and was refused by Monsieur the
governor; in turn, he refused Monsieur de la
poterie in the matter of other lineations.

Monsieur de la Poterie vigorously disputed


Mission among the
Abnagquiors.


Those who returned
Jrom the Hurons.


Ponfar.


Disputes about the
lands at 3 rivers.


depart des Hurons.


depart du p. logues.


arrinuée des vais-
seaux de france


Le P. Quentin


le sr. de aubiniere


230 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


M. de la Poterie disputa puissament le
Cap des 3. riu. affecté aux Sauuages, en ayant
la Concession de cette année de M de la
magdelaine: l’affaire fut Indecise

Il y auoit 80. Canots, ils remporterent vne
dousain de paquets de robe a faute de Mar-
chandises & partirent p™. s’en retourner le
mesme Iour que nvf scauoir le 22. ondisaharea
quitta la grande bande & voulut aller par le
grand lac, il fut attrapé par les ennemys ils
estoient deux Canots deux hommes se sauue-
rent.

le p. Iogues deuoit partir le 29. p’. son hy-
uernement aux yroquois auec lalande, otrihsyré
huron yroquise, & deux ou trois autres
Hurons qui alloit voir leur parens captifs.

Auec les Hurons remonta Eustache, & les
trois dont i’ay parlé y dessvf, Ité deux veaus
& plvf{ de 50. paquets.

En reuenant a Quebek, nvf rencontrasmes
au Cap a l’Arbre vne Chaloupe qui portoit le
p. Daran qui nvf apporta les nouuelles de
Varriués de M. de Maisonneuue & de M. de
repentigny & des autres qui estoient proches;
ce fut le 20°. qu’arriua M. de maisonneuue &
de 23. arriua M. de repentigny & nvf aussy
quelques heures auparauant.

Auec M. de repentigny estoit le f°. Quentin
& quelques hommes p*. les Hurons, & p'. icy
bas: Ité vn Ieune gentilhomme de la mazson
de Courtené, qui s’estoit conuerti a la rochelle,


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 231
ret Se eat 2.


the Cape at 3 rivers,—set apart for the Sav-
ages, since we had the Grant of it for this
year, from Monsieur de la magdelaine: the
matter was Undecided.

There were 80 Canoes; they carried away
a dozen bundles of skins, for want of Mer-
chandise, and left in order to return the same
Day as we,—to wit, the 22nd. Ondiwaharea
parted from the main band, and chose to go
by the great lake; he was caught by the
enemies, of whom there were two Canoes; two
men escaped.

Father Jogues was to start on the 29th, for
his wintering among the yroquois, with
lalande, otrihouré,—a huron-yroquise,— and
two or three other Hurons, who were going
to see their captive relatives.

With the Hurons Eustache went up, and
the three of whom I have spoken above; /tem,
two calves, and more than 50 bundles.

On returning to Quebek, we encountered
at the Cap a l’Arbre a Shallop, which carried
father Daran, who brought us the news of the
arrival of Monsieur de Maisonneuve and of
Monsieur de repentigny and others, who were
near. It was the 20th, when Monsieur de
maisonneuve arrived; and on the 23rd arrived
Monsieur de repentigny,—and we, too, some
hours previously.

With Monsieur de repentigny were father
Quentin and some men both for the Hurons
and for work down here: /tem, a Young gen-
tleman from the house of Courtené, who had
been converted at la rochelle and had subse-


Departure of the
Hlurons.


Departure of father
Sogues.


Arrival of vessels
Jrom france.


father Quentin.


The steur de
l’ aubintere.


Benedictin apostat,
vagabond...


Ceux gui vinrent
cette année de france


pour nuf.
G. Laleman


Le Sr. de Laubintere


232 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 28


& en suite auoit fait voeu d’aller aux Hurons:
mais il s’est trouué, que ce n’estoit gu’vn
fourbe; qui auoit paru en Angleterre comme
petit fils de la maison de Sancerre & nepueu
de M. desnoyers qui faisoit mine de se vou-
loir faire heretique, & sentant que les nou-
uelles de france venoient sur l’aduis qu’on en
auoit donné, s’enfuit: on eut en mesme temps
aduis de plusieurs autres fourbes, il fit mille
pieces icy, & enfin aduoiia ou mentist qu'il
estoit religieux benedictin profés de plusieurs
années; qu’il estoit soubsdiacre, & on deposa
icy qu'il estort passé a Alengon en vn monastere
de benedictines ou il auoit confessé vne reli-
gieuse mourante: il fit mine de vouloir de-
meurer, & faisoit rage sur ce qu’on auoit
estoit [sc. ecrit—- Laverd.| de luy qu’il estoit
bastar: mais ceux qui l’auoient veu en An-
gleterre luy dirent a l’oreille, qu’il se teust; il
s’en alla donc, ilnvf a affronté de plvf de 2ooft.
qu’on auanga pt. luy.

Ceux donc qui arriuerent cette année, outre
le p. Quentin furent le P. Daran, le p. gabr. lale-
ment, le p. Amable de fretat; noe frere Pierre
masson: pt. les Hurons, desforges, pierre
tourmente masson, Jean guiet menusier; fr.
Goiiaut Apdtiq. & le dit S*. de laubiniere.
Pt. icy bas Pierre deschamps laboureur,
Simon gabory laboureur, Charles Droiiillar &
gilles Henar.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 233
Scr


quently made a vow to go tothe Hurons. But
it proved that he was only a swindler, who had
appeared in England as grandson to the house
of Sancerre, and nephew to Monsieur desnoy-
ers,— who made a pretense of intending to
become a heretic. But, learning that news
from france was on the way, in consequence
of information that had been given about
him, he fled; they had warning, at the same
time, of several other knaves. He played a
thousand tricks here, and finally avowed, or
lied, that he was a benedictine religious,—a pro-
fessed, for several years,—and that he was a
subdeacon; and it was affirmed here that he
had entered, at Alencon, a monastery of benedic-
tine nuns, where he had heard the confession
ofa dying nun. He affected to wish to re-
main, and was enraged because they had writ-
ten about him that he was a bastard; but
those who had seen him in England whispered
to him to keep quiet; and he then went away.
He cheated us by more than 200 livres, which
we advanced for him,

Those, then, who arrived this year, besides
father Quentin, were Father Daran, father
gabriel lalemant, father Amable de fretat,® and
our brother Pierre masson. For the Hurons,
came desforges; pierre tourmente, a mason;
Jean gutiet, a joiner; brother Gouaut, an
Apothecary; and the said Sieur de laubiniere.
For work down here, came Pierre deschamps,
a laborer; Simon gabory, a laborer; Charles
Drouillar, and gilles Henar.

Our brother masson and desforges were


A Benedictine apos-
tate, a vagabond.


Those who came this
year from france
Sor us.
Gabriel Laleman.


The Steur de Lau-
binzere.


depart de noe f mas-
son & desforges.


arriuée de la
derntere barqgue &
de M. le Tardif


bastien


la tratte de ces deux
années.


Mariage de la fille
dem. de repentigny:
ot le p. Vemont & le

p. le Teune assiste-

rent.


234 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vot. 28


noe f masson & desforges furent enuoyés
aux Hurons & partirent le iour de St. Michel,
par l’occasion de deux canots qui se trouue-
rent heureusemt. a Quebek.


1646. OCTOBRE


le 14. arriua la barque qui estoit le dernier
de tvf les vaisseaux qu’on attendoit de france,
& ce mesme vaisseau apporta les nouuelles de
l’arriuée a Tadoussac de M. le Tardif arresté
en france par Mons". de repentigny, lequel M.
le Tardif ne fut que 44. Iours en chemin. &
atriua a Quebek le 17.

le 28. entra a nde sertiice bastien a 1oofl. de
gages & vn paire de souliers.

L’an 1645. qui fut l’année du changemt. de
la traite & que Mess. de la Compi*. generale
partagerent la traite auec les Habitans les
seuls habitans eurent pour leur part 98. poin-
cons de Castor, & en 1646. plvf de 160. dans
vn poincon il y a 200. liures de Castor, & la
liure vendue tolf. sans les peaux d’orignak &c.

le 2. de ce moys se fit le mariage de la fille
de mons’. de repentigny auec m. godefroy, a
petit bruit, & les nopces 10. iours apres.

& tout le moys se traiterent les affaires;
Mons’. de repentigny fut continué Admiral,
& les autres capitaines aussy; mais Mons".
des chastelets fut constitué commis generale
sur les vaisseaux pour tvf les achapts.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 235


sent to the Hurons, and started on Michael-
mas,—availing themselves of two canoes
which fortunately happened to be at Quebek.


1646, OCTOBER.


On the 14th, the bark arrived which was
the last of all the vessels that were expected
from france; and this same vessel brought
the news of the arrival at Tadoussac of
Monsieur le Tardif, detained in france by
Monsieur de repentigny. This Monsieur le
Tardif was only 44 Days on the way, and
arrived at Quebek on the 17th.

On the 28th, bastien entered our service
for 100 livres in wages and a pair of shoes.

In the year 1645,—which was the year
of the change in trade, and that in which
Messieurs of the general Company shared the
trade with the Habitans,— the habitans alone
had for their part 98 casks of Beaver, and, in
1646, they had more than 160; in a cask there
are 200 pounds of Beaver, and the pound is
sold at 10 livres. That does not include the
skins of elk, etc.

On the 2nd of this month occurred the mar-
riage of the daughter of monsieur de repen-
tigny to monsieur godefroy, quietly; and the
nuptial feast 10 days later.

And all this month, business was carried
on; Monsieur de repentigny was continued
Admiral, and the other captains in their posts;
but Monsieur des chastelets was appointed
general agent on board the vessels for all the
purchases.


Departure of our
brother masson and
desforges.


Arrival of the last
bark, and of Mon-
szeur le Tardif.


Bastten.


The trade in these
two years.


Marriage of the
daughter of mon-
Sieur de repentigny,
at which father
Vimont and father
le Jeune were
present.


Conseils & assem-


blées pr. les affatres.


Augmentiion de ce
gu’on nuf donnott.


salut du St. Sacremt.


establz.


vatsons prquoy.


236 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 28


DERE i) Colbek ic: eda ie ht Sele 2 2b 2,

Il sembla dans toutes les assemblées qui se
firent que ceux qui n’auoient point aymé le
transport de la traite voulurent faire voir les
desordres elle estant entre les mains des Ha-
bitans de sorte qu’au lieu de les empescher,
ils sembloient les fomenter: ou en ne faisant
rien n’agissant point & laissant tout aller, ou
en quelqu’autre maniere: c’est ce qui donna
suiet de dresser les memoires pour vn bon
reiglement

Nvf presentasmes requeste pour auoir aug-
mentaon de ce qu’on nvf donnoit, on donna
douse cent francs a chaqu’vne des trois mai-
sons Quebek, 3. riu. & Hurons, mais aussy on
se dechargea du chaufage, & nv{f demeurasmes
obligés de nvf en fournir nvf mesmes; voyes
le papier dans les Archiues.

mais ensuite aussy tv{f ceux du Conseil se
tirent puissament augmenter leur gages & re-
compenser de leur seruice ce qui apporta vne
telle confusion me [sc. que] cela fit honte, &
M. de maisonneuue n’ayant point voulu signer,
rien ne fut signé de ces gratifications-la:

dans vne des premieres assemblées, on de-
manda que le salut du St. Sacremt. fut establi
pour iamais tvf les Ieudis, en action de grace
de la paix exterieure & p™. sa continufon; &
en outre pour obtenir la paix Interieure, &
bonne vnion & Intelligence entre tvf les corps
& personnes interessées aux affaires du pays.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 237


It seemed, at all the assemblies which were
held, that those who had not favored the
transfer of the trade, wished to bring to light
the disorders while it lay in the hands of the
Habitans. Thus, instead of preventing these,
they seemed to foment them,—either by
doing nothing, taking no action, and letting
everything go, or in some other manner. It
is this that gave occasion to draw up memorials
for a suitable regulation.

We presented a petition for an increase in
what was allowed us: they gave twelve hun-
dred francs to each of the three houses,—
Quebek, 3 rivers, and Hurons,— but they also
exempted themselves from supplying fuel,
and we remained obliged to furnish ourselves
with it; see the paper in the Archives.

But then, too, all those of the Council make
strenuous efforts to augment their own pay
and to requite their own services; which re-
sulted in such confusion as was disgraceful.
But, as Monsieur de maisonneuve had not con-
sented thereto, none of these gratuities were
subscribed to.

At one of the first assemblies, it was re-
quested that the benediction of the Blessed
Sacrament should be instituted forever, every
Thursday,— by way of thanksgiving for peace
without, and on behalf of its continuation;
and furthermore, to obtain Internal peace,
and full union and Harmony between all the
corporations and persons interested in the
country’s affairs.

On the last Day of october, the vessels


Councils and assem-
bles for business.


Increase in what
they allowed us.


Benediction of the
Blessed Sacrament
instituted.


Reasons why.


238 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 28


depart des vaisseaus Le dernier Iour d’oct. partirent les vais-
seaux; le p. Quentin y estoit seul des NN.
auec luy repassa robert hache: Ité M. de mai-
sonneuue M. giffar, M. Tronquet & tvf auec
bonne resolfion de poursuiure quelque reigle-
ment p’. leurs affaires ——chaqu’vn pretendant
ses Interests particuliers. Ilsembloit y deuoir
auoir crise a cause du retardemt. de m le Tardif.

En mesme temps aussy repassa le vaisseau
qui auoit apporté M. le Tardif, & vn nommé
Laualée repassa, qui estoit venu auec M. le
Tardif.

Auec eux repasserent le fils de M. de repen-
tigny de M. Couillar, de mons’. giffar, la nep-
ueux de M. deschastelets tvf /rzpons p*.la plvf
part qui auoient fait mille pieces a l’autre voy-
age, & on donnoit a tvf de grands apointe-
mens.

bastimens. On fait vn nouueau four & vne brasserie a
Sillery
On commence auec 6. hommes a tirer de la
pierre & a disposer la place p'. le presbytere
& |’ Eglise
pesche d’ Anguille, On prit cette année quarante milliers d’an-
go. mailléers. guille qu’on vendit la plvf part demy escu le
cent: on commenga a en pescher en Aoust &
on finit sur le 9. ou 10. de nouembre.
presens aux En oct. le p. le Ieune fit a Sillery l’expdon

Saunages- ~~ d’vn tableau aux Sauuages venu de la part de
Portraits du roy Et la royne, de son portrait, de celuy du roy &c.
de la reyne a Stllery. :

on donna en mesme temps trois Couuertes &


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 239


sailed; father Quentin was the only one of
Ours on board. With him returned robert
hache; Jtem, Monsieur de maisonneuve,
Monsieur giffar, Monsieur Tronquet,—and all
firmly resolved that they would strive to ob-
tain some regulation for their affairs, each
one seeking his own private Interests. It
seemed that a crisis was likely to occur, on
account of monsieur le Tardif’s delay.

At the same time, also, the vessel went back
which had brought Monsieur le Tardif, and
one Lavalée went over again, who had come
with Monsieur le Tardif.

With them returned the sons of Monsieur
de repentigny, Monsieur Couillar, and mon-
sieur giffar, and the nephews of Monsieur
deschastelets,—all rogues, for the most part,
who had played a thousand tricks on the other
voyage; and they all were given high salaries.

They are making a new oven and a brew-
ery at Sillery.

We begin with 6 men to quarry stone, and
to prepare the site for the clergy-house and
the Church.

They caught, this year, forty thousand eels,
most of which were sold at half an écu the
hundred. They began to fish for them in
August, and they finished about the gth or
roth of november.

In october, father le Jeune exhibited a pic-
ture to the Savages at Sillery, which had come
from the queen,—containing her portrait,
that of the king, etc. At the same time,
they were given three Blankets and three


Departure of the
vessels.


Buildings.


Eel fishery; 4o
thousand.


Presents to the
SAaVAaAZES.


Portraits of the king
and of the queen, at
Sillery.


la Toussaincts


salut du St. Sacre-
ment


dernier depart des
UALS SCAUK


Mort de lam. de St.


Lenace 1°. Sup. de
LT hotel D.


240 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


trois arquebuses aux despends du magazin, &
nvf leur fismes festin.


1646. NOU.


La veuille de la Toussaincts il y eut salut
oti furent chantées les litanies des saincts auec
le salue.

Le Iour de la Toussaincts qui estoit vn
Ieudy fut publié l’establissement du salut du


St. Sacrement, & fut ce Iour la fait a Vespres:


le reste des deux iours se passa cée l’année
d’auparauant excepté que les soldats ne vin-
rent point sonner parceque nvf ne le Iugasmes
point a propos nos hommes sonnerent pt. la
solemnité du morts; & les soldats sonnerent
au fort, mais ie n’y voy point de raison.

le 4°. Les vaisseaux n’estant encores qu’a
4. ou 5. lieties d’icy on en eut encores nou-
uelles; ils eurent vn vent fauorable ce Iour-la.

les 5°. mourut la m. Marie de St. Ignace
premiere Superieure de l’hospital de Quebek
sur les 5. h. du matin elle ne fut enterrée que
le lendemain, ie dis la grande messe en leur
Eglise respondue par mons. de St. Sauueur
& autres chantres: apres l’Euangile ie dis
lespace de deux ou trois miserere quelques
considerdons sur la mort a l’occasion de celle
de cette bonne mere; nvf entrasmes dans leur
Cheur 5. prestres & vn chantre seculier St.
Martin pour faire 1’office de la Sepulture.

le 6. rené Oheraenti Huron voulut s’en aller


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 241


arquebuses, at the expense of the warehouse;
and we made a feast for them.


1646, NOVEMBER.


On the eve of All Saints there was benedic-
tion, at which was sung the litany of the
saints, with the salve.

On the Day of All Saints, which was on
Thursday, the institution of the benediction of
the Blessed Sacrament was announced, and on
that Day it was held at Vespers. The remain-
der of the two days was spent as in the pre-
ceding year, except that the soldiers did not
come to ring the bell, because we did not
Judge it proper. Our men rang for the
solemnity of the dead, and the soldiers rang
at the fort; but I see no reason for this.

On the 4th, since the vessels were as yet
no more than 4 or 5 leagues from here, we
still had news of them; they had a favorable
wind on that Day.

On the 5th, mother Marie de St. Ignace,
first Superior of the hospital at Quebek, died
about 5 o’clock in the morning; she was not
buried until the next day. I said high mass
in their Church, at which monsieur de St.
Sauveur and other choristers made the re-
sponses. After the Gospel I spoke, for the
space of two or three mzsereres, upon death, on
the occasion of that of this good mother; we
entered their Choir,—5 priests and a lay chor-
ister, St. Martin,— to perform the Burial office.

On the 6th, rené Oheraenti, a Huron, wished
to go to 3 rivers by land, for want of a Canoe;


All Saints.


Benediction of the
Blessed Sacrament.


Final departure of
the vessels.


Death of mother de
St. Lgnace, rst
Superior of the

Hotel Dieu.


depart de rené
oheraentz.


le temps de la gelée
& de la neige


Mariage de Mad.
Nicolet.


present de madame
de la Pelterie


& de charlotte


mort de loachim.


242 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 28


aux 3. riu. par terre a faute de Canot, il alla
coucher a Sillery; il fut arresté icy auec Ar-
mand au moys de Sept. de la part de M. le
gouu. & des Habitans pour y hyuerner: il ser-
uit 1°. a aller reconnoistre les mines preten-
dues; puis estant de retour icy a Quebek il y
demeura quelque temps & puis s’y ennuya: il
arriua heureusemt. aux 3. riu.

le 7. il commenga a geler a glace sans qu’il
eut encore neigé pour en parler & fort legere-
ment & passagement.

le lendemain la neige commenga.

le 12. mariage de Champagne & de Madame
Nicolet a 5. h. du matin; le p. Vimont se
deliure de 1’Importunité d’aller aux nopces &
fait en sorte qu’on enuoye de la nopce quel-
que chose a la maison.

le 14. Mad. de la pelleterie enuoya ceans vn
present: c’estoit vn paquet, ofi il y auoit, vne
pierre d’Autel, & vn petit missel, deux napes
dont l’vne estoit Damassée; deux dousaines
de seruietes, & deux linceuils qui furent don-
nés a noe f. liegeois; six mains de papier; &
vn beau Chapelet.

Quelques iours apres la Sceur Charlote
enuoya quatre brasses & plvf d’estoffe bleiie, &
vne brasse & demie d’estoffe rouge; & plu-
sieurs milliers de porcelaine le tout pour les
Sauuages comme chose qui luy auoit esté
donnés pour ce suiet —

Enuiron ce temps vn nommé Ioachim Xstien


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 243


he went to stay over night at Sillery: he was
stopped here with Armand in the month of
September, by Monsieur the governor and the
Habitans, to winter here. He was employed
at ist, to goand reconnoitre the alleged mines;
then, returning to Quebek, he remained here
some time, and then grew tired of the place.
He arrived safely at 3 rivers.

On the 7th, it began to freeze hard, though
there had as yet been no snow worth mention-
ing, except a very light and transient fall.

On the next day the snow began.

On the 12th, the marriage of Champagne
and of Madame Nicolet at 5 o’clock in the
morning;* father Vimont escaped from the
Annoyance of attending the nuptials, and so
contrived that something for the wedding
should be sent to the house.

On the 14th, Madame de la pelleterie sent
a present here. It was a package, in which
there was an Altar-stone and a small missal;
two cloths, of which one was Damask; two
dozen napkins, and two sheets,— which were
given to our brother liegeois; six quires of
paper; and a handsome Rosary.

A few days later, Sister Charlote sent four
brasses, and more, of blue cloth, and a brasse
and a half of red cloth; and several thousand
porcelain beads,—all for the savages, as
something which had been given her for this
purpose.

About this time one Joachim, a Christian
savage, and the son of Jean Guion, while pass-
ing the long point were surprised by a gust


Departure of rené
oher aentz.


The season of tce and
SNOW.


Marriage of
Madame Nicolet.


Present from
madame de la
Pelterte,


and from charlotte.


Death of Joachim.


Nouices aux Vrsu-
lines


Perte du brigantin
& de 9. hommes


leur seruzce a
LE glese


Crerges aux 3. riu.


244 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VoL. 28


sauuage, & le fils de Iean Guion passant la
longue pointe furent surpris d’vn coup de
Nord-est, & penserent renuerser, ils se iette-
rent a l’eau; mais estant tout glacés, & le sau-
uage moins habillé que le francois le sauuage
arriué au bord mourut, & le francois l’eschapa
belle.

le 21. Commencerent leur nouitiat aux Vr-
sulines Madame de la Pelterie, Charlote, & la
»*. Caterine.

Ce mesme Iour arriua la nouuelle assurée
du plvf grand desastre qui fut encores arriué
en Canada: scauoir la perte ou debris du bri-
gantin qui alloit de Quebek aux 3. riu. dans
lequel estoit vne bonne partie de ce qui estoit
necessaire pour le magasin & habitans des 3.
riu. nvf y perdismes beaucoup; mais la prin-
cipale perte fut de 9. hommes, dont 1’vn estoit
a nvf nommé gaspar goiiaut de Poitiers Apoti-
quaire venu pour les Hurons, fort bon garcon.

On fit pour eux vn salut du morts le Ieudy
apres celuy du St. Sacrement.

Le lendemain on dit vne grande messe; &
le Dimanche, vespres des morts apres celle du
Tour.

Les 3. riu. manquant sur tout de Cierges, on
prit l’occasion d’vn Canot qui s’y en alloit pour
y enuoyer deux dousaines de Cierges Iaunes
pris a la paroisse de Quebek & deux dousaines
de Chandele de cire blanche pris dans mon
armoire.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 245


from the Northeast, and came near upsetting.
They jumped into the water, but being cov-
ered with ice, and the savage clothed more
lightly than the frenchman, the savage died
on reaching shore, and the frenchman had a
narrow escape.

On the 21st, Madame de la Pelterie, Char-
lotte, and Sister Caterine Began their novi-
tiate with the Ursulines.

This same Day, the certain news arrived of
the greatest disaster which had yet happened
in Canada,—to wit, the loss or wreck of the
brigantine which went from Quebek to 3
rivers; in this vessel was a great part of what
was necessary for the warehouse and habitans
of 3 rivers. We lost much therein; but the
main loss was of 9 men, one of whom was
ours, named gaspar gouaut, of Poitiers,—an
Apothecary who had come for the Hurons, and
a very good fellow.

We held for them a benediction for the
dead, on Thursday, after that of the Blessed
Sacrament.

On the next day, we said high mass; and
on Sunday, vespers for the dead, after those
of the Day.

As 3 rivers lacked Candles more than any-
thing else, we availed ourselves of a Canoe
which was leaving, to send thither two dozen
Yellow Tapers taken from the parish church
of Quebek, and two dozen white wax Candles
taken from my cupboard.

On the 29th, the mass of the Holy Ghost
was said by father Vimont at the hospital, for


Novices at the
Ursulines’.


Loss of the brigan-
tine and of 9 men.


Thetr service at the
Church.


Candles for 3
VLVErs.


Messe pr. Mess. de la
Compre. generale.


bastimens a Sillery.


Xstiens de Sillery


M. Nicolet a beau-
port


St. Xauter.


246 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


Le 29. la messe du St. Esprit dite par le p.
Vimont a l’hospital pour Mess. de la Comp*.
gle en acquit de ce qu’en cela estoit obligé
l’hospital: ie ne scay si mons’. le gouuern'.
presumera que c’est aussy en acquit de la
Messe que nvf deuons selon la concession de
Mess. de la Comp. en vertu de laquelle nvf
auons pris cette année possession de nos ter-
res: mais la messe que nvf deuons dire € p*. les
defuncts associés de la Comp’. & se doit dire
le 7°. mardy de Dec. & ie pretends bien la dire,
mais non pas y inuiter M’. le gouu. pour ne
point preiudicier a nos anciens droits de M.
de Vantadour &c., & a la declaration faite en
mesme temps de cette prise de possession au
greffe.

A Sillery on y bastit cette année vne brasse-
rie; & vn four nouueau. Les sauuages y
furent a leur ordinaire au commencemt. de
l’hyuer, & parmy eux 120. Xstiens.

M. Nicolet, a qui M*. le gouu. donnoit cent
escus p*. dire les messes, alloit a beauport la
dire les Dimanches & festes d’ordinaire

On eut nouuelles que la perte n’auoit pas
esté si grande, & qu’on auoit recouuré 2. tiers
pour le moins de ce qui estoit dans le brigantin.


1646. DECEMBRE.


Le Iour de St. fr. xauier estant tombé cette
année 1646. la 1*. Dim. de 1l’Aduent, on ne fit
rien de luy sinon a Vespres: le lendemain la


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 247


Messieurs of the general Company in acquit-
tal of the hospital’s obligation tothis. I know
not whether monsieur the governor will not
suppose that this is also to fulfill the obliga-
tion of saying the Mass which we owe in
consequence of the grant of Messteurs of the
Company, by virtue of which we have this year
taken possession of our lands. But the mass
which we are to sayis for the deceased asso-
ciates of the Company, and is to be said on
the first tuesday of December; and I certainly
intend to say it, but not to invite Monsieur
the governor to it,— in order not to prejudice
our former rights from Monsieur de Vanta-
dour, etc., and the declaration made, at the
same time with that act of possession, at the
record office.

At Sillery, a brewery has been built this
year, and a new oven. The savages were
there as usual at the beginning of winter, and
among them 120 Christians.

Monsieur Nicolet, to whom Monsieur the
governor gave a hundred écus to say masses,
went regularly to beauport to say mass on
Sundays and ordinary feasts.

We had news that the loss had not been so
great, and that they had recovered at least 2
thirds of what was in the brigantine.


1646, DECEMBER.


The Day of St. francois xavier having
occurred this year, 1646, on the 1st Sunday in
Advent, we did nothing on his account except
at Vespers: the next day, high mass and the


Mass for Messteurs
of the general
Company.


Buildings at Sillery.


Christians of
Szllery.


Monsieur Nicolet at
beauport.


Sz. Xavier.


la Conception


Mort d' Abdon


Abturion du Sr. de
Champigny


Musigue ag parties.


Noel


248 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


grande messe & le reste c6e l’an passé: i’inti-
mé le Dimanche d’auparauant les Indulgences
mais asses froidement pour n’estre pas assuré
de ces Indulgences; & que celles de la feste
de la Concepti6 estoient proches: la veuille se
renouuela le veu de le Conception.

la veuille de la Conc. a midy on tira du fort
vn coup de Canon a bale; le soir nvf fismes vn
salut les litanies de la vierge auec 1’Alma: le
Iour a la pointe du Iour on tira vn autre coup
de Canon, & le soir aux vespres nvf dismes
les litanies apres le benedicamvf D»°.

Yoctaue de St. fr. xauier estant venue le 2.
Dim. de l’Aduent on n’en fit que commemora-
tion partout a l’office du Dimanche.

Ce mois on receut nouuelle de la mort d’vn
malheureux Apostat des trois riuieres nommé
Abdon, ou la grenoiiille.

le Iour de la Conception vn soldat nommé de
Champigny, natif de fontainebleau, fit abiura-
tion de son heresie auparauant la grand messe.

Ce mesme soldat scachant la musique, & pou-
uant chanter vn dessvf nvf commencasmes le
Iour de S'. Thomas a chanter a quatre parties.

On sonna la veuille de Noel a 11. heures, on
dit l’air Mortels, & ensuite les litanies du nom
de Iesvf, on tira vn Coup de Canon a minuit
& aussy tost on commenca le Tedeti & puis la
messe, ie dis deux messes cée l’an passé vne
haute & vne basse, le p. Vimont en dit deux
ensuite & la 3°. a l’Aurore a Vhospital: Sur


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 249


rest as last year. I gave notice, on the Sun-
day before, of the Indulgences, but rather
coldly,— because I was not quite certain about
these Indulgences, and because those for the
feast of the Conception were near; at the
vigil, the vow of the Conception was renewed.

On the eve of the Conception, at noon, a
Cannon was fired at the fort, with balls; at
evening, we held a benediction,—the litany
of the virgin, with the Alma. On the Day
itself, at Daybreak, another Cannon was fired ;
and in the evening, at vespers, we said the
litany, after the denedicamus Domino.

The octave of St. frangois xavier having
fallen on the 2nd Sunday in Advent, nothing
but the commemorations were made at the
Sunday office.

This month we received news of the death
of a wretched Apostate at three rivers, named
Abdon, or la grenouille, [‘‘ the frog’’].

On the Day of the Conception, a soldier
named de Champigny, a native of fontaine-
bleau, abjured his heresy before high mass.

This same soldier, understanding music and
being able to sing the treble part, we began on
the Day of St. Thomas to sing in four voices.

We rang on Christmas eve, at 11 o’clock;
we recited the air, Mortels, and then the
litany of the name of Jesus; a Gun was fired
at midnight, and immediately we began the
Te deum, and then mass. I said two masses,
as last year,—one high, and one low; father
Vimont afterward said two, and the 3rd at
Dawn, at the hospital. Between 6 and 7


The Conception.


Death of Abdon.


Abjuratzion of the


Szeur de Champigny.


Music in 4g votes. |


Christmas.


voyage du p. Vimont.


Saluts.


Comedie


desordre, mangue de
police.


250 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VoL. 28


les entre 6. & 7. le p. gabr. lalement en dit
deux & la 3°. aux Vrsul®. ie dit la grande
messe a 8. h. & le p. defretat ensuite ses 3.
messes: le temps fut si doux qu’on n’eut pas
besoin de rechau sur l’Autel pendant toutes
les messes. on tira 5. coups a 1’Eleudon de la
messe de minuict.

le p. Vimont partit le mesme Iour de Noel
pour la visite de beauport, il en reuint le
penultiéme de l’an sur les Io. h.

On alla le Iour de Noel faire le salut a 1’hos-
pital, & le lendemain aux Vrsulines

le dernier Iour de l’an on representa vne
Action dans le magazin du sit, Nos Peres y
assisterent p*. la considerdon de Mons. le
gouu. qui y auoit de l’affection & les sauuages
aussy scauoir les pp. de Quen, Lalement, &
defretat: le tout se passa bien, & n’y eut rien
qui put mon [sc. mal—Laverd.] edifier. ie
prié Mons’. le gouu. de m’en exépter.

Cette année on mit la corde de bois a cent
sols; c’estoit ceux qui y auoient interest qui
vendoient & acheptoient pour eux-mesme: il
y auoit en ce poinct vn grand desordre qui
donnoit de la Ialousie; ce qui adoucissoit
estoit que cela tournoit au profit du pays & de
quelques habitans.

Mais le mal principal estoit que les demy
cordes deuant auoir 4. pieds en tout sens,
elles n’en auioient pas trois, & c’estoit de fort
matuais bois.


1645-46] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 251
ee a ee


o'clock, father gabriel lalement said two, and
the 3rd at the Ursulines’. I said high mass
at 8 o’clock, and father defretat, afterward,
his 3 masses. The weather was so mild that
we had no need of a warmer on the Altar
during all the masses. 5 cannon shots were
fired at the Elevation, at the midnight mass.

Father Vimont started, this same Christmas
Day, for the visitation at beauport; he came
back the day before the last of the year, about
10 o'clock.

On Christmas Day, we went to give bene-
diction at the hospital; and, on the next day,
at the Ursulines’.

On the last Day of the year, they gave a
performance at the warehouse, Enacting
the sit. Our Fathers were present,—in
deference to Monsieur the governor, who took
pleasure therein, as also did the savages,—
that is, fathers de Quen, Lalement, and defre-
tat: all went well, and there was nothing which
could not edify. I begged Monsieur the
governor to excuse me from attendance.

This year, the cord of wood was placed at a
hundred sols; it was those who were inter-
ested therein who sold and bought for them-
selves. There was great disorder on this
score, which caused Jealousy. What quieted
matters was, that that went to the profit of
the country and of some habitans.

But the principal evil was, that, whereas
the half-cords should have been 4 feet on each
side, they were not so much as three; and it
was very poor wood at that.


Father Vimont’s
journey.


Benedictions.


Comedy.


Disorder; lack of
police regulations.


LX


RELATION OF 1645-46


PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1647


SOURCE: For the text of this Relation we follow a copy
of the original Cramoisy, in Lenox Library; the facsimile of
the title-page we obtain from a like copy in possession of the
Wisconsin State Historical Society.

Owing to the length of the Re/atzon, we herewith publish
only the first two chapters of Part I.; the remainder of the
document will appear in Volumes XXIX. and XXX.


S eRe MARQVAB
ge és én s des Peres Ra


ES ANNEES 1645. & 1646.
fe | BnuoyéeauR, te Prouincial dela P ouince
fe ode France,


recur det Mifions dela efi
ey cenpecure Car


RE LA@E TON


OF WHAT O@GURRED
MiOrs 7 NOTEWORTHY
in the Missions of the Fathers

of the Society of JESUS,


IN
NEW FRANCE,
IN THE YEARS 1645 AND 1646.
Sent to the Reverend Father Provincial of
the Province of France.


By the Supertor of the Missions of the same
Society.


Pyar inne,
SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY,
Printer in ordinary to the King)

and to the Queen Regent, |


rue St. Jac-
ques, atthe
Sign of the
Storks.


Print-


ed by rote


GABRIEL CRAMOISY.


Mew.  xLV II
WITH ROYAL LICENSE.


258 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


Extraict du Priuilege du Roy.


AR grace & priuilege du Roy, il eft permis a
Sebaftien Cramoify Marchand Libraire Iuré en
l’Vniuerfité de Paris, & Imprimeur ordinaire

du Roy & de la Reyne Regente, Bourgeois de Paris,
d’imprimer ou faire imprimer vn Liure intitulé, Reda-
tion de ce qui s'eft pafsé de plus remarquable és Mifsions
des Peres de la Compagnie de IESVS, en la Nouuelle
France, és années 1645. & 1646. enuoyée au R. P. Pro-
uincial de la Prouince de France, par le Superieur des
Mifsions de la mefme Compagnie. Et ce, pendant le
temps & efpace de dix années confecutiues, auec
deffenfes 4 tous Libraires & Imprimeurs d’imprimer
ou faire imprimer ledit Liure, fous pretexte de de-
guifement ou changement qu’ils y pourroient faire,
a peine de confifcation & de l’amende portée par ledit
Priuilege. Donné a Paris le 6. Decembre 1646.
Par le Roy en fon Confeil,
CRAMOISY.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 259


Extract from the Royal License.


Y the grace and privilege of the King, Sebastien
B Cramoisy, Sworn Merchant Bookseller in the
University of Paris, Printer in ordinary to the
King and to the Queen Regent, and Citizen of Paris,
is permitted to print, or cause to be printed, a Book
entitled: Relation de ce qui s'est passé de plus remarquable
és Missions des Peres de la Compagnie de JESUS, en la
Nouvelle France, és années 1645. et 1646. envoyée au R.
P. Provincial de la Province de France, par le Superieur
des Missions de la mesme Compagnie. And this, during
the time and space of ten consecutive years, with pro-
hibition to all Booksellers and Printers of printing,
or causing to be printed, the said Book, under pretext
of disguise or change that they might make therein:
under penalty of confiscation and the fine imposed by
the said License. Given at Paris, the 6th of Decem-
ber, 1646.
By the King in his Council,
CRAMOISY.


260 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 28


Permiffion du P. Prouincial.


OVS Eftienne Charlet Prouincial de la Compa-
N gnie de IESvs en la Prouince de France,
auons accordé pour l’aduenir au fieur Sebaftien
Cramoify Marchand Libraire, Imprimeur ordinaire
du Roy, l’impreffion des Relations de la Nouuelle
France. Fait a Paris ce 8. Ianuier 1647.
ESTIENNE CHARLET.


1645 - 46] RELATION OF 1645+ 46 261


TT


Permission of the Father Provincial.


E, Estienne Charlet, Provincial of the Society

Y V of JESUS in the Province of France, have

granted for the future to sieur Sebastien

Cramoisy, Merchant Bookseller, Printer in ordinary

to the King, the right to print the Relations of New
France. Done at Paris, this 8th of January, 1647.
ESTIENNE CHARLET.


262


LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 28


Table des Chapitres contenvs en ce Liure.


ELATION de ce qui seft pafsé en la Nouuelle
France, fur le grand fleuue S. Laurens, en
L année 1646. ; : - pare I


CHAP. I. De ce qui s’eft pa/sé entre les Francots, les


II.


Vi


Vil


Hurons & les Algonguins, pour la conclufion de


la paix auec les Troquois. : fol. 7
De la venué de fept Ambaffadeurs rs iee vers

les Francois, & de leur negociation. . 18
De l’heureufe mort du Pere Anne de Noite,

& du P. Enemond Maffe. : : 27
De la Mifsion des Martyrs commencée au .

des Iroquois. . SG

De la refidence de S. lofeph a Sm OO
De la refidence de la Conception aux trots

Riuzeres. : 81


De la Mifsion de Tine Chie a Peete 102


VIII. De L’ habitation de Ville-Marie, en l'Ifle de


1G


ee


Montreal. : ; ‘ : LS
De quelques bonnes actions, & de quelques
bons fentimens des Sauuages Chreftiens. w46


De quelques particularitez du pays, & autres


chofes qui n'ont pi eftre rapportées Sous les
Chapitres precedens. . : 5 + -166


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46


263-


Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.


ELATION of what occurred in New France,

R on the great river St. Lawrence, in the year

1646. ; . page

Cuap. I. Of what yoy ie the French,
the Hurons, and the Algonquins, for the con-
clusion of the peace with the Iroquots. Jol.

II. Of the coming of seven Iroquois Ambassadors
to the French, and of their negotiations.

III. Of the blessed deaths of Father Anne de Notie
and Father Enemond Masse.

IV. Of the Mission of the Martyrs, Seah im the
country of the Iroquots.

V. Of the residence of St. Ree R at Swe

VI. Of the residence of la EE e at three
Rivers.

VII. Of the holy oon Wee at T. Weare

VIII. Of the settlement of Ville-Marie, in the
Island of Montreal. ;

IX. Of some good deeds and some good sentiments
of the Christian Savages.

X. Of some peculiarities of the porte ti,
other things which could not be related under the
preceding Chapters.


166


264 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


ELATION de ce qui s' eft pafsé de plus remar-
R quable en la Mifsion des Peres de la Compa-
gnie de LESVS aux Hurons pays de la Nou-
uelle France, depuis le mois de May de l'année
1645. tufques au mois de May de l'année
1646. : : page
Cuap. 1. De l’efiat du pays. : : fol.
Il. Deleftat du Chriftianif/me. : :
III. Actions remarquables du zele de quelques
CLYE MES ts. ; : ; ;
IV. L£/preuue de la conftance & du courage de
cette Eglife parmy les oppofitions des Infideles. .
V. Bons fentimens de quelques Chreftiens. 5
VI. Prouidence de Dieu fur quelques particuliers.
VII. De la Mifsion du Sain@-E/prit.
VII. De ce quis eft pafsé a Miskou.


Fin de la Table des Chapitres.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 265


ee a


ELATION of what occurred most noteworthy
R in the Mission of the Fathers of the Society of
JESUS among the Hurons, a country of New
France, from the month of May in the year 1645,

to the month of May in the year 1646, page I


Cuap. I. Of the state of the country. ; e 5
Il. Of the state of Christianity. : II
Ill. Remarkable instances of the zeal i some
Christians... ; : IS
IV. Trial of the constancy and courage of ie
Church amid the opposition of the Infidels. «14 eae
V. Good Sentiments of some Christians. oaumSal
VI. Providence of God over certain individuals. 85
VII. Of the Mission of the Holy Ghost. 402
VII. Of what occurred at Miskou. A elke


End of the Table of Chapters.


266 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


[1] Relation de ce qvi s’eft paffé en la Nov-
velle France fvr le grand Fleuue de S.
Laurens, en l’année mil fix
cens quarante-fix.


Av k. P. Efttenne Charlet Prouincial de la Compagnie de lxsvs,
en la Prouince de France.


ON R. PERE,

M Me trouuant obligé de rendre d’orefnauant
vn compte plus particulier 4 Voftre Reuer.
des chofes qui fe paffent és Miffions d’icy bas, ie luy
diray qu’apres auoir conferé ce que i’y ay veu depuis
vn an, auec ce que i’ay remarqué 14 haut, aux [2]
Miffions Huronnes dans l’efpace de plufieurs années,
ie ne puis que ie ne me confirme en la creance que
digitus Det eff hic, que c’eft l’ouurage d’vne proui-
dence toute particuliere, & d’vne bonté veritablement

infinie.
l’aurois bien de la peine d’expliquer les raifons
qui caufent en moy ce fentiment: il y a des fecrets
cachez auffi bien dans les ouurages de la prouidence,
que dans les merueilles de la nature, on les conoift
moins qu’on ne les admire. Peut-eftre que la face
du pays, qui me parut toute affreufe dans la guerre,
quand ie le vis pour la premiere fois, s’e{tant chan gée
& deuenué toute belle dans la douceur de la paix,
forme en moy cette penfée & me donne ce fenti-
ment: mais cét ouurage, quoy qu’excellent, furpaffant
toutes nos efperances, ne feroit pas fuffifant de me


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 267


[1] Relation of what occurred in New France,
on the great River St. Lawrence, in
the year one thousand six
hundred and forty-six.


To the Reverend Father Estienne Charlet, Provincial of the
Society of Jesus in the Province of France.


Y REVEREND FATHER,

M Finding myself obliged to render hereafter

amore detailed account to Your Reverence
of matters which occur in the Missions down here, I
will say to you that—after having compared what
I have seen in these within one year, with what I
observed up yonder in the [2] Huron Missions during
the space of several years—I can only confirm my-
self in the belief that digitus Dei est hic,—that it is
the work of a very special providence, and of a good-
ness truly infinite.

I would have much difficulty in explaining the
reasons which cause in me this feeling; there are
hidden secrets in the works of providence, as well as
in the wonders of nature: one understands them less
than one admires them. Perhaps the aspect of the
country,— which appeared to me wholly frightful in
war, when I saw it for the first time,—having
changed and become very beautiful in the quiet of
peace, forms in me this thought and gives me this
feeling; but that work— though excellent, and sur-
passing all our hopes—would not be sufficient to


268 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo. 28


donner tant de fatisfaction, s’il n’eftoit accompagné
de fa fin principale, l’eftabliffement & l’aduancement
du Royaume de Dieu.

En fuite donc les Sauuages des autres nations atti-
rez par l’odeur des premiers Chreftiens de la redu-
ction de S. Iofeph a Sillery, abordent de toutes parts,
[3] pour fe faire inftruire, & pendant que les vns
cherchent la Foy, les autres croiffent & s’augmentent
dans la charité: en vn mot ceux qui fuyoient IEsvs-
CurRIsT, & qui le regardoient comme la caufe de
leur mort en la terre, le viennent maintenant cher-
cher en leurs maladies, comme la fource de leur vie
dans le Ciel, & ceux qui l’ont trouué, font dans des
treffentimens & des reconnoiffances toutes particu-
lieres du bon-heur qu’ils ont rencontré.

Or ayant veu les mefmes benedictions fur les
nations plus hautes & plus éloignées, c’ef{t ce qui me
fait penfer que le temps enfin eft venu de la conuer-
fion de ce nouteau monde, que |’Efprit de Dieu veut
conduire ces pauures peuples a la fin pour laquelle il
les a creés, & qu’apres vne nuit de tant de fiecles, la
lumiere a paru fur ces contrées, la Foy y eft dans
fon Aurore, elle aura fon afcendant, & ceux qui vien-
dront apres nous, la verront en fon Midy.

Plufieurs chofes A ce que ie puis reconnoiftre de
plus prés, ont contribué 4 ce bon-heur. Le bon eftat
dans lequel Meffieurs de la Compagnie de la nouuelle
[4] France, ont mis le pays & la Colonie; le fecours
& l’affiftance qu’ont donné Meffieurs de Montreal:
la pieté & le bon exemple des habitans, & particu-
lierement le courage, le zele & la charité des deux
familles Religieufes de 1’Hofpital & des Vrfulines,
qui apres auoir furpaffé le commun de leur condition,


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 269


give me so much satisfaction, if I could not view it in
connection with its principal design, the establish-
ment and advancement of the Kingdom of God.

As a result, then, the Savages of the other nations,
attracted by the reputation of the first Christians at
the reduction of St. Joseph at Sillery, approach from
every direction, [3] in order to become instructed;
and, while some seek the Faith, others increase and
expand in charity. In a word, those who shunned
Jesus CHRIST and who regarded him as the cause of
their death on the earth, now come to seek him in
their diseases, as the source of their life in Heaven;
and those who have found him, are filled with emo-
tion and gratitude for the happiness which they have
encountered.

Now, having seen the same blessings upon the
upper and more distant nations, this makes me think
that the time has at last come for the conversion of
this new world; that the Spirit of God will guide
these poor peoples to the end for which he has
created them; and that, after a night of so many
centuries, the light has appeared upon these countries.
The Faith is in its Dawn here: it will have its
ascendant, and those who shall come after us will see
it in its Noon.

Several things, as nearly as I can ascertain, have
contributed to this blessing: the good condition in
which Messieurs of the Company of new [4] France
have placed the country and the Colony; the succor
and assistance given by Messieurs of Montreal; the
piety and the good example of the habitans; and
especially the courage, zeal, and charity of the Reli-
gious families, the Hospital nuns and Ursulines,—
who, after having surpassed the average of their


270 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


en paffant la mer, femblent tous les iours fe furmon-
ter elles-mefmes dans tous les exercices de charité
enuers Dieu & le prochain, qu’on peut attendre
d’elles.

I’ay quelquefois pris plaifir de comparer la charité
des vnes A affifter iour & nuit de pauures Barbares tous
chancreux & mourans, mettans en cela tout leur plai-
fir & contentement; & le zele des autres 4 apprendre
les langues & ramaffer de tous coftez en leur Semi-
naire des filles & des femmes Sauuages, pour leur
expofer & debiter les marchandifes du Ciel: mais
i’aduoiie que ie n’en ay pti conclure autre chofe, finon
que ces fpectacles eftoient dignes d’attirer les yeux
du Paradis fur ce pauure pays, & de le luy rendre
fauorable. Dieu beniffe 4 iamais les perfonnes qui
fauorifent & qui fouftiennent de fi fainctes entre-
prifes.

[5] Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny noftre
Gouuerneur a auffi efté l’vn des principaux in{ftru-
mens, dont la Diuine Prouidence s’eft feruie, pour
mettre les affaires. dans le poinct & dans le iour
qu’elles paroiffent: le trauail de dix ans n’a point
ébranlé fa conftance, ny diminué fes foins pour tout
ce qui regarde l’auancement de la Religion, & du
bien public.

Ie ne parle point de la premiere & principale roiie
qui fait mouuoir ce nouueau monde, auffi bien que
l’ancien, ny des autres roiies qui luy font coniointes,
& qui luy donnant & receuant d’elle vn fainct mouue-
mét, l’impriment fur ce grand ouurage: il n’y a que
Dieu qui puiffe eftre le prix & la recompenfe de ces
belles & grandes ames, qui feront bien aifes d’ap-
prendre que nous auons cette année augmenté nos


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 271


station, by crossing the sea, seem every day to outdo
themselves in all the exercises of charity toward God
and their neighbor that can be expected from them.

I have sometimes taken pleasure in comparing the
charity of those who assist, day and night, poor Bar-
barians all full of sores, and dying,— finding therein
their whole pleasure and satisfaction,—and the zeal
of the others, in learning languages and gathering
from all directions into their Seminary Savage girls
and women, in order to set forth and sell to them the
merchandise of Heaven. But I avow that I could
form no other conclusion therefrom, save that these
sights were worthy to attract the eyes of Paradise
upon this poor country, and to render it favorable to
it. May God forever bless the persons who foster
and who support such holy enterprises.

[5] Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny, our
Governor, has also been one of the principal instru-
ments which the Divine Providence has used for put-
ting affairs at the point and in the light in which
they appear; the labor of ten years has not shaken
his constancy, or diminished his cares for all which
regards the advancement of Religion and of the
public good.

I do not speak of the first and main wheel which
moves this new world as well as the old, nor of the
other wheels which are conjoined with it, and which,
giving to it and receiving from it a blessed motion,
impart that to this great work. Only God can be the
reward and the recompense of those beautiful and
lofty souls, who will be very glad to learn that we
have this year augmented our little Churches by
three hundred Neophytes, newly baptized.

For the rest, my Reverend Father, here follows


272 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


petites Eglifes de trois cens Neophytes nouuellement
baptizez. ;

Au refte, mon R. Pere, voicy la Relation des chofes
principales qui fe font paffées depuis vn an: elle y
verra la mort de deux des plus anciens ouuriers qu’ait
eu noftre Compagnie en ces contrées, c’ef{t le Pere
Anne de Noiie, & le Pere Enemond Maffe: ie ne voy
icy perfonne [6] de ceux qui les ont connus qui ne
die de bon coeur, viuvat & moriatur anima mea vité &
morte tuftorum tftorum. Or jacoit que leur mort doiue
donner plus d’enuie que de compaffion, ie ne laiffe
pas de les recommander aux fuffrages & aux fainctes
prieres de vof{tre Reuer. & de toute la Prouince, cOme
auffi toutes nos Miffions.

L’arriuée des trois Peres qu’il luy a pleu nous
enuoyer de renfort, nous a bien confolé; mais ce
nombre eftant defia au deffous de celuy que i’auois
demandé pour les Miffions Huronnes, elle peut voir le
befoin que nous en auons d’autres, & le verra encore
dauantage dans la Relation, y rencontrant les nou-
uelles Miffids dont Dieu nous a donné les ouuertures:
c’e{t ce que nous efperons de fa charité, & du zele de
nos Peres pour ces petites Eglifes naiffantes, que ie
ne puis affez recommander aux faincts Sacrifices &
aux fainctes prieres de tous en general, & de chacun
en particulier.

De Voftre Reuerence,
De Quebek ce Tres-humble & tres-obeiffant
28. Octobre 1646. feruiteur, felon Dieu,
HIEROSME LALEMANT.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 273


the Relation of the principal things which have
occurred within a year; you will see in it the death
of two of the most veteran workers whom our Society
has had in these countries— Father Anne de Noiie
and Father Enemond Masse. I see no one here, [6]
of those who have known them, who does not say
with good heart: vivat et moriatur anima mea vité et
morte gustorum istorum. Now, though their death
must occasion more envy than compassion, I never-
theless commend them, as also all our Missions, to
the suffrages and the holy prayers of your Rever-
ence and of the whole Province.

The arrival of the three Fathers whom you have
been pleased to send us as a reinforcement, has much
consoled us; but, this number being even below that
which I had requested for the Huron Missions, you
can see the need that we have of others; and you
will see it still more in the Relation, on encounter-
ing therein mention of the new Missions of which
God has granted the beginnings. This is what we
hope from your charity, and from the zeal of our Fa-
thers for these little infant Churches, which I cannot
sufficiently commend to the holy Sacrifices and to
the blessed prayers of all in general, and of each in
particular.

Your Reverence’s
From Quebek, this Very humble and most obe-
28th of October, 1646. dient servant in God,
HIEROSME LALEMANT.


274 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


[7] CHAPITRE I.


DE.CE.OUI1S ESE PASSE ENTRE LES FRANCOIS, LES
HURONS & LES ALGONQUINS, POUR LA CONCLU-
SION DE LA PAIX AUEC LES IROQUOIS.


L eft a propos de faire quelques remarques 4a 1’en-

| trée de ce Chapitre, pour auoir vne idée plus

nette & vne connoiffance plus particuliere des
affaires qu’on a traitées auec ces peuples.

Ie dy done en premier lieu, que fous le nom
d’Iroquois nous auons iufques 4 maintenant compris
plufieurs Nations confederées, toutes ennemies des
Sauuages qui nous font Alliez: ces Nations ont leurs
noms particuliers, les Annierronnons, les Oniontche-
ronons, les Onontagueronons, les Sonont¥aéronons,
& atttres. Nous n’auons encor proprement la paix
qu’auec les Annierronnons, qui font les plus voifins
de nos habitations, & ceux qui nous donnoient plus
de peine, d’orefnauant nous les diftinguerons par [8]
leurs noms propres & particuliers, afin d’éuiter la
confufion.

En fecond lieu, outre ces Iroquois il y a d’autres
Nations plus au Nord qui femblent vouloir entrer en
guerre auec nos Sauuages, comme les Sokoquiois que
nos Sauuages appellent Affok¥ekik, les Mahingds, ou
Mahinganak, auec lefquels les Algonquins ont eu
autrefois de grandes alliances; mais les Iroquois
Annierronnons les ayans domtez, ils fe font iettez de
leur party: il y en a d’autres, comme les Abnaquiois,
qui nous font amis.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 275


[7] CHAPTER I.


OF WHAT OCCURRED BETWEEN THE FRENCH, THE
HURONS, AND THE ALGONQUINS, FOR THE CON-
CLUSION OF THE PEACE WITH THE IROQUOIS.


T is fitting to make some remarks at the begin-

| ning of this Chapter, to give a more distinct

idea and a more definite knowledge of the affairs
which have been transacted with these peoples.

I say then, in the first place, that under the name
of ‘‘ Iroquois’? we have hitherto included several
confederated Nations, all enemies of the Savages who
are Allied to us. These Nations have their separate
names—the Annierronnons, the Oniontcheronons,
the Onontagueronons, the Sonontwaéronons, and
others. We have as yet no peace, in a proper sense,
except with the Annierronnons, who are nearest our
settlements, and who were giving us most trouble.
Henceforth we will distinguish these tribes by [8]
their proper and special names, so as to avoid
confusion.

In the second place, besides these Iroquois there
are other Nations, more to the North, who seem
disposed to undertake war with our Savages,—as the
Sokoquiois, whom our Savages call Assokwekik; and
the Mahingans, or Mahinganak, with whom the
Algonquins formerly had extensive alliances,— but,
the Annierronnon Iroquois having subdued them,
they have ranged themselves upon their side. There


276 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


Ie remarqueray en troifiéme lieu, que l’an paffé au
depart de la flotte, comme nous gouftions la douceur
de la paix encommencée, on nous vint apporter la
nouuelle que trois Sauuages de la bourgade de S.
Iofeph ou de Sillery, auoient efté tuez, & quelques
autres fort bleffez: ce bruit détrempa noftre ioye
d’abfynthe fur le doute que les Annierr6énons n’euf-
fent agy de mauuaife foy auec nous. Enfin apres
toutes les perquifitions poffibles, nous trouuafmes
que l’vn des plus feruens Chreftiens de Sillery ou
de fainct lofeph, auoit ef{té traitreufement maffacré,
auec deux ieunes garcons baptizez, [9] que le fils de
Frangois Xauier Nenasksmat, l’vne des deux pre-
mieres colomnes de la reduction des Sauuages, auoit
efté bleffé 4 mort: en effet il eft venu rendre l’ame
tres-fainctement entre nos bras, apres auoir receu en
l’Hofpital de Kebec tous les charitables traitemens
dont vn pauure malade peut eftre affifté. Sa femme
dans cette trahifon fut laiffée pour morte, on luy en-
leua vne partie de la peau & des cheueux de la tefte,
mais Noftre Seigneur luy a rendu lafanté. Ce nous
fut vne confolation que ces deux derniers n’expire-
rent pas fur la place: car ils nous affeurerent que le
langage des meurtriers eftoit entieremét different du
langage des Iroquois: cela arrefta les haches des
Algonquins, qui n’auroiét point manqué d’affommer
quelques Annierronnons qui fe trouuoient pour lors
parmy eux & parmy nous: enfin on a découuert que
cét affaffinat auoit efté commis par les Sokoquiois,
deux defquels s’eftans rencontrez quelques années
auparauant dans les confins des Iroquois, auoient
efté tuez par quelques foldats montagnais, & vn
autre auoit efté fort mal traité des Algonquins, mais


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 277


are others, as the Abnaquiois, who are friends to us.
' I will remark, in the third place, that last year, at
the departure of the fleet, when we were tasting the
sweetness of the incipient peace, news was brought
to us that three Savages of the village of St. Joseph,
or Sillery, had been killed, and some others severely
wounded. ‘This report tempered our joy with worm-
wood, in the doubt lest the Annierronnons had acted
in bad faith with us. Finally, after all possible
investigation, we found that one of the most fervent
Christians of Sillery, or of saint Joseph, had been
treacherously slain, with two baptized young lads;
[9] that the son of Francois Xavier Nenaskoumat —
one of the two chief pillars of the Savage reduction —
had been mortally wounded. Indeed, this man came
to give up the ghost very piously in our arms, after
having received in the Hospital at Kebec all the
charitable attentions with which a poor sick man can
be assisted. In that treacherous attack, his wife was
left for dead; they removed a part of the skin and
the hair from her head, but Our Lord restored her
health. It was a consolation to us that these last
two did not die on the spot; for they assured us that
the language of the murderers was altogether differ-
ent from the language of the Iroquois; that stayed
the hatchets of the Algonquins, who would not have
failed to beat to death some Annierronnons who at
that time happened to be among them and among
us. At last, it was discovered that this murder had
been committed by the Sokoquiois, two of whose
tribe — having chanced to be, some years before, on
the borders of the Iroquois—had been killed by
some montagnais warriors; and another had been
very badly treated by the Algonquins, but ransomed


278 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo. 28


racheté [10] & renuoyé de [sc. dans] fon pais par
Monfieur nof{tre Gouuerneur.

Le Diable preuoyant que la paix troubleroit fon
royaume, s’eftoit efforcé de la rompre: mais l’Ange
de l’Eglife de Dieu 1l’a tenu a la cadene, ila fait
conclure auec benediction ce qu’on a fouhaité depuis
tant d’années, auec vne confidente humilité & vne
patience Chreftienne.

Les Iroquois Annierronnons ont chaffé auec toute
liberté dans les confins des Algonquins, & ceux-cy
les ont veu & receu de bon ceil, les ont amenez en nos
habitations: il n’y a lieu en tous ces quartiers ot on
n’ait veu de temps en temps quelques Annierronnons.
Ceux qui fgauent l’antipathie de ces peuples, & les
€épouuentables inclinations qu’ils ont 4 la vengeance,
penfent voir autant de miracles qu’ils voyent de
bonne intelligence entre vn Algonquin & vn Iroquois.

On efcriuit l’an paffé comme les Ambaffadeurs
Annierronnons ayans negocié auec les Francois fur
la paix vniuerfelle, s’eftoient retirez en leur pais
pour reporter la parole & la voix d’Onontio, c’eft a
dire les penfées de Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur. Le
Frangois qui auoit efté long-temps [11] captif en leur
pais, les accompagnoit, auec ordre de fe trouuer en
toutes leurs affemblées: voicy ce qu’il en a remarqué.

Ayant quitté les Francois, ils furent dix-huic
iours en chemin, & trois iours apres leur arriuée dans
le pais, les principaux s’ef{tant affemblez de diuers
endroits, fe comporterent en cette forte.

Auant que ces Ambaffadeurs parlaffent, on leur fit
vn prefent pour adoucir le conduit de leur voix, afin
que les paroles d’Onontio qu’ils auoient receu par
leurs oreilles, fortiffent sis peine & fans rudeffe de


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 279:


[10] and sent back to his own country by Monsieur
our Governor.

The Devil, foreseeing that the peace would trouble
his kingdom, had striven to break it; but the Angel
of the Church of God has kept it fast locked; he has
brought to a happy conclusion that which has been
desired for so many years with a confident humility
and a Christian patience.

The Annierronnon Iroquois have hunted with
every liberty in the borders of the Algonquins, and
the latter have seen and received them with friend-
liness, and have conducted them to our settlements;
there is no place in all these quarters where from
time to time some Annierronnons have not been
seen. Those who know the antipathy between these
peoples and their frightful proneness to vengeance,
regard it as a miracle whenever they see a friendly
understanding between an Algonquin and an Iro-
quois.

It was written last year, how the Annierronnon
Ambassadors, having negotiated with the French for
a universal peace, had withdrawn to their own coun-
try in order to report the word and the voice of
Onontio,—that is to say, the opinions of Monsieur
our Governor. The Frenchman who had long been
a [11] captive in their country, accompanied them,
with orders to be present in all their assemblies;
here follows what he has observed therein.

Having left the French, they were eighteen days
on the way; and, three days after their arrival in the
country, the principal persons having assembled
from various places, behaved in this manner:

Before those Ambassadors spoke, they were given
a present, in order to soften the tones of their voices,


280 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


leur bouche. Ce prefent fait, le Fragois qui a con-
noiffance de leur langue, & ces Ambaffadeurs déploy-
erét les prefens ddt ils eftoient chargez, & en fuite
haranguerent auec la fatisfaction de tout le monde,
leurs difcours finis, les Capitaines firent auffi d’au-
tres prefens pour eftre apportez 4 Onontio & & fes
confederez.

Le premier feruit comme d’vn bain, dans lequel
ces Ambaffadeurs recrus du chemin fe pouuoient
delaffer; ou comme d’vn onguent qui gueriroit les
bleffeures que les pierres, les ronces & les halliers
qu’on rencontre en vn fi long voyage, auroient [12]
pt faire a leurs pieds.

Le fecond publioit que leur hache d’armes fufpen-
dué en l’air fans ramener fon coup iufques a la ref-
ponfe des Hurons & des Algonquins fuiuant le defir
d’Onontio, auoit perdu fon vfage, qu’on l’auoit iettée
filoin qwhomme du monde ne la pourroit iamais
retrouuer, c’e{t 4 dire que les Hurons & les Algon-
quins eftans entrez dans la paix, les Annierronnons
n’auoient plus d’armes que pour la chaffe.

Le troifiéme tefmoignoit la douleur que receuoient
les Annierronnons de leur miferable fille onniexte,
laquelle méprifoit la voix de fa mere & le confeil de
fon pere, quelle eftoit fi infolente d’auoir encor
enuoyé de fes enfans vers Montreal, pour furprendre
ceux qui fe trouueroient en cette contrée. Onniexte
eft vne bourgade dont la plus grande partie des
hommes ayant e{té deconfis en guerre par les hauts
Algonquins, elle fut contrainte d’appeller des Annier-
ronnons pour fe repeupler; de 1a vient que les
Annierronnons l’appellent leur fille. Monfieur le
Gouuerneur l’ayant inuitée comme fon enfant i


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 281


so that the words of Onontio, which they had received
by their ears, might issue without difficulty and with-
out roughness from their lips. This gift made, the
Frenchman, who has knowledge of their language,
and those Ambassadors, displayed the presents with
which they were charged, and then harangued to the
satisfaction of all the people. Their speeches fin-
ished, the Captains also made other presents, to be
conveyed to Onontio and to his confederates.

The first served as a bath in which those Ambas-
sadors, fatigued from the journey, might refresh
themselves; or as an ointment which would cure the
wounds that the stones, the briars, and the thickets,
encountered in so long a journey, might [12] have
caused to their feet.

The second proclaimed that their war hatchet —
according to the desire of Onontio, suspended in the
air without finishing its blow until the answer of the
Hurons and of the Algonquins —had lost its use;
and that it had been thrown so far that not a man in
the world could ever find it again,— that is, that, the
Hurons and the Algonquins having entered into
peace, the Annierronnons had no more arms except
for the chase.

The third indicated the grief which the Annier-
ronnons received from their miserable daughter onni-
eoute, who despised the voice of her mother and the
counsel of her father; that she was so insolent as even
to have sent some of her children to Montreal, in
order to surprise those who should happen to be in
that country. Onnieoute is a village which, the
greatest part of its men having been defeated in war
by the upper Algonquins, was constrained to call the
Annierronnons to repeople it; thence it comes that


282 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


entrer dans vne paix generale par l’entremife des
Annierronnons, [13] difent qu’elle eft rebelle a fon
pere & Afa mere. Le temps amenera tout, & Dieu
donnera des fruicts en fa faifon.

Le quatriéme fut vn tefmoignage public de la
reconnoiffance de toutes les bourgades des Annier-
ronnons, de ce qu Onontio auoit aplany la terre &
reiiny les coeurs.

Le cinquiéme eftoit vne action de grace au mefme
Onontio, qu’ils reconnoiffoient comme le pere com-
mun de toutes ces Nations, luy donnant mille loii-
anges de ce qu’il auoit rendu l’efprit aux Algon-
quins; ce que nul autre n’auoit pt faire deuant luy.

Le fixiéme eftoit vne requefte qu’ils luy prefen-
toient a ce qu’il fit allumer des feux dans toutes les
habitations de fon gouuernement, afin que toutes les
Nations s’y venans chauffer en affeurance, puiffent
efcouter fa voix & joiiir de fon amitié; & en cas qu'il
arriue quelque different, qu’il foit l’arbitre des Iro-
quois, des Hurons & des Algonquins.

Ces prefens faits, on ne parla plus que de feftins,
que de danfes, & que de refjoiiiffances publiques: on
employa dix iours en ces bals & ences feftes, & puis
[14] on renuoya le Francois auec fept Ambaffadeurs
pour porter ces prefens, & pour fe refiotiir auec les
Francois & auec leurs alliez fur la paix conclué.

Ces Ambaffadeurs eftans venus par terre iufques au
lac oti il fe faut embarquer, ne trouuerent point leurs
canots ou leurs bateaux d’écorces, quelque mécontent
ou quelque larron les auoit brifez ou enleuez, fi bien
quwils furent contraints de retourner fur leurs pas,
pour pouruoir a4 leur voyage: ce retour fut vn coup
du Ciel, qui nous voulut donner des preuues de la


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 283


the Annierronnons call it their ‘‘ daughter.” Mon-
sieur the Governor having invited it, as his child, to
enter upon a general peace through the mediation of
the Annierronnons, [13] they say that it is rebellious
to its father and mother. Time will bring about
everything, and God will give fruits in his season.

The fourth was a public token of the gratitude of
all the villages of the Annierronnons, that Onontio
had leveled the earth and united the hearts.

The fifth was an act of thanks to the same Onon-
tio, whom they recognized as the common father of
all those Nations,— giving him a thousand praises
for having restored sense to the Algonquins, which
no other had been able to do before him.

The sixth was a request which they submitted to
him, that he should cause fires to be kindled in all
the settlements of his government, so that all the
Nations coming thither to warm themselves in safe-
ty, may listen to his voice and enjoy his friendship;
and, in case there occurs some difference, that he be
the umpire of the Iroquois, the Hurons, and the
Algonquins.

These presents made, there was mention only of
feasts, of dances, and of public rejoicings. They
spent ten days in these balls and feasts, and then
[14] they sent away the Frenchman with seven Am-
bassadors to convey those gifts, and to rejoice with
the French and with their allies over the conclusion
of peace.

These Ambassadors having reached, by land, the
lake where they must embark, did not find their
canoes or their boats of bark; some disaffected person
or some thief had broken these, or carried them
away; insomuch that they were constrained to retrace


284 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


fincerité des Iroquois Annierronnons; car 4 mefme
temps que le Francois entra dans leur principale bour-
gade, arriuerent quelques Ambaffadeurs Sokoquiois
deleguez de leur nation pour faire rompre la paix
entre les Annierronnons & les Algonquins: 1’audi-
ence leur eftant donnée celuy qui portoit la parole
harangua en ces termes: Il y a long-temps que ie
vous ay entendu dire que les Algonquins eftoient vos
ennemis irreconciliables, & que vous les haiffez au
de 18 du tombeau, en forte que fi vous les pouuiez
rencontrer en l’autre vie que voftre guerre feroit
eternelle, comme nous fommes [15] vos alliez, nous
entrons dans vos paffions & dans vos interefts: voila
les teftes de quelques-vns que nous auons maffacrez,
& vn lien que nous vous prefentons pour en garoter
auec nous autant qu'il nous fera poffible. La deffus
ils prefentent les cheuelures des Chreftiens de S.
Iofeph tuez 1’Automne derniere, comme i’ay dit au
commencement de ce Chapitre, & vn grand collier
de porcelaine qui deuroit feruir de fers pour les
mettre a la cadene.

Les Iroquois refpondirent auec indignation: Nous
nous eftonnons de voftre hardieffe, ou plui{toft de
voi{tre temerité, vous nous iettez la honte fur le
vifage, vous nous faites paffer pour des fourbes.
Onontio auec lequel nous auons traité la paix n’eft
point vn enfant, fi nous vous regardions de bon ceil,
il auroit fujet de dire, les Annierronnons n’ont pas
tué mes alliez, mais bien leurs haches, ie penfois
agir auec de vrays hommes, & i’ay traité auec des
trompeurs & auec des fourbes.

Ce nveft pas tout, les Algonquins apprenans
que les teftes de leurs freres font en nos cabanes


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 285
a eck. tes SL
their steps, to provide for their journey. Thisreturn
was an act of Heaven, which willed to give us proofs
of the sincerity of the Annierronnon Iroquois; for,
at the same time when the Frenchman entered their
principal village, some Sokoquiois Ambassadors
arrived, delegated by their nation, in order to break
the peace between the Annierronnons and the Algon-
quins. Audience being given them, he who was
spokesman harangued in these terms: ‘“‘ For a long
time I have heard you say that the Algonquins were
your irreconcilable enemies, and that you hated them
even beyond the grave,—so that, if you could meet
them in the other life, your war would be eternal.
As we are [15] your allies, we enter into your pas-
sions and into your interests. Behold the heads of
some whom we have massacred, and a cord which we
present to you for the sake of binding with us as
many of them as we possibly can.” Thereupon they
present the scalps of the Christians of St. Joseph,—
killed last Autumn, as I have said at the beginning
of this Chapter,—and a great necklace of porcelain,
which was to serve as irons to put them in chains.
The Iroquois answered, with indignation: ‘‘ We
are astonished at your boldness, or rather at your
temerity; you cast shame on our faces; you make us
pass for knaves. Onontio, with whom we have
treated peace, is not a child; if we looked at you
with favor, he would have reason to say, ‘ The Anni-
erronnons have not killed my allies, but it was done
by their hatchets. I thought to deal with true men,
and I have treated with deceivers and with knaves.’
“This is not all; the Algonquins, learning that
the heads of their brothers are in our cabins, will
cut off those of our [16] fellow countrymen whoare in


286 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28
SMS PERC: PA ALS cafe rboaaice, SS Os a


couperont celles de nos [16] compatriotes qui font en
leur pais, voila les defordres de voftre temerité, retirez
vous, cachez ces teftes, emportez ces liens, comme
nous n’auons qu’vn coeur, nous ne voulons qu’vne
langue.

S’il y ade la tromperie dans cette action, elle eft
plus que tres-raffinée, & il femble que la raifon con-
uie ces peuples A embraffer la paix, Dieu leur a donné
yn fentiment que le demon de la guerre qui les auoit
tofijours fauorifez, les alloit quitter, la refolution de
quelques Algonquins & Hurons qui ayds fur la fin
genereufement combatu auoient pris quelques-vns
d’eux captifs, fouftenoit cette penfée. En fecond
lieu, comme ils font chaffeurs & que la plufpart des
animaux font fur les marches des Algonquins, ils
ont vne paffion d’en tirer 4 leur aife & fans crainte:
en effet ils ne s’y font pas épargnez: car on dit qu’ils
ont tué plus de deux mille cerfs cét hyuer.

Troifiémement, le prifonnier Annierronnon que les
Hurons auoient pris proche de Richelieu, & qu’ils
auoient emmené en leur pais, eftant de retour en
fa patrie, a parlé hautement des Francois; il a fait
entendre A fes compatriotes que fi [17] Onontio prefte
la main aux Hurons, le mal-heur tombera fur leurs
teftes.

Apres tout, le grand Dieu des armées eft le feul &
vnique autheur de cette paix, ie le prie qu’il en foit
le conferuateur: nos raifonnemens eftoi€t trop cours
dans vne fi grande barbarie, la fureur ef{toit trop
allumée pour eftre affoupie ou efteinte par vne con-
duite humaine, & nous confeffons ingenuément que
fi celuy qui ‘a fait la paix, ne la conferue, nous n’a-
uons pas affez d’induftrie pour retenir l’inconftance
de ces Barbares dans la fermeté.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 287


their country,—such would be the evil results of your
temerity. Begone; hide these heads, take away
these bonds; as we have but one heart, we desire
but one tongue.”’

If there is deceit in this act, it is more than very
subtle; and it seems that reason invites these peoples
to embrace the peace. God has given them a feel-
ing that the demon of war, which had always favored
them, was about to leave them; the resolution of
some Algonquins and Hurons—who, having bravely
fought toward the last, had taken some Iroquois
captive—confirmed this idea. In the second place,
as they are hunters, and as most of the animals are on
the marches of the Algonquins, they have a great
desire to shoot these at their ease and without fear.
Indeed, they have not stinted themselves in this;
for it is said that they have killed more than two
thousand deer this winter.

Thirdly, the Annierronnon prisoner whom the
Hurons had taken near Richelieu, and whom they
had led away to their own country, having returned
to his native land, has spoken highly of the French;
he has given his countrymen to understand that if
[17] Onontio lends a hand to the Hurons, the misfor-
tune will fall on their own heads.

After all, the great God of hosts is the one and
only author of this peace; I entreat him that he will
be the preserver thereof. Our arguments were too
limited in so great a barbarism; fury was too much
kindled to be quelled or extinguished by human
effort; and we candidly confess that if he who has
made the peace does not preserve it, we have not
enough skill to restrain the inconstancy of these
Barbarians within firm bounds.


288 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


IESVS-CHRIST veut fauuer quelques-vns de ces
peuples, & enuoye defia fes precurfeurs ou fes auant-
couriers, les maladies peftilentielles, les afflictions,
& la mort mefme: ce font des fleaux qui humilient
les ames, & qui les font recourir a celuy qui a la force
en main: les Iroquois nous croiront bien-toft, & que
les Magiciens caufent ces mal-heurs, mais ce feroit
vne folie de chercher vn autre chemin, que celuy
de la Croix pour faire connoiftre les grandeurs du
Crucifié.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 239


JESUS CHRIST wills to save certain ones of these
peoples, and already sends his precursors or his
forerunners,— pestilential diseases, afflictions, and
death itself; these are scourges which humiliate
souls, and which make them have recourse to him
who hasthe powerin hand. The Iroquois will credit
us soon, and believe that the Magicians cause these
misfortunes; but it would be a folly to seek another
way than that of the Cross, to make known the gran-
deurs of the Crucified.


290 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 28


{18} CHAPITRE IT.


DE LA VENUE DE SEPT AMBASSADEURS IROQUOIS VERS
LES FRANCOIS, & DE LEUR NEGOCIATION.


E 22. de Feurier de cette année prefente 1646.
ip fept Iroquois Annierronnons & deux Hurons,
accompagnez du Frangois dont i’ay fait men-
tion cy-deffus, parurent 4a Montreal, apres auoir
tefioiiy cette habitation, ils defcendent aux trois
Riuieres. De 1a on enuoye donner aduis 4 Monfieur
no{tre Gouuerneur de leur venué: or comme ce che-
min s’eftoit fait fur les neiges, & que le froid faifoit
encor rouler les glaces fur noftre grand fleuue, les
Annierronnons s’en allerent a la chaffe qui deca qui
dela, en attendant le mois de May, que Monfieur le
Gouuerneur monta en cette habitation.

Le feptiéme de ce mois il leur donna audiance:
voicy ce qui fe paffa dans cette affemblée.

Le plus confiderable éleuant fa voix, entonna [19]
vne chanfon d’adctid de graces: Nous eftids morts,
difoit-il, & nous voila viuans, nous apportions nos
teftes pour eftre facrifiées aux ombres des Algonquins
ou des montagnais qui ont efté maffacrez 1’ Automne
dernier, nous doutans bien qu’on nous feroit coupa-
bles de cet affaffinat; mais Onontio arreftant la cho-
lere des Algonquins, a d6éné iour A noftre innocence.
La deffus ils tirent vn prefent, le iettent aux pieds
des parens & des alliez des defundcts, difant que
ceftoit pour nettoyer la place toute fanglante d’vn


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 291


[18] CHAPTER II.


OF THE COMING OF SEVEN IROQUOIS AMBASSADORS TO
THE FRENCH, AND OF THEIR NEGOTIATIONS.


N the 22nd of February in this current year,
1646, seven Annierronnon Iroquois and two
Hurons, accompanied by the Frenchman whom

I have mentioned above, appeared at Montreal; after
having rejoiced that settlement, they come down to
the three Rivers, whence advice is sent to Monsieur
our Governor of their coming. Now, as this jour-
ney had been made over the snows, and as the cold
was still causing the ice to accumulate upon our great
river, the Annierronnons went away to the chase,—
some on this side, some beyond,— while waiting for
the month of May, when Monsieur the Governor
went up to that settlement.

On the seventh of that month, he gave them audi-
ence; here follows what occurred in that assembly.

The most considerable person, raising his voice,
chanted [19] a song of thanksgiving. ‘‘ We were
dead,” said he, ‘‘ and behold us alive; we were bring-
ing our own heads to be sacrificed to the shades of
the Algonquins or of the montagnais who were
massacred last Autumn,—surely anticipating that we
should be held guilty of that murder; but Onontio,
staying the wrath of the Algonquins, has made our
innocence manifest.’’ Thereupon they draw forth a
gift, and cast it at the feet of the relatives and allies
of the departed,—saying that it was to cleanse the


292 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


meurtre commis par trahifon, proteftans qu’ils n’en
auoient eu aucune connoiffance qu’apres le coup don-
né, que tous les Capitaines du pays auoient condamné
cet attentat.

C’eft la couftume des peuples de ces contrées,
quand quelque perfonne de confideration parmy eux,
eft morte, d’effuyer les larmes de leurs parens par
quelque prefent. Ce Capitaine ayant apris a fon
arriuée la mort autant glorieufe que funefte du Pere
Anne de Noiie de noftre Compagnie, voulut garder
la loy de fon pays: il éleue les yeux au Ciel, comme
fe plaignant de fa rigueur, puis fe tournant [20] vers
les robes noires, ietta des braffelets de Porcelaine:
voila, dit-il, pour rechauffer la place ot le froida
fait mourir ce bon Pere: mettez ce petit prefent en
voftre fein pour vous diuertir des penfées qui vous
pourroient atrifter.

Ils firent en fuite les prefens qu’on leur auoit
confiez dans leur pays, defquels i’ay fait mention au
Chapitre precedent, tefmoignant leur ioye de fe voir
vnis & alliez des Francois, des Hurons & des Algon-
quins, qui font les trois plus confiderables Nations
auec lefquelles ils ont traité la paix, toutes les autres
e{tant comprifes fous ces trois chefs. Ils firent quel-
ques autres prefens aux Hurons, pour leur donner
aduis de fe tenir fur leurs gardes, dans les chemins,
iufques ace que les hauts Iroquois, les Onontague-
ronons, les Sonontseronons, & quelques autres euffent
les oreilles percées, c’ef{t A dire ouuertes a la douceur
de la paix.

Bref ils offrirent vne braffe de Porcelaine pour
allumer vn feu de cdfeil aux trois Riuieres, & vn
grand collier de trois mille grains pour feruir de bois


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 293
SLES AMRIT RTR S  -| ! an aga  ARg ied


place, all bloody, from a murder committed by
treachery; and protesting that they had had no
knowledge of it until after the act was done, and that
all the Captains of the country had condemned this
outrage.

It is the custom of the peoples of these countries,
when some person of consideration among them is
dead, to dry the tears of his relatives by some pres-
ent. This Captain having learned, on his arrival, of
the death—no less glorious than sad—of Father
Anne de Noiie of our Society, wished to observe the
law of his country. He lifted his eyes to Heaven,
as if complaining of its severity; then, turning [20]
toward the black robes, he threw down some Porce-
lain bracelets. ‘‘ That,’’ said he, ‘‘ is to warm again
the place where the cold has caused this good Father
to die; put this little gift in your bosom, to divert
yourself from the thoughts which might sadden
yous

They next offered the presents which had been
confided to them in their own country,—which I
have mentioned in the preceding Chapter, — betoken-
ing their joy to see themselves united and allied to
the French, the Hurons, and the Algonquins, who
are the three most considerable Nations with which
they have negotiated peace,—all the others being
comprised under these three most important. They
made some other presents to the Hurons, in order to
give them warning to be on their guard in the roads,
until the upper Iroquois—the Onontagueronons, the
Sonontweronons, and some others—should have
their ears pierced,— that is to say, open to the benig-
nity of peace.

In short, they offered a brasse of Porcelain to


294 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


oe eS ee


ou d’aliment & ce feu. Les Sauuages ne font quafi
aucune affemblée que le calumet auec le petun [21] en
la bouche, & comme le feu eft neceflaire pour pren-
dre le tabac, ils en allument quafi toufiours en toutes
leurs affemblées, fi bien que c’eft vne mefme chofe
chez eux allumer vn feu de confeil ou tenir vne place
propre pour s’affembler, ou vne maifon pour s’entre-
uifiter, comme font les parens & les amis.

Deux iours apres cette affemblée Monfieur noftre
Gouuerneur s’accommodant fort prudemment aux
facons de faire de ces peuples, fit venir ces deputez:
il agift auec eux felon leurs couftumes, les Hurons
qui eftoient 14 & les Algonquins, ne manquerent pas
de s’y trouuer.

Le Francois qui entend la langue Iroquoife, offrit
vn prefent de la part d’Onontio, pour gratuler les
Iroquois Annierronnons, & pour marque de l’eftime
qu'il faifoit de leur nation, d’auoir tenu fa parole.

Il en fit vn autre pour tefmoigner le contente-
ment qu’il receuoit, voyant la terre aplanie & la
hache leuée & éloignée des teftes des Hurons & des
Algonquins: car pour les Frangois leur paix fut faite
dés la premiere entreueué.

En troifiéme lieu, on offrit vn collier de [22] mille
grains de Porcelaine, pour affeurer qu’on tiendroit
allumé ce feu de confeil qu’ils auoient demandé aux
trois Riuieres, & que le bois n’y manqueroit pas,
c’e{t a dire qu’ils feroient toufiours les bien-venus, &
quon prefteroit l’oreille aux Capitaines qui vien-
droient pour traiter d’ affaires.

On fit vn quatriéme prefent, pour donner 4 enten-
dre qu’Onontio defiroit voir le petit Francois qui feul
eftoit refté prifonnier en leur pais.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 295


kindle a council fire at three Rivers, and a great
necklace of three thousand beads to serve as wood,
or fuel for this fire. The Savages hold scarcely any
assembly without the calumet filled with tobacco [21]
in their mouths; and, as fire is necessary to the use of
tobacco, they nearly always kindle fires at all their
assemblies,— insomuch that it is the same thing with
them to light a council. fire, or toskeep a place
suitable for assembling, or a house for visiting one
another, as do relatives and friends.

Two days after this assembly, Monsieur our Gov-
ernor, very prudently adapting himself to the usages
among these peoples, sent for those deputies; he
dealt with them according to their customs; the
Hurons who were there, and the Algonquins, did not
fail to be present.

The Frenchman who understands the Iroquois lan-
guage offered a gift on behalf of Onontio, to congrat-
ulate the Annierronnon Iroquois, and in token of
the esteem in which he held their nation for having
kept its word.

He made another, to signify the satisfaction that
he received on seeing the earth leveled, and the
hatchet lifted and removed from the heads of the
Hurons and the Algonquins; for, as regards the
French, their peace was made from the time of the
first interview.

In the third place, he offered a necklace of [22]
a thousand Porcelain beads, for assurance that he
would keep lighted that council fire which they had
requested at three Rivers, and that the fuel should
not fail for it, that is to say, that they would always
be welcome, and that hearing would be given to the
Captains who should come to treat of affairs.


296 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


Et vn cinquiéme, pour faire reuenir fa fille nom-
mée Therefe, afin qu’elle preparaft du bled d’Inde a
leur fagon, pour les feftiner, quand ils nous vou-
droient vifiter.

Il a efté fouuent parlé dans les Relations de cette
fille: c’eft vne Huronne, laquelle ayant efté inftruite
au Seminaire des Vrfulines, fut prife auec fes parens
par les Iroquois, lors qu’ils la remenoient en fon
pays. Les Meres Vrfulines ne pouuant fupporter
que cette pauure petite creature demeuraft dans cette
captiuité éloignée de tous les fecours qui luy pou-
uoient ouurir les portes du falut, n’ont rien épargné,
& ont remué Ciel & terre pour luy procurer fa liberté.

[23] Monfieur noftre Gouuerneur approuuant ce
grand zele & cette grande charité, n’a perdu aucune
occafion de la tirer de cet efclauage, & d’y contribuer
de tout fon pouuoir.

Tefouéhat, appellé des Hurons & des Iroquois On-
deffon, & des Frangois le Borgne de I’'Ifle, voyant que
no{tre Interprete ne parloit plus, entonna vne chan-
fon affez lugubre, puis leuant fes yeux au Ciel pria
le Soleil d’eftre le {pectateur & de feruir de te{moin
de tout ce qui fe paffoit dans cette action, & de
découurir auec fa lumiere, la fincerité de fon coeur &
de fes intentions. Il entonne derechef vne autre
chanfon, & puis éleuat fa voix il harangue au nom
de tous les Algonquins, dont il portoit la parole. La
premiere fut vne proteftation que la rupture de la
paix ne prouiendroit point de fon cofté, & pour
tef{moignage de cette verité, il prefente deux robes de
peaux d’Elan, adiouftant qu’il auoit quelque deffiance
des Annierronnés qu’il vouloit banir par ce prefent.

Le fecond prefent fut auffi de deux robes, fur


1645 - 46] RELATION OF 1645-46 297


A fourth present was made, to give them to under-
stand that Onontio desired to see the little French-
man who alone had remained a prisoner in their
country.

And a fifth, for causing the return of his daugh-
ter, named Therese, so that she might prepare In-
dian corn in their fashion, to feast them when they
should wish to visit us.

Mention has often been made, in the Relations,
of this girl: she is a Huron, who, having been in-
structed at the Seminary of the Ursulines, was cap-
tured by the Iroquois, with her relatives, when the
latter were taking her back to her own country. The
Ursuline Mothers—not being able to endure that
this poor little creature should remain in that captiv-
ity, remote from all the helps which could open for
her the gates of salvation—have spared no pains,
and have moved Heaven and earth to procure her
liberty.

[23] Monsieur our Governor, approving this great
zeal and this great charity, has lost no opportunity
for releasing her from that slavery, and of codperat-
ing in the matter with all his power.

Tesouéhat,—called by the Hurons and the Iro-
quois, Ondesson; and by the French, le Borgne of
the Isle,— seeing that our Interpreter spoke no more,
chanted a rather lugubrious song; then, lifting his
eyes to Heaven, prayed the Sun to be a spectator and
to serve as witness of all that occurred in this action,
and with his light to make evident the sincerity of
his heart and of his intentions. Again he chanted
another song; and then, raising his voice, he ha-
rangued in the name of all the Algonquins, whose
words he conveyed. The first was a protestation


298 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vor. 28


lefquelles fe deuoient repofer ces Ambaffadeurs, pour
fe delaffer du trauail de leur chemin.

[24] Le troifiéme portoit vne humble priere a
Onontio a ce qu’il ne marcha{t point tout feul en
affeurance dans les chemins qu’il auoit applanis &
frayez; mais que ce bon-heur fut auffi commun aux
Algonquins & aux Hurons: en vn mot cet homme
deffiant & foupconneux au poffible, auoit peur que
les Francois ne fiffent leur paix en particulier, fans
fe mettre en peine des Sauuages leurs alliez.

Le quatriéme prefent affeuroit que les Algonquins
auoient auffi pofé les armes & ietté leurs haches en
vne terre inconnué a tous les hommes.

Le cinquiéme demandoit qu’on ne donna{t point
de fauffes alarmes, que la chaffe fut libre par tout,
que les bornes & les limites de toutes ces grandes
contrées fuffent leuées, & qu’vn chacun fe trouuaft
par tout, dans fon pais.

Le fixiéme affeuroit les Annierronnons qu’ils pou-
uoiét librement fe venir chauffer au feu qu’Onontio
leur auoit allumé, aux trois Riuieres, que les Algon-
quins & les Iroquois y petunneroient auec plaifir, &
que leurs pipes ou leurs calumets ne bruleroient
point, c’ef{t a dire que la peur n’y feroit trembler per-
fonne. Tous ces [25] prefens eftoiét compofez chacun
de deux robes d’Elan, bien peintes & bien paffemen-
tées a leur mode.

Le dernier comprenoit douze de ces belles robes,
quatre pour chacune des trois bourgades des Annier-
ronnons, fuppliant ces peuples de donner la liberté
aux enfans des Algonquins, ou mefme aux grandes
perfonnes qui feroient encor en leur pais, auec
affeurance qu’on n’épargneroit point la graiffe aux


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 299
a ee


that a breach of the peace would not proceed from
his side; and, in token of this truth, he presented
two robes of Elk skins,— adding, that he had some
distrust of the Annierronnons, which he wished to
banish by this gift.

The second gift was also of two robes, on which
those Ambassadors were to repose themselves, in
order to be refreshed from the toil of their journey.

[24] The third conveyed a humble prayer to Onon-
tio, that he should not walk all alone in safety with-
in the roads which he had leveled and broken: but
that this happiness should also be common to the
Algonquins and to the Hurons. Ina word, this man,
utterly distrustful and suspicious, was afraid that the
French might make their peace in private, without
troubling themselves about the Savages, their allies.

The fourth gift gave assurance that the Algon-
quins had also laid down their arms, and thrown
their hatchets into a land unknown to all men.

The fifth requested that no false alarms be given;
that the chase be everywhere free; that the land-
marks and the boundaries of all those great coun-
tries be raised; and that each one should find him-
self everywhere in his own country.

The sixth assured the Annierronnons that they
could freely come to warm themselves at the fire
which Onontio had kindled for them at three Rivers;
that the Algonquins and the Iroquois would smoke
there with pleasure, and that their pipes or their
calumets would not burn,—that is to say, that fear
would cause no one to tremble there. All these [25]
gifts were each composed of two Elk robes, hand-
somely painted and well trimmed in their fashion.

The last included twelve of these beautiful robes,


300 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 28


e{tomacs de ceux qui les rameneroient, & qu’ils
trouueroient des onguents pour oindre leur tefte: en
vn mot il vouloit dire qu’on leur feroit bonne chere,
& que leur peine feroit amplement recompenfée.

Ces prefens acceptez, Kistfaeton principal Am-
baffadeur des Annierronnons, apoftrophant les Hu-
rons, leur fit vn prefent d’action de graces de ce qu’ils
n’auoient fait aucun mal aux prifonniers Annierron-
nons qu’ils auoient pris l’an paffé: il leur dift comme
par parenthefe, qu’ils euffent bien fait de diftribuer
ces prifonniers aux autres nations Iroquoifes leurs
alliées, qu’ils les auroient obligées par cette deffe-
rence d’entrer das vne paix vniuerfelle, qu’auec le
temps on pourroit [26] obtenir ce bon-heur, mais
quils fe deuoient encor deffier d’eux fur leurs
chemins.

I] leur fit vn fecond prefent, pour les inuiter 4 dreffer
vn feftin aux Annierronnons qui les iroient vifiter en
leur pays comme leurs vrays amis, & que s’ils tar-
doient quelque temps, qu’ils mangeaffent ce qu’ils
auroient preparé, a condition de remettre incontinent
le pot au feu de peur d’eftre furpris, puifque l’on fe
difpofoit a ce voyage.

Le treiziéme du mefme mois de May Monfieur
nof{tre Gouuerneur traita ces Deputez en la cabane
d’vn Capitaine Algonquin; on leur porta deux pa-
roles par deux prefens, la premiere n’eftoit qu’vn
remerciement de ce qu’ils n’auoient pas voulu accep-
ter les teftes ou les cheueleures de fes alliez par les
Sokoquiois.

La feconde leur fignifioit qu’il auoit refolu d’en-
uoyer deux Francois en leur pais, & qu’ils pouuoient
partir dans trois iours. Ce qui fit refoudre les


1645 - 46] RELATION OF 1645-46 301
EE Hie ee Dv NARI Ss org eye


four for each of the three villages of the Annierron-
nons, entreating those tribes to give liberty to the
children of the Algonquins, or even to the adult
persons who should still be in their country; with
assurances that the fat would not be spared for the
stomachs of those who should lead them back, and
that they would find ointments with which to anoint
their heads,—in a word, he meant that they would
be given good cheer, and that their trouble would
be amply rewarded.

These gifts accepted, Kioutsaeton, principal Am-
bassador of the Annierronnons, addressing the Hu-
rons, made them a present of thanksgiving because
they had done no harm to the Annierronnon prison-
ers whom they had taken the year before. He told
them, parenthetically, that they would have done
well to distribute those prisoners among the other
Iroquois nations, their allies; that they would have
obliged them, by this deference, to engage in a uni-
versal peace; that, in course of time, they might [26]
obtain this good fortune, but that they should still
beware of them upon their journeys.

He made them a second present, to invite them
to prepare a feast for the Annierronnons, who would
go to visit them in their country as their true friends;
saying that if these delayed for some time, the
Hurons should eat what they might have prepared, on
condition of immediately setting the pot back on the
fire, for fear of being surprised, since his people
were making ready for this journey.

On the thirteenth of the same month of May, Mon-
sieur our Governor entertained these Deputies in the
cabin of an Algonquin Captain. Two speeches were
conveyed to them by two gifts; the first was only an


302 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


Algonquins de leur donner deux de leur nation pour
eftre de la partie.

La conclufion de ces affemblées fe faifoit toufiours
auec des refioiiiffances publiques, [27] mais ceux qui
penetroient plus auant que l’écorce, admiroient la con-
duite de Dieu, & luy donnoient mille benedictions de
fes bontez: car il faut auoiier qu’a luy feul appar-
tient de donner le poids aux vents, de changer le
poifon en medecine, la maladie en la fanté, la mort
en la vie, & la fureur de la guerre en la douceur de
la paix. Sa bonté vueille accorder cette benediction
a nof{tre France.


1645-46] RELATION OF 1645-46 308


expression of thanks because they had not been will-
ing to accept the heads or the scalps of his allies
from the Sokoquiois.

The second indicated to them that he had resolved
to send two Frenchmen into their country, and that
they would probably start in three days. This made
the Algonquins resolve to give them two of their
nation, to be of the party.

The conclusion of these assemblies was always
marked by public rejoicings; [27] but those who
penetrated deeper than the bark admired the con-
duct of God, and gave him a thousand blessings for
his kindnesses; for it must be acknowledged that to
him alone it belongs to give force to the winds, to
change poison into medicine, sickness into health,
death into life, and the fury of war into the mildness
of peace. May his goodness grant this blessing to
our France.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXVIII


LV
For particulars of this document, see Vol. XXVII.
LVI


In presenting the text of Father Isaac Jogues’s
description of New Netherland, called MOUUM
BELGIUM from the form of its endorsement, we fol-
low the original manuscript preserved in the archives
of St. Mary’s College, Montreal. The history of this
document’s preservation is most interesting. John
Gilmary Shea gave a partial account of its pedigree
in Collections of the New York Htstorical Society (2nd ser.,
vol. iii., part i.), which we are enabled to elaborate
through the kindness of Rev. Arthur E. Jones, S.J.,
archivist of St. Mary’s.

Father Jean Joseph Casot, the last of the old
race of the Jesuits of the French colony, who died
March 16, 1800, seeing that his order was about “‘ to
expire by the enactments of the English conquerors,
which prevented their receiving new members,
wished to save for Catholicity at least a few of the
most valuable of the papers in the archives.” He,
therefore, having made a selection, placed them in the
custody of the Augustine nuns of the Hotel Dieu, at
Quebec. There they remained until 1843, when
they were restored to the Society, being entrusted to
the Rev. Felix Martin, then superior of the Jesuits


306 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES


in Canada, and founder of St. Mary’s College, Mont-
real.

Father Martin presented the regents of the Univer-
sity of the State of New York with a transcript of
the original French manuscript of the VOUUM
BELGIUM, accompanying it with an English trans-
lation; and this ¢ranslation was used in the Docu-
mentary History of the State of New-York, vol. iv.
(Albany, 1851)—see the octavo edition, pp. 21-24;
and the quarto edition, pp. 15-17. This was the
document’s first appearance in print, in any form.

In 1852, Father Martin printed the French text
for the first time in the appendix (pp. 306-309) to
his translation of Bressani’s Italian Relation of 1653.

In 1857, a new translation appeared in the Colec-
tions of the New York Historical Society, 2nd ser., vol.
iii., part i., pp. 215-219, among the ‘‘ Jogues Papers.
Translated and arranged, with a memoir by John
Gilmary Shea.” In 1856, while the above volume
was in press, a separate edition of the ‘‘Jogues
Papers”’ (pp. 69) was struck off, apparently for Dr.
Shea’s use.

In 1862, Dr. Shea issued in a privately-printed
volume another translation, which varies somewhat
from all predecessors. It collates as follows:

Novum Belgium: | an | Account of New Nether-
land | in 1643-4. | By Rev. Father Isaac Jogues, | of
the Society of Jefus. | With a Facfimile of his Orig-
inal Manufcript | his Portrait a Map and Notes by
John | Gilmary Shea. | [Cut with storks] | New
York: | Privately Printed. | 1862.

Quarto; title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; ‘‘ Preface,”
with verso blank, 1 leaf; ‘‘ Sketch of the Life of Fa-
ther Isaac Jogues,’’ pp. 5-16; facsimile of the Jogues


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXVIII 307
ea a ee ee


manuscript, four unnumbered leaves; printed text,
Pp. 9-21; p. 22 blank; translation, pp. 23-35; p.
36 blank; notes, pp. 37-53, with the verso of P- 53
blank; coat-of-arms, etc., with verso blank, 1 leaf.
The plates, etc., are: (1) Portrait frontispiece of
Jogues; (2) Autograph of Jogues, bet. sig. Aij and
Alij; (3) Facsimile of De Laet’s map; (4) View of
New Amsterdam, from Montanus. The impression
of the printed text (pp. 9-21) is the same as that of
the following. It will be noticed, in the facsimile of
the original MS., given in the edition just described,
that the endorsement — apparently in Jogues’s own
handwriting —reads: ‘‘ Nouum Belgium | 1644 | a p
Is Jogues.”” The MS. takes its name in bibliography
from this endorsement; the date, however, is mis-
leading, for Jogues’s experience in New Amsterdam
was only in 1643, although at the close of his account
(written in 1646) he, cursorily, alludes to events
occurring in 1644.

Dr. Shea’s Cramoisy series of Relations (1857-
1868), though not having a series numbering, is,
nevertheless, usually treated so for the sake of con-
venience. According to the form usually adopted,
the Movum Belgium is numbered 16 in the series. It
was printed on both large and small paper, and
limited to one hundred copies. A collation follows:

Novum Belgium, | description de | Nieuw Nether-
jama@ |e jnotice sur René Goupil. | Par le R. P.
Isaac Jogues, | de la Compagnie de Jéfus. | [Cut with
storks|| A New York, dans 1l’Ancien Niew [szc]
Netherland, | Preffe Cramoify de J. M. Shea. | 1862.

Title, with certification (of copies printed) on the
verso, 1 leaf; contents, with verso blank, 1 leaf;
text of Novum Belgium, pp. 9-21; p. 22 blank;


308 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES


notice of René Goupil, pp. 23-44. Facsimile of De
Laet’s map of.‘‘ Nova Anglia, Novvm Belgivm et
Virginia.’’

The French text of Movum Belgium, annotated, is
also to be found in Martin’s life of Jogues, where it
forms appendix H, and covers pp. 344-350. There
are two issues of this biography, one with the im-
print: ‘‘ Paris | Joseph Albanel, Libraire | 7, Rue
Honoré — Chevalier, 7 |1873;" and the other:
‘“ Quebec | Ovide Frechette, Libraire | 43, Cote de la
Montagne, 43 | 1874.”’ The Paris edition has a por-
trait of Jogues and five plates, which are not in the
Quebec edition. Both issues are exactly alike, from
the ‘‘ Avant-propos”’ (pp. v—xi) to the end of the
volume (p. 352), and are from the same type. They
vary in that the Quebec copy has a new half-title and
a new title-page, and the verso of the half-title shows
that these were printed at ‘‘ Paris.—Imprimerie
Jules: LeClére et Cie; Rue Cassette 20. 4

Other editions of NVovum Belgium have, of course,
since appeared in print.


LVII


In the Collections of the New York Htstorical Society
(2nd ‘ser., vol. ili., part 1... p. 221) UGesneasoivessa
letter of Father Jogues to his superior, dated ‘‘ Mont-
real, April, 1646,” in which the missionary says: ‘‘ I
owe your Reverence the account of the ‘ Capture and
death of good René Goupil,’ which I should have
sent already. sf the, bearer of this give [szc}] ame
time, I will send it along.’’ The Notice sur René
Goupil here reproduced, is the account thus promised.

The history of the original MS. of this interesting
document is identical with that of the Movum Belgt-


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXVIII 309


um, already given (see LVI., above)—having been
entrusted to the nuns of Quebec by Father Casot,
and restored to the Jesuit order by the nuns in 1843.

An English translation of the Notice, by Shea, was
given in the volume of New York Historical Society
Collections, above cited, pp. 221-257.

It was also given in the separate edition of the
Jogues Papers (see data under LVI.) with this title:
“Narrative of a Captivity among the Mohawk In-
dians, a description of New Netherland in 1642-3,
and other Papers. By Father Isaac Jogues, of the
Society of Jesus. With a Memoir of the Author, by
John Gilmary Shea. New York: Edward Dunigan
& Brother. 1856;’’ also with the imprint: ‘‘ New
York: Press of the Historical Society. 1856.”’

The French edition bears the following title:
‘“Novum Belgium, | description de | Nieuw Nether-
land>|et_|" Notice. surskRené Goupil~| Parle’ RvB.
Isaac Jogues, | dela Compagnie de Jéfus. | [Cut with
storks} | A New York, dans l’Ancien Niew [szc]
Netherland, | Preffe Cramoify de J. M. Shea. |
1862.’’ The account of Goupil covers pp. 23-44.
For more complete details, see LVI. above.


LVIII


The original of this letter from Jogues to Father
André Castillon (dated Montreal, September 12, 1646),
rests in the archives of the Jesuit Province of Lyons,
France, having first been published in Rochemon-
teix’s /ésuttes et la Nouvelle-France, li., pp. 450-452.
We follow Rochemonteix.


LIX


For bibliographical particulars of the /ournal des
Jésuites, see Vol. XXVII.


310 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES


LX


In reprinting the Relation of 1645-46 (Paris, 1647),
we follow the text of the original Cramoisy edition,
from a copy in Lenox Library. This copy is inter-
esting from association — for it bears on the title-page
the autograph of ‘‘ Robert Southey 20 May 1817.
Paris.’’ Our title-page is a facsimile of the copy in
the possession of the Wisconsin State Historical
Society.

The wPrinilege’ ig dated “Parts leo. Decembre
1646, “and the. “‘ Permiffion~’.““Paris ce 38. lanuier
1647.’ This Relation consists of two parts, both of
which are addressed to the provincial, Estienne
Charlet. Part I. is Jerome Lalemant’s regular New
France Relation, and part II. is the Huron Relation
from May, 1645 to May, 1646, signed ‘‘ Paul Ra-
gneav,’’ and dated ‘‘ Des Hurons ce 1. May 1646.”’
‘The volume.is;oenerallyreterredito as. F336
because described in Harrisse’s Votes, no. 86. His
description, however, is not precise.

Collation: Sig. 4in four (consisting of one blank
leaf; title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; ‘‘ Table des
Chapitres,’”’ pp. (2); and ‘‘ Priuilege,’’ with ‘‘ Per-
miffion’’ on the verso, 1 leaf); prefatory epistle by
Lalémant to Part I., pp.-1—63téxt ofsbart'). spp. 7—
184; title to Part II., with verso blank, 1 leaf; epistle
by Ragueneau, and text to Part II., pp. 3-128.

Pecultarities: All copies examined have but one case
of mispagination; namely, in Part II., where p. 25
is numbered 33. In the Lenox copy from which
we reprint, the sentence in Montagnais commencing
on line 10 of p. 176, in Part I., begins: ‘‘ Tapoué
Nama Nitirinifin;’’ but in another copy in that


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXVIII 311


Library, formerly George Bancroft’s, this sentence
begins: ‘‘ Tapde Nama.’’ Evidently the latter is the
earlier impression, in which ‘‘ oué”’ of ‘‘ Tapoué”’
was thought to be “‘de.”” Otherwise, typographically
and textually, the two volumes are identical.

Copies of H. 86 have been sold or priced as
follows: Harrassowitz (1882), priced at 160 marks;
O’Callaghan (1882), no. 1224, sold to the Library of
Parliament, Canada, for $24, and had cost him $32.50
in gold; Barlow (1890), no. 1291, sold for $10;
Dufossé, of Paris, priced (1891 and 1892) at 225 and 175
francs, respectively; Lenox duplicate, sold April 29,
1895, by Bangs & Co., New York City, to Dodd,
Mead & Co., for $35, and was priced by them in
their list of April, 1896, no. 42, at $50. Copies in
collections: Lenox (two variations), Harvard, Wis-
consin State Historical Society, New York State
Library, Laval University (Quebec), Brown (private),
Bibliothéque Nationale (Paris), and British Museum.


Fe ey me i,


Blew pancsaty


I
,


NOTES TO VOL. XXVIII


(figures tn parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages
of English text.)


I (p. 25).— This ecclesiastic (vol. xxv., zofe 9) was a member of
the commercial company that controlled the trade of Miscou.

2 (p. 105).— Both these names, Maurice and Nassau, were given
to the Hudson River, at that early day, in honor of Prince Maurice
of Nassau (1567-1625), the celebrated Dutch general.


3 (p. 107).— For information regarding the West India Company,
see vol. xxi., zofe 20. Shea, in his privately-printed edition of
Novum Belgium (see Bibliographical Data in this volume), states
(1862) that ‘‘the papers of the West India Company were but a few
years since sold as waste paper.’’

4 (p. 109).— Muzstes: apparently an abbreviation of Wennonzstes,
modernized as Mennonites,—the followers of Simon Menno, who
organized them in 1535 as an independent body, though really one
of the branches of the great Protestant reformation of that time.
They believed in the personal coming and reign of Christ upon
earth for a thousand years; opposed infant baptism; and regarded
war, capital punishment, and the taking of oaths as unlawful.
Persecuted in Germany and Switzerland in the r6th century, many
of this sect fled to Holland, where their co-religionists were already
numerous; and not afew found new homes in the Dutch foreign
colonies. The Mennonites are, at the present day, a large body;
many of them have formed flourishing colonies in the Western
States of America,—largely driven hither by persecution in their
native lands, especially in Russia.

5 (p. 109).—In regard to the conditions of settlement in New
Netherlands, cf. 4. Y. Colon. Docs., vol.i., p. 114; and O’Calla-
ghan’s New Netherland, vol. i., p. 206.

6 (p. 109).— Fresh River: thus named by the Dutch explorer,
Adrien Block (1614). Connecticut is a corruption of the aboriginal
name, Quinnehtukgut, meaning ‘‘land on the long tidal river.”


(Trumbull, /xd. Names, p. 60).


314 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES


7 (p. 109).— This ‘‘ South River’’ was, even then, also known as
the Delaware,—a name applied to the bay by Argall, in 1610, in
compliment to the first governor of Virginia, although these waters
were discovered by Hendrik Hudson in the preceding year. The
river was first explored in 1616, by Hendrickson, a Dutch captain.
The first settlement was made by the Dutch, in 1623, at Fort Nas-
sau, near the site of the present Gloucester, N. J. Three years
later, Gustavus Adolphus granted to a Swedish company (organized
mainly by William Usselincx) a charter for lands in this region;
but it was not until 1638 that they sent colonists thither. In that
year, a Swedish settlement was made at Fort Christina, on the site
of the present Wilmington, Del.

8 (p. 109).— Jogues here refers to the French edition of De Laet
(Leyden, 1640), and, therein, to chapters treating of New Bel-
gium,—vii., x., and xi., of book iii. At the beginning of De Laet’s
volume is an extensive ‘‘ Table des Chapitres qui sont contenus
en chaque Livre;’’ this, no doubt, is ‘‘la table’’ mentioned by
Jogues.— V. H. PAttsirs.

g (p. I1r).— Concerning this settlement and fort, see vol. xxiv.,
note 22.

Io (p. 113).— Wolves; see vol. xxvi., note 4.

II (p. 137).— For sketch of Bourdon, see vol. xi., zo¢e 11.

12 (p. 143).— Jean Bonnet —a member of the Jesuit order, 1599-
1654, and rector at Saintes — wrote Jmage Sacrée de la vie e¢ de la
doctrine de Jésus-Christ (Poitiers, 1634).

Jeremias Drexel was born at Augsburg, Aug. 15, 1581. When
barely seventeen, he became a Jesuit novice, and studied at Augs-
burg and Dillingen. During twenty-three years he was court
preacher for the Elector of Bavaria, and died at Munich, Apr. 19,
1638. He was a prolific writer of religious works; among these,
was De Aternitate Considerationes (Munich, 1620), which went
through numerous editions, and was translated into eight languages.

13 (p. 143).— The telescope was invented about 1609, by Jakob
Metzu, of Alkmaer, Holland, whence it was called /unette de Hol-
land, The appellation given in our text, /umette de Galilée, arose
from its use by Galileo, who mentions the instrument in his Vunczus
sydereus (1610); he made one for himself, after the model of
Metzu’s, in order to examine the motions of Jupiter’s satellites.—
Felice’s Encyclopédie (Yverdon, 1773), t. xxvi., pp. 727, 728.

14 (p. 143).— This was Marguerite Langlois, wife of the pilot
Abraham Martin, from whom the ‘‘ Plains of Abraham ”’ derive their
name. Marguerite was probably a relative of the Norman pilot
Noél Langlois, one of the early settlers in Canada. Martin had ten


NOTES TO VOEAXXV UT 315


children — all, save one, girls. One of these, Héléne, was the first
wife of the explorer Chouart des Groseilliers (note 32, post).


15 (p. 147).— This was Jacques Maheu, a native of Perche, who
came to Quebec before 1639. The Journal mentions him, in this
same month, as aiding Marsolet in arousing discontent among the
habitants; and, in 1659-61, as engaged in the cod-fishery on the
Gaspé coast.


16 (p. 151).— Following is the translation of the Latin passage in
the text:

“When these things were reported by us—that is, by me and
Father de Quen —to Monsieur the Governor, he himself disclosed to
us the whole matter, thus: Last summer, when the Annieronon
envoys came with Cousture to treat for peace, after they had dis-
cussed and transacted many things in public, they demanded — their
leader being a man named Ze crochet [‘the hook’]—that Monsieur
the Governor would consent to talk with them in a private confer-
ence. This man thought that a considerable present should be
made to Monsieur the Governor, that, if he desired peace for both
himself and the Hurons, he should abandon the Algonquins without
shelter. When Onontio was informed of this, he would not even
look at any such present, nor would he suffer it to be delivered; and
he said that the thing was impossible. Le crochet was chagrined
at this repulse, and from that time the peace seemed to be endan-
gered. Monsieur the Governor saw this; and both Father Vimont,
the superior, and Father le Jeune thought that the difficulty might be
smoothed over. In a 2nd private conference,—at which, as at the
former, were present Monsieur the Governor, le Crochet, and Cous-
ture,— Monsieur the Governor said that there were two kinds of
Algonquins,— one like ourselves, recognized as Christians; the
other, unlike us. Without the former, it is certain, we do not make
a peace; as for the latter, they themselves are the masters of their
own actions, nor are they united with us like the others. This, as
uttered by Monsieur the Governor, was, and perhaps for a worse
reason, thus repeated by the envoy to his own people,— which, being
understood by all the Annieronons in his country, was made public
by such of them as left it, sed merzto, denied by the french.”’

17 (p. 153).— Mathurin Gagnon, with his brothers Jean and Pierre,
settled at Chateau-Richer, probably by 1640. From them, accord-
ing to Sulte, ‘‘ have sprung innumerable families, who have spread
into all regions where Canadians are found.’’ Among these are,
in the present generation, several men of prominence in Canadian
literature and public affairs.

18 (p. 155).— Pierre Boucher, a native of Perche (1622), came


316 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES


with his father’s family to Canada in 1634. He spent the years
1639-41 in the service of the Jesuits, in their Huron missions, and
four years more as a soldier of the Quebec garrison; and, in 1645,
became an interpreter at Three Rivers. From that time, he secured
rapid promotion, occupying many important positions in business
and in public affairs,— notably that of governor of Three Rivers
(1653-58, and 1662-67). In 1661, Boucher was ennobled; and, in
the same year, he went to France, in order to represent there the
enfeebled condition of the Canadian colonies, and their urgent need
of aid. He was partially successful, returning the next year with 200
colonists and roo soldiers, and having awakened in France renewed
interest in the Canadian enterprise. It was for this purpose, and at
the king’s request, that Boucher undertook to write his /zstozre
véritable (vol. viii., of this series, zote 3), a sketch of the natural
resources of Canada. In 1667, retiring from the governorship of
Three Rivers, he settled upon his estate at Boucherville, and devoted
his energies to the improvement and colonization of this and other
jands in which he had an interest. He died in 1717, aged 95, leav-
ing a numerous family. Boucher’s first wife was an Indian girl,
educated at the Ursuline convent; her death soon left him a childless
widower. He then married (1652) Jeanne Crevier, by whom he had
sixteen children. Most of the particulars here given are obtained
from Sulte’s excellent paper, ‘‘ Pierre Boucher et son livre,”’ Canad.
Roy. Soc. Proc., 1897, vol. ii., sect. i., pp. 99-168. This is a reprint
of the Ast vérzt., accompanied by a biographical sketch of
Boucher, and bibliographical notice of his book.

Toussaint Toupin, here mentioned, was husband of Boucher’s
sister Marguerite, and ‘‘an influential citizen of Quebec’’ (Sulte):
he was an ancestor of the noted Charles de Langlade.

19 (p. 167).— Gabriel Duclos de Celles, sieur de Sailly, spent the
winter of 1645-46 at Quebec, but apparently removed thence to
Montreal, where he married (1652) Barbe Poisson. He was a judge,
in both civil and criminal affairs, and was granted lands in 1654.

20 (p. 173).— Reference is evidently here made to the Indian
Francois Xavier Nenaskoumat, one of the original two settlers at
the Sillery reduction, who died in 1639; but it is difficult to explain
why he should also be named Boulé,— unless, possibly, on account
of some special circumstance connecting him with a Frenchman of
that name. Tanguay (Dzct. Généal. }mentions one Francois Boulé,
‘located at Sillery,’’ whose infant child was buried at Three Rivers,
Jan. 31, 1639. Inadocument dated Feb. 8, 1652, one of this name
is mentioned among the landholders near Cap Rouge; he was slain
there by the [roquois in June, 1653. Both references may be to the
same person. Nenaskoumat’s surname may, with more probability,


NOTES TO VOERXXY TIL 317


be connected with Frangois Boullé, mentioned as ‘‘ one of our domes-
tics,’’ in the Sillery baptismal register (vol. xx., ote 10), which
states that he was (June 24, 1639) godfather to an Indian boy bap-
tized there.


21 (p. 185).— ‘‘ This paragraph ends with the following sentence,
which has been crossed off, probably by Father Jerome himself:
‘But, this rule having proved difficult of observance to our Brother
Claude, we were obliged to set it aside, and to continue in these
matters the practice customary in our Company.’ ’’—Queb. ed. of
Journ., Pp. 43, note.


22 (p. 187).— For sketch of Massé, see vol. i., zofe 39. The
monument to his memory, there mentioned, was unveiled June 25,
1870. Ina private note to the Editor, Crawford Lindsay, of Quebec,
thus describes it: ‘‘The monument, plain but elegant, is about
twenty feet in height, and stands within an enclosure. It is of cut
stone, with four marble tablets, surmounted by a marble crown.
One of the tablets bears the following inscription (in French):
‘The inhabitants of Sillery have erected this monument to the
Memory of Pierre Enemond Massé, S.J., first missionary in Can-
ada,— buried in 1646, in the church of Saint Michel, on the Domain
of Saint Joseph of Sillery.’ On another tablet is inscribed: ‘The
Church of Saint Michel, which formerly stood on this spot, was
built by the Commander of Sillery, founder (in 1637) of the Saint
Joseph Domain.’ Facing the monument, and on the opposite side
of the road, stands the building occupied by the Jesuit missionaries.
It is a two-story house, with very thick walls, and is still in very
good condition; it is occupied by a family.”’

23 (p.tgor ).— MW. le prieur; René Chartier, chaplain of the
Ursulines (vol. xxiii., 20¢e 17).

24 (p. 201).— ‘‘ The Jesuit Fathers had their cattle-pen at Point
aux Lievres, at the place where now stands the Marine Hospital,
opposite Notre Dame des Anges.’’—Queb. ed. of /Journ., p. 51,
note 2.

25 (p. 203).— Thomas Hayot, a native of Perche, connected by
marriage with the family of Pierre Boucher (mote 18, ante), was
farmer of the Jesuit lands at Beauport; he came to Canada probably
about 1637. The Journal mentions him (August, 1653) as deputy
from Cap Rouge for the election of a syndic. Numerous families
trace their origin to him.


26 (p. 203).— The bridegroom in this marriage was Antoine
Martin, nicknamed ‘‘ Montpellier’’ from his birthplace, the city of
that name in France. He married Denise, daughter of Charles
Sevestre —a native of Paris, who had come to Quebec about 1635;


318 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES


he died there in 1657. Martin died two years later, leaving six
children; his widow, in less than three months, married Philip
Nepveu, by whom she had eleven children.

27 (p. 211).—For information concerning lands belonging to
Jesuits, see: Three Rivers, vol. iv., mote 24; Notre Dame des
Anges, vi., zote 7; St. Gabriel, vi., ote 8; Sillery, vii., mote 22,
and ix., zofe 32; Caughnawaga, xii., zofe 11; Isle of Orléans, xviii.,
note 1; Batiscan and Cap de la Madeleine, xxv., zofe 9.

28 (p. 223).— Our Lady of the Snows: an ancient feast in the
Roman Catholic Church, celebrated on the fifth day of August. It
originated thus: A wealthy Roman patrician, named John, prayed
for Divine enlightenment on the best way to spend his money. The
Virgin appeared to him in a dream, telling him to build in her honor
a church on Mount: Esquiline, at a spot where he would next day
find the ground covered with snow. This sign being given, al-
though the heat of summer prevailed, John erected at this place the
church of St. Mary Major, which, several times rebuilt, is now one
of the great basilicas of Rome. This miraculous event took place
under Pope Liberius, in the fourth century A. D.; and August 5, the
day of its occurrence, is commemorated as ‘‘the day of Our Lady
of the Snows.’’— T. E. Hamet.

The church of St. Mary Major is thus named because it is, both
in antiquity and dignity, the first church in Rome among those that
are dedicated to God in honor of the Virgin Mary. It was conse-
crated under the title of the Virgin Mary by Sixtus III., about the
year 435. Itis also called St. Mary ad Nzves (‘‘ at the Snows ’’).—
Butler’s Lzves of the Saints, vol. iii., p. 322.

29 (p. 223).— Adrien Daran, a spiritual coadjutor of the Jesuit
order, was born at Rouen, Sept. 9, 1615, and became a novice at the
age of twenty, at Paris. His studies were pursued at Clermont and
Rouen, his term as instructor being spent at Nevers and Alencon.
Coming to Canada in 1646, he spent two years in the French settle-
ments on the St. Lawrence, and, in August, 1648, was sent to the
Huron country. Upon the ruin of that mission, in the following
year, it would appear that Daran went with the fugitive Huron
Christians to their new residence on Christian Island, and accom-
panied them on their subsequent flight to Quebec (June-July, 1650).
Daran returned to France in the following September; he spent
a year at Alengon, and the rest of his life at Vannes, where he died
in 1670.

30 (p. 223).— Charles Amador de la Tour, at the age of fourteen,
was brought from Paris by his father, Claude, who settled in
Acadia, near Poutrincourt (vols. i.-ii., of this series). Upon the


NOTES TO VOL. XXVIII 319
a ES EE IO


destruction of the French establishments by Argall (1613), Charles
took refuge, with his friend Biencourt, among the Souriquois In-
dians; and the latter, when dying (1623), appointed Charles his suc-
cessor in command of the few Acadian posts they had established
after the departure of the English, and in his rights at Port Royal.
These were not disturbed until 1627, when Kirk seized Port Royal
in the name of Sir William Alexander (vol. iv., zo¢e 46). La Tour,
however, retained an estate and a fort near Cape Sable; and in
1632, when Acadia was restored to France, Razilly appointed him
one of his lieutenants, the other being Charles d’Aulnay (vol. viii.,
mote 2). After Razilly’s death (1635), quarrels arose between
these officers, owing to conflicting interests and authority; D’ Aulnay
had the greater influence at the French court, and obtained (1641)
a royal order revoking La Tour’s commission, and commanding him
to return to France. This he refused to do; and, as he was of
Huguenot birth, he endeavored to secure aid from the Protestant
English of Boston. This, however, they declined to give, further
than to allow him (1643) to hire soldiers and purchase supplies at
his own expense. With these, La Tour returned to his fort at the
mouth of St. John River (N. B.), and drove away D’Aulnay, who was
besieging the place. The latter again attacked the fort (apparently
in the spring of 1646), which, though valiantly defended by Madame
de la Tour in her husband’s absence, was captured,— D’Aulnay
treacherously putting to death the entire garrison, notwithstanding
his promise to spare their lives; and the lady is said to have died
soon afterward from grief. This disaster compelled La Tour to take
refuge in Canada, where he seems to have remained till about 1651.

31 (p. 227).— This refers to the statement in the Journa/, in Octo-
ber preceding (vol. xxvii., p. 89), that a sum of money had been
set apart by the habitants for the erection of a church and clergy-
house for the Jesuits.

32 (p. 229).— Médard Chouart, sieur des Groseilliers, from Brie,
in France, was born in 1621 (according to Tanguay; but 1625,
Sulte). He came to Three Rivers in 1641, and, later, spent some
time in the Huron country. (Sulte claims that, in 1645, Chouart was
sent to the Lake Superior region by the Jesuits, in whose service
he was.) Returning thence (August, 1646, as mentioned in our
text), he became, at first, a soldier in the Quebec garrison, and then
a pilot on the St. Lawrence; and, a year later, he married Héléne,
daughter of Abraham Martin. She died in 1651, leaving a son; and,
in 1653, he took for his second wife Marguerite, sister of his friend
Radisson. ‘These two adventurous men made various important
explorations together, to the west and north, and were the original
promoters of the Hudson’s Bay Company. Regarding the first of


320 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES


these voyages, there has been much uncertainty and discussion; the
subject is exhaustively considered in Campbell’s ‘‘ Radisson and
Groseilliers,’’ Parkman Club Pubs., no. 2 (Milw., 1896). He ad-
duces much evidence to show that these two Frenchmen were the
nameless explorers mentioned in the Jesuit Re/adzon of 1656, who
spent the two preceding years in the regions about Lakes Michigan
and Superior, bringing back much information about the Indian
tribes therein. They again journeyed westward, in the summer of
1659, and spent the winter near Lake Pepin, among the Sioux tribes
then located southwest of Lake Superior. On this voyage, they
gained information which led them to plan further explorations
northward; and, after several unsuccessful attempts to secure aid
for this enterprise, they finally obtained ships and men from
Charles II. of England, in the spring of 1668. Radisson’s ship was
driven back by a storm, but that of Groseilliers succeeded in reach-
ing Hudson’s Bay, the objective point of this expedition. In con-
sequence, an English fort was established that year, at the mouth
of Rupert’s River; and, in the following year, Radisson took posses-
sion of Port Nelson in the name of the English king. Another
result of these explorations was the formation (1670) of the Hudson’s
Bay Company. Radisson and Groseilliers remained at Hudson’s
Bay till 1673, in the employ of the English; and would seem then
to have gone to France. Five years later, they returned to Canada,
and Groseilliers remained for a time with his family at Three
Rivers. In 1681, the two friends commanded another expedition to
Hudson’s Bay, this time to establish a French post there; but, two
years later, they returned to Europe, and were induced by the Eng-
lish to reénter the service of the Hudson’s Bay Company. Radis-
son went back to the Bay, and spent several years there; but
Groseilliers apparently remained and died in England. By his
second wife, he had five children.


33 (p. 233).— Amable ‘Defretat came to Canada in September,
1646; he remained but one year, probably at Quebec and Sillery;
and in September, 1647, he was sent back to France.


34 (p. 243).— This was the widow of Jean Nicolet (vol. viii., zote
29), and daughter of Guillaume Couillard (vol. xii., zo¢e 27). She
married Nicolas Macart (Macard), nicknamed ‘‘ Champagne,’’ from
his native province. He came to Canada before 1640, and lived at
Quebec, where at one time he was agent for the habitants. His
daughters made excellent marriages, and his youngest son became
a member of the Sovereign Council. Macart died in October, 1659.

35 (p. 251).— Le set: probably Le Czd of Corneille, which had been
first represented in Paris about ten years before.


——— ———F


GAYLORD


ae Library
oy Ridge Road
Berkeley, CA 94709


Ar PONE ~
Wa tf LEW Gkt


vals call (510) 649-2500


ubject to recall.


PRINTED INUS.A


%


|


1093


RF
1030.7
| 696

g


| Vea

/ GRADUATE THEOLOGICAL UNION LIBRARY
BERKELEY, CA 94709

|

|

:

|


ASN


eee


ve c
rn


LIBRARY USE ONLY


. gSuk jE) ce : a] i Re a
E et ey [38.8 a8 te ie A te Bia) Soe Sec e se
Si 8 a A A Am, 9 2) AS ey Gh I ie es es
k oe et Fe a 8 mPa. . a s
ne Lae Ne et a (BiB Ras i io Mf My i i
BOS eat My Ma eS \# (2G) 8.0)8 (8, aa eel boe
BSR: i me mY BS. at 2 3 3 5 5881398
= ®) tat aay P i


g
1 Fy | HS A
Fae


GE Ws BW:


sa. Ba) 6 86,88 Bu Cr 2:9 6.8 0R RLS aie Ries Pen ht
rae ; } f J ry i (Bus 18,68


oe


BAC: Sk Bb
iy. ORES .


ee


a
my He Oe


&
eo


S


ia a, ecu ry
ea ew For et bce Fat ar Wet ae if et sit Ae PLM BLY eB LL 8 tase
muss . y 7 } me i ; “aT Phat oot ir ¥ h tebe ; iat toh RP a
cea Ret yet 3 oa Lt ee a ise if


£3.) Bice;
et s io 1


Sa)


ut


ARS,
