Et
pee Es
SG rare Erp
eS es |
eh =
rei
me a)
wi Ge
a a
stag = 1
en-t
ot
K = it
he 2
<M 7
A ED
ws be >
re Rue TT
i - oo
|
egy
Graduate Theological
THE JESUIT RELATIONS
AND
ALLIED DOCUMENTS
VOL. XXVII
The edition consists of sev-
en hundred and fifty sets
all numbered
7. Cae A rr AA Lt ‘shit J}
Te ine Reations and Allied Documents
TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES
IN NEW FRANCE


1610-1791


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL-
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA-
LAONS SAND NOTES; -ILLUSFRATED- BY
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES


EDITED BY
REUBEN GOLD THWAITES
Secretary of the State Historical SocietyZof Wisconsin


y a7 7
eas e ey
Property CHURONS, LOWER CANADA: 1642-1648" eee
CLgA
F . ei


age CLEVELAND: The Burrows Brothers » 2,
OT) af - Company, Pus SHar MDCCCXCVII y
j fi i


060 Gy
; T 426


rey Cy Oe!
i me eS


[is


CopyRIGHT, 1898
BY
Tur Burrows Brotuers Co


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


The Imperial Press, Cleveland


EDITORIAL STAFF


Editor ; . REUBEN GOLD THWAITES
{ FINLOW ALEXANDER
PERCY FAVOR BICKNELL


WILLIAM FREDERIC GIESE


Translators .
CRAWFORD LINDSAY
WILLIAM PRICE
HIRAM ALLEN SOBER
Assistant Editor . EMMA HELEN BLAIR


Bibliographical Adviser ViIcTOR HuGO PALTSITS


CONTENTS OF VOL. XXVII


PREFACE TO VOLUME XXVII

DOCUMENTS : —

LIII. Relation de ce qvi s’est passé en la Nov-
velle France, és années 1643. & 1644.
[Chap. vi. to end of Part II., completing
the document.] Azerosme Lalemant,; Des
Hurons, September 21, 1643, and March
31, 1644 : : ;

LIV. Journal des PP. Jésuites. Hzerosme Lale-
mant,; Quebek, September-— December,
1645 : : ;

LV. Relation de ce qvi s’est passé en la Nov-
velle France, és années 1644. & 1645.
[Chaps. i.—xi.] Barthelemy Vimont,;
Quebec, October 1, 1645

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOLUME XXVII


NOTES


73


123
» 307
LeeLt


10 PRERACE NOW ZOE wea uae


devotion and piety are related. Driven hither by
the murderous Iroquois, many Algonkins from the St.
Lawrence valley have taken refuge with the Hurons;
and in their behalf is established the mission of Ste.
Elizabeth, in charge of Ménard. He soon finds ready
access to them, and they listen to him willingly;
several conversions occur among them.

The final chapter describes the labors of Pijart and
Ménard, begun in the previous summer, among the
Nipissing Algonkins. They meet a friendly recep-
tion; but on attempting to rebuke the superstitious
and licentious practices of the natives, much opposi-
tion is aroused, and the missionaries are even threat-
ened and assaulted. In December, these and several
other Algonkin tribes come to winter among the
Hurons, and Pijart continues his instruction to them.
He secures some conversions, and baptizes several at
the point of death.

It will be remembered (see Preface to Vol. XXV.)
that the original Huron report for 1642-43 was cap-
tured by the Iroquois; and the second draft thereof
reached Quebec too late, in the autumn of 1643, to
be sent to France from Quebec, for insertion in the
Relation of that year. In publishing this belated copy
in the Relation of 1643-44, the account of affairs in
the Huron mission is brought up to date by a supple-
mentary letter from Lalemant to his provincial, dated
March 31, 1644. In this epistle, Lalemant reports
that the Iroquois have closed all passage by the
rivers to Quebec; many of the Hurons, attempting to
descend thither, have been slaughtered or captured,
or have barely escaped with their lives; and their
country has been continually harassed by the foe.
Largely as a result of the war, a severe famine has


PIRIGEAGTE TO VOL: XEXVIT 11


helped still further to desolate this afflicted land,—
‘““ prevailing among all the tribes for over a hundred
leagues around.’’ There is hardly enough Indian
corn for sowing the fields. Fortunately, the Jesuits
have a good supply of corn; and this enables them
to exercise toward the starving Indians a charity that
wins their affection. On the whole, the church has
been strengthened, rather than injured, by these
afflictions. The mission stations have become resi-
dences, and the chapels have been everywhere
enlarged. The Christians are notably more numer-
ous, and even the Infidels are less hostile.

LIV. We here commence the publication of the
Journal des Jésuttes,—as its title indicates, a brief rec-
ord, from day to day, of events occurring in the Jesuit
residence at Quebec, and written by the superior in
charge. It is prefaced by an outline of affairs in
Canada, as they existed at the time when Jerome
Lalemant came down to Quebec (September, 1645),
to replace Vimont as superior of the Canadian mis-
sion. The /ournal itself commences October 17,
1645, and continues to June 21, 1668, with some gaps
between 1654 and 1656; weshall present its contents
in yearly installments,—the portion given in this
volume embracing September to December, 1645.

The Relations were formal accounts, carefully edited
in Quebec and in Paris, and avowedly published for
the purpose of attracting money and recruits for the
missions of New France; it is to the letters and other
informal documents of the period, that we must look
for side lights with which to illumine the heroic pic-
ture of the Jesuits in New France. Among the mass
of material of this character which will be supplied
in the present series, no document will be more


12 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVII


serviceable to historians of the period than the /our-
nal des Jésuttes, which is the more valuable because
obviously not intended for the public eye.

In his introductory note on the ‘“‘ state of the coun-
try ’’ when he arrived at Quebec in September, 1645,
Lalemant says that the Hundred Associates had just
ceded the fur trade to the French colonists on the St.
Lawrence. At Montreal, ‘‘ there remain, of notable
persons,’ only D’Ailleboust and his family, and
Mlle. Mance. Le Jeune and Jogues are assigned to
that post for the winter. Cofiture, the donné who
had been captured with Jogues, two years before, by
the Iroquois, returns from an embassy to the Mo-
hawks, with whom he has been negotiating a peace.
Fort Richelieu is almost abandoned, only eight or
ten soldiers being left there. A list of the appoint-
ments at the various mission stations is given.

Here the /ournal proper begins. Following are
the principal entries: The fleet departs for France,
October 24, ‘‘ laden, as is estimated, with 20,000
pounds’ weight of Beaver skins for the habitans, and
10,000 for the general company, at a pistole, or ten
or eleven francs, a pound.” The soldiers sent last
year to the Huron country return, this September,
to Montreal, with a valuable cargo of furs. ‘‘ A dis-
pute over this having arisen between the habitans,
lately put in possession of the trade, and the mes-
sieurs of the general Company, they agreed to employ
the proceeds in building a church and clergy-house,
for which 6,000 livres were specially set aside.’’
They make up for this, however, by allowing the
Jesuits only thirty crowns apiece for the maintenance
of these soldiers during the past year; ‘‘ they caused
us thereby a loss of more than 2,500 livres.’’ Some


PREPACE TO VOL. XXVIT 13


of the Hurons wintering at Sillery steal from a
Frenchman; they are ‘‘ intimidated with the anger
of Monsieur the Governor at his return.”’

Complaint is made of the Huron Atironta and his
family, who lodge at the hospital, that they take the
place of the sick there. A wedding, at which Le
Jeune officiates, causes Chavigny to lose one of his
men, for which he blames the priest; but it appears
afterward that he was wrong in complaining of Le
Jeune. A house for the Jesuits at Montreal is ready
for erection, when orders come from France that all
the workmen must at once begin work on Madame
de Bullion’s hospital. Maisonneuve finds it hard to
tell this news to the Fathers; Lalemant says: ‘‘I
took it upon myself to do so, and to persuade them
to regard the matter favorably; afterward, they flung
the cat at my legs, as if I were the one who had
hindered that work.”’

November 15, Vimont obtains Des Chastelets’s
consent that the prohibition of trade with the Indians
shall not apply to the Jesuits, but that they must
carry it on quietly. ‘‘ The Algonquins of Sillery
inflict on themselves severe disciplines for having
been several times drunk; but they complain much
and stoutly that the French get drunk and are bad,
and that not a word is said about it.’’ At a wed-
ding, “there were two violins, for the first time.”
Much curious information is given, incidentally,
about the values of wages, food, peltries, etc. Lale-
mantenotcsathe great expenses incurred for the
Sillery establishment,— nearly a thousand écus,—
while the revenues therefrom are nz/.

December 3, the Ursulines send a dinner to the
Fathers——“‘a perfect banquet, indeed.”’ * About


14 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVII


this time, we began to make bread at the house, not
only because that made for us at the warehouse oven
was not good, but because we wished to use the corn
of the land, which they did not use at the ware-
house.’’ The religious ceremonies observed on the
various church festivals of the month are described, —
especially those at Christmastide. Two great kettles
filled with fire have been furnished by the warehouse,
to warm the chapel; through neglect to remove these
after mass, the floor beneath them catches fire, early
in the morning, but it is fortunately seen by the
Jesuits’ cook, who quietly extinguishes the fire.
Two Frenchmen create a scandal by getting intoxi-
cated, while waiting for the midnight mass. The
Jesuits vigorously denounce this, ‘‘ because the sav-
ages said: ‘ They make us take the discipline when
we get drunk, and they say nothing to the French.’
Nothing further was required than this public
expression; Monsieur the governor had them put
on the chevalet, exposed to a frightful Northeast
wind.”

Lalemant finds that his predecessor, Vimont, had
granted to the two convents of nuns twelve arpents
of the best meadow lands owned by the Jesuits, for a
term of six years. He blames Vimont for this; but
the latter soon afterward obtains a retrocession of the
land, as appears by a marginal note in the text.


LV. The Relation of 1644—45 consists of but one
part (dated at Quebec, October 1, 1645), written by
Vimont, because his successor, Jerome Lalemant,
had not arrived in time to perform the task; it is
supplemented by a letter from Lalemant, dated in
the Huron country, May 15, 1645, and treating of the
mission in that quarter. We present the first eleven


PREFACE TO VOL. XXVIT 15


chapters of the Relation in this volume; it will be
concluded in Vol. XXVIII.

The great event of the year, says Vimont, is the
peace which has just been concluded with the dreaded
Iroquois. ‘‘ Another blessing ”’ to the country is the
cession of the fur trade to the habitants by the Com-
pany of New France and the Montreal Associates,
respectively.

Much space is this year devoted to the pious utter-
ances and behavior of the Christian Indians. Some,
who become intoxicated, are shut out from the
church, and kneel by the door, in the midst of rain
and mud. The Father orders some boards to be
brought for them to kneel on, that they may not soil
their clothing; but they decline this relief. Some
even refuse to enter the church when he gives them
permission, so humble and contrite are they.

One of these neophytes, while on a trading trip,
meets a small tribe who have thus far had no inter-
course with the French. He preaches to them, and
so arouses their interest in the new religion that they
help him erect a large cross on the banks of a river,
where he promises to meet them in the following
spring.

The new Christians persist in their religious duties,
despite the scorn and jeers of their heathen compan-
ions. They resist the numerous temptations to
anger, licentiousness, and superstition. They pa-
tiently suffer hunger, sickness, and affliction; and
comfort one another in those troubles. At Tadous-
sac, one man is suddenly cured of an illness, and
claims that he has been in heaven, where he has seen
Jesus, who has given him a message to his tribes-
men. This man has seen the book in which are


16 PREFACE TO VOL. XXVII


inscribed all their names, and the record of their
sins; also he has seen hell itself, and men burn-
ing in the infernal fires. To all this, the Indians
listen with the utmost attention, and in profound
silence; it frightens the wicked, and consoles the
good, and has excellent results. Some of them
surprise their priest by inflicting the discipline upon
themselves,—of their own accord, and in public.
This arouses a contagion of fervor among those
assembled: ‘‘the penance was so general that the
innocent wished to share it with the guilty. Even
the children were not spared; their fathers and moth-
ers made them approach the altar, took off their
little garments, and begged him who held the whip
to chastise them. These poor victims went there
cheerfully, and without shrinking, or shedding one
little tear, they received the blows from the whip,
which were gently delivered on their innocent flesh.
Some of the mothers even struck with their Rosa-
fies, in “thée=manner of the <discipline, their little
children still at the breast. This flagellation would
have been too long had not the Father put an end to
it; he consoled them, assured them of the pardon of
their sins, and warned them not to perform any other
public penance without the advice of their Confess-
ors.”’ Afterward, ‘“‘the discipline was hung up on
a nail in the Chapel,” as a warning.

A party of Sillery Indians go into the woods for
their usual great hunt; and, at their request, Father
Dreuillettes goes with them as their spiritual guide.
They greatly edify him by their zeal in observing all
religious duties, especially at Christmas. The poor
Father becomes blind through the smoke of the cab-
ins. An Indian woman attempts with a bit of rusty


PAGE OVO XV LT 17


iron to remove this difficulty, but to no avail. Fi-
nally, his sight is suddenly restored through an appeal
to the intercession of the Virgin.

Vimont relates the particulars of several Iroquois
raids upon Fort Richelieu, also of a retaliatory incur-
sion made by the Algonkins, in which they capture
two Iroquois prisoners; contrary to the usual savage
custom, these prisoners are not harmed, but are kind-
ly treated, and are delivered to Montmagny. He
orders another Iroquois, who had been kept at Three
Rivers, to be liberated and sent back to his own coun-
try. This man returns (July 5) with ambassadors,
who negotiate a treaty of peace with both French
and Hurons. These envoys bring back Cotiture,
who had been captured with Jogues, and restore him
to the French. Ten days are spent in the prelimi-
naries of a peace, which is finally ratified, early in
September, at a general council of the Hurons,
Algonkins, and French, who meet deputies from the
Iroquois. The proceedings by which this treaty is
made, with the speeches, gifts, and feasts accom-
panying, are given in much detail. The Iroquois
envoys depart September 23, leaving three of their


number with the French as hostages.
RAG. Te
Maoptson, Wis., July, 1898.


LHI (concluded)


RELATION OF 1643-44


PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1645


Chaps. i.—viii. of Part I. were given in Volume XXV.; in
Volume XXVI. were given the remainder of Part I., and the
first five chapters of Part II. (the Huron report); we here-
with present the remainder of Part II., thus completing the
document.


20 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 27


[110] CHAPITREW 2


DE LA MISSION DES ANGES AUX ATIOUENDARONK, OU
NATION NEUTRE.


E peu de nombre que nous fommes eftant a peine
Le fuffifant pour cultiuer les bourgades qui nous
font plus voifines, nous n’auons pti continuer
l’inftruction de la Nation neutre, ot il y a deux ans
que nous iettames les premieres femences de 1’ Euan-
gile. Quelques Chreftiens Hurons y ont efté en noftre
place, y ont fait le deuoir d’Apoftres, & peut eftre
auec plus de fuccés pour le prefent que nous n’euffions
fait par nous mefmes.

Eftienne Totiri du bourg de 8. Iofeph accompagné
d’vn fien frere s’eftans arreftez dans les bourgades
plus frontieres, trouuerent des oreilles fi difpofées a
les entendre, qu’a peine auoient-ils trois ou quatre
heures dans la nuict pour prendre leur fommeil.
Ils portoient leur chapelet au col, & comme la curiofité
picque autant ces peuples barbares, qu’elle [111]
fait en Europe les Natids plus ciuilifées, cette nou-
ueauté en des perfonnes qui d’ailleurs en tout leur
teffemblét, faifoit qu’a chaque bourgade on leur en
demandoit la raifon. C’eft, difoient-ils, vne des
marques, que nous reconnoiffons pour maiftre celuy
qui feul a creé le Ciel & la terre. I1 nous eft inui-
fible, quoy qu’il rempliffe tout le monde, & que luy
feul fouftienne toutes chofes, ainfi que l’ame remplit
nos corps, les viuifie & les fouftient, quoy qu’elle
mefme iamais ne paroiffe A nos yeux. En {uite ils


1642-45} RELATION OF 1643-44 21


fr10o] CHAPTER VI.


OF THE MISSION OF THE ANGELS AMONG THE ATI-
OUENDARONK OR NEUTRAL NATION.


UR small number being barely sufficient to at-
tend to the villages that are nearest to us, we
have been unable to continue the instruction

of the neutral Nation, where two years ago we sowed
the first seeds of the Gospel. Some Christian Hurons
went there in our stead and performed the duty of
Apostles, perhaps with more success for the present
than we ourselves could have had.

Estienne-Totiri, of the village of St. Joseph,
accompanied by one of his brothers, stopped in one of
their villages nearer the frontier, and found ears so
well disposed to listen to them that they had barely
three or four hours at night for sleep. They carried
their rosaries around their necks, and, as curiosity
excites, these barbarous. peoples, as it )f111]' does
the most civilized Nations in Europe, such a novelty,
in persons who in all other respects resemble them,
caused them to be asked the reason thereof at every
willage.s) it is,’’ they said, “ onétof the signs ‘that
we acknowledge as our master him who alone has
created Heaven and earth. He is invisible to us,
although he fills the whole world; and he alone main-
tains all things, as the soul fills the body, vivifies and
sustains it, though it never appears to our eyes.”’
Afterward, they expounded the principal mysteries
of the Faith. But what touched those people more


22 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Nou. 27


alloient deduifans les principaux myiteres de la Foy.
Mais ce qui touchoit dauantage ces peuples, eftoit la
crainte de ces feux qu’on difoit leur eftre inéuitables,
s’ils n’adoroient ce grand maiftre dela nature. Et
pourquoy donc, repartoient-ils, n’a-t’on continué de
nous venir inftruire? pourquoy nous donnez vous la
connoiffance de ce malheur qui nous attend, fi on ne
vient en mefme temps pour nous en deliurer? autre-
ment nous donnant cette crainte que iufqu’icy nous
n’auions pas, c’e{t pour nous rendre miferables dés
cette vie, auant que [112] nous le foyons en 1’autre.

Barnabé Otfinnonannhont excellent Chreftien du
bourg de S. Michel ayant penetré iufqu’au fond du
pais, y a fait vn plus long feiour; & comme il eft de
grande authorité parmy ces peuples, fon zele y a
donné bien plus de iour aux veritez de noftre Foy, &
fon exemple a prefché plus fortement que fes dif-
cours. Il refufa publiquement des defirs d’vne femme
effrontée, qui demandoit de luy ce que fa confcience
ne luy pouuoit permettre, quoy que les couftumes de
ces pais l’y condamnaffent, & qu’on appelle icy vertu,
ce qui deuant Dieu n’eft qu’vn crime. Ila eu mille
combats 4 rendre contre ceux mefme qu'il cheriffoit
le plus, ayant toufliours conftamment refufé d’obeyr
4 leurs fonges, qui eft le Dieu de tous ces peuples.
Et comme on luy reprochoit que la Foy eftoit vn
ioug infupportable, l’obligeat de rompre ainfi les
droits de l’amitié, & le priuer des plus grands plaifirs
de la vie. Non, difoit-il, fi pour aller en Paradis ie
{cauois vn chemin couuert de precipices, i’irois tefte
baiffée & m’eftimerois trop heureux de [113] mourir
en la peine. A quelque prix que nous gagnions vn
bon-heur eternel, nous ne l’auons qu’A bon marché.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 23


than all was the fear of those fires that they were told
they could not avoid, unless they adored the great
master of nature. ‘‘ And why,”’ replied they, ‘‘ have
they not continued to come and instruct us? Why
do you give us the knowledge of this misfortune
that awaits us if no one come at the same time to
deliver us from it? Otherwise by inspiring us with
that fear, that we have not had till now, it is enough
to make us miserable even in this life, before [112]
we are in the other.’”’

Barnabé Otsinnonannhont, an excellent Christian
of the village of St. Michel, who penetrated to the
heart of the country, made a longer stay there; and,
as he has great authority among these tribes, his zeal
has given much more publicity to the truths of our
Faith, and his example has preached more forcibly
than his words. He publicly refused the desires of
a shameless woman, who asked him to do what his
conscience could not permit, although the customs of
this country sentenced him to it, and here they call
a virtue what, before God, is but a crime. He had
to fight a thousand battles against those even whom
he held most dear; for he always firmly refused to
obey their dreams, which are the God of all these
peoples. And when they reproached him, saying
that Faith was an intolerable yoke, as it compelled
him thus to sever the bonds of friendship, and to
deprive himself of the greatest pleasures of life,
““No,” said he, ‘‘if, in order to reach-Paradise, ]
knew of a road full of precipices, I would coura-
geously advance, and would consider myself only too
happy if [113] I perished in the effort. At whatever
price we win eternal happiness, we always acquire it
cheaply.”


24 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo 27


Enfin lors qu'il fut preft de fon retour il fe vit
obligé de donner le Baptefme 4 vne fienne fille qu’il
laiffoit en ce pais-14, ot il a grand nombre de parens.
Mais fouuiens-toy ma fille, luy difoit-il, de conferuer
precieufement la grace que tu regois par le Baptefme.
Quand le Diable ou les langues impies te poufferont
au mal, penfe que Dieu te voit, quoy que ton pere
foit abfent; & ficette confideration ne t’arrefte, refou-
uiens-toy au moins de celle-cy; Que la plus grande
douleur que tu puiffe caufer 4 ton pere, eft de com-
mettre vn peché qui te doiue 4 iamais feparer d’auec
luy.

Sur la fin de l’hyuer vne bande d’enuiron cent per-
fonnes de ces peuples de la Natio Neutre font venus
nous vifiter en ce pais. Ils y ont veu 1’Eglife naif-
fante des Hurons, fe font informez de nos Chreftiens
des chofes de la Foy, nous les auons in{truits nous
mefmes, & s’il faut croire 4 leur parole, ils s’en font
retournez auec vn regret que nous ne leur tenons
[114] compagnie; & des promeffes que leur pais ne
fera pas de refiftance a receuoir la Foy, auffi toft
qu’ayans fuffifamment fait bréche icy dans les Hu-
rons, nous aurons le moyen de donner iufqu’a eux.
Dieu veiiille que cette femence porte fruicts en fon
temps.

Ces peuples de la Nation neutre ont toufiours
guerre auec ceux de la Nation du feu encore plus
éloignez de nous. Ils y allerent 1’Ef{té dernier en
nombre de deux mille, y attaquerent vn bourg bien
muny d’vne paliffade, & qui fut fortement defendu
par neuf cens guerriers qui fouftinrent l’affaut; enfin
ils le forcerent aprés vn fiege de dix iours, en tuerent
bon nombre fur la place, prirent huit cens captifs,


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 25


Finally, when the time drew near for his return,
he found himself obliged to give Baptism to a daugh-
ter of his, whom he left in that country, where he has
a great many relatives. ‘‘ But remember, my daugh-
ter,’’ he said to her, ‘‘ carefully to preserve the grace
that thou receivest through Baptism. When the
Devil, or impious tongues, shall impel thee to evil,
think that God sees thee, although thy father be
absent. And if that consideration do not stop thee,
remember at least this one —that the greatest sorrow
thou canst cause thy father is to commit a sin that
will separate thee from him forever.’’

At the end of the winter, a party of about one
hundred persons of these peoples of the Neutral Na-
tion came to visit us in this country. They saw here
the nascent Church of the Hurons; they questioned
our Christians on matters of the Faith; we instructed
them ourselves; and, if we may trust their word,
they went away regretting that we could not [114]
accompany them, and promising that their country
would offer no resistance to the reception of the
Faith. As soon as we shall have made a sufficient
breach here among the Hurons, we shall be able to
gotothem. God grant that this seed may bear fruit
in due time.

These peoples of the neutral Nation are always at
war with those of the Nation of fire, who are still
farther distant from us. They went there last Sum-
mer to the number of two thousand, and attacked a
village well protected by a palisade, and strongly
defended by nine hundred warriors who withstood
the assault. Finally, they carried it, after a siege of
ten days; they killed many on the spot, and took
eight hundred captives, men, women, and children.


26 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


tant hommes que femmes & enfans, aprés auoir bruflé
foixante & dix des plus guerriers, creué les yeux &
cerné tout le tour de la bouche aux vieillards, que
par aprés ils abandonnent a leur conduite, afin qu’ils
traifnent ainfi vne vie miferable. Voila le fleau qui
depeuple tous ces pais: car leur guerre n’eft qu’a
s’exterminer.

Cette Nation du feu eft plus peuplée [115] elle feule
que ne font tous enfemble ceux de la Nation Neutre,
tous les Hurons & les Iroquois ennemis des Hurons:
elle contient grand nombre de villages qui parlent la
langue Algonquine, quiregne encore plus auant. La
vie nous manquera plufto{t que des nations nouuelles
A conquefter a Iefus-Chrift; & il faut que la Foy
adouciffe ces peuples, ainfi qu’elle commence d’apri-
uoifer ceux de mefme langage qui habitent vers le
Septentrion. Au moins quelques Hurons dignes de
foy, qui tous les ans vont trafiquer auec des nations
Algonquines qui y font répandués ¢a & 14, nous ont
fait le rapport qu’ils en ont trouué de Chreftiens qui
fe mettent 4 genoux comme nous, ioignent les mains,
regardent vers le Ciel, prient Dieu foir & matin,
deuant & aprés le repas: & la meilleure marque de
leur Foy, eft qu’ils ne font plus méchas ny deshon-
neftes comme ils eftoient auparauant. Ils les ap-
pellent Ondoutaoiiakeronnon. Ce font peuples enui-
ron cent lieués dans les terres au deffus du Saguené
tirant au Nort, qui ayans receu quelque inftruction
les vns 4 Tadouffak, les [116] autres aux Trois Riui-
eres, ot! ils ne vont que comme des oifeaux de paflage,
portent dedans leurs bois, leurs lacs & leurs monta-
gnes folitaires la Foy & la crainte de Dieu, qui trouue
fon feiour par tout.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 27


After having burned seventy of the best warriors,
they put out the eyes and girdled the mouths of all
the old men, whom they afterward abandoned to
their own guidance, in order that they might thus
drag out a miserable life. Such is the scourge that
depopulates all these countries; for their wars are
but wars of extermination.

This Nation of fire alone is more populous [115]
than all the Neutral Nation, all the Hurons, and all
the Iroquois, enemies of the Hurons, put together.
It consists of a large number of villages, wherein is
spoken the Algonquin language, which prevails still
farther on. Life will fail us rather than new nations
to conquer for Jesus Christ. And it is necessary that
the Faith should soften these tribes, as it is com-
mencing to tame those of the same language who
live toward the North. At least, some trustworthy
Hurons, who go every year to trade with the Algon-
quin tribes scattered here and there, have informed
us that they have met Christians who kneel as we
do, clasp their hands, raise their eyes to Heaven, and
pray to God night and morning, and before and after
meals. And the best evidence of their Faith is that
they are no longer wicked and dishonest, as they
formerly were. They call them Ondoutaouakeron-
non. These are people about a hundred leagues
above the Saguené, toward the North, who have
been instructed — some at Tadoussak, [116] and others
at Three Rivers, where they go merely as birds
of passage, bearing with them into their solitary
woods, lakes, and mountains the Faith and the fear
of God, which finds its abode everywhere.


28 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Nou 27


CHAPTER valle


DE LA MISSION DE SAINCT IEAN BAPTISTE AUX AREN-
DARONNONS.


E Pere Antoine Daniel a continué dans le foin
is de cette Miffion, qui cette année a eu dans fon
reffort les bourgs de S. Iean Baptifte & de S.
Ioachim, & vn troifiéme éloigné d’enuiron fix lieués,
qui porte le nom de S. Ignace. Dieu a par tout aug-
menté le nombre des Chreftiens & des Catechumenes:
mais pour rapporter quelque chofe plus en particu-
lier de cette Eglife.

Vn bon vieillard Chref{tien aagé de plus de cent
ans, ayant appris que les ennemis s’approchoient de
fon bourg pour l’enleuer par force, fe réiotiiffoit au
milieu des frayeurs publiques & des pleurs [117] qu’il
entendoit de tous coftez, difant aux Infideles qu’a ce
coup il alloit eftre heureux, & ioiiir des plaifirs que
fa Foy luy faifoit efperer.

Dans ce mefme efprit de la Foy vne femme Chre-
{tienne qui venoit de perdre la veué, & fentoit des
douleurs quafi infupportables, chantoit au plus fort
de fon mal, que la penfée du Paradis adouciffoit fes
peines, que fa mifere trouueroit vne fin, mais que la
ioye qu’elle efperoit dedans le Ciel iamais ne finiroit.

Vn ieune homme Chreftien qui l’an paffé fe voy-
ant pourfuiuy d’vne bande Iroquoife, s’eftoit ietté
quafi par defefpoir derriere vn arbriffeau ov il trouua
la vie lors qu’il n’attendoit que la mort, nous racon-


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 29


CHAPTER VII.


OF THE MISSION OF SAINT JEAN BAPTISTE AMONG
THE ARENDARONNONS.


ee Antoine Daniel has continued in charge
of this Mission, which this year has had within
its province the villages of St. Jean Baptiste,
of St. Joachim, and of a third, about six leagues
distant, that bears the name of St. Ignace. God has
everywhere increased the number of the Christians
and Catechumens. But let us give more particulars
respecting that Church.

A good old man—a Christian, over a hundred
years old—heard that the enemy were approaching
his village to carry it by storm. He rejoiced amid
the public alarm, and the weeping [117] that he heard
on all sides, saying to the Infidels that this time he
would be happy and enjoy the pleasures that his
Faith led him to hope for.

In this same spirit of Faith, a Christian woman
who had just lost her sight, and felt almost unbear-
able pain, sang while her sufferings were keenest,
that the thought of Paradise alleviated her trouble;
that her misery would come to an end, but the joy
that she hoped to feel in Heaven would never cease.

A Christian young man, last year, saw himself
pursued by a band of Iroquois, and threw himself,
almost in despair, behind a bush, where he found
life when he expected only death. He told us that,
in the midst of his fears, he was about to call out to


30 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


toit qu’au milieu de fes craintes il fut tout fur le point
d’appeller l’ennemy, fongeant qu’aprés la mort il feroit
heureux dans le Ciel. Mon Dieu, difoit-il dans le
fond de fon cceur, c’eft vous qui me cachez icy, l’en-
nemy eft a vingt pas de moy, fi vous n’aidiez a4 me
couurir ferois-ie icy en feureté? Difpofez de ma vie
felon qu'il vous plaira. Si ie fgauois vos volontez ie
me prefenterois moy [118] mefme, & leur dirois qu’ils
me bruflaffent, & alors ie vous offrirois mes tourmens.
Ie ne vous demande, mon Dieu, rien que le Ciel, ot
ie puiffe 4 iamais vous voir comme vous me voyez
maintenant. Ce ieune homme eft venu bien fouuent
de dix & douze lieués pour entendre la Meffe; &
comme c’e{toit en vn temps dangereux pour la crainte
des ennemis, & que nous luy difions gu’il auoit tort
de s’expofer a ce peril fans bonne compagnie: Et
quoy, nous difoit-il, Dieu n’eft-il pas auec moy? fi
ie fuis tué en chemin pourrois-ie mieux mourir? N’i-
rois-ie pas droit dans le Ciel? Puis-ie craindre la
mort, quoy que ie marche au milieu des perils, m’en-
tretenant dans ces penfées.

Les parens d’vn ieune Neophyte luy ayant propofé
vn party qui luy eftoit aduantageux, luy demanderent
fila fille luy agreoit. Vous ne regardez qu’au dehors,
leur dit-il, ce que ie veux aimer ne fe voit point des
yeux. A-t’elle de bonnes penfées pour le Ciel?
Eft-elle difpofée de mourir en la Foy? Son cceur
eft-il a Dieu? Aimera-t’elle*fon falut? Si cela eft
[119] ie l’aime: fans cela iamais elle ne me fera rien.

Vn Capitaine Chreftien des plus confiderables du
bourg de S. Iean Baptifte, ayant parlé publiquemét
en faueur d’vn fonge de quelque fien amy, en fut
incontinent touché au coeur. Vay fafché Dieu, dit-il


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 31


the enemy, thinking that after death he would be
happy in Heaven: ‘‘ My God,”’ he said in the depths
of his heart, ‘‘it is you who hide me here. The
enemy are twenty paces from me. If you did not
help me to conceal myself, would I be safe here?
Dispose of my life as you please. If I knew your
will, I would present myself, [118] and tell them to
burn me; and then I would offer you my torments.
I ask of you nothing, my God, but Heaven, where I
may ever see you as you see me now.”’ This young
man came very frequently from a distance of ten or
twelve leagues to hear Mass; and, as it was a dan-
gerous time, owing to fear of the enemies, we told
him that he was wrong in exposing himself to that
danger without being in a numerous company.
‘What, ssaid he, **is not God with mer If I were
killed on the road, could I die a better death? Would
I not go straight to Heaven? Can I fear death, even
when walking in the midst of peril, while I have such
thoughts?”’

The parents of a young Neophyte proposed to him
a marriage that was advantageous for him and asked
him if the girl pleased him. ‘‘ You look only at the
outside,’ he said to them. ‘‘ What I wish to love
cannot be seen with the eyes. Has she good thoughts
regarding Heaven? Is she disposed to die in the
Faith? Does her heart belong to God? Will she
cherish her salvation? If so, [119] I love her; if not,
she will never be anything to me.”’

A Christian Captain, one of the leading men of the
village of St. Jean Baptiste, who had spoken publicly
in favor of a dream of one of his friends, was at once
touched to the heart. ‘‘I have offended God,” he
said to the Father; ‘‘ my sin deserves to be punished ;


32 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 27


au Pere, mon peché merite punition; & comme il a
e{té public ne crains point de m’ordonner vne peni-
tence publique, parle & ie t’obeiray. Le Pere luy
ordonne d’eftre huict iours fans fe trouuer 4 aucun
feftin. C’eftoit le condamner 4 vn ieufne plus eftroit
qu’au pain & a l'eau, & l’obliger plus de dix fois le
iour de refpondre A tous les Infideles, qu'il faifoit
penitence de fon peché. Quelquefois il eftoit plus
de trois heures aprés midy auant qu’il euft rompu
fon ieufne, a caufe que les feftins qui fe faifoient en
fa propre cabane empefchoient le repas ordinaire.
Le Pere s’en eftant apperceu voulut luy relafcher fa
penitence. Mon frere, luy repartit ce Capitaine, tu
n’as pas affez de courage, tu te défies trop de nous
autres; non, non, ne mollis point. Ie prens plaifir a
me punir [120] de mon peché, il faut acheuer iuf-
qu’au bout: Quiconque offenfe Dieu eft trop heureux
d’en eftre quitte 4 fi bon marché.

Ie penfois finir ce Chapitre par la conuerfion d’vn
magicien le plus fameux qui foit en ces pais. La
crainte de l’Enfer auoit ce femble touché fon coeur:
defia il auoit ietté publiquement dedans le feu fes
characteres, il auoit prote{té en la prefence mefme
des Infideles, que iamais les Demons n’auroient plus
de part auec luy, que Dieu feul meritoit d’eftre adoré
de tous les hommes, que les Diables en effet ne con-
{pirent qu’a noftre mal-heur. Mais auant qu’il euft
receu le fainct Baptefme, il eft retourné & fon vomif-
fement; & la honte qu’il a maintenant d’auoir décre-
dité fon art, fait qu’il blafpheme contre Dieu plus
horriblement que iamais, qu'il fe donne A tous les
Demons: quoy que de fois a autres fa confcience
layt preffé de venir nous demander pardon. Ie prie


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 33


and, as it was a public one, fear not to order me to
do penance publicly. Speak, and I will obey thee.”’
The Father ordered him to abstain from going to any
feast for a period of eight days. This meant con-
demning him to a fast stricter than if on bread and
water, and compelled him, more than ten times a day,
to reply to all the Infidels that he was doing penance
for his sins. Sometimes it was past three in the
afternoon before he broke his fast, because the feasts
that were given in his own cabin prevented him from
taking his usual repast. When the Father perceived
this, he wished to relax his penance. ‘‘ My brother,’’
replied the Captain to him, ‘‘ thou hast not enough
courage; thou mistrustest us too much. No, no, do
not waver. I take pleasure in punishing myself
[120] for my sin; I must serve my penance to the
end. Whosoever offends God is only too happy to
be so easily forgiven.’’

I thought that I would conclude this Chapter with
the conversion of a magician, the most famous one
in this country. The fear of Hell seemed to have
touched his heart. He had already publicly thrown
his charms into the fire; he had protested, in the
presence even of the Infidels, that the Demons would
never have anything to do with him, that God alone
deserved to be loved by all men, and that, in truth,
the Devils conspired together only for our misfor-
tune. But, before he received holy Baptism, he
returned to his vomit; and the shame that he now
feels for having cast discredit on his art makes him
blaspheme against God more horribly than ever, and
give himself up to all the Demons,—although from
time to time his conscience has urged him to come
to us and ask pardon. I pray our Lord that he may


34 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


nof{tre Seigneur qu'il en tire fa gloire: mais pour
dire la verité, il femble que ce malheureux foit du
nombre des reprouuez; en vn mot il voudroit [121]
bien eftre tout a Dieu dans le Ciel, & tout au Diable
fur la terre.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 35


derive his own glory therefrom; but, to tell the
truth, it seems that this unfortunate man is num-
bered among the reprobates. In a word, he would
wish [121] to belong entirely to God in Heaven, and
entirely to the Devil on earth.


36 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


CHAPITRE VIII.


DE LA MISSION DE SAINTE ELIZABETH AUX ALGON-
QUINS ATONTRATARONNONS.


ES Iroquois qui fe font craindre fur le grand
L fleuue de S. Laurent, & qui tous les hyuers
depuis quelques années ont efté dans ces vaftes
forefts, Ala chaffe des hommes, ont fait quitter aux
Algonquins qui habitoient les coftes de ce fleuue,
non feulement leur chaffe, mais auffi leur pais, & les
ont reduit cet hyuer a fe ranger icy proche de nos
Hurons, pour y viure plus en affeurance; fi bien que
s’eftant trouué vne bourgade entiere de ces pauures
Nations errantes & fugitiues auprés du bourg de
fainct Iean Baptifte, nous nous fommes veus obligez
de leur donner quelque affiftance, & de ioindre pour
cet effet au P. Antoine Daniel qui auoit foin de la
Miffion Huronne, dont i’ay parlé dans le Chapitre
precedent, le P. René Menard, [122] qui ayant fuffi-
famment l’vfage de l’vne & l’autre langue, auoit en
mefme temps le foin de cette Miffion Algonquine, A
laquelle nous auons donné le nom de fainte Eliza-
beth.

Dans ce ramas de peuples qui d’ordinaire n’ont
point d’autre maifon que les bois & les fleuues, il
s’eft trouué dix ou douze Chreftiens qui autrefois ont
e{té baptifez aux Trois Riuieres ou A Kebec, &
d'autres qui iamais n’auoient oiiy parler de Dieu.

Le Pere aprés quelques vifites n’eut pas beaucoup


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 37


CHAPTER VIII.


OF THE MISSION OF SAINTE ELIZABETH AMONG THE
ATONTRATARONNON ALGONQUINS.


HE Iroquois, who make themselves dreaded on
AP the great river St. Lawrence and who every
winter for some years past have been hunting
men in these vast forests, have compelled the Algon-
quins who dwelt on the banks of the river to aban-
don not only their hunting grounds, but also their
country, and have reduced them this winter to come
here near our Hurons, in order to live more in safe-
ty,—so much so, that a whole village of these poor
wandering and fugitive Tribes came near the village
of saint Jean Baptiste. We were obliged to give
them some assistance, and for that purpose to asso-
ciate with Father Antoine Daniel—who had charge
of the Huron Mission of which I have spoken in the
preceding Chapter — Father René Menard,[122] who,
having a sufficient knowledge of both languages,
had, at the same time, charge of this Algonquin Mis-
sion, to which we have given the name of sainte
Elizabeth.

Amid this gathering of people—who, as a rule,
have no other abode than the woods and the rivers —
there were ten or twelve Christians who had for-
merly been baptized at Three Rivers or at Kebec,
and others who had never heard of God.

The Father had not much trouble in winning the
hearts of all after a few visits. “‘ Take courage,”’


38 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 27


de peine A leur gagner 4 tous le coeur. Prens cou-
rage, luy difoiét-ils, tu dis vray qu’il eft raifonnable
d’auoir recours & ce grand Maiftre de nos vies: en-
feigne nous ce qu'il faut dire pour qu’il entende nos
prieres; ne te laffe point de parler, & iamais nous ne
ferons las de t’entendre, quoy que nous n’ayOs pas
tant d’efprit, ne laiffe pas d’auoir pitié de nous.
A fiictio dat intellectum, 1a mifere a ce femble ouuert
leur efprit; & fila crainte des Iroquois ne rendoit la
demeure proche des Francois redoutable, ie croy
qu’en peu d’années on en feroit [123] vn peuple tout
Chreftien. Au moins deferent-ils beaucoup a nos
paroles, & la plufpart fe rendent fouples 4 la raifon.

Le Pere ayant appris qu’vn Infidele auoit deux
femmes, dont l’vne eftoit Chreftienne, parle 4 cet
homme de la griefueté de fa faute, de la grandeur de
Dieu qu’il offenfoit, & des peines d’enfer qui luy
eftoient inéuitables s’il continuoit dans ce peché.
Mon frere, repart l’Infidele, ie reconnois la verité de
ce que tu m’enfeigne, mais ie ne me fens pas encore
affez fort pour obeir entierement a Dieu: ie luy
obeiray en partie, & dés maintenant ie renonce a
l’vne de ces femmes, & ne veut retenir que celle qui
croit en Dieu, prie le qu’il ait pitié de moy.

Vne mere Infidele cémandoit a fa fille de fe trou-
uer a vn feftin fuperftitieux, ot les ceremonies
demandent qu’on n’y affifte que tout nud. Le P.
Menard ayant entendu ce commandement impudique
repréd & la mere & la fille. Nos Capitaines nous le
commandent, repliquent-elles: Oiiy mais Dieu le de-
fend, & ce feu qui brufle 4 iamais les pecheurs fera
votre [124] fupplice, fi vous refufez de luy obeir. A
ce mot ces femmes demeurent fans replique, &


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 39


they said to him, ‘“‘ thou sayest truly that it is right
to have recourse to that great Master of our lives.
Teach us what we should say, so that he may hear
our prayers. Do not weary of speaking to us; we
shall never be tired of listening to thee, although we
have not much sense; fail not to have pity on us.”
Affiictio dat intellectum—misfortune seems to have
opened their minds; and, if dread of the Iroquois did
not make them fear to live near the French, I think
that in a few years we would make [123] an entirely
Christian people of them. At least, they pay much
deference to our words, and most of them are becom-
ing amenable to reason.

The Father heard that an Infidel had two wives,
one of whom was a Christian. He spoke to that man
of the grievousness of his sin; of the greatness of
God, whom he offended; and of the pains of hell,
that would inevitably be his fate if he continued in
that sin, Mls brother,” replied the Infidel) Tf
acknowledge the truth of what thou teachest me;
but I do not yet feel strong enough to obey God
completely. I will obey him partly; and from this
moment I give up one of my wives, and will keep
only her who believes in God. Pray him to have pity
on me.”’

An Infidel mother commanded her daughter to be
present at a superstitious feast, at which the ceremo-
nial required that they should attend quite naked.
When Father Menard heard of this shameless order,
he reproved the mother and the daughter. ‘' Our
Captains command it,’’ they replied. ‘‘ Yes, but
God forbids it; and the fire that burns sinners for-
ever shall be your [124] punishment if you refuse to
obey him.” To these words, the women made no


40 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 27


n’oferent pas mefme fortir de leur cabane pour aller
voir cette ceremonie, ayant appris que Dieu y feroit
offenfé.

Vne femme Infidele eftant tombée griefuement
malade, on luy dit que nous auions recours 4 Dieu en
nos afflictions, comme a celuy qui nous en pouuoit
deliurer, qu’elle le priaft de tout fon coeur, & que
peut eftre il auroit pitié d’elle. Le mefme Pere qui
l’auoit enfeignée paffant par 14 deux iours aprés, &
se{tonnant de la veoir trauailler auffi fortemét que
les autres; cette femme l’appelle, luy dit qu’il n’eft
pas vn menteur, que vrayement Dieu eft tout puif-
fant, & que l’ayant prié, en mefme temps elle s’eft
veué guerie. Puis luy parlant plus en fecret, elle
adioufte que fon efprit eftoit en peine, que le mef-
chant Manitou luy eftoit apparu la nuict, l’auoit me-
nacée de la mort fi elle ne luy faifoit vn facrifice, &
que publiquement elle n’aduoiiaft tenir de luy la vie.
Tu fcais, luy repartit le Pere, que Dieu feul t’a
guery, n’obeis [125] pas 4 ce Demon qui cherche les
moyens de te perdre pour vn iamais. Non, non,
replique cette femme, ie veux honorer Dieu, ie le
prieray toute ma vie, & iamais ie ne m’oublieray de
luy. Elle eft tres-bien difpofée au Baptefme, & toute
{a famille n’eft pas efloignée du Royaume de Dieu.

D’aucuns fuiuoient le Pere de cabane en cabane,
ne pouuans fe laffer de l’entendre parler de Dieu:
d’autres le venoient trouuer reglément tous les foirs
& matins, quelque orage & tempefte qu’il y euft au
plus fort de l’hyuer, quoy que ces cabanes Algon-
quines fuffent éloignées du bourg de S. Iean Baptifte
vn quart de lieué de tres-mauuais chemin; & c’eftoit
vne confolation 4 nos Peres de voir en leur Chapelle


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 41


answer; and they did not even venture to go out of
their cabin to witness the ceremony, when they heard
that God would be offended by it.

An Infidel woman fell grievously ill. She was
told that we had recourse to God in our afflictions as
to one who could deliver us from them; that she
should pray to him with all her heart, and that per-
haps he would have pity on her. The same Father
who had taught her passed that way, two days after,
and was surprised to see her working as hard as the
others! The woman called him, and told him that
he was not a liar; that, in truth, God is all-powerful;
that she had prayed to him, and at the same time she
was cured. Then, speaking more privately to him,
she added that her mind was in trouble,—that the
wicked Manitou had appeared to her during the night,
and had threatened her with death if she did not offer
a sacrifice to him, and publicly avow that she owed
her life to him. ‘‘ Thou knowest,’’ said the Father
to her, ‘‘ that God alone has cured thee; obey [125]
not that Demon who seeks the means of damning
thee forever.’’ ‘‘ No, no,’’ replied the woman, ‘‘I
wish to honor God; I will pray to him all my life,
and I will never forget him.’’ She is very well
disposed to Baptism, and all of her family are not far
from the Kingdom of God.

Some followed the Father from cabin to cabin,
being never weary of hearing him speak of God.
Others went regularly to see him, every night and
every morning, no matter how stormy or tempes-
tuous the weather inthe depth of winter. Although
these Algonquin cabins were distant from the village
of St. Jean Baptiste a quarter of a league, and the
road was very bad, it was consoling to our Fathers


42 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


Dieu adoré en mefme temps en ces deux langues
differentes, Huronne & Algonquine, & par des
peuples qui n’auoient rien de commun que la Foy.

La conduite de Dieu s’eft particulierement fait pa-
roiftre fur quelques-vns qui ont receu le fainct Bap-
tefme, & entre autres fur vn guerrier qui receut dans
ces [126] eaux facrées lenom d’Antoine. Cet homme
s’e{t échapé plus de huit fois des mains de l’ennemy,
& depuis fon enfance fa vie n’a e{té qu’vne fuite de
combats & d’auantures qui fuccedoient les vns aux
autres. Encore depuis peu, il n’y a pas fix mois,
qu’eftant entre les mains des Iroquois qui auoient
defia commencé d’exercer deffus luy leur rage, il trou-
ua le moyen de couper fes liens, & fe fauuer tout
nud dans le plus profond de la nuit, faifant plus de
cent lieués dans des routes égarées, n’ayant pour
toute nourriture que les herbes & les racines qu’il
trouuoit dans le milieu des bois. Dés lors, dit-il, ie
remerciay Dieu fans le connoiftre, car iamais ie
n’auois receu d’inftruction: feulement il y a quelques
années qu’vn de mes camarades me dit, qu’il y auoit
vn grand Maiftre de tout ce monde qu'il falloit ado-
rer. Ie m’eftois oublié de luy, mais lors que ie me
vis miferable, il fut tout mon refuge, i’attendois de
luy du fecours, & me voyant échapé des terreurs de
la mort, & des feux qui m’eftoiét preparez, ie recon-
nus qu’a luy feul i’eftois obligé de ma vie. Le Pere
l'ayant [127] entendu parler de la forte quafi en
mef{me temps qu'il arriua; Mais fgeais-tu, luy dit-il,
les deffeins de Dieu deffus toy. Ce n’eft pas affez
que tu le reconnoiffe, mais il veut que tu l’aime, &
que luy ayant obey icy bas fur la terre tu fois heu-
reux 4 iamais dans le Ciel. Ces paroles entrerent


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 43


to see God worshiped in their Chapel at the same
time in two different languages, the Huron and the
Algonquin, and by nations who had nothing in
common but the Faith.

The guidance of God has manifested itself particu-
larly in the case of some who have been granted
holy Baptism, and, among others, a warrior who
teceived in those [126] sacred waters the name of
Antoine. This man had escaped more than eight
times from the hands of the enemy; and, ever since
his birth, his life has been but one series of combats
and adventures that succeeded one another. Quite
recently, not more than six months ago, while in the
hands of the Iroquois, who had already commenced
to vent their fury on him, he found means to cut his
bonds and to flee,—quite naked, in the dead of
night,— making his way for over a hundred leagues
by devious paths, with no other food than the grasses
and roots that he found in the woods. ‘‘ From that
moment,’’ he said, ‘‘ I thanked God, without know-
ing him, for I had never received any instruction,—
only, some years ago, one of my comrades told me
that there was a great Master of the whole world, who
must be adored. I had forgotten about him; but,
when I saw myself so wretched, he was all my ref-
uge. I looked to him for help; and, when I found
that I had escaped the terrors of death and of the
fires prepared for me, I recognized that to him alone
did I owe my life.’” When the Father [127] heard
him speak in that manner, almost as soon as he ar-
rived, he said to him, ‘‘ But knowest thou the designs
that God has for thee? It is not enough that thou
shouldst acknowledge him; he also wishes thee to
love him, that, after obeying him here on earth,


44 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


fi auant dans l’ame de ce pauure captif fi fouuent
échapé de la mort, que dés lors il prit feu, fe refolut
d’eftre Chreftien, & du depuis quelque refiftace qu’il
ait trouué, quelques difficultez qui fe foient prefen-
tées, iamais il ne s’eft démenty de fes faintes refolu-
tions.

Vn autre quafi de mefme aage qui luy tint compa-
gnie au Baptefme, prit le nom de René. Ce ieune
homme ne fut pas pluftoft retourné de la chaffe qu'il
vint trouuer le Pere. Efface moy ie te prie mes
pechez, luy dit-il, nous fommes dans de continuels
dangers de nos vies, ott irois-ie n’eftant pas baptifé?
ie crains plus l’enfer que la mort, ie fuis tout refolu
de feruir Dieu; & quoy qu'il arriue iamais ie ne
Yoffenferay: il voit la fincerité de mon cceur, & ie
croy qu'il eft content de moy, ne me fois pas plus
rigoureux [128] que luy. En effet fes actions n’ont
point démenty fes paroles, & totiiours il s’eft com-
porté en Chreftien mefme auant que de 1’eftre.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 45


thou shouldst be happy forever in Heaven.’’ These
words entered so deeply into the soul of the poor
captive, who had so often escaped from death, that
he at once ardently resolved to be a Christian. And
ever since, no matter what opposition he may have
encountered, whatever difficulties have arisen, he
has never belied his holy resolutions.

Another of about the same age, who kept him
company at Baptism, took the name of René. That
young man had no sooner returned from hunting
than he went tothe Father. ‘‘ Wipe away my sins,
I beg of thee,’’ he said. ‘‘ We are in continual dan-
ger of our lives. Where would I go, if I were not
baptized! I dread hell more than death. I am quite
resolved to serve God, and, whatever may happen, I
will not offend him. He perceives the sincerity of
my heart, and I think that he is satisfied with me.
Be not more rigorous [128] than he.’’ Indeed, his
actions have not belied his words; and he has always
behaved as a Christian, even before becoming one.


46 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 27


CHAPITRE IX.


DE LA MISSION DU S. ESPRIT AUX ALGONQUINS NIPIS-
SIRINIENS.


e{ftendué & foit commune 4a quantité de

peuples que la Foy n’a iamais éclairé; elle fe
trouue toutefois tellement ramaffée au milieu d’vne
infinité de Nations répandués ca & 1a a1l’Orient, a
1’Occident, au Septentrion, au Midy, qui toutes ont
l’vfage de la langue Algonquine, qu'il femble que
les peuples de la langue Huronne ne foient quafi que
comme au centre d’vne vafte circonference remplie
de peuples Algonquins. Et ainfi noftre peine n’eft
pas de trouuer icy de l’employ, mais pltitoft dans le
peu d’ouuriers que nous fommes, de nous refoudre
en quelle part nous deuons pluftoft appliquer nos
trauaux. :

[129] Finiffant la Relation de l’an paffé, ie dy que
le P. Claude Piiart & le P. René Menard s’eftoient
depuis peu de iours embarquez auec les Nipiffiriniens
pour continuer de les inftruire en leur pais, éloigné
du lieu ot nous fommes enuiron de foixante & dix
lieués. Ils y ont demeuré depuis le mois d’Auril
iufqu’au mois de Septembre; ou pour mieux dire ils
ont fuiuy tout ce temps-la ces peuples fans demeure,
dans les bois, dans les fleuules, dans les rochers &
dans les lacs, n’ayans pour abry qu’vne efcorce, pour
paué qu’vne terre humide; ou la pente de quelque


Orn que la langue Huronne ait vne tres-grande


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 47


CHAPTER 4x.


OF THE MISSION OF THE HOLY GHOST AMONG THE
NIPISSIRINIEN ALGONQUINS.


LTHOUGH the Huron language is very widely
A spoken and is common to a number of peoples
whom Faith has never enlightened, neverthe-
less it is so concentrated in the midst of a multitude
of Tribes,—scattered here and there, to the East, to
the West, to the North, and to the South,— who all
speak the Algonquin language, that the tribes of the
Huron tongue almost seem to be only at the center,
as it were, of a vast circumference filled with Algon-
quin tribes. Consequently, our trouble is not to find
employment here, but rather, considering our small
number of laborers, in deciding where it were better
that we should apply our labor.

[129] In concluding the Relation of last year, I
said that Father Claude Pijart and Father René
Menard had embarked a few days before with the
Nipissiriniens, in order to continue instructing them
in their own country, which is distant about seventy
leagues from the place where weare. They remained
there from the month of April to the month of
September; or, rather, during all that time they fol-
lowed those homeless people in the woods and on the
rivers, over the rocks and across the lakes,— having
for shelter but a bark hut; for flooring, but the damp
earth or the slope of some uneven rock, which served


48 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


rocher inégal, qui fert & de table & de fiege & de
lict, de chambre & de cuifine, de caue & de grenier,
de Chapelle & de tout. En vn mot on y mene vne
vie ott on apprend bien toft que la Nature fe contente
de peu: & s’il faut quitter fa maifon en quelque lieu
qu’on aille, ilfe trouue qu’on n’a rien perdu, & qu’en
moins d’vne demie heure on s’ef{t bafty vn logement
entier.

Les Peres commencerent leur in{truction par les
principaux Capitaines, /ed non hos elegit Dominus;
mais Dieu ne [130] commence pas fes outrages par
ce qui éclate le plus. Il faut qu’vne pauure vieille
aueugle l'emporte, & recoite toute la premiere les
benedictions qui decoulent du Ciel. La grace s’em-
para de fon coeur & changea bien toft la nature: c’e-
{toit vn efprit orgueilleux & plein de raillerie, qui fe
mocquoit des chofes de la Foy. Dieu ne l’eut pas fi
to{t touchée qu’elle ne fuft plus ce qu’elle eftoit; fes
paroles ne font que douceur, elle re{pecte nos my-
{teres, elle fouhaite le Baptefme; enfin l’ayant receu,
& fe voyant dans le bon-heur des enfans de Dieu,
elle ne fonge qu’au Ciel. C’eftoit vn plaifir, difent
nos Peres, de la voir le iour qu’elle venoit pour eftre
baptifée, par vn temps affez rude, par vn chemin de
roches oti elle s’égaroit a caufe de fon aueuglemét,
& ott fans doute elle euft perdu courage, fi fa ferueur
ne luy euft rendu ces peines agreables, & ces égare-
mens pleins d’amour.

Vne femme infidele en trauail d’enfant eftoit de-
puis deux iours dans le defefpoir de la vie. Les
Medecins ou pltitoft les Sorciers du pais ayans épuifé
tout [131] leur art, & iugeans que la mere & l'enfant
n’en pourroient refchaper, vinrent trouuer nos Peres.


1642 - 45] RELATION OF 1643-44 49


as table, seat, bed, room, kitchen, cellar, garret,
Chapel, and all. In a word, one leads there a life in
which one soon learns that Nature is content with
little; and, if one has to abandon his house wherever
he goes, he finds that he has lost nothing, and in
less than half an hour he has erected a complete
lodging.

The Fathers commenced their instruction with
the principal Captains; sed non hos elegit Dominus, but
God does not [130] commence his works by that which
makes most display. It was necessary that a poor
old blind woman should be preferred and be the first
to receive the blessings that flow from Heaven.
Grace took possession of her heart, and soon changed
her nature; she had a proud and mocking spirit,
which scoffed at the things of the Faith. No sooner
had God touched her, than she was no longer what
she had been. Her words were all gentleness; she
respected our mysteries; shedesired Baptism. Final-
ly, when she had received it, and found herself in
the happy condition of the children of God, she
thought only of Heaven. ‘‘ It was a pleasure,’ our
Fathers say, ‘‘ to see her on the day when she came
to be baptized,—in rather severe weather, over a
rocky road where she lost her way, owing to her
blindness; and where, no doubt, she would have lost
courage if her fervor had not made such difficulties
agreeable to her, and made of her wanderings a
means of showing her love.”

An infidel woman, in the pains of childbirth, was
for two days in despair of her life. The Medicine
men, or rather the Sorcerers of the country, had
exhausted [131] their arts; and, thinking that the
mother and child could not escape death, they sought


50 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


Ef{t-il done vray, leur dirent-ils, que celuy que vous
honorez foit plus puiffant que nos Demons? qu'il
faffe paroiftre fon pottuoir, priez-le qu’il refufcite
cette femme qui a perdu le iugement, & va perdre la
vie; au moins qu’elle fe deliure de fon fruict auant
que de mourir. S’il entend vos prieres vous difpofe-
rez de l’enfant, vous le pourrez inftruire, vous luy
dénerez le Baptefme, & pas vn ne vous refiftera.
Nos Peres fe tranfportent ot eftoit la malade, la
recommandent a Dieu & aux prieres de S. Ignace.
Ce grand Sainct fut bien toft exaucé; fur l’heure
mefme cette femme mourante fe deliure tres-heu-
reufement de fon fruict, l’enfant fe trouue plein de
vie, la mere reuient en fanté, tous en donnent la
gloire a Dieu, & reconnoiffent que c’eft luy qui tol
merite d’eftre adoré.

I] n’eft pas difficile de faire que ces peuples ayent
recours a Dieu dans leurs neceffitez; & fi les Hereti-
ques qui veulent que la Foy fans les ceuures nous
iuftifie, [132] venoient en ces pais enfeigner leur
erreur, ils trouueroient nos fauuages de tres-bon
accord atiec eux: car pourueu qu’on les laiffe viure en
barbares, ils fe feront bien toft Chreftiens. Mais
quand nous leur difons que pour honorer Dieu &
eftre heureux au Ciel, il faut abandonner le vice,
viure en homme & non pas en befte, fonger plus 4
nos ames qui font immortelles qu’a vn corps qui pour-
tira aprés la mort; enfin qu’il faut les bonnes ceuures
auec la Foy, c’eft ce qui leur femble fafcheux, ce qui
les efpouuante & les rebute de la fainteté de nos
myiteres, & cela feul nous les rend ennemis.

Nos Peres l’efprouuerent bien tof{t au milieu de ce
peuple errant, car lors qu’ilfallut en venir au point,


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 51


our Fathers: ‘‘Is it true,’’ they said to them, ‘‘ that
he whom you honor is more powerful than our
Demons? Let him manifest his power. Entreat him
to bring back to life this woman, who has lost the
use of her senses, and is about to lose her life,—at
least, that she may be delivered of her child before
she dies. If he grant your prayers, you shall dis-
pose of the child; you may instruct it and administer
Baptism to it, and no one will oppose you.” Our
Fathers went to the place where the sick woman was,
and recommended her to God and to the prayers
of St. Ignatius. That great Saint was not long
unheard. At that very hour, the dying woman was
happily delivered of her child, who was full of life.
The mother’s health returned; all gave glory to God,
and acknowledged that it was he alone who was
worthy of being adored.

It is not difficult to induce these people to have
recourse to God in their necessities; and if the Here-
tics, who claim that Faith without works can justify,
[132] were to come to this country to teach their
error, they would find our savages quite in accord
with them. For, if they were allowed to live as
barbarians, they would soon become Christians. But,
when we tell them that, in order to honor God and
to be happy in Heaven, they must abandon vice; live
as men, and not as beasts; think more of their souls,
that are immortal, than of a body that will rot after
death; finally, that with Faith good works are
needed,— that is what seems difficult to them, what
frightens and repels them from the holiness of our
mysteries; and that alone makes them hostile to us.

Our Fathers soon experienced this, amid this nomad
people. For, when it was necessary to come to the


52 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


décrediter le vice, reprendre ceux qui auoient deux
femmes, defendre le recours aux fuper{titions diabo-
liques, ce fut lors qu’ils trouuerent plus de refiftance,
qu'il y eut A combatre plus fortement; que les fup-
pofts du Diable & ceux qui paffent icy pour Magi-
ciens fe rendirent plus infolens a blafphemer contre
la Foy, 4 vfer de menaces, & faire quelque chofe de
plus. [133] Quiconque vienne icy doit apporter fon
ame entre fes mains, & attendre la mort peut eftre
autant de la rage d’vn Algonquin ou d’vn Huron,
que d’vn ennemy Iroquois. Vn barbare qui ne craint
aucune iuftice ny de Dieu ny des hommes, a bien toft
fait vn mauuais coup.

Vn de ces fuppofts de Satan s’eftant vn iour mis
en colere contre vn des Peres, fe ietta furieufement
fur luy, & l’ayant terraff{é eftoit aprés pour 1’eftran-
gler. Le Pere appellant Dieu a fon fecours fut enten-
du de quelqu’vn qui de bon-heur n’eftoit pas efloigné,
& qui ayant horreur d’vne méchanceté fi noire fe
ietta fur cet homme, luy arracha la proye des mains,
& enfin errefta fon crime.

Ces refiftances n’empefchoient pas que quelques-
vns, mefme des principaux, ne gouftaffent les chofes
de Dieu, ne fe fiffent affiduement inftruire, & n’euffent
recours aux prieres qu’ils faifoient dans vne Cha-
pelle, qui n’auoit rien de riche qu’vn Autel ot les
Anges adoroient tous les iours ce qu’ils voyent de
plus augufte dans le Ciel. Mais nos Peres ne voyans
pas encore en tout cela rien d’affez fort [134] pour les
fondemens d’vne Eglife, qui doiuent eftre folides, fi
on veut baftir quelque chofe qui foit de durée; &
ayans appris que ces peuples deuoient hyuerner icy
dans les Hurons, fe refolurent de ne baptifer rien


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 53:


point,— to cast discredit on vice, to reprove those who
had two wives, to forbid recourse to diabolical super-
stitions,—then they encountered more opposition,
and had to contend more arduously; then the instru-
ments of the Devil, and those who pass here for
Magicians, became more insolent in blaspheming
against the Faith, in making use of threats, and in
doing something more. [133] Whoever comes here
must carry his life in his hands, and expect death,—
perhaps as much from the fury of an Algonquin or
of a Huron as of an Iroquois foe. A barbarian, who
dreads the justice neither of God nor of man, will
very readily commit a crime.

One of these instruments of Satan one day became
angry with one of the Fathers, rushed furiously on
him, threw him down, and tried to strangle him.
The Father called on God to succor him, and was
heard by some one who fortunately was not far away,
and who, having a horror of so black a crime, threw
himself on the man, tore his victim from his hands,
and prevented this crime.

These acts of opposition did not hinder some, even
among the principal persons, from relishing matters
pertaining to God. They assiduously obtained
instruction and attended the prayers said in a Chapel
which had nothing rich in it but an Altar whereon
the Angels adored every day the most august object
of their vision in Heaven. But our Fathers did not
see, as yet, in all this anything sufficient [134] for
the foundations of a Church, which must be solid, if
we wish to build anything lasting on them; and,
when they heard that these tribes were to winter
here in the Huron country, they resolved to baptize
only those whom they saw in danger of death, and.


54 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES \[lo1. 27


que ceux qu’ils voyoiét en danger de mort, & diffe-
rerent a efprouuer les autres pendant tout le cours
de l’hyuer.

En effet fur la fin de Decembre non feulement les
Nipiffiriniens, mais auffi plufieurs autres de ces Na-
tions errantes & de mef{me langue Algonquine qui
habitent fur les riuages de nof{tre mer douce, arri-
uerent quafi 4 nos portes, drefferent leurs cabanes
affez proches de nous: & le Pere Claude Piiart qui
feul alors nous reftoit de la langue Algonquine
continua de les in{ftruire.

Le premier qui receut le Baptefme en eftat de
pleine fanté, fut vn Capitaine de guerre nommé Ali-
moueskan. C’eftoit vn naturel fougueux & fuperbe,
principalement en noftre endroit: La Foy en a fait
vn agneau & l’a rendu méconnoiffable. I1 prit le
nom d’Euftache lors qu’il fe fit Chreftien, & du de-
puis il a tourné [135] tellement fon courage A fe vain-
cre foy mefme, 4 méprifer les railleries des Infideles,
a refifter a leurs attaques, que quelques efforts
qu’ayent apporté les plus ennemis de la Foy pour
l’engager A quelque faute, iamais ils n’ont pf rien
gagner fur luy. Vniour qu’on l’entraifnoit par force
en vn lieu dont fa feule Foy luy pouuoit donner de
Vhorreur; voyat qu'il n’euft pf vaincre en comba-
tant, il fe deliura par la fuite des mains de ceux qui
vouloient le perdre en l’aimant. Souuent il a quitté
les compagnies pour ce {uiet; il a forty brufquement
des feftins au milieu des ceremonies, quoy que par-
my ces peuples cela foit iugé pour vn crime. Mais,
difoit-il, i’aime mieux eftre criminel aux yeux de
tous les homes qu’aux yeux de Dieu. II prie publi-
quement foir & matin en fa cabane, & ne rougit en


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 85


to put off the others for a probation during the whole
course of the winter.

Indeed, at the end of December, not only the
Nipissiriniens but also several others of these nomad
Tribes, and of the same Algonquin language, who
dwell on the shores of our fresh-water sea, came
almost to our doors. They set up their cabins quite
near us; and Father Claude Pijart, who was the only
one left us able to speak the Algonquin tongue,
continued to instruct them.

The first who received Baptism while in full health
was a war Captain, named Alimoueskan. He was
of an impetuous and arrogant character, especially
toward us. Faith has made a lamb of him, and has
changed him beyond recognition. Hetook the name
of Eustache when he became a Christian; and since
then he has so exerted [135] his courage in conquer-
ing himself, in scorning the banter of the Infidels,
and in repelling their attacks, that, whatever efforts
the enemies of the Faith have made to induce him to
commit sin, they have never been able to overcome
him. One day, while he was being dragged by
force to a place for which his Faith alone could
inspire him with horror, when he saw that he could
not win by fighting, he escaped by flight from the
hands of those who sought to effect his ruin through
love. He has often left the company of people on
that account. He has abruptly come away from
feasts in the midst of the ceremonies, although that
is considered an offense among these peoples.
“But, he said, “1 “prefer ‘to be a criminal in’ the
eyes of all men than in the sight of God.”” He prays
publicly, night and morning, in his cabin, and is
never ashamed to appear a Christian in any place.


56 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 27


aucun lieu de paroiftre Chreftien. Comm[e] quel-
ques railleurs luy reprochoient que fa Foy le rendoit
efclaue, & que c’eftoit trop s’abaiffer d’obeir au Pere
qui l’enfeignoit; Et bien, dit-il, ie ne veux plus luy
obeir, mais ie veux obeir A Dieu duquel il porte la
parole. Ie n’ay plus qu’vne [136] crainte en ce
monde, difoit-il vne fois, de perdre la grace du Bap-
tefme, c’eft l’entretien de mes penfées, & le defir qui
regne plus dedans mon cceur.

Vne faueur du Ciel en attire bien toft vne autre,
& les graces de Dieu ne s’arreftent pas 4 vn feul.
Celuy qui fuiuit au Baptefme ce Capitaine, fut ap-
pellé Eftienne, fon furnom eft Mangouch. C’eft vn
homme d’vne fort douce humeur, qui auoit defia con-
noiffance de nos myfteres pour auoir quafi toufiours
e{té le Maiftre de nos Peres en la langue: mais il les
{fcauoit sas les croire, & ce qu il auoit entendu du
Paradis & de l’Enfer iamais n’auoit fait de bréche
en so coeur.

Quand Dieu anime vne parole elle a mille fois
plus d’effet que la plus forte Rhetorique des Ariftotes
& Cicerons. Le P. Charles Raymbaut paffant
l’Efté dernier par les Nipiffiriniés, languiffant d’vne
maladie déot il mourut, e{tat arriué a Kebec, ne dit
que trois lignes a cet hdme qui percerent fon cceur.
Mangouch, luy dit-il, tu voy bien que ie m’en vay
mourir, c’ef{t maintenant que ie ne voudrois pas te
mentir: ie t’affeure qu’il y a [137] 14 bas vn feu qui
bruflera eternellement les mécroyans. Cet homme
auoit entendu mille fois cette verité, mais alors il la
redouta: il demeura fans repartie, quoy que fon coeur
fut plus fortement agité que iamais. Sans doute,
conclut-il deflors en foy mefme, cela eft vray, il


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 57


When some scoffers reproached him, saying that
Faith made him a slave, and that it was lowering
himself too much to obey the Father who taught
him. ‘“‘ Well,” said he, ‘‘I do not wish to obey him
any longer, but I wish to obey God, whose word he
bears.’’ ‘‘I have now but one [136] fear in this
world,’’ he said on one occasion, ‘‘ and that is that I
may lose the grace of Baptism. That is the occupa-
tion of my thoughts, and the strongest desire of my
hear.

One favor from Heaven soon attracts another, and
the graces of God do not stop at a single person.
He who followed this Captain in Baptism was named
Estienne; his surname is Mangouch. He is a man
of very sweet temper, who had already some knowl-
edge of our mysteries through having nearly always
been the Teacher of the language to our Fathers.
But he knew them without believing them, and what
he had heard of Paradise and of Hell had never
effected a breach in his heart.

When God gives life to words, they have a thou-
sand times more effect than the most forcible Rhet-
orice of an Aristotle or a Cicero. Father Charles
Raymbaut spent last Summer with the Nipissiriniens,
and while he was suffering from the disease that
killed him after his arrival at Kebec, he said buta
few words to this man, which pierced his heart.
‘‘ Mangouch,”’ he said to him, ‘‘ thou seest well that
Iam about to die; and at such a moment I would
not tell thee alie. I assure thee that there is [137]
down below a fire that will burn the wicked forever.”’
This man had heard this truth a thousand times, but
this time he feared it. He did not reply, although
his heart was more strongly agitated than ever.


58 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


faut que i’obeiffe 4 Dieu; mais qui dénoiiera les liens
qui me tiennent enchaifné? en vn mot il fe fentoit
trop foible, & voyoit fa mifere fans pouuoir encore
en fortir.

Enfin la grace a acheué fon coup. Cet hyuer lors
qu’vn certain des plus confiderables de toute la
Natid, que Dieu auoit touché tout le premier, perdit
courage, & refufa fur le point d’eftre baptifé le bon-
heur des enfans de Dieu, celuy-cy prit fa place, fut
tout changé en vn moment; il brifa tout d’vn coup
fes chaifnes, rompit le noeud de fa captiuité, fe mit
a prier Dieu publiquement, renonga aux fuperfti-
tions du pais, fe mocqua de tous ceux qui s’oppofe-
rent a fon deffein; & il parut en fa perfonne, qu’en
vn moment le S. Efprit donne plus de force a vn
coeur dont il veut prendre poffeffion, qu’il n’étoit [138]
remply de foibleffe lors qu’il eftoit abandonné aux
lafchetez d’vne nature corrompué.

Sa ferueur eft accreué depuis fon Baptefme; il va
toufiours montant dans cet efprit de Foy qui anime
fon zele, qui enflamme fa charité, qui viuifie tout ce
qu'il fait, & par tout le donne a connoiftre pour
excellent Chreftien. Ila gagné fa femme & Dieu, &
luy mefme l’inftruit pour la difpofer a la grace.
Non, dit-il quelquefois, ie ne fens plus de peine &
rien, toutes chofes me font faciles, & il m’eft aduis
que ie marche dans vn chemin tout applany fcachat
ce que ie fcay. Quand mefme ceux qui m’ont in-
{truit fe banderoient tous contre moy, & me chaffe-
roient de la compagnie des Chreftiens i’aurois
recours 4 Dieu, il feroit ma conduite, & toufiours ie
viurois dans l’efperance que voulant eftre tout a luy,


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 59


‘“ Beyond a doubt,’’ he concluded in his own mind,
‘“that is true. I must obey God. But who will
loosen the chains that keep me captive?’’ In a word,
he felt himself too weak, and saw his misfortune
without being able, as yet, to extricate himself
from it.

Finally, grace crowned its work. Last winter,
when one of the most important personages of the
Nation, whom God had touched first of all, lost
courage and, just as he was on the point of being
baptized, refused the happiness of the children of God,
‘this man took his place, and was quite changed in a
moment. He suddenly broke his chains, and burst
the bonds of his captivity. He began to pray to God
publicly; he renounced the superstitions of the coun-
try; he laughed at those who opposed his designs;
and it was manifest in his person that in one moment
the Holy Ghost gives, to a heart of which he wills to
take possession, strength greater than was [138] the
depth of its weakness, when abandoned to the base-
ness of a corrupt nature.

His fervor has increased since his Baptism, he con-
tinues to progress in the spirit of Faith, that ani-
mates his zeal, that inflames his charity, that gives life
to everything that he does, and makes him known
everywhere as an excellent Christian. He has won
his wife over to God, and teaches her himself, to
prepare her for grace. ‘‘ No,’’ he sometimes says,
‘‘T no longer find difficulty in anything. Everything
is easy to me, and I feel that I walk in a road all
smoothed, knowing what I know. Even if those who
have taught me should league themselves against me,
and should drive me away from the company of the
Christians, I would have recourse to God. He would


60 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VouL. 27


quoy que fiffent les hommes, luy feul auroit pitié de
moy.

Quelques autres perfonnes font efbralées de ces ex-
emples, & donnent efperance de quelque bon fuccez;
mais nous ne iugeons pas qu'il faille fe preffer auec
[139] des fauuages, ny leur confier la faincteté de nos
myifteres fans quelque forte efpreuue. Cependant
on ne laiffe pas d’enuoyer toufiours dans le Ciel des
ames innocentes, & quelquefois auec tant de bon-
heur, qu’il eft aifé de voir que les conduites de la
diuine prouidence font par tout adorables, & en tout
lieu remplies d’amour pour fes Efleus. Ce font
autant d’Aduocats dans le Ciel, autant d’interceffeurs
auprés de Dieu, qui en fin fléchiront fa mifericorde
& attireront fa benediction fur ces peuples.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 61


be my guide, and I would always live in the hope
that, as I wish to belong entirely to him, he alone
will have pity on me, no matter what men may do.”

Some other persons are moved by these examples,
and give us hopes of fair success; but we do not con-
sider that we should be in haste with [139] savages,
or confide our holy mysteries to them without some
thorough test. Meanwhile, we fail not at least to
send to Heaven some innocent souls, and occasion-
ally with so much happiness that it is easy to see
that the ways of divine providence are adorable every-
where, and are in all places full of love for his Elect.
These are so many Advocates in Heaven; so many
intercessors with God, who in the end will cause his
mercy to incline, and will call down his blessing on
these peoples.


62 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


Lettre de M. DC. XLIV.


ON REVEREND PERE,
M l’adreffois l’an paffé la Relation a voftre


Reuerence, mais les porteurs ayans e({té pris
ou défaits en chemin par les ennemis, les Anges du
Ciel la conduifirent heureufement entre les mains du
P. Ifaac Iogues, pour luy feruir de quelque confola-
tion dans fa captiuité, & luy faire voir les fruicts de
fes trauaux & fouffraces Apoftoliques. Nous [140]
en enuoyd4mes depuis vne fecdde copie, nous ne f¢a-
uons encore ce qu'elle eft deuenué. Nous auons tout
fuiet de craindre que les mefmes accidens n’arriuent
cette année; c’eft pourquoy pour effayer toutes les
voyes poffibles de faire fcauoir 4 voftre Reuerence de
nos nouuelles, n’ayat pti encore receuoir des me+
moires plus amples de nos Peres, pour vne nouuelle
Relation, voicy par auance vn mot qui pourra doéner
quelque idée de l’eftat prefent des affaires de Dieu
en ce pais.

La guerre y a continué fes rauages ordinaires pen-
dant l Efté: les Iroquois ennemis de ces peuples ont
bouché tous les paffages & les auenués de la Riuiere
qui conduit 4 Kebec; & de ceux que la neceffité des
marchandifes de France auoit contraint de fermer
les yeux 4 ces dangers, plufieurs y font demeurez;
les autres pour la plufpart font retournez tout nuds
ou percez d’arquebufades, aprés auoir efchapé fept
ou huit fois les mains & la cruauté de ces barbares.

La defolation n’eftoit pas moindre fur le pais; de


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 63


Letter of M. DC. XLIV.


Y REVEREND FATHER,

M Last year, I sent the Relation to your Rev-

erence; but when the bearers were captured
or killed on the way by the enemies, the Angels
of Heaven happily made it fall into the hands of
Father Isaac Jogues, to serve him as some consolation
in his captivity, and to show him the fruits of his
Apostolic labors and sufferings. We [140] afterward
sent a second copy, but we do not know what became
of it. We have every reason to fear that the same
accidents will happen this year. Therefore, in order
to attempt every possible means of giving your Rev-
erence some news of us, since I have not received
more ample notes from our Fathers for a new Rela-
tion, I now send a few words in advance, to give you
some idea of the present state of the affairs of God
in this country.

War continued its usual ravages during the Sum-
mer. The Iroquois, who are the enemies of these
tribes, have closed all the passages and avenues of
the River that leads to Kebec; and of those whom
the necessity of obtaining goods from France had
compelled to close their eyes to these dangers, many
have fallen therein. Most of the others have come
back entirely naked, or pierced with arquebus balls,
after having escaped seven or eight times from the
hands and the cruelties of those barbarians.

There was no less desolation throughout the


64 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 27


pauures femmes fe font trouuées prefque tous les
iours affommées [141] dans leurs champs; les bourgs
dans les allarmes continuelles, & toutes les troupes
qui s’eftoient leuées en bon nombre pour aller don-
ner la chaffe A l’ennemy {ur les frontieres, ont efté
défaites & mifes en déroute, les captifs emmenez a
centaines, & fouuent nous n’atons point eu d’autres
courriers & porteurs de ces funeftes nouuelles, que
de pauures mal-heureux efchapez du milieu des
flammes, dont le corps demy bruflé, & les doigts des
mains coupez, nous donnoiét plus d’affeurance que
leur parole mefme, du malheur qui les auoit accueilly
eux & leurs camarades.

Ce fleau du Ciel en eftoit d’autant plus fenfible
qu’il eftoit accompagné de celuy de la famine, vniuer-
felle parmy toutes ces Nations a plus de cent lieués a
la ronde: le bled d’Inde, qui eft icy 1’vnique fouftien
de la vie, y eftoit fi rare, que les plus accommodez
a peine en auoient-ils pour enfemencer leurs terres;
plufieurs ne viuoient que d’vn peu de gland, de poti-
rons, & de chetiues racines quils alloient fouuent
chercher bien loin en des lieux de maffacre, & qui
n’eftoient [142] batus que des pas de l’ennemy.

Nous auons tiré cet auantage de la neceffité publi-
que, que Dieu par vne prouidence toute particuliere
nous ayant pourueu a fuffifance de bled du pais, nous
aenmefme temps donné vne belle occafion de faire
connoiftre 4 nos Chreftiens par des effets bien fenfi-
bles, l’étroite vnion que nots contractons auec eux
par l’efprit de la Foy. Noftre maifon, dans laquelle
nous ations vne efpece d’hofpital hors de noftre
appartement, leur a toufiours efté ouuerte; ils y font
venus fe rafraifchir de temps en temps les vns aprés


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 65


country. Nearly every day, unfortunate women were
killed [141] in their fields. The villages were ina
state of continual alarm, and all the troops that were
raised in good numbers to pursue the enemy over the
frontiers were defeated and routed; captives were
taken by hundreds, and frequently we had no other
couriers and bearers of these dismal tidings but poor
unfortunates who had escaped from the midst of the
flames, whose half-burnt bodies and mutilated fingers
convinced us, more than their words, of the misfortune
that had fallen on them and on their comrades.

This scourge of Heaven was all the more felt as
it was accompanied by that of famine, which is
universal among all these Tribes for over a hundred
leagues around. Indian corn, which is the sole staff
of life here, was so scarce that those who had the
most had hardly enough for sowing their fields.
Many lived only on a kind of acorn, on pumpkins,
and on paltry roots which they often went to seek
very far away, in places where they were exposed
to massacre and which were [142] covered only with
the enemies’ tracks.

We have derived this benefit from the public neces-
sity, that God, by a special providence, had furnished
us with a sufficient supply of the corn of the coun-
try; and this gave us, at the same time, a fine oppor-
tunity of showing our Christians by very perceptible
effects the close union that we contract with them
through the spirit of Faith. Our house, in which
we have a sort of hospital outside of our apartments,
has always been open to them. They have come
there from time to time, and one after another, to
recruit their strength, so that they might afterward
more easily work in their fields. The Infidels were


66 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


les autres, pour trauailler par aprés plus aifément
a leurs champs. Les Infideles ont efté viuement
touchez de cette charité inufitée parmy eux, &
plufieurs en font deuenus excellens Chreftiens.

Des moyens ef{tudiez par la prudence humaine font
trop bas pour conduire des entreprifes que Dieu re-
garde comme fiennes. La guerre, la famine, les perfe-
cutions, toutes ces tempeftes qui fembloient plus que
iamais deuoir abattre le Chriftianifme, l’ont puiffam-
ment [143] eftably. Contre l’ordinaire des années
precedentes, nos Peres ont euautant & plus d’employ
pendant l’efté que durant Vhyuer: nos Miffions ont
e{té changées en Refidences, les Chapelles agrandies
par tout: faute de cloches il nous a fallu pendre de
vieux chaudrons 4 l’inftance & Aa la follicitation de
nos Chreftiens: les cimetieres ont efté benis, les
proceffions dans les bourgs, les funerailles felon la
couftume de l’Eglife, les Croix erigées & adorées
folennellement 4 la veué des barbares.

Les anciens Chreftiens menent vne vie irrepro-
chable & pleine de fainteté, les bons fentimens que
Dieu leur donne plus que iamais nous font connoiftre
que le fainct Efprit prend tous les iours vne nouuelle
& plus forte poffeffion de leurs cceurs. Ils font 1’ office
de Dogiques en l’abfence de nos Peres. Dans leurs
guerres & leurs chaffes eftans mefmes en grandes
troupes, font faire les prieres publiques, & marcher
le feruice diuin auffi exactement, que s’ils eftoient
dans leur Eglife; inf{truifent & baptifent auec beau-
coup de fatisfaction & [144] edification dans les dan-
gers; rempliffent les Nations ef{trangeres ot ils vont
en marchandife de l’odeur de leur vertu, y prefchent
la fainteté de la loy Chreftienne, font naiftre par tout


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 67


greatly touched by such charity, which is unusual
among them; and many of them have become excel-
lent Christians.

Methods elaborated by human prudence are too
inferior to carry out undertakings that God considers
as his own. War, famine, persecutions, all these
storms that seemed more likely than ever to over-
whelm Christianity, have greatly [143] strengthened
it. Contrary to the usual experience of previous
years, our Fathers have had as much and more occu-
pation during the summer than during the winter.
Our Missions have been changed into Residences,
and the Chapels have been everywhere enlarged.
Through lack of bells, we have had to hang up old
caldrons, at the request and solicitation of our
Christians. The cemeteries were blessed; proces-
sions were held in the villages and funerals were
solemnized according to the custom of the Church;
Crosses were erected and solemnly adored, in the
sight of the barbarians.

The older Christians lead a life that is irreproach-
able and full of godliness. The good sentiments,
with which God inspires them more than ever, show
us that the holy Ghost every day takes new and
stronger possession of their hearts. They perform
the office of Dogique,! in the absence of our Fathers.
In their wars and on their hunts, even when they are
in large bands, they offer public prayers, and hold
divine service, as strictly as if they were in their
Church; they instruct and baptize, with much satis-
faction and [144] edification, in times of danger; the
reputation of their virtue pervades the foreign Tribes
with whom they trade; they preach there the holi-
ness of the Christian law; they inspire everywhere


68 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES, “{Vou 27


le defir de iotiir du bon-heur qu’ils poffedent, & nous
ouurent infenfiblement la porte a plufieurs grands
peuples qui ne pouuoient entendre noftre nom fans
fremir, & ne nous auoient regardé par le paffé, que
comme des perfonnes qui leur portoient malheur.

Pour ce qui eft des nouueaux Chreftiens, le nom-
bre en a e{té notablement plus grand cette année que
les precedentes. Les Infideles mefmes humiliez &
rendus plus dociles par l’affliction, nous femblent
beaucoup moins éloignez du Royaume de Dieu. En-
fin le corps des Chreftiens aprés de fortes épreuues
du Ciel, fe va rendant confiderable & commence A
emporter le deffus en quelques bourgs. Sur quoy vn
des plus notables de ce pais fe plaignant vn iour
4 vn Capitaine Chreftien, de l’empire que prenoit
infenfiblement la Foy fur les couftumes de leurs
anceftres, & difant qu'il feroit & [145] propos de s’op-
pofer au pluftoft au cours de l’Euangile; cela euft
e{té bon dans les commencemens, dit ce braue Neo-
phyte, mais maintenant que les chofes font fi auan-
cées, cette entreprife feroit tout A fait au deffus des
forces humaines: il nous fera plus aifé A nous de con-
uertir ce qui refte encore dans l’infidelité, qu’A vous
de nous faire quitter noftre refolution, & abandon-
ner la Foy.

Dieu verifie ce bon courage, auant que d’en venir
a ce point, nous auons encor de puiffans obftacles A
rompre, l’in{tabilité inueterée dans les mariages ne
feroit pas vn des moindres, fans la charité de quel-
ques perfonnes, aufquelles nous fommes redeuables
d’vn bon nombre de familles Chreftiennes, que nous
n’aurions iamais gagnées A Dieu fans ces affiftances
temporelles; & nous auons tous fujet d’efperer que


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 69


the desire of enjoying the blessing that they possess,
and imperceptibly open the door for us to many great
nations who could not hear our name without a shud-
der, and who had looked upon us in the past only as
persons who brought misfortune upon them.

As for the new Christians, their number has been
much greater this year than in previous ones. Even
the Infidels, who are humiliated and made more
docile by affliction, seem to us to be less distant from
God’s Kingdom. Finally, the body of Christians,
after heavy trials sent by Heaven, is becoming more
considerable, and begins to be in the majority in
some of the villages. Concerning this, one of the
most important personages of this country complained
one day, to a Christian Captain, of the sway that the
Faith was imperceptibly gaining over the customs of
their forefathers, and said that it would be [145] ad-
visable to oppose the course of the Gospel as soon as
possible. ‘‘ That would have answered at the begin-
ning,’’ said the brave Neophyte; ‘‘ but, now that
matters are so far advanced, such an undertaking
would be completely beyond human strength. It
will be easier for us to convert those who still remain
infidels, than for you to make us abandon our resolu-
tion and give up the Faith.”

May God confirm what that courageous heart has
said. Before obtaining it, we have still great ob-
stacles to overcome, of which the inveterate insta-
bility of marriages would not be the least, but for the
charitable assistance of certain persons, to whom we
are indebted for a goodly number of Christian fami-
lies, whom we would never have won over to God
without such temporal assistance. And we have
every reason to hope that our Churches will continue


70 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Not. 27


nos Eglifes iront toufiours croiffans par tout, tandis
que ces fources de pieté ne tariront point: vn mari-
age bien eftably nous donne fouuent quinze ou feize
Chreftiens.

Mais la plus forte efpine que nous [146] ayons, eft
que les ennemis de ces peuples ayas le deffus par le
moyen des arquebufes qu’ils ont de quelques Euro-
peas, nous fommes maintenans comme inueftis &
affiegez de tous coftez, fans pouuoir foulager la mi-
fere d’vne infinité de peuples, qui viuent encore dans
Vignorance du vray Dieu; ny receuoir mefme du
fecours de la France qu’auec des peines incroyables.
Nous attendons vniquement du Ciel, l’aplaniffement
de ces difficultez & les prieres, & les vceux qu’on fera
pour nous, & pour tant de pauures Barbares, feront
fans doute les affiftances les plus affeurées qu’on nous
puiffe rendre. Au moins fi le malheur des temps
empefche que tous les effets de la charité de tant
d’ames fainctes, ne viennent iufques A nous, tant de
larmes qu’elles verfent nuict & iour deuant les facrez
Autels, leurs foufpirs & leurs gemiffemens penetre-
ront malgré la rage des Iroquois, iufques au plus haut
des Cieux, pour y crier mifericorde en faueur de tant
de Nations racheptées du precieux fang du Fils de
Dieu. Nous [174 i.e., 147] faliions tous humble-
ment voftre Reuerence, & nous recommandons
affectueufement a fes SS. SS. & PP.

OEM Tn.
Des Hurons, ce der-
nier de Mars, 1644.
Tres-humble & tres-obeyffant
feruiteur en N. Seigneur,
HIEROSME LALEMANT.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1643-44 71


to grow everywhere, as long as such pious sources
are not exhausted. A well-established marriage
often gives us fifteen or sixteen Christians.

But our sharpest thorn [146] is, that the enemies
of these tribes have the advantage over them through
the arquebuses that they obtain from certain Euro-
peans. We are now, as it were, invested and be-
sieged on all sides, without being able to relieve the
misery of a multitude of peoples who, as yet, live in
ignorance of the true God. Nor can we receive aid
from France without incredible trouble. To Heaven
alone do we look for the removal of these obstacles;
and the prayers that will be said and the vows that
will be made for us, and for so many poor Barbari-
ans, will, no doubt, be the surest assistance that can
be given us. At least, if the misfortunes of the
times prevent the effects of the charity of so many
saintly souls from coming to us, all the tears that
they shed night and day before the sacred Altars,
their sighs and groans, will, in spite of the fury of
the Iroquois, reach to the highest Heavens, and cry
for mercy in favor of so many Nations redeemed by the
precious blood of the Son of God. We [174 i.e., 147]
all send our humble salutations to your Reverence,
and affectionately commend ourselves to your Holy
Sacrifices and Prayers.

Your Reverence’s
From the Huron country,
this last of March, 1644.
Very humble and very obedient
servant in Our Lord,
HIEROSME LALEMANT.


LIV


JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES


Septembre — Decembre, 1645


SOURCE: We follow the original MS., in the possession of
Laval University, Quebec.


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 75


Sz Vacat Annales nostrorum audire Laborum,;
Ante annos clauso Componet Vesper olympo,
Quam, primé repetens ab origine, singula tradam.
Que regio in terris, nostri tam plena Laborts ?
Dispice sacratas nostrorum ex ordine pugnas;
Bellaque jam famé totum Vulgata per orbem,;

Et Laceros artus, ambustdque corpora flammts.
Juratus preclaram Hluronum exscindere gentem
Troqueus, multa vastabat cede colonos:

FHlostibus occisis, pessumdedit Algonquinos.


H.. Lalement
1645.


76 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 27


Estat du pays lors que i’y arriue en Sept.
1645.


le 7. a montreal, le ro. aux 3. rtu.; le rer. a’oct. a Sil-
lery, & le 2. a Quebek. declaré supere.
le 16. de sept. a 8.h. du
SOUY AUX 3. ¥tU


E moys precedent scauoir au moys
L d’Aoust arriuerent 5. Vaisseaux dont
Mons". de repentigny estoit admiral; la
nouuelle principale qu’ils apporterent fut que
Messieurs de la Comp’*. generale auoient cedé
la traite aux Habitans moyenant certaines
Conditions portées par leurs Conuentions qui
sont dans nos Archiues, agente regina &
nobis impellentib.

Ensuite les Inuentaires furent faits, & les
Hurons arriuerent auec moy heureusemt. le
10. de sept. apres toutes les publicaons faites;
de sorte que tous les Castors s’en allerent aux
Habitans. Montreal auoit fait Ses Conuen-
tions a part atiec les habitans, & sembloit
s’estre dechargé sur eux de la plu part de ses
obligaons: Il ne demeura a Vilmarie que
Mons’. d’Alibour sa femme & sa sceur Mads.
Manse de considerables; le P. le leune a la
requeste de Monst. de la Dauuersiere Intendant
des affaires de montreal en France, & le P.
Iogues y furent destinés pour y hyuerner. le


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 77


State of the country when I arrive there,
in September, 1645.


The 7th at montreal, the roth at 3 rivers; the rst of Oc-
tober at Sillery,; and the 2nd at Quebek. Declared
superior the 16th of September, at 8
o’clock tn the evening, at 3 rivers,


N the month preceding,—to wit, in the
month of August,—5 Vessels arrived, of
which Monsieur de repentigny was ad-

miral; the principal news that they brought
was that Messieurs of the general Company
had ceded the right of trade to the Habitans,
on certain Conditions conveyed by their Agree-
ments, which are in our Archives, agente regt-
na et nobis tmpellentibus.*

Next the Inventories were taken; and the
Hurons arrived with me prosperously, on the
1oth of September, after all the announce-
ments were published; so that all the Beavers
went to the Habitans. Montreal had made
Its own Agreements privately with the habi-
tans, and seemed to have fulfilled, with respect
to them, most of its obligations. There re-
mained at Vilmarie, of notable persons, only
Monsieur d’Alibour, his wife and sister, and
Mademoiselle Manse. Father le Jeune, at
the request of Monsieur de la Dauversiere,
Intendant of the affairs of montreal in France,
and Father Jogues, were appointed to winter
there; father buteux and father Jogues had


Heerosme Lalement
1645.


78 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 27


=—*


p. buteux & le p Iogues y auoient hiuerné
auparauant. mons’. de maisonneuue qui com-
mandoit a montreal repassa cette année en
france p'. la mort de son pere.

En mesme temps que i’arriue ou estoit en
attente du retour de quelques frangois & Cap-
tifs qu’on auoit enuoyé aux Annieronons pour
traiter la paix; ils retournerent icy auec Cous-
ture le 17. du mesme moys de Sept & en
repartirent le 22: les Hurons & les Algonq.
s’estoient trouués ace pourparler de paix, &
auoient pris resolfiion de reconduire les An-
nieronons a leur pays; mais estant arriuer a
tichelieu, ils s’en reuinrent; if n’y eut que
Cousture auec 4. Annieronons & trois Hurons
qui passerent outre.

Enuiron le 12. d’oct. on tua trois ou quatre
Montagnes qui estoient a la chasse, on eut
peur que ce ne fussent Annieronons, toutes-
fois on pensa que ce pouroient bien estre des
sokokiois, dont on avoit tué il y a quelques
années quelquesvns: il y auoit pour lors cing
Annieronons: qui hyuernoient auec les mon-
tagnes & Algonquains qui n’eurent aucun
mal; mais Piscaret, Cap. Algonquain qui en
auoit deux ou 3 en sa charge, iugea a propos
de renuoyer les fiens: tant pour euiter tous
les hasars & ftireurs des ieunes gens, que pr.
donner aduis a Anniés de ce qui se passoit, on
en donna aduis a Cousture, affin que si c’es-
toient Annieronons, il sceut qu’en cas qu’on


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 79


wintered there before. Monsieur de maison-
neuve, who commanded at montreal, went
back to france this year on account of the
death of his father.’

At the very time when I arrived, they were
expecting the return of some frenchmen and
Captives, who had been sent to the Anniero-
nons to treat for peace; they returned here
with Cousture the 17th of the same month of
September, and went away again on the 22nd.
The Hurons and the Algonquains had been
present at this peace conference, and had
adopted a resolution to escort ‘the Anniero-
nons back to their country; but, having
arrived at richelieu, they returned; only Cous-
ture, with 4 Annieronons and three Hurons,
went beyond.

About the 12th of October, three or four
Montagnais were kilied, who were hunting;
it was feared that these slayers might be An-
nieronons, although it was thought that they
might well be sokokiois, of whom some had
been killed a few years ago. There were, at
that time, five Annieronons, who were winter-
ing with the montagnais and Algonquains;
these suffered no harm, but Piscaret, an Algon-
quain Captain, who had two or 3 of them in his
care, deemed it advisable to send back his,—
both to avoid all risks, and the fury of the
young men, and to give warning to Anniés of
what was going on. They notified Cousture
of this, to the end that, if the offenders were
Annieronons, he might know that, in case
satisfaction were made, the peace would not


noe f. Claude
Loyer


80 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


satisfit, la paix ne seroit point rompue. vn
de ceux que Piskaret auoit enuoyé n’alla pas
loin: il reuint aussy tost craignant dit il les
Algonquains.

Richelieu fut presque abandonne scauoir a
la reserue de 8 ou 10 soldats. nos PP. den-
demare & Joseph duperon en reuinrent sur la
fin de septembre: & personne n’alla a leur
place pour y demeurer Mons". de Sennetaire
qui y commandoit s’en retourna en france:
mons". de Champhlour, quia commendoit aux
3-Tiu. s’en retourna aussy; a sa place fut mis
pour vn temps Mons’. bourdon & enfin mons".
de la poterie y alla p'. y commender: le p.
buteux y fut mis sup. p de noiie, p. p. piiart
procureur des Hurons & le p. Ioseph duperon;
& trois hommes.

A Sillery fut mis le p. de Quen le p. Masse
& le p. druilletes vn frere et quatre hommes

A Quebek, le p. hierosme lalemant Super’.
p. Vimont, & p. dendemare, trois de nos ff. &
vn homme.—nos ff. liegeois, Ambr. Cauuet,
& P. feauté—le P Quentin Procureur alloit
& venoit dans les vaisseaux le f. liegeois estoit
son Compagnon qui faisoit office de Procureur
dans le pays; il reuenoit de france fresche-
ment y ayant demeuré vn an.

Les 3. hommes qui estoient aux 3. riu.
gangnoient roolt. l’vn se nommoit xstiennot;
l’autre mathieu Chouré, & le 3°. Ant. desrosiers.
A Sillery les deux mercenaires a r1oolt. aussy


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 81


be broken. One of those whom Piskaret had
sent did not go far; he came back immedi-
ately,— fearing, he said, the Algonquains.

Richelieu was almost abandoned,—to wit,
with the exception of 8 or 10 soldiers. Our
Fathers dendemare and Joseph duperon re-
turned thence, toward the end of September;
and no one went to stay there in their place.
Monsieur de Sennetaire, who commanded
there, returned to france; monsieur de
Champhlour, who commanded at 3 rivers,
also returned; Monsieur bourdon was placed
for a time in his stead; and finally monsieur
de la poterie went thither as commandant.
Father buteux was appointed superior there;
with him were father de noiie, father p. pijart,
procuror for the Hurons, father Joseph dupe-
ron, and three men.

At Sillery were stationed father de Quen,
father Masse and father druilletes, a brother,
and four men.

At Quebek, father hierosme lalemant, Su-
perior; father Vimont and father dendemare,
three of our brethren, and one man—our
brethren liegeois, Ambroise Cauvet, and P.
feauté. Father Quentin, Procuror, went and
came in the vessels: brother liegeois was his
Companion, who performed the duties of Pro-
curor inthe country; he had recently returned
from france, having sojourned there a year.

The 3 men who resided at 3 rivers re-
ceived 100 livres; one was named chrestien-
not, the second, mathieu Chouré, and the 3d,
Antoine desrosiers. At Sillery, the two hired


Our brother Claude
Soyer.


Archives.


82 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VoL. 27


se nommoient Simeon, & l’autre la neigerie:
les deux Domestiques ad vita, Iaques Iunier
& robert hache. A Quebek il n’y auoit que
Pierre Gontier Domest. ad Vitam: on verra
dans les Archiues la Condition des Domest.
ad vitam & leur histoire.


1642-45] /OURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 83


men, also at 100 livres, were appointed — one
Simeon, and the other la neigerie: the two
Domestics ad vitam, Jaques Junier and robert
hache. At Quebek there was only Pierre
Gontier, as Domestic ad Vitam: we shall see
in the Archives the Status of the Domestics
ad vitam, and their history.


Archives.


Xstienut, entre a rire
Serutce


Four


habits de sauuage
pr. le roy.


depart des vats-
SCAUX.


84 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 27


lournal commencé 1645.


OCTOBRE


E 17. fut receu a nde seruice Chrestien-
[3 naut a trente escus de gages par an &
fut enuoyé aux 3. riu. p™. y seruir de
Cuisinier & Cousturier en vn mot de tout: Il
estoit passé de france icy dans le bord de M.
de repentigny & y auoit receu du mesconten-
tement, de sorte quil auoit resolu de se
retirer dans les bois plustost que de re-
passer: il n’y eut point de marché par escrit
auec luy. ;
le 19. on commenga a faire vn four chez nvf
[z.e., nous] apres en auoir demandé la per-
mission aux MM. de la maison.
le mesme Jour sortit de~ la. maison ne
petite quaisse ou estoient 3. ou 4. habits de
sauuages accomplis; pour estre presentés au
roy par M. de repentigny; sur ce que le roy
auoit tesmoigné desirer qu’on luy enuoyat
quelque chose de par deca. le magazin en
auoit fait la plvf grande depence.
le 29. partirent les vaisseaux cinq en nom-
bre chargés a ce que l’on tient de vingt mille
liures de Castor pesant p*. les habitans, & de
dix mille pt. la Comp’*. géale a vne pistole ou
dix ou onse francs la liure. mons". de repen-


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 85


Journal begun, 1645.


OCTOBER.
N the 17th, Chrestiennaut was received Chrestiennaut enters
into our service, at wages of thirty écus GUS Ce


a year, and was sent to 3 rivers in
order to serve there as Cook and Clothier,—in
a word, for everything. He had come hither
from france in Monsieur de repentigny’s
retinue, and had become discontented there,
so that he had resolved to retreat to the woods
rather than go back [to France]; there was no
written contract with him.

On the 19th, we began to build an oven at OUGts
our house, after having asked permission from
Messieurs the owners of the house.‘

On the same Day, there left the house a Sevage garments
little box in which were 3 or 4 savage gar-  /07 “%¢ #"S-
ments, all complete, to be presented to the
king by Monsieur de repentigny,— because the
king had expressed a desire that something
from over here should be sent him. The ware-
house had borne the main expense thereof.

On the 2gth, the vessels sailed, five in num- 2¢A07#re of the
ber,—laden, as is estimated, with twenty pesiels
thousand pounds’ weight of Beaver skins for
the habitans, and ten thousand for the general
Company, at a pistole, or ten or eleven francs,

a pound. Monsieur de repentigny was admi-
ral; his brother, monsieur de Tilly,> com-
manded the vessel of Montreal, in which


Chapelle prestée a
Mr. Nicolet ptre. &c
rendue & represtée


infra.


on va a beaupre.
M. de St. Sauueur.


86 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VoL. 27


tigny en estoit admiral; son frere mons’. de
Tilly commadoit le vaisseau de Montreal dans
lequel repassoit Mons’. de maisonneuue; &
mons’. Godefroy vn autre vaisseau; on tira
trois coups du fort lorsque mons. de re-
pentigny en fortit prenant congé de mons’. le
gouu. & trois du magazin lorsqu’il s embarqua
dans la chaloupe; reciproquem*t. tous les
vaisseaux: leuant l’ancre saluerent mons’. le
Gouuerneur.

Le P. Quentin procureur ordinaire; & nde
f. dominique skot venu des Hurons pour
son Infirmité de polmon, passerent dans 1’ Ad-
miral

le 25. partit mons". le Gouverneur pr’. aller
a l’Isle aux oyes, oti il faisoit trauailler A la
terre & y auoit 7. ouuriers: il laisse monst. de
Chauigny p’. Son lieutenant, & me donna vn
papier cacheté pt". dans lequel estoit l’ordre a
garder en cas qu’il vint faute de luy: il mena
auec soy mons’. /Vicolet prestre & me fit prier
de luy prester vne chapelle garnie: on luy en
donna vne oti il y auoit calice d’Argent, cha-
suble neuue, fort belle nape & grande, belle
ausbe & tout le reste a l’auenant, il desira sur
tout qu’on luy donnast bougie & hosties: bref
rien n’y manquoit.

Ce mesme Iour partit mons’. de St. Sauueur
pour beaupré; messieurs de cette Compi*. luy
donne 25. escus par an pour y faire quelques
voyages & y auoir le soin du spirituel & tem-


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 87


Monsieur de maisonneuve was returning; and
monsieur Godefroy, another vessel. Three
shots were fired from the fort, when monsieur
de repentigny left it, having taken leave of
monsieur the governor; and three shots from
the warehouse, when he embarked in the shal-
lop. All the vessels, upon weighing anchor,
saluted, in their turn, monsieur the Governor.

Father Quentin, procuror in ordinary, and
our brother dominique skot—who had come
from the Hurons, because of his Infirmity of
the lungs— went over in the Admiral’s ship.

On the 25th, monsieur the Governor set out
to go to the Isle aux oyes, where he was cul-
tivating the land, and had thereon 7 work-
men. He left monsieur de Chavigny® as
His lieutenant, and gave me a sealed paper,
in which was the order to be observed in case
any accident befell him. He took with him
monsieur Wicolet,’ priest, and sent the request
to me to lend him a furnished oratory. He
was given one in which there was a Silver
chalice, a new chasuble, a very beautiful and
large cloth, and a handsome alb, and every-
thing else in keeping; he especially desired
that he be given a candle and hosts; in short,
nothing was wanting.

This same Day, monsieur de St. Sau-
veur® left for beaupré; messieurs of this Com-
pany give him 25 écus a year to make some
trips thither, and to have charge there of spirit-
ual and temporal affairs. This has been done
with our consent, in order to provide mean-
while for a priest at the hospital; but that will


Oratory lent to Mon-

szeur Nicolet, przest,

etc., delivered, and
described infra.


Trip to beaupreé.
Monsteur de St.
Sauveur.


Mariage


dessetn de bastir
LE glise Et vn
présbitere


Payement de depence
des soldats aux
flurons.


88 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 27


porel; ce qui s’est fait auec nde consentem*.
pour pouruoir cependant de prestre a l’hospi-
tal: mais cela ne sera que p’. vn an, on mande
vn autre prestre en france pt. l’hospital a la
place de m. de St. Sauueur.

le 26. fut marié francois Marguerie auec la
fille de Mt. Zacharie le P. Vimont fut inuité
aux nopces & y alla.

22. Soldats ayant esté enuoyes aux Hurons
en 1644. enuoyes de france par la royne auec
plusieurs autres p™. le bien du piys laquelle
p’. ce suiet auoit donné cent mille francs: ils
logerent chez nvf aux Hurons & vescurent a
noe table; ils retournerent vn an apres iour
pour iour: car estant arriués aux Hurons le 7.
de Sept. ils arriuerent a montreal auec 60.
canots Hurons le 7. .de Sept. de l’annee
d’apres: ils reuinrent chargés de quantité de
Castors pour trente ou 4o. mille francs. Sur
quoy y ayant eu dispute entre les habitans
mis nouuellemt. en possession de la traite &
messieurs de la Comp’. gfile, ils s’accorderetit
d’employer le prouenu a bastir vne Eglise &
presbytere pt. lequel en particulier six mille
liures furent destinées, sauf a nvf d’y adious-
ter si bon nvf sembloit. Au reste n’y ayant
rien de plvf raisonable que de nvf donner la
nouriture destinée p". ces soldats, qui pouuoit
monter a ca 200f]. par teste on ne nvf en don-
na que trente escus par teste y compris tous
les autres fraits d’auoir refait les armes assis-


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 89


be only for one year; another priest is sent
by those in france for the hospital, in the
place of monsieur de St. Sauveur.

On the 26th, francois Marguerie was mar-
tied to the daughter of Master Zacharie;? Fa-
ther Vimont was invited to the wedding, and
went thither.

22 Soldiers had been despatched to the Hu-
rons in 1644,—sent from france with several
others, for the good of the country, by the
queen, who for this purpose had given a hun-
dred thousand francs. While among the Hu-
rons, they lodged at our house, and lived at
our table. They returned a year later, to the
very day; for, having arrived among the
Hurons the 7th of September, they arrived at
montreal, with 60 Huron canoes, on the 7th
of September in the following year; they
came back laden with a quantity of Beavers,
to the amount of thirty or 40 thousand francs.
A dispute over this having arisen between the
habitans lately put in possession of the trade
and messieurs of the general Company, they
agreed to employ the proceeds in building a
Church and clergy-house, for which six thou-
sand livres were specially set aside,— with
the proviso that we might add to the same if
we were so disposed. Moreover,—as it was
no more than reasonable to give us the main-
tenance intended for these soldiers, which
might amount to about 200 livres apiece,—
they gave us only thirty écus apiece, includ-
ing in this all the other expenses of having
repaired the arms, aided the sick, etc.; they


Marriage.


“Plan for building
the Church And a
clergy-house.


Payment of outlay
Jor soldiers among
the Hurons.


Charles le Moyne


Nicolas Giffar


pleinte des Hurons
hiuernans a
Sillery.


Il se trouue que la
pleinte estott plus


grande gue le mal,


' Hurons hyuernans
al hospital.


90 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


té les malades &c on nvf fit tort de plvf de
deux mille 500 liures.

rescription donnée en mesme temps a monst.
du Chesne oncle de Charles le Moyne de 20
escus que nvf donnions a son nepueu prt. le
seruice de quatre ans rendu aux Hurons; on
Vhabilla & luy donnat-on du linge honeste-
ment, il fut enuoye aux 3-riu. soldat & Inter-
prete.

Nicolas Giffar qui aussy en qualité d’Enfant
nvf auoit serui 4. ans aux Hurons eut vn
habit honneste, & vn autre de toile p". le con-
seruer, du linge honnestem*. & soft. dont nvf
luy demeurasmes redeuables; il fit marché
auec M'*. Zacharie charpentier p™. estre auec
luy 5. ans moyenant 4oll. de gages: ils eurent
tous deux quelques profits de Castors:

Sur la fin du moys il y eut de grandes
pleintes des Hurons qui hiuernoient a Sillery
auec les Algonq. scauoir entr’autres choses
que ils auoient plusieurs fois monté par la
fenestre du logis de Gadois, & auoient pris du
cochon salé dedans; qu’ils auoient battu ledit
gadois qui auoit despouillé quelques vns de
quelque mechant bout de Couuerture: le
remede qu’on y apporta fut de les Intimider
dé la colere dé m. le Gouu. a son retour, &
de les porter a quelque satisfaction.

Atironta sa femme son petit fils; & Iaques
Acharo, Hurons, logeoient a lhospital; nvf
leur fournissions vne partie des viures, ble &


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 91


caused us thereby a loss of more than two
thousand 500 livres.

An order was given at the same time to
monsieur du Chesne, uncle of Charles le
Moyne, for 20 écus, which we were giving
his nephew for four years’ service rendered
among the Hurons. He was clothed and de-
cently supplied with linen, and was sent to 3
rivers as soldier and Interpreter.

Nicolas Giffar— who also, in the capacity of
a Lad, had served us 4 years among the Hu-
rons —had a decent coat and another of linen
to keep it clean; sufficient body linen; and
50 livres, for which we were in debt to him.
He made a bargain with Master Zacharie,
carpenter, to be with him 5 years, in consid-
eration of 4o livres in wages. They both
had some profits from Beavers.

Toward the end of the month, there were
great complaints of the Hurons who wintered
at Sillery with the Algonquains,—to wit,
among other things, that they had several
times climbed through the window of the Ga-
dois dwelling, and had taken some of the salt
pork therein; that they had beaten the said
gadois,'! who had stripped certain ones of some
wretched scrap of Covering. The remedy ap-
plied thereto was to Intimidate them with the
anger of monsieur the Governor at his return,
and to induce them to make some satisfaction.

Atironta, his wife, his grandson, and Jaques
Acharo, Hurons, were lodging at the hospi-
tal; we furnished them a part of their provi-
sions,— wheat and Eels; they supplied their


Charles le Moyne.


Nicolas Giffar.


Complaint about the
flurons wintering
at Sellery.


Lt appears that the
cry was worse than
the hurt.


Hurons wintering at
the hospital.


vetour de mr. le
Gouuerneur.


Crerges a
Ll’ Eg lise


Mariage de Nopce.


bastiment pr.nos PP.


a Montreal


matertaux emploiez
pour L’ hopital...


92 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


Anguille ils faisoient leurs bois: on se plei-
gnit qu’ils y tenoient la place des malades.

le 29. retourna mons’. le Gouuerneur, on
tira trois coups du magasin a son arriuée.

Ce mesme Jour on aporta nouuelle de nou-
uelles frayeurs & apprehensions des Algonq.
pour de nouueaux massacres; commengoient a
penser que c’estoient en effect Annieronons.

le 30. fut arresté qu’on n’allumeroit plvf
qu’vn Cierge dans nos Chapelles pendant la
Messe, au moins les Jours ouuriers.

Sur la fin du moys d’oct. le p. le Ieune & le
p. buteux s’en retournant de Quebek pr. les
3. riu. & Montreal: marierent en chemin vn
nommé Nopce auec la fille d’vn nommé Picar
qui estoient pour lors chez mons". de Chauigny
& puis demeurerent chez Mons’. de la pote-
rie: mons'. de Chauigny se ressentit de ce
changem'. & s’en prenoit au p. le Ieune, mais
il parut depuis que Mons’. de Chauigny auoit
tort de se pleindre du p. le Ieune.

Lors que i’arriué a montreal on auoit pre-
paré vn logis de charpente pour nos PP. &
il sembloit qu’il n’y eut plvf qu’a le leuer;
comme on en estoit sur le poindt, les vaisseaux
arriuerent, qui aporterent nouuelle & ordre de
france a ceux qui commandoient a Montreal,
d’employer tous les ouuriers a autre chose
scauoir a dresser vn hospital p™. lequel on
auoit touché de grands deniers des les années
precedentes & cependant il n’y auoit rien de


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 93


wood. Complaint was made that they took
the place of the sick there.

On the 29th, monsieur the Governor re-
turned; three shots were fired from the ware-
house, at his arrival.

This same Day, word was brought of new
terrors and apprehensions, on the part of the
Algonquins, concerning fresh massacres; they
were beginning to think that these slayers
were indeed Annieronons.

On the 30th, it was decided that no more
than one Candle should be lighted in our Chap-
els during Mass,—at least, on working Days.

Toward the end of the month of October,
father le Jeune and father buteux, while re-
turning from Quebek to 3 rivers and Mont-
teal, married by the way a certain Nopce and
the daughter of one Picar,’ who were at that
time with monsieur de Chavigny; after this,
they lived with Monsieur de la poterie. Mon-
sieur de Chavigny resented this change, and
blamed father le Jeune for it; but it appeared
afterward that Monsieur de Chavigny was
wrong in complaining of father le Jeune.

When I arrived at montreal, they had pre-
pared a timber dwelling for our Fathers, and
it seemed that there was nothing more to be
done than to raise it; but, when they were on
the point of doing so, the vessels arrived,
bringing word and orders from france to those
who commanded at Montreal, to employ all
the workmen for other things,— namely, in
erecting a hospital, for which large funds had
been received in the preceding years; and yet


Return of monsteur
the Governor.


Candles tn the
Church.


Marriage of Nopce.


Building for our
Fathers at Montreal.


Materials used for
the Hospital.


Jermiers des 3.
riuteres


ordre de la Conzion,
pr. le gouuerneur.


94 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


commencé: Mons’. de matsonneuue qui estoit
p'. lors a Montreal, auoit de la peine de dire
cette nouvelle a nos PP. ie me chargé de le
faire & de leur faire trouuer bon: depuis on
me ietta le chat aux iambes, comme si c’estoit
moy qui l’auois empesché.

Aux 3. riu. il y auoit deux fermiers tenant
nos terres per modi Vniv{f; ils n’y vaquoient
qu’a demy, trauaillant ailleurs pour eux: on
mit en deliberaon si on reprendroit les terres
p™. les gouuerneur, & il fut dit qu’ouy: les.
fermiers y condescendirent volontiers, &
dans l’Impuissance de trouuer des hommes:
p’. nvf, cde on voulut les porter a les re-
prendre, ils n’y voulurent point entendre;
on fut donc contraint de faire les terres nvf
mesme.

Arriuant icy on donnoit la Cénion. 1°. a
M:. le Gouuerneur & puis on s’en alloit com-
mencer par ot il falloit: ne m’estant pas fait
Instruire la dessus la 1°. fois ie ne commencé
pas par M la Gouuern". ayant esté aduerti de
la coustume ie commencé par luy la 2°. fois;
mais luy mesme m’ayant dit qu’il en estoit
choqué, ie fis depuis cde la 1°. fois, & ainsy il
conie le dernier de la 1°. tablée a son rang
selon la place of il se met.


NOUEMBRE


Il y eut grande messe le Iour de la Touss.
& le Iour des morts.


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 95


no beginning had been made. Monsieur de
maisonneuve, who was then at Montreal, found
it hard to tell this news to our Fathers; I
took it upon myself to do so, and to persuade
them to regard the matter favorably; after-
ward, they flung the cat at my legs, as if I
were the one who had hindered that work.

At 3 rivers, there were two farmers hold-
ing our lands per modum Unius,; they only half
attended to the land, working elsewhere for
themselves. We deliberated whether we
should take back the lands, in order to man-
age them, and it was decided todo so. The
farmers willingly agreed; and when, in view
of our Inability to find men for ourselves, we
sought to incline them to take back the land,
they would not listen to it; we were then
constrained to cultivate the lands ourselves.

When I arrived here, Communion was
given 1st to Monsieur the Governor, and then
they proceeded in the proper order. Not
having Informed myself in the matter the
1st time, I did not begin with Monsieur the
Governor. Having been apprised of the cus-
tom, I began with him, the 2nd time; but he
himself having told me that he was thereby
offended, I did afterward the same as the Ist
time, and thus he receives communion the last
at the 1st round, in his turn, according to the
place which he himself takes.


NOVEMBER.


There was high mass on All Saints’ Day
and on all souls’ Day.


Farmers at 3
rivers.


Order of Communion
Jor the governor.


Accordatilles


Chapelle prestée pr
Un an


Mariage


donné a madle


Liar


Changement de
Pierre Gontier & de
mathieu Chourel,


Presens acceptés,
nutsent


96 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


Le 4. nvf fusmes Inuités le p. Vimon & moy
d’assister au Contract de mariage de la fille de
Mons". Giffar, nvf y assistasmes mais nous n’y
signasmes point. M. le gouu. & plusieurs
autres signerent.

le 6. Monst. Nicolet remporta de rechef vne
chapelle garnie de tout a l’Isle aux oyes, il y
auoit calice d’argent doré, chasuble de damas
blanc &c. on luy donna deux pains de bougie,
3. Images grandes en papier: on luy presta
deux liures, la vie de Teki& Pabregé de
dupont.

le 7. se maria M. de launay auec la fille de
pinguet; le p. Vimon assista aux nopces.

le 12. on donne a Mad. giffar de lestoffe
noire. de vieille sotanne p'. doubler des
manches.

Ce mesme Iour arriua Pierre Gontier des 3.
riu. que robert hache estoit allé querir dans
vn Canot p". faire icy la cuisine, a la place de
nos ff qui y auoient trop de peine: on enuoya
pour soulager nos PP. a sa place mathieu
Chourel qui demeuroit icy.

le p. de Quen sup. a Sillery se trouua en
peine pour auoir pris quelques Castors d’vne
vieille & de sa parenté, qui le prenoient a la
place d’vn de leur parens tué; tous les Iours
ces nouueaux parens l’accabloient de deman-
des comme celuy qui leur deuoit faire tout ce
que le defunct leur faisoit, il les fallut nourir
loger &c pendant l’hyuer.


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 97


On the 4th, we were Invited, father Vimon
and I, to witness the marriage Contract of
Monsieur Giffar’s daughter; we were present,
but we did not sign it. Monsieur the govern-
or and several others signed.

On the 6th, Monsieur Nicolet again took
away an oratory completely furnished, to the
Isle aux oyes; there was a gilded silver chal-
ice, a chasuble of white damask, etc. We
gave him two cakes of candle wax, and 3
large paper Images; and we lent him two
books—the life of Jesus Christ, and the
abridgment of dupont.”

On the 7th, Monsieur de launay married
the daughter of pinguet; father Vimon was
present at the wedding.

On the 12th, we give Mademoiselle giffar
some black stuff from an old cassock, for
lining sleeves.

This same Day, Pierre Gontier arrived from
3 rivers, whom robert hache had gone to
fetch in a Canoe, to do the cooking here,
in the place of our brethren, who found
it too hard; to relieve our Fathers, we
sent in his place mathieu Chourel, who lived
here.

Father de Quen, superior at Sillery, found
himself embarrassed, for having accepted
some Beavers from an old woman and her
kindred, who were adopting him in the place
of one of their relatives, who was killed.
Every Day, these new relatives overwhelmed
him with requests, as one who was expected
to do for them all that the deceased was accus-


Marriage Contract.


Oratory lent for a
year.


Marriage.


Given to mademot-
selle giffar.


Exchange of Pierre
Gontter and mathteu
Chourel.


Gifts.accepted are an
NJ ULY


Pr. la tratte des
Castors


Neiges


Mariage


religues données par
nous al hospital,


Confirmion dela
rupture de pazx.


98 LES RELATIONS DES JESVITES [Vou. 27


Le 15. de nou. le bruit estant qu’on s’en
alloit icy publier la defense qui auoit esté
publiée aux 3. riu. que pas vn n’eut a traiter
auec les sauuages: le p. Vimon demanda a
Mons". des Chastelets Commis géal si nvf
serions de pire condition soubs eux que soubs.
Messieurs de la Compi*.? la Conclusion fut.
que non, & que cela iroit p’. nvf a l’ordinaire
mais que nvf le fissions doucemt. le p. Vimont
luy adiousta qu’on en donneroit aduis au p.
buteux, & M. des Chastelets le trouua bon.

Ce mesme Jour commencerent les neiges a
demeure il auoit puissament neigé le Iour de
5”. Vrsule le 21. d’oct. mais cela ne dura pas.

le 21. se fit le mariage & les nopces de
Marie Giffar & du fils de Mons". de Maure, of
le p. Vimon assista.

Enuiron ce temps furent données par nous
de belles reliques a l’hospital, elles n’estoient
point enchassées & depuis plusieurs années
estoient sans véneraon & reliquaire, & les
hospitalieres auoient des reliquaires, sans
reliques.

En ce temps aussy se sauua des Ennemys
Annieronons vn Ieune Algonquain & vn peu
apres vn Huron quiyestoient captifs ilsrapor-
toient que les Annier n’auoient aucune bonne
volonté p™. les Algonquains: on dit, que le
Ieune Algonq. deuant que partir se voyant seul
dans la Cabane amassa tout ce qu’il y auoit &
surtout les peaus & brusla tout; ils confir-


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 99


tomed to do; they had to be fed, lodged, etc.,
during the winter.

The 15th of November, — the rumor prevail-
ing that the prohibition was about to be
published here which had been published at 3
rivers, to the effect that no one was to trade
with the savages,— father Vimon asked Mon-
sieur des Chastelets, general Manager, wheth-
er we would be in worse condition under them
than under Messieurs of the Company. The
Conclusion was that we would not be, and
that this matter would proceed for us as usual,
but that we should carry it on quietly; father
Vimont added that we would notify father
buteux, and Monsieur des Chastelets approved
this.*4

This same Day, the lasting snows began: it
had snowed heavily on the Day of St. Ursule,
the 21st of October, but that did not remain.

On the 21st occurred the marriage and the
nuptials of Marie Giffar and the son of Mon-
sieur de Maure, at which father Vimon was
present.

About this time, some excellent relics were
given by us to the hospital; they were not
enshrined, and for several years had been
without veneration and reliquary; and the
hospital nuns had reliquaries, without relics.

At this time also, a Young Algonquain
escaped from the Annieronon Enemies, and a
little later a Huron, who were captives there;
they reported that the Annier had no good
will for the Algonquains. It is said that the
Young Algonquain, before going away, seeing


Concerning the
Beaver trade.


Snows.


Marriage.


Relics given by us to
the hospital.


Confirmation of the
breach of peace.


aisciplines par les
Algonguins.


Chan gement de
Cloche ala parotsse.


Mariage de Guyon —


Vn Chirurgien a


Sillery


Tabernacle presté


Meubles de sacristie
VeEnaus


100 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 27


moient que c’estoient les Annieronons qui
auoient ou fait ou fait faire le massacre du
moys passé.

Les Algongq. de Sillery font de rudes disci-
plines p™. s’estre enyurés plusieurs fois: mais
se pleignent fort & ferme que les frangois
s’enyurent & sont vilains & qu’on n’en dit
mot.

Le 25. fut mise a la paroisse vne plus grosse
cloche au lieu de la petite qui y estoit.

Le 27. Mariage de la fille de Mons'. Coiiil-
lar auec Le fils de Iean Guion: le p. Vimont
assista aux nopces, il y eut deux violons pr".
ta: rf = fois.

Vn nommé dubok soldat Empyrique fut inui-
té d’aller voir les malades de Sillery pour 3
ou 4. Iours: I] fut logé chez nvf sans en
rien communiquer au Superieur & hoc
male; & y demeura depuis le 20°. ou enui-
ron de nouembre iusques au 22. de Ianuier:
la chose ne reussit pas; Inuisus barbaris et
gallis.

Ce moys icy au Commencemt. on presta le
Tabernacle de nde dame des Anges aux Vrsu-
lines, excepté les Anges qui furent prestés a
la paroisse p". ornemt. de leur Autel.

On vendit aussy ce moys icy a la paroisse
pour pres de 4ooil. de meubles ou ornemens
d’Eglise dont ils se seruoient, & la separation
de meubles fut faite, & les Catalogues dres-
sés.


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 101


himself alone in the Cabin, piled up whatever
there was, especially the skins, and burned
everything. They confirmed the idea that it
was the Annieronons who had either com-
mitted or instigated the massacre in the past
month.

The Algonquains of Sillery inflict on them-
selves severe disciplines for having been
several times drunk; but they complain much
and stoutly that the french get drunk and are
bad, and that not a word is said about it.

On the 25th a larger bell was placed in the
parish church, instead of the small one which
was there.

On the 27th, Marriage of the daughter of
Monsieur Couillar to The son of Jean Guion;*
father Vimont was present at the nuptials;
there were two violins, for the 1st time.

One dubok—a soldier, and an Empiric—
was invited to go and see the sick at Sillery
for 3 or 4 Days: he was lodged with us,
without giving any information thereof to the
Superior, e¢ hoc male; and he stayed there
from the 2zoth of November, or thereabout,
until the 22nd of January. The affair was
not a success — /nvisus barbaris et galls.

At the Beginning of this month, the Taber-
nacle of nostre dame des Anges was lent to
the Ursulines,—except the Angels, which
were lent to the parish church as ornament
for their Altar.

There was sold, also during this month, to
the parish church, nearly 400 livres’ worth of
Church furniture or ornaments, which they


Acts of discipline by
the Algonquins.


Change of Bells at
the parish church.


Marriage of Guyon.


A Surgeon at
Sillery.


Loan of Tabernacle.


Vestry Furniture
sold.


Messe anntuersatre
adel hospital.


Dons aux sauuages.


defense de tratter


On commence a ven-
are le bots.


Jfournzture de bors


Valeur du pain


assemblées du Ven-
aredy, de nrelnstitut,


102 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


la messe, qui se deuoit dire du S‘. Esprit a
Vhospital p'. messieurs de la Comp’. gene-
ralle, le dernier Iour de ce moys, fut remise
au lendemain qui estoit le Vendredy.

On donna plusieurs choses aux sauuages Al-
gonq. ce moys icy par les mains du p. Vimont,
entr’autres deux bariques de pois; quelques
estoffes, &c. ces sauuages estoient Noel &
Iean bapt. cde ie croy. outre cela on ne rece-
uoit rien du reuenu de Sillery, & cependant
on y faisoit vne depence de prés de mille
escus; on nourrissoit aussy 3. ou 4. hurons a
l’hospital, scauoir Atironta sa femme, son fils,
& Jaques Acharo.

le 26. du moys fut affichée la défence de
traiter aucune pelleterie mais de porter au
magazin le tout qui le feroit valoir aux por-
teurs. cette defense longtemps auparauant
auoit esté faite aux 3. riuieres.

Cette année on commenga a vendre le bois
& celuy qui le fournissoit par les maisons en
auoit 30. s. de la corde s’il le prenoit sur les
terres d’autruy, mais de celuy qu'il prenoit sur
ses terres, il en auoit 2it. c’estoit donc dix sols
la corde.

On nvf fournit du bois a 1l’ordinaire le plvf
souuent deux traines par Iour.

Le pain valoit au magazin en ce temps 15
sols

Les vendredys vne demy heure deuant la
Colaon nvf nvf assemblions pour lire quelque


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 103


used there; also the classification of the fur-
niture was made, and the Lists were drawn up.

The mass of the Holy Ghost, which was to
be said at the hospital for messieurs of the
general Company, on the last Day of this
month, was postponed till the next day, which
was Friday.

Sundry things were given to the Algonquain
savages this month by the hand of father Vi-
mont,— among others, two kegs of peas, some
stuffs, etc.; these savages were, I believe,
Noel and Jean baptiste. Besides that, we
received nothing in the way of revenue from
Sillery, and yet we incurred an expense there
of nearly a thousand écus; we also fed 3 or
4 hurons at the hospital,—to wit, Atironta,
his wife, his son, and Jaques Acharo.

On the 26th of the month was posted the
order not to trade any peltry, but to carry
everything to the warehouse, which would
pay the bearers its value; this prohibition had
been made long before at 3 rivers.

This year they began to sell wood; and the
man who furnished it through the houses had
30 sols a cord for it, if he took it from the
lands of others; but, for that which he took
from his own lands, he had 2 livres,— which
is, therefore, ten sols a cord [more].

They furnish us with wood as ustial: most
frequently, two sledges a Day.

Bread, at this time, was worth 15 sols at
the warehouse.

On Fridays, a half-hour before Supper, we
assembled to read something about our


Anniversary Mass
at the hospital.


Gifts to the savages.


Prohibition of trade.


Sale of wood
begins.


Supply of wood.
Value of bread.


Friday assemblies of
our Institute.


St. Eloy


St. fr. Xauier


Vrsulines nuf enuoy-
ent a disner.


104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


chose de nostre Institut, ou qui y eut du ra-
port; nvf le faisions tous les Vendredys dans.
la vetie qu’apres pasque il seroit difficile de le
faire pour les diuerses absences & voyages:
nv{ commengasmes par la lecture du 3°. traité
de rodriguez de la Comp*. & on 1’Interrom-
poit de fois a autre pour lire le sommaire &
autres choses quon lit tous les moys chez nvf;
nvf y estions trois PP trois ff & vn de nos
Domestiques.


DECEMBRE 1645.


le 1°. ceux de la forge vinrent demander le
vin de la St. Eloy. ils estoient quatre, on
leur donna quatre chapelets, & au maistre vne
bouteille de vin.

le 2™¢, a la messe St. fr. xauier, on dit vne
grande messe, of nos ff seruirent en surplis;
on intima le Dimanche auparauant les Indul-
gences & Monst. le Gouuerneur fit sonner le
matin au poinct du Jour la Diane, & tirer vn
coup de canon; il n’y eut autre Ceremonie ce
Iour-la: on y renouuela a la maison le veu de
la Conception & a cet effect on fut dire
deuant le St. Sacremt. les litanies & aux Vrsu-
lines la veuille.

le 3°. les Vrsulines enuoyerent a disner a la
maison; mais vn festin accompli: c’estoit le
ir, Dim. de ?Aduent que le P. Dendemare
commenga a y prescher & moy aux Hospi-
talieres.


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 105


Institute, or bearing thereon; we did so
every Friday, considering that after easter
it would be difficult to do this, because of
the various absences and journeys. We be-
gan with the reading of the 3rd treatise of
rodriguez,” of the Society; and we Inter-
rupted it from time to time, in order to read
the summary and other things which are
read every month with us; we were three
Fathers, three brethren, and one of our
Domestics.


DECEMBER, 1645.


On the ist, those of the forge came to ask
for the wine for the feast of St. Eloy. They
were four: we gave them four rosaries, and
to the master a bottle of wine.

On the 2nd, at the mass of St. francois
xavier, high mass was said, at which our
brethren served in surplices. On the Sunday
before, the Indulgences were announced; and
Monsieur the Governor had the Reveille
sounded in the morning at Daybreak, anda
gun fired; there was no other Ceremony on
that Day. At the house, the vow of the
Conception ® was then renewed; and to this
end the litany was said before the Blessed
Sacrament,— and, the day before, at the Ursu-
lines:

On the 3rd, the Ursulines sent dinner to the
house,—a perfect banquet, indeed. It was
the 1st Sunday in Advent when Father Den-
demare began to preach there, and I to the
Hospital Nuns.


St. Eloy.


St. frangots Xavier.


Ursulines send us
dinner.


Chapelle a beauport
1645


pain fatt ala
matson


Lour de la Concep-
tion.


Commencem#. de
saluts, prieres
extraordinaires.


106 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


le 4°. on enuoya ,vne Chapelle complete a
beauport dont le calice estoit d’estain, il fut
rompu, & on le refit & reconsacra.

Enuiron ce temps on commenga a faire le
pain a la maison tant a cause que celuy qu’on
nv{ faisoit au four du magazin n’estoit pas
bon; que parce qu’on se vouloit seruir du blé
du pays dont on ne seruoit point au magazin.

le 8. Iour de la Conception le matin au point
dunlotr .enGtira vn “coup de -Canon; vees2
l’Eleudon de la grande Messe trois autres: ie
publié le Dimanche d’auparauant Indulgence
pleniere, en vertu de la bulle de Paul. 5°. qui
é[z.e., est] aux Hurons par laquelle Indulgence
pleniere € accordée 4 toutes nos Eglises le
Iour du Patron ou Titulaire de l’Eglise. Ay-
ant Ieusné la veuille, on ne fit point absti-
nence le Jour, qui estoit vendredy.

le 7. premier leudy de l’Aduent commen-
cerent les saluts du S‘. Sacrement auec quatre
cierges; le salut consiste aux vespres du Jour,
du St. Sacrement a commencer par le pange
Lingua. & y adioustant quelques oraisons con-
uenables aux necessités du temps. Cette de-
udon succeda aux Litanies de nde Dame qu’on
disoit tous les Iours a l’issue des messes, &
qui dura iusques aux Aduents; on retint
toutesfois les Litanies de nde Dame tous les
samedys a l’Issue des messes, dont il y en auoit
vne principale qui deuoit estre tousiours de
Beata autant qu'il se pouroit, ou auec comme-


wae


ms


ee ee i) isthe i ra sien
tale Daky Rema asad $+ Potrwn fub ‘ BAU eos gibt Mekdh Miata lease § yMicabionss grtium abiowr) vet


|


; j
=


:


ed


CORBANVS.PP.VIL


; . 2 | : - 9? ee
ainsi ooyhilelitaus yutes Era ingests olan or apbicaimn Gai « AL aren Sd drenvaligumem caning Galan coobestiles eal esa ia Ranhelesnkoieh eibasveig fs
Kp filets Vert Doomion 12 confers at Sauron coiomes vee’ ows Calionn Preshiterny Socckovkis su Rusdemrar § Mens *viragns pwwallins Dior Prowimids: Huron noud framed
es: : AY * aes ‘ : a : ; ' Pe e 43 ae y : * aes Pie
pie 5: Josepha « primis estenin soi, aD excafen folis Sef: Rio firraytis amis reurtes vafitamovint 070s gre oxpiononum Craps BNO Fay or ie GE
eubide expalharions, is © Benen prreces ofhidurmk ylemanam ciwin yeuastorwm Jag nDralgantam e7vemishiontim aw sevicero ikow Le Bee Pet Dalseatles feireseonet eds
| 20 i calpliae wpifdelifur me seieang, aWvr Zohan Cukiawn feu Capella ant Afton, wm eA Ske evi few abiguivm alin vdutae kK “porpas Let, fone aa
emits 1.2.04) Ss “4 movin Delrair art tt (yonde, oBlarwen ecipiahur pwies walle fo

Piscakorss Dia RVG: feOrarny MD C90 3 0 ||


TAY Conhis Cea wy “yup fone prime
CRuiw pre 28 BTeiptom — )


i
|
i
i
}


\


| MA Monty


REDUCED FACSIMILE OF BRIEF OF POPE URBAN VIII.


(Granting plenary indulgence, for seven years, to those who, after approaching the Sacraments, should visit on the feast of St. Joseph, the chapel of St. Mary’s in the Huron country. It bears date February 18, 1644, and is
L 5S , Ss) ’


accredited with being “the first Apostolic document issued in behalf of the Church in what is now the Province of Ontario,’ The original is in the archives of St, Mary’s College, Montreal.]


‘sett ket Phere


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 107


On the 4th, we sent a complete Chapel to
beauport, in which the chalice was of pewter;
it was broken, but was repaired, and conse-
crated anew.

About this time we began to make bread at
the house,—not only because that made for
us at the warehouse oven was not good, but
because we wished to use the corn of the land,
which they did not use at the warehouse.

On the 8th,— Day of the Conception,—a
Cannon was fired in the morning at Daybreak,
and three others at the Elevation during high
Mass. On the Sunday previous, I announced
plenary Indulgence, by virtue of the bull of
Paul 5th, which is among the Hurons,—
whereby plenary Indulgence is granted to all
our Churches on the Day of the Patron or
Titular Saint of the Church. Having Fasted
the day before, we did not observe abstinence
on the Day itself, which was Friday.

On the 7th,—first Thursday in Advent,—
the benedictions of the Blessed Sacrament
with four candles began; the benediction con-
sists, of the vespers of the Day, of the Blessed
Sacrament, beginning with the pange Lingua,
and some prayers are added, suitable to the
exigencies of the time. This devotion took
the place of the Litany of our Lady, which
was said every Day at the end of the masses,
up to the season of Advent; nevertheless, the
Litany of our Lady was said every Saturday at
the End of the masses, among which there
was a principal one, which was always de
Beata, so far as possible; or, if not possible,


Chapel at beauport,
1645.


Bread made at the
house.


Day of the Concep-
tion.


Beginning of bene-
dictions, spectal
prayers.


Dimanches del? Ad-
uent dans les octaues


Ll est mieux de ne
point fare de Com-
mem. a vespres &
de se contenter de
dive ala fin le Tan-
tu ergo Sacramenti
pr. salut auecl’ oraz-
son du St. Sacremt.
& l’oraison Devf
refugtu hrune
& virtus &c.


108 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


mordon s'il ne se pouuoit, au lieu de Congre-
gaon ou Confrerie du Rosaire.

Le g. on fut en doute si a cause des octaues
de St. fr. Xauier & de la Conception il falloit
aux Dimanches del’ Aduent mettre du Violet &
dire gloria, & il Se trouua que selon les rubri-
ques, il falloit du Violet & ne point dire gloria.

Le 17. Commenga le Iubilé accordé par In-
nocent. X. on ne fit point icy de Procession,
mais le matin de ce Dimanche qui estoit le 3°.
de 1 Aduent apres 1’eau beniste faite & iettée,
on commenga vu Vent Creator: pendant lequel
le St. Sacrement fut exposé, & en suite on dit
la grande messe du Dimanche auec paremens
violets & sans Gloria, auec Commemor&aon
du S‘. Sacrement: pendant le Veni creator
lors qu’on exposoit le St. Sacrement on tira
trois Coups de Canon; les 3. stations estoient
la paroisse de Quebek, les Hospitalieres & les
Vrsulines: les Vespres furent dites par les
prestres debout & nue teste, & tout le peuple
en ayant esté aduerti auparauant se tint debout
ou a genoux, Mons". le Gouuerneur se tint
debout; le tout suiuant l’aduis donné le
Dimanche d’auparauant de l’honneur extraor-
dinaire qu’il falloit rendre au St. Sacremt. lors
qu'il € exposé conformement au Ceremonial
des Euesques chez Gauantus: au commen-
cem'. de Vespres, il n’y eut que deux cierges
allumés, & au Magnificat on en alluma 6.
autres pour le salut qui se fit en suite de Ves-


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 109


with commemoration, instead of the Congre-
gation or Brotherhood of the Rosary.

On the oth, we were in doubt whether, be-
cause of the octaves of St. frangois Xavier and
of the Conception, it was required to wear
Violet and say the gloria on the Sundays in
Advent; and it was found that, according to
the rubrics, Violet was required and not the
gloria.

On the 17th, Began the Jubilee granted by
Innocent X. We made no Procession here,
but on the morning of that Sunday,— which
was the 3rd in Advent,—after the holy water
had been blessed and sprinkled, we began a
Vent Creator, during which the Blessed Sacra-
ment was exposed; and then we said the
Sunday high mass, with violet vestments
and without the Gloria, with Commemoration
of the Blessed Sacrament. During the Venz
creator, while the Blessed Sacrament was
being exposed, three Cannon Shots were fired ;
the 3 stations were the parish church of Que-
bek, the Hospital, and the Ursuline Convent.
Vespers were chanted by the priests, standing
and bareheaded; and all the people, having
been previously notified thereof, stood or
knelt, Monsieur the Governor standing,—all
conforming to the notice given the Sunday
before, concerning the extraordinary honor
which must be rendered to the Blessed Sacra-
ment when it is exposed, conformably to the
Ceremonial of the Bishops in Gavantus.’ At
the beginning of Vespers, there were only two
candles lighted, and at the Maguzficat 6 others


Sundays in Advent
wethin the octaves.


Lt 7s better not to
make a Commemora-
tion at vespers, and

to stop with saying
at the close, the Tan-
tum ergo sacramen-
tum for benediction,
withthe prayer of the
Blessed Sacrament
and the prayer Deus
refugium nostrum et

virtus, efc.


110 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


pres par vne commemoraon du S‘. Sacrement
O sacri Conuiuiii auec l’oraison; apres la-
quelle on dit l’Alma redemptoris &c. apres
quoy on donna la benediction au peuple auec
le St. Sacrement, on y fit vne faute de ne
point chanter pour lors Tanti ergo Sacramen-
tai pendant lequel se deuoient faire les encen-
semens sans dire l’oraison: on finit par vn
laudate, & le sermon se fitapres. le St. Sacre-
ment ne fut exposé que les Dimanches &
festes de la quinzaine, les Iours ouuriers il ne
lestoit pas. Les Vrsulines entr’autres firent
de belles aumosnes d’Estoffe aux pauures
francois & sauuages. pour nvf nos Aumosnes
principales furent de 7. pains, chaqu’vn de la
valeur de 15. sols pour autant de personnes
que nvf estions a cette maison de Quebek.
cela toutesfois fut changé en estoffes souliers
& linge dont les pauures gens auoient plvf
de besoin. Mons. le Gouuerneur aussy fit de
belles aumosnes, 1°. de deux pistoles a donner
sur le champ dont vne pour les pauures fran-
cois fut changée en estoffe, l’autre fut laissée
a la disposién du p. dequé pt. les pauures
sauuages de Sillery. 2°. il donna charge a
Mons". des Chastelets de donner ce que nvf
luy demanderions pr’. les pauures iusques a la
concurrence de 2ooif.

les saluts se faisoient aux religions a quatre
heures l’vne apres l'autre Indifferemment se-
lon la commodité du Superieur qui preschoit


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. J/ESUITES 111


were lighted for the benediction, which oc-
curred after Vespers, with a commemoration
of the Blessed Sacrament: O sacrum Convivium,
with the prayer. After this, was said the
Alma redemptoris, etc., and then we gave the
benediction to the people, with the Blessed
Sacrament,—a mistake was made herein, by
not singing just then the Zantum ergo Sacra-
mentum, during which the incense should be
burned without saying the prayer; we ended
with a /audate, and the sermon was preached
afterward. The Blessed Sacrament was
exposed only on Sundays and feasts within the
fortnight; on working Days, it was not. The
Ursulines among others, gave noble alms of
Cloth to the french and savage poor; as for
us, our chief Alms were 7 loaves, each of the
value of 15 sols, for as many persons as we
were in this house at Quebek,— however that
was exchanged for cloth, shoes, and linen, of
which things the poor people had more need.
Monsieur the Governor also gave generous
alms: Ist, two pistoles, given upon the spot,—
one of which, for the french poor, was ex-
changed for cloth; the other was left to the
disposition of father dequen, for the poor sav-
ages of Sillery. 2nd, he gave orders to Mon-
sieur des Chastelets to give what we should
ask of him for the poor, up to the amount of
200 livres.

The benedictions were held at the religious
orders at four o’clock, one after the other,—
Indifferently, according to the convenience of
the Superior; he preached at one of them, and


Ceremonies supplées \


& 17¢, Communion
de Caterine femme
@ Attronta.


Ceremonies ala feste
de Noel.


112 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VoL. 27


a l’vne des deux & ensuite n’en partoit bien
qu’apres le salut & puis alloit a l’autre, &
Mons". le Gouuerneur & le monde suiuoit.

le. 23. de Dec. furent supplées=les “Cere-
monies de baptesme a Caterine femme d’ Ati-
ronta, & a son fils mathieu aagé de deux ans;
ce fut dans la chapelle de Quebek ils se tin-
rent dans le banq de Mons’. le gouuerneur
au commencement & furent par la Introduits
a l’Eglise. Monst. Tronquet secretaire de
mons’. le Gouuerneur fut le parain du petit,
& Madame de la ferté nouuelle mariée fille
de mons’. Giffar fut la maraine de Caterine,
qui fit sa 1. Comon a Minuit.

le 1°. coup de la messe de minuit sonna a
vnse heures, le 2. vn peu deuant la demye &
p’. lors on commenga a chanter deux airs, Ve-
nez mon Dieu &c & Chantons noe &c. Mons'.
de la ferté faisoit la basse St. martin Ioiioit du
violon, il y auoit encores vne fluste d’alemagne
que ne se trouue pas d’accord quand se vint a
l’Eglise: nvf eusmes fait vn peu deuant minuit;
on ne laissa pas de chanter le Te Det, & vn
peu apres on tira vn coup de canon pt. Signal
de minuit ou commenga la messe; le pain be-
nist se fit lors que le prestre alla p'. ouurir son
liure. Ce fut le 1°. depuis plusieurs années
qu'il auoit esté intermis p". les preferences
en la distribtion que chaqu’vn pretendoit.
Le renouuelement s’en fit par la deudon des
tailladiers qui eurent deudon de le faire a la


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 113


then withdrew only after the benediction, and
then went to the other; and Monsieur the
Governor and the people followed.

On the 23rd of December, the Ceremonies Ceremonies com-
of baptism were completed upon Caterine, Aleted, and rst Com-
wife of Atironta, and on her son mathieu, 72" 9% Caterie,

5 : wife of Attronta.
aged two years; this took place in the chapel
at Quebek; they sat in Monsieur the govern-
or’s pew, at the start, and were thereby In-
troduced to the Church. Monsieur Tronquet,
secretary to monsieur the Governor, was
godfather to the little one; and Madame de
la ferté, the newly-married daughter of
monsieur Giffar,!* was godmother to Caterine,
who received her 1st Communion at Midnight.

The ist stroke of the midnight mass rang Ceremonies at the
at eleven o'clock, the 2nd, a little before the /east of Christmas.
half-hour; and then they began to sing two
airs — Venez, mon Dieu, etc., and Chantons noe,
etc. Monsieur de la ferté sang the bass; St.
martin” Played the violin; there was alsoa
german flute, which proved to be out of tune
when they came to the Church. We had fin-
ished a little before midnight; they neverthe-
less sang the Ze Deum, and a little later a can-
non shot was fired as the Signal of midnight,
when mass began; the bread was blessed
when the priest went to open his book. This
was the ist bread blessed for several years,
during which it had been stopped, on account
of the precedence in its distribution, which
every one claimed. The renewal of the cus-
tom was caused by the devotion of the tool-
makers, whose devotion urged them to have


Danger du feu.


114 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ VoL. 27


messe de minuit; & les esprits se trouuerent
disposés a remettre cette coustume; Mons". le
Gouuerneur eut le chanteau p’. le faire le Di-
manche d’apres: ce que l’on fit p’. obuier aux
brouilleries des preferences pretendues fut
d’ordonner qu’en ayant donné au prestre & au
Gouuerneur, on donneroit a tout le reste
comme il viendroit & se trouueroit a 1’ Eglise,
commengant tantost par en haut, & tantost
par en bas.

Mons". le Gouverneur auoit donné ordre de
tirer a l’Eleuadon plusieurs coups de Canon
lors que fire f. le sacristain en donneroit le
Signal, mais il s’en oublia, & ainsy on ne tira
point: le monde Communia a la fin de la
grande messe, apres laquelle s’en dit vne
basse.

Il y auoit quatre chandeles dans 1’Eglise
dans des petits chandeliers de fer en facon de
Goncole & cela suffit. Il y auoit en outre
deux grandes chaudieres fournies du magazin
pleines de feu pour eschaufer la chapelle;
elles furent allumées auparauant sur le pont,
on auoit donné ordre de les oster apres la
messe, mais cela ayant esté negligé le feu prit
la nuit au plancher qui estoit au dessoubs de
l’vne des chaudieres dans laquelle il n’y auoit
pas au fond assez de cendre, mais par bon-
heur dirigente Dfio le feu ne parut que sur
les 5. h. du matin au dessus de fire sale ou
refectoire & cuisine dans laquelle estoit pierre


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 115


it during midnight mass; and people’s minds
were disposed to restore this custom. Mon-
sieur the Governor received the chanteau”!
that he might furnish it on the Sunday fol-
lowing: what was done to obviate the compli-
cations of the preferences claimed was, to
order that after a portion had been given to
the priest and to the Governor, all the others
should receive as they might come and chance
to be in the Church: beginning now in front,
and now in the rear.

Monsieur the Governor had given orders to
fire several Cannon shots at the Elevation,
when our brother the sacristan should give
the Signal; but he forgot it, and thus there
was no salute. The people received Commun-
ion at the end of high mass; after which alow
mass was said.

There were four candles in the Church in
small iron candlesticks in the form of a
Bracket, and that isenough. There were, be-
sides, two great kettles full of fire, furnished
by the warehouse in order to warm the chap-
el; they were kindled beforehand, on the
bridge. Directions had been given to remove
them after mass, but, that having been neg-
lected, the fire caught in the night on the
floor which was under one of the kettles, 1
which there were not enough ashes at the
bottom. But fortunately, dérigente Domino,
the fire did not appear till toward 5 o’clock in
the morning, above our hall or refectory, and
kitchen, in which was pierre gontier, our
Cook,— who, perceiving this, immediately


Danger of fire.


on va a beauport


‘ Sauuages gagnent
le Iubzlé.


On ferme le Iubilé.


116 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


gontier fire Cuisinier qui s’aperceuant de cela
monta aussy tost & sans autre bruit esteignit
le'feu.

on dit la grande messe du Iour sur les 8.
heures, & deuant & apres deux prestres dirent
leur trois messes.

a vespres on chanta quelques pscaumes en
faux-bourdon.

Le P. Vimont apres auoir assisté au Salut
des Hospitalieres s’en allaa beauport p™. ceux
qui n’auoient pu venir icy; il y fut 3. Iours.

Le 26. Iour de St. Estienne La bourgade de
Sillery vint icy en procession faire ses stations
p’. gangner le Iubilé deux de nos hommes por-
toient la baniere & la croix, les PP. de Quen
& dreuilletes vinrent auec eux en Surplis &
dominau, & entre’eux deux toute la troupe des
sauuages Xstiens au nombre de plus d’vne
centaine. ils vinrent a Jeun en vn temps
grandement froid, & s’en retournerent sans
manger. on leur fit festin au retour a Sillery
de la part de Monst. le Gouuerneur: ils
chanterent par tout fort melodieusement, &
dirent vne dizaine de leur chapelet.

Le dernier Iour de 1l’an se firma le Iubilé;
nvf pensasmes faire procession, mais le temps
d’hyuer n’est nullemt. commode pour cela.
on se contenta donc de faire le salut a l’ordi-
naire a l’'issue de vespres, on tira trois coups
de Canon lors qu’on donna la benediction auec
le St. Sacrement, & on alla aux maisons


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 117


went up and, without other noise, put out the
Dre.

High mass for the Day was said at 8 o’clock,
and, before and afterward, two priests said
their three masses.

At vespers, some psalms were chanted in
Jaux-bourdon.

Father Vimont, after being present at the
Benediction at the Hospital Nuns’, went away
to beauport, for those who had not been able
to come here; he was there 3 Days.

On-=the- 26th, Day of. St..Stephen, The
village of Sillery came here in a procession to
make its stations in order to gain the Jubilee;
two of our men bore the banner and the cross;
Fathers de Quen and dreuilletes came with
them, in Surplices and dominoes, and between
them the whole troop of Christian savages to
the number of more thana hundred. They
came Fasting, at an extremely cold season,
and returned without eating. A feast was
given them on their return to Sillery, on the
part of Monsieur the Governor. They sang
very melodiously everywhere, and said a
decade of their rosaries.

On the last Day of the year, the Jubilee
was closed; we thought of making a proces-
sion, but the winter season is not at all con-
venient for that; accordingly, we were con-
tent with giving the benediction as usual at
the end of vespers. Three Cannon shots were
fired when the benediction with the Blessed
Sacrament was given, and we went to the
religious houses to give the benedictions in


Trip to beauport.


Savages gain the
JSubtlee.


The Jubzlee ts closed.


aificulté sur le pain
benzt.


Lustice de deux
yurongnes.


on va a richelieu


118 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


religieuses faire le salut pareillement, & fermer
le Iubilé, on ne tira point.

Le pain benit du Dimanche fut transporté
au lundy, iour de la Circoncision. Mons". le
Gouuerneur le donna; il y eut quelque parolle
en suite a qui on le donneroit apres luy, & il
fut trouué plvf a propos de le donner aux deux
marguillers, Mons". Giffar & Monst. des Chas-
telets, & puis commencer par le haut de la
coste de St’, genetiicue, comme par vne riie;
puis reuenir par en bas, comme par vne autre
rue, & continiier de la sorte le p. Vimont en
dressa vn Catalogue.

Deux de nos fran¢ois s’estant mis a boire,
attendant la messe de minuit, s’enyurerent
auec beaucoup de scandale de quelques fran-
cois & sauuages qui les virent, on prescha
fortement? contre; aliraison.de~.cé ques les
sauuages disoient on nvf fait prendre la disci-
pline, quand nvf nvf enyurons & on ne dit
rien aux francois. il n’en falloit pas dauan-
tage que ce qui en fut dit en public. Monst.
le gouuerneur les fit mettre sur le cheualet
exposes a vn Nord est espouuantable.

le p. de noiie partit du 3. riu. le Dimanche
deuant Noél pt. aller a richelieu leur faire
gangner le Iubilé. il y demeura 12. Iours, &
en raporta, qu'il y auoit quelque espece de
necessité qu’on y retournast pour empescher
bien du desordre & de la brouillerie

Sur la fin de l'année, les Vrsulines & Hos-


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. JESUITES 119


like manner, and to close the Jubilee; there
was no salute.

The bread blessed on Sunday was distrib-
uted on Monday, day of the Circumcision;
Monsieur the Governor gave it. There was
some discussion afterward as to whom it
should be given after him; and it was found
more suitable to give it to the two church-
wardens, Monsieur Giffar and Monsieur des
Chastelets, and then to begin at the top of the
side of Ste. genevieve, as in case of a street;
then to return from behind, as if by another
street, and to continue in that way. Father
Vimont drew up a List for them.

Two of our french having begun to drink,
while waiting for the midnight mass, became
intoxicated, with much scandal to some french-
men and savages who saw them. We preached
vigorously againstit, because the savages said:
‘“They make us take the discipline when we
get drunk, and they say nothing to the
french.”’ Nothing further was required than
this public expression; Monsieur the governor
had them put on the chevalet, exposed to a
frightful Northeast wind.

Father de noiie started from 3 rivers the
Sunday before Christmas, in order to go to
richelieu, and have them gain the Jubilee; he
remained there 12 Days, and reported that
there was some sort of necessity to return
there, in order to prevent much disorder and
confusion.

Toward the end of the year, the Ursulines
and Hospital Nuns showed mea document by


Dificulty about the
consecrated bread.


Justice to two
adrunkaras.


Trip to richelzeu.


Concession de prairie
aux religteuses


le p. Vimont luy
mesme repara le
tout puis apres;
voyez cy apres
au moys de
Luin.


Sauuages Xstiens
hitu. a Sillery.


120 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


pitalieres me firent voir vn escrit, par lequel
le p. Vimont mon predecesseur leur avoit
donné & cedé pour 6. ans 6. arpents de preza
chaqu’vne sur les meilleures prairies que nvf
eussions: scauoir depuis la riuiere de la Ca-
bane aux Topiers 12. arpens en tirant vers
Mons’. Giffar le don estoit signé du moys
d’Auril ou de May 1645. vn an presq. apres
qu'il auoit receu les patentes de son succes-
seur, qu’on attendoit en ce temps-la: apres
auoir veu les papiers, ie les rendis sans les
approuuer ou Improuuer, ne Iugeant pasa pro-
pos de rien faire dauantage; au fond i’y trou-
uois deux choses a redire. 1’vne qu’il eut fait
ce don pour 6. ans se deuant contenter au plvf
de le faire pour vn an; l’autre qu'il leur eut
cedé cela pour vn temps notable gratis sans
aucune charge cde d’vn x®. ou xx®. ou xxx®,

Il y auoit a Sillery cette année enuiron 167.
ames, tous Xstiens ou Catecumenes; 98. de
Communians, 47. non capable de Confession,
14. capable de la seule Confession, le reste
passoit p’. Catecumene


1642-45] JOURNAL DES PP. /ESUITES 121


which father Vimont, my predecessor, had
given and ceded to them, for 6 years, 6 arpents
of grazing land to each convent, on the best
natural meadows that we had,—to wit, from
the river of the Cabin to the Topiers,” 12
arpents, in the direction of Monsieur Giffar.
The grant was signed in the month of April or
of May, 1645, almost a year after he had re-
ceived the letters patent of his successor, who
was expected at that time. After seeing the
papers, I returned them without approving
or Disapproving them,— not Judging it advis-
able to do anything further. In reality, I
found two. things to criticize therein,— one,
that he had made this gift for 6 years, whereas
he should have been content to make it for
one year, at the most; the other, that he had
made them such a concession for a consider-
able time, gratuitously, without any charge —
as, for instance, a tenth, or twentieth, or
thirtieth.

There were at Sillery, this year, about 167
souls, all Christians or Catechumens,—98
Communicants, 47 not qualified for Confes-
sion, 14 qualified for Confession alone, the
rest were considered Catechumens.


Grant of meadow
land to the nuns.


father Vimont him-
self recovered the
whole subsequently,
see hereinafter
under the month of


June.


Christian savages
wintering at Sillery.


LV


RELATION OF 1644-45


PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1646


SOURCE: We follow a copy of the original Cramoisy edi-
tion, owned by The Burrows Brothers Company, Cleveland,
a duplicate of the one at Lenox Library (H. 84).

Chaps. i.-xi. are given in the present volume; the
remainder of the document will appear in Volume XXVIII.


AS


4)


hie gn ara


¢s Années_ 1644. & 1645.


-ENVOYEE AV R, PERE |


Prouincial de la Compagnie de


Jesvsenla Prouince deFrance.


Par le P. Ban Thies MY Vans dé


4 me/me Compagnie , Superieur de la
Asfere de Kebecy


A PA A R 1S,
SEBASTIEN CRAMOISYpy os
+ Imprimeurordinairedu Roy, } rué S.tags =
Chery & dela mone Regente. ques, aus
oe He


UGasnizs Cramors x Je


M. DC. SUV


AVEC YM 7 oT Ld (SBOE OP NP BER ACAD ee ee


“NOVVELLE. FRANCE; :


|
|
4
|


RELATION


OF WHAT OCCURRED


INGE ee N.C EF


in the Years 1644 and 1645.


SENT TO THE REV.FATHER
Provincial of the Society of Jesus
in the Province of France.


By Father BARTHELEMY VIMONT of
the same Soctety, Superior of the
Residence of Kebec.


Bakes
(SEBASTIEN, CRAMONSY; |)".
2 | Printer in ordinary to the King, gases
rint- 4 ques,
aa by } and to the Queen Regent ; Sign of the
“sia Storks.
GABRIEL CRAMOISY.


Mee DG Sly i
Bim eat LIC EN Sit.


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 21


Table des Chapitres contenus en ce Liure.


ELATION de ce qui s’eft pafsé en la nouuelle
France, és années 1644. G 1645. . page I
Chapitre I. De l’eftat general de la miffion. 2

Chap. II. De quelques bonnes actions, & de quelques


bons fentimens des Sauuages Chreftiens. : 7
Chap. III. Continuation du me/me Sujet. Bratt 3
Chap. IV. Suzte du mefme Sujet. : 25


Chap. V. De quelques actions plus rents 32
Chap. VI. De l’hyuernement d’vn Pere auec les


Sauuages. ; 48
Chap. VII. De quelques Supe ae par Pr
ffiroquots. 62


Chap. VIII. De pepe seh nes eh oe 68
Chap. IX. Traité de la Paix entre les Frangots,


Htroquois & autres nations. . : 3 AO?
Chap. X. Suztte du Traité dela Paix. . 102
Chap. XI. De la derniere affemblée tenué pour -

Paix. : aes
Chap. XII. De ce quis ‘ef pafsé a arom et eye


Lettre du P. Hierofme Lalemant, efcrite des Hurons
au Rk. P. Prouincial de la Compagnie de
IESVS. : ; : : ~ S136


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45


129


Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.


in the years 1644 and 1645. . page
Chapter I. Of the general state of the mission.
Chap. II. Of some good actions and some good
sentiments of the Christian Savages.
Chap. III. Continuation of the same subject.
Chap. IV. Continuation of the same subject.
Chap. V. Of some especially remarkable actions.
Chap. VI. Of the wintering of a Father among the
Savages. :
Chap. VII. Of some Nori: by ve res.
Chap. VIII. Of some Htroquots prisoners.
Chap. IX. Treaty of Peace between the Lens
the Hiroquois, and other nations.
Chap. X. Continuation of the Treaty of Peace.
Chap. XI. Of the last meeting held for the Peace.
Chap. XII. Of what occurred at Miscou.
Letter from Father Hierosme Lalemant, written
from the Huron country to the Reverend
Father Provincial of the Society of JESUS.


Rees of what occurred in new France,


102
115
124


136


130 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox 27


Extraict du Priuilege du Roy.


AR Grace & Priuilege du Roy, il eft permis a
Pp SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY Marchand Libraire
Iuré en l’Vniuerfité de Paris, & Imprimeur
ordinaire du Roy, d’imprimer ou faire imprimer vn
Liure intitulé, Relation de ce qui s’eft pafsé en la Nou-
uelle France és années mil fix cens quarante-quatre &
guarante-cing, enuoyée au R. P. Prouincial de la Compa-
gnie delESVS en la Prouince de France, par le P. Bar-
thelemy Vimont de la mefme Compagnie, & Superieur de
la Refidence de Kebec: & ce pendant le temps & efpace
de fept années confecutiues, auec deffenfes a tous
Libraires & Imprimeurs d’imprimer ou faire impri-
mer ledit Liure, fous pretexte de déguifement ou
changement qu’ils y pourront faire, a peine de confif-
cation & de l’amende portée par ledit Priuilege.
Donné a Paris le vnziéme Decembre 1645.
Par le Roy en fon Confeil,
CRAMOISY.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 131


Extract from the Royal License.


Y Grace and Privilege of the King, permission
B is granted to SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, Book-
seller under Oath in the University of Paris
and Printer in ordinary to the King, to print or to
have printed a Book entitled: Relation de ce qui s'est
passé en la Nouvelle France és années mil six cens qua-
rante-quatre et quarante-cing, envoyée au R. P. Provin-
cial de la Compagnie de JESUS en la Province de France,
par le P. Barthelemy Vimont de la mesme Compagnie, et
Superieur de la Residence de Kebec; and this during the
time and space of seven consecutive years; prohibit-
ing all Booksellers and Printers to print or to have
printed the said Book, under pretext of disguise or
change that they might make therein, on pain of con-
fiscation of the copies, and of the fine provided by
the said License. Given at Paris, the eleventh of
December, 1645.
By the King in Council,
CRAMOISY.


132 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


Permiffion du P. Prouincial.


OVS ESTIENNE BINET Prouincial de la Com-
N pagnie de IESvs en la Prouince de France,
auons accordé pour l’aduenir au fieur Sebaftien
Cramoify Marchand Libraire, Imprimeur ordinaire
du Roy, l’impreffion des Relations de la Nouuelle
France. Fait a Paris le 26. Mars 1638.
ESTIENNE BINET.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 133


Permission of the Father Provincial.


E, ESTIENNE BINET, Provincial of the
Society of JESUS in the Province of France,
have granted for the future to sieur Sebas-

tien Cramoisy, Bookseller and Printer in ordinary to

the King, the printing of the Relations of New

France. Done at Paris, the 26th of March, 1638.
ESTIENNE BINET.


134 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


[1] Relation de ce qui s’eft paffé en la Novvelle
France, es Annees 1644. & 1645.


ON REVEREND PERE,
M Voila noftre Relation que i’enuoye encore
cette Année axvoltre Reuerence. Le R:P-
Hierofme Lallemant noftre Superieur eftant arriué fi
tard, qu’il ne luy a pas efté poffible d’y vacquer: ie
croy que les nouuelles de cette Année donneront de
la confolation 4 Voftre Reuerence, & a tous ceux qui
prennent quelque part dans les affaires de l’eftabliffe-
ment du Royaume de Dieu en ces contrées; il plaira
a V. Ro nots: ayder= [2] oa en. remercier la “diuine
Bonté, & a obtenir les graces neceffaires pour nous
rendre dignes de fes faueurs
Denvouks

De Quebec, ce Tres-humble & tres-
1. @’ Odtobre, 1645. obeiffant feruiteur,

en N. Seigneur,

BARTHELEMY VIMONT.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 135


[1] Relation of what occurred in New France, in
the Years 1644 and 1645.


Here is our Relation that I send this Year
again to your Reverence. Reverend Father
Hierosme Lallemant, our Superior, arrived so late
that he was unable to attend to it. I think that this
Year’s news will give consolation to Your Reverence,
and to all who take any interest in the affairs of the
establishment of God’s Kingdom in these countries.
Your Reverence will be pleased to help us [2] to thank
the divine Goodness for it, and to obtain the neces-
sary graces to make us worthy of his favors.
Your Reverence’s


M Y REVEREND FATHER,


From Quebec, this Most humble and most
ist of October, 1045. obedient servant in
Our Lord,


BARTHELEMY VIMONT.


136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


CHAPITRE PREMIER.
DE L’ESTAT GENERAL DE LA MISSION.


IEU foit beny dans le temps & dans 1’Eternité,
iD le fang refpandu pour IESVS-CHRIST dans
les pays des Iroquois, meflé auec les prieres &

les voeux de tant d’ames fainctes, qui s’intereffent
pour l’amplification de fon Royaume en ce nouueau
Monde nous a enfin produit la Paix auec ces Bar-
bares. Le P. Ifaac logues & le P. Francois Breffani
a fon retour ont embraffé comme amis ceux qui [3]
ont déchiré leurs corps, arrachés leurs ongles & coup-
pez leurs doigts, en vn mot ceux qui les ont traitez
en tygres, ce coup eft venu du Ciel, nous verrons
tantoft cdme la chofe s’eft paffée. Voila vne grande
porte ouverte aux Croix & a l’Euangile, dans plu-
fieurs Nations fort peuplées pourueu qu’on y puiffe
entretenir des ouuriers Euangeliques. Pendant que
Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagni noftre Gouuer-
neur traittoit cette Paix auec fa prudence ordinaire,
le pays poffedoit vn autre bon-heur dont il n’a eu
connoiffance qu’a la venué des vaiffeaux. Meffieurs
de la Compagnie de la Nouuelle France voulant pro-
curer la conuerfion des Sauuages, & amplifier la Colo-
nie Frangoife, luy ont remis entre les mains le trafic
de la Pelterie, que Sa Majeité leur auoit accordé,
n’ignorant pas que la force des Francois fera l’apuy
des nouuelles Eglifes qu’on tafche d’engendrer A
IESVS-CHRIST dans cette extremité du Monde.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 137


CHAPTER FIRST.
OF THE GENERAL STATE OF THE MISSION.


OD be praised in time and in Eternity; the
Ce blood shed for JESuS CHRIST in the coun-
try of the Iroquois— mingled with the pray-

ers and vows of so many holy souls, who are inter-
ested in the spread of his Kingdom in the new
World — has finally brought us Peace with those Bar-
barians. Father Isaac Jogues and Father Francois
Bressani, on their return, embraced as friends those
who [3] had lacerated their bodies, torn out their
nails, and cut off their fingers,—in a word, those who
had treated them as tigers would. This event was
due to Heaven; we shall presently see how it came
to pass. This is a wide gateway opened for Crosses
and to the Gospel in many very populous Nations,
provided we can maintain Evangelistic laborers there.
While Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagni, our
Governor, was treating for this Peace with his usual
prudence, the country possessed another blessing,
which came to its knowledge only when the ships
arrived. The Gentlemen of the Company of New
France, wishing to procure the conversion of the
Savages, and to increase the French Colony, returned
into His Majesty’s hands the traffic in Furs that he
had granted them,—being fully aware that the
strength of the French would be the support of the
new Churches that we endeavor to beget to JESUS
CHRIST at this extremity of the World. Nowas


138 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


Or comme cette Colonie eft encor en fon Enfance,
Meffieurs de Monftreal zelé pour la Conuerfion de ces
peuples, ont auffi fait paroiftre l’excez de leur amour
& de leur charité enuers la Colonie [4] Frangoife. La
Reyne dont les bontez ne font point limitées par les
bornes de 1’Europe, s’eft nettement declarée la Mere
& la Protectrice de fes fujets Francois & Sauuages
de ces contrées. Toutes ces benedictions font d’au-
tant plus douces qu’il y a d’amertumes dans vn pais
tout remply d’horreur & de barbarie, car il faut auotier
que ces peuples font extremement efloignez de la
courtoifie Francoife, & qu'il faut des Heros, des
Hercules, & des Geans pour combattre des Monitres,
des Hydres, & des Demons. Les Sauuages qui fe
trouuent ordinairement dans toutes nos habitations,
depuis Tadoufac iufques & Monftreal, ont efté culti-
uez auec vn grand foin, & auec beaucoup de peines
en diuers endroits. Les Vrfulines & les Hofpitali-
eres fe font acquittées de leurs fonctions auec des
ioyes & des contentemens dignes de leurs courages;
celles-cy ont efté affligées par de longues maladies de
leurs Sceurs, & les premieres ont trouué vn nouuel
employ pour l’in{truction des Sauuages. Les femmes
Chreftiennes demanderent & vn Pere de noftre
Compagnie s'il n’y auroit pas de moyen que quel-
qu’vne de ces bonnes [5] Meres vint demeurer auec
elles pour les faire prier Dieu, cela n’ef{tant pas dans
la bien-feance, elles leurs enuoyerent l’vne de leurs
Seminariftes, qui s’ef{t fort bien acquittée de fon
petit deuoir.

Les Peres de noftre Compagnie ont trauaillé auec
fuccez. Les Sauuages de plufieurs petites Nations
fe font petit a petit approchées, & le bruit de 1’ Euan-


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 139


this Colony is, as yet, but in its Infancy, the Gentle-
men of Montreal, zealous for the Conversion of these
peoples, have likewise manifested the excess of their
love and of their charity toward the French Colony.
[4] The Queen, whose kindness is not limited by the
boundaries of Europe, has distinctly declared herself
the Mother and Protectress of her French and Savage
subjects in these countries. All these blessings are
the sweeter, since there are bitter experiences in a
country so filled with horrors and barbarism; for it
must be admitted that these peoples are very far from
having the French courtesy, and that Heroes, Her-
cules, and Giants are needed to fight Monsters,
Hydras, and Demons. The Savages who are usually
found in all our settlements, from Tadousac to Mont-
teal, have been fostered with much care, and with
much trouble in various ways. The Ursulines and
the Hospital Nuns have performed their duties with
joy and content worthy of their courage. The latter
have been afflicted by long illnesses of their Sisters;
and the former have found a new employment, in
the instruction of the Savages. The Christian wom-
en asked a Father of our Society if it would not be
possible to have one of these good [5] Mothers reside
with them, to make» them pray to God. As this
would not be proper, they sent them one of their
Seminarists, who has very well performed her little
task.

The Fathers of our Society have labored with suc-
cess. The Savages of many small Tribes have grad-
ually drawn near, and the fame of the Gospel is
spreading to the remotest depths of the thickest for-
ests, where Barbarism has its lair. We will not say
anything in particular of the various residences, or of


140 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 27


gile fe va refpandant iufques dans le fonds des plus
épaiffes forefts, ot la Barbarie fait fon repaire. Nous
ne parlerons point en particulier des diuerfes refi-
dences ny des diuerfes Miffions de noftre Compagnie,
de peur d’vfer de redites, les chofes qui fe paffent de
nouueau ont tant de raport auec celles qui ont defia
e{té efcrites, que le danger du degouft nous rendra
fuccints de plus en plus: fi bien que nous ne touche-
rons en cette Relation que quelques fentimens, &
quelques actions des plus feruens Chreftiens, fans
fpecifier s’ils font de Monftreal, de Sainct Iofeph, ou
de Tadoufac; Et en fuite nous verrons les Ceremo-
nies qui fe font faites dans le traitté de la Paix auec
les Iroquois. Comme nous eftions dans cette ayma-
ble occupation, qui depuis long-temps auoit plutoft
e{té [6] l’objet de nos fouhaits que de nos attentes,
Dieu nous voulut donner la ioye toute entiere: Car
le Reuerend P. Hierofme Lallemant qui eft venu
prendre la charge de toute noftre Miffion, auec vne
bonne trouppe de Hurons, parmy lefquels il y auoit
vne trentaine de braues Chreftiens qui ont tenu les
premiers rangs dans les harangues & dans les affaires
qu’on a coclu auc les Iroquois. Que le Dieu d’Ifraél
foit beny 4 iamais pource qu'il nous a cdblé de fes
plus grandes mifericordes il fgait abaiffer & releuer
quand il luy plaift, mais au bout du compte ce nou-
uel éclat eft vn rayon de la Montagne de Thabor ot
on ne parle que des excés de IESVS-CHRIST, il ne
faut pas fucrer nos trauaux, le falut des hommes s’eft
operé en la Croix, on ne fgauroit le procurer par autre
voye, C’eft par ce chemin feul qu’on ameine les ames
a Dieu, & qui n’y veut point entrer, n’a que faire de
paroiftre parmy les Sauuages.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 141


the various Missions of our Society, for fear of repe-
tition; the new events that occur are so similar to
those which have already been written of, that the
fear of causing distaste will make us more and more
concise,— so much so that, in this Relation, we will
mention only some sentiments and some actions of
the most fervent Christians, without specifying
whether they belong to Montreal, to Saint Joseph, or
to Tadousac. And afterward we will see the Cere-
monies that were observed in the negotiation of the
Peace with the Iroquois. While we were engaged
in that pleasant occupation, which had long been
more [6] the object of our desires than of our expec-
tations, God chose to give us the fullest joy. For
Reverend Father Hierosme Lallemant came to take
charge of the whole of our Mission, with a consider-
able band of Hurons, among whom were some thirty
worthy Christians, who occupied the foremost rank
in the harangues, and in the affairs that were con-
cluded with the Iroquois. Praised forever be the God
of Israel, because he has showered his greatest
mercies upon us. He can both humble and exalt
when he pleases; but, after all, this new light isa
ray from Mount Tabor, where the death-sufferings of
Jesus CuRIsT alone are mentioned. Our labors
must not be sweetened; the salvation of mankind
was effected on the Cross and it cannot be obtained
in any other way. It is by that road alone that souls
can be brought to God; and he who has no desire to
enter upon it need not make his appearance among
the Savages.


142 WEES RIGA L1O NSS ES STESULL ES. [Vou. 27


[7] CHAPITRE II.


DE QUELQUES BONNES ACTIONS & DE QUELQUES BONS
SENTIMENS DES SAUUAGES CHRESTIENS.


9 VSERAY de redites fi ie fais mention des prieres
| que font les Chreftiens tous les foirs & tous les
matins. Leurchaffe & les Iroquois les ont efloi-
gnez de l’Eglife pendant tout l’hyuer; mais ny les
hommes ny les Demons ne les ont pfi empefcher de
rendre 4 Dieu leur petit deuoir. Ils emportent auec
eux dans les bois vn memoire ou vn petit Cathalogue
des iours de Fefte, qu’ils gardent auec beaucoup de
refpect pour des hommes naiz & nourris dans les
forefts comme des beftes. Ils s’affemblent tous dans
vne Cabane, font leurs prieres publiquement, ils
chantent quelque Cantique Spirituel, & l’vn d’eux
tiendra par fois quelques difcours fur quelques points
de noftre creance, ces Affemblées n’empefchent pas
que chacun ne prie encor en fa Cabane 4a fon réueil
[8] & a fon coucher, s’ils font proches de 1’ Eglife, la
cloche les appelle tous les iours 4 la Meffe, & les fait
venir fur le foir aux prieres & a linftruction. Cela
va fon train en forte neantmoins que les vns marchent
bien plus vifte que les autres.

Retournant de leur longues chaffes ils fe confeffent
ordinairement deux fois deuant que de fe Commu-
nier, ils difent pour raifon que leur memoire eft
courte, qu’ils n’ont point de papier ny d’ancre comme
nous pour marquer leurs fautes, & que s’ils en obmet-


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 143


[7] CHAPTER II.


OF SOME GOOD ACTIONS AND OF SOME GOOD SENTI-
MENTS OF THE CHRISTIAN SAVAGES.


WOULD only use repetitions were I to mention
| the prayers said by the Christians, every night
and morning. Their hunting and the Iroquois
kept them away from the Church throughout the
winter, but neither men nor Demons could prevent
them from performing their minor duties toward
God. They take with them to the woods a memo-
randum or short Catalogue of the Festival days,
which they observe with much respect, for men born
and brought up in the forests like beasts. They all
assemble in one Cabin, say their prayers publicly,
and sing a Hymn, and sometimes one of them will
give a discourse on some points of our belief. These
Meetings do not prevent each one from saying his
prayers again in his Cabin, on rising [8] and on going
to sleep. If they are near the Church, the bell calls
them every day to Mass, and summons them at even-
ing for prayers and instruction. This goes on regu-
larly —in such manner, however, that some advance
much faster than others.

When they return from their long hunts, they usu-
ally confess themselves twice before receiving Com-
munion. They give as a reason for this that their
memory is short; that they have neither paper nor
ink, as we have, wherewith to write down their sins;
and that, if they omit some through forgetfulness at


144 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


tent quelques vnes par oubly a la premiere Confef-
fion, qu’ils s'en pourront fouuenir a la feconde, quel-
ques-vns fe feruent des grains de leurs Chappelets
pour memoire locale. Vne bonne féme doiiée d’vne
auffi grande fimplicité qu’elle a peu de memoire,
abordant vn Pere luy dit auec vne ingenuité toute
aymable: voila tous mes pechez, elle mon{troit enui-
ron vne dixaine de fon Chappelet, ils font tous fur
ces grains, difoit-elle, & les maniant les vns apres
les autres comme fi elle euft fait fa priere, elle
s’accufoit comme coupable de beaucoup de chofes
innocentes.

Vne autre enuoye fon mary pour s’excufer [9] fi
elle ne venoit point a la fainte Table comme elle
auoit promis, elle a oublié, difoit fon mary, vn gros
peché: & ie croy qu’il auoit charge de le dire au
Pere; mais cette bonne femme eftant venué elle
mefme, le Pere la fit Communier, ayant reconnti la
crainte & la fimplicité innocente du mary & de la
femme.

Vn ieune homme ayant ordre de fe Communier,
car pour l’ordinaire ils ne s’aprochent point de ce
diuin Sacrement qu’on ne leur permette, fe vint auffi
excufer difant, qu'il vouloit preparer fon cceur &
ieufner plufieurs fois, & s’attrifter long-temps de fes
pechez deuant que de receuoir fon Seigneur. Quel-
ques-vns prient leurs Confeffeurs de leur enioindre
de bonnes Penitences, de les faire ieufner, tefmoi-
gnans de grands regrets d’auoir fafché Dieu comme
ils parlent.

Vn Capitaine ayant trouué le moyen d’auoir du
vin, en donna a boire 4 quelques-vns de fes amys,
l’vn d’eux s’enyura: Cela nous eftant rapporté nous


1642-45] ‘RELATION OF 1644-45 145


the first Confession, they will be able to remember
them at the second. Some of them use the beads of
their Rosaries as a local reminder. A good woman,
whose simplicity is as great as her want of memory,
approached a Father one day, and said to him, with
most pleasing ingenuousness, ‘‘ Here are all my
sins;’’ and she showed him about a decade of her
Rosary. ‘‘ They are all on those beads,”’ she said;
and, passing them one after another through her
fingers, as if she had been saying her prayers, she
accused herself of having committed many harmless
things.

Another sent her husband to bear her excuses [9]
for not having approached the holy Table as she had
promised. ‘‘ She has forgotten,’”’ said her husband,
‘‘a great sin;’’ and I think that he had been charged
to tell it to the Father, but the good woman herself
came, and the Father gave her Communion, having
recognized the fear and innocent simplicity of the
husband and wife.

A young man who had obtained permission to
receive Communion—for, as a rule, they do not
approach that divine Sacrament unless we allow them
to do so—also came to excuse himself, saying that he
wished to prepare his soul, to fast several times, and
to sorrow for his sins a long while, before receiving
his Lord. Some beg their Confessors to give them
hard Penances, and to make them fast; and they
manifest great regret for having made God angry, as
they say.

A Captain found means to procure wine, and gave
some of his friends a portion of it to drink, so that
one of them became intoxicated. When we were in-
formed of this, we protested against such disorderly


146 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


crids contre ce defordre. Ce Capitaine vint trouuer
le Peres qui; axfoin de la «refidence, & luysdite Creit
moy qui ay cOmis le peché, ne criez point ie vous
prie contre ce pauure [10] Homme, c’eft moy qui en
dois faire la Penitence. Le Dimanche fuiuant tout
le monde eftant allé a la Meffe, ce Capitaine fe mit
a genoitiil deuant l’Autel, & leuant fa voix, s’écria,
toy qui as tout fait ie t’ay fafché ayes pitié de moy,
ne prends point de mefchantes penfées pour mon
peché, ie le detefte, ie fuis bien marry de 1’auoir com-
mis: 14 deffus il iette vn collier de deux ou trois
mille grains de Porcelaine fur le marchepied de
l’Autel, voila pour reparer ma faute & fecourir les
pauures. Voila pour empefcher que perfonne ne me
fuiue dans vn fi mauuais exemple. Ie fuis trifte iuf-
ques au fond de mon coeur d’auoir fafché Dieu. Le
Pere qui eftoit defia veftu pour commencer la Meffe,
fe tourna vers le peuple & expliqua aux Francois qui
fe trouuerent prefent, ce que difoit ce bon Neophyte,
cela les edifia tous & en toucha quelques-vns. On
luy rendit vne partie de fon prefent & on employa
l’autre pour le fecours de quelques neceffiteux.

La faute qui fuit me femble plus coupable, mais
auffi femble-elle plus fortement reparée. Quelques
Sauuages Chreftiens ayant trouué ce Printemps vn
vaiffeau [11] Bafque au deffus de Tadouffac, achepte-
rent du vin & quelques-vns en burent auec excez.
Le Pere qui a foin d’eux ayat appris ce defordre leur
dit, qu’ils n’entreroient point A 1l’Eglife, qu’ils
n’euffent expié leur offenfe. Ils fe tindrent tous a
la porte vn iour de Fefte, que les Francois & les Sau-
uages y entroient le lieu eftant fangeux: car il pleu-
uoit actuellement pour lors. Ils fe mirent A deux


1642 - 45] RELATION OF 1644-45 147


conduct. The Captain came to the Father who
has charge of the residence and said to him: ‘It is
I who have committed the sin; do not, I beseech
you, upbraid that poor [10] Man; it is I who must do
Penance for it.” On the following Sunday, when
every one had gone to Mass, this Captain knelt before
the Altar, and, raising his voice, exclaimed: ‘‘ Thou
who hast made all, I have angered thee. Have pity
onme. Let not my sin lead thee to think badly of
me; I detest it, and I am very sorry for having com-
mitted it.” Thereupon he threw a collar of two or
three thousand Porcelain beads on the step of the
Altar, saying: ‘‘ This is to atone for my sin, and to
succor the poor; this is to prevent every one from
following my bad example. I am sorry in the very
depths of my heart for having angered God.’’ The
Father, who was already robed in his vestments to
begin Mass, turned toward the people and explained
to the French who were present what the good Neo-
phyte had said. This edified them all, and touched
some of them. A portion of his present was given
back to him, and the remainder was employed in
succoring some needy persons.

The following offense seems to me more culpable,
but also it seems to have been more thoroughly atoned
for. Some Christian Savages, last Spring, came
across a Basque ship [11] above Tadoussac, from
which they bought wine; and some of them drank
to excess. The Father who has charge of them heard
of this bad conduct, and told them that they could
not enter the Church until they had atoned for their
offense. They all remained outside the door on a
Festival day, while the French and Savages went in.
The spot was muddy, for it was actually raining at


148 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 27


genoux dans la fange, le Pere donnant charge qu’on
aporta{t quelques planches de peur qu’ils ne faliffent
leurs habits: Non, mon Pere, difent-ils, nous en
meritons bien dauantage, nous auons fafché celuy qui
a tout fait. Ils demandent publiquement pardon a
Dieu, fe reconnoiffant indignes d’entrer dans fon
Eglife; ils prierent neatmoins qu’on euft pitié d’eux,
& qu’on les receut en la compagnie des autres, priez
pour nous, difoient-ils, A ceux qui eftoiét dans 1’E-
glife, on fit en effet vne petite Oraifon publique, puis
le Pere leur dit que Dieu eftant plein de bonté, leur
permettoit l’entrée en fa Maifon. Quelques-vns
entrent auffi-to{t, mais d’autres fe fafchans contre
eux-mefmes de leur faute, fe mirent dans l'eau
fangeufe [12] qui eftoit hors 1’Eglife, & s’écrierent,
nous n’entrerons pas mon Pere, nous auons trop faf-
ché Dieu, il n’importe que nous foyons dans la fange,
& que la pluye tombe fur nous, nous fommes indi-
gnes d’eftre en la compagnie de ceux qui ayment
Dieu. Le Pere fut furpris & attendit voyant cette
ferueur, il les laiffa faire, fi bien qu’ils pafferent tout
le temps de la Meffe dans cette action d’humilité &
de Penitence. Ces deuotions font bonnes dans vne
Eglife naiffante; afin que les Payens connoiffent que
les pechez des Chreftiens ne prouiennent pas de leur
doctrine, mais de leur foibleffe.

Ce n’eft pas tout, le Capitaine de cette efcoiiade
voulant fubir la me{me ignominie que fes gens, difant
qu’encor qu'il ne fe fuft pas enyuré, que neantmoins
il auoit bi, & qu'il eftoit coupable. La conclufion
fut, que quelques-vns entrans dans 1’Eglife ietterent
{ur le marche-pied de 1’ Autel quelques aumofnes qui
feruirent pour donner A manger aux plus pauures.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 149


the time; but they knelt on both knees in the mud.
The Father gave orders to bring them some boards
to kneel on, that they might not soil their clothes.
““No, my Father,’’ they said; ‘‘ we deserve much
more, for we have angered him who has made all.’’
They publicly begged pardon of God, acknowledging
themselves to be unworthy to enter his Church.
They nevertheless prayed us to have pity on them,
and to admit them in the company of the others.
‘‘ Pray for us,’’ they said to those who were in the
Church. In fact, we said a short public Prayer, and
then the Father told them that, as God was all kind-
ness, he would allow them to enter his House. Some
of them entered at once; but others, who were angry
with themselves on account of their sin, took their
places in the muddy water [12] outside of the Church,
and cried out: ‘‘ We will not enter, my Father; we
have too deeply offended God. It matters not that
we are in the mud, and that the rain fallson us. We
are unworthy to be in the company of those who love
God.’’ The Father was surprised and touched, on
observing such fervor; he left them alone, and they
passed the whole time of Mass in this posture of
humility and Penance. Such devotions are good in
a nascent Church, in order that the Pagans may know
that the sins of Christians come not from their doc-
trine but from their own weakness.

That is not all; the Captain of that band wished to
submit to the same ignominy as his people, saying
that, although he had not become intoxicated, he had
nevertheless drunk, and was guilty. The conclusion
was that some of them on entering the Church threw
on the steps of the Altar some alms which served to
provide food for the poorer ones.


150 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


Apres cette Penitence l’vn de ces bons Neophytes
venant vifiter le Pere en particulier, luy difoit auec
vn oppreffement de poitrine, falloit-il que i’offenfaffe
Dieu [13] fi lourdemét, ie n’auois pas encor foiiille
mon Baptefme, ie ne m’eftois pas encore beaucoup
efcarté du chemin, le Diable ma trompé, la boiffon
m’a renuerfé l’efprit. Ie n’ay point de bien quand
ie penfe 4 mon peché, il pouffoit ces paroles entre-
couppées de fanglots qu’il tafchoit de cacher, mais
la trifteffe le decouuroit.

Ie ne fgay, difoit vn autre, fi ce qui m’anime eft
bon quand ie fuis en la Chappelle, & que ie penfe a
mes pechez, les larmes me viennent aux yeux, ie
fens mon vifage tout mouillé, & ie dis en moy-mefme,
C’eft mon cceur qui doit pleurer & non pas mes yeux,
cela eft-il bon, difoit-il, car cela m’arriue affez fou-
uent pour les pechez que i’ay commis deuant mon
Baptefme: Ie fens ces mefmes regrets quand ie voy
que mes gens n’obeyffent pas bien a Dieu.

Vne femme veufue fort pauure & delaiffée, fe
maria a4 la fagon des Sauuages, elle fe laiffa cajoler
par vn Payen qui la trompa, elle eut vn tel regret de
fa faute, qu’apres en auoir demandé pardon publique-
ment en l’Eglife, elle difoit au Pere que fentant les
douleurs de fa groffeffe elle fouhaittoit la mort pour
expier fon crime: [14] ie prie Dieu tous les iours,
faifoit-elle, qu’il me chaftie: quand ie voy des
femmes qui fe mocquent de moy; quand ie les entend
fe gauffer de mon peché ie dis & part moy, i’ay bien
merité cela, ie ne réponds rien, ie demeure toute
confufe, c’eft la raifon que ie fouffre toute ma vie,
i’auois belle peur qu’on me chaffaft pour toufiours
de la maifon des Prieres. Comme elle alloit quel-


1642-45} RELATION OF 1644-45 151


After that Penance, one of these good Neophytes
came to see the Father in private, and said to him,
with his heart oppressed with woe: ‘‘ Alas, that I
should offend God [13]so grievously! I had not yet
defiled my Baptism; I had not yet strayed far from
the road. The Devil deceived me, and the liquor
upset my mind. I have no comfort when I think of
my sin.’’ He uttered these words mingled with sobs,
which he tried to repress, but his sorrow revealed
itself.

““T know not,’’ said another, ‘‘ whether what ani-
mates me is good. WhenI amin the Chapel, and
think of my sins, tears come to my eyes; I feel my
face quite wet, and I say to myself: ‘It is my heart
that should weep and not my eyes.’ Is that good?”
said he, “‘ because it often happens to me for sins
that 1 committed before my Baptism. I feel these
same regrets, when I see that my people do not obey
God as they should.”

A widow, who was very poor and forsaken, was
married in the fashion of the Savages. She allowed
herself to be cajoled by a Pagan, who deceived her.
She felt such regret for her fault that, after asking
pardon publicly in Church, she said to the Father
that when she felt the pains of her pregnancy she
wished for death, in order to expiate her crime. [14]
‘*T entreat God every day,’’ she said, “‘ to punish me.
When I see women who scoff at me, when I hear
them jesting about my sin, I say to myself: ‘I have
well deserved this.’ I answer nothing and remain
quite ashamed. It is just that I should suffer all my
life. I was greatly afraid that I would be expelled
forever from the house of Prayer.’’ When she some-
times went to the Ursulines, she kept her child away


152 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 27


ques-fois aux Vrfulines elle efloignoit fon enfant de
la grille, de peur qu’on ne le vift; mais ce pauure
petit s’eftant vn iour produit foy-mefme par fes cris,
la Religieufe qui luy parloit luy demanda innocem-
ment fi c’eftoit fon enfant & fi elle s’ef{toit remariée,
la pauure femme rougit & confeffa fon peché auec
tant de douleur & de pudeur, que cette bonne Mere
en re{ta edifiée au dernier point; Elle luy difoit
qu'elle auoit efté fortement tentée de tuer fon enfant
& de fe faire mourir foy-mefme, mais qu’elle n’auoit
pas voulu offenfer Dieu, & qu’il valloit mieux qu’elle
beuft la honte de fon peché que d’en commettre vn
autre.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 153


from the grating, lest some one might see it. But
the poor little thing made its presence known one
day, by crying; and the Nun who was speaking to
her innocently asked her if that were her child, and
if she were marriedagain. The poor woman blushed,
and confessed her sin with such sorrow and modesty
that the good Mother was edified to the highest
degree. She told her that she had been strongly
tempted to kill her child, and to bring about her own
death; but that she did not wish to offend God, and
it was better to bear the shame of her sin than to
commit another.


154 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 2


[15] [CHAPITRE III.]
CONTINUATION DU MESME SUIET.


N bon Neophyte ayat penetré bien auant dans
AV les terres du cof{té du Nord, rencontra le Capi-
taine d’vne petite Nation qui n’a aucun com-
merce auec les Francois, finon par l’entre-mife des
Sauuages qui nous font voifins; Cét homme qui eftoit
allé en ce pays-la pour trafiquer fe fit de Marchand
Predicateur, il parle de Dieu 4 ces nouueaux hoftes;
il leur fait ententre que fon Fils s’e{t fait Homme, &
qu'il eft venu iufques a ce point d’amour pour fes
freres que de perdre la vie fur vne Croix: Et comme
il vit que ces Auditeurs prenoient gouft a cette nou-
uelle Doctrine, il les prie de mettre la main auec luy
pour dreffer dans les terres ce grand Memorial de
noftre Salut, auffi-toft dit auffi-toft fait, ils fe mettent
en action, ils abattent vn grand arbre, & 1’ébranchent
auec plus d’affection que d’indufirie, ils efleuent vne
grande Croix fur les riues d’vn beau fleuue ot ils
s’eftoient rencontrez. Ie me feruy, difoit ce nou-
ueau Charpentier, de quelque os de [16] Cerf que
i’ appointy comme des cloux pour atacher le trauers de
cette Croix que nous plantafmes en vn lieu fort émi-
nent & fort aifé 4 découurir de bien loin: Ie leur dis
que ce bois leur porteroit bon-heur, que les Demons
le craignoient, que c’ef{t 1a qu’ils fe doiuent affem-
bler, & que c’eft en ce lieu que ie les viendrois trou-
uer le Printemps prochain. le fentois, difoit ce bon


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 155
2 ITTV ESS TMS Sl A rrr re


[15] [CHAPTER III.]
CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT.


A GOOD Neophyte, who had penetrated very far
inland toward the North, met the Captain of
a small Tribe which has no intercourse with

the French except through the Savages who are our
neighbors. This man, who had gone to that country
to trade, from a Merchant became a Preacher. He
spoke of God to these new hosts; he explained to
them that his Son had been made Man, and had
loved his brothers to such an extent as to give up his
life on a Cross. And, when he saw that his Auditors
relished this new Doctrine, he begged them to help
him erect in that land the great Memorial of our Sal-
vation. No sooner said, than done; they set to work
at once, cut down a large tree, from which they
remove the branches with more affection than skill,
and raise a great Cross on the banks of a fine river
where they had met each other. ‘“‘I made use,”’
said this new Carpenter, ‘‘ of some bones of [16] a
Deer that I sharpened to a point, like nails, to hold
the transverse piece of this Cross, which we planted
in a very prominent place where it can easily be seen
from a great distance. I told them that that tree
would bring them happiness; that the Demons feared
it; that they must assemble at that spot; and that I
would come and meet them there next Spring. I
felt,’’ said the good Christian, “‘ pleasure and joy in
my heart while I labored at that holy Work. I said


a


156 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


Chreftien, vn plaifir & vne ioye dedans mon cceur
trauaillant A ce faint Ouurage. Ie difois 4 IESVs tu
es bon, fecoures ces pauures peuples, tu es mort pour
eux, ouures leurs yeux, fais qu’ils te connoiffent &
qu’ils croyent en toy. Cette ame eft bien choifie,
elle a des fentimens qui ne font pas du commun.

Mademoifelle d’Alibour demandoit certain iour 4
vn bon Neophyte quelles penfées il auoit eti voyant
les Iroquois arriuez aux trois Riuieres pour traitter de
la Paix, A cette demande il prit fon Tapabort, ioignit
les mains efleuant les yeux au Ciel, il parut grande-
ment touché/ helas difoit-il, [ie difois] en mon
coeur parlant a celuy qui a tout fait, ces gens ne te
connoiffent pas, la paix leur apportera de grads biens,
car ils feront inftruits & nous ferons auec [17] eux
dans le Ciel. Ie ne me refiouys pas tant de me voir
deliuré de la main & de la dent de ces peuples fort
cruels, comme de les voir en la difpofition d’eftre
faits enfans de Dieu, nous ne ferons plus qu’vne
me{me chofe auec eux; voila, faifoit-il, ce que ie
penfois. Monfieur d’Alibouft fut rauy voyant des
fentimens fi épurez dans l’ame d’vn Barbare. [1
faut auouér que la grace fait d’eftranges metamor-
phofes.

Ce mefme homme eftoit eftrangement addonné a
petuner, cette paffion eft fi grande qu'il fe trouue
des Francois mef{mes qui vendét iufques a leurs habits
pour y fatisfaire. Ce nouueau Chreftien voyat que
cette fumée luy eftoit inutile s’en eft tellement abfte-
nu qu’on diroit qu’il n’a iamais aymé cette herbe.
Il ne s’ef{t pas fait feulement violence en ce point:
mais fouuent il a paffé les iours entiers fans rien
manger du tout, pour garder le Commandement de


1642-45} RELATION OF 1644-45 157


to JESUS: ‘ Thou art good; help these poor people.
Thou didst die for them; open their eyes; make them
know thee and believe in thee.’’’ This is indeed
a chosen soul, and its sentiments are out of the
common.

Mademoiselle d’ Alibour one day asked a good Neo-
phyte what his thoughts were when he saw the Iro-
quois arrive at three Rivers to negotiate the Peace.
On hearing this question, he took off his Cap, clasped
his hands, raised his eyes to Heaven, and seemed
greatly touched. ‘‘ Alas!’’ exclaimed he, ‘‘I said
in my heart, speaking to him who has made all:
‘These people know thee not. Peace will bring
them great blessings, for they will be taught and we
shall be with [17] them in Heaven. I rejoice, not
so much at seeing myself delivered from the hands
and teeth of those so cruel people, as at seeing them
disposed to become children of God. | We shall here-
after be but one with them.’ That,’’ said he, ‘‘is
what Ithought.’’ Monsieur d’ Aliboust was delighted
to find sentiments so refined in the soul of a Barba-
rian. It must be admitted that grace effects strange
transformations.

This same man was singularly addicted to smok-
ing. This passion is so great that there are French-
men themselves who sell even their clothes to gratify
it. When this new Christian saw that that smoke was
useless to Him, he abstained from it to such an extent
that one would have said that he never cared for this
plant. Not only on this point has he done violence
to himself, but he has frequently passed entire days
without eating anything, in order to keep the Com-
mandment of the Church which orders its Children
to abstain from meat on certain days. Asarule, he


158 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


VEglife, qui ordonne 4 fes Enfans l’ab{tinence de
viande en certains iours; pour l’ordinaire il fe contente
d’vn peu de pain & d’eau, ou de pois pour rendre
cette obeyflance, quoy qu’on luy faffle entendre que
la neceffité l’en difpenfe.

[18] Vn Capitaine Chreftien parlant 4 vn Payen
qui l’eftoit venu vifiter & qui entreprenoit vn grand
voyage, luy dit, d’y moy ie te prie nettement quelle
eft ta penfée touchant la priere: Il y a long-temps
que ie t’ay dit que ie priois du fond du cceur: ie t’ay
preffé autre-fois de prendre noftre Creance, & tu ne
m’as pas refpondu; fi tu me donnois quantité de
viures & de robbes ie ne m’en refiouyrois pas, mais fi
tu me difois, ie croy en Dieu, mon coeur feroit efpa-
notiy. Pour moy ie ne fuis pas capable de te donner
confeil, va t’en neantmoins auec cette penfée de moy,
que ie perdrois pluto{t toutes chofes & la vie que la
Foy.

Vn impie debatant contre vn Pere fur la verité de
no{tre Doctrine, & apres plufieurs paroles s’écriant
que nos prieres faifoient mourir les Sauuages, vn
Chreftien qui eftoit 14 prefent ne fe pouuant plus
taire efleua fa voix tout en colere, ne parle plus en
ces termes, dit-il a cét homme infidelle, c’eft voftre
impieté qui gafte tout, c’eft voftre incredulité qui
nous tué, vous retenez les Demons auec vous. Mon
Pere, adiouftoit-il, i’ay toufiours eu cette penfée, que
la malice & Vinfidelité [19] de ces gens-la nous
perdoient, ie leur ay fouuent dit, & il s’en trouue
encor qui ofe nous faire ce reproche.

Ce mefme Chreftien qui eft Attikameg de nation,
fe trouuant dans l’affemblée de fes Compatriotes,
dont la plus part n’eftoient pas encore baptifez, &


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 159


contents himself with a little bread and water, or
peas, in order to observe such obedience, although
he is given to understand that necessity dispenses
him from it.

[18] A Christian Captain, speaking to a Pagan who
had come to see him and who was about to go ona
long journey, said to him: ‘‘ Tell me clearly, I beg
thee, what thou thinkest of prayer. It is a long time
since I told thee that I prayed from the bottom of
my heart; formerly I urged thee to adopt our Belief,
and thou didst not answer me. If thou wert to give
me a quantity of food and of robes, I would not
rejoice at it; but if thou saidst to me, ‘I believe in
God,’ my heart would be delighted. For my part, I
am not able to give thee advice. Go, however, with
this thought of me, that I would rather lose every-
thing, even life itself, than the Faith.’’

An impious man was arguing against a Father
respecting the truth of our Doctrine; and, after much
talk, he cried out that our prayers caused the Sav-
ages to die. A Christian who was present could no
longer keep silent, and, raising his voice in anger, he
said to that infidel man: ‘‘ Speak no longer in such
terms. It is your impiety that spoils all; it is your
incredulity that kills us. You retain the Demons
with you. My Father,’’ he added, ‘‘I have always
had this thought that the malice and infidelity [19]
of those people would be our ruin. I have often told
them so, and there are still some of them who
venture to cast that reproach at us.”’

This same Christian, who is of the Attikameg tribe,
was present at a meeting of his Countrymen, most
of whom were not yet baptized; and, when he
saw that a Father wished to preach to them, he


160 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 27


voyant qu’vn Pere les vouloit prefcher, il le preuint
pour les difpofer 4 receuoir ce qu’on leur diroit. Mes
parés, leur dit-il, vous fgauez bien qu’encor que ie
fois efloigné de noftre pays ie ne laiffe pas d’eftre de
vo{tre Nation; mais prenez garde que la parenté
dicy bas eft bien courte: nous ferons bien-toft
feparez les vns des autres, rencontrons-nous au Ciel.
Efcoutez le Pere, ie vous affeure que ce qu’il dit eft
veritable, il vous enfeignera le moyen d’eftre con-
tent & bien-heureux a tout iamais.

Cét homme qui ne fe produit que dans les occa-
fions, parlant a quelques ieunes Cadets, leur difoit,
ie vous ayme parce que vous croyez en Dieu, mon
plus grad contentement eft de vous voir conftant en
la Foy. Tay fait plufieurs folies deuant que d’eftre
baptifé, ne me confiderez pas en ma ieuneffe, mais
apres mon baptefme, ie n’ay plus qu’vne femme & ie
publie [20] hautement que ie n’en veux pas d’autre;
ne tombez pas dans les defauts que i’ay commis
deuant que de reconnoiftre Dieu; vous eftes mes
neueux, mais ma plus forte parenté eft dans la Foy.
Vn tel, quil nommoit, quoy qu’il foit d’vne nation
ennemie de la noftre ne me femble plus eftranger:
Ie le tiens pour mon parent, parce qu'il croit forte-
ment en Dieu.

Vne femme s’accufoit vn iour de ce qu'elle fentoit
vne alienation contre fon pere, celuy qui 1’efcoutoit
luy en demandant la raifon, elle refpondit: I] n’ayme
point la Foy, il ne veut pas croire en Dieu, il me
femble que quelqu’vn me dit en mon cceur, ce n’eft
point-la ton pere, iln’y a plus que Dieu qui foit ton
Pere, i’ay tafché de me forcer, mais ie ne fcaurois
aimer celuy qui n’ayme pas Dieu.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 161


forestalled him, that he might prepare them to listen
to what should be told them. ‘‘ My relatives,’’ he
said to them, ‘‘ you know well that, though I am far
from our own country, I still belong to your Tribe.
But observe that relationship here below is very short;
we shall soon be separated from one another,—
let us meet in Heaven. Listen to the Father; I
assure you that what he says is true. He will teach
you how to be content and happy forever.”’

This man, who introduces himself only when
opportunity presents, while speaking to some young
Relatives, said to them: ‘‘I love you, because you
believe in God; my greatest happiness is to see you
constant in the Faith. I committed many follies
before I was baptized. Consider not what I was in
my youth, but what I have been since my baptism.
I have no more than one wife, and I proclaim [20]
aloud that I do not desire another. Fall not into the
errors that I committed before I acknowledged God.
You are my nephews; but my closest relationship is
in the Faith. Such a one’’—naming him—‘“al-
though he belongs to a tribe that is hostile to ours,
no longer seems a stranger to me; I consider him as
a relative, because he believes firmly in God.”

A woman accused herself one day of feeling es-
trangement against her father. He who heard her
asked the reason of it, and she replied: ‘‘ He loves
not the Faith; he will not believe in God. It seems
to me that some one says to me in my heart, ‘ That
is not thy father; God alone is thy Father.’ I have
tried to force myself to it, but I cannot love one who
does not love God.’’

It must be admitted that God has his elect every-
where, and that Faith produces powerful effects in


162 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES ~ {Vou 27


Il faut auoiier que Dieu a fes efleus par tout, &
que la Foy a de puiffans effects dans les ames les
plus fauuages. Vn ieune homme grand chaffeur &
grand coureur s’eftant fort long-temps efloigné du
lieu ot il auoit efté inftruit, a paffé l’hyuer en tres-
mauuaife compagnie; mais fa con{tance & fa fermeté
en la Foy, l’ont fait marcher droit ot les autres ont
bronché. [21] Il n’apasmanqué vn foir ny vn matin
de faire fes prieres 4 genoiiil, & en public tant qu’il
aefté en fanté, fa femme prioit auec luy. II eftoit
parmy des Payens, & auec des hommes demy Apo-
itats. Ils fe gauffoient de luy, ils lexcitoient a chan-
ter des chanfons fuperftitieufes, dont ils fe feruent
pour auoir recours au Demon. Is luy reprochoient
qu’il ne trouueroit aucune bonne chaffe. Ce bon
ieune homme n’a iamais bronché en fa creance, ny
du coeur, ny de la parole, ny d’aucun gefte, l’exemple
de ceux qui tomboient, les railleries de ceux qui
le gauffoient n’ont iamais pti l’efbranler. Ie luy
demandois fi du moins fon cceur n’eftoit point quel-
ques-fois fecoiié, point du tout refpondit-il: ie fen-
tois affez fouuent de la triftefle & de la douleur de
mes pechez; mais il me femble que i’auois vne telle
force dans mon coeur pour la priere & pour la Foy,
que i’ef{tois plus touché de compaflion pour ces pau-
ures gens, Acaufe de leur incredulité & de leur badi-
neries, que ie n’en auois d’auerfion pour les mefpris
qu’ils faifoient de moy: Auffi eft-il vray que ce ieune
homme eft fils de l’vn des plus genereux Chreftiens
de la reduction de S. Iofeph.

[22] Sa femme accoucha dans ce grand efloigne-
ment, l’enfant difoit-il, ne paroiffoit quafi pas eftre
viuant, on me dit qu’il eftoit mort, que c’en eftoit


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 163


the most savage minds. A young man, who was a
great hunter and a great runner, was away for a long
time from the place where he had been instructed,
and passed the winter in very bad company. But
his constancy and firmness in the Faith kept him
straight, where others wavered. [21] He did not fail,
a single night or morning, to say his prayers on his
knees, and in public, so long as he was in good
health; his wife prayed with him. He was among
Pagans, and with men who were half Apostates.
They scoffed at him; they urged him to sing super-
stitious song's which they use when they have recourse
to the Devil. They reproached him, saying that he
would not be fortunate in his hunting. This good
young man never faltered in his belief, either in
heart or by word or deed. The example of those
who fell, the raillery of those who scoffed, could
never shake him. I asked him if at least his courage
had not been sometimes weakened. ‘‘ Not at all,”’
he replied, ‘‘I very often felt sorrow and regret for
my sins; but it seems to me that I had in my heart
such strength for prayer and for Faith that I was
more touched with compassion for these poor people,
on account of their incredulity and their jests, than I
felt aversion for the contempt with which they
treated me.’’ It is true that this young man is the
son of one of the bravest Christians of the reduction
of St. Joseph.

[22] His wife was delivered of a child in that very
remote region. ‘‘ The child,’’ he said, ‘‘ appeared
to be barely alive. They told me that he was dead —
that it was all over with him. I knelt and offered
him to God, begging him that he might at least be
spared until he could be baptized. God granted my


164 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


fait; ie me mis A genoux & le prefentay a Dieu, le
fuppliant qu'il fift en forte pour le moins qu'il ptt
ef{tre baptisé: Dieu exau¢a ma priere, car tout fou-
dainement l’enfant reprit vie, auec l’eftonnement de
tous ceux qui eftoient dans la Cabane.

Il fe trouua dans cette Compagnie quelques Chre-
{tiens, que l’exemple de la parole de ce bon Neo-
phyte animerent, il les fouftint & les fit perfeuerer
en la Foy. Et mefme il eft croyable que ces demy-
Apoftats qui par apres firent Penitence, y furent atti-
rez par la vertu & par la con{tance de ce braue foldat
de IESVS-CHRIST. Sur tout il confola vn pauure
malade fort perfecuté de ces impies, ils le gauffoient
& excitoiét a auoir recours au Demon, le bon malade
dit qu'il aimoit mieux mourir. Le Pere racontant
vn iour lhiftoire de Iob en prefence de ce bon Neo-
phyte, il fe mit 4 rire, entendant les reproches que
luy faifoit fa femme: voila iuftement, fit-il, tout ce
qu’on me crioit cét hyuer. Tu mourras, me difoit-
on, fi tu prie Dieu, tu [23] ne gueriras jamais fi tu
ne chate vne chanfon qui eftoit pour implorer le De-
mo. Les Sauuages difent fort peu ce qui fe paffe en
eux. Sion n’eut racdté par occafid l’hiftoire de Iob,
nous n’aurions pas eu la connoifsace de la generofité
de ce braue Athlete.

Ie fermeray ce Chapitre par quelques actions d’vn
ieune garcon nouuellement baptifé. Au commence-
ment, difoit-il, que i’ay oiiy parler de la priere, i’ay
voulu mettre en pratique ce qu’on me préchoit. I’e-
{tois auec des Algonquins proches voifins des Hurons,
voulant donc le foir faire ma petite priere, tout le
monde fe prift a rire, plufieurs fe gauffoient tout
hautement de moy, Tun’as point d’efprit, me difoit-


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 165


prayer, for all of a sudden the child’s life was
restored, to the astonishment of all who were in the
Cabin.’”’

There were in this Band some Christians whom the
example of this good Neophyte’s testimony encour-
aged; he sustained them, and made them persevere
in the Faith. And we may even believe that those
semi-Apostates who afterward did Penance were
attracted to it by the virtue and constancy of that
Diavercolaier. of |ESUS CHRIST. Above all, he
consoled a poor sick man who was greatly persecuted
by the ungodly. They jeered at him and urged him
to have recourse to the Demon; the good sick man
said that he would rather die. One day, the Father
related the story of Job, in the presence of this good
Neophyte. He began to laugh and, on hearing his
wife’s reproaches, said: ‘‘ All that is exactly what
they shouted at me this winter. ‘Thou wilt die,’
they said to me, ‘if thou pray to God; thou [23] wilt
never be cured unless thou sing’” a song which was
to implore the aid of the Demon. The Savages say
very little of what passes in their minds. If we had
not by accident related the story of Job, we would
not have had any knowledge of the courage of that
brave Athlete.

I will close this Chapter with some actions of a
young boy but newly baptized. ‘‘ When I first heard
prayer mentioned,” he said, ‘‘I wished to put into
practice what was preached tome. I was with some
of the Algonquins who are near neighbors to the
Hurons. At night, when I wished to say my little
prayer, every one began to laugh, and many jeered
aloud at me. ‘ Thou hast no sense,’ they said to me.
‘To whom speakest thou? Where is he? Dost thou


166 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Not 27


on, A qui parle-tu, ot: eft-il? le vois-tu, te laiffe-tu
amufer par ces eftrangers nouueaux venus! Ie ne
difois mot a tout cela. Le lendemain voulant man-
ger, ie commencay A prier Dieu, ils fe mirét vne
autre-fois a rire a gorge déployée: 1a-deffus l’vn de
mes parens me dit, mon neveu, tu n’a pas d’efprit,
tu ne t’eftonne de rien, tu n’entends pas ces gens-la
qui fe mocquent de toy. Ie ne voulu pas pourtant
quitter ma priere; ils continuerent leurs gaufferies:
ef{t-il fou, difoient-ils? ie ne [24] perdis pas courage
pour cela, ie ne me cOdtentay pas de croire tout feul:
ie m’efforcay de gagner vne mienne petite foeur,
ie la tiray a part & luy dit, ma foeur, que dirois-tu,
fion t’enfeignoit a prier Dieu, elle me refpondit, ie
ne veux pas prier car ie mourrois; le moyen de
parler a celuy qu’on ne voit pas. Le Pere qui m’in-
{truifoit m’auoit donné vne petite fonnette, ma foeur
la voyant me la demande, ie luy dis que ie la luy
donnerois fi elle vouloit prier: non dit-elle, ie ne
prieray point, car ie mourrois, & fi tu prends la fon-
nette ne mourras-tu point? non ie n’en mourray pas,
fit-elle, alors ie luy repliquay, fi tu ne meurs pas pour
prendre vne fonnette qui vient de la main des Fran-
cois? pourquoy mourrois-tu receuant d’eux la priere
qui eft bien meilleure? elle ne repartit rien pour lors;
enfin ie luy donnay ma fonnette pour la gagner, mais
en ce méme temps ie la quittay pour venir ¢A bas.

Ce ieune Neophyte rendant compte de fa confci-
ence a celuy qui le dirigeoit, luy difoit quelques-fois,
en verit€é, mon ame n’a point d’efprit: elle fort quel-
ques-fois de fon chemin fans rien dire, ie ne la fens
pas partir; & puis m’auifant tout a coup [25] qu’elle
s’égare ie la ramene. Quelques-fois il eft fi fort


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 167


see him? Dost thou allow thyself. to be tricked by
those strangers who have recently come here?’ To
all this I answered not a word. On the following
day, as I was about to eat, I began to pray to God;
again they commenced to laugh immoderately.
Thereupon one of my relatives said to me: ‘ My
nephew, thou hast no sense; thou art not surprised
at anything; hearest thou not those people who are
scoffing at thee?’ Nevertheless, I would not give
up my prayer. They continued their banter. ‘Is
he mad?’ they said. I [24] did not lose courage for
all that. I did not content myself with merely
believing; I endeavored to win over my little sister.
I took her to one side, and said to her: ‘ My sister,
what wouldst thou say if thou wert taught to pray
to God?’ She replied, ‘I do not wish to pray, for I
would die. How can one speak to him whom one
does not see?’ The Father who instructed me had
given me a little bell; when my sister saw it, she
asked me for it. I told her that I would give it to
her if she would pray. ‘No,’ she said, ‘1 will not
pray, for I would die.’ ‘ Andif thou takest the bell,
wilt thou not die?’ ‘No, I shall not die,’ she said.
‘Then,’ I replied, ‘if thou wilt not die because thou
takest a bell that comes from the French, why
shouldst thou die for receiving prayer from them,
which is very much better?’ She answered nothing
then. Finally, I gave her my bell to win her; but,
at the same time, I left her to come down here.”’
While this young Neophyte was baring his con-
science to his director, he said: ‘‘ Sometimes, in
truth, my soul has no sense. It sometimes leaves its
path, without saying anything,—I do not notice its
going; and when, all of a sudden, I observe [25]


168 LES REEATION SWQ2S JESUITES [VoL. 27


touché du rapport qu’on luy fait de quelques Hiftoires
facrées, que les larmes luy tombent des yeux. En-
fin il ne fgauroit fouffrir vne chofe qu’il penfe eftre
griefue qu'il ne s’en décharge au plutoft par la
Confeffion.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 169


that it wanders, I bring it back.’”” Sometimes he is
so affected by the recital of some sacred Stories, that
tears fall from his eyes. Finally, he cannot do
anything that he considers wrong, without at once
unburdening himself of it through Confession.


170 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES \ {Now 27


CHAPITRE Fv.
SUITE DU MESME SUJET.


OUS auons eu peu de malades cette année &

N encor moins de morts. La maladie auroit

bien-toft tout égorgé fi elle perfeueroit dans la
fureur oti nous l’auons veué.

Vne bonne femme vrayement Chreftienne fut prife
d’vn mal affez violent, fi toft qu’elle en fentit 1’ effort,
elle dit a l’vne de fes compatriotes, ie vous prie de
me faire voir le Pere, ie voudrois bien me confeffer
& me difpofer A la mort pendant que ie fuis encore
en mon bon fens. Le Pere l’alla vifiter, & voyant
qu’elle n’eftoit loin de la Chappelle, il luy fit c6duire
pour luy donner le faint Viatique. [26] Vn malade
parmy les Sauuages eft bien-to{t leué & bien-toft
couché: Cette pauure creature s’ef{tant confeffée, dit
au Pere, ie n’en puis plus les forces me manquent: ie
ne fuis pas trifte pour me voir proche de la mort,
mon corps eft abbatu; mais mon ame eft contente,
il me femble que ie m’en vais au Ciel, rien ne me
trouble, la mort ne me fais point de peur. Ie fouffre
beaucoup mais cela fe paffera bien-toft, i’ay toufiours
dans l’efprit les dernieres paroles que mon fils me
dit en mourant, il m’appella & me dit, ma Mere, ie
m’en vay au Ciel, croyez fortement en Dieu, ne quit-
tez iamais la Foy, ne perdez point l’Efperance que
vous auez en celuy qui a tout fait, pour moy ie meurs
dans la creance de mon Baptefme, nous nous verrons
au Ciel fi vous perfeuerez dans la Foy: i’ay toufiours


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 171


CHALLE. Ly .
CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT.


E have had but few cases of sickness this year,

y V and still fewer deaths. Disease would soon

have killed all, had it continued to rage as
furiously as we have seen it do.

A good and truly Christian woman was attacked
by a rather violent illness. As soon as she felt its
stress, she said to one of her countrymen: ‘‘I beg
you to bring a Father to me. I would like very
much to confess, and to prepare myself for death,
while I still have possession of my senses.’’ The
Father went to visit her, and, seeing that she was
not far from the Chapel, he had her carried thither,
in order to give her the holy Viaticum. [26] A sick
person among the Savages is soon raised and soon
bedded. When this poor creature had confessed,
eye said to the —Pather: “I am exhausted; my
strength fails me. J am not sorry to see myself near
death; my body is cast down, but my soul is con-
tent; it seems to me that I am going to Heaven.
Nothing disturbs me; death causes me no fear; I
suffer much, but that will soon pass. I have always
in mind the last words that my son said to me, when
he was dying. He called me and said: ‘ My Moth-
er, I am going to Heaven; believe firmly in God;
never abandon the Faith; do not lose the Hope that
you have in him who has made all. For my part, I
die in the belief of my Baptism that we shall see each


172 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


ces paroles grauées dans mon cceur depuis la mort de
mon fils, i’efpere que ie le verray bien-toft: car en
verité il croyoit fortement en Dieu. Elle fe confeffa
& receut le Viatique dans vn grand oppreffement de
poitrine. Ce qui n’empefchoit pas de dire de fois a
autre IESVS ma regle & mon Capitaine, ie croy en
vo{tre parole: vous eftes das mon [27] coeur, quoy
que vous ne paroiffiez pas, ie le croy, otiy en verité,
ie le croy: determinez de moy comme il vous plaira,
ie vous verray, ie vous verray. Eftant reconduite
en fa Cabane, le Pere luy porta quelque temps apres
l’Extreme-Onction, elle ne donna iamais aucun indice
ny de trifteffe ny de crainte, vous euffiez dit qu’elle
e{toit affeurée du lieu ot elle alloit. En effet fi nous
procedons auec amour & auec fimplicité deuant
Dieu, nous pafferons de la mort 4 la vie comme on
paffe de l’Hyuer dans le Printemps.

Vn bon Chreftien la voyant fort oppreffée luy dit,
Charité, c’eft ainfi qu’elle fe nommoit, ne t’afflige
point, i’ay toufjours eu cette penfée de toy que tu
croyois fortement en Dieu, fi cela eft ne t’attrifte
point: car tu iras bien-toft au Ciel, fois conftante en
la Foy iufques au dernier fotipir. Mi entian, refpon-
dit-elle, Ka nont niteponetauzin. Ie fuis dans cette
difpofition, ie ne croiray plus 4 demy, ie croy tout
de bon: c’eft pourquoy ie ne fuis point trifte, ie m’en
vay au Ciel, ie le croy, elle mourut dans cette ferueur.

Quelqu’vn des Peres ayant rencontré vne femme
qui portoit du bois a vn malade, [28] luy dit apres
auoir lotié fa charité, quand vous faites quelque
bonne action enuers voftre prochain, il faut que vous
difiez en voftre cceur, ie m’en vay porter du bois &
mon SauueurITEsvs. Ie m’en vay faire du feu, ie


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 173


other in Heaven if you persevere in the Faith.’ I
always have those words graven in my heart, since
my son’s death. I hope that I shall soon see him,
for, in truth, he firmly believed in God.’’ She con-
fessed herself and received the Viaticum, while she
had a great oppression on her chest. This did not
prevent her from saying, from time totime, ‘‘ JESUS
my guide and my Captain, I believe in your word;
you are in my [27] heart, although you appear not.
I believe it; yes, in truth, I believe it. Do with me
aewyeo will, I shall. see: you;:1 shall <seecyou.”’
When she was taken back to her Cabin, the Father
some time afterward carried to her Extreme Unc-
tion. She never betrayed the slightest sign of sor-
row or of fear. You would have said that she was
sure of the place to which she was going. Indeed,
if we proceed with love and simplicity before God
we shall pass from death to life as from Winter to
Spring.

A good Christian, who saw that she was greatly
oppressed, said to her: ‘‘ Charité,”—such was her
name,—‘‘ be not afflicted. I have always had this
thought of thee that thou believest firmly in God.
If that be the case, be not sorrowful, for thou wilt
soon go to Heaven; be constant in the Faith to the
last breath.’’ M7 entian, she replied, Ka nont nite-
ponetauzin, ‘“‘Y am in that disposition, I will no
longer only half believe; I believe fully. That is
why Iam not sad. I am going to Heaven; I believe
it.”’ She died while in that fervor.

One of our Fathers met a woman carrying wood to
a sick person. [28] He said to her, after having
praised her charity: ‘‘ When you do a good action
toward your neighbor, you must say in your heart,


174 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


-vay luy donner & manger, ie le vay foigner & pen-
fer, car il a dit que ce qu’on feroit au moindre des
fiens qu'il le recompenferoit, comme s’il eftoit fait a
fa propre perfonne. Cette pauure femme refpondit,
mon Pere ie penfois actuellement 4 ce que vous dites,
& comme Dieu m’afflige moy-mefme, & qu’il m’a
ofté la pluf-part de mes enfans, & que les autres font
malades, ie dis en mon cceur, il n’importe encore
qu’il m’éprouue, Aiantch nigatepouet, ie croiray
dauantage, c’eft a luy 4 determiner du tout. |

Vne femme eftant venué de Tadoufac a S. Iofeph,
en partie pour fe confeffer & communier, fift paroiftre
vne grande innocence; depuis que ie fuis baptifée,
difoit-elle, i’ay tafché d’aymer IESVS, i’ay fouuent
la penfée de ne le iamais fafcher; en verité i’ayme
la priere. Ie dis 4 part moy dans mon cceur, ceux
qui font baptifez ne font plus de mal, ie n’en veux
point [29] faire, fur tout, ie ne me mets point en colere
quoy qu’on me faffe, ma fille eft mariée 4 vn Payen qui
e{t tres-colere, il l’a voulu precipiter de fon canot
dans la riuiere: ie voulus entrer en colere contre luy,
mais ie dy dans mon cceur, ie fafcheray celuy quia
tout fait. Ie me retins, ie ne dis mot, i’eftois feule-
ment honteufe & confufe, voyant comme il traitoit
ma fille, mais ie ne me mis point en colere.

Vn Capitaine voyant embarquer quelques perfon-
nes de fes gens, leur dit tout haut en peu de paroles
a leur depart, prenez vn efcrit des Peres comme
vous eftes Chreftiens, & ne le dementez point, priez
Dieu tous les foirs & tous les matins, ne vous mettez
point en colere, vous femmes obeiffez A vos maris,
fur tout, qu’on f¢ache que vous aymez la priere, &
que vous ne pouuez commettre aucun mal.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 175


‘Iam: going to carry wood to my Savior Jesus; I
am going to light a fire; Iam going to give him food;
Iam going to attend him and to dress his wounds;’
for he has said that what might be done to the
least of his brethren, he would reward as if it were
done to him.’’ The poor woman replied: ‘‘ My Fa-
ther, I was really thinking of what you say; and—
as God afflicts me myself, and has taken most of my
children from me, while the others are sick —I say
in my heart that it matters not if he try me still
further. <Azantch nigatepouet; I will believe even
more. It is for him to decide all things.”

A woman who came from Tadousac to St. Joseph —
in part, that she might confess and receive commun-
ion—displayed great innocence. ‘‘ Since I have
been baptized,’’ she said, ‘‘I have endeavored to
love JESUS; I often think of never offending him.
In truth, I love prayer. I say to myself in my
heart, ‘ Those who are baptized no longer do evil; I
do not wish [29] to do any; above all, I do not get
angry, whatever may be done to me. My daughter
is married to a Pagan who is very quick-tempered ;
he tried to throw her out of his canoe into the river.
I was ready to get angry with him; but I said in my
heart, ‘I shall offend him who has made all.’ I
restrained myself, and said not a word; I was mere-
ly ashamed and covered with confusion when I saw
how he treated my daughter, but I did not get
angry.”’

A Captain saw some of his people embark, and
said a few words aloud to them on their departure:
‘Take a writing from the Fathers, as you are Chris-
tians, and be not unfaithful. to it. Pray to God,
every night and every morning. Do not get angry;


176 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 27


Vn bon Neophyte de la nation des Attikameg,
racontoit fes petites deuotions auec vne fimplicité
toute aimable; quand ie fonge que Dieu eft par tout
ie reffens vn grand plaifir, quand ie porte les yeux au
Ciel, quand ie regarde les arbres, les oifeaux, les
riuieres, les animaux: il me femble que mon cceur
eft tout plein de [30] ioye, connoiffant que toutes ces
chofes viennent du Tout-puiffant. Il m’eft auis
que ie fuis comme vn homme riche, que ie poffede
beaucoup, connoiffant ce que i’auois ignoré fi long
temps, ie dy dans mon cceur, le l’admire, ie l’ayme,
& puis ie me trouue tout content & tout ioyeux.

Ce bon homme adiouftoit qu’eftant allé bien auant
dans les terres, il rencontra quelques Sauuages qui
n’auoient iamais veu de Francois, & qui n’auoient
iamais ouy parler de Dieu. Or comme nous faifions
nos prieres tous les foirs & tous les matins, ils nous
efcoutoient: car nous parlions tout haut, ils s’efton-
noient & admiroient ce que nous difions. Ils furent
furpris voyant vne petite Image qu’on nous auoit
donnée. Je me rencontray, difoit-il, vne autre-fois
auec des Payens qui fe mocquoient de la priere, ils
nous dirent que nous priaffions & qu’eux fe ferui-
roient de leurs tambours & de leurs chants, & qu’on
verroit laquelle des deux bandes trouueroit plutoft de
la chaffe, nous difmes que nous ne croyons pas en
Dieu pour manger & pour viure en terre, nous ne
laiffafmes pas de prier Dieu qu’il nous aidaft. Ces
miferables penferét mourir [31] de faim, & nous ne
manquafmes point de viures. Quand i’allois a la
chaffe ie me mettois a genoiiil au milieu de mon
chemin fur la neige, & ie difois 4 Dieu tu as fait les
animaux, tu en difpofe, fi tu m’en veux donner ie


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 177


you women, be obedient to your husbands. Above
all, let it be known that you love prayer, and that
you cannot commit any evil.”

A good Neophyte, of the Attikameg tribe, related
his minor devotions with a most agreeable simplicity:
‘“When I think that God is everywhere, I feel great
pleasure; when I raise my eyes to the Sky, when I
look at the trees, the birds, the rivers, the animals,
it seems to me that my heart is quite full of [30]
joy; for I know that all these things come from the
Almighty. Ithink that I am, as it were, a rich man,
that Iown a great deal. Knowing what I had been
ignorant of so long, I sayin my heart, ‘I admire
him, I love him;’ and then I feel quite content and
very joyful.”’

This good man added that, having penetrated very
far inland, he met some Savages who had never seen
any French, and had never heard of God. ‘‘ Now
when we said our prayers every night and every
morning, they listened to us, for we spoke aloud;
and they were both astonished and delighted at what
we said. They were surprised when they saw a
little Picture that had been given us. On another
occasion,’’ he said, ‘‘ Imet some Pagans, who laughed
at prayer. They told us to pray, while they would
have recourse to their drums and their songs; and
we should see which of the two bands would find
game the sooner. We said that we do not believe
in God merely for the purpose of eating, and of liv-
ing on earth. We did not fail to entreat God to help
us. Those wretches nearly died [31] of hunger, and
we never were in want of food. When I went
out to hunt, I knelt in the middle of my path on
the snow, and said to God, ‘Thou hast made the


178 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


croiray en toy, fi tu ne m’en donne point ie ne laif-
feray pas de ccroire. Pendant que ie cheminois il me
venoit en l’efprit, ot eftois-tu il y a cent ans? d’ot
es-tu prouenu, tu n’eftois point & te voila, en verité
cela eft admirable, ayme donc celuy qui a tout fait,
ie l’ayme me femble, difoit-il.

Vn de nos Peres demandant 4 vn petit Sauuage
aagé de cing ans, ot. eftoit fon pere, l’enfant le
monftra de la main; mais fon pere luy dit: Mon fils
regarde le Ciel, voila ot eft ton Pere, c’eft Dieu qui
eft ton vray Pere, & pourfuiuant il adioufta, ie te
donne tous les iours 4 celuy quia tout fait, & ie le
prie de te faire Religieux afin que tu le fcache prier:
car ma plus grande trifteffe en ce monde eft, que ie
ne {cay pas bien comme il le faut prier; ie penfe
quafi toufiours 4 luy, & l’ayme ce me femble, mais ie
ne {cay pas beaucoup de chofes qu’il luy faut dire!


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 179


animals; thou disposest of them. If thou choose to
give me some, I will believe in thee; if thou give me
none, I will still believe.’ While I walked along,
this idea came to my mind: ‘ Where wast thou a
hundred years ago? Whence didst thou come?
Thou wast not, and here thou art. In truth, it is
admirable. Love, therefore, him who has made
all.” It seems to me that I do love him,” he said.
One of our Fathers asked a little Savage, five years
old, where his father was. The child pointed to him
with his hand, but his father said to him: ‘‘ My son,
look up to Heaven; that is where thy Father is. It
is God who is thy true Father;’”’ and continuing, he
added, ‘‘ I give thee every day to him who has made
all; and I beg him to make thee Religious, so that
thou mayst know how to pray to him,—for my great-
est sorrow in this world is that I do not know how
to pray aright tohim. I think nearly always of him,
and it seems to me that I love him; but I do not
know many things that should be said to him.’’


180 LES RELATIONS. DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


(32) CHAPITE REV.
DE QUELQUES ACTIONS PLUS REMARQUABLES.


9ESPRIT de IESvS-CHRIST eft vn Efprit pur,
L vn efprit qui deftruit la nature & qui fait viure
la grace; vn efprit qui prend fes delices & fon
repos non dans la panne & dans le fatin, mais dans
vne ame enrichie d’vne amoureufe crainte. Vn
ieune homme Sauuage affez difgracié de la nature,
car il eft rude en paroles, & fes recreations paroiffent
des coleres & des rebus, eftant plufieurs fois follicité
fecrettement par vne femme Payenne, il ne luy fit
qu’vne feule refponfe: Tu n’as point d’efprit, tu
viens trop tard, ie fuis baptifé, ie prie Dieu, ie ne
fcaurois plus cOmettre ces crimes. Vn ieune garcon
prié par vne fille fe mit encor mieux a4 couuert, car
fans raifonner auec le ferpent il s’enfuit comme
le chafte Iofeph. Wne femme veufue affez ieune
inuitée par vn ieune homme fut faifie de crainte &
d’efpouuante, s’eftonnant qu’vn homme qui auoit tant
otiy parler de |’Enfer, y voulut [33] defcendre pour
vn plaifir fi paffager.

Vn bon Chreftien qui receut le nom d’ [onaes en
fon Baptefme, tomba malade d’vne fievre violente
cét efté dernier: Il prie auffi-to{t qu’on faffe venir le
Pere pour fe confeffer, & voyant qu’il tardoit trop fe
fait porter 4 la Chappelle, par vn defir qu’il auoit de
foulager fon ame deuant que de penfer fon corps.
De 1a on le porte dans vne petite Cabane d’écorces


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 181


[32] CHAPTER V.
OF SOME ESPECIALLY REMARKABLE ACTIONS.


HE Spirit of JESus CHRIST is a pure Spirit —
a a spirit that destroys nature, and causes grace
to live; a spirit that finds its delight and its
repose, not in plush and satin, but in a soul enriched
with loving fear. A young man, a Savage, who is
somewhat ill favored by nature,—for he is harsh in
speech, and his recreations seem to consist in fits of
anger and in riddles,— was several times solicited in
secret by a Pagan woman. He gave her but one


answer: ‘‘ Thou hast no sense; thou comest too
late,—I am baptized; I pray to God. I can no
longer commit those sins.”’ A young boy, who was


tempted by a girl, escaped the danger still better;
for, without arguing with the serpent, he fled like
the chaste Joseph. <A widow, still young, who was
tempted by a young man, was seized with fear and
horror,— being astonished that a man who had heard
so much of Hell should be willing [33] to go there
for so fleeting a pleasure.

A good Christian, who received the name of Ignace
at his Baptism, fell ill of a violent fever last sum-
mer, Heat once requested that the Father be sent
for, to confess him; and, seeing that he delayed too
long, he had himself carried to the Chapel, through
the desire that he felt to relieve his soul before
thinking of his body. From there he was carried
to a small bark Cabin, separated from the others, that


182 LES RELATIONS: DES JES UITES [Vou. 27


feparée des autres qui luy feruit d’infirmerie. Le
Pere le vifite fouuent, le confole, le veille la nuit,
l’affifte felon fon petit pouuoir de ce qu’il a dans la
miffion de Tadouffac, ot il n’y a que ce qu’on y
porte. Les Sauuages A fon exemple luy rendent les
mefmes deuoirs de charité: vn entr’autre le confolant
luy tenoit ce difcours: vous endurez beaucoup mon
frere, luy dit-il, prenez courage & fouffrez paifible-
ment voftre mal, i’ay e{té malade iufques a la mort
cét hyuer, ie n’ay iamais demandé la fanté a Dieu,
ie l’ay toufiours prié de faire fa volonté en moy, &
m’en fuis tres-bien trouué, me voila encor fain &
gaillard & dans la refolution de le feruir le refte de
mes iours: faites-en de mefme, & vous ferez con-
tent; puis fe mit a [34] genoiiil, fit fa petite priere
pour le malade & s’en retourna. Vn autre, d’abort
qu’il entra dans la Cabane voyant le malade dans de
grandes conuulfions, luy demanda ot eftoit fon plus
grand mal, le malade luy faifant figne que c’eftoit a
Veftomach, il moiiilla fon poux de fa faliue, marqua
quelques fignes de Croix fur cette partie pronongant
ces paroles: Seigneur, ie ne fais pas cecy en vain,
i’ay appris que vous auez infiniment fouffert eftant
attaché 4 la Croix: ie vous fupplie qu’en confidera-
tion de ces fouffrances vous foulagiez celles de ce
pauure malade. Vn autre Chreftien voyant le ma-
lade en danger de mourir demanda aux affiftans s’il
s’eftoit confeffé, & combien de fois depuis fa mala-
die, otiy, luy dit-on, il s’eft acquitté fouuent de ce
deuoir, il n’y a donc plus rien 4 craindre, refpondit-
il; s’il perd le corps il fauuera l’ame qui vaut cent
mille fois mieux que le corps. Ignace tefmoignoit
que telles vifites luy eftoient agreables, il prioit fes


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 183.


served him as an infirmary. The Father visits him
often, consoles him, watches over him at night, assists
him as far as the slender resources of the Tadoussac
mission permit, where there is only what we carry
there. The Savages, following his example, did him
the same charitable services. One, among others, in
order to console him, spoke to him as follows: ‘‘ You
suffer much, my brother; take courage, and endure
your sickness with patience. I was sick unto death
this winter. Inever asked God for health,—I always
begged him to do his will unto me, and I was all the
better for it. Here I am, quite healthy and hearty
again, and resolved to serve him for the remainder of
my days. Do likewise, and you will be content.”
Then he [34] knelt down, said a short prayer for the
sick man, and went away. Another, as soon as he
entered the Cabin, saw the patient in strong convul-
sions, and asked him where he felt the most pain.
The sick man made him a sign that it was in his
stomach. He moistened his thumb with his saliva
and made some signs of the Cross on that part,
pronouncing these words: ‘‘ Lord, I am not doing
this without a purpose; I have learned that you
suffered infinite torture while attached to the Cross;
I beg you, in consideration of those sufferings, to
relieve those of this poor sick man.” Another Chris-
tian, seeing the patient in danger of death, asked
those who were present if he had confessed, and how
many times he had done so from the beginning of
his illness. ‘‘ Yes,’’ he was told; ‘‘he has often
acquitted himself of that duty.’’ ‘‘ Then, there is
nothing to fear,’ he said. ‘‘If he lose his body he
will save his soul, which is worth a thousand times
more than the body.’’ Ignace showed that such


184 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


gens de l’entretenir de femblables difcours. Comme
il commencoit defja & fe mieux porter & qu'il eut
quitté fon infirmerie d’écorce pour fe loger auec les
autres, il luy arriua vne chofe bien eftrange. [35]
Il fut faifi de ie ne fgay quel entoufiafme dans le plus
profond filéce de la nuit, il fe leue fubitemét fur fon
feant, puis fe met 4a genoiiil, leue les mains & les
yeux vers le Ciel, en s’écriant, ie viens du Ciel, ie
fuis guary, IESVS m’a donné la vie, ie l’ay veu de
mes yeux. A ce bruit ceux de la Cabane & du
voifinage s’éueillent, on vient voir ce que c’eft, on
demande au conualefcent ce qu’il veut dire par trois
& quatre fois, A toutes ces demandes point d’autre
re{ponfe que ces paroles, ie viens du Ciel, ie fuis
guary, iiay veu IESvVS; il les dit & redit toute la nuit
iufques au matin qu’il prit vn peu de repos, apres
deux ou trois heures de fommeil il fe met a4 genoiiil
derechef & prie quelqu’vn de fa Cabane d’appeller
tous les Sauuages pour leur dire vn mot de la part
de Dieu. I] ne fallut que cette parole pour leur faire
croire que cét homme eftoit reffufcité, ils y courent
tous pour le voir & l’otiir parler. Ignace voyant vne
fi belle affemblée commence fon difcours comme il
auoit fait a minuit. Ie viens du Ciel, mes amis, leur
dit-il, lIESvs m’a donné la vie ie l’ay veu de mes
yeux, il m’a fait voir des chofes eftranges auec cOman-
demét de vous en faire le rapport. [36] Il ma mon-
{tré vn grand Liure ot font efcrits d’vn cofté les
vices qu’il a en horreur, comme l’yurognerie, le
peché de la chair, la communication auec le Diable
& plufieurs autres qu’il nomma, & de l'autre co{té
du liure, il m’a fait voir ceux qui d’entre-vous font
les plus fujets 4 ces pechez, chacun eft efcrit dans ce


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 185


visits were agreeable to him. He begged his people
to entertain him with similar discourses. When he
began to get better, and was able to leave his bark
infirmary, to lodge with the others, a very strange
thing happened to him. [35] He was seized with I
know not what enthusiasm, in the deepest silence of
the night. Hexrises) at. once to. a sitting. posture,
then kneels down, and raises his hands and his eyes
to Heaven, exclaiming: ‘‘I come from Heaven; I am
cured; JESUS has given me life. I have seen him
with my own eyes.’’ On hearing the noise, those in
the Cabin and in the neighborhood awake; they
come to see what is the matter; they ask the con-
valescent, three or four times, what he means. To
all these questions he gives no other answer than
these words: ‘‘I come from Heaven; I am cured; I
have seen JESUS.’’ He repeats them over and
over again, during the night, until toward morning,
when he gets a little rest. After sleeping two or
three hours, he again kneels down and requests one
of those in his Cabin to summon all the Savages, that
he may give them a message from God. It needed
but these words to make them believe that the man
had risen from the dead. They all hasten to see
him, and to hear him speak. When Ignace sees so
large an assemblage, he commences to speak as he
had spoken at midnight. ‘‘I come from Heaven,
my friends,’ he says to them. ‘JESUS has given
me life; I saw him with my own eyes. He showed
me wonderful things, and commanded me to relate
them to you. [36] He showed me a great Book, in
which are written on one side the vices of which he
has a horror, such as drunkenness, the sin of the
flesh, communication with the Devil, and many


186 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


liure qui plus, qui moins, vous vn tel (le nommant
par fon nom) vous y eftiez beaucoup efcrit, voftre
Maffinahigan, c’eft A dire voftre efcriture, eft grand,
il y a quelque chofe qui ne va pas bien dans voftre
affaire, vous n’allez pas droit, vous n’auez pas foin
de corriger la ieuneffe quand elle fait mal. Vn tel
qui eft baptisé ne croit que du bout des levres, la foy
qu’ilas’arrefte ala gorge & ne paffe pas iufques au
coeur, iln’y a point d’apparence qu’il la garde long-
temps. Vn tel n’eft pas beaucoup efcrit dans ce
liure; il eft homme de bien & fa femme auffi, tous
deux vont droit au Ciel. Vn tel qui a quitté fa
femme prend le chemin de 1’Enfer, & eft en danger
d’y aller s’il ne s’amende, car fon papier eft bien long,
& ilya bien de l’efcriture pour luy. Iamais vous
ne viftes des gens plus attentifs ny vn plus profond
filence. Cét homme [37] de l’autre monde pourfuit;
IESVS m/’a fait voir, difoit-il, A fa main droite vne
chofe qui n’a point fon pareil en beauté, c’ef{t vne
lumiere en comparaifon de qui le Soleil n’eft que
tenebres, vn lieu de plaifirs & de contentemét, enfin
le fejour de Dieu mefme & de tous les Bié-heureux.
C’eft 18 ott iay veu les enfans de nos gens, qui font
morts incontinent apres leur baptefme, mais i’y ay
veu fort peu d’hommes & de femmes Sauuages bap-
tifez. A fa main gauche il m’a découuert vn feu
qui m’a fait trembler de peur, dont nous parle fou-
uent le Pere qui nous enfeigne; mais qui eft tel qui
[sc. quil] n’y a point de paroles qui en puiffe expri-
mer la rigueur. C’eft dans ce feu que i’ay veu
brufler les Sauuages qui ne croyent point en Dieu, &
ceux qui croyans en luy ne luy ont point obey en cette
vie: i’y ay auffi veu des Frangois, 6 que le nombre eft


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 187


others that he named. And, on the other side of
the book, he made me see those among you who are
most addicted to those sins. Each one is inscribed
in that book,—some for more, some for less. You,
such a one” (calling him by his name), ‘‘ were in-
scribed there very often. Your Massinahigan,”’ that
is to say, your account, ‘‘is a long one. There is
something in your conduct that is not right. You do
not go straight; you are not sufficiently careful to
correct the young people when they do wrong. Such
a one is baptized but his belief does not extend be-
yond his lips. His faith stops at his throat, and does
not reach his heart; it is not probable that he will
long retain it. Such a one is not often inscribed in
the book; he is a good man, and his wife is also a
good woman; both are going straight to Heaven.
Such a one, who has abandoned his wife, takes the
road to Hell, and is in danger of going there if he
do not amend his ways; for his account is a very long
one, and there is much writing about him.’’ Never
have you seen people more attentive, or in greater
silence. This man [37] from the other world con-
tinued: ‘‘ JESUS showed me,”’ he said, “‘ on his right
hand a thing that has not its equal for beauty. It is
a light compared with which the Sun is but dark-
ness, a place of pleasure and of happiness,—in a
word, the abode of God himself and of all the Blessed.
There I saw the children of our people, who have
died immediately after their baptism; but I observed
there but few Savage men and women who have
been baptized. On his left hand, he showed mea
fire that made me tremble with fear,—of which the
Father who teaches us often speaks, but which is
such that no words can expressitsintensity. In that


188 LES RELATIONS: DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


grand des vns & des autres. IESVS eftoit au milieu
du Paradis & de 1’Enfer, il m’a monftré fes mains &
fes pieds percez de gros cloux, puis m’a dit deux ou
trois mots. Ignace, me difoit-il, ce que vous auez
enduré pendant voftre maladie n’eft rié, c’eft moy
qui ay fouffert pendant 4 la Croix pour vous, moy
[38] qui fuis voftre Createur & voftre Roy. Quand
ie vous enuoye quelque affliction, la faim, la foif, la
maladie, la pauureté, fouffrez cela patiemment pour
moy & 4 mon exemple.

En fuitte de cela Ignace fit vne petite In{ftruction
4 fon auditoire; Il faut mes freres, leur dit-il, nous
affembler tous les foirs dans vne grande Cabane pour
chanter les lotianges de Dieu, & nous exhorter les
vns les autres a le feruir fidellement. II faut tous
les matins apres vos prieres en particulier que vous
fortiez de vos Cabanes & que vous vous promeniez
en difant vos Chappelets, & que vous imitiez le Pere
qui fe retire dans le bois tous les matins pour prier
Dieu. N’oubliez point la benediction & 1’action de
graces en vos repas; foyez foigneux de corriger vos
enfans, & de faire plus d’eftat de la foy que Dieu vous
a donnée que de vos vies, ainfi finit le Sermon, &
chacun fe retira chez foy en vn profond filence.

Quoy qu’il en foit de cete vifid, foit qu’elle paffe
pour veritable, foit qu’il n’y ait que de l’imagina-
tion: il eft toufiours vray de dire qu’elle a produit
de bons fruits dans les efprits de tous ceux qui en
ont [39] otiy le rapport. Les mefchans en ont efté
efpouuantez & les bons confolez; Ie vis pour lors les
pauures Sauuages de Tadouffac bien changez, dit le
Pere qui a foin de cette Miffion. Ie les ay veus fon-
dre 4 la foule Chreftiés & Payens dans la Chappelle


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 189


fire 1saw the Savages burning who believe not in
God, and those who, while believing in him, have
not obeyed him in this life. There also I saw
Frenchmen. Oh! how great is the number of both.
JESUS stood between Paradise and Hell. Heshowed
me his hands and his feet, pierced by great nails,
and then he said afew words to me. ‘Ignace,’ he
said, ‘what you have endured during your illness is
nothing. It is I who suffered, while hanging on the
Cross for you—I [38] whoam your Creator and your
King. When I send you any affliction,— hunger,
thirst, sickness, poverty,—suffer it patiently for me,
and in imitation of my example.’ ”’

After that, Ignace delivered a short Instruction to
his audience: ‘‘ We must, my brothers,” he said,
““assemble every night in a large Cabin, to sing
God’s praises and to exhort one another to serve
him faithfully. Every morning, after saying your
prayers in private, you must come out of your Cabins
and walk about reciting your Rosaries, and imitate the
Father who withdraws into the woods every morn-
ing to pray to God. Do not forget to ask a blessing
and to return thanks at your meals. Be careful to
correct your children, and to think more highly of
the faith that God has given you than of your lives.’’
Thus ended the Sermon, and each one withdrew to
his home in profound silence.

However it may be as regards this vision, — whether
it be true or whether it be only imagination,— it is
nevertheless a fact that it produced a good effect
upon the minds of all who [39] heardit related. The
wicked were frightened and the good were consoled
by it. ‘‘ For the time, I found the poor Tadoussac
Savages greatly altered,’’ says the Father who has


190 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 27


pour y faire des prieres extraordinaires; ie les ay
veus fe promener le foir & le matin difant leurs
Chappelets auec vne deuotion toute particuliere; ie
les ay oiiy parler A Dieu la nuit, fe promenant a
l’entour de la Chappelle, auec des paroles animées de
deuotion, & fortant d’vn coeur qui fembloit eftre veri-
tablement contrit. Ha mon Pere/ me difoit vn des
plus zelez, qu’Ignace m’a donné d’épouuante par fon
difcours, il me femble que ie m’éueille d’vn pro-
fond fommeil, i’ay efté aueugle iufques icy & ie
commence a ouurir les yeux, il me femble que i’eftois
mort, & ie commence a viure auiourd’huy, & quoy que
ie fois baptifé ily a defia deux eftez, il m’eft aduis
toutes fois que ie ne l’ay pas encore receu en Chre-
{tien. Vnechofe fi nouuelle fut incontinent diuul-
guée parmy les Sauuages de Silleri & des trois
riuieres, dont les mieux difpofez en furent viuement
touchez.

[40] Les Chreftiens de la mefme Miffion firent vne
faute affez pardonnable dont ils firent vne penitence
publique incontinent apres a la porte de 1’Eglife;
mais ayant apris du Pere qui les enfeigne quelques
exemples de ceux qui font penitence pour leurs
pechez dont quelques-vns ieufnent au pain & 4 l’eau,
d’autres fe flagellent quelques fois, quelques-vns font
de grandes aumofnes & de longues prieres, & d’au-
tres meurent de regret & de douleur de leurs fautes,
e{timerent que la penitence qu’on leur auoit donnée
a faire eftoit trop petite, & que la fatisfaction qu’ils
auoient faite publiquement n’eftoit point égale a leur
delit. Ils fe refolurent tous d’vn commun confente-
ment d’en faire vne plus grande, & de fe flageller 4
limitation de ces faints Penitens dont ils auoient


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 191


charge of that Mission. ‘‘I saw them come in
crowds, both Christians and Pagans, to the Chapel,
to say special prayers there. I saw them walking
about night and morning, reciting their Rosaries,
with most special devotion. I heard them speaking
to God at night, while walking round the Chapel,
with words full of devotion and coming from hearts
which seemed truly contrite. ‘Ah, my Father,’
one of the most zealous would say to me, ‘how
Ignace has frightened us by his discourse. It seems
to me that I am awaking from a profound slumber;
I have been blind hitherto, and Iam commencing to
open my eyes. It seems to me that I was dead and
to-day Iam beginning to live; and, although I was
baptized two summers ago, I nevertheless think that
I have not yet received that Sacrament as a Chris-
tian should.’’’ An occurrence so novel was quickly
made known among the Savages of Silleri and of
three rivers, the best disposed among whom were
deeply touched by it.

[40] The Christians of the same Mission committed
a somewhat pardonable offense, for which they at
once did public penance at the Church door. But
having learned, from the Father who teaches them,
some examples of those who do penance for their
sins,— some of whom fast on bread and water, others
scourge themselves a certain number of times, others
give considerable alms and say long prayers, while
others die of sorrow and regret for their sins,— they
considered that the penance that they had been given
to perform was too light, and that the public atone-
ment which they had made was not adequate to the
offense. They all resolved, by common consent, to
perform a harder one and to scourge themselves in


192 LES RELATIONS ‘DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


oiiy parler. Ils font fur le champ vne grande difci-
pline de cordes affez groffes pleine de gros noeuds
quwils lient au bout d’vn bafton pour feruir de poi-
gnée, ils la gardent toute la nuit, & le lendemain
matin s’eftans affemblez au fon de la voix du Pere
qui les appelle a la Meffe: vn des plus confiderables
entre les Chreftiens pria tout le monde indifferem-
ment de fe [41] trouuer a 1|’Eglife, auffi bien les infi-
delles que les baptifez, pour oiiyr vn mot d’impor-
tance qu’il auoit a leur dire. Il y auoit pour lors a
Tadouffac 6. ou 7. nations differentes qui fe trouue-
rent dedans ou proche de la Chappelle: alors cét
homme zelé fe leua au milieu de l’affemblée & tint
ce difcours. Ie crains fort, dit-il, que le peuple de
Tadouffac ne foit point fauué; ie voy que c’eft vn
peuple trop mefchant, & que iufques icy apres tat
de fautes qu'il a fait, il n’a donné aucun ou fort peu
de tefmoignages de fon amandemét, Tenez, regar-
dez, voila comme la terre eft faite, difoit-il, mon-
{trant fa main fermée, la terre eft ronde cOme mon
poin: elle eft par tout habitée 4 ce qu’on nous dit, &
n’y a prefque point de lieux ot il n’y ait des fidelles
qui croyent fortement en Dieu. Il] n’ya que ce bout
du monde, ot l’on trouue bien peu de Chrettiens, &
encor ceux qui font profeffion de l’eftre font fi foi-
bles dans la foy, que le Demon a bon marché d’eux
quand il les attaque. Les Francois qui croyent en
Dieu font comme vne forte muraille, le Diable trouue
de la refiftance quand il s’en approche: mais ceux de
Tadouffac font comme ce mefchant [42] drap percé
(c’ef{toit vn vieil drap qui feruoit de courtine al’ Eglife
faute de quelque autre chofe meilleure) nous fommes
difoit-il comme ce drap troiié, le Demon paffe tout


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 193


imitation of the holy Penitents of whom they had
heard. They at once made a great discipline of
heavy cords, full of large knots, which they tied to
the end of a stick, to serve as a handle. They kept
it all night, and on the following day, when they
assembled at the sound of the Father’s voice calling
them to Mass, one of the leading Christians begged
every one, without distinction,— [41] both the infidels
and the baptized,—to go to the Church to hear some-
thing of importance that he had to tell them. There
were at the time at Tadoussac 6 or 7 different tribes
who were in or near the Chapel. Then this zealous
man stood up in the middle of the assembly, and
spoke as follows: ‘‘I greatly fear,’ he said, ‘‘ that
the people of Tadoussac will not be saved; I see that
they are too wicked a people, and that, after commit-
ting so many offenses, they have as yet manifested
but few, if any, signs of improvement. Here, look,
see how the earth is made,’’ he said, showing his
closed hand; ‘‘the earth is round, like my fist; it
is everywhere inhabited, we are told, and there is
hardly a place where there are not faithful ones who
firmly believe in God. It is only at this end of the
world that there are very few Christians; and even
those who profess to be such are so weak in the faith,
that the Devil easily overcomes them when he attacks
them. The French who believe in God are likea
strong wall; the Devil meets with resistance when
he approaches it. But those of Tadoussac are like
that shabby, [42] torn cloth”’ (this was an old cloth
that served as curtain in the Church, for want of
something better). ‘‘ We are,’’ said he, “like that
cloth, full of holes; the Devil passes through our
hearts as my finger passes through that hole. That


194 LES RELATIONS ' DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


au trauers de nos cceurs, comme mon doigt fait au
trauers de ce trou. Ce malin efprit fait de nous ce
qu’il veut, pour moy ie crains fort qu’il ne m’arrefte
en chemin & qu’il ne m’attrappe au milieu de ma
courfe. Que fi iamais ie vay au Ciel, le Pere qui
nous enfeigne y fera fi haut qu’a peine le pourray-je
voir; car que faifons nous pour y aller. Or fus, ie
defire mon{trer plus de courage dorefnauant, ie veux
fatisfaire pour mes fautes & marcher droit le refte
de mes iours: 1a-deffus il tire cette grande difcipline
qu'il cachoit deffous fa robbe la monftrant a toute
l'affemblée, & efleuant le ton de fa voix, ce n’eft pas-
1a le feu d’Enfer que i’ay merité, difoit-il, ce n’eft
qu’vne petite paille en comparaifon de ce qu’on
fouffre 1a-bas dans la demeure des Demons. Quand
on mettroit mon corps en fang auec ce fotiet & qu’on
defchireroit ma chair de coups, ie ne croirois pas
pourtant auoir payé mes debtes & fatisfait 4 la iu{tice
de Dieu; mais ie fcay qu’il eft infiniment [43] bon &
qu'il fait mifericorde 4 ceux qui luy demandent
pardon de coeur. Tenez, dit-il, au Capitaine, voila
la difcipline que ie vous mets entre les mains & mes
efpaules nués que ie vous prefente, frappez & ne
m’épargnez point. Le Capitaine obeyt fur l’heure a
fa parole, & luy defcharge fur le dos vne grefle de
coups, ce penitent demande humblement pardon a
Dieu de fes fautes pendant qu’on le flagelle, & fe
iette par terre pour la baifer, & fe releuant inuite
tous les Chreftiens a fuiure fon exemple, il crie,
venez tant que vous eftes de coupables, venez vous
prefenter deuant 1’ Autel, venez fatis-faire a la iuftice
de Dieu. On ne difputa point qui pafferoit le pre-
mier, les plus proches furent les premiers, chacun


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 195


evil spirit does with us as he wishes. For my part,
I greatly fear that he will stop me on the way, and
catch me in the midst of my career. And, if ever I
go to Heaven, the Father who teaches us will be so
high up that I shall hardly be able to see him. For
what are we doing, in order to get there? Now, then,
I wish to manifest more courage in future. I wish
to atone for my sins and to walk straight for the
remainder of my days.’’ ‘Thereupon he drew out the
great discipline, that was hidden beneath his robe;
and showing it to the whole assembly, and raising
his voice, he said, ‘‘ This is not that Hell-fire that I
have deserved. It is but a little straw, in compari-
son with what is suffered down below in the abode
of the Demons. Evenif my whole body were cov-
ered with blood from this whip, and my flesh were
torn by blows, I would not even then consider that I
had paid my debts and satisfied God’s justice. But
I know that he is infinitely [43] good, and has mercy
on those who ask pardon of him with all their hearts.
Here,’’ said he to the Captain, ‘‘ here is the disci-
pline that I place in your hands, and here are my
bare shoulders that I present to you. Strike, and
spare me not.’’ The Captain at once took him at his
word, and delivered a shower of blows on his back.
The penitent humbly begged pardon of God for his
sins while he was being scourged, and threw himself
on the ground, to kiss it; and, on rising, he urged
all the Christians to follow his example. He cried
out, ‘‘ Come, all ye who are guilty; come and pre-
sent yourselves before the Altar. Come and satisfy
the justice of God.’’ There was no dispute as to
who should go first. The nearest went the first;
they all came up, one after another, to perform their


196 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  {Vot. 27


s’approcha fil a fil pour faire fa penitence, chacun
determina de ce qu’il vouloit donner & de ce qu'il
vouloit receuoir; les vns demandoient qu’on leur
donnaft vingt coups, les autres dix, les autres plus,
les autres moins. Le Pere qui eftoit fur le point de
celebrer la Meffe fut furpris a la veué de cette nou-
uelle deuotion, qu’il n’attendoit pas d’vn peuple qui
ne {gait encore ce que c’eft que de [44] fouffrir pour
Dieu. Il ne la voulut pas interrompre fur l’heure de
peur de s’oppofer aux mouuemens du fainct Efprit;
mais feulement il prit garde qu’elle ne paffaft les
termes de la prudence & qu’il n’y eut point d’excez.
La penitence fut fi generale, que les amnocens. y
voulurent auoir part auffi bien que les coupables, les
enfans mefmes ny furent point efpargnez, les peres
& les meres les faifoient approcher de 1’Autel, les
dépoiiilloient de leurs petites robbes, & prioient celuy
qui tenoit le fouét en main de les chaftier 4 difcretion
felon leur aage & leurs forces; allegant que ce chafti-
ment eftoit defia deu Aa leur defobeyffance. Ces
pauures victimes s’y en alloient de bon coeur fe met-
toient a genouil deuant l’Autel, ioignoient les mains
& receuoient fans branler & fans ietter vne petite
larme, les coups de fouét qu’on defchargeoit douce-
ment fur leurs chairs innocentes. Il fe trouua mefme
des meres qui cha{tierent de leurs Chappelets a guife
de difcipline leurs petits enfans qui pendoient encore
alamamelle. Vn bon vieillard Chreftien qui venoit
de l’habitation de faint lofeph, & ne faifoit que [45]
d’arriuer 4 Tadouffac, fe trouua fort A propos a cette
fainte Ceremonie, il en fut fi fort touché qu’il cria
tout haut qu’il eftoit pecheur & qu’il vouloit faire
penitence auec les autres; il s’auance en difant ces


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 197


penance; each one decided what he wished to give
and what he wished to receive. Some asked to be
given twenty blows, others ten,—some more, some
less. The Father, who was about to say Mass, was
surprised at the sight of this new devotion, which he
did not expect from a people who know not yet what
it is to [44] suffer for God. He did not wish to inter-
rupt it at once, for fear of opposing the workings of
the holy Ghost. He merely took care that it did not
go beyond the bounds of prudence, and that there
were no excesses. The penance was so general, that
the innocent wished to share it with the guilty. Even
the children were not spared; their fathers and
mothers made them approach the Altar, took off their
little garments, and begged him who held the whip
to chastise them at his discretion, in proportion to
their age and strength,—alleging that this chastise-
ment was already due to their disobedience. These
poor victims went there cheerfully; they knelt be-
fore the Altar, clasped their hands, and, without
shrinking or shedding one little tear, they received
the blows from the whip, which were gently deliv-
ered on their innocent flesh. Some of the mothers
even struck with their Rosaries, in the manner of
the discipline, their little children still at the breast.
A good old man—a Christian, who came from the
settlement of saint Joseph and who had only just
[45] arrived at Tadoussac—happened, very oppor-
tunely, to be present at this holy Ceremony. He
was so touched by it that he cried out aloud that he
was a sinner and wished to do penance with the
others. Hecame forward, as he uttered these words,
prostrated himself on the ground, presented his bare
shoulders, and received at once what he fervently


198 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Vou 27


paroles, fe profterne en terre, prefente fes efpaules
nués, & recoit a l’inftant ce qu’il demandoit auec fer-
ueur. Le lendemain il s’en retourne dans fon canot
a Sillery d’ot: il eftoit party. Enfin celuy qui atten-
dit le dernier fut le mieux payé: ce fut tout a deffein
qu'il laiffa paffer les autres deuant luy, & qu’il choi-
fit le dernier rang, afin de faire fa penitence plus a
fon aife & auec plus de confufion. C’eft a moy, dit
ce braue champion de IESVS-CHRIST, c’eft & moy
a payer a mon tour, ie fuis le plus mefchant, il faut
que ie fois plus chaftié que les autres, ie fuis le plus
criminel ie veux eftre le plus mocqué. Frappez fur
moy hardiment, dit-il a celuy qui tenoit la difcipline,
tandis que ie me pourmeneray dans l’Eglife pour
boire la confufion & pour eftre l’opprobre du monde;
auffi-toft dit auffi-toft fait, il fe promene le mieux
qu'il peut par la Chappelle, & l’autre le fuit toufiours
[46] frappant & flagellant, 4 chaque coup qu’on luy
donnoit il difoit des paroles qui faifoient quafi fondre
en larmes toute l’affiftance. Ie vous fupplie, Sei-
gneur, que ce que ie fens maintenant fur ma chair
par les coups de fotiet que ie fens, effacent les pechez
que i’ay efcry mal 4 propos fur voftre liure. Sei-
gneur, ayez pitié de ce pauure homme, difoit-il vne
autrefois, quia merité l’Enfer, & qui vous demande
pardon. le vous abandonne mon corps & mon ame
& vous promets de vous eftre plus fidelle & 1’aduenir
moyennant voftre grace. Cette flagellation euft efté
trop longue fi le Pere n’y euft mis fin, qui les confola
les voyant dans cét eftat de penitence, & les affeura
du pardon de leurs fautes fi leurs cceurs refpondoient
a leurs parolles & a leurs actions, ils les aduertit
qu'ils n’euffent plus 4 faire de penitence publique


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 199


asked for. On the following day, he returned in his
canoe to Sillery, whence he had come. Finally, he
who waited until the last was the best paid. He
purposely allowed the others to pass before him, and
chose the last place, so as to perform his penance
more leisurely and with more humiliation. ‘‘ It is
my turn,’’ said this brave champion of JESUS
CHRIST, ‘it is my turn to atone. I am the most
wicked of all; I must be punished more than the
others. I am the most criminal; I wish to be the
most scorned. Strike me boldly,’’ he said to him
who held the discipline, ‘‘ while I walk about in the
Church, to endure the shame and be an object of
opprobrium toall.’’ Nosooner said,than done. He
walked as best he could through the Chapel, while
the other followed him, ever [46] striking and scourg-
ing him. At every blow that was given him, he
uttered words that almost caused all present to melt
in tears. ‘‘I beg you, Lord, that what I now suffer
in my flesh, by the blows from the whip that I feel,
may wipe out the sins that I have so wrongly caused
to be inscribed in your book.” ‘‘ Lord,’’ he said at
another time, ‘‘ have pity on this poor man who has
deserved Hell and who asks your pardon. I resign
my body and my soul to you, and promise you to be
more faithful in future with the help of your grace.”’
This flagellation would have been too long, had not
the Father put an end to it. He consoled them,
when he saw them in so penitent a condition; and
he assured them of the pardon of their sins, if their
hearts responded to their words and their actions.
He warned them not to perform any other public
penance without the advice of their Confessors. The
conclusion was, that they must live better, and show


200 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


fans le confeil de leurs Confeffeurs. La conclufion
fut qu'il failloit mieux viure, & monftrer plus de
courage A combattre le vice dorefnauant, & 1a-deffus
on pendit la difcipline 4 vn clou de la Chappelle, pour
auertir qu’elle eftoit-la, pour [47] chaftier publique-
ment ceux qui feroient quelque fcandale public.

Quatre ou cing ieunes gens s’en eftoient allez a la
chaffe & ne s’eftoient pas trouuez 4 cette publique
fatisfaction & generale, ils ne furent pas fi-toft de
retour qu’on les inuita de faire comme les autres,
puis qu’ils eftoient coupables. Ils ne fe firent pas
tirer l’oreille, ils fe prefenterent tous au commence-
ment de la Meffe, & fatisfirent au contentement & a
l’edification de tous les Chreftiens.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 201


more courage in fighting against vice, in future; and
thereupon the discipline was hung up on a nailin
the Chapel, as a warning that it was there to [47]
chastise publicly those who should be guilty of any
public scandal.

Four or five young men had gone out hunting, and
were not present at this public and general atone-
ment. No sooner had they returned when they were
asked to do as the others had done, since they also
were guilty. They did not hesitate; but all presented
themselves at the beginning of Mass, and made their
atonement to the satisfaction and edification of all
the Christians.


202 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [WNou. 27


[48] CHAPITRE VI.


DE L’HYUERNEMENT D’VN PERE AUEC LES SAU-
UAGES.


difpofans pour leur grande chaffe & pour faire

leur prouifion de chairs d’Elan, me prierent
de leur donner vn Pere de noftre Compagnie qui les
accompagnatt, ils apportoient pour raifon que les Iro-
quois les pourfuiuans par tout, ils eftoient contraints
de s’efloigner de plufieurs iournées de la maifon de
prieres, & que dans leur fejour de plufieurs mois, ils
fouhaittoient ardemment d’auoir quelqu’vn auec eux
qui leur ptit adminiftrer les Sacremens & leur enfei-
gner lé-ehemin, du Ciel, bey P. Gabriel) Druiletes
leur fut accordé, il fut bien-tof{t equippé, tout fon
bagage eftoit renfermé dans vne petite caiffe ou dans
vn petit coffret qui ne contenoit que les ornemens
neceffaires pour dire la fainte Meffe; le voila chargé
de tous fes meubles & [49] d’vne bonne refolution de
bien fouffrir, car quiconque s’embarque auec ces peu-
ples ne fera iamais logé dans tout fon voyage qu’a
l’enfeigne de la Croix; il eut pour compagnon yn
ieune Francois qui ne luy pouuoit donner autre
confolation que de le feruir 4 1l’Autel; comme le gros
des Sattuages auoient pris le deuant, deux ieunes
hommes l’enleuerent dans vn petit batteau d’écorfe,
& le porterent en peu de iours ot ils s’eftoient donné
le rendez vous.


Ve bonne efcoiiade de Sauuages Chreitiens fe


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 203


[48] CHAPTER VI.


OF THE WINTERING OF A FATHER AMONG THE SAV-
AGES.


CONSIDERABLE band of Christian Savages
who were preparing for their great hunt, and
for securing their provision of Elk meat,

begged me to give them a Father of our Society, to
accompany them. They alleged asa reason that, as
the Iroquois pursued them everywhere, they were
compelled to remain at a distance of several days’
journey from the house of prayer; and that, during
their sojourn of several months, they ardently desired
to have some one with them who could administer
the Sacraments to them, and teach them the way to
Heaven. They were given Father Gabriel Druil-
letes. He was soon equipped; all his baggage was
contained in a small box or trunk which held only
the necessary supplies for saying Mass. Behold
him, then, loaded with all his movable effects, and
[49] animated by a noble resolution to suffer much;
for whosoever embarks with these people will never
be lodged throughout his journey elsewhere than at
the sign of the Cross. He had for companion a
young Frenchman, who could give him no other con-
solation than to serve him at the Altar. As the main
body of the Savages had preceded him, two young
men took him in a little boat of bark, and in a few
days brought him to the appointed rendezvous.


204 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


Auffi-toft que ce canot parut chacun accourt fur les
riues du grand fleuue, c’eft 4 qui tefmoignera plus
de ioye de la venué du Pere, on le careffe non ala
mode de la Cour, mais 4 la mode de la fincerité &
de la franchife. Noél Negabamat que ces bons
Neophytes ont choifi pour leur Capitaine, harangua
publiquement, declarant d’vne voix haute & forte les
fujets qui auoient amené le Pere, les befoins qu’ils
en auoient, les biens qu’ils pouuoient recueillir de fa
prefence & de fa conuerfation, les obligations qu’ils
luy auoient de s’eftre voulu rendre compagnon de
leu[r]s grands trauaux pour les inftruire: bref il
exhortoit tous fes gés auec [50] vne grande ferueur de
rendre toute forte d’obeyflance & de refpectt aux
volontez de leur Pere.

Tous ceux qui deuoient marcher de compagnie
e{tans raffemblés on leue le camp, on met toutes les
maifons en rouleaux, c’eft a dire qu’on plie les écor-
ces qui compofent les baftimens, on quitte les bords
de la grande riuiere ott le pais des poiffons, pour
entrer dans la region des Elans, des cerfs, des caftors
& des autres animaux, aufquels ils alloient declarer
la guerre. Ie ne parleray point de leur facon de
camper ny de leurs armes ny de leurs chariots de
bagages qui ne font autres que leurs dos ou des trai-
neaux de bois fort legers, quand la terre eft couuerte
de neige. Je ne parleray non plus de diuerfes fortes
de beftes qu’ils rencontrent dans leurs grandes forefts,
ny leurs couftumes ou de leurs facons de faire, tout
cela eft décrit dans les Relations precedentes, ie tra-
ceray feulement vn petit crayon de la pieté & de la
deuotion que ces bons Neophytes exercent dans leurs
grands bois.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 205


As soon as the canoe appeared, all hastened to the
banks of the great river, and vied with one another
in expressing their joy at the arrival of the Father.
He was welcomed, not in the fashion of the Court,
but with sincerity and frankness. Noél Negabamat,
whom these good Neophytes have chosen for their
Captain, delivered a public harangue, declaring in a
loud and strong voice the reasons that had brought
the Father there; the need that they had of him;
the benefits that they might derive from his presence
and conversation; the obligations that they owed him
for having consented to become their companion in
their great labors, in order to instruct them. Ina
word, he exhorted all his people with [50] great fer-
vor to show every obedience and respect to the wishes
of their Father.

When all who were to travel together were as-
sembled, the camp was broken; all the houses were
rolled up—that is to say, the bark of which these
buildings are made was folded up; they quitted the
banks‘of the great river, or the fish country, to enter
the region of Elk, of deer, of beaver, and of other
animals, against which they were proceeding to wage
war. I will not speak of their mode of camping, or
of their weapons, or of their baggage,— wagons,
which are no other than their own backs, or very
light wooden sleds when the ground is covered with
snow. Neither will I speak of the various kinds of
beasts that they find in their great forests, or of their
customs, or of their methods of doing things; all
these have been described in the preceding Rela-
tions. I will merely give a slight sketch of the piety
and devotion practiced by these good Neophytes in
their great forests.


206 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


On ne manquoit iamais tous les foirs & tous les
matins de faire les prieres en [51] public dans vne
cabane deftinée a cét effet. Les peres & les meres y
amenoient leurs enfans aufquels on donnoit vne
petite inftruction qui les confolloit merueilleufement.
Quelques-vns plus feruens déroboient de leur fom-
meil pour le donner 4 Dieu, fe leuant plutoft ou fe
couchant plus tard que les autres pour s’entretenir
auec luy dans leurs prieres.

Les hommes demandoient au Pere fa benediction
deuant que de fortir de la cabane pour aller a leur
chaffe, les femmes en faifoient autant deuant que de
s’engager dans leur trauail, & les vns & les autres
remercioient noftre Seigneur A leur retour de les
auoir affiftez, & ceux-la mefme qui retournoient fans
auoir rien pris beniffoient Dieu d’auffi bon-cceur,
comme s’ils euffent fait vn tres-heureux rencontre.

Lors quwil n’y auoit plus de chaffe en quelques
endroits & qu’ils decabanoient pour porter plus auant
dans ces grandes forefts leurs pauillons d’écorces, le
Pere efleuoit vn Crucifix, tout le monde fe mettoit 4
genoux, & iettans les yeux fur cette image de vie,
ils chantoient auec vne deuotion toute fimple & toute
rauiffante, [52] les Litanies des attributs de Dieu, ils
prioient leur Sauueur d’eftre leur guide & leur con-
ducteur, & leur force dans les fatigues qu’ils alloient
prendre auec amour & fatisfaction de leurs pechez,
cela fait chacun fe mettoit en chemin portans ou
traifnans tout l’attiral de leur camp. Sur le midy
le Capitaine faifoit faire alte pour prendre vn petit
de repos & pour reparer fes forces dans vne hoftele-
rie couuerte de la votite du Ciel, abbriée de deux ou
trois millions d’arbres, ot les fieges ne font que de
la neige, ot la boiffon ne coufte qu’& prendre dans vn


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 207


They never failed, every night and every morning,
to say their prayers in [51] public, in a cabin set apart
for the purpose. Fathers and mothers brought their
children there, and we gave them a slight instruction
that wonderfully consoled them. Some of the most
fervent gave up a portion of their slumbers for God,
rising at an earlier or retiring at a later hour than
the others, to hold converse with him in their prayers.

The men asked the Father for his blessing, before
leaving the cabin to go out hunting; the women did
likewise, before commencing their labors; and all
thanked our Lord on their return for having assisted
them. Even those who came back empty-handed
praised God as heartily as if they had met with very
great success.

When there was no longer any game in a place,
and they broke their camp to carry their bark pavil-
ions still deeper into the great forests, the Father
held up a Crucifix; all knelt down and, casting their
eyes on that image of life, they sang with very
simple and most delightful devotion [52] the Litanies
of the attributes of God. They begged their Savior
to be their guide, their leader, and their strength, in
the fatigues that they were about to undergo with
love, and in satisfaction for their sins. This done,
each one would set out on his way, carrying or haul-
ing all their camp equipage. Toward noon, the
Captain would call a halt for the purpose of taking a
little rest and of restoring their strength in a hostelry
roofed in by the vault of Heaven, sheltered by two
or three million trees,— where the seats are but the
snow; where the beverage costs but the trouble of
taking it from a brook after the ice has been broken,
or of dipping it from a kettle in which snow has been


208 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Wou. 27


ruiffeau apres qu’on en a fendu la glace, ou bien a
puifer dans vne chaudiere en laquelle on fait fondre
de la neige, ot pour tout partage & pour tous mets
vous n’auez qu’vn morceau de boucan fans pain,
quafi auffi dur que du bois & auffi infipide que de la
filace. Apres tout la ioye & le contentement s’y ren-
contre, & ces bonnes gens font mille fois plus fatis-
faits que ces bouches delicates qui ont plus d’amer-
tumes de l’excez d’vn grain de fel, que de plaifir de
la delicateffe des mets les plus friands. Enfin on
fort de ces hofteleries fans mettre la main 4 la bource,
[53] tout y eft dans la franchife du premier fiecle.

Mais pour reprendre noftre route quand le Soleil
approche de fon declin on s’arrefte au lieu le plus
auantageux qu’on rencontre pour camper, la place
choifie, chacun met bas fon fardeau, on quitte fa
traifne, & fe mettant 4 genoux on remercie Dieu de
fes bontez & d’auoir conferué toute la bande, & puis
on dreffe le baftiment ot on doit loger, qui en deux
ou trois heures eft mis en fa perfection.

Le Pere a celebré la fainte Meffe quafi tous les
iours, & fi quelqu’vn preuoyoit qu’il n’y peuft affifter
fy matin, yi. le venoit” prier=de sretardersvngpetit,
l’affeurant qu’il fe prefferoit dans fon ouurage.

Les Fef{tes & les Dimanches eftoient gardées tres-
fainctement, ces bons Neophytes fe confeffoient &
fe communioient auec vne ioye incomparable, admi-
rans l’excez des bontez de celuy qui ne dedaignoit
pas la baffeffe de leurs huttes & de leurs cabanes.

Les Sauuages ont vne deuotion particuliere A la
nuit qui fut éclairée de la [54] naiffance du Fils de
Dieu, il n’y eut pas vn d’eux qui ne voulut iefiner
le iour qui la precede. Ils baftirent vne petite


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 209


melted; where for your share, and for all viands, you
have but a piece of smoked meat without bread,
almost as hard as wood and as insipid as tow. After
all, joy and content are found there; and these good
people are a thousand times more easily satisfied than
those dainty mouths that find more bitterness in the
excess of a single grain of salt than they find pleas-
ure in the delicacy of the choicest viands. Finally,
one quits these hostelries without putting his hand
into his purse; [53] everything there is as free as in
the first age of the world.

But, to resume our route: when the Sun approaches
its decline, they stop at the most suitable place they
find for camping. When the spot is chosen, each
one lays down his burden, or quits his sled, and
kneeling down, they thank God for his goodness and
for having preserved the whole band. Then they
put up the buildings in which they are to dwell and
which are completed in two or three hours.

The Father said holy Mass nearly every day; and,
if any one foresaw that he would be unable to attend
so early, he would come and ask him to delay ita
little, assuring him that he would hasten his work.

The Festivals and Sundays were observed in a
most holy manner. These good Neophytes confessed
and received communion with matchless joy, admir-
ing the excessive goodness of him who did not
disdain the lowliness of their huts and cabins.

The Savages have a particular devotion for the
night that was enlightened by the [54] birth of the
Son of God. There was not one who refused to fast
on the day that preceded it. They built a small
Chapel of Cedar and fir branches in honor of the
manger of the infant Jesus; they wished to perform


210 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Not. 27


Chappelle de branches de Cedre & de fapin en l’hon-
neur de la creiche du petit IESvs; ils voulurent faire
quelques penitences pour fe mieux difpofer a le rece-
uoir dans leurs coeurs en ce iour facré, & ceux-la
mefme qui eftoient efloignez de plus de deux iour-
nées fe trouuerent a point nommé pour chanter des
Cantiques en l’honneur de 1’Enfant nouueau né, &
pour s’approcher de la table ot il a voulu eftre le
mets adorable: ny l’incommodité de la neige, ny la
rigueur des froids ne ptt eftouffer l’ardeur de leur
deuotion, cette petite Chappelle leur fembloit vn petit
Paradis.

Ils prierent le Pere de faire pour leur confolation &
pour leur inftruction dans leurs Chappelles volantes,
tout ce que nous faifons dans nos Eglifes fixes &
arre{tées, leur donnant des cendres beniftes le premier
iour de Carefme; ils auoient le cceur & la bouche
pleins de tres-bons fentimens de pieté; ils recoiuent
les Ceremonies dans vne fi grande droiture & dans vne
fi grande fimplicité, [55] comme des gens qui croient
que tout le monde en goufte les bons effets. Ils
portoient des rameaux comme des palmes de victoire
tout remplis de ioye des triomphes de IESvVs-
CHRIST en fon entrée dans la ville de Ierufalem.

Ayant veu celebrer 4 Kebec la fefte du grand faint
Iofeph, patron de toute la Nouuelle France, auec des
feux de ioye, ils voulurent luy rendre cét honneur,
le cedre ny les autres bois ne leurs pouuoient man-
quer dans ces grandes fore(ts.

Scachans que IESVS-CHRIST s’eftoit premiere-
ment donné aux hommes fous les efpeces de pain &
de vin le iour qui precedoit fa mort, ils tefmoigne-
rent de grands fentimens de fon amour, & apres luy


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 211


some penance, to prepare themselves for better re-
ceiving him into their hearts on that holy day; and
even those who were at a distance of more than two
days’ journey met at a given place to sing Hymns in
honor of the newborn Child and to approach the
table whereat it was his will to become the adorable
food. Neither the inconvenience of the snow nor
the severity of the cold could stifle the ardor of their
devotion. That small Chapel seemed to them a little
Paradise.

They begged the Father, for their consolation and
instruction, to do in their flying Chapels all that we
do in our permanent and stationary Churches, by
giving them blessed ashes on the first day of Lent,
Their hearts and mouths were filled with the most
pious sentiments. They received the Rites with the
utmost sincerity and the greatest simplicity, [55] like
people who believe that every one feels the good
effects thereof. They carried branches as palms of
victory, full of joy for the triumphs of JESUS
CHRIST at his entrance into the city of Jerusalem.

As they had seen the festival of the great saint
Joseph, the patron of all New France, celebrated at
Kebec with bonfires, they wished to pay him the
same honor; cedar and other woods of all kinds could
not fail them in these great forests.

Knowing that JESUS CHRIST had first given him-
self to man under the appearances of bread and wine,
on the day that preceded his death, they manifested
deep gratitude for his love; and, after returning to
him a thousand thanks, they very humbly begged his
pardon, all together, for not having paid him all the
homage of respect and honor due to that adorable
victim and to that divine Sacrifice.


212 LES RELATIONS\ DES JESUITES  [Wot. 27


auoir rendu mille actions de graces ils luy demande-
rent tres-humblement pardon tous enfemble de ce
qu’ils n’auoient pas rendu tous les deuoirs de refpect
& d’honneur A cette adorable victime & a ce diuin
Sacrifice.

Ils firent vne action le Vendredy Sainct la plus
genereufe qu’on pouuoit quafi attendre d’vn Sauuage,
apres auoir adoré la Croix qu’ils firent repofer fur
vne belle robbe de caftor eftendué en forme de tapis,
[56] fe fouuenans que cét aimable Sauueur auoit prié
pour ceux qui le mettoient en Croix; ils luy ad-
drefferent cette petite Oraifon du profond de leur
cceeur, parlans pour ceux qui les bruflent, qui les
roftiffent & qui les mangent. Seigneur, pardonnez a
ceux qui nous pourfuiuent auec tant de fureur, qui
nous font mourir auec tant de rages, ouurez leurs
yeux ils ne voyent goutte, faites qu’ils vous connoif-
fent & qu’ils vous ayment, & alors eftans vos amys
ils feront les noftres & nous ferons tous vos enfans:
ie ne doute point que tous ces bons fentimens n’ayent
beaucoup contribué 4 la paix dont ils iotiiffent main-
tenant. L’hyuer fe paffa dans ces courfes affez
innocentes & dans ces exercices de pieté. Si-toft
que la chaleur du Printemps commenga d’amollir les
neiges, ils retournerent vers les riues du grand fleuue
oti ils auoient laiffé leurs canots & leurs chalouppes.
La premiere action qu’ils firent fortans de ces forefts,
fut de charpenter comme ils ptirent vne grande Croix,
les Capitaines y mirent la main les beaux premiers,
& la voulurent eux-mefmes porter fur leurs efpaules
iufques en vn lieu fort eminent [57] ot ils la plan-
terent: fitoft qu’elle fut arborée, ils adorerent en ce
bois facré celuy qui l’auoit fanctifié par fa mort, & le


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 213


On Good Friday, they performed the most gener-
ous act that could be expected from a Savage. After
having adored the Cross, which they laid upon a
fine beaver robe, spread out like a carpet, [56] they
remembered that the amiable Savior had prayed for
those who had placed him on the Cross; and they
said this short Prayer to him from the depth of their
hearts, speaking of those who burn, roast, and eat
them. ‘‘ Lord, forgive those who pursue us with
such fury, who put us to death so cruelly. Open
their eyes, for they see not. Make them know and
love you; and then, when they are your friends, they
will be ours, and we shall all be your children.”’ I
have no doubt that these good sentiments contributed
in a great measure toward obtaining the peace that
they now enjoy. The winter passed in these inno-
cent excursions and these pious exercises. As soon
as the warmth of the Spring began to thaw the snow,
they returned to the banks of the great river, where
they had left their canoes and shallops. The first
thing that they did, on issuing from the forest, was
to fame a eteat Cross, as best they could, The
Captains were the first to lend a hand, and they
wished to carry it themselves on their shoulders to a
very conspicuous place, [57] where they planted it.
As soon as it was erected, they adored in that sacred
wood him who had sanctified it by his death, and
offered it to his Father in thanksgiving for having
preserved them all throughout the winter. They
went now and then to kneel before that divine stand-
ard, and to say their simple prayers in such words
as these: ‘‘ Lord, we wish to show you by this rood,
which we have erected in your honor, that you are
the Master of these great forests; that you reign


214 LES RELATIONS DES: JESUITES aN 02. 27


prefenterent A fon Pere en action de graces de ce
qu’il les auoit tous conferuez pendant l’hyuer. Ils
alloient parfois flechir le genoiiil deuant ce diuin
ef{tendart faifans leurs petites prieres en ces termes;
Seigneur, nous defirons témoigner par ce bois que
nous auons erigé en voftre honneur, que vous eftes le
Maiftre de ces grandes forefts, que vous regnez fur la
mer & fur la terre par le merite de voftre Croix, &
que par vos fouffrances vous auez payé nos debtes &
effacé nos offenfes.

Voila des fubiets d’vne grande confolation au mi-
lieu de la Barbarie, mais certes il faut achepter ces
plaifirs de l’efprit auec de grandes fatigues du corps,
coucher fur la belle terre tapiffée de quelques
branches de fapin, n’auoir entre la tefte & la neige
qu’vne écorce €paiffe d’vn tefton, viure autant parmy
les chiens que parmy leshommes: car tout eft pefle
méle dans leurs cabanes, iefiner par fois les Diman-
ches plus rigoureufement que le Vendredy fainct,
n’atoir pour boiffon [58] que celle qui eft commune
aux animaux les plus delaiffez de la terre, ne man-
ger pour l’ordinaire que des viandes qui ne font pas
tant viure qu’elles empefchent de mourir, n’auoir
pour cuifinier que la faleté, compagne infeparable
de leur extreme pauureté, fouffrir les gaufferies & les
mépris de ceux qui ne font pas baptifez, & des enfans
qui ne voyant en vn Francois aucune perfection de
Sauuages & ne pouuant encor reconnoi{tre les vertus
d'vn genereux Chreftien, méprife au dernier point ceux
qui ne font pas bons mulets de charge. La Philofo-
phie & la Theologie n’ont point de cours dans ces
grands arbres, les jambes des cerfs & les forces des
boeufs tiennent les premiers rangs parmy ces peuples.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 215


over sea and land, through the merits of your Cross;
and that by your sufferings you have paid our debts,
and wiped out our sins.”

Such matters give great consolation in the midst
of Barbarism, but assuredly such pleasures of the
spirit must be purchased at the cost of much bodily
fatigue. One must sleep on the bare ground cov-
ered with a few fir branches, having between one’s
head and the snow merely a piece of bark of the
thickness of a teston; live as much among the
dogs as with men, for everything is promiscuous in
their cabins; fast sometimes on Sundays more rigor-
ously than on good Friday; have no other beverage
[58] than that which is common to the most neglected
creatures on earth; eat, as a rule, meats which stave
off death rather than sustain life; have no other cook
but uncleanliness, the inseparable companion of their
extreme poverty; endure the jests and the scorn of
those who are not baptized, and of the children,
who—because they do not see in a Frenchman any
of the perfections of a Savage, and cannot recog-
nize the virtues of a generous Christian — despise to
the last degree those who are not good beasts of bur-
den. Philosophy and Theology have no currency
amid these great trees; legs like those of the deer,
and strength like that of oxen, hold the first rank
among these peoples.

All this, with some Baptisms which the Father
administered in the midst of the woods, seasoned
with the piety of the good Neophytes, of which I
have spoken, gave some satisfaction to a man who
loves sufferings. But smoke was his greatest Cross.
That half Element, or that imperfect mixture, which
retains the heat of the fire and the malignancy of


216 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


Tout cela auec quelques Baptefmes que le Pere a
fait au milieu des bois, affaifonné de la pieté des
bons Neophytes dét ie viens de parler, a donné du
contentement A vn homme amateur des fouffrances,
mais la fumée a efté fa plus grande Croix, ce demy
Element ou ce mixte imparfait qui retient l’ardeur
du feu, la malignité d’vn air empefté deffeicha fi
bien les yeux de ce pauure Pere qu'il en deuint [59]
aueugle, au commencement il ne voyoit qu’vne con-
fufion d’objets, fans rien diftinguer en particulier,
fi bien que voulant fortir hors de la Cabane 11 paffoit
quelques-fois au trauers du feu placé au beau milieu
de ces tanieres: d’autre-fois il tref{buchoit aux pieds
de quelques-vns, appreftant 4 rire a ceux-l4 mefme
qui luy portoient compaffion. Enfin il perdit entiere-
ment la veué, en forte qu’il ne fe pouuoit plus con-
duire. Les Sauuages furpris de cét accident voyant
qu’outre la perte de fes yeux, il fouffroit vne fi
eftrange douleur qu’il en perdoit les forces, confulte-
rent entre-eux s’ils ne l’enuelopperoient point comme
vn paquet, pour l’attacher fur leurs traifnées & le
tirer comme le refte de leur bagage: Le Pere les
entendant fe mit a rire & les affeura que s’ils luy
vouloient donner vn guide qu'il auoit encor affez de
viguetr pour les fuiure, ils luy donnent vn enfant
auquel le pauure Pere obeiffoit comme vn efcolier a
fon precepteur. Ce n’eft pas tout, ils firent vne
affemblée fur fa maladie, dont le refultat fut que s’il
fe vouloit affuiettir 4 leurs remedes qu’il pourroit
guerir; ce bon Pere ne refpirant que l’abandon leur
[60] obeit veritablement a l’aueugle, 1a-deffus vne
femme e{tant choifie pour faire cette cure, fe leua de
fa place & luy dit fors [de] la Cabane, mon Pere


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 217


tainted air, so completely dried up the eyes of the
poor Father that he became [59] blind. At the
beginning, he could see objects only confusedly,
without being able to distinguish anything in detail, —
so that, when he wished to go out of the Cabin, he
sometimes walked through the fire, which is placed
in the very center of these dens. At other times, he
stumbled over the feet of some, exciting merriment
in those even who had compassion on him. Finally,
he lost his sight completely, so that he could no
longer guide his steps. The Savages were surprised
at this accident when they saw that, in addition to
the loss of his sight, he suffered such pain that his
strength failed him. They consulted among them-
selves whether they should not wrap him up like a
parcel, tie him on their sleds, and haul him like the
rest of their baggage. When the Father heard them,
he began to laugh, and assured them that, if they
would give him a guide, he had still enough strength
to follow them. They gave him a child, whom the
poor Father obeyed as a pupil does his teacher. That
is not all. They held an assembly concerning his
disease, the result of which was that, if he would sub-
mit to their remedies, he might be cured. The good
Father, breathing only renunciation, [60] in truth
blindly obeyed them. Thereupon a woman who was
selected to effect the cure, rose from her place and
said to him: ‘‘ Go out of the Cabin, my Father; open
thine eyes, and look at the Sky.” The poor blind
man obeyed without a word. When he had assumed
the attitude required, this fine oculist armed with a
bit of knife blade, or of rusty iron, scraped his eyes
till a little humor flowed fromthem. Never had the
poor Father suffered so much. The hand of the


218 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vov. 27


ouure les yeux, regarde le Ciel, ce pauure aueugle
obeyt fans replique, eftant done en la pofture qu’on
le demandoit, cette belle oculifte armée d’vn mor-
ceau de canif ou de fer tout roiiillé, luy racle les
yeux, en forte qu’elle en fit tomber vne petite hu-
meur, iamais ce pauure Pere ne fouffrit tant, la main
de cette operatrice n’eftoit pas fi legere qu’vne plume,
& elle n’auoit non plus de dexterité que de fcience.

Enfin le malade eftant defefperé de ces braues
Medecins, qui auoient plus de bonne volonté que
d’experience & que d’induftrie; s’addreffe a celuy qui
luy auoit donné les yeux, & le prie de les luy rendre
vne autre fois fi ceft pour fa gloire; il conuie les
Sauuages de faire la mefme demande en cas que fa
veué leur pit eftre profitable, ils s’affemblent tous
au lieu deftiné pour faire leurs prieres, ils prennent
la fainte Vierge pour leur Aduocate, le malade fg¢a-
chant par coeur l’vne des Meffes qui fe difent en fon
honneur, la commenca, comme [61] sil euft voulu
dire vne Meffe feiche, auec vne grande confiance que
le Pere des lumieres luy donneroit quelque foulage-
ment dans fon mal. Or foit que le moment de fa
guerifon fuft venu, ou que Dieu voulut exaucer les
prieres des enfans en faueur de leur Pere par l’inter-
ceffion de leur Mere, quoy que c’en foit, vn rayon
brillant deffilla tout 4 coup les yeux de ce pauure
aueugle, & luy rendit fi parfaitement l’vfage de la
veué au milieu de la Meffe, qu'il n’a reffenty depuis
ce temps-la ny douleur ny incommodité, ny des
neiges ny de la fumée, & apres plufieurs mois de
fouffrances il e{t reuenu plain de fanté en noftre mai-
fon, bien ioyeux d’auoir efté quelque temps Sauuage
pour l’amour de IESVS-CHRIST.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 219
ee ee ee


operator was not as light as a feather, and she
possessed no more skill than science.

Finally, when the patient had been given up by
his worthy Physicians, whose willingness was great-
er than their experience or their skill, he addressed
himself to him who had given him his eyes, and
begged him to give them to him a second time, if it
were for his glory. He asked the Savages to make
the same request in case his sight might be of
advantage tothem. They all met at the appointed
spot to say their prayers, and took the blessed Virgin
as their Advocate. The patient knew by heart one
of the Masses that are said in her honor. He began
it as [61] if he wished to say a blank Mass, with great
confidence that the Father of light would grant some
relief for his illness. Now, whether the time for his
cure had come, or whether God willed to grant the
prayers of the children on behalf of their Father
through the intercession of their Mother, in any case,
a bright ray suddenly opened the eyes of the poor
blind man, and so fully restored to him the use of
his sight, in the middle of the Mass, that ever since
then he has not felt pain or discomfort, either from
snow or from smoke; and, after suffering for several
months, he returned full of health to our house,—
happy indeed at having been for some time a
Savage for the love of JESUS CHRIST.


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo. 27


[62] CHAPITRE VII.
‘DE QUELQUES SURPRISES FAITES PAR LES IROQUOIS.


9AYMEROIS quafi autant eftre affiegé par des Lu-

| tins que par des Iroquois, les vns ne font gueres

plus vifibles que les autres, quand ils font efloi-
gnez on les croit a nos portes, & lors qu’ils fe iettent
fur leur proye on s’imagine qu’ils font en leur pays.
Ceux qui ont habité dans les forefts de Richelieu &
de Montreal ont efté releuez & renfermez plus eftroit-
tement qu’aucun Religieux, ny aucunes Religieufes
dans les plus petits Monafteres de la France. II eft
vray que ces Croates n’ont point paru cette année a
Montreal, on n’auoit pas toutes-fois d’affeurance
qu’ils en fuffent beaucoup efloignez, Pour Richelieu,
voicy comme ils s’en font approchez.

Le 14. Septembre de l’an paffé vn foldat trauail-
lant par diuertiffement a la portée d’vn moufquet du
Fort, en vn petit champ [63] qu’il difpofoit pour y
planter du bled d’inde, quatre ou cing Iroquois for-
tant d’vne embufcade fe iettent fur luy fans luy faire
aucun mal. Ce ieune homme aymant mieux mourir
parle fer que par le feu, fe lie fi fortement 4 vne
fouche & 4 quelques racines, que iamais ils ne purent
l’en tirer, enragez de voir fa refiftance luy defchar-
gent ie ne fray combien de coups de haches d’armes
fur la tefte, & voyans qu’ils eftoient découuerts du
Fort, & qu’on tiroit defia deffus eux, ils quittent ce
pauure homme penfant l’auoir maffacré, luy prenant


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 221


[62] CHAPTER VII.
OF SOME SURPRISES BY THE IROQUOIS.


WOULD almost as soon be besieged by Goblins

| as by the Iroquois; the latter are hardly more
visible than the former. When they are far
away, we think they are at our doors; and when they
fling themselves on their prey, we imagine that they
are in their own country. The people who dwelt in
the forests of Richelieu and of Montreal were brought
in and shut up more closely than any Religious or any
Nun in the smallest Monasteries of France. Itis true
that these Croats did not make their appearance at
Montreal this year, but nevertheless there was no
assurance that they were very far away from there.
As regards Richelieu, observe how they approached it.
On the 14th of September of last year, a soldier
was working for amusement, at a distance of a mus-
ket shot from the Fort, in a small field [63] that he
was tilling in order to plant indian corn therein, when
four or five Iroquois rushed from an ambush, and
threw themselves on him, without doing him any
harm. The young man, preferring to die by steel
rather than by fire, clung so firmly to a stump and
to some roots, that they could not succeed in drag-
ging him away from these. Furious at his resistance,
they discharged I know not how many blows from
their war hatchets upon his head; and, finding
that they were observed from the Fort, and that
some shots were already being fired at them, they


222 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Wou. 27


courage voulut s’auancer vers le Fort; mais deux
Iroquois l’apperceuant tournerent vifage, luy donnent
encor deux grands coups d’efpée au trauers du corps,
& fila crainte d’eftre furpris par les Fran¢ois ne les
eut faifi, ils luy auroient couppé & enleué la peau de
la tefte auec fa cheuelure qui eft l’vn des grands
trophées des Sauuages. On penfoit que cét homme
eftoit mort, le Chirurgien accourut & arrefta fon fang
fort a propos, s’expofant aux embufcades des ennemis
qui tiroient dedans le bois: la premiere action que
fit ce bon ieune homme eftant remis [64] parmy les
Francois, ce fut de demander vn Pere pour fe
confeffer, cela fait il fit fon teftament en faueur des
pauures, aufquels il donnoit tout fon petit meuble.
Or iacgoit qu'il eut deux coups a la tefte, deux au bras
& quatre dans le corps qu’on iugeoit tous mortels, il
guerit neantmoins fauorifé de Dieu.

Quelque temps apres cette furprife on entendit
dans vne Ifle voifine des cris de ioye & d’allegreffe
redoublez par dix ou douze fois pour marque du
nombre des Hurons que les Iroquois auoient pris
ou maffacrez vn peu plus haut que Richelieu, ceux
qui refterent de cette defaite fe vindrent refugier
vers les Frangois. I] y eut entre autres vn Huron
nommeé Henry Aonkerati qui nous affeura qu’il s’eftoit
efchappé des mains & des liens de fes ennemis, & que
deux autresfois en cette mefme année Dieu 1’auoit
conferué dans la déroute de fes gens.

Le feptiefme de Nouembre vn ieune homme qui
commandoit aux ouuriers du Fort, eftant forty feul
pour tirer fur quelque gibier quafi A la porte de nos
Francois, fut enuironné des ennemis cachez dans des
broffailles, fut mis 4 [65] mort tres-mal-heureufement.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 223


abandoned the poor man, thinking that they had killed
him. He, taking courage, undertook to advance
toward the Fort but two Iroquois observed him.
They turned back, and gave him two sharp thrusts
of javelins through the body; and, if they had not
been seized with the fear of being surprised by the
French, they would have cut and removed his scalp
with his hair, which is one of the great trophies of
the Savages. They thought that the man was dead;
but the Surgeon hastened to the spot, and most
opportunely stopped the bleeding,— exposing himself
to the ambuscades of the enemy, who fired from the
woods. This good young man's first act, when he
returned [64] among the French, was to ask fora \
Father to confess him. When this was done, he
made his will in favor of the poor, to whom he gave
the few effects that he possessed. Now although he
had received two wounds on the head, two on the
arm and four in the body,—all of which were con-
sidered mortal,— he nevertheless recovered, through
God’s favor.

Some time after this surprise they heard, on an
Island in the vicinity, cries of joy and delight repeated
ten or twelve times, to show the number of Hurons
whom the Iroquois had taken or massacred a little
above Richelieu. Those who fled from this defeat
sought refuge with the French. Among others,
there was a Huron named Henry Aonkerati, who
assured us that he had escaped from the hands and
the bonds of his enemies; and that, on two other
occasions during the same year, God had preserved
him when his people had been routed.

On the seventh of November, a young man, who
was at the head of the workmen of the Fort, went


224 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES Savou. 27


Ils le dépoiiillerent tout nud & luy enleuerent la che-
uelure auec la peau de la tefte. .Comme l’on vit que
ce ieune homme tardoit, & qu’on eut apperceu deux
canots Iroquois fur la grande Riuiere: on creut quils
l’auroient furpris & emmené vif auec eux; on crie,
on l’appelle par fon nom, point de refponfe,; on tire
le canon fur les coureurs: mais en vain, trois iours
apres les Corbeaux croagans a l’entour de fon corps
dénerent aduis du lieu ot il eftoit, on y va, on le
trouue e{tédu fur la terre, tranfpercé de coups d’ef-
pée, trempé dans fon fang, & defia vn petit endom-
magé du bec des oifeaux: la guerre des Sauuages
n’ef{t non plus la guerre des Fran¢ois, que la guerre
des Parthes' n’eftoit point la guerre des Romains.
Les Peres qui eftoient en cette habitation enterrerent
ce pauure homme, & offrirent a Dieu plufieurs fois
le faint Sacrifice de la Meffe, fuppleans a la charité
qu’auroient eu pour luy fes parens s/il eftoit mort en
fon pays.

Le douziéme de Decembre la terre eftant couuerte
d’vn pied de neige, comme on ne penfoit quafi plus
aces chaffeurs d’hommes, & que le froid fe faifoit
[66] fentir, fept foldats fortirent pour aller querir du
bois de chauffage, ayant chargé leur traifneau & le
tirant fur la neige, vne bande de ces Lutins fe ietta
fur eux a l’improuifte, les plus leftes & les moins
embaraffez fe deprirent du cordage qu’ils auoient
enlaffé dans leur corps pour traifner leur charge, &
fe fauuerent a la courfe dans leur retranchement:
Celuy qui eftoit le plus fortement lié au traifneau
fut attrapé. Ces barbares luy donnerent de grands
coups de leurs maffes armées d’vn fer trenchant, &
layant renuersé par terre luy coupperent vne partie


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 225


out alone to shoot game, almost at the door of our
French. He was surrounded by the enemies, who
lay hidden in the brushwood, and was put to [65] a
most miserable death. They stripped him entirely
naked, and tore off his hair with his scalp. When
it was noticed that the young man delayed his return,
and when two Iroquois canoes were seen on the great
River, they thought that he had been surprised and
carried off alive by them. They shouted, and called
him by his name, but received no answer. The can-
non was fired at the fleeing foes, butin vain. ‘Three
days afterward, Crows, croaking around his body,
indicated the spot where he was. They proceeded
thither, and found him stretched out on the ground,
pierced by javelin thrusts, bathed in his own blood,
and his body already slightly injured by the birds’
beaks. The warfare of the Savages is no more the
warfare of the French than the warfare of the Par-
thians was that of the Romans. The Fathers who
were at that settlement bursed the poor man, and
offered to God the holy Sacrifice of the Mass several
times, supplying the charity that his relatives would
have displayed had he died in his own country.

On the twelfth of December, the earth was cov-
ered with snow to the depth of a foot. As we had
hardly a thought of those manhunters, and as the
cold made itself [66] felt, seven soldiers went out to
get firewood. When they had loaded their sled, and
were hauling it over the snow, a band of those Imps
unexpectedly rushed on them. The more active
ones, and those who were the least encumbered,
released themselves from the ropes that they had put
around their bodies in order to haul their load, and
saved themselves by running toward their entrench-


226 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 27


de la peau de la tef{te qu’ils emporterent auec le poil,
la fentinelle ayant donné aduis, on décharge des
fufils fur eux, ce qui les contraignit de fe retirer,
croyant que ce pauure homme eftoit mort, en effet il
n’auoit plus de mouuement: mais comme on eut mis
le feu au canon pour le décharger fur les ennemys,
il s’éueilla & commenegea a fe traifner, on courre vers
luy on le trouue bleffé a la tefte de 7. ou 8. grands
coups de hache d’armes que tout le monde croyoit
eftre mortels: vous euffiez dit que les yeux n’eftoient
plus en leur place & le fang qui le trempoit de tout
co{tez [67] le rendoit horriblement affreux; ayant
vne partie de la tefte découuerte de fon poil & de fa
peau, on lappelle, on luy parle, il n’auoit plus de
connoiffance tous fes fens eftoiét perdus, il n’auoit
plus qu’vn moutuement animal qui le faifoit traifner
ca & 1a fans raifon, le Chirurgien l’ayant fait porter
dans le Fort, en eut vn fi bon foin qu'il eft mainte-
nant en pleine fanté: il fut trois iours fans aucune
connoiffance, & vn fort long-temps en danger a4 caufe
que le crafne eftoit enfoncé & que les contufions
ef{toient fort grandes. Depuis ce temps-la les Fran-
¢ois auoient pour cloiftre vne palliffade de pieux
d’vne bien petite eftendué; mais enfin les Ambaffa-
deurs Iroquois arriuans au commencement de I[uil-
let, rompirent la clofture de ces pauures reclus, qui
n’ayant pas tous le don d Oraifon ne prenoient pas
trop de plaifir en vn fi petit monaftere.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 227


ment. One, who was the most securely fastened to
the sled, was taken prisoner. The barbarians struck
him heavy blows with their clubs, armed with a sharp
piece of iron; and, after throwing him down, they
cut off a portion of his scalp which they carried off
with the hair on it. The sentry gave the alarm, and
shots were fired at them from muskets. This caused
them to retreat, believing that the poor man was
dead. In fact, he was quite motionless. But just as
fire was applied to the cannon, to discharge it at
the enemies, he roused himself, and began to drag
himself along. They ran toward him, and found on
his head 7 or 8 great wounds, inflicted with war hat-
chets, which every one considered mortal. You
would have said that his eyes were no longer in their
place; and the blood that covered him all over [67]
gave him a horrible appearance; a portion of his
head was stripped of its hair and its scalp. They
called him by name, and spoke to him. He was
unconscious, and entirely deprived of his senses, and
was animated merely by an animal instinct that led
him to drag himself here and there, without purpose.
The Surgeon had him carried to the Fort, and attended
him so well that he is now in good health. He was
unconscious for three days, and was for a long time
in danger, owing to the skull having been driven in,
while the contusions were very serious. From that
time, the French had for a cloister a palisade of
stakes, of very smallextent. But finally the Iroquois
Ambassadors came at the beginning of July, and put
an end to the confinement of these poor hermits,
who, since not all had the gift of Prayer, did not find
much pleasure in so small a monastery.


228 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


(68] CHAPITRE VIII.
DE QUELQUES PRISONNIERS IROQUOIS.


A Relation de 1’an paffé portoit que les Hurons
le ayans pris prifonniers trois Iroquois, en auoient
donné vn aux Algonquins & mené les deux
autres en leur pays. Les Algonquins firent prefent
4 Monfieur le Gouuerneur de celuy qui leur eftoit
efcheu. Il eftoit demy mort & demy bruflé: mais le
foin qu’on en prit le remit en fanté.

Ce Printemps quelques Sauuages en amenerent
deux autres, aufquels ils ne firent aucun mal, fga-
chans bien que les Frang¢ois ne fe plaifent point a la
cruauté; voicy comme lachofe fe paffa. Sept Algon-
quins allant a la chaffe des Iroquois firent traifner
leurs canots fur la glace iufques a Richelieu pour
prendre la riuiere qui vient du pays des Iroquois, &
qui eft plutoft dégelée que le grand fleuue, eftant
entrez dans vn grand lac d’ot fort cette riuiere: ils
abordent vne Ifle [69] pour y chercher leur proye;
l’vn d’eux eftant aux aguets, entend tirer vn coup
d’arquebufe, il en donne la nouuelle a fes Cama-
rades, le maiftre de ces chaffeurs commande qu’on
prenne fa refection; mangeons, dit-il Camarades,
pour la derniere fois: car quoy quw il arriue il faut
pluto{t mourir que de fuyr, ayant bien difné vn nom-
mé Makons s’eftant écarté pour découurir l’ennemy,
vit deux canots qui fembloient tirer droit 4 eux, ce
font rapporta-il des guerriers, tant mieux, repliqua


1642 - 45] RELATION OF 1644-45 229


HOsiPCITAP DER -V1IIT.
OF SOME IROQUOIS PRISONERS.


HE Relation of last year stated that the Hurons,
ae after having taken three Iroquois prisoners, had
given one to the Algonquins, and taken the
two others to their own country. The Algonquins
presented to Monsieur the Governor the one that had
been given them. He was half dead, and half
burned; but the care that they gave him restored
him to health.

Last Spring, some Savages brought in two others,
to whom they did no harm,—knowing well that the
French do not like cruelty; this event occurred thus:
Seven Algonquins went to hunt for Iroquois; they
dragged their canoes on the ice as far as Richelieu,
to take the river which flows from the Iroquois coun-
try, in which the ice melts sooner than in the great
river. Having entered a large lake, whence this river
flows, they landed on an Island [69] to seek their
quarry. One of them, who was watching, heard an
arquebus shot, and notified his Comrades. The
leader of these hunters ordered them to take their
fepast. ““Let us eat,’’ he said, “forthe last time,
Comrades; for, whatever happens, we must die rather
than retreat.” When they had partaken of a good
dinner, one, whose name was Makons, went away
alone, to look for the enemy; he saw two canoes,
that seemed to be coming straight toward them.
‘“They are warriors,’ he reported. ‘‘So much the


230 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 27


vn Chreftien nommé Bernard homme de bien &
courageux, il y a plus d’héneur de vaincre des gens
armez que des courreurs de beftes. Diefcaret qui con-
duifoit cette petite efcoiiade fa va mettre iuftement ot
ces deux canots venoient aborder, le premier qui por-
toit cing [sc. fept] hommes approchant & ne penfant
point A cét embufcade fe veit faliié de fix coups d’ar-
quebufes, qui furent fi adroitement defchargez qu’ils
renuerferent fix hommes, & le feptiéme fe fauua a la
nage tirant vers l’autre canot qui venoit derriere.
Ce canot ayant pris ce fuyart ne perdit point coeur, il
fe deftourne de fa route pour aller aborder 1’Ifle par
vn autre [70] endroit & combattre a terre; mais nos
Algonquins leur vont coupper chemin par dedans le
bois, ils eftoient huit foldats dans ce fecond batteau
bien deliberez de venger la mort de leurs gens; mais
vn coup d’arquebufe renuerfant l’vn de ces guerriers,
fit auffi renuerfer le canot dans 1l’eau, comme ils
auoient pied, ils reprennent courage, ils fe prefen-
tent pour aborder la terre, nos Algonquins leur vont
ala rencontre, ils fe batent vaillamment de part &
d’autre; mais Dieu donnant lauantage a nos gens,
ils renuerferent quatre Iroquois dans l’eau & les
maffacrerent 4 mefme temps: les trois autres redou-
tans les vainqueurs tournerent vifage; mais Bernard
pourfuiuit le plus grand, & luy donnant vn petit coup
d’efpée dans les reins, luy crie, Camarade rends-toy,
autrement tues mort. L’autre qui eftoit plus ieune
fut bien-toft attrapé, & le troifiéme fe fauua: voila
comme fept hommes en tuerent vnze & enamenerent
deux prifonniers. Le Combat ceffé les victorieux vont
chercher les corps morts; ils enleuent la cheuelure
de leurs teftes, & puis s’embarquent pour leur retour.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 231


better,’’ replied a Christian named Bernard, a worthy
and brave man; ‘‘ there is more honor in vanquish-
ing armed men than hunters of animals.” Diesca-
ret, who led this little band, placed himself at the
very spot where the two canoes were about to touch
the shore. When the first approached, carrying
seven men, who had no idea of the ambush, it was
received with a volley from six arquebuses, whose
shots were so skillfully fired that they laid low six
men, while the seventh escaped by swimming to the
other canoe, which came behind. The men in this
canoe picked up the fugitive, and did not lose heart.
They altered their course, so as to land on the Island
at another [70] spot, and to fight on shore; but our
Algonquins ran through the woods, to cut them off.
There were in this second boat eight warriors, fully
resolved to avenge the death of their people; but an
arquebus shot overthrew one of these warriors, and
this also upset the canoe in the water. As they
secured a footing, they regained courage, and tried
to reach land. Our Algonquins advanced to meet
them, and both sides fought bravely; but God gave
the advantage to our people. They threw down four
Iroquois in the water, and killed them at the same
time. The three others, fearing the victors, turned
to flee; but Bernard pursued the tallest of them, and
giving him a slight javelin thrust in the loins, he
called out to him: ‘‘ Surrender, Comrade, or thou
art a dead man.”’ The other, who was younger, was
soon caught, while the third escaped. In this man-
ner seven men killed eleven, and took two prisoners.
The Combat over, the victors went to seek the dead
bodies, scalped them, and embarked on their return
journey. The younger of the two [71] prisoners


232 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


Le plus ieune de ces deux [71] prifonniers eftant lié
trop eftroittement s’en plaignit; vn Algonquin luy
refpondit, Camarade, il femble que tu ignore les loix
de la guerre, il les fcait bien, repart fon Compagnon,
il a veu pleurer plufieurs de vos gens, pris & bruflez
dans nof{tre pays, ilne craint point ny vos menaces ny
vos tourmens. L’Algonquin croyant qu'il parloit
infolemment pour vn prifonnier, luy defchargea deux
ou trois coups: mais le prifonnier ne rabaiffant rien de
fon courage fe mit 4 chanter, difant: que fes parens
trouueroient bien lemoyende vangerfamort. Ilya
peut-eftre cinquante ans qu’aucun prifonnier Sauuage
n’a e{té fi doucement traitté, on ne les battit point
dauantage, on ne leur arracha point les ongles, on
ne leur couppa aucun doigt, qui font les premieres
careffes que les Sauuages font a leurs prifonniers.
Vn iour deuant que d’arriuer A fainct Iofeph ot ils
furent amenez, Dieskaret enuoya vn ieune homme
donner aduis au Pere qui a foin des Sauuages de ce
lieu, qu'il arriueroit bien-toft, & qu’il ameneroit des
prifonniers a Monfieur le Gouverneur, & aux Chre-
{tiens Sauuages fes amis; on les entendit [72] plutoft
qu’on ne les vit; car ils s’en venoient chantans dans
leurs canots, chacun accourt fur le bord du grand
fleuue, les prifonniers eftoient debout dancans a leur
mode au bruit des auirons & au fon de la voix des
vainqueurs. Les cheuelures de ceux qui auoient
e{té tuez au combat, attachez au bout de certains
baftons, voltigeoient en l’air au gré du vent comme
des flouettes, approchant de nos riues il fe fit vne
falue d’arquebufades de part & d’autre auec affez
@adreffe. lean Baptifte Etinechkaouat les voyat
tous prefts de mettre pied A terre, fit faire halte, &


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 233


found that his bonds were too tight, and complained
of it. An Algonquin replied to him, ‘‘ Comrade,
thou seemest ignorant of the rules of war.’’ ‘‘ He
knows them well,” replied his Companion; ‘‘ he has
seen many of your people weep who have been taken
prisoners, and have been burned in our country. He
fears neither your threats nor your tortures.” The
Algonquin considered that he spoke insolently for a
prisoner, and gave him two or three blows. But the
prisoner did not lose courage, and began to sing,
saying that his friends would find means to avenge
his death. It is perhaps fifty years since any Sav-
age prisoner has been so gently treated. They did
not beat them any more, nor tear out their nails, nor
cut off their fingers, which are the first attentions
that the Savages pay to their prisoners. One day,
before they arrived at saint Joseph, whither they
were taken, Dieskaret sent a young man to inform
the Father who has charge of the Savages at that
place that he would soon arrive, and would bring
prisoners to Monsieur the Governor and to the Chris-
tian Savages, his friends. They were heard [72]
sooner than they were seen, for they came on, sing-
ing in their canoes. Every one ran to the bank of
the great river. The prisoners were erect, dancing
in their fashion to the noise of the paddles and to
the sound of the conquerors’ voices. The scalps of
those who had been killed in the fight, attached to
the ends of some sticks, fluttered in the air at the will
of the wind, like vanes. As they neared the shore,
a salvo of musketry was fired on either side with
considerable skill. When Jean Baptiste Etinechka-
ouat saw that they were all ready to land, he called
a halt, and, raising his voice, he addressed these few


234 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


releuant fa voix addreffa ce peu de paroles au Capi-
taine qui amenoit ces captifs. Nous prenons plaifir
de te voir, tu t’es vaillamment comporté, chacun fe
refioiiit de ta venué, tu ne pouuois rien apporter de
plus agreable 4 nos yeux que ces dépoiiilles de nos
ennemis dont tu t’és enrichy. Tu fcais bien que
nous procedons maintenant d’vne autre fagon que
nous ne faifions iadis, nous auons ietté par terre
toutes nos vieilles couftumes: C’ef{t pourquoy nous te
receurons en paix fans faire tort aux prifonniers,
fans les frapper ny endommager en [73] quelque
facon que ce foit. Ce Capitaine fe leuant debout en
fon canot, refpondit en peu de mots: Ie fuis dans
voftre penfée, i’ay donné ma parole qu’on n’offenfe-
roit point les prifonniers, refjoiiiffons nous paifible-
ment, chantons faifons feftin, dancons, voila difoit-
il, de fujets d’allegreffes, mon{ftrant les cheuelures
& les prifonniers affis parmy les Algonquins dans
leurs canots. Le Pere qui auoit charge des Sauuages
fit auffi fa petite harangue, loiiant les guerriers de
leur courage & les congratulant de leur douceur, leur
remon{trant que c’eftoit le propre des chiens & des
loups de deuorer leur proye: mais que les hommes
deuoient eftre humains, notamment enters leurs
femblables; qu’au refte il auoit donné aduis a
Monfieur le Gouuerneur de leur arriuée, & qu'il auoit
enuoyé vne efcotiade de foldats pour les bien vei-
gner, & 1a-deffus les foldats firent vne defcharge de
leurs armes qui plit grandement aux Sauuages. Ces
complimens faits, les prifonniers defcendirent des
canots, comme ils n’entendoient point la langue
Algonquine, ils auoient belle [74] peur qu’on ne les
faltiaft 4 l’entrée des Cabanes a grands coups de


1642 - 45] RELATION OF 1644-45 235


words to the Captain who brought the prisoners:
“We take pleasure in seeing thee; thou hast behaved
valiantly. All rejoice at thy coming; thou couldst not
bring anything more agreeable to our eyes than these
spoils of our enemies with which thou hast enriched
thyself. Thou knowest well that we now proceed in
a different fashion than we formerly did. We have
overturned all our old customs. That is why we
receive thee quietly, without harming the prisoners,
without striking or injuring them in [73] any way.”’
The Captain stood up in his canoe, and replied in a
few words: ‘‘I am of your mind. I gave my word
that the prisoners would not be harmed. Let us
rejoice peacefully; let us sing, feast, and dance.
These,’’ said he, ‘‘are cause for joy,’’—showing the
scalps, and the prisoners sitting among the Algon-
quins in their canoes. The Father in charge of the
Savages also delivered a short harangue, praising
the warriors for their courage, congratulating them
upon their gentleness, and showing them that it
was for dogs and wolves to devour their quarry, but
that men should be humane, especially toward
their fellow creatures; he told them, moreover, that
he had notified Monsieur the Governor of their
atrival, and that he had sent a squad of soldiers
to welcome them. Thereupon, the soldiers dis-
charged their pieces, which greatly pleased the Sav-
ages. When these compliments had been paid, the
prisoners disembarked from the canoes. As they did
not understand the Algonquin language, they great-
ly [74] feared that, on entering the Cabins, they
would be received with heavy strokes from cudgels,
with blows from whips and ropes, with slashes from
knives, and with burning firebrands, according to


236 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


bafton, auec des coups de foiiets & de cordes, auec
des taillades de coufteaux, auec des tifons ardens
felon leur couftume. I] n’y a pas long-temps que les
Sauuages venans de la guerre & amenans des pri-
fonniers, les filles & les femmes voyant les canots fe
iettoient 4a l’eau toute nués pour attraper ce qu’elles
pourroient des dépoiiilles de ’ennemy. Ces info-
lences font bannies de la refidence de faint lofeph.
Il n’y eut qu’vn ieune homme, encor n’eftoit-il pas
entierement nud, qui fe lancant dans la riuiere &
faifant le plongeon paffa fous le canot du Capitaine,
lequel pour recompenfe luy donna l’vne des arque-
bufes qu’il auoit enleué fur les Iroquois, tous les
autres ne branflerent point, les prifonniers furent
receus paifiblement comme dans leurs maifons. Les
ieunes filles vindrent demander congé au Pere de
dancer & de fe rejoiiyr, ce qu'il leur fut aifément
accordé; on planta les eftendars, c’eft a dire les teftes
volantes fur les cabanes, & tout le monde fit feitin &
fe refiotiit 4 fa mode.

[75] Ie diray en paffant que ce n’ef{t pas peu auoir
gaigné fur les Sauuages, d’empefcher qu’ils ne def-
chargeaffent leur colere fur ceux qui les traittent auec
vne fureur diabolique quand ils lestiennent. I1 fe
rencontra vne vieille 4 qui la veué de ces nouueaux
hoftes faifoit bien mal au cceur: elle n’ofa neant-
moi[n]s les toucher fans en auoir permifiion, s’addref-
fant au Pere, elle luy dit; mon Pere permettez moy
de careffer vn petit les prifonniers, c’eft vn terme
irronique, dont ils fe feruent les voulant tourmenter;
ils ont tué, bruflé, mangé mon pere, mon mary &
mes enfans. Permettez mon Pere que ie les careffe,
le Pere luy ayant reparty qu’en effet ces Iroquois


1642-45} RELATION OF 1644-45 237


their custom. Not long ago, when the Savages
returned from war and brought prisoners with them,
the girls and women, on seeing the canoes, would
throw themselves into the water, stark naked, to catch
what they could of the enemy’s spoils. Such un-
seemly conduct is banished from the residence of
saint Joseph. There was only one young man, and
even he was not quite naked, who threw himself into
the river and dived under the Captain’s canoe. The
latter rewarded him by giving him one of the arque-
buses that he had taken from the Iroquois. None
of the others stirred. The prisoners were received
as peaceably as in their own houses. The young
girls came and asked the Father to give them permis-
sion to dance and enjoy themselves, which was will-
ingly granted. The standards—that is, the flying
scalps — were fastened on the cabins; and all feasted
and made merry in their fashion.

[75] I may say, in passing, that it is no little hold
gained over the Savages, to hinder them from
venting their fury on those who, when they hold
them, treat them with fiendish cruelty. There was
an old woman to whom the sight of these new guests
was exceedingly unwelcome; however, she did not
dare to touch them without permission. Addressing
herself to the Father, she said: ‘‘ My Father, allow
me to caress the prisoners a little.’”’ This is an iron-
ical expression they use when they wish to torture
them. ‘‘ They have killed, burned, and eaten my
father, my husband, and my children. Permit me,
my Father, to caress them.” The Father replied to
her that it was true that the Iroquois had done her
great injury; but that she also had offended God, and
that with what measure she meted to her enemies so


238 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


l’auoient bien offenfée; mais auffi qu’elle auoit fafché
Dieu, & qu’a la mefme mefure qu’elle mefureroit fes
ennemis Dieu la mefureroit, qu’elle trouueroit le
pardon fi elle pardonnoit, & la vengeance fi elle fe
vengeoit. Cette pauure femme ne repartit autre
chofe, finon ie ne leur feray donc point de mal.

En ce mefme temps le Pere demandant par ren-
contre 4 vne autre femme fi [76] elle aymoit Noftre
Seigneur, cette feéme qui eft d’vn naturel extreme-
ment vindicatif, & qui autre-fois eftoit comme enra-
gée contre les Iroquois, refpondit d’vn bon accent:
I’ayme Dieu plus que ie ne hai les Iroquois: c’eft ce
feul amour que ie luy porte qui n’empefche de leur
faire reffentir les torts qu’ils mont faits. «le vimic
re{tée feule d’vne groffe famille, ie fuis pauure &
abandonné, ils m’ont mis en cét eftat, ayant rofty &
mangé tous mes parens & tous mes amys, en effet,
mon coeur veut hayr ces gens-la, difoit-elle; mais ila
plus d’amour pour Dieu qu’il n’a de hayne & d’auer-
fion pour eux: c’eft pourquoy ie ne leur veus aucun
mal, rentrons s’il vous plaif{t en difcours.

Le fecond iour apres l’arriuée de ces prifonniers,
Monfieur le Gouuerneur fe tranfportant a la refidence
de S. Iofeph bien accompagné, entra dans noi{tre
petite maifon, ot fe trouuerent auffi les vainqueurs,
les vaincus & les autres Sauuages. MDieskareth parla
en cette forte; c’eft a vous a qui i’addreffe ma parole,
vous qui n’eftes qu’vne mefme chofe, vous qui n’a-
uez [77] qu’vn mefme fecret, vous qui vous vous par-
lez a l’oreille: C’eft au Capitaine des Francois, c’eft
& vous qui depuis trois ans ef{tez deuenus Francois,
c’eft a toy Negabamat, c’eft 4 toy Etinechkaouat, a qui
i’addreffe ma voix, vous n’ef{tes qu’vn mefme confeil,


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 239


would God measure it to her; that she would find
forgiveness if she forgave, and vengeance if she
revenged herself. The poor woman said not another
word in reply, except these: ‘‘ Then I will do them
no harm.”’

At the same time, the Father casually asked an-
other woman whether [76] she loved Our Lord.
This woman — whois exceedingly vindictive, and had
been almost insanely furious against the Iroquois —
replied in a gentle tone: ‘‘I love God more than I
hate the Iroquois; that love alone which I bear to
him prevents me from making them feel the injuries
that they have done to me. I am the only one
remaining of a large family; I am poor and forsaken.
They have placed me in that condition for they
roasted and ate all my relatives and all my friends.
In fact, my heart would hate those people,’’ she
said; ‘‘ but it has more love for God than hatred and
aversion for them. That is why I wish them no
evil.’’ Let us return to our subject, if you please.

On the second day after the arrival of these prison-
ers, Monsieur the Governor proceeded to the resi-
dence of St. Joseph, well accompanied, and en-
tered our modest house, where were also the victors,
the vanquished, and the other Savages. Dieskareth
spoke as follows: ‘‘It is to you that I address my
words, you who are but one and the same thing, you
who have [77] but one secret, you who whisper into
each other’s ears. It isto the Captain of the French,
and to you who in the past three years have become
French,—to thee, Negabamat; to thee, Etinechka-
ouat—to whom I address my voice; you are but one
council. Listen to me”’ (he named the two Captains
who are at saint Joseph). ‘‘ Although I have no


240 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 27


ef{coutez-moy (il nommoit les deux Capitaines qui
font a faint Iofeph) encor que ie n’aye point d’efprit,
fouffrez que ie vous parle, apres ce preambule il
expliqua le deffein qu’il auoit eu allant 4 la guerre, &
le bon rencontre que le Ciel luy auoit fait faire, &
pour conclufion il dit: vay veu, i’ay tué, i’ay pris,
lay amené, les voila prefens, i’entre dans vos pen-
fées, elles font bonnes, ie penetre dans vos cceurs,
vous qui n’auez qu’vne mefme demeure, qui n’auez
qu’vn mefme aduis, foyez les Dieux de la terre, met-
tez la paix par tout, donnez le repos a tout le pays;
puis mettant la main fur les teftes des prifonniers
qui ef{toient liez deuant Monfieur le Gouuerneur: les
voila tous entiers fans eftre offenfez, ie vous les liure,
difpofez-en felon vos penfées.

Bernard fe leuant parla en ces termes; [78] ie con-
firme tout ce qu’a dit celuy qui vient de haranguer, &
pour prouuer que fa parole eft veritable, & que luy
& moy vous donnons ces prifonniers: ie vay ietterau
feu leurs liens & le cou{teau qui les couppera & toute
ma colere: difant cela, il tire vn coufteau couppe
les liens, & iettant tout dans le feu, ie n’ay plus,
dit-il de paffion que pour la paix, & ayant fait leuer
debout les prifonniers, les prefenta 4 Monfieur de
Montmagny noftre Gouuerneur: lequel leur fit ref-
pondre par fon interprete qu’il honoroit leur vaillance
& leur courage, qu’il les auoit toufiours aimez, notam-
ment ceux qui eftoient deuenus fes freres & fes pa-
rens par le Baptefme, qu’au refte il ne vouloit pas
que fon action de graces pour le prefent qu’ils luy
faifoient fut vne parole toute nué, qu’il la vouloit
reueftir de robbes & armer de poudre & de plomb,
parlant conformement & leur fagon de fenoncer, & 14


1642-45) RELATION OF 1644-45 241


sense, allow me to speak to you.” After this pre-
amble, he explained the design that he had had in
going to war, and the good fortune that Heaven had
sent him; and in conclusion he said: ‘‘ I have seen,
I have killed, I have captured, I have brought back;
here they are present. I enter into your thoughts;
they are good. I penetrate into your hearts, you who
have but one abode and the same opinion. Be the
Gods of the earth; cause peace to reign everywhere;
give rest to the whole country.’’ Then, laying his
hand on the heads of the prisoners, who lay bound
before Monsieur the Governor, ‘‘ Here they are,
uninjured and without harm; I deliver them to you;
do as you think best with them.”’

Bernard arose and spoke in these terms: [78]
““T confirm all that has been said by him who has
just harangued us; and, to prove that his words are
true, and that he and I give you those prisoners, I
will cast into the fire their bonds, the knife that will
cut them, and all my anger.” As he said this, he
drew a knife and cut the bonds; and, throwing the
whole into the fire, he said: ‘‘ I have no longer any
passion, but for peace;’’ and, making the prisoners
stand up, he presented them to Monsieur de Mont-
magny our Governor. He replied to them, through
his interpreter, that he honored their valor and their
courage; that he had always loved them, especially
those who had become his brothers and his relatives
through Baptism; moreover, that he did not wish
that his thanks for the present which they were giving
him should be but a bare word; that he wished to
clothe it with robes, and arm it with powder and
lead,— speaking in their mode of expressing them-
selves,—and then he gave them handsome presents.


242 LES RELATIONS ‘DES SESULTES [VoL. 27


deffus, il leur fit de beaux prefens. Les Iroquois
qui iufques alors auoient gardé le filence incertains
du fuccez de ce confeil & des harangues qui [sc. qu’ils]
n’entendoient pas cOmmencerent a changer [79] de
pofture & de vifage, l’vn d’eux, homme grand &
bien-fait fe prefente deuant Monfieur le Gouuerneur,
s’écriant; voila qui va bien, mon corps eft deliuré de
la mort, ie fuis retiré du feu. Onontio tu m’as donné
la vie, ie t’en remercie, ie ne m’oublieray iamais de
ce bien-fait, tout mon pays en fera reconnoiffant, la
terre va eftre toute belle, la riuiere fera toute calme
& toute vnie, & la paix nous fera tous amys. Ie n’ay
plus d’ombre deuant mes yeux. Les ames de mes
anceftres maffacrez par les Alguonquins font difpa-
rués, ie les ay fous mes pieds. Onontio il faut
auotier que tu es bon & que nous fommes mefchans;
mais noftre colere eft partie, ie n’ay plus de vigueur
que pour la ioye & pour la paix, & difant cela il fe
mit 4 dancer d’vne facon vn peu differente de celle
de nos Sauuages. I1 chantoit, il fe remuoit, il eften-
doit les bras, il les efleuoit en haut comme apoftro-
phant le Ciel, il fe mettoit a genoiiil, & dancoit en
cette pof{ture, leuant les yeux & les bras vers le Ciel,
puis fe leuant tout a coup prend vne hache, il entre
comme en furie, & en fe deftournant [80] ietta fa
hache au feu, difant: voila ma colere a bas, adieu la
guerre, ie pofe les armes, ie fuis voftre amy pour ia-
mais. S’il y a dans ces peuples des actions barbares,
il y a des penfées dignes de l’efprit des Grecs & des
Romains.

La Ceremonie faite, chacun fe retira en fon quar-
tier, les prifonniers demeurerent en liberté: en forte
neantmoins que quelques foldats Francois les veil-


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 243


The Iroquois, who had remained silent up to that
moment,— being uncertain as to the result of the
council, and of the harangues that they heard and
could not understand,— began to change [79] their
attitudes and countenances. One of them, a tall
and well-shaped man, presented himself before Mon-
sieur the Governor, exclaiming: ‘‘ This is well, my
body is delivered from death; I am withdrawn from
the fire. Onontio, thou hast given me life; I thank
thee for it,—I shall never forget this kindness. The
whole of my country will be grateful for it; the
earth will be quite beautiful, the river will be quite
calm and smooth, and peace will make us all friends.
I have no longer any shadow before my eyes. The
souls of my ancestors killed by the Alguonquins have
disappeared; I have them under my feet. Onontio,
it must be admitted that thou art good and that we
are wicked, but our anger has departed; I no longer
have any ardor except for joy and peace.’’ As he
said this, he began to dance, in a fashion somewhat
different from that of our Savages. He sang, he
shook himself; he spread out his arms and raised
them aloft, as if addressing himself to Heaven; he
knelt down and danced in that posture, raising his
eyes and arms to Heaven. Then, suddenly rising,
he took a hatchet and seemed to fly into a rage; and,
turning to one side, [80] he threw the hatchet into
the fire, saying: ‘‘ There is my anger cast down;
farewell to war; I lay down my arms; I am your
friend forever.’’ If there be barbarous actions
among these peoples, there are also thoughts worthy
of the spirit of the Greeks and Romans.

The Ceremony over, each one withdrew to his
own quarters. The prisoners remained at liberty,


244 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 27


loient, ce que nos Sauuages mefmes ne pouuoient
fupporter, difant, qu'il ne failloit pas craindre qu’ils
fe fauuaffent & qu’on les tiendroit pour des poltrons
en leur pays, d’auoir eu peur de ceux qui leurs
auoient donné la vie. I’ay fouuent remarqué que les
Sauuages naturellement volages & inconftans font
tres-feruens dans quelques couftumes de leur pays.

Cecy fe paffa le dix-huitiefme de May, bien-toft
apres Monfieur le Gouuerneur renuoyant ces Iroquois
aux trois riuieres,ordonna au fieur de Chanflour d’équi-
per le prifonnier Iroquois qu’on auoit tenu tout l’hy-
uer, & de l’enuoyer en fon pays porter les nouuelles
de ce qui fe [81] paffoit icy, auec ordre de dire aux
Capitaines des Iroquois que Onontio fe refentant de la
courtoifie qu’il auoit receu d’eux, lors quiils luy
ramenerent deux prifonniers Francois, non feulement
il l’auoit retiré de la main des Alguonquins; mais qu’il
luy auoit donné la liberté comme il auoit defia fait a
vn Sokokiois leur amy & allié, qu’au refte il auoit
encor deux prifonniers pleins de fanté, & qu’il eftoit
tout pre{t de les rendre apres les auoir entendu parler
fur ce fujet, que l’occafion d’applanir la terre & de faire
vne paix vniuerfelle entre toutes les Nations, eftoit
toute belle, qu’ils en feroient comme bon leur fem-
bleroit. Le Chapitre fuiuant nous fera voir le fuccez
de ce voyage.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 245


except, however, that some French soldiers watched
them. This our Savages themselves could not bear,
Saying that there was no need to fear that they would
escape, and that they would be considered as cowards
in their own country if they were afraid of those who
had given them life. I have often remarked that the
Savages, who are naturally fickle and inconstant,
are very earnest as regards some customs of their
country.

This happened on the eighteenth of May. Shortly
afterward, Monsieur the Governor sent these Iro-
quois back to three rivers, and ordered the sieur de
Chanflour to equip the Iroquois prisoner that had
been kept all winter, and to send him to his own
country to carry the news of what was [81] passing
here. This prisoner was also ordered to tell the Cap-
tains of the Iroquois that Onontio was grateful for the
courtesy that he had received from them when they
sent back to him two French prisoners; and that, not
only had he released him from the hands of the
Alguonquins, but that he had given him his liberty as
he had already done to a Sokokiois, their friend and
ally; that, moreover, he had two other prisoners full
of health, and that he was quite prepared to give up
these, after having heard them speak on the subject;
that this was a most excellent opportunity to smooth
the earth, and to bring about universal peace among
all the Nations; and that they might do as seemed
good tothem. The following Chapter will show us
the success of that journey.


246 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


[82] CHAPITRE XI. [i.e., ix.]


TRAITTE DE LA PAIX ENTRE LES FRANCOIS, IROQUOIS
& AUTRES NATIONS.


E cinquiéme iour de Iuillet, le prifonnier Iro-
is quois mis en liberté & renuoyé en fon pays,
comme i’ay dit au Chapitre precedent, parut
aux trois Riuieres accompagné de deux hommes de
confideration parmy ces peuples deleguez pour venir
traitter de paix auec Onontio (c’eft ainfi qu’ils noment
Monfieur le Gouuerneur[)], & tous les Ffancois & tous
les Sauuages nos alliez.

Vn ieune homme nommé Guillaume Coufture qui
auoit e{té pris auec le Pere Ifaac Iogues, & qui depuis
ce temps-la eftoit re{té dans le pays des Iroquois les
accompagnoit, fi-toft qu’il fut reconnu chacun fe
ietta a fon col, on le regardoit comme vn homme
reffufcité qui donne de la ioye a tous ceux qui le
croyoient mort, ou du moins en danger de paffer le
re{te de fesiours dans vne tres-amere & [83] tres-bar-
bare captiuité. Ayant mis pied 4 terre, il nous infor-
ma du deffein de ces trois Sauuages, auec lefquels il
auoit efté renuoyé, le plus remarquable des trois
nommé Kiotfeaeton, voyant les Francois & les
Sauuages accourir fur le bord de la riuiere, fe leua
debout fur l’auant de la Chalouppe qui l’auoit amené
depuis Richelieu iufques aux trois Riuieres. I1 eftoit
quafi tout couuert de Pourcelaine, faifant figne de la
main qu’on l’efcouta{t, il s’écria, mes Freres, i’ay


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 247
a le ec


[82] CHAPTER XI. [ie., ix.]


TREATY OF PEACE BETWEEN THE FRENCH, THE IRO-
QUOIS, AND OTHER NATIONS.


N the fifth day of July, the Iroquois prisoner
who had been set at liberty and sent back to
his own country, as I have said in the fore-

going Chapter, made his appearance at three Rivers
accompanied by two men of note among those people,
who had been delegated to negotiate peace with
Onontio (thus they name Monsieur the Governor), and _
all the French, and all the Savages who are our allies.
A young man named Guillaume Cousture who had
been taken prisoner with Father Isaac Jogues, and
who had since then remained in the Iroquois coun-
try, accompanied them. As soon as he was recog-
nized all threw their arms around his neck; he was
looked upon as a man risen from the dead, who
brought joy to all who thought him dead,—or, at
least, that he was in danger of passing the remainder
of his days in most bitter and [83] cruel captivity.
As soon as he landed, he informed us of the design of
the three Savages with whom he had been sent back.
When the most important of the three, named Kiotse-
aeton, saw the French and the Savages hastening to
the bank of the river, he stood up in the bow of the
Shallop that had brought him from Richelieu to three
Rivers. He was almost completely covered with
Porcelain beads. Motioning with his hand for
silence, he called out: ‘‘ My Brothers, I have left my


248 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — {Vou. 27


quitté mon pais pour vous venir voir, me voila enfin
arriué fur vos terres, on m’a dit 4 mon depart que ie
venois chercher la mort, & que ie ne verrois iamais
plus ma patrie; mais ie me fuis volontairement
exposé pour le bien de la paix: ie viens donc entrer
dans les deffeins des Francois, des Hurons & des
Alguonquins, ie viens pour vous communiquer les
penfées de tout mon pays, & cela dit, la Chalouppe
tire vn coup de pierrier, & le Fort refpond d’vn coup
de canon pour marque de réjoiiiffance.

Ces Ambaffadeurs ayans mis pied 4a terre, furent
conduits en la chambre du [84] fieur de Chanflour,
lequel leur fit fort bon accueil; on leur prefenta quel-
ques petits rafraifchiflemens, & apres auoir mangé &
petuné, Kiotfaeton qui portoit toufiours la parole, dit
a tous les Francois qui lenuironnoient, ie trouue
bien de la douceur dans vos maifons, depuis que i’ay
mis le pied das voftre pays ie n’ay veu que dela
refiotiiffance, ie voy bien que celuy qui eft au Ciel
veut conclure vne affaire bien importante, les hommes
ont des efprits & des penfées trop differentes pour
tomber d’accord, c’eft le Ciel qui reiinira tout. Ce
mefme iour on enuloya vn canot 4 Monfieur le Gou-
uerneur pour l’informer de la venué de ces nouueaux
hoftes.

Cependant & eux & les prifonniers qui n’eftoient
pas encor rendus auoient toute liberté de s’aller pro-
mener ott ils vouloient. Les Alguonquins & les Mon-
tagnais les inuitoient 4 leur feftins, & petit a petit
ils s’accouftumoient 4 conuerfer enfemble. Le fieur
de Chanflour les ayant bien traittez, certain iour leur
dit qu’ils eftoient parmy nous comme dans leur pays,


x


qu’il n’y auoit rien 4 craindre [85] pour eux, qu’ils


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 249


country to come and see you. At last I have reached
your land. I was told, on my departure, that I was
going to seek death, and that I would never again
see my country. But I have willingly exposed my-
self for the good of peace. I come therefore to enter
into the designs of the French, of the Hurons, and
of the Alguonquins. I come to make known to
you the thoughts of all my country.’’ When he had
said this, the Shallop fired a shot from a swivel gun,
and the Fort replied by a discharge from the can-
non, as a sign of rejoicing.
_ When those Ambassadors had landed, they were
conducted into the room of the [84] sieur de Chan-
flour, who gave them a very cordial reception.
They were offered some slight refreshments, and, '
after they had eaten and smoked, Kiotsaeton, who
was always the spokesman, said to all the French
who surrounded him, ‘‘I find much pleasure in your
houses. Since I have set foot in your country, I
have observed nothing but rejoicing. I see very
well that he who is in the Sky wishes to bring toa
conclusion a very important matter. The minds and
thoughts of men are too diverse to fall into accord;
it is the Sky that will combine all.’’ On the same
day, a canoe was sent to Monsieur the Governor to
inform him of the arrival of these new guests.
Meanwhile, both they and the prisoners who had
not yet been given up had full liberty to wander
where they willed. The Alguonquins and Monta-
gnais invited them to their feasts, and they gradually
accustomed themselves to converse together. The
sieur de Chanflour treated them very well; one day
he said to them that they were with us as if in their
own country; that they had nothing to fear; [85]


250 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


e{toient dans leur maifon. Kiotfaeton repartit a
ce compliment auec vne pointe affez aigué & affez
gentile: Ie te prie, dit-il a I’Interprete, de dire a ce
Capitaine qui nous parle qu’il vfe d’vne grande men-
terie en noftre endroit, du moins eft-il affeuré que
ce qu'il dit n’eft pas veritable: & 1a-deffus il fit vne
petite paufe pour laiffer former l’eftonnement. Puis
il adioufta; ce Capitaine me dit que ie fuis icy comme
dans mon pays, cela eft bien efloigné de la verité:
car ie ne ferois ny honoré ny careffé dans mon pays,
& ie voy icy que tout le monde m’honore & me ca-
reffe, il dit que ie fuis comme dans ma maifon; c’eft
vne e{pece de menterie: car ie fuis mal-traitté dans
ma maifon; & ie fais icy tous les iours bonne chere:
ie fuis continuellement dans les feftins, ie ne fuis
donc pas icy comme dans mon pays, ny comme dans
ma maifon; il fit quantité d’autres reparties qui
tef{moignoient affez qu’il auoit de l’efprit.

Enfin Monfieur le Gouuerneur eftat arriué de
Quebec aux trois Riuieres, apres auoir confideré les
Ambaffadeurs, leur [86] donna audiance le douziéme
Iuillet. Cela fe fit dans la cour du Fort ot l’on fit
eftendre de grandes voiles contre l’ardeur du Soleil;
voicy comme le lieu eftoit difpofé, d’vn cofté eftoit
Monfieur le Gouuerneur, accompagné de fes gens,
& du Reuerend Pere Vimont Superieur de la Miffion.
Les Iroquois eftoient affis 4 fes pieds fur vne grande
écorce de pruffe, ils auoient tefmoigné deuant l’affem-
blée qu’ils fe vouloient mettre de fon cofté pour
marque de l’affection qu’ils portoient aux Francois.

A loppofite eftoient les Algonquins, les Montagnais
& les Attikamegues, les deux coftez eftoient fermez
de quelques Frangois & de quelques Hurons. Au


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 251


that they were in their own house. Kiotsaeton
replied to this compliment by a very well-pointed
and neat retort. ‘‘ I beg thee,’’ he said to the Inter-
preter, “‘ to say to that Captain who speaks to us that
he tells a great falsehood with respect to us; at
least, it is certain that what he says is not true.’’
And thereupon he paused a little, to let the wonder
grow. Then he added: ‘‘ That Captain tells me that
Iam here as if in my own country. That is very
far from the truth. I would be neither honored nor
treated with such consideration in my own country,
while here every one honors me and pays me atten-
tion. He says that I am asif in my own house; that
is a sort of falsehood, for I am maltreated in my
house, and here I fare well every day,—I am con-
tinually feasting. Therefore I am not as if I were
in my own country or in my own house.’’ He in-
dulged in many other repartees which clearly showed
that he had wit.

Finally, Monsieur the Governor came from Quebec
to three Rivers; and, after having seen the Ambassa-
dors, [86] he gave audience to them on the twelfth of
July. This took place in the courtyard of the Fort,
over which large sails had been spread to keep off
the heat of the Sun. Their places were thus ar-
ranged: on one side was Monsieur the Governor,
accompanied by his people and by Reverend Father
Vimont, Superior of the Mission. The Iroquois sat
at his feet, on a great piece of hemlock bark. They
had stated before the assembly that they wished to
be on his side, as a mark of the affection that they
bore to the French.

Opposite them were the Algonquins, the Monta-
gnais, and the Attikamegues; the two other sides


252 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


4


milieu il y auoit vne grande place vn peu plus longue
que large, ott les Iroquois firent planter deux perches,
& tirer vne corde de l’vn a l'autre pour y pendre &
attacher les paroles qu’ils nous deuoient porter, c’eft
a dire, les prefens qu’ils nous vouloient faire, lefquels
confiftoient en dix-fept colliers de pourcelaine, dont
vne partie eftoit fur leurs corps. l’autre partie eftoit
renfermée [87] dans vn petit fac placé tout aupres
d’eux, tout le monde eftant affemblé & chacun ayant
pris place, Kiotfaeton qui eftoit d’vne haute {ftature
fe leua & regardant le Soleil, & puis tournant fes
yeux fur toute la Compagnie, il prit vn collier de
porcelaine en fa main, commengant fa harangue d’vne
voix forte: Onontio prefte l’oreille, ie fuis la bouche
de tout mon pays, tu efcoute tous les Iroquois enten-
dant ma parole, mon coeur n’a rien de mauuais, ie
n’ay que de bonnes chanfons en bouche, nous auons
des tas de chanfons de guerre en noftre pays, nous
les auons toutes iettées par terre, nous n’auons plus
que des chants de refjoiiiffance, & 14 deffus ilfe mit a
chanter, fes compatriotes refpondirent, il fe pourme-
noit dans cette grande place comme deffus vn theatre,
il faifoit mille geftes, il regardoit le Ciel, il enuifa-
geoit le Soleil, il frottoit fes bras comme s’il en eut
voulu faire fortir la vigueur qui les anime en guerre,
apres auoir bien chanté, il dit que le prefent qu’il
tenoit en main, remercioit Monfieur le Gouuerneur
de ce qu’il auoit fauué la vie & Tokhrahenehiaron,
[83] le retirant 1’Automne paffé du feu & de la dent
des Alguonquins, mais il fe plaignit gentiment de ce
qu'on l’auoit renuoyé tout feul dans fon pays, fi fon
canot fe fut renuerfé, fi les vents l’euffent fait fub-
merger, sil eut efté noyé, vous euffiez long temps


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 253


were closed in by some French and some Hurons.
In the center was a large space, somewhat longer
than wide, in which the Iroquois caused two poles to -
be planted, and a cord to be stretched from one to
the other on which to hang and tie the words that
they were to bring us,—that is to say, the presents
they wished to make us, which consisted of seven-
teen collars of porcelain beads, a portion of which
were on their bodies. The remainder were en-
closed [87] in a small pouch placed quite near them.
When all had assembled and had taken their places,
Kiotsaeton who was high in stature, rose and looked
at the Sun, then cast his eyes over the whole Com-
pany; he took a collar of porcelain beads in his hand
and commenced to harangue ina loud voice. ‘* Onon+
tio, lend me ear. Iam the mouth for the whole of
my country; thou listenest to all the Iroquois, in
hearing my words. There is no evil in my heart; I
have only good songsin my mouth. We havea mul-
titude of war songs in our country; we have cast
them all on the ground; we have no longer anything
but songs of rejoicing.’”’ Thereupon he began to
sing; his countrymen responded; he walked about
that great space as if on the stage of a theatre; he
made a thousand gestures; he looked up to Heaven;
he gazed at the Sun; he rubbed his arms as if he
wished to draw from them the strength that moved
them in war. After he had sung awhile, he said
that the present that he held in his hand thanked
Monsieur the Governor for having saved the life of
Tokhrahenehiaron, [88] when he drew him last Au-
tumn out of the fire and away from the teeth of the
Alguonquins; but he complained gracefully that he
had been sent back all alone to hisown country. ‘“‘If


“Zu


254 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


attendu le retour de ce pauure homme aby{mé, &
vous nous auriez accufez d’vne faute que vous-mefmes
auriez faite: Cela dit, il attacha fon collier au lieu
deftiné.

En tirant vn autre il l’attacha au bras de Guil-
laume Coufture, en difant tout haut, c’eft ce Collier
qui vous ramene ce prifonnier: ie ne luy ay pas .
voulu dire eftant encor dans le pays; va t’en mon
Neueu, prends vn Canot & t’en retourne 4 Quebec,
mon efprit n’auroit pas efté en repos, i’aurois tou-
fiours penfé & repenfé a par[t] moy, ne s’eft-il pas
perdu, en verité ie n’aurois pas eu d’efprit fi i’euffe
procedé en cette forte. Celuy que vous auez ren-
uoyé a eu toutes les peines du monde en fon voyage,
il commenga a les exprimer; mais fi pathetiquement
qu'il n’y a tabarin en France fi naif que ce Barbare.
Il prenoit vn bafton, le mettoit fur [89] fa tefte
comme vn paquet, puis le portoit d’vn bout de la
place 4 l'autre, reprefentant ce qu’auoit fait ce pri-
fonnier dans les faults & dans le courrant d’eau, auf-
quels eftant arriué, il auoit tranfporté fon bagage
piece a piece, il alloit & reuenoit reprefentant les
voyages, les tours & retours du prifonnier, il cher-
choit [sc. s’échouoit] contre vne pierre, il reculoit
plus qu'il n’auangoit dans fon canot, ne le pouuant
fouftenir feul contre les courans d’eau, il perdoit cou-
rage, & puis reprenoit fes forces, bref, ie n’ay rien
veu de mieux exprimé que cette action, encor (difoit-
il) fi vous l’euffiez aidé a paffer les faults & les mau-
uais chemins, & puis en vous arreftant & petunant fi
vous l’euffiez regardé de loin vous nous auriez con-
folé, mais ie ne feay ot eftoit voftre penfée, de ren-
uoyer ainfi vn homme tout feul dans tant de dangers,


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 255


his canoe had been upset; if the winds had caused
it to be submerged; if he had been drowned, you
would have waited long for the return of the poor
lost man, and you would have accused us of a fault
which you yourselves would have committed.”
When he had said this, he fastened his collar in the
appointed spot.

Drawing out another, he tied it to the arm of Guil-
laume Cousture, saying aloud: ‘‘ It is this Collar that
brings you back this prisoner. I would not have said
to him, while he was still in our country: ‘Go, my
Nephew; take a Canoe and return to Quebec.’ My
mind would not have been at rest; I would always
have thought over and over again to myself, ‘Is he
not lost?’ In truth, I would have had no sense, had
I acted in that way. He whom you have sent back
had all the difficulties in the world, on his journey.”’
He began to express them, but in so pathetic a
manner that there is no merry-andrew in France so
ingenious as that Barbarian. He took a stick, and
placed it on [89] his head like a bundle; then he car-
ried it from one end of the square to the other, repre-
senting what that prisoner had done in the rapids
and in the current of the water,—on arriving at
which he had transported his baggage, piece by
piece. He went backward and forward, showing the
journeys, the windings, and the turnings of the pris-
oner. Heran against a stone; he receded more than
he advanced in his canoe, because alone he could not
maintain it against the current. He lost courage,
and then regained his strength. Ina word, I have
never seen anything better done than this acting.
‘“ Again” (said he), ‘‘if you had helped him to pass
the rapids and the bad roads, and then if, while


256 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Vou. 27


ie n’ay pas fait le mefme,; Allons mon nepueu, dit-il
[se. dif-ie], A celuy que vous voyez deuant vos yeux,
fuis-moy, ie te veux rendre dans ton pays au peril
de ma vie, voila ce que difoit le fecond collier qu’il
attacha aupres de l’autre.

La troifiéme tefmoignoit qu’ils auoient [go] ad-
ioufté quelque chofe du leur, aux prefens que Mon-
fieur le Gouuerneur auoit donné au captif, qu’il auoit
renuoyé en leur pays, & que ces prefens auoient efté
diftribuez aux Nations qui leur font alliées pour
arre{ter leurs haches pour faire tomber des mains de
ceux qui s’embarquoient pour venir a la guerre,
leurs armes & leurs auirons. I] nomma toutes ces
Nations.

Le 4. prefent eftoit pour nous affeurer que la pen-
fée de leurs gens tuez en guerre ne les touchoit plus,
qu’ils mettoient leurs armes fous leurs pieds. I’ay
paffé, difoit-il, aupres du lieu ott les Algonquins nous
ont maffacrez ce Printemps. I’ay veu la place du
combat ot ils ont puny [sc. pris] les deux prifonniers
qui font icy, i’ay paffé vifte, ie n’ay point voulu voir
le fang refpandu de mes gens, leurs corps font encor
fur la place, i’ay deftourné mes yeux de peur d’irri-
ter ma colere, puis frappant la terre & preftant
l’oreille, i’ay oiiy la voix de mes Anceftres maffacrez
par les Alguonquins, lefquels voyans que mon cceur
eftoit capable de fe venger, m’ont crié d’vne voix
amoureufe, mon petit fils, [91] mon petit fils, foyez
bon, n’entrez point en fureur, ne penfez plus 4 moy:
car il n’y a plus de moyen de nous retirer de la mort,
penfez aux viuans, cela eft d’importance, retirez ceux
qui viuent encor du glaiue & du feu qui les pourfuit,
vn homme viuant vaut mieux que plufieurs trefpaffez;


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 257


stopping and smoking, you had looked after him
from afar, you would have greatly consoled us. But I
know not where your thoughts were, to send a man
back quite alone amid so many dangers. I did not
do that. ‘Come, my nephew,’ I said to him whom
you see before your eyes; ‘ follow me, I wish to bring
thee to thy own country, at the risk of my life.’”’
That is what was said by the second collar, which he
tied near the first.

The third showed that they had [90] added some-
thing of their own to the presents that Monsieur the
Governor had given to the captive whom he had sent
back to their country; and that those presents had
been distributed to the Tribes who are their allies to
arrest their hatchets, and to cause the weapons and
paddles to fall from the hands of those who were
embarking to goto war. Henamed all those Tribes.

The 4th present was to assure us that the thought
of their people killed in war no longer affected them ;
that they cast their weapons under their feet. “‘I
passed,”’ he said, ‘‘ near the place where the Algon-
quins massacred us last Spring. I saw the spot
where the fight took place in which they captured
the two prisoners who are here. I passed by quick-
ly; I did not wish to see my people’s blood that had
been shed. Their bodies still lie in that place. I
turned away my eyes for fear of exciting my anger;
then, striking the earth and listening, I heard the
voice of my Forefathers massacred by the Alguon-
quins. When they saw that my heart was capable
of seeking revenge they called out to me in a loving
voice: ‘My grandson, [91] my grandson, be good;
do not get angry. Think no longer of us for there
is no means of withdrawing us from death. Think


258 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


ayant otiy ces voix, i’ay paffé outre & m’en fuis venu
& vous pour déliurer ceux que vous tenez encor.

Le cinquiefme fut donné pour nettoyer la riuiere,
pour chaffer les canots ennemys qui pourroient trou-
bler la nauigation. Il faifoit mille geftes comme s’il
euft amaffé les vagues, & donné vn calme depuis
Quebec iufques au pays des Iroquois.

Le fixiéme pour aplanir les faults & les cheutes
d’eau ott les grands courrans qui fe treuuent fur les
riuieres fur lefquels il faut nauiger pour aller en leur
pays. I’ay penfé perir, difoit-il, dans des boiiillons
d’eau, voila pour les appaifer, & auec fes mains &
fes bras il vniffoit & arre{toit les torrens.

Le feptiéme eftoit pour donner vne grande bonace
au grand Lac de Sainct [92] Louys, qu’il faut trauer-
fer; voila, difoit-il, pour le rendre vny comme vne
glace, pour appaifer les vents & temperer la colere
des eaux, & puis ayant par fes geftes rendu le
chemin fauorable, il attacha vn collier de porcelaine
au bras d’vn Frangois, & le tira tout droit au trauers
de la place pour marque que nos canots iroient fans
peine en leur pays.

Le huitiéme faifoit tout le chemin qu’il faut faire
par terre, vous euffiez dit qu'il abbattoit des arbres,
qu'il couppoit des branches, qu’il repouffoit des bois,
qu’il mettoit de la terre és lieux plus profonds.
Voila, difoit-il, le chemin tout net, tout poly, tout
droit, il fe baiffoit vers la terre, regardant s’il n’y
auoit plus d’épines, ou de bois, s’il n’y auoit point de
bute qu’on ptit heurter en marchant. C’en eft fait,
on verra la fumee de nos bourgades depuis Quebec
iufques au fonds de noftre pays, tous les obftacles
font ottez.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 259


of the living,—that isof importance; save those who
still live from the sword and fire that pursue them;
one living man is better than many dead ones.’
After having heard those voices I passed on, and I
came to you, to deliver those whom you still hold.”’

The fifth was given to clear the river, and to drive
away the enemy’s canoes, which might impede navi-
gation. He made use of a thousand gestures, as if
he had collected the waves and had caused a calm,
from Quebec to the Iroquois country.

The sixth was to smooth the rapids and waterfalls,
or the strong currents, that occur in the rivers on


which one must sail to reach their country. ‘‘I
thought that I would perish,” he said, ‘‘ in those boil-
ing waters. This is to appease them;’’ and with


his hands and arms he smoothed and arrested the
torrents.

The seventh was to produce a profound calm on
the great Lake Saint [92] Louys that has to be crossed.
‘‘ Here,” he said, ‘‘ is something to make it smooth
as ice, to appease the winds, and to allay the anger
of the waves.’’ Then, after having by his gestures
rendered the route easy, he tied a collar of porcelain
beads on the arm of a Frenchman, and pulled him
straight across the square, to show that our canoes
could go to their country without any difficulty.

The eighth performed the whole journey that had
to be made on land. You would have said that he
felled trees; that he lopped off branches; that he
pushed back the bushes; that he put earth in the
deepest holes. ‘‘ There,” said he, ‘‘is the road,
quite smooth and quite straight.’ He bent toward
the ground, looking to see whether there were any
more thorns or bushes, and whether there were any


260 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


Le neufiéme eftoit pour nous enfeigner que nous
trouuerions du feu tout preft dans leurs maifons, que
nous n’aurions pas la peine d’aller querir du bois,
que [93] nous en trouuerions de tout fait, & que ce
feu ne s’ef{teindroit iamais ny iour ny nuit, que nous
en verrions la clarté iufques dans nos fouyers.

Le dixiéme fut donné pour nous lier tous enfemble
tres-ef{troittement, il prit vn Francois enlaga fon bras
dans le fien, & vn Alguonquin de l’autre, & s’eftant
ainfi lié auec eux, voila le noeud qui nous attache
infeparablement, rien ne nous pourra def-vnir. Ce
colier eftoit extraordinairement beau, quand la foudre
tomberoit fur nous elle ne pourroit nous feparer, car
fi elle couppe ce bras qui vous attache a nous, nous
nous faifirons incontinent par l’autre, & 1a-deffus il fe
retournoit & faififfoit le Francois & l Alguonquin par
leur deux autres bras, les tenant fi ferme qu’il paroiffoit
ne vouloir iamais quitter.

L’vnziéme inuitoit A manger auec eux. Noftre
pays eft remply de poiffon, de venaifon, de chaffe,
tout y eft plein de cerfs, d’Elans, de caftors, quittez,
difoit-il, quittez ces puans pourceaux qui courent icy
parmy vos habitations, qui ne mangent que des faletez,
& venez manger de bonnes viandes auec nous, le che-
min eft frayé, [94] il n’y a plus de danger, il faifoit
les geftes conformement a fon difcours.

Il efleua le douziéme collier pour diffiper tous les
nuages de l’air, afin qu’on vift tout a découuert que
nos coeurs & les leurs ne fuffent point cachez, que le
Soleil & la verité donnaffent iour par tout.

Le treiziéme fut pour faire reffouuenir les Hurons
de leur bonne volonté; il y a cing iours, difoit-il,
c’eft 4 dire cing années, que vous auiez vn fac remply


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 261


mounds over which one might stumble in walking.
“It is all finished. We can see the smoke of our
villages, from Quebec to the extremity of our coun-
try. All obstacles are removed.’’

The ninth was to tell us that we would find fires
all lighted in their houses; that we would not have
the trouble of seeking for wood,—that [93] we would
find some already cut; and that the fire would never
go out, day or night,—that we would see its light,
even in our own homes.

The tenth was given to bind us all very closely
together. He took hold of a Frenchman, placed his
arm within his, and with his other arm he clasped
that of an Alguonquin. Having thus joined himself
to them, ‘‘ Here,” he said, ‘‘ is the knot that binds us
inseparably; nothing can part us.’’ This collar was
extraordinarily beautiful. ‘‘ Even if the lightning
were to fall upon us, it could not separate us; for, if
it cuts off the arm that holds you to us, we will at
Siceeseize cach. other. by the other arm.’ And
thereupon he turned around, and caught the French-
man and the Alguonquin by their two other arms,—
holding them so closely that he seemed unwilling
ever to leave them.

The eleventh invited us to eat with them. ‘‘ Our
country is well stocked with fish, with venison, and
with game; it is everywhere full of deer, of Elk, of
beaver. Give up,’’ said he, ‘‘ those stinking hogs
that run about among your houses, that eat nothing
but filth; and come and eat good meat with us. The
road is cleared; [94] there is no longer any danger.”’
He accompanied his discourse with appropriate
gestures.

He lifted the twelfth collar, to dispel the clouds in


262 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 27


de porcelaine & d’autres prefens tous preparez pour
venir chercher la paix, qui vous a deftourné de cette
penfée? Ce fac fe renuerfera, les prefens tomberont
ils fe cafferont, ils fe diffiperont & vous perdrez
courage.

Le quatorziéme fut pour preffer les Hurons qu’ils
fe haftaffent de parler, qu’ils ne fuffent point hon-
teux comme des femmes, & que prenans refolution
d’aller aux Iroquois, qu’ils paffaffent par le pays des
Alguonquins & des Frang¢ois.

Le quinziéme fut pour témoigner qu’ils auoient
toufiours eu enuie de ramener le Pere le Iogues & le
P, Breffani, que c'eftoit leur penfée, que lew rs le
Iogues leur fut dérobé, & qu’ils auoient donné le P.
[95] Breffani aux Holandois, pour ce quw’il l’auoit
defiré, s’il euft eu patience ie l’aurois ramené, que
fcay-je maintenant ot il eft? peut-eftre eft il mort,
peut eftre eft-il noyé, noftre deffein n’eftoit pas de
le faire mourir. Si Francois Marguerie & Thomas
Godefroy, adjouftoit-il, fuffent reftez en noftre pays,
ils feroient mariez maintenant, & nous ne ferions plus
qu’vne Nation, & moy ie ferois des voftres. Le P. le
Iogues entendant ce difcours, nous dit en foufriant,
le bucher eftoit preparé fi Dieu ne m’eut fauué, cent
fois ils m’ont ofté la vie, ce bon homme dit tout ce
qu'il veut, le P. Breffani nous dit le mefme 4a fon
retour.

Le feiziéme fut pour les receuoir en ce pais icy
quand ils y viendroient, & pour les mettre a couuert
pour arrefter les haches des Alguonquins & les canons
des Francois; quand nous ramenames vos prifonniers
il y a quelques années, nous penfions eftre de vos
amys, & nous entendifmes des arquebufes & des


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 263


the air, so that all might see quite plainly that our
hearts and theirs were not hidden; that the Sun and
the truth might light up everything.

The thirteenth was to remind the Hurons of their
good will. ‘‘It is five days ago,’’ he said,—that is
to say, five years,—‘‘ since you had a pouch filled
with porcelain beads and other presents, all ready to
come and seek for peace. What made you change
your minds? ‘That pouch will upset, the presents will
fall out and break, they will be dispersed; and you
will lose courage.’’

The fourteenth was to urge the Hurons to make
haste to speak,— not to be bashful, like women; and,
after taking the resolution to go to the Iroquois coun-
try, to pass by that of the Alguonquins and of the
French.

The fifteenth was to show that they had always
desired to bring back Father le Jogues and Father
Bressani; that they had thought that Father le Jogues
had been stolen from them, and that they had given
Father [95] Bressani to the Dutch because he had
desired it. ‘‘If he had had patience, I would have
brought him back. How can I know now where he
is? Perhaps he is dead; perhaps he is drowned. It
was not our intention to put him to death. If Fran-
cois Marguerie and Thomas Godefroy,’”’ he added,
‘‘had remained in our country, they would be mar-
ried by this time; we would be but one Nation, and I
would be one of you.” When Father le Jogues heard
this discourse, he said with a smile: ‘‘ The stake
was all prepared; had not God preserved me, they
would have put me to death a hundred times. This
good man says whatever pleases him.” Father Bres-
sani told us the same thing on his return.


264 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [ Vox. 27


canons fiffler de tous coftez: cela nous fit peur, nous
nous retirafmes, & comme nous ations du courage
pour la guerre, nous prifmes refolution d’en donner
des preuues pour le Printemps [69 i.e., 96] fuiuant,
nous parufmes fur vos terres, & prifmes le P. le
Iogues auec des Hurons.

Le dix-feptiéme prefent eftoit le collier propre
que Honatteniate portoit en fon pays. Ce ieune
homme eftoit l’vn des deux prifonniers derniers, fa
mere qui eftoit tante du P. Ilogues au pays des Iro-
quois, enuoya fon collier pour celuy qui auoit donné
la vie 4 fon fils, cette bonne femme apperceuant que
le bon Pere qu’elle appelloit fon Neveu eftoit en ce
pays-cy, en fut fort refiotiye & fon fils encore plus;
car il parut toufiours trifte iufques a tant que le P.
Iogues fut defcendu de Montreal, alors il commeng¢a
a refpirer & & fe monftrer gaillard.

Apres que ce grand Iroquois eut dit tout ce que
deflus, il adjoufta, ie m’en vay paffer le refte de
Vefté en mon pays en jeux, en dances, en réioiiif-
fance pour le bien de la paix: mais i’ay peur que
pendant que nous danferons les Hurons ne nous vien-
nent pincer & importuner. Voila ce qui fe paffa en
cette affemblée, chacun auoiia que cét homme eftoit
pathetique & eloquent, ie n’ay recueilly que quelques
pieces comme decoufués tirées [97] [de la] bouche de
l’interprete, quine parloit qu’a baftons rompus, & non
dans la {uitte que gardoit ce Barbare.

Il entonna quelque chanfons entre fes prefens, il
dan¢a par refiotiiffance, bref, il fe monftra fort bon
Acteur, pour vn homme qui n’a d’autre eftude que
ce que la nature luy a apris fans regle & fans precep-
tes. La conclufion fut que les Iroquois, les Francois,


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 265


The sixteenth was to receive them in this country
when they came to it, and to protect them; to stay
the hatchets of the Alguonquins and the cannons of
the French. ‘‘ When we brought back your prison-
ers, Some years ago, we thought that we were your
friends, and we heard arquebus and cannon shots
whistling on all sides of us. That frightened us; we
withdrew; and, as we have courage for war, we took
the resolution to give proofs of it the following
Spring; [69 i.e., 96] we appeared in your land, and
captured Father le Jogues, with some Hurons.

The seventeenth present was the very collar that
Honatteniate wore in his country. This young man
was one of the two prisoners last captured. His
mother, who had been Father Jogues’s aunt in the
Iroquois country, sent his collar for him who had
given her son his life. When the good woman
learned that the good Father whom she called her
Nephew was in this country, she greatly rejoiced, and
her son still more so; for he always seemed sad until
Father Jogues came down from Montreal when he
commenced to breathe freely and be in good spirits.

When this great Iroquois had said all that is men-
tioned above, he added: ‘‘I am going to spend the
remainder of the summer in my country in games,
in dances, in rejoicing for the good of peace; but I
fear that, while we dance, the Hurons will come to
taunt and importune us.’’ That is what occurred at
that assembly. Every one admitted that this man
was impassioned and eloquent. I gathered only
some disconnected fragments, taken from the [97]
mouth of the interpreter who spoke only in a desul-
tory manner and did not follow the order observed
by the Barbarian.


266 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


les Alguonquins, les Hurons, les Montaignets, & les
Attikamegues danceroient tous, & fe refioiiyroient
auec beaucoup d’allegreffe.

Le lendemain Monfieur le Gouuerneur fit feftin a
tous ceux de ces Nations qui fe trouuerent aux trois
riuieres, pour les exhorter tous enfemble & de bannir
toutes les deffiances qui les pourroient diuifer. Les
Iroquois tefmoignerent toute forte de fatisfaction, ils
chanterent & dancerent felon leur couftume, & Kiot-
faeton recOmanda fort aux Alguonquins & aux Hurons
d’obeyr a Onontio, & de fuiure les intentions & les
penfées des Francois.

Le quatorziéme du mefme mois Monfieur le
Gouverneur refpondit aux prefens des Iroquois, par
quatorze prefens qui auoient tous leurs fignifications,
& [98] qui portoient leurs parolles, Les Iroquois les
accepterent tous auec de grands tefmoignages de
fatisfaction qu’ils faifoient paroi{tre par trois grands
cris, pouffez 4 mefme temps du fond de leur eftomach
a chaque parolle ou a chaque prefent qui leur eftoit
fait. Ainfi fut conclué la paix auec eux a condition
qu’ils ne feroient aucun acte d’hoftilité auec les Hu-
rons, ou enuers les autres Nations nos alliées, iufques
ace que les principaux de ces Nations qui n’eftoient
pas prefens euffent agy auec eux.

Cette affaire eftant heureufement conclué, Pieska-
ret fe leuant fit vn prefent de quelque pelterie a ces
Ambaffadeurs, s’écriant que c’eftoit vne pierre ou vne
tombe qu’il mettoit deffus la foffe de ceux qui eftoient
morts au dernier combat, afin qu’on ne remuaft plus
leurs os, & qu’on perdit la memoire de ce qui leur
eftoit arriué fans plus iamais penfer a la vengedace.

Noél Negab[a]mat fe leua en fuitte, il mit au milieu


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 267


He sang some songs between his gifts; he danced
for joy; in a word, he showed himself to be a very
good Actor, for a man who has learned but what
nature has taught him, without rule and without
precept. The conclusion was that the Iroquois, the
French, the Alguonquins, the Hurons, the Monta-
gnais, and the Attikamegues all danced and rejoiced
with much gladness.

On the following day, Monsieur the Governor gave
a feast to all belonging to those Nations who were at
three rivers, to exhort them all together and to ban-
ish all distrust that might set them at variance. The
Iroquois manifested their satisfaction in every way;
they sang and danced according to their custom, and
Kiotsaeton strongly urged the Alguonquins and
Hurons to obey Onontio, and to follow the intentions
and the thoughts of the French.

On the fourteenth of the same month, Monsieur
the Governor replied to the presents of the Iroquois
by fourteen gifts, all of which had their meanings
and [98] which carried their own messages. The
Iroquois accepted them all with great marks of satis-
faction, which they manifested by three loud cries,
uttered at the same time from the depths of their
chests, at each word or at each present that was
given them. Thus was peace concluded with them,
on condition that they should commit no act of hos-
tility against the Hurons, or against the other Nations
who are our allies, until the chiefs of those Nations
who were not present had treated with them.

When this matter had been brought to a happy
conclusion, Pieskaret arose and made a present of
some furs to the Ambassadors, exclaiming that it
was a rock or a tombstone that he placed on the


268 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


de la place cing grandes peaux d’Elans, voila dit-il
aux Iroquois, dequoy vous armer les pieds & les
iambes, de peur que vous ne vous bleffiez au retour,
s'il reftoit encore quelque pierre au chemin [99] que
vous auez applany. Ilen prefenta encore cing autres
pour enfeuelir les corps de ceux que le combat auoit
fait mourir, & pour appaifer la douleur de leurs pa-
rens & amys qui ne les pourroient fouffrir fans fepul-
ture, qu’au refte que luy & fes gens qui font a Sillery
n’ayant qu’vn mefme cceur auec leur frere aifné
Monfieur le Gouverneur, ils ne faifoient qu’vn prefent
auec le fien. Finalement on tira trois coups de canon
pour chaffer le mauuais air de la guerre, & fe refioiiyr
du bonheur de la paix.

Quelque temps apres cette affemblée vn Huron mal
bafty abordant le Capitaine Iroquois, qui auoit tou-
flours agy & parlé, luy voulut ietter quelque deffiance
des Frangois; mais ce Capitaine luy repartit genti-
ment en ces termes: Il’ay la face peinte & barboiiillée
d’vn cofté, & de l’autre cofté ie l’ay toute nette, ie
ne voy pas bien clair du co{té que ie fuis barboiiillé,
de l’autre i’ay la veué bonne, le cofté peint eft le
cofté des Hurons, ie n’y voy quafi goutte, le cofté
net e{t le cofté des Francois; i’y voy clair comme en
plein midy, cela dit il fe teut, & cét efprit mal-fait
demeura confus.

[110 i.e., 100] Sur le foir le R. P. Vimont Supe-
rieur de la Miffion, ayant fait venir les Iroquois dans
nof{tre maifon, leur fit quelques petits prefents, leur
donna du petun ou tabac, & a chacun vn beau calu-
met ou vne pippe pour le prendre. Kiotfaeton luy
fit vn remerciement plein d’efprit, quand ie fuis party
de mon pays i’ay abandonné ma vie, ie me {uis


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 269


grave of those who had been killed in the last fight,
so that their bones might no longer be disturbed;
and that the remembrance of what had happened
might be forgotten, and revenge might no longer be
thought of.

Then Noél Negabamat arose; he laid down in the
middle of the square five great Elk skins. ‘‘ There,’’
he said to the Iroquois, ‘‘ is something wherewith to
cover your feet and your legs, lest you might hurt
them on your return journey, if any stone should
remain in the road [99] that you have made smooth.”’
He also gave them five others to serve as shrouds for
those who had been killed in the battle, and to allay
the grief of their relatives and friends, who could
not bear to have them left unburied. He said, more-
over, that as he and his people at Sillery were invited
in heart with their elder brother Monsieur the Gov-
ernor, they gave but one present with his. Finally’
three shots were fired from the cannon, to drive
away the foul air of war, and to rejoice at the happy
advent of peace.

Some time after this meeting, an ill-disposed Hu-
ron accosted the Iroquois Captain who had always
been the agent and spokesman, and sought to inspire
him with distrust of the French. But the Captain
nobly replied to him in these terms: ‘‘My face is
painted and daubed on one side, while the other is
quite clean. I do not see very clearly on the side
that is daubed over; on the other side my sight is
good. The painted side is toward the Hurons, and
I see nothing; the clean side is turned toward the
French, and I see clearly, as in broad daylight.’’
Having said this he remained silent; and that evil-
minded man was covered with confusion.


270 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


expofé a la mort, fi bien que ie vous fuis redeuable de
ce que ie fuis encor viuant. Ie vous remercie de ce
que ie voy encore le Soleil, ie vous remercie de ce
que vous m’auiez bien receu, ie vous remercie de ce
que vous m’auez bien traitté, ie vous remercie de
toutes les bonnes conclufions que vous auez prifes,
toutes vos paroles nous font extremement agreables,
ie vous remercie de vos prefens, vous nous auez
couuers depuis les pieds iufques a la tefte, il ne nous
ref{toit plus que la bouche de libre, & vous l’auez
remply d’vn beau calumet, & reflotiye de la faueur
d’vne herbe qui nous eft tres-douce, ie vous dis done
adieu, non pour long-temps; car vous aurez bien-toft
de nos nouuelles: quand nous ferions naufrage dans
les eaux, quand nous ferions bien fubmergez, ie [101]
ne croy pas que les Elemens ne rendiffent quelque
témoignage anos compatriotes de vos bien-faits: &
ie m’affeure que quelque bon genie nous a deuancé,
& que nos compatriotes reffentent defia vn auant-
gouft des bonnes nouuelles que nous leur allons
porter.

Le Samedy quinziéme ils partirent des trois Riui-
eres, Monfieur le Gouuerneur leur donna deux ieunes
garcons Francois, tant pour les aider a reconduire
leurs canots, & leurs prefens que pour tefmoigner la
confiance qu’il auoit en ces peuples.

Le Capitaine Kiotfaeton voyant tous fes gens
embarquez efleua fa voix, & dit aux Francois & aux
Sauuages qui eftoient fur les riues du grand fleuue.
Adieu mes freres, ie fuis de vos parens, ie m’en vay
tapporter de bonnes nouuelles en noftre pays, puis
fe retournant vers Monfieur le Gouuerneur, Onontio
ton nom fera grand par toute la terre, ie ne penfois


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 271


[110 i.e., 100] Toward evening, Reverend Father
Vimont the Superior of the Mission caused the
Iroquois to be brought to our house, where he pre-
sented to them some small gifts; he gave them some
petun, or tobacco, and to each of them a handsome
calumet or pipe wherewith to smoke it. Kiotsaeton
thanked him very wittily: ‘‘ When I left my coun-
try, I gave up my life and exposed myself to death,
so that I am indebted to you for being still alive. I
thank you that I still see the Sun; I thank you for
having received me well; I thank you for having
treated me well. I thank you for all the good con-
clusions to which you have come; all your words are
very agreeable to us. I thank you for your presents;
you have covered us from our feet to our heads.
Only our mouth remained free and you have filled it
with a fine calumet and have gladdened it with the
flavor of a plant that is very pleasing to us. I there-
fore bid you adieu, but not for long; you will soon
iheapeirom, us, Even af we are wrecked in “the
waters, even if we are quite submerged, I [101] think
that the Elements will in some way bear witness to
our countrymen of your kind deeds; and I am con-
vinced that some good genius has gone before us,
and that our countrymen already have a foretaste of
the good news that we are going to bring them.”’

On Saturday, the fifteenth, they started from three
Rivers. Monsieur the Governor gave them two
young French lads, both to help them to take back
their canoes and their presents, and to manifest the
confidence that he had in those people.

When the Captain Kiotsaeton saw that his people
had embarked, he raised his voice, and said to the
French and to the Savages who were on the banks of


272 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 27


pas reporter ma tefte que i’auois hazardée ie ne pen-
fois pas qu’elle deuft refortir de vos portes, & ie m’en
retourne chargé d’honneur, de prefens, & de bien-
veillance. Mes freres parlant aux Sauuages, obeyfiez
[102] 4 Onontio & aux Frangois, ils ont le coeur & les
penfées fort bonnes, tenez-vous bien vnys auec eux
& vous accommodez 4 leurs facgons de faire, vous
aurez bien-to{t de nos nouuelles. Les Sauuages ref-
pondirent par vne gentile falue d’arquebufades, & le
Fort tira vn coup de canon, ainfi fe termina leur Am-
baffade. Dieu faffe reiiffir le tout pour fa plus grande
gloire.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 278


the great river: ‘‘ Adieu my brothers; I am one of
your relatives. JI am going to carry back good news
to our country.” Then, turning to Monsieur the
Governor, ‘‘Onontio, thy name shall be great
throughout the earth; I did not think that I would
take back my head that I had risked,—I did not
think that it would go forth from your doors; and I
am going back loaded with honor, with gifts, and
with kindness. My brothers,’’ speaking to the
Savages, ‘‘obey [102] Onontio and the French.
Their hearts and their thoughts are good; remain
united with them and accommodate yourselves to
their customs. You will soon have news from us.”’
The Savages replied by a fine salvo of musketry,
and the Fort fired a cannon shot. Thus ended their
Embassy. May God cause all this to succeed for his
greater glory.


274 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  {Nou. 217


———


CHAPITRE X:
SUITTE: DU TRAITTE DESLA PAIX.


L eftoit neceffaire pour conclure & pour affeurer la
paix dans ce nouueau monde que les deputez
des Iroquois, les deputez des Hurons & les prin-

cipaux Capitaines de trois ou quatre peuples Alguon-
quins fe trouuaffent tous enfemble, en vn mefme
endroit auec Monfieur le Gouverneur, & que toutes ces
Nations qui parlent de trois ou quatre langues diffe-
rentes qui ont des humeurs fi efloignez les vns des
autres, & qui depuis tant d’années, [103] fe mangent,
fe deuorent & fe bruflent comme des enragez, fiffent
vne action de tres-grande fageffe, & que tant de bar-
bares inhumains trouuaffent de la douceur pour s’ac-
corder, bref, il falloit pour mettre tout dans l’affeu-
rance que les vns allaffent vifiter les autres dans leur
propre pays, tout cela fembloit impoffible a l’indu-
{trie humaine: mais quand Dieu fe mefle d’vne affaire
il ne peut maquer de conduite. Les ames faintes &
efpurées qui fouftiennent ces pauures peuples par
leurs prieres & par leurs voeux ont faits ce grand
ouurage. Jamais toutes ces Nations qui ont de cou-
{tume de nous venir voir tous les ans, n’eftoient def-
cendus fi tard, & fi elles fuffent arriuées plutoft elles
n’auroient ptii remonter les Ambaffadeurs Iroquois
qui tenoient le noeud de l’affaire entre les mains n’y
eftans pas. Nous eftions tous les iours dans l’attente,
philofophans de loin fur les fujets qui pouuoient


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 275


CHAPTER °X.
CONTINUATION OF THE TREATY OF PEACE.


*T°O conclude and to secure peace in this new world,
ap it was necessary that the delegates of the Iro-

quois, those of the Hurons, and the principal
Captains of three or four Alguonquin tribes, should
meet all together at some place with Monsieur the
Governor; in order, too, that all these Nations,—
who speak three or four different languages, whose
dispositions are so distinct one from another, and
who for so many years [103] have been eating,
devouring, and burning each other like madmen,—
should perform an act of the utmost wisdom, and
that so many inhuman barbarians should find enough
gentleness to agree together. In a word, to make
everything sure, it was necessary that each should
visit the others in their own country. All this
seemed impossible to human skill. But, when God
interposes in a matter, it cannot lack direction. The
holy and pure souls who support these poor peoples
by their prayers and by their vows have accomplished
that great work. Never had all these Nations who
are accustomed to come and see us every year,
come down so late; and, if they had arrived sooner,
they could not have gone up again, — for the Iroquois
Ambassadors, who held the knot of this matter in
their hands, were not here. We expected them
every day, speculating from afar upon the reasons
that could have caused so extraordinary a delay.


276 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 27


caufer vn retardement fi extraordinaire. I] n’eftoit
defcendu pas vn feul canot, ny des Alguonquins, ny
des Nipifi[riJniens, ny des Hurons pour nous donner
quelque connoiffance de ce qui fe paffoit en ce pays
plus haut, chacun en [104] parloit felon fon genie &
conformement a4 fon inclination. Les vns difoient
que tous les Francois qui eftoient montez au pays des
Hurons atuiec nos Peres eftoient maffacrez, que le
Demon auoit parlé a quelques Sauuages, & par con-
fequent qu’il ne falloit plus attendre de nouuelles de
ces contrées-la, d’autres plus enclins 4 prendre de
bonnes penfées coniecturoient que ces peuples de-
uoient venir en grand nombre, & qu’il falloit beau-
coup de temps pour les affembler. Cependant la fai-
fon fe paffoit, & nos doutes fe vouloient changer en
defefpoir, quand tout a coup on vit paroiftre fur le
fleuue de fainct Laurens foixante canots de Hurons
chargez de Francois & de Sauuages & de pelteries. Le
Pere Hierofme Lallemant attendu & fouhaitté depuis
vne année toute entiere, & dauantage eftoit dans
cette belle Compagnie, qui refioiiyt infiniment tous
ceux qui fouhaittent le bon-heur du pays, & le falut
de ces peuples. Les foldats Francois que la Reyne
auoit enuoyez l’année paffée retournoient en bonne
fanté, plus chargez de vertu & de connoiffance des
veritez Chreftiennes qu’ils n’en auoient embarquez
[105] au fortir de la France. Les principaux Capi-
taines des Hurons ramenoient l’vn des deux Iroquois
qu’ils auoient pris prifonniers l’année d’auparauant
aupres de Richelieu, auec deffein de le prefenter A
Monfieur le Gouuerneur, comme ils ont fait, ainfi que
nous allons voir. Ces Capitaines auoient ordre de
tout leur pays de traitter plainement de la paix, &


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 277


Not a single canoe had come down, whether from the
Alguonquins, the Nipisiriniens, or the Hurons, to
bring us any news of what was going on in the upper
country. Each one [104] spoke of it according to his
own idea and in accordance with his own inclination.
Some said that all the French who had gone up to
the Huron country with our Fathers had been massa-
cred; that the Devil had spoken to some Savages,
and that consequently we need not expect any news
from those countries. Others, who were more in-
clined to take a favorable view of the matter, con-
jectured that these tribes would come down in great
numbers, and that it required a great deal of time to
assemble them. Meanwhile, the season was passing
away, and our doubts were about to change to
despair, when all of a sudden we saw upon the river
saint Lawrence sixty Huron canoes, laden with
French, with Savages, and with furs. Father
Hierosme Lallemant — whose arrival had been ex-
pected and desired for a whole year and more — was
in this fine Company, which greatly rejoiced all who
had at heart the welfare of the country and the salva-
tion of these peoples. The French soldiers whom
the Queen had sent out last year came back in good
health, better supplied with virtue and with the
knowledge of Christian truths than when they had
embarked [105] to leave France. The principal
Captains of the Hurons brought back one of the two
Iroquois whom they had taken prisoners in the
previous year, near Richelieu, with the intention of
presenting him to Monsieur the Governor; this
they did, as we shall see. These Captains had
orders from the whole of their country to enter into
full negotiations for peace, and to follow the judg-


278 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo.. 27


de fuiure les penfées d’Onontio. A mefme temps
les Alguonquins des Nations plus hautes arriuerent;
mais fi & propos qu’on eut dit que quelque puiffance
fuperieure eut enuoyé des ouuriers pour les faire
paroiftre A point nommé. Tout cecy fe paffoit aux
trois Riuieres, ot ils ne manquoit plus que les Iro-
quois qui auoient donné parolle de fe trouuer dans
peu de temps, s’ils euffent retardé quelques iours ce
grand nombre de Sauuages, Attikamegues, Monta-
gnais, Alguonquins de l’Ifle de la Nation d’Iroquet,
& autres Hurons fe fuffent bien-toft defilez & diffipez
fans efperance de les pouuoir r’allier de long-temps.
Mais Dieu prenoit plaifir de les faire venir tous les
vns apres les autres au moment le plus a propos qu’on
eut pi choifir. Les Montagnais s’y [106] trouuerent
fur la fin du mois d’Aoutft, quelques Alguonquins y
arriuerent quelque temps apres. Les Hurons y abor-
derent le dixiéme Septembre, les Sauuages de 1’Ifle
& d’autres nations y defcendirent deux ou trois iours
auparauant. Monfieur le Gouuerneur y monta le
douziéme du mefme moys, on n’attendoit plus que
les deputez des Iroquois. Enfin le quinziéme il parut
vn canot qui portoit cing hommes de cette Nation,
lefquels nous affeurerent que les prefens d’Onontio
auoient e{té portez en leur pays pour la confirmati6
de la paix, & qu’en peu de iours on verroit quelques
Ambaffadeurs deleguez pour luy porter cette parole.
En effet le dix-feptiéme du mefme mois nous en
vifmes quatre, l’vn defquels haranguant fur le bord
du fleuue felon leur couftume, donna bien de la ioye
a tous les Francois, & a plus de quatre cent Sauuages
de diuerfes nations qui fe trouuerent pour lors aux
trois Riuieres. Monfieur le Gouuerneur les ayant


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 279


ment of Onontio. At the same time, the Alguon-
quins of the upper Tribes arrived, and so opportunely
that one would have said that some higher power had
sent workmen to make them appear at an appointed
spot. All this happened at three Rivers, where only
the Iroquois were wanting, who had given their word
that they would be there in a short time. Had they
delayed but a few days, this great concourse of
Savages — Attikamegues, Montagnais, Island AI-
guonquins and those of the Iroquet Tribe, and others,
Hurons—would soon have been dispersed and
scattered, without any hope that we could again
assemble them together for a long time. But God
took pleasure in making them come, one after
another, at the most opportune time that could have
been chosen. The Montagnais [106] arrived there
about the end of August; some Alguonquins came
shortly afterward. The Hurons landed on the tenth
of September; the Island Savages and other tribes
came down two or three days before. Monsieur the
Governor came up on the twelfth of the same month.
They waited only for the Iroquois delegates. Fi-
nally, on the fifteenth, a canoe appeared, bearing five
men of that Nation, who assured us that the presents
of Onontio had been taken to their country for the
confirmation of the peace, and that in a few days we
should see some Ambassadors delegated to bring
him word to that effect. In fact, on the seventeenth
of the same month, we saw four of them,—one of
whom delivered a harangue on the bank of the river,
according to their custom,— causing joy to all the
French and to more than four hundred Savages of
various tribes who were then at three Rivers.
Monsieur the Governor perceived them from afar,


280 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Nou. 27


apperceus de loin enuoya au deuant vne efcotiade de
foldats pour empefcher le defordre, les foldats s’e-
{tans mis en haye les Iroquois pafferent au trauers fans
e{tre oppreffez d’vn grand nombre [107] de perfonnes
qui les regardoient de tous coftez, apres s’eftre
rafraifchis le refte de la iournée on tint confeil le
lendemain en la fagon que ie l’ay marqué au Cha-
pitre precedent. Ie n’ay que faire de reiterer fi
fouuent que les paroles d’importance en ce pays-
cy font des prefens, fuffit de dire que celuy qui
harangue ne faifant point de prefens, parle en ces
termes.

Ie n’ay point de voix, ne m’efcoutez pas ie ne parle
point, ie n’ay en main qu’vn auliron pour vous rame-
ner vn Francois, qui a dans fa bouche la parole de
tout nof{tre pays. Il parloit du Frangois dont i’ay
fait mention cy-deffus, qui auoit efté pris auec le
Pere le Iogues, auquel les Iroquois auoient confié
leurs prefens, c’eft a dire leurs parolles. Ce Fran-
cois tira dix-huit prefens tous compofez de porcelaine
aufquels il donna cette explication.

Le premier difoit qu’Onontio auoit vne voix de
tonnerre, qu’il fe faifoit entendre par tout, & qu’au
bruit de fa parole tout le pays des Iroquois auoit ietté
les armes & les haches, mais fi loin au dela du Ciel,
qu’il n’y auoit plus de bras au monde affez longs
pour les retirer de 1a.

[108] Le fecond difoit que les armes eftans hors de
la veué des hommes qu’il fe falloit vifiter fans crainte
ioiiiffans de la douceur de la paix.

Au troifiéme prefent, voila dit-il, reprefentans les
Iroquois, vne natte ou vn lit pour vous coucher molle-
ment quand vous viendrez en noftre pays; car eftans


1642 - 45] RELATION OF 1644-45 281


and sent a squad of soldiers to meet them and to
prevent disorder. The soldiers formed in two lines
and the Iroquois passed through them without being
impeded by a large number [107] of persons who
gazed at them on all sides. They rested for the
remainder of the day, and a council was held on the
morrow in the same manner that I have related in
the previous Chapter. It is needless for me to repeat
so often that words of importance in this country are
presents. Suffice it to say that, as he who harangued
gave no presents, he spoke in these terms:

““T have no voice; do not listen to me. I speak
not; I hold in my hand only a paddle to bring you
back a Frenchman in whose mouth is the message
from all our country.’’ He spoke of the Frenchman
whom I have mentioned above, who had been taken
prisoner with Father le Jogues, to whom the Iroquois
had confided their presents,—that is to say, their
words. This Frenchman drew out eighteen presents,
all consisting of porcelain beads, of which he gave
this explanation:

The first said that Onontio had a voice of thunder,
that he made himself heard everywhere, and that at
the sound of his words the whole Iroquois country
had thrown away their weapons and their hatchets,—
but so far beyond the Sky that there were no arms in
the world long enough to draw them back from there.

[108] The second said that, as the arms were
beyond the sight of men, they ought to visit each
other without fear while they enjoyed the sweets of
peace.

At the third present, ‘‘ Here,” he said, represent-
ing the Iroquois, ‘‘is a mat or bed on which you can
lie softly when you come to our country; for, as we


282 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


freres nous ferions confus fi nous ne vous traittions
pas felon vos merites.

Au 4. ce n’eft pas affez d’auoir vn bon lit, les nuits
font froides, voila dequoy allumer vn bon feu &
vous tenir chaudement, marqués en paffant que les
Sauuages couchent ordinairement prés du feu.

Au fixiéme [sc. cinquiéme], que feruiroit-il d’auoir
vn bon lit, & d'eftre deffus couchez chaudement fi
vous n’eftiez bien nourris; ce prefent vous affeure
qu’on vous fera feftin, & que vous trouuerez le
pot au feu a voftre arriuée, il parloit toufiours aux
Francois.

Au fixiéme, voila vn peu d’onguent pour guerir les
bleffures que les Francois fe font faits aux pieds,
allans dans leurs pays heurtans contre des pierres ou
contre des racines qu’on y rencontre affez fouuent.

[109] Au 7. il dit que depuis le lieu ot on quitte
l’eau pour prendre terre, il y auoit bien trente lieués
de chemin iufques en leurs bourgades, & qu'il falloit
porter tout le bagage a pied, que les Frangois ayans
eu de la peine, ce prefent adouciffoit vn petit leurs
efpaules déchirées par la pefanteur des paquets.

Au 8. voila pour donner affeurance aux Francois
que s’ils fe veulent marier en leurs pays qu’ils y
trouueront des femmes comme eftans leurs amis &
alliez.

Aug. comme les Alguonquins auoient dit au pre-
mier voyage des Iroquois, que les principaux de leur
Nation eftant abfens ils ne pouuoient donner aucune
parole affeurée. Ce prefent fut fait afin qu’ils parlaf-
fent tous, & qu’ils ne s’excufaffent point les vns fur
les autres; mais qu’ils declaraffent nettement leurs
prefens.


“Sey


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 283


are brothers, we would be ashamed if we did not
treat you according to your deserts.”’

At the 4th, ‘‘It is not enough to have a good bed;
the nights are cold; here is something with which
to light a good fire, and to keep yourselves warm.”
Observe, in passing, that the Savages usually sleep
close to the fire.

At the fifth, ‘‘ Of what use would it be to have a
good bed and to lie warmly covered on it if you were
not well fed? This present assures you that you will
be feasted there, and will find the pot boiling on your
arrival.”” He spoke always to the French.

At the sixth, ‘‘ Here is a little ointment to heal
the wounds which have been inflicted on the feet of
the French, while they walked in their country, by
stumbling against the stones or the roots that are
very often found there.’’

[109] At the 7th, he said that, from the place
where they leave the water to take to the land, there
was a distance of fully thirty leagues to be gone
over before reaching their villages, and that all the
baggage had to be carried on foot; that, as the
French had had some difficulty, this present would
slightly relieve their shoulders that were chafed by
the weight of their packs.

At the 8th, ‘“‘ This is to assure the French that, if
they wish to marry in this country, they will find
wives here, since we are their friends and allies.’’

At the oth, as the Alguonquins had stated, at the
first journey of the Iroquois, that they could not say
anything positive during the absence of the chief
men of their Nation, this present was given that all
might speak, and that they might not cast the blame


284 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 27


Au to. voila dit celuy qui les expliquoit pour faire
parler les Hurons, & pour tirer leurs fentimens du
fond de leurs cceurs.

L’onziéme prefent difoit que les principaux Iro-
quois ne faifoient rien que petuner en leurs pays,
qu’ils auoient toufiours le calumet en la bouche. Ils
vouloient dire qu’ils attendoient la parole des Al-
guonquins [110] & des Hurons.

Au 12. ils difoient que les ames de leurs parens
tuez en guerre s’ef{toient fi profondement retirez dans
le centre de la terre, que iamais plus ils n’y pour-
roient penfer, c’eft a dire qu’ils auoient effacé la
vengeance de leur coeur.

Au 13. ils ont obei a la voix de Monfieur le Gouuer-
neur qui auoit ordonné qu’on fufpendit les armes &
qu’on cachaft les haches, c’eft pourquoy ils ont paffé
tout l’efté en dances & en feftins fans penfer A la
guerre.

Au 14. Ils veullent fgauoir au plutoft s’ils conti-
nueront leurs dances, & par confequent ils defirent
que les Alguonquins & les Hurons fe haftent de par-
ler, c’eft & dire de porter des prefens en leur pays
s’ils veulent la paix.

Le 15. eftoit pour adoucir les fatigues des Francois
qui auoient efté en leur pays, lefquels faifans dili-
gence de rapporter 4 Onontio des nouuelles des Iro-
quois, auoient pris beaucoup de peine.

Le 16. prioit Onontio de faire retourner dans le
pays des Iroquois vne femme de leur pays, qui auoit
efté prife en guerre par les Alguonquins, & donnée
aux [111] Francois. Cette femme fut menée en
France il y a quelques années, & apres auoir efté
in{truite & baptifée, elle eft morte au Conuent des


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 285


from one to the other, but clearly declare their
presents.

At the roth, ‘“ This,’’ said he who explained
them, ‘‘is to make the Hurons speak, and to draw
their sentiments from the depth of their hearts.’’

The eleventh present said that the Iroquois chiefs
did nothing but smoke in their country, and that
their calumets were always in their mouths. They
wished to say that they awaited the word of the
Alguonquins [110] and of the Hurons.

At the 12th, they said that the souls of their rela-
tives who had been killed in war had withdrawn so
far into the center of the earth that they could never
think of them again,—that is to say, that they had
wiped out vengeance from their hearts.

At the 13th, they obeyed the voice of Monsieur
the Governor, who had ordered that hostilities be
suspended, and that the hatchets be hidden. For
that reason, they had passed the summer in dancing
and feasting, without thinking of war.

At the 14th, they wished to know as soon as possible
if they should continue their dances; and, conse-
quently, they desired that the Alguonquins and the
Hurons should hasten to speak,—-that is to say, to
carry presents to their country,—if they wished for
peace.

The 15th was to lessen the fatigues of the French
who had been in their country, who had used much
diligence and had taken much trouble to bring news
from the Iroquois to Onontio.

The 16th begged Onontio to have a woman of the
Iroquois country sent back to it, who had been taken
in war by the Alguonquins and given to the [111]
French. This woman was taken to France some


286 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 27


Carmelites de Paris, auec de grandes marques de fon
falut, comme il a efté remarqué és Relations prece-
dentes.

Le 17. prioit Onontio de fonder les Hurons & les
Alguonquins, & de dire nettement qu’elle eftoit leur
penfée touchant la paix ou la guerre.

Le 18. eftoit vn excufe de ce qu’ils n’auoient pas
ramené vn petit Francois qu’ils tiennent encor en leur
pays. Il n’eft point captif, difoit-il, il reuiendra
auec ceux qui porteront la parole des Alguonquins &
des Hurons.

Ces prefens faits, le plus remarquable des Iroquois
feleua, & tirant de fon fac quelques prefens de porce-
laine, parla en ces termes.

Au premier prefent qu il tenoit en la main, & quwil
mon{troit a toute l’affemblée, fe promenant par la
place, dit que fon pays eftoit plein de Hurons & de
femmes Alguonquines (car pour les hommes Alguon-
quins ils ne leur donnoient iamais la vie) qu’au refte
ces hommes & ces [112] femmes eftoient affis fur des
bufches ou des pieds de bois hors de leurs bour-
gades, c’eft a dire, quils n’eftoient point retenus &
quwils eftoient tous pre{ts de retourner en leur pays,
ainfi que le bois fec qui n’a point de racines fur
lequel ils font affis, peut eftre facilement tranfporté.

Au 2. prefent il dit que la petite Huronne appellée
Therefe, qui auoit ef{té prife fortant du Seminaire
des Vrfulines comme on la ramenoit en fon pays
eftoit toute prefte d’eftre deliurée, & que fi les Hurons
entroient dans la paix, qu’elle s’en retourneroit auec
eux fi elle vouloit, finon qu’ils la retiendroient comme
vn enfant nourrie de la main des Francois, pour
preparer leur manger quand ils iroient en leur pays.


1642-45) RELATION OF 1644-45 287


years ago and, after having been instructed and bap-
tized, she died at the Convent of the Carmelites of
Paris with evident marks of salvation, as has been
stated in the previous Relations.

The 17th begged Onontio to sound the Hurons
and Alguonquins, and get them to say clearly what
their opinion was respecting peace or war.

The 18th was an excuse for not having brought
back a little Frenchman whom they still detain in
their country. ‘‘ He is nota prisoner,’’ he said, ‘‘ he
will return with those who shall bear the word of the
Alguonquins and Hurons.”’

When these presents had been made, the chief man
among the Iroquois arose, and, drawing from his
pouch some presents of porcelain beads, he spoke in
these terms:

At the first present,— which he held in his hands,
and showed to the whole assembly, while he walked
about the square,—he said that his country was full
of Hurons and of Alguonquin women (for, as regards
the Alguonquin men, they never spared their lives);
that, however, those men and [112] women were
seated on logs or on stumps of trees outside of their
villages,— that is to say, they were not detained, and
were all ready to return to their country like the
dried trees on which they sat, which have no roots
and can easily be removed.

At the 2nd present, he said that the little Huron
girl called Therese—who had been captured just
after she had left the Seminary of the Ursulines,
while she was being taken to her own country — was
quite ready to be delivered up; and that, if the
Hurons joined in the peace, she would return with
them, if she wished; if not, that they would keep


288 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 27


Le 3. portoit que tous les prefens que Mr le Gou-
uerneur auoit fait aux premiers Ambaffadeurs auoient
efté portez felon fon ordre a toutes les Nations qui
leur font alliées. I] les nomma toutes.

Au 4. Il dit qu’Onontio auoit enfanté Ononjote,
c’eft vne bourgade qui leur eft alliée, mais qu’eftat
encore enfat il n’auoit pfi parler, que fi M. le Gou-
uerneur en auoit foin il deuiendroit grad & qu’il par-
leroit. [113] Il vouloit dire, que le prefent fait a
cette bourgade eftoit petit pour traiter vne paix
d’importance, & qu il le falloit aggrandir pour auoir
leur parole. Ce difcours finy, l’Hiroquois fe mit a
chanter & A danfer, il prit vn Francois d’vn cofté, vn
Algonquin & vn Huron de l’autre, & fe tenant tous
liez auec les bras, ils danfoient 4 la cadence, & chan-
toient d’vne voix forte vne chanfon de paix, qu’ils
pouffoient du fond de leur eftomach.

Apres cette danfe vn Capitaine Huron, nommé
Iean Baptifte Atironta, bon Chreftien, fe leua & ha-
ranguafort&ferme. C’eneft fait, dit-il, nous fommes
freres, la conclufion eft prife, nous voila tous parens,
Hiroquois, Hurons, Algonquins & Francois, nous ne
fommes plus qu’vne mefme chofe. Ne trahy per-
fonne, dit-il a l’Hiroquois, pour nous autres fg¢achez
que nous auions le coeur droit. Ie t’entend, refpon-
dit 1’Hiroquois, ta parole eft bonne, tu me trouueras
veritable. Et puis efleuant le dernier prefent il
s'eferia, tout le pais qui nous. fepare eft remply
d’Ours, de Cerfs, d’Elans de Caftors, & de quantité
d’autres beftes, pour moy ie fuis aueugle, ie chaffe a
l’auenture, quand jay tué [114] vn Caftor, ie penfe
auoir fait vne grande prife: mais vous parlant des
Algonquins, qui auez des yeux clair-voyans, vous ne


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 289


her as a child brought up by the hand of the
French, in order to prepare their food when they
went to their own country.

The 3rd meant that all the gifts that Monsieur the
Governor had given to the first Ambassadors had been
carried, according to his orders, to all the Tribes
who are allied to them. He named all these.

At the 4th, he said that Onontio had given birth
to Ononjote—this is a village that is allied to
them — but that, as it was still only a child, it could
not speak;* that, if Monsieur the Governor took care
of it, it would grow and speak. [113] He meant that
the present made to that village was a small one for
negotiating an important peace, and that it must be
increased, in order to get their promise. When this
discourse was ended, the Hiroquois began to sing
and to dance. He took a Frenchman on one side,
an Algonquin and a Huron on the other; and, hold-
ing one another by the arms, they danced in time,
and sang in a loud voice a song of peace which they
uttered from the depths of their chests.

After this dance, a Huron Captain named Jean
Baptiste Atironta, a good Christian, arose and har-
angued loudly and resolutely. ‘‘It is done,’’ he
said; ‘‘we are brothers. The conclusion has been
reached; now we all are relatives,— Hiroquois,
Hurons, Algonquins, and French; we are now but
one and the same people. Betray no one,” he said
to the Hiroquois. ‘‘ As for us, know that we have
sound hearts.”’ ‘‘I hear thee,’’ replied the Hiro-
quois; ‘‘ thy word, is good; thou wilt find me true.”’
Then, raising the last present, he exclaimed, ‘‘All
the country that lies between us is full of Bears, of
Deer, of Elk, of Beaver, and of numerous other


290 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox 27


faites que lancer l’efpée & voila la befte a bas. Ce
prefent vous inuite A la chaffe, nous joiiirons de
vo{tre induftrie, nous ferons roftir les animaux dans
vne mefme broche, & nous mangerons d’vn cofté, &
vous de 1’autre.

Vn Algonquin repartit a cela: Ie ne puis plus par-
ler, mon cceur a trop de joye, i’ay de grandes oreil-
les, & tant de bons difcours y entrans a la foule me
noyent de plaifir. Il eft vray que ie ne fuis qu’vn
enfant, cét [sc. c'eft] ‘Onontio "qui a les. grandes
paroles en bouche, c’eft luy qui fait la terre, & qui
refiotiit tous les hommes.

Pour conclufion de ce confeil Monfieur le Gouuer-
neur fit remercier ces trois Nations des bonnes
paroles qu’elles auoient données, les exhortans de
tenir ferme dans leurs deffeins, & les affeurant qu’il
leur feroit toufiours amy & parent fidel.


1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 291


animals. For my part, I am blind; I hunt at hap-
hazard; when I have killed [114] a Beaver, I think
that I have secured a great prize. But you,” speak-
ing of the Algonquins, ‘‘who are clear-sighted, you
have but to throw a javelin, and the animal falls.
This present invites you to hunt, we shall benefit by
your skill; we shall roast the animals on the same
spit, and we shall eat on one side, and you on the
other:

An Algonquin replied to this: ‘‘I can no longer
speak; my heart is too full of joy. I have large
ears and so many good words crowd in there that
they drown me in pleasure. It is true that I am but
achild. It is Onontio who has great words in his
mouth; he it is who makes the earth, and who
rejoices all men.”’

At the conclusion of this council, Monsieur the
Governor caused these three Nations to be thanked
for the good words that they had given, exhorting
them to remain firm in their purposes, and assuring
them that he would always be their friend and
faithful relative.


292 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 27


fits | CHARI URE ct
DE LA DERNIERE ASSEMBLEE TENUE POUR LA PAIX.


E vingtiéme du mefme mois de Septembre, fut
le tenué la derniere affemblée entre les Frangois,
les Algonquins qui comprennent plufieurs
petites Nations, les Hurons & les Hiroquois. Voicy
en peu de mots tout ce quis’y paffa de plus remar-
quable.

Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny ayant receu
tous les prefens dont il eft fait mention au Chapitre
precedent, les fit diuifer en trois parts, s’accommo-
dant aux couftumes de ces peuples. Et apres auoir
fait parler fes Truchemens, il en offrit vne partie
aux Hurons, vne autre partie aux Algonquins, & la
troifiéme fut pour les Francois. Nottez en paffant
qu'il falloit parler en quatre forte[s] de langues, en
Francois, en Huron, en Algonquin, & en Hiroquois.
On trouue icy des Interpretes de toutes ces langues.
Ces prefens faits Monfieur [116] le Gouuerneur en
fit deux autres aux Hiroquois, l’vn pour effuyer les
larmes des parens de la femme Hiroquoife qu’ils
auoient demandé, & qui eftoit morte en France;
lautre pour repofer fes os en fon pais, ou pour la
faire reuiure, faifant porter fon nom & quelque autre
femme. De plus il en fit’ encore deux autres
aux Hurons & aux Algonquins, pour les inuiter
de dire librement leurs penfées fur le deffein de la
paix: car c’eftoit luy, 4 proprement parler qui en


“Nc


}
1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 293


[115] CHAPTER XI.
OF THE LAST MEETING HELD FOR THE PEACE.


N the twentieth of the same month of Sep-
tember, the last meeting was held between
the French, the Algonquins,— who comprise

several petty Tribes,—the Hurons, and the Hiro-
quois. Here, in a few words, are all the most
remarkable things that occurred.

When Monsieur the Chevalier de Montmagny had
received all the presents mentioned in the foregoing
Chapter, he had them divided into three portions, in
accordance with the usages of these peoples; and,
after having made his Interpreter speak, he offered
one portion to the Hurons, another portion to the
Algonquins, while the third was for the French.
Observe, in passing, that it was necessary to speak in
four different languages,—in French, in Huron, in
Algonquin, and in Hiroquois; we have here Inter-
preters of all those languages. When these gifts had
been presented, Monsieur [116] the Governor gave
two others to the Hiroquois,— one to wipe away the
tears of the relatives of the Hiroquois woman whom
they had asked for, and who had died in France; the
other that her bones might be laid to rest in her own
country, or that she might be brought back to life,
by making some other woman bear her name.
Moreover, he also gave two others to the Hurons
and to the Algonquins, to invite them to express their
thoughts freely with reference to the peace; for it


294 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [NVou. 27


eftoit l’autheur, & qui la procuroit a ces peuples.

A cette parole vn Capitaine Huron s’éleua & dit,
qu’auparauant que de refpondre 4 la voix d’Onontio,
il luy vouloit faire prefent de la part de tout fon pais
d’vn Hiroquois prifonnier qu’il auoit tefmoigné defi-
rer dés l’année precedente: il prend donc ce prifon-
nier d’vne main, & de l’autre il tenoit vne branche de
Porcelaine en bafton, & paffant au trauers de la
place met ce pauure Hiroquois au pied de Monfieur
le Gouuerneur, auec cette Porcelaine qui reprefentoit
fon lien, marque de fa captiuité.

Monfieur le Gouuerneur ayant agreé ce prifonnier,
le fit conduire auffi-toft auec [117] fon lien de Porce-
laine au quartier ou eftoient affis les Hiroquois, luy
donnant la liberté, & le remettat entre les mains de
fes Compatriotes. Ce ieune foldat fit affez paroiftre
a fa mine qu’il prenoit grand plaifir de fe voir douce-
ment conduit vers fon Capitaine, apres auoir efchap-
pé le feu & la dent de fes ennemis, qui deuiennent
fes amis.

Cette ceremonie faite, le Capitaine Huron refpondit
a la fommation de Monfieur le Gouuerneur par
quatorze prefens qu’il fit aux Hiroquois, dont voicy
l’explication. Ces prefens eftoient compofez de
peaux de Caftors, & de Porcelaine.

Au premier, voila, dit-il, le lien du prifonnier qui
sefchappa de nos mains, 1’Automne paffé. Vous
{caurez en paffant que les Hurons auoient pris trois
Hiroquois auprés de Richelieu, qu’ils en auoient
donné vn aux Algonquins, lequel fut mis par apres
entre les mains de M' le Gouuerneur. Ils menerent
les deux autres dans leur pais. Enchemin l’vn de ces
deux prisoéniers s’efchappa: mais le froid, la faim &


ial


fgg
1642-45] RELATION OF 1644-45 295


was he, properly speaking, who was the author of it
and who procured it for these peoples.

At this speech, a Huron Captain arose and said
that, before replying to the words of Onontio, he
wished, on behalf of all his country, to make him a
present of a Hiroquois prisoner whom he had ex-
pressed a desire to have in the previous year. He
therefore took this captive with one hand, and with
the other he held a branch of Porcelain on a stick;
and, walking across the square, he brought the poor
Hiroquois to the feet of Monsieur the Governor,
with this Porcelain, that represented his bonds, the
mark of his captivity.

Monsieur the Governor accepted the prisoner, and
had him taken at once, with [117] his bond of Por-
celain beads, to the quarter where the Hiroquois
were seated,— giving him his liberty, and placing
him in the hands of his Countrymen. This young
warrior showed sufficiently by his countenance that
he felt much pleasure at seeing himself gently led
toward his Captain, after having escaped the fire and
the teeth of his enemies, who had become his friends.

This ceremony over, the Huron Captain replied to
the summons of Monsieur the Governor by fourteen
presents, which he gave to the Hiroquois, and of
which the following is an explanation. These
presents consisted of Beaver skins and Porcelain
beads.

At the first, ‘‘ Here,’’ said he, ‘‘ are the bonds of
the prisoner who escaped from our hands last
Autumn.’’ You must know, in passing, that the
Hurons had taken three Hiroquois near Richelieu;
that they had given one of them to the Algonquins,
who was afterward handed over to Monsieur the


296 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {Vou 27


la mifere le firent mourir dans les bois. Il eftoit
d’vne bourgade nommée Ononjoté, animée au der-
nier poinct contre les Hurons: [118] dautant que ces
peuples dans vn combat exterminerent quafi tous les
hommes de cette bourgade, laquelle fut contrainte
d’enuoyer demander aux Hiroquois, nommez Agnier-
ronons, auec lefquels nous auons fait la paix, des
hommes pour fe marier aux filles & aux femmes qui
e{toiét reftées fans maris, afin que leur nation ne
perit point. C’eft pourquoy les Hiroquois nomment
cette bourgade leur Enfant; Et pource que Monfieur
le Gouuerneur leur a enuoyé des prefens, & fait la
paix auec ceux qui les ont repeuplez, ils le nomment
auffi le Pere de cette bourgade. Rentrons, s’il vous
plaift, en difcours. Ce Capitaine Huron offrit donc
les liens de ce prifonnier efchappé pour marque qu’on
ne l’auroit pas fait mourir, & qu’on auoit deffein de
le mettre: en, liberté.

Au fecond prefent, voila, dit-il, pour reporter les
os de voftre enfant dans fon pais. C’eft la couftume
des Hurons de decharner les os de leurs gens, & de
les porter auec ceux de leurs parens, en quelque
quartier du monde qu’ils meurent.

Au troifiéme, voicy le lieu qui raffemblera ces os,
& qui vous les fera rapporter plus aifément: En vn
mot, il les vouloit [119] confoler & effuyer leurs
larmes a la fagon des Barbares qui font des prefens
aux parens de leurs amis trefpaffez.

Au quatriéme pour marque que nous fommes amis,
ce prefent fera vn chemin de vos bourgades dans les
no{tres.

Le cinquiéme faifoit l’ouuerture des portes de
leurs villages & de leur maifons.


bs, -45]


Governor; and had taken the two others to their own
country. One of these two captives escaped on the
way, but he died in the woods of cold, hunger, and
exposure. He belonged toa village called Ononjoté,
that. was angered to the last degree against the
Hurons; [118] for that nation had, in a battle, exter-
minated nearly all the men of that village, which
was compelled to send to the Hiroquois—who are
called Agnierronons, and with whom we have made
the peace—for men to marry the girls, and the
women who were left without husbands, so that their
tribe might not become extinct. That is why the
Hiroquois call that village their Child; and, because
Monsieur the Governor had sent them presents, and
made peace with those who had repeopled their
village, they also called him its Father. Let us
ferUrmerOeolr stoject, if you please. The Huron
Captain therefore offered the bonds of the prisoner
who had escaped, as a token that they would not
have put him to death, and that they had intended
to set him at liberty.

mistie seccoud! present, lis,” ‘said he,” 4s: to
carry back the bones of your child to his country.”’
It is the custom of the Hurons to remove the flesh
from the bones of their people, and to place them
with those of their relatives, in whatever quarter of
the world they may die.

At the third, ‘‘ Here is the bond that will bind
those bones together, and enable you to carry them
more easily.’’ In a word, he wished [119] to console
them and to wipe away their tears, according to the
fashion of the Barbarians, who give presents to the
relatives of their deceased friends.

At the fourth, he said, ‘‘ This is a token that we


RELATION OF 1644-45 297


298 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Mou. 27

Le fixiéme les inuitoit d’aller vifiter quelques pri-
fonniers Hiroquois que les Hurons tenoient en leur
pays, c’eftoit leur demander qu’ils portaffent des
prefens pour les aller requerir en affeurance.

Le feptiéme, comme les Hiroquois auoient dit dans
l’affemblée precedente que Ononjoté eftoit leur en-
fant, & l’enfant de M' le Gouuerneur, & qu’il ne fga-
uoit pas encore parler: Voila, dit ce Capitaine, pour
luy faire vn berceau denotant que les Hurons defi-
roient la paix auec cette bourgade.

Le huictiéme fut donné pour faire tomber toutes
les armes & toutes les haches qui fe pourroient encor
trouuer dans les mains des Iroquois.

Le neufiéme pour arracher leur bouclier de deffus
leur dos ot ils le portent ordinairement l’auangant ou
l’efloignant comme [120] ils veullent dans le combat.

Le dixiéme pour mettre bas leur Etendart de


guerre.

Le vnziéme pour arrefter le bruit de leurs arque-
buzes.

Le douziéme pour effacer la peinture de leur vifage,
les Sauuages ont couftume quand ils vont en guerre
de fe peindre de diuerfes couleurs & de s’huyler ou
de fe greffer la tefte & le vifage,; Voila, dit-il, pour
emporter les taches de voftre vifage & de vos yeux
afin que le iour foit tout beau & tout ferain.

Le treiziéme fut pour brifer la chaudiere dans la-
quelle ils faifoient boitillir les Hurons qu’ils pou-
uoient attraper en guerre pour les manger.

Le quatorziéme demandoit qu’on preparaft vne
natte c’eft a dire vn lict ou vn logis aux Hurons qui fe
deuoient bien-toft tranfporter au pays des Hiroquois.

Tous ces prefens, adjoufta-il, ne font rien, nous


RELATION OF 1644-45 299


are friends; this present will make a road from your
villages to ours.”’

The fifth opened the gates of their villages and the
doors of their houses.

The sixth invited them to go and see some Hiro-
quois prisoners whom the Hurons detained in their
country. This was asking them to bring presents so
as to go and claim them in safety.

At the seventh,—as the Hiroquois had said at the
previous assembly that Ononjoté was their child,
and the child of Monsieur the Governor and that it
could not yet speak,—‘‘ Here,’’ said the Captain,
‘‘is something to make a cradle for it,’’ meaning
that the Hurons wished for peace with that village.

The eighth was given to cause all the weapons and
all the hatchets that might still be in the hands of
the Iroquois, to drop.

The ninth was to snatch their shields from their
backs, where they generally carry them, moving
them backward and forward as [120] they please in
battle.

The tenth was to lower their war Standard.

The eleventh, to stop the reports of their arque-
buses.

The twelfth, to wash away the paint from their
faces. These Savages are accustomed, when they
go to war, to paint themselves in various colors, and
to oil or grease their heads and faces. “‘ Here,”’
said he, ‘‘ is something to remove the stains from
your faces and your eyes, so that the day may be
quite fine and serene.’’

The thirteenth was to break the kettle in which
they boiled the Hurons whom they took in war, in
order to eat them.


300 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 217


en auons bien d’autres dans noftre pays qui vous
attendent.

Les Hurons ayans refpondu 4 la demande de Mon-
fieur le Gouverneur, & témoigné par tous ces prefens
quils fouhaitoient la paix, vn Algonquin fe leua &
fit [121] quelques prefens, dont voicy la fignification.

Au premier iettant vn paquet de Caftors, voila
pour me faire connoiftre, & de quelle nation ie fuis,
moy qui demeure dans des maifons volantes bafties
de petites efcorces, c’eft ainfi qu’ils diftinguent les
Algonquins Errans d’auec les Hurdés fedentaires.

Au deuxiéme, ce prefent arreftera vos plaintes, il
eftouffera vos reffentimés & fera difparoiftre le fang
refpandu dans nos riuieres & dans les voftres des
Algonquins & des Hiroquois.

Ce troifiéme prefent nous donnera libre entrée dans
vos maifons ayans brifé les portes de vos bourgades.

Le quatriéme, voila pour petuner les vns atec
les autres Hiroquois & Algéquins dans vne mefme
pipe, comme font les amis qui prennent du tabac par
enfemble.

Le cinquiéme nous fera nauiger dans vn mefme
vaiffeau, ou dans vn mefme canot, en forte que n’e-
{tant plus qu’vn il ne faudra plus qu’vne méme bour-
gade, vne mefme maifon, vn mefme Calumet & vn
mef{me canot. Le refte de nos paroles ou de nos
prefens fera porté en vo{tre pays, voila comme il finit
fon difcours.

[122] Monfieur le Gouuerneur fit parler en fuite
les interpretes, offrant vn prefent qui donnoit affeu-
rance aux Hiroquois qu’il tiendroit la main que ces
deux grandes nations tinfent leur paroles.

Il fit encor vn autre prefent pour eftre porté dans la


1642-45) RELATION OF 1644-45 301


The fourteenth asked that a mat — that is to say, a
bed or a lodging — be prepared for the Hurons who
would soon go to the Hiroquois country.

‘‘All these presents,’’ he added, ‘‘ are nothing; we
have many others in our country, which await you.’’

When the Hurons had replied to the demand of
Monsieur the Governor, and had manifested by all
these presents that they desired peace, an Algonquin
arose and gave [121] some presents, of which the
following is the meaning:

At the first, he threw down a bundle of Beaver
skins. ‘‘ This is to show who I am, and to what
nation I belong,— I who live in traveling houses built
of small pieces of bark.” Thus they distinguish the
Wandering Algonquins from the Hurons, who are
sedentary.

At the second, ‘‘ This present will stop your com-
plaints; it will subdue your anger, and will cause our
rivers and yours to wash away the blood that has
been shed by Algonquins and by Hiroquois.’’

‘“ This third present will give us free entrance to
your houses, after breaking down the gates of your
villages.”

At the fourth, ‘‘ Here is something wherewith to
smoke with one another, both Hiroquois and Algon-
quins, in the same pipe, as friends do who use
tobacco together.”’

‘The fifth will make us sail in the same ship or
in the same canoe; so that, as we shall be but one
people, but one village, one house, one Calumet, and
one canoe will be needed. The remainder of our
words, or of our presents, will be carried to your
country.’’ Thus he ended his speech.

[122] Monsieur the Governor afterward made the


302 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (Nou. 27


bourgade d’On[on]joté, afin de donner des nouuelles
a fon enfant (pour s’accommoder 4 leurs termes)
qu’il auoit defir d’embellir toute la terre, & de l’ap-
planir en forte qu’on peuft aller par tout fans trefbu-
cher & fans trouuer aucun mauuais rencontre.

Le Capitaine Hiroquois ayant receu ces prefens
fe leue & regardant le Soleil & puis toute l’affemblée,
Onontio, dit-il, tu as diffipé tous les nuages, lair eft
ferain, le Ciel paroift 4 defcouuert, le Soleil eft bril-
lant, ie ne vois plus de trouble, la paix a tout mis
dans le Calme, mon cceur eft en repos, ie m’en vais
bien content.

Onontio, ayant fait exhorter tous ces peuples a la
con{tance & A la fidelité, rompit l’affemblée, & le
lendemain il fit vn feftin a plus de quatre cens
perfonnes a4 la fagon des Sauuages.

Voila qui va bien, difoient tous les conuiez, nous
mangeons tous enfemble, & [123] n’auons plus qu’vn
mefme plat. Le Reuerend Pere Hierofme Lalemant
qui ef{toit party des Hurons dans les craintes de ren-
contrer des Hiroquois, les vid d’vn ceil tout plein de
ioye dans ces affemblées. I1 eftoit rauy voyant vn
changement fi miraculeux, il en fit benir Dieu & en
public & en particulier.

Enfin le 23. de Septembre ces Ambaffadeurs Hiro-
quois accompagnez de deux Frang¢ois, de deux Algon-
quins & de deux Hurons, s’en retournerent en leurs
pays, laiffant parmy nos Sauuages, maintenant leurs
alliez, trois hommes de leur nation, comme pour
hoftages ou plutoft pour marque d’amitié.

Que le Dieu des Dieux foit beny a iamais, que fon
Nom foit glorieux dans toutes les Contrées de la
Terre. Si ces Barbares qui pour ne pas connoiftre


1642-45] RELATION OF rbag-45 308


interpreters speak, offering a present that assured
the Hiroquois that he would see that those two great
nations kept their word.

He also gave another present to be carried to the
village of Ononjoté, so as to give news to his child
(making use of their own terms), that he desired to
make the whole earth beautiful, and to smooth it so
that one might walk everywhere without stumbling,
and without meeting any misadventure.

When the Hiroquois Captain had received these
presents, he arose and, looking at the Sun and then
at the entire assembly, he said: ‘‘ Onontio, thou
hast dispersed the clouds; the air is serene, the Sky
shows clearly; the Sun is bright. I see no more
trouble; peace has made everything Calm; my heart
is at rest; I go away very happy.’’

Onontio caused all these nations to be exhorted to
remain constant and faithful; then he broke up the
meeting, and on the following day he gave a feast,
in the fashion of the Savages, to more than four
hundred people.

‘““Things are going well,’ said all the guests;
““we eat all together, and [123] we have but one
dish.’’ Reverend Father Hierosme Lalemant who
had started from the Huron country with the fear
of meeting Hiroquois, watched them at these assem-
blies with eyes full of joy. He was delighted to see
so miraculous a change, and praised God for it both
in public and in private.

Finally, on the 23rd of September, these Hiroquois
Ambassadors, accompanied by two Frenchmen, two
Algonquins, and two Hurons, returned to their own
country, leaving among our Savages, who were now
their allies, three men of their nation as hostages, or
rather as pledges, of their friendship.


304 LES RELATIONS, DES
eS x


Dieu n’ont guere de iuftice, ny de fermeté ne trou-—
blent cette paix conclué pour les Francois & bien
auancée pour les Sauuages, il y aura moyen d’aller
fouffrir pour IESvs-CHRIST dans vn grand nombre
de peuples.


1642-45) RELATION OF 1644-45 305


Praised forever be the God of Gods; may his
Name be glorified in all the Countries of the Earth.
If these Barbarians— who, because they know not
God, have hardly any equity or stability—do not
disturb this peace,— which is concluded, as far as
the French are concerned; and in a very advanced
state, as regards the Savages,— it will be possible to
go and suffer for JESUS CHRIST in a great many
nations.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXVII


LIIl
For particulars of this document, see Vol. XXV.


DN


In publishing the Journal des Jésuites, we follow
the original manuscript in the library of Laval Uni-
versity, Quebec. It covers the period from Septem-
ber, 1645, to June, 1668, excepting some lacunze
between February 5, 1654, and October 25, 1656.
This manuscript belonged originally to the archives
of the old Jesuit Fathers at their house in Quebec,
and was found there after the death of their last
survivor, Father Jean Joseph Casot, who died March
16, 1800. Afterward it disappeared, but was recov-
ered about the year 1815, when Andrew William
Cochran, civil secretary to Governor Sir John Cope
Sherbrooke, accidentally discovered it in an obscure
corner of his office. After Mr. Cochran’s death —
which occurred on July 11, 1849—his widow pre-
sented it to George Barthélemy Faribault, of Quebec.
Mr. Faribault died December 21, 1866, and by his
last will and testament bequeathed all of his books,
manuscripts, paintings, and engravings, relative to
the history of Canada, to the Seminary of Quebec.
The original of the Journal des /ésuites thus passed to
the Seminary, and is now among the matchless
treasures of the library of Laval University.

There is evidence that the /ournal was continued


308 LES RELATIONS. DES JESUITES


down to 1755; but the manuscripts of this continua-
tion, which must have comprised at least two more
volumes, have disappeared. In 1897, the Abbé Henri
R. Casgrain, of Laval University, made special
researches for the missing volumes in England
among the heirs of William Smith, the historian of
Canada — but without success. Smith had quoted
from it under date of December 20, 1710, and again
under 1752; and in his preface he specially mentions
‘‘the Jesuits’ Journals’’ among the sources from
which he derived ‘‘ valuable information.” Mer.
Thomas E. Hamel, librarian of Laval University,
writes us, May 7, 1898, that he is under the impres-
sion that Mr. Smith had only access to the manu-
scripts, and was not the owner of them; and that it
is only by mere chance that the missing volumes
can be found —if, in fact, they have not perished
altogether.

In 1871 the Journal des /ésuites was first printed
under the editorship of the Abbés Laverdiére and
Casgrain; but after a few copies, perhaps about sixty,
had been distributed, a fire broke out in the printing
establishment of the publisher, Léger Brousseau,
and nearly all the remaining copies were consumed.
A few of them (Henry C. Murphy says twelve, but a
penciled memorandum in the copy in the Wisconsin
Historical Society’s library says forty), which were
singed and water-stained, were afterward bound up,
and are now occasionally met with. A description
of this printed edition follows:

Le | Journal | des | Jésuites | publié | d’aprés le
manuscrit original conservé aux archives | du Sémi-
naire de Québec | par | MM. les abbés Laverdiére
et Casgrain |


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DA PAV OL. XXV IL 309
7
san A Québec | Chez Léger Brousseau, Imprimeur-
Editeur a 7 tie obaade. '|/)1871 |

Title;swith verso blank, 1 leaf; ‘“ Préface,” pp.
v.-x.; ‘‘ Errata,” with verso blank, 1 leaf; calendar
from 1645 to 1668, twelve unnumbered leaves —com-
prising signatures A-—F in twos; ten Latin hex-
ameters with verso blank, 1 leaf; text, pp. 3-361;
p. 362 blank; ‘‘ Table des Matiéres,’’ pp. 363 — 403.

In 1893, J. M. Valois, of Montreal, published a
reprint of the 1871 edition; but omitted the leaf of
errata. In some cases the errata were corrected in
the text, though not always; and in one case (p. 172,
1. 29), an insertion was made for a transposition.
The cover-title of the Montreal edition is dated
1893; but the title-page has the date 1802.

Copies of the 1871 edition have been sold or priced
as follows: Murphy sale (1884), no. 1349, sold for
$8; auction sale of Bangs & Co., New York, Nov.
It, 1895, for $9.50; and priced by Raoul Renault
(1898), at $30. The 1893 reprint is worth about $5.


LV


In reprinting the text of the Relation of 1644-45
(Paris, 1646), we follow a copy owned by The Bur-
rows Brothers Company, Cleveland, and which ise<23
duplicate from the collection in the Lenox Library.
The ‘‘ Priuilege”’ is dated ‘‘ Donné a Paris le vnziéme
Decembre 1645;"’ and the date of ‘‘ Permiffion ”’
follows the form of that of the Relation of 1638, and
reads ‘‘ Fait & Paris le 26. Mars 1638. ESTIENNE
BineT.’’ It is generally designated as ‘‘H. 84,”
because described in Harrisse’s Votes, no. 84.

Collation: ‘Title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; ‘‘ Table
des Ouapitres,” pp. @); ‘“ Priuilege,’’ with) Per-


310 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES~_


miffion’’ on the verso, 1 leaf; one blank leaf,
completing sig. 4 in four; text of Vimont’s Relatzon,
pp. 1-135; Jerome Lalemant’s Huron fedation, pp.
136-183; verso of p. 183 blank. Pp. 96, 100, and 180
are mispaged 69, 110, and 80, respectively.

Copies of this Relation may be found in the follow-
ing libraries: Lenox, Harvard, Brown (private), Ayer
(private), New York State Library, Laval University
(Quebec), Bibliothéque Nationale (Paris), and the
British Museum (two copies, both badly cut at bot-
tom). The Henry C. Murphy copy was sold with
others en bloc in 1884; at the Barlow sale (1890), a
copy, no. 1290, sold for $29; and a Lenox duplicate
was sold by Bangs & Co., of New York, on April 29,
1895, for $32.50. This annual does not come into
the market as generally as do some of the others.
We have searched in vain for data in several Parisian
booksellers’ catalogues, covering a period of several
years.


NOTES FO VOL. XXVII


(Figures in parentheses, following number of note, refer to pages
of English text.)


I (p. 67).— Dogzgue: thus explained by Father Martin, Douniol’s
Relations Inédites de la Nouvelle-France (Paris, 1861), t. 1., p. 158,
note. ‘‘'The name which, in foreign Missions, is given to those of
the natives who instruct their countrymen. It would appear that
there were in Canada dogiques or catechists not only among the
men, but also among the women.”’

2 (p. 77).— The terms of this cession are stated in vol. viii.,
note 57.

3 (p- 79).— D’Alibour is but a variant of D’Ailleboust (vol. xxiii.,
mote 16). Concerning Dauversiére and Maisonneuve, see vol. xxi.,
note 4. A sketch of Jeanne Mance is given in vol. xxii., xofe 7.

4 (p. 85).— Regarding this house, Laverdiére says (Quebec ed.
of Journal, p. 7, note): ‘‘The Jesuit Fathers were still lodged in
the house belonging to the Hundred Associates, who had lent it
to them after the fire of 1640. This house must have been situated
near the site of the Anglican church.”’

5 (p. 85).—Charles le Gardeur, sieur de Tilly (the name of the
family estate in Normandy), the younger brother of Pierre le Gar-
deur de Repentigny (vol. viii., zo0¢e 57), was born in 1616, and came
to Canada at the age of twenty. These, with Le Neuf de la Poterie
and Charles D’Ailleboust, were among the most prominent Cana-
dian habitants and the first to be ennobled,— all four receiving this
honor from the king in 1666. ‘Tilly married (Oct. 1, 1648) Genevieve
Juchereau, by whom he had fifteen children. At his marriage, he
received, as his wife’s dowry, the estate of St. Michel de Sillery,
which later became the property of the Seminary of Quebec. He is
mentioned in August, 1653, as deputy from Céte Ste. Geneviéve for
the election of the syndic of Quebec; and in 1663, and during
several years afterward, as a member of the Sovereign Council.
He was also one of those associated with Godefroy (vol. ix., zofe 4)
in the Tadoussac trade. He died in November, 1695.

6 (p. $7).—‘‘ Francois Chavigny de Berchereau, of Creancée,
Champagne, came to Canada about 1640. He established himself at


312 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES
SE _  ,
Sillery, where estates had been granted to him; his influence in New
France was great,— Montmagny appointed him his representative,
during the former’s absences from Quebec. As he came from the
same province as Maisonneuve, Mlle. Mance, and Mile. Bourgeois,
and was, besides, their personal friend, his advice was sought by
the founders of Montreal as well as by those of Quebec. While on
a voyage to France for the sake of his health, he died at sea, in
1651.’"’— Sulte’s Can. Frangazs, vol. ii., p. 80. Chavigny married
Eléonore de Grandmaison, whose third husband was Jacques Gour-
deau (vol. xi., 20¢e 12).

7 (p. 87).— Gilles Nicolet, a secular priest, came to Canada prob-
ably in 1640 or 1641. He officiated for several years at Beauport
and other outlying settlements where churches were not yet estab-
lished, and returned to France in October, 1647.

8 (p. 87).—St. Sauveur was another secular priest; see sketch in
vol. xxiv., zo7é 7.

9 (p. 89).— This was Zacharie Cloutier, a carpenter, who came
to Quebec with Giffard (1634). He had a wife and five children;
one of the daughters married Francois Marguerie (vol. x., zofe 4),
and a son married Marie, daughter of Abraham Martin. Cloutier
settled at Chateau-Richer; his death occurred in September, 1677.

10 (p. 91).—Charles le Moyne (Lemoine), a native of Dieppe,
France (born 1624), came to Canada about 1641, at the instance of
his uncle, Adrien du Chesne (vol. viii., zofe 68). As stated in our
text, Le Moyne spent four years among the Hurons, in the service
of the Jesuits. Returning thence, he settled at Montreal, about
1646 or 1647, soon afterward receiving lands there; for many years,
he served as interpreter for the colony, also as captain of its militia.
He was a brave soldier, and often repelled the attacks of the Iro-
quois, with whom, in 1653, he negotiated a peace. Two years later,
he was captured by them; but they were so impressed by his courage
that they sent him home after three months, unharmed. He was
one of Montreal’s most prominent citizens, and for his public serv-
ices was ennobled by Louis XIV. (1668),— under the title Sieur de
Longueuil, from the seigniory of that name granted him in 1657,
and augmented in 1672. He also obtained (1664) the islands Ste.
Héléene and Ronde; and (1673) Chateauguay. Le Moyne married
(1654) an adopted orphan, named Catherine Tierry, aged thirteen.
They had fourteen children, most of whom achieved distinction in
civil or military affairs; among these were Iberville, the noted ex-
plorer, and Bienville, the founder of New Orleans. Sieur le Moyne
died at Montreal, in 1683.


Ii (p. g1).— Pierre Gadois, a native of Perche, came with his


%


NOTES TO VOL. XXVII 313


—_ —


family to Canada about 1640, or perhaps somewhat earlier. He
~tesided for a time at Sillery, but afterward removed to Montreal,

where in 1648 he obtained land. He was the first settler in that

colony, and died there in October, 1667, leaving several children.

12 (p. 93).— René Mézeray (Mézier),— nicknamed Noce,— born
in 1611, emigrated from Normandy to Canada about 1636. The
marriage here mentioned was his second,— his first wife having died
childless; at this time, he was living on the estate of M. de Chavigny.
About 1650, he obtained lands at Cap Rouge; and, in 1656, another
grant from Charles de Lauson. In 1681, Mézeray was living in the
seigniory of Godarville; he died near Quebec, in March, 1695.

His father-in-law on this occasion was Pierre Garemand,— nick-
named “the Picard,’ from his native province. He was captured
by the Iroquois in 1653, and probably burned to death.

13 (p. 97).— Luis de la Puente, a Spanish Jesuit,—‘‘ generally
known, outside Spain, under the names of Dupont, or de Ponte”’
(Sommervogel),— was born at Valladolid, Nov. 11,1554. At the age
of twenty, he became a Jesuit novice; and, after completing his
studies, composed numerous devotional works. The most widely-
read of these is Medztaczones de los Mystertos de nuestra Sancta
fe (Valladolid, 1605). Translations of this work into nine different
languages are enumerated by Sommervogel. The ‘“‘ abridgment”’
referred to in the text is probably either the Refectoir spirituel des
euvres du R. P. Louys du Pont (Paris, 1621),— a French translation
by a priest named Claude Godeme; or, Compendium medita-
tionum,—a Latin version from the MWedztaczones, by the Jesuit P.
Ximenez (1620). Dela Puente died at Valladolid, Feb. 16, 1624.


14 (p. 99).— Noél Juchereau, sieur des Chastelets, born in the
vicinity of Chartres, France, came to Quebec in 1632. He was a
licentiate in the legal profession; Sulte conjectures that he was act-
ing ‘‘in the interests of Rosée and Cheffault, who desired to obtain
from the Hundred Associates a grant of part of the New France
trade.’’ Estates near Quebec were granted to Juchereau, who,
being unmarried, conferred them upon his nephews. He is men-
tioned in our text as ‘‘ general agent,’’— of the Company of France,
according to Laverdiére; but of the Association of Habitants, in
Sulte’s opinion. The latter statement seems the more probable,
since Des Chastelets made his last voyage to France (1647) as a dele-
gate of the habitants, to secure certain changes in their govern-
ment. He died there, soon afterward.

15 (p. 99).— Marie Francoise, eldest daughter of Sieur Giffard,
was but eleven years and five months old at the time of her mar-
riage. Her husband was Jean Juchereau de la Ferté, eldest son of


314 LES RELATIONS DES JES UT

7 ; a
Jean Juchereau, seigneur du Maure,— the latter being a brother of
Noél, sieur des Chastelets (zofe 14, ante).

16 (p. 1or).— Jean Guyon was the name of two men who came
with Giffard,— both from Mortagne, in Perche, and both masons
by trade. To one of these men Giffard gave the fief of Buisson; his
wife was Mathurine Robin, and their children married into promi-
nent colonial families; he died in May, 1663. The other Guyon was
an educated man, and often drew up legal and official documents;
little else is known of him.

17 (p. 105).—There were numerous Jesuit writers of this name; the
one here referred to was doubtless Alonso Rodriguez, born at VaHa-
dolid, Spain, in 1537. He entered the novitiate at the age of twenty,
and his priestly life was spent in the colleges of Monterey, Montilla,
and Cordova; his death occurred at Seville, Feb. 21, 1616. His
principal work was Exercicio de Perfection, y virtudes cristianas
(Seville, 1609), divided into three parts; it was translated into many
languages, European and Oriental. The book mentioned in the
text was probably the French version by Paul Duez, Pratiguve de
la Perfection et des vertus chrestiennes (Paris, 1621), which went
through numerous editions.


18 (p. 105).— “‘ By this vow, the Jesuit Fathers bound themselves
to say twelve masses a year (for those who were priests), or twelve
rosaries (for those not ordained), and always to fast on the eve of
the feast of the Immaculate Conception; this was done in order to
obtain, through the intercession of the blessed Virgin, the conver-
sion of the peoples in this new world.— See Relation of 1635 (at the
end), and of 1636 (chap. ii.).’’— Queb. ed. of Journ., p. 16, ote.


Ig (p. 109).— Barthélemi Gavanti, an Italian ecclesiastic (1569-
1638), was consulter of the Congregation of Rites, and general of
the Barnabites. He wrote several books; that mentioned in the
text is either Praxis visttatzonis episcopalis (Rome, 1628), or
Manuale Episcoporum (Paris, 1647).

20 (p. 113).— This was another name for Martin Boutet (said by
Tanguay to be a professor of mathematics), apparently an immi-
grant from Saintes, France. In 1651, he opened a school for the
children of the French colonists at Quebec. He had two daughters,
of whom one married Charles Philippau; the other became an
Ursuline nun.


21 (p. 115).— Chanteau: thus defined by Bescherelle: ‘The
piece of the consecrated bread which is sent to the person who is to
furnish the bread on the Sunday following, or on the next feast-day.
The Jain bénit generally consisted of flat, round loaves of sweetened
bread, piled one upon another, and decreasing in size to the top, the


Pas,


NOTES TO VOL. XXVII 315


_ last and smallest being called the chanteau; this was given to the
person who was to furnish the bread next time. If furnished by
wealthy persons, the Jazz bénzt was a very elaborate structure,
sometimes resembling a church steeple, or other object.’’— Craw-
FORD LINDSAY.


22 (p. 121).— ‘‘ This name was originally given—and probably
derived from the first persons who here erected a cabin —to the
little river Chalifour, which passes near the Insane Asylum; on
account of this latter circumstance, it is now called ‘River of
Fools.’ ’’— Queb. ed. of Journ., p. 23, note.

23 (p. 289).— Ononjote-: the chief village of the Oneidas (vol.
viii., pp. 299, 300).

24 (p. 295).— For information regarding porcelain (wampum), see
vol. vili., zote 70. Cf. Holmes’s ‘‘ Beads as Currency,’’ U. S. Bur.
Lithn. Rep., 1880-81, pp. 234-255.

Opinions differ as to the meaning of the term ‘‘ branches of por-
celain.’”’ Holmes translates it ‘‘strings,’’ as used by Lafitau; but
he says that the latter’s use of this and other terms is somewhat
confusing. Slafter (Prince Champlazn, vol. iii., p. 150, zofe) says
that ‘‘ branches were strings of white shells,’’ as distinguished from
the purple. E. E. Taché thinks that they were twigs or sticks
strung with large beads, to represent ropes. Crawford Lindsay has
seen, among old specimens of wampum, small beads strung on a
long thread which was closely wound round a pliable stick or
twig. He also mentions information given him by an educated
Indian from Lorette, ‘‘ who says that he has frequently seen these
porcelain branches. They consist of large beads strung on the fiber
of the ortze (urtica, the nettle), which is very tough, and which
the squaws treated like flax, making from it strong threads,—or on
slender thongs of caribou hide. Several of these branches are
united on one stem, like the twigs of a tree-branch. Each, he says,
represents a parole, or word, of a discourse.’’ Dionne thinks that
beads were strung upon the branches of a twig, which, being pli-
able, would simulate the withes used in binding prisoners.


*.


GTU Library
2400 Ridge Road
Berkeley, CA 94709
For renewals call (510) ee -2500


All items are subject to recall,


7)


ge
}


- 7 “ at
See tee rene |


4


;
es


ai


Ph eat


arr!


. — -— ~ a oe


a 7092


GRADUATE THEOLOGICAL UNION LIBRARY


BERKELEY, CA 94709


. we a =e


ee


a


_ 3 2400 00324 8832


LIBRARY USE ONLY


RAEI ae


wae


QEwsy


aes SH
a=


zi
