M
Si'
Iji^Qx.
:ag
*r^ *rw^'1  '^-1 ^  J ' ^ t
3  11
1  P-^'
S  MR
THE  JESUIT  RELATIONS
AND
ALLIED  DOCUMENTS
VOL.  XXIV
The  edition  consists  of  sev-
en hundred and  fifty  sets
all  numbered
No.
A/  ^/y^r
The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents
Travels  and  Explorations
OF  THE  Jesuit  Missionaries
IN  New  France
1610-1791
THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL-
IAN TEXTS.  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA-
TIONS AND  NOTES  ;  ILLUSTRATED  BY
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES
EDITED  BY
REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES
Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconslo
Vol.  XXIV
LOWER  Canada  and  Iroquois:  1642- 1643
CLEVELAND: Zlbe  :fiSurrows  asrotbers
Company,  PUBLISHERS,  mdcccxviii
Copyright, 1898
BY


The  Burrows  Brothers  Co


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


The  Imperial  Press,  Cleveland


EDITORIAL  STAFF


Editor


Translators


Assistant  Editor
Bibliographical  Adviser


Reuben  Gold  Thwaites
FiNLOw  Alexander
Percy  Favor  Bicknell
William  Frederic  Giese
Crawford  Lindsay
William  Price
Hiram  Allen  Sober
Emma  Helen  Blair
Victor  Hugo  Paltsits


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  XXIV

Preface  to  Volume  XXIV .  .  -9

Document: —

LI.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe  en  la  Novvelle
France,  en  I'annee  1642.  &  1643.  [Chaps,
iv.-xii.,  second  installment  of  the  docu-
ment.] Barthelemy  Vimont;  undated  . 19

Notes ......  309


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIV


The  Relation  of  1642-43  (Document  LI.)  was  writ-
ten wholly  by  Vimont,  the  superior  —  the  manuscript
for  the  intended  Huron  part  having  been  captured
by  the  Iroquois.  In  Vol.  XXIII.,  we  presented  the
first  three  chapters ;  Chapters  iv.  -  xii.  are  herewith
given,  and  the  remaining  two  chapters  will  appear
in  Vol.  XXV.

In  continuing  his  account  of  the  Sillery  mission,
Vimont  describes  the  manner  of  life  of  the  Indians
settled  there,  and,  as  usual,  relates  numerous  in-
stances of  their  piety  and  zeal.  A  woman  says  twice
as  many  prayers  for  the  soul  of  Father  Raymbault
as  for  that  of  her  own  daughter,  in  order  that  he  may
be  first  released  from  Purgatory,  as  "  his  prayers
will  get  her  out  sooner  than  mine."  A  man  who
speaks  contemptuously  of  the  faith  is  severely  dis-
ciplined by  the  Christian  Indians.  An  old  woman,
who  stays  at  home  one  feast  day,  imitates  the  church
ceremonies  as  closely  as  she  can,  and  thus  ' '  has  mass
in  her  own  cabin."  A  young  man,  tempted  to  sin,
not  only  resists  stoutly,  but  severely  flogs  his  entire
body,  by  way  of  penance,  for  fear  lest  he  have  erred ;
and,  in  deep  distress,  he  begs  the  Fathers  to  punish
him  to  the  utmost.  These  Christian  Indians  also  are
doing  much,  by  words  and  by  example,  for  the  con-
version of  their  neighbors,  the  Attikamegues.  Chap-
ter iv. closes  with  a  letter  from  an Indian  to  his


10  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIV

benefactor  in  France,  written  in  his  own  language
and  his  own  forms  of  expression.

The  Sillery  Indians  are  especially  severe  on  the
women  who  leave  their  husbands.  An  instance  of
this  sort  having  occurred,  they  secure  permission
from  Montmagny  to  build  a  little  prison  of  their  own
at  Sillery,  in  which  the  woman  is  placed,  with  an
injunction  to  entreat  God  to  make  her  more  sensible
and  obedient.  Here,  in  the  depth  of  winter,  she  is
kept  twenty-four  hours,  without  fire  or  blanket,  or  at
first,  without  other  bed  than  the  bare  ground ;  through
Father  de  Quen's  intercession  she  is  afterward  given
a  little  bread,  and  some  straw  to  rest  on.  "  Toward
evening,  they  judged  it  proper  to  release  her;  it  was
enough  for  inspiring  terror  in  this  poor  creature,  and
was  a  little  beginning  of  government  for  these  new
Christians.  The  punishment  sufficed  for  this  young
woman,  and  for  several  others."  Several  of  the  men
no  longer  strike  their  wives  in  anger,  but  gently
reprove  them,  or  even  patiently  endure  without  reply.

Charles  Meiachkawat  takes  back  to  the  Abenakis
a  prisoner  from  that  region,  and  winters  with  them;
he  eagerly  embraces  this  opportunity  to  preach  to
them  the  Christian  faith,  but,  as  they  have  no  ac-
quaintance with  the  French  people,  and  are  much
addicted  to  drunkenness,  his  sermons  have  not  much
effect.  He  goes  with  the  Abenakis  to  visit  an  Eng-
lish settlement,  where  a  heretic  tries  to  dispute  his
religious  belief;  but  Charles  warns  him  that  he
"  will  burn  in  hell,  for  despising  what  God  has  made
and  ordered."  An  Abenaki  chief  follows  Charles
back  to  Sillery,  where  he  is  baptized,  with  Mont-
magny acting  as  his  sponsor  in  the  name  of  the
grand  master  of  Malta.


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIV  11

A  party  of  Attikamegues,  sixty  in  number,  come
to  Sillery,  persuaded  thereto  by  the  converted  chief
Jean  Baptiste ;  they  are  delighted  to  receive  instruc-
tion from  the  Fathers,  and  presents  from  Mont-
magny.  Half  of  them  have  been  baptized,  and  the
remainder  are  catechumens;  the  baptism  of  many
has  been  deferred  until  they  shall  be  weaned  from
their  superstitions.  Vimont  recounts  various  details
of  these  conversions,  and  acts  of  piety  and  zeal.  One
man  finds  in  his  cabin  a  French  drum,  and  forthwith
tears  it  to  pieces,  ' '  although  it  is  not  bad,  lest  it
cause  the  others  to  remember  their  drums  and  for-
bidden superstitions."  These  Attikamegues  urge
the  Jesuits  to  send  a  missionary  to  their  country.
As  usual,  the  Fathers  find  their  chief  encouragement
in  the  children,  who  are  docile  and  intelligent.

Great  is  the  joy  of  the  Sillery  Christians  at  the
conversion  of  their  Attikamegue  friends,  and  they
fervently  exhort  these  to  remain  in  the  Faith.  When
the  latter  set  out  on  their  annual  hunt,  they  bid  a
grateful  and  touching  farewell  to  Father  Buteux,
their  teacher.  In  the  spring,  they  return  to  Three
Rivers  for  further  instruction,  and  many  new  bap-
tisms occur.  The  Sillery  colony  is  doing  much
toward  the  conversion  of  the  savages ;  but  its  progress
is  greatly  hindered  by  their  poverty,  which  forces
them  to  keep  up  their  nomadic  life,  and  by  their
dread  of  the  Iroquois,  whose  cruelty  and  boldness
continually  increase.

Vimont  relates  how  the  Huron  seminary  at  Notre-
Dame  des  Anges  was  suspended,  no  appreciable
result  of  its  influence  appearing  among  the  savages.
The  Fathers  of  the  Huron  mission  send  down  to  Sil-
lery two  young  men  of  that  tribe  for  instruction,  and


12  PREFACE  TO  VX)L.  XXIV

Brebeuf  is  detailed  to  take  charge  of  them.  With
Montmagny's  aid,  and  that  of  the  Hospital  nuns,  the
mission  is  able  to  maintain,  in  all,  six  of  these
Hurons,  who  are  promising  pupils, —  older  and  more
intelligent  than  those  at  Notre- Dame  des  Anges  had
been.  Details  of  their  characteristic  traits,  conver-
sion, and  devout  behavior  are  given  by  the  superior.
Encouraging  results  are  reported  from  the  mission
at  Tadoussac,  which  has  been  supported,  for  the  past
year,  by  the  generosity  of  the  Duchess  d'Aiguillon.
In  answer  to  the  entreaties  of  the  Indians,  a  priest
was  sent  to  them  in  the  spring, —  Father  de  Quen.
While  waiting  for  him,  they  appoint  a  ''  master  of
prayers," — a  young  man  who  had  wintered  at  Sil-
lery, — and  under  his  direction  they  offer  public  pray-
er, twice  a  day ;  he  is  provided  with  a  heavy  knotted
whip,  "  to  beat  those  who  fail  to  be  present  at  pray-
ers." When  De  Quen  arrives,  they  welcome  him
most  hospitably,  and  urge  him  for  immediate  bap-
tism ;  but  he  judiciously  defers  that  rite  ' '  until  the
coming  of  the  ships,  or  till  Autumn,"  for  all  except
two  married  pairs,  "  who  live  peaceably."  A  sick
child  is  cured  by  prayer,  after  its  father  has  surren-
dered his  "  pouch  of  magic."  The  zealous  "  master
of  prayers  ' '  thereupon  is  ' '  impelled  by  the  spirit  of
God:  he  suddenly  goes  away  into  all  the  cabins;
ransacks  all  the  bundles,  and  inspects  all  the  pouches;
takes  all  these  spoils  of  the  fiend  to  the  Chapel,  and
makes  a  present  of  them  to  God."  The  Father,
overjoyed  thereat,  assembles  the  savages  and  makes
them  a  feast;  then  orders  them  to  burn  these  "im-
plements of  impiety, ' '  which  they  do ;  "  then,  having
all  together  thanked  God,  and  sung  a  hymn  in  token
of  rejoicing,  they  go  away,  well  content."


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIV  13

Nevertheless,  the  Father  is  greatly  tried  by  the
drunkenness,  and  consequent  licentiousness,  prevail-
ing among  these  Tadoussac  nations.  At  one  of  their
assemblies,  a  zealous  neophyte  publicly  rebukes
these  disorders,  and  an  old  woman  names  aloud
the  persons  she  knows  to  be  guilty.  All  these,  and
others  who  are  suspected,  are  summoned  before  a
council,  and  severely  questioned.  They  are  advised
to  mend  their  ways,  and  to  consult  the  parents  and
the  priests  in  all  love  affairs,  which  they  promise  to
do,  and  go  away,  "  very  well  satisfied  on  both  sides."
De  Quen  is  obliged  to  return  to  Sillery,  but  is
replaced  by  Buteux ;  the  latter  finds  the  Indians  well
disposed,  but  dreads  the  results  of  their  intemper-
ance, arising  from  their  illicit  traffic  with  the  French
fur  traders,  for  intoxicating  liquors.

The  Indians  of  Miscou  have  heard  of  the  mission,
and  are  "  beginning  to  sigh  for  their  salvation."  A
letter  from  Andre  Richard  gives  an  account  of  his
labors  among  these  Micmacs.  He  mentions  hearing
the  confession  of  a  woman  who  had  been  baptized
at  Port  Royal,  by  Father  Biard,  some  thirty  years
before.  The  savages  give  Richard  a  friendly  recep-
tion, and  build  a  chapel  for  him,  where  they  offer
prayers  every  day  under  his  direction ;  he  finds  them
honest,  intelligent,  and  affectionate.  A  new  mission
station  is  to  be  established  at  the  Nepegiguit  river.
Richard  relates  the  illness  of  his  colleague  D'Olbeau,
and  the  kind  assistance  rendered  them  by  Desdames,
commandant  at  Miscou;  also,  the  coming  of  De
Lyonne, — who,  stopping  at  Miscou  on  his  way  to  the
Huron  mission,  consents  to  take  D'Olbeau's  place.

Vimont  proceeds  to  describe  the  noble  work  of  the
Hospital  nuns,  whose  generous  devotion  and  assist-


14  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIV

ance  is  of  the  utmost  aid  in  the  colonization  of  the
savages, —  indeed,  "  it  bears  a  good  part  of  the  ex-
penses and  burdens  thereof, —  and  I  know  not  yet  if
the  colony  could  subsist  without  this  help. ' '  About
a  hundred  savages  have  been  received  in  the  hospital
the  past  year,  representing  nearly  all  the  tribes
between  Lake  Huron  and  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence.
Some  of  these  have  been  converted,  and  Vimont
relates  many  particulars  of  their  virtue  and  piety.
The  hospital  cares  for  not  only  the  bodies  but  the
souls  of  the  savages;  for  instruction  in  the  catechism
and  prayers  is  given  there  regularly,  which  "  often
makes  a  Chapel  and  a  School  of  the  sick  ward,  as  well
as  of  our  house  at  Sillery."  The  entire  time  of  one
nun,  and  more  or  less  that  of  several  other  persons,
is  required  ' '  to  answer  these  visits  and  pious  impor-
tunities." Their  expenses  have  been  great;  but
the  Duchess  d'Aiguillon  has  generously  aided  them.
During  the  past  year,  the  mission  station  at  Three
Rivers  has  been  in  the  charge  of  Le  Jeune,  "  sent
there  to  see  if  he  could  subdue  the  Pride  of  those
people  '  *  (the  haughty  Upper  Algonkins).  They,
being  insolent  and  mischief-making,  "  give  him
plenty  of  exercise;"  but,  when  they  go  to  Fort
Richelieu  for  their  annual  hunt,  he  as  "  a  good  pas-
tor, goes  after  his  flock."  At  the  fort,  he  finds  Fa-
ther De  None,  Br^beuf 's  comrade  in  the  first  Huron
mission  (1626), — now  growing  old,  but  still  full  of
zeal  and  devotion, —  who  is  the  spiritual  adviser  of
the  French  garrison.  Le  Jeune  could  do  much  for
the  Indians  under  his  charge  there,  were  it  not  for
the  wretched  Upper  Algonkins ;  they  cling  to  their
superstitions,  and  torment  the  Christians  in  every
way. "  The  Father,  with  his  little  band  of  faithful


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIV  15

ones,  vigorously  opposed  them, — now  by  dint  of
arguments,  again  by  ridiculing  their  foolish  notions ;
that  made  them  die  with  spite."  In  return,  they
accuse  the  missionaries  of  having  taken  away  their
success  in  hunting,  nullified  the  predictions  of  their
soothsayers,  and  caused  their  deaths, — all  through
the  introduction  of  this  new  religion.  "Besides,"
they  say,  '*  if  you  called  to  prayers  only  once  in  ten
days,  we  would  have  some  respite ;  but  you  have  no
regard  to  either  rain,  or  snow,  or  cold, —  every  day
you  are  heard  shouting  for  the  prayers.  It  is  a
strange  thing  that  you  cannot  remain  quiet. ' '  Some
conversions  are  secured,  notwithstanding  all  these
hindrances.  Moreover,  the  ringleader  of  the  opposi-
tion is,  by  the  judgment  of  God,  suddenly  prostrated
by  a  most  painful  illness ;  but  the  exhortations  of  Le
Jeune  finally  soften  his  hard  heart,  and,  returning
soon  after  to  Montreal,  he,  with  others  of  his  tribe,
is  there  baptized  by  the  Jesuits.

The  Montreal  colony  promises  to  be  a  great  assist-
ance to  the  missionary  enterprise,  especially  since  the
Indians  are  being  attracted  thither  by  the  prospect
of  aid  from  the  French  against  the  Iroquois.  There
are  about  fifty-five  settlers,  among  whom  prevail
great  peace,  virtuous  conduct,  and  excellent  govern-
ment. A  great  rise  in  the  river,  at  the  Christmas
season,  threatens  to  destroy  the  settlement.  Mai-
sonneuve  has  public  prayers  offered,  and  makes  a
vow  himself  to  carry  a  cross  up  the  neighboring
mountain,  if  God  please  to  avert  the  ruin  with  which
they  are  menaced.  The  flood  stops  at  the  very  gate
of  the  settlement,  and  then  gradually  subsides.
Maisonneuve  fulfills  his  vow  on  Epiphany,  and  bears
on  his  shoulders  a  heavy  cross  for  the  distance  of  a


16  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIV

league,  following  a  solemn  procession.  At  the
summit  of  the  mountain,  the  cross  is  planted  in  the
ground,  mass  is  said  by  Father  Du  Peron,  and  Ma-
dame de  la  Peltrie  is  the  first  to  receive  communion
on  this  spot, — which  becomes  thereafter  the  objec-
tive point  of  many  pilgrimages.  The  Montreal
colonists,  notwithstanding  the  severe  climate,  and
the  inconveniences  attending  a  new  settlement,  have
universally  enjoyed  excellent  health;  and  their  piety
and  devotion  render  their  life  there  "  a  picture  of
the  primitive  Church."  The  Indians  would  settle
there  in  great  numbers,  if  but  the  Iroquois  could  be
subdued  or  pacified ;  and  Vimont  regards  this  danger
as  a  menace  to  the  prosperity  of  the  colony  itself.
He  quotes  a  letter  from  Du  Peron,  concerning  the
Indians  who  come  to  Montreal.  One  of  these,  a
nephew  of  the  Island  chief  Tesswehat,  is  converted
and  baptized,  and  becomes  sedentary, —  receiving
from  the  Association  a  piece  of  ground ;  from  Maison-
neuve,  the  name  of  Joseph ;  and  from  Madame  de  la
Peltrie,  a  gun.  Soon  after,  Tesswehat  unexpected-
ly arrives  at  Montreal  and  follows  his  nephew's
example,  receiving  baptism  under  the  name  of  Paul.
As  he  was  one  of  those  who  had  so  troubled  Le  Jeune
at  Three  Rivers  and  Fort  Richelieu,  his  conversion
is  regarded  as  of  the  utmost  importance,  and  much
is  hoped  from  this  newly-made  Christian.

Pieskaret,  the  Sillery  chief, —  for  some  time
mourned  as  having  been  slain  by  the  Iroquois, —
comes  back  victorious,  and  great  is  the  rejoicing
thereat.  The  ice  breaks  up  precisely  in  time  to  pre-
vent the  Iroquois  from  pursuing  a  Huron  band  across
the  St.  Lawrence.

Vimont  describes  the  country,  forces,  and  methods


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIV  17

of  war,  of  the  Iroquois ;  among  these,  the  Agniers  or
Mohawks  are  the  fiercest,  boldest,  and  most  danger-
ous. They  are  now  harassing  the  Hurons,  and  all  the
dwellers  along  the  St.  Lawrence, — making  raids  by
small  parties,  and  at  all  seasons  of  the  year ;  attack-
ing alike  all  other  tribes  and  the  French ;  and  enabled
to  do  so  by  the  supply  of  firearms  received  from  the
Dutch  traders.  Rumors  come  from  France  that  the
Dutch  expect  by  this  means  to  drive  out  the  French
from  Canada.  Vimont  cannot  believe  that  they  have
such  a  plan,  but  considers  them  responsible  for  not
stopping  this  practice.  The  superior  describes  vari-
ous Iroquois  incursions,  especially  that  in  which
Jogues  is  made  a  prisoner.  The  Huron  chief  Joseph,
escaping  their  hands,  returns  to  Quebec,  and  relates
the  particulars  of  Jogues 's  captivity  and  Goupil's
murder.  A  letter  from  the  captive  priest  is  brought
to  Three  Rivers  by  an  Iroquois  envoy ;  Jogues  warns
the  French  of  the  treacherous  plans  laid  for  them  by
their  crafty  foe,  and  urges  them  to  forestall  these,
without  regard  for  the  safety  of  himself  or  his  fellow
captives.

R.  G.  T.

Madison,  Wis.,  June,  1898.


LI (continued)

Relation  of  1642-43

Paris: SEBASTIEN  ET  GABRIEL  CRAMOISY, 1644


Chaps,  i.-iii.  were  presented  in  Volume  XXIII.;  we
herewith  give  chaps,  iv.-xii.,  leaving  the  conclusion  of  the
document  for  Volume  XXV.


20  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24


[41]  CHAPITRE  IV.

DE LA FAgON DE VIURE DES CHRESTIENS DE SIL-

LERY.

PENDANT  le  temps  que  les  Sauuages  ont  efte
^  Sillery,  ils  y  ont  frequents  les  Sacremens
auec  autat  d'affiduite  &  de  ferueur  que  nos
Fran9ois  a  Quebec,  ils  ont  pris  auffi  vn  fmgulier  plai-
llr  d'aller  quelquefois  k  Quebec  fe  Communier  &  fe
ioindre  k  cette  faerie  Table  auec  nos  Francois,  dont
la  deuotion  les  refiouyt  &  edifie  grandement.

Quoy  qu'on  faffe  le  foir  les  prieres  publiques  en  la
Chapelle,  plufieurs  pourtant  ne  laiffent  pas  de  les
faire  encor  vne  [42]  ou  deux  fois  en  leur  cabane,  &
tout  haut;  ce  qui  a  donne  fubiet  de  les  appeller  les
Cabanes  des  Priants.

Les  petits  enfans  eflans  malades,  les  parens  les
apportent  quelquefois  a  la  Chapelle,  &  les  prefentent
a  Dieu,  comme  ^  celuy  qui  en  eft  le  maiftre,  &  le
tout  auec  vne  grande  refignation.  C'eft  k  vous,  Sei-
gneur, cet  enfant,  difent-ils,  faites  en  comme  il  vous
femblera  bon,  ie  vous  I'offre.  Voicy  les  termes  pro-
pres  d'vne  mere  qui  auoit  fa  fille  malade :  mo  Dieu
vous  pouuez  tout,  fi  vous  voulez  ma  fille  guerira,  li
vous  ne  le  voulez  pas,  i'en  fuis  contente,  faites  ce
qu'il  vous  plaira,  i'aimeray  toufiours  ce  que  vous
ferez.  Dieu  leur  rend  quelquefois  la  fante  en  confi-
deration  de  cette  faindte  refignation,  quelquefois  auffi
en  la  vertu  de  I'eau  benifte  qu'on  leur  donne  k  boire.


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  21


[41]  CHAPTER  IV.

OF THE MANNER OF LIVING AMONG THE CHRISTIANS

AT SILLERY.

WHILE  the  Savages  have  been  at  Sillery,  they
have  frequented  the  Sacraments  there  with
as  much  diligence  and  fervor  as  our  French
at  Quebec ;  they  have  also  taken  a  singular  pleasure
in  going  occasionally  to  Quebec  to  receive  Commun-
ion and  to  associate,  at  that  sacred  Table,  with  our
French,  whose  devoutness  greatly  delights  and
edifies  them.

Though  public  prayers  are  said  at  evening  in  the
Chapel,  many  none  the  less  make  it  a  point  to  say
them  again  once  [42]  or  twice  in  their  own  cabins,
and  that  audibly, — which  has  given  occasion  for
calling  them  the  Cabins  of  those  who  Pray.

When  the  little  children  are  sick,  the  parents  some-
times bring  them  to  the  Chapel,  and  present  them  to
God,  as  to  him  who  is  their  master;  and  all  this  with
great  resignation.  "Yours,  Lord,  is  this  child,"
they  say;  "  do  with  it  as  it  shall  seem  good  to  you,
I  offer  it  to  you."  Here  are  the  very  words  of  a
mother  whose  daughter  was  sick :  "  My  God,  you  can
do  all  things;  if  you  will,  my  daughter  will  recover;
if  you  are  not  willing,  I  am  content.  Do  as  it  shall
please  you;  I  will  always  love  what  you  shall  do,"
God  sometimes  restores  their  health  to  them,  in  con-
sideration of  this  holy  resignation, — sometimes,  also,
by  virtue  of  the  holy  water  which  is  given  them  to


22  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.24

En  voicy  vne  exemple.  Vn  ieune  Sauuage  de  Ta-
doulTac  fut  atteint  d'vne  forte  pleurefie,  au  bout  de
fix  ou  fept  iours,  fes  gens  I'apporterent  de  Tadouffac
aux  Religieufes  Hofpitalieres  a  Sillery,  c'eft  ^  dire
de  quarante  lieues  loin:  on  le  penfe  auec  grand  foin,
on  le  feigne  deux  ou  [43]  trois  fois :  mais  le  mal  eft
plus  fort  que  les  remedes:  ce  pauure  gargon  fe
voyant  defefpere,  fe  leue  comme  il  put,  fe  traine  "k  la
Chapelle,  fait  fes  prieres,  le  pere  qui  fe  trouua  la,  luv
fait  boire  de  I'eau  benifte,  &  recite  I'Euangile  fut
\sc.  fur]  luy,  puis  le  renuoye  en  fon  lit,  il  commence
auffi-toft  a  fe  mieux  porter,  &  dans  peu  de  temps  fort
de  I'Hofpital  en  fante,  auec  I'eftonnement  de  fes
Compatriotes.

Les  Sauuages  font  fort  peu  recognoiffans  de  leur
naturel,  fur  tout  enuers  les  Europeans:  le  Chriftia-
nifme  les  forme  peu  ^  peu  ^  cette  vertu.  Mofieur  le
Gouuerneur  retournant  I'an  paffe  du  fort  de  Riche-
lieu, apres  I'affaut  rude  &  inopine  que  les  Hyro-
quois  y  donnerent,  &  oil  ils  furent  fort  mal  traitez,
nos  Sauuages  allerent  de  leur  propre  mouuement  le
faluer,  &  porterent  deux  prefens,  I'vn  pourle  remer-
cier  de  ce  qu'il  auoit  expofe  fa  vie  pour  eux,  &  auoit
chaff e  leurs  ennemis,  I'autre  pour  effuyer  nos  larmes
de  la  prife  du  Pere  Iogue[s],  &  de  nos  hommes  par
les  Hyroquois.

Vn  de  nos  principaux  Chrefliens  difcourans  auec
vn  Sauuage  nouellement  [44]  defcendu  a  Sillery,
vit  vn  de  nos  Peres  qui  paffoit  par  1^,  voila,  dit-il,
ceux  qui  nous  enfeignent,  &  nous  apprennent  le
chemin  du  Ciel,  ils  n'efpargnent  rien  pour  cet  effet :  ils
s'appauuriffent  pour  nous,  ils  deuiennent  malades
pour  nous:  fi  tu  paffes  icy  I'Hyuer, tu  cognoiftras


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  23


drink.  Here  follows  an  example.  A  young  Savage
of  Tadonssac  was  attacked  with  a  violent  pleurisy ;
after  six  or  seven  days,  his  people  brought  him  from
Tadoussac  to  the  Hospital  Nuns  at  Sillery, —  that  is
to  say,  from  a  distance  of  forty  leagues.  He  is  nursed
with  great  care,  and  they  bleed  him  two  or  [43]  three
times ;  but  the  disease  is  stronger  than  the  remedies.
This  poor  fellow,  seeing  himself  in  a  desperate  pass,
rises  when  his  strength  permits,  drags  himself  to  the
Chapel,  and  says  his  prayers ;  the  father  who  chanced
to  be  there  makes  him  drink  holy  water,  and  recites
the  Gospel  over  him,  then  sends  him  back  to  his  bed.
He  straightway  begins  to  mend,  and  in  a  short  time
leaves  the  Hospital,  in  good  health,  to  the  astonish-
ment of  his  fellow  Countrymen.

The  Savages  are  scantily  grateful  in  their  natural
state,  especially  toward  the  Europeans ;  Christianity
trains  them,  little  by  little,  in  this  virtue.  Monsieur
the  Governor  coming  back  last  year  from  the  fort  of
Richelieu,  after  the  severe  and  unexpected  assault
made  upon  it  by  the  Hyroquois, —  wherein  they  were
very  badly  treated, —  our  Savages  went  of  their  own
impulse  to  greet  him,  and  carried  two  gifts.  One
was  to  thank  him  for  having  exposed  his  life  for
them,  and  having  driven  away  their  enemies;  the
other,  to  wipe  away  our  tears  for  the  capture  of
Father  Jogues  and  our  men  by  the  Hyroquois.

One  of  our  principal  Christians,  discoursing  with
a  Savage  newly  [44]  come  down  to  Sillery,  saw  one
of  our  Fathers  who  was  passing  that  way.  "  There,"
said  he,  "  are  those  who  teach  us,  and  show  us  the
way  to  Heaven.  They  spare  ho  pains  for  this  pur-
pose,—  they  make  themselves  poor  for  us,  they  be-
come sick  for  us;  if  thou  spend  the  Winter  here,  thou


24  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  24


par  eflfet  la  verite  de  ce  que  ie  te  dis  ce  qu'ils  nous
enfeignent  eft  d'importance,  ils  nous  deffendent  tout
ce  qui  eft  mauuais,  les  feftins  a  tout  manger,  I'inuo-
cation  des  demons,  la  croyance  aux  fonges,  la  multi-
plicite  des  femmes  dans  le  mariage,  &  en  vn  mot
toutes  nos  mefchantes  couftumes  qui  nous  donnent
&  nous  iettent  dans  vn  feu  apres  la  mort,  c'eft  vn
feu,  difoit-il,  qui  ne  s'efteindra  iamais;  dont  celuy
qui  nous  efchauffe  icy  fur  terre  n'eft  qu'vn  leger
crayon,  il  eft  efpouuentable  dans  fa  duree  eternelle:
ceux  qui  y  vont  bruflent  fans  efperance  d'en  fortir.

Vne  femme  ayant  ouy  difcourir  du  Purgatoire,  &
qu'il  y  auoit  peu  de  perfonnes  qui  allaffent  en  Para-
dis,  fans  paffer  par  le  feu,  fut  touchee  &  fe  mit  a
prier  Dieu  inftamment  pour  fa  fille  deffunte  [45]
depuis  peu,  le  pere  fgachant  fa  deuotion,  luy  demanda
ce  qu'elle  faifoit  pour  la  fille  defundte,  ie  dis  tous  les
iours  trois  Chapellets  (dit-elle)  I'vn  pour  ma  fille,  &
deux  pour  le  Pere  qui  eft  mort,  il  y  a  quelques  iours
(c'eftoit  le  Pere  Raymbault)  Et  pourquoy  deux  pour
ce  dernier,  &  vn  feulement  pour  ta  fille,  luy  repart  le
Peres?  s'il  eft  vray,  dit-elle,  ce  que  vous  enfeignez
que  peu  de  ges  vont  au  Ciel  fans  aller  auparauant  das
le  Purgatoire,  ce  Pere  qui  vient  de  mourir,  quoy  que
tres  hommes  de  bien,  y  aura  peut-eftre  efte  pour
quelque  temps,  &  ie  dis  deux  Chapellets  pour  luy,
afin  que  Dieu  le  deliure  au  plutoft,  &  qu'eftant  au
Ciel  il  prie  pour  ma  fille,  Ses  prieres  la  feront
pluftoft  fortir  que  les  miennes.

On  aura  affez  remarque  es  precedentes  Relations
que  la  grande  tentation  des  Sauuages,  eft  que  le
Baptefme  &  la  priere  les  font  mourir.  Vn  certain  ap-
pelle  Fran9ois  Kok8eribabougouz  voyant  vn  de  nos


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  25

wilt  know  by  experience  the  truth  of  what  I  tell
thee.  What  they  teach  us  is  of  importance;  they
forbid  us  everything  that  is  bad, —  the  feasts  where
all  the  food  is  eaten,  the  invocation  of  evil  spirits,
the  belief  in  dreams,  the  multiplicity  of  wives  in
marriage,  and,  in  a  word,  all  our  wicked  customs
which  betray  us  and  cast  us  into  a  fire  after  death.
That  is  a  fire,"  he  said,  "  which  will  never  go  out,
of  which  the  one  that  warms  us  here  on  earth  is
only  a  faint  outline.  It  is  terrible  in  its  eternal  dura-
tion ;  those  who  go  into  it  burn,  without  hope  of
getting  out  of  it."

A  woman  having  heard  a  discourse  on  Purgatory,
and  that  there  were  few  persons  who  went  into  Para-
dise without  passing  through  the  fire,  was  touched,
and  began  to  entreat  God  urgently  for  her  daughter,
deceased  [45]  not  long  ago.  The  father,  knowing
her  piety,  asked  her  what  she  did  for  her  deceased
daughter.  "  I  repeat  the  Rosary  three  times  every
day  "  (she  said),  "  once  for  my  daughter,  and  twice
for  the  Father  who  died  a  few  days  ago  ' '  (that  was
Father  Raymbault).  "  And  why  twice  for  the  latter,
and  only  once  for  thy  daughter?  "  rejoins  the  Father.
"If  it  be  true,"  said  she,  "  what  you  teach, — that
few  people  go  to  Heaven  without  first  going  into
Purgatory, — this  Father  who  has  just  died,  although
a  very  good  man,  will  perhaps  have  been  there  for
some  time;  and  I  say  two  Rosaries  for  him,  in  order
that  God  may  release  him  as  soon  as  possible,  and
that,  being  in  Heaven,  he  may  pray  for  my  daugh-
ter. His  prayers  will  get  her  out  sooner  than  mine."

It  may  have  been  sufiiciently  remarked  in  the  pre-
ceding Relations  that  the  great  temptation  of  the
Savages  is, that  Baptism  and  prayer  cause  them  to


26  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.24

Peres  entrer  dans  fa  cabane,  I'attaque  &  luy  demande
s'il  ne  f9ait  pas  enfin  la  caufe  pourquoy  ils  meuret
ainfi  tons,  depuis  quelques  annees  qu'on  leur  [46]  a
parle  de  noftre  foy,  il  infmuoit  afTez  clairement  que
la  priere  &  le  baptefme  en  eftoit  la  caufe,  &  parloit
auec  orgueil,  &  mefpris  de  la  foy.  II  eft  affez
haiitain  de  fon  naturel,  le  Pere  fe  fentit  oblige  de
refuter  le  difcours  de  cet  homme  comme  mefchant
&  fcandaleux,  &  reprendre  quant  &  quant  fon  orgueil
&  fa  fuperbe:  mais  au  lieu  de  s'humilier,  il  tire  fon
Chapellet,  &  le  iette  au  feu,  en  la  prefence  de  tous
ceux  de  la  cabane,  &  du  Pere  mefme:  nos  bos  Neo-
pbytes  ayant  entendu  cette  adtion  en  furent  entiere-
ment  indignez,  ils  vont  le  trouuer,  &  luy  remontrent
viuement  fa  faute,  &  I'incitent  a  faire  penitence,
mais  la  crainte  &  la  confufion  le  retenoient;  ils
retournent  deux  &  trois  fois,  &  font  fi  bien  qu'il  fe
prefente  pour  receuoir  telle  penitence  qu'on  iugeroit
conuenable:  on  affemble  les  Sauuages  a  la  Meffe
dans  la  Chapelle  de  I'Hofpital,  il  eftoit  cabane  fort
proche,  on  le  fait  demeurer  ^  la  porte  comme  indigne
d'entrer  a  I'Eglife,  apres  quel  que  efpace  de  temps  on
I'appelle,  il  fe  met  "k  genoux  deuant  I'Autel,  demande
pardon  ^  Dieu,  &  k  la  tres-faindte  [47]  Vierge ;  puis
"k  tous  fes  Compatriotes  qu'il  auoit  fcandalifez,  les
coniure  de  I'ayder  par  leurs  prieres  k  fatisfaire  k  Dieu
pour  fa  faute,  ce  qu'ils  firet  tout  haut  &  tous  enfem-
ble :  apres  on  luy  commande  de  baifer  trois  fois  la
terre:  le  pauure  homme  touche  de  regret  tient  fa
bouche  colee  contre  terre:  iufqu'a  ce  qu'on  le  force
de  fe  releuer:  le  Pere  luy  donne  vn  autre  chappellet
en figne  de  fa  reconciliation,  &  tous  affiftent  k  la


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  27

die.  A  certain  man  called  Fran9ois  Kokweribabou-
gouz,  seeing  one  of  our  Fathers  enter  his  cabin,
accosts  him,  and  asks  him  if  he  does  not  at  last  know
the  reason  why  they  all  die  thus,  within  the  few
years  since  they  [46]  have  been  told  of  our  faith.  He
insinuated  quite  plainly  that  prayer  and  baptism
were  the  reason,  and  spoke  with  pride,  and  contempt
for  the  faith.  He  is  somewhat  haughty  by  nature,
so  the  Father  felt  himself  obliged  to  refute  this  man's
utterance  as  wicked  and  scandalous,  and  reprove
then  and  there  his  pride  and  haughtiness ;  but  instead
of  humbling  himself,  he  takes  his  Rosary  and  throws
it  into  the  fire,  in  the  presence  of  all  those  in  the
cabin,  and  of  the  Father  himself.  Our  good  Neo-
phytes, having  heard  of  this  action,  were  thoroughly
indignant;  they  go  and  find  him,  sharply  set  before
him  his  fault,  and  urge  him  to  do  penance,  but  fear
and  confusion  restrained  him.  They  return  two  and
three  times,  and  succeed  so  well  that  he  presents
himself  to  receive  such  penance  as  should  be  judged
suitable.  They  assemble  the  Savages  at  Mass  in  the
Chapel  of  the  Hospital,  which  his  cabin  was  very
near;  they  make  him  stay  at  the  door,  as  being
unworthy  to  enter  the  Church.  After  some  space  of
time  they  call  him;  he  kneels  before  the  Altar,  asks
pardon  of  God  and  of  the  most  blessed  [47]  Virgin,
then  of  all  his  fellow  Countrymen  whom  he  had
scandalized;  he  entreats  them  to  aid  him  by  their
prayers  to  atone  to  God  for  his  fault, —  which  they
do  aloud,  and  all  together.  Next,  they  bid  him  kiss
the  earth  three  times;  the  poor  man,  touched  with
sorrow,  holds  his  lips  glued  against  the  earth,  until
they  compel  him  to  rise.  The  Father  gives  him
another  rosary,  in  token  of  his  reconciliation,  and


28  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  24

faindte  Meffe  auec  vne  joye  &  deuotion  fenfible.  A
la  fin  Noel  TeKb'erimatch  Capital ne  des  Algonquins
fe  leue  &  parle  ainfi  h.  f es  gens  en  ton  fort  &  haut :
Mes  nepueux  refiouyffons-votis,  noftre  frere  eftoit
entre  les  mains  du  Diable  &  s'il  fufl  mort,  I'Enfer
eftoit  fa  demeure  pour  iamais;  &  Dien  Ten  a  deliure:
il  eftoit  mort  &  le  voila  viuant,  refiouyffons-nous  de
ce  que  nous  fgauons  maintenant  les  moyens  d'appaifer
la  colere  de  Dieu,  perf euerons  dans  la  priere ;  &  quoy
qu'il  femble  que  nous  mourions  tons,  croyons  forte-
ment  &  fincerement  iufques  a  la  mort  &  ayons  efpe-
rance  en  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait.  Apres  cette  petite
[48]  exhortation  le  pere  leur  donna  la  benedi(5tion  k
tous  &  les  renuoya  fort  contens  &  ioyeux,  cet  homme
s'eft  tres-bien  comporte  depuis  ce  temps  la  toute  fa
famille  eft  Chreftienne,  II  me  preffe  ^  prefent  de  luy
faire  vne  petite  maifon  pour  I'an  prochain.

Le  iour  de  faindt  lean  I'Euangelifte  il  fift  vn  temps
fort  rude,  le  froid  les  vents  &  la  neige  fembloient
vouloir  tout  perdre,  c'eft  chofe  efpouuantable  de  voir
I'air  en  ces  teps-lk.  Les  Sauuages  eftoient  pour  lors
cabanes  fur  la  montagne  dans  le  bois :  on  ne  croyoit
pas  qu'ils  puffent  venir  k  la  Meffe,  on  enuoya  leur
dire  qu'ils  ny  eftoient  pas  obligez:  que  fi  les  plus
robuftes  vouloient  venir,  qu'ils  le  pouuoiet  par  deuo-
tio,  mais  tous  y  vinret  a  leur  ordinaire.  Vne  vieille
Algonquine  demeura  dans  fa  cabane  pour  garder
quelques  petits  enfans,  &  fe  comporta  comme  fi  elle
euft  efte  k  la  Meffe,  elle  eftendit  vne  image  de  noftre
Seigneur,  fe  mift  k  genoux  deuant  auec  les  enfans,
recita  fon  chappellet,  fe  leua  comme  on  fait  k  I'Euan-
gile,  adora  noftre  Seigneur  comme  on  fait  k  I'eleua-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  29

all  join  in  holy  Mass  with  manifest  joy  and  fervor.
At  the  end,  Noel  Tekwerimatch,  Captain  of  the
Algonquins,  rises  and  speaks  thus  to  his  people,  in  a
strong  and  loud  tone:  "  My  nephews,  let  us  rejoice;
our  brother  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Devil,  and,  if  he
had  died,  Hell  was  his  dwelling  forever;  but  God
has  delivered  him  thence, —  he  was  dead,  and  behold
him  living.  Let  us  rejoice  that  we  now  know  the
means  of  appeasing  the  wrath  of  God.  Let  us  per-
severe in  prayer,  and  though  it  seem  that  we  all  die,
let  us  believe  stoutly  and  sincerely,  even  to  death,
and  let  us  have  hope  in  him  who  has  made  all
things."  After  this  brief  [48]  exhortation,  the  fa-
ther gave  the  blessing  to  them  all,  and  sent  them
away  very  contented  and  joyful.  This  man  has
behaved  very  well,  since  that  time:  his  whole  family
is  Christian.  He  urges  me  at  present  to  make  him
a  little  house  for  next  year.

On  the  day  of  saint  John  the  Evangelist,  the
weather  was  very  severe;  the  cold,  the  winds,  and
the  snow  seemed  likely  to  destroy  everything.  It  is
something  awful  to  see  the  weather  at  such  times.
The  Savages  were  lodged  at  that  time  in  cabins  on
the  mountain,  in  the  woods.  We  did  not  suppose
that  they  could  come  to  Mass,  and  sent  them  word
that  they  were  not  obliged  to, —  that,  if  the  most
robust  wished  to  come,  they  might  do  so,  through
devotion;  but  all  came  as  usual.  An  old  Algonquin
woman  stayed  in  her  cabin,  to  look  after  some  little
children,  and  behaved  as  if  she  had  been  at  Mass.
She  set  up  an  image  of  our  Lord,  knelt  before  it  with
the  children,  recited  her  beads,  rose  as  is  customary
at  the  Gospel,  adored  our  Lord  as  is  done  at  the
elevation,  and  sang  as  [49] they  are  accustomed  to


30  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

tions,  chata  come  [49]  ils  ont  accouftume  apres  la
Meffe,  fi  bien  que  quand  le  Pere  I'alla  voir,  elle  luy
dift  qu'elle  auoit  efte  ^  la  Meffe  dans  fa  Cabane,  le
Pere  I'interroga,  comment,  &  aprit  ce  que  ie  viens
de  dire.

Vne  femme  Chreftienne  appellee  Louyfe  auoit  vne
fille  malade  qu'elle  cheriffoit  comme  fa  vie  propre,
elle  la  porte  a  I'Hofpital,  les  Religieufes  qui  aymoient
fa  mere  h.  raifon  de  fa  vertu  n'y  efpargneret  rien :
mais  nonobftant  le  remedes  fa  maladie  redoubloit,
deux  Sauuageffes  payennes  la  viennent  voir,  puis  fe
tournant  vers  la  mere  la  prefente  &  fort  affligee,  luy
promettent  de  guerir  la  fille,  fi  elle  veut  permettre
qu'elles  la  penfent  k  leur  fagon:  c'eft  a  dire  qu'elle
la  chantent,  la  foufflent,  &  la  zonglent  auec  leurs
tambours :  mais  il  faudroit,  difent  elles,  la  porter  dans
les  bois:  car  autrement  ceux  qui  ont  des  robbes
noires  le  f9auroient,  &  nos  medecines  feroient  inu-
tiles:  au  refte  tiens  pour  certain  que  ta  fille  guerira,
fi  tu  nous  obeis :  k  Dieu  ne  plaif  e  repartit  cette  bonne
Chreftienne,  que  Ton  faffe  quelque  chofe  a  ma  fille,
qui  foit  cotre  la  loy  de  Dieu,  [50]  [ie]  craindrois  bien
plutofl  que  cela  ne  la  fift  mourir,  &  quand  mefme  ie
f9aurois  qu'elle  gueriroit  de  vos  medecines,  ie  ne  le
permettrois  pas,  puis  que  Dieu  le  deffend,  il  n'im-
porte  que  ma  fille  meure,  pourueu  qu'elle  aille  au
Ciel.  Ces  deux  femmes  fortirent  bien  eftonnees,  &
ne  parlerent  plus  de  rien :  il  pleut  a  Dieu  d'appeller
k  foy  cette  petite  creature  &  d'approuuer  la  conftance
de  la  mere,  laquelle  en  demeura  affligee  au  poffible:
mais  nuUement  efbranlee  en  la  foy,  quoy  que  ce  foit
la  troifieme  qu'elle  a  perdue  depuis  qu'elle  a  receu


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  31


do  after  Mass, —  insomuch  that,  when  the  Father
went  to  see  her,  she  told  him  that  she  had  been  to
Mass  in  her  Cabin ;  the  Father  asked  her  how,  and
learned  what  I  have  just  related.

A  Christian  woman,  called  Louyse,  had  a  sick
daugfhter  whom  she  cherished  as  her  own  life.  She
carried  her  to  the  Hospital ;  the  Nuns,  who  loved  her
mother  on  account  of  her  virtue,  spared  no  pains;
but,  notwithstanding  the  remedies,  her  sickness  in-
creased. Two  Savage  women,  pagans,  come  to  see
her;  then,  turning  toward  the  mother,  there  present
and  much  afflicted,  they  promise  her  to  cure  her
daughter,  if  she  will  allow  them  to  treat  her  in  their
fashion, —  that  is  to  say,  that  they  sing  over  her,
blow  on  her,  and  juggle  for  her  with  their  drums.
"  But  it  would  be  necessary,"  they  say,  "  to  carry
her  into  the  woods;  for  otherwise,  those  who  have
black  gowns  would  know  it,  and  our  medicines  would
be  useless.  For  the  rest  be  assured  that  thy  daugh-
ter will  recover,  if  thou  obey  us."  "  God  forbid,"
replied  that  good  Christian  woman,  "  that  you  do
anything  to  my  daughter  which  is  against  the  law  of
God, —  [50]  I  would  much  sooner  fear  that  that  would
make  her  die;  and  even  though  I  knew  that  she
would  recover  by  your  medicines,  I  would  not  allow
it,  since  God  forbids  it.  No  matter  if  my  daughter
die,  provided  she  go  to  Heaven."  Those  two  women
went  away  much  astonished,  and  had  not  a  word
more  to  say.  It  pleased  God  to  call  to  himself  that
little  creature,  and  to  approve  the  mother's  con-
stancy ;  she  remained  in  the  utmost  affliction  thereat,
but  not  at  all  shaken  in  the  faith,  although  this  is
the  third  she  has  lost  since  she  received  Baptism.
May  not  this  kind of  affliction,  recurring in many


32  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.24

le  Baptefme.  Cette  efpece  d'afflic5tion  fe  retrouuant
en  quantite  de  families  Chreftiennes,  eft-ce  pas  vne
puiffante  efpreuue  que  Dieu  leur  enuoye,  &  k  nous
auffi  ?  Sa  fille  mourut  das  les  bois :  car  ayant  enfin
receu  quelque  foulagement  a  I'Hofpital,  fa  mere  qui
efloit  obligee  a  quelque  voyage,  la  traifna  a  leur  fagon,
comme  elle  peuft,  le  mal  redoublat  dans  les  bois
I'emporta,  elle  n'efloit  agee  que  de  huidt  ou  a  neuf
ans :  fa  mere  rapporta  f on  corps  a  Sillery  pour  eflre
enterre  auec  fes  parens.  Elle  nous  dift  qu'elle  auoit
admire  les  penfees  &  difcours  [51]  de  fa  fille  a  la
mort,  premieremet  elle  tefmoigna  qu'elle  euft  bien
defire  de  voir  encor  vne  fois  vn  des  Peres,  pour  rece-
uoir  vn  mot  de  confolation  en  ce  paffage,  que  neant-
moins  elle  fe  confole  en  Dieu.  Apres  elle  remercia
fa  mere  du  foin  &  de  la  peine  qu'elle  auoit  pris  d'elle,
pendant  tout  le  cours  de  fa  maladie,  &  luy  promift
en  recompenfe  de  prier  Dieu  pour  elle  apres  fa  mort.
Son  frere  aifne  I'eftant  venu  voir,  elle  luy  recom-
manda  de  faire  eftat  de  la  foy  &  des  prieres,  &  come
elle  auoit  apprins  qu'il  n'eftoit  pas  bien  auec  fa
femme,  elle  le  coniura  de  la  fupporter  en  fon  humeur,
qu'il  fe  gardafl  bien  de  la  quitter  iamais,  qu'il  euft
patience,  que  luy  qui  efloit  homme,  fe  deuoit  mon-
ftrer  plus  fage.  le  ne  fgay  pas  oil  cet  enfant  de  neuf
ans  au  plus  auoit  apris  tout  cela,  le  S.  Efprit  la
faifoit  parler  par  deffus  fon  age.

A  peine  croira  on  ce  que  ie  vay  dire  d'vn  Neophyte
Sauuage,  puis  qu'il  s'en  rencontra  fi  peu  parmy  nos
Chreftiens  d' Europe  qu'ils  le  peuffent  faire.  Vn
ieune  Sauuage  Chreftien  fut  puiffamment  tente  par
vne  femme  qui  le  pourfuiuit  [52]  dans  les  bois,  &  le


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  33

Christian  families,  be  a  severe  test  which  God  sends
to  them,  and  to  us  also?  Her  daughter  died  in  the
woods;  for,  having  finally  received  some  relief  at  the
Hospital,  her  mother,  who  was  obliged  to  go  on  a
journey,  dragged  her  along  in  their  fashion,  as  best
she  could ;  the  sickness,  increasing  in  the  woods,  car-
ried her  off ;  she  was  only  eight  or  nine  years  old.
Her  mother  brought  her  body  back  to  Sillery  to  be
buried  with  her  kinsfolk.  She  told  us  that  she  had
marveled  at  the  ideas  and  utterances  [51]  of  her
daughter  at  her  death.  In  the  first  place,  she  asserted
that  she  would  have  much  desired  to  see  one  of  our
Fathers  once  again,  so  as  to  receive  a  word  of  con-
solation at  that  change;  but  that,  nevertheless,  she
consoled  herself  in  God.  Then  she  thanked  her
mother  for  the  care  and  pains  that  she  had  taken  for
her,  during  the  whole  course  of  her  sickness,  and
promised,  by  way  of  reward,  to  pray  to  God  for  her
after  her  death.  Her  eldest  brother  having  come  to
see  her,  she  charged  him  to  rely  on  the  faith  and  the
prayers ;  and,  as  she  had  heard  that  he  was  not  on
good  terms  with  his  wife,  she  besought  him  to  en-
dure the  woman  in  her  temper, — that  he  should  take
care  never  to  leave  her,  that  he  should  have  patience,
that  he,  being  a  man,  ought  to  show  himself  wiser.
I  know  not  where  this  child,  of  nine  years  at  the
most,  had  learned  all  that ;  the  Holy  Ghost  made  her
speak  beyond  her  years.

You  will  hardly  believe  what  I  am  about  to  say  of
a  Savage  Neophyte,  since  so  few  would  be  found
among  our  Christians  of  Europe  who  could  do  like-
wise. A  young  Christian  Savage  was  mightily
tempted  by  a  woman  who  pursued  him  [52]  in  the
woods, and  solicited  him  to  do  evil,  with  as  much


34  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

follicita  k  mal  faire  auec  autant  d' impudence  que  de
charmes  &  d'attraits,  elle  y  employa  tout.  Le  bon
ieune  homme  luy  refifte  fortement  la  reprend,  luy
remonftre  que  Dieu  voit  tout;  qu'il  les  regarde,  cela
ne  la  rend  pas  plus  fage,  elle  redouble  iufques  a
deux  &  trois  fois,  le  diable  trauaille  de  fon  cofte,  &
ioint  fes  forces  auec  celles  de  la  femme,  attaque  le
cceur  de  ce  pau[u]re  Neophyte,  ex[c]itant  en  luy  la
paffion  &  le  preffant  viuement,  le  voila  tente  dehors
&  dedans,  il  refifte  pourtant  courageufemet,  inuoque
Taffiftance  de  Dieu,  &  puis  fentant  que  le  danger
croifCoit,  s'enfuit  dans  les  bois,  &  abandonne  cette
malheureufe  creature,  eftant  lors  feul  &  h.  I'efcart  fe
met  a  genoux,  prie  Dieu,  luy  demande  pardon,  prend
des  verges  &  fe  defpoiiillant  nud  fe  chaftie  rudement
par  tout  le  corps,  c'eftoit  au  milieu  des  neiges,  &  au
cceur  de  I'Hyuer  que  les  arbres  fendent  de  froid:
mais  la  peur  d'auoir  manque,  &  la  crainte  de  la  ten-
tation  le  font  refoudre  a  cette  penitence,  ils  n'en
demeure  pas  la,  il  court  a  Quebec  ou  il  auoit  entendu
que  le  Pere  qui  cofeffe  les  Sauuages  eftoit  alle,  il
entre  [53]  chez  nous  tout  defole,  &  fe  iette  aux  pieds
du  Pere,  luy  racote  fa  tentatio,  &  le  dager  ou  il  a
efte  auec  autat  de  regret  que  s'il  euft  comis  le  peche :
les  foufpirs  &  les  larmes  entrecoupoiet  toutes  fes
paroles,  il  demade  penitence:  mo  Pere,  dit-il,  ne
m'efpargnez  pas,  ie  vous  prie  dites  moy  ce  qu'il  faut
faire,  pour  appaifer  Dieu,  ie  fuis  tout  preft  de  vo^
obei'r  quad  vous  me  doneriez  vne  penitece  capable  de
m'ofter  la  vie:  6  Dieu  que  ie  mourrois  volotiers  pour
cela!  le  Pere  le  cofola  fort,  eftat  luy-mefme  grade-
ment  cofole  d'vne  telle  ferueur,  &  le  r'enuoya  auec


1 642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  35

indecency  as  with  charms  and  attractions ;  she  em-
ployed every  means  thereto.  The  good  young  man
resists  her  stoutly, —  he  reproves  her,  and  shows  her
that  God  sees  all,  and  that  he  looks  at  them.  This
makes  her  none  the  better ;  she  renews  the  tempta-
tion even  two  and  three  times.  The  devil  works,  on
his  side,  and  joins  his  forces  to  those  of  the  woman;
he  attacks  the  heart  of  this  poor  Neophyte,  exciting
passion  in  him,  and  fiercely  urging  him.  Behold
him  tempted  without  and  within ;  he  nevertheless
resists  courageously,  invokes  the  aid  of  God,  and
then,  feeling  that  the  danger  is  increasing,  flees
into  the  woods  and  abandons  that  wretched  creature.
Being  then  alone  and  retired,  he  kneels  down,  prays
to  God,  and  asks  his  pardon;  he  takes  rods,  and,
stripping  himself  naked,  severely  chastises  his  whole
body.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  the  snows,  and  in  the
heart  of  Winter,  when  the  trees  split  with  cold ;  but
the  fear  of  having  erred,  and  the  dread  of  the  temp-
tation, make  him  resolve  upon  this  penance.  He
stops  not  with  that ;  he  hastens  to  Quebec,  whither
he  had  heard  that  the  Father  who  confesses  the  Sav-
ages had  gone;  he  enters  [53]  our  abode,  in  great
distress,  and  casts  himself  at  the  Father's  feet,  telling
him  his  temptation,  and  the  danger  in  which  he  has
been,  with  as  much  sorrow  as  if  he  had  committed
the  sin.  Sighs  and  tears  interrupted  all  his  words ;
he  asks  penance.  "  ]\Iy  Father,"  he  said,  "  spare  me
not;  I  beg  you,  tell  me  what  I  must  do  to  appease
God,  I  am  quite  ready  to  obey  you,  though  you
should  give  me  a  penance  capable  of  taking  away
my  life.  O  God,  how  gladly  would  I  die  for  that!  "
The  Father  greatly  comforted  him,  being  himself
much  consoled  by  such  a  fervor,  and  sent  him  away


.36  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.24

vne  penitence  bien  legere,  &  femblable  a  celle  que
plufieurs  Ss.  ont  impofee  en  tel  cas.

Les  Chrefties  de  Sillery  ont  contribue  notablement
de  paroles  &  d'exeple  k  la  conuerfion  des  Attica-
meges,  ils  prenoiet  le  teps  de  faire  les  prieres  publi-
quemet  en  leur  cabane,  quad  les  Atticameges  les
venoiet  voir :  ils  deffendoiet  aux  ieunes  ges  de  cette
natio  de  vifiter  la  nuidt  les  filles  qu'ils  recherchoiet  en
mariage,  felo  leurs  vieilles  couflumes,  ils  ne  les  inui-
toient  iamais  aux  feftins,  que  pour  parler  de  Dieu  &
de  la  priere,  come  tous  les  principaux  [54]  tat  de  cette
natio  que  de  ceux  de  Sillery  eftoient  vn  iour  affem-
bles  en  vn  feftin  (ces  feftins  ne  confiftet  d' ordinaire
qu'en  deux  chaudieres  de  bleds  diners  auec  vn  mor-
ceau  d'oreignac  ou  de  caftor)  lean  Baptifte  qui  auoit
efte  autheur  des  Atticameges  prit  la  parole,  &  did,
ie  ne  fgauois  autrefois  ce  que  vouloient  dire  les  Fran-
9ois,  quand  ils  nous  parloient  de  Dieu:  ie  penfois
qu'ils  mentoient:  mais  i'ay  recogneu  qu'ils  difent
vra}^  &  qu'en  effet  il  y  a  vn  Maiftre  qui  a  tout  fait,
&  qui  gouuerne  tout,  &  qui  doit  chafhier  les  mefchans
d'vn  feu  eternel,  &  recompenfer  h.  iamais  les  gens  de
bien  au  Ciel,  le  Capitaine  des  Atticameges  tefmoigna
vn  grand  contentement  de  ces  paroles,  &  exhorta
tous  ces  ieunes  gens  a  bien  apprendre  ce  que  on  leur
enfeigneroit.

Nous  auons  baptife  ga-bas  enuiron  cent  Adultes,
fans  les  enfans:  voicy  les  paroles  d'vn  des  chefs  de
Tadouffac:  I'Automne  paffe  en  la  Chapelle  des  Vrfu-
lines,  auec  quelques-vns  de  ces  gens  il  parloit  en  vn
conf eil  de  Sauuages  auat  f on  Baptef me :  il  y  a  trois
ans  que  i'efcoute  les  Peres  auec  attention,  &  approuue


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  37

with  a  very  light  penance,  similar  to  that  which
several  Saints  have  imposed  in  such  case.

The  Christians  of  Sillery  have  notably  contributed,
by  words  and  by  example,  to  the  conversion  of  the
Atticameges ;  they  took  the  opportunity  to  say  pray-
ers publicly  in  their  cabins,  when  the  Atticameges
came  to  see  them :  they  forbade  the  young  men  of
that  nation  to  visit  by  night  the  maidens  whom  they
sought  in  marriage,  according  to  their  old  customs;,
they  never  invited  them  to  the  feasts  except  to  speak
of  God  and  of  prayer.  When  all  the  principal  men,
[54]  both  of  that  nation  and  those  of  Sillery,  were  one
day  assembled  at  a  feast  (these  feasts  usually  consist
of  nothing  but  two  kettles  of  sundry  grains,  together
with  a  piece  of  elk  or  of  beaver),  Jean  Baptiste,  who
had  been  sponsor  for  the  Atticameges,  made  a  speech
and  said :  "  I  formerly  knew  not  what  the  French-
men meant,  when  they  spoke  to  us  of  God ;  I  thought
that  they  were  lying:  but  I  have  recognized  that
they  speak  true,  and  that  in  fact  there  is  a  Master
who  has  made  all  things,  who  governs  all,  and  who
is  to  punish  the  wicked  with  an  eternal  fire,  and  to
recompense  the  good  people  forever  in  Heaven."
The  Captain  of  the  Atticameges  betokened  a  great
satisfaction  with  these  words,  and  exhorted  all  those
young  men  to  learn  well  what  should  be  taught
them.

We  have  baptized  down  here  about  a  hundred
Adults,  without  the  children.  Here  are  the  words
of  one  of  the  chiefs  of  Tadoussac,  who  last  Autumn
in  the  Chapel  of  the  Ursulines,  in  company  with
some  of  those  people,  spoke  in  a  council  of  Savages
before  his  Baptism :  ' '  For  three  years  I  have  been
listening  to  the  Fathers  with  attention,  and  approv-


38  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.24

leurs  difcours:  i'ay  pour  cela  attedu  a  me  [55]  faire
baptifer  iufque  icy,  parce  que  le  Baptefme  eft  vne
chofe  importante  &,  laqiielle  il  faut  ferieufement  pen-
fer:  quand  on  eft  vne  fois  baptife,  on  ne  peut  plus
reculer,  il  faut  marcher,  droit  &  viure  en  bon  Chre-
ftien :  quelques-vns  vous  difent  haftez  vous  de  me
baptifer,  &  puis  au  bout  d'vn  mois  ou  deux,  ils
perdent  leur  ferueur,  &  ne  font  quafi  plus  d'eftat  de
leur  baptefme.  le  fens  mon  coeur  qui  me  dit  qu'il
voudroit  eftre  Chreftien,  il  y  a  long  temps,  il  ayme  la
priere,  &  neantmoins  il  n'ofe  vous  preffer:  c'eft  done
"k  vous,  mes  Peres,  d'en  difpofer,  voyez,  efprouuez
moy,  &  fi  vous  me  iugez  tel  qu'il  faut,  vous  me  ferez
vn  plaifir  extreme  de  me  mettre  au  nombre  des  Chre-
fties,  &  ie  tafcheray  d'eftre  fidelle  k  Dieu,  ie  ne  fuis
pas  feul,  voicy  plufieurs  de  mes  gens  qui  attendent
la  mefme  faueur :  interrogez  les  tous  les  vns  apres  les
autres,  &  voyez  fi  ie  dis  la  verite,  &  fi  eux-mefme
font  difpofez,  comme  il  faut.  Apres  fon  baptefme,
&  celuy  de  fa  femme,  il  fut  marie  folemnellement  ^
I'Eglife,  quatre  autres  de  fes  gens  auec  leurs  femmes
receurent  la  mefme  faueur  des  deux  Sacremens  de
baptefme  &  du  mariage.

[56]  Ie  croy  qu  il  7ie  /era  pas  inal  a  propos  de  fernier  ce
Chapitre  par  vne  lettre  quvn  Neophyte  Chrejlien  a  di6l^e
de  foy-nicfnie  pour  ejlre  enuoy^e  en  Frajice,  a  vn  hontme
de  confidcration  fon  bien-fa6leur ,  voyez  fes  propres  tennes
&  la  facojt  de  s'enoncer.

I? ADMIRE  ce  que  vous  faites,  de  ce  que  vous  vouliez

Nimakaterindam  Ka  tien,  ka  b'ich

auoir  piti^  de  moy,  de  ce  que  vous  vouliez  auoir

chab'erimien  ka  «icli  chab'erimach


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  39

ing  their  sermons;  I  have  therefore  waited  to  [55]
be  baptized,  until  this  time,  because  Baptism  is  an
important  matter,  upon  which  one  must  seriously
think.  When  one  is  once  baptized,  one  can  no  more
retreat,  one  must  walk  straight,  and  live  as  a  good
Christian.  Some  tell  you,  *  Make  haste  to  baptize
me; '  and  then,  after  a  month  or  two,  they  lose  their
fervor,  and  make  scarcely  any  more  account  of  their
baptism.  I  feel  my  heart  telling  me  that  it  would
like  to  be  Christian,  this  long  time  past;  it  loves
prayer,  and  nevertheless  it  dares  not  urge  you :  it  is
for  you,  then,  my  Fathers,  to  dispose  of  it.  See,  try
me,  and  if  you  judge  me  suitable,  you  will  do  me  a
very  great  pleasure  to  put  me  in  the  number  of  the
Christians,  and  I  will  try  to  be  faithful  to  God.  I
am  not  alone, —  here  are  several  of  my  people  who
await  the  same  favor;  ask  them  all,  one  after  the
other,  and  see  if  I  speak  the  truth,  and  if  they  them-
selves are  properly  inclined. "  After  his  baptism  and
that  of  his  wife,  he  was  solemnly  married  at  the
Church ;  four  others  of  his  people,  with  their  wives,
received  the  same  favor  —  the  two  Sacraments  of
baptism  and  of  marriage.

[56]  /  think  that  it  ivill  not  be  amiss  to  close  this
Chapter  with  a  letter  which  a  Christian  Neophyte  has
dictated,  by  himself,  to  be  sent  to  Fratice,  to  a  man  of
consideration,  his  benefactor;  you  see  his  own  terms  and
manjier  of  expression.

I MARVEL  at  what  you  are  doing,  in  that  you  are  pleased

Nimakaterindam  Ka  tien,  ka  wich

to  have  pity  on  me,  that  you  are  pleased  to  have

chawerimien  ka  wich  chawerimach


40


LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.  24


pitie de  ma  femme & de  mes  enfans,  nous  ne  fommes

Nib' gaie ninithanifak Nikokb'atifimin
pas  capables  de  vous  remercier,  celuy  qui  tout  fait,

Ki  nakbmirang miffi  Ka  Kichitbtch
c'eft  celuy  qui  vous  payera:  tous  les  iours  nous  prions

mi  Ke  kichikb'k  kachigakir  kigagarb'n-

Va-Y  dit  au  P.  Vimont viues  [^sc.  ecriu^s]

Nitira Pere  Vimont  Maffi-

car  ie  n'y  attends  [^sc.  entends]  rien : ie  vous  donna

kir  ketna  nikikerindan,  kimirir

fut-il  ainli  qu' autre  chofe  ie  vous

katira  kotak  nita  mi-

vous  luy  efcrir^s,  mon  enfant

kiga  maffmahamaba.  Ninitchanis

qui  fe  nomme,  remercie  voftre  fils

ka  irintch  bnakbmar  khikbilis

qui  efl  appell^  il  priera  pour

ka  irintch  bga  gagarbnta-

Vous  faites  bien  de  ce  que  vous  voulez  auoir

Kberatch  entien  ka  bich  Chabe-


pour  vous,

tambrimin

vous:

nahiker

mon  fac  a  Petun:

nikachtipitagan,

puiffe  donner :

riram

lacques
laques

[57]  lofeph

lofephet

luy.

mabar.


pitie  de  nous :

rimiang


fortement

fbnka


nous  vous  puffions  voir

bapmirang

verrons  au  Ciel:

bantimin bakbing

Ie  Pere  Ie  leune,

kakina  P.  Ie  leune

auec  les  filles  de  I'hofpital,

ikbefenfak

maifon  tout  aupres

kibam  pechkhich

ie  les  honoreray,

niga  manatchihock,

de  ce  qu'il  en  eft  arriu^  d'eux,
Ninch  ka  michagabatch


nous  croyons
nitepbetamin
en  voftre  pays,


fut-il  ainfi  que
kat  nita
nous  nous


endrakieg  niga  kichka-

il  vous  expliquera  tout

kiga  irbtamakba

ie  fuis  comme  demeurant
kbnt  nibintiKemack
ce  n'eft  que  comme  vne
kbnt  peiik  mi-
nous  demeurons  toufiours
nit'apimin eapitch
nous  fommes  bien  aifes

nimirberindamin

vne  qui  efl

peiik  Ka


1642-43]


RELA  TION  OF  1642-43


41


pity


able


on  my  wife and  children.  We  are  not

Niou gaie ninithanisak  Nikokwatisimin

to  thank  you ;  he  who  does  all,

Ki  nakoumirang  naissi  Ka  Kichitoutch

it  is  he  who  will  reward  you ;  every  day we  pray

mi  Ke  kichikouk  kachigakir kigagaroun-

f or  you. I  have  said  to  Father  Vimont : ' '  Do  you

tamourimin Nitira  Pere  Vimont  Massi-

write  this,  for  I  understand  nothing  about  it :  'I  give  you

nahiker  kir  ketna  nikikerindan,  kimirir

my  Tobacco  pouch ;  should  there  be  some  other  thing  I

nikachtipitagan,  katira  kotak  nita  mi-

could  give  you,  write  to  him.  My  child,

riram  kiga  massinahamawa.  Ninitchanis

who  is  named,  thanks  your  son,

ka  irintch ctinakoumar  khikwisis

who  is  called ;  he  will  pray  for

ka  irintch  ouga  gagarounta-

You  do  well in  that  you  are  pleased  to  have

ka  wich  Chawe-


Jacques
Jaqties
[57]  Joseph
Josephet

him.

mawar.


Kweratch  entien

pity  on  us ;  firmly  we  believe. Would  it  were  so  that

rimiang sounka nitepwetamin  kat  nita

we  could  see  you  in  your  own  country ;  we  shall

wapmirang  endrakieg  niga  kichka-

see  each  other  in  Heaven.

bantimin  wakwing

Father  le  Jeune.
kakina P.  le  Jeune
with  the  sisters  of  the  hospital ;

ikwesensak

house,  quite  near

kiwam  pechkhich

I  shall  honor  them.
niga  manatchihock,
that  two  of  them  have  arrived, —


Ninch  ka  michagawatcli


To  you  he  will  explain all,

kiga  iroutamakwa

As  it  were,  I  am  dwelling

kount  niwintikemack

it  is  just  like  one

kount  peiik  mi-

we  dwell.  Always

nit'apimin  eapitch

We  are  very  glad

nimirwerindamin
one  who  is
peiik  Ka


42


LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  24


petite  I'autre

agachinchitch  Kotak

cela  va  bien  de  ce  qu'elles  font  arriuees,

Kb'eratch  Ka  michagaJ^atch

nous  enfeignent  &  afin

kinohamab'iiamintb'a  gaie itchi

piti^  de  nous.  Nous  fommes  bien  aifes

rimiiamintb'a.  Nimirberindamin

qu'elles  ont  compaffion  des  malades

chaberimabatch  eakbfirittii

[58]  tres  nous  n'auons  point  cette  couflume,

rabint  nitichirinibakifimin

abandonnons  nous  avitres,  quelquefois

ritimin  nirabint Nanikbtbnbz

glons  les  malades:

piskitbnebirenanak  eakbfitiik

comme  nous  faifions ;
echirinibakifiang


qui  eft  grande

Ka  Kinbfitch

afin  qu'elles

itchi  Ki-

qu'elles  ayent

chabe-

de  ce

Ka


car  nous  au-

Ketna  mi-
nous  nous
Nipaki-
nous  eflran-
ni-
voila  autrefois

mi  tabch

voila  pourquoy  nous  fom-
mi  ka  bntchi  mirbe-


de  ce  qu'elles  font  arriuees
ka  michagabatch
depuis

ki  akb


mes  bien  aifes
rindamang
veftues  de  b[l]anc:

babakoretiik

puis  ce  temps-la

akb

Nous  admirons

nimakaterindamin

leur  pays,

bbatch  endrakibatch

trauailler ;  pleufb  a  Dieu

nita  arokefi  kat

daft  a  defricher  la  terre

chihitch itchi  Kitikeian.


icy

bndoire


les

ka
qu'elles  font  arriuees c'eft  de-

michagabatch  mi

qu'elles  ont  compaffion  de  nous.

chaberimiiomintba

de  ce  qu'elles  ont  quitte

ka  nagatahunt

ie  fuis  aag6  ie  ne  puis  plus

Nifafikis  ka  mini-

qu'vn  European  m'ay-

peiik  bemichtigbch bit-


1642-43]


RELA  TION  OF  1642-43


43


the  other

Kotak

that  they  have  arrived,


little,

agachinchitch

It  is  good  for  us

Kweratch

may  teach  us  and

tinohamawiiamintwa gaie

We  are  very  glad

Nimirwerindamin

for  the  sick.


Ka  michagawatch


so
itchi


pity  on  us.

rimiiamintwa.


they  have  compassion

chawerimawatch

[58]  ers,

rawint

forsake  one  another,

ritimin

gle

piskitounebirenanak

we  were  wont  to  do :

echiriniwakisiang

very  glad


who  is  tall.

Ka  Kinousitch

so  that  they

itchi  Ki-

that  they  may  have

chawe-

that

Ka

for  we  oth-

Ketna  nii-


rindamang

are  robed  in  white.
wabakoretiik
since  that  time

akou


eakousirittii

we  have  not  that  custom, —  we

nitichiriniwakisimin  Nipaki-

we  people ;  sometimes we  stran-

nirawint Nanikoutounouz  ni-

the  sick.  It  was  thus  formerly

eakousitiik  mi  taouch

that  is  why  we  are

mi  ka  ountchi  mirwe-

that  they  have  arrived  here  who

ka  michagawatch oundoire ka

Since  they  have  arrived,  it  is

ki  akoii  michagawatch  mi

that  they  have  compassion  on  us.

chawerimiiomintwa


We  wonder

nimakaterindamin

their  own  country.

ouwatch  endrakiwatch

would  to  God

arokesi  kat


work;

nita

aid  me
chihitch


that  they  have  left

ka  nagatahunt

I  am  old, —  I  can  no  more

Nisasikis  ka  mini-

that  a  European  would

peiik  wemichtigouch wit-


to  cultivate  the  land. ' '
itchi  Kitikeian.^


44  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jiSUITES [Vol.24


[59]  CHAPITRE  V.

CONTINUATION DU MESME SUBIECT.

ESTIENNE  Pigarouich  dont  il  eft  parl6  aux  pre-
cedentes  Relations  nous  a  donne  cette  annee
des  tefmoignages  de  fon  zele  &  de  fa  vertu,
auffi  remarquables  que  iamais.  II  arriua  vn  iour  vne
querele  dans  vne  famille  Chreftienne  entre  le  mary
&  la  f emme :  ils  f e  f rapperent  aff ez  rudement :  Eftiene
entre  en  la  cabane  &  parle  au  mary  en  cette  forte :  il
faut  que  les  hommes  ayent  plus  d'efprit  que  les
femmes  &  qu'ils  doptent  mieux  leur  colere:  vn  bon
moyen  d'appaifer  vne  femme  quand  elle  crie,  c'eft  de
ne  luy  dire  mot,  ou  bien  fortir  de  la  cabane,  &  la
laiff er  crier  toute  feule ;  ie  me  fuis  bien  trouue  de  ce
remede :  quelquefois  ie  fais  encor  mieux,  au  lieu  d'en
fortir,  ie  luy  fais  [60]  vne  legon  fort  doucement,  eft-
ce-la,  luy  dif-ie,  ce  qu'on  vous  enfeigne  tous  les  iours
&  bien  fafche  toy:  mais  f9aclie  que  tu  prens  le
chemin  d'Enfer,  &  que  tu  feras  bruflee  par  ta  colere,
ie  trouue  fouuent  qu'elle  s'appaife  &  fe  prend  k  rire.
Get  home  parmy  fon  zele  eft  ioyeux  &  agreable :  il
eftoit  vn  iour  dans  vne  cabane  de  Sauuages,  oil  Ton
parloit  de  ce  que  les  Peres  auoient  enfeigne  touchant
le  Sacrement  de  Confeffion ;  il  f e  mit  ^  leur  f aire  vne
queftion  &.  tous  les  vnes  apres  les  autres,  fgauoir  fi
pour  les  pechez  qu'ils  auoient  commis,  on  leur  don-
noit  pour  penitence  de  fe  letter  du  haut  du  grand
faut  de  Montmorency  en  bas  (c'eft  vn  precipice  d'eau


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  45


[59]  CHAPTER  V.

CONTINUATION OF THE SAME SUBJECT.

ESTIENNE  Pigarouich,  of  whom  there  is  mention
in  the  preceding  Relations,  has  given  us  this
year  manifestations  of  his  zeal  and  of  his  vir-
tue, as  remarkable  as  ever.  There  arose,  one  day,
a  quarrel  in  a  Christian  family  between  the  husband
and  the  wife :  they  struck  each  other  quite  violently.
Estienne  enters  the  cabin  and  speaks  to  the  husband
in  this  wise:  "  Men  should  have  more  sense  than
women,  and  should  better  control  their  anger.  A
good  way  to  appease  a  woman,  when  she  scolds,  is
to  say  not  a  word  to  her,  or  else  to  go  out  of  the
cabin  and  let  her  scold  all  alone ;  I  have  had  good
success  with  this  remedy.  Sometimes  I  do  still  better ;
instead  of  going  out,  I  give  her  [60]  a  lesson  very
quietly.  '  Is  that,'  I  say  to  her,  '  what  you  are  taught
every  day?  Very  well,  be  angry:  but  know  that
thou  art  taking  the  way  to  Hell,  and  that  thou  wilt
be  burned  by  thine  own  anger.'  I  often  find  that
she  becomes  quiet  and  begins  to  laugh. ' '

This  man,  with  all  his  zeal,  is  merry  and  agree-
able. He  was  one  day  in  a  cabin  of  Savages,  where
mention  was  made  of  what  the  Fathers  had  taught
concerning  the  Sacrament  of  Confession;  he  pro-
ceeded to  put  a  question  to  them  all,  one  after  the
other, —  to  wit:  if,  for  the  sins  which  they  had  com-
mitted, the  penance  were  appointed  them  to  cast
themselves  from  top  to  bottom  of  the  great  fall  of


46  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

qui  tombe  d'vne  motagne  pres  Quebec)  le  feroient-
ils?  refpondirent  tous  qu'ouy,  pourueu  qu'on  leur
enioignift,  &  moy  auffi,  dit-il,  qui  fuis  le  plus  grand
pecheur  de  tous,  ie  redoute  I'Enfer,  &  crains  fort  que
mes  pechez  ne  m'y  attirent,  ie  me  foucie  peu  que
mon  corps  foit  englouti  dans  [6i]  I'eau,  mais  ie
fouhaite  ardemment  que  mon  ame  aille  an  Ciel.

La  flabilite  du  mariage  eil  vn  des  poindts  des  plus
difficiles  dans  la  conuerfion,  &  arreft  des  Sauuages,
nous  auons  bien  de  la  peine  k  I'obtenir  &  k  le  main-
tenir.  Vne  ieune  femme  voulant  abandonner  fon
mary  fans  iufte  fubiedl,  les  principaux  &  plus  zelez
Sauuages  s'affemblerent,  &  prierent  Monfieur  le  Gou-
uerneur  de  leur  permettre  de  faire  vne  petite  prifon
a  Sillery,  &  y  enfermer  quelque  temps  cette  femme,
&  la  mettre  en  fon  deuoir.  Eftienne  Pigarouich  en
prend  la  commiffion  &  la  faidl  faiflr,  &  comme  elle
fut  a  la  porte  de  la  prifon,  il  luy  tint  ce  difcours:  ma
niepce,  prie  bien  Dieu  toute  la  nuidt,  tu  auras  du
loifir,  demande  luy  que  tu  deuienne  fage,  &  que  tu
ne  fois  plus  opiniafhre,  endure  cette  prifon  pour  tes
pechez,  prends  courage ;  fi  tu  veux  eflre  obeyffante,
tu  n'y  demeureras  pas  long-temps,  elle  entre  fort
paifiblement,  fe  laiffant  conduire  comme  vn  agneau,
&  demeura  1^  toute  la  nui(5t  a  plate  terre  [62]  fans  feu
&  fans  couuerture,  c'eftoit  le  fecond  iour  de  lanuier,
au  plus  rude  teps  de  I'hyuer:  le  lendemain  matin  le
Pere  de  Rinen  [sc.  Quen]  la  fut  vifiter  auec  Eftienne,
&  luy  fift  donner  vn  peu  de  pain  &  de  la  paille  pour
fe  repofer,  le  Pere  la  voulut  faire  fortir  vn  peu  de
temps  pour  fe  chauffer  en  vne  chambre  prochaine,
puis  la  remettre  en  fon  cachot,  mais  le  Sauuage  luy
dift  qu'elle  deuoit  endurer  cela  pour  fes  fautes,  &


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  J642-43  47

Montmorency  (this  is  a  cataract  of  water  which  falls
from  a  mountain  near  Quebec),-  would  they  do  it?
All  answered  "  Yes,  provided  we  were  so  enjoined."
"And  I  too,"  said  he,  "  who  am  the  greatest  sinner
of  all ;  I  dread  Hell,  and  greatly  fear  that  my  sins
may  draw  me  into  it :  I  care  little  that  my  body  be
swallowed  up  in  [6i]  the  water,  but  I  ardently  desire
that  my  soul  go  to  Heaven."

The  stability  of  marriage  is  one  of  the  most  per-
plexing questions  in  the  conversion  and  settlement
of  the  Savages ;  we  have  much  difficulty  in  obtaining
and  in  maintaining  it.  A  young  woman  wishing  to
leave  her  husband  without  just  cause,  the  principal
and  most  zealous  Savages  assembled,  and  begged
Monsieur  the  Governor  to  allow  them  to  make  a  little
prison  at  Sillery,  and  there  to  lock  up  this  Avoman
for  some  time,  and  bring  her  to  her  duty.  Estienne
Pigarouich  undertakes  this  commission,  and  has  her
seized;  and  as  she  was  at  the  door  of  the  prison,  he
addressed  her  as  follows:  "  My  niece,  pray  earnestly
to  God  all  night, — thou  wilt  have  leisure;  ask  him
that  thou  mayst  become  sensible,  and  that  thou  mayst
no  longer  be  self-willed.  Endure  this  prison  for  thy
sins.  Take  courage ;  if  thou  wilt  be  obedient,  thou
wilt  not  stay  there  long."  She  entered  very  peace-
ably, suffering  herself  to  be  led  like  a  lamb,  and
stayed  there  all  night,  flat  on  the  ground,  [62]  with-
out fire  and  without  covering ;  it  was  the  second  day
of  January,  at  the  severest  season  of  the  winter.
The  next  morning,  Father  de  Quen  went  with  Es-
tienne to  visit  her,  and  saw  to  it  that  she  was  given
a  little  bread,  and  some  straw  to  rest  on.  The  Fa-
ther wished  to  have  her  go  forth  a  little  while,  to
warm  herself  in  a  neighboring  room,  then  to  put  her


48  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  24

luy  mefme  I'encouragea  ^  porter  patiemment  cette
penitence :  fur  le  f oir  pourtant  on  lugea  a  propos  de
la  deliurer,  c'efloit  affez  pour  donner  de  la  terreur  k
cette  pauure  creature,  &  vn  petit  commencement  de
police  ^  ces  nouueaux  Chreftiens,  ioint  que  la  melan-
cholie  fe  mettant  dans  I'efprit  d'vn  Sauuage,  il  en
vient  &.  de  grandes  extremitez,  &  fouuent  k  vne  mort
violente,  le  chaftiment  a  feruy  a  cette  ieune  femme,
&  h.  plufieurs  autres.

Le  mefme  Eftienne  Pigarouich  s'en  vint  trouuer
vn  de  nos  Peres,  le  lendemain  de  Noel  de  grand
main,  &  luy  difl:  voila  leur  fefte,  voila  le  iour  de
mon  patron  S.  Eftienne,  que  pouray-ie  [63]  faire  pour
I'honorer,  le  pere  luy  donna  quelques  enfeignemens,
&  fur  tout  luy  fift  voir  comme  faincft  Eftienne  auoit
parle  feruemment  de  Dieu,  &  donn6  fa  vie  pour  la
foy;  il  s'en  va,  &  apres  auoir  entendu  la  Meffe,  &
Communie  denotement,  il  inuite  plufieurs  Sauuages
baptifez,  &  autres  auffi  en  vn  feftin  qu'il  leur  fift  en
I'honneur  de  faindt  Eftienne  fon  Patron.  Puis  il  leur
parle  ainfi,  vous  fcauez  affez  mon  nom  de  Baptefme,  &
vous  auez  ouy  raconter  auiourd'huy  k  la  Meffe  ce
qu'a  fait  faindt  Eftienne,  eftat  en  ce  monde,  pluft  a
Dieu  que  ie  I'imitaffe  en  fa  vie  &  en  fa  mort,  comme
ie  fais  en  fon  nom,  "k  tout  le  moins  ie  le  veux  faire
en  quelque  chofe,  c'eft  k  dire  parlant  de  Dieu,  &  de
la  foy:  c'eft  done  ce  que  ie  fais  maintenant,  vous
conuiant  &  coniurant  tous,  que  nous  viuions  &  mou-
rions  en  la  foy,  que  nous  auons  profeffee,  &  pour
vous  autres  qui  n'eftes  pas  baptifez,  le  feftin  eft  pour
vous  faire  cognoiftre  mon  nom  de  Baptefme,  c'eft
Eftienne,  ouy  i'ayme  le  nom  d'Eftiene,  auffi  m'eft
il  plus  honorable,  que celuy  de  Pigarouich, on  ne


1642-43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  49

back  in  her  cell ;  but  the  Savage  told  him  that  she
ought  to  endure  that  for  her  faults,  and  he  himself
encouraged  her  to  bear  this  penance  patiently.  To-
ward evening,  nevertheless,  they  Judged  it  proper
to  release  her ;  it  was  enough  for  inspiring  terror  in
this  poor  creature,  and  was  a  little  beginning  of
government  for  these  new  Christians, — moreover,
melancholy  fixing  itself  in  the  mind  of  a  Savage,  he
comes  to  great  extremities  therein,  and  often  to  a
violent  death.  The  punishment  sufficed  for  this
young  woman,  and  for  several  others.

The  same  Estienne  Pigarouich  came  to  find  one  of
our  Fathers,  very  early  on  the  morrow  after  Christ-
mas, and  said  to  him:  "  That  was  their  feast;  here
is  the  day  of  my  patron  St.  Stephen, —  what  can  I
[63]  do  to  honor  him?  The  father  gave  him  some
instructions,  and  especially  showed  him  how  saint
Stephen  had  spoken  fervently  of  God,  and  given  his
life  for  the  faith.  He  goes  away,  and,  after  having
heard  Mass,  and  devoutly  received  Communion,
he  invites  several  baptized  Savages,  and  others  also,
to  a  feast  which  he  prepared  for  them  in  honor  of
saint  Stephen,  his  Patron.  Then  he  speaks  to  them
as  follows :  ' '  You  know  very  well  my  Baptismal
name,  and  you  have  heard  related  to-day  at  Mass,
what  saint  Stephen  did  while  in  this  world.  Would
to  God  that  I  might  imitate  him  in  his  life  and  in  his
death,  as  I  do  in  his  name!  At  the  very  least,  I  wish
to  do  so  in  some  respect, — that  is,  by  speaking  of
God  and  of  the  faith.  This  is,  accordingly,  what  I
am  now  doing,  inviting  and  entreating  you  all,  that
we  live  and  die  in  the  faith  which  we  have  professed ;
and,  for  you  others  who  are  not  baptized,  the  feast
is  to  acquaint  you  with  my  name  of  Baptism,  which


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.24

cognoift  le  dernier  [64]  qu'icy  proche  parmy  quelque
nombre  de  Sauuages  que  nous  f ommes :  fi  ie  paff ois
la  mer  &  que  Ton  me  demandaft  mon  nom,  on  ne
m'entendroit  pas,  fi  ie  difois,  Pigarouich,  mais  fi  ie
nommois  Eflienne,  incontinent  on  f cauroit  que  ie  fuis
amy  de  Dieu,  &  de  tous  ceux  qui  prient,  &  que  ie
porte  vn  nom  qui  eft  chery  &  prife  au  Ciel,  &  par
toute  la  terre,  c'efl  done  en  confideration  de  ce  nom
&  de  celuy  dont  nous  faifons  auiourd'huy  la  fefte  que
ie  fais  f eftin :  Nous  autres  quand  on  nous  donne  le
nom  de  quelqu'vn  qui  eft  mort,  pour  en  conferuer  le
memoire,  on  nous  oblige  par  confequent  des  I'heure
mefme  d'imiter  celuy  que  nous  faifons  reuiure,  ne
vous  eftonnez  done  pas  fi  ie  parle  maintenant  &
prends  la  hardieffe  de  vous  enfeigner,  ie  ne  le  fais
que  dans  le  defir  que  i'ay  que  tous  nos  ges  embraffent
la  foy,  &  obeyffent  k  Dieu,  &  c'eft  ce  que  defiroit
Saindt  Eflienne,  en  enfeignant  ceux  de  fa  nation,
plufieurs  feftins  faits  de  la  forte  cette  annee  n'ont
pas  peu  feruy  k  confirmer  la  ferueur  de  nos  Chre-
ftiens.  Au  [65]  refle  ils  ne  confiftent  pour  I'ordinaire
qu'en  vne  grande  chaudiere  ou  deux  de  bled  d'Inde,
ou  de  poids,  auec  vn  cartier  d'orignac  ou  de  caftor,
felon  le  nombre  des  conuiez,  &  ils  les  font  pour
s'entre-foulager  en  leur  pauurete,  &  fe  faire  la  cha-
rite  les  vns  aux  autres,  fi  bien  que  faire  vn  feftin,
c'eft  icy  ^  prefent  le  mefme  que  donner  a  manger
^  ceux  qui  font  en  neceffite,  &  exercer  vn  adte  de
mifericorde.

Nos  Algonquins  Chreftiens  allerent  vn  iour  k  la
chaffe  auec  quelques  ieunes  gens  Atticameges  nou-
uellement arriuez, & qui n'auoient encor guere


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  51'

is  Estienne.  Yes,  I  love  the  name  of  Estienne,  and
it  is  also  more  honorable  for  me  than  that  of  Piga-
rouich:  the  latter  is  known  [64]  only  hereabout,
among  our  small  number  of  Savages.  If  I  crossed
the  sea,  and  were  asked  my  name,  they  would  not
understand  me  if  I  said  Pigarouich ;  but,  if  I  called
myself  Estienne,  straightway  they  would  know  that
I  am  a  friend  of  God,  and  of  all  those  who  pray,  and
that  I  bear  a  name  which  is  cherished  and  prized  in
Heaven  and  throughout  the  earth.  It  is  therefore
in  consideration  of  this  name,  and  of  him  whose  feast
we  celebrate  to-day,  that  I  am  giving  a  feast.  Among
us,  when  we  are  given  the  name  of  some  one  who  is
dead,  so  as  to  preserve  his  memory,  we  are  conse-
quently obliged  from  that  very  hour  to  imitate  him
whom  we  cause  to  live  again.  Therefore,  be  not
astonished  if  I  now  speak,  and  make  bold  to  teach
you;  I  do  so  only  in  the  desire  that  I  have,  that  all
our  people  embrace  the  faith  and  obey  God ;  and  that
is  what  Saint  Stephen  desired,  in  teaching  those  of
his  nation."  Several  feasts  prepared  on  that  plan
this  year  have  served  not  a  little  to  confirm  the  fer-
vor of  our  Christians.  In  [65]  fine,  these  generally
consist  of  nothing  but  a  great  kettle  or  two  of  Indian
corn,  or  of  peas,  Avith  a  quarter  of  moose  or  of  bea-
ver, according  to  the  number  of  those  invited,  and
they  make  them  in  order  to  comfort  one  another  in
their  poverty,  and  to  bestow  charity  upon  one  anoth-
er,—  insomuch  that  to  make  a  feast  is  at  present  the
same  here  as  to  feed  those  who  are  in  necessity,  and
to  exercise  an  act  of  mercy.

Our  Christian  Algonquins  went  to  the  hunt  one
day  with  some  young  men  of  the  Atticameges,  newly
arrived,  who  had  as  yet  but  little  affection  for  the


62  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.24

d'affe(5tion  pour  la  foy,  ils  virent  la  pifte  de  deux
orignaux  qui  alloient  I'vn  a  gauche,  1' autre  k  droidt,
vn  des  Atticameges  dift  a  nos  Chreftiens,  qui  fera-
ce  de  vous  autres  Chreftiens,  qui  nous  baillera  ^
manger?  lequel  tu[e]rez-vous  des  deux  Orignaux?
Eftienne  entendit  bien  que  cet  homme  vouloit  taxer
la  priere,  &  mettoit  fon  efperance  en  fes  fuperfti-
tions,  auec  lefquelles  il  pretendoit  inuoquer  le  demon,
&  faire  bonne  chafle:  il  prift  done  la  parole,  &  dift.
Ce  n'eft  pas  nous  [66]  qui  donnerons  a  manger,  c'eft
celuy  qui  gouuerne  tout,  nous  efperons  en  luy,  &
non  pas  en  nos  iambes  ny  en  nos  tambours,  s'il  veut
que  nous  prenions  les  premiers  des  orignaux,  cela
arriuera,  nonobftant  vos  longleries,  s'il  veut  que  ce
foit  vous  qui  en  preniez,  il  fera  ainfi.  Nous  allons
le  prier  qu'il  nous  affifte,  &  puis  qu'il  en  difpofe,
comme  il  voudra,  alors  il  fit  mettre  tous  fes  compa-
triotes  a  genoux,  &  les  fit  prier  Dieu :  les  Attica-
megues  partiret  les  premiers  pour  fuiure  les  piftes
d'vn  de  ces  deux  orignaux:  mais  en  vain,  ils  furent
obligez  de  retourner  fans  auoir  rien  rencontre,  apres
vn  extreme  I'affitude.  Les  Algonquins  partirent
feulement  fur  le  haut  du  iour,  &  fur  le  midy  ils
attraperent  la  befte  qu'ils  fuiuoiet,  &  la  tuerent,  puis
retournats  fur  les  piftes  des  Atticamegues,  trouuerent
encor  I'autre,  &  la  mirent  a  mort,  &  retournerent
fort  ioyeux  vers  les  Atticamegues,  leur  laiffant  a  tous
vne  tres-bonne  odeur  de  noftre  faindte  foy,  &  vn
defir  du  Baptefme.

Vn  des  premiers  Sauuages  de  Tadouffac  nomme
Achille,  en  fon  Baptefme  \^^^^  par  Monfieur  le
Cheualier  de  L'ifle,  s'arrefta  a  Sillery,  &  y  faifoit  vne


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  53'

faith.  They  saw  the  trail  of  two  moose,  going  one
to  the  left,  the  other  to  the  right.  One  of  the  Atti-
cameges  said  to  our  Christians,  "Which  of  you
Christians  shall  it  be,  who  will  give  us  to  eat?  which
of  the  two  Moose  will  you  kill  ? ' '  Estienne  plainly
understood  that  this  man  wished  to  accuse  prayer,
and  that  he  was  putting  his  own  hope  in  his  supersti-
tions, with  which  he  pretended  to  invoke  the  evil
spirit,  and  secure  success  in  hunting.  Accordingly,
he  made  a  speech,  saying:  "It  is  not  we  \()6\  who
will  give  to  eat, —  it  is  he  who  governs  all;  we  hope
in  him,  and  not  in  our  legs  or  in  our  drums.  If  he
will  that  we  take  the  first  of  the  moose,  that  will
happen,  notwithstanding  your  Juggleries;  if  he  will
that  you  be  the  ones  to  take  them,  it  will  be  so.  We
are  going  to  pray  him  to  assist  us ;  and  let  him  then
dispose  the  matter  as  he  will."  Then  he  caused  all
his  fellow  countrymen  to  kneel  and  pray  to  God ;  the
Atticamegues  were  the  first  to  follow  the  trail  of
one  of  those  two  moose:  but  in  vain;  they  were
obliged  to  return  without  having  found  anything,
after  extreme  fatigue.  The  Algonquins  set  out  only
toward  the  middle  of  the  day,  and  about  noon  they
caught  the  beast  which  they  were  following,  and
killed  it;  then,  returning  upon  the  trail  of  the  Atti-
camegues, they  found  also  the  other,  and  put  it  to
death,  and  returned  very  gayly  to  the  Atticamegues, —
leaving  all  of  them  an  excellent  opinion  of  our
holy  faith,  and  a  desire  for  Baptism.

One  of  the  foremost  Savages  of  Tadoussac  —  named
Achille,  at  his  Baptism,  [67]  by  Monsieur  the  Cheva-
lier de  L'isle"  —  settled  at  Sillery,  and  there  main-
tained one  of  the  best  families.  Some  time  after  his
baptism,  he  was  attacked  by  a  languishing  sickness,..


54  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.24

des  meilleures  families,  quelque-temps  apres  auoir
efte  baptife,  il  fut  attaque  d'vne  maladie  languiffante,
qui  luy  dura  plus  de  deux  ans  &  demy,  pendant
lefquels  il  tefmoigna  toufiours  vne  grande  conflance
en  la  foy,  &  vne  grande  reflgnation  a  la  volonte  de
Dieu:  le  mal  redoublant,  on  le  porte  k  I'Hofpital,  1&,,
oil  il  exerce  des  adtions  de  vertu  fignalee,  il  eft  meur
pour  le  Ciel,  Dieu  I'appelle  k  foy,  les  Sauuages  en
demeurerent  extr[em]emet  affligez:  car  il  eftoit  re-
marquable  parmy  eux,  &  I'aymoient  fort.  Eftienne
Pigarouich  les  voyant  tous  affis  autour  du  deffundt
defolez  an  poffible,  &  les  tefles  baiffees,  en  figne  de
trifteffe,  leur  dift,  mes  freres,  prenez  courage,  ne  vous
attriftez  pas  trop,  nous  n'auons  pas  embrafle  la  foy,
afin  de  viure  long-temps  9a-bas  dans  la  terre:  mais
afin  de  bien  viure,  &  d'aller  au  Ciel,  I'excez  de  la
trifteffe  ne  vaut  rien,  &  defplaift  k  Dieu,  &  vous
apportera  du  mal,  que  voftre  trifteffe  foit  courte  &
moderee,  ne  croyez  vous  pas  que  I'ame  de  cet  homme
qui  [68]  vient  de  mourir,  &  a  creu  fortement  en  Dieu,
eft  au  Ciel,  ou  y  fera  bien-toft,  pourquoy  doncque
pleurez  vous?  ne  faut-il  pas  que  nous  mourrions
tous?  cette  vie  n'eft  pas  plus  longue  que  le  bout  du
doigt:  mais  celle  que  nous  attendons  n'a  point  de
fin:  c'eft  ce  que  nous  enfeigne  la  priere,  faites  en
eftat,  &  la  gardez  conftamment  parmy  toutes  les
fafcheufes  rencontres.  Ce  difcours  partant  d'vn  coeur
feruent,  &  prononce  d'vn  ton  ferme,  effuya  les  larmes
de  ces  pauures  gens,  &  leur  fift  leuer  les  teftes  qui
tenoient  baffees  entre  leurs  mains.

Charles  Meiafkb'at  nous  fournit  encore  cette  annee
dequoy  confoler  ceux  qui  ayment  nos  Sauuages. II


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  55

which  lasted  more  than  two  years  and  a  half,  during
which  he  continually  manifested  a  great  constancy
in  the  faith,  and  a  great  resignation  to  the  will  of
God.  The  malady  increasing,  they  carry  him  to  the
Hospital ;  there,  where  he  exercises  acts  of  notable
virtue,  he  is  ripe  for  Heaven,  and  God  calls  him  to
himself.  The  Savages  were  extremely  afflicted  at
this,  for  he  was  remarkable  among  them,  and  they
loved  him  much.  Estienne  Pigarouich,  seeing  them
all  seated  about  the  dead  man,  utterly  desolate,  with
their  heads  bowed  in  token  of  sorrow,  said  to  them :
"  My  brothers,  take  courage ;  do  not  grieve  too  much.
We  have  not  embraced  the  faith  in  order  to  live  long
here  below,  on  the  earth :  but  in  order  to  live  well,
and  go  to  Heaven.  The  excess  of  sorrow  is  of  no
avail ;  it  displeases  God,  and  will  bring  you  harm ;
let  your  sorrow  be  brief  and  moderate.  Do  you  not
believe  that  the  soul  of  this  man  who  [68]  has  just
died,  and  who  has  stoutly  believed  in  God,  is  in
Heaven,  or  will  be  there  soon?  why  then  do  you
weep?  Must  we  not  all  die?  This  life  is  not  longer
than  the  tip  of  the  finger ;  but  the  one  which  we
expect  has  no  end.  That  is  what  prayer  teaches  us ;
make  account  of  it,  and  observe  it  constantly  amid  all
grievous  occurrences."  This  speech,  proceeding
from  a  fervent  heart,  and  pronounced  in  a  firm  tone,
dried  the  tears  of  those  poor  people,  and  made  them
lift  their  heads,  which  they  were  holding  bowed
between  their  hands.

Charles  Meiaskwat  this  year  again  gives  us  occa-
sion to  comfort  those  who  love  our  Savages.  He  is
from  Tadoussac,  and  lives  at  Sillery,  in  one  of  the
houses  built  on  the  French  plan.  He  landed  from  a
journey  to  the  three Rivers,  a  few  days  after  the


56  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.24

eft  de  Tadouffac,  &  refide  a  Sillery  en  vne  des  mai-
fons  bailies  a  la  Franjoife,  il  arriua  d'vn  voyage  des
trois  Riuieres,  pen  de  iours  apres  la  mort  de
Monfieur  Nicollet,  la  premiere  nouuelle  qii'il  entendit,
fut  celle-1^,  il  leue  incontinent  les  yeux  au  Ciel,  prie
Dieu  pour  fon  ame,  va  droidt  a  nollre  Eglife  dire  fon
Cliap[e]let  pourledeifundt,&  delk  a  la  Chappelle  [69]
de  I'Hofpital,  ou  il  en  fift  autant,  puis  il  vient  nous
voir  chez  nous,  &  trouuant  le  Pere  de  Quen  en  meil-
leure  fante  qu'il  ne  I'auoit  laiffe  en  partant,  il  luy
dift  ces  mots,  Mon  Pere  i'ay  prie  Dieu  pour  vous
tous  les  iours,  ie  luy  ay  dit,  mon  Dieu  guariffez  le
Pere  qui  nous  enfeigne,  fi  vous  voyez  que  cela  foit
bien,  que  fi  vous  voulez  qu'il  meure,  faite  qu'il  aille
droidt  au  Ciel :  apres  cela  il  demanda  au  Pere,  ce  qu'il
falloit  faire  pour  expier  entierement  vne  faute  dont
il  s'eftoit  defia  confeffe,  le  Pere  luy  expliqua  les  trois
fortes  de  fatisfadtions,  I'aumofne,  I'oraifon,  &  le
ieufne,  le  lendemain  il  s'en  va  a  I'Hofpital  voir  les
malades:  I'vn  defquels  luy  demanda  vn  drap,  il  fort
fans  delay,  s'en  va  &.  Kebec,  achete  vn  drap  au  ma-
gazin,  &  I'apporte  a  ce  malade,  il  a  depuis  toufjours
continue  cette  charite  enuers  les  pauures,  &  les
infirmes,  &  prend  vn  fmgulier  plaiflr  a  les  confoler  &
leur  parler  de  Dieu.

L'an  pafCe  eftant  en  Carefme  dans  les  bois  pour  y
faire  fa  chaffe  &  fa  prouifion  [70]  de  viande  boucanee,
il  faifoit  fa  cuifine  a  part,  afin  de  ne  point  manger  de
viande  en  Carefme,  vn  iour  comme  il  faifoit  cuire  vn
peu  de  poiffon  dans  vne  petite  chaudiere,  fa  femme
qui  n'eft  pas  Chreftienne,  &  qui  eft  d'vn  humeur  bau-
taine,  ietta  de  depit  vne  poignee  de  cendre  dans  la.


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  57

death  of  Monsieur  Nicollet ;  the  first  news  that  he
heard  was  that.  He  straightway  lifts  his  eyes  to
Heaven,  prays  to  God  for  his  soul,  goes  straight  to
our  Church  to  recite  his  Rosary  for  the  deceased,  and
thence  to  the  Chapel  [69]  of  the  Hospital,  where  he
does  the  same.  Then  he  comes  to  see  us  at  our  abode,
and  finding  Father  de  Quen  in  better  health  than  he
had  left  him  on  going  away,  he  said  to  him  these
words :  ' '  My  Father,  I  have  prayed  to  God  for  you
every  day,  I  have  said  to  him,  '  My  God,  heal  the
Father  who  teaches  us,  if  you  see  that  that  be  well;
but  if  you  will  that  he  die,  make  him  go  straight  to
Heaven.'  "  After  that,  he  asked  the  Father  what  he
must  do  in  order  thoroughly  to  expiate  a  fault  of
which  he  had  already  made  confession.  The  Father
explained  to  him  the  three  kinds  of  atonement  —
alms,  prayer,  and  fasting.  The  next  day  he  goes
away  to  the  Hospital  to  see  the  sick,  one  of  whom
asked  him  for  a  sheet ;  he  goes  out  without  delay,
proceeds  to  Kebec,  buys  a  sheet  at  the  store,  and
brings  it  to  the  sick  man.  Since  then,  he  has  always
continued  this  charity  toward  the  poor  and  the  infirm,
and  takes  a  singular  pleasure  in  comforting  them,
and  in  speaking  to  them  of  God.

Last  year,  being  in  the  woods  during  Lent,  to  hunt
and  make  his  provision  [70]  of  smoked  meat,  he  did
his  own  cooking  apart,  so  as  not  to  eat  meat  in  Lent.
One  day,  when  he  was  cooking  a  bit  of  fish  in  a  small
kettle,  his  wife,  who  is  not  Christian,  and  who  is  of
a  haughty  temper,  spitefully  threw  a  handful  of
ashes  into  the  kettle,  mocking  him  and  prayers :  our
good  Charles,  without  growing  angry  or  saying  a
single  word,  empties  the  kettle,  goes  after  some  wa-
ter, and  puts  it  back  on  the  fire ;  throwing,  by  that


58  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ&SUITES  [Vol.24

chaudiere,  fe  mocquant  de  luy  &  des  prieres:  noftre
bon  Charles  fans  fe  fafcher  ny  dire  vn  feul  mot,
vuide  la  chaudiere,  va  querir  de  I'eau,  &  la  remet  fur
le  feu,  iettant  par  cet  acte  de  patience  vn  bon  verre
d'eau  fur  la  cholere,  &  I'orgueil  de  fa  femme,  qui
n'ofa  depuis  rien  faire.

Voyant  fon  frere  qui  s'en  alloit  "k  la  chaffe,  &  quel-
ques  autres  Algonquins  Chreftiens  qui  alloient  au
fort  de  Richelieu,  il  leur  donna  a  tous  chacun  vne
braffee  de  pourcelaine,  large  de  trois  doigts:  c'eft  vn
prefent  de  valeur  parmy  eux,  afin  qu'ils  fiffent  tou-
fiours  eflat  de  la  priere,  &  priffent  garde  de  ne  fe
point  perdre  parmy  les  Algonquins  de  la  haut,  puis
tirant  [71]  fon  frere  a  part  (il  s'appelle  Euftache,  &
eft  fort  bon  Chreftien)  il  luy  bailla  fon  Crucifix,  &
luy  dift,  mon  frere,  priez  toufiours  deuant  le  Cruci-
fix, &  puis  quand  vous  aurez  prie  baifez-le  auec
amour  &  refpedt,  fouuenez  vous  de  moy  en  vos  pri-
eres, &  prenez  courage :  reuenez  le  plutoft  que  vous
pourrez,  afin  d'eftre  enfeignez,  fouuenez-vous  que
Dieu  eft  par  tout,  &  qu'il  vous  void  toufiours,  ne
faites  rien  de  mal,  gardez  les  Dimanches,  &  les
Feftes,  ayez  a  cet  effedt  vn  papier  qui  les  marque,
pour  moy  ie  ne  f^ay  encor  ou  i'iray,  ie  feray  ce  que
me  dira  celuy  qui  commande  icy,  ie  ne  difpofe  pas
de  ma  perfonne,  &  ie  ne  le  veux  pas  faire :  Car  ie
fgay  que  Dieu  veut  que  nous  defpendions  de  ceux
qu'il  a  mis  c'k-bas  en  fa  place.  I'iray  "k  la  chaffe  du
cofte  qu'il  me  dira,  puis  ie  remmeneray  le  prifonnier
en  fon,  pays,  fi  on  m'en  donne  la  commiffion,  au  cas
que  ie  ne  vous  voye  plus,  ie  vous  fais  heritier  de  tout
mon  petit  meuble,  de  mon  lidt,  de  mes  rets,  de  [72]


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  59

act  of  patience,  a  full  glass  of  water  over  the  anger
and  the  pride  of  his  wife,  who  after  that  dared  to  do
nothing.

Seeing  his  brother  going  away  to  the  hunt,  and
some  other  Christian  Algonquins,  who  were  going  to
the  fort  of  Richelieu,  he  gave  to  each  one  of  them  an
arm's  length  of  porcelain,  three  fingers  wide,  which
is  a  present  of  value  among  them, —  so  that  they
should  always  have  regard  for  prayer,  and  take  care
not  to  go  astray  among  the  Algonquins  up  there.
Then,  taking  [71]  his  brother  aside  (whose  name  is
Eustache,  and  who  is  a  very  good  Christian),  he  gave
him  his  Crucifix,  and  said  to  him:  "  My  brother,
pray  constantly  before  the  Crucifix,  and  then,  when
you  shall  have  prayed,  kiss  it  with  love  and  respect.
Remember  me  in  your  prayers,  and  take  courage;
return  as  soon  as  you  can,  so  as  to  be  taught.  Re-
member that  God  is  everywhere,  and  that  he  sees
you  always ;  do  nothing  wrong ;  keep  Sundays  and
Feast  days:  have  for  this  purpose  a  paper  which
marks  them.  As  for  me,  I  know  not  yet  where  I
shall  go ;  I  will  do  what  he  who  commands  here  shall
tell  me.  I  do  not  dispose  of  my  own  person,  and  I
do  not  wish  to ;  for  I  know  that  God  wishes  that  we
depend  on  those  whom  he  has  put  here  below  in  his
place.  I  will  go  to  the  hunt  in  the  direction  that  he
shall  tell  me ;  then  I  will  guide  the  prisoner  back  to
his  own  country,  if  they  give  me  that  commission.
In  case  I  do  not  see  you  again,  I  make  you  heir  to  all
my  little  furniture,  to  my  bed,  to  my  nets,  to  [72]
my  French  dishes ;  you  are  already  with  me  in  pos-
session of  the  little  French  house  which  the  Fathers
have  given  us.  If  I  go  as  far  as  the  country  of  the
Albenaquiois,  with  the  prisoner  whom  I  am  to  leave


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

mes  plats  Frangois,  vous  eftes  defia  auec  moy  en
poffeffion  de  la  petite  maifon  Frangoife,  que  les  Peres
nous  ont  donnee,  fi  ie  vay  iufque  au  pays  des  Albena-
quiois  auec  le  prifonnier  que  ie  dois  quitter  la,  ie
voudrois  bien  auoir  vn  interprete,  pour  leur  parler  de
Dieu  &  de  la  foy,  ie  le  ferois  bien  volontiers.

Get  homme  femble  plein  de  I'efprit  de  Dieu  en  fes
paroles,  &  en  fes  adtions,  Dieu  luy  accorda  fon  delir:
car  il  euft  pour  compagnon  de  fon  voyage  vn  ieune
homme  natif  du  pays  des  Abenaquiois  mefme,  &  qui
parle  fort  bien  leur  langue,  &  eft  bon  Chrellien,  il
ont  tous  deux  remene  le  prifonnier,  &  ont  hyuerne
aux  Abenaquiois,  oil  Charles  a  efficacement  prefche
la  loy  de  Dieu:  mais  comme  ces  gens  n'ont  cognoif-
fance  ny  commerce  auec  autre  perfonne  qu'auec  quel-
ques  Anglois  habituez  Ik,  &  font  forts  fubiets  a  I'y-
rongnerie,  par  le  moyen  de  la  boiffon  qu'ils  traitet
auec  les  heretiques,  &  auec  les  nauires  de  la  cofte,
les  difcours  de  noftre  bo  Chreftien  n'euret  pas  tant
d'effet,  vn  des  [73]  Capitaines  Abenaquiois  pourtant
la  fuiuy  &  a  protefte  qu'il  abandonnoit  fon  pays  pour
refider  icy,  &  fe  faire  inftruire,  afin  d'eftre  Baptif6,
il  y  trauaille  maintenant  &  femble  d'vne  humeur
docile,  &  defirer  fortement  le  Baptefme:  I'iffue  le
fera  voir:  il  le  faut  efprouuer  k  loifir,  I'experience
nous  apprend  icy  &  aux  Hurons  que  la  multitude  de
Sauuages  baptifez,  &  peu  efprouuez  ne  fert  pas  beau-
coup  k  I'auancement  du  Chriftianifme,  nous  voyons  h.
I'oeil  qu'vn  Sauuage  bien  efprouue,  bien  conuerty  &
conftant  en  fa  refolution,  fait  beaucoup  plus  pour
eftendre  la  foy  &  attirer  toute  vne  nation,  qu'vne
multitude  lafche  &  inconftante.


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  ib42-43  ^1

there,  I  would  like  to  have  an  interpreter,  in  order
to  speak  to  them  of  God  and  of  the  faith ;  I  would  do
so  very  gladly. ' '

This  man  seems  full  of  the  spirit  of  God  in  his
words  and  in  his  deeds.  God  granted  him  his  de-
sire :  for  he  had  as  companion  on  his  journey  a  young
man  who  is  a  native  of  that  very  country  of  the  Abe-
naquiois,  who  speaks  their  language  very  well,  and
is  a  good  Christian.  These  two  led  back  the  prison-
er, and  wintered  with  the  Abenaquiois,  where
Charles  efficaciously  preached  the  law  of  God;  but  —
as  those  people  have  no  acquaintance  or  commerce
with  any  one  else,  except  with  some  English  who  are
wont  to  go  there ;  and  are  much  given  to  drunken-
ness by  means  of  the  liquor  that  they  get  in  trade
with  the  heretics,  and  with  the  vessels  of  the  coast  —
the  discourses  of  our  good  Christian  had  not  so  much
effect.  One  of  the  [73]  Abenaquiois  Captains,  how-
ever, followed  him  and  protested  that  he  was  forsak-
ing his  own  country  in  order  to  dwell  here  and  obtain
instruction,  so  as  to  be  Baptized.  He  is  working  to
that  end  now,  and  seems  of  a  docile  temper,  and
very  desirous  of  Baptism ;  the  result  will  appear, —
we  must  prove  him  at  leisure.  Experience  teaches
us  here  and  among  the  Hurons,  that  the  multitude
of  Savages  baptized  and  little  tried,  serves  not  much
for  the  advancement  of  Christianity ;  we  see  clearly
that  one  Savage  well  tried,  well  converted,  and  con-
stant in  his  resolution,  does  much  more  to  extend
the  faith  and  attract  a  whole  nation,  than  a  weak  and
inconstant  multitude.

Our  good  Charles,  while  with  the  Abenaquiois,
went  with  them  to  visit  the  English  in  their  settle-
ment.** He  took  them  for  Frenchmen, — the  Savages


62  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JASUITES [Vol.24

Noftre  bon  Charles  eftant  aux  Abenaquiois,  fut
auec  eux  vifiter  les  Anglois  en  leur  habitation,  il  les
prenoit  pour  des  Frangois,  ils  ne  fgauent  pas  encor
diftinguer  les  Europeans,  ny  de  nation,  ny  de  reli-
gion :  Charles  done  croit  aller  voir  des  Fran§ois :  eflant
entre  il  tire  fon  Chapellet,  &  en  fait  monftre :  vn  An-
glois  prend  la  parole,  &  luy  dit,  c'eft  le  Diable  qui  a
trouue  ce  que  tu  [74]  tiens,  c'eft  vne  inuention  du
demon:  Charles  fans  fe  troubler  le  regarde,  &  luy
dit:  mais  c'eft  le  diable  qui  le  fait  parler  &  luy  met
fes  paroles  en  la  bouche,  tu  mefprifes  le  fils  de  Dieu
&  fa  Mere.  L'Anglois  ne  fceut  que  dire  voyant  vn
homme  fi  refolu,  &  qui  n'entendi  autre  raifon  que  fa
foy.  Charles  tire  de  rechef  vne  belle  image:  car  il
eft  fourny  de  toutes  les  inftrudtios  de  deuotion:  I'he-
retique  le  voyant  luy  monftra  vn  vieil  linge  a  terre,
&  luy  dift,  ce  que  tu  tiens  ne  vaut  pas  mieux  que
cela.  Charles  le  regarde  de  rechef,  &  luy  dift.
Crois-tu  que  Dieu  te  voye  &  t'entends.  S9ais-tu  bien
que  tu  bruleras  dans  I'enfer,  puifque  tu  mefprifes  ce
que  Dieu  a  fait  &  ordonne,  depuis  ce  temps-Ik  les
heretiques  le  laifferent  en  paix.

Ce  bon  homme  a  eu  la  confolation  de  voir  baptifer
le  Capitaine  Abnaquiois  qui  le  fuiuit.  Ce  chapitre
eftoit  defia  efcrit  quand  ce  Profelyte  preffant  fon
baptefme  fe  vit  enrichy  d'vn  furcroy  de  faueur  qu'il
n'attendoit  pas:  car  Monfieur  le  Cheualier  de  Mont-
magny  voulut  eftre  fon  Parain,  au  nom  du  Grand  [75]
Maiftre  de  Malte :  Ce  Prince  vrayment  zele  pour
lefus-Chrift,  luy  refcriuant,  I'exhorte  de  continuer
fon  zele,  &  de  redoubler  fa  ferueur,  pour  la  gloire  du
Roy  du  Ciel,  &  pour  le feruice  de  fa  Maiefte  tres-


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  63

do  not  yet  know  how  to  distinguish  the  Europeans,
either  by  nation  or  by  religion ;  Charles  therefore  be-
lieves that  he  is  going  to  see  some  Frenchmen.  Hav-
ing entered,  he  takes  his  Beads,  and  shows  them ;  an
Englishman  addresses  him,  saying:  "  It  is  the  Devil
who  invented  that  which  thou  [74]  boldest ;  it  is  an
invention  of  the  evil  spirit. ' '  Charles,  without  being
disturbed,  looks  at  him,  and  says  to  him:  "  But  it  is
the  devil  who  makes  him  speak,  and  puts  his  own
words  into  his  mouth.  Thou  despisest  the  son  of
God  and  his  Mother."  The  Englishman  knew  not
what  to  say,  seeing  a  man  so  resolute,  who  under-
stood no  other  argument  than  his  own  faith.  Charles
again  draws  forth  a  beautiful  image ;  for  he  is  fur-
nished with  all  the  instructions  for  devotion.  The
heretic,  seeing  him,  showed  him  an  old  rag  on  the
ground,  and  said  to  him,  "  What  thou  boldest  is
worth  no  more  than  that. ' '  Charles  looks  at  him
again,  and  says  to  him:  ''  Believe  this,  that  God  sees
and  hears  thee.  Know  certainly  that  thou  wilt  burn
in  hell,  since  thou  despisest  what  God  has  made  and
ordered."  After  that  time,  the  heretics  left  him  in
peace.

This  good  man  has  had  the  comfort  of  seeing  the
Abnaquiois  Captain  who  followed  him,  baptized.
This  chapter  was  already  written  when  that  Prose-
lyte, urging  his  baptism,  saw  himself  enriched  with
an  increase  of  favor,  which  he  was  not  expecting, —
for  Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de  Montmagny  wished  to
be  his  Godfather,  in  the  name  of  the  Grand  [75]  Mas-
ter of  Malta.  This  Prince,  truly  zealous  for  Jesus
Christ,  writing  back  to  him,  exhorts  him  to  continue
his  zeal,  and  to  increase  his  fervor,  for  the  glory  of
the  King  of  Heaven,  and  for  the  service  of  his  most


64  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  j£SUITES [Vol.24


Chreftienne,  qui  I'lionorant  comme  il  dit,  d'vn  Gou-
uemement  temporel,  le  fauorife  bien  dauantage,  luy
donnant  vn  employ  ou  il  y  a  tant  de  Couronnes  a
amaffer  pour  I'Eternite:  auffi  eft-il  vray  que  ce  braue
Cheualier  ne  laiffe  perdre  aucune  fleur  ny  aucune
perle  qui  puille  feruir  pour  les  eftoffer.


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  65

Christian  Majesty, —  who,  honoring  him,  as  he  says,
with  a  temporal  Government,  favors  him  much  more
by  giving  him  an  office  in  which  there  are  so  many
Crowns  to  gather  for  Eternity.  It  is  certain,  more-
over, that  this  worthy  Chevalier  allows  no  flower  or
pearl  to  be  lost,  which  can  serve  as  material  for
these.


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.24


[y^]  CHAPITRE  VI.

DE LA VENUE DES ATTICAMEGES & DE LEUR BAP-

TESME.

LES  Atticameges  font  vne  des  Nations  que  nous
auons  au  Nort,  ils  demeurent  ^  trois  ou  quatre
iournees  du  grand  fieuue  dans  les  terres.  L'au-
tomne  paffe  1642.  treize  canots  faifant  enuiroQ  foi-
xante  perfonnes,  defcendirent  en  traite  aux  trois
riuieres,  c'eftoient  mefnages  entiers  contre  I'ordinaire
de  ces  peuples  qui  n'enuoyent  que  les  plus  robuftes
en  ces  voyages,  k  raifon  de  I'extreme  difficulte  des
chemins.  Mais  comme  ils  auoient  vn  deffein  plus
releue  que  celuy  de  la  traite,  &  qui  leur  eftoit  infpire
de  Dieu,  les  families  entieres  en  voulurent  iouyr.  En
voicy  roccafion,  lean  Baptifle  Capitaine  des  Monta-
gnets,  &  refidens  ^  Sillery,  &  qui  tire  luy  mefme  fon
origine  du  pays  des  Atticameges,  [77]  fut  touche  d'vn
zele  &  defir  de  leur  Salut.  II  inuita  done  leur  Capi-
taine auec  prefens  felon  fa  couftume,  pour  venir  voir
r habitation  de  Sillery,  &  les  defers  qu'on  leur  a  fait,
&  enfemble  entendre  parler  de  la  Loy  de  Dieu:  ils
accepterent  les  prefens  &  fe  refolurent  d'obeyr.  Le
Pere  Buteux  qui  eftoit  aux  trois  riuieres,  quand  ils
y  arriuerent,  les  confirma  dans  leur  refolution,  ils
defcendent  done  k  Sillery  fur  le  commencement  de
Nouembre  1642.  &  fe  cabanent  pres  de  lean  Baptifle.
Tons  nos  Chrelliens  les  receuret  auec  beaucoup  de


1642  -  43J  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  67


[76] CHAPTER  VI.

OF  THE  COMING  OF  SOME  ATTICAMEGES,  AND  OF  THEIR

BAPTISM.

THE  Atticameg-es  are  one  of  the  Nations  whom
we  have  in  the  North ;  they  live  three  or  four
days'  journey  from  the  great  river,  inland.
Last  autumn,  1642,  thirteen  canoes,  containing  about
sixty  persons,  came  down  to  the  trade  at  the  three
rivers;  they  were  entire  households,  contrary  to  the
usual  practice  of  those  peoples,  who  send  only  the
most  robust  on  such  journeys,  on  account  of  the
extreme  difficulty  of  the  roads.  But  as  they  had  a
nobler  object  than  that  of  trade,  and  one  which  was
inspired  in  them  of  God,  these  families  wished  to
attain  it  all  together.  This  was  the  occasion  of  their
coming:  Jean  Baptiste,  Captain  of  the  Montagnais,
a  resident  at  Sillery,  and  himself  deriving  his  origin
from  the  countr}^  of  the  Atticameges,  \y']'\  was  moved
with  a  zeal  and  desire  for  their  Salvation.  Accord-
ingly, he  invited  their  Captain,  with  gifts  according
to  his  custom,  to  come  and  see  the  habitation  of  Sil-
lery, and  the  clearings  that  have  been  made  for  them,
and  together  hear  mention  of  the  Law  of  God ;  they
accepted  the  gifts,  and  resolved  to  obey.  Father
Buteux,  who  was  at  the  three  rivers  when  they  ar-
rived there,  confirmed  them  in  their  resolution ;  they
then  come  down  to  Sillery  toward  the  beginning  of
November,  1642,  and  encamp  near  Jean  Baptiste.
All  our  Christians  received  them  with  much  charity;


68  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.  24

charite,  chactin  fe  cotife  pour  leur  fournir  leur  petite
prouifio d'anguilles, & de bled d'inde. Voicy  la
fa9on,  vn  des  principaux  Neophytes  fort  de  fa  cabane
fait  vne criee publique de la part du Capitaine,
remonftrant  la  venue de  ces  bonnes  gens & leur
deffein:  cela  fuffit,  chacun  court  "k  fon  petit  magafm,
pred  vn  bo  paquet  &  leur  porte  fans  delay  &  gayemet.
Le  Capitaine  Atticamege  auec  cinq  ou  fix  des  plus
remarquables,  s'en  vient  ^  Quebec  pour  faluer  Mon-
feigneur  le  Gouuerneur,  &  luy  rendre  raifon  de  leur
arriuee  [78]  lean  Baptifte  &  Noel  Tek^erimatch  auec
deux  de  nos Peres  les  accompagnerent,  ils  remon-
ftrent  done  comme lean Baptifte leur a  parle de
noftre  faindte  foy,  &  du  fecours  que  les  Fran9ois  leur
donnoient  du  grand  foing  que  Mofieur  le  Gouuerneur
prend  de  ceux  qui  veulent  croire  en  Dieu,  que  c'eft
ce  qui  les  a  amenez :  qu'apres  auoir  eft6  inftruits  &
baptifez, ils  retourneroient  en  leur  pays  porter  les
nouuelles  a  leurs  Compatriotes,  Monfieur  le  Gouuer-
neur les  recent  auec  beaucoup  d'affedtion,  les  encou-
ragea  d'efcouter  les  Peres,  &  bien  apprendre  ce  qui
efloit  de  leur  Salut, puis ioignant  les  effedts  aux
paroles,  leur  fait  donner  vne  bonne  prouifion  de  bois
&  de  gallette:  ils  s'en  retournent  a  Sillery  tons  rauis
de  ioye  &  fe  mettent  k  eiludier  auec  ardeur,  le  Cathe-
chifme  &  les  prieres,  le  Pere  Buteux  fut  leur  maiftre.
La  moitie  ont  efte  baptifez,  tous  les  autres  font  Cate-
cumenes  &  dans  vn  fort  defir  du  mefnae  bon-heur.
Mais  on  les  differe  pour  de  iuftes  raifons,  il  eft  bo
d'efprouuer  long-temps  les  Sauuages  fur  tout  quand
on  fe  doute  que  I'interefl  teporel  [79]  les  porte,  ou
qu'ils  font  plus attachez a  leurs  erreurs; il  n'y  a


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  69

eacli  one  taxes  himself  in  order  to  furnish  them  their
little  store  of  eels  and  of  Indian  corn.  It  is  done  in
this  fashion:  one  of  the  principal  Neophytes  goes
forth  from  his  cabin,  and  makes  a  public  proclama-
tion on  the  part  of  the  Captain,  representing  the
coming  of  these  good  people,  and  their  design.
That  is  enough ;  each  one  runs  to  his  little  store-
house, takes  a  goodly  bundle,  and  carries  it  to  them
without  delay,  and  cheerfully.  The  Atticamege
Captain,  with  five  or  six  of  the  most  notable  persons,
proceeds  to  Quebec,  to  greet  Monseigneur  the  Gov-
ernor, and  render  him  account  of  their  arrival.  [78]
Jean  Baptiste  and  Noel  Tekwerimatch,  with  two  of
our  Fathers,  accompanied  them.  They  then  relate
how  Jean  Baptiste  has  told  them  of  our  holy  faith,
and  of  the  help  which  the  French  were  giving  them ;
of  the  great  care  which  Monsieur  the  Governor  takes
of  those  who  are  willing  to  believe  in  God, — that
this  is  what  has  brought  them ;  that,  after  having
been  instructed  and  baptized,  they  would  return  to
their  own  country  to  carry  the  news  to  their  fellow
Countrymen.  Monsieur  the  Governor  received  them
with  much  affection,  encouraged  them  to  listen  to
the  Fathers,  and  to  learn  thoroughly  that  which  con-
cerned their  Salvation;  then,  adding  deeds  to  words,
he  sees  to  it  that  they  are  given  a  good  supply  of
wood  and  of  biscuit.  They  return  to  Sillery,  quite
carried  away  with  joy,  and  proceed  to  study  with
ardor  the  Catechism  and  the  prayers ;  Father  Buteux
was  their  teacher.  The  half  have  been  baptized ;  all
the  others  are  Catechumens,  and  exceedingly  desir-
ous of  the  same  blessing.  But  they  are  put  off  for
good  reasons ;  it  is  well  to  try  the  Savages  a  long
time, —  especially  when  one  suspects  that  temporal


70


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  24


nation  pour  barbare  qu'elle  foit  qui  n'ayt  ces  fuperlti-
tions.  Ceux-cy  dont  il  eft  queftion,  mettent  toute
leur  confiance  en  leurs  tambours,  leurs  feftins  &  leurs
fu[e]ries  qu'ils  font  pour  inuoquer  le  manitou  &  pour
chaffer  la  maladie  &  la  faim,  ces  erreurs  qui  ne  f em-
blent  que  les  niaiferies,  les  poffedoiet  puiffammet,  ils
ne  croyoiet  pas  eux-mefmes  s'e  pouuoir  iamais  def-
faire,  ils  approuuoient  pour  la  plus  part  la  priere,
comme  chofe  bonne  &  neceffaire:  mais  au  refte  ne
vouloiet  pas  quitter  leurs  fuperftitions,  croyans  que
c'eftoit  s'expofer  aux  miferes  qu'ils  redoutoient  le
plus,  I'exemple  des  Chreftiens  de  Sillery,  &  I'inflru-
dlion  continuelle  les  a  defabufez  &  leur  a  peu  k  peu
arrache  cette  fottife  de  I'efprit  auec  les  inftrumens
dont  ils  f e  f eruoient  pour  les  pratiquer :  la  marque  la
plus  certaine  que  quelqu'vn  vouloit  doner  de  fa  bone
volote,  eftoit  d'apporter  fon  tabour  aux  peres  qui  les
enfeignoiet,  plufieurs  le  firent  d^s  le  comencement
de  I'hyuer  &  fe  redirent  capables  d'eftre  enrolls  au
nombre  [80]  des  enfans  de  Dieu,  ie  toucheray  icy  ce
qui  s'eft  paffe  de  plus  remarquable  au  Baptefme  de
quelques-vns.

Le  premier  qui  y  fut  receu,  fut  vn  appelle  Ani-
koutchi  nomme  Michel  en  fon  Baptefme,  c'eft  vn
ieune  homme  aage  d'enuiron  25.  ans  qui  a  apporte
vn  foin  incroyable  a  fe  faire  inftruire,  &  h.  receuoir
ce  qu'on  luy  difoit:  toutes  fes  penfees  n'eftoient  que
de  la  priere,  voire  fes  fonges;  fi  bien  qu'en  dormant,
il  luy  fembloit  efcouter  quel  que  inftrudlion,  ou  repe-
ter  ce  qu'il  auoit  appris.  Vn  iour  le  Pere  le  voulant
moderer,  luy  dift  qu'il  ne  vint  pas  fi  fouuent,  &  qu'il
fe  degouteroit  de  la  priere,  fi  on  I'inftruifoit  fi  long-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  71

interest  [79]  moves  them,  or  that  they  are  more
attached  to  their  errors;  there  is  no  nation,  however
barbarous,  which  has  not  its  superstitions.  The  lat-
ter class  in  question  put  their  whole  confidence  in
their  drums,  their  feasts,  and  their  sweats,  which
they  make  in  order  to  invoke  the  manitou,  and  to
drive  away  sickness  and  hunger.  These  errors,
which  seem  nothing  but  silly  nonsense,  possessed
them  thoroughly, —  they  themselves  did  not  believe
they  could  ever  get  rid  of  them.  Most  of  them
approved  prayer  as  something  good  and  necessary :
but,  for  the  rest,  they  were  not  willing  to  quit  their
superstitions,  believing  that  this  was  to  expose  them-
selves to  the  miseries  which  they  dreaded  most.  The
example  of  the  Christians  of  Sillery,  and  continual
instruction,  have  undeceived  them  and  have,  little
by  little,  plucked  away  this  folly  of  the  understand-
ing, and  with  it  the  instruments  which  they  used  for
practicing  their  superstitions.  The  most  certain
mark  of  his  good  will  that  any  one  wished  to  give,
was  to  bring  his  drum  to  the  fathers  who  were  teach-
ing them;  several  did  so  at  the  beginning  of  the
winter,  and  rendered  themselves  capable  of  being
enrolled  in  the  number  [80]  of  the  children  of  God.
I  will  here  allude  to  the  more  notable  incidents
which  occurred  at  the  Baptism  of  certain  persons.

The  first  who  was  thus  received,  was  one  called
Anikoutchi,  named  Michel  at  his  Baptism;  he  is  a
young  man  about  25  years  old,  who  has  displayed
incredible  care  to  be  instructed,  and  to  receive  what
was  said  to  him.  All  his  thoughts  were  wholly  of
prayer,  and  even  his  dreams ;  insomuch  that  while
sleeping  it  seemed  to  him  that  he  was  listening  to
some  instruction,  or  repeating  what  he  had  learned.


72  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  24


temps,  ne  crains  pas  cela,  dit-il,  tu  ne  m'en  fgaurois
tant  dire  comme  i'en  defire,  ie  me  puis  bien  fouler  de
viande  ou  d' autre  chofe,  mais  non  pas  de  ce  qui
touche  la  foy:  c'eft  ce  qui  me  plaill,  c'efl  ce  que  ie
cheris  par  deffus  toutes  les  chofes  du  monde,  tout  ce
que  ie  vols  de  beau  parmy  vous  autres  Frangois,  ne
me  touche  point:  il  n'y  a  que  voftre  foy  &  voftre
fa9on  de  prier  Dieu,  qui  me  rauit  Ie  coeur:  ie  ne
fouhaitte  que  cela  de  [8i]  vous,  comme  il  euft  apris
qu'vn  certain,  dont  ie  parleray  cy-apres,  auoit  appor-
te  fon  tambour  au  Pere,  il  s'y  en  vint  auffi,  &  luy
dift:  comment  tu  ne  m'as  pas  demande  Ie  mien  ?  Ie
voila,  ie  I'auois  defia  iette,  ie  ne  f9ais  oii:  dis  moy,
s'il  y  a  quelque  autre  chofe  ^  quitter,  afin  d'eilre
mieux  difpofe  ^  mon  baptefme,  dis  Ie  moy  au  plu-
tofl:  car  ie  fuis  pres  de  I'executer.  Ie  ne  me  foucie
plus  de  ce  que  pourroient  dire  de  moy  ceux  de  ma
nation :  ie  ne  voudrois  pas  en  tout  autre  chofe  leur
def plaire ;  mais  en  ce  qui  eft  de  la  foy  &  du  feruice
de  Dieu,  il  m'importe  peu  de  leur  plaire  ou  defplaire.
lis  fe  mocquet  de  moi,  de  ce  que  ie  vay  quelquefois
coucher  chez  vous,  ie  ne  m'en  mets  guere  en  peine,
ie  Ie  fais  pour  gagner  Ie  temps,  &  I'occafion:  tu  n'as
pas  de  loifir  Ie  long  du  iour,  que  tu  vifites  les  Ca-
banes;  la  nuidt  tu  as  Ie  temps  de  m'enfeigner.  Vn
foir  tout  tard,  Ie  Pere  retournant  des  Cabanes  ou  il
auoit  fait  I'inftrudtion,  tomba  du  haut  en  bas  d'vne
montagne  fort  gliffante,  &  enfon9a  dans  les  neiges,
la  cheute  fut  affez  rude  &  dangereufe.  Ce  bon  ieune
homme  qui  I'accompagnoit  [82]  afin  d'aprendre  tou-
fiours  quelque  bon  mot,  Ie  voyant  en  cet  eftat,  &  vne
petite  lanterne  a  fa  main,  pour  fe  fauuer  des  preci-


1642  -  43J  RELA  TJON  OF  1642  -  43  73

One  day,  the  Father,  wishing  to  moderate  him,  told
him  that  he  should  not  come  so  often,  and  that  he
■would  lose  his  taste  for  prayer,  if  he  were  taught  so
long.  "  Fear  not  that,"  he  said;  "  thou  couldst  not
tell  me  so  much  of  it  as  I  desire,  I  can  indeed  sur-
feit myself  with  meat  or  other  things,  but  not  with
that  which  concerns  the  faith ;  that  is  what  I  like,
that  is  what  I  cherish  above  all  things  in  the  world.
Whatever  beautiful  thing  I  see  among  you  French,
touches  me  not :  it  is  only  your  faith  and  your  man-
ner of  praying  to  God,  which  ravishes  my  heart ;  I
desire  only  that  from  [81]  you."  When  he  had
learned  that  a  certain  man,  of  whom  I  shall  speak
hereinafter,  had  brought  his  drum  to  the  Father,  he
came  on  the  same  errand,  and  said  to  him :  ' '  Why
hast  thou  not  asked  for  mine?  here  it  is;  I  had
already  thrown  it  away,  I  know  not  where ;  tell  me
if  there  is  anything  else  to  be  given  up,  so  as  to  be
better  prepared  for  my  baptism ;  tell  me  at  once,  for
I  am  ready  to  carry  it  out.  I  care  no  more  for  what
those  of  my  nation  might  say  of  me ;  I  would  not  in
anything  else  displease  them,  but  in  that  which  is
of  the  faith  and  of  the  service  of  God,  it  matters  little
to  me  to  please  or  displease  them.  They  mock  at
me  because  I  sometimes  go  to  spend  the  night  with
you,  but  I  scarcely  vex  myself  for  that.  I  do  so  in
order  to  gain  time  and  opportunity ;  thou  hast  no
leisure  during  the  day,  when  thou  art  visiting  the
Cabins;  at  night  thou  hast  the  time  to  teach  me."
One  evening,  quite  late,  the  Father,  returning  from
the  Cabins  where  he  had  given  instruction,  fell  from
top  to  bottom  of  a  very  slippery  hill,  and  sank
in  the  snows ;  the  fall  was  quite  severe  and  danger-
ous. This  good  young  man  —  who  was  accompany-


74  LES  RELATIONS  DESjASUITES [Vol.24

pices  de  glaces  &  de  neiges;  s'efcria,  6  que  les  Sau-
uages  qui  ne  veulent  pas  croire,  ne  voyent  ils  la  peine
que  vous  prenez  pour  eux,  ils  iugeroient  par  la  que
la  priere  eft  vne  chof e  de  confequence ;  &  en  effect
plufieurs  de  fes  compatriotes  eftoient  touchez,  voyas
qu'on  ne  s'epargnoit  ny  foir  ny  matin  parmy  des
cliemins  &  des  teps  fi  rudes,  pour  les  enfeigner.  Ce
ieune  home  done  fut  choifi  auec  vne  ieune  fille  fa  pa-
rente,  aagee  d'enuiron  quinze  ans,  fort  modefhe,  d'vn
bon  efprit,  &  bien  inftruite,  afin  d'eftre,  comme  les
premices  de  la  foy  entre  les  autres  de  cette  nation  du
Nort.  Nous  priafmes  Mofieur  le  Gouuerneur  d'hono-
rer  leur  baptefme,  &  de  feruir  de  Parain,  il  le  fit  fort
volontiers,  &  choifift  pour  cet  effet  I'Hofpital  confa-
cre  au  precieux  fang  de  lefus-Chrift.  Les  principaux
Sauuages  s'y  trouuerent  tons.  Ce  ieune  homme  &
cette  ieune  fille  eftoient  rauis  d'aife  de  leur  bon-
heur,  ils  refpondirent  ^  toutes  les  queftions  &  [83]
interrogations  auec  vne  hardieffe  &  modeftie  qui  ne
reffentoit  rien  du  Sauuage.  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur
donna  le  nom  de  Michel  au  ieune  homme,  nous  efpe-
rons  que  le  glorieux  Archange  protedteur  de  toute
I'Eglife,  eftend[r]a  fon  bras  &  fa  force  pour  la  def-
fence  de  ces  nouueaux  Chreftiens  du  Nord,  &  de  ces
peuples  les  plus  delaiffez  du  monde.  La  fille  fut
nommee  Marie.  Apres  le  baptefme  Monfieur  le
Gouuerneur  fit  vn  feftin  remarquable  pour  le  pays,  ^
quarante  des  premiers  Sauuages.  Les  Atticamegues
le  remercierent,  &  luy  tefmoignerent  vn  grand  con-
tentement  de  voir  cet  heureux  commencement  parmi
leur  nation.  En  voicy  vn  autre  qui  n'a  pas  tefmoigne
moins  d'ardeur  &  de  courage  en  fon  baptefme:  c'eft


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  75

ing  him,  [82]  so  as  to  be  always  learning  some  good
word  —  seeing  him  in  this  plight,  with  a  small  lan-
tern in  his  hand  in  order  to  save  himself  from  the
precipices  of  ice  and  snow,  exclaimed:  "  Oh,  that  the
Savages  who  will  not  believe  might  see  the  pains
that  you  take  for  them ;  they  would  judge  by  that,
that  prayer  is  a  thing  of  consequence." And, in
fact,  several  of  his  fellow  countrymen  were  touched,
seeing  that  no  pains  were  spared  either  morning  or
evening,  amid  roads  and  weather  so  rough,  in  order
to  teach  them. This  young  man  was  then  chosen,
together  with a  young  girl  his  kinsmaid,  about  fif-
teen  years old,  very  modest,  of  a  good  mind, and
well  instructed, — that  they  might  be,  as  it  were,  the
first  fruits  of  the  faith  among  the  others  of  that  nation
of  the  North. We  begged  Monsieur  the  Governor
to  honor  their  baptism,  and  to  serve  as  Godfather;
he  did  so  very  willingly,  and  chose  for  this  purpose
the Hospital consecrated  to  the  precious blood  of
Jesus  Christ. The  principal  Savages  were  all  there.
This  young  man  and  this  young  girl  were  delighted
with  their  good  fortune ;  they  answered  all  the  ques-
tions and [83] interrogations  with  a  confidence  and
modesty  that  indicated  nothing  of  the  Savage. Mon-
sieur the  Governor  gave  the  name  of  Michel  to  the
young  man ;  we  hope  that  the  glorious  Archangel,
protector  of  the  whole  Church,  will  stretch  forth  his
arm and  his  might, for  the  defense  of  these new
Christians of  the  North,  and  of  these  peoples,  the
most  forsaken  in  the  world. The  girl  was  named
Marie. After  the  baptism,  Monsieur  the  Governor
made  a  feast,  remarkable  for  the  country,  for  forty
of  the  leading  Savages. The  Atticamegues  thanked
him, and showed him  their great satisfaction at


76  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.24

vn  appelle  Antoine  ou  OiiabaKoiiachits,  aage  d'enui-
ron  cinquante  ans :  ce  fut  luy  qui  le  premier  de  tons
apporta  fon  tambour  au  Pere,  apres  I'auoir  ouy  dif-
courir  vn  foir  k  I'ordinaire  des  chofes  de  Dieu,  il  s'ef-
cria  tout  haut,  il  eft  vray  tu  as  raifon,  &  ie  protefte
deuant  tous  ceux  qui  m'efcoutent  que  ie  ne  veux
plus  auoir  de  recours  au  diable,  [84]  ny  a  mes  fuper-
ftitions,  ie  les  defauoiie,  &  en  quitte  tous  les  inftru-
mens,  &  veux  eftre  baptife,  tien  voil^  mon  tambour,
il  le  iette  deuant  tous,  &  comme  ce  fut  le  premier
qui  fift  publiquement  &  hardiment  cette  ac5tion,  il  fut
fort  lolie  de  tous  les  Chreftiens.  Cet  homme  a  de
grands  fentiments  des  chofes  de  Dieu  &  de  la  foy,  il
n'y  a  rie,  difoit-il  vn  iour,  qui  m'atrifhe  tant  que
de  voir  que  i'ay  fi  long-temps  obey  au  diable,  &  n'ay
pas  cognu  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait,  &  qui  conferue  tout,
&  i'ay  fi  peu  de  chofe  pour  I'honorer  &  le  prier.  All!
que  ne  fuis-ie  comme  mes  enfans  qui  eflans  encor
ieunes,  ont  I'efprit  vif  &  la  memoire  bonne,  pour
retenir  ce  qu'on  leur  enf eigne.  Ie  me  veux  fouuent
fafcher  contre  eux  de  ce  qu'ils  ne  m'enfeignent  pas
tant,  comme  ie  voudrois.  C'eftoit  vn  plaifir  de  voir
cet  homme  aage  de  cinquante  ans  fe  faire  inftruire
par  vne  fienne  petite  fille  de  dix  ans,  il  la  faifoit
feoir  aupres  de  luy,  repetoit  apres  elle  fon  Pater,  fon
Aue,  &  toutes  les  prieres,  fe  faifoit  interroger  du
Catechifme,  comme  vn  Efcolier  par  fon  Maiftre,  il
fut  baptif6  ^  noflre-Dame  des  [85]  Anges,  auec  vne
fmguliere  confolation  de  nos  Peres  qui  y  affifteret.
II  faifoit  vn  froid  violent,  &  tel  que  plufieurs  en  ont
eu  quelquef  ois  les  bouts  des  pieds  &  des  mains  gelees,
il demeura les mains iointes pendant toutes les


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  77

seeing  this  happy  beginning  among  their  nation.
Here  is  another  who  has  shown  no  less  of  ardor  and
courage  in  his  baptism ;  he  is  one  called  Antoine,
or  Ouabakouachits,  aged  about  fifty  years, —  it  was  he
who  the  first  of  all  brought  his  drum  to  the  Father.
After  having  heard  him  discourse  one  evening,  as
usual,  concerning  the  things  of- God,  he  exclaimed
aloud:  "It  is  true;  thou  art  right;  and  I  protest
before  all  those  who  are  listening  to  me,  that  I  will
no  longer  have  recourse  to  the  devil,  [84]  or  to  my
superstitions.  I  disavow  them  and  give  up  all  the
instruments  thereof,  and  wish  to  be  baptized.  See,
there  is  my  drum;"  he  throws  it  down  before  all,
and,  as  he  was  the  first  to  do  this  action  publicly  and
boldly,  he  was  much  praised  by  all  the  Christians.
This  man  has  high  opinions  of  the  things  of  God  and
of  the  faith.  "  There  is  nothing,"  he  said  one  day,
' '  which  so  saddens  me  as  to  see  that  I  have  so  longf
obeyed  the  devil,  and  have  not  known  him  who  has
made  all,  and  who  preserves  all;  and  I  have  so  little
wherewith  to  honor  him  and  pray  to  him.  Ah !  why
am  I  not  like  my  children,  who,  being  still  young,
have  a  quick  wit  and  a  good  memory  for  retaining
what  is  taught  them.  I  am  often  inclined  to  be
angry  at  them,  because  they  do  not  teach  me  as  much
as  I  would  like."  It  was  a  pleasure  to  see  this  man,
fifty  years  old,  being  taught  by  his  own  little  girl  of
ten  years;  he  would  make  her  sit  beside  him,  and
repeat  after  her  his  Pater,  his  Ave,  and  all  the
prayers;  and  would  have  her  question  him  in  the
Catechism,  like  a  Pupil  by  his  Teacher.  He  was
baptized  at  nostre-Dame  des  [85]  Anges,  with  especial
consolation  to  our  Fathers  who  were  there  present.
It  was  intensely  cold weather, —  so much so that


78  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.24

ceremonies  du  Baptefme,  &  refpondit  toufiours  auec
vn  fentiment  de  deuotion  &  d'humilite,  qui  parroiffoit
en  tout  fon  exterieur.  On  baptifa  apres  luy  fon  fils,
aage  de  fept  ou  huidl  ans,  il  voulut  encor  affifter  a
toute  la  ceremonie,  &  I'encourager  par  paroles  &  par
geftes  ^  f e  comporter  modeftement  en  cette  adtion :
k  la  fin  il  luy  dift,  mon  fils  prend  courage,  c'eft  main-
tenant  qu'il  faut  eftre  ennemy  de  tout  ce  que  Dieu
.  deffend,  c'eft  maintenant  qu'il  faut  eftre  fage,  aprend
bien  les  prieres,  &  les  retiens,  afin  de  me  les  enfei-
gner:  Cet  homme  eft  vn  des  plus  confiderables  des
Atticameges  ?

En  voicy  vn  troifiefme  appell6  Oiieratchenon,  qui
merite  icy  place:  c'eft  le  coufin  de  Michel,  duquel
i'ay  parl6  cy-deuant,  il  eft  d'vn  naturel  hardy,  &  en-
trant, ce  qui  a  fait  differer  fon  Baptefme  affez  long-
temps  :  mais  les  grandes  [86]  inftances  qu'il  en  a  fait,
luy  ont  ouuert  la  porte :  il  eft  vray  que  Ton  auroit  de
la  peine  a  croire  tout  ce  qu'il  a  fait  pour  paruenir  k
fon  deffein.  Du  commencement  qu'il  eut  refolu  de
pourfuiure  le  baptefme :  il  alia  chercher  fon  tambour
enfeuely,  ie  ne  fgay  oil  dans  les  neiges,  &  vint  trou-
uer  le  Pere:  tien  luy  dift-il,  voila  ce  qui  a  efte  autre-
fois ma  plus  grande  attache :  puis  que  ie  le  quitte,
i'abandonne  toutes  mes  fuperftitions,  ne  crains  point
de  me  baptifer:  ie  fuis  marie,  ma  femme  veut  eftre
baptifee,  mon  fils  I'eft  defia,  &  ma  mere  auffi,  qui
t'empefche  done  de  me  faire  le  mefme :  fois  afCeure
de  moy,  ie  n'auray  iamais  honte  de  profeffer  la  foy,
depuis  que  ie  f9ais  les  prieres,  ie  les  ay  fait  dire
publiquement  chez  moy  le  matin,  &  le  foir :  dis  moy  fi
tu  defire  encor  quelque  chofe,  ie  le  feray. Ie  te  veux


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  ib4^-43  79

several  persons  sometimes  had  the  extremities  of
their  feet  and  hands  frozen  by  it.  He  remained,  with
clasped  hands,  during  all  the  ceremonies  of  the  Bap-
tism, and  always  answered  with  a  sense  of  devotion
and  of  humility,  which  appeared  in  his  whole  bearing.
They  baptized  after  him  his  son,  seven  or  eight  years
old;  he  further  wished  to  be  present  at  the  entire
ceremony,  and  to  encourage  him  by  words  and  by
gestures  to  behave  himself  modestly  in  this  action.
At  the  end,  he  said  to  him:  "  My  son,  take  courage;
it  is  nov/  that  you  must  be  enemy  of  everything
which  God  forbids ;  it  is  now  that  you  must  be  wise.
Learn  the  prayers  well,  and  remember  them,  so  as
to  teach  them  to  me."  This  man  is  one  of  the  most
considerable  of  the  Atticameges.

Here  is  a  third,  called  Oueratchenon,  who  deserves
place  here:  he  is  the  cousin  of  Michel,  of  whom
I  have  spoken  previously.  He  is  of  a  bold  and
forward  nature,  which  has  caused  his  Baptism  to  be
deferred  a  considerable  time ;  but  the  great  [86]  en-
treaties that  he  made  for  it,  have  opened  the  door  to
him, —  indeed,  one  would  find  it  hard  to  believe  all
that  he  has  done  in  order  to  attain  his  object.  As
soon  as  he  had  resolved  to  seek  baptism,  he  went  in
quest  of  his  drum,  buried  somewhere  in  the  snows,
and  came  to  find  the  Father.  "  See,"  he  said  to  him,
' '  that  is  what  was  formerly  my  greatest  attachment ;
since  I  give  it  up,  I  forsake  all  my  superstitions.
Fear  not  to  baptize  me;  I  am  married, —  my  wife
wishes  to  be  baptized,  my  son  is  so  already,  and  my
mother  also ;  what  then  hinders  you  from  doing  the
same  to  me?  Be  assured  of  me,  I  shall  never  be
ashamed  to  profess  the  faith.  Since  I  have  known
the prayers, I have  had  them  said openly at  my


80  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.24

encor  efprotiiier,  luy  dill:  le  Pere,  il  patieta  quelque
temps,  puis  interpofa  par  plulieurs  fois  les  Religi-
eufes,  afin  d'interceder  pour  luy,  &  voyant  qu'on
differoit  encor,  il  va  trouuer  le  Pere  en  particulier,  &
luy  difl,  or  9^  fi  ie  meurs  fans  baptefme  k  qui  en  fera
la  faute,  tu  en  repondras  [87]  a  Dieu:  car  ie  le  fou-
haitte  auec  ardeur,  i'ay  fait  tout  ce  que  tu  m'as  dit,
i'ay  apris  tout  ce  que  tu  m'as  enfeigne,  ie  le  fgay  par
coeur,  &  me  voila  preft  h.  en  faire  encor  dauantage,  &
mourir  plutoft  que  rien  faire  contre  la  foy,  ou  la  quit-
ter :  &  apres  tout  cela  tu  me  refufe,  &  que  feray-ie,
s'il  me  faut  demeurer  tout  cet  hyuer  fans  eftre  bap-
tife,  &  courir  les  dangers  de  mon  falut,  i'ayme  mieux
hyuerner  icy  aupres  de  toy,  fi  tu  en  es  content,  ennn
il  fifh  tant  qu'il  obtint  le  baptefme,  &  fut  nomm6  lean,
il  s'eft  tres-bien  comporte  depuis  ce  temps  \k.  Vn
lour  de  Dimache,  fur  le  tard  le  Pere  entrant  en  fa
cabane,  le  trouua  recitant  fon  Cbapellet  fort  denote-
ment. Sa  priere  eltant  finie,  c'efl  dit-il,  pour  fatis-
faire  a  la  faute  que  i'ay  faite  de  n'auoir  pas  auiour-
d'buy  3.^\i€  a  la  Melle,  eftant  alle  depuis  cinq  iours
h.  la  challe,  pour  nourrir  ma  famille.  Le  Pere  luy
dift  qu'il  n'y  auoit  point  de  faute,  puis  qu'il  n'auoit
peu  retourner  a  temps,  il  eft  \Tay,  dift-il:  mais
pourtat  il  faut  fatisfaire  de  ce  que  ie  n'y  ay  pas  affilte.
Vn  fien  camarade  fe  pleignant  ^  luy  de  ce  qu'il  ne
fcauoit  pas  les  prieres,  &  ne  les  pouuoit  [88]  retenir,
ce  n'eft  pas  de  merueille,  luy  diil:-il:  car  tu  ne  crois
pas  fermement  &  de  coeur  ce  qu'on  t'enfeigne,  &
ainfi  tu  ne  te  mets  pas  en  peine  de  I'apprendre,  ton
efprit  ne  s'y  applique  qu'a  demi,  pour  moy  ie  fuis
afleure dans  mon  coeur,  que  ie  crois  &  tiens  pour


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  81

house,  morning  and  evening ;  tell  me  if  you  desire
anything  further,  and  I  will  do  it."  "I  wish  to
prove  you  further,"  said  the  Father.  He  was  patient
for  some  time,  then  several  times  brought  forward
the  Nuns  to  intercede  for  him ;  but,  seeing  that  we
still  deferred,  he  goes  to  find  the  Father  in  private,
and  says  to  him:  "Come  now,  if  I  die  without
baptism,  who  will  be  to  blame?  Thou  wilt  answer
for  it  [87]  to  God,  for  I  desire  it  with  ardor.  I  have
done  all  that  thou  hast  told  me ;  I  have  learned  all
that  thou  hast  taught  me, —  I  know  it  by  heart;  and
behold  me  ready  to  do  still  more,  and  to  die,  rather
than  do  aught  against  the  faith,  or  give  it  up ;  and,
after  all  that,  thou  refusest  me.  And  what  shall  I
do,  if  I  must  still  continue  all  this  winter  without
being  baptized,  and  incur  dangers  to  my  salva-
tion? I  would  rather  winter  here  near  thee,  if  thou
art  so  satisfied,"  Finally,  he  did  so  much  that  he
obtained  baptism,  and  was  named  Jean ;  he  has  be-
haved himself  very  well  since  that  time.  One  Sun-
day, toward  evening,  the  Father,  entering  his  cabin,
found  him  reciting  his  Rosary  very  devoutly.  His
prayer  being  done,  "  This,"  he  said,  "  is  in  order  to
atone  for  the  fault  which  I  have  committed  by  not
having  been  present  to-day  at  Mass,  having  gone
five  days  ago  to  the  hunt,  in  order  to  feed  my  fami-
ly." The  Father  told  him  that  there  was  no  fault
in  this,  since  he  had  not  been  able  to  return  in  time.
"It  is  true,"  he  said;  "but  nevertheless  I  must
make  amends,  because  I  was  not  present  there."  A
comrade  of  his,  lamenting  to  him  that  he  did  not
know  the  prayers,  and  could  not  [88]  remember
them, — "  It  is  no  wonder,"  Jean  said  to  him;  "  for
you  do  not  firmly  and  heartily  believe  what  is  taught


82  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.24

certain  tout  ce  que  Ton  nous  enf eigne,  «&  ainfi  i'em-
ploye  toutes  mes  forces,  pour  le  comprendre  &  le
retenir,  &  en  effedt  il  s'appliquoit  auec  tant  d' effort
qu'il  conceut  &  aprit  par  cceur  tout  le  Pater  en  moins
d'vne  demie-lieure,  au  refte  qui  cognoiftra  les  Sau-
uages,  s'eftonnera  de  la  liberte  qu'il  eut  h.  reprendre
fon  camarade:  car  ie  diray  en  paffant,  que  c'eft  vne
chofe  eftonnante  du  refpedt  que  les  Sauuages  fe
portent  en  ce  poindt  I'vn  h.  I'autre,  quoy  qu'ils  foient
priuez  de  I'liumilite,  &  ayet  vne  entiere  liberte,  de
faire  &  dire  tout  ce  qu'ils  veulent  dans  leurs  cabanes,
toutesfois  en  ce  qui  eft  de  fe  reprendre,  ils  y  vont
auec  vne  circofpedlion,  &  prudence  eftrange.

Deux  autres  furent  baptifez  en  la  Chappelle  des
Vrfulines,  Guillaume  Pataoiiabi  &  Anne  fa  femme
tous  deux  [89]  aagez  d'enuiron  vingt-cinq  ans,  il  fe
font  rendus  fignal6s  non  feulemet  ^  apprendre  les
prieres:  mais  encor  k  les  enfeigner  aux  autres.
Quant  le  Pere  comme9a  de  les  inftruire,  ils  cotoient
les  poindts  &  les  demandes  fur  leurs  doigts :  mais  le
nombre  venant  h.  furpaffer  celuy  des  doigts,  ils  les
marquoiet  fur  des  efcorces  faifants  certaines  figures
qui  leur  reprefentoient  le  fens  de  quelques  article,  &
s'appliquoient  auec  grande  contention  pour  le  com-
prendre &  le  retenir,  &  puis  1 '  enfeigner  aux  autres.  La
femme  auoit  encor  fa  mere  aagee  d'enuiron  cinquante
ans,  d'vn  fort  bon  naturel,  &  qui  fembloit  nay  pour  la
deuotion :  mais  au  refte  qui  auoit  vn  extreme  peine
"k  retenir  ce  qu'on  luy  enfeignoit.  Cette  femme  done
fe  mit  a  ayder  fa  mere  auec  vn  grand  zele:  cette
bonne  vieille  auffi  s'y  appliqua  de  cceur,  en  forte
qu'auec  le  fecours  de  fa  fille,  elle  apprit  par  coeur  en


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  j642- 43  83

you,  and  so  you  do  not  exert  yourself  to  learn  it, —
your  mind  applies  itself  only  by  half.  As  for  me,  I
am  assured  in  my  heart  that  I  believe  and  hold  for
certain  all  that  they  teach  us,  and  thus  I  employ  all
my  powers  in  order  to  understand  it  and  retain  it."
And,  in  fact,  he  applied  himself  with  so  much  effort
that  he  understood  and  learned  by  heart  the  whole
Pater  in  less  than  a  half-hour.  Moreover,  one  who
shall  understand  the  Savages  will  be  astonished  at
the  liberty  that  he  took  in  reproving  his  comrade ;
for  I  will  say,  in  passing,  that  it  is  astonishing,  what
respect  the  Savages  show  to  one  another  in  this
regard.  Although  they  are  void  of  humility,  and
have  an  entire  freedom  to  do  and  say  whatever  they
like  in  their  cabins,  nevertheless,  in  the  matter  of
reproving  one  another,  they  proceed  with  a  strange
circumspection  and  prudence.

Two  others  were  baptized  in  the  Chapel  of  the
Ursulines :  Guillaume  Pataouabi  and  Anne  his  wife,-
both  [89]  aged  about  twenty-five  years.  They  have
signalized  themselves,  not  only  in  learning  the  pray-
ers, but  also  in  teaching  them  to  the  others.  When
the  Father  began  to  instruct  them,  they  would  count
the  points  and  the  questions  on  their  fingers;  but,
the  number  coming  to  exceed  that  of  the  fingers,
they  would  mark  them  on  pieces  of  bark,  making
certain  figures  which  represented  for  them  the  sense
of  some  clause ;  they  would  apply  themselves  with
great  intensity  to  understand  it  and  retain  it,  and
then  to  teach  it  to  the  others.  The  wife  had  also  her
mother,  about  fifty  years  old,  very  good-natured,  and
who  seemed  born  for  devotion, —  but  who  had,  withal,
extreme  difficulty  in  retaining  what  was  taught
her. This woman then  began  to aid  her mother


84  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

moins  de  trois  oil  quatre  iours  le  Pater,  I'Aue,  &  le
Credo.  Le  mary  n'en  fift  pas  moins  de  fon  cofl6 :
car  ayant  vn  fien  frere  d'vn  efprit  groffier,  mais  de
bonne  volont6,  il  paffoit  la  meilleure  partie  du  iour
^  rebatre  [90]  aupres  de  luy  les  prieres  &  I'inftrudlion,
&  k  les  luy  faire  repeter  auec  vne  patience  admirable
&  qui  ne  pouuoit  proceder  que  d'vne  vraye  charite
depuis  leur  Baptefme,  ils  nous  ont  donn6  de  beaux
exemples  de  vertu.

Le  Mary  entrant  vn  iour  en  fa  cabane  vit  vn  tam-
bour fait  a  la  Frangoife,  il  le  prend  &  le  met  en
pieces,  difantie  fgaybien  que  celan'efk  pas  manuals:
mais  pourtant  il  ne  le  faut  pas  garder  de  peur  de
faire  refouuenir  les  autres  de  leurs  tabours  &  fuper-
ftitions  deffendues.  II  n'y  a  rien,  difoit-il  vn  iour,
qui  ne  me  faffe  refouuenir  de  Dieu  de  quelque  cofte
que  i'aille,  ie  ne  peux  rien  voir  qui  n'ayt  efte  fait  de
luy,  &  ou  fa  puiffance  &  fa  bonte  n'apparoillent,  la
veue  des  creatures  me  fert  pour  croire  qu'il  y  a  vn
Dieu  qui  les  a  faidts  &  pour  I'aymer.  Comme  il  fut
preft  ^  partir  pour  retourner  en  fon  pays,  le  fieur
Tronquet  qui  auoit  efte  fon  parin  luy  fift  vn  pref ent :
ce  bon  Sauuage  demeura  quelque  temps  fans  mot
dire,  puis  fe  tournant  vers  le  Pere  Buteux  1^  pref  ent
luy  tint  ce  difcours.  Ie  ne  f9ay  en  qu'elle  confidera-
tion  cet  honnefte  homme  [91]  fait  ce  pref  ent,  fi  c'eft
pour  m'inuiter  ^  garder  la  Foy,  il  ne  faut  que  le  feu
d'Enfer  pour  m'arrefter  &  me  tenir  en  mon  deuoir:
fi  c'efl  affin  que  ie  me  fouuienne  de  luy,  ie  ne  m'en
f9aurois  oublier,  fi  ie  n'oublie  le  nom  de  Guillaume
qu'il  m'a  donne,  &  que  ie  cheris  infiniment:  {\  c'eft
pour  monflrer  fa  liberalite en mon endroit,  ie  ne


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  85

with  a  great  zeal ;  the  good  old  woman  also  applied
herself  heartily,  so  that,  with  the  help  of  her  daugh-
ter, she  learned  by  heart,  in  less  than  three  or  four
days,  the  Pater,  the  Ave,  and  the  Credo.  The  hus-
band did  no  less  on  his  side :  for,  having  a  brother  of
his, —  of  a  gross  mind,  but  having  good  will, —  he
would  spend  the  best  part  of  the  day  in  rehearsing
[90]  beside  him  the  prayers  and  the  instruction,  and
in  making  him  repeat  them,  with  an  admirable
patience,  which  could  proceed  only  from  a  true  char-
ity. Since  their  Baptism,  they  have  given  us  noble
examples  of  virtue.

The  Husband  one  day,  entering  his  cabin,  saw  a
drum  made  on  the  French  pattern ;  he  takes  it  and
tears  it  to  pieces,  saying,  "  I  know  well  that  that  is
not  bad ;  but  yet  I  must  not  keep  it,  for  fear  of  caus-
ing the  others  to  remember  their  drums  and  forbid-
den superstitions."  "  There  is  nothing,"  he  said
one  day,  "which  does  not  remind  me  of  God;  in
whatever  direction  I  go,  I  can  see  nothing  which  has
not  been  made  by  him,  and  wherein  his  power  and
his  goodness  do  not  appear.  The  sight  of  creatures
helps  me  to  believe  that  there  is  a  God  who  has
made  them,  and  to  love  him."  When  he  was  ready
to  go  away,  on  the  return  to  his  own  country,  sieur
Tronquet,^  who  had  been  his  godfather,  made  him  a
present.  This  good  Savage  remained  some  time
without  saying  a  word,  then,  turning  toward  Father
Buteux,  there  present,  he  spoke  to  him  as  follows:
"  I  know  not  on  what  account  that  excellent  man
[91]  makes  me  this  present;  if  it  be  to  engage  me  to
keep  the  Faith,  it  needs  no  more  than  the  fire  of
Hell  to  check  me,  and  hold  me  in  my  duty.  If  it  be
to  the  end  that  I  remember  him,  I  could  not  forget


86  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  24


peux  autre  chofe  que  le  remercier,  ce  que  ie  fais  de
ccEur  &  le  prie  de  croire  que  iamais  ie  ne  quitteray
la  foy  en  laquelle  il  m'a  feruy  de  parain:  ceux  qui
eftoiet  la  prefens,  n'attendoient  pas  cette  refponce
•fur  le  champ  d'vn  Sauuage.

Le  Capitaine  des  Atticamegues  [n]e  fut  pas  Bap-
tife  pour  lors,  il  auoit  bonne  volonte :  mais  non  pas
toutes  les  difpofitions  neceffaires  fa  femme  le  deuan-
9a  &  obtint  le  Baptefme  par  fa  ferueur,  &  fa  conftance
&  depuis  gagna  fi  bien  fon  mary  qu'elle  le  faifoit
prier  Dieu  foir  &  matin,  &  I'obligea  doucement  de
quitter  fon  tambour,  qu'on  croyoit  qu'il  n'abandon-
neroit  iamais  qu'a  la  mort;  tant  il  y  efloit  attache  &
fe  vantoit  d'auoir  conferue  fa  vie  &  celle  de  fes  gens
par  [92]  les  longleries  qu'il  fait  auec  cet  inftrument.
Or  quoy  qu'il  le  quittafl,  on  differa  pourtant  iufques
au  prin-temps  fon  Baptefme,  affin  de  le  rendre  plus
f olide :  voicy  vn  cas  de  conf cience  que  fa  femme  pro-
pofa  au  Pere,  lors  qu'elle  efloit  prefte  a  partir,  fi  mon
mary,  difl-elle  qui  n'eft  pas  encor  Baptife  veut  faire
quelque  feftin  ou  le  Diable  foit  honore,  ie  feray  obli-
gee felo  noftre  couftume  d'aprefler  la  chaudiere,  que
feray-ie  la  deffus :  ce  f era  bien  fait,  dit  le  Pere  de  n'y
pas  mettre  la  main  &  de  dire  ^  ton  mary  que  tu  as
renonce  au  Diable,  &  qu'il  en  doit  faire  autat.  Que
fi  neatmoins  tu  iugeois  qu'il  te  deuft  molefter  au
s'alterer  contre  la  Foy,  pour  ce  fubiet:  tu  pourrois  te
comporter  comme  "k  1' ordinaire,  fans  pretendre  autre
chofe  qu'obeyr  "k  ton  mary,  &  luy  apprefter  a  man-
ger. Arriue  qui  voudra,  dift-elle,  ie  fuis  toute  refo-
lue  de  n'en  rien  faire,  celny  qui  a  tout  faidl,  me
-donnera  des  forces.


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  87

him,  unless  I  forget  the  name  of  Guillaume  which
he  has  given  me,  and  which  I  cherish  infinitely.  If
it  be  to  show  his  liberality  toward  me,  I  can  do  noth-
ing else  than  thank  him,  which  I  do  heartily,  and
beg  him.  to  believe  that  I  will  never  give  up  the  faith
in  which  he  has  served  me  as  godfather."  Those
who  were  there  present  were  not  expecting  this
answer  on  the  spot,  from  a  Savage.

The  Captain  of  the  Atticamegues  was  not  Baptized
at  that  time ;  he  had  good  will,  but  not  all  the  neces-
sary preparation.  His  wife  outstripped  him,  and
obtained  Baptism  by  her  fervor  and  her  constancy ;
and  she  then  so  effectually  gained  her  husband  that
she  made  him  pray  to  God  evening  and  morning,  and
gradually  obliged  him  to  give  up  his  drum, —  which,
it  was  believed,  he  would  never  abandon  till  death,
so  attached  was  he  to  it;  and  he  kept  boasting  of
having  preserved  his  own  life  and  those  of  his  peo-
ple by  [92]  the  Juggleries  that  he  performed  with  that
instrument.  Now,  although  he  gave  it  up,  his  Bap-
tism was  nevertheless  deferred  until  the  spring,  so
as  to  render  him  more  steadfast.  Here  is  a  case  of
conscience  which  his  wife  proposed  to  the  Father,
when  she  was  ready  to  go  away:  "  If  my  husband,"
said  she,  "  who  is  not  yet  Baptized,  wishes  to  make
some  feast  at  which  the  Devil  shall  be  honored,  I
shall  be  obliged,  according  to  our  custom,  to  prepare
the  kettle ;  what  shall  I  do  in  that  event  ? "  '  *  It
will  be  well,"  says  the  Father,  "not  to  have  a
hand  in  it,  and  to  tell  thy  husband  that  thou  hast
renounced  the  Devil,  and  that  he  ought  to  do  the
same.  But  if,  nevertheless,  thou  shouldst  judge
that  he  might  molest  thee,  or  weaken  toward  the
Faith  on  that  account,  thou  couldst  behave  as  usual,


88  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.24

Vn  bon  vieillard  (c'eftoit  le  plus  aage  de  la  troupe)
s'eftant  venu  confeffer  auant  que  partir,  dift  au  Pere,
c'eft  pour  la  derniere  fois  que  ie  te  parleray,  mon
[93]  corps  s'en  va  en  pouriture,  ie  le  laifferay  dans
les  bois :  mais  mon  ame  ne  peut  mourir ;  prend  cou-
rage a  prier  Dieu  pour  moy.  Penfe  en  ton  coeur  que
ie  feray  mort  auec  la  Foy,  &  le  defir  d'aller  au  Ciel:
quoy  qu'il  arriue  ie  ne  reprendray  iamais  mes  fuper-
ftitions :  en  verite  ie  te  remercie  de  mon  Baptefme  &
de  m'auoir  appris  le  chemin  du  Ciel,  que  te  redray-ie
pour  la  peine  que  tu  as  de  m'enfeigner?  fi  i'auois
des  forces  pour  aller  k  la  chaffe,  ie  te  ferois  prefent
du  premier  Oreignac  que  ie  tuerois,  il  ne  me  refle
rien  qu'vn  petit  fac  a  petun,  que  i'ay  ornay  &  enioli-
uay  come  tu  vols :  le  voila,  ie  te  le  donne.  Le  Pere,
luy  refpondit  en  fouriant,  ie  t'enfeigne  pour  Dieu  &
pour  I'amour  que  ie  porte  ^  ton  ame  &  non  pour  tes
biens,  garde  le,  i'attens  la  recompenfe  de  Dieu,
aye  courage  &  perfeuere  conftament,  affin  d'aller  au
Ciel.

Vne  bonne  vieille  apres  fon  Baptefme  ayant  ouy
raconter  quelque  chofe  des  grandeurs  de  la  France,
dift  au  Pere :  ie  croy  que  tout  ce  que  vous  dittes  de
voftre  pays,  eft  vray,  mais  ce  n'efl  pas  ce  que  ie
defire  le  plus,  i'ayme  mieux  le  [94]  Paradis  que  tout
cela:  fi  i'y  fuis  vn  iour  comme  i'efpere,  ie  verray
tout  le  monde,  &  ce  qui  eft  encor  de  plus  beau  que
le  monde:  en  verite  ie  foupire  apres  cette  maifon
eternelle  &  voudrois  y  pouuoir  mener  tous  mes  gens
auec  moy  ie  brufle  d'vn  defir  de  les  voir  tous  conuertis :
6  que  ie  voudrois  bien  fgauoir  tout  ce  que  tu  f9ais :
i'enfeignerois  mes  enfans  &  mes  nepueux,  qui  font


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  89

without  claiming  anything  else  than  to  obey  thy
husband  and  prepare  for  him  to  eat."  "  Come  what
will,"  said  she,  "  I  am  quite  resolved  to  do  nothing
for  such  a  feast ;  he  who  has  made  all  will  give  me
strength."

A  good  old  man  (he  was  the  oldest  of  the  band),
having  come  to  confess  before  going  away,  said  to
the  Father :  "  It  is  for  the  last  time  that  I  shall  speak
to  thee,  my  [93]  body  is  going  into  decay.  I  shall
leave  it  in  the  woods ;  but  my  soul  cannot  die ;  take
courage  to  pray  God  for  me.  Think  in  thy  heart
that  I  shall  have  died  in  the  Faith,  and  in  the  desire
of  going  to  Heaven ;  whatever  happens,  I  will  never
take  back  my  superstitions.  Truly,  I  thank  thee  for
my  Baptism,  and  for  having  taught  me  the  way  to
Heaven, — how  shall  I  repay  thee  for  thy  trouble  in
teaching  me?  If  I  had  strength  to  go  to  the  hunt,  I
would  make  thee  a  present  of  the  first  Moose  that  I
should  kill.  I  have  nothing  left  but  a  little  tobacco
pouch,  which  I  have  ornamented  and  beautified  as
thou  seest;  there  it  is,  I  give  it  to  thee."  The  Fa-
ther answered  him,  smiling:  "  I  teach  thee  for  God,
and  for  the  love  that  I  bear  to  thy  soul,  and  not  for
thy  goods;  keep  it,  I  await  the  recompense  from
God.  Have  courage  and  persevere  constantly,  so  as
to  go  to  Heaven."

A  good  old  woman,  after  her  Baptism,  having
heard  some  account  of  the  grandeurs  of  France,  said
to  the  Father :  "  I  believe  that  all  thou  sayest  of  thy
country  is  true,  but  that  is  not  what  I  desire  the
most, —  I  prefer  [94]  Paradise  to  all  that.  If  I  am
there  some  day,  as  I  hope,  I  shall  see  all  the  world,
and  what  is  still  more  beautiful  than  the  world.  In-
deed, I  sigh  after  that  eternal  house,  and  would  I


90  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

Ik  haut  dans  les  bois,  ou  ils  viuent  comme  des  beftes,
prends  courage  toy  qui  es  amy  de  Dieu,  k  nous  enfei-
gner!  6  fi  tu  te  pouuois  embarquer  au  prin-temps
auec  nous,  tu  nous  inftruirois  dans  noftre  pays,  que
ferons-nous  fans  Meffe,  fans  Confeffion  &  fans  mai-
ftre?  Ce  dernier  fentiment  auquel  nous  ne  pouuions
pas  encor  fatisfaire  eftoit  commun  k  tous  ces  pauures
ges,  &  nous  tiroit  les  larmes  des  yeux :  mais  pourtant
ce  n'eftoit  pas  ce  qui  nous  affligeoit  le  plus.  Le  peu
de  moyen  que  nous  anions  de  les  deffendre  eux  &  les
autres  vSauuages  contre  les  Hiroquois  leurs  ennemis,
nous  donoit  bien  plus  viuemet  au  coeur,  &  detrempoit
la  joye  que  nous  anions  de  leur  conuerfion,  d'vne
amertume  extreme :  [95]  i'en  parleray  cy-apres.  le
reuies  encor  vn  peu  a  cette  bonne  vieille :  quand  on
faifoit  les  prieres,  elle  ne  pouuoit  permettre  qu'au-
cun  de  fes  Compatriotes  fuffet  affis,  elle  les  exhortoit
k  ioindre  les  mains  &  fe  tenir  modeftement  &  fl  c'e-
ftoient  des  enfans  elle  prenoit  elle  mefme  leurs  mains
&  leur  faifoit  ioindre  durant  les  prieres.  Voyant
entrer  le  Pere  en  fa  cabane,  elle  dift  k  fon  fils,  voicy
le  Pere,  prends  courage  &  faits  ce  que  tu  as  refolu :
au  mefme  temps  le  ieune  homme  tire  fes  deux  tam-
bours &  les  donne  au  Pere  auec  ces  parolles,  tien
voila  mes  tambours,  ie  les  quitte :  la  mere  adiouiia,
cela  veut  dire  qu'il  renonce  au  Diable  &  demande  le
Baptefme:  cela  eft  vray,  dift  le  fils,  &  ie  croy  qu'on
me  I'accordera,  quand  ie  f9auray  les  prieres:  mais
puifque  ie  te  donne  la  chofe  en  laquelle  i'efperois
beaucoup  pour  ma  confolation,  il  faut  auffi  que  tu  me
dones  vne  chofe  que  tu  cheris  grandement,  ie  veux
dire  vn  Chappellet  pour  honorer  la  Mere  du  Fils  de


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  ib42-43  ^1

could  lead  thither  all  my  people  with  me. I  burn
with  a  desire  to  see  them  all  converted. Oh,  but  I
would  like  to  know  all  that  thou  knowest  I I  would
teach  my  children  and  my  nephews,  who  are  up  there
in  the  woods, where they  live  like  beasts. Take
courage,  thou  who  art  a  friend  of  God,  to  teach  us!
Oh,  if  thou  couldst  embark  with  us  in  the  spring,
thou  shouldst  instruct  us  in  our  own  country ! What
shall  we  do  without  Mass,  without  Confession,  and
without  a  teacher?" This  last  sentiment,  which  we
were  not  yet  able  to  satisfy,  was  common  to  all  these
poor people, and drew tears from our eyes; but
yet  it  was  not  that  which  most  grieved  us. The
slight  means  that  we  had  to  defend  them  and  the
other  Savages  against  the  Hiroquois,  their  enemies,
gave  us  much  keener  pangs  at  heart,  and  tempered
the  joy  that  we  had  at  their  conversion,  with  extreme
bitterness; [95] I  will  speak  of  it  subsequently. I
recur  a  little  more  to  that  good  old  woman ;  while
prayers  were  being  said,  she  could  not  permit  that
any  of  her  fellow  Countrymen  should  be  seated, —
she  would exhort them to  fold  their hands, and
demean  themselves  modestly ;  and  if  they  were  chil-
dren, she  would  herself  take  their  hands,  and  make
them  fold  them  during  the  prayers. Seeing  the  Fa-
ther enter  her  cabin,  she  said  to  her  son:  "  Here  is
the Father;  take courage, and do what  thou  hast
resolved." At  the  same  time,  the  young  man  draws
forth  his  two  drums,  and  gives  them  to  the  Father,
with  these  words:  "  See,  there  are  my  drums,  I  give
them  up. ' ' The  mother  added :  * '  That  means  that  he
renounces  the  Devil  and  requests  Baptism." "  That
is  true,"  said  the  son,  "  and  I  believe  that  it  will  be
granted  me,  when  I  shall  know  the  prayers :  but  since


92  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

Dieu:  le  Pere  luy  en  promift  vn,  fi  toft  qii'il  auroit
appris  a  le  dire,  ce  qui  fut  bien  toft  fait:  il  n'eft  pas
croyable  cobien  [96]  ces  bonnes  gens  font  portes  ^
cette  deuotion  de  dire  leur  Chappellet  en  I'honneur
du  Fils  de  Dieu  &  de  fa  tres-Saindte  Mere,  &  com-
bien  ils  font  paffionnes  d'en  auoir,  fur  tout  qui  foient
vn  peu  gros  &  beaux  pour  les  porter  pedus  h.  leur
col.  Voicy  vne  chofe  qui  fera  honte  a  plufieurs  en-
fants  de  France :  le  Pere  demandoit  vn  iour  a  vne
petite  fille  £i  elle  vouloit  aller  au  Ciel,  &  oil  voudrois-
ie  aller  done,  fift  elle :  mais  dift  le  Pere  en  riant,  les
filles  qui  n'obeiffent  point  a  leurs  parens  comme  toy
ne  vont  pas  au  Ciel:  &  comment  dis-tu  cela  toy?
puifque  tu  pries  &  que  tu  enfeignes  qu'il  ne  faut  pas
mentir  ny  detradter?  tu  fais  I'vn  &  I'autre,  tu  ments
&  tu  paries  mal  de  moy :  car  ie  ne  defobey  iamais  h.
mes  pares,  &  n'ay  garde  de  le  faire  ^  prefent  que  ie
cognois  Dieu  &  ayme  la  priere.  La  Mere  qui  eftoit
la  prefente,  la  feconda:  vn  autre  fe  mit  de  fon  cofte
&  toute  la  cabane  euft  efte  contre  le  Pere,  s'il  n'euft
confeffe  qu'il  auoit  dit  cela  en  riant  &  pour  I'efprou-
uer.

Les  enfans  qu'on  a  Baptifes  ^  I'vfage  de  raifon,  ont
donne  des  tefmoignages  [97]  d'vn  bon  efprit,  ils  con-
Qoiuent  promptemet,  retiennent  aifement,  &  fe  font
rendus  fort  affidus  au  Catechifme ;  ce  qui  n'a  pas  peu
feruy  pour  les  plus  grands  qui  ont  appris  les  prieres
des  plus  petits,  il  eft  arriue  fouuent  que  le  Pere
voulant  apprendre  le  Pater,  I'Aue,  &  le  Credo,  ^  des
perfonnes  aages,  ils  luy  difoient:  ie  fcay  defia  tout
cela,  mon  fils  ou  ma  fille  me  I'ont  appris,  ce  moyen  a
tres  bien  reiiffi:  mais  il  faut  auoiier  que  le  grand


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  j642- 43  93

I  give  thee  the  thing  in  which  I  was  hoping  much
for  my  consolation,  thou  must  also  give  me  a  thing
which  thou  greatly  cherishest, —  I  mean  a  Rosary,  in
order  to  honor  the  Mother  of  the  Son  of  God. "  The
Father  promised  him  one,  as  soon  as  he  should  have
learned  to  say  it,  which  was  soon  done.  It  is  incred-
ible how  much  [96]  these  good  people  are  inclined  to
this  devotion  of  saying  their  Rosary  in  honor  of  the
Son  of  God  and  of  his  most  Blessed  Mother,  and  how
eager  they  are  to  have  them, —  especially  those  which
are  rather  large  and  handsome,  to  wear  them  sus-
pended about  their  necks.  Here  is  an  incident  which
will  cause  shame  to  many  children  of  France:  the
Father  was  one  day  asking  a  little  girl  if  she  wished
to  go  to  Heaven.  "  And  where,  then,  should  I  wish
to  go?"  said  she.  "  But,"  said  the  Father,  smiling,
"  girls  who,  like  thee,  do  not  obey  their  parents,  do
not  go  to  Heaven. "  "  And  why  dost  thou  say  that,
since  thou  prayest,  and  teachest  that  we  must  not  lie
or  slander?  Thou  dost  both, — thou  liest,  and  thou
speakest  ill  of  me ;  for  I  never  disobey  my  parents,
and  am  careful  not  to  do  so,  now  that  I  know  God
and  love  prayer."  The  Mother,  who  was  there
present,  seconded  her;  another  put  himself  on  her
side,  and  the  whole  cabin  would  have  been  against
the  Father,  if  he  had  not  confessed  that  he  had  said
that  in  jest,  and  in  order  to  try  her.

The  children  who  have  been  Baptized  at  years  of
discretion,  have  given  evidences  [97]  of  a  good  mind ;
they  quickly  apprehend,  retain  easily,  and  have
become  very  diligent  in  the  Catechism ;  which  has
been  not  a  little  useful  for  the  older  ones,  who  have
learned  the  prayers  from  the  younger.  It  has  often
happened that, the Father wishing to teach the


94  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.24

defir  qu'ils  ont  eu  d'apprendre,  &  leur  bo  naturel  y
ont  bien  feruy.  Le  Pere  entrant  le  foir  en  la  cabane
du  Capitaine,  pour  y  faire  les  prieres  &  Tinflrudtion,
on  alloit  incontinent  aux  autres  cabanes  les  aduertir;
chacun  venoit,  tons  fe  mettoient  k  genoux  ioignoient
les  mains  &  fermoient  les  yeux  pour  prier  &  repeter
auec  plus  d'attention,  fi  quelqu'vn  ne  quittoit  pas
incontinet  la  befongne  qu'il  auoit  en  main,  il  eftoit
rudement  repris :  vne  petite  fiUe  ayant  voulu  mettre
vn  pruneau  en  fa  bouche  qu'on  luy  auoit  done  pour
auoir  bien  refpondu,  trois  ou  quatre  la  frapperent  fur
le  champ,  &  la  firent  quitter:  vne  autre  fille  aagee  de
[98]  fept  ans,  voyant  fa  foeur  aifnee  badiner  auec  ie
ne  f9ay  quoy  qu'elle  tenoit  en  fa  main,  luy  arracha
difant,  c'eft  le  Diable  qui  te  met  cela  en  main.  Quant
le  Pere  expliquoit  quelque  poindl,  chacun  marquoit
fur  fes  doigts  fi  tofl  qu'il  ouuroit  la  bouche:  c'eftoit
vn  plaifir  de  les  voir  tous  leuer  les  mains  en  I'air  &
plier  les  doigts  felon  le  nombre  des  propofitions  qu'il
faifoit,  «&  comme  cela  n' eftoit  pas  affez  capable
d'aider  la  memoire,  la  plus  part  peignoient  ou  faifoiet
des  marques  fur  des  efcorces  auec  de  la  peinture
rouge,  k  la  fin  ils  perfuaderent  au  Pere  de  figurer
luy-mefme  fur  vn  papier,  ce  qu'il  leur  deuoit  expli-
quer :  il  faifoit  done  certaines  marques  ou  lettres  qui
fignifioiet  le  fens  des  chofes :  chacun  voyant  le  papier
attache  au  haut  de  la  cabane  le  deuoroit  des  yeux :  le
Pere  auec  vne  baguette  leur  montroit  ce  que  vouloit
dire  chaque  lettre  ou  figure,  apres  qu'il  auoit  parle
ceux  qui  penfoient  auoir  cSpris,  prenoient  la  baguette
&  en  repetat,  faifoi[e]nt  comme  ceux  qui  expliquet
des enigmes, cette fagon iointe  a  leur  ferueur  &


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  95

Pater,  the  Ave,  and  the  Credo  to  persons  of  age,
they  would  say  to  him :  "  I  know  all  that  already ;
my  son  or  my  daughter  has  taught  it  to  me. ' '  This
method  has  succeeded  very  well;  but  one  must
acknowledge  that  the  great  desire  to  learn  which
they  have  had,  and  their  good  nature,  have  availed
much  therein.  The  Father  entering  the  Captain's
cabin  at  evening  in  order  to  hold  prayers  and  instruc-
tion there,  they  would  go  straightway  to  the  other
cabins  to  notify  them.  Every  one  would  come;  all
would  kneel,  fold  their  hands,  and  close  their  eyes
in  order  to  pray  and  repeat  with  more  attention.  If
any  one  did  not  immediately  quit  the  task  that  he
had  in  hand,  he  was  severely  reproved.  A  little  girl
having  wished  to  put  in  her  mouth  a  prune  that  had
been  given  her  for  having  answered  well,  three  or
four  struck  her  forthwith,  and  made  her  stop.  An-
other girl,  aged  [98]  seven  years,  seeing  her  elder
sister  toying  with  something  or  other  that  she  held
in  her  hand,  seized  it  from  her,  saying,  "It  is  the
Devil  who  puts  that  in  thy  hand. ' '  When  the  Father
was  explaining  some  point,  each  one  would  note  it
on  his  fingers,  as  soon  as  he  opened  his  lips.  It  was
a  pleasure  to  see  them  all  raise  their  hands  in  the
air,  and  bend  their  fingers,  according  to  the  number
of  the  propositions  that  he  made ;  and  as  that  was  not
quite  sufficient  to  aid  the  memory,  most  of  them
would  paint  or  draw  marks  on  pieces  of  bark,  with
red  paint.  At  last,  they  persuaded  the  Father  him-
self to  represent  on  a  paper  what  he  had  to  explain
to  them.  He  would  therefore  make  certain  marks
or  characters,  which  signified  the  meaning  of  these
things ;  each  one,  seeing  the  paper  fastened  aloft  in
the  cabin, devoured  it  with  his  eyes; the Father,


96  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

bonne  volonte,  ne  feruoit  pas  [99]  pen  k  leur  faire
comprendre  les  myfteres  de  noftre  faindte  Foy :  les
Chreftiens  de  Sillery  efhoient  remplis  de  ioye  de
voir  vn  tel  fuccez  parmy  leurs  allies,  &  y  contribu-
oient  de  leur  cofte  piiiffammet.  Vn  entre  autre  alloit
vn  iour  criant  tout  haut  autour  des  cabanes :  Attica-
megues  prenez  courage  croyez  fermemet,  fi  c'eft  tout
de  bon  que  vous  croyez:  vous  priferez  la  Foy  par
deffus  toutes  les  chofes  du  monde :  nous  I'experimen-
tons  maintenant  en  vous  autres  nous  qui  croyons
defia  depuis  quelques  Annees,  nous  fentons  combien
c'eft  vn  grand  bon  heur  de  cognoiftre  Dieu  &  f9auoir
le  cliemin  du  Ciel,  les  femmes  Algonquines  en  fai-
f oient  autant  de  leur  code :  le  Pere  en  rencontra  vn
iour  vne  appellee  Angelique  qui  les  exhortoit,  il  I'en-
couragea  &  luy  dift :  tu  fais  bien ;  cotinue,  elle  repart
ie  le  fais  de  bon  coeur:  mais  que  fgauroit  dire  vne
pauure  vieille  comme  moy,  fmon  de  leur  apprendre
'k  dire  le  Chappellet,  &  de  le  reciter  moy-mefme  pour
eux,  cette  bumilite  efloit  loiiable :  mais  au  fond  quand
nous  I'entendions  expliquer  les  mifteres  de  noftre
[100]  faindle  Foy,  elle  nous  rauiffoit,  elle  demandoit
fouuent  aux  Peres  &  bien  que  font  les  Atticamegues,
croyent  ils  fermement  ?  f9auent-ils  les  prieres  ?  pleuft
k  Dieu  qu'eux  &  tons  les  Sauuages  euffent  vn
coeur  femblable  au  mien,  ils  auroient  enuie  d' aimer
Dieu  dauantage  qu'ils  ne  font.  Cette  bonne  vieille
a  quelques  parens  Atticamegues,  elle  a  voulu  aller
hyuerner  auec  eux  dans  leurs  pays,  pour  les  ayder
k  prier  Dieu,  &  a  retenir  ce  qu'ils  auoient  appris.
Le  foir  auant  qu'ils  partiffent  pour  leur  grande
chaffe, le Pere  Buteux leur  fut  dire k dieu:  tons


1(342-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  97

with  a  stick,  would  show  them  what  each  character
or  figure  meant.  After  he  had  spoken,  those  who
thought  they  had  understood  would  take  the  stick ;
and,  repeating,  would  do  like  those  who  explain
enigmas.  This  method,  joined  to  their  fervor  and
good  will,  served  not  [99]  a  little  to  make  them  un-
derstand the  mysteries  of  our  holy  Faith.  The  Chris-
tians of  Sillery  were  filled  with  joy  to  see  such  a
result  among  their  allies,  and,  on  their  side,  vigor-
ously contributed  thereto.  One,  among  others,  went
about,  one  day,  shouting  aloud  round  the  cabins:
"  Atticamegues,  take  courage;  believe  firmly.  If
it  is  in  earnest  that  you  believe,  you  will  prize
the  Faith  above  all  things  in  the  world.  We  now
experience  it  in  you  others, —  we  who  have  already
believed  for  several  Years ;  we  feel  how  great  a  bless-
ing it  is  to  know  God  and  learn  the  way  to  Heaven."
The  Algonquin  women  did  the  like,  on  their  side ;
the  Father  one  day  met  one  of  these,  called  Ange-
lique,  who  was  exhorting  them.  He  encouraged
her,  and  said  to  her :  ' '  You  do  well ;  continue. ' '  She
answers,  "  I  do  so  with  a  good  heart :  but  what  can
a  poor  old  woman  like  me  tell  them,  except  to  teach
them  to  say  the  Rosary,  and  to  recite  it  for  them
myself?"  This  humility  was  praiseworthy;  but,  in
reality,  when  we  heard  her  explain  the  mysteries  of
our  [100]  holy  Faith,  she  delighted  us.  She  often
asked  the  Fathers,  "  Well,  what  are  the  Atticamegues
doing?  Do  they  believe  firmly?  do  they  know  the
prayers?  Would  to  God  that  they  and  all  the  Sav-
ages had  a  heart  like  mine ;  they  would  desire  to  love
God  more  than  they  do."  This  good  old  woman  has
some  Atticamegue  kinsfolk;  she  wished  to  go  and
winter  with  them  in  their  own  country,  in  order  to


98  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.24

s'affemblerent  en  vne  cabane  &  luy  tefmoigne-
rent  des  reffentimens  capables  de  fendre  le  coeur,
il  les  confola,  &  leur  fift  voir  le  changement  que
Dieu  auoit  opere  en  eux  la  grande  obligation
qu'ils  auoient  d'en  remercier  la  diuine  bonte  &  de
I'aimer,  la  fidelite  qu'ils  luy  auoiet  promife,  les  chafli-
mens  dont  Dieu  puniroit  ceux  qui  abandonneroient
la  Foy,  &  fe  comporteroient  mal  dans  le  Chriftia-
nifme :  puis  il  leur  fift  deux  prefens  pour  les  f aire
reffouuenir  de  deux  chofes,  le  premier  fut  vn  Cruci-
fix, pour  les  [loi]  aduertir  de  conferuer  la  Foy  toute
leur  vie,  &  fe  fouuenir  que  le  fils  de  Dieu  eftoit  mort
pour  eux,  le  fecond  fut  vn  bafton  fee  qui  n'eftoit  bon
qu'a  mettre  au  feu,  adiouftant  que  ce  feroit  le  mefme
de  ceux  qui  n'obeiroient  pas  ^  Dieu,  qu'ils  feroient
comme  vn  bois  mort,  &  brufleroient  ^  iamais  dans
I'Enfer,  k  la  fin  fe  firent  les  prieres  auec  vne  grande
ferueur,  le  Pere  diftribua  des  Catalogues  ^  plufieurs,
pour  cognoiftre  les  iours  de  feftes  &  les  garder,  les
femmes  attendoient  le  Pere  au  fortir  de  la  cabane
pour  luy  dire  a  dieu,  la  femme  du  Capitaine  prift  la
parolle  &  la  meflant  de  larmes,  luy  dift:  en  verit6
nous  auons  vn  grand  regret  de  te  quitter,  &  que
ferons  nous  fans  maillre  dans  les  bois?  ^  Dieu  Pere
Buteux,  &  que  fera  vne  pauure  idiote  comme  moy
fans  meffe,  fans  Confeffion  &  fans  aucun  qui  nous
enfeigne,  les  autres  femmes  n'en  difoient  pas  moins,
&  toutes  dirent  ^  Dieu  les  mains  ioindtes  criant :  prie
Dieu  pour  nous  &  pour  nos  pares,  il  fallut  enfin  que
le  froid  &  la  nuidt  les  f eparaft :  voila  vne  partie  de
ce  qui  s'eft  paffe  de  plus  confiderable  [102]  en  I'in-
ftrudtion  &  au  Baptefme  des  Atticamegues  pendant


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  99

help  them  pray  to  God,  and  remember  what  they  had
learned.  The  evening  before  they  set  out  for  their
great  hunt,  Father  Buteux  went  to  say  farewell  to
them ;  all  assembled  in  one  cabin,  and  showed  him  a
gratitude  fit  to  break  the  heart.  He  consoled  them,
and  made  them  see  the  change  which  God  had
wrought  in  them;  the  great  obligation  which  they
had  to  thank  the  divine  goodness  therefor,  and  to
love  it ;  the  fidelity  which  they  had  promised  him ;
the  chastisements  wherewith  God  would  punish  those
who  should  forsake  the  Faith,  and  behave  them-
selves ill  in  Christianity.  Then  he  made  them  two
presents,  in  order  to  remind  them  of  two  things :  the
first  was  a  Crucifix,  to  [loi]  warn  them  to  keep  the
Faith  all  their  life,  and  to  remember  that  the  son  of
God  had  died  for  them.  The  second  was  a  dry  stick,
which  was  good  only  to  put  in  the  fire, —  adding,
that  it  would  be  the  same  with  those  who  should  not
obey  God;  that  they  would  be  like  dead  wood,  and
would  burn  forever  in  Hell.  At  the  end,  the  pray-
ers were  said  with  a  great  fervor.  The  Father  dis-
tributed Catalogues  to  several,  that  they  might  know
the  days  of  feasts,  and  observe  them.  The  women
were  awaiting  the  Father  at  the  exit  from  the  cabin,
in  order  to  say  farewell  to  him.  The  Captain's  wife
spoke,  and,  mingling  tears  with  her  words,  said  to
him:  "  In  truth,  we  feel  a  great  regret  to  leave  thee;
and  what  shall  we  do  without  a  teacher  in  the  woods?
Adieu,  Father  Buteux, —  and  what  will  a  poor  idiot
like  me  do,  without  mass,  without  Confession,  and
without  any  one  to  teach  us  ?  "  The  other  women
said  no  less  to  him,  and  all  said  "Adieu"  with
clasped  hands,  exclaiming:  "  Pray  to  God  for  us  and
for  our  kinsfolk." Finally,  the  cold  and  the  night


100  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

I'hyuer,  ils  font  retournez  an  prin-temps  aux  trois
riuieres,  pour  iouir  des  Sacremens,  &  apprendre  de
plus  en  plus  les  chofes  de  la  Foy,  &  faire  Baptifer
ceux  qui  efloient  les  mieux  difpofez,  entre  lefquels
a  efte  le  Capitaine  auec  deux  de  fes  filles  mariez,  ie
ne  f§ay  fi  i'auray  loifir  d'en  dreffer  vn  memoire  auant
le  depart  des  Nauires :  quand  la  donation  de  feu  Mon-
fieur  de  Sillery  n'auro[i]t  iamais  produit  autre  bien,
ie  crois  qu'il  eft  tres  fatisfait  dans  le  Ciel,  il  eft  vray
que  Dieu  a  donne  des  le  commencement  fa  bene-
didtion  fur  le  Chriftianifme  de  Sillery,  &  continue
toufiours  k  verfer  fes  graces  fur  les  Sauuages  Chre-
ftiens  qui  y  reOdent:  mais  leur  arrefk  y  eft  puilTam-
ment  combattu  de  deux  coftez.  L'vn  eft  la  peur  des
Hiroquois  qui  vont  croiffant  en  armes,  en  forces  &
en  cruaute,  I'autre  eft  la  pauurete  du  pays  &  des  Sau-
uages qui  les  rend  errans,  &  les  oblige  a  courir  pour
chercher  leur  vie :  &  ie  ne  f 9ay  fi  on  pourra  continuer
les  fecours  &  les  moyens  qu'on  nous  donne  pour
remedier  ^  ce  [103]  mal,  &  faire  vn  arreft  qui  puiffe
eftre  ftable  de  foy-mefme,  la  benedidtion  que  Dieu  a
donne  fur  les  commencemens,  nous  fait  efperer  vn
bon  progrez  &  vne  heureufe  fin.


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  101

had  to  separate  them.  Such  is  a  portion  of  the  most
noteworthy  incidents  [102]  in  the  instruction  and  at
the  Baptism  of  the  Atticamegues  during  the  winter.
They  returned  to  the  three  rivers  in  the  spring,  in
order  to  enjoy  the  Sacraments,  to  learn  more  and
more  about  the  things  of  the  Faith,  and  to  have  those
Baptized  who  were  the  best  prepared, — among  whom
was  the  Captain  with  two  of  his  married  daughters.
I  know  not  whether  I  shall  have  leisure  to  draw  up
an  account  of  it  before  the  departure  of  the  Ships.
Even  if  the  donation  of  the  late  Monsieur  de  Sillery
had  never  produced  any  other  good,  I  believe  that  he
is  well  satisfied  in  Heaven.  It  is  true  that  God  has,
from  the  start,  given  his  blessing  upon  the  Chris-
tianity of  Sillery,  and  still  continues  to  pour  his
graces  upon  the  Christian  Savages  who  dwell  there;
but  their  settlement  at  that  place  is  greatly  hindered
in  two  directions.  One  obstacle  is  the  fear  of  the
Hiroquois,  who  are  increasing  in  arms,  in  forces,
and  in  cruelty ;  the  other  is  the  poverty  of  the  coun-
try and  of  the  Savages,  which  makes  them  roving,
and  obliges  them  to  wander  in  search  of  their  living ;
and  I  know  not  whether  the  succor  and  the  means
which  are  given  us  in  order  to  remedy  this  evil  can
be  continued,  [103]  and  a  settlement  be  made  which
can  be  stable  of  itself.  The  blessing  which  God  has
given  upon  the  beginnings,  makes  us  hope  for  a  suc-
cessful advance  and  a  happy  end.


102  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  24


CHAPITRE  VII.

DES HURONS QUI ONT HYUERNE A QUEBEC & A SIL-

LERY.

LE  Seminaire  des  Hurons  qui  auoit  effce  eftably  k
nollre-Dame  des  Anges,  il  y  a  quelques  An-
nees  pour  efleuer  des  enfans  de  cette  nation,
fut  interrompu  pour  de  iuftes  raifons  &  nomement
par  ce  que  Ton  ne  voyoit  pas  de  fruidl  notable  parmy
les  Sauuages,  comen^ant  I'inflrudtio  d'vn  peuple  par
des  enfans,  1' experience  nous  I'a  faidt  cognoiftre,
voicy  vne  occafion  qui  nous  a  oblige  de  reftablir
comme  vne  nouuelle  f a9on  de  Seminaire :  mais  plus
aifee  &  pour  des  perfonnes  plus  aagees  &  plus  capables
d'inftrudlion,  Dieu  veille  que  les  courfes  des  Hiro-
quois  ne  nous  empefchent  pas  de  continuer.

[104]  Vne  ieune  homme  de  ceux  qui  auoient  efte
autrefois  au  premier  Seminaire  des  Hurons  a  N.
Dame  des  Anges,  s'eftant  trouue  en  vne  grande
tepefte,  au  milieu  de  leur  grand  lac,  fift  vceu  k  Dieu
s'il  rechapoit  de  mener  vne  vie  plus  reglee  &  plus
parfaidte,  fon  voeu  eft  exauce,  il  eft  deliur6  contre
toute  apparence  humaine,  il  va  trouuer  nos  Peres  qui
eftoient  aux  Hurons  &  leur  comunique  fon  voeu  &  fa
refolutio,  on  y  pefe,  on  delibere,  on  fe  refout  enfin
de  le  tirer  hors  de  so  pais,  oil  il  eftoit  en  plus  grand
danger,  &  de  I'enuoyer  5k  bas  affin  qu'il  fut  mieux
ayde,  &  qu'il  peuft  voir  I'exeple  des  Fra9ois  &  des
Algonquins  de  Sillery:  on  luy  donna  pour  compa-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  103


CHAPTER  VII.

OF THE HURONS WHO WINTERED AT QUEBEC AND

SILLERY.

THE  Seminary  of  the  Hurons,  which  had  been
established  at  nostre-Dame  des  Anges  some
Years  ago,  in  order  to  educate  children  of  that
nation,  was  interrupted  for  good  reasons,  and  espe-
cially because  no  notable  fruit  was  seen  among  the
Savages;  our  experience  in  beginning  the  instruc-
tion of  a  people  with  the  children,  has  made  us
recognize  this  fact.  Here  is  an  occasion  which  has
obliged  us  to  reestablish  a  Seminary  in  a  new
fashion,  as  it  were, — but  easier,  and  in  behalf  of
persons,  older,  and  more  capable  of  instruction.
God  grant  that  the  incursions  of  the  Hiroquois  may
not  hinder  us  from  continuing.

[104]  A  young  man,  of  those  who  had  formerly
been  at  the  first  Seminary  of  the  Hurons  at  Nostre
Dame  des  Anges.  happening  to  be  in  a  great  storm,
in  the  midst  of  their  great  lake,  made  a  vow  to  God,
if  he  escaped,  to  lead  a  more  regular  and  orderly
life.  His  vow  is  heard, —  he  is  delivered,  contrary
to  every  human  probability;  he  goes  to  find  our
Fathers  who  were  with  the  Hurons,  and  imparts  to
them  his  vow  and  his  resolution.  They  think  there-
on ;  they  deliberate ;  they  finally  resolve  to  take  him
out  of  his  own  country,  where  he  was  in  greater  dan-
ger, and  to  send  him  down  here,  so  that  he  should
be  better  aided,  and  that  he  might  see  the  example


104  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

gnon  vn  autre  ieune  homme  Huron,  lequel  defiroit
de  fe  faire  Chreftien:  ils  arriuerent  tous  deux  k
Sillery,  I'an  palTe  le  mois  de  Septembre,  ce  fut  a
cette  occafion  que  i'arreftay  derechef  le  Pere  lean
de  Brebeuf  qui  auoit  hyuerne  icy  Tan  precedent,
&  qui  n'eftoit  pas  encor  remonte,  afin  de  les  inftruire
&  d'en  prendre  la  charge,  plufieurs  autres  ieunes  gens
Hurons  qui  eftoiet  defcedus  en  traitte,  fe  prefenteret
[105]  auffi  a  nous  pour  eftre  receus  &  eftre  inftruits:
mais  le  peu  de  viures  que  nous  auons,  ne  nous  per-
mettant  pas  d'en  admettre  dauantage,  vne  partie  d'i-
ceux  fut  contrainte  de  s'en  retourner  en  leurs  pais,
&  r autre  de  fe  ioindre  aux  Algonquins  pour  aller
pendant  I'hyuer  a  la  chaffe  ou  a  la  guerre  auec  eux.
Toutesfois  la  charite  de  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  &
des  Meres  Hofpitalieres  nous  a  donne  moyen  d'en
adioindre  trois  aux  deux  premieres,  &  baptifer  ceux
qui  ne  I'eftoient  pas  chez  nous,  auec  I'aide  que  i'ay
dit,  nous  en  auons  loge  &  entretenu  quatre,  &  vers
le  Printemps  vn  fixiefme  qui  eft  furuenu,  tous  vni-
uerfellement  parlant,  nous  ont  fort  edifie,  ils  eftoient
toufiours  des  premiers  a  la  Meffe  &  aux  prieres,  &
en  fortoient  les  derniers  au  foir  &  au  matin,  ils  ne
manquoient  pas  de  faire  leurs  prieres  affez  longues  k
deux  genoux,  foit  qu'ils  fuffent  ^  la  maifon,  foit  qu'ils
fullent  dedans  les  bois  a  la  chaffe  plufieurs  fois  le
iour  ils  alloient  ^  la  Chappelle,  pour  prier  Dieu,  &
faluer  le  faindt  Sacrement,  ils  n'euffent  eu  garde  de
rien  encommencer,  [106]  fans  auoir  fait  au  prealable
le  figne  de  la  Croix :  Tous  depuis  leur  baptefme  n'ont
pas  manque  de  fe  Conf eff er  «&  Comunier  au  moins  tous
les  Dimanches,  &  plufieurs  d'entre  eux  s'alloient.
ConfeHer  fi  toft  qu'ils  penfoient  auoir  commis  quel-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  105

of  the  French  and  of  the  Algonqiiins  of  Sillery.
They  gave  him  for  companion  another  Huron  young
man,  who  desired  to  become  a  Christian;  both  these
arrived  at  Sillery  last  year,  in  the  month  of  Septem-
ber. It  was  on  that  occasion  that  I  again  detained
Father  Jean  de  Brebeuf,  who  had  wintered  here  in
the  preceding  year,  and  who  had  not  yet  gone  up
again,  in  order  to  instruct  them  and  to  take  charge
of  them.  Several  other  Huron  young  men,  who  had
come  down  to  trade,  presented  themselves  [105]  also
to  us,  in  order  to  be  received  and  instructed;  but,
the  scanty  provisions  that  we  have  not  permitting  us
to  admit  any  more,  part  of  them  were  constrained  to
return  to  their  own  country,  and  the  others,  to  join
the  Algonquins  in  order  to  go  during  the  winter  to
the  hunt  or  to  the  war  with  them.

Nevertheless,  the  charity  of  Monsieur  the  Govern-
or and  of  the  Hospital  Mothers  has  given  us  means
to  add  three  to  the  first  two,  and  to  baptize  those
with  us  who  were  not  baptized.  With  the  help  that
I  have  mentioned,  we  have  lodged  and  maintained
four  of  them,  and  toward  the  Spring,  a  sixth,  who
came  unexpectedly.  Generally  speaking,  all  have
greatly  edified  us ;  they  were  always  among  the  first
at  Mass  and  at  prayers,  and  were  the  last  to  leave,
both  at  evening  and  in  the  morning.  They  failed
not  to  say  their  prayers,  quite  long,  on  both  knees,
whether  they  were  at  home  or  hunting  in  the  woods.
Several  times  in  the  day  they  went  to  the  Chapel,  to
pray  to  God  and  salute  the  blessed  Sacrament ;  they
would  take  care  not  to  begin  anything  [106]  without
having  first  made  the  sign  of  the  Cross.  All,  since
their  baptism,  have  not  failed  to  Confess  themselves
and  receive  Communion  at  least  every  Sunday;  and


106  LES  RELA  TJONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  24

que  faute  vn  pen  notable:  tout  le  long  de  I'hyuer,  ils
alloient  tons  les  Dimaches  a  Quebec,  pour  afllfter  a  la
grade  Meffe,  k  quoy  ils  n'ont  pas  nianqu6,  quelque
temps  qu'il  ayt  fait,  quoy  qu'il  y  ait  enuiron  deux
lieues,  &  qu'il  falluft  partir  pour  1' ordinaire  auant  le
iour,  pendant  la  rigueur  de  I'hyuer:  mais  le  defir  de
plaire  a  Dieu,  «&  le  contentement  qu'ils  receuoient  h.
voir  la  deuotion  de  nos  Frangois  affembles  en  I'Eglife,
faifoit  qu'ils  ne  trouuoient  rien  difficile.  De  plus  la
paix  &  I'vnion,  en  laquelle  ils  ont  vefcu  par  enfem-
ble,  &  auec  nos  Frangois  &  les  Sauuages  Algonquins,
&  les  feruices  qui  rendoient  volontiers :  monftroient
affez  ce  que  pent  la  force  de  la  foy,  &  de  la  grace
diuine  quand  elle  s'eft  empar^e  des  coeurs  mefme
Sauuages.  Voila  ce  qui  a  efte  commun  a  tous,  voicy
ce  qu'il  y  a  de  particulier.  Celuy  qui  a  [107]  done
occafio  a  toute  I'affaire  eft  vn  nome  Armat  Andebla-
raken  qui  n'a  pas  peu  feruy  par  fes  exemples  &  fes
paroles  k  I'inftrudtion  des  autres,  &  h.  les  encourager
k  bien  faire.  Noftre  Seigneur  luy  a  communique
par  interualle  de  grands  defirs  de  fon  falut,  &  mefme
quelquefois  d'abandonner  le  monde,  &  d'entrer  en
Religion,  laquelle  il  cognoift  fort  bien,  &  diftingue
d'auec  la  vie  commune:  mais  elle  demande  vne
longue  efpreuue,  eftre  Sauuage,  &  eftre  Religieux
font  chof es  qui  f emblent  bien  repugnantes ;  toutef ois
la  grace  de  Dieu  &  le  teps  pourront  tout  apporter.
Ce  ieune  homme  vint  vn  iour  de  cet  Hyuer  trouuer
le  Pere  Brebeuf,  k  la  fin  de  fa  Meffe,  &  luy  tint  ce
difcours;  Mon  Pere  i'ay  grande  enuie  de  bien  faire
&  de  me  fauuer,  i'ay  entierement  refolu  cela:  car  ie
crains  ces  feux  qui  bruflent  inceffamment  fous  terre,
&  qui  ne  s'efteignent  iamais. Pour  paruenir  oii  ie


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  107

several  of  them  went  to  Confess  themselves  as  soon
as  they  thought  they  had  committed  any  notable
fault.  Throughout  the  winter,  they  went  every  Sun-
day to  Quebec,  in  order  to  attend  high  Mass,  from
which  they  have  not  been  absent,  whatever  the  state
of  the  weather, —  although  the  distance  is  about  two
leagues,  and  though  they  were  usually  obliged  to  start
before  daylight,  during  the  rigor  of  the  winter ;  but
the  desire  of  pleasing  God,  and  the  satisfaction  that
they  received  in  seeing  the  devotion  of  our  French,
assembled  in  the  Church,  caused  them  to  find  noth-
ing difficult.  Moreover,  the  peace  and  unity  in  which
they  have  lived  together,  and  with  our  French  and
the  Algonquin  Savages,  and  the  services  which  they
willingly  rendered,  showed  well  enough  what  the
power  of  faith  and  of  the  divine  grace  can  do  when
it  has  gained  possession  of  even  Savage  hearts.  The
foregoing  is  what  was  common  to  all ;  here  follows
what  is  individual.  The  one  who  [107]  gave  occa-
sion for  the  whole  enterprise  is  a  certain  Armant
Andewaraken,  who  has  aided  not  a  little,  by  his  deeds
and  his  words,  in  the  instruction  of  the  others,  and
in  encouraging  them  to  do  well.  Our  Lord  has
imparted  to  him,  at  intervals,  great  desires  for  his  sal-
vation,—  and  sometimes  even  to  forsake  the  world
and  to  enter  into  Religion,  which  he  knows  very
well,  and  separates  from  the  common  life;  but  it
requires  a  long  probation, —  to  be  a  Savage  and  to  be
a  Religious  are  things  which  seem  very  repugnant ;
nevertheless,  the  grace  of  God,  and  time,  will  avail
to  compass  everything.  This  young  man  came  one
day  of  last  Winter  to  find  Father  Brebeuf ,  at  the  end
of  his  Mass,  and  spoke  to  him  as  follows:  "  My  Fa-
ther, I  have  great  desire  to  do  right  and  to  save  my-


108  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUlTES  [Vol.24

pretens,  ie  voudrois  bien  demeurer  toufioiirs  auec
vous,  &  ne  retourner  point  aux  Hurons,  ou  il  y  a
grade  peine  de  fe  fauuer,  les  occafions  de  pecher  font
frequetes  dedans  nos  bourgades:  [io8]  la  liberte  y
eft  grande,  ie  fuis  pourtant  determine  d'obeir  &  de
faire  tout  ce  que  Ie  Pere  Superieur  ordonnera :  s'il
me  commandoit  d'aller  aux  Hyroquois,  i'irois  tres-
volontiers  fans  aucune  efcorte,  &  mefme  s'il  me
commandoit  de  me  letter  a  corps  perdu  dedans  cette
riuiere  qui  paffe  Ik  deuant,  ie  Ie  ferois  auffi  toft.
C'eft  ainfi  qu'il  parloit,  ne  regardant  pas  k  la  chofe
qui  de  f oy  eft  illicite :  mais  fimplement  au  comman-
dement :  au  refte  difoit-il,  que  Ie  Pere  Superieur  me
dife  ce  qu'il  me  conuient  faire,  ie  fuis  affeur6  que  ce
fera  la  volonte  de  Dieu,  &  par  ainfi  i'y  acquiefceray.
Archiendaffe,  c'eft  a  dire  Ie  Pere  Hierofme  I'Alle-
mant  qui  eft  Superieur  aux  Hurons,  m'a  adrelle  a  luy.
Ie  fgay  bien  que  vous  auez  encor  d'autres  Superieurs
en  France:  mais  c'eft  luy  qui  tient  icy  la  place  de
Dieu,  &  qui  me  dira  ce  qu'il  faut  que  ie  faffe.  Le
Pere  Superieur  luy  fift  dire  qu'il  loiioit  fort  fon  defCein
&  fa  deuotion,  qu'il  perfeueraft  courageufement,
que  nous  aurions  toufiours  vn  foin  tres-particulier  de
luy,  que  pour  ce  qui  ell  de  demeurer  Ik  bas  chez
nous,  on  y  penferoit,  [109]  &  on  le  recommanderoit
k  Dieu,  &  qu'il  lift  le  mefme  de  fon  cofte:  on  confulta
apres  les  prieres  faites,  &  on  trouua  meilleur  qu'il
retournaft  encor  en  fon  pais,  &  qu'eftant  craignant
Dieu,  comme  il  eft,  &  affifte  de  nos  Peres,  ce  feroit
le  meilleur  pour  luy  &  pour  les  Compatriotes.  II
s'eft  eftudi6  fortement  k  la  mortification  de  fes  mouue-
mens  &  inclinations :  f ouuent  il  f e  f entoit  porte  k  dif-
puter,  «&  quelquefois  il  s'emportoit  a  quelques  paroles:


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  109

self;  I  have  wholly  resolved  that,  for  I  fear  those  fires
which  burn  incessantly  beneath  the  earth,  and  which
are  never  extinguished.  In  order  to  attain  what  I
desire,  I  would  like  to  live  always  with  j^'ou,  and  not
return  to  the  Hurons,  where  there  is  great  difficulty
in  saving  oneself, — the  opportunities  for  sin  are
frequent  in  our  villages,  [108]  and  the  liberty  in
them  is  ofreat.  I  am  nevertheless  determined  to
obey,  and  to  do  everything  which  the  Father  Supe-
rior shall  order.  If  he  commanded  me  to  go  to  the
Hyroquois,  I  would  go  very  willingly,  without  any
escort ;  and  even  if  he  commanded  me  to  cast  myself,
at  the  loss  of  life,  into  this  river  which  passes  yonder
before  us,  I  would  do  so  at  once."  Thus  he  spoke,
not  looking  at  the  thing  which  in  itself  is  illicit,  but
simply  at  the  command.  "  Moreover,"  he  said,  "let
the  Father  Superior  tell  me  what  I  ought  to  do ;
I  am  sure  that  it  will  be  the  will  of  God,  and  there-
fore I  shall  acquiesce  therein.  Archiendasse " —
that  is  to  say,  Father  Hierosme  I'AUemant,  who  is
Superior  among  the  Hurons  —  * '  has  addressed  me  to
him.  I  know  well  that  you  have  still  other  Superi-
ors in  France ;  but  it  is  he  who  here  takes  the  place
of  God,  and  who  will  tell  me  what  I  must  do."  The
Father  Superior  sent  him  word  that  he  greatly  praised
his  design  and  his  devotion ;  that  he  should  persevere
courageously;  that  we  would  always  have  a  most
special  care  for  him ;  that,  with  reference  to  living
down  there  with  us,  we  would  think  of  it,  [109]  and
we  would  recommend  the  matter  to  God,  and  that
he,  on  his  part,  should  do  the  same.  There  was  a
consultation  after  prayers  were  done,  and  it  was
found  best  that  he  should  return  again  to  his  own
country, — that  God-fearing,  as  he  is,  and  assisted  by


110  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.24

mais  incontinent  il  rentroit  en  foy-mefme,  &  fe
taifoit  tout  court,  fe  fouuenant  qu'il  auoit  refolu  de
bien  faire.  Vn  iour,  ayant  eu  quelque  differend  auec
vn  de  nos  Frangois,  non  feulement  il  s'en  alia  incon-
tinent Confeffer,  mais  il  alia  demander  pardon  a  celuy
qu'il  auoit  offenc^,  en  Tembraffant  tendrement,  &  du
depuis  il  luy  a  rendu  tons  les  feruices  qu'il  a  peu.

Le  premier  qui  a  profit^  de  ces  exemp[le]s,  a  efte  vn
ieune  homme  nomme  Saoiiaretclii,  qui  eftoit  defcen-
du  auec  luy,  il  eft  d'vn  excellent  naturel,  doux,
paifible,  obeiffant,  laborieux,  &  doiie  d'vn  bon  efprit;.
au  moyen  dequoy  il  a  promptement  [no]  apris  toutes
les  prieres.  II  fut  baptife  la  veille  de  Noel,  en  la
Chappelle  des  Meres  Vrfulines,  &  nomme  Ignace  par
Monfieur  Martial  Piraube,  &  la  nuidt  mefme  de  cette
grande  Fefte,  il  fift  fa  premiere  Communion,  &  de-
puis ce  temps-la  il  a  toufiours  continue  a  fe  confeffer
&  Communier  tous  les  Dimanches,  auec  beaucoup  de
deuotion :  fon  defir  k  fe  faire  inftruire,  a  paru  notam-
met  en  ce  poindt.  Ses  camarades  vers  le  comence-
ment  du  Carefme,  ayant  pris  refolution  d'aller  ^  la
chaff e  de  Lorignac,  il  dift  pour  luy  qu'il  n'iroit  pas,
&  qu'il  n'eftoit  pas  venu  de  fi  loin  pour  aller  "k  la
chaff e:  mais  afin  de  cognoiftre  Dieu,  &  apprendre  ^
le  feruir,  &  qu'il  ne  faifoit  eftat  d'aucune  autre  chofe
que  de  cela;  que  c'eft  ce  qu'il  pretendoit  remporter
k  fon  retour,  non  pas  des  peaux  Dorignac,  ou  autres
chof es :  fa  deuotion  particuliere  a  eft6  de  ieufner  tous
les  Samedis,  pour  fe  difpofer  a  la  Communion  du
Dimanche,  &  a  effedtuer  promptement  tout  ce  qui  luy
eftoit  commande.  Le  Baptefme  de  ce  ieune  homme
nous  fait  efperer  la  Conuerfion  de  beaucoup  d'autres :
[in]  car  outre  qu'il  eft  fort  exemplaire  &  fort  zel6,.


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  HI

our  Fathers,  this  would  be  the  best  for  him  and  for
his  fellow  Countrymen.  He  has  mightily  applied
himself  to  the  mortification  of  his  impulses  and
inclinations;  often  he  felt  himself  prone  to  dispute,
and  sometimes  he  would  grow  angry  at  certain
words ;  but  straightway  he  would  return  to  himself,
and  stop  short  in  silence,  remembering  that  he  had
resolved  to  do  right.  One  day,  having  had  some
difference  with  one  of  our  Frenchmen,  he  not  only
went  straightway  to  Confess,  but  he  went  to  ask
pardon  of  the  one  whom  he  had  offended,  embracing
him  tenderly ;  and  since  then  he  has  rendered  him
all  the  services  in  his  power.

The  first  to  profit  by  these  examples  has  been  a
young  man  named  Saouaretchi,  who  had  come  down
with  him;  he  is  of  an  excellent  disposition, — gentle,
peaceable,  obedient,  industrious, — and  endowed  with
a  good  mind,  by  means  of  which  he  has  quickly  [i  10]
learned  all  the  prayers.  He  was  baptized  on  Christ-
mas eve,  in  the  Chapel  of  the  Ursuline  Mothers,  and
named  Ignace,  by  Monsieur  Martial  Piraube.  On
the  very  night  of  that  great  Feast,  he  received  his
first  Communion ;  and  since  that  time  he  has  always
continued  to  confess  himself  and  receive  Communion
every  Sunday,  with  much  devotion :  his  desire  to  be
instructed  has  notably  appeared  in  this  point.  His
comrades,  toward  the  beginning  of  Lent,  having
taken  the  resolution  to  go  hunting  for  the  Moose,  he
said  that,  for  his  part,  he  would  not  go;  and  that  he
had  not  come  from  so  far  in  order  to  go  hunting,  but
in  order  to  know  God,  and  learn  to  serve  him,  and  that
he  made  account  of  no  other  thing  than  that ;  that  it
was  this  which  he  aspired  to  carry  away  at  his  return,
and not skins of Moose, or other things. His


112  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  24

il  apartient  k  vne  des  plus  groffes  &  nombreufes
families  des  Hurons,  qui  defia  eft  toute  affectionnee
^  la  foy,  &  qui  n'attend,  ce  femble,  que  le  Baptefme
de  ce  ieune  homme,  pour  fe  letter  apres  luy  dedans
ces  faindtes  eaux.

Enuiron  la-my-Ianuier  vn  des  autres  Hurons,  qui
auoient  pris  party  parmy  les  Algonquins  de  I'lfle,  &
qui  auoient  demeure  iufques  alors  auec  eux,  aupres
du  fort  de  Richelieu,  defcendit  expres  a  Sillery,  pour
fe  faire  inftruire  en  la  foy,  le  bourg  d'ou  il  eft  natif
fe  nomme  Arrente,  il  eft  nepueu  d'vndes  Capitaines:
mais  ce  qu'il  le  rend  encor  plus  recommandable,  eft
qu'il  eft  extremement  doux  &  fouple  a  tout.  II  a
I'efprit  &  le  iugement  fort  bon,  doux  &  obeiffant  au
poffible.

Les  Meres  Hofpitalieres  I'ont  loge  &  nourry,  auec
vne  charite  qui  embraffe  toutes  fortes  de  nations.
C'eft  merueille  combien  il  leur  a  donn6  de  content6-
ment,  dans  tons  les  feruices  qu'on  a  defir6  de  luy,
lef quels  il  a  rendu  auec  vne  gai'te,  promptitude  &
conftance,  qui  [112]  feroit  honte  a  plufieurs  Frangois:
fon  affedtion  enuers  la  foy  s'eft  rendue  remarquable,
non  feulement  en  ce  qu'il  venoit  conftamment  foir  &
matin  trouuer  le  Pere,  pour  fe  faire  inftruire:  mais
auffi  en  ce  qu'ayant  efte  inftruidl  de  quelque  nouuelle
priere  ou  legon,  il  la  repetoit  &  ru[m]inoit,  &  tant  &
fi  long-temps,  qu'il  la  f9auoit  auant  que  de  partir:  en
forte  qu'il  n'eftoit  nullement  befoin  de  luy  redire
deux  fois  vne  mefme  chofe,  il  ne  manquoit  point  tous
les  foirs,  &  tous  les  matins  d'aller  dans  la  Chapelle
de  I'Hofpital,  pour  y  faire  fes  prieres,  &  y  demeuroit
vne  bonne  efpace  de  temps.  II  fut  baptife  a  I'Hof-
pital, le  8.  de  Mars,  &  nomme  Pierre  par  Monfieur  de


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  113

particular  devotion  has  been  to  fast  every  Saturday,
in  order  to  prepare  himself  for  Sunday  Communion,
and  for  the  prompt  performance  of  all  that  was  com-
manded him.  The  Baptism  of  this  young  man  causes
us  to  hope  for  the  Conversion  of  many  others;  [m]
for,  besides  that  he  is  very  exemplary  and  very  zeal-
ous, he  belongs  to  one  of  the  largest  and  most  nu-
merous families  of  the  Hurons,  which  already  is  thor-
oughly attached  to  the  faith,  and  which  awaits,  it
seems,  only  the  Baptism  of  this  young  man  in  order
to  plunge  after  him  into  those  blessed  waters.

About  the  middle  of  January,  one  of  the  other  Hu-
rons, who  had  gone  to  live  among  the  Algonquins  of
the  Island,  and  who  until  then  had  remained  with
them  near  the  fort  of  Richelieu,  came  down  to  Sil-
lery,  expressly  to  be  instructed  in  the  faith.  The
village  of  which  he  is  native  is  named  Arrente,®  and
he  is  nephew  to  one  of  the  Captains ;  but  what  com-
mends him  still  more,  is  his  extreme  gentleness  and
docility  in  every  respect.  He  has  very  good  wit
and  judgment ;  mild  and  thoroughly  obedient.

The  Hospital  Mothers  have  lodged  and  fed  him,
with  a  charity  which  embraces  all  sorts  of  nations.
It  is  remarkable  how  much  satisfaction  he  has  given
them  in  all  the  services  which  have  been  desired  of
him;  these  he  has  rendered  with  a  cheerfulness,
promptness,  and  constancy  that  [112]  would  cause
shame  to  many  Frenchmen.  His  affection  toward
the  faith  has  made  itself  noteworthy, —  not  only  in
that  he  constantly  came,  evening  and  morning,  to
find  the  Father,  in  order  to  be  instructed ;  but  also
in  that,  having  been  instructed  in  some  new  prayer
or  lesson,  he  would  repeat  and  meditate  upon  it,  and
that so  much and  so  long, that  he  knew  it  before


114  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.24

Repentigny, qui luy a  toufiours depuis  tefmoigne
beaucoup  d'affection.

Enuiron  la  my  Feurier  deux  autres  ieunes  hommes
Hurons,  natifs  du  mefme  bourg,  que  le  precedent,  &
pouffez  du  mefme  defir  de  fe  faire  enroller  au  nom-
bre  des  Chreftiens,  abandonnerent  auffi  les  Algon-
quins  au  fort  de  Richelieu,  pour  s'en  venir  chercher
le  Pere  de  Brebeuf,  afin  d'eftre  par  luy  inftruits,  [113]
[nous]  les  receumes  encor  chez  nous :  faute  de  lieu
nous  fufmes  contrains  de  les  loger  auec  nos  oeuuriers :
I'vn  fe  nommoit  Atarohiat,  &  I'autre  Atokouchioliani.
L'enuie  d'eftre  au  pluftoft  baptifes,  leur  enflama
tellement  le  defir  de  fe  faire  inftruire,  qu'ils  eurent
apris  toutes  les  prieres  &  le  Catechifme  en  fort  peu
de  temps,  &  I'vn  d'iceux,  efmeu  de  ce  vehement  defir
d'apprendre,  ne  voulut  pas  fe  diuertir  pour  aller  a  la
chaff e  auec  fes  Camarades,  difant;  Le  temps  que
nous  auons  pour  demeurer  icy,  eft  trop  court.  le
defire  1' employer  k  me  faire  inftruire,  &  puis
d'ailleurs,  ie  n'ay  pas  la  plus  heureufe  memoire  du
monde,  ie  ne  fuis  defcendu  icy  pour  aller  a  la  chaffe,
&  pour  manger  de  la  viande;  fi  i'auois  en  enuie  d'en
manger,  ie  n'auois  qu'a  demeurer  auec  les  Algon-
quins,  Ik-haut  a  Richelieu,  la  ou  la  chaffe  eft  bien
meilleure  qu'icy,  voyant  qu'ils  fgauoient  bien  les
prieres,  ils  demanderent  fi  ardamment  le  Baptefme,
difant,  entre  autre  chofe  qu'ils  craignoient  qu'allant
fouuent  das  les  bois,  fur  les  eaux,  &  autres  lieux
dagereux,  il  ne  leur  arriuaft  quelque  mal-heur,  [114]
qu'enfin  on  leur  accorda,  ce  fut  dans  I'Eglife  de
Quebec  oii  ils  furent  baptifez  fort  folemnellement  le
iour  de  I'Annonciation  de  noftre-Dame,  auquel  auffi
ils  Communierent  pour  la  premiere  fois,  felon  I'vfage


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  115

going  away.  Hence  there  was  no  need  of  telling
him  the  same  thing  twice  over.  He  failed  not  to  go
into  the  Chapel  of  the  Hospital  every  evening  and
every  morning,  in  order  to  say  his  prayers  there;
and  stayed  there  a  good  space  of  time.  He  was
baptized  at  the  Hospital,  the  8th  of  March,  and  was
named  Pierre  by  Monsieur  de  Repentigny,  who  since
then  has  ever  shown  him  much  affection.

About  the  middle  of  February,  two  other  Huron
young  men  —  natives  of  the  same  village  as  the
preceding,  and  impelled  by  the  same  desire  to  have
themselves  enrolled  in  the  number  of  the  Chris-
tians—  also  abandoned  the  Algonquins  at  the  fort
of  Richelieu,  in  order  to  come  in  quest  of  Father  de
Brebeuf,  so  as  to  be  instructed  by  him.  [113]  We
received  them,  moreover,  at  our  abode;  for  want  of
room  we  were  constrained  to  lodge  them  with  our
workmen ;  one  was  named  Atarohiat,  and  the  other,
Atokouchiouani.  The  longing  to  be  baptized  as  soon
as  possible,  so  greatly  kindled  in  them  the  desire  to
be  instructed,  that  they  had  learned  all  the  prayers
and  the  Catechism  in  a  very  little  while ;  and  one  of
them,  moved  with  this  vehement  desire  to  learn,  was
not  willing  to  divert  himself  by  going  to  the  hunt
with  his  Comrades,  saying:  "  The  time  that  we  have
for  staying  here  is  too  short :  I  desire  to  employ  it
in  obtaining  instruction;  and  then,  besides,  I  have
not  the  happiest  memory  in  the  world.  I  have  not
come  down  here  to  go  hunting;  and,  as  for  eating
meat,  if  I  had  cared  to  eat  any,  I  had  only  to  stay
with  the  Algonquins  up  there  at  Richelieu,  where
the  hunt  is  much  better  than  here."  Seeing  that
they  knew  the  prayers  well,  they  requested  Baptism
so  ardently, —  saying,  among  other  things,  that  they


116  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.24


de  I'Eglife.  Monfieur  de  faindl  Sauueur  donna  le
nom  de  lofeph  a  Atarohiat,  &  Monfieur  de  la  Vallee,
celuy  de  Rene  k  Atokouchioiianj .

I'ay  dit  qu'on  les  auoit  baptifez  le  plus  folemnelle-
ment  qu'on  auoit  peu,  &  ce,  a  deffein;  parce  que  cela
a  beaucoup  d'effedt  fur  les  efprits  des  Sauuages,  &
n'eft  pas  enuers  eux  vn  petit  motif  de  credibilite.  A
ce  propos  apres  le  baptefme  de  ces  deux  derniers,  le
Pere  de  Brebeuf  ayant  mene  tous  les  Hurons  chez
Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  pour  le  remercier  de  tant  de
bien  &  d'honneur  qu'il  leur  faifoit,  il  leur  demanda
en  fa  prefence  ^  tous,  les  vns  apres  les  autres,  qui  eft
ce  qui  les  touchoit  le  plus,  &  les  portoit  dauantage  a
ambraffer  la  foy,  le  premier  dift  que  ce  qui  le  frap-
poit  dauantage  eftoit  de  confiderer  la  toute-puiffance
de  Dieu,  a  qui  rien  n'eft  impoffible,  &  de  pefer  aux
[115]  oeuures  merueilleufes  qu'il  a  fait,  depuis  le
commencement  du  monde,  comme  eft  d'auoir  tire  du
neant  tant  de  creatures,  d'auoir  fait  paffer  les  enfans
d'Ifrael  au  trauers  de  la  mer-rouge  ^  pied  fee,  les
auoir  nourry  de  la  Manne,  I'efpace  de  quarante  ans,
auoir  raffafie  plufieurs  mille  perfonnes,  auec  cinq
pains  &  deux  poiffons,  auoir  refufcite  le  Lazare,  mort
de  quatre  iours,  &  vne  infinite  d'autres  merueilles
femblables.

Vn  autre  dilt  que  ce  qui  le  touclio[it]  bien-fort
eftoit  de  voir  des  hommes  [&]  des  fiUes  Religieufes,
quitter  leur  pay[s]  ou  ils  eftoient  bien  k  leur  aife,  &
fans  danger,  pour  venir  en  des  lieux  oil  il  n'y  a  que
des  dangers,  &  des  incommoditez  incroyables,  &  tout
cela  pour  les  inftruire  &  les  gagner  a  Dieu.

Mais  la  plufpart  refpondit,  que  ce  q[ui]  leur  don-
noit  dauantage  dans  les  yeu[x]  eftoit  de  voir  tout  ce


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  117

feared  lest,  going  often  into  the  woods,  upon  the
waters,  and  into  other  dangerous  places,  there  might
happen  to  them  some  misfortune, —  [114]  that  finally
it  was  granted  them.  It  was  in  the  Church  of
Quebec  where  they  were  baptized,  very  solemnly,  the
day  of  the  Annunciation  of  our  Lady,  when  they  also
received  Communion  for  the  first  time,  according  to
the  custom  of  the  Church.  Monsieur  de  saint  Sau-
veur "'  gave  the  name  of  Joseph  to  Atarohiat ;  and  Mon-
sieur de  la  Vallee,  that  of  Rene  to  Atokouchiouani.

I  have  said  that  they  had  been  baptized  as  solemn-
ly as  possible, —  and  this  designedly,  because  that
has  much  effect  upon  the  minds  of  the  Savages,  and
is  to  them,  not  a  slight  incentive  to  belief.  To  this
end,  after  the  baptism  of  these  two  latter,  Father  de
Brebeuf  —  having  led  all  the  Hurons  before  Monsieur
the  Governor,  in  order  to  thank  him  for  so  much
kindness  and  honor  as  he  did  them  —  asked  them  in
his  presence,  all  in  succession,  what  that  is  which
touched  them  the  most,  and  most  inclined  them  to
embrace  the  faith.  The  first  said,  that  what  struck
him  chiefly  was,  to  consider  the  omnipotence  of  God,
with  whom  nothing  is  impossible;  and  to  think  of
the  [115]  marvelous  works  which  he  has  done,  from
the  beginning  of  the  world, —  as,  to  have  drawn  so
many  creatures  out  of  nothing ;  to  have  caused  the
children  of  Israel  to  pass  through  the  red  sea  with
dry  feet ;  to  have  fed  them  with  the  Manna  for  the
space  of  forty  years;  to  have  satisfied  several  thou-
sand persons  with  five  loaves  and  two  fishes ;  to  have
raised  Lazarus  from  the  dead,  four  days  after  death ;
and  countless  other  like  wonders.

Another  said  that  what  touched  him  very  strongly
was,  to  see  men  and  Religious  maids  leave  their  own


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.24

que  Ton  faifoit  pour  honorer  Dieu,  quand  nous  voy-
ons,  difoient-ils,  tout  le  monde  s'affembler,  icy  les
Dimanches  &  les  Feftes,  pour  ouyr  la  Meffe,  &  pour
prier  Dieu,  quand  nous  voyons  les  Confeffions  &
Communion  [i  i6]  frequente  &  pratiquee  auec  tant  de
deuotion,  quand  nous  confiderons  ce  que  Ton  fait  pour
les  Sauuages,  comme  on  leur  f  aidt  des  champs,  comme
on  leur  baftit  des  maifons,  comme  on  les  affifte  au
corps  &  en  I'ame,  c'eft  ce  qui  nous  fait  dire  que  la
foy  eft  vne  chofe  importante,  &  que  ce  que  vous  en-
feignez  eft  veritable.  Vers  le  Printemps  il  en  arriua
vn  fixiefme,  qui  auoit  efte  baptife  en  pafTant  par
Montreal,  auec  quelques  Algonquins,  il  logea  pour
I'ordinaire  ^  I'Hofpital,  auec  Pierre  fon  Camarade,
&  tafcha  de  recompenfer  auec  fa  ferueur  le  peu  de
temps  qu'il  auroit,  &  de  fe  faire  inllruire  auant  fon
Baptefme.  II  a  donn6  toute  forte  de  contentement
au  Pere  Brebeuf,  le  peu  de  temps  qu'il  a  peu  I'auoir
pour  fon  Maiflre.  Voyla  I'eftat  auquel  ont  efte  nos
cinq  ou  fix  penfionnaires  Hurons,  qui  feroient  fans
doute  en  plus  grand  nombre,  fi  les  moyens  eftoient
plus  grands,  au  refte  vne  chofe  leur  a  caufe  de  la
crainte,  &  donne  de  la  peine,  f9auoir  le  retour  en
leurs  pays:  car  difoient-ils,  tandis  que  nous  ferons
icy  parmy  vous,  il  ne  [117]  nous  eft  pas  quafi  poffible
d'offencer  Dieu,  voyant  tant  de  bons  exemples  de
vertu,  &  point  de  vices:  mais  en  noftre  pays:  c'eft
tout  au  contraire,  on  ne  f9ait  que  c'eft  que  de  bien
faire,  c'eft  vn  chaos  de  confufion  &  de  defordre,  &
puis  difoient  les  derniers  baptifez,  il  n'y  a  quafi  en-
core perfonne  en  noftre  bourg,  ny  des  circonuoifms,
qui  ait  folidement  embraffe  la  foy,  nous  fommes  les
premiers  &  les  vniques. C'eft  ainfi  qu'ils  parloient


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  119

country,  where  they  were  much  at  their  ease,  and
without  danger,  in  order  to  come  to  places  where
there  is  nothing  but  dangers  and  incredible  incon-
veniences,—  and  all  that  in  order  to  instruct  them,
and  win  them  to  God.

But  the  most  part  answered  that  what  mainly
attracted  their  attention  was,  to  see  all  that  was  done
to  honor  God.  "  When  we  see,"  said  they,  "  every
one  assemble  here  on  Sundays  and  Feasts,  in  order
to  hear  the  Mass  and  to  pray  to  God ;  when  we  see
Confessions  and  frequent  Communions,  [116]  observed
with  so  much  devotion;  when  we  consider  what  is
done  for  the  Savages, — how  fields  are  prepared  for
them,  how  houses  are  built  for  them,  how  they  are
assisted  in  body  and  soul, —  that  is  what  makes  us
say  that  faith  is  something  important,  and  that  what
you  teach  is  true."  Toward  Spring  there  arrived  a
sixth,  who  had  been  baptized  in  passing  through
Montreal,  together  with  some  Algonquins.  He
lodged,  as  a  rule,  at  the  Hospital,  with  Pierre,  his
Comrade,  and  tried  to  compensate  with  his  fervor  for
the  little  time  that  he  should  have,  and  to  become
instructed  before  his  Baptism.  He  has  given  every
sort  of  contentment  to  Father  Brebeuf,  in  the  short
time  that  he  could  have  him  for  his  Teacher.  Such
has  been  the  status  of  our  five  or  six  Huron  board-
ers, who  no  doubt  would  be  more  numerous  if  the
means  were  greater.  Howbeit,  one  thing  has  caused
them  fear  and  given  them  pain, —  to  wit,  the  return
to  their  country;  "  For,"  they  said,  "  while  we  shall
be  here  among  you,  it  [i  17]  is  hardly  possible  for  us
to  offend  God,  seeing  so  many  good  examples  of  vir-
tue, and  no  vices :  but  in  our  own  country,  it  is  quite
the  contrary, —  one  knows  not  what  it  is  to  do  right;


120  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.24

&  qu'ils  reprefentoient  le  danger,  auquel  ils  fe  croy-
oient  d'offencer  la  diuine  Maiefte:  &  en  effedt  ils  ont
iufte  fubiedt  de  craindre,  &  nous  auffi:  &  quand  bien
quelqu'vn  d'eux  viendroit  ^  trebucher,  il  ne  s'en
faudroit  pas  eftonner.  Nous  efperons  toutefois  en  la
diuine  bonte  qu'elle  les  conferuera,  &  qu'elle  per-
fedtionnera  ce  qu'elle  a  commence.  lis  partirent
tous  vers  la-my-Iuin,  pour  retourner  en  leur  pays,
en  la  compagnie  d'enuiron  fix-vingts  autres  Hurons,
qui  eftoient  venus  en  traite.  Cette  fagon  de  Semi-
naire  eft  aifee,  &  fe  pent  faire  "k  petis  frais,  &  eft
excellente,  choififfant  nombre  de  ieunes  gens  de  vingt
[ii8]  ou  vingt-cinq  ans,  de  bonne  volont^,  &  bon
efprit,  &  les  cultiuant  vn  Automne,  «&  vn  Hyuer  par-
my  nos  Fran§ois,  &  nos  Chreftiens  Algonquins,  leur
faifant  voir  &  goufter  la  profeffion  du  Chriftianifme
parmy  nous,  &  parmy  des  gens  de  leur  pays  mefme,
&  puis  les  renuoyant  fous  la  Garde,  &  la  conduite  de
nos  Peres,  qui  font  aux  Hurons :  mais  ie  ne  f9ay  fi  la
rage  des  Hiroquois  ne  nous  priuera  point  de  cette
confolation,  &  eux  d'vn  fi  grand  bon-heur.  Si  les
Hurons  eftoient  gagnez,  la  nation  des  Neutres,  &
autres  voifmes  ne  tarderoit  gueres  a  fuiure.  Les  Hu-
ros  qui  font  venus  en  traitte,  nous  ont  dit  que  ce  font
\  prefent  les  principaux  du  pays  qui  fe  font  inftruire.


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  121

it  is  a  chaos  of  confusion  and  of  disorder. "  "  And
then,"  said  the  one  last  baptized,  "  there  is  as  yet
scarcely  any  one  in  our  village,  or  in  those  round
about,  who  has  solidly  embraced  the  faith.  We  are
the  first  and  the  only  ones."  Thus  they  spoke,  and
represented  the  danger  wherein  they  believed  them-
selves to  be,  of  offending  the  divine  Majesty.  In
fact,  they  have  just  cause  to  fear,  and  we  also ;  and
if,  indeed,  some  one  of  them  should  happen  to
stumble,  we  must  not  be  surprised.  Nevertheless,
we  hope  in  the  divine  goodness  that  it  will  preserve
them,  and  that  it  will  perfect  what  it  has  begun.
They  all  went  away  toward  the  middle  of  June,  in
order  to  return  to  their  own  country,  in  the  company
of  about  six-score  other  Hurons,  who  had  come  for
trade.  This  plan  of  Seminary  is  easy,  and  can  be
realized  at  small  expense,  and  is  excellent, —  choos-
ing a  number  of  young  men,  of  twenty  [118]  or  twen-
ty-five years,  of  good  will  and  good  intelligence,  and
training  them  one  Autumn  and  one  Winter  among
our  French  and  our  Algonquin  Christians ;  causing
them  to  see  and  to  taste  the  profession  of  Christian-
ity among  us,  and  among  people  of  their  very  coun-
try; and  then  sending  them  away,  under  the  Guard
and  the  guidance  of  our  Fathers  who  are  with  the
Hurons.  But  I  know  not  whether  the  rage  of  the
Hiroquois  will  not  deprive  us  of  this  consolation;
and  them,  of  so  great  a  good  fortune.  If  the  Hu-
rons were  won  over,  the  nation  of  the  Neutrals,  and
others  neighboring,  would  hardly  be  slow  to  follow..
The  Hurons  who  have  come  for  trade  have  told  us
that  these  who  are  being  instructed  are,  at  present,
the  principal  men  of  the  country.


122  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.24


[119]  CHAPITRE  VIII.

DE LA MISSION DE TADOUSAC.

IL  y  a  trois  ans  que  nous  commengames  cette  Mif-
fion,  nous  alliens  chercher  des  nations  bien  loin,
&  quittions  1^  nos  voilins,  cela  prouenoit  de
leur  mauuaife  difpolltio,  &  de  Tauerfion  qu'ils  tefmoi-
gnoient  aux  chofes  de  la  f oy :  mais  depuis  quelques
annees,  Dieu  en  ayant  touche  d'entre  eux  fortement,
lis  font  venus  fouuent  nous  voir,  &  demander  d'eftre
infkruits,  puis  enfin  nous  ont  prie  &  coniure  d'aller
en  leur  pays  paffer  quelques  mois  de  I'annee,  ce  qui
a  tres-bien  reiiffi,  en  forte  que  quantite  de  petites
nations  circonuoifmes,  efmeues  du  bruidl  &  de  I'ex-
emple  de  ces  premiers,  font  forties  de  ces  grandes
forefts  du  Nort,  comme  de  pauures  brebis  efgarees
&  perdues,  pour  chercher  elles-mefmes  le  Pafteur,  8c
fe  fauuer  de  la  gueule  des  loups.  Ces  pauures  [120]
gens,  ayant  ouy  la  parole  de  Dieu,  &  goufte  fa  dou-
ceur, s'en  retournoient  d'auec  nos  Peres  en  leur  pays
pleins  de  regret  &  de  deplaifir,  de  n'auoir  perfonne
qui  cultiuafl  cette  femence  celefte,  qu'ils  emportoient
en  leurs  coeurs ;  chacun  au  moins  remettoit  de  retour-
ner  le  Printemps,  &  I'Efte,  &  prioit  le  Pere  qui  les
enfeignoit,  de  reuenir  auffi  lu  -mefme  en  ce  temps-
1^.  Madame  la  Ducheffe  d'Aiguillon  nonobftant  les
eftranges  fujets  de  douleur  &  trifteffe  qu'elle  a  eu,
&  qui  euffent  abattu  le  courage  d'vne  infinite  d'au-
tres,  n'a  paslaiffe  d'eftendre  fes  foins,  &  fes  affedlions


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  123


[119]  CHAPTER  VIII.

OF THE MISSION AT TADOUSAC.

IT  is  three  years  since  we  began  this  Mission ;  we
were  going  in  quest  of  nations  very  distant,  and
were  leaving  our  neighbors  there;  that  pro-
ceeded from  their  bad  disposition,  and  from  the
aversion  which  they  showed  for  the  things  of  the
faith.  But  within  some  years  past,  God  having
strongly  influenced  some  of  them,  they  have  often
come  to  see  us,  and  to  ask  to  be  instructed;  then,
in  fine,  they  begged  and  entreated  us  to  go  into  their
country,  to  spend  some  months  of  the  year.  This
has  succeeded  very  well, —  insomuch  that  many  little
nations  round  about,  moved  by  the  rumor  and  the
example  of  the  former  ones,  have  issued  from  these
great  forests  of  the  North, — like  poor  sheep,  stray-
ing and  lost, — in  order  themselves  to  seek  the  Pas-
tor, and  save  themselves  from  the  jaws  of  the  wolves.
These  poor  [120]  people,  having  heard  the  word  of
God,  and  tasted  its  sweetness,  returned  from  the
company  of  our  Fathers  into  their  own  country,  full
of  regret  and  affliction  at  having  no  one  to  cultivate
that  heavenly  seed  which  they  carried  away  in  their
hearts.  Each  one  counted  on  returning  at  least  in
the  Spring  and  in  the  Summer,  and  begged  the  Fa-
ther who  taught  them  to  return  himself  also,  at  that
time.  Madame  the  Duchess  d'Aiguillon,  notwith-
standing the  unusual  causes  of  grief  and  sadness  that
she  has  had,  and  that  would have  prostrated the


124  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

ordinaires  fur  nos  Miffions,  &  nommement  fur  celle-
cy  de  Tadoufac.  Le  P.  Charl.  Lalemat  m'efcrit  de
France  qu'entendant  les  larmes  &  les  plaintes  des
Sauuages  de  ces  quartiers-lk,  fur  ce  qu'ils  auoient  fi
peu  fouuent  des  perfonnes  pour  les  inllruire,  elle  a
fourny  dequoy  entretenir  cette  annee,  les  Peres
neceff aires  a  cete  milTion.  Auant  que  nous  euffios  eu
cette  nouuelle,  nous  anions  preuenu  fes  penfees,  &
le  P.  de  Quen  y  eftoit  alle  des  le  Prin-teps,  auec  vn
heureux  fuccez:  en  voicy  le  somaire.

[i2i]  Si  toft  que  les  Sauuages  eurent  entendu  la
nouuelle  que  le  Pere  venoit  en  Canot,  ils  enuoyerent
vne  troupe  de  ieunes  gens  au  deuat  auec  vne  chaloup-
pe,  qu'ils  auoient  pour  Tembarquer,  &  comme  il  mit
pied  a  terre,  ils  firent  tons  paroiftre  vne  merueilleufe
ioye  auec  des  reproches  amoureufes  d'vn  trop  long
retardement  contre  la  parolle  qu'il  leur  auoit  donn^e
de  fe  trouuer  k  Tadoufac  des  le  commencement  du
prin-temps :  puis  ils  fe  mirent  k  luy  raconter  ce  qu'ils
auoient  fait  en  1' attendant.  Car  voyant  qu'il  tardoit,
ils  auoient  choifi  vn  ieune  Sauuage  fort  bon  Chre-
ftien  venu  de  Sillery  depuis  peu,  &  1 'auoient  eftably
maiftre  des  prieres,  il  auoit  appris  k  Sillery  celles  du
matin  &  du  foir  auec  la  fagon  de  dire  le  Chappellet.
Le  Capitaine  luy  parla,  &  luy  fit  entendre  comme  il
auoit  eu  charge  du  Pere  fi  toft  que  les  Sauuages  fe-
roient  arriues  ^  Tadoufac  au  prin-temps  de  les  affem-
bler  tons  dans  vne  grande  cabane  deux  fois  le  iour,
le  matin  &  le  foir,  pour  y  prier  Dieu  publiquement
qu'ils  ne  f9auoient  encore  gueres  de  chofes :  que  pour
luy,  ayat  hyuern^  [122]  k  Sillery,  il  auoit  eu  la  com-
modity d'apprendre,  &  auoit  veu  la  pratique  des  pri-
eres qu'ils  fupplioient  d'en  prendre  la  charge,  que  tous


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  ib42-43  125

courage  of  countless  others,  has  none  the  less  ex-
tended her  care  and  her  customary  affection  toward
our  Missions,  and  notably  upon  this  one  at  Tadousac.
Father  Charles  Lalemant  writes  to  me  from  France
that,  hearing  the  tears  and  the  complaints  of  the  Sav-
ages of  those  quarters,  because  they  so  seldom  had
persons  to  instruct  them,  she  has  furnished  means  for
supporting,  this  year,  the  Fathers  necessary  to  that
mission.  Before  we  had  received  this  news,  we  had
anticipated  her  thoughts,  and  Father  de  Quen  had
gone  thither  as  early  as  Spring,  with  excellent
success;  here  follows  a  summary  thereof.

[i2i]  As  soon  as  the  Savages  had  heard  the  news
that  the  Father  was  coming  by  Canoe,  they  sent  a
band  of  young  men  to  meet  him  with  a  shallop  which
they  had,  in  order  to  put  him  on  board;  and  as  he
landed,  they  all  showed  a  wonderful  joy, — together
with  loving  reproaches  because  of  too  long  a  delay,
contrary  to  the  word  which  he  had  given  them,  to  be
at  Tadousac  by  the  beginning  of  spring ;  then  they
proceeded  to  relate  to  him  what  they  had  done  while
waiting  for  him. For,  seeing  that  he  was  late,  they
had  chosen  a  young  Savage, — a  very  good  Christian,
recently  come  from  Sillery, —  and  had  appointed  him
master  of  prayers. He  had  learned  at  Sillery  those
for  morning  and  evening,  together  with  the  manner
of  reciting  the  Rosary. The  Captain  spoke  to  him,
and  gave  him  to  understand  how  he  had  received
charge  from  the  Father,  as  soon  as  the  Savages  should
have  arrived  at  Tadousac  in  the  spring,  to  assemble
them  all  in  a  large  cabin,  twice  a  day,  morning  and
evening,  in  order  there  to  pray  to  God  in  public ;  that
as  yet,  they  knew  very  little, — but,  as  for  him,  hav-
ing wintered  [122]  at  Sillery,  he  had  had  the  oppor-


126  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

feroient  obliges  de  luy  obeir.  Apres  luy  auoir  tenu
ce  difcours  il  luy  mit  vn  grad  fouet  de  corde  k  gros
noeuds  entre  les  mains  pour  toucher  fur  ceux  qui
manqueroient  de  fe  trouuer  aux  prieres.

De  plus  par  vne  limplicite  innocente  voyant  que
ceux  qui  inftruifent  parmy  nous,  portent  vne  cou-
ronne  a  la  tefte,  ils  luy  en  firent  vne  penfant  que
cela  fuft  neceffaire.  Ce  bon  Neophyte  exer9a  fa
charge  auec  vn  grand  zele  &  vn  grand  foing,  les
affemblant  tous  foir  &  matin,  pronon9ant  tout  haut
les  prieres,  recitant  auec  eux  le  Chappellet,  &  leur
enfeignant  ce  qu'il  f9auoit,  auec  vn  grand  contente-
ment  de  tous  ces  bonnes  gens  &  vne  grande  edifica-
tion de  quelques  Francois,  qui  eftoient  defcendus  au
prin-temps  de  Kebec  h.  Tadoufac,  Le  Pere  les  cogra-
tula  fort  ^  ces  bones  nouuelles,  &  prit  ce  ieune
gargon  pour  fon  copagnon,  ne  luy  ofkant  rien  de  fa
charge  que  la  Couronne  qu'il  auoit  h.  la  tefte.

[123]  La  premiere  chofe  que  fit  le  Pere,  fut  vne
criee  par  toutes  les  cabanes  qu'on  amenaft  tous  les
enfans  auant  I'vfage  de  raifon  qui  n'efloient  pas
encore  baptifez,  afin  de  leur  conferer  ce  facrement,  ce
qui  fut  bien-toft  execute  par  la  diligence  &  piet6  des
parents,  qui  en  furent  rauis  d'aife:  ils  les  amenerent
a  la  Chapelle,  c'efh  vne  pauure  mafure  baflie  a  la
hafle  par  les  Fran9ois,  qui  font  la  defcharge  des  Na-
uires  k  Tadoufac,  &  qui  a  faute  d'autre  lieu,  fert  de
Chappelle.  Cela  fait,  le  Pere  affemble  en  particu-
lier  tous  les  Chreftiens,  &  leur  fait  exhortation,  tous
fe  confeffent  auec  vne  fmguliere  confolation  &  de-
uotion,  il  ne  donna  pourtant  ^  cet  abord  la  Commu-
nion qu'k  ceux  qu'il  iugea  les  plus  capables,  ils
affiftoient  tous  les  matins  aux  prieres,  &  k  la  MelTe,


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-43  127

tunity  to  learn,  and  had  seen  the  practice  of  prayers ;
and  they  besought  him  to  take  charge  thereof,  say-
ing that  all  would  be  obliged  to  obey  him.  After  hav-
ing spoken  thus  to  him,  he  put  in  his  hands  a  heavy
whip  of  cords,  with  large  knots,  in  order  to  beat
those  who  should  fail  to  be  present  at  the  prayers.

Furthermore,  with  an  innocent  simplicity,  having
seen  that  those  who  instruct  among  us  wear  the  ton-
sure on  their  heads,  they  made  him  one,  thinking  that
that  was  necessary.  This  good  Neophyte  exercised
his  charge  with  great  zeal  and  great  care, — assem-
bling them  all,  evening  and  morning ;  pronouncing
aloud  the  prayers,  reciting  with  them  the  Rosary,
and  teaching  them  what  he  knew, — to  the  great  satis-
faction of  all  those  good  people,  and  to  the  great
edification  of  some  Frenchmen  who  had  come  down,
in  the  spring,  from  Kebec  to  Tadousac.  The  Father
heartily  congratulated  them  upon  these  good  tidings,
and  took  that  young  lad  for  his  companion,  remov-
ing nothing  from  his  office  but  the  Tonsure  that  he
had  on  his  head.

[123]  The  first  thing  that  the  Father  did,  was  to
make  a  proclamation  through  all  the  cabins,  that  they
should  bring  all  the  children  under  the  age  of  discre-
tion, who  were  not  yet  baptized,  so  as  to  confer  upon
them  this  sacrament, —  which  was  soon  executed  by
the  diligence  and  piety  of  the  parents,  who  were
transported  with  delight.  They  brought  them  to
the  Chapel,  a  poor  hut, — built  in  haste  by  the  French,
who  unlade  the  Ships  at  Tadousac, — which,  for  want
of  other  room,  serves  as  Chapel.  That  done,  the
Father  privately  assembles  all  the  Christians,  and
makes  an  exhortation  to  them ;  all  confess  them-
selves with  singular  comfort  and  devotion ;  neverthe-


128  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

entendoient  rinftrudlion  qui  fe  faifoit  k  TEuangile,
apres  laquelle  les  Cathecumenes  fortoient.  La  plus
grande  partie  du  iour  fe  paffoit  k  enfeigner  en  parti-
culier,  les  hommes  &  les  femmes,  k  faire  le  Cate-
chifme  aux  enfants,  k  difpofer  ceux  qui  demandoiet
le  Baptefme,  k  apprendre  par  coeur  le  [124]  Pater,
rAuCy  le  Credo,  &  ce  qu'il  faut  dire  foir  &  matin,  de-
quoy  ils  font  tres  auides.  Sur  la  fin  du  iour  ils  s'af-
f embloient  derechef  en  la  Chappelle ;  le  Pere  faifant
vn  cry  au  milieu  de  ce  petit  village  portatif,  vous
euffiez  veu  tous  ces  pauures  gens  hommes  &  femmes,
grands  &  petits  fortir  k  la  foule  de  leurs  taudis,  quit-
ter leur  befongne,  &  leurs  ieux,  &  courir  a  la  Chap-
pelle pour  faire  les  prieres,  &  efcouter  la  dodlrine
Chreftiene.  Tous  ceux  qui  n'eftoient  pas  encore
Baptifez,  preffoient  auec  importunite  pour  obtenir  ce
bon-heur,  ils  s'entrencourageoient,  &  fe  demandoient
I'vn  k  1  autre  quand  feras-tu  baptife?  vn  d'entre-eux
fameux  forcier,  difoit  vn  iour  au  Pere  ie  voy  bien
que  vous  differez  toufiours  mon  baptefme  a  deffein,
vous  croyez  que  ie  le  demande  par  feinte,  &  fans  de-
fir  de  quitter  mes  mauuaifes  couftumes  que  vous  me
reprochez,  il  n'importe:  differez  tant  que  vous  vou-
drez,  efprouuez-moy  tant  qu'il  vous  plaira,  enqueftez-
vous  de  ma  vie,  ie  ne  perderay  pas  pourtant  courage,
ie  ne  laifferay  pas  d'efperer,  &  vous  importuner,  &
affifter  [125]  aux  prieres:  le  Pere  le  confola,  &  luy
donna  efperance:  mais  il  n'ofa  pas  s'y  fier  encores:
ie  I'ay  defia  dit  plufieurs  fois,  on  ne  fjauroit  trop  long
temps  efprouuer  les  Sauuages,  ils  en  font  beaucoup
mieux  par  apres.  Le  Pere  fe  refolut  done  de
pourfuiure  leur  inftrudtion,  &  leur  efpreuue,  &  les
differer  quafi  tous  a  la venue  des  vaiffeaux, ou k


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  129

less,  on  that  first  occasion,  he  granted  Communion
only  to  those  whom he judged  most  fit  therefor.
They  were  present  every  morning  at  prayers  and  at
Mass,  and  heard  the  instruction  which  was  given  after
the  Gospel,  after  which  the  Catechumens  went  out.
The  greatest  part  of  the  day  was  spent  in  teaching
the  men  and  the  women,  in  private;  in  rehearsing
the  Catechism  to  the  children,  preparing  those  who
requested  Baptism,  and  teaching  by  heart  the  [124]
Pater, the  Ave, the Credo, and what  must  be said
evening  and  morning,  for  which  they  are  very  eager.
Toward  the  end  of  the  day,  they  assembled  again  in
the  Chapel ;  upon  the  Father  making  a  proclamation
in  the  midst  of  that  little  portable  village,  you  would
have  seen  all  those  poor  people,  men  and  women,
great  and  small,  issuing  in  a  crowd  from  their  hovels,
leaving  their  work  and  their  sports,  and  running  to
the  Chapel  in  order  to  say  the  prayers  and  listen  to
the  Christian  doctrine. All  those  who  were  not  yet
Baptized, were  urging  with  importunity,  to  obtain
this  blessing ;  they  would  encourage  one  another  and
inquire of  one another,  "  When shall you  be  bap-
tized?" One  of  them,  a  famous  sorcerer,  said  one
day  to the Father, "  I see well,  that  you  always
put  off  my  baptism  on  purpose ;  you  believe  that  I
request  it  as  a  pretense,  and  without  desire  of  giving
up  my  bad  practices,  with  which  you  reproach  me.
No  matter, —  put  it  off  as  long  as  you  will ;  try  me  as
much  as  you  like ;  inquire  about  my  life. I  shall
nevertheless  not  lose  courage ;  I  shall  not  cease  to
hope, and  to importune you, and  to attend [125]
prayers." The  Father  consoled  him  and  gave  him
hope,  but  dared  not  trust  him  as  yet ;  I  have  already
said  several  times,  that  one  cannot  try  the  Savages


130  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JASUITES [Vol.24

I'Automne,  il  choilift  pourtant  deux  hommes,  &  deux
femes  chefs  de  deux  bones  families:  qui  viuoiet
fort  paifiblemet  pour  leur  coferer  ces  eaux  falutaires,
tous  leurs  enfants  efloient  defia  baptifez.  Vn  de  ces
quatre  s'entretenant  vn  iour  familierement  auec  le
Pere,  luy  racontoit  quelque  traits  de  la  diuine  Proui-
dence  fur  fa  vie,  i'ay  toufiours  eft6  heureux  a  la
chaff e,  difoit-il,  quand  i'allois  vifiter  les  attrapes  que
i'auois  faittes  pour  prendre  des  Caftors  &  des  Ours,
ie  trouuois  toufiours  ma  proye,  &  ne  retournois  ia-
mais  vuide,  cela  m'eftonoit  fort,  veu  que  mes  cama-
rades  ne  prenoient  fouuent  rien,  ie  difois  a  part  moy :
mais  qui  eft  celuy  Ik,  qui  me  donne  k  manger  fi  libe-
ralement,  fans  doubte  il  m'ayme  &  me  veut  du  bien,
[126J  ie  le  voudrois  bien  cognoiftre  pour  Ten  remer-
cier,  1&,  deffus  vous  ayant  entendu  parler,  comme  il
y  a  vn  Dieu,  qui  a  tout  fait,  &  qui  gouuerne  tout,
i'ay  penfe  incontinent  que  c'efloit  celuy  qui  me  don-
noit  a  manger,  &  m'attiroit  k  fa  cognoiffance  par  ce
foing  qu'il  auoit  de  moy.  Ie  n'ofois  pas  pourtant
vous  demander  le  Baptefme,  n'eflant  pas  encor  affez
inftruit,  &  doutant  mefme  a  par  moy,  fi  ie  pourrois
executer  ce  que  vous  nous  apprenez,  viuant  vne
bonne  partie  de  I'annee  dans  les  bois,  ou  nous
fommes  contraints  de  chercher  noftre  vie.  Mais  a
prefent  que  ie  fuis  fuffifamment  inftruit,  &  que  vous
m'affeurez  que  ie  peux  honorer  ce  grand  Dieu  par
tout,  &  dans  les  bois  mefmes,  attendant  qu'il  en
ordonne  autrement,  ie  defire  I'aymer  &  le  feruir  toute
ma  vie,  &  vous  prie  de  me  donner  le  Baptefme,  qui
en  eft  I'entr^e:  Cet  homme  done  fut  Baptife  auec  fa
femme,  &  en  fuitte  furent  mariez  en  faffe  d'Egliffe,
auec  cet  autre  mefnage,  dont  i'ay  fait  mention. Vne


1642 -43J  RELATION  OF  1642-43  131

too  long, — they  are  much  the  better  for  it  afterward.
The  Father  then  resolved  to  continue  their  instruc-
tion and  their  probation,  and  to  put  off  nearly  all  of
them  till  the  coming  of  the  vessels,  or  till  Autumn ;
he  chose,  nevertheless,  two  men  and  two  women,
heads  of  two  good  families,  who  were  living  very
peaceably, — in  order  to  grant  them  those  salutary
waters;  all  their  children  were  already  baptized.
One  of  these  four,  familiarly  conversing  one  day  with
the  Father,  told  him  some  instances  of  the  divine
Providence  over  his  life.  ' '  I  have  always  been  fortu-
nate in  hunting, "  said  he ;  "  when  I  went  to  visit  the
traps  that  I  had  made  in  order  to  catch  Beavers  and
Bears,  I  would  always  find  my  prey,  and  never
returned  empty-handed, —  that  astonished  me  greatly.
Seeing  that  my  comrades  often  took  nothing,  I  would
say  to  myself  apart:  '  But  who  is  that  one,  who  gives
me  to  eat  so  liberally?  No  doubt  he  loves  me  and
wishes  me  well;  [126]  I  would  much  like  to  know
him,  in  order  to  thank  him  for  it.'  Thereupon,  hav-
ing heard  you  mention  how  there  is  a  God,  who  has
made  everything,  and  who  governs  all,  I  straightway
thought  that  it  was  he  who  gave  me  to  eat,  and  was
attracting  me  to  his  acquaintance  by  this  care  that
he  had  for  me.  Nevertheless,  I  did  not  dare  to  ask
you  for  Baptism,  not  yet  being  sufficiently  instructed,
and  even  doubting  within  myself  whether  I  could
accomplish  what  you  teach  us, —  living  a  good  part
of  the  year  in  the  woods,  where  we  are  constrained
to  seek  our  living.  But,  now  that  I  am  sufficiently
instructed, —  and  that  you  assure  me  that  I  can  honor
this  great  God  everywhere,  and  even  in  the  woods,
until  he  order  otherwise, —  I  desire  to  love  him  and
to  serve  him  all  my  life ;  and  I  beg  you  to  give  me


132  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.24

ieune  veufue  fort  bien  difpofee,  les  fuiuit,  &  tous  en-
femble  tefmoignerent  vne  deuotion  &  ioye  fingiiliere.
[127]  Le  Pere  auoit  pri6  Monlieur  Marfolet  qui  efloit
party  deuant  luy,  pour  venir  k  Tadoufac,  que  s'il  ren-
controit  quelque  malade  "k  la  mort,  il  le  baptifaft. Si
toft  qu'il  y  fut  arriue,  il  va  par  les  cabanes,  il  trouue
vn  pauure vieillard qui  combattoit auec la mort:
depuis  quelques  iours,  &  n'attendoit  qu'vn  beureux
moment  de  la Diuine Prouidence  pour  luy  ceder.
Le  fieur  Marfolet  luy  parle  I'inftruidt,  luy  demande
s'il  veut  eftre  baptife,  que  le  Pere  luy  en  a  donne
commiffion:  c'eft  ce  que  i'attens  dit-il,  &  ce  que  ie
defire  pour  partir  de ce  monde:  on  le Baptife, &
incontinent  apres  il  meurt,  &  s'en  va  au  Ciel  prendre
la  place  que  cette eau  Sacree  luy  dona. Vn  enfant
tomba  malade le lendemain  de  fon Baptefme : fes
parens I'aymoient vniquement, c'eftoit toute leur
cofolation,  on  appelle  le  Pere  de  Quen  pour  le  vifi-
ter,  &  prier  Dieu  pour  fa  fante,  il  y  va,  il  trouue  ce
pauure  enfant  fort  mal,  &  fon  Pere  &  fa  Mere  triftes
au  poffible,  ils  n'eftoient  pas  encore  Chreftiens,  &  le
Pere  eftoit  vn  vieillard  fort  addonne  aux  fonges  &
fuperftitions : le  [128] Pere  de  Quen  fait  quelques
prieres  pour  le  malade,  &  tafche  de  confoler  le  Pere
&  la  Mere:  mais  tout  cela  auoit  peu  d'effedt,  voicy
entrer  de  bonne  fortune  vn  des  Neophytes  de  Sillery
qui  auoit  emmene  le  Pere  k  Tadoufac,  il  s'addreffe
au  vieillard,  &  I'exhorte  de  mettre  fon  efperance  en
celuy  qui  a  tout  fait,  que  luy  feul  pent  rendre  la  fan-
t^  a  fon  fils,  &  non  pas  le  Diable  ennemy  de  tous  les
hommes,  mais  que  s'il  defire  d  eftre  exauce,  il  faut
qu'il  renonce  au  padte  qu'il  a  auec  ce  malin  efprit,
qu'il abandonne fes fuperftitions, & qu'il donne


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  133

Baptism,  which  is  the  entrance  thereto."  This  man,
then,  was  Baptized  with  his  wife,  and  afterward  they
were  married,  conformably  to  the  Church,  along  with
that  other  household  of  which  I  have  made  mention.
A  young  widow,  very  well  disposed,  followed  them,
and  all  together  showed  a  singular  devotion  and  joy.
[127]  The  Father  had  requested  Monsieur  Marso-
let^  —  who  had  started  before  him,  in  order  to  come
to  Tadousac  —  that,  if  he  encountered  any  one  sick
unto  death,  he  should  baptize  him.  As  soon  as  the
sieur  had  arrived  there,  he  goes  through  the  cabins;
he  finds  a  poor  old  man  who  had  been  struggling
with  death  for  several  days  past,  and  was  expecting
only  a  happy  moment  from  the  Divine  Providence,
in  order  to  yield  to  it.  The  sieur  Marsolet  speaks  to
him,  instructs  him,  asks  him  if  he  wishes  to  be  bap-
tized,—  saying  that  the  Father  has  given  him  this
commission.  "  That  is  what  I  await,"  he  said,  "  and
what  I  desire,  in  order  to  depart  from  this  world."
He  is  Baptized,  and  straightway  afterward  he  dies,
and  goes  thence  to  Heaven,  to  take  the  place  which
that  Sacred  water  gave  him.  A  child  fell  sick  the
morrow  of  its  Baptism :  its  parents  loved  it  singu-
larly,—  it  was  their  whole  consolation.  They  call
Father  de  Quen  to  visit  it,  and  to  pray  to  God  for  its
health.  He  goes  thither,  he  finds  this  poor  child
very  sick,  and  its  Father  and  Mother  extremely  sad ;
they  were  not  yet  Christians,  and  the  Father  was  an
old  man,  much  given  over  to  dreams  and  supersti-
tions. [128]  Father  de  Quen  offers  some  prayers  for
the  sick,  and  tries  to  console  the  Father  and  the
Mother,  but  all  that  had  little  effect.  At  this  point,
by  good  fortune,  enters  one  of  the  Neophytes  of
Sillery,  who  had  conducted  the  Father  to  Tadousac.


134  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  24

prefentement  au  Pere  les  inflruments  dont  il  fe  fert,
ie  I'ay  delia  fait,  refpond-il,  i'ay  iette  mon  tambour,  &
ie  vendis  hier  aux  Frangois  vne  robbe  fuperftitieufe
que  i'auois  fait  peindre,  comme  ie  I'auois  veue  en
fonge  pour  ma  sate;  voila  qui  va  bien,  repart  Ie
Neophyte,  mais  il  faut  encore  donner  Ie  fac  que  vous
tenez  cache,  c'eft  Ik  ou  eft  Ie  refte  de  vos  maudits
inflruments,  k  ce  mot  ce  bon  homme  fut  furpris,
c'eftoit  luy  arracher  Ie  coeur  que  de  luy  enleuer  ce
paquet,  ou  il  auoit  enueloppe  Ie  refte  de  fa  magie  :
[129]  mais  qu'euft-il  fait,  il  craignoit  plus  la  mort  de
fon  fils  encore  que  la  perte  de  ce  fac.  II  Ie  prend
done,  &  Ie  met  entre  les  mains  du  Pere,  tremblant  de
tout  Ie  corps,  comme  s'il  euft  deu  perdre  tout  ce
qu'il  auoit  au  monde;  alors  Ie  Pere  commande  k  tous
les  Sauuages  de  fe  mettre  a  genoux,  &  prier  Dieu
pour  la  fante  de  cet  enfant,  ils  Ie  font,  &  pendant  vn
Crucifix  au  deffus  de  fa  tefle,  "k  la  place  du  fac  de
magie,  il  pluft  k  Dieu  que  la  fievre  diminuaft  deflors,
&  Ie  lendemain  I'enfant  eftant  guery,  fes  parens  I'em-
menerent  k  I'Eglife,  fort  confolez,  &  prierent  Ie  Pere
de  les  inflruire,  &  difpofer  au  baptefme,  ce  qu'il  fift,
mais  il  n'ofa  pas  encore  leur  confier  Ie  Sacrement,
remarquant  en  eux  de  fois  k  autres  quelque  attache
k  leurs  fonges  &  fuperftitions.

Voicy  en  fuitte  de  cette  hiftoire  vne  adtion  gene-
reufe  de  ce  bon  Neophyte,  qui  auoit  charge  des  pri-
eres  auant  I'arriuee  du  Pere,  comme  Ie  Vieillard  eufl
donne  fon  fac  de  magie,  ce  ieune  Chreftien  fe  fou-
uint  que  Ie  Pere  auoit  prefch6  Ie  iour  d'auparauat,
qu'il  ne  falloit  point  eftre  hypocrite,  ny  croire  k
demy,  &  [130]  donner  feulement  vne  partie  de  fes


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  135

He  addresses  himself  to  the  old  man,  and  exhorts
him  to  put  his  hope  in  him  who  has  made  all, —  that
he  alone  can  restore  health  to  his  son,  and  not  the
Devil,  the  enemy  of  all  men ;  but  that,  if  he  desires
to  be  heard,  he  must  renounce  the  compact  which  he
has  with  that  evil  spirit ;  he  must  abandon  his  super-
stitions, and  presently  give  the Father  the  instru-
ments which  he  uses. "  I  have  done  so  already,"  he
answers ; "I  have  thrown  away  my  drum ;  and  yes-
terday I  sold  to  the  French  a  superstitious  robe  that
I  had  had  painted,  as  I  had  seen  it  in  a  dream,  for
my  health." "  That  is  very  well,"  replies  the  Neo-
phyte; "but  you  must  still  give  the  pouch  which
you  keep  concealed ;  that  is  where  the  rest  of  your
cursed  instruments  are." At  this  word,  the  good
man  was  surprised ;  it  was  tearing  his  heart  out,  to
take  from  him  this  bundle,  in  which  he  had  envel-
oped the  remainder  of  his  magic, —  [129]  but  what
could  he  do?  he  dreaded  his  son's  death  still  more
than  the  loss  of  this  pouch. He  takes  it,  according-
ly, and  puts  it  in  the  Father's  hands,  trembling  in  all
his  body,  as  if  he  had  had  to  lose  all  that  he  had  in
the  world. Then  the  Father  commands  all  the  Sav-
ages to  kneel,  and  to  pray  God  for  the  health  of  this
child;  they  do  so,  and, —  suspending  a  Crucifix  above
his  head, in  the  place  of  the  pouch  of  magic, — it
pleased  God  that  the  fever  should  decrease  from  that
time. The  next  day,  the  child  being  cured,  his  par-
ents brought  him  to  the  Church,  much  consoled,  and
prayed the Father  to instruct  them, and prepare
them  for  baptism ;  this  he  did,  but  he  dared  not  yet
bestow  upon  them  this  Sacrament,  observing  in  them
from  time  to  time  some  attachment  to  their  dreams
and  superstitions.


136  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.24

inftruments  diaboliques,  cachant  I'autre,  qu'il  falloit
tout  donner,  qu'il  iroit  luy-mefme  vn  de  ces  iours  en
faire  la  vifite  par  les  cabanes.  Ce  bon  Neophyte
done  k  la  veue  du  fac  du  Vieillard,  fe  fent  pouff6  de
I'efprit  de  Dieu,  s'en  va  fubitement  dans  toutes  les
cabanes,  foiiille  tous  les  paquets,  vifite  tons  les  facs,
emporte  fans  refiftance  luy  feul  toutes  ces  defpoiiil-
les  du  demon,  les  porte  ^  la  Chapelle,  &  en  fait  vn
prefent  a  Dieu.  Le  Pere  tout  ioyeux  de  cet  heureux
coup,  appelle  les  principaux  Sauuages,  leur  fait  vn
feflin,  fe  confole  auec  eux,  &  leur  monftrant  en  vn
monceau  tous  ces  mif erables  inftruments :  voila  leur
dift-il,  ce  qui  retient  le  diable  parmy  vous;  voila  les
cordes  dont  il  vous  lie,  fus  mettez  y  le  feu,  bruflez-
les.  Le  Pere  leur  fait  vn  prefent  de  petun,  &
chacun  allumant  fon  calumet,  iette  le  feu  quant  &
quant  dans  ces  meubles  d'impiete,  puis  ayant  tous
enfemble  remercie  Dieu,  &  ctiante  vne  chanfon,  en
figne  de  refioiiiffance,  ils  s'en  vont  fort  contens.

Outre  les  fuperftitions,  ils  ont  encore  [131]  d'autres
vices,  qui  nous  donnent  bien  de  la  peine,  ils  font
paffionnez  au  dernier  point  de  la  boiflon,  &  s'en-
yurent  facilement,  quand  ils  en  peuuent  traiter,  de
Ik  s'enfuiuent  les  pechez  deshonneftes,  fur  tout  en
la  ieunefle.  Ceux  qui  leur  vendent  du  vin  ou  de  I'eau
de  vie,  font  vn  tord  irreparable  "k  leur  falut.  Vn
Neophyte  zel6  fift  vn  traidt  hardy  fur  ce  fubiedt.  Le
Pere  ayant  vn  iour  acheue  fon  exhortation :  ce  Chre-
ftien  fe  leua,  &  demanda  permililon  de  dire  vn  mot
a  I'aflemblee.  Ouy  da,  dit  le  Pere,  parlez :  nous  vous
efcouterons.  C'eft  vn  bruidt  qui  court  fit-il,  que  la
ieunefTe  fe  desbauche  h.  present,  qu'on  va  voir  les  filles


1642-43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  137

Here  follows,  as  sequel  to  this  story,  a  generous
action  of  that  good  Neophyte  who  had  charge  of  the
prayers  before  the  Father's  arrival.  When  the  Old
Man  had  given  up  his  pouch  of  magic,  this  young
Christian  remembered  that  the  Father  had  preached,
the  day  before,  that  they  must  not  be  hypocritical,
nor  believe  by  half,  and  [130]  give  only  a  part  of
their  diabolical  instruments,  hiding  the  other, —  that
they  must  give  all ;  that  he  himself  would  go,  one
of  these  days,  to  make  a  search  for  these  among  the
cabins.  This  good  Neophyte,  then,  at  the  sight  of
the  Old  Man's  pouch,  feels  himself  impelled  by  the
spirit  of  God ;  he  suddenly  goes  away  into  all  the
cabins;  ransacks  all  the  bundles,  and  inspects  all  the
pouches ;  carries  off  without  resistance,  himself  alone,
all  these  spoils  of  the  fiend;  conveys  them  to  the
Chapel ;  and  makes  a  present  of  them  to  God.  The
Father,  overjoyed  at  that  excellent  action,  calls  the
principal  Savages,  makes  them  a  feast,  and  takes
comfort  with  them;  and  showing  them,  in  a  single
heap,  all  those  wretched  instruments,  "  There,"  said
he  to  them,  "  is  what  keeps  the  devil  among  you;
there  are  the  cords  with  which  he  binds  you, —  put  fire
beneath  them,  and  burn  them."  The  Father  makes
them  a  present  of  tobacco,  and  each  one,  lighting  his
calumet,  then  and  there  throws  the  fire  into  these
implements  of  impiety;  then,  having  all  together
thanked  God,  and  sung  a  hymn  in  token  of  rejoicing,
they  go  aw^ay,  well  content.

Besides  the  superstitions,  they  have  still  [131]
other  vices,  which  give  us  much  trouble.  They  are
to  the  last  degree  passionately  fond  of  drink,  and  are
easily  intoxicated,  when  they  can  trade  for  any ;
thence  follow  the  indecent  sins, especially  in  the


138  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

la  nuicft,  que  les  filles  deuiennent  follaftres  &  fans
efprit,  qu'il  y  a  devS  hommes  parmy  nous,  qui  veu-
lent  auoir  deux  femmes,  ce  n'eft  pas  Ik  ce  que  nous
auons  promis  a  Dieu,  il  faut  empefcher  que  le  mal
n'aille  plus  auant:  pour  moy  ie  ne  veux  pas  faire  du
Capitaine,  n'y  encore  moins  du  Dodteur:  mais  i'ay
de  la  peine  k  tenir  mon  coeur  &  ma  lange,  quand
ie  vois,  qu'on  ferme  les  yeux  a  vn  mal  cognu,  il
faudroit  que  ceux  qui  f9auent  ces  coureurs  [132]  de
nuidt,  &  ces  perfonnes  qui  ne  fe  contentement  pas
d'vne  femme,  les  declaraffent  publiquement :  vne
bonne  vieille  qui  eftoit  au  Sermon,  touchee  de  la
crainte  de  Dieu,  prend  la  parole,  &  nomme  tout  haut
ceux  qu'elle  cognoiffoit.  On  fort  fur  le  champ  de
la  Chappelle,  on  s'affemble  dans  la  plus  grande
cabane,  on  y  appelle  le  Pere,  vn  Neophyte  va  luy-
mefme  chercher  les  gar§6s  &  les  filles  qu'on  auoit
nommez,  &  d'autres  qu'on  foupgonnoit,  les  oblige
d'entrer;  on  les  interroge  tous,  ils  auoiient  franche-
ment  deuant  toute  I'affemblee  telles  vifites:  mais  ils
proteftent  que  ce  ne  font  que  recherches  de  mariage
accouftumees  parmy  eux,  fi  cela  eft,  difl,  noftre  bon
Chreftien,  declarez  vos  affec5tions  a  vos  parens,  pre-
nez  leur  aduis,  &  celuy  du  Pere,  de  peur  que  vous  ne
vous  repentiez,  quand  vous  ferez  liez  dans  le  mariage,
&  qu'ainfi  vous  ne  vous  quittiez  auec  fcandale,  vifitez-
vous  le  iour,  &  non  la  nuidt,  la  foy  &  la  priere  nous
deffendent  cette  couftume:  ils  le  promirent,  &  s'en
allerent  fort  contents  de  part  &  d'autre.  Cela  n'a
pas  peu  feruy.

[133] Ce mefme  Neophyte  fut  bleffe  I'Automne
dernier,  par  la  cheute  d'vn  gros  arbre  qui  tomba  fur


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  1^9


youth.  Those  who  sell  them  wine  or  brandy  do  an
irreparable  wrong  to  their  salvation.  A  zealous
Neophyte  dealt  a  bold  stroke  in  this  matter.  The
Father,  having-  one  day  finished  his  exhortation,  this
Christian  arose,  and  asked  permission  to  speak  a
word  to  the  assembly.  "  Certainly,"  said  the  Fa-
ther; "  speak, — we  will  listen  to  you."  "  It  is  a  cur-
rent rumor,"  said  he,  "that  the  young  people  are
becoming  corrupt,  at  present, — that  the  men  go  to
see  the  girls  at  night ;  that  the  girls  become  wanton
and  witless ;  that  there  are  men  among  us  who  wish
to  have  two  wives.  That  is  not  what  we  have  prom-
ised to  God ;  we  must  prevent  the  evil  from  proceed-
ing further.  As  for  me,  I  do  not  wish  to  act  the
Captain,  nor  still  less,  the  Doctor:  but  I  can  hardly
restrain  my  heart  and  my  tongue,  when  I  see  that
your  eyes  are  closed  to  a  known  evil.  Such  as
know  those  who  stroll  [132]  at  night,  and  those
persons  who  are  not  content  with  one  wife,  ought
to  declare  them  publicly. ' '  A  good  old  woman  who
was  at  the  Sermon,  touched  by  the  fear  of  God,
speaks,  and  names  aloud  those  whom  she  knew.
They  immediately  leave  the  Chapel ;  they  assemble
in  the  largest  cabin,  and  call  the  Father  thither.  A
Neophyte  goes  in  person  to  seek  the  youths  and  girls
who  had  been  named,  and  others  who  were  suspected,
and  obliges  them  to  enter.  All  are  questioned ;  they
avow  frankly  before  the  whole  assembly  such  visits,
but  they  protest  that  they  are  only  suits  of  marriage,
customary  among  them.  "  If  that  be  the  case,"  said
our  good  Christian,  "  declare  your  affections  to  your
parents;  take  their  advice  and  that  of  the  Father,
lest  you  repent  when  you  shall  be  bound  in  marriage,
and  thus  leave one another  with  scandal. Make


140  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£:SUITES  [Vol,  24

luy,  tout  au  travers  du  corps,  &  le  mift  en  danger  de
fa  vie:  Dien  le  deliura  pourtant,  quoy  qu'il  luy  foit
refte  vne  douleur  d'eftomach  continuelle:  fi  toft
qu'il  fe  fut  retire  de  ce  manuals  pas,  11  remercia  Dieu
de  luy  auoir  conferu6  la  vie,  &  s'humilia  quand  &
quand,  recognoiffant  que  ce  mal  luy  eftoit  arriu6
pour  chaftiment  de  fa  faute,  de  ce  que  commen^ant
fon  trauail,  il  ne  I'auoit  pas  offert  ^  Dieu,  felon  fa
couftume,  &  propofa  de  ne  plus  rien  entreprendre,
fans  r auoir  prefente  a  Dieu,  &  implore  auparauant
fon  affiftance.  Le  Pere  eftant  arriue  k  Tadoufac,  il
le  vint  incontinent  trouuer  pour  fe  confelTer,  puis
s'entretint  auec  luy  des  bons  fentiments  que  Dieu
luy  auoit  donne  pendant  I'Hyuer ;  ie  vous  diray  fran-
chement,  dift-il,  la  penfee  que  i'eus,  quand  ie  fus
bleffe,  afin  que  vous  la  redrefliez,  fi  elle  n'eft  pas
bonne:  ie  difois  ^  Dieu,  Seigneur  ie  voudrois  bien
guerir,  &  viure  iufques  au  Prin-temps,  afin  de  voir
encore  vne  fois  les  Peres  qui  m'ont  [134]  inftruidl.
Ie  fyay,  mon  Dieu,  que  ie  vous  ay  offence,  &  qu'il
y  a  quelque  chofe  das  mon  coeur  qui  vous  d6plaift^
fi  ie  meurs  auant  la  venue  du  Pere  ie  ne  pourray
me  confeffer,  &  cela  m'empefchera  peut-eftre  de
vous  aller  voir  au  ciel,  voila  ce  qui  m'afflige,  &  qui
fait  que  ie  vous  demande  la  prologation  de  ma  vie,
iufques  au  Prin-temps  ou  ie  verray  le  Pere,  s'il
garde  fa  promeffe,  faites  neantmoins  mo  Dieu  tout
ce  qu'il  vous  plaira,  vous  eftes  le  maiftre  de  la  vie,
ie  vous  demande  pardon  des  pechez  que  i'ay  comis,
ie  defire  d'y  fatisfaire,  «&  des  maintenant  ie  me  refous
de  ne  point  manger  tout  ce  iourd'huy  pour  chattier
ma  chair: ie  fentiray  la  faim  dans  I'abondance  de


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  141

your  visits  by  day,  and  not  by  night ;  the  faith  and
prayer  forbid  us  this  custom."  They  promised  it,
and  went  away  very  well  satisfied  on  both  sides.
That  aided  not  a  little.

[133]  This  same  Neophyte  was  wounded,  last  Au-
tumn, by  the  fall  of  a  great  tree,  which  fell  upon
him,  right  across  his  body,  and  put  him  in  danger  of
his  life;  God  nevertheless  delivered  him,  though
there  has  remained  with  him  a  chronic  pain  in  the
stomach.  As  soon  as  he  had  released  himvSelf  from
this  mishap,  he  thanked  God  for  having  spared  his
life,  and  then  and  there  humbled  himself, —  acknowl-
edging that  this  injury  had  happened  to  him  for
punishment  of  his  fault,  because,  on  beginning  his
work,  he  had  not  offered  it  to  God,  according  to  his
custom, —  and  proposed  to  undertake  nothing  further,
without  having  presented  it  to  God,  and  first  im-
plored his  assistance.  The  Father  having  arrived  at
Tadousac,  this  man  immediately  came  to  find  him,
in  order  to  confess  himself ;  then  conversed  with  him
of  the  good  thoughts  which  God  had  given  him
during  the  Winter.  "  I  will  tell  you  frankly,"  said
he,  "  the  thought  that  I  had  when  I  was  wounded,  so
that  you  may  correct  it  if  it  is  not  good.  I  said  to
God:  '  Lord,  I  would  like  to  get  well,  and  live  till
Spring,  so  as  to  see  once  again  the  Fathers  who  have
[134]  instructed  me.  I  know,  my  God,  that  I  have
offended  you,  and  that  there  is  something  in  my
heart  which  displeases  you ;  if  I  die  before  the  com-
ing of  the  Father,  I  shall  not  be  able  to  confess  my-
self, and  that  will  hinder  me,  perhaps,  from  going  to
see  you  in  heaven.  That  is  what  grieves  me,  and
makes  me  ask  you  for  the  extension  of  my  life  until
Spring,  when  I  shall  see  the  Father,  if  he  keeps  his


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.24

viande,  que  nous  auons  a  prefent,  afin  d'appaifer
voftre  colere:  il  adioufta  que  ce  iour-lk  qu'il  auoit
ieufne,  il  employa  quafi  tout  en  prieres,  &  nomement
^  reciter  fon  Chapellet,  en  fe  pourmenat  feul  das  les
bois,  au  plus  grand  froid  de  I'hyuer,  &  fans  appro-
cher  du  feu,  le  Pere  I'encouragea  fort  ^  la  perfeue-
rance,  &  au  zele  qu'il  auoit  pour  empefcher  les  vices;
il  en  fit  autant  enuers  les  Capitaines,  &  les  princi-
paux  [135]  Sauuages,  il  ne  demeura  pas  plus  d'vn
mois  &  demy  en  cette  miffion,  laquelle  les  Chreftiens
de  Sillery  me  contraignirent  d'interrompre:  depuis
i'y  ay  enuoye  le  P.  Buteux  "k  I'arriuee  des  nauires,.
afin  de  continuer  ce  faindt  ouurage,  &  nommement
pour  empefcher  les  defordres  de  la  boiffon,  que  les
Sauuages  traictent  en  cachette  auec  les  Frangois,  qui
font  dans  les  nauires,  nonobftant  les  deffences  &  les
chaftimens  de  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur:  la  paffion  de
quelque  pelleterie,  les  aueugle  &  les  fait  tomber  en
cette  faute,  qui  perd  les  ames  &  les  corps  de  ces  pau-
ures  peuples.  lis  s'appergoiuent  bien  eux-mefmes,
que  la  boiffon  leur  caufe  des  maux  infinis.  C'efl
pourquoy  les  Chreftiens  ont  prie  nos  Peres  de  faire
tout  ce  qu'ils  pourroient,  pour  empefcher  que  les
Fran9ois  ne  traitaffent  ny  vin  ny  eau  de  vie  k  leur
gens.  Monfieur  de  Courpon  Admiral  de  la  flotte,  y
apporta  toutes  les  diligences  poffibles  des  fon  arriuee,
faifant  paroiftre  vne  ioye  bien  fenfible  de  la  conuer-
fion  de  ces  pauures  peuples,  luy  mefme  a  voulu  eftre
le  Parain  de  quelques-vns.

[136]  Voicy  vn  mot  que  m'en  efcrit  de  T[ad]oufac
le  Pere  Buteux.  Les  Sauuages  d'icy  font  fort  bien  \
les  Capitaines  me  contentent  grandement:  mais  il  y


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  143


promise.  Do,  nevertheless,  my  God,  all  that  you
shall  please ;  you  are  the  master  of  life.  I  ask  your
pardon  for  the  sins  which  I  have  committed ;  I  desire
to  atone  for  them,  and  from  now  on  I  resolve  not  to
eat  anything  throughout  this  day,  in  order  to  chasten
my  flesh ;  I  will  experience  hunger  in  the  abundance
of  meat  that  we  have  at  present,  so  as  to  appease
your  anger.' "  He  added  that  he  employed  nearly
all  that  day  that  he  had  fasted,  in  prayers,  and
especially  in  reciting  his  Rosary,  walking  alone  in
the  woods,  in  the  greatest  cold  of  the  winter,  and
without  approaching  the  fire.  The  Father  strongly
encouraged  him  in  perseverance,  and  in  the  zeal  that
he  had  for  preventing  vicious  practices;  he  did  the
same  with  the  Captains  and  the  principal  [135]  Sav-
ages. He  remained  not  more  than  a  month  and  a
half  in  that  mission,  which  the  Christians  of  Sillery
constrained  me  to  interrupt.  Since  then,  I  have  sent
thither  Father  Buteux  at  the  arrival  of  the  ships,  in
order  to  continue  that  holy  work,  and  especially
to  prevent  the  disorders  arising  from  the  liquor  which
the  Savages  secretly  trade  for  with  the  French  who
are  in  the  ships,  notwithstanding  the  prohibitions  and
the  punishments  of  Monsieur  the  Governor.  The
passion  for  a  few  pelts  blinds  them,  and  makes  them
fall  into  this  offense,  which  destroys  the  souls  and
the  bodies  of  these  poor  peoples.  They  themselves
perceive  well  that  drink  causes  them  infinite  evils.
This  is  why  the  Christians  have  begged  our  Fathers
to  do  all  that  they  can,  in  order  to  prevent  the
French  from  trading  either  wine  or  brandy  to  their
people.  Monsieur  de  Courpon,  Admiral  of  the  fleet,
applied  all  possible  diligence  herein  from  the  time
of  his  arrival, —  manifesting  very  evident  joy  at  the


144  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.24

a  bien  k  craindre  que  le  vin  &  I'eau  de  vie  ne  faffent
de  grand  maux,  i'y  apporteray  tout  le  remede  poffi-
ble,  i'attendray  pour  cet  effedt  iufques  apres  1' Affomp-
tion  de  noftre-Dame  ^  m'en  retourner,  ie  m'en  vais
en  baptifer  quelques-vns  k  cette  arriuee  des  vaiff eaux,
def quels  nous  auons  eu  nouuelle,  ce  iourd'huy  fep-
tiefme  d'Aouft  a  midy.  Voila  pour  le  prefent  I'eftat
de  la  million  de  Tadoufac,  qui  eft  I'entree  de  toutes
les  autres  qui  font  dans  cette  grande  riuiere.  Les
Sauuages  de  Gafp6  &  Miskou,  qu'on  rencontre  encore
deuant  eux,  venants  de  Frace,  en  ont  eu  le  bruit,  &
comencent  a  fouhaitter  la  foy,  &  foufpirer  apres  leur
falut.  Voicy  ce  qu'en  efcrit  au  Pere  le  leune,  le
Pere  Richard  qui  demeure  a  MifKou,  auec  le  Pere
Lionne  arriue  cette  annee  de  France.

^  ▼  *  •  le  remercie  affectueufement  V.  R.  des  ef-
crits  qu'elle  m'a  enuoyes  de  la  langue  [137]  Monta-
gnefe,  i'en  feray  Dieu  aidat  mon  profit.  Fen  ay  par-
couru  quelque  chofe,  ou  i'ay  remarque  quafi  la  mefme
fagon  de  s'enoncer,  quoy  que  les  mots  foient  tous
autres  parmy  les  Sauuages  de  ces  coftes.  Ie  vous
ay  defia  efcrit  par  Nb'dagaro  vn  de  nos  bons  Sauuages
qui  s'en  va  voir  fes  parens  &  amis  par  de-1^:  car  il
fe  dit  Motagnes.  Fefpere  que  I'exemple  de  fes  Copa-
triotes  &  les  inftrucl;ions  de  nos  Peres  luy  feront
vtiles.  II  a  de  bonnes  volontez,  prie  volontiers  Dieu,
fe  comporte  fagement,  regoit  les  aduis  &  inftrudtions
Chreftiennes  qu'on  luy  donne.  Ie  le  tiens  pour  I'vn
de  ceux  qui  receura  des  premiers  la  Foy.  Ie  defire-
rois  qu'il  apprehendaft  I'importance  de  fon  Salut,  &


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  145

conversion  of  these  poor  peoples. He  himself  has
consented  to  be  the  Godfather  for  some  of  them.

[136]  Here  is  a  word  on  the  subject,  which  Father
Buteux  writes  to  me  from  Tadousac :  ' '  The  Savages
here  are  doing  very  well ;  the  Captains  content  me
greatly ;  but  there  is  much  reason  to  fear  that  wine
and  brandy  are  causing  great  evils.  I  will  apply  all
the  remedy  possible ;  I  will  wait,  to  accomplish  this,
until  after  the  Assumption  of  our  Lady,  to  return
hence,  I  am  going  to  baptize  some  of  them  at  the
arrival  of  the  vessels,  of  which  we  have  had  news.
This  day,  the  seventh  of  August,  at  noon."  Such,
for  the  present,  is  the  state  of  the  mission  at  Tadou-
sac, which  is  the  entrance  to  all  the  others  that  are
along  this  great  river.  The  Savages  of  Gaspe  and
Miskou,  whom  one  meets  still  ahead  of  these,  on
coming  from  France,  have  had  the  rumor  of  it,  and
begin  to  desire  the  faith,  and  to  sigh  after  their
salvation.  Here  is  what  Father  Richard  —  who  lives
at  Miskou,  together  with  Father  Lionne,  arrived  this
year  from  France^  —  writes  on  the  subject  to  Father
le  Jeune.

^^I\/Iy  Reverend  Father,

i  V  1  I  thank  Your  Reverence  affectionately,  for
the  writings  that  you  have  sent  me  concerning  the
language  [137]  of  the  Montagnais ;  I  shall  find  in  them,
God  helping,  my  profit.  I  have  perused  them,  to
some  extent,  and  in  them  I  have  remarked  much  the
same  fashion  of  utterance,  though  the  words  are  quite
different  among  the  Savages  of  these  coasts.  I  have
already  written  to  you  by  Noudagaro,  one  of  our
good  Savages  who  is  on  his  way  to  see  his  relatives
and  friends  yonder, — for  he  says  that  he  is  Monta-


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.24

du  moyen  de  I'obtenir,  &  ne  fe  flattaft  point  du  pre-
texte  de  prier  Dieu,  comme  li  cela  fuffifoit  a  le  faire
homme  de  bien.  le  vous  le  recommande,  quantity
de  nos  Sauuages  non  feulement  de  cefte  Baye,  mais
de  toute  la  cofte,  montent  ^  Tadoufac,  quelques-vns
particulierement  des  ieunes  pourront  doner  iufques
^  Kebec,  &  par  dela  pour  aller  en  guerre  cotre  les
Hiroquois.  [138]  le  me  reliouis  que  fans  y  penfer
ils  trouuent  de  grandes  occafions  d'entrer  en  co-
gnoiffance  de  la  Foy.  La  Miffion  de  Tadoufac  aura
vn  beau  champ  a  trauailler,  qui  donnera  fon  fruidt
en  fon  temps,  toft  ou  tard  la  parole  de  Dieu  aura  fon
effedt,  que  diriez-vous  que  ie  confeffay  il  y  a  quelque
temps  vne  pauure  femme  qui  auoit  efte  baptifee  par
le  R.  P.  Biar[d]  au  commencement  que  les  Francois
habiterent  ces  coftes.  Cette  pauure  creature  eftant
tob^e  malade,  au  comencemet  de  I'hyuer,  fuft  con-
trainte  de  fuiure  ou  pluftoft  f e  laiff er  porter  &  traifner
apres  fes  gens  das  les  bois,  oil  elle  languift  tout  I'hy-
uer. Au  prin-teps  ie  la  reuis  en  pauure  eftat  deffei-
chant  &  mourant  peu  a  peu.  Nous  la  fecourufmes
de  ce  que  nous  anions.  I'appris  cependant  qu'elle
auoit  efte  baptifee  au  Port  Royal,  fon  fils  me  I'af-
feure,  elle  me  la  confirme,  &  m'en  donne  des  mar-
ques, &  touche  des  circonftances  qui  me  le  font
croire,  Ie  I'inftruis  de  nouueau  es  myfteres  de  la
Foy.  Ie  la  confeffe,  elles  s'en  va  auec  quelques  fiens
parens  qui  arriuerent  Ik,  &  peu  de  iours  apres  on
nous  rapporta  fon  corps  [139]  que  nous  enterrafmes
auec  les  ceremonies  de  I'Eglife,  ainfi  la  Prouidence
diuine  conduifit  cette  pauure  creature  au  poindt
de  fon  bon-heur  par  des  voyes  &  rencontres  admi-


1 642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642 -  43  147

gnais,  I  hope  that  the  example  of  his  fellow  Coun-
trymen, and  the  instructions  of  our  Fathers,  will  be
useful  to  him.  He  has  good  inclinations,  prays  will-
ingly to  God,  behaves  himself  discreetly,  and  receives
the  Christian  advice  and  instructions  which  are  given
him.  I  hold  him  for  one  of  those  who  will  first
receive  the  Faith.  I  would  that  he  might  apprehend
the  importance  of  his  Salvation,  and  of  the  means  to
obtain  it,  and  not  flatter  himself  with  a  pretext  of
praying  to  God,  as  if  that  were  enough  to  make  him
a  man  of  worth.  I  commend  him  to  you.  A  num-
ber of  our  Savages,  not  only  from  this  Bay,  but  from
all  the  coast,  are  going  up  to  Tadousac;  some  par-
ticularly of  the  youth,  may  proceed  as  far  as  Kebec,
and  beyond,  in  order  to  go  to  war  against  the  Hiro-
quois.  [138]  I  rejoice  that,  without  realizing  it,  they
find  excellent  opportunities  for  entering  into  knowl-
edge of  the  Faith.  The  Mission  at  Tadousac  will
have  a  fine  field  for  work,  which  will  yield  its  fruit  in
its  season ;  sooner  or  later,  the  word  of  God  will  have
its  effect.  What  do  you  say  to  this?  I  confessed,
some  time  ago,  a  poor  woman  who  had  been  baptized
by  the  Reverend  Father  Biard  when  the  French  first
inhabited  these  coasts. ^°  This  poor  creature  having-
fallen  sick  at  the  beginning  of  the  winter,  was
constrained  to  follow  —  or  rather  to  be  carried  and
dragged  after  —  her  people  into  the  woods,  where  she
languished  all  the  winter.  In  the  spring,  I  saw  her
again,  in  a  forlorn  plight,  withering  away  and  dying
by  slow  degrees.  We  assisted  her  with  what  we
had.  I  learned,  however,  that  she  had  been  bap-
tized at  Port  Royal, —  her  son  assures  me  so;  she
confirms  it  to  me,  and  gives  me  tokens  of  it,  and
refers  to  circumstances  which  make  me  believe  it. I


148  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.24

rabies.  V.  R.  fe  fouuient  elle  du  rencontre  qu'elle
euft  I'an  paff6  d'vne  partie  de  nos  Sauuages?  C'e-
ftoient  des  guerriers,  qui  ne  laifferent  pourtat  de  fe
vater  de  prier  Dieu,  ils  m'ont  fait  recit  de  I'accueil
qui  leur  fut  fait,  mais  ceux  qui  demeurerent,  firent
plus  fagement.  Eftat  venus  icy,  ils  m'obligeret  de
tenir  la  parole  que  ie  leur  auois  donee  de  les  aller
voir  I'efte,  s'ils  fe  trouuoient  enfemble.  Ie  ne  leur
pens  refufer.  Ie  fus  auec  noftre  gar9on,  ils  me
baftirent  promptement  vne  cabane  approchante  de
la  forme  de  nos  baftimens,  qui  deuoit  principalemet
feruir  de  Chappelle,  ou  ils  s'afsebloiet  foir  &  matin
pour  faire  les  prieres  que  ie  comengois,  &  ils  me  fui-
uoient  mot  k  mot,  apres  Ie  figne  de  la  Croix,  ie  recitois
en  Latin  Ie  Pater.  Puis  en  leur  lague  la  mefme  orai-
fon.  I'adiouftois  vne  priere  en  leur  langue  cotenat  les
principaux  adtes  qu'ils  deuoiet  faire,  toutes  lefquel-
les  prieres  ils  difoient  apres  moy.  [140]  Le  foir
i'adiouftois  vn  petit  mot  d'inflrudtion  Chreftienne,  ce
que  ie  ne  pouuois  fi  commodement  le  matin,  car  les
femmes,  les  enfans,  &  ieunes  gens  n'efloient  pas  fi.
matineux  que  les  homes  qui  fe  diligentoient  d'ache-
uer  leurs  canots,  fi  bien  qu'il  fut  a  propos  de  les
affembler  des  le  grand  matin  pour  prier  Dieu :  &  puis
fur  les  fept  ou  liui(5t  heures  les  femmes  &  la  ieuneffe
fe  rangeoient  ^  la  Chappelle  pour  faire  le  mefme.
La  difette  &  la  neceffite  les  obligeoient  d'acheuer
promptemet  leurs  canots.  Si  eft-ce  pourtant  qu'ils
ne  voulurent  pas  y  trauailler  le  Dimanche:  mais
demeurerent  en  repos,  &  fe  couurirent  de  leurs  plus
beaux  veftements.  On  les  pourra  a  mon  aduis  aife-
ment  maintenir  dans I'obferuance  des  commande-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  149

instruct  her  anew  in  the  mysteries  of  the  Faith ;  I
confess  her.  She  goes  away  with  some  relatives  of
hers  who  arrived  there,  and,  not  many  days  after,
they  brought  back  to  us  her  body,  [139]  which  we
buried  with  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church ;  thus  the
divine  Providence  conducted  this  poor  creature  to
the  height  of  her  blessedness,  by  ways  and  coinci-
dences that  are  admirable.  Does  Your  Reverence
remember  the  encounter  that  you  had,  last  year,
with  a  party  of  our  Savages?  They  were  warriors,
who  nevertheless  boasted  of  praying  to  God.  They
gave  me  an  account  of  the  reception  which  they  had
met;  but  those  who  remained  acted  more  wisely.
Having  come  here,  they  obliged  me  to  keep  the
word  which  I  had  given  them,  of  going  to  see  them
in  the  summer,  if  they  happened  to  be  together:  I
could  not  refuse  them, —  I  went  with  our  servant.
They  promptly  built  me  a  cabin,  approaching  the
shape  of  our  buildings,  which  was  chiefly  to  serve
as  a  Chapel,  where  they  assembled  evening  and  morn-
ing in  order  to  say  the  prayers  which  I  would  begin,
and  they  followed  me  word  for  word.  After  the  sign
of  the  Cross,  I  recited,  in  Latin,  the  Pater;  then,  in
their  language,  the  same  prayer.  I  added  a  prayer
in  their  language,  containing  the  principal  acts  which
they  were  to  perform ;  all  these  prayers  they  said
after  me.  [140]  In  the  evening  I  added  a  brief
word  of  Christian  instruction,  which  I  could  not  do
so  conveniently  in  the  morning;  for  the  women,  chil-
dren, and  young  people  were  not  so  early  as  the
men,  who  were  diligently  working  to  finish  their
canoes, —  insomuch  that  it  was  best  to  assemble  them
very  early  in  the  morning  to  pray  to  God ;  and  then,
toward  seven  or  eight  o'clock,  the  women  and  youth


150  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  24

mens  de  Dieu,  &  de  I'Eglife,  lors  principalement
qu'on  fera  auec  eux.  lis  ont  cette  penfee  qui  eft  veri-
table, que  faire  profeffion  d'adorer  Dieu,  c'eft  mener
vne  vie  irreprochable.  Vne  ieune  gargon  me  defro-
ba  vn  peu  de  Petun  que  i'auois  pour  les  gratifier,
lors  que  cela  fuft  defcouuert,  comment,  difoient-ils,
il  prie  Dieu,  &  il  defrobe?  [141]  c'eft  le  premier  lar-
recin  que  i'ay  veu  parmy  eux.  Car  ils  ont  les  mains
fort  nettes  du  bien  d'autruy.  Vn  autre  me  parlant
d'vn  certain  qui  fait  eflat  de  prier  Dieu,  &  s'amufoit
pourtant  a  boire,  comment,  dit-il,  cela  s'accorde-il
bien  prier  Dieu  &  s'enyurer?  que  ne  lu}^  reproches
tu?  que  ne  pred-il  exeple  fur  voS'  autres  PP?  le  les
ay  trouues  affez  curieux,  lis  m'ont  fait  quantite  de
queftions  fur  des  cbofes  artificielles  &  naturelles ;  la
cognoiffance  defquelles  les  a  fi  fort  refjoui's,  qu'ils  fe
flattent  d'vne  efperance  d'eftre  bien  toft  fgauans  en
tout,  par  noftre  moyen.  lis  nous  aiment  &  ref-
pedlent,  &  noftre  conlideration  les  retient  en  deuoir.
le  t'obeiray,  me  difoit  vn  iour  vn  des  plus  renom-
mez  de  la  cofte,  &  fi  tu  demeures  auec  nous,  ie  ne
m'amuferay  plus  a  boire.  Ie  te  croiray  &  fuiuray  tes
aduis,  nous  verrons  fi  luy  &  les  autres  font  homes
de  parole !  car  vn  grand  homme  de  bien  nous  fournit
trois  hommes,  pour  aller  baftir  vne  petite  maifon
parmy  eux,  nous  I'allons  commencer  dans  vne  riuiere
qu'ils  appellent  Nepegig8it  a  18.  lieues  de  cette  habi-
tation. Si  [142]  i'euffe  fceu  cela,  i'en  euffe  peut-
eftre  retenu  quelques-vns  qui  s'en  vot  voyager  &
paffer  I'efte  d'vn  cofte  &  d'autre.  II  y  a  pourtant
tel  qui  m'a  donne  parole  de  fe  ranger  aupres  de  nous,
lors  qu'il  entendra  que  nous y baftirons, tel m'a


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  151

took  their  places  in  the  Chapel,  in  order  to  do  the
same.  Dearth  and  necessity  obliged  them  to  finish
their  canoes  promptly.  It  is  a  fact,  however,  that
they  were  not  willing  to  work  at  them  on  Sunday,
but  remained  at  rest,  and  put  on  their  finest  cloth-
ing. It  will  be  easy,  in  my  opinion,  to  maintain
them  in  the  observance  of  the  commandments  of  God
and  of  the  Church, — especially  by  living  with  them.
They  have  this  notion,  which  is  true,  that  to  make
profession  of  adoring  God  is  to  lead  an  irreproach-
able life.  A  young  lad  stole  from  me  a  little  Tobac-
co that  I  had  for  gratuities  to  them ;  when  that  was
discovered,  '  How?'  said  they,  'he  prays  to  God,
and  he  steals! '  [141]  This  is  the  first  theft  that  I
have  seen  among  them;  for  they  have  hands  very
clean  of  others'  property.  Another  speaking  to  me
of  a  certain  man  who  makes  account  of  prayer  to
God,  and  yet  amused  himself  by  drinking,  '  How,'
said  he,  '  does  that  agree  well,  to  pray  to  God  and
to  get  drunk?  Why  dost  thou  not  rebuke  him?
Why  does  he  not  take  example  from  you  Fathers  ? '  I
have  found  them  quite  curious ;  they  have  asked  me
many  questions  about  things  both  natural  and  artifi-
cial,—  the  knowledge  of  which  has  so  greatly  pleased
them  that  they  flatter  themselves  with  a  hope  of
soon  being  versed  in  everything,  by  our  means.
They  love  and  respect  us,  and  consideration  for  us
keeps  them  dutiful.  '  I  will  obey  thee,'  said  to  me
one  day  one  of  the  most  renowned  on  the  coast;
'  and  if  thou  remainest  with  us,  I  will  no  longer
amuse  myself  by  drinking;  I  will  believe  thee,  and
will  follow  thy  advice.'  We  shall  see  whether  he
and  the  others  are  men  of  their  word,  for  a  great  man
of  worth  furnishes  us  three  men,  in  order  to  go  and


152  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.24

reproche  le  trop  de  delay  que  nous  y  apportions.  II  y
a,  difoit  ce  Capitaine,  long  teps  que  tu  nous  promets
de  venir  auec  nous,  &  maintenant  que  voicy  le  prin-
temps,  tu  nous  remets  encore,  pour  moy  ie  ne  fais
point  comme  cela,  quand  i'ay  dit  vne  chofe,  elle
vaut  faidte.  Ces  bonnes  gens  ne  cognoiffent  pas  les
difficultez  de  femblables  entreprifes.  Monfieur  Def-
dames  Capitaine  icy  depuis  quatre  ans,  a  toufiours
fort  oblige  cette  Miffio,  mais  particulierement  cette
annee,  pendant  la  maladie  du  R.  P.  Dolbeau  qui  a
efte  longue  &  dangereufe.  II  en  fut  attaque  ^  Noel,
&  a  traine  &  languy  tout  1  hyuer  dans  de  grandes  &
diuerfes  douleurs ;  au  prin-temps  ie  veux  dire  enui-
ron  le  mois  d'Auril,  ces  douleurs  le  quittant,  I'ont
laiffe  dans  vne  impuiffance  des  bras  &  des  mains  qui
ne  luy  permet  de  celebrer  la  faindte  Meffe.  [143]
Or  pendat  tout  ce  temps  Monfieur  Defdames  I'a  fi
charitablement  &  puiffamment  affifte  en  tout,  qu'il
luy  doit  en  partie,  la  conferuation  de  fa  vie.  Cepen-
dant  la  Prouidence  de  Dieu  qui  gouuerne  toutes
chofes  efficacemet  &  doucement,  voulant  retirer  le  P.
Dolbeau  de  ce  pays  icy,  pour  s'en  feruir  ailleurs  felon
fes  deffeins,  a  conduit  icy  le  Pere  Lyonne  par  des
voyes  bien  particulieres,  pour  prendre  fa  place,  &
trauailler  en  cette  vigne  frudtueufement.  II  eft  vray
qu'il  eftoit  pour  les  Hurons,  mais  voyant  la  neceffite
ou  nous  eftions,  &  qu'il  eftoit  k  propos  que  le  Pere
Dolbeau  retournaft  en  France  pour  la  conferuation
de  fa  vie,  &  recouurement  de  fa  fante,  comme  il  ne
cherche  que  Dieu  &  ne  fe  foucie  pas  du  lieu  oil  il
trauaille  k  fa  gloire,  il  a  volontiers  confenty  &  aggre6
de  demeurer  icy. Ie  le  recommande affedtueufe-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  153

build  a  little  house  among  them ;  we  are  going  to
begin  it  in  a  river  which  they  call  Nepegigwit,"  18
leagues  from  this  settlement.  If  [142]  I  had  known
that,  I  would  perhaps  have  retained  some  who  go
away  on  journeys  and  to  spend  the  summer  in  one
place  or  another.  One,  however,  has  given  me  his
word  to  locate  himself  near  us,  when  he  shall  hear
that  we  are  building  there ;  another  has  reproached
me  for  the  too  long  delay  that  we  made  therein.
*  Long  ago, '  said  this  Captain,  '  thou  didst  promise
to  come  with  us ;  and,  now  that  spring  is  here,  thou
still  puttest  us  off.  As  for  me,  I  do  not  act  like  that ;
when  I  have  said  a  thing,  it  is  as  good  as  done.'
These  good  people  do  not  recognize  the  difficulties
of  such  enterprises.  Monsieur  Desdames,  Captain
here  these  four  years  past,  has  always  greatly  accom-
modated this  Mission, — but  particularly  this  year,
during  the  sickness  of  the  Reverend  Father  Dolbeau,
which  has  been  long  and  dangerous.^-  He  was
attacked  by  it  at  Christmas,  and  he  lingered  and
languished  all  winter  in  great  and  various  pains.  In
the  spring, —  I  mean  to  say,  about  the  month  of
April, — these  pains,  quitting  him,  left  him  in  an
impotence  of  the  arms  and  hands  which  does  not
allow  him  to  celebrate  holy  Mass.  [143]  Now,  dur-
ing all  this  time.  Monsieur  Desdames  has  so  chari-
tably and  efficiently  assisted  him  in  everything,  that
he  owes  him,  in  part,  the  preservation  of  his  life.
However,  the  Providence  of  God,  which  governs  all
things  efficaciously  and  gently,  wishing  to  withdraw
Father  Dolbeau  from  the  country  here,  in  order  to
make  use  of  him  elsewhere  according  to  its  designs,
has  led  hither  Father  Lyonne  by  very  singular  ways,
to  take  his  place  and  work  profitably  in  this  vine-


154  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.24

ment  au  SS.  SS.  &  prieres  de  Voftre  Reuerence,  ce
que  fait  auffi  de  Voftre  Reuerence,

Seruiteur  tres-humble  en  N.  S.

Andr6  Richard.

[144]  Non  feulement  les  Sauuages  de  ces  cartiers-lk
ont  ouy  parler  de  noftre  faindte  Foy,  mais  aufsi  quan-
tite  de  petites  nations  du  Nord,  dont  en  voicy  les
nos.  Les  KaKouchakhi,  ceux  qui  fe  trouuent  ^
Maouatchihitonnam,  c'eft  le  lieu  oii  les  Hurons  font
leur  affemblees  venans  traitter  auec  les  Nations  du
Nord.  Les  Mikouachakhi  les  Outakouamiouek.  Les
Miflafmiouek,  Oukefeftigouek,  Mouchaouaouaftiiri-
nioek.  Ounachkapiouek,  Efpamichkon,  Aftourega-
migoukh,  Oueperigoueiaouek.  Oupapinachiouek,
Oubeftamiouek,  Attikamegouek.  Les  Chreftiens  de
faindt  lofeph  &  de  Tadouffac,  ont  port6  le  nom  de
lefus-Chrift,  dans  toutes  ces  petites  Nations  auec
lef quels  ils  ont  quelque  commerce.  Le  iour  qu'ils
commencent  de  voir,  croiflra  auec  le  temps  iufques
k  fon  Midy.


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  l->5

yard.  It  is  true  that  he  was  bound  for  the  Hurons ;
but, —  seeing  the  necessity  in  which  we  were,  and
that  it  was  expedient  that  Father  Dolbeau  should
return  to  France  for  the  preservation  of  his  life  and
recovery  of  his  health, —  as  he  seeks  only  God,  and
cares  not  about  the  place  where  he  works  to  his
glory,  he  has  gladly  consented  and  agreed  to  stay
here.  I  commend  him  affectionately  to  the  Holy
Sacrifices  and  prayers  of  Your  Reverence,  as  does
also  Your  Reverence's

Most  humble  Servant  in  Our  Lord,

Andre  Richard."

[144]  Not  only  the  Savages  of  those  quarters  have
heard  mention  of  our  holy  Faith,  but  also  many  little
nations  of  the  North,  the  names  of  which  follow:  the
Kakouchakhi,  those  who  are  at  Maouatchihiton-
nam, —  the  place  where  the  Hurons  hold  their  assem-
blies, coming  to  trade  with  the  Nations  of  the  North ;
the  Mikouachakhi,  the  Outakouamiouek,  the  Mistasi-
niouek,  Oukesestigouek,  Mouchaouaouastiirinioek,
Ounachkapiouek,  Espamichkon,  Astouregamigoukh,
Oueperigoueiaouek,  Oupapinachiouek,  Oubestami-
ouek,  Attikamegouek.^^  The  Christians  of  saint
Joseph  and  of  Tadoussac  have  carried  the  name  of
Jesus  Christ  into  all  these  little  Nations,  with  whom
they  have  some  commerce.  The  day  that  they  begin
to  see  will  increase,  with  time,  even  to  its  Noon.


156  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24


[145] CHAPIT[R]E  IX.
DE L'HOSPITAL.

TOVT  le  Canada  a  fondu  en  dueil  k  la  nouuelle
de  la  mort  du  Roy,  &  de  Monfeigneur  le  Car-
dinal :  mais  cette  maifon  de  Mif ericorde  en  a
plus  de  fubiedt  qu'aucun  autre ;  veu  la  triftefle  arriuee
en  fuitte  k  Madame  la  Ducheffe  d'Eguillon,  qui  en  eft
la  fondatrice :  fa  douleur  a  perce  viuement  le  cceur
de  ces  bonnes  Religieufes,  qu'elle  a  cheries  come  vne
mere  fes  enfans,  &  ie  ne  f9ay  quad  leurs  larmes
s'elluiront:  mais  enfin  il  faut  que  la  refignation  &
conformite  k  la  volenti  de  Dieu,  que  cette  Dame  pra-
tique fi  hautement  parmy  des  accidens  li  funeftes,
appaif e  auffi  &  calme  le  coeur  des  Religieufes :  Nous
deuons  efperer  que  la  diuine  bonte  remediera  ^  tous
ces  mal-heurs.  Dieu  eft  Pere  des  affligez,  &  des
pauures,  il  en  a  vn  foin  particulier,  &  y  prend  fes
delices :  &  ceux  qui  ont  k  pref ent  le  pouuoir  en  main,
imitent  fortement  [146]  cette  charite  de  Dieu,  comme
ils  en  tiennet  la  place  gk-bas  en  terre,  nous  le  f9a-
uons  bien:  mais  venons  k  ce  qui  s'eft  paffe  en  cette
maifon  de  Mifericorde,  outre  I'ornement  &  la  con-
folation  qu'elle  donne  k  toute  la  Colonic,  elle  fert
d'vn  fort  appuy  a  I'arreft  des  Sauuages,  &  emporte
vne  bonne  partie  des  frais  &  du  fardeau,  la  Bour-
gade  de  Sillery  eft  encore  petite :  mais  ie  doute  fort
H  sas  cette  maiso,  qui  s'y  eft  eftablie :  elle  euft  peu
arriuer  k  I'eftat  ou  elle  eft,  &  ie  ne  f§ay  encore  £1


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  157


[145] CHAPTER  IX.
OF THE HOSPITAL.

ALL  Canada  melted  in  grief  at  the  news  of  the
death  of  the  King  and  of  Monseigneur  the
Cardinal ;  but  this  house  of  Mercy  has  more
cause  for  it  than  any  other, —  considering  the  sad-
ness which  in  consequence  befalls  Madame  the
Duchess  d'Eguillon,  who  is  its  founder.  Her  sorrow
has  keenly  pierced  the  heart  of  these  good  Nuns,
whom  she  has  cherished  as  a  mother  her  children,
and  I  know  not  when  their  tears  will  be  dried ;  but
the  resignation  and  conformity  to  the  will  of  God,
which  that  Lady  so  nobly  practices  amid  events  so
disastrous,  must  also  at  least  soothe  and  calm  the
hearts  of  the  Nuns.  We  are  bound  to  hope  that  the
divine  goodness  will  remedy  all  these  misfortunes.
God  is  the  Father  of  the  afflicted  and  of  the  poor ;  he
has  a  special  care  for  them,  and  in  them  takes  his
delight ;  and  those  who  have  at  present  the  power  in
hand,  closely  imitate  [146]  this  charity  of  God,  as
they  take  his  place  here  below  on  earth, — we  know
it  well.  But  let  us  come  to  what  has  occurred  in
this  house  of  Mercy.  Besides  the  adornment  and
consolation  which  it  gives  to  the  whole  Colony,  it
serves  as  a  strong  support  to  the  settlement  of  the
Savages,  and  bears  a  good  part  of  the  expenses  and
burden  thereof.  The  Village  of  Sillery  is  still  small,
but  I  doubt  very  much  if,  without  this  house  which
has  been established  there,  it  could  have  reached


158  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JASUITES  [Vol.24

elle  pourroit  fubfifter  fans  cet  aide :  il  en  a  bien  coufte
des  incommoditez  a  ces  bonnes  filles:  la  iournee  d'vn
homme  qui  ne  reuient  pas  icy  a  moins  de  trente  &
quarante  fols,  a  efle  fouuent  employee  pour  aller  "k
Quebec  querir  vn  peu  d'herbe,  ou  vne  demie  dou-
zaine  doeufs  pour  les  malades:  mais  le  defir  qu'elles
ont  eu  d'exercer  leurs  fodtions  enuers  les  Sauuages,
&  contribuer  a  leur  arreft,  felon  I'eftendue  de  leur
vocation,  les  a  fait  abandonner  leur  baftiment  de
Quebec,  auec  toutes  fes  commoditez,  comme  il  les
auoit,  fait  abandonner  la  France,  veu  nommement
que  [147]  les  Fran9ois  eftant  malades  n'ont  pas  de
peine  d'aller  a  Sillery:  mais  les  Sauuages  malades
font  incapables  d'aller  a  Quebec,  &  ainfi  c'euft  efte
vn  Hofpital  de  Sauuages  fans  Sauuages :  la  peur  des
Hiroquois  n'ayant  pas  empefche  tant  d'honeftes  per-
fonnes  de  I'vn  &  I'autre  fexe  d'aller  a  Montreal,  &
autres  endroits  de  la  grande  Riuiere,  pour  y  confa-
crer  k  Dieu  fi  faindlement  leur  vie:  quoy  que  les
Hiroquois  en  foient  voilins,  &  rodet  tout  autour,  n'a
pas  deu  auoir  effect  "k  vne  lieue  ou  deux  de  Quebec,
pour  empefcber  vne  communaute  Religieufe  de  fes
fun(5tions,  &  d'vn  bien  pour  lequel  feul  elle  venoit
en  ce  nouueau  monde,  &  que  les  Sauuages  defiroient
ardemment.  Au  refte  leur  baftimet  de  Quebec  s'a-
cheue  peu  a  peu,  afin  que  s'il  furuient  quelque  acci-
dent, elles  puiffent  felon  la  prudence  &  le  confeil  s'y
retirer,  &  G  les  Fran9ois  fe  multiplient  dauantage,
elles  puiffent  faire  vn  petit  Hofpital  fepare  pour  leurs
fecours,  qui  ne  nuiroit  pas  a  celuy  des  Sauuages,  &
aduanceroit  la  colonic.

Les  Religieufes  ont  receu  &  affifte  [148]  cette  an-
nee  en  1' Hofpital,  enuiron  cent  Sauuages  de  diuerfes


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  159

the  State  in  which  it  is ;  and  I  know  not  yet  if  it
could  subsist  without  this  help.  It  has  indeed  cost
inconveniences  to  these  good  sisters;  the  day's  time
of  a  man,  which  amounts  here  to  no  less  than  thirty
or  forty  sols,^^  has  often  been  employed  for  going
to  Quebec  in  quest  of  a  few  herbs  or  a  half-dozen  of
eggs  for  the  sick ;  but  the  desire  that  they  have  had
to  exercise  their  offices  toward  the  Savages,  and  to
contribute  to  their  settlement,  in  accordance  with
the  scope  of  their  vocation,  has  caused  them  to  aban-
don their  building  at  Quebec,  with  all  its  conven-
iences, as  that  desire  had  caused  them  to  abandon
France, —  seeing,  especially,  that  [147]  the  French,
when  sick,  have  no  difficulty  in  going  to  Sillery;
but  the  sick  Savages  are  unable  to  go  to  Quebec,  and
thus  it  would  have  been  a  Hospital  for  Savages,  with-
out Savages.  The  fear  of  the  Hiroquois  not  having
hindered  so  many  worthy  persons  of  both  sexes  from
going  to  Montreal  and  other  places  on  the  great
River,  in  order  there  to  consecrate  so  piously  their
lives  to  God, — though  the  Hiroquois  are  near  by,
and  prowl  all  about, —  it  was  not  likely  to  have  effect
a  league  or  two  from  Quebec,  so  as  to  impede  a  Reli-
gious community  in  its  offices,  and  in  a  benevolence
for  which  alone  it  came  into  this  new  world,  and
which  the  Savages  were  ardently  desiring.  More-
over, their  building  at  Quebec  is  being  finished,  little
by  little, —  so  that,  if  any  accident  occurs,  they  can
prudently  and  advisedly  retreat  thither;  and,  if  the
French  multiply  further,  they  can  establish  a  little
separate  Hospital  for  their  succor,  which  would  not
injure  that  of  the  Savages,  and  would  advance  the
colony.

The  Nuns  have  received  and  assisted  [148]  in  the


160  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.24

nations  Montagnez,  Algonquins,  Atticamegues,  Ab-
naquiois,  Hurons,  ceux  de  Tadoufac  &  du  Saguene,
&  de  quelques  autres  natios  plus  efloignees.  A
I'heure  que  i'efcris  ce  memoire,  il  y  a  vne  feme  affli-
gee  d'vne  maladie  lente,  que  le  Pere  Buteux  y  amena
dernieremet,  retournat  de  Tadoufac,  laquelle  eft  de
plus  de  treize  ou  de  quatorze  iournees,  auant  dans
les  terres  du  Saguene,  &  eft  venue  k  deffein  non
feulemet  d'eflre  fecourue  en  fon  mal:  mais  de  co-
gnoiftre  Dieu,  &  de  voir  I'exemple  des  Francois.
Cinq  ou  fix  ouuriers  Fran9ois  ont  auffi  efte  foulagez
en  cette  maifon  de  charite,  ils  auoient  efhe  frapez  du
mal  de  terre  au  fort  de  Richelieu,  &  en  danger  d'en
mourir,  s'ils  n'vfent  trouu6  vn  bon  fecours:  voila  ce
qui  eft  du  general  de  cette  maifon :  venons  a  ce  qui
eft  de  particulier  plus  remarquable,  les  miferes  &  les
maladies  des  Sauuages  me  rendront  plus  long  que  ie
ne  voudrois.  I 'ay  defia  parle  cy-deffus  de  la  mort
d'vn  appell6  Achille  Sauuage,  en  voicy  quelques  par-
ticularitez  qui  regardent  [149]  I'Hofpital.  Lors  qu'il
commen9a  de  s'alliter,  il  eftoit  cabane  dans  les  bois
"k  deux  cens  pas  de  Sillery.  Le  P.  Buteux,  I'allant
vifiter  vn  matin,  le  trouua  a  genoux  aux  pieds  de  fon
lit.  C'eft  k  dire  fur  le  bout  d'vne  efcorce,  ou  d'vne
couuerture  deuant  vn  Crucifix  qu'il  auoit  pendu  k  fa
cabane,  il  pria  le  Pere  de  s'affoir  vn  peu,  &  de  luy
donner  loifir  d'acheuer  fa  priere,  apres  laquelle  il  fe
confeffa  auec  grand  fentiment  de  deuotion,  puis  dift
au  Pere:  ie  ne  m'atrifte  pas  de  ma  maladie:  mais
deux  chofes  me  font  de  la  peine,  I'vne  eft  que  ie  ne
puis  plus  dire  mon  Cbappellet,  la  tefte  me  manque
en  vne  fi  longue  priere,  1' autre  eft  que  ie  fuis  efloi-
gn6  de  I'Eglife,  &  ne  peux  aller  "k  la  MelTe. Le  Pere


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  161

Hospital,  this  year,  about  a  hundred  Savages  of  vari-
ous nations :  Montagnais,  Algonquins,  Atticamegues,
Abnaquiois,  Hurons,  those  of  Tadousac  and  the
Saguene,  and  of  some  other  nations,  more  distant.
At  the  time  I  write  this  report,  there  is  a  woman
afflicted  with  a  slow  disease,  whom  Father  Buteux
lately  brought  hither,  on  returning  from  Tadousac.
She  is  from  a  region  above  thirteen  or  fourteen  days
distant,  far  within  the  lands  of  the  Sagu6n6,  and  has
come  on  purpose,  not  only  to  be  aided  in  her  mala-
dy, but  to  know  God  and  see  the  example  of  the
French.  Five  or  six  French  workmen  have  also
been  relieved  in  this  house  of  charity ;  they  had  been
stricken  with  the  land  disease,  at  the  fort  of  Riche-
lieu, and  were  in  danger  of  dying  from  it,  if  they
had  not  found  kind  help.  Thus  much  is  general,
concerning  this  house :  let  us  come  to  what  is  most
remarkable  in  details ;  the  miseries  and  the  diseases
of  the  Savages  will  render  me  more  tedious  than  I
could  wish.  I  have  already  spoken  above,  of  the
death  of  one  called  Achille,  a  Savage;  here  follow
some  particulars  which  concern  [149]  the  Hospital.
When  he  began  to  take  to  his  bed,  he  was  in  a  cabin
in  the  woods,  two  hundred  paces  from  Sillery.  Fa-
ther Buteux,  going  to  visit  him  one  morning,  found
him  kneeling  at  the  foot  of  his  bed, —  that  is  to  say,
on  the  end  of  a  piece  of  bark  or  of  a  blanket, —  before
a  Crucifix  that  he  had  suspended  in  his  cabin.  He
begged  the  Father  to  be  seated  a  little  while,  and  to
give  him  leisure  to  finish  his  prayer,  after  which  he
confessed  himself  with  a  great  feeling  of  devotion ;
then  he  said  to  the  Father:  "  I  do  not  grieve  for  my
sickness;  but  two  things  cause  me  pain:  one  is,  that
I  can  no  longer  say  my  Rosary, —  my  head  fails  me


162  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

luy  dift  que  pour  fon  Chapellet,  il  n'en  deuoit  pas
eftre  en  peine  que  c'eftoit  affez  qu'il  en  dift  vne
dixaine  par  interualle,  ou  mefme  fift  quelque  autre
priere  plus  courte  pour  fe  recommander  k  Dieu,  &  fe
refigner  h.  fa  volonte,  &  quand  k  ce  qui  eft  de  fon
efloignement  de  I'Eglife  qu'il  donneroit  ordre  qu'on
I'aportaft  a  THofpital  ou  k  vne  cabane  tout  proche
d'oii  il  pourroit  [150]  affifter  k  la  Meffe  quand  il
auroit  vn  peu  de  forces.  Le  Pere  en  aduertit  les
principaux  Sauuages  qui  I'apporterent  incontinent  k
I'Hofpital,  &  luy  drefferent  auffi  vne  petite  cabane
tout  proche  de  la  porte,  afin  de  s'y  retirer  s'il  vouloit,
il  edifia  extremement  les  Religieufes  &  les  Sauuages
par  fa  patience  &  fa  deuotion,  quad  on  luy  apporta
le  viatique,  il  eftoit  en  cette  petite  cabane:  les  Sau-
uages accompagnerent  le  precieux  Corps  de  noflre
Seigneur,  &  enuironnerent  le  petit  taudis  auec  vne
merueilleufe  piete  &  modeftie:  depuis  ce  temps-Ik
noftre  malade  ne  parla  plus  que  du  ciel  &  de  I'eter-
nite,  il  forgoit  fouuet  fa  voix,  &  s'ecrioit  tout  haut
pour  former  les  adtes  de  vertu  qu'on  luy  recomman-
doit,  il  demanda  au  Pere  qui  I'affiftoit  s'il  verroit  pas
au  Ciel  fa  fille  morte  depuis  peu,  &  ceux  qu'il  auoit
aime  ca-bas  en  terre?  Le  P.  I'affeura,  qu'ouy  &  que
tous  les  gens  de  bien  s'entre-verroient,  &  fe  commu-
niqueroient  dans  le  Ciel:  cette  ref ponce  le  confola
fort.  Vne  heure  auant  que  mourir,  il  coniura  inftam-
ment  le  Pere  d'exhorter  les  Francois  &  les  Sauuages
k  ce  [151]  qu'ils  priaffent  Dieu  pour  fon  ame,  fi  toft
qu'il  feroit  paffe  de  cette  vie.  Ce  qui  luy  fut  libe-
ralement  accorde:  car  il  n'eut  pas  plutoft  expir6  que
les  Sauuages  s'affemblerent  &  porterent  fon  corps  en
la  Chapelle  autour  de  luy :  le  Pere  de  Quen  y  eftoit


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  1 63

in  SO  long  a  prayer ;  the  other  is,  that  I  am  far  from
the  Church,  and  cannot  go  to  Mass."  The  Father
told  him  that,  as  for  his  Rosary,  he  should  not  be  in
distress, — that  it  was  enough  that  he  should  say  ten
beads  at  intervals,  or  even  make  some  other  and
shorter  prayer,  in  order  to  commend  himself  to  God,
and  resign  himself  to  his  will;  and,  as  for  his  dis-
tance from  the  Church,  he  would  give  orders  that  he
should  be  carried  to  the  Hospital,  or  to  a  cabin  quite
near,  whence  he  might  [150]  attend  Mass  when  he
should  have  a  little  strength.  The  Father  notified
the  principal  Savages,  who  brought  him  straightway
to  the  Hospital,  and  also  put  up  for  him  a  little  cabin
quite  near  the  door,  so  as  to  withdraw  thither  if  he
wished.  He  extremely  edified  the  Nuns  and  the
Savages  by  his  patience  and  his  devotion  ;  when  they
brought  him  the  viaticum,  he  was  in  that  little  cab-
in ;  the  Savages  accompanied  the  precious  Body  of
our  Lord,  and  surrounded  the  little  hovel  with  a
marvelous  piety  and  modesty.  From  that  time,  our
patient  spoke  of  nothing  but  heaven  and  eternity ;  he
frequently  strained  his  voice,  and  shouted  aloud,  in
order  to  utter  the  acts  of  virtue  which  they  recom-
mended to  him.  He  asked  the  Father  who  was  as-
sisting him,  if  he  would  see  in  Heaven  his  daughter,
who  died  a  little  while  ago,  and  those  whom  he  had
loved  here  below  on  earth.  The  Father  assured
him,  "Yes;"  and  that  all  good  people  would  see
one  another  and  communicate  together  in  Heaven.
This  answer  greatly  consoled  him.  An  hour  before
dying,  he  urgently  besought  the  Father  to  exhort  the
French  and  the  Savages  that  [151]  they  should  pray
to  God  for  his  soul,  as  soon  as  he  should  have  passed
from  this  life, —  which  was  liberally  granted  him:


164  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.24

qui  les  confola  dans  leur  trifteffe :  car  cet  homtne
ertoit  vn  des  plus  confiderables.  La  conftance  &
vertu  de  la  femme  eft  remarquable  auffi  bien  que
celle  du  mary,  fi  tofl  qu'ils  eurent  receu  tous  deux  le
fecond  Baptefme,  Dieu  les  efprouua  &  afdigea  par  la
mort  d'vne  fille  qu'ils  aymoiet  vniquement:  peu
apres,  le  mary  tombe  malade,  languit  deux  ans  &
demy,  &  meurt :  il  reftoit  vn  fils  aage  de  quatre  ans
a  cette  bonne  veufue,  pour  toute  confolation  huidt
iours  apres  que  fon  mary  eft  mort,  1' enfant  eft  atta-
qu6  de  maladie,  &  meurt  entre  les  bras  de  fa  pauure
mere,  auec  tout  cela  elle  eft  ferme  &  conftante  en  la
foy,  &  dit  qu'elle  y  mourra,  que  Dieu  eft  le  Maiftre,
qu'il  eft  bon,  &  qu'elle  aymera  toufiours  ce  qu'il  or-
donnera,  elle  demeure  maintenant  auec  vn  fien  frere
nomm^  Thomas,  fort  bon  Chreftien,  &  vit  dans  vne
grande  patience  [152]  &  humilite.  Vn  iour,  come  ie
voulois  aller  "k  Quebec,  en  Canot,  ie  la  priay  de  me
mener  auec  vn  autre  Sauuage,  qui  eftoit  Ik,  elle  me
refpondit:  vrayement  c'eft  bien  a  moy  d'entrepren-
dre  cela  maintenant,  &  qui  fuis-ie  a  prefent?  vne
poignee  de  terre  inutile.

On  a  parl6  fouuent  das  les  precedetes  Relations  de
Pierre  Tregatin:  fa  vertu  I'auoit  rendu  recomman-
dable  quelque  temps  auant  qu'eftre  baptife,  il  eftoit
demeure  boiteux  d'vne  bleffure  qu'il  fe  fift  en
courant  dans  les  bois,  fes  gens  I'auoient  abandonne  au
coin  d'vne  ance  ou  pointe  de  terre,  ou  nos  Peres  le
trouuerent  "k  demy  mort,  fans  cabane  &  fans  viures,
&  fans  autre  habit  qu'vn  morceau  de  couuerture  qui
luy  couuroit  vne  partie  du  corps.  lis  le  porterent
chez  nous,  &  le  traicfterent  le  mieux  qu'ils  peurent,
& apres I'auoir inftruit, le baptiferent:  enfin les


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  165

for  he  had  no  sooner  expired  than  the  Savages  assem-
bled and  carried  his  body  into  the  Chapel  near  by.
Father  de  Quen  was  there,  who  consoled  them  in
their  sadness :  for  this  man  was  one  of  the  most  influ-
ential. The  constancy  and  virtue  of  the  wife  is
remarkable  as  well  as  that  of  the  husband ;  as  soon
as  they  had  both  received  the  second  Baptism,  God
tried  and  afflicted  them  by  the  death  of  a  daughter
whom  they  singularly  loved ;  shortly  after,  the  hus-
band falls  sick,  languishes  two  years  and  a  half,  and
dies.  There  remained  to  this  good  widow,  for  her
whole  consolation,  a  son,  aged  four  years;  eight
days  after  her  husband  has  died,  the  child  is  attacked
by  sickness,  and  dies  in  its  poor  mother's  arms.
With  all  that,  she  is  firm  and  constant  in  the  faith,
and  says  that  she  will  die  in  it;  that  God  is  the
Master,  and  that  he  is  good ;  and  that  she  will  always
love  what  he  shall  order.  She  now  dwells  with  a
brother  of  hers,  named  Thomas,  a  very  good  Chris-
tian, and  lives  in  great  patience  [152]  and  humility.
One  day,  when  I  wished  to  go  to  Quebec  by  Canoe,
I  begged  her  to  take  me,  with  another  Savage  who
was  there.  She  answered  me :  "  Truly,  I  am  a  likely
one  to  undertake  that  now ;  and  what  am  I  at  pres-
ent? a  handful  of  useless  earth."

There  has  been  frequent  mention  in  the  preceding
Relations,  of  Pierre  Tregatin ;  his  virtue  had  made
him  commendable.  Some  time  before  being  bap-
tized, he  had  become  lame  from  a  wound  that  he
incurred  while  running  in  the  woods ;  his  people  had
abandoned  him  in  the  corner  of  a  cove,  or  point  of
land,  where  our  Fathers  found  him  half  dead,  with-
out cabin  and  without  provisions,  and  without  other
clothing  than  a  piece  of  blanket,  which covered  a


166  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.24


Religieufes  venat  en  Canada,  il  trouua  vne  heureufe
demeure  en  la  maifon  de  charite,  il  y  paffa  deux  ou
trois  Hyuers,  pendant  lefquels  nos  Peres  conferoient
auec  luy  de  la  langue  Algonquine,  &  luy  apprenoient
enfemble  les  chofes  [153]  de  Dieu:  de  maniere  qu'il
les  entendoit  parfaitement  bien,  &  qui  plus  eft  y
conformoit  fa  vie,  &  feruoit  de  vray  Predicateur  par
fes  paroles  &  fes  exemples.

Les  Sauuages  en  vne  de  leur  affembl^e  I'eftablirent
Capitaine  ou  Maiftre  des  Prieres,  c'eftoit  k  luy  dans
les  Confeils  de  parler  des  affaires  de  Dieu,  de  remon-
trer  ce  qui  eftoit  expedient:  la  deffus  &  aduertir  ceux
qui  manqueroient  publiquement  k  leur  deuoir,  fur
tout  aux  prieres.  Le  premier  iour  de  Septembre  il
tomba  malade  &  fut  apporte  a  I'Hofpital,  &  y  mou-
rut  au  bout  de  trois  Sepmaines  qu'il  employ  a  a  fe
preparer  a  la  mort,  auec  des  adtes  de  vertus  heroi'ques,
il  fe  confeffoit  fort  fouuent,  il  appelloit  chaque  iour
au  moins  vne  fois,  vn  de  nos  Peres  pour  parler  de
Dieu  &  de  fa  confcience,  ie  ne  me  foucie  point  de
viure,  difoit-il,  ie  n'ayme  point  mon  corps,  i'ayme
la  mort,  de  bon  coeur  ie  la  fouhaitte  quand  il  plaira
^  Noftre  Seigneur :  il  Communioit  fouuent :  mais  il
redoubla  fa  deuotion  &  fa  ferueur  pour  fa  derniere
Communion,  apres  laquelle  il  demada  auffi  &  receut
I'Extreme-Ondtio:  [154]  il  pria  les  Religieufes
qu'elles  le  fiffent  enterrer  k  la  Fran9oife,  dans  vn  drap
implement.  II  prit  fon  petit  fils  aag^  feulement  de
fix  mois  entre  fes  bras,  luy  donna  fa  benedidtion,  &
dift  qu'il  le  donnoit  k  nos  Peres,  pour  eftre  inftruit :
deux  heures  auant  fa  mort,  il  appella  la  Mere  Supe-
rieure  &  luy  dift  Ningay  Ninnip,  ma  Mere,  c'efl  k  ce
coup  ie  vay  mourir:  fais  prier  Dieu  pour  mon  ame.


1G42-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  167

part  of  his  body.  They  carried  him  to  our  house,
and  treated  him  as  best  they  could ;  and,  after  hav-
ing instructed  him,  they  baptized  him.  Finally,  the
Nuns  coming  to  Canada,  he  found  a  happy  abode  in
the  house  of  charity.  He  spent  two  or  three  Win-
ters there,  during  which  our  Fathers  conferred  with
him  concerning  the  Algonquin  language,  and  together
taught  him  the  things  [153]  of  God,  so  that  he  un-
derstood them  perfectly  well, —  and  what  is  more,
conformed  his  life  to  them,  and  served  as  a  true
Preacher  by  his  words  and  his  examples.

The  Savages,  at  one  of  their  assemblies,  appointed
him  Captain  or  Master  of  the  Prayers ;  it  was  his
place,  in  the  Councils,  to  speak  of  the  affairs  of  God,
to  point  out  what  was  expedient  therein,  and  warn
those  who  should  be  openly  wanting  in  their  duty,
especially  in  the  prayers.  The  first  day  of  Septem-
ber, he  fell  sick,  and  was  carried  to  the  Hospital,  and
died  there  at  the  end  of  three  Weeks, — which  he
employed  in  preparing  himself  for  death,  with  heroic
acts  of  virtue.  He  confessed  himself  very  often  ;  he
called  one  of  our  Fathers  at  least  once  each  day,  in
order  to  speak  of  God  and  of  his  conscience.  ' '  I  care
not  to  live,"  said  he;  "  I  do  not  love  my  body, —  I
love  death;  with  good  heart  I  wish  it,  when  it  shall
please  Our  Lord."  He  frequently  received  Commun-
ion; but  he  redoubled  his  devotion  and  his  fervor
for  his  last  Communion,  after  which  he  also  requested
and  received  Extreme  Unction.  [154]  He  begged
the  Nuns  that  they  should  have  him  buried  in  the
French  manner,  simply  in  a  sheet.  He  took  his
little  son,  only  six  months  old,  in  his  arms,  gave  him
his  blessing,  and  said  that  he  gave  him  to  our
Fathers,  in  order  to  be  instructed. Two  hours  before


168  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

ce  n'eft  point  icy  noftre  pays,  noftre  demeiire  eft  au
Ciel:  i'efpere  que  Dieu  m'y  mettra,  il  demanda  le
Crucifix  &  I'Apoftropha  auec  des  paroles  fi  amou-
reufes  qu'il  tira  les  larmes  des  Religieufes,  il  fut  pris
d'vne  defaillance,  pendant  ces  Colloques,  &  en  vn
inftant  alia  de  la  terre  au  Ciel.

Vn  nomme  Marc-Antoine,  duquel  on  parla  Tan  paffe
entre  les  malades,  n'a  point  releue  de  fa  maladie  qui
le  confomma,  en  forte  qu'il  ne  luy  reftoit  que  les  os
&  la  peau,  laquelle  mefme  fe  deftachoit  en  diuers
endroits  du  corps:  mais  il  auoit  toufiours  le  vifage
gay  &  ioyeux,  il  eftoit  log^  dans  vne  cabane  k  la
porte  de  I'Hofpital,  toute  fa  maladie  [155]  ne  fut
qu'vne  cotinuation  de  patiece  &  de  deuotion,  on  le
faifoit  prier  Dieu  fans  ceffe,  neantmoins  il  eftoit  im-
poffible  de  le  conteter  en  ce  poindt,  il  enuoyoit  k  tons
propos  fa  f emme  aux  Religieufes  leur  dire :  venez ;
celuy  qui  eft  malade  veut  prier  Dieu,  les  Religieufes
craignoient  de  le  laffer,  mais  au  contraire  il  fe  plai-
gnoit  qu'on  ne  le  faifoit  pas  prier  Dieu,  &  quoy  que
les  prieres  qu'on  luy  faifoit  dire,  fuffent  longues,  ils
les  repetoit  toufiours  auec  ferueur  aufll  bien  k  la  fin
qu'au  commencement,  iamais  on  ne  I'entendoit  dire
c'eft  affez,  il  auoit  toufiours  fon  Chappellet,  &  fi  par
hazard  il  luy  tomboit  ou  s'egaroit,  il  falloit  renuerfer
le  lidt  &  la  cabane  pour  le  cherclier:  quand  il  n'eut
plus  afl!ez  de  force  pour  le  dire,  il  le  pedit  h.  fon  col,
&  le  touchoit  fans  ceffe  auec  les  mains,  &  prenoit  vn
fingulier  plaifir  qu'on  le  recitaft  aupres  de  luy,  il  ne
paffoit  aucun  iour  qu'il  ne  priaft  Dieu  pour  leurs
bienfa(5teurs,  &  pour  ceux  qui  auoient  eftably  cette
maifon  de  charity :  c'eft  la  priere  qu'il  faifoit  actuelle-
ment  quand  il  entra  en  I'agonie,  laquelle  I'emporta


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  169

his  death,  he  called  the  Mother  Superior  and  said  to
her:  Ningay  Ninnip, — "  My  Mother,  this  time  I  am
going  to  die;  have  prayer  offered  to  God  for  my
soul.  Not  here  is  our  country, — our  dwelling  is  in
Heaven;  I  hope  that  God  will  place  me  there."  He
asked  for  the  Crucifix,  and  Addressed  it  with  words
so  loving  that  he  drew  tears  from  the  Nuns.  He  was
taken  with  a  faintness,  during  these  Colloquies,  and
in  an  instant  went  from  the  earth  to  Heaven.

A  certain  Marc-Antoine,  who  was  mentioned  last
year  among  the  sick,  did  not  recover  from  his  mala-
dy, which  consumed  him  so  that  he  was  reduced  to
bones  and  skin,  —  which  even  detached  itself  on
various  parts  of  the  body ;  but  he  always  had  a  gay
and  joyful  countenance.  He  was  lodged  in  a  cabin
at  the  door  of  the  Hospital.  His  entire  sickness
[155]  was  but  one  continuation  of  patience  and  devo-
tion. They  had  him  pray  to  God  without  ceasing ;
nevertheless  it  was  impossible  to  content  him  in  this
respect, — he  would  send  his  wife  to  the  Nuns  at  every
opportunity,  in  order  to  tell  them,  "  He  who  is  sick
wishes  to  pray  to  God."  The  Nuns  dreaded  to
fatigue  him,  but,  on  the  contrary,  he  complained  that
they  did  not  make  him  pray  to  God ;  and  though  the
prayers  which  they  had  him  say  were  long,  he  would
always  repeat  them  with  fervor,  as  well  at  the
end  as  at  the  beginning.  They  never  heard  him
say,  "It  is  enough."  He  always  had  his  Rosary;
and,  if  by  chance  it  fell  from  him,  or  was  misplaced,
they  had  to  turn  the  bed  and  cabin  upside  down  in
order  to  find  it.  When  he  no  longer  had  strength
enough  to  say  it,  he  hung  it  to  his  neck,  and  inces-
santly touched  it  with  his  hands,  and  took  a  singular
pleasure  in  their  reciting  it  near  him. Not  a  day


170  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J£SUITES [Vol.  24

fi  [156]  doucement  qu'a  peine  le  vit-on  paffer :  il  feroit
difficile  d'expliquer  les  foings  qu'en  prenoit  fa  femme,
&  les  charitez  qu'elle  luy  a  rendues  I'efpace  d'vn  an
ou  deux,  qu'il  a  efte  malade ;  les  Religieufes  en
demeuroient  extremement  edifiees,  &  I'affiftoient  elle
mefme  auec  grande  affedtion.

Vne  bonne  veufue  appellee  Louyfe,  vrayment  Hof-
pitalierie  d'affedlion  (nous  en  auons  parle  autrefois)
auoit  vne  fienne  fille  nomme  Vrfule,  qui  eftoit  mariee
k  vn  Capitaine  de  Tadoufac :  cette  ieune  femme  tom-
ba  malade,  &  apres  deux  ou  trois  ans  de  langueur,
s'alita  enfin  k  Sillery,  &  fe  vint  retirer  a  I'Hofpital,
demeurant  tantofl  dans  la  falle  commune,  tantoft
dans  la  cabane  proclie.  Ses  langueurs  fe  terminerent
en  des  douleurs  violentes:  fa  bone  mere  en  eut  des
foins  inimaginables :  mais  le  premier  eftoit  de  I'ex-
horter  k  la  patiece :  ma  fille,  difoit  elle,  fouffre  pai-
fiblemet,  ne  te  fafche  pas,  affin  que  tu  ne  donne  point
d'entree  au  peche,  &  au  malin  efprit  das  ton  coeur,
&  que  tu  allies  au  Ciel:  ma  fille  penfe  ainfi  de  Dieu,
il  a  tout  fai(5t,  il  [157]  gouuerne  tout:  il  m'ayme,  ie
fuis  contete  de  ce  qu'il  m'enuoye  la  maladie,  ie  croi-
ray  toufiours  en  luy,  ie  I'aymeray  toufiours:  voila  ce
que  tu  peferas  en  to  coeur,  il  fut  neceffaire  de  luy
doner  le  viatique ;  elle  eftoit  lors  en  fa  cabane  pres  la
porte  de  I'Hofpital,  la  b5ne  Louyfe  orna  cette  petite
maifon  d'efcorces,  come  vne  oratoire:  mais  tout  h.  la
Sauuage,  elle  tendit  tout  autour  des  robes  de  Caftor,
&  d'Oreignac,  toutes  neufues  &  bie  matachiees,  elle
mift  la  plus  belle  fur  le  lidt  de  la  malade,  elle
couurit  tout  le  placher  de  fueillage,  &  le  baud  de  la
cabane  auffi,  elle  alia  aux  Religieufes  emprunter  vn
Crucifix  &  deux  chandeliers  auec  les  cierges,  &  les


1642  -  48]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  171

passed  that  he  did  not  pray  to  God  for  their  bene-
factors, and  for  those  who  had  established  this  house
of  charity, — this  is  the  prayer  that  he  was  actually
saying  when  he  entered  the  death  struggle,  which
carried  him  off  so  [156]  gently  that  they  hardly  saw
him  pass  away.  It  would  be  difficult  to  express
the  care  taken  by  his  wife,  and  the  charities  which
she  rendered  him,  for  the  space  of  a  year  or  two
during  which  he  was  sick ;  the  Nuns  were  extremely
edified  by  it,  and  themselves  assisted  her,  with  great
affection,

A  good  widow  called  Louyse  —  truly  a  Hospital
nun  in  affection  (we  have  spoken  of  her  before)  —
had  a  daughter  named  Ursule,  who  was  married  to  a
Captain  of  Tadousac.  This  young  woman  fell  sick,
and,  after  two  or  three  years  of  debility,  finally  took
to  bed  at  Sillery,  and  retreated  to  the  Hospital;  stay-
ing now  in  the  common  ward,  again  in  the  neighbor-
ing cabin.  Her  languors  ended  in  violent  pains;  her
good  mother's  attentions  were  inconceivable;  but
the  first  one  was  to  exhort  her  to  patience.  "  My
daughter,"  she  said,  "suffer  peaceably;  do  not  be
angry,  so  that  thou  mayst  not  give  admission  to  sin
and  to  the  evil  spirit  in  thy  heart,  and  that  thou
mayst  go  to  Heaven.  My  daughter,  think  thus  of
God:  *  He  has  made  all,  he  [157]  governs  all.  He
loves  me;  I  am  content  that  he  sends  me  sickness.  I
will  always  believe  in  him,  I  will  always  love  him.'
That  is  what  thou  shouldst  think  in  thy  heart."  It
was  necessary  to  give  her  the  viaticum ;  she  was  then
in  her  cabin  near  the  door  of  the  Hospital.  The
good  Louyse  adorned  this  little  house  with  bark,  like
an  oratory;  but,  quite  in  the  Savage  fashion,  she
hung  all  around  it  robes  of  Beaver  and  of  Moose,


172  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.24

mifl  proche  du  licl  de  fa  fille,  tout  le  voifmage  acco-
pagna  le  S.  Sacremet  auec  grad  refpedt  &  deuotion,
la  malade  entedant  fonner  la  clochette  qui  fert  de
fignal  pria  fa  mere  de  la  dreffer  fur  so  li(5t,  affin  d'ho-
norer  le  Corps  de  N.  S.  Si  toft  qu'elle  eut  Comunie,
fa  mere  s'approcha  &  luy  dift,  or  fus  ma  fille,  c'efl
maintenat  que  I.  C.  eft  en  ton  coeur,  prend  courage,
remercie  le  fortement:  &  puis  appellant  vne  des  Re-
ligieufes,  elle  luy  dift,  ayde  la  [i  58]  a  faire  fes  prieres,
elle  preffa  qu'on  luy  donnaft  rExtre[me]-On(5tion,
apres  laquelle  elle  mourut  fort  tranquillement  fa
mere  la  fift  enterrer  auec  toute  la  folemnite  poffible
a  vn  Sauuage,  &  mift  dans  fa  foffe  tout  ce  qu'elle
auoit  de  plus  precieux  en  Caflor,  Porcelaine,  &  autres
meubles  dont  ils  font  eflat,  &  comme  les  Religieufes
luy  remontroient  fa  pauurete  &  celle  des  Sauuages,
&  que  cela  ne  feruoit  de  rien  aux  morts,  elle  luy  dift
&  vous  autres  vous  auez  bien  enterr6  voftre  foeur
Religieufe  (c'eftoit  la  mere  de  fain(5te  Marie  morte  il
y  a  deux  ans)  auec  fon  bel  habit  &  auec  tout  I'hon-
neur  que  vous  auez  peu,  fi  ce  que  ie  fais,  offengoit
Dieu,  ie  le  quitterois :  mais  puifque  Dieu  ne  le  deffend
pas,  ie  veux  honorer  les  morts.  II  pleuft  k  Noftre
Seigneur  efprouuer  encor  vn  autre  fois,  cette  bonne
veufue:  elle  auoit  deCia  perdu  deux  filles,  vne  troi-
fiefme  tomba  incontinent  malade,  &  comme  c'eftoit
le  commencement  de  I'hyuer  «&  de  leur  chaff e,  elle
pria  fa  mere  de  la  mener  auec  elle  dans  les  bois,  oil
elle  mourut  peu  apres :  mais  auec  la  piete  &  les  fen-
timens  [159]  de  deuotion,  dont  i'ay  parl6  cy-deuant.
Suffit  de  dire  icy  que  cela  n'efbranla  point  la  bonne
Louyfe,  laquelle  rapportat  le  corps  de  fa  fille  de  dedas
les  bois,  &  le  donnant  aux  Religieufes  pour  le  faire


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  173


wholly  new  and  finely  embroidered.  She  put  the
most  beautiful  one  on  the  bed  of  the  sick  woman ;
she  covered  the  whole  floor  with  leaves,  and  also  the
top  of  the  cabin ;  she  went  to  the  Nuns  to  borrow  a
Crucifix  and  two  candlesticks,  with  the  tapers,  and
put  them  near  her  daughter's  bed.  The  whole  neigh-
borhood accompanied  the  Blessed  Sacrament  with
great  respect  and  devotion.  The  sick  woman,  hear-
ing the  sound  of  the  bell,  which  serves  as  signal,
begged  her  mother  to  raise  her  upon  her  bed,  so  as
to  honor  the  Body  of  Our  Lord.  As  soon  as  she  had
received  Communion,  her  mother  approached  and
said  to  her:  "  Come,  now,  my  daughter;  it  is  now
that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  thy  heart.  Take  courage;
thank  him  heartily;  "  and  then,  calling  one  of  the
Nuns,  she  said  to  her,  "  Help  her  [158]  to  say  her
prayers."  She  urged  that  they  should  give  her  Ex-
treme Unction,  after  which  she  died  very  tranquilly.
Her  mother  had  her  buried  with  all  the  solemnity
possible  to  a  Savage,  and  put  in  her  grave  all  that
she  had  most  precious  in  the  way  of  Beaver,  Porce-
lain, and  other  articles  of  which  they  make  account.
When  the  Nuns  pointed  out  to  her  her  poverty,  and
that  of  the  Savages,  and  that  that  availed  nothing  for
the  dead,  she  said  to  them :  ' '  But  you  people  certainly
buried  your  sister  Religious  ' '  (it  was  the  mother  de
sainte  Marie,  deceased  two  years  ago)  "  with  her
beautiful  robe,  and  with  all  the  honor  that  you  could.
If  what  I  do  offended  God,  I  would  renounce  it;  but,
since  God  forbids  it  not,  I  wish  to  honor  the  dead."
It  pleased  Our  Lord  to  try  this  good  widow  once
again;  she  had  already  lost  two  daughters, — a  third
fell  suddenly  sick;  and,  as  it  was  the  beginning  of
the  winter  and  of  their  hunt,  she  begged  her  mother


174  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.24

enterrer  pres  de  fa  foeur,  leur  dift,  ie  ne  fuis  point
trifle  ie  me  refioui's  dauantage  de  raffeurance  que  i'ay
que  mes  filles  font  au  Ciel,  que  ie  ne  ferois  de  les  voir
viure  en  ce  monde,  Dieu  eft  noftre  Pere  "k  tous:  ie
I'aymeray  &  tout  ce  qu'il  fera.  Ce  fentiment  excel-
lent de  la  conformity  ^  la  volonte  de  Dieu  eft
bien  auant  imprime  dans  Ie  coeur  de  plufieurs  de  nos
Neophytes.

La  femme  d'vn  appell^  Vincent  Xauier  fils  du  pre-
mier Sauuage  errant  qui  s'eft  arrefte  k  Sillery,  tom-
ba  malade  vn  an  apres  fon  mariage,  &  languit  plus
de  deux  ans.  Enfin  elle  fut  contrainte  de  garder  Ie
lidt,  elle  vint  a  I'Hofpital  ou  elle  furpaffa  encor  la
patience  des  autres :  car  pendant  tout  Ie  temps  qu'elle
y  fut,  on  ne  I'entendit  iamais  demander  chofe  aucune
ny  fe  plaindre,  except6  Ie  dernier  iour  de  fa  vie,  &
encor  fort  peu,  quoy  que  d'ailleurs  elle  fuft  d'vn  [i6o]
ef prit  fort  vif  &  agiff ant :  elle  auoit  toufiours  "k  fon
coft6  vne  fienne  petite  fille  aagee  de  deux  ans  &
demy,  &  quoy  qu'elle  fut  preffee  de  mal,  elle  ne
laiffoit  pas  de  la  faire  prier  Dieu  au  temps  accouftu-
m6,  &  de  I'inftruire :  comme  elle  fe  fentit  proche  de
fa  fin,  elle  appella  fon  mary,  luy  parla  auec  beaucoup
d'affection,  &  puis  luy  bailla  fa  petite  fille  qu'elle  ne
voulut  plus  voir  depuis  ce  temps  la,  ne  penfant  qu'k
bien  mourir:  ce  qu'elle  fift  heureufement,  ayant
receu  tous  fes  Sacremens.  Sa  fille  demeura  quelque
temps  ^  la  maifon  de  fon  Pere :  mais  comme  il  alloit
fouuent  k  la  chaff e,  la  pauure  enfant  demeuroit  come
abandonnee:  ceux  qui  la  gardoient  n'en  auoient  pas
de  foing:  elle  s'efchappoit  &  entroit  pour  I'ordinaire
"k  I'Hofpital  oil  les  Religieufes  la  carreffoient,  &  luy
donnoient  a  manger, fon Pere enfin la  mena aux


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  175

to  take  her  with  her  into  the  woods,  where  she  died
soon  after,  but  with  the  piety  and  the  sentiments
[159]  of  devotion  whereof  I  have  spoken  heretofore.
Suffice  it  to  say  here,  that  that  did  not  shake  the
good  Louyse,  who,  bringing  back  the  body  of  her
daughter  from  within  the  woods,  and  giving  it  to
the  Nuns,  in  order  to  have  it  buried  near  her  sister,
said  to  them:  "  I  am  not  sad.  I  rejoice  more  in  the
assurance  which  I  have  that  my  daughters  are  in
Heaven,  than  I  would  to  see  them  living  in  this
world.  God  is  the  Father  of  us  all;  I  will  love  him,
and  all  that  he  shall  do."  This  excellent  sentiment
of  conformity  to  the  will  of  God  is  deeply  imprinted
in  the  hearts  of  many  of  our  Neophytes.

The  wife  of  one  Vincent  Xavier,  son  of  the  first
roving  Savage  who  settled  at  Sillery,  fell  sick  a  year
after  her  marriage,  and  languished  more  than  two
years.  Finally,  she  was  constrained  to  keep  her
bed ;  she  came  to  the  Hospital,  where  she  surpassed
the  patience  even  of  the  others,  for,  during  all  the
time  that  she  was  there,  she  was  never  heard  to  ask
for  anything  or  to  complain, —  except  the  last  day
of  her  life,  and  then  very  little ;  although,  moreover,
she  was  of  a  [160]  very  quick  and  active  mind.  She
had  always  at  her  side  a  little  girl  of  hers,  aged  two
years  and  a  half ;  and  though  she  was  beset  by  sick-
ness, she  failed  not  to  have  the  child  pray  to  God  at
the  usual  time,  and  to  instruct  her.  When  she  felt
herself  near  her  end,  she  called  her  husband,  spoke
to  him  with  much  affection,  and  then  gave  him  her
little  girl,  whom  she  would  no  longer  see  from  that
time, —  thinking  only  of  dying  well,  which  she  did
happily,  having  received  all  her  Sacraments.  Her
daughter  lived  for  some  time  at  her  Father's  house ;


176  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.24

Vrfulines,  lefquelles  la  receurent  auec  toutes  forte
d'affe(5tion :  elle  y  eft  ^  prefent  &  donne  vne  fort
bonne  efperance ;  voila  comme  ces  deux  communau-
tez  s'entre-foulagent  &  defpencent  auec  grande
charite  ce  quell es  re9oiuent  [i6i]  de  Noftre  ancienne
France,  pour  le  bien  &  la  confolation  de  ces  pauures
peuples.

Vne  femme  appellee  Marguerite  auoit  vn  mal  de
iambes  depuis  plufieurs  annees  qui  la  contraignoit  de
paffer  tous  les  hyuers  a  I'Hofpital,  ou  dans  vne  cabane
proche:  I'Hyuer  dernier,  elle  euft  enuie  de  fuiure  les
chaff eurs,  pour  manger  de  la  viande  fraiche  (on  n'en
void  encor  guere  en  ce  pays  icy  fans  chaffe)  fon
mary,  la  charge  fur  fa  traine,  &  la  tire  gayement  apres
f oy  tous  les  iours  fur  des  montagnes  de  neiges :  mais
fa  iambe  fe  pourriffant,  il  la  ramena  ^  I'Hofpital:  ils
auoient  grande  peur  que  1' ordure  &  la  puanteur
de  fes  playes  n'empefchaft  les  Religieufes  de  la
receuoir:  mais  ils  furent  bien-toft  deliurees  de  leur
crainte,  quand  ils  virent  que  ces  bonnes  filles  la  rece-
uoient  auec  plus  de  ioye  que  les  autres.  Si  toft
qu'elle  fut  arriuee,  elle  demande  "k  fe  confeffer,  la
gangrene  fe  mift  en  fon  mal,  &  I'emporta  en  peu  de
temps  apres  auoir  receu  denotement  tous  fes  Sacre-
mens.

Vne  ieune  veufue  nommee  Charite,  [162]  fort  pau-
ure :  mais  tres-vertueufe  auoit  trois  enfans  Baptifez,
I'aifn^  s'eftoit  marie,  fa  femme  &  luy  eftoient  ma-
lades,  les  deux  autres  eftoient  aflez  infirmes,  la  bonne
Charite  feule  eftoit  forte  &  vigoureufe:  elle  s'en
vient  Cabaner  tout  I'Hyuer  pres  de  I'Hofpital,  pour
eftre  fecourue,  elle  ne  demeure  pas  pourtant  oyfeufe,
elle fait I'Hofpitaliere, elle mefme, &  rend  toute


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  177

but,  as  he  went  often  to  the  hunt,  the  poor  child
remained  as  though  forsaken, — those  who  kept  her
took  no  care  of  her.  She  would  escape,  and  usually
enter  the  Hospital,  where  the  Nuns  caressed  her,  and
gave  her  food.  Her  Father  at  last  took  her  to  the
Ursulines,  who  received  her  with  all  manner  of  affec-
tion; she  is  there  at  present,  and  gives  very  good
promise.  Thus  do  these  two  communities  relieve
each  other,  and  expend  with  great  charity  that  which
they  receive  [161]  from  Our  old  France  for  the  weal
and  the  consolation  of  these  poor  peoples.

A  woman  called  Marguerite  had  had  a  disease  of
the  legs  for  several  years,  which  constrained  her  to
spend  all  the  winters  at  the  Hospital,  or  in  a  neigh-
boring cabin.  Last  Winter,  she  desired  to  follow
the  hunters,  in  order  to  eat  fresh  meat  (scarcely  any
is  as  yet  seen  in  the  country  here,  without  hunting).
Her  husband  loads  her  on  his  sledge,  and  draws  her
cheerfully  after  him  every  day,  over  mountains  of
snow ;  but,  her  leg  festering,  he  brought  her  back
to  the  Hospital.  They  had  great  fear  that  the  filth
and  the  stench  of  her  sores  might  prevent  the  Nuns
from  receiving  her;  but  they  were  soon  delivered
from  their  dread,  when  they  saw  that  these  good
daughters  received  her  with  more  joy  than  the
others.  As  soon  as  she  had  arrived,  she  asked  to
confess  herself;  gangrene  occurred  in  her  disease,
and  carried  her  off,  a  short  time  after  having  devout-
ly received  all  her  Sacraments.

A  young  widow  named  Charite,  [162]  very  poor,
but  very  virtuous,  had  three  Baptized  children, —  the
eldest  had  married.  His  wife  and  he  were  sick,  the
two  others  were  quite  feeble ;  the  good  Charite  alone
was  strong  and  vigorous. She  comes  to  lodge  in  a


178  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J t SUITES [Vol.  24

I'affiflance  poffible  "k  cette  pauure  troupe,  elle  va  au
bois,  &  a  I'eau,  elle  fait  la  ctiifme,  elle  paffe  les
peaux,  elle  fait  les  fouliers,  fi  on  tue  quelque  Orignac
a  trois  &  quatre  lieues,  elle  prend  fa  treine,  &  va
querir  fon  fardeau  fur  les  neiges.  Sa  belle  fille  eftoit
la  plus  malade,  &  n'eltoit  pas  encore  Baptifee,  &
n'en  tefmoignoit  pas  mefme  enuie,  elle  prie  Dieu
fans  ceffe  pour  elle,  elle  I'exhorte,  elle  importune
nos  Peres,  &  les  Religieufes,  pour  I'encourager  'k  la
foy,  enfin  elle  obtint  de  Dieu  ce  quelle  demandoit:
car  cette  ieune  femme  deux  iours  auant  que  mourir
enuoya  fon  mary  chez  nous,  k  dix  heures  du  foir  frap-
per  k  la  porte,  &  demander  vn  Pere,  i'y  allay  auec  le
Pere  Buteux;  Dieu  luy  auoit  [163]  cliang6  le  cceur,
elle  preffe  pour  eftre  Baptifee.  Helas,  difoit-elle,
eft-il  pas  temps,  haftez-vous,  ie  veux  eftre  baptifee,
ie  le  fouhaitte,  ce  n'eft  pas  pour  auoir  la  fant6  du
corps,  ie  ne  me  foucie  pas  de  la  vie,  ie  demade  le
baptefme,  pour  obeir  a  Dieu  &  aller  au  Ciel,  fi  toft
qu'elle  I'euft  obtenue  elle  en  tefmoigna  vne  grade
ioye,  nonobftant  fes  violentes  douleurs,  &  mourut
incontinent  apres  dans  le  contentement.

C'eft  affez  parle  des  morts,  difons  vn  mot  de  ceux
qui  ont  loge  tous  en  cette  maif  on  ou  y  ont  recouure  la
fante,  les  deux  aueugleffes  qui  s'y  retirent  fouuet,  y
ont  paff6  I'hyuer  dernier,  elles  auoient  chacun  vne
petite  fille  pour  les  conduire,  dont  la  plus  aagee  qui
eftoit  de  neuf  ^  dix  ans,  auoit  vn  efprit  excellent  &
la  memoire  heureuf e :  elle  apprift  tout  le  Catechifme
&  les  prieres  en  fort  peu  de  temps.  Vn  iour  elle  fift
vne  faute  qui  fembla  affez  groffe  a  noftre  aueugleffe,
laquelle  a  la  confcience  fort  tendre,  elle  la  reprifl
rudement,  &  luy  ordonna  de  ne  point  fortir  de  I'Hof-


1642-43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  179

Cabin  all  Winter,  near  the  Hospital,  in  order  to  be
assisted;  however,  she  does  not  stay  idle,  she  acts
the  Hospital  nurse  herself,  and  renders  all  the  assist-
ance possible  to  that  poor  company.  She  goes  for
wood  and  for  water,  she  does  the  cooking,  she  dresses
the  skins,  she  makes  the  shoes;  if  they  kill  some
Moose  three  or  four  leagues  away,  she  takes  her
sledge  and  goes  to  seek  her  burden,  over  the  snows.
Her  daughter-in-law  was  the  most  sick,  and  was  not
yet  Baptized,  and  showed  not  even  a  desire  for  it.
She  prays  to  God  for  her,  without  ceasing;  she  ex-
horts her,  she  importunes  our  Fathers  and  the  Nuns
to  encourage  her  in  the  faith.  Finally,  she  obtained
from  God  what  she  was  requesting;  for  this  young
woman,  two  days  before  dying,  sent  her  husband  to
us,  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening,  to  knock  at  the  door
and  ask  for  a  Father.  I  went  thither  with  Father
Buteux.  God  had  [163]  changed  her  heart, —  she
urges  to  be  Baptized.  "  Alas,"  she  said,  "  is  it  not
time?  Make  haste;  I  wish  to  be  baptized, —  I  desire
it.  It  is  not  to  have  health  of  body, —  I  care  not  for
life ;  I  ask  baptism  in  order  to  obey  God  and  go  to
Heaven."  As  soon  as  she  had  obtained  it,  she  mani-
fested great  joy,  notwithstanding  her  violent  pains,
and  died  immediately  afterward,  in  contentment.

This  is  enough  said  of  the  dead ;  let  us  say  a  word
of  those  who  have,  every  one,  lodged  in  this  house,
or  have  recovered  their  health  in  it.  The  two  blind
women  who  often  retreat  thither,  spent  last  winter
therein;  they  had  each  a  little  girl  to  lead  them.
The  elder  of  these,  who  was  nine  or  ten  years  old,
had  an  excellent  mind  and  a  happy  memory;  she
learned  the  whole  Catechism  and  the  prayers  in  very
little  time. One  day,  she  committed  a  fault  which


180  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jiSUITES [Vol.24

pital  tout  ce  iour-lk,  e[l]le  obeit  exadtement,  &  mef-
me  ne  [164]  changea  pas  de  place  qu'on  ne  luy  euft
-commande,  elle  difoit  quelquefois  aux  Religieufes.
Regarde  cet  enfant:  elle  eft  ma  parente,  ie  I'aynie
comme  ma  fille:  mais  ie  n'ayme  point  fon  corps  c'eft
fon  ame  que  i'affedtione:  c'eftoit  vn  grand  contente-
ment  d' entendre  comme  elle  luy  expliquoit  les  my-
fteres  de  noftre  faindte  foy,  &  les  belles  inftrudtions
qu'elle  luy  donnoit:  elle  va  quelquefois  aux  trois
Riuieres,  paffer  vne  bonne  partie  de  I'eft^,  &  y  faidt
vn  grand  fruidt  parmy  ces  infideles.

Vn  ieune  homme  Huron,  comme  i'ay  dit  cy-deffus,
a  hyuerne  en  cette  maifon  de  Cliarit6.  Voicy  ce  que
i'en  ay  appris  de  particulier  depuis  les  Chapitres  pre-
cedents. Le  iour  qu'il  fut  baptife  en  la  Chapelle  de
I'Hofpital,  il  fe  leua  des  deux  heures  du  matin,
employant  tout  ce  temps-Ik  k  prier  Dieu,  iufques  a
fon  baptefme,  qui  fut  fur  les  neuf  ou  dix  heures.
Depuis  qu'il  fut  Chreftien,  fa  deuotion  redoubla,  il  fe
leuoit  affez  matin,  mettoit  tout  le  temps  en  prieres
iufques  k  la  MelTe,  qui  fe  difoit  enuiron  les  fept
heures  &  demie,  le  foir  eilant  retourne,  [165]  d'auec
le  Pere  Brebeuf ,  oil  il  auoit  defia  faidt  les  prieres  auec
les  Hurons  fes  camarades,  il  les  recommengoit  auec
les  Algonquins  en  la  fale  des  malades,  &  puis  pour  la
troifiefme  fois,  il  entroit  dans  la  Chapelle  des  Reli-
gieufes, &  y  demeuroit  fouuent  pendant  tout  le  teps
de  leur  Matines,  &  fi  de  hazard  la  Chapelle  eftoit
fermee,  il  fe  mettoit  k  genoiiil  k,la  porte,  &  quelque
bruit  qu'on  fift  dans  I'Hofpital,  il  demeuroit  a  faire
fes  prieres  paifiblement.

Voicy  comme  le  Socoquiois  fait  prifonnier  par  les
Algonquins  dont  i'ay  parl6  cy-deffus,  arriua  en  cette


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  164^-43  181

seemed  quite  immense  to  our  blind  woman,  who  has
a  very  tender  conscience ;  she  reproved  the  child
severely,  and  ordered  her  not  to  leave  the  Hospital
all  that  day.  She  punctually  obeyed,  and  did  not
even  [164]  change  the  place  which  had  been  assigned
to  her.  This  woman  said  sometimes  to  the  Nuns :
"  Look  at  that  child, —  she  is  my  relative;  I  love  her
as  my  daughter,  but  I  do  not  love  her  body, — it  is-
her  soul  that  I  cherish. ' '  It  was  a  great  satisfaction
to  hear  how  she  explained  to  her  the  mysteries  of
our  holy  faith,  and  the  excellent  instructions  that
she  gave  her.  She  sometimes  goes  to  the  three  Riv-
ers, to  spend  a  good  part  of  the  summer,  and  there
gathers  much  fruit  among  those  infidels.

A  Huron  young  man,  as  I  have  said  above,  has
wintered  in  this  house  of  Charity;  I  have  learned-
about  him  the  following  particulars,  since  the  pre-
ceding Chapters.  The  day  that  he  was  baptized  in
the  Chapel  of  the  Hospital,  he  rose  at  two  o'clock  in
the  morning,  employing  all  that  time  in  praying  to
God,  even  until  his  baptism,  which  was  toward  nine
or  ten  o'clock.  After  he  had  become  a  Christian,
his  devotion  redoubled;  he  would  rise  quite  early,
spend  all  the  time  in  prayers  until  Mass,  which  was
said  about  half  past  seven.  Having  returned  at
evening  [165]  from  Father  Brebeuf,  where  he  had
already  said  the  prayers  with  the  Hurons,  his  com-
rades, he  recommenced  them  with  the  Algonquins  in
the  ward  of  the  sick;  and  then,  for  the  third  time,
he  entered  the  Chapel  of  the  Nuns,  and  often  stayed
there  during  the  entire  time  of  their  Matins.  If  by
chance  the  Chapel  was  closed,  he  would  kneel  at  the
door;  and  no  matter  what  noise  occurred  in  the
Hospital,  he  remained  to  say  his  prayers  quietly.


182  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

maifon,  le  neufiefme  de  Nouembre  I'an  paffe,  {i  toft
qu'il  fut  debarqu6  vis  ^  vis  de  I'Hofpital,  les  Sau-
uages  de  Sillery  allerent  au  deuant  pour  le  receuoir
auec  Charite,  ils  le  menerent  en  toutes  leurs  mai-
fons,  &  cabanes,  I'vne  apres  I'autre,  &  le  firent  dan-
cer en  toutes :  mais  auec  douceur  &  amitie ;  il  obei't
par  tout,  quoy  qu'il  euft  le  corps  tout  couuert  de
playes  &  blelTures :  apres  cela  deux  des  principaux
Sauuages  I'amenerent  "k  I'Hofpital,  ou  il  fut  receu
des  Religieufes  auec  grande  ioye  [i66]  on  appelle  le
Chirurgien:  toute  la  fale  fe  trouua  pleine  de  Sau-
uages, pour  voir  en  quel  eftat  eftoient  fes  playes,  il
auoit  tous  les  ongles  arrachez,  de  trois  doigts  coupez
tout  nouuellement  le  pus  en  fortoit,  les  vers  y  four-
milloient,  il  auoit  vn  pied  perc6  d' outre  en  outre,
auec  vn  bafton,  il  auoit  les  deux  poignets  des  mains
liez  iufques  aux  os,  auec  des  cordes,  &  le  corps  brufl6
&  perce  d'alefnes  en  diuers  endroits:  ie  me  trouuay
^  ce  fpedtacle,  la  premiere  veue  nous  fit  tranfir,  il
endura  qu'on  le  penfaft  fans  iamais  dire  vn  feul  mot,
ny  monftrer  aucun  figne  de  douleur,  il  declaroit  par
fignes  la  fa9on  dont  on  I'auoit  ainfi  traidte,  fans
tefmoigner  aucun  mefcontentement  contre  ceux  qui
I'auoient  mis  en  ce  piteux  eftat:  il  y  auoit  de  bonne
fortune  k  I'Hofpital  vn  malade  Abnaquiois  baptife,
&  appelle  Claude,  qui  entendoit  bien  le  Socoquiois:
ce  pauure  miferable  fut  extremement  confole  de  fa
rencontre,  &  comme  il  s'eftonnoit  k  I'abbord  de  voir
les  Religieufes  luy  tefmoigner  tant  de  charite;  ce
bon  Chreftien  luy  expliqua  comme  toute  leur  occu-
pation n'eftoit  [167]  que  d'affifter  &  fecourir  les
pauures,  &  les  malades,  &  qu'elles  gardoient  toute
leur  vie,  la  virginity :  cela  luy  frappa  I'efprit,  il  fut


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  183

I  will  relate  how  the  Socoquiois  ^^  made  prisoner
"by  the  Algonquins,  of  whom  I  have  previously  spok-
en, arrived  in  this  house  the  ninth  of  November,  last
year.  As  soon  as  he  had  landed  opposite  the  Hospi-
tal, the  Savages  of  Sillery  went  forward  to  receive
him  with  Charity,  They  led  him  into  all  their
houses  and  cabins,  one  after  the  other,  and  made
liim  dance  in  all, —  but  with  gentleness  and  friend-
ship. He  obeyed  throughout,  although  he  had  his
body  all  covered  with  wounds  and  sores.  After  that,
two  of  the  principal  Savages  led  him  to  the  Hos-
pital, where  he  was  received  by  the  Nuns  with  great
joy.  [166]  They  call  the  Surgeon;  the  whole  ward
was  full  of  Savages,  in  order  to  see  in  what  state  his
wounds  were.  He  had  all  his  nails  torn  out;  matter
was  issuing  from  three  fingers,  quite  recently  cut,
and  the  worms  were  swarming  therein ;  he  had  one
foot  pierced  through  and  through  with  a  stick ;  he
had  both  wrists  of  his  hands  tied,  even  to  the  bone,
with  cords;  and  his  body  was  burned,  and  pierced
with  awls  in  sundry  places.  I  was  present  at  this
sight;  the  first  view  made  us  chill  with  horror.  He
endured  the  dressing  of  his  wounds  without  ever
saying  a  single  word,  or  showing  any  sign  of  pain;
he  made  known  by  signs  the  manner  in  which  they
had  thus  treated  him,  without  betokening  any  dis-
pleasure against  those  who  had  put  him  in  this  piti-
ful condition.  By  good  luck,  there  was  at  the  Hos-
pital a  sick  Abnaquiois,  baptized,  and  called  Claude,
who  well  understood  Socoquiois.  This  poor  wretch
was  extremely  comforted  to  meet  him;  and,  as  he
was  astonished,  at  first,  to  see  the  Nuns  show  him  so
much  charity,  this  good  Christian  explained  to  him
how  their  whole  occupation  was  [167]  only  to  assist


184  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

remis  en  affez  peu  de  temps,  &  renuoye  en  fon  pays,
pour  tefmoigner  I'affedtion  des  Fran9ois  &  Sauuages
enuers  luy,  ce  font  autat  d'aiiancouriers  de  I'Euagile
que  Dieu  enuoye  a  fes  peuples.

Quatre  Hurons  eftant  defcendus  des  trois  Riuieres
k  Sillery,  vn  deux  rechappe  nouuellement  des  mains
des  Hyroquois  tomba  malade,  fes  Camarades  I'amene-
rent  k  I'Hofpital,  &  y  logerent  auffi  eux-mefmes,
n'ayant  point  d'autre  retraite:  ces  bonnes  gens  tef-
moignerent  fur  leur  vifage  vne  grande  ioye  de  ren-
contrer  i^i  h  propos  vn  lieu  de  charite :  la  maladie  de
leur  conipagnon  en  vint  k  I'extremite,  on  le  defefpe-
roit :  defia  deux  d'etr'eux  ne  bougeoiet  de  fes  coftez
pour  raffifter.  Cette  charite  ne  leur  eft  pas  ordi-
naire, les  chofes  de  Dieu  gaignent  peu  a  peu  fur  leurs
coeurs,  quad  les  Religieufes  donnoient  quelque  chofe
au  malade,  tons  les  trois  autres  ne  manquoient  iamais
de  les  en  remercier  k  leur  fagon  ordinaire,  ho,  ho,
ho,  s'il  le  falloit  leuer  ou  [i68]  remuer,  ils  fe  prefen-
toient  incontinent,  &  quelquesfois  luy  ont  fouftenu
la  tefte  ou  le  corps,  quatre  ou  cinq  heures  de  fuite,.
fans  fe  laffer:  I'vn  d'entr'eux  fgauoit  les  prieres,  il
eftoit  auec  les  deux  autres  en  la  Chappelle,  foir  &
matin,  pour  les  dire,  puis  s'en  alloit  en  faire  autant
pr^s  de  ce  malade,  qui  prioit  incontinent  qu'on  le
dreffaft  fur  fon  lit,  pour  les  dire  auec  plus  de  refpedl,
il  pleuft  "k  N.  Seig.  luy  redre  la  fante,  &  leur  donner
moyen  ^  tous  de  retourner  en  leur  pays :  ie  ne  dis  rie
du  Catechifme  qu'on  a  fait  en  ce  lieu  vne  bone
partie  de  I'annee,  tatoft  aux  malades,  tatoft  aux
pauures,  tatoft  aux  enfas.  Ten  ay  parle  cy-deffus,  ie
diray  feulement  que  le  defir  que  les  Sauuages  grads
&  petits  ont  d'aprendre  le  Catechifme  &  les  prieres,


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  185

and  succor  the  poor  and  the  sick,  and  that  they  ob-
served virginity  all  their  life.  That  greatly  impressed
his  mind.  He  was  restored  in  a  fairly  short  time,
and  sent  back  to  his  own  country,  in  order  to  show
the  affection  of  the  French  and  Savages  toward  him.
These  are  so  many  precursors  of  the  Gospel,  that
God  sends  to  his  peoples.

Four  Hurons  having  come  down  from  the  three
Rivers  to  Sillery,  one  of  them,  newly  escaped  from
the  hands  of  the  Hyroquois,  fell  sick ;  his  Comrades
led  him  to  the  Hospital,  and  also  lodged  there  them-
selves, not  having  other  shelter.  These  good  people
expressed  in  their  faces  their  great  joy  at  so  oppor-
tunely encountering  a  place  of  charity.  Their  com-
panion's sickness  came  to  a  crisis,  and  they  were
despairing  of  him ;  by  that  time  two  of  them  stirred
not  from  his  side,  in  order  to  assist  him.  This  char-
ity is  not  usual  with  them :  the  things  of  God  gain
little  by  little  upon  their  hearts.  When  the  Nuns
gave  anything  to  the  sick  man,  all  the  three  others
never  failed  to  thank  them  for  it,  in  their  usual  fash-
ion— "  Ho,  ho,  ho."  If  it  were  necessary  to  lift  or
[168]  move  him,  they  straightway  presented  them-
selves; and  they  sometimes  supported  his  head  or
body  four  or  five  hours  in  succession,  without  becom-
ing fatigued.  One  of  them  knew  the  prayers, —  he
was  with  the  two  others,  in  the  Chapel,  evening  and
morning,  to  say  them ;  then  he  went  away  to  do  the
same  near  that  sick  man,  who  straightway  begged
that  they  should  raise  him  up  on  his  bed,  in  order  to
say  them  with  more  respect.  It  pleased  Our  Lord  to
restore  his  health,  and  to  give  all  of  them  means  to
return  to  their  own  country.  I  say  nothing  of  the
lessons  in  the  Catechism  which  were  given  in  this


186  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  jtSUITES [Vol.24

fait  fouuent  vne  Chapelle,  &  vne  Efcole  de  la  lale
des  malades,  auffi  bien  que  de  noftre  maifon  de  Sil-
lery,  ils  entrent  fans  ceffe,  &  difent :  enf eigne  moy,
fais-moy  prier  Dieu :  vne  Religienf e  eft  affes  &  fainte-
met  occupee  "k  fatisfaire  a  ces  vifites,  &  importunitez
pieufes:  &  en  effet  outre  celles  qui  afQftent  les
malades,  il  en  a  fallu  eftablir  d'autres  pour  ceux  qui
demandent  [169]  k  reciter  les  prieres,  &  apprendre  le
Catechifme,  la  comodite  du  lieu  y  fert  beaucoup,  les
maifons  de  ces  bonnes  gets  touchent  au  baftimet  de
I'Hofpital,  &  n'ont  qu'vne  court  comune,  ils  entret  "k
tous  propos  quand  il  font  a  Sillery,  &  difent !  ie  veux
prier  Dieu,  ie  veux  appredre,  inftruy-moj^  O  que
cette  importunit6  eft  agreable,  quoy  qu'elle  attire
par  neceffit^  des  frais  notables!  mais  que  faire,  toute
la  Miffion  n'efl  que  pour  cette  fin,  cela  confole  &
eftonne  tout  enfemble,  en  vn  pays  &  en  vn  lieu
depourueu  de  tout.  Voicy  ce  que  la  Mere  Superieure
efcriuoit  fur  ce  fubiet,  en  vne  lettre  il  y  a  quelques
iours;  ie  ne  fgay,  dit  elle,  ce  que  nous  fairons  auec
le  temps,  les  Sauuages  font  pauures,  ils  font  fubiets
"k  vne  infinite  de  maladies,  leur  vertu  n'en  eft  pas
moindre,  mais  leur  fecours  en  eft  plus  difficile :  les
Hofpitaux  de  France  ont  efte  fondez  par  les  Roys  les
Princes  &  les  Princeffes  bien  richement,  &  auec  tout
cela  ils  ne  fubfifteroient  pas,  fi  les  Euefques  &  les
perfonnes  de  merite  n'y  faifoient  de  bonnes  aumof-
nes,  fi  les  Parlemens  &  les  Prefidiaux  [170]  n'y  appli-
quoiet  les  amendes;  1' Ocean  nous  exclud  de  tous  ces
fecours:  il  fe  trouue  en  France  des  perfonnes  qui
entreprenent  icy  faincilement  vn  &  deux  Semina-
riftes,  d'autres  I'entretien  &  foulagement  d'vne
famille Sauuage, mais peu  de  perfonnes  pefent  k


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  187

place  a  good  part  of  the  year, — now  to  the  sick,
anon  to  the  poor,  again  to  the  children.  I  have
spoken  of  them  before;  I  will  only  say  that  the
desire  of  the  Savages,  great  and  small,  to  learn  the
Catechism  and  the  prayers,  often  makes  a  Chapel
and  a  School  of  the  sick  ward  as  well  as  of  our  house
at  Sillery.  They  enter  incessantly,  and  say:  "  Teach
me ;  have  me  pray  to  God."  One  Nun  is  amply  and
blessedly  occupied  in  answering  these  visits  and
pious  importunities ;  and,  in  fact,  besides  those  who
assist  the  sick,  it  has  been  necessary  to  establish
others  for  those  who  request  [169]  to  recite  the  pray-
ers and  to  learn  the  Catechism.  The  convenience
of  the  place  is  of  much  service  herein ;  these  good
people's  houses  adjoin  the  building  of  the  Hospital,
and  have  but  one  common  court.  They  come  in  on
every  occasion,  when  they  are  at  Sillery,  and  say:
"  I  wish  to  pray  to  God;  I  wish  to  learn, —  instruct
me."  Oh,  how  agreeable  is  this  importunity,  al-
though it  necessarily  leads  to  considerable  expenses !
But  what  shall  be  done?  The  entire  Mission  is  only
for  this  end ;  that  comforts  and  astonishes,  all  at  once,
in  a  country  and  in  a  place  destitute  of  everything.
See  what  the  Mother  Superior  wrote  on  this  subject,
in  a  letter  some  days  ago:  "  I  know  not,"  she  says,
''  what  we  shall  do  in  course  of  time.  The  Savages
are  poor ;  they  are  liable  to  countless  diseases :  their
virtue  is  none  the  less,  but  their  succor  is  more  diffi-
cult. The  Hospitals  of  France  have  been  founded  by
Kings,  Princes,  and  Princesses,  very  richly ;  and  with
all  that,  they  would  not  subsist  if  the  Bishops  and
persons  of  merit  did  not  bestow  generous  alms  on
them,  and  if  the  Parliaments  and  the  Tribunals  [170]
did  not  apply  the  fines  to  them :  the  Ocean  excludes


188  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  24

I'entretien  d'vn  malade,  &  a  le  fournir  de  linges  ou
de  couuertures.  Dieu  a  des  voyes  qui  nous  font
inconnues,  &  fes  moyens  fe  trouueront  quand  il  luy
plaira.  Quelques  honneftes  perfonnes  nous  I'ont  fait
ef prouuer,  cette  annee :  Dieu  en  f oit  a  iamais  benift ;
nous  eftions  au  bout,  la  neceffite  de  logis  &  la  mifere
des  pauures  nous  auoit  oblige  a  des  debtes :  noftre
chere  fondatrice,  nonobftant  le  fubiedt  de  fes  dou-
leurs,  n'a  pas  laifle  d'appliquer  fes  foins,  &  nous  en
deliurer  de  la  plus  groffe  partie:  fa  charite  ne  s'eft
iamais  laffee,  noftre  confolation  efl  qu'elle  en  voit
les  fruits  tres  agreables,  &  en  iouyt  auec  nous:  voila
les  penfees  de  ces  bonnes  filles  parmy  leur  pauuret6.
le  veux  finir  ce  Chapitre  par  les  parolles  que  le
bon  Charles  Meca  Skoiiat  \sc.  Meiafkoiiat]  [171]  a
fouuent  tenu  aux  malades,  les  venant  vifiter  quand
il  eft  ^  Sillery :  vous  autres  (dit-il)  qui  eftes  malades,
n'eftimez  pas  que  la  maladie  foit  vne  chofe  mauuaife,
ne  penfez  pas  en  voftre  coeur,  voila  qui  va  mal  de  ce
que  nous  fommes  affligez,  mais  penfez  ainfi  de  Dieu,
c'eft  noftre  Pere  h.  tons;  il  nous  a  fait,  il  nous  ayme,
c'eft  pour  noftre  bien  qu'il  nous  enuoye  la  maladie,
il  nous  mettra  dans  le  Ciel  &  nous  donnera  vne  vie
qui  ne  meurt  iamais,  voila  ce  que  vous  penferez  de
Dieu.  Ay6s  done  courage  ne  vous  attriftez  pas,
croyez  fortement,  ce  que  vous  endurez  prendra  bien-
toft  fin:  mais  voftre  ioye  durera  a  iamais  dans  le
Ciel.


1642-43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43


189


US  from  all  these  aids. There  are  in  France  persons
who holily maintain here one or two Seminary
pupils,—  others,  who  undertake  the  support  and  relief
of  a  Savage  family ;  but  few  persons  think  of  the  sup-
port of  a  patient,  and  of  furnishing  him  with  linen  or
bedding. God  has  ways  which  are  unknown  to  us,
and  these  means  will  be  found  when  it  shall  please
him. Some  worthy  persons  have  made  us  experience
that,  this  year ;  God  be  forever  blessed  for  this. We
were  in  extremity,— the  necessity  for  lodgings,  and
the  misery  of  the  poor,  had  obliged  us  to  incur  debts;
our  dear  foundress,  notwithstanding  her  occasion  for
sorrow,  nevertheless  applied  her  care,  and  delivered
us  from  the  main  part  of  them. Her  charity  has
never  grown  weary ;  our  consolation  is  that  she  sees
the  very  pleasant  fruits  thereof, and  enjoys  them
with us." Such  are  the thoughts  of these good
sisters  amidst  their  poverty.

I  wish  to  finish  this  Chapter  with  the  words  which
the  good  Charles  Meiaskouat  [171]  has  often  addressed
to  the  sick,  on  coming  to  visit  them  when  he  is  at
Sillery. "  You  "  (said  he)  "  who  are  sick,  deem  not
that  sickness  is  an  evil  thing,— do  not  think  in  your
heart : '  It is  a  bad  affair,  that we are afBicted ;  '
but  think  thus  of  God:  '  He  is  the  Father  of  us  all,—
he  has  made  us;  he  loves  us;— it  is  for  our  good
that  he  sends  us  sickness. He  will  place  us  in  Heav-
en, and  give  us  a  life  which  never  dies. ' That  is
what you should think of God. Have courage,
then,— do  not  be  grieved;  believe  firmly;  what  you
endure  will  soon  have  an  end,  but  your  joy  will  last
forever  in  Heaven."


190  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24


[172]  CHAPITRE  X.

DE CE QUI S'EST PASSE AUX TROIS RIUIERES & AU
FORT DE RICHELIEU.

IE  mets  ces  deux  lieux  en  vn  Chapitre,  par  ce  qu'ils
ont  couru  mefme  rifque  des  Hiroquois,  &  ont
receu  les  mefmes  Sauuages  lefquels  ont  paffe
I'annee,  partie  en  vn  de  ces  lieux,  partie  en  I'autre:
ceux  qui  ont  demeure  en  ces  deux  habitations,  ont
efte  les  Algonquins  d'en-haut,  autant  fuperbes  &
difficilles  "k  gouuerner  (comme  i'ay  defia  remarque)
que  ceux  de  deuers  Quebec  font  humbles  &  dociles.
L'an  paffe  incontinent  apres  le  depart  des  Nauires,
qui  fut  le  feptiefme  d'Odtobre,  i'euoyay  le  Pere  le
leune  demeurer  aux  trois  riuieres,  pour  voir  s'il
pourroit  dompter  I'Orgueil  de  ces  gens  1^,  &  les
reduire  "k  lefus-Chrift :  fon  zele  &  fa  vertu  affez  co-
gneue  me  donnerent  aifement  cette  [173]  penf6e,  il
n'y  fut  pas  pluftoft  arriue  que  ces  miferables  luy  don-
nerent bien  de  I'exercice,  les  deux  principaux  chefs
eftoient  vn  appelle  TefS'efatch  homme  rufe,  fuperbe,
ennemy  des  fagons  de  faire  des  Francois  &  du  Chri-
ftianifme,  I'autre  eftoit  vn  apoftat  nomme  Abdon
plein  d'efprit:  mais  mefchant  &  hardy,  ces  deux
hommes  gouuernoient  les  Algonquins  d'en-haut,  &
taf chant  "k  leur  letter  le  mefme  efprit  qui  les  poffe-
doit,  feignoiet  par  interualle  d'aymer  la  Foy,  &  les
Fran9ois,  &  puis  ils  faifoient  tout  le  contraire  en  par-
ticulier,  &  f ouuent  en  public :  il  y  auoit  neantmoins


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  4  J  191


[172]  CHAPTER  X.

OF EVENTS AT THE THREE RIVERS AND AT THE
FORT OF RICHELIEU.

I  BRING  these  two  places  into  one  Chapter,  be-
cause they  have  incurred  like  peril  from  the
Hiroquois,  and  have  received  the  same  Savages,
who  have  spent  the  year  partly  in  one  of  these  places,
partly  in  the  other.  Those  who  have  lived  at  these
two  settlements  have  been  the  upper  Algonquins, —
just  as  proud,  and  difficult  to  govern  (as  I  have  already
remarked),  as  those  from  about  Quebec  are  humble
and  docile.  Last  year,  immediately  after  the  depar-
ture of  the  Ships, —  which  was  the  seventh  of  Octo-
ber,—  I  sent  Father  le  Jeune  to  live  at  the  three
rivers,  in  order  to  see  if  he  could  subdue  the  Pride
of  those  people,  and  bring  them  to  Jesus  Christ.
His  well-known  zeal  and  virtue  readily  inspired  me
with  this  [173]  idea.  He  had  no  sooner  arrived  there
than  those  wretches  gave  him  plenty  of  exercise.
The  two  principal  chiefs  were:  one,  Teswesatch,^^  —
a  crafty,  proud  man,  and  an  enemy  to  the  French
usages  and  to  Christianity ;  the  other  was  an  apostate
named  Abdon,  full  of  intelligence,  but  wicked  and
bold.  These  two  men  governed  the  upper  Algon-
quins; and,  striving  to  infuse  into  them  the  same
mind  which  possessed  themselves,  they  feigned,  at
intervals,  to  love  the  Faith  and  the  French,  and  then
they  did  the  very  contrary  in  private,  and  often  in
public. There  were,  nevertheless,  among  that  band


192  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.24

parmy  la  troupe  quelques  ames  choifies  de  Dieu.
L'an  paffe  le  19.  d'Ocftobre,  Abdon  auec  fa  troupe
retournant  de  la  guerre  amena  aux  trois  Riuieres  vn
prifonnier  qui  n'eftoit  pas  Hiroquois:  mais  leur  voi-
lin  &  amy :  les  voila  incontinent  dans  la  ref olution
de  le  brufler,  on  leur  remontre  qu'il  ne  faut  pas
multiplier  les  ennemis,  &  qu'ils  deuoient  maintenant
quitter  toutes  ces  cruautez :  mais  ils  fe  mocquent  du
Pere,  &  de  tous  ceux  qui  leur  en  parlent,  percent  vn
pied  ^  ce  pauure  [174]  homme  auec  vn  bafton,  luy
arrachent  les  ongles  des  doigts  a  belles  dents,  il  ten-
doit  la  main  &  donnoit  les  doigts  comme  fi-il  n'euft
rien  fenty,  ils  luy  lient  les  deux  poignets  des  mains
auec  des  cordes  a  neuds  coulans,  &  quatre  ieunes
hommes  tiroient  &  bandoient  les  cordes  de  toutes
leurs  forces,  defchirants  &  emportants  la  chair  des
bras  iufques  aux  os,  la  douleur  le  fait  tomber  en
foibleff e ;  ils  ceff ent  de  le  tourmenter  luy  iettent  de
I'eau,  luy  donnent  a  mager  pour  le  faire  reuiure  aux
tourments,  le  bois  eftoit  defia  prepare  pour  le  brufler,
&  la  nuidl  de  cette  tragedie,  s'alloit  commencer:  mais
le  foir  de  bonne  fortune  il  arriua  vn  canot  de  Que-
bec, auec  des  lettres  de  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  au
fieur  des  Rocbers  qui  commande  aux  3.  riuieres,  afin
qu'il  rachetafl  &  deliuraft  le  prifonnier,  ce  qu'il  fifl
auec  bien  de  la  peine :  car  la  rage  &  la  vengeance
poffedoient  le  coeur  de  ces  Barbares:  cette  affaire
expediee,  le  Pere  s'applique  a  I'inftrudtion  des  Sau-
uages,  s'oppofe  aux  mutins  &  encourage  a  la  perfe-
uerance,  ceux  qui  auoient  bien  commence,  le  [175]
mal-heureux  Teft^oaths  \_sc.  Tefb'efatch]  deffendoit
publiquement  a  fes  gens  qu'ils  n'allaffent  "k  la  mefle.
Le  Pere  eftant  vn  iour  pres  de  la  dire,  &  voyant  que


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  1^3

some  soTils  chosen  of  God. Last  year,  on  the  19th
of  October, Abdon  with  his  troop,  returning  from
the  war,  brought  to  the  three  Rivers  a  prisoner  who
was  not  Hiroquois, but  their  neighbor  and  friend :
behold  them  suddenly  resolving  to  burn  him. They
are  admonished  that  they  must  not  multiply  their
enemies,  and  that  they  ought  now  to  give  up  all  those
cruelties ;  but  they  mock  at  the Father, and  at  all
those  who  mention  it  to  them. They  pierce  one  foot
of  this  poor  [174]  man  with  a  stick,  and  atrociously
tear  out  his  finger-nails, —  he  held  out  his  hand  and
gave  his  fingers,  as  if  he  had  felt  nothing ;  they  tie
both  his  wrists  with  cords  with  running  knots,  and
four young men pull and fasten the cords with
all  their  might,  tearing  and  removing  the  flesh  of  his
arms  even  to  the  bones. The  pain  causes  him  to  fall
in  a  swoon ;  they  cease  to  torture  him,  throw  water
upon  him,  and  give  him  food,  in  order  to  revive  him
for  the  torments ;  the  wood  was  already  prepared  for
burning  him,  and  the  night  of  this  tragedy  was  about
to  begin. But  at  evening,  by  good  fortune, there
arrived  a  canoe  from  Quebec,  with  letters  from  Mon-
sieur the  Governor  to  sieur  des  Rochers,  who  com-
mands at  the 3  rivers, —  to  the  end  that  he  should
ransom  and  release  the  prisoner, —  which  he  did  with
much  difficulty, for  rage  and  vengeance  possessed
the  hearts  of  those  Barbarians. This  business  de-
spatched, the  Father  applies  himself  to  the  instruction
of  the  Savages,  opposes  the  mutinous,  and  encourages
to  perseverance those who  had  begun well. The
[175]  miserable  Teswesatch  publicly  forbade  his  peo-
ple to  go  to  mass. The  Father  being  one  day  ready
to  say  it, and seeing  that  no one came,  leaves  the
Church ;  and  having  perceived  from  a  distance  some


194  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.24

perfonne  ne  venoit,  il  fort  de  I'Eglife  &  ayant  apper-
ceu  de  loing  quelques  ieunes  filles  qui  s'approchoient
auec  crainte,  il  leur  demande?  pourquoy  elles  n'en-
troient  pas?  le  Capitaine  a  crie  publiquement,  difent
elles,  qu'il  tueroit  ceux  qui  y  viendroient  venez :  dift
le  Pere,  ne  craignez  rien,  les  Frangois  vous  defifen-
dront :  vne  eftant  entr6e  les  autres  fuiuirent,  &  enfin
tous  vinrent  a  la  Meffe :  ils  ne  tarderent  guere  aux
trois  riuieres  auffi  n'y  font-ils  pas  encor  refidens,  &
n'y  ont  aucune  maifon  ftable.  Sur  la  fin  de  Nouem-
bre  ils  prirent  quel  que  refolution  d'aller  a  Mont- Real
pour  y  faire  leur  chaffe,  pendant  tout  I'hyuer:  mais
ayant  entendu  que  quelques-vns  de  leurs  compagnons
qui  y  eftoient  alles  peu  de  temps  auparauant  redef-
cendoient  pour  demeurer  au  Fort  de  Riche-lieu,  ils
les  allerent  trouuer  pour  hyuerner  la  tous  enfemble,
&  fe  tenir  compagnie  foit  a  la  chaffe,  foit  k  la  guerre.
[176]  Ce  feroit  vn  grad  bo-heur  que  ces  gens  Ik  fe
peuffent  vne  fois  fixer  &  arrefler  en  quelque  bonne
habitation,  comme  les  autres  ont  fait  a  Sillery:  le
Pere  le  leufne  faifant  1' office  d'vn  bon  pafteur,  va
apres  f  on  troupeau  &  le  f  uit  quittant  les  trois  Riuieres
pour  tirer  auec  eux  vers  Riche-lieu,  comme  ils  eftoient
en  chemin  vn  certain  Sauuage  bon  Chreftien  fait
vne  criee  a  cinq  cabanes,  que  le  Pere  accompagnoit.
Efcoutes  moy  tous,  diit-il,  voicy  de  pauures  veufues
qui  viennent  hyuerner  auec  nous,  elles  viennent  pour
auoir  a  manger,  il  les  faudra  fecourir  de  noflre
chaffe,  efcoutez  moy  derechef :  ie  vols  bien  que  nous
ne  fommes  pas  au  bout  de  nos  mal-heurs,  nous  auons
des  gens  de  bien  auec  nous,  &  nous  n'en  fommes  pas
meilleurs:  voicy  vn  homme  qui  a  paffe  le  grand
Ocean  pour  parler  pour  nous,  afin  qu'on  nous  affiftaft:


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  195

young  girls  who  were  approaching  with  fear,  he  asks
them  why  they  did  not  come  in.  "  The  Captain  has
publicly  announced,"  they  say,  "  that  he  would  kill
those  who  should  go  thither."  The  Father  said,
"  Fear  nothing;  the  French  will  defend  you."  One
having  entered,  the  others  followed;  and  finally  all
came  to  Mass.  They  tarried  not  long  at  the  three
rivers, —  so  they  are  not  yet  resident  there,  and  have
no  fixed  abode  there.  Toward  the  end  of  Novem-
ber, they  took  a  sort  of  resolution  to  go  to  Mont-
Real,  in  order  to  make  their  hunt  there  during  all
the  winter;  but,  having  heard  that  some  of  their
companions,  who  had  gone  thither  shortly  before,
were  coming  down  again  in  order  to  stay  at  Fort
Riche-lieu,  they  went  to  find  them,  so  as  to  winter
there  all  together,  and  keep  one  another  company,
either  in  the  chase  or  in  war.  [176]  It  would  be  a
great  blessing  if  those  people  could  once  become
fixed  and  settled  in  some  suitable  residence,  as  the
others  have  done  at  Sillery.  Father  le  Jeusne,  per-
forming the  office  of  a  good  pastor,  goes  after  his
flock  and  follows  it,  leaving  the  three  Rivers  in  order
to  move  with  them  toward  Riche-lieu.  As  they  were
on  the  way,  a  certain  Savage,  a  good  Christian,
makes  a  public  statement  to  five  cabins  which  the
Father  accompanied.  "  Listen  to  me,  all  of  you,"
said  he ;  "  here  are  poor  widows  who  come  to  winter
with  us ;  they  come  to  have  food ;  we  shall  have  to
help  them  with  our  hunting.  Listen  to  me  again ;  I
see  well  that  we  are  not  at  the  end  of  our  bad  luck ;
we  have  worthy  people  with  us,  and  we  are  none  the
better  for  it.  Here  is  a  man  who  has  crossed  the
great  Ocean  in  order  to  speak  for  us,  to  the  end  that
we  should  be  assisted;  but  we  do  not  listen  to  him


196  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.24

mais  nous  ne  I'efcoutons  pas  comme  il  faut;  le  mal-
heur  vient  de  ce  que  nos  Capitaines  ne  croyent  pas
en  Dieu,  que  s'il  en  donne  aduis  en  fon  pays,  le
Maffmaigan,  c'efl  k  dire  leur  Efcriture,  empefchera
le  bie  qu'on  nous  [177]  procure.  Sus  doc  vous  autres
qui  croyez  en  Dieu,  &  vous  qui  auez  enuie  de  croire,
vniffons  nous,  &  tenons  ferme  pour  la  foy,  &  efcou-
tons  le  Pere.  Cela  dit,  il  s'embarque,  &  arriue  le
mefme  iour  au  fort  de  Richelieu,  le  fieur  de  Chamfe-
lourt  \sc.  Chamflour],  qui  y  commandoit,  recent  le
Pere  auec  vne  affe(5tion  toute  extraordinaire  qu'il  a
continuee  tout  I'hyuer,  le  fecourant  fortement  dans  le
delTein  d'attirer  ces  peuples  ^  lefu-Chrift.  Le  Pere
de  Noiie  qui  y  eftoit  pour  auoir  foin  des  Fran9ois,
fut  rauy  d'aife  d'auoir  auec  foy  le  Pere,  pour  enfei-
gner  les  Sauuages.  Voicy  leur  occupation,  pendant
I'Hyuer  &  I'ordre  qu'ils  gardoient  tous  les  matins.
Au  point  du  iour  le  Pere  de  Noiie  difoit  la  Meffe,  h.
laquelle  affiftoient  les  Frangois  &  les  Sauuages  Chre-
ftiens.  Le  fieur  de  Normanuille  (c'eft  ce  ieune  home,
qui  a  efte  autrefois  pris  des  Hiroquois,  &  qui  fifl  I'an
paffe  le  voyage  de  France  auec  le  Pere  le  Ieune)  leur
faifoit  faire  les  prieres  tout  haut  au  commencement
de  la  Meffe,  il  entend  fort  bien  la  langue.  Pendant
ce  temps  1^  le  Pere  en  enfeignoit  quelques-vns  en
particulier  [178]  ou  les  efcoutoit  de  Confeffion,  puis
les  menoit  ^  la  Chappelle  oil  il  leur  difoit  la  Meffe,  &
faifoit  Communier  ceux  qui  en  eftoient  capables,  &
ainfi  il  les  prenoit  tous  les  vns  apres  les  autres :  la
Meffe  eftant  finie,  il  affembloit  quelque  ieunes  gens,
pour  leur  faire  le  Catechifme.  La  plus  grande  partie
du  iour  leur  petite  chambre  eftoit  pleine,  &  ce
n'eiloit  quafi  qu'vne  inftrudtion  continuelle. Sur  le


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  197


as  we  ought. The  misfortune  comes  from  the  fact
that  our  Captains  do  not  believe  in  God ;  so  that  if
he  gives  information  of  this  in  his  own  country,  the
Massinaigan, —  that  is to  say,  their  Writing, — will
hinder  the  benefit  that  is  being  [177]  procured  for
us. Up,  then,  you  who  believe  in  God,  and  you  who
have  desire  to  believe ;  let  us  unite,  and  make  a  stand
for  the  faith;  and  let  us  heed  the  Father." That
said, he embarks,  and  arrives  the  same  day  at  the
fort  of Richelieu. The  sieur de Chamflour, who
commanded there, ^" received  the Father  with an
affection  quite extraordinary, which he continued
throughout  the  winter, — efficiently  assisting  him  in
the  design  of  drawing  these  peoples  to  Jesus  Christ.
Father  de  Noiie,  who  was  there  in  order  to  have  care
of  the  French,  was  delighted  to  have  the  Father  with
him,  to  teach  the  Savages. Here  follows  their  occu-
pation during  the  Winter,  and  the  order  that  they
observed  every  morning. At  daybreak,  Father  de
Noiie  ^^  said  Mass,  at  which  were  present  the  French,
and  the  Christian  Savages. The  sieur  de  Norman-
ville  ^^  (this  is  the  young  man  who  was  formerly  taken
by  the  Hiroquois,  and  who,  last  year,  made  the  voyage
to  France  with  Father  le  Jeune)  had  them  say  the
prayers  aloud,  at  the  beginning  of  Mass;  he  under-
stands the  language  very  well. During  that  time,  the
Father  taught  some  of  them  in  private,  [178]  or  heard
them  in  Confession,  then  led  them  to  the  Chapel,
where  he  said  Mass  for  them,  and  gave  Communion
to  those  who  were  fit  for  it;  and  so  he  took  them  all,
one  after  another. Mass  being  over,  he  assembled
some  young  people, to  instruct  them  in  the  Cate-
chism. The greater  part  of the  day, their  little
room  was  filled ;  and  it  was  practically  one  continual


198


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jlSUITES  [Vol.  24


foir  le  Pere  prenoit  vne  partie  des  cabanes,  &  le
fieur  de  Norma[n]uille  I'autre,  &  ainfi  on  faifoit  prier
tout  le  monde :  la  priere  eftoit  ordinairement  fuiuie
d'vne  exhortation,  &  d'vn  Cantique  en  leur  langue.
Voila  I'ordre  qti'ils  ont  garde  pedant  I'Hyuer,  iufques
a  ce  que  les  Sauuages  qiiitterent  ce  lieu,  pour  aller  a
Mont-Royal,  &  aux  trois  Riuieres.  Voyons  quelques
adtions  particulieres.

Vn  Sauuage  Chreftien  eftant  malade  tomba  dans
vne  grande  foibleffe,  on  le  penfoit  mort,  fa  tante  qui
I'affiftoit,  luy  demada  s'il  ne  fe  fouuenoit  de  rien
pendant  cette  foibleffe,  &  ou  il  penfoit  aller  apres  fa
mort,  ou  auec  fes  pares  deffundts  ou  auec  les  croyas,
il  moftra  le  Ciel  auec  [179]  la  main,  puis  s'effor$at  de
parler,  ie  m'en  vay  1^,  dit-il,  i'ay  veu  le  lieu  oil  ie
dois  aller,  la-deffus  il  meurt.  Vne  femme  Chre-
flienne  vifitee  la  nuidt,  &  fortement  folicitee  par  vn
mefchant  homme  repartit,  toufiours  ie  refpedte  mon
Baptefme,  &  ie  ne  veux  iamais  fafcher  Dieu.

Vn  Dimanche  le  Pere  ayant  confeffe  ceux  qui  vou-
loient  Communier,  comme  il  retardoit  k  dire  la  MelTe,
retenu  par  cette  occupation,  vn  Payen  fift  feftin,  &
y  conuia  la  plufpart  des  Chrefliens  qui  s'efloient  con-
feffez,  ils  y  vont  tons,  &  pas-vn  ne  fe  trouue  k  la
Meffe  qu'on  alloit  dire.  Le  Pere  bien  eflonne  de-
mande  oii  eftoient  ceux  qui  fe  vouloient  Communier,
les  autres  refpondirent  tout  haut  qu'ils  efloient  au
feftin,  cela  le  fafcha  d'abord,  il  crie  contre  eux,  &
contre  leur  couftume,  il  loiie  ceux  qui  efloient  pre-
fens,  &  blafme  les  abfens:  mais  il  luy  fallut  bien-tofl
apres  changer  de  ton,  &  de  notte:  car  la  feconde
Meffe  eflant  fonnee,  voicy  tons  les  conuiez  qui  vien-
nent dire au Pere, qu'ils Communiroient a cette


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  199

instruction.  Toward  evening,  the  Father  took  one
part  of  the  cabins,  and  the  sieur  de  Normanville  the
other;  and  thus  they  had  all  the  people  pray.  The
prayer  was  usually  followed  by  an  exhortation,  and  a
Hymn  in  their  own  language.  Such  was  the  order
that  they  observed  during  the  Winter,  until  the  Sav-
ages left  that  place,  to  go  to  Mont-Royal  and  to  the
three  Rivers. Let  us  note  some  special  good  deeds.

A  Christian  Savage,  being  sick,  fell  into  a  heavy
swoon ;  they  thought  him  dead.  His  aunt,  who  was
assisting  him,  asked  him  if  he  remembered  nothing
during  that  faintness ;  and  where  he  thought  to  go
after  his  death, — with  his  deceased  relatives,  or  with
the  believers?  He  pointed  to  Heaven  with  [179]  his
hand;  then,  speaking  with  an  effort,  "  I  am  going
there,"  he  said;  "  I  have  seen  the  place  where  I  am
to  go;"  thereupon  he  dies.  A  Christian  woman,
visited  at  night,  and  urgently  solicited  by  a  wicked
man,  answered:  "  Always  I  respect  my  Baptism,  and
I  will  never  offend  God."

One  Sunday,  the  Father  having  confessed  those
w^ho  wished  to  receive  Communion, — as  he  was
delaying  to  say  Mass,  being  detained  by  that
occupation, —  a  Pagan  made  a  feast  and  invited  to  it
the  greater  part  of  the  Christians  who  had  confessed
themselves.  They  all  go  to  it,  and  not  one  is  pres-
ent at  Mass,  about  to  be  said.  The  Father,  much
astonished,  asks  where  those  were  who  wished  to
receive  Communion.  The  others  answered  aloud,
that  they  were  at  the  feast.  That  angered  him  at
first ;  he  denounces  them  and  their  custom ;  he  praises
those  who  were  present,  and  blames  the  absent.  But
he  soon  afterward  had  to  change  his  tone  and  key;
for, the  second Mass  having  rung, behold all  the


200  LES  RELA  TJONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  24

Meffe-lk:  Comment  dit  le  Pere,  ne  venez-vous  pas
du  feftin?  ouy  dea  [i8o]  nous  en  venons:  mais  nous
n'auons  point  mange,  nous  auons  garde  tout  le  mets
qu'on  nous  a  donne,  &  I'auons  porte  a  nos  families,
fans  y  goufter.  Le  Pere  furpris  par  cette  refponce,
leur  rendit  autant  de  loliange,  qu'il  leur  auoit  donne
deblafme:  car  il  ne  penfoit  pas  qu'on  demeuraft  a
ieun,  au  milieu  du  feflin.

Voicy  vne  ac5tion  pleine  de  conftance,  en  vne  aage
tendre :  vne  ieune  fille  aagee  d'enuiron  fept  ans,  iou-
ant  auec  fes  compagnes,  recent  vn  coup  de  pierre  au
front,  tirant  vers  le  nez,  qui  luy  en  couppa  la  chair
iufques  aux  os,  eftant  toute  remplie  de  fang,  elle  fe
prefente  a  so  Pere,  lequel  fans  s'efmouuoir  ny  crier
cotre  ceux  qui  auoiet  bleff6  fa  fille,  I'enuoya  k  celuy
qui  penfe  les  Fran9ois,  &  continua  vne  partie  qu'il
auoit  commencee  au  ieu,  on  I'ameine  droidt  chez
nous,  on  appelle  le  Chirurgie,  lequel  ayat  vifite  la
playe,  dift,  qu'il  la  falloit  coudre,  la  crainte  qu'on
auoit  que  1' enfant  ne  peuft  fupporter  la  douleur,
nous  fift  refoudre  d'appeler  fon  Pere,  il  vient  ayat
perdu  la  partie,  &  fans  en  eflre  de  plus  mauuaife
humeur,  on  luy  dift  qu'il  faut  recoudre  la  [i8i]  playe
de  fon  enfant,  &  que  cela  luy  fera  bien  du  mal  (Nita-
nai  Chibiner)  ma  fille  luy  dift-il,  fouffre  conftam-
ment,  monftre  que  tu  as  du  courage,  la  pauure  enfant
fe  prefente  au  Chirurgien  arme  de  fil  &  d'efguille,  il
fai(5t  plufieurs  poindts  de  coufture  k  la  chair,  fans  que
iamais  elle  dift  vn  feul  mot,  ny  branlaft,  quoy  qu'elle
ne  fuft,  ny  liee,  ny  tenue,  feulement  elle  roidiffoit  le
bras,  &  encor  non  pas  k  toutes  les  fois  qu'on  luy  per-
§oit  la  chair:  ce  qui  fe  faifoit  auec  grande  difficulte
h,  caufe  du  manuals  endroit  ou  eftoit  la  bleffure,  ce


1642  -  43]  RELA  TJON  OF  1642-  43  201

guests,  who  come  to  tell  the  Father  that  they  would
receive  Communion  at  that  Mass.  "How?"  said
the  Father,  "are  you  not  coming  from  the  feast?"
"  Certainly,  [180]  we  are  coming  from  it:  but  we
have  not  eaten;  we  have  kept  all  the  food  which
they  gave  us,  and  have  carried  it  to  our  families,
without  tasting  it. ' '  The  Father,  surprised  by  this
answer,  gave  them  as  much  praise  as  he  had  given
them  blame ;  for  he  did  not  think  that  they  would
stay  fasting  in  the  midst  of  the  feast.

Here  is  an  act  full  of  constancy,  at  a  tender  age:  a
young  girl  aged  about  seven  years,  playing  with  her
companions,  received  a  blow  from  a  stone,  in  her
forehead,  near  the  nose,  which  cut  her  flesh  even  to
the  bone.  Being  all  covered  with  blood,  she  pre-
sented herself  to  her  Father,  who,  without  becom-
ing excited,  or  reproaching  those  who  had  wounded
his  daughter,  sent  her  to  the  one  who  attends  the
French,  and  continued  a  play  that  he  had  begun  in
a  game.  They  lead  her  straight  to  us;  they  call  the
Surgeon,  who,  having  examined  the  wound,  said
that  it  must  be  sewed.  The  dread  we  had,  that  the
child  could  not  bear  the  pain,  made  us  resolve  to  call
her  Father;  he  comes,  having  lost  the  game,  and
without  being  in  the  worse  temper  for  it.  They  tell
him  that  it  is  necessary  to  sew  up  the  [181]  wound
of  his  child,  and  that  that  will  cause  her  much  pain.
' '  (Nitanai  CJiibiner)  —  My  daughter, ' '  said  he  to  her,
"  suffer  with  constancy;  show  that  you  have  cour-
age. ' '  The  poor  child  presents  herself  to  the  Sur-
geon, who  is  armed  with  thread  and  needle.  He
takes  several  stitches  in  the  flesh,  without  her  ever
saying  a  single  word,  or  flinching,  although  she  was
neither  bound  nor  held ;  she  only  stiffened  her  arm, —


202  LES  RELATIONS  DESj£SUITES [Vol.24

courage  en  vn  enfant  de  fept  ans  eft  remarquable.

Vn  ieune  Chreftien  vint  dire  au  Pere :  ie  ne  puis
plus  durer  icy,  il  faut  que  i'aille  la-bas  a  Sillery,
auec  les  croyans :  on  ma  rompu  mon  Chapellet,  on  fe
mocque  de  moy,  quand  ie  prie  Dieu,  on  me  faidt  mille
niches,  permettez  moy  de  loger  chez  vous  en  vofhre
maifon,  iufqu'a  ce  que  les  chofes  foient  paifibles.

Le  Pere  appela  vn  ieune  homme  Chreftien  qui  fe
gouuernoit  affez  mal,  il  le  menace  des  chaftimens  de
Dieu,  &  I'inuite  a  fe  recognoiitre,  comme  il  ne  [182]
difoit  mot.  Le  Pere  luy  demande  ce  qu'il  penfoit,
i'ay  vne  penfee  qui  ne  vaut  rien,  dift-il:  le  Pere  I'ex-
cite  a  ouurir  fon  coeur,  refpond  moy,  auparauat  dift-il :
vn  tel,  eft-il  damne  ou  fauue?  il  parloit  d'vn  autre
ieune  homme  Chreftien,  mort  depuis  peu,  qui  s'eftoit
mal  comporte  vn  temps,  &  auec  lequel  il  auoit  grande
amitie.  Le  Pere  fut  eftonne  de  cette  demande,  &  ne
refpondit  pas.  Le  Sauuage  recharge,  dis  moy  vn  tel
eft-il  damne?  non  dit  le  Pere:  car  il  s'eft  recognu  k
fa  mort.  Ie  penfois,  dit-il  qu'il  fuft  damne?  &  pource
que  ie  I'aymois,  ie  voulois  courrir  mefme  fortune
que  luy:  mais  s'il  eft  fauue,  il  faut  que  ie  m'amende:
car  ie  veux  eftre  auec  luy,  apres  ma  mort ;  a  quatre
iours  dela  il  fe  vint  confeffer,  &  nous  dift,  il  y  a
quatre  iours  que  ie  penfe  fans  ceffe  ^  ma  confcience,
ie  ne  veux  plus  offencer  Dieu.  La  bonte  diuine  fe
fert  de  toutes  fortes  de  moyens  pour  le  falut  de  fes
efleus.

Vne  petite  efcoiiade  de  Sauuages  voulut  partir
pour  aller  h.  la  guerre,  au  pays  des  Hyroquois:  vn  de
la  troupe  qui  eftoit  Chreftien,  les  amena  aux  Peres,
[183]  pour  entendre  vn  mot  d' exhortation,  apres  la-
quelle  il  prift  luy-mefme  la  parole,  &  s'adreffant  aux


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  203

and  even  that,  not  every  time  they  pierced  her  flesh,
which  was  done  with  great  difficulty,  on  account  of
the  unfavorable  place  where  the  wound  was.  This
courage  in  a  child  of  seven  years  is  remarkable.

A  young  Christian  came  and  said  to  the  Father :  "  I
cannot  stay  here  longer;  I  must  go  yonder  to  Sil-
lery,  with  the  believers.  They  have  broken  my
Rosary,  they  mock  at  me  when  I  pray  to  God;  they
play  me  a  thousand  tricks.  Permit  me  to  lodge  with
you  in  your  house,  until  matters  be  peaceable."

The  Father  called  to  a  Christian  young  man,  who
was  behaving  himself  quite  badly ;  he  threatens  him
with  the  punishments  of  God,  and  bids  him  come  to
his  senses.  As  he  [182]  said  not  a  word,  the  Father
asks  him  of  what  he  was  thinking.  ' '  I  have  a  thought
which  is  of  no  account,"  said  he.  The  Father  urges
him  to  open  his  heart:  "  First  answer  me,"  said
he, —  "such  a  one,  is  he  damned  or  saved?"  He
spoke  of  another  Christian  young  man,  lately  de-
ceased, who  had  behaved  badly  for  a  time,  and  with
whom  he  had  had  great  friendship.  The  Father  was
astonished  at  this  question,  and  made  no  answer.
The  Savage  tries  again:  "  Tell  me,  is  such  a  one
damned?"  "  No,"  said  the  Father;  "  for  he  came
to  himself  at  his  death."  "  I  thought,"  said  he,
"  that  he  was  damned,  and,  because  I  loved  him,  I
was  willing  to  incur  the  same  risk  as  he ;  but  if  he
is  saved,  I  must  reform;  for  I  wish  to  be  with  him
after  my  death."  Four  days  from  then,  he  came  to
confess,  and  said  to  us :  "  These  four  days,  I  have  been
thinking  incessantly  of  my  conscience ;  I  do  not  wish
to  offend  God  further."  The  divine  goodness  uses
all  sorts  of  means  for  the  salvation  of  its  elect.

A  small  squad  of  Savages  wishing  to  start  for  the


204  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.24

Chreftiens,  leur  dift,  prenons  courage,  mes  freres,
tenons  ferme,  faifons  tons  les  iours  nos  prieres,  ne
foyons  point  honteux,  fi  I'vn  de  nous  prie  feul,  la
honte  enfin  le  fera  taire,  li  nous  prions  tons  enfemble,
nous  en  ferons  plus  forts,  &  peut-ellre  qu'a  noi?l:re
exemple,  les  Payens  priront  come  nous.  Comme  ils
furent  pres  de  partir,  ils  allerent  tous  enfemble  "k  la
Chappelle,  &  leur  priere  finie,  fe  rendirent  fur  le
fleuue  glace,  la  ils  fe  mettent  en  rond,  &  leurs  Capi-
taines  les  ayant  harenguez,  ils  chantent  &  danfent  ^
la  veue  des  Frangois  qui  efloient  dans  le  fort :  il  les
faifoit  beau  voir  veftus  ^  la  foldate,  &  quafi  en  maf-
quarade  de  France,  les  vns  auoient  le  vifage  peint  de
rouge,  les  autres  de  bleu,  les  autres  de  noir,  quelques-
vns  de  toutes  les  couleurs:  ils  auoient  des  efpees
amanchees  en  forme  de  demy-pique,  plufieurs  auoient
des  corcelefls,  piques,  &  entrelaffez  de  petits  baftons,.
les  autres  auoient  des  boucliers  faits  de  bois,  il  y  en
auoit  quelques-vns  qui  auoient  [184]  des  arquebufes,
tous  auoient  les  pieds  armez  de  bonne  raquettes,  pour
courir  fur  les  neiges :  leurs  iambes  font  les  pouruoi-
eurs  de  leur  armee,  ils  ne  mangent  pour  I'ordinaire
en  chemin  que  les  animaux  qu'ils  rencontret  &  qu'ils
tuent,  ils  auoient  auec  eux  vne  femme  qui  s'eftoit
fauuee  I'a  paffe  des  mains  &  du  pays  des  Hyroquois,
laquelle  les  deuoit  mener  aux  endroi(5ts  oil  les  enne-
mis  ont  accouftum6  de  faire  leur  chaff e  pendant  I'Hy-
uer.  Les  voilk  done  partis  gayement  fans  apprehen-
Hon  des  trauaux  horribles,  &  du  froid  infuportable,
n'ayans  autre  retraidte  que  les  bois,  ny  autre  lict  que
la  neige,  &  la  glace,  &  eftant  contraints  de  paffer  plu-
fieurs iours  fans  faire  du  feu,  de  peur  d'eflre  d6cou-
uerts. Les  Chreftiens  firent  conftamment  leurs  pri-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  205

war  in  the  country  of  the  Hyroquois,  one  of  the  band,
who  was  a  Christian,  led  them  to  the  Fathers,  [183]
in  order  to  hear  a  word  of  exhortation ;  after  which
he  himself  took  the  floor,  and,  addressing  himself
to  the  Christians,  said  to  them:  "  Let  us  take  cour-
age, my  brothers;  let  us  hold  firm,  let  us  say  our
prayers  every  day,  let  us  not  be  ashamed.  If  one  of
us  prays  alone,  shame  will  finally  cause  him  to  be
silent;  if  we  pray  all  together,  we  shall  be  the
stronger  for  it,  and  perhaps  by  our  example  the  Pa-
gans will  pray  as  we  do."  When  they  were  about  to
start,  they  went  all  together  to  the  Chapel ;  and,  their
prayer  ended,  they  betook  themselves  to  the  frozen
stream.  There  they  form  in  a  ring,  and,  their  Cap-
tains having  harangued  them,  they  sing  and  dance
in  the  sight  of  the  French  who  were  in  the  fort.
They  made  a  smart  appearance,  dressed  like  soldiers,
'and  somewhat  as  in  a  masquerade  of  France.  Some
had  their  faces  painted  with  red,  others  with  blue,
others  with  black,  some  with  all  the  colors.  They
had  javelins  with  handles,  in  the  shape  of  a  half-
pike;  many  had  corselets,  stitched,  and  interlaced
with  small  sticks ;  others  had  shields  made  of  wood.
There  were  some  who  had  [184]  arquebuses, —  all
had  their  feet  equipped  with  good  snowshoes,  to  run
on  the  snows ;  their  legs  are  the  purveyors  of  their
army.  They  do  not  usually  eat  while  on  the  way,
save  the  animals  which  they  encounter  and  kill.
They  had  with  them  a  woman,  who  had  escaped  the
preceding  year  from  the  hands  and  the  country  of
the  Hyroquois;  she  was  to  lead  them  to  the  places
where  the  enemy  have  been  accustomed  to  carry  on
their  hunt  during  the  Winter.  Behold  them,  then,
setting out gayly, without apprehension of the


206  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  24

eres  en  chemin :  mais  les  Payens  qui  auoient  promis
de  ne  faire  aucune  fuperftition,  confulterent  le  diable
k  leur  mode,  approchans  du  pays  des  ennemis,  &  ils
fe  diuiferent  &  firent  deux  petites  bandes  dont  I'vne
euft  quelque  fuccez,  I'autre  fut  furprife  la  nuidl  dans
fon  fommeil,  fans  [185]  faire  le  guet.  Au  bruidt  de
I'ennemy,  &  aux  coups  des  arquebufes,  chacun  s'ef-
ueille,  &  fe  voyant  rudement  attaqu6,  prend  la  fuitte :
quelques-vns  furent  tuez  fur  la  place,  les  autres  s'ef-
chaperent  ^  demy  nuds,  quelques-vns  eurent  les  pieds
gelez  iuf ques  aux  os :  ils  rencontrerent  de  bon-heur
r habitation  de  Mont- Real,  oil  ils  furent  receus  auec
beaucoup  de  charite,  fans  cela,  ils  eftoient  morts,  &
ce  fut  auffi  vn  coup  heureux  pour  leur  ame,  comma
ie  diray  cy-apres:  cette  ieune  femme  qui  les  condui-
foit  fe  fauua  pendant  la  meflee,  elle  ne  reueint  que
long-temps  apres  les  autres,  fuyant  loing  dans  les
bois:  elle  n'auoit  ny  bonnet,  ny  foliilliers,  ny  man-
ches,  ny  bas  de  chauffes:  pour  tout  habit,  elle  n'auoit
qu'vn  bout  de  couuerture,  qui  k  peine  luy  couuroit  la
moiti6  du  corps  contre  le  froid  extreme :  elle  marcha
trente  iours  en  cet  eftat,  fur  la  neige,  fans  voir  vne
eftincelle  de  feu :  on  ne  fgait  ce  qu'elle  a  peu  manger
durant  ce  temps-1^:  elle  paffa  vis  a  vis  de  I'habitation
de  Montreal,  de  I'autre  code  de  la  grande  Riuiere,  &
y  demeura  fix  ou  [186]  fept  iours  "k  crier  tant  qu'elle
pouuoit,  afin  qu'on  la  vint  paffer :  mais  voyant  qu'elle
n'eftoit  pas  entendue:  elle  fut  en  fin  contrainte  de
tirer  vers  le  fort  de  Richelieu,  oil  elle  arriua  ^  demy-
morte :  la  charite  des  Francois  luy  rendill  la  vie  &
les  forces:  cent  hommes  (difoient  quelques-vns)
fuffent  morts  des  trauaux,  qui  n'ont  peu  tuer  vne
femme.


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  207

horrible  toils  and  of  the  intolerable  cold, —  having  no
other  retreat  than  the  woods,  nor  other  bed  than  the
snow  and  the  ice,  and  being  constrained  to  spend
several  days  without  making  fire,  for  fear  of  being
discovered.  The  Christians  steadfastly  said  their
prayers  by  the  way ;  but  the  Pagans,  who  had  prom-
ised to  perform  no  superstitious  rite,  consulted  the
devil  in  their  fashion,  on  approaching  the  enemy's
country.  They  separated,  and  formed  two  small
bands,  one  of  which  had  some  success ;  the  other  was
surprised  at  night  in  its  sleep,  without  [185]  keeping
watch.  At  the  noise  of  the  enemy,  and  at  the  shots
of  the  arqtiebuses,  each  one  awakes,  and  seeing  him-
self rudely  attacked,  takes  flight.  Some  were  killed
on  the  spot,  the  others  escaped,  half  naked ;  some
had  their  feet  frozen  even  to  the  bone.  Fortunately,
they  came  upon  the  settlement  of  Mont-Real,  where
they  were  received  with  much  charity.  But  for  that,
they  were  dead ;  and  it  was  also  a  happy  event  for
their  souls, —  as  I  shall  tell  hereafter.  That  young
woman  who  was  guiding  them  escaped  during  the
fight ;  she  returned  only  a  long  time  after  the  others,
fleeing  far  into  the  woods.  She  had  neither  cap,  nor
shoes,  nor  sleeves,  nor  stockings;  for  all  clothing,
she  had  only  a  bit  of  blanket,  which  hardly  protected
half  her  body  against  the  extreme  cold.  She  walked
thirty  days  in  this  condition,  over  the  snow,  without
seeing  a  spark  of  fire ;  there  is  no  knowing  what  she
could  have  eaten  during  that  time.  She  passed
opposite  the  settlement  of  Montreal,  on  the  other  side
of  the  great  River,  and  stayed  there  six  or  [186]
seven  days,  shouting  as  loudly  as  she  could,  so  that
they  might  come  and  ferry  her  across;  but  seeing
that  she  was  not  heard,  she  was  finally  constrained


208  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.24

Vn  des  Algonquins  de  I'lfle  ayant  rencontre  vn  des
Chreftiens  de  deuers  Quebec,  il  en  fut  fi  bien  edifie,
qu'il  paffa  quafi  toute  la  nuic5t  k  I'entendre  parler  de
Dieu,  arriuant  de  la  a  Richelieu,  il  va  trouuer  le
Pere,  &  luy  racompte  cet  entretien  qu'auec  beau-
coup  de  confolation  ce  bon  homme  faifoit:  il  me
difoit,  courage,  quittons  nos  vieilles  couftumes,  nous
voyons  bien  que  nous  eftions  des  aueugles,  nos  yeux
commencent  de  s'ouurir,  ne  les  fermons  plus:  cette
vie  n'eft  pas  longue,  ne  fais  plus  aucune  mauuaife
fuperftition,  deffie  toy  de  tes  Compatriotes  les  Algon-
quins de  Ik-haut,  ils  ne  font  pas  portez  k  la  foy,  [187]
&  tous  ceux  qui  femblent  parmy  eux  approuuer  les
prieres,  ne  les  ayment  pas :  garde  toy  de  les  imiter,
&  li  tu  veux  croire,  fais-le  de  coeur.  Voila,  dit-il,
les  difcours  que  m'a  tenu  cet  homme,  nous  y  auons
employe  vne  bonne  partie  de  la  nuidt :  cela  me  tient
bien  au  coeur.

Toutes  ces  bonnes  adtions  eftoient  grandement  tra-
uerfees  par  la  mefchante  vie  de  ces  miferables  Algon-
quins, d'en  haut,  ce  n'eftoient  que  fuperftitions,  par-
my eux  ce  n'eftoient  qu'iniures  &  calomnies  enuers
nos  Chreftiens.  Le  Pere  auec  fa  petite  troupe  de
fidelles  les  combattoit  puiffamment,  tantoft  ^  force
de  raifons,  tantoft  en  fe  riant  de  leurs  fottif es :  cela
les  faifoit  mourir  de  depit.  C'eft  chofe  eftrange
difoient-ils,  que  depuis  que  la  priere  eft  entree  dans
nos  cabanes,  nos  anciennes  couftumes  ne  nous  fer-
uent  plus  de  rien :  &  ce  pendant  nous  mourrons  tous
k  caufe  que  nous  les  quittons.  I'ay  veu  le  temps,
difoit  vn  d'eux,  que  mes  fonges  eftoient  vrays,  quand
i'auois  veu  des  [188]  Orignaux  ou  des  Caftors  en
dormant,  i'en  prenois. Quand  nos  Deuins  fentoient


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  209

to  move  toward  the  fort  of  Richelieu,  where  she
arrived  half  dead.  The  charity  of  the  French
restored  her  life  and  her  strength ;  a  hundred  men
(said  some)  would  have  died  from  the  hardships
which  could  not  kill  one  woman.

One  of  the  Algonquins  of  the  Island,  having  met
one  of  the  Christians  from  near  Quebec,  was  so  much
edified  that  he  spent  nearly  all  the  night  in  hearing
him  speak  of  God.  Arriving  thence  at  Richelieu,
he  goes  to  find  the  Father,  and  relates  to  him  this
conversation,  which  that  good  man  held  with  him  to
his  great  comfort:  "  He  said  to  me,  '  Courage;  let  us
give  up  our  old  customs.  We  see  well  that  we  were
blind;  our  eyes  are  beginning  to  open,  let  us  not
close  them  again.  This  life  is  not  long;  practice  no
more  any  evil  superstition.  Beware  of  thy  fellow
Countrymen,  the  upper  Algonquins:  they  are  not
inclined  to  the  faith,  [187]  and  not  all  those  among
them  who  seem  to  approve  the  prayers,  love  them.
Take  care  not  to  imitate  them,  and  if  thou  wilt
believe,  do  so  heartily.'  Such,"  said  he,  "  were  the
words  addressed  to  me  by  that  man ;  we  spent  a  good
part  of  the  night  thus;  that  possesses  my  heart."

All  these  good  deeds  were  greatly  thwarted  by  the
wicked  conduct  of  those  wretched  upper  Algon-
quins,—  there  was  nothing  but  superstitions  among
them ;  there  was  naught  but  outrages  and  calumnies
against  our  Christians.  The  Father,  with  his  little
band  of  faithful  ones,  vigorously  opposed  them, —
now  by  dint  of  arguments,  again  by  ridiculing  their
foolish  notions;  that  made  them  die  with  spite.  "  It
is  a  strange  thing,"  said  they,  "that  since  prayer
has  come  into  our  cabins,  our  former  customs  are  no
longer  of  any  service ;  and  yet  we  shall  all  die  because


210


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  24

venir  I'ennemy,  cel^  fe  trouuoit  veritable:  on  fe  dif-
pofoit  a  le  receuoir;  maintenant,  nos  fonges  &  nos
propheties  ne  font  plus  veritables,  la  priere  nous  a
tout  gafl^:  d'autres  s'en  prenant a  nous  des  chafti-
ments  que  Dieu  leur  enuoyoit,  difoient :  nous  voyons
bien  que  Dieu  eft  fafche  contre  nous,  &  qu'il  a  rai-
fon:  car  nous  ne  faifons  pas  ce  qu'il  dit,  dautant  qu'il
nous  femble  difficile,  nous  luy  defobeiff ons :  &  ainfi
11  entre  en  colere  contre  nous  &  nous  tue :  mais  vous
autres  vous  en  eftes  la  caufe :  Car  fi  vous  demeuriez
en  voftre  pays  fans  nous  parler  de  Dieu,  il  ne  nous
diroit  mot,  puifque  nous  ne  le  cognoiftrions  pas,  n'y
fes  volontez :  vous  feriez  done  bien  mieux  de  vous
en  retourner  en  voftre  pays,  &  de  demeurer  en  repos:
car  c'eft  vous  qui  nous  tuez,  deuant  que  vous  vinliez
icy,  les  Fran9ois  ne  difoient  point  tant  de  prieres :  ils
ne  faifoient  que  le  figne  de  la  Croix,  &  encor  tous  ne
le  [189]  fgauoient  pas  faire:  ils  n'auoient  point  toutes
ces  prieres  que  vous  introduifez,  c'eft  vous  qui  auez
amene  toutes  ces  nouueautez,  &  qui  les  apprenez  aux
Sauuages  &  leur  renuerfez  la  ceruelle  &  les  faidtes
mourir,  &  encor  fi  vous  n'appelliez  aux  prieres  que
de  dix  iours  en  dix  iours  vne  fois,  on  auroit  quelque
relafche:  mais  vous  n'auez  efgard  ny  ^  pluye  ny  ^
neige,  ny  a  froid,  tous  les  iours  on  vous  entend  crier
aux  prieres:  c'eft  chofe  eftrange  que  vous  ne  pouuez
demeurer  en  repos,  le  Pere  leur  remonftroit  que  fi  on
ne  les  enfeignoit,  &  qu'on  les  laiffaft  dans  le  repos
qu'ils  difent-ils  brufleroient  eternellement  dansl'En-
fer,  &  que  le  danger  de  leur  Salut  nous  obligeoit  de
les  preffer :  mais  la  plus  part  s'opiniaftroient  dauan-
tage,  &  enragoient  de  d^pit  contre  le  Pere,  &  difoiet
qu'il  eftoit  plus  grand  forcier  que  leurs  gens,  qu'il


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  211

we  give  them  up."  "  I  have  seen  the  time,"  said  one
of  them,  "  when  my  dreams  were  true;  when  I  had
seen  [188]  Moose  or  Beavers  in  sleep,  I  would  take
some.  When  our  Soothsayers  felt  the  enemy  coming,
that  came  true ;  there  was  preparation  to  receive
him.  Now,  our  dreams  and  our  prophecies  are  no
longer  true, —  prayer  has  spoiled  everything  for  us."
Others,  blaming  us  for  the  punishments  which  God
was  sending  them,  said:  "  We  see  well  that  God  is
angry  at  us,  and  that  he  is  right, — for  we  do  not  do
what  he  says ;  inasmuch  as  it  seems  hard  to  us,  we
disobey  him,  and  so  he  becomes  angry  with  us  and
kills  us.  But  you,  you  are  the  cause  of  it :  for  if  you
had  lived  in  your  own  country  without  speaking  to
us  of  God,  he  would  not  say  a  word  to  us,  since  we
would  not  know  him  or  his  will.  You  would  then  do
much  better  to  return  to  your  country  and  live  at
rest;  for  it  is  you  who  kill  us.  Before  you  came
here,  the  French  did  not  say  so  many  prayers ;  they
only  made  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  and  even  then,  all
did  not  [189]  know  how  to  make  it.  They  did  not
have  all  those  prayers  which  you  are  introducing ;  it
is  you  who  have  brought  in  all  these  novelties,  and
who  teach  them  to  the  Savages,  and  overturn  their
brains  and  make  them  die.  Besides,  if  you  called  to
prayers  only  once  in  ten  days,  we  would  have  some
respite;  but  you  have  no  regard  to  either  rain,  or
snow,  or  cold ;  every  day  you  are  heard  shouting  for
the  prayers.  It  is  a  strange  thing  that  you  cannot
remain  quiet. "  The  Father  remonstrated  with  them,
that  if  one  did  not  teach  them,  and  if  one  left  them  in
the  quiet  that  they  mentioned,  they  would  burn  eter-
nally in  Hell,  and  that  the  danger  of  their  Salvation
obliged  us  to  urge  them. But  the  majority  became


212  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

en  falloit  deffaire  le  pays,  qu'ils  auoient  affomme
trois  forciers  a  I'lfle,  qui  n'auoient  pas  tant  faidl  de
mal  que  luy :  on  eut  quelque  peur  qu'ils  n'executafCent
leur  mauuaife  penfee:  mais  la  Diuine  bonte  ne  le
permit  pas,  [190]  ains  au  contraire  elle  tira  de  grands
bies  de  leur  malice:  car  cet  apoflat  dont  i'ay  parl6
cy-deuant,  voyant  ce  refroidiffement  des  Fran9ois,  &
fur  tout  de  Monfieur  de  Chamflour  enuers  luy  &
enuers  tous  ceux  qui  perfecutoient  la  Foy,  feignit  de
s'y  monftrer  affedtionne,  &  donna  quelque  tefmoi-
gnage  de  fe  vouloir  conuertir.  Le  lieur  de  Cham-
flour  pour  I'obliger  dauantage,  luy  dona  dequoy  faire
feftin  a  fes  gens:  c'eft  la  d'ordinaire  qu'ils  mani-
f eftent  leurs  volontez :  mais  ce  miferable  au  lieu  de
fe  declarer  du  party  de  lefus-Chrift,  fe  monftra  plus
que  iamais  du  party  du  Diable,  &  cria  dans  le  feftin
contre  la  priere,  &  contre  ceux  qui  fe  faifoiet  bapti-
fer:  cette  perfidie  depleut  extremement  non  feule-
ment  aux  Sauuages  Chreftiens,  plufieurs  defquels
eftoiet  du  banquet :  mais  encor  aux  Payens  mefmes,
dont  I'vn  des  principaux,  &  qui  auoit  efte  des  plus
obftinez  vint  cliez  nous  fe  declarer  ouuertement  &
demader  le  baptefme:  mo  pere,  dit-il,  ie  fuis  du  no-
bre  des  croyats,  e'en  eft  fai(5t  a  prefent  il  y  a  long
teps  que  ie  vo^*  efcoute,  ie  ne  vo^  ay  iamais  dit  bap-
tifez  [191]  moy,  ie  le  dis  maintenat,  ie  ne  peux  fouf-
frir  la  perfidie  de  cet  home,  ie  veux  eftre  baptife,  &
le  cotrecarer  s'il  ne  fe  red.  Le  pere  luy  refpodit:
vous  venez  en  bon  teps  demander  le  baptefme,  quand
il  eft  perfecute :  c'eft  la  marque  d'vn  bo  coeur :  faidtes
feftin  &  declarez  voftre  volonte;  il  n'y  manque  pas,
les  conuiez  affembles,  il  s'efcrie:  il  y  a  plus  de  cinq
,ans  que  ie  refifte  k  Dieu,  ie  trouuois  bonne  la  dodtrine


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  21S

Still  more  obstinate,  and  were  furious  with  spite
against  the  Father,  and  said  that  he  was  a  greater
sorcerer  than  their  own  people ;  that  the  country  must
be  cleared  of  such ;  that  they  had  clubbed  three  sor-
cerers at  the  Island,  who  had  not  done  so  much  harm
as  he.  There  was  some  fear  lest  they  should  carry
out  their  evil  thought :  but  the  Divine  goodness  did
not  permit  it, —  [190]  on  the  contrary,  it  drew  great
benefits  from  their  malice.  For  that  apostate  of
whom  I  have  previously  spoken  —  seeing  this  cold-
ness of  the  French,  and  especially  of  Monsieur  de
Chamflour,  toward  him  and  toward  all  those  who
were  persecuting  the  Faith  —  feigned  to  show  him-
self favorable  toward  it,  and  gave  some  indication
of  wishing  to  become  converted.  The  sieur  de
Chamflour,  in  order  to  oblige  him  further,  gave  him
wherewith  to  make  a  feast  for  his  people, —  it  is
there,  as  a  rule,  that  they  manifest  their  intentions;
but  this  wretch,  instead  of  declaring  himself  on  the
side  of  Jesus  Christ,  showed  himself  more  than  ever
on  the  side  of  the  Devil,  and,  at  the  feast,  denounced
prayer,  and  those  who  were  going  to  be  baptized.
This  treachery  not  only  very  greatly  displeased  the
Christian  Savages,  several  of  whom  were  at  the
feast,  but  even  the  Pagans  themselves, — of  whom
one  of  the  principal  men,  who  had  been  among  the
most  obstinate,  came  to  us  to  declare  himself  openly,
and  to  request  baptism.  "  My  father,"  said  he,  "  I
am  of  the  number  of  the  believers :  it  is  all  settled,
now.  I  have  listened  to  you  for  a  long  time, —  I
have  never  said  to  you,  '  Baptize  [191]  me;  '  I  say  so
now.  I  cannot  suffer  that  man's  treachery;  I  wish
to  be  baptized,  and  to  thwart  him  unless  he  gives  in."
The  father answered him :  * '  You  come  at  a  good.


214  LES  RELA  TIONS  DBS  /^SUITES  [Vol.  24

que  les  Peres  enfeignoient:  mais  elle  me  fembloit
difficile  «fe  ne  pouuois  me  refoudre  de  la  fuiure :  le
<;oup  eft  iette,  c'eft  tout  de  bon:  ie  veux  eftre  bap-
tife  &  obeyr  a  Dieu :  c'efl  pour  vous  declarer  mon
defCein  que  ie  vous  ay  inuitez,  il  employa  encore
quelque  temps  k  fe  faire  inflruire,  &  puis  fut  baptife
auec  beaucoup  de  confolation  de  fon  coll:e  &  du
noftre.

Vn  autre  Sauuage  dot  la  femme  eftoit  defia  Chre-
ftienne,  le  fuiuit  au  baptefme,  auec  vne  fiene  petite
fille,  celuy-cy  eftoit  d'vn  fort  bon  naturel  &  doux,
vif  au  refte  &  des  meilleurs  coureurs  d'entr'eux:
auant  qu'il  fuft  baptife,  le  fieur  de  Norma[n]uille  luy
demanda  s'il  n'auoit  iamais  [192]  eu  auerfion  de  la
Foy,  ouy  dit-il,  quant  on  me  parloit  de  Dieu.  Ie  me
riotte  [sc.  riois]  maintenant,  c'eft  tout  mon  contente-
ment  d'en  entendre  parler,  &  ie  fuis  fafche  en  mon
coeur  quand  ie  vols  quelqu'vn,  qui  ne  veut  pas  efcou-
ter  fa  parolle,  il  me  femble  que  depuis  que  ie  veux
croire,  ie  deuiens  cholere,  &  que  ie  le  feray  tout  k
faidt,  quand  ie  feray  baptife :  car  ie  ne  pourray  fuppor-
ter  qu'on  dife  rien  contre  Dieu,  &  qu'on  mefprife  la
priere,  le  malheureux  apoftat  mouroit  de  depit,  de
voir  ces  bonnes  adtions  que  Dieu  tiroit  de  fes  mau-
uais  deffeins,  la  bonte  &  iuftice  diuine  fe  firent  lors
paroiftre  enfemble  fur  cet  home,  par  I'entremife  de
la  mere  des  mif ericordes,  a  qui  on  eut  recours :  car
on  prioit  Dieu  fans  ceffe  pour  luy.  Au  plus  fort  de
fon  impiete,  le  voila  faifi  en  vn  inftant  par  tout  le
corps  d'vne  douleur  fi  pergate  &  fi  violente  qu'elle
approchoit  de  la  rage  &  de  la  fureur:  il  eft  entiere-
ment  abattu :  mais  no  pour  cela  gagne  encore  k  Dieu
le  corps  eft  dompte:  mais  I'ame  perfifte  en  fa  malice,


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  215

time  to  request  baptism,  when  it  is  persecuted ;  that
is  the  token  of  a  good  heart.  Make  a  feast,  and  de-
clare your  intention."  In  this  he  fails  not ;  the  guests
assembled,  he  exclaims:  "  For  more  than  five  years
I  have  resisted  God;  I  found  the  doctrine  good,
which  the  Fathers  were  teaching,  but  it  seemed  hard
to  me,  and  I  could  not  resolve  to  follow  it.  The  die
is  cast,  it  is  all  in  earnest;  I  wish  to  be  baptized  and
obey  God, —  it  is  to  declare  to  you  my  purpose,  that
I  have  invited  you."  He  spent  some  time  further  in
being  instructed,  and  was  then  baptized,  with  much
consolation  on  his  side  and  on  ours.

Another  Savage,  whose  wife  was  already  a  Chris-
tian, followed  him  to  baptism,  together  with  a  little
girl  of  his.  This  man  was  very  good-natured  and
gentle;  quick  withal,  and  one  of  the  best  runners
among  them.  Before  he  was  baptized,  the  sieur  de
Normanville  asked  him  if  he  had  never  [192]  had
aversion  for  the  Faith.  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  when  they
spoke  to  me  of  God,  I  laughed  in  scorn.  Now,  it  is
my  whole  contentment  to  hear  him  spoken  of,  and  I
am  grieved  in  my  heart  when  I  see  any  one  who  is
not  willing  to  listen  to  his  word.  It  seems  to  me
that,  since  I  have  chosen  to  believe,  I  become  angry,
and  that  I  shall  be  so  altogether,  when  I  shall  be
baptized ;  for  I  shall  not  be  able  to  endure  that  they
say  aught  against  God,  and  that  they  despise  prayer. ' '
The  wretched  apostate  was  dying  with  chagrin  to
see  these  good  results  which  God  was  deriving  from
his  bad  designs.  The  divine  goodness  and  justice
then  conjointly  appeared  upon  this  man,  through  the
mediation  of  the  mother  of  mercies,  to  whom  they
had  recourse :  for  they  prayed  to  God  for  him  with-
out ceasing. At  the  climax  of  his  impiety,  behold


216  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.24

on  enuoye  appeller  le  Pere  pour  le  voir,  il  y  vient  &
le  regarde  [193]  comme  vn  obiedt  de  la  cholere  de
Dieu,  &  dans  des  poftures  d'vn  homme  qui  fouffre
vn  petit  Enfer:  ce  n'eft  point  la  maladie  qui  me  tiet^
difoit-il,  ie  n'y  auois  aucune  difpofition,  c'eft  le
Demon  qui  me  caufe  ces  douleurs,  par  I'etremife  de
quelqu'vn,  on  me  procure  la  mort:  il  vouloit  accufer
le  Pere  d'eftre  caufe  de  fon  mal,  fon  frere  qui  eftoit
Ik  prefent,  en  difoit  autant,  le  Pere  fe  mift  la  deilus
"k  declarer  come  la  Loy  de  Dieu,  nous  deffendoit  de
procurer  &  mefme  defirer  du  mal  a  persone,  qu'il
offenferoit  Dieu  s'il  leur  fouhaittoit  la  maladie  ou  la
mort ;  qu'au  contraire  il  fouhaittoit  &  procuroit  leur
bien,  qu'au  refte  il  fe  pouuoit  bien  faire  que  cette
maladie  ne  fuft  pas  naturelle  que  Dieu  voyoit  tout,
qu'il  iettoit  les  yeux  fur  luy,  quand  il  crioit  contre
les  prieres  qu'il  efcoutoit  toutes  fes  paroles,  qu'il
penetroit  dedas  fon  coeur,  qu'il  luy  donnoit  ce  coup
pour  luy  faire  recognoiftre  fa  faute,  que  les  douleurs
qu'il  fouffroit  &  eftimoit  infuportables  n'eftoient  rien,
en  comparaifon  des  horribles  fupplices  qu'il  fouffri-
roit  aux  Enfers,  s'il  continuoit  das  fes  perfidies  que
[194]  s'il  vouloit  fe  recognoiftre,  Dieu  n'eftoit  que
douceur,  &  luy  feroit  mif ericorde :  cela  fift  impreffion
fur  fon  efprit,  &  [il]  fupplia  le  Pere  de  prier  Dieu  pour
luy,  &  de  I'enfeigner,  le  mal  luy  dura  quelque,  iours,
pendant  lefquels  nos  Peres  I'affiflerent  de  tout  leur
poffible,  &  le  recommanderent  inftamment  a  la  tres-
faindle  Vierge,  il  guerit  foudainement  comme  il  eftoit
foudainement  tombe  malade :  depuis  ce  temps-Ik,  il
ne  fift  plus  rien  cotre  la  Foy,  ains  au  contraire  il  fe
mift  k  la  proteger,  I'autre  chef  aufsi  nome  Teff^eatch
fut  efpouuant^,  &  n'ofa  remuer  dauantage. Sur  la


1642-43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  217

him  instantly  seized  throughout  his  body  with  a  pain
so  piercing  and  so  violent  that  it  bordered  on  rage
and  fury ;  he  is  utterly  prostrated,  but  not,  as  yet,
thereby  gained  to  God.  The  body  is  conquered,  but
the  soul  persists  in  its  malice.  They  send  to  call  the
Father  to  see  him;  he  comes  thither  and  sees  him,
[193]  as  it  were,  an  object  of  the  wrath  of  God,  and
in  the  attitude  of  a  man  who  suffers  a  little  Hell.
"  It  is  not  the  sickness  which  holds  me,"  said  he,  "  I
had  no  tendency  toward  that.  It  is  the  Demon  who
causes  me  these  pains ;  by  the  agency  of  some  one,
they  are  procuring  my  death. "  He  sought  to  accuse
the  Father  of  being  the  cause  of  his  trouble;  his
brother,  who  was  there  present,  said  the  like.  The
Father  proceeded  thereupon  to  declare  how  the  Law
of  God  forbade  us  to  procure,  or  even  to  desire,  harm
to  any  one ;  that  it  would  offend  God  if  he  should
wish  them  sickness  or  death ;  that,  on  the  contrary,
he  was  desiring  and  procuring  their  good ;  that,  in
fine,  it  might  well  be  that  this  sickness  was  not  nat-
ural,—  that  God  saw  everything,  and  was  casting  his
eyes  upon  him  when  he  denounced  the  prayers ;  that
God  listened  to  all  his  words ;  that  he  penetrated  with-
in his  heart ;  that  he  gave  him  this  blow,  in  order  to
make  him  recognize  his  fault ;  that  the  pains  which
he  suffered,  and  accounted  intolerable,  were  nothing
in  comparison  with  the  horrible  tortures  that  he  would
suffer  in  Hell,  if  he  continued  in  his  treacheries;
that,  [194]  if  he  would  come  to  his  senses,  God  was
altogether  mildness,  and  would  show  him  mercy.
That  made  an  impression  on  his  mind,  and  he
entreated  the  Father  to  pray  to  God  for  him  and  to
teach  him.  The  pain  remained  with  him  several
days,  during  which  our  Fathers  assisted  him  in  all


218  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  24

fin  de  Feurier,  ils  partirent  tons  deux  du  Fort  de
Richelieu,  auec  vne  petite  trouppe  de  leurs  gens,
pour  aller  ^  I'lfle  de  Montreal,  ils  arriuerent  a  1' ha-
bitation nomm6e  Ville-Marie  fur  le  commencement
de  Mars  Ik  oil  les  Peres  du  Perron  &  Poncet  qui  y
ont  hyuernd,  les  voyant  plus  fouples  &  qui  tefmoi-
gnoient  vne  particuliere  affectiS  a  ce  lieu,  &  fouhait-
toient  de  s'y  habituer,  trouuerent  "k  propos  de  les
baptifer  auec  plufieurs  de  leurs  gens  comme  nous
verrons  au  Chapitre  fuiuant.


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  219

possible  ways,  and  urgently  commended  him  to  the
most  blessed  Virgin.  He  recovered  suddenly,  as  he
had  suddenly  fallen  sick ;  from  that  time  he  did  noth-
ing more  against  the  Faith,  but,  on  the  contrary,  he
began  to  protect  it.  The  other  chief,  too,  named
Tessweatch,  was  awed,  and  dared  not  stir  further.
Toward  the  end  of  February,  they  both  started  from
Fort  Richelieu,  with  a  small  band  of  their  people,  in
order  to  go  to  the  Island  of  Montreal.  They  arrived
at  the  settlement  named  Ville-Marie,  toward  the  be-
ginning of  March;  and  there,  Fathers  du  Perron  and
Poncet,  who  have  wintered  there, — seeing  them
more  tractable  and  manifesting  a  special  liking  for
that  place,  and  desiring  to  resort  thither, —  found  it
opportune  to  baptize  them,  with  several  of  their
people,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  Chapter  following.


220  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.24


[195]  CHAPITRE  XL

DE CE QUI S'EST PASSE A MONTREAL.

CEST  a  prefent  que  Ton  voit  les  voeux  de  I'an-
cienne  France  exaucez,  &  que  le  temps  de
grace  eft  venu  en  ce  bout  du  monde,  ou  la
fageffe  &  bont^  Diuine  commence  k  fe  faire  fentir  fi
benignement  dans  les  coeurs,  que  fans  bruit,  &  fans
voix  les  anciens  habitans  de  ces  contrees  y  font  inui-
tez  &  attirez  fortement  par  les  chaifnes  d 'amour,  que
le  feu]  S.  Efprit  imprime  dans  leurs  coeurs :  ils  enuoy-
oient  icy  de  toutes  parts,  leurs  couriers  pour  nous
affeurer  qu'ils  fe  veulent  rendre  aux  touches  du  Ciel,
&  s'arrefter  pour  ce  fubiet  en  ce  lieu,  tous  de  compa-
gnie.  Nos  PP.  des  Hurons  nous  ont  efcrit  que  les
Sauuages  de  leur  quartier,  y  auroient  deuace  les
Fragois,  s'ils  y  euf  set  peu  trouuer  vn  lieu  d'affurance,
ou  azyle  tel  que  [196]  celuy  qui  y  eft  defia  a  prefent,
quoy  que  petit,  en  comparaifon  de  ce  qui  eft  ^  efpe-
rer  k  I'auenir.  lis  mandent  qu'ils  font  perpetuelle-
ment  ^  en  parler,  &  que  toft  ou  tard  ils  y  viendront
tous:  nonobftant  la  crainte  des  Iroquois,  fi  Ton  y  eft
fort  de  fecours  temporel  contre  I'ennemy :  voila  de
belles  moiffons.

Le  gros  des  Fran§ois  qui  font  icy,  eft  compof6  de
gens  bien  differents  a  la  verite  de  condition  d'aage
&  de  naturels,  pour  eftre  quafi  tous  de  diuers  pays  r
mais  ils  ne  font  qu'vn  en  volonte,  vifans  tous  k  vn
mefme  but  de  la  gloire  de  Dieu,  &  au  falut  de  ces


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  221


[195]  CHAPTER  XI.

OF OCCURRENCES AT MONTREAL.

IT  is  now  that  we  see  the  prayers  of  old  France
heard,  and  that  the  time  of  grace  has  come  to
this  end  of  the  world, —  where  the  Divine
wisdom  and  goodness  begins  to  make  itself  felt  so
benignly  in  hearts  that,  without  noise  and  without
speech,  the  former  inhabitants  of  these  countries  are
invited  to  it  and  strongly  drawn  by  the  chains  of
love,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  alone  is  fastening  upon
their  hearts.  They  sent  here  their  messengers  from
every  direction,  to  assure  us  that  they  wish  to  yield
to  the  influences  of  Heaven,  and,  for  that  purpose,
to  settle  in  this  place,  all  in  company.  Our  Fathers
with  the  Hurons  have  written  to  us  that  the  Savages
of  their  quarter  would  have  anticipated  the  French
here,  if  they  could  have  found  a  place  of  safety,  or
asylum,  such  as  [196]  the  one  which  is  already  there
at  present,  though  small  in  comparison  with  what  is
to  be  hoped  for  the  future.  They  send  word  that
they  are  perpetually  speaking  of  it,  and  that  sooner  or
later  they  will  all  come  thither,  notwithstanding  the
dread  of  the  Iroquois,  if  there  is  strong  temporal
succor  against  the  enemy.  Behold  glorious  harvests.
The  bulk  of  the  French  who  are  here  is  composed
of  people  very  different,  indeed,  in  respect  to  age
and  character, —  almost  as  if  they  were  all  of  differ-
ent countries.  But  they  are  only  one  in  intention,  all
living  for  one  and  the  same  object,  the  glory  of  God,


222  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jlSUITES [Vol.24

pauures  Sauuages,  &  ie  puis  dire  que  leur  vertu  a
feruy  a  la  conuerfion  de  plulieurs  qui  ont  efte  gagnez
"k  Dieu  par  Taffedtion  qu'ils  leur  ont  tefmoigne.  Croy-
riez  vous  bien  que  plufieurs  des  ouuriers  qui  trauail-
lerent  icy,  d^s  leur  depart  de  France  ne  fe  font  pro-
pofe  autre  motif  que  celuy  de  la  gloire  de  Dieu,  &
de  leur  falut  en  vn  lieu  retire  des  occafions  de  mal
faire?  la  feule  penfee  qu'ils  contribuent  autant  qu'ils
peuuent  au  falut  des  ames,  les  fait  trauailler  de  £1  bon
courage,  qu'il  ne  leur  arriue  [197]  iamais  de  fe  plain-
dre.  Auffi  ont  ils  efte  coduits  par  vn  Getil-homme
de  merite,  que  Dieu  femble  auoit  tres-particuliere-
ment  infpire,  &  appelle  pour  le  feruir  en  ce  lieu,  tant
il  a  d'affe(5tion,  &  pour  reftabliffement  de  la  Colonie,
&  pour  le  falut  des  Sauuages :  il  me  f uffit  de  dire  que
c'efl  Monfieur  de  Chomadeu  de  Maifon-neufue :  fa
modeftie  ne  me  permettant  pas  d'en  dire  dauantage.
Depuis  le  depart  des  vaiifeaux  de  I'an  paffe,  vne
des  chofes  des  plus  remarquable,  qui  fe  trouue  dans
I'habitation  de  Montreal,  eft  la  grande  vnion,  &  la
bonne  intelligence  de  tons  ceux  qui  y  demeurent.
II  y  a  enuiron  cinquante  cinq  perfonnes  de  diuers
pays,  de  differentes  humeurs,  de  diuerfes  conditions,
&  tons  d'vn  mefme  coeur  &  dans  vn  mefme  deffein
de  feruir  Dieu.  Chacun  s'eft  fi  bien  acquitte  de  fon
deuoir  enuers  Dieu  &  les  hommes,  qu'on  n'a  trouu6
aucun  fubiedt  de  fe  plaindre,  I'efpace  de  dix  mois
entiers:  le  commandement  a  efte  doux  &  efficace,
I'obeiffance  ayfee,  &  la  deuotion  aymee  de  tous  vni-
uerfellemet.  Si  bien  que  celuy  qui  commande  dans
[198]  cette  habitation  a  receu  vne  fatisfa(5tion  grade
de  fes  ges,  tat  des  fujets  que  de  leur  Capitaine,  &
ceux  qui  gouuernet  I'Eglife,  vn  cotetemet  entier  des


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  223

and  for  the  salvation  of  these  poor  Savages ;  and  I
may  say  that  their  virtue  has  served  for  the  conver-
sion of  many,  who  have  been  won  over  to  God  through
the  affection  which  these  have  betokened  for  them.
Could  you  really  believe  that  several  of  the  work-
men who  labored  here,  from  the  time  of  their  depar-
ture from  France  have  entertained  no  other  motive
than  that  of  the  glory  of  God,  and  of  their  salvation
in  a  place  withdrawn  from  occasions  of  evil-doing?
The  very  thought  that  they  are  contributing,  as  far
as  they  can,  to  the  salvation  of  souls,  makes  them
work  with  such  good  courage,  that  it  never  occurs  to
them  [197]  to  complain.  Moreover,  they  have  been
conducted  by  a  Gentleman  of  merit,  whom  God
seems  to  have  most  specially  inspired,  and  called  to
serve  him  in  this  place, —  so  much  affection  has  he,
for  both  the  establishment  of  the  Colony  and  the  sal-
vation of  the  Savages.  It  is  enough  for  me  to  say  that
this  is  Monsieur  de  Chomadeu  de  Maison-neufve, — his
modesty  not  permitting  me  to  say  more.

Since  the  departure  of  the  vessels,  last  year,  one
of  the  most  notable  things  which  prevails  in  the
habitation  of  Montreal  is  the  thorough  unity  and  the
good  understanding  among  all  those  who  dwell  there.
There  are  about  fifty-five  persons  of  various  coun-
tries, different  temperaments,  and  diverse  condi-
tions,—  and  all  of  the  same  heart,  and  with  the  same
design  of  serving  God.  Each  one  has  so  well  dis-
charged his  duty  toward  God  and  men,  that  no  cause
of  complaint  has  been  found,  in  the  space  of  ten
whole  months.  The  government  has  been  gentle
and  efficient,  obedience  easy,  and  worship  universally
loved  by  all, — so  much  so,  that  he  who  commands  in
[198]  this  settlement  has  received  a  great  satisfaction


224  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.  24

vns  &  des  autres.  On  y  a  frequente  les  Sacremes,
auec  profit,  efcoute  la  parole  de  Dieu  auec  affiduite,
&  continue  les  prieres  ordinaires  auec  edification:
Texemple  de  M.  de  Maifon-neufue,  &  des  autres
perfonnes  de  confideration,  qui  font-la,  n'ont  pas  peu
contribue  k  cela.  Les  Sauuages  voyans  vne  fi  grande
paix  entre  les  Frangois,  en  ont  efte  bien  edifiez  ont
ay  me  leur  vertu,  &  en  ont  bien  parle.

Dieu  nous  a  fait  voir  le  foin  qu'il  a  de  cette  habita-
tion, la  deffendant  cet  hyuer  contre  les  eaux,  qui  par
vne  creiie  extraordinaire  la  menacerent  d'vne  mine
totale,  s'il  n'en  n'eufl  par  fa  prouidence  arrefte  le
cours :  elles  couurirent  vn  peu  de  temps  les  prairies
&  les  lieux  voifms  du  fort :  chacun  f e  retire  k  la  veiie
de  cette  inondation  qui  s'augmentoit  toufiours  dans
I'endroit  le  plus  affeure,  on  a  recours  aux  prieres.
Monfieur  de  Maifon-neufue  fe  fent  pouffe  interieure-
met,  d'aller  planter  vne  Croix  au  bord  de  la  [199]  pe-
tite riuiere,  au  pied  de  laquelle  eft  baflie  I'habitation,
qui  commengoit  ^  fe  deborder,  pour  prier  fa  diuine
Maiefte  de  la  retenir  dans  fon  lieu  ordinaire,  fi  cela
deuoit  eflre  pour  fa  gloire,  ou  de  leur  faire  cognoiftre
le  lieu,  ou  il  vouloit  eflre  feruy  par  ces  Meffieurs  de
Montreal,  a  fin  d'y  mettre  le  principal  eftabliffe-
ment,  au  cas  qu'il  permit  que  les  eaux  vinfent  k
perdre  ce  qu'on  venoit  de  comencer:  il  propofa  auffi-
tofl  ce  f entimet  aux  Peres,  qui  le  trouuerent  bon :  il
I'efcrit  fur  vn  morceau  de  papier,  le  fait  lire  publi-
quement,  afin  qu'on  recognufl;  la  purete  de  fon  inte-
tion,  s'en  va  planter  la  Croix,  que  le  P.  benifl,  au
bord  de  la  riuiere  auec  I'efcrit  qu'il  attache  au  pied:
s'e  retourne  auec  promeffe  qu'il  fait  k  Dieu,  de  porter
vne  Croix  luy  feul  fur  la  montagne  de  Mot-royal:


J


1642-43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  225

from  his  people, —  from  the  subordinates  as  well  as
from,  their  Captain; — and  those  who  govern  the
Church,  entire  contentment  from  all  parties.  The
people  have  frequented  the  Sacraments  there  with
profit,  listened  to  the  word  of  God  with  diligence,
and  continued  the  usual  prayers  with  edification.
The  example  of  Monsieur  de  Maison-neufve,  and  of
the  other  persons  of  distinction  who  are  there,  has
not  a  little  contributed  thereto.  The  Savages,  see-
ing so  great  peace  among  the  French,  have  been
much  edified  by  it,  have  loved  their  virtue,  and  have
spoken  well  of  it.

God  has  shown  us  the  care  that  he  has  for  this
settlement,  by  defending  it  this  winter  against  the
waters,  which,  in  an  uncommon  flood,  threatened  it
with  total  ruin,  if  he  had  not,  by  his  providence,
stayed  their  course.  They  covered,  for  a  little  while,
the  meadows  and  the  places  near  the  fort ;  at  the
sight  of  this  inundation,  which  was  continually
increasing,  every  one  withdraws  into  the  safest  place.
They  have  recourse  to  prayers.  Monsieur  de  Mai-
son-neufve feels  himself  inwardly  prompted  to  go
and  plant  a  Cross  at  the  edge  of  the  [199]  little  river, —
at  the  foot  of  which  the  settlement  is  built,  and  which
was  beginning  to  overflow, —  in  order  to  entreat  his
divine  Majesty  to  confine  it  in  its  usual  place,  if  that
should  be  for  his  glory ;  or  to  acquaint  them  with
the  place  where  he  wished  to  be  served  by  those
Gentlemen  of  Montreal, — to  the  end  of  establishing
the  principal  settlement  there,  in  case  he  permitted
that  the  waters  should  come  to  destroy  the  one  that
had  just  been  started.  He  forthwith  proposed  this
sentiment  to  the  Fathers,  who  found  it  good;  he
writes  it  on  a  piece  of  paper,  has  it  read  publicly,  so


226  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.24

s'il  luy  plaifl  accorder  fa  demande.  Les  eaux  neant-
moins  ne  laiff  erent  pas  de  pafC er  outre :  Dieu  voulant
efprouiier  leur  foy.  On  les  voyoit  rouler  de  grofCes
vagues,  coup  fur  coup,  remplir  les  foffez  du  fort,  &
monter  iufques  a  la  porte  de  I'habitatio,  &  fembler
deuoir  engloutir  tout  fans  [200]  refource:  chacun
regarde  ce  fpecftacle  fans  trouble,  fans  crainte,  fans
murmure;  quoy  que  ce  fut  au  coeur  de  I'Hyuer,  en
plein  minuidt,  &  lors  mefme  qu'on  celebre  la  Naif-
fance  du  Fils  de  Dieu  en  terre :  ledit  fieur  de  Maifon-
neufue  ne  perd  pas  courage,  efpere  voir  bien-toft
I'effet  de  fa  priere,  qui  ne  tarda  guere:  car  les  eaux
apres  s'eftre  arrellees  peu  de  teps  au  feliil  de  la  porte,
fans  croiftre  dauantage,  fe  retirerent  peu  k  peu,  met
les  habitans  hors  de  danger,  &  le  Capitaine  dans
I'execution  de  fa  promeffe.

II  employe  fans  delay  fes  ouuriers,  les  vns  a  faire
le  chemin,  les  autres  a  couper  les  arbres ;  les  autres
k  faire  la  Croix,  luy-mefme  met  la  main  a  I'oeuure,
pour  les  encourager  par  fon  exemple.  Et  le  iour
eftant  venu,  qui  fut  le  iour  des  Roys,  qu'on  auoit
choifi  pour  cette  ceremonie,  on  benift  la  Croix,  on
fait  Monfieur  de  Maifon  neufue  premier  foldat  de  la.
Croix,  auec  toutes  les  ceremonies  de  I'Eglife,  il  la.
charge  fur  fon  efpaule,  quoy  que  tres-pefante,  mar-
che  vne  lieue  entiere,  charge  de  ce  fardeau,  fuiuant.
la  Proceffion,  &  la  plante  fur  la  cime  de  la  [201]  mon-
tagne.  Le  Pere  du  Perron  y  dift  la  Meffe,  &  Madame-
de  la  Pelletterie  y  communia  la  premiere.

On  adore  la  Croix  &  de  belles  Reliques  qu'on  y
auoit  enchaffe  dedans,  &  depuis  ce  temps-la,  ce  lieu
fut  frequente  par  diuers  pelerinages.  Ainfi  il  fem-
ble  que  le  zele,  la  deuotion,  &  la  charite  de  tous  ces


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  227

that  they  might  recognize  the  purity  of  his  intention ;
goes  to  plant  the  Cross,  which  the  Father  blesses,  at
the  edge  of  the  river,  with  the  writing  which  he
attaches  to  the  foot.  He  returns,  with  a  promise,
which  he  makes  to  God,  to  bear  a  Cross  himself  alone
upon  the  mountain  of  Mont-royal,  if  he  please  to
grant  his  request.  The  waters  nevertheless  con-
tinued to  pass  beyond,  God  wishing  to  prove  their
faith.  They  were  seen  to  roll  great  waves,  one  after
the  other,  fill  the  moats  of  the  fort,  and  rise  even  to
the  gate  of  the  settlement, —  seeming  liable  to  swal-
low up  everything,  without  [200]  remedy.  Every
one  surveys  this  spectacle  without  agitation,  without
dread,  without  complaint, —  although  it  was  in  the
heart  of  the  Winter,  at  full  midnight,  and  at  the
very  time  when  the  Nativity  of  the  Son  of  God  is
celebrated  on  earth.  The  said  sieur  de  Maison-
neufve  does  not  lose  courage  and  hopes  soon  to  see
the  effect  of  his  prayer,  which  was  not  long  delayed ;
for  the  waters,  after  having  stopped  a  little  while  at
the  threshold  of  the  gate,  without  swelling  further,
subsided  by  degrees,  put  the  inhabitants  out  of  danger,
and  set  the  Captain  to  the  fulfillment  of  his  promise.
He  employs  the  workmen,  without  delay, —  some
to  make  the  road,  others  to  cut  the  trees,  others  to
make  the  Cross.  He  himself  takes  a  hand  in  the
work,  in  order  to  encourage  them  by  his  example.
And  the  day  having  come, —  it  was  Epiphany,  which
they  had  chosen  for  this  ceremony, —  they  bless
the  Cross ;  they  make  Monsieur  de  Maison  neufve  first
soldier  of  the  Cross,  with  all  the  ceremonies  of  the
Church.  He  loads  it  upon  his  shoulder,  although
very  heavy;  walks  a  whole  league,  freighted  with
this  burden,  following  the  Procession ;  and  plants  it


228  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

Meffieurs  qui  fe  font  affociez  en  France  a  ce  pieux  &

noble  deffein,  s'eft  refpandue  &  communiquee  a  tons

ceux  qui  ont  demeure  par  de-gk  en  leur  habitation,

lefquels  ont  efte  touchez  bien particulierement de

Dieu, & ont tefmoigne auoir receu beaucoup de

faueurs  &  graces  du  Ciel,  puifque  la  vie  qu'ils  y  ont

menes  I'Hyuer, a  efte  vne image de  la  primitiue

Eglife. Tous  y  ont  vefcu  auec  ioye,  fouffrans  les  %

incommoditez  d'vne  nouuelle  demeure,  en  vn  pays

defert,  oil  pas-vn n'a efte malade;  ce qui ne  s'eft  •

encor  iamais  remarque  en  aucune  nouuelle  habitation

par  dega. Le  lieu  eft  beau,  la  terre  graffe, &  les  %

prairies  en  quantite:  les  Sauuages  s'y  plaifent  ex-

tremement,  &  y  demeureroient  volontiers,  fi  on  auoit

ofl6  le  danger  des  ennemis,  [202]  ou  mefnage  la  paix

auec  eux:  fans  cela  ie  ne  vois  pas  qu'il  y  ait  moyen

que  les Sauuages  s'y  puiffent  fixer  &  arrefter,  ny

que  les  Hurons  ayent  la  liberte  d'y defcendre,  ny

que  la  colonic  des  Frangois  y  puiffe  profperer. Ie

fuis  oblige  de  parler  auec  cette  fincerite.

Quant  aux  Sauuages  qui  ont  frequente  cette  habita-
tion: voicy  ce  que  m'en  efcrit  le  Pere  du  Peron,  qui
y  a  paffe  tout  I'Hyuer;  Ie  puis  dire  auec  verite  qu'ils
n'ont  pas  plutoft  commence  a  cognoiftre  la  purete  du
deffein  de  Meffieurs  de  Mont-real,  qu'ils  en  ont  efte
touchez  viuement,  la  croyance  qu'ils  ont  quafi  par
tout  que  Mont- Real  n'ell  eltably  que  pour  le  feul
bien  des  Sauuages,  eft  le  plus  fort  attrait,  que  Ton
aye  icy  pour  les  porter  a  Dieu :  ce  font  des  chaif nes
d'amour,  qui  nous  les  attachent  fortement,  &  font
qu'on  ne  trouue  plus  de  refiftance  dans  leurs  coeurs,
comme  par  le  paffe,  lis  difent  tous  que  c'eft  icy  oil  ils
veulent  croire  &  eftre  baptifez,  &  non  feulement  ceux


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  >  229

on  the  summit  of  the  [201]  mountain.  Father  du
Perron  said  Mass  there,  and  Madame  de  la  Pelletterie
was  the  first  to  receive  communion  there.

They  adore  the  Cross,  and  some  honored  Relics
which  they  had  enshrined  in  it ;  and  from  that  time
this  place  was  frequented  in  sundry  pilgrimages.
Thus  it  seems  that  the  zeal,  the  devotion,  and  the
charity  of  all  those  Gentlemen  who  have  associated
themselves  in  France  with  this  pious  and  noble
design,  has  been  spread  abroad  and  imparted  to  all
those  who  have  lived  on  this  side  in  their  settlement..
These  have  been  very  specially  moved  by  God,  and
have  testified  that  they  have  received  many  favors
and  graces  from  Heaven, —  since  the  life  which  they
have  led  there,  this  Winter,  has  been  a  picture  of  the
primitive  Church.  All  have  lived  there  with  joy;,
though  suffering  the  inconveniences  of  a  new  dwell-
ing in  a  desert  country,  not  one  there  has  been  sick,
which  has  thus  far  never  been  remarked  in  any  new
settlement  on  this  side.  The  place  is  fair,  the  land
rich,  and  the  meadows  abundant:  the  Savages  are
extremely  well  pleased  with  it,  and  would  gladly  live
there,  if  the  danger  of  the  enemy  were  removed,
[202]  or  peace  with  them  concluded.  Without  that,
I  do  not  see  that  there  is  a  way  for  the  Savages  to
become  fixed  and  settled  there,  or  that  the  Hurons
will  have  freedom  to  come  down  thither,  or  that  the
colony  of  the  French  can  prosper  there.  I  am  obliged
to  speak  with  this  frankness.

As  for  the  Savages  who  have  frequented  this  set-
tlement, here  follows  what  is  written  to  me  of  them,
by  Father  du  Peron,  who  has  spent  the  whole  Win-
ter there :  "  I  can  say  with  truth,  that  they  no  sooner
began  to  recognize  the  integrity  of  the  purpose  of


230  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

qui  ont  defia  eu  le  bon-heur  d'y  demeur[er]  ou  paffer:
mais  mefme  ceux  des  nations  plus  eloignees  au  deffus
de  nous,  [203]  par  le  feul  recit  qu'ils  en  ont  ouy.
Voicy  ce  qui  s'elt  paffe  de  plus  remarquable  a  leur
regard,

Sur  la  fin  de  Feurier  arriua  a  Mont- Real,  vne  bande
de  vingt-cinq  hommes  allans  a  la  guerre  contra  les
Iroquois,  &  les  femmes  &  enfans  s'arrefterent  icy.
A  deux  ou  a  trois  iours  de  1^  voicy  encore  venir  vne
autre  bande  pour  la  cbaffe,  laquelle  y  efl  fi  excel-
lente,  que  les  Sauuages  nous  difent  tous  qu'ils  y
auroient  demeure,  il  y  a  long-temps  en  grad  nobre,
s'ils  y  euffent  eu,  comme  a  prefent,  vn  lieu  de  refuge
contre  les  Iroquois,  nos  proches  voifins.  Celuy  qui
conduifoit  cette  bade,  a  efte  le  premier  homme  qui
y  a  efte  baptife  &  mari6  en  face  d'Eglife :  il  fe  nomme
^mafafik^eie,  &  par  fon  nom  de  baptefme  lofeph,
pour  luy  faire  porter  le  nom  de  la  premiere  famille
que  ces  Meffieurs  de  Mont- Royal  ont  done  pour  les
Sauuages:  ceftui-cy  n'auoit  point  encore  paru  a
Mont-Royal,  il  venoit  pour  le  cognoiftre,  il  I'eufl
fait  en  moins  d'vn  iour :  car  ayant  entedu  le  deCCein
de  cette  habitation,  il  en  fut  foudain  touche,  tefmoi-
gna  le  defir  qu'il  auoit  de  [204]  s'arrefter  enfin  apres
tant  d'annees  de  vie  vagabonde,  aggrea  les  propofi-
tions  qu'on  luy  fift,  d'vn  champ,  &  de  deux  hommes
qui  y  trauailleroient  vne  annee  entiere  pour  le  mettre
en  train,  il  demada  inftamment  d'eftre  inflruit:
comme  on  vift  que  cet  homme  y  alloit  tout  de  bo,
fans  differer,  on  le  mena  fur  les  lieux,  ou  il  choiiit
luy-mefme  la  place,  &  y  met  tout  auffi-toft  fes  deux
hommes  en  befoigne.  II  fouhaittoit  fort  que  fon
oncle,  Capitaine  de  la  nation  de  I'lfle,  celebre  parmy


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  231

Messieurs  of  Mont-real,  than  they  were  keenly-
touched  by  it.  The  belief  which  they  have  nearly
everywhere,  that  Mont- Real  is  established  only  for
the  sole  benefit  of  the  Savages,  is  the  strongest  attrac-
tion that  we  have  here  to  incline  them  to  God ;  these
are  chains  of  love,  which  bind  them  to  us  potently,
and  cause  resistance  to  be  no  longer  found  in  their
hearts,  as  in  the  past.  They  all  say  that  here  is
where  they  will  believe  and  be  baptized, — and  not
only  those  who  have  already  had  the  advantage  of  liv-
ing or  passing  there,  but  even  those  of  the  more
distant  nations  above  us,  [203]  solely  through  the
account  that  they  have  heard  of  it.  Here  follows
what  has  occurred  of  most  note  with  respect  to  them.
"  Toward  the  end  of  February,  there  arrived  at
Mont- Real  a  band  of  twenty-five  men,  going  to  the
war  against  the  Iroquois;  and  the  women  and  chil-
dren stopped  here.  Two  or  three  days  thereafter,
lo,  still  another  band  comes,  for  the  chase,  which  is
so  excellent  there  that  the  Savages  all  tell  us  that
they  would  have  lived  there  long  ago,  in  great  num-
ber, if  they  had  had  there,  as  at  present,  a  place  of
refuge  against  the  Iroquois,  our  near  neighbors.  He
who  was  leading  this  band  was  the  first  man  to  be
baptized  and  married  there  conformably  to  the
Church ;  he  is  named  Oumasasikweie,  and  in  his  bap-
tismal name,  Joseph,  in  order  to  have  him  bear  the
name  of  the  first  establishment  which  these  Gentle-
men of  Mont-Royal  have  given  for  the  Savages.
This  man  had  not  yet  appeared  at  Mont-Royal;  he
was  coming  to  get  acquainted  with  it,  and  had  done
so  in  less  than  one  day, — for,  having  heard  the  pur-
pose of  this  settlement,  he  was  suddenly  interested
in  it ;  indicated  the  desire  that  he  had  of  [204]  at  last


232  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

ces  nations,  &  nommemet  celles  d'en-haut,  nomme
Teffb'ehas, &  des  Frafois, le  Borgne  de  I'Ifle,  fuft
aduerty  de  la  gratification  qu'on  luy  faifoit,  &  nous
prioit  d'en  efcrire  par  nos  premieres  lettres  g'a-bas
aux  trois  Riuieres,  oh  il  deuoit  aller :  le  bon-homme
fuft  bien  eftonne  de  voir  fon  defir  accompli,  quafi
auffi-tofl  qu'il  I'euft  conceu:  car  peu  de  temps  apres
Teff^ehas  arriue  fur  les  glaces,  viet  droit  au  Fort,  &
nous  furprift, D'abord,  il  dift,  qu'il  venoit  pour  fe
faire  inftruire  &  baptif er :  &  entendat  ce  qu'on  venoit
de  faire  ^  fon  nepueu,  promet  de  s'arrefter  icy,  &  luy
&  les  fies:  a  7.  ou  8.  iours  de  la,  so  nepueu  i^mafafi-
kbJeie,  [205]  fe  voyant  preffe  par  fes  gens  de  partir
le  ledemain  pour  aller  a  la  chaffe,  n'y  voulut  point
aller  fans  Dieu:  ainfi  il  en  parla  a  fa  feme,  &  nous
viennet  prier  de  copagnie  qu'6  les  baptif e,  &  marie
ce  mefme  iour, ce  que  nous  fifmes  auec  les  circo-
fpedtios,  &  inftrudtios  requifes,  &  a  ce  neceffaires  en
tel  cas, M.  de  Maifon-neufue  auec  I'heritage  de  la
premiere famille, luy dona le no de lofepb, &
Madame  de  la  Peltrie  fa  Marraine  vne  arquebufe, fa
femme  furnomee  en  fa  lague  Mitigb'kHe  fut  nomee
leanne  par  M. de  Pifeaux. De  Ik  nous  tiros  ces  2.
Sauuages  a  part,  pour  leur  parler  particulieremet  de
Dieu,  &  entras  das  la  chabre  de  M.  de  Maiso  neufue
oil  eftoiet  les  pP  cofiderables,  ces  bones  ges  comace-
ret  en  leur  prefence  a  no^  tefmoigner  la  ioye  de  leur
cceur,  de  fe  voir  Chreflies,  & Fran9ois,  difoient-ils,
iufques  a  en  fouhaiter  Thabit,  «&  la  demeure,  &  pour
marque de  la  grace  qu'ils  auoiet  receue, nous  les
vifmes qu'ils s'entredifoiet I'vn I'autre, contre la
refolutio de  tous  leurs gens qui deuoiet  partir  le
ledemain,  retardos no^  autres  icy  deux  iours,  pour


1642  - 43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642 - 43  233

settling  down,  after  so  many  years  of  roving  life:
accepted  the  terms  which  they  made  him,  of  a  field
and  of  two  men  who  should  labor  in  it  a  full  year,  in
order  to  put  it  in  working  condition ;  and  urgently
requested  to  be  instructed.  As  it  was  seen  that  this
man  was  in  good  earnest,  without  delay  they  led  him
to  the  locality,  where  he  himself  chooses  the  place,
and  immediately  sets  his  two  men  at  work  upon  it.
He  greatly  wished  that  his  uncle,  Captain  of  the
nation  of  the  Island,  celebrated  among  these  nations,
and  especially  the  upper  ones, —  named  Tesswehas,
and  by  the  French,  '  le  Borgne  of  the  Isle,'  ^"^  —  should
be  apprised  of  the  favor  that  was  done  to  him ;  and
begged  us  to  write  of  it  by  our  first  letters  down  here
to  the  three  Rivers,  where  he  was  to  go.  The  good
man  was  much  astonished  to  see  his  desire  fulfilled
almost  as  soon  as  he  had  conceived  it :  for  shortly
after,  Tesswehas  arrives  over  the  ice,  comes  straight
to  the  Fort,  and  surprises  us.  At  the  outset,  he
said  that  he  came  to  be  instructed  and  baptized ;  and
hearing  what  they  had  just  done  for  his  nephew,
promises  to  settle  here,  both  himself  and  his  family.
About  7  or  8  days  later,  his  nephew  Oumasasikweie,
[205]  seeing  himself  urged  by  his  people  to  start  the
next  day  in  order  to  go  to  the  hunt,  would  not  go
without  God.  He  spoke  of  it,  therefore,  to  his  wife,
and  they  came  together  to  beg  us  that  they  be  bap-
tized and  married  that  same  day, —  which  we  accorded,
with  the  circumspection  and  instructions  requisite
and  necessary  thereto  in  such  case.  Monsieur  de
Maison-neufve,  with  the  heritage  of  the  first  family,
gave  him  the  name  of  Joseph :  and  Madame  de  la
Peltrie,  his  Godmother,  an  arquebus.  His  wife,
surnamed  in  her  language  Mitigoukwe,  was  named


234  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  24

pouuoir  Fefter  pour  la  i.  fois auec  les  Fran9ois,  le
[206] Dimanche  qui  eftoit  le  iour  fuiuant.

Le  9.  iour  de  Mars  le  Borgne  de  I'lfle  premier
Capitaine  de  tous  ces  pays,  &  fa  femme  apres  les  dif-
pofitions  requifes  pour  le  Baptefme  le  receuret  enfin
auec  admiration  de  tous  nos  Fran9ois,  &  de  tous  ces
gens  qui  auoient  veu  autrefois  cet  homme  fi  efloign6
de  ce  qu'il  faifoit,  s'eftimant  ^  prefent  heureux  du
nom  de  Chreftien,  qu'on  luy  alloit  donner.  Monfieur
de  Maifon-Neufue  auec  Madamoifelle  Manfe,  le  nom-
merent  Paul,  &  fa  femme  fut  nommee  Magdelaine
par  Madame  de  la  Peltrie,  &  Monfieur  de  Puifeaux.
Toutes  les  ceremonies  en  furent  faites  auec  grande
folemnite  ^  caufe  du  grand  progres  qu'on  en  doit
efperer,  pour  la  gloire  de  Dieu.  Le  Pere  Poncet  par
la  a  tout  le  monde  de  la  grande  bonte  de  Dieu  enuers
cet  homme :  les  larmes  de  ioye  qui  parurent  fur  plu-
lieurs  vifages  firent  bien  cognoif[t]re  que  les  coeurs
eftoient  remplis  de  contentement,  le  pere  ne  pouuoit
quafi  parler,  tant  il  eftoit  touche.  Apres  qu'ils  eurent
receu  la  benedicl:ion  du  Mariage,  Monfieur  de  Maifon-
Neufue  donna  vne  [207]  belle  arquebufe  k  Paul  auec
les  chofes  neceff aires  pour  s'en  feruir,  les  fift  difner
auec  nous,  &  apres  difner,  fift  vn  grand  feftin  a  tous
les  Sauuages,  oii  tous  les  Frangois  affifterent,  qui
eftoient  fi  refiouys  qu'il  n'eft  pas  pofsible  de  plus,
de  voir  vne  fi  grande  mifericorde  de  Dieu.  L'on  a
toufiours  eftim6  que  le  gain  de  c6t  homme  eftoit  plus
k  prifer,  que  d'vn  grand  nombre  d'autres,  iamais  on
n'a  doute  que  s'il  fe  conuertiffoit  vne  fois,  qu'il  ne  fift
parfai(5tement  bien,  veu  les  grands  talents  naturels
que  Dieu  luy  a  donne.  Auparauant  qu'il  fuft  Chre-
ftien, Dieu  luy  auoit  fait  vne  grande  grace,  a  f9auoir


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  ib42-43  235

Jeanne  by  Monsieur  de  Piseaux.  Then  we  take  these
2  Savages  aside,  in  order  to  speak  to  them  privately
of  God ;  and  entering  into  the  room  of  Monsieur  de
Maison  neufve,  where  the  most  considerable  persons
were,  these  good  people  began,  in  their  presence,  to
testify  to  us  the  joy  of  their  hearts  at  seeing  them-
selves Christians, — and  French,  they  said,  even  to
desiring  the  dress  and  the  dwelling  of  these.  And,
in  token  of  the  grace  which  they  had  received,  we
saw  them  exchange  words  together,  opposing  the
resolution  of  all  their  people,  who  were  to  start  the
next  day :  '  Let  us  tarry  here  two  days,  in  order  to
be  able  to  Feast  for  the  ist  time  with  the  French,  on
the  [206]  Lord's  Day,'  which  was  the  day  following.
"  The  9th  day  of  March,  le  Borgne  of  the  Isle,  first
Captain  of  all  these  countries,  and  his  wife,  after  the
preparations  requisite  for  Baptism,  finally  received
it,  to  the  admiration  of  all  our  French,  and  of  all
those  people  who  had  formerly  seen  that  man  so
removed  from  what  he  was  now  doing, —  esteeming
himself  happy,  at  present,  in  the  name  of  Christian,
which  they  were  about  to  give  him.  Monsieur  de
Maison-Neufve,  with  Mademoiselle  Manse,  named
him  Paul;  and  his  wife  was  named  Magdelaine  by
Madame  de  la  Peltrie  and  Monsieur  de  Puiseaux.
All  the  ceremonies  thereof  were  performed  with  great
solemnity,  on  account  of  the  great  progress  which  is
to  be  hoped  from  them  for  the  glory  of  God.  Father
Poncet  spoke  to  all  the  people  of  the  great  goodness
of  God  toward  this  man;  the  tears  of  joy  which
appeared  on  several  faces  showed  plainly  that  their
hearts  were  filled  with  contentment.  The  father
could  scarcely  speak,  so  much  was  he  touched.  After
they  had  received  the  blessing  of  Marriage,  Monsieur


236  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

de  permettre  que  fes  enfans  fullent  baptifez,  &  outre
cela  il  a  efte  caufe  que  beaucoup  d'autres  I'ont  efte,
lefquels  font  prefque  tous  morts,  &  pour  luy  il  ne  le
vouloit  point  eftre  du  tout ;  d'autre  cofte  il  a  beau-
coup  retarde  la  gloire  de  Dieu,  les  Sauuages  prenant,
exemple  fur  luy,  mais  il  y  a  apparence  qu'il  le
reparera.

Voicy  le  chemin  dont  Dieu  s'eft  feruy  pour  le  tirer
h.  foy,  lequel  eft  bien  au  deffus  de  toute  prudence
humaine:  car  [208]  lors  que  Ton  ne  penfoit  ^  rien
moins  que  de  le  voir  icy,  veu  I'auerfion  qu'il  en  auoit
tefmoigne  fur  la  fin  de  I'efle,  le  voila  cependant  arri-
ue  icy  le  premier  iour  de  Mars,  il  frappe  h.  la  porte
de  la  chambre  de  Mofieur  de  Maifon-Neufue:  lofeph
fon  nefueu  que  i'enfeignois  en  ma  chambre,  &  qui
nous  auoit  dit,  deux  heures  auparauant,  qu'il  cut
bien  defire  que  le  Borgne  fon  oncle  eut  fceu  ce  bon
traittement  qu'il  auoit  receu  de  nous,  &  qu'il  fouhait-
teroit  qu'on  luy  en  efcriuit :  il  ne  pouuoit  croire  qu'il
fut  venu,  auparauant  que  I'auoir  veu,  tant  il  le  croy-
oit  eftre  eloigne  de  venir  icy:  le  Borgne  nous  dit
qu'eftat  party  de  Richelieu,  pour  aller  aux  trois  Ri-
uieres,  il  auoit  tout  d'vn  coup  pris  refolution  de  venir
icy  auec  fa  femme,  &  fa  fille,  nonobftant  les  dangers:
I'vnique  fujet  qui  m'ameine,  dift  il,  c'eft  la  priere,
c'eft  icy  ou  ie  defire  prier,  eftre  inftruit  &  baptife,  que
fi  vous  ne  I'aggrees  pas,  ie  m'en  iray  aux  Hurons,  ou
les  robes  noires  qui  y  font  autour  des  Algonquins
m'enfeigneront,  comme  i'efpere.

Monfieur  de  Maifon-neufue,  touche  [209]  de  voir
c6t  homme,  &  refolu  de  n'efpargner  aucune  chofe
qui  fuft  en  fon  pouuoir,  pour  la  conuerfion  de  ce  pau-
ure  Sauuage,  nous  fupplie  de  luy  dire  de  fa  part,  que


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  237

de  Maison-Neufve gave a  [207] fine arquebus to
Paul, with  the  articles necessary  for its use, and
had  them dine  with  us ;  and  after  dinner,  he  made
a  great feast to all the Savages, where all the
French  were  present, — who  were  so  rejoiced  that  it
is  not  possible  to  be  more  so,  to  see  so  great  a  mercy
of  God. It  has  ever  been  thought  that  the  conquest
of  that  man  was  more  to  be  prized  than  that  of  a
great  number  of  others ;  it  was  never  doubted  that,
if  he  were  once  converted,  he  would  do  thoroughly
well,  in  view  of  the  great  natural  talents  which  God
has  given  him. Before  he  was  a  Christian,  God  had
done  him  a  great  favor,— to  wit,  in  permitting  that
his  children  should  be  baptized ;  and  besides  that,  he
has  been  the  occasion  for  many  others  to  be,  who  are
nearly  all  dead;  but,  as  for  him,  he  did  not  wish  to
be,  at  all. On  the  other  hand,  he  has  much  retarded
the  glory  of  God,  the  Savages  taking  pattern  after
him;  but  there  is  a  probability  that  he  will  make
amends  for  that.

"  Behold  the  way  which  God  has  used  for  drawing
him  to  himself,  which  is  far  above  all  human  pru-
dence; for  —  [208]  when  we  were  thinking  of  any-
thing else  than  of  seeing  him  here,  considering  the
aversion  which  he  had  shown  for  it  toward  the  end  of
the summer  —  there he was, nevertheless, having
arrived  here  the  first  day  of  March. He  knocks  at
the  door  of  the  room  of  Monsieur  de  Maison-Neufve.
Joseph, his  nephew,  whom I was  teaching  in  my
room, — and  who  had  told  us,  two  hours  before,  that
he  had  much  desired  that  le  Borgne,  his  uncle,  might
have  known  what  good  treatment  he  had  received  from
us ;  and  that  he  wished  we  would  write  to  him  of  it, —
could  not  believe  that  he  had  come,  before  having  seen


238  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.24

s'il  auoit  enuie  de  fe  faire  initruire  &  s'arreller,  il
n'auoit  que  faire  d'aller  plus  loin  qu'en  ce  lieu  cy,  oil
11  I'affifteroit  de  tout  fon  poffible,  &  I'aymeroit  comme
fon  frere:  cet  homme  luy  tefmoigna  beaucoup  de
reff entimet  de  ces  offres :  cependant  nous  tafchafmes
de  ne  perdre  aucun  moment  de  temps,  pour  trauail-
ler  k  fa  conuerfion,  de  laquelle  delors  il  nous  donna
bonne  efperance,  affiftant  toufiours  aux  prieres  &
inftrudtions,  &  ^  tous  les  baptefmes  de  tous  fes  gens,
il  procedoit  tant  auec  Monfieur  de  Maifon-neufue,
qu'auec  nous,  auec  fi  grande  prudence  qu'il  n'efl  pas
poffible  de  I'exprimer:  on  la  veu  efcouter  des  deux
heures  ce  caticees  \sc.  le  catechifme]  que  nous  luy
difions,  fans  dire  vn  feul  mot,  pour  mieux  penfer  &,
ce  qu'il  auoit  a  faire:  il  tefmoignoit  tant  de  defir
d'eftre  inflruidt  qu  il  fe  faifoit  inftruire  de  tous
indifferemment,  difant  fon  Pater  auec  les  vieilles  &
enfans:  Ma  fille,  difoit-il,  les  [210]  n'a  pas  d'efprit,  de
ne  me  vouloir  pas  enfeigner  ce  qu'elle  fgait:  C'efloit
la  fon  vnique  &  important  affaire,  &  autrefois  indi-
gne,  "k  fon  aduis,  de  fes  penfees,  il  portoit  fes  gens  k
faire  comme  luy :  en  vn  mot  Dieu  qui  vouloit  eftre
le  Maiftre  de  ce  coeur,  luy  donna  de  grandes  difpofi-
tions  pour  la  foy:  en  fuitte  dequoy  il  nous  dift,  ie
n'ay  iamais  promis  Ik-bas  de  me  faire  baptifer,  mais
de  me  faire  inftruire:  mais  a  prefent  ie  vous  le
promets.  La  nuidt  enfuiuant,  il  dift  a  fes  gens  la
refolution  qu'il  auoit  prife,  &  la  parole  qu'il  auoit
donnee,  il  paffa  le  refte  de  la  nuidt  "k  haranguer
tous  les  Sauuages  oil  il  dift  des  merueilles  de  la
foy,  pour  les  encourager  tous,  improuua  fon  procede
palfe,  &  difl  qu'il  efperoit  que  Dieu  I'aideroit
eftant Chreltien, "k mieux faire a I'aduenir. Le


1642-43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  239

him :  so  averse  did  he  suppose  him  to  be  to  coming
here.  Le  Borgne  told  us,  that  having  left  Richelieu
to  go  to  the  three  Rivers,  he  had  all  at  once  resolved
to  come  here  with  his  wife  and  his  daughter,  not-
withstanding the  dangers.  '  The  single  purpose
which  brings  me,'  said  he,  'is  prayer.  It  is  here
that  I  desire  to  pray,  to  be  instructed  and  baptized;
but,  if  you  do  not  agree  to  it,  I  will  go  away  to  the
Hurons,  where  the  black  robes  who  are  there  with
the  Algonquins  will  teach  me,  as  I  hope.'

"  Monsieur  de  Maison-neufve,  touched  [209]  to  see
this  man,  and  resolved  to  spare  nothing  which  was
in  his  power,  for  the  conversion  of  this  poor  Savage,
entreats  us  to  tell  him,  on  his  part,  that  if  he  desired
to  become  instructed  and  settled  he  had  no  occasion
to  go  further  than  this  place,  where  he  would  assist
him  to  the  best  of  his  ability,  and  would  love  him  as
his  brother.  This  man  showed  him  much  gratitude
for  these  offers ;  meanwhile,  we  strove  to  lose  not  a
moment  of  time,  to  work  for  his  conversion,  of
which,  thenceforth,  he  gave  us  good  hope, —  always
attending  the  prayers  and  instructions,  and  all  the
baptisms  among  his  people.  He  acted  both  toward
Monsieur  de  Maison-neufve  and  toward  us,  with  so
great  prudence  that  it  is  not  possible  to  express  it ;  he
has  been  known  to  listen  two  hours  to  those  lessons  in
the  catechism  that  we  were  repeating  to  him,  with-
out saying  a  single  word, —  in  order  the  better  to
think  upon  what  he  had  to  do.  He  betokened  so
much  desire  to  be  instructed  that  he  had  himself
taught  by  all,  impartially,  saying  his  Pater  with  the
old  women  and  children.  '  My  daughter,'  said  he,
[210]  '  has  no  sense,  not  to  be  willing  to  teach  me
what she knows.' That was his exclusive and


240  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.24

lendemain,  il  nous  vint  troiiuer  le  Pere  Poncet,  &
moy,  nous  demande  inflamment  le  Baptefme,  que
nous  luy  accordafmes  pour  le  voir  dans  la  meilleure
difpofition,  que  nous  I'aurions  peu  iamais  fouhaitter,
9a  me  dit  alors,  ce  bon-homme,  plein  de  ioye  de  cette
bone  nouuelle,  meine  nous  [211]  en  ta  chambre,  ma
femme  &  moy,  pendant  que  les  autres  s'en  iront  k  la
Meffe  du  Pere,  tu  nous  inftruiras  la,  de  ce  que  nous
deuons  refpondre  ^  la  ceremonie  du  Baptefme:  9a
hafte-toy :  car  il  y  en  aura  iufques  a  la  nuidt,  tant  il
te  faudra  baptif er  de  perf onnes :  tu  auras  aff ez  affaire
aufli  bie  que  le  Pere,  pource  tout  le  log  du  iour  ne
pent  fatisfaire  k  mes  gens,  qui  veulent  tous  eftre  bap-
tif ez,  ^  quoy  luy  ayant  fatisfaidt,  il  les  mene  k  I'E-
glife,  les  met  entre  les  mains  du  Pere,  qui  auant  qu'en
partir,  les  fift  enfans  de  Dieu,  leur  verfant  I'eau  &  le
S.  Efprit  fur  la  tefte.  En  fuitte  Monfieur  de  Maifon-
neufue,  pour  I'arrefter  icy,  luy  donna  la  mefme  con-
dition qu'il  auoit  fait  a  lofeph,  &  met  deux  hommes
pour  trauailler  pour  lui,  qui  auec  les  deux  autres,  fai-
foiet  quatre,  &  s'il  eufl  peu,  euft  fait  encore  dauan-
tage  pour  vne  affaire  de  telle  importance.  Si  toft
qu'il  a  efte  baptif6.  Ton  a  recognu  tout  vifiblement
de  tres-grands  effects  de  la  grace  de  Dieu  fur  luy :
Nous  prenions  plaifir  a  le  confiderer  &  entendre  par-
ler  des  bons  fentimens  que  le  S.  Efprit  luy  donnoit,
touchant  la  grace  du  [212]  Baptefme,  Ton  voyoit  en
luy  vn  vifage  d'autant  plus  refolu  ^  tenir  bon  pour
la  foy,  qu'il  y  auoit  efte  long  temps  fort  contraire,
au  lieu  que  Paul  TeffHehat  eftoit  I'homme  du  monde
le  plus  fuperbe  auparauant  fon  Baptefme,  fi  toft  qu'il
a  elte  Chreftien,  Dieu  luy  donna  la  douceur  &  I'hu-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  241

important  business,  though  formerly  unworthy,  in
his  opinion,  of  his  thoughts.  He  inclined  his  people
to  do  like  him ;  in  a  word,  God,  who  willed  to  be  the
Master  of  that  heart,  gave  him  excellent  inclinations
for  the  faith,  in  consequence  of  which  he  said  to  us,
*  I  never  promised,  down  there,  to  be  baptized,  but  to
be  instructed;  but  now  I  promise  you  it.'  The  fol-
lowing night,  he  told  his  people  the  resolution  which
he  had  taken,  and  the  word  that  he  had  given;  he
spent  the  rest  of  the  night  in  haranguing  all  the
Savages,  wherein  he  told  wonders  of  the  faith,  to
encourage  them  all ;  deprecated  his  past  behavior ;  and
said  that  he  hoped  that  God  would  aid  him,  being  a
Christian,  to  do  better  in  future.  The  next  day,  he
came  to  find  us, —  Father  Poncet  and  me,  and  urgent-
ly asked  us  for  Baptism,  which  we  granted  him  upon
seeing  him  in  the  best  disposition  that  we  could  ever
have  wished.  '  Come,'  then  said  to  me  this  good
man,  full  of  joy  for  this  good  news,  '  lead  us  [21 1]  to
thy  room, — my  wife  and  me, —  while  the  others  go
to  the  Father's  Mass.  Thou  shalt  instruct  us  there,
in  what  we  are  to  answer  at  the  ceremony  of  Bap-
tism. Come,  make  haste ;  for  there  will  be  some,
even  till  night, —  so  many  persons  thou  wilt  have  to
baptize.  Thou  wilt  have  plenty  to  do,  as  well  as  the
Father;  because  the  entire  day  cannot  satisfy  my
people,  who  all  wish  to  be  baptized.'  Having  satis-
fied him  therein,  he  leads  them  to  the  Church,  and
puts  them  in  the  Father's  hands, —  who,  before  leav-
ing, made  them  children  of  God,  pouring  the  water
and  the  Holy  Ghost  upon  their  heads.  Thereafter,
Monsieur  de  Maison-neufve,  to  settle  him  here,
assigned  him  the  same  estate  that  he  had  granted  to
Joseph,  and  appointed  two  men  to  work  for  him, —


242  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.24

milite  d'vn  petit  enfant,  fe  faifant  inftruire,  mefme
par  fa  petite  fille,  auec  vne  douceur  nompareille,  &
fimplicit^  Chreltienne,  qui  le  rend  fouple  ^  toutes
nos  volontez :  il  eft  fi  zel6  &  ardent  k  apprendre  ce
qui  luy  eft  neceffaire  pour  fon  falut,  qu'il  trouuoit
les  iours  trop  cours,  &  couchoit  fouuent  chez  nous,
afin  de  fe  faire  inftruire  pendant  la  nuidl,  iamais  ie
n'ay  veu  vn  homme  auoir  tant  d'affedtion  d'eftre
inftruidt :  il  apportoit  vne  diligece  &  application  nom-
pareille a  apprendre  par  coeur  les  prieres,  en  pronon-
gant  tons  les  mots  fur  fes  doigts,  y  paffant  les  nuidts
entieres;  nous  ne  pouuions  le  laffer,  quoy  que  nous
y  f uffios  quelquefois  iuf que  ^  la  minuidl :  il  parloit
fouuent  a  tons  fes  gens  d'embraffer  la  foy,  refutoit
I'ignorance  de  nos  myfleres  qu'ils  apportoient  en
excufe,  [213]  par  fon  exemple  qu'il  leur  alleguoit,  leur
difant,  que  quand  ils  feroient  baptifez,  ils  appren-
droient  plus  aifement.  II  recognoiffoit  auec  eftonne-
ment  qu'il  y  auoit  quelqu'vn  dedans  luy  qui  I'inftrui-
foit,  &  luy  fuggeroit  ce  qu'il  deuoit  dire  "k  Dieu:
fouuent  il  arriue  des  merueilles  en  ces  bonnes  gens,
fans  qu'ils  s'en  appergoiuent.

Ce  bon  homme  nous  difoit  qu'autant  de  fois  qu'il
s'efueilloit  la  nuidt,  il  prioit  pour  fes  ieunes  gens  qui
eftoient  a  la  guerre :  la  priere  que  ie  fais,  difoit-il,  ie
la  repete,  comme  apres  vn  autre,  qui  m'enfeigne
interieurement :  car  ie  ne  f9ay  encore  rien  pour
parler  k  Dieu :  voicy  comme  ie  dis.  Toy  qui  as  tout
fait,  aide  ^  nos  ieunes  gens,  deffends  les  contre  nos
ennemis :  tu  peux  tout,  donne  leur  courage  pour  les
vaincre :  Voil^  qui  feroit  bo  fi  nos  ennemis  croyoiet
en  toy,  pour  les  aider  auffi  bien  que  nous  qui  efperos


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  243

who,  with  the  two  others,  made  four;  and,  if  he  had
been  able,  he  would  have  done  still  more  for  a  mat-
ter of  such  importance.  As  soon  as  he  was  baptized,
one  recognized,  quite  visibly,  very  great  effects  of
the  grace  of  God  upon  him.  We  took  pleasure  in
observing  him,  and  in  hearing  him  speak  of,  the
good  feelings  which  the  Holy  Ghost  was  granting
him,  respecting  the  grace  of  [212]  Baptism.  One
saw  in  him  a  countenance  all  the  more  resolved  to
hold  fast  for  the  faith,  that  he  had  been  for  a  long
time  very  averse  to  it.  Whereas  Paul  Tesswehat
was  the  most  haughtv  man  in  the  world,  before  his
Baptism,  God  gave  him,  as  soon  as  he  became  a
Christian,  the  gentleness  and  the  humility  of  a  little
child, —  having  himself  instructed  even  by  his  little
daughter,  with  a  gentleness  unequaled,  and  a  Chris-
tian simplicity  which  renders  him  pliable  to  all  our
wishes.  He  is  so  zealous  and  ardent  to  learn  that
which  is  necessary  to  him  for  his  salvation,  that  he
found  the  days  too  short,  and  often  stopped  over
night  with  us,  so  as  to  be  instructed  during  the  night.
Never  have  I  seen  a  man  have  so  much  partiality  for
being  instructed ;  he  bestowed  a  diligence  and  appli-
cation unparalleled,  in  learning  by  heart  the  pray-
ers,—  enumerating  all  the  words  on  his  fingers,  and
spending  whole  nights  therein.  We  could  not  weary
him,  although  we  were  at  it  sometimes  even  till
midnight.  He  often  spoke  to  all  his  people  about
embracing  the  faith ;  refuted  the  excuse  which  they
offered,  of  ignorance  of  our  mysteries,  [213]  by  his
own  example,  which  he  cited  to  them, — telling  them
that  when  they  should  be  baptized,  they  would  learn
more  easily.  He  recognized  with  astonishment  that
there  was  some  one  within  him  who  instructed  him,


244  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

en  toy,  ils  ne  t'honoret  point,  abandone  les,  &  nous
deffends  nous  autres,  qui  voulons  maintenant  croire
en  toy.  Deux  ou  trois  iours  apres  fon  Baptefme,
allant  a  la  chaff e  auec  vn  ieune  Huron  qu'il  tient
chez  [214]  foy  par  charity,  depuis  I'Efle  paffe,  fe
voyat  bien  auant  dans  le  iour,  fans  auoir  rien  pris,  il
fe  met  k  genoux,  &  prie  en  cette  forte;  Toy  grand
efprit,  qui  cognois  tout,  ne  vois-tu  pas  bien  que  ie
n'en  pourray  venir  a  bout,  fi  tu  ne  m'aides,  tu  peux
tout,  aide  moy  done,  &  a  I'inftant  voila  qu'il  entend
du  bruit,  le  fuit  &  tue  auec  fon  compagnon  deux
vaches  &  vn  orignac.  Sa  ferueur  aux  prieres  eft
incoparable,  il  n'eft  pas  plutoft  appelle  qu'il  vient,
premier  «&  appelle  &  preffe  les  autres  de  s'y  rendre
promptement,  il  fe  rend  fi  fouple  a  tout,  que  mefme
il  n'ofoit  partir,  pour  aller  icy  autour  a  la  chaffe,  k
caufe  que  nous  luy  anions  dit,  qu'on  I'inftruiroit  plus
amplement  apres  fon  Baptefme,  il  n'eft  honteux  aux
Catechifmes  que  I'on  fait  en  public,  de  repeter  comme
vn  enfant,  ce  qu'il  f9ait  du  Pater,  &  excite  fes  gens
a  y  ref pondre  hardiment :  bref  il  fe  trouue  k  tout,  ce
que  nous  faifons  en  I'Eglife,  k  tons  les  Baptefmes  de
fes  gens,  les  Feftes  apres  que  nous  anions  chante
les  Vefpres,  il  nous  venoit  auffi  folliciter  de  le  faire
prier  &  chanter  a  part,  il  experimentoit  la  douceur  de
[215]  I'efprit  du  Chriftianifme,  &  nous  difoit  que  les
cruautez  qu'ils  exergoient  contre  leurs  ennemis,  luy
defplaifoient,  il  ne  ceffoit  de  louer  la  charite  de  M.
de  Maifon  neufue  noftre  Capitaine,  la  bie-veillace  des
Dames  qui  font  icy,  la  bonte  de  tons  nos  gens,  &  la
douceur  dont  nous  vfions  enuers  eux,  &  que  ce  qu'ils
entendoient  dire  d'vn  Dieu  plein  de  bonte  &  miferi-


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  245

and  prompted  him  what  he  should  say  to  God.  Often
there  happen  marvels  in  these  good  people,  without
their  perceiving  it.

"  This  good  man  told  us  that,  as  many  times  as  he
awoke  at  night,  he  prayed  for  his  young  men  who
were  in  the  war.  '  The  prayer  which  I  offer, '  said
he,  '  I  repeat  as  though  after  another,  who  teaches
me  within;  for  I  know  nothing,  as  yet,  to  say  to
God.  See  how  I  speak :  ' '  Thou  who  hast  made
everything,  help  our  young  men,  and  defend  them
against  our  enemies.  Thou  canst  do  everything;
give  them  courage  to  overcome  them.  Lo,  that
would  be  orood  if  our  enemies  believed  in  thee,  so  as
to  help  them,  as  well  as  us  who  hope  in  thee;  but
they  do  not  honor  thee;  forsake  them,  and  defend
us  who  wish  now  to  believe  in  thee."  '  Two  or
three  days  after  his  Baptism,  going  to  the  hunt  with
a  young  Huron, —  whom  he  has  kept  with  [214]  him
through  charity,  since  last  Summer, —  finding  himself
quite  late  in  the  day  without  having  taken  aught,  he
kneels  and  prays  as  follows :  '  Thou  great  spirit,  who
knowest  everything,  seest  thou  not  well,  that  I  shall
never  succeed  unless  thou  helpest  me?  Thou  canst
do  everything ;  help  me  then ;  '  and,  at  that  instant,
lo,  he  hears  a  noise,  follows  it,  and,  with  his  com-
panion, kills  two  cows  and  a  moose.  His  fervor  in
prayers  is  incomparable ;  he  is  no  sooner  called  than
he  comes  the  first,  and  calls  and  urges  the  others  to
gather  thither  promptly.  He  makes  himself  so  pli-
able to  everything,  that  he  did  not  even  dare  to  start,
in  order  to  go  to  the  chase  hereabout,  because  we  had
said  to  him  that  he  should  be  instructed  more  fully
after  his  Baptism.  He  is  not  ashamed,  at  the  lessons
in  the  Catechism  which  are  given  in  public,  to  repeat.


246  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.24

corde  pour  les  hommes  les  rauiffoit,  &  que  ce  qui  les
auoit  le  plus  touche,  eftoit  la  cognoiffance  qu'on  leur
donnoit  de  la  bonte  de  Dieu,  &  que  c' eftoit  cela  qui
les  auoit  tous  gagnez,  &  faifoit  qu'ils  efloiet  tous  en
noftre  difpofition :  il  conceuoit  de  grandes  efperances
de  la  conuerfion  des  autres  peuples,  auf quels  i'efpere
que  fon  exemple  ne  feruira  pas  de  peu,  pour  les
ranger  ^  robeiffance  de  la  foy.  En  vn  mot  il  s'eft
comporte  icy  en  vray  Chreftien.

Vn  certain  foir  eftant  venu  en  noftre  falette,  il  fe
mift  imperceptiblement  ^  y  prefcher  deux  bonnes
femmes  qui  y  eftoient.  Le  difcours  qu'il  leur  tinft,
eftoit  rauiffant,  &  comme  la  plus  forte  raifon  qu'elles
alleguoient,  pour  n'eftre  [216]  pas  encore  baptifez,
eftoit  qu'elles  n'eftoient  pas  inftruites,  il  leur  refpon-
dit,  quand  vous  ferez  baptifez  vous  en  apprendrez  en
vn  iour  plus  que  vous  n'en  euffiez  fait  en  quinze  iours
car  Dieu  vous  y  aidera.  II  ne  veut  pas  aller  k  la
chaffe  auec  les  autres  homes,  quoy  qu'il  en  foit  prefix
par  les  fiens  mefmes,  fi  i'y  vais,  difoit-il,  toutes  les
femmes  &  enfans  m'y  voudront  fuiure,  i'ayme  mieux
demeurer,  pour  leur  donner  le  moyen  d'eftre  inftruits
aupres  de  vous  autres,  &  moy  auffi :  &  en  effet  il  le
fit,  fe  redant  affidu  k  toutes  les  inftrudtions  publiques
&  particulieres,  &  preffant  luy-mefme  les  autres.
Que  ne  fift-il  autour  de  fon  ieune  Huron  qu'il  entre-
tient?  il  luy  redifoit  tout  ce  qu'il  entendoit  &  f9auoit
de  nos  myfteres,  il  eftoit  rauy  de  le  voir  en  la  difpo-
fition de  vouloir  eftre  Chreftien  comme  luy :  enfin  il
fift  fi  bien  que  nous  le  baptifafmes,  apresauoirremar-
que  en  luy  la  difpofition  neceffaire  en  tel  cas.  II  fut
nomm6  lofeph:  comme  on  luy  demandoit  en  d'eftail,


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  247

like  a  child,  what  he  knows  of  the  Pater,  and  incites
his  people  to  answer  boldly  therein.  In  short,  he  is
present  at  everything  that  we  do  in  the  Church,  and
at  all  the  Baptisms  of  his  people.  At  the  Feasts,
after  we  had  sung  Vespers,  he  also  came  to  be-
seech us  to  have  him  pray  and  sing  apart.  He  was
experiencing  the  gentleness  of  [215]  the  spirit  of
Christianity,  and  told  us  that  the  cruelties  which
they  practiced  against  their  enemies  displeased  him.
He  did  not  cease  to  praise  the  charity  of  Monsieur  de
Maison  neufve,  our  Captain ;  the  benevolence  of  the
Ladies  who  are  here ;  the  kindness  of  all  our  people,
and  the  mildness  that  we  use  toward  them.  He
declared  that  what  they  heard  said  of  a  God  full  of
goodness  and  mercy  toward  men  delighted  them;
and  that  what  had  most  touched  them  was  the  knowl-
edge that  we  gave  them  of  the  goodness  of  God,  that
it  was  that  which  had  won  them  all,_  and  which  caused
them  all  to  be  at  our  disposal.  He  conceived  great
hopes  for  the  conversion  of  the  other  peoples, —  with
whom,  I  hope,  his  example  will  serve  not  a  little  in
subduing  them  to  the  obedience  of  the  faith.  In  a
word,  he  has  behaved  here  like  a  true  Christian.

"  A  certain  evening,  having  come  to  our  little  hall,
he  began,  imperceptibly,  to  preach  to  two  good
women  who  were  there.  The  discourse  that  he  ad-
dressed to  them  was  delightful ;  and,  as  the  strongest
reason  which  they  adduced  for  not  [216]  yet  being
baptized,  was  that  they  were  not  instructed,  he
answered  them:  '  When  you  are  baptized,  you  will
learn  in  one  day  more  than  you  could  have  done  in
fifteen  days,  for  God  will  help  you.'  He  is  not  will-
ing to  go  to  the  chase  with  the  other  men,  although
he  is  urged  to  do  so  even  by  his  own  people. *  If  I


248  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ^SUITES [Vol.24

s'il  croyoit  les  articles  du  Credo ^  il  refpondit  en  vn
mot  de  bo  coeur,  ie  crois  tout:  Ton  voyoit  [217]  fur
fon  front  ie  ne  fcay  quelle  ioye  fi  extraordinaire,  que
chacun  des  Francois  Ie  vouloit  voir,  pour  en  tirer  de
la  confolation,  fa  modeftie  &  fes  mains  continuelle-
ment  iointes  de  fi  bonne  fagon,  nous  parloient  affez,
&  faifoient  voir  qu'il  prifoit  grandement  la  grace
qu'il  alloit  receuoir.

Vn  ieune  homme  de  la  nation  d'Iroquet,  nomme
ChinaJ^ich,  merite  qu'on  en  dife  vn  mot  en  palfant:
il  y  a  vn  an  a  ce  Prin-temps  qu'il  defcendit  de  fon
pays,  &  vint  aux  trois  Riuieres,  efquippe  en  guerre,
auec  vne  vingtaine  de  fes  gens,  &  entr'autres  Ie  Capi-
taine  des  Nipiffiriniens,  nomme  8iKaff  8mint :  ce  ieune
homme  ayant  parmy  fes  gens,  reputation  de  vaillant,
&  bon  chafleur,  eftoit  defia  recommendable,  &  fon
humeur  gaye  tout  ce  qu'il  fe  pent,  &  libre,  Ie  faifoit
aimer  de  tous  aux  trois  Riuieres :  il  m'auoit  tefmoi-
gne  pendant  vn  ou  deux  mois,  vn  grand  defir  de
croire,  &  venoit  fort  fouuent  nous  voir  pour  eftre
inftruit.  Auffi  toft  qu'il  fut  icy,  &  bie,  dit-il,  c'elt
tout  de  bo  qu'il  faut  que  tu  m'enfeignes,  &  que  tu
me  baptifes,  [218]  i'en  ay  vne  fi  grande  enuie,  que  ie
feray  tout  ce  que  tu  me  diras,  iufques  la  mefme  que
li  tu  me  dis  que  ie  quitte  mo  Demon,  qui  me  faidt
prendre  a  la  chaffe,  tout  ce  que  ie  veux,  ie  fuis  pres
^  Ie  faire,  quoy  que  ie  I'ayme  bien,  i'ay  ieufne  fept
iours  entiers,  fans  rien  manger  du  tout  pour  I'auoir,
ie  I'ayme  come  mon  corps,  auffi  eft-ce  ainfi  qu'il  I'ap-
pelloit :  Ce  fut  icy  ou  ceux  qui  y  eftoient  pref ents,
viret  vn  grand  effort  du  Diable,  fur  cet  homme,  pour
deftourner  Ie  coup  de  pied  qu'il  luy  vouloit  donner;


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  249

go  thither, '  said  he,  '  all  the  women  and  children  will
wish  to  follow  me;  I  prefer  to  stay,  in  order  to  give
them  the  means  of  being  instructed  with  you,  and
myself  also.'  And,  in  fact,  he  did  so,  being  assidu-
ous in  attendance  at  all  the  public  and  private  instruc-
tions, and  personally  urging  the  others.  What  did
he  not  do  in  the  case  of  his  young  Huron,  whom  he
is  maintaining?  He  repeated  to  him  all  that  he
heard  and  knew  of  our  mysteries ;  he  was  delighted
to  see  him  inclined  to  wish  to  be  a  Christian,  like
himself.  In  fine,  this  young  man  did  so  well  that
we  baptized  him,  after  having  observed  in  him  the
disposition  necessary  in  such  case.  He  was  named
Joseph.  When  they  asked  him  in  detail  whether  he
believed  the  articles  of  the  Credo,  he  answered  in  one
w^ord,  with  good  heart:  '  I  believe  all.'  There  was
seen  [217]  on  his  brow  a  sort  of  joy,  so  extraor-
dinary that  each  one  of  the  French  wished  to  see
him,  in  order  to  derive  consolation  from  it.  His  mod-
esty, and  his  hands  continually  clasped  in  so  pious  a
manner,  told  us  enough,  and  showed  that  he  greatly
prized  the  grace  which  he  was  about  to  receive.

"  A  young  man  of  the  Iroquet  nation,  named  China-
wich,  deserves  that  a  word  be  said  of  him,  in  passing.
It  is  a  year  ago,  this  Spring,  since  he  came  down
from  his  own  country,  and  went  to  the  three  Rivers,
armed  for  war,  with  a  score  of  his  people, —  and
among  others,  the  Captain  of  the  Nipissiriniens,
named  Wikassoumint.  This  young  man,  having
among  his  people  the  reputation  of  one  valiant  and  a
good  hunter,  was  already  commendable;  and  his
temper,  extremely  cheerful  and  frank,  made  him
loved  by  all  at  the  three  Rivers.  He  had  indicated
to  me,  during  one  or  two  months,  a  great  desire  to


250  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.24

car  il  commenga  a  I'inflant  a  tourner  les  yeux  en  la
tefte,  &  deuint  penfif,  nous  regarda  affreufement,  ioi-
gnant  toufiours  pourtant  les  deux  mains,  &  continu-
ant a  me  refpondre  affez  doucement  &  pertinemment
^  ce  que  ie  luy  demandois,  mais  iamais  nous  ne  pumes
tirer  de  luy  qu'il  renon9aJ?t  fur  I'heure  a  fon  ennemy
cach^,  &  comme  nous  le  preffions  de  nous  le  doner,
qu'autrement  il  ne  feroit  point  baptif6,  voila  qui
feroit  bon,  difoit-il,  s'il  paroiffoit,  il  eft  dans  moy
fans  que  ie  le  voye,  quelque  fois  il  m'apparoift  en
fonge,  de  nuidt  comme  vne  femme  nue,  [219]  &  me
parle  quelque  mot  tout  bas,  quand  ie  fuis  das  les  bois,
fi  ie  penfe  que  ie  veux  tuer  telle  befie,  auffi-toft  i'en
vols  vne,  ie  cours  &  la  tue,  mais  quoy,  luy  dif-ie,  ne
le  fens  tu  point  maintenant,  non  non  dit-il,  mais  ie
le  crains  ^  prefent?  prends  courage  luy  difmes-nous,
Dieu  t'aidera,  efpere  en  luy,  apres  t'on  baptefme
toutes  ces  craintes  s'efuanouyront.  Le  Diable  qui
le  poffedoit,  fans  qu'il  s'en  apperceut,  I'empefclia  de
nous  donner  pour  ce  iour  la  parole  de  cofentement
que  nous  luy  demandios  pour  renoncer  a  fon  Demon :
I'exemple  de  Paul  TeffJ^ehat  qui  fuft  baptize  le  len-
demain,  le  fortifia  enfin,  &  le  fift  retourner  a  nous
apres  midy,  nous  demandant  auec  de  tres  grandes
inftances  le  baptefme,  &  promettant  en  fuitte  de
bonne  fa^on  de  renoncer  entierement  &  quitter  fon
Diable  &  toutes  fes  iongleries  defendues,  ce  qu'il  fift
courageufement,  apres  quoy  on  le  baptiza  &  noma
lacques.  Ainfi  toft  apres,  d'affreux  qu'il  eftoit  aupa-
rauant,  il  parut  gay  &  ioyeux  au  poffible,  il  ne  f9a-
uoit  quelle  chere  nous  faire,  il  nous  rendoit  tous  les
offices  qu'il  pouuoit,  [220]  il  dit  a  Monfieurde  Maifon-


1642  - 43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  251

believe;  and  he  came  very  often  to  see  us,  in  order
to  be  instructed.  As  soon  as  he  was  here,  *  Well,
then,'  said  he,  '  it  is  in  good  earnest  that  thou  must
teach  me  and  baptize  me;  [218]  I  have  so  great  a
desire  for  it  that  I  will  do  all  that  thou  shalt  tell
me, — even  so  far  that  if  thou  tell  me  to  give  up  my
Demon,  who  causes  me  to  take  all  that  I  desire  in
hunting,  I  am  ready  to  do  so,  though  I  love  him
well.  I  have  fasted  seven  whole  days,  without  eat-
ing anything  at  all,  in  order  to  possess  him ;  I  love
him  as  my  body,' — indeed,  it  is  thus  that  he  called
him.  It  was  at  this  point  that  those  who  were  there
present  saw  a  great  effort  of  the  Devil  upon  this
man,  to  turn  aside  the  kick  that  the  latter  wished  to
give  him ;  for  he  straightway  began  to  roll  his  eyes
in  his  head,  became  pensive,  and  looked  at  us  fright-
fully,—  nevertheless,  continually  clasping  his  hands,
and  continuing  to  answer  me  quite  gently  and
pertinently  to  what  I  was  asking  him.  But  we
could  never  draw  from  him  that  he  should  immedi-
ately renounce  his  concealed  enemy ;  and,  when  we
urged  him  to  give  him  to  us, — as  otherwise  he  could
not  be  baptized,  '  That  would  be  good,'  said  he,  '  if
he  would  appear;  he  is  in  me  without  my  seeing
him.  Sometimes  he  appears  to  me  in  a  dream  at
night,  like  a  naked  woman,  [219]  and  speaks  to  me
some  word  quite  softly.  When  I  am  in  the  woods,
if  I  think  that  I  wish  to  kill  this  or  that  beast,  im-
mediately I  see  one;  I  run  and  kill  it.'  '  But  what?'
I  say  to  him,  '  dost  thou  not  feel  him  now? '  '  No,
no,'  said  he;  'but  I  fear  him  at  present.'  'Take
courage,'  we  said  to  him,  '  God  will  help  thee;  hope
in  him ;  after  thy  baptism  all  thy  fears  will  vanish. '
The Devil,  who was possessing him without his


252  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

neufue,  que  s'il  vouloit,  il  demeureroit  toufiours
icy,  pour  feruir  d'interprete  aux  Hurons,  pour  les
inftruire,  afin  qu'ils  fuffent  baptifez?  Puis-ie  aller  ^
la  guerre  contre  les  Iroquois,  me  demanda-il?  Ouy,
difmes  nous,  &  'ii  i'en  prenois  quelqu'vn,  &  qu'on  le
voulut  tourmenter,  que  ferois  ie?  y  contriburois-ie
du  mien?  non,  dit-il,  de  foy-mefme,  ie  le  tuerois  fur
le  champ :  ce  font  la  des  eff ets  bien  grands  de  la
grace  receue  par  le  baptefme,  depuis  lequel  il  s'eft
toufiours  comporte  en  vray  Chreftien ;  Ie  luy  ay  veu
faire  icy  des  traits  rauiffans  pour  la  foy:  mais  la
crainte  de  m'engager  en  de  trop  longs  difcours,  ou
ie  me  iette  imperceptiblement,  m'empefche  d'en  dire
autre  chofe.

Apres  le  Baptefme  de  ceux-cy,  nous-nous  fentif-
mes  incontinent  obligez  le  Pere  Poncet  &  moy,  ^
fatisfaire  aux  inftantes  demandes  de  quantity  d'autres
perfonnes,  &  ce,  en  vn  temps  que  nous  les  penfions
plus  eloignez  de  nous  faire  telles  propofitions ;  puif-
que  c'eftoit  au  retour  d'vne  bade  de  quinze  guerriers,.
qui  [221]  auoient  efte  mis  en  fuitte  par  I'ennemy,  qui
les  auoit  furpris  la  nuidl,  ou  il  y  en  euft  4.  tant  pris
que  tuez,  &  quelques-vns  de  bleffez,  des  vnze  qui
retourneret  tous  nuds  &  delabrez,  &  fans  armes,  auec
la  croyance  ferme  que  PiesKaret,  &  huidt  autres  de
leurs  gens  qui  faifoient  vne  petite  bande  ^  part,  "k
vne  demie-iournee  d'eux,  &  plus  proche  du  pays  de
I'ennemy,  auoient  efte  tous  furpris,  ou  tuez  fur  la
place,  affeurans  en  auoir  veu  les  armes  entre  les
mains  des  Iroquois,  qui  les  auoiet  attaquez.  Ce  fut
icy  a  tous  vn  grad  fubiet  de  confternation,  &  vn  pau-
ure  temps  k  gaigner  quelque  chofe  pour  la  foy  aupres-


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  253

perceiving  it,  prevented  him  from  giving  us,  for  that
day,  the  word  of  consent  that  we  were  asking  him,  to
renounce  his  Demon.  The  example  of  Paul  Tesswe-
hat,  who  was  baptized  the  next  day,  finally  strength-
ened him,  and  caused  him  to  return  to  us  after  noon,
requesting  from  us  baptism  very  urgently,  and  then
promising,  in  a  suitable  manner,  to  renounce  entirely
and  give  up  his  Devil  and  all  his  forbidden  juggler-
ies,—  which  he  did  courageously; — after  which  he
was  baptized,  and  named  Jacques.  As  a  result,  pres-
ently afterward,  frightful  though  he  was  before,  he
appeared  extremely  gay  and  joyful.  He  knew  not
what  welcome  to  give  us;  he  rendered  us  all  the
services  that  he  could;  [220]  he  said  to  Monsieur  de
Maison-neufve  that  if  he  wished,  he  would  always
live  here,  to  serve  as  interpreter  for  the  Hurons,  in
order  to  instruct  them,  so  that  they  might  be  bap-
tized. '  May  I  go  to  the  war  against  the  Iroquois? '
he  asked  me.  '  Yes,'  we  said.  *  And  if  I  captured
some  one  of  them,  and  they  wished  to  torture  him,
what  would  I  do, — would  I  take  part  therein?  —  No,'
said  he,  of  his  own  accord;  '  I  would  kill  him  on  the
spot.'  Those  are  very  great  results  of  the  grace
received  through  baptism.  Since  then,  he  has
always  behaved  like  a  true  Christian, —  I  have  seen
him  perform  here  delightful  acts  for  the  faith ;  but
the  fear  of  engaging  myself  in  too  long  discourses,
into  which  I  lapse  imperceptibly,  prevents  me  from
saying  aught  else  of  them.

"  After  the  Baptism  of  these,  we  felt  ourselves
immediately  obliged.  Father  Poncet  and  I,  to  satisfy
the  urgent  requests  of  many  other  persons, — and
that  at  a  time  when  we  thought  them  most  averse  to
making  us  such  propositions. For  it  was  at  the  return


254  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.24

des  Sauuages :  ceux  qui  les  cognoiff ent,  fgauent  dSi^z^
que  femblables  rencotres  leur  donnet  fujet  de  renuer-
fer  le  Chriftianifme,  attribuans  tous  leurs  malheurs
au  Baptefme:  on  n'ofe  pas  feulement  dire  vn  mot
pour  lors,  crainte  de  donner  occafion  k  quelque  eflour-
dy,  de  dire  ou  faire  quelque  chofe  mal  k  propos  pour
la  foy:  cependant  come  les  affaires  de  Dieu  font
d'vne  telle  nature,  que  fouuent  ce  que  la  raifon
humaine  y  penfe  contraire,  c'eft  iultement  [222]  ce
dont  il  en  tire  plus  de  gloire,  nous  pouuons  dire  qu'il
en  a  fait  de  mefme  icy,  car  nous  auons  plus  tire  de
profit  de  leur  mal-heur  que  de  leur  profperite,  tous
ces  pauures  guerriers  ne  font  pas  pluftofl  de  retour,
qu'ils  demandent  les  vns  apres  les  autres,  qu'on  les
inftruife  &  baptife,  &  ceux  entre  autres  qui  auoient
efte  des  premiers  k  faire  des  iongleries  «fe  fe  feruir  du
Diable  pour  leur  gueule  eftoient  les  plus  feruents  ^
nous  en  preffer,  nous  eftions  tous  eftonnez  qu'en-
trans  en  leur  cabane  fans  leur  vouloir  quafi  rien  dire,
ils  nous  y  incitoient,  &  nous  donnoient  de  belles
occafions  de  parler  de  Dieu,  de  recourir  a  luy  dans
la  neceffit^.  Venes  fouuent  nous  vifiter  difoient-ils,
nous  fommes  tous  refolus  a  croire  en  Dieu  &  a  luy
obeyr.  Le  temps  nous  tardoit  de  voir  icy  de  retour
Paul  Teffouehat  qui  eftoit  fraifchement  alle  a  la
chaffe  pour  deux  ou  trois  iours,  afin  de  remarquer
comme  il  fe  comporteroit,  on  craignoit  qu'il  ne
parlaft  au  defauantage  de  la  Foy :  mais  tant  s'en  faut  il
prit  de  1^  occafion,  ainfi  que  i'entendis  moy  mefme
de  dehors,  de  prefcher  [223]  fes  gens  en  fa  cabane,
il  auoit  plus  de  fubiedt  de  s'affliger  qu'aucun :  car  outre
quatre  de  fes  fort  proches  parents,  il  voyoit  vne  par-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  255

of  a  band  of  fifteen  warriors,  who  [221]  had  been  put
to  flight  by  the  enemy,  who  had  surprised  them  by
night, —  wherein  there  were  4  captured  or  killed,
and  some  wounded  of  the  eleven  who  returned.  All
these  were  naked  and  wretched,  and  without  arms,
in  the  firm  belief  that  Pieskaret  and  eight  others  of
their  people, —  who  formed  a  small  detached  band,
half  a  day  from  them,  and  nearer  the  country  of  the
enemy, —  had  all  been  surprised,  or  killed  on  the
spot,  asserting  that  they  had  seen  their  arms  in  the
hands  of  the  Iroquois,  who  had  attacked  them.  This
was  to  all  a  great  cause  of  consternation,  and  a  poor
time  to  gain  anything  for  the  faith,  with  respect  to
the  Savages;  those  who  know  them,  know  well
enough  that  such  accidents  give  them  occasion  to
attack  Christianity,  as  they  attribute  all  their  misfor-
tunes to  Baptism.  One  dare  not  so  much  as  say  a
word  to  them  just  then,  for  fear  of  giving  cause  to
some  thoughtless  fellow  to  say  or  do  something  inop-
portune for  the  faith.  However,  as  the  affairs  of
God  are  of  such  nature  that,  often,  that  which  human
reason  thinks  adverse  to  them  is  precisely  [222]  that
by  which  he  derives  from  them  more  glory,  we  may
say  that  he  has  done  the  same  here;  for  we  have
derived  more  profit  from  their  misfortune  than  from
their  prosperity.  All  those  poor  warriors  have  no
sooner  returned  than  they  request,  one  after  the
other,  to  be  instructed  and  baptized;  and  those,
among  others,  who  had  been  among  the  first  to  prac-
tice juggleries,  and  make  use  of  the  Devil  for  their
throats,  were  among  the  most  fervent  to  urge  us  in
the  matter.  We  were  all  astonished,  that,  on  enter-
ing their  cabin,  almost  without  intending  to  say  any-
thing to  them,  they  pressed  us  to  talk,  and  gave  us


256  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.24

tie  de  fes  gens  perdus ;  cependant  parmy  toutes  fes
afflidtions,  il  tint  toufiours  ferme  en  la  priere,  &  ne
manqua  point  d'affifter  a  fon  ordinaire  k  toutes  les
chofes  que  nous  faifions  en  I'Eglife,  &  tefmoignoit
dans  fon  afflidtio  beaucoup  de  cofolatio,  de  voir  que
fes  ges  fe  portoiet  a  I'imiter  au  bien,  il  ne  nous  fer-
uit  pas  peu  a  les  encourager  a  tenir  bon,  ils  firent  fl
bien  que  dans  le  refte  du  mois  de  Mars,  il  y  en  eut
affez  bon  nombre,  a  qui  en  confcience  on  ne  pouuoit
refufer  cette  grace,  pour  eftre  tres-bien  difpofez.

Des  auffi-toft  qu'on  s'apperceuoit  de  quelque  petit
meflange  d'intereft  temporel,  en  ceux  qui  fe  rengeants
au  bien  nous  demandoient  le  baptefme,  c'eftoit  affez
pour  nous  lier  les  mains,  ainfl  qu'il  arriua  au  frere  de
lofeph,  a  Micliaketcliits  &  plufieurs  autres  qui  fai-
foient  voir  par  Ik  qu'ils  n'apprehendoient  pas  alfez
la  grace  du  baptefme :  comme  la  plus  grande  faueur
qu'on  leur  put  faire.  [224]  le  m'oubliois  quafi  d'vn
bon  trait  de  Paul  Teffouebat  dans  le  reffentiment
qu'il  auoit  des  obligations  de  fon  baptefme,  il  s'en
vint  treuuer  Monfieur  de  Maifon-Neufue,  pour  le
remercier  de  ce  qu'il  y  auoit  ayde  de  fi  bon  coeur,  &
luy  dit,  que  pour  luy  il  vouloit  acheuer  le  refte  de  fes
fours  aupres  de  luy,  voulant  par  vne  demeure  coti-
nuelle  recompenfer  le  peu  de  temps  qu'il  auoit  a
viure,  &  que  quand  il  voudroit  aller  en  traitte  aux
trois  Riuieres  qu'il  luy  demanderoit  conge,  &  fgau-
roit  de  luy  s'il  I'auroit  pour  agreable.  Monfieur  de
Maifon-Neufue,  le  remercia  de  ce  tefmoignage
d'affedtion,  &  luy  dit  qu'il  ne  defiroit  pas  le  gefner,
&  qu'il  pouuoit  aller  hardiment  ou  il  luy  plairoit,  &
pour tant de temps qu'il voudroit, qu'il ne I'en


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  257

excellent  opportunities  to  speak  of  God,  and  of  hav-
ing recourse  to  him  in  extremity.  '  Come  often  to
visit  us,'  they  said;  '  we  are  all  resolved  to  believe
in  God,  and  to  obey  him.'  The  time  was  long  for
us,  to  see  here,  on  his  return,  Paul  Tessouehat, —
who  had  recently  gone  to  the  hunt,  for  two  or  three
days, —  in  order  to  remark  how  he  would  demean
himself.  It  was  feared  that  he  might  speak  to  the
disadvantage  of  the  Faith ;  but,  far  from  it,  he  took
occasion  therefrom,  as  I  myself  heard  from  without,
to  preach  [223]  to  his  people  in  his  cabin.  He  had
more  cause  to  grieve  than  any  one ;  for  besides  four
of  his  very  near  relatives,  he  saw  a  part  of  his  peo-
ple destroyed.  However,  amid  all  his  afflictions,  he
always  held  firm  in  prayer,  and  failed  not  to  be  pres-
ent, in  his  usual  way,  at  everything  that  we  did  in  the
Church ;  and  he  manifested,  in  his  affliction,  much
consolation  to  see  that  his  people  were  inclining  to
imitate  him  in  the  right.  He  aided  us,  not  a  little,
in  encouraging  them  to  persevere.  They  did  so  well
that,  in  the  remainder  of  the  month  of  March,  there
was  a  fairly  good  number  of  them  to  whom,  in  con-
science, one  could  not  refuse  that  grace,  on  account
of  being  very  well  disposed.

"  As  soon  as  any  slight  mixture  of  temporal  inter-
est was  perceived  in  those  who,  taking  their  stand
for  the  right,  asked  us  for  baptism,  that  was  enough
to  tie  our  hands.  It  happened  thus  to  the  brother  of
Joseph,  to  Michaketchits,  and  several  others,  who
thereby  showed  that  they  did  not  sufficiently  appre-
hend the  grace  of  baptism,  as  the  greatest  favor  that
could  be  done  to  them.  [224]  I  was  almost  forgetting
a  good  trait  of  Paul  Tessouehat, — the  gratitude  that
lie  had  for  the  obligations  of  his  baptism. He  came


258  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.24

aymeroit  iamais  moins,  iugeant  bien  pour  la  gloire
de  Dieu,  que  cefte  liberie  eftoit  plus  auantageufe,  en
effedl  elle  le  rauit,  &  nous  I'attacha  plus  fortement
que  iamais.

le  dirois  volontiers  icy  vn  mot  d'vn  chacun  en  par-
ticulier  pour  faire  voir  plus  clairement  que  ce  n'eft
pas  I'induftrie  [225]  humaine  qui  a  opere  en  cette
affaire :  mais  Dieu  f eul  qui  f e  f ert  des  perf onnes,  des
lieux  &  des  temps,  comme  il  luy  plaift,  &  a  fa  fa9on,
contre  la  prudence  humaine :  la  crainte  de  m' engager
en  vn  trop  long  difcours  m'arrefte.

Sur  le  commencement  d'Auril  vne  bonne  partie
des  Sauuages  eftans  partis  pour  aller  dans  les  bois,
tant  pour  la  chaffe  des  Caftors  que  pour  y  faire  des
Canots,  Paul  eftant  reft6  auec  quelque  autre,  voila
qu'on  appergoit  a  I'autre  bord  de  la  riuiere,  quelques
perfonnes  qui  defcendoient  a  nous,  &  cherchoient
paffage  pour  paffer  fur  les  glaces,  on  ne  tarda  pas  k
recognoiftre  par  le  nombre,  que  c'eftoit  la  bande  de
Piefcaret,  &  de  fes  gens  qu'on  auoit  pleure  come
morts  lefquels  retournans  vidtorieux  auec  vne  tefte
de  I'ennemy,  venoient  changer  le  deiiil  en  ioye.  Paul
enuoye  querir  ceux  qui  elloient  fraifchement  partis,
delegue  diuers  Ambaffadeurs  vers  ceux  qui  eftoient
dans  les  bois,  on  revolt  les  vic5torieux,  on  les  traitte
on  danfe  auec  eux,  Paul  demande  qu'on  les  face  tous
prier  de  compagnie  dans  la  Chappelle  k  [226]  quelque
temps  de  la,  il  reuient  chez  nous  auec  Pieskaret,  &
deux  ou  trois  autres  des  plus  confiderables,  denian-
dans  'k  parler  a  Monfieur  de  Maifon-neufue.  Piefca-
ret fit  le  rapport  du  refultat  de  leur  confeil  tenu  le
f oir  en  leur  cabane :  mais  Paul  ayant  cognu  que  cet


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  259

to  find  Monsieur  de  Maison-Neufve,  to  thank  him  for
having  aided  therein  with  so  good  a  heart ;  and  said
to  him  that,  for  himself,  he  wished  to  finish  the
remainder  of  his  days  near  him, —  desiring,  by  a
steadfast  abode,  to  make  amends  for  the  little  time
he  had  to  live ;  and  that,  when  he  might  wish  to  go
for  trade  to  the  three  Rivers,  he  would  ask  leave  of
him,  and  would  learn  from  him  whether  he  would
consent  thereto.  Monsieur  de  Maison-Neufve  thanked
him  for  this  manifestation  of  affection,  and  told  him
that  he  did  not  desire  to  restrain  him,  and  that  he
could  go  boldly  where  he  pleased,  and  for  as  long  as
he  would,  and  that  he  would  never  love  him  less  for
it, —  rightly  judging  that  for  the  glory  of  God  such
liberty  was  more  advantageous.  In  fact,  it  delighted
him,  and  attached  him  to  us  more  strongly  than  ever.

"  I  would  gladly  say  a  word  here  of  each  one  in
particular,  in  order  to  show  more  clearly  that  it  is
not  human  ingenuity  [225]  which  has  operated  in  this
matter,  but  God  alone, — who  uses  persons,  places,
and  times  as  he  pleases  and  in  his  own  way,  con-
trary to  human  wisdom.  The  fear  of  involving
myself  in  too  long  a  discourse  restrains  me.

"  Toward  the  beginning  of  April,  a  good  part  of
the  Savages  having  started  to  go  into  the  woods,
both  to  hunt  Beavers  and  to  make  Canoes  there, —
Paul  having  remained,  with  one  other  man, —  they
suddenly  perceive  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  some
persons  who  were  coming  down  to  us,  and  seeking
passage,  to  cross  on  the  ice.  They  were  not  slow  to
recognize,  by  the  number,  that  it  was  the  band  of
Piescaret  and  his  people,  who  had  been  mourned
as  if  dead, —  but  who,  returning  victorious,  with  a
head of the enemy, came to change the  mourn-


-260  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24


homme  auoit  deduit  1' affaire  tout  d'vne  tire,  &  auec
embarras  de  paroles,  fe  mit  luy-mefme  a  nous  en
redire  les  poindts  d'vne  fagon  nette  &  claire,  que  ce
qui  eftoit  arriu6  dans  cette  derniere  guerre  oil  ils
auoient  perdu  quatre  perfonnes,  &  les  armes  de  la
plus  part  des  autres,  les  mettoient  en  vn  eftat  de
changer  I'ordre  de  leurs  affaires,  qu'ils  s'eftoient  pro-
pofez,  que  la  deffus  ils  auoient  refolu  d'aller  tous  aux
trois  riuieres,  oil  les  autres  eftoient,  iufques  a  la  fin
de  I'efte,  tant  pour  faire  tous  enfemble  le  dueil  des
morts,  que  pour  deliberer  en  commun  ce  qu'ils  fe-
roient  la  deffus,  de  plus  qu'ils  vouloient  voir  pour  la
derniere  fois,  fi  on  leur  tiendroit  la  promeffe  de  leur
donner  fecours  centre  noftre  ennemy  commun.

Enfin  pour  conclufion  ces  bonnes  [227]  gens  comme
perfonnes  qui  fe  fentoient  grandement  obliges,  com-
mencerent  a  faire  des  remerciments  a  leur  mode  fort
gentils:  ils  ne  fgauoient  que  dire  ny  que  faire  pour
tefmoigner  le  reffentiment  qu'ils  auoient  de  la  cour-
toifie  &  bien-veillance  de  Monfieur  de  Maifon  neufue :
,il  y  a  trois  ans,  difoit  Paul,  que  i'auois  ouy  parler  de
ce  deffein,  nous  I'admirions  &  defirions,  &  mainte-
nant  nous  voyons  ce  que  nous  attendions.  Monfieur
de  Maifon-neufue  pour  refponce  a  leur  confeil,  leur
fit  entendre  qu'ils  eftoient  en  pleine  liberte,  ne  les
defirant  pres  de  foy  que  pour  leur  bien,  &  que  toutes-
fois  &  quantes  qu'ils  viendroient  icy,  ils  y  trouue-
Toient  toufiours  vn  coeur  ouuert,  &  preft  a  leur  don-
ner tous  les  fecours  &  faueurs  poffibles,  qu'ils  allaffent
hardiment  oil  il  leur  plairoit.  lis  partent  done  tous
le  lendemain  pour  les  trois  riuieres  fur  les  glaces  qui
comman9oient de toutes parts  a  fe defprendre,  &


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  261

ing  into  joy.  Paul  sends  in  quest  of  those  who
had  recently  started,  and  commissions  various  Am-
bassadors to  those  who  were  in  the  woods;  they
receive  the  victorious,  they  treat  them,  they  dance
with  them.  Paul  requests  that  we  have  them  all
pray  together  in  the  Chapel,  [226]  some  time  later.
He  returns  to  us  with  Pieskaret,  and  two  or  three
others  of  the  most  considerable  men,  asking  to  speak
to  Monsieur  de  Maison-neufve.  Piescaret  makes  the
report  of  the  result  of  their  council,  held  at  evening
in  their  cabin;  but  Paul,  having  learned  that  this
man  had  related  the  affair  in  a  long-drawn  style,
and  with  intricate  sentences,  himself  proceeds  to
repeat  to  us  the  points  of  it,  in  a  manner  concise  and
clear.  It  was  to  the  effect  that  what  had  happened
in  this  last  war, —  wherein  they  had  lost  four  per-
sons, and  the  weapons  of  most  of  the  others, —  put
them  in  a  position  to  change  the  order  of  their  affairs
which  they  had  proposed  for  themselves;  that  there-
upon they  had  resolved  all  to  go  to  the  three  rivers,
where  the  others  were,  until  the  end  of  the  sum-
mer,—  both  to  celebrate,  all  together,  the  mourning
for  the  dead,  and  to  deliberate  in  common  what  they
would  do  thereafter ;  moreover,  that  they  wished  to
see,  for  the  last  time,  whether  the  promise  would  be
kept  to  them,  of  giving  them  assistance  against  our
common  enemy.

"  Finally,  in  conclusion,  these  good  [227]  people,  as
persons  who  felt  themselves  greatly  obliged,  began
to  give  thanks  in  their  manner,  which  was  very  polite ;
they  knew  not  what  to  say  or  do,  to  show  the  grati-
tude which  they  had  for  the  courtesy  and  benevo-
lence of  Monsieur  de  Maison  neufve.  '  It  is  three
years,'  said  Paul,  '  since  I  had  heard  mention  of  this


■262  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  24

reftoient  della  vis  h.  vis  de  nous;  &  ce  des  auffi-tofl
apres  le  retour  de  Pief caret  &  de  fa  bande,  laquelle  ne
fut  pas  plufloft  paffee  fur  la  glace,  quele  [228]  grand
chenail  fe  rompit  &  boucha  le  paffage  k  I'ennemy  qui
ainfi  que  nous  auons  appris  du  depuis  par  les  Hurons
fauues  des  mains  des  Iroquois,  pourfuiuirent  ceux-
cy,  &  fuffent  mefme  venus  iufques  a  nos  portes,  fans
les  glaces  qui  deriuoient  delia  bien  fort.  De  tous
les  Sauuages  il  ne  nous  en  demeura  qu'vn  nomm6
Pacbirini  qui  efloit  arefte  par  les  pieds,  depuis  leur
desfaitte,  il  auoit  toufiours  voulu  demeurer  chez  nous
auec  deux  autres  malades  dans  le  petit  Hofpital  que
nous  y  anions  dreffe  pour  les  bleffez,  tant  pour  y
eftre  mieux  panfez ;  que  pour  y  eftre  mieux  inftruidts,
en  effed:  &  luy  &  les  autres  y  receurent  les  gueri-
fons  du  corps  &  de  I'ame,  ce  dernier  le  mefme  iour
qu'il  fut  baptize,  qui  fut  le  leudy  faindt,  recent  auffi
en  mefme  temps  le  Sacrement  de  rEucbariftie,  qu'il
ne  pouuoit  receuoir  de  fa  vie,  en  meilleure  difpofi-
tion.  II  nous  feruit  icy  pendant  fept  ou  buic5t  iours,
qu'il  refha  apres  les  autres,  a  faire  quelques  decou-
uertes  de  pays  icy  autour:  nous  fufmes  auec  luy  k
I'autre  bord  de  noftre  [229]  grande  riuiere,  ou  tant
foit  peu  au  deffus  de  nous  a  I'emboucheure  d'vne
petite  riuiere  affez  profonde,  il  y  a  les  plus  beaux
lieux  du  monde  pour  les  habitations  Fran9oifes,  tout
foifonne  en  prairies,  force  chaffe  &  pefche,  les
arbres  fort  beaux  tres  bonne  terre,  il  n'y  a  que
I'ennemy  a  craindre,  &  de  baffe  eau  le  portage  des
viures :  mais  plus  bas  il  y  a  de  mefme  cofte  de  tres-
belles  Ifles  de  grand  abord  propres  a  eftre  habitues,
le  ne  diray  rien  icy  de  plufieurs  autres  baptefmes


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  263

project ;  we  admired  and  desired  it,  and  now  we  see
what  we  were  expecting.'  Monsieur  de  Maison-
neufve,  in  answer  to  their  council,  gave  them  to  un-
derstand that  they  were  at  full  liberty, —  not  desiring
them  near  him,  except  for  their  benefit;  and  that,
whenever  and  as  often  as  they  should  come  here,  they
would  always  find  a  heart  open  and  ready  to  give
them  all  the  assistance  and  favors  possible ;  that  they
should  go  boldly  where  they  pleased.  They  all  start,
therefore,  the  next  day,  for  the  three  rivers,  over
the  ice,  which  was  everywhere  beginning  to  break
up.  It  had  already  done  so,  across  from  us, —  and
that  immediately  after  the  return  of  Piescaret  and
his  band,  which  had  no  sooner  crossed  on  the  ice  than
the  [228]  main  channel  broke  open,  and  stopped  the
passage  for  the  enemy.  They  —  as  we  have  since
learned  by  the  Hurons  saved  from  the  hands  of  the
Iroquois  —  pursued  these,  and  would  have  come  even
to  our  gates,  but  for  the  ice,  which  was  already  drift-
ing rapidly.  Of  all  the  Savages,  there  remained
with  us  but  one,  Pachirini,  detained  because  of  the
condition  of  his  feet.  Since  their  rout,  he  had  al-
ways wished  to  live  with  us,  together  with  two  other
patients,  in  the  little  Hospital  which  we  had  erected
there  for  the  wounded, — both  in  order  to  be  better
cared  for  there,  and  to  be  more  thoroughly  instructed ;
in  fact,  both  he  and  the  others  received  in  it  healing
for  the  body  and  for  the  soul.  This  last  one,  the
same  day  that  he  was  baptized,  which  was  Holy
Thursday,  received  also  at  the  same  time  the  Sacra-
ment of  the  Eucharist,  which  he  could  not,  in  his
life,  receive  in  better  disposition.  He  served  us  here,
during  the  seven  or  eight  days  that  he  remained
after  the  others,  in  making  some  discoveries  of  the


264  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.24

d'enfans  qui  furent  fais  icy  TAutomne  paff6,  &  a  ce
prin-temps,  contentons-nous  de  dire,  qu'^  Mont-real
autant  qu'en  aucun  autre  lieu,  Dieu  y  a  fait  fentir  de
tres  grands  effedls  de  fa  grace,  tant  fur  les  Sauuages
que  fur  les  Francois,  ainfi  que  nous  auons  veu  cy-
deuant.

Nous  auons  veu  fraifchement  Mont-real  auoir  efte
I'azile  des  Hurons  refugies,  &  le  falut  de  quantite
d'autres  de  diuerfes  nations  oil  Ton  a  commence  k  le
cognoiftre,  &  fouhaitter  le  bon-heur  d'y  eftre,  nom-
mement  ces  nations  d'en  [230]  haut,  fi  nous  en  croy-
ons  a  ce  que  nous  en  efcriuent  nos  Peres  des  Hurons,
&  nommement  ceux  qui  y  font  pour  les  Algonquins,
dont  voicy  les  propres  termes.

Nous  auons  recogneu  par  experience  que  Ville-
Marie  pent  beaucoup  pour  contribuer  a  la  conuerfion
des  Sauuages,  nommement  Algonquins,  ayantenmain
les  biens  faidts  qui  font  des  charmes  puiffants  fur  les
ames  grolTieres,  &  telles  que  font  celles  de  nos  Cana-
dois,  il  n'y  en  a  point  qui  aye  tant  entendu  parler  de
I'acceuil  que  Ton  y  fait  aux  Sauuages,  que  celuy  qui
les  a  veu  au  retour,  &  a  eu  fon  departement  d'hyuer
a  leur  rendez  vous  ordinaire  dans  les  Hurons :  ie  ne
doute  nullement  qu'apres  ce  qu'ils  m'en  ont  dit,  fi  le
lieu  auoit  plus  d'affeurance,  qu'ils  ne  quittaff ent  pour
toufiours  ce  pays  icy  pour  compofer  "k  Mont  Royal
vne  bourgade,  &  y  amaffer  ceux  de  I'lfle,  &  les  autres
nations  efparfes,  qui  fe  voyent  eftre  la  proye  des  en-
nemis  icy,  &  fur  la  riuiere  ou  ils  ont  leur  habitudes  r
lis  ne  demandent  pas  mieux  que  d'auoir  [231]  vn  lieu
de  refuge,  affeure  ou  ils  puiffent  viure,  &  fe  ramaffer:
cela  fera  comme  i'efpere,  &  ne  fgauroit  eftre  alTez


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  265

country  hereabout.  We  went  with  him  to  the  other
shore  of  our  [229]  great  river,  where,  but  a  little
above  us,  at  the  mouth  of  a  small  river,  somewhat
deep,  there  are  the  fairest  places  in  the  world  for  the
French  settlements.  Everything  abounds, —  mead-
ows, plenty  of  hunting  and  fishing ;  the  trees  are  very
beautiful,  the  soil  very  good;  there  is  only  the  enemy
to  fear,  and  at  low  water,  the  portage  of  provisions.
But  lower  down  there  are,  on  the  same  side,  very
beautiful  Islands,  of  ample  approach,  suitable  to  be
inhabited.

"  I  will  say  nothing  here  of  several  other  bap-
tisms, of  children,  which  occurred  here  last  Autumn
and  this  spring;  let  us  be  content  to  say  that  at
Mont-real,  as  much  as  in  any  other  place,  God  has
made  perceptible  very  great  effects  of  his  grace,  both
upon  the  Savages  and  upon  the  French,  as  we  have
seen  above."

We  have  recently  seen  that  Mont-real  has  been  the
asylum  of  the  refugee  Hurons,  and  the  salvation  of
many  others  of  various  nations  in  which  the  people
have  begun  to  know  it,  and  to  desire  the  happiness
of  being  there, — especially  those  nations  from  [230]
above,  if  we  believe  what  our  Fathers  with  the
Hurons  write  to  us  of  them,  and  especially  those
who  are  there  for  the  Algonquins,  whose  own  words
are  as  follows:

"  We  have  ascertained  by  experience,  that  Ville-
Marie  can  do  much  to  contribute  to  the  conversion
of  the  Savages,  notably  Algonquins, —  having  in
hand  the  benefits  which  are  powerful  charms  upon
rude  souls,  and  such  as  those  of  our  Canadians.
There  is  no  one  who  has  heard  so  much  spoken  of
the  reception  which  is  there  given  to  the  Savages,


266  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

toll  pour  le  bien  d'vne  nation,  la  plus  pauure  &
miferable  que  i'aye  veue.

II  y  a  icy  autour  de  nous  quantite  d'Algonquins
qui  ne  cherchent  que  rendez-vous  affeur6,  oii  ils
puiffent  chaffer  &  viure  hors  des  dangers  des  enne-
mis,  oil  ils  font  a  toute  heure,  ils  viennent  icy  haut
pour  chercher  lieu  de  refuge,  ne  le  trouuant  pas  fur
la  grande  riuiere,  oil  font  toutes  leurs  habitudes,  s'il
n'euft  faidt  i^i  chaud  a  Mont-royal,  ils  y  feroient  defia,
&  y  euffent  deuance  les  Frangois,  ce  lieu  leur  agreant
plus  que  tout  autre.  Maintenant  qu'ils  vous  y  croy-
ent,  ils  ne  parlent  d'autre  chofe,  &  quand  ils  nous
voyent,  ils  n'ont  autre  entretien.  C'eft-la  difent-ils,
oil  nous  voulons  obeyr  a  Dieu,  &  non  pas  icy.  le  ne
doute  point  de  leur  recit,  que  ce  qu'ils  y  virent,  I'an
paff6  en  remontant  icy  n'aye  beaucoup  ayd6  k  esbran-
ler  leurs  coeurs,  &  penfe  que  i^\  I'affaire  [232]  eft  bien
conduitte,  dans  peu  d'annees  les  Sauuages  fe  renge-
ront  a  Ville- Marie,  en  beaucoup  plus  grand  nombre
qu'ils  ne  font  a  Sillery,  ce  ne  f9auroit  eftre  afCez  toft
pour  eux  &  pour  nous:  Car  quand  bien  les  Mata-
ouachkariniens,  Onontchateronons,  Kinonchepirinik,
iiei^efkariniens,  ceux  de  I'lfle,  &  autres  qui  parlent
I'idiofme  de  1^  bas,  &  s'vniffent  icy  I'hyuer,  proche
des  Hurons,  iroient  a  Mont- Royal,  nous  aurions  en-
core outre  les  Nepiffiriniens,  Archirigouans,  Archou-
guets,  tons  les  Algonquins  vniuerfellement  du  lac
des  Hurons,  qui  font  encore  en  grand  nombre.  C'eft
k  vous  autres  qui  eftes  fur  les  lieux  d'auifer  aux
moyens  d'attirer  ces  peuples,  &  les  conferuer.

La  liberalite  fans  doute  eft  la  meilleure  chaifne
qu'on  puiffe  apporter  "k  gaigner  leurs  coeurs,  nomme-


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  267

as  that  one  who  has  seen  them  at  their  return,  and
has  had  his  winter  allotment  of  labor  at  their  usual
rendezvous  among  the  Hurons.  I  have  no  doubt,
according  to  what  they  have  told  me  of  this,  that,  if
the  place  had  more  security,  they  would  forever
leave  this  country  here,  in  order  to  form  a  village  at
Mont  Royal,  and  gather  there  those  of  the  Island,
and  the  other  scattered  nations,  who  see  themselves
to  be  the  prey  of  the  enemy  here,  and  on  the  river
where  they  have  their  haunts.  They  ask  nothing
better  than  to  have  [231]  a  secure  place  of  refuge,
where  they  can  live  and  rally  together.  That  will
be,  as  I  hope ;  and  it  cannot  be  soon  enough  for  the
good  of  a  nation  the  poorest  and  most  wretched  that
I  have  seen.

"  There  are  about  us,  here,  many  Algonquins  who
seek  but  a  safe  rendezvous,  where  they  can  hunt  and
live  free  from  danger  of  the  enemy,  in  which  they
are  at  all  times.  They  come  up  here  to  seek  a  place
of  refuge,  not  finding  it  on  the  great  river,  where  all
their  haunts  are.  If  it  had  not  been  so  hot  at  Mont-
royal,  they  would  be  there  already,  and  would  have
anticipated  the  French, —  that  place  suiting  them
better  than  any  other.  Now  that  they  believe  you
there,  they  speak  of  nothing  else ;  and,  when  they
see  us,  they  have  no  other  conversation.  '  There,'
they  say,  '  is  where  we  wish  to  obey  God,  and  not
here. '  I  do  not  doubt,  from  their  story,  that  what
they  saw  there  last  year,  on  their  way  up  here,  has
much  assisted  in  moving  their  hearts;  and  I  think
that,  if  the  affair  [232]  be  well  managed,  in  a  few
years  the  Savages  will  take  their  stand  at  Ville-Marie
in  much  greater  number  than  they  are  at  Sillery ;  it
cannot  be  soon  enough  for  them  and  for  us. For  even


268  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  24

ment  dans  la  mifere  ou  ils  font:  car  ie  n'ay  point  veu
d'Algonquins  fi  pauures  &  neceffiteux,  que  ceux-la.
Ce  font  d'ailleurs  gens  fort  traitables.

[233]  Voila  deux  efchantillons  de  lettres  de  nos
Peres  des  Hurons,  que  i'ay  rapportez,  mot  pour  mot,
qui  nous  font  cognoiftre  que  le  deffein  de  Mont- Real
eft  de  grande  confequence,  pour  la  conuerfion  de  ces
pays:  les  grandes  efperances  qu'on  en  a  conceu  par
le  palI6,  ne  feront  pas  vaines,  Dieu  aidant,  &  pour
moy  ie  crois  qu'on  n'en  f9auroit  tant  conceuoir  de
bien  qu'il  y  en  a,  &  aura  k  I'aduenir.


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  269

though  the  Mataouachkariniens,-^  Onontchateronons,
Kinonchepirinik,  Weweskariniens,  those  of  the  Is-
land, and  others, — who  speak  the  dialect  of  that
region,  and  unite  here  in  winter  near  the  Hurons, —
should  go  to  Mont-Royal,  we  should  still  have,
besides  the  Nepissiriniens,  Archirigouans,  Archou-
guets, — all  the  Algonquins,  in  general,  from  the  lake
of  the  Hurons,  who  are  still  in  great  number.  It
is  for  you,  who  are  on  the  spot,  to  think  of  the  means
for  attracting  these  peoples  and  preserving  them.

"  Liberality,  no  doubt,  is  the  best  chain  that  one
can  apply  to  win  their  hearts,  especially  in  the  misery
that  they  are  in, —  for  I  have  not  seen  Algonquins  so
poor  and  necessitous  as  those  yonder.  They  are,
withal,  very  tractable  people,"

[233]  Such  are  two  specimens  of  letters  from  our
Fathers  with  the  Hurons,  which  I  have  reported
word  for  word, —  which  give  us  to  understand  that
the  project  of  Mont- Real  is  of  great  consequence  for
the  conversion  of  these  countries.  The  great  hopes
that  have  been  conceived  thereof,  in  the  past,  will
not  be  vain,  God  helping;  and,  for  my  part,  I  believe
one  cannot  conceive  all  the  good  there  is  in  the
enterprise,  and  will  be  in  future.


270  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.24


[234]  CHAPITRE  XII.

DES COURSES DES HIROQUOIS, & DE LA CAPTIUITE

DU PERE lOGUES.

ILy  a  deux  fortes  d' Iroquois:  les  vns  voifins  des
Hurons,  &  en  pareil  nombre  qu'eux,  ou  mefme
plus  grand,  ils  s'appellent  Sant^eronons.  Autre-
fois les  Hurons  auoient  le  deffus,  S,  prefent  ceux-cy
I'emportent,  &  pour  le  nombre  &  pour  la  force:  les
autres  demeuret  entre  les  trois  Riuieres,  &  les  Hiro-
quois  d'en-haut,  &  s'appellent  Agneronos;  il  n'y  a
en  ceux-cy  que  trois  villages :  f aifant  enuiron  f ept  ou
huidt  cens  hommes  d'armes,  I'habitation  des  Hollan-
dois  eft  proche  d'eux,  ils  y  vont  faire  leur  traidtes
fur  tout  d'arquebufes,  ils  en  ont  a  prefent  trois  cens,
&  s'en  feruent  auec  addreffe  &  hardieffe.  Ce  font
ceux-cy  qui  couret  fur  nos  Algonquins  &  Montagnets,
&  [235]  guettet  les  Hurons  par  tous  les  endroits  de  la
Riuiere,  les  maffacrats,  les  brulats,  &  emportants
leur  Pelterie,  qu'ils  vont  vendre  aux  Hollandois,  pour
auoir  de  la  poudre  &  des  Arquebufes,  &  puis  rauager
tout  &  fe  rendre  maiftres  par  tout:  ce  qui  leur  eft
affez  facile,  fi  la  France  ne  nous  donne  fecours.  Car
diuerfes  maladies  contagieufes,  ayant  confomme  la
plus  grande  partie  des  Montagnets  &  Algonquins,
qui  nous  font  voifins,  ils  n'ont  rien  k  craindre  de  ce
cofte  la:  &  d'ailleurs  les  Hurons  qui  defcendent,  ve-
nants  en  traidle,  &  non  en  guerre,  &  n'ayants  aucune
Arquebufe,  s'ils  font  recontrez,  comme  il  arriue  d'or-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  271


[234] CHAPTER XII.

OF  INCURSIONS BY  THE HIROQUOIS,  AND  THE CAPTIV-
ITY OF FATHER JOGUES.

THERE  are  two  divisions  of  Iroquois, — the  one,
neighbors  of  the  Hurons  and  equal  to  them  in
number,  or  even  greater,  are  called  Santwero-
nons.  Formerly,  the  Hurons  had  the  upper  hand ;
at  present,  these  prevail,  both  in  number  and  in
strength.  The  others  live  between  the  three  Rivers
and  the  upper  Hiroquois,  and  are  called  Agneronons."^^
There  are  among  these  latter  only  three  villages,
comprising  about  seven  or  eight  hundred  men  of
arms.  The  settlement  of  the  Dutch  is  near  them ;  ^^
they  go  thither  to  carry  on  their  trades,  especially  in
arquebuses ;  they  have  at  present  three  hundred  of
these,  and  use  them  with  skill  and  boldness.  These
are  the  ones  who  make  incursions  upon  our  Algon-
quins  and  Montagnais,  and  [235]  watch  the  Hurons
at  all  places  along  the  River, —  slaughtering  them,
burning  them,  and  carrying  off  their  Peltry,  which
they  go  and  sell  to  the  Dutch,  in  order  to  have  pow-
der and  Arquebuses,  and  then  to  ravage  everything
and  become  masters  everywhere,  which  is  fairly  easy
for  them  unless  France  gives  us  help.  For,  sundry
contagious  diseases  having  consumed  the  greater
part  of  the  Montagnais  and  Algonquins,  who  are
neighbors  to  us,  they  have  nothing  to  fear  on  that
side ;  and,  moreover,  the  Hurons  who  come  down, —
coming  for  trade,  and  not  for  war,  and  having  not


272  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

dinaire,  ils  n'ont  autre  deffence  que  la  fuitte:  &  s'ils
font  pris,  ils  fe  laiflent  lier  &  mafCacrer  comme  des
moutons.  Les  annees  precedentes,  les  Iroquois  ve-
noient  en  alTez  groffes  troupes  en  certains  teps  de
I'Eft^,  &  laiffoient  apres  la  Riuiere  libre:  mais  cette
annee  prefente  ils  ont  change  de  deffein,  &  fe  font
diuifez  en  petites  troupes  de  vingt,  trente,  cinquante,
&  de  cent  au  plus,  par  tous  les  palTages  &  endroits  de
la  Riuiere,  &  quad  vne  bade  [236]  s'en  va,  I'autre  luy
fuccede.  Ce  ne  font  que  petites  troupes  bien  armees,
qui  partent  fans  ceffe,  les  vnes  apres  les  autres  du
pays  des  Iroquois,  pour  occuper  toute  la  grande
Riuiere,  &  y  dreffer  par  tout  des  embufches,  dont  ils
fortent  a  Timpourueu  &  fe  iettent  indifferemmet  fur
les  Montagnets,  Algonquins,  Huros,  &  Frangois:  on
nous  a  efcrit  de  France,  que  le  deffein  des  Holladois
eft  de  faire  tellemet  harceler  les  Fragois  par  les  Iro-
quois, qu'ils  les  cotraignent  de  quitter  &  abandoner
tout,  &  mefme  la  conuerfion  des  Sauuages.  le  ne
puis  croire  que  ces  Meffieurs  de  Hollande,  eftant  li
vnis  ^  la  France,  ayent  cette  malheureufe  pefee :  mais
la  pratique  des  Iroquois  y  eftant  fi  coforme,  ils
doiuent  y  apporter  remede  en  leur  habitation,  comme
M.  le  Gouuerneur  a  fait  icy,  empefchat  fouuet  nos
Sauuages  d'aller  tuer  des  Hollandois,  ce  qui  leur  eft
tres-facile :  autrement  ils  auront  de  la  peine  a  fe  pur-
ger,  &  fe  mettre  hors  du  tort.  Or  voicy  le  miferable
fuccez  des  courfes  des  Iroquois  cette  annee.

Le  9.  de  May  dernier,  fi  tofl  que  les  glaces  furent
parties  de  defCus  la  grande  [237]  Riuiere,  huidt  Al-
gonquins defcendans  de  deuers  les  Hurons  dans  deux
canots:  tous  chargez  de  pelterie,  fe  mirent  k  terre,
vn  matin  k  quatre  lieues  des  trois  Riuieres,  pour  faire


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  273

one  Arquebus, —  if  they  are  met,  as  usually  happens,
have  no  other  defense  than  flight;  and,  if  they  are
captured,  they  allow  themselves  to  be  bound  and
massacred  like  sheep.  In  former  years,  the  Iroquois
came  in  rather  large  bands  at  certain  times  in  the
Summer,  and  afterward  left  the  River  free :  but,  this
present  year,  they  have  changed  their  plan,  and  have
separated  themselves  into  small  bands  of  twenty,
thirty,  fifty,  or  a  hundred  at  the  most,  along  all  the
passages  and  places  of  the  River;  and  when  one  band
[236]  goes  away,  another  succeeds  it.  They  are  mere-
ly small  troops  well  armed,  which  set  out  incessantly,
one  after  the  other,  from  the  country  of  the  Iroquois,
in  order  to  occupy  the  whole  great  River,  and  to  lay
ambushes  along  it  everywhere;  from  these  they
issue  unexpectedly,  and  fall  indifferently  upon  the
Montagnais,  Algonquins,  Hurons,  and  French.  We
have  had  letters  from  France  that  the  design  of  the
Dutch  is  to  have  the  French  harassed  by  the  Iroquois,
to  such  an  extent  that  they  may  constrain  them  to
give  up  and  abandon  everything, —  even  the  conver-
sion of  the  Savages.  I  cannot  believe  that  those
Gentlemen  of  Holland,  being  so  united  to  France,
have  this  wretched  idea;  but,  the  practice  of  the
Iroquois  being  so  consistent  with  it,  they  ought  to
apply  to  it  a  remedy  in  their  settlement,  as  Monsieur
the  Governor  has  done  here, —  often  preventing  our
Savages  from  going  to  kill  the  Dutch.  That  is  very
easy  for  them ;  otherwise,  they  will  have  difficulty  in
clearing  themselves  and  in  exculpating  themselves
from  the  wrong.  Now  here  is  the  miserable  result
of  the  incursions  of  the  Iroquois  this  year.

The  9th  of  last  May,  as  soon  as  the  ice was  gone
from the surface of  the  great [237] River, eight


274  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jiSUITES [Vol.24

vn  peu  de  feu:  il  auoit  gele  affez  fort  toute  la  nuidt,
&  auoient  rame  pendant  les  tenebres,  craignant  la
furprife  de  leur  ennemis.  A  peine  auoiet-ils  eft6
demie  heure  ^  fe  rafraifchir,  que  dix-neuf  Iroquois
fortent  du  bois,  &  fe  iettent  fur  eux,  tuent  deux
hommes,  &  amenent  les  autres  captifs,  auec  toute  leur
pelterie.  Le  Pere  Buteux  auoit  paff6  par  la,  il  n'y
auoit  que  deux  iours  dans  vn  canot,  accompagne  de
trois  Hurons.  C'eft  miracle  comme  il  ne  fut  apper-
ceu,  &  pris  auec  fes  compagnons,  les  dix-neuf  Iro-
quois n'eftoient  pas  feuls,  on  en  apperceut  d'autres
a  fix  ou  fept  lieues  au  deffus,  tirat  vers  le  fort  de
Richelieu.

Vn  mois  apres  qui  fut  le  neufiefme  de  luin,  vne
autre  bande  de  quarente  fid  fon  coup  a  Mont-Real,
&  aux  enuirons,  ils  eftoient  en  embufcade  a  demy-
lieue,  au  deffus  de  I'habitatio  du  Mot-Real  das  I'lfle
mefme  k  cent  pas  de  la  Riuiere,  ils  y  auoient  dreffe
vn  petit  fort  des  leur  arriuee,  qui  fut  peu  de  iours
auparauant  [238]  de  la  ils  guettoient  les  Hurons  fur  la
Riuiere,  &  les  Frangois  du  Mont- Real,  fur  terre,  pour
en  furprendre  quelques-vns  a  I'efcar  autour  de  I'habi-
tation,  tout  leur  retiffit  a  fouhait:  car  le  fufdit  iour
neufiefme  de  luin,  ils  apperceurent  foixante  Hurons
defcendans  dans  treize  canots,  fans  Arquebufes,  &  fans
armes :  mais  tous  chargez  de  pelteries,  qui  venoient
au  Mont- Real,  &  dela  aux  trois  Riuieres  a  leur  traitte :
ils  portoient  les  lettres  de  nos  Peres  des  Hurons,  &
vne  copie  de  leur  Relation.  Les  quarante  Hiroquois
fortent  du  bois,  fe  iettent  deffus,  les  efpouuentent  de
leurs  Arquebufes,  les  mettent  en  fuitte,  en  prennent
vingt-trois  prisoniers,  auec  leur  canots,  &  la  pelterie :
le  refle  fe  fauue,  &  tafche  de  gagner  I'habitation  du


1 642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  lib

Algonquins,  coming  down  from  toward  the  Hurons  in
two  canoes,  all  laden  with  peltry,  landed  one  morning
four  leagues  from  the  three  Rivers,  in  order  to  make
a  little  fire ;  it  had  frozen  quite  hard  all  night,  and
they  had  paddled  during  the  darkness,  fearing
surprise  from  their  enemies.  Hardly  had  they  been
half  an  hour  refreshing  themselves,  when  nineteen
Iroquois  issue  from  the  wood,  and  fall  upon  them,
kill  two  men,  and  take  the  others  captive,  with  all
their  peltry.  Father  Buteux  had  passed  by  there
only  two  days  before,  in  a  canoe,  accompanied  by
three  Hurons.  It  is  a  miracle  that  he  was  not
perceived  and  taken,  with  his  companions.  The
nineteen  Iroquois  were  not  alone ;  others  were  seen
six  or  seven  leagues  above,  moving  toward  the  fort
of  Richelieu.

A  month  later,  which  was  the  ninth  of  June,  an-
other band  of  forty  made  its  attack  at  Mont- Real  and
the  environs;  they  were  in  ambush  half  a  league
above  the  settlement  of  Mont- Real,  on  the  Island
itself,  a  hundred  paces  from  the  River.  They  had
erected  a  little  fort  there  at  the  time  of  their  arrival,
which  was  a  few  days  before;  [238]  thence  they
were  watching  the  Hurons  on  the  River,  and  the
French  of  Mont- Real  on  land,  in  order  to  surprise
any  of  them  who  might  be  scattered  about  the  set-
tlement. Everything  succeeded  for  them  to  their
wish;  for  on  the  aforesaid  day,  the  ninth  of  June,
they  perceived  sixty  Hurons  coming  down  in  thirteen
canoes, —  without  Arquebuses  and  without  arms,  but
all  freighted  with  peltries, —  who  were  coming  to
Mont-Real,  and  from  there  to  the  three  Rivers,  for
their  trade.  They  carried  the  letters  of  our  Fathers
with  the  Hurons,  and  a  copy  of  their  Relation. The


276  LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  24

Mont- Real. Les Hiroquois  ne  s'arreftent  pas  la,  ils
baillent  leur  vingt-trois  prifonniers,  tous  nuds  k  gar-
der,  a  dix  de  leur  camarades  bien  armez,  &  en  enuoy-
ent  dix  autres  fe  letter  fur  cinq  Fran9ois,  qui  trauail-
loient  ^  vne  charpente,  a  deux  cents  pas  de  1 'habita-
tion, tandis  que  les  vingt  qui  reftent,  fe  prefentent
[239]  deuant  le  fort,  &  y  donnet  vne  fauffe  attaque,
par  vne def charge de  plus de cent coups d'arque-
bufes :  ce  qui  donna  loifir  aux  autres  dix  de  furpren-
dre  nos  cinq  Francois,  dont  ils  en  affommerent  trois,
h.  qui  ils  efcorchent  la  tefte,  &  enleuent  les  cheue-
lures,  &  amenent  les  deux  autres  captifs,  puis  fe  vont
reioindre  h.  leur  compagnons,  &  tous  enfemble  fe  ren-
dent  a  leur  fort,  ou  les  deux  Francois  furent  liez  &
mis  auec  les  Hurons  captifs. Les  Hiroquois  palTe-
rent  la  nuidt  a  fe  refioiiir  de  leur  prife,  &  en  confulter
ce  qu'ils  feroient. Le  matin  venu, ils  fe  riiet  fur
les  prifonniers Hurons, & en affommerent treize,
quafi  fans  choix,  ils  en  referuent  dix  en  vie,  auec  nos
deux  Fran9ois,  &  puis  s'en  vont  aux  canots  prendre
des  robes  de  Caftor,  fans  nombre,  &  apres  en  auoir
charg6  tout  ce  qu'ils  pouuoient,  en  laiffent  encor  plus
d'vne  trentaine  fur  la  place,  &  paffent  ainfi  la  Riui[e]re,
triomphans  de  ioye,  &  chargez  de  riches  defpoiiilles.
Nos  Frangois  de  I'habitation  les  regardent  trauerfer,
fans  y  pouuoir  apporter  aucun  remede. Huidt  ou
dix  iours  apr6s  vn  des  deux  Fran9ois  [240]  prifon-
niers fe  fauua  a  la  fuitte,  feignant  a  fon  hofte  d'aller
chercher  du  bois,  pour  faire  la  chaudiere,  il  rapporta
que  les  Iroquois  ne  leur  auoient  fait  aucun  mal  depuis
leur  prife,  &  ne  les  auoient  tenus  liez  que  deux  iours,
qu'ils  leur  fignifioiet  qu'ils  auoient  defia  des  Francois
prifonniers,  &  que  tous  enfemble  laboureroiet  la  terre


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  277

forty  Hiroquois  issue  from  the  wood,  fall  upon  them,
frighten  them  with  their  Arquebuses,  put  them  to
flight,  and  take  twenty-three  of  them  prisoners,  with
their  canoes  and  the  peltry;  the  rest  escape,  and
strive  to  reach  the  settlement  of  Mont- Real.  The
Hiroquois  do  not  stop  there ;  they  give  their  twenty-
three  prisoners,  all  naked,  into  the  charge  of  ten  of
their  comrades,  well  armed,  and  send  ten  others  to
fall  upon  five  Frenchmen,  who  were  working  at  some
carpentry,  two  hundred  paces  from  the  settlement.
Meanwhile  the  twenty  who  remain  present  them-
selves [239]  before  the  fort,  and  make  a  false  attack
on  it,  with  a  discharge  of  more  than  a  hundred
arquebus  shots;  this  gave  leisure  to  the  other  ten
to  surprise  our  five  Frenchmen.  Three  of  these
they  beat  to  death, —  scalping  them,  and  carrying
away  their  hair, —  and  take  the  two  others  captive ;
then  they  go  to  rejoin  their  companions,  and  all
together  betake  themselves  to  their  fort,  where  the
two  Frenchmen  were  bound,  and  put  with  the  cap-
tive Hurons.  The  Hiroquois  passed  the  night  in
rejoicing  over  their  prize,  and  in  consulting  as  to
what  they  should  do  with  it.  Morning  having  come,
they  rush  upon  the  Huron  prisoners,  and  beat
thirteen  of  them  to  death,  almost  without  selection.
They  reserve  ten  of  them  alive,  along  with  our  two
Frenchmen,  and  then  go  away  to  the  canoes  to  get
robes  of  Beaver  without  number;  and  after  having
loaded  all  that  they  could  of  these,  they  leave  even
more  than  thirty  on  the  spot,  and  thus  cross  the  Riv-
er, triumphant  with  joy,  and  laden  with  rich  spoils.
Our  French  of  the  settlement  see  them  cross,  with-
out being  able  to  offer  any  remedy.  Eight  or  ten
days  later,  one  of  the  two French [240] prisoners


278  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.24

en  leur  pays.  Au  refte  en  ces  rencontres  &  atta-
ques,  il  ne  faut  pas  parler  de  fortir  fur  I'ennemy:
car  comme  on  ne  f9ait  pas  leur  venue,  ny  leur  nom-
bre,  &  qu'ils  font  cachez  dans  les  bois,  oil  ils  font
duits  ^  la  courfe  bien  autremet  que  nos  Fran9ois,  les
forties  ne  feruiroient  qu'a  fouffrir  de  nouueaux  maf-
facres:  car  d'ordinaire  vne  petite  partie  attaque,
&  r  autre  demeure  en  embufcade  dans  le  gros  du
bois.

Ceux  des  Hurons  qui  fe  peurent  fauuer  a  la  fuitte,
arriuerent  fil  a  fil,  a  I'habitation  du  Mont-Real,  par-
tie  fur  le  foir,  partie  le  lendemain,  tous  nuds,  &  don-
nerent  des  nouuelles  de  leur  funefte  accident,  appre-
nant  auffi  le  noftre:  on  m'a  efcrit  du  Mont- Real,  que
les  cinq  Fran9ois  qui  ont  efte  pris  ou  tuez:  comme
[241]  s'ils  euffent  preueu  leur  mort,  s'y  difpofoient
par  des  adtes  fignalez  de  vertu,  «&  par  la  frequentation
des  Sacrements  dont  ils  s'eftoient  approchez,  peu  de
iours  auparauant,  &  quelques-vns  le  iour  mefme  de
leur  prife.

Pendant  que  cette  troupe  de  quarente,  eftoient  a
Mont-Real,  &  y  faifoient  ces  rauages,  vne  autre  de
pareil  nombre  efloit  dans  le  lac  Sain(5t  Pierre,  au
deffous  du  fort  de  Richelieu,  &  le  douziefme  de  luin
fe  vint  caper  dans  vn  ancien  fort,  faidt  il  y  a  quatre
ans  par  les  Iroquois,  'k  trois  ou  quatre  lieues  des  trois
Riuieres,  du  cofte  mefme  de  Thabitation.  Ils  auoient
auec  eux  trois  ou  quatre  Hurons,  pris  I'an  paffe  auec
le  Pere  logues :  entre  lefquels  eftoient  deux  freres
de  ce  grand  lofeph,  [connu]  par  la  Relation  des
Hurons  &  par  fa  vertu:  tous  deux  s'efchaperent  de  la
bande  des  Iroquois,  &  s'en  vinrent  fur  le  foir  aux
trois  Riuieres,  ou  de  bonne  fortune,  ils  trouuerent  le


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  279

escaped  by  flight, —  pretending  to  his  host  to  go  to
fetch  some  wood,  in  order  to  prepare  the  kettle.  He
reported  that  the  Iroquois  had  not  done  them  any
harm  since  their  capture,  and  had  kept  them  bound
only  two  days ;  that  they  signified  to  them  that  they
already  had  French  prisoners,  and  that  all  together
were  tilling  the  soil  in  their  country.  For  the  rest,
in  these  encounters  and  attacks,  one  must  not  speak
of  making  a  sally  upon  the  enemy ;  for,  as  neither
their  coming  nor  their  number  is  known,  and  as  they
are  concealed  in  the  woods, —  where  they  are  trained
for  running,  very  differently  from  our  French, —  the
sallies  would  avail  only  to  undergo  new  massacres ;
for  usually  a  small  party  attacks,  and  the  others
remain  in  ambush  in  the  thick  of  the  woods.

Those  of  the  Hurons  who  could  escape  by  flight
arrived  in  single  file  at  the  settlement  of  Mont-
Real, —  partly  toward  evening,  partly  the  next  day,
and  all  naked, — and  gave  news  of  their  disastrous
accident,  also  learning  ours.  I  have  had  letters  from
Mont- Real  that  the  five  Frenchmen  who  were  cap-
tured or  killed,  as  [241]  if  they  had  anticipated  their
death,  were  preparing  themselves  for  it  by  notable
acts  of  virtue,  and  by  attendance  at  the  Sacraments, —
which  they  had  approached  a  few  days  previously,
and  some,  the  very  day  of  their  capture.

While  this  band  of  forty  were  at  ]Slont-Real,  and
were  making  these  ravages  there,  another  of  like
number  was  on  lake  Saint  Pierre,  below  the  fort  of
Richelieu ;  and  on  the  twelfth  of  June  they  came  to
encamp  in  an  old  fort,  made  four  years  ago  by  the
Iroquois,  three  or  four  leagues  from  the  three  Riv-
ers, on  the  same  side  as  the  settlement.  They  had
with them three or  four Hurons, taken the year


280  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  24

Pere de Brebeuf, a qui ils  raconterent  force  nou-
uelles. Que  le P.  Iogue[s]  eftoit  encor  en  vie,  que
I'an  paffe  apres  fa  prife,  pouuant  s'enfuyr,  il  ne  le
voulut  pas  [242]  faire,  pour  ne  fe  feparer  pas  des  Hu-
rons  captifs,  qu'apres  le  combat :  il  baptifa  tous  les
prifonniers  qui  n'attendoiet  que  la  mort,  &  ne  refpi-
roient  que  le  Ciel,  que  fur  le  champ  le  Pere  &  les
deux  Frangois  Coufture  & Rene  Goupil,  receurent
plufieurs  coups  de  poing,  &  coups  de  bafton:  mais
que  le  pire  traidtement  qu'on  leur  fifl,  fut  h.  la  ren-
contre de  deux  cents  cinquate  Iroquois,  qui  retour-
noient  de  leur  attaque  de  Richelieu,  oil  ils  perdirent
cinq  de  leur  gents,  &  plufieurs  furent  blellez. On
ne les lia pas  pourtant  par  les chemins  qu'^  leur
entree  dans  le  village,  qu'on  les  mift  tous  en  chemife
&  on  leur  fifl  plufieurs affronts & outrages,  qu'on
leur  arracha  la  barbe,  qu'on  leur  enleua  les  ongles,
leur  bruflant  apres  les  bouts  des  doigts  dans  des  calu-
mets tous  rouges  de  feu,  qu'on  couppa  le  poulce  gau-
che au  Pere  Iogue[s],  qu'on  luy  efcrafa  auec  les  dents,
I'index  de  la  main  droitte,  dont  pourtant  il  fe  fert  vn
peu  k  prefent ;  qu'ils  donnerent  la  vie  h.  tous  les  Hu-
rons,  excepte  a  deux  qui  furent  bruflez;  que  la  petite
Therefe  Seminarifte [243] des  Vrfulines  efloit  fort
recherchee  en  mariage,  qu'elle  auoit  demeure  pres
de  fon  oncle  nomme  lofeph,  qui  eft  celuy  qui  s'eftant
efchapp6,  racontoit  toutes  ces  nouuelles  au  Pere  de
Brebeuf, que Rene Goupil  fe promenant pres du
village  auec  le  Pere  logues,  &  priat  Dieu  tous  deux
enfemble, fut  affomme  d'vn  coup  de  hache  par  vn
Iroquois, qui venoit d'apprendre la  mort de  quel-
ques-vns  des  fiens  tuez,  au  Fort  de  Richelieu,  Que  le


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  281

before  with  Father  Jogues,  among  whom  were  two
brothers  of  that  great  Joseph,  known  through  the
Relation  of  the  Hurons,  and  by  his  own  virtue.
Both  escaped  from  the  band  of  the  Iroquois,  and
came  toward  evening  to  the  three  Rivers,  where  by-
good  fortune  they  found  Father  de  Brebeuf ,  to  whom
they  related  plenty  of  news:  that  Father  Jogues  was
still  alive;  that  last  year  after  his  capture,  though
able  to  escape,  he  would  not  [242]  do  it,  in  order  not
to  separate  himself  from  the  captive  Hurons  till  after
the  combat ;  he  baptized  all  the  prisoners,  who  were
expecting  nothing  but  death,  and  longed  only  for
Heaven.  They  said  that  immediately  the  Father  and
the  two  Frenchmen,  Cousture  and  Rene  Goupil,'-^  re-
ceived many  blows  with  fists  and  clubs ;  but  that  the
worst  treatment  which  was  dealt  them  was  at  their
encounter  with  two  hundred  and  fifty  Iroquois,  who
were  returning  from  their  attack  on  Richelieu,  where
they  lost  five  of  their  people,  and  several  were
wounded.  Yet  they  were  not  bound  while  on  the
road,  except  at  their  entrance  into  the  village,  when
they  were  all  stripped  to  their  shirts,  and  received
many  affronts  and  outrages, — their  beards  were
plucked  out,  their  nails  were  torn  out,  the  tips  of
their  fingers  being  afterward  burned  in  calumets  all
red  with  fire.  Father  Jogues  had  his  left  thumb
cut  off,  and  they  crushed  with  their  teeth  the  index
finger  of  his  right  hand,  w^hich  nevertheless  he  uses
a  little  at  present.  We  were  told  they  spared  the
lives  of  all  the  Hurons  except  two,  who  were  burned ;
that  the  little  Therese,  the  Seminarist  [243]  of  the
Ursulines,  was  much  sought  after  in  marriage ;  that
she  had  lived  near  her  uncle  named  Joseph,  who  is
the  one  who,  having  escaped,  was  relating  all  these


282  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.24

Pere  Iogue[s]  voyant  tomber  Ren6  ^  fes  pieds,  fe
mift  ^  genoux,  &  prefenta  fa  tefte  a  I'lroquois,  qui
fe  contenta  d'en  auoir  tu6  vn,  que  Guillaume  Cou-
fture  dans  le  combat  ne  voulut  pas  s'enfuyr,  ny  fe
feparer  d'auec  le  Pere,  que  le  Pere  a  demeure  tout
I'hyuer,  en  la  cabane  d'vn  Capitaine  Iroquois,  fans
auoir  efte  donn6  ^  perfonne,  apres  la  prife  contre
leur  couftume ;  &  qu'ainfi  il  leur  eft  toufiours  libre
de  le  faire  mourir,  qu'il  a  paffe  I'liyuer  auec  vn  feul
capot  rouge  pour  tout  habit,  ayant  neantmoins  liberty
d'aller  aux  trois  Villages,  confoler  &  enfeigner  [244]
les  Hurons  &  les  captifs,  que  les  Iroquois  ne  I'enten-
doient  pas  volontiers  parler  de  Dieu,  que  Coufture  a
eu  le  pied  gele  de  froid,  que  deux  Hollandois  dot  I'vn
eftoit  mont6  a  cheual;  eftoient  venus  au  village,  oil
eftoit  le  pere  logues,  &  auoient  tafcli6  de  le  rachep-
ter:  mais  que  les  Iroquois  n'auoient  voulu  y  enten-
dre, qu'vn  des  Iroquois  de  cette  bande  auoit  efte
charge  d'vne  grande  lettre  par  le  pere  logues,  pour
nous  donner;  que  les  Iroquois  parloient  de  les
ramener:  mais  que  luy  ny  les  autres  n'en  croyoient
rien.

Voicy  ce  que  lofeph  racontoit  de  foy  mefme:  ie
priois  Dieu  continuellement  difoit-il,  au  Pere  Bre-
beuf,  mes  doigts  me  feruoiet  de  chappelet  que  ie
parcourois  tons  les  iours,  ie  faifois  mon  examen,  &
confeffois  mes  pechez  k  Dieu,  comme  quand  ie  me
confeffe  k  vous  autres,  ie  m'entretenois  fans  ceffe
auec  Dieu,  &  luy  parlois  en  mon  coeur  comme  fi  nous
euffions  efte  deux,  qui  euffent  parle  enfemble,  &
ainfi  ie  ne  m'ennuyois  point,  fi  quelquefois  on  me
donnoit  k  faire  feftin,  ie  le  faifois  fans  aucune  cere-
monie,  [245]  &  les  Iroquois  me  laiffoient  faire. Ie


1 642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  283

tidings  to  Father  de  Brebeuf .  He  said  that  Rene  Gou-
pil,  walking  near  the  village  with  Father  Jogues, —
both  praying  to  God  together, —  was  struck  down
with  a  blow  of  a  hatchet  by  an  Iroquois,  who  had  just
learned  the  death  of  some  of  his  people,  killed  at  the
Fort  of  Richelieu;  that  Father  Jogues,  seeing  Rene
fall  at  his  feet,  fell  on  his  knees  and  offered  his  head  to
the  Iroquois,  who  was  content  with  having  killed  one
of  them.  Guillaume  Cousture,  in  the  combat,  would
not  flee  or  separate  himself  from  the  Father;  the
latter  abode  all  the  winter  in  the  cabin  of  an  Iroquois
Captain,  without  having  been  given  to  any  one  after
the  capture, — contrary  to  their  custom, — and  thus
it  is  always  free  to  them  to  kill  him ;  he  passed
the  winter  with  a  single  red  cape  for  all  his  cloth-
ing. He  had,  nevertheless,  liberty  to  go  to  the  three
Villages,  to  console  and  teach  [244]  the  Hurons  and
the  captives ;  the  Iroquois  did  not  willingly  hear  him
speak  of  God.  These  Hurons  said  that  Cousture  had
his  foot  frozen  with  cold;  that  two  Hollanders,  one
of  whom  was  mounted  on  horseback,  had  come  to
the  village  where  father  Jogues  was,  and  had  tried
to  ransom  him,  but  that  the  Iroquois  would  not  listen
to  it ;  that  an  Iroquois  of  that  band  had  been  charged
with  a  long  letter,  by  father  Jogues,  to  give  to  us;
that  the  Iroquois  spoke  of  conducting  them  back,
but  that  he  and  the  others  put  no  faith  in  it.

Here  follows  what  Joseph  related  of  himself:  "  I
prayed  to  God  continually,"  said  he  to  Father  Bre-
beuf; "  my  fingers  served  me  for  a  rosary,  which  I
rehearsed  every  day.  I  made  my  examination,  and
confessed  my  sins  to  God,  as  when  I  confess  to  you ;
I  conversed  incessantly  with  God,  and  spoke  to  him
in  my  heart  as  if  we  had  been  two  who  had  talked


284  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.  24

connois  bien  que  Dieu  m'a  fauue  la  vie:  car  ayant
efte  donne  ^  des  gets  qui  n'auoient  pas  affez  de
moyens  pour  me  fauuer  la  vie,  dormant  des  prefents
felon  noftre  couftume,  il  fift  qu'ils  ne  m'accepterent
pas,  &  que  ie  fus  pour  la  f econde  fois  donne  h.  vn  autre
qui  auoit  le  moyen  &  la  volonte  de  me  deliurer  de  la
mort.  Si  toft  que  ie  penfois  auoir  peche,  i'allois
trouuer  le  Pere  logues  pour  m'en  confeffer.  Pour
ce  qui  eft  du  Pere,  difoit-il,  il  fait  fes  prieres  tout
ouuertement :  mais  pour  nous  il  nous  difoit  que  nous
priaffions  tous  bas,  que  les  Iroquois  n'auoiet  pas
encore  de  I'efprit.  Le  Pere,  adiouftoit-il,  leur  parle
de  Dieu:  mais  ils  ne  I'efcoutent  pas,  il  n'a  qu'vn
petit  liure  de  prieres  &  Coufture  I'autre,  il  adioufta
encor  qu'il  auoit  efte  deux  fois  h.  I'habitation  des  Fla-
mands,  &  fon  frere  quatre  fois,  d'ou  il  racontoit  beau-
coup  de  chofes  de  leur  traittes,  maifons  &c.  Mais
ce  qu'il  auoit  remarque  fur  tout,  c'eft  que  comme  on
luy  eut  donn6  a  manger,  &  qu'il  eut  fait  le  figne  de
la  Croix,  vn  Hollandois  luy  dift  que  cela  [246]  n'eftoit
pas  bien :  &  en  effedt,  dift-il,  ils  ne  le  font  pas  comme
vous,  ils  petunent  &  boiuent  fans  ceffe,  i'attendois
dit-il,  au  foir  qu'ils  allaffent  prier  Dieu  enfemble,
comme  vous  faidtes :  mais  il  n'y  venoient  point ;  voila
ce  que  lofepb  raconte.

Reuenons  h.  la  bande  de  nos  Iroquois  d'oii  il  s'eftoit
efchapp^  auec  fon  frere,  &  vn  autre  troifiefme  qui
arriua  peu  apres,  les  Iroquois  ne  voyant  plus  les  trois
Hurons,  &  fe  doutants  de  ce  qui  eftoit,  qu'ils  s'eftoiet
retirez  aux  trois  riuieres,  creuret  eftre  defcouuerts  &
s'en  retournerent  en  leur  pays :  mais  en  mefme  temps
d'autres  leur  fuccederent  dans  le  mefme  lac  S.  Pierre


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  285

together,  and  thus  I  was  not  weary.  If  sometimes
they  gave  me  wherewith  to  make  a  feast,  I  did  so
without  any  ceremony,  [245]  and  the  Iroquois  let  me
do  it.  I  know  well  that  God  has  saved  my  life ;  for,
having  been  given  to  people  who  had  not  sufficient
means  to  save  my  life,  by  giving  presents  according
to  our  custom, — he  caused  that  they  did  not  accept
me,  and  that  I  was,  for  the  second  time,  given  to
another,  who  had  the  means  and  the  wish  to  deliver
me  from  death.  As  soon  as  I  thought  I  had  sinned,
I  went  to  find  Father  Jogues  in  order  to  confess.  As
regards  the  Father,"  he  said,  "  he  offers  his  prayers
quite  openly ;  but  as  for  us,  he  told  us  that  we  should
pray  quite  low, — that  the  Iroquois  had  as  yet  no
sense.  The  Father,"  he  added,  "  speaks  to  them  of
God :  but  they  do  not  listen  to  him ;  he  has  only  one
little  book  of  prayers,  and  Cousture  the  other."  He
added  withal,  that  he  had  been  twice  at  the  habita-
tion of  the  Flemings,  and  his  brother  four  times;
whence  he  related  many  things  of  their  trade,  houses,
etc.  But  what  he  had  remarked  above  all  was  that,
when  they  had  given  him  to  eat,  and  he  had  made
the  sign  of  the  Cross,  a  Hollander  said  to  him  that
that  [246]  was  not  well;  "And,  in  fact,"  he  said,
"they  do  not  do  so,  like  you.  They  smoke  and
drink  without  ceasing.  I  was  expecting,"  said  he,
* '  that  in  the  evening  they  would  go  to  pray  to  God
together,  as  you  do,  but  they  did  not  come  to  that."
That  is  what  Joseph  relates.

Let  us  return  to  the  band  of  our  Iroquois  from
which  he  had  escaped  with  his  brother,  and  a  third
who  arrived  shortly  after.  The  Iroquois,  no  longer
seeing  the  three  Hurons,  and  suspecting  what  the
matter  was, — that  they  had  withdrawn  to  the  three


286  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.24


au  deff US  des  trois  riuieres :  en  forte  que  les  Hurons
qui  s'eftoient  fauuez  ^  Mont  real,  &  qui  defcedoient
aux  3.  riuieres,  furet  derechef  rencotrez  &  pourfui-
uis:  mais  il  pleuit  ^  Dieu  les  deliurer  quoy  qu'auec
des  peines  infinies:  car  la  plus  part  quittant  leur
canots,  fe  ietterent  dans  les  bois,  &  vinret  tous  nuds
aux  trois  riuieres  par  des  chemins  effroyables :  quel-
ques  autres  Hurons  captif  s  des  annees  precedentes  qui
[247]  eftoient  auec  ces  dernieres  bandes  d' Iroquois,
s'efchapperent  &  vinrent  aux  trois  riuieres,  &  con-
firmerent  tout  ce  que  leurs  compagnons  auoient  dit,
nommement  qu'on  parloit  dans  le  pays,  d'amener  le
Pere  logues,  &  le  rendre  aux  Fran9ois :  mais  comme
on  cognoift  la  perfidie  des  Iroquois,  perfonne  n'en
croyoit  rien.  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  pourtant  qui
fouliaittoit  la  deliurance  du  Pere,  &  la  paix,  fi  elle
eftoit  raifonnable,  equippa  quatre  chalouppes,  &  s'en
alia  prepare  pour  la  guerre  ou  la  paix,  aux  trois
riuieres ;  &  de  la  au  Fort  de  Richelieu  pour  voir  fi
les  Iroquois  fe  prefenteroient  ou  fur  la  riuiere  ou  de-
uant  les  habitations :  mais  rien  ne  parut,  fi  toft  qu'ils
apperceuoient  les  chalouppes,  ils  entroient  plus  auant
dans  les  bois,  &  les  chalouppes  paffees,  ils  retour-
noient  fur  le  bord  de  I'eau,  guettoient  les  Algonquins
&  Hurons.  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  mettoit  fouuent
pied  a  terre  pour  remarquer  leur  trace,  &  voir  s'il
en  rencontreroit  quelque  trouppe  dans  leurs  Forts
accouftumez,  pour  les  y  attaquer.  A  deux  lieues  au
deffus  de  Riche-lieu,  [248]  il  trouua  vn  chemin  fait
de  nouueau  das  le  bois  qui  tenoit  enuiron  deux  lieues,
par  oil  les  Iroquois  trauerfoient  &  couppoient  vne-
pointe  de  terre  pour  venir  de  leur  riuiere  dans  celle-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  287

rivers, — believed  they  were  discovered,  and  returned
to  their  country.  But,  at  the  same  time,  others  suc-
ceeded them  in  the  same  lake  of  St.  Pierre,  above  the
three  rivers;  so  that  the  Hurons  who  had  escaped
to  Mont  real,  and  who  were  coming  down  to  the  3
rivers,  were  again  met  and  pursued.  But  it  pleased
God  to  deliver  them,  though  with  infinite  hardships ;
for  most  of  them,  leaving  their  canoes,  rushed  into
the  woods  and  came  all  naked  to  the  three  rivers,  by
frightful  roads.  Some  other  Hurons,  captives  of  for-
mer years,  who  [247]  were  with  these  latter  bands  of
Iroquois,  escaped  and  came  to  the  three  rivers,  and
confirmed  all  that  their  companions  had  said, —  espe-
cially that  there  was  talk  in  the  country  of  bringing
hither  Father  Jogues  and  restoring  him  to  the
French;  but,  as  the  treachery  of  the  Iroquois  is
known,  no  one  believed  a  word  of  it.  Monsieur  the
Governor,  however,  who  desired  the  Father's  deliver-
ance, and  peace  if  it  were  reasonable,  equipped  four
shallops  and  went,  prepared  for  war  or  peace,  to  the
three  rivers,  and  thence  to  the  Fort  of  Richelieu,  in
order  to  see  if  the  Iroquois  would  present  themselves
on  the  river  or  before  the  habitations.  But  nothing
appeared ;  as  soon  as  they  perceived  the  shallops,  they
entered  further  within  the  woods ;  and,  the  shallops
having  passed,  they  returned  to  the  edge  of  the  wa-
ter, and  kept  watch  on  the  Algonquins  and  Hurons.
Monsieur  the  Governor  often  landed,  in  order  to
examine  their  trail,  and  to  see  if  he  might  encounter
some  band  of  them  in  their  customary  Forts,  in
order  to  attack  them  there.  Two  leagues  above
Riche-lieu  [248]  he  found  a  road  newly  made  in  the
woods,  which  extended  about  two  leagues,  whereby
the  Iroquois  traversed  and  cut  off  a  point  of  land  in


288  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.  24

de  S.  Laurens,  portants  leur  canots  &  bagage  fur
leurs  efpaules,  &  ne  point  paffer  deuant  le  Fort  de
Riche-lieu.  Si  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  euft  eu  les
foldats  qu'il  efperoit  de  France,  il  euft  fans  doubte
donne  iufques  dedans  le  pays  des  Iroquois,  auec  200.
ou  300.  Algonquins  &  Montagnets  qui  s'offroient  k
luy  faire  compagnie,  &  ie  croy  que  c'euft  efte  auec
vn  tres  bon  effedt,  &  qu'il  euft  cotraind;  ces  Barbares
orgueilleux  k  vne  paix  honnefte,  ou  les  euft  entiere-
ment  domtez.  II  ne  faut  pas  que  ce  que  i'ay  dit  cy-
deffus,  donne  de  la  terreur  extraordinaire:  quand  les
Iroquois  ont  rencontre  de  la  refiftance,  ils  ont  lafche
le  pied  auffi  toft,  ou  pluftoft  que  les  autres.  Les  Al-
gonquins eftant  en  nombre  raifonnable  les  ont  faidt
fouuent  trembler  &  fuyr.  Reuenons  k  leurs  courfes
de  cette  annee,  nonobftant  lefquelles  les  Algonquins
ne  laiffoient  pas  d'aller  k  la  chaff e,  [249]  ils  ne  peu-
uent  fe  paffer  de  ces  exercices  fans  mourir  de  faim,
la  terre  ne  leur  done  pas  encore  affez,  il  vaut  autant,
difent-ils,  mourir  de  la  main  ou  du  fer  des  Iroquois,
que  d'vne  cruelle  faim.  Le  30.  luillet  fept  ieunes
Algonquins  allerent  k  la  chaffe  vers  Mont-real,  ils
eftoient  quafi  tous  Chreftiens,  ils  rencontrerent  deux
canots  Iroquois,  I'vn  defquels,  ou  il  y  auoit  douze
hommes,  courut  incontinent  fur  eux :  ces  bons  ieunes
hommes  ne  s'efpouuanterent  point;  le  Pere  le  leune
leur  auoit  dit  en  partant,  fi  vous  fuyez  la  mort,  vous
la  trouuerez,  fi  vous  la  cherchez,  elle  vous  f uyra :  re-
commandez-vous  ^  Dieu  fi  vous  rencontres  les  enne-
mis:  ils  fe  feruent  de  ce  confeil,  ils  prient  Dieu  fer-
uemment  en  leur  coeur,  &  nagent  droit  tant  qu'ils
peurent  vers  les  Iroquois  qui  defchargent  fur  eux,  dix


1642-43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  289

order  to  come  from  their  river  into  that  of  St.  Law-
rence, bearing  their  canoes  and  baggage  on  their
shoulders,  and  not  to  pass  before  the  Fort  of  Riche-
lieu. If  Monsieur  the  Governor  had  had  the  soldiers
for  whom  he  was  hoping  from  France,  he  would  no
doubt  have  proceeded  even  into  the  country  of  the
Iroquois,  with  200  or  300  Algonquins  and  Monta-
gnais  who  offered  themselves  to  keep  him  company ;
and  I  believe  that  this  would  have  produced  a  very
good  effect,  and  that  he  would  have  constrained  those
proud  Barbarians  to  an  honest  peace,  or  have  entirely
subdued  them.  What  I  have  said  herein  above,  need
not  give  extraordinary  terror;  when  the  Iroquois
have  encountered  resistance,  they  have  given  way
as  soon  as,  or  sooner  than,  the  others.  The  Algon-
quins, being  in  reasonable  number,  have  often  made
them  tremble  and  flee.  Let  us  return  to  their  incur-
sions of  this  year,  notwithstanding  which  the  Algon-
quins failed  not  to  go  to  the  chase;  [249]  they  cannot
forego  that  exercise  without  djdng  from  hunger.
The  land  does  not  yet  yield  enough  for  them ;  "  As
well,"  they  say,  "  die  by  the  hand,  or  by  the  iron  of
the  Iroquois,  as  of  a  cruel  hunger."  The  30th  of
July,  seven  young  Algonquins  went  to  the  chase
toward  Mont-real, — they  were  nearly  all  Christians;
they  encountered  two  Iroquois  canoes,  one  of  which,
in  which  there  were  twelve  men,  ran  straightway
upon  them.  These  good  young  men  were  not  fright-
ened ;  Father  le  Jeune  had  said  to  them  on  leaving :
■"  If  you  flee  death,  you  will  find  it;  if  you  seek  it,  it
will  flee  from  you.  Commend  yourselves  to  God,  if
you  meet  the  enemy. "  They  observe  this  counsel, —
they  pray  to  God  fervently  in  their  hearts,  and
paddle  with  all  their  might  straight  toward  the  Iro-


290  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.24

ou  douze  coups  d  arquebuze,  fans  autre  effect  que  de
percer  vn  canot  &  bleff er  vn  Algonquin  par  le  pied ;
les  Algonquins  s'aduancent  touliours  &  defchargent
deux  ou  trois  arquebufes  qu'ils  auoient,  &  renuerfent
deux  Iroquois  bleffez  a  mort  dans  leur  cannot,  &  les
[250]  contraignent  de  fe  mettre  tous  a  terre,  &  de  fe
retirer,  fi  ces  leunes  Algonquins  euffent  eu  de  la
pouldre  pour  continuer  &  pourfuiure  dauantage,  ils
euffent  tue  la  plufpart  de  la  bande,  mais  nous  auons
toufiours  eu  peur  d'armer  trop  les  Sauuages;  pleuft
a  Dieu  que  les  Holandois  euffent  fait  le  mefme,  &  ne
nous  euffent  pas  forcez  a  donner  des  armes  mefmes
^  nos  Chrefliens:  car  iufques  ^  prefent  on  n'en  a
traitte  qu'k  ceux-la.

Le  15.  d'Aouft  vingt  Algonquins  partirent  des  trois
riuieres,  pour  aller  a  la  chaffe  vers  Richelieu,  eftant
dans  le  lac  de  S.  Pierre,  a  fept  ou  huidt  lieues  de
I'habitation,  "k  Tembouclieure  d'vne  riuiere  appellee
faindt  Francois,  ils  fe  diuiferent  en  deux  bandes  pour
chaffer  mieux,  I'vne  qui  eftoit  compofee  de  douze,
rencontre  incontinent  vingt  Iroquois  bien  armes,  les
voila  aux  prifes,  premierement  auec  les  arquebufes,
les  Iroquois  en  auoient  au  double,  puis  auec  I'efp^e,
enfin  auec  le  coufteau :  quelques-vns  de  part  &  d'au-
tre  font  tuez,  les  Algonquins  fe  voyants  plus  foibles,
prennent  la  fuitte:  trois  auec  vn  Huron  qui  fe  [251]
trouua  en  leur  compagnie,  font  faits  prifonniers,  ils
en  bruflerent  vn,  Dieu  fift  la  grace  a  2,  autres  qui
eftoient  Chreftiens  de  s'efchapper,  ils  nous  rapporte-
rent  que  les  Iroquois  eftoient  quafi  tous  bleffez,  &
quelques  vns  a  mort,  a  mefme  temps  que  cela  fe
paffoit  dans  le  lac  de  S.  Pierre,  il  y  auoit  2.  autres


1642-43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  291

quois,  who  discharge  upon  them  ten  or  twelve  arque-
bus shots,  without  other  effect  than  to  pierce  one
canoe  and  to  wound  one  Algonquin  in  the  foot.  The
Algonquins  continually  advance,  and  discharge  two
or  three  arquebuses  that  they  had;  they  prostrate
two  Iroquois,  wounded  to  death  in  their  canoe,  and
[250]  constrain  them  all  to  go  ashore  and  retreat.  If
these  Young  Algonquins  had  had  powder  to  continue
and  pursue  further,  they  would  have  killed  most  of
the  band ;  but  we  have  always  been  afraid  to  arm  the
Savages  too  much.  Would  to  God  that  the  Holland-
ers had  done  the  same,  and  had  not  compelled  us
to  give  arms  even  to  our  Christians, —  for  hitherto,
these  have  been  traded  only  to  the  latter.

The  15th  of  August,  twenty  Algonquins  left  the
three  rivers  in  order  to  go  to  the  chase  toward  Riche-
lieu. When  in  the  lake  of  St.  Pierre,  seven  or  eight
leagues  from  the  settlement,  at  the  mouth  of  a  river
called  saint  Frangois,  they  separated  themselves  into
two  bands,  in  order  to  hunt  better.  The  one,  which
was  composed  of  twelve,  straightway  encounters
twenty  Iroquois,  well  armed ;  then  they  were  in  close
conflict, —  first  with  the  arquebuses,  of  which  the
Iroquois  had  twice  as  many,  then  with  the  javelin,
finally  with  the  knife.  Some  on  both  sides  were
killed;  the  Algonquins,  seeing  themselves  weaker,
took  flight;  three,  with  a  Huron  who  [251]  happened
to  be  in  their  company,  were  made  prisoners.  They
burned  one  of  these ;  God  granted  the  favor  to  2
others,  who  were  Christians,  to  escape.  They  re-
ported to  us  that  the  Iroquois  were  nearly  all
wounded,  and  some,  to  death.  At  the  same  time
when  that  was  occurring  in  the  lake  of  St.  Pierre,
there  were  2 other  bands  of Iroquois, who were


292  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.24

trouppes  d' Iroquois  qui  rodoiet  autour  du  Fort  de
Riche-lieu  ils  auoient  auec  eux  vn  Huron  captif ,  mais
Iroquois  d'affedlion,  celuy  cy  fe  mift  feul  das  vn  canot,
&  s'aduanga  vers  le  Fort,  «&  demanda  a  parler:  on  le
regoit,  on  le  fait  entrer,  on  luy  demade  qui  il  eft  &
ce  qui  Tameine,  il  refpond  qu'il  eft  Iroquois,  &  qu'il
veut  traitter  de  paix  pour  luy  &  pour  fes  compa-
gnons,  il  prefente  quelques  caftors  a  cet  effect:  on
luy  demande  s'il  a  nouuelle  du  Pere  logues,  il  tire
vne  lettre  de  fa  part  &  la  prefente,  puis  demande  a
s'en  retourner,  on  luy  dit  que  la  lettre  s'addreffe  &.
Mr.  le  Gouuern.  qui  eft  k  Kebec,  ou  aux  3.  riuieres,
&  qu'il  faut  qu'il  attede  refpoce,  il  demade  qu'6  tire
vn  coup  de  cano,  ce  qu'o  fift  &  incotinet  fes  cama-
rades  paroiffent  en  3.  ou  4.  canots:  ils  nagent  tou-
fiours  pour  [252]  venir  vers  le  Fort,  on  leur  crie  qu'ils
s'arreftet  par  trois  ou  quatre  fois;  k  quoy  n'obeyffant
point,  on  tire  fur  eux:  ce  qui  les  contraignit  de  fe
mettre  ^  terre,  &  s'enfuyr  dans  les  bois  abandon-
nants  leur  canots  &  bagage,  on  ne  fgait  point  s'ils  ont
efte  tues  ou  bleffes.

Peu  de  iours  apres,  vne  trouppe  d'enuiron  100.  Iro-
quois parut  au  mefme  lieu  dans  vnze  grads  canots,  ils
auoient  paffe  au  deffus  Mont-real,  y  eftoient  demeu-
rez  plufieurs  iours  en  embufches,  s'eftoient  prefentez
deuant  I'habitation,  &  foubs  couleur  de  quelque  flgne
de  paix,  auoient  tafch^  d'attirer  pres  d'eux  quelques
Algonquins  de  la  nation  d'Iroquet,  qu'on  auoit  enuoye
parlementer  de  loing,  fur  lefquels  ils  defchargerent
en  trahifon  plus  de  cent  coups  d'arquebufe:  mais
graces  "k  Dieu  fans  effedt,  ils  eftoient  depuis  defcen-
.dus  a  Richelieu  ou  fe  voyans  defcouuerts,  ils  fe  reti-


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  293

prowling  about  the  Fort  of  Riche-lieu ;  they  had  with
them  a  captive  Huron,  but  an  Iroquois  by  affection.
The  latter  took  his  place  alone  in  a  canoe,  and  ad-
vanced toward  the  Fort,  and  requested  to  speak ;  they
receive  him, — they  have  him  enter,  they  ask  him
who  he  is,  and  what  brings  him.  He  answers  that
he  is  an  Iroquois,  and  that  he  wishes  to  treat  of  peace
for  himself  and  for  his  companions;  he  presents
some  beavers  with  this  object.  They  ask  him  if
he  has  news  of  Father  Jogues;  he  draws  forth  a
letter  from  him  and  presents  it,  then  asks  to  return.
They  tell  him  that  the  letter  is  addressed  to  Mon-
sieur the  Governor,  who  is  at  Kebec  or  at  the  3
rivers,  and  that  he  must  wait  for  an  answer;  he  re-
quests that  they  fire  a  cannon  shot,  which  is  done,
and  straightway  his  comrades  appear  in  3  or  4  canoes.
They  paddle  steadily,  in  order  to  [252]  come  toward
the  Fort;  they  are  hailed  to  stop,  three  or  four
times, —  which  not  obeying,  they  are  fired  upon;  that
constrained  them  to  go  ashore,  and  flee  into  the
woods,  abandoning  their  canoes  and  baggage ;  it  is
not  known  whether  they  were  wounded  or  killed.

Not  many  days  later,  a  band  of  about  100  Iroquois
appeared  at  the  same  place,  in  eleven  great  canoes;
they  had  crossed  above  Mont-real,  had  remained
there  several  days  in  ambush,  and  had  presented
themselves  before  the  settlement.  There,  under
pretext  of  some  sign  of  peace,  they  had  essayed  to
attract  near  them  some  Algonquins  of  the  Iroquet
nation,  who  had  been  sent  to  parley  at  a  distance,
upon  whom  they  treacherously  discharged  more  than
a  hundred  arquebus  shots, — but,  thanks  to  God,
without  effect.  They  had  afterward  come  down  to
Richelieu, where, seeing themselves discovered,


294  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vou  24

rerent.  Voicy  la  coppie  de  la  lettre  du  Pere  logues
efcrite  des  Iroquois,  que  ce  Huron  dont  i'ay  parle,
apporta  &  dona  k  Monfieur  de  Champ-flour :  elle  s'ad-
dreffe  a  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur,  [253]  c'eft  vn  grand
dommage  que  les  trois  autres  qu'il  nous  efcriuoient
auparauant  ont  efte  perdues.

Monfieur,  voicy  la  4.  que  i'efcris  depuis  que  ie  fuis
aux  Iroquois.  Le  temps  &  le  papier  me  manquent,
pour  repeter  icy  ce  que  ie  vous  ay  defia  mande  tout
:au  long,  Coufture  &  moy  viuons  encor.  Henry  (c'eft
vn  de  ces  deux  ieunes  hommes  qui  furent  pris  k
Mont-real)  fut  amene  la  veille  de  faindt  lean,  il  ne
fut  pas  charge  de  coups  de  bafton  ^  1' entree  du  vil-
lage comme  nous,  ny  n'a  point  eu  les  doigts  couppez
come  nous;  il  vit  &  tons  les  Huros  amenez  auec  luy
dans  le  pays;  foyez  f ur  vos  gardes  par  tout,  toufiours
nouuelles  trouppes  partent,  &  faut  fe  perfuader  que
iufques  das  I'Automne,  la  riuiere  n'eft  fans  ennemis,
il  y  a  icy  pres  de  trois  cents  arquebufes,  fept  cent
Iroquois:  ils  font  adroits  a  les  manier,  ils  peuuet
arriuer  aux  trois  riuieres  par  diuers  fleuues,  le  Fort  de
Richelieu  leur  donne  vn  peu  plus  de  peine,  mais  ne
les  empefche  pas  tout  k  faict.  Les  Iroquois  difent
.  que  fi  ceux  qui  ont  pris  &  tue  les  Frangois  a  Mont-
real, [254]  euffent  fceu  ce  que  vous  auez  faidt  en  reti-
rant  le  Sokokiois  que  vous  auez  deliur6  des  mains  des
Algonquins,  ils  n'eufCent  pas  faidt  cela,  ils  eftoient
partis  au  milieu  de  I'hyuer,  &  deuant  que  la  nouuelle
envint:  Neantmoins  tout  fraifchement  il  eft  party
vne  trouppe,  &  I'homme  de  Mathurin  (le  Pere  Bre-
beuf  le  cognoift  bien)  y  eft,  &  conduit  la  bande  comme
"k  noftre  prife  de  I'an  paffd. Cette  trouppe  dellre  &


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  ib42-43  295

they  retreated.  Here  follows  a  copy  of  tlie  letter
from  Father  Jogues,  written  from  the  Iroquois,  which
that  Huron  of  whom  I  have  spoken,  brought  and
gave  to  Monsieur  de  Champ-flour :  it  is  addressed  to
Monsieur  the  Governor.  [253]  It  is  a  great  pity  that
three  others,  which  he  wrote  to  us  previously,  have
been  lost.

"  Monsieur,  here  is  the  4th  that  I  have  written
since  I  am  with  the  Iroquois.  Time  and  paper  fail
me  to  repeat  here  what  I  have  already  conveyed  to
you  at  great  length.  Cousture  and  I  are  still  living.
Henry  (one  of  those  two  young  men  who  were  taken
at  Mont-real)  was  brought  here  the  eve  of  saint
John's  day.  He  was  not  loaded  with  blows  from
clubs  at  the  entrance  to  the  village,  like  us,  nor  has
he  had  his  fingers  cut,  like  us;  he  lives,  and  all  the
Hurons  brought  with  him  into  the  country.  Be  on
your  guard  everywhere ;  new  bands  are  always  leav-
ing, and  we  must  persuade  ourselves  that,  until  the
Autumn,  the  river  is  not  without  enemies.  There
are  here  nearly  three  hundred  arquebuses,  and  seven
hundred  Iroquois ;  they  are  skilled  in  handling  them.
They  can  arrive  at  the  three  rivers  by  various
streams;  the  Fort  of  Richelieu  gives  them  a  little
more  trouble,  but  does  not  hinder  them  altogether.
The  Iroquois  say  that  if  those  who  took  and  killed
the  French  at  Mont-real  [254]  had  known  what  you
have  done, —  in  redeeming  the  Sokokiois  whom  you
delivered  from  the  hands  of  the  Algonquins, — they
would  not  have  done  that ;  they  had  started  in  the
midst  of  the  winter,  and  before  the  news  of  it  came.
Nevertheless,  quite  recently  there  has  departed  a
band,  and  the  man  of  Mathurin  (Father  Brebeuf
knows  him  well)  is  in  it,  and  leads  the  band,  as  at


296  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.  24

a  deffein  de  prendre  des  Fran9ois,  auffi  bien  que  des
Algonquins,  Que  noftre  confideration  n'empefche  de
faire  ce  qui  eft  a  la  gloire  de  Dieu.  Le  deffein  des
Iroquois  autant  que  ie  peux  voir,  eft  de  prendre  s'ils
peuuent  tous  les  Hurons,  &  ayant  mis  k  mort  les  plus
confiderables,  &  vne  bonne  partie  des  autres,  ne  faire
des  deux  qu'vn  feul  peuple  &  vne  feule  terre.  I'ay
vne  grande  compaffion  de  ces  pauures  gents,  dont
plufieurs  font  Chrefties,  les  autres  Catecumenes,  &
difpofez  au  baptefme :  quand  eft-ce  qu'on  apportera
remede  a  ces  mal-heurs?  quand  ils  feront  tous  pris?
I'ay  receu  plufieurs  lettres  des  Hurons  [255]  auec  la
Relation  prife  aupres  de  Mont-real.  Les  Hollandois
nous  ont  voulu  retirer :  mais  en  vain :  ils  taf chent  de
le  faire  encor  a  prefent,  mais  ce  fera  encor  comme  ie
croy  auec  la  mefme  iffue.  Ie  me  confirme  de  plus
en  plus  a  demeurer  icy  tant  qu'il  plaira  k  Noflre
Seigneur,  &  ne  m'en  aller  point,  quand  mefme  I'occa-
fion  s'en  prefenteroit.  Ma  prefence  confole  les  Fran-
9ois  Hurons  &  Algonquins.  I'ay  baptife  plus  de
foixante  perfonnes,  plufieurs  defquels  font  arriuez
au  Ciel.  C'eft  la  mon  vnique  confolation  &  la  volon-
t6  de  Dieu,  ^  laquelle  tres  volontiers  ie  conioidts  la
mienne.  Ie  vous  fupplie  de  recommander  qu'on  faffe
des  prieres,  &  qu'on  dife  des  meffes  pour  nous,  &  fur
tout  pour  celuy  qui  defire  eilire  k  iamais.

MONSIEVR,

Voftre  tres-liumble  feruiteur  Ifaac
logues  de  la  Compagnie  de
Iesvs.
Du  village  des  Iroquois  le  30.
luin  1643.


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  297

our  capture  last  year.  This  troop  desires  and  pur-
poses to  take  some  French,  as  well  as  Algonquins.
Let  not  regard  for  us  prevent  from  doing  that  which
is  to  the  glory  of  God.  The  design  of  the  Iroquois,
as  far  as  I  can  see,  is  to  take,  if  they  can,  all  the  H.u-
rons ;  and,  having  put  to  death  the  most  considerable
ones  and  a  good  part  of  the  others,  to  make  of  them
both  but  one  people  and  only  one  land.  I  have  a
great  compassion  for  these  poor  people,  several  of
whom  are  Christians, — the  others  Catechumens,  and
ready  for  baptism ;  when  shall  a  remedy  be  applied
to  these  misfortunes?  when  they  shall  all  be  tak-
en? I  have  received  several  letters  from  the  Hurons,
[255]  with  the  Relation  taken  near  Mont-real.^'*  The
Dutch  have  tried  to  ransom  us,  but  in  vain ;  they  are
still  endeavoring  to  do  so  at  present,  but  it  will  again
be,  as  I  believe,  with  the  same  result.  I  become
more  and  more  resolved  to  dwell  here  as  long  as  it
shall  please  Our  Lord,  and  not  to  go  away,  even
though  an  opportunity  should  present  itself.  My
presence  consoles  the  French,  the  Hurons,  and  the  Al-
gonquins. I  have  baptized  more  than  sixty  persons,
several  of  whom  have  arrived  in  Heaven.  That  is
my  single  consolation,  and  the  will  of  God,  to  which
very  gladly  I  unite  my  own.  I  beg  you  to  recom-
mend that  prayers  be  said,  and  that  masses  be  offered
for  us,  and  above  all  for  the  one  who  desires  to  be
forever,

MONSIEUR,

Your  very  humble  servant,  Isaac
Jogues,  of  the  Society  of
Jesus.

''  From  the  village  of  the  Iroquois,  the  30th
of  June,  1643."


298  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

[256]  Cette  lettre  a  plus  de  fuc  que  de  parolles,  la
tiffure  en  eft  excellente  quoy  que  la  main  qui  en  a
forme  les  charadteres,  foit  toute  dechiree,  elle  eft
compofee  d'vn  flile  plus  fublime  que  celuy  qui  fort
des  plus  pompeufes  ecoles  de  la  Rhetorique:  mais
pour  mieux  cognoiftre  les  richeffes  de  celuy  qui  la
tracees,  il  en  faut  confiderer  la  pauurete.  Quelques
Hurons  faits  prifonniers  auec  ce  bon  Pere,  s'eftans
fauues  ce  printemps  dernier  des  mains  des  Iroquois,
nous  ont  fait  conceuoir  la  riche  liberte  de  ce  pauure
captif,  &  nous  voulans  depeindre  les  baffeffes  oil  les
hommes  I'ont  iette,  nous  ont  donne  vne  belle  idee  de
fes  grandeurs.  Les  Iroquois  I'ayant  pris  le  2.  iour
d'Aouft  1642.  le  traifnerent  en  leur  pays  auec  des  cris
&  des  hu6es  de  Demons,  qui  emportent  leur  proye,
il  fut  falu6  de  cent  baftonnades  a  1' entree  de  la  Bour-
gade,  oil  il  fut  premierement  conduit:  il  n'y  eut  fils
de  bonne  mere  qui  ne  iettaft  la  patte  ou  la  griffe  fur
cette  pauure  vi(5time :  les  vns  le  f rappoient  a  grands
coups  de  cordes,  d'autres  "k  coups  de  baftons,  les  vns
luy  tiroient  &  [257]  emportoient  les  cheueux  de  la
tefte,  les  autres  par  derifio  luy  arrachoient  le  poil  de
la  barbe:  vne  femme,  ou  plutofl  vne  Megere,  luy
prend  le  bras  &  luy  couppe,  ou  plutofl  luy  fcie  auec
vn  coufleau,  le  poulce  de  la  main  gauche:  elle  fait
vn  cerne  «&  s'en  va  rechercher  la  iointure,  auec  moins
d'induftrie :  mais  auec  plus  de  cruaute  qu'vn  boucher
n'en  exergoit  fur  vne  befte  morte :  bref  elle  luy  def-
cbarne  &  enleue  tout  le  gros  du  poulce,  vn  autre  luy
mord  vn  des  doigts  de  la  main  droite,  offence  I'os,  &
rend  ce  pauure  doigt  perclus  &  inutil,  d'autres  luy
arrachent  les  ongles,  puis  mettent  du  feu  fur  I'extre-
mite  de  ces  pauures  doigts,  defpoiiilles,  pour  rendre


1642  -  43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  299

[256]  This  letter  contains  more  substance  than
words;  its  construction  is  excellent,  although  the
hand  which  formed  its  characters  is  all  torn;  it  is
composed  in  a  style  more  sublime  than  that  which
proceeds  from  the  most  pompous  schools  of  Rhetoric ;
but  in  order  better  to  understand  the  riches  of  him
who  traced  it,  one  must  consider  his  poverty.  Some
Hurons,  made  prisoners  with  this  good  Father,  hav-
ing escaped  this  last  spring  from  the  hands  of  the
Iroquois,  have  given  us  an  idea  of  the  rich  liberty  of
this  poor  captive ;  and,  wishing  to  depict  to  us  the
abasement  into  which  men  have  thrown  him,  have
given  us  a  noble  idea  of  his  grandeur.  The  Iroquois,
having  taken  him  the  2nd  day  of  August,  1642,
dragged  him  into  their  country,  with  the  shouts  and
hootings  of  Demons  who  carry  off  their  prey.  He
was  greeted  with  a  hundred  beatings  at  the  entrance
to  the  Village  where  he  was  first  conducted;  there
was  no  good  mother's  son  who  did  not  fling  his  paw
or  claw  on  this  poor  victim, — some  struck  him  with
heavy  blows  of  cords,  others  with  blows  of  sticks;
some  pulled  and  [257]  carried  away  the  hair  of  his
head;  others,  in  derision,  tore  out  the  hair  of  his
beard.  A  woman,  or  rather  a  Megera,  takes  his  arm
and  cuts  off,  or  rather  saws  off,  with  a  knife  the
thumb  of  his  left  hand;  she  cuts  a  gash,  and  goes  in
quest  of  the  joint,  with  less  skill,  but  with  more  cru-
elty than  a  butcher  exercises  upon  a  dead  beast ;  in
short,  she  lacerates  and  removes  the  whole  mass  of
the  thumb.  Another  bites  one  of  the  fingers  of  his
right  hand,  injures  the  bone,  and  renders  that  poor
finger  crippled  and  useless ;  others  tear  out  his  nails,
then  put  fire  on  the  end  of  those  poor  fingers,  —  laid
bare,  in  order  to  render  the  martyrdom  more  keenly


300  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jiSUITES [Vol.24

le  martyre  plus  fenfible,  A  tous  ces  maux  le  pauure
Pere  n'euft  point  d'autre  Medecin,  ny  d'autre  Chi-
rurgien,  que  la  patience,  point  d'autre  vnguent  que
la  douleur,  point  d'autre  enueloppe  que  I'air,  qui
enuironnoit  fes  playes  :  ce  n'eft  pas  tout,  ces
Barbares  luy  arrachent  fa  foutane,  ils  le  defpoiiil-
let,  &  pour  couurir  fa  nudite,  luy  iettent  vn  bout
d'vne  vieille  peau,  chargee  de  falete  &  de  puanteur,
11  s'en  couure  la  moitie  [258]  du  corps,  il  a  les  pieds
&  les  iambes  nues,  les  bras  nuds,  la  tefte  nue :  il  a
pour  maifon  des  ecorces,  la  terre  eft  fon  lit,  &  fon
matelas;  le  bout  d'vne  peau  ou  d'vn  capot  qui  luy
fert  de  robe,  pedant  le  iour,  luy  fert  encor  de  cou-
uerture  pendant  la  nuidt;  fon  viure  n'eft  pour  I'ordi-
naire  copofe  que  d'vn  peu  de  farine  de  bled  d'Inde
boiiillie  das  I'eau  fans  fel;  fes  oreilles  sot  battues  de
mille  gaufferies,  de  mille  brocards,  &  de  mille  in-
iures,  que  ces  Barbares  vomiffent  contre  les  Fran9ois,
&  cotre  les  Sauuages  Chreftiens,  &  contre  nos
alliez.  Prens  courage,  mon  nepueu,  luy  dira  vn
Capitaine,  en  fe  gauffant,  ne  t'afflige  point,  tu
verras  bie  toft  icy  quelques-vns  de  tes  freres,  qui
te  viendront  tenir  compagnie.  Nos  guerriers  ont
enuie  de  manger  de  la  chair  des  Franjois,  tu  en  pour-
ras  goufter  auec  nous :  voila  comme  on  nous  a  depeint
ce  Martyr  viuant,  ce  Cofeffeur  fouffrant,  c6t  homme
riche  das  1' extreme  pauurete,  ioyeux  &  content  dans
le  pays  des  douleurs,  &  de  la  trifteff e :  en  vn  mot  ce
lefuitte  veflu  kla  Sauuage,  ou  plutoft  a  la  faindt  lean
Baptif[t]e:  ruminons  ie  vous  prie  ces  paroles:  [259]
Que  nojlre  confideration  (dit-il)  n  empefche  point  de  /aire
ce  qui  eji  a  la  gloire  de  Dieii.  C'eft  k  dire,  n'ayez  point
d'efgard  a  ma  vie, regardez  moy,  comme  vn  home


1642-43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  301

felt.  For  all  these  pains,  the  poor  Father  had  no
other  Physician  or  other  Surgeon  than  patience ;  no
other  salve  than  pain,  no  other  cover  than  the  air
which  surrounded  his  wounds.  This  is  not  all, —
those  Barbarians  tear  off  his  cassock;  they  strip  him,
and,  to  cover  his  nakedness,  throw  at  him  a  bit  of  an
old  skin,  charged  with  filth  and  stench.  He  covers
half  [258]  of  his  body  with  it;  he  has  his  feet  and  his
legs  bare,  his  arms  bare,  his  head  bare.  He  has  for
house  some  pieces  of  bark ;  the  earth  is  his  bed  and
his  mattress;  a  fragment  of  skin,  or  of  a  cape,  which
serves  him  as  robe  during  the  day,  still  serves  him
as  cover  during  the  night.  His  living,  as  a  rule,  is
composed  only  of  a  little  meal  of  Indian  corn,  boiled
in  water  without  salt.  His  ears  are  assailed  with  a
thousand  jeers,  a  thousand  taunts,  and  a  thousand
insults, —  which  those  Barbarians  vomit  against  the
French,  against  the  Christian  Savages,  and  against
our  allies.  "  Take  courage,  my  nephew,"  a  Captain
will  say  to  him,  jeering;  "  be  not  grieved,  thou  wilt
soon  see  some  of  thy  brothers  here,  who  will  come
to  keep  thee  company.  Our  warriors  desire  to  eat  of
the  flesh  of  the  French, —  thou  wilt  be  able  to  taste  it
with  us."  Behold  how  they  have  depicted  to  us  this
living  Martyr,  this  suffering  Confessor,  this  man  rich
in  extreme  poverty,  joyful  and  contented  in  the  land
of  pains  and  sadness, —  in  a  word,  this  Jesuit  clothed
like  a  Savage,  or  rather  like  saint  John  the  Baptist.
Let  us  meditate,  I  beg  you,  upon  these  words:  [259]
Let  not  regard  for  ns  (he  says)  prevent  from  doi7ig  that
which  is  to  the  glory  of  God.  That  is  to  say,  "  Have
not  regard  for  my  life ;  regard  me  as  a  man  already
dead.  I  know  well  that  if  you  illtreat  the  Iroquois,
I  am  murdered, —  I  no  longer  account  myself  among


302  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.24

delia  mort:  ie  fgay  bien  que  {\  vous  traitez  mal  les
Iroquois,  ie  fuis  maffacr^,  ie  ne  me  conte  plus  entre
les  viuans ;  ma  vie  eft  a  Dieu,  faites  tout  ce  que  vous
iugerez  de  plus  k  propos,  pour  fa  gloire.  Que  lefus-
Chrift  eft  puiffant  das  vn  bon  coeur!  fa  bonte  ne  fe
laiffe  pas  vaincre,  elle  fait  gloire  de  triompher  dans
Ie  plus  grand  abandon.  Ie  me  conjirjne  de  plus  en  plus
(adioufte-il)  a  demeurer  icy,  tant  quil  plaira  a  nojire
Seigneur,  &  a  ne  m  en  point  aller,  quand  me/me  Voccafion
s'en  prefenteroit:  Que  cette  generorit6  eft  agreable  ^
Dieu !  cet  homme  dont  tous  les  fens  n'ont  que  des
obiets  de  douleur,  dit  qu'il  ne  fe  fauueroit  pas  quand
il  Ie  pourroit  faire.  Ma  prefence  (pourfuit-il)  confole
les  Frangois,  les  Hurons  &  les  Algonquins.  II  y  a  deux
Francois  captifs  auec  ce  bon  Pere,  quantite  de
Hurons,  &  quantite  d' Algonquins,  dont  quelques-vns
font  Chreftiens,  &  les  autres  ont  enuie  de  I'eftre:
voudriez-vous  bien  que  ce  [260]  coeur  plein  de  feu,
que  ce  Pafteur  plein  d'amour  abandonnaft  fes  oiiail-
les:  certes  il  n'eft  point  larron,  ny  mercenaire:  pour
commettre  vne  fi  grande  perfidie,  encore  que  ces  pa-
roles nous  ayent  tire  les  larmes  des  yeux,  elles  n'ont
pas  laiffe  d'augmenter  la  ioye  de  noftre  coeur:  il  y
en  a  qui  luy  porte  plus  d' enuie  que  de  compaffion,
quitter  les  creatures  pour  Dieu,  ce  n'eft  pas  vn  man-
uals change.  F ay  Baptifc  plus  de  foixante  perfonnes.
Nous  croyons  que  ce  font  des  Hurons,  &  des  Algon-
quins fes  concaptifs,  &  peut-eftre  encore  quelques
petits  enfans  Iroquois  mourans,  qui  prient  Dieu  dans
les  cieux,  pour  leurs  parens,  c' eji  la  mon  vnique  conf ela-
tion, &  la  volont^  de  Dieu,  a  laqjielle  tres  volontiers  ie
conioints  la  niicnne.  Voicy  de  riches  paroles!  mais
encore  qui  pourroit  confoler  ce  pauure  Pere,  fmon


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  303

the  living.  My  life  is  God's;  do  all  that  you  shall
judge  most  suitable  for  his  glory."  How  powerful
is  Jesus  Christ  in  a  pious  heart !  His  goodness  does
not  allow  itself  to  be  vanquished,  it  makes  a  glory
of  triumphing  in  the  greatest  desolation.  /  become
more  and  more  resolved  (he  adds)  to  dwell  Jiere  as  long  as
it  shall  please  our  Lord,  and  not  to  go  away ,  even  though  the
opportunity  should  present  itself.  How  agreeable  is
such  generosity  to  God !  This  man,  all  whose  senses
have  nothing  but  objects  of  pain,  says  that  he  would
not  escape  though  he  could  do  so.  My  presence  (he
continues)  consoles  the  FrencJi,  the  Hurons,  and  the  Al-
gonguins.  There  are  two  captive  Frenchmen  with  this
good  Father,  many  Hurons,  and  many  Algonquins, —
some  of  whom  are  Christians,  and  the  others  desire  to
be :  would  you,  indeed,  that  this  [260]  heart  full  of  fire,
that  this  Pastor  full  of  love,  should  abandon  his
sheep?  Surely  he  is  not  a  thief  or  hireling,  to  com-
mit so  great  a  treachery.  Although  these  words
have  drawn  the  tears  from  our  eyes,  they  have  not
failed  to  augment  the  joy  of  our  hearts:  there  is  one
of  us  who  feels  toward  him  more  envy  than  compas-
sion ;  to  give  up  creatures  for  God,  is  not  a  bad  ex-
change. I  have  Baptized  more  than  sixty  persons.  We
suppose  that  these  are  Hurons  and  Algonquins,  his
fellow  captives ;  and  perhaps  further,  some  little  Iro-
quois children,  dying,  who  pray  to  God  in  the  heav-
ens for  their  parents, —  that  is  my  single  consolation,
and  the  will  of  God,  to  which  very  gladly  I  unite  my  own.
These  are  glorious  words !  But  moreover,  who  could
console  this  poor  Father,  if  not  the  one  who  alone  is
left  for  him,  and  whom  the  whole  Universe  cannot
ravish  from  him !  The  two  Frenchmen  who  are  with
the  Father  give  us  astonishment, — that one, espe-


304  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.24

celuy  qui  luy  eft  refte  feul,  &  que  tout  I'Vniuers  ne
luy  f gauroit  rauir !  Les  deux  Frangois  qui  font  auec
le  Pere,  nous  donnent  de  I'eftonnenient,  celuy  notam-
ment  qui  fe  nomme  Guillaume  Coufture :  ce  ieune
homme  fe  pouuoit  fauuer:  mais  la  penfee  luy  en
eftant  venue,  non,  dit-il,  ie  [261]  veux  mourir  auec
le  Pere,  ie  ne  le  f9aurois  abandonner,  ie  fouffriray
volontiers  le  feu  &  la  rage  de  ces  tygres,  pour  I'a-
mour  de  lefus-Chrift,  en  la  compagnie  de  mon  bon
Pere,  c'eft  parler  en  homme  vrayement  fidelle,  auffi  ne
s'eftoit-il  pas  iette  dans  ces  dangers,  pour  aucune
confideration  temporelle.  La  lettre  porte  qu'il  eftoit
party  des  Iroquois,  vne  troupe  conduite  par  rhomme
de  Mathurin,  c'eft  a  dire  par  vn  Huron  pris  des  Iro-
quois, &  qui  a  perdu  I'affedtion  de  fon  pays,  &  de  fas
compatriotes,  aufquels  il  fait  la  guerre  maintenant,
comme  il  fgait  les  endroits  oil  ils  doiuet  paffer,  il  les
va  attendre  &  furprendre  au  paffage,  ce  fut  ce  mife-
rable  renie,  qui  deffit  les  Hurons,  auec  lefquels  le
Pere  fe  rencontra,  on  I'appelle  rhomme  de  Mathurin,
pour  ce  qu'il  ramena  des  Hurons,  deuant  qu'il  fut
pris  des  Iroquois,  vn  braue  ieune  homme  qui  portoit
ce  nom,  lequel  apres  s'eftre  bien  comporte  auec  nos
Peres,  en  ce  bout  du  monde,  eft  repaffe  en  France,
pour  fe  donner  a  Dieu,  dans  le  faindt  Ordre  des  Reue-
rends  Peres  Capucins,  oil  il  ^  fait  profeffion.

[262]  Au  refte  cette  lettre  eftoit  efcrite  partie  en
Frangois,  partie  en  Latin  partie  en  langue  Sauuage,
afin  que  fi  elle  tomboit  entre  les  mains  de  quelque
autre,  que  de  celuy  auquel  elle  s'adreffoit,  il  ne  put
aifement  defcouurir  les  bons  aduis  que  le  Pere
nous  donne.

Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  qui  eftoit  aux  trois  Ri-


1642-43]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  305

cially,  who  is  named  Guillaume  Cousture.  This
young  man  was  able  to  escape ;  but  the  thought  of  it
having  come  to  him, —  "  No,"  he  says,  "  I  [261]  wish
to  die  with  the  Father ;  I  cannot  forsake  him ;  I  will
gladly  suffer  the  fire  and  the  rage  of  these  tigers,  for
the  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  company  of  my  good
Father. "  That  is  speaking  like  a  truly  faithful  man,
as,  indeed,  he  had  not  thrown  himself  into  these
dangers  for  any  temporal  consideration.  The  letter
states  that  there  had  started  from  the  Iroquois  a  band
led  by  the  man  of  Mathurin, — that  is  to  say,  by  a
Huron  taken  by  the  Iroquois,  who  has  lost  affection
for  his  country  and  his  fellow  countrymen,  on  whom
he  now  makes  war.  As  he  knows  the  places  where
they  are  to  pass,  he  goes  to  await  and  surprise  them
at  the  passage;  it  was  this  miserable  renegade
who  defeated  the  Hurons  with  whom  the  Father
happened  to  be.  They  call  him  "  the  man  of
Mathurin,"  because  he  brought  back  from  the
Hurons,  before  he  was  taken  by  the  Iroquois,  a  worthy
young  man  who  bore  that  name ;  who,  after  having
well  conducted  himself  with  our  Fathers  in  this  end
of  the  world,  crossed  back  to  France,  in  order  to  give
himself  to  God  in  the  holy  Order  of  the  Reverend
Capuchin  Fathers,  wherein  he  has  made  profession.

[262]  Furthermore,  this  letter  was  written  partly
in  French,  partly  in  Latin,  partly  in  the  Savage
tongue,  so  that  if  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  some  one
else  than  the  one  to  whom  it  was  addressed,  he  could
not  easily  discover  the  good  counsel  which  the
Father  gives  us.

Monsieur  the  Governor,  who  was  at  the  three  Riv-
ers, made  answer  to  the  letter  of  Father  Jogues ;  I
wrote  to  him  also,  quite  at  length,  and  sent  Father


306  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.24

uieres,  fift  refponce  a  la  lettre  du  Pere  logues,  ie  luy
efcriuis  auffi  bien  au  long,  &  enuoyay  le  Pere  Bre-
beuf  ^  Richelieu,  pour  conferer  auec  ce  Huron  fur
f on  retour  aux  Iroquois :  mais  le  pauure  homme  nous
mift  en  vne  nouuelle  peine  bien  grande:  car  crai-
gnant  que  les  Iroquois  dans  le  pays  ne  le  priffent
pour  efpion,  &  pour  auoir  quelque  intelligence  auec
nous,  il  declara  tout  net,  qu'il  ne  retourneroit  plus
aux  Iroquois:  mais  aux  Hurons:  &  n'y  euft  moyen
de  luy  perfuader  autre  chofe:  li  bien  que  nous
demeurafmes  priuez  de  cette  confolation ;  &  le  Pere
logues  encore  plus  que  nous  n'ayant  aucune  refponce,
ny  nouuelle  de  noftre  pays,  &  peut-eftre  en  danger
[263]  d'eftre  mis  ^  mort,  fur  le  foup§on  que  les  Bar-
bares  auront,  qu'on  aura  fait  quelque  mal  au  Huron
captif,  qui  eftoit  de  leur  bande.  I'efpere  pourtant
que  noftre  bon  Dieu  qui  Ta  conferue  iufques  icy,  con-
tinuera  fes  mifericordes,  &  fe  feruira  de  la  vertu  de
ce  Pere,  pour  le  falut  de  ces  peuples,  &  pour  quelque
bon  effe(5t,  que  fa  diuine  prouidence  cognoift.


1 642  - 43]  RELA  TION  OF  1642 -  43  307

Brebeuf  to  Richelieu  in  order  to  confer  witli  that
Huron  about  his  return  to  the  Iroquois.  But  the
poor  man  placed  us  in  a  new  difficulty,  a  very  great
one, —  for,  fearing  lest  the  Iroquois  in  the  country
should  take  him  for  a  spy,  and  for  having  some
intelligence  with  us,  he  declared  very  plainly  that  he
would  return  no  more  to  the  Iroquois,  but  to  the
Hurons ;  and  there  was  no  way  of  persuading  him  to
anything  else.  Consequently,  we  remained  deprived
of  that  consolation,  and  Father  Jogues  still  more  than
we, — having  no  answer  or  news  from  our  country,
and  perhaps  in  danger  [263]  of  being  put  to  death
upon  the  suspicion  which  the  Barbarians  will  have,
that  some  harm  may  have  been  done  to  the  captive
Huron  who  was  of  their  band.  I  hope,  however,
that  our  good  God,  who  has  preserved  him  hitherto,
will  continue  his  mercies,  and  will  employ  this
Father's  virtue  for  the  salvation  of  these  peoples,  and
for  some  good  result  which  his  divine  providence
knows.


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XXIV

(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  number  of  note,  refer  to  pages

of  English  text.)

1  (p.  43). —  Cf.  the  two  prayers  in  Montagnais  given  by  Le  Jeune
in  vol.  vii.,  pp.  152-157.  See  also  Trumbull's  valuable  contribution
to  Algonkin  comparative  grammar,  "Notes  on  Forty  Versions  of
the  Lord's  Prayer  in  Algonkin  Langfuages,"  A^ner.  Philol.  Soc.
Trans.,  1872  (Hartford,  1873),  pp.  113-218.

2  (p.  47). —  The  falls  of  Montmorency  are  at  the  mouth  of  Mont-
morency River,  nine  miles  below  Quebec;  they  are  about  250  feet  in
height,  but  only  50  wide.  Electric  light  and  power  for  the  city  of
Quebec  are  derived  from  this  cataract.  It  was  named  by  Champlain
(1608),  probably  for  Henri  de  Montmorency,  constable  of  France.

3  (P-  53)- — This  man  was  baptized  at  Quebec,  Nov.  4,  1640,  by  Le
Jeune.  For  description  of  the  baptismal  register  at  Sillery',  see  vol.
XX.,  note  10.

4  (p.  61). —  Numerous  settlements  had  been  begun  in  Maine,  by
this  time, —  Piscataqua  (Kittery)  and  Monhegan  Island,  1622;  Saco,
1623 ;  Sagadahoc,  Damariscotta,  and  Pemaquid,  probably  about  the
same  time.  Robert  Gorges  in  1624  established  a  colony  at  Aga-
menticus  (York).  Two  years  later  a  trading  post  was  located  at
Penobscot  (Castine) ;  and,  in  1628,  one  on  the  Kennebec,  not  far
from  Casco  Bay.

5  (p.  85). —  Guillaume  Tronquet  was  Montmagny's  secretary,
probably  during  most  of  the  latter's  term  as  governor.  He  is  also
mentioned  as  exercising  the  functions  of  a  notary  at  Quebec,  in
1644-46.

6  (p.  113). —  For  location  of  Arente  (Aronte)  see  vol,  x.,  note  23.

7  (p.  117). —  Jean  le  Sueur,  a  secular  priest,  came  to  Canada  in
1634,  with  Giffard  (vol.  vi.,  note  8);  his  other  title  was  derived  from
a  parish  in  Normandy,  which  he  had  served,  Saint  Sauveur  de
Thury.  In  1645-46,  he  was  missionary  at  Cote  de  Beaupre,  and  later
officiated  in  the  chapel  at  Coteau  Ste.  Genevieve.  In  March,  1646,
he  became  joint  proprietor,  with  Jean  Bourdon,  of  the  fief  St.
Francis  (vol.  xi., note 11). The  Journ. des  Jesuit es  frequently


310  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

mentions  him,  up  to  1660. One  of  the  suburbs  of  Quebec  is  named
St.  Sauveur,  for  this  priest.

8  (p.  133). —  Marsolet  is  sketched  in  vol.  v.,  note  35.

9  (p.  145). —  Martin  de  Lyonne,  born  at  Paris,  May  13,  1614,  en-
tered the  Jesuit  novitiate  Dec.  8,  1629,  at  Nancy.  His  studies  were
pursued  at  Pont-a-Mousson  (1631-34)  and  Rome  (1638-42),  the
interval  being  spent  as  instructor  at  Sens  and  Charleville.  Having
spent  his  last  year  of  probation  at  Rouen,  at  its  close  (1643)  he
joined  the  Canada  mission.  He  labored  therein  during  the  re-
mainder of  his  life, —  during  most  of  that  period  at  Miscou  and  other
posts  along  the  coast,  from  Cape  Breton  to  Gaspe  Bay.  He  made
several  voyages  to  France  during  that  time ;  on  his  return  from  the
last  of  these  (1657),  l^e  went  to  labor  in  the  mission  station  of
Chedabouctou,  in  Acadia,  where  he  finally  died,  Jan.  16,  1661,  a  vic-
tim of  his  devotion  in  attending  the  sick,  during  an  epidemic  of
scurvy.

For  account  of  Richard,  see  vol.  viii.,  note  17.

10  (p.  147). —  The  labors  of  Father  Biard  are  recounted  at  length  in
vols,  i.-iii.  of  this  series.

11  (p.  153). —  A^<?/>^_^^>'ze'// (now  Nipisiguit,  or  Nepisiquit) :  a  river,
100  miles  in  length,  flowing  into  Bathurst  Bay,  N.  B. ;  noted  for
salmon  fishing,  and  for  the  beauty  and  grandeur  of  its  scenery.
Twenty  miles  above  its  mouth  are  the  Great  Falls,  140  feet  in  height.

The  settlement  of  this  name  was  an  early  trading  and  fishing
post,  at  the  mouth  of  the  river.  The  Rdcollet  missionaries  of
Aquitaine  (vol.  iv.,  note  22)  first  labored  here  (1619-24);  later,  the
Capuchins,  for  a  time;  the  Jesuits,  1642-61.  Some  years  later,  the
Recollets  returned  to  this  field,  notable  among  whom  was  the  mis-
sionary Le  Clercq  (vol.  iii.,  note  45);  they  remained  here  till  near
the  close  of  the  century.  Bishop  Laval  took  great  interest  in  the
Acadian  and  Gaspesian  missions,  and  sent  thither  priests  from  the
Seminary  of  Quebec,  during  many  years.  Denys,  the  governor  of
Acadia  (vol.  ix.,  note  26),  had  his  residence  here  for  several  years
(1661-71?).  In  1692,  the  French  at  this  settlement  were  expelled  by
the  natives.  Except  for  a  Scotch  trading  post  maintained  here,
about  1766-76,  Nipisiguit  seems  to  have  remained  uninhabited  by
Europeans  until  1818,  when  the  present  city  of  Bathurst  was  founded
by  Sir  Howard  Douglas  at  this  place.  Much  valuable  information,
descriptive  and  historical,  concerning  this  region  is  given  by  Dionne,
in  "Miscou,"  Can.-Franqais,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  515-519.

12  (p.  153). —  Jean  d'Olbeau  was  bom  at  Langres  in  i6o3.  A
student  in  the  Jesuit  college  there,  he  entered  the  novitiate  of  that
order  Oct.  16,  1628. Having  spent  the  usual  term  as  instructor,  at


(


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XXIV  311

Vannes  and  Caen  (1630-34),  and  at  Moulins  (1638-39),  and  studied
theolog}'  at  La  Fleche  (1634-33),  he  spent  his  last  year  at  Rouen;
at  its  close  (1640),  he  began  his  missionary'  labors  at  Miscou.  There
he  remained  till  1643,  when  broken  health  forced  him  to  return  to
France;  on  the  voyage  thither,  he  was  drowned  (vol.  viii.,  note  17).
For  sketch  of  Desdames,  see  vol.  xii.,  note  26.

13  (p.  155). —  Few  of  these  small  Montagnais  tribes  can  now  be
identified.  They  inhabited  the  Saguenay  valley,  and  the  region
northward,  watered  by  that  and  neighboring  streams,  to  the  water-
shed between  the  St.  Lawrence  and  Hudson  Bay.

14  (p.  159). —  Sol:  the  early  name  of  the  French  coin  now  known  as
sou;  derived  from  Ital.  soldo  (Lat.  solidus) ;  the  twentieth  part  of
the  old  li\Te,  and  now  the  twentieth  part  of  a  franc.

15  (p.  1S3). —  Socoquiois  (Sokokis):  an  Abenaki  tribe,  settled  along
the  Saco  river.  They  were  at  enmity  with  the  Mohawks,  and,
before  Philip's  war,  had  a  strong  fort  on  the  bank  of  the  Ossipee,
to  repel  the  attacks  of  the  latter.  Among  their  sagamores  was  the
noted  Squanto,  who  burned  the  English  settlement  at  Saco,  Sept.  18,
1675.  Eventually,  this  tribe  removed,  with  other  Abenakis.  to
Canada  (vol.  xii.,  note  22).

16  (p.  191). —  For  sketches  of  several  chiefs  bearing  this  name,  see
vol.  viii.,  note  30.

17  (p.  197). —  Champflour  is  noticed  in  vol.  xx.,  note  14.

18  (p.  197). —  For  sketch  of  De  Noue,  see  vol,  iv.,  note  31.

19  (p.  197). —  Regarding  De  Normanville,  see  vol.  xxi.,  note  i.

20  (p.  269). —  Mataouchkariniens:  the  savages  resident  along  the
Madawaska  River  (vol.  xviii.,  7iote  14).

21  (p.  271). —  Santweronons:  the  Sonnontouan  or  Seneca  tribe  (vol.
viii.,  note  21).

22  (p.  271). —  This  settlement  of  the  Dutch  was  close  to  the  site  of
the  present  city  of  Albany.  It  was  first  begun  as  a  fortified  trading
post,  in  1614,  on  Castle  Island;  the  buildings  were  so  injured  by  a
freshet,  four  years  later,  that  they  were  abandoned.  In  1623,  a  new
fort,  named  Orange,  was  built  on  the  west  side  of  the  Hudson ;  and,
seven  %'ears  later,  a  colony  was  brought  over  from  Holland  by  the
patroon  Kiliaen  Van  Rensselaer,  Johannes  de  Laet,  and  others,
who  settled  these  people  in  the  vicinity  of  the  fort,  giving  the  colony
the  name  of  Rensselaerswyck.  Its  first  minister,  who  came  in  1642,
was  Johannes  Megapolensis.  a  clerg\-man  of  great  learning  and
piety ;  he  exercised  much  kindness  and  charity  to  the  captive  Jesuit
Jogues  (vol.  ix.,  note  41).

Full  particulars  regarding  this  and  other  early  Dutch  settlements


312  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES


on  the  Hudson  are  given  by  O'Callaghan,  in  vol.  i.,  of  Hist.  New
Netherlands.

23  (p.  281).—  Rene  Goupil,  a  young  French  surgeon,  born  in  Anjou,
was  for  several  months  a  Jesuit  novice  at  Paris ;  but,  his  health  not
permitting  him  to  study  for  the  priesthood,  he  came  to  Canada,
apparently  in  1640,  as  a  donne  in  that  mission.  He  remained  at  or
near  Quebec  for  two  years,  part  of  the  time  caring  for  the  sick  at
the  hospital.  In  August,  1642,  he  set  out  with  Jogues  for  the  Huron
mission ;  but,  on  the  way,  they  were  captured  by  the  Iroquois,  and
taken  to  the  country  of  that  tribe.  Goupil  was  Jogues's  companion
in  captivity  for  a  short  time;  but  was  slain  (Sept.  29,  1642)  by  an
Iroquois.  A  sketch  of  his  life,  written  by  Jogues,  will  appear  in
vol.  xxviii.  of  this  series.

Concerning  Couture,  see  vol.  xxi.,  note  22.

24  (p.  297). —  Of  this  lost  Relation  another  copy  was  made  at  the
Huron  mission,  and  sent  to  Quebec ;  arriving  there  too  late  for  that
year's  Relation,  it  appeared  in  that  for  1644,  q.  v.


I


d


t>A


/
