ie”
Zs
i]
bik saad
iy i ti
ietateratetaty
state
a Sosaeet
Bt
1 f i es bh
iste A SeKsisiam ,
atoeance aia suet AF
Z : ;
Li = J 7 aan at
hepa } tab Li
ny
Slahetsra ss a dak ; acer
ahem f t 2 : i i es iit ie
Ie Ak fae ik 4 s At " ‘ f Lt i
ref ashi: r i . + = < . a
el aoecroren far mnedee i aia! i ; aneNalit : "3
es
Piri dat jah m : : 2 A
2°
issih }
ig fans
?
BF et 3
: 3
Tecate
E | 7 e
rete
i ‘gigs ; E
Ss Slergiars ; | hs ‘ Q ee Aik 4
a nabs eisise i Ssavenav f } if
] asia iaieieiaielaiete jay f ; { Lj
S18 eo sieieleis: a i ;
= siete eats
@)asam: =
te ad
duate Theological
Graduate Theologica


| ish
Plictam Lene ras
RS eREC ae beebok Cae ¥


pars
—
aed
aie
‘ re - ,
A
4 +
y ’
¢ oe pa
j ‘ a. ”
Z B y oa
a, ‘ f ¢ :
a ; \ /
ie, , ' ;
Bro
Hh


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2022 with funding from
Kahle/Austin Foundation


https://archive.org/details/jesuitrelationsa0023jesu


e


THE JESUIT RELATIONS


AND


ALLIED DOCUMENTS


VOL. XXIII


The edition consists of sev-
en hundred and fifty sets
all numbered


Mo... eel


SO PDecuwrleheuse


: — =>
7 i oh Lae f ; 7
= uk i ae af


_


<
<


Ss


ISAAC JOGUES, S.J.


pak nee
CLeA HURONS, QUEBEC, IROQUOIS ms
g 1642-1643 ae as ;
Please retur> to Zou GS LIBRA DS
G tas 4, mye F A 2 i ee P ‘,
sracuate The. ‘ral of ten LA RCH


pin <.
? , f
ot L_4€. LY» me
= f
ad ra Ce ) yy


The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents


TRAVELS AND EXPLORATIONS
OF THE JESUIT MISSIONARIES
IN NEW FRANCE


1610-1791


THE ORIGINAL FRENCH, LATIN, AND ITAL-
IAN TEXTS, WITH ENGLISH TRANSLA-
TIONS AND NOTES; ILLUSTRATED BY
PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND FACSIMILES


EDITED BY


REUBEN GOLD THWAITES
Secretary of the State Historical Society of Wisconsin-


Property of “% Vol. XXIII ,


LRA: °F. ei $ te
Union Libra: |
LEVELAND: Tbe Hurrows Brothers

any, PUBLISHERS aay ee
% f” 4 ed {. d .


of f ® ;
Xe fx 6
~ ~y OG0.4


i wily ss
A. gl ia Ye
)


e\arh S


COPYRIGHT, 1898
BY
Tur Burrows BRoTHERS Co


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


The Imperial Press, Cleveland


EDITORIAL STAFF


Editor ; 5 REUBEN GOLD THWAITES
{ FINLOW ALEXANDER
Percy FAVOR BICKNELL


WILLIAM FREDERIC GIESE


Translators .
CRAWFORD LINDSAY
WILLIAM PRICE
HIRAM ALLEN SOBER
Assistant Editor . EMMA HELEN BLAIR


Bibliographical Adviser VicTOR HuGo PALTSITS’


CONTENTS OF VOL. XXIU


PREFACE TO VOLUME XXIII _. : Tee

DOCUMENTS :—

XLVIII. Relation de ce qvi s’est passé en la
Novvelle France, en l’année 1642.
[Chaps. ii.—xii. of Part II., complet-
ing the document.] MHzerosme Lale-
mant,; Ste. Marie aux Hurons, June


10, 1642 j : hae Y
XD ee ete es Monsieur POM of. | Cranes

Garnier, Ste. Marie aux Hurons,

23, 10A3 , : 230


L. Epistola ad R. P. Mutium Vitelleschi,
Prepositum Generalem Societatis
Jesu, Roma. /oannes de Brébeuf;
Tria Flumina, September 23, 1643 246
LI. Relation de ce qvi s’est passé en la
Novvelle France, en l’année 1642. &
1643. [Chaps. i.-ili.] Barthelemy
Vimont,; without date ; Pe
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOLUME XXIII O32


NOTES : ‘ ; ; ; 132%


ih


IIT:


IV.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO VOL. XXIII


Portrait of Isaac Jogues, S.J.; photo-en-
graving from oil portrait by Donald


Guthrie McNab . ; . Frontispiece


Photographic facsimile of handwriting of
Charles Raymbault, S.J., Chevalier de
Montmagny, Guillaume Hébert, Jean
Bourdon, et al., from a document in
archives of St. Mary’s College, Mont-


real : : . Facing 224


Reduced facsimile of Boisseau’s Map of


New France, 1643 : Facing 234


Photographic facsimile of title-page, Re-
lation of 1642-43 .


. 258


PREFACE: TO VOL: XXIll


Following is a synopsis of documents contained in
the present volume:

XLVIII. The Relation of 1642 is in two parts,—
Part I., by the superior Vimont, being dated at Que-
bee, October 4; Part II., by Jerome Lalemant, is
dated at Ste. Marie, in the Huron country, June 1o.
In Vol. XXII. we presented Part I., and the opening
chapteson Partyll. Wevherein give: Chaps: ii; xii
of Part II., thus completing the document.

In continuing his narrative of the year’s work
among the Hurons, Lalemant describes the appor-
tionment of work among the missionaries in that
field, and the great assistance and comfort they de-
rive from their annual retreat at the residence of Ste.
Marie, which is the central point of all their activi-
ties, and a refuge for the more devout of their Indian
converts. The Jesuit chapel there is regarded by
the savages ‘‘ as one of the Wonders of the World,
although in France it would be considered but a poor
affair.’’ Over 120 baptisms have been solemnized
therein during the past year; the most notable of
these converts is Ahatsistari, ‘‘ the chief Warrior in
the Country,” of whose strength and daring marvel-
ous tales are related. He sets out to the war immedi-
ately after his baptism; and he and his Christian com-
rades, before departing, make certain resolutions
of affection and loyalty to one another and to the


10 PREPA CE WOW OL a Aexilh


Faith. One of these declares that, if they perish,
they desire their remains to be buried apart, and not
mingled with the bones of unbelievers, even if the
latter be their fathers or their children, —‘‘ since our
Souls will be eternally separated, and our affection
will not continue beyond this life.”’

The missionaries baptize certain Iroquois captives
during their torments; this incenses the Hurons,
who already distrust the Fathers, on account of
slanderous rumors that the latter are secretly leagued
with the Iroquois. In time, however, this excite-
ment dies away.

The residence of Ste. Marie is also the center of
a mission among the Ataronchronons, who at first
refuse to listen to Pijart, but at last are won by his
patience, and some acknowledge the truth of the
Gospel. Chastelain, however, is well received, and
his preaching has made some converts.

From La Conception (Ossossané), the oldest of
these missions, come encouraging reports of the
constancy and faithfulness of the converts, under
many temptations and assaults. They are threatened
by the medicine men with the loss of their harvest,
unless they sacrifice to the demons; but they refuse,
preferring death to sin. The writer adds: ‘‘ We
do not know whether God willed to reward their
Faith, and to punish the impiety of the others; but
we were witnesses that most of the corn did not
ripen, especially that belonging to those who had
sacrificed to the Devil, while our Christians gathered
a fair crop.” Many instances of virtuous resistance
and brave steadfastness are related; and the pious
acts and devotions of certain converts — notably of


Joseph Teondechoren and Charles Tsondatsaa —are


PREFACE TO VOL. XXIII 11


recounted in detail. When the pagans celebrate
their Ononharoia, ‘‘ the dream feast,’’ the Christian
Indians meet, to state their desires also. One wishes
to go to heaven; another, that all their brothers
be converted, and gathered into a village where no
sin could enter. Another declares that if a pagan
should ask him the customary question, to guess his
desire, he ‘‘ would say to the fool who should pro-
pound his enigma, ‘ Thou wishest to burn in the fire
with the Devil, whose desires thou seekest; throw
thyself into those fireplaces, and thy desire and his
will be accomplished.’’’ ‘‘ Some of the foolish ones
became wise, while stopping to hear such pious dis-
course.’’ Lalemant describes the usual routine of
pious duties performed by the members of this little
Huron church,— the daily Mass and evening prayer,
the weekly confession, and Sunday services. The
neophytes show great tenderness of conscience, and
confess, with great contrition, their least shortcom-
ings; ‘‘ sometimes there is more holiness than evil in
acts which they think have been highly criminal.’’
One man was at a council, where a dance in honor
of the devil was ordered; ‘‘ being caught there by
surprise without being able to get away, I begged
pardon of God; I said many insulting things to the
Devil, and I went to sleep.” The converts watch
over not only their own consciences, but those of
their relatives and friends.

The mission of St. Joseph (the most southerly of
all) is next discussed. Garnier and Le Moyne, in
whose charge it is, report several interesting con-
versions, and relate the persecutions to which these
new Christians are subjected by their pagan coun-
trymen. They remain, however, steadfast, and
profess the Faith boldly.


12 PIRI A CL) LOM VOTE eX Xe,


The itinerant mission of St. Jean Baptiste, among
the Arendahronons, is in charge of Daniel and
Chaumonot. The missionaries had at first looked
for much success because the Indians had no definite
form of ‘‘ worship for any false Divinity; but ex-
perience has shown us that they are full of Diabolical
superstitions,’’ which greatly hinder them from
receiving the true faith. Several instances are
related of demoniacal apparitions and even posses-
sion. The people sacrifice to these demons, and
think that the latter predict to them the future;
relying thereon, these poor dupes are often disap-
pointed.

A chief named Atironta is put to death by the
Iroquois; his brother Aéontahon becomes a Christian
(the first adult in good health baptized in this mis-
sion), and is persecuted in consequence, until, in
accordance with Indian custom, he is elected captain
in his deceased brother’s place, and takes his name,
Atironta. Much is said of the savage belief in
dreams, and the manner in which evil omens are
averted. Several instances are given of the efficacy
of prayer to God, offered by the Indian converts when
in danger; in one case, a violent storm was about to
engulf them in the waters, when, as soon as prayer
was offered, ‘‘ the Canoe was at rest, the waves fell,
and the tract through which they passed became as
smooth as a mirror, although all around them the
wind continued to blow furiously.’’

Lalemant describes an eclipse of the moon (April
14,1642). He states that the mission to the Tobacco
Nation, begun last year, cannot be fully sustained,
on account of the small force of missionaries; but
Garnier and Pijart make occasional visits thither, to


TTA OMA CE! LORVOL XXL 13


minister to their few converts in that tribe. The
great difficulties which, among all these peoples,
hinder the Faith are recounted—the ‘“‘ diabolical
superstitions,’ the impious feasts, and the instability
of marriages. The fidelity of their few converts,
however, cheers the missionaries, and they hope for
still greater blessings in future.

The final chapter relates the work carried on
among the Nipissings, north of the Huron country,
by Claude Pijart and Charles Raymbault, who spend
the summer with them at Lake Nipissing. While
there, the Algonkin tribes celebrate their ‘‘ feast of
the dead,” somewhat similar to that among the
Hurons, described earlier by Brébeuf; its special
rites are graphically depicted—among them, ‘‘a
ballet in three parts,’’ and a competition in climbing
a greased pole. Gifts are made to one another by
the tribes present on this occasion; those of the
Nipissings alone ‘‘ would have cost in France forty
or even fifty thousand francs.’’ The Jesuit mission-
aries are present at all the ceremonies of this festival,
and receive numerous marks of honor and affection.
Following savage custom, they also proffer feasts
and gifts to the Indians; in consequence of which,
the Algonkins resident at Sault Ste. Marie invite
the ‘‘ black robes’’ to visit them at their. home.
Raymbault and Jogues, in accordance with their
request, journey to the Sault (September — October,
1642); and are most hospitably received by their
Indian friends. On his return from this voyage,
Raymbault at once begins another journey, with
Ménard, to the winter quarters of the Nipissings; but
storms compel them to return to Ste. Marie. The
exposure and hardship bring on a severe illness for


14 IWGACMOIS, JUO) WAOWE, AOL,


Raymbault, and wreck his health. Ménard and
Pijart spend the winter in ministering to the Algon-
kins who come during that season to the Huron
country.


XLIX. This is a letter from Garnier to a friend
in France (‘‘ Monsieur J. M. J.’’), written from Ste.
Marie of the Hurons, the 23rd of some unnamed
month,— possibly August. The writer mentions the
captivity of Jogues, and a letter written by that
unfortunate priest, which has been sent to the
brethren in France. After certain personal exhor-
tations to his correspondent, he recounts his own
work among the savages. He mentions the death
of several notable Huron converts during the year,
and certain valuable accessions recently made to the
infant church, notwithstanding the persecutions they
meet,

L. Brébeuf writes from Three Rivers, September
23, 1643, to the Father General, at Rome. He refers
his distinguished correspondent to the Relations
written by Bressani and Lalemant, but gives some
additional information. The reports of the Huron
mission for the past year, and letters from the
Fathers there, have, he states, fallen into the hands
of the Iroquois, owing to the latter’s capture of the
Huron fleet. This and other incursions of these fierce
enemies have placed the colony and the missions in
great danger. Thecurrent reports of Jogues’s death
in captivity, Brébeuf pronounces untrue; but that
Father and his companions have been cruelly tortured
by their savage captors, who as yet refuse to deliver
them to the French. The writer consoles himself,
in the midst of these heavy afflictions, not only by
the unshaken courage and devotion of his Jesuit


PIETEA CES BOW VO Li XXTLT 15


brethren, but by the piety of the French colonists
and of the Indian converts.

LI. Owing to the fact that the Iroquois had
captured the year’s report of the Huron missions
(although it had been given to Jogues), the Relation
for 1642-43 is written wholly by the Superior,
Vimont; it is without date, but doubtless was written
in the early autumn of 1643, in time for the vessel
returning to France. We have space in this volume
for the first three chapters only; the rest will appear
in Vols. XXIV. and XXV.

The superior opens his narrative by describing the
prosperous condition of the French colony. The
settlers now cultivate the land, and thus produce a
large part of their own food. They live in the exer-
cise of virtue and piety; the church at Quebec is
under the care of Bressani and Massé, who are aided
on occasion by Vimont and Brébeuf, both of whom
have resided for some time at Sillery. Raymbault’s
illness has proved fatal; he dies at Quebec, October
22, 1642, and is buried near Champlain. Ten days
later, the interpreter Nicolet is drowned, in the St.
Lawrence; a sketch of his life and achievements is
given. Vimont mentions the grief of both the
colonists and savages at the death of the French
King, Louis XIII., and of Cardinal Richelieu, both
of whom had greatly aided the Canadian missions.
The French fleet comes late this year (1643); but it
brings three new Jesuits — Garreau, Dreuillettes, and
Chabanel—and three nuns, together with a priest
for the Ursulines, and a new colonist, Louis d’ Aille-
boust.

The Ursuline seminary is in a prosperous condition,
and has been removed to its own new building, not


16 PREFACE ORM O LeXEXUL:


far from the fort. The events of special interest
therein, during the year, are recounted, as also the
pious and devout practices of the Indian pupils. In-
struction is given to many adults, as well as to the
little girls. Madame de la Peltrie has gone to
Montreal.

The Indian colony of Sillery now contains thirty-
five or forty resident families, Montagnais and Algon-
kins; the former tribe are much more docile than
the latter, having been longer and more closely as-
sociated with the French. More buildings are needed
for their families; only four are constructed, though
three more are planned or in process of erection; it
is hoped that the mission may soon be able to secure
the donation given them for this purpose by the late
Chevalier de Sillery, which has been delayed, prob-
ably through legal processes. Vimont recounts the
religious work among the Sillery Indians and their
Attikamégue friends who have passed the winter
there; also the manner of life, both social and re-
ligious, of these former nomads, now learning the
elements of civilization. In the spring, they have
barely planted their corn before they are obliged to
go to Fort Richelieu, to check the raids of the
Iroquois. They soon return home, however, owing
to the failure of expected money and supplies from
France; so they go into the woods to hunt, pending
the arrival of the ships.

re LY,


Maovison, Wis., May, 1808.


XLVIII (concluded)


RELATION OF 1642


PARIS: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1643


Part I. and chap. i. of Part II. were given in Volume XXII;
we herewith present chaps. ii.— xii. of Part II., thus conclud-
ing the document.


18 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


fe CAP Pel:


DE LA MAISON OV RESIDENCE FIXE DE SAINCTE
MARIE.


OVS auons efté cette Année icy dans les Hurons
N quatorze Preftres de noftre Compagnie; mais
& peine nous voyons-nous vn mois entier re-
iinis tous enfemble. Nous nous fommes ordinaire-
ment diffipez, principalement durant 1’Hyuer, qui
eft’ le fort du. trauail. pour la Conuerfion de ces
Peuples. Huict de cé nombre ont trouué leur em-
ploy dans les quatre principales Mifflions Hurones,
que nous auons pti cultiuer cette Année. Les Algon-
quins qui habitent icy proche de nos Hurons, ont
occupé le trauail de trois autres. Nos Peres ainfi
diuifez chacun dans le foin de la Miffion qui luy eft
écheué en partage, m’ayans obligé de me joindre a
eux, tanto{t vn mois en vn endroit puis en vn autre,
felon les occafions qui fe font prefentées, ie n’ay
pas [12] eu de demeure affeurée: & ainfi le foin de
cette Refidence eft demeuré en partage a deux feuls
qui reftoient, au P. Maae logues, & au P. Francois
dusPeron.

C’eft vne confolation bien fenfible & tous nos Miffi-
onnaires, apres les fatigues foit de l’Hyuer foit de
VE{té, de fe rendre en cette Maifon, pour vaquer a
eux-mefmes, & refpirer vn peu plus librement auec
Dieu dans ce repos d’efprit, pour par apres retourner
au mefme trauail auec plus de vigueur. Outre cela,
ils en tirent vn notable aduantage des Conferences


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 19


[11] CHAPTER II.


OF THE HOUSE OR PERMANENT RESIDENCE OF
SAINTE MARIE.


E have numbered this Year here among the
Hurons, fourteen Priests of our Society; but
we hardly ever meet all together for a whole

month atatime. We are generally scattered, espe-
cially during Winter, which is the most important
season of work for the Conversion of these Peoples.
Eight of the number found their employment in the
four principal Huron Missions which we have been
able to maintain this Year. The Algonquins who
dwell here, near our Hurons, have occupied the atten-
tion of three others. Our Fathers being thus dis-
tributed, each having charge of the Mission that
has fallen to his share, I have been obliged to join
them,— sometimes for a month at one place, then in
another, as the occasion presented itself; therefore,
I have [12] had no fixed abode. Consequently, the
care of this Residence has been shared by the only
two who remained — Father Isaac Jogues and Father
Francois du Peron.

It is a profound consolation to all our Missionaries,
after the fatigues of the Winter or of the Summer,
to return to this House, in order to give some atten-
tion to themselves, and to breathe a little more free-
ly with God in tranquillity of spirit, that they may
return afterwards to the same work with renewed
vigor. In addition to this, they derive marked bene-


20 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES _ [Vou. 28


quwils y font tous enfemble, tant des lumieres & des
moyens que Dieu leur ouure pour faciliter 1’in-
{truction & la Conuerfion des Sauuages, que des nou-
uelles connoiffances qu’ils ont receués pour s’auancer
en vne Langue ot il faut eftre & Maiftre & Efcholier
tout en mefme temps.

Cette mefme Maifon eftant le centre du Pais, a
bien fouuent la confolation de receuoir les Chreftiens
qui y viennent de diuers endroits pour y faire leurs
Deuotions plus en repos que dans les Bourgs, & dans
cette efpece de Solitude, y conceuoir [13] plus a loifir
les fentimens de Pieté & de Religion. Nous leur
auons dreffé pour cet effet vn Hofpice ou Cabane
d’écorce, ot Dieu nous donne les moyens de loger &
nourrir ces bons Pelerins dans leur propre Pais. Du-
rant l’Ei{té, de quinze en quinze jours, il s’en trouue
totijours bon nombre, qui de quatre & cinq lieués s’y
rendent dés le Samedy, pour paffer fainctement le
Dimanche, n’en partant que le Lundy matin. Le
Dimanche fuiuant nous les déchargeons de cette
peine; nos Peres allans chez eux vn & deux jours
auparauant, pour les difpofer aux Deuotions de ce
fainct our. Et ainfi par ces vifites alternatiues, on
les entretient doucement dans l’exercice du Chrifti-
anifme, dont 1’Hyuer, demeurant plus afsiduément
auec eux, on a tafché de leur donner de plus folides
connoiffances.

Si dedans les Miffions quelque Adulte en eftat de
fanté, e{t jugé digne du Baptefme, apres toutes les
€preuues qu’on a tirées de luy, c’ef{t en cette Maifon
qu’on le renuoye pour derechef y eftre examiné &
receuoir aulec folennité ce Sacrement qui le fait
Enfant de 1’ Egelife.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 21


fit from the Conferences that they hold, all together,
not only in the enlightenment and the methods
disclosed to them by God to facilitate the instruction
and Conversion of the Savages, but in the new
knowledge they have acquired for their advancement
ina Language in which one must be both Master and
Pupil at the same time.

As this House is the centre of the Country, it fre-
quently has the consolation of receiving the Chris-
tians who come to it from various places, to perform
their Devotions in more quiet than in the Villages,
and in this sort of Solitude to entertain, [13] at great-
er leisure, sentiments of Piety and Religion. For
that purpose we have prepared for them a Refuge or
Cabin of bark, wherein God gives us the means of
lodging and feeding these good Pilgrims in their own
Country. During the Summer, from fortnight to
fortnight, there are always a goodly number who
come to it on Saturday, from a distance of four or
five leagues, to pass the Sunday in a devout manner,
leaving only on Monday morning. On the follow-
ing Sunday, we save them this trouble; for our
Fathers go to their houses a day or two beforehand,
to prepare them for the Devotions of that holy Day.
Thus, by these alternate visits, we gently maintain
them in the practice of Christianity, whereof during
the Winter, while we reside more constantly with
them, we have endeavored to give them more sub-
stantial knowledge.

If in the Missions some Adult in good health is
deemed worthy of Baptism, after all the trials to
which he is subjected, he is sent to this House to be
again examined, and to receive with solemnity that
Sacrament which makes him a Child of the Church.


a2, LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo. 23


[14] Nous auons referué la plus grand’ part de ces
Baptefmes aux Feftes de Noél, de Pafques, & de la
Pentecofte, d’ott nos Chreftiens qui s’y font affemblez
de toutes parts, n’ont forty chaque fois, qu’auec vn
accroiffement fenfible de leur foy. L’éclat exterieur
dont nous tafchons d’accompagner les Ceremonies de
1’Eglife, la beauté de noftre Chapelle (qui paffe en ce
Pais pour vne Merueille du Monde, quoy qu’en
France ce ne feroit que pauureté) les Meffes, les Ser-
mons, les Vefpres, les Proceffions, & les Saluts qu’on
a faits en ce temps-la, auec vn appareil qui furmonte
tout ce que iamais ont veu les yeux de nos Sauuages;
Tout cela fait vne impreffion dans leur efprit, & leur
forme vne idée de la Majefté de Dieu, qu’on leur dit
eftre honorée d’vn culte mille fois plus augufte par
toute la Terre.

Le nombre de ceux qui ont receu le S*. Baptefme a
efté de plus de fix-vingt perfonnes. Ie croy que
Dieu a receu les prieres qu’ils ont offertes pour ceux
qui demeurans en France, font paffer iufques en ce
Nouueau Monde les effets de leur Charité, pour
cooperer fainctement au [15] Salut de ces Peuples &
achepter ces pauures Ames, qui quoy qu’elles leur
cotitent, ont cofité mille & mille fois plus cher au
Sang de IESVS-CHRIST. Quand j’entends les
aumofnes qui fe fourniffent pour cet effet; quand ie
lis les Memoires des deuotions publiques de plufieurs
Maifons Religieufes, qui nuict & jour tout le long de
l’Année, n’ont ce femble rien plus A cceur que de
hater les Mifericordes de Dieu fur ces pauures Sau-
uages; Quand j’aprends que des particuliers, qui ne
veulent auoir que les Anges du Ciel pour témoins de
leur Charité, fe confomment en toute facon pour en


1642-43] RELATION OF 162 23


[14] We have reserved the majority of these Bap-
tisms for the Festivals of Christmas, of Easter, and
of Pentecost, from which our Christians, who have
assembled there from all parts, have always departed
with a marked increase in their faith. The outward
splendor with which we endeavor to surround the
Ceremonies of the Church; the beauty of our Chapel
(which is looked upon in this Country as one of the
Wonders of the World, although in France it would
be considered but a poor affair); the Masses, Sermons,
Vespers, Processions, and Benedictions of the Blessed
Sacrament that are said and celebrated at such times,
with a magnificence surpassing anything that the
eyes of our Savages have ever beheld,—all these
things produce an impression on their minds, and
give them an idea of the Majesty of God, who, we
tell them, is honored throughout the World by a
worship a thousand times more imposing.

The number of persons who have received Holy
Baptism has exceeded one hundred and twenty. I
think that God has heard the prayers that they have
offered to him on behalf of those living in France
who cause the effects of their Charity to be felt as
far as this New World, to codperate in a holy man-
ner in the [15] Salvation of these Peoples, and to
redeem these poor Souls who, whatever they may
cost them, have cost a thousand times more to the
Blood of JesusCurist. WhenThear of the alms
that are given for that object; when I read the
Accounts of the public devotions of many Religious
Houses who, night and day, throughout the Year,
seem to have no greater desire than to promote the
granting of God’s Mercies to these poor Savages;
when I learn that private individuals, who wish to


24 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 23


auancer les momens: Quand ie voy tant de jeufnes,
tant de veilles, tant d’oraifons, tant de cilices & tant
de fainctes cruautez, qui ne peuuent partir que d’vn
coeur enflammé d’vn Amour facré; en vn mot, tant
de feu qu’autre que le fainct Efprit ne peut allumer
dans les cceurs: Ie confeffe qu’il ne m’eft pas poffible
entendant tout cela, d’entrer en deffiance, & qu’auf_i-
to{t ie douterois d’eftre au lieu ot ie fuis, que de dou-
ter que Dieu qui donne luy-mefme ces defirs, ne
vueille accorder ces demandes fi juftes, & [16] que le
temps ne foit venu qu’il veut donner a IESVS-
CHRIST ce quiluy a promis, la Conuerfion de ce qui
luy ref{te de Gentils, aufquels fes Diuines Souffrances
ont e{té inutiles par tant de Siecles.

Entre ceux que nous auons Baptifez folennellement
en cette Maifon, vn nommé Ahatfi{tcari du bourg de
S*. Iofeph, a efté le plus confiderable: Son courage,
& les exploits qu’il fait toutes les Années contre les
Ennemis, le font paffer pour le premier Guerrier qui
foit dans le Pais. Il n’ya pas encore vn an qu’ayant
fait rencontre de trois cens Iroquois, il les mit tous
en fuite, & en prit quelques-vns captifs; quoy que de
fon cofté ils ne fuffent que cinquante, dont il eftoit
le Chef. Et 1’E{té precedent, lors qu’il trauerfoit vn
grand lac, qui fepare les Hurons de leurs Ennemis,
ayant aperceu nobre de grands Canots Iroquois qui
venoient fondre fur luy, fes Compagnons ne fongeans
qu’a la fuite: Non, non, dit-il, mes Camarades, Al-
lons nous mefmes les aborder. Eftans venus aux
approches, il faute luy feul & tout nud, dans vn grand
Canot d’Ennemis, il fend la tefte au premier qu'il
rencontre, [17] en jette deux autres dans l’eau, & f’y
precipite foy-mefme, renuerfe en mefme téps le


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 1642 25


have the Angels of Heaven as the sole witnesses of
their Charity, devote themselves in every way to has-
ten the coming thereof; when I see so many fasts,
so many vigils, so many prayers, so many cilices, and
so many acts of holy severity, which can come but
from a heart inflamed with a sacred Love; ina word,
such fire, which the holy Ghost alone can kindle in
hearts,—I confess that it is impossible for me, when
I hear all this, to be distrustful. And I would as
soon doubt that I am on the spot where I stand, as
doubt that God, who himself inspires such desires,
wills to grant petitions so just, and [16] that the time
has come when he will give to JESUS CHRIST what
he has promised him,—that is the Conversion of
those who remain of the Gentiles, for whom his
Divine Sufferings have been useless for so many
Centuries.

The man of greatest importance among those whom
we have solemnly Baptized in this House, has been
one Ahatsistcari of the village of St. Joseph. His
courage and his Yearly exploits against the Enemies
cause him to be looked upon as the chief Warrior in
the Country. It is not yet a year since, having en-
countered three hundred Iroquois, he put them all to
flight, and made some of them prisoners, although on
his side there were but fifty, of whom he was the
Chief. And during the previous Summer, while
crossing a great lake which separates the Hurons
from their Enemies, having perceived a number of
large Canoes filled with Iroquois who were coming
to attack him, his Companions thought of nothing
but flight, but he said: ‘‘ No, no, my Comrades. Let
us attack them ourselves.” As they approached each
other, he jumped, alone and quite naked, into a large


26 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Canot & tous ceux qui eftoient dedans; puis apres
nageant d’vne main, il tué & maffacre de l’autre ceux
qu’il rencontre prés de foy. Ce fpectacle fi inopiné
remplit d’effroy les autres Canots Ennemis, qui fe
voyans vaincus dans leur victoire, auant mefme que
d’auoir combatu, prennent la fuite redoutans ce
Courage. Mais luy eftant remonté dans fon Canot,
pourfuit ceux qui reftoient en l’eau & les amene
victorieux dans le Pais. En vn mot, la vie de cet
Homme n’eft qu’vne fuite de combats; & depuis fon
enfance, fes penfées n’ont efté que de guerre; auffi
e{t-ce par 14 que Dieu l’a fait Chreftien.

Iamais il n’a monftré d’alienation de noftre Foy,
& il y a plus de trois ans qu’il nous demandoit le
Baptefme; mais ne pouuant pas le refoudre a quitter
quelques Super{titions, ordinaires parmy les Infideles,
nous ne pouuions luy accorder. En fin les Peres qui
ont eu le foin de la Miffion de fain& Iofeph, luy
ayans donné cet Hyuer, les dernieres in{tructions &
luy leur ayant fatisfait, il vint 4 Pafques plaider [18]
fa caufe: I’ay la Foy dans le fonds de mon cceur,
difoit-il, & mes actions l’ont fait affez paroiftre tout
le long de l’Hyuer; dans deux jours, ie pars pour la
guerre; fi ie meurs en la meflée, dites-moy, ot ira
mon Ame, fi vous me refufez le Baptefme? Si vous
voyez dedans mon coeur auffi clair que le Grand-Mai-
{tre de nos vies, ie ferois déja du nombre des Chre-
{tiens, & la crainte des flammes d’Enfer ne m’accom-
pagneroit pas, maintenant que ie vay enuifager la
Mort. lene puis me Baptifermoy-mefme; tout ce que
ie puis, eft de vous declarer fincerement les defirs que
iven ay: Aprés cela, fi mon Ame eft briilée dans les
Enfers, vous en ferez la caufe: Mais quoy que vous


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 27


Canoe full of Foes, split open the head of the first
one that he met, [17] threw two others into the
water, into which he himself leaped, upsetting at the
same time the Canoe and all who were init. Then
swimming with one hand, he killed and massacred
with the other all who came near him. So unex-
pected a sight filled the other Canoes of the Enemy
with fear; and, they, finding themselves vanquished
by their own conquest, even before they had fought,
took to flight from fear of such Courage. But he,
having regained his own Canoe, pursued those who
remained in the water, and brought them back in
triumph to his Country. In a word, this Man’s life
is but a series of combats, and from his childhood his
thoughts have been only of war; and it was through
this that God made him a Christian.

He never manifested any aversion to our Faith, and
asked us for Baptism more than three years ago; but,
as he could not make up his mind to abandon some
Superstitious practices that are customary among the
Infidels, we could not grant it to him. At last, the
Fathers who have had charge of the Mission of saint
Joseph gave him the final instructions last Winter,
and, as they were satisfied with him, he came at Eas-
ter to plead [18] his own case. ‘‘I have Faith in the
depth of my heart,” he said, ‘‘ and my actions have
sufficiently shown it throughout the Winter. In two
days I shall leave for the war; if Iam killed in battle,
tell me, where will my Soul go if you refuse me
Baptism? If you saw into my heart as clearly as
the Great Master of our lives, I would already be
numbered among the Christians; and the fear of the
flames of Hell would not accompany me, now that I
am about to face Death. I cannot Baptize myself;


28 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


faffiez, ie prieray tofijours Dieu, puis que ie le co-
gnois; & peut-eftre qu’il me fera mifericorde; car
vous dites qu'il eft meilleur que vous. Mais d’ot te
font venués les premieres penfées de croire? luy
repartit vn de nos Peres. Aulant mefme que vous
fuffiez dans le Pais, répondit-il. Ie m’eftois veu
échaper de mille perils ot mes Compagnons demeu-
roient. Ie voyois bien que ce n’eftoit pas moy qui
me tirois [19] de ces dangers; i’auois cette penfée, que
quelque Genie plus puiffant, qui m’eftoit inconnu,
me preftoit vn fecours fauorable (quoy que les Hu-
rons attribuent a leurs fonges les caufes de tout leur
bon-heur) i’ef{tois conuaincu que tout cela n’eftoit que
fottife; mais ie n’en f¢gauois pas dauantage. Lors
que iay entendu parler des Grandeurs de DIEV
que vous prefchez, & de ce que IESVS-CHRISTa
fait eftant fur Terre, ie l’ay reconnu pour celuy qui
m’auoit conferué, & me fuis refolu de l’honorer toute
ma vie: Allant en guerre, foir & matin ie me recom-
mandois a luy, c’eft de luy que ie tiens toutes mes
victoires, c’eft en luy que ie croy, & vous demande
le Baptefme, afin qu’aprés ma mort, il ait pitié de
moy.

Euft-on peu donner vn refus 4 cet Homme? Nous
le Baptifames publiquement auec quelques autres le
Samedy Sainct, & luy donnames le nom d’Eutftache.
Puis ayant fait fes Deuotions le iour de Pafques, il
partit pour la Guerre auec quelques vns de nos meil-
leurs Chreftiens, qui n’eftoient demeurez que pour
celebrer ce fainct Iour, quoy que les Troupes auf-
quelles [20] ils deuoient fe joindre, fuffent déja par-
ties. Mais auant que de fe feparer, fe voyans affem-
blez vn nombre de perfonnes affez confiderables, de


1642-43] RELATION OF 16g2 29


all that I can do is to declare sincerely the desire that
I have for it. After that, if my Soul be burned in
Hell, you will be the cause of it. But, whatever you
may do, I will always pray to God, because I know
him; and perhaps he will have mercy on me, for you
say that he is better than you.”’ ‘‘ But,’’ said one of
our Fathers, ‘‘ what made you first think of believ-
ingr ae elven beforé your came to-this’Country,”’
he replied, ‘‘ I had escaped from a great many perils
in which my Companions perished. I saw very well
that it was not I who extricated myself [19] from
these dangers. I had this thought, that some more
powerful Spirit, who was unknown to me, gave me
favorable aid’’ (although the Hurons attribute to
dreams the source of all their good fortune); “‘ 1 was
convinced that all that was only nonsense, but I knew
no more about it. WhenI heard of the Greatness of
GOD, whom you preach, and of what JESUS
CHRIST had done when he was on Earth, I recog-
nized him as the being who had preserved me, and
I resolved to honor him all my life. When I went
to war, I recommended myself to him night and
morning. It is to him that all my victories are due;
he it is in whom I believe; and I ask you for Bap-
tism, so that he may have pity on me after my death.”’

Was it possible to refuse such a Man? We Bap-
tized him publicly, with some others, on Holy Satur-
day, and gave him the name of Eustache. When he
had performed his Devotions on Easter Sunday, he
started for the War with some of our best Christians,
who had remained solely for the purpose of celebrat-
ing that holy Day, although the Troops whom [20]
they were to join had already departed. But, before
separating, finding that a considerable number of


30 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 23


diuerfes Nations, ils voulurent d’eux-mefmes tenir
Confeil; Voicy en peu de mots les refolutions qui f’y
prirent.

Ne foyons plus qu’vn corps & qu’vn efprit, puis
que nous feruons tous le mefme Maiftre: Quand
quelqu’vn paffera par vn Bourg ot il y aura quelque
Chreftien, qu’il n’aille pas loger ailleurs: Quand
quelqu’vn fera affligé, qu’il trouue fa confolation chez
les autres: Ne découurons pas aux Infideles mutuel-
lement nos fautes, mais qu’on reconnoiffe par l’amitié
que nous aurons les vns enuers les autres, que le
Nom de Chreftien eft vn noeud plus eftroit que les
liens de la Nature.

Témoignons a nos Parens, qui ne font pas de mef-
me Foy que nous, fuffent-ils nos peres & nos enfans,
que nous ne voulons pas que nos os aprés noftre
mort, foient meflez enfemble, puifque nos Ames feront
eternellement feparées, & que noftre amitié ne con-
tinuéra pas plus loin que cette vie.

[21] S’il ya chofe au monde qui foit Saincte parmy
les Hurons, c’eft le droit de leur Sepulture. Leur
foin furpaffe de beaucoup en cecy tout ce qu’on fait
en France: Ils y font des profufions eftranges, felon
leur portée, & fe dépoiiillent eux-mefmes pour reuétir
leurs Morts & conferuer precieufement les os de leurs
Parens, afin de repofer apres leur mort en mefme
lieu. Jamais nous n’euffions creu que nos Chreftiens
euffent deu renoncer fi tof{t a ce droict d’amitié, fondé
fi fortement dans la Nature; mais la Foy eft vn glaiue
qui fepare l’Ame d’auec le corps, & les enfans, des
Peres.

Ne profanons pas, adiofiterent ces bons Chreftiens,
les Myfteres qu'on nous enfeigne, quand nous voy-


1642 — 43] RELATION OF 1642 31


persons were assembled there belonging to various
Nations, they wished of their own accord to hold a
Council. Here, in a few words, are the resolutions
that they took:

‘Let us hereafter be but one body and one mind,
since we all serve the same Master. Whenever any
one of us passes by a Village wherein a Christian
dwells, let him not lodge elsewhere. Whenever any
one is afflicted, let him seek consolation among the
others. Let us not reveal one another’s faults to the
Infidels; but let it be recognized, through the friend-
ship that we shall have for one another, that the
Name of Christian isa tie more binding than Nature’ s
bonds.

‘“Let us inform our Relatives who are not of the
same Faith as we, even if they be our fathers and
our children, that we do not wish our bones to be
mingled together after our death, since our Souls will
be eternally separated, ate our affection will not
continue beyond this life.’

[21] If there be anything in the sarah that is Sacred
among the Hurons, it is their law of Burial. Their
care in this matter greatly exceeds anything that is
done in France. They are singularly lavish in pro-
portion to their means, and despoil themselves to
clothe their Dead and to preserve carefully the bones
of their Relatives, in order that they may repose
after their death in the same spot. Never would
we have believed that our Christians would so soon
renounce this claim of affection so firmly implanted
in Nature; but Faith is a sword that severs the Soul
from the body, and children from their Fathers.

‘‘Let us not,’’ added these Christians, ‘* profane
the Mysteries that are taught us, when we see souls


32 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


ons des ames de chiens & de beftes brutes, ains
publions par tout les auantages de la Foy; mais fur
tout, que noftre vie & nos exemples faffent connoiftre
que nous auons la Foy plus auant que fur le bout des
léures.

DIeEvV beniffe ces bon propos. Quoy quwil en foit,
nous voyons plus clair que iamais, que le Ciel veut
faire quelque [22] chofe. Il a fes Ames deftinées
pour le Paradis, autant dans ce Pais Barbare, que
dans 1’Europe; pas vne ne perira: quand mefme
elle feroit dans le milieu de nos plus cruels Ennemis
& en vn lieu dépourueu de toutes les voyes de Salut,
nous la mettrons dans le Ciel, lors mefme qu’elle
femblera plus efloignée de fon bon-heur. En voicy
vn exemple:

L’E{té dernier, quelques Captifs de guerre furent
diuifez par le Pais, afin que chaque Nation puft fe
vanger fur ces pauures Victimes des pertes de leurs
Parens encore toutes fanglantes, qui animoient leur
cruauté. Nos Peres y coururent fans delay, les vns
au Bourg de la Conception, les autres 4 celuy de
fainct Michel, les autres pouffent plus auant, & apres
treize ou quatorze lieués de chemin le plus dange-
reux, pour la cruauté des Iroquois, qui foit dans les
Hurons, 4 peine arriuerent-ils de iour, vne heure
auant l’execution. Il faut fendre la preffe, receuoir
les iniures, & entendre mille blafphemes contre
DIEV d’vne troupe d’impies qui f’oppofent au bon-
heur de leurs Ennemis, & voudroient leur faire endu-
rer en leur [23] Ame autant de fupplices, qu’ils en
font fouffrir au corps, mais l’amour d’vne Ame A qui
on veut ouurir le Ciel, fe fait chemin par tout. Tous
ces pauures Captifs ouurent bien-toft & leur cceur &


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 33


of dogs and of brute beasts; but let us publish every-
where the advantages of the Faith. Above all, let
our lives and our examples show that our Faith does
not rest merely on our lips.’’

May GoD bless these good resolutions. In any
case, we see more clearly than ever that Heaven will
do [22] something. It has its Souls destined for
Paradise, as much in this Barbarous Country as in
Europe. Not one shall perish; were one in the midst
of our most cruel Enemies, and ina place devoid of
all means of Salvation, we will place it in Heaven,
even when it seems the furthest from its happiness.
Here is an instance:

Last Summer, some Prisoners of war were divided
throughout the Country in order that each Nation
might revenge itself upon these unfortunate Victims
for the still recent loss of their Relatives, which in-
flamed their cruelty. Our Fathers hastened to them
without delay. Some went to the Village of la Con-
ception; others to that of saint Michel; others pro-
ceeded still further, and after a journey of thirteen
or fourteen leagues through that part of the Huron
Country which the ferocity of the Iroquois rendered
most dangerous, they arrived by day, barely an hour
before the execution. They had to force a passage
through the crowd, receiving insults, and hearing
a thousand blasphemies against GOD, from a band
of impious men who were opposed to the happi-
ness of their Enemies and who wished to make
them endure [23] as much torment in their Souls
as they inflict on their bodies. But love for a Soul,
to whom one desires to open Heaven, will make
its way anywhere. All these unfortunate Captives
soon opened their hearts, and their hopes to the


34 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 23


leur efperances aux nouuelles du Paradis; les feux
dont ils fentent déia la cruauté, leur font apprehender
plus viuement les flammes del’Enfer: ilsreconnoiffent
DieEv, luy demande mifericorde, & dans ce dernier
acte tragique de leur vie, reg¢oiuent des gages affeu-
rez du bon-heur qui les attendoit dans le Ciel. He-
las! feray-ie feul qui ioitiray de ce Bien, f’écrioit
doucement le plus ieune de tous, A peine aagé de
dix-neuf a vingt ans, auez-vous eu pitié de mes com-
pagnons de fupplice? leur a-t’on annoncé ces Veritez
fi importantes & fi inconnués? En vn mot, la Chari-
té le preffe déia plus que la douleur d’vne main qu’on
luy auoit tout fraifchement coupée.

En mefme temps quafi tout le Pais eftoit animé
contre nous. Par tout on ne crioit qu’aux Traiftres,
& fans doute il y auoit grand fuiet de le croire. Dés
Tiividemeprecedent, que Wes sleanades brevet a) 24)
ef{toit allé en Miffion dans la Nation Neutre; le bruit
auoit couru qu’en ce voyage les Ennemis ayans traité
fecrettement auec luy, l’auoient corrompu par pre-
fens, & qu'on verroit en fon temps les funeftes effets .
de cette trahifon. Au retour de cette Miffion, le
cours de nos affaires nous obligea d’enuoyer 4 Kebec
le mefme Pere. Pour cet effet nous équipames deux
Canots de quatre Francois, & fix Sauuages, tant Chre-
{tiens que Catechumenes, qui ayans les premiers
defcendu la Riuiere, échaperent heureufement trois
rencontres des troupes Iroquoifes dans lefquelles tom-
berent cing Canots de Hurons, qui fuiuoient vn ou
deux iours apres. Le bruit confus de ces nouuelles,
fit paffer pour veritez certaines les foupgons de
VHyuer, qui déja auoient alteré les efprits: Mais plus
encore, quand quelque temps aprés vn malheureux


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 35


tidings of Paradise. The fires, the pain from which
they already felt, inspired them with still greater
dread of the flames of Hell. They acknowledged
Gop, craved his mercy, and, in this last tragic
act of their lives, received a sure pledge of the hap-
piness that awaited them in Heaven. ‘‘Alas!” grate-
fully exclaimed the youngest of all, who was barely
nineteen or twenty years of age, ‘‘shall I alone
enjoy this Blessing? Have you had pity on my com-
panions in suffering? Have they been told of these
so important and so unknown Truths?’’ Ina word,
he was more moved by Charity than by the pain that
he suffered from a recently-severed hand.

At the same time, nearly the whole Country was
incensed against us. We were denounced on all
sides as Traitors, and doubtless there was very good
reason for believing it. During the previous Winter
Father Jean de Brebeuf [24] had gone on a Mission
to the Neutral Nation, and the rumor had spread that
on that journey the Enemies had treated secretly with
him, and had bribed him by presents, and that in due
time the disastrous effects of this treachery would
be felt. On his return from that Mission, we were
compelled, in the course of our affairs, to send the
same Father to Kebec. To that end we manned two
Canoes with four Frenchmen and six Savages, both
Christians and Catechumens, who, being the first to go
down the River, fortunately escaped three encounters
with Iroquois bands, in which five Canoes of Hurons
who followed a day or two after were attacked. The
vague rumors of these occurrences caused them to
regard as certainly true the suspicions aroused
during the Winter, which had already agitated their
minds. But this was still more the case when, some


36 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Huron, qui ayant brfilé fes liens f’eftoit efchapé des
mains des Iroquois, maintint publiquement auoir
entendu de la bouche des Ennemis, les intelligences
fecretes qu’ils auoient auec nous: adiofitant mefme
que le P. de Brebeuf [25] leur auoit parlé au ren-
contre, &ereceu=d eux de nouteaux preiens, pous
falaire de fa trahifon, les ayans aduertis que la mefme
ils attendirent au paffage quelques Canots qui le
fuiuoient d’vn iour, & que c’eftoit vne proye affeurée
pour eux.

En fuite de cela, eft-ce merueille qu'on eut de
mauuais deffeins contre nous? mais qui met fa con-
fiance en Dieu, entend en affeurance le bruit de ces
tempeftes. Sa protection eft fi fenfible fur nous &
fon amour fi continuel, pour nous preferuer des pe-
rils qui nous enuirdnent de toutes parts, que cela feul
nous feroit croire affeurément qu’il veut faire mife-
ricorde a tous ces Peuples, puifque ce ne peut eftre
que pour eux, qu’il nous conferue d’vne Prouidence
fi forte & fiamoureufe. En fin, le temps & le retour
des Hurons qui eftoient defcendus de compagnie auec
le P. de Brebeuf, diffiperent toutes ces calomnies.


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 1642 37


time afterward, a wretched Huron, who had burned
his bonds and escaped from the hands of the Iro-
quois, asserted publicly that he had heard from the
mouths of the Enemies the secret understanding that
they had with us. He even added that Father de
Brebeuf [25] had spoken to them when he met them;
had received new presents from them, as a reward
for his treachery; and had told them to lie in wait
on that very spot for the passage of some Canoes that
were following him, a day’s journey behind, and
that these would be a sure prey for them.

After all this, is it to be wondered that evil designs
were harbored against us? But whosoever places his
trust in God listens in security to the roaring of such
tempests. So manifest is his protection over us, and
so constant is his love in preserving us from the perils
that surround us on all sides, that this alone would
suffice to make us firmly believe that he will have
mercy on all these Peoples, since it can be but on
their account that he guards us with a Providence so
powerful and so loving. Finally, time, and the re-
turn of the Hurons who had gone down in company
with Father de Brebeuf, dispelled all these calum-
nies.


38 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


[26] CHAPITRE III.


DE LA MISSION DE SCTE. MARIE AUX ATARON-
CHRONONS.


ETTE Maifon de Saincte Marie, porte auffi le
Ss titre de Miffion, 4 raifon de quatre Bourgs
affez proches quien font dependans. Le Pere

Pierre Chaftelain en a cultiué deux, de fainct Loiiis &
de S. Denys. LeP. Pierre Pijart a eu le foin des deux
autres, de faincte Anne & de fainct Francois Xauier.

Le P. Pierre Pijart trouua d’abord les efprits fort
reuefches, qui luy fermoient & leurs oreilles & leurs
Cabanes, refufans d’efcouter ce qu’ils n’entendoient
qu’auec vn ef{prit de blafpheme: Mais en fin fa pa-
tience les a apriuoifez pour la plufpart, & en a con-
duit quelques-vns iufqu’a ce poinct qu’ils connoiffent
la Verité, & fe plaignent d’eux-mefmes de n’auoir pas
affez de forces pour embraffer vn fi grand bien.

[27] Le P. Pierre Chaftelain a par tout efté bien
venu, & entr’autres ayant fait rencontre de quelques
bons efprits, leur a fait penetrer fi auant la faincteté
de nos Myfteres, qu’ils en parlent tres-hautement,
iufqu’a inftruire & toucher lesautres. Maisce fruict
n’eft pas meur, & leur Foy n’eft pas encores affez
forte dans l’occafion, pour en faire eftat, comme de
perfonnes gagnées 4 Dieu; c’eft a luy de faire le
coup, & nous deuons eftre contens d’auoir jetté &
arroufé cette Semence.

Les Peres n’eftans pas obligez de faire aucun


1642-43] RELATION OF r6g2 39
ner erates eee ee eg


(26) "CHAPTER VIII,


OF THE MISSION OF STE. MARIE AMONG THE
ATARONCHRONONS.


HIS House of Sainte Marie also bears the title
| of Mission, on account of four Villages close
by, which are dependent thereon. Father
Pierre Chastelain has had the direction of two—
those of saint Louis and St. Denys. Father Pierre
Pijart has had charge of the two others—those of
sainte Anne and of saint Francois Xavier.!

At first, Father Pierre Pijart met with very stub-
born-minded persons, who closed their ears and their
Cabins to him and refused to listen to what they
heard, except in a spirit of blasphemy. But, in the
end, his patience tamed the majority of them, and
influenced some of them to such an extent that they
know the Truth, and complain of themselves that
they have not strength enough to embrace so great
a blessing.

[27] Father Pierre Chastelain was welcomed every-
where, and, having met among them some right-
minded persons, he caused these to enter so far into
the holiness of our Mysteries that they speak very
highly of them and even instruct and impress oth-
ers. But this fruit is not ripe, and their Faith is not
strong enough at present to regard them as persons
who are won over to God. It is for him to accom-
plish the result, and we must rest satisfied with
having sown and watered this Seed.


40 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES Nouns


fejour dehors, veu la proximité des Bourgs; outre les
courfes qu’ils y ont faites, ont eu le moyen de vac-
quer a la reception des Chreftiens, & 4 l’inftruction
de plufieurs infideles, qui paffans par cette Maifon,
y recoiuent des enfeignemens, que quelquefois on
n’euft pas pti ailleurs leur donner auec tant d’aduan-
tage. Souuent le Cerf recoit le coup de mort en vn
endroit, & tombe aux abois loin de 1a. Souuent auffi
nous auons veu qu’vn Infidele aura receu le coup de
vie en cette Maifon, qui eftant retourné dans fon [28]
Bourg, fe jette entre les bras des Miffionnaires qui y
font, & leur demande le Baptefme. Pourueu qu’vn
iour nous les voyons tous dans le Ciel, n’importe ot
Dieu leur aura fait mifericorde.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 41


Although the Fathers are not obliged to make a
long stay outside, owing to the proximity of the
Villages, nevertheless, in addition to the visits they
have made there, they have found means to attend
to the reception of Christians and the teaching of
many infidels, who, passing through this House, re-
ceive therein instruction that could not be so advan-
tageously given to them elsewhere. Often the Hart
receives its deathblow in one place, and falls dead
faraway fromit. Frequently, also, we have observed
that our Infidel has felt the life-giving influence in
this House, who, upon returning to his own [28}
Village, has thrown himself into the arms of the
Missionaries who dwell there, and has asked them
for Baptism. Provided we see them all one day in
Heaven, it matters little where God has had mercy
on them.


42 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


CHAPITRE TV.


DE LA MISSION DE LA CONCEPTION, AUX ATIGNA-
OUANTAN.


E foin de cette Miffion eft tombé en partage au
iE Pere Francois le Mercier & au P. Paul Rague-
neau. Et c’eft dans le principal Bourg de
cette Miffion, qui en porte le nom, ot nous auons
recueilly les fruidts de la Foy, les plus meurs qui
nous ayent paru dans ce Pais, depuis qu’on y a ietté
la femence de 1’Euangile. Auffi eft-ce en ce Bourg
ott depuis quelques Années nous auons apliqué plus
fortement noftre trauail. le puis dire qu’on y void,
par la grace de DIEV, vne Eglife formée, & des
Chreftiens qui viuent non feulement dans l’exercice
dela Foy, mais qui triomphent [29] au milieu du
regne de Sathan, de l’impieté mefme. Ie ne dis pas
que tout le Bourg foit conuerty, ny que le nombre
des Chreftiens y furpaffe celuy des Infideles; mais
ie veux dire, que le[ur] courage, leur zele, leur fide-
lité, leur conftance fe rend victorieufe de tout ce qui
s’opofe a leur Vertu, & donnent cent fois plus de
credit a la faincteté de nos Myfteres, que nos paroles
& nos exemples. On y a veu tous les Chreftiens
combatus par les puiffances les plus fortes qui foient
dans le Pais, & le mefme iour a e{té témoin de leur
Victoire, fans que pas vn ait fuccombé, quoy que
chacun fuft attaqué feparément, fans fcauoir le
courage & la refiftance des autres.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 43


CHAPTER IV.


OF THE MISSION OF LA CONCEPTION AMONG THE
ATIGNAOUANTAN.


HE charge of this Mission has fallen to the share
ie of Father Francois le Mercier and Father Paul
Ragueneau. It is in the principal Village of
this Mission— which bears its name—that we have
gathered the ripest fruits of the Faith that we have
seen in this Country since we have sown the seed of
the Gospel here. It is in this Village also that, for
some Years, we have most vigorously carried on our
work. I may say that here is seen, through the
grace of GOD, a Church established, and Christians
who not only live in the practice of the Faith, but
who triumph, [29] inthe midst of Satan’s reign, over
impiety itself. I do not assert that the entire Village
is converted, nor that the number of the Christians
in it exceeds that of the Infidels; but I mean to say
that their courage, their zeal, their faithfulness, their
constancy, prove victorious over everything that is
opposed to their Virtue, and secure respect for the
sacredness of our Mysteries a hundred times more
than our words or our examples can do. We have
seen all the Christians assailed by the most powerful
influences in the Country, and the same day witnessed
their Victory, without a single one yielding, although
each was attacked separately and was not aware of
the firmness and resistance of the others.
It was in the middle of Winter; everywhere


44 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Ce fut au milieu de 1’ Hyuer, que tout eftoit remply
de fuperf{titions Diaboliques, & que les puiffances
d’Enfer s’eftoient fait rendre deux iours entiers vn
homage continuel, promettant la guerifon d’vne
malade. Le plus impie qui foit dans le Bourg, auoit
entrepris cette cure, auec l’aide de fon Demon; mais
voyant tout fon art fans effet, il fe plaint de ce que
les Chreftiens ne paroiffoient [30] point dans vne
. Fefte fi publique: & fur tout il demande qu’vn nou-
teau Chreftien nommé Charles Tfondatfaa, joigne fa
voix auec la fienne, pour inuocquer plus fortement
Vaffiftance du Demon, qui deuoit rendre la fantéa
cette malade. C’eft le plus noble employ des Capi-
taines, d’obeir A ces Impofteurs. On tient Confeil,
l’affaire eft jugée d’importance, les principaux font
deputez par le Public, pour attaquer en mef{fme temps
tous les Chreftiens.

Charles eft tout eftonné de voir trois des plus
confiderables Capitaines entrer en fa Cabane. Mon
Dieu, s’écrie-t’il dans le fonds de fon cceur, arreftez
leffort de ces efclaues de Satan, qui viennent me
porter quelque chofe de fa part: Confeillez-moy,
mon Dieu, dans ce rencontre. I] ne {gait pas ce qui
les amene, mais il fe doute bien qu’eftans dans le
plus fort de ces ceremonies d’Enfer, l’efprit de ces
malheureux n’ef{t poffedé que du Demon. Bonjour,
mes freres, leur dit-il; puifque vous me venez voir,
c’e{t 4 moy 4 vous entretenir. Ie vous diray les pen-
{ées que i’atiois de vous-autres, il n’y a pas long-
temps: [31] le vous porte compaffion, vous obeiffez A
vn mai{tre le plus infame qu’il y ait au monde, vous
emploiez tous les iours vo{tre voix a proclamer fes
commandemens, ce n’ef{t pas vous qui commandez,


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 45


abounded Diabolical superstitions, and the powers of
Hell had caused continual homage to be rendered to
them for two entire days, promising the cure of a
sick person. The most impious man in the Village
had undertaken the cure, with the assistance of his
Demon; but, seeing that all his arts were of no avail,
he complained that the Christians did not make their
appearance [30] in so publica Festival, and, in partic-
ular, he asked that a new Christian, named Charles
Tsondatsaa, should unite his voice to his, more stren-
uously to invoke the aid of the Demon who was to
restore the health of the sick person. It is the high-
est duty of the Captains to obey these Impostors.
A Council was held; the matter was deemed impor-
tant; the chief men were deputed by Public author-
ity to attack all the Christians at the same time.
Charles was greatly surprised at seeing three of the
leading Captains enter his Cabin. ‘‘ My God!”’ he
exclaimed in the depths of his heart, ‘‘ stay the
efforts of these slaves of Satan, who come to bring
me something on his behalf. Counsel me, O God!
in this emergency.’ Hedid not know what brought
them, but he was quite sure that, as these Hellish
ceremonies were at their height, the minds of those
wretches were possessed only by the Devil. ‘‘ Good
day, my brothers,” he said to them. “‘ As you have
come to see me, it is for me to entertain you. I will
tell you the thoughts that I had of you not long ago.
[31] I feel compassion for you; you obey a master
who is the most infamous in the world; you use your
voices every day to proclaim his commandments. It
is not you who command, but he. Why do not all
the people believe? and why do not you yourselves
believe the first of all? Then would you really be


46 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 23


mais luy. Que tout le monde ne croyt-il? & vous-
mefmes, que ne croyez-vous les premiers? ce feroit
bien alors que vous feriez veritablement Capitaines,
qui obeiffans 4 D1Ev feul, vous rendriez noftre Pais
le plus heureux du monde. Apres cela, comme il
ne manque pas d’efprit ny de langue, il leur declare
lequité des Commandemens de DIEV, la verité &
la grandeur de fes promeffes, & le malheur eternel
de tous ceux qui refufent de luy obeir.

Comme il ne trouuoit point de fin, Meffieurs les
Capitaines auoient bien de la peine a trouuer quel-
que entrée fauorable. En fin le plus hardy f’auance:
Mon frere, luy dit-il, ie ne viens pas icy tout feul ny
de mon propre mouvement, le Confeil nous a enuoiez
pour te porter vne parole, maisie n’ofe parler. Non,
ce n’e{t pas moy qui te parle, mais toutes ces Caba-
nes. As tu veu cette malade languiffante? [32] elle
n’en peut plus, & n’a de voix qu’autant qu’il luy en
faut, pour te dire: Tfondatfaa, ayes pitié de moy.
Tout le Public f’eft emploié depuis deux iours pour
elle, mais nos remedes font fans force, n’ef{tans pas
animez de ta voix, vn tel, defire que ce foit toy qui
prefide auec luy a la ceremonie: ne refufe pas au
Public cette faueur, pour vn iour feulement.

Mes freres, leur replique-t’il, vous feauez que ie
croy; cette Cabane eft faincte; fi ie pechois, quel
exemple donneroif-ie aux autres qui font fur le poinct
d’ef{tre Baptifez? Commandez-moy quand nous irons
en guerre, de me jetter dans le peril, quand ie ferois
moy feul, ie feray tefte 4 1’7Ennemy; mais pluftoft
mourir que pecher.

Mon frere, luy dit vn Apoftat, ce n’eft pas vn mal
fans remede; nous venons de parler aux Robes noires


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 47


Captains who, by obeying GoD alone, would make
our Country the happiest on earth.’”’ After this, as
he is not deficient in wit or in language, he declared
to them the equity of GOD’s commandments, the
truth and greatness of his promises, and the eternal
misery of all who refuse to obey him.

As his speech had no end, Messieurs the Captains
had great difficulty in securing any opportunity for
answer. At last, the boldest advanced. ‘‘ My broth-
creado me, ldo not comes herevalone; or of my.
own accord. The Council has sent us to say a word
to thee, but I dare not speak. No, it is not I who
speak, but all the Cabins. Hast thou seen that sick
woman who languishes? [32] She is exhausted, and
her voice has but strength enough to say to thee:
‘Tsondatsaa, have pity on me!’ All the People
have striven for her during the past two days, but
our remedies are without effect, not being animated
by thy voice. Such a one desires that thou shouldst
be the one to preside with him at the ceremony. Do
not refuse the People that favor, for a single day.”’

‘* My brothers,” he replied, ‘‘ you know that I am
a believer. This Cabin isholy. Were I to sin, what
example would I give to those who are on the point
of being Baptized? Command me, when we shall
go to war, to put myself in a dangerous place, and,
even if I were alone, I would make head against the
Enemy; but I would rather die than commit sin.’’

‘‘ My brother,’’ said an Apostate to him, ‘‘ this is
not an evil without remedy. We have just spoken
to the black Gowns who teach thee. It is true that
they do not wish to exhort thee to obey us on this
point; but they have promised us that to-morrow
they will wipe out thy sin. Courage, therefore, and


48 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


qui t’enfeignent; il eft vray qu’ils ne veulent pas
t’exhorter & nous obeir en ce poinct, mais ils nous
ont promis que demain ils t’effaceront ton peché.
Courage donc, & ne crains pas vn peché qui demain
ne fera plus, quand tu te feras Confeffé.

[33] Le Diable eft bien rufé; Mais vn coeur quia
pour fa deuife: Pluftoft mourir que de pecher, n’eft
pas pour eftre pris dedans ces pieges. Le combat
n’en demeura pas 1a, mais tofijours ce nouueau
Fidele, eft femblable 4 foy-mefme. Ils tachent en fin
de corrompre fa Femme, mais ils trouuent par tout
vn genereux refus.

A mefme temps vn Capitaine plus fougueux que
ceux-cy, eftoit entré en la Cabane de quelques autres
Chreftiens. I] f’adreffe au plus jeune de tous: Mon
nepueu, f’écrie-t’il d’vne voix infernale, fais tréue
pour vn iour, de la Foy, -noltre Pais fe perd, les
malades fe meurent, ott fuirons-nous, pour éuiter la
mort? pourquoy vous retirez-vous de nos dances?
pourquoy refufez-vous de rendre cette charité au
Public? Ce font les Chreftiens qui nous tuént, puif-
qu’ils ne nous veulent pas fecourir. Viens, mon
nepueu, danfer auiourdhuy, & demain tu reprendras
les exercices de la Foy.

Ce jeune Chreftien répond a tout cela, fans dire
mot. Il met fa tefte entre fes jambes, felon la cou-
{tume du Pais, c’eft A dire qu’il n’en ferarien. Le
Chef de la [34] Cabane n’eit pas content de ce fimple
refus, il veut vne protef{tation plus viue de la Foy qui
regne dans toute fa Famille. Tu perdras icy ton
temps, dit-il au Capitaine, les enfans mefmes ne
t'obeiront pas: le Diable n’a point icy d’empire ot
DieEv feul eft le Maiftre. Ie porte la parole pour


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 49


fear not a sin that to-morrow will no longer exist,
when thou shalt have Confessed.”’

[33] The Devil is very cunning, but a heart whose
motto is ‘‘ Death before sin’’ is not to be taken in
such snares. The struggle did not end there, but
this new Believer remained ever consistent. Final-
ly, they endeavored to bribe his Wife, but they met
at all points a brave refusal.

At the same time, a Captain, more impetuous than
they, had entered the Cabin of some other Christians.
Addressing the youngest, he said to him in a fiendish,
voice: ‘‘ My nephew, make a truce for one day with
the Faith. Our Country is going to ruin; the sick
are dying. Whither can we flee to avoid death?
Why do you keep away from our dances? Why do
you refuse to do this act of kindness to the People?
It is the Christians who kill us, since they will not
help us. Come and dance to-day, my nephew, and
to-morrow thou shalt resume the practice of the
Faith.”’

To all this the young Christian answered not a
word. He bowed his head between his knees, accord-
ing to the custom of the Country, meaning thereby
that he would do nothing of the kind. The Head
of the [34] Cabin was not satisfied with so simple a
refusal; he preferred a more energetic protestation
of the Faith that reigned in all his Family. “‘ Thou
wilt lose thy time here,’’ he said to the Captain;
‘Ceven the children will not obey thee. The Devil
has no authority here, where GOD alone is Master.
I speak in the name of all, for I know that their Faith
is like unto mine. We may, indeed, all be mas-
sacred; but no one can force us to pay the homage
that you render to the Devil.”


50 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL, 23


tous, feachant bien que leur Foy eft femblable a la
mienne: on peut bien tous nous maffacrer, mais non
pas extorquer de nous cet hommage que vous rendez
au Diable.

Ce Capitaine entre en fureur, redouble fes cris, fes
menaffes, & fes blafphemes contre Dieu. En fin il
e{t contraint de quitter la partie, voyant mefme que
les enfans le regardoient d’vn ceil auffi affeuré que
f’il les euft fimplement vifitez.

Il n’y eut pas vne Cabane ot habitaft quelque
Chreftien, qui ce iour 1a ne rendift témoignage que
leur Foy eftoit plus forte que le pouuoir de tous les
Capitaines. Il n’y eut pas mefme iufqu’a vn pauure
petit Homme, nommé Mathias Atieffa, qui eftant le
rebut de tous ceux de fon Bourg, eut toutefois affez
d’efprit [35] & de courage, pour arrefter l’infolence
d’vn Capitaine qui le vouloit forcer 4 luy obeir en ce
poinct. Ceffe de croire, luy dit en fin ce Capitaine,
apres mille efforts inutiles. Et moy & mon fils,
répondit-il, nous mourrons pluftoft. Mais fi ton fils
tombe malade? Plufto{t, répond le pere, ie le verray
mourir, que de me feruir de vos remedes & danfes
Diaboliques. Que te donnent ces Robes noires pour
croire de la forte? Le Paradis, réplique-t’il. Tu
parles bien refolument pour vn Gueux; encore f’ils
te donnoient quelque robe pour te couurir. Ie feray
riche dans le Ciel; mais 4 ce que ie vois (répondit-il
au Capitaine, qui autrefois auoit témoigné quelque
volonté pour la Foy) c’eft juftement cela qui t’em-
pefche de croire, tu ne fonges qu’a la vie prefente &
non pas a l’Eternité. Ce pauure Homme a plus de
bonne volonté que d’efprit; mais fi DIEV rend les
langues des Enfans difertes, ce n’eft pas d’auiour-


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 61.


The Captain became furious, and redoubled his
cries, his threats, and his blasphemies against God.
In the end, he was compelled to abandon his design
when he saw that even the children looked at him
with as untroubled a gaze as if he were merely
paying a visit.

There was not one Cabin where any Christian
dwelt that did not bear witness, on that day, that
their Faith was stronger than the power of all the
Captains. Even one poor little Man, named Mathias
Atiessa, who was the butt of the Village, had never-
theless sufficient wit [35] and courage to check the
insolence of a Captain who tried to compel him to
obedience in that respect. ‘‘ Cease to believe,’ the
Captain said to him at last, after many useless efforts.
‘Both my son and I,” he replied, ‘‘ would sooner
die.”’ ‘‘ But if thy son should fallill?’’ ‘‘ I would
rather see him die,’’ replied the father, ‘‘ than have
recourse to your Diabolical remedies and dances.”’
‘What dothe black Gowns give thee, to induce thee
to believe thus?’’ ‘‘ Paradise,’’ he replied. ‘‘ Thou
speakest very boldly for a Beggar, even if they gave
thee a robe to cover thee.’’ ‘‘ I shall be rich in Heav-
en; but from what I see’’ (he replied to the Captain,
who had formerly shown some inclination toward
the Faith) ‘‘it is precisely that which prevents thee
from believing,— thou thinkest only of this life, and
not of Eternity.’’ This poor Man has more good
will than wit; but if Gop makes the tongues of Chil-
dren eloquent, this is not the first time that he has
given to the Souls of the weakest the means of con-
founding those who think that they are the greatest
minds of the Earth.

When evening came, the Christians [36] felt great-


52 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


dhuy qu’il donne aux Ames les plus foibles, dequoy
confondre ceux qui penfent eftre des plus forts efprits
dedlaslerre,

Le foir eftant venu, ce fut a ces Chreftiens [36]
vne confolation bien fenfible, de fcauoir l’vn de
l’autre, ce qu’il leur eftoit arriué. Les Diables, difoit
Charles, ont paru aujourd’uy dedans ma Cabane, oiiy
trois Diables d’Enfer, mais reuef{tus de chair; ils ont
voulu la renuerfer, mais DIEV la fotitenué. C’eft
ainfi qu’ils en donnent toute la gloire 4 DIEV.

Ces attaques n’ont pas e{té pour vn iour feulement,
ceieroit en eftre quite aActrop bon marche. 4 peime
y a-il aucun iour en 1l’Année, que quelque Demon
ne fe faffe rendre vn homage particulier: mais cOme
dans le Chriftianifme chaque Sainct ayant eu fon
Tour, il fe fait vne Feite plus celebre ott tous les
Saincts font honorez de Compagnie, de mefme auffi
dans ce Pais, chaque Demon ayant efté honoré a fon
tour, il fe fait durant l’Hyuer vne folennité publique,
ot. les Demons fe font tous honorer en mefme iour.
On appelle cette celebrité Ononhoiiaroia, ou renuer-
fement de tefte, parce que toute la jeuneffe, & mefmes
les femmes & enfans, courent comme des furieux
exigeans qu’on obeiffe a leurs Demons, en leur faifant
prefent d’vne chofe qu’ils [37] propofent auec enigme
& qui leur a ef{té dictée en fonge.

On ne pti cette Année tirer de nos Chreftiens aucuns
de ces homages, ils en ont refufé conftamment mefme
tous leursintimes. Ce pauure Mathias, dont ie viens
de parler, f’eft veu arraché de la place, il a efcouté
les menaces qu’on luy faifoit, & a confideré la hache
déja leuée deffus fa tefte, fans iamais auoir ouuert la
bouche pour dire vn mot qu’on vouloit tirer de luy.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 53:


ly consoled at learning from one another what had
happened to them. ‘‘ The Devils,”’ said Charles, ‘‘ ap-
peared to-day in my Cabin,— yes, three Devils from
Hell, but clothed with flesh. They wished to over-
turn it, but GoD held it up.’’ Thus did they attrib-
ute all the glory thereof to Gop.

These attacks were not for one day only; that
would have been escaping too easily. There is hard-
ly a day in the Year on which some Demon does not
have special homage rendered unto him. But, as
among Christians, after each Saint has had his own
Day, there is a more solemn Festival on which all the
Saints are honored in Company, so likewise in this
Country, after each Demon has been honored in his
turn, there is a public celebration during Winter, at
which all the Demons are honored on the same day.
This celebration is called Ononhouaroia, or ‘‘ upset-
ting of brain,” because all the youth, and even the
women and children, run about as if they were mad,
insisting upon obedience being paid to their Demons
by making them a present of something which they
(37] proffer with an enigma, and which has been
suggested to them in a dream.

This Year, it was found impossible to secure from
our Christians any such homage; they always refused
it, even for all their intimate friends. Poor Mathias,
whom I have just mentioned, was lifted up from the
ground, heard the threats uttered against him, and
saw the hatchet already raised over his head, without
opening his lips to say a single word that they wished
to draw from him.

An hour afterward, they did the same to another
Christian named Pierre Andation, and the same
Silence was his sole complaint. His Wife, a Chris-


54 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 23


Vne heure apres, on fit le mefme 4 vn autre Chre-
‘f{tien, nommé Pierre Andation, & lemefme Silence en
fut auffi toute fa plainte. Sa Femme, Chreftienne
comme luy, qui le tenoit d’vn bras pour arrefter
celuy qui le tiroit auec violence, l’accufe doucemét
quelque téps apres, de n’auoir pas eu affez d’affeu-
rance puifque la fuéur luy en eftoit venué par tout le
corps. Vn des Peres fe trouuant la heureufement,
eut la confolation d’ef{tre témoin de toute cette fide-
lite

Ce n’eft pas feulement dans les Hommes que fe
rencontre cette force; la Foy ne trouue point de
difference entre les fexeés, [33] <elle atfermit aum te
courage des Femmes. L’E({té dernier, le plus fameux
Magicien qui foit dans le Pais, fut confulté, quel fuc-
cés on deuoit efperer des bleds qui eftoient fur terre.
I] répondit deux chofes: Premierement, Qu’il falloit
que chaqu'vn allaft tous les iours dedans fon champ,
jetter du petun dans le feu & l’y confommer en 1 hon-
neur du Demon qu il adore; criant 4 haute voix cette
formule: Efcoute, Ciel, goufte de mon petun, ayes
pitié de nous.

Secondement, il ordonna, que pas vn n’allaft cueil-
lir du chanvre (c’eft le temps ot on va d’ordinaire
cueillir dans les campagnes defertes, vne certaine
herbe fauuage dont on fait du fil a retz:) Et ce mal-
heureux adiofita, que fi en cela on manquoit a obeir
a fon Demon, tous les bleds eftoient perdus. Le
commandement eft incontinent proclamé par les
Capitaines. Mais les Chreftiens ne font pas pour
facrifier au Diable, pluftoft refolus de mourir de faim:
Et deux foeurs qui f’étoient donné parole d’aller le
lendemain cueillir du chanvre, croyans qu’elles ne


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 55


tian like himself, who held him by one arm in order
to stop the man who pulled him violently, gently
reproached him some time afterward with not having
had enough confidence, for the sweat had broken out
all over his body. One of the Fathers, who was for-
tunately on the spot, had the consolation of witness-
ing all this faithfulness.

It is not only among the Men that one meets such
strength. Faith finds no difference between the
sexes; [38] it fortifies the courage of the Women as
well. Last Summer, the most famous Magician in
the Country was consulted to learn what success
might be expected from the corn that had been
planted. He gave two answers,—in the first place,
that it was necessary that each one should go every
day to his field, throw some tobacco on the fire, and
burn it in honor of the Demon whom he worshiped,
calling aloud this form of prayer: ‘‘ Listen, O Sky!
Taste my tobacco; have pity on us.”’

Secondly, he ordered that no one should go to
gather hemp (that was the time when they usually
go to the untilled plains, in order to gather a certain
wild plant, from which twine for their nets is made).”
And the wretch added that, if they failed to obey
therein his Demon, all the grain would be lost. This
command was at once proclaimed by the Captains;
but the Christians would not offer sacrifices to the
Devil, being resolved to die of hunger, rather than
do so. Two sisters, who had agreed together to go
out on the following day to gather hemp, thought
that they could not without sin [39] break this agree-
ment; they went with bowed heads, and returned in
the sight of allthe Infidels. Complaints of this were
made to tue Captains, who proclaimed through the


56 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


pourroient pas fans peché [39] rompre cette partie; y
vont tefte baiffée, & en reuiennent a la veué de tous
les Infideles. Les Capitaines en re¢oiuent les plain-
tes, ils vont crier par tout le Bourg qu’il ne falloit
pas efperer vne heureufe recolte, que les Chreftiens
feroient caufe de la famine, & qu’il eftoit bien vray
que la Foy eftoit la ruine du Pais. Tous accufent
ces pauures innocentes, mais le coeur d’vn Fidele ne
craint que Dieu, & le peché. Nous ne fceauons fi
DIEV a voulu recompenfer leur Foy & punir 1’impi-
eté des autres, mais nous auons e{té témoins que la
plufpart du bled ne vint pas 4 maturité, & de ceux
nommément qui auoient facrifié au Diable, nos Chre-
{tiens ayans fait vne recolte affez heureufe.

Quelques mois par apres, lorfque le Bourg trem-
bloit de peur de l’Ennemy: Ne nous venez pas
fecourir, nous difoient ces deux bonnes foeurs, quand
bien les Iroquois viendroient brtiler nos palliffades,
puifque les Capitaines excitent tout le monde au fer-
uice du Diable. Mais ie ne fcay fi leur zele n’eftoit
point du genre de celuy de ces deux Freres Boanerges,
au moins auoient-elles quelque chofe de [40] plus, puif-
qu’elles mefmes euffent pery dans l’embrazement de
leur Bourg.


1642 — 43] RELATION OF 1642 57


Village that a good harvest could not be expected,
that the Christians would be the cause of famine, and
that it was quite true that the Faith was the ruin of
the Country. Every one accused these poor inno-
cent women, but the hearts of the Faithful fear only
God and sin. We do not know whether GoD willed
to reward their Faith, and to punish the impiety of
the others; but we were witnesses that most of the
corn did not ripen, especially that belonging to those
who had sacrificed to the Devil, while our Christians
gathered a fair crop.

Some months afterward, when the Village trembled
with fear of the Enemy, these two good sisters said
to us, ‘‘ Do not come to our succor, even if the Iro-
quois come and burn our palisades, because the Cap-
tains are urging all the people to the service of the
Devil.’’ But Ido not know whether their zeal was
not like that of the Brothers Boanerges,—at least
these women had somewhat [40] more, for they them-
selves would have perished in the burning of their
Village.


58 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Not. 28


CHAPITRE WV.


QVELQVES BONS SENTIMENS DE QUELQUES CHRESTIENS
DE CETTE MESME MISSION.


E n’eft pas feulement en public que les Chre-
{tiens ont fait paroiftre leur fidelité: le Ciel
en veut auoir des preuues, dont quafi luy feul

en veut eftre témoin. Vn nommé lofeph Teonde-
choren, auoit vne fille de neuf 4 dix ans, qu’vne mala-
die foudaine emporta lors qu’il f’y attendoit le moins.
Incontinent les Infideles luy reprochent que cette mort
eft vn fruict de la Foy, qu’il auoit embraffée depuis
le maffacre de feu Iofeph Chihoatenhoiia fon frere
qu’autrefois fa femme eftoit morte vn jour apres
qu’on l’auoit baptifée, quoy qu’a l’heure de fon Bap-
tefme elle fuft pleine de fanté; en vn mot, que fa
Famille fe voyoit depeuplée depuis qu’on y auoit
[41] admis la Foy. Ayans apris cette nouuelle, vn
Pere va pour le confoler; mais vn cceur qui recoit les
confolations de DIEv mefme, n’a pas befoin d’autre
confolation. Il m’eft aduis, difoit ce bon Chreftien,
que ie voy ma fille joyeufe deuant moy, fa mort m’a
plus confolé que fa vie, mon efprit n’en a point efté
alteré: Il y a quelque temps que ie l’auois donnée A
DIEV, ilena difpofé, elle eftoit plus a luy qu’é moy.
Ie ne fay pas beaucoup d’eftat de la vie que nous roul-
lons icy bas fur terre, ie ne prife que 1’Eternité, &
les entretiens qu’éa iamais nous aurons enfemble.
Marie Aonetta ve[u]fue de feu Iofeph Chihoaten-


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 59


CHAPTER V.


OF THE GOOD SENTIMENTS OF SOME CHRISTIANS OF
THIS SAME MISSION.


fested their faithfulness. Heaven desires

proof of the same, whereof it alone, so to
speak, will be the witness. One Joseph Teondecho-
ren had a daughter, nine or ten years old, who was
carried away by a sudden illness when he least
expected it. The Infidels at once reproached him,
saying that her death was a result of the Faith, which
he had embraced after the murder of the late Joseph
Chihoatenhoua, his brother; that, some time previ-
ously, his wife had died a day after having been
baptized, although at the hour of her Baptism she
was in good health,—in a word, that his Family was
being destroyed since they had [41] accepted the
Faith. A Father who had heard the news went to
console him; but a heart that receives its consolation
from GOD alone needs no other. ‘‘ It seems to me,”’
said this good Christian, ‘‘ that I see before me my
daughter, full of joy; her death has consoled me
more than her life; my mind has not been disturbed
by it. Some time ago, I gave her up to Gop; he
has disposed of her; she belonged to him more than
tome. Ido not place much value upon the life we
lead here below on earth. I prize Eternity alone,
and the intercourse that we will have together


forever.”’


NG, only in public have the Christians mani-


60 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


hoiia, cet infigne Chreftien, fe comporta auec vn fem-
blable courage, la mort luy ayant ofté vne petite fille
de trois ans, nommée Geneuiefue, qui fouuent durant
fa maladie, mon{trant le Ciel difoit qu’elle cherchoit
fon pere, & vouloit aller auec luy. Les Peres qui
e{toient pour lors a la Conception, quinze iours ou
trois femaines deuant fa mort, la voyant griefuement
malade, f’aduiferent de dire quelques Meffes Votiues
en l’honneur de fa bonne Patronne faincte Geneuiefue,
[42] pour la prier de procurer a cette petite creature
ce qui feroit pour fon mieux, ou la vie ou la mort en
cet eftat d’innocence. Il femble que cette bonne
Saincte leur voulut faire fentir qu'elle auoit oiiy leur
requefte, la vie eftant reftée a cette petite fille iuf-
qu’au troifiéme iour de l’An, iour de la fefte de la
Saincte, que cette petite Geneuiefue expira. C’eftoit
la premiere qu’vn de nos Peres auoit baptifée arri-
uant au Pais, & a laquelle, par voeu, il auoit donné ce
Nom, atiec prieres 4 cette bonne Patronne, que
comme elle deuenoit la Gardienne de cette premiere
grace, il luy pleuft faire en forte que par fon moyen
elle obtint la derniere. Sa mere Aonetta ayant affi{té
a l’enterement de fa fille, voyant que fes parens Chre-
{tiés f’areftoient A pleurer fur la foffe de fon feu
mary, ne ptt arrefter les plus vifs fentimens de fon
coeur. A quoy bon toutes ces larmes, leur dit elle?
tafchons a les fuiure 14 haut dedans le Ciel; faifons
y vne famille toute entiere de Saincts, feruons tous
Dieu fidelement: que les mefcroyans recognoiffent
que noftre Foy n’eft pas morte auec les deffunts, &
que [43] l’efperance du Paradis eft capable d’arrefter
nos larmes.


Vn jeune Homme Chreftien eftant dans vn voyage,


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 61


Marie Aonetta, widow of the late Joseph Chihoa-
tenhoua, that distinguished Christian, behaved with
similar courage when death robbed her of a little
daughter three years old, named Geneviefve, who,
during her illness, frequently pointed to Heaven say-
ing that she was looking for her father, and wished
to go with him. When the Fathers who at that time
were at la Conception, a fortnight or three weeks be-
fore her death, saw her grievously ill, they bethought
themselves of having some Votive Masses said in
honor of her good Patroness sainte Geneviefve, [42]
to pray her to obtain for the little creature whatever
might be best for her,— either life, or death while in
that state of innocence. It would seem that the good
Saint wished to show them that she had heard their
prayer; for life lingered in the little girl until the
third day of the Year, the feast day of the Saint,
when little Geneviefve expired. She was the first
whom one of our Fathers had baptized on his arrival
in the Country, and to whom, in fulfillment of a vow,
he had given that Name, praying that good Patroness
that, as she had become the Guardian of this first
grace, she might be pleased so to act that by her
means she would obtain the last. When her mother
Aonetta, who had attended her daughter’s interment,
saw her Christian relatives stop to weep over the
grave of her late husband, she could not restrain the
liveliest emotions of her heart. ‘‘ What is the good
of all these tears?’” she said to them. ‘‘ Let us
endeavor to follow them up there, in Heaven; let us
gather there an entire family of Saints; let us all
serve God faithfully, so that the unbelievers may see
that our Faith has not died with those who have
departed, and that [43] the hope of Paradise is suff-
cient to check our tears.”’


62 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


fait rencontre d’vne femme infidelle qui le follicite a
ce qu’il ne peut luy accorder qu’auec intereft de fa
confciéce. Tues vne chienne, luy refpondit-il, retire
toy de moy. Mais que crains-tu dedans ces bois,
repart cette impudente, perfonne ne nous void. Mais
le grand maiftre de nos vies a les yeux arreftez fur
nous, luy replique ce bon fidele, & c’eft celuy-la que
je crains.

Vn bon Neophyte eftoit allé en vn bourg voifin, en
vn feftin celebre, ott les guerriers qui y font inuitez
faniment mutuellement par leurs chanfons a faire
quelque: acte de valeur. Au fortimidescette:aiiem-
blée, eftant déja bien tard, vne femme luy prend la
main, & l’inuite a loger chez-elle. I’ay déja, luy-
dit-il, pris mon logis ailleurs. La nuict t’empefche
de me recognoiftre, repart cette affaitée, c’eft en cette
maifon, ot! tu as autrefois logé; oiiy dea, dit-il, mais
alors ie n’eftois pas Chreftien. Dieu fcait lequel des
deux fut le plus eftonné. Quoy que c’en foit, ce bon
Neophyte craignant [44] que dans cette occafion, le
Diable ne le tentaft plus fortement, fe refolut de
conferuer fa victoire en fuyant. I] part toute nuict
de ce bourg, & arriue fur la minuit en fa Cabane, ot
on ne l’attendoit qu’au lendemain.

Vn Chreftien s’eftoit refolu de jeufner, par deuo-
tion, vn mois entier. A peine a il cOmencé que les
chaffeurs retournét des bois, chargez de chairs d’ours
& de cerfs. Autant de feftins qui fe font par toutes
les Cabanes, ce font autant de tentations bien fortes
pour vn Homme, qui en tout autre temps eft con-
traint par neceffité de mener vne vie plus auftere que
celle du Carefme. On l’inuite au feftin deux, trois
& quatre fois le jour; mais crainte de fe voir engagé


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 63
ee ee ere

A Christian young Man ona journey met an infi-
del woman, who solicited him to do what he could
not yield to her without prejudice to his conscience.
““Thou art a bitch,’’ he replied to her; ‘‘ withdraw
fromme.’’ ‘‘ But what fearest thou in these woods?’”’
answered the shameless woman, ‘‘ no one sees us.’’
““ But the great master of our lives has his eyes fixed
upon us,’’ replied the good believer, ‘‘ and it is he
whom I fear.”’

A good Neophyte went to a neighboring village on
the occasion of a noted feast, at which the invited
warriors excited one another by their songs to per-
form some deed of valor. When he left the meet-
ing, at a very late hour, a woman took his hand and
invited him to lodge with her. ‘‘I have already
secured my lodgings elsewhere,’’ he replied. ‘‘ The
darkness prevents thee from recognizing me,’’ said
the decoy; “‘ it was in that house that thou didst for-
methnmiodge., . ves, indecd, @he-scaid, “but then I
was not a Christian.’’ God knows which of the two
was the more astonished. However, the good Neo-
phyte, fearing [44] that on this occasion the Devil
might tempt him more energetically, resolved to
make sure of his victory by flight. He left the vil-
lage that very night, and about midnight he reached
his own Cabin, where he was not expected till the
following day.

A Christian resolved, through devotion, to fast for
an entire month. Hardly had he begun when the
hunters returned from the woods, loaded with the
flesh of bears and of deer. All the feasts that were
held, in all of the Cabins, were so many very strong
temptations for a Man who, at all other times, is com-
pelled through necessity to lead a life more austere


64 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


dans quelqu’vn qui pfit rompre fon jeufne, il fe
priue de tous les autres, ot fouuent il n’y auoit que
du poiffon. On le ’preffe de n’eftre pas fi auftere a
foy-mefme, & les Peres luy-difent, Que fans feru-
pule, il peut remettre fa Deuotion a quelque autre
faifon, puifqu’il n’y eft pas obligé. I] eft vray, ref-
pondit-il, que ie mangerois volontiers de la chair;
mais aujourd’huy, ie fuis bien aife de m’en [45] eftre
hier ab{tenu: & quand le mois fera paffé, la confola-
tion m’en fera toute entiere: chaque fois que ie
confidere que mon jeufne fera recompenfé 4 iamais
dans le Ciel, ie n’y fens plus de peine.

Te ne fcay pas, difoit le mefme en yne autre occa-
fion, ce qui fe paffe dans mon Ame, mais ie n’ay point
plus grand plaifir que lors que ie prie Dieu. I’at-
tends le temps de la Priere, comme vn homme qui
a grand faim, fe difpofe 4 vn repas qu’il void qu’on
luy prepare: Quand on m’inuite 4 vn feftin proche
du temps de la Priere, ie n’ay garde de m’y engager.

Il me femble, difoit vne certaine, que quelqu’autre
que moy parle dedans mon cceur. Lors que ie fuis A
trauailler dedans mon champ, fans ceffe il m’eft
aduis que quelqu’vn m/’aduertit, que j’offre mon
trauail A DIEV. Quoy que fouuent ie l’aye fait, il
ne ceffe pas de parler: fouuent ie differe long-temps,
& il me preffe dauantage. Plus ie le fay, & plus ie
reffens vn plaifir que ie ne puis dire, & toutefois ie
{uis en cela comme ces pareffeux, qui ne font pas ce
que totijours ils font obligez de faire.

[46] Vn pauure Homme, feul Chreftien de toute
fa Fgmille, eft tourmenté de fes parens, qui le
preffent de quitter la Foy. Ils le chaffent de leurs
Cabanes, ils luy refufent & manger; ils luy repro-


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 65


than in the time of Lent. He was invited to a feast
twice, thrice, and four times a day; but, through
fear of pledging himself to attend one where he
might break his fast, he refrained from attending all
the others, at which often fish alone was served. He
was urged not to be so severe with himself; and the
Fathers told him that he might without scruple post-
pone his Devotion to some other season, as he was
not obliged to perform it. ‘‘It is true,” he replied,
‘that I would willingly eat flesh; but to-day Iam
well pleased at [45] having deprived myself of it
yesterday; and, when the month shall have passed,
my satisfaction will be unalloyed. Whenever I think
that my fast will be rewarded forever in Heaven, I
experience no more difficulty in it.”

‘“T know not,’’ said the same man on another occa-
sion, ‘‘ what passes in my Soul, but I feel no greater
pleasure than when I pray to God. I look forward
to the hour of Prayer, just as a very hungry man
makes ready for a meal that he sees being prepared
for him. When I am invited to a feast near the
hour of Prayer, I am careful not to pledge myself
fort.”

‘‘Tt seems to me,’’ said a certain woman, “‘ that
some one other than myself speaks within my heart.
While I am working in my field, I think all the time
that some one is advising me to offer my work to
Gop. Although I have frequently done so, he does
not stop speaking. Sometimes I put it off for a long
time, and he urges me still more earnestly. The
more I do so, the more do I experience a pleasure
that I cannot describe; and yet I am in this matter
like those sluggards who do not always do what they
are obligea.”’


7:


66 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


chent la mort d’vne fienne niepce qui auoit efté bap-
tifée. Il refte fans fupport, il eft contrainct de faire
ce, qt, cit. de: lottice deca t eminess ss Onelenmocaue
de luy, on le rebute des Compagnies, on luy fufcite
des querelles: & fi quelquefois on l’appelle en quel-
que feftin, il fe trouue des infolens qui crient tout
haut, qu’il ne falloit pas l’inuiter parce qu’il e{t Chre-
{tien & qu’il porte malheur ot il va: qu’il doit bien
fe refoudre 4 mourir pluftoft qu’il ne penfe, & qu’on
Vaffommera comme vn Sorcier. N’importe, a répon-
du fouuent ce bon Chreftien, a toutes ces menaces,
ie perfifteray dans la Foy, pas vn ne me la peut
rauir, plus ie fuis pauure moins ie perdray a la mort,
& ceux qui me méprifent, trouueront apres cette vie,
que ie feray plus riche qu’eux: ils ont leur cceur en
Terre, & mes defirs font dans le Ciel, depuis que ie
fuis baptifé.

Ce pauure Homme fit cet Hyuer vn [47] acte de
Charité, qui luy penfa cotiter la vie, & qui mit dans
le chemin du Ciel, vne Ame qui eftoit bien proche
de l’Enfer. Ils eftoient en voyage: Apres cing ou
fix lieués de chemin dans les neiges, vne fienne niepce
qui les fuiuoit eft arreftée par la rigueur du froid.
Le foir ayans pris leur gifte au milieu de cette cam-
pagne, ils f’apergoiuent que cette fille manque, ils fe
doutent de ce qui eft arriué: Ce bon Ch[r]eftien part
au mefme moment pour aller fecourir fa niepce.
Apres vne traitte affez longue, il trouue cette pauure
fille toute roide au milieu des neiges, il la charge fur
fes €paules, la Charité luy fait doubler fes pas, mais
en fin il n’a plus de forces luy-mefme, il fuccombe
fous la pefanteur de ce faix & demeure par le che-
min. Wn de nos domeftiques qui eftoit de la bande,


1642-43] RELATION OF rbuz 67


[46] A poor Man, the only Christian in all his Fam-
ily, was persecuted by his relatives who urged him
to abandon the Faith. They drove him away from
their Cabins, and refused to give him anything to
eat; they reproached him with the death of one of
his nieces, who had been baptized. He was left
without means of support, and was compelled to do
what is usually the work of Women. He was
mocked at, and spurned from every Company; and
quarrels were picked with him. If at any time he
was invited to a feast, some insolent persons present
would call out that he should not have been invited,
because he was a Christian, and because he brought
misfortune wherever he went; that he might certain-
ly make up his mind to die sooner than he expected;
and that he would be clubbed to death as a Sorcerer.
‘* Never mind,’ this good Christian would often
reply to all these threats, ‘‘I will persevere in the
Faith; no one can ravish it from me. The poorer I
am, the less shall I lose at death; and those who
despise me will find after this life that I shall be
richer than they. Their hearts are on Earth; while
my desires are in Heaven, since I have been bap-
tized.

Last Winter this poor Man performed an [47] act
of Charity which nearly cost him his life, and placed
on the road to Heaven a Soul that was very near
Hell. They were on a journey; and, after they had
made their way for five or six leagues through the
snow, one of his nieces, who followed them, had to
stop in consequence of the severe cold. At evening,
having chosen a place for their lodging in the midst of
the open country, they noticed that the girl was miss-
ing and suspected what had happened. This good


68 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


voyant le iour finy, a crainte que ce Chreftien fe foit
efgaré: il va fuiure fes piftes dans l’obfcurité de la
nuict. Il le trouue en prieres, qui ne pouuant paffer
plus outre, fe difpofoit A bien mourir. La fille n’a-
uoit plus ny mouuement ny connoiffance. Ce ieune
Homme, Francois, fe dépoiiille pour couurir ce [48]
pauure Chreftien, & fe charge de ce fardeau mou-
rant. Ils demandent l’affiftance de Dieu, ils luy
offrent leur vie, & apres bien des peines fouffertes,
ils arriuent au gifte. On aproche du feu cette
fille plus que demy-morte, elle n’a ny poulx ny fenti-
ment; pour toute medecine ils luy verfent dedans la
bouche de la neige fondué en eau: en fin elle reuient
a foy, mais c’eftoit pour bien-toft mourir. On eut
toutefois tout le temps de l’inftruire 4 loifir pour
receuoir le fainct Baptefme. Et fi elle eft maintenant
dans le Ciel, elle eft redeuable de fon Salut A ce chari-
table Chreftien, car fes paroles entroient plus auant
dans fon cceur, & luy ne pouuoit fe laffer de l’animer
dans l’efperance du Paradis.

Vne Chreftienne racontoit vn jour 4vn de nos
Peres, vne glorieufe victoire qu’elle auoit remportée
{ur le Diable, penfant f’accufer d’vn grand peché. I’ay
porté, difoit-elle, le Diable dedans mon corps quafi
vn jour entier. Sans ceffe il parloit dans mon cceur
& y mettoit des penfées deshonneftes. I’allois & ie
venois a mon trauail tafchant de le quitter, [49] mais
il eftoit fi attaché dedans mon Ame, que par tout il
venoit auec moy. As-tu prié, te voyant ainfi atta-
quée? Non, difoit-elle, ie n’ay pas bien prié, fans
ceffe ie ne fongeois qu’&A Dieu, & au feu qui brtile
dans l’Enfer. Ie difois tofijours, Non, ie ne veux
point pecher; mais nonob{tant ie pechois tofijours,


1642-43] RELATION OF 16g2 69


Christian started immediately to the assistance of his
niece. After going a long distance, he found the
poor girl lying quite stiff in the snow, and placed her
on his shoulders. Charity made him hasten his
steps, but at last his own strength failed him; he fell
under the weight of his burden, and lay down by the
road. One of our servants, who was with the band,
seeing that the daylight was gone, feared that this
Christian might be lost, and followed his tracks in
the darkness of the night. He found him praying,
for, as he could go no further, he was preparing to
die well. The girl was both motionless and uncon-
scious. The young Frenchman divested himself of
his coat to cover the [48] poor Christian and took
charge of the dying burden. They prayed to God
for aid, offered him their lives, and, after enduring
many hardships, they reached shelter. The girl,
who was more than half dead, was placed near the
fire; she had neither pulse nor feeling; for all medi-
cine, they poured into her mouth some water obtained
by melting snow. At last, she regained conscious-
ness, but only to die soon afterward. They had,
however, sufficient time to give her ample instruc-
tion in order to receive holy Baptism; and, if she be
now in Heaven she owes her Salvation to that char-
itable Christian, for his words sank more deeply into
her heart, and he was never tired of animating her
with hopes of Paradise.

A Christian woman related one day to one of our
Fathers a glorious victory that she had won over the
Devil, while she thought that she was accusing
herself of a great sin. ‘‘I carried the Devil in my
body,” she said, ‘‘ nearly a whole day. He spoke to
my heart without ceasing, and suggested immodest


70 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


& le Diable rendoit fans ceffe mon Ame mal-faite:
c’eft fans doute qu’alors ie ne priois pas bien. Mais
en quoy pechois tu? Le Diable, difoit-elle, euft-il
e{té le maiftre, fi ie n’euffe peché? ne f’en fuft-il pas
fuy, fi iveuffe prié comme il fant. Mais en fin,
comment a-til ceffé de ter tourmenterade 1a fortes,
Apres auoir fouuent dit & redit les Prieres que ie
fcay, répondit-elle, ne fcachant plus que faire, i’ay
dit de toutes mes forces IESOVS, TAITENR, IE-
SVS, AYEZPITIEDEMOY! Et au mefme moment,
mon Ame a ceffé d’eftre mal-faicte: c’eft comme cela
que ie deuois prier dés le commencement.

Vne autre ayant remarqué qu’vn certain Infidele
venoit fouuent en fa Cabane, fe trouua vn jour inte-
rieurement fort confule, fe voyant regardée de ‘cet
Homme, [50] d’vne facgon qui luy fit foupconner quel-
que mauuais deffein. Elle tourne incontinent fon
coeur a Dieu, & fe refout de ne pas ietter mefme vne
ceillade vers le co{té d’ot elle craignoit 1’Ennemy:
& dés le foir ne manqua pas de découurir le tout au
Pere qui la conduifoit, luy adiouftant qu’elle auoit
penfé que cette découuerte affoibliroit le Diable, qui
ne luy vouloit que du mal & tafchoit a l’induire au
peché; pour par apres, luy faire perdre la Foy.

Vne fille Chreftienne eftoit interrogée, fi dans la
licence que prennent icy les ieunes gens, elle n’auoit
point prefté l’oreille 4 quelque mauuais difcours.
Pas vn ne me parle, répondit-elle, finon que fouuent on
me dit que ie fuis trop melancholique: mais A cela
ie ne replique rien, feulement ie prie DIEV dans mon
cceur, afin qu'il me garde, parce que i’ay crainte de
pecher. Ils ne feauent pas mes penfées, adiofita-
t’elle, ie ne fais paroiftre ma ioye que dans ma


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 ral


thoughts toit. I came and went while occupied with
my work, endeavoring to leave him; [49] but so fixed
was he in my Soul that he accompanied me every-
where.” ‘‘ Didst thou pray when so tempted?’’
““No,’’ she said, ‘‘ I did not really pray; my thoughts
were ever of God alone, and of the fire that burns in
Hell. Isaid continually: ‘ No, I will not sin.’ But,
nevertheless, I sinned all the time, and the Devil
ever kept my Soul in evil. Doubtless that was
because I did not then pray as I ought.’’ ‘‘ Butin
what didst thou sin?’’ ‘‘ Would the Devil,’’ she
said, ‘‘ have been the master had I not sinned?
Would he not have fled, had I prayed as I should
have done?’’ ‘‘ But, at last, how did he cease to
torment thee so?’’ ‘‘ After having frequently re-
peated the Prayers that I know,” she replied, ‘‘as I
could not find anything else to do, I said with all my
strenoth> JESOUS, TAITENR, “JESUS, HAVE
PITY ON ME!’ and at the same instant my Soul
ceased to be wicked. It is thus that I should have
prayed at the very beginning.”’

Another woman, who had observed that a certain
Infidel came frequently to her Cabin, was one day
greatly disturbed in mind when she saw that Man
looking at her [50] in a way that made her suspect
him of some evil design. She at once turned her
heart to God, resolved not even to cast a glance in
the direction whence she feared the Enemy; and that
very evening she did not fail to tell everything to
her Father director,—adding that she had thought
that this discovery would weaken the Devil, who
sought only to do her evil, and to tempt her to sin,
in order to make her afterwards lose the Faith.

A Christian girl was asked whether in the license


72 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Cabane, lorfque ie fuis auec mes fceurs & mes parens.
Quand ie vay quelque part, ie change de vifage: ie
tieus la -veué baifiée, le front ridé, & tafche de [51]
paroiftre trifte, afin qu’aucun ne trouue abord aupres
de moy.

Il n’y aque DIEV qui puiffe donner ces defirs de
la pureté en des cceurs, & en wn Pais ot l’impureté
ne paroift qu’auec gloire: mais quand la Foy eft
dans vn coeur, elle y fait des changemens eftranges.
Nous l’allons voir dans le Chapitre fuiuant.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 ; 73


which the young men here assume, she had not lent
an ear to some improper discourse. ‘‘ No one speaks
to me,’’ she said; “‘ except that I am often told that
Iam too melancholy; but to this I answer nothing.
I only pray to GOD in my heart so that he may keep
me safe, because I fear to commit sin. They do not
know my thoughts,’’ she added; ‘‘I manifest my
joy only in my Cabin, when I am with my sisters
and my parents. When I go anywhere, I alter my
appearance; I keep my eyes cast down, and my fore-
head wrinkled, and I try to [51] look sad so that no
one is encouraged to accost me.’’

It is only GOD who can inspire such desires for
purity in hearts and in a Country where impurity is
viewed only with honor. But when Faith is in a
heart, it effects wonderful changes therein. We
shall see this in the next Chapter.


74 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox 28


CEEAPY DR ead.


DES DEPORTEMENS DE QVELQUES CHRESTIENS EN PAR-
TICULIER, DE CETTE MESME MISSION.


OSEPH Teondechoren, auant fon Baptefme, eftoit
| vne maffe de chair, qui couuroit vne Ame auffi
épaiffe que fon corps. Tous les iours on luy
prefchoit les myfteres de noftre Foy, & i] ne
pouuoit les entendre. Il voyoit des exemples de
faincteté deuant fes yeux, en vn frere moins aagé
que luy, qui ne refpiroit que le Ciel; & luy n’auoit
que des penfées de terre. Depuis la mort [52] de ce
fien frere, prenant fon nom lofeph, il a tellement
herité de fa Foy, de fon efprit & de fon zele, qu’on
void bien que c’e{t vn coup du Ciel.

Il ya quelque temps qu’vn nombre d’Infideles,
apres auoir admiré fes difcours, & le zele dont il leur
parloit des chofes de la Foy, plus encore fa vie, qui
depuis fon Baptefme, a e{fté fans reproche: Mais,
f’écrierent-ils, que t’ont ils fait, les Robes noires,
pour t’auoir changé de la forte? Ils m’ont tiré, leur
repartit ce bon Chreftien, tout le mal qui eftoit en
mon Ame. Croyez tous comme il faut, & vous
l’éprouuerez mieux que ie ne puis pas vous le dire?

Vne autrefois, rendant conte de fa confcience au
Pere qui le gouuerne: I] me femble, difoit-il, que
nous ne fommes qu’vn, DIEV & moy: ot il me {uit,
ou ie le trouue par tout ot ie vay: il ne me feroit pas
poffible de me feparer d’auec luy. Ie voy bien quand


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 75


CATA P TERI.


OF THE CONDUCT OF SOME CHRISTIANS IN PARTICU-
LAR, OF THIS SAME MISSION.


OSEPH Teondechoren, before his Baptism, was

a mass of flesh, that covered a Soul as gross as

his body. Every day the mysteries of our Faith

were preached to him, and he could not understand

them. He saw examples of godliness before his

eyes in a brother younger than he, who thought but

of Heaven, while his own thoughts were ever of

earth. After the death [52] of that brother, taking

his name of Joseph, he inherited his Faith, his

spirit, and his zeal to such an extent that one can
easily see that it is an effect of Heaven.

Some time ago, a number of Infidels,— after admir-
ing his discourses and the zeal with which he spoke
to them on matters of Faith, and still more his
manner of living, which since his Baptism has been
beyond reproach,— exclaimed: ‘‘ But what have the
black Gowns done to thee to alter thee so?’’ ‘‘ They
have drawn out all the evil that was in my Soul,’’
said this good Christian. ‘‘ Believe as you ought,
all of you, and you will experience it better than I
ean tell you.”

On another occasion, when he was baring his con-
science to his Father director, he said: ‘‘ It seems to
me that we are but one, Gop and myself. Either
he follows me, or I find him, wherever I go. It
would be impossible for me to separate from him.


76 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


ie peche, qu’il y eft; mais quoy [que] ie n’aye point
d’efprit, ie voy continuellement vn changement
dedans mon Ame. Quafi chaque iour, ie dis en moy-
mefme, me voila bien; & le lendemain, [53] i’ay pitié
de ce que i’eftois, me voyant deuenu tout autre.

Vn iour qu’il parloit A vn vieil Sauuage, des plus
riches du Bourg, mais des plus attachez au feruice
du Diable. Mon oncle, luy difoit-il, tu crois eftre
bien riche, tu es vn gueux, & plus miferable que
moy: fi ie fuis pauure, ie fuis content dedans ma
pauureté; & toy, tu n’as iamais ton efprit en repos.
Sion te difoit des iniures, & fion médifoit de toy,
cela te troubleroit, & toutes tes richeffes ne te gueri-
roient pas. Pour moy, i’ay le coeur difpofé a tous
les maux qui me peuuent arriuer: ie me réioiiirois
me voyant dans l’opprobre, & mefme en cet eftat, ie
ferois plus heureux que toy. Ie ne fonge qu’au
Ciel: & tout ce que ie voy en Terre, foit de bien, foit
de mal, me femble comme vne fumée qui naift, &
puis {’éuanoitiit en vn moment. Ie n’ay pas totiiours
efté dans ces penfées, adiofitoit-il, peut-eftre en ay-ie
e{té plus efloigné que toy. Si iamais tu as recours A
DIEV de tout ton cceur, il eft tout preft de te faire
les mefmes graces.

Vn nommé René Sondihouane, vn des [54] pre-
miers Fideles que nous ayons eu, nous fait bien voir
par fes deportemens, qu’il eft enfeigné d’vn autre
Maiftre que de nous. Souuent, dit-il, ie me réueille
au milieu de la nuict, ie fonge A DiEV, & fans y
prendre garde, ie trouue la nuict écoulée plus douce-
ment que ie n’euffe fait dans vn profond fommeil.
Ie ne fcay qui me met les penfées que i’ay dans le
coeur, mais il m’eft impoffible de repeter ce que mon


1642-43] RELATION OF 162 i


When I sin, I see very well that he is there; but,
although I have no sense, I constantly observe a
change within my Soul. Nearly every day, I say to
myself: ‘Now I am well,’ and the next day [53] I
have pity on what I was, seeing myself become quite
another.”

One day, he was speaking to an old Savage, one of
the wealthiest of the Village but also one of the most
attached to the service of the Devil. ‘‘ My uncle,’’
he said to him, ‘‘thou thinkest thyself very rich;
thou art a beggar, and more miserable than Iam. If
I be poor, lam content in my poverty, while thy mind
is never at ease. If one were to say insulting things
to thee, or slander thee, thou wouldst be troubled,
and all thy wealth would not cure thee. As for me,
my heart is prepared for all the evils that may
happen to me; I would be pleased if I saw myself
in disgrace, and even in that condition I should be
happier than thou. I think only of Heaven, and all
that I see on Earth, whether of good or of evil, seems
to me like smoke that rises and disappears in a
moment. I have not always had such thoughts,’’ he
added; ‘‘ perhaps I have been more averse to them
than thou art. If ever thou hast recourse to GOD
with all thy ee he is quite Pad to grant thee
the same graces.’

A man named René Sondihouane, one of the [54]
first of our Believers, shows us clearly by his conduct
that he is taught by a better Master than ourselves.
‘‘ Frequently,’’ he says, ‘‘I awake in the middle of
the night; I think of GOD, and I find that the night
passes without my noticing it, more pleasantly than
if I had slept soundly. I do not know who puts in
my heart the thoughts that I have there, but it is


78 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


coeur me dit. Souuent de iour il va dans la Chapelle,
& y demeure en oraifon les heures entieres, fans
auoir eu aucune diftraction d’efprit. Vn foir qu’il
faifoit vn f[rjoid exceffif, vn de nos Peres l’en voyant
fortir tout tremblant, long-temps apres qu'il y eftoit
entré, n’ayant pour tout veftement qu’vne peau
d’ours, qui ne luy couuroit que la moitié du corps,
le tenca doucement d’eftre demeuré fi long-temps en
fon Oraifon, veu la rigueur du froid. Ie fuis entré
tout nud, n’ayant qu’vne petite Priere 4 faire, répon-
dit fimplement ce bon Homme, aagé du moins de
foixante ans; mais ayant commencé, dit-il, ie ne me
fuis pas aperceu que i’y fuffe long-temps, & ie ne
fongeois pas [55] que i’y auois grand froid. Souuent
chofes femblables luy arriuent, il les fait exprés pour
meriter dauantage, & fe punirfoy-mefme. Pourquoy,
dit-il, ne ferois-je pas fouffrir quelque chofe 4 mon
corps? ie luy rends ce qu’il fait fouffrir 4A mon Ame;
il m’a troublé l’efprit durant que ie priois, & faifoit
que mon Ame f’ennuyoit parlant 4 DIEV, peu f’en
e{t fallu que ie n’aye tout quitté 14: fi cela demeuroit
impuny, il me feroit totiiours le mefme.

Vn iour eftant entré feul dans la Chapelle, fe met-
tant a prier, il fent vne perfonne fe mettre a genoux
prés de luy, il eft furpris; mais fon étonnement
redouble, entendant vne voix inconnué, dire les mef-
mes Prieres que luy. Apres vn temps affez notable,
il fe laiffe emporter a la curiofité, & comme il faifoit
fombre 14 dedans, il demande qui c’eft; perfonne ne
répond, & toutefois il fent encore cette perfonne prés
de foy; il auance fa main pour la reconnoiftre; mais
cela difparoift tout d’vn coup. Eftant forty de 1a,
il dit a vn des Peres, qu’vne chofe prodigieufe [l]uy


1642-43] RELATION OF 16g2 79


impossible for me to repeat what my heart tells me.’’
Often during the day he goes to the Chapel, and
remains there in prayer for hours at a time, without
any distraction of mind. One night, when it was
exceedingly cold, one of our Fathers who saw him
come out of it all trembling, a long while after he
had gone in,—having only a bearskin for clothing,
which covered but half of his body,— gently rebuked
him for remaining so long at his Prayers, consider-
ing the severity of the cold. ‘‘I wentin quite naked,
having only a short Prayer to say,’’ simply replied
the good Man, who is at least sixty years of age;
‘“ put, having begun, I did not notice that I was there
a long time, and I did not think [55] that I was very
cold.’’ Such things frequently happen to him; he
does them on purpose to gain greater merit, and to
punish himself. ‘‘ Why,” he says, ‘‘ should I not
make my body suffer something? I pay back to it
what it makes my Soul suffer. It disturbed my mind
while I prayed, and caused my Soul to become weary
while speaking to Gop. But little more, and I
should have left everything there. If it remained
unpunished, it would always do the same to me.”
One day, when he had entered the Chapel alone
and had commenced to pray, he felt a person kneel
near him. Hewas astonished, but his surprise was
still greater when he heard an unknown voice repeat-
ing the same Prayers as himself. After some time,
he allowed his curiosity to overcome him; and, as it
was dim in there, he asked who it was. No one
answered, and yet he still felt that person near him.
He stretched out his hand to discover who it was,
but the other suddenly disappeared. When he came
forth from that place, he told one of the Fathers that


80 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 23


eftoit arriuée, & raconte le tout. Qu’as-tu fait, luy
dit-on, apres l’auoir [56] cherché? I’ay repris ma
Priere, répond-il, & ie me fuis trouué en mefme eftat
qu’auparauant: feulement i’ay penfé que tu m’en-
feignerois ce que ce pourroit eftre,; car ie n’ay point
d’efprit. Nous n’en fcauons pas en ce poinct plus
que luy: mais nous n’ignorons pas que Dieu fe plaift
a parler auec les Ames les plus fimples.

Vne nuict, ce bon-homme apres f{’ef{tre long-temps
entretenu fur les grandeurs de DIEvV, f’y trouua
fans y penfer, engagé dans la profondeur d’vn Myftere
dont il ne trouuoit point d’iffué. Mais comment,
difoit-il, fe peut-il faire qu’vn Pere & vn Fils, foient
de mefme, fans eftre le mefme? Si Dieu le Pere eft
vrayement Pere, fe produit-il foy-mefme, puis qu’il
ne produit pas vn autre Dieu? C’eftoient des tene-
bres pour luy, plus obfcures que celles de la nuict.
Le iour eftant venu, il vint chercher lumiere fur fon
doute. Mais, luy dit-on, quelle penfée as-tu eué la
deffus? Qu’euffé-ie penfé autre chofe, refpondit-il,
finon que DIEV n’eft pas vn Homme comme moy?
Si vn chien, difois-ie en moy-mefme, vouloit fonger
quelles font les penfées des Hommes, [57] que
deuroit-il dire autre chofe, finon que 1’ Homme n’eft
pas tout de mefme qu’vn chien. DIEV ne feroit pas
Tout-puiffant & ce qu’il eft, fiie pouuois comprendre
quelsilett.

L’ An paffé, vn de nos Catechumenes, nommé Tfon-
datfaa, eftant décendu a Kebec auec le P. Iean de
Brebeuf, fatisfit tellement dans tout le chemin, que
Monfieur le Cheualier de Montmagny noftre Gouuer-
neur, luy ayant voulu parler; & ayant reconneu fon
e{prit, & entendu les defirs qu’il auoit de fe voir


1642-43] RELATION OF 16g2 81


a wonderful thing had happened to him; and he
related all. ‘‘ What didst thou,’ he was asked,
‘after having [56] looked for him?” ‘‘ I resumed
my Prayer,’ he said, ‘‘and I found myself in the
same condition as before; only I thought that thou
couldst tell me what this might be, for I have no
sense.’’ We knew no more than he does, on that
point; but we are not ignorant of the fact that God
is pleased to converse with the simplest Souls.

One night this good man, after having for a long
time meditated upon the greatness of GoD, found
himself unexpectedly plunged in the depths of a
Mystery from which he could find noissue. ‘* But
how,’’ said he, ‘‘ can it be that a Father and a Son
are the same, without being the same person. If
God the Father be really the Father, does he
produce himself, since he does not produce another
God?” All this was darkness to him, more obscure
than the darkness of night. When day broke, he
came to seek light upon his doubts. “‘ But,’’ he was
asked, ‘‘ what idea hadst thou on the subject?”
‘‘ What else could I think,” he replied, ‘‘ but that
GoD is not a Man like myself? ‘Ifa dog,’ I said to
myself, ‘wished to imagine what the thoughts of Men
are, [57] what else could he say but that Man is not
the same as adog? GoD would not be All-powerful,
and what he is, if I could understand what he is.’’’

Last Year, one of our Catechumens, named Tson-
datsaa, who had gone down to Kebec with Father
Jean de Brebeuf, gave such satisfaction throughout
the journey that Monsieur the Chevalier de Montma-
gny, our Governor, who talked with him, having
recognized his intelligence and heard his desire to
be baptized, decided that we were too strict in refus-


82 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


baptifé, trouua que nous eftions trop rigoureux de luy
refufer vne demande fi faincte. Ce qui nous auoit
arre{té, eftoit que nous craignions que ce Sauuage,
ef{tant des plus engagez dans les fuperi{titions du Pais,
& Chef de bande en ce meftier, n’euft pas affez de
force pour nous tenir la parole qu’il nous donnoit,
qu’au moment qu’il feroit baptifé, il abandonneroit
tout ce que DIEV a defendu: nous euffions fouhaitté
de luy qu’il euft commencé, mefme auant fon Bap-
tefme. Quoy qu'il en foit, l’effet nous a fait recon-
noiftre que ce fut vn mouuement de DIEV, qui porta
Monfieur le [58] Gouuerneur, a defirer de le voir bap-
tifé, & luy-mefme d’eftre fon Parrain. Ie croy que la
relation de 1’An paffé, auoit fait quelque mention de
fon Baptefme, qui fe fit la bas 4 Kebec; & ainfi ie
n’en diray rien crainte de redites.

Cet heureux Neophyte, nommé Charles en fon
Baptefme, n’eft pas fi toft arriué icy en fon Pais, qu’il
inuite tous les principaux de fon Bourg. Mes freres,
leur dit-il, vous voyez vn Chreftien, qui pluftoft
mourra que de quitter la Foy. C’eft au Grand Mai-
{tre de nos vies, auquel ie me fuis engagé de promeffe.
Iamais le Diable, & tout ce qui vient de luy, n’au-
ront aucun pouuoir furmoy. Que pas vn n’ait defor-
mais 4 m’inuiter a quelque peché que ce foit, {’il
n’eft tout refolu de remporter vn refus. Ie vous
veux deliurer, & moy auffi, de peine, vous donnant a
tous cet aduis. Mes biens, ma vie & mon courage
font a vous, pourueu qu’on n’exige rien de moy qui
foit contre DIEv. Ien’en fcais pas beaucoup, mais
ie m’offre d’enfeigner tous ceux qui aurét quelque
defir de m’imiter. Ie voy bien que ie vous aban-
donne dans les couftumes du [59] Pais, i’y ay efté


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 83


ing to grant him so holy ademand. What had pre-
vented us was that we feared that this Savage, who
was one of those most involved in the superstitions
of the Country, and a Leader in that trade, would
not have sufficient strength to keep the promise that
he gave us,—that, when once baptized, he would
abandon all that Gop has forbidden. We could
have wished that he had begun to do so, even before
his Baptism. In any case, the event showed us that
it was an inspiration from GoD that led Monsieur
the [58] Governor to wish to see him baptized, and
himself to be his Godfather. I think that the rela-
tion of last Year made some mention of his Baptism
which took place down there at Kebec, therefore I
will say nothing about it for fear of repetition.

This happy Neophyte, who received the name of
Charles at his Baptism, had no sooner arrived here
in his own Country than he invited all the leading
men of his Village. ‘‘ My brothers,” he said to them,
‘“you see a Christian who would rather die than
abandon the Faith. It is to the Great Master of our
lives that I have pledged myself by promise. Never
shall the Devil, or anything that comes from him,
have any power over me. Let no one in future
tempt me to commit any sin whatever, unless he be
prepared to take away a refusal. I wish to save
you, and myself also, from trouble, by giving you all
this notice. My property, my life, and my courage
belong to you, provided that I am not called upon to
do anything that is opposed to GoD. I donot know
much: but I offer myself to teach all those who may
feel any desire to imitate me. I see very well that
I abandon you in the customs of the [59] Country; I
have been engaged in them as deeply as you have.


84 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


auffi auant que vous; fi vous auez quelque regret
que ie vous quitte, fuiuez moy, & nous ferons plus
liez que iamais par-enfemble.

Depuis ce temps-la, il a fait tout ce qu’il auoit dit.
Ceferoit en peu “de paroles atiez le lower, ii nots
n’auions autre deffein: mais ie croy qu’on en don-
nera toute la gloirea DIEV, entendant quelque chofe
plus en particulier de ce bon Neophyte.

L’aduertiffement du Sage eft bien veritable, Que
celuy qui commence a vouloir feruir DIEV, doit
preparer fon Ame aux attaques de latentation. La
Cabane de ce nouueau Chreftien fe trouue bien-toft
affaillie de toutes parts. Vn fien nepueu tombe
malade, & tous defefperent de fa fanté: on luy vient
aporter la nouuelle de la mort d’vn autre noyé dans
les eaux: le Diable entre dans le corps d’vne fienne
niepce infidele, & la rend frenetique. Ses plus pro-
ches parens forment vn party contre luy, & la que-
relle en viét quafi iufqu’au meurtre de part & d’autre.
Moins que cela eft capable d’abatre vn cceur que
Diev ne fofitient pas, mais lors [60] qu’on met en luy
toute fa confiance, il viuifie apres auoir mortifié. Ces
querelles f’étouffent heureufement; le Diable quitte
cette femme: la nouuelle de mort de ce fien nepueu
en fin fe trouue fauffe, & rend la fanté A celuy que
tous, hormis vn de nos Peres auoient abandonné.

Ce bon Chreftien eft fi touché de tant de graces,
que pour reconnoi{tre la main dont il les receuoit, il
promet de baftir vne Chapelle plus grande que celle
qui eft de prefent dans le Bourg, ot tous les Chre-
{tiens fe pourroient plus facilement affembler.

Le Diable n’en demeure pas 14. Quelque temps
apres vn autre de fes niepces d’enuiron quatre ou


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 1642 85


If you feel any regret at my leaving you, follow
my example, and we shall be bound together more
closely than ever.’”’

Since then, he has done all that he promised. To
say this would be to praise him sufficiently in a few
words, had we no other object in view; but I think
that all the glory thereof will be given to Gop, after
hearing something more in detail about this good
Neophyte.

The warning of the Sage is very true, that he who
begins to wish to serve GOD must prepare his Soul
against the assaults of temptation. The Cabin of this
new Christian is soon assailed on all sides. One of
his nephews falls ill, and all despair of his recovery ;
he is informed of the death of another, who has been
drowned in the waters. The Devil enters into the
body of one of his nieces, who is an infidel, and
makes her frenzied. His nearest relatives conspire
against him and the quarrel almost extends to mur-
der on both sides. Less than that suffices to break
down a mind that is not sustained by GoD; but when
[60] we place all our trust in him, he gives new life
after having chastised us. The quarrels are happily
settled; the Devil leaves the woman; the news of
his nephew’s death proves in the end to be untrue;
and health is restored to him who was given up by
all, except one of our Fathers.

This good Christian was so touched by all these
favors that, in order to acknowledge the hand from
which he received them, he promised to build a
Chapel, larger than that which is now in the Village,
in which all the Christians might more conveniently
meet.

The Devil does not stop there. Some time after-


86 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL, 23


cing ans, tombe malade: Le bruit court que cette
maladie eft du genre de celles que procure vn certain
Demon, qui iamais ne {’apaife qu’apres qu’on luy a
fait homage d’vne danfe, dont ce nouueau Chreftien
eftoit le Chef, auparauant que d’eftre baptifé. Mais,
dit-il, qu’elle meure pluftoft, que i’aye recours a
laffi{tance d’vn ennemy juré de DIEV.

Vn iour qu’il eftoit abfent, tous ceux de la Cabane
font furpris de voir cette fille [61] quafi reuenué en
fanté, retomber tout d’vn coup malade & 4a 1’extre-
mité. Elle pert le jugement & la parole, & on
n’atend plus que le dernier fofipir. Charles retourne
bien fatigué de fon voyage, affez auant dedans la
nuict: Il n’entend que des pleurs, & aprend de fes
yeux, ce que pas vn n’a le courage de luy dire. Vous
pleurez, leur dit-il, fa mort, & moy ce qui m’atrifte
le plus, eft qu’elle ne foit point baptifée: demain
matin les Peres doiuent eftres de retour icy, mais
l’enfant n’aura plus de vie, ayons donc noftre recours
a Dieu: difant cela, il fort, & va affembler prompte-
ment les plus principaux Chreftiens du Bourg, leur
reprefente fa peine, leur difant: Helas! quelqu’vn
de vous autres ne feait-il point les paroles facrées qu’il
faut dire pour baptifer? On me lesa aprifes, répond
Iofeph Teondechoren; Allons donc de ce pas, dit
Charles, voila mon efprit grandement foulagé. Ils
entrent tous de compagnie dans cette Cabane defolée,
ils y font leurs Prieres: Ilofeph baptife cet Enfant,
qui tire 4 la mort; puis fe retournant vers 1’ Affi-
{tance, dit: Arreftons maintenant nos larmes, confo-
lons-nous, [62] fon Ame eft en affeurance, elle {’en-
uolera dans le Ciel, ot elle priera D1EV pour nous:
pour moy, adjotta-il, ie me tiens bien-heureux d’a-


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 87


ward, another of his nieces, aged about four or five
years, falls ill. It is rumored that this illness is of
the sort caused by a certain Demon, who is never ap-
peased until homage has been paid to him in a dance,
of which this new Christian had been the Leader
before he was baptized. “‘ But,’’ said he, “‘ let her
die, rather than that I should have recourse to the
assistance of a sworn enemy of GOD.”’

One day, when he was absent, all those who were
in the Cabin were surprised to see this girl, [61] who
was almost restored to health, suddenly fall ill again,
and in danger of death. She loses both her senses
and her speech, and they await but her last breath.
Charles returns, greatly fatigued from his journey,
quite late at night. He hears nothing but weeping,
and learns with his own eyes what no one has the
courage to tell him. ‘‘ You weep,’’ he says, “‘ be-
cause of her death; but what causes me the most sor-
row is, that she is not baptized. To-morrow morn-
ing the Fathers will return here, but the child will
no longer be alive. Let us therefore apply to God.”
Having said this, he went out and quickly assembled
the principal Christians of the Village, to whom he
told his trouble, saying: ‘‘ Alas! does not some one
among you know the sacred words that must be pro-
nounced in baptizing?’’ ‘‘ They were taught to me,”
replied Joseph Teondechoren. “Let us then go at
once,’’ said Charles; ‘‘my mind is now greatly re-
lieved.” They entered together the afflicted Cabin,
and there offered their Prayers; then Joseph bap-
tized the Child, who was nigh unto death, and, turn-
ing towards those who were Present, he said: ‘* Let
us now cease weeping, and console ourselves; [62]
her Soul is safe; she will fly to Heaven where she


88 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


uoir quatre de mes enfans en Paradis, & ie les inuoque
auec confolation. Charles prend la parole & s’adref-
fant A la mere de l’enfant baptifé, qui alors eftoit
encore Catechumene, c’eft toy, luy dit-il, qui dois
reffentir plus particulierement ce bien-fait, remercie
DIEV pour ton enfant, de la grace qu’elle vient de
receuoir par le Baptefme: conte la fi tu veux pour
morte, mais tu la dois tenir pour bien-heureufe dans
le Ciel. Non,non, reprend=lotepn,bictsen difpo-
fera; il peut, s’il veut, luy rendre la fanté: prions-le
tous qu’en cela fa volonté foit faite. Ils font dere-
chef leurs Prieres, puis apres fe retirent chacun chez
foy. Le lendemain matin les Chreftiens s’étans
affemblez a l’ordinaire dans la Chapelle: La bapti-
fée eft-elle morte? demandent-t’ils 4 Charles. Nen-
ny, dit-il, Dieu a eu pitié de nous, elle eft maintenat
dedans la Cabane, & fe portera bien. DIEV fgeait
quelle joye fe répandit dedans les coeurs de ces bons
Fideles, qui [63] fur l’heure luy en rendirent toute
la gloire.

Si cette guerifon a quelque chofe d’extraordinaire,
il n’y a que le Ciel qui fgcache a la foy de qui on le
doit attribuer. Quoy qu'il en foit, la Foy de ce
courageux Neophyte fe fait affez connoiftre dans fes
cuures. Parlant & quelques Infideles; ce n’eft pas
de jour feulement que ie croy, difoit-il, & que ie fuis
tout refolu de me voir maffacrer pltitoft que de qui-
ter la Foy: ie croy mefme la nuict au plus profond de
mon fommeil. Ie refufe en dormant, d’obeir A mes
fonges, & n’y a pas beaucoup de nuicts que ie voyois
tout le Pais bandé contre moy feul, pour me faire
abandonner la Foy, ie refufay tous leurs prefens, ie
me mocquay de leurs menaces, & me fentois plus


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 89


will pray to GOD forus. As for me,’’ he added, ‘‘ I
consider myself very happy because four of my chil-
dren are in Paradise, and I invoke them with con-
solation.’”’ Charles then spoke, and, addressing the
mother of the baptized child, who was yet a Catechu-
men, he said to her: ‘‘ It is thou who shouldst more
especially appreciate this blessing. Thank GOD on
behalf of thy child, for the grace that she has just
received through Baptism. Consider her as dead, if
thou wilt; but thou must consider her as blessed in
Heaven.’’ ‘‘ No, no,’’ answered Joseph, ‘‘ God will
dispose of her; he can, if he will, restore her to
health; let us all pray that in this his will be done.’’
They again said their Prayers, and then each with-
drew to his home. When the Christians met as
usual on the following day, in the Chapel, they asked
Charles: ‘‘Is the girl dead who was baptized?”’
‘‘ Not at all,” he replied; ‘‘ God has had pity on us.
She is now in the Cabin and will do well.’’ Gop
knows what joy diffused itself through the hearts of
these good Believers, who [63] on the spot gave to
him all the glory therefor.

If this cure be at all extraordinary, Heaven alone
knows to whose faith it is to be attributed. In any
case, the Faith of this brave Neophyte manifests
itself sufficiently in his works. Speaking to some
Infidels, he said: ‘‘ Not only by day do I believe,
and am fully resolved to let myself be killed rather
than abandon the Faith. I believe even at night, in
my soundest slumber. While sleeping, I refuse to
obey my dreams. Not many nights ago, I saw the
whole Country leagued against me, tomake me aban-
don the Faith. Irefused all their presents, I laughed


90 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL 23


courageux, que iamais ie ne fus au combat contre
mes Ennemis.

Il yadu plaifir a l’entendre parler des auantages
de la Foy. Eft-il auec des jeunes gens, qui n’ont le
ceeur rien qu’a la guerre. I’ay compaffion de vous,
dit-il, Tout le long de 1’ Efté vous viuez au milieu des
perils, & vous tremblez de crainte, [64] comme fi déja
l’Ennemy vous brtiloit. Le feu que vous craignez,
n’e{t qu’vne peinture de l’Enfer. On en eft quitte
pour vne ou deux nuicts, tombant entre les mains des
Iroquois, & encores quelquefois on s’échape: Dans
l’Enfer on y brfile pour vne eternité, & pas vn iamais
n’en e{t forty. Que ne redoutez-vous ces flames
impitoyables? Vous allez en guerre pour faire paroi-
{tre vo{tre courage, & ie ne fcgay fi vous fcauez ce
que c’e{t qu’eftre courageux. Ona eu quelque eftime
de moy, mais ie confeffe que ie craignois allant aux
coups, & qu’il n’y auoit que la crainte d’eftre jugé
cotiard, qui me donnoit quelque courage. Croyezd’vne
bonne forte, & vous fentirez vof{tre cceur tout autre
dans le peril. Ce n’eft pas que ie vueille prodiguer
ma vie, mais deux chofes m’affeurent: Premierement,
que c’eft Dirv feul quien difpofera: fecondement,
que fi ie meurs, ie feray heureux dans le Ciel. Auant
que d’ef{tre baptifé, mon corps & mon ame trembloient
dans les dangers, maintenant mon Ame eft en lieu
d’affeurance, quoy que mon corps redoute le peril.

[65] Se trouue-t’il en d’autres Compagnies, Auant,
dit-il, que ie fuffe tout refolu de me ranger du party
de la Foy, on me croyoit heureux; i’auois trois forts
bien €prouuez: 1’vn me donnoit bon fuccés 4 la chaffe:
Vautre eftoit pour la pefche, & le dernier feruoit
dedans mes Traittes. I’ay tout jetté ces forts dedans


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 91


at their threats, and felt more courageous than ever
I was when fighting in battle against my Enemies.”’

It is a pleasure to hear him speak of the advan-
tages of the Faith. When with young men whose
thoughts are all of war, he says: ‘‘ I feel compassion
for you. All the Summer, you live in the midst of
perils, and you tremble with fear, [64] as if the
Enemy werealready burning you. The fire that you
dread is but a representation of Hell. When in the
hands of the Iroquois, it lasts but one or two nights,
and sometimes even one may escape. In Hell they
burn throughout eternity, and no one has ever gone
out thence. Why do you not fear those pitiless
flames? You go to war to show your courage, and I
know not whether you understand what it is to be
brave. I have been held in some esteem; but I con-
fess that I was afraid when we came to blows, and
that it was only the fear of being deemed a coward
that gave me some courage. Believe in earnest and
you will feel that your courage is very different in
peril. Itis not that I am anxious to throw away my
life, but two things reassure me,—in the first place,
that it is Gop alone who will dispose of my life;
secondly, that if I die, I shall be happy in Heaven.
Before I was baptized, my body and my soul trembled
in the midst of dangers; while now my Soul is ina
place of safety, although my body dreads the peril.”

[65] If he happen to be in other Company, he says:
‘‘ Before I was fully resolved to range myself on the
side of the Faith, I was considered fortunate. I had
three well-tried charms,— one brought me success in
the chase, another in fishing; and the third served
me in my Trading. I threw all these charms into
the fire for fear of being cast therein myself. 1


92 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 28


le feu, de peur d’y eftre precipité moy-mefme: i’ay
abandonné toutes les danfes, ot vous fcauez le
pouuoir que i’y auois: ie me fuis priué en fuite de la
plufpart des feftins du Pais. Vne femme qui mainte-
nant f’adrefferoit 4 moy, n’en remporteroit que les
coups. Vous penfez que i’aye fait du fol, d’auoir
quitté ce que vous eftimez le bonheur de la vie, mais
c’e{t vous qui me faites pitié. Mon jugement eft
preferable au voftre, puifque i’ay efprouué en moy
ce que vous eftes, & vous n’éprouuez pas ce que ie
fuis. Faites-vous tous Chreftiens d’vne bone facon,
& alors ie feray fans réponfe fi vous me démentez:
Mais croiez-moy, vous ef{tes tous miferables & le
Diable vous traite comme nous faifons nos Captifs:
Nous n’auons pour eux que des carreffes vn iour
deuant leur mort, lors [66] mefme que noftre efprit
n’e{t remply que de cruautez: dont par apres nous
prenons tout noftre plaifir &4 leur en faire fentir la
Tigueur.

lamais ie n’aurois fait, de raconter des difcours qui
n’ont point de fin: car ce font fes entretiens les plus
ordinaires. Et fans doute, fi pour eftre Chreftien, il
{uffifoit d’eftre conuaincu de veritez de noftre Foy,
il feroit quafi autant de Chreftiens qu’il trouue d’Au-
diteurs. Mais ceux qui luy ont dit: Nous fommes
refolus de te fuiure; n’ont pas tous fon courage, quand
leurs ceuures doiuent confirmer leurs paroles. Toute-
fois dans fa feule Cabane, il y en a déja plus de douze
qui font baptifez, & fi neantmoins. eftoit-ce l’vne des
plus attachée du Pais, au feruice du Diable.

N’eft-ce pas témoigner qu’on eftime la Foy, eftant
au plus fort de fa pefche, éloigné de cinq lieués, de
quiter tout, & venir en courant, crainte de manquer


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 93


abandoned all the dances, wherein you know what
powerlIhad. I afterward deprived myself of attend-
ing most of the feasts of the Country. If any wom-
an were to accost me now, she would receive nothing
but blows. You think that I have acted foolishly,
in giving up what you consider the happiness of life;
but it is you who arouse my pity. My judgment is
better than yours, because I have felt in myself what
you are, and you do not feel what Iam. Become
Christians, all of you, in real earnest; and then I
will not answer a word, if youdeny whatI say. But,
believe me, you are all miserable; and the Devil
treats you as we do our Captives. We have nothing
but caresses for them a day before their death, even
when [66] our minds are filled with cruelties, the
severity of which we afterward find all our pleasure
in making them feel.”

I would never finish, were I to repeat these endless
discourses, for they are the usual subjects of his con-
versation. And, beyond a doubt, if to be a Christian
it were sufficient to be convinced of the truths of our
Faith, he would make almost as many Christians as
he finds Hearers. But not all of those who have said
to him, ‘‘ We are resolved to follow thee,” have his
courage, when it is necessary that their deeds should
confirm their words. Nevertheless, in his Cabin
alone there are already more than twelve who have
been baptized; and yet it was one of the most attached
in the Country to the service of the Devil.

Is it not a proof that a man esteems the Faith
when, during the busiest time in the fishing season,
he leaves everything, and from a distance of five
leagues comes on the run, for fear of missing Mass
on a Sunday? There are many in France who would


94 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


vn Dimanche a4 la Meffe. Il y en a beaucoup en
France, qui euffent pris plaifir de le voir arriuer tout
nud, fa robe en pacquet fous le bras, crainte de la
moiiiller durant [67] vn orage de pluye. Ce fpectacle
n’a rien de fauuage qu’au jugement des yeux; mais
Vefprit de la Foy y confidere ie ne fgay quoy, qui
donneroit de la confufion & plufieurs bons Chreftiens.

S'il auoit foin de feruir DIEV, DIEV auoit foin de
luy. Il y eut fept iours de tempefte, qui ne permet-
toit nullement qu’on mift le canot en l’eau, pour aller
leuer les retz qui eftoient tendus: ce mauuais temps
luy donnoit le loifir de prier dauantage. Le calme
e{tant venu, les Infideles trouuerent leurs filets tous-
rompus & emportez de cet orage, & luy trouua les
fiens au mefme lieu ot: il les auoit mis fains & entiers.

Cela & femblables exemples, qui fouuent font
arriuez a nos Chreftiens, font des Lecons, bien a la
portée de leurs fens, qu’il fait bon auoir recours a
DIEV. Vn jeune enfant Chreftien, fut cet Hyuer
f{urpris bien auant dedans la nuict, dans vne cam-
pagne de neiges: le froid, qui tous les Hyuers arrefte
& fait auffi mourir au milieu des chemins, les per-
fonnes les plus robuftes, l’abat quafi dedans ces neiges.
Ie fuis mort, s’écrie-t’il, IESvS, [68] ayez pitié de
moy. Il fent 4 l’inftant vne chaleur qui fortifie fes
membres, & le fait pltito{t courir que marcher lente-
ment. Apres vne traite de chemin affez longue, il
retombe en foibleffe; fon recours eft a fa priere,
IESVS, ayez pitié demoy. Ses forces fe redoublent
au me{me moment, & [il] continué fa courfe. Sou-
uent fes forces s’affoibliffent, mais chaque fois il
repete la mefme Priere, & €prouue le mefme fecours.
En-fin fur les deux heures apres minuid, il arriue en


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 95


have found pleasure in seeing him arrive, all naked,
with his clothes in a bundle under his arm, for fear
of their getting wet during [67] a shower of rain.
Such a spectacle is a savage one only to the eyesight;
but the spirit of Faith sees in it something undefin-
able which would cause confusion to many good
Christians.

If he was attentive in serving GOD, GOD took care
of him. There was a storm that lasted seven days,
and rendered it impossible to launch a canoe for the
purpose of taking up the nets that were set. This
bad weather gave him leisure to pray still more.
When calm returned, the Infidels found all their nets
broken and carried away by the storm; while his
were safe and sound, in the same place where he had
put them.

This and similar instances, which have frequently
happened to our Christians, are so many Lessons
well within the scope of their understanding, which
show that it is good to have recourse to GOD. Last
Winter, a young Christian child unexpectedly found
himself, late at night, in a plain all covered with
snow. Thecold, which every Winter stops the most
robust persons, and even causes them to die in the
middle of the road, almost overcame him amid the
snow. ~‘ l shall die,’’ he cried;"“ Jesus, [68] have
pity on me.” He at once felt a warmth which gave
new vigor to his limbs, and made him run rather
than walk slowly. After traversing a long stretch
of road, he again felt weak. He had recourse to his
prayer: ‘‘JESUS, have pity on me.” His energy
was redoubled at the same moment, and he continued
torun. His strength often failed him; but on each
occasion he repeated the same Prayer, and experi-


96 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


fa Cabane, & tous beniffent DIEvV de l’auoir confer-
ué: mais luy s’accufe qu’au milieu de fes courfes, il
auoit perdu la memoire de celuy qui luy donnoit ces
forces pour courir.

Vne Chref{tienne venant d’vn feftin, fe fentit atta-
quée de la fiéure: elle craint que ce ne foit quelque
fort qu’on ait jetté dedans fon plat: Car, difent-ils,
c’eft 14 le temps que prennent fubtilement les Sor-
ciers, pour les faire mourir. Nenny, dit le mary,
Qui croit bien, ne craint point le Diable. N’as-tu
pas prié DIEV auant que de manger? I’eftois feule
Chreftienne, répondit candidement la femme, i’ay eu
peur qu’on fe mocquaft de moy. Tu as [69] donc
jufte occafion de craindre, repartit le mary: Qui a
honte de DIEV ne merite pas que DIEV luy aide.

A ce propos, vn bon Enfant s’accufoit il y a quel-
que temps, qu’eftant injurié, il s’étoit mis en grande
cholere, & auoit rendu injure pour injure. Et qu’as-
tu dit, luy demanda le Pere qui luy parloit. Vn tel,
répondit-il, qui n’a pas encores d’efprit (c’eft a dire,
qui ne croit pas encore) s’ef{t efcrié en me voyant:
Voila la Foy qui marche. Ie n’ay pt fupporter cela;
& luy ay reparty auffi en me mocquant de luy: Voila
le fonge, voila la danfe, voila le Diable qui marche.
Tu es vn poltron, m’a-t’il dit, tu crains le feu d’En-
fer. Oltiy dea, ie le crains, luy ay-je répondu; Viens
en noftre Cabane, & faute dans le feu que ie t’y feray,
& 1a tu me feras paroiftre ton courage; & alors tu
auras raifon de m’appeller poltron: Tu ne crains pas
le feu quand il eft bien loin de toy. Ce bon Enfant
croyoit auoir commis quelque grand peché.

Vne ieune fille, Agée de quinze A feize ans, eftant
allée couper du bois, auec fes compagnes Infideles,


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 1642 97


enced the same assistance. Finally, about two hours
after midnight, he reached his own Cabin and all
thanked Gop for having preserved him; but he
accused himself for having, while running, forgotten
to remember him who had enabled him so to run.

A Christian woman felt herself attacked by fever,
on her return from a feast; she feared that this
resulted from some spell that had been cast in her
plate,— for, they say, that is the moment that the
Sorcerers craftily seize, to make them die. ‘‘ Not at
all,’’ said her husband; ‘‘ whosoever truly believes,
fears not the Devil. Didst thou not pray to GoD
before eating?’’ ‘‘I was the only Christian there,”
candidly replied his wife; ‘‘ I feared that they would
scoff at me.’’ ‘‘ Thou hast [69] then, good reason
tow fear, “replied her husband; |“ whosoever is
ashamed of GoD, does not deserve that GOD should
help him.’’

In this connection, a good Child confessed some
time ago that, on being insulted, he had flown into a


great rage, and had returned insult forinsult. “‘ And
what didst thou say?’’ asked the Father who spoke
to him. ‘‘ Soand so,’’ he replied, ‘“ who has not yet


any sense’’ (that is, who does not yet believe) ‘‘called
out on seeing me: ‘ Here is the Faith walking about!’
I could not endure that; and I also replied, mocking
him: ‘ Here is the dream, here is the dance, here is
the Devil, walking about!’ ‘Thou art a coward;’
he said to me, ‘ thou fearest the fire of Hell.’ ‘ Yes,
indeed, I do fear it,’ I replied to him. ‘ Come to our
Cabin, and jump into the fire that I shall prepare for
thee, and thus thou wilt show me thy courage; and
then thou wilt have reason to call me a coward.
Thou fearest not fire, when it is very far from thee.’ ”’


98 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


s’accufoit pareillement [70] de les auoir tancée, parce
qu’elles difoient des chofes deshonneftes. Tu deuois
les quitter 1a, luy dit-on, Auffi ay-ie fait, répondit-
elle: & eftant toute feule vn peu efloignée d’elles, ie
difois en moy-mefme, Helas! que ne croyent-elles?
elles font fans efprit; ie profite autant comme elles
en terre, mon bois eft auffi bon que le leur, & outre
tout’ cela, ie “merite le-Ciel}ycependant~qu’elles fé
damnent de la forte.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 99:


This good Child thought that he had committed a
great sin.

A young girl, fifteen or sixteen years old, who had
gone to cut wood with her Infidel companions, like-
wise accused herself [70] for having rebuked them
because they talked about immodest things. ‘‘ Thou
shouldst have left them,’’ she was told. ‘‘ I did so,’’
she replied, ‘‘and when I was all alone, some dis-
tance away, I said to myself: ‘ Alas! why do they
not believe? They have no sense. I derive as much
benefit from the earth as they,—my wood is as good
as theirs; and, in addition to that, I deserve Heaven
while they are damning themselves thus.’ ”’


100 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


CHAPITRE=Vil.


EXERCICES ORDINAIRES DES CHRESTIENS DE LA MESME
MISSION.


VELQVES robuftes que foient nos corps, difoit
© vn iour vn de nos Sauuages, Chreftien, a

quelques Infideles qu’il enfeignoit. Si nous
manquons de nourriture, nos forces manquent, & vn
enfant nous pourroit terracer. Quelques refolutions
que prenne noftre coeur, fila grace de DIEV ne for-
tifie puiffamment noftre [71] Ame, le moindre heurt
nous fait tomber, & fans difficulté le Diable nous ren-
uerfe. le fentois ces foibleffes, leur difoit-il, aupara-
uant que deftre baptifé; mais depuis ce temps-la, ie
fens mon Ame de plus en plus remplie de forces:
parce que DIEV va augmentant fa grace a ceux qui
continuent a bien faire. Puifque nos Sauuages d’eux-
mef{mes reconnoiffent cette verité, nous pouuons bien
dire apres eux, que fi DIEV leur a donné quelque
courage, ce n’a.efté qu’en fuite de leur fidelité, dans
les exercices de la Foy.

Dés le matin, quelque rigueur de froid qu’il fift,
Hommes, Femmes & Enfans, rempliffoient la Cha-
pelle pour entendre la Meffe, atiec autant de deuotion
que fi chaque iour leur euft efté vn iour de Fefte: le
leuer du Soleil eft la cloche qui les aduertit. Ils ne
fortoient point de ce lieu, qu’on ne leur euft donné
a tous en commun quelque aduis, pour paffer plus
Chreftiennement le refte de la iournée.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642. 101


CHAPTER VII.


USUAL EXERCISES OF THE CHRISTIANS OF THE SAME
MISSION.


66 OWEVER robust our bodies may be,’’ said
H one of our Christian Savages one day, to
some Infidels whom he was teaching, “‘ if
food fails us, we lose our strength, and a child could
throw us to the ground. Whatever resolutions our
hearts may take, if the grace of GOD do not power-
fully fortify our [71] Souls, the slightest shock causes
us to fall, and the Devil overthrows us without any
difficulty. I felt such weakness,’ he said to them,
‘“before I was baptized; but since then I feel my
Soul more and more strengthened, because GOD
gives an increased measure of his grace to those who
continue to do well.’’ Since our Savages acknowl-
edge this truth of their own accord, we may well
say with them that, if Gop has given them some
courage, it has been solely in consequence of their
fidelity in the practice of the Faith.

Early in the morning, however cold the weather
might be, Men, Women, and Children filled the
Chapel to hear Mass, with as much devotion as if
every day had been a Feast day for them. The
rising of the Sun is the bell that warns them. . They
did not leave the place until some advice had been
given to them in common about passing the remain-
der of the day in a more Christian manner.

During the day, the Fathers went to their Cabins,


102 LES RELATIONS DES JES CITES [VoL. 23


Pendant le iour, les Peres alloient les enfeigner
dans leurs Cabanes, non feulement leur Catechifme,
mais toutes les veritez les plus importantes de noftre
[72] Foy: Le tout eftant tellement difpofé en que-
{tions & réponfes, felon la portée des Sauuages, qu’il
n’y a quafi chofe aucune dont ils ne foient capables.
C’eft vn plaifir d’eftre en cecy témoin de leur ferueur:
On verroit des Vieillards, des ieunes Hommes, des
Femmes & des Enfans, n’auoir point de recreation
plus fenfible que de fe faire interroger, & fe répondre
les vns aux autres; & ce qui nous confole le plus eft,
qu’il n’y a point d’autre atrait, ny efperance d’autre
recompenfe pour eux, que celle du Paradis. Tel 4gé
de cinquante & de foixante ans, rencontrant vn
Enfant, luy dira: Mon nepueu, tu as vn bon efprit,
enfeigne-moy? fais-moy fuér a te répondre. La
femme interrogera le mary, le fils enfeignera pareille-
ment fa mere, & fi elle manque a bien répondre, il fe
mocquera d’elle, la menagant de ne la plus inftruire,
puis qu’elle ne veut pas retenir ce qu’on luy veut
apprendre: & le bon eft, que la mere ne s’en fachera
pas. Ila raifon, dira-t’elle, de me tancer, car ie n’ay
pas bien retenu ma legon.

Auant que ie fuffe baptifé, nous difoit vn certain,
ie m’ennuyois fouuent nonobftant [73] tous les diuer-
tiffemens du Pais, que ie recherchois autant qu’vn
autre, maintenant eftant feul, ie repete Aa part-moy
les belles chofes qu’on m’enfeigne, & ie m’entretiens
dans les defirs d’en fcauoir dauantage. Ce font-lA
mes plaifirs, mes danfes, mes feftins, & tout ce que
i’ay abandonné pour deformais embraffer la Foy.

Tandis qu’on faifoit dans le Bourg 1’Ononhoiia-
roia, dont cy-deffus il a efté parlé, & que les Infideles


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 103


to teach them not only their Catechism but also the
most important truths of our [72] Faith,—the whole
being so arranged in questions and answers, accord-
ing to the capacity of the Savages, that there is hard-
ly anything that they cannot understand. It is a
pleasure to witness their fervor in this respect. One
sees Old Men, young Men, Women, and Children,
who can find no more pleasant recreation than to be
questioned by and to answer one another; and what
consoles us the most is, that there is no other attrac-
tion or other hope of reward for them than that
of Paradise. One who is between fifty and sixty
years of age, on meeting a Child, will say to him:
‘My nephew, thou art clever, teach me; make me
sweat to answer thee.’’ A wife will question her
husband; a son will likewise teach his mother, and,
if she fail to answer properly, he will laugh at her,
threatening to give up instructing her, because she
will not remember what he wishes her tolearn. And
the best of it is, that the mother will not be angry at
him. ‘‘ He is right,’’ she will say, ‘‘ in scolding me,
for I have not remembered my lesson well.”’

‘* Before I was baptized,’’ a certain man said to us,
‘“T often felt dull, in spite of [73] all the amusements
of the Country, which I sought as much as any other.
Now, when I am alone, I repeat to myself the excel-
lent things that are taught me, and I encourage
myself in the desire to know more. Such are my
pleasures; my dances and my feasts, and all that, I
have abandoned to embrace henceforth the Faith.”

While they were celebrating in the Village the
feast of Ononhouaroia, which has been mentioned
above, and while the Infidels were demanding, by
means of enigmas, their desires,—that is to say, the


104 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


fe demandoient par enigme leurs defirs, c’eft a dire,
celuy de leur Demon; nos Chreftiens s’affembloient
pour fe propofer auffi leurs defirs. Pour moy, difoit
l’vn, ie defire aller au Ciel; & moy, difoit l’autre, ie
fouhaiterois de voir tous nos Freres qui font dans ce
Pais, Chreftiens, & qu’ils fuffent raffemblez tous dans
vne Bourgade ott le peché n’euft point d’entrée: quant
a moy, difoit vn troifiéme, ie voudrois voir tout le
Pais bien conuerty: & moy, difoit vn autre, fi on me
vouloit fendre la tefte d’vn coup de hache, pour me
faire trouuer le defir de ces Diables, ie me laifferois
maffacrer pltito{t que de parler vn mot: pour moy,
[74] difoit le fuiuant, ie parlerois bien-haut, & voicy
ce que ie dirois au fol qui me propoferoit fon enigme:
Tu defire briler dans le feu, auec le Diable dont tu
recherches les defirs, jette toy dans ces braziers, ton
defir & le fien fera accomply. Lors qwils fe recre-
oient de la forte, ces infenfez ne laiffoient pas de
paffer a trauers de la Cabane, & tel deuenoit fage
f’arre{tant 4 ces bons difcours.

Le fruict de ces bonnes inftructions, nous a paru A
loeil fi fenfiblement, que nous en efperons encore
beaucoup dauantage: Car comme la plufpart des
Chreftiens poffedent les principales veritez de noftre
Foy, par ces queftions & réponfes faciles, ils font bien
plus que nous pour inftruire les autres Sauuages. Et
aul moins auons-nous cette confolation, que fi la pluf-
part ne font pas baptifez, ce n’eft pas marque qu’ils
ne {gachent tout ce qui eft neceffaire pour l’eftre.

Les Hurons eurent cet Hyuer vne veritable crainte,
en fuite d’vne fauffe alarme qui leur eftoit venué:
Qu’vne Armée d’Iroquois eftoit fur le point d’enleuer
le bourg de Kontarea, principal bouleuard [75] du


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 105


desire of their Demon,— our Christians met together
to state their desires also: ‘‘ As for me,”’ said one,
““T wish to go to Heaven.” ‘‘ And I,” said another,
“would like to see all our Brothers in this Country
Christians, and all gathered together in a Village


where sin could not enter.’’ ‘‘ As for me,’’ said a
third, “‘ I would like to see the whole Country thor-
oughly converted.” ‘And I,’’ said another, ‘‘if


any one wished to split my head open with a blow
from a hatchet, to make me find out the desire of
those Devils, I would let myself be murdered, rather
than say a word.’ ‘‘ For my part,’’ [74] said the
next, ‘‘I would speak out aloud, and this is what I
would say to the fool who should propound his enig-
ma to me: ‘ Thou wishest to burn in the fire with
the Devil, whose desires thou seekest; throw thyself
into those fireplaces, and thy desire and his will be
accomplished.’’’ While they were amusing them-
selves in this manner, the foolish ones ceased not to
pass through the Cabin, and some became wise while
stopping to hear such pious discourse.

The fruit of these good instructions has been so
apparent to our eyes, that we hope to derive still
greater benefit therefrom. For, as most of the Chris-
tians possess the principal truths of our Faith through
those easy questions and answers, they do much more
than we can for the instruction of the other Savages.
And at least we have this consolation, that, if the
majority of them be not baptized, it is not a sign
that they do not know all that is required for it.

Last Winter, the Hurons had a real fright, in con-
sequence of a false alarm that had reached them that
an Army of Iroquois was on the point of carrying the
village of Kontarea, the chief bulwark [75] of the


106 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Pais. Ceux de la Conception nous firent demander,
fi nous ne les Baptizerions pas tous lorfque 1’Ennemy
paroiftroit; que pour eux ils defiroient aller dans le
Ciel apres la mort. Cela mon{ftre qu’ils connoiffent
la Verité; mais en France, auffi bien qu’aux Hurons,
il n’y en a que trop, qui viuans en Barbares, vou-
droient bien apres, mourir bons Chreftiens.

Lors que le Soleil fe recouche, il aduertit les Chre-
{tiens de fe raffembler en la Chapelle: Les Peres qui
ont foin d’eux y font pour l’ordinaire; mais c’eft quel-
qu’vn des plus anciens Chreftiens, qui chacun & fon
tour, de Semaine en Semaine, prefide 4 cette Affem-
blée, dit tout haut les Prieres, les autres le fuiuant:
& ala fin, lors que les Peres font abfens, exhorte tous
les autres 4 bien faire les deuoirs de Chreftien.

Les Samedis, tous fe confeffent, pour fe bien
difpofer au fainct Iour, (c’eft ainfi qu’ils nomment le
Dimanche) auquel auant la Meffe, on leur fait vn
petit Sermon. Quoy que tous fe foient confeffez,
toutefois d’ordinaire on ne les fait Communier
[78 1.6., 76] quyne fois chaque mois. le me fou-
uiens d’auoir leu dans les Epiftres de ce grand
Apoftre de 1l’Orient fainct Francois Xauier, que des
Indiens, tant noirs que blancs, dont il en auoit bap-
tifé des milliers, il n’y auoit quafi que les Enfans &
tres-peu d'autres, qui fe fauuaffent. Plus ie confi-
dere les Epiftres de ce grand Sainct, & plus il me
femble que ces Peuples icy ot nous fommes en 1’Inde
Occidentale, font plus capables des my{teres de noftre
Foy: at. moins les fentimens de DIEV, entrent plus
auant dedans leurs cceurs, quand vne fois ils fe font
conuertis. Sil plaift au Ciel continuer fes bene-
dictions fur les autres, & en faire d’auffi bons Chre-


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 107


Country.? Those who resided at la Conception asked
us whether we would not Baptize them all when the
Enemy should appear, because they wished to go to
Heaven after death. This shows that they know the
Truth; but, in France as well as among the Hurons,
there are but too many who, after having lived as
Barbarians, are very anxious to die good Christians.

The setting of the Sun warns the Christians to
collect in the Chapel. The Fathers who have charge
of them are generally there; but it is always one of
the older Christians who —each in turn, from Week
to Week —presides over the Meeting; who recites
the Prayers aloud, while the others follow him; and
who at the end, when the Fathers are not present,
exhorts all the others properly to perform their
duties as Christians.

On Saturday, all go to confession, to prepare them-
selves for the holy Day (so they call Sunday), on
which a short Sermon is preached to them before
Mass. Although all have confessed their sins, never-
theless, as a rule, they are allowed to receive Com-
munion [78 i.e., 76] but once a month. I remember
having read in the Epistles of that great Apostle of
the East, saint Francois Xavier, that of the Indians,
both black and white, whom he had baptized by thou-
sands, only the Children and a very few others were
saved. The more I read the Epistles of that great
Saint, the more does it seem to me that these Peoples
among whom we are in Western India are more cap-
able of understanding the mysteries of our Faith; at
least, the perception of GOD penetrates more deeply
into their hearts, when once they are converted. If
Heaven be pleased to continue to grant its blessings
to the others, and to make as good Christians of them


108 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


{tiens que font ceux qu’il nous donne pour le prefent,
ie dirois auec affeurance que la plufpart, & quafi tous,
feront du nombre des Eleuz.

La vraye Foy fait de grands Miracles; elle change
vn cceur barbare, en vn coeur felon le coeur de DIEV.
On le void plus clairement dans la tendreffe de leur
confcience, qu’ailleurs. Tel f’accufe de ce que la
nuict f’étant refueillé, crainte du froid, il n’a ofé tirer
le bras de deffous fa [79 1.e., 77] robe, pour faire le
figne de la Croix, fe contentant de le faire fur fa poi-
ctrine. Ie me fuis comporté comme feroit vn Infi-
dele, dira vn autre, eftant a mon trauail, i’auois déja
déné huict ou neuf coups deffus vn arbre, pour l’aba-
tre, fans demander l’affiftancede DIEv. I’ay enduré
du froid, dira vn autre, comme les beftes qui font
dedans les bois, il veut dire, qu’il n’a pas offert a
DIEV, fes petites fouffrances. Que f’ils tombent fur
la Semaine, en quelque peché plus grief, ils vien-
dront fouuent 4 l’heure mefme, f’en accufer: & quel-
quefois il y a plus de faincteté que de mal en ce en
quoy ils penfent auoir efté grandement criminels.
Tu fcauras, diront-ils, que ie me fuis trouué au Con-
feil, ou on a refolu de faire vne telle danfe, pour
appaifer le Diable. Y eftant engagé par furprife,
fans en pouuoir fortir, lay demandé pardon a DIEv,
i’ay bien dit des injures au Diable, & me fuis endor-
my. Lors qu’on f’eft leué pour fortir, ie me fuis
refueillé, & ay dit aux Capitaines qu’ils auoient tort
de m’inuiter 4 femblables Confeils, puis qu’ils feauent
bien que ie n’ay que l’horreur pour les Demons.

[80 i.e., 78] Vn jeune Enfant penfoit eftre perdu,
quelques iours apres fon Baptefme: Ie viens d’enten-
dre, difoit-il, de méchantes paroles; ie haiffois ces


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 109


as those whom it now gives us, I may safely say that
most and nearly all of them will be of the number of
the Elect.

True Faith works great Miracles; it changes a sav-
age heart into one that is in accord with the heart of
Gop. We observe this more clearly in the tender-
ness of their conscience than in anything else. One
accuses himself because, on awakening during the
night, he has, on account of the cold, been afraid to
withdraw his arm from beneath his [79 i.e., 77] cover-
ing, in order to make the sign of the Cross, contenting
himself with making it on his breast. ‘‘ I behaved as
an Infidel would have done,’’ another will say; ‘‘I
was at work, and had already struck eight or nine
blows on a tree to fell it, and I had notasked Gop’s
assistance.’’ ‘‘I have endured cold,’’ still another
will say, ‘‘like the beasts that live in the woods.”’
By this he means that he has not offered his petty
sufferingstoGop. If during the Week they commit
some more grievous sin, they often come at once to
confess it; and sometimes there is more holiness than
evil in acts which they think have been highly crimi-
fal, ~ ° Pho must know, they willssay “that I
was present at the Council when it was resolved that
such a dance should be performed to appease the
Devil. Being caught there by surprise, without
being able to get away, I begged pardon of Gop; I
said many insulting things to the Devil, and I went
to sleep. When they rose to depart, I awoke, and
told the Captains that they did wrong in inviting me
to such Councils, because they knew that I had
nothing but horror for the Demons.”

[80 i.e., 78] A young Child thought that he was
lost, some days after his Baptism. ‘‘I have just


110 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23:


chofes 14 de tout mon cceur, & priois DIEV qu'il
n’effacaft pas mon Baptefme; ie leur difois qu’ils fe
t’euffent [sc. teuffent], que le Grand Maiftre les puni-
roit, & qu’il les entendoit bien; nonobftant ce que ie
leur difois, ils fe mocquoiét de moy.

Vn Chef de Cabane Chreftienne, vn iour ayant
repris fa foeur, encore Catechumene, d’vn zele vn
peu trop actif: Hé quoy, luy difoit-il, veux-tu donc
e{tre miferable, & que moy feul ie fois heureux? tu
fais ce qui merite que iamais on ne te Baptife. Cette
pauure femme f’en prend a fes yeux, elle pleure fa
faute & luy en demande pardon, le priant de ne le
pas dire aux Peres. Ma fceur, i’ay peché plus que
toy, luy répond ce bon Chreftien, car eftant Baptifé,
ma perfonne eft facrée, & mon peché en eft plus
grand: mais c’eft l’amour que ie te porte qui m’a
ainfi mis en cholere. I] n’y a que l’efprit de DIEV
qui donne cet’ horreur du peché, & n’y a pas d’autre
lumiere que la fienne, qui efclaire [81 i.e., 79] vne
Ame, a reconnoi{tre iufqu’aux petites fautes.

Vn Infidele demandoit vn iour a vne Chreftienne,
ce qu’ils alloient faire l’vn apres l’autre dans la Cha-
pelle; & elle luy ayant répondu fimplement, qu’ils
alloient fe confeffer de leurs pechez. Et comment,
dit-il, pechons-nous? pour moy, ie ne reconnois point
de pechez. Il ne faut pas f’en étonner, repartit cette
bonne Femme, ta vie n’eft qu’vne fuite continuelle
de pechez, comment les diftinguerois-tu? Nous
autres qui auons la Foy, nous fommes totijours fur
nos gardes, & par ainfi nous reconnoiffons bien nos
fautes.

Lors quwils fe doiuent Confeffer, ils fe preparent
auec vn foin tout a fait loiiable. On verra quelque-


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 Hale


heard bad words,’’ he said. ‘‘ I detested those things
with all my heart, and prayed GoD not to blot out
my Baptism. I told them to be silent,—that the
Great Master would punish them, and that he heard
them well. In spite of what I said to them, they
scoffed at me.”’

The Head of a Christian Cabin one day reproved
his sister, who was still a Catechumen, with a little
too much zeal. ‘‘ What,’’ said he, ‘‘ dost thou wish
to be miserable, and that I alone should be happy?
What thou art doing is enough to prevent thee from
ever being Baptized.’’ The poor woman, not know-
ing what to do, takes refuge in tears; she laments
her error, and begs him not to tell the Fathers of it.
‘“My sister,’’ replies this good Christian, “‘ I have
sinned more than thou hast, for, inasmuch as I am
Baptized, my person is consecrated, and my sin is all
the greater; but it is the love that 1 bear thee, which
has caused me to be soangry.’’ The spirit of GoD
alone gives such a horror of sin, and there is no other
light than his which illumines [81 i.e., 79] a Soul so
that it recognizes even its slight faults.

An Infidel one day asked a Christian woman what
they all went to do, one after the other, in the Chap-
el; and she replied simply that they went to confess
their sins. ‘‘ And how,’ said he, “do wesin? As
for me, I do not recognize any sins.’ ‘‘ There is
nothing surprising in that,’’ replied the good Wom-
an; ‘‘ thy life is but one continual succession of sins;
how couldst thou distinguish them? We who have
the Faith are always on our guard, and thus we easily
recognize our faults.”’

When they are about to go to Confession, they
prepare themselves with most praiseworthy care.


112 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


fois la femme & le mary, qui tous deux fe deman-
dent leurs fautes: f’aduertiffent de ce qu’ils ont peché
le long de la femaine, & f’apprennent comment il
{’en faut accufer. Ie croy que le Ciel prend plaifir a
leur fimplicité. D’autrefois on verra le Pere contre
fon Enfant, le fils contre fa mere, & toute vne Fa-
mille qui s’accuferont les vns les autres, [82 i.e., 80]
quand les Peres qui les vont inftruire entrent dans la
Cabane. Mon fils, dira la mere, n’a pas voulu nous
faire; prier DIEV, sen elt-ilconfelie;=Oy dea,
répond 1’Enfant, ie ne l’ay pas voulu; car tandis que
ie fais les Prieres, vous ne faites que badiner: foyez
fage, & ie vous feray prier DIEV. Oiiy, mais tun’as
pas obey, dira le Pere-il eit vray, répondra te mis:
mais vous auez auffi peché, car ce matin vous auez
raconté vn fonge que vous auiez eu la nuict. En vn
mot, c’e{t vne diuifion toute pleine de paix, c’eft vne
guerre aimable que la Foy apporte dans vne Maifon.

Puifque nous fommes fur la Confeffion, ie ne puis
raporter en lieu plus conuenable, vne penfée d’vn
Chreftien, Sauuage, qui m’a femblé digne d’eftre
couchée icy. On luy auoit enfeigné que les pechez
e{tans vne fois effacez, jamais ne retournoient, mais
que la Grace perdué par le peché, nous eft rendué
quand nous nous Confeffons. Cherchant en fon efprit
la caufe de cette difference, voicy le raifonnement
qu'il faifoit: La Grace, difoit-il, eft comme vne belle
robe de Caftor, [83 i.e., 81] dont Dieu noftre pere va
reueiftant l’ame de fes bons enfans. Quad vn de nos
enfans nous a fafché, nous luy oftons fa belle robe,
& le laiffons tout nud; mais nous ne jettons pas la
robe dans le feu, c’eft vne chofe trop pretieufe, nous
la referuons quelque part, pour luy rendre, quand il


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 113


Sometimes one will hear the husband and wife ask-
ing each other their faults; they inform each other
of the sins that they have committed during the week,
and each teaches the other how he should confess.
I think that Heaven takes pleasure in their simplicity.
At other times, one will see the Father with his Child,
the son with his mother, and an entire Family accus-
ing one another, [82 i.e., 80] when the Fathers who
goto teach them enter the Cabin. ‘‘ My son,” the
mother will say, ‘‘ would not hear us say our prayers
to Gop. Has heconfessedit?” ‘‘ Yes, indeed,’’ the
Child replies; ‘‘I would not do so because, when I
say the Prayers, you do nothing but jest; behave
properly, and I will hear you pray toGop.”’ “‘ Yes,
but thou didst not obey,’’ the Father will say. “‘It
is true,’’ the son will answer; ‘‘ but you also have
sinned, for this morning you related a dream that you
had during the night.” Ina word, it is a most peace-
ful discord, a pleasing strife, that Faith brings into a
House.

While on the subject of Confession, I cannot find
a more suitable occasion to speak of the opinion ex-
pressed by a Christian Savage, which has seemed to
me to be worthy of mention here. He had been
taught that, when sins are once forgiven, they never
return, but that Grace lost through sin comes back
to us when we Confess. Seeking in his own mind
for the cause of this difference, he reasoned as fol-
lows: ‘‘ Grace,”’ said he, ‘‘ is like a beautiful robe of
Beaver fur, [83 i.e., 81] with which God our father
clothes the souls of his good children. When one of
our children offends us, we take his fine robe from
him and leave him quite naked, but we do not throw
the dress into the fire. It is too valuable a thing, and


114 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


voudra nous obéyr. De mefme Dieu, quand nous
auons peché, defpouille noftre ame de fa grace, mais
il ne veut pas que cette grace foit perdué, elle luy eft
trop pretieufe, il la conferue cherement dedans fes
threfors, tous pre{t de nous la rendre quand nous
luy demandons pardon. Mais le Peché eft vne chofe
fi diforme, que Diet. en a horreur; quand nous nous
confeffons, il l’aneantit tout a fait, voudroit il mettre
dans fes threfors vn monftre fi hideux? ce n’eft donc
pas merueille, que iamais il ne retourne dans noftre
Ame, en eftant vne fois effacé. Si ce raifonnement
n’eft pas receu dedans 1’Efchole, on doit excufer vn
Barbare, qui iamais n’a leu fainct Thomas.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 115"


we put it away somewhere to give it back to him
when he is willing to obey us. In the same manner,
God, when we have sinned, deprives our soul of its
grace; but he does not wish that grace to be lost,
for it is too precious to him. He preserves it very
carefully in his treasury, being quite ready to give
it back to us when we ask his pardon. But Sin is so
hideous a thing, that God has a horror of it. When
we confess ourselves he destroys it entirely. Would
he place so frightful a monster among his treasures?
It is therefore not surprising that it never returns
into our Souls, when once it is washed away.”’ If
this argument be not received in the School, we must
excuse a Barbarian who has never read saint Thomas.


116 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


[84 i.e., 82] CHAPITRE VIII.


DE LA MISSION DE SAINCT IOSEPH AUX ATTINGUEE-
NONGNAHAK.


ETTE Miffion eft échué en partage au P. Charles

& Garnier & au P. Simon le Moine; qui ont fait

leur refidence plus ordinaire dans le bourg de

Sainct Iofeph. A peine y font-ils arriuez, quils

aprennent qu’vn petit enfant au berceau, eft aban-

doné affez loing dedans la campagne, comme vne

proye dont la mort auoit déja pris poffeffion. Ils y

courent de mefme pas, & trouuent cet enfant qui

tiroit a la fin, le Baptizent, & l’enuoyent au Ciel
accroi{tre le nombre des Eleus.

Peu de iours apres, entrant en la cabane du plus
grand Magicien, qui foit dans cette Nation, ils aper-
coiuent vne fille de treze 4 quatorze-ans, qui fe mou-
roit. Ils iugent bien qu’en vne cabane fi maudite,
oti le Diable eft le maiftre, pour tirer cette victime
de fes mains, il faut y proceder [85 i.e., 83] douce-
ment, & inftruire l’enfant, fans témoigner le vouloir
faire. Ils font moniftre d’vne image de Noftre Sei-
gneur, qui agrée a la mere de cette malade; & prenét
occafion 1a deffus, de parler des gradeurs de Dieu,
du Paradis, & de 1’Enfer, & des veritez principales
de noftre foy. Dés le moment, que cet infame Magi-
cien, entendit parler du Baptefme, il fe met A vomir
mille blafphemes contre Dieu. Nos Peres voyent
affez, qwil eft temps de découurir nettement leur


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 117


Roadie. Oe) Cita hike NE


OF THE MISSION OF SAINT JOSEPH AMONG THE AT-
TINGUEENONGNAHAK.


HIS Mission has fallen to the lot of Father
T Charles Garnier and Father Simon le Moine,
who usually reside in the village of Saint
Joseph. Hardly had they arrived when they learned
that a little child, still in its cradle, had been aban-
doned at a considerable distance in the open country,
as a prey of which death had already taken posses-
sion. They hastened thither at once, found the
child, whose end was approaching, Baptized it, and
sent it to Heaven, to be added to the number of the
Elect.

A few days afterward, when they entered the cabin
of the greatest Magician of that Nation, they observed
a girl thirteen or fourteen years of age, who was dy-
ing. They decided that in so cursed a cabin, where-
in the Devil was master, it was necessary to proceed
with care in order to pluck this victim from his
clutches, [85 i.e., 83] and to instruct the child with-
out declaring that they wished to do so. ‘They
exhibited a picture of Our Lord, which pleased the
mother of the sick girl; andthey took advantage of
the opportunity to speak of the greatness of God, of
Paradise, of Hell, and of the principal truths of our
faith. As soon as the infamous Magician heard them
speak of Baptism, he commenced to pour forth a
thousand blasphemies against God. Our Fathers


118 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 23


deffein. Que dif-tu la deffus? demandent-ils a la
malade; veux-tu a iamais eftre bruflée dans 1’Enfer?
Non, non s’écrie ce fupoit de Satan, refolument elle
ne fera pas Baptizée: fortés de ma Maifon. Sa pau-
ure fille languiffante, qui iufqu’alors n’auoit dit pas
vn mot prend d’elle mefme la parole. Ce n’eft pas
vous, dit-elle, courageufement a fon pere, qui en cela
difpoferez de moy: ie defire, fans delay, eftre Bap-
tizée: car ie veux aller dans le Ciel. A cette réponfe,
que pas vn n’attendoit, ce malheureux demeure sas
parole: mais la mere de l’Enfant, parle pour le mary.
Ce n’eft pas, s’efcrie elle, vne maladie ordinaire qui
fait [86 i.e., 84] mourir ma fille; c’eft vn tel Demon
qui la tué depuis quatre moys: c’eft a luy feul, & A
nos danfes que nous auds recours, atiec cela tu ne
peux pas la Baptizer. Pourquoy non, répond la
malade, ie detefte tous les demons, ie renonce 3
nos danfes, & toy ie te prie, ne me refufe pas le
Baptefme, dit-elle, au Pere qui la venoit d’in{truire.
Quand Dieu vient poffeder vn coeur, il n’a ny oreilles,
ny fentiment pour tout ce qui eft de plus tendre dans
la nature. C’efit efté vne cruauté de refufer A cette
Ame, l’entrée du Paradis, ot le Sang de Iefus-Chrift
& fon courage luy auoient donné droit; Mais il faloit
que la grace remportaft vne glorieufe victoire. Ma
fille, luy dit le Pere qui la venoit dinftruire, ta
demande eft bien raifonnable, mais ie ne dois pas
expofer le Baptefme, a le veoir profané. Auant cela il
faut que tes parens me promettent de ne plus auoir
recours au. Diable & aux danfes, pour ta guerifon.
Ne crains pas cela, replique cet enfant, pluftoft ie
mourray, que de le permettre. Puis donc que tu le
defires, luy difent fes parens, qu’il te Baptize s'il


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 119


saw well enough that it was time to expose clearly
their design. ‘‘ What dost thou say about it?’’ they
asked the patient. ‘‘ Dost thou wish to burn forever
in Hell?”’ ‘‘ No, no,’’ boldly exclaimed this instru-
ment of Satan, ‘‘ she certainly shall not be Baptized.
Get out of my House.’’ His poor suffering daugh-
ter, who until then had not said a word, began her-
self to speak. ‘‘It is not you,’’ she said resolutely
to her father, ‘‘ who shall dispose of me on that
point. I desire to be Baptized without delay, for I
wish to go to Heaven.’’ On hearing this answer,
that no one expected, the miserable man remained
speechless; but the mother of the Child spoke for
her husband. ‘“‘ It is not,’’ she exclaimed, ‘‘ an ordi-
nary disease that is causing [86 i.e., 84] the death of
my daughter; it is such and such a Demon who has
been killing her during the last four months. To
him alone and to our dances have we recourse; there-
fore thou canst not Baptize her.” ‘‘ Why not?’’ re-
pied the sick ein, "1 detest-all’ the demons ;1
renounce our dances, and thou, I pray thee, refuse
me not Baptism,’’ she said to the Father who had
just instructed her. When God comes to possess a
heart, it has neither ears nor feeling for all that is
tenderest in nature. It would have been cruel to
refuse this Soul entrance to Paradise, to which the
Blood of Jesus Christ and her own courage had
entitled her. But it was necessary that grace should
win a glorious victory. ‘‘ My daughter,’’ said the
Father who had just instructed her, ‘‘ thy request is
indeed reasonable, but I must not expose Baptism to
be profaned. Before that, thy parents must promise
me that they will no longer have recourse to the
Devil; or to dances, to obtain thy cure.’ ‘‘ Fear it


120 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


veut, nous n’aurons plus iamais pour toy recours a
(57) 1.02," 05 | ces» remedes;, te toy-melmess mane ste
demandes. Ce fut vne confolation bien grade, &
pour celuy qui confera ce fa[iJnct Baptefme, & pour
celle qui le réceut de veoir'& de fentir ‘ce que fait le
fainct Efprit dedans vne Ame, quad il la prepare
pour foy. Ojiy, difoit cette fille au momét que les
eaux du baptefme la rendoient innocente, ie detefte
tous mes pechez! grand maiftre de nos vies, ayés
pitié de moy! Elle mourut bien toft apres.

CES ames, & quelques femblables, ayant efté auffi-
to{t dans le Ciel, qu’elles ont trouué l’entrée de
l’Eghife, n’ont pas eti befoing de grande affiftance.
Auffi n’ef{t-ce pas pour elles, qu’on a employé le plus
fort du trauail. Le principal foin a efté de former
les Chreftiens Adultes, qui y compofent vne petite
Eglife; qui cette Année, s’ef{t veué acriie en nom-
bre, & plus encore en Saincteté.

Vw de ces bons Chreftiens eftoit malade depuis
VE{té, il fut foudainement guery Ala venué des Peres,
qui alloient les inftruire, foit pour la ioye qu’il en
recett, ou pltito{t felon fon fentiment, pour s’eftre
confeffé.

[88 i.e., 86] Le mefme iour vne Femme d’enuiron
feptante ans, entendant les Enfans qui crioient dans
le Bourg: Les deux veftus de noir arriuent, fut auffi
deliurée d’vne fiéure qui la tourmentoit. Ie gueri-
tay, f’écria-t’elle, ie verray mes Freres: au mefme
moment elle recouure la fanté, elle fort pour la pre-
miere fois, & apporte pour remerciement aux deux
Peres, vn pain cuit fous la cendre.

La Foy de cette bonne Femme nommée Anne
Outenen, depuis trois ans qu’elle fut baptifée, a efté


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 1642 121


not,’’ replied the. child, ‘‘ I will die rather than per-
mit them to do so.” ‘‘ Since thou desirest it,” her
parents said to her, “‘ let him Baptize thee, if he will.
We will never again have recourse on thy behalf
to [87 i.e., 85] those remedies unless thou thyself
shouldst ask it.’’ It was avery great consolation,
both for him who administered holy Baptism and for
her who received it, to see and feel what the holy
Ghost effects in a Soul when he prepares it for him-
self. ‘‘ Yes,’’ said the girl at the moment when the
waters of baptism made her innocent, “‘I detest all
my sins. Great master of our lives, have pity on
me.’’ She died shortly afterward.

THESE souls and others like them, which went to
Heaven as soon as they found entrance into the
Church, did not need much assistance; therefore it
was not for them that the greatest amount of labor
has been performed. The chief care has been to
train the Adult Christians who constitute a small
Church there, which this Year has increased in
numbers and still more in Godliness.

ONE of these good Christians had been ill since
the Summer, and he was suddenly cured on the ar-
rival of the Fathers who came to teach them,— either
through the joy that he felt therefrom, or rather,
according to his own opinion, because he had made
his confession.

[88 i.e., 86] On the same day, a Woman about sev-
enty years of age, on hearing the Children cry out
in the Village: ‘‘ Here come the two clothed in
black,’’ was also cured of a fever that tormented her.
‘‘T shall be cured,’’ she exclaimed, ‘‘ I shall see my
Brothers.’’ At the same moment she recovered her
health, went out for the first time, and carried to the


122 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


tofiiours f’augmentant, & fa pieté eft fi fenfible, qu'il
eft aifé de voir que DIEV eft dans foncceur. Elle
ieufne fouuent, & quelquefois iufqu’a la nuict, parti-
culierement le Samedy, pour fe difpofer au fainct
Tour. Elle a vne affection fi tendre pour nous, &
pour tous les Fideles, que chaque fois qu’elle entend
mal parler, elle fe fent faifie dans le cceur, & n’en
peut quelquefois retenir fes larmes. Wn des princi-
paux Capitaines ayant dit qu'il falloit maffacrer les
Chreftiens, & en fuite vn fien frere la follicitant
fortement d’abandonner la Foy. Qu’on commence
par moy, [89 1.e., 87] dit-elle, la Foy m’eft plus pre-
cieufe que la vie; ie vay luy prefenter ma tefte; &
il verra que ie fuis prefte de receuoir le coup. Le
chaud, le froid, les afflictions, les maladies, les peines
& les trifteffes, elle offre tout 4 DIEV, pour la remif-
fion de fes fautes: f’eftimant criminelle mefme dans
les pechez d’autruy. Elle en a telle horreur, que
quelquefois elle n’a peti coucher en fa Cabane, parce
qu’alors elle y euft veu DIEV offenfé: Elle couchoit
dehors. Et vne fois ayant fceu que quelquesvns
dvne confrairie Diabolique, auoient couché deffus
fa natte, iamais depuis n’a voulu f’en feruir. Eft-
elle 4 fon trauail bien loin dedans les champs, la
Priere eft fon plus grand repos: elle dit fon Chape-
let, & fafeule deuotion luy a enfeigné de fe tourner
le corps & l’efprit vers noftre Chapelle de Saincte
Marie, ott repofe le tres-Sainct Sacrement; parce,
dit-elle, que ie me fens attirée de ce cofté 12.

Vne femme Infidele receut en fonge commande-
ment de fon Demon, de contracter amitié auec vne
femme Chreftienne. Pour commencer cette alliance,
[90 i.e., 88] feachant qu’vn chien qu’elle auoit chery,


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 123


two Fathers, in token of thanks, a loaf of bread baked
in the embers. ;

The Faith of this good Woman, whose name is
Anne Outenen has constantly increased since she was
baptized, three years ago; and her piety is so mani-
fest that it is easy to see that GOD is in her heart.
She fasts often, and sometimes until night, especially
on Saturday, in order to prepare herself for the holy
Day. She has so tender an affection for us and for
all the Faithful that whenever she hears any one
speak harshly, she feels greatly troubled in her
heart, and sometimes she cannot restrain her tears.
When one of the chief Captains said that the Chris-
tians must be massacred, and when afterward one of
her brothers strongly urged her to abandon the Faith,
erate Deeidowith, ie, [(Soi.es557)| sie-cala:
‘“ Faith is more precious to me than life. I will pre-
sent my head to him, and he shall see that Iam ready
to receive the blow.’’ Heat, cold, affliction, sick-
ness, trouble, and sorrow, she offers all to GOD for
the remission of her sins, considering herself guilty
even in the faults of others. She has such a horror
of them that she sometimes has been unable to lie
down in her Cabin, because then she would have wit-
nessed offenses against GOD. She would sleep out-
side; and, on one occasion, having heard that some
members of a Diabolical confraternity had slept upon
her mat, never afterward would she use it. When
she is at work far away in the fields, Prayer is her
greatest rest. She says her Rosary, and her devo-
tion alone has taught her to turn her body and mind
towards our Chapel of Sainte Marie, where the Blessed
Sacrament reposes,—‘‘ Because,’’ she says, ‘‘I feel
attracted in that direction.”’


124 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


ef{toit mort, elle luy en fait prefent d’vn autre (c’eft
comme fi en France on donnoit 4 vn amy vn beau
cheual d’Efpagne) outre cela, elle la prie d’agreer vne
couuerture qu’elle luy enuoya; & pour la foulager
en fon ménage, luy fait apporter quelque charge de
bois. Puis inuitant & le mary & la femme au feftin,
publiquement, l’amitié f’y notia, qui eftat tres-auan-
tageufe a cette Famille Chreftienne, leur caufa vne
ioye bien fenfible. Mais depuis ayant fceu que tout
cela ne f’étoit fait que pour obeir au fonge de cette
femme Infidele, ce fut lors que ces bons Chreftiens
commencerent a trembler. Le Diable, difoient-ils,
a quelque deffein fur nous, ces prefens qu’il nous a
procuré, feront noftre malheur. Ojiiy bien, dit le
mary, fi nous voulions les retenir; mais ils ne cou-
cheront pas en ma maifon. Auffi toft dit, auffi toft
fait; il comm&de qu’on remporte le bois, il prend &
le chien & la couverture, puis allant trouuer cette
femme Infidele, luy dit: Ie te viens rendre tes pre-
fens, tu feais bien que noftre Cabane eft Chreftienne:
[91 i.e., 89] cette alliance que tu veux contracter
auec nous, n’ayant pour autheur que le Diable qui
te l’a commandé en fonge, nous pecherions de luy
obeir en cela. Ie ne feay fi les Cafuiftes euffent efté
fi rigides en cette occafion. Quoy qu'il en foit, ce
coup la eftoit difficile; mais il n’y a point de lien
d'amiti€é que la Foy ne fepare pltitoft que de nous
voir feparez d’auec DIEV.

C’eft ce que difoit vn Chreftien de ce mefme Bourg,
fe voyant fur le poinct d’ef{tre abandonné de fa femme
& de fes enfans, par les pourfuites d’vne belle mere,
qui le voyant Chreftien, ne le pouuoit fupporter chez
elle. Non, difoit-il, ie n’euffe jamais penfé, que


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 125


An Infidel woman received in a dream a command
from her Demon to contract a friendship with a Chris-
tian woman. In order to commence this intimacy,
[90 1.e., 88] as she knew that a dog which the other
had cherished was dead, she made her a present of
another one (this is just as if in France one were to
give a friend a fine Spanish horse). In addition, she
begged her to accept a blanket that she sent her; and
in order to assist her in her housekeeping, she had a
load of wood taken to her. Then she invited both
husband and wife publicly toa feast. A friendship
was formed, which as it was of great advantage to
the Christian Family, caused them great joy. But,
when they afterwards learned that all this was done
merely in order to obey the dream of that Infidel
woman, these good Christians began to tremble.
‘““The Devil,’ they said, ‘‘has some designs on us;
these presents that he has caused to be sent to us
will bring us misfortune.’’ ‘‘ Yes indeed,” said the
husband, ‘‘if we were willing to keep them; but
they shall not pass the night in my house.’ This
was no sooner said than done. He gave orders that
the wood be returned, took the dog and the blanket,
and went to the Infidel woman, to whom he said:
‘‘T have come to return thy presents; thou knowest
well that ours is a Christian Cabin; [91 i.e., 89] this
friendship that thou wishest to contract with us has
no other author than the Devil, who has commanded
itto thee in a dream; and we would sin, were we to
obey him in this.” I do not know whether the
Casuists would have been so strict on this occasion.
In any case, it was not an easy thing to do. But
there is no bond of friendship that Faith will not
sever, rather than see us separated from GOD.


126 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


chofe au méde m’euft peu feparer de ma femme; il
y a quinze ou feize ans que nous fommes enfemble,
cing enfans que nous auons eus, me fembloient autant
de liens qui rendroient noftre mariage indiffoluble.
Elle & moy apres auoir receu le fainct Baptefme,
auons promis & DIEV de iamais ne nous feparer:
maintenant elle a quitté la Foy, ou au moins pour
complaire 4 fa mere, elle n’a plus le courage d’en
faire [92 i.e., 90] profeffion; elle ne laiffe pas de
m’aimer, & ie l’aime auffi, & toutefois fa mere la
contraint de m’abandonner, fi ie n’abandonne la Foy.
Cette diuifion m’eft fenfible, mais i’y fuis refolu
plito{t que iamais me feparer d’auec DIEV.

Ce bon Chreftien a vn fils de douze A treize ans,
qui-a-imité le couragende fom pere. Ona fait le
poffible afin qu’il defiftaft de la Foy, on a taché de le
corrompre par douceur, par menaces, & par les
rigueurs qu’on a peu. En-fin, fe voyant tourmenté
d’vne grand-mere, qui nuict & jour ne luy donnoit
aucun repos, efperant emporter de luy qu’il defiftaft
des exercices de Chreftien, comme auoit fait fa mere.
Scachez, dit cet enfant A cette Megere d’Enfer, qu’on
me peut bien briiler tout vif, voila mes bras, mes
pieds, & mon corps tout difpofé a le fouffrir, mais
jamais ie n’abandonneray la Foy.

Ces refolutions ne font pas dans la portée de la
nature, auffi eft-ce celuy feul pour qui on fait ces bons
propos, qui déne en mefme temps la force d’executer
tout ce qu'ilexige de nous. Les Infideles [93 i.e., 91]
mefmes ne font pas a le connoiftre, & A fe plaindre
en me{me temps de leur mifere. Les Demons, difoit
vn certain, nous commandent des chofes impoffibles:
ils ne nous donnent pas pour faire feftin & veulent


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 127


That is what a Christian of this same Village said,
when he saw himself about to be abandoned by his
wife and children, in consequence of the persecutions
of his mother-in-law, who could not bear to have him
in her house when she found that he was a Christian.
“No,” he said, ‘‘I never would have thought that
anything in the world could separate me from my
wife. We have lived together for fifteen or sixteen
years. The five children that we have had seemed
so many bonds that would render our marriage indis-
soluble. After she and I had received holy Baptism,
we promised GOD that we would never separate.
Now she has abandoned the Faith, or at least, to
please her mother, she no longer has the courage
[92 i.e., 90] to profess it. She still loves me, and I
also love her; and nevertheless her mother compels
her to leave me, if I do not abandon the Faith. Such
a separation is painful to me, but I am resolved to
endure it rather than ever separate myself from
GOD...

This good Christian has a son twelve or thirteen
years of age, who has imitated his father’s courage.
Everything that could be done was tried, to make
him desist from the Faith. They endeavored to cor-
rupt him by kindness, by threats, and by such rigor-
ous measures as were within their power. At last,
when he saw himself tormented by his grandmother,
who allowed him no rest by night or by day, hoping
to prevail upon him to give up the Christian prac-
tices as his mother had done, the child said to this
Hellish Megera: ‘‘ Know that they may burn me
alive, here are my arms, my feet, and my body,
all ready to suffer it; but never will I abandon the
Faith.”


128 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


qu’on en faffe: ils nous obligent quelquefois fi nous
voulons éuiter quelque grand malheur, a leur offrir
ce que nous n’atlons pas, ny ne pouuons auoir.
N’eft-ce pas ou fe mocquer de nous, ou qu’ils fe plai-
fent A nous voir miferables? Mais lé DIEV des
Chreftiens ne leur commande rien qui ne leur foit
poffible, & s’ils y manquent, c’eft de leur volonté.
C’eft en cela, difoit-il, que ie reconnois qu’il eft luy
feul le Maiftre de nos vies, puis qu’il ne veut que
noftre bien. Ie prie le fainct Efprit, que cette con-
noiffance ne ferue point vn iour a la condamnation
de cet Homme, qui nonobftant cela ne rend pas encore
a DIEV toute la gloire qu’il void bien luy eftre deué.

LES meilleurs efprits des Hurons, ne font pas ceux
qui fe rendent pltitoft aux veritez qu’ils recognoiffent:
De fimples femmes font bien fouuent, plus tendres,
[94 1.e., 92] aux fentiments du fainc&t Efprit. Vne
bonne Chreftienne, ayant vn iour affifté au Sermon
qui s’eftoit fait de la Refurrection, ne pefit contenir
en fon cceur, la ioye dont elle eftoit remplie. C’eft
cela, s’écria-elle 4 toute 1’ Affiftance, qui fait que
nous croyons: c’e{t dans cette efperance, que nous
fouffrons en patience les médifances, & les iniures:
on nous menace de la mort, on dit qu’il faut maffacrer
les Chreftiens; qu’ils nous tuent s’ils en ont 1l’affeu-
rance, vn iour ie refufciteray dans ce corps qu’ils
auront affommé.

V NE autre aagée d’enuiron quatre-vingt-ans, atten-
dant l'heure de la mort, apres auoir receu l’abfolutid:
fuplia, qu’on la leuaft a fon feant, pour prier DIEV
auec plus de refpect. Puis d’vne voix mourante;
TESvs, dit-elle, ayez pitié de moy, tirez moy dans
voftre Paradis; ie fuis contente de mourir, ie n’afpire


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 129


Such determination is not within the capacity of
nature; and he alone for whom such good resolutions
are taken gives at the same time the strength neces-
sary for performing what he requires of us. The Infi-
dels [93 i.e., 91] themselves are not unaware of it,
and they also complain of their own unhappiness.
‘‘ The Demons,” said one of them, ‘‘ command us to
do impossible things. They do not give us what is
necessary for a feast, and they require us to make
one. Sometimes they compel us, if we would avoid
some great misfortune, to offer what we do not pos-
sess, and cannot get. Does not this show that they
either trifle with us, or that they are pleased to
see us miserable? But the GoD of the Christians
commands them to do nothing that is impossible for
them; and, if they fail, it is of their own will. It is
by this,’’ he said, ‘‘ that I recognize that he alone is
the Master of our lives, since he desires only our
good.’’ I pray the holy Ghost that this knowledge
may not serve one day for the condemnation of this
Man, who, in spite of it, does not yet give to GOD
the praise that he knows very well is due to him.

THE best minds among the Hurons are not those
which soonest yield to the truths that they acknowl-
edge; some simple women are often more suscep-
tible [94 i.e., 92] to the influence of the holy Ghost.
A good Christian woman, hearing one day a Sermon
preached on the Resurrection, could not contain in
her heart the joy with which she was filled. ‘‘ This
it is,’ she called out aloud to the entire Audience,
‘‘that makes us believe. It is through this hope
that we suffer calumnies and insults in patience.
We are threatened with death; it is said that the
Christians must be massacred. Let them kill us, if


130 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou. 23


qu’au Ciel, IESVS ayez pitié de moy. Dieu auoit
preferué cette bonne Femme, tout le long de fa vie,
dans vne pureté tout a fait rare en ce Pais; & de-
puis fon baptefme, elle s’eftoit conferuée dedans l’in-
nocence, ne prenant point plus grad plaifir, qu’a prier
[95 1.e., 93] Dieu, quoy qu’elle ne fcefit quafi que
ces deux mots. IESOVS TAITENR; IESVS ayez
pitié de moy.

IE fus touché il y a quelque temps entendant racon-
ter vn trait de Charité, que ie ne puis obmettre. Vne
pauure Chreftiéne, aagée d’enuiron foixante-ans,
ayant otiy parler de la ferueur qui fe voit en France,
pour enrichir les lieux de deuotion, & que plufieurs
fe dépouilloient, pour offrir a Noftre Seigneur tout
ce quils ont, fe fentit, en mefme temps, touchée d’vn
femblable defir; & quoy que la faifon fut froide,
n’ayat rien de precieux qu’vne robe de Caftor, dont
elle eftoit couuerte, s’en eftant dépoitiillée: I’en fay,
dit-elle, vne offrande 4 Noftre Seigneur, ce fera pour
tapiffer noftre Chapelle, quand on l’aura accommo-
dée; fi i’auois quelque chofe de plus, ie le donnerois
de bon coeur, afin que Dieu ait pitié de moy.


1642-43] RELATION OF r6g2 131


they have the boldness to do so. I shall rise again
some day, in the body that they shall have killed.’’

ANOTHER, about eighty years of age, who was
awaiting the hour of her death, after having received
absolution, begged to be raised in a sitting posture
in order to pray to GOD with morerespect. Then in
a dying voice, she said: ‘‘JESUS, have pity on me;
take me into thy Paradise. I am content to die; I
aspire but to Heaven. JESUS, have pity on me.”’
God has preserved this good Woman, throughout
her life, in a state of purity that is very rare in this
Country; and, after her baptism, she retained her
innocence, having no greater pleasure than to pray
[95 1.e., 93] to God, although she knew hardly more
than these two words: JESOUS TAITENR, ‘‘JESUS,
have pity on me.’’

I was touched, some time ago, when I heard a
deed of Charity related which I cannot avoid repeat-
ing. A poor Christian woman, about sixty years of
age, who had heard of the zeal that is manifested in
France for adorning places of devotion, and that
many stripped themselves to give all they had to Our
Lord, felt herself at the same time affected with the
like desire. Although the weather was cold, as she
had nothing of value except a robe of Beaver fur that
covered her, she took it off, and said: ‘‘ I offer it to
Our Lord; it will serve, when fitted thereon, as a
carpet for our Chapel. If I had anything else, I
would give it cheerfully, so that God may have pity
ete.


132 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vo 28


[96 i.e., 94] CHAPITRE IX.


PERSECVTIONS DES CHRESTIENS DE LA MESME
MISSION.


ES Chreftiens & Catechumenes de cette Miffid,
fs auoient paffé quafi tout l’Hyuer, dans des
épreuues de leur foy, qui nous faifoient affez
paroiftre, que le Ciel trauailloit plus fortement 4 leur
inftruction, que les Hommes. Les enfeignemens
qu’on leur donnoit, entroient fi doucement das leurs
efprits, & y faifoient des impreffids fi viues, que nous
fufmes étonnez au bout d’vn & deux mois, qu’il euffent
plus profité dans les cognoiffances de nos Myitere, &
dans les fentimens de Dieu, qu’on n’efit 0zé attendre,
apres le trauail d’vne & de deux années, mais man-
que de Chapelle, & de lieu feparé des vfages de la
vie commune, ils auoient ce regret d’eftre priuez du
Sacrifice de la Meffe, & du plus fainct de tous les
Sacremens; finon aux grades Feftes de 1’Année, auf-
quelles nous [97 i.e., 95] tafchons de faire affembler
la plufpart de nos Chreftiens, dans noftre Maifon de
Se Marie, pour y faire leurs deuotions, aux autres
temps, il falloit qu’ils fe contétaffent de s’affembler
dans la Cabane de quelqu’vn des Chreftiés, & la y
faire leurs Prieres, en la prefence mefme des Infi-
delles; qui, felon la couftume du Pais, entrent quad
il leur plaift, en quelque Cabane que ce foit; & y
font témoins de tout ce quis’y paffe. C’eftoit eftre
expofé aux railleries de mille langues médifantes,


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 133


[96 i.e., 94] CHAPTER IX.


PERSECUTIONS OF THE CHRISTIANS OF THE SAME
MISSION.


HE Christians and Catechumens of this Mission
| had passed nearly the whole Winter in trials
of their faith, which showed us that Heaven
worked more energetically than Men for their in-
struction. The teaching that we had given them so
easily penetrated their minds and produced so vivid
impressions therein, that we were surprised after one
or two months at their having made more progress
in the knowledge of our Mysteries, and in the love of
God, than we had dared to expect after one or two
years’ labor. But owing to the want of a Chapel,
and of a place separated from the uses of common life,
they had the regret of being deprived of the Sacrifice
of the Mass, and of the most holy of all the Sacra-
ments, except at the great Festivals of the Year — on
which we [97 i.e., 95] endeavor to gather most of
our Christians together in our House of Ste. Marie,
in order that they may perform their devotions there:
at other times, they had to be content with meeting
in the Cabin of some one among the Christians, and
with reciting their Prayers there in the very presence
of the Infidels, who, according to the custom of the
Country, enter any Cabin whenever they please, and
witness all that passes therein. This exposed them
to the jests of a thousand slanderous tongues, which
blasphemed against things of which they are igno-


134 LES RELATIONS DES JESCITES [VoL. 23


qui blafphement contre ce qu’ils ignorent. En effet,
on comméce 4 médire d’eux; on les apelle MARIAN
par mocquerie, a caufe que fouuent on entendoit dans
leurs Prieres, le Nom de la tref-Saindte Vierge. On
dit publiquement qu'ils ont des forts pour caufer des
naufrages, & que leurs Chapelets & Medailles, font
vomir & l’Ame & le fang a ceux qui les enuifagent
d’vn certain afpect.

SvR la fin de l’ Hyuer, vn des meilleurs Chreftiens
confacra vne partie de fa Cabane, pour en faire vn
lieu de deuotion. On y baftift, de quelques planches &
efcorces, vne Chapelle affez raifonnable: [98 i.e., 96]
& on commenga, a la Sainct Iofeph, 4 donner aux
Chreftiens la confolation d’y entendre la Meffe. Mais
ce fut lors que les perfecutions redoublerent. Ce
fera 1a, dit-on, le malheur du Pais! On veut chaffer
tous les Chreftiens du Bourg; & mefme leurs plus
proches parens leur difent, qu’ils aillent fe loger
ailleurs, ou quils abandénét la Foy, s’ils ont quelque
amour delavie. Wn deschefs du Confeil, dit le mot
a Voreille 4 vn de fes nepueux, Onhoiia Etfitenrou-
taotia. Nous vous allons arracher de la terre, racine
empoifonnée; c’eft le mot dont les Hurons menacent
ceux qu’ils foupgonnent d’eftre Sorciers, quand ils
les veulent maffacrer.

Vn nommé Eftienne Totihri, quoy que des mieux
apparentez du Bourg, fe trouua plus auant dans la
perfecution, comme il étoit le plus feruent dedans la
Foy; & que cette Chapelle eftant baftie dans fa
Cabane, on s’attaquoit plus viuement A luy: mais ny
luy, ny toute fa famille, ne branfla pas pour toutes
ces menages. Otiy dea, dit-il, ie fortiray tref-volon-
tiers, fi les Peres, qui nous inftruifent, abandonnent


1642-43] RELATION OF 16g2 135


rant. Indeed, they began by speaking ill of them,
and called them MARIAN in mockery, because they
frequently heard the Name of the most Blessed Virgin
repeated in their Prayers. It was publicly stated that
they possessed charms that caused shipwrecks, and
that their Rosaries and Medals caused both Soul and
blood to pour forth from those who looked at them
in a certain manner.

TOWARD the end of the Winter, one of the best
Christians set apart a portion of his Cabin as a place
of devotion. With a few boards and some bark, a
fairly adequate Chapel was made therein; [98 i.e., 96]
and on the feast of Saint Joseph we commenced to
give the Christians the consolation of hearing Mass
ijits ee Lnepsene petsecitions redoubled. “*-Phis,”’
it was said, ‘‘ will be the misfortune of the Country.”
They wished to expel all the Christians from the
Village; and even the nearest relatives of the latter
told them that they must go and dwell elsewhere,
or abandon the Faith, if they had any desire to live.
One of the chiefs of the Council whispered in the
ear of one of his nephews: Onxhoua Etsitenroutaoua,
‘‘We will tear you out of the earth as a poisonous
root.’’ This is the expression with which the
Hurons threaten those whom they suspect of being
Sorcerers, when they wish to kill them.

One Estienne Totihri, although connected with
the best families of the Village, endured the greatest
persecution, because he was the most fervent in the
Faith; and he was attacked the most sharply, because
the Chapel was erected in his Cabin. But neither
he nor his family wavered, in spite of all these
threats. ‘‘ Yes, indeed,’’ he said; ‘‘I will go quite
cheerfully if the Fathers who teach us give up the


136 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [(Non. 23


le foing de ce Bourg, mais ce ne fera que [99 1.e., 97]
pour les fuiure en quelque lieu qu’ils aillent: ie fuis
plus attaché 4 eux qu’a ma Patrie, & a tous mes
parens, puis qu’ils nous portent les paroles d’vn bon-
heur eternel. Ie ne crains point la mort, depuis que
DIEV a ouvert mon efprit, & m’a fait voir des chofes
plus importantes que la vie de ce corps, fur qui feul
on peut auoir quelque deffein. Qu’on tué ma mere,
ma femme, mes enfans & mes freres, ie verray apres
eux, venir fondre fur moy le coup de mon bonheur!
Mon Ame ne tient pas 4 mon corps, vn moment peut
les feparer, mais iamais on ne me rauira la Foy.
C’e{t vne confolation bien grande, d’eftre tefmoing
de la ferueur de toute fa famille. Ce font eux qui
ont le foin d’affembler les Fideles, les encourager &
in{truire, en l’abfence des Peres; & qui ont l’ceil fur
ce petit Troupeau, auec vne fidelité & vne zele tout
a fait Chreftien. Au plus fort mefme de ces perfe-
cutions, vne femme fe mouroit, ayant refufé le
baptefme a nos Peres, qui la vouloient inftruire: Hé
quoy, dit ce Chreftien, faut-il que cette Ame fe perde?
Il va trouuer cette malade. [100 i.e., 98] Ma bonne
mere, luy dit-il, fi vous fgauiés le haux prix de la
Foy, vous auriés plus de defir d’eftre enfeignée, que
nous de vous inftruire; mais quoy que ie ne fois pas
appellé, ie ne puis pas me taire, crainte, qu’vn iour,
vous ne men fiffiez les reproches, lors que vous
feriez dans les flames eternelles de l’Enfer. Le peu
de t€ps qui vous re{te de vie, fuffit pour vous deliurer
de ce grand malheur, qui n’eft pas plus éloigné de
vous que la mort. Il tache en fuite de cela, A émou-
uoir ce coeur; mais c’étoit vn coeur de rocher, qui
n’ayant efi en la fanté, que des blafphemes contre


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 137


care of this Village; but it will be only [99 i.e., 97]
to follow them wherever they may go. Iam more
attached to them than to my Country and to all my
relatives, because they bring us the promise of
eternal happiness. I fear not death, since GOD has
enlightened my mind, and has shown me things
more important than this bodily life, against which
alone any design can be harbored. Let them kill
my mother, my wife, my children, and my brothers;
after them, the blow that is to give me happiness
will fall on me! My Soul is not attached to my
body,—a single instant can separate them; but Faith
shall never be ravished from me.”’

It is a great consolation to witness the fervor of
his whole family. To them is assigned the duty of
gathering the Faithful together, of encouraging and
instructing them, in the absence of the Fathers;
and they watch over this little Flock with a faithful-
ness and zeal that are truly Christian. At the very
height of these persecutions, a woman lay dying,
who had refused to allow herself to be baptized by
our Fathers, who wished to instruct her. ‘‘ What?”’
said this Christian, ‘‘ must this Soul be allowed to
perish?’’ He went to see the sick woman, [100
i.e., 98] and said to her: ‘‘ My good mother, if you
knew the great value of Faith, you would have more
desire to be taught than we would have to teach
you. But, though I am not called upon, I cannot
remain silent, lest some day you may reproach me
when you will be in the eternal flames of Hell.
The short time that you have still to live is sufficient
to deliver you from that great misfortune, which is
no further from you than death.” He afterward
endeavored to produce an impression on that heart,


138 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


DIEV, mourut le mefme iour dans fon impieté, &
fit cognoiftre 4 ce bon Chreftien, que le don de la
Foy, n eit) pas vn) prefent: de: la) terre, 7ce, que*Dinyv
feul eft celuy qui touche les cceurs.

VN autre Chef de famille, nommé Thomas Saoiien-
hati, n’a pas eti de moindres coups 4 fuporter. Mais
la Foy, difoit-il, eft trop auant dedans mon Ame, on
ne peut pas me l’arracher, tandis qu’il me reftera le
moindre mouuement de vie. Ce bon homme autre-
fois, nous auoit affez contenté, mais dans quelques
rencontres, [IOI 1.e., 99] ot DIEV voulut efprouuer fa
fidelité, la chair auoit efté plus forte que l’efprit; &
quoy que iamais depuis fon Baptefme, il n’ayt perdu
la Foy, il n’oza toutefois continuer dedans 1’exercice,
lors qu’on menagoit les Chreftiens, il y a deux ans,
de les maffacrer auec nous. Cette année icy il s’eft
remis en fon deuoir, & s’e{t comporté fi genereufe-
ment en diuerfes rencontres, qu’il a fait voir aux
Infideles que quand Dieu nous appuye, nos foibleffes
paffées font paroiftre auec plus d’éclat la force de la
Grace, puifque pour lors ce qui eftoit l’objet de noftre
crainte, eft l’entretien de nos defirs.

L’experience que nous auons icy de lefprit des
Sauuages, nous rend fort referuez A les receuoir au
Baptefme, & plus encore & leur permettre l’vfage de
la Communion. C’eft toutefois de 1A que la plufpart
de nos Chreftiens ont receu ce courage: & nommé-
ment les deux derniers dont ie viens de parler. v-ont
fenty vn changement fi foudain de leur cceur, qu’ils
en furent tout hors d’eux-mefmes: & depuis nous
auons veu dans leurs actions, la verité de leurs
paroles. [102 i.e., 100] Ce n’eft point vn menfonge
que IESVS-CHRIST foit en VHoftie, nous dit vn


1642-43] RELATION OF 16g2 139


but it was a heart of stone, which, while in good
health, could utter nothing but blasphemies against
Gop; and she died the same day in her impiety,
showing the good Christian that the gift of Faith is
not a present from earth, and that Gop alone can
touch the heart.

ANOTHER Head of a family, named Thomas
Saouenhati, has had to endure as many stripes.
““ But Faith,’’ he said, ‘‘ has entered too deeply into
my Soul to allow of its being torn from me while
the least impulse of life remains to me.’”’ This
good man had formerly given us fair satisfaction, but
on some occasions, [IOI i.e., 99] when Gop willed
to try his faithfulness, the flesh had been stronger
than the spirit; and, although he had never lost
Faith after his Baptism, nevertheless he had not
dared to continue in its exercise when they threatened
to massacre the Christians with us, two years ago.
This year he returned to his duty, and behaved so
courageously in various emergencies that he proved
to the Infidels that, when God supports us, our past
weakness shows out the strength of Grace more
clearly, since what was then the object of our fears
now sustains our desires.

The experience that we have here of the Savage
disposition makes us very cautious in admitting them
to Baptism, and still more in allowing them to
receive Communion. Nevertheless, it is from this
rite that most of our Christians have derived so much
courage; and, in particular, the two last whom I
have mentioned experienced therein so sudden a
change in their hearts that they were quite beside
themselves. Since then, we have witnessed in their
actions the truth of their words. [102 i.e., 100] ‘‘ It


140 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


jour Eftienne, ie l’y fentis le iour de Noél apres auoir
communié: mais ie ne fcay fi depuis ce temps-la, il
demeure tofiiours dedans mon cceur: car bien fou-
uent faifant toute autre chofe, ie me fens tout chan-
gé, comme s'il y auoit dedans moy-mefme quelqu’vn
qui me parlaft, & fouuent ie luy parle, fans dire mot:
il me répond, & ie voy bien pour lors qu’il entend
mes defirs.

Ie ne doute plus maintenant des veritez qu’on nous
enfeigne, dit fort fouuent Thomas, lors qu’il exhorte
les autres Chreftiens 4 tenir ferme dans la Foy; a
lV’heure mefme que ie Communiay, ie fentis lESvs-
CHRIST dans mon ceur, & i’aperceu 4mefme temps
que c’eftoit luy qui m’éleuoit 4 foy, & m’enfeignoit
ce que iamais ie n’auois fceu comprendre. ITauois
e{té iufqu’alors comme vn Homme qui s’égare, ou
qui craint de s’égarer au milieu de la nuict; mais
maintenant ie marche en affeurance comme nous fai-
fonsen plainiour. Croyez, dit-il, tout ce qu’on nous
enfeigne, mais fur [103 i.e., 101] tout, croyez ferme-
ment que IESVS-CHRIST entre dans noftre cceur,
lors que nous mangeons le Pain facré.

Les calomnies contre la Foy, redoublerent apres
Pafques; & ce fut lors que les Chreftiens connurent
plus éuidemment que iamais, que toutes ces tempeftes
font fufcitées par les Demons. En voicy 1’occafion.
Vn Capitaine du bourg de Sain& Iofeph, nommé
Aftifkoiia, apres auoir donné fatisfaction aux Peres
qui l’enfeignoient, & auoir inftamment demandé le
Baptefme, fut apellé pour fe trouuer en 1’Affemblée
des Chreftiens & Catechumenes, qui fe fit A Pafques,
en noftre Maifon de Saincte Marie. Comme il eft


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 141


is nota lie that JESuS CHRIST is in the Host,”
said Estienne to us one day. ‘‘I felt it on Christmas
day, after I had received communion. But I do not
know whether he has always remained in my heart
since then, for very often, while I am doing some-
thing else, I feel quite changed, as if there were
some one inside of me who speaks to me, and I
frequently speak to him without saying a word. He
answers me, and then I see very well that he under-
stands my desires.”’

‘“T no longer doubt the truths that are taught us,”
frequently says Thomas, when he exhorts the other
Christians to remain steadfast in the Faith. At the
very moment when I received Communion, I felt
JESUS CHRIST in my heart, and I perceived at the
same time that it was he who raised me up to him,
and who taught me what I had never been able to
understand. I had until then been like a Man who
is lost, or who fears to be lost, in the middle of the
night; but now I walk in security, as we do in the
full ight of day. Believe,” said -he,. ““all.that’ is
taught us; but, above [103 i.e., 101] all, believe
firmly that JESUS CHRIST enters into our hearts
when we eat the consecrated Bread.’’

The calumnies against the Faith redoubled after
Easter, and then the Christians saw, more clearly
than ever, that all these tempests are raised by the
Demons. This was the occasion thereof. A Captain
of the village of Saint Joseph, named Astiskoua,
after having given satisfaction to the Fathers who
taught him, and having earnestly demanded Baptism,
was summoned to appear before the Assembly of
Christians and Catechumens that was held at Easter,
in our House of Sainte Marie. As he had a good


142 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


d’vn bon efprit, & que la Foy fembloit eftre dedans
fon ceeur, fes fentimens n’auoient rien de fauuage,
fes difcours eftoient pleins de zele & de ferueur, fes
refolutions tout a fait dignes d’vn Chreftien: mais
comme il n’y a que DIEV qui connoiffe le fecret des
ceeurs, auffi par tout, fes fainctes Prouidences font
autant cachées qu’admirables. Cet Homme fe pre-
fentant pour entrer dans 1’Eglife, fent vne force
occulte qui le repouffe [104 i.e., 102] violemment;
il tente pour la feconde & la troifiéme fois, il ne void
pas pourtant ce qui l’arrefte, ains toufiours il fe fent
repouffé. En mefme temps fon efprit eft troublé,
fans toutefois qu’il le paroiffe; il void tous les Chre-
{tiens entrer, & luy feul ne peut neantmoins auancer
vn pas. En vain fa Femme qui eftoit venué auec
luy, le preffe de fuiure les autres, en vain auffi il fe
fait force pour furmonter cette refiftance inuifible, il
eft en-fin contraint de reculer. Il fort donc de la
Maifon fans dire mot. Apres trois lieués ou enuiron
de chemin, il fait paroiftre ce qu’il eft: il entre furi-
eux dans les bourgs de Sainct Iean & de Sainct
Ignace, enfonce les Cabanes, brife les portes, rompt
les Canots, & pas vn ne I’ofe aborder.

Il crie qu’vn Diable luy eft entré dans le corps,
que ce Demon luy auoit dit qu'il le prift pour fon
pere, qu'il fuiuift fes conduites, & s’affeuraft qu’il
auoit de l’amour pour luy, mais qu’il falloit refolu-
ment tuér tous les Frang¢ois, qu’eux feuls ruinoient
tout le Pais. On ne peut retenir fes fougues, il va
courir dedans les bois, [105 i.e., 103] il trouue fon
chemin par tout; les ronces & les épines defchirent
tout fon corps, mais ne peuuent pas l’arrefter.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 143


mind, and as Faith seemed to have entered into his
heart, there was nothing savage about his senti-
ments; his discourse was full of zeal and fervor; his
resolutions were in every way worthy of a Christian.
But as GOD alone knows the secrets of all hearts, so
also everywhere are his holy Providences as hidden
as they are admirable. When this Man wished to
enter the Church, he felt an occult force that
repelled him [104 i.e., 102] violently; he tried a
second and a third time, still he could not see what
stopped him, but he always felt repulsed. At the
same time his mind was troubled though he did
not manifest this. He saw all the Christians go in,
and he alone could not advance a step. In vain did
his Wife, who had come with him, urge him to fol-
low the others; in vain also did he strive to overcome
this invisible resistance; he was at last compelled
to retire. He therefore went from the House, with-
out saying a word. After walking three leagues, or
thereabout, he showed what he was; he furiously
entered the villages of Saint Jean and of Saint
Ignace, burst into the Cabins, smashed the doors
and broke the Canoes, while no one dared to ap-
proach him.

He cried out that a Devil had entered into his
body, and that this Demon had told him to take him
for his father, to follow his guidance, and to rest
assured that he had an affection for him; but that he
must boldly kill all the French, as they alone were
ruining the whole Country. It was impossible to
restrain his violence. He ran about in the woods,
[105 i.e., 103] forcing his way everywhere. The
briars and thorns tore his whole body but could not
stop him.


144 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


Apres de longs égaremens, il arriue en fon Bourg,
il bat, il frappe, il veut tuér tous ceux qu’il rencon-
tre. En-fin on le faifit, on le lie, & on l’interroge;
c’ef{t tofijours ce Demon qui parle, cet ennemy de
Paix. Les Chreftiens eftans de retour, le lendemain
de Pafques, trouuent tout le Bourg en émeute. On
dit, on crie qu'il faut maffacrer les Francois. I1 faut
donc me tuér auec eux, s’écrie E{tienne Totihri, f’ils
font coulpables, ie ne fuis pas plus innocent qu’eux;
car ie voy bien que c’eft Ala Foy qu’on en veut. Ce
Demoniacle rompt fes liens, force ceux qui le tien-
nent, fe iette luy-mefme dans le feu; me veut ny
boire ny manger, difant que fon Demon luy a ainfi
ordonné.

Mais il cherche nommément les Chreftiens: I1
trouue vne bonne Femme en fon chemin, c’eft l’eau,
luy dit-il, que vous aimez vous autres Chreftiens,
puifque vous prifez tant voftre Baptefme & en mefme
temps il luy verfe quantité d’eau deffus la tefte. Les
autres qu’il rencontre, [106 i.e., 104] n’en font pas
quittes pour fi peu de chofe; il brife tout dans les
Cabanes, on luy ferme les portes, mais il monte deffus
les toits. Il va pour rompre la Chapelle, il leue les
écorces dont elle ef{toit couuerte, il cherche Eftienne
& luy reproche qu'il eft Chreftien. I1 fe jette deffus
vn autre, & eftant armé de tifons, c’eft fur toy, luy
dit-il, que ie me veux vanger, il faut que ie te brie.
Ce bon Chreftien fe recommande & DIEv, fe refigne
a fa faincte volonté, & s’étant refolu A tout, prefente
a ce poffedé fes deux bras joints enfemble & tous
nuds, pour eftre briilez. Courage, luy dit-il, brfile
moy fi tu veux. A ces mots ce Furieux s’arrefte,


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 145


After long wanderings, he arrived at his own
Village; he beat, he struck, he wished to kill all
whom he met. At last he was seized, bound, and
questioned. It was ever the Demon, that enemy of
Peace, that spoke. When the Christians returned,
on the day after Easter, they found the entire Vil-
lage in a state of excitement; all were saying and
calling out that the French must be massacred. ‘‘I1
must, then, be killed with them,” exclaimed Estienne
Totihri. ‘‘If they are guilty, I am not more inno-
cent than’ they,-for I see very. well: that it is on
account of the Faith that you bear them ill will.”
The Demoniac burst his bonds, broke away from
those who held him, threw himself into the fire,
and refused to eat or to drink, saying that his Demon
had thus commanded him.

But he sought the Christians chiefly. Meeting a
good Woman on his way, he said to her: ‘“‘It is
water that you Christians like, since you so highly
prize your Baptism;” and at the same time he
poured a quantity of water on her head. The others
whom he met [106 i.e., 104] did not get rid of him
so easily. He smashed everything in the Cabins.
They closed the doors to him, but he climbed on the
roofs. He tried to break into the Chapel, and tore
off the pieces of bark with which it was covered. He
sought Estienne, and reproached him with being a
Christian. He threw himself upon another, and,
being armed with firebrands, he said to him: “It
is on thee that I wish to avenge myself; I must burn
thee.’’ The good Christian commended himself to
Gop, resigned himself to his holy will, and, being
resolved to endure everything, he held out to the
possessed man both his arms, clasped together and


146 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES {VoL. 23


paffe plus outre, & va décharger vne partie de fa
fureur.

Vn Infidele de nos meilleurs Amis, Capitaine de ce
mef{me Bourg, vient en hafte nous donner aduis de
tout ce qui fe paffe; nous prie de ne pas paroiftre fi
toft, crainte d’vn plus grand malheur: Mais ce petit
Troupeau de Fideles auoit befoin de fon Pafteur.
Les Peres y courent, trouuent cette pauure Eolife
bien auant dedans les fouffrances, & plus encore
[107 i.e., 105] dans la crainte de ce qui deuoit fuiure:
mais tous ces pauures Chreftiens font difpofez a tout
fouffrir pour l’amour de DIEV, & f’animent les vns
les autres, dans les efperances du Paradis qu’on ne
pouuoit pas leur rauir.

Comme cet homme poffedé auoit quafi efté cing
ou fix iours fans boire ny manger, fans repofer ny
dormir: les Peres craignent qu’il ne meure fans
affiftance; ils s’y tran{portent pour voir ce quiils y
pourroient faire. A leur venué ce Furieux fe fent
tout appaifé; il entend leur difcours, mais pour
toutes chofes ils n’en remportent que des coups, &
des marques de fa folie, & voyent bien que c’eft a
DIEv feul qu’il faut renuoyer l’iffué de cet affaire.

En-fin apres quelques iours, cette poffeffion ceffe,
le Diable quitte fa demeure. Ce pauure homme eft
tout honteux, lors qu’on luy dit ce qu’il a fait: il
vient nous trouuer en noftre Maifon, nous raconte,
autant qu’il peut f’en fouuenir, les commencemens
de fon mal, les operations du Demon deffus yr
temoigne qu'il n’a perdu ny la Foy, ny les defirs de
[108 i.€., 106] fe voir Baptizé, nous demande pardon
de tout ce qu'il a fait; fi toutefois on peut luy impu-


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 147°


quite naked, to be burned. ‘‘ Courage,” said he;
‘“burn me, if thou wilt.’’ At these words the
Madman stopped, then passed on, and gave partial
vent to his fury elsewhere.

An Infidel, who was one of our best Friends and
the Captain of this same Village, came in haste to
inform us of all these occurrences. He begged us
not to make our appearance too soon, for fear of a
greater misfortune. But the little Flock of Faithful
ones needed their Pastor. The Fathers hastened to
the spot, and found the poor Church in great afflic-
tion and in still greater [107 i.e., 105] dread of what
might follow. But all these poor Christians were
determined to endure everything for the love of
GoD, and animated one another with the hope of
Paradise, which no one could ravish from them.

As this possessed man had been almost five or six
days without eating or drinking, without rest or
sleep, the Fathers feared that he might die with no
one to assist him, and they went to see what they
could do. On their arrival, the Madman felt quite
calmed. He listened to their discourse, but for all
they said they obtained only blows and other tokens
of his madness; so they saw very plainly that the
issue of this affair must be referred to GOD alone.

Finally, after some days, this possession ceased,
and the Devil quitted his abode. The poor man
was quite ashamed, when he was told what he had
done. He came to see us at our House, and told us,
as well as he could remember, how his disease had
commenced, and how the Demon had worked upon
him. He showed that he had lost neither Faith nor
the desire [108 i.e., 106] to be Baptized, and asked
pardou of us for what he had done,—if indeed he


148 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


ter quelque crime, ot fa volonté n’a eu aucune part,
-& dans lefquels il a fouffert plus qu’aucun autre.
Nous ne nous fommes pas refolus de rien precipiter
en ce Baptefme, le temps nous donnera plus de
connoiffance; nous efperons auec l’aide de DIEV,
que tout reiiffira 4 la confufion des Demons, & au bien
de cette petite Eglife.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 149


could be charged with any crime, in acts in which
his will had had no share, and from which he had
suffered more than any other. We are determined
to do nothing rash in this Baptism; time will bring
us more knowledge. We hope that, with Gop’s
assistance, everything will result in the confusion of
the Demons, and in the welfare of this little Church.


150 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


CHAPIT REE


DE LA MISSION DE SAINCT IEAN BAPTISTE, AUX
ARENDAENHRONON.


IEV a tellement reiiny le plus fort de Chreftiens,
‘e qui font en ce Pais dans les Miffions de la Con-
ception & de Sainc Iofeph, les deux parties
les plus confiderables des Hurons; que neantmoins il
fe retrouue bon nombre tant de Chreftiens que de
Catechumenes, ¢a & 1a difperfez en plufieurs autres
endroits. [109 i.e., 107] Cela nous a obligez, quoy que
nous foyons au milieu d’vn Peuple fedentaire, d’y
faire vne Miffion Errante, qui euft le foin de cultiuer
ces Ames, qui ont dautant plus befoin de fecours
qu’elles fe voyent priuées de l’exemple des autres
Chreftiens.

Le P. Antoine Daniel, & le P. Iofeph Marie Chau-
monot, ayans eu ce departemét, ont demeuré tantoft
en vn Bourg, tantoft en vn autre, felon le trauail
quils y trouuoient; toutefois leur plus long fejour
ayant efté dans les Bourgs des Arendaenhronon,
cette Miffion en a porté le nom.

Auant que nous euffions la connoiffance de ces
Peuples, telle que le temps nous l’a donnée: ne
voyant aucun culte qu’ils rendiffent & quelque fauffe
Diuinité, nous jugions que leur Conuerfion en feroit
dautant plus facile; puifque comme fur vne table
rafe, n’y ayant rien a effacer, on y pourroit fans
refiftance imprimer les Idées d’vn vray DIEV, & les


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 151


CHAP TI Rex.


OF THE MISSION OF SAINT JOHN THE BAPTIST AMONG
THE ARENDAENHRONON.


OD has thus far gathered together most of the
Christians of this Country in the Missions of
la Conception and of Saint Joseph, the two

most important localities among the Hurons. Never-
theless, there are many, both Christians and Cate-
chumens, who are scattered here and there in several
other places. [109 i.e., 107] This has compelled us,
although we are in the midst of a sedentary People,
to establish among them an Itinerant Mission, which
shall be charged with the instruction of these Souls,
which are all the more in need of succor that they
are deprived of the example of other Christians.

Father Antoine Daniel and Father Joseph Marie
Chaumonot, who have had charge of this depart-
ment, have dwelt sometimes in one Village and
sometimes in another, according to the work that
they had to do. However, as their longest sojourn
has been in the Villages of the Arendaenhronon,
this Mission has borne that name.

Before we had obtained that knowledge of these
Peoples which has come to us in course of time, when
we saw no worship paid by them to any false
Divinity, we concluded that their Conversion would
be all the easier; because —as upon a bare tablet,
from which there was nothing to erase— we might
without opposition impress on them Ideas of a true


152 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23:


conduire au refpect & a1’ Adoration qui luy eft detie
par toute la Terre. Mais l’experience nous a fait
voir qu’ils font [110 i.e., 108] remplis de Superfti-
tions Diaboliques, prenans leurs Songes pour leurs
Diuinitez, d’ot dépend le bonheur de leur vie. Outre
cela, nous voyons qu’ils reconnoiffent des Genies
plus puiffans qui difpofent des affaires Publiques,
qui caufent les Famines, qui ont le maniment des
Guerres, & donnent la Victoire 4 ceux qui fe rendent
plus fouples 4 leurs volontez.

Ce n’eft pas feulement vne fauffe opinion qui ait
pris pied dans leur efprit, l’ayans recetie par tradi-
tion de leurs Anceftres; mais fouuent ces Demons ne
fe rendent que trop vifibles, & fe donnent en forte a
connoiftre, qwils n’en peuuent douter. Ondoutaehte,
quils reconnoiffent pour le Dieu de la Guerre, leur
apparoift fort fouuent; mais comme il eft terrible,
ce n’ef{t jamais qu’auec effroy, empruntant quelquefois
le vifage d’vn homme forcené de rage, d’autrefois
d’vne femme qui n’a que des traits de fureur.

CrET Hyuer, vn ieune Homme enuiron de trente
ans, vit entrer fur le foir, vn fpectre en fa Cabane,
en ‘forme d'vne Meseres|1lisi.e% 100] “armee de
tifons & de flammes, qui s’efcrioit qu’on le briilaft.
Son efprit eft troublé aux horribles regards de cette
furie enragée, il entre luy-mefme en fureur, fe iette
dans les feux, qui ef{toient allumez; & quoy qu’il fe
briilaft, il n’en reffent point la douleur. I1 chante
continuellement, plufieurs iours, ou pluitoft, il pouffe
fans ceffe, des hurlemés terribles, fans toutefois
perdre rien de fa voix. En fin on faifit cet homme
forcené, on interroge ce Demon de fureur, qui l’anime
& quile poffede. Il répond qu’il demande en offrade,


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 153


GoD, and guide them into that respect and Adora-
tion which are due to him throughout the Earth.
But experience has shown us that they are [I1oi.e.,
108] full of Diabolical Superstitions, looking upon
their Dreams as their Divinities, upon whom the
happiness of their lives depends. Besides that, we
see that they acknowledge more powerful Genii who
settle Public affairs, who cause Famine, who control
Wars, and give Victory to those who become most
obedient to their will.

It is not only an erroneous opinion that has obtained
footing in their minds, through their having received
it as a tradition from their Ancestors; but frequently
these Demons show themselves only too visibly, and
make their appearance in such a manner that these
people cannot doubt their existence. Ondoutaehte,
whom they recognize as the God of War, often
appears to them,— but never without inspiring fright,
for he is terrible. Sometimes he assumes the coun-
tenance of a man mad with rage; again, that ofa
woman whose features are only those of fury.

LAST Winter, a young Man about thirty years of
age saw, one evening, a spectre enter his Cabin
having the appearance of a Megera, [III i.e., 109]
armed with firebrands and flames, who exclaimed
that she would burn him. His mind is disturbed by
the horrible glances of this enraged fury; he himself
becomes furious, and throws himself into the fires
that had been lighted, and, although he burns him-
self, he feels no pain. He sings continually, for
several days, or rather he utters, without ceasing,
terrible yells, without at all weakening his voice. At
last the madman is seized, and the Demon of fury
that animates and possesses him is questioned. It


154 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


vne armure fauuage, qui le couure de pied en tefte,
vne enfeigne de muzeau de loup, & quelque autre
equipage de guerre. Ces chofes n’ayant pefi luy
e{tre fournies, cette Megere apparoift pour la feconde
fois, tenant par les cheueux vne tefte effroyable,
& criant que c’étoit la tefte d’vn certain Capitaine
Iroquois: En fuite, il aper¢coit la ceruelle d’vn homme,
encore toute fanglante: Et en ce mefme temps il luy
fut dit, que c’eftoit la ceruelle d’vn autre de leurs
Ennemis, qui toutes les années eft la terreur de nos
Hurons. C’e{t ainfi que vous euffiés emporté [112
i.e., 110] les dépoiiilles de ces Capitaines Iroquois,
& des troupes que cet E{té ils mettront en campagne,
pour vous faire la guerre, s écrie cette Furie.

I’ESTOIS venué d’Onontaé (c’eft vne Nation en-
nemie des Hurons) mais puis qu’icy on me refufe les
honneurs, que i’attendois d’y receuoir, ie vay de ce
pas 4 Agnée (c’eftoit vne autre Natid Iroquoife, la
plus voyfine de Kebec) & 14 ie feray honorée. A ces
mots ce Monftre difparut, & laiffa l’épouuante & la
crainte dans le coeur des Hurons.

Nous verrons cet Efté, fi ces menaces auront eti
quelque mauuais effet. Quoy qu'il en foit, il eft
affeuré que fouuent les paroles de ces Demons fe
trouuent veritables. Puis que ie m’y voy engagé, en
voicy vn exemple qui merite de trouuer icy place.

VN certain, qui nous preffe de le Baptizer, n’eftant
encore agé que de quinze a feize ans, s’eftoit retiré
dans les bois, pour f{’y difpofer par vn ieufne; A l’ap-
parition de quelque Demon, (apres auoir ieufné feize
iours, fans manger, mais beuuant feulement de lean)
il entendit tout d’vn coup, [113 i.e., 111] cette voix
qui venoit du Ciel: Prens le foin de cet homme, &


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 155


replies that it demands, as an offering, a set of
armor, of savage fashion, which covers a man from
his head to his feet;* an ensign consisting of a wolf’s
muzzle; and certain other warlike equipment. As
these things cannot be supplied her, this Megera
appears a second time holding up by the hair a hor-
rible head, and calling out that it was the head of a
certain Iroquois Captain. Then he saw a man’s
brains, still quite gory; and at the same time he was
told that they were the brains of another of their
Enemies, who is the terror of our Hurons every
year. ‘“Thus,’’ called out the. Fury, “would you
have carried off [112 i.e., 110] the spoils of those
Iroquois Captains, and of the troops that they will
put in the field next Summer to make war on you.

‘‘T HAD come from Onontaé”’ (a Nation hostile to
the Hurons) ‘‘ but since Iam refused the honors that
I expected to receive, I will go at once to Agnée”’ (this
was another Iroquois Nation, the nearest to Kebec)
‘and there I shall be honored.’’ At these words
the Monster disappeared, leaving terror and fear in
the hearts of the Hurons.

We shall see this Summer whether these threats
will have any evil effect. In any case, it is a fact
that these words of the Demons often turn out to be
true. While I am on this subject, I will relate an
instance that deserves to be recorded here.

A CERTAIN man, who urges us to Baptize him,
had, when but fifteen or sixteen years of age, retired
into the woods to prepare himself by fasting for the
apparition of some Demon. (After having fasted
sixteen days without eating anything, and drinking
water only) he suddenly heard [113 i.e., 111] this
utterance, that came from the Sky: ‘‘ Take care of


156 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


qu'il mette fin Afon ieufne. A mefme temps il aper-
coit vn vieillard, d’vne rare beauté, qui décendat du
Ciel, f’aproche de luy, & l’enuifageant d’vn regard
fauorable, Courage, luy dit-il, i’auray foin de ta vie,
c’eft vn bonheur pour toy, de m/’auoir pris pour
Maiftre: Tous les Demons qui hantent ces contrées
n’auront pas le pouuoir de te nuire: Vn iour tu verras
ta cheuelure blanche cOme la mienne: Tu auras
quatre enfans, les deux premiers & le dernier ferét
mafles, & la troifiéme fera vne fille; apres cela ta
femme te tiendra lieu de foeur. Finiffant ces paroles,
il luy prefente vn morceau de chair humaine toute
crué. Ce ieune enfant en ayant horreur, deftourne
vn peu la tefte: mange donc de cecy, dit le vieil-
lard, luy prefentant vn morceau de graiffe d’ours.
L’ayant mangé, ce Demon fe retire, remontant vers
le Ciel d’ot: il eftoit venu. Du depuis il luy eft fou-
uent apparu, & luy a promis affiftance: de ce qu’il
luy auoit predit, quafi le tout eft arriué. Cette
homme a eti quatre enfans, dét le troifiéme a efté
vne fille: apres cela vne [114 i.e., 112] certaine infir-
mité l’a obligé 4 la continéce, que le Diable deman-
doit de luy. Du refte, il eft de tref-bonne fanté, &
quoy qu’il aproche de fa vieilleffe, il a paffé plufieurs
maladies contagieufes fans en auoir efté atteint. Il
a toufiours e{té tres-heureux 4 la chaffe; de forte que
lors qu'il eftoit dans les bois, entendant quelque
nombre de crys du Ciel, ce luy eftoient des marques
qu’il prendroit autat d’ours: & d’autrefois voyant
luy feul quantité de cerfs & de biches entrer en la
Cabane, il en donnoit aduis aux autres, qui veritable-
ment trouuoient le lendemain dedans leurs pieges, le
mefme nombre qu’il leur auoit dit. Il attribué ce


1642-43] RELATION OF 162 157


this man, and let him end his fast.’’ At the same
time, he saw an aged man of rare beauty who came
down from the Sky, approached him, and, looking
kindly at him, said: ‘‘ Have courage, I will take care
of thy life. It is a fortunate thing for thee, to have
taken me for thy Master. None of the Demons who
haunt these countries, shall have any power to harm
thee. One day thou wilt see thy hair as white as
mine. Thou wilt have four children; the first two
and the last will be males, and the third will bea
girl; after that, thy wife will hold the relation of a
sister to thee.’’ As he concluded these words, he
held out to him a piece of human flesh, quite raw.
The youth in horror turned away his head. ‘‘ Eat
this,’’ said the old man, presenting him with a piece
of bear’s fat. When he had eaten it the Demon
withdrew, ascending toward the Sky, whence he had
come. After that, he often appeared to him and
promised to assist him. Nearly all that he predicted
to him has happened. This man has had four chil-
dren, the third of whom was a girl; after which a
[114 i.e., 112] certain infirmity compelled him to the
continence that the Devilasked of him. Apart from
that, he is in excellent health; and although he is
approaching old age, he has been exposed to many
contagious diseases without having been attacked by
them. He was always very fortunate in the chase;
thus, while in the woods, whenever he heard a certain
number of cries from the Sky, they were signs that
he would take so many bears. At other times, when
he alone saw a number of stags and does entering
the Cabin, he would inform the others of it; and
they would really find in their snares on the follow-
ing dey the same number of animals that he had told


158 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


grand bonheur qu’il a tofijours eu dedans fes chaffes,
& ce morceau de graiffe d’ours que ce Demon luy
auoit fait manger, & juge de 1a qu’il auroit eu vn
pareil fuccez 4 la guerre, s’il euft mangé ce morceau
de chair humaine qu’il refufa.

Semblables chofes font fi communes en ce Pais,
que ce n’eft pas merueille que ces pauures Barbares
foient fi fortement attachez au feruice du Diable,
quwils” luy “facent. des sacrifices -d’'Ours,4de~Cerfs
[115 i.e., 113] & de Chiens, qui brfilent & confom-
ment en fon honneur. Mais f’il arriue quelquefois
que fes~ promefies “te— trouuet “veritables lem nlus
fouuent auffi il les decoit, & les precipite tout a fait
dans le malheur.

Les Arendaenhronon l’éprouuerent l’Efté paffé.
Auant qu’ils allaffent en guerre, le Diable leur auoit
promis qu’ils auroient la victoire fur leurs Ennemis,
en fuite d’vne impudicité publique dont ils luy auoient
fait hommage, & toutefois ils y furent vaincus. Les
Chefs de cette guerre infortunée eftoient vn Capi-
taine dont autrefois il a efté parlé, nommé Atironta,
& vn fien frere nommé Aéotahon: Tous deux fuffi-
famment inftruits des chofes de la Foy, & qui
fouuent nous auoient demandé le Baptefme; mais
parce qu’il leur manquoit encore quelque difpofition
neceffaire pour cet effet, nous n’auions pti leur accor-
der. jl wn. fut prisg@epralé par les Hnnemis;—&
l’autre f’'échapa. Nous efperons que le premier aura
trouué mifericorde aupres de DIEV, au moins on
nous a affeuré qu’il eut recours 4 fa Bonté, lors qu'il
fe vid dans ce malheur.

[116 i1.e., 114] Celuy qui f’échapa de la meflée, a
reconnu cette faueur venir du Ciel, dont il auoit


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 159


them. He attributes this excellent fortune that he
has always had in the chase, to the piece of bear’s fat
that the Demon made him eat; and he judges from
this that he would have had equal success in war, had
he eaten the piece of human flesh that he refused.

Such things are so common in this Country that it
is no wonder that these poor Barbarians are so at-
tached to the service of the Devil that they Sacrifice
to him Bears, Stags, [115 i.e., 113] and Dogs, which
are burned and consumed in his honor. But, if it
sometimes happen that his promises are fulfilled, he
more frequently deceives them and overwhelms them
with misfortune.

The Arendaenhronon had an experience of this
last Summer. Before they went to war the Devil
promised them that they should be victorious over
their Enemies, in consequence of a public act of
shamelessness that they had performed in his honor,
and nevertheless they were defeated. The Chiefs in
that ill-fated war were a Captain who has already
been mentioned, named Atironta, and one of his
brothers, named Aéotahon. Both had been suffi-
ciently instructed in matters of Faith and had
frequently asked us for Baptism; but, as they still
lacked some necessary preparation therefor, we had
been unable to grant it to them. One was taken pris-
oner, and burned by the Enemies, and the other
escaped. We hope that the former will have found
mercy with Gop,—at least, we have been assured
that he had recourse to his Goodness, when he found
himself in that misfortune.

[116 i.e., 114] He who escaped from the combat
has acknowledged that this favor came from Heav-
en, whose assistance he had frequently implored


160 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


imploré l’affiftance auant que de combatre, & d’ot il
attendoit fon plus puiffant fecours; ayant conftam-
ment refufé de rendre au Diable les hommages impu-
diques qu’auoient fait ceux qui demeurerent en ce
rencontre. Auant que de partir, vn Demon luy eftant
apparu en fonge, luy auoit fait cette menace: Tu
te repentiras ‘de t'eltre Leparé de moy, te te feray
fentir les veritables cruautez du feu des Iroquois,
puifque la crainte d’vn feu imaginaire de l’Enfer te
fait trembler, & te fait quitter mon feruice. Mais
DIEV qui jamais n’abandonne les fiens, ny mefme
les pauures miferables qui mettent en luy leur con-
fiance, ayant deliuré ce bon Catechumene, lors quwil
fe voyoit 4 deux doigts du malheur dont le Diable
l’auoit menaffé, luy a apris que tous les Demons ne
peuuent rien fur noftre vie quand nous les méprifons,
pour honorer celuy qui feul au monde doit eftre
redouté. '
Vne Grace de DIEV bien receué, en attire beau-
coup d’autres apres foy. Ce Guerrier eftant de re-
tour, fe met en fi:| 117 d.e,, 115) bon eftat que nous
[ne] ptimes pas luy refufer le fainct Baptefme. On
luy donne le nom de Iean Baptifte, pource qu’il eftoit
le premier Adulte de la Miffion dediée a4 ce Sainct,
qui euft efté admis en l’Eglife en eftat de fanté.
C’eft la couftume en ce Pais d’inuiter au feftin fes
Amis, & tous les principaux du Bourg, lorfque quel-
qu’vn veut témoigner au Public quelque grand’ joye
ou trifteffe: La compagnie des Conuiez eft quelque-
fois de deux trois & quatre cens. Ce Neophyte n’eft
pas fi to{t Chreftien, qu’il veut publiquement fe faire
reconnoiftre pour tel. Il prepare vn feftin magnifique
a leur mode; tout le monde eftant affemblé: Mes


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 161


before the fight, and whence he expected his most
powerful aid, having constantly refused to render to
the Devil the unchaste homage paid by those who
were engaged in this battle. Before he left, a De-
mon had appeared to him ina dream and had threat-
ened him in this wise: ‘‘ Thou shalt repent of hav-
ing separated thyself from me. I will make thee
feel the real cruelties of the Iroquois fire, since the
fear of an imaginary Hell fire makes thee tremble,
and causes thee to leave myinservice.* But-GoDy
who never abandons his own,—not even poor
wretches who place their confidence in him,—by
delivering this good Catechumen, who saw himself
within a finger-length of the misfortune with which
the Devil had threatened him, showed him that all
the Demons have no power over our lives, when we
despise them in order to honor him who alone in
the world is to be dreaded.

A Grace from GOD that is well received attracts
many others after it. When this Warrior returned,
he prepared himself so [117 i.e., 115] well that we
could not refuse him holy Baptism. He was named
Jean Baptiste, because he was the first Adult of the
Mission dedicated to that Saint, who was admitted
into the Church while in good health.

It is the custom of this Country to invite to a feast
one’s Friends, and all the leading men of the Village,
when one wishes to declare before the Public some
great joy or some great sorrow. The number of the
Guests is sometimes two, three, or four hundred.
No sooner had this Neophyte become a Christian
than he wished to be publicly recognized as such.
He had a splendid feast prepared, in their fashion.
When all were assembled, he said to them: ‘* My


162 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox. 23


Camarades, leur dit-il, ie ne fuis plus ce que vous
eftes, & ce qu’autrefois i’ay efté, vn efclaue des Son-
ges & des Diables que vous honorez. Ie quitte leur
feruice, i’abandonne leurs pernicieufes ceremonies,
ie me fepare entierement d’auec vous, m’eftant donné
avn plus puiffant Maiftre. Vous fcaurez mainte-
nant que ie fuis baptifé, & que ie ne rougiray iamais
def{tre appellé Chreftien. JI’admire vos courages,
d’eftre [118 i.e., 116] fans crainte, & de ne point trem-
bler de peur, aux nouuelles qu’on nous apporte de
ces feux Eternels, qui briilent 4 iamais au centre de
la Terre, ceux qui durant leur vie n’ont pas adoré cet
Efprit Tout-puiffant, qui d’vn mot a creé & la Terre
& les Cieux. Pour moy ie confeffe ma lafcheté; ces
nouuelles m’ont d’abord fait trembler, & l’horreur
qui me faifit lors que i’y penfe, m’a fait 4 jufte rai-
fon, prendre la refolution d’éuiter ce malheur, main-
tenant qu'il eft en mon pouuoir. Si vous craignez
autant que moy le feu des Iroquois, excufez-moy,
pardonnez a ma lafcheté, fi ie crains mille fois dauan-
tage le feu d’Enfer qui eft cent-mille fois plus
dangereux & plus cuifant. Non, non, mes Freres, ie
n’ay plus de courage, quand on viendra m’inuiter au
peché, ie trembleray de peur & d’apprehenfion, & en
cela ie vous laifferay tous feuls dans le peril; mais s’il
faut attaquer l’Ennemy, s’il faut vanger la mort de
nos parens, s’il faut defendre le Pais, ie vous tien-
dray fidele compagnie, ie ne fuyray pas le danger,
& iefpere que le courage ne me manquera pas A
l’occafion.

[119 1.€5 117] Deptis ce temps 14, ce nouueau
Chreftien a eu des attaques bien fortes. Souuent on
a tafché de lengager dans les fuperftitions du Pais, &


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 163


Comrades, Iam no longer what you are, and what I
formerly was,—a slave to the Dreams and to the
Devils that you honor. I quit their service; I aban-
don their pernicious ceremonies; I separate myself
completely from you, for I have given myself toa
more powerful Master. You must know now that I
am baptized, and that I will never blush at being
called a Christian. I admire your courage in being
[118 i.e., 116] without fear, and in not trembling at
the news that is brought to us of those Eternal fires
that consume forever, in the center of the Earth,
those who during their lives have not adored that
All-powerful Spirit who with a single word has
created both Earth and Heaven. For my part, I con-
fess my cowardice. That news caused me to tremble
at the start, and the horror that seizes me when I
think of it has given me good reason to take the reso-
lution to avoid that misfortune, now that it is in my
power todoso. If you dread the fire of the Iroquois
as much as I do, excuse me and forgive my lack of
bravery if I dread a thousand times more the fire of
Hell, that is a hundred thousand times more danger-
ous and more painful. No, no, my Brothers, I have
no more courage; when urged to sin, I shall tremble
with fear and apprehension, and in this respect I
shall leave you all aloneinthe peril. But if we have
to attack the Enemy, if we have to avenge the death
of our relatives, if we have to defend the Country, I
will be your faithful companion; I will not fly from
danger, and I hope that courage will not fail me on
that occasion.”’

[119 i.e., 117] From that time, this new Christian
has had many violent attacks. Frequent attempts
have been made to draw him into the superstitions


164 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


toufiours il a refifté. Iufque 1&4 mefme, qu’vn fien fils
étant tombé malade, & luy iamais n’ayant voulu per-
mettre, qu’en fa Cabane, on efit recours 4 ces remedes
diaboliques; fa femme 1’a abandonné, luy a enleué
cet enfant, & a pris vn autre mary. Sa chafteté n’a
pas eu de moindres affauts. En vn Pais, ou les
femmes & les filles n’ont rien qui les retiennét; ou,
la pudeur que la nature a donné pour defenfe a leur
fexe, paffe pour vn opprobre; ou par honneur, elles
font obligées de fe def-honorer; il eft bien difficile,
& vn ieune Homme, qui toute fa vie s’y eft veu enga-
gé, de parer a ces coups, lors qu’il veut faire vne
retraite. Mais la crainte de Dieu, a efté toute fa
defenfe. En vain on Ia follicité, il a refufé des pre-
fens, & a tréblé de peur, feld qu’il auoit dit, lors qu’il
sieit. vet, fuyant leydancer de-pérdte, ce. ques la
feule Foy luy auoit apris de cherir, plus que le plai-
fir & la vie. Je marche par le Bourg, a-t’il dit quel-
quefois parlant mefme 4 des Infidelles, [20 i.e., 118]
comme fur vne terre ennemie: ie crains le rencontre
des femmes, comme celle d’vn Iroquois, encore vn
Ennemy me fait-il moins de peur, car ie lenuifage
auec affeurance; mais ie n’oze leuer la veué, lors
qu’vne Femme vient 4 moy.

En ce Pais, il n’en va pas des Noms affectez aux
Familles, de mefme qu’en Europe: Les Enfans ne
portent pas le nom du Pere, & n’y en a aucun qui
foit commun a toute la Famille, chacun a le fien diffe-
rent; en telle forte neantmoins que f’il fe peut faire,
jamais aucun Nom ne fe perd: ains quand quelqu’vn
de la Famille eft mort, tous les parens f’affemblent,
& deliberent enfemble lequel d’entr’eux portera le
nom du deffunct, donnant le fien & quelque autre


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 16g2 165


of the Country, but he has always resisted. So far,
even, have these efforts gone, that when one of his
sons fell ill, and when he refused ever to allow
recourse to be had, in his Cabin, to such diabolical
remedies, his wife left him, carried the child away
from him, and took another husband. His chastity
was exposed to equally violent assaults. In a Coun-
try where women and girls have nothing to restrain
them; where the modesty which nature has given
them as a protection for their sex passes for a dis-
grace; where for honor’s sake they are compelled to
dishonor themselves; it is very difficult for a young
Man who has been engaged in such affairs all his
life, to parry these blows when he wishes to effect a
retreat. But the fear of God was his sole defense.
In vain did they solicit him; he refused presents,
and trembled with fear, as he had said, when he fled
from the danger of losing what Faith alone had
taught him to cherish above pleasure and above life.
‘““T walk through the Village,’’ he has sometimes
said, speaking even to Infidels, {20 1.e., 118] “as in
an enemy’s country. I dread meeting women as I
would an Iroquois. Even an Enemy would cause me
less fear, for I can look at him boldly; but I dare not
lift my eyes when a Woman approaches me.”’

In this Country, there are no Names appropriated
to Families, as in Europe. The Children do not
bear their Father’s name, and there is no name that
is common to the whole Family,—each one has his
own different name. Nevertheless, it is so arranged
that, if possible, no Name is ever lost; on the con-
trary, when one of the Family dies all the relatives
assemble, and consult together as to which among
them shall bear the name of the deceased, giving


166 LES RELATIONS DES SESCITES | Si Vvornes


parent. Celuy qui prend vn nouueau nom, entre
auffi dans les Charges qui y font annexées, & ainfi il
elt=Capitaine,’ & le defunciel eltoit™ Wela taitetls
retiennent leurs larmes, ils ceffent de pleurer le mort,
& le mettent en cette forte au nombre des viuants,
difans qu'il eft refufcité, & a pris vie en la perfonne
de> celuy quia teccusiongnom ew elarit2t te. rio]
rendu immortel. De 1a fe fait que jamais vn Capi-
taine n’a d’autre nom, que fon predeceffeur, ainfi
qu’autrefois dans l’Egy[p]te, tous les Roys portoient
le nom de Ptolemée.

Cette élection donc des Capitaines, ou (comme par-
lent les Hurons) la refurrection des defuncts, ne fe
faifant qu’auec pompe & éclat; lors qu’il falut refuf-
citer le frere de ce nouueau Chreitien, c’eft a dire,
lors qu’il fallut créer vn nouueau Capitaine, on con-
uoqua tous les principaux du Pais, & nous y ffimes in-
uitez, comme a vne Ceremonie ot: les Francois auoient
vne grande part; puis qu'il eftoit queftion de faire
reuiure le nom d’Atironta, celuy qui autrefois le
premier des Hurons auoit defcendu A Kebec, & lié
amitié auec les Fran¢ois. Les Nations eftans affem-
blées, on nous defera cet honneur, de choifir qui nous
voudrions, pour prendre & ce nom & la charge de
Capitaine. Nous renuoyames ce choix A la difcre-
tion & prudence des Parents. Nous jettons donc les
yeux fur vn tel, dirent-ils, nous mon{trans Iean
Baptifte, & ne defirons point que fon n6 [122 i.e., 120]
foit dauantage d’Aéoptahon, mais Atironta, puifqu’il
le ‘refureite:

Cela fait, chaque Nation fit fes prefens, qui, felon
la couftume font diuerfement qualifiez. Les vns
faifans leur don, difent, Qu’ils prennent le bras du


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 167


his own to some other relative. He who takes a new
name also assumes the Duties connected with it, and
thus he becomes a Captain if the deceased had been
one. This done, they dry their tears, and cease to
weep for,the deceased. In this manner, they place
him among the number of the living, saying that he
is resuscitated, and has come to life in the person of
him who has received his name, and has[121 1.e., 119]
rendered him immortal. Thus it happens that a
Captain never has any other name than that of his
predecessor, as formerly in Egypt all the Kings bore
the name of Ptolemy.

Therefore, as this election of the Captains, or (as
the Hurons say) the resurrection of the dead, is
always celebrated with pomp and splendor, when it
became necessary to bring back to life the brother of
this new Christian,— that is, when anew Captain had
to be elected,—all the chief men of the Country were
called together; and we also were invited, as to a
Ceremony in which the French were greatly inter-
ested because it was a question of reviving the name
of Atironta, he who had formerly been the first of the
Hurons to go down to Kebec, and to form a friend-
ship with the French. When the Nations were as-
sembled, they conferred on us the honor of selecting
him whom we wished to assume that name and the
office of Captain. We deferred the choice to the dis-
cretion and prudence of the Relatives. ‘‘ We there-
fore,’’ said they, ‘‘ cast our eyes on that man,’’ point-
ing out Jean Baptiste to us; ‘‘and we do not wish
his name [122 i.e., 120] to be any longer A€optahon,
but Atironta, siice he brings him back to life.”’

When this was done, each Nation gave its presents,
which, according to custom, were differently charac-


168 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


deffunct pour le retirer du tombeau; les autres,
QOu’ils fouftiennent fa tefte, crainte qu’il ne retombe.
Vn autre, faifant tofijours quelque nouueau prefent,
adjotitera dabondant, qu'il luy donne des armes pour
repouffer les Ennemis. Et moy, dira vn quatriéme,
jaffermis la Terre fous luy, A ce que pendant fon
regne elle foit inébranlable. De noftre part, nous
fifmes trois prefens; & produifans le plus confide-
rable: Ce prefent, difmes-nous, eft pour rendre la
Voix au deffunct, mais vne Voix qui ne foit plus
Vin{ftrument des Demons 4 proclamer & commander
des Ceremonies defendués, ie dis vne Voix digne d’vn
Chreftién, qui aime & encourage tout le monde a la
defenfe du Pais, a la de{truction de l’Impieté & a la
publication du fainct l’Euangile. A ces mots toute
lAffiftance répondit. Ao! qui chez eux eft fa
marque d’vn fentiment [123 i.e., 121] d’approbation.
DIEv beniffe ce nouueau Capitaine Chreftien, & luy
donne la grace de faire tout le bien dont il eft capable.

Quelques autres ont ef{té baptifez en eftat de fanté:
mais nous n’y allons qu’auec choix; iugeant que
nous deuons dans ces commencemens eftre plus refer-
uez a les admettre dedans 1’Eglife, afin qu’elle en
foit plus faincte.

Entre les autres Bourgs de cette Miffion, celuy de
fainct Michel paroiffoit en ces commencemens tout
remply d’efperances; la plufpart fe faifoient inf{truire,
& il fembloit que la Semence qu’on jettoit lors dans
ces cceurs y auoit pris quelque racine. Mais le
Diable y ayant furfemé fon yvroye, ie veux dire, Que
plufieurs ayans receu en fonge commandement de
leur Demon, d’auoir recours aux fuperftitions ancien-
nes du Pais, s’ils vouloient éuiter les malheurs dont


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 169


terized. Some, as they presented their gifts, said:
‘“ May these grasp the arm of the deceased, to draw
hint from ithe: grave.’’. .Otherssaid:'‘ May these
support his head, lest he fall back again.’’ Another,
giving still a new present, would add volubly, that
he gave him weapons to repel the Enemies. ‘‘ And
I,’’ a fourth would say, ‘‘ I make the Earth solid un-
der his feet, so that it may remain immovable during
his reign.’’ On our part, we gave three presents;
and, as we produced the most valuable, we said:
“This gift is intended to restore the Voice of the
deceased, but a Voice that will no longer be the
instrument of the Demons to proclaim and command
forbidden Ceremonies,—I say, a Voice worthy of a
Christian, who loves and encourages every one to
defend his Country, to overthrow Impiety, and to
promulgate the holy Gospel.’’ To these words the
entire Audience replied: ‘‘ Ao!’’ which with them
indicates a sentiment [123 i.e., 121] of approval.
May Gop bless this new Christian Captain, and
grant him the grace to do all the good in his power.

Some others have been baptized, who are in good
health; but we make a careful selection, considering
that at the outset we should be more cautious in
admitting them into the CHurch, in order that it may
thereby be made more holy.

Among the other Villages of this Mission, that of
saint Michel appeared at the beginning to be most
hopeful. The majority of the inhabitants sought
instruction; and it seemed as if the Seed then sown
in those hearts had taken root to some extent. But,
as the Devil afterwards sowed his tares,—I mean
that many received in dreams a command from their
Demon to have recourse to the old superstitions of


170 LES RELATIONS‘\DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


on les menagoit, tout ce bon grain fut bien-toft
eftouffé: Au moins le peu quia refté, n’a pas eu cette
vigueur que nous fouhaitons en tous ceux qui paffent
en noftre eftime pour folides Chreftiens. Volontiers
[124 i.e., 122] ils croyroient en DIEV, pourueu que
le Diable les affeuraft que DIEV dift vray. Ie fuis
tout difpofé 4 embraffer la Foy & me faire Chreftien,
quelque horreur que i’en aye, nous difoit vn de ces
pauures efclaues de Satan, pourueu que mon Songe
me le commande. En effet, rien ne leur femble
difficile quand il faut obeir au Songe.

Ie pourrois dire en verité, que le Songe eft en effet
le Dieu de ces pauures Infideles, puis que c’eft luy
qui commande dans le Pais, que luy feul s’y fait obeir
& quil y eft par tout honoré: & que s’ils ont des
craintes, des efperances, des defirs, des paffions, & des
amours; quafi le tout fe fait en fuite de leurs Songes.
Vn certain auoit fongé au plus profond de fon fommeil,
que les Iroquois l’auoient pris & le briiloient comme
vn Captif. Il n’eft pas fi toft refueillé, qu’on tient
Confeil fur cet affaire. I] faut, dit-on, effuyer le
malheur de ce Songe. Incontinent les Capitaines
font allumer douze ou treize feux dans le lieu ot ils
auoient couftume de brfiler leurs Ennemis: chacun
s’arme de tifons & de torches enflamées; [125 i.e., 123]
on brile ce Captif de Songe, il crie comme vn enragé;
lors qu’il éuite vn feu, il retombe tout incontinent
dans vn autre: il fait de la forte trois fois le tour dans
la Cabane; & lors qu’il paffe ainfi tout nud comme
la main, chacun luy applique fes flambeaux allumez;
en luy difant: Courage, mon Frere, c’eft de cette
fagon que nous auons pitié de toy. Pour conclufion,
on luy ouure vne iffué afin qu’il forte de la captiuité.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 gal


the Country, if they wished to avoid the evils with
which they were threatened,—all this good grain
was soon choked; at least, the little that remained
had not the strength that we wish to see in all who
pass in our opinion for firm Christians. [124 i.e., 122]
They would willingly believe in GOD, provided that
the Devil would assure them that GOD tells the
truth. ‘‘ Il am quite ready to embrace the Faith, and
to become a Christian, whatever dread I may have
of it,’’ one of these poor slaves of Satan said to us,
‘‘ provided my Dream commands me-to do so.’’ In
fact, nothing seems difficult to them when they have
to obey a Dream.

I might truly say that Dreams are indeed the God
of these poor Infidels, because it is they who com-
mand in the Country,—they alone are obeyed and
honored by all. If they have any fears, hopes,
desires, passions, and affections, everything they do
is a result of their Dreams. A certain man had
dreamed, while in the soundest slumber, that the
Iroquois had taken and burned him asa Captive. No
sooner was he awake than a Council was held on
the matter. ‘‘ The ill fortune of such a Dream,”’ it
was said, ‘‘ must be averted.’’ The Captains at once
caused twelve or thirteen fires to be lighted, on the
spot where they were accustomed to burn their
Enemies. Each one armed himself with firebrands
and flaming torches, [125 i.e., 123] and they burned
this Captive of a Dream; he shrieked like a madman.
When he avoided one fire, he at once fell into an-
other. Inthis manner, he made his way three times
around the Cabin; and, as he thus passed, as naked
as one’s hand, each one applied to him a lighted
torch, saying: ‘‘ Courage, my Brother, it is thus that


172 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 23


En fortant il fe faifit d’vn chien qu’on luy tenoit tout
preparé, il le charge & Vinftant fur fes efpaules & le
porte par les Cabanes comme vne victime facrée, dont
il fait vne offrande publique au Demon de la guerre, le
priant qu’il agrée cette feinte, au lieu de la verité de
fon Songe. Et afin que ce Sacrifice foit entierement
confommé, on affomme ce chien, on le grille & on le
ro{tit dedans les flammes, & apres toutes ces chofes,
on le mange dans vn feftin public, en la mefme facon
quils ont couftume de manger leurs Captifs.

A peine auroy-je peu le croire, fi ie ne l’auois veu
dé’mes* yeux; quoy que [126 i/e., 124] ie feeulle bier
que le Diable eft vn maiftre cruel, & qui mefme
n’épargne pas dés cette vie, ceux qu’il tient fous fa
feruitude. Mais ce qui eft de plus déplorable en ces
pauures gens, eft qu’ils cheriffent cette malh[eur]Jeufe
captiuité, encore qu’ils fentent & voyent leur mifere
pour la plufpart, & qu’ils foient contraints d’auoiier
eux-mefmes, que le joug de la Foy n’eft que douceur
pour ceux qui l’embraffent. Ils en ont maintenant
des exemples deuant leurs yeux fi manifeftes qu’ils
ont e{té contraints d’en rendre 4 DIEV la gloire, fans
toutefois luy rendre les veritables homages qu’ils
voyent luy eftre deus.

L’E{té dernier, quelques guerriers du mefme Bourg
de fainct Michel, s’en retournans des terres Enne-
mies, fe virent accueillis d’vn orage extremement
furieux au milieu d’vn grand lac d’enuiron vingt
lieués de largeur, qu’ils ne penfoient plus qu’A la
mort, leurs petits Canots faits d’écorces, n’eftans pas
pour refifter dans ces tépeftes. Ils chantent tous vne
chanfon lugubre, comme ils ont accouftumé de faire
en guerre lors qu’ils [127 i.e., 125] font dans le


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 173


,’


we have pity on thee.’’ At the conclusion, they left
him an opening by which he might issue from cap-
tivity. As he went out, he seized a dog that was
held there ready for him, placed it at once on his
shoulders, and carried it among the Cabins as a
consecrated victim, which he publicly offered to the
Demon of war, begging him to accept this semblance
instead of the reality of his Dream. And, in order
that the Sacrifice might be fully consummated, the
dog was killed with a club, and was singed and
toasted in the flames; and, after all this, it was eaten
at a public feast, in the same manner as they usually
eat their Captives.

I could hardly have believed this, had I not seen
it with my own eyes; although [126 1.e., 124] Iknew
very well that the Devil is a cruel master, and does
not spare, even in this life, those whom he keeps
under histhraldom. But what is most deplorable in
these poor people is, that they cherish this miser-
able servitude even though most of them feel and see
their misery, and are themselves compelled to admit
that the yoke of Faith is gentleness itself for those
who embrace it. They now have such manifest ex-
amples of it before their eyes that they are constrained
to praise GOD therefor, without, however, paying
him the true homage that they see is due to him.

Last Summer, while seme warriors of the same
Village of saint Michel were returning from the
Enemy’s country, they were caught in an extremely
violent storm in the middle of a great lake, about
twenty leagues wide. They expected nothing but
death, for their little bark Canoes are not strong
enough to withstand such tempests. They sang a
dolef1l chant, as they are in the habit of doing in war,


174 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


defefpoir de la vie: & cependant les vagues les fur-
montans, leur Canot fe remplit, & ils attendent, a
chaque moment, de fe voir fubmergez; les Demons
qu’ils auoient inuoqué a leur aide, ne leur preftans
pour lors aucun fecours. Vn feul Chreftien eftoit de
cette compagnie: Mes Camarades, leur dit-il, vos
voix fe noyent dans ces orages, elles ne vont pas
jufques aux Enfers, ot briilent ces malheureux Demos
qu’en vain vous appellez, qui ne vous peuuent enten-
dre: pour moy, i’auray recours 4 mon DIEV, car ie
{cay bien qu’il eft par tout, & qu’affurément il écou-
tera ma Priere, & s'il veut, il nous fera mifericorde,
quoy que vous l’ayez offenfé. I] dit a celuy qui
eftoit affis au gouuernail, qu’il cede pour vn temps
aux vagues, afin que luy qui eftoit au deuant du
Canot, euft moyen de prier DIEV d’vn efprit plus
raffis, n’ayant pas a parer aux flots, qui fans relache
les battoient. I] n’a pas fi toft finy fa Priere, & fait
vn veeu & DIEV ot fa deuotion le porta, fans pref-
qu’il y euft penfé, que le Canot fe trouue en repos, que
les vagues s’appaifent, & que l’endroit [128 i.e., 126]
par ot ils paffent fe rencontre auffi vny qu’vne glace,
quoy que de part & d’autre le vent continuaft tou-
fiours dans fa fureur, & qu’il y euft de la tempefte
affez pour aby{mer mille Canots s’ils y auoient efté.

Les Infideles adorent au mefme moment ce grand
DIEvV des mers & des vents; & depuis fort fouuent
ils ont rendu auec admiration témoignage A la verité,
confeffans ingenuement qu’ils deuoiét leur vie a la
Priere de ce bon Chreftien, nommé Iean Armand
Andeotiarahen. C’eft vn jeune Homme qui ayant
demeuré deux ans au Seminaire des Hurons, qu’au-
trefois nous auions a Kebec, apres y auoir efté Baptifé,


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 175


when they [127 i.e., 125] despair of their lives. Still
the waves grew higher; their Canoe filled, and they
expected at every moment to be submerged. The
Demons whom they called upon to assist them did not
bring them any succor. A single Christian was among
the band. ‘‘ My Comrades,’’ he said to them, ‘‘ your
voices are drowned in the roaring of the storm; they
do not reach Hell, where those wretched Demons are
burning whom you call in vain, and who cannot hear
you. For my part, I will have recourse to my GOD;
for I know well that he is everywhere, and that he
will surely hear my Prayer. If he choose, he will
have mercy on us, although you have offended him.”’
He told him who steered to give way to the waves
for a while, in order that he, who was in the bow of
the Canoe, might be able to pray to GOD witha
more settled mind than if he had to protect himself
against the billows that broke over them without ces-
sation. No sooner had he finished his Prayer and
made a vow to GOD, as his devotion inspired him,
almost without his thinking of it, than the Canoe
was at rest, the waves fell, and the tract [128 i.e., 126]
through which they passed became as smooth asa
mirror,— though all around them the wind continued
to blow furiously, and the storm was violent enough
to have engulfed a thousand Canoes, had they been
gece:

At that moment, the Infidels adored the great GOD
of the sea and of the winds, and since then they have
often admiringly borne testimony to the truth, frank-
ly confessing that they owed their lives to the
Prayer of that good Christian, named Jean Armand
Andeouarahen. He is a young Man who spent two
years in the Seminary of the Hurons, that we for-


176 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


remonta icy haut, plein de zele & de Foy, il y a
enuiron quatre ans; & depuis ce temps-la, quoy qwil
ait totijours vefcu parmy les Infideles, dans vn age
affez fujet aux débauches & A l’inconftance, jamais
neantmoins fa Foy n’a pti eftre ébranlee, & par tout
oti il s’eft trouué, il a tenu a tres-grande gloire &
honneur d’eftre recogneu pour Chreftien.

Vne autrefois eftant en guerre efchaufé [129 1.e.,
127] au combat, il {’enfonca fi auant dans les darts
& les fléches des Ennemis, qu’il fut abandonné des
fiens dans le plus fort de la meflée: ce fut alors quwil
fe recommanda plus particulierement a4 DIEV: il
fentit pour lors vn fecours fi prefent, que du depuis,
appuyé fur cette mefme confiance, il eft tofijours le
premier & le plus auant dans les perils, & jamais ne
palit, pour quelque danger qu’il enuifage. Ie voy-
ois, difoit-il, comme vne grefle de fléches venir fondre
fur moy, ie n’auois point d’autre bouclier pour les
arrefter, que la croyance feule que DIEV difpofant
de ma vie, il en feroit felon fa volonté. Chofe
étrange! les fléches f’écartoient 4 mes deux coftez,
ainfi, difoit-il, que fait l’eau lors qu’elle rencontre la
pointe d’vn vaiffeau qui va contre marée. En effet,
fes Compagnons qui le tenoiét pour mort, furent tout
étonnez de voir qu'il s’ef{toit retiré d’vne fi furieufe
décharge fans aucune bleffure.


1642-43] RELATION OF r6g2 177


merly had at Kebec.® After having been Baptized,
he came up here, about four years ago, full of zeal
and Faith; and since then, although he has always
lived in the midst of Infidels, at an age very prone
to debauchery and inconstancy, nevertheless his Faith
has never been shaken, and, wherever he has been,
he has considered it a very great glory and honor to
be recognized as a Christian.

On another occasion, during a war and in the heat
[129 1.e., 127] of battle, he fought his way so far amid
the spears and arrows of the Enemies, that he was
abandoned by his own people in the thick of the fray.
He then commended himself more especially to Gop,
and thereupon felt such immediate aid that ever since
then, supported by this same confidence, he is always
the first and foremost in all perils, and has never
turned pale, whatever danger might confront him.
““T saw,’’ said he, ‘‘ as it were, a hailstorm of arrows
about to pour upon me. I had no other buckler with
which to stop them than this belief alone, that, as
GoD disposed of my life, he would do so according
to his will. Strange to say, the arrows parted on
either side of me, as the water does when it meets
the prow of a vessel advancing against the tide.’’ In
fact, his Companions, who thought him dead, were
utterly astonished when they saw him retire from so
furious a discharge without a single wound.


178 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


[136 hes 2s CHAPIT RE 2c:


DIVERSES CHOSES QVI N’ONT PU ESTRE RAPORTEES
AUX CHAPITRES PRECEDENS.


OVR fatisfaire au defir de quelques perfonnes
p qui nous ont demandé quelque obferuation des
Eclypfes que nous remarquerions en ce Pais;
en voicy vne de Lune fort remarquable, qui nous
apparut le foir du quatorziéme d’Auril, de cette pre-
fente Année 1642. Le commencement ne nous pfit
ef{tre affeuré, a caufe que la Lune, qui alors fe leuoit,
e{toit encore cachée des bois. La fin de 1’Eclypfe
fut a dix heures huict ou neuf minutes. Et ainfi
(fuiuant le calcul de Noél Duret, qui a fupputé cette
Eclypfe dans fes Ephemerides, pour le Meridien de
Paris) nous fommes diftans de Paris, de cinq heures
& demy quart. Car il met la fin de cette Eclypfe, a
lefgard de Paris, le quinziéme d’ Auril, 4 trois heures
& vn quart.

[131 1.e., 129] L’an paffé, nous auions fait Miffion
aux Kionontatehronon ou Nation du petun; & mefme
nous ations pouffé iufqu’aux Attiotiendaronk, appel-
lée Nation Neutre. Mais apres auoir confideré
combien grand eftoit l’ob{tacle, au deffein que nous
auions, de la publication & progrez de 1’Euangile en
ces Contrées, les calomnies que les Barbares qui font
plus proches de nous, femoient & faifoient courir par
tout, de nos perfonnes, & de nos fonctions; nous auons
iugé plus 4 propos, pour le prefent, de rallier nos


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 179


fr30:e:; 0128} - CHAPTER Re XI.


DIVERS MATTERS WHICH COULD NOT BE RELATED:
IN THE FOREGOING CHAPTERS.


N order to gratify the desire of certain persons
who have asked us for some remarks on the
Eclipses that we might observe in this Country,

here is one regarding a very remarkable Eclipse of
the Moon that appeared to us on the evening of the
fourteenth of April of the present Year, 1642. We
were unable to ascertain the time at which it com-
menced, because the Moon, then rising, was still
hidden by the woods. The end of the Eclipse was.
about eight or nine minutes past ten o’clock. Thus
(according to the calculation of Noél Duret, who has
computed that Eclipse in his Ephemerides, for the
Meridian of Paris), we are distant from Paris five and
half-a-quarter hours; for he gives the end of that
Eclipse as regards Paris, as being at a quarter past
three on the fifteenth of April.

[131 i.e., 129] Last year, we had held a Mission
among the Kionontatehronon, or tobacco Nation, and
had even pushed as far as the Attiouendaronk, called
the Neutral Nation. But—after having considered
how great an obstacle was presented to our design of
preaching and spreading the Gospel in these Coun-
tries, by the calumnies that the Barbarians who dwell
nearest to us had repeated and published everywhere,
about our persons and our functions— we deemed it
more expedient for the present to unite our forces,


180 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


forces, & ne pas eftendre nos trauaux a ces Nations
plus efloignées; eu égard particulierement au petit
nombre d’Ouuriers; que celles qui nous font plus
voyfines ne foient gaignées, au moins pour la pluf-
part, & ne fe foient rendiies aux veritez, que nous
venons leur annoncer. L’experience femble nous
faire voir, que cette voye eft la meilleure, & la plus
auantageufe a la conuerfion de ces Peuples; qui fans
doute fe reduiront facilement, les vns apres les
autres, lors que ceux aupres defquels nous trauail-
lons, s’eftans fais bons Chreftiens, prefcheront plus
{132 1,¢,;.130] fortement que nous, & de parole, 7c
encore plus efficacement par leurs exemples.

Nous n’auons laiffé de faire quelques voyages a la
miffion des Apoftres, n’ayans pas pti ny deu entiere-
mét abandonner quelques Chreftiens que Dieu nous
y auoit donnés. La Foy ade grands effets dans les
cceurs, & des attraits mille fois plus puiffans, que
toutes les douceurs & les charmes de la nature.
Quelques vns de ces pauures Chreftiens s’eftans reti-
rez en ce Pais, & approchez de nous, beniffét Dieu,
chaque iour, de fe voir, difent-ils, moins éloignez du
Paradis, eftans moins éloignez de ceux qui leur ont
ouuert ce chemin. Quelques autres, qui font reftez
nous viennent quelquefois voir; & nous auffi de fois
4 autres, auons pris le temps de les vifiter. Le P.
Charles Garnier, & le P. Pierre Pijart ont fait ces
courfes fi 4 propos pour quelques Ames qui n’atten-
-doient que leur veniie pour s’enuoler au Ciel, qu’il
eut femblé que leur voyage eut efté a deffein pour
les Baptizer, quoy que ce ne fut qu’vn hazard: fi
toutefois il ya du hazard dans cette Prouidence eter-
nelle, [133 i.e., 131] qui va difpofant nos penfées,


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 18}


and not to extend our labors to the more remote
Nations, especially in view of the small number of
Laborers, until those that are nearest to us have been
won over, at least for the greater part, and have
acknowledged the truths that we come to preach to
them. Experience seems to show us that this way is.
the best, and the most advantageous for the conver-
sion of these Peoples, who without doubt will easily
submit, one after the other, when those with whom
we labor shall have become good Christians; and
will preach [132 i.e., 130] better than we can, by
word, and still more effectively by their example.
We nevertheless made some journeys to the mis-
sion of the Apostles, for we were not able nor was it
consistent with our duty entirely to abandon the few
Christians whom God had given us there. Faith
produces great effects on hearts, and its attractions.
are a thousand times more powerful than all the
allurements and charms of nature. Some of those
poor Christians, who have removed to this Country
and settled close by us, bless God every day when
they see themselves, they say, less remote from Para-
dise, by being nearer to those who have opened them
the road to it. Others, who remained behind, some-
times come to see us; and we also have occasionally
taken leisure to visit them. Father Charles Gar-
nier and Father Pierre Pijart have made these excur-
sions, which have been so opportune in the case of
some Souls, that awaited but their coming to soar to
Heaven, that it seemed as if their journey had been
undertaken expressly for the purpose of Baptizing
them, although it was a mere chance if indeed there
be such a thing as chance in that eternal Providence
[133 i.e., 131] which directs our thoughts, our de-


182 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vot. 23


nos deffeins, nos voyages & tous nos mottuemens,
pour le falut de fes Efleus.

En l’vne de ces courfes, on fit rencontre de quel-
ques Capitaines de la Nation Neutre, ou Miffion des
Anges, qui nous inuiterent 4a les retourner voir.
Mais outre l’abfence du P. Iean de Brebeuf qui ayant
eu cette miffion pour fon partage 4 Kebec ot le cours
de nos affaires nous auoit obligé de l’enuoyer; il
femble que trauaillant plus fortement a la conuerfion
des Hurons, nous auancons en mefme temps la
conuerfion des autres. Et ainfi nous attendrons le
temps & les moments du Ciel, pour entreprédre ces
voyages: & fur tout, le renfort d’Ouuriers.

Ie ne puis icy retenir ma plume, & il faut que mon
cceur fe defcharge fur ce papier. Les fentimens de
compaffion que i’ay pour tous ces pauures Peuples
qui font a l’entour de nous, qui ont des Ames auffi
precieufes aux yeux du Fils de DIEV, que celles qui
liront cette Relation; au moins luy ont-elles autant
cofité, & fon Sang & fa vie: La neceffité que ie voy
d’vn prefent & puiffant fecours,; [134 i.e., 132] pour
cooperer a leur Salut, auec les Anges Tutelaires de
ces Contrées; L’Efprit de DIEV & la fidelité A fes
Graces dont nous fommes témoins en la plufpart de
ceux que le fainct Efprit a vne fois touchez, Les
e{perances plus grandes que iamais, que tous tant
que nous fommes icy, auons conceués depuis vn An,
que le temps eft venu que la Gloire de DIEV appa-
roiftra dans ce Nouueau Monde. Tout cela fait que
nous crions a l’aide, que nous demandons affiftance.
Ce n’eft pas pour le temporel, car ce n’eft pas & nous
de pouruoir en ce point; mais & celuy qui nous
employe, qui y a engagé la verité de fa parole. Nous


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 183


signs, our travels, and all our movements, for the
salvation of the Elect.

On one of these excursions we met some Captains
of the Neutral Nation, or Mission of the Angels, who
invited us to return and see them. But in addition
to the absence of Father Jean de Brebeuf — who had
had this mission as his share of the work —at Kebec,
whither the course of our affairs has obliged us to
send him, it seems to us that by working more ener-
getically at the conversion of the Hurons, we at the
same time further the conversion of the others.
Therefore we will await from Heaven the time and
the moment for undertaking these journeys, and above
all a reinforcement of Laborers.

I cannot here restrain my pen, and my heart must
overflow upon this paper. The feeling of compas-
sion that I have for all these poor Peoples around us,
who have Souls as precious in the eyes of the Son of
GOD as those of the persons who will read these Re-
lations,—at least, they have cost him as much, both
his Blood and his life; the necessity that I see for
immediate and powerful assistance [134 i.e., 132] to
coéperate for their Salvation with the Guardian An-
gels of these Countries; the Spirit of GoD, and the
fidelity to his Graces that we witness in the majority
of those whom the holy Ghost has once touched; the
hopes, greater than ever, that we all here have enter-
tained fora Year, that the time has come when GOD’S
Glory will appear in this New World,—all these in-
duce us to cry out for help and to ask assistance,— not
in temporal matters, because it is not for us to make
any provision in this respect; but for him who em-
ploys us, and who has pledged his word to it. We
are greatly in need of Laborers. It is they whom we


184 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23°


auons grand befoin d’Ouuriers. Ce font ceux-la que
nous appellons 4 noftre fecours, ce font 1a les plus
riches prefens que nous attendons de la France.
Qui que ce foit qui fe fente appellé du Ciel, quel-
ques auantages qu'il puiffe auoir, foit de Nature, foit
de Grace, ie le puis affeurer qu’il trouuera icy de l’em-
ploy plus qu’il n’aura de vie: & que plus il aura
quitté, dans le defir de ne trouuer icy que des croix
& des peines, plus il benira DIEV, de l’auoir
[135 i.e., 133] amené en vn Pais auffi abondant dans
les confolations du Ciel, quwil eft fterile pour les.
biens de la terre.

Aimer DIEvV, faire beaucoup, bien fouffrir, &
s’e{timer au bout fort inutile, ie croy que ce font les
quatre Elemens pour faire vn bon Ouurier des Hu-
rons. Et ce font ces gens la que nous appellons au
fecours: Car il eft vray qu’il fe trouue des difficultez
quafi infurmontables pour la Conuerfion de ces
Peuples.

Eftre Capitaine parmy eux, & eftre Chreftien, c’eft
joindre le feu & l’eau: tout l’employ des Capitaines
n’ef{tant quafi que d’obeir au Diable, de prefider a
des Ceremonies d’Enfer, d’exhorter la jeuneffe a des
danfes, des feftins, des nuditez, & A des impudicitez
tres-infames.

E{tre Chreftien, & fe condamner & mourir fans fe
defendre contre les maladies, il femble que ce foit le
mefme: tous leurs remedes eftans ou veritables forti-
leges, ou tellement remplis de fuperftitions defen-
dués, qu’ils ne peuuent prefque fe guerir, qu’en
commettant vn crime.

[136 1.e., 134] L’efperance qu’ils ont dans leurs
chaffes, leurs pefches, & leurs traites auec les


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 185


call to our help; they are the most valuable gifts that
we expect from France. If any one should feel
called by Heaven, whatever advantages of Nature or
of Grace he may have, I can assure him that he will
find here more employment than his life can com-
pass, and the more he shall have abandoned, in the
desire to find here but crosses and trouble, the more
will he bless GOD for having [135 i.e., 133] brought
him to a Country, that abounds as much in Heavenly
consolations as it is sterile in earthly blessings.

To love GOD, to work hard, to suffer much, and
to consider oneself after all as very useless,— such
are, I consider, the four Elements necessary to con-
stitute a good Worker among the Hurons. Such are
the men whom we call to our aid, for it is true that
almost insurmountable difficulties exist with regard
to the Conversion of these People.

To bea Captain among them and to be a Christian,
is to unite fire and water, as almost the entire occu-
pation of the Captains consists in obeying the Devil,
in presiding over Hellish Ceremonies, in exhorting
young people to dances, to feasts, to nudity, and to
most infamous lewdness.

To be a Christian, and to condemn oneself to die
without defense against disease, seems to be the same
thing, for all their remedies are either veritable sor-
ceries, or are so full of forbidden superstitions that
they can hardly become cured without committing a
erime.

[136 i.e., 134] Their hopes of success in hunting,
fishing, and trading with outside Nations, are in most
instances founded solely on spells and charms,— so
much so, that they are convinced that by embracing


186 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Nations eftrangeres, n’e{t fondée le plus fouuent que
fur des forts & characteres. Tellement quils fe per-
fuadent qu’en embraffant la Foy, ils fe condamneront
& iamais de ne f’y voir heureux.

La plufpart des Feftins, qui font la douceur du
Pais, font autant de facrifices au Diable, ou bien
feront meflez de quelque autre impieté: il faut vne
Foy bien viue pour s’en bannir foy-mefme, & fe
refoudre 4 jeufner vne bonne partie de l’Année, plus
ef{troittement qu’au pain &aleau. Car hors de ces
Feftins, leur ordinaire n’eft fouuent que du bled
rof{ty dans les cendres, ou reduit en farine detrempée
dans l’eau.

La licence dans les Mariages eft fi grande, & la
liberté de fe quitter dés la moindre occafion tellement
receué pour Loy fondamentale de ces Peuples, que
quelque Chreftien que ce foit, pour lors mefme qu’il
fe marie, {’expofe avn danger de fe voir le lende-
main de fes Nopces, obligé de garder tout le refte
de fa vie, la continence. Que fera donc vn
[137 i1.e., 135] jeune Homme Chreftien, fi le mefme
jour de fes Nopces, fa femme abandonnant la Foy,
rompt auffi par mefme moyen ce lien facré? Elle
prendra auffi-toft party ailleurs; & deuft-il briiler
mille & mille fois, il faudra qu’il vieilliffe vierge fans
iamais en auoir fait veu. L’Eglife n’a point icy de
glaiue: Vne femme qui l’auroit fait ainfi, n’en feroit
point blamée parmy les Infideles. Nous auons efté
plufieurs fois dedans ces craintes, & auons admiré la
refolution tout a fait genereufe, & tout a fait faincte
de quelques vns qui fe voyoient a la veille de cette
mifere: Mais le bon DIEVa arref{té ces coups, & a
beny iufqu’éa maintenant la charité de ceux qui ont


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 187


the Faith they would condemn themselves to per-
petual ill luck.

Most of the Feasts, which are the chief pleasure of
the Country, are so many sacrifices to the Devil, or
else some other impiety is mixed up with them. It
requires a very ardent Faith to banish oneself from
them, and to be resolved to fast for a good part of
the Year, more strictly than on bread and water; for,
outside of these Feasts, their meals consist frequent-
ly but of corn roasted in the embers, or ground into
meal and mixed with water.

License in Marriages is so great, and the freedom
of leaving one another on the slightest pretext is so
generally admitted as a fundamental Law of these
Peoples, that every Christian who marries is exposed,
on the morrow of his Nuptials, to the danger of be-
ing compelled to observe continence for the remain-
der of his life. What therefore can a [137 1.e., 135]
Christian young Man do if, on his very Wedding
day, his wife should abandon the Faith, and thereby
at the same time break that sacred tie? She will at
once take a new husband; and, were he to burn with
passion a thousand times over, he must grow old in
chastity without having ever made a vow to do so.
The Church has in this case no sword. A woman
who would act thus would not be at all blamed for it
by the Infidels. We have often feared such things,
and have admired the altogether brave and saintly
resolution of some who saw themselves on the brink
of such unhappiness. But the good Gop has stayed
these blows, and has hitherto blessed the charity of
those who have been pleased to contribute their Alms
for the purpose of giving stability to the Marriages
of Christians. We have more fear for the future; for


188 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23.


voulu contribuer par leurs Aumofnes, a l’affermiffe-
ment des Mariages des Chreftiens. Nous craignons
plus pour l’aduenir; car nous voyons bien que nos
foins, nos aumofnes, & tous les fecours que nous pou-
uons efperer de la terre, ne peuuent pas arrefter ce
malheur, fi le Ciel, ne lie luy-mefme & les cceurs &
les affections. A cet effet, nous auons fait vn Voeu
a D1Even Vhonneur de fainct Iofeph Patron de ce
Pais.

[138 i.e., 136] En-fin il fe trouue des cceurs telle-
ment endurcis dans leur impieté, que ne pouuans pas
refifter 4 la verité qu’ils reconnoiffent; au lieu de fe
foufmettre 4 DIEv, ils entrent dans des rages, &
refufent d’écouter ce qu’ils voudroient bien ne pas
craindre.

Si tu veux me parler de 1’Enfer, difent-ils quel-
quefois, forts promptement de ma Cabane, ces
penfées troublent mon repos, & m’inquiettent dans
mes plaifirs. Ie voy bien qu'il yavn DIEV, dira
quelqu’autre, mais ie ne puis fouffrir qu’il puniffe
nos crimes. Vn certain fe voyant vn iour trop
preffé, difoit 4 celuy qui le venoit in{ftruire: Ie fuis
content d’eftre damné; en luy portant vn coup de
coutteau, qui toutefois ne luy déchira que la fotane.
En vn autre Bourg, vne femme qui ne vouloit pas écou-
ter la parole de DIEv, f’eftant bouché les oreilles,
jetta des cendres toutes rouges au vifage d’vn de nos
Peres qui parloit 4 elle, {’écriant qu’elle deuenoit
folle, quand elle entendoit fes difcours. Non, difoit
vn impie, que fes parens auoient faifi lors qu’il vou-
loit tuér vn de nos Peres, qui eftoit allé [139 i-e., 137]
dans fa Cabane pour Confeffer vne malade, non,
difoit-il, ie ne veux pas entendre ce qu'ils nous pref-


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 189


we see very clearly that our care, our alms, and all
the assistance we can hope to receive from earth, can-
not arrest this evil if Heaven itself do not bind hearts
and affections. With that view, we have made a Vow
to GOD in honor of saint Joseph, the Patron of this
Country.

[138 i.e., 136] Finally, there are some hearts so
hardened in their impiety, that, although they are
unable to resist the truth of what they acknowledge,
instead of submitting to GoD, they become furious,
and refuse to listen to what they would be very glad
not to fear.

“If thou wishest to speak to me of Hell,’’ they
sometimes say, ‘‘ go out of my Cabin at once. Such
thoughts disturb my rest, and cause me uneasiness
amid my pleasures.’’ ‘‘I see very well that there is
a GOD,”’ another will say; ‘‘ but I cannot endure
that he should punish our crimes.’’ <A certain man,
who one day found himself pressed too hard, said to
him who came to instruct him: ‘‘I am content to be
damned,’’ while dealing him a blow with a knife,
which, however, merely cut his cassock. In another
Village, a woman who would not listen to GoD’sS
word, and had closed her ears, threw live coals in the
face of one of our Fathers who spoke to her, calling
out that she became crazy when she heard his dis-
course. ‘‘ No,’’ said an impious man,— whose rela-
tives had seized him when he tried to kill one of our
Fathers, who had gone [139 i.e., 137] into his Cabin
to hear the Confession of a sick woman,— ‘‘ no, I will
not listen to what they preach to us about Hell. It
is these impostors who, because they have no other
defense in this Country than the fear of an imagi-
nary fire of Hell, intimidate us by such penalties, in


190 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


chent del’Enfer. Ce font des impofteurs, qui n’ayant
point en ce Pais d’autre defenfe, que la crainte d’vn
feu imaginaire de l’Enfer, nous intimident de ces
peines pour conferuer leur vie, & arrefter le coup que
déja nous deurions auoir fait, fi nous auions quelque
tefolution.

Sans doute ces oppofitions font bien grandes a la
grace du Chriftianifme: Et de cceurs rebelles iufqu’a
ce point, au fainct Efprit, en faire des Fideles, des.
Saincts, & fi befoin eft des Martyrs, c’eft vn ouurage
qui furpaffe nos forces. Mais tout cela n’eft rien a
DIEvV: le Ciel eft plus remply de Criminels, que
d’Innocens. Si autrefois d’vne eau infecte & d’vn
bourbier puant, on a tiré des flammes pures pour con-
fommer les Sacrifices, la main de DIEV n’eft en rien
racourcie depuis ce temps-la. I1 vaincra cette dure-
té, fa Bonté eft plus grande que nos malices; & fice
Peuple eft miferable ot fera-t’il paroiftre dauantage
fes Mifericordes?

[140 i.e., 138] Nous auons maintenant des Chre-
{tiens difpofez 4 mourir pour la Foy, qu’autrefois ils
auoient en horreur: La pureté a trouué place dans
leurs coeurs: Ils ont plus d’amour pour le Ciel, que
iamais ils n’en ont eu pour les biens de la Terre: En
vn mot ot le peché a plus efté dans fon regne, la
Grace y eft plusabondante. Pourquoy n’efpererons-
nous pas le mefme de ceux qui reftent a conuertir?
Sice n’eft que les faueurs du Ciel foient efpuifées,
ou que le Sang de IESVS-CHRIST n’ait pas merité
dauantage.

Non, difoit vn Huron Chreftien, parlant aux Infi-
deles, tout ce Pais fe verra quelque iour conuerty ;
tous ceux qui f’y oppofent, fe trouueront alors trop


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 191


order to save their own lives, and to arrest the blow
that we would already have struck, had we any
resolution.’’

Of course such opposition is a great obstacle to the
grace of Christianity; and to form, from hearts that
have hitherto rebelled against the holy Ghost, Believ-
ers, Saints, and, if necessary, Martyrs, is a work
beyond our strength. But all this is as nothing to
Gop; Heaven contains more Criminals than Inno-
cents. If, of old, pure fire for burning Sacrifices was
obtained from putrid water and from a foul quagmire,
the arm of GOD has not shortened in any wise since
that time. He will overcome this obstinacy; his
Goodness is greater than our evil acts; and, if this
People be miserable, where will he make his Mercies
more manifest?

[140 i.e., 138] We have, at present, Christians who
are prepared to die for the Faith of which they
formerly had a horror. Purity has found a place in
their hearts. They have a greater love for Heaven
than they ever had for the good things of the Earth.
In a word, wherever sin has held most sway, there is
Grace more abundant. Why should we not hope the
same for those who still remain to be converted? un-
less it be that the favors of Heaven are exhausted, or
that the Blood of JESusS CHRIST has not deserved
more.

‘‘No,’’ said a Christian Huron, speaking to the
Infidels, ‘‘ the whole Country will one day be con-
verted; all who are opposed to it will then be too
weak, for they carry the word of the Devil, and we
that of Gop. Who, then, ought to win of the two?’’

A Woman one day begged one of our Fathers to
come and instruct her, saying that she was resolved


192 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


foibles; car ils portent la parole du Diable, & nous
celle de DIEV, qui le doit donc emporter des deux?

Vne Femme priant vn iour vn de nos Peres, de la
venir inftruire, difant qu’elle eftoit refolué de croyre.
Cela n’eft pas poffible, adjotita fon Mary, tu es d’vne
humeur fi fafcheufe, que perfonne ne la peut fuppor-
ter. La Foy me changera, repartit cette pauure
Femme, ils appriuoifent [141 i.e., 139] bien leurs
chiens: quand ils m’auront bien in{truite, ils vien-
dront a bout de moy.

En effet l’experience nous fait voir que la grace du
Baptefme opere puiflamment dans vn cceur. La
nuict auant que d’eftre baptifé, difoit vn certain
Neophyte, ie n’en peus pas dormir de joye. Ie
paffay tout ce temps a me refoudre deuant DIEV, de
tout abandonner ce qu'il nous a deffendu. Ie me
fentois affez de forces & de courage pour toutes les
autres chofes, les Femmes feules me faifoient peur:
il me fembloit voir des vifages auprés de moy qui
me faifoient trembler: mais en-fin ie me confiay que
Dieu me changeroit dans le Baptefme, & ie n’ay pas
efté trompé; car iamais depuis vne femme ne f’eft
adreffée 4 moy pour la feconde fois.

Vne Chreftienne fe voyant malade, auec fon petit
enfant qui ne fucgoit plus que du laict contagieux,
au lieu de bonne nourriture: Auant que d’e{tre bap-
tifée, difoit-elle, ie me fuffe affligée dans mon mal;
mais depuis que la Foy m’a fait recognoiftre que
céttemviemmrelt tien, “Memaiiice [rq2“1e6 gop faire a
DIeEV, fi ceft fa volonté, ie fuis contente de mourir.
Ie ne demande la fanté ny pour moy ny pour mon
enfant, mon efprit eft maintenant tout en repos, car
DieEv feait bien ce qui m’eft neceffaire.


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 16g2 193


to believe. ‘‘ That is impossible,’’ added her Hus-
band; ‘‘thou hast so bad a temper that nobody can
endure it.’’ ‘‘ Faith will change me,’’ replied the
poor Woman. ‘“‘ They tame, [141 i.e., 139] indeed,
their dogs. When they shall have taught me well,
they will easily manage me.”’

In fact, experience has shown us that the grace of
Baptism works powerfully in a heart. ‘‘ The night
before I was baptized,’’ a Neophyte said, ‘‘ I was un-
able to sleep for joy. I spent all my time in resolv-
ing before GOD to abandon all that is forbidden to
us. I felt sufficient strength and courage for any-
thing. Women alone caused me fear. I seemed to
see faces near me that made me tremble; but at last
I felt confident that God would change me in Bap-
tism, and I have not been deceived, for never since
then has any woman addressed me a second time.’’

A Christian woman lay sick with her little child,
which sucked nothing but infectious milk, instead of
wholesome nourishment. ‘‘ Before I was baptized,’’
she said, ‘‘ my sickness would have caused me sor-
tow; but now that Faith has shown me that this life
is nothing, I leave [142 i.e., 140] everything to Gop.
If it be his will, I am quite content to die; I do not
ask for health, either for myself or for my child. My
mind is now quite easy, for GoD knows well what I
need.

A girl fifteen or sixteen years of age, who had suf-
fered for three entire days from a pain in her side,
was asked whether she had not manifested or felt
some impatience during the violence of her suffer-
(ies NOt auc) Sieseplied star fro iter
prayed to God that the pain might continue, if such
were his will, because during that time I felt more


194 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES (VoL. 23


Vne fille de quinze A feize ans, apres auoir e{té
trois iours entiers dans les douleurs d’vn mal de
cofté; eftant interrogée fi quelquefois elle n’auoit
point tefmoigné ou conceu quelque impatience dans
la force defon mal. Nenny, refpondit-elle, tant s’en
faut; ie priois Dieu que la douleur continuait, fi c’e-
{toit fa volonté: parce que durant ce temps-1a i’auois
plus de plaifir dans les penfées du Paradis, & ne
fongeois quafi A autre chofe. I’ay apris par occafion,
que cette mefme Fille, le iour qu’on maffacra feu
Iofeph Chihoatenhoiia fon oncle, qui luy tenoit lieu
de pere & de mere: a la premiere nouuelle qu’elle en
eut, ne pouuat arreiter ny fes cris ny fes larmes, ny
contenir fes mains qu'elle ne s’arrachait les cheueux;
n’auoit point toutefois en bouche d’autres paroles
que celle-cy: Non, ie ne lairray point pour cela de
croyre; [143 1.e., 141] Mon DIEV, ayez pitié de moy,
qu'on nous maffacre tous, & qu’on me tué moy-
mefme, iamais ie ne vous abandonneray.

Charles Tfondatfaa, dont il a efté parlé cy-deffus,
initruifant vn iour quelques Infideles, des auantages
de noftre Foy; apres auoir long-temps parlé de la
Bonté & de la Puiffance de DIEV, f’adreffa au plus
confiderable de l’Affemblée: Si, difoit-il, ie te don-
nois la difpofition de moy-mefme, aurois-tu bien le
courage de me jetter dans les dangers, preuoyant
mon malheur? Tous les Chreftiens, adjotita-t’il en
fuite, difent 4 DIEV tous les iours dedans leurs Pri-
eres, qu'il difpofe & de leur Ame & de leur vie, felon
fa volonté; eit-il pour nous trahir? luy qui n’a pas
vn cceur eftroit comme le tien; I] nous protege &
nous conferue, car il a de l’amour pour ceux quile
craignent. Que quelque affliction nous arriue, dit-il


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 195»


pleasure in thinking of Paradise, and I thought of
hardly anything else.’’ I learned by accident that,
on the day on which they slew the late Joseph Chi-
hoatenhoua,—her uncle, who took the place of her
father and mother,— when this Girl first heard of it,
she could not stop her cries or her tears, or restrain
her hands from tearing her hair. Nevertheless, her’
only words were: ‘‘ No, I will not cease to believe
on that account. [143 i.e., 141] My Gop, have pity
onme. Even if they massacre all of us, and if they
kill me, I will never abandon you.”’

Charles Tsondatsaa, who has been already men-
tioned, was one day engaged in instructing some In-
fidels on the advantages of our Faith. After having
spoken at length of the Goodness and Power of Gop,
he addressed the chief person of the Assembly, say-
ing “liele gave thee the disposal’of my person,
wouldst thou have the courage to cast me into-
dangers, foreseeing my destruction? All the Chris-
tians, he then added, “tell@Gop every day,;in
their Prayers, to dispose of both their Souls and their
lives according to his pleasure. Will he betray us,
he who has not a heart as narrow as thine? He pro-
tects and preserves us, for he loves those who fear
him. Whatever affliction may happen to us,’’ he
further added, ‘‘ you Infidels must not imagine that
he has forgotten us. He loves us even while he
afflicts us, for, instead of the eternal fire which our
sins have justly deserved, he is satisfied with a pun-
ishment which, however [144 i.e., 142] severe it may
appear, is still very slight, for it ends with our lives.”’

‘‘ Whatever may happen to me, continue always:
in the Faith,’’ he said one day to all his Family, when
he was going forth to war, scarcely a month ago.


196 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


encore, ne croyez pas vous autres Infideles, qu’il
nous ait oublié: il nous ayme en nous affligeant; car
au lieu d’vn feu eternel que nos pechez ont iuftement
merité, il fe —contente- d-vne peine, qui. quelque
[144 i.e., 142] grande qu'elle paroiffe, eft tofijours
tres-petite, puis qu’elle trouue fin auec noftre vie.

Quoy qu’il m’arriue, continuez tofijours dans la
Foy, difoit vn iour le mefme a toute fa Famille, lors
qu’il partit pour marcher en guerre, il n’y a pas vn
mois: Nous ne deuons pas croyre en intention de
iamais ne mourir, mais pour Refufciter vn iour a la
gloire Eternelle.

Si ie fuis pris des Ennemis, & fi ie fuis brfilé,
difoit-il en continuant, 4 vn de nos Peres, tu prieras
DIEV pour moy; & ie luy offriray mes tourmens,
afin qu’il recompenfe ta charité.

Ces bons fentimens font dignes d’vn Chreftien:
Mais fi DIEV fait leuer fon Soleil, autant pour les
Impies comme pour les Iu{tes, il fait auffi par mefme
moyen fentir les effets de fa Grace & de fa Bonté au
coeur mefme des plus Infideles.

Deux ieunes Hommes du Bourg de Sainct Iofeph,
ayans e{té pris Captifs en guerre par les Iroquois,
auoient dé-ja perdu toute efperance de la vie, dans
Tattente [145 1.e., 143] des mefmes cruautez, dont
ils auoient veu tourmenter leurs autres Compagnons
de malheur. Déja les ongles leur auoient efté arra-
chez & quelques doigts coupez; on leur auoit grillé
les jambes & les bras, & fait vomir le fang A force
de coups de bafton qu’on leur auoit donné fur les
reins & fur l’eftomach: lors qu’ils trouuerent moyen
de s’échaper durant la nuict: Mais fuyant vne mort,
ils en trouuoient vne plus longue, portans outre la


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 197


‘“We must not believe with the idea that we shall
never die but that we shall Rise again one day to
Everlasting glory.”’

“If I be taken by the Enemies, and if I be
burned,’’ he afterward said to one of our Fathers,
‘““thou shalt pray to GOD for me, and I will offer him
my tortures so that he may reward thy charity.”’

Such good sentiments are worthy of a Christian.
But, if GOD causes the Sun to rise as much for the
Impious as for the Just, he also by the same means
makes the effects of his Grace and of his Goodness
felt in the hearts of even the greatest Infidels.

Two young Men of the Village of Saint Joseph,
who had been taken Prisoners of war by the Iroquois,
had already lost all hope of life, in the expectation
[145 1.e., 143] of the same cruelties with which they
had seen their Companions in misfortune tormented.
Already had their nails been torn out, and some of
their fingers cut off; already had their legs and arms
been scorched; and they had vomited blood from the
force of the blows struck with clubs on their loins
and their stomachs,—when they found means to
escape during the night. But, as they fled from one
death, they were confronted with a more lingering
one, for in addition to their fear they carried with
them an internal enemy, a raging hunger that tor-
mented them night and day. At the end of three
days, they were reduced to despair. Then one of
them began to think of us. ‘‘ Comrade,’’ said he to
the other, ‘‘the French are people who never lose
hope; in their misfortunes and needs they have re-
course to him who, they say, has made all things and
who is the Master of our lives. Let us apply to
him.’’ The other did not see that such a remedy


198 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


crainte, vn ennemy domeftique auec eux, vne faim
enragée qui iour & nuict les tourmentoit. Au bout de
trois iours ils fe voyent reduits dans le defefpoir. Ce
fut alors qu’vn d’eux commenga 4 fonger a nous.
Camarade, dit-il 4 l’autre, les Francois font des gens
qui ne perdent iamais efperance, ils ont recours dans
leurs miferes & neceffitez, A celuy qu’ils difent auoir
tout fait, & eftre le Maiftre de nos vies; Ayons
recours Aluy. Celuy-cy ne voyoit pas que ce remede
fuft affez efficace pour l’extreme neceffité & le defef-
poir dans lequel ils eftoient. Mais neantmoins tout
autre fecours leur manquant, il eft contraint de
[146 i.e., 144] recourir 4 DIEV auec fon Compagnon.
Efcoute, dirent-ils, Toy qui as fait le Ciel & la Terre,
c’e{t a toy maintenant a qui nous parlons, Nous ne
t’auons pas honoré, parce que nous n’auons pas et
d’efprit: Pardonnes-nous nos fautes; & puis que rien
ne t’e{t impoffible quand tu le veux, tire-nous de
cette mifere; Ayes pitié de nous. Ils font fortifiez
apres cette Priere, & fentent auoir affez de courage
pour continuer leurchemin. Apres vne affez longue
traitte, ils trouuerent en terre quelques racines, &
mangerent quelques herbes, en forte qu’ils laifferent
leur faim toute entiere. Mais, Camarade, dit celuy
qui le premier auoit fongé a nous, fouuiens-toy que
les Francois remercient DIEV apres auoir fait leur
repas. Otiy dea, repart l’autre; fouuent ie les ay
veus, mais c’eft apres auoir mangé vn grand plat de
Sagamité; mais icy n’ayans que de l’eau, & ce que
mangeroient des beftes, dequoy remercierions-nous
DiEv? ‘Toutefois fon compagnon l’emporte, ils font
leur Priere felon que la neceffité les enfeignoit; & fe
trouuerent apres plus vigoureux. En-fin apres


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 199


was very efficacious in the dire necessity and for the
desperate condition in which they were placed. But,
nevertheless, as all other assistance failed them, he
was constrained to [146 i.e., 144] have recourse to
GOD, with his Companion. ‘‘ Listen!” they said,
““Thou who hast made the Sky and Earth; it is to
thee that we now speak. We have not honored
thee before, because we had no sense. Forgive our
sins; and, since nothing is impossible to thee when
thou willest it, extricate us from this misery. Have
pity on us.’’ After this Prayer, they were strength-
ened, and felt enough courage to continue their way.
After walking a considerable distance, they found
some roots in the ground, and ate some herbs, which
completely relievedtheirhunger. ‘‘ But, Comrade,’’
said he who had first thought of us, ‘‘ remember
that the French thank GOD after eating their meal.’’
*“ Yes, indeed,”’ replied the other; ““ I have often seen
them do so, but it was after eating a great dishful of
Sagamité. But, as we have only water here, and
what the beasts would eat, for what should we thank
Gop?’’ However, his companion prevailed; they
offered their Prayer, as necessity taught them, and
afterward felt stronger. Finally, after [147 i.e., 145]
a journey of twenty days and more, they reached this
Country, where, on their arrival, they met one of
our Fathers, to whom they related all that had hap-
pened to them during their wandering. And they
proved to us that he who blasphemes and rages
against Gop afterward blesses and adores him,
when the holy Ghost has been pleased to cause fruit
to grow from the Seed that we have sown in a soil
that seemed infertile.

Some Infidels, who were about to go to war not long


200 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


[147 i.e., 145] vingt jours & dauantage de chemin,
ils arriuent en ce Pais, o4 ayans rencontré dés leur
abord vn de nos Peres, auquel ils raconterent tout ce
qui leur eftoit arriué pendant leur voyage. Et [ils]
nous ont fait cognoiftre que tel blafpheme & vomit
rage contre DIEV, qui par apres le benit & l’adore,
lors qu’il a pleu au fainct Efprit faire pouffer les
fruicts a la Semence que nous auons jettée dans vne
terre qui fembloit infertile.

Quelques Infideles deuans aller en guerre, il n’y a
pas long-temps, commencerent 4 fonger a leur Ame,
autant ou plus qu’a leurs corps, & pour eftre affurez
de trouuer 4 leur mort la Grace qu’ils refufoient pen-
dant leur vie, demanderent 4a vn de nos Chreftiens
qui deuoit eftre de la partie, f’il ne fcauoit pas bien
les paroles qu’il falloit dire pour baptifer. Oiiy dea,
répondit-il, mais ie ne puis pas m’en feruir qu’en la
neceffité. C’eft affez pour nous, repliquerent-ils, fi
dauenture quelque malheur nous arriue, tu nous
Baptiferas. Nenny, dit le Chreftien, il n’ef{t pas temps
alors de fe mettre au feruice de DIEV, quand nous
perdons [148 i.e., 146] les efperances de la vie: il
abandonne a l’heure de la mort, ceux qui ne luy ont
jamais voulu obeir qu’ence temps la. Ie feray comme
luy, ie me mocqueray de vous en cette extremité. Le
zele de ce bon Chreftien eftoit vn peu trop rigoureux,
auffi l’auons-nous bien inftruit cdme il fe doit com-
porter en femblables rencontres.

Ces Infideles commencerent A trembler, l’enten-
dant parler de la forte, ils n’ont point de repos qu’ils
ne nous foient venus trouuer, ils nous fupplient de
les vouloir inftruire, nous demandét d’eftre Baptifez,
nous affeurans qu’ils croyoient tout ce que nous pref-


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 1642 201


ago, began to think of their Souls as much as, if not
more than, of their bodies; and, that they might be
sure to find at death the Grace that they refused dur-
ing life, they asked one of our Christians who was to
be of their party, whether he knew well all the words
that must be said in baptizing. ‘‘ Yes, indeed,’’ said
he; ‘‘ but I can only avail myself of them in a case
of necessity.”’ ‘‘ That is enough for us,’’ they replied.
“Tf peradventure any misfortune should happen to
us, thou shalt Baptize us.’’ ‘‘ Not at all,’’ said the
Christian; ‘‘ it is not the time to enter the service of
GoD when we lose [148 i.e., 146] the hope of living.
He abandons at the hour of death those who have
never wished to serve him except at that time. I
will do like him. I will laugh at you in that extrem-
ity.’’ The zeal of this Christian was somewhat too
severe, so we taught him thoroughly what he was to
do on such occasions.

Those Infidels began to tremble when they heard
him speak thus, and did not rest until they came to
us. They begged us to teach them, and asked to be
Baptized, assuring us that they believed all that we
preached,—that, if they had scoffed at the fires of
Hell, they had nevertheless feared them, and had
considered fortunate those who have courage to do
what God commands. We began therefore to teach
them; they came twice, thrice, or four times a day,
to hasten their instruction. But we do not grant
Baptism so easily; we require a Faith tested by
works, before admitting them into the Church. So
we put them off until their return [149 i.e., 147] from
the war. ‘‘ At least,’’ they said when they saw
themselves so delayed; “‘ tell all the Christians with
whom we are going, to teach us on the way, and not


202 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


chions: que s’ils fe font mocquez des feux d’Enfer,
ils n’ont pas pourtant laiffé de les craindre, & d’efti-
mer heureux ceux qui ont le courage de faire ce que
Dieu. commande. On commence donc 4 les enfei-
gner, ils viennent deux, trois & quatre fois le iour
pour auancer leur in{truction: mais nous n’expofons
pas fi facilement le Baptefme, nous voulons vne Foy
efprouuée par les ceuures, auant que de les admettre
en l’Eglife; nous les remettons apres le retour
[149 i.e., 147] de leur guerre. Au moins nous dirent-
ils, fe voyans ainfi reculez, dites a tous les Chreftiens,
auec qui nous allons, qwils nous enfeignent par le
chemin, & qu’ils ne nous foient pas fi cruels que de
nous refufer le Baptefme, s’il fe peut auparauant que
de mourir. Priez DIEV qu'il ait pitié de nous; & en
cas que par malheur nous detiions mourir fans
Baptefme, qu’il nous ouure l’efprit, afin que nous
deteftions auparauant tous les pechez de noftre vie,
comme vous nous auez enfeigné.

Il eft veritable que la voix de DIEV fe fait enten-
dre quand il veut: qu’il n’y a point de cceurs infen-
fibles 4 fes touches quand il luy plaift: il rompt mef-
mes les Cedres du Liban, il fend les pierres, & brife
les rochers: Et quelques barbares que puiffent eftre
ces Peuples, il fera adoré dans ce Nouueau Monde,
& fe fera des Temples ott le Diable s’eft fait adorer
par tant de fiecles. Mais pour cela il faut des Ouuri-
ers, & de bons Ouuriers: Dieu nous en enuoye, s’il
luy plaift.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 203


to be so cruel as to refuse us Baptism, if that be pos-
sible before we die. Entreat GOD to have pity on
us, and, in case we should unfortunately die without
Baptism, to enlighten our minds, so that we may
first detest all the sins of our lives, as you have taught
us to do.”’

Verily, the voice of GOD makes itself heard when-
ever he wills; no hearts are insensible to his touch
when he pleases; he breaks even the Cedars of Leb-
anon; he rends the rocks, and shatters the stones.
And, however barbarous these Peoples may be, he
will be adored in this New World, and will make
for himself Temples where the Devil has been
worshiped for so many centuries. But, for that,
Laborers are needed, and good Laborers; may God
be pleased to send us some.


204 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


[150 i.e., 148] CHAPITRE XII.


DE LA MISSION DV SAINCT ESPRIT AUX ALGONQUINS
PLUS VOYSINS DES HURONS.


N ce Pais & auec des Peuples qui ne font pas
plus differens de nous, pour le Climat & pour
la Langue, qu’ils le font en leur naturel: leur

procedé, leurs opinions, & tout ce qui peut eftre en
1’Homme, hormis le corps & 1’Ame; il faut du temps
pour fe recognoif{tre foy-mefme: & plus encore pour
y mettre les cognoiffances & les Idées d’vn DIEV
quiiamais n’y aefté nommé, d’vne Loy qui iamais
n’y a e{té receué, d’vne facon de vie toute contraire a
celle qu’ils ont tofijours menée depuis deux, trois &
quatre mille ans. Maintenant l’experience du paffé,
nous fait voir vn affez grand iour dans les moyens
qu’il faut tenir pour la Conuerfion des Hurons: mais
il faut confeffer que nous fommes encore dans
[151 i.e., 149] de grandes tenebres, pour ce qui con-
cerne les Algonquins qui habitent en ces Contrées,
plus efloignées du Fort de nos Francois.

C’eft vne vie errante de gens diffipez ca & 1a, felon
que la chaffe & la pefche les meine: tanto{t dedans
les bois, tanto{t fur les rochers, ou dans les Ifles au
milieu de quelque grand lac, tanto{t fur le bord des
riuieres, fans toict, fans maifon, fans demeure affeu-
rée, ny fans recueillir rien de la terre, finon ce
qu’elle donne en vn Pais ingrat a ceux qui ne l’ont
iamais cultiué. Il faut fuiure ces Peuples, fi on veut
les rendre Chreftiens: mais comme ils fe diuifent


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 205


[1504.¢., 148] CHAPTER XII.


OF THE MISSION OF THE HOLY GHOST AMONG THE AL-
GONQUINS, THE NEAREST TO THE HURONS.


differ from us more in Climate and in Language

than they do in their nature, their way of acting,
and their opinions, and in everything that can exist
in Man, except body and Soul,— it takes time to re-
alize the situation. Still more is needed to introduce
among them the knowledge and Ideas of a GoD
whose name has never been mentioned here; of a
Law that has never been received here; of a manner
of life wholly different from that which has been led
here for two, three, even four thousand years. Now,
the experience of the past has enlightened us consid-
erably as to the means that must be adopted for the
Conversion of the Hurons; but it must be confessed
that we are still [151 i.e., 149] very: much in the
dark as regards the Algonquins who dwell in these
Countries that are more remote from the Fort of our
French people.

They lead the nomad life of people scattered here
and there, wherever the chase or the fishing may
lead them,—sometimes in the woods, sometimes
over rocks, or in Islands in the middle of some great
lake; sometimes on the banks of rivers,— without a
roof, without a house or fixed residence; and without
gathering anything from the earth, beyond what it
yields in a barren Country to those who have never


fF this Country,—and with Nations who do not


206 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


totijours, on ne peut fe donner aux vns, qu’en f’éloi-
gnant des autres.

L’an paffé, nous n’auions icy que deux de nos
Peres, pour la langue Algonquine: le P. Claude
Pijart, & le P. Charles Raymbaut. Comme la Proui-
dence ide Dieu, leur anoit) amené Sa moss porttes,
durant l’Hyuer, les Nipiffiriniens, dont ils auoient
commencé l’inftruction; ces Peuples nous quittans,
les glaces eftant fondués, les mefmes Peres les
fuiuirent.

[152 i.e., 150] S’il y a des dangers, dans cette vie
etrante, plus fur les eaux; que fur la terre 6 liv a
des peines 4 fouffrir, dans ces Maifons volantes. Si
durant les ardeurs de 1’ Eité, il y a des fatigues, a faire
des voyages, ott vous ne trouuez point de gifte, point
de viures, point de meubles, que le peu que vous
y portez, & ot mefme fouuent vous vous voyez
contraint, de vous charger, en trauerfant les terres, du
Canot qui vous a porté fur l’eau; Si quelque chofe
plus penible que tout cela, eft difficile Ala nature: Le
Ciel ne manque pas en ces befoins, & on voit dans
l’experience, qu’il n’ef{t pas toufiours vray, que le
corps fatigué appefantiffe l’Ame. Quoy qu’il en
foit, les deux Peres y demeurerent tout l’E{té, conti-
nuans a4 inftruire ces pauures Peuples. Mais d’vn
Barbare, faire vn Chreftien, ce n’eft pas l’ouurage
d’vn iour. La femen[c]e qu’on iette, vne année, das
la terre, ne porte pas fi toft fon fruict: C’eft beau-
coup auancé, que de recognoiftre fon monde, d’en-
trer dans les ef{prits, de fe faire 4 leur langue, a leurs
couftumes, a leur fagon de vie; & s’il eft befoing, fe
faire Barbare auec eux, pour les gaigner [153 i.e., 151]
a Iefus-Chrift.


1642-43] RELATION OF 16g2 207


cultivated it. It is necessary to follow these Peo-
ples, if we wish to Christianize them; but, as they
continually divide themselves up, we cannot devote
ourselves to some without wandering from the others.

Last year, we had here only two of our Fathers
who spoke the Algonquin language,— Father Claude
Pijart and Father Charles Raymbaut. God’s Provi-
dence brought to them at our doors, during the
Winter, the Nipissiriniens whom they had commenced
to instruct. When these Peoples left us after the ice
had melted, the same Fathers followed them.

[152 i.e., 150] If in this wandering life there be
greater danger on the water than on land; if suffer-
ings must be borne in these shifting Houses; if, dur-
ing the heat of Summer, fatigue must be endured in
making journeys whereon can be found no shelter,
no provisions, no furniture, other than the little that
one carries with him, and whereon one is even obliged
in going across the land to transport on his shoulders
the Canoe that has borne him over the water; if
anything still more arduous than all that, is trying
to one’s nature,— Heaven does not fail us in these
necessities; and we find by experience that it is not
always true that the fatigued body weighs down the
Soul. In any case, the two Fathers remained there
all Summer, continuing to instruct those poor Peo-
ples. But to make a Christian out of a Barbarian is
not the work of a day. The seed that is sown one
year in the earth does not bear fruit sosoon. A great
step is gained when one has learned to know those
with whom he has to deal; has penetrated their
thoughts; has adapted himself to their language,
their customs, and their manner of living; and, when


208 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vot. 28


Ce n’a pas efté vn petit attrait, pour adoucir ces
- Peuples, & effacer de leur efprit, les mauuaifes im-
preffions qu’on leur auoit donné des veritez de noftre
Foy; Que Dieu ait tellement beny le trauail de nos
Peres; que de plufieurs enfants griefuement malades,
aufquels ils confererent le Baptefme, tous foient reue-
nus en fanté. Auffi eftoit-ce les parens, qui voyans
cette benediction du Ciel, fur ces petits Chreftiens,
leur procuroient au pluftoft, ce bonheur, lors qu’ils
_ les voyoient en danger.

Sur la fin de l’Eité, ces Peuples tournerent toutes
leurs penfées 4 celebrer leur fefte des morts: c’eft a
dire, a recueillir les os de leurs parens defuncts, &
pour honorer leur memoire, leur procurer vn fepul-
cre plus honnorable, que celuy qui depuis leur decez,
les attoit renfermez. Cette folennité, parmy les
Peuples Errans de deca, ayant des couftumes affez
confiderables, bien differentes de celles de nos
Hurons, qu’on a peti voir dans les Relations prece-
dentes; peut eftre fera-on bien ayfe d’en apprendre
encores quelques [154 1.e., 152] particularitez que ie
pourray deduire en ce lieu.

Le iour eftoit donné, pour le commencement de
Septembre, 4 toutes les Nations confederées, qui y
font inuitées par Deputez exprés. Le lieu deftiné a
ce fujet fut en vne Baye du grand Lac, efloignée des
Hurés, enuiron de vingt lieu€és. Y ayant efté con-
wié, ie creus que ie deuois me feruir de 1’occafion que
DIEV me prefentoit, de confpirer 4 vne plus eftroite
vnion atiec ces Barbares, pour y trouuer A l’aduenir
plus de moyen d’y auancer fa Gloire. Le nombre
des perfonnes qui f’y trouuerent, eftoit d’enuiron
deux mille.


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 1642 209


necessary, has been a Barbarian with them, in order
to win them over [153 i1.e., 151] to Jesus Christ.

This has been no slight influence in soothing these
People, and in removing from their minds the bad
impressions that had been given them of the truths
of our Faith, that God has so blessed the labors of
our Fathers that, out of many children who were
dangerously ill and who were Baptized, all recovered
their health. Therefore it was that the parents, who
witnessed this blessing of Heaven conferred on these
little Christians, procured this happiness for them as
soon as possible, when they saw them in danger.

Toward the end of the Summer, these Peoples
turned their thoughts to the celebration of their feast
of the dead,—that is, to collect the bones of their
deceased relatives, and, by way of honor to their
memory, to procure for them a more honorable
sepulchre than that which had enclosed them since
their death. This solemnity, among the Nomad
Tribes up here, is accompanied by rites of some
importance, differing much from those of our Hu-
rons, which may be seen in previous Relations; and
it may perhaps be interesting to learn some further
[154 i.e., 152] particulars about them, which I shall
set down here.

The day was appointed, at the beginning of Sep-
tember, for all the confederated Nations, who were
invited thereto by Envoys expressly sent. The spot
selected for the purpose was at a Bay of the great
Lake, distant about twenty leagues from the country
of the Hurons. Having been invited to attend, I
thought that I ought to take advantage of the oppor-
tunity that GOD gave me to establish closer relations
with these Barbarians, so as to secure, in the future,


210 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


Chaque Nation, auant que de mettre pied a terre,
pour faire fon entrée auec plus de magnificence,
difpofe fes Canots tout de front, & attend qu’on luy
vienne au deuant. Lors que le Peuple eft affemblé,
le Chef fe leue au milieu du Canot, & declare le
deffein qui l’amene: puis chacun jette en proye vne
partie de fes richeffes. Les vnes flottent deffus l’eau,
les autres vont aufonds. La jeuneffe y accourt: l’vn
fe faifira d’vne natte ouuragée, [155 1.e., 153] comme
font en France les tapifferies; l'autre de quelque
Caftor, qui d’vne hache, qui d’vn plat, qui de Pour-
celaine, ou de quelque autre chofe, felon 1’adreffe
d’vn chacun, & le bonheur quiluy en vient. Ce n'eft
que joye, que cris, qu’acclamations publiques, dont
les Rochers qui bordent ce grand Lac, rendent vn
Echo qui l’emporte au deffus de toutes ces voix.

Les Nations affemblées, & diuifées chacune en leur
feance, on met en veué les Robes de Caftor, les
peaux de Loutre, de Caribou, de Chat fauuage &
d’Orignac, les Haches les Chaudieres, la Pourcelaine,
& tout ce qu’il y ade precieux en ce Pais. Chaque
Chef de Nation fait fon prefent a ceux qui font la
Fefte, donnant 4 chacun des prefents les noms qui
leur femblent les plus conuenables. Pour nous, les
prefens que nous fifmes, ne furent pas pour effuyer
leurs larmes, & les confoler dans la mort des deffuncts;
mais pour fouhaitter aux viuans, le mefme bonheur
que nous efperons dans le Ciel, apres qu’ils auront
recognu le mef{me DIEV que nous feruds[156i.e., 154]
en Terre. Cette qualité de prefent les étonna d’a-
bord, n’eftant pas felon leurs formules: mais nous
leur fifmes entendre, que la feule efperance que nous
auions de les voir Chreftiens, nous faifoit cherir leur
amitié.


1642-43] RELATION OF r6g2 211


better means for the advancement of his Glory among
them. The number of persons present was about
two thousand.

Those of each Nation, before landing, in order to
make their entry more imposing, form their Canoes
in line, and wait until others come to meet them.
When the People are assembled, the Chief stands up
in the middle of his Canoe, and states the object that
has brought him hither. Thereupon each one throws
away some portion of his goods to be scrambled for.
Some articles float on the water, while others sink to
the bottom. The young men hasten to the spot.
One will seize a mat, wrought [155 i.e., 153] as tapes-
tries are in France; another a Beaver skin; others
get a hatchet, or a dish, or some Porcelain beads, or
other article, each according to his skill and the
good fortune he may have. There is nothing but
joy, cries, and public acclamations, to which the Rocks
surrounding the great Lake return an Echo that
drowns all their voices.

When the Nations are assembled, and divided,
each in their own seats, Beaver Robes, skins of
Otter, of Caribou, of wild Cats, and of Moose;
Hatchets, Kettles, Porcelain Beads, and all things
that are precious in this Country, are exhibited.
Each Chief of a Nation presents his own gift to those
who hold the Feast, giving to each present some
name that seems best suited to it. As for us, the
presents that we gave were not for the purpose of
drying their tears, or consoling them for the death
of the deceased; but that we might wish to the liv-
ing the same happiness that we hope to enjoy in
Heaven when they shall have acknowledged the same
Gop whom we serve [156i.e., 154] on Earth. This


212 LES RELATIONS! DES YES ULTES [VoL. 23


En fuitte de cela, ce fut vn plaifir qui n’eut rien de
fauuage, de voir au milieu de cette Barbarie vn Balet
danfé par quarante perfonnes, au fon des voix & d’vne
efpece de tambour, auec vn accord fi heureux, quils
rendoient tous les tons les plus agreables de la
Mufique.

La danfe eut trois parties: La premiere fe paffa en
la reprefentation de diuerfes rencontres d’ennemy,
homme a héme: l’vn pourfuiuant fon ennemy, la
hache en main, pour luy porter la mort; 4 mefme
temps, il femble la receuoir luy-mefme perdant fon
auantage: il le reprend, & apres mille feintes, toutes
en cadence, terraffe en-fin fon homme, & retourne
victorieux. Vnautre, dans des mouuemens differents,
fait fon efcrime l’efpée en main; celuy-cy eft armé
de fléches, fon ennemy fe pare d’vne rondache qui le
couure, &luy porte va coup 157 4.e., 155 | de.matiue.
Ils font trois diuers perfonnages; pas vn n’eft armé
de mefme fagon, leurs geftes, leurs mouuemens,
leurs pas, leurs ceillades, en vn mot, tout ce qui fe
void, eft different en vn chacun, & dans vn raport
des vns aux autres tellement accomply, qu’il euft
femblé qu’vn mefme efprit euft reglé ces mouuemens
fans regle.

A peine ce combat eft finy, que les Muficiens fe
leuent, & pour vne Seconde Partie, on void vn gros
de danfe: Premierement de huict, puis de douze,
puis de feize, toufiours multiplians A proportion,
haftans & retardans leurs pas fuiuant les voix qui
les mefurent.

Les Femmes furuiennent a limpourueu, qui firent
vne Troifiéme Partie de ce Bal, qui fut auffi agre-
able que les autres, & n’eut rien de moins pour la


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 213


kind of present astonished them at first, as not being
according to their usages. But we gave them to
understand that only the hope that we had of seeing
them become Christians led us to desire their friend-
ship.

After that, it was a pleasure characterized by noth-
ing of savagery, to witness in the midst of this Bar-
barism a Ballet danced by forty persons, to the sound
of voices and of a sort of drum, in such harmonious
accord that they rendered all the tones that are most
agreeable in Music.

The dance consisted of three parts. The first rep-
resented various encounters of enemies in single com-
bat,— one pursuing his foe, hatchet in hand, to give
him the deathblow, while at the same time he seems
to receive it himself, by losing his advantage; he
regains it, and after a great many feints, all per-
formed in time with the music, he finally overcomes
his antagonist, and returns victorious. Another, with
different movements, fences, javelin in hand; this
one is armed with arrows; his enemy provides him-
self with a buckler that covers him, and strikes a
blow at him [157 i.e., 155] with a club. They are
three different personages, not one of whom is armed
like the others; their gestures, their movements,
their steps, their glances,—in a word, everything
that can be seen, is different in each one; and yet in
so complete accord with one another that it seems as
if but one mind governed these irregular movements.

Hardly was this combat ended than the Musicians
arose; and we witnessed, as the Second Part, a dance
on a large scale,—first by eight persons, then by
twelve, then by sixteen, ever increasing in propor-


214 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


modeftie. Les habitans du Saut, venus pour cette
Fefte, de cent ou fix-vingt lieués, eftoient Acteurs en
ce Balet.

Il y auoit vn May planté, d’vne hauteur affez rai-
fonnable. Vn Nipiffirinien eftant monté au haut, y
attacha deux prix, fgcauoir vne Chaudiere, & vne
peau [158 *ie.5 156)ide Cerf-innitantelasjeuneiicra
faire paroiftre fon agilité. Outre que le May eftoit
fans écorce & fort liffé, il le graiffa pour en rendre
la prife plus difficile. Il ne fut pas pluftoft defcen-
du, qu'il y eut preffe 4 y monter, qui perdit courage au
cOmencement, qui a moins, qui a plus de hauteur,
& tel fe voyant quafi arriué iufqu’au haut, qui tout
d’vn coup fe voyoit en bas. Perfonne n’y pouuant
atriuer; il y eut vn Huron qui fe garnit d’vn couteau
& de cordes, & ayant fait fes efforts raifonnables iuf-
qu’a la moitié du May, eut recours aux fineffes; il
tire fon couteau, entaille l’arbre, y arrefte fa corde,
puis faifant vn eftrié, il fe fouftient, & fe leue plus
haut, il fait tant qu’il arriue iufqu’aux prix qui
eftoient 14 pendus, nonobftant les huées & les cla-
meurs de toute l’Affiftance. S’en eftant faifi, il fe
laiffe couler en bas, fe rembarque pour defcendre 4
Kebec ott fon voyage le menoit.

Ce defordre porta les Capitaines Algonquins, & vne
plainte Publique, qui eftant jugée raifonnable, les
Hurons fe taxerent 4 vn prefent de Pourcelaine, pour
reparation de cette injuftice, qui [159 i.e., 157] fai-
foit pleurer les Ames des defundcts.

En fuite de cecy, on proceda a 1’élection des Chefs
Nipiffiriniens. Les fuffrages eftans recueillis, le
grand Capitaine fe leua, & les appella chacun par leur
nom. Ils parurent couuerts de leurs belles robes.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 215


tion, who quickened or checked their steps according
to the voices that gave the measure.

The Women then suddenly appeared, and danced
the Third Part of this Ball, which was as agreeable as
the others, and in no wise offensive to modesty. The
inhabitants of the Saut, who came to this Feast from
a distance of a hundred or a hundred and twenty
leagues, were Actors in this Ballet.

A Pole of considerable height had been set in the
ground. A Nipissirinien climbed to the top of it,
and tied there two prizes,—a Kettle, and the skin
[158 i.e., 156] of a Deer,—and called upon the young
men to display their agility. Although the bark had
been stripped from the Pole, and it was quite smooth,
he greased it, to make it more difficult to grasp. No
sooner had he descended, than several pressed forward
to climb it. Some lost courage at the beginning,
others at a greater or lesser height; and one, who
almost reached the top, suddenly found himself at the
bottom. No onecould attain the top; but there wasa
Huron who provided himself with a knife and some
cord, and, after having made reasonable efforts until
he reached the middle of the Pole, he had recourse
to cunning. He drew his knife, and cut notches in
the tree, in which he placed his cord; then making
a stirrup of it, he supported and raised himself high-
er, and continued to do so until he attained the prizes
suspended there, in spite of the hooting and shouting
of the Audience. Having grasped these, he slid to
the ground, and reémbarked to go to Kebec, whither
his journey led him.

This unfair conduct led the Algonquin Captains to
make a Public complaint, which was deemed reason-
able; and the Hurons taxed themselves for a present


216 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Ayans receu leurs Commiffions, ils firét largeffe
d’vne quantité de Caftors & peaux d’Orignac, pour
fe faire cognoiftre, & eftre receus auec applaudiffe-
ment dans leurs Charges.

Cette Election fut fuiuie de la Refurrection des
Perfonnes de marque, decedez depuis la derniere
Fefte: c’eft a dire, que felon la couftume du Pais, on
tranfporta leurs noms 4 quelqu’vn de la parenté, pour
en conferuer la memoire.

Le iour fuiuant, les Femmes f’occupent a parer
fuperbement vne Cabane, courbée en berceau, longue
enuiron de cent pas, dont la largeur & la hauteur
ef{toient a proportion.

Quoy que les Richeffes de ce Pais, ne foient pas
recherchées dans les entrailles de la Terre, & que pour
la plufpart, [160 i.e., 158] ce ne foient que les dépoiiil-
les des Animaux; fi toutefois elles eftoient tranf-
portées en Europe, elles y auroient leur prix. Les
feuls prefens que firent les Nipiffiriniens aux autres
Nations, auroient coufté en France, quarante voire
cinquante mille francs.

Apres cela, les mef{mes Femmes apporterent les os
de leurs Morts dans cette Sale magnifique. Ces os
font renfermez dans des caiffes d’écorce, couuerts de
robes neufues de Caitor, enrichies de colliers & échar-
pes de Pourcelaine.

Aupres de chaque Mort, les femmes f’eftans affifes
a terre, en deux rangs oppofites: ou void entrer les
Capitaines qui feruent de Maiftres-d’Hoftel, pour
apporter les plats de feruice. Ce Feftin n’eft que
pour les Femmes, a caufe qu’elles témoignent eftre
plus auant dans le dueil.


En fuitte, vne douzaine d’Hommes, les voix les


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 217


of Porcelain Beads to repair this injustice, which
[159 i.e., 157] caused the Souls of the deceased to
weep.

After this, the election of the Nipissirinien Chiefs
took place. When the votes were taken, the chief
Captain arose, and called them each by name. They
made their appearance, clothed in their finest robes.

When they had received their Commissions, they
gave largess of a quantity of Beaver skins and Moose
hides, in order to make themselves known, and that
they might be received with applause in their Offices.

This Election was followed by the Resurrection of
those Persons of importance who had died since the
last Feast; which means that, in accordance with
the custom of the Country, their names were trans-
ferred to some of their relatives, so as to perpetuate
their memory.

On the following day, the Women were occupied
in fitting up, in a superb manner, a Cabin with an
arched roof, about a hundred paces long, the width
and height of which were in proportion.

Although the Riches of this Country are not sought
for in the bowels of the Earth, and although most
of them [160 i.e., 158] consist only in the spoils of
Animals,—nevertheless, if they were transported to
Europe, they would have their value. The presents
that the Nipissiriniens gave to the other Nations
alone would have cost in France forty or even fifty
thousand francs.

After that, the same Women carried the bones of
their Dead into this magnificent Room. These
bones were enclosed in caskets of bark, covered with
new robes of Beaver skins, and enriched with collars
and scarfs of Porcelain Beads.


218 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


mieux choifies, entrent au milieu de la Cabane, &
commencent vn chant fort lugubre, qui eftant fecon-
dé des Femmes, dans les reprifes, fut extremement
doux & trifte.

[161 i.e., 159] L’horreur de la nuict ne feruoit pas
peu ace Dueil; & les tenebres qui n’eftant efclairées
que d’vne lumiere mourante de deux feux qu’on
auoit allumez en chacun bout de la Cabane, receuoient
ces plaintes & fofipirs. Le fujet de la lettre conte-
noit vne forte d’hommage fait au Demon qu’ils
inuoquoient, luy adreffant leurs plaintes. Ce chant
continua toute la nuict dans vn grand filence des
Affiftans, qui n’auoient ce femble, que du refpect &
de l’admiration pour vne ceremonie fi faincte.

Le matin fuiuant, ces Femmes firent vne diftribu-
tion de bled, de fouliers fauuages, & autres petits
meubles qui font de leur reffort, & dependent de leur
induftrie. Leur chant toufiours plainctif & entre-
coupé de fofipirs, fembla depuis f’adreffer aux Ames
des defuncts, qu’elles congedioient, comme il fem-
bloit, auec vn grand regret, par l’agitation continu-
elle d’vn rameau qu’elles tenoient en main, crainte
que ces pauures Ames eftans furprifes de l’effroy de
la guerre & de la terreur des armes, leur repos n’en
fu{t troublé. Car en mefme temps on [162 i.e., 160]
apercoit vn gros d’Armée qui defcendoit d’vne Mon-
tagne voifine, auec des cris & heurlemens effroyables;
courans premierement en rond, puis en ouale: &
apres mille autres figures, enfin viennent fondre a
l’entour de la Cabane, & f’en rendent les Maiftres,
les Femmes ayans quitté la place comme A des
Ennemis.

Ces Guerriers deuiennent Baladins apres cette


1642-43] RELATION OF 16g2 219


Near each Dead body sat the women, in two lines,
facing each other. Then entered the Captains, who
acted as Stewards, and carried the dishes containing
food. This Feast is for the Women only, because
they evince a deeper feeling of mourning.

Afterward, about a dozen Men with carefully
selected voices entered the middle of the Cabin, and
began to sing a most lugubrious chant, which, being
seconded by the Women in the refrains, was very
sweet and sad.

[161 i.e., 159] The gloom of the night conduced
not a little to this Mourning; and the darkness,
lighted only by the flickering flames of two fires which
had been kindled at each end of the Cabin, received
their wailings and their sighs. The theme of the
song consisted in a sort of homage paid to the Demon
whom they invoked, and to whom their lamentations
were addressed. This chant continued through the
night, amid deep silence on the part of the Audience,
who seemed to have only respect and admiration for
so sacred a ceremony.

On the following morning, these Women distrib-
uted corn, moccasins, and other small articles that
are within their means, or the products of their indus-
try. Their chant—ever plaintive, and interspersed
with sobs—seemed to be addressed to the Souls of
the deceased, whom they sped on their way —as it
appeared, with deep regret— by continually waving
branches that they held in their hands, for fear that
these poor Souls might be surprised by the dread of
war and the terror of arms, and that their rest
might thus be disturbed. For, at the same time,
[162 i.e., 160] the body of an Army could be observed
descending a neighboring Mountain with frightful


220 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Victoire. Chaque Nation a fon tour eut la Sale du
Bal, pour y faire paroiftre fon adreffe, iufques a ce
que les Capitaines Algonquins, Maiftres des Ceremo-
nies, entrerent dix ou douze en ordre, portans des
farines, des caftors & quelques chiens tous vifs, dont
ils preparerent vn Feftin magnifique pour les Hurons.
Les Nations Algonquines furent traittées a part:
comme auffi leur Langue eft entierement differente
de la Huronne.

En fuite fe firent deux Affemblées L’vne des Al-
gonquins, qui auoient e{té inuitez 4 cette Solennité,
aufquels on fit des prefens differens felon les degrez
de 1’ Alliance que les Nipiffiriniens auoient auec eux.
Les offemens des Morts pafferent [163 i.e., 161] entre
les prefens qui furent faits aux plus intimes Amis,
& furent accompagnez de robes les plus precieufes, &
des coliers de pourcelaine, qui eft l’or, les perles &
les diamans de ce Pais.

La feconde Affemblée fut celle des Natids Huron-
nes, ott les Nipiffiriniens nous donnerent la premiere
Seance, les premiers titres d’héneur, & témoignages
d’affection, au deffus de tous leurs Confederez: Et 14
fe firent de nouueaux prefens, & en fi grand nombre
qu’il n’y eut aucun Capitaine qui fe retiraft les mains
vuides.

La Fefte f’acheua par quelque prix qu’on donna 4
la force du bras, a l’adreffe du corps, & a l’agilité.
Les Femmes mefmes firent partie de ce combat, & le
tout fe paffa auec tant de moderation & retenué, qu’a
moins de le voir, on n’eu{t iamais creu eftre au milieu
d’vne affemblée de Barbares, tant ils fe portoiét de
re{fpect, mefme en conteftant la victoire.

MAIS pour ne nous pas égarer trop loin, reuenons


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 221


cries and yells, running around at first in a circle,
then in an oval; and, at last, after a thousand other
figures they rushed upon the Cabin, of which they
became Masters,—the Women having yielded the
place, as if to an Enemy.

These Warriors became Dancers after this Victory.
Each Nation, in turn, occupied the Ballroom, for
the purpose of displaying their agility, until the Al-
gonquin Captains, who acted as Masters of Ceremo-
nies, entered ten or twelve in line, bearing flour,
beavers, and some dogs still alive, with which they
prepared a splendid Feast for the Hurons. The Al-
gonquin Nations were served apart, as their Language
is entirely different from the Huron.

Afterward, two Meetings were held; one consisted
of the Algonquins who had been invited to this
Solemnity, to whom various presents were given,
according to the extent of the Alliance that existed
between the Nipissiriniens andthem. The bones of
the Dead were borne [163 i.e., 161] between the pres-
ents given to the most intimate Friends, and were
accompanied by the most precious robes and by collars
of porcelain beads, which are the gold, the pearls, and
the diamonds of this Country.

The second Assembly was that of the Huron
Nations, at which the Nipissiriniens gave us the
highest Seat, the first titles of honor, and marks of
affection above all their Confederates. Here new
presents were given, and so lavishly that not a single
Captain withdrew empty-handed.

The Feast concluded with prizes given for physical
strength, for bodily skill, and for agility. Even the
Women took part in this contest, and everything was
done with such moderation and reserve that—at


222 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 23


aux affaires de D1IEv: La plus heureufe de toute
1’ Affemblée, fut vne pauure Vieille, d’enuiron quatre-
vings ans, qui paroiffoit aux yeux des Hommes, la
plus proche de fon malheur. Depuis vn long-temps,
[164 i.e., 162] elle auoit perdu l’vfage de la veué, &
ne pouuant pas fotitenir le peu qui luy reftoit de vie,
elle ef{toit cdtrainte de fuiure fes enfans quelque part
quils allaffent. Iamais le Nom de DIEV n’eftoit
venu iufqu’a elle; mais quand le fainct Efprit veut
f’emparer d’vn coeur, il eft bien-to{t gagné. Cette
Femme prend feu aux premieres nouuelles de fon
Salut: elle fe veut du mal d’auoir efté toute fa vie
dans l’ignorance des Veritez qu’on luy propofe. Elle
dete{te fes pechez, demande le Baptefme, & ne veut
plus fonger qu'aw Cielas Le Pere Claude: Pijgrt da
baptife; Elle appergoit en mefme temps vne joye fi
fenfible fur fon vifage, quwil eft aifé de voir que
DIEV opere puiffamment dans fon cceur. Ainfi ne
pouuoit elle affez fe conjotiyr de fon bonheur; & pour
témoigner le reffentiment qu’elle en auoit; elle pre-
fente en don vne peau de Caftor, n’ayant rien de plus
precieux; mais le Pere la refufa, eftant trop riche-
ment payé de voir vne Ame fi-toft difpofée pour le
Ciel.

Dans ce concours de tant de Nations affemblées,
nous nous efforcames de gagner l’affection des plus
confiderables, par quelques feftins & prefens. En
effet, les Paiioitigotieieuhak nous inuiterent de les
aller voir [165 i.e., 163] en leur Pais, (c’eft vne Na-
tion de la Langue Algonquine, efloignée des Hurons
de cent ou fix-vingt lieués, tirant vers 1’Occident, que
nous appellons les Habitans du Sault) nous leur
promifmes vne vifite, pour voir qu’elle difpofition il


1642-43} RELATION OF 162 223


least, in watching them—one would never have
thought that he was in the midst of an assemblage
of Barbarians,—so much respect did they pay to one
another, even while contending for the victory.
BUT, not to wander too far, let us return to the
affairs of GOD. ‘The happiest person in the whole
Assemblage was a poor Old Woman about eighty
years of age, who in the eyes of Men seemed nearest
tounhappiness. For a long while [164 i.e., 162] she
had lost the use of her sight; and, as she was unable
to support herself during the short time she had still
to live, she was compelled to follow her children
wherever they went. The Name of Gop had never
come to her ears; but, when the holy Ghost wishes
to take possession of a heart, it is soon won. This
Woman took fire at hearing the first news of her
Salvation. She was angry with herself for having
remained all her life in ignorance of the Truths that
we propounded to her. She detested her sins, asked
for Baptism, and would think of nothing but Heav-
en; Father Claude Pijart baptized her. Such manifest
joy appeared on her features that it was easy to see
that GOD exerted a powerful influence on her heart.
Thus she could not sufficiently congratulate herself
on her happiness; and, to show how much she felt
it, she tendered as a gift a Beaver skin, having noth-
ing more valuable. But the Father refused it, being
already amply repaid at seeing a Soul so soon pre-
pared for Heaven.
In this gathering of so many assembled Nations,
we strove to win the affections of the chief person-
ages by means of feasts and presents. In conse-
quence of this, the Pauoitigoueieuhak invited us to go
and see them [165 i.e., 163] in their own Country.


224 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


pourroit y auoir, afin de trauailler 4 leur Conuerfion;
vel. nommément que nous aprenions qu’vne certaine
Nation plus efloignée, qu’ils appellent Pouteatami,
auoit abandonné fon Pais, & f’étoit venué refugier
auec les Habitans du Sault, pour f’éloigner de quel-
que autre Nation ennemie, qui les vexoit par des
guerres continuelles. Nous jettames les yeux fur le
Pere Charles Raymbaut, pour entreprendre ce voy-
age, & parce qu’en mefme temps quelques Hurons
deuoient eftre de la partie, le P. Ifaac Iogues y fut
deftiné, pour agir auec eux.

Ils partirent de noftre Maifon de S**. Marie, fur la
fin de Septembre, & apres dix-fept iours de nauiga-
tion fur ce grand Lac, ou mer douce, qui vient bai-
gner les terres des Hurons, ils aborderent au Sault,
y trouuerent enuiron deux mille Ames, & f’affeure-
rent des nouuelles d’vn grand nombre d’autres Peu-
ples fedentaires, qui iamais n’ont cognti les Europe-
ans. & iamais n’ont entendu parler de [166 i.e., 164]
DIEV: Entr’autres d’vne certaine Nation Nadoiieffis,
{fcituée au Noroiieft ou Oiieft du Sault, a dix-huict
journées plus auant. Les neuf premieres fe font par
le trauers d’vn autre grand Lac, qui commence au
deffus du Sault: les neuf derniers iours, il faut monter
vne Riuiiere qui coupe dans les terres. Ces Peuples
cultiuent la terre a la fagon de nos Hurons, recueillent
du bled d’Inde, & du Petun. Leurs Bourgs font plus
gros & de plus de defenfe, 4 raifon des guerres con-
tinuelles qu’ils ont auec les Kiriftinons, Irinions, &
autres grades Nations qui habitent les mefmes Cé-
trées. Leur Langue eft differente de 1’Algonquine,
& de la Huronne.

Les Capitaines de cette Nation du Sault, inuitent nos


E CN —heowan te Bie Bereclee? ple! re beige es An ee oT a

; gu. epee mi avguce— A pe ee Jton f Koy S-t our See Aran
ie Foutetad”’ ST alle sear sfpach is Par a xo —

op Pei 50 Sone ares ute c§ IeSuo— LAF Beir oe fi t—

TY ii ai ASE ie sicca tog —

des Bors JAG ite Peet -carfon eet uy ce Cee Keven
scbvoye oy hate ey be Soube Aiguee Lace —

Wy) f in


men, ee
Bog ae


MIC AUT =,


AG


ot


Upp Wille


fe


- bully 441 bebo
“UM OX. soe


FACSIMILE OF SIGNATURES OF CHEVALIER DE MONTMAGNY, CHARLES RAYMBAUT, S.J., GUILLAUME HEBERT, JEAN BOURDON, ET AL.


[From a document signed July 2, 1639, in the archives of St. Mary’s College, Montreal, being the original of the concession of Isle aux Ruaux,
made by the Company of New France to the Jesuit Fathers.]


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 225


(They are a Nation of the Algonquin Language, dis-
tant from the Hurons a hundred or a hundred and
twenty leagues towards the West whom we call the
Inhabitants of the Sault.)® We promised to pay them
a visit, to see how they might be disposed, in order
to labor for their Conversion,—especially as we
learned that a more remote Nation whom they call
Pouteatami‘’ had abandoned their own Country and
taken refuge with the Inhabitants of the Sault, in
order to remove from some other hostile Nation who
persecuted them with endless wars. We selected
Father Charles Raymbaut to undertake this jour-
ney; and as, at the same time, some Hurons were to
be of the party, Father Isaac Jogues was chosen, that
he might deal with them.

_ They started from our House of Ste. Marie, about
the end of September, and after seventeen days
of navigation on the great Lake or fresh-water sea
that bathes the land of the Hurons, they reached the
Sault, where they found about two thousand Souls,
and obtained information about a great many other
sedentary Nations, who have never known Europeans
and have never heard of [166i.e., 164] GOD,— among
others, of a certain Nation, the Nadouessis, situated
to the Northwest or West of the Sault, eighteen days’
journey further away.® The first nine days are occu-
pied in crossing another great Lake that commences
above the Sault; during the last nine days one has
to ascend a River that traverses those lands. These
Peoples till the soil in the manner of our Hurons,
and harvest Indian cornand Tobacco. Their Villages
are larger, and in a better state of defense, owing to
their continual wars with the Kiristinons, the Irini-
ons, and other great Nations who inhabit the same


226 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL, 23


Peres A faire quelque forte de demeure parmy eux.
On leur fait entendre que cela n’eft pas impoffible,
pourueu qu’ils fuffent difpofez a receuoir nos in{tru-
ctions. Apres auoir tenu Confeil, ils répondirent
quils defirent grandemét ce bon-heur; qu’ils nous
embrafferont come leurs Freres, & qu’ils feront profit
de nos paroles. Mais il nous faut des Ouuriers pour
cet effet: il faut auparauat tafcher de gagner les
Peuples qui nous font plus voyfins, & cependant prier
le Ciel, qu’il hafte les moments de leur Conuerfion.

[167 i.e., 165] Le P. Charles Raymbaut ne fut pas
pluftoft de retour de ce voyage du Saut, qu’il fe rem-
barque dans vn autre Canot, pour aller chercher les
Nipiffiriniens au lieu de leur Hyuernement, & conti-
nuer leur in{truction. Le P. René Menard, qui fraif-
chement nous eftoit venu au fecours, fe joignit auec
luy; car nous jugeames a propos de retenir le P.
Claude Pijart, afin de ne pas entie[re]ment aban-
donner quantité d’autres troupes Algonquines qui
toutes les Années viennent hyuerner icy dans les
Hurons.

Le Lac fe trouua fi émeu, les vents fi opiniaftres,
les tempeftes fi grandes, que ce Canot fut contraint
derelafcher 4 noftre Port d’ot il eftoit party, & les
glaces furuenant incontinent apres, rendirent ce
voyage impoffible. Le P. Charles Raymbaut tomba
deflors griefuement malade, & depuis n’a pas eu vn
iour de fanté.

Quantité d’Algonquins aborderent 4 mefme temps
proche de noftre Maifon, auec deffein d’y paffer l’Hy-
uer. DIEV voulant donner de l’employ aux deux
Peres, de la Langue Algonquine, qui reftoient en
fanté, & fauuer par me{me moyé quelques Ames qu'il


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 227


Country. Their Language differs from the Algon-
quin and Huron tongues.?®

The Captains of this Nation of the Sault invited
our Fathers to take up their abode among them.
They were given to understand that this was not
impossible, provided that they were well disposed to
receive our instruction. After having held a Coun-
cil, they replied that they greatly desired that good
fortune,— that they would embrace us as their Broth-
ers, and would profit by our words. But we need
Laborers for that purpose; we must first try to win
the Peoples that are nearest to us, and meanwhile
pray Heaven to hasten the moment of their Conver-
sion.

[167 i.e., 165] Father Charles Raymbaut had no
sooner returned from this journey to the Saut than
he reémbarked in another Canoe, to seek the Nipissi-
riniens at their Winter quarters and to continue
instructing them. Father René Menard, who had
recently come to our assistance, went with him, for
we deemed it advisable to retain Father Claude Pi-
jart, so as not to abandon entirely a number of other
Algonquin bands who come here every Year to
winter with the Hurons.

The Lake was so agitated, the winds so contrary,
and the storms so great, that the Canoe was compelled
to put back to our Port, whence it had started; and,
as the ice formed immediately afterward, it rendered
the voyage impossible. Father Charles Raymbaut
thereupon fell seriously ill, and has not had one day’s
good health since.

A great many Algonquins landed at the same time
near our House, with the intention of spending the
Winter here. Gop wished to give employment to


228 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


auoit choifies pour le Ciel. Car la maladie ayant em-
porté plufieurs enfans, ie ne fcay f’il en eft mort vn
feul, fans auoir receu le Baptefme, quelque oppofi-
tion que fouuent les parens y ayent pi apporter.

[168 i.e., 166] Vn pere craignat qu’on ne baptifaft
fon enfant, auoit tofijours tenu fa maladie cachée.
Le P. Menard veut entrer dans cette Cabane; on le
rebute brufquement. I1 fe doute de ce qui eftoit, il
y retourne deux & trois fois, toufiours ce Barbare eft
4 la porte comme vn Cerbere, qui en defend l’entrée.
Le Pere allant vifiter en quelque autre Cabane, fe
fent interieurement pouffé de retourner d’ot fi fou-
uent il {’étoit veu chaffé. Il y entre fans refiftance,
il ne trouue plus que la femme de ce Barbare, luy
ef{tant forty pour aller au feftin, il luy demande des
nouuelles de fon enfant, elle dit qu’il eft mort. En-
fin apres quelques difcours qui adoucirent fon efprit,
elle leue vne robe qui cachoit ce petit innocent, qui
rendoit les derniers fofipirs, & prie le Pere de n’en
pas aprocher, parce que fon mary luy auoit defendu.
C’euft ef{té perdre vne trop belle occafion de faire vn
Ange du Paradis de ce petit agonifant: il n’eft pas fi
toft baptifé, fans que la mere f’en ptft apperceuoir,
que fon Ame f’enuole ou Ciel.

Sil y eut de la peine a fauuer les Enfans, lin-
{truction qu’on donnoit aux Adultes, ne fut pas moins
penible. C’eftoient gens ramaffez qui n’auoient
iamais rien entendu que du mal de nous: Leur efprit
eftoit tout remply de foupcons & de craintes. Les
veritez de no{tre Foy eftoient defcriées aupres d’eux.
En vn mot, ils reffembloient [169 i.e., 167] a ces
malades, qui ont horreur de ceux qui leur veulent
rendre lafanté. Quand on n’auroit rien gaigné autre


1642-43] RELATION OF r6g2 229


the two Fathers who knew the Algonquin Language,
and who remained in health, so as thereby to save
some Souls that he had chosen for Heaven; for dis-
ease carried off several children, and I do not think
that a single one of them died without having
received Baptism whatever opposition the parents
may often have shown thereto.

[168 i.e., 166] A father, who feared that his child
might be baptized, had always kept its sickness
concealed. When Father Menard tried to enter his
Cabin, he was rudely repulsed. He suspected the
cause of this, and returned two or three times; but
the Barbarian was always at the door like a Cerberus,
defending the entrance. While the Father was visit-
ing another Cabin, he felt inwardly impelled to return
to the place whence he had been so often driven away.
He entered without resistance, and found there only
the wife of the Barbarian, for he had gone out toa
feast. He asked news of her child, and she said that
it was dead. Finally, after some conversation that
soothed her mind, she lifted the robe that hid the
little innocent, who was about to draw his last breath,
and begged the Father not to approach, because her
husband had forbidden her to allow it. That would
have been the loss of too good an opportunity for
making an Angel of Paradise of this little sufferer.
No sooner was he baptized, without the mother
perceiving it, than his Soul flew to Heaven.

If it was difficult to save the Children, it was no
less arduous to give instruction to the Adults. The
people gathered here had heard nothing but evil of
us; their minds were filled with suspicion and fear;
they had received disparaging accounts of our Faith;
in a word, they were like [169 i.e., 167] those sick


230 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


chofe que de leuer tous ces foupgds, de diffiper ces
craintes, & de gagner leur amitié, 1’ Hyuer n’euft pas
e{té mal employé. Outre cela, il n’y en a pas vn qui
n’ait efté fuffifamment in{truit: au moins auons-nous
cette confolation, que fils f’écarterent de nous, dés
que le Printemps fut venu, ils ont remporté auec eux
affez de cognoiffances des chofes de la Foy pour fe
fauuer; ou bien en cas quils en abufent, pour jufti-
fier les mifericordes de DIEV.

Le P. Claude Pijart fit auffi quelques courfes
pendant l’Hyuer, a dix ou douze lieués d’icy, pour
inftruire quelques troupes paffageres d’ Algonquins.
Outre les enfans qu’il enuoya au Ciel par les eaux du
Baptefme, il Confeffa quelques Chreftiens, qui auoient
efté inftruits & baptifez a Kebec & aux Trois-Riui-
eres. C’e{t vne confolation bien grande, de voir de
pauures gens, fans Eglife, fans Sacremens, fans Sacri-
fice, fans Predicateur, fans In{truction, fans liures;
enfin priuez de tout fecours, au milieu des forefts,
menans vne vie au dehors, plus femblable a celle des
beftes, qu’a celle du refte des Hommes; nonobftant
tout cela, fe conferuer dedans la Foy, continuer dans
la crainte de DirEv, dans les fentimens de pieté,
viure dans l’innocence.

[170 i.e., 168] Is prioient DIEV publiquement,
chantoient des Cantiques de Deuotion, compofez en
leur Langue, profeffoient hautement la Foy; Benif-
foient D1eEv de leur auoir ouuert l’efprit pour le
cognoiftre; & ne refpiroient plus qu’a vn fejour proche
les Frangois, ot ils peuffent eftre plainement inftruits,
& viure dans les exercices d’vne vie vrayement Chre-
{tienne, dont ils ont goufté quelque temps la douceur.
Mais les Iroquois ont tellement remply toutes ces


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 231


persons who have a horror of those who wish to
restore them to health. Even if we had gained noth-
ing more than to remove all these suspicions, dispel
their fears, and win their friendship, the Winter
would not have been so badly spent. Besides this,
there is not one who has not been sufficiently in-
structed; at least, we have this consolation that, if
they wandered away from us when the Spring came,
they took with them a sufficient knowledge of
matters of the Faith to save them, or, in the event
of their making a bad use of it, to justify GopD’s
mercies.

Father Claude Pijart also made some excursions
during the Winter, to a distance of ten or twelve
leagues from here, to teach some roving bands of
Algonquins. Besides the children whom he sent to
Heaven by means of the waters of Baptism, he Con-
fessed some Christians, who had been instructed and
baptized at Kebec and at the Three Rivers. Itisa
very great consolation to see poor people without a
Church, without the Sacraments, without the Sacri-
fice, without a Preacher, without Instruction, with-
out books,—in fine, deprived of all assistance, in the
midst of the forests, leading a life externally more
like that of beasts than that of other Men; notwith-
standing all that, maintaining themselves in the
Faith, persevering in the fear of GOD and in senti-
ments of piety, and living in innocence.

[170 i.e., 168] They prayed to GOD publicly, sang
Devotional Hymns composed in their Language, and
openly professed the Faith; they blessed GoD for
having enlightened their minds so that they might
know him, and desired nothing better than to dwell
near the French, where they could be fully instructed


232 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Contrées de frayeur, que ces pauures Chreftiens font
contrai[n]ts de fe bannir eux-mefmes, & viure dedans
les bois: jufqu’a ce que quelque bras plus puiffant
ait reprimé l’infolence de leurs Ennemis.


Les Peres Claude Pijart, & René Menard nous
quittent a la fin d’Auril, pour retourner aux Nipiffi-
riniens en leur Pais, pour continuer 4 les inftruire:
Car c’eft la Nation qui femble la moins efloignée de
la Foy, de tous ces Peuples Errans.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642 233


and live in the practices of a truly Christian life,
whose pleasures they have enjoyed foratime. But
the Iroquois have inspired such terror throughout all
these Countries that these poor Christians are com-
pelled to banish themselves, and to live in the woods,
until some more powerful arm shall have subdued
the insolence of their Enemies.


Fathers Claude Pijart and René Menard leave us
at the end of April, to return to the Nipissiriniens
in their own Country, and to continue instructing
them; for that Nation seems of all these Wandering
Peoples, the least averse to the Faith.


%


ks el SS BLS SS
SS rr re ——$—or a, EN NN eS SS I SE es Se Ce aa eee oo tor
SMI 0 OO a rr TT ot ——— ot} $ret et ———t ot rt het oat ——} ST, a 222)0 2 TT |The TS NTT) FTA | TS


a C Elizabeth GN
GREENLAND?™®
TEN


MER


71 ende Inlet


=


le q q ¢
TR ABA
ATA


“il!


PRE Os oat a ie Be &


SRO ae Pr ars a
TR TERRE DE LABRADOR
(


LK 9 Tat 9


om, ~% CANADA oN ae . Ge


Erarisey AS -
Se SSS


Le grand Baye


Belle Tle
=I Fichot


A


NaN Sauuages B LE COLFE DE


B des Rochers =
: ert LAVRENT =
=P Ne if = = oA ned
P a —= Min
5 Mor guerite =a ie eas oe , : 4 Bo. Toon
| d @ = = —SSS= = 3s
vane R36 Valpes = Ga spay ¢ == I JemMay


Cde home Viste


Montane Fk =


B des Moluey


MM de PR E | Persee I de Bacalles
= Sault dele am Gad Efpoir? I de hoane Aventure
f Chav fiers Boe Chalou ae Orphe/ms
Tan o *


a: f v'
Q = ’e. 5 é ie
~arn & Saule % 7 EP, vil / ’ 9°


ma od


Tow ily a une Lied eules Souvag ‘ Ry,
Ssynine de Kuiure os fant fecheore de fremb Yererns as a \ 3 Ja. Mapdeleine EM “ ; ‘ : EET dE Ipoir
atfblnes Fon Jes ons 9 Sault tong z : - / x 7 LS e & ieee Petit Bore ote = ‘ Ce Rare


Chaffo defcarihous “8g


a 4


= oy sf fey GD audico he jn Anglois
ij ; a ;
—_- = Soult MER DOVCE ov 1 Wed Lieu ou ly « quanhi ce : : air i catoine
Sault de Gaflgn —~ descounert ouec es rinage S dalentoer es \ de'Grfs y =| = Bre rarucile E
Longue


= (“dix Cornailles


Annees 1514. 1619, et 1618. par le Side Champlain
T de Safinou


vf de Keoubstan 2 im R Hes : jean
<=. = F7 Hira des 2 2 Pes ipt t Aor faines > 5
Cheweu’ ewer Thireaias us 2
a faa


z \ oe? Laux Loups AMarins
€5 Jens defen


Affiftagueronens


Gens doPohin J FBu's de Chnsel..
7 rw t faigners pe
= : Y Sau ange My


Aurg
ty


2 Ree,


Anteworonons


Pye en ee oy re P de For WHR
= a Ee gave Je“Chat t sou is cay! = Meath ees NOVVELLE FRANCE i
ES ; ee Garanteuanhnais ~ oe hae au font remorqures les diuerfes habitations
Aghon and y oquorhle ™ ee a” oF gers an des Francois, defpuis la Premiere defecuverte
dale th ee oe pe enien Jufuessa present, recomllie et dresset fur
mr At wes j : ye g diver fes relahens modernes,
Gea > TR ss Po A. q 1643


fe. 7% Re Chesle
Te Les AndafacibeaeAe ts


|. 4 Pape chez Jean Boiffeou, Enlumineur
que fort le Poreellaine


oy pour les Curtes Geogra hiques, ents

ith du Palais a Lad ayal ip :

‘entaine de Touyence,
7 £37 *®N


= Immefhar


J Cherles
Point Confort
¢ Henry


ey in ~~: 7


a £22886 Ce ee OUNCE SS ere cesT! Sones FLUNTENILONS Semmens oe Ste


- rs
—————we 8a
Sonny ri


1 FRANCE, 1643, BY JEAN BOISSEAU.


ced from the printed original in Lenox Library.]


XLIX—L


Two LETTERS OF 1643


XLIX.— Lettre du P. Charles Garnier 4 Monsieur J. M. J.;
Ste. Marie aux Hurons, ce 23 ——, 1643


L.— Epistola Patris Joannis de Brébeuf ad R. P. Mutium
Vitelleschi, Prapositum Generalem  Societatis
Jesu, Rome; ex residentia Conceptionis ad Tria
Flumina in Nova Francia, 23 Sept., 1643


SOURCE: For XLIX., we follow a contemporary copy of
the original, in the archives of St. Mary’s College, Montreal ;
for L., we follow Father Martin’s apograph of the original,
also in St. Mary’s archives.


236 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Lettre du P. Charles Garnier a Monsieur
dU eal


Au Monsieur J. M. J.
ON TRES CHER FRERE
M Notre S': vo donne son s*. amour et sa s*.
paix.

Il a plu a Dieu que touttes les letres quon n6 ecri-
uoit 1 An passe de France ayent eté prises par les
yroquois Auec le bon P. Jogues et deux autres fran-
cois parmy quelqunes quon a apporte icy s’estoient
trouuees les Votres Celles du P Buteux Celles de ma
tante la Relligieuse et de Mon Cousin et de Ma Cousine
Bué Voyla tout Ce q*. jay receu de france, Je ne scay
pas simon frere de S‘*. Marie m’auoit ecrit Je nay
point regu les siennes pd vous je Croy que vous auez
recu tout ensemble la lettre que je vous ecriuois
YAn passé et Celle de l’Année precedente qui etoit
arriué a quebec apres le depart des Vaisseaux. nous
ne scauions pas encor au sur Ce qui est arriué a nos
trois francois que les Iroquois ont pris neamoins n6
auons entendu de plusieurs endroits qu’ils ont ete
brulez et tuez a leur arriuée dans le pays des Enne-
mis et Cela est plus q* probable. Hi sunt Martyres
Caritatis et obedientiz V6 les verrez dans la relation
et si Vous estez Dans Vne Ville ot il y ait des notres
vous pouuez en prier quelqun de vous montrer leur
petit [recit?] que nd enuoyons d’icy du P Isaac Jogues.


1642-43] GARNIER TO J. M. J 237


Letter of Father Charles Garnier to Monsieur
Joa Wewel.


To; Monsieur [4M J.


Y DEAREST BROTHER,
Our Lord give you his holy love and his
blessed peace.

It pleased God that all the letters that were writ-
ten to us last Year from France should be taken by
the yroquois, Together with the good Father Jogues
and two other frenchmen: among some that were
brought here were Yours, Father Buteux’s, my aunt
the Nun’s, and those from My Cousins Bué. That
is all That I have received from france. I know not
whether my brother de Ste. Marie had written to
me,—I have not received his letters. As for you, I
Suppose that you have received, both together, the
letter which I wrote to you last Year and the One of
the preceding Year, which had reached quebec after
the departure of the Vessels. We do not yet know
with certainty What has befallen our three frenchmen
whom the Iroqtois have captured; nevertheless, we
have heard from several sources that they were
burned and killed at their arrival in the country of
the Enemies; and That is more than probable. Hz
sunt Martyres Caritatis et obedientie. You will see
them in the relation, and if You are In A City where
there are some of ours, you can pray some one of
them to show you their little [narrative] by Father
Isaac Jogues, which we send from here, when they


238 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


quand on Aura receu je Croy q¢* faute d autre Le P.
fauyer vo fera bien Cette charité il est vray que no
sommes icy dans de grands dangers de n6é vies mais
le bon est q® Cest pour le seruice de N6 M*. po qui
mourir vaut plus que miles vies que si v6 n’estez pas
dans de si grandes occasions de souffrances Courage
neamoins mon cher frere Consolez v6 de la Croix
que n.s. vO presente que si vO me dites que Votre
laschete v6 empesche de la receuoir de ses mains
Comme vous desirez regardez Cette lascheté Comme
vne Autre Croix quil vé faut aussi suporter doucem*.
Je veux dire que Vous ne Vous en affligiez [pas] auec
Exces. Helas il faut bien que n6 nous suportions
nous mesmes He qui na rien a suporter en soy meme
en Cette Vie? Cela n’appartient qua N.S. eta N. D.
Et qui simpatientera Contre soy meme po ses imper-
fections en Cela-meme sen rendra plus imparfait qu’il
nest mon cher frere donum habemus dominum il vous
ayme trop po vous quitter Consolez v6 Ce nest pas
peu que vous: portiez les liurés de Ni Sivet dessa
sainte mere et que V6 soyez de leur maison v6 ferez
beaucoup Auec vn peu de Courage et beaucoup de
patience a attendre la Visite de Dieu dans vostre
Coeur vne chose que je Craindrois pd vne personne
de votre naturel seroit vn peu d’ennuy si vous n’a-
uiez de loccupation mais je Croy que Vous vé endon-
neriez suffsament que si lobeissance ne v6 endonnoit
assez je prie N.S. quil v6 Consolle et vous face trou-
uer du plaisir dans vos Employs Vous me ferez plaisir
de me mander quelsils sont pd Ce qui est des notres
C est destre en mission six mois Continuellement
scauoir Est pendant l’automne et 1 hyuer et meme


1642-43] GARNIER TO j. M. J 239


shall Have received it. I Think that, for want of
another, Father fauyer will gladly do you This
kindness. It is true that we are here in great dan-
gers of our lives; but the advantage is, that It is for
Our Master’s service for whose sake to die is worth
more than a thousand lives. What if you have not
so great opportunities for suffering? Courage, never-
theless, my dear brother: Console yourself with the
Cross which our lord offers you; and if you tell me
that Your cowardice prevents you from receiving it
at his hands As you desire, regard This cowardice
As Another Cross, which you must also bear quietly.
I mean that You should not grieve Yourself to Ex-
cess. Alas, we must needs endure our own selves.
Why, who has nothing to endure in himself, in This
Life? That belongs only to Our Lord and to Our
Lady. And he who shall lose patience With himself
for his imperfections, in That very thing will render
himself more imperfect than he is: my dear brother,
bonum habemus dominum,; he loves you too much to
forsake you. Console yourself. It is not a little
thing, that you bear the liveries of Our Lord and of
his holy mother, and that You are of their house;
you will do much With a little Courage and much
patience, to await the Visit of God in your Heart.
A thing which I would Fear for a person of your
nature would be a little weariness, if you had no
occupation; but I Think that You would adequately
supply yourself therewith. And, if obedience should
not supply you enough, I pray Our Lord that he Con-
sole you, and always cause you to find pleasure in
your Tasks; You will do me a favor to apprise me
what they are. As Touching ours, It is to be ona
mission six months Continually,—to wit, Both dur-


240 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


pendant l’eté faire souuent des Voyages au bourg que
n6 auons po partage n6 auons encor passé Cette hyuer
Le P. Le Moyne et moy au Bourg de S‘. Joseph de
Teanaostriae Lequel Bourg fut affligé L’Eté Dernier
de la mort de deux chrestiens et vne Chrestienne qui
nd etoient bien Considerables scauoir est de Eustache
ahatsistari qui etoit le premier guerrier de Ce pays
et qui fut pris des ennemis auec Le p Jogues de
Thomas savenhati qui fut tué vers Lautomne par les
ennemis auec plusieurs autres de son bourg qui etoient
allé Cueillir vne Certaine Espece de Chanure et de
christine Tarihia Mere d’Estienne Totiry chef de la
Cabanne ou est notre petitte Chapelle de s‘. Joseph
mais N.S. a repare abondament Ces pertes nous don-
nant Cet hyuer dans Ce bourg plusieurs bons chre-
stiens nouueaux et fortifiant de plus en plus les
anciens entre Autres Neophytes qu’il luy a plu de nd
donner est un Capitaine nommé Thomas Tsondak¥a
quy etoit notre hoste depuis quatre Ans enfin ila
plu a Dieu de Luy toucher Le Coeur auec vne sienne
sceur nomme andiora que no auons nommé marie
depuis qu’ils sont Chrestiens nd auons quitté leur
Cabanne po loger chez Etienne ou est la chapelle
ayant trop d’incommodité a etre dans vne autre
Cabanne que Celle ou est la chapelle ou nous auons a
entrer fort souuent po y faire prier les chrestiens.
Ce Tomas Tsondak8a est homme fort exact a faire
bien son deuoir de chrestien il est tous les matins
des premiers a la porte de la chapelle p6 entendre la
messe et tous les soirs ne manque pasa y aller prier
Dieu non obstant les affaires que sa charge luy donne
vn Autre Capitaine nommé Assisk¥a Cest aussy fait


1642-43] GARNIER TO j. M. J 241


ing the autumn and winter, and even during the sum-
mer; to make frequent Journeys to the village which
we have as our portion. We also went, This last
winter, Father Le Moyne and I, to the Village of St.
Joseph of Teanaostriae; Which Village was afflicted
Last Summer by the death of two christian men and
a Christian woman, who were greatly Esteemed by
us,—namely, of Eustache ahatsistari, who was the
first warrior of This country, and who was taken by
the enemies, with father Jogues; of Thomas sauen-
hati, who was killed toward Autumn by the enemies,
with several others of his village, who had gone to
Gather a Certain Kind of Hemp; and of christine
Tarihia, Mother of Estienne Totiry, chief of the
Cabin in which is our little Chapel of st. Joseph.
But Our Lord abundantly made good These losses,
by giving us This last winter in This village several
good new christians, and strengthening the former
ones more and more; among Other Neophytes whom
it has pleased him to give us, is a Captain named
Thomas Tsondakwa, who had been our host for four
Years; at last it has pleased God to touch His Heart,
with that of a sister of his named andiora, whom we
have named marie. Since they have become Chris-
tians, we have left their Cabin to lodge with Etienne,
where the chapel is,—finding too much inconven-
ience in being in another Cabin than That where the
chapel is, which we have to enter very often, to have
the christians pray there. This Tomas Tsondakwa
is a very strict man in doing well his duty as a chris-
tian,— he is every morning among the first at the
door of the chapel to hear mass; and every evening
he fails not to go thither and pray to God, notwith-
standing the business which his office occasions him.


242 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 23


Chrestien grace a Dieu et nd Contente bien le jeune
h6e a quitte sa Capitainerie pd etre Exemp de plu-
sieurs soins superstitieux des malades qui appartienent
aux Capitaines il disoit vn jour a quelques de ses
parentes qui le detournoient daller prier dieu a la
chapelle; quand je scaurois que 20 Hommes m’y au-
roient dresse des Ambusches po me tuer et qu’on me
diroit demain ils my seront plus attends a Demain a
aller prier Dieu je n’en ferois rien tous les samedys
nos chrestiens se Confessent et les dimanches nous
leurs faisons cathechisme ou né les interogeons tous
il ya plaisir a voir des Capitaines et des femmes
vieilles repondre. Estienne fait de sa Cabanne vne
Ecolle de devotion ne prenant plaisir a parler d Autre
chose a Ceux qui le viennent voir Et il ne se Con-
tente pas de Cela &c Au lieu de leur faire le Cathe-
chisme le dimanche né leur faisons dire leur Chape-
letadeux Cheeurs ils y trouuent bien du plaisir ils
ayment bien leur chapelet et le portent pé la plus
part pendant a leur Cous n6n6 seruons dune Inuen-
tion po les accoutumer a Cognoitre le Dimanche qui
est de leur faire réciter la premiere dizaine de leur
Chapelet le lundy la2 le mardy &c puis le dimanche
ils le disent tout Entier et Ainsy ils s accoutument
a Conoitre le dimanche etant meme a la Chasse.

Les ministres de Satan ont pris plaisir a susciter
Cet hyuer quantité de mauuaises Langues Contre n6
Chrestiens on se mocque d eux on les menace de les
tuer ou du moins de les chasser du bourg on ne les
inuite que raremt. aux festins mais ce sont Ces perse-
qutions qui affirmisent leglise de Dieu Veritablemt.
C est vne grande Consolation que de Voir dans vne


1642-43] GARNIER TO /]. M. J 243


Another Captain, named Assiskwa, has also become
a Christian, thanks to God, and Contents us well; the
young man has left his Captaincy in order to be Ex-
empt from several superstitious attentions to the sick,
which belong to the Captains. He said one day to
some of his female relatives who were diverting him
from going to pray to Godin the chapel: ‘‘ Though I
knew that 20 Men had laid Ambushes there to kill
me, and one should say to me ‘ To-morrow they will
no longer be there; wait till To-morrow to go and
pray to God,’ I would do nothing of the kind.’’ Every
saturday our christians Confess, and on sundays we
instruct them in the catechism, in which we question
them all: it is a pleasure to see Captains and old
women respond. Estienne makes of his Cabin a
School of devotion,— not taking pleasure in speaking
of Anything else to Those who come to see him.
And he is not Satisfied with That, etc. Instead of
teaching them the Catechism on sunday, we have
them say their Rosary in two Choirs; they find much
pleasure therein. They are very fond of their chap-
let, and most of them wear it hanging on their
Necks. We use a Device to accustom them to Know
Sunday, which is to have them recite the first decade
of their Rosary on monday, the 2nd on tuesday,
etc.; then on sunday they say it Completely, and
Thus they accustom themselves to Know sunday,
even when Hunting.

The ministers of Satan have taken pleasure in ex-
citing, This past winter, many evil Tongues Against
our Christians; they mock them, they threaten to
kill them, or at least to drive them from the village;
they rarely invite them to the feasts; but These
persecutions are what establishes the church of God.


244 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vot. 28


Barbarie plusieurs Ames Aussy pures que sont Celles

des bons Religieux M.C. fr. Je brise icy v6 Conju-

rant de prier bien particulieremt. pd Celuy qui est &c
CaG.


de St‘. Marie Aux Hurons ce 23 1643


Le P. chastelain Le: P. Pijart’et Le.P. René Me-
nard qui sont icy se reeommandent bien a vos bonnes
Prieres Helas que deuiendra M.f. de St‘. Marie je
luy escris.


1642-43] GARNIER TO /. M. J 245


Truly It is a great Consolation to See in a Barbarous
land several Souls As pure as are Those of the good
Religious. My Dear brother, I close here: Beseech-
ing you to pray very specially for Him who is, etc.
C..G.
From Ste. Marie Of the Hurons, this 23rd, 1643.


Father chastelain, Father Pijart, and Father René
Menard, who are here, commend themselves earn-
estly to your good Prayers. Alas, what will become
of My brother de Ste. Marie? Iam writing to him..


‘246 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Epistola Patris Joannis de Brébeuf ad Reveren-
dissimum Patrem Mutium Vitelleschi, Prapo-
situm Generalem Societatis Jesu, Rome.


IR?
ine Potuit noscere P. V. statum pristinum ha-
rum Canadensium missionum tum ex litteris
nostris, tum maxime ex relatione anno superiore
italice scripta a P. Jos. Bressani qui tota hac hyeme
ccurionis officio Quebec egregie functus est. Statum
vero preesentem nostre missionis huronicz cujus ego
hic procurationem ago satis etiam agnoscit P. V.
ex litteris P. hier. Lalemant superioris illius mis-
sionis. Duo tamen sunt aut tria quae meum esse
putem perscribere, tum quia P. Lalemant ea non
potuit scribere, quia ignorat, tum quia expedit ad
Re SV. Seire,

Primum est cymbas illas huronicas que et relati-
ones hujus anni et litteras pene omnes Patrum huro-
nicorum et alia quedam preter se afferebant captas
direptasq. ab inimicis hac exeunte estate cum jactura
omiium pene rerum plurimorumq. . . . . Ca-
noz erant undecim, 23 hurones partim occisi, partim
in captivitatem seu ad flammas abducti :
vero merces omnes nostraque etiam suppellex capta
direptaq. litterarum pars maxima aut ablata una cum


1642-43] BREBEUF TO FATHER GENERAL 247


Letter of Father Jean de Brébeuf to the Very
Reverend Father Mutius Vitelleschi, Gen-
eral of the Society of Jesus, at Rome.


ERY REVEREND FATHER,

Your Paternity has been able to learn the
early state of these Canadian missions, both
from our letters, and especially from the relation
written in Italian last year by Father Joseph Bres-
sani,’? who throughout this winter has discharged the
office of parish priest at Quebec in an excellent man-
ner. The present state of our Huron mission, of
which I here conduct the administration, Your Pater-
nity also sufficiently knows from the letters of Father
Hierosme Lalemant, superior of that mission. There
are two or three things, nevertheless, which I think
it my duty to relate,— both because Father Lale-
mant was unable to write them, as he did not know
them; and also because it is important that Your

Reverence should be informed thereof.

The first is, that those Huron canoes which con-
veyed both the relations for this year, and almost all
the letters of the Huron Fathers, and certain other
things with them, were captured and plundered by
the enemies, at the close of this summer, with the
loss of nearly everything, and of most [of the
‘menj]. . . . There were eleven canoes; 23
Hurons were in part killed, in part carried away to
captivity or to the flames. . . . Moreover, all
the merchandise and even our furniture was cap-


248 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


relatione aut lacerata et in aquam projecta sunt.
Quare non mirabitur P. V. si aut nullas a Patribus
huronensibus litteras accipiat, aut saltem paucas easq.
laceras et deletas. Ut autem pretermittam ceteras
inimicorum incursiones que tota hac estate continue
fuerunt. ut etiam taceam caedem nostrorum Gallo-
rum qui in novo presidio Montis regalis capti czesiq.
sunt, ex hoc solo que dixi satis concipit P. V. quantis
tandem in angustiis versetur canadensis negotiatio
totaq. res christiana, quantaq. pericula subire debeant
qui ex huronibus huc descendunt vel qui illuc hine
proficiscuntur. Atque ob eam causam P. Jos. Bres-
sani, P. Gab. Druillete et a [sc. ego] Quebec iterum
subsistere hyemareq. fortasse cogemur.

Alterum quod velim scire P. V. pertinet ad P. Isa-
acum Jogues. de cujus captivitate nondudum certi
facti sumus et de quo tanquam de mortuo scribunt
Patres qui apud hurones sunt. Imo et ejus elogium
tanquam de mortuo mittunt ad P. V., nos autem cer-
tis nuntiis nempe ab ejus concaptivis qui aufugerunt
hucque ad nos venerunt, imo et ex ipsiusmet litteris
accepimus eum Dei gratia adhuc vivere et libere apud
inimicos agere more aliorum captivorum. Pater
certe et duo illi domestici ejus captivi ubi primum
ad sedes inimicorum pervenerunt variis atque exqui-
sitis tormentis affecti sunt omnes. Patri abscissus
est pollex sinistra, dextree vero index contritus et
mutilus redditus. Alteri etiam ex domesticis index
amputatus est omnibus vero barba et ungues avulsi,


1642-43] BREBEUF TO FATHER GENERAL 249


tured and plundered; most of the letters were either
carried away, along with the relation, or torn and
thrown into the water. Therefore, Your Paternity
will not wonder if either you receive no letters from
the Huron Fathers, or, at all events, only a few, and
those torn and obliterated. Though I pass over the
other incursions of the enemies, which were uninter-
rupted throughout this summer; though I also pass
in silence the massacre of our French, who were cap-
tured and slain in the new post of Montreal,— from
what I have said alone, Your Paternity sufficiently
understands in what great straits are the canadian
trade and the whole christian cause, and how great
dangers those must undergo who come down hither
from the Hurons, or who depart hence to go thither.
And on this account Father Joseph Bressani, Father
Gabriel Druillete," and I shall perhaps be compelled
again to stay and winter at Quebec.

The other thing that I would have Your Paternity
know, pertains to Father Isaac Jogues,—of whose
captivity we have recently been informed, and of
whom the Fathers who are with the Hurons write as
if he were dead,—nay, more, they even send his
eulogium to Your Paternity, as of onedead.” But we
have assuredly learned, by positive messages through
his fellow captives who have fled and come hither to
us,—nay, also, from his own letters,—that by the
grace of God he is still alive, and freely goes about
among the enemies, in the manner of the other cap-
tives. The Father, it is true, and those two captive
attendants of his, when they first arrived at the hab-
itations of the enemies, were all subjected to mani-
fold and excruciating tortures. The Father’s left-
hand thumb was cut off, and the forefinger of his


250 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 23


ignes etiam admoti, tandem tamen vita donati sunt
omnes franci. Nuncque [spes] illis est fore ut liberi,
salvi et incolumes ad nos reducerentur, sed ut in-
constans est et mutabile barbarorum ingenium pau-
cos post dies mutata sunt corda, unus nostrorum ex
improviso interfectus est, reducendorumque aliorum
consilium abreptum atque ex eo tempore usque in
hodiernum diem non cessarunt nobis insidias et

sicut et huronibus et algonquinis. atque
adeo dum hec scribo ecce refert nuntius hurones
internecioni datos novem, multos vulneratos nos-
trasq. omnes sarcinulas quas revehebant penitus
amissas. ea autem erant non pauca atque ad victum
nostrorum qui illic sunt, imprimis necessariz: Sit
nomen Domini benedictum, Dominus Dedit, Dominus
abstulit.

Ex his liquet quam pessimo in statu site sint res
Canadenses, sed aliunde he infelices plage tantis
donis coelestibus sunt locupletiores quanto sunt mise-
riores: Non regnat hic vitium sed virtus et pietas
non solum apud nostros qui ubique sese viros et ger-
manos Societatis filios ostendunt, sed etiam apud
nostros Gallos et apud Barbaros, nec solum apud eos
Barbaros qui jam fidei nomen dederunt sed etiam
apud ceteros qui nondum fidem profitentur. Vix
enim easdem suas superstitiones exercent, speran-
dumque esset si pace nunc fueremus [sc. frueremur]
brevi omnes ad fidem aggregandos esse.
Commendo me impense P. V® SS. sacrificiis et preci-


— 1642-43] BREBEUF TO FATHER GENERAL 251


right hand was crushed and mutilated; one of the
attendants also had a forefinger cut off. Indeed, all
had their beards and nails torn out, and fire was also
applied ;— finally, however, all the Frenchmen were
granted their lives. They now had hope that they
might be led back to us, free, safe, and unharmed; but,
as the barbarians’ character is inconstant and fickle,
their inclinations were changed, after a few days.
One of ours was suddenly killed, and their intention
of conducting the others home was renounced;
and, besides, from that time even to the present
day, they have not ceased [to lay] snares for us and
Sls just as they do for both the Hurons and
the Algonquins. Indeed, even while I am writing
these things, lo, a messenger reports that nine Hu-
rons have been given over to massacre, and many
wounded, and all our little baggage, which they were
carrying back, totally lost. Moreover, there were
not a few of these articles, and they were most neces-
sary for the sustenance of ours who are there. May
the Lord’s name be blessed; the Lord Gave, the
Lord has taken away.

From these things it is evident in what a very
evil condition Canadian affairs are placed; but, on
another side, these unhappy afflictions are by so much
richer in heavenly gifts, as they are more lament-
able. Not vice rules here, but virtue and piety: not
only among ours, who everywhere show themselves
men, and true sons of the Society; but also among
our French and among the Barbarians,—nor alone
in the case of those Barbarians who have already en-
rolled their names for the faith, but also in the case
of others who do not yet profess the faith. For they
scarcely practice their former superstitions; and we


252 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vot. 28


bus, et positis genibus ejus benedictionem obnixe
efflagito utpote qui sum
je AG
Servus in X*°. humill. atq.
obedientiss.
Joan. DE BREBEUF
Ex residentia Conceptionis
ad tria flumina in Nova francia
23 Sept. 1643.


1642-43] BREBEUF TO FATHER GENERAL 253


might hope, if we now enjoyed peace, to bring all, in
a short timento the faith: .-- | lvearnestly com-
mend myself to Your Paternity’s Holy sacrifices and
prayers; and on my knees I do urgently beseech
your blessing; inasmuch as I am
Your Paternity’s
Most humble and obedient
Servant in Christ,
JEAN DE BREBEUF.


From the residence of the Conception,
at the three rivers in New france.
September 23, 1643.


LI


RELATION OF 1642-43


PARIS: SEBASTIEN ET GABRIEL CRAMOISY, 1644


SOURCE: We follow a copy of the original Cramoisy
edition (H. 81), in Lenox Library.

There is but one part to this Relation, of which we give
herewith the first three chapters; the rest will be contained
in Volumes XXIV. and XXV.


=
=. §, oe
— : = a
a _ a = Mics 4 7 =
—— 7
: era
ee “


AQeHS erin ho Sc eee einige aa oc tant .
eee SL Sones 1 tS 257 each
Suiy “VP haliw 2 ow} A ~iqlf 9 - P11 BS fies) Uc wt i wit. a

bantatnioe ny (li Fett ai-: — i


wets Sait


a
mush, kee “


ELATIC


DE CE QVI S'EST PASSE’
: URNS LOA 3
NOVVELLE FRANCE
EN L'ANNEE 1642. & 1643.
Enuoyée au R. P.TEAN FILLEAV


Provincial de la Compagnie de lesys
. enla-Prouinee de France.


UR.P. BARTHELEMY Vimon t, dé
la me[me. Cc ompagnie , Superieur de
toute ela MifSon.


Upp. UU a tnt


LORE RMIRE IIIT


A PARIS,


_ SEBASTIEN CRA MOISY,-
Cher Imprimear foe da Roy,
: ET


eer I ee Metom/8


roé S, face
ques, aux


GABRIEL ‘CRAMOBSY. Cicoignts.
M. DG. XLIV. ;
“nec Prinlege du Roy.


RELATION


OF OCCURRENCES
IN


NEW FRANCE
IN THE YEAR 1642 AND 1633.


Sent to-hev. Father,-E ANS PIPL EAU,
Provincial of the Society of Jesus,
in the Province of France.


By REV. FATHER BARTHELEMY VIMONT,
of the same Socwety, Superior of
all the Mission.


eA S:,


(SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, | ruést. Jac-
Print- | Printer in Ordinary to the King, | ques, atthe
ed by AND Sign of the

GABRIEL CRAMOISY, | Storks.


Me Dee XLV;
By Royal License.


260 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vox 23


Table des Chapitres contenvs en ce Livre.


ELATION de ce qui s eft pafsé en la Nouuelle


France, en l Année 1642. & 1643. pag. I
Chapitre I. De la Refidence de Kebec, & de
Leftat de la colonie, = : : 4
Chap. II. Du Seminatre des Vrfulines, 19
Chap. III. De la Refidence de Sillery, & comme
les Sauuages y ont paffé l’ année. ; 28
Chap. IV. De la fagon de viure des Merge: ae
Sillery. : aera
Chap. V. Continuation di mefme fubicll- = BO
Chap. VI. De la venué des Atticamegues & de leur
Baptefme. : 76
Chap. VII. Des eee gut ont Raieae a Outer
& a Sillery. : 7 6103
Chapa vi ltnwlad2 Woe de Tatu foe - IO
Chap. IX. De 1’ Hofpital. ; 145
Chap. X. De ce qui s’eft pafsé aux trots Ries
& au Fort de Richelieu. ‘ eek?
Chap. XI. De ce qui s’eft paffé & Mont- ey ito
Chap. XII. Des courfes des Iroquois, & de la
captiuité du Pere logues. : 234


Chap. XIII. De quelques remarques, ‘gets eB
Hurons. : 263
Chap. XIV. Dela oe au vee og [aac rene
& de fon arriuée en France. : ees


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43


261


Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.


ELATION of occurrences in New France, in
R the Year 1642 and 1643. . - page
ChapterI. Of the Residence at Kebec, and the
state of the colony, é ‘
Chap. II. Of the Ursuline Soper
Chap. III. Of the Residence at Sillery, and oe
the Savages there spent the year.
Chap. IV. Of the manner of cane among the
Christians at Sillery.
Chap. V. Continuation of the same eure
Chap. VI. Of the coming of some Atticamegues,
and of their Baptism.
Chap. VII. Of the Hurons who Ph ee at Ge
and Sillery. ;
Chap. VIII. Of the Nan at ae
Chap. IX. Of the Hospital.
Chap. X. Of events at the three Muar. and at
the Fort of Richelieu. ; : ;
Chap. XI. Of occurrences at Mont-real. :
Chap. XII. Of incursions by the Iroquois, and the
captivity of Father Jogues. : ;
Chap. XIII. Some observations touching the
Flurons. ‘
Chap. XIV. Of the se ae Madier jee
Jogues, and his arrival in France. f


262 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Extraict du Priuilege du Roy.


AR Grace & Priuilege du Roy, a eft permis A
SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY Marchant Libraire LIuré,
Imprimeur Ordinaire du Roy, Directeur de l’Im-

primerie Royalle du Chafieau du Louure, & Ancien Efche-
uin de noftre bonne ville de Paris, d’ Imprimer, ow faire
Imprimer vn Liure Intitulé Relation de ce qui s’eft paffe
en la Nouuelle France, en l’annee 1642. & 1643. En-
uoyee au R, P, (EAN FILLEAV Prouincial de la Compagnie
de IESVS en la Prouince de France, par le R. P. Barthe-
lemy Vimont de la mefme Compagnie Superieur de toute
la Mifston. Et ce pendant le temps & efpace de cing
ans confecutifs, auec defféces a tous Libraires & Im-
primeurs d’Imprimer ou faire Imprimer ledit Liure,
fous pretexte de deguifement, ou changement qu’ils
y pourroient faire, 4 peine de confifcation & de
l’amende portee par ledit Priuilege. Donné a Paris
le 24. Decembre 1643.
Par le Roy en fon Confeil.
CRAMOISY.


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 1642-43 263


Extract from the Royal License.


Y Grace and Privilege of the King, SEBASTIEN
B CRAMOISY, Sworn Merchant Bookseller, Printer in
Ordinary to the King, Director of the Royal Press
at the Castle of the Louvre, and Sometime Alderman of
our good city of Paris, zs authorized to Print, or cause
to be Printed, a Book Entitled: Relation de ce qui s’est
passe en la Nouvelle France, en l’annee 1642. et 1643.
Envoyee au R. P. JEAN FILLEAU Provincial de la Com-
pagnie de JESUS en la Province de France, par le R. P.
Barthelemy Vimont de la mesme Compagnie Superieur de
toute la Mission. And during the time and space of
five consecutive years, all other Booksellers and Print-
ers are forbidden to Print, or cause to be Printed,
the said Book, under pretext of disguise, or possible
alterations therein, on penalty of confiscation and
the fine provided by this License. Given at Paris,
the 24th of December, 1643.
By the King in his Council,
CRAMOISY.


264 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Permifsion du R. P. Prouincial.


OVS IEAN FILLEAV Prouincial de la Compa-

N gnie Geules ws cm 1a) rolince emit atce:

auons accordé pour l’aduenir au fleur SEBAS-

TIEN CRAMOISY Marchand Libraire Iuré Imprimeur

Ordinaire du Roy, Directeur de l’Imprimerie Roy-

ale du Chafteau du Louure, & Ancien Efcheuin de

la ville de Paris, l’impreffion des Relations de la
Nouuelle France, faict a Paris le Ianuier. 14.
IEAN FILLEAV.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 265
ee ee ee


Permission of the Reverend Father Provincial.


E, JEAN FILLEAU, Provincial of the Society
\V V of JESUS in the Province of France, have
granted, from this time forth, to sieur
SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, Sworn Merchant Bookseller,
Printer in Ordinary to the King, Director of the Roy-
al Press at the Castle of the Louvre, and Sometime
Alderman of the city of Paris, the right to print the
Relations of New France; done at Paris, Jan-
wary. 14.
JEAN FILLEAU.


266 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


[1] Relation de ce qvi s’eft paffé en la nouuelle
France, en l’annee 1642. & 1643.


IBAAG (CLEMRIOS LI


OSTRE REUERENCE,

N’aura pas ceite annee tout le contentement

accouftumé de la Relation: Car la meilleure
partie qui eft celle des Hurons a eftre prife par les
Hiroquois, auc les lettres de nos Peres, en vne dé-
faite de 40. Hurons, qui arriua le g. de Iuin dernier,
prés de Montreal. Le Pere Ifaac Iogues, qui eft
captif parmy les Barbares, nous efcrit du dernier de
Iuin, [2] qu’elle eft tombee en fes mains auec plu-
fieurs lettres de nos Peres des Hurons. Ie ne fcay
s'il pourra bien l’adreffer 4 Voftre R. par quelque
voye que nous ne f¢auons pas, ie ne doute nullement
qu’elle ne foit pleine de grande confolation; nous
auons aprins en gros, que les principaux Hurons
commencent a goufter 4 bon efcient les chofes de
Dieu, & fe difpofer au Baptefme, qu’enuiron cent
ont efté choifis cette année pour eftre receus au
nombre des enfans de Dieu. I’ay veu cette année aux
3. Riuieres les Hurons Chreftiens commencer a faire
bande a part, & publiquement, de maniere qu’il y
auoit d’vn co{té la bande des Croyans qui groffit tous
les iours & fait profeffion publique du Chriftianifme,
& de l'autre celle des Infideles, qui commence a
d{iJminuer d’eftime & de hardieffe. I’enuoyea voftre
R. la Relation de ga bas, laquelle fournira des


1642-43} RELATION OF 1642-43 267


[1] Relation of occurrences in new France, in
the year 1642 and 1643.


IPAS ACIEHEM SUN,


OUR REVERENCE

Will not this year find your usual satisfac-

tion im the-Relavion; tor the-best.part of it;
which is that concerning the Hurons, was taken by
the Hiroquois, together with our Fathers’ correspon-
dence, in a defeat of 40 Hurons, which occurred on
the oth of last June, near Montreal. Father Isaac
Jogues, now captive among the Barbarians, writes to
us, on the last day of June, [2] that it has fallen into
his hands, along with sundry letters of our Fathers
among the Hurons; I know not whether he can at
all convey it to Your Reverence by some way un-
known to us. I doubt not that it is full of great
consolation; for we have learned, in general, that the
principal Hurons are beginning to relish the things
of God in good earnest, and to dispose themselves to
Baptism, so that about a hundred have been chosen
this year to be received into the number of the chil-
dren of God. At the 3 Rivers this year, I saw that
the Huron Christians were beginning to separate
themselves, and that publicly,—so that on one side
was a daily increasing band of Believers, openly pro-
fessing Christianity; and on the other, that of the
Infidels, who begin to decrease in both esteem and
boldness. I send your Reverence the Relation for
this region, which will furnish examples of virtue,


268 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


exemples de vertu, & des accroiffemens du Chriftia-
nifme remarquables, mais ce fera 4 l’ordinaire, auec
lVamertune de plufieurs mauuaifes nouuelles proue-
nantes de la part des Hiroquois, [3] lefquels fans
doute, fi nous n’auds quelque fecours de la France,
feroit pour ruiner icy & la foy & le commerce. I]
n’y a quafi plus de paffages ouuerts pour aller aux
Hurons, nos pacquets l’an paffé, furent prins en
montant; cette année, ils l’ont efté en defcendant.
Comme i’efery cecy lI’apprens que les voila’ prins
pour la troifiefme fois en rem6tant, cela nous a obligé
d’enuoyer 4 voftre R. le P. le Jeune, comme experi-
menté de log-téps aux affaires de ces cdtrees, pour le
remonttrer plus efficacement 4 ceux qui ont de l’af-
fection pour ce pauure pays. C’a eité l’aduis & le
fouhait de Monfieur de Mé[t]magny noftre Gouuer-
neur, & de tous les habitas qui m’en ont in{ftamment
prié. Ie ne doute nullement que la charité de voftre
R. n’embraffe efficacement l’affaire de Dieu & du
falut de ces peuples delaiffés depuis tant de fiecles:
nous experimentons tous les ans des effects rares de
fon affection cordiale & paternelle, fur tout i’implore
le fecours de fes SS. SS. & de tous nos PP. & FF. qui
font fous fa charge.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 269


and show notable increase of Christianity; but it
must, as usual, be tempered with the bitterness of
manifold evil tidings, arising from the side of the
Hiroquois, [3] who, had we not some help from
France, would undoubtedly ruin here both the faith
and commerce. There is hardly an open passage left
for us to reach the Hurons; our baggage last year
was taken going up,—this year, coming down. At
this writing, I learn that it is now captured for the
third time on the way upward; and therefore we are
obliged to send to your Reverence Father le Jeune,
as one of long experience in the affairs of these re-
gions, that he may more effectually represent them to
those whose thoughts are favorable to this poor land.
Such has been the advice and desire of Monsieur de
Montmagny, our Governor, and of all the inhabit-
ants, who have urgently besought me to the same
end. I doubt not that your Reverence’s charity will
effectually embrace the cause of God and the salva-
tion of these peoples, forsaken throughout so many
generations; every year we experience the singular
fruits of your cordial and fatherly affection; and
above all I beseech the help of your Holy Sacrifices
and of all our Fathers and Brethren who are under
your charge.


270 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 23


(4) CHAPITRE PREMIER.


DE LA RESIDENCE DE QUEBEC & DE iL PSPARADE yA.
COLONIE.


l’vnique fondement de la conuerfion de tous

ces peuples: on ne peut mieux ny plus efficace-
ment procurer leur falut qu’en fecourant cefte peu-
plade, laquelle graces 4 Dieu, va peu a peu croiffant,
furmontant les grands empefchemens qui s’y rencé-
trent comme font l’eloignement des fecours d’Eu-
rope, le peu de gens de trauail, la difficulté du
comerce, la longueur de l’Hyuer qui couure la terre,
cing, voire fix mois de neiges: nonobftant tout cela
chaque famille Fran¢oife, au moins pour la plufpart
fait maintenant fa petite prouifion de froment, feigle,
poix, orge, & autres grains neceffaires a la vie hu-
maine, qui plus qui moins; les vns quafi pour la moi-
tié de l’annee, les autres pour vne [5] partie: & com-
mencent 4 cognoiftre le genie du leu, & les faifons
propres a la culture de la terre, l’ouurage eft bien
commencé, il a encor befoin de fecours: mais il
auance notablement graces a Dieu. Vous voyez de
plus en chaque maifon quantité d’enfans, biens-faits,
& de bon efprit, & ce qui eft de principal en tous vn
defir ardent de fon falut, & vne eftude particuliere
de la vertu. Il] séble que la refolution de fe donner
entierement a Dieu naift auec la penfee de s’eftablir
en la Nouuelle France. Ce n’eft pas une petite


Colonie des Francois eft le premier moyen &


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 271


[4] CHAPTER FIRST.


OF THE RESIDENCE AT QUEBEC, AND THE STATE OF
THE COLONY.


HE French Colony is the chief means and only
| foundation for the conversion of all these
tribes: there is no better or more efficacious

way of procuring their salvation than by succoring
this settlement, which, thanks be to God, increases
little by little, and overcomes the great impediments
it encounters,—as the remoteness of help from
Europe, the scarcity of laborers, difficulties of trade,
and the long Winter which covers the earth, five and
even six months, with snow. Notwithstanding all
these hindrances, nearly every French household
now provides its little store of wheat, rye, peas, bar-
ley, and other grains necessary to the life of man, —
some more, some less,—some making provision for
haply six months; others, for only a [5] part of that
time. Now they begin to understand the nature of
the place, and the right seasons for tilling the soil.
The work is well started: it still has need of help,
but, thanks be to God, it makes notable progress.
Moreover, in every household you will see many chil-
dren, comely and of good wit; and in them all you
will find what is most important,—a warm desire for
their own salvation, and a singular zeal for virtue.
It would seem that the purpose of entire devotion to
God is born with the thought of establishing oneself
in New France. Nor is this a small favor of God to


272 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


faueur de Dieu, fur le pays; elle a toufiours paru &
paroift encor de nouueau plus que iamais en la per-
fonne de Meffieurs dela Cépagnie de Montreal, & de
tous ceux qui demeurent par-deca en leur habitatio.
La Frace en void vne partie nous voyons icy l’autre.
Au refte il feroit difficile d’expliquer les foins & les
peines que Monfieur de Motmagny noftre Gouuerneur
a pris & préd encor tous les iours pour applanir les
difficultez de la Colonie, tout autre auroit cent fois
perdu courage. Le “Pere Bretlany a cu, fom cette
annee de 1’inftruction [6] des Frangois, de Quebec:
il s’en eft dignement acquité, & a fait vn fruict nota-
ble par fes Predications. Le Pere Enemond Maffe
la affifté: & quoy que caffé d’[aJage, il a genereufe-
ment trauaillé, fuppleat aux forces, par fon courage,
auec grande edification de tous les habitans. Le Pere
de Brebeuf & moy venions toutes les Feftes & Di-
manches de Sillery 4 Quebec pour les aider a entédre
les Confeffions, & pour faire vn mot d’exhortation
aux Francois, & contribuer 4 la confolation de tous.

Noftre Seigneur a appellé 4 foy cette année le Pere
Charles Raymbault, c’eft le premier Religieux de
no{tre Compagnie qui foit mort en ces quartiers icy.
Il auoit vn zele tres-grand pour l’eftabliffement de
la Colonie Frang¢oife, & pour la conuerfion de ces
peuples: il auoit procuré en France quelques années
les affaires de noftre Miffion auec beaucoup de pru-
dence & de charité, fon zele le porta 4 demander auec
in{tance d’e{tre du nombre des ouuriers de cette nou-
uelle Eglife: Ce qui luy fut accordé, il fut enuoyé
il ya quatre ans aux Hurons, [7] 4 la Requefte de
nos Peres qui font 14, qui cognoiffoient fa prudence
& fon courage, ils efperoient s’en feruir pour la


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 1642-43 273


the land; it has ever appeared, and is manifest still
more than ever in the persons of the Gentlemen in
the Company of Montreal, and of all the dwellers in
their settlement on this side. France may see this
favor in part; we here see the rest. After all, it
would be a difficult task to set forth the care and
pains continually taken by Monsieur de Montmagny,
our Governor, both hitherto and now, in relieving
the Colony’s hardships,— wherein all others would
have lost courage, times without number. Father
Bressany has had charge this year of the religious
instruction [6] of the French at Quebec; which office
he has worthily fulfilled, and has produced remark-
able effects by his Preaching. He has been assisted
by Father Enemond Masse, who has nobly labored,
though broken with age,—supplying by courage his
want of strength, unto the great edification of all the
residents. Father de Brebeuf and I went every
Feast day and Sunday from Sillery to Quebec, to help
them in hearing the Confessions, to speak a word of
exhortation to the French, and to minister to the
consolation of all.

Our Lord has called to himself, this year, Father
Charles Raymbault, the first Religious of our Society
to die in these quarters. He was very zealous for the
establishment of the French Colony, and for the con-
version of these tribes; he had managed the affairs
of our Mission with much prudence and fervor,
during several years in France, and the same zeal
prompted him to ask urgently that he be numbered
with the laborers of this new Church. His request
being granted, he was sent four years ago to the
Hurons, [7] at the Request of our Fathers there, who,
knowing his prudence and courage, hoped to employ


274 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


defcouuerture de quelques nations plus efloignées, &
comme la langue Algonquine y eft neceffaire, on
lennuoya aux Nipiffiriniens peuples Algonquins auec
le P. Claude Piiart, oti les voyages & les trauaux
font incroyables, il y gaigna vne maladie lente qu’il
le confommoit peu a peu: Ce qui obligea nos Peres
de l’enuoyer icy-bas, ot la commodité de viures & de
remedes eft plus grande, mais noftre bon Dieu le
trouua mur pour le Ciel, il mourut l’an paffé le 22.
d’Octobre, aprés vne langueur de trois mois qu'il
paffa dans vne grande tranquillité d’efprit, vne enti-
ere cO0formité a la vol6te de Dieu, & vne cdfolatiod
bien particuliere de mourir en la nouuelle Frace, &
d’auoir gaigné so mal en trauaillat pour le falut des
Sauuages. Monfieur le Gouuerneur, qui eftimoit fa
vertu defira qu’il fuft enterré prés du corps de feu
Monfieur de Champlain, qui eft dans vn fepulchre
particulier, erigé exprés pour honorer la memoire
de ce fignalé [8] perfonnage qui a tant obligé la
Nouuelle France.

I’adioufteray icy vn mot de la vie & de la mort de
Monfieur Nicollet, Interprete & Commis de Meffieurs
de la Compagn{ije de la Nouuelle France, il mourut
dix iours apres le Pere, il auoit demeuré vingt-cing
ans en ces quartiers. Ce que i’en diray feruira pour
la cognoiffance du pays, il arriua en la Nouuelle
France, l’an mil fix cents dix-huit, fon humeur & fa
memoire excellente firent efperer quelque chofe de
bo de luy, on l’enuoya hiuerner auec les Algonquins
de I’Ifle, afin d’aprendre leur langue, il y demeura
deux ans feul de Francois, accompagnant toufiours les
Barbares dans leurs courfes & voyages, auiec des fati-
gues qui ne font imaginables qu’&a ceux qui les ont


1642-48] RELATION OF 1642-43 275


him for the discovery of some remoter nations. And,
as the Algonquin speech was necessary for this, they
sent him, in company with Father Claude Pijart, to
the Nipissiriniens, an Algonquin people,— in which
mission, journeys and labors are past belief. There
he was seized with a slow sickness, which wasted
him little by little, insomuch that our Fathers had
to send him down here, for greater convenience of
food and medicine. But our good God found him
tripe for Heaven; and, on October 22nd of last year,
he died, after languishing during the space of three
months,— which he spent in great peace of mind, in
full resignation to the will of God, and with a very
special solace at dying in new France, and having
gained his disease while working for the salvation of
the Savages. Monsieur the Governor, esteeming
his virtue, desired that he be buried near the body
of the late Monsieur de Champlain; which is in a
separate tomb, erected expressly to honor the re-
membrance of that illustrious [8] personage, to whom
New France has owed so much.

I will now speak of the life and death of Monsieur
Nicollet, Interpreter and Agent for the Gentlemen of
the Company of New France. He died ten days after
the Father [Raymbault], and had lived in this region
twenty-five years. What I shall say of him will
aid to a better understanding of the country. He
came to New France in the year sixteen hundred and
eighteen; and forasmuch as his nature and excellent
memory inspired good hopes of him, he was sent to
winter with the Island Algonquins, in order to learn
their language. He tarried with them two years,
alone of the French, and always joined the Barba-
rians in their excursions and journeys,— undergoing


276 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


veiies, il paffa plufieurs fois les fept & huict iours
fans rien manger, il fut fept femaines entieres fans
autre nourriture qu’vn peu d’efcorce de bois: il
accompagna quatre cents Algonquins, qui alloient en
ce temps 1a faire la paix auec les Hyroquois, & en
vint A bout heureufement; [9] pleuft aA Dieu qu'elle
n’euft iamais efté rompué, nous ne fouffririons pas a
prefent les calamitez qui nous font gemir, & donne-
ront vn eftrange empefchemét 4 la conuerfion de ces
peuples. Apres cette paix faite, il alla demeurer
huict ou neuf ans auec la nation des Nipiffir[inJiens,
Algonquins, la il paffoit pour vn de cette nation,
entrant dans les confeils forts frequents a ces peuples,
ayant fa cabane & fon mefnage a part, faifant fa
pefche & fa traitte, il fut enfin rappellé & eftably
Commis & Interprete. Pendant qu’il exercoit cet[t]e
charge, il fut delegué pour faire vn voyage en la
nation appellée des Gens de mer, & traiter la paix
auec eux, & les Hurons, defquels ils font efloignés,
tirant vers l’Oiieft d’enuiron trois cents lieués. II
s’embarqua aux pays des Hurons auec fept Sauuages,
ils pafferent par quantité de petites nations, en allant
& en reuenant, lors qu’ils y arriuoient, ils fichoient
deux baftonens [sc. baftons en] terre, auquel ils pen-
doient des prefens, afin d’ofter a ces peuples la pen-
{ée de les prendre pour ennemis, & de les maffacrer.
A deux iournées de cette nation il [10] enuoya vn de
ces Sauuages porter la nouuelle de la paix, laquelle
fut bien receué, nommément quand on entendit que
c’e{toit vn European qui portoit la parole, on depef-
cha plufieurs ieunes gés pour aller au deuant du
Manitouiriniou, c’eft a dire de l’homme merueilleux:
on y vient, on le conduit, on porte tout fon bagage,


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 1642-43 277


such fatigues as none but eyewitnesses can con-
ceive; he often passed seven or eight days without
food, and once, full seven weeks with no other nour-
ishment than a little bark from the trees. He
accompanied four hundred Algonquins, who went
during that time to make peace with the Hyroquois,
which he successfully accomplished; [9] and would
to God that it had never been broken, for then we
would not now be suffering the calamities which move
us to groans, and which must be an extraordinary
impediment in the way of converting these tribes.
After this treaty of peace, he went to live eight or
nine years with the Algonquin Nipissiriniens, where
he passed for one of that nation, taking part in the
very frequent councils of those tribes, having his
own separate cabin and household, and fishing and
trading for himself. He was finally recalled, and
appointed Agent and Interpreter. While in the
exercise of this office, he was delegated to make a
journey to the nation called People of the sea, and
arrange peace between them and the Hurons, from
whom they are distant about three hundred leagues
Westward. He embarked in the Huron country,
with seven Savages; and they passed by many small
nations, both going and returning. When they
arrived at their destination, they fastened two sticks
in the earth, and hung gifts thereon, so as to relieve
these tribes from the notion of mistaking them for
enemies to be massacred. When he was two days’
journey from that nation, he [10] sent one of those
Savages to bear tidings ,of the peace, which word
was especially well received when they heard that
it was a European who carried the message; they
despatched several young men to meet the Manitoui-


78 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 28


il eftoit reueftu d’vne grande robbe de damas de la
Chine, toute parfemée de fleurs, & d’oyfeaux de
diuerfes couleurs: Si toft qu’on l’apperceut, toutes
les femmes & les enfans s’enfuirent, voyant vn
homme porter le tonnerre en ces deux mains. C’eft
ainfi quils nommoiét deux piftolets qu'il tenoit, la
nouuelle de fa venué s’efpandit incontinent aux lieu
circonuoifins, il fe fift vne affemblée de quatre ou
cing mil hommes, chacti des principaux fift sd feftin,
-en l’vn defquels on feruit au moins fix vingt Caftors,
la paix fut conclué, il retourna aux Hurons, & dela
& quelque téps aux trois Riuieres, ot il continua fa
charge de Commis & Interprete auec vne fatisfaction
grande des Francois & des Sauuages, defquels il
ef{toit efgalement & vniquement [11] aymé, il confpi-
roit puiffamment, autant que fa charge le permettoit
auec nos Peres pour la conuerfion de ces peuples
lefquels il fcauoit manier & tourner ot il vouloit
d’vne dexterité qui 4 peine trouuerra fon pareil.
Monfieur Oliuier Commis General de Meffieurs de la
Cépagnie, eftat venu l’an paffé en France, ledit fieur
Nicollet defcendit 4 Quebec en fa place, auec vne
ioye & confolation fenfible qu’il eut de fe voir dans
la paix, & la deuotion de Quebec, mais il n’en ioiiit
pas long temps: car vn mois ou deux aprés fon
arriuée, faifant vn voyage aux trois Riuieres pour
la deliurance d’vn prifonnier Sauuage, fon zele luy
coufta la vie qu’il perdit dans le naufrage, il s’em-
barqua a Quebec fur les fept heures du foir, dans la
chalouppe de Monfieur de Sauigny, qui tiroit vers les
trois Riuieres, ils n’eftoient pas encore arriuez & Sil-
lery qu’vn coup de vent de Nord-Ett, qui auoit excité
vne horrible tempefte fur la grande riuiere, remplit


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 279°


riniou,— that is to say, ‘‘ the wonderful man.’’ They
meet him; they escort him, and carry all his bag-.
gage. He wore a grand robe of China damask, all
strewn with flowers and birds of many colors. No
sooner did they perceive him than the women and
children fled, at the sight of a man who carried thun-
der in both hands,—for thus they called the two
pistols that he held. The news of his coming quick-
ly spread to the places round about, and there assem-
bled four or five thousand men. Each of the chief
men made a feast for him, and at one of these ban-
quets they served at least sixscore Beavers. The
peace was concluded; he returned to the Hurons,
and some time later to the three Rivers, where he.
continued his employment as Agent and Interpreter,
to the great satisfaction of both the French and the
Savages, by whom he was equally and singularly
[11] loved. In so far as his office allowed, he vigor-
ously codperated with our Fathers for the conversion
of those peoples, whom he could shape and bend
howsoever he would, with a skill that can hardly be
matched. Monsieur Olivier, Chief Agent of the Gen-
tlemen of the Company, having gone to France last
year, sieur Nicollet came down to Quebec in his
place, with joy and lively consolation at sight of the
peace and devotion at Quebec: but his joy was not
‘long. A month or two after his arrival, he made a
journey to the three Rivers for the deliverance of a
Savage prisoner; which zeal cost him his life, ina
shipwreck. He sailed from Quebec, toward seven
o’clock in the evening, in the shallop of Monsieur de
Savigny, bound for the three Rivers. Before they
reached Sillery, a gust of wind from the Northeast,
which had raised a horrible storm upon the great


280 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


la chalouppe d’eau, & la coula 4 fond, apres luy auoir
fait faire deux ou trois tours dans l'eau. [12] Ceux
qui eftoient dedans n’allerent pas incontinent a fond,
ils s’attacherent quelque temps alachalouppe. Mon-
fieur Nicollet eut loifir de dire a2 Monfieur de Saui-
gny, Monfieur fauuez-vous, vous fgcauez nager. Ie
ne le fcay pas? pour moy ie m’en vay a Dieu. Ie
vous recommande ma femme & ma fille, les vagues
les arracherent tous les vns aprés les autres de la cha-
louppe qui flottoit renuerfée contre vne roche. Mon-
fieur de Sauigny feul fe ietta a l’eau & nagea parmy
des flots & les vagues, qui reffembloiét a de petites
montagnes, la chalouppe n’eftoit pas bien loin du
riuage, mais il eftoit nuict toute noire, & faifoit vn
froid afpre, qui auoit des-ia glacé les bors de la riuiere,
ledit fieur de Sauigny s’entant [sc. fentant] le coeur &
les forces qui luy manquoient, fift vn voeu a Dieu, &
peu aprés frappant du pied il fent la terre, & fe tirant
hors de l’eau, s’en vint en noftre maifon a Sillery A
demy mort, il demeura affez long-temps fans pouuoir
parler, puis enfin il nous racompta le funefte accident,
qui outre la mort de Monfieur Nicollet, dommageable
a tout le pays, [13] luy auoit perdu trois de fes meil-
leurs homme, & vne grande partie de fon meuble,
& de fes prouifions, luy & Madamoifelle fa femme
ont porté cette perte fignalée das vn pays barbare,
auec vne grande patience & refignation a la volonté
de Dieu, & fans rien diminuer de leur courage. Les
Sauuages de Sillery au bruit du nauffrage de Mon-
fieur Nicollet, courent fur le lieu, & ne le voyant
plus paroiftre en tefmoignent des regrets indicibles.
Ce n’eftoit pas la premiere fois que cét homme s’eftoit
expofé au danger de la mort pour le bien & le falut


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 281


river, filled the shallop with water and caused it to
sink, after two or three turns in the waves. [12]
The passengers did not immediately sink, but clung
for some time to the shallop. Monsieur Nicollet
had leisure to say to Monsieur de Savigny, ‘‘ Sir,
save yourself; you can swim. I cannot; as for me,
I depart to God. I commend to you my wife and
my daughter.’’ One by one, the waves tore them all
from the shallop, which was floating overturned
against arock. Monsieur de Savigny alone plunged
into the water, and swam amid the billows and
waves, which were like small mountains. The shal-
lop was not very far from shore, but it was now black
night, and there prevailed a sharp frost, which had
already frozen the borders of the stream; so that the
sieur de Savigny, perceiving his heart and strength
fail, made a vow to God, and, soon afterward strik-
ing with his foot, he felt the ground. Drawing him-
self out of the water, he came to our house at Sillery,
half dead, and remained a long time without strength
to speak; then at last he told us of the woeful mis-
chance, which, besides the death of Monsieur Nicol-
let, so grievous for all the country, [13] had lost him
three of his best men, and a great part of his furni-
ture and stores. He and Madamoiselle his wife
endured this notable affliction in a barbarous country
with great patience and resignation to the will of
God, and without abating a jot of their courage.
The Savages of Sillery, at the noise of Monsieur
Nicollet’s shipwreck, ran to the spot, and manifested
unspeakable grief to see him appear no more. This
was not the first time that this man had exposed him-
self to the peril of death for the weal and salvation
of the Savages,—he did so very often, and left us


282 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


des Sauuages, il l’a faict fort fouuent, & nous a laiffe
des exemples qui font au deffus de l’eftat d’vn homme
marié, & tiennét de la vie Apoftolique, & laiffent vne
enuie au plus feruent Religieux de limiter. Douze
iours aprés leur naufrage le prifonnier, pour la deli-
urance duquel il s’eftoit embarqué, arriua icy. MO6-
fieur des Roches command&t aux trois Riuieres, fui-
uant l’ordre de Monfieur le Gouuerneur l’auoit racheté,
il mit pied a terre a Sillery, & de 1a fut conduit a
1’ Hofpital pour eftre penfé des playes & [14] bleffures
que les Algéquins luy auoient fait apres fa capture,
il luy auoiét emporté la chair des bras, en quelques
endroits iufques aux os, les Religieufes hofpitalieres,
le receurent auec beaucoup de charité, & le firent pen-
fer fort foigneufement, en forte qu’en trois femaines
ou vn mois il fut en eftat de retourner en fon pays,
tous nos Neophytes luy te{moignerent autant de com-
paffion & de charité que les Algéquins de 1a haut luy
auoient montré de cruauté, ils luy donnerent deux
bons Sauuages Chreftiens, pour le conduire iufques
aux pays des Abnaquiois, qui font voifins de fa
nation, Charles Meiafchasat affez cogneu és prece-
dentes Relations, & dont ie feray encor mention cy-
aprés, fut vn des deux deftinez a le remener, il fut
rauy d’aife de faire ce voyage, & auoir cette occafion
de pouuoir parler de noftre faincte foy aux Abna-
quiois & autres nations voifines. Au refte tout lhy-
uer s’eft paffé & Quebec, dans la paix & la deuotid
accouftumee, mais tout le Printemps n’a efté qu’vne
continuation de plufieurs nouuelles affligeantes du
cof{té [15] des Hiroquois, apres lefquelles font furue-
nués les plus triftes, & les plus funeftes qui euffent
jamais pel nous arriuer: c’eft la mort du grand


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 283


examples beyond one’s expectations from a married
man, which recall Apostolic times, and inspire even
the most fervent Religious with a desire to imitate
him. Twelve days after their shipwreck, the pris-
oner for whose deliverance he had embarked arrived
here. Monsieur des Roches, commander at the three
Rivers, had ransomed him, according to Monsieur
the Governor’s order. He came ashore at Sillery,
and was thence conducted to the Hospital, to be
dressed for the sores and [14] wounds inflicted by the
Algonquins after his capture. They had stripped
the flesh from his arms, in some places even to the
bones; but the hospitable Nuns received him with
much charity and had him dressed with such care
that in three weeks or a month he was able to return
to hisowncountry. All our Neophytes showed him
no less compassion and charity than the Algonquins
up there had shown him cruelty. They gave him
two kind Christian Savages to guide him unto the
lands of the Abnaquiois, who are neighbors to his
nation. Charles Meiaschawat, well known in the
former Relations, and whom I shall again mention
hereinafter, was one of those appointed to conduct
him back. He was exceedingly glad to make this
journey, and to have this opportunity of speaking of
our holy faith to the Abnaquiois and other neigh-
boring peoples. In fine, the entire winter at Quebec
passed with its wonted peace and devotion; but the
whole of Spring was one continued season of mani-
fold heavy tidings from the direction [15] of the
Hiroquois. Then came the saddest and most woeful
news that could ever have reached us,—the death of
great Louys the Just, which grieved the Christian
Savages equally with the French since those esteemed


284 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


Louys le Iufte, qui a autant attrifté les Sauuages
Chreftiens que les Francois, ceux-l4 ne s’eftimants
pas moins fes naturels fubiets, que ceux cy, auffi a-on
toufiours tafché de les obliger A le recognoiftre pour
leur fouuerain, & aconferuer pour luy leur affectis
toute entiere, la fouuenance des prefens qui leur
auoit fait autrefois eftoit encore fi fraifche, qu’a la
premiere nouuelle qu’ils en eurent, on les vit tous
abbatus, nous eufmes peine a les confoler, n’ayant
pas moins befoin de confolation qu’eux dans la perte
d’vn fi bon Prince: ils s’appaiferent vn peu quand on
leur dit qu’il viuoit encore en la persdne de fon fils,
qui auoit fuccedé a fes Eftats & a fa Couronne, &
s’en allerent prier Dieu pour luy.

A cefte trifte nouuelle on en adioufta vne autre
qui renouuella l’affliction, ce fut le decez de Monfieur
le Cardinal Duc, qui outre le foin qu'il auoit pour
l’ancienne Frace, n’oublioit pas la nouuelle, laquelle
[16] parmy fes grandes difficultez, & parmy fes
dangers refpiroit au fouuenir & aux promeffez de ce
grand coeur, & attendoit auec ioye & efperance vn
fecours neceffaire, lors qu’on nous annonga fa mort.
Quand nous nous fouuenions cét Hyuer de ce que
Madame la Ducheffe d’Eguillon, & Madame la Con-
teffe de Brienne qui ont toufiours fi puiflammét porté
les interefts de la Colonie & des Sauuages nous en
efcriuoient, & les fecours tres-certains que nous en
efperids les plus grands maux nous fembloient bien
petits; mais il a pleu 4 Dieu en difpofer autrement
par des fecrets de fon infinie fageffe qui nous font
incognus. I’efpere pourtant que nous ne ferons point
fru{trez de nos efperances, puifque les perfonnes
aufquelles la diuine prouidence a mis en main le


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 285
SEE es EST OA Rea ne


themselves his natural subjects no less than these;
and therefore had we ever sought to oblige them to
acknowledge him for their sovereign, and yield him
their fullest affection. The remembrance of his
former gifts to them was still so fresh that, on first
hearing the news, they were all dejected, and we
could hardly comfort them, seeing that we had the
like need of consolation for the loss of so kinda
Prince. But they were somewhat calmed when told
that he was yet living in the person of his son, who
had succeeded to his Estates and Crown; and so they
went to pray to God for him.

This sad news was augmented by other tidings,
which renewed our affliction; this was the death of
Monsieur the Cardinal Duke, who, besides the care
that he had for old France, was not forgetful of the
new, which [16] amid its great difficulties, and its
dangers, breathed afresh at the remembrance and
the promises of that great heart, and was with joy
and hope awaiting a necessary aid, when we learned
of his death. When we remembered, that Winter,
what Madame the Duchess d’Eguillon and Madame
the Countess de Brienne, who have always so vigor-
ously supported the cause of the Colony and of the
Savages, wrote to us of him, and the assured help
that we expected from him, the greatest evils ap-
peared to us small, indeed; but it has pleased God
to dispose affairs differently, in the secrets of his
infinite wisdom, which are to us unknown. I trust,
however, that we shall not be disappointed in our
expectations; since the persons to whom divine prov-
idence has committed the Government of France,
have no less of zeal and power than they had, to
stuiccor these poor countries, and contribute to the


286 LES RELATIONS DES JESUTTES [VoL. 23:


Gouuernement de la France, n’ont pas moins de zele
& de pouuoir quils auoient pour fecourir ces pauures
contrees, & contribuer 4 la conuerfion de ces peuples,
nous en fommes bien affeurez, nous ne doutons
aucunement que la diuine bonté qui a fait fucceder
nof{tre ieune Roy aux gradeurs [17] de fon pere, ne
le faffe auffi heritier du zele qu’il auoit pour le falut
de nos Sauuages, & de toutes ces nations.

Nous fommes auffi bien certains de la bonne volon-
té & affection de la Royne Regente, nous en ations eu
iufques a prefent des tefmoignages trop euidens,
pour ne pas receuoir vne confolation fenfible, & des
efperances bien grandes parmy tant de fafcheux acci-
dens. En vn mot elle nous monftre vn cceur de
mere.

Nous receumes toutes ces triftes nouvelles a4 la
fainct Iean, par le vaiffeau de Mifcou, qui donna iuf-
ques a Tadouffac les autres nauires de la flotte ont
tardé cette annee plus que iamais, ce qui nous eftoit
vn notable furcroift d’affliction, & aux Sauuages auffi.
Nous commencions 4 craindre quelque nouueau mal-
heur. En fin Dieu nous les dona en l’heureux iour
de l Affomption de noftre-Dame. Comme nous alli-
ons commencer la Meffe deux voiles parurent 4 vne
lietie de noftre port, la ioye & la confolati6 faifirét le
coeur de tous les habitas, mais elle redoubla bien fort
quand vne [18] chalouppe nous vint donner la nou-
uelle des perfonnes qui y eftoient: le P. Quétin auec
trois braues ouuriers Religieux de nof{tre Compagnie,
& tres-propres a la langue, fgauoir, les Peres Leonard
Garreau, Gabriel Druillet, & Noél Chabanel. Il y
auoit auffi trois Religieufes bien choifies, & dont le
courage furpaffe le fexe, fcauoir la Mere Marie de


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 287


conversion of these peoples. Weare well assured, we
nowise doubt, that the divine goodness which has
made our young King succeed to the grandeurs [17]
of his father, will also make him heir to the zeal
which he had for the salvation of our Savages and of
all these nations.

We are also very certain of the good will and affec-
tion of the Queen Regent, of which we have hitherto
had proofs too manifest not to receive a sensible
consolation and very strong hopes amid so many
grievous accidents. In a word, she shows for us a
mother’s heart.

We received all these sad tidings on saint John’s
day, by the Miscou vessel, which came as far as Ta-
doussac; the other ships of the fleet were later than
ever this year, which was a notable increase of afflic-
tion to us, and also to the Savages. We were begin-
ning to fear some new misfortune. Finally, God
sent them to us, on the holy day of our Lady’s
Assumption. As we were about to begin Mass, two
sails appeared a league distant from our port; joy
and consolation seized the hearts of all the inhabit-
ants, but it very greatly redoubled when a [18] shal-
lop came and brought us the news of the persons
who were there: Father Quentin, with three worthy
workers, Religious of our Society, and very apt for
the language—to wit, Fathers Leonard Garreau,”
Gabriel Druillet, and Noél Chabanel.“* There were
also three well-chosen Nuns, whose courage exceeds
their sex —to wit, Mother Marie de Ste. Geneviefve,»
and Mother Anne de St. Joachim, Hospital nuns from
the house of Diepe; and Mother Anne des Seraphins,
Ursuline, from the Convent of Plermel in Brittany.
It required great strength for these good women to


288 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


S. Geneuiefue, & la M. Anne de S. Ioachim, Hofpi-
taliere[s] de la maifon de Diepe, & la M. Anne des
Seraphins, Vrfuline du Conuent de Plermel en Bre-
tagne. Ila fallu vne grande force a ces bones filles
pour furmonter les dangers de 1’Ocean, la crainte du
pays Barbare, & les difcours importuns de ceux qui
ont voulu les deftourner en France d’vne fi faincte
entreprife. Monfieur d’Alibouft tres-honnette, & tres-
vertueux Gentil-homme, affocié en la Compagnie
de Meffieurs de Montreal auec fa femme, & fa belle
fceur de pareil courage & vertu eftoient dans vn de
ces deux nauires: toute cette faincte troupe aborda
a Kebec, & fe vint confacrer A Dieu & au falut des
Sauuages, fous la protection & la[1g]faueur de 1l’Em-
periere de l’Vniuers, I’oubliois la pieté d’vn hénefte
Preftre némé M. Chartrier, qui grofiffoit la troupe,
& eft venu fe déner au feruice des Meres Vrfulines,
auec defir & deffein de feruir Dieu en ces pays le
refte de fes iours, & contribuer ce qu’il pourra de
force & d’indu{trie pour le falut des Sauuages.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 289


overcome the dangers of the Ocean, the fear of the
Barbarous country, and the importunate words of
those who wished to turn them aside in France from
so holy an enterprise. Monsieur d’ Aliboust,! a very
honest and most virtuous Gentleman, associated in
the Society of Gentlemen of Montreal, with his wife
and his sister-in-law, of similar courage and virtue,
were in one of these ships: all this blessed company
landed at Kebec, and came to consecrate itself to
God and to the salvation of the Savages, under the
protection and the [19] favor of the Empress of the
Universe. I was forgetting the piety of an honest
Priest named Monsieur Chartrier,’’ who increased
the company, and came to devote himself to the
service of the Ursuline Mothers, with the desire and
purpose of serving God in this country the rest of his
days, and contributing what he can, in the way of
strength and industry, to the salvation of the Savages.


290 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


CHARM UR arl.
DU SEMINAIRE DES VRSULINES.


VISQUE les Meres Vrfulines font eftablies a
p Quebec, ie mettray icy en fuite ce qui les
regarde. Ce Seminaire eft vn des plus beaux
ornemens de la Colonie, & vn ayde fignalé pour
l’arre{t & conuerfion des Sauuages. Elles allerent en
leur nouueau logis, quittant celuy qu’elles tenoient a
loiiage le 21. Nouembre 1’an paffé, iour auquel la
tres-faincte Vierge fe confacra 4 Dieu dans le temple,
leur [20] baftiment eft grand & folide, fait 4 chaux
& afable. Elles ont trouué vne affez belle fontaine
dans les fondemens du logis qui leur eft extremément
commode. Elles font en lieu d’affeurance autant
qu'il eft poffible dans le Canada, eftant placee a 80.
ou 100. pas du fort de Kebec. Elles ont eu toufiours
vn affez bon nombre de filles Sauuages, tant penfion-
naires arreftees que paffageres outre les petites filles
Francoifes, & quantité de Sauuages, hommes & fem-
mes qui les vont fouuent vifiter & receuoir quelque
fecours & inftruction. Voicy en particulier ce qui
s’eft paffé cette annee dans cette faincte maifon. Les
petites filles feminariftes ont excellé dans le foin de
fe preparer a la faincte Communion, elles l’ont ordi-
nairement demandee 8. iours auparauant que s’en
approcher. Elles employoient ce temps a4 s’y dif-
pofer, elles fe iettoient quelquefois 4 genoux deuant
leur maiftreffe, pour tefmoigner leur defir, & luy


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 291


CHAPTER II.
OF THE URSULINE SEMINARY.


C INCE the Ursuline Mothers are established at
Quebec, I will here set forth what pertains to
them. This Seminary is one of the fairest orna-

ments of the Colony, and a marked help for the

detention and conversion of the Savages. The sis-
ters went into their new dwelling, quitting the one
which they held by lease, on the 21st of November
of last year, day on which the most blessed Virgin

consecrated herself to God inthetemple. Their [20]

building is large and substantial, and thoroughly and

carefully constructed. They have discovered an ex-
cellent spring of water in the foundations of the dwell-
ing, to their very great convenience. They are in

a place of safety so far as is possible in Canada, being

located from 80 to 100 paces from the fort of Kebec.

They have always had a fairly good number of

Savage girls, both permanent and temporary boarders,

besides the little French girls; and many Savages,

men and women, often come to visit them and to
receive some help and instruction. Here are some
details of the events of this year in that holy house.

The little seminary girls have excelled in care to

prepare themselves for holy Communion, which they

have usually asked 8 days before approaching it.

“They would spend this time in preparation for it:

sometimes they would cast themselves on their knees

before their mistress, in order to manifest their


292 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vou. 28


eee eee eee ee


declarer les intentions qu’elles auoient pour appli-
quer la faincte Communion, laquelle regarde tou-
fiours la conuerfion de leur compatriotes [21] & le
bien de ceux qui leur font des charitez en France.
Il y en a lefquelles outre les prieres ordinaires &
l’examen qu’elles font le foir, employent encore vn
bon efpace de téps a prier Dieu en leur particulier,
auant que fe coucher. Ces prieres particulieres
s'addreffent d’ordinaire & la faincte Vierge. C’eft vn
grand coup pour leur falut que de leur donner cette
deuotion.

Elles difent quelquesfois aux rencontres fort naifue-
ment les prieres iaculatoires qu’elles font. Ma Mere,
difent-elles, ie parle fort fouuent 4 Dieu dans mon
ceeur. Ie prends grand plaifir a prononcer les faincts
noms de Iefus & Marie. Elles font fort facilement
touchees du remords de leurs pechez, & les declarent
fort candidement A leurs maiftreffes, & n’ont aucun
repos qu’elles ne s’en foient confeffees. Les Reli-
gieufes les ont veués plufieurs fois s’arrefter a dreffer
leur intention auant que commencer leurs actions
particulieres, & prononcer tout haut le nom de Dieu,
ou de la Vierge, ou de quelque Sainct qu’elles
vouloient honorer pour lors.

[22] Vne Sauuageffe eftant veniie demeurer au
feminaire pour quelques iours, afin de fe difpofer au
fainct Baptefme qu’elle fouhaittoit auec ardeur, edifia
grandement les Religieufes par fa ferueur. Elle les
preffoit fans ceffe pour eftre inftruite de ce qui eftoit
neceffaire, elle alloit mefme trouuer toutes les petites
penfionnaires les vnes apres les autres, pour repeter
ce qu’on luy auoit donné a apprendre. Vne Reli-
gieufe l’ayant trouuee vn iour qu’elle fautoit de ioye,


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 293


desire, and to declare to her their intentions of stead-
fastly applying the holy Communion to the conver-
sion of their fellow countrymen [21] and to the
good of those who bestow upon them charities in
France. There are some who, in addition to the cus-
tomary prayers and the evening examination, spend.
considerable time in private prayer to God, before
going to sleep. These private prayers are usually
addressed to the blessed Virgin. It is a great aid to
their salvation to give them this form of worship.

They sometimes very artlessly mention in conver-
sations their ejaculatory prayers. ‘‘ My Mother,’’
they say, ‘‘ I very often speak to God in my heart. I
take great pleasure in pronouncing the holy names of
Jesus and Mary.” They are very easily touched with
remorse for their sins, and declare them very candidly
to their teachers, and have no rest until they have
made their confession. The Nuns have repeatedly
seen them stop to fix their attention before beginning
their private tasks, and pronounce aloud the name of
God, or of the Virgin, or of some Saint whom they
wished to honor at that moment.

[22] A Savage woman, having come to sojourn at.
the seminary for some days,—in order to prepare
herself for holy Baptism, which she ardently desired, —
greatly edified the Nuns by her fervor. She inces-
santly urged them to instruct her in that which was
necessary; she would even go in quest of all the
little boarders, one after the other, to rehearse what
had been given her to learn. A Nun, having one
day found her leaping for joy, asked her the reason.
‘“The Father,’ she said, ‘‘has assured me that I
should soon be baptized, and that I had learned well.”

A Seminary pupil, named Barbe, having been se-


294 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


luy en demanda la caufe. Le Pere, dit-elle, m’a
affeuré que ie ferois bien-toft baptifée, & que i’auois
bien appris.

Vne Seminarifte nommee Barbe, ayat efté rudemét
reprife de fa faute, i’ay bien merité cela, dit-elle, car
“‘moy qui fuisinftruite & baptizee, ie fais bien vne plus
groffe faute, que celles qui faillent & ne fgauent pas
encore les prieres.

Cét enfant a d’excellens fentimens de Dieu, ie luy
ay fouuent parlé moy-mefme hors du feminaire, elle
a l’efprit vif, & le iugement fort bon, & l’humeur
docile, elle appartient 4 vn homme fort [23] groffier
& charnel, & qu’on na peu encore admettre au bap-
tef{me pour ce fubiect, il le fouhaitte, mais il ne veut
pas encore quitter ces mauuaifes habitudes. Dés
que cét enfant fcait qu’il s’approche du feminaire,
elle fe va cacher. On la trouua vn iour en vn
coin toute tranfie de crainte pour ce fubiect, on luy
demande ce quelle a. C’eft Kimichfamifman, cét
hommes s'appelle ainfi, qui me veut amener, que
feray-ie? on ne prie point Dieu dans fa cabane, fi
mefme il en auoit enuie, fa femme l’en empefcheroit,
on ne fait que du mal 1a dedans, il n’y a du tout
qu’vne perfonne qui y prie Dieu, ie ne veux point
fortir d’auec vous que ie ne fcache lire & efcrire, &
tout ce qui eft neceffaire pour aller au Ciel, pour-
uoyez moy quand ie feray grande, afin que ie puiffe
viure auec les bons Chreftiens de Sillery fans crainte
de cét homme.

Vne petite fille aagee de huict, ou neuf ans fortit
du feminaire 1’Automne dernier, pour retourner auec
fes parens, & hyuerna auec eux prés du [24] fort de
Richelieu. Le Printemps venu ils retournét: cette


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 295


verely reproved for her fault, ‘‘ I have well deserved


that,’’ said she, ‘‘ for I who am instructed and bap-


tized commit a much greater fault than they who:


transgress, and have not yet a knowledge of the
prayers.’
This child has excellent notions of God; I myself


have often talked with her outside the seminary.


She has a lively wit and very good judgment, anda
docile temper; she belongs to a man very [23] rude
and carnal, whom, on that account, it has not yet
been expedient to admit to baptism; he wishes it,
but he is not yet willing to forsake his bad habits.
As soon as this child knows that he is approaching
the seminary, she goes to hide herself. They found
her one day in a corner, all chilled with fear on that
account; they asked what ails her. ‘‘ Itis Kimichsa-
misman,’’—that man is thus called,—‘‘ who wishes
to take me away; what shall I do? They do not


pray to God in his cabin,— even if he desired to, his’


wife would stop him; they do nothing but evil in
there; there is only one person at all there who
prays to God. I do not at all wish to go from you
till I can read and write, and know all that is neces-
sary for going to Heaven. Provide for me when I
shall be grown up, so that I can live with the good
Christians of Sillery without fear of this man.”’

A little girl, aged eight or nine years, left the semi-
nary last Autumn, to return to her parents, and win-
tered with them near the [24] fort of Richelieu. At
the coming of Spring, they returned; this poor child
came to beg the Mothers to take her back; they
refused her at first, for some just reasons, and ex-
pressly because her parents wished to have hers she;
began to weep, and would stay in spite of them, and


=


296 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


pauure enfant vint prier les Meres de la reprendre,
elles la refuferent d’abord pour quelques iuftes rai-
fons, & nommément pource que fes parens la vou-
loient auoir, elle fe met a pleurer, & veut demeurer
malgré eux, & malgré les Religieufes, on la renuoya
pourtant, elle reuint peu apres, on la refufe derechef,
enfin elle prend l’occafid de la Proceffion du S. Sacre-
ment pour retourner la troifiefme fois. Les Religi-
eufes faifoient ce iour-la feftin aux Sauuages, fes
parens y eftoient, & lors qu’ils s’en voulurent aller a
Sillery, la fille s’efchappe d’auec eux, & fe va cou-
cher aupres la porte des Meres, & leur dit, ie veux
eftre inftruite, ayez pitié de moy, ie n’ay que faire
de mes parés pour ce fubiet, la pluye furuient, elle
ne feremuépoint pour cela. Elle euft paffe la nuid,
fifes larmes n’euffent obligé les Religieufes de luy
ouurir la porte de la maifon, ot elle entra comme
dans vn paradis. La pauure enfant n’a pas l’efprit
des plus vifs du monde, elle fait ce qu'elle peut, fa
bonne volonté fupplée au [25] defaut de l’efprit.
Nous auons apris des nouuelles de la petite The-
refe Huronne qui a demeuré deux ans en ce femi-
naire, & fult prife lan paffé par les Hiroquois, auec
le Pere Iogues, & auec fon oncle, appellé Iofeph,
lequel s’eft efchappé a ce Printemps des mains des
Iroquois. I’en parleray cy-apres plus au long. Il
vint 4 Kebec apres fa deliurance, & alla faliier les
Meres Vrfulines. Voicy ce qu’il racontoit de fa
niepce captiue. Elle n’a point de honte, difoit-il,
de fon Baptefme. Elle prie publiquement Dieu, elle
dit qu’elle croit, elle fe confeffe fouuent au P. Iogues,
elle m’obeyffoit en tout. Ie l’exhortois fouuent de
bien-faire, & de ne perdre point courage: ie vous


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 297


in spite of the Nuns; nevertheless, they sent her
back. She returns soon afterward,— they refuse her
again; finally, she seizes her opportunity, at the
Procession of the Blessed Sacrament, to return the
third time. The Nuns were that day feasting the
Savages: her parents were there, and, when they
wished to go away to Sillery, the girl escaped from
them, and went to lie down near the door of the Moth-
ers, Saying to them: ‘‘ I wish to be instructed; have
pity on me; I have nothing to do with my parents in
this matter.” The rain comes on; she stirs not for
that. She would have spent the night there, if her
tears had not constrained the Nuns to open the door
of the house to her, where she entered, as into a para-
dise. The poor child has not one of the quickest
wits in the world,—she does what she can; her gooa
will supplies the [25] want of intellect.

We have learned some news of the little Huron
Therese who sojourned two years in this seminary,
and was taken last year by the Hiroquois, with
Father Jogues, and with her uncle, called Joseph, who
escaped this Spring from the hands of the Iroquois.
I will speak of this at more length hereinafter. He
came to Kebec after his deliverance, and went to
greet the Ursuline Mothers. This is what he related
of his captive niece. ‘‘ She is not ashamed,” he said,
‘‘of her Baptism. She prays publicly to God; she
says that she believes; she often confesses herself to
Father Jogues; and she obeys me in everything. I
would often exhort her to do well, and not to lose
courage. Iam much obliged to you, my Mothers,”
the poor man said, ‘‘for the good instructions that
you have given her,—she forgets them not, she
knows all that you teach. She speaks to Father


298 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


fuis bien obligé mes Meres, difoit le pauure homme,
des bones inftructions que vous luy auez donné, elle
ne les oublie point, elle fcait tout ce que vous enfei-
gnez, elle parle au P. Iogues toutes les fois qu’elle le
void cela n’empefche pas qu'elle ne foit grandement
trifte, viuant parmy nos cruels ennemis, elle a bien
enduré du froid & des incommoditez l’Hyuer, elle a
efté fort [26] malade, mais Dieu luy a rendu la fanté,
ie luy difois fouuét: aye courage, cette vie eft courte,
tres [sc. tes] trauaux prendront fin, & tu feras bien-
heureufe au Ciel, fi tu perfeueres, elle n’a point de
chapelet, elle fe fert de fes doigts pour le dire, ou de
petites pierres qu’elle met 4 terre a chaque Awe Maria,
quelle dit, elle me parloit fouuét de vous. Helas difoit
elle, files filles vierges me voyoient en cét eftat parmy
ces mefchans Iroquois qui ne cognoiffent pas Dieu,
qu’elles auroiét pitié de moy! Ce bon lofeph racon-
tant cecy aux Religieufes, eftoit accompagné de trois
ou quatre autres Hurons qui s’eftoient efchapez auec
luy.

Le parloir de ces bonnes filles fert fouuent de claffe,
les Sauuages de dehors y venant exprez les voir, &
demander & eftre inftruits, ou reciter les prieres, il
y en a qui ont pris le temps que les enfans faifoient
les prieres ou l’examen, pour entrer au parloir ou en
la Chapelle, & fe ioindre a leur deuotid. Les Atika-.
megues qui font peuples Montaignets du cofté du
Nord pendant le téps qu’ils ont feiourné aupres de
Quebec, ont efté fouuent [27] vifiter les Religieufes
pour efcouter ou apprendre quelque bon mot, ils
entroient au parloir foir & matin auec importunité
mefme pour repeter leurs prieres ou le Catechifme.
Les frais qui fuiuent ces fainctes vifites & in{tructions


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 299
ee et


Jogues whenever she sees him; but these things do
not prevent her from being exceedingly sad, living
among ourcruel enemies. She has well endured the
cold and inconveniences of the Winter; she was very
[26] sick, but God has restored her health. I would
often say to her: ‘ Have courage,—this life is short;
your labors will have an end, and you will be very
happy in Heaven, if you persevere.’ She has no
rosary; she uses her fingers to recite it, or little peb-
bles, that she lays on the ground at each Ave Maria
that she says. She often spoke to me of you. ‘ Alas,’
she said, ‘if the virgin sisters should see me in this
condition among these wicked Iroquois who know
not God, how they would pity me!’’’ The good
Joseph, who related this to the Nuns, was accom-
panied by three or four other Hurons who had escaped
with him.

The parlor of these good ladies often serves as
classroom,—the Savages from without coming thith-
er purposely to see them, and to ask to be instructed,
or to repeat the prayers; there are some who have
taken the time when the children were saying their
prayers or answering questions, to enter the parlor
or the Chapel, and join in their devotion. The Ati-
kamegues, who are Montagnais peoples in the direc-
tion of the North, during the time that they sojourned
near Quebec, often came [27] to visit the Nuns, in
order to hear or learn some good word; they would
enter the parlor evening and morning, with impor-
tunity even, for the sake of repeating their prayers
or the Catechism. The expenses attending these
holy visits and necessary instructions are great and
unavoidable, and perhaps hardly yield to those
incurred for the seminary pupils ordinarily detained


300 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


neceffaires font grands & ineuitables, & ne cedét
peut-eftre gueres 4 ceux qu’on fait pour les femina-
riftes arreftés d’ordinaire apres l’inftruction, il faut
foulager la faim de ces pauures gens. Ie ne dis rié
icy de Madame de la Pelterie: car il y euft vn an au
Printemps qu’elle alla 4 Montreal pour affifter au
commencement de cette nouuelle & faincte habita-
tion. Les Religieufes ont fait aggrandir cette annee
leur corps de logis pour auoir vne Chapelle, & loger
dauantage de Religieufes & Seminariftes. Il eft vray
que cette augmentation n’eft bonnement que com-
mencee, il y refte plus a faire qu’il n’y a de fait, la
patience gagnera tout. Cette vertu eft le miracle du
Canada.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 301


after the lesson; it is necessary to relieve the hunger
of these poor people. I say nothing here of Madame
de la Pelterie; for a year ago from Spring she went
to Montreal, to be present at the beginning of that
new and holy settlement. The Nuns have this year
enlarged their buildings, in order to have a Chapel,
and to accommodate more Nuns and Seminary pupils.
It is true that this extension is only just begun,— there
is more left to do than there has been done; patience
will conquer everything. This virtue is the miracle
of Canada.


302 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


[28] CHAPITRE III.


DE LA RESIDENCE DE SILLERY, & COMME LES SAU-
UAGES Y ONT PASSE L’ANNEE.


A bourgade de S. Iofeph, dite Sillery, diftance
is de Quebec de deux petites lieties eft compofée
d’enuiron 35. ou 40 familles de Sauuages Chre-

{tiens qui s’y font arreftez, & y demeurent toute
Vannée, excepté les teps de leur chafles a ‘ceux-cy fe
viennent fouuent ioindre plufieurs de ceux qui font
encore errans, partie pour receuoir quelque fecours,
partie pour eftre in{truicts dans les myfteres de
noftre faincte foy. Ce nombre femblera petit 4 ceux
qui ne cognoiffent pas ce que c’eft qu’vn Sauuage
errant: mais affez grand 4 ceux qui en ont la co-
gnoiffance, & fcauent la vie que menoient auparauant
ces pauures miferables. Au refte, quoy qu'il foit
petit, il n’a pas laiffé d’auoir vne grande efficace, car
[29] ¢’a efté comme la femence du Chriftianifme
parmy cette grande Barbarie. La bonne odeur des
Sauuages qui s’y font retirez, & y font publiquement
l’exercice de Chreftien, s’e{t refpandué de tous coftez.
Depuis Tadouffac & Miskou iufques aux Hurons quafi
tous parlent de les imiter. Ces familles arreftees
font cdpofees de deux fortes de persdnes, les vns
Montaignets, les autres Algonquins. Les Montai-
gnets font ceux qui ont leur pays plus prés de Kebec,
& s’appellent ainfi, a raifon de nos hautes montaignes.
Les Algonquins font de plus hault: les derniers font


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 303


[28] CHAPTER III.


OF THE RESIDENCE AT SILLERY, AND HOW THE SAV-
AGES THERE SPENT THE YEAR.


HE little village of St. Joseph, called Sillery, two
af scant leagues distant from Quebec, is composed
of about 35 or 40 families of Christian Savages

who have settled there, and live there all year,
except the times for their hunting; these are often
joined by many of those who are still roving,— partly
to receive some assistance, partly to be instructed in
the mysteries of our holy faith. This number will
seem small to those who are not acquainted with the
state of a roving Savage; but sufficiently large to
those who are thus acquainted, and know the life
which these poor wretches formerly led. Moreover,
small though it be, it has certainly been very efficient ;
for [29] it has been like the seed of Christianity
amid this great Barbarism. The good reputation
of the Savages who have betaken themselves thither,
and who there publicly exercise their Christian duties,
has spread abroad on all sides; from Tadoussac and
Miskou even to the Hurons, nearly all speak of imi-
tating them. These resident families are composed
of two sorts of persons,—one Montagnais, the other
Algonquins. The Montagnais are those who reside
nearer Kebec, and are thus called on account of our
high mountains. The Algonquins are further back;
the latter are of two sorts,—some are of the Island,
and from various places, extending toward the Hu-


304 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES — [Vot. 28


de deux fortes; les vns font de l’Ifle, & de diuers
lieux, tirant vers les Hurons, les autres font voifins
des Montaignets, & comme meflez auec eux. La
cognoiffance de Dieu & le commerce des Frangois de
Kebec a rendu ceux-cy plus fouples & plus dociles,
les autres quoy que prefque tous ruinez & reduits a
rien font demeurez dans vn orgueil eftrange, & nous
ont donné iufques 4 prefent de grands empefchemens
4a la conuerfion des autres Algonquins & des Hurons
mefmes, qui doiuent paffer par [30] leur pays, pour
venir icy bas. Nous n’auons encore pour toutes ces
familles arreftees que quatre petites maifons a la
Francoife, aufquelles nous en allds Dieu aidant cét
Automne ioindre deux autres commencees des
l’Hyuer dernier, par le moyen de quelques aumofnes
qu’on nous a donnees pour ce fubiect. Ce font quel-
ques perfonnes fignalees en vertu & en merite de
noftre ancienne France, qui ont entrepris en particu-
lier l’auancement de quelques-vnes de ces familles,
c’ef{t vn ceuure de charité excellemment bien appliqué
nous en difpofons encore vn autre pour le Printemps
prochain qui fera dediee a fain&t Frang¢ois, celuy a
qui elle eft promife porte defia le mefme nom: c’eft
le fouhait & la deuotion d’vne perfonne de merite, de
no{tre ancienne France, qui a de l’affection pour nos
Sauuages, & a choisy cette famille pour luy faire du
bien, & la tenir comme fienne. Ces maifons font
bafties moitié de noftre cofté, & moitié du cofté de
l’Hofpital, qui eft feparé d’auec nous d’vne colline
ou platon large d’enuiron foixante pas. Des‘ [36
Montaignets ont choisy noftre cof{té: les Algonquins
ont pris celuy de 1’ Hofpital, les principaux Sauuages
font logez en ces maifons 4 la Frangoife, les autres fe


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 305


rons; the others are neighbors of the Montagnais,
and as if mingled with them. The knowledge of
God, and intercourse with the French of Kebec, has
rendered the latter more supple and more docile; the
others, although nearly all ruined and reduced to
nothing, have remained in a strange pride, and have
hitherto occasioned us great hindrances to the con-
version of the other Algonquins, and of the Hurons
themselves, who are obliged to pass through [30]
their country, in order to come down hither. We
have, as yet, for all these resident families only four
little houses, on the French plan; to these, God help-
ing, we are going to add this Autumn two others,
begun last Winter, by means of some alms which have
been given us for this purpose. Some persons dis-
tinguished in virtue and in merit, of our old France,
are the ones who have undertaken in private the
advancement of some of these families,—it is a work
of charity excellently well applied. We are plan-
ning for still another, for next Spring, which is to
be dedicated to saint Francois; the man to whom it is
promised already bears the same name; such is the
wish and the devotion of a person of merit, of our
old France, who has affection for our Savages, and
has chosen this family for the sake of doing it good,
and of regarding it ashisown. The houses are built
half on our side, and half on the side of the Hospital,
which is separated from us by a hill or mound about
sixty paces wide. The [31] Montagnais have chosen
our side, the Algonquins have taken that of the
Hospital; the principal Savages are lodged in these
houses on the French plan, the others dwell, in their
fashion, under cabins of bark,—each on the side
chosen by his own tribe, waiting until we can procure


306 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 23


cabanent 4 leur facon fous des efcorces, chacun du
co{té de fon party attendant qu’on leur puiffe auffi
procurer quelques petits baftimens, comme 4 leurs
compagnons la principale vtilité de ces maifons font
les petits greniers ot ils ferrent leurs viures, & leur
petis meubles, qui auparauant fe diffipoient & fe
perdoient faute de lieu 4 les conferuer. On n’a pas
peu en faire dauantage: car a proportion des maifons,
il faut aider 4 deferter des terres 4 ceux qui font logez,
du commencement nous auions moyen de nourrir
huict hommes de trauail a Sillery, ils font a prefent
reduits a quatre, & encore nous efcrit on de France
que le fond de la donation de feu Monfieur de Sillery
deftiné 4 leur entretien, eft arre{té en France. Ie ne
fcay que penfer la deffus, finon que tout cét affaire
eft l’ceuure de Dieu. C’eft fa bonté & puiffance qui
luy ont donné commencement, & luy [32] donneront
maintenant tel progrez qu'il voudra. Ie fuis bien
certain d’vne chofe quwil eft encore plus difficile
de le continuer & maintenir qu’il n’a efte de le
commencer.

Or voicy comme les Sauuages ont paffé leurs
annees a Sillery. Les nauires leuerent l’anchre de
deuant Kebec le 7. d’Octobre de l’an paffé 1642. Leur
depart fait icy vn merueilleux filence, & applique
chacun a fa famille dans vne tranquilité profonde.

Nos Sauuages de Sillery auec quelques autres qui
s’e{toient ioins 4 eux cOtinuerent leur pefche d’An-
guille qu’ils auoient commencee quelque temps aupa-
rauant, c’e{t vne tres-fertile moiffon que Dieu fait
ciieillir tous les ans & Kebec & aux enuirons, depuis
le commencement de Septembre iufques A la fin
d’Octobre dans la grande riuiere de S. Laurens, il s’y


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 307


for them also some small buildings, as for their com-
panions. The principal advantages of these houses
are the little lofts in which they bestow their provi-
sions, and their little belongings, which formerly
became scattered and lost for want of a place in which
to keep them. It has not been feasible to do more:
for, in proportion to the houses, it is necessary to aid
in clearing lands for those who are lodged. At the
start, we had means of supporting eight workmen at
Sillery; they are at present reduced to four; and still
we hear from France that the amount of the dona-
tion of the late Monsieur de Sillery, intended for
their maintenance, is detained in France. I know
not what to think of this, except that all this matter
is the work of God. It is his goodness and power
which have given it a start, and [32] will now give
it such progress as he wills. I am very certain of
one thing,—that it is still more difficult to continue
and maintain it than it was to begin it.

Now let us observe how the Savages have spent
their years at Sillery. The ships weighed anchor
from before Kebec the 7th of October of last year,
1642. Their departure produces a wonderful silence
here, and directs each man’s attention to his own
family, in deep tranquillity.

Our Savages of Sillery, and some others who had
united with them, continued their fishing for Eels
which they had begun some time before; this is a
very fertile harvest which God offers for the gather-
ing, at Kebec and in the surrounding regions, every
year, from the beginning of September to the end of
October, in the great river of St. Lawrence. At that
time, they found this fish in prodigious abundance;
the French salt it, the Savages smoke it, both make


308 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vor. 23


en trouua pour lors vne quantité prodigieufe, les
Francois la falent, les Sauuages la boucanent: les
vns & les autres en font prouifion pour l’Hyuer, les
Sauuages quittent leur petites maifons pour faire
cette pefche, & fe cabanent [33] 4 vne portee de mouf-
quet afin que les ordures de poiffon qu’on accommode,
ne les infecte pas. Eftant 1a ils venoient tous les
iours a la faincte Meffe, quoy qu’ils euffent fouuent
paffé la nuict a la pefche, vn de nos Peres leur fai-
foit vn mot d’exhortation auant la Meffe. Le foir le
mefme Pere alloit aux cabanes les faire prier Dieu.
Leur pefche eftant finie, qui fuft fur le commence-
ment de Nouembre ils retournerent a leurs maifons,
& emplirent leurs petits magazins de poiffon bou-
cané. Ceux. qui n'ont=pas: encore “dew maitonus ie
cabanerent chacun de leur cofté. Ils ne furent pas
plufto{t ramaffez, que treize canots de la nation des
Atikamegues les veinrent voir pour hyuerner auec
eux, & fe faire in{truire. Ils fe logerent du cofté des
Montaignets prés de Iean Baptifte qui en eft le Capi-
taine. Le P. Buteux qui eftoit defcendu des trois
Riuieres pour hyuerner 4 Sillery euft charge de l’in-
{truction des vns & des autres, c’eft & dire des Mon-
taignets & des Atikamegues. Ilsdemeuroient enfem-
ble, comme parlant mefme lague. Le P. Dequen
euft [34] pour fa part les Algonquins 4 enfeigner.
Voicy l’ordre qu’on y a tenu tout l’hyuer, Le P. De-
quen alloit tous les matins a l’hofpital au quartier des
Algonquins dire la Meffe: hommes, femmes & enfans
tous s’y trouuoient. La Chapelle & la fale des
malades eftoit fouuent remplie, auant la Meffe le P.
prononcoit tout haut les prieres en leur langue que
chacun repetoit auffi tout haut. Apres il leur expli-


1642-43} RELATION OF 1642-43 309:


provision thereof for Winter. The Savages leave
their little houses to carry on this fishing, and encamp.
[33] a musket range away, so that the refuse of the
fish which they prepare may not infect them. While
there, they came every day to holy Mass, although
they had often spent the night in fishing. One of
our Fathers gave them a word of exhortation before
the Mass. At evening, the same Father went to the
cabins to have them pray to God. Their fishing
done, which was toward the beginning of November,
they returned to their houses, and filled their little
stores with smoked fish. ‘Those who have as yet no:
house, lodge in cabins, each on his own side. They
were no sooner assembled, than thirteen canoes of
the nation of the Atikamegues came to see them, in
order to winter with them, and receive instruction.
They lodged on the side of the Montagnais, near
Jean Baptiste, whois their Captain. Father Buteux,
who had come down from the three Rivers to winter
at Sillery, had charge of the instruction of both
parties,— that is to say, of the Montagnais and of the
Atikamegues. They lived together, speaking the
same language. Father Dequen had [34] for his
share the instruction of the Algonquins. This is the
plan we followed all the winter: Father Dequen went
every morning to the hospital, in the Algonquin
quarter, to say Mass: men, women, and children all
were there. The Chapel and the ward of the sick
were often filled. Before Mass, the Father pro-
nounced aloud in their language the prayers, which
each one also repeated aloud. Afterward he explained
to them, at length, one of the mysteries of our holy
Faith. Mass being said, the Father went through the
cabins to teach in private those who were to be bap-


310 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


quoit au long vn des myiteres de noftre faincte Foy.
La Meffe eftant dite le P. alloit par les cabanes enfei-
gner en particulier ceux qui deuoient eftre baptifez,
ou qui fe difpofoient A cOmunier. Apres midy ie
prenois le foing de faire le catechif{me aux enfans
Algonquins. Ilss’affembloient ala fale des malades
auec autant d’affiduité & de feruer que ceux de noftre
France. Si leur arreft eftoit auffi folide, ils ne leur
cederoient en rien: le prix du catechifme eftoit vn
coufteau, ou vn morceau de pain, d’autrefois vn cha-
pelet, quelquesfois vn bonnet, ou vne hache aux plus
grands & aux plus fcauans, c’eft vne belle occafion
de foulager la mifere de ces pauures peuples les [35]
parens eftoient rauis de voir la ferueur de leurs
enfans qui alloient par les cabanes faire monitre de
leur—prix.— Le {oir lée=P. Dequen: retoumncit sania
Chapelle, ot ils s’affembloient derechef pour faire les
prieres. Le P. s’approchant de 1’ Hofpital crioit tout
haut, venez tous aux prieres: 4 ce cry chacun fortoit
en filence & couroit 4 la Chapelle, ot les prieres du-
roiét enuiron vn quart d’heure, & l’inftruction autant,
le tout en grande modeftie & deuotion. Voyant les
Sautages en cet eftat, ie me fuis fort fouuent eftonné
de la pareffe d’vne infinité de Chreftiens de noftre
ancienne France, qui n’ont iamais peu fe refoudre de
donner a Dieu vn demy quart d’heure le foir 4 genoux
pour faire leur priere. lene fcay ce qu ils refpondront
au iugement de Dieu.

Les Religieufes Hofpitalieres entonnoient fouuent
aux prieres & au catechif{me quelque hymne en lan-
gue Algonquine. Les Sauuages fe plaifent fort au
chant & y reiiffiffent tres bien. D’ordinaire auffi elles
prenoient les filles 4 part pour leur faire le catechifme


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 311


tized, or who were preparing to receive communion.
After noon I assumed the charge of teaching the
catechism to the Algonquin children. They assem-.
bled in the ward of the sick, with as much diligence
and fervor as those of our France. If their stability
were equally firm, they would yield to them in:
nothing. The reward for catechism was a knife, or
a piece of bread, at other times a chaplet,—some-
times a cap, or an axe, for the tallest and the most
intelligent; it isan excellent opportunity for reliev-
ing the misery of these poor peoples. The [35] par-
ents were charmed to see the fervor of their children,
who went through the cabins to show their prizes.
At evening, Father Dequen returned to the Chapel,
where they again assembled for prayers. The Fa-
ther, approaching the Hospital, cried aloud, “* Come,
all, to prayers;’’ at this cry each went forth in
silence, and ran to the Chapel, where the prayers
lasted about a quarter of an hour, and the instruction
likewise,— all in great modesty and devotion. See-
ing the Savages in this condition, I have very often
been astonished at the indolence of countless Chris-
tians in our old France, who have never been able to
bring themselves to accord God a half-quarter of an
hour an evening, on their knees, to say their prayer.
I know not what they will answer at the judgment
of God.

The Hospital Nuns often intoned, at prayers and
at catechism, some hymn in Algonquin speech. The
Savages take much pleasure in singing, and succeed
in it very well. Usually, too, they took the girls
aside to hear them in the catechism, in the [36] ward
of the sick, or at their grating, while the boys were
instructed separately, so that all could say their les--


312 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


en la [36] fale des malades, ou a leur grille, pédant
qu’on in{truifoit feparement les garcons, afin que tous
peuffent dire leur lecon: car fi on en omettoit quel-
qu’vn, il fe mettoit a pleurer. Diftribuat vn iour vn
pain aux enfans apres le catechif{me, i’en prefentay a
vn qui me refufa de le receuoir, & fe mit a pleurer,
difant, commét veux-tu que ie mange n’ayant rien
dit: quand ils eftoient dans la necefflité, le catechifme
eftoit fuiuy d’vn petit feftin ou fagamité pour foula-
ger leur faim. Les Religieufes cdtribuoient 4 leur
tour aux defpenfes neceffaires, & vniuerfellemét par-
lant outre le foing & le fecours des malades, elles ont
exercé vne finguliere charité tout le long de l’annee
enuers ces familles arreftees, nommément enuers les
Algonquins: quifont de leur quartier elles en ont eu
fouuent deux ou trois cabanes des plus pauures fur
les bras: c’e{t chofe incroyable des defpéfes qu’on
e{t obligé de faire en ces rencontres, la mifere & la
neceffité eft telle que la confcience y eft obligee.
Voila pour les Algonquins.

Le P. Buteux a gardé le mefme ordre pour les
Montaignets & Atikamegues, [37] excepté que les
derniers s’ef{tant retirés vn peu auant dans les bois
fur vne petite montagne proche de Sillery, il eftoit
obligé d’y aller tous les iours apres la Meffe, & fur
le foir, ot il affembloit les hommes & les femmes 4
part. Les neiges eftoient hautes de 3. a quatre pieds.
Ie l’ay veu plufieurs fois retourner le foir eftant id
nuict auec vne lanterne 4 la main, que le vent impe-
tueux luy arrachoit ou efteignoit, & puis le renuer-
foit das les neiges de haut en bas de la montagne:
cela peut eftonner ceux qui l’ont cogneu en France
infirme au dernier point, & prefque toufiours valetu-


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 313


son; for, if any one were omitted, he began to weep.
Distributing one day a loaf of bread to the children
after catechism, I offered some to one, who declined
to receive it, and began to weep, saying, ‘‘ How?
would you have me eat, when I have said nothing?’”’
When they were in need, the catechism was followed
by a little feast, or sagamité, to relieve their hunger.
The Nuns contributed in their turn to the necessary
expenses; and, generally speaking, in addition to the
care and succor of the sick, they have practiced a sin-
gular charity throughout the year toward these resi-
dent families,— notably toward the Algonquins who
are of their precinct. They have often had two or
three cabins of the poorest of these on their hands;
it is incredible what expenses one is obliged to incur
on stich occasions; the misery and necessity is such
that conscience is compelled thereto. So much for
the Algonquins.

Father Buteux has observed the same plan for the
Montagnais and Atikamegues, [37] except that when
the latter had betaken themselves a little way into
the woods on a small eminence near Sillery, he
was obliged to go thither every day after Mass, and
toward evening, when he assembled the men and the
women apart. The snows were from 3 to four feet
deep. I have repeatedly seen him return at even-
ing—night having already set in—with a lantern
in his hand, which the impetuous wind snatched from
him or extinguished, and then overturned him in the
snows from top to bottom of the hill. That may
astonish those who have known him in France,— in-
firm to the last degree, and nearly always on the sick
list. I will mention in a separate Chapter the prin-
cipal incidents of the Baptism of the Atikamegues.


314 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES  [Vou. 28


L


dinaire. Ie remarqueray en vn Chapitre a part ce
qui s’e{t paffé de plus notable au Baptefme des Atika-
megues.

Voila comme les Sauuages ont paffé la premiere
partie de Vhyuer. Sur la my-Ianuier les neiges
e{tant defia grandes & fortes, ils decabanerent tous
de Sillery, & allerent enuiron 4 vn quart de lieué de
Kebec, pour y faire leurs traifnes, & commencer leur
premiere chaffe, ils y demeurerent enuiron trois
femaines le P. Buteux fuiuit les Atikamegues, & alla
[38] loger dans leur cabanes: ces bonnes gens furent
tauis d'aife de le'voir logé chez eux, & seicricrent
tous, En verité tu es de noftre nati6, en verité tu nous
aymes. Ils faifoient tous les iours vn quart de lieué
pour venir 4 Quebec entendre la Meffe, nonobftant la
rigueur du froid & des neiges, pour Vordinaire ils
entroient dans la Chapelle des Vrfulines ot le P.
Buteux les enfeignoit. Ils alloient auffi fort fouuent
au parloir des Religieufes, & demandoient a repeter
leurs prieres, afin de les mieux apprendre. Les Vr-
fulines leur tefmoignerent toute forte de charité, leur
donnerent tous les iours 4 manger apres la Meffe, ou
Vini{truction, & n’efpargnerét rié de ce qu’elles auoiét
pour les affifter, & cooperer 4 leur conuerfion. Elles
n’en font pas moins tout le long de l’année aux Al-
gonquins & Montaignets quand ils vont A Kebec. Ce
font des frais ineuitables 4 ceux qui ont entrepris
layde des Sauuages. Ils décabanerent tous fur le
commencement de Feurier, & entrerent dans les
grands bois pour la chaffe de lOrignac. Le lende-
main de leur depart comme [39] i’allois de Kebec 4
Sillery, ie trouuay vne feule cabane de douze ou treize
infirmes, vieillards & enfans, que les Sauuages


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 315


In this manner the Savages spent the first part of
the winter. Toward the middle of January, the
snows being already deep and abundant, they all with-
drew from the cabins at Sillery, and went to about
a quarter of a league from Kebec, to make their
sledges there, and to begin their first hunt; they
remained there about three weeks. Father Buteux
followed the Atikamegues, and went [38] to lodge in
their cabins; these good people were delighted to
see him lodged with them, and all exclaimed, ‘‘ In
truth you are of our nation; in truth you love us.”
They went a quarter of a league every day, so as to
come to Quebec and hear Mass, notwithstanding the
rigor of the cold and the snows. Usually they went
into the Chapel of the Ursulines, where Father
Buteux taught them. They also went very often to
the Nuns’ parlor, and asked to repeat their prayers, in
order to learn them better. The Ursulines showed
them every sort of charity, gave them to eat, every
day, after Mass or instruction; and spared nothing
of what they had to assist them, and to codperate in
their conversion. They dono less than this, through-
out the year, for the Algonquins and Montagnais,
when they come to Kebec. These are inevitable
expenses, for those who have undertaken to aid the
Savages. They all left their cabins toward the
beginning of February, and went into the great woods
for the chase of the Moose. The day after their
departure, as [39] I was going from Kebec to Sillery,
I found a single cabin of twelve or thirteen invalids,
old men, and children, whom the Savages had com-
mended to me the evening before, and had asked me
to send them to the Hospital. When they saw me
pass, they took their coverings of bark, followed


316 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [Vou 28


m’auoiét recommandes le foir auparauant & prié de les
enuoyer 4 l’Hofpital: comme ils me virent paffer, ils
leuerent leurs efcorces, & me fuiuirent, comme ils
peurent, & s’en vinrent a l’Hofpital paffer leur hyuer
partie dans la fale des malades, partie dans vne ca-
bane proche de l’Hofpital. Les Sauuages ne demeure-
rent gueres que 2. mois en leur grande chaffe, plufieurs
retournerent pour les feftes de Pafques, chafque ca-
bane porte d’ordinaire vn papier, qui marque les iours
de fefte, afin quils s’abftiennent du trauail, finon en
cas de neceffité, & employent plus de temps 8 la pri-
ere. Jean Baptifte auec fa bande retourna le Mer-
credy fainct, & fe trouua fort a propos le lendemain
au lauement des pieds qui fe fit &4 1 Hofpital, & les
cofola fort: on choifift 12. hommes & 12. femmes,
nous lauafmes les pieds des hommes, & les Religi-
eufes les lauerent aux femmes, puis leur firent a tous
vn feftin magnifique felon le pays. Cinq [40] Hurons
qui ont hyuerné 4a Sillery & y ont fait vn petit femi-
naire, admirerent cefte celebrité que le P. de Bre-
boeuf leur expliqua (ils ne manquent pas de raconter
ces nouvelles en leur pays.) Sur la fin d’Auril tous
les Sauuages fe trouuerent raffemblés, chacun re-
tourne en fon quartier & dreffe fa cabane, faict fon
petit magazin, paffe fes peaux, & vient a l’inftructié,
ou 1’6 garde le mefme ordre qu’a l’automne. Quand
la terre eft entierement defcouuerte de neiges, cha-
cun vifite fon champ, & commence 2 le cultiuer.
Ceftoit vn contentemét de les voir aller au trauail
apres auoir entédu la faincte Meffe, & puis venir tous
les foirs faire les prieres 4 la Chapelle, & entendre
Vini{truction. Mais ce contentement ne dura gueres.
Car a peine auoient ils acheué de femer leur bled


1642 - 43] RELATION OF 1642-43 317


me as best they could, and came away to the Hos-
pital to spend their winter, partly in the ward of the
sick, partly in a cabin near the Hospital. The Sav-
ages remained hardly 2 months in their great hunt;
several returned for the Easter holidays. Each cabin
usually contains a paper which marks the feast days,
so that they may abstain from work, save in case of
necessity, and spend more time in prayer. Jean Bap-
tiste with his band returned on Wednesday in Passion
Week, and was present in good time next day for the
washing of the feet, which occurred at the Hospital,
and greatly consoled them. They chose 12 men and
I2 women; we washed the feet of the men, and the
Nuns washed those of the women; then we prepared
for all a feast that was magnificent for this country.
Five [40] Hurons who wintered at Sillery, and formed
a little seminary there, marveled at this festival,
which Father de Brebceuf explained to them (they
do not fail to relate these tidings in their own coun-
try). Toward the end of April, all the Savages again
rally together; each returns to his own quarter and
sets up his cabin, prepares his little store, dresses
his skins, and comes to instruction, where the same
order is observed as inthe autumn. When the earth
is altogether free from snow, each one visits his field,
and begins to till it. It was a pleasure to see them
going to work after having heard holy Mass, and
then coming every evening to say their prayers in
the Chapel, and hear instruction. But this pleasure
hardly lasted; for, scarcely had they finished plant-
ing their Indian corn, when the rumors of incursions
and ravages by the Iroquois obliged them to form a
small body of warriors, and go to the fort of Riche-
lieu and to the 3 rivers, in order to confront their


318 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES [VoL. 23


d’Inde, que les bruits des courfes & rauages des
Iroquois les obligerent de faire vn petit gros de guer-
riers, & aller au fort de Riche-lieu & au 3. riuieres
pour s’oppofer a leurs ennemys. Mais les funeftes
nouvelles de la mort du Roy & de Mofeigneur le Car-
dinal, & en fuite le manque des fecours d’armes [41]
& foldats qu’on efperoit de Frace les firét redefcédre
a Sillery tous triftes, & comme les nauires tardoient
beaucoup, & que les viures leur manquoient, ils fe
diuiferent par petites bandes, & allerent a la chaffe
vers Tadouffac, s’efloignans toufiours de leurs enne-
mis, & attendans les nauires.


1642-43] RELATION OF 1642-43 319


enemies. But the disastrous news of the death of
the King and of Monseigneur the Cardinal, and then
the want of the succor of arms [41] and soldiers
which we were expecting from France, made them
return to Sillery, quite sad; and as the ships were
very late, and as provisions failed them, they broke
up into little bands, and went hunting toward
Tadoussac, continually removing from their enemies,
and awaiting the ships. =


as


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXIII


XLVIII
For particulars of this document, see Vol. XXII.


XLIX


This is a letter written by Garnier to a friend in
France (‘‘ Monsieur J. M. J.”), from the Huron coun-
try, upon the 23rd of some unnamed month (possibly
August), 1643. We follow a contemporary copy
presumably by a member of the Garnier family in
France, and now in the archives of St. Mary’s College,
Montreal. Although he addresses his correspondent
as ‘‘ brother,” it is evident that this is only in the
ecclesiastical sense.


L


In publishing the letter of Brébeuf to the Father
General, dated at Three Rivers, September 23, 1643,
we follow Father Martin’s apograph (now in the
archives of St. Mary’s College, Montreal) of the orig-
imal Watin ex JSS. Soct Jes.


LI


Owing to the fact that the first MS. of the Huron
report for the year ending in the spring of 1643 fell
into the hands of the Iroquois, (the report was rewrit-
ten, and published in connection with the Huron part
of the Relation for 1643-44), the Relation for 1642-43
consists of but one part, by Vimont, the superior; to


322 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES


this being added a brief Declaration of the Directors
of the Company of New France.

In reprinting the text of this Re/ation, we follow a
copy of the original Cramoisy edition in the Lenox
Library. It) isyeenerally referred to vas\s 1H S1;*
because described in Harrisse’s Votes, no. 81. The
‘* Priuilege,”” which is signed “ Par le Roy en fon
Confeils ~CRAMOISY.’ = 1s, dateds. 2 Paris ler, De
cembre 1643;’’ and the ‘‘* Permifsion,’’ with the
signature ‘‘ IEAN FILLEAV,” is dated ‘‘ Paris le [space]
Tanuier. 14.’

Collation: Title, with verso blank, 1 leaf; ‘‘ Table
des Chapitres,” "spp. .(3);-** Bxtraict du Priaivleve du
Roy, pea); > Permifsion duck. P> Prouincial “swith
verso blank, pp. (2); text, pp. 1-309; ‘* Declaration
de | Meffieurs les Directeurs, & Af-| fociez en la
Compagnie de la | Nouuelle France. | ,’’ pp. (3).

Peculiarities: In the imprint of the title-page ‘‘ Ci-
cognes’’ is misprinted ‘‘ Cicoignes.’’ Page 1 of the
text is usually not numbered, though we have met
with copies in which the numeration is distinctly
indicated. Copies of an early issue have pp. 306 and
307 mispaged 326 and 327, while in later impressions
the mispagination has been rectified. In all copies
which we have examined, the endings of the lines of
the last two paragraphs on p. II5 are more or less
imperfect. The imprint of this Relation bears the
names of Sebastien Cramoisy and Gabriel Cramoisy.

A letter in Ottawa, with an interlinear translation
in French, covers pp. 56-58.

Copies of the Relation of 1642-43 have been sold
or priced as follows: O’Callaghan (1882), no. 1222,
sold for $17, and had cost him $30.50 in gold;
Barlow (1890), nos. 1286 and 1287, sold for $6 and


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL DATA: VOL. XXIII 323


$12, respectively; Dufossé, priced (1891-92) at 150
and 190 francs; Chadenat (1893), no. 11862, priced
at 200 francs; and Lenox duplicate, sold by Bangs
& Co. of New York, April 29, 1895, at $31.

Copies in libraries: Lenox (two copies, with both
varieties of pagination); Harvard (correctly paged,
but having sig. V, containing pp. 305 to the end,
added from another copy); St. Mary’s College, Mont-
real; Laval University, Quebec; Library of Parlia-
ment, Ottawa; Brown (private); and British Museum
(two copies, correctly paged).


/


NOTES*1O.VOEe xxl!


(Figures in parentheses, followin & number of note, refer to pages
of English text.)


I (p. 39).— These four villages are the same mentioned by Lale-
mant in his report for 1640 (vol. xix., p. 167), except that St. Jean is
here replaced by St. Frangois Xavier, the latter village being classed
in 1640 under the Attignawantan mission. In this interval of two
years, there was probably a redistribution of the field of work,
rather than a removal of the mission itself; for St. Jean was east of
Sturgeon River, fully ten miles distant.— A. F. Hunter.


2 (p. 55).— This native hemp may have been Asclepizas zncarnata
(vol. xili., zo¢e 17), or Apocynum cannabinum, which latter is men-
tioned by Kalm (1750) and other early writers as employed by the
Indians in the manufacture of various fabrics. See Holmes’s
‘*Prehistoric Textile Art,” in U. S. Bur. Ethnol. Rep., 1891-92,
Pp. 21-45.

3 (p. 107).— On location of Kontarea, see vol. x., zofe 8.


4 (p. 155).— For description of armor and weapons used by North
American aborigines, see vol. xiii., zofe 18, and vol. xv., mote 2.


5 (p. 177).— The origin of this Huron seminary is described in vol.
vi., zote 9. The funds used for its support were afterward devoted
te the Sillery colony (vol. xviii., p. 79).


6 (p. 225).— The Sauteurs, or Ojibwas (vol. xviii., zofe 16).


7 (p. 225).— Pouteatami (Pottawattomies): an Algonkin tribe, occu-
pying the region around Lake Michigan. Nicolet found them (1634)
about the entrance to Green Bay; and in this same region Allouez
undertook a mission to them, 1667-70. The elatzon of 1671 (chap.
v.) states that ‘‘they had been driven, by fear of the Iroquois, from
their lands, which were between the Lake of the Hurons and that
of the Ilinois.’’ In 1681, one of their bands was located on the
Chicago River; other bands, at various historic periods, occupied
the vicinity of St. Joseph, Mich., the neighborhood of Detroit, and
the Manitoulin Islands. Their tribal location is often indistinct,
through their frequent migrations and extensive affiliations with
other tribes, especially the Foxes and Winnebagoes.


326 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES


8 (p. 225).— Nadouessz, or Nadouessioux: now known by the ab-
breviated name of Sioux; the chief tribe of the Dakota stock, occu-
pying the region of the upper Missouri and Mississippi Rivers;
hostile to most of the Algonkin tribes.

A. F. Hunter says: ‘‘This Algonkin name of the Sioux tribes
came to be applied generally to any other Indian nation of different
language,— thus, to the Iroquois (see Copway’s and Jones’s histories
of the Ojibways); also to the Hurons, which application of the name
is preserved in Nottawa, a village, and in Nottawasaga, river and
township, all three in Simcoe Co., Ont., in the district once occupied
by the Huron and Tobacco nations. The name exists also in con-
nection with the Nahdoway River, flowing into James Bay.”’


9 (p. 227).—Kzrzstinons : the Cree tribes (vol. xviii., ote 15).
Jrinz: the Illinois tribe, occupying the valley of the river thus
named; also of Algonkin stock.


10 (p. 247).— Francesco Gioseppe Bressani was born at Rome,
May 6, 1612, and became a Jesuit novice Aug. 15, 1626. His studies
were pursued at Rome and Clermont; the customary service as
instructor being rendered at Sezza, Tivoli, and Paris. Arriving in
Canada in 1642, he ministered for a time to the French at Quebec;
in the following year, to the Algonkins at Three Rivers. In April,
1644, he set out, with an escort of Christian Indians, for the Huron
mission; but, on the way, they were captured by the Iroquois, and
carried to one of the villages of the latter, where he was cruelly tor-
tured, at intervals, for overtwo months. Finally, he was ransomed
by the Dutch at Fort Orange, and sent to France, where he arrived
in the following November. The next year, he returned to Canada,
and, after a short stay at Three Rivers, joined the Huron mission,
where he labored until its destruction by the Iroquois, four years
later. In the summer of 1648, he came down to Quebec for addi-
tional missionaries, returning to his field of labor with a reinforce-
ment of five brethren. In the following year, he went with the
fugitive Hurons to St. Joseph (Christian) Island; but their situation
there was so perilous that Bressani was sent by his superior to Que-
bec to ask for succor,— a vain quest, however, since the authorities
there could spare none of their slender force of soldiers. The dan-
gers of the road preventing his return to his flock, he was obliged to
remain at Quebec, where, at various times, he officiated in the church.
Nov. 2, 1650, Bressani was obliged to return to Europe — on account
partly of the limited resources of the mission, partly of his own pre-
carious health. Having regained sufficient strength in his own coun-
try, he spent many years as a missionary and preacher in the prin-
cipal Italian cities, and died at Florence Sept. 9, 1672. Soon after
his return to Italy, Bressani published his Breve Relatione d'al-


NOTES SLOW O Lee XSLT, 327


cune Missiont... nella Nuoua Francia (Macerata, 1653), which
will, in due course, appear in the present series.

11 (p. 249).—Gabriel Druillettes, born Sept. 29, 1610, began his
novitiate in the Jesuit college at Toulouse, July 28, 1629. His studies
were pursued in that college and at Puy; and he was a teacher in the
institutions, successively, at Mauriac, Béziers, and Puy. In 1643, he
came to Canada, his first year being devoted to the study of the
Algonkin tongue. Becoming proficient therein, he accompanied wan-
dering bands of those savages on their hunting expeditions, as Le
Jeune before had encamped with the Montagnais. In August, 1646,
Druillettes set out on a mission to the Abenaki tribes of Maine,
who, interested in the new religion through the Sillery converts, had
asked for a teacher. He remained with these people one year, then
three years with the Montagnais about Tadoussac. In June, 1651,
he again went to the country of the Abenakis, not only for their in-
struction, but as an envoy from the Canadian authorities to secure,
if possible, an alliance with the New England colonists against the
Iroquois (vol. ix., zote 4); his efforts were unsuccessful. Return-
ing to Quebec in the following spring, he resumed his labors among
the Montagnais, which, with ministrations at Sillery, Three Rivers,
and other posts, occupied most of his time for twenty years there-
after. He accompanied Dablon on a mission to the Cree tribes,
1661-62; and in 1671-72 was in charge of the mission at Sault Ste.
Marie. Druillettes ended his days at Quebec, Apr. 8, 1681. Two
‘documents written by him will appear in this series.

12 (p. 249).—Lalemant wrote to Vitelleschi (March 27, 1643), a
letter announcing the deaths of Jogues and the two donnés, and stat-
ing that he had written a eulogy on the Father, to be sent with this
letter. An apograph of this epistle (in Latin) is in the archives of
st. Mary’s College, Montreal.

13 (p. 287).— Leonard Garreau was born at St. Yrieix, France, in
September, 1610. At the age of eighteen, he became a Jesuit
novice; he studied at Pau and Rome, and in turn gave instruction
at Poitiers, Agen, and Bordeaux. At the close of his final year of
probation (1643), he embarked for Canada. In the following year,
he joined the Huron mission, and during nearly two years labored
among the Nipissing Indians, with Claude Pijart; thereafter, he
was probably employed in the Huron churches, until their ruin by
the Iroquois. He is mentioned in the Re/atzon of 1652 (chap. iti.)
as one of the priests in charge of the Huron colony on the Isle of
Orléans. In August, 1656, he set out, with Druillettes, to accom-
pany a band of Ottawas to their country. Attacked on the way by
the Iroquois, Garreau was mortally wounded; and, having been
carried to Montreal, he died there, Sept. 2.


328 LES RELATIONS DES JESUITES


The manner of Garreau’s death is narrated otherwise by Perrot.
He says (AZémozre, Tailhan’s ed., p. 84) that the Father was shot by
a renegade Frenchman; see Tailhan’s comments thereon (uf supra,
pp. 228-231).

14 (p. 287).— Noél Chabanel was born Feb. 2, 1613, in the diocese
of Mende. At seventeen, he entered upon his novitiate in the Jesuit
college at Toulouse, where his priestly studies were carried on; his
term of instruction was also served there (1634-39), and at Rodez
(1641-42). His course completed, he at once joined the Canadian
mission (1643), at the same time with Garreau (see preceding note);
and together they went to the Huron mission. Chabanel remained
there until the overthrow of the Huron nation; and, on his way to
Ste. Marie, was slain by a Huron apostate, Dec. 8 or 9, 1649.


15 (p. 287).— The only record we have, concerning this nun, is
one pathetic line in Journ. des Jésuztes, under date of June 21, 1647:
‘‘Mother de Ste. Geneviéve, at the Hospital, fell into a demented
condition.’’


16 (p. 289).— Louis d’Ailleboust, one of the Montreal proprietors,
succeeded Montmagny (September, 1648) as governor general of
Canada; three years later, he was replaced by Jean de Lauson. In
1652, he obtained a grant of land on the Isle of Orléans (St. Francis
parish). In the following year, he was chosen as a syndic of Quebec.
During the interval between De Lauson’s departure and D’Argen-
son’s arrival (September, 1657—July, 1658), D’Ailleboust was acting
governor of the country. He died at Montreal, May 31, 1660, leav-
ing but one child, Barbe, who married De Lauson, the governor.


17 (p. 289).— René Chartier was the chaplain of the Ursulines at
Quebec during his stay there, which lasted until October, 1647, when
he returned to France. This event was, perhaps, hastened by a
curious episode occurring in the month of June preceding, which is
thus related in the Journ. des Jésuttes: ‘‘The room of Monsieur
the Prior, priest of the Ursulines, was searched; and more than 260
livres weight of Beaver skins were taken thence, after his boast
that he had these, and that he would not deliver them to the [Com-
pany’s] store, except at a good price.’’


GTU Library
2400 Ridge Road
Berkeley, CA 94709
For renewals call (510) 649-2500


All items are subject to recall,


1030.7
096


GRADUATE THEOLOGICAL UNION LIBRARY
BERKELEY, CA 94709


|
GTU Libra ry
i


(NOU NCI | |


3 24 324 8790


LIBRARY USE ONLY


ee ree
bie Pee
2h a ee
Cia Ne es)
He


Me a

B11 Mi Hb 8

ee ee ee) ww
Oe i Pee


SW 35 we, o
ee
