. :  ^  5  > :  ,  '  •
LS  COLLEGE 1
198  4 1
^IIVERSITYOFST.  MCHAE
3  1761  061 2C
3
y^
3  l1
s  Wirt
\
LSRARY
:^j
THE  JESUIT  RELATIONS
AND
ALLIED  DOCUMENTS
VOL.  XXV
The  edition  consists  of  sev-
en hundred  and  fifty  sets
all  numbered
No.
The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents
Travels  and  Explorations
OF  THE  Jesuit  Missionaries
IN  New  France
1610-1791
THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL-
IAN TEXTS,  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA-
TIONS AND  NOTES  ;  ILLUSTRATED  BV
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES
EDITED  BY
REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES
Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin
Vol.  XXV
Iroquois,  Hurons,  Quebec
1642- 1644
CLEVELAND: tTbc  J8UCC0W6  .iSrotbers
Company,  publishers,  mdcccxcviii

Copyright, 1898

BY

The  Burrows  Brothers  Co
all  rights  reserved


The  Imperial  Press,  Cleveland


EDITORIAL  STAFF


Editor


Translators


Assistant  Editor
Bibliographical  Adviser


Reuben  Gold  Thwaites
FiNLOw  Alexander
Percy  Favor  Bicknell
William  Frederic  Giese
Crawford  Lindsay
William  Price
Hiram  Allen  Sober
Emma  Helen  Blair
Victor  Hugo  Paltsits


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  XXV

Preface  to  Volume  XXV .  .  -9

Documents: —

LI.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe  en  la  Nov-
velle  France,  en  I'annee  1642.  &  1643
[Chaps,  xiii.-xiv.,  concluding  the  docu-
ment.] BartJieleniy  Vimont;  undated . 17

LII.  Epistola  ad  R.  P.  Mutium  Vitelleschi
Praepositum  Generalem  Societatis  Jesu
Romse.  Caroliis  Gamier;  Setae.  Mariae
apud  Hurones,  April  8,  1644 .  .81

LIII.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe  en  la  Nov
velle  France,  es  annees  1643.  &  1644
[Chaps,  i.-viii.  of  Part  I.,  being-  the
first  installment  of  the  document.]  Bar-
tJieleniy Vimont;  Kebec,  September  5,
1644  .  .  .  .  .89

Bibliographical  Data:  Volume  XXV  .  283

Notes ......  287


ILLUSTRATION  TO  VOL  XXV


L Photographic  facsimile  of  title-page,  Relation

of  1643-44  .  •  •  .92.


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXV


Following  is  a  synopsis  of  the  documents  contained
in  the  present  volume :

LI.  The  Relation  of  1642-43,  written  wholly  by
Vimont,  as  superior  of  the  Jesuit  missions  in  New
France,  was  commenced  in  Vol.  XXIII.  of  our  series,
wherein  the  first  three  chapters  were  given ;  in  Vol.
XXIV.  we  presented  Chapters  iv.  -xii. ;  and  herewith
publish  Chapters  xiii.-xiv.,  thus  concluding  the
document.

After  his  survey  of  the  missions  in  Lower  Canada,
and  account  of  Father  Jogues's  capture  by  the  Iroquois
(see  preceding  volume),  Vimont  turns  his  attention
to  the  Huron  mission,  with  its  peculiar  difficulties
and  dangers.  He  cites  letters  from  the  Fathers  there,
which  have  fortunately  escaped  from  the  clutches  of
the  Iroquois :  they  note  encouraging  progress  in  their
work,  and,  among  the  savages,  more  inclination  to  the
faith ;  but  the  loss  of  Jogues,  and  of  so  many  Huron
converts  who  were  captured  with  him,  has  dealt  a
severe  blow  to  the  infant  church.  The  fierce  Iro-
quois are  rendering  the  St.  Lawrence  so  unsafe  that
the  welfare  of  the  Huron  mission  is  greatly  imperiled.
Among  the  Huron  converts  are  found  a  much  larger
number  of  warriors  than  formerly.  ''  The  use  of
arquebuses,  refused  to  the  Infidels  by  Monsieur  the
Governor,  and  granted  to  the  Christian  Neophytes,


10  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXV

is  a  powerful  attraction  to  win  them ;  it  seems  that
our  Lord  intends  to  use  this  means  in  order  to  render
Christianity  acceptable  in  these  regions."

The  superior  notes  the  deaths  of  three  mission-
aries,—  Raymbault,  D'Olbeau,  and  Davost, —  also  the
murder  of  Goupil,  the  donne  captured  with  Jogues ;
and  he  takes  occasion  to  praise  the  devotion  and  cour-
age of  the  donnes  as  a  class.  Goupil' s  example  has
inspired  another  young  surgeon,  in  Orleans,  France,
to  give  himself  for  the  Canada  mission ;  he  has  come
hither  for  that  purpose,  and  has  gone  to  the  Huron
country.

Vimont  observes  that  the  Canadian  savages  have
good  reason,  from  a  purely  human  standpoint,  for
being  averse  to  the  faith;  for,  since  it  has  been
proclaimed  among  them,  they  have  experienced  ex-
traordinary misfortunes  —  pestilence,  famine,  and
war.  Many  of  them  bitterly  complain :  ' '  You  tell  us
that  God  is  full  of  goodness ;  and  then,  when  we  give
ourselves  up  to  him,  he  massacres  us.  The  Iroquois
do  not  believe  in  God,  they  are  more  wicked  than
Demons ;  and  yet  they  prosper. "  They  are  answered
thus :  ' '  God  regards  you  as  his  children ;  he  wishes
to  give  you  sense;  he  uses  the  Iroquois  as  a  whip,  in
order  to  correct  you."  "  Alas!  "  say  some,  "  why
did  he  not  begin  with  the  Iroquois?  why  did  not
he  try  to  give  them  sense  first?  we  have  so  much
already,  and  they  have  none  at  all."  But  the  mis-
sionaries console  themselves  with  remembering  that
''  these  same  scourges  and  these  same  reproaches
were  in  olden  time  encountered  in  the  primitive
Church."

The  superior  announces  a  happy  event, — the  de-
liverance of  Jogues  from  the  hands  of  the  Iroquois,


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXV  11

and  his  safe  arrival  in  France ;  this  is  described  by
that  Father's  own  letters,  written  from  the  Dutch
settlement  of  Rensselaerswyck  (now  Albany),  and
from  Rennes,  France.  Taken  by  some  Iroquois  on
a  fishing  expedition  to  the  vicinity  of  the  Dutch,  he
hears  while  there  that  he  is  to  be  burned  on  his
return  to  the  place  of  his  captivity.  The  Dutch
provide  him  a  way  of  escape,  which  he  accepts  only
when  he  is  persuaded  that  his  return  to  the  Iroquois
would  be  useless  for  aught  save  his  death.  The
commandant  at  Rensselaerswyck  hides  him  in  his
own  house  for  some  time,  and  finally  ransoms  Jogues
from  the  savages,  sending  him  to  Manhattan,  whence
he  voyages  across  the  ocean,  reaching  France  on
Christmas,  1643,  after  much  hardship  and  suffering.
A  letter,  written  by  a  Jesuit  at  Rennes,  is  added,
giving  various  details  of  Jogues 's  captivity  which
are  not  included  in  his  own  letters;  the  latter
expects  to  return  to  the  Canadian  mission.

To  this  Relation  is  appended  a  formal  declaration
by  the  directors  and  associates  of  the  Company  of
New  France,  exonerating  the  Jesuits  from  the  oft-
preferred  charge  of  having  commercial  interests  in
Canada,  or  any  connection  with  the  fur  trade.

LII.  This  is  a  letter  (in  Latin)  from  Garnier  to
the  Father  General  (Vitelleschi),  dated  at  Ste.  Marie-
of-the-Hurons,  April  8,  1644.  Garnier  reports  that
the  Huron  mission  is  carried  on  with  great  devotion
and  excellent  discipline.  He  especially  praises  the
pious  zeal  and  labors  of  the  donnes,  saying  that  with-
out them  the  mission  would  soon  collapse.  He  sug-
gests that,  if  Lalemant  be  removed  from  his  position
as  superior  of  this  field,  Ragueneau  is  best  fitted  to
succeed him. He mentions the constancy  of  the


12  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXV

native  converts  in  the  trials  to  which  their  country-
men subject  them.

LIII.  The  Relation  of  1643-44  is  in  two  parts  —
the  first,  the  usual  general  survey  by  Vimont,  dated
at  Quebec,  September  5,  1644;  the  second  is  devoted
to  the  Huron  mission,  and  covers  two  years,  1642-44.
It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Huron  report  for
1642-43  was  being  carried  down  to  Quebec  in  the
summer  of  1643,  by  the  trading  fleet  of  that  tribe.
These  Hurons  were  captured  upon  the  Ottawa  River
by  the  Iroquois;  and,  upon  reaching  the  Iroquois
country,  this  document,  together  with  several  letters
which  the  Huron  missionaries  were  sending  to
France,  was  given  to  Jogues,  as  he  states  in  his
letters  appended  to  the  Relation  oi  1642-43,  in  the
present  volume.  Having  no  prospect  of  escape  at
the  time  when  he  went  to  visit  the  Dutch  at  Fort
Orange,  he  left  these  papers  in  his  cabin ;  and  they
were,  of  course,  destroyed.  September  21  follow-
ing, Lalemant  sent  down  to  Vimont  another  copy  of
the  Huron  report, —  it  was  the  practice  of  the  mis-
sionaries to  keep  original  drafts  at  the  local  house,
and  forward  to  their  superiors  a  well-written  copy
thereof;  this,  as  Vimont  explains  in  a  note  prelimi-
nary to  Part  II.  in  the  present  Relation,  reached  him
too  late  to  be  sent  to  France  for  inclusion  in  the
Relation  of  1642-43.  It  is  therefore  given  in  this
Relation,  supplemented  by  a  brief  letter  by
Lalemant,  dated  ''the  last  of  March,"  1644,  bring-
ing the  account  of  the  mission  up  to  date.  In  the
present  volume,  we  give  the  first  eight  chapters  of
Part  I.

Vimont  begins  this  Relation  by  a  graphic  account
of  the  afflictions  which  have  so  scourged  the  infant


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXV  13

church  in  Canada, —  disease,  war,  and  famine, —  and
the  suffering  caused  by  these  among  the  wretched
savages.  The  Jesuits  and  the  Hospital  nuns  at  Sil-
lery  have  supported  throughout  the  winter  over  forty
savages,  most  of  whom  were  infirm  or  aged,  and
would  have  died  without  this  aid.  The  Indian  popu-
lation has  been  so  greatly  reduced  by  these  misfor-
tunes that,  "  where  eight  years  ago  one  could  see
eighty  or  a  hundred  cabins,  barely  five  or  six  can
now  be  seen;  a  Captain,  who  then  had  eight  hundred
warriors  under  his  command,  now  has  not  more  than
thirty  or  forty;  instead  of  fleets  of  three  or  four
hundred  Canoes,  we  see  now  but  twenty  or  thirty.
And  the  pitiful  part  of  it  is,  that  these  remnants  of
Nations  consist  almost  entirely  of  women,  widows  or
girls,  who  cannot  all  find  lawful  husbands,  and  who
consequently  are  in  danger  of  much  suffering,  or  of
committing  great  sins."

The  savages  are  more  submissive  in  their  afflic-
tions than  could  have  been  expected ;  but  their  usual
pride  has  been  humiliated  by  trouble,  "  necessity
has  made  them  more  dependent  upon  the  French,
and  has  made  them  experience  the  effects  of  Chris-
tian Charity."  They  admit  that  the  new  religion  is
true,  even  if  they  do  not  at  once  accept  it;  and  "  the
craft  of  the  Jugglers  and  sorcerers  is  gradually  losing
credit."  Many  other  encouraging  facts  are  cited;  but
these  "do  not  mean  that  all  has  been  done.  We  have
greater  trouble  in  keeping  our  Christians  than  in
acquiring  them."  It  is  the  old  story,  of  their  wan-
dering life  and  their  license  in  regard  to  marriage.

Nearly  a  fourth  of  Vimont's  account  is  occupied  by
the  conversions,  religious  experiences,  and  pious
acts  of  the  Christian  Indians  at  Sillery. One  is  an


14  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXV

Abenaki  chief,  wlio  promises  to  return  thither  to
live,  after  settling  up  his  affairs  at  home ;  but  there
is  reason  to  believe  that  he  was  captured,  on  the  way,
by  the  Iroquois.  Another  convert  —  an  old  man,
and  "a  notorious  sorcerer  of  the  Iroquets" — con-
sents to  all  that  is  required,  except  to  give  up  a  hair
that  "  he  has  pulled  from  the  moustache  of  the  Mani-
tou,"  which  has  brought  him  good  fortune  for  many
years.  "The  Devil  held  him  firmly  by  that  hair;
but,  in  the  end,  the  Holy  Ghost  was  victorious;  "
the  precious  hair  is  sacrificed  to  God.

The  good  example  of  the  Sillery  neophytes  has
greatly  aided  the  mission  cause,  by  recommending  to
the  heathen  the  true  religion.  Especial  praise  is
due  to  their  ' '  Captains, ' '  Noel  Tekwerimat  and  Jean
Baptiste  Etinechkawat,  "  whose  zeal  and  prudence
surpass  everything  that  might  be  expected  from  a
Savage,"  of  which  various  instances  are  related.
The  latter  does  not  talk  much ;  but  Noel  ' '  allows  no
opportunity  to  escape  of  making  himself  heard  in
favor  of  the  Faith ;  ' '  and  he  keenly  pursues  all  evil-
doers, not  only  with  rebukes,  but  with  the  force  of
his  authority  as  chief.  Neither  of  these  men  will
undertake  anything  of  importance  without  the  advice
and  consent  of  Montmagny  and  the  Jesuits.  As  soon
as  he  hears  that  the  Iroquois  have  captured  Father
Bressani,  Jean  Baptiste  volunteers  to  lead  against
them  a  band  of  his  warriors,  to  punish  their  evil
deed.

The  Sillery  Christians  go  on  their  annual  hunt, —
but  three  months  earlier  than  their  usual  time,  in
order  to  anticipate  the  raids  of  the  Iroquois.  Dur-
ing their  six  months'  absence,  they  "  retain  the  inno-
cence and  grace  of  their  Baptism,  though  without


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXV  15


instruction  or  any  Sacrament, ' '  much  better  than  do
many  Christians  in  Europe.  Upon  their  return,  they
hasten  to  confess  themselves, —  one  of  them,  two  or
three  times  a  day ;  and  the  Fathers  have  to  lose  their
sleep  during  several  nights,  in  order  to  satisfy  them.

At  the  remarriage  of  Charles  Meiachkawat,  the
husband  compels  his  wife  —  who  had  been  arrogant
and  ill-tempered  —  publicly  to  promise  that  she  will
conduct  herself  better  in  future.  He  adds  that,  if
she  do  not  keep  her  word,  "  thou  wilt  cause  me  to
be  angry;  and,  if  I  get  angry,  I  shall  go  to  Hell,  and
so  wilt  thou."  The  woman  soon  "  becomes  truly  a
lamb ;  ' '  her  husband  is  ' '  all  afire  in  the  affairs  of
God,"  and  of  his  own  accord  resolves  to  visit  the
Abenakis,  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  them.

The  writer  relates  several  incidents  showing  the
tenderness  of  conscience  among  the  Sillery  Chris-
tians, and  the  sort  of  discipline  maintained  among
them,  not  only  by  the  Jesuits,  but  by  themselves.

The  Iroquois  continue  more  and  more  to  harass
the  St.  Lawrence  valley.  This  year,  ten  of  their
bands  have  lurked  along  the  shores  of  that  river,  and
have  done  much  harm.  One  of  these  captured  (April
28)  Father  Bressani  and  the  Hurons  of  his  party.
Another  penetrated  to  Montreal,  killing  several
Frenchmen,  and  capturing  two  whom  they  afterward
tortured  to  death.  Many  of  the  Sillery  Indians  take
to  flight,  in  consequence ;  and  the  Hospital  nuns  are
obliged  to  remove  to  their  house  in  Quebec,  although
only  its  walls  and  roof  are  yet  built.  They  have
cared  for  nearly  forty  sick  persons,  this  year,  besides
many  old  men,  women,  and  children  who  had  no
other  refuge.  Many  of  those  who  are  attended  by
the  nuns  find  the  hospital  salvation  for  their  souls,


16  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXV


as  well  as  the  cure  of  their  bodily  ailments ;  several
instances  of  this  sort  are  narrated  in  detail.  The
neighboring children  are  instructed,  and  are  eager

to  learn.

The  Ursuline  seminary  has  been  reinforced  by  two
more  nuns.  Their  Indian  pupils  surprise  them  by
their  obedience,  affection,  and  piety ;  and  the  parents
are  now  only  too  glad  to  place  their  girls  in  charge
of  the  nuns.  Many  of  these  children  come  to  the
seminary  in  utter  destitution,  and  must  be  clothed  as
well  as  taught.  This  is  done  by  the  nuns,  as  far  as
their  means  permit;  they  also  feed  many  hungry
savages.

The  unrestrained  license  in  which  the  Indians
have  always  lived  leads  to  some  scandals  among
those  regarded  as  converts.  One  of  these  concerns
the  quondam  "sorcerer,"  Pigarouich,  who  is  very
zealous  while  at  St.  Joseph,  but  who  is  corrupted  by
his  countrymen  of  the  Island  tribe,  while  with  them
at  Three  Rivers.  He  professes  repentance  and
reformation,  but  soon  relapses  into  dissolute  ways.
Driven  by  hunger,  he  and  another  apostate  come
down  to  Quebec  and  Sillery ;  but  no  one,  at  either
settlement,  will  aid  them.  The  deserted  wife  of  one
of  these  men  will  not  receive  a  visit  from  him,  and
threatens  to  kill  him  with  a  knife.  Even  the  Pagan
Indians  do  not  dare  receive  them.  This  treatment
subdues  Pigarouich,  and  in  public  he  makes  confes-
sion of  his  sin,  and  submits  to  penance.

R.  G.  T.

Madison,  Wis.,  June,  1898.


LI (concluded)

Relation  of  1642-43

Paris: SEBASTIEN  ET  GABRIEL  CRAMOISY, 1644


Chaps.  i,-iii.  were  given  in  Volume  XXIII.;  iv.-xii.,  in
Volume  XXIV.;  and  xiii.-xiv.  herewith,  thus  concluding  the
document.


18


LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.25


[263]  CHAPITRE  XIII.

DE QUELQUES REMARQUES, TOUCHANT LES HURONS.

LE  Chapitre  precedet  nous  donne  la  conclufion
des  chofes  plus  memorables,  qui  fe  font  palTee
depuis  Tadouffac,  iufques  a  Mont- Real,  il  fal-
loit  maintenant  parler  des  Nations  plus  hautes :  mais
les  Iroquois  nous  ayans  rauy  la  Relation  &  les  lettres
que  nos  Peres,  qui  font  en  ces  [264]  contrees  plus
eloignees,  efcriuoient  aux  perfonnes  qui  les  honorent
de  leur  amiti6,  &  de  leur  fecours,  nous  ayans  dis-ie
enleu6  ce  petit  trefor,  nous  ont  cotraint  de  garder  le
fllence,  neantmoins  quelques  Frangois,  &  quelques
Sauuages  de  nos  alliez,  marchants  par  apres  fur  les
brifees  de  ces  Barbares,  nos  ennemis  ont  recueilly
quelques  papiers  qu'ils  auoiet  iettez  dans  les  bois,  ou
qui  leur  eftoient  efchappez  des  mains,  &  nous  les
ayans  fait  tenir  en  France,  nous  en  auons  recueilly
ce  qui  fuit,  pour  confoler  ceux  qui  s'intereffent  auec
tant  d'amour  en  la  conuerfion  de  ces  pauures  peuples,
&  pour  leur  donner  vne  petite  cognoiffance  de  ce
que  noftre  Seigneur  va  operant  dans  cette  extremity
du  monde.

Ic  ne  fqay  (dit  I'vn  de  ceux  dont  les  lettres  font
venues  iufques  "k  nous)  a  quoy  feruiroit  de  m  e^endre
fur  la  confideration  de  ce  que  Dieu  a  pertnis  nous  e^re
arriu^:  cela  ejl  inconceuable  a  ceux  qui  ne  font  pas  fur
les  lieux:  car  pour  ne  parler  point  du  Pere  logues.  le
vous  diray  que  les  deux  Francois  qui  V accompagnoient ,


1 642  -  44  ]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -43  19


[263] CHAPTER XIII.
SOME OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING THE HURONS.

THE  preceding  Chapter  gives  us  the  conclusion
of  the  more  memorable  things  which  have
occurred  from  Tadoussac  even  to  Mont- Real;
it  would  be  now  in  order  to  speak  of  the  Nations
higher  up,  but  the  Iroquois, — having  robbed  us  of  the
Relation,  and  of  the  letters  which  our  Fathers  who
are  in  those  [264]  more  distant  regions  wrote  to  per-
sons who  honor  tliem  with  their  friendship  and  their
help, — having,  I  say,  taken  from  us  that  little  treas-
ure, have  constrained  us  to  keep  silence.  Neverthe-
less, some  Frenchmen,  and  some  Savages  of  our
allies, — marching  afterward  in  the  footsteps  of  those
Barbarians,  our  enemies, — picked  up  some  papers
which  they  had  thrown  into  the  woods,  or  which  had
escaped  from  their  hands;  and,  they  having  caused
us  to  receive  these  in  France,  we  have  collected  from
them  what  follows,  in  order  to  console  those  who
interest  themselves  with  so  much  love  in  the  conver-
sion of  those  poor  peoples,  and  to  give  them  a  little
knowledge  of  what  our  Lord  continues  to  effect  in
that  extremity  of  the  world.

/  know  not  (says  one  of  those  whose  letters  have
reached  us),  what  it  would  avail  to  expatiate  upon  the
thought  of  what  God  has  permitted  to  happen  to  us, —  that
is  inconceivable  to  those  who  are  not  on  the  spot.  For,  not
to  speak  of  Father  Jogues,  I  will  tell  you  that  the  two
Frenchmen who accompanied him, 7iamed Guillaume


20


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  25


nomez  Gitillaume Coujlure,  &  Rend  Goupil,  qui  ont  ejld
pris auec le  Pere [265]  par  les  Iroquois, ejloient deux
ieunes  homines  incomparahles  en  leur  genre,  &  tres-propres
pour  ces  pays-cy. Et  fi  la  flotte  de  Hurons  Chrejlies,  &
des  Catechumenes  qiiils  accompagnoieyit ,  &  qui  a  ejle  prife
&  defaite  a  me/me  teps,  fut  arriuee  faine  &  fauue,  coinme
nous  Vattendions,  la  cornier fion  du  pays  feinbloit  prefque
infaillible,  ce  font  des  fecrets  que  nous  ne  verrons  que  dans
VeternitL Croyriez  vous bien neantmoins, que iamais
nous  nauons  pris  plus  de  courage,  tant  pour  le  fpirituel,
que  pour  le  temporel. La  Relation  vous  en  fera  voir  les
particularitez: Si  on  pouuoit  remedier  aux  courfes  des
Iroquois,  &  les  contraindre  a  vne  bonne  paix :  nous  verrions
en  peu  de  temps  de  notables  progrez,  en  ces  contrees,  pour
le  Chrijiianifme:  c  ejl  oil  ie  ne  voy  goutte,  Ji  ce  n  eji  par
des  voyes,  qui  approchent  du  miracle,  ft bien  quil  nous
faut  ietter  les  yeux  vers  le  Ciel,  pour  attendre  les  arrejls
de  la  diuine  prouidence,  &  ce  quil  en  plaira  a  ceux  de  qui
la  chofe  depend.

Le  Pere  qui  nous  parle  en  ces  termes,  f9auoit  bien

le  defaftre  qui  eftoit  arriue  I'annee  precedente,  k  la

flotte  des  pauures  Hurons:  mais  il  ne  pouuoit  pas

preuoir  que  fes  lettres  pafferoi[en]t  [266]  par  les  mains

des  Iroquois, que  la  Relation  qu'il  nous  enuoyoit,

feroit  rauie, que tous les Hurons  qui defcendoiet

feroient  les  vns  maffacrez,  les  autres  menez  prifon-

niers  dans  le  pays  des  Iroquois,  &  les  autres  pourfui-

uis  &  defpoiiillez  iufques  k  la  chair. Iamais  (dit-il)

nous  n'auons  pris  plus  de  courage,  tant  pour  le  fpirituel

que  pour  le  temporel. Ie  n'entends  que  la  moitie  de

ces  paroles :  ie  confois  fort  bien  ce  redoublement  de

coeur  &  d'efprit,  qui  fait  trouuer  la  ioye  au  milieu

des  angoifles,  &  la  paix  dans  I'ardeur  de  la  guerre:


1642 -44J  RELATION  OF  1642-43  21

Cousture  and  Ren^  Goupil,  zvlio  were  taken  with  the
FatJier  [265]  by  the  Iroquois,  were  two  young  men  match-
less of  their  kind,  and  excellently  adapted  to  these  countries.
And  if  the  fleet  of  Huron  Christians  and  Catechtunens
which  they  accompanied,  and  zuJiicJi  was  taken  and  defeated
at  the  same  time,  had  arrived  safe  and  sound,  as  we
were  expecting,  the  conversion  of  the  country  would  have
seemed  almost  infallible;  these  are  secrets  which  we  shall
discover  only  in  eternity.  Could  you  zvell  believe,  neverthe-
less, that  never  have  zve  taken  more  courage,  alike  for  the
spiritual  and  for  the  temporal  ?  The  Relation  will  show  you
the  particulars  thereof.  If  one  could  remedy  the  incursions
of  the  Iroquois,  and  constrain  them  to  a  favorable  peace,  we
would  see  in  a  little  time  notable  advances  for  Christianity
in  these  regions.  It  is  in  this  direction  that  I  cannot  see
an  atom,  unless  by  ways  which  approach  the  miraculous ;
insomuch  that  we  must  cast  our  eyes  toward  Heaven,  in
order  to  await  the  decrees  of  divine  providence ,  and  what
shall  be  pleasing,  in  the  affair,  to  those  on  whom  the  matter
depends.

The  Father  who  speaks  to  us  in  these  terms,  was
well  aware  of  the  disaster  which  had  happened,  in
the  preceding  year,  to  the  fleet  of  the  poor  Hurons :
but  he  could  not  foresee  that  his  letters  would  pass
[266]  through  the  hands  of  the  Iroquois;  that  the
Relation  which  he  was  sending  us,  would  be  plun-
dered; that  all  the  Hurons  who  were  coming  down
would  be  partly  massacred,  partly  taken  prisoners
into  the  country  of  the  Iroquois,  and  the  rest  pur-
sued and  stripped  even  to  the  flesh.  Never  (he  says)
have  zve  taken  more  courage,  alike  for  the  spiritual  and
for  the  temporal.  I  understand  only  the  half  of  these
words :  I  apprehend  very  well  this  increase  of  heart
and  spirit,  which  causes  joy  to  be  found  in  the  midst


22  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.25

ie  fcay  bien  que  Dieu  ne  fe  laiffe  pas  vaincre,  &  que
i'aymerois  mieux  eftre  fecouru  de  luy  tout  feul,  que
de  toutes  les  creatures  enfemble :  ce  qui  f e  paff e  dans
I'abandon,  fe  peut  bien  fentir:  mais  la  langue  n'a
pas  de  parole  pour  I'exprimer:  les  ioyes  interieures
font  plutoft  des  ioyes  de  I'efprit  que  du  corps.  Ie
n'entends  pas  comme  ces  pauures  Peres  preuuent
prendre  courage,  pour  Ie  temporel,  puis  que  tout  ce
que  Ie  Pere  logues  leur  portoit,  fut  enleue  auec  luy,
par  les  Iroquois,  &  que  tout  ce  qu'on  leur  enuoyoit
cette  annee,  a  efte  pris  &  pill6  [267]  par  les  mefmes.
Quel  courage  peuuent-ils  auoir  dans  Ie  temporel  qui
leur  manque?  Ie  fgay  bien  que  leur  refolution  eft
de  tenir  f  erme  iufques  au  bout,  &  d'aller  plutofl  nuds,
comme  Ie  Pere  logues,  que  de  laf cher  pied :  ils  ont
defia  quelque  rapport  auec  luy :  car  leur  maif on  pour
la  plufpart  du  temps  n'eft  baftie  que  d'efcorces,  &
leur  viure  n'eft  pour  1' ordinaire  que  de  la  boiiillie  de
farine  de  bled  d'Inde,  cuitte  dans  I'eau,  fans  fel,  &
fans  autre  ragouft  que  I'appetit:  certes  ie  ne  voy  pas
quel  plaifir  temporel  ils  puifTent  prendre  dans  ce
traitement:  mais  ie  vous  confeffe  &  vous  donne  pa-
role, que  I'accroiffement  de  I'efprit  recompenfe  bien
les  deffauts  que  fouffre  Ie  corps,  &  que  Dieu  opere
plus  parfaitement,  &  plus  doucement  par  foy-mefme,
que  quand  il  fe  fert  de  fes  creatures,  pourfuiuons  nos
lettres.

Nos  Catalogues  vous  feront  voir  nos  befoins :  ce  que  ie
demande  plus  particulierement  eji  qii  on  nous  enuoye  de
braues  ouuriers ,  pour  auancer  V ouurage  que  nous  auons  en
main,  &  pour  fucceder  auec  Ie  temps  a  ceux  que  I'aage,
&  les  accidents  de  cette  vie  peuuent  retidre  moins  vtils.

[268]  II  faut  que  ie  dife  en  paff  ant  que  Ie  corps  eft


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  23

of  anguish,  and  peace  in  the  ardor  of  war;  I  know
well  that  God  does  not  allow  himself  to  be  van-
quished, and  that  I  would  prefer  to  be  helped  by  him
all  alone,  than  by  all  creatures  together ;  what  passes
in  desolation  can  indeed  be  felt,  but  the  tongue  has
no  word  to  express  it;  the  joys  within  are  rather
joys  of  the  mind  than  of  the  body.  I  do  not  under-
stand how  these  poor  Fathers  can  take  courage  for
the  temporal,  since  everything  that  Father  Jogues
was  conveying  to  them  was  carried  off  with  him  by
the  Iroquois;  and  since  everything  which  was  sent
to  them  this  year  was  taken  and  plundered  [267]  by
the  latter.  What  courage  can  they  have  in  the  tem-
poral, which  fails  them  ?  I  well  know  that  their  reso-
lution is  to  hold  firm  even  to  the  end,  and  rather  to
go  naked,  like  Father  Jogues,  than  to  give  way.
Their  experiences  are  already  somewhat  like  his, — for
their  house,  most  of  the  time,  is  built  of  nothing  but
bark ;  and  their  living  is  usually  nothing  but  mush
of  Indian  cornmeal,  cooked  in  water  without  salt,
and  without  other  relish  than  that  of  appetite.  Cer-
tainly, I  do  not  see  what  temporal  pleasure  they  can
take  in  this  treatment ;  but  I  confess  to  you  and  give
you  my  word  that  the  increase  of  spirit  well  rewards
the  privations  which  the  body  suffers,  and  that  God
operates  more  perfectly  and  more  gently  by  himself
than  when  he  employs  his  creatures.  Let  us  continue
our  letters.

Our  Catalogues  ivill  show  you  our  needs;  what  I  ask
more  particularly  is  that  they  send  us  courageous  laborers,
in  order  to  advance  the  zvork  which  we  have  in  hand,  and
to  succeed,  in  course  of  time,  those  whom  age  and  the  acci-
dents of  this  life  may  reyider  less  useftil.

[268]  I  must  say,  in  passing,  that  the  body  is  lim-


24  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.25

limite:  mais  que  I'efprit  ne  I'eft  pas:  celuy  qui  a
couch6  ces  lignes  fgait  bien  ce  qu'on  fouffre,  pour  le
peu  de  fecours  qu'on  a  dans  ce  bout  du  monde,  &
cependant  il  demande  encore  des  compagnons  de  fon
courage,  &  de  fa  ioye:  car  les  trauaux  pris  pour
lefus-Chrift  portent  ces  fruidts. Paffons  outre.

Tandis  que  la  Riuiere  /era  af^iegee  de  toutes  parts  par
les  Iroquois:  i  auray  bien  de  la  peine  d' enuoyer  de  nos
Peres  a  'Kedec,  de  peur  de  les  expofer  aux  prifes  de  V en-
nemy.  perdre  vn  ouurier  tout  fait,  &  tout  form^  pour  ces
contrees:  c  eji  perdre  vn  precieux  t re/or:  &  fi  me/me
encor  no^  pouuds  7ious  dispefer  de  faire  defcendre  quelques-
vns  de  nos  homines  la  bas,  nous  le  ferons,  que  s'il  n  eft
pas  en  noflre  pouuoir,  il  les  faudra  facrifier  aufji  bien  en
defcedant  qu' on  fait  efi  montant:  car  de  pouuoir  fubfifter
icy  fajis  fecours  d' homines,  il  feroit  tofl  ou  tard  ivipoffible.

Les  Iroquois  fe  font  tellement  refpandus  fur  le
grand  fleuue  de  S.  Laurent,  &  fur  la  Riuiere  des  prai-
ries, qu'il  n'y  a  point  d'affurance  depuis  le  lac  de  S.
Pierre,  qui  eft  vn  peu  au  delTus  des  trois  Riuieres
[269]  iufques  bien  loing  au  dela  de  Mont- Real:  ces
Barbares  fe  cachent,  tantoft  en  vn  endroidt,  tantoft
en  I'autre  fe  iettans  a  I'improuifte  fur  les  Franjois,
fur  les  Hurons,  &  fur  les  Algonquins,  quand  ils  voy-
ent  leur  auantage :  fi  bien  qu'on  n'oferoit  quafi  naui-
ger  tout  I'Efte  fur  ces  beaux  fleuues,  fi  on  ne  fait  des
Carauanes,  comme  dans  1' Arabic,  ce  que  nous  ne
pouuons  pas  faire  pour  noftre  petit  nombre.

Pour  nos  mif^ions  dans  les  Bourgades  des  Hurons:
nous  les  auons  continuees  a  V ordinaire:  nous  ne  fufmes
iamais  ft  heureux,  ny  iantais  fi  inalheureux :  la  prife  du
Pere  logues,  de  nos  Franqois,  &  de  nos  Hurons  Chrefliens,
&  de  nos  Cat echumenes  nous  faire  [sc.  fait] reffentir  nos


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  25

ited:  but  the  spirit  is  not.  The  one  who  has  written
those  lines  knows  well  what  one  suffers  for  the  little
help  one  has  in  that  end  of  the  world ;  and  yet  he
still  asks  for  companions  in  his  courage  and  in  his
joy, —  for  the  labors  undertaken  for  Jesus  Christ  bear
those  fruits. Let  us  proceed.

As  long  as  the  River  shall  be  beset  from  every  direction
by  the  Iroquois,  I  shall  have  much  anxiety  about  sending
any  of  our  Fathers  to  Kebec,  for  fear  of  exposing  them  to
capture  by  the  enemy.  To  lose  one  laborer,  tlioroiighly
accustomed  and  suited  to  these  regions,  is  to  lose  a  precious
treasure, —  and  if  ,  even  yet,  zue  can  dispense  with  sending
some  of  our  men  down  tJiitJier,  we  will  do  so.  But,  if  that
be  not  in  our  power,  it  will  be  necessary  to  sacrifice  them,  no
less  going  doivn  than  is  done  coming  up;  for  the  ability  to
subsist  here  without  help  of  men  ivould,  sooner  or  later,  be
impossible.

The  Iroquois  have  so  spread  themselves  along  the
great  stream  of  St.  Lawrence,  and  along  the  River
des  prairies,  that  there  is  no  security  from  the  lake
of  St.  Pierre,  which  is  a  little  above  the  three  Riv-
ers, [269]  even  to  very  far  beyond  Mont-Real.  Those
Barbarians  conceal  themselves,  now  in  one  place,
now  in  another, —  falling  suddenly  upon  the  French,
upon  the  Hurons,  and  upon  the  Algonquins,  when
they  see  their  opportunity ;  insomuch  that  one  would
scarcely  dare  to  navigate,  in  all  the  Summer,  these
noble  streams,  unless  Caravans  be  made,  as  in  Ara-
bia, which  we  cannot  do  because  of  our  small  number.

As  for  our  missions  in  the Villages  of  the  Hurons,  we
have  contimied  them  as  usual. We  zvere  never  so  fortunate,
nor  ever  so  unfortunate  —  the  capture  of  Father  fogues,  of
our  Frenchmen, of  our Christian Hurons, and of  our
Catechumens,  makes  us  realize  our  troubles;  and  what  has


26  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.25

malheurs,  &  ce  qiii  s' ejl  pajfe  cette  annee,  pour  V amplifi-
cation de  la  foy,  publie  dans  la  Relation  nojlrc  felicity \
Nous  entrons  de  plus  en  plus  dans  la  pojjfej^ion  des  biens,
que  nous  venons  acheter  en  ce  botit  du  monde,  au  prix  de
nojlrc  fang  &  de  nos  vies :  le  voy  de  plus  graiides  difpo-
fitions  que  iamais,  a  la  co?iuerfion  totale  de  ccs  peuples,  que
no2ts  attaquons  des  premiers,  &  qtie  nous  e?itreprenons
d'emporter,  pour  feruir  de  modele,  &■  d' exemple  [270]  ^
ceux  qui  fe  conuertiront  par  apres.  En  vn  mot  nos  petites
Eglifes  vont  toujiours  croiffant  en  nombre  de  perfonnes,
&■  en  vertu.  Les  affaires  de  nojlrc  Seigneur  s' auancent,
a  proportion  des  dijgraces  qii  il  iious  cnuoyc,  a  peine  Je
rencontroit-il  cy-dcuant  parmy  nos  Chrcjlictis  deux  ou  trois
guerriers:  mais  dcpjiis  la  prije  de  ce  braue  Neophyte,
nomm^  Eujlache  le  plus  vaillant  de  tons  les  Hurons,  nous
avos  compte'  en  vne  Jeule  bande,  iujques  a  vingt-dcux
Croyans,  tons  hommes  de  cceur,  la  pluspart  Capitaines  ou
ge7ts  de  coyijidcration.  Vvjage  des  arqucbujcs  refuje  aiix
Infideles,  par  Monficur  le  Gouuerncur,  &  accorde  aux
Neophytes  Chrcjlicns  ejl  vn  puiffant  attrait,  pour  les
gaigner:  il  Jemble  que  nojlrc  Scig?teur  Je  vueille  Jeruir  de
ce  moye,  pour  rcdre  le  Chrijlianijme  rccommandable  en  ces
contrees.

Vne  autre  lettre  parle  en  ces  termes.

Dieu  nous  conjole  Jortement  par  V auanccment  du  Jpiri-
iuel,  qui  eji  le  Jeul  attrait,  qui  nous  amene  icy.  La  Joy
fait  vn  progrez  notable  parmy  les  Hurons:  on  auroit  de  la
peine  de  croire  qti  il  Je  rencontre  tant  de  Jolidit^,  tant
d'  iymocence,  &  tant  de  te?idreffe  en  des  cceur s  Sauuages,  fi  la
verite  ne  nous  cjifeignoit  que  Dieu  a  des  bontez,  &  des
mifericordes ,  auf^i  [271]  bien  pour  les  Sauuages,  que  pour
les  autres  nations  de  la  terrc.  II  a  iett^  les  yeux  cette
annee,  fur  les  Nipifiriniens  par  le Baptefme  folemnel  de


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  27

occurred  this  year  for  the  enlargement  of  the  faith  publishes
in  the  Relation  onr  blessedness.  We  are  enteri^ig  more  and
more  into  the  possession  of  the  goods  which  we  come  to  buy
in  this  end  of  the  zv  or  Id  at  the  price  of  our  blood  and  of  our
lives:  I  see  stronger  tendencies  tJian  ever  toward  the  total
conversion  of  these  peoples,  wJiom  we  are  attacking  among
the  first,  and  zvJiom  zee  are  2indertaking  to  carry  away,
in  order  to  serve  as  models  and  as  examples  [270]  to  those
who  shall  be  subsequently  converted.  In  a  word,  our  little
Churches  are  continually  increasing  in  number  of  persons,
and  in  virtue;  the  affairs  of  our  Lord  advance  in  propor-
tion to  the  adversities  which  he  sends  us.  Hardly  could
one  find,  hitherto,  among  our  Christia?is  two  or  three
warriors;  btit,  since  the  capture  of  that  worthy  Neophyte,
named  Eustache,  the  most  valiant  of  all  the  Hurons,  we
have  counted  in  a  single  band  as  ma?iy  as  tzuenty-two  Be-
lievers,—  all  men  of  courage,  and  mostly  Captains  or  people
of  importance .  The  use  of  arquebuses,  refused  to  the  In-
fidels by  Monsietir  the  Governor,  a7id  granted  to  the  Chris-
tian NeopJiytes,  is  a  pozuerful  attraction  to  win  them:  it
seems  that  our  Lord  intends  to  tise  this  means  in  order  to
render  Christianity  acceptable  in  these  regions.

Another  letter  speaks  in  these  terms :

God  mightily  consoles  us  by  the  adva^icement  of  the
spiritual,  which  is  the  only  attraction  that  bririgs  us  hither.
The  faith  makes  a  Jiotable  progress  among  the  Hurons;
one  could  hardly  believe  that  he  woiild  encounter  so  much
firmness,  so  much  innocence,  and  so  much  feeling  in
Savage  hearts,  if  the  truth  did  not  teach  us  that  God  has
bounties  and  mercies  as  [271]  well  for  the  Savages  as  for
the  other  fiat  ions  of  the  earth.  He  has  cast  his  eyes  this
year  upon  the  Nipisiriniens,  through  the  solemn  Baptism  of
certain  persons  more  advanced  in  age, —  besides  some  little


28  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.25

quelq2ies-vns  plus  aiianccz  en  aage.  Outre  quelques  petits
enfans,  a  qui  ces  eaux  facrees  07it  ouuert  les  partes  du  del.
Ne  paffons  pas  s'il  vous  plaift  legerement,  les  yeux
fur  ces  fragments  de  lettres,  tout  n'eft  pas  ruine,  puis
que  nous  ne  perdons  que  I'acceffoire,  &  que  le  prin-
cipal demeure  en  fon  entier.  Trois  braues  ouuriers
font  morts  quafi  a  mefme  annee.  Le  Pere  Charles
Raimbaut,  qui  auoit  vn  cceur  plus  grand  que  tout  fon
corps,  quoy  qu'il  fut  d'vne  riche  taille,  il  meditoit  le
chemin  de  la  Chine,  au  trauers  de  noftre  Barbarie,  &
Dieu  I'a  mis  dans  le  chemin  du  Ciel,  le  Pere  lean
Dolbeau,  que  la  paralyfie  auoit  attaqu6  dans  fes  tra-
uaux,  le  nauire  qui  le  reportoit  en  France,  ayant  efte
pris  par  trois  fregates  ennemies :  come  les  vainqueurs
le  pilloient,  on  laiffa  tomber  du  feu  dedans  les  pou-
dres,  qui  firent  voler  dans  la  mer  nos  amis,  &  nos
ennemis,  Le  pauure  Pere  fut  noye  dans  la  mer;
bien-heureux  d'auoir  donn6  fa  vie  dans  vn  fi  \2y2'\
genereux  employ,  &  d'auoir  paffe  par  le  feu,  &  par
I'eau,  pour  entrer  dans  vn  repos,  &  dans  vn  rafrai-
chiff ement  eternel :  il  menoit  vne  vie  faindte  dans
les  grandes  forefts,  &  maintenant  il  ioiiit  de  la  gloire
des  Saindts,  dans  ces  demeures  eternelles.  Le  Pere
Ambroife  Dauoft  repaffant  pour  fon  aage,  &  pour  la
foibleffe  de  fon  corps,  eftant  bien  fouuent  attaque  du
fcurbut,  a  efte  emporte  fur  la  mer  d'vne  fievre,  qui
ne  la  point  quitt6  iufques  k  ce  qu'il  ait  efte  enfeuely
dans  les  ondes :  il  eftoit  toufiours  auec  Dieu,  pendant
fa  vie.  II  auoit  vne  patience  de  fer,  ou  plutoft  vne
patience  toute  d'or,  ou  vne  patience  de  lob,  &  en  fa
vie,  &  en  fa  maladie,  &  en  fa  mort:  la  rigueur  de  la
fi6vre,  les  incommoditez  du  vaisseau,  le  deffaut  de
Chirurgien,  de  Medecin  &  de  remedes,  &  des  autres


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  29

children, to  ic/ioin these  sacred  zvatcrs  have  opened  the
gates  of  Heave }i.

Let  us  not,  if  you  please,  pass  lightly  over  these
fragments  of  letters;  everything  is  not  ruined,  since
we  lose  only  the  accessory,  and  since  the  essential
remains  intact.  Three  worthy  laborers  have  died,
almost  in  the  same  year.  Father  Charles  Raim-
baut  —  who  had  a  heart  greater  than  all  his  body,
though  he  was  of  generous  stature  —  was  meditating
the  way  to  China  through  our  Barbarian  land ;  and
God  has  put  him  in  the  way  to  Heaven.  Another  was
Father  Jean  Dolbeau,^  whom  paralysis  had  attacked
amid  his  labors ;  the  ship  which  was  bearing  him  back
to  France  having  been  seized  by  three  hostile  frig-
ates, while  the  victors  were  plundering  it,  some  one
let  fall  fire  into  the  magazine,  which  hurled  into
the  sea  both  our  friends  and  our  enemies.  The  poor
Father  was  drowned  in  the  sea, —  fortunate  to  have
given  his  life  in  so  [272]  noble  an  occupation,  and  to
have  passed  through  fire  and  through  water,  to  enter
into  an  eternal  rest  and  enjoyment.  He  led  a  holy
life  in  the  great  forests,  and  now  he  enjoys  the  glory
of  the  Saints,  in  those  eternal  dwellings.  Father
Ambroise  Davost  —  crossing  over  because  of  his  age
and  the  weakness  of  his  body,  having  been  very  often
attacked  by  the  scurvy  —  was  carried  off  on  the  sea
by  a  fever,  which  did  not  leave  him  until  he  was
buried  in  the  waves ;  he  was  always  with  God,  dur-
ing his  life.  He  had  a  patience  of  iron, — or  rather
a  patience  all  of  gold,  or  a  patience  of  Job, —  in  his
life,  in  his  sickness,  and  in  his  death.  The  severity
of  the  fever ;  the  discomforts  of  the  vessel ;  the  want
of  Surgeon,  of  Physician,  of  remedies,  and  of  the
other  comforts  which  are  found  on  land,  and  which


30  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.25

foulagemens qui fe trouuet en terre, & qii'il n'a
point  rencontre  dans  fon  nauire,  les  douleurs  qu'on
fouffre  en  ces  extremitez,  ne  luy  ont  iamais  ouuert
la  bouche,  ny  delie  la  langue  pour  fe plaindre,  il
eftoit  accouftume  a  fuiure  plutoft  les  volontez  &  les
inclinations  des  autres  que  les  [273]  liennes:  il  auoit
vne  fi  grande  habitude  ^  prendre  la  conduite  de  Dieu,
&  a  receuoir  de  fa  main,  tout  ce  qui  luy  arriuoit,  que
iamais  il  ne  demanda  rien  en  toute  fa  maladie, &
iamais  auffi  ne  refufa  rien  de  tout  ce  qu'on  luy  vou-
loit  faire  prendre,  &  iamais  n'efcoduifit  perfonne  de
ce  qu'on  defira  qu'il  fift:  ces  vertus  ne  font  pas  com-
munes. Outre  la  mort  de  ces  trois  perfonnes  d'elite,
la  prife  &  les  manuals  traitemens  qu'on  a  fait  au  Pere
Ifaac  logues,  &  a  trois  de  nos  Frangois,  dont  I'vn  a
efte  aff omme  par  les  Iroquois ;  la  deffaite  des  Chre-
ftiens  &  des  Cathecumenes  Hurons,  le  vol  qu'on  a
fait  de  tout  ce  qu'on  enuoyoit  I'an  paffe,  &  encore
cette  annee  aux  pauures  ouuriers  Euangeliques,  qui
font  es  nations  plus  hautes,  les  hazards,  les  perils,  les
embufches,  ou  ces  braues  Athletes  fe  iettent  tons  les
iours;  les  morts  continuelles  ne  font  que  I'acceffoire,
le  principal  eft  que  Dieu  foit  cognu,  qu'il  foit  aime,
que  la  foy  fe  plante,  &  s'amplifie:  c'eft  la  parole,  ou
la  pierre  precieufe,  pour  laquelle  il  faut  vendre,  don-
ner,  prodiguer  fa  vie  &  fong  \_sc.  fon]  fang :  ceux-1^
font  bien-heureux  [274]  qui  font  ce  riche  aqueft  ^  fi
bon  prix!

Puis  que  ie  fuis  en  train,  il  faut  que  ie  donne  quel-
que  liberte  k  mon  coeur,  &  a  ma  plume:  ie  touche
deux  points  en  paffant  deuant  que  de  conclure  ce
chapitre :  tons  deux  me  femblent  bien  confiderables.
Le  premier  eft  que  ce  feu  &  cette  ardeur  de  prodi-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib42-43  31

he  did  not  find  in  his  ship;  the  pains  which  one
suffers  in  these  extremities, — all  these  never  opened
his  lips  or  loosed  his  tongue  to  complain.  He  was
accustomed  to  follow  rather  the  wishes  and  the  in-
clinations of  others  than  [273]  his  own.  He  was  so
accustomed  to  take  the  guidance  of  God,  and  to
receive  from  his  hand  all  that  befell  him,  that
never  did  he  ask  for  anything  in  all  his  sickness;
also  he  never  refused  anything  of  all  that  they  would
have  him  take,  and  never  denied  any  one  what
one  desired  that  he  should  do ;  these  virtues  are  not
common.  Besides  the  death  of  these  three  elect
persons,  the  capture  and  the  evil  treatments  suffered
by  Father  Isaac  Jogues,  and  three  of  our  French-
men,—  one  of  whom  was  beaten  to  death  by  the
Iroquois ;  the  defeat  of  the  Huron  Christians  and  Cate-
chumens; the  robbery  that  occurred,  of  all  that  was
sent  last  year,  and  again  this  year,  to  the  poor
Gospel  laborers  who  are  among  the  upper  nations ;  the
risks,  the  dangers,  the  ambushes  into  which  these
brave  Athletes  plunge  every  day;  the  continual
deaths, —  all  these  are  only  the  accessory:  the  main
thing  is,  that  God  may  be  known,  that  he  may  be
loved,  that  the  faith  be  planted  and  enlarged.  This
is  the  word,  or  the  precious  stone,  for  which  it  is
necessary  to  sell,  give,  lavish,  one's  life  and  one's
blood.  Blessed  are  they  [274]  who  make  this  rich
acquisition  on  so  good  terms !

Since  I  am  on  the  road,  I  must  give  some  liberty  to
my  heart  and  to  my  pen :  I  touch  two  points,  in
passing,  before  closing  this  chapter;  both  seem  to
me  very  important.  The  first  is,  that  this  fire  and
this  ardor  of  lavishing  one's  blood  for  Jesus  Christ,
is  communicating  itself  to  young  men  who  might


32  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.25

guer  fon  fang  pour  lefus-Chrift,  fe  communique  a
de  ieunes  hommes  qui  auroient  traifne  leur  mife-
rable  vie  dedans  les  vices,  s'ils  eftoient  reftez  en
France,  &  qui  paffent  pour  des  Saindts  en  ce  nouueau
monde,  celuy  qui  a  eite  affomme  des  Iroquois,  nom-
me  Goupil,  eftoit  vn  braue  Chirurgien,  qui  auoit
dedie  fa  vie,  fon  coeur,  &  fa  main  au  feruice  des
pauures  Sauuages :  il  a  demeure  quelques  annees  k  S.
lofeph,  ou  I'odeur  de  fes  vertus,  notammet  de  fon
humilite,  &  de  fa  charite  refioiiit  encor  les  Fran9ois,
&  les  Sauuages  qui  I'ont  cognu.  Quand  on  luy  parla
d'aller  aux  Hurons,  fon  coeur  s'efpanoiiift  k  la  penfee
des  dangers  qu'il  alloit  encourir  pour  fon  maiftre:
enfin  il  a  donne  fa  vie  pour  fon  amour:  mais  voicy
qui  accroit  noflre  eftonnement:  vn  autre  ieune  [275]
Chirurgien  bien  verfe  dans  fon  art,  &  bien  cognu
dans  I'Hofpital  d'Orleans,  ou  il  a  donne  des  preuues
de  fa  vertu,  &  de  fa  fuffifance,  a  voulu  prendre  la
place  de  fon  camarade,  il  eft  paffe  en  la  Nouuelle
France,  &  moy  qui  efcri  ce  dernier  chapitre,  le  voy-
ant  fur  le  poindt  de  monter  aux  Huros,  ie  luy  repre-
setay  tous  les  perils  oil  il  s'alloit  letter:  ie  preuois
tout  cela,  me  dift-il,  li  mes  deffeins  ne  tendoient
qu'a  la  terre,  vos  paroles  me  donneroient  de  I'efpou-
uante :  mais  mo  coeur  ne  voulant  que  Dieu,  ne  craint
plusrien:  Ik  deffus  il  s'embarque  auec  trois  ieunes
Hurons  Chreftiens,  refolus  "k  tout  ce  qu'il  plairoit  k
Noftre  Seigneur  leur  enuoyer:  nous  croyons  qu'ils
ont  paff6  a  la  defrobee,  au  trauers  des  ennemis,  nous
n'en  auons  point  encor  d'affeurance.

Au  temps  que  les  Hurons  eftoient  plus  animez
contre  les  Frangois,  &  contre  nos  Peres,  &  qu'ils
machinoient  leur  mort,  on  demanda  k  quelques  ieunes


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  33

have  dragged  their  miserable  lives  into  vices,  if  they
had  remained  in  France,  and  who,  in  this  new  world,
pass  for  Saints.  The  one  who  was  beaten  to  death
by  the  Iroquois,  named  Goupil,  was  a  gallant  Sur-
geon, who  had  dedicated  his  life,  his  heart,  and  his
hand  to  the  service  of  the  poor  Savages.  He  lived
some  years  at  St.  Joseph,  where  the  reputation  of
his  virtues,  especially  of  his  humility  and  of  his
charity,  still  gladdens  the  French  and  the  Savages
who  knew  him.  When  we  spoke  to  him  of  going  to
the  Hurons,  his  heart  expanded  at  the  thought  of
the  dangers  that  he  was  about  to  incur  for  his  mas-
ter ;  finally,  he  gave  his  life  for  the  sake  of  his  love.
But  here  is  what  increases  our  astonishment :  another
young  [275]  Surgeon,  well  versed  in  his  art,  and
well  known  in  the  Hospital  at  Orleans,  where  he
has  given  proofs  of  his  virtue  and  of  his  competence,
has  chosen  to  take  the  place  of  his  comrade ;  he  has
crossed  into  New  France ;  and  I  who  write  this  last
chapter,  seeing  him  on  the  point  of  going  up  to  the
Hurons,  represented  to  him  all  the  perils  into  which
he  was  about  to  plunge.  "  I  foresee  all  that,"  he  said
to  me ;  "  if  my  designs  tended  only  to  the  earth,
your  words  would  give  me  terror:  but  my  heart,
desiring  only  God,  fears  nothing  more."  There-
upon, he  embarks  with  three  young  Christian  Hu-
rons, resolved  upon  all  that  it  might  please  Our  Lord
to  send  them.  We  believe  that  they  have  passed
secretly  through  the  enemy;  we  have  as  yet  no
assurance  thereof.

At  the  time  when  the  Hurons  were  most  irritated
against  the  French  and  against  our  Fathers,  and
when  they  were  plotting  their  death,  it  was  asked  of
some  young  men  who  had  come  down  from  those

(UBRARY  I


34  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jlSUITES [Vol.25

homes  defcendus  de  ces  Nations  plus  hautes,  s'ils
n'eftoient  pas  bien  fatisfaits  d'eflre  deliurez  de  ces
grands  dangers,  ou  la  malice  des  Barbares  les  auoit
iettez,  [276]  [ils  refpondirent  que  les  Peres — inserted
in  Quebec  edition']  prodiguans  fi  liberalement  leurs
vies,  pour  la  gloire  de  noftre  Seigneur,  qu'ils  eftoient
encor  tous  prefts  de  leur  aller  tenir  copagnie,  &  de
mourrir  auec  eux :  leur  parole  ne  fut  pas  vn  fimple
fon  forme  de  leurs  levrees,  ils  remonterent  la  mefme
annee,  &  s'expoferent  de  nouueau  dans  les  perils,
qu'ils  auoient  euitez:  ces  fentimens  &  ces  adtions  ne
font  pas  du  creu  de  la  nature.  le  veux  dire  en  fecond
lieu,  que  les  Sauuages  ont  tous  les  fubiets,  que  le
raifonnement  purement  humain  leur  pent  fuggerer
d'auoir  de  I'eloignement  de  la  foy,  ou  plutofh  de  la
rebuter :  c'eft  en  ce  point  que  Dieu  fait  voir  que  la
conuerfion  de  ces  peuples  eft  fon  ouurage.  Depuis
que  nous  auons  public  la  loy  de  lefus-Chrift  dans  ces
contrees,  les  fleaux  fe  font  iettez  comme  a  la  foule.
Les  maladies  contagieufes,  la  guerre,  la  famine  font
les  tyrans  qui  ont  voulu  rauir  la  foy  aux  fideles,  &
qui  I'ont  fait  hair  des  infideles.  Combien  de  fois
nous  a-on  reproche,  que  par  tout  ou  nous  mettions
le  pied,  la  mort  y  entroit  auec  nous?  combien  de  fois
nous  a-on  dit  qu'on  n 'auoit  [277]  iamais  veu  de  cala-
mitez  femblables  k  celles  qui  ont  paru,  depuis  que
nous  parlous  de  lefus-Chrift.  Vous  nous  diftes  (s'ef-
crient  quelques  vns)  que  Dieu  efl  plein  de  bont6,  &
lors  que  nous  nous  rendons  k  luy,  il  nous  maffacre.
Les  Iroquois  nos  ennemis  mortels  ne  croyent  point
en  Dieu,  ils  n'aymet  point  les  prieres,  ils  font  plus
mefchans  que  les  Demons,  &  cependant  ils  profperent,
&  depuis  que  nous  quittons  les  fagons  de  faire  de  nos


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib42-43  35

upper  Nations,  whether  they  were  not  well  satisfied
to  be  delivered  from  those  great  dangers  into  which
the  malice  of  the  Barbarians  had  thrown  them  ;  [276]
[they  answered  that,  since  the  Fathers  were]  so  free-
ly lavishing  their  lives  for  the  glory  of  our  Lord,
they  were  again  quite  ready  to  go  and  keep  them
company,  and  to  die  with  them.  Their  statement
was  not  a  mere  sound  formed  by  their  lips;  they
went  up  again  the  same  year,  and  exposed  themselves
anew  to  the  perils  which  they  had  avoided.  Such
sentiments  and  such  deeds  are  not  of  nature's  growth.
I  wish  to  say,  in  the  second  place,  that  the  Savages
have  all  the  reasons  which  purely  human  argument
can  suggest  to  them,  for  having  an  aversion  toward
the  faith,  or  rather,  for  rejecting  it;  it  is  in  this
point  that  God  shows  that  the  conversion  of  these
peoples  is  his  own  work.  Since  we  have  published
the  law  of  Jesus  Christ  in  these  regions,  plagues  have
rushed  in  as  in  a  throng.  Contagious  diseases,  war,
famine, — these  are  the  tyrants  that  have  sought  to
wrest  the  faith  from  the  faithful,  and  that  have
caused  it  to  be  hated  by  the  infidels.  How  many
times  have  we  been  reproached  that,  wherever  we
set  foot,  death  came  in  with  us !  How  many  times
have  they  told  us  that  they  had  [277]  never  seen
calamities  like  those  which  have  appeared  since  we
speak  of  Jesus  Christ !  ' '  You  tell  us  ' '  (exclaim
some)  "that  God  is  full  of  goodness;  and  then,
when  we  give  ourselves  up  to  him,  he  massacres  us.
The  Iroquois,  our  mortal  enemies,  do  not  believe  in
God,  they  do  not  love  the  prayers,  they  are  more
wicked  than  the  Demons, —  and  yet  they  prosper;
and  since  we  have  forsaken  the  usages  of  our  ances-
tors, they  kill  us,  they  massacre  us,  they  burn  us, —


36  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.25

ancellres,  ils  nous  tuet,  ils  nous  maffacrent,  ils  nous
bruflent,  ils  nous  exterminent  de  fond  en  comble.
Quel  profit  nous  peut-il  reuenir  de  prefler  I'oreille  a
I'Euangile,  puis  que  la  mort  &  la  foy  marche  quafi
toufiours  de  compagnie?  II  fe  trouue  des  Chreftiens
qui  refpondent  genereufement  a  ces  plaintes.  Quand
la  foy  nous  feroit  perdre  la  vie,  eft-cy  vn  grand  mal-
heur  de  quitter  la  terre,  pour  eftre  bien-heureux  au
Ciel?  fi  la  mort  &  la  guerre  efgorgent  les  Chrelliens,
elle  n'efpargne  non  plus  les  infideles.  Ouy,  mais
repartent  les  autres,  les  Iroquois  ne  meurent  point,
&  cependant  ils  ont  la  priere  en  horreur.  Auant
[278]  que  les  nouueautez  paruffent  en  ces  contrees,
nous  viuions  auffi  long-temps  que  les  Iroquois :  mais
depuis  que  quelques-vns  ont  receu  la  priere,  on  ne
void  plus  de  teftes  blanches,  nous  mourrons  k  demy
aage.

Dieu  fe  comporte  en  voftre  endroit,  leur  dift,  quel-
qu'vn,  comme  vn  Pere  enuers  fon  enfant:  fi  fon
enfant  ne  veut  point  auoir  d'efprit,  il  le  chaflie  pour
luy  en  donner,  I'ayant  corrige  il  iette  les  verges  au
feu,  vn  Pere  ne  fe  met  pas  tant  en  peine  de  fes  valets,
que  de  fes  enfans.  Dieu  vous  regarde  comme  fes
enfans,  il  vous  veut  donner  de  I'efprit,  il  fe  fert  des
Iroquois,  comme  d'vn  foiiet,  pour  vous  corriger,  pour
vous  donner  de  la  foy,  pour  vous  faire  auoir  recours
k  luy.  Quad  vous  ferez  fages,  il  iettera  les  verges  au
feu,  il  chaftiera  les  Iroquois,  s'ils  ne  s'amendet.
Helas !  difent  quelques-vns,  que  n'a-il  commence  par
les  Iroquois?  que  ne  tafchoit-il  de  leur  donner  pre-
mierement  de  I'efprit:  nous  en  auons  defia  tat,  &
eux  n'en  ont  point  du  tout.  II  eft  le  Maiftre,  leur
dift-on,  il  fait  tout  ce  qu'il  [279]  veut, il  vous  pre-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  J642 -43  37

they  exterminate  us,  root  and  branch.  What  profit
can  there  come  to  us  from  lending  ear  to  the  Gospel,
since  death  and  the  faith  nearly  always  march  in
company?"  There  are  Christians  who  generously
answer  these  complaints :  ' '  Though  the  faith  should
cause  us  to  lose  life,  is  it  a  great  misfortune  to  leave
the  earth  in  order  to  be  blest  in  Heaven?  If  death
and  war  slaughter  the  Christians,  no  more  do  they
spare  the  infidels."  "  Yes,  but,"  answer  the  others,
"  the  Iroquois  do  not  die,  and  yet  they  hold  prayer
in  abomination.  Before  [278]  these  innovations
appeared  in  these  regions,  we  lived  as  long  as  the
Iroquois;  but,  since  some  have  accepted  prayer,  one
sees  no  more  white  heads, — we  die  at  half  age."

"  God  behaves  toward  you,"  was  said  to  them,
"  like  a  Father  toward  his  child;  if  his  child  will  not
have  sense,  he  punishes  it,  in  order  to  give  it  some;
having  corrected  it,  he  throws  the  rods  into  the  fire.
A  Father  does  not  put  himself  to  so  much  trouble
about  his  servants  as  about  his  children.  God  regards
you  as  his  children :  he  wishes  to  give  you  sense ;  he
uses  the  Iroquois  as  a  whip,  in  order  to  correct  you,
to  give  you  faith,  to  make  you  have  recourse  to  him.
When  you  shall  be  wise,  he  will  throw  the  rods  into
the  fire;  he  will  chastise  the  Iroquois,  unless  they-
reform."  "Alas!"  say  some,  "why  did  he  not
begin  with  the  Iroquois?  Why  did  not  he  try  to  give
them  sense  first?  we  have  so  much  already,  and  they
have  none  at  all."  "  He  is  the  Master,"  they  are
told;  "he  does  whatever  he  [279]  will;  he  prefers
you  to  the  Iroquois,  he  loves  you  much  more,  since
he  gives  a  life  all  full  of  pleasures  to  those  among
you  who  die  after  Baptism,  and  since  he  casts  all  the
Iroquois  into  the  fires, — not  one  of  them  believing


38  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jiSUITES  [Vol.25


fere  aux  Iroquois,  il  vous  aime  bien  dauantage,  puis
qu'il  donne  vne  vie  toute  pleine  de  plaifirs  a  ceux
d'entre-vous  qui  meuret  apres  le  Baptefme,  &  qu'il
precipite  tous  les  Iroquois  dans  les  feux;  pas-vn
d'eux  ne  croyans  en  Dieu.  Apres  tout  on  ne  void
quafi  aucun  Payen,  pour  opiniaflre  qu'il  ayt  eft6
pendant  fa  vie,  qui  ne  demande  le  Baptefme  k  la
mort,  &  nonobftant  toutes  ces  calamitez,  ces  pauures
gens  ne  laiffent  pas  d'embraffer  lefus-Chrift.  Ces
mefmes  fleaux  &  ces  mefmes  reproches  fe  rencon-
troient  iadis  en  la  primitiue  Eglife.  Les  humiliations
font  les  fourriers  qui  marquet  les  logis  du  grand
Dieu,  &  la  tribulation  nous  attire  plus  fortement,  &
auec  bien  plus  d'affeurace  que  la  confolation :  il  faut
abbatre  I'orgueil,  &  la  fuperbe  de  ces  peuples,  pour
donner  entree  a  la  foy:  mais  reuenons  ^  nos  lettres.

Nous  I'oyoris  bien  que  fi  on  n  arrcjie  les  Iroquois^  ?ioiis
ne  pouiions  pas  long-temps  fubjijler,  nous  ferons  neant-
moins,  ic  ne  dis  pas  le  pojfible  feulement'.  mais  r imagina-
ble, pour  ne  [280]  point  quitter  pri/e,  7ious  di/po/ants
neatmoins  a  receuoir  les  ordres  qii  il  plaira  a  fa  diuine
Maiejl^  de  nous  prefer  ire.

Si  les  Iroquois  ne  retardoient  point  le  progrez  de
I'Euangile,  s'ils  ne  tenoient  point  les  aueniies  d'vne
infinite  de  peuples,  qui  font  dans  les  nations  plus
hautes,  &  qui  n'ont  iamais  ouy  parler  de  Iesvs-
Christ,  s'ils  ne  mena9oient  point  la  Colonie  d'vne
honteufe  ruine,  &  I'Ancienne  France  d'vne  efpece
d'infamie  de  n'auoir  peu  donner  de  fecours  a  fa
cadette  contre  vne  poignee  de  Barbares :  en  vn  mot
s'ils  ne  tuoient  que  les  corps,  fans  endommager  le
falut  des  ames,  nos  mal-heurs  nous  fembleroient
tolerables:  mais  qui  cognoift  la  valeur  du  fang  de


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  39

in  God."  After  all,  one  sees  hardly  any  Pagan,  how-
ever obstinate  he  may  have  been  during  his  life,  who
does  not  ask  for  Baptism  at  death ;  and,  notwithstand-
ing all  those  calamities,  these  poor  people  neverthe-
less embrace  Jesus  Christ.  These  same  scourges
and  these  same  reproaches  were,  in  olden  time,
encountered  in  the  primitive  Church.  Humiliations
are  the  harbingers  that  mark  the  dwellings  of  the
great  God ;  and  tribulation  attracts  us  more  strongly
and  with  much  more  certainty  than  does  comfort.
It  is  necessary  to  abase  the  pride  and  the  haughtiness
of  these  peoples,  in  order  to  give  admission  to  the
faith. But  let  us  return  to  our  letters.

We  see  zuell  that,  if  the  Iroquois  be  not  checked,  we
cannot  long  subsist;  zve  zuill  do,  nevertheless,  1  do  not  only
say  our  best,  but  zvhatever  zve  can  contrive ,  in  order  not
[280]  to  let  go  our  hold, — prcpari7ig  ourselves,  hozvever,  to
receive  the  orders  which  it  shall  please  his  diviiie  Majesty
to  prescribe  for  us.

If  the  Iroquois  did  not  retard  the  progress  of  the
Gospel ;  if  they  did  not  hold  the  avenues  of  approach
to  a  vast  number  of  peoples,  who  are  among  the
upper  nations,  and  who  have  never  heard  Jesus
Christ  mentioned;  if  they  did  not  threaten  the  Col-
ony with  a  shameful  ruin,  and  Old  France  with  a
kind  of  infamy  for  not  having  been  able  to  give  help
to  her  junior  against  a  handful  of  Barbarians, — in  a
word,  if  they  killed  only  the  bodies,  without  preju-
dicing the  salvation  of  the  souls,  our  misfortunes
would  seem  to  us  tolerable;  but  whoso  knows  the
value  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  knows  the  price
and  the  value  of  a  soul.  Let  us  finish  this  discourse.
Here  are  a  few  words  of  a  son,  written  to  his  father,
which  have  but  little  sweetness  as  regards  the  senses,


40  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.25

Iesvs-Christ,  cognoift  le  pris  &  la  valeur  d'vne
ame.  Acheuons  ce  difcours,  voicy  quatre  paroles
d'vn  enfant  efcrites  a  fon  pere,  qui  n'ont  guere  de
douceur,  pour  les  fens:  mais  beaucoup  pour  I'efprit:
c'eft  vn  Religieux  de  noftre  compagnie,  qui  parle  ^
fes  plus  proches,  &  qui  leur  demande,  s'ils  ne  [281]
luy  portent  point  de  copafiion  tV  aiwir  ejl^  priue  dii  bon-
heur  qua  receu  le  Pere  Ifaac  logues,  tojnbant  entre  les
mains  des  Iroquois.  Ce  Pere,  dit-il,  n  a  fait  ce  voyage
qu'v^ie  feule  fois,  &  il  a  fait  rejicontre  de  ce  bon-Jieur.  le
fuis  defcendu  fix  fois  a  ^^cbec,  &  fix  fois  remo7it^ par  les
niefmes  chemins,  fans  faire  ce  bon  rencontre.  le  Jie  fgay
ce  que  noflre  bon  Dieu  me  garde:  mais  ie  m  efiimerois
bien-heureux  d'auoir  trouue  vn  rencontre  pareil,  apres
auoir  paff^  toute  ma  vie  a  fon  fain6l  feruice.  La  rage  de
nos  enncuiis  augmente  noflre  mcrite,  &  leurs  feux  noflre
gloire,  lors  que  nous  entrerons  dans  les  Cieux,  par  cette
porte,  nous  aurons  plus  de  force  pour  les  attirer,  ie  les  y
fouhaitte  de  bon  cceur,  ne  les  appellant  ?ios  e?inemis,  quen-
tant  quits  empefcJient  la  propagation  de  la  foy.

VOICY  pour  conclufion  le  fentiment  d'vn  Sauuage
Chreftien,  auquel  comme  on  reprochoit  qu'il
efloit  pauure,  pource  qu'il  croyoit  en  Dieu:  Quand
bien  [282]  cela  feroit  refpondit-il,  ie  ne  in  en  refiouyrois,
pource  que  mes  ricJieffes  font  an  Ciel:  mais  toy  qui  ine
fais  ce  reproche,  &  qui  n  as  point  la  foy,  tu  feras  7wnob-
Jiant  tons  tes  biens,  pauure  &  miferable,  &  brufle  dans
les  flammes  toute  vne  eternity,  il  faudroit,  dift,  celuy  qui
a  couche  ce  bon  fentiment  dans  fes  lettres,  venir  paffer
icy  quelques  annees,  pour  faire  cas  &  eflime  de  la  foy,
dont  nous  ne  cognoiffons pas  la  valeur y  pour  r auoir  receu'e
comme  par  heritage.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  41

but  much  as  regards  the  spirit :  it  is  a  Religious  of
our  society,  who  speaks  to  his  nearest  friends,  and
asks  them  if  they  do  7tot  [281]  feel  compassion  for  him,  to
have  been  deprived  of  the  good  fortune  which  Father  Isaac
Jogues  has  received,  by  fallijig  into  the  hands  of  the
Iroquois.  This  Father,  he  says,  has  made  that  journey
only  once,  and  he  has  encountered  that  happiness.  I  have
come  down  six  times  to  Kebec,  and  six  times  gone  up  again
by  the  same  ways,  without  meeting  that  fortunate  adven-
ture. I  know  not  ivhat  our  good  God  has  in  reserve  for
me;  but  I  would  esteem  myself  very  happy  to  find  a
similar  encounter,  after  passing  all  my  life  i?t  his  holy
service.  The  rage  of  our  enemies  augments  our  merit,  and
their  fires,  our  glory;  when  we  shall  enter  Heaveit  by  that
gate,  we  shall  have  a  greater  force  by  which  to  attract
them.  I  desire  the^n  there  with  good  heart, —  not  calling
them  our  efiemies,  except  in  so  far  as  they  hinder  the
propagation  of  the  faith.

HERE  follows,  in  conclusion,  the  sentiment  of  a
Christian  Savage,  who  had  been  reproached
that  he  was  poor,  because  he  believed  in  God :  Even
though  [282]  that  were  so, —  he  answered, — I  would  rejoice
in  it,  because  my  riches  are  in  Heaven.  But  thou  who
easiest  at  me  this  reproach,  and  who  hast  not  the  faith, —
thou  wilt  be,  nottvithstanding  all  thy  goods,  poor  and  miser-
able, and  burned  in  the  fames  a  whole  eternity.  It
would  be  necessary,  says  he  who  has  noted  this  good
sentiment  in  his  letters,  to  come  and  spend  some  years
here,  in  order  to  make  account  and  esteem  of  the  faith, —
the  vahie  of  which  we  do  not  know,  by  reason  of  having
received  it,  as  it  were,  by  inheritance.


42  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.25


[283]  CHAPITRE  XIV.

DE LA DELIURANCE DU  PERE ISAAC lOGUES  &  DE  SON
ARRIUEE EN FRANCE.

CETTE  noutielle  fera  d'autant  plus  agreable
qu'elle  eftoit  moins  attendue.  On  ne  parloit
plus  de  ce  pauure  Pere,  qu'k  la  fa9on  qu'on
parle  des  morts.  Quelques-vns  le  croyoient  brufl6
&  deuore  des  Iroquois,  d'autres  le  regardoient  comme
vne  vidtime  qui  n'attendoit  plus  que  le  coufteau  &  la
dent  des  Sacrificateurs  de  Moloc.  En  effedt  le  Dieu
des  abandonnes  I'a  fauue  par  vne  Prouidence  toute
particuliere,  au  moment  qu'il  eftoit  deftin6  au  feu  &
"k  ces  autres  cruautes  qui  passent  la  malice  des  hom-
mes,  il  eft  viuant ;  &  li  f es  mains  font  racourcies,  f on
coeur  eft  aggrandy,  les  fouff ranees  de  fon  corps  n'ont
point  diminue  la  force  de  fon  efprit:  nous  I'atten-
dons  de  iour  k  autre  [Si]  I'lmprimeur  [284]  n' eftoit
pas  £i  prefer,  nous  apprendrions  de  fa  bouche  les
douces  voyes  que  Dieu  a  tenues  pour  le  deliurer,  la
lettre  qu'il  recrit  de  fa  captiuite  au  Pere  Charles
Lalemant,  nous  en  parle  affez  amplement:  mais  elle
ne  fatisfait  pas  ^  toutes  les  demandes  que  nous  luy
pourions  faire.  Suiuons  la  neantmoins,  car  elle
merite  bien  fa  place  dans  ce  Chapitre.

le  party  le  propre  iour  de  la  Fejle  de  Nojlre  Bien  heureux
Pere  faincl  Ignace  de  la  Boiirgade,  ok  i  ejiois  captif  pour
fuiure  &  acconipagner  quelques  Iroquois  qui  s' en  alloient
premier ement  en  traiite,  puis  en  pefcherie :  ayans  fait  leur


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  -13


[283]  CHAPTER  XIV.

OF  THE  DELIVERANCE  OF  FATHER  ISAAC  JOGUES,  AND
HIS  ARRIVAL  IN  FRANCE.

THIS  news  will  be  by  so  mtich  more  agreeable
as  it  was  less  expected.  This  poor  Father  was
no  longer  spoken  of,  save  as  one  speaks  of  the
dead.  Some  believed  him  burned  and  devoured  by
the  Iroquois ;  others  regarded  him  as  a  victim  who
awaited  nothing  more  but  the  knife  and  the  teeth  of
the  Sacrificers  of  Moloch.  In  fact,  the  God  of  the  for-
saken saved  him  by  a  wholly  special  Providence,  at
the  moment  when  he  was  destined  to  the  fire,  and
to  those  other  cruelties  which  pass  the  malice  of  men.
He  is  living,  and,  if  his  hands  are  shortened,  his
heart  is  enlarged, — the  sufferings  of  his  body  have
not  diminished  the  strength  of  his  mind:  we  are
expecting  him  from  day  to  day.  [If]  the  Printer
[284]  were  not  so  hurried,  we  could  learn  from  his
own  lips  the  pleasant  ways  which  God  has  taken  in
order  to  deliver  him.  The  letter  which  he  writes
again  from  his  captivity  to  Father  Charles  Lalemant,
speaks  to  us  of  these  quite  amply ;  but  it  does  not
satisfy  all  the  questions  that  we  might  put  to  him.
Let  us  follow  it,  nevertheless;  for  it  well  deserves
its  place  in  this  Chapter.

I  started  the  very  day  of  the  Feast  of  Our  Blessed  FatJier
saint  Igtiace,  from  the  Village  where  I  was  captive, —
in  order  to  folloiv  and  accompajiy  some  Iroquois  %vho  were
going  away,  first  for  trade,  then  for  fishing. Having


44  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.25

petit  trafic  ils  s' arrejlercnt  fcpt  ou  huicl  lieues  au  dcffoiis
d'vne  habitation  des  Hollandois,  placee  fur  vne  riuiere  oil
nous  faijions  nojire  pcfche:  coimne  nous  drej^ions  des
embufches  aiix  poijjfons,  arriiie  vn  bruit  qiivne  efcoiiade
d' Iroquois  retournee  de  la  chaffe  des  Hurons,  en  auoit  tue'
cinq  ou  fix  fur  la  place,  &  amend  qiiatre  pr if onniers,  dont
les  deux  efloient  defia  bruflez  dans  noflre  Bourgade,  auec
des  cruautez  extraordinaires:  a  cette  nouuelle  inon  cceiir
fut  transpercd  [285]  d'vne  douleur  tres-amere  &  tres-
fenfible,  de  ce  que  ie  71  auois  point  veu,  ny  confole,  ny
baptist  ces pauures  victimes,  fi  bieti  qu' apprehendant  qii  il
n  arriuafl  quelque  autre  chofe  de  feniblable  en  mon  ab fence,
ie  dy  a  vne  botine  vieille  femme  qui  pour  fon  age  &  pour
le  foin  qu  e lie  auoit  de  nioy,  &  pour  la  conipaj^ion  qii  elle
me portoit,  m  appelloit  fo)i  nepueu,  &  inoy  ie  f  appellois
ma  tante,  ie  luy  dy  done,  Ma  tante  ie  voudrois  bien  re-
tourner  eti  no^re  Cabane,  ie  m  ennuye  beaucoup  icy,  ce
n  efloit  pas  que  i  attendiffe  plus  de  douceur  &  inoins  de
peine  en  noflre  Bourgade,  oil  ie  fouffrois  vn  martyr  conti-
nuel,  efla7it  contraint  de  voir  de  ines  yeux  les  horribles
cruautez  qui  s'y  exercent:  mais  mon  cceur  ne  pouuoit
fouffrir  la  mort  d'aucim  homme  fans  que  ie  luy  procuraffe
Ie  fainfl  Baptefme,  cette  botine  femme  me  dit  vas  f  en
done  mon  nepueu,  puis  que  tu  f  en^iuies  icy,  prends  dequoy
manger  e?i  chemin :  ie  m' embarquay  dans  Ie  premier  Canot
qui  remontoit  a  la  Bourgade,  toufiours  conduit  &  toufiotirs
accompagnd  des  Iroquois,  arriuds  que  nous  fufmes  en
V habitation  des  Hollandois,  par  oil  il  nous  falloit  paffer,
I  apprends  que  toute  no  fire  Bourgade  efi  animde  [286]  centre
les  Francois,  &  qii" on  n  attendoit  plus  que  mon  retour  pour
nous  brufier,  voicy  Ie  fubie6t  de  cette  nouuelle.  Entre
plufieurs  bandes  d'  Iroquois,  qui  efioient  allez  en  guerre  centre
les  Francois,  centre  les  Algonquins ,  &  centre  les  Hurons,


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  46

accomplished  their  little  traffic,  they  stopped  at  a  place  seven
or  eight  leagues  beloto  a  settlement  of  the  Dutch,  %vhich  is
located  on  a  river  zvhere  ive  carried  on  our  fishing.  While
we  were  setting  S7iares  for  the  fish,  there  came  a  rumor
that  a  squad  of  Iroquois,  returned  from  pursuit  of  the
Hurons,  had  killed  five  or  six  on  the  spot,  and  taken  four
prisoners,  tzvo  of  zvhom  had  been  already  burned  in  our
Village,  with  cruelties  extraordinary.  At  this  news,  my
heart  ivas  pierced  through  [285]  tvith  a  most  bitter  and
sJiarp  pain,  because  I  had  not  seen,  or  consoled,  or  baptized
those  poor  victims.  Conseqtiently,  fearing  lest  some  other
like  thing  should  happen  in  my  absence,  I  said  to  a  good  old
zvoman, —  zvho,  by  reason  of  her  age,  and  the  care  that  she
had  for  me,  and  the  compassion  that  she  felt  tozuard  me,
called  me  her  nephezv,  and  I  called  her  my  aunt, —  /  then
said  to  her:  "  My  aunt,  I  would  much  like  to  ret7ir7t  to
our  Cabin;  I  grow  very  zveary  here.''  It  was  7iot  that  I
expected  more  ease  and  less  pain  in  our  Village, —  where  I
suffered  a  continual  7nartyrdom,  being  constrained  to  see
with  7ny  eyes  the  horrible  cruelties  which  are  practiced
there;  but  my  heart  could  not  endure  the  death  of  any  man
without  my  procuring  Jiim  holy  Baptisjii.  That  good
woman  said  to  me:  ' '  Go  then,  my  nephew,  since  thou  art
weary  here;  take  something  to  eat  on  the  way.''  I  em-
barked in  tJie  first  Canoe  that  was  going  up  to  the  Village, —
alzvays  conducted  and  alzvays  accompanied  by  the  Iroquois.
Having  arrived,  as  we  did,  in  the  settlement  of  the  Dutch,
through  zvhich  it  was  necessary  for  us  to  pass,  I  learn  that
our  whole  Village  is  excited  [286]  against  the  French,
and  that  only  my  return  is  awaited,  for  them  to  burn
us.  Now  for  the  cause  of  such  news.  Among  several
bands  of  Iroquois,  who  had  gone  to  zvar  against  the  French,
the  Algonquins,  and  the  Hurons,  there  zvas  one  which  took
the resolution to  go  round  about  Richelieu, in  order  to


46


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  25


il  s'eti  trouua  vne  qui prit  la  refolution  dialler  ti  V entour
de  Richelieu,  pour efpier les  Francois &  les Sauuages
leurs  allies,  vn  certain  Huron  de  cette  bande  pris  par  les
Hiroquois,  &  habitu^  parmy  eux,  me  vint  demander  des
let  tres  pour  les  porter  aux  Francois,  ef per  ant  pent  ejlre  en
fiirprendre  quelquvn  par  cette  amorce:  mais  comme  le  ne
doutois  pas  que  nos  Frangois  ne  fuffcnt  fur  leurs  gardes,
&  que  ie  voyois  d" ailleurs  qiiil  ejloit  iinportant  que  ie  leur
domiajjfe  quelques  auis  des  deffeins &  des  amies  &  des
dejloyautez  de  nos  ennemis,  ie  trouuay  moyen  d'auoir  vn
bout  de  papier  pour  leur  efcrire,  les  Hollandois  me  faifants
cette  charitd. Ie  cognoiffois  fort bien les  dangers  oil  ie
m'expofois, ie nignorois  pas que  sil  arriuoit quelque
difgrace  a  ces  guerriers,  qii  on  vi  en  feroit  refponfable,  &
quon en  accu feroit  mes  lettrcs, ie  preuoyois  ma mort:
mais  elle  me  fembloit  douce  &  agr cable,  employee  pour  le
bien  public,  &  pour  \2?>y']  la  confolation  de  nos  Francois,
&  des  pauures  Sauuages  qui  ef  content  la  parole  de  Noftre
Seigneur. Mon  cceur  fie  fut  faifi  d'aucune  crainte,  a  la
veue  de  tout  ce  qui  en  pourroit  arriuer,  puis  quil  y  alloit
de  la  gloire  de  Dieu :  ie  donnay  done  ma  lettre  a  ce  ieune
guerrier  qui  tie  retourna  point . V  Jiifioire  que  fes  cama-
rades  ont  rapportee,  dit  qiiil  la  porta  au  fort  de  Richelieu,
&  quauj^i  tofi  que  les  Franqois  Veurent  veue  quils  tire-
rent  le  Cajion  fur  eux,  ce  qui  les  efpouuanta  tellement  que
la  plus  part  s  enfuyrent  tons  nuds,  qii  ils  abandonnerent
Vvn  de  leurs  Canots,  dans  lequel  il  y  auoit  trois  arquebufes
de  la  poudre  &  du  plomb,  &  quelque  autre bagage:  ces
nouuelles  apportdes  dans la Bourgade,  on crie tout  haiit
que  mes  lettrcs  ont  efld  caufes  quoti  les  a  traittez  de  la
forte:  le  bruit  s' en  repand par  tout,  il  vient  iufques  a  mes
oreilles:  on  me  reproche  que  i  ay  fait  ce  manuals  coup; on
ne  parle  que  de  me  brufler,  &  ft  ie  me  fuffe  trouud  dans


1 642 - 44]  RELA  TION  OF  1642-43  47

Spy  on  the  French  and  the  Savages,  their  allies.  A  certain
Huron  of  this  band,  taken  by  the  Hiroquois,  and  settled
among  them,  came  to  ask  me  for  letters,  in  order  to  carry
them  to  the  Fre7ich, —  hoping,  perhaps,  to  surprise  some  one
of  them  by  this  bait;  but,  as  I  doubted  not  that  our  French
would  be  071  their  guard,  and  as  I  saw,  moreover,  that  it
was  importafit  that  I  should  give  them,  some  war7iing  of  the
desig7is,  the  ar77is,  and  the  treachery  of  our  enemies,  I
found  means  to  secure  a  bit  of  paper  i7i  order  to  write  to
the7n, —  tJie  Dutch  accordi7ig  me  this  charity.  I  k7iew
very  well  the  da7igers  to  which  I  was  exposi7ig  myself;  I
was  7iot  ignora7it  that,  if  a7iy  misfortu7ie  Jiappened  to  those
warriors,  they  would  make  me  resp07isible  therefor,  a7id
would  blame  my  letters  for  it.  I  a7iticipated  7ny  death;
but  it  seei7ied  to  me  pleasant  and  agreeable,  ei7iployed  for
the  public  good,  and  for  [287]  the  co7isolation  of  our  French
a7id  of  the  poor  Savages  who  liste7t  to  the  word  of  Our
Lord.  My  heart  was  seized  with  no  dread,  at  the  sight  of
all  that  might  happen  therefro7}i,  si7ice  it  was  a  matter  of
the  glory  of  God;  I  accordi7igly  gave  my  letter  to  that
you7ig  warrior,  who  did  7iot  return.  The  story  which  his
co77irades  have  brought  back,  says  that  he  carried  it  to  the
fort  of  Richelieu,  and  that,  as  soon  as  the  Fre7ich  had  see7i
it,  they  fired  the  Canno7i  upon  them.  This  frightened  them
so  that  the  greater  part  fled,  all  7iaked, —  abando7ii7ig  07ie
of  their  Ca7ioes,  i7i  which  there  were  three  arquebuses,
powder  and  lead,  a7id  S07ne  other  baggage.  These  tidi7igs
being  brought  into  the  Village,  they  cla7)wr  aloud  that  my
letters  have  caused  them  to  be  treated  like  that;  the  rumor
of  it  spreads  every iv here, —  it  co77ies  eve7i  to  my  ears.
They  reproach  me  that  I  have  done  this  evil  deed;  they
speak  07ily  of  burning  m,e;  and,  if  I  had  chanced  to  be  in
the  Village  at  the  returri  of  those  warriors,  fire,  rage,
a7id  cruelty  would  have take7i tny  life. For  cli7itax  of


48  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.25

la  Boiirgade  au  ret  our  de  ces  gens  de  guerre;  le  feu,  la
rage  &  la  cruaut^  m  auroit  oji^  la  vie.  Pour  redouble-
ment  de  malheur,  vne  autre  trouppe  reuenant  d' aupres  de
Mont-real,  oil  Us  auoient  dreff^  des  embufches  aux  Fran-
cois, di/oit  qu  on  auoit  tud  [288]  Vvn  de  leurs  homines,
&  qii  on  en  auoit  bleff^  deux  autres:  chacun  me  fai/oit
coulpable  de  fes  mauuaifes  rencontres.  Us  e^oient  comnie
forcenez  de  rage,  m  aitendans  auec  impatience .  F efcoutois
tous  ces  bruits,  m  offrant  fans  referue  a  nofire  Seigneur,
&  me  remettant  en  tout  dr  par  tout  it  fa  tres-fain6le
volontL  Le  Capitaine  de  V habitation  des  Hollandois  oU
nous  efiions:  ti' ignorant  pas  le  mauuais  deffein  de  ces
Barbares,  &  fqachant  d'ailleurs  que  Motijieur  le  Cheualier
de  Motmagny  auoit  empefch^  les  Sauuages  de  la  Nouuelle
France,  de  venir  tu'er  des  Hollandois,  ni  ouurit  les  moyens
de  me  fauuer,  voila  me,  dit  il,  vn  vaiffeau  h  V ancre,  qui
partira  dans  peu  de  iours,  iettez  vous  dedaiis  fecreteinent,
il  s' en  va  premierement  a  la  Virginie,  &  de  la  il  vous
portera  h  Bordeaux,  ou  a  la  Rochelle,  oil  il  doit  aborder,
V  ay  ant  remerci^  auec  beaucoup  de  refpe6l  de  fa  courtoifie,
ie  luy  dis,  que  les  Iroquois  fe  doutans  bien  qu  on  auroit
fauorif^  ma  retrai£ie,  pourroient  caufer  quelques  damages
hfesges.  Non,  no,  reipod-il,  ne  craignez  rien,  I'occaf  on
e^  belle,  embarquez-vous ,  iamais  vous  ne  trouuerez  de  voye
plus  affeuree  pour  vous  fauuer.  Mon  coeur  demeura  per-
plex a  ces  paroles,  doutant  [289]  s' il  n  efioient  poi?it  a
propos  potir  la  plus  grande  gloire  de  Jioflre  Seigneur,  que
ie  m'expofe  au  danger  du  feu,  &  a  la  furie  de  ces
Barbares,  pour  aider  au  falut  de  quelque  ame.  Ie  luy  dis
done,  Monfieur  V affaire  me  femble  de  telle  importance,
que  le  ne  vous  puis  respoiidre  fur  le  champ :  donnez-moy
s'tlvous plaifi,  la  nui^ pour y  penfer ,  ie  la  recommanderay  a
nofire  Seigneiir,  i  examiner  ay  les  raifons  de  part  &  d' autre,


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  49

misfortune,  another  troop  —  coming  back  frovi  Mont-real,
where  they  had  set  ambushes  for  the  French  —  said  that
[288]  one  of  their  men  had  been  killed,  and  two  others
wounded.  Each  one  held  me  guilty  of  these  adverse  en-
counters; they  were  fairly  mad  with  rage,  awaitijig  me
with  impatience.  I  listened  to  all  these  rumors,  offering
myself  without  reserve  to  our  Lord,  and  committing  myself
in  all  and  through  all  to  his  most  holy  will.  The
Captain  of  the  Dutch  settlement  where  we  were, —  not  being
ignorant  of  the  evil  design  of  those  Barbarians,  and  know-
ing, moreover,  that  Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de  Montmagny
had  prevented  the  Savages  of  New  Frajice  from  coming
to  kill  some  Dutch,  —  disclosed  to  me  means  for  escape.'^
' '  Yonder, ' '  said  he  to  me,  "-is  a  vessel  at  ancJior,  which
will  sail  in  a  few  days;  enter  into  it  secretly.  It  is
goijig  first  to  Virginia,  and  thence  it  will  carry  you  to
Bordeaux  or  to  la  Rochelle,  where  it  is  to  layid.""
Having  thanked  him,  zuith  much  regard  for  his  courtesy,
I  tell  him  that  the  Iroquois,  probably  suspecting  that
some  one  had  favored  my  retreat,  might  cause  some
damages  to  Jiis  people.  ''No,  no,''  he  answers,  ''fear
nothing;  this  opportunity  is  favorable;  embark;  you  will
never  find  a  more  certain  way  to  escape. ' '  My  heart
remained  perplexed  at  these  zvords,  zvondering  [289]  if
it  zvere  not  expedient  for  the  greater  glory  of  our  Lord,
that  I  expose  myself  to  the  danger  of  the  fire  and  to  the
fury  of  those  Barbarians,  in  order  to  aid  in  the  salvation
of  some  soul.  I  said  to  him  then:  "  Monsietir,  the  affair
seems  to  me  of  sucJi  importance  that  I  cannot  answer  you  at
once;  give  me,  if  you  please,  the  night  to  think  of  it.  I
will  commend  it  to  our  Lord;  I  will  examine  the  arguments
on  both  sides;  and  to-morrow  morning  I  will  tell  you  my
final  resolution.''  He  granted  me  my  request  with  aston-
ishment; I  spent  the  night  in  prayers,  greatly  beseecJiing  our


50  LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  25

&  deviain  matin  ie  vous  diray ma derniere refolutio7i ;

m' ay  ant  accords  ma  demande  anec  ejionnement,  ie  pa/fay

la  nuicl  en  prieres,  fuppliant beaucoup nojlre Seigneur,

qiiil  ne  me  laiffajl  point  prendre  de  conclnjion de  moy-

me/me,  qii  il  m,e  donnajl  Inniiere  pour  cognoijire  fa  tres-

fai7i£le  volont^,  qu  en  tout  &  par  tout,  ie  la  voulois  fuiure,

iu/ques a ejlre brujle'  a  petit  feu. Les  raifons  qui  me

pouuoient  retenir  dans  Ie  pays  efioient  la  confideration  des

Franqois,  &  des  Sauuages:  ie  fentois  de  V amour  po7ir  eux,

&  vn  grand  defir  de  les  aj^i^er, fi  bien  que  i'auois  refolu

de  paffer  Ie  refle  de  mes iours dans  cette  captiuitc,  pour

leur  falut :  mais  ie  voyois  la  face  des  affaires  toute  changee.

Preniierement  pour  ce  qui  regardoit  nos  trois  Franqois

amenez  captifs  dans Ie  pays  [290]  a^tjsi  bien  que  moy:

L'vn  deux  appelle  Ren^  Goupil,  auoit  defia  e^^  maffacr^

a  mes  pieds:  ce  ieune  honime  auoit  la  pur  etc  d'vri  Ange.

Henry  qii  on  auoit  pris  a  Mont-Real,  s  en  e^oit  enfuy  dans

les  bois. Comme  il  regardoit  les  cruautez  qii  on  exerqoit

fur  deux  pauures Hurons  rofiis a  petit  feu : quelques

Iroquois  luy  dirent,  qii  on  luy  feroit  Ie  mefme  trai6teme7it,

&  a  moy  auj^i,  quand  ie  ferois  de  retour : ces  menaces  Ie

firent  refoudre  de  fe  letter  plutofi  dans  Ie  danger  de  mourir

de  faim  datis  les  bois;  ou  d' efire  deuord  par  quclque  be  fie

fauuage  que  d'endurer  les  tour  metis  que  ces  demy- Demons

faifoient  fouffrir. II  y  auoit  defia  fept iours  quil  ne

par oiffoit  plus. Quant  a  Guillaumc  Couflure,  ie  7tc  voyois

quafi plus  de  moyen  de  V aider:  car  on  V auoit  fnis  en  vne

bourgade  eloignee  de  celle  ou  i  efiois,  &  les  Sauuages  V oc-

cupoient  tellcment  deqa  de  la,  que ie ne Ie  pouuois  plus

rencontrer. Adioufiez  que  luy-mefme m' auoit tenu ce

difcours :  Mon  Fere  tafchcz  de  vous  fauuer,  ft  tofi  que  ie

ne  vous  verray  plus, ie  trouueray  les  moyens  d'euader.

Vous  fqauez  bien  que  ie  ne  demeure  dans  cette  captiuitd,


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  J642-43  51

Lord  that  he  should  not  allow  me  to  reach  a  conclusion  by
myself;  that  he  should  give  me  light,  in  order  to  know  his
most  holy  will;  that  in  all  and  through  all  I  wished  to
follow  it,  even  to  the  extent  of  being  burned  at  a  slow  fire.
The  reasons  which  might  keep  vie  in  the  country  were  con-
sider at  io7t  for  the  French  a?id  for  the  Savages;  I  felt  love
for  them,  and  a  great  desire  to  assist  them, —  insomuch  that
I  had  resolved  to  spend  the  reniaiftder  of  my  days  in  that
captivity,  for  their  salvation;  but  I  sazv  the  face  of  affairs
quite  chattged.

In  the  first  place,  as  regarded  our  three  Frenchmen,  led
captive  into  the  country  [290]  as  well  as  I:  one  of  them,,
named  Rend  Goupil,  had  already  been  murdered  at  my  feet;
this  young  man  had  the  purity  of  an  A  ngel.  Henry,  wliom
they  had  taken  at  Mont-Real,  had  fled  into  the  woods.
While  he  was  looking  at  the  cruelties  which  were  practiced
upon  two  poor  Hurons,  roasted  at  a  slow  fire,  some  Iroquois
told  him  that  he  would  receive  the  same  treatment,  and  I,
too,  when  I  should  return;  these  threats  made  him  resolve
rather  to  plunge  into  the  danger  of  dying  from  hunger  in
the  woods,  or  of  being  devoured  by  some  wild  beast,  than  to
endure  the  torments  which  these  half  Demons  infiicted.  It
was  already  seven  days  si?ice  he  had  disappeared.  As
for  Guillaume  Cousture,  I  saw  scarcely  any  further  way  of
aidi?ig  him, — for  they  had  placed  him  in  a  village  far
from  the  one  where  I  was;  and  the  Savages  so  occupied  it
on  the  hither  side  of  that  place,  that  I  could  no  longer  meet
hifn.  Add  that  he  himself  had  addressed  me  in  these
words:  ' '  My  Father,  try  to  escape;  as  soon  as  I  shall  see
you  no  more,  I  shall  find  the  means  to  get  away.  You
well  know  that  I  stay  in  this  captivity  only  for  the  love  of
you;  make,  then,  your  efforts  to  escape,  for  I  cannot  think
of  my  liberty  and  of  my  life  unless  [291]  /  see  you  in
safety. ' ' Furthermore,  this  good  youth  had  been  given  to


52  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.25

que  pour  V amour  de  iious:  faites  done  vos  efforts  de  vous
fauuer:  car  ie  ne  puis  penfer  a  ma  liberty,  &  a  ma  vie
que  [291]  ie  ne  vous  voye  en  afftirance.  De  plus  ce  hon
ieune  homm.e  auoit  eji^  donn^  a  vn  vicillard,  qui  m  affura
qiiil  Ie  laifferoit  aller  en  paix,  fi  ie  pouuois  obtenir  ma
deliurance,  fi  bien  que  ie  ne  voyois  plus  de  raifon  qui
m  obligeajl  de  rejler  pour  les  Franqois.

Pour  les  Sauuages  i  ejlois  dans  Vimpof^ibilit^,  &  hors
d'efperance  de  les  pouuoir  injlruire :  car  tout  Ie  pays  e^oit
tellement  anime  contre  moy,  que  ie  ne  trouuois  plus  aucune
ouuerture  pour  leiir  parler,  ou  pour  les  gagner,  &  les
Algoquins,  &  les  Huros  ejloiet  contrains  de  s' eloigner  de
moy,  comme  d'vne  viclime  de^inee  au  feu,  de  peur  de  par-
ticiper  a  la  haine  &  a  la  rage  que  'tne  portoiet  les  Iroquois.
Ie  voyois  d'  ailleurs  que  i  auois  quelque  cogjioiffance  de  leur
langue,  que  ie  cognoiffois  leur  pays,  &  leur  force,  que  ie
pouuois  peut-eflre  mieux  procurer  leur  falut  par  d'autres
voyes,  qii  en  reflant  parmy  eux.  II  tne  venoit  en  V  efprit
que  toutes  ces  cognoiffances  mourroient  auec  vwy,fi  ie  ne  me
fauuois]  ces  miferables  auoient  fi  pcu  d' enuie  de  nous  de-
liurer,  qu  ils  commirent  vne  perfidie  contre  Ie  droi6l  &  la
couflume  de  toutes  ces  nations:  Vn  Samiage  du  pays  des
Sdkokiois,  alliez  des  Iroquois,  ayant  efl^ pris  par  les  haults
Algonquins,  &  [292]  men^ prifonnier  aux  trois  Riuieres,
ou  a  Y^ebec,  fut  deliur^  &  mis  en  liberty,  par  V entremife
de  Monfieur  Ie  Gouuerneur  de  la  Nouuelle  France,  a  la
follicitation  de  nos  Peres.  Ce  bo7i  Sauuage  voyant  que  les
Frangois  luy  auoient  fauu^ la  vie,  enuoya  au  mois  d' Auril,
de  beaux  pref ens,  a  fin  qii  on  deliurafi  pour  Ie  moins  Vvn
des  Frangois :  les  Iroquois  retinrent  les  pref  ens,  fans  en
mettre  pas  vn  en  liberte:  deloyaute,  qui  efl  peut-efire  fans
exeple  parmy  ces  peuples :  car  ils  gardent  inuiolablement
cette  loy,  que  quiconque  louche  ou  accepte  Ie  prefeiit  qu  on


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  63^

a7i  old  man,  who  assured  me  that  he  would  allow  him  to  go
in  peace,  if  I  could  obtain  my  deliverance;  consequently
I  saw  no  further  reason  which  obliged  me  to  remain  on
account  of  the  French.

As  for  the  Savages,  I  was  without  power  and  beyond
hope  of  being  able  to  instruct  them;  for  the  whole  country
was  so  irritated  against  me  that  I  found  no  more  any  open-
ing to  speak  to  them,  or  to  win  them;  and  the  Algonquins
and  the  Hurons  were  constrained  to  withdraw  from  me,
as  from  a  victim  destined  to  the  fire,  for  fear  of  sharing
in  the  hatred  and  rage  which the  Iroquois  felt against
me. I  realized, moreover, that  I  had  some  acquaintance
with  their  language;  that  I  knew  their  country  and  their
strength;  that  I  could perJiaps  better  procure  their  salvation
by  other  ways  than  by  remaining  among  them. It  came
to  my  mind  that  all  this  knowledge  would  die  with  me,  if  I
did  not  escape. These  wretches  had  so  little  inclination  to
deliver  us,  that  they  committed  a  treachery  against  the  law
and  the  custom  of  all  these  nations. A Savage  from  the
country  of  the  Sokokiois, allies  of  the Iroquois, having
been  seized  by  the  upper  Algonquins  and  [292]  taken  a
prisoner  to  the  three  Rivers,  or  to  Kebec,  was  delivered  and
set  at  liberty  by  the  mediation  of  Monsieur  the  Governor  of
New  France,  at  the  solicitation  of  our  Fathers. This  good
Savage,  seeing  that  the  French  had  saved  his  life,  sent,  in
the  month  of  April,  some  fine  presents,  to  the  end  that  they
should  deliver  at  least  one  of  the  French. The  Iroquois
retained  the  presents,  without  setting  one  of  them  at  liberty,
which  treachery  is  perhaps  unexampled  among  these  peo-
ples,— for  they  inviolably  observe this  law,  that  whoever
touches  or  accepts  the  present  which  is  made  to  him,, is
bound  to  fulfill  what  is  asked  of  him  through  that  present.
This  is  why, when  they  are  unwilling  to  grant  what  is
desired,  they  send  back  the  presents  or  make  others  in  place


54  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.25

luy  fait,  doit  execiiter  ce  qii  on  luy  deniande  par  ce  prefent'.
c  e^  pourquoy  quand  ils  ne  veulent  pas  accorder  ce  quon
dejire,  ils  re7moycnt  les  pre  fens  on  en  font  d' autre s  en  la
place',  niais  pour  reuenir  a  inon  propos,  ayant  balance
deuant  Dieu,  auec  tout  le  dcgagevient  qui  in  efioit
poffible,  les  raifons  qui  me  portoient  a  refler  pariny
ces  Barbares,  ou  a  les  quitter,  i  ay  creu  que  noflre
Seigneur  auroit  plus  agreable,  que  ie  priffe  V occafion
de  me  fauuer.  Le  iour  efiant  venu  i  allay  faluer  Monfieur
le  Gouuerneur  Hollandois,  &  luy  declaray  les  penfees  que
i'auois  pris  deuant  Dieu,  il  mande  les  principaux  du
nauire,  leur  fgnifie  fes  intentiofis,  &  les  exhort e  [293]  a
me  receuoir,  &  a  me  tenir  cache',  en  vn  mot  a  me  rcpaffer
en  Europe.  Ils  refpondent ;  que  fi  ie  peux  vne  fois  mettre
le  pied  dans  leur  vaiffeau,  que  ie  fuis  eji  affurance,  que  ie
n  en  fortiray  point  que  ie  ne  fois  a  Bourdeaux,  ou  a  la
Rochelle.  Sus  done,  me  dit  le  Gouuerneur,  retournez-vous
en  auec  les  Sauuages,  &  fur  le  foir,  ou  dans  la  nui^l,
derobez  vous  doucement ,  &  tirez  vers  la  riuiere,  vous  y
trouuerez  vn  petit  bateau,  que  ie  feray  tenir  tout  prefl,
pour  vous  porter  fecrettement  au  Nauire.  Apres  mes  tres-
huinbles  actions  de  graces,  a  tous  ces  Mef^ieurs,  ie  m  e-
floignay  des  Hollandois,  pour  mieux  cacher  mon  deffein:
fur  le  foir  ie  me  retiray  auec  dix  ou  douze  Iroquois  dajts
vne  grange,  oil  nous  paffames  la  nui6l,  auparauant  que  de
me  coucher,  ie  forty  de  ce  lieu,  pour  voir  par  quel  endroit
ie  pourrois  phis  facilevient  efchapper.  Les  chiens  des
Hollandois,  eflans  pour  lors  deflachez  accourent  a  moy:
I'vn  deux  grand  &  puiffant  fe  iette  fur  ma  iambe  que
iauois  nu'e  &  me  V offenqa  notablement,  ie  rentre  au  phitofi
dans  la  grange,  les  Iroquois  la  fermet  fortement :  &  pour
me  mieux  garder,  fe  viennent  coucher  aupres  de  moy.
notamment  vn  certain  qui  auoit  quelque  charge  de  me  veiller,


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  55

of  tJiem.  But  to  return  to  my  subject^ — having  weighed
before  God,  with  all  the  impartiality  in  my  power,  the
reasons  which  inclined  me  to  remain  among  those  Barba-
rians or  to  leave  tJiem,  I  believed  that  our  Lord  wonld  be
better  pleased  if  I  should  take  the  opportimity  to  escape.
Daylight  having  come,  I  went  to  greet  Monsieur  the
Dutch  Governor,  and  declared  to  him  the  opinions  that
I  had  adopted  before  God.  He  summons  the  chief  men
of  the  ship,  signifies  to  them  his  intentions,  and  exhorts
them  [293]  to  receive  me,  and  to  keep  me  concealed, —
in  a  word,  to  convey  me  back  to  Europe.  They
answer  that,  if  I  can  otice  set  foot  in  their  vessel,  I  am  in
safety;  that  I  shall  not  leave  it  until  I  reach  Bourdeaux
or  la  Rochelle.  "Well,  then,"  the  Governor  said  to  me,
'  *  return  with  the  Savages,  and  tozvard  the  evening,  or  in
the  night,  steal  away  softly  and  move  toward  the  river;
you  will  find  there  a  little  boat  which  I  will  have  kept  all
ready  to  carry  you  secretly  to  the  Ship.''  After  very
humbly  returning  thanks  to  all  those  Gentlemeti,  I  zvith-
drew  from  the  Dutch,  in  order  better  to  conceal  my  design.
Toward  evening,  I  retired  with  ten  or  twelve  Iroquois  into
a  barn,  where  we  passed  the  night.  Before  lying  down,
I  went  out  of  that  place,  to  see  in  zvhat  quarter  I  might
most  easily  escape.  The  dogs  of  the  Dutch,  being  then
untied,  run  up  to  me;  one  of  them,  large  and  powerful,
fiings  Jiimself  upon  my  leg,  which  is  bare,  and  seriously
injures  it.  I  return  immediately  to  the  barn;  the
Iroquois  close  it  securely,  and,  the  better  to  guard  me,
come  to  lie  down  beside  me, —  especially  a  certain  man
who  had  been  charged  to  watch  me.  Seeing  myself
[294]  beset  with  those  evil  creatures,  and  the  barn  well
closed,  and  surrounded  with  dogs,  which  would  betray  me
if  I  essayed  to  go  out,  I  almost  believed  that  I  could  not
escape. I  complained  quietly  to  my  God,  because,  having


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.25

me  voyant  [294]  obfed^de  ces  mauuais  corps,  &  la  grange
bien  fermee,  &  efitourree  de  chicns,  qui  vi  accuferoieiit  fi
ic  pretendois fortir, ie creu quaji que ie ne  pourrois
euader,  ie  me  plaignois  doucement  a inon  Dieu,  de  ce  que
m  aydt  donn^  la  penfee  de  me  fauuer, Concluferat  vias
meas  lapidibus  quadris,  &  in  loco  fpatiof o  pedes  meos :
//  en  bouchoit  les  voyes  &  les  chemins. Ie  pcijfay  encore
cette autre 7iiii6l fans dorinir, Ie iour approchant
t  entendy les  coqs  chanter: bieyi toji  apres vn  valet  du
laboureur Hollayidois qui nous auoit hebergd  da?is  fa
grange, y  eflant entre  par ie 7ie fqay qii  elle porte,
ie  r aborday  doucement ,  &  luy  fis  fegne  {car  ie  n  entendois
pas  f on  Flamand)  quil  empefchafl  les  chiens  de  iapper,  il
fort  incontinent ,  & moy  apres,  ayatit  pris  au  prealable
tout  mon  meuble  qui  co7ififioit  en  vn  petit  office  de  la  Vierge,
en  vn  petit  Gerfon,  &  vne  Croix  de  bois  que  ie  in  e^ois
faite,  pour  conferuer  la  memoire  des  fouffrances  de mon
Sauueur,  eflant  hors  de  la  grange,  fans  auoir  fait  aucun
bruit,  ny  efueille  vies  gardes,  ie  paffe  par  deffus  vne  bar-
rier e  qui  fermoit  V enclos  de  la  maifon,  ie  cours  droit  a  la
riuiere  oil  efloit  Ie  Nauire:  c  eft  tout  Ie  feruice  que  me  pHt
retidre,  ma  iambe  bien  bleffee:  car  il  [295]  y  auoit  bien  vn
bon  quart  de  lieile  de  chemin  a  faire :  Ie  trouuay  Ie  batteau
comme  on m  auoit  difl:  mais  la mer  s' eflant  retiree,  il
efloit  h  fee,  ie  Ie  poujfe  pour  Ie  mettre  a  V eau,  n' en  pouuant
venir  a  bout,  pour  fa  pefanteur,  ic  crie  au  Nauire,  qii  on
amene  V efquif,  pour  me  paffier,  poi?tt  de  nouuelle-.  ie  7ie
fgay  Ji  on  m  cntendoit, quoy  que  c  en  foit,  perfonne  ne
paru^, Ie iour  cependant  commenqoit  a defcouurir  aux
Iroquois  Ie  larcin  que  ie  faifois  de  moy  mefme,  ie  craignois
quils ne me  furpriffent  dans  ce delit innocent,  laff^  de
crier  ie  retourne  au  batteau,  ie  prie  Dieu  d'augmenter  mes
forces:  ie  fay  fi  bien,  Ie  tournant  bout  pour  bout,  &  Ie


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  hi

given  me  the  idea  of  escaping,  Concluserat  vias  meas
lapidibus  quadris,  et  in  loco  spatioso  pedes  meos:
He  was  stopping  up  the  ways  and  paths  of  it.  I  spetit
also  that  second  night  without  sleeping;  the  day  approach-
ing, I  heard  the  cocks  crow.  Soon  afterward,  a  servant
of  the  Diitch  farmer  who  had  lodged  lis  in  his  barn,  having
entered  it  by  some  door  or  other, —  /  accosted  him.  softly,
and  made  signs  to  him  (for  I  did  not  understand  his
Flemish),  that  he  should  prevent  the  dogs  frojn  yelping.
He  goes  out  at  once,  and  I  after  him,  having  previously
taken  all  my  belongings, —  which  consisted  of  a  little  office
of  the  Virgin,  of  a  little  Gerson,^  and  a  wooden  Cross  that
I  had  made  for  myself,  in  order  to  preserve  the  m.emory  of
the  sufferings  of  my  Savior.  Beifig  outside  of  the  barn,
without  having  made  any  noise,  or  awakened  m.y  guards,
I  cross  over  a  fence  which  confined  the  enclosure  about  the
house;  I  run  straight  to  the  river  where  the  Ship  was, —
this  is  all  the  service  that  my  leg,  much  wounded,  could
render  me:  for  there  [295]  zvas  surely  a  good  quarter  of  a
league  of  road  to  make.  I  found  the  boat  as  they  had
told  me,  but,  the  water  having  subsided,  it  was  aground.
I  push  it,  in  order  to  set  it  afloat;  not  bei?tg  able  to  effect
this,  on  account  of  its  weight,  I  call  to  the  Ship,  that  they
bring  the  skiff  to  ferry  me, — but  no  news.  I  know  not
whether  they  heard  me;  at  all  events,  no  one  appeared.
The  daylight  meanwhile  was  beginning  to  discover  to  the
Iroquois  the  theft  that  I  was  makiiig  of  myself;  I  feared
that  they  might  surprise  me  in  this  innocent  misdemeanor.
Weary  of  shouting,  I  return  to  the  boat;  I  pray  God  to
increase  my  streiigth;  I  do  so  well,  turning  it  end  for  end,
and  push  it  so  hard  that  I  get  it  to  the  water.  Having
made  it  float,  I  Jump  into  it,  and  go  all  alone  to  the  Shipy
where  I  go  on  board  without  being  discovered  by  any
Iroquois. They  lodge  me  forthwith  down  in  the  hold;  and^


58  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  25

pouffe  Ji  fortement  que  ie  le  mets  a  V  eau,  V  ay  ant  fai6l
flatter  ie  me  iette  dedans^  &  in  en  vay  tout  feul  au  Nauire^
oil  I  ab  or  day  fans  ejlre  defcouuert  d'  auciin  Iroquois:  on
me  loge  auf^i-tojl  a  fond  de  cale,  &  pour  vie  cacher,  on
met  vn  grand  coffre  fur  V efcoutille .  Ie  fus  deux  tours  &
deux  nuiSts  dans  le  ventre  de  ce  vaiffeau,  auec  telle  incom-
modit^,  que  ie  penfay  efiotiffer  &  inourir  de  pua7iteur.  Ie
me  fouuins  pour  lors,  du  pauure  lonas,  &  ie  priay  nofire
Seigneur,  Ne  fugerem  a  facie  Domini :  que  ie  ne  [296]
^ne  cachajfe  point  deuant  fa  face,  &  que  ie  ne  mefloignajfe
point  de  fes  volontez :  ains  au  cotitraire,  infatuaret  omnia
confilia  quae  non  efre[n]t  ad  fuam  gloriam:  Ie  le  priois
de  renuerfer  tons  les  confeils  qui  ne  tenderoient  point  a  fa
gloire,  &  de  m  arrefler  dans  le  pays  de  ces  in  fide  les,  s'il
n  approuuoit  point  ma  retraite,  &  ma  fuite.  La  feconde
nui6t  de  ma  prifon  volontaire,  le  Minifire  des  Hollandois
me  vint  dire  que  les  Iroquois  auoient  bien  fait  du  brui6i,
&  que  les  Hollandois  habit ans  du  pays  auoie?it  peur  quils
ne  mijjfent  le  feu  dans  leurs  maifons,  ou  quils  ne  tilaffent
leurs  befiiaux:  ils  ont  raifon  de  les  craindre,  puis  qtiils
les  ont  armez  de  bonnes  arquebufes.  A  cela  ie  responds,  £i
propter  me  orta  eft  tempeftas,  proijcite  me  in  mare :
Si  la  tempefle  s'ejl  eleuee  a  mon  occafion,  ie  fuis  prefl  de
V appaifer,  en  perdat  la  vie,  ie  n  auois  iamais  eu  de  volontd
de  me  fauuer,  au  prciudice  du  moindre  komme  de  leur
habitation.  Enfin  il  me  falhit  fortir  de  ma  cauerne:  tous
les  Nautonniers  s'e7i  formalifoient,  difans  qii  on  in  auoit
donnd parole  d"  affurance,  au  cas  que  ie  puffe  inettre  le  pied
dans  le  Nauire,  &  qu  on  nt  en  retiroit  au  moment  quil
my  faudroit  amener,  fi  ie  ti  y  e^ois  pas,  que  ie  mettois
\sc.  m'efiois']  mis  en  danger  [297]  de  la  vie  en  me  fau-
uant  fur  leur  parole,  qu  il  la  falloit  tenir  quoy  qu'il
en  coutafl,  ie  priay  qu' on  m,e  laiffafi  fortir,  puis  que  le


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  69

in  order  to  conceal  nie,  they  put  a  great  chest  over  the
hatchway.  I  was  two  days  and  two  nights  in  the  belly  of
that  vessel,  zuith  such  discomfort  that  I  thought  I  ivould
suffocate  and  die  with  the  stench.  I  remembered  then  poor
Jonas,  and  I  prayed  our  Lord,  Ne  fugerem  ^  facie
Domini, —  tliat  1  [296]  might  not  hide  myself  before  his
face,  and  that  I  might  not  withdratu  far  from  his  wishes;
but  on  the  contrary,  infatuaret  omnia  consilia  quae  non
essent  ad  suam  gloriam,  —  I  prayed  him  to  overthrow
all  the  counsels  zvhich  sJiould  not  tend  to  his  glory,  and  to
detain  me  in  the  country  of  those  infidels,  if  he  did  7iot
approve  my  retreat  and  my  flight.  The  second  night  of
my  voluntary  prison,  the  Midlist er  of  the  Dutch^  came  to
tell  me  that  the  Iroquois  had  indeed  made  some  disturbance,
and  that  the  Dutch  inliabitants  of  the  country  were  afraid
that  they  would  set  fire  to  their  houses,  or  kill  their  cattle;
they  have  reason  to  fear  them,  since  they  have  armed  them
with  good  arquebuses.  To  that  I  answer:  Si  propter  me
orta  est  tempestas,  projicite  me  in  mare :  '  'If  the  storm
has  risen  on  my  accowtt,  I  am  ready  to  appease  it  by  losing
my  life;"  I  had  never  the  wish  to  escape  to  the  prejudice
of  the  least  man  of  their  settlement.  Finally,  it  was
necessary  to  leave  my  cavern;  all  the  Mariners  were
offended  at  this,  saying  that  the  promise  of  security  had
been  given  me  in  case  I  could  set  foot  in  the  Ship,  and  that
I  was  being  voithdrawn  at  the  moment  when  it  would  be
requisite  to  bring  me  thither  if  I  were  not  there;  that  I
had  put  myself  in  peril  \2gy']  of  life  by  escaping  upon  their
word;  that  it  m.ust  needs  be  kept,  whatever  the  cost.  I
begged  that  I  be  allowed  to  go  forth,  since  the  Captain
who  had  disclosed  to  me  the  way  of  '>ny  flight  was  asking
for  me.  I  went  to  find  him  in  his  house,  where  he  kept
me  concealed;  these  goings  and  these  coinings  having  oc-
curred by  night,  I  was  not  yet  discovered. I  might  ijideed


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.25

Capitaine  qui  m  auoit  ouuert  le  cheniin  de  ma  fuitte,  me
demandoit,  ie  le  fus  trouuer  en  fa  maifon,  oil  il  me  tiyit
cach^:  ces  allees  &  ces  venues  s'ejiant  faites  la  nuiSl,  ie
n  ejlois  point  encore  de/couuert:  i  aurois  bien  pd  allegtier
quelques  raifons  en  tous  ces  rencontres:  inais  ce  n  ejloit  pas
a  may  a  parler  en  ma  propre  caufe,  Ji  bien  a  future  les
ordres  d'autruy,  que  ie  fubiffois  de  bon  coeur.  En  fin  le
Capitaine  me  dit  qu  il  falloit  doucement  ceder  a  la  tern-
pefie,  &  attedre  que  les  efprits  des  S ami  ages  fujfent  ad-
doucis,  &  que  tout  le  monde  efloit  de  cet  aduis:  Me  voila
done  prifonnier  volontaire  en  fa  maifoti  d' oil  ie  vous  refcry
la  prefente.  Que  Ji  vous  me  demandez  mes  penfees  dans
tous  ces  rencontres,  ie  vous  diray.

Premier emetit  que  ce  Nauire  qui  in  auoit  voulu  fauuer
la  vie,  efl  party  fans  moy.

Secoftdement  ft  N.  Seig7ieur  tie  me  protege  d'vne  faqon
quafi  miraculeufe,  les  Sauuages  qui  vont  &  viennent  icy  a
tous  moments,  m.e  defcouurirotit ,  &  fo  iamais  ils  fe  perfua-
dent,  que  ie  ne  fois  point  party,  il  faudra  de  necefiitd  me
remettre  entre  leurs  m.ains:  or  s'ils  [298]  auoient  vne  telle
rage  contre  moy,  auant  ma  fuitte,  quel  traiteinent  me
feront-ils,  me  voyant  retomb^  dans  leur  pouuoir,  ie  7ie
m,ourr ay  point  d'vne  m.ort  commutie:  le  feu,  la  rage  &  les
cruautez  qu  ils  inuentetit,  m  arracheront  la  vie,  Dieu  foil
be?iy  pour  iamais.  Nous  fomnies  inceffamment  dans  le
fein  de  fa  diuine  &  toufiours  adorable  prouidence ,  Veflri
capilli  capitis  numerati  funt:  nolite  timere:  multis
pafferibus  meliores  eftis  vos  quorum  vnus  non  cadet
fuper  terrain  line  patre  veftro.  Celuy  qui  a  foin  des
petits  oifeaux  de  V  air  ne  nous  met  pas  eyi  oubly,  il  y  a  defia
douze  iours  que  ie  fuis  cach^,  il  efl  bien  difficile  quvn
mauuais  iour  ne  vienne  iiifques  h  moy.

En  troifefme  lieu  vous  voyez  les  grands  befoins  que  nous


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  61

have  alleged  some  reasons  in  all  these  encounters;  but  it
was  not  for  me  to  speak  in  my  own  cause ^  but  rather  to
follow  the  orders  of  others,  to  which  I  submitted  with  good
heart.  Finally,  the  Captain  told  me  that  it  was  necessary
to  yield  quietly  to  the  storm,  and  zvait  until  the  minds  of
the  Savages  should  be  pacified;  and  that  every  one  was  of
this  opinion.  So  there  I  was,  a  voluntary  prisoner  in  his
house,  from  which  I  am.  writing  back  to  you  the  present
letter.  A  nd  if  you  ask  my  thoughts  ifi  all  these  adventures,
I  will  tell  you.

First,  that  that  Ship  ivhich  had  zvished  to  save  my  life,
sailed  ivithout  me.

Secondly,  if  Our  Lord  do  not  protect  me  in  a  manner
wellnigh  miraculous,  the  Savages,  who  go  and  come  here
at  every  moment,  will  discover  me;  and  if  ever  they  con-
vince themselves  that  I  have  not  gone  away,  it  will  be
necessary  to  return  into  their  hands.  Now,  if  they  [298]
had  such  a  rage  against  me  before  my  flight,  what
treatment  will  they  inflict  on  me,  seeing  me  fallen  back
into  their  power  ?  I  shall  not  die  a  common  death;  the  fire,
their  rage,  and  the  cruelties  which  they  invent,  will  tear
away  my  life.  God  be  blessed  forever.  We  are  incessantly
in  the  bosom  of  his  divine  and  ahvays  adorable  providence.
Vestri  capilli  capitis  numerati  sunt:  nolite  timere:
miiltis  passeribus  meliores  estis  vos  quorum  unus
non  cadet  super  terram  sine  patre  vestro ;  he  who  has
care  for  the  little  birds  of  the  air  does  not  cast  us  into
oblivion.  It  is  already  twelve  days  that  I  have  been
concealed, —  it  is  quite  improbable  that  fnisfortune  will
reach  me.

In  the  third  place ,  you  see  the  great  need  that  we  have
of  your  prayers  a7id  of  the  holy  Sacrifices  of  all  our
Fathers;  procure  us  this  alms  everywhere,  Ut  reddat  me
Dominus  idoneum  ad  se  amandum,  fortem  ad  patien-


62  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  25

auo7is  de  vos  prieres,  &  des  faincls  Sacrifices  de  tous  nos
Peres,  procurez  nous  cette  aumofne  par  tout.  Vt  reddat
me  Dominus  idoneum  ad  fe  amandum,  fortem  ad
patiendum,  conflantem  ad  perfeuerandum  in  fuo
amore,  &  feruitio :  a  fin  que  Dieu  me  rende  propre,  &
bie  difpof^  pour  V aimer,  quil  me  rede  fort  &  courageux ,
pour  foufi^rir,  &  pour  cndurer,  &  qu'il  me  donne  vne
getiereufe  confiance,  pour  perfeuerer  en  [299]  fon  amour,
&  en  fon  feruice :  c'ejice  qui  ie  fouhaitterois  vniquement
auec  vn  petit  Nouueau  Tefiament  d' Europe:  Priez pour
ces  pauures  nations,  qui  s' entrebrufient,  &  qui  s'entre-
mangent,  a  ce  qii  elks  viennent  enfin  a  la  cognoijjance  de
leur  Createur,  pour  luy  rendre  le  tribut  de  leur  amour,
Memor  fum  veflri  in  vinculis  meis :  ie  ne  vous  oublie
pas,  ma  captiuitd  ne  peut  enchaifner  ma  m.em.oire.  Ie  fuis
de  cceur  &  d' affection,  &c.

De  Renfelaerivich,  ce  30.
d'Aouft  1643.

Dans  vne  autre  lettre  efcrite  au  mefme  P.  Charles
Lalemat,  du  6.  lauier,  de  cette  prefente  annee,  il
parle  en  ces  termes,

Nuc  fcio  vere  quia  mifit  Dominus  Angelum  fuum,
&  eripuit  me  de  manu  Herodis,  &  de  omni  expedta-
tione  plebis  ludaeorum,  Enfin  ie  ftiis  deliure.  N.
Seigneur  a  enuoye  Vvn  de  fes  Anges,  pour  me  tirer  de  la
captiuit^.  Les  Iroquois  s' ejlatis  re^tdus  a  V habitation  des
Hollandois,  vers  la  my-Septebre,  apres  auoir  fait  beaucoup
de  brui^,  otit  enfin  receu  des  pre  fens,  que  le  Capitaine  qui
me  tenoit  cacM  leur  a  fait,  iufques  a  la  concurrence,
d' enuiron  trois  cent  liures  [300]  que  ie  m  efforceray  de
recognoifire:  toutes  chofes  eftant  pacifiees,  ie  fus  enuoy^  a
Manhat^,  oii  demeure  le  Gouuerneur  de  tout  le  pays,  il  me


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  63

dum,  constantem  ad  perseverandum  in  suo  amore,  et
servitio, —  to  the  eyid  that  God  may  render  me  fit  and
zvell  disposed  to  love  him;  that  he  may  render  me  strong
and  courageous  to  suffer  and  to  endure;  and  that  he  may
give  me  a  Jioble  constancy  to  persevere  in  [299]  his  love  and
in  his  service,  —  this  is  what  I  would  desire  above  all,
together  with  a  little  New  Testament  from  Europe.  Pray
for  these  poor  nations  which  burti  and  devour  one  another, —
tJiat  at  last  they  may  come  to  the  knowledge  of  their
Creator,  in  order  to  render  to  him  the  tribute  of  their  love.
Memor  sum  vestri  in  vinculis  meis;  /  do  not  forget
you;  my  captivity  cannot  fetter  my  memory.  I  am,
heartily  and  with  affection,  etc.

From  Renselaerivich,  this  30th
of  August,  1643.

In  another  letter,  written  to  the  same  Father
Charles  Lalemant,  dated  the  6th  of  January  of  this
present  year,  he  speaks  in  these  terms :

Nunc  scio  vere  quia  misit  Dominus  Angelum  suum,
et  eripuit  me  de  manu  Herodis,  et  de  omni  expecta-
tione  plebis  J  udaeorum .  A  t  last  lam  delivered;  Our  Lord
has  sent  one  of  his  Angels,  to  release  me  from  captivity.
The  Iroquois  having  betaken  themselves  to  the  Dutch
settlement  toward  the  middle  of  September,  after  making
much  disturba?ice,  filially  accepted  some  presents  which
the  Captain,  zvho  kept  me  concealed,  made  to  them,  to  the
amount  of  about  three  hundred  livres,  [300]  which  I  will
strive  to  repay.  All  matters  being  settled,  I  was  sent  to
Manhate,  where  dwells  the  Governor  of  all  the  country.^
He  received  me  very  humanely ;  he  gave  me  a  coat,  and
then  had  me  go  on  board  a  bark  which  crossed  the  Ocean
in  the  middle  of  Winter.  Having  put  back  into  England, —
/  boarded another bark, a Collier, which  carried  me


M  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Voi..  25

recent  fort  humainement ,  il  me  donna  vn  habit,  &  puis  me
Jit  monter  dans  V7ie  barque,  qui  a  trauerf^  V  Ocean  au
milieu  de  V Hyuer,  ayant  relafch^  en  Angleterre,  ie  me
fnis  dans  vne  autre  barque  de  Charbonnier,  qui  ma  portd
en  bajfe  Bretagne,  auec  vti  bonnet  de  7iui6l  en  tejie,  &  dans
r  indigence  de  toutes  cho/es,  eft  la  me/me  fago7i  que  vous
arriuajies  a  S.  Sebajlien :  viais  non  pas  degouttant  d'vn
fecond  naufrage.

Voicy  encore  vne  autre  lettre,  que  le  Pere  a  efcrite
k  vne  perfonne  qui  luy  portoit  plus  d'enuie  que  de
compaffion,  &  qui  auroit  bien  fouhait6  d'eflre  fon
compagnon  de  fortune.

En  Jin  mes  peches  m'ont  rendu  indigne  de -mourir  parmy
les  Iroquois :  Ie  vis  encore,  &  Dieu  veille  que  ce  foil  pour
m'amander,  pour  le  moins  ie  recognoy  comme  vne  grande
faueur,  de  ce  qu'il  a  voulu  que  taye  endur^  quelqtie  cho/c.
ie  dis  fouuent  auec  reffentiment,  [301]  Bonum  mihi  quia
humiliafli  me,  vt  difca  iuftificationes  tuas.  Ie  party  le
cinquiefme  de  Nouembre  de  V habitation  des  Hollandois,
dans  vne  barque  de  cinquante  tonneaux,  qui  m,e  rendit  a
Falmuth  en  Angleterre,  la  veille  de  Noel,  &  t  arriuay
en  Bajfe  Bretagne,  entre  Breji  &  S.  Paul  de  Leon,  le
propre  tour  de  Noel,  affez  toji,  pour  auoir  le  bien  d' en-
tendre la  Meffe,  &  fairc  mes  deuotions.  Vn  honnejie
Marchand,  m.' ayajit  reticontr^  in  a  amene,  &  defray^
iufques  a  Rennes,  oil  ie  fuis  arriud  ce  iourd' huy  veille  des
Rois.  Quel  bon-heur  apres  auoir  demeure'  Jl  long-temps
parmy  des  Sauuages,  apres  auoir  conuerfe  des  Caluinijles,
des  Lutheriens,  des  Anabaptijles,  &  des  Puritains,  de  fe
voir  parmy  des  feruiteurs  de  Dieu,  dans  V Eglife  Catho-
lique\  de  fe  voir  eji  la  compagnie  de  Iefus\  c  efl  vne  petite
idee  des  contentements  que  nous  receurons  quelque  iour  dans


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  65

into  lower  Brittany^  zuitJi  a  tiightcap  on  my  head,  and  in
want  of  all  things, —  i)i  the  same  way  that  you  arrived  at
St.  Sebastien,  but  not  dripping  with  a  second  shipwreck.^

Here  is  still  another  letter,  which  the  Father  has
written  to  a  person  who  felt  toward  him  more  envy
than  compassion,  and  who  would  have  much  desired
to  be  the  companion  of  his  fortune :

After  all,  my  sins  have  rendered  me  unworthy  to  die
among  the  Iroquois;  I  still  live,  and  God  grant  that  it  be
to  amend  myself;  at  least,  I  acknozvledge  it  as  a  great
favor,  that  he  has  willed  that  I  should  endure  something.
I  say  often  with  gratitude,  [301]  Bonum  mihi  quia
humiliasti  me,  ut  discam  justificationes  tuas.  I  de-
parted on  the  fifth  of  November  from  the  Dutch  settlement,
in  a  bark  of  fifty  tons,  which  conveyed  ine  to  Falmouth  in
England,  the  day  before  Christmas;  and  I  arrived  in
Lower  Brittany,  between  Brest  and  St.  Paul  de  Leon,  the
very  day  of  Christmas,  in  time  to  have  the  blessing  of
hearing  Mass  and  offeritig  my  devotions.  An  honest  Mer-
chant, having  met  me,  took  me  and  paid  my  way  to  Rennes,
where  I  have  arrived  this  day,  the  eve  of  Epiphany.
What  happiness,  after  having  dzvelt  so  long  among  Sav-
ages, after  having  conversed  with  Calvinists,  zvith  Lu-
therans, with  Anabaptists,  and  with  Puritans,  to  see  one-
self among  servants  of  God,  in  the  Catholic  Church!  to
see  oneself  in  the  society  of  Jesus  I  It  is  a  slight  idea  of
the  satisfactions  that  we  shall  receive  some  day  in  Paradise,
if  God  please;  when  dispersiones  Israelis  congregabit.
When  will  God  withdrazv  his  hand  from  over  our  poor
French  and  our  poor  Savages  ?  Vse  mihi  ut  quid  natus
sum  videre  contritionem  populi  mei!  My  sins  and
the  unfaithfulness  of  viy  past  life  have  made  very  heavy
the [302] hand  of the  divine  Majesty,  Justly  provoked


66  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  25

le  Paradis,  sil  plaijl  a  Dicu,  lors  que  difperfiones
Ifraelis  congregabit.  Quand  eji-ce  que  Dieu  retirera
fa  main  dedeffus  nos  pauures  Franqois,  &  nos  panures
Sauuagcs.  Vae  mihi  vt  quid  natus  fum  videre  contri-
tionem  populi  mei !  Mes  pechez  &  les  i7ifidelitez  de  ma
vie  paffee  out  beaucoup  appcfanty  la  [302]  mai^i  dc  la
diuine  Maieji^,  iujlement  irritee  contre  nous.  le  fupplie
V.  R.  de  111  obtenir  de  nojlre  Seigneur,  vne  parfaite  Con-
ner Jion,  &  que  ce  petit  chajiiment  qiiil  ma  do7tnef,  me
ferue  felon  fon  dejfein,  a  me  rendre  meilleur.  Le  Pcre
Raiinbault ,  le  Pcre  Dolbcau,  &  le  P.  Dauofl,  font  done
marts}  ils  efioient  meurs pour  le  Paradis,  &  la  Nouuelle
Fra7ice  a  perdu  en  V7ie  annee,  trois  perfonnes  qui  y  auoient
beaucoup  trauailU.  le  ne  fqay  fi  on  a  receu  cette  annee
vne  coppie  de  la  Relation  des  Hurons.  Le  premier  exem-
plaire  fut  pris  auec  les  Hurons,  qui  defcendoient  aux
Franqois,  au  mois  de  luin,  &  me  fut  rendu  au  pays  des
Iroquois,  auec  vfi  gros  paquet  de  lettres  que  7ios  Peres  des
Hurons  enuoyoient  en  France,  fi  teuffe  creu  que  Dieu
m  euji  voulu  deliurer,  ie  Vaurois  port^e  auec  moy,  qua?id
t  allay  vijiter  les  Hollandois,  tout  efl  demeure  en  la  Cabane
oil  teflois:  vne  autrefois,  ie  feray  plus  long,  en  voila  affez
pour  le  premier  iour  de  mon  arriuee.

A  Rennes  ce  5.  de
lanuier  1644.

[303]  JE  croyois  que  la  fin  de  cette  lettre  feroit  la
1  conclufion  de  ce  Chapitre:  mais  en  voicy
encor  vne  autre  qui  donnera  quelque  iour  aux  prece-
dentes,  ie  les  couche  fuiuant  I'ordre  du  temps  qu'elles
nous  font  enuoyees,  fans  auoir  efgard  s'il  n'y  aura
point  quelques  redites.  L'Imprimeur  ne  pennettant
pas  d'en  tirer  vne  fuitte  de  difcours.


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1642  -  43  67

against  us.  I  beseech  Your  Reverence  to  obtain  for  me,
from  our  Lord,  a  perfect  conversion;  arid  that  this  little
cJiastisement  that  he  has  given  me  may  avail,  according  to
his  purpose,  to  render  me  better.  Father  Raimbault,
Father  Dolbeau,  and  Father  Davost  are  then  dead?  They
were  ripe  for  Paradise,  and  New  France  has  lost  in  one
year  three  persons  who  had  greatly  labored  there.  I  know
not  whether  a  copy  of  the  Relation  of  the  Hiirons  has  been
received  this  year.  The  first  copy  was  taken  ivith  the
Hurons  who  were  going  down  to  the  French,  in  the  mofith
of  June,  and  was  restored  to  me  in  the  country  of  the
Iroquois,  with  a  large  package  of  letters  which  our  Fathers
with  the  Hurons  were  sending  to  France.  If  I  had  sup-
posed that  God  intended  to  deliver  ine,  I  would  have  carried
it  with  me  when  I  went  to  visit  the  DutcJi;  everything
remained  in  the  Cabin  where  I  was.  A  not  her  time,  I  will
write  at  greater  length:  this  is  enough  for  the  first  day  of
my  arrival.''

At  Rennes,  this  5th  of
January,  1644.

[303]  T  THOUGHT  that  the  end  of  this  letter  would  be
1  the  conclusion  of  this  Chapter :  but  here  is
still  another,  which  will  shed  some  light  upon  the
ones  preceding.  I  arrange  them  according  to  the
time  when  they  are  sent  to  us,  without  considering
whether  there  may  not  be  some  repetitions, — the
Printer  not  permitting  me  to  draw  from  them  a
connected  narrative.

When  I  begged  Father  Isaac  Jogiies  to  relate  to  us  the
details  of  his  capture  and  of  his  captivity,  lie  answered  me
that  he  had  written  thereof  quite  amply;  but  because  I
perceive  every  day  that  he  is  so  reserved  in  speaking  of  him-
self that  he  may  have  omitted  mafiy  interesting  particulars,


68  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  jiSUITES [Vol.25

Comme  ie  priois  le  P.  Ifaac  logues  de  nous  raconiter  les
particularitez  de  fa  prife ,  &  de  fa  captiuit^,  il  in  a  refpodu
quit  en  auoit  efcrit  ajfez  aniplement:  mats  pource  que  ie
m  apperqois  tous  les  iours  qii  il  eft  fi  referue  a  parler  de
foy  quil  pent  auoir  obmis  plufieurs  belles  particularitez,
voicy  ce  que  i  en  ay  tire  de  fa  bouche  h  diucrfes  fois.
Apres  le  combat  des  Hurons  qui  fut  bien-tos2  fuiuy  de
leur  deffaite,  ce  bon  Pere  fe  trouua  en  lieu  oil  il  nefioit
pas  hors  d" efperance  de  fe  fauuer  de  leurs  mains:  mais
il  en  pcrdit  bien-to^  la  volontd:  car  s^  eft  ant  pris  garde
que  les  principaux Chrefiies de r Efcouade, qui  V acco-
pagnoity  efioict  pris  auec  zm  Frd^ois,  il  appella  luy-mefme ,
&  fit vetiir a  foy les Iroquois, aufquels il  fe donna
genereufemefit,  afin  de  pouuoir  ajsifler  ces  pauures  [304]
captif\s'\. Aiifsi-tofi  qu'ilfe  fut  rendu,  ils  le  defpouille-
rent,  ne  luy  laiffant  que  fa  chemife,  ils  luy  arrachercnt
les  ongles  des  doigts, excepts  deux. II  falliit  faire  en
fuitte  vn  voyage  d" enuiroyt  dix  iours  auec  de  grandes  fa-
tigues, &  de  notables  incommoditez  de  la  f aim,  ces  Barbares
manquans  de  viures. Aprochant  du  pays  enuiron  d'vne
iournee,  il  fut  cruellemcnt  bafionn^,  &  tous  fes  concaptifs
par  vne  bade  de  deux  cens  Sauuages. On  leur  fit  le  mefme
traitenient a V entree de trois Bourgades, fi bien que
pendant  trois  iours  qti  on  les  mena  en  triomphe,  de  Bour-
gade  en  Bourgade :  ils  receurent  vn  nombre  fans  nonibre  de
baflonnades,  comme  ces  Barbares  e^oient  fort  animez  contre
les  Francois,  &  quits  tenoient  le  Pere  pour  vn  de  leurs
principaux  Capitaines :  la  furie  des  coups tomboient  plus
particulierement  dejfus  hiy. On  les  faifoit  mojiter  pendant
le  four  fur  des  efchaffaux ,  pour  efire  expofez  a  la  rifee,
& a Vinfolcnce de ces Barbares. La nui6i on les
restiroit dans les Cabanes, ou les enfa7is les  tourmen-
toient  auec  des  ce^idres  brufiantes, &  auec  des  charbons


1642 -44J  RELATION  OF  1642-43  69

here  follows  what  I  have  drawn  from  his  lips  on  sundry
occasions.  After  the  combat  of  the  Hurons,  which  was
soon  follozved  by  their  defeat,  this  good  Father  found  him-
self in  a  place  where  he  was  not  beyond  hope  of  saving
himself  from  their  hands.  But  he  soon  lost  the  desire  for
this,  for, —  having  noticed  that  the  principal  Christians
of  the  Squad  zvhich  accompanied  him.  were  taken,  with  a
Frenchman, — he  himself  called  and  summoned  to  him  the
Iroquois,  to  whom  he  generously  surrendered,  that  he
might  be  able  to  assist  these  poor  [304]  captives.  As  soon
as  he  had  given  himself  iip,  they  stripped  him,  leaving  him
only  his  shirt.  They  tore  out  his  finger-nails,  except  two.
It  was  necessary  to  make  afterward  a  journey  of  about  ten
days,  zvitJi  great  fatigues,  and  notable  inconveniences  from
hunger,  those  Barbarians  lacking  provisions .  Approach-
ing within  about  a  day' s  journey  of  the  country,  he  was
cruelly  beaten,  and  all  his  fellow  captives,  by  a  band  of
two  hundred  Savages.  They  received  the  same  treatment
at  the  entrance  to  three  Villages  insomuch  that,  during
three  days  in  which  they  were  led  in  triumph  from  Village
to  Village,  they  received  a  countless  number  of  beatings.
As  those  Barbarians  were  greatly  enraged  against  the
French,  and  as  they  regarded  the  Father  as  one  of  the
principal  French  Captains,  the  fury  of  the  blows  fell  more
especially  on  him.  They  were  tnade  to  mount,  during  the
day,  upon  scaffolds,  in  order  to  be  exposed  to  the  ridicule
and  to  the  insolence  of  those  Barbarians.  At  night,  they
were  withdrawn  into  the  Cabins,  where  the  children  tor-
mented them  with  burning  cinders  and  live  coals.  The
fourth  day  of  their  arrival,  they  cut  off  the  Father's  left
thumb,  even  to  the  root;  they  crushed  and  they  burned  the
ends  of  the  fingers  [305]  from  which  they  had  torn  off  the
nails.  The  left  index  finger  appears  to  have  been  partly
burtied  with  a  hot  iron;  it  lias  thus  remained  somewhat


70  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.25

ardcns.  Le  quatriefme  iour  de  leur  arriuec,  on  couppa  le
poulce  gauche  an  Pere,  iufques  a  la  racine^  on  luy  efcrafa,
&  brujla  on  le  bout  des  doigts,  [305]  dont  on  auoit  arrache'
les  angles:  r index  gauche paroi^  auoir  ejl^  a  demy  brujla,
auec  vn  fer  chaud,  il  en  ejl  demeurd  vn  petit  extropie',
ayant  le  mouuevtent  libre  des  autres  qui  luy  font  rejlez.
Le  Jixiefme  iours  ils  V attacherent  a  deux  pieux,  come  s'ils
r  euffent  voulu  brujler:  les  cor  des  ejioient  ft  ferrees  quil
s'en  alloit  dans  pen  de  temps  tomber  en  deffailance,  lors
quvn  ieune  Iroquois  touchy  de  compaffion^  &  de  pitid,  le
delta.  Cette  chariti  fiit  recognu'e  du  del:  car  quelques
mois  apres,  le  Pere  V ayant  comme  par  hazard  rencontrd
Me  malade,  Vinjlruijit  &  le  baptifa,  &  peu  de  temps  apres
il  mourut'.  071  dit  quvn  bien  fai6i  n  eji  iamais  perdu',
mais  celui-la  a  ed^  bien  recompen/L

Le  fcptiefme  iour  oti  les  aduertit  que  c  ejloit  le  derjtier
de  leur  vie,  &"  qu  on  commenceroit  h  les  brujler  fur  le  foir:
ils  tinrent  neantmoins  vn  grand  confeil  fur  aft  affaire :
pendant  lequel  le  Pere  rallie  fes  gens,  comme  vn  bon  Pa^eur
fes  brcbis,  donne  courage  aux  Chretiens,  les  in^ruit  des
fnoyens  de  fair e  profit  pour  le  Ciel  de  ces  horribles  cruautez'.
baptife  quelques  Hurons,  encore  Catechumenes,  &  lors  quils
attendoient  leur  dernier  e  fentence,  les  Bar  bares  for  tans  de
V  affemblcc  [326  i.e. ,  306]  leur  difent  quils  n  en  mourroient
J>as,  ilsfurent  neantmoins  quatre  mois  entiers,  traitez  comme
des  victimes  deflinees  aux  fupplices :  enfin  le  Pere  ayant
donne  aduis  de  faprife  aux  Hollandois,  qui  font  habituezfur
la  cofle  prochaine  des  Iroqiiois :  le  Goiiuerneur  de  tout  le  pays
refcriuit  au  Capitaine  qui  commande  en  V habitation  plus
voifine  des  Iroquois,  qiiil  s' efforqafi  de  le  retirer,  &  les
autres  Francois  fes  concaptifs,  il  fit  quelques  pre  fens  d  ces
Bar  bares;  ce  que  firent  auf^i  quelques  Sauuages  d'vne
nation  voifine,  pour  auoir  efl^  obligez  a Y^ebec  par  les


1642 -44J  RELATION  OF  1642-43  71

crippled, — though  he  has  the  free  movement  of  the  others
ivhich  are  left  to  hitn.  The  sixth  day,  they  bound  him  to
two  stakes,  as  if  they  intejided  to  burn  him;  the  cords  were
so  tight  that  he  zvas  likely,  ifi  a  little  time,  to  fall  into  a
sivoon, —  wJien  a  young  Iroquois,  touched  with  compassion
and  pity,  unbound  him.  This  charity  was  recognized  by
Heaven;  for,  some  months  later,  the  Father  having,  as  if
by  chance,  encountered  him  very  sick,  instructed  and  bap-
tized him;  and  soon  afterward  he  died.  It  is  said  that
a  good  deed  is  never  lost;  but  that  one  has  indeed  been
rewarded.

The  seventh  day,  they  tvere  notified  that  it  zvas  the  last
of  their  lives,  and  that  toward  evening,  their  captors  would
begin  burning  them;  these  held,  nevertheless,  a  great  council
abotit  that  busi?tess.  Mcamvhile,  the  Father  rallies  his
people,  as  a  good  Pastor  his  sheep;  gives  courage  to  the
Christians,  instructs  them  in  the  ways  of  deriving  profit
for  Heaven  out  of  these  horrible  cruelties;  and  baptizes
some  Hurons,  still  Catechumens.  When  they  were  expect-
ing their  final  sentence,  the  Barbarians,  leaving  the  assem-
bly, [326  i.e.,  306]  tell  them  that  they  should  not  die;  they
were,  nevertheless,  for  four  whole  months,  treated  like
victims  destined  to  tortures.  Finally, —  the  Father  having
given  notice  of  his  capture  to  the  Dutch,  who  are  settled  in
the  region  near  the  Iroquois, —  tJie  Governor  of  all  the
country  wrote  to  the  Captairi  who  commands  in  the  settle-
ment nearest  the  Iroquois,  that  he  sJiould  strive  to  release
him  and  the  other  French,  his  fellow  captives.  He  made
some  presents  to  these  Barbarians, — as  did  also  some  Sav-
ages of  a  neighboriyig  nation,  for  Jiaving  been  obliged  at
Kebec  by  the  French;  these  presents  somewhat  softeiied  the
Iroquois,  insomuch  that  they  gave  liberty  to  the  Father  to
go  and  to  come  where  he  would.  This  gave  him  opportunity
to  baptize  about  seventy  persons,  both  cJiildren  and  adults^


72  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.25

Francois :  ces  pre/ens  addoucirent  vn  petit  Ics  Iroquois,  Ji
bien  quits  dojinoient  liberty  au  Pere,  d'aller  &  de  vcnir
ok  il  vouloit,  ce  qui  luy  donna  occafion  de  bapti/er  enuiron
feptante  perfonnes,  tant  enfans  qii  adult es  dont  la  plufpart
font  au  Ciel.  II  eittretenoit  aujji  par  ce  moycn  les  Huro7is
captifs  da7is  la  piete.  Ces  bomtes  actions  qui  V auoient  fait
refoudre  h  ne  fe  point  fauuer ,  le  pouuant  faire,  addoucif-
foient  grandeinent  la  rigueur  de  fa  captiuite'.  Les  Iroquois
cependant  ne  vouloient  point  oiiir  parler  de  fa  deliurance,
s' imaginans  que  pendant  qiiils  retiendroiet  le  Pere,  les
Frdqois  de  K.ebec  &  d' autre s  lieux  circonuoifins  nofe-
roient  leur  faire  aucun  mal,  [327  i.e.,  307]  quand  ils
viendroient  a  la  chaffe  des  Hurons,  &  des  Algoquins:
mais  le  Pere  mefprifant  fa  vie,  refcriuit  aux  Franqois,
que  fa  confidcration  ne  les  enipefchaft  point  de  faire  tout
ce  qui  feroit  a  la  plus  grade  gloire  de  noflre  Seigneur,  ne
voulant  pas  eflre  V occafion  que  quelques  Francois,  ou
quelques  pauures  Sauuages  fuffent  furpris  &  majfacrez
par  ces  Barbarcs.  En  fin  ce  pauure  Pere  efiant  arriue' en
Angleterre:  coinme  luy-inefme  V a  viajtd^.  Les  Hollandois
defcendirent  a  terre,  pour  s' aller  vn  petit  rafraifchir  de
la  mer,  &  d'vn  long  voyage,  quelques  voleurs  Anglois  e7i-
trans  dans  la  Barque,  &  naydts  trouu^  que  le  Pere  tout
feul,  la  pillerent,  &  luy  rauirent  &  emporterent  le  manteau
&  le  chapeau,  que  les  Hollandois  luy  auoient  donn^.  Vous
aurez  pti  voir  par  les  fien7ies,  en  quel  equipage  il  arriua  en
Fra7ice.  Pour  co7iclufio7i,  il  efi  aufii  gay,  co77iine  s'il
n'auoit  rie7i  foufi^crt,  &  auffi  zele  pour  retourner  aux
Hurons,  par77iy  tous  ces  da7igers,  C077i77ie  fi  les  perils  luy
efloient  des  affeurdces,  il  s'atte7td  bie7i  de  repajfer  vne
autrefois  V  Ocean,  pour  aller  fecourir  ces  pauures  peuples,
&  acheuer  le  facrifice  enco77t77tanc(f.

A  Rennes  ce  14.  de  lanuier.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  73

most  of  zvhorn  are  in  Heaven;  he  also,  by  this  means,
maintained  the  captive  Hurons  in  piety.  These  good
deeds  —  which  had  made  hijn  resolve  not  to  escape,  even
when  able  to  do  so — greatly  mitigated  the  rigor  of  his  cap-
tivity. The  Iroquois,  however,  ivoiild  not  hear  mention  of
his  deliverance, —  imagining  that,  zvhile  they  could  retain
the  Father,  the  FrencJi  of  Kebec  and  other  places  round
about  would  ?iot  dare  to  do  them  any  harm,  [327  i.e.,  307]
when  they  should  come  in  pursuit  of  the  Hurons  and  Algon-
quins.  But  the  Father,  despising  his  life,  tvrote  back  to
the  French  that  consideration  for  him,  should  not  prevent
them  from  doing  all  that  might  be  to  the  greater  glory  of
our  Lord, —  not  unwilling  to  be  the  occasion  for  some
Frenchmen,  or  some  poor  Savages,  to  be  surprised  and
massacred  by  those  Barbaria?is.  At  last,  this  poor  Father
having  arrived  in  England,  as  he  himself  has  sent  word,
the  Dutch  went  ashore  in  order  to  go  and  refresh  themselves
a  little  from  the  sea  and  from  a  long  voyage;  some  English
robbers,  entering  the  Bark  and  having  found  only  the
Father,  all  alone,  plundered  it,  and  seized  from  him  and
carried  off  the  cloak  and  the  hat  which  the  Dutch  had  given
him.  You  have  been  able  to  see,  by  his  own  letters y
in  what  plight  he  arrived  in  France.  In  conclusion,  he  is
as  cheerful  as  if  he  had  suffered  nothing;  and  as  zealous
to  return  to  the  Hurons,  amid  all  those  dangers,  as  if  perils
were  to  him.  securities;  he  certainly  expects  to  cross  the
Ocean  once  again,  in  order  to  go  to  succor  those  poor
peoples,  and  to  finish  the  sacrifice  already  begun.

At  Rennes,  this  14th  of  January.


74


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  25


[30S]  /^^  EUX  qui  croyent  que  les  lefuifles  vont  en
V^_^  ce  bout  du  monde,  pour  faire  trafic  de
peaux  de  befles  mortes,  les  tiennent  fort
temeraires,  &  depourueus  de  fens,  de  s'aller  expofer
k  de  ^i  horribles  dangers,  pour  vn  bien  11  raualle.  II
me  femble  qu'ils  ont  vn  coeur  plus  genereux,  &  que
Dieu  feul,  &  le  falut  des  ames  eft  capable  de  leur
faire  quitter  leur  patrie,  &  la  douceur  de  la  France,
pour  aller  chercher  des  feux,  &  des  tourmens  au  mi-
lieu de  la  Barbarie.  Pour-autant  neantmoins  que  c6t
erreur  de  commerce  fe  pourroit  gliffer  dans  I'efprit
de  ceux  qui  ne  les  cognoillent  pas:  on  a  iug6  ^
propos  d'appofer  icy  vne  atteftation  authentique,  qui
f era  voir  combien  ils  font  ^loignez  de  ces  penf ees :  li
ceux  qui  en  parlent  auec  liberte  pour  ne  les  cognoiftre
pas,  fe  trouuoient  auec  eux  en  ce  nouueau  monde,
ils  changeroient  bien  de  langage,  &  fe  faifans  com-
pagnons  de  leurs  fouffrances,  &  de  leur  zele,  ils  fe
trouueroient  vnis  &  liez,  de  mefmes  affedtions,  &  ces
chaifnes  [309]  pourroient  eflre  eternelles,  puifque  le
vray  amour,  &  la  vraye  charite,  pafle  au  delk  des
temps :  c'eft  allez  finiffons  par  vn  tefmoignage  veri-
table, &  desinterelle,  qu'on  pent  tirer  de  la  bouche
de  perfonnes  honnorables,  qui  I'ont  marque  de  leurs
noms,  &  confirme  de  leur  feing.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  75


[308]  'T^HOSE  who  believe  that  the  Jesuits  go
J[  into  this  end  of  the  world  in  order  to
make  traffic  of  skins  of  dead  beasts,
account  them  very  rash,  and  destitute  of  sense,
to  go  and  expose  themselves  to  such  horrible
dangers,  for  a  benefit  so  sordid.  It  seems  to
me  that  they  have  more  generous  hearts;  and
that  only  God  and  the  salvation  of  souls  can
make  them  leave  their  native  land,  and  the  comfort
of  France,  in  order  to  go  in  quest  of  fires  and  tor-
ments in  the  midst  of  Barbarism.  Forasmuch,  never-
theless, as  this  error  about  commerce  might  slip  into
the  minds  of  those  who  are  not  acquainted  with  them,
it  has  been  judged  proper  to  affix  here  an  authentic
attestation,  which  will  show  how  far  they  are  removed
from  such  thoughts.^  If  they  who  speak  of  them
with  freedom,  for  want  of  knowing  them,  chanced  to
be  with  them  in  that  new  world,  they  would  certain-
ly change  their  tone ;  and,  becoming  companions  in
their  sufferings  and  their  zeal,  they  would  find  them-
selves united  and  bound  by  like  affections;  and
these  chains  [309]  might  be  eternal,  since  true  love
and  true  charity  pass  beyond  time.  Enough ;  let  us
conclude  with  a  genuine  and  impartial  testimonial,
which  may  be  drawn  from  the  lips  of  honorable
persons,  who  have  stamped  it  with  their  names  and
confirmed  it  with  their  signatures.


76  LES  RELATIOXS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.25


Declaration  de  Meffieurs  les  Diredeurs,  &  Af-

fociez  en  la  Compagnie  de  la

Nouuelle  France.

LES  Dire£teurs,  &  Affociez  en  la  Compagnie  de  la
Nouuelle  Fra7ice,  di6ie  de  Canada  :  ayans  f^eu  que
qiielques  perfonnes  fe  perfuadent,  &  font  courir  le
bruit,  que  la  Compagnie  des  Peres  lefuijles  a  part  aux
enibarqueniens,  retours  &  Commerces  qui  fe  font  audit
pats,  voulans  par  ce  moyeti  raualer,  &  fuprimer  V efiime,
&  le  prix  des  grands  trauaux  quils  entreprennent  audit
pais,  auec  des  peines,  &  fatigues  incroyahles,  &  au  peril
de  leur  vie,  pour  le  feruice  &  la  gloire  de  Dieu,  dans  la
Conuerfion  des  Sauuages  a  la  foy  du  Chriflianifme,  &
Religion  Catholique,  Apofloliquc  &  Romaine:  En  quoy  ils
ont  fai6t  &  font  tous  les  ans  de  grdds  progr^s,  dot  ladite
Compagnie  eft  tres-particulieremetit  informee,  ont  creu  efire
obligez  par  deuoir  de  la  Charity  Chreflienne,  de  defabufer
ceux  qui  auroient  cette  creance,  par  la  declaration  &
certification  qii  ils  font  par  les  prefentes,  que  lefdits
PP.  lefuifles  nc  font  affociez  en  ladite  Compagnie  de  la
Nouuelle  France,  dire6teme7it,  ny  indire6leme7it,  &  ti  ont
aucune  part  au  trafic  des  marchandifes  qui  s'yfai6t;  E?i
foy  dequoy  la  prefente  declaration  a  efld  fignee  defdits
Dire6leurs  &  Affociez,  Et  fcellee  du  fceau  de  ladite  Com-
pagjiie.  A  Paris  en  V Affemblee  ordiiiaire  d'icelle,  le
premier  tour  de  Decembre  milk  fix  cent  quarante  trois.
Ainfi  figne'. De  la  Fert^,  Abb^  de  fain£le  Magdeleine.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  77


Declaration of Messieurs the Directors and

Associates  in  the  Company  of

New  France.

THE  Directors  and  Associates  in  the  Company  of  New
France,  called  Canada,  having  learned  that  some
persons  persuade  themselves,  and  circulate  the  report,
that  the  Society  of  the  Jesuit  Fathers  has  part  in  the  ship-
ments, returns,  and  Commercial  Transactions  which  are
jnade  in  the  said  country, —  zvishing  by  this  device  to  dis-
parage and  destroy  the  reputation  and  value  of  the  great
labors  which  they  undertake  in  the  said  country,  with  paifis
and  fatigues  incredible,  and  in  peril  of  their  lives,  for  the
service  and  glory  of  God,  in  the  Conversion  of  the  Savages
to  the  faith  of  Christianity  and  the  Catholic,  Apostolic,
and  Roman  Religion,  in  which  they  have  made  and  are
making  great  progress  every  year,  whereof  the  said  Society
is  very  intimately  informed, — have  believed  themselves
obliged  by  the  duty  of  Christiayi  Charity,  to  undeceive  those
who  might  have  this  belief,  through  the  declaration  and
certification  which  they  make  by  these  presents:  that  the
said  Jesuit  Fathers  are  not  associated  in  the  said  Cofnpany
of  New  France,  directly  or  indirectly,  and  have  no  part  in
the  traffic  of  merchandise  which  is  carried  on  by  it.  In
witness  whereof  the  present  declaration  has  been  signed  by
the  said  Directors  and  Associates,  and  sealed  with  the  seal
of  the  said  Company,  at  Paris,  in  the  regular  Assembly  of
the  same,  the  first  day  of  December  one  thousand  six
hundred  a7id forty-three. Thus  signed:  De  la  Fert^,  Abb^


78  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.25

Bordier,  Margonne,  Beruyer,  Robvieau,  Tabouret,  Ber-
ruyer,  Vcrdier,  Fleuriaii,  Cafct,  Bourguet,  &  Clarentin,
&  fcelle  d\m  Cachet.

Collationne  a  1' Original  par
moy  Confeiller,  Secretaire
du  Roy,  maifon  &  Cou-
ronne  de  France.

lOLLY.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1642-43  79


de  saiiite  Magdeleine,^  Bordier,  Margonne,  Beriiyer,  Robi-
neau,  Tabouret,  Berrtiyer,  Verdier,  Fleuriau,  Caset,  Bour-
guet,  and  Clarentin;  and  sealed  with  a  Seal.

Collated  with  the  Original  by
me,  Counsellor,  and  Secretary
of  the  King,  house,  and
Crown  of  France.

JOLLY.


LI  I

Epistola  Patris  Caroli  Gamier,  ad  R.  P.  Mutium
Vitelleschi,  Pr^epositum  Generalem

Setae.  Mariae,  apud  Hurones,  8  Aprilis,  1644


Source:  The  original  is  in  the  MSS.  Soc.  Jes.;  we
follow  an  apograph  thereof  by  Father  Martin,  in  the  archives
of  St.  Mary's  College,  Montreal.


82  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUJTES [Vol.25


Epistola  p.  Caroli Gamier  ad R. P. Mut.

Vitellescum  Pr^p.  Gen.

S.  J.

REVERENDE  ADMODUM  IN  ChRISTO  PaTER,
Pax  christi
De  nostris  qui  sunt  in  hac  Huronum  missi-
one  hoc  tantum  dicam  Paternitati  vestrae  eos  esse
admodum  religiosse  disciplinae  observatores  et  stre-
nuos  in  vinea  Domini  operarios.  Superiorem  quoque
habemus  virum  virtute  insignem,  prudentem  admo-
dum, et  suorum  peramantem.  Hoc  tamen  aliquan-
tulum  ei  deest,  quod  non  satis  in  suorum  animos  se
insinuat.  Nihil  tamen  est  quod  urgeat  ut  mutetur.
Cum  autem  mutabitur,  nullus  mihi  esse  videtur  qui
in  ejus  locum  suffici  aeque  dignus  sit  ac  P.  Paulus
Ragueneau,  quippe  qui  singularibus  et  virtutis  et
ingenii  et  prudentiae  doctrinseque  ornamentis  praedi-
tus  est,  quique  multis  partibus  eum  superat  quem
nunc  habemus  superiorem,  R.  P.  Hyeron[ym]um
Lallemant.

De  domesticis  nostris  qui  se  nobis  ad  vitam  dede-
runt,  satis  laudare  divinum  numen  non  possumus,
quod  eos  nobis  dederit,  et  procul  dubio  si  rem  oculis
spectaret  P.  V.,  ad  laudandum  Deum  optimum,
maximum  ipsa  nos  excitaret,  videret  enim  perdifii-


1642-44] GARNIER  TO  FATHER  GENERAL  83


Letter  from  Father  Charles  Gamier  to  the  Rever-
end Father  Mutius  Vitelleschi,  General
of  the  Society  of  Jesus.

VERY  Reverend  Father  in  Christ,
Pax  Christi.
Concerning  ours  who  are  in  this  mission  of
the  Hurons,  I  will  say  only  this  to  your  Paternity, —
that  they  are  very  strict  observers  of  religious  disci-
pline, and  earnest  laborers  in  the  Lord's  vineyard.
For  superior,  too,  we  have  a  man  distinguished  in
virtue,  very  discreet,  and  greatly  attached  to  his
people.  However,  he  lacks  this  little, — that  he  does
not  sufficiently  find  his  way  into  their  hearts;  yet
there  is  nothing  which  urges  his  removal.  But,
when  he  shall  be  removed,  no  one  seems  to  me  equal-
ly worthy  to  be  substituted  in  his  place,  as  Father
Paul  Ragueneau,  inasmuch  as  he  is  endowed  with
unusual  graces  of  virtue,  talent,  prudence,  and  learn-
ing; and,  in  many  respects,  he  excels  him  whom
we  now  have  for  superior.  Reverend  Father  Jerome
Lallemant.

As  to  our  domestics  who  have  given  themselves
to  us  for  life,  we  cannot  sufficiently  praise  the  divine
will  for  having  given  them  to  us;  and  no  doubt,  if
Your  Paternity  saw  the  matter  with  your  own  eyes,
you  yourself  would  urge  us  to  praise  the  best  and
greatest  God,  for  you  would  see  that  it  is  most  un-
likely that  domestics  are  attracted  hither  by  the  mere


84  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.25

cillimtini  esse  ut  domestici  hue  advocenttir  sola  spe
lucri  alicujus.  Fore  autem  impossibile  cerneret  ut
per  multos  annos  multi  hie  prsestent :  tanta  est  itine-
rum  difficultas,  tarn  horrenda  pericula,  tanta  victus
tenuitas,  ut  si  se  nobis  Deo  movente  non  dedissent
qui  se  dederunt,  certe  absque  domesticis  nunc  esse-
mus,  hoc  est  brevi  collapsura  esset  haec  missio.  Hi
autem  sunt  domestici  isti  ut  paucos  tales  inveniri  sit
qui  stipend[i]arii  sint,  hoc  est  admodum  pii,  ad  obedi-
ent [i]  am  promptissimi,  et  singularis  exempli  Barbaris
nostris,  quod  ultimum  magni  nos  facere  docuit  diffi-
cultas  quam  passi  sumus  h.  Barbaris  per  multos  annos,
qui  legem  evangelicam  exponentibus  nobis  Gallorum,
qui  primi  ad  has  oras  appulerunt,  corruptos  mores
opponebant,  ita  ut  nos  unos  christianos  existima-
rent  qui  nigram  vestem  gerimus.  Tanti  momenti
nobis  visum  est  hoc  negotium  de  domesticis  nostris
ut  una  voce  clamare  ad  V.  P.  necessarium  nobis
visum  sit.

De  Barbaris  nostris  ut  aliquid  dicam:  crescit  in
dies  Evangelicae  legis  studium.  Duo  sunt  in  primis
pagi  in  quibus  bene  multi  sunt  christiani,  et  inter
eos  non  pauci  singulari  pietate  praediti  constantiaque
qua  neque  adversae  res,  neque  infidelium  convitia  et
maledicta  infringere  possint.  Sunt  et  in  aliis  pagis
aliqui  Christiani  et  sedes  sacrse.  Certe  si  pagus  ali-
quis  integre  fidei  semel  dederit  manus,  spes  est  bene
multos  pagos  in  X"*"  suo  exemplo  pertracturum.
P.  V*™. enixis precibus rogamus ut nos suis SS.


1642-44] GARNIER  TO  FATHER  GENERAL  85

hope  of  any  gain.  You  would  moreover  perceive
the  impossibility  that  many  of  these  should  serve  here
during  many  years.  So  great  is  the  difficulty  of  the
roads,  so  horrible  are  the  dangers,  so  great  is  the
scarcity  of  provisions,  that,  if  these  who  have  given
themselves  to  us,  impelled  by  God,  had  not  given
themselves,  certainly  we  would  now  be  without
domestics, — that  is,  this  mission  would  soon  collapse.
Such,  too,  are  these  domestics  that  few  like  them  are
to  be  found  who  are  hired, —  that  is,  very  pious,  most
prompt  in  obedience,  and  an  unusual  example  to  our
Barbarians.  The  difficulty  which  we  have  experi-
enced with  the  Barbarians,  during  many  years,  has
taught  us  to  value  highly  this  last  qualification ;  since
to  us  who  expound  the  law  of  the  gospel  they  opposed
the  corrupt  morals  of  the  French  who  first  landed  on
these  shores, —  so  that  they  deemed  us  alone  Chris-
tians, who  wear  the  black  gown.  Of  so  great  moment
this  matter  of  our  domestics  has  seemed  to  us,  that
with  one  voice  it  has  seemed  necessary  to  us  to  cry
aloud  to  Your  Paternity.

To  say  somewhat  of  our  Barbarians :  the  zeal  for
the  Gospel  law  increases  daily.  There  are  especially
two  villages  in  which  are  very  many  Christians,  and
among  them  not  a  few  endowed  with  singular  piety,
and  with  constancy  which  neither  adversity  nor  the
taunts  and  curses  of  the  infidels  can  shake.  There
are  some  Christians  and  sacred  buildings  in  other  vil-
lages. Certainly,  if  any  entire  village  will  once  give
support  to  the  faith,  there  is  hope  that  it  will,  by  its
example,  bring  over  to  Christ  very  many  villages.
We  request  Your  Paternity  with  earnest  entreaties
that  you  aid  us  with  your  Holy  Sacrifices  and  prayers.


86  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUJTES  [Vol.  25

Sacrificiis  et  precibus  adjuvet. Ego  autem  imprimis
enixe  opem  imploro,  qui  sum
Paternitatis  Vestrae

Ultimus  in  Christo  filius

Carolus  Garnier.

In  Residentia  S^^^  Mariae,  apud  Hurones
8  aprilis  1644.


1642-44] GARNIER  TO  FATHER  GENERAL  87

I,  too,  with  especial  earnestness  implore  your  aid,
who  am

Your  Paternity's

Most  unworthy  son  in  Christ,
Charles  Garnier.

At  the  Residence  of  Ste.  Marie  of  the  Hurons,

April  8,  1644.


LIII

Relation  of  1643-44

PARIS:  SEBASTIEN  ET  GABRIEL  CRAMOISY, 1645


Source  :  Our  facsimile  of  the  title-page  is  from  the  origi-
nal Cramoisy  edition  of  H.  83,  in  the  library  of  the  Wisconsin
Historical  Society ;  in  reprinting  the  text,  we  follow  the
Lamoignon  copy  in  Lenox  Library.

The  Relation  is  in  two  parts  ;  we  present  herewith  chaps,
i.-viii.  of  Part  I.


REL  ATIO  N

DE  CE  QVI  S'EST  PASSE'

EN LA

NOVVELLE FRANCE

E'S ANNEXES i^43-&  1^44^

£nuoyceau  R.  P,  IE  AN FILLEAY,

Prouincial  de  la  Compagnie  do  I  e  s  v  s,

en  la  Prouince  dc  France.

P^r/e  R  =  P.  B  A  R  T  H  E  IE  M  Y V  I  M  O  N  T,  dff

U  mejmc  Compagnie ,  Sffpcrwur  di^
tGUte  U  Mifiion.


Chez


A PARIS,

fSEBASTIEN CRAMOISy,"]


^ Imprimeur  du  Roy  ,  &  dc (  ^'WsSJac


I


Ja.Reyiic  Rcgente,  iques,  aux

E  T  C,  Cicognti,

GABRIEL  CRAMOISY.'  )'

XLV,


M. DC.
sAn€C  Priuiicge  dn  Ro)\


P.


RELATION

OF  WHAT  OCCURRED

NEW FRANCE

IN  THE  YEARS  1643  AND  1644.

Sent  to  Rev. Father  JEAN FILLEAU,

Provincial  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,

in  the  Province  of  France.

By  Rev. Father Barthelemy Vimont,

of  the  same  Society, Superior  of

the  whole  Mission.


PARIS,

SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY,\

„., \ Printer  to  the  King  and  to  ]  ^'^^'^^' ^f^'

Print- )  ^, ^  r. X  \  ques,  atthe

ed  by  ^he  Q^^^"  ^^g^"^'  Sign  of  the

AND  \  Storks.

GABRIEL CRAMOISY.  /


M. DC. XLV,
By  Royal  License.


94  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.25


Av Reverend Pere lean Filleav, Provincial de

la  Compagnie  de  Iesvs,  en  la  Pro-

uince  de  France.

MON  REVEREND  PERE,
Ce  nous  eji  vne  confolation  bien  fenfible  de  rece-
uoir  tons  les  ans  des  lettres  de  V.  R.  qui  font  antanf
de  te/jnoignages  authcntiqncs  de  V  affection  qii  elle  a  pour  la
cornier fion  de  ces  peuples,  &  des  effets  fignalez  de  /on  amour
en  nojlre  efidroit,  elle  ne  feruent  pas  peu  a  nous  e7icourager
pour  pour fuiure  le  dcffein  que  nous  auons  d'attirer  a  la
connoiffance  &  amour  de  Dieu  toutes  les  Nations  de  ces
contrees  qui  font  plus  grandes  en  Jtombre  qu  on  ne  fe  per-
fiadoit  an  commencement,  nous  en  defcouurons  tous  les
ans  de  nouuelles  qui  ne  font  point  errantes  &  vagabondes,
&  qui pourroient  feruir  d'vn  iufle  employ  a  ceux  qiii  ont
du  zele pour  leur  falut:  deux  cents  mille  Algonquins  les
attendent,  &  fi  leur  zele  n  efl  point  borne,  il  pourra
s' efiendre  a  plufieurs  autres  Nations  qui  font  au  Midy  de
noflre  grand  fleuue,  &  s'ils  ne  font  contens  de  cela,  ils
pourront  s'auancer  iufques  aii  Coucha?it,  ou  ils  trouueront
affez  d' exercice  pour  le  refie  de  leur  vie.  lis  verront  que
ces  peuples  ne  font  pas  fi  Bar  bares  qu  ils  n  ayent  V  efprit
capable  d'inflruclion,  &  vn  coeur  fufceptible  des  maxitnes
de  r Euangile,  que  fi  quelqu'vn  auoit  d' autres  fentimens,
la  Relation  que  i  enuoye  a  V.  R.  de  ce  qui  s' efl  paffe  icy
cette  anne'e,  le  pourra  defabufer,  elle  y  verra  de  bons  &
de  mauuais  fuccez,  &  remarqucra  que  Dieu  va  toil  fours
exau<^ant  de  phis  en  plus  les  prieres  qu  on  fait  en France


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  96


To  the  Reverend  Father  Jean  Filleau,  Provincial

of  the  Society  of  Jesus  in  the

Province  of  France.

MY  REVEREND  FATHER,
//  is  a  dccply-felt  consolation  for  us  to  receive
every  year  Your  Reverence' s  letters,  zvhicJi  are  so
many  authentic  proofs  of  the  interest  that  you  take  iii  the
conversion  of  these  peoples,  and  signal  marks  of  yonr  af-
fection for  us.  They  serve  not  a  little  to  encourage  us  in
prosecuting  our  design  to  attract  to  the  knowledge  and  love
of  God  all  the  Nations  of  these  countries,  who  are  more
numerous  than  we  supposed  at  first.  We  discover  new
ones  every  year,  who  are  neither  wandering  nor  nomadic,
and  who  could  give  worthy  employment  to  those  who  have
zeal  for  their  salvation.  Two  hundred  thousand  Algon-
quins  await  these;  a?id  if  their  ardor  be  not  limited,  it
can  extend  itself  to  many  other  Nations  to  the  SoutJi  of  our
great  river.  And  if  tJicy  be  not  satisfied  zvith  this,  they
can  go  as  far  as  the  Setting  Sun,  where  they  zvill  find
sufficient  occupation  for  the  remainder  of  their  lives.
They  will  see  that  these  peoples  are  not  so  Barbarous  that
their  minds  are  not  capable  of  instruction,  and  their  hearts
not  susceptible  to  the  maxims  of  the  Gospel.  If  any  one
should  be  of  a  different  opinion,  the  Relation  that  I  send
Your  Reverefice,  of  what  has  occurred  this  year,  will  re-
vtove  that  impression;  for  in  it  you  ivill  find  both  good
and  ill  success,  and  will  observe  that  God  hearkens  more
and  more  to  the  prayers  that  are  said  in  France  for  our
poor  Savages,  and  that  he  contijiues  to  bless  the  assistance


96  LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  25

p02ir  nos  paimres  Sauitages,  &  qiiilva  beniffant  les  fecours
qii  on  leiir  donne.  Elle  connoijlra  d' autre  part  que  les
ennemis  dii  falut  de  ces  pcuples  veillent  toiijlours  a  leur
mine  &  s  efforcent  de  les  perdre,  ce  qui  nous  oblige  de  re-
courir  plus  particulieremetit  a  elle  pour  luy  demander  le
fecours  &  aj^ijlance  des  prieres  &  faincls  Sacrifices  de  nos
Peres  &  Freres,  &  fpecialement  celle  de  V.  R.  de  qui
ie  fuis.

A  'Kebec,  ce  j.  de
Septenibre,  1644.

Tres-humble  &  tres-obeyffant
feruiteur,
Barth^lemy  Vimont.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  87

that  is  give7i  to  them.  You  will  see  on  the  other  hand  that
the  enemies  of  the  salvation  of  these  peoples  ever  seek  to
compass  their  rtiin,  ayid  to  destroy  them;  and  this  co)npels
us  to  have  more  especial  recourse  to  you,  to  ask  the  assist-
ance of  the  prayers  and  holy  Sacrifices  of  our  Fathers  and
Brethren,  and,  above  all,  that  of  Your  Reverence,  of  whom
I  remain

At Kebec,  this  §th
of  September,  1644.

The  most  humble  and  most  obe-
dient servant,

Barth^lemy  Vimont.


98


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  25


Table  des  Chapitres  contenvs  en  ce  Livre.


Chapitre  I. 1 '\E I'ejiat  general  des Chrejiies

I J de  la  Nouuelle  France,  P^-gs.  i

Chap.  II.  De quelqiies Baptefme en la

refidence  de  S.  lofeph,  .  . pag. lo

Chap.  III. Des dons fentiniens & actions des

CJireJliens  de  Sain£l  lofeph, .  . pag. 23

Chap.  IV. Continuation des tons fentimeyis &

actions  des  Chrejliens  de  S.  lofeph, . pag. 45

Chap.  V. Contimiation des tons fentime?ts &

actions  des  Chrefliens  de  Sain6l  lofeph, pag. ^6

Chap.  VI. De  V Hofpital,  .  . pag. 70

Chap.  VII. Du  Seminaire  des  Vrfulines, pag. 94

Chap.  VIII. De  ce  qui  s' eft  pafse  a  f  occafion  de

quelques  Apofiats,  .  .  . pag. 1 1 3

Chap.  IX.  Du  Seminaire  des  Hurons  aux  trois
Riuieres,  &  de  leur  prife  auec  celle  du  Pere  lo-
feph Br  eff  any,  par  les  Iroquois,  pag.  139.  [i.e.,  143]

Chap.  X. De  la  prife  de  trois  Iroquois, . pag. 171

Chap.  XI. Des dons deporteviens des  Atikame-

gues,  .... pag. 187

Chap.  XII. De la Mifsion de  fain5te  Croix  a

Tadouffac, .... pag. 209

Chap.  XIII. Continuation  de  la  Mifsion  de  Sain5te

Croix  a  Tadouffac, .  .  . pag. 229

Chap.  XIV. De  la  Creation  d'vn  Capitaine  a  Ta-
douffac, .... pag. 249


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  99


Table  of  the  Chapters  contained  in  this  Book.

Chapter  I. /^"^^ ^^^'^  general condition of  the

\^ Christians  of  New  France,  page  i

Chap.  II.  Of  some  Baptisms  at  the  residence

of  St.  Joseph,  .  .  . page 10

Chap.  III. Of  the  good  sentiments  and  actions  of

the  Christians  of  Saint  Joseph,  . page 23

Chap.  IV. Continuation  of  the  good  sentiments  and

actions  of  the  Christians  of  St.  Joseph, page 45

Chap.  V. Contimiation  of  tJie  good  sentiments  and

actions  of  the  Christiafis  of  Saint  Joseph, page ^6

Chap.  VI. Of  the  Hospital,  .  . page 70

Chap.  \^II. Of  the  Ursuline  Seminary, . page 94

Chap.  VIII. Of  what  occurred  in  connection  with

some  Apostates,  .  .  . page 1 1 3

Chap.  IX.  Of  the  Seminary  of  the  Hurons  at
the  three  Rivers,  and  of  their  capture,  zvith
that  of  Father  Joseph  Bressany,  by  the  Iro-
quois, .  .  page  139  [i.e.,  143]

Chap.  X. Of  tJie  capture  of  tJiree  Iroquois, page 171

Chap.  XI. Of  the  good  conduct  of  the  Atikame-

gucs,  .  .  .  . page 187

Chap.  XII. Of  the  Mission  of  the  holy  Cross  at

Tadoussac, .... page 209

Chap.  XIII. Continuation of  the  Mission of  the

Holy  Cross  at  Tadoussac,  .  . page 229

Chap.  XIV.  Of  the  Creation  of  a  Captain  at  Ta-
doussac, .... page 249


100  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.25


Extraid  du  Priuilege  du  Roy.

PAR  grace  &  Priuilege  du  Roy,  il  efl  permis  ^
Sebaftien  Cramoify,  Marchand  Libraire  lure,
Imprimeur  ordinaire  du  Roy  &  de  la  Reyne
Regente  Mere  de  fa  Majefte,  Diredteur  de  I'lmpri-
merie  Royalle  au  Chafteau  du  Louure,  Ancien
Efcheuin  &  Conful  de  cette  Ville  de  Paris,  d'impri-
mer  ou  faire  imprimer  vn  Liure,  intitule.  La  Rela-
tion de  ce  qui  s' ejl  paffe  en  la  Nomielle  France,  e's  ann^es

1643.  &  1644.  cnuoyee  an  Reuerend  Pere  lean  Filleaii,
Prouincial  de  la  \Compagnie  de  Iesvs  en  la  Prouince  de
France,  par  le  R.  P.  Barthclemy  Vimont  de  Icl\  me/me
Compagnie,  Supcricur  de  toute  la  Mijsion.  Et  ce  pen-
dant le  temps  &  efpace  de  dix  ans  confecutifs,  auec
deffences  "k  tons  Libraires  &  Imprimeurs  d'imprimer
ou  faire  imprimer  ledit  Liure,  fous  pretexte  de  de-
guifement  ou  changemet  qu'ils  y  pourroient  faire,  ^
peine  de  confifcation  &  de  I'amende  portee  par  ledit
Priuilege. Donne  a  Paris  le  14.  iour  de  Decembre,

1644.  Signe  par  le  Roy  en  fon  Confeil  Cramoify,  &
f6elle  du  grand  Seel  en  cire  iaune.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  101


Extract  from  the  Royal  License.

BY  the  grace  and  Prerogative  of  the  King,  permis-
sion is  granted  to  Sebastien  Cramoisy,  Sworn
]\Ierchant  Bookseller,  Printer  in  ordinary  to
the  King  and  to  the  Queen  Regent,  the  Mother  of
his  Majesty,  Director  of  the  Royal  Printing  House
at  the  Castle  of  the  Louvre,  Formerly  Alderman  and
Consul  of  this  City  of  Paris,  to  print  or  to  have
printed  a  Book  entitled :  La  Relation  de  ce  qui  s  est
passe'  e)i  la  Noiivelle  France ^  ds  annees  1643.  et  1644.
envoy ie  au  Reverend  Pere  Jean  Filleaii,  Provincial  de  la
\Compagnie  de  Jesus  en  la  Province  de  France,  par  le  R.
P.  Bartheleniy  Vimojit  de  la']  mesnie  Conipagnie ,  Superieur
de  toute  la  Mission.  And  this  during  the  space  and
time  of  ten  consecutive  years,  prohibiting  all  Book-
sellers and  Printers  to  print  or  have  printed  the  said
Book,  under  pretext  of  disguise  or  change  that  they
might  make  therein,  on  pain  of  confiscation  and  of
the  fine  provided  by  the  said  License.  Given  at  Paris,
on  the  14th  of  December,  1644.  Signed  by  the  King
in  Council,  Cramoisy ;  and  sealed  with  the  great  Seal
in  yellow  wax.


102  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.25


Permifsion  du  R.  Pere  Prouincial.

NOUS  lean  Filleau,  Prouincial  de  la  Compagnie
de  Iesvs  enlaProuince  de  France,  auons  ac-
corde,  pour  I'aduenir,  au  Sieur  Sebaftien  Cra-
moify,  Marchand  Libraire,  lure  Imprimeur  ordinaire
du  Roy  &  de  la  Reyne  Regente  Mere  de  fa  Majefl6,
Diredteur  de  I'lmprimerie  Royalle  du  Chafteau  du
Louure,  Ancien  Efcheuin  &  Conful  de  la  Ville  [de]
Paris,  rimpreffion  des  Relations  de  la  Nouuelle
France. Fait  a  Paris  le  quinziefme  Decembre,  1644.

Signe  Iean Filleav.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  103


Permission  of  the  Reverend  Father  Provincial.

WE,  Jean  Filleau,  Provincial  of  the  Society  of
Jesus  in  the  Province  of  France,  have
granted  for  the  future  to  Sieur  Sebastien
Cramoisy,  Sworn  Merchant  Bookseller,  Printer  in
ordinary  to  the  King  and  to  the  Queen  Regent,  the
Mother  of  his  Majesty,  Director  of  the  Royal  Printing
House  at  the  Castle  of  the  Louvre,  Formerly  Alder-
man and  Consul  of  the  City  of  Paris,  the  Printing  of
the  Relations  of  New  France.  Done  at  Paris,  the
fifteenth  of  December,  1644.

Signed,  Jean  Filleau.


104


LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.25


[i]  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'eft  paffe  en  la  Nouuelle
France,  es  annees  1643.  &  1644.

CHAPITRE  I.

DE  l'estat  general  des  chrestiens  de  la  nou-
uelle FRANCE.

L^  EST  AT  ou  f  e  void  maintenant  reduite  cette
Eglife  naiffante  eft  capable  de  tirer  des  yeux,
de  tous  ceux  qui  rayment,  des  larmes  de
trifleffe  &  de  io3"e.  Car  d'vn  cofte  c'eft  vne  chofe
pitoyable  de  voir  perir  deuant  nos  yeux  ces  pauures
peuples  a  mefure  qu'ils  embraffent  [2]  la  Fo}^:  &  de
I'autre  nous  auons  fujet  de  nous  confoler  voyant  que
les  miferes  qui  les  accueillent  de  toutes  parts,  ne
feruent  qu'a  faire  fouhaitter  la  foy  ^  ceux  qui  iufques
A  prefent  I'auoient  mefprifee,  &  la  fortifier  &  faire
paroiftre  auec  plus  de  gloire  dans  les  coeurs  de  ceux
qui  defia  I'auoient  receue.  Nous  voyons  bien  que
Dieu  eft  le  Fondateur  de  cette  Eglife,  auffi  bien  que
de  la  primitiue;  car  il  I'a  fait  naiftre  comme  celle-lk
dans  les  trauaux,  &  croiftre  dans  les  fouffrances,
pour  la  couronner  auec  elle  dans  la  gloire.

La  maladie,  la  guerre,  &  la  famine  font  les  trois
fleaux  dont  il  a  pleu  "k  Dieu  frapper  nos  Neophytes,
de  puis  qu'ils  ont  commence  a  I'adorer,  &  fe  foufmet-
tre  k  fes  Loix.  A  peine  eurent-ils  oiiy  parler  de
la  Dodtrine  que  nous  leur  prefchons,  &  commence
"k  receuoir cette diuine femence, qu'vne maladie


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  105


[i]  Relation  of  what  occurred  in  New  France,  in
the  years  1643  and  1644.

CHAPTER  I.

OF THE GENERAL CONDITION OF THE CHRISTIANS  OF

NEW FRANCE.

THE  condition  to  which  this  nascent  Church  is
now  reduced  is  such  as  to  bring  to  the  eyes  of
all  who  love  it  tears  both  of  sorrow  and  of  joy.
For,  on  the  one  hand,  it  is  pitiful  to  see  these  poor
peoples  perish  before  our  eyes  as  soon  as  they
embrace  [2]  the  Faith ;  and,  on  the  other,  we  have
reason  to  console  ourselves  when  we  see  that  the  mis-
fortunes which  assail  them  on  all  sides  serve  but  to
arouse  a  desire  for  the  faith  in  those  who  had  hither-
to despised  it,  and  to  strengthen  it  and  make  it  shine
with  still  greater  glory  in  the  hearts  of  those  who
had  already  received  it.  We  see  very  well  that  God
is  the  Founder  of  this  Church,  as  well  as  of  the  prim-
itive one;  for  he  has  caused  the  former  to  be  born,
like  the  latter,  in  travails,  and  to  grow  in  sufferings,
in  order  to  be  crowned  with  her  in  glory.

Disease,  war,  and  famine  are  the  three  scourges
with  which  God  has  been  pleased  to  smite  our  Neo-
phytes since  they  have  commenced  to  adore  him,  and
to  submit  to  his  Laws.  Hardly  had  they  heard  of
the  Doctrine  that  we  preach  to  them,  and  commenced
to receive this divine seed, when a contagious


106  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.25


contagieufe  s'ef pandit  dans  toutes  ces  nations,  &  en
moiffonna  la  plus  faine  partie:  Cette  maladie  n'euft
pas  pluftoft  ceffe,  que  la  guerre,  qui  iufques  alors
leur  auoit  elle  fi  aduantageufe  qu'ils  [3]  s'eftoient
rendus  Maiftres  du  pays  de  leurs  ennemis,  &  les
auoient  battus  par  tout,  commenga,  &  a  continue
depuis  k  leur  eftre  fi  funefte,  qu'ils  y  ont  perdu  tous
leurs  meilleurs  guerriers,  ont  ell;e  chaffez  de  leur
propre  pays,  &  ne  font  plus  maintenant  autre  chofe
que  fuyr  la  cruaute  des  Iroquois,  qui  ne  laiffent  pas
neantmoins  de  les  attrapper  bien  fouuent  &  en  faire
d'horribles  maffacres.

En  fuitte  de  ce  malheur  eltans  contrains  de  quitter
les  bois  les  plus  commodes  a  la  chaffe,  qui  font  au
Midy  du  grand  fleuue,  &  fujets  aux  courfes  de  leurs
ennemis,  ils  font  tombez  entre  les  mains  d'vn  autre
ennemy  non  moins  cruel,  qui  eft  la  faim,  laquelle  en
a  ramene  plufieurs  du  milieu  des  forefts  a  nos  portes,
pour  nous  demander  I'aumofne  en  vn  temps  auquel
ils  auoient  accouftume  d'eftre  tous  les  iours  dans  les
feftins.  Nous  en  auons  veu  qui  ont  couru  dans  les
bois  dix,  quinze,  &  vingt  iours  fans  rien  manger  que
quelque  bout  d'efcorce  ou  de  peau:  d'autres  fe  font
refolus  de  paffer  la  grande  riuiere  [4]  en  vn  temps
auquel  elle  rouloit  par  tout  des  rochers  &  des  monta-
gnes  de  glace  pour  entrer  dans  les  bois  du  Midy,
nonobftant  I'apprehenfion  de  leurs  ennemis,  difant
qu'ils  aimoient  autant  mourir  du  feu  des  Iroquois
comme  de  faim/  &  comme  fi.  le  malheur  les  euft  ac-
compagne  par  tout,  apres  auoir  couru  parmy  les
glaces  &  les  neiges  mille  hazards  de  perdre  la  vie,  ils
font  retournez  fans  auoir  mange  autre  chofe  que  les
cordes  de  leurs  raquetes. Ceux qui ont  le  moins


1 642  -  44 J  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  1 07

disease  spread  throughout  all  these  nations,  carrying
off  the  healthiest  of  them.  No  sooner  had  disease
ceased  its  ravages,  than  war  —  which  had  previously
been  so  much  to  their  advantage  that  they  [3]  had
become  Masters  of  their  enemies'  country,  and  had
defeated  them  everywhere  —  commenced,  and  has
since  continued  to  be  so  disastrous  to  them  that  they
have  lost  all  their  best  warriors,  have  been  driven
from  their  own  country,  and  at  present  do  nothing
but  flee  from  the  cruelty  of  the  Iroquois,  who  never-
theless very  often  overtake  them,  and  massacre  them
horribly.

Being  compelled,  in  consequence  of  this  misfor-
tune, to  abandon  the  woods  best  suited  for  hunting,
which  lie  to  the  South  of  the  great  river,  and  being
exposed  to  the  inroads  of  their  enemies,  they  have
fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  no  less  cruel  enemy,
hunger, —  which  has  brought  many  of  them  from  the
depths  of  the  forest  to  our  doors,  to  ask  us  for  alms
at  a  season  when  they  were  accustomed  to  hold  a
feast  every  day.  We  have  seen  some  who  have
wandered  in  the  woods  for  ten,  fifteen,  and  twenty
days,  without  other  food  than  a  piece  of  bark  or  of
skin.  Others  resolved  to  cross  the  great  river  [4]  at
a  time  when  everywhere  its  waters  rolled  down  rocks
and  mountains  of  ice,  in  order  to  reach  the  woods  to
the  South,  notwithstanding  their  dread  of  their  ene-
mies,—  saying  that  they  would  as  soon  die  by  the  fire
of  the  Iroquois  as  by  hunger;  and,  as  if  misfortune
accompanied  them  everywhere,  after  having  been  a
thousand  times  in  danger  of  losing  their  lives  amid
the  ice  and  snow,  they  have  come  back  without  hav-
ing eaten  anything  but  the  cords  of  their  snowshoes.
Those  who  have  suffered  the  least  are  a  portion  of


108  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.25

fouffert,  font  vne  partie  des  Chrefliens  de  Sillery  &
de  Tadouffac,  qui  pour  n'eftre  pas  incommodez  en
leur  chaff e  par  les  Iroquois,  font  entrez  dans  les  bois
du  Midy  trois  mois  pluftoft  qu'a  I'ordinaire,  &  font
allez  fi  auant  que  les  Iroquois  ne  les  ont  peu  rencon-
trer,  quoy  qu'ils  les  ayent  cherchez  comme  on  a
reconneu  par  leurs  piftes.  Cela  a  efte  caufe  que  les
Meres  Hofpitalieres  &  nos  Peres  de  Sillery  ont  eu  fur
les  bras  pendant  tout  I'Hyuer  plus  de  quarante
Sauuages,  la  plus  part  infirmes,  &  vieillards,  qu'il  a
fallu  nourrir  auec  de  grands  frais,  &  qui  autrement
[5]  fuffent  morts  de  faim  &  de  mifere  dans  les  bois
fans  aucune  affiftance  corporelle  ny  fpirituelle.

Tous  ces  accidens  ont  tellement  efclaircy  nos  Sau-
uages,  que  Ik  oil  Ton  voyoit  il  y  a  huidt  ans,  quatre-
vingt  &  cent  cabanes,  k  peine  en  voit-on  maintenant
cinq  ou  Gx :  &  tel  Capitaine  qui  commandoit  pour  lors
k  huidt  cents  guerriers,  n'en  compte  plus  a  prefent
que  trente  ou  quarante,  &  au  lieu  des  fiottes  de  trois
ou  quatre  cents  Canots,  nous  n'en  voyons  plus  que
de  vingt  ou  trente;  &  ce  qui  eft  pitoyable,  c'eft  que
ces  reftes  de  Nations  confiftent  quafi  toutes  en  des
femmes  veufues,  ou  filles  qui  ne  f9auroient  toutes
trouuer  vn  mary  legitime,  &  qui  partant  font  en  dan-
ger de  fouffrir  beaucoup  ou  de  faire  de  grandes  fautes.

Ce  comble  de  miferes  qui  les  accablent,  deuroit  fe
me  femble  les  fortifier  dans  la  creance  qu'ils  auoient
des  le  commencement,  que  la  priere  les  faifoit  mou-
rir,  que  nous  eftions  des  forciers,  qui  anions  coniure
centre  leurs  vies,  que  nous  anions  des  intelligences
[6]  fecretes  auec  leurs  ennemis.  Mais  celuy  qui  eft
le  Maiftre  des  coeurs  leur  donne  d'autres  penfees,  &
leur  fait  reconnoiftre,  &  aduouer  publiquement au


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  109

the  Christians  of  Sillery  and  of  Tadoussac,  who,  in
order  to  avoid  being  disturbed  by  the  Iroquois  in
their  hunting,  went  into  the  woods  to  the  South
three  months  earlier  than  usual,  and  penetrated  so
far  that  the  Iroquois  did  not  find  them, — although
they  sought  for  them,  as  could  be  seen  from  their
tracks.  The  result  of  this  was  that  the  Hospital
Mothers  and  our  Fathers  at  Sillery  had  on  their
hands  throughout  the  Winter  over  forty  Savages,
most  of  whom  were  infirm  or  aged,  who  had  to  be
fed  at  great  expense,  and  who  otherwise  [5]  would
have  perished  in  the  woods,  from  hunger  and  hard-
ships, without  any  bodily  or  spiritual  aid.

All  these  events  have  so  greatly  thinned  the  num-
bers of  our  Savages  that,  where  eight  years  ago  one
could  see  eighty  or  a  hundred  cabins,  barely  five  or
six  can  now  be  seen;  a  Captain,  who  then  had  eight
hundred  warriors  under  his  command,  now  has  not
more  than  thirty  or  forty ;  instead  of  fleets  of  three
or  four  hundred  Canoes,  we  see  now  but  twenty  or
thirty.  And  the  pitiful  part  of  it  is,  that  these  rem-
nants of  Nations  consist  almost  entirely  of  women,
widows  or  girls,  who  cannot  all  find  lawful  husbands,
and  who  consequently  are  in  danger  of  much  suffer-
ing, or  of  committing  great  sins.

Such  an  accumulation  of  miseries  as  overwhelms
them  would,  it  seems  to  me,  strengthen  them  in  the
belief  which  they  had  at  the  very  beginning,  that
prayer  caused  them  to  die;  that  we  were  sorcerers,
who  had  conspired  against  their  lives ;  and  that  we
had  secret  communication  [6]  with  their  enemies.
But  he  who  is  the  Master  of  all  hearts  inspires  them
with  other  thoughts,  and  causes  them  to  acknowl-
edge and  admit  publicly,  in  the  midst  of  their  afliic-


110  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.25

milieu  de  leurs  afflictions,  que  la  main  qui  les  frappe
eft  celle  du  vray  Dieu,  qu'ils  n'auoient  pas  encore
conneu,  &  dont  les  iugemens  font  auffi  fecrets  comme
ils  font  equitables.  Nous  auons  cependant  grand
fujet  de  loiier  Dieu  de  ce  qu'il  tire  fa  gloire  de  I'af-
fiidtion  de  ce  pauure  peuple  &  la  fait  feruir  auanta-
geufement  k  fa  conuerfion.  Quoy  qu'il  ne  foit  point
dans  le  monde  aucune  nation  plus  pauure  que  celle-
cy,  il  n'en  eft  pas  neantmoins  de  plus  orgueilleufe,
lors  qu'ils  eftoient  dans  la  profperite,  nous  ne
pouuions  quafi  les  aborder,  les  Fran9ois  eftoient  des
chiens,  &  tout  ce  que  nous  leur  prefchions  eftoient
des  fables.  Mais  depuis  que  les  afflidtions  les  ont  hu-
miliez,  &  que  la  neceffite  les  a  rendus  plus  dependans
des  Fran9ois,  &  leur  a  fait  efprouuer  les  eJffedts  de  la
charite  Chreftienne,  ils  ont  ouuert  les  yeux,  &  voy-
ent  maintenant  plus  clair  que  iamais  qu'il  n'y  a  point
d'autre  Diuinite  [7]  que  celle  que  nous  leurs  pref-
chons.  En  effedt  de  tons  ceux  qui  ne  font  pas
encore  Chreftiens,  il  n'y  en  a  prefque  point  qui  ne
tende  pour  le  moins  exterieurement  vn  tefmoignage
public  de  I'eftime  &  approbation  qu'il  fait  de  noftre
creance:  Car  fi  on  les  interroge  s'ils  croyent  ce  que
nous  leur  difons,  &  s'ils  ne  veulent  pas  eftre  baptifez,
ils  refpondent  qu'ils  croyent  en  effedt,  &  qu'ils
fouhaittent  le  Baptefme,  que  s'ils  ne  font  pas  encore
tous  difpofez  a  receuoir  la  Foy,  ou  fi  quelques-vns
mefme  I'abandonnent,  c'eft  toufiours  en  aduoiiant  ^
la  gloire  de  Dieu,  que  ce  que  nous  prefchons  eft  vray,
mais  difficile.  Ce  n'eft  plus  maintenant  vne  chofe
honteufe  parmy  eux  de  profeffer  le  Chriftianifme,  de
prier  Dieu  le  foir  &  le  matin  en  prefence  des  infideles
mefmes. La  grace  va  tous  les  iours  adouciffant  leur


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  HI

tions,  that  the  hand  that  smites  them  is  the  hand  of
the  true  God  whom  they  had  not  yet  known,  and
whose  judgments  are  as  secret  as  they  are  equitable.
We  liave,  however,  great  reason  to  praise  God  be-
cause he  reaps  his  glory  from  the  affliction  of  these
poor  peoples  and  makes  it  serve  still  more  for  their
conversion.  Although  there  is  not  in  the  world  a
nation  poorer  than  this  one,  nevertheless  there  is
none  prouder  than  they.  When  they  were  prosper-
ous, we  could  hardly  approach  them;  the  French
were  dogs,  and  all  that  we  preached  them  were
fables.  But  since  affliction  has  humiliated  them,  and
necessity  has  made  them  more  dependent  upon  the
French,  and  has  made  them  experience  the  effects  of
Christian  charity,  their  eyes  are  opened;  and  they
see  more  clearly  than  ever  that  there  is  no  other
Divinity  [7]  than  he  whom  we  preach  to  them.  In
fact,  there  is  hardly  one  of  all  those  who  are  not  yet
Christians  who  does  not,  outwardly  at  least,  bear  wit-
ness to  his  esteem  and  approval  of  our  belief.  For,
if  we  ask  them  whether  they  believe  what  we  tell
them,  and  if  they  do  not  wish  to  be  baptized,  they
reply  that  indeed  they  do  believe,  and  that  they
desire  Baptism.  And  if  they  be  not  yet  all  disposed
to  receive  the  Faith,  or  even  if  some  of  them  aban-
don it,  they  always  admit,  to  the  glory  of  God,  that
what  we  preach  is  true,  but  difficult.  Among  them
it  is  now  no  longer  a  thing  to  be  ashamed  of  to  pro-
fess Christianity,  to  pray  to  God  night  and  morning,
even  in  the  presence  of  infidels.  Grace  continues
day  by  day  to  temper  their  former  barbarism.  The
craft  of  the  Jugglers  and  sorcerers  is  gradually  losing
credit.  Remote  nations,  attracted  by  the  reputation
of  our  good  Christians,  approach  us  to  enjoy  the  same


112  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  25-

ancienne  barbarie.  Le  meftier  des  longleurs  &  des
forciers  perd  fon  credit  pen  a  peu,  les  nations  efloi-
gnees  attirees  par  I'odeur  de  nos  bons  Chrell;iens
s'approchent  de  nous  pour  ioiiyr  de  la  mefme  faueur
que  regoiuent  celles  qui  nous  [8]  font  plus  proches:
ils  commencent  h.  s'appriuoifer  a  nos  couftumes,  les
difficultez  qu'ils  ont  ^  fe  foufmettre  aux  loix  Ctire-
ftiennes  s'applaniffent  de  plus  en  plus,  la  vertu  &
rhonneftete  eft  maintenant  parmy  eux  en  venera-
tion, ceux  mefme  qui  la  pratiquent  le  moins,  ne
laiffent  pas  de  I'lionnorer  exterieurement.  Ils  con-
noiffent  maintenant  &  deteftent  plufieurs  chofes  fous
le  tiltre  de  vice,  qu'ils  eftimoient  auparauant  &  loii-
oient  fauffement  comme  des  vertus.  Enfin  la  verit6
triomphe  de  I'erreur,  &  le  Prince  des  tenebres  eft
contraint  de  ceder  la  place  au  Roy  de  gloire  &  de
lumiere.

Ce  n'eft  pas  h.  dire  que  tout  foit  fait.  Nous  auons
plus  de  peine  a  conferuer  nos  Chreftiens,  qu'k  les
acquerir.  Leur  vie  errante  eft  vn  grand  empefche-
ment  a  la  vertu,  &  neantmoins  les  difficultez  qu'il  y
a  pour  les  arrefter,  font  quafi  infurmotables.  Les
terres  que  nous  leur  defrichons,  les  maifons  que  nous
leur  bafliffons,  &  les  autres  fecours  fpirituels  &  cor-
porels  que  nous  tafchons  de  leur  rendre  les  arreftent
vn  peu,  mais  [9]  non  pas  tout  a  fait.  La  colonic  des
Fran5ois  qui  efl  a  vray  dire  le  fondement  du  Chrifti-
anifme  en  ces  contrees  va  toufiours  croiffant,  mais
lentement,  n'eftant  pas  affiftee  de  I'ancienne  France
affez  puiffamment.  Les  Algonquins  de  I'lfle,  &  ceux
de  la  Nation  d'Hiroquet  apres  tant  d'ann6es  d'in-
ftruc5tion  ne  font  pas  a  la  verite  fi  infolens  comme
auparauant;  mais  auffi ils ne font pas fi humbles


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  113

advantages  that  are  obtained  by  those  [8]  nearer  to
us.  They  are  beginning  to  become  accustomed  to
our  habits ;  the  difficulties  that  they  have  in  submit-
ting to  Christian  laws  are  disappearing  more  and
more ;  virtue  and  modesty  are  now  held  in  veneration
by  them,  and  even  those  who  practice  them  the  least
nevertheless  honor  them  outwardly.  They  now
know  and  detest  as  vices  many  things  that  they
formerly  esteemed  and  falsely  applauded  as  virtues.
Finally,  truth  triumphs  over  error,  and  the  Prince  of
darkness  is  compelled  to  give  way  to  the  King  of
glory  and  of  light.

This  does  not  mean  that  all  has  been  done.  We
have  greater  trouble  in  keeping  our  Christians  than
in  acquiring  them.  Their  wandering  life  is  a  great
obstacle  to  virtue ;  and  still  the  difficulties  that  exist
with  respect  to  their  becoming  settled  are  almost
insurmountable.  The  land  that  we  clear,  the  houses
that  we  build  for  them,  and  the  other  aid,  spiritual
and  material,  that  we  endeavor  to  give  them,  keep
them  stationary  for  a  while,  but  [9]  not  permanently.
The  French  colony,  which  is  in  truth  the  foundation
of  Christianity  in  these  countries,  continues  to  in-
crease; but  it  does  so  slowly,  because  it  does  not
receive  sufficient  aid  from  old  France.  The  Island
Algonquins,  and  those  of  the  Hiroquet  Tribe,  after
so  many  years  of  instruction,  are  not,  it  is  true,  so
insolent  as  they  formerly  were ;  but  they  are  not  yet
so  humble  as  they  must  be  to  become  worthy  of
Baptism.  The  examples  of  some  of  them  who  have
abandoned  the  Faith,  or  who  have  profaned  it  by
shameful  actions,  prevent  us  from  baptizing  many
who  present  themselves.  Marriages  still  give  us  much
trouble. We  are  completely  surrounded  by  Nations


114  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.25

comme  ils  faudroit  pour  eftre  capables  du  Baptefme.
Les  exemples  de  quelques-vns  d'entr'eux  qui  ont
quitte  la  Foy,  ou  I'ont  profanee  par  des  adtions  indi-
gnes  nous  empefchent  d'en  baptifer  plufieurs  qui  fe
prefentent.  Les  mariag-es  nous  donnent  encore  bien
de  la  peine.  Nous  fommes  tons  enuironnez  de  Na-
tions qui  ne  nous  ont  encore  iamais  veu,  fi  le  grand
fleuue  eft  vne  fois  libre,  il  nous  donnera  1' entree  dans
des  Nations  innombrables,  &  grandement  peuplees,
dont  quelques-vnes  ont  defia  ouy  parler  de  nous,  &
nous  fouhaittent.  En  vn  mot  nous  ne  faifons  que
commencer;  mais  nous  efperons  que  ces  heureux
commencemens  auront  d'heureux  [lo]  progrez,  &
que  Dieu  confommera  enfin  I'ouurage  qu'il  a  entre-
pris,  puis  qu'il  eft  k  fa  gloire.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  115

who  have,  as  yet,  never  seen  us.  If  the  great  river
once  be  free,  it  will  give  us  access  to  Nations  beyond
number,  and  very  populous, — some  of  whom  have
already  heard  of  us  and  wish  for  us.  In  a  word,  we
are  only  beginning;  but  we  hope  that  these  auspi-
cious beginnings  will  have  happy  [10]  results,  and
that  God  will  finally  accomplish  the  work  that  he  has
undertaken,  since  it  is  for  his  glory.


116  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.25


CHAPITRE  II.

DE  QUELQUES  BAPTESMES  EN  LA  RESIDENCE  DE  SAINCT

lOSEPH.

DIEU  eft  toufiours  admirable  dans  la  predeftina-
tion  de  fes  efleus  fes  deffeins  font  fecrets,  &
fes  penfees  cachees,  mais  1' execution  en  eft
merueilleufement  efficace.  Nous  I'auons  veu  en  la
perfonne  d'vn  Capitaine  Abnaquiois,  que  Dieu  a  tire
du  milieu  d'vne  Nation  toute  infidele,  &  bien  efloi-
gn6e  de  nous  pour  le  mettre  dans  le  fein  de  fon
Eglife.  II  y  a  trois  ans  qu'il  eftoit  venu  k  Sillery
pour  offrir  k  nos  Sauuages  des  prefens  en  fatisfacftion
de  la  mort  d'vn  Algonquin  que  ceux  de  fa  Nation
auoient  tue.  Nos  Chreltiens  accepteret  les  prefens,
les  parens  du  defundt  effuyerent  [i  i]  leurs  larmes,  &
la  Paix  fuft  renoliee  entre  ces  deux  Nations,  Vn  de
nos  Principaux  Neophytes  haragua  pour  annoncer
cette  paix,  &  adioufta  a  la  fin,  parlant  au  Capitaine
Abnaquiois  qui  eftoit  entremetteur  de  la  paix,  que
pour  rendre  leur  amiti6  afleuree  &  immortelle,  il
falloit  qu'il  renongaft  ^  fes  fuperftitions,  &  qu'il  em-
braffaft  la  creance  dont  ils  faifoient  maintenant  pro-
feffion.  Si  tu  veux,  luy  dit-il,  lier  nos  deux  Nations
par  vne  parfaite  amiti6,  ils  faut  que  nous  croyons
tous  le  mefme :  Fais-toy  baptifer,  &  procure  que  tes
gens  falTent  le  mefme,  ce  lien  fera  plus  fort  que  tous
les  prefens.  Nous  prions  Dieu,  &  ne  reconnoiflons
point d'autres  amis  ny  freres  que ceux qui  prient


1G42-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  117'


CHAPTER  n.

OF SOME BAPTISMS AT THE RESIDENCE OF SAINT

JOSEPH.

GOD  is  ever  admirable  in  the  predestination  of
his  elect;  his  designs  are  secret,  and  his
thoughts  are  hidden,  but  their  accomplish-
ment is  marvelously  effective.  We  have  observed
this  in  the  person  of  an  Abnaquiois  Captain,  whom
God  took  from  the  midst  of  an  utterly  infidel  Nation,
far  distant  from  us,  to  place  him  in  the  bosom  of  his
Church.  Three  years  ago,  he  had  come  to  Sillery  to
offer  presents  to  our  Savages,  in  satisfaction  for  the
death  of  an  Algonquin  whom  those  of  his  Tribe  had
killed.  Our  Christians  accepted  the  gifts;  the  rela-
tives of  the  deceased  dried  [i  i]  their  tears,  and  Peace
was  renewed  between  these  two  Tribes.  One  of  our
Principal  Neophytes  delivered  a  harangue  to  an-
nounce this  peace;  and  at  the  end,  speaking  to  the
Abnaquiois  Captain  who  was  the  agent  of  the  peace,
he  added  that,  to  make  their  friendship  firm  and
everlasting,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  renounce
his  superstitions,  and  embrace  the  belief  that  they
now  professed.  "If,"  said  he,  "thou  wishest  to
bind  our  two  Tribes  by  a  perfect  friendship,  it  is
necessary  that  we  should  all  believe  the  same.  Have
thyself  baptized,  and  cause  thy  people  to  do  likewise,
and  that  bond  will  be  stronger  than  any  gifts.  We
pray  to  God,  and  know  no  other  friends  or  brothers
than  those  who  pray  like  us. How  can  we  love  those


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.25

comme  nous.  Comment  aimerions-nous  ceux  que
Dieu  hai't?  Or  Dieu  hait  ceux  qui  ne  prient  pas:
Si  tu  veux  doncques  nous  auoir  pour  frere[s]  &  pour
amis,  aprends  a  prier  comme  Ton  nous  a  enfeigne :
Ces  paroles  firent  vne  telle  impreffion  dans  I'efprit
du  Capitaine  Abnaquiois  qu'il  promit  de  retourner  a
Sillery  I'Efte  prochain  pour  fe  faire  enfeigner.  En
effet  [12]  il  s'acquitta  de  fa  promeffe,  &  parull  icy  au
commencement  de  I'Efte  auec  huidt  Canots,  lors
qu  on  fe  preparoit  pour  aller  a  la  guerre  contre  les
Iroquois,  ou  il  fuft  emmene,  &  eitant  de  retour,  il
commen9a  a  preffer  fortement  fon  Baptefme.  Ses
gens  firent  quelque  infolence  qui  fuft  caufe  qu'on
parla  de  les  chaffer.  II  prie  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur
qu'on  luy  permette  de  demeurer  auec  trois  de  fes
gens,  on  le  luy  accorde.  II  fe  fait  inftruire,  il  affiile
aux  Prieres  foir  &  matin,  il  entre  fouuent  dans
TEglife  pour  vifiter  le  Saindt  Sacrement  &  luy  deman-
der  la  grace  d'el^re  bien  toft  baptife.  Le  Pere  Dequen
le  rebute  diuerfes  fois  pour  I'eprouuer,  alleguant  qu'il
faut  vaquer  aux  autres  qui  font  plus  preffez  que  luy
&  mieux  difpofez,  qu'il  eft  eftranger,  &  qu'on  ne  fe
fie  point  a  fa  parole.  II  refpond  a  tout  cela,  que
s'agiffant  du  falut  de  fon  ame,  il  eft  autant  preff6
que  les  autres  eftant  autant  en  danger  de  fe  perdre
comme  eftoient  les  autres  qui  pourfuiuoient  leur  Bap-
tefme, qu'il  f9ait  defia  les  Prieres  &  le  Catechifme,
I'ayant  apris  de  Charles  Mejask8at,  [i  3]  auec  qui  il  auoit
demeure  pendant  I'Hyuer,  que  pour  eftre  Eftranger,
il  ne  doit  pas  eftre  rebute  puis  que  le  Paradis  eft  fait
aulfi  bien  pour  ceux  de  fa  Nation  que  pour  les  autres,
qu'il  n'eft  pas  vn  enfant  pour  fe  defdire,  qu'il  a  quit-
te  fon  pays  &  renonce  a  fa  charge  de  Capitaine  pour


1G42-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  119

whom  God  hates?  Now  God  hates  those  who  do  not
pray.  If  therefore  thou  wouldst  have  us  for  brothers
and  friends,  learn  to  pray  as  we  have  been  taught  to
do."  These  words  made  such  an  impression  on  the
mind  of  the  Abnaquiois  Captain  that  he  promised  to
return  to  Sillery  the  following  Summer  to  be  in-
structed. Indeed,  [12]  he  fulfilled  his  promise,  and
came  here  at  the  beginning  of  Summer  with  eight
Canoes,  at  the  time  when  preparations  were  being
made  for  war  against  the  Iroquois,  in  which  he
accompanied  them;  and,  on  his  return,  he  began  to
press  urgently  for  his  Baptism.  His  people  were
guilty  of  some  offensive  conduct  which  led  to  threats
of  their  expulsion.  He  begged  Monsieur  the  Govern-
or to  allow  him  to  remain  with  three  of  his  people^
and  this  was  granted  to  him.  He  had  himself
instructed,  attended  the  Prayers  night  and  morning,
and  frequently  entered  the  Church  to  visit  our  Lord
in  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  and  to  ask  of  him  the  grace
to  be  soon  baptized.  Father  Dequen  refused  him
several  times,  in  order  to  try  him, —  saying  that  he
had  to  attend  to  others,  who  were  more  eager  and
better  prepared  than  he ;  that  he  was  a  stranger,  and
that  his  word  was  not  relied  on.  To  all  this  he
replied  that,  as  the  salvation  of  his  soul  was  at  stake,
he  was  quite  as  eager  as  the  others,  for  he  was  as
much  in  danger  of  being  lost  as  were  the  others  who
sought  Baptism ;  that  he  already  knew  the  Prayers
and  the  Catechism,  having  learned  them  from  Charles
Meiaskwat,  [13]  with  whom  he  had  lived  during  the
Winter ;  that  he  should  not  be  refused  on  account  of
his  being  a  Stranger,  because  Paradise  is  as  much  for
those  of  his  Nation  as  for  the  others;  that  he  was
not  a  child  to  break  his  word ;  that  he  had  left  his-


120  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  25

eftre  inftruit,  qu'il  veut  demeurer  toufiours  auec  les
Chreftiens  de  Syllery  pour  conferuer  la  Foy,  apres
qu'il  aura  fait  vn  voyage  en  fon  pays,  &  pourueu  k
fes  petites  affaires.  Le  Pere  voyant  fon  courage  &
fa  perfeuerance  apres  vne  longue  efpreuue  luy  donna
le  contentement  qu'il  defiroit,  &  le  mit  au  nombre
des  enfans  de  Dieu.  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  le
nomma  lean  Baptifte.  Apres  fon  Baptefme  il  vint
trouuer  le  Pere  Dequen  &  luy  dit  qu'il  n'auoit  iamais
reffenty  vne  ioye  pareille  a  celle  de  ce  iour:  Non,
dit-il,  ie  ne  ferois  pas  fi  ioyeux  quand  on  m'auroit
retire  des  mains  des  Iroquois.  Helas !  nous  croyons
qu'il  y  eft  tombe.  II  s'en  alloit  a  fon  pays  pour
prendre  coge  de  fes  parens,  &  dire  a  Dieu  a  fes  gens,
il  nous  auoit  promis  de  parler  hautement  [14]  &
hardimet  en  faueur  de  la  foy,  &  come  i'ecris  cecy  vn
Canot  d'Abnaquiois  viet  d'arriuer  par  la  mefme  riui-
ere  par  laquelle  il  s'en  alloit,  qui  ne  la  point  rencon-
tre, mais  bien  plufieurs  piftes  d'Iroquois,  &  vn  de
leurs  Canots  qu'ils  ont  laiffe,  apres  s' eftre  faifis,
comme  Ton  croit,  de  celuy  de  ce  pauure  Chreftien,
il  ertoit  en  compagnie  d'vn  Catechumene  de  fa  Na-
tion qui  auoit  de  grandes  ardeurs  &  difpofitions  ^  la
Foy.  Dieu  foit  beny  de  tout,  nous  ne  deuons  pas
foiiiller  dans  fes  confeils,  mais  les  adorer  tous  auec
refpedt.

Vn  vieillard  de  la  Nation  d'Hiroquet  fameux  Sor-
cier,  &  grandement  expert  dans  toutes  les  fuperiti-
tions  de  fa  Nation,  qui  en  eft  toute  pleine,  ne  pouuat
fuiure  fes  gens  a  la  chaffe,  full:  oblige  de  s'arrefter  k
Sillery,  ou  les  Meres  Hofpitalieres  luy  firent  la
charite  de  le  nourrir  dans  leur  Hofpital  pendant  tout
.I'Hyuer  auec  plufieurs  autres  infirmes  &  malades.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  121

country  and  renounced  his  office  of  Captain,  in  order
to  be  instructed ;  that  he  wished  to  remain  always
with  the  Christians  of  Syllery,  in  order  to  maintain
his  Faith,  after  he  should  have  made  a  voyage  to  his
own  country  and  settled  his  little  affairs.  When  the
Father  saw  his  courage  and  his  perseverance,  after  a
long  trial  he  granted  him  the  satisfaction  that  he
desired,  and  placed  him  in  the  number  of  the  chil-
dren of  God.  Monsieur  the  Governor  named  him
Jean  Baptiste.  After  his  Baptism,  he  came  to  Fa-
ther Dequen,  and  told  him  that  he  had  never  expe-
rienced joy  such  as  he  felt  that  day.  "  No,"  he  said,
"  I  could  not  be  so  joyful  even  if  I  had  been  saved
from  the  hands  of  the  Iroquois."  Alas!  we  fear  that
he  has  fallen  into  them.  He  was  going  back  to  his
own  country,  to  take  leave  of  his  relatives  and  to  bid
Adieu  to  his  people.  He  had  promised  us  that  he
would  speak  decidedly  [14]  and  boldly  in  favor  of
the  faith;  and,  as  I  write  this,  an  Abnaquiois  Canoe
has  just  arrived  which  came  by  the  very  river  on
which  he  went.  These  people  did  not  meet  him,
but  saw  many  traces  of  the  Iroquois,  and  one  of  their
Canoes  that  they  had  left,  after  having  seized,  as  we
believe,  that  of  this  poor  Christian.  He  was  accom-
panied by  a  Catechumen  of  his  Tribe  who  had  a  great
ardor  and  disposition  for  the  Faith.  God  be  blessed
for  all;  we  must  not  seek  to  pry  into  his  counsels,
but  adore  them  all  with  respect.

An  old  man  of  the  Hiroquet  Tribe  —  who  was  a
notorious  Sorcerer,  and  very  well  versed  in  all  the
superstitions  of  his  Nation,  which  is  saturated  with
them  —  could  not  follow  his  people  to  the  chase,  and
was  obliged  to  stop  at  Sillery,  where  the  Hospital
Mothers  fed  him out  of  charity  in  their  Hospital,


122  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  j£SUITES [Vol.25

La  charite  eft  parfaitement  eloquente  dans  fon
filence,  les  oetiures  font  bien  plus  d'impreffion  fur
les  efpris  que  toutes  les  plus  exquifes  paroles.  [15]
Auffi  eft-ce  le  plus  fort  argument  de  credibilite  que
nous  ayons  pour  toucher  les  cceurs  des  Sauuages.
Ce  pauure  vieillard  fe  voyant  feruy  &  affifte  fi  cha-
ritablement  par  ces  bonnes  Meres,  &  confiderant  le
foing  &  les  grands  frais  auec  lefquels  elles  foignoient
les  autres  malades  &  infirmes  fans  aucune  efperance
de  recompenfe,  &  oyant  dire  qu'elles  auoient  quitte
leurs  parens  &  vn  li  beau  pays  pour  venir  fecourir
icy  les  pauures  &  les  malades,  congeut  vne  grande
idee  de  la  bonte  &  faindtete  de  noftre  Religion,  &  fe
fentit  efmeu  ^  I'embraffer.  Ces  bons  mouuemes
eftant  affiftez  des  bonnes  paroles  qu'il  oyoit  dire,  &
de  I'inftrucflion  qu'on  luy  faifoit  le  firent  refoudre  k
demander  d'eftre  inftruit  &  difpofe  au  Baptefme,
fon  aage  ne  luy  permettoit  pas  d'auoir  beaucoup
d'efprit  ny  de  memoire/  neantmoins  il  s'appliqua
auec  tant  de  ferueur  &  de  contention  h.  apprendre
les  Prieres  qu'il  en  vint  h.  bout  dans  trois  iours  au
grand  eftonnement  de  tous  les  autres  &  de  foy-mefme
qui  defefperoit  auparauant  de  fjauoir  rien  appren-
dre. II  ne  [16]  reftoit  qu'k  luy  faire  rendre  vn  poil
qu'il  conferuoit  cherement,  &  adoroit  come  vne  petite
diuinite.  C'eft  vn  poil,  difoit-il,  que  i'ay  arrache  de
la  mouftache  du  Manitou,  c'eft  ce  poil  qui  m'a  con-
ferue  la  vie  dans  mille  hazards  oil  ie  me  fuis  rencon-
tre de  la  perdre.  Ie  me  fuffe  noye  cet  fois  fans  ce
poil:  c'eft  luy  qui  m'a  fait  tuer  des  orignaus,  qui  m'a
preferue  des  maladies,  &  m'a  fait  viure  ^i  long-
temps:  I'ai  gueri  auec  ce  poil  des  malades,  il  n'y  a
rien  que  ie  ne  faff e  auec  ce  poil :  me  le  demander,


1642  -  44  j  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  123

during  the  whole  Winter,  together  with  many  other
infirm  and  sick  persons.  Charity  is  thoroughly  elo-
quent in  its  silence ;  works  produce  much  more  im-
pression on  the  mind  than  the  most  exquisite  oratory.
[15]  It  is  therefore  the  strongest  argument  for  belief
that  we  have,  wherewith  to  touch  the  hearts  of  the
Savages.  When  this  poor  old  man  saw  himself  so
charitably  waited  upon  and  succored  by  the  good
Mothers;  when  he  observed  the  attention  and  the
great  expense  with  which  they  cared  for  the  other
sick  and  infirm,  without  any  hope  of  reward;  and
when  he  learned  that  they  had  left  their  relatives
and  so  fine  a  country,  in  order  to  come  here  to  suc-
cor the  indigent  and  the  sick, —  he  conceived  a  high
idea  of  the  goodness  and  holiness  of  our  Religion,
and  felt  himself  impelled  to  embrace  it.  This  good
impulse,  aided  by  the  pious  words  that  he  heard,  and
the  instruction  that  was  given  to  him,  made  him
resolve  to  ask  to  be  instructed  and  prepared  for  Bap-
tism. His  age  did  not  allow  him  to  have  much  mind
or  memory;  nevertheless,  he  applied  himself  with
so  much  fervor  and  perseverance  to  the  task  of  learn-
ing the  Prayers  that  he  succeeded  in  doing  so  in  the
space  of  three  days,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  all
the  others  and  of  himself,  for  he  had  before  despaired
of  learning  anything.  It  only  [16]  remained  to
induce  him  to  give  up  a  hair  that  he  lovingly
preserved,  and  worshiped  as  a  little  divinity.  "  It  is
a  hair,"  he  said,  "  that  I  have  pulled  from  the  mous-
tache^*^ of  the  Manitou.  That  hair  has  saved  my
life  a  thousand  times,  when  I  have  been  in  danger
of  losing  it.  I  would  have  been  drowned  a  hundred
times  had  it  not  been  for  this  hair.  It  is  this  which
has  enabled  me  to  kill  moose,  has  preserved  me  from


124  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES  [Vol.25

c'eft  me  demander  la  vie.  II  fallut  bien  du  temps  &
de  la  patience  pour  defabufer  ce  pauure  vieillard;
le  Diable  le  tenoit  fortement  par  ce  poil,  &  liiy  per-
fuadoit  viuement,  qu'il  eftoit  mort  s'il  s'en  defaifoit:
Mais  enfin  le  Saindt  Efprit  fuft  le  maiftre ;  le  crois
que  ie  mourray,  dit-il,  quand  i'auray  rendu  mon  poil,
mais  il  n'importe,  ie  le  donneray:  i'ayme  mieux
mourir  &  aller  en  Paradis,  que  de  viure  plus  long-
temps  &  aller  en  Enfer.  Quand  la  volonte  eft  gai-
gnee,  I'entendement  ne  fait  pas  de  grandes  refiftences.
Apres  cette  genereufe  refolution,  il  fut  aife  [17]  de
luy  perfuader,  qu'il  n'en  mouroit  pas,  &  que  fa  vie
n'eftoit  pas  attachee  ^  ce  poil,  mais  "k  la  Prouidence
d'vn  Dieu  plus  fort  que  fon  Manitou.  Le  leudy
Saindt  les  Sauuages  eftans  tous  affemblez  pour  affi-
fter  k  la  ceremonie  du  lauement  des  pieds,  &  du
feftin  qu'on  leur  deuoit  faire  enfuite  dans  I'Hofpital,
ce  bon  Catechumene  fe  refolut  enfin  de  fe  defaire  de
fon  poil,  &  en  faire  vn  facrifice  ^  Dieu;  il  prend  fon
fac  k  petun,  &  en  tire  vn  autre  plus  petit,  &  de  cet-
tuy-cy  vn  troifiefme  gentiment  ouurag^  k  leur  mode,
&  bigarre  de  Porc-Epi,  qu'il  me  met  entre  les  mains.
Ie  I'ouure  &  le  trouue  remply  de  duuet  au  milieu
duquel,  ce  poil  eftoit  enuelope:  brufle-le  me  dit-il,
afin  qu'il  ne  me  brufle,  ie  liai's  &  detefte  le  mefchant
Manitou,  ie  ne  le  crains  point,  ie  renonce  &  k  luy,  &
k  tout  ce  qui  luy  appartient.  Apres  cela  ie  n'ay  rien
k  te  donner,  ny  ^  quiter,  ce  poil  eltoit  mon  threfor,
toute  ma  malice  eftoit  attachee-1^:  baptifez-moy.
Nous  luy  accordafmes  ce  bon-heur  le  Samedy  Saindt,
iour  depute  particulierement  k  la  ceremonie  [18]  du
Saindt  Baptefme:  Monfieur  de  Saindt  Sauueur  le
nomma  Bonauenture,  il  monta  quelque  temps  apres


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  125

sickness,  and  has  made  me  live  so  long.  I  have
cured  the  sick  with  this  hair;  there  is  nothing  that
I  cannot  do  with  it.  To  ask  me  for  it  is  to  ask  for
my  life."  "  It  took  a  long  time  and  much  patience
to  undeceive  this  poor  old  man.  The  Devil  held
him  firmly  by  that  hair,  and  strongly  persuaded  him
that  he  would  die  if  he  parted  with  it ;  but,  in  the
end,  the  Holy  Ghost  was  victorious.  "  I  think  that
I  shall  die,"  he  said,  "  when  I  shall  have  given  up
my  hair;  but  no  matter,  I  will  give  it  up.  I  would
rather  die  and  go  to  Paradise,  than  live  longer  and
go  to  Hell."  When  the  will  is  gained,  the  intel-
lect does  not  offer  great  resistance.  After  this
brave  resolution,  it  was  easy  [17]  to  convince  him
that  he  would  not  die,  and  that  his  life  did  not  depend
upon  that  hair,  but  upon  the  Providence  of  a  God
who  was  more  powerful  than  his  Manitou.  On  Holy
Thursday, —  when  the  Savages  were  all  assembled  to
assist  at  the  ceremony  of  washing  the  feet,  and  at
the  feast  that  was  afterward  to  be  given  them  in  the
Hospital, — this  good  Catechumen  resolved  at  last  to
part  with  his  hair,  and  to  make  a  sacrifice  of  it  to
God.  He  therefore  took  his  tobacco  pouch,  from
which  he  drew  a  smaller  one,  and  from  the  latter  a
third,  neatly  embroidered  in  their  fashion  with  rows
of  Porcupine  quills,  which  he  placed  in  my  hands.
I  opened  it,  and  found  it  filled  with  down,  in  which
the  hair  was  wrapped.  "  Burn  it,"  he  said  to  me,
"  so  that  it  may  not  burn  me.  I  hate  and  detest  the
wicked  Manitou ;  I  do  not  fear  him ;  I  renounce
both  him  and  all  that  belongs  to  him.  Besides  that,
I  have  nothing  to  give  thee,  or  to  abandon ;  that
hair  was  my  treasure ;  all  my  wickedness  depended
upon  it. Baptize  me." We  granted  him  that  hap-


126  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.25

aux  trois  Riuieres,  Ik  ou  ceux  qui  I'auoient  conneu,
le  voyant  prier  Dieu,  s'eftonnerent  de  ce  grand
changement,  &  comme  ils  luy  demandoient,  fi  en
effet  il  aymoit  la  Priere,  il  faut  bien,  dit-il,  que  ie
I'ayme,  puis  que  pour  I'amour  d'elle  i'ay  donne  mon
poil,  &  interrog6  derechef  qu'elle  chofe  I'auoit  con-
uerty,  il  refpondit  que  c'eftoit  la  Charite  qu'il  auoit
efprouuee  chez  les  Filles  qui  font  habillees  de  blanc :
il  vouloit  dire  les  Hofpitalieres.

Nous  baptifames  bien-toft  apres  vn  ieune  homme
de  la  mefme  Nation,  auquel  arriua  vne  chofe  affez
notable  auant  fon  Baptefme :  II  efloit  alle  k  la  chaff e
auec  fes  compagnons,  &  auoit  couru  plufieurs  iours
dans  les  bois  fans  rien  trouuer,  la  faim  les  preffoit
tous  viuement,  lors  que  cettuy-cy  qui  n'eftoit  encore
que  Catechumene  &  n' auoit  receu  quafi  aucune
inftru(5tion  fe  retira  a  I'efcart,  fe  mit  k  deux  genoux
dans  la  neige,  &  efleuant  les  yeux  &  [19]  les  mains
au  Ciel :  Mon  Dieu,  dit-il,  aye  pitie  de  moy ;  i'ay  bien
faim :  Tu  le  fgais  bien;  ie  voudrois  tuer  vn  orignac :
ie  n'en  ay  iamais  tue ;  ie  n'en  vols  point :  fi  tu  veux
pourtat,  i'en  tuerai  bien-toft  vn.  C'eft  toy  qui  les  a
faits,  &  tu  les  a  faits  pour  nous :  fi  tu  ne  le  veux  pas,
n'importe:  mais,  ne  me  laiffe  pas  mourir,  car  ie  ne
fuis  pas  encore  baptife,  &  ie  le  veux  bien  eftre.  Dieu
aggrea  cette  priere  faite  auec  tant  d'ingenuite,  de
confiance  &  de  refignation :  il  voit  incotinent  la  pifte
d'vn  orignac,  il  court  apres,  il  I'attrape,  le  tue,  fe
remet  k  genoux  dans  la  neige,  remercie  fon  bien-
fadteur  &  luy  deftine  la  meilleure  partie  de  fa  prife
qu'il  luy  offrit  k  fon  retour  en  la  perfonne  des
malades  de  I'Hofpital.

Les  autres  Baptefmes  que nous  auons  fait  icy  ne


1642  -  44j  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  127

piness  on  Holy  Saturday,  the  day  especially  set  apart
for  the  ceremony  [18]  of  Holy  Baptism.  Monsieur
de  Saint  Sauveur  named  him  Bonaventure.  Some
time  afterward,  he  went  up  to  the  three  Rivers;  and
when  those  who  lived  there,  and  who  had  known
him,  saw  him  pray  to  God,  they  were  surprised  at
the  great  change.  When  they  asked  him  if  he  really
loved  Prayer,  he  said :  "  I  must  really  love  it,  since
I  have  given  up  my  hair  for  love  of  it."  And,  on
being  again  asked  what  had  converted  him,  he  replied
that  it  was  the  Charity  that  he  had  received  from
"  the  Women  clothed  in  white,"  meaning  the  Hos-
pital Nuns.

Shortly  afterward,  we  baptized  a  young  man  of
the  same  Tribe,  to  whom  a  rather  remarkable  thing
happened  before  his  Baptism.  He  had  gone  out
hunting  with  his  companions,  and  had  roamed
through  the  woods  for  several  days  without  finding
anything.  They  were  all  much  pressed  by  hunger,
when  he  —  who  was  only  a  Catechumen,  and  had
received  but  little  instruction  —  withdrew  to  one
side,  knelt  in  the  snow,  and,  raising  his  eyes  and
[19]  his  hands  to  Heaven,  said:  "  My  God,  have  pity
on  me.  I  am  very  hungry ;  Thou  knowest  it  well.
I  would  like  to  kill  a  moose ;  I  have  never  killed  one,
and  I  do  not  see  any;  and  yet,  if  thou  grant  it,  I
could  soon  kill  one.  Thou  hast  made  them,  and
thou  hast  made  them  for  us.  If  thou  dost  not  grant
this,  it  matters  not ;  but  do  not  let  me  die,  for  I  am
not  yet  baptized,  and  I  desire  to  be."  God  granted
this  prayer,  said  with  such  ingenuousness,  such
confidence,  and  such  resignation.  He  forthwith  came
upon  the  track  of  a  moose,  and  pursued,  caught,  and
killed  it. Then  he  knelt  again  in  the  snow,  thanked


128  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.25


font remarquables par aucune circonflance extra-
ordinaire,  ie ne puis  neantmoins  m'empefclier  de
coucher  icy  quelques  bons  fentimens  de  ces  nouueaux
enfans  de  Dieu. Pierre  Oumenabano  s'efl  difpofe  a
fon  Baptefme  auec  vne  ferueur  extraordinaire,  on  ne
pouuoit I'enfeigner affez,  ny  affez [20] faire  prier
Dieu:  d6s  qu'il  commenga  a  eftre  Catechumene,  il
eufl  vne  deuotion  particuliere  an  Sainct  Sacrement
qu'il  vifitoit  plufieurs  fois  foir  &  matin: fa  priere
eftoit, lefus  aye  pitie de moy, qu'il  repetoit  cent
fois, ne  f9acliant  dire  autre  chofe. II  regarda  foi-
gneufement  toutes  les  fortes  de  reuerences  qu'on  fait
au  Saindt  Sacrement,  &  autant  de  fois  qu'il  entroit  &
fortoit de  la  Chappelle,  il les faifoit toutes I'vne
apres  I'autre, & celles des Preftres, & celles des
hommes,  &  celles  des  femmes.  &  interrog6  pourquoy
il  en  faifoit  tant:  Ie  voudrois, dit-il, honorer  Dieu
autant  que  font  tous  les  autres  enfemble,  quelques-
vns ne pouuoient s'abftenir de rire, il perfiftoit
toufiours  neantmoins  dans  fa  deuotion,  ie  crois  que
Dieu  aggreoit  cette  fimplicite. Apres  fon  Baptefme
il  continua  dans  fa  deuotion  au  Saindt  Sacrement  Ie
vifitant fouuent, & repetant continuellement ces
paroles:  lefus  ie  te  remercie,  lefus  ie  te  remercie. II
dit  vn  iour  au  Pere  qui  I'inftruifoit,  &  Ie  repeta  par
apres fort fouuent. Ie fuis bien mal, outre les
efcroiielles  qui  me deffeichent, [21] i'ay  beaucoup
d'autres  incommoditez  qui  me  trauaillent. Ie  fuis
content  de  mourir  fi  Dieu  Ie  veut;  mais  neantmoins
ie  ferois  bien  aife  de  viure  long-temps  fi  Dieu  Ie  vou-
loit. Eftant  interroge  pourquoy  il  auoit  ce  defir/  ce
n'eft  pas,  dit-il,  pour  ioiiyr  des  plaifirs  de  cette  vie,
car  ie  n'en  goufte  point,  ny  ne  les  fouhaitte,  mais


1 642 - 44]  RELA  TION  OF  /'^i7-j4  ] 29


his  benefactor,  and  set  apart  for  him  the  best  portion
of  his  capture,  which  he  offered  to  him  on  his  return
in  the  persons  of  the  sick  in  the  Hospital.

The  other  Baptisms  that  we  have  administered
here  are  not  remarkable  for  any  peculiar  circum-
stances. I  cannot,  however,  refrain  from  mention-
inof  here  some  crood  sentiments  of  these  new  children
of  God.  Pierre  Oumenabano  prepared  himself  for
his  Baptism  with  extraordinary  fervor;  he  could  not
receive  enough  instruction,  nor  could  he  [20]  pray  to
God  sufficiently.  As  soon  as  he  commenced  to  be  a
Catechumen,  he  had  a  special  devotion  for  our  Lord
in  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  whom  he  visited  several
times,  night  and  morning.  His  prayer  was:  "  Jesus,
have  pity  on  me,"  which  he  repeated  a  hundred
times,  not  knowing  what  else  to  say.  He  carefully
remarked  all  the  obeisances  that  are  made  before  the
Blessed  Sacrament,  and,  whenever  he  entered  or  left
the  Chapel,  he  made  all  these,  one  after  another  —
those  of  the  Priests,  those  of  the  men,  and  those  of
the  women ;  and,  when  he  was  asked  why  he  made
so  many,  he  said:  "  I  would  like  to  honor  God  as
much  as  all  the  others  together  honor  him."  Some
could  not  refrain  from  laughing;  he  nevertheless
persevered  in  his  devotion  and  I  think  that  his  sim-
plicity was  agreeable  to  God.  After  his  Baptism,  he
continued  his  devotion  to  our  Lord  in  the  Blessed
Sacrament,  visiting  him  often,  and  continually
repeating  these  words:  "  Jesus,  I  thank  thee;  Jesus,
I  thank  thee."  He  said  one  day  to  the  Father  who
instructed  him,  and  afterward  repeated  very  often,
"  I  am  very  ill;  besides  the  scrofula  that  withers  me,
[21]  I  have  many  other  ailments  that  trouble  me.  I
am  content  to  die,  if  it  be  God's  will;  but, never-


130-  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  25

afin  de  pouuoir  remercier  Dieu  long-temps,  &  le
feruir.  le  ne  commence  qu'k  le  connoiftre:  ie  n'ay
encore  rien  fait  pour  luy,  ie  voudrois  bien  faire
quelque  chofe  pour  fon  amour,  &  auoir  beaucoup  de
temps  pour  le  feruir,  &  apprendre  k  le  bien  prier.
Le  Pere  luy  dit,  qu'il  feroit  tout  cela  en  Paradis
mieux  qu'en  terre :  Mais,  dit-il,  en  Paradis  on  n'a
point  de  peine  a  feruir  Dieu,  &  il  en  a  tant  eu  pour
nous.  Ce  bon  Neophyte  difoit  en  fa  langue  ce  que
Saindt  Auguftin  difoit  en  vn  autre.  Sero  te  cognoui
bonitas  antiqua,  fero  te  aniaui.

lofeph  Memench  ieune  gargon  de  la  Nation  des
Nipiffiriniens  eftant  encore  Catecbumene,  &  voyant
qu'on  differoit  de  le  baptifer,  nonobflant  qu'il  fuft
fuffifamment  [22]  inftruidl,  en  demanda  la  raifon.
On  luy  refpondit,  qu'on  apprehendoit  qu'il  ne  fufl
pas  affez  conftant,  &  que  remontant  en  fon  pays,  il
n'abandonnaft  la  Foy :  Cette  parole  I'affligea  f enable-
ment/ il  s'addreffe  au  Pere  qui  I'inftruifoit.  Efcrits-
luy,  dit-il,  au  Pere  Vimont:  Voyla  ce  que  tu  luy
efcriras.  Pere  Vimont,  Memench  eft  trifle,  de  ce
qu'on  ne  veut  pas  le  baptifer,  il  femble  qu'il  perd
courage,  il  te  veut  parler  afin  que  tu  le  faffe  baptifer;
efcoute-le,  Voicy  comme  il  te  parle.  I'ay  quitte
mon  pays  &  mes  parens  pour  venir  icy,  &  y  eftre
baptife :  car  quelle  autre  chofe  f erois-ie  venu  cher-
cher  icy  oil  ie  n'ay  aucun  parent,  ny  aucune  connoif-
fance?  Ie  f9ais  toutes  les  Prieres,  &  tout  le  Cate-
chifme,  fi  ie  fuis  vne  fois  baptife,  ie  ne  veux  point
remonter  la-haut  oil  font  les  mefchans,  ie  demeure-
ray  icy  auec  les  bons,  ie  fuis  ieune,  mais  ie  fgay
pourtant  ce  que  ie  fais,  ie  conferueray  la  Priere  toute
ma  vie:  ie  ne  mens  point,  commande-donc  qu'on  me


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  131


theless,  I  would  be  well  pleased  to  live  a  long  time
if  God  granted  it. ' '  On  being  asked  why  he  had  that
desire,  he  said:  "It  is  not  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of
this  life,  for  I  taste  of  none,  nor  do  I  desire  them;
but  in  order  to  be  able  to  thank  God  for  a  long  time,
and  to  serve  him.  I  am  only  commencing  to  know
him ;  I  have  as  yet  done  nothing  for  him ;  I  would
like  to  do  something  for  love  of  him,  and  to  have
plenty  of  time  to  serve  him,  and  to  learn  to  pray
properly  to  him."  The  Father  told  him  that  he  could
do  all  that  better  in  Paradise  than  on  earth.  "  But,"
he  replied,  "  in  Paradise  there  is  no  trouble  in  serv-
ing God,  and  he  has  had  so  much  for  us."  This
good  Neophyte  said  in  his  own  language  what  Saint
Augustine  said  in  another:  Sero  te  cognovi  bonitas
aiitiqiia,  sero  te  amavi.

Joseph  Memench, — a  young  boy  of  the  Nipissiri-
nien  Tribe,  who  was  yet  a  Catechumen, —  seeing  that
we  delayed  baptizing  him,  although  he  was  suffi-
ciently [22]  instructed,  asked  the  reason  of  it.  He
was  told  that  we  feared  that  he  would  not  be  con-
stant enough,  and  that,  when  he  returned  to  his  own
country,  he  would  abandon  the  Faith.  These  words
caused  him  great  affliction.  He  said  to  the  Father
who  instructed  him :  ' '  Write  to  Father  Vimont,  and
this  is  what  thou  shalt  write  to  him :  '  Father  Vi-
mont, Memench  is  sad  because  they  will  not  baptize
him ;  he  seems  to  lose  courage ;  he  wishes  to  speak
to  thee,  that  thou  mayst  have  him  baptized.  Listen
to  him ;  this  is  what  he  says :  "  I  have  left  my  own
country  and  my  parents,  to  come  here  and  be  bap-
tized; for  what  else  would  I  have  come  to  seek
here,  where  I  have  no  relatives  or  acquaintances?  I
know  all  the  Prayers  and  the  whole  of  the  Catechism.


132  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.  25

baptife;  fi  tu  ne  le  veux  pas  faire,  ie  feray  trifte,  ie
m'en  retourneray  en  mon  pays  ou  ie  [23]  mourray
peut  eftre  fans  Baptefme,  tu  en  feras  la  caufe :  Voyla
ce  que  te  dit  Memench ;  Ce  n'eft  pas  mal  dit  pour  vn
Sauuage  de  quinze  ans,  il  voulut  eftre  luy-mefme  le
porteur  de  la  lettre,  pour  plaider  fa  caufe  en  propre
perfonne,  &  il  la  plaida  fi  bien  qu'il  la  gaigna.  Mon-
fieur  de  Godefroy  luy  fit  I'lionneur  de  luy  donner
le  nom  de  lofeph.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  ]  33

If  I  am  once  baptized,  I  do  not  wish  to  go  back  up
there  where  the  wicked  are ;  I  will  remain  here  with
the  good  people.  I  am  young,  but  still  I  know
what  I  am  doing.  I  will  keep  up  Prayer  all  my  life ;
I  do  not  lie.  Command,  therefore,  that  I  be  bap-
tized. If  thou  wilt  not  do  so,  I  shall  be  sad;  I  shall
return  to  my  own  country,  where  I  [23]  shall  per-
haps die  without  Baptism.  Thou  wilt  be  the  cause
of  it."  This  is  what  Memench  says  to  thee.'  "  It
was  not  badly  said,  for  a  Savage  fifteen  years  old.
He  wished  to  be  himself  the  bearer  of  the  letter,  so
that  he  might  plead  his  cause  in  person ;  and  he
pleaded  so  well  that  he  won  it.  Monsieur  de  Gode-
froy  did  him  the  honor  of  giving  him  the  name  of
Joseph.


134


LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.  25


CHAPITRE  III.


DES BONS SENTIMENS  &  ACTIONS DES CHRESTIENS DE

SAINCT JOSEPH.

POUR  donner  vne  idee  generale  des  Chreftiens  de
Saint  lofeph,  il  fuffit  de  dire  en  pen  de  mots,
qne  cette  petite  trouppe  qui  fait  fon  fejour  dans
cette  refidence  eft  le  leuain  de  cette  nouuelle  Eglife,
&  la  plus  belle  perle  de  la  Couronne  que  lefus-Chrift
s'eft  acquife  dans  ce  nouueau  Royaume,  ce  font  eux
qui  ont  receu  les  premiers  la  Foy,  [24]  qui  I'ont
portee  dans  les  autres  Nations,  &  qui  la  fouftiennent
maintenant  par  tout  par  leurs  paroles,  &  bons  ex-
emples,  quand  on  parle  de  reformer  quelque  manuals
Chreftien,  on  le  met  en  la  compagnie  de  ceux-cy,  de
laquelle  ceux  qui  font  les  plus  feruens,  ne  fgauroient
fe  feparer,  fans  reffentir  quelque  refroidiffement  de
leur  ferueur.  Si  quelquesfois  ils  fe  trouuent  meflez
auec  les  Algonquins  &  autres  Nations  plus  hautes,
on  les  diftingue  affez  par  la  prof effion  publique  qu'ils
font  de  toutes  les  vertus  Chreftiennes,  &  par  I'auer-
fion  qu'ils  tefmoignent  auoir  de  tout  ce  qui  reffent
leur  ancienne  barbarie.  Auffi  leur  reputation  eft
eftendue  dans  toutes  ces  contrees,  &  fait  vn  merueil-
leux  efclat  parmy  toutes  les  Nations  qui  accourent
icy  pour  voir  ce  qu'elles  ont  oiiy  dire  du  changement
admirable  que  la  Foy  opere  dans  des  coeurs  qui
auparauant  n'eftoient  rien  moins  barbares  que  les
leurs:  Nous  attribuons  ce  bon-heur  apres  Dieu,
aux  deux Capitaines qui  commandent ^ ces  bons


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  135


CHAPTER  III.

OF THE GOOD SENTIMENTS AND ACTIONS OF THE
CHRISTIANS OF SAINT JOSEPH.

TO  give  a  general  idea  of  the  Christians  of  Saint
Joseph,  it  suffices  to  say,  in  a  few  words,  that
this  little  band  who  dwell  in  this  residence  are
the  leaven  of  this  new  Church,  and  the  finest  pearl
in  the  Crown  that  Jesus  Christ  has  acquired  for
himself  in  this  new  Kingdom.  It  is  they  who  first
received  the  Faith,  [24]  who  have  borne  it  to  other
Nations,  and  who  now  maintain  it  everywhere  by
their  words  and  good  examples.  When  we  wish  to
reform  a  bad  Christian,  we  put  him  in  the  company
of  these  people,  from  which  those  who  are  most
fervent  cannot  separate  themselves  without  feeling
some  cooling  of  their  fervor.  If  sometimes  they  find
themselves  mingled  with  the  Algonquins  and  other
Nations  further  up,  they  are  sufficiently  distinguished
by  their  public  profession  of  all  the  Christian  virtues,
and  by  the  aversion  that  they  manifest  for  all  that  is
the  sign  of  their  former  barbarism.  Consequently,
their  reputation  has  spread  throughout  all  these
countries,  and  has  a  wonderful  luster  among  all  the
Nations.  These  flock  hither  to  witness  that  of  which
they  have  heard,  the  marvelous  change  that  Faith
has  worked  in  hearts  which  formerly  were  no  less
barbarous  than  theirs.  We  attribute  this  blessing,
after  God,  to  the  two  Captains  in  command  of  these
good  Neophytes,  Noel  Tekwerimatch  and  Jean  Bap-


136  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.25

Neophytes,  Noel  TekS'erimatch  &  lean  Baptifte  qui
[25]  embraffent  &  pouffent  les  affaires  de  la  Foy  auec
vn  zele  &  vne  prudence  qui  furpaffent  tout  ce  qu'on
peut  efperer  d'vn  Sauuage.  lean  Baptifte  fe  contente
d'agir,  &  ne  parle  pas  beaucoup.  Noel  eft  puiffant
en  fes  paroles,  auffi  bien  qu'en  fes  adlions.  le
rapporteray  icy  quelques-vns  de  fes  difcours,  ou  Ton
verra  les  lumieres  &  les  fentimens  que  Dieu  luy
donne.

Vn  iour  le  Pere  Dequen  faifant  feftin  h.  nos
Neophytes  k  I'occafion  du  Baptefme  d'vn  Sauuage,  h.
mefure  qu'il  leur  rapportoit  felon  leur  couftume  les
diuers  mets  dont  eftoit  affaifonnee  la  fagamite,  ils
refpondoient  a  vn  chacun  par  autant  de  ho  qui  font
des  cris  de  ioye,  qu'ils  arrachent  du.  fonds  de  la
poic5trine.  Mais  a  la  fin  quand  il  leur  euft  dit  que  le
fujet  du  feftin  eftoit  le  Baptefme  d'vn  de  leurs  gens,
ils  efleuerent  la  voix  &  ietterent  non  vn,  mais  trois
cris,  ho,  ho,  ho:  cela  donna  occafion  k  Noel  de
parler  en  faueur  de  la  Foy,  &  de  dire  a  ces  gens:

A  la  bonne-heure,  que  vous  vous  faffiez  tons
baptifer,  &  que  vous  defiriez  [26]  tous  de  croire  en
Dieu.  La  Dodtrine  que  les  Peres  nous  prefchent,  eft
excellente.  Tout  ce  qu'elle  contient,  eft  parfaitement
raifonnable;  elle  ne  reff enable  pas  k  nos  anciennes
fables  qui  font  remplies  de  fotifes,  &  d'extrauagances.
C'eft  vrayement  vn  Dieu  celuy  qu'on  nousprefche:
Les  promeffes  qu'il  nous  fait,  font  rauiff antes,  les
fupplices  dont  il  menace  les  mefchans,  font  efpou-
uentables,  mais  iuftes  &  equitables/  Pour  moy  ie
vous  affeure  que  i'eftime  &  ay  me  cette  dodtrine  d6s
qu'elle  me  fuft  propof6e;  8z  quoy  que  i'aymaffe  ma
reputation  &  ma  vie,  neantmoins  ie  I'ay  embraffee
nonobftant  la  crainte  que  i'auois  pour  lors  de  perdre


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  137

tiste,  who  [25]  undertake  and  advance  matters  relat-
ing to  the  Faith,  with  a  zeal  and  prudence  surpassing
everything  that  might  be  expected  from  a  Savage.
Jean  Baptiste  is  content  with  deeds,  and  speaks  but
little ;  Noel  is  energetic  in  his  speech,  as  well  as  in
his  actions.  I  will  here  relate  some  of  his  speeches,
which  will  show  the  enlightenment  and  the  senti-
ments that  God  gives  him.

One  day.  Father  Dequen  gave  a  feast  to  our  Neo-
phytes, on  the  occasion  of  the  Baptism  of  a  Savage.
As  he  brought  them,  according  to  their  custom,  the
various  viands  with  which  the  sagamite  was  sea-
soned, they  received  each  of  these  with  as  many
exclamations  of  "Ho!" — an  expression  of  joy  which
they  draw  from  the  depths  of  their  chests.  But  at
the  end,  when  he  told  them  that  the  occasion  of  the
feast  was  the  Baptism  of  one  of  their  people,  they
raised  their  voices  and  called  out,  not  once  but  three
times,  "  Ho!  ho!  ho!"  This  gave  Noel  an  oppor-
tunity of  speaking  in  favor  of  the  Faith,  and  of
saying  to  his  people :

"It  is  a  good  thing  that  you  should  all  be  bap-
tized, and  that  you  should  all  wish  [26]  to  believe  in
God.  The  Doctrine  that  the  Fathers  preach  to  us  is
excellent — all  that  it  contains  is  entirely  reason-
able; it  in  no  wise  resembles  our  old  fables,  which
are  full  of  folly  and  extravagance.  He  whom  they
preach  to  us  is  truly  a  God.  The  promises  that  he
makes  us  are  delightful ;  the  torments  with  which  he
threatens  the  wicked  are  fearful,  but  they  are  just
and  equitable.  For  my  part,  I  assure  you  that  I
esteemed  and  loved  that  doctrine  as  soon  as  it  was
propounded  to  me ;  and,  although  I  loved  my  repu-
tation  and  my  life, I nevertheless  embraced  it  in


138  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.25

I'vn  &  rautre:  ie  voyois  que  tons  les  iours  nous
allions  mourant,  &  que  la  mort  moiffonnoit  pluftoft
les  Chreftiens  que  les  infideles.  Ceux  qui  croyoient
pour  lors  paffoient  pour  des  efprits  foibles,  n'importe,
difois-ie  en  mon  coeur,  a  la  bonne-heure  que  ie  fois
mefprife  &  que  ie  meure,  ie  veux  croire,  puis  que
c'eft  la  volonte  de  Dieu  qui  eft  preferable  ^  la  repu-
tation, &  k  la  vie.  C'efl  Dieu  qui  [27]  m'a  fortifie
contre  ces  vaines  apprehenfions :  haftez-vous  de  vous
faire  baptifer,  vous  qui  ne  refte[s]  pas  encore,  ne
craignez  pas  la  mort,  ny  Ie  mefpris,  la  Priere  n'en
eft  pas  la  caufe,  c'eft  elle  qui  nous  donne  la  vie,  &
qui  nous  met  dans  la  poffeffion  de  la  vraye  gloire.

Voicy  vn  autre  de  fes  difcours  k  I'occafion  d'vn
mariage.  Vn  Capitaine  de  la  Nation  des  Abnaquiois
baptife  depuis  peu  recherchoit  en  mariage  vne  fille
Chreftienne.  Noel  eftant  confulte  fur  ce  fujet,  apres
auoir  demande  du  temps  pour  y  penfer,  refpondit
qu'il  n'eftoit  point  d'aduis  qu'on  fe  haftaft,  dans
I'apprehenfion  qu'il  auoit  de  I'inconftance  de  ce  Capi-
taine :  mais  cettuy-cy  ayant  perflfte  long-temps  dans
fa  recherche,  &  donne  toutes  les  affeurances  qu'on
pouuoit  efperer  de  fa  fidelite,  Noel  &  les  autres  Capi-
taines  &  principaux  Chreftiens  confentirent  a  cete
alliance,  laquelle  fe  fit  publiquement  dans  noil:re
Chappelle  auec  toutes  les  folemnitez  de  I'Eglife,
apres  que  Ie  Pere  euft  fait  vn  petit  difcours  pour
exhorter  a  I'amour  coniugal  ceux  qui  venoient  de  [28]
receuoir  la  Benedidtion  Nuptiale,  Noel  Tekb'erimatch
print  la  parole,  &  fe  tournant  vers  I'aff emblee :

Ne  vous  eftonnez  pas,  leur  dit-il,  fi  i'ay  differe  fi
long-temps  a  confentir  "k  ce  mariage,  c'eft  vne  chofe
de  grande  importance  que  Ie  mariage  des  Chreftiens,
&  qui  eft  extremement  contraire  a  nos  humeurs  &  ^


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  139

spite  of  the  fear  that  I  then  had  of  losing  both.  I
saw  that  we  were  dying  off  every  day,  and  that  death
reaped  his  harvest  more  among  the  Christians  than
among  the  infidels.  Those  who  then  believed  were
considered  weak-minded.  '  No  matter,'  I  said  in  my
heart;  'even  if  I  am  to  be  despised  and  to  die,  I  wish
to  believe,  because  God's  will  is  preferable  to  reputa-
tion and  to  life.'  It  was  God  who  [27]  strengthened
me  against  those  idle  fears.  Hasten  to  be  baptized,
ye  who  are  not  yet  so.  Fear  neither  death  nor  con-
tempt. Prayer  is  not  the  cause  thereof;  it  gives  us
life,  and  places  us  in  possession  of  true  glory."

Here  is  another  of  his  discourses,  on  the  occasion
of  a  marriage.  A  Captain  of  the  Abnaquiois  Nation,
who  had  recently  been  baptized,  sought  a  Christian
girl  in  marriage.  Noel  was  consulted  on  the  sub-
ject, and  after  asking  to  be  allowed  some  time  to
think  over  the  matter,  he  replied  that  he  was  of
opinion  that  there  should  be  no  haste,  owing  to  the
fear  that  he  had  of  the  Captain's  inconstancy.  But,
as  the  latter  pressed  his  suit  for  a  long  time,  and
gave  every  assurance  of  his  fidelity  that  could  be
expected,  Noel  and  the  other  Captains  and  principal
Christians  consented  to  the  marriage,  which  was
publicly  contracted  in  our  Chapel,  with  all  the  rites
of  the  Church.  After  the  Father  had  delivered  a
short  discourse,  exhorting  to  conjugal  love  those
who  had  just  [28]  received  the  Nuptial  Benediction,
Noel  Tekwerimatch  began  to  speak,  and,  turning
toward  the  assembled  people,  he  said :

"  Be  not  surprised  if  I  have  so  long  deferred  my
consent  to  this  marriage.  The  marriage  of  Chris-
tians is  a  matter  of  great  importance,  and  quite
opposed  to  our  inclinations  and  customs. We  are


140  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.25

nos  couftumes :  nous  aymons  auec  paffion  la  liberte,
nous  nous  plaifons  k  changer  de  femme,  &  quelques-
fois  nous  en  voudrions  auoir  plus  d'vne;  Tout  cela
eft  contre  les  loix  du  mariage  des  Chreftiens,  c'eft  vn
affaire  auquel  il  ne  faut  pas  fe  precipiter,  ie  connois
rhumeur  de  nos  filles,  qui  font  volages,  &  ont  de  la
peine  k  demeurer  toufiours  attachees  ^  vn  mary,  ie
fgay  d'ailleurs  que  les  Abnaquiois  font  fujets  ^  quit-
ter &  changer  leurs  femmes,  &  ^  en  retenir  plufieurs
enfemble:  Pour  toy  tu  n'as  pas  toufiours  efte  fort
fage,  ie  fgay  que  tu  as  couru  de  nuidt  les  Cabanes,  il
femble  que  tu  as  plus  d'efprit  depuis  ton  Baptefme/
mais  il  falloit  t'efprouuer,  i'apprehendois  qu'il  n'y
euft  pas  affez  de  fmcerite  &  de  fermete  en  [29]  tes
paroles,  &  ie  ne  fuis  pas  encore  tout  k  fait  hors  de
cette  apprehenfion,  fouuiens-toy  de  ce  que  tu  as  dit
maintenant:  nous  I'auons  ouy,  fi  tu  nous  trompe,
nous  t'en  ferons  de  fanglans  reproches  deuant  Dieu
&  deuant  les  hommes.  Tu  as  eu  loifir  de  penfer  "k
ce  que  tu  deuois  faire,  tu  n'eft  pas  vn  enfant  pour
t'en  defdire,  refpedte  ton  mariage  qui  n'eft  pas  pro-
fane comme  celuy  des  infideles,  mais  Saindt  &  Reli-
gieux ;  fois  fidel  k  Dieu  &  k  ta  femme,  fi  tu  fais  ce
que  ie  te  dis,  Dieu  t'aymera,  &  nous  auffi:  prends
courage,  ne  te  fie-pas  k  toy  mefme,  prie  Dieu  efpere
■en  luy,  il  t'aydera.

Cette  harangue  prononcee  en  bons  termes  &  auec
ardeur  beaucoup  plus  cofufement  &  efiicacement
qu'elle  n'efl  icy  couch^e  fuft  efcoutee  auec  attention
de  toute  I'afCemblee,  &  donna  a  tons  les  Sauuages
qui  eftoient  la  prefens  en  bon  nombre,  du  refpedt  &
de  la  veneration  enuers  Ie  Sacrement  de  Mariage,
principalement  au  nouueau  Mari^,  qui  refpondit  ^
Noel  en  ces  termes.


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  141


passionately  fond  of  liberty ;  we  like  to  change  our
wives,  and  sometimes  we  would  wish  to  have  more
than  one.  All  this  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of  Chris-
tian marriage.  It  is  a  matter  in  which  one  must
not  be  hasty.  I  know  the  disposition  of  our  girls,
who  are  flighty,  and  find  it  difficult  to  remain  always
attached  to  one  husband.  I  know  also  that  the
Abnaquiois  are  in  the  habit  of  leaving  and  changing
their  wives,  and  of  having  several  at  the  same  time.
As  for  thee,  thou  hast  not  always  been  very  discreet,
and  I  know  that  thou  hast  gone  about  the  Cabins  at
night.  It  seems  that  thou  hast  more  sense  since  thy
Baptism,  but  it  was  necessary  to  try  thee.  I  feared
that  there  was  not  sufficient  sincerity  and  firmness  in
[29]  thy  words,  and  I  am  not  yet  quite  free  from  that
apprehension.  Remember  what  thou  hast  just  now
said ;  we  have  heard  it.  If  thou  shouldst  deceive  us,
we  will  reproach  thee  bitterly  before  God  and  before
men.  Thou  hast  had  leisure  to  think  of  what  thou
shouldst  do ;  thou  art  not  a  child,  to  break  thy  word.
Respect  thy  marriage,  which  is  not  a  profane  one
like  that  of  the  infidels,  but  Holy  and  Religious.  Be
faithful  to  God  and  to  thy  wife.  If  thou  wilt  do
what  I  tell  thee,  God  will  love  thee,  and  so  shall  we.
Take  courage ;  rely  not  upon  thyself.  Pray  to  God,
hope  in  him,  and  he  will  help  thee."

This  harangue  —  delivered  in  good  terms,  and
with  ardor,  much  more  fluently  and  effectively  than
is  here  set  down  —  was  listened  to  attentively  by  the
whole  assembly,  and  inspired  all  the  Savages,  who
were  present  in  good  number,  with  respect  and
veneration  for  the  Sacrament  of  Marriage,  especially
the  Bridegroom,  who  replied  to  Noel  as  follows:

[30]  "  Thou  sayest  truly  that  the  Marriage  of  Chris-


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.  25

[30]  Tu  dis  vray,  le  Mariage  des  Chreftiens  eft  vn
affaire  de  grande  importance,  &  auquel  il  ne  faut  pas
fe  precipiter:  i'y  ay  penfe  meurement,  auant  que
d'en  parler,  &  ay  prie  Dieu  fouuent  fur  ce  fujet,  ie
n'ay  iamais  trouue  mauuais  que  vous  efprouuafQez
ma  conftance,  &  quoy  qu'il  me  fembloit  que  vous
n'agreaffiez  pas  ma  recherche,  ie  ne  me  fuis  pas
pourtant  rebute :  Mais  ie  me  fafche  de  ce  que  vous
doutez  encore  de  ma  fidelity,  il  eft  vray  que  ie  fuis
d'vne  Nation  volage  &  fujete  a  fes  plaifirs;  mais  ne
fyauez-vous  pas  que  ie  fuis  baptife,  &  que  i'apprends
depuis  long-temps  par  vos  exemples  comme  ie  dois
viure,  i'aduoue  que  deuant  mon  Baptefme  ie  n'eftois
pas  affez  fage,  mais  depuis  que  ie  fuis  baptife,  ie  ne
crois  pas  auoir  donne  aucun  fujet  de  fcandale,  i'efpere
que  celuy  qui  m'a  fait  la  grace  comme  ^  vous  autres,
d'eftre  baptife,  me  donnera  auffi  la  mefme  force  qu'il
vous  donne  pour  luy  garder  la  foy  que  ie  luy  ay
promife  dans  mon  mariage :  ie  vous  promets  derechef
que  ie  garderay  inuiolablement  la  parole  que  ie  vous
[31]  ay  donn6e,  &  que  ie  refpec5teray  mon  mariage
comme  vne  chofe  faindte,  &  ne  le  profaneray  iamais
par  aucune  adlion  contraire  au  deuoir  auquel  il
m'oblige.  A  tant  le  tout,  &  en  effet  il  a  gard6  fa
parole,  en  telle  forte  que  c'eft  vn  des  plus  heureux  &
paifibles  mariage  que  nous  ayons  fait  parmy  les  Sau-
uages,  mais  continuous  k  ouir  les  difcours  de  noftre
Noel.

Apres  que  les  Sauuages  de  Sillery  furent  reuenus
de  leur  grande  chaff e,  les  Capitaines  &  principaux
Chreftiens  furent  faluer  Monheur  le  Gouuerneur,
Noel  fit  le  compliment  au  nom  de  tous  les  autres,
auquel Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur refpondit (tefmoi-


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  1 43

tians  is  a  matter  of  great  importance,  and  one  in
which  we  should  not  be  precipitate.  I  considered  it
maturely  before  speaking  of  it,  and  frequently  prayed
to  God  on  the  subject.  I  never  objected  to  your
trying  my  constancy,  and,  although  it  seemed  to  me
that  you  did  not  approve  of  my  suit,  still  I  did  not
desist  from  it.  But  I  am  grieved  that  you  still  doubt
my  fidelity.  It  is  true  that  I  belong  to  a  Nation  that
is  flighty,  and  addicted  to  its  pleasures;  but  do  you
not  know  that  I  am  baptized,  and  that  I  have  been
learning  for  a  long  time  by  your  examples  how  I
should  live?  I  admit  that  before  my  Baptism  I  was
rather  imprudent ;  but,  since  I  have  been  baptized,  I
do  not  think  that  I  have  given  any  cause  for  scandal.
I  hope  that  he  who  has  given  me,  as  he  has  given
you,  the  grace  of  being  baptized,  will  also  give  me
the  same  strength  that  he  gives  you  to  keep  the
faith  that  I  have  pledged  him  in  my  marriage.  I
promise  you  once  more  that  I  will  inviolably  keep
the  word  that  I  [31]  have  given  you;  and  that  I  will
respect  my  marriage  as  a  holy  thing,  and  will  never
profane  it  by  any  action  contrary  to  the  duty  to
which  it  binds  me."  After  this,  he  said  no  more;
and,  in  fact,  he  kept  his  word,  so  that  it  is  one  of  the
happiest  and  most  peaceful  marriages  that  we  have
formed  among  the  Savages.  But  let  us  continue  to
hear  the  discourses  of  our  Noel.

After  the  Savages  of  Sillery  had  returned  from
their  great  hunt,  the  Captains  and  principal  Chris-
tians went  to  salute  Monsieur  the  Governor.  Noel
paid  him  a  compliment  in  the  name  of  all  the  others,
to  which  Monsieur  the  Governor  replied  (expressing
his  satisfaction  at  seeing  them,  and  at  learning  of
their  good conduct  during their  wintering); after


144  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.25


gnant  le  contentement  qu'il  auoit  de  les  voir,  &  d'ap-
prendre  leurs  bons  deportemens  pendant  lenr  hyuer-
nement)  apres  quoy il adioufla, qu'il n'eftoit pas
content  de  tons,  &  qu'il  y  en  auoit  quelques-vns  qui
donnoient  du  f candale  par  leurs  mauuaifes  acftions :
Le  Pere  Dequen  qui  feruoit  d'interprete  en  cette  occa-
fion,  ayant  expofe  aux  Sauuages  le  mefcontentement
que  receuoit  Monfieur  [32]  le  Gouuerneur  de  ces  mau-
uais  Chreftiens,  fans  les  nommer,  Noel  luy  repartit,
parle  clair:  Le  Pere  Dequen  s'explique,  fans  nom-
mer neantmoins  ceux  dont  il  eftoit  queftion:  Noel
replique;  le  te  dis  derechef  que  tu  parle  clair,  &  que
tu nomme ceux qui font mefchans:  Le Pere les
nomme,  &  leur  dit  que  c'eft  Eftienne  Pigarouich,  &
Frangois  Koskb'eribagb'gb'ch  qui  entretienne[nt] des
concubines  au  lieu  de  leurs  femmes  legitimes  qu'ils
ont  abandonnees: Noel  pour  lors s'abandonnant  ^
fon  zele  ordinaire.

le  voulois  fgauoir,  dit-il,  fi  ce  n'efloient  point  de
mes  gens  fur  qui  i'euffe  de  I'authorite,  i'y  euffe  pour-
ueu:  Pour  ceux-cy,  ie  ne  fuis  point  leur  Capitaine,
mais  ie  hais  leur  malice,  &  detefle  leur  compagnie,
ie  n'ay  iamais  approuue  les  adtions  qu'ils  ont  faites
contre  la  Foy,  &  la  fidelity  de  leur  Mariage:  ie  les
improuue,  &  les  condamne,  ils  n'ont  point  d'efprit,
les  femmes  le  leur  ont  ofte,  peut-eftre  qu'ils  le  recou-
ureront  li  on  les  cbaftie,  ils  retourneront  bien-tofl  de
la  chaffe,  ils  [33]  voudront  cabaner  ^  Sillery,  ils  au-
ront  befoin  du  fecours  des  Frangois,  mais  il  faut  les
chaffer  bien  loing  de  nous,  ie  ne  fouffriray  point
qu'ils  s'approchent  de  mes  cabanes,  ny  eux,  ny  ceux
qui  les  fupportent,  ils  nous  corromproient  par  leurs
manuals  exemples:  pour  toy,  dit-il,  parlant  "k  Mon


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  145

which  he  added  that  he  was  not  pleased  with  all  of
them,  and  that  there  were  some  who  gave  scandal  by
their  evil  deeds.  Father  Dequen,  who  acted  as  inter-
preter on  this  occasion,  explained  to  the  Savages
the  displeasure  felt  by  Monsieur  [32]  the  Governor
on  account  of  those  bad  Christians,  without  naming
them.  Noel  replied  to  him :  "  Speak  plainly."  Fa-
ther Dequen  explained  himself,  without  however
naming  those  who  were  referred  to.  Noel  answered:
"  Again  I  tell  thee  to  speak  plainly,  and  to  name
those  who  are  wicked."  The  Father  mentioned
their  names,  and  said  that  they  were  Estienne  Piga-
rouich  and  Frangois  Koskweribagougouch,  who  kept
concubines  instead  of  their  lawful  wives,  whom  they
had  abandoned.  Thereupon  Noel,  giving  way  to  his
usual  zeal,  said:

"  I  wished  to  know  whether  they  were  of  my
people  over  whom  I  have  authority,  for  I  would  have
seen  to  it.  I  am  not  the  Captain  of  those  men,  but
I  hate  their  wickedness  and  detest  their  society.  I
have  never  approved  the  actions  that  they  have
committed,  and  which  are  contrary  to  the  Faith  and
the  fidelity  of  their  Marriage.  I  blame  and  condemn
them.  They  have  no  sense;  women  have  taken  it
away  from  them.  Perhaps  they  will  recover  some  if
we  punish  them.  They  will  soon  return  from  the
hunt;  they  [33]  will  desire  to  have  cabins  at  Sillery;
they  will  need  the  help  of  the  French ;  but  we  must
drive  them  far  away  from  us.  I  will  not  allow  them
to  come  near  my  cabins,  neither  them  nor  those  who
support  them.  They  would  corrupt  us  by  their  bad
examples.  As  for  thee,"  he  said  to  Monsieur  the
Governor,  "  do  not  allow  thyself  to  be  moved  by  the
prayers  that  they will address to thee;  close  thy


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.25

fieur  le  Goiiuemeur,  ne  te  laiffe  point  flefchir  par  les
prieres  qu'ils  te  feront,  ferme  tes  oreilles,  &  n'efcoute
point  leurs  paroles,  s'ils  tefmoignent  quelque  repen-
tance de  leur  faute,  &  s'ils  s'offrent  a  en  faire  fatis-
fadtion,  ie  fuis  d'aduis,  qu'on  les  efprouue  pendant
vn  an,  durant  lequel  temps  ils  demeureront  bannis
de  Quebec  &  de  Sillery,  &  efloignez  de  leurs  concu-
bines, &  apres  cela  on  pourra  les  admettre  dans
I'Eglife,  &  leur  faire  mifericorde.

Ce  difcours  de  Noel  fuft  fuiuy  de  celuy  d'vn  autre
Capitaine  de  Tadouffac  qui  fe  trouua  en  cette  affem-
bl6e,  ie  fuis  bien  aife,  dit-il,  de  voir  comme  vous
traittez  les  mefcbans.  Vous  m'apprenez  comme  ie
me  dois  comporter  en  femblables  occafions,  quand  ie
feray  ^  mon  pais,  ie  feray  comme  ie  vous  vols  [34]
faire,  li  quelqu'vn  de  mes  gens  veut  eftre  mefchant,
ie  le  chaftieray  en  telle  forte  qu'il  feruira  d'exemple
aux  autres,  &  moy-mefme  fi  ie  veux  eftre  mefchant,
ie  defire  qu'on  me  chatie  plus  feueremet  que  tout
autre,  ie  veux  qu'on  me  degrade  de  la  quality  de
Capitaine,  qu'on  me  foiiette,  qu'on  me  pende,  ou
qu'on  me  iette  dans  la  riuiere.  Quiconque  offenfe
Dieu,  merite  la  mort:  il  faut  croire  tout  de  bon,  ou
ne  s'en  mefler  pas,  les  mefchans  gaftent  les  bons,  ce
meflange  ne  vaut  rien,  c'eft  vne  contagion  qui
s'efpand  &  fe  dilate  peu  k  peu,  iufques  a  ce  que  tout
eft  infedte,  dequoy  nous  fert  d' eftre  baptifez,  fi  nous
n'obeyffons,  on  nous  a  dit  fouuent  que  le  Baptefme
ne  fert  qu'k  vne  plus  grande  damnation,  quand  on  le
deshonore  par  des  mauuaifes  adtions.  Ie  veux  eftre
obey  quand  ie  commande,  &  ie  me  fafche  fi  mes  gens
fe  reuoltent  contre  mes  ordres.  Et  Dieu  n'a-il  pas
plus  de  fujet  d' eftre  irrite  contre  nous  fi  nous  ne  luy


1642  -  44 J  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  147

ears,  and  listen  not  to  their  words.  If  they  manifest
any  repentance  for  their  sin,  and  if  they  offer  to  give
satisfaction  for  it,  I  am  of  opinion  that  they  be  tried
for  a  year, — during  which  time  they  will  be  banished
from  Quebec  and  from  Sillery,  and  be  separated  from
their  concubines.  After  that  they  may  be  admitted
into  the  Church,  and  mercy  maybe  shown  to  them."

This  discourse  of  Noel's  was  followed  by  that  of
another  Captain,  from  Tadoussac,  who  was  present  at
the  meeting.  "  I  am  very  glad,"  he  said,  "  to  see
how  you  deal  with  the  wicked.  You  teach  me  how
I  should  act  on  similar  occasions.  When  I  shall  have
returned  to  my  own  country,  I  will  act  as  I  have  seen
you  [34]  do.  If  any  one  of  my  people  choose  to  be
wicked,  I  will  punish  him  in  such  a  way  that  he  will
serve  as  an  example  for  the  others.  And,  if  I  choose
to  be  wicked,  I  myself  desire  that  I  be  punished  more
severely  than  any  other, —  I  wish  that  I  may  be
degraded  from  my  office  of  Captain ;  that  I  may  be
whipped,  hanged,  or  cast  into  the  river.  Whosoever
offends  God  deserves  death.  We  must  believe  in
earnest,  or  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  Faith.  The
wicked  spoil  the  good ;  such  a  mingling  is  of  no  use ;
it  is  a  contagion  that  spreads  and  extends  gradually,
until  everything  is  infected.  What  does  it  avail  us
that  we  be  baptized,  if  we  do  not  obey?  We  are
often  told  that  Baptism  serves  but  for  greater  con-
demnation when  we  dishonor  it  by  evil  deeds.  I  wish
to  be  obeyed  when  I  command,  and  I  am  angry  if
my  people  rebel  against  my  orders.  Has  not  God
still  greater  reason  to  be  irritated  against  us  if  we
obey  him  not?  I  will  make  my  people  behave  prop-
erly, else  they  or  I  will  die."

If  the  zeal  of  these  two  Captains  resemble,  [35]  to


148  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.25

obei'ffons  pas,  ie  feray  que  mes  gens  feront  fages,  ou
eux,  ou  moy  y  perdrons  la  vie.

Si  le  zele  de  ces  deux  Capitaines  tient  [35]  vn  peu
de  celuy  des  enfans  de  tonnerre,  il  ne  laiffe  pas  de
proceder  d'vn  bon  principe,  &  d'eftre  loiiable  en  des
coeurs  barbares,  qui  n'auoient  pas  auparauant  d'ar-
deur  ny  de  fentiment  que  pour  la  chair  &  pour  le
fang.

Ie  ne  puis  obmettre  vn  autre  difcours  que  lift  Noel
"k  la  nouuelle  de  la  prife  du  Pere  Breffany  &  des  Hu-
rons :  Le  Pere  Dequen  leur  ayant  fait  vn  difcours  fur
ce  fujet,  pour  leur  monftrer  que  c6t  accident  &  tant
d'autres  malheurs  eftoient  des  effets  de  la  cholere  de
Dieu,  iuflement  irritee  par  la  mefchancete  des  mau-
uais  Chreftiens,  &  des  infideles  qui  ne  vouloient  pas
obei'r  k  fa  parole/  Noel  vouluft  parler  a  fon  tour,  il
commande  que  perfonne  ne  forte  de  la  Chappelle  &
qu'on  ferme  la  porte.

Tu  dis  vray,  dit-il,  ce  font  nos  pechez  qui  ont  mis
le  Pere  Breffany  &  les  Hurons  entre  les  mains  des
Iroquois :  ce  font  nos  pechez  qui  peut  eftre  mainte-
nant  les  chargent  de  coups  de  baftons,  leurs  arrachent
les  ongles,  leurs  coupent  les  doigts,  leur  mettent  les
tifons  dans  les  flancs,  &  les  bruflent  ^  petit  feu ;  qu'on
[36]  ne  die  pas  que  c'eft  la  priere  qui  eft  caufe  de  ces
malheurs.  Ce  feroit  vn  autre  peche  capable  d'attirer
de  plus  grandes  maledictions  de  Dieu  fur  nos  teftes/
c'eft  nous-mefme  qui  exterminons  noftre  Nation,  &
celle  des  Hurons,  &  des  Fran9ois:  Comment  eft-ce
que  Dieu  ne  nous  chaftieroit  pas?  II  y  a  fi  long-
temps  qu'on  nous  enf eigne,  &  qu'on  nous  prefche  la
crainte  &  I'amour  de  Dieu,  &  il  s'en  trouue  encore
parmy  nous  qui  s'enyurent,  qui  font  des  feftins  k  tout


1642 -44J  RELATION  OF  ib43 -44  149'

some  extent,  that  of  the  sons  of  thunder,  it  never-
theless proceeds  from  a  good  principle,  and  is  praise-
worthy in  the  hearts  of  barbarians,  who  formerly-
had  no  ardor  or  affection  for  anything  but  flesh  and
blood.

I  cannot  omit  another  discourse  made  by  Noel,
when  the  news  arrived  of  the  capture  of  Father  Bres-
sany  and  the  Hurons.  Father  Dequen  had  preached
a  sermon  to  them  on  the  subject,  to  show  them  that
this  accident  and  so  many  other  misfortunes  were  the
effects  of  God's  anger,  who  was  justly  irritated  by
the  wickedness  of  bad  Christians  and  of  the  infidels
who  would  not  obey  his  word.  Noel  wished  to  speak
in  his  turn,  and  he  gave  orders  that  no  one  should
leave  the  Chapel  and  that  the  door  be  closed.

"  Thou  sayest  truly,"  he  said;  "  it  is  our  sins  that
have  placed  Father  Bressany  and  the  Hurons  in  the
hands  of  the  Iroquois.  It  is  our  sins  that,  perhaps
at  this  moment,  are  loading  them  with  the  blows  of
clubs ;  are  tearing  out  their  nails,  are  cutting  off  their
fingers;  are  applying  firebrands  to  their  sides,  and
burning  them  at  a  slow  fire.  Let  [36]  no  one  say
that  prayer  is  the  cause  of  all  these  misfortunes.
That  would  be  another  sin,  capable  of  bringing  down
God's  greatest  curses  upon  our  heads.  It  is  we  our-
selves who  exterminate  our  Nation,  and  that  of  the
Hurons,  and  of  the  French.  Why  should  God  not
punish  us?  We  have  so  long  been  taught  and
preached  to  about  the  fear  and  love  of  God,  and  still
there  are  some  among  us  who  become  intoxicated,
who  give  eat-all  feasts,  who  consult  the  Demons  and
offer  Sacrifices  to  them,  and  renew  their  old  supersti-
tions. I  myself, —  who  in  my  capacity  of  Captain
should  furnish  good  examples  to  others,  especiallv


150  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.25

manger,  qui  confultent  les  Demons,  luy  [sc.  leur]
font  des  Sacrifices,  &  renouuellet  leurs  ancienes
f uperftitions :  moy-mefme,  qui  dans  la  qualite  que
ie  porte  de  Capitaine,  deurois  donner  de  bons  exem-
ples  aux  autres  particulierement  ayant  efl6  tant
inflruit,  ie  ne  laiffe  pas  pourtant  d'eftre  mefchant  &
pent  eftre  plus  que  tous  les  autres;  apres  cela  faut-il
s'eflonner  fi  les  Iroquois  nous  confument,  il  eft  vray
que  nos  ennemis  font  mefchans  auffi  bien  que  nous,
mais  neantmoins  nous  fommes  plus  coupables  qu'eux,
parce  que  nous  fommes  inftruits  &  eux  ne  Ie  font
pas;  fi  on  les  [37]  enfeignoit  comme  Ton  nous  enf ei-
gne, lis  croiroient  pent  eftre  plus  fortement  que  nous
ne  faifons.  Nous  ne  croyons  qu'k  demy,  &  nos
adtions  defmentent  nos  paroles.  C'eft  ce  qui  irrite
Dieu  contre  nous.  II  eft  temps  que  nous  I'apaifions
li  nous  voulons  conferuer  ce  peu  qui  nous  refte  de
noftre  Nation,  &  il  n'eft  pas  difficile  de  I'apaifer.  II
eft  bon;  il  eft  noftre  Pere,  c'eft  a  regret  qu'il  nous
chaftie:  fi  nous  confpirons  tous  "k  I'aymer  &  ^  luy
obeyr,  il  aura  pitie  de  nous,  prenez  courage,  ne  laiffez
pas  d'aymer  la  priere,  quand  bien  elle  nous  deuroit
caufer  la  mort,  mais  i'efpere,  qu'au  contraire,  fi  nous
I'aymons,  elle  nous  donnera  la  vie,  non  feulement
Teternelle,  mais  auffi  la  temporelle,  Dieu  nous  cha-
ftie pour  nous  rendre  fages:  il  ceffera  de  nous  cha-
ftier  quand  nous  cefferons  d'eftre  mefchans.  Voyla
ce  que  i'auois  k  vous  dire.

Cette  harangue  prononc^e  par  ce  Capitaine  auec
vne  ferueur  extraordinaire  eftonna  les  mefchans,  &
confola  les  bons  qui  fe  trouuerent  en  cette  affembl6e,
&  peut  eftre  fortifia  quelque  [38]  coeur  qui  chanceloit,
car  comme  il  eft  homme  d'authorit^  parmy  fes  gens,


1642-44J  RELATION  OF  1643-44  151

after  having  received  so  much  instruction, —  am
nevertheless  wicked,  and  perhaps  more  so  than  any  of
the  others.  After  that,  can  it  be  wondered  that  the
Iroquois  destroy  us?  It  is  true  that  our  enemies  are
wicked,  as  well  as  we ;  but  nevertheless  we  are  more
guilty  than  they,  because  we  are  instructed,  and  they
are  not.  If  they  were  [37]  taught  as  we  are,  they
would  perhaps  believe  more  firmly  than  we  do.  We
only  half  believe,  and  our  deeds  belie  our  words.
That  is  what  irritates  God  against  us.  It  is  time  that
we  should  appease  him,  if  we  wish  to  preserve  the  little
that  remains  of  our  Nation ;  and  it  is  not  difficult  to
appease  him.  He  is  good;  he  is  our  Father;  and  it
is  with  regret  that  he  chastises  us.  If  we  all  unite
in  loving  and  obeying  him,  he  will  have  pity  on  us.
Take  courage ;  cease  not  to  love  prayer,  even  if  it
should  cause  our  death ;  but  I  hope,  on  the  contrary,
that  if  we  love  it  well,  it  will  give  us  not  only  eter-
nal but  also  temporal  life.  God  chastises  us  to  make
tis  good ;  he  will  cease  to  chastise  us  when  we  cease
to  be  wicked. That  is  what  I  had  to  tell  you. ' '

This  harangue,  delivered  by  this  Captain  with
extraordinary  fervor,  astonished  the  wicked  and  con-
soled the  good  who  were  present  at  the  meeting,
and  perhaps  strengthened  some  [38]  weakening  heart ;
for,  as  he  is  a  man  of  authority  among  his  people,
and  has  the  reputation  of  being  a  prudent  person,
his  discourses  have  a  wonderful  effect  on  the  minds
of  all  the  Savages.

I  would  never  finish,  were  I  to  repeat  all  the
other  harangues  that  he  has  delivered  in  favor  of  the
Faith;  for  he  allows  no  opportunity  to  escape  of
making  himself  heard  on  the  subject,  and  he  always
speaks  of  it  with  more  energy  and force  than  we


152  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£:SUITES  [Vol.25

&  en  reputation  de  perfonne  prudente,  fes  difcours
font  vne  merueillenfe  impreffion  fur  les  coeurs  de
tous  les  Sauuages.

le  n'aurois  iamais  fait  fi  ie  voulois  raporter  toutes
les  autres  harangues  qu'il  a  fait  en  faueur  de  la  Foy,
car  il  ne  laiffe  paffer  aucune  occallon  de  parler  fur  ce
fujet,  &  il  en  parle  toufiours  auec  plus  d'energie  &
de  force  que  nous  ne  f[9]aurions  exprimer  par  nos
paroles.  Au  refte  fa  vie  eft  conforme  k  fa  parole :  II
n'entreprend  rien  d' importance  qu'il  n'ait  auparauat
confulte  Mofieur  le  Gouuerneur  &  nos  Peres,  fa  ca-
bane  ne  fouffre  point  que  de  bons  Chreftiens,  il  tient
fa  famille  dans  la  crainte  &  dans  le  refpedt,  il  efl  le
premier  aux  prieres,  &  s'intereffe  fmgulierement  en
tout  ce  qui  regarde  le  progrez  du  Chriftianifme
en  ces  contr^es.  Difons  vn  mot  de  lean  Baptifte
Etinechkab'at  qui  eft  le  Capitaine  des  Montaignets  &
Attikamegues  qui  font  leur  feiour  ordinaire  k  Saindt
lofeph.

[39]  La  refponfe  qu'il  fit  k  ce  Capitaine  Abnaquiois,
duquel  nous  auons  parle,  tefmoigne  I'eftat  qu'il  fait
de  la  Foy.  Ce  Capitaine  auant  que  d'eftre  baptif^
recherchoit  vne  de  fes  parentes  en  mariage,  il  luy
enuoya  pour  ce  fujet  par  vn  autre  Sauuage  vn  beau
colier  de  Pourcelaine,  lean  Baptifte  refpondit  froide-
ment:  Nous  ne  vendons  pas  nos  filles,  mais  nous  les
donnons  en  mariage  k  des  gens  qui  font  profeffion  de
la  Foy  comme  nous,  &  puis  fit  reporter  le  prefent
fans  y  toucher.  Ce  Capitaine  eftant  par  apres  bap-
tife,  &  continuant  dans  fa  recherche,  lean  Baptifte
apres  auoir  long-temps  efprouue  fa  conftance  &  fa
fidelite  luy  donna  tout  le  contentement  qu'il  defiroit
tefmoignant  par  cette  ac5tion,  que  s'il  n'auoit  aupara-


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  153

could  express  by  our  words.  Moreover,  his  life  is  in
accordance  with  his  speech.  He  never  undertakes
anything  of  any  moment  without  first  consulting
Monsieur  the  Governor  and  our  Fathers.  None  but
good  Christians  are  allowed  in  his  cabin.  He  keeps
his  family  in  fear  and  in  respect.  He  is  the  first  at
the  prayers,  and  takes  a  deep  interest  in  everything
relating  to  the  progress  of  Christianity  in  these  coun-
tries. Let  us  say  a  word  about  Jean  Baptiste
Etinechkawat  who  is  the  Captain  of  those  Montagnais
and  Attikamegues  who  usually  dwell  at  Saint  Joseph.

[39]  The  answer  that  he  gave  to  that  Abnaquiois
Captain  whom  we  have  mentioned,  shows  what
esteem  he  has  for  the  Faith.  That  Captain,  before
being  baptized,  sought  one  of  his  relatives  in  mar-
riage. With  that  view  he  sent  him  a  fine  collar  of
Porcelain  beads  by  another  Savage.  Jean  Baptiste
coldly  replied:  "We  do  not  sell  our  girls,  but  we
give  them  in  marriage  to  those  who  profess  the  Faith
as  we  do ;  "  and  he  sent  back  the  present  without
touching  it.  Afterward,  when  this  Captain  had  been
baptized,  he  pressed  his  suit.  Jean  Baptiste,  after
having  long  tried  his  constancy  and  fidelity,  gave  him
all  the  satisfaction  that  he  desired, — thereby  showing
that,  if  at  first  he  had  not  consented  to  his  alliance,
it  was  only  because  he  did  not  yet  belong  to  the
Faith.

Another  young  Savage,  a  good  Christian,  named
Alexis,  of  the  Nipissirinien  Tribe,  sought  one  of  his
daughters  in  marriage.  As,  like  Noel,  he  never  un-
dertakes anything  without  the  consent  of  our  Fathers,
he  came  [40]  to  consult  us  on  the  subject.  "  I  am
pleased  with  the  young  man, ' '  he  said,  ' '  on  account
of  his  goodness  and  virtue ;  but  I  am  afraid  of  one


154  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  25

uant  agree  fon  alliance,  eftoit  feulement  par  ce  qu'il
n'auoit  pas  encore  la  Foy.

Vn  autre  ieune  Sauuage,  bon  Chreflien,  nomme
Alexis,  de  la  Nation  des  Nipiffiriniens,  recherchant
vne  de  fes  filles  en  mariage,  comme  il  n'entreprend
rien  non  plus  que  Noel  fans  le  confentement  de  nos
Peres,  il  nous  vint  [40]  confulter  fur  ce  fujet:  ce
ieune  homme,  dit-il  m'agree  a  caufe  de  fa  bont6  &
vertu;  mais  i'apprehende  vne  chofe:  c'efl  qu'il  eft
parent  du  Capitaine  des  Nipiffiriniens,  &  doit  fucce-
der  k  fa  charge,  ie  crains  que  cela  ne  le  rende
fuperbe,  &  que  I'ambition  de  paroiftre  Capitaine,  ne
I'oblige  de  monter  la  haut  &  retourner  en  fon  pays
apres  la  mort  de  1' autre,  &  qu'en  fuite  il  perde  I'affe-
dlion  qu'il  a  maintenant  pour  la  priere :  car  la  fuperbe
eft  vn  grand  empefchement  k  la  Foy,  &  i'eftime  plus
auoir  vn  gendre  pauure  &  mefprif6,  mais  bon  &
vertueux,  que  glorieux,  &  fuperbe  Capitaine.

Voicy  vne  autre  marque  du  mefpris  qu'il  fait  de
I'honneur,  &  de  I'humilite  qu'il  porte  dans  le  coeur/
ie  voudrois  bien,  difoit-il,  vn  iour  au  Pere  Dequen,
me  pouuoir  demettre  de  ma  charge  de  Capitaine  en
faueur  de  Philippe  Sakapi^am,  elle  luy  appartient  par
droit  de  naiffance  eftant  fils  de  Capitaine,  que  fi  ie
I'ay  receue  &  conferuee  iufques  k  prefent,  c'eft  parce
qu'il  eftoit  trop  ieune  pour  la  pouuoir  exercer  apres
la  [41]  mort  de  fon  pere,  mais  puis  qu'k  prefent  il  a
I'aage,  &  les  forces  fuffifantes  pour  s'acquiter  de  c6t
ofl&ce,  &  en  faire  tous  les  deuoirs,  i'eftime  qu'il  eft
raifonnable  qu'il  en  iouyfle :  Ie  ne  veux  pas  retenir
ce  qui  n'eft  pas  k  moy,  outre  qu'il  faut  icy  des  Capi-
taines  qui  foient  vigoureux,  qui  puiflent  difcourir  en
faueur  de  la  Foy,  &  qui  ayent  de  I'authorite  enuers


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TJON  OF  1643  -  44  156

thing,  and  that  is  that  he  is  related  to  the  Captain  of
the  Nipissiriniens  and  will  succeed  to  his  office.  I
fear  that  this  will  make  him  proud,  and  that  the
ambition  to  appear  as  a  Captain  will  induce  him  to
go  up  there  and  return  to  his  own  country,  when  the
other  dies,  and  that  he  will  afterward  lose  the  affec-
tion that  he  now  has  for  prayer ;  for  pride  is  a  great
obstacle  to  Faith,  and  I  would  value  more  highly  a
son-in-law  who,  though  poor  and  despised,  was
good  and  virtuous,  than  a  proud  and  boastful
Captain."

Here  is  another  indication  of  the  contempt  that  he
has  for  honors,  and  of  the  humility  that  lies  in  his
heart.  "  I  would  like,"  he  said  one  day  to  Father
Dequen,  "  to  lay  aside  my  office  of  Captain,  in  favor
of  Philippe  Sakapwam.  It  belongs  to  him  by  right
of  birth,  because  he  is  the  son  of  a  Captain.  If  I
have  accepted  it,  and  retained  it  until  now,  it  is  because
he  was  too  young  to  exercise  it  after  the  [41]  death
of  his  father.  But,  now  that  he  is  old  enough,  and
has  sufficient  energy  to  fill  the  office,  and  to  perform
all  the  duties  connected  with  it,  I  consider  it  right
that  he  should  enjoy  it.  I  do  not  wish  to  keep  what
does  not  belong  to  me.  Besides,  it  is  necessary  that
we  should  have  Captains  here  who  are  energetic,  and
who  can  speak  in  favor  of  the  Faith,  and  who  have
authority  with  the  young  men ;  and  he  possesses  all
these  qualities  to  a  greater  degree  than  I,  who  have
neither  wit,  nor  words,  nor  anything  to  give  me
credit  and  authority.  And  I  care  not  for  such
honors ;  I  despise  them  in  my  heart.  I  also  fear  to  be
accountable  for  the  actions  and  conduct  of  my  people.
I  would  far  prefer  that  another  should  be  responsible
for  them." The  Father  did  not  give  such  an  answer


156  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES [Vol.25

les  ieunes  gens,  &  toutes  ces  qualitez  font  beaucoup
plus  aduantageufement  en  luy  qu'en  moy,  qui  n'ay
point  d'efprit,  ny  de  paroles,  ny  dequoy  me  donner
du  credit  &  de  Tauthorit^,  &  puis  ie  ne  me  pique
point  de  ces  honneurs,  ie  les  mefprife  dans  mon  coeur,
ie  crains  encore  de  rendre  compte  des  adtions  &
deportemens  de  mes  gens,  ie  ferois  bien  aife  qu'vn
autre  que  moy  en  refpondiil;.  A  quoy  Ie  Pere  n'ay-
ant  pas  refpondu  conformeme[n]t  a  fa  volonte,  il  s'en
retourna  fort  afflige.  La  fuperbe  eftant  Ie  plus  grand
vice  de  ces  Sauuages,  ce  n'eft  pas  peu  que  cettuy-cy
foit  arriue  a  ce  degre  d'humilite  que  de  hayr  ce  qui
eft  de  plus  augufte  &  efclatant  parmy  eux.  II  nous
fera  voir  [42]  maintenant  comme  I'humilite  Chrefti-
enne  n'eft  point  contraire  ^  vn  franc  &  genereux
courage.

Deflors  qu'il  euft  ouy  la  nouuelle  de  la  prife  du
Pere  Breffany,  des  Hurons,  &  de  plufieurs  Algon-
quins,  il  forma  incontinent  Ie  deffein  d'aller  k  la
guerre  pour  tirer  raifon  des  Iroquois  de  tous  ces
affrons  &  dommages.  Voicy  les  raifons  qu'il  nous
en  rendit  dans  Ie  confeil  qu'il  tint  auec  nous  fur  ce
fujet.

C'eft  vne  chofe  honteufe,  dit-il,  que  les  Iroquois
nous  battent  par  tout,  &  que  nous  demeurions  fans
fentiment,  &  fans  faire  autre  chofe  que  fuir,  on  dit
maintenant  auec  fujet  que  nous  ne  fommes  plus  des
hommes,  mais  des  femmes,  &  ce  qui  me  pique  da-
uantage,  c'eft  que  les  infideles  &  quelques  manuals
Chreftiens  difent  publiquement  que  c'elt  la  priere,
qui  nous  rend  poltrons,  &  qui  abbat  nos  courages,
depuis  qu'on  fait  eftat  de  prier  Dieu,  nous  n'auons
plus  de  coeur,  difent-ils,  il  faut  leur  monftrer  qu'ils


1642  -  44]  RELA  TJON  OF  1643  -  44  167


to  this  as  he  wished,  so  he  went  away  much  grieved.
Pride  is  the  greatest  vice  of  these  Savages,  and  it  is
no  small  matter  that  this  one  should  have  attained
such  a  degree  of  humility  as  to  despise  what  is
considered  most  august  and  brilliant  among  them.
He  will  show  us  [42]  now  that  Christian  humility  is
not  inconsistent  with  frank  and  generous  courage.

As  soon  as  he  heard  the  news  of  the  capture  of  Fa-
ther Bressany,  of  the  Hurons,  and  of  several  Algon-
quins,  he  at  once  resolved  to  go  to  war,  to  call  the
Iroquois  to  account  for  all  those  insults  and  wrongs.
Here  are  the  reasons  that  he  gave  us  therefor,  in  the
consultation  that  he  held  with  us  on  the  subject.

"  It  is  a  shame, ' '  he  said,  ' '  that  the  Iroquois  should
beat  us  everywhere,  and  that  we  should  remain
without  feeling,  and  without  accomplishing  anything
but  flight.  It  is  now  asserted  with  reason  that  we  are
no  longer  men,  but  women;  and  what  irritates  me
still  more  is,  that  the  infidels  and  some  bad  Chris-
tians publicly  state  that  it  is  prayer  that  makes  us
cowards  and  depresses  our  courage.  Since  we  rely
on  prayer  to  God,  they  say,  we  have  no  more  cour-
age. We  must  show  them  that  they  have  lied,  and
that  the  Faith  is  far  from  making  us  timid, —  [43]
that,  on  the  contrary,  it  animates  our  hearts  in  the
midst  of  the  most  pressing  dangers,  and  gives  us
courage  in  our  greatest  weakness.  We  must  not
allow  Faith  to  be  dishonored  by  the  falsehoods  and
calumnies  of  the  wicked.

"  What  compels  me  once  more  to  go  to  war  is  the
capture  of  Father  Bressany.  He  is  one  of  those  who
have  come  from  so  far  to  teach  us,  and  who  love  us
so  much.  He  has  exposed  himself  to  this  danger
for our sake. His brothers are afflicted at his


158  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.25

ont  menty,  &  que  tant  s'en  faut  que  la  Foy  nous  rende
timides,  [43]  qu'au  contraire  c'eft  elle  qui  anime  nos
coeurs  au  milieu  des  plus  grands  dangers  &  nous
bailie  du  courage  dans  noftre  plus  grande  foibleffe.
II  ne  faut  pas  fouffrir  que  la  Foy  foit  deshonoree  par
les  menfonges  &  calomnies  des  mefchans.

Ce  qui  m'oblige  encor  de  faire  la  guerre,  c'eft  la
prife  du  Pere  Breffany,  il  eft  vn  de  ceux  qui  viennent
de  fi  loing  pour  nous  inflruire,  &  qui  nous  ayment
tant,  il  s'eft  expofe  pour  nous  ^  ce  danger,  fes  freres
font  affligez  de  fa  prife,  il  faut  les  confoler  &  effuyer
leurs  larmes  par  la  prife  de  quelque  Iroquois.  Pent
eftre  encore  reprimerons-nous  I'infolence  de  nos
ennemis,  fi  nous  remportons  quelque  aduantage  fur
eux,  comme  il  nous  fera  facile  dans  la  methode  que
ie  veux  tenir  pour  faire  cette  petite  guerre,  &  parce
que  Dieu  hayt  les  mefchans,  &  qu'il  ne  benifl  pas
leurs  deffeins,  ie  ne  veux  fouffrir  en  ma  compagnie
que  de  bons  &  fideles  Chreftiens;  nous  ferons  peu,
mais  i'efpere  que  nous  ferons  plus  forts,  que  fi  noflre
bande  eftoit  groffie  d'vn  grand  nombre  [44]  de  guer-
riers,  ou  infideles,  ou  manuals  Chreftiens:  Voila  mon
deffein,  fi  Ie  Capitaine  des  Francois  &  vous  autres
ragr6e[nt],  ie  fuis  refolu  de  I'executer.

En  voila  affez  pour  reconnoiftre  la  bonte  &  Ie  zele
de  lean  Baptifte,  que  fi  ces  deux  Capitaines,  dont
nous  venons  de  parler,  ont  tant  de  vertu,  de  pru-
dence, &  de  zele  pour  la  Foy;  il  eft  aife  de  iuger
quels  font  les  deportemens  de  nos  Chreftiens  de  Sil-
lery,  aufquels  ils  commandent  &  feruent,  de  regie  &
d'exemple.  Nous  verrons  cecy  plus  en  particulier
&  en  deftail  dans  Ie  Chapitre  fuiuant.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  159

capture.  We  must  console  them,  and  dry  their  tears,
by  the  capture  of  some  Iroquois.  Perhaps  also  we
may  repress  the  insolence  of  our  enemies,  if  we  gain
some  advantage  over  them, — as  it  will  be  easy  for  us
to  do,  according  to  the  plan  that  I  wish  to  follow  in
carrying  on  this  little  war,  and  because  God  hates
the  wicked  and  does  not  bless  their  projects.  I  do
not  wish  to  have  any  but  good  and  faithful  Christians
in  my  company.  We  shall  be  but  few  in  number,
but  I  trust  that  we  shall  be  stronger  than  if  our  band
were  increased  by  a  great  many  [44]  warriors  who
would  be  infidels  or  bad  Christians.  Such  is  my
plan.  If  the  Captain  of  the  French  and  you  approve
it,  I  am  resolved  to  carry  it  out. ' '

This  is  sufficient  to  show  the  goodness  and  zeal  of
Jean  Baptiste.  And  if  these  two  Captains  of  whom
we  have  just  spoken  manifest  so  much  virtue  and
prudence,  and  zeal  for  the  Faith,  it  is  easy  to  judge
what  must  be  the  conduct  of  our  Christians  of  Sillery
whom  they  command,  and  to  whom  they  serve  both
as  rule  and  example.  We  shall  see  this  more  particu-
larly and  in  detail,  in  the  following  Chapter.


160  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.  25


[45]  CHAPITRE  IV.

CONTINUATION DES BONS SENTIMENS & ACTIONS  DBS
CHRESTIENS DE SAINCT lOSEPH.

AVSSI-TOST  que  les  Nauires  eurent  leue  I'anclire
de  deuant  Quebec  pour  retourner  en  France,
la  meilleure  partie  des  Sauuages  de  cette  refi-
dence  leuerent  leurs  efcorces  pour  aller  k  la  chafTe
de  I'orignac  anticipant  de  trois  mois  le  temps  ordi-
naire de  leur  depart,  de  crainte  des  Iroquois  qui  les
auoient  menacez  de  les  venir  attaquer  iufques  dedans
nos  portes,  &  qui  leur  eullent  oft6  la  liberte  de  chaffer
bien  auant  dans  les  bois,  s'ils  n'euffent  preuenu  le
temps  auquel  ils  ont  accouftume  de  fe  mettre  en
campagne  &  venir  en  guerre.  Comme  ils  s'embar-
quoient  ils  ne  peurent  s'empefcher  de  nous  temoi-
gner  les  reffentimens  qu'ils  auoient  de  fe  [46]  feparer
de  nous  pour  fi  long-temps.  Non  fommes  trifle,
nous  difoient-ils,  de  vous  quitter:  Qui  nous  enfei-
gnera  dans  les  bois?  Si  quelqu'vn  de  vous  autres,
nous  pouuoient  accompagner,  cela  nous  conf oleroit :
mais  puifque  cela  ne  fe  pent,  nous  tafcherons  de
faire  le  mieux  qui  nous  fera  poffible :  nous  prierons
Dieu  fouuent :  nous  refpedlerons  les  iours  de  Feftes :
nous  croirons  touf jours  f ortement :  nous  fommes  bien
aife  que  nous  ayons  vn  petit  Fran9ois  en  noftre  compa-
gnie  pour  eftre  tefmoin  de  nos  adtions,  il  vous  rap-
portera  a  noftre  retour  I'eftat  que  nous  faifons  de  la
priere. Priez  Dieu  pour  nous.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  161


[45] CHAPTER IV.

CONTINUATION OF THE GOOD SENTIMENTS AND AC-
TIONS OF THE CHRISTIANS OF SAINT JOSEPH.

AS  soon  as  the  Ships  weighed  anchor  before  Que-
bec, to  return  to  France,  the  majority  of  the
Savages  of  this  residence  launched  their  bark
canoes  to  go  and  hunt  moose, —  anticipating  their
usual  time  of  departure  by  three  months,  through
fear  of  the  Iroquois.  These  had  threatened  to  come
and  attack  them  at  our  very  doors,  and  would  have
deprived  them  of  the  liberty  of  hunting  far  back  in
the  forest,  if  they  had  not  forestalled  the  time  when
they  are  accustomed  to  take  the  field  and  go  to  war.
When  they  embarked,  they  could  not  refrain  from
showing  us  the  regret  that  they  felt  at  [46]  separat-
ing themselves  from  us  for  so  long  a  time.  "We
are  sorry  to  leave  you,"  they  said.  "  Who  will
teach  us  in  the  woods?  If  one  of  you  could  accom-
pany us,  it  would  console  us ;  but,  since  that  cannot
be,  we  will  endeavor  to  do  the  best  we  possibly  can.
We  will  pray  to  God  often ;  we  will  observe  the
Festival  days ;  we  will  always  believe  firmly.  We  are
very  glad  to  have  a  little  Frenchman  with  us,  to  be
a  witness  of  our  actions.  He  will  tell  you  on  our
return  how  we  value  prayer.  Pray  to  God  for  us."
It  is  a  marvelous  effect  of  grace  that  men  born  in  the
most  cruel  barbarism  that  exists  on  earth, —  brought
up  in  the  freedom  of  all  kinds  of  vice,  who  have  often
fed  upon  human  flesh  and  blood, —  who  have  been


162  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.25

C'eft  vn  effedt  merueilleux  de  la  grace  que  des
hommes  nez  dans  la  plus  cruelle  barbaric  qui  foit  fur
la  terre,  efleuez  dans  la  liberty  de  toute  forte  de  vice,
qui  fe  font  nourris  fouuent  du  fang  &  de  la  chair  des
homes,  baptifez  depuis  peu  de  iours,  conferuent
neantmoins  I'innocence  «fe  la  grace  de  leur  Baptefme
pendant  fix  mois  fans  inftrudtion  &  fans  Sacrement,
auec  plus  de  facilite  &  de  perfedtion  que  ne  font
beaucoup  de  [47]  Chreftiens  en  France  &  ailleurs
parmy  tant  d'aydes  &  inftrumens  de  falut.  le  crois
que  le  Ciel  prend  plaifir  de  voir  ces  bonnes  ames
adorer  Dieu  au  milieu  des  bois,  oti  fi  fouuent  le  diable
auoit  efte  adore,  &  d'ouyr  retentir  ces  vaftes  defers
des  noms  de  lefus  &  de  Marie,  qui  auparauant  ne
refonnoient  que  des  cris  &  hurlemens  effroyables.

Leur  premiere  &  derniere  acftion  de  la  iournee,
c'eft  de  flefchir  les  genoux  deuant  vn  Crucifix  ou  vne
Image  qu'ils  attachent  a  vne  efcorce,  &  faire  la  leurs
prieres:  ils  celebrent  les  Dimanches  &  les  Feftes,
s'abrtenans  de  la  chafl^e,  &  faifant  des  prieres  plus
longues :  il  y  en  a  qui  parmy  les  grands  trauaux  &
fatigues  de  leur  chafl!e  obferuent  les  ieufnes  comman-
dez :  lis  ont  recours  a  Dieu  dans  leurs  neceflitez  &
ne  manquent  pas  de  reconnoiftre  fur  le  champ  les
graces  qu'ils  re9oiuent  de  fa  main  liberale:  Mais
voyons  des  adtions  &  fentimens  plus  particuliers.

II  y  auoit  trois  mois  que  ces  bons  Neophytes
couroient  chaffans  dans  les  bois,  &  diuifez  en  diuerfes
trouppes,  lors  que  [48]  plufieurs  families  qui  ne
s'elloient  veues  depuis  I'Automne,  fe  rencontrerent
en  vn  mefme  lieu  oil  la  premiere  chofe  qu'ils  firent
fuft  de  confronter  les  papiers  que  nous  leur  anions
donne, pour  reconnoiftre  les  iours  de  Feftes  qu'ils


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  1 63

but  recently  baptized,  should  nevertheless  retain
the  innocence  and  grace  of  their  Baptism  for  six
months,  without  instruction  or  any  Sacrament,  with
greater  facility  and  perfection  than  many  [47]  Chris-
tians do  in  France  and  elsewhere,  amid  so  many  aids
and  instruments  of  salvation.  I  think  that  Heaven
takes  pleasure  in  seeing  these  good  souls  adore  God
in  the  midst  of  the  woods,  where  the  devil  had  so
frequently  been  worshiped,  and  in  hearing  the
names  of  Jesus  and  Mary  reechoed  by  those  vast  soli-
tudes, which  formerly  repeated  nothing  but  horrible
yells  and  cries.

Their  first  and  last  action  every  day  is  to  kneel
before  a  Crucifix  or  a  Picture  which  they  fasten  to  a
piece  of  bark,  and  there  say  their  prayers.  They
observe  Sundays  and  Festival  days  by  abstaining
from  hunting,  and  by  saying  longer  prayers.  Some
of  them,  amid  the  great  labors  and  fatigues  of  the
hunt,  observe  the  prescribed  fasts.  They  have
recourse  to  God  in  their  necessities,  and  do  not  fail
to  acknowledge  on  the  spot  the  graces  that  they
receive  from  his  liberal  hand.  But  let  us  consider
some  actions  and  sentiments  more  in  detail.

These  good  Neophytes  had  been  hunting  in  the
woods  for  three  months,  and  were  divided  into  vari-
ous bands,  when  [48]  several  families,  who  had  not
seen  one  another  since  the  Autumn,  met  in  the  same
place.  The  first  thing  that  they  did  was  to  compare
the  papers  that  we  had  given  them,  to  enable  them
to  know  the  Festival  days  that  they  were  to  observe
with  respect.  Their  rejoicing  was  not  slight  when
they  saw  that  they  agreed  to  the  very  day,  and  that
no  one  had  forgotten  to  recognize  and  honor  Sun-
day. Charles  Meiaskwat,  who  is  always  true  to  his


164  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.25

doiuent  celebrer  auec  refpedt :  la  ref  jouylTance  ne  fut
pas  petite,  voyant  qu'ils  fe  rencontroient  tons  au
xnefme  iour,  &  que  pas  vn  n'auoit  oublie  ^  recon-
noiftre  &  honorer  le  Dimanche.  Charles  Mejask-
iiat  toufiours  femblable  "k  foy-mefme,  c'eft  k  dire,
toufiours  zel^  pour  la  Foy,  prift  la  parole :  mes  freres,
dit-il,  il  n'y  a  pas  icy  de  Peres  pour  nous  enfeigner,
&  faire  prier  Dieu;  ne  laiffons  pas  de  prier  tous
enfemble  puifque  la  commodite  fe  prefente,  ie  crois
que  vous  ne  manquez  pas  k  vous  acquiter  foir  &  matin
de  voftre  deuoir ;  mais  puis  que  Dieu  agree  &  benift
I'vnion  des  prieres,  prions-le  en  commun,  vn  chacun
s'y  accorde,  on  dit  les  prieres,  on  chante  vn  Hymne
en  leur  langue.  Apres  cela  ce  braue  Neophyte  leur
fait  vn  petit  difcours  de  la  prefence  de  Dieu.  Mes
freres,  dit-il,  ie  n'ay  [49]  point  d'efprit,  ie  ne  retiens
point  ce  qu'on  nous  enfeigne:  ie  ne  fuis  pas  Capi-
taine  pour  entreprendre  de  haranguer,  ie  crois  neant-
moins  que  vous  agreerez  que  ie  vous  die  ce  que  Dieu
m'infpire:  Ne  vous  perfuadez  pas  qu'eftans  efloignez
de  I'Eglife,  &  errans  parmy  les  bois,  vous  foyez  efloi-
gnez de  Dieu :  il  eft  par  tout,  il  nous  efcoute,  &  nous
void  auffi  bien  icy  comme  "k  Sillery :  c'eft  vne  grande
folie  de  croire  qu'il  ne  nous  void  pas/  c'eft  encore
vne  plus  grande  folie  de  croire  qu'il  nous  void  &  de
mal  faire ;  on  peut  bien  fe  cacher  des  hommes,  mais
non  pas  de  Dieu,  nous  auons  honte  de  faire  de  fales
adlions  deuant  les  hommes,  n'auons-nous  pas  honte
d'en  faire  deuant  Dieu.  Souuenez-vous  done  que
Dieu  eft  par  tout,  &  qu'il  le  faut  honorer  en  tout  lieu,
comme  nous  croyons  qu'il  nous  cherit,  qu'il  nous
conferue,  &  nourrifl  en  tout  lieu.  II  a  foin  de  nous
dans les  bois, il  nous bailie des  orignaus,  il  nous


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  J 65

character, — that  is,  ever  zealous  for  the  Faith, —  spoke
as  follows:  "  My  brothers,"  he  said,  "  there  are  no
Fathers  here  to  teach  us,  and  to  make  us  pray  to
God.  Let  us  nevertheless  not  fail  to  pray  all
together,  as  the  opportunity  presents  itself.  I
believe  that  you  do  not  omit  your  duty,  night  and
morning;  but,  since  God  loves  and  blesses  prayers
recited  in  common,  let  us  pray  together,"  All
agreed  to  this;  the  prayers  were  said,  and  a  Hymn
was  sung  in  their  own  language.  Afterward,  this
worthy  Neophyte  delivered  a  short  discourse  on  the
presence  of  God.  "  My  brothers,"  he  said,  "  I  have
[49]  no  wit;  I  do  not  remember  what  I  am  taught.
I  am  not  a  Captain,  to  undertake  to  harangue  you.
Nevertheless,  I  believe  that  you  will  be  pleased  that
I  should  tell  you  what  God  inspires  me  to  say.  Do
not  think  that  because  you  are  far  from  the  Church,
and  because  you  wander  through  the  woods,  that  you
are  far  from  God.  He  is  everywhere;  he  hears  and
sees  us,  here  as  well  as  at  Sillery.  It  is  a  great  folly
to  believe  that  he  does  not  see  us ;  it  is  still  greater
folly  to  think  that  he  sees  us,  and  to  do  wrong.  We
can  hide  ourselves  from  men,  but  not  from  God.  We
are  ashamed  to  commit  indecent  actions  before  men ;
are  we  not  ashamed  to  commit  them  before  God?
Remember  that  God  is  everywhere,  and  that  we  must
honor  him  in  all  places,  since  we  believe  that  he
loves  us,  that  he  preserves  and  feeds  us  everywhere.
He  takes  care  of  us  in  the  forest ;  he  gives  us  moose ;
he  clothes  and  warms  us ;  he  lodges  and  feeds  us.
Let  us  therefore  honor  him  in  the  woods,  and  do  here
what  we  [50]  do  in  the  Churches;  for  God  deserves
to  be  honored  everywhere,  since  he  is  everywhere
the  same, and  does  good  to  us  everywhere. " He


166  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.25

habille  il  nous  chauffe,  il  nous  loge,  il  nous  nourrift:
honorons-le  done  dans  les  bois,  &  faifons  icy  ce  que
nous  [50]  faifons  dans  les  Eglifes,  car  Dieu  merite
d'eftre  honore  par  tout,  puis  qu'il  eft  par  tout  le
mefme,  &  qu'il  nous  fait  du  bien  par  tout:  il  pour-
fuiuit  ce  difcours  fortement  &  efficacement :  qui  euft
iamais  attendu  cela  d'vn  Barbare?  Mais  il  n'y  a
point  de  Barbarie  qui  refifte  ^  I'efprit  de  Dieu.

Voicy  vn  effet  de  fa  charite  qui  s'etend  auffi  bien
fur  les  corps,  que  fur  les  ames.  Dans  ce  rencontre  de
Sauuages,  dont  ie  viens  de  parler,  il  fe  trouua  vne
vieille  femme,  qui  auoit  bien  de  la  peine  a  marcher,
ce  bon  homme  en  euft  pitie,  &  la  chargeant  fur  fa
traifne  auec  tout  fon  meuble,  la  traifna  fur  les  neiges
plufieurs  iours,  &  puis  fe  deuant  feparer,  incita  ceux
de  cette  bande  oil  eftoit  la  malade,  de  luy  continuer
la  mefme  charite  qu'il  auoit  exercee  enuers  elle.

Vn  autre  nous  racontoit  qu'il  auoit  efte  grandement
tent6  dans  les  bois  par  le  malin  efprit:  ie  fentois,
difoit-il  fouuent  quelqu'vn  qui  me  parloit  dans  le
coeur  de  la  forte;  il  y  a  long-temps  que  tu  ne  t'es  pas
confeffe,  ton  ame  eft  maintenant  [51]  toute  fale,  tu
ne  la  f9aurois  fallir  dauantage :  f ais  ce  que  ie  te  dis,
tu  vols  ta  femme  qui  languift  depuis  tant  de  temps,
elle  t'empefche  de  vaquer  k  la  chaffe,  prends  vn  tam-
bour, inuoque  le  Manitou,  vfe  de  tes  anciennes  ion-
gleries,  pent  eftre  elle  guerrira,  tu  auras  le  loifir  de
chaffer,  &  tuer  des  orignaus,  &  puis  fi  tu  veux,  tu  te
confefferas,  &  tu  feras  laue  a  mefme-temps  de  cette
faute  auffi-toft,  &  aufli  facilement  que  des  autres:
quoy  que  tu  faffe,  tu  ne  laifferois  pas  d'aller  en  En-
fer,  fi  tu  mourrois  maintenant:  I'eus  de  la  peine,  dit-
il,  k  vaincre  cette  penfee,  qui  me  venoit  fouuent  dans


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  167

continued  this  discourse  energetically  and  effective-
ly. Who  would  ever  have  expected  it  from  a  Bar-
barian ?  But  no  Barbarism  can  resist  the  spirit  of
God.

Here  is  an  effect  of  his  charity  which  extends  as
much  to  the  body  as  to  the  soul.  In  this  meeting  of
Savages  of  which  I  have  just  spoken,  there  was  an
old  woman  who  walked  with  great  difficulty.  This
good  man  took  pity  on  her,  and,  putting  her  on  his
sled  with  all  his  effects,  he  dragged  her  over  the
snow  for  several  days;  and,  when  the  time  came  for
separating,  he  urged  those  of  the  band  to  which  the
sick  woman  belonged  to  continue  the  same  charity
that  he  had  shown  to  her.

Another  told  us  that  he  had  been  grievously
tempted  in  the  woods  by  the  evil  spirit.  "  I  often,"
he  said,  "  felt  as  if  some  one  were  speaking  to  me  in
my  heart  like  this :  '  It  is  a  long  while  since  thou
hast  been  to  confession;  thy  soul  is  now  [51]  quite
unclean;  thou  canst  not  soil  it  more.  Do  what  I  tell
thee.  Thou  seest  thy  wife,  who  has  languished  for
so  long;  she  prevents  thee  from  attending  to  thy
hunting.  Take  a  drum,  and  invoke  the  Manitou;
have  recourse  to  thy  former  sorceries.  Perhaps  she
will  be  cured ;  then  thou  wilt  have  time  to  hunt  and
to  kill  moose.  And  then,  if  thou  desirest  thou  wilt
confess,  and  this  sin  will  be  washed  away  at  the  same
time  and  as  easily  as  the  others.  Whatever  thou
doest,  thou  wilt  certainly  go  to  Hell  if  thou  diest  now. '
I  had  great  difficulty,"  he  said,  "in  overcoming
this  thought,  which  frequently  came  into  my  mind.
I  prayed  to  God  and  then  I  said  to  him  who  spoke  in
my  heart  and  wished  me  to  be  wicked :  *  Thou  liest  •
if  my  soul  be  unclean  I  must  not  soil  it  more. If  I


168  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.26

I'efprit,  ie  priay  Dieu,  &  puis  ie  dis  k  celuy  qui  me
parloit  dans  Ie  coeur,  &  me  vouloit  rendre  mefchant.
Tu  mens:  fi  mon  ame  ell;  fale,  ie  ne  la  dois  pas  fallir
dauantage,  fi  ie  dois  eftre  damne,  i'ayme  mieux  que
ce  foit  pour  vn  feul  peche,  que  pour  deux,  ie  n'offen-
ceray  iamais  Dieu  pour  guerir  ma  femme,  ou  pour
auoir  de  la  chair,  ie  n'auois  qu'vn  regret,  difoit-il,
c'eftoit  de  voir  ma  femme  dans  vn  danger  continuel
de  mourir  fans  confeffion.  Ie  diray  \sc.  difois]  [52]
fouuent  a  Dieu:  Aye  pitie  de  ma  femme,  ie  ne
demande  pas  que  tu  la  gueriffe,  ta  volonte  foit  faite,
mais  ie  te  prie  de  luy  conferuer  la  vie,  iufques  a  ce
qu'elle  fe  foit  confeflee:  Dieu  m'a  exauce,  me  voicy
de  retour  de  la  chaffe,  &  ma  femme  a  affez  de  vie
pour  fe  confeffer,  il  eft  vray  que  ie  n'ay  rien,  n'ayant
peu  faire  autre  chofe  pendant  I'Hyuer  que  traifner
ma  femme  apres  les  chaffeurs/  mais  n'importe,  Dieu
eft  bon,  il  me  nourrira :  Celuy  qui  gouuerne  la  con-
fcience  de  ce  bon  Chreftien,  Ie  trouua  quafi  aulTi  inno-
cent, apres  fix  mois  paffez  dans  les  bois,  comme  il
eftoit  quand  il  y  entra.  Dieu  foit  loii6  qui  fait  triom-
pher  fi  parfaitement  fa  grace  de  tous  les  efforts  de
I'Enfer.

Vn  autre  rendant  compte  de  fes  deportemens  pen-
dant I'Hyuer,  nousauons,  difoit-il,  obf erue  exaclement
les  Dimaches  &  les  Feftes,  nommemet  celles  qu'on
refpecte  particulierement,  &  mefme  la  nuict  ou  Ton
prie  fi  long-temps;  (c'eft  la  veille  de  Noel)  mais  en-
core, que  fiftes-vous,  leur  dit-on?  perfonne  ne  dormit
cette  nuict,  on  ne  fit  autre  chofe  [53]  que  prier  Dieu:
il  y  en  euft  tel  qui  recita  fept  ou  huict  fois  fon
Chapelet.

La  prouidence  de  Dieu  a  tefmoign6  fouuent  dans


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  169

must  be  damned,  I  would  rather  be  so  for  a  single
sin  than  for  two.  I  will  never  offend  God  to  cure
my  wife,  or  to  obtain  meat.'  I  had  but  one  regret,"
he  said,  "  and  that  was  to  see  my  wife  in  continual
danger  of  dying  without  confession.  I  often  said  [52]
to  God :  '  Have  pity  on  my  wife.  I  do  not  ask  thee
to  cure  her;  thy  will  be  done.  But  I  pray  thee  to
preserve  her  life  until  she  has  confessed. '  God
granted  my  prayer;  I  have  returned  from  my  hunt,
and  my  wife  is  sufficiently  alive  to  confess  herself.
It  is  true  that  I  have  nothing,  because  I  was  unable
to  do  anything  during  the  Winter  but  drag  my  wife
after  the  hunters ;  but  never  mind.  God  is  good;  he
will  feed  me."  He  who  directs  the  conscience  of  this
good  Christian  found  him  almost  as  innocent  after
six  months  passed  in  the  woods  as  he  was  when  he
entered  them.  Praise  be  to  God,  who  causes  his
grace  to  triumph  so  completely  over  all  the  efforts
of  Hell.

Another,  who  was  accounting  for  his  conduct
during  the  Winter,  said:  "We  strictly  observed  the
Sundays  and  Festival  days,  especially  those  that  are
particularly  respected,  and  even  the  night  when  we
pray  so  long"  (Christmas  eve).  "  But  again,  what
did  you  do?"  they  were  asked.  "  No  one  slept  that
night;  we  did  nothing  else  [53]  but  pray  to  God."
There  was  one  of  them  who  recited  his  Rosary  seven
or  eight  times.

God's  providence  has  frequently  manifested  in  the
woods  the  care  that  it  takes  of  these  good  people.
All  the  provisions  that  they  take  with  them,  when
they  start  for  their  hunt,  consist  of  a  bag  of  Indian
corn  and  a  few  packages  of  smoked  eels.  This  is
very  little  for  six  months. They  expect  the  remain-


170  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUJTES [Vol.25

les  bois  le  foin  qu'elle  a  de  ces  bonnes  gens,  toute  la
pronifion  qu'ils  emportent  aiiec  eux  quand  il  vont  k
la  chaffe,  confifte  en  quelque  fac  de  bled  d'Inde,  &
quelques  paquets  d'anguiles  boucanees,  c'eft  bien  pen
pour  ^i-^  mois,  ils  attendent  le  rette  de  la  main  de
Dieu  qui  eiprouiie  quelquesfois  leur  confiance  &  la
foy  qu'ils  ont  en  fa  bonte,  II  eft  arriu6  fouuent
qu'ils  ont  couru  plufieurs  iours  fans  rencontrer  aucune
befte:  mais  ils  n'ont  pas  pluftoft  flefchi  le  genoiiil
dans  la  neige  pour  inuoquer  fon  affiftance,  qu'ils  en
ont  reconneu  les  effets,  &  trouue  dans  I'extreme
neceffite  de  quoy  foulager  leur  faim  tres-abondam-
ment.

Vne  femme  Chreftienne  auoit  vne  de  fes  filles
extremement  malade,  apres  auoir  languy  long-temps,
en  fin  elle  tombe  dans  des  fymptomes,  &  conuulfions
de  mort;  la  mere  a  recours  ^  Dieu,  luy  recommande
fa  fille  auec  tant  de  [54]  foy  &  de  deuotion  que  Dieu
rexau9a,  &  rendit  ^  la  malade  en  Tefpace  d'vne  nuidt
vne  tres-parfaite  fante.

Voyla  comme  nos  Sauuages  fe  comportent  dans  les
bois,  cela  montre  que  fi  les  Demons  n'en  font  pas
fortis,  les  bons  Anges  y  font  les  plus  forts,  &  que  le-
temps  eft  venu  auquel  Dieu  veut  fandtifier  cette  bar-
barie,  &  verifier  la  parole  de  fon  Prophete.  Populus
quetn  non  cognoui,  feriiiuit  mihi.  In  audiUi  auris  obedi-
uit  mihi.

D6s  que  la  riuiere  commenja  k  eftre  libre  par  le
depart  des  glaces,  nos  chaffeurs  s'embarquerent  pour
nous  reuenir  voir:  vne  tempefte  furieufe  s'eftant
efleuee  come  ils  eftoient  au  mil[i]eu  du  grand  fleuue,.
nous  les  penfa  rauir.  Ce  danger  ne  leur  fuft  pas  Cl
fenfible  comme  la  perte  qu'ils  firent  d'vne  chaloupe


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  171

der  from  the  hand  of  God,  who  sometimes  tries  their
confidence,  and  the  faith  that  they  have  in  his  good-
ness. It  frequently  happens  that  they  wander  for
several  days  without  finding  any  animal ;  but  no
sooner  have  they  knelt  down  in  the  snow  to  invoke
his  assistance,  than  they  have  felt  the  effects  [of  their
piety],  and  in  their  extreme  necessity  have  found
something  with  which  abundantly  to  relieve  their
hunger.

One  of  the  daughters  of  a  Christian  woman  was
exceedingly  ill.  After  languishing  for  a  long  time,  at
last  she  had  the  symptoms,  and  fell  into  the  convul-
sions, of  death.  The  mother  had  recourse  to  God,  and
commended  her  daughter  to  him  with  so  much  [54]
faith  and  devotion  that  God  granted  her  prayer,  and
restored  perfect  health  to  the  sick  girl  in  the  space
of  one  night.

Such  is  the  manner  in  which  our  Savages  behave
while  in  the  woods.  It  shows  that,  if  the  Demons
have  not  gone  out  from  them,  the  good  Angels  are
stronger  there,  and  that  the  time  has  come  when
God  wishes  to  sanctify  this  barbarism  and  to  verify
the  word  of  his  Prophet:  Popiilus  qiiem  non  cognovi,
servivit  mihi. In  auditu  aiiris  obedivit  mihi.

As  soon  as  the  river  began  to  be  free  by  the
departure  of  the  ice,  our  hunters  embarked  to  come
back  and  see  us.  A  furious  storm  that  arose  when
they  were  in  the  middle  of  the  great  river  nearly
snatched  them  from  us.  They  did  not  feel  this  dan-
ger so  keenly  as  the  loss  of  a  shallop  that  we  had
lent  them ;  for  they  were  afraid  of  the  displeasure  we
might  feel  at  its  loss.  But  Noel  Tekvverimatch  soon
consoled  them  by  assuring  them  that  the  Fathers
were firm believers, and that  whosoever believes


172  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.25

que  nous  leurs  auios  preftee,  apprehendat  le  defplai-
fir  que  nous  pourrions  conceuoir  de  cette  perte :  mais
Noel  Tekb'erimatch  les  confola  bien-toft  dans  I'affeu-
rance  qu'il  leur  donna  que  les  Peres  croyoient  forte-
ment,  «&  que  quiconque  croit  fortement,  ne  fe  foucie
point  des  bies  de  la  [55]  terre,  &  ne  craint  de  perdre
rien  que  Dieu.

La  premiere  adtion  qu'ils  firent  a  leur  abord,  fuft  de
nous  demander  fi  ce  iour  la  n'eftoit  pas  la  veille  de
celuy  qu'on  refpedte:  c'eft  ainfi  qu'ils  appellent  le
Dimanche)  cela  fuft  trouue  vray,  en  fuite  de  cela  ils
mettent  pied  k  terre,  entrent  dans  la  Chapelle,  font
leur  deuotion,  nous  mettent  entre  les  mains  les  corps
de  cinq  ou  fix  petits  enfans  baptifez,  &  morts  depuis
dans  les  bois,  empaquetez  proprement  dans  des  efcor-
ces,  pour  eftre  enterrez  auec  les  ceremonies  de  I'E-
glife,  &  autant  d'autres  nouuellement  nes  pour  eftre
baptifez,  puis  adiouftent  parlant  au  Pere  qui  les  gou-
uerne,  tiens-toy  preft  pour  nous  confeffer,  il  falluft
veiller  cette  nuic5t,  &  les  autres  enfuiuantes,  pour  fatis-
faire  k  leur  deuotion :  il  y  en  auoit  tel  qui  f e  vouloit
confeffer  en  vn  iour  deux  &  trois  fois,  difant  que
c'eftoit  pour  reparer  la  faute  qu'il  auoit  commife,
ayant  demeure  fi  long-temps  fans  fe  confeffer;  ce
nous  eft  vne  confolation  bien  fenfible  de  voir  d'vn
cofle  le  zele  &  I'ardeur  [56]  auec  laquelle  ils  s'appro-
chent  de  ce  Sacrement,  &  de  I'autre  I'innocence  &  la
puret6  de  leur  vie.


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643 - 44  173

firmly  cares  not  for  the  goods  of  the  [55]  earth  and
fears  only  to  lose  God.

The  first  thing  that  they  did,  on  approaching  the
shore,  was  to  ask  us  whether  that  day  was  not  the
eve  of  that  which  is  respected  (so  they  call  Sunday).
This  was  found  to  be  the  case.  Afterward,  they
landed,  entered  the  Chapel,  performed  their  devo-
tions, and  handed  us  the  bodies  of  four  or  five  little
children  who  had  been  baptized,  and  had  since  died
in  the  woods,  neatly  wrapped  up  in  bark,  to  be  buried
with  the  rites  of  the  Church;  and  they  brought  as
many  newborn  ones  to  be  baptized.  Then,  speak-
ing to  their  Father  director,  they  added:  "  Hold  thy-
self  ready  to  confess  us."  We  had  to  remain  awake
that  and  the  following  nights,  to  satisfy  their  devo-
tion. There  was  one  man  who  wished  to  confess
himself  two  or  three  times  a  day,  saying  that  it  was
to  atone  for  the  fault  he  had  committed  in  remaining
so  long  without  confession.  It  is  a  touching  consola-
tion for  us  to  see,  on  the  one  hand,  the  zeal  and  ardor
[56]  with  which  they  approach  this  Sacrament,  and,
on  the  other,  the  innocence  and  purity  of  their  lives.


174  LES  RELATIONS  DES JJ&SUITES  [Vol.25


CHAPITRE  V.

CONTINUATION DES BONS SENTIMENS & ACTIONS DES
CHRESTIENS DE SAINCT JOSEPH.

LE  zele  de  Charles  MeiasKaHat  eft  autant  agreable,
que  feruent.  II  auoit  pris  auant  que  d'eftre
baptife  vne  femme  qui  eftoit  d'vn  naturel
extremement  fuperbe,  &  violent,  &  n'auoit  aucune
difpolition  a  la  Foy:  cependant  il  fe  rend  digne
du  Baptefme,  &  le  recoit :  &  elle  demeure  toufiours
opiniaftre  dans  fon  infidelite,  il  tafche  de  I'adoucir,
&  de  la  difpofer  peu  k  peu  ^  la  Foy,  auec  vne
patience  admirable :  il  en  vint  a  bout,  la  voyla  qui
preffe  fortement  fon  Baptefme,  &  I'obtient:  on  parle
de  les  efpoufer  en  face  de  I'Eglife,  &  donner  ^  leur
mariage  la  qualite  &  la  [57]  grace  du  Sacrement,  ils
s'y  accordent  tous  deux,  ils  s'en  vont  k  I'Eglife  pour
receuoir  la  Benedidtion  du  Preftre,  qui  demande
premierement  a  Charles  s'il  agree  vne  telle  pour  fa
femme.  Attends  vn  peu,  refpond  Charles,  &  fe  tour-
nant  vers  fa  femme;  mais-toy,  luy  dit-il,  feras-tu
encore  fuperbe,  defobeyffante,  cholerique,  comme  tu
as  efte  par  le  paffe :  refponds  moy;  car  fi  tu  ne  veux
eflre  plus  fage,  ie  ne  t' agree  point  pour  ma  femme,
i'en  trouueray  bien  vne  autre,  elle  luy  r^pond  toute
confufe,  qu'elle  fera  plus  fage  k  I'aduenir:  parle  plus
haut,  replique  Charles,  on  ne  t'entend  pas,  quand  tu
te  fafche,  tu  crie  comme  vne  folle,  &  tu  fais  mainte-
nant  la  petite  bouche, il falluft que cette  pauure


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  175


CHAPTER  V.

CONTINUATION OF THE GOOD SENTIMENTS AND AC-
TIONS OF THE CHRISTIANS OF SAINT JOSEPH.

THE  zeal  of  Charles  Meiaskawat  is  as  agreeable
as  it  is  fervent.  Before  being  baptized,  he
had  taken  a  wife  who  was  of  a  very  arrogant
and  violent  temper,  and  who  had  no  inclination
toward  the  Faith.  Nevertheless,  he  made  himself
worthy  of  Baptism  and  received  it,  while  she  always
stubbornly  persisted  in  her  unbelief.  He  tried  to
soothe  her,  and  to  incline  her  gradually  to  the  Faith,
with  admirable  patience.  He  succeeded;  she  urgent-
ly asked  for  Baptism  and  obtained  it.  It  was  pro-
posed that  they  be  married  according  to  the  Church,
so  as  to  give  to  their  marriage  the  character  and  the
[57]  grace  of  that  Sacrament.  They  both  agreed  to
this,  and  proceeded  to  the  Church  to  receive  the
Blessing  of  the  Priest,  who  first  asked  Charles  if  he
took  such  a  one  for  his  wife.  "  Wait  a  little,"
answered  Charles ;  and,  turning  to  his  wife,  he  said :
"  But  thou,  wilt  thou  continue  to  be  proud,  diso-
bedient, and  ill-tempered,  as  in  the  past?  Answer
me;  for,  if  thou  wilt  not  behave  better,  I  will  not
take  thee  for  my  wife, —  I  shall  easily  find  another."
She  was  quite  abashed,  and  replied  that  she  would
conduct  herself  better  in  future.  "  Speak  louder,"
said  Charles ;  ' '  we  do  not  hear  thee.  When  thou  art
angry,  thou  screamest  like  a  mad  woman ;  and  now


176  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.25

femme  criaft  bien  haut  &  proteftaft  publiquement
qu'elle  feroit  obeyffante  ^  fon  mary,  &  viuroit  auec
luy  dans  la  douceur,  &  auec  toute  forte  d'humilite :
Voyla  qui  eft  bien  dit  Charles,  pourueu  que  tu  faffe
ce  que  tu  dis,  autrement  tu  me  donneras  occafion  de
me  fafcher;  &  fi  ie  me  fafche,  i'iray  en  Enfer,  &  toy
auffi:  puis  s'addreffant  au  [58]  Pere,  continue,  dit-il,
ie  fuis  content,  ie  I'aimeray  toufiours  comme  ma
femme  vnique  &  legitime.  Dieu  a  beny  ce  mariage
vifiblement,  &  nous  n'auons  point  veu  de  plus  fen-
fible  changement  qu'en  cette  femme,  qui  eft  mainte-
nant  deuenue  vn  vray  aigneau,  &  a  des  fentimens  de
deuotion  tres-folides  &  tres-affedtueux.

Voicy  vn  autre  effet  du  zele  de  ce  mefme  Neo-
phyte, qui  eft  tout  feu  dans  les  chofes  de  Dieu.  II  a
quelque  connoiffance  du  pays  des  Abnaquiois,  &  de
leur  langue,  depuis  quelques  voyages  qu'il  y  a  fait:
II  a  apris  la  refolution  d'y  retourner  cette  ann^e,  non
pour  autre  fin  que  pour  leur  prefcher  lefus-Chrift,  il
nous  vient  communiquer  fon  deffein.  II  n'y  a  point
de  Peres  chez  les  Abnaquiois,  nous  dit-il,  perfonne
ne  les  enf eigne,  vous  autres  n'y  pouuez  pas  aller,  i'ay
pitie  de  ces  pauures  gens  qui  fe  damnent:  ie  m'en
vais  les  voir,  ie  leur  apprendray  ce  que  vous  m'auez
appris.  On  luy  demanda  qu'eft-ce  qu'il  leur  enfeigne-
roit?  Lk-deffus  il  fit  vn  Sermon  tres-iudicieux  qui
comprenoit  les  principaux  [59]  myfteres  de  noftre  Foy,
&  les  maximes  les  plus  cofiderables  del'Euangile:
Voyla,  dit-il,  ce  que  ie  leur  prefcheray.  Ie  n'ay
point  d'efprit,  mais  fi  Dieu  fe  veut  feruir  de  moy,  il
m'en  donnera,  &  nous  ferons  tous  deux  des  merueil-
les.  Apres  cela  il  s'embarque  dans  vne  pauurete
vrayement Apoftolique : apres deux iourn6es de


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  1 77

thou  wilt  not  open  thy  mouth."  The  poor  woman
had  to  shout  aloud,  and  protest  publicly  that  she
would  be  obedient  to  her  husband,  and  live  with
him  in  gentleness  and  in  the  utmost  humility.
"  That  is  right,"  said  Charles,  "  provided  thou  doest
as  thou  sayest;  otherwise,  thou  wilt  cause  me  to  be
angry;  and,  if  I  get  angry,  I  shall  go  to  Hell,  and
so  wilt  thou."  Then  speaking  to  the  [58]  Father,
"  Go  on,"  he  said,  "  I  am  satisfied.  I  will  always
love  her  as  my  only  and  my  lawful  wife."  God  has
visibly  blessed  this  marriage,  and  we  have  never
seen  a  greater  change  than  in  this  woman,  who  has
now  become  truly  a  lamb,  and  has  very  deep  and
affectionate  feelings  of  devotion.

Here  is  another  instance  of  the  zeal  of  this  same
Neoph}' te,  who  is  all  afire  in  the  affairs  of  God.  He
has  some  knowledge  of  the  country  of  the  Abnaquiois
and  of  their  language,  since  he  has  made  some  jour-
neys thither.  He  resolved  to  return  to  those  people
this  year,  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  preach  Jesus
Christ  to  them.  He  came  to  tell  us  of  his  design.
"  There  are  no  Fathers  with  the  Abnaquiois,"  he
said ;  "  no  one  teaches  them,  and  you  cannot  go  there.
I  feel  pity  for  those  poor  people  who  are  exposing
themselves  to  damnation.  I  am  going  to  see  them;
I  will  teach  them  what  you  have  taught  me."  He
was  asked  what  he  would  teach  them.  Thereupon
he  gave  a  most  judicious  Sermon  which  included  the
principal  [59]  mysteries  of  our  Faith  and  the  most
important  maxims  of  the  Gospel.  "  That,"  said  he,
"  is  what  I  shall  preach  to  them.  I  have  no  sense;
but,  if  God  wishes  to  make  use  of  me,  he  will  give
me  some,  and  together  we  shall  do  wonders."  After-
ward, he  embarked  in  a  state  of  truly  Apostolic  pov-


178  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  25

chemin  fon  compagnon  I'abandone  &  il  fe  trouue  feul
dans  fon  canot,  il  s'en  retourne  froidement  a  Sillery
en  chercher  vn  autre:  il  s'embarque  derechef,  &
nage  fortement  pendant  deux  iours,  apres  lefquels
fon  canot  fe  rompit,  il  s'en  reuient  "k  Sillery  en  pren-
dre vn  autre.  Cependant  quelques  Abnaquiois  arri-
uent  de  leur  pays  &  racontent  qu'ils  ont  veu  en  che-
min quantite  de  pifte  d'Iroquois :  cela  n'eftonne  point
noftre  Apoftre,  on  luy  veut  diffuader  fon  voyage,  en
luy  propofant  le  danger  oil  il  s'expofe,  il  s'en  moque,
ie  ne  crains  pas  les  Iroquois:  ie  ne  crains  que  Dieu,
s'il  veut,  il  me  conferuera:  s'il  ne  le  veut  pas,  il
fgait  bien  pourquoy,  ie  ne  me  foucie  pas  d'eftre  pris,
brufl^,  &  mange  pour  vne  telle  occafion.  En  fuite
de  [60]  cela  il  fe  confeffe,  demande  vn  Crucifix,  le
baife,  &  fe  iette  dans  fon  efcorce,  il  auoit  defia  efte
en  toutes  les  maifons  Religieufes  pour  fe  recomman-
der  a  leurs  prieres :  Dieu  le  conf erue,  &  beniff e  fon
deffein,  mais  le  voifmage  des  Anglois  met  de  grands
obftacles  a  la  conuerfion  de  cette  Nation,  pour
laquelle  ce  bon  Neophyte  a  tant  de  zele.  Dieu  trou-
uera  des  voyes  que  nous  ne  fcauons  pas  pour  faire
entrer  la  Foy  dans  cette  Nation,  &  en  tant  d'autres
oti  I'entree  nous  a  efte  fermee  iufques  a  prefent.

Ie  crois  qu'on  pourroit  faire  vn  iufte  Liure  des
bons  fentiment[s]  &  adtions  de  cet  homme :  il  eft
admirable  quand  on  le  met  a  difcourir  fur  les  chofes
de  Dieu,  il  a  la  confcience  extrem^ment  tendre,  les
feules  penf^es  qu'il  a  de  faire  du  mal,  quoy  qu'il  les
chaffe  incontinent  auec  horreur,  luy  font  criminelles,
il  penfe  fouuent  s'accufer  d'vn  grand  peche,  quand
il  dit  vn  a(5te  heroique  de  vertu  qu'il  a  pratique:  il
s'accufera  par exemple comme d'vn grand peche.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  179

erty.  After  two  days'  journey,  his  comrade  abandons
him,  and  he  is  left  alone  in  his  canoe.  He  quietly
returns  to  Sillery,  to  seek  for  another  companion.
He  again  embarks  and  paddles  steadily  for  two  days,
when  his  canoe  breaks;  he  returns  to  Sillery  to  get
another  one.  Meanwhile,  some  Abnaquiois  arrive
from  their  country,  and  relate  that  they  have  seen
on  the  way  many  tracks  of  Iroquois;  but  this  does
not  frighten  our  Apostle.  We  try  to  dissuade  him
from  undertaking  the  journey ;  when  we  tell  him  of
the  danger  to  which  he  exposes  himself,  he  laughs
at  it.  "I  do  not  fear  the  Iroquois;  I  fear  God  alone.
If  he  choose,  he  will  preserve  me ;  if  not,  he  knows
why.  I  do  not  mind  being  captured,  burned,  and
eaten  for  such  a  cause."  Afterward,  [60]  he  con-
fessed himself,  asked  for  a  Crucifix  which  he  kissed,
and  stepped  into  his  bark  canoe.  He  had  previously
gone  to  all  the  Religious  houses  to  recommend  him-
self to  their  prayers.  God  preserved  him,  and  blessed
his  undertaking ;  but  the  vicinity  of  the  English  is  a
great  obstacle  to  the  conversion  of  that  Nation,  for
which  the  good  Neophyte  is  so  zealous.  God  will
find  means  that  we  know  not  of,  to  bring  into  the
Faith  this  Nation  and  so  many  others  that  have,  up
to  the  present,  been  closed  to  us.

I  think  that  a  whole  Volume  might  be  written  about
the  good  sentiments  and  actions  of  this  man.  He  is
admirable,  when  one  engages  him  in  discourse  on
matters  relating  to  God.  His  conscience  is  exceed-
ingly tender;  the  very  thought  of  committing  evil
he  considers  criminal,  even  though  he  repel  it  at  once
with  horror.  He  often  thinks  that  he  accuses  him-
self of  a  grievous  sin,  when  he  relates  a  heroic  deed
of  virtue  that  he  has  performed. For  instance,  he


180  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jlSUITES  [Vol.25

d'auoir  eu  la  penfee  de  manger  de  la  chair  vn  [6i]
Vendredry,  n'ayant  aucune  autre  chofe  quoy,  qu'il
aye  detefte  cette  penfee,  &  pafs6  tout  ce  iour  fans
rien  manger,  Ce  lu}^  eft  indiferent  de  s'accufer  en
Confeffion  ou  hors  de  confeffion.  II  fuft  inuit6  vn
Samedy  au  f oir  a  vn  f eftin  ou  il  y  auoit  de  la  chair :
11  euft  quelque  defir  d'en  goufter:  mais  il  fe  mortifia
bien-toft :  il  coucha  toute  la  nuit  auec  fa  chair  fans  y
mordre,  &  le  lendemain  il  ne  manqua  pas  de  s'accu-
fer de  cette  faute  innocente  c'eft  vn  plaifir  de  I'oiiyr
crier  quelques  fois  parmy  les  cabanes  quand  il  a-
pelle  les  autres  aux  prieres;  car  il  fe  glorifie  du  tiltre
de  Capitaine  des  prieres,  &  s'acquite  excellemment
de  cette  office;  c'eft  affes  de  cefluy-cy:  nous  n'au-
rions  iamais  fait,  &  il  eft  affez  connu  par  tout.

II  y  en  a  qui  pratiquent  de  bonne  graces  les  oeuures
de  mifericorde  vifitant  les  malades,  les  confolant,  &
leur  donnant  a  manger.  Vn  certain  ayant  oiiy  dire
I'eftat  que  Dieu  fait  de  cefte  forte  de  bonnes  ceuures,
entre  foudain  das  I'Hofpital,  &  y  trouuant  des  ma-
lades fans  efperance  de  guerifon,  ne  perdez  pas  cou-
rage mes  freres,  dit-il,  ne  foyez  pas  trifles  de  ce  [62]
que  vous  deuez  bien-toll;  mourir,  cefte  vie  eft  pleine
de  miferes.  Apres  celle-cy  vous  en  aurez  vn  autre
pleine  de  contentemens  qui  fera  eternelle  nous  mou-
rons  tous  les  iours,  &  quand  nous  acheuons  de  mou-
rir, nous  ne  mourons  pas  totalement.  II  n'y  a  que
la  moitie  de  nous  mefme  qui  meure,  &  la  plus  baffe
&chetifue:  L'ame  ne  meurt  point:  ce  n'eft  que  le
corps,  lequel  encore  doit  refuf citer  vn  iour :  penfes  k
cela,  &  vous  ne  feres  pas  trifles.

Vn  autre  leur  difoit,  Pourquoy  vous  aftiiges  vous,
de  ce  que  vous  mourez,  vollre  corps  n'eft  pas  a  vous,


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  181

will  confess,  as  a  great  sin,  that  he  has  thought  of
eating  meat  on  a  [61]  Friday  because  he  has  had
nothing  else,  although  he  has  hated  the  thought,  and
has  passed  the  entire  day  without  eating  anything.
It  is  quite  immaterial  to  him  whether  he  accuse  him-
self in  Confession  or  out  of  confession.  He  was
invited  on  a  Saturday  night  to  a  feast  whereat  meat
was  served.  He  felt  a  desire  to  eat  some,  but  soon
mortified  himself.  He  slept  all  night  with  his  meat,
without  eating  it ;  and  on  the  following  day  he  did
not  fail  to  accuse  himself  of  this  harmless  offense.
It  is  a  pleasure  to  hear  him  shout  sometimes  among
the  cabins,  when  he  calls  the  others  to  prayers;  for
he  glories  in  the  title  of  "  Captain  of  the  prayers,"
and  performs  the  duties  of  that  office  in  an  excellent
manner.  This  is  enough  for  him ;  we  would  never
have  done,  and  he  is  sufficiently  known  to  all.

There  are  some  who  with  good  grace  practice  works
of  mercy,  such  as  visiting  and  consoling  the  sick,
and  giving  them  food.  A  certain  man,  who  had
learned  how  highly  God  esteems  such  good  works,
at  once  entered  the  Hospital ;  and,  finding  therein
sick  persons  who  despaired  of  being  cured,  he  said  to
them:  "  Do  not  lose  courage,  my  brothers;  be  not
sad  because  [62]  you  are  about  to  die.  This  life  is
full  of  misery.  After  it  you  will  have  another,  full
of  satisfactions  that  will  be  everlasting.  We  are  dying
every  day,  and,  when  we  finish  dying,  we  do  not  die
altogether, —  only  one  half  of  us  dies,  and  that  the
lower  and  baser  half.  The  soul  does  not  die ;  it  is
only  the  body,  and  that  will  rise  again  some  day.
Think  of  this,  and  you  will  not  be  sad."

Another  said  to  them :  ' '  Why  do  you  afflict  your-
selves because  you  are  dying? Your  body  does  not


182  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.25

il  efl  k  Dieu  qui  vous  I'a  donne:  vous  n'eftes  pas  le
maiflre  de  vos  vies;  c'eft  Dieu  feul  qui  en  efl  le
maiftre,  il  eft  raifonnable  qu'il  en  difpofe  comme  bon
luy  femble.  Confeffez  vous  feulemet,  mettez  voflre
ame  en  bon  etat,  &  puis  n'aprehendez  rien.

Vne  bonne  vieille  ayant  oiiy  dire  dans  vne  ex[li]or-
tation  que  Dieu  aggreoit  grandemet  qu'on  donnafl  k
manger  aux  pauures,  s'en  va  incontinent  dans  fa
cabane  prend  le  meilleur  morceau  de  chair  qu'elle
euft,  &  le  porte  aux  malades  de  [63]  I'Hofpital.
C'eft  vn  a(5le  genereux  k  vn  Sauuage  de  donner  ainfi
fa  chair  gratuitement,  &  pour  Tamour  de  Dieu.

Les  Sauuages  aiment  leurs  enfans  auec  des  paffions
eftranges,  &  la  perte  qu'ils  en  font  eft  I'vnique  dont
ils  temoignent  du  reffentiment.  II  s'eft  trouu6
neantmoins  vne  femme  courageufe,  qui  apres  en  auoir
perdu  trois,  &  voyant  le  quatrieme  languiffant,  ne
s'eftonnoit  point:  voila  I'vnique  enfant  qui  me  refte,
difoit-elle  vn  iour  k  vn  de  nos  Peres,  i'en  ay  perdu
trois,  ceftuy-cy  mourra  bien-toft.  le  fuis  agee,  &
fans  mary,  n'importe,  Dieu  le  veut  ainfi,  il  eft  le
maiftre :  ie  ne  laifferay  pas  de  I'aymer  &  feruir.

Cette  mefme  femme  de  laquelle  nous  parlons  a  vn
zele  admirable  de  la  purete  des  filles:  lors  que  la
ieuneffe  reuient  de  la  guerre,  elle  prend  le  foin  de
les  ramaffer  toutes,  &  les  enfermer  pendant  la  nuidt
fous  la  clef,  ou  dans  les  maifons  que  nous  leur  auons
bafti  a  la  frangoife,  ou  dans  les  greniers  ou  ils  fer-
rent  leurs  prouifions.  Vn  foir  comme  nous  faifions
les  prieres  dans  noftre  chapelle,  elle  entre  brufque-
ment,  &  nous  hafte  de  fortir,  [64]  nous  trouuafmes
qu'elle  nous  apelloit  au  fecours  centre  quelques
ieunes  gens  qui  fe  promenoient  pres  d'vne  maifon  ou


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  1«3

belong  to  you, —  it  belongs  to  God,  who  gave  it  to
you.  You  are  not  the  masters  of  your  lives;  God
alone  is  master  of  them.  It  is  reasonable  that  he
should  dispose  of  them  as  he  thinks  proper.  Only
confess  yourselves,  put  your  souls  in  a  proper  state,
and  apprehend  nothing."

A  good  old  woman,  who  heard  it  said  in  an  exhor-
tation that  God  was  greatly  pleased  at  food  being
given  to  the  poor,  went  at  once  to  her  cabin,  took
the  best  piece  of  meat  that  she  possessed,  and  carried
it  to  the  sick  in  [63]  the  Hospital.  It  is  a  generous
action  for  a  Savage,  thus  to  give  meat  gratuitously
and  for  the  love  of  God.

The  Savages  have  an  extraordinary  love  for  their
children,  and  their  loss  is  the  only  thing  for  which
they  manifest  any  deep  feeling.  Nevertheless,  there
was  a  brave  woman  who  after  having  lost  three,  saw
the  fourth  dying,  and  was  not  disturbed.  "  This  is
the  only  child  that  is  left  to  me,"  she  said  one  day
to  one  of  our  Fathers;  "  I  have  lost  three,  and  this
one  will  soon  die.  I  am  old,  and  have  no  husband.
Never  mind;  God  so  wills  it.  He  is  the  master;  I
will  not  cease  to  love  and  serve  him."

This  same  woman  of  whom  we  speak  manifests
admirable  zeal  for  the  purity  of  the  girls.  When
the  young  men  come  back  from  war,  she  carefully
assembles  all  the  girls  and  locks  them  in  at  night,  or
shuts  them  up  in  the  houses  that  we  have  built  for
them  in  the  manner  of  the  French,  or  in  the  grana-
ries where  they  keep  their  provisions.  One  night,
while  we  were  reciting  the  prayers  in  our  chapel,
she  suddenly  entered  and  hurried  us  out.  [64]  We
found  that  she  called  us  to  help  her  against  some
young  men,  who  were  walking  about  near  a  house  in


184  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  25

quelques  filles  eftoient  enf ermees :  ce  fuft  affez  pour
les  chaffer  de  Sillery,  ou  les  moindres  foup§ons  en
cette  matiere  font  criminels.

Vn  de  nos  Peres  ayant  tefmoigne  h.  vne  fille  fort
innocente  enfuite  de  quelques  difcours  &  raports,
qu'il  craignoit  quelque  chofe  touchant  fon  honneur,
&  I'aduertiffant  d'y  prendre  garde,  elle  fe  mit  a  pleu-
rer,  «&  fe  retira  dans  fa  cabane,  la  ou  ayant  raconte
k  fes  parens  le  fujet  de  fes  pleurs,  tons  fe  mirent  k
pleurer  auec  elle,  &  pafferent  toute  la  nuidt  en  larmes,
iufques  k  ce  que  le  lendemain,  le  Pere  ayant  fceu  ce
qui  s'efloit  paffe,  les  confola  en  les  affeurant  qu'il  ne
doutoit  point  de  1' innocence  de  cefte  fille,  mais  ce
qu'il  luy  auoit  dit,  n'efloit  que  pour  luy  faire  appre-
hender  d'auantage  ce  qui  pouuoit  nuire  k  fa  puret^.

II  y  en  a  plufieurs  qui  s'accufent  comme  d'vn  grand
peche  de  ce  que  quelques  ieunes  hommes  leur  a  parl6
de  fe  marier,  quoy  qu'elles  ayent  refpondu  froide-
ment  [65]  h.  cela  que  c6t  affaire  ne  depend  pas  d'elles,
mais  de  leurs  parens.  Vne  bonne  femme  eftant
grandement  malade,  demanda  infhamment  qu'on  ne
la  defpoiiillaft  aucunement  apres  fa  mort,  mais  qu'on
la  laiffe  enuelopee  dans  fa  robe  de  caftor,  comme  elle
eftoit  alors :  vn  f oir  vne  troupe  de  ieunes  filles  vin-
drent  crier  k  noftre  porte  mon  Pere  aye  pitie  de  nous,
on  leur  demande  qu'eft-ce  que  c'eft?  nous  auons
peur,  difent-elles,  de  quelques  ieunes  gens  qui  ne
font  pas  fages,  nous  ne  fommes  pas  en  affeurance
dans  nos  cabanes,  ferme-nous  ^  la  clef  dans  quel-
qu'vne  de  ces  petites  maifons,  il  y  en  a  qui  rendent
compte  de  leur  confcience  s'accufent  comme  d'vn
grand  peche  de  hayr  grandement  vn  homme  qui  leur
a  dit  quelque  parole  trop  libre,  ces  fcrupules  font


1642 -44J  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  185


which  some  girls  were  shut  up.  This  was  enough
to  drive  them  from  Sillery,  where  the  slightest
suspicion  on  this  head  is  criminal.

One  of  our  Fathers  told  a  very  innocent  girl,  in
consequence  of  some  remarks  and  reports,  that  he
feared  something  affecting  her  honor,  and  advised
her  to  be  on  her  guard.  She  began  to  cry  and  with-
drew to  her  cabin,  where  she  related  to  her  parents
the  cause  of  her  tears.  All  began  to  weep  with  her,
and  passed  the  whole  night  in  tears,  until,  on  the
following  day,  the  Father,  who  had  heard  what  had
happened,  consoled  them  and  assured  them  that  he
did  not  doubt  the  girl's  innocence;  but  what  he  had
said  was  merely  for  the  purpose  of  making  her  dread
still  more  whatever  might  harm  her  purity.

There  are  many  who  accuse  themselves,  as  of  a
grievous  sin,  that  some  young  men  have  spoken  to
them  of  marriage, —  although  they  have  coldly  an-
swered [65]  to  this  that  the  matter  did  not  depend
upon  them,  but  upon  their  parents.  A  good  woman,
who  was  very  ill,  urgently  requested  that  she  be  not
stripped  after  her  death,  but  that  she  be  left  wrapped
up  in  her  dress  of  beaver  skins,  as  she  then  was.  One
night  a  band  of  young  girls  came  to  our  door  and
called  out:  "My  Father,  have  pity  on  us."  We
asked  what  was  the  matter.  "  We  are  afraid,"  they
said,  "  of  some  young  men  who  are  not  well  behaved.
We  are  not  safe  in  our  cabins ;  lock  us  up  in  one  of
those  small  houses."  There  are  some  who,  in  giving
an  account  of  their  consciences,  accuse  themselves,
as  of  a  grievous  sin,  of  greatly  hating  a  man  who
has  spoken  too  freely  to  them.  Such  scruples  are
pardonable  in  girls,  and  show  in  what  esteem  purity
is  held  here,  where  formerly  its  name  was  hardly


186  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.25

fuportables  en  des  filles,  &  font  voir  I'eftat  qu'on  fait
icy  de  la  purete,  Ik  oii  auparauant  k  peine  en  con-
noiffoit-on  le  nom.  C'eft  affez  de  ce  fujet;  voicy
comme  nous  traitons  ceux  qui  font  quelque  faute
publique.

Vn  Chreflien,  d'ailleurs  innocent,  [62  i.e.,  66]  &
fort  homme  de  bien,  s'eftoit  enyure  non  tant  par  fa
faute,  que  par  celle  d'vn  Frangois  qui  I'auoit  inuite  k
boire,  il  falluft  qu'il  fatisfit  k  Dieu  qu'il  auoit  offenf6,
&  aux  hommes  qu'il  auoit  fcandalife.  Le  Pere
Dequen  luy  fit  vne  bonne  reprimende  k  la  fin  de  la
Meffe,  en  prefence  de  tous  les  Sauuages,  luy  enioi-
gnit  de  baifer  trois  fois  la  terre,  &  de  ieufner  trois
iours  confecutifs,  ce  qu'il  accomplit  auec  humilite,  &
edification  de  tous  les  afiiftans:  outre  cela  il  fuft
oblige  de  payer  1 'amende  qu'on  a  taxe  par  le  confen-
tement  mefmes  des  Sauuages  \  ceux  qui  s'enyurent,
il  fuft  au  fort  pour  cet  effet,  ou  apres  auoir  efte  dere-
chef  repris  par  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  de  fa  faute,  il
ietta  trois  Caflors  k  terre:  Voyla,  dit-il,  que  ie  iette
ma  mefchancete,  ie  ne  fuis  pas  mary  de  bailler  mes
Caflors,  mais  ie  fuis  marry  de  les  bailler  pour  ce
fujet,  i'ay  fafcli6  Dieu,  &  perdu  fon  amitie,  c'eft  ce
qui  m'afflige  &  non  pas  la  perte  de  mes  Caftors,  c'eft
la  premiere  fois  que  ie  me  fuis  enyure,  ce  fera  la
derniere:  celuy  qui  m'a  fait  boire  n'a  point  d'efprit:
mais  ie  ne  deuois  pas  luy  obeir.  \^']'\  Ie  te  deuois
aduertir :  Voila  ce  que  ie  feray  vne  autre  fois,  quand
cela  m'arriuera,  ces  rigueurs  font  douces  "k  nos  Chre-
ftiens,  &  ne  laiffent  pas  neantmoins  d'eftre  efficaces.

Ie  mettray  icy  vn  ou  deux  traits  pour  faire  voir  le
refpec5t  qu'ils  portent  aux  chofes  fainc5tes.  Vn  Chre-
flien auoit  perdu  dans  les  bois  vn  Crucifix  qu'on  luy


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  1 87

known. This  is  enough  on  the  subject;  see  how  we
treat  those  who  commit  some  public  sin.

A  Christian  who  was  innocent  in  other  respects,
[62  i.e.,  66]  and  a  very  good  man,  had  become  intox-
icated,—  not  so  much  through  his  own  fault  as
through  that  of  a  Frenchman,  who  had  invited  him
to  drink.  He  had  to  give  satisfaction  to  God,  whom
he  had  offended;  and  to  men,  whom  he  had  scandal-
ized. Father  Dequen  administered  a  severe  repri-
mand to  him,  after  Mass,  in  the  presence  of  all  the
Savages,  and  ordered  him  to  kiss  the  ground  three
times,  and  to  fast  for  three  consecutive  days.  This
he  performed  with  humility,  and  to  the  edification
of  all  present.  Moreover,  he  was  obliged  to  pay  the
fine  that  has  been  imposed,  with  the  consent  of  the
Savages  themselves,  on  those  who  become  intoxicated.
He  went  to  the  fort  for  that  purpose,  where,  after
having  been  again  reproved  by  Monsieur  the  Govern-
or for  his  offense,  he  threw  down  three  Beaver  skins.
"  There,"  said  he,  "  I  throw  away  my  wickedness.
I  am  not  sorry  to  give  my  Beaver  skins,  but  I  am
sorry  to  give  them  for  this  purpose.  I  have  offended
God,  and  have  lost  his  friendship ;  that  is  what  afflicts
me,  and  not  the  loss  of  my  Beaver  skins.  It  is  the
first  time  that  I  have  been  intoxicated ;  it  shall  be
the  last.  He  who  made  me  drink  has  no  sense;  but
I  should  not  have  obeyed  him — [67]  I  should  have
notified  thee.  That  is  what  I  will  do  another  time,
if  the  same  thing  happens  to  me."  Such  strong
measures  seem  lenient  to  our  Christians,  but  are
none  the  less  effective.

I  shall  here  relate  one  or  two  instances  to  show
the  respect  that  they  have  for  holy  things.  A  Chris-
tian had  lost  in  the  woods  a  Crucifix  that  had  been


188  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.25

auoit  donne,  il  creuft  auoir  offenfe  Dieu  griefuement;
quoy  qu'il  fufl  innocent  dans  cette  perte,  il  part  fou-
dain  pour  venir  k  Sillery,  il  rencontre  vn  de  nos  Peres,
ie  fuis  trifle,  luy  dit-il,  i'ay  fafche  Dieu,  hafte-toy,
ie  me  veux  confeffer.  Ce  crime  pretendu  le  preffoit
£l  fort,  qu'il  en  fit  vne  Confeffion  publique  fur  le
champ,  n'ayant  pas  la  patience  d'attendre  qu'il  fuft
aux  pieds  du  Confeffeur,  i'ay  perdu,  dit-il,  mon  Cru-
cifix, depuis  cette  perte,  ie  fuis  exacftement  afiflige,
que  feray-ie  pour  appaifer  Dieu?

Vne  bonne  vieille  ayant  trouu6  fon  Chappelet
qu'elle  auoit  perdu,  6  que  ie  fuis  aife,  difoit-elle,
d'auoir  trouue  mon  Chappelet,  il  y  a  deux  iours  que
ie  I'auois  perdu:  pendant  tout  ce  temps,  il  m'a  [68]
femble  que  i'auois  mal  au  coeur,  non  feulement  k
caufe  de  la  perte  que  i'auois  faite,  mais  aulTi  parce
que  ie  ne  fentois  plus  la  croix  me  battre  fur  le  coeur,
comme  elle  faifoit  d'ordinaire  lors  que  ie  portois  mon
Chapelet  pendu  au  col.  Ces  fentimens  monflrent
qu'il  n'y  a  plus  de  barbaric  dans  ces  coeurs,  puis  que
I'amour  de  la  Croix  y  eft.

Ie  finiray  ce  Chapitre  par  I'edification  publique
qu'ont  donne  les  Chreftiens  de  Sillery  allant  k  la
guerre  contre  les  Iroquois,  le  rendez-vous  eftoit  aux
trois  Riuieres  ou  il  fe  trouua  fix-vingts  Guerriers  par-
my  lefquels  il  y  auoit  quelques  manuals  Chreftiens,
&  plufieurs  infideles:  Les  noftres  voulurent  toufiours
cabaner  a  part  pour  n'auoir  aucune  communication
auec  les  mefchans.  Quelques-vns  de  ceux-cy  firent
vn  feftin  de  guerre,  oil  ils  introduifirent  (felon  leur
ancienne  couftume)  des  filles  niies;  Ceux  des  noftres
qui  s'en  doutoient  ny  allerent  point,  les  autres  qui
y  allerent  innocemment,  detefterent  cete  impiete,  &


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  189

given  to  him.  He  thought  that  he  had  grievously-
offended  God,  although  he  was  not  to  blame  for  the
loss.  He  at  once  started  to  return  to  Sillery,  where
he  met  one  of  our  Fathers,  and  said  to  him:  "  I  am
sad;  I  have  offended  God;  hasten,  I  wish  to  make
my  confession."  This  sin  that  he  thought  he  had
committed  caused  him  such  remorse  that  he  made  a
public  Confession  of  it  on  the  spot,  being  too  impa-
tient to  wait  until  he  was  at  his  Confessor's  feet.
^'  I  have  lost  my  Crucifix,"  he  said.  "  Ever  since
my  loss,  I  have  been  truly  contrite.  What  can  I  do
to  appease  God? "

A  good  old  woman,  who  had  found  her  Rosary
that  she  had  lost,  said:  "  Oh,  how  glad  I  am  that  I
have  found  my  Rosary!  I  lost  it  two  days  ago.
During  the  whole  of  that  time,  it  [68]  seemed  to  me
that  I  was  sick  at  heart, — not  only  on  account  of  my
loss,  but  also  because  I  no  longer  felt  the  cross  strik-
ing against  my  heart  as  it  used  to  do,  when  I  carried
my  Rosary  hung  around  my  neck."  Such  sentiments
show  that  there  is  no  longer  any  barbarism  in  these
hearts,  since  love  for  the  Cross  dwells  in  them.

I  shall  conclude  this  Chapter  by  the  public  edifica-
tion given  by  the  Christians  of  Sillery,  when  about
to  go  to  war  against  the  Iroquois.  The  rendezvous
was  at  the  three  Rivers,  where  there  were  one  hun-
dred and  twenty  Warriors,  among  whom  were  some
bad  Christians  and  several  infidels.  Ours  always
wished  to  have  separate  cabins,  so  as  to  have  no
communication  with  the  wicked  ones.  Some  of  the
latter  held  a  war  feast,  in  which  they  introduced  (in
accordance  with  their  old  custom)  naked  girls.
Those  of  ours  who  suspected  this  did  not  go.  The
others,  who  went  there  unwittingly, detested  such


190  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.25

en  temoignerent  de  vifs  reffentimens.  Monfieur  de
Chamflour  Gouiiemeur  [69]  des  trois  Riuieres  chaftia
tous  ceux  qui  auoient  trempe  dans  cette  faute  par  vne
peine  corporelle  en  les  chaffant  de  fon  Fort,  &  le
Pere  Brebeuf  d'vne  peine  fpirituelle  en  les  chaffant
de  I'Eglife.  La  veille  de  leur  depart,  ceux-cy  paffe-
rent  toute  la  nuidt  en  des  feftins  fuperftitieux,  en
des  danfes,  &  en  des  oris  &  hurlemens  effroyables,
les  noftres  la  pafferent  dans  la  Chappelle  en  priant
Dieu  &  fe  confeffant ;  fi  leur  piet6  a  paru  en  fe  dif-
pofant  a  la  guerre,  leur  courage  n'a  pas  moins  paru
en  y  allant :  Voicy  le  tefmoignage  qu'en  rend  le  Pere
Buteux  qui  les  a  veus  k  Montreal,  «&  eft  defcendu
auec  eux  aux  trois  Riuieres.  lis  eftoient,  dit-il,  les
premiers  h.  s'embarquer  pour  aller  h.  la  defcouuerte
de  Tennemy,  &  entrer  bien  auant  dans  les  bois  aux
lieux  les  plus  dangereux,  ils  alloient  par  tout  la  tefte
leuee  fans  aucune  demonftration  de  crainte;  mais  i'ay
admire  encore  dauantage  la  bonte  de  leur  courage
les  voyant  prier  Dieu  parmy  les  infideles  fans  aucun
refped;  humain.  Lors  que  ie  prenois  mon  Breuiaire
pour  prier  Dieu,  celuy  qui  commandoit  dans  cette
chaloupe,  &  les  [70]  autres  Chreftiens  a  fon  exemple
prenoient  leur  Chapelet,  qu'ils  recitoient  denotement
lors  que  le  vent  les  exemptoit  de  fe  feruir  de  I'auiron.
Ceux  qui  les  voyoient  dans  cette  pofture,  quoy  qu'in-
fideles  faifoient  autant  d'eftat  de  leur  vertu,  comme
ils  conceuoient  de  mefpris  des  autres  qui  ayant  efte
baptifez  ne  viuoient  pas  conformement  k  leur  pro-
feffion,  tant  il  eft  vray  que  la  vertu  a  de  grands  at-
traits  pour  fe  faire  aimer,  mefme  parmy  les  barbares.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  191

impiety,  and  expressed  strong  resentment  at  it.
Monsieur  de  Chamflour,  the  Governor  [69]  of  tlie
three  Rivers,  inflicted  a  corporal  punishment  on  all
who  had  participated  in  this  offense,  by  driving  them
out  of  his  Fort ;  and  Father  Brebeuf  inflicted  spirit-
ual punishment  by  expelling  them  from  the  Church.
On  the  eve  of  their  departure,  they  passed  the  whole
night  in  superstitious  feasts,  in  dances,  and  in  utter-
ing horrible  yells  and  cries.  Ours  passed  it  in  the
Chapel,  praying  to  God  and  confessing  themselves.
If  their  piety  made  itself  apparent  in  their  prepara-
tion for  war,  their  courage  manifested  itself  no  less
by  their  going  thither.  This  is  what  Father  Buteux
says  of  it,  who  saw  them  at  Montreal,  and  who  came
with  them  down  to  the  three  Rivers.  "  They  were,"
he  says,  "  the  first  to  embark,  to  go  and  discover  the
enemy,  and  to  penetrate  into  the  woods  at  the  most
dangerous  points.  They  went  everywhere  with
heads  erect  and  without  any  manifestation  of  fear.
But  I  admired  still  more  the  greatness  of  their  cour-
age  when  I  saw  them  praying  to  God  in  the  midst
of  the  infidels,  without  fear  of  what  might  be  said  of
them.  When  I  took  my  Breviary  to  pray  to  God,  he
who  commanded  in  that  shallop,  and  the  [70]  other
Christians  in  imitation  of  him,  took  their  Rosaries,
which  they  recited  devoutly  when  the  wind  dispensed
them  from  the  necessity  of  using  their  paddles.
Those  who  saw  them  doing  so,  infidels  though  they
were,  had  as  high  an  opinion  of  their  virtue  as  they
felt  contempt  for  the  others  who  had  been  baptized,
but  did  not  live  in  accordance  with  their  belief;  so
true  it  is  that  virtue  possesses  great  attractions,  that
cause  it  to  be  admired,  even  among  barbarians."


192  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.25


CHAPITRE VI.

DE L'HOSPITAL

LES  Iroquois  qui  font  les  vrais  tiras  &  les  perfecu-
teurs  de  cette  nouuelle  Eglife,  ont  iett^  la  ter-
reur  cette  ann6e  dans  le  pais,  ils  eftoient  diui-
fez  ce  Prin-temps  dernier  en  dix  bandes  efparfes  9^
&  1^  fur  la  grande  Riuiere  pour  ef cumer  tout  ce  qu'ils
rencontreroient,  I'vne  de  ces  bandes  [71]  prift  le  Pere
Breffany  &  les  Hurons,  qui  le  conduifoient  en  leur
pais  le  28.  iour  d'Auril  k  quatre  lieues  au  deffus  des
trois  Riuieres :  vne  autre  ef coiiade  ayant  maff  acre  trois
Frangois  ^  Mont- Real,  en  emmena  deux  autres  cap-
tifs,  qu'ils  ont  depuis  bruflez  dans  leur  pais  au  raport
d'vn  Huron  qui  s'eft  efchappe  de  leurs  mains,  plu-
fieurs  Sauuages  de  la  refidence  de  Saindt  lofeph
efpouuantez,  eurent  fujet  de  craindre  que  ces  enne-
mis  ne  defcendiffent  plus  bas,  &  pour  cela  fe  retire-
rent,  qui  degk,  qui  dela,  ce  qui  obligea  les  Religieufes
Hofpitalieres  auec  I'aduis  de  Mofieur  le  Gouuerneur,
des  Peres,  &  des  habitans  de  ceder  au  temps,  &  de
fe  tranfporter  en  leur  maifon  de  Kebec,  non  fans  vne
grande  incommodite,  pour  ce  que  cette  maifon  n'a-
uoit  encor  que  les  quatre  murailles  &  la  couuerture,
mais  auffi  elles  emporterent  cette  confolation  auec
elles  que  les  Sauuages  fains  &  malades  auoient  acquis
I'habitude,  &  familiarite  de  cette  faindte  maifon,  &
perdu  la  difficulte  de  les  venir  trouuer  k  Kebec
en  leur  neceffitez  &  maladies.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  193


CHAPTER VI.
OF THE HOSPITAL.

THE  Iroquois,  who  are  the  true  tyrants  and  perse-
cutors of  this  new  Church,  have  spread  terror
this  year  throughout  the  country.  They  were
divided  last  Spring  into  ten  bands,  scattered  here  and
there  along  the  great  River,  to  take  all  whom  they
came  across.  One  of  these  bands  [71]  captured  Fa-
ther Bressany,  and  the  Hurons  who  were  conducting
him  to  their  country,  on  the  28th  day  of  April,  four
leagues  above  the  three  Rivers.  Another  party
massacred  three  Frenchmen  at  Mont-Real  and  took
two  others  captive,  whom  they  have  since  burned  in
their  country,  according  to  the  report  of  a  Huron
who  escaped  from  their  hands.  Many  Savages  of
the  residence  of  Saint  Joseph  were  terrified,  and  had
cause  to  believe  that  the  enemies  would  come  further
down.  For  that  reason  they  took  flight,  hither  and
thither,  which  compelled  the  Hospital  Nuns,  by  the
advice  of  Monsieur  the  Governor,  of  the  Fathers,  and
of  the  inhabitants,  to  yield  to  circumstances,  and  to
remove  to  their  house  in  Kebec, — not  without  great
inconvenience,  because  the  building  had  as  yet  but
the  four  walls  and  the  roof.  But  they  also  took  with
them  this  consolation,  that  the  Savages,  both  healthy
and  sick,  had  become  accustomed  to  and  familiar  with
that  holy  house  and  had  lost  their  unwillingness
to  come  to  them  at  Kebec  in  their  necessities  and
sickness.


194  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.25

[72]  Noel  Tek^erimath  Capitaine  de  Sillery,  s'eftant
retire  aux  trois  Riuieres  pendans  ces  bruits,  pria  le
Pere  Brebeuf  qui  y  eftoit  pour  lors  d'efcrire  aux
Religieufes  Hofpitalieres  que  fi  toft  que  les  femences
feroient  faites  elles  fe  retiraCfent  ^  Kebec  &  y  me-
naffent  auffi  auec  elles  toutes  les  femmes,  enfans  &
vieillards  iufques  a  fon  retour,  cela  ne  peut  pas  s'ex-
ecuter  entierement,  mais  quand  les  Religieufes  quit-
terent  Sillery,  toutes  les  femmes  Sauuages  vinrent  a
Kebec  dreffer  deux  cabanes  pres  de  la  maifon  des
Religieufes,  I'vne  pour  les  hommes  qui  trauailloient
au  baftiment,  1' autre  pour  les  malades,  attendant
qu'il  y  euft  vne  fale  faite  pour  ce  fujet  «&  ne  manque-
rent  pas  d'enuoyer  incontinent  deux  ou  trois  de  leur
gens  qui  eftoient  malades,  &  qui  ont  encor  efte  fui-
uis  de  quelques  autres.  Les  Sauuages  les  vifitent  a
tous  propos,  &  les  preffent  de  paracheuer  quelque
lieu  commode  pour  paffer  I'Hyuer,  &  fe  garantir  des
neiges,  &  des  glaces.

Leur  charite  a  fecouru  cette  ann^e  plus  de  35.
malades,  dont  le  Ciel  en  a  pris  [73]  dix,  &  outre  ces
malades,  plufieurs  Sauuages  ont  paffe  les  deux  ou
trois  iours  en  cette  maifon  de  mifericorde  pour  s'y
faire  purger  &  medicamenter  voulans  preuenir  quel-
que maladie  dont  ils  fe  fentoient  menacez.  Ce  n'eft
pas  Ik  encor  tout  I'exercice  de  charite  de  ces  bonnes
meres,  la  maifon  de  Dieu  fait  du  bien  aux  pauures
auffi  bien  qu'aux  malades,  plufieurs  vieillards,  plu-
fieurs  femmes  &  plufieurs  enfans  leur  font  demeurez
deux  ou  trois  mois  fur  les  bras  pendant  I'Hyuer,  &
fuffent  morts  de  miferes  fans  ce  fecours,  c'efl  vne
neceffite,  mais  auffi  vn  contentement  de  s'efpuifer
en  ces  rencontres,  comme  la  plufpart  de  ces  pauures


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  195

[72]  Noel  Tekwerimath,  Captain  of  Sillery,  who
had  gone  to  the  three  Rivers  during  these  rumors,
begged  Father  Brebeuf,  who  was  then  there,  to  write
to  the  Hospital  Nuns  that,  as  soon  as  the  crops  were
sown,  they  were  to  withdraw  to  Kebec,  and  to  take
with  them  all  the  women,  children,  and  old  men
until  his  return.  This  could  not  be  fully  carried  out;
but,  when  the  Nuns  left  Sillery,  all  the  Savage
women  came  to  Kebec,  and  erected  two  cabins  near
the  Nuns'  house, —  one  for  the  men  who  were  work-
ing at  the  building,  and  the  other  for  the  sick,  until
a  ward  could  be  prepared  for  them ;  and  they  did
not  fail  at  once  to  send  thither  two  or  three  of  their
people  who  were  sick,  and  who  were  afterward  fol-
lowed by  some  others.  The  Savages  visited  them  at
every  opportunity,  and  urged  them  to  complete  the
building  of  a  suitable  house  to  enable  them  to  pass
the  Winter  and  to  be  protected  against  the  snow  and
ice.

Their  charity  has  this  year  succored  over  35  sick,
of  whom  Heaven  has  taken  [73]  ten;  and,  in  addi-
tion to  these  sick  persons,  many  Savages  have  passed
two  or  three  days  in  this  house  of  mercy  for  the  pur-
pose of  undergoing  purgation,  and  of  taking  medi-
cines for  the  prevention  of  some  disease  with  which
they  felt  themselves  threatened.  Even  this  is  not
all  the  charity  exercised  by  these  good  mothers.
The  house  of  God  does  good  to  the  poor  as  well  as  to
the  sick.  Several  old  men,  several  women,  and  sev-
eral children  have  remained  on  their  hands  for  two
or  three  months  during  the  Winter,  and  would  have
died  of  hardship  without  such  assistance.  It  is  a
necessity,  but  also  a  satisfaction,  to  spend  oneself  in
such  circumstances. As  the  majority  of  these  poor


196  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.25

gens  eftoient  Chrelliens,  ils  ont  donne  vne  grande
Edification  aux  Religieufes,  en  voicy  quelques  adtions
particulieres.

On  a  fouuent  parle  dans  les  relations  precedentes
d'vne  bonne  femme  aueugle  nomm6e  Helene,  fa  mort
a  donne  vne  fainte  approbation  aux  adtions  de  la  vie
qu'elle  a  menee  depuis  fon  Baptefme,  vn  excez  peu
blafmable  la  iettee  dans  le  tombeau,  fe  fentant  atta-
quee  [74]  d'vne  forte  fieure,  elle  dift  aux  Meres  Hof-
pitalieres  la  triftefle  que  ie  reflents  voyant  la  duret6
des  Algonquins  de  I'lfle  mes  compatriotes  &  le  f can-
dale  qu'ils  donnent  aux  autres  Sauuages  par  le  mef-
pris  qu'ils  font  de  la  Foy  me  fera  mourir,  fi  i'entre
dans  leur  cabane  pour  raconter  quelque  Hiftoire
Saindte,  ou  pour  les  imiter  \sc.  inuiter]  k  prier  Dieu,
ils  fe  mocquent  de  tous  les  aduis  qu'on  leur  donne,
ils  mefprifent  la  priere  comme  s'ils  eftoient  indepen-
dans,  de  Dieu  leur  malheur  me  touche  fi  viuement  le
coeur,  que  i'en  fuis  trifle  iufques  au  mourir,  voila,
difoit-elle,  la  caufe  de  ma  maladie.  Vn  grand  Saindt
dit  que  toute  chofe  doit  auoir  fa  mefure  &  fa  reigle
excepte  1 'amour  qu'on  porte  a  Dieu,  cette  bonne  ame
auoit  trop  de  zele  et  fa  ferueur  eftoit  trop  preffante,
i'auois  \sc.  i'ai],  dit-elle  vne  grande  confolation  quand
ie  vay  vifiter  les  Sauuages  d'icy  bas,  ils  prennent
plaifir  d' entendre  parler  de  Dieu,  ie  leur  raconte
r  Hiftoire  d' Abraham,  de  Moyfe  &  les  autres  que  i'ay
retenues  dans  rinftruc5tion  qu'on  m'a  donnee  (en  eifet
elle  eftoit  auffi  ffauante  [75]  dans  les  myfteres  du
vieil  Teftaraent,  que  plufieurs  femmes  des  plus  capa-
bles  de  nollre  France)  ils  prennent  tous  plaifir  d'oiiyr
parler  de  chofes  fi  rauiffantes,  ils  fe  mettent  a  genoux
tous  les  foirs,  &  ils  prononce[nt]  les  prieres  tout  haut


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  197

people  were  Christians,  they  gave  great  edification  to-
the  Nuns. Here  are  some  especial  actions.

Mention  has  frequently  been  made  in  previous  rela-
tions of  a  good  blind  woman  named  Helene.  Her
death  has  given  holy  approbation  to  the  deeds  of  the
life  that  she  had  led  since  her  Baptism.  An  impru-
dence, hardly  blamable,  brought  her  to  her  grave.
Feeling  herself  attacked  [74]  by  a  violent  fever,  she
said  to  the  Hospital  Mothers:  "  The  sorrow  that  I
feel  at  seeing  the  hard-heartedness  of  the  Algonquins
of  the  Island,  my  countrymen,  and  the  scandal  that
they  give  to  the  other  Savages  by  their  contempt  for
the  Faith,  will  cause  my  death.  If  I  enter  their  cab-
ins, to  relate  some  narrative  from  Sacred  History,  or
to  invite  them  to  pray  to  God,  they  laugh  at  all  the
advice  that  is  given  to  them ;  they  despise  prayer,  as
if  they  were  independent  of  God.  Their  misfor-
tune touches  my  heart  to  such  an  extent,  that  I  am
sorrowful  unto  death.  That,"  said  she,  "  is  the  cause
of  my  illness."  A  great  Saint  says  that  everything
must  have  its  measure  and  its  rule,  except  the  love
we  bear  to  God.  This  good  soul's  fervor  was  too
zealous,  and  she  was  too  eager.  "  I  feel  much  con-
solation," she  said,  "  when  I  go  to  visit  the  Savages
down  here.  They  take  pleasure  in  hearing  one  speak
of  God.  I  relate  to  them  the  Story  of  Abraham,  of
Moses,  and  of  others,  which  I  have  retained  in  my
memory  from  the  instruction  given  to  me"  (in  fact,
she  was  as  learned  [75]  in  the  mysteries  of  the  old
Testament  as  many  of  the  most  clever  women  of  our
France).  ' '  They  all  take  pleasure  in  hearing  of  such
delightful  things.  They  kneel  down  every  night,
and  repeat  their  prayers  aloud, —  each  one  following
me  with  much  modesty. But  there  is  still  another


198  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.25

chacun  me  fuit  auec  beaucoiip  de  modeflie,  mais  ils
maquent  encor  en  vn  point  pour  la  plufpart,  c'eft
que  ie  voudrois  qu'apres  leur  priere  ils  gardaffent  le
filence,  qu'ils  ruminafl'ent  ce  qu'ils  ont  dit  k  Dieu,  &
qu'il  s'endormiffent  en  pefant  a  luy,  or  vne  bonne
quatite  ne  laiffe  pas  de  parler  &  de  s'entretenir  apres
qu'ils  ont  prie  Dieu,  cela  m'afflige  vn  petit,  car  ie
voudrois  qu'ils  fillent  encor  mieux  qu'ils  ne  font.

Elle  adioutoit  que  depuis  qu'elle  etoit  deuenue
aueugle  «&  qu'elle  s'eftoit  ragee  a  la  foy,  elle  auoit
toufiours  efte  trauaill^e  de  quelque  maladie,  le  diable
prenoit  de  la  occafion  de  luy  fuggerer  cette  penfee,
mais  d'ou  viet  que  depuis  que  ie  conoy  Dieu  &  que  ie
I'aime  fi  particulierement,  ie  fuis  toufiours  dans  les
fouffrances,  &  voyla  des  femmes  qui  fe  portent,  fi
bien  &  qui  le  m'efprifent?  auffi-toft,  il  \y6'\  luy  venoit
vne  autre  penf6e  c'eft  I'amour  de  mon  Dieu  qui  fait
cela  pour  m'efprouuer  &  pour  me  faire  paier  mes
debtes  icy  bas,  afin  que  ie  ne  fois  point  tourmentee
en  I'autre  vie,  voyla  comme  il  traite  fes  amis,  cela
luy  donnoit  des  defirs  de  fouffrir,  en  forte  que  ne
pouuans  ieufner  le  Carefme,  &  croyant  que  les  fouf-
frances eftoient  agreables  a  Dieu,  elle  lu}^  difoit  fi  ie
ne  puis  ieufner  ie  peux  endurer,  ie  vous  offre  les
douleurs  de  ma  maladie.

Ie  n'aurois  iamais  fait  fi  ie  voulois  rapporter  le  nom-
bre  des  prieres  que  faifoit  cette  bonne  ame,  elle  auoit
vne  deuotion  amoureufe  enuers  Noftre  Seigneur,  elle
aimoit  cordialement  la  faindte  Vierge,  elle  s'addref-
foit  fouuent  k  fon  bon  Ange  &  a  faincle  Helene
dont  elle  portoit  le  nom,  faifant  des  colloques  auec
vn  langage  qui  eft  bien  venu  au  Ciel,  fur  tout  fe
voyant charitablement affift^e non feulement elle


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  199»


point,  on  which  most  of  them  fail.  I  could  wish  that
after  their  prayer  they  should  keep  silent,  ponder
over  what  they  have  said  to  God,  and  go  to  sleep
while  thinking  of  him.  Now  a  good  many  speak
and  converse  together,  after  having  prayed  to  God.
This  afflicts  me  a  little,  for  I  would  like  them  to  do
still  better  than  they  do."

She  added  that  since  she  had  become  blind,  and
since  she  had  belonged  to  the  faith,  she  had  always
been  afflicted  with  some  disease.  The  devil  took  the
opportunity  to  suggest  this  thought  to  her:  "  But
how  is  it  that  since  I  know  God,  and  love  him  so-
thoroughly,  I  am  always  suffering,  while  there  are
women  who  are  in  good  health  and  who  think  noth-
ing of  him  ? ' '  [76]  Another  thought  came  at  once  to
her  mind :  "  It  is  the  love  of  my  God  which  does  this,
to  try  me  and  to  make  me  pay  my  debts  here  below,
so  that  I  may  not  be  tormented  in  the  other  life ;  it
is  thus  that  he  treats  his  friends."  This  inspired
her  with  a  desire  to  suffer;  therefore,  as  she  could
not  fast  through  Lent,  and  as  she  believed  that  suf-
fering was  agreeable  to  God,  she  said  to  him:  "  If  I
cannot  fast,  I  can  suffer;  I  offer  you  the  pains  of  my
sickness."

I  would  never  have  done,  were  I  to  repeat  the
number  of  prayers  that  this  good  soul  said.  She  had
an  affectionate  devotion  for  Our  Lord ;  she  heartily
loved  the  blessed  Virgin ;  she  often  addressed  her-
self to  her  good  Angel,  and  to  saint  Helena,  whose
name  she  bore,  holding  this  communion  in  a  lan-
guage which  surely  reached  Heaven.  Above  all,
when  she  saw  herself  so  charitably  succored,  she  not
only  thanked  the  Mothers  who  attended  her,  but  she
never  failed  frequently  to  repeat  these  words:  "  My


200  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  25

remercioit  les  Meres  qui  la  feruoient,  mais  elle  ne
manquoit  point  de  dire  f ouuent  ces  paroles :  mon  Dieu
determinez  de  ma  vie  vous  efles  le  maiftre;  ayez
pitie  de  ceux  qui  ont  pitie  de  moy,  fecourez  tous  ceux
qui  \J7^  nous  fecourent,  &  fur  tout  eleuez  au  Ciel  la
perfonne  qui  a  fait  baflir  cette  maifon  oil  on  regoit
les  pauures  malades,  eleuez  y  auiTi  tous  fes  amis
Min^kiteh  ainfi  foit-il.

Elle  auoit  vne  grande  deuotion  d' Entendre  la
faindte  Meffe,  enuoyant  aduertir  certain  iours  les
bonnes  Meres  qu'elle  fe  trouuoit  fi  mal  qu'elle  ne
pouuoit  aller  feule  a  la  Chappelle,  on  luy  refpondit
qu'elle  n'efhoit  point  obligee  d'affifter  k  la  Meffe  dans
vne  fi  grande  maladie,  mais  deuant  que  la  refponce
luy  fuft  rendiie  deux  femmes  Sauuages  I'eftant  veniie
voir,  elle  fi  fift  traifner  &  I'entendit  a  deux  genoux,
.&  pour  marque  que  fa  ferueur  la  fouftenoit,  fes  deuo-
tions  finies  elle  n'en  pouuoit  plus,  tombans  en  deffail-
lance,  fi  bien  qu'a  peine  la  peut-on  reporter  fur  fon
lic5t  d'oii  elle  difoit  k  Dieu  les  iours  qu'on  ne  luy  per-
mettoit  pas  d'aller  a  la  Chappele,  tu  f9ais  bien  que  ie
fuis  malade,  &  que  ie  fuis  trifle  de  ne  pouuoir  entrer
dans  la  maifon  des  prieres,  &  elle  prenoit  pour  lors
fon  chappelet,  &  fe  tournant  vers  I'Eglife  le  recitoit
auec  toute  I'attention  [78]  qu'elle  pouuoit  auoir.

Elle  demanda  qu'elle  opinion  auoit  le  Medecin  de
fa  maladie,  on  luy  dit,  qu'il  auoit  bonne  efperance
de  fa  fante,  c'eft  "k  Dieu  fift-elle  d'en  determiner,
qu'il  face  ce  qu'il  voudra  ie  ne  feray  pas  marrie  de
le  voir,  comme  elle  vit  que  les  remedes  la  tourmen-
toient  fans  effedt  elle  en  eut  auerfion,  neantmoins
elle  fe  \sc.  les]  prenoit  difant  qu'il  falloit  obeyr.

Elle  efloit  dans  vne  ardeur  bruflante  la  colique  la


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  201

God,  decide  as  to  my  life ;  you  are  the  master.  Have
pity  on  those  who  have  pity  on  me.  Assist  all  those
who  \y^'\  assist  us,  and  especially  take  up  to  Heaven
the  person  who  has  caused  this  house  to  be  built,  in
which  the  poor  sick  are  received.  Take  there,  like-
wise, all  her  friends. Minoukiteh, —  Amen."

She  had  a  great  devotion  for  Hearing  holy  Mass.
When,  on  a  certain  day,  she  sent  word  to  the  good
Mothers  that  she  felt  too  ill  to  go  alone  to  the  Chap-
el, she  was  told  that  she  was  not  obliged  to  attend
Mass  while  she  was  so  sick.  But,  before  the  answer
reached  her,  she  induced  two  Savage  women,  who
had  come  to  see  her,  to  drag  her  there,  and  she  heard
it  kneeling.  And,  as  it  was  only  her  fervor  which
sustained  her,  when  her  devotions  were  ended  she  was
exhausted,  and  in  a  fainting  condition,  so  that  they
could  hardly  carry  her  back  to  her  bed,  where  she
said  to  God,  every  day  when  she  was  not  allowed
to  go  to  the  Chapel:  "  Thou  knowest  well  that  I  am
sick,  and  that  I  am  sad  because  I  cannot  enter  the
house  of  prayer."  Then  she  would  take  her  rosary,
and,  turning  toward  the  Church,  she  would  recite  it
with  all  the  attention  [78]  in  her  power.

She  asked  what  opinion  the  Physician  had  of  her
illness,  and  was  told  that  he  had  good  hope  for  her
recovery,  "  That  is  for  God  to  decide,"  she  said.
"  Let  him  do  as  he  will;  I  shall  not  be  sorry  to  see
him."  When  she  saw  that  the  medicines  tormented
her  without  effect,  she  felt  an  aversion  to  them;
nevertheless,  she  took  them,  saying  that  she  must
obey.

She  was  in  a  burning  fever ;  she  sometimes  suffered
greatly  from  colic;  and,  if  in  her  agony  any  fretful
words escaped her, she at once begged pardon,


202  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jiSUITES [Vol.25

preffoit  quelquefois  viuemet,  &  li  dans  fes  angoiffes
il  luy  efchapoit  qiielqiies  paroles  de  chagrin  auffi-
toft  elle  demandoit  pardon,  c'eft  le  mal  difoit-elle
qui  parle,  ie  veux  obeyr  a  Dieu  priez-le  qu'il  aye
pitie  de  moy,  c'eft  chofe  bien  remarquable  que  iamais
fa  maladie  ne  I'empefcha  d'inltruire,  &  de  parler  de
Dieu  k  ceux  oil  celles  qui  la  venoient  vifiter,  &  mefme
encor  par  fois  elle  enfeignoit  quelque  chofe  de  fa
langue  aux  meres  qui  I'affiftoient.  Elle  auoit  de
grandes  affedtions  de  mourir  Religieufe  comme  on
ne  iugeoit  pas  ^  propos  de  luy  accorder  fa  demande,
on  luy  promit  pour  fa  confolation  qu'on  I'enterreroit
[79]  aupres  de  la  Mere  de  faindte  Marie,  qui  eft  paffe
de  ce  monde  dans  I'eftime  d'vne  haute  vertu,  on  luy
dift  auffi  qu'on  I'enfeueliroit  ^  la  Fran9oife,  cela  luy
donna  vne  ioye  fi  fenfible  qu'elle  ne  fe  pouuoit
contenir,  elle  auoit  neantmoins  encor  vn  regret  c'eftoit
de  mourir  deuat  que  les  Sauuages  fuffent  retournez.
de  leur  grade  chaffe  defirat  leur  temoigner  le  conten-
tement,  qu'elle  reffentoit  d'auoir  embraff^  la  foy  de
lefus-Chrift,  elle  demanda  cette  faueur  "k  Dieu,  qui
luy  f ut  accordee :  car  ayant  [arriues]  deux  iours  de-
uat fa  mort,  I'eftant  venue  vifiter  elle  deploya  fon
zele  et  fa  rhetorique,  elle  fe  met  fur  fon  feant,  &  les
fentant  a  I'entour  de  fon  lidt  elle  leur  dit  d'vne  voix
ferme,  k  la  bonne-heur  que  ie  vous  parle  encor  vne
fois  deuant  ma  mort,  iauois  defir6  cela  tres-ardem-
ment,  ne  croyez  pas  que  ie  fois  trifte,  quoy  que  vous
me  voyez  malade  &  toute  mourante,  mon  coeur  eft
plein  de  ioye  de  ce  que  ie  m'en  vay  au  Ciel;  6  que
ie  remercie  Dieu  de  bon  coeur  de  ce  que  ie  fuis
baptifee  &  de  ce  qu'il  m'a  fait  la  grace  de  croire
toufjours  en  luy depuis  que  ie  fuis  Chreftienne, ie


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  203

saying- :  "  It  is  the  disease  that  is  speaking.  I  wish  to
obey  God.  Pray  him  to  have  pity  on  me."  It  is  a
very  remarkable  thing  that  her  illness  never  pre-
vented her  from  instructing,  and  telling  of  God,  those
who  came  to  visit  her;  and  even  occasionally  she
taught  something  of  her  own  language  to  the  moth-
ers who  attended  her.  She  had  a  great  desire  to  die
a  Nun.  As  it  was  not  deemed  advisable  to  grant  her
request,  she  was  promised,  for  her  consolation,  that
she  should  be  buried  [79]  near  Mother  de  sainte
Marie  who  had  passed  away  from  this  world  with  the
reputation  of  lofty  virtue.  She  was  also  told  that  she
would  be  enshrouded  in  the  French  manner.  This
gave  her  such  joy  that  she  could  not  contain  herself.
She  had,  nevertheless,  still  one  sorrow,  which  was
that  she  might  die  before  the  Savages  returned  from
their  great  hunt.  As  she  wished  to  manifest  to  them
the  content  that  she  felt  at  having  embraced  the  faith
of  Jesus  Christ,  she  asked  that  favor  of  God,  which
was  granted  to  her, — for  they  arrived  two  days  before
her  death ;  when  they  came  to  visit  her,  she  dis-
played her  zeal  and  her  rhetoric.  She  raised  herself
to  a  sitting  posture,  and,  feeling  them  around  her
bed,  she  said  to  them  in  a  firm  voice :  "  It  is  well  that
I  should  speak  to  you  once  more  before  I  die ;  I  have
desired  it  very  ardently.  Do  not  think  that  I  am
sad.  Although  you  see  me  ill  and  dying,  my  heart
is  full  of  joy  because  I  am  going  to  Heaven.  Oh,
how  heartily  I  thank  God  that  I  have  been  baptized,
and  that  he  has  granted  me  the  grace  of  always  be-
lieving in  him  since  I  have  been  a  Christian !  I  [80]
die  with  that  satisfaction.  Be  firm  in  the  faith.  I
will  pray  to  God  for  you  when  I  shall  be  in  Paradise,
so  that  you  may  persevere  in  his  Church. Pray  to


204  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  25

[80]  meurs  dans  ce  contentement  Ik,  foyez  fermes  en
la  foy,  ie  prieray  Dieu  pour  vous  quand  ie  feray  en
Paradis,  afin  que  vous  perfeueriez  en  fon  Eglife,  priez-
le  auffi  qu'il  m'ayde  k  bien  mourir.  lay  vne  confo-
lation  toute  particuliere  de  ce  que  mes  bonnes  Meres
m'ont  promis  que  ie  ferois  enterree  aupres  de  la  Reli-
gieufe  qui  mourut  il  y  a  3.  ans.  A  ce  difcours  les
Sauuages  refpondirent  k  leur  ordinaire  ho,  6,  6,  pour
marque  qu'ils  approuuoiet  tout  ce  qu'elle  auoit  dit,
plulieurs  lui  parlerent  en  particulier,  &  tons  luy
donnant  Ie  dernier  adieu,  s'en  retournerent  fort  fatis-
faits;  Nous  fommes  grandement  fafchez  difoient-ils,
de  la  mort  de  cette  bonne  femme,  elle  fgauoit  toutes
les  prieres,  elle  nous  inftruifoit  &  nous  parloit  fou-
uent  de  Dieu  dans  nos  cabanes,  nous  I'aymions  tous.

Le  Pere  Superieur  la  voyant  baiffer  notablement
luy  donna  le  fainc5t  viatique  &  en  fuitte  1' Extreme
Ondtion,  &  luy  recommanda  de  s'occuper  tant  qu'elle
pourroit  dans  I'amour  de  celuy  qu'elle  alloit  voir,  fe
fentant  affoiblir  c'eft  k  ce  coup  dit-elle,  ie  me  meurs,
&  ioignant  [81]  les  mains  &  leuant  les  yeux  au  Ciel,
elle  perdit  la  parole,  mais  non  pas  I'oiiye,  fi  bien  que
comme  on  luy  fuggeroit  quelques  ac5les  d' Amour  &
de  confiance  elle  monftroit  en  ferrant  la  main  des
Meres  qui  I'approclioient,  qu'elle  prenoit  plaifir  en
ces  fainc5tes  adtions,  elle  paffa  au  Ciel  dans  cette
douceur,  nous  lailTant  vn  riche  exemple  des  bontez
de  I'efprit  diuin.  Les  Religieufes  Hofpitalieres  qui
aimoient  vniquement  cette  bonne  femme  pour  fa
vertu  luy  firent  vn  feruice  le  plus  folemnel  qu'elle[s]
peurent,  auquel  affifterent  les  Sauuages  qui  fe  trou-
uerent  pour  lors  k  faindt  lofeph.

Le  12.  d'Odtobre  vne  autre  femme  nomm^e  Marie


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  J643-44  206

him  also  that  he  may  aid  me  to  die  a  good  death.  I
have  a  very  special  consolation  in  the  promise  that
my  good  Mothers  have  made  to  me,  that  I  shall  be
buried  near  the  Nun  who  died  3  years  ago."  To  this
discourse  the  Savages  replied,  as  usual,  "  Ho,  6,  6,"
to  show  that  they  approved  all  that  she  had  said.
Several  spoke  to  her,  individually;  and,  after  they
had  all  bidden  her  a  last  adieu,  they  returned  very
well  satisfied.  "  We  are  very  sorry,"  they  said,  "  for
the  death  of  that  good  woman ;  she  knew  all  the
prayers;  she  instructed  us,  and  often  spoke  to  us  of
God  in  our  cabins. We  all  loved  her."

The  Father  Superior,  seeing  that  she  was  visibly
sinking,  administered  to  her  the  holy  viaticum,
and  afterward  Extreme  Unction,  and  recommended
her  to  occupy  her  mind  as  much  as  possible  with  love
for  him  whom  she  was  about  to  see.  As  she  felt
herself  growing  weaker,  she  said,  "  Now  I  am  dy-
ing; "  and,  clasping  [81]  her  hands,  and  raising  her
eyes  to  Heaven,  she  was  deprived  of  speech,  but  not
of  hearing ;  so  much  so,  that  when  some  acts  of  Love
and  of  faith  were  suggested  to  her,  she  showed,  by
pressing  the  hands  of  the  Mothers  who  were  near
her,  that  she  took  pleasure  in  those  holy  actions.
She  thus  gently  passed  away  to  Heaven,  giving  us  a
striking  example  of  the  goodness  of  the  divine  spirit.
The  Hospital  Nuns,  who  greatly  loved  this  good
woman  for  her  virtue,  honored  her  with  the  most
solemn  funeral  service  in  their  power,  at  which  the
Savages  who  were  then  at  saint  Joseph  were  present.

On  the  1 2th  of  October,  another  woman,  named
Marie  Oukiwichunoukwe,  gave  up  her  soul  to  Our
Lord  in  the  same  Hospital  after  an  illness  of  three
months, caused  partly  by  the  loss  of  her  Christian


206  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  jASUITES  [Vol.25

8kiyicliunb'k8e  rendit  rame  a  Nortre  Seigneur  dans
le  mefme  Hofpital  apres  vne  maladie  de  trois  mois,
caufee  en  partie  pour  la  perte  de  fon  mary  Chreftien
tue  par  les  Iroquois,  fa  patience  fut  infigne,  elle
brufloit  d'vn  feu  qui  luy  confommoit  la  langue  &  le
gofier  &  toute  la  poitrine,  elle  deffecha  comme  vn
fquelet,  iamais  neantmoins  elle  ne  manqu'a  de  rendre
fes  petits  deuoirs  h.  Dieu  foir  &  matin,  elle  n'euft  pas
[82]  crii  eftre  Chreftienne  fi  elle  n'euft  fait  fes  prieres,
le  Pere  Superieur  Ik  confolant  fur  fes  AngoifTes  elle
s'efcria  d'vne  voix  fort  dolente,  ie  n'apprehende
point  la  mort,  ie  ne  me  fafche  point  de  ce  que  Dieu
ordonnera  de  moy,  mais  i'ay  des  regrets  bien  fenfi-
bles  de  laiffer  cette  pauure  petite  orfeline,  (monftrant
vne  feule  enfant  qui  luy  reftoit)  fans  aucun  fecours,
le  Pere  luy  promit  qu'il  I'aideroit  &  les  Hofpitalieres
luy  firent  faire  vne  petite  robe  au  pluftoft  ce  qui  con-
fola  tellement  cette  bonne  Mere  qu'elle  embraffa  fon
enfant,  auec  des  tendreffes  admirables,  puis  la  don-
nant  a  vne  femme  Sauuage  luy  dit,  pred  Ik  pour  ta
fille  &  ne  I'apporte  plus,  de  peur  que  cela  ne  refueille
mes  douleurs.  Quelque  temps  deuant  fa  mort,  elle
demanda  a  fe  confeffer,  ie  me  fuis  fafchee  difoit-elle,
ie  defire  qu'on  me  face  venir  vn  Pere,  ce  fut  la
derniere  Confeffion  de  fa  vie,  car  bien-toft  apres  elle
perdit  la  parole,  ne  laiffant  pas  par  vn  figne  de  fes
yeux  de  tefmoigner  qu'elle  entendoit  ce  qu'on  luy
difoit  &  qu'elle  exergoit  les  adles  qu'on  luy  fuggeroit,
eflant  encor  [83]  aux  trois  Riuieres  deuant  qu'elle
defcendifl  a  1' Hofpital,  elle  dift  a  vn  Pere  qui  la  con-
foloit  ie  m'en  vay  k  fainc5t  lofeph,  ie  me  logeray  au-
pres  de  1' Hofpital,  &  ie  demeureray  le  refte  de  mes
iours  auec  les  croyans,  ie  m'approcheray  d' Helena


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  207

husband,  who  had  been  killed  by  the  Iroquois.  Her
patience  was  remarkable.  She  burned  with  a  fire
that  devoured  her  tongue,  her  throat,  and  all  her
chest ;  she  became  emaciated  like  a  skeleton ;  never-
theless, she  never  failed  to  perform  her  minor  duties
toward  God,  night  and  morning.  She  would  not
have  [82]  considered  herself  a  Christian  if  she  had
not  said  her  prayers.  When  the  Father  Superior
consoled  her  in  her  Sufferings,  she  exclaimed  in  a
very  sad  voice:  "  I  fear  not  death,  I  do  not  grieve  at
what  God  may  order  for  me ;  but  I  feel  deep  regret
at  leaving  this  poor  little  orphan"  (pointing  to  the
only  child  that  was  left  to  her)  "  without  any  assist-
ance." The  Father  promised  that  he  would  help
her,  and  the  Hospital  Nuns  made  her  a  little  dress
as  soon  as  possible,  which  so  consoled  the  good
Mother  that  she  embraced  her  child  with  admirable
tenderness.  Then,  giving  her  to  a  Savage  woman,
she  said  to  her:  "Take  her  for  thy  daughter,  and
bring  her  here  no  more,  for  fear  of  reviving  my
grief."  Some  time  before  her  death,  she  asked  to
be  confessed,  and  said:  "  I  have  been  angry,  and  I
wish  a  Father  to  be  brought  here."  It  was  the  last
Confession  of  her  life,  for  shortly  afterward  she  was
deprived  of  speech ;  but  she  failed  not  to  show  by  a
movement  of  her  eyes  that  she  heard  what  was  said
to  her,  and  that  she  performed  the  acts  suggested  to
her.  While  she  was  still  [83]  at  the  three  Rivers,
before  coming  down  to  the  Hospital,  she  said  to  a
Father  who  was  consoling  her :  "  I  am  going  to  saint
Joseph.  I  will  lodge  near  the  Hospital,  and  will
spend  the  remainder  of  my  days  with  believers.  I
will  get  near  Helene,  who  knows  all  the  prayers"
(this  was  the  good  woman of  whom we  have  just


208  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.25

qui  fgait  toutes  les  prieres  (c'eft  cette  bonne  femme
dont  nous  venons  de  parler)  elle  m'inftruicit  profond^-
ment,  en  effedt  cette  bonne  femme  Aueugle  a  aid6
beaucoup  de  perfonnes  a  voir  &  embraffer  la  vertu  &
les  Veritas  de  noftre  creance.

Vne  ieune  fille  d'vne  Nation  qui  tire  plus  vers  le
Nord  que  Tadouffac,  eftant  venue  voir  les  Sauuages
de  ce  quartier  Ik,  tomba  malade,  on  la  fift  apporter
de  40,  lieues  loin  en  cet  Hofpital,  ou  elle  a  demeur6
4.  oil  5.  mois  malade,  c'eft  chofe  eftrange  que  cette
ame  qui  auoit  toufiours  eft6  dans  la  barbaric  eftoit
neantmoins  dou6e  d'vne  douceur  li  aimable  qu'on  la
gouuernoit  auffi  facilement  qu'vn  petit  enfant,  quoy
qu'elle  euft  des  douleurs  tres-fenfibles  &  tres-ennuy-
antes,  iamais  elle  ne  fe  plaignoit  iamais  elle  ne
demandoit  rien,  elle  aggreoit  auec  vn  vifage  gay  &
ferain  tout  [84]  ce  qu'on  luy  donnoit  fes  delices
eftoient  de  prier  Dieu  &  quoy  qu'elle  fut  debile,  elle
ne  vouloit  rien  prendre  qu'elle  n'euft  entendu  la
Mefle,  ayant  defir  de  communier  elle  fouffrit  beau-
coup  pour  ioiiir  de  cette  faueur,  car  eftant  bruflee
d'vne  foif  qui  la  confommoit  elle  endura  toute  la
nui(5t  cette  peine  fans  iamais  vouloir  prendre  vne
goutte  d'eau,  elle  en  fut  fi  foible  que  cette  commu-
nion luy  feruit  de  viatique.  Le  Pere  Dequen  la  con-
folant  apres  la  MelTe  les  Meres  s'apperceurent  qu'elle
defailloit,  le  Pere  luy  done  au  pluftoft  I'Extreme-
Ondtion,  &  ce  petit  Agneau  lau6  depuis-peu  dans  le
fang  de  lefus-Chrift,  s'en  alia  auec  fon  vray  pafteur
dans  le  Ciel.

Vn  ieune  Attikamegue,  c'eft  vne  nation  qui  eft  au
Nord  des  trois  Riuieres,  auoit  trois  grandes  playes
mortelles  &  vne  violente  fievre  qui  I'oppreffoit  de


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  209

spoken);  "  she  teaches  me  thoroughly."  Indeed,
that  good  Blind  woman  has  assisted  many  to  see  and
embrace  the  virtue  and  the  truths  of  our  belief.

A  young  girl,  belonging  to  a  Tribe  that  dwells
farther  toward  the  North  than  Tadoussac,  came  to
see  the  Savages  in  that  quarter,  and  fell  ill.  She
was  brought  from  a  distance  of  40  leagues  to  this
Hospital,  where  she  remained  sick  for  4  or  5  months.
It  is  a  strange  thing  that  this  soul,  which  has  always
lived  in  barbarism,  should  nevertheless  have  been
endowed  with  a  gentleness  so  lovable  that  she  was
managed  as  easily  as  a  little  child.  Although  her
sufferings  were  very  keen  and  wearisome,  she  never
complained,  and  never  asked  for  anything.  She
accepted  with  a  cheerful  and  serene  countenance  all
[84]  that  was  given  to  her.  Her  delight  was  to
pray  to  God ;  and  although  she  was  very  weak  she
refused  to  take  anything  before  she  had  heard  Mass,
because  she  wished  to  receive  communion.  She
suffered  much  to  enjoy  that  favor,  for  she  burned
with  a  consuming  thirst ;  and  she  endured  the  suffer-
ing throughout  the  night,  without  ever  taking  a  drop
of  water.  She  was  so  weak  that  this  communion
served  as  a  viaticum  to  her.  When  Father  Dequen
consoled  her  after  Mass,  the  Mothers  noticed  that
she  was  swooning  away.  The  Father  administered
Extreme  Unction  to  her,  as  soon  as  possible;  and
this  little  Lamb,  lately  washed  in  the  blood  of  Jesus
Christ,  went  to  join  her  true  pastor  in  Heaven.

A  young  Attikamegue  —  this  is  a  tribe  to  the
North  of  the  three  Rivers  —  had  three  deep  mortal
wounds,  and  a  violent  fever  that  oppressed  him  from
time  to  time.  His  severe  illness  did  not  rob  his  soul
of  peace,  nor  his  countenance  of  its  serenity. For


210  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  25

temps  en  temps,  fes  grandes  maladies  ne  luy  dero-
boient  point  la  paix  de  fon  ame  n'y  la  ferenite  de  fon
vifage,  aux  moindres  petits  feruices  qti'on  luy  ren-
doit,  il  tefmoignoit  des  adtions  de  graces  plaines  de
coeur,  comme  il  n'auoit  [85]  pas  efte  profondement
inftruic5t,  fa  maladie  nous  ayant  oblige  de  le  baptifer
promptemet,  il  ne  f9auoit  que  quelques  prieres  qu'il
recitoit  li  fouuent  auec  fon  Chappelet,  qu'on  euft-dit
qu'il  n'auoit  rien  au  monde  de  plus  cber,  en  effedt  fi
dans  fon  fommeil,  fon  Chappelet  luy  efchapoit,  il
n'auoit  point  de  repos,  qu'on  ne  I'eut  cherche  &
qu'on  ne  luy  euft  rendu,  comme  on  vit  que  fa  mala-
die luy  donnoit  le  temps  d'eftre  inftruidt  de  la  Com-
munion, d'ont  il  n'auoit  point  encor  eu  de  connoif-
fance,  on  luy  en  parla:  mais  on  n'euft  pas  fi-to£t
entame  ce  difcours  que  le  voyla  en  ferueur,  il  preffe  a
toute-heure  ces  bonnes  Meres  de  rinft[r]uire,  fi  quel-
que  Sauuage  le  vient  voir,  il  luy  demande  s'il  eft
admis  h.  la  Communion  s'il  refpond,  que  ouy,  tu  fgais
done  bien  ce  que  c'eft,  fied  toy  la  &  m'inftruy ;  car
ie  veux  Communier  deuant  que  de  mourir,  en  effedt
il  mourut  le  lendemain  qu'il  eut  receu  fon  Sauueur.
Vn  nomme  Charles  kJ^erafing  fils  d'vne  bonne
veufue  nomm^e  Charitee  eftoit  feul  chaffeur  de  fa
famille  compof6e  de  dix  perfonnes,  il  a  eft6  trois  ans
[86]  malade,  enfin  s'eftant  retire  a  I'Hofpital;  iamais
on  ne  I'entendit  pleindre,  iamais  il  ne  tefmoigna  au-
cune  trifteffe  n'y  ennuy  de  fon  mal,  il  eftoit  tres-bien
inftruidt,  c'eft  pourquoy  il  n' eftoit  pas  befoin  de  luy
remettre  en  memoire  fon  petit  deuoir,  il  perdit  la
veue  8.  ou  9.  mois  deuant  fon  trefpas,  fes  douleurs
augmenterent,  mais  fa  patience  ne  diminua  iamais:
enfin  elles  en  vindrent  a  tel  point,  qu'on  ne  penfoit


1642--J4J  RELATION  OF  1643-44  ^H

the  smallest  service  rendered  to  him,  he  returned
the  most  heartfelt  thanks.  He  had  [85]  not  been
fully  instructed,  because  his  illness  compelled  us  to
baptize  him  promptly ;  and  he  knew  only  a  few  pray-
ers, which  he  recited  so  often,  with  his  Rosary,  that
one  would  think  that  nothing  in  the  world  was  dearer
to  him.  Indeed,  if  during  his  sleep  his  Rosary
slipped  from  him,  he  had  no  rest  until  it  was  searched
for  and  restored  to  him.  As  we  saw  that  his  sick-
ness allowed  him  time  to  be  instructed  for  Commun-
ion, of  which  he  had  as  yet  no  knowledge,  we  spoke
to  him  of  it.  But  we  had  no  sooner  begun  this  dis-
course than  he  became  eager;  he  pressed  the  good
Mothers  at  all  hours  to  instruct  him.  If  any  Savage
came  to  see  him,  he  would  ask  him  if  he  were
admitted  to  Communion,  and,  if  he  answered  in  the
affirmative,  he  would  say:  "Thou  knowest  well,
then,  what  it  is.  Sit  down  and  teach  me,  for  I  wish
to  receive  Communion  before  I  die."  In  fact,  he
died  the  day  after  he  had  received  his  Savior.

One  Charles  kwerasing,  the  son  of  a  good  widow
named  Charitee,  was  the  sole  hunter  of  his  family,
consisting  of  ten  persons.  He  was  ill  for  three
years,  [86]  and  finally  went  to  the  Hospital.  He  was
never  heard  to  complain ;  he  never  manifested  any
sorrow  or  weariness  on  account  of  his  illness.  He
was  very  well  instructed,  consequently  it  was  not
necessary  to  remind  him  of  his  minor  duties.  He
lost  his  sight  8  or  9  months  before  his  death.  His
sufferings  increased,  but  his  patience  never  dimin-
ished. Finally,  they  became  so  great  that  it  was
thought  that  he  could  not  endure  them  for  two  days
without  dying ;  and  still  he  endured  them  for  three
full  weeks  and more. He sometimes pronounced


212  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.25

pas  qu'il  les  peult  fupporter  deux  iours  fans  mourir,
&  il  les  endura  encor  trois  femaines  entieres  &  dauan-
tage,  il  pronongoit  par  f  ois  le  S.  Nom  de  I  E  s  v  s  ,
comme  en  criant  &  en  fe  plaignant  dans  fes  plus
grandes  preff es :  mais  auffl-tofl  qu'on  luy  parloit  de
Dieu  il  s'arrefloit  tout  court,  prenant  vn  fmgulier
plaifir  dans  les  difcours  de  piete,  &  quelquefois  il
difoit  aux  affiftans,  encor  que  vous  m'entendiez  crier,
ie  ne  fuis  pas  neantmoins  fafch6,  ie  ne  fuis  point  las
de  fouffrir,  c'eft  la  douleur  qui  a  fes  faillies  ie  veux
ce  que  Dieu  veut,  c'eft  a  luy  d'ordonner  de  ma  vie,
il  paffa  de  ce  monde  muny  de  tons  les  Sacremens  de
I'Eglife.

[87]  Le  5.  d'Auril,  vn  nomme  Alexis  Pimina-
kb'auich  Algonquin,  quitta  cette  vie  pour  entrer  dans
vne  autre  meilleure,  &  de  plus  grande  duree,  ce  pauure
gargon  eftoit  d'vn  naturel  affez  vif,  mais  la  grace
temperoit  bien  fon  ardeur,  vn  an  ou  enuiron  deuant
fon  trefpas  s'eflant  rencontre  aux  trois  Riuieres  auec
fes  camarades  qui  traittoient  auec  leur  rage  ordinaire
vn  pauure  prifonnier,  il  fe  retira  doucement  d'auec
eux,  ils  fe  gaufferent  de  luy,  ils  luy  offcerent  fon
Chappelet  le  mirent  en  piece[s],  en  vn  mot  ils  firent
ce  qu'ils  peurent  pour  I'induire  ^  tourmenter  auec
eux  ce  pauure  miferable,  ce  ieune  homme  s'enfuit  &
fe  retira  dans  noflre  maifon,  fuppliant  le  Pere  qui
eftoit-l^  de  luy  donner  le  couuert,  &  de  I'aider  h.
trouuer  vne  commodite  pour  retourner  auec  les
croyans  de  faint  lofeph,  le  Pere  s'y  employa,  ce  bon
gargon  ne  f  e  contentant  pas  de  viure  a  la  f  agon  des
Neophytes,  qui  gagnent  le  coeur  de  ceux  qui  les  con-
noiffent  tefmoigna  vn  defir  de  paffer  en  France,  pour
apprendre  la  langue  &  employer  le  refle  de  fes  iours


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  213

the  Holy  Name  of  J  E  s  u  s  as  if  crying  and  complain-
ing to  him,  in  his  greatest  paroxysms;  but,  as  soon
as  they  spoke  to  him  of  God,  he  would  stop  quite
short,  taking  a  remarkable  pleasure  in  pious  dis-
courses ;  and  sometimes  he  would  say  to  the  attend-
ants: "  Even  if  you  hear  me  cry  out,  I  am  not
grieving, —  I  am  not  weary  of  suffering;  it  is  the
pain  that  breaks  out.  I  wish  what  God  wishes;  it
is  for  him  to  dispose  of  my  life."  He  passed  away
from  this  life  fortified  with  all  the  Sacraments  of  the
Church.

[87]  On  the  5th  of  April,  one  Alexis  Piminakwa-
uich,  an  Algonquin,  departed  this  life  to  enter  into  a
better  and  a  more  lasting  one.  This  poor  youth  was
of  a  rather  passionate  nature,  but  grace  tempered
much  his  ardor.  A  year  or  so  before  his  death,  he
encountered  at  the  three  Rivers  his  comrades,  who
treated  a  poor  prisoner  with  their  usual  cruelty ;  he
quietly  withdrew  from  them.  They  laughed  at  him,
took  away  his  Rosary  from  him,  and  broke  it  to
pieces;  in  a  word,  they  did  what  they  could  to  in-
duce him  to  torture  the  poor  wretch  with  them.
The  young  man  fled,  and  took  refuge  in  our  house,
begging  the  Father  who  was  there  to  give  him  shel-
ter, and  to  help  him  find  means  to  return  among  the
believers  at  saint  Joseph ;  this  the  Father  undertook
to  do.  This  good  youth  was  not  content  to  live  in
the  manner  of  the  Neophytes,  who  win  the  hearts  of
those  who  know  them ;  he  expressed  a  desire  to  go
to  France,  to  learn  the  language  and  to  devote  the
remainder  of  his  days  to  the  service  of  Our  Lord,
[88]  without  marrying.  Death  overtook  him  while
in  that  desire,  and  in  the  practice  of  Christian  vir-
tues. He  was  very  careful  to  cleanse  his  soul  in  the


214  LES  RELATIONS  DESjASUITES  [Vol.25

an  feruice  de  Noftre  Seigneur  [88]  fans  fe  marier,  la
mort  le  prit  dans  ce  defir  &  dans  I'exercice  des
vertus  Chriftiennes,  il  auoit  vn  grand  foin  de  purifier
fon  ame  dans  le  Sacrement  de  Penitence,  &  de  s'ap-
procher  de  fon  Sauueur  autant  de  fois  qu'on  luy  per-
mettoit,  peut-eftre  que  c6t  amour  luy  obtint  la  grace
de  ioiiyr  deuant  fon  trefpas  de  tons  les  Sacremens
que  Dieu  a  laiffez  en  fon  Eglife  pour  le  foulagement,
&  pour  la  fan(5tification  de  fes  enfans,  &  qu'il  puifa
dans  ces  diuines  fontaines  les  eaux  de  grace  qui  luy
donnerent  vne  mort  auffi  douce  que  celle  d'vn  petit
enfant.

Vn  autre  ieune  gargon  aage  d'enuiron  i6.  ans,  nous
a  laiff6  des  exemples  d'vne  patience  de  fer,  vn  abcez
s'eftant  forme  dans  fa  tefte,  &  en  fuitte  eftant  deue-
nu  paralitique  fon  pauure  corps  commenga  a  fe  pour-
rir  deuant  que  d'eftre  en  terre,  les  vers  luy  fortoient
par  les  oreilles,  fa  peau  eftoit  toute  dechiree  &  fes
membres  s'en  alloient  quafi  en  lambeaux,  ie  vous
laiffe  a  penfer  de  combien  de  douleurs  eftoit  enuiron-
ne  ce  pauure  gargon?  on  ne  le  pouuoit  remuer  [89]
ny  tourner,  ny  toucher  qu'il  ne  fouffrifl  dans  I'ex-
tremite,  cependant  il  ne  difoit  que  deux  mots  Kita-
kb'clifin  vous  me  faites  mal,  &  il  le  difoit  fi  doucement
qu'on  eut  dit  qu'il  parloit  pour  vn  autre,  il  n'auoit  de
I'efprit  qu'autant  qu'il  en  falloit  pour  fouffrir  patiem-
ment  &  pour  prier  Dieu,  la  viuacite  qu'il  faifoit
paroiftre  en  fante,  &  qui  auroit  donn^  vn  indice  d'vne
ame  colere  &  impatiente  ne  parut  plus  dans  fa  mala-
die,  finon  pour  demander  qu'on  luy  fifl  dire  les  prieres
que  nous  enfeignons  aux  nouueaux  Chreftiens,  ayant
efhe  muny  de  tout  le  fecours  qu'on  donne  aux  enfans
de  Dieu,  il  nous  quitta  cliarg6  des  merites  d'vne
riche  patience.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  215

Sacrament  of  Penance,  and  to  approach  his  Savior
whenever  he  was  allowed  to  do  so.  Perhaps  that
love  obtained  for  him  the  grace  of  enjoying  before
his  death  all  the  Sacraments  that  God  has  bestowed
upon  his  Church,  for  the  relief  and  sanctification  of
his  children ;  and  he  drew  from  those  divine  foun-
tains the  waters  of  grace,  that  gave  him  a  death  as
peaceful  as  that  of  a  little  child.

Another  young  boy,  about  i6  years  of  age,  gave  us
examples  of  a  patience  of  iron.  An  abscess  formed
in  his  head,  and  he  afterward  became  paralyzed;  his
poor  body  began  to  rot  before  being  in  the  ground ;
worms  came  out  of  his  ears;  his  skin  was  all  torn,
and  his  limbs  were  falling  away  almost  piecemeal.
I  leave  you  to  imagine  how  the  poor  boy  must  have
suffered.  He  could  not  be  moved,  [89]  or  turned,
or  touched  without  suffering  extremely;  still,  he
uttered  only  two  words, —  Kitakouchsin,  "  You  hurt
me ;  ' '  and  he  said  it  so  gently  that  one  would  think
he  was  speaking  for  some  one  else.  He  had  only
enough  sense  to  suffer  patiently,  and  to  pray  to  God.
The  vehemence  that  he  had  manifested  while  in  good
health  and  which  would  have  indicated  a  passionate
and  impatient  soul,  no  longer  appeared  during  his
illness,  except  to  ask  us  to  make  him  say  the  prayers
that  we  teach  to  the  new  Christians.  Having  been
provided  with  all  the  help  that  is  given  to  the  chil-
dren of  God,  he  left  us,  laden  with  the  merits  of  a
lofty  patience.

A  woman  already  aged  was  carried  to  the  Hospi-
tal, there  to  find  her  eternal  salvation;  for,  accord-
ing to  all  human  appearances,  she  ran  the  risk  of
almost  certain  reprobation  if  she  had  not  found  that
refuge. It  must  be  confessed  that  God  exercises  a


216


LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  25


Vne  femme  defia  aagee  fut  port6e  a  I'Hofpital  pour
y  trouuer  fon  falut  eternel,  car  felon  les  apparences
humaines  elle  couroit  des  rifques  d'vne  reprobation
qnali  certaine,  fi  elle  n'euft  trouu6  ce  refuge,  il  faut
confeffer  que Dieu  exerce  vne  eftrange  prouidence,
&  qu'il  tient  des  voyes  tres-cachees  fur  ce  pauure
peuple,  les  Peres  qui  font  venus  icy  des  premiers  ont
veu cette femme mariee [90] a vn Capitaine de
grande  an  thorite  parmy  ceux  de  fa  Nation,  elle  auoit
vne famille  groffe & fioriffante,  vne  parente nom-
breufe, quantite  d'alliances,  elle  a  veu  de  fes  yeux
toute  cette fplendeur  reduite  au neant  ne  laiffant
apres  foy  [de]  quantite  d'enfans  qui  luy  font  morts
qu'vne  fille  aueugle,  laquelle  ne  luy  donnoit  pas  trop
de  contentement,  ces  grads  coups  dechargez  du  Ciel
fur  la  tefte  d'vne  pauure  femme  qui  demeuroit  parmy
des  impies,  lefquels  attribuent  k  noftre  creance  tons
les  fleaux,  &  toutes  les  calamitez  qui  accablent  les
Sauuages  depuis  qu'ils  ont  receu  la Foy, eftoient
capables  non  feulement  de  luy  donner  de  grandes
fecouffes,  mais  auffi  de  la  terraller  &  de  la  perdre  de
fond  en  comble  fi elle n'euft efl6 fecourtie,  mais
comme  elle  auoit  grandement  bien  fecouru  &  fortifi^
fes  enfans  &  fes  alliez  k  I'heure  de  la  mort,  ayant  vn
foin  qu'ils  mouruffent en  vrais  Chreftiens, noftre
Seigneur  la  voulu  prendre  en  vn  lieu  oii  elle  fuft
grandement  affiftee. Le  diable  luy  liura  plufieurs
attaques,  mais  elle  auoit  cela  de  bon  qu'elle  ouuroit
aifement  fon  coeur  [91]  «&  nonobftant  fes  tentations
elle  prioit  Dieu  fort  volontiers,  fa  bonte  luy  a  accor-
ds h.  la  mort  ce  qu'elle  auoit  procure  aux  autres,  nous
laiffans  dans  la  croyance  qu'elle  auoit  trouue  grace
deuant  fes  yeux.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  217

wonderful  providence  and  that  he  has  mysterious
ways  for  these  poor  people.  The  Fathers  who  first
came  here  saw  this  woman  married  [90]  to  a  Captain
high  in  authority  among  those  of  his  Tribe.  She
had  a  large  and  flourishing  family,  many  relatives,
and  numerous  connections.  She  saw  with  her  own
eyes  all  this  splendor  reduced  to  nothing, —  leaving
her,  out  of  her  many  children  who  are  dead,  but
one  blind  daughter  who  did  not  give  her  much  satis-
faction. These  heavy  blows,  falling  from  Heaven
on  the  head  of  a  poor  woman  living  among  the  un-
godly,—  who  attribute  to  our  belief  all  the  scourges
and  calamities  that  overwhelm  the  Savages  since
they  have  received  the  Faith, —  were  sufficient  not
only  to  give  her  great  shocks  but  also  to  overthrow
and  destroy  her  utterly,  had  she  not  received  succor.
But,  as  she  had  greatly  assisted  and  fortified  her  chil-
dren and  relatives  at  the  hour  of  death,  being  careful
that  they  should  die  as  true  Christians,  our  Lord
chose  to  take  her  to  a  place  where  she  would  be
greatly  assisted.  The  devil  made  several  attacks
upon  her,  but  she  had  this  good  trait,  that  she  easily
opened  her  heart;  [91]  and,  in  spite  of  her  tempta-
tions, she  prayed  very  willingly  to  God.  His  good-
ness granted  her  at  her  death  what  she  had  procured
for  others,  leaving  us  in  the  belief  that  she  had  found
grace  in  his  eyes.

This  house  of  Charity  has  not  only  taken  care  of
grown  persons,  but  has  also  aided  the  sinallest  chil-
dren,—  with  this  additional  burden  in  New  France,
that  the  mothers  must  be  fed  and  lodged  while  their
children  are  being  attended  to,  for  they  do  not  leave
them  out  of  their  sight.  These  poor  women,  while
watching  the  sufferings  of  those  who  are  dearest  to


218  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ^SUITES [Vol.25

Cette  maifon  de  Charite  n'a  pas  eu  foin  des  grandes
perfonnes  feulement,  mais  elle  a  foulage  les  plus  pe-
tits  enfans  auec  cette  charge  qui  eft  de  furcroift  en  la
Nouuelle  France  qu'il  faut  nourrir  &  heberger  les
meres  pendant  qu'on  fecourt  leur  enfans,  car  elles  ne
les  quittent  point  de  veues,  ces  pauures  femmes  voy-
ant  fouffrir  ce  qu'elles  ont  de  plus  cher  paileront  les
iournees  entieres  fans  dire  vn  feul  mot  fi  on  ne  leur
parle,  les  enuifageant  auec  des  tendrelfes  affligeantes,
elles  mefmes  les  enfeueliffent  &  les  portent  en  la
Chappelle  en  attendant  qu'on  les  mettent  en  terre,  fe
tenant  par  force  vn  long-temps  deuant  1' Autel  k  prier
Dieu.  Vne  Religieufe  fe  perfuadant  vn  iour  que  ces
bonnes  meres  prioient  pour  leur  enfans  leur  dift,
vous  n'auez  que  faire  de  pref  enter  vos  prieres  "k  Dieu
pour  ces  petits  innocens,  ce  font  [92]  des  Anges
deuant  fa  face,  nous  le  fgauons  bien,  refpondent-elles,
c'eft  noftre  ioie  que  nos  enfans  ne  fentent  point  le
feu  deuant  que  d'aller  au  Ciel  nous  penfons  aux  con-
tentemens  qu'ils  ont,  &  nous  les  fupplions  en  noftre
coeur  de  fe  fouuenir  de  nous  aupres  de  Dieu.

Comme  on  faifoit  tous  les  foirs  les  prieres  a  I'Hof-
pital,  oil  les  Sauuages  voifins  fe  trouuoient  quatre  ou
cinq  femmes  eflat  reftees  apres  les  autres  dirent  k  la
Mere  qui  vouloit  efteindre  les  cierges  de  la  Chap-
pelle, attend  vn  petit,  ma  Mere,  nous  n'auons  pas
acheue  nos  prieres,  auiourd'huy  on  a  enterre  vne
femme  Chreftienne,  nous  voulons  prier  Dieu  pour
elle,  leur  deuotion  dura  vne  bonne  heure,  ces  adtions
confolent  bien  fort  ces  bonnes  ames  qui  recueillent
d^s  cette  vie  le  fruidt  de  leur  charite,  ayat  veu  de
leurs  yeux  quantite  de  fain(5tes  adtions  qui  fe  font
faites  dans  leur  Hofpital.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  jb43-44  219

them,  will  pass  entire  days  without  saying  a  word  if
they  be  not  spoken  to,  looking  at  them  with  distress-
ful tenderness.  They  themselves  enshroud  them,
and  carry  them  to  the  Chapel  until  such  time  as  they
can  be  buried,  forcing  themselves  to  remain  for  a
long  time  before  the  Altar,  praying  to  God.  A  Nun
thought  one  day  that  these  good  mothers  were  pray-
ing for  their  children  and  said  to  them:  "  You  need
not  offer  your  prayers  to  God  for  these  little  inno-
cents; they  are  [92]  Angels  before  his  face."  "  We
know  it  well,"  they  replied;  "it  is  a  joy  to  us  that
our  children  do  not  feel  the  fire  before  going  to
Heaven.  We  think  of  their  happiness,  and  beg  them
in  our  hearts  to  remember  us  before  God."

The  prayers  were  said  every  night  at  the  Hospi-
tal, and  the  Savages  of  the  neighborhood  were  pres-
ent. Four  or  five  women,  who  remained  after  the
others,  said  to  the  Mother  who  wished  to  extinguish
the  tapers  of  the  Chapel :  "  Wait  a  little,  my  Mother;
we  have  not  finished  our  prayers.  To-day  they  have
buried  a  Christian  woman;  we  wish  to  pray  to  God
for  her."  Their  devotions  lasted  a  good  hour.
Such  actions  comfort  these  good  souls,  who  reap  the
fruits  of  their  charity  in  this  life ;  for  they  have  seen
with  their  own  eyes  very  many  holy  actions  that
have  been  performed  in  their  Hospital.

Several  persons  have  been  baptized, —  among  oth-
ers, an  Old  Man  who  passed  the  Winter  there,  and
who  displayed  an  extraordinary  fervor  in  learning
the  mysteries  of  our  belief,  and  in  committing  to
memory  the  prayers  [93]  and  exercises  of  a  true
Christian.  He  was  never  tired  of  saying  and  re-
peating them  continually. Finally,  his  assiduity  and


220  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.25

On  a  baptife  plufieurs  perfonnes,  entre  autre[s]  vn
Vieillard  y  ayant  paffe  I'Hyuer  monftra  vne  ferueur
extraordinaire  a  apprendre  les  myfteres  de  noftre
creance  &  a  faire  entrer  dans  fa  memoire  les  prieres
[93]  &  I'exercice  d'vn  vray  Chreftien,  il  ne  fe  laffoit
point  de  les  dire  &  redire  incelTamment,  enfin  fon
affiduite  &  fa  diligence  luy  obtindrent  vne  faueur
dont  il  n'en  cognoiftra  la  beaute  qu'au  Ciel.

D'autres  ayant  appris  que  Dieu  aggreoit  qu'on  luy
prefentafl  les  premices  de  toutes  chofes,  prirent  les
plus  beaux  faiffeaux  d'efpics  de  leur  Bled-d'Inde,  que
nous  leur  aidons  a  cultiuer,  &  les  allerent  prefenter
fur  I'Autel  auec  plus  de  coeur  que  de  compliments.

Les  petites  filles  Sauuages  voifmes  de  I'Hofpital
vont  vifiter  fouuent  les  Religieufes,  les  fuppliant  de
les  inftruire,  on  leur  faidt  reciter  le  Catechifme,  on
les  interroge,  on  les  fait  prier  Dieu,  &  il  y  en  a  de  fi
conftantes  qu'il  les  faut  pluftoft  reprendre  d'eftre
importunes  que  de  manquer  de  diligence,  comme  les
Religieufes  donnoient  certain  iour  quelque  petite
recompenfe  a  celles  qui  auoient  bien  retenu  ce  qu'on
leur  auoit  enfeign6,  &  qu'on  voulut  auffi  prefenter
quelque  chofe  a  leur  compagnes,  elles  repartirent,
fort  bien,  interrogez-nous  &  nous  demandez  comme
aux  autres,  &  [94]  fi  nous  difons  bien  nous  prendrons
vos  prefens.

Voila  en  quoy  ces  bones  Religieufes  fe  font  occu-
pees  cette  annee  voyla  leur  exercices  outre  leur  fon-
c5tions  ordinaires  dont  elles  s'acquittent  faincftement,
fi  le  deffaut  des  petits  foulagemens  qu'on  a  en  France,
fi  la  pauurete  &  la  difette,  fi  les  incommoditez  d'vn
nouueau  pays  aide  a  faire  des  faincfts,  elles  y  auront
bonne  part.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  221

diligence  obtained  for  him  a  favor  whose  value  he
will  recognize  only  in  Heaven.

Others,  having  learned  that  God  was  pleased  that
the  first  fruits  of  all  things  should  be  offered  him,
took  the  finest  sheaves  of  ears  of  their  Indian  Corn,
which  we  help  them  to  cultivate,  and  offered  these
on  the  Altar,  with  more  heart  than  compliments.

The  little  Savage  girls  who  live  in  the  neighborhood
of  the  Hospital  frequently  visit  the  Nuns,  and  beg
them  to  instruct  them.  They  are  made  to  recite  the
Catechism,  they  are  questioned,  and  are  taught  to
pray  to  God ;  and  some  of  them  are  so  persevering  in
this  that  they  have  to  be  reproved  more  for  being
importunate  than  for  want  of  diligence.  The  Nuns
one  day  gave  a  slight  reward  to  those  who  had  well
remembered  what  they  had  been  taught,  and  also
wished  to  present  something  to  their  companions;
the  latter  replied:  "Very  well.  Question  us  and
ask  us,  as  you  have  done  the  others ;  and,  [94]  if  we
answer  well,  we  will  take  your  presents."

Thus  have  these  good  Nuns  occupied  themselves
this  year;  such  has  been  their  practice,  in  addition
to  their  ordinary  duties,  which  they  perform  in  a
saintly  manner.  If  the  absence  of  the  petty  com-
forts that  one  has  in  France,  if  poverty  and  priva-
tions, if  the  inconveniences  inseparable  from  a  new
country,  contribute  to  the  making  of  saints,  they  will
have  a  goodly  share  thereof.


222  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.25


CHAPITRE  VII.

DU SEMINAIRE DES VRSULINES.

LARRIUEE  des  vaiffeaux  k  augments  la  ioye  de
ce  petit  feminaire  luy  rendant  faines  &  fauues
deux  braues  Vrfulines  qui  fe  font  moquees  aufll
bien  que  les  autres  des  dangers  de  la  mer,  &  qui
pour  toutes  les  fatigues  d'vn  long  voyage  n'ont  ia-
mais  tourne  la  tefte  en  arriere,  le  choix  de  ces  deux
bons  fubiedts  a  efte  [95]  fait  par  Monfeigneur  I'Ar-
cheuefque  de  Tours,  lequel  eftant  fupplie  par  la  Su-
perieure  du  petit  Conuent  de  Kebec,  de  leur  enuoier
du  renfort  douta  quelque  temps  s'il  confiroit  aux
longs  dangers  de  I'Ocean  des  filles  qui  viuoient  icy
dans  I'affeurance,  mais  voyans  que  le  chemin  eftoit
defia  fraye  &  qu'il  ne  pouuoit  fans  quelque  reproche
de  fa  bonte  refufer  vne  demande  {\  raifonnable  &
fi  fainte,  n'eftant  pas  bien  feant  de  laiffer  vn  tel
ouurage  imparfait,  il  y  voulut  luy  mefme  contribuer
f es  foins  &  fes  affedtions.  II  fe  tranfporte  en  la  maifon
des  Vrfulines  de  Tours  il  ecoute  celles  qui  auoient  plus
de  feu  &  plus  de  zele  pour  cette  miffion,  &  apres  les
auoir  diligemment  «&  fain(5tement  examinees,  il  donne
fa  Benedi(5t[i]on  a  foeur  Anne  de  faincfte  Cecile  &  k
foeur  Anne  de  Noftre  Dame,  &  pour  tefmoignages
des  defirs  qu'il  a  de  fouflenir  ce  petit  feminaire,  il
fait  conduire  ces  deux  bonnes  filles  dans  fon  propre
CarofCe  iufques  a  Poitiers,  fes  affedtions  ne  fe  renfer-
ment  pas  dans  1' enceinte  de  fon  Diocefe,  fon  cceur  eft


1642  -  44J  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  223


CHAPTER  VII.

OF THE URSULINE SEMINARY.

THE  arrival  of  the  ships  increased  the  joy  in  this
little  seminary,  for  they  brought  to  it  safe  and
sound  two  brave  Ursulines,  who,  like  the
others,  scorned  the  dangers  of  the  sea,  and,  in  spite  of
all  the  fatigues  of  a  long  journey,  never  looked  back.
The  choice  of  these  two  worthy  persons  was  [95]  made
by  Monseigneur  the  Archbishop  of  Tours,  who  on
being  requested  by  the  Superioress  of  the  little  Con-
vent of  Kebec  to  send  them  a  reinforcement,  doubted
for  some  time  whether  he  should  expose,  to  the  con-
tinued dangers  of  the  Ocean,  girls  who  lived  there  in
security.  But,  seeing  that  the  road  was  already
opened,  and  that  he  could  not,  without  reproach  to
his  own  goodness,  refuse  so  reasonable  and  so  holy
a  request, —  for  it  would  not  have  been  fitting  to
leave  such  a  work  unfinished, —  he  himself  wished
to  contribute  thereto  his  care  and  his  affections.  He
went  to  the  house  of  the  Ursulines  of  Tours,  listened
to  those  who  had  the  most  ardor  and  zeal  for  that
mission,  and,  after  having  diligently  and  holily  ques-
tioned them,  he  gave  his  Blessing  to  sister  Anne  de
sainte  Cecile  and  sister  Anne  de  Nostre  Dame.
And,  as  evidence  of  his  desire  to  support  this  little
seminary,  he  caused  these  two  good  maidens  to  be
conveyed  in  his  own  Carriage  to  Poitiers.  His  affec-
tions are  not  bounded  by  the  limits  of  his  Diocese, —


224  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES  [Vol.25

plus  grand  que  le  lardin  de  la  France,  il  fait  efperer
aux  pauures  [96]  Sauuages  vne  partie  de  fes  bontez/
mais  difons  deux  mots  de  I'employ  de  ces  bonnes
Ames.

Les  Vrfulines  ont  de  petites  ecolieres  Franjoifes
elles  en  ont  auffi  de  penfionnaires  &  le  pais  fe  peu-
plant  dauantage  augmentera  leur  employ,  elles  ont
des  feminariftes  fedentaires,  elles  en  ont  de  paffa-
geres  tirees  des  cabanes  des  Sauuages,  leurs  grilles
font  par  fois  vifitees  des  nouueaux  Chreftiens  &  des
bons  Neophytes  qui  les  vont  voir  pour  entendre  par-
ler  des  chofes  du  Ciel,  il  y  a  des  filles  en  cette  maifon
qui  parlet  Algonquin,  d'autres  qui  parlent  Huron,  elles
honorent  Noftre  Seigneur  en  plufieures  langues,  &  fa
bonte  leur  donne  occafion  de  debiter  la  fcience  qu'il
leur  a  departies  leur  enuoyant  des  perfonnes  qui  ap-
prennent  par  leur  moyen  k  le  connoiflre  &  a  I'aimer.

Cette  annee  vne  feminarifte  qui  auoit  deflre  ardem-
ment  d'eftre  Religieufe  eft  paffee  de  cette  vie  dans
vne  meilleure  elle  fe  nommoit  Agnes  Chabb'ek^e-
chich  fes  parens  I'ayant  retiree  du  feminaire  pour  fe
feruir  de  fon  petit  trauail  comme  [97]  elle  eltoit  defia
grade,  il  arriua  qu'en  nauigeant  dans  leurs  petits
canots  elle  trouua  \sc.  tomba]  dans  la  grande  riuiere
fon  beau  frere;  I'ayat  apperceue  fe  iette  k  I'eau  &  la
retire  de  la  mort  car  elle  couloit  defia  k  fonds,  il
fauua  auffi  fes  compagnes  qui  eftoient  dans  le  mefme
nauffrage,  or  comme  on  ne  rechauffe  point  cette
pauure  fille  que  le  froid  d'vne  faifon  defia  bien  rude
auoit  portee  k  deux  doigts  du  trepas  elle  ne  fift  que
traifner  iufques  enuiron  les  feftes  de  Noel  qu'elle
prit  vne  nouuelle  naiffance  en  Paradis,  elle  donna
beaucoup  dedification  aux  Sauuages dans  le  peu  de


1 642  -  44 J  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  225

his  heart  extends  beyond  the  Garden  of  France ;  he
leads  the  poor  [96J  Savages  to  hope  for  a  share  of  his
benevolence.  But  let  us  say  a  few  words  as  to  the
manner  in  which  these  good  Souls  employ  them-
selves.

The  Ursulines  have  little  French  girls  as  pupils ;
they  also  have  some  as  boarders;  and,  as  the  country
becomes  more  settled,  they  will  have  more  occupa-
tion. They  have  resident  and  transient  seminarists,
taken  from  the  cabins  of  the  Savages.  Their  grated
parlors  are  sometimes  visited  by  the  new  Christians
and  by  the  good  Neophytes,  who  go  to  visit  them,
to  hear  about  matters  relating  to  Heaven.  There
are  sisters  in  this  house  who  speak  Algonquin,  and
others  who  speak  Huron.  They  honor  Our  Lord  in
several  tongues,  and  his  goodness  gives  them  an  op-
portunity of  spreading  the  knowledge  that  God  has
bestowed  on  them  by  sending  them  persons  who  learn
by  their  means  to  know  and  love  him.

This  year,  a  seminarist  who  had  ardently  desired
to  become  a  Nun  passed  from  this  life  to  a  better
one.  Her  name  was  Agnes  Chabwekwechich.  Her
parents  had  withdrawn  her  from  the  seminary  to
make  use  of  her  for  light  work,  as  [97]  she  was
already  grown  up.  It  happened  that,  while  paddling
in  one  of  their  little  canoes,  she  fell  into  the  great
river.  Her  brother-in-law,  who  saw  her,  jumped
into  the  water  and  saved  her  from  death  as  she  was
about  to  sink  to  the  bottom.  He  also  saved  her  com-
panions, who  were  wrecked  at  the  same  time.  Now
as  they  did  not  warm  this  poor  girl,  whom  the  cold
of  an  already  severe  season  had  brought  within  two
finger-lengths  of  death,  she  lingered  only  until  about
Christmastide,  when  she  was  born  to  a  new  life  in


226  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.25

temps  qu'elle  fut  auec  eux,  comme  elle  auoit  vne
belle  voix,  elle  leur  chantoit  des  Cantiques  fpirituels
qu'on  luy  auoit  appris  au  feminaire,  elle  fe  rendoit
obei'ffante  &  fa  deuotion  agreoit  extremement  "k  ces
bons  Neophytes,  quand  ceux  qui  raffiftoient  luy
eurent  annonc^  la  nouuelle  de  fa  mort  voyans  la
rigueur  de  fa  maladie,  elle  rentra  dans  foy-mefme
puis  tirans  vn  profond  foupir,  helas  ie  voudrois  bien
dit-elle  me  pouuoir  Confeffer,  ie  ne  fens  rien  qui  me
preffe  la  confcience,  [98]  mais  ie  foubaitterois  bien
fort  neantmoins  d'eftre  affiftee  par  quelque  Pere,  il
n'y  auoit  pas  de  moyen  pour  lors,  car  fes  parens
I'auoient  menee  auec  eux  dans  leurs  grandes  chaff es,
vn  ieune  Fran9ois  qui  accompagnoit  cette  efcouade
de  Sauuages  Chreftiens,  pour  apprendre  leur  lague
s'en  reuint  fi  edifie  &  fi  eftonne  de  tons  tant  qu'ils
eftoient,  &  notamment  de  la  belle  mort  de  cette
ieune  feminarifte  qu'il  en  confola  bien  fort  tons  fes
pares  qui  nous  I'ont  raconte,  elle  produifoit  des  adtes
de  douleur  d'auoir  fache  Dieu,  mais  auec  des  ten-
dreffes  fi  grandes,  que  les  Sauuages  en  eftoiet  tou-
chez,  elle  auoit  toufiours  en  main  &  deuant  fes  yeux
f on  liure  de  prieres :  car  elle  lifoit  fort  bien  &  quand
fa  veue  vint  k  s'affoiblir  elle  fe  feruoit  de  fon  Chap-
pelet  pour  entretenir  fes  petites  deuotions,  fes  parens
enterrerent  auec  elle  fon  liure  &  fon  Chappelet  pour
marque  de  fa  piete  &  de  I'amour  qu'elle  auoit  enuers
Dieu,  &  enuers  la  faindte  Vierge.  Comme  on  leur
demandoit  s'ils  n'auoient  point  de  regret  de  fa  mort
non  dirent-ils,  elle  eft  trop  bien  morte  nous  la  croy-
ons  bien-heureufe,  [99]  il  ne  faut  pas  s'attrifter  de
fon  bon-heur,  c'eftoit  vn  excellent  efprit,  Dieu  luy  a
accord6  de  mourir  vierge  comme  elle  1' auoit  defire.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  - 44  227

Paradise.  She  greatly  edified  the  Savages,  during
the  short  time  that  she  was  with  them.  She  had
a  fine  voice,  and  would  sing  to  them  Hymns  that
she  had  learned  at  the  seminary.  She  was  always
obedient,  and  her  devotion  gave  great  pleasure  to
those  good  Neophytes.  When  those  who  attended
her  saw  how  severe  was  her  illness,  and  informed
her  that  her  death  was  near,  she  communed  with
herself,  and,  heaving  a  deep  sigh,  said:  "  Alas!  I
would  be  very  happy  if  I  could  make  my  Confession.
I  feel  nothing  that  troubles  my  conscience,  [98]  but
I  would  like  very  much  to  be  assisted  by  a  Father.
This  was  impossible,  at  the  time,  for  her  parents  had
taken  her  with  them  on  their  great  hunt.  A  young
Frenchman,  who  accompanied  this  band  of  Christian
Savages  for  the  purpose  of  learning  their  language,
came  back  so  edified  and  so  astonished  by  what  he
saw  of  all  of  them,  and  especially  by  the  beautiful
death  of  this  young  seminarist,  that  he  gave  great
consolation  to  all  her  relatives,  who  told  us  of  it.
She  uttered  acts  of  sorrow  for  having  offended  God,
but  with  such  affection  that  the  Savages  were  touched
by  it.  She  always  kept  her  prayer  book  in  her
hands,  and  before  her  eyes,  for  she  could  read  very
well;  and,  when  her  sight  grew  weak,  she  made  use
of  her  Rosary  to  perform  her  minor  devotions.  Her
parents  buried  her  book  and  her  Rosary  with  her,  as
a  mark  of  her  piety,  and  of  the  love  that  she  had  for
God  and  for  the  blessed  Virgin.  When  they  were
asked  whether  they  did  not  feel  regret  for  her  loss,
they  replied:  "  No,  she  died  too  good  a  death;  we
think  her  happy,  [99]  and  we  should  not  regret  her
happiness."  She  had  an  excellent  mind.  God
allowed her to die  a  virgin, as  she  had desired.


228  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.25

nonobftant  qu'elle  euft  efte  recherchee  de  quelque
Francois  &  de  quelques  Sauuages.

Vne  bonne  femme  Chreftienne  ayant  en  deux  filles
d'vne  ventree  demandoit  il  n'y  k  pas  long-temps  a
vn  des  Peres  de  noflre  Compagnie  fi  les  Meres  Vrfii-
lines  ne  voudroient  pas  bien  prendre  I'vn  de  fes  en-
fans,  n'ayant  pas  le  moyen  de  les  nourrir  tons  deux,
le  Pere  luy  repartit  qu'il  eftoit  trop  petit  n'eftant
encore  qu'au  maillot,  il  eft  vray  refpondit-elle  que
les  Religieufes  n'ont  point  de  laidt,  mais  elles  ont
tant  de  charite  &  tant  d'efprit  qu'elles  trouueront
bien  le  moyen  de  luy  fauuer  la  vie,  elles  difoit  cela
k  mon  aduis  a  raifon  que  les  Vrfulines  ont  eu  auec
elles  trois  petites  orphelines  aufquelles  il  falloit  quail
faire  1' office  de  nourrices;  II  y  en  ^  vne  autre  qui
n'a  que  trois  ans  &  qui  a  efte  trois  mois  de  I'annee
perclufe  de  tous  fes  petits  membres,  fi  bien  qu'elle
n'auoit  que  la  langue  libre,  vous  diriez  que  la  raifon
[lOo]  a  notablement  preuenu  le  temps  qu'elle  fe  de-
couure  es  autres  enfans,  &  que  les  benedi(5tions  du
Ciel  luy  ont  efte  donnees  en  abondance,  elle  a  efte
voiiee  a  Dieu  par  Ion  Pere,  &  par  fa  Mere  des  fa
premiere  naiffance,  il  n'y  a  rien  de  fi  obeyffant  rien
de  fi  complaifant  c'elt  vne  humeur  compofee  de  fuccre
&  de  miel  tant  elle  eft  douce,  ce  qui  n'a  pas  peu  feruy
pour  foulager  les  peines  de  fes  maitreffes,  car  il  fal-
loit qu'ils  la  tinffent  quafi  iour  &  nuit  fur  leurs  bras,
lors  que  fes  douleurs  plus  pregnantes  luy  tiroient  les
larmes  des  yeux,  fi  on  luy  difoit  c'eft  affez  pleure,
priez  Dieu,  elle  fe  mettoit  a  chanter  V Aue  Maria,  ou
quelque  autre  priere,  il  arriua  que  I'vne  de  fes  mai-
ftreffes  fut  contrainte  de  la  leuer  quatre  fois  pour
vne  nuidt,  le  ledemain  matin  on  luy  dit  Charite,  c'eft


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  229"

although she had been sought in  marriage  by  a
Frenchman  and  by  some  Savages.

A  good  Christian  woman,  who  had  two  girls  at  a
birth,  asked  one  of  the  Fathers  of  our  Society  not
long  ago  whether  the  Ursuline  Mothers  would  not
take  one  of  her  children,  as  she  had  not  the  means  of
supporting  both.  The  Father  replied  that  it  was  too
young,  being  still  but  in  swaddling  clothes.  "  It  is
true,"  she  said,  "  that  the  Nuns  have  no  milk;  but
they  have  so  much  charity  and  wisdom  that  they  will
be  sure  to  find  some  way  of  saving  its  life."  She
said  this,  I  believe,  because  the  Ursulines  have  had
with  them  three  little  orphans  for  whom  they  have
had  almost  to  perform  the  duty  of  nurses.  There  is
another,  who  is  only  three  years  old,  and  who  was
for  three  months  of  the  year  crippled  in  her  little
limbs,  so  that  only  her  tongue  was  free.  You  would
think  that  in  her  reason  [lOO]  had  greatly  anticipated
the  time  when  it  manifests  itself  in  other  children,
and  that  Heaven's  blessings  have  been  showered  on
her  in  abundance.  She  was  dedicated  to  God  by  her
Father  and  Mother,  from  the  moment  of  her  birth.
No  one  can  be  more  obedient  or  more  obliging.
Her  disposition  is  one  of  sugar  and  honey,  so  sweet
is  she.  This  has  served  not  a  little  to  lighten  the
trouble  of  her  mistresses,  for  they  had  to  keep  her  in
their  arms  night  and  day.  When  her  more  violent
pains  brought  tears  to  her  eyes,  if  they  said  to  her,
"  You  have  cried  enough;  pray  to  God,"  she  would
begin  to  sing  the  Ave  Maria,  or  some  other  prayer.
It  happened  that  one  of  her  mistresses  was  compelled
to  raise  her  four  times  in  one  night.  On  the  follow-
ing day  they  said  to  her:  "  Charite  " — that  is  her
name, —  '*  you have given much trouble  to your


230  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.25

ainfi  qu'elle  fe  nomme,  vous  auez  bien  donne  de  la
peine  a  voftre  mere,  il  eft  vray  dit-elle  mais  m'a
mere  eft  bien  patiente,  elle  ma  fait  comme  elle  feroit
a  lefus,  cette  enfant  qui  n'a  que  trois  ans  fait  plu-
fieurs  adtions  qui  la  font  admirer,  les  Meres  ne  chan-
tent  quafi  rien  au  Choeur  que  cette  petite  innocente
[loi]  ne  retienne  quelque  verfet,  variant  les  champs
\sc.  chants]  &  les  entonnans  auffi  gentiment  qu'vne
grande  perfonne,  cela  confole  bien  fort  ces  bonnes
Religieufes  de  voir  de  fi  gentilles  inclinations  en  des
Sauuageons  fi  peu  cultiuez  depuis  tant  de  fiecles.

Comme  les  Seminariftes  fedentaires  font  veftues  ^
la  Fran9oife,  demeurant  auec  les  Penfionnaires
Pran9oifes,  on  tafche  par  fois  de  leur  donner  de
l'6mulation,  on  en  a  fait  communier  cette  annee  vne
petite  bande  d'vnes  &  d'autres,  vne  Maiftreffe  a  pris
foin  des  Fran^oifes,  &  vne  autre  a  pris  le  foin  des
filles  Sauuages,  elles  ont  employe  fix  femaines  a  les
inftruire  &  a  les  difpofer  plus  particulierement  a  cette
premiere  Communion,  ces  enfans  firent  paroiftre  tant
d'afifedtion  &  tant  de  ferueur  que  ces  bonnes  meres
en  eftoient  dans  I'eftonnement,  les  voyant  conceuoir
&  goufter  les  chofes  de  Dieu  d'vne  fa9on  toute  par-
ticuliere,  i'aduoue,  difoit  la  Mere  Superieure  que  les
interrogeant  pour  reconnoiftre  fi  elles  eftoient  capa-
bles  de  receuoir  ce  pain  celefte,  qu' elles  [102]  ont  fur-
paffe  mon  attente,  les  voyant  inftruites  &  touch^es
au  dela  de  mes  efperances,  le  temps  de  leur  Commu-
nion approchant,  leur  Maiftreffe  voyant  que  leur  defir
augmentoit,  leur  dit  qu'il  leur  manquoit  encor  quel-
que chofe  pour  plaire  a  celuy  qu' elles  vouloient  rece-
uoir, ces  pauures  petites  creatures  fe  croyans  quafi
Tebutees  demandoient en pleurant ce qu'il falloit


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  231

mother."  "  It  is  true,"  she  said;  "  but  my  mother
is  very  patient;  she  did  for  me  what  she  would  do
for  Jesus."  This  child,  who  is  only  three  years  old,
does  many  things  which  cause  her  to  be  admired.
The  Mothers  hardly  sing  anything  in  the  Choir,
of  which  this  little  innocent  [loi]  does  not  remember
some  verse,  varying  the  airs,  and  intoning  them
as  pleasingly  as  a  grown  person  would.  It  is  a  great
consolation  for  these  good  Nuns  to  see  such  sweet
dispositions  in  Wildings,  that,  for  so  many  centuries,,
have  received  so  little  cultivation.

As  the  resident  Seminarists  are  clothed  like  the
French,  and  reside  with  the  French  Boarders,  at-
tempts are  sometimes  made  to  excite  emulation
among  them.  A  small  party  of  both  were  prepared
for  communion  this  year.  One  Mistress  had  charge
of  the  French  girls,  and  another  of  the  Savage  girls.
They  took  six  weeks  to  instruct  them,  and  to  give
them  special  preparation  for  this  first  Communion.
These  children  manifested  such  affection  and  such
fervor,  that  the  good  mothers  were  astonished  when
they  saw  them  understand  and  relish  the  things
which  relate  to  God  in  a  very  special  manner.  "  I
admit,"  said  the  Mother  Superior,  "that,  when  I
questioned  them  to  see  whether  they  were  fit  ta
receive  that  celestial  bread,  they  [102]  surpassed  my
expectations ;  I  found  them  instructed  and  impressed,
beyond  my  hopes."  As  the  time  for  their  Commun-
ion drew  near,  their  Mistress,  observing  that  their
desire  increased,  told  them  that  they  still  lacked
something  in  order  to  please  him  whom  they  wished
to  receive.  The  poor  little  creatures  considered
themselves  almost  refused,  and  asked  with  tears
what  they  had  to  do. They  were  told  of  a  general


232  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  25

done  faire,  on  leur  parle  d'vne  Confeffion  generalle
qui  ne  pouuoit  pas  eftre  de  beaucoup  d'annees,  non
feulement  pour  ce  qu'elles  font  encor  ieunes,  mais
par  ce  qu'il  n'y  a  pas  long-temps  qu'elles  font  bapti-
fees,  on  les  inftruit  la  deffus,  elles  s'y  comportent  en
perfonnes  meures  &  touchees  de  Dieu,  fe  confeffans
auec  beaucoup  de  tendreffe,  &  auec  beaucoup  de
reffentiment  de  leurs  pechez,  s'eflant  ainfi  difpof^es
elles  vont  trouuer  leur  Maiftreffe  &  luy  difent  ii,  n'y  a
plus  rien  dans  noftre  coeur,  tout  le  mal  en  eft  dehors,
c'efl  a  ce  coup  que  lefus  y  viendra,  on  leur  accorde
ce  qu'elles  auoient  tant  demand^  &  tant  attendu;  de
verite  Noftre  Seigneur  ne  fait  point  de  diftincftion
[103]  du  Barbare  ou  du  Grec,  il  agit  en  ce  Sacrement,
felon  la  difpofition  de  noitre  coeur,  ces  petites  ames
en  firent  paroiftre  les  effedts:  pleuft  a  Dieu,  difoit
I'vne  que  celuy  qui  m'eft  venu  voir  demeuraft
toufiours  auec  moy,  6  que  i'ay  reffenty  vn  grand  deQr
de  iamais  ne  Toffenfer,  difoit  I'autre,  fut-il  ainfi,  ad-
iouftoit  fa  compagne,  que  iamais  plus  ie  ne  retour-
naffe  aux  cabanes  des  Sauuages,  i'ay  trop  peur  de
fafcher  Dieu.

A  peine  auroit-on  creu  que  les  fiUes  Sauuages  fe
d'euffent  iamais  affujettir  a  tous  les  exercices  d'vne
Claffe  comme  font  les  Frangoifes,  on  n'eut  iamais
penfe  dans  les  premiers  commencemens  qu'il  eurt  fallu
parler  de  corredtion  a  des  enfans  qui  iamais  n'en
regoiuent  de  leurs  parens,  cela  fe  fait  neantmoins  &
auec  fruidt,  «&  maintenant  elles  s'y  accouftument  foit
par  I'exemple  des  Frangoifes,  foit  que  leur  efprit  fe
rende  petit  a  petit  plus  fouple.  La  Mere  Superieure
en  ayant  veu  quelqu'vne  commettre  vne  faute,  recom-
tnanda  a  fa  Maiftreffe  d'en  tirer le chaftiment,  la


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  233

Confession  which  could  not  cover  many  years, —  not
only  because  they  were  still  young,  but  also  because
they  had  not  long  been  baptized.  They  received
instruction  on  this  point,  and  behaved  as  persons  of
mature  age  and  moved  by  God, —  confessing  their
sins  with  much  feeling,  and  with  a  great  detestation
of  their  errors.  Having  done  this,  they  went  to  their
Mistress  and  said  to  her:  "  There  is  nothing  left  in
our  hearts;  all  evil  has  gone  out  of  them.  Now
Jesus  will  come  to  them."  They  were  granted  what
they  so  earnestly  desired  and  awaited.  In  truth.
Our  Lord  makes  no  distinction  [103]  between  the
Barbarian  and  the  Greek ;  he  acts  in  this  Sacrament
according  to  the  dispositions  of  our  hearts.  These
little  souls  manifested  the  effects  thereof.  "  Would
to  God,"  said  one,  "  that  he  who  has  come  to  visit
me  would  always  remain  with  me."  "  Oh,  what  a
great  desire  I  felt  never  to  offend  him!"  said
another.  "  Would  that  I  might  never  return  to  the
cabins  of  the  Savages,"  said  her  companion;  "  I  am
too  afraid  of  offending  God."

One  would  hardly  have  believed  that  Savage  girls
could  ever  subject  themselves  to  all  the  restraints  of
a  Class,  as  the  French  girls  do.  One  would  never
have  thought  that,  at  the  beginning,  it  would  be
necessary  to  speak  of  correction  to  children  who
never  receive  any  from  their  parents.  It  is  done,
nevertheless,  and  with  good  effect;  and  now  they
are  becoming  accustomed  to  it,  either  through  the
example  of  the  French  girls,  or  because  their  minds
are  gradually  becoming  more  pliant.  The  Mother
Superior  saw  one  commit  a  fault,  and  advised  her
Mistress  to  chastise  her  for  it.  The  poor  child
showed  that  she  was  more  contrite  and  more  afflicted


234  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JASUITES [Vol.25'

pauure  enfant  fe  monftra  plus  contrite  &  plus  afflig^e
[104]  de  fa  faute  que  de  la  peine,  elle  fe  vint  ietter
aux  pieds  de  la  Superieure  apres  la  corredtion  auec
des  regrets  fi  fenfibles  qu'il  la  fallu[t]  confoler.

Comme  on  difoit  certain  iour  aux  Seminariftes  que
les  corps  des  bien-heureux  auroient  d'autant  plus  de
gloire  qu'ils  auroient  fouffert  9a  bas  auec  plus  de
patience  &  que  la  grandeur  des  fouffrances  feroit  la
mefure  de  leur  beaute:  Voyla  qui  va  bien,  refpondi-
rent-elles,  les  Sauuages  feront  done  bien  releuez  au
Ciel,  car  ils  fouffrent  beaucoup  notamment  pendant
I'Hyuer,  cela  nous  donne  enuie  d'eftre  malade,  afin
d'endurer  dauantage  pour  auoir  plus  de  gloire,  elles
offrent  a  Noflre  Seigneur  leurs  petits  trauaux  &  leurs
petites  peines,  elles  dreffent  leurs  penfees  &  leurs
intentions  auant  que  de  commencer  leurs  petits
ouurages,  que  fl  la  chofe  ell;  penible,  elles  s'arreftent
par  fois  vn  peu  de  temps  pour  faire  vne  petite  priere,
&  vne  petite  eleuation  de  coeur  au  Ciel,  elles  paffent
encore  plus  auant,  car  pour  entretenir  cette  ferueur,
il  y  en  a  touf jours  quelqu'vne  qui  reueille  les  autres
[105]  s'efcriant  tout  haut,  faifons  tout  pour  I'amour
de  Noftre  Seigneur,  mes  foeurs,  faifons  tout  pour  fon
amour,  cette  deuotion  les  tire  petit  a  petit  de  la
pareffe  &  de  la  liberte  qui  n'eft  que  trop  naturelle
aux  Sauuages.

Deux  Seminariftes  ayant  efte  enuoy^es  en  quelque
endroit,  &  s'eftant  arreftees  plus  de  temps  qu'il  n'en
falloit  pour  la  commiffion  qu'on  leur  auoit  donnee,  ne
refpondoient  rien  "k  leur  Maiftreffe  qui  les  tan9oit,
iufques  a  ce  qu'elle  leur  vint  a  demander  a  quoy  elles
auoient  employe  leur  temps,  nous  nous  fommes  arre-
ftees, dirent-elles,  a  penfer  &  a  parler  des  fouffrances


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TJON  OF  1643  -44  235

[104]  on  account  of  the  fault  than  of  the  punishment.
After  being  punished,  she  threw  herself  at  the  feet
of  the  Superioress  with  such  manifest  regret  that  she
had  to  be  consoled.

The  Seminarists  were  told  one  day  that  the  bodies
of  the  blessed  will  be  all  the  more  glorious,  the  more
patiently  they  have  suffered  here  below;  and  that
the  extent  of  their  sufferings  will  be  the  measure  of
their  beauty.  "  That  is  a  good  thing,"  they  replied.
"  Then  the  Savages  will  occupy  a  high  place  in
Heaven,  for  they  suffer  greatly,  especially  in  Winter.
This  makes  us  wish  to  be  ill,  so  as  to  endure  more
and  have  greater  glory."  They  offer  their  petty
tasks  and  troubles  to  Our  Lord;  they  arrange  their
thoughts  and  their  intentions  before  beginning  their
little  tasks.  If  these  be  difficult  they  sometimes  stop
a  moment  to  say  a  short  prayer,  and  to  uplift  their
hearts  to  Heaven  for  a  little  while.  They  even  go
further ;  for,  to  maintain  this  fervor,  there  is  always
one  of  them  who  arouses  the  others  [105]  by  calling
aloud:  "  Let  us  do  everything  for  the  love  of  Our
Lord,  my  sisters;  let  us  do  everything  for  his  love."
This  devotion  gradually  cures  them  of  the  sloth  and
freedom  that  are  only  too  natural  among  Savages.

Two  Seminarists  who  had  been  sent  somewhere,
and  who  had  remained  away  longer  than  was  neces-
sary for  executing  the  commission  that  had  been
given  them,  replied  not  a  word  to  their  Mistress
who  reprimanded  them,  until  she  asked  them  how
they  had  employed  their  time.  "  We  stopped,"  they
said,  "to  think  and  speak  of  the  sufferings  of  the
Son  of  God ;  for  it  is  very  wonderful  that  he  should
have  made  himself  man,  in  order  to  suffer  and  to
repay  his Father. He  has  great  love  for  mankind,


236  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.25

du  Fils  de  Dieu,  car  cela  eft  bien  eftrange  qu'il  fe
foit  fait  homme  pour  endurer,  &  pour  payer  fon  Pere;
il  aime  bien  les  homines,  puis  qu'il  a  tant  paty  pour
leurs  pechez,  ie  penfe  fouuent  a  cela  pendant  la
Meffe,  difoit  I'vne  des  deux:  &  moy,  difoit  I'autre,
i'y  penfe  auffi,  &  ie  me  donne  a  luy,  &  ie  le  prie  qu'il
difpofe  de  moy  comme  il  voudra.

Ie  n'aurois  pas  penfe  que  les  Sauuages  fuffent  fi
confhans  a  prier  pour  quelques  [io6]  perfonnes  quand
ils  I'ont  entrepris,  vne  ieune  fille  aagee,  peut-eftre  de
douze  ans  difoit  au  Pere  qui  eft  retourne  cette  annee
de  France,  il  ne  s'eft  paffe  iour  que  ie  n'aye  prie  pour
toy,  le  Pere  ne  la  croyant  pas,  luy  demande  ce  qu'elle
difoit  a  Dieu,  auffi-toft  fans  broncher,  elle  luy  dift
promptement,  voicy  comme  ie  luy  parle:  Mon  Dieu
ayez  pitie  de  noftre  Pere,  conferuez-le,  empefchez
qu'il  ne  faffe  naufrage  par  vn  trop  grand  vent,  ou  par
de  trop  grandes  vagues,  menez-le  en  fon  pays,  &  le
ramenez,  vous  pouuez-tout:  Voyla  toute  fa  Retho-
rique  qui  vaut  mieux  que  celle  de  Ciceron.

II  y  a  vne  ieune  Seminarifte  qui  n'a  point  manque
depuis  trois  ans  de  prier  Dieu  a  la  faincte  Commu-
nion pour  Madame  de  la  Peltrie  Fondatrice  du  Semi-
naire,  les  autres  font  le  mefme  pour  les  perfonnes  qui
leur  font  du  bien  en  particulier  dont  ont  leur  donne
aduis;  mais  a  propos  de  Madame  de  la  Peltrie,  quand
ces  petites  plantes  la  virent  de  retour  au  Seminaire,
apres  quelque  fejour  qu'elle  a  fait  a  Montreal,  elles
ne  pouuoient  contenir  leur  ioye,  c'eft  bien  pour  [107]
lors  qu' elles  la  regardoient  pour  leur  vraye  Mere  qui
les  a  toufiours  bien  cheries  &  bien-aimees :  Or  ce  n'eft
pas  feulement  a  I'endroit  de  ces  ieunes  enfans  que
ces  bonnes  meres  employent  leur  zele,  des  femmes


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  237

since  he  suffered  so  much  for  their  sins."  "  I  often
think  of  it  during  Mass,"  said  one  of  them.  "And
I,"  said  the  other,  "  think  of  it  also,  and  give  my-
self to  him,  and  beg  him  to  do  with  me  as  he  wills."

I  would  not  have  thought  that  the  Savages  could
be  so  constant  in  praying  for  [io6]  persons,  when
they  have  undertaken  to  do  so.  A  young  girl,  about
twelve  years  of  age,  said  to  the  Father  who  returned
this  year  from  France :  ' '  Not  a  day  passed  that  I  did
not  pray  for  thee."  The  Father,  who  did  not  be-
lieve her,  asked  her  what  she  said  to  God.  At  once,
without  hesitation,  she  promptly  replied:  "  I  speak
to  him  in  this  way :  '  My  God,  have  pity  on  our  Fa-
ther ;  preserve  him ,  and  save  him  from  being  wrecked
by  too  stormy  winds,  or  too  heavy  waves.  Take
him  to  his  own  country,  and  bring  him  back  to  us.
You  can  do  all  things.'  "  That  is  all  her  Rhetoric,
which  is  better  than  that  of  Cicero.

There  is  a  young  Seminarist  who  has  not  failed  for
three  years  to  pray  to  God,  at  holy  Communion,  for
Madame  de  la  Peltrie,  the  Foundress  of  the  Seminary.
The  others  do  likewise  for  the  persons  who  are  espe-
cially kind  to  them,  of  whom  they  are  told.  But,  with
respect  to  Madame  de  la  Peltrie,  when  these  young
plants  saw  her  return  to  the  Seminary  after  a  short
stay  in  Montreal,  they  could  not  contain  their  joy.
Then,  indeed,  [107]  they  looked  upon  her  as  their
true  Mother,  who  had  always  cherished  and  loved
them.  Now  it  is  not  only  in  the  direction  of  these
young  children  that  the  good  mothers  display  their
zeal.  Grown  women,  and  even  other  persons,  visit
them  in  their  grated  parlor,  and  beg  them  for
instruction.  Others  leave  their  daughters  there  as  if
on  deposit,  for  several  months,  while  they  are  away


238  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.25

toutes  faites,  &  meftne  encor  d'autres  perfonnes  les
vont  vifiter  ^  leurs  grilles,  &  les  fupplient  de  leur
donner  quelque  inftrudtion:  d'autres  laiffent  leurs
filles  comme  en  depoft  pendant  quelques  mois  qu'ils
vont  faire  leurs  grandes  chaffes,  ce  qui  les  accom-
mode  entierement,  car  ils  n'ont  point  la  peine  de  les
traifner  apres  eux  dans  les  bois,  ils  font  bien  affeurez
que  leurs  enfans  ne  fouffriront  ny  la  faim,  ny  le  froid
pendant  qu'elles  feront  auec  ces  bonnes  meres,  &  ce
qui  vaut  mieux  que  tout  le  refte,  ils  fe  refioiiyffent  de
ce  qu'on  leur  apprend  le  chemin  du  Ciel,  vne  pauure
femme  voulant  a  ce  propos  laiffer  fa  fille  auec  les
autres,  cet  enfant  ne  peuft  demeurer  fi  long-temps
efloignee  de  fa  mere,  elle  pleure,  elle  s'afiiige,  bref
on  la  renuoye  a  fes  parens;  La  mere  s'en  attriftant,
difoit,  ma  fille  n'a  point  d'efprit,  i'efperois  qu'elle
m'efeigneroit  ce  qu'elle  [io8]  auroit  apris  aupres  de
ces  bonnes  Meres  pendant  cet  Hyuer,  &  me  voila
fruftree  de  mon  attente:  Vne  autre  fienne  parente
difoit  a  I'enfant;  pleuft  a  Dieu  que  ie  fuffe  en  aage
d'eftre  auec  les  Religieufes,  i'aurois  plus  d'efprit  que
toy,  car  ie  ne  les  quitterois  pas  que  ie  ne  fuffe
inftruite :  pour  conclufion  ces  deux  bonnes  f emmes  fe
rendirent  affidues  cinq  on  fix  femaines  pour  venir
entendre  parler  de  la  dodtrine  de  lefus-Chrift,  &  puis
il  fallut  fuiure  ceux  qu'elle[s]  ne  pouuoient  quitter.
Vne  autre  femme  baptifee  depuis  quelques  annees
s'en  alia  exprez  chez  les  Meres  &  demanda  qu'on
I'inftruifit  du  myftere  du  tres-faindt  Sacrement,  i'ay
eft6  long-temps  abfente  de  faindl  lofeph,  difoit-elle,
ie  ne  me  fuis  point  trouuee  aux  inftructions,  i'ay
perdu  la  memoire  de  ce  que  ie  dois  f9auoir,  a  chaque
article  que  luy  expliquoit  la  bonne  Mere  qui  luy  fut


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43- 44  239

on  their  great  hunts.  This  suits  them  admirably,
for  they  have  not  the  trouble  of  dragging  them  after
them  in  the  woods.  They  are  very  sure  that  their
children  will  suffer  from  neither  hunger  nor  cold
while  with  those  good  mothers;  and,  what  is  better
than  all  the  rest,  they  rejoice  because  they  are  taught
the  road  to  Heaven.  A  poor  woman  wished,  on  that
account,  to  leave  her  daughter  with  the  others;  the
child  could  not  remain  so  long  away  from  her  moth-
er,—  she  cried,  she  grieved,  until  finally  she  was  sent
back  to  her  parents.  The  mother  was  sorry  for  it,
and  said:  "  My  daughter  has  no  sense.  I  hoped
that  she  would  teach  me  what  she  [io8]  would  have
learned  from  the  good  Mothers  during  the  Winter,
and  now  I  am  disappointed  in  my  expectations."
Another,  a  relative  of  hers,  said  to  the  child :  "  Would
to  God  that  I  were  of  an  age  to  remain  with  the
Nuns.  I  would  have  more  sense  than  thou,  for  I
would  not  leave  them  until  I  had  been  taught. ' '  To
conclude,  these  two  good  women  went  assiduously,
for  five  or  six  weeks,  to  hear  the  doctrine  of  Jesus
Christ  explained  to  them,  and  then  they  had  to
follow  those  whom  they  could  not  leave.

Another  woman  who  had  been  baptized  for  some
years  went  to  the  Mothers  on  purpose  to  ask  for
instruction  in  the  mystery  of  the  most  holy  Sacra-
ment, "  I  have  been  away  from  saint  Joseph  a  long
time,"  she  said;  "  I  have  not  been  present  at  the
instructions,  and  have  forgotten  what  I  should
know."  As  each  article  was  explained  to  her  by  the
good  Mother  who  was  appointed  to  be  her  mistress,
she  would  say :  ' '  That  is  exactly  what  was  taught
me.  I  have  no  sense;  I  cannot  remember  what  I
am  told. Truly  thou  givest  me  pleasure; I  thank


240  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ESUITES [Vol.25

donn^e  pour  maitreffe,  voila  iuftement  ce  qu'on  m'a-
uoit  enfeigne,  ie  n'ay  point  d'efprit,  ie  ne  fgaurois  re-
tenir  ce  qu'on  me  dit,  en  verite  tu  me  fais  plaifir,  ie
te  remercie,  ah  [109]  que  i'eftois  affligee  autre  fois,
adioutoit-elle  quand  quelqu'vn  de  mes  enfans  venoit
^  mourir;  ie  ne  pouuois  me  confoler  en  fagon  du
monde,  mais  depuis  que  ie  fuis  baptifee  ie  n'ay  plus
ces  ennuis,  car  ie  d'y  en  mon  coeur,  Dieu  a  de  I'ef-
prit,  il  eft  bien  fage,  il  eft  bon,  il  fcait  tout  ce  qu'il
fait,  peut-eftre  qu'il  voit  de  loin  que  fi  mon  enfant
viuoit  plus  long-temps  il  ne  croiroit  plus  en  luy  &
qu'il  feroit  brufle,  voila  pourquoy  il  Ie  prend  de  bonne
heure,  laiffons  Ie  done  faire:  car  mon  enfant  n'eft
pas  mal  d'eftre  auec  luy,  quand  i'en  voy  mourir  quel-
qu'vn, ie  d'y  6  Dieu,  determine  de  moy  auffi  fi  tu
veux,  fais  tout  ce  que  tu  voudras  de  mes  enfans,  tu
me  veux  peut-eftre  efprouuer  tu  veux  voir  fi  ie  croy
en  toy  quand  tu  m'affligerois  cent  fois  d'auantage  i'y
croyray  toufiours,  ie  t'aymeray  &  t'obei'ray  toufiours,
ie  veux  tout  ce  que  tu  veux,  &  puis  m'addreffant  k
mon  enfant,  ie  luy  d'y  prens  courage  vas-t'en  voir
Dieu,  &  quand  tu  Ie  verras,  dis  luy,  ayez  pitie  de  ma
mere,  prie-le  pour  moy  afin  que  i'aille  au  Ciel  auec
toy,  ie  priray  pour  ton  ame  afin  que  tu  ne  fois  pas
[no]  long-temps  en  Purgatoire.

Sa  maitreffe  luy  parlant  a  ce  propos  des  Indulgences
qu'on  pouuoit  gagner  auec  vne  medaille,  elle  s'efcria
auec  autant  de  ioye  comme  fi  elle  euft  trouue  vn  thre-
for,  voyla  pour  la  premiere  fois  que  i'entends  parler
de  cette  doc5trine,  en  verite  m'a  mere,  difoit-elle,  tu
me  fais  plaifir  ie  te  remercie  6  ce  que  tu  dis  eft  bon
ie  m'en  fouuiendray  tous  les  iours  de  ma  vie,  notam-
jnent quand  ie Communiray, elle  prit  la  medaille


1 042  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  241

thee.  Ah!  [109]  how  grieved  I  used  formerly  to
be,"  she  added,  "  when  one  of  my  children  died;  I
could  not  console  myself  in  any  possible  way.  But
since  I  have  been  baptized  I  no  longer  feel  such
grief,  for  I  say  in  my  heart :  '  God  has  wisdom ;  he  is
very  wise ;  he  is  good ;  he  knows  all  that  he  does.
Perhaps  he  sees  long  beforehand  that,  if  my  child
lived  longer,  he  would  no  longer  believe  in  him,  and
would  be  burned, — that  is  why  he  takes  him  so
early.  Let  him  do  so,  for  my  child  is  fortunate  in
being  with  him. '  When  I  see  any  one  die,  I  say :  '  O
God,  dispose  of  me  also,  if  thou  wilt.  Do  all  thou
choosest  with  my  children.  Perhaps  thou  desirest
to  try  me ;  thou  wishest  to  see  whether  I  believe  in
thee.  Even  if  thou  wert  to  afflict  me  a  hundred  times
more,  I  would  still  believe.  I  will  always  love  and
obey  thee;  I  desire  everything  that  thou  desirest.'
And,  addressing  my  child,  I  say  to  him:  '  Take  cour-
age; go  and  see  God,  and  when  thou  seest  him,  say
to  him:  "  Have  pity  on  my  mother."  Pray  to  him
for  me,  so  that  I  may  go  to  Heaven  with  thee.  I
will  pray  for  thy  soul  so  that  thou  mayst  not  remain
[no]  long  in  Purgatory.'  "

When  her  mistress  spoke  to  her,  in  this  connec-
tion, of  the  Indulgences  that  could  be  gained  with  a
medal,  she  exclaimed,  as  joyfully  as  if  she  had  found
a  treasure :  ' '  This  is  the  first  time  that  I  hear  of
that  doctrine.  Truly,  my  mother,"  she  said,  "  thou
givest  me  pleasure;  I  thank  thee.  Oh,  what  a  good
thing  thou  tellest  me !  I  will  remember  it  every  day
of  my  life,  especially  when  I  shall  receive  Commun-
ion." She  took  the  medal  that  was  given  her,  with
feelings  of  deep  gratitude, and  said: "  Not  a  day


242  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.25

qti'on  luy  donna  auec  vn  fentiment  tout  plein  de
reconnoiffance  il  ne  fe  paffera  iour  que  ie  ne  prie
Dieu  qu'il  te  recompence  de  la  peine  que  tu  as  prife
de  m'enfeigner.

Quelques  Hurons  eflat  defcendus  cet  Hyuer  a  faindl
lofeph,  ne  manquoient  iamais  de  deux  iours  I'vn  d'al-
ler  vifiter  celles  qui  parlent  leur  langue  pour  eftre
inflruit  en  noftre  creance  notamment  fur  1' Adorable
myftere  du  faindt  Sacrement,  ils  auoient  plus  d'vne
lieue  de  chemin  a  faire  pour  aller  a  cette  efcole,  ny
le  vent  ny  la  neige  ny  le  froid  ny  le  manuals  temps
ne  les  en  ont  iamais  empefchez,  &  par  fois  ils  demeu-
roient  les  deux  &  trois  [m]  heures  dans  le  parloir,
nonobftant  la  rigueur  du  temps,  fans  iamais  par-
ler  d' autre  chofe  que  de  leur  Catechifme  quoy  qu'on
leur  offrit  a  manger  &  qu'on  les  inuitaft  de  s' aller
chauffer  dans  la  maifon  voifme,  rien  ne  leur  fembloit
plus  prelTe  n'y  de  plus  grande  importance  que  de  fe
faire  inliruire,  la  ferueur  du  difciple  aide  par  fois  a
rechauffer  le  coeur  de  fon  maiflre.

Ie  ne  finiray  point  ce  Chapitre  que  ie  n'aye  encor
touchy  vne  autre  occupation  des  Vrfulines  de  Canada,
c'eft  I'exercice  des  oeuures  de  mifericorde  corporelle,
11  faut  aider  les  corps  qui  veut  gagner  les  efprits,  fi
tofl  que  les  vaiffeaux  furent  partis  plufieurs  Semina-
riftes  paffageres  fe  prefenterent  fi  pauures  &  fi  mal
veftues  qu'il  fallut  leur  donner  dequoy  fe  couurir,  &
ce  qu'on  leur  donna  auroit  ferui  a  plus  de  vingt  Semi-
nariftes  fedentaires,  elles  deroberent  aux  vnes  ce  que
la  charite  vouloit  qu'on  donnail;  aux  autres,  cette
annee  on  les  a  bien  empefchees  de  commettre  vn  fem-
blable  larcin :  car  on  ne  leur  a  point  ou  fort  peu
apporte  d'etoffes  le  deffaut  [112]  du  temporel  retarde
beaucoup  le  fpirituel.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  '^43

shall  pass  without  my  pra3'ing  God  to  reward  thee
for  the  trouble  thou  hast  taken  in  teaching  me."

Some  Hurons  who  came  down  to  saint  Joseph  last
Winter  never  failed  to  go  every  other  day  to  visit
those  who  spoke  their  language,  in  order  to  be
instructed  in  our  belief,  especially  on  the  Adorable
rnystery  of  the  holy  Sacrament.  They  had  to  make
a  journey  of  over  a  league  to  reach  this  school;  and
yet  neither  wind,  nor  snow,  nor  cold,  nor  bad  weath-
er ever  prevented  them  from  doing  so.  Sometimes
they  remained  two  or  three  [i  1 1]  hours  in  the  parlor,
in  spite  of  the  severity  of  the  weather,  speaking  of
nothing  else  but  their  Catechism.  Although  they
were  offered  food,  and  were  invited  to  go  and  warm
themselves  in  the  next  house,  nothing  seemed  to
them  more  urgent  or  more  important  than  to  be
instructed.  The  disciple's  fervor  sometimes  assists
in  warming  the  heart  of  his  master.

I  cannot  conclude  this  Chapter  without  saying  a
word  of  another  occupation  of  the  Ursulines  of
Canada, —  that  is,  the  practice  of  works  of  corporal
mercy.  He  who  would  win  the  mind  must  succor
the  body.  As  soon  as  the  ships  had  left,  some  of
the  transient  Seminarists  presented  themselves,  so
wretched  and  so  poorly  clad  that  they  had  to  be  pro-
vided with  something  to  cover  themselves ;  and  what
was  given  to  them  would  have  served  for  more  than
twenty  of  the  resident  Seminarists.  They  robbed
these  of  what  charity  required  to  be  given  to  the
former.  This  year  they  were  prevented  from  com-
mitting such  a  theft,  for  no  materials,  or  only  very
little,  were  brought  to  them.  The  want  [112]  of
temporal  things  greatly  delays  spiritual  matters.

That  is  not  all. Many  Savages  from  the  Island,


244  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  25

Ce  n'eft  pas  tout,  plufieurs  Sauuages  de  I'lfle  de
la  Nation  d'Iroquet,  &  d'autres  endroits  s'eftans  cam-
pez  affez  proche  de  Kebec,  alloient  tons  les  iours  en
la  Chappelle  des  Vrfulines,  ou  le  Pere  Dequen  leur
faifoit  I'aiimofne  fpirituelle,  on  en  a  baptife  quel-
ques-vns  en  cette  petite  Eglife  apres  les  auoir  fnffi-
famment  initruits:  Or  comme  la  mifere  accabloit  ce
peuple,  I'aumofne  fpirituelle  eflant  faite  fuiuoit  la
corporelle,  les  Meres  an  fortir  du  Sermon  donnoient
a  manger  a  quatre-vingt  perfonnes,  charite  qu'elle  ont
continuee  enuiron  fix  femaines  durant:  Voicy  la
reconnoiffance  de  ce  bien  fait,  les  femmes  venoient
encor  en  d'autres  temps  vifiter  les  Meres,  elles  en-
troient  dans  la  Claffe  des  filles  Sauuages,  ou  Ton  ne
ceffoit  de  leur  apprendre  a  prier  Dieu,  les  hommes
entroient  aux  parloirs  pour  le  mefme  fujet,  leur
ferueur  payoit  &  recompenfoit  la  bonte  des  Meres,  &
comme  vn  bien-fait  difpofe  vn  bon  coeur  a  en  faire
vn  autre,  ils  ne  pouuoient  renuoyer  ces  bonnes  [113]
gens  fans  vne  feconde  aumofne,  le  moyen  de  voir  de
grands  corps  affamez  fans  les  fecourir,  qui  donne  ^
Dieu  doit  ouurir  fon  coeur  &  fes  mains  pour  receuoir,
il  veut  eflre  le  Maiftre  &  auoir  le  deffus  en  tout,  qu'il
foit  beny  au  dela  des  temps  &  de  I'eternite.


1  ()42  -  44  ]  K  EL  A  TIO  M  OF  1643-44  24  5-

from  the  Iroquet  Tribe,  and  from  other  quarters,
who  had  encamped  somewhat  close  to  Kebec,  went
every  day  to  the  Chapel  of  the  Urstilines,  where
Father  Dequen  dispensed  spiritual  alms  to  them.
Some  of  them  were  baptized  in  this  little  Church,
after  having  been  sufficiently  instructed.  Now  as
distress  overwhelmed  these  people,  the  spiritual  gifts
were  followed  by  material  ones.  When  the  Sermon
was  over,  the  Mothers  gave  food  to  eighty  persons, —
an  act  of  charity  that  they  continued  during  about  six
weeks.  Oh,  what  gratitude  they  showed  for  this
kindness !  The  women  also  came  at  other  times  to
visit  the  Mothers.  They  entered  the  Classroom  of
the  Savage  girls,  where  they  were  always  taught  to
pray  to  God ;  the  men  went  into  the  parlors  for  the
same  purpose.  Their  fervor  repaid  and  rewarded
the  kindness  of  the  Mothers;  and,  as  one  benefit  im-
pels a  kind  heart  to  bestow  another,  they  could  not
send  away  these  good  [113]  people  without  a  second
alms.  How  could  they  see  great  crowds  of  people
starved,  without  succoring  them?  He  who  gives  to
God  must  open  his  heart  and  his  hands  to  receive.
He  chooses  to  be  the  Master,  and  to  have  the  suprem-
acy in  everything.  May  he  be  blessed  beyond  time,.
and  for  eternity.


me  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.25


CHAPITRE  VIII.

DE CE QUI S'EST PASSE A L'OCCASION DE QUEL-

QUES APOSTATS.

QVOY  que  cette  nouuelle  Eglife  foit  dans  la  fer-
ueur  de  fes  commencemens,  elle  ne  laiffe  pas
pourtant  de  fouffrir  des  fcandales  de  quelques
manuals  Chreftiens;  Satan  faifant  tous  fes  efforts
pour  reprendre  les  places  que  lefus-Chrill:  a  con-
queftees  fur  luy,  &  fe  maintenir  dans  la  poffeffion
d'vn  pays  ou  il  a  regne  paifiblement  pendant  tant  de
fiecles.  Nous  auons  neantmoins  fujet  de  nous  confo-
ler  dans  ce  malheur,  fur  ce  [i  14]  que  ces  fcandales  ne
font  pas  foufferts,  &  que  bien  fouuent  ils  reufri[ff]ent
^  la  gloire  de  Dieu  qui  les  a  permis,  &  a  la  confufion
du  Demon  qui  les  a  fufcitez.  La  fource  de  tous  ces
fcandales  n'efl  autre  que  la  liberte  qu'ont  toufiours
eu  nos  Sauuages,  &  qu'ils  voudroient  bien  retenir,
d'auoir  autant  de  femmes  que  bon  leur  femble,  &  de
les  quitter  felon  leur  fantaifie:  D'ou  viet  que  de
toutes  les  loix  Chreftiennes  que  nous  leur  propofons,
il  n'en  eft  point  qui  leur  femble  fi  rude,  comme  celle
qui  defend  la  polygamic,  &  qui  ne  permet  pas  qu'on
rompe  les  liens  d'vn  iufte  mariage,  Comme  ils
haiffent  extremement  tout  ce  qui  choque  tant  foit
peu  la  liberte,  ils  ont  de  la  peine  a  plier  le  col  fous
vn  ioug  qu'il  n'eft  pas  licite  de  changer  ny  de  qui-
ter,  &  ne  regardent  plus  le  mariage  des  Chreftiens
comme  vn  ayde  &  vn  foulagement  de  la  vie  humaine,


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  247


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF WHAT OCCURRED IN CONNECTION WITH SOME

APOSTATES.

ALTHOUGH  this  new  Church  is  in  the  fervor  of
its  beginning,  it  cannot  avoid,  nevertheless,
suffering  scandal  through  the  acts  of  some
bad  Christians.  Satan  spares  no  effort  to  recapture
the  posts  that  Jesus  Christ  has  taken  from  him,  and
to  maintain  himself  in  possession  of  a  country  where
he  has  reigned  undisturbed  for  so  many  centuries.
We  have  reason,  however,  to  console  ourselves  in
this  misfortune  with  the  fact  [114]  that  these  scan-
dals are  not  tolerated,  and  that  often  they  result  in
the  glory  of  God,  who  has  permitted  them,  and  the
confusion  of  the  Demon,  who  has  given  rise  to  them.
The  source  of  all  these  scandals  is  none  other  than
the  liberty  that  our  Savages  have  always  had,  and
that  they  would  like  to  retain,  of  having  as  many
wives  as  they  please,  and  of  leaving  them  according
to  their  fancy.  Hence  it  results  that,  of  all  the
Christian  laws  which  we  propound  to  them,  there  is
not  one  that  seems  so  hard  to  them  as  that  which
forbids  polygamy,  and  does  not  allow  them  to  break
the  bonds  of  lawful  marriage.  As  they  hate  to  the
utmost  anything  which  in  the  least  restricts  their
liberty,  they  find  it  very  difficult  to  bend  their  necks
to  a  yoke  which  they  cannot  lawfully  change  or  set
aside; and they no longer look upon Christian


■248  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  25


mais  comme  vne  feruitude  pleine  de  defplaifir,  &  d'a-
mertume:  Cell:  ce  qui  empefche  la  plufpart  des  infi-
deles  d'accepter  la  Foy,  &  I'a  fait  perdre  a  quelques-
vns  qui  I'auoient  defia  embraffee. II  y  en  a  plufieurs,
[115]  graces  a  Dieu,  qui  nous  donnent  toute  forte  de
contentement  fur  ce  fujet,  gardant  exadtement  toutes
les  loix  du  Mariage,  fans  peine  &  auec  la  benedicftion
du  Ciel. II s'en eft trouue  neantmoins deux cet
annee,  qui  ont  caufe  du  fcandale  en  cette  matiere,  &
ont  beaucoup  trouble  la  Paix  de  cette  petite  Eglife.
Le  premier  s'appelle  Eftienne  Pigar8ich,  le  fecond,
Frangois Kokb'eribagb'gb'ch :  celuy-la  auant  fon  Bap-
tefme eftoit vn des plus fameux Sorciers de fa
Nation,  &  qui  donnoit  plus  de  peine  a  ceux  qui  trauail-
loient  a  fa  conuerfion :  Mais  enfin,  apres  auoir  recon-
neu  &  embraffe  apres  plufieurs  combats  la  verity  de
noftre  creance,  il  I'a  profeffa  auec  autant  d'ardeur,
comme  il  I'auoit  auparauant  combattue. C'eltoit  luy
qui  appelloit  &  amenoit  les  autres  aux  prieres,  qui
chaftioit  les  mefchans,  &  qui  prefchoit  noftre  dodrine
dans  les  Eglifes  &  dans  les  cabanes  auec  vne  ferueur
&  eloquence  qui  n'auoit  rien  de  barbare :  il  cotinua
dans  ce  zele  tandis  qu'il  fuft  en  la  compagnie  des
Chreftiens  de  faindt  lofeph;  [116]  mais  s'eftant  fepa-
r6  de  ceux-cy,  pour  monter  aux  trois  Riuieres  oil  fe
trouuoient  pour  lors  les  Algonquins  de  I'lfle  fes  com-
patriotes  &  ceux  d'Hiroquet,  qui  font  deux  Nations
extremement infolentes, orgueilleufes, pleines de
fuperftitions,  &  de  libertinage,  il  fe  laiffa  bien-toft
corrompre  auec  fon  compagnon  par  ces mauuaifes
compagnies ;  en  forte  que  tons  deux  quitterent  leurs
femmes  legitimes  auec  I'exercice  de  la  Foy,  &  prin-
drent  chacun  vne  cocubine.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  16^3-44  249

marriage  as  an  aid  and  comfort  of  human  life,  but  as
a  servitude  full  of  vexation  and  bitterness.  It  is  this
that  prevents  most  of  the  infidels  from  accepting  the
Faith,  and  has  caused  some  to  lose  it  who  had  already-
embraced  it.  There  are  many,  [115]  thanks  be  to
God,  who  give  us  every  satisfaction  on  this  point,
faithfully  observing  all  the  laws  of  Marriage,  with-
out any  trouble,  and  with  Heaven's  blessing.  How-
ever, this  year  there  have  been  two  who  have  given
scandal  in  this  matter,  and  have  greatly  disturbed
the  Peace  of  this  little  Church.

The  name  of  the  first  is  Estienne  Pigarouich ;  that
of  the  second  Frangois  Kokweribagougouch.  The
former  was,  before  his  Baptism,  one  of  the  most
famous  Sorcerers  of  his  Tribe,  and  one  who  gave  the
most  trouble  to  those  who  labored  for  his  conversion.
But  at  last,  after  several  contests,  he  acknowledged
and  embraced  the  truths  of  our  belief  and  professed
it  with  as  much  ardor  as  he  had  formerly  contended
aeainst  it.  He  it  was  who  called  and  brought  the
others  to  the  prayers,  who  chastised  the  wicked,  and
who  preached  our  doctrine  in  the  Churches  and  in  the
cabins  with  a  fervor  and  eloquence  that  savored  in
no  wise  of  barbarism.  This  zeal  continued  while  he
was  in  the  company  of  the  Christians  of  saint  Joseph ;
[116]  but  after  he  left  them  to  go  up  to  the  three
Rivers,  at  which  place  were  the  Algonquins  of  the
Island,  his  countrymen,  and  those  of  Hiroquet, —
who  are  two  Tribes  extremely  insolent,  arrogant,
full  of  superstitions,  and  very  profligate, — he  soon
allowed  himself,  with  his  comrade,  to  be  corrupted
by  such  bad  company,  so  that  both  abandoned  their
lawful  wives  with  the  practice  of  the  Faith,  and  took
each  a  concubine.


250  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.25

Le  25.  de  Decembre,  iour  de  la  Natiuit6  de  Noftre
Seigneur,  le  Pere  lean  de  Brebeuf  qui  iufques  a  lors
n'auoit  rien  peu  gagner  fur  les  efprits  de  ces  deux
Apoftats,  enuoye  querir  Eilienne  pour  I'aduertir  que
c'eftoit  le  lendemain  qu'on  folemnifoit  la  fefle  du
Sainct  dont  il  porte  le  nom,  &  qu'en  ce  iour  il  deuoit
mettre  fin  a  fes  defbauches,  &  fe  remettre  dans  le
deuoir  d'vn  bon  Chreftien.  II  vient  &  apres  auoir
ouy  le  fujet  pour  lequel  on  I'auoit  appelle,  fe  retire,
fans  dire  autre  chofe,  finon  que  c'eftoit  perdre  du
temps  que  de  luy  parler  de  cette  matiere.  Ce  fuft
neantmoins  vn  coup  [117]  de  flefche  qui  luy  entama
le  coeur,  &  y  fit  vne  playe  dont  il  reuint  bien-toft
chercher  le  remede.

Ce  fufl  le  lendemain,  iour  de  Saindt  Eftienne  fon
Patron  qu'il  reuint  fans  eflre  appelle,  &  dit  au  Pere:
le  parle  tout  de  bon,  ie  ne  ments  point,  i'ay  refolu
de  mettre  fin  a  mes  defbauches,  depuis  que  i'ay  quit-
t6  Dieu,  ie  n'ay  pas  eu  vne  bonne  heure.  Ie  fuis
pique  nuidt  &  iour  des  remords  de  ma  confcience,  les
flammes  que  vous  nous  prefchez,  font  toufiours  pre-
fentes  a  mon  efprit,  ie  ne  vois  iamais  de  feu,  que  ie
ne  me  fouuienne  de  celuy  d'Enfer,  &  ie  me  figure
qu'il  n'eft  allume  que  pour  moy,  mille  penfees  me
troublent  I'efprit,  &  me  percent  le  coeur,  i'ay  efte
inftruit  auec  tant  de  foin,  dis-ie  en  moy-mefme,  i'ay
protefte  mille  fois  que  i'aymerois  mieux  perdre  la  vie,
que  d'abandonner  la  priere,  i'enfeignois  les  autres,
i'affeurois  ceux  qui  branfloient,  i'encourageois  ceux
qui  craignoient,  ie  chafkiois  les  mefchans,  &  me
voyla  declieu  maintenant,  &  deuenu  le  plus  abomi-
nable de  tons.  Dieu  me  hait,  le  malin  [118]  efprit
me  poffede,  &  ie  ne  puis  attendre  autre  chofe  que  de


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  -51

On  the  25th  of  December,  the  anniversary  of  the
Nativity  of  Our  Lord,  Father  Jean  de  Brebeuf  —  who,
up  to  that  time,  had  been  unable  to  exert  any  influ-
ence on  the  minds  of  these  two  Apostates — sent  for
Estienne,  to  notify  him  that  on  the  following  day
would  be  celebrated  the  festival  of  the  Saint  whose
name  he  bore ;  and  that  on  that  day  he  must  put  an
end  to  his  debauchery,  and  return  to  the  duty  of  a
good  Christian.  He  came,  and  after  having  heard
what  he  had  been  summoned  to  hear,  he  left  with-
out saying  a  word,  except  that  it  was  a  loss  of  time
to  speak  to  him  on  that  matter.  It  was,  neverthe-
less, an  [117]  arrow  shot  that  reached  his  heart,  and
inflicted  a  wound  for  which  he  soon  came  to  seek  a
remedy.

On  the  following  day,  the  feast  of  Saint  Stephen,
his  Patron,  he  came  back  without  having  been  sent
for,  and  said  to  the  Father :  "  I  speak  the  truth ;  I
do  not  lie :  I  have  resolved  to  put  an  end  to  my
debauchery.  Ever  since  I  have  abandoned  God,  I
have  not  had  an  hour's  peace;  I  am  goaded  night
and  day  by  remorse  of  conscience.  The  flames  of
which  you  preach  to  us  are  ever  present  to  my  mind.
I  never  see  a  fire  without  thinking  of  that  of  Hell;
and  I  imagine  that  it  is  lighted  only  for  me.  A  thou-
sand thoughts  disturb  my  mind,  and  pierce  my  heart.
*  I  have  been  so  carefully  taught,'  I  say  to  myself;
'  I  have  protested  a  thousand  times  that  I  would
rather  lose  my  life  than  abandon  prayer.  I  taught
the  others ;  I  steadied  those  who  wavered ;  I  encour-
aged those  who  were  afraid ;  I  chastised  the  wicked ;
and  now  I  am  fallen  and  have  become  the  most
abominable  of  all.  God  hates  me;  the  evil  [118]
spirit  has  possession  of  me ;  and  I  can  expect  noth-


252  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  j£SUITES [Vol.25

brufler  eternellement :  dans  ces  penfees  qui  ne  me
quittent  iamais,  ie  m'eftime  indigne  de  viure;  II  y
a  trois  iours  que  ie  ne  mange  rien,  ie  ne  fgaurois
fubfifter  dans  cet  eftat,  il  faut  que  demain  ie  me
confeffe,  &  puis  ie  demeureray  auec  toy,  fi  tu  I'agree,
pour  m'ef carter  des  occafions  qui  me  perdent,  tu
m'obligeras  encore  de  me  prefter  vn  habit  Frangois,
qui  me  fera  fouuenir  que  ie  ne  dois  plus  viure  en
Infidele,  mais  en  Chreftien.  Ie  defcendray  bien  toft  a
Sain(5t  lofeph,  efcrits  au  Pere  Vimont,  qu'il  me  re-
9oiue  dans  fa  maifon,  afin  que  ie  ne  fois  pas  contraint
de  retourner  dans  les  cabanes  de  nos  gens,  ou  les
mauuaifes  compagnies  auec  la  foiblefCe  de  ma  nature,
acheueroient  a  me  perdre.

Le  Pere  Brebeuf  efmeu  de  ce  difcours,  luy  accorde
ce  qu'il  demande,  &  le  retire  dans  noftre  maifon,  oil
eftant  vifite  par  vn  des  principaux  nomme  Salomon,
il  luy  declare  la  refolution  qu'il  auoit  prife,  le  f up-
pliant  de  luy  pardonner  la  faute  qu'il  auoit  commife,
&  le  fcandale  qu'il  [i  19]  auoit  donne,  &  le  loiiant  de
ce  qu'il  croyoit  fermement  nonobftant  les  contra-
dictions, &  manuals  exemples  des  Infideles,  parmy
lefquels  il  conuerfoit;  a  quoy  Salomon  refpondit  fort
a  propos,  loiiant  le  deffein  d'Eftienne,  &  I'exhortant
h.  la  perfeuerance.

Le  28.  de  Decembre  iour  de  faindt  lean  apres  auoir
paffe  toute  la  nuicl  fans  dormir  dans  la  recherche,  &
douleur  de  fes  pechez  il  fe  confeffa  auec  toutes  les
marques  exterieures  d'vne  vraye  penitece,  &  ayat
demeure  en  priere  hors  de  la  Chappelle  iufques  apres
la  Predication,  enfin  il  entre  veitu  d'vn  habit  Fran-
cois, fe  met  a  genoux  deuant  I'Autel,  baife  la  terre,
puis  fe  leue,  &  fe  tournant  vers  les  Francois,  &
Sauuages  il  harangua  en  cette  forte.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  253

ing  else  than  to  burn  eternally.'  With  such  thoughts,
that  never  leave  me,  I  consider  myself  unworthy  to
live.  For  three  days,  I  have  eaten  nothing.  I  can-
not live  in  this  condition.  To-morrow,  I  must
confess  my  sins,  and  then  I  will  remain  with  thee  if
thou  art  willing,  so  as  to  keep  myself  aloof  from  the
temptations  that  are  causing  my  ruin.  Thou  wilt
also  oblige  me  by  lending  me  French  garments,  which
will  remind  me  that  I  must  no  longer  live  as  an  Infi-
del, but  as  a  Christian.  I  shall  soon  go  down  to  Saint
Joseph ;  write  to  Father  Vimont  to  receive  me  in  his
house,  so  that  I  may  not  be  compelled  to  return  to
the  cabins  of  my  people,  where  evil  companionship,
with  the  weakness  of  my  nature,  would  complete
my  ruin."

Father  Brebeuf,  moved  by  these  words,  granted
him  what  he  asked,  and  took  him  into  our  house, —
where,  on  being  visited  by  one  of  the  leaders  named
Salomon,  he  told  him  of  the  resolution  that  he  had
taken.  He  begged  the  latter  to  pardon  the  sin  that
he  had  committed,  and  the  scandal  that  he  [119]  had
given,  and  praised  him  because  he  firmly  believed
in  spite  of  the  contradictions  and  bad  examples  of
the  Infidels  with  whom  he  lived.  To  this  Salomon
replied  in  appropriate  terms,  praising  Estienne's
resolution  and  exhorting  him  to  persevere.

On  the  28th  of  December,  the  feast  of  saint  John,
after  having  passed  the  entire  night  without  sleep,
thinking  over  and  sorrowing  for  his  sins,  he  made
his  confession,  with  all  the  outward  marks  of  sincere
repentance;  and,  after  having  remained  in  prayer
outside  the  Chapel  until  the  Sermon  was  over,  he
came  in  at  last,  clad  in  French  garments,  knelt  be-
fore the  Altar,  and  kissed  the  ground ;  then  he  arose


254  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.25

le  fuis  celuy  qu'on  appele  Eftienne  Pigaroiiicli,
celuy  qui  iadis  auoit  tant  d'affedtion  pour  la  priere,
qui  a  efle  inftruit  auec  tant  de  foin,  qui  a  efte  bapti-
fe  des  premiers  de  notre  Natio,  qui  prefchoit  la  Foy
aux  autres,  qui  chaftioit  les  medians  &  qui  par  apres
eft  deuenu  le  plus  mefchat  de  tous,  &  s'efl  cliang6
en  vn  miferable  [120]  Apoflat,  ie  n'ay  pas  honte  de
conf effer,  ce  que  vous  f9au6s  defia ;  mon  peche  a  eft6
public,  ie  veux  auffi  que  ma  penitence  foit  publique,
&  que  tous  ceux  qui  croyent,  fgachent  que  ie  detefle
mon  impiet6,  &  que  i'ay  vn  extreme  regret  du
fcandale  que  i'ay  donne.  Aprenez  cela  de  moy,  que
c'eft  vne  chofe  efpouuentable  d'eftre  ennemy  de
Dieu,  &  coupable  de  damnation  eternelle,  depuis  que
ie  fuis  en  cet  eftat,  ie  n'ay  iamais  dormy  en  repos,  &
ie  n'ay  iamais  veu  de  feu,  que  ie  n'aye  efte  trouble
de  cette  penfee.  Pourras-tu  fouffrir  le  feu  d'Enfer,
dont  celuy-cy  n'eft  qu'vn  ombre,  &  tu  ne  le  ffaurois
euiter  mourant  dans  1' eftat  ou  tu  es?  Si  I'appre-
henfion  de  ce  feu  donne  tant  de  peine,  que  feras-ce
de  le  reffentir  en  effet,  &  d'eflre  entoure  &  penetre
de  ces  flammes.  Ie  ne  merite  pas  que  vous  me  par-
donniez  le  manuals  exemple,  &  le  fcandale  que  ie  vous
ay  donne:  i'efpere  neantmoins  que  vous  aurez  pitie
de  moy,  &  que  vous  ni'accorderez  le  pardon  que
ie  vous  demande.  Ie  me  foufmets  entierement  a  la
difcretion  des  Peres  qui  nous  gouuernent,  pour  eftre
[121]  chafti6  felon  qu'il  ordonneront,  ie  ne  refuferay
aucune  penitence.  Vous  tels  &  tels,  qui  croyez
fermement  &  qui  refpectez  la  priere,  i'eftime  voftre
courage,  &  loiie  la  fidelite  que  vous  gardez  a  Dieu:
ne  fuiuez  pas  le  manuals  exemple  que  ie  vous  ay
donne,  mais  continuez  a  bien  faire. Et  vous  ieunes


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  255

and, turning  toward  the French  and  the Savages,
he  harangued  them  as  follows :

"  I  am  he  who  is  called  Estienne  Pigarouich, —  he
who  formerly  had  so  much  love  for  prayer,  who  was
so  carefully  taught,  who  was  one  of  the  first  of  our
Tribe  to  be  baptized,  who  preached  the  Faith  to
others,  who  chastised  the  wicked,  and  who  afterward
became  the  most  wicked  of  all,  and  changed  into  a
miserable  [120]  Apostate.  I  am  not  ashamed  to  con-
fess what  you  already  know.  My  sin  has  been  pub-
lic, I  wish  my  repentance  to  be  public  also,  and  that
all  who  believe  may  know  that  I  detest  my  impiety
and  that  I  deeply  regret  the  scandal  that  I  have
given.  Learn  this  from  me,  that  it  is  a  dreadful
thing  to  be  an  enemy  of  God,  and  to  be  deserving  of
eternal  damnation.  Ever  since  I  have  been  in  that
state,  I  have  had  no  quiet  sleep;  I  have  never  seen  a
fire  without  being  disturbed  by  this  thought :  '  Wilt
thou  be  able  to  bear  the  fire  of  Hell,  of  which  this  is
but  a  shadow  ?  and  thou  canst  not  avoid  it  if  thou
shouldst  die  in  thy  present  condition.  If  the  fear  of
this  fire  disturb  thee  so,  what  wilt  thou  do  when  thou
shalt  really  feel  it,  and  shalt  be  surrounded  and
penetrated  by  those  fires?'  I  do  not  deserve  that  you
should  pardon  the  bad  example  and  the  scandal  that
I  have  given  you.  I  hope,  however,  that  you  will
have  pity  on  me  and  that  you  will  grant  me  the
pardon  that  I  ask  of  you.  I  submit  entirely  to  the
discretion  of  the  Fathers  who  direct  us,  to  be  [121]
punished  as  they  may  order.  I  will  not  refuse  any
penance.  You,  and  you,  who  firmly  believe  and
respect  prayer,  I  esteem  your  courage,  and  praise
your  faithfulness  to  God.  Do  not  follow  the  bad
example  that  I  have  given  you,  but  continue  to  do


256  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.25

gens,  qui  n'eftes  pas  encore  baptifez,  ou  qui  desho-
norez  voftre  Baptefme  par  vos  libertinages,  fi  vous
auez  fuiuy  mon  exemple,  &  imite  mon  peche,  imitez
auffi  ma  penitence,  craignez  Dieu  &  apprehendez
I'Enfer  que  vous  auez  merite,  &  que  vous  ne  pouuez
euiter  fi  vous  ne  changez  de  moeurs  &  de  vie,  ne
defefperez  pas  de  la  bonte  de  Dieu,  fi  quelqu'vn  en
deuoit  defefperer,  ce  feroit  moy  qui  ay  tant  abufe  de
fes  graces:  mais  neantmoins  i'efpere  en  fa  miferi-
corde.  Priez  Dieu  pour  moy,  afin  que  ie  puilTe
appaifer  fa  colere,  que  i'ay  tant  irrit6e  par  mes  pechez.

Voyla  le  Sommaire  de  la  harangue  de  ce  Sauuage,
dit  le  Pere  Brebeuf,  qui  nous  a  donne  ces  memoires,
ie  fuis  extremement  marry,  adioufte-il,  que  ie  [122]
ne  puiffe  repeter  mot  a  mot  tout  ce  qu'il  dit,  mais  ny
ie  n'ay  peu  le  bien  comprendre,  ny  ne  I'ay  peu  bien
f9auoir  des  interpretes,  lefquels  apres  auoir  repete  ce
que  deffus,  dirent  qu'il  n'efloit  pas  poffible  de  redire
ce  qu'il  auoit  dit,  &  qu'eux  &  tous  ceux  qui  fe
mefle[nt]  de  parler  la  langue  des  Sauuages  ne  font
que  begayer  en  comparaifon  de  cet  homme,  &  qu'il
auoit  auffi  bien  dit,  comme  le  Pere  de  Breffany  ve-
noit  de  bien  prefcher.  Ce  que  ie  puis  dire,  c'efb  que
fa  fa9on,  fa  deuotion,  &  toute  fon  adtion  toucha  extre-
mement tous  les  Frangois  &  tous  les  Sauuages,  &  tira
mefmes  les  larmes  des  yeux  de  plufieurs  qui  I'efcou-
toient.

Apres  que  cettuy-cy  euft  harangue,  vn  des  princi-
paux  Chrel^iens  prift  la  parole.  ]\Ion  frere,  dit-il,
nous  fommes  grandement  confolez  de  voir  que  tu  as
recouuert  I'efprit,  que  les  femmes  t'auoient  oft6:  Ie
haiffois  ta  malice,  &  ne  pouuois  fouffrir  le  fcandale
que  tu  nous  donnois,  maintenant  i'eflime  &  loiie  ton


1 642  -  44J  RELA  TION  OF  1643  " 44  257

well.  And  you,  young  men,  who  are  not  yet  bap-
tized or  who  dishonor  your  Baptism  by  your  profli-
gacy, if  you  have  followed  my  example  and  imitated
my  sin,  imitate  also  my  repentance.  Fear  God,  and
dread  the  Hell  that  you  have  deserved,  and  that  you
cannot  avoid  unless  you  change  your  habits  and  your
lives.  Do  not  despair  of  God's  goodness.  If  any
one  should  despair,  it  should  be  myself,  who  have  so
greatly  abused  his  graces.  But,  nevertheless,  I  trust
to  his  mercy.  Pray  God  for  me,  so  that  I  may  ap-
pease his  wrath  which  I  have  so  excited  by  my  sins."

"  Such  is  the  Summary  of  the  harangue  of  this
Savage,"  says  Father  Brebeuf,  who  has  given  us
these  notes.  "  I  am  extremely  sorry,"  he  adds,
"  that  I  [122]  cannot  repeat  word  for  word  all  that  he
said.  But  either  I  did  not  hear  him  well,  or  I  could
not  learn  it  properly  from  the  interpreters,  who,
after  having  repeated  what  I  have  related  above,
stated  that  it  was  impossible  to  report  all  that  he
had  said ;  that  they,  and  all  who  undertake  to  speak
the  language  of  the  Savages,  can  only  stammer  in
comparison  with  this  man;  and  that  he  had  spoken
as  well  as  Father  de  Bressany,  who  had  just  preached
a  fine  sermon.  What  I  can  assert  is  that  his  manner,
his  devotion,  and  all  his  actions  greatly  impressed
all  the  French  and  all  the  Savages,  and  even  brought
tears  to  the  eyes  of  many  who  heard  him."

After  this  man  had  delivered  his  harangue,  one  of
the  principal  Christians  spoke.  "  My  brother,"  he
said,  "  we  are  greatly  consoled  at  seeing  that  thou
hast  recovered  thy  sense,  which  the  women  had
taken  from  thee.  I  detested  thy  wickedness,  and
could  not  bear  the  scandal  that  thou  gavest  us;  now,
I  esteem  and  praise  thy  courage. Do  not  lose  heart;


258  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  25

courage.  Ne  perds  point  coeur,  repare  ta  faute,  fou-
uies-toy  de  ce  que  tu  viens  [123]  de  dire,  ne  ments
point,  ie  tourne  maintenant  toute  mon  indignation
contre  quelques  ieunes  gens  qui  perfiftent  dans  leurs
defbauches:  Mes  nepueux,  iufques  a  quand  n'aurez
vous  point  d'efprit?  Serez-vous  toufiours  fols ?  Vous
mentez  quad  vous  dites  que  vous  croyez  en  Dieu,
ceux  qui  croyent  fermement,  ne  font  pas  libertins
comme  vous  eftes;  imitez  celuy  qui  vient  de  parler,
il  vous  a  gafte  peut-ellre  par  fon  mauuais  exemple,
maintenant  que  fa  penitence  vous  remette  dans  voftre
deuoir,  ce  font  ceux  de  la  Nation  d'Iroquet  qui  nous
rendent  mefchans,  rapportant  icy  leurs  anciennes
fuperftitions  &  mauuaif es  couftumes :  f uff ent-ils  bien
loin  de  nous.  Prenons  courage  tous  tant  que  nous
fommes,  appaifons  Dieu,  afin  qu'il  nous  faffe  part  de
fes  mifericordes.

Paul  Teffb'ehats  Capitaine  des  Algonquins  de  I'lfle
approuua  ce  que  ceftuy-cy  venoit  de  dire,  &  adioufta
qu'il  falloit  parler  plus  amplement  de  ces  affaires.
Apres  cela  Eftienne  difoit  que  tandis  qu'il  eftoit  dans
fa  mauuaife  vie,  illuy  fembloit  qu'il  eiloit  lie  comme
vn  prifonnier  [124]  de  quantite  de  cordes,  mais  qu'a
prefent  il  luy  fembloit  eftre  en  liberte,  II  continue
dans  ces  bons  fentimens,  &  parle  fouuent  hautement
tant  a  I'encontre  de  foy-mefme,  &  de  fes  desbauches
paffee,  qu'en  faueur  de  la  vertu,  &  de  la  priere,
iufques  a  ce  qu'il  partit  des  trois  Riuieres  auec  tous
fes  compagnons  pour  defcendre  a  Sillery.

Ce  fuft  en  ce  voyage  que  s'oubliant  de  ce  qu'il  auoit
promis,  &  abufant  des  lumieres,  &  fentimens  que  le
fainct  Efprit  luy  auoit  donne,  il  recheut  dans  fon
peche  foit  qu'il  fuft  follicite  a  cela  par  les  difcours.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43- 44  259

repair  thy  fault;  remember  what  thou  hast  just  [123]
said,  and  do  not  lie.  I  now  turn  all  my  indignation
against  some  young  men  who  persist  in  their  de-
bauchery. My  nephews,  how  long  will  you  remain
without  sense?  Will  you  always  be  foolish?  You
lie,  when  you  say  that  you  believe  in  God.  Those
who  believe  firmly  are  not  libertines  as  you  are.  I
imitate  him  who  has  just  spoken.  He  has  perhaps
injured  you  by  his  bad  example ;  now  let  his  repent-
ance induce  you  to  return  to  duty.  It  is  those  who
belong  to  the  Iroquet  Tribe  who  make  us  wicked,
by  bringing  here  their  old  superstitions  and  evil
customs.  Would  that  they  were  far  from  us!  Let
us  all  take  courage ;  let  us  appease  God,  so  that  he
may  grant  us  a  share  of  his  mercies. ' '

Paul  Tesswehats,  Captain  of  the  Island  Algon-
quins,  approved  what  the  last  speaker  had  said,  and
added  that  it  was  necessary  to  speak  more  fully  of
these  matters.  After  that,  Estienne  said  that,  while
he  was  leading  his  evil  life,  it  seemed  to  him  that  he
was  bound,  like  a  prisoner,  [124]  with  many  ropes;
but  that,  at  that  moment,  he  felt  at  liberty.  He
continued  in  these  good  sentiments  and  often  spoke
aloud  both  with  reference  to  himself  and  his  past
debauchery,  and  in  favor  of  virtue  and  of  prayer,
until  he  left  the  three  Rivers  with  all  his  compan-
ions, to  come  down  to  Sillery.

It  was  during  this  voyage  that,  forgetting  what  he
had  promised,  and  abusing  the  enlightenment  and
sentiments  with  which  the  holy  Ghost  had  inspired
him,  he  relapsed  into  his  sin, —  either  because  he
was  solicited  thereto  by  the  words  and  bad  examples
not  only  of  the  Infidels,  but  also  of  some  bad  Chris-
tians who  accompanied  him ;  or  because  he  is  of  a


260  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jiSUITES  [Vol.25

&  manuals  exemples  non  feulement  des  Infideles,
mais  mefmes  de  quelques  matmais  Chreftiens  qui
raccompagnoient,  foit  parce  que  c'eft  vn  efprit  vio-
lent, &  en  qui  la  mauuaife  couftume  auoit  iette  de
profondes  racines,  tant  y  a  que  le  Pere  Breffany  qui
eftoit  party  deux  iours  apres  ceux-cy  pour  defcendre
"k  Kebec,  les  ayant  rencontre  en  chemin,  &  s'eftant
informe  d'Eftienne,  trouua  qu'il  auoit  repris  fa  con-
cubine, &  ne  fuil  pas  fatisfait  des  refponces  qu'il
luy  fit.

[125]  La  malice  de  cet  homme,  &  celle  de  quelques
autres  manuals  Chreftiens,  Infideles,  &  forclers  qui
fe  trouuoient  en  cette  trouppe,  &  s'eil;olent  compor-
t6s  infolemment  aux  trois  Rluleres,  nous  fit  refoudre
auec  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  de  leur  falre  vn  mau-
uais  accuell  pour  leur  tefmolgner  I'horreur  que  nous
auons  des  mefchans,  &  leur  falre  apprehender
d'auantage  leur  faute.

La  cralnte  des  Iroquois,  &  la  famine  les  contrai-
gnolt  de  defcendre  a  Kebec,  ou  11  efperolent  d'eftre
proteges  par  le  voifinage  des  Fran9ols,  &  receuoir  de
leur  charlte  qu'ils  auolent  toufiours  experlmentee  en
femblables  occafions  quelque  foulagement  k  la  faim
qui  les  preffolt.  Mais  11  furent  blen  eftonnes  a  leur
abord,  de  voir  que  ceux  la  qui  auparauant  leur
monftrolent  vn  vlfage  ferain,  &  les  receuolent  a  bras
ouuers,  &  ne  leur  refufoient  rien,  ne  leurs  parolffolent
alors  qu'auec  des  vlfages  courrouces,  ne  leur  par-
loient  qu'auec  des  inlures,  &  leur  fermolent  la  porte
comme  a  des  excommunles.  lis  fe  prefentent  pre-
mierement  a  nolire  malfon  de  Sillery,  [126]  &  on  les
chaffe  apres  vne  verte  reprlmende,  11  vont  chez  les
Meres  Hofpltalleres,  &  on  les  renuoye. lis  prefen-


1 642  -  44 J  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  261

passionate  nature,  and  evil  habits  had  become  deep-
ly rooted  in  him.  At  all  events,  Father  Bressany,
who  started  two  days  after  them  to  go  down  to
Kebec,  overtook  them  on  the  way,  and,  on  inquiring
about  Estienne,  found  that  he  had  taken  back  his
concubine;  nor  was  the  Father  satisfied  with  the
answers  that  he  gave  him.

[125]  The  wickedness  of  that  man  and  of  some
other  bad  Christians,  infidels,  and  sorcerers,  who
were  in  this  band,  and  who  had  behaved  in  an  inso-
lent manner  at  the  three  Rivers,  made  us  resolve
with  Monsieur  the  Governor  to  give  them  a  harsh
reception,  to  show  them  the  horror  that  we  have  for
the  wicked,  and  to  make  them  comprehend  their  fault
still  more.

Fear  of  the  Iroquois  and  famine  compelled  them
to  come  down  to  Kebec,  where  they  hoped  to  be
protected  by  the  neighborhood  of  the  French,  and  to
receive  from  their  charity,  which  they  had  always
experienced  on  similar  occasions,  some  relief  from
the  hunger  that  pressed  them.  But  they  were  great-
ly surprised,  on  their  arrival,  to  see  that  those  who
had  formerly  received  them  with  a  serene  counte-
nance and  open  arms,  and  had  refused  them  noth-
ing, appeared  now  with  angry  faces,  spoke  to  them
only  with  insults,  and  closed  their  doors  to  them  as
to  excommunicated  persons.  They  first  came  to  our
house  at  Sillery  [126]  and  were  driven  off  with  a
sharp  reprimand.  They  went  to  the  Hospital  Moth-
ers, and  were  sent  away.  They  brought  some  sick
persons,  and  were  not  admitted.  They  went  to  the
houses  of  the  inhabitants,  who  all  closed  their  doors
to  them.  They  wished  to  enter  the  Church,  and
were  forbidden  to  do  so. They  went  to  the  Gentle-


■262  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.25

tent  des  malades,  &  on  ne  les  accepte  pas:  ils  s'en
vont  par  les  maifons  des  habitans,  &  on  leur  ferme
par  tout  la  porte.  Ils  veulent  entrer  dans  I'Eg-life,
&  on  leur  en  deffend  I'entree:  ils  ont  recours  k
Meffieurs  du  Magazin,  &  on  les  rebute:  ils  orient
qu'ils  meurent  de  faim,  &  perfonne  ne  leur  donne  ^
manger,  ils  iettent  des  caftors,  des  coliers  de  Pource-
laine,  &  tout  ce  qu'ils  auoient  de  plus  precieux  pour
auoir  vn  morceau  de  pain,  &  on  reiette  leurs  pre  fens,
lis  fe  mettent  en  eftat  de  cabaner  proche  des  Fran-
9ois,  &  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  leur  fait  faire  deffence
de  s'approcher,  &  d'auoir  aucune  comunication  auec
les  Frangois,  iufques  a  ce  qu'ils  ayent  chaffe  les  deux
Apoftats,  &  fatisfait  pour  les  fautes  commifes  aux
trois  Riuieres.

Les  Sauuages  mefmes  qui  fe  trouuerent  pour  lors
a  Sillery,  ne  leur  firent  pas  meilleur  accueil  que  les
Francois.  lis  ne  les  voulurent  point  admettre  dans
leur  cabanes,  quelques-vns  fe  retirerent  dans  [127]
nos  maifons  pour  n'eflre  pas  obligez  de  conuerfer
auec  eux,  les  autres  s'efcarterent  parmy  les  bois
pour  eftre  plus  efloignez  de  leur  compagnie,  pas  vn
ne  leur  offrit  a  manger,  ils  ne  daignoient  pas  mefme
leur  parler,  fmon  pour  leur  faire  des  reproches  de
leur  mefchancete,  ils  voulurent  entrer  en  des  cabanes
ou  il  n'y  auoit  que  des  femmes,  qui  n'eftans  pas  affez
fortes  pour  chaffer  ces  manuals  hofles,  courent  k
noflre  maifon  pour  auoir  main  forte,  d' autres  fe
barricaderent  dans  vne  petite  maifon  que  nous  leur
auons  bafty  a  la  Francoife,  vne  femme  Chreitienne
qui  auoit  efte  abandonnee  par  vn  de  ces  Apoftats,
apres  vn  legitime  mariage,  ayant  apris  que  fon  mary
la  vouloit  venir  voir,  fe  retranche  dans  vn  coin  de


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  263-

men  at  the  Storehouse,  and  were  turned  away.  They
cried  out  that  they  were  dying  of  hunger,  and  that
no  one  gave  them  anything  to  eat.  They  threw
down  beaver  skins,  collars  of  Porcelain  beads,  and
all  the  most  valuable  things  that  they  had,  for  a
piece  of  bread;  and  their  presents  were  rejected.
They  prepared  to  erect  their  cabins  near  the  French,
and  Monsieur  the  Governor  gave  orders  to  forbid
them  to  approach,  or  to  hold  any  communication  with,
the  French,  until  they  had  driven  away  the  two
Apostates,  and  had  atoned  for  the  faults  committed
at  the  three  Rivers.

Even  the  Savages  who  were  then  at  Sillery  did
not  give  them  a  better  welcome  than  the  French.
They  would  not  admit  them  into  their  cabins;  some
of  them  withdrew  into  [127]  our  houses,  so  as  not
to  be  obliged  to  converse  with  them.  The  others
scattered  themselves  in  the  woods,  so  as  to  be  far
removed  from  their  company.  No  one  offered  them
food;  they  would  not  even  speak  to  them,  except  to
reproach  them  with  their  vnckedness.  They  tried
to  enter  cabins  in  which  there  were  only  women,
who,  not  being  strong  enough  to  expel  these  evil
guests,  fled  to  our  house  for  assistance ;  others  bar-
ricaded themselves  in  a  small  house,  which  we  had
built  for  them  in  the  French  style.  A  Christian
woman,  who  had  been  abandoned  by  one  of  these
Apostates  after  lawful  marriage,  heard  that  her  hus-
band wished  to  come  and  see  her.  She  took  refuge
in  a  corner  of  her  cabin  and  armed  herself  with  a
knife,  being  resolved  to  kill  him  if  he  approached
her.  Another,  to  whom  wisdom  and  age  gave  much
authority,  was  visited  by  some  of  these  newcomers,
who  were  her  countrymen  and  near  relatives. She


264


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  25


cabane,  &  s'arme  d'vn  couteau,  refolue  de  le  tuer  s'il
s'approche,  vne  autre  a  qui  I'efprit  &  I'aage  donnoit
beaucoup  d'authorite  ayant  efte  vifit^e  par  quelques-
vns  de  ces  nouueaux  venus  qui  efloient  fes  compa-
triotes,  &  fes  proches  parens,  leur  dit  librement;
vous  n'efles  point  mes  parens,  depuis  que  vous  auez
quitte  la  priere,  ie  ne  connois  [128]  point  d'autres
parens  que  les  vrais  Chreftiens,  ie  hais  voftre  malice,
ne  craignez-vous  pas  I'Enfer,  il  y  a  fi  long-temps
qu'on  vous  enfeigne,  &  vous  n'eftes  pas  encore  fages,
c'eft  la  fuperbe  &  les  femmes  qui  vous  empefchent
d'auoir  de  I'efprit,  ne  vous  eflonnez-pas  fi  les  Fran-
9ois  vous  traittent  mal,  ils  haiffent  voitre  mefchan-
cete,  quoy  qu'ils  ne  haiffent  pas  vos  perfonnes;  foyez
gens  de  bien,  &  ils  vous  aimeront  &  affii^eront,  mais
ce  qui  eft  le  principal,  Dieu  vous  aymera.

Cette  rigueur  euft  vn  excellent  effet,  &  fit  que
les  deux  Apoftats  qui  attiroient  toute  cette  haine  fur
eux  &  fur  leurs  compagnons,  furent  abandonnez  de
tons  les  Sauuages,  lefquels  firent  tous  vne  protefla-
tion  publique  qu'ils  haiffoient  la  mefchancete  de  ces
deux  Apoftats,  qu'ils  n'approuuoient  point  leurs
adtions,  &  qu'ils  ne  les  fouffriroient  point  en  leur
compagnie,  ceux  mefme  de  la  Nation  d'Iroquet  qui
font  encore  quafi  tous  infideles  fe  fequeftrerent  des
manuals  Chreftiens,  &  vindrent  trouuer  Monfieur  le
Gouuerneur,  [129]  auquel  le  Capitaine  de  cette  bande
fit  vne  affez  iudicieufe  remonftrance.

Nous  nous  fommes  grandement  eftonnez,  dit-il,  de
la  fa9on  auec  laquelle  on  nous  a  traite  a  noftre  arri-
u6e,  la  plufpart  de  mes  gens  qui  font  icy,  n'auoient
iamais  veu  les  Fran9ois,  &  n'eftoient  venus  que  dans
I'affeurance  que  ie  leur  donnois,  de  I'affec^ion  que


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  265

boldly  said  to  them:  "  You  are  no  relatives  of  mine,
since  you  have  abandoned  prayer;  I  know  [128]  no
other  relatives  than  true  Christians.  I  detest  your
wickedness.  Do  you  not  fear  Hell?  You  have  been
taught  for  so  long  a  time,  and  you  are  not  yet  good.
It  is  pride  and  women  that  prevent  you  from  having
sense.  Be  not  surprised  that  the  French  treat  you
badly ;  they  detest  your  wickedness,  although  they
do  not  hate  you  personally.  Be  good  men,  and  they
will  love  and  assist  you;  but,  above  all,  God  will
love  you."

Such  severity  had  an  excellent  effect,  and  caused
the  two  Apostates  who  had  brought  all  this  anger  on
them  and  on  their  companions  to  be  abandoned  by
all  the  Savages.  These  publicly  protested  that  they
abhorred  the  wickedness  of  the  two  Apostates ;  that
they  did  not  approve  their  conduct,  and  would  not
suffer  them  in  their  company.  Even  those  of  the
Iroquet  Tribe,  who  are  nearly  all  infidels,  kept  aloof
from  the  bad  Christians,  and  went  to  Monsieur  the
Governor  [129]  to  whom  the  Captain  of  the  band
made  a  very  sensible  remonstrance.

"  We  were  greatly  astonished,"  he  said,  "  at  the
manner  in  which  we  were  treated  on  our  arrival.
Most  of  my  people  who  are  here  had  never  seen  the
French,  and  came  here  solely  on  the  assurance  that
I  had  given  them  of  the  affection  that  the  French
had  for  us.  '  The  French,'  I  said  to  them,  '  are  our
brothers ;  they  love  us  even  better  than  our  relatives
do.  It  is  for  us  that  they  have  left  all  the  riches  and
pleasures  of  their  country.  They  are  a  very  kind
Nation ;  their  Captain  loves  us.  Let  us  go  and  see
them,  my  nephews.  They  will  protect  and  preserve
the  wretched  remnants  of  our  Tribe  who  have  escaped


266  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.  25-

les  Fran9ois  nous  portoient.  Les  Fran9ois,  leur
difois-ie,  font  nos  freres,  ils  nous  cheriffent  plus  que
ne  font  nos  parens  mefmes,  c'efl  pour  nous  qu'ils  ont
quitte  les  richeffes  &  les  plaifirs  de  leur  pais,  c'eft
vne  Nation  toute  bien-faifante,  leur  Capitaine  nous
ayme,  allons  les  voir,  mes  neueux,  ce  font  eux  qui
nous  protegeront  &  qui  conferueront  ces  miferables
reftes  de  noftre  Nation  qui  font  efchappees  de  la
rage,  de  la  faim,  &  de  la  cruaute  des  Iroquois;  il  y
a  parmy  eux  des  hommes  qui  enfeignent  des
merueilles  de  I'autre  vie.  Nous  apprendrons  leur
doc5trine,  nous  croirons  comme  eux,  &  nous  ne  ferons
plus  qu'vn  peuple:  c'ell:  ce  que  ie  leur  difois,  me
perfuadant  de  trouuer  maintenant  les  [130]  Francois
dans  la  mefme  affedlion  qu'ils  auoient  toufiours  eu
pour  nous.  Mais  maintenant  qu'ils  ne  voyent  que
des  vifages  courroucez,  &  n'entendent  que  des  pa-
roles d 'outrages,  &  que  toutes  les  portes  leur  font  fer-
mees,  &  qu'ils  meurent  de  faim,  fans  que  perfonne
leur  porte  compaffion ;  ils  difent  que  ie  fuis  vn  men-
teur,  que  ce  ne  font  pas  ces  Frangois  bien-faifans,
defquels  ie  leur  auois  parle:  ou  bien,  difent-ils,  'ii  ce
font  les  mefmes,  ils  ne  nous  connoiffent  pas,  &  comme
ils  voyent  de  nouueaux  vifages  peut-eftre  nous  pren-
nent-ils  pour  des  Iroquois.  Falloit-il,  que  nous
vinffions  de  fi  loin  pour  mourir  de  faim,  que  leur
auons-nous  fait  pour  eftre  traittez  de  la  forte?

En  effet,  ie  ne  f9ay  a  quoy  attribuer  la  rigueur  qu'on
exerce  enuers  nous;  eft-ce  parce  que  nous  eftions
auec  quelques  Algonquins  qui  ont  quitte  la  priere?
Mais  nous  n'en  fommes  pas  la  caufe.  Nous  deteltons
leur  malice,  &  fi  nous  eftios  baptifez  come  eux,  nous
nous  garderions  bien  de  tomber  dans  ces  fautes :  Eft-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  267

from  the  fury,  the  appetite,  and  the  cruelty  of  the
Iroquois.  There  are  men  among  them  who  teach
the  wonders  of  the  other  life.  We  will  learn  their
doctrine,  we  will  believe  as  they  do,  and  we  will  be
but  one  people  with  them.'  That  is  what  I  told
them,  being  convinced  that  I  would  still  find  the  [130]
French  animated  with  the  same  affection  that  they
have  always  had  for  us.  But, —  now  that  they  see  only
angry  faces,  and  hear  only  insulting  words ;  that  all
doors  are  closed  against  them ;  that  they  die  of  hun-
ger, without  any  one  having  compassion  on  them, —
they  say  that  I  am  a  liar,  that  these  are  not  the  kind
Frenchmen  of  whom  I  had  told  them.  '  Or, '  they  say,
'  if  they  be  the  same,  they  do  not  know  us ;  and,  as
they  see  new  faces,  perhaps  they  take  us  for  Iroquois.
Was  it  necessary  that  we  should  come  from  so  far,
to  die  of  hunger?  What  have  we  done  to  them  to
be  treated  in  that  manner?'

"  Indeed,  I  know  not  to  what  we  must  attribute
the  severity  displayed  against  us.  Is  it  because  we
were  with  some  Algonquins  who  abandoned  prayer?
But  we  are  not  to  blame  for  that.  We  detest  their
wickedness;  and,  if  we  were  baptized  as  they  are,
we  would  be  very  careful  not  to  commit  such  faults.
Is  it,  then,  because  we  do  not  yet  pray,  [131]  and  be-
cause we  retain  the  ancient  customs  of  our  country?
But  that  is  not  our  fault.  For  my  part,  I  have  asked
for  Baptism  for  over  three  years,  and  the  Fathers  have
never  granted  it  to  me.  As  for  my  people,  most  of
them  have  never  seen  the  French  up  to  this  time.
Order  now  what  thou  wishest  us  to  do,  and  we  will
obev  thee.  Look  at  our  arms ;  there  is  no  more  flesh
on  them  —  they  are  but  bones  covered  -vvith  skin.
These  few  men,  whom  thou  seest  around  me,  are  the


268  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.25

ce  done  parce  que  nous  ne  prions  [131]  pas  encore?
&  que  nous  conferuons  les  anciennes  couftumes  de
noflrepais?  mais  ce  n'efl  pas  noftre  faute;  pourmoy,
il  y  a  plus  de  trois  ans  que  ie  demande  le  Baptefme,
&  les  Peres  ne  me  I'ont  voulu  iamais  accorder;  pour
ce  qui  eft  de  mes  gens,  la  plufpart  d'eux  n'auoit
encore  veu  les  Frangois  iufques  a  prefent.  Ordonne
maintenant  ce  que  tu  veux  que  nous  falTions,  &  nous
t'obeyrons:  regarde  nos  bras,  ils  n'ont  plus  de  chair,
ce  ne  font  que  des  os  reueftus  de  peau;  ce  peu  d' hom-
ines que  tu  vols  icy  a  I'entour  de  moy.  font  les  reftes
d'vne  des  plus  fleuriffantes  Nations  qui  fuffent  dans
ces  contrees:  Si  tu  n'as  pitie  de  nous,  nous  ferons
bien-toft  reduits  au  neant.  &  les  autres  Nations  qui
font  voyflnes,  &  chez  lefquelles  ta  bonte  &  valeur  font
dans  vne  haute  eftime  fgauront  que  nous  fommes
morts  parce  que  tu  n'as  pas  eu  pitie  de  nous.

En  difant  cela.  il  iette  vn  paquet  de  vingt  Caftors.
par  ce  que  ces  peuples  ne  parlent  iamais  fans  prefens,
ce  n'eft  pas  la,  dit-il,  vn  prefent  que  ie  t'offre,  voyla
bien  de  quoy  pour  appaifer  vn  tel  Capitaine,  [132]
mais  tu  verras  par  la  noftre  pauurete,  &  peut-eftre
auras-tu  compafQon  de  nous.

Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  luy  refpondit  qu'il  auoit
toufiours  eu  beaucoup  d'affedtion  pour  luy  &  pour  fa
Nation,  dans  la  croyance  qu'il  auoit  qu'il  fe  feroit
Chreftien  auec  fes  gens:  mais  que  maintenant  il
hayffoit  fa  malice,  &  non  pas  fa  perfonne,  parce  qu'il
le  voyoit  efloigne  des  difpofitions  de  la  Foy,  &  recon-
noiffoit  qu'il  ne  demandoit  le  Baptefme  que  par  cere-
monie,  qu'il  y  auoit  long-temps  qu'on  I'inftruifoit,  &
qu'on  auoit  de  I'inclination  a  le  baptifer,  mais  qu'il
s'en  eftoit  toufiours  monftre  indigne  continuant  dans


1642  - 44J  RELA  TION  OF  1643  - 44  269

remnant  of  one  of  the  most  flourishing  Tribes  that
ever  dwelt  in  this  country.  If  thou  hast  not  pity  on
us,  we  shall  soon  be  reduced  to  nothing;  and  the
other  neighboring  Nations,  by  whom  thy  kindness
and  valor  are  held  in  high  esteem,  will  know  that  we
died  because  thou  hadst  not  pity  on  us."

As  he  said  this,  he  threw  down  a  package  of  twen-
ty Beaver  skins,  because  these  people  never  speak
without  making  presents.  "It  is  not  a  gift,"  he
said,  ' '  that  I  offer  thee.  This  is  not  much  to  appease
so  great  a  Captain;  [132]  but  thou  wilt  see  by  it  how
poor  we  are,  and  perhaps  thou  wilt  have  compassion
on  us."

Monsieur  the  Governor  replied  that  he  had  always
had  a  great  affection  for  him  and  for  his  Tribe,  be-
lieving that  he  would  become  a  Christian  with  his
people,  but  that  now  he  detested  his  wickedness,
though  not  him  personally,  because  he  saw  that  he
was  far  from  having  inclinations  for  the  Faith,  and
that  he  asked  for  Baptism  merely  for  the  sake  of
ceremony.  He  reminded  this  Captain  that  he  had
been  instructed  for  a  long  time,  and  that  they  had
been  inclined  to  baptize  him,  but  that  he  had  always
shown  himself  to  be  unworthy  of  it,  for  he  had  con-
tinued his  incantations  and  superstitions,  and  had
within  a  few  days  seduced  a  Christian  woman  whom
he  had  taken  for  his  wife,  not  being  content  with
the  two  others  whom  he  kept;  that,  if  he  wished  to
be  a  friend  of  the  French,  he  would  have  to  give  up
the  Christian  woman  whom  he  had  seduced,  and  keep
but  one  of  the  two  others,  with  whom  he  must  always
live.  He  told  him  that  he  must  separate  himself
from  the  Apostates;  that  after  [133]  that  he  would
be  well  received  by  the  French,  and  have  every  kind


270  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.25

fes  iongleries,  &  fnperftitions,  &  ayant  encore  depuis
peu  de  iours  defbauche  vne  femme  Chreftienne  qu'il
auoit  pris  pour  femme,  ne  fe  contentant  pas  de  deux
autres  qu'il  retenoit  que  s'il  defiroit  eftre  amy  des
Fragois,  il  falloit  qu'il  quittaft  cette  femme  Chrefti-
enne qu'il  auoit  defbauchee,  qu'il  n'en  retint  qu'vne
des  deux  autres,  auec  laquelle  il  demeureroit  toufiours,
&  qu'il  fe  feparaft  des  Apoftats;  qu'apres  [133]  cela
il  feroit  bien  venu  parmy  les  Francois,  &  y  receuroit
toute  forte  de  contentement.  Luy  &  fes  gens  tefmoi-
gnerent  qu'ils  s'accordoient  a  tout  cela  par  leurs  ho,
ho,  qu'ils  redoublerent  "k  la  veue  des  prefens  que  leur
fit  M.  le  Gouuerneur.  Paul  Teffb'ehas,  Capitaine  des
Algonquins  de  I'lfle  vouluft  pareillement  faire  fa  paix
auec  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur,  mais  parce  qu'il  auoit
fupporte  &  fauorife  les  deux  Apoftats  contre  le  de-
uoir  auquel  I'obligeoit  la  qualite  de  Capitaine  «&  de
Chreftien,  il  fouffrit  la  confufion  d' eftre  renuoye
honteufement  de  la  porte  du  Fort  en  fatisfadtion
de  fa  lafchete,  ce  qui  I'obligea  a  fe  declarer  ennemy
des  Apoftats  &  faire  des  foumiffions  affez  fafcheufes
a  vn  homme  de  fon  humeur.

Cependant  les  deux  Apoftats  demeurerent  errans
&  vagabons  fans  maifon  &  fans  compagnie,  mais
non  pas  fans  de  grands  remords  de  confcience,  parti-
culierement  Eftienne  Pigaroiiich  comme  il  tefmoigna
vn  iour  au  Pere  Dequen,  duquel  ayant  efte  accueilly
vn  iour  affez  froidement:  He  quoy,  dit-il,  il  n'y  a
[134]  point  done  de  mifericorde  pourmoy:  Voulez-
vous  que  ie  courre  dans  les  bois  comme  vn  Loup-
garou  abandonne  de  Dieu  &  des  hommes.  I'ay  man-
qu6,  ie  I'aduoiie,  mais  pour  cela  faut-il  me  letter  dans
le  def efpoir :  Suis  ie  vn  Ange  pour  ne  pas  pecher^


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  271

of  satisfaction.  He  and  his  people  showed  that  they
agreed  in  all  this  by  their  exclamations  of  "  Ho,  ho,"
which  they  redoubled  when  they  saw  the  presents
given  to  them  by  Monsieur  the  Governor.  Paul
Tesswehas,  Captain  of  the  Island  Algonquins,  also
wished  to  make  his  peace  with  Monsieur  the  Govern-
or. But  as  he  had  supported  and  favored  the  two
Apostates,  contrary  to  his  duty  as  a  Captain  and  a
Christian,  he  had  the  confusion  of  being  sent  away
in  disgrace  from  the  gate  of  the  Fort,  as  a  penalty
for  his  cowardice.  This  compelled  him  to  declare
himself  an  enemy  of  the  Apostates,  and  to  make
submission  in  a  manner  very  galling  to  a  man  of  his
temper.

Meanwhile,  the  two  Apostates  were  wanderers  and
vagrants  without  house  or  company,  and  not  without
great  remorse  of  conscience, —  especially  Estienne
Pigarouich,  as  he  stated  on  one  occasion  to  Father
Dequen.  Having  met  one  day  with  a  rather  cold
reception  from  the  latter,  he  said:  "  What!  is  there
[134]  no  mercy  for  me?  Do  you  wish  me  to  roam
the  woods  like  a  Werewolf,  abandoned  by  God  and
men?  I  have  sinned,  I  admit;  but  must  I  for  that
be  cast  into  despair?  Am  I  an  Angel,  that  I  should
not  sin?  Do  not  the  French  sin  sometimes?  You
often  preach  to  us  that  God  has  mercy  on  those  who
repent,  and  who  confess  their  offenses.  Here  I  am,
quite  ready  to  confess  mine  and  to  expiate  them  by
whatever  penance  you  may  be  pleased  to  impose.
Why  should  you  refuse  me  what  you  grant  to  others  ?
It  is  not  the  punishments  with  which  you  threaten
me  that  give  me  fear, —  I  fear  neither  hunger,  nor
the  prison,  nor  the  whip;  I  am  satisfied  to  remain  in
prison  during  the whole  Winter. Make  me  die  of


272  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES [Vol.25

les  Frangois  ne  f aillent-il  pas  qiielquesf ois :  vous  nous
prefchez  fouuent  que  Dieu  fait  mifericorde  a  ceux
qui  fe  repentent  &  confeffent  leur  fautes,  me  voila
tout  preft  a  confeffer  les  miennes  &  a  les  expier  par
quelque  penitence  qu'il  vous  plaira.  Pourquoy  me
refuferez-vous  ce  que  vous  accordez  aux  autres?  Ce
ne  font  pas  les  chaftimens  dont  vous  me  menacez,  qui
m'effrayent,  ce  n'eft  ny  la  faim,  ny  la  prifon,  ny  le
foiiet  que  ie  crains,  ie  fuis  content  de  demeurer  en
prifon  pendant  tout  I'Hyuer,  faites-moy  mourir  de
faim  li  vous  voulez.  Ie  ne  crains  que  I'Enfer  oil  le
defefpoir  me  precipite,  fi  vous  ne  me  faites  miferi-
corde.

Le  Pere  luy  refpond  que  s'il  a  bonne  volonte  de
confeffer  fon  peche,  &  s'en  corriger,  il  entendra  vo-
lontiers  fa  confeffion,  mais  qu'il  ne  peut  I'admettre  fi
[135]  toft  dans  I'Eglife  auec  les  autres  Chreftiens,  h.
caufe  du  fcandale  qu'il  a  donne,  &  qu'il  faut  qu'il  en
faffe  pluftoft  vne  penitence  publique,  &  qu'il  donne
des  preuues  de  fa  conftance,  &  fidelite  pendant  les
trois  mois  qu'il  doit  paffer  a  la  chaffe  de  I'orignac
dans  les  bois,  que  ^i  au  printemps  fes  compagnons
rendent  bon  tefmoignage  de  fes  deportemens,  il  fera
remis  dans  I'Eglife,  &  iouyra  de  toutes  les  autres  fa-
ueurs  communes  a  tous  les  Chreftiens,  il  s'y  accorde,
&  prend  iour  du  Pere  pour  fe  confeffer,  mais  la  mau-
uaife  habitude  euft  plus  de  force  fur  fon  efprit  que
la  grace:  il  fe  prefente  au  iour  determine,  &  aduoiie
ingenument  que  fon  coeur  n'efloit  pas  bien  refolu  de
quiter  fon  peche,  qu'il  preuoyoit  bien  qu'il  y  retom-
beroit  pendant  I'Hyuer,  &  que  dans  cet  eltat,  il  ne
vouloit  pas  fe  confeffer  pour  ne  fe  rendre  pas  plus
coupable,  le  Pere  ne  pouuant  gagner  autre  chofe  fur
fon  efprit  le  renuoye.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  273

hunger,  if  you  will.  I  fear  only  Hell,  into  which
despair  will  cast  me,  if  you  have  not  mercy  on  me."

The  Father  replied  that,  if  he  were  really  willing
to  confess  his  sin,  and  to  correct  himself  for  it,  he
would  willingly  hear  his  confession ;  but  that  he
could  not  at  once  admit  him  [135]  into  the  Church
with  the  other  Christians,  on  account  of  the  scandal
that  he  had  given ;  that  he  would  have  to  perform  a
public  penance,  and  give  proofs  of  his  constancy  and
fidelity  during  the  three  months  that  he  was  to  pass
hunting  moose  in  the  woods ;  that  if,  in  the  spring,
his  companions  gave  a  good  report  of  his  conduct,  he
would  be  restored  to  the  Church,  and  would  enjoy
all  the  other  favors  common  to  all  Christians.  He
consented  to  this,  and  agreed  with  the  Father  upon  a
day  for  confessing  himself.  But  evil  habits  had  more
influence  over  his  mind  than  grace.  He  presented
himself  on  the  day  appointed  and  frankly  admitted
that  his  heart  was  not  firmly  resolved  to  abandon  his
sin ;  that  he  foresaw  very  well  that  he  would  relapse
into  it  during  the  Winter;  and  that,  in  the  circum-
stances, he  would  not  go  to  confession,  that  he  might
not  render  himself  still  more  guilty.  As  the  Father
could  not  gain  anything  more  in  his  mind,  he  dis-
missed him.

In  short,  he  continued  in  his  debauchery  for  the
remainder  of  the  Winter,  in  consequence  of  which  he
was  no  better  received  on  his  return  than  on  the
previous  occasion  and  [136]  was  again  compelled  to
live  apart  from  the  French  and  the  Savages,  like  an
excommunicated  person,  without  daring  to  show  him-
self except  at  night, —  ever  feeling  the  same  remorse
of  conscience,  and  never  losing  the  recollection  of
Hell,  which  goaded  him  sharply. The  shame  that


274  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.25

En  effedt  il  continua  dans  fes  desbanches  pendant
le  refte  de  I'Hyuer,  ce  qui  fuft  caufe  qu'a  fon  retour
il  ne  fuft  pas  mieux  accueilly  qu'a  I'autre  fois,  &  [136]
fuft  contraint  derechef  de  demeurer  fepare  des
Frangois  &  des  Sauuages  comme  vn  excommunie
fans  ofer  paroiftre  que  la  nuidl,  reffentant  toufiours
les  mefmes  remords  de  confcience,  &  ne  perdant
iamais  la  memoire  de  I'Enfer  qui  le  piquoit  viue-
ment,  la  honte  qu'il  auoit  d'auoir  fi  fouuent  viole
les  promeffes  qu'il  auoit  faites  fi  folemnellement,
rempefctia  a  ce  coup  de  fe  prefenter  a  aucun  de
nos  Peres,  il  refolut  neantmoins  de  quiter  fa  concu-
bine, &  reprendre  fa  femme  legitime,  apres  quoy
il  remonta  aux  trois  Riuieres  auec  le  refte  des
Sauuages  pour  aller  en  guerre,  &  ce  fuft  la  011 1'appre-
henfion  du  danger  qu'il  alloit  encourir,  ioindte  a  la
crainte  continuelle  de  I'Enfer  qui  le  fuiuoit  par  tout,
fit  vn  dernier  effort  fur  fon  efprit,  &  I'obligea  d'aller
voir  le  Pere  Brebeuf,  auquel  il  reprefenta,  apres
auoir  auoiie,  &  detefte  fon  inconil;ance  &  infidelite,
le  danger  ou  il  s'alloit  expofer,  I'apprelienfion  qu'il
auoit  du  feu  eternel,  le  defir  qu'il  auoit  de  bien  faire,
comme  il  auoit  defia  abandonne  fa  concubine,  &
repris  fa  femme  legitime,  qu'il  proteftoit  de  [137]
n'abandonner  iamais  plus,  «&  le  coniura  apres  tout  cela
de  ne  luy  refufer  point  I'abfolution  de  fes  fautes,  «&
de  mettre  fon  ame  en  repos  s' off  rant  a  toute  forte  de
penitence.

Le  Pere  Brebeuf  n'ofant  pas  fe  fier  a  vn  efprit  fi
inconftant,  &  d'ailleurs  defirant  luy  faire  apprehen-
der  d'auantage  fa  faute  le  renuoye  fans  le  vouloir  ex-
aucer.  Eftienne  employe  la  faueur  des  Fragois  pour  ce
mefme  effect,  mais  le  Pere  tient  bon:  il  fupplie  que


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  j64S -44  275

he  felt  at  having  so  often  violated  the  promises  that
he  had  so  solemnly  made,  prevented  him  this  time
from  presenting  himself  to  any  of  our  Fathers.  He
resolved,  however,  to  leave  his  concubine,  and  to
take  back  his  lawful  wife ;  after  which  he  went  up
to  the  three  Rivers  with  the  remainder  of  the  Sav-
ages, to  go  to  war.  There  the  apprehension  of  the
danger  that  he  was  about  to  incur,  added  to  the  con-
tinual dread  of  Hell  that  followed  him  everywhere,
produced  a  final  effect  upon  his  mind,  and  compelled
him  to  go  and  see  Father  Brebeuf.  To  him,  after
admitting  and  expressing  detestation  of  his  incon-
stancy and  infidelit}^  he  represented  the  danger  to
which  he  was  about  to  expose  himself,  the  fear  that
he  had  of  the  eternal  fire,  his  desire  to  do  right,  and
the  fact  that  he  had  already  left  his  concubine,  and
taken  back  his  lawful  wife,  whom,  he  protested,
[137]  he  would  never  again  abandon;  and  he  begged
him,  after  all  that,  not  to  refuse  to  give  him  absolu-
tion for  his  sins,  and  to  put  his  soul  at  peace,  offer-
ing to  do  any  kind  of  penance.

Father  Brebeuf,  fearing  to  place  any  reliance  on
so  inconstant  a  mind,  and  desiring,  moreover,  to
make  him  realize  still  better  his  offense,  dismissed
him  without  granting  his  request.  Estienne  em-
ployed the  influence  of  the  French  for  this  same
purpose,  but  the  Father  remained  firm.  He  begged
that,  as  he  would  not  be  listened  to,  he  might  at  least
be  given  a  letter  of  recommendation  to  enable  him  to
make  his  confession  at  Richelieu  or  at  Montreal;
this,  Father  Brebeuf  granted  to  him.  Finally  he
arrived  in  Montreal,  where  he  met  Father  Buteux,
-who  writes  to  us  as  follows :

"  Estienne  Pigarouich,  who  arrived  here  with  the


276  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES [Vol.25

puis  qu'on  ne  le  vent  pas  efcouter,  on  luy  bailie  pour
le  moins  vne  lettre  de  faueur  pour  pouuoir  fe  con-
feffer  a  Richelieu  ou  a  Montreal,  le  Pere  Brebeuf  la
luy  accorde :  il  arriue  enfin  a  Montreal  ou  il  rencontra
le  Pere  Buteux  qui  nous  efcrit  de  la  forte.

Eflienne  Pigaroiiicli  eflant  arriue  icy  auec  le  refte
de  nos  guerriers,  me  vint  trouuer  incontinent,  &  me
preffa  long-temps,  &  fortement  d'auoir  pitie  de  fon
ame:  ie  luy  dis  que  s'il  vouloit  fe  confeffer,  &  remet-
tre  en  fon  premier  eltat,  il  falloit  qu'il  fe  foufmit  k
tout  ce  que  ie  luy  dirois,  ie  le  feray,  dit-il,  &  fallut-il
[138]  me  percer  de  ce  coufteau  que  ie  porte,  ce  n'effc
pas,  luy  refponds-ie,  ce  que  ie  defire  de  toy,  ie  me
contente  de  cecy.  Premierement  que  tu  crie  tout
haut  hors  des  cabanes,  felon  la  couftume,  que  tu  as
tres-mal  fait,  &  que  tu  defapprouue  tout  ce  que  tu  as
dit,  &  fait  au  fcandale  de  la  priere,  &  des  Chreftiens,
fecondement  que  tu  die  hautement,  &  publiquement
que  tu  quitte  la  compagnie  de  ceux  qui  ne  prient  pas,
&  qu'en  effedl  tu  les  quitte,  &  te  range  auec  ceux  de
Sillery  qui  font  eftat  de  prier  Dieu.  Troifiefmement
que  dans  la  Chappelle  tu  demande  pardon  a  deux
genoux  a  tons  ceux  qui  font  baptizez,  &  que  tu  les
fupplie  de  prier  Dieu  pour  toy,  &  te  pardonner.  Auant
que  faire  ce  dernier,  il  faut  que  tu  te  difpofe  a  la  con-
feffion,  &  apres  I'auoir  faite,  &  demande  pardon  aux
Chreftiens,  tu  feras  en  quatriefme  lieu  la  difcipline
publiquement  en  fatisfadtion  de  tes  fautes,  pour  affli-
ger  ta  chair,  &  monflrer  par  effedt  le  reffentiment
que  tu  as  de  ton  peche,  voila  ce  que  ie  defire  de  toy
s'il  n'y  a  que  ce  cela,  me  dit-il,  affeure  toy  [139]  que
ie  I'accompliray  de  point  en  point :  il  le  fit  en  effedl
au  dela  de  ce  que  i'euffe  peu  fouhaiter. II  harangua


l()42-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  277

remainder  of  our  warriors,  came  at  once  to  see  me,
and  urged  me  long  and  earnestly  to  have  pity  on  his
soul.  I  told  him  that,  if  he  wished  to  confess,  and
to  restore  himself  to  his  former  condition,  he  must
submit  to  everything  that  I  should  tell  him.  '  I  will
do  so,'  he  said,  '  and  even  if  I  have  [138]  to  stab  my-
self with  this  knife.'  '  That,'  I  replied,  '  is  not  what
I  require  of  thee;  I  am  satisfied  with  this:  In  the
first  place,  thou  shalt  announce  aloud,  outside  of  the
cabins,  according  to  the  custom,  that  thou  hast  be-
haved very  badly,  and  that  thou  dost  condemn  all
that  thou  hast  said  and  done  to  the  scandal  of  prayer
and  of  the  Christians.  Secondly,  thou  shalt  state,
aloud  and  publicly,  that  thou  abandonest  the  com-
pany of  those  who  do  not  pray,  and,  in  fact,  that
thou  dost  abandon  them,  and  dost  range  thyself  with
those  of  Sillery  who  make  a  practice  of  praying  to
God.  Thirdly,  thou  shalt  in  the  Chapel  and  on  thy
knees  ask  pardon  of  all  those  who  are  baptized,  and
beg  them  to  pray  to  God  for  thee,  and  to  pardon
thee.  Before  doing  the  latter,  thou  must  prepare
thyself  for  confession;  and,  after  having  made  it,
and  having  asked  pardon  of  the  Christians,  thou
shalt,  in  the  fourth  place,  take  the  discipline  publicly
as  an  atonement  for  thy  faults,  to  punish  thy  flesh,
and  thereby  to  show  the  hatred  that  thou  hast  for
thy  sin.  That  is  what  I  desire  of  thee.'  '  If  that  be
all,'  he  said,  '  rest  assured  [139]  that  I  will  accomplish
it  in  every  respect.'  He  did  so,  in  fact,  beyond
what  I  could  have  wished.  He  delivered  a  harangue
near  the  cabins, —  he  acknowledged  his  sin,  protested
that  he  was  sorry  for  it,  renounced  the  company  of
the  wicked,  and  promised  to  confine  himself  to  that
of  the  good;  after  which,  he  confessed  himself  with


278  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.25


proche  des  cabanes,  auoiia  fon  peche,  protefta  qu'il
en  eiloit  mar[r]y,  renon^a  a  la  compagnie  des  mef-
chans,  promit  de  n'adherer  qu'a  celle  des  bons,  apres
cela  il  fe  confeffa  auec  toutes  les  marques  d'vne  vraye
penitence,  ie  n'ay  iamais  ouy  Sauuage  mieux  parler,
ny  plus  hardiment  qu'il  fit  en  I'Eglife  I'efpace  d'vn
quart  d'heure. La  fubftance  de  fon  difcours  full  k
remonft[r]er  Tenormite  de  fa  faute,  &  I'importance
de  tenir  ferme  en  la  Foy,  que  cela  eftoit  preferable  k
toutes  les  chofes  du  monde,  qu'on  ne  prit  pas  exem-
ple  fur  luy,  fi  on  ne  fe  vouloit  perdre,  qu'on  ne  fe  fia
pas  trop  en  foy-mefme,  &  qu'on  tint  pour  tout  affeu-
re,  que  fi  on  quitte Dieu,  on fera quite  de  luy,  &
qu'6 ne pourra  retourner  a  luy  fi  ce  n'eft  par  vne
particuliere  faueur de fa  bonte,  qu'au refte on  ne
creuft  pas  que  ce  qu'il  en  faifoit,  eitoit  pour  fe  remet-
tre  aux  bonnes  graces  des  Fran9ois,  [140]  o^  pour
crainte de la  mort  teporelle: que ce n'eftoit que
I'eternelle  qu'il  craignoit,  c'eft  pourquoy  il  fupplioit,
&  les  Peres  &  les  Sauuages  de  la  bas,  meme  les  Al-
gonquins  d'en  haut  (s'il  y  en  auoit  quelqu'vn  qui  euft
la  Foy  dans  fon  coeur)  de  prier  Dieu  pour  luy,  que
Dieu  elioit  bon,  &  qu'il  efperoit  en  fa  mifericorde,
que  defia  il  s'eftoit  confeffe,  mais  que  pour  tefmoi-
gner  qu'il  quitoit  tout  de  bon  fa  mefchancete,  &  la
confiance  qu'il  auoit  en  foy-mefme,  il  en  donnoit  vne
marque  en  iettant  fon  couteau  par  la  feneftre,  qu'il
pouuoit dire neantmoins  en verite  qu'il  n'en  auoit
iamais  fait  de  mefme  de  la  priere,  quelque  mine  qu'il
euft  faite  a  I'exterieur,  qu'il  [I'Jauoit  toufiours  aymee,
&  conferuee  en  fon  coeur,  &  que  de  fois  a  autre  en
cachette  il  eftoit  demeure  long-temps  en  priere.
Apres  cette  harangue  il  s'aproche  de  moy,  met  fon


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  279

all  the  marks  of  true  penitence.  I  have  never  heard
any  Savage  speak  better  or  more  boldly  than  he  did
in  the  Church,  for  the  space  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour.
The  substance  of  his  discourse  consisted  in  showing
the  enormity  of  his  sin,  and  the  necessity  of  remain-
ing firm  in  the  Faith ;  that  this  was  preferable  to
anything  else  in  the  world ;  that  they  must  not  follow
his  example,  unless  they  wished  to  be  damned ;  that
they  should  not  be  over-confident  of  themselves ;  and
that  they  might  rest  assured  that,  if  they  abandoned
God,  he  would  abandon  them,  and  that  they  could
not  return  to  him  except  by  special  favor  of  his  good-
ness. He  said  that  they  must  not  think  that  what
he  was  then  doing  was  for  the  purpose  of  regaining
the  good  graces  of  the  French,  [140]  or  through  fear
of  temporal  death,  —  that  he  dreaded  only  eternal
death;  for  that  reason,  he  begged  the  Fathers,  and
the  Savages  who  dwelt  below,  and  the  Algonquins
who  dwelt  above  (if  there  were  one  of  these  who  had
Faith  in  his  heart),  to  pray  to  God  for  him.  He  said
that  God  was  good  and  that  he  trusted  in  his  mercy ;
that  he  had  already  confessed,  but,  to  show  that  he
abandoned  his  wickedness  for  good,  and  what  confi-
dence he  had  in  himself,  he  gave  a  proof  of  it  by
throwing  his  knife  out  of  the  window.  He  added
that  he  could  nevertheless  say  truly  that  he  had
never  done  the  same  with  prayer;  but  that,  what-
ever his  outward  actions  might  have  been,  he  had
always  loved  it  and  preserved  it  in  his  heart,  and  at
various  times  had  prayed  a  long  time  in  secret.

"  After  this  harangue  he  drew  near  to  me,  removed
his  hat  and  shirt,  and,  holding  the  whip  of  discipline,
that  had  been  given  him  before  he  entered,  said:
*  This  will  not  do  to  tear  my  flesh ;  bring  me  a  more


280  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  25


chapeau,  & fa  chemife  bas,  &  tenant  la difcipline
qu'on  luy  auoit  baillee  auant  que  d'entrer. Ce  n'eft
pas  la,  dit-il,  dequoy  defchirer  m'a  chair,  qu'on  ap-
porte  quelque  inftrument  plus  [141]  rude:  ie  ne  me
feray  pas  grand  mal  auec  celluy-cy,  ou  qu'vn  autre
prenne  la  difcipline,  &  qu'il  me  flate  moins  que  ie  ne
feray. Ie  luy  dis  la  deffus  que  Dieu  defiroit  plus  la
contrition  de  coeur, que  I'effufion de  fang,  qu'il  fe
donnaft  feulement  cinq  coups,  ce  qu'il  fit  deuant  les
Sauuages, & Fran9ois,  voila  ce qu'a fait Eftienne
Pigaroiiich. De  f^auoir  ce  qu'il  fera,  il  n'apartient
qu'a  Dieu,  comme  il  ny  a  que  luy  qui  fgache  s'il  eft
vrayement  contrit,  ce  qu'il  a  fait  a  I'exterieur,  femble
eftre  vn  tefmoignage  affez  grand  d'vne  entiere  con-
uerfion,  &  particulierement  en  fa  confeffion, ou  du
commencement  il  fuft  fi  long-temps  a  pleurer,  que  ne
pouuant  parler  il  falluft luy  dire  qu'il tafchat de
reprimer  fes  larmes,  auec  tout  cela  peut-eftre  qu'il
retombera,  il  Ie  craint,  &  m'a  prie  de  faire  en  forte
qu'il  ne  full:  pas  ou  eft  cette  miferable  femme  qui  luy  a
ferui  de  pierre  de  fcandale:  ie  luy  ay  dit  que  i'en
efcrirois  a  voftre Reuerence,  &  que  s'il  retomboit  la
bas,  on  Ie  mettroit  en  prifon,  il  s'eft  accorde  a  cela
tres-volontiers,  &  a  demande  [142] encore  pardon  a
ceux  qui  font  la  bas,  en  vn  mot  a  faire  tout  ce  qu'on
luy  dira. A  fon  exemple  Ie  grand  forcier,  &  quel-
ques  autres  fe  font  conuertis,  &  confeffez  auec  beau-
coup  de  fatisfadtion  de  leur  cofte,  &  du  mien. Dieu
leur  donne  a  tons  la  perfeuerance,  a  tant  Ie  Pere  Bu-
teux :  ie  prie  tons  ceux  qui  liront  cecy  de  recomman-
der  k  Dieu  particulierement  ce  pauure  homme  duquel
nous  venous  de  parler,  car  il  pent  feruir, &  nuire
beaucoup  a  I'auancement  de  la  Foy  en  ces  contrees.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  281

severe  instrument;  [141]  I  shall  not  hurt  myself
much  with  this  one.  Or,  let  another  take  the  whip
and  let  him  treat  me  less  gently  than  I  would  my-
self.' Thereupon  I  told  him  that  God  desired  con-
trition of  heart  more  than  the  effusion  of  blood,  and
that  he  should  give  himself  five  blows  only,  which
he  did  in  the  presence  of  the  Savages  and  of  the
French.  That  is  what  Estienne  Pigarouich  did.
What  he  will  do  is  known  to  God  alone,  as  he  alone
knows  whether  he  is  truly  contrite.  The  outward
actions  that  he  has  done  seem  sufficiently  strong
proofs  of  his  complete  conversion,  and  more  espe-
cially his  confession, — at  which,  from  the  begin-
ning, he  wept  so  long  that  he  was  unable  to  speak,
and  it  was  necessary  to  tell  him  that  he  must  strive
to  suppress  his  tears.  Even  after  all  this,  he  may
relapse.  He  fears  this,  and  has  begged  me  to
manage  so  that  he  may  not  be  where  that  wretched
woman  is  who  has  been  his  rock  of  scandal.  I  told
him  that  I  would  write  to  your  Reverence  about  it ;
and  that,  if  he  again  fell  into  evil  ways  down  there,
he  would  be  put  in  prison.  He  willingly  agreed  to
this,  and  also  to  ask  [142]  pardon  from  those  who
are  down  there, —  in  a  word,  to  do  all  that  he  should
be  told  to  do.  Following  his  example,  the  great
sorcerer  and  some  others  became  converted,  and
confessed  themselves,  with  much  satisfaction  on  their
part  and  on  mine.  May  God  grant  them  all  per-
severance." So  much  from  Father  Buteux.  I  beg
all  those  who  shall  read  this  to  commend  specially
to  God  this  poor  man  of  whom  we  have  just  spoken ;
for  he  can  greatly  aid  or  injure  the  progress  of  the
Faith  in  these  countries.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA:  VOL  XXV

LI
The  particulars  of  this  document  were  given in

VoL  xxin.

LII

This  is  a  letter  of  Garnier  to  the  Father  General
(Vitelleschi),  dated  from  Ste.  Marie-of-the-Hurons,
April  8,  1644.  The  original  is  in  the  MSS.  Soc.  Jes.;
Father  Felix  Martin  made  a  copy  thereof  in  1858,
when  in  Europe,  and  this  apograph,  which  we  fol-
low, rests  in  the  archives  of  St.  Mary's  College,
Montreal.

LIII

In  reprinting  the  text  of  the  Relation  of  1643-44
(Paris,  1645),  we  follow  a  copy  of  the  original  edi-
tion in  the  Lenox  Library,  known  there  as  the  La-
moignon  copy ;  our  facsimile  of  the  title-page  is  from
a  like  copy  in  the  library  of  the  Wisconsin  Historical
Society.  This  7?^/<7/z^«  consists  of  Part  L,  by  Vimont,
who  dates  his  "  epistre "  or  '  prefatory  letter  "A
Kebec,  ce  5.  de  Septembre,  1644;"  and  Part  II.,  by
Jerome  Lalemant,  whose  introductory  epistle  is
dated  "  Des  Hurons  ce  21.  de  Septembre  1643."  The
Huron  report  covers  the  period  from  June,  1642,  to
June,  1643, Preceding  it  is  a  letter  from  Vimont  to


284


LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES


his  Provincial,  dated  "  De  Kebec,  ce  i.  de  Septem-
bre,  1644,"  in  which  he  tells  him  that  the  first  copy,
which  the  Huron  Fathers  had  forwarded  to  him,  fell
into  the  hands  of  the  Iroquois.  A  second  copy-
reached  him  too  late  for  transmission  to  France  in
1643,  and,  consequently,  was  delayed  until  1644,
when  it  went  over  with  a  supplementary  report  for
that  year.

The  1643-44  Relation  is  usually  designated  as
"  H.  83,"  because  described  in  Harrisse's  Notes ,
no.  83.

Collation:  Title,  with  verso  blank,  i  leaf;  Vimont's
prefatory  letter  to  Filleau,  pp.  (3);  "  Table  des  Cha-
pitres  "  to  Part  I.,  pp.  (2);  "  Priuilege  "  and  "  Per-
mifsion,"  p.  (i);  text  to  Part  I.,  pp.  1-256.  Part
II.  consists  of:  Half-title,  with  verso  blank,  1  leaf;
Vimont's  special  letter  to  Filleau,  p.  (i);  "  Table  des
Chapitres  "  to  Part  II.,  p.  (i);  Lalemant's  text,  pp.
I  -  147  (the  last  mispaged  174).  The  supplementary
"  Lettre  de  M.DC.XLIV  "  covers  pp.  139,  ff.,  and  is
dated  "  Des  Hurons,  ce  dernier  de  Mars,  1644."  In
Part  I.,  the  paging  of  p.  37  is  almost  obliterated,  and
pp.  66  and  143  are  misnumbered  62  and  139,  respec-
tively. The  only  mispagination  in  Part  II.  is  that  of
174  for  147.

Besides  the  Lamoignon  copy  in  the  Lenox  Library,
there  is  another,  formerly  owned  by  George  Bancroft.
Both  of  these  seem  to  agree  to  the  greatest  degree  of
typographical  exactness,  excepting  in  signatures  D
and  E.  These  particular  signatures  are  of  different
composition.  This  is  not  only  discernible  from  the
spacing,  line-endings,  etc.,  but  also  from  the  follow-
ing peculiarities :


BIBLIO GRA  PHICA  L  DA  TA : VOL.  XX  V


285


Lamoignon.


p.  52,  1.  20:  "auons"
P.  55,1.  6:  "refpec1:e:  c'efl"
P. 55, 1. 9: "la Chapelle,
font  leur  deuo-"

P.  55,  1.  17:  "adiouftent"
P.  56 has  the  initial L  en-
circled by  leaves,  and  small.


P. 58, last line: "compre-
noit"

P.  61,  1.  2:  "penfee"

P.  61,1.  18:  "connu  par  tout"

P.  63,  1.  6: "dont  ils  temoi-
gnent"

P.  67,  1.  22: "appaifer"
P.  67,  1.  24: "Chappelet"


Bancroft.


p.  52,  1.  20: "auos  "
P.  55,1.6: "refpeae:  (c'efl"
P. 55,  1.  9: "la  Chappelle,
font  leur  de-"
P.  55,  1.  17:  "adjouflent"
P.  56  has  the  initial  L  with  a
figure, apparently the angel
Gabriel, blowing  a  horn, and
larger  than  in  the  other  copy.
P.  58,  last  line: "coprenoit"

P.  61,  1.  2:  "pensee  "

P. 61, 1. 18: "conneu par

tout"

P.  63,  1.  6: "dot ils  tefmoi-

gnent ' '

P.  67,  1.  22:  "  apaifer  "
P.  67,  1.  24:  "Chapelet"

Copies  of  H.  83  may  be  found  in  the  following
libraries:  Lenox  (two  variations),  Harvard,  Laval
University  (Quebec),  Public  Library  (Toronto),  Li-
brary of  Parliament  (Ottawa),  Wisconsin  State  His-
torical Society,  Brown  (private),  and  the  British
Museum.  Copies  have  been  sold  or  priced  as  fol-
lows: O'Callaghan  (1882),  no.  1223,  sold  to  Library
of  Parliament,  Ottawa,  for  $17.50,  had  cost  him
$32.50  in  gold;  Barlow  (1890),  no.  1288,  sold  for  $21;
Dufosse  (1891-95),  priced  at  175  to  225  francs;
Lenox  duplicate,  sold  by  Bangs  &  Co.,  New  York,
April  29,  1895,  for  $32;  and  Dodd,  Mead  &  Co.,  no.
42  in  list  of  April,  1896,  priced  at  $47.50.

Note:  —  The  Public  Library  of  Toronto  has  also
originals  of  our  nos.  XXX.  and  XLL  Subsequent
ones  will  be  duly  recorded.


i


NOTES  TO  VOL  XXV

(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  number  of  note,  refer  to  pages

of  English  text.)

1  (p.  29). —  For  sketch  of  Raymbault,  see  vol.  xi.,  note  16;  of
Davost,  vol.  v.,  note  54;  of  D'Olbeau,  vol.  xxiv.,  note  12.

2  (p.  49). —  This  "captain"  was  Arendt  Van  Curler  (Corlaer).
He  was  a  cousin  of  the  patroon  Van  Rensselaer,  and  came  to  New
Netherlands  with  the  colony  sent  hither  in  1630  (vol.  xxiv.,  note  22).
Van  Curler  was  commissary- general  or  superintendent  of  Rensse-
laerswyck,  his  jurisdiction  extending  from  Beeren  Island,  near
Coeymans's  Landing,  to  the  mouth  of  the  Mohawk;  he  was  also
colonial  secretary  until  1642.  He  ruled  the  colony  with  firmness,
justice,  and  honesty,  and  from  the  outset  cultivated  friendly  rela-
tions with  the  Indians.  Making  numerous  visits  to  the  savages,  in
their  own  villages,  and  learning  their  language,  he  acquired  their
confidence,  and  a  strong  influence  with  them.  In  1646,  he  retired
to  private  life,  but  was  often  consulted  by  officials,  both  civil  and
military,  in  regard  to  Indian  affairs.  Two  of  his  visits  to  the
Indians,  above  referred  to,  are  of  especial  interest, —  one,  in  1634-35,
of  which  he  preserved  a  record  in  his  Journal  (vol.  viii.,  p.  299) :  and
another,  in  September,  1642,  to  intervene  in  behalf  of  Father  Jog^es
and  other  French  prisoners  among  the  Mohawks.  Although  he
offered  them  a  ransom  of  600  guilders  (then  equal  to  $250  of  our
money),  the  savages  refused  to  release  the  captives;  but  they  finally
promised  Van  Curler  that  they  would  not  kill  Jogues,  or  torture  him
further.  Later,  Van  Curler  aided  the  priest  to  escape  to  his  own
country.

After  a  long  and  useful  life.  Van  Curler  met  his  death  by  acci-
dent, in  the  summer  of  1667, —  being  drowned  while  crossing  Lake
Champlain,  on  his  way  to  Quebec,  going  thither  in  response  to  an
invitation  sent  him  by  the  viceroy,  De  Tracy.  So  honored  was  Van
Curler  by  the  Iroquois  that,  until  this  century,  they  applied  his
name  to  the  successive  governors  of  New  Amsterdam  and  New
York;  and,  at  this  day,  the  Mohawks  of  Canada  address  the
governor-general  of  that  country  as  "Kora,"  a  corruption  of
Corlaer. For more detailed information regarding this noted


288  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES

pioneer,  see  O'Callaghan's  Hist.  New  Netherlands,  vol.  i.,  and
Griffis's  Arendt  Van  Curler,  a  paper  read  before  Albany  (N.  Y.)
Institute,  Nov.  i8,  1884  [Albany,  18S5?].

3  (P-  57)- — The  book  here  mentioned  was  doubtless  one  of  those
written  "by  Jean  Charlier,  better  known  by  his  scholastic  name  of
Gerson  (adopted,  in  accordance  with  the  custom  of  the  time,  from
that  of  his  native  village).  He  was  born  Dec.  14,  1363,  and  died  at
Lyons,  July  12,  1429.  From  1395  to  141S,  he  was  chancellor  of  the
university  of  Paris.  During  that  period,  he  was  actively  engaged
in  the  theological  controversies  so  bitterly  waged,  striving  earnestly
for  the  extinction  of  schism,  and  the  reformation  of  the  church.
This  course  aroused  many  enmities  against  him,  which  drove  him
for  a  time  into  exile.  Returning  to  France  in  1419,  he  retired  to
the  Celestine  convent  at  Lj-ons,  of  which  his  brother  Jean  was  prior.
The  remaining  ten  j'ears  of  his  life  were  there  spent  in  works  of
piety  and  instruction ;  he  also  wrote  many  religious  books, —  com-
mentaries, didactic  and  ecclesiastical  treatises,  and  devotional  and
mystical  meditations.  He  has  divided  with  Thomas  a  Kempis,  in
the  minds  of  many,  the  honor  of  having  written  the  hnitation  of
Christ — a  controversy  probably  not  yet  settled.  Aube  gives  a
summary  of  this  discussion  in  Hoefer's  Biog.  Ginirale  {art.
Gerson). Gerson  was  surnamed  "  the  most  Christian  doctor."

Jogues's  mention  of  the  "little  Gerson,"  and  his  possession  of
it  in  such  circumstances,  suggest  the  probability  that  the  book  he
refers  to  was  Thierrj^'s  duodecimo  edition  (Paris,  1621)  of  IV  livres
de  V imitation  de  Jesus-Christ, —  a  French  translation  from  the
Latin, —  most  of  the  early  editions,  whether  French  or  Latin,  having
varied  in  size  from  folio  to  octavo.

4  (p.  59). —  This  Dutch  minister  was  Domine  Johannes  (or  Jan)
Megapolensis  (vol.  xxiv.,  jiote  22).  He  was  called  to  Rensselaers-
wyck  for  a  term  of  six  years,  at  a  salarj^  of  1,000  guilders  yearly.
In  1649,  having  been  dismissed  from  this  post,  he  became  minister
of  the  church  at  New  Amsterdam  (New  York),  at  an  annual  salary
of  1,200  guilders.  He  was  the  fourth  pastor  of  this  church,  which
still  exists  as  the  Collegiate  Reformed  church  of  New  York  City;
next  after  Trinity,  it  is  the  wealthiest  religious  corporation  in  the
city.  Jan  Megapolensis  died  in  1669;  his  son  Samuel  was  also  a
minister,  officiating  in  the  above-named  church  from  1664  till  his
death  in  1668.

5  (p.  63). —  Manhate:  afterward  Manhattan ;  the  island  on  which
the  city  of  New  York  was  built.  O'Callaghan  {Hist.  New  Nether-
lands, vol.  i.,  p.  47,  note  2)  says  that  this  name  is  that  of  the  Indian
tribe  living  thereon at  the  time  of the  first Dutch settlement.


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XXV  289

Beauchamp  {/mi.  Navies,  p.  45) regards  it  as  a  form  of  the  Dela-
ware word  Ma)i-a-tey,  "an  island."

6  (p.  65). —  Concerning  this  shipwreck  of  Lalemant's,  see  vol.  iv.,
p.  235-245.

7  (p.  67). —  Another  letter  by  Jogues,  describing  his  captivity,  is
given  by  Bressani  in  his  Breve  Relatione;  it  is  dated  from  Rensse-
laerswyck,  Aug.  5,  1643.  This,  however,  is  but  an  Italian  version
of  the  original  Latin,  which  is  found  in  the  MS.  Memoire  tou-
chant  la  mart  et  les  vert  us  des  Peres  Isaac  Jogues,  De  Noted,  et  al.
(1652  —  archives  of  St.  Mary's  College,  Montreal;  see  vol.  ix.,  of  this
series,  note  40),  and  is  given  by  Alegambe  (with  some  additions)  in
his  Mortes  illustres  (Rome,  1657).

8  (p-  75)- — Concerning  the  relations  of  the  Jesuits  to  the  fur  trade,
see  vol.  i.,  note  31;  vol.  iii.,  note  33;  and  Le  Jeune's  elaborate  dis-
cussion of  the  subject,  vol.  ix.,  pp.  171 -181.

9  (p.  79). —  This  was  Jacques  de  la  Ferte,  abbe  of  Ste.  Madeleine
at  Chateaudun ;  one  of  the  Hundred  Associates  (as  enumerated  by
Creuxius).  He  gave  to  the  Jesuits  two  seigniories, —  in  1639,  that
of  Batiscan;  and,  in  1646,  that  of  Cap  de  la  Madeleine.  In  1647,
he  gave  funds  to  Richard  and  De  Lyonne  for  the  erection  of  a
chapel  at  the  Nipisiguit  mission  on  the  Bay  des  Chaleurs.

10  (p.  123). —  Concerning  the  olden  use  of  the  word  "  moustache,"
see  vol.  v.,  note  14.

11  (p.  125). —  Regarding  these  fetiches  ("medicines"),  see  vol..
xxii.,  note  6.


f  LIBRARY  j


rn


(  :  1  ::i-;  I : ; ! ,


:n:i,rii:U:M5^/^


1 ",  r;-)  tr^ip^-r^r-i-uprp'ty-'y--:;^:^
