I
,dflEltP.QttAXII
-  - -  — ■ — -
317
£V\R_
THE  JESUIT  RELATIONS
AND
ALLIED  DOCUMENTS
Vol.  X
The  edition  consists  of  sev-
en hundred and  fifty  sets
all  numbered
No U-
The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents
Travels  and  Explorations
of  the  Jesuit  Missionaries
in  New  France
1610-1791
THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL-
IAN TEXTS,  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA-
TIONS AND  NOTES  ;  ILLUSTRATED  BY
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES
EDITED  BY
REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES
Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin
Vol.  X
HURONS  : 1636
Cleveland: Gbe  Burrows  JBrotbera
Company,  publishers,  mdcccxcvii
Copyright,  1897
BY
The  Burrows  Brothers  Co
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
The  Imperial  Press, Cleveland
EDITORIAL  STAFF
Editor


Translators


Assistant  Editor


Reuben  Gold  Thwaites
f  Finlon  Alexander
Percy  Favor  Bicknell
William  Frederic  Giese
Crawford  Lindsay
William  Price
Emma  Helen  Blair


Bibliographical  Adviser Victor  Hugo  Paltsits


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  X

Preface  to  Volume  X  .  .  . i

Document: —

XXVI.  Relation  de  ce  qui  s'est  passe  en  la  Nov-
velle  France,  en  l'annee  1636.  [Part
II.,  being  Brebeuf's  Relation  of  the
Hurons  for  this  year,  originally  pub-
lished as  an  appendix  to  Le  Jeune's
Relation  of  i6j6,  and  thus  complet-
ing the  document.]  Jean  de  Bre'beuf;
Ihonatiria,  July  16,  1636 .  . 5

Notes .  .  .  .  .  -3*9


ILLUSTRATION  TO  VOL  X


I. Map  showing  sites  of Huron Missions, by

Andrew  F.  Hunter,  of  Barrie,  Ont. Facing  319


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  X


Following  is  a  synopsis  of  the  third  and  final  in-
stallment of  Document  XXVI.,  contained  in  the  pres-
ent volume :

XXVI.  In  the  Preface  to  Vol.  VIII.,  we  explained
that  the  Relation  of  1636,  like  many  others  of  the
series,  is  a  composite.  Part  I.  is  a  general  report  to
the  provincial  of  the  Jesuits,  at  Paris,  upon  the  prog-
ress and  condition  of  the  missions  in  New  France,  in
1636,  from  the  pen  of  the  superior,  Le  Jeune;  Part
II.  consists  of  a  specific  Relation,  addressed  to  the
latter  by  Brebeuf ,  of  the  mission  to  the  Hurons  for
this  year.  In  Vols.  VIII.  and  IX.  were  presented  Le
Jeune 's  Relation  proper,  the  present  volume  being
devoted  to  Brebeuf 's  Huron  Relation,  thus  completing
the  document.

As  usual,  Brebeuf  commences  his  annual  letter
by  describing  "  the  conversion,  baptism,  and  happy
death  of  some  Hurons."  During  the  year,  the  mis-
sionaries in  that  far-away  field  have  baptized  eighty-
six  savages, —  an  encouraging  gain  over  the  fourteen
who  were  ' '  rescued  from  the  service  of  the  devil
during  the  first  year  of  their  labors.  Their  great
hope  is  in  the  conversion  of  the  children,  who,  they
report,  show  surprising  aptitude  and  willingness
to  learn  the  doctrines  of  the  Christian  faith;  and,
through  them,  many  parents  have  been  reached.

At  a  council  of  the  Huron  chiefs,  Brebeuf  produces


PREFACE  TO VOL.  X


letters  from  Champlain  and  Duplessis-Bochart,  who
exhort  the  tribesmen  to  follow  the  teaching  of  the
missionaries,  and  embrace  Christianity ;  to  emphasize
this  advice,  and  in  accordance  with  the  custom  of  the
country,  he  ' '  presents  to  the  assembly  a  collar  of
twelve  hundred  beads  of  Porcelain,  telling  them  that
it  was  given  to  smooth  the  difficulties  of  the  road  to
Paradise."

The  writer  describes  the  unusual  and  intense
drought  which  prevailed  throughout  Canada,  in  the
spring  and  early  summer  of  1635.  The  Huron  coun-
try, being  sandy,  is  especially  affected,  and  is  threat-
ened with  a  total  failure  of  the  crops.  The  ' '  sorcer-
ers," or  medicine  men,  practice  all  their  arts  to  bring
rain,  but  without  success,  and  attribute  their  failure
to  the  cross  erected  by  the  missionaries.  The  latter,
as  a  last  resort,  appeal  to  their  patron  saints;  and
abundant  rains  are  secured, —  in  June,  by  a  novena
of  masses  in  honor  of  St.  Joseph;  and  in  August,  by
another  novena  for  St.  Ignace.  The  result  is  a  plenti-
ful harvest,  which  increases  the  good  will  of  the  sav-
ages toward  the  black  gowns.

The  Hurons  are  in  constant  dread  of  hostile  incur-
sions from  the  Iroquois ;  the  missionaries  promise  to
assist  them  in  such  emergencies,  and  instruct  them
how  to  improve  the  fortifications  around  their  vil-
lages; for  this,  the  Hurons  are  duly  grateful.

In  August,  Mercier  and  Pijart  arrive  from  Que-
bec,—  a  welcome  reinforcement.  Many  details  of
missionary  work  are  given, — journeys,  instructions,
debates  with  Indians,  conversions,  baptisms,  etc.
Louis  de  Sainte-Foi  (Amantacha),  who  had  been
educated  in  France  during  1626-28,  is  praised  for
his intelligence, fidelity, and Christian character;


PREFACE  TO VOL.  X


and  he  greatly  aids  the  labors  of  the  missionaries.

An  embassy  of  Island  savages  (from  the  Allu-
mettes)  visits  the  Hurons,  attempting,  but  in  vain,
to  incite  them  to  an  attack  on  the  Iroquois.  Br6-
beuf  takes  this  opportunity  to  win,  for  himself  and
his  brethren,  the  friendship  of  these  Islanders, — giv-
ing them  a  canoe  and  other  presents.

For  the  benefit  of  those  of  his  brethren  in  France
who  desire  to  undertake  missionary  work  in  the  Hu-
ron country,  Brebeuf  recounts  the  many  perils  of  the
journey  hither,  and  the  annoyances  and  dangers  to
which  apostles  of  the  faith  are  continually  exposed
among  the  savages ;  but  he  offers  much  encourage-
ment and  consolation  to  those  who  are  willing,  never-
theless, to  brave  all  obstacles,  and  to  devote  them-
selves to  the  conversion  of  the  natives.

The  missionaries  are  compiling  a  grammar  and
dictionary  of  the  Huron  dialect ;  and  Brebeuf  devotes
a  chapter  to  the  peculiarities  of  this  tongue.

The  second  part  of  this  Relation,  is  occupied  by  a
minute  account  of  "  the  beliefs,  manners,  and  cus-
toms of  the  Hurons," — their  myths  of  Deity  and
creation ;  their  notions  regarding  the  nature  of  man's
soul,  and  its  condition  after  death ;  their  worship  of
the  sky,  and  of  demons;  their  superstitions,  and  faith
in  dreams ;  their  feasts  and  dances ;  their  games,  and
the  general  habit  of  gambling.  Then  are  described,
at  length,  the  tricks  of  medicine  men;  the  national
characteristics  of  the  Huron  tribes;  their  customs,
both  in  peace  and  war;  their  councils  and  oratory;
and,  finally,  their  solemn  feast  of  the  dead, —  at
which  ghastly  ceremony,  once  in  twelve  years,  the
corpses  of  all  who  have  died  during  that  time  receive
a  public  and  common  burial.


PREFACE  TO VOL.  X


Brebeuf  closes  his  account  with  an  expression  of
much  hope  for  the  future  success  of  their  labors, —
mingled,  however,  with  fear  lest  these  savage  neo-
phytes may  grow  restive  when  placed  under  greater
restrictions  on  their  moral  and  social  conduct,  than
have  thus  far  seemed  advisable  to  the  cautious  mis-
sionaries.

The  translation  of  Brebeuf's  portion  of  the  Relation
of  1636,  contained  in  the  present  volume,  was  made
by  the  late  James  McFie  Hunter,  M.  A.,  of  Barrie,
Ont.

R.  G.  T.

Madison,  Wis.,  October, 1897.


XXVI (concluded)

Le  Jeune's  Relation,  1636

PARIS: SEBASTIEN CRAMOISY, 1637


Part  I.  (Le  Jeune's  own  Relation)  appeared  in  Volumes
VIII.,  IX.  The  present  installment,  which  closes  the  docu-
ment, is  Part  II.,  consisting  of  Brebeuf's  annual  report  on
the  Huron  mission.


LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.10


[i]  Relation  de  ce  qui  s'eft  paffe  dans  le  Pays
des  Hvrons  en  l'annee  1636.

Enuoyie  a  Kebec  au  R.  P.  Paul  le  Ieune  Superieur  de  la  Mijfion
de  la  Compagnie  de  Iesvs,  en  la  Nouuelle  France.

Mon  Reverend  Pere,
Ayant  appris,  tant  par  vos  lettres,  que  par
le  recit  des  Peres,  qui  arriuerent  heureufe-
ment  l'an  paffe\  comme  l'ancienne  France  brufle  de
tres-ardens  defirs  pour  la  Nouuelle ;  que  noftre  R.  P.
General  cherit  cette  Million  comme  la  prunelle  de
fes  yeux;  que  le  P.  Prouincial  s'y  porte  de  tout  fon
cceur;  que  le  feu  eft  11  grand  dans  nos  Colleges,  qu'il
eft  plus  difficile  d'appaifer  les  [2]  larmes  de  ceux
qu'on  econduit,  &  auf quels  on  refufe  de  nous  venir
ayder,  que  de  trouuer  des  ouuriers;  qu'vne  infinite
de  perfonnes  Relig[i]eufes  &  feculieres,  offrent  conti-
nuellement  a  Dieu  leurs  prieres  &  leurs  vceux  pour
la  conuerfion  des  pauures  Barbares  de  tout  ce  pays,
&  qu'en  la  Maifon  de  Montmartre,  fans  parler  des
autres,  il  y  a  inceffamment  nuict  &  iour  vne  Reli-
gieufe  profternee  deuant  le  S.  Sacrement,  qui  prie  a
cefte  intention :  Tout  cela  nous  fait  croire  &  efperer,
que  Dieu  veut  maintenant  ouurir  les  threfors  de  fes
graces  &  faueurs  deffus  ces  pauures  Peuples,  &  leur
deffiller  les  yeux  de  Tame  pour  cognoiftre  la  verite.
Car  il  n'inciteroit  pas  tant  de  deuotes  perfonnes  a  de-
mander,  s'il  n'auoit  enuie  de  les  exaucer:  Ioint  que
nous  fcauons  que  la  peuplade  de  Kebec  fe  va  grande-


1636]  LE  JE UNE '  S  RELA  TION,  1636


[1]  Relation  of  what  occurred  in  the  Country  of
the  Hurons  in  the  year  1636.

Sent  to  Kebec  to  Reverend  Father  Paul  le  Jeune,  Superior  of  the
Mission  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  in  New  France.

My  Reverend  Father,
Having  learned  from  your  letters,  and
from  the  statements  of  the  Fathers  who  ar-
rived here  fortunately  last  year,  how  old  France  is
burning  with  ardent  desires  for  the  New ;  that  our
Reverend  Father  General  cherishes  this  Mission  as
the  apple  of  his  eye ;  that  the  Father  Provincial  is
inclined  to  it  with  his  whole  heart ;  that  the  ardor  in
our  Colleges  is  so  great  that  it  is  more  difficult  to
check  the  [2]  tears  of  those  who  are  turned  away,  and
refused  permission  to  come  to  our  assistance,  than  to
find  those  who  will  work ;  that  a  very  great  number
of  persons,  Religious  and  secular,  are  continually
offering  their  prayers  and  their  vows  to  God  for  the
conversion  of  the  poor  Barbarians  of  this  whole  coun-
try; and  that  in  the  House  of  Montmartre,  not  to
speak  of  others,  a  Nun  is  prostrated  night  and  day
before  the  Holy  Sacrament,  praying  for  this  result;
all  this  makes  us  hope  and  believe  that  God  will  now
open  the  treasures  of  his  grace  and  favor  upon  these
poor  Peoples,  and  unseal  the  eyes  of  their  souls  to
know  the  truth.  For  he  would  not  incite  so  many
devout  persons  to  ask,  if  he  had  not  the  inclination  to
grant  their  prayers.  Besides,  we  learn  that  the  colo-
ny of  Kebec  is  rapidly  increasing,  through  the  efforts


8  LES  EEL  A  TIONS  DES  J E SUITES [Vol.  10

ment  multipliant  par  les  foins  de  Meffieurs  les  AfTo-
ciez  de  la  Compagnie  de  la  Nouuelle  France,  qui  n'ef-
pargnent  rien  de  leur  coite" ;  &  que  nous  ef perons  que
le  bon  exemple  de  nos  Francois  feruira  grandement,
tant  a  ramafTer  &  encourager  les  Sauuages  errants,  &
faineants  au  trauail,  qu'a  les  porter  a  vouloir  faire
pour  Dieu  ce  qu'ils  verront  eflre  faifable.  Outre
que  ie  puis  dire  [3]  auec  raifon,  que  fi  la  diuine  Bonte
continue  a  repandre  fes  faueurs  &  benedictios  fur  nos
Hurons,  &  fur  nous,  qui  les  cultiuons,  ainfi.  comme
elle  a  fait  depuis  noftre  arriu6e,  il  faut  dans  [sans]
doute  attendre  icy  vn  iour  vne  plantureufe  moifion
des  ames.  Ce  n'eft  pas  qu'il  n'y  ait  parmy  ces  Peu-
ples  beaucoup  d'erreurs,  de  fuperftitions,  de  vices,  &
de  tres-mauuaifes  couftumes  a  deraciner,  encore  plus
que  nous  ne  nous  eftions  figurez  au  commencement,
ainfi  qu'il  fe  verra  au  cours  de  cefte  Relation.  Mais
auec  Dieu  rien  n'eft  impoffible ;  c'eft  par  fon  ayde  que
nous  auons  defia  plante  la  Croix  parmy  cefte  Barba-
rie,  &  que  nous  commencos  &  continuerons,  s'il  luy
plaift,  a  publier  le  nom  &  les  merueilles  de  celuy,
qui  par  la  Croix  a  rachete  le  monde.  Mais  en  voila
affez  en  general,  il  faut  defcendre  plus  en  particu-
lier ;  ce  que  ie  feray  volontiers,  &  amplement,  vous
affeurant  que  ie  n'auanceray  rien  que  ie  n'aye  veu
moy-mefme,  ou  que  ie  n'aye  appris  de  perfonnes
dignes  de  foy.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  9

of  Messieurs  the  Associates  of  the  Company  of  New
France,  who  spare  no  pains  on  their  side;  and  we
hope  the  good  example  of  our  Frenchmen  will  greatly
aid  not  only  to  bring  together  and  encourage  to  work
the  idle  and  wandering  Savages,  but  to  incite  them
to  do  for  God  what  they  shall  find  practicable.
Moreover,  I  can  say  [3]  with  reason  that  if  divine
Goodness  continues  to  scatter  his  favors  and  blessings
on  our  Hurons,  and  on  us  who  labor  among  them,
as  freely  as  he  has  done  since  our  arrival,  we  ought,
without  doubt,  to  expect  here  some  day  an  abundant
harvest  of  souls.  It  is  true,  there  are  among  these
Tribes  many  errors,  superstitions,  vices,  and  utterly
evil  customs  to  uproot, —  more  than  we  had  imagined
at  first,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  course  of  this  Relation ;
but  with  God  nothing  is  impossible.  It  is  by  his  aid
that  we  have  already  planted  the  Cross  in  the  midst
of  this  Barbarism,  and  are  beginning  and  will  con-
tinue, if  it  please  him,  to  make  known  the  name  and
marvelous  works  of  him  who  by  the  Cross  has  re-
deemed the  world.  But  enough  has  been  said  in  a
general  way;  it  is  time  to  enter  into  particulars,
which  I  shall  willingly  and  fully  do,  assuring  you
that  I  shall  state  nothing  that  I  have  not  seen  myself
or  have  not  learned  from  persons  worthy  of  credence.


10  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


[4]  Premiere  Partie.

CHAPITRE  PREMIER.

DE LA CONUERSION, BAPTESME & HEUREUSE MORT

DE QUELQUES HURONS, & DE L'ESTAT DU

CHRISTIANISME EN CESTE BARBARIE.

IL  y  en  a  eu  cede  annee  quatrevingts  fix  de  bapti-
fez,  aufquels  ioignant  les  quatorze  de  l'annee
pafTee,  ce  font  en  tout  cent,  que  nous  croyons
eftre  fortis  de  la  feruitude  du  diable  en  ce  pays  de-
puis  noftre  retour.  De  ce  nobre  Dieu  en  a  appelle"
dix  au  Ciel,  fix  en  bas  aage,  &  quatre  plus  aduancez.
L'vn  d'iceux  nome  Francois  Sangtiati  eftoit  Capitaine
de  noftre  village;  il  eftoit  naturellement  bon,  &  con-
fentit  tres  volontiers  a  eftre  inftruit,  &  receuoir  le  S.
Baptefme,  qu'il  auoit  auparauant  loiie-  &  approuue"  en
autruy.  I'admiray  la  douce  Prouidence  de  Dieu  en
la  conuerfion  d'vne  femme,  qui  eft  l'vne  des  quatre
decedez;  laquelle  ie  baptifay  [5]  cet  Automne  au  vil-
lage de  Scanonaenrat,  en  retournant  de  la  maifon  de
Louys  de  faincte  Foy,  oil  nous  eftions  allez  inftruire
fes  parens.  La  furdite  de  cefte  malade,  &  la  profon-
deur  des  myfteres  que  ie  luy  propofois,  faifoit  qu'elle
ne  m'entendoit  pas  fuffifamment,  ioinct  que  l'accent
de  cefte  Nation,  vn  peu  different  de  celuy  des  Ours
oil  nous  fommes,  mefme  mon  ignorance  en  la  langue,
accroiffoient  la  difnculte,  &  me  rendoient  moins  intel-
ligible. Mais Noftre Seigneur  qui  vouloit  fauuer


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  11


[4]  Part  First.

CHAPTER  FIRST.

OF  THE CONVERSION,  BAPTISM,  AND HAPPY  DEATH OF

SOME HURONS; AND OF THE CONDITION OF

CHRISTIANITY  AMID  THIS  BARBARISM.

DURING  the  present  year,  eighty-six  have  been
baptized,  and,  adding  to  these  the  fourteen  of
last  year,  there  are  a  hundred  souls  in  all  who,
we  believe,  have  been  rescued  from  the  service  of
the  devil  in  this  country  since  our  return.  Of  this
number  God  has  called  ten  to  Heaven, —  six  while  they
were  young,  and  four  more  advanced  in  age.  One
of  these,  named  Francois  Sangwati,  was  Captain  of
our  village.  He  had  a  naturally  good  disposition,
and  consented  very  willingly  to  be  instructed  and  to
receive  Holy  Baptism,  a  course  he  had  previously
praised  and  approved  in  others.  I  admired  the  ten-
der Providence  of  God  in  the  conversion  of  a  woman,
who  is  one  of  the  four  deceased.  I  baptized  her  [5]
this  Autumn  at  the  village  of  Sca?ionaenrat ,l  when  re-
turning from  the  house  of  Louys  de  saincte  Foy,
where  we  had  gone  to  instruct  his  parents.  The
deafness  of  this  sick  woman,  and  the  depths  of  the
mysteries  I  brought  to  her  notice,  prevented  her
from  sufficiently  understanding  me;  and,  besides,
the  accent  of  that  Nation  is  a  little  different  from
that  of  the  Bears,  with  whom  we  live.  My  own  im-
perfect acquaintance  with  the  language  rendered  me


12  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  10

cefte  ame,  nous  pourueut  incontinent  d'vn  ieune
home,  lequel  nous  feruit  de  truchement.  II  s'eftoit
trouue-  auec  nous  en  la  Cabane  de  Louys,  &  nous
auoit  ouy  difcourir  de  nos  myfteres,  de  forte  qu'il  en
poffedoit  defia  vne  bonne  partie,  &  conceuoit  fort
bien  ce  que  ie  luy  difois.  On  dit  que  cefte  femme  qui
fut  nommee  Marie,  dans  fes  plus  grandes  foibleffes,
predit  qu'elle  ne  mourroit  de  huict  iours;  ce  qui
arriua.

lis  ne  recherchent  prefque  le  Baptefme  que  pour
la  fante.  Nous  tafchons  de  purifier  cefle  intention,
&  les  difpofer  a  receuoir  egalement  de  la  main  de
Dieu  la  maladie  &  la  fante,  la  mort  &  la  vie,  &  leurs
enfeignons  que  les  eaux  viuifiantes  du  S.  [6]  Bap-
tefme, nous  conferent  principalement  la  vie  de  Tame,
&  non  celle  du  corps.  Cependant  ils  ont  cefte  opi-
nion fi  fort  imprimee,  que  les  baptifez,  nommement
les  enfans,  ne  font  plus  maladifs,  qu'ils  l'auront  tatoft
diuulguee  &  publiee  par  tout,  de  forte  qu'on  nous
apporte  pluiieurs  enfans  a  baptifer  de  deux,  de  trois,
voire  mefmes  de  fept  lieue's.

Au  refte  la  diuine  Bonte,  qui  agit  en  nous  fuiuant
la  mefure  de  la  Foy,  a  conferue  iufques  a  prefent  ces
petits  enfans  en  bonne  fante :  de  forte  que  la  mort  de
ceux  qui  font  decedez,  a  efte  attribute  aux  maladies
incurables  &  defefperees  dont  ils  eftoient  malades
auparauant,  &  fi  quelqu'autre  a  efte  par  fois  atteint
de  quelque  petite  maladie,  les  parens  bien  qu'encores
infideles,  l'ont  rapport6e  a  la  negligence  &  au  mef-
pris  qu'ils  ont  fait  paroiftre  au  feruice  de  Dieu.

II  y  a  en  noftre  village  vne  petite  fille  Chreftienne
nommee  Louyfe,  laquelle  a  fix  mois  a  commence  a  mar-
cher toute  f eule :  les  parens  afleurent  n'auoir  encor


1636]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  13

still  less  intelligible,  and  increased  my  difficulties.
But  Our  Lord,  who  willed  to  save  this  soul,  immedi-
ately sent  us  a  young  man,  who  served  us  as  inter-
preter. He  had  been  with  us  in  the  Cabin  of  Louys,
and  had  heard  us  talking  of  our  mysteries,  so  that
he  already  knew  a  considerable  part  of  them,  and
understood  very  well  what  I  said.  It  is  said  that  this
woman,  who  was  named  Marie,  in  the  midst  of  her
greatest  weakness  foretold  that  she  would  not  die  for
eight  days ;  and  so  it  happened.

They  seek  Baptism  almost  entirely  as  an  aid  to
health.  We  try  to  purify  this  intention,  and  to  lead
them  to  receive  from  the  hand  of  God  alike  sickness
and  health,  death  and  life;  and  teach  them  that  the
life-giving  waters  of  Holy  [6]  Baptism  principally  im-
part life  to  the  soul,  and  not  to  the  body.  However,
they  have  the  opinion  so  deeply  rooted  that  the  bap-
tized, especially  the  children,  are  no  longer  sickly,
that  soon  they  will  have  spread  it  abroad  and  pub-
lished it  everywhere.  The  result  is  that  they  are
now  bringing  us  children  to  baptize  from  two,  three,
yes,  even  seven  leagues  away.

Moreover,  the  divine  Goodness  which  acts  in  us
according  to  the  measure  of  our  Faith,  has  thus  far
preserved  these  little  ones  in  good  health ;  so  that
the  death  of  those  who  have  passed  away  has  been
attributed  to  incurable  and  hopeless  maladies  con-
tracted beforehand;  and,  if  another  has  occasionally
suffered  from  some  trifling  ailment,  the  parents,  al-
though still  unbelieving,  have  attributed  it  to  the
neglect  and  irreverence  they  have  shown  toward  the
service  of  God.

There  is  in  our  village  a  little  Christian  girl  named
Louyse,  who  at  six  months  began  to  walk  alone;  the


14  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

rien  veu  de  femblable,  &  l'attribuent  a.  l'efficace  du
S.  Baptefme.  Vn  autre  nous  difoit  vn  iour  auec
beaucoup  de  ioye,  que  fon  petit  [7]  garcon,  qui  eftoit
prefque  toufiours  malade,  &  comme  tout  etique  auant
le  Baptefme,  s'efloit  du  depuis  parfaictement  bien
ported  Cecy  fuffira  pour  monftrer  comme  Noftre
Seigneur  va  leur  imprimant  vne  grande  opinion  de  ce
diuin  Sacrement ;  laquelle  fe  fortifie  par  la  bonne  &
entiere  fante  que  Dieu  nous  donne,  &  qu'il  a  toufiours
donnee  a  tous  les  Francois  qui  ont  efte  en  ce  pays :
car,  difent-ils,  c'eft  merueille  qu'horfmis  vn  feul  qui
eft  mort  icy  de  fa  mort  naturelle,  tous  les  autres,  de-
puis vingt-cinq  ans  ou  enuiron  qu'on  y  hante,  n'ayent
quafi  pas  efte  malades.

De  tout  cecy  on  pourra  facilement  recueillir  l'eftat
prefent  du  Chriftianifme  naiffant  en  ce  pays,  &  l'ef-
perance  du  futur.  Deux  ou  trois  chofes  y  feruiront
encor.  La  premiere  eft  la  methode  que  nous  tenons
a  1'inftruction  des  Sauuages.  Nous  affemblons  les
hommes  le  plus  fouuent  que  nous  pouuons,  car  leurs
confeils,  leurs  feftins,  leurs  ieux,  &  leurs  danfes  ne
nous  permettent  pas  de  les  auoir  icy  a  toute  heure,
ny  tous  les  iours.  Nous  auons  egard  particulierement
aux  Anciens,  d'autant  que  ce  font  eux  qui  determi-
nent  &  decident  des  affaires,  &  tout  fe  fait  fuiuant
leurs  aduis.  [8]  Tous  viennent  volontiers  nous  en-
tendre, tous  vniuerfellement  difent  qu'ils  ont  enuie
d'aller  au  Ciel,  &  qu'ils  redoutent  ces  braifes  ardentes
de  l'enfer:  ils  n'ont  quafi  rien  a.  nous  repliquer,  nous
fouhaitterions  quelquesfois  qu'ils  propofaffent  plus  de
doutes,  ce  qui  nous  donneroit  toufiours  plus  d'occafio
de  leur  d6chiffrer  par  le  menu  nos  faincts  Myfteres.
En  verite  les  Comandemens  de  Dieu  font  tres-iuftes


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  15


parents  declare  they  have  seen  nothing  like  it,  and
attribute  it  to  the  efficacy  of  Holy  Baptism.  Another
person  told  us  one  day,  with  great  delight,  that  his
little  [7]  boy,  who  had  always  been  sick  and  much
emaciated  before  Baptism,  had  been  very  well  since
then.  This  will  suffice  to  show  how  Our  Lord  is  in-
spiring them  with  a  high  opinion  of  this  divine  Sac-
rament, which  is  strengthened  by  the  perfect  health
God  gives  us,  and  which  he  has  given  to  all  the
French  who  have  been  in  this  country;  for,  they
say,  it  is  very  strange  that,  except  a  single  man  who
died  here  from  natural  causes,  all  the  others,  during
the  twenty-five  years  or  thereabout  in  which  the
French  have  been  frequenting  this  region,  have
scarcely  ever  been  sick.

From  all  this  may  be  easily  gathered  the  present
state  of  the  young  Christianity  of  this  country,  and
the  hope  for  the  future.  Two  or  three  things  be-
sides will  help  to  the  same  end.  The  first  is  the
method  we  pursue  in  the  instruction  of  the  Savages.
We  gather  together  the  men  as  often  as  we  can ;  for
their  councils,  their  feasts,  their  games,  and  their
dances  do  not  permit  us  to  have  them  here  at  any
hour,  nor  every  day.  We  pay  especial  attention  to
the  Old  Men,  inasmuch  as  they  are  the  ones  who  de-
termine and  decide  all  matters,  and  everything  is
ordered  by  their  advice.  [8]  All  come  willingly  to
hear  us;  all,  without  exception,  say  they  have  a  de-
sire to  go  to  Heaven  and  fear  the  fiery  torments  of
hell.  They  have  hardly  anything  to  answer  us
with ;  we  could  wish  sometimes  that  they  would  bring
forward  more  objections,  which  would  always  afford
us  better  opportunity  to  explain  our  holy  Mysteries
in  detail. Of  a  truth,  the  Commandments  of  God


16  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

&  tres-raifonnables,  &  ceux  la  doiuent  eftre  moins
qu'hommes  qui  y  trouuent  a  redire;  car  nos  Hurons
qui  n'ont  encor  que  la  lumiere  naturelle,  les  ont  trou-
ue  fi  beaux,  &  fi  conformes  a  la  raifon,  qu'apres  en
auoir  ouy  l'explication,  ils  difoient  par  admiration  ca
chia  attSain  aa  arrihtfaa,  certes  voila  des  affaires  d'im-
portance,  &  dignes  d'eflre  propofees  dans  des  con-
feils;  ils  difent  la  verite,  ils  ne  difent  rien  hors  de
propos,  nous  n'auons  iamais  entendu  de  tels  difcours.
Entre  autres  chofes  qui  leur  ont  fait  auoiier  la  verite-
d'vn  Dieu,  Createur,  Gouuerneur  &  Conferuateur  de
toutes  chofes,  fut  l'exemple  que  ie  leur  apportay  de
1' enfant  coceu  dans  le  ventre  de  la  mere.  Car  qui
eft-ce,  difois-ie,  fino  Dieu,  qui  organife  le  corps  de
cet  enfant,  qui  d'vne  mefme  matiere  [9]  forme  le
cceur,  le  foye,  le  poulmon,  bref  vne  infinie  variete  de
membres  fi  neceff aires,  &  tous  fi  bien  proportionnez  &
ioints  les  vns  auec  les  autres:  ce  n'eft  pas  le  pere,  car
ces  merueilles  s'accompliffent  en  fon  abfence,  &  quel-
quesfois  apres  fa  mort.  Ce  n'eft  non  plus  la  mere,
car  elle  ne  fcait  ce  qui  fe  paffe  dedans  fon  ventre:
que  fi  c'eft  le  pere  ou  la  mere  qui  forment  ce  corps  a
difcretion,  pourquoy  n'engendrent-ils  vn  fils  ou  vne
fille  quand  ils  veulent?  pourquoy  ne  produifent-ils  des
enfans  beaux,  grands,  forts  &  adroits.  Et  fi  les  pa-
rens donnent  l'ame  a  leurs  enfans?  pourquoy  ne  leur
departent-ils  a  tous  de  grands  efprits,  vne  heureufe
memoire,  &  toutes  fortes  de  belles  &  loiiables  quali-
tez,  veu  qu'il  n'y  a  perfonne  qui  ne  defiraft  auoir  de
tels  enfans,  s'il  eftoit  en  fon  pouuoir?  A  cela  nos
Hurons  s'eftonnent,  &  n'ayant  que  refpondre,  ils  co-
feffent  que  nous  difons  la  verity,  &  qu'en  effet  il  y  a
vn  Dieu,  que  d'orefnauant  ils  le  veulent  recognoiftre,


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  17

are  very  just  and  reasonable,  and  they  must  be  less
than  men  who  find  therein  anything  to  censure.
Our  Hurons,  who  have  as  yet  only  the  light  of  nature,
have  found  them  so  noble,  so  agreeable  to  reason,
that  after  having  heard  the  explanation  of  them  they
would  say,  in  admiration,  ca  chia  attwain  aa  arrihwaa,
"  Certainly  these  are  important  matters,  and  worthy  of
being  discussed  in  our  councils ;  they  speak  the  truth,
they  say  nothing  but  what  is  to  the  purpose;  we
have  never  heard  such  discourse."  Among  other
things  which  made  them  acknowledge  the  truth  of
one  God,  Creator,  Governor,  and  Preserver  of  all
things,  was  the  illustration  I  employed  of  the  child
conceived  in  its  mother's  womb.  "  Who,"  said  I,
' '  but  God  forms  the  body  of  this  child ;  who  out  of
one  and  the  same  material  [9]  forms  the  heart,  the
liver,  the  lungs, — in  short,  an  infinite  variety  of
members,  all  necessary,  all  well-proportioned,  and
joined  one  to  another?  Not  the  father,  for  these
wonders  take  place  in  his  absence,  and  sometimes
after  his  death.  Nor  is  it  the  mother,  for  she  does  not
know  what  takes  place  in  her  womb.  If  it  be  the
father  or  the  mother  that  forms  this  body  at  discre-
tion, why  is  not  a  son  or  a  daughter  begotten  at  will?
Why  do  they  not  produce  children,  handsome,  tall,
strong,  and  active  ?  And,  if  parents  give  the  soul  to
their  children,  why  do  they  not  impart  to  all  of  them
great  minds,  a  retentive  memory,  and  all  sorts  of
noble  and  praiseworthy  qualities,  seeing  that  there  is
no  one  who  would  not  desire  to  have  such  children
if  this  were  in  his  power?"  To  all  this  the  Hurons,
full  of  wonder,  make  no  reply.  They  confess  that
we  speak  the  truth,  and  that  indeed  there  is  a  God;
they  declare that  henceforth they  will recognize,


18  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES [Vol.10

le  feruir  &  honorer,  defirans  d'eftre  promptement  in-
ftruits,  de  forte  qu'ils  demandent  que  nous  leur  faffions
tous  les  iours  le  Catechifme:  mais  come  i'ay  defia
dit,  leur[s]  occupations  &  diuertiffemens  ne  le  per-
mettent  pas.

[10]  Outre  cela,  la  conformite  de  tous  les  poincts  de
la  Doctrine  Chreftienne  leur  plaift  merueilleufement ;
car,  difent-ils,  vous  parlez  conformement,  &  toufiours
confecutiuement  a  ce  que  nous  auez  dit;  vous  n'ex-
trauaguez  point;  vous  ne  dites  rie  hors  de  propos,
mais  nous  autres  nous  parlos  al'etourdy,  fans  fcauoir
ce  que  nous  difons.  C'eft  le  propre  de  la  faufTete  de
s'ebaraffer  dans  vne  infinite  de  contradictions.

Le  mal  eft,  qu'ils  font  fi  attachez  a  leurs  vieilles
couftumes,  que  cognoifsat  la  beaute  de  la  verite  ils  fe
contentent  de  l'approuuer  fans  l'embraffer.  Leur  re-
pofe  ordinaire  eft,  oniondecJiXten,  la  couftume  de  noftre
pais  eft  telle.  Nous  auons  combattu  cefte  excufe,  &
la  leur  auons  oftee  de  la  bouche,  mais  non  encores  du
cceur ;  noftre  Seigneur  le  f era  quand  il  luy  plaira.

C'eft  ainfi  que  nous  agiffons  auec  les  Anciens;  car
pour  autant  que  les  femmes  &  les  enfans  nous  cau-
foient  beaucoup  de  trouble,  nous  auons  trouue  cefte
inuention,  qui  nous  reiiffit  affez  bien:  le  P.  Antoine
Daniel,  &  les  autres  Peres  vont  tous  les  iours  par
toutes  les  Cabanes  enfeigner  aux  enfans,  foit  baptifez
ou  non,  la  doctrine  Chreftienne,  fcauoir  eft  le  figne
de  la  Croix,  [u]  le  Pater,  I'Aue,  le  Credo,  les  Com-
mandemens  de  Dieu,  l'Oraifon  a  l'Ange  Gardien,  &
autres  briefues  prieres ;  le  tout  en  leur  langue,  pource
que  ces  Peuples  ont  vne  ineptitude  naturelle  d'en  ap-
prendre  vne  autre.

Les  Dimanches nous  affemblons  toute  cefte  ieu-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  19

serve,  and  honor  him ;  and,  desiring  to  be  promptly
instructed,  they  ask  us  to  teach  them  the  Catechism
every  day ;  but,  as  I  have  said,  their  occupations  and
amusements  do  not  permit  that.

[10]  Moreover,  the  harmony  of  all  points  of  Chris-
tian Doctrine  pleases  them  wonderfully;  "For,"  they
say,  "  you  always  speak  connectedly,  and  consistent-
ly with  what  you  have  said ;  you  never  wander  off,
you  never  speak  save  to  the  purpose;  we,  on  the  con-
trary, speak  heedlessly,  not  knowing  what  we  say."
It  is  a  characteristic  of  falsehood  to  embarrass  itself
in  a  multitude  of  contradictions.

The  evil  is,  they  are  so  attached  to  their  old  cus-
toms that,  knowing  the  beauty  of  truth,  they  are
content  to  approve  it  without  embracing  it.  Their
usual  reply  is,  oniondechouten,  "  Such  is  the  custom
of  our  country."  We  have  fought  this  excuse  and
have  taken  it  from  their  mouths,  but  not  yet  from
their  hearts;  our  Lord  will  do  that  when  it  shall
please  him.

Thus,  then,  we  deal  with  the  Old  Men.  As  the
women  and  children  caused  us  much  trouble,  we
have  hit  upon  this  plan,  which  succeeds  fairly  well.
Father  Antoine  Daniel  and  the  other  Fathers  go
every  day  through  the  Cabins,  teaching  the  children,
whether  baptized  or  not,  Christian  doctrine, — name-
ly, the  sign  of  the  Cross,  [11]  the  Pater,  the  Ave,  the
Credo,  the  Commandments  of  God,  the  Prayer  to  the
Guardian  Angel,  and  other  brief  prayers,  all  in  their
own  tongue,  because  these  Peoples  have  a  natural
inaptitude  for  learning  any  other.

On  Sundays,  we  assemble  all  these  young  people
twice  in  our  Cabin,  which  serves  as  a  Chapel.  In
the morning  we get  them  to  assist  at  Mass,  even


20  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.10

nefle  par  deux  fois  das  noftre  Cabane  qui  nous  fert
de  Chappelle.  Le  matin  nous  les  faifons  amfter  a  la
Mefle  iufques  a  l'offertoire;  deuant  laquelle  nous  fai-
fons folemnellement  l'eau  benifte,  puis  ie  leur  fais
dire  a  tous  enfemble  apres  moy  le  Pater,  VAue,  &
autres  prieres  qu'ils  fcauent.  L'aprefdinee  ie  leur
propofe  quelque  petite  demande  du  Catechifme,  &•
leur  fais  rendre  compte  de  ce  qu'ils  ont  appris  pendant
la  femaine,  donnant  a  chacun  quelque  petit  prix  fe-
lon fon  merite.

Cefte  methode  coniointe  auec  ces  petites  recom-
penfes  a  des  effects  incroyables:  car  premierement
cela  a  allume-  parmy  tous  les  enfans  vn  fi  grand  defir
d'apprendre,  qu'il  n'y  en  a  point  du  tout,  pourueu
qu'ils  fcachent  tant  foit  peu  beguayer,  qui  ne  vueillent
eftre  inftruits,  &  comme  ils  font  quail  tous  d'vn  aflez
bon  efprit,  c'eft  auec  vn  grand  progrez;  car  mefme
ils  [12]  s'inftruifent  les  vns  les  autres.

Ie  ne  fcaurois  dire  le  contentement  &  la  confolation
que  nous  donne  cefte  petite  ieuneffe,  quand  nous  con-
fiderons  leurs  Peres  plongez  encor  dans  leurs  fuperfti-
tions,  quoy  qu'ils  recognoiffent  fumfamment  la  verite\
II  nous  vient  en  penfee  de  craindre  que  Dieu  irrite"
par  leurs  pechez  ne  les  ayt  rebutez  encor  pour  vn
temps ;  car  pour  les  enfans  fans  doute  il  leur  tend  les
bras,  &  les  attire  a  foy;  l'ardeur  qu'ils  tefmoignent  a
apprendre  ce  qui  regarde  le  deuoir  d'vn  Chreftien
nous  empefche  d'en  douter;  les  plus  petits  fe  vien-
nent  ietter  entre  nos  bras  quand  nous  allons  par  les
Cabanes,  &  ne  fe  font  point  prier  pour  dire  &  eftre
inftruits.  Le  P.  Daniel  a  trouue"  l'inuention  d'appai-
fer  vn  petit  enfant,  quand  il  le  trouue  pleurant  entre
les  bras  de  fa  mere ;  qui  eft  de  luy  faire  faire  le  figne


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  21


to  the  offertory,  before  which  we  solemnly  bless  the
holy  water ;  then  I  make  them  say  all  together,  after
me,  the  Pater,  the  Ave,  and  other  prayers  they  know.
In  the  afternoon  I  propose  to  them  some  little  ques-
tion from  the  Catechism,  and  make  them  give  ac-
count of  what  they  have  learned  during  the  week,
giving  to  each  some  little  prize  according  to  his  merit.

This  method,  along  with  the  little  rewards,  has
wonderful  results.  For,  in  the  first  place,  it  has
kindled  among  all  the  children  so  great  a  desire  to
learn  that  there  is  not  even  one  who,  if  it  can  stam-
mer out  words  at  all,  does  not  desire  to  be  instructed ;
and,  as  they  are  almost  all  fairly  intelligent,  they
make  rapid  progress,  for  they  even  [12]  teach  one
another.

I  cannot  tell  you  the  satisfaction  and  consolation
these  little  children  give  us.  When  we  consider
their  Fathers,  still  plunged  in  their  superstitions,
although  recognizing  sufficiently  the  truth,  we  are
afraid  that  God,  provoked  by  their  sins,  has  rejected
them  for  a  time ;  but,  as  for  the  children,  without
doubt  he  holds  out  his  arms  to  them  and  draws  them
to  himself.  The  eagerness  they  show  to  learn  the
duties  of  a  Christian  keeps  us  from  doubting  it.  The
smallest  ones  throw  themselves  into  our  arms,  as  we
pass  through  the  Cabins,  and  do  not  require  to  be
urged  to  talk  and  to  learn.  Father  Daniel  hit  upon
the  plan  of  quieting  a  little  child,  crying  in  its
mother's  arms,  by  having  it  make  the  sign  of  the
Cross.  And  indeed,  one  day  when  I  had  just  been
teaching  the  Catechism  to  them  in  our  Cabin,  this
child  made  us  laugh ;  its  mother  was  carrying  it  in
her  arms,  and  was  going  out;  but,  as  soon  as  she
reached  the  door,  it  began  to  cry  so  that  she  was  com-


22  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

de  la  Croix :  Et  de  fait,  vn  iour  que  ie  venois  de  leur
faire  le  Catechifme  en  noftre  Cabane;^cet  enfant  nous
fit  rire :  fa  mere  le  portoit  entre  fes  bras,  &  s'en  al-
loit,  mais  elle  ne  fut  pas  fi  toft  fur  le  feiiil  de  la  porte
qu'il  fe  prit  a  pleurer,  de  forte  qu'elle  fut  contrainte
de  rentrer;  elle  luy  demande  ce  qu'il  auoit,  Que  ie
recommence,  [13]  dit-il,  que  ie  recommence,  ie  veux
encor  dire.  Ie  luy  fis  done  faire  derechef  le  figne  de
la  Croix,  &  il  fe  prit  incontinent  a  rire,  &  a  fauter
d'aife.  I'ay  veu  le  mefme  vne  autrefois  pleurer  bien
fort  pour  auoir  eu  le  doigt  froiffe,  cependant  s'appai-
fer,  &  rire,  auffi-toft  qu'on  luy  euft  fait  faire  le  figne
de  la  Croix.  Ie  m'eftend  volontiers  fur  ce  fuiet,  ne
doutant  point  que  les  bonnes  ames  ne  prennent  plai-
fir  d' entendre  toutes  ces  particularitez ;  dans  les  com-
mencemens  de  cefte  Eglife  naiffante,  que  pouuons
nous  raconter  finon  les  begayemens  de  nos  enfans
fpirituels?  Nous  auons  vne  petite  fille  entre  autres
nomee  Marie  AoeJiXa,  qui  n'a  point  fa  pareille;  vous
diriez  que  tout  fon  contentement  foit  de  faire  le  figne
de  la  Croix,  &de  dire  fon  Pater  &  Aue,  a  peine  auons
nous  mis  le  pied  dans  fa  Cabane,  qu'elle  quitte  tout
pour  prier  Dieu.  Quand  nous  affemblons  les  enfans
pour  la  priere  ou  pour  le  Catechifme,  elle  fe  trouue
toufiours  des  premieres,  &  y  accourt  plus  gayement
que  plufieurs  ne  feroient  au  ieu;  elle  ne  bouge  de
chez  nous,  &  ne  fe  laffe  point  de  faire  le  figne  de  la
Croix,  &  de  dire  &  redire  cinquante  fois  le  iour  le
Pater  &  Aue;  elle  le  fait  faire  aux  autres,  &  vn  de  nos
[14]  Francois  eitant  arriue  de  nouueau;  pour  tout
compliment,  elle  luy  prift  la  main,  &  luy  fit  faire  le
figne  de  la  Croix.  Souuent  elle  fe  trouue  dans  la
campagne  quand  nos  Peres  y  recitent  leur  Office  elle


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  23

pelled  to  turn  back.  She  asked  it  what  was  the  mat-
ter. "  Let  me  begin  again,"  [13]  it  said,  "  let  me
begin  again,  I  want  to  say  more."  I  then  got  it  to
make  again  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  and  it  immediately
began  to  laugh  and  to  jump  for  joy.  I  saw  the  same
child,  another  time,  crying  hard  because  it  had  had
its  finger  frozen;  but  it  quieted  down  and  laughed,
as  soon  as  they  had  it  make  the  sign  of  the  Cross.  I
dwell  willingly  upon  this  matter,  as  I  am  sure  pious
souls  take  pleasure  in  hearing  all  these  particulars.
In  the  beginnings  of  this  infant  Church,  what  can  we
speak  about  if  not  the  stammerings  of  our  spiritual
children?  We  have  one  little  girl,  among  others,
named  Marie  Aoesiwa,  who  has  not  her  equal.  Her
whole  satisfaction  seems  to  be  in  making  the  sign  of
the  Cross  and  in  saying  her  Pater  and  Ave.  Scarcely
have  we  set  foot  in  her  Cabin,  when  she  leaves  every-
thing to  pray  to  God.  When  we  assemble  the  chil-
dren for  prayers  or  for  Catechism,  she  is  always
among  the  first,  and  hastens  there  more  cheerfully
than  many  would  to  play.  She  does  not  stir  from
our  Cabin,  and  does  not  omit  making  the  sign  of  the
Cross,  and  saying  over  and  over  fifty  times  a  day  the
Pater  and  Ave.  She  gets  others  to  do  the  same;  and,
one  of  our  [14]  Frenchman  having  newly  come,  her
only  greeting  was  to  take  his  hand,  and  have  him
make  the  sign  of  the  Cross.  Often  she  is  in  the
field  when  our  Fathers  recite  their  Office  there ;  she
stands  in  the  road,  and,  almost  every  time  they  re-
turn, she  begins  to  make  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  and
to  pray  to  God  in  a  loud  voice.

Another  little  girl  named  Catherine  had  often  been
wayward  about  receiving  instruction,  and  so  had  not
been  rewarded  like  the  others. Some  days  afterward,


24  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

fe  tient  dans  le  chemin,  &  prefque  autant  de  fois
qu'ils  fe  retournent,  elle  fe  met  a  faire  le  figne  de  la
Croix,  &  a  prier  Dieu  a  haute  voix.

Vne  autre  petite  nommee  Catherine,  auoit  fait  fou-
uent  la  difficile  a  fe  faire  inftruire,  &  en  fuite  n'auoit
point  efte"  recompenfee  comme  les  autres:  quelques
iours  apres  vne  fienne  compagne  l'amena  a  vn  des
noftres,  luy  faifant  accroire  qu'elle  eftoit  toute  difpo-
fee  a  dire ;  mais  quand  ce  fut  au  fait  &  au  prendre,
elle  fit  a  l'ordinaire ;  alors  cefte  petite  qui  l'auoit  ame-
nee  fe  mift  en  humeur,  &  employa  toute  fa  petite
rhetorique  naturelle  pour  luy  deferrer  les  levres,  &
la  faire  parler,  tantoft  vfant  de  menaces,  tantoft  luy
faifant  efperer  quelque  recompenfe  de  moy,  fi  elle
difoit  bien,  &  fit  fi  bien  qu'elle  en  vint  a  bout  au  grand
contentement  de  celuy  des  noftres  qui  l'efcoutoit.

Vn  autre  bien  qu'apporte  cefte  practique  conforme
a  noftre  Inftitut,  eft  que  les  grads  mefmes  demeurent
[deviennent]  par  ce  moyen  inftruits;  [15]  car  le  defir
que  les  peres  &  meres  ont  que  leurs  enfans  foient
loiiez  &  recompenfez  de  quelque  prix,  fait  qu'ils  s'in-
ftruifent  eux-mefmes  pour  inftruire  leurs  enfans ;  par-
ticulierement  beaucoup  de  grandes  filles  prennent
plaifir  a  imiter  les  petites.  Quand  elles  retournent
du  bois,  fouuent  elles  s'arreftent  au  premier  de  nos
Peres  qu'elles  rencontrent,  &  luy  difent  ta  arrihSaiens-
tan  fen,  enfeigne  moy  ie  te  prie,  &  quoy  qu'elles
foient  bien  chargees,  elles  ne  font  point  contentes
qu'on  ne  leur  ait  fait  dire  le  Pater  &  V Aue.  Quelques-
fois  mefmes  elles  nous  preuiennent,  &  de  fi  loin
qu'elles  appercoiuent  quelqu'vn  de  nous  autres,  elles
fe  mettent  a  dire  ce  qu'elles  fcauent.  Quelle  confo-
lation  d'entendre  retentir  ces  campagnes  du  nom  de


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  163b  25

one  of  her  companions  brought  her  to  one  of  our  Fa-
thers, giving  him  to  understand  that  she  was  quite
disposed  to  learn ;  but,  when  it  came  to  the  point,  she
acted  as  usual.  The  little  girl  who  had  brought  her
became  annoyed,  and  used  all  her  little  natural  rhet-
oric to  make  her  open  her  lips  and  to  get  her  to
speak, — sometimes  using  threats,  sometimes  holding
out  a  reward  from  me  if  she  spoke  properly ;  she  was
so  earnest  that  she  succeeded,  to  the  great  satisfac-
tion of  those  of  our  Fathers  who  were  listening  to  her.

Another  benefit  that  results  from  this  practice  —
which  is  in  conformity  with  our  Institute  —  is,  that
even  the  adults  become  instructed  by  this  means;
[15]  for  the  desire  of  the  fathers  and  mothers  that
their  children  should  be  praised  and  rewarded  leads
them  to  be  instructed  themselves,  in  order  to  teach
their  children;  particularly  many  older  girls  take
pleasure  in  imitating  the  younger  ones.  When  they
are  returning  from  the  forest,  they  often  stop  the
first  of  our  Fathers  whom  they  meet,  and  say  to  him,
ta  arrihwaienstan  sen,  "  Teach  me,  I  pray  thee;"  and
although  they  may  be  well  laden,  they  are  not  satis-
fied unless  he  has  them  say  the  Pater  and  the  Ave.
Sometimes  they  anticipate  us,  and,  from  as  far  as
they  can  see  one  of  our  Fathers,  they  begin  to  recite
what  they  know.  What  a  consolation  to  hear  these
districts  resound  with  the  name  of  Jesus,  where
the  devil  has  been,  so  to  speak,  adored  and  recog-
nized as  God  during  so  many  ages.

This  exercise  also  enables  us  to  improve  greatly  in
the  use  and  knowledge  of  the  language,  which  is  no
small  gain.  Generally  speaking  they  praise  and  ap-
prove the  Christian  Religion,  and  blame  their  wicked
customs;  but  when  will  they  leave  them  off  entirely?


26  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.10

Iesvs,  ou  le  diable  a  efte\ pour  ainfi  dire,  adore &
recognu  pour  Dieu  par  tant  de  fiecles.

Ce  mefme  exercice  fait  que  nous  profitons  beaucoup
en  l'vfage  &  cognoiflance  de  la  langue,  qui  n'eft  pas
vn  petit  fruict.  Vniuerfellement  parlant  ils  loiient  &
approuuent  la  Religion  Chreftienne,  &  blafment  leurs
mefchantes  couftumes;  &  quand  fera-ce  qu'ils  les
quitteront  tout  a  fait?  Quelques-vns  nous  difent,
Penfez-vous  [16]  venir  a  bout  de  renuerfer  le  Pays,
c'eft  ainfi  qu'ils  appellent  le  changement  de  leur  vie
Payenne  &  Barbare,  en  vne  vie  ciuile  &  Chreftienne?
Nous  refpondons  que  nous  ne  fommes  pas  fi  prefomp-
tueux,  mais  que  ce  qui  eft  impoffible  aux  hommes,  eft
non  feulement  poffible,  mais  facile  a  Dieu.  Voicy
encor  vn  autre  indice  de  leur  bonne  volonte  pour  la
Foy.  Monfieur  de  Champlain  &  Monfieur  le  General
du  Pleffis  Bochart,  nous  obligerent  grandement  l'an-
nee  paffee,  exhortant  les  Hurons  en  plein  confeil  a
embraffer  la  Religion  Chreftienne,  &  leur  difant  que
c'efloit  la  l'vnique  moyen  non  feulement  d'eftre  vn
iour  veritablement  heureux  dans  le  Ciel,  mais  auffi
de  lier  a  l'auenir  vne  tres-eftroite  amitie  auec  les
Fran9ois,  lefquels  en  ce  faifant  viendroient  volontiers
en  leur  Pays,  fe  marieroient  a  leurs  filles,  leurs  ap-
prendroient  diuers  arts  &  meftiers,  &  les  affifteroient
contre  leurs  ennemis;  &  que  s'ils  vouloient  amener
quelques-vns  de  leurs  enfans  l'an  prochain,  qu'on  les
inftruiroit  a  Kebec,  que  nos  Peres  en  auroient  vn
grand  foin.  Et  pour  autant  que  les  Capitaines  du
pays  n'eftoient  pas  la.  bas,  ils  leur  dirent  qu'ils  tinffent
confeil  tous  enfemble  quand  ils  [17]  feroient  de  retour
touchant  les  poincts  fufdits,  &  qu'ils  me  rendiflent  les
lettres  dont  il  leur  pleuft  m'honorer,  par  lefquelles
ces Meffieurs  nous  donnoient  aduis  de  ce  qui  auoit


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63b  27

Some  say  to  us:  "Do  you  think  [16]  you  are  going
to  succeed  in  overturning  the  Country?"  Thus  do
they  style  the  change  from  their  Pagan  and  Barba-
rous life  to  one  that  is  civilized  and  Christian.  We
reply  that  we  are  not  so  presumptuous,  but  that  what
is  impossible  to  man  is  not  only  possible  but  easy  to
God.  Here  is  another  indication  of  their  good  will
toward  the  Faith.  Monsieur  de  Champlain  and  Mon-
sieur the  General  du  Plessis  Bochart  rendered  us
great  service  last  year,  by  exhorting  the  Hurons  in
full  council  to  embrace  the  Christian  Religion,  and
by  telling  them  that  it  was  the  only  means  not  only
of  being  some  day  truly  happy  in  Heaven,  but  also
of  cementing  in  the  future  a  very  close  alliance  with
the  French, — who,  if  this  were  done,  would  readily
come  into  their  Country,  marry  their  daughters,  teach
them  different  arts  and  trades,  and  assist  them
against  their  enemies ;  and  that,  if  they  would  bring
some  of  their  children  next  year,  to  be  instructed  at
Kebec,  our  Fathers  would  take  good  care  of  them.
And,  inasmuch  as  the  Captains  of  the  country  were
not  there,  they  asked  them  to  hold  a  general  council
on  their  [17]  return,  concerning  the  points  mentioned ;
also  to  give  me  the  letters  with  which  they  were
pleased  to  honor  me,  in  which  these  Gentlemen  in-
formed us  of  what  had  been  said,  in  order  that  we
might  be  present  at  the  Huron  Council,  and  be  able
to  avail  ourselves  of  what  they  had  done.  In  accord-
ance with  this,  in  the  month  of  April  last,  having
been  invited  to  an  Assembly  or  Council,  where  all
the  Old  Men  and  Chiefs  of  the  Nation  of  the  Bear
met  to  deliberate  on  their  great  feast  of  the  dead,  I
took  occasion  to  show  them  the  letters  of  these  Gen-
tlemen, and  asked  them  to  decide,  after  careful  delib-


28  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

efte*  dit,  afin  que  nous  afliftaffions  au  Confeil  des  Hu-
rons,  &  fceuffions  nous  preualoir  de  ce  qu'ils  auoient
fait.  Conformement  a  cela  au  mois  d'Auril  dernier
ayant  efte*  inuite"  a  vne  Affemblee  ou  Confeil,  ou
eftoient  tous  les  Anciens  &  les  Chefs  de  la  Nation  des
Ours,  pour  deliberer  fur  leur  grande  fefte  des  morts,
ie  pris  l'occafion  de  leur  reprefenter  la  lettre  de  ces
Meffieurs,  &  demander  qu'ils  deliberaffent  meurement
ce  qu'ils  defiroient  y  refpondre.  Ie  leur  dis  que  tous
les  hommes  ayant  l'ame  immortelle  alloient  finale-
ment  apres  cefte  vie  en  l'vn  de  ces  deux  lieux,  fcauoir
en  Paradis  ou  en  Enf er,  &  ce  pour  vn  iamais :  mais
que  ces  lieux  eftoiet  grandement  differents,  car  le
Paradis  eftoit  vn  lieu  remply  de  toutes  fortes  de  biens,
&  exempt  de  toutes  fortes  de  maux;  &  l'Enfer  eftoit
vn  eftat  deftitue  de  tout  bien,  &  remply  de  toutes
fortes  de  maux,  que  c'eftoit  vne  fournaife  tres-ardente
au  milieu  de  laquelle  les  damnez  feroient  a  iamais
tourmentez  &  brulez  fans  eftre  confommez,  [18]  qu'ils
auifaffent  maintenant  auquel  de  ces  deux  lieux  ils
defiroient  vn  iour  aller  pour  vn  iamais,  &  ce  pendant
qu'ils  efloiet  encor  en  vie;  car  pour  tous  les  defunts
pour  qui  ils  auoient  fait,  &  alloient  faire  la  fefte,  que
c'eftoit  vne  affaire  decidee,  que  tous  ayat  ignore  Dieu,
&  outrepaffe  fes  comandemens,  auoiet  fuiuy  le  che-
min  de  l'Enfer,  oil  ils  eftoient  maintenant  tourmen-
tez de  fupplices  qui  ne  fe  peuuent  imaginer,  &  qu'il
n'y  auoit  plus  de  remede.  Que  pour  eux  s'ils  vou-
loient  aller  au  Ciel  nous  leur  enfeignerions  le  chemin ;
&  pour  autant  que  toutes  les  affaires  d'importans  fe
font  icy  par  prefens,  &  que  la  Pourcelaine  qui  tient
lieu  d'or  &  d'argent  en  ce  Pays,  eft  toute  puiffante,
ie  prefentay  en  cefte  Affemblee  vn  collier  de  douze
cens  grains  de  Pourcelaine,  leur  difant,  que  c'eftoit-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  1636  29

eration,  what  they  wished  to  answer  thereto.  I  told
them  that  every  man,  as  possessing  an  immortal  soul,
would  at  last,  after  this  life,  go  to  one  or  the  other  of
two  places,  Paradise  or  Hell,  and  that  forever ;  but  that
these  places  were  widely  different,  since  Paradise  is
a  place  abounding  in  blessings  of  all  kinds,  and  free
from  all  manner  of  ills ;  Hell,  a  place  where  no  bless-
ing comes,  and  where  ills  of  all  kinds  abound ;  that
it  is  a  fiery  furnace,  in  the  midst  of  which  the
damned  would  be  forever  tormented,  and  burned
without  ever  being  consumed;  [18]  that  they  must
now  consider  to  which  of  these  two  places  they  pre-
ferred to  go  some  day,  forever,  and  to  do  this  while
they  were  still  in  this  life,  because  the  matter  was
decided  so  far  as  it  concerned  all  the  dead  for  whom
they  had  made  or  were  going  to  make  feasts ;  that
all  those  who  had  slighted  God  and  broken  his  com-
mandments had  followed  the  path  to  Hell,  where
they  now  were  tormented  by  punishments  that  could
not  be  imagined,  and  for  which  there  was  no  remedy.
I  told  them  that,  if  they  wished  to  go  to  Heaven,  we
would  teach  them  the  way;  and,  inasmuch  as  all
affairs  of  importance  are  managed  here  by  presents,
and  as  the  Porcelain  that  takes  the  place  of  gold  and
silver  in  this  Country  is  all-powerful,  I  presented  in
this  Assembly  a  collar  of  twelve  hundred  beads  of
Porcelain,  telling  them  that  it  was  given  to  smooth
the  difficulties  of  the  road  to  Paradise.  It  is  custom-
ary to  employ  such  terms,  when  they  make  presents
to  succeed  in  some  difficult  enterprise.  Then  all,  in
turn  expressing  their  opinions,  said  that  they  dreaded
these  glowing  fires  of  Hell,  and  that  they  preferred
the  road  to  Heaven.  There  was,  nevertheless,  one
who  —  either seriously, or  more  probably [19] in


30  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.10

la  pour  applanir  les  difficultez  du  chemin  de  Paradis ;
ce  font  les  termes  dont  ils  ont  couftume  de  fe  feruir
quand  ils  font  quelques  prefens  pour  venir  a  bout  de
quelque  difficile  entreprife.  Alors  tous  opinans  a
leur  tour,  dirent  qu'ils  redoutoient  ces  feux  ardens
de  l'Enfer,  &  qu'ils  aymoient  mieux  prendre  le  che-
min du  Ciel :  il  y  en  eut  neatmoins  vn  lequel  ou  f eri-
eufement,  ou  plutoft  [19]  en  gauffant  dit,  que  cela
alloit  bien  que  tous  vouluffent  aller  au  Ciel,  &  eftre
bien-heureux,  pour  luy  qu'il  n'importoit  pas  quand  il
feroit  brule  dedans  l'Enfer.  Ie  repartis  que  Dieu
nous  donnoit  a  tous  1' option  de  l'vn  &  de  1' autre,
mais  qu'il  ne  fcauoit  pas  quel  eftoit  le  feu  d'Enfer,
&  que  i'efperois  qu'il  changeroit  de  refolution  quand
il  en  feroit  mieux  informe.

Voila  la  difpofltion  qu'ont  les  Hurons,  &  notam-
ment  la  Nation  des  Ours,  a  receuoir  le  Chriflianifme,
a  quoy  feruira  grandement  que  nous  auons  defia  bap-
tife  beaucoup  d'enfans;  car,  difent-ils,  nous  ne  vou-
lons  pas  abandonner  nos  enfans,  nous  defirons  aller
au  Ciel  auec  eux.  Tu  peux  iuger,  difent  ils,  combien
nous  agreons  tes  difcours,  puis  que  nous-nous  y  trou-
uons  volontiers,  &  fans  mot  dire,  &  que  nous  permet-
tos  que  nos  enfans  foient  baptifez.  II  ne  faut  pas
que  ie  m'oublie  a  cefte  occafion  de  tefmoigner  la  fa-
tisfaction  que  nous  donne  Louys  de  faincte  Foy;  il
eft  vray  qu'il  nous  a  autant  edifiez  &  contentez  dans
le  deuoir  de  Chreftien,  qu'il  y  auoit  manque  par  le
paffe.  A  ce  mois  de  Septembre  il  eut  vn  defir  de  re-
tourner  pour  hyuerner  chez  nous  a  K6bec,  afin  d'y
rapprendre  paifiblement  [20]  les  bons  enfeignemens
qu'il  auoit  eu  autrefois  de  nos  Peres  en  France,  &  fe
remettre  parfaictement  dans  le  train  de  la  vertu  &
piete  Chreliienne. Nous  approuuions  fort  ce  deffein,


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  31

jest  —  said  it  was  very  fine  that  all  should  wish  to  go
to  Heaven,  and  be  happy;  but  that,  as  far  as  he  was
concerned,  it  did  not  matter  even  if  he  should  be
burned  in  Hell.  I  replied  that  God  gave  us  all  the
choice  of  the  one  or  the  other ;  that  he  did  not  know
what  Hell  fire  was,  and  that  I  hoped  he  would  change
his  mind  when  he  was  better  informed.

You  see  the  inclination  of  the  Hurons,  and  espe-
cially of  the  Nation  of  the  Bear,  to  receive  Christian-
ity ;  and  this  will  be  greatly  increased  by  the  fact
that  we  have  already  baptized  many  of  their  chil-
dren. For  they  say,  "  We  do  not  wish  to  be  sepa-
rated from  our  children,  we  desire  to  go  to  Heaven
with  them.  You  can  judge,"  they  say,  "  how  much
we  approve  your  talk,  seeing  we  willingly  listen  to
it,  without  contradiction,  and  permit  you  to  baptize
our  children."  I  must  not  forget  to  express  on  this
occasion  the  satisfaction  which  Louys  de  saincte  Foy
gives  us ;  he  certainly  performs  his  duties  as  a  Chris-
tian as  much  to  our  edification  and  pleasure  as  for-
merly he  failed  therein.  In  this  month  of  Septem-
ber he  had  a  desire  to  return  to  our  house  at  Kebec
for  the  winter,  in  order  to  resume  quietly  [20]  the
good  instructions  he  had  had  formerly  from  our  Fa-
thers in  France,  and  to  devote  himself  again  to  the
practice  of  virtue  and  Christian  piety.  We  strongly
approved  this  design,  the  more  so  as  he  could  have
taken  with  him  some  young  relative  who  might  have
been  instructed  and  baptized  there ;  but  as  some  diffi-
culty came  in  the  way  of  his  resolution,  he  concluded
that  he  would  pass  a  good  part  of  the  Winter^with
us.  This  he  has  done  with  much  satisfaction  and
profit,  both  to  himself  and  to  us ;  for  he  has  resumed
attendance  upon  the  Sacraments,  and  the  habit  of


32  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.10

veil  mefmement  qu'il  euft  mene  auec  luy  quelque
ieune  homme  de  fes  parens,  qui  euft  pu  eftre  inftruit
&  baptif 6  la  bas :  mais  quelque  difficult^  ayant  tra-
uerfe"  cefte  refolution,  il  fe  delibera  de  pafler  vne
bonne  partie  de  l'Hyuer  auec  nous,  ce  qu'il  a  fait
auec  beaucoup  de  contentement  &  de  profit,  tat  de
fon  cofte"  que  du  noftre;  car  il  s'eft  remis  dans  lahan-
tife  des  Sacremens,  &  dans  l'vfage  de  la  priere.  A
Noel  il  fit  vne  fort  bonne  Confeffion  generale  depuis
fon  Baptefme:  d'autre  part  en  nos  Catechifmes  &  in-
ftructions  que  nous  faifons  aux  Sauuages  il  nous  fer-
uoit  de  Truchement,  &  nous  a  traduit  plufieurs  chofes
en  langue  Huronne,  oil  nous  admirions  la  facility  qu'il
auoit  a  entendre  noftre  langue,  &  a  comprendre  &
expliquer  les  myfteres  les  plus  difificiles.  Bref  il  tef-
moigne  que  veritablement  il  a  la  crainte  de  Dieu.

Pour  conclulion  de  ce  chapitre  nous  efperons  vous
renuoyer  les  Peres  Antoine  Daniel,  &  Ambroife  Da-
uot  auec  vne  bande  de  braues  petits  Hurons,  afin  de
donner  [21]  commencement  au  Seminaire,  duquel  on
peut  efperer  auec  raifon  de  grands  fruits  pour  la  con-
uerflon  de  ces  Peuples.  Que  s'il  y  auoit  a  K6bec  des
Religieufes,  ie  croy  qu'on  vous  pourroit  aufli  enuoyer
de  petites  Seminariftes,  il  y  a  icy  quantite  de  braues
petites  filles,  lefquelles  fi  elles  eftoient  bien  efleuees
ne  cederoient  en  rien  a  noftre  ieunefle  Fran9oife.  Ce
nous  eft  vn  grand  creue-coeur  de  voir  ces  petites  inno-
centes  foiiiller  incontinent  la  purete  de  leur  corps  &
beaute*  de  leur  ame  faute  de  bon  exemple  &  bonne
inftruction ;  ie  ne  doute  nullement  que  la  diuine  Bon-
t6  ne  comble  de  grands  biens,  particulierement  ceux
qu'elle  infpirera  de  contribuer  a  la  fondation  de  ces
Seminaires,  &  a  l'education  de  ces  petites  plantes  de
cefte  Eglife  naifiante.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  33


prayer.  At  Christmas  he  made  a  very  good  general
Confession  for  the  period  since  his  Baptism.  Be-
sides, in  our  Catechizing  and  teaching  of  the  Sav-
ages, he  served  as  Interpreter,  and  has  translated
several  things  into  the  Huron  language  for  us,  where-
in we  admired  the  facility  with  which  he  understood
our  language,  and  comprehended  and  explained  the
most  difficult  mysteries.  In  short,  he  gives  evidence
that  truly  he  has  the  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes.

To  conclude  this  chapter,  we  hope  to  send  you  Fa-
thers Antoine  Daniel  and  Ambroise  Davot  with  a
band  of  honest  little  Hurons,  to  make  [21]  a  begin-
ning for  the  Seminary,  from  which  we  can  reasonably
expect  much  fruit  in  the  conversion  of  these  Peoples.
If  there  were  Nuns  at  Kebec,  I  believe  we  might  be
able  to  send  also  girls  for  a  Seminary.  There  are
here  a  number  of  fine  little  girls,  who,  if  they  were
well  brought  up,  would  not  yield  in  any  respect  to
our  young  French  girls.  It  makes  our  hearts  ache
to  see  these  innocent  young  girls  so  soon  defile  their
purity  of  body  and  beauty  of  soul,  for  lack  of  a  good
example  and  good  instruction.  I  doubt  not  at  all
that  the  divine  Goodness  will  crown  with  great  bless-
ings those  in  particular  whom  he  inspires  to  con-
tribute to  the  foundation  of  these  Seminaries,  and  to
the  education  of  these  young  plants  of  this  infant
Church.


34  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES [Vol.10


CHAPITRE  II.

CONTENANT SELON L/ORDRE DES TEMPS LES AU-

TRES CHOSES REMARQUABLES ADUENUES

PENDANT CESTE ANNEE.

LA  premiere  chofe  eft  la  fechereffe  de  l'Efte*  paffe
laquelle  a  efte  fort  vniuerfelle  [22]  en  tons  ces
Pays,  autant  que  i'ay  pen  appredre  tant  des
lettres  de  Kebec,  comme  de  diners  Sauuages  reuenans
des  traittes  loingtaines,  tout  eftoit  fi  fee  &  fi  aride
qu'a  la  moindre  etincelle  de  feu  les  forefts  &  les  cam-
pagnes  eftoient  incontinent  embrafees:  d'ou  arriua
que  plufieurs  Sauuages  allans  par  pays,  &  n'eftans
pas  fur  leur  garde  eurent  leurs  Cabanes  &  viures
bruflez,  comme  auffi  deux  de  nos  hommes.  Mais
pour  ne  parler  que  du  Pays  des  Hurons,  la  fechereffe
y  fut  tres-grande,  car  depuis  Pafques  iufques  a  la
my-Iuin  il  ne  pleut  point,  ou  fort  peu ;  rien  ne  pro-
fitoit,  tout  deperiffoit,  de  forte  qu'on  apprehendoit
vne  grand  famine,  &  a  bon  droit ;  car  tout  le  terroir
des  Hurons  &  des  lieux  circonuoifins  eftans  tout  fa-
blonneux,  s'il  eft  trois  iours  fans  eftre  arroufe  des
pluyes  du  Ciel,  tout  commence  a  faner  &  a.  baiffer  la
tefte.  Dans  ces  apprehenfions  tout  le  Pays  eftoit  en
alarme  de  la  famine,  veu  mefmement  que  le  Prin-
temps  paffe"  trois  villages  auoiet  efte  bruflez,  qui  fans
cet  accident  euff ent  pu  feruir  dans  la  neceffite  de  gre-
niers  a  tout  le  Pays.  Tous  crioient  a  l'ayde,  &  im-
ploroient  a  leur  ordinaire  le  fecours  des  Sorciers  ou


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  35


CHAPTER  II.

CONTAINING IN THE ORDER OF TIME THE OTHER

REMARKABLE THINGS THAT HAPPENED

DURING THIS YEAR.

FIRST,  I  notice  the  dryness  of  the  past  Summer,
which  has  been  very  general  [22]  throughout
these  Regions,  so  far  as  I  can  learn  from  Kebec
letters,  and  from  Savages  returning  from  distant
trading  expeditions;  everything  was  so  dry  and  so
arid  that  at  the  least  spark  of  fire  the  forests  and
fields  were  at  once  in  a  blaze.  Thus  it  happened
that  many  Savages,  going  about  the  country  and  not
being  on  their  guard,  had  their  Cabins  and  provisions
burned,  as  did  also  two  of  our  men.  But  to  speak
only  of  the  Huron  Country, —  the  drought  was  very
great,  for  from  Easter  until  the  middle  of  June  there
was  no  rain  at  all,  or  very  little.  Nothing  was  grow-
ing, everything  was  dying,  so  that  we  apprehended
a  serious  famine,  and  rightly;  for,  the  soil  of  the
Huron  country  and  adjacent  regions  being  sandy,  if
three  days  pass  without  its  being  watered  with  rain
from  Heaven,  everything  begins  to  fade  and  hang
its  head.  Filled  with  these  apprehensions,  the  whole
Country  was  dreading  a  famine,  especially  as  last
Spring  three  villages  had  been  burned  which,  but
for  this  accident,  might  have  served  in  case  of  neces-
sity as  granaries  to  the  whole  Country.  All  were
crying  for  help,  and  imploring,  according  to  their
custom,  the  help  of  the Sorcerers,  or  Arendiowane,


36  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

ArcndioXanc,  qui  fe  font  icy  adorer,  [23]  promettans
qu'ils  deftourneroit  les  malheurs  dont  le  Ciel  les  me-
nace. Ces  abufeurs  firent  ioiier  tous  les  refforts  que
les  fonges,  &  leur  ceruelle  creufe  leur  peut  fuggerer,
afm  de  faire  pleuuoir,  mais  en  vain,  le  Ciel  eftoit
d'airain  a  leurs  fottifes.  II  y  eut  vn  de  ces  Sorciers
nomine  Tcliorenliaegnon  plus  fameux  que  les  autres,
qui  promift  merueilles,  pourueu  que  tout  le  Pays  luy
fift  vn  prefent  de  la  valeur  de  dix  haches,  fans  con-
ter  vne  infinite  de  feflins :  mais  ces  efforts  f urent  en
vain,  il  auoit  beau  fonger,  feitiner  &  danfer,  il  n'en
tomboit  pas  vne  goutte  d'eau,  de  forte  qu'il  cofeffoit
qu'il  n'en  pouuoit  venir  a  bout,  &  affeuroit  que  les
bleds  ne  meuriroient  point ;  mais  le  mal  eftoit  pour
nous,  ou  plutolt  le  bon-heur,  qu'il  difoit  qu'il  eftoit
empefche  de  faire  pleuuoir  par  vne  Croix  qui  eft  vis
a  vis  de  noftre  porte,  &  que  la  maifon  des  Francois
eftoit  vne  maifon  de  demons,  ou  de  gens  mefaifans
qui  eftoiet  venus  en  leur  Pays  afin  de  les  faire  mou-
rir.  Quelques-vns  encheriffans  la  deffus  difoient  que
parauanture  nous  auions  des  reffentimens  de  la  mort
d'Eftienne  Brufle,  &  que  nous  voulions  tirer  ven-
geance de  tout  le  Pays  pour  la  mort  d'vne  feule  per-
fonne.  [24]  D'autres  adioufloient  que  les  Algonquins
leur  auoient  dit  que  les  Francois  ne  venoient  icy  que
pour  les  faire  mourir,  &  que  d'eux  eftoit  prouenue  la
contagion  de  l'annee  paffee.  En  fuite  de  ces  difcours
on  nous  difoit  que  nous  abatiffions  la  Croix,  &  que  fi
les  bleds  ne  meuriffoient  pas,  on  nous  pourroit  bien
affommer  ainfi  comme  on  fait  icy  les  Sorciers,  &
autres  gens  pernicieux.  Quelques-vns,  a  noftre  grand
regret  &  creue-cceur,  difoient  qu'ils  abbattroient  la
Croix,  &  vinrent  iufques  a  ce  poinct,  que  des  ieunes
gens  en  ayants  fait  vne  autre,  &  l'ayans  plantee  fur


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib36  37

who  are  here  held  in  reverence,  [23]  because  they
promise  to  turn  aside  the  misfortunes  with  which
Heaven  threatens  them.  These  deceivers  played  all
the  tricks  that  dreams  and  their  own  empty  heads
could  suggest  to  them,  in  order  to  bring  rain,  but  in
vain,  the  Heavens  were  as  brass  to  their  foolishness.
There  was  one  of  these  Sorcerers  named  Tehorenhaeg-
non,  more  famous  than  the  others,  who  promised
marvels,  provided  the  whole  Country  made  him  a
present  of  the  value  of  ten  hatchets,  not  to  speak  of
a  multitude  of  feasts ;  but  these  efforts  were  in  vain, —
dreaming,  feasting,  dancing,  were  all  to  no  purpose,
there  fell  not  a  drop  of  water ;  so  that  he  had  to  con-
fess that  he  could  not  succeed,  and  he  declared  that
the  crops  would  not  ripen;  but  unfortunately,  or
rather  fortunately  for  us,  he  said  that  he  was  hin-
dered from  making  it  rain  by  a  Cross  which  is  before
our  door,  and  that  the  house  of  the  French  was  a
house  of  demons,  or  of  ill-disposed  people  who  had
come  into  their  Country  in  order  to  make  them  die.
Some  thereupon,  trying  to  outdo  him,  said  perhaps
we  cherished  resentment  for  the  death  of  Estienne
Brusle  and  that  we  wished  to  draw  down  vengeance
upon  the  whole  Country  for  the  death  of  a  single  per-
son. [24]  Others  added  that  the  Algonquins  had  told
them  that  the  French  came  here  only  to  compass
their  death,  and  that  from  them  had  come  the  con-
tagion of  last  year.  In  consequence  of  these  state-
ments we  were  told  that  we  must  take  down  our
Cross;  and  that,  if  the  crops  should  not  mature,  they
might  beat  us  to  death  as  they  do  the  Sorcerers  and
other  pernicious  people  here.  Some,  to  our  great
regret  and  sorrow,  said  that  they  would  pull  down
the  Cross ;  and  it  even  went  so  far  that  some  young


38  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES  [Vol.10

le  faifte  d'vne  Cabane,  fe  mirent  a,  tirer  a  l'encontre,
comme  au  blanc,  auec  leurs  arcs  &  leurs  fleches;  mais
noftre  Seigneur  ne  permifl  pas  qu'ils  la  frappaffent
d'vn  feul  coup.  D'autres  eftoient  d'autant  plus  me-
dians qu'ils  eftoient  defia  mieux  informez  de  la  co-
gnoiffance  d'vn  Dieu  Createur  &  Gouuerneur  de  toutes
chofes,  car  ils  accufoient  fa  Bonte  &  Prouidence  auec
d'horribles  blafphemes.  II  euft  fallu  eflre  de  bronze
pour  n'eftre  pas  irrite  de  ces  infolences.  Ce  qui  nous
touchoit  dauantage  eftoit  la  mifere  de  ce  pauure
Peuple,  fon  aueuglement,  &  fur  tout  l'iniure  qu'on
faifoit  [25]  a  Dieu  le  quittant  pour  des  Sorciers:  car
pour  la  mort  ie  croy  que  tous  euffent  efte  tres  aifes
de  la  fubir  pour  la  defenfe  de  la  Croix.  Nous  aff em-
blafmes  done  en  noftre  Cabane  les  hommes  &  les
femmes  de  noftre  village,  attendu  particulierement
qu'eux  feuls  n'auoient  point  eu  recours  aux  Sorciers,
ains  nous  demandoiet  continuellement  que  nous
fifflons  pleuuoir.  Ils  ont  cefte  penfee  que  rien  ne
nous  eft  impoffible :  Ie  leur  dis  que  ny  nous,  ny  au-
cun  homme  ne  difpofoit  de  la  pluye,  ou  du  beau
temps ;  que  celuy  qui  a  fait  le  Ciel  &  la  terre  en  eftoit
feul  le  maiftre,  &  la  diftribuoit  felon  fon  bon  plaifir ;
que  e'eftoit  a.  luy  a  qui  il  falloit  auoir  recours;  que  la
Croix  que  nous  auions  plantee  n'empefchoit  point  la
pluye,  veu  que  depuis  que  nous  1' auions  erigee  il
auoit  pleu  &  tonne  par  plufieurs  f ois ;  mais  que  para-
uanture  Dieu  eftoit  fafche  de  ce  qu'ils  en  parloient
mal,  &  de  ce  qu'ils  recouroient  a.  de  mefchans  Aren-
dioXanc,  lef quels  ou  n'auoient  point  de  pouuoir,  ou
bien  peut-eftre  caufoient  eux-mefmes  les  fechereffes
par  les  hantifes  &  pacts  qu'ils  auoient  auec  le  diable;
&  qu'au  refte  tout  ce  qu'ils  en  faifoient  n'eftoit  que
pour  auoir  des  prefens;  que  s'ils  y  pouuoient  [26]


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  39

people,  having  made  another  and  having  placed  it
on  the  ridge  of  a  Cabin,  began  to  shoot  at  it  as  at  a
target  with  their  bows  and  arrows,  but  our  Lord  did
not  permit  them  to  hit  it  even  once.  Others  were
much  more  wicked,  since  they  were  more  fully  ac-
quainted with  the  knowledge  of  the  one  God,  Creator
and  Governor  of  all  things,  for  they  accused  his  Good-
ness and  Providence  with  horrid  blasphemies.  One
would  have  to  be  of  bronze  not  to  be  irritated  by
such  insolence.  What  touched  us  most  keenly  was
the  misery  of  these  poor  People,  their  blindness,
and  above  all  the  offense  they  committed  [25]  against
God  by  forsaking  him  for  the  Sorcerers.  As  to  death,
I  believe  that  all  of  us  would  have  been  very  glad  to
submit  to  it  for  the  defense  of  the  Cross.  We  there-
fore assembled  in  our  Cabin  the  men  and  women  of
our  village,  especially  because  they  alone  had  not
resorted  to  the  Sorcerers,  but  had  always  asked
us  to  make  it  rain.  They  believe  that  nothing  is  im-
possible for  us.  I  told  them  that  neither  we  nor  any
man  could  bring  rain  or  fine  weather ;  that  he  who
made  Heaven  and  earth  alone  was  master  of  them,  and
distributed  them  according  to  his  good  pleasure ;  that
recourse  must  be  had  only  to  him ;  that  the  Cross  we
had  planted  had  not  hindered  the  rain,  as  it  had
often  rained  and  thundered  since  we  had  erected  it;
but  that  perhaps  God  was  angry  because  they  had
spoken  ill  of  him  and  had  had  recourse  to  wicked
Arendiowanc,  who  either  had  no  power,  or,  indeed,
perhaps  had  themselves  caused  the  drought  by  their
intercourse  and  pacts  with  the  devil ;  that,  besides,
everything  they  did  was  only  to  get  presents,  and
that,  if  they  could  do  [26]  anything,  they  should
make  rain. Consequently,  if  they  would  obtain  what


40  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol. 10

quelque  chofe,  qu'ils  fiffent  doc  plouuoir.  Partant
que  s'ils  vouloient  obtenir  ce  qu'ils  defiroient,  ie  leur
dis  qu'ils  s'adrefTaffent  a  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait,  &  qui
eft  feul  Auteur  de  tous  biens,  duquel  nous  leur  auions
tant  parle,  &  que  nous  leur  enfeignerions  la  facon  de
le  prier.  Cefte  Nation  eft  fort  docile,  &  fous  la  con-
sideration des  biens  temporels  vous  les  nechiffez  ou
vous  voulez.  lis  me  refpondirent  tous,  qu'ils  n'ad-
iouftoient  point  foy  a  leurs  deuins,  &  que  c'eftoient
des  abufeurs,  qu'ils  ne  vouloient  point  d'autre  Dieu
que  celuy  que  nous  leur  enfeignions,  &  qu'ils  feroient
ce  que  nous  leur  dirions.  Ie  leur  dis  done  qu'ils  de-
uoient  detefter  leurs  pechez,  &  fe  refoudre  a  bon
efcient  a  feruir  ce  Dieu  que  nous  leur  annoncions,  &
que  d'orefnauant  nous  ferions  tous  les  iours  vne  Pro-
ceffion  pour  implorer  fon  ayde,  que  e'eftoit  ainfi  que
faifoient  tous  les  Chreftiens;  qu'ils  fuffent  conftans
&  perfeuerans,  ne'perdant  pas  courage  s'ils  n'eftoient
incontinent  exaucez;  nous  adiouftafmes  a  cela  vn
vceu  de  neuf  Meffes  en  l'honneur  du  glorieux  Efpoux
de  noftre  Dame  Protecteur  des  Hurons ;  nous  expo-
fafmes  auffi  le  S.  Sacremet  a  l'occauon  de  fa  Fefte
qui  arriua  en  ce  temps-la.

[27]  Or  il  auint  iuftement  que  la  neufuaine  eftat
accomplie,  qui  fut  le  treiziefme  Iuin,  nous  ne  peufmes
paracheuer  la  Proceffion  fans  pluye,  qui  fuiuit  fort
abondante,  &  dura  a  diuerfes  reprifes  l'efpace  de  plus
d'vn  mois  auec  vn  grand  amandement  &  accroiffement
des  fruicts  de  la  terre,  &  d'autant  que,  comme  i'ay
dit,  ces  terres  fablonneufes  demanderoient  quafi  des
pluyes  de  deux  iours  l'vn,  vne  autre  fechereffe  eftant
furuenue  depuis  la  my-Iuillet  iufques  a  la  fin  du  mois,
nous  entreprifmes  vne  autre  neufuaine  en  l'honneur
de  noftre B.  Pere  S.  Ignace, par  les  prieres  duquel


1636]  LE  J EUNE'S  RELATION,  ib36  41

they  desired,  I  urged  them  to  address  him  who  made
everything,  and  who  alone  is  the  Author  of  all  bless-
ings, of  whom  we  had  so  often  spoken  to  them,  and
to  whom  we  would  teach  them  to  pray.  This  Na-
tion is  very  docile,  and  when  influenced  by  temporal
considerations  it  can  be  bent  as  one  pleases.  They
all  replied  that  they  put  no  faith  in  their  soothsay-
ers, and  that  they  were  deceivers :  that  they  wished
no  other  God  than  him  whom  we  taught  to  them,
and  that  they  would  do  what  we  told  them.  I  then
told  them  that  they  must  hate  their  sins,  and  resolve
in  earnest  to  serve  that  God  whom  we  announced  to
them ;  that  henceforth  we  would  every  day  make  a
Procession  to  implore  his  help,  that  all  Christians
did  this ;  that  they  should  be  constant  and  persever-
ing, not  losing  courage  if  they  were  not  immediately
heard.  We  added  to  this  a  vow  of  nine  Masses  in
honor  of  the  glorious  Spouse  of  our  Lady,  the  Pro-
tector of  the  Hurons.  We  exposed  also  the  Blessed
Sacrament  on  the  occasion  of  its  Feast,  which  hap-
pened at  that  time.

[27]  Now  it  happened  that,  exactly  as  the  novena
was  completed,  which  was  on  the  thirteenth  of  June,
we  could  not  finish  the  Procession  on  account  of  the
rain,  which  followed  very  abundantly  and  lasted,
with  several  intervals,  the  space  of  a  month,  with  a
great  improvement  and  growth  of  the  fruits  of  the
earth;  and  because,  as  I  have  said,  these  sandy  soils
need  rain  almost  every  other  day,  another  drought
having  occurred  from  the  middle  of  July  until  the
last  of  the  month,  we  undertook  another  novena  in
honor  of  our  Blessed  Father  St.  Ignatius,  through
whose  prayers  we  had,  from  the  day  after  this  nove-
na began  and  since,  such  an  abundance  of  rain  that


42  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

nous  eufmes  des  le  lendemain  de  la  neuf uaine  encom-
mencee,  &  du  depuis,  telle  abondance  de  pluyes
qu'elles  firent  parfaictement  efpier  les  bleds,  &  les
amenerent  a  maturite,  de  forte  qu'il  y  a  eu  cefte  an-
nee  autant  de  bled  que  de  long  temps.

Or  ces  pluyes  ont  fait  deux  biens;  l'vn  en  ce
qu'elles  ont  accreu  les  fruicts  de  la  terre,  &  l'autre  en
ce  qu'elles  ont  etouffe  toutes  les  mauuaifes  opinions
&  volontez  conceues  contre  Dieu,  contre  la  Croix,  &
contre  nous ;  car  tous  les  Sauuages  de  noftre  cognoif-
fance,  &  notamment  de  noftre  village,  font  venus  ex-
preffement  nous  trouuer  [28]  pour  nous  dire  qu'en
effet  Dieu  eftoit  bon,  &  que  nous  eftions  auffi  bons,
&  qu'a  l'auenir  ils  vouloient  feruir  Dieu,  adiouftant
mille  pouilles  a  l'encontre  de  leurs  Arendiottane,  ou
deuins.  A  Dieu  foit  pour  iamais  la  gloire  de  tout ;
il  permet  la  fechereffe  des  terres,  pour  arroufer  les
cceurs  de  fes  benedictions.

L'annee  1628.  que  les  Anglois  defirent  [defirent]  la
flotte  de  la  Compagnie  de  la  Nouuelle  France,  dont
la  perte  a  efte  la  damnation  de  plufieurs  Canadois,  &
le  retardement  de  la  conuerfion  de  quelques  autres,
come  il  eft  a  croire,  il  m'arriua  en  ce  pays  vne  hiftoire
quafi  pareille  a  la  precedente,  laquelle  a  raiso  de  la
conformite  ie  penfe  eftre  bo  de  raconter  icy.  La  fe-
chereffe eftoit  extraordinaire  par  tout,  mais  fmguliere-
ment  en  noftre  village,  &  aux  enuirons.  Cettes  [cer-
tes]  ie  m'eftonnois  de  voir  quelquesfois  l'air  tout
charge  de  nuees  ailleurs,  &  ouyr  bruire  les  tonnerres
&  au  contraire  en  nos  quartiers  le  Ciel  y  eftre  tres
pur,  tres  ferain,  &  tres  ardent.  II  fembloit  mefme
que  les  nuees  fe  diuifoient  a  l'abord  de  noftre  contr6e ;
Ce  mefme  fuppoft  du  diable,  que  i'ay  nomme  cy-de-
uant Tchore?ihaegnon, eftant  prie de faire plouuoir,


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  43


it  caused  the  corn  to  form  perfect  ears,  and  ripened
them ;  so  that  there  was  this  year  as  much  corn  as
there  has  been  for  a  long  time.

Now  these  rains  have  produced  two  good  results :
one  in  that  they  have  increased  the  fruits  of  the
earth ;  the  other  that  they  stifled  those  false  opinions
and  notions  conceived  against  God,  against  the  Cross,
and  against  ourselves.  For  all  the  Savages  that
knew  us,  and  especially  those  of  our  village,  came
expressly  to  see  us,  [28]  to  tell  us  that  God  was  in
truth  good,  and  that  we  also  were  good ;  and  that  in
the  future  they  would  serve  God,  adding  a  thousand
abusive  words  in  reference  to  all  their  Arendiozvane,
or  soothsayers.  To  God  be  forever  the  glory  of  the
whole;  he  permits  the  drought  of  the  soil,  to  bedew
all  hearts  with  his  blessings.

In  the  year  1628,  when  the  English  defeated  the
fleet  of  the  Company  of  New  France,2 — whose  loss
was  the  damnation  of  many  Canadians  and  the  post-
ponement of  the  conversion  of  many  others,  as  may
be  believed, — there  happened  to  me  in  this  country
an  incident  almost  the  same  as  the  preceding,  which,
by  reason  of  its  likeness  to  it,  seems  to  me  worth  re-
lating here.  The  drought  was  very  great  every-
where, but  particularly  so  in  our  village  and  its
neighborhood.  I  was  indeed  astonished,  sometimes,
to  see  the  air  heavily  laden  with  clouds  elsewhere,
and  to  hear  the  thunders  roaring ;  while  in  our  neigh-
borhood, on  the  contrary,  the  Sky  was  clear,  very
bright  and  very  hot.  It  seemed  even  that  the  clouds
separated  as  they  approached  our  region.  That
same  tool  of  the  devil  that  I  have  mentioned  before,
Tehorcnhacgnon,  having  been  entreated  to  make  rain,
replied  that  he  could  not  [29]  make  it;  and  that  the


44  LES  EEL  A  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  10

refpondit  qu'il  ne  le  potmoit  [29]  pas  faire,  &  que  le
tonnerre  qu'ils  feignent  eflre  vn  oyfeau,  auoir  peur  de
la  Croix  qui  eftoit  deuant  la  maifon  des  Francois,  &
que  cefte  couleur  rouge  dont  elle  eftoit  peinte,  eftoit
comme  vn  feu  ardent  &  flamboyant  qui  diuifoit  les
nuees  en  deux,  quand  elles  venoient  a  paffer  par
deffus.

Les  Capitaines  du  village  ayant  entendu  ces  nou-
uelles  me  firent  appeller,  &  me  dirent;  Mon  nepueu,
voila  ce  que  dit  vn  tel,  que  refponds-tu  a  cela?  nous
fommes  perdus,  car  les  bleds  ne  meuriront  point.
Si  au  moins  nous  mourrions  par  la  main  &  les  armes
de  nos  ennemis,  qui  font  prefts  de  venir  fondre  fur
nous,  encor  a  la  bonne  heure,  nous  ne  languirions
pas,  mais  fi  eftans  efchapez  de  leur  fureur,  nous  tom-
bons  das  la  famine,  c'eft  aller  de  mal  en  pis,  qu'en
penfe-tu?  tu  ne  voudrois  pas  eftre  cause  de  noftre
mort?  &  puis  il  t'importe  autant  qu'a  nous:  nous  fe-
rions  d'auis  que  tu  abbatiffe  celte  Croix,  &  que  tu  la
cachaffe  pour  vn  temps  ou  dedans  ta  Cabane,  ou
bien  dans  le  lac,  afin  que  le  tonnerre  &  les  nuees  ne
la  voyent  plus,  &  qu'ils  n'en  ayent  plus  de  peur,  &
puis  apres  la  moiffon  tu  la  replanteras.  A  cela  ie
refpondis,  Pour  moy  iamais  ie  n'abbattray,  ny  ne  ca-
cheray  la  Croix  [30]  ou  eft  mort  celuy  qui  eft  la  caufe
de  tous  nos  biens.  Pour  vous  fi  vous  la  voulez  ab-
batre,  auifez-y  ie  ne  pourray  pas  vous  en  empefcher,
mais  prenez  garde  qu'en  l'abbatant  vous  n'irritiez
Dieu,  &  que  vous  n'accroiffiez  voftre  mifere.  Croyez-
vous  a  cet  abufer;  il  ne  fcait  ce  qu'il  dit,  il  y  a  plus
d'vn  an  que  cefte  Croix  a  efte"  plantee  voyez  combien
de  fois  il  a  pleu  icy  du  depuis:  c'eft  vn  ignorant  de
dire  que  le  tonnerre  craint;  ce  n'eft  pas  vn  animal,
mais  vne  exhalaifon  feiche  &  embrafee,  qui  eitant


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  45

thunder,  which  they  pretend  is  a  bird,  was  afraid  of
the  Cross  that  was  in  front  of  the  Frenchmen's  house,
and  that  the  red  color  with  which  it  was  painted  was
like  a  fire  burning  and  flaming,  which  divided  the
clouds  in  two  when  they  passed  above  it.3

The  Captains  of  the  village,  having  heard  these
stories,  sent  for  me  and  said,  "  My  nephew,  here  is
what  so-and-so  says;  what  dost  thou  answer  to  it?
We  are  ruined,  for  the  corn  will  not  ripen.  If  at
least  we  should  die  by  the  hands  and  arms  of  our
enemies  who  are  ready  to  burst  upon  us,  well  and
good, —  we  should  not  at  any  rate  pine  away;  but  if,
having  escaped  from  their  fury,  we  are  exposed  to
famine,  that  would  be  to  go  from  bad  to  worse.
What  dost  thou  think  of  it?  Thou  dost  not  wish  to
be  the  cause  of  our  death?  besides,  it  is  of  as  much
importance  to  thee  as  to  us.  We  are  of  the  opinion
that  thou  shouldst  take  down  that  Cross,  and  hide  it
awhile  in  thy  Cabin,  or  even  in  the  lake,  so  that  the
thunder  and  the  clouds  may  not  see  it,  and  no  longer
fear  it ;  and  then  after  the  harvest  thou  mayest  set  it
up  again."  To  this  I  answered,  "  As  for  me,  I  shall
never  take  down  nor  hide  the  Cross  [30]  where
died  he  who  is  the  cause  of  all  our  blessings.  For  your-
selves, if  you  wish  to  take  it  down,  consider  the  mat-
ter well;  I  shall  not  be  able  to  hinder  you,  but  take
care  that,  in  taking  it  down,  you  do  not  make  God
angry  and  increase  your  own  misery.  Do  you  be-
lieve in  this  deceiver?  He  does  not  know  what  he
says.  This  Cross  has  been  set  up  for  more  than  a
year,  and  you  know  how  many  times  there  has  been
rain  here  since.  Only  an  ignorant  person  would  say
that  the  thunder  is  afraid;  it  is  not  an  animal,  it  is  a
dry  and  burning  exhalation which, being  shut  in,


46  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

enf  ermee  court  ga  &  la.  pour  f  ortir ;  &  puis  que  craint
le  tonnerre?  cefte  couleur  rouge  de  la  Croix?  oftez
done  auffi  vous  mefmes  toutes  ces  figures  &  peintures
rouges  qui  font  fur  vos  Cabanes.  A  cela  ils  ne  fca-
uoient  que  me  repartir,  ils  s'entre-regardoient,  &  di-
foient,  il  dit  vray,  il  fe  faut  bien  garder  de  toucher  a
cefte  Croix;  &  cependant,  adiouftoient-ils,  Tchoren-
haegnon  dit  cela.  II  me  vint  vne  penfee,  Puis,  dine,
que  Tchorcnhaegnon  dit  que  le  tonnerre  apprehende
cefte  couleur  de  la  Croix,  fi  vous  voulez  nous  la  pein-
drons  d'vne  autre  couleur,  de  blanc  ou  de  noir,  ou  en
quelqu'autre  facon ;  &  fi  incontinent  apres  il  vient  a
plouuoir,  vous  croirez  que  Tehorenhaegno  a  [31]  dit
vray,  finon  que  e'eft  vn  impofteur.  C'eft  fort  bien
auife,  dirent-ils,  ainfi  le  faut-il  faire.  On  peint  done
la  Croix  de  blanc,  mais  vn,  deux,  trois  &  quatre  iours
f e  paffent  qu'il  ne  plouuoit  non  plus  qu'auparauant ;
&  cependant  tous  ceux  qui  voyoient  la  Croix  fe  faf-
choient  contre  ce  Sorcier,  qui  auoit  eft6  la  caufe  de  la
defigurer  de  la  forte :  Sur  cela  i'allay  trouuer  les  An-
ciens;  Et  bien  a-il  pleu  dauantage  qu'auparauant?
Eftes  vous  contens?  Ouy,  dirent-ils,  nous  voyos  bien
que  Tehorenhaegnon  n'eft  qu'vn  abufeur  :  mais  dis
nous  toy,  qu'eft-ce  que  nous  ferons,  &  nous  t'obey-
rons.  Alors  noftre  Seigneur  m'infpira  de  les  inftruire
du  myftere  de  la  Croix,  &  de  l'honneur  que  par  tout
on  luy  rendoit,  &  de  leur  dire  que  i'eftois  d'auis
qu'ils  vinffent  tous  en  corps,  hommes  &  femmes  ado-
rer la  Croix,  pour  reparer  l'honneur  d'icelle:  &  d'au-
tant  qu'il  s'agiffoit  de  faire  croiftre  les  bleds,  qu'ils
apportaffent  chacun  vn  plat  de  bled  pour  en  faire
offrande  a.  noftre  Seigneur,  &  que  ce  qu'ils  donne-
roient  fuft  puis  apres  diftribue  aux  pauures  du  vil-
lage. L'heure  eft  donee  aulendemain;  Ils  ne  l'at-


*t>


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  47

seeks  to  get  out  this  way  and  that.  And  then  what
does  the  thunder  fear?  This  red  color  of  the  Cross?
Take  away  then,  yourselves,  all  those  red  figures  and
paintings  that  are  on  your  Cabins."  To  this  they
did  not  know  what  to  reply;  they  looked  at  each
other  and  said,  "It  is  true,  we  must  not  touch  this
Cross;  and  yet,"  added  they,  "  Tehorenhaegnon  says
so."  A  thought  came  to  me.  "  Since,"  said  I,
' '  Tehorenhaegnon  says  that  the  thunder  is  afraid  of
this  color  of  the  Cross,  if  you  like  we  will  paint  it
another  color,  white,  or  black,  or  any  other;  and  if,
immediately  after,  it  begins  to  rain,  you  will  be  sure
TeJiorenhaegnon  has  [31]  told  the  truth;  but  if  not,
that  he  is  an  impostor. "  "  Well  said, ' '  they  replied,
"  we  will  do  that."  The  Cross  was  therefore  painted
white,  but  one,  two,  three,  four  days  passed  without
any  more  rain  than  before ;  and  meanwhile  all  who
saw  the  Cross  became  angry  at  the  Sorcerer  who  had
been  the  cause  of  disfiguring  it  thus.  Thereupon  I
went  to  see  the  Old  Men.  "  Well,  has  it  rained  any
more  than  before?  Are  you  satisfied?"  "Yes,"  said
they,  "  we  see  clearly  enough  that  Tehorenhaegnon  is
only  a  deceiver ;  but  now,  do  thou  tell  us  what  to  do,
and  we  will  obey  thee."  Then  our  Lord  inspired
me  to  instruct  them  in  the  mystery  of  the  Cross,  and
speak  to  them  of  the  honor  that  was  everywhere  ren-
dered to  it ;  and  to  tell  them  that  it  was  my  opinion
that  they  should  all  come  in  a  body,  men  and  wom-
en, to  adore  the  Cross  in  order  to  restore  its  honor ;
and,  inasmuch  as  it  was  a  matter  of  causing  the  crops
to  grow,  they  should  each  bring  a  dish  of  corn  to
make  an  offering  to  our  Lord,  and  that  what  they
gave  should  afterwards  be  distributed  to  the  poor  of
the  village. The  hour  is  appointed  for  the  morrow;


48  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

tendent  pas,  mais  la  preuiennent :  nous  entourons  la
Croix  repeinte  de  fes  premiers  couleurs,  [32]  fur  la-
quelle  i'auois  mis  vn  Crucifix ;  Nous  faif ons  quelque
priere,  puis  i'adoray  &  baifay  la  Croix  pour  leur
monftrer  comme  ils  deuoient  faire,  ils  me  fuiuirent
les  vns  apres  les  autres  apoftrophants  noitre  Sei-
gneur crucifie  par  des  prieres  que  la  Rhetorique  na-
turelle,  &  la  neceffite  du  temps  leur  fuggeroit.  Certes
leur  feruente  fimplicite  me  donnoit  de  la  deuotion;
bref  ils  firent  fi  bien  que  des  la  mefme  iournee  Dieu
leur  donna  de  la  pluye,  &  enfin  vne  tres-heureufe  re-
colte,  auec  vne  tres-grande  admiration  de  la  Puiffance
diuine.

Pour  conclufion  de  ces  deux  hiftoires,  ie  diray  que
ces  Peuples  font  grands  admirateurs,  &  font  eflat  des
perfonnes  qui  ont  quelque  chofe  de  releue  par  deffus
le  commun ;  a  cefle  occafion  ils  les  appellent,  oki  du
mefme  nom  qu'ils  donnent  aux  demos:  Partant  s'il  y
auoit  icy  quelqu'vn  doiie  du  don  de  miracles,  ainfi
qu'eftoient  les  premiers  qui  ont  annonce  l'Euangile
au  monde,  il  conuertiroit  a  mon  aduis  fans  difficulte,
tous  ces  Barbares ;  mais  Dieu  depart  telles  faueurs,
quand,  a  qui,  &  comment  il  luy  plaift,  &  parauanture
veut-il  que  nous  attedions  la  recolte  des  ames  auec
patience  &  perfeuerance.  Auffi  certes  ne  fe  portent-
ils  [33]  encore  a  leur  deuoir  que  par  vn  refpect  tem-
porel,  fur  lequel  on  pourroit  bien  leur  faire  ce  re-
proche  de  l'Euangile;  Amen,  amen  dico  vobis,  quatritis
me,  no?i  quia  vidiftis  figna,  fed  quia  manducajlis  ex  pani-
bus,  &  faturati  cftis.

Nous  auons  eu  cefte  annee  deux  alarmes,  dont  en-
fin,  Dieu  mercy,  il  ne  nous  eft  refte  que  la  peur;  5'a
efte  fur  rapprehenfion  des  ennemis.  La  premiere,
qui  auoit  quelque  apparence,  fut  l'Efte  paffe,  &  dura


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  49

they  do  not  wait  for  it,  they  anticipate  it.  We  sur-
round the  Cross,  painted  anew  in  its  first  colors,  [32]
upon  which  I  had  placed  the  body  of  our  Lord  cruci-
fied; we  recite  some  prayers;  and  then  I  adored  and
kissed  the  Cross,  to  show  them  how  they  ought  to  do
it.  They  imitated  me  one  after  the  other,  apostro-
phizing our  crucified  Savior  in  prayers  which  natural
Rhetoric  and  the  exigency  of  the  time  suggested  to
them.  In  truth,  their  fervent  simplicity  inspired  me
with  devotion ;  briefly,  they  did  so  well  that  on  the
same  day  God  gave  them  rain,  and  in  the  end  a
plentiful  harvest,  as  well  as  a  profound  admiration
for  the  divine  Power.

In  concluding  these  two  accounts,  I  shall  say  that
these  Peoples  admire  and  esteem  highly  those  persons
who  have  anything  that  elevates  them  above  the
crowd.  Such  persons  they  call  oki,  the  same  name
as  they  give  to  demons ;  consequently,  if  there  were
any  one  here  endowed  with  the  gift  of  miracles,  as
were  those  who  first  announced  the  Gospel  to  the
world,  he  would,  in  my  opinion,  convert  all  these
Barbarians  without  difficulty.  But  God  dispenses
such  favors  when,  how,  and  to  whom  he  pleases;
and  perhaps  he  wishes  us  to  wait  for  the  harvest  of
souls  with  patience  and  perseverance.  Besides,  cer-
tainly, they  are  inclined  [33]  as  yet  to  their  duty
only  by  temporal  considerations,  so  that  we  may  well
apply  to  them  the  reproach  of  the  Gospel:  Amen,
amen  dtco  vobis,  qticeritis  me,  non  quia  vidistis  signa,  sed
quia  manducastis  ex  panibus,  et  saturati  estis.

We  have  had  this  year  two  alarms,  which  resulted,
thank  God,  in  nothing  worse  than  the  fear  aroused
by  the  apprehension  of  enemies.  The  first,  for
which  there  were  some  grounds,  occurred  last  Sum-


50  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

tout  le  mois  de  Iuin;  c'eft  vn  des  temps  des  plus
propres  a  femblables  efpouuantes,  d'autant  que  pour
lors  le  Pays  eft  defnue  des  hommes,  qui  vont  en
traitte  qui  d'vn  cofte,  qui  d'vn  autre.  L'autre  a  efte
cet  Hyuer,  &  s'eft  trouuee  faufTe;  en  l'vne  &  en
l'autre  on  la  nous  donnoit  bien  verte  affez  fouuent,
tant  de  iour  que  de  nuict ;  les  f emmes  &  les  enfans
commencoient  a  plier  bagage  fur  le  rapport  des  cri-
eurs ;  ce  font  icy  nos  efpions.  La  f uite  eft  aucune-
ment  tolerable  en  Efte,  car  on  fe  peut  echaper  en
quelque  Ifle,  ou  cacher  dans  l'obfurite  de  quelque
epaiff e  foreft ;  mais  en  Hyuer  quand  les  glaces  fer-
uent  de  pont  pour  aller  fureter  les  Ifles,  &  que  la
cheute  des  fueilles  a  eclaircy  les  forefts,  vous  ne  fcau-
riez  [34]  ou  vous  retirer,  puis  on  defcouure  inconti-
nent les  vestiges  fur  la  neige ;  ioinct  qu'il  fait  bien
froid  en  Hyuer  pour  coucher  long  temps  a  l'enfeigne
de  la  Lune.  II  y  a  quelques  villages  affez  bien  forti-
fiez,  oil  on  pourroit  demeurer,  &  attendre  le  fiege  &
l'affaut,  ceux  qui  peuuent  s'y  retirent,  les  autres  ga-
gnent  au  pied,  ce  qui  eft  le  plus  ordinaire;  car  le
petit  nombre  d'hommes,  le  manquement  d'armes,  le
grand  nombre  d'ennemis,  leur  font  redouter  la  foi-
blefle  de  leurs  forts,  il  n'y  a  que  les  vieilles  gens  qui
pour  ne  pouuoir  aller  attendent  de  pied  quoy  la  mort
dans  leurs  Cabanes.  Voila  ou  nous  en  fommes  d' or-
dinaire. Cet  Hyuer  nous  fufmes  fur  le  poinct  de
fuyr,  mais  oil  cacher  nos  petites  commoditez?  car  les
Hurons  en  font  auffi  frians  que  les  Iroquois.  D'ail-
leurs  neantmoins  ces  efpouuantes  n'ont  pas  efte  inu-
tiles ;  car  outre  les  prieres  &  les  vceux  que  nous  auons
faits  pour  deftourner  les  fleaux;  outre  le  foin  que
chacun  apportoit  pour  fe  difpofer  a  la  mort,  ou  a  l'ef-
clauage, &  outre  que  de  la  nous  prenions  occafion


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  51

mer  and  lasted  the  whole  month  of  June.  It  is  one
of  the  most  fitting  times  for  such  fear,  inasmuch  as
then  the  Country  is  stripped  of  the  men,  who  have
gone  trading,  some  one  way,  some  another.  The
other  was  this  Winter,  and  turned  out  to  be  false ;  in
both  cases  the  alarm  was  quite  often  given  very  un-
expectedly, sometimes  by  day,  sometimes  by  night;
the  women  and  children  began  packing  up  their  bag-
gage on  the  report  of  the  criers,  who  are  our  spies
here.  Flight  is  to  some  extent  tolerable  in  Summer,
for  one  can  escape  to  an  Island  or  hide  in  the  obscu-
rity of  some  dense  forest;  but  in  Winter,  when  ice
serves  as  a  bridge  to  enable  the  enemy  to  search  the
Islands,  and  when  the  fall  of  the  leaves  has  laid  bare
the  forest  recesses,  you  do  not  know  [34]  where  to
hide;  besides,  the  tracks  on  the  snow  are  immedi-
ately discovered ;  and  it  is,  moreover,  extremely  cold
in  Winter  to  sleep  long  at  the  sign  of  the  Moon.
There  are  some  villages  tolerably  well  fortified,
where  one  might  remain  and  await  siege  and  assault ;
those  who  can,  withdraw  there;  the  others  take  to
flight,  which  is  most  commonly  done ;  for  the  small
number  of  men,  the  lack  of  arms,  the  multitude  of
enemies,  cause  them  to  dread  the  weakness  of  their
forts.  Only  a  few  old  people,  who  are  not  able  to  go
away,  quietly  await  death  in  their  Cabins.  That  is
our  usual  condition.  This  Winter,  we  were  on  the
point  of  fleeing ;  but  where  could  we  conceal  our  few
belongings?  for  the  Hurons  are  as  fond  of  them  as
are  the  Iroquois.  In  other  ways,  however,  these  fears
have  not  been  useless,  for  besides  the  prayers  and
vows  we  made  to  turn  aside  the  scourge,  the  pains
each  one  took  to  prepare  himself  for  death  or  slav-
ery, and  the  opportunity  we  had  to  impress  upon  the


52  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

d'inftruire  les  Sauuages  du  fecours  qu'ils  doiuent
attendre  de  Dieu  ;  nous-nous  fommes  rendus  ay-
mables,  recommandables,  &  vtiles  a  tout  le  [35]  Pays,
tant  en  leur  donnant  des  fers  de  fleches,  comme  en
nous  difpofant  de  les  aller  fecourir  dans  leurs  forts
felon  noftre  pouuoir.  En  effect  nous  auions  quatre
de  nos  Francois  munis  de  bonnes  arquebufes,  qui
eftoient  tous  prefts  de  courir  au  premier  village  ou
fe  fust  donne  l'affaut,  &  moy  i'efhois  refolu  de  les
aller  accompagner  pour  les  affifter  fpirituellement,  &
pour  prendre  les  autres  occafions  qui  fe  fuffent  pre-
fentees  d'auancer  la  gloire  de  Dieu.  De  la  ie  vous
laifle  a  penfer  fi  nous  auons  befoin  du  fecours  d'en-
haut,  &  que  ceux  qui  viuent  en  repos  &  en  affeurance,
le  nous  obtiennent  par  leurs  prieres ;  c'eft  ce  que  nous
leur  demandons  humblement.

Les  Hurons  nous  font  demeurez  fort  affectionnez
de  la  promptitude  que  nous  leur  auons  monftree  a
les  affifter.  Nous  leur  auons  dit  auffi  que  d'orefna-
uant  ils  fiffent  leurs  forts  quarrez,  &  tiraffent  leurs
pieux  en  ligne  droicte,  &  qu'au  moyen  de  quatre  pe-
tites  tourelles  aux  quatre  coings,  quatre  Francois
pourroient  facilement  auec  leurs  arquebufes  ou  mouf-
quets  conferuer  &  defendre  tout  vn  village.  Ils  ont
fort  goufte  cet  aduis,  &  ont  defia  commence  a  le  prac-
tiquera  la  Rochelle,  ouil[s]  fouhaittent  [36]  paffionne-
ment  auoir  des  noftres.  Dieu  fe  fert  de  tout  pour
donner  entree  aux  porteurs  de  l'Euangile.

L'Efte  eft  icy  vne  faifon  fort  incommode  pour  in-
ftruire  les  Sauuages ;  les  traittes  &  les  champs  em-
menent  tout  hommes,  femmes  &  enfans,  il  ne  de-
meure  quad  perfonne  dans  les  villages ;  voicy  comme
nous  paflafmes  le  dernier.

En  premier  lieu  nous-nous  recueillifmes  tous  par


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION, i636  53

Savages  the  help  they  might  expect  from  God, — we
were  able  to  win  for  ourselves  the  regard  and  esteem
of  the  People,  and  to  make  ourselves  useful  to  them,
[35]  as  well  by  giving  them  iron  arrow-heads  as  by
arranging  to  assist  them  in  their  forts,  according  to
our  power.  In  fact,  we  had  four  of  our  Frenchmen
furnished  with  good  arquebuses,  who  were  ready  to
hasten  to  the  first  village  where  an  attack  should  be
made;  and  I  had  resolved  to  accompany  them,  to  as-
sist them  in  spiritual  matters,  and  to  take  advantage
of  any  other  occasions  which  might  present  them-
selves to  advance  the  glory  of  God.  From  this  I
leave  you  to  imagine  whether  or  not  we  need  help
from  on  high ;  and  may  those  who  live  in  comfort
and  safety  obtain  it  for  us  by  their  prayers,  which
we  humbly  ask  from  them.

The  Hurons  have  remained  very  friendly  to  us,
on  account  of  the  promptitude  we  showed  in  assist-
ing them.  We  have  told  them  also  that  henceforth
they  should  make  their  forts  square,  and  arrange
their  stakes  in  straight  lines ;  and  that,  by  means  of
four  little  towers  at  the  four  corners,  four  French-
men might  easily  with  their  arquebuses  or  muskets
defend  a  whole  village.  They  are  greatly  delighted
with  this  advice,  and  have  already  begun  to  practice
it  at  la  Rochelle,  where  they  eagerly  desire  [36]  to
have  some  of  our  Fathers.  God  employs  all  means
to  give  an  entrance  to  those  who  bear  the  Gospel.

Summer  here  is  a  very  inconvenient  season  for  in-
structing the  Savages.  Their  trading  expeditions
and  the  farms  take  every  one  away,  men,  women,
and  children  —  almost  no  one  remains  in  the  vil-
lages. I  will  tell  you  how  we  spent  last  Summer.

In  the  first  place,  we  all  came  together  for  the


54  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

les  exercices  fpirituels  a  la  facon  de  noftre  Compa-
gnie.  Nous  en  auons  d'autant  plus  befoin,  que
l'excellence  de  nos  fonctions  requiert  plus  d'vnion
auec  Dieu;  &  que  nous  fommes  contraints  de  viure
continuellement  dans  le  tracas ;  c'eft  ce  qui  nous  fait
fouuent  recognoiftre  qu'il  faut  que  ceux  qui  viennent
icy  y  apportent  vn  bon  fonds  de  vertu,  s'ils  veulet  y
en  cueillir  les  fruicts.  Apres  nos  exercices  nous  fif-
mes  vn  memorial  confus  des  mots  que  nous  auions
remarquez  depuis  noftre  arriuee,  &  puis  nous  efbau-
chafmes  vn  Dictionaire  de  la  langue  des  Hurons,  qui
fera  tres-profitable.  On  y  verra  les  diuerfes  fignifi-
cations,  on  y  recognoiftra  ayfement  la  difference  des
mots  par  enfemble,  qui  ne  confifte  quelquesfois  qu'en
vne  feule  lettre,  ou  mefme  [37]  en  vn  accent.  Finale-
ment  nous-nous  occupafmes  a  reformer,  ou  plutoft  a
ranger  vne  Grammaire.  Ie  crains  qu'il  ne  nous  faille
faire  fouuent  de  femblables  reformes,  car  tous  les
iours  nous  allons  defcourans  de  nouueaux  fecrets  en
ceiie  fcience;  ce  qui  nous  empefche  d'enuoyer  rien  a
imprimer  pour  le  prefent.  Nous  en  fcauons,  graces  a
Dieu,  tantoft  fufnfamment,  tant  pour  entendre  que
pour  eftre  entendus,  mais  non  encor  pour  mettre  au
iour.  C'eft  a  la  verite  vne  chofe  bien  laborieufe  de
vouloir  comprendre  de  tous  poincts  vne  langue  eftran-
gere,  tres-abondante,  &  autant  differente  de  nos
langues  Europeanes  qu'eft  le  Ciel  de  la  terre,  &  ce
fans  maiftre  &  fans  liures.  Ie  n'en  dis  pas  dauan-
tage,  parce  que  i'en  fais  vn  Chapitre  plus  bas.  Nous
y  trauaillons  tous  auec  ferueur ;  c'eft  vne  de  nos  plus
ordinaires  occupations,  il  n'y  en  a  point  qui  ne  iar-
gonne  defia,  &  ne  fe  faffe  entendre,  les  Peres  nou-
uellement  venus  auffi  bien  que  les  anciens;  i'efpere
en  particulier  que  le  P.  Mercier  y  fera  bientoft  mailtre.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  55

spiritual  exercises,  as  is  the  custom  of  our  Society.
We  had  the  more  need  of  these  exercises,  as  the
high  duties  we  are  called  upon  to  perform  need  more
union  with  God,  and  because  we  are  compelled  to
live  in  a  continual  bustle.  For  this  reason  we  often
acknowledge  that  those  who  come  here  should  bring
a  good  reserve  fund  of  virtue,  if  they  wish  here  to
gather  the  fruits  thereof.  After  our  exercises  we
made  a  confused  memorandum  of  the  words  we  had
learned  since  our  arrival,  and  then  we  outlined  a
Dictionary  of  the  Huron  language  which  will  be  very
profitable.  In  it  will  be  seen  the  various  meanings ;
one  will  easily  recognize  in  it,  when  the  words  are
grouped,  their  differences,  which  consist  sometimes
in  only  a  single  letter,  or  even  [37]  in  an  accent.
Finally  we  busied  ourselves  in  revising,  or  rather
in  arranging,  a  Grammar.  I  fear  we  shall  often  have
to  make  similar  revisions ;  for  every  day  we  discover
new  secrets  in  this  science,  which  for  the  present
hinders  us  from  sending  anything  to  be  printed.
We  know  now,  thank  God,  sufficient  to  understand
and  to  be  understood,  but  not  yet  to  publish.  It  is
indeed  an  exceedingly  laborious  task  to  endeavor  to
understand  in  all  points  a  foreign  tongue,  very  abun-
dant, and  as  different  from  our  European  languages
as  Heaven  is  from  earth, —  and  that  without  master
or  books.  I  say  no  more  about  it  here,  as  I  shall
write  a  Chapter  about  it,  further  on.  We  all  work
at  it  diligently ;  it  is  one  of  our  most  common  occu-
pations. There  is  not  one  of  us  who  does  not  al-
ready talk  a  jargon,  and  make  himself  understood,
the  newly-arrived  Fathers  as  well  as  the  others.  I
trust  that  Father  Mercier,  in  particular,  will  soon  be
master  of  it.


56  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

Le  neufiefme  d'Aouft  arriua  de  Kebec  vn  de  nos
homraes,  deux  mois  &  douze  iours  apres  fon  embar-
quement  d'icy,  Dieu  [38]  fcait  auec  quel  contente-
ment  nous  l'ecoutafmes  fur  l'eftat  de  tous  les  Fran-
cois de  Kebec,  &  des  trois  Riuieres,  que  le  bruit  nous
auoit  d^peints  comme  tous  morts  de  la  contagion.
Nous  fufmes  auffi  tres-aifes  d'entendre  l'heureufe  ar-
riuee  des  cinq  vaiffeaux  de  Meffieurs  de  la  Compa-
gnie,  commandez  par  Monfie[u]r  le  General  du  Pleffis
Bochart,  qu'on  nous  faifoit  croire  s'eftre  perdus  dans
les  glaces.  Noftre  ioye  fut  vn  peu  rabatue  par  la
crainte  qu'on  auoit  qu'il  ne  fuft  arriue  quelque  acci-
dent au  Capitaine  Bontan ;  mais  on  nous  a  releuez  de
cefte  apprehenfion.

Le  treiziefme  du  mois  d'Aouft  le  P.  Mercier  arriua,
&  le  P.  Pijart  le  dix-f  ept,  le  P.  Mercier  s'eftant  tres-bien
porte  depuis  la  France,  fut  faifi  d'vne  petite  fieure  vn
iour  ou  deux  auant  fon  arriuee  aux  Hurons,  mais  des
le  lendemain  qu'il  fut  arriue,  il  en  fut  quitte  pour  vne
legere  emotion,  qui  fut  fuiuie  d'vne  parfaite  fante.
C'eft  vne  benediction  du  Ciel,  ce  femble,  que  ce  nous
eft  affez  d'eftre  aux  Hurons  pour  nous  bien  porter.  Au
refte  tous  les  Peres  ont  efte  fort  doucement  conduits,
ils  n'ont  ny  rame,  ny  porte,  finon  leurs  petites  hardes;
mais  plutoft  ont  efte  honorez,  &  portez  [39]  eux-
mefmes  aux  endroits  faf cheux  &  difficiles :  &  partant
qu'aucun  n'apprehende  les  difficultez  qu'il  y  a  a  mon-
ter  icy,  pour  auoir  leu  noftre  Relation  de  l'an  paffe ;
les  commencemens  font  toufiours  difficiles,  &  puis  les
caufes  de  nos  peines  eftoient  extraordinaires ;  &  enfin
ie  croy  que  mes  pechez  qui  demandoient  cela  pour
moy,  redonderent  encor  fur  les  autres ;  mais  plaife  a
Dieu  que  nous  ayons  epuife  le  calice  des  amertumes
iufques  a  la  derniere  goutte  ;  quoy  que  nul  ne  deuroit


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  57

On  the  ninth  of  August,  one  of  our  men  arrived
from  Kebec  two  months  and  twelve  days  after  de-
parting hence.  God  [38]  knows  how  glad  we  were
to  hear  of  the  state  of  all  the  French  at  Kebec  and
the  three  Rivers,  who  report  had  declared  were  all
dead  of  the  plague.  We  were  also  very  glad  to  hear
of  the  happy  arrival  of  five  ships  of  the  Gentlemen
of  the  Company,  commanded  by  Monsieur  the  General
du  Plessis  Bochart,  which  we  had  been  informed  were
lost  in  the  ice.  Our  joy  was  somewhat  lessened  by
the  fear  they  had  that  some  accident  had  befallen
Captain  Bontan ;  but  we  have  been  relieved  of  this
apprehension.

On  the  thirteenth  of  the  month  of  August,  Father
Mercier  arrived,  and  Father  Pijart  on  the  seven-
teenth. Father  Mercier,  who  had  had  good  health
all  the  way  from  France,  was  seized  with  a  slight
fever  a  day  or  two  before  his  arrival  among  the  Hu-
rons ;  but  the  day  after  his  arrival  he  was  free  from
it,  except  for  a  slight  disturbance,  which  was  fol-
lowed by  perfect  health.  It  is  a  blessing  from  Heav-
en, it  seems,  that  as  soon  as  we  are  in  the  Huron
country  we  should  have  good  health.  For  the  rest,
all  the  Fathers  have  been  well  treated  on  the  way.
They  have  neither  paddled,  nor  carried  burdens,  ex-
cept their  little  supply  of  clothing:  but,  on  the  con-
trary, have  been  honored  and  have  been  themselves
carried  [39]  over  troublesome  and  difficult  places.
Consequently  let  no  one  fear  difficulties  in  coming
up  here,  from  having  read  my  Relation  of  last  year.
Beginnings  are  always  hard,  and  then  the  causes  of
our  troubles  were  extraordinary;  and,  moreover,  I
believe  that  my  sins,  which  required  that  I  should
suffer  these  things,  fell  also  upon  the  others;  but,


58  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.10

perdre  courage  quand  les  trauaux  feroient  toufiours
egaux,  noftre  Seigneur  en  a  bien  endure  dauantage
pour  le  falut  des  ames.  Noftre  petit  bagage  nous  a
efte  auffi  apporte  tres-fidelement,  &  affez  bien  confer-
ue;  vous  ne  f9auriez  croire  le  bien  qu'ont  fait  les
pois,  le  pain,  &  le  fagamite  que  vous  diftribuaftes
l'an  paffe  a  nos  Hurons,  &  le  bon  vifage  que  vous
leur  monftrates.  Ce  bon  traictement  vous  a  gagne,
&  nous  auffi,  leurs  cceurs;  nous  n'allons  en  aucun
lieu  qu'on  ne  nous  dife,  que  nos  Freres  de  Kebec
font  tres  courtois  &  tres  liberaux:  Toutes  chofes
nous  difpofent  ces  Peuples  a  receuoir  la  femence  de
l'Euangile,  car  l'affectio  qu'ils  nous  portent  leur  rend
croyable  ce  que  nous  leur  difons.

[40]  Sur  l'Eclypfe  de  Lune  du  vingt-feptiefme
d'Aouft,  nos  Barbares  s'attendoient  a  vne  grande  de-
faite  des  leurs  parce  qu'elle  parut  fur  le  Pays  enne-
my,  qui  eft  a  leur  egard  au  Su-eft ;  car  fi  elle  paroift  en
Orient  c'eft  a  leur  cSpte  que  la  Lune  eft  malade,  ou
qu'elle  a  receu  quelque  defplaifir ;  iufques  a  nous  inui-
ter,  ie  ne  fcay  fi  c'eftoit  en  riant,  de  tirer  contre  le  Ciel,
pour  la  deliurer  du  danger,  nous  affeurans  que  c'eftoit
leur  couftume  d'y  decocher  plufieurs  fleches  a  cet
effect.  II  eft  vray  qu'ils  crient  tous  tant  qu'ils  peu-
uent  en  ces  occafions,  &  font  des  imprecations  a  leurs
ennemis,  difans,  que  telle  &  telle  Nation  periffe.
I'eftois  pour  lors  en  vn  autre  village,  oil  demeuroit
ce  fameux  Sorcier,  dont  i'ay  defia  parle,  Tehore?ihac-
gnon\  il  fit  feftin,  ce  dit-on,  pour  deftourner  les  mal-
heurs  de  cefte  Eclypfe.

Le  vingtiefme  Octobre  mourut  dans  fon  infidelite
vn  vieillard  de  noftre  village,  dont  la  fin  eftonna  plu-
fieurs, &  leur  laiffa  de  bons  dears  de  fe  conuertir ;  il
femble  que  noftre  Seigneur  luy  auoit  communique'


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  59

please  God,  we  have  drunk  the  cup  of  bitterness  to
its  dregs.  Yet  no  one  should  lose  courage,  even  if
our  labors  were  always  equally  hard ;  for  truly  our
Lord  has  endured  more  for  the  salvation  of  souls.
Our  scanty  baggage  was  also  faithfully  brought,  and
in  fairly  good  condition.  You  would  scarcely  be-
lieve the  good  done  last  year  by  the  distribution  you
made  to  our  Hurons  of  peas,  bread,  and  sagamite,
and  by  the  kindly  attentions  you  showed  them.
That  good  treatment  has  won  their  hearts  for  you
and  for  us  also.  We  do  not  go  anywhere  without
hearing  that  our  Brothers  at  Kebec  are  very  cour-
teous and  liberal.  Everything  is  leading  these  Peo-
ples to  receive  the  seed  of  the  Gospel,  for  the
affection  they  have  for  us  renders  them  disposed  to
believe  what  we  tell  them.

[40]  On  the  Eclipse  of  the  Moon,  of  August  twen-
ty-seventh, our  Barbarians  expected  a  great  defeat  of
their  men,  because  it  appeared  over  their  enemies'
Country,  which  is  on  their  Southeast;  for  if  it  ap-
pears in  the  East,  it  is  on  their  account  that  the  Moon
is  sick,  or  has  experienced  some  displeasure;  they
even  invited  us,  perhaps  in  jest,  to  shoot  at  the  Sky,
to  deliver  it  from  danger,  assuring  us  that  it  was
their  custom  to  discharge  several  arrows  for  this  pur-
pose. Indeed,  they  all  cry  out  as  loudly  as  they  can
on  such  occasions,  and  make  imprecations  against
their  enemies,  saying,  "  May  such  and  such  a  Na-
tion perish."  I  was  at  that  time  in  another  village,
where  was  living  the  famous  Sorcerer  of  whom  I
have  already  spoken,  TcJwrenhaegnon;  he  made  a
feast,  I  was  told,  to  turn  aside  the  unluckiness  of  this
Eclipse.

On  the  twentieth  of  October,  an  old  man  of  our  vil-


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

depuis  vn  an  plufieurs  bons  mouuements,  il  affiftoit
volontiers  a  toutes  nos  Affemblees,  efcoutant  nos  in-
ftructions;  c'eftoit  le  premier  a  faire  le  figne  de  la
Croix:  [41]  mais  apres  il  tafchoit  d'accorder  noftre
creance  auec  leurs  fuperflitions  &  refueries,  &  difoit
qu'il  vouloit  aller  auec  fes  Anceftres.  Quelque  fonge
fembloit  l'auoir  difpofe  au  bie ;  mais  comme  il  aymoit
a  faire  bonne  chere,  &  a  dire  le  mot,  Dieu  le  chaftia.
Eftant  malade  pour  la  derniere  fois,  il  fit  fon  Atha-
taion,  ou  feftin  d'adieu,  en  vne  grande  Affemblee,  ou
il  f e  traicta  des  mieux  a  leur  facon ;  renouuellant  ces
careffes  a  chaque  fyncope  qui  luy  furuenoit.  Nous
l'allafmes  voir,  &  ce  fut  a  nous  inuiter  d'autant,  nous
menacant  que  fi  nous  ne  luy  faifions  raifon  de  chanter
a  noftre  mode,  il  renuerferoit  tout  apres  fa  mort  dans
noftre  Cabane,  &  mefme  l'emporteroit.  Vn  iour  il
nous  demada  le  Baptefme,  .mais  comme  il  sebloit  fe
remettre,  nous-nous  defiafmes  de  fon  humeur.  Sur
le  foir  y  eftans  retournez  il  dormoit.  A  peine  eftions
nous  hors  de  fa  Cabane  qu'il  expira,  &  Dieu  ne  per-
mit pas  que  ce  qu'il  auoit  mefprife  pendant  la  vie,  luy
fuft  accorde  a.  la  mort. Indicia  Dei  abyffns  multa.

Le  vingtiefme  de  Septembre  le  pere  de  Louys  de
faincte  Foy  nous  vint  vifiter  en  noftre  Cabane,  &  nous
dire  la  volonte  qu'il  auoit  luy  &  toute  fa  famille  de  fe
faire  baptifer,  [42]  pouffe  a  cela,  difoit-il,  entre  autres
motifs,  parce  que  en  leur  defaite  par  les  Iroquois  Dieu
luy  auoit  conferue  extraordinairement  la  vie.

Le  quatriefme  de  Nouembre  nous  partifmes  pour
aller  initruire  cefte  maifon,  &  confiderer  plus  exacte-
ment  la  difpofition  qu'ils  auoient  a.  la  Foy.  En  che-
min  nous  baptifafmes  deux  malades,  que  nous  croy-
ons  eftre  maintenant  dans  le  Ciel ;  nous  demeurafmes
fept  iours  en  noftre  voyage,  pendant  lequel  nous  in-


1636]  LE  JEUNES  RELATION,  ib36  61

lage  died  in  his  unbelief;  his  end  frightened  some,
and  awakened  in  them  good  resolutions  to  become
converted.  It  seems  that  our  Lord  had  communi-
cated to  him,  a  year  ago,  several  good  impulses.  He
was  willingly  present  at  all  our  Assemblies,  listening
to  our  instructions ;  he  was  the  first  to  make  the  sign
of  the  Cross;  [41]  but  afterwards  he  tried  to  blend
our  creed  with  their  superstitions  and  nonsense,  and
said  that  he  wished  to  go  with  his  Ancestors.  Some
dream  seemed  to  have  inclined  him  to  good ;  but  as
he  liked  to  live  well,  and  to  have  his  say,  God  pun-
ished him.  Being  sick  for  the  last  time,  he  made
his  AtJiataion  or  farewell  feast,  in  a  large  Assembly,
where  he  partook  of  the  best,  after  their  fashion,  re-
newing his  indulgences  after  each  syncope  which
came  upon  him.  We  went  to  see  him,  and  he  again
sought  our  good  offices, —  threatening  that,  if  we  did
not  satisfy  him  by  singing  in  our  way,  he  would  over-
turn everything  in  our  Cabin  after  his  death,  and
even  carry  it  away.  One  day  he  asked  us  for  Bap-
tism ;  but,  as  he  seemed  to  be  recovering,  we  dis-
trusted his  mood.  When  we  returned  in  the  even-
ing, he  was  sleeping.  Scarcely  were  we  outside  his
Cabin,  when  he  expired;  and  God  did  not  permit
that  what  he  had  scorned  during  life  should  be
granted  him  at  death. Judicia  Dei  abyssus  mult  a.

On  the  twentieth  of  September,  the  father  of  Louys
de  saincte  Foy  came  to  visit  us  in  our  Cabin,  and  told
us  of  his  desire  that  he  and  all  his  family  should  be
baptized, —  [42]  urged,  he  said,  among  other  motives,
by  the  fact  that,  in  their  defeat  by  the  Iroquois,  God
had  extraordinarily  preserved  his  life.

On  the  fourth  of  November,  we  set  out  to  instruct
this  household,  and  to  consider  more  exactly  their


62  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~ SUITES [Vol.10

ftruififmes  toute  cefte  famille  de  tous  les  poincts  im-
portans  de  la  Religion  Chreftienne.  Louys  nous
feruoit  en  cela  de  truchement,  lequel  poffede  fort
bien  nos  myfteres,  &  les  explique  auec  affection.
Tous  approuuoient  &  gouftoient  grandement  les  veri-
tez  Chreftiennes,  &  tant  s'en  faut  qu'ils  iugeaffent
aucun  des  commandemens  de  Dieu  difnciles,  que
mefmes  ils  les  trouuoient  faciles.  La  continence  con-
iugale,  &  l'indiffolubilite  du  manage,  leur  fembloit
deuoir  plus  empefcher  le  progrez  de  l'Euangile,  &  en
effect  ce  nous  fera  entre  autres  vne  pierre  d'achop-
pement.  Cependant  ils  difoient  qu'eu  egard  a  vne
vie  eternellementheureufe,  ou  eternellement  malheu-
reufe,  rien  [43]  ne  deuoit  fembler  difficile.  Et  puis,
difoit  le  pere  de  Louys,  fi  vous  difiez  qu'il  falluft
paffer  les  deux,  les  trois,  &  plufieurs  iours  fans  man-
ger, on  y  pourroit  trouuer  de  la  peine ;  mais  en  tout
le  refte  il  n'y  en  a  point.  II  difoit  que  les  Francois
qui  auoient  efte  icy,  ne  leur  auoient  iamais  parle  de
Dieu,  ains  s'eftoient  eux-mefmes  adonnez  comme  eux
a  courir  &  folaftrer  auec  les  femmes.  Au  refte  il  di-
foit au  P.  Pijart  qui  eftoit  auec  moy,  qu'il  apprift
promptement  la  langue,  afin  d'aller  demeurer  a  leur
village,  &  y  eftre  le  Superieur  d'vne  maifon.

En  cefte  vifite  ie  remarquay  deux  ou  trois  chofes.
Le  pere  de  Louys  entendant  qu'il  falloit  apprendre  le
figne  de  la  Croix,  le  Pater,  V 'Ave,  &  le  Symbole  des
Apoftres,  dit  que  tout  cela  eftoit  peu,  &  qu'il  n'auroit
gueres  d'efprit  s'il  ne  pouuoit  l'apprendre;  qu'eftant
alle  en  diuerfes  Nations  on  luy  auoit  commis  quel-
quesfois  plus  de  vingt  fortes  d'affaires,  &  qu'au  retour
il  les  auoit  toutes  rapportees  tres-fidelement,  &  par-
tant  qu'il  auroit  bien-toft  appris  &  retenu  ce  peu  que
nous  luy  impofions ;  cependant  ce  bel  efprit  trauailla


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  63

disposition  towards  the  Faith.  On  the  way  we  bap-
tized two  sick  persons  whom  we  believe  to  be  now  in
Heaven.  We  remained  away  seven  days,  during
which  we  instructed  the  whole  family  in  all  the  im-
portant points  of  the  Christian  Religion.  Louys
served  us  in  this  as  interpreter,  as  he  is  well  ac-
quainted with  our  mysteries,  and  explains  them  with
enthusiasm.  They  all  approved  and  enjoyed  greatly
the  Christian  truths;  and,  far  from  judging  any  of
the  commandments  of  God  difficult,  they  even  found
them  easy.  Conjugal  continence,  and  the  indissolu-
bility of  marriage,  seemed  to  them  the  most  serious
obstacles  in  the  progress  of  the  Gospel ;  and  indeed
this  will  be,  among  other  things,  a  stumbling-block.
However,  they  said  that,  in  view  of  a  life  of  eternal
happiness  or  of  eternal  misery,  nothing  [43]  ought
to  seem  difficult.  "  And  then,"  said  Louys's  father,
' '  if  you  said  that  we  must  pass  two,  three,  or  more  days
without  eating,  we  might  find  that  a  hardship ;  but
there  is  none  in  all  the  rest."  He  said  that  the
French  who  had  been  here  had  never  spoken  to  them
of  God,  but  had  been  as  much  addicted  as  they  to
run  after  and  dally  with  the  women.  Moreover  he
urged  Father  Pijart,  who  was  with  me,  to  learn  the
language  quickly,  that  he  might  settle  in  their  vil-
lage, and  be  there  the  Superior  of  a  house.

On  this  visit  I  noticed  two  or  three  things.  Louys's
father,  hearing  that  it  was  necessary  to  learn  the
sign  of  the  Cross,  the  Pater,  the  Ave,  and  the  Apos-
tles' Creed,  said  that  all  that  was  a  small  matter,  and
that  he  would  have  little  intelligence  if  he  could  not
learn  it;  that,  having  gone  to  various  Nations,  he
had  sometimes  been  entrusted  with  more  than  twenty
different  kinds  of  business,  and  that  on  his  return  he


64  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

fort  a  apprendre  le  figne  de  la  Croix.  C'eft  merueille
combien  les  hommes  font  prompts  [44]  &  eueillez
aux  affaires  du  monde,  eftans  hebetez  en  celles  de
Dieu.

I'eus  du  plaifir  a  oiiir  Louys  expliquant  nos
Myfteres  a  fes  parens,  il  le  faifoit  auec  grace,  &  mon-
ftroit  qu'il  les  comprenoit  &  pofTedoit  tres-bien ;  Ah
que  ie  fouhaitterois  parler  en  Huron  auffi  bien  que
luy,  car  il  eft  vray  qu'en  comparaifon  ie  ne  fais  que
begayer,  &  cependant  la  facon  de  dire  donne  toute
vne  autre  face.  Comme  i'eus  mis  en  auant  l'embrafe-
ment  des  cinq  villes  abominables,  &  la  preferuation
de  Loth  &  de  fa  famille,  pour  monflrer  comme  Dieu
chaftie  feuerement  des  cefte  vie  les  mefchans  &  les
vilains,  &  comme  il  fauue  les  bons,  Louys  en  tira
cefte  confequence  pour  fes  parents,  que  s'ils  feruoient
fidelement  Dieu,  leur  Cabahe  ne  bruleroit  pas,  quand
bien  tout  le  village  feroit  embrafe.

Parauanture  trouuera-on  ces  chofes  trop  baffes
pour  eftre  efcrites;  mais  quoy?  Ciim  eram  paruulus,
loquebar  vt  paruulus,  fapiebain  vt  paruu/us;  ciim  autem
f actus  ero  vir,  euacuabo  qua  erant  paruuli.  Quand  cefte
Eglife  fera  creue,  elle  produira  d'autres  fruits,  on
efcrira  peut-eftre  vn  iour  les  grandes  aumofnes,  les
ieufnes,  les  mortifications,  la  patiece  admirable,  voire
les  martyres  des  Hurons  [45]  Chreftiens:  Maintenant
qu'ils  ne  font  encor  qu'au  berceau,  on  ne  doit  attendre
que  des  begayemens  d'enfans;  &  partant  ie  conti-
nueray  dans  le  recit  de  ces  petites  chofes,  qui  feront,
Dieu  aydant,  la  femence  de  plus  grandes.

Expofant  aux  parens  de  Louys  le  commandement
dene  point  defrober,  &  difant  qu'en  France  on  faifoit
mourir  les  larrons,  fon  pere  demanda  fi  deuenant  Capi-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  65

had  reported  them  all  faithfully ;  and  consequently
he  could  very  soon  learn  and  remember  the  little  we
asked.  Yet  this  intelligent  man  had  to  work  hard  to
learn  the  sign  of  the  Cross.  It  is  wonderful  how
prompt  [44]  and  wide  awake  men  are  in  worldly  af-
fairs, and  how  dull  they  are  in  Spiritual  things.

I  took  pleasure  in  hearing  Louys  explain  our  Mys-
teries to  his  relatives;  he  did  it  with  grace,  and
showed  that  he  had  understood  them  and  made  them
his  own.  Ah!  how  I  wish  I  could  speak  Huron  as
well  as  he  does,  for  indeed  in  comparison  with  him
I  only  stutter;  and  yet  the  way  of  saying  a  thing
gives  it  an  entirely  different  meaning.  When  I
brought  forward  the  burning  of  the  five  wicked  cities,
and  the  preservation  of  Lot  and  his  family,  to  show
how  God  chastises  severely  even  in  this  life  the
wicked  and  vile,  and  how  he  saves  the  good,  Louys
drew  the  conclusion  from  it  for  his  relatives  that,  if
they  served  God  faithfully,  their  Cabin  would  not  be
burned  even  if  all  the  village  were  afire.

Perhaps  some  one  will  think  these  things  too  tri-
fling to  be  written;  but  why?  dim  eram  parvulus,
loquebar  ut  parvulus,  sapiebam  ut  parvulus;  cum  autem
/actus  ero  vir,  evacuabo  qua  erant  parvuli.  When  this
Church  shall  attain  its  growth,  it  will  produce  other
fruits.  Some  day,  perhaps,  will  be  told  the  great
alms,  the  fasts,  the  mortifications,  the  admirable  pa-
tience, even  the  martyrdoms  of  the  Huron  [45]  Chris-
tians. Now  that  they  are  yet  in  their  cradle,  we
ought  to  expect  only  the  stammerings  of  children ;
and  so  I  shall  continue  the  recital  of  these  little  things
which  shall  be,  with  God's  aid,  the  seed  of  greater.

In  explaining  to  Louys' s  relatives  the  commandment
not  to  steal,  and  mentioning  that  in  France  thieves


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.10

taine  il  les  feroit  auffi  mourir?  Et  Louys  hiy  repartit,
que  le  Pays  feroit  bien  toft  depeuple,  car  il  faudroit
tout  tuer;  vn  Huron  &  vn  larron  eftant  prefque  la
mefme  chofe.  Tandis  que  nous  eftions  icy  nous
fifrnes  obferuer  le  premier  Vendredy  &  le  premier
Samedy  qui  ayt  efte  iamais  obferue  par  les  Hurons.
Des  le  Ieudy  ils  porterent  ailleurs  le  refte  de  leur
fagamite,  &  de  leur  viande,  &  le  Vendredy  &  Samedy
ayans  efte"  inuitez  au  feftin,  ils  difoient  que  fi  on  leur
donnoit  de  la  viande  ils  la  garderoient  pour  le  Di-
manche ;  &  de  fait  nous  auons  veu  vne  fois  en  noftre
village  le  pere  de  Louys  refufer  en  vn  feftin  le  Ven-
dredy, vn  morceau  de  chair  qu'on  luy  prefentoit,  ne
faifant  pas  neantmoins  de  fcrupule  de  mager  du  faga-
mite ou  on  l'auoit  cuit.  Ce  nouueau  [46]  profelyte
n'en  fcauoit  pas  dauantage.  Nous  les  laiffafmes  en
bonne  difpofition  &  bonne  volonte,  &  ce  fut  tout;  le
fruict  n'eft  pas  encor  meur.

Le  quinziefme  d'Octobre  nous  allafmes  au  village
d'tfenrio  vifiter  quelques  malades,  ou  noftre  Seigneur
nous  ayda  par  le  moyen  d'vne  ieune  fille  de  noftre
village  qui  s'y  trouua,  &  defabufa  fi  a  propos  vne
pauure  femme  malade,  fur  la  crain[d]re  qu'elle  auoit
que  le  Baptefme  ne  luy  aduancaft  fes  iours,  qu'elle  fe
rendit  enfin,  &  vne  autre  auec  elle.

Le  premier  de  Nouembre  voyant  vne  femme  groffe
aux  abois  de  la  mort,  nous  fifmes  vn  voeu  a  fainct
Iofeph,  au  cas  qu'elle  guerift,  &  que  1' enfant  fuft
baptif6,  auffi.  toft  elle  commenca  a  fe  bien  porter,  &
quelque  temps  apres  accoucha  d'vne  fille,  laquelle
par  le  Baptefme  a  efte"  mife  au  rang  des  enfans  de
Dieu.

Le  huictiefme  de  Decembre  nous  celebrafmes  auec


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  67

were  put  to  death,  his  father  asked  him  if,  when  he
became  Captain,  he  would  also  put  them  to  death.
Louys  replied  that  in  that  case  the  Country  would
very  soon  be  depopulated,  as  it  would  be  necessary
to  kill  every  one, —  a  Huron  and  a  thief  being  almost
the  same.  While  we  were  here,  we  made  them  keep
the  first  Friday  and  the  first  Saturday  that  had  ever
been  observed  by  the  Hurons.  From  Thursday  they
laid  aside  the  remainder  of  their  sagamite  and  their
meat;  and  on  Friday  and  Saturday,  having  been  in-
vited to  a  feast,  they  said  that  if  meat  were  given  to
them  they  would  keep  it  until  Sunday;  and,  indeed,
once  in  our  village  we  saw  Louys's  father  refuse,  at  a
feast  given  on  Friday,  a  piece  of  meat  that  was  offered
him,  but  not  scrupling  to  eat  some  of  the  sagamite
with  which  it  had  been  cooked.  This  new  [46]  pros-
elyte knew  no  better.  We  left  them  kindly  disposed
and  well-intentioned,  and  that  was  all ;  the  fruit  is
not  yet  ripe.

On  the  fifteenth  of  October,  we  went  to  the  village
of  Wenrio,  to  visit  some  sick  people,  in  which  our
Lord  helped  us  by  means  of  a  young  girl  of  our  vil-
lage who  was  there,  and  who  so  opportunely  dis-
pelled the  fear  of  a  poor  sick  woman  that  Baptism
would  shorten  her  life,  that  she  at  last  gave  way,
and  another  with  her.

On  the  first  of  November,  seeing  a  woman  with
child  at  the  point  of  death,  we  made  a  vow  to  saint
Joseph  that,  in  case  she  recovered,  the  child  should
be  baptized.  Immediately  she  began  to  improve,
and  some  time  afterward  gave  birth  to  a  daughter,
who  by  Baptism  has  been  brought  within  the  ranks
of  the  children  of  God.

On  the  eighth  of  December,  we  celebrated  with  all


68  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

toute  la  folemnite  poffible,  la  Fefte  de  l'immaculee
Conception  de  la  Vierge,  &  voiiafmes  de  dire  chacun
vne  Mefle  tous  les  mois  de  l'annee  en  l'honneur  de  ce
mefme  fainct  Myftere,  auec  les  autres  particularitez
que  voftre  R.  nous  [47]  auoit  prefcrites.  Nous  croy-
ons  que  la  Bienheureufe  Vierge  a  eu  pour  agreables
nos  petites  deuotions,  car  des  la  mefme  iournee  nous
baptifafmes  trois  petites  filles,  dont  l'vne  nommee
Marie  de  la  Conception  eft  cefte  petite  qui  eft  fi  fer-
uente  a  apprendre,  dont  nous  auons  parle  cy-deflus,
&  deuant  la  fin  du  mois  nous  en  eufmes  baptife  vingt-
huict ;  &  du  depuis  nous  y  voyons  vn  notable  change -
ment,  fi  bien  que  chaque  mois  nous  en  auons  toufiours
gagne  bon  nombre,  en  fuite  de  cefte  offrande.

Le  iour  de  la  Purification  ayant  affemble  tous  les
enfans  Chreftiens  parez  le  mieux  qu'il  fe  petit,  auec
leurs  parens ;  nous  fifmes  en  leur  pref ence  la  bene-
diction des  cierges,  puis  ayant  explique  aux  grands
come  a  tel  iour  noftre  Dame  auoit  offert  fon  Fils  au
Temple  au  Pere  Eternel,  &  qu'a  fon  imitation  ils  de-
uoient  auffi  prefenter  leurs  enfans  au  feruice  de  Dieu,
&  qu'en  ce  faifant  Dieu  en  prendroit  vn  foin  plus  par-
ticulier,  ils  en  furent  tres-contens.  C'eft  pourquoy
prenant  vn  Crucifix  en  main  ie  pronongay  en  leur
lanofue  cefte  Oraifon.


*&


[48]  Sus efcoutez vous qui  auez  fait  la  terre, &  vous
Io fakhrihote de  Sondechichiai, dinde

qui  Pere  vous  appellez,  &  vous  fon  Fils

efa d'Oiftan ichiatfi,  dinde  de  hoen

qui  vous appellez, &  vous Efprit  Sainct qui  vous  appel-

ichiatfi,  dinde  de EfKen  d'oatatoecti ichiat-

lez,  fus efcoutez carcen'eft  paschofe  de  peu  d'importance que
fi ; Io  fakhrihote,  onekinde  oeron  d'ictfa-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib36  69


possible  solemnity  the  Festival  of  the  immaculate
Conception  of  the  Virgin,  and  each  of  us  vowed  to
say  a  Mass  every  month  in  the  year  in  honor  of  this
same  holy  Mystery,  with  the  other  details  your  Rev-
erence [47]  had  laid  down  for  our  guidance.  We  be-
lieve that  the  Blessed  Virgin  has  accepted  our  humble
devotions;  for  that  very  day  we  baptized  three  little
girls, —  one  of  whom,  named  Marie  of  the  Conception,
is  that  little  girl  so  eager  to  learn,  of  whom  we  have
spoken  above, — and  before  the  end  of  the  month  we
had  baptized  twenty-eight;  since  then,  we  see  a  not-
able change,  so  much  so  that  every  month  we  have
gained  a  goodly  number,  in  consequence  of  that
offering.

On  the  day  of  the  Purification,  having  assembled
all  the  Christian  children,  adorned  as  best  they  could,
along  with  their  parents,  we  performed  in  their  pres-
ence the  benediction  of  the  tapers  ;  then  we  ex-
plained to  the  adults  how  on  such  a  day  our  Lady
had  offered  her  Son  in  the  Temple  to  the  Eternal
Father*  and  how,  in  imitation  of  her,  they  ought  also
to  present  their  children  to  the  service  of  God,  and  if
they  did  so  God  would  take  a  more  particular  care  of
them ;  they  were  very  well  pleased  with  these  state-
ments. Hence,  taking  a  Crucifix  in  my  hand,  I  pro-
nounced in  their  language  this  Prayer:

[48]  Come listen  you who  have  made  the  earth, and  you

Io sakhrihote de Sondechichiai,  dinde

who  Father  call  yourself,  and  you  his  Son

esa d'Oistan ichiatsi,  dinde  de  hoen

who  call  yourself , and  you Spirit  Holy who  call  yourself ;

ichiatsi,  dinde  de  Esken  d'oatatoecti ichiatsi;

come listen, for  it  is  not  a  thing  of  small  importance that
Io sakhrihote  onekinde  oeron  d'icwa-


70


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJESUITES [Vol.  10


nous  faifons,

kerha,

en  fans,  defia

Atichiaha,  onne

on  les  a  baptifez.

onatindecbaefti.

te  les  prefentons

cbas  echa

c'eft  ce  que

ondayee

bl6es

cbate

qu'il  foit

abaton


regardez  ces  affemblez

atifacagnren  cha ondikhucbate

ce  font  tes  creatures tous ; parce  que

atifataban  abeti ; aerhon

Mais  voicy  que vne  autrefois  nous

Caati  onne  bato efataan-

eux  tous,  nous  te  les  abandonnons  tous,

abeti,  abeti  efatonkhiens,

penfent ce  que  voila  affem-

echa  benderhay cha  bendikhu-

femmes, elles  penfent  maiftre

otindekhien, benderhay  abandio


de  tous

eba


prenez  courage

etfaon

ne

che


les  enfans.
tichiaha.
gardez-les,
hatfacaratai,
deuiennent  point  malades,
batinonhbaKe,


iamais,
derake, aonhbentfannenhan,

qui  eft  mal ;  que  fi

d'otechienti, din  de


Sus done

Io ichien

defendez-les.
atfatanonftat
qu'ils  ne
enonche
deftournez

ferreba

la  contagion
ongnratarrie


maintenant

nonhba

Qu'ils

Enon-

pechent

batirihban-

tout  ce

eba

nous  attaque

etfefo-


derechef ,  deftourne-la  auffi ;  que  fi

nachien,  ferreba  itondi ; din  de

[49]  nous  attaque deftourne-la  auffi ;  que  fi

efonachien, ferreba  itondi ; din  de


la  famine

onrendich


la  guer-
bsken-
que  fi
din  de


re  nous  aff ault  deflourne  la  auffi ;

raetac efonachien,  ferreba  itondi;

le  demon nous  prouoque, c'eft  a  dire le  mauuais  demo,  &

oKi  efoniatoata ondayee  d'okiafli. chia

les  mefchans  qui  par  poifon  font  mourir,  deftourne  les

daononcbaieila  d'oki  afaoio,  ferreba

auffi.  Finalement deftourne tout  ce qui  eft  de  mauuais.

itondi. ocbetacbi ferreba ebe  d'otechienti.

Iefus  noftre  Seigneur de  Dieu Fils, c'eft  ce  a  quoy  tu

Iefus onandaerari Dieu hoen  ondayee


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  71

we  do ;  look  upon  these  assembled

kerha,  atisacagnren  cha ondikhucwate

children,  already these  are  thy  creatures all ; because  that

Atichiaha, onne  atisatawan aweti; aerhon

they  have  been  baptized.  But  lo !  again  we

onatindecwaesti.  Caati  onne wato esataan-

to  thee  present  them  all,  all  we  give  them  up  to  thee,

cwas  echa  aweti,  aweti  esatonkhiens,

this  is  what  these  think,  these  assem-

ondayee  echa wenderhay cha wendikhu-

bled  women,  they  think  master
cwate  otindekhien,  wenderhay  awandio
that  he  is  of  all  the  children.  Come,  then,  now
awaton  ewa  tichiaha.  Io  ichien  nonhwa
take  courage,  keep  them ;  defend  them.  That  they
etsaon  hatsacaratai,  atsatanonstat.  Enon-
may  not  become  sick,  that  they  may  sin
che  watinonhwake,  enonche  watirih  wan-
never,  turn  away  all  that
derake,  aonhwentsannenhan,  serrewa  ewa
which  is  evil ; and  if the  plague  attack  us

d'otechienti,  din  de  ongnratarrie  etseso-

again,  turn  away  that  also ;  and  if  famine

nachien, serrewa  itondi; din  de onrendich

[49]  attack  us,  turn  away  that also ;  and  if  war

esonachien, serrewa itondi; din  de ousken-

assail  us, turn  away  that also ;  and  if

raetac  esonachien, serrewa itondi; din  de

the  demon  provoke  us,  that  is. the  bad  demon, and

oki  esoniatoata ondayee d'okiasti. chia

the  wicked  ones  who  through  poison cause  death, turn  them  away

daononcwaiessa  d'oki  asaoio,  serrewa

also.  Finally,  turn  away all  that  which  is  evil.

itondi. ocwetacwi serrewa ewe d'otechienti.

Jesus  our  Lord  of  God  the  Son,  for  this

Jesus onandaerari Dieu  hoen ondayee


72  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

exhorteras  ton Pere,  car  il  ne  te  refufe

achiehetfaron de hiaiftan, oneke  tehia-

point.  Et  vous auffi Marie de  Iefus la  Mere qui

nonftas. chia defa tfarie Iefus ond&e de

efles  Vierge,  cela  auffi  dis.  Ainu

chiKhoncb'an, ondayee itondi chihon.  to

foit-il.

hayatfan.

Cefle  Oraifon  entre  autres  leur  aggrea,  d'autant
que  nous  demandions  a  Dieu  qu'il  les  preferuaft  de
lacontagion,  de  la  famine,  &de  la  guerre;  ilsn'y  defire-
rent  de  plus  que  ces  deux  prieres,  qu'ils  ne  fiflent
point  naufrage,  &  ne  fe  bruflaffent  point:  enonche
Xatitfareha,  enonche  Xatidtate' ;  cela  y  eftant  ils  la  iu-
gerent  accomplie.  Dieu  foit  innniement  loiie,  &  la
B.  Vierge,  car  nous  pouuons  dire  que  de  ce  iour-la
nous  prifmes  poffeffion  decefte  petite  ieuneffe,  qui
[50]  a  continue  depuis  a  s'aff  embler  tous  les  Dimanches
dans  noftre  Cabane  pour  prier  Dieu.  II  efloit  bien
raifonnable  que  puis  qu'ils  auoient  commence  a
naiftre  enfans  de  Dieu  le  iour  de  l'immaculee  Concep-
tion de  cefte  faincte  Vierge,  ils  commencaffent  auffi
le  iour  de  fa  Purification  a  practiquer  le  deuoir  de
Chreftien,  pour  le  continuer  le  refte  de  leur  vie ;  c'eft
ce  que  nous  efperons  par  l'entremife  de  cefte  Mere
de  mifericorde,  qui  nous  fait  affez  paroiftre  que  fans
doute  elle  veut  eftre  la  Mere  de  cefte  nouuelle  Eglife.

Le  vingt-vniefme  de  Mars  vne  femme  qui  auoit
efle  enuiron  vingt-quatre  heures  en  trauail  d' enfant,
accoucha  heureufement,  auffi  toft  qu'on  luy  eut  ap-
plique vne  Relique  de  N.  B.  P.  S.  Ignace;  fon  fruict
ne  vefquit  qu'autant  qu'il  fallut  pour  aller  au  Ciel
par  le  Baptefme.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6s6  73


thou  wilt  exhort thy Father,  for he  does  not  refuse  thee

achiehetsaron de hiaistan, oneke"  tehia-

anything.  And  you  also  Mary,  of  Jesus  the  Mother  who
nonstas.  chia  desa  Warie  Jesus  ondwe  de
art  Virgin,  that  also  say.  So

chikhoncwan, ondayee itondi chihon.  to

be  it.
hayawan.

This  Prayer,  among  others,  pleased  them,  inas-
much as  we  asked  God  to  preserve  them  from  pesti-
lence, famine,  and  war.  They  desired  nothing  more
than  these  two  prayers,  that  they  might  not  be  ship-
wrecked, and  might  not  suffer  by  fire :  enonche  wati-
wareha,  enonche  watidtate;  these  being  added,  they
thought  it  complete.  God  and  the  Blessed  Virgin
be  praised  forever;  for  we  can  say  that,  from  that
day,  we  took  possession  of  these  little  ones,  who  [50]
have  continued  since  then  to  gather  every  Sunday  in
our  Cabin,  to  worship  God.  It  was  very  fitting  that,
since  they  had  become  children  of  God  on  the  day  of
the  immaculate  Conception  of  the  holy  Virgin,  they
should  also  begin  on  the  day  of  her  Purification  to
practice  Christian  duty,  to  continue  it  the  rest  of
their  lives.  This  we  hope  through  the  mediation
of  the  Mother  of  mercy,  who  has  shown  us  plainly
that  she  will  be  the  Mother  of  this  rising  Church.

On  the  twenty-first  of  March,  a  woman,  who  had
been  about  twenty-four  hours  in  travail,  brought
forth  a  child  happily,  as  soon  as  we  had  applied  to
her  a  Relic  of  Our  Blessed  Father  St.  Ignatius.  Her
child  lived  only  long  enough  to  enable  us  to  send  it
to  Heaven  by  Baptism.

On  the  twenty-eighth  of  March,  Francois  Margue-
rie,  who  had  gone  to  winter  with  the  Savages  of  the


74  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

Le  vingt-huictiefme  de  Mars  Francois  Marguerie
qui  eftoit  alle  hyuerner  auec  les  Sauuages  de  l'lfle,
nous  en  amena  quatre ;  Ce  nous  fut  vne  grande  con-
folation  de  receuoir  des  vifites  Fran9oifes  en  vne  telle
faifon,  &  d' entendre  des  nouuelles  de  Kebec,  &  des
trois  Riuieres.  Nous  fufmes  auffi  furpris  d'eftonne-
ment  de  voir  qu'vn  ieune  [51]  homme  comme  luy
aage  de  vingt  a  vingt-deux  ans,  euft  le  courage  de
fuiure  les  Sauuages  fur  les  glaces,  dans  les  neiges,  &
au  trauers  des  forefis  quarante  iours  continus,  &  l'ef-
pace  de  quelques  trois  cens  lieues,  portant,  trainant
&  trauaillant  autant  &  plus  que  pas  vn  de  fa  bande,
car  ces  Barbares  eftans  arriuez  au  gifle  luy  faifoient
faire  leur  chaudiere,  tandis  qu'ils  fe  chauffoient  &  fe
repof oient ;  II  nous  fait  au  refle  vne  belle  lecon,  car
11  pour  contenter  vn  defLr  de  voir,  il  a  tant  pris  de
peine,  &  deuore  tant  de  difficultez  venant  en  une  fai-
fon fi  fafcheufe,  &  par  des  chemins  ft  etranges,  cer-
tainement  des  perfonnes  Religieufes  pouflees  du
fainct  defir  de  gagner  des  ames  a  Dieu,  ne  doiuent
nullement  redouter  l'afprete  des  chemins,  que  la  com-
modite  des  Canots,  la  faifon  plaifante  de  l'Efte,  &  la
compagnie  des  Sauuages  affez  fecourables,  rendent
non  feulement  beaucoup  moindre,  mais  auffi  en  quel-
que  facon  agreable ;  outre  que  Dieu  a  des  confolations
admirables  pour  ceux  qui  le  craignent,  mais  beau-
coup  plus  pour  ceux  qui  l'ayment.

L'occafion  de  la  venue  des  Sauuages  de  l'lfle  en  ce
pays  des  Hurons,  eftoit  la  mort  [52]  de  vingt-trois
perfonnes  que  les  Iroquois  auoient  maffacrez  nonob-
ftat  la  paix :  Cette  perfidie  leur  caufoit  vn  grand  defir
de  fe  venger.  lis  auoient  amaile  quelques  vingt-trois
colliers  de  Pourcelaine  arm  de  foufleuer  les  Hurons


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  75

Island,4  brought  four  of  them  to  us.  It  was  a  great
consolation  to  receive  visits  from  Frenchmen  at  such
a  season  and  to  hear  news  of  Kebec  and  the  three
Rivers.  We  were  also  deeply  astonished  to  see  that
a  young  [51]  man  like  him,  only  twenty  to  twenty-
two  years  old,  had  the  courage  to  follow  the  Savages
over  ice  and  snow,  and  through  forests,  forty  succes-
sive days,  and  for  the  space  of  some  three  hundred
leagues, —  carrying,  dragging,  and  working  as  much
as,  and  more  than  any  of  his  band,  for  these  Barbari-
ans, having  arrived  at  their  halting  place,  made  him
get  ready  their  meal,  while  they  warmed  themselves
and  rested.  Furthermore,  he  taught  us  a  good  les-
son ;  for  if,  to  satisfy  a  wish  to  see,  he  took  so  much
pains,  and  endured  such  hardships  in  a  season  so
rude  and  over  roads  so  strange, — surely  Religious
persons,  urged  on  by  a  holy  desire  to  win  souls  to
God,  ought  in  no  way  to  dread  the  roughness  of  the
roads  which  the  convenience  of  Canoes,  the  pleasant-
ness of  the  Summer  season,  and  the  company  of
generally  helpful  Savages,  render  not  only  much  less
annoying,  but  even  to  some  extent  agreeable.  Be-
sides, while  God  has  admirable  consolations  for
those  who  fear  him,  he  has  much  greater  ones  for
those  who  love  him.

The  occasion  of  the  coming  of  these  Island  Sav-
ages to  the  country  of  the  Hurons  was  the  death  [52]
of  twenty-three  persons  whom  the  Iroquois  had  mas-
sacred, notwithstanding  the  peace.  This  perfidy  had
excited  a  strong  desire  for  vengeance.  They  had
collected  some  twenty-three  collars  of  Porcelain,  to
rouse  the  Hurons  and  the  Algonquins  to  take  up
arms  and  lend  them  assistance,  promising  that  our
French  would  be  of  the  party,  as  against  the  com-


76  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

&  les  Algonquins  a  prendre  les  armes,  &  leur  prefter
main  forte,  fe  promettant  que  nos  Francois  feroient
de  la  partie,  comme  contre  vn  commun  ennemy ;  Mais
ny  les  Hurons  ny  les  Algonquins  n'y  ont  point  voulu
entendre,  &  ont  refufe  leurs  prefens ;  les  Biffiriniens
n'y  ont  non  plus  voulu  entendre  a  caufe  des  extor-
tions qu'ils  fouffrent  defdits  Sauuages  de  rifle  en
defcendant  a  la  traitte ;  Pour  les  Hurons,  ils  ont  cou-
uert  leurs  refus  de  l'apprehenfion  d'vne  armee  dont
on  les  menacoit  en  bref.  Mais  en  effet  c'a  efte  pour
ce  que  la  Nation  des  Ours  qui  fait  la  moitie  des  Hu-
rons, s'eft  piquee  de  ce  que  les  Sauuages  de  l'lfle  ne
les  inuitoient  point  comme  les  autres,  ne  leur  faifants
point  part  de  leurs  prefens,  au  contraire  defendant
qu'on  ne  leur  en  parlaft.

Cependant  d'vn  autre  cofte  nous  apprehendons  que
ce  ne  foient  tous  f  tratagemes  de  Satan  pour  empefcher
la  conuerfion  de  ces  Peuples,  car  ceux  de  l'lfle  fe  voy-
ans  [53]  econduits  s'en  font  retournez  fort  mefcontes
tant  des  Hurons,  que  des  Biffiriniens,  &  ont  menace"
qu'ils  ne  lairroient  \_sc.  laiffoient]  paffer  ny  les  vns,
nyles  autres  pour  aller  aux  Francois.

Le  Borgne  de  l'lfle  difoit  aux  Hurons  en  noftre
prefence,  pour  recommander  le  fuiet  de  fon  Am-
baflade,  que  fon  corps  eftoit  des  haches,  il  vouloit
dire,  que  la  conferuation  de  fa  perfonne,  &  de  fa  Na-
tion, eftoit  la  conferuation  des  haches,  des  chaudieres,
&  de  toute  la  traitte  des  Francois  pour  les  Hurons ;
mefmes  on  dit,  foit  vray,  foit  faux,  qu'il  s'eft  vante
qu'il  eftoit  maiftre  des  Francois,  &  qu'il  nous  remene-
roit  a  Kebec,  &  nous  f eroit  repaff er  la  mer  a  tous ;  ie
dis  qu'on  le  dit,  &  qu'on  luy  attribue  ces  rodomon-
tades, car  nous  ne  les  auons  pas  ouyes,  au  contraire


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  77

mon  enemy ;  but  neither  the  Hurons  nor  the  Algon-
quins  have  been  willing  to  listen  to  them,  and  have
refused  their  presents.  The  Bissiriniens  likewise
have  refused  to  listen  to  them,  on  account  of  the  ex-
tortion practiced  on  them  by  the  Island  Savages  in
going  down  for  trade.  As  to  the  Hurons,  they  have
covered  their  refusal  with  the  apprehension  they
have  of  an  army  with  which  they  were  lately  threat-
ened. But  the  real  cause  was  in  fact  that  the  Nation
of  the  Bear,  which  constitutes  the  half  of  the  Hu-
rons, was  piqued  because  the  Island  Savages  did  not
invite  them  as  well  as  the  others, —  offering  them  no
presents,  and  on  the  contrary  forbidding  that  they
should  be  told  of  the  matter.

Meanwhile,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are  afraid  that
these  are  all  stratagems  of  Satan  to  hinder  the  con-
version of  these  Peoples;  for  the  men  of  the  Isle,
seeing  themselves  [53]  refused,  have  returned  very
much  discontented  at  the  Hurons  as  well  as  at  the
Bissiriniens,  and  have  threatened  that  they  would  let
neither  of  them  pass  down  to  the  French.

Le  Borgne  [the  One-eyed]  of  the  Isle  said  to  the
Hurons,  in  our  presence,  in  order  to  recommend  the
subject  of  his  Embassy,  that  his  body  was  hatchets ;
he  meant  that  the  preservation  of  his  person  and  of
his  Nation  was  the  preservation  of  the  hatchets,  the
kettles,  and  all  the  trade  of  the  French,  for  the  Hu-
rons. They  even  say,  whether  true  or  false,  that  he
has  boasted  that  he  is  master  of  the  French,  and
that  he  would  lead  us  back  to  Kebec  and  make  us  all
recross  the  sea.  I  am  telling  what  is  said,  and  the
boasts  attributed  to  him,  for  we  did  not  hear  them ;  on
the  contrary,  they  went  away,  so  far  as  we  are  con-


78  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

ils  fe  departirent  d'auec  nous  auec  toute  forte  de  fatis-
faction  &  de  contentement.

Ils  nous  firent  a  la  verite  vn  grand  difcours  comme
d'amis,  qui  tendoit,  ou  a  nous  faire  quitter  tout  a  fait
le  Pays  des  Hurons,  ou  au  moins  la  Nation  des  Ours,
comme  la  plus  mefchante  de  toutes,  qui  auoit  maffa-
cre  Eftienne  Brufle,  &  le  bon  Pere  Nicolas  Recolet
auec  f on  compagnon ;  [54]  &  qui  pour  vn  coup  leur
auoit  autrefois  aff omme  huict  de  leurs  hommes ;  Et
pour  moy  en  particulier,  en  me  fiattant  &  me  loiiant,
ils  me  dirent,  que  plutoft  que  de  rifquer  ma  vie  par-
my  vne  Nation  fi  perfide,  ils  me  confeilloient  de
defcendre  a  Kebec,  au  moins  apres  auoir  paffe  icy
encor  vn  an,  pour  fcauoir  parfaictement  la  langue,
que  ie  ferois  vn  grand  Capitaine,  &  qu'il  n'y  auroit
que  moy  qui  parleroit  dans  les  confeils;  C'efl  ainfi
que  ces  braues  confeillers  nous  donnoient  des  aduis,
auec  plufieurs  &  long  difcours,  pour  monftrer  l'amitie
qu'ils  auoient  toufiours  portee  aux  Francois  par  deffus
toutes  les  Nations.  Nous  leur  refpondifm.es  que  nous
n'eftios  pas  venus  en  ces  Pays  pour  feruir  de  truche-
ment,  ny  fous  efperance  de  nous  y  enrichir,  ou  de
deuenir  vn  iour  grands  Capitaines;  mais  que  nous
auions  abandonne  nos  parens,  nos  moyens,  &  toutes
nos  poffeffions,  &  auions  trauerfe  la  mer  afin  de  leur
venir  enf eigner  la  voye  de  falut,  au  peril  de  nos  vies ;
qu'au  refte  nous  tafchions,  &  que  nous  tafcherions  de
fi  bien  nous  coporter,  que  les  autres  Nations  auroient
plus  de  fuiet  de  nous  aymer,  que  de  nous  mal-faire.
Bref  nous  leur  difmes  qu'vn  iour  [55]  quelqu'vn  des
noftres  pourroit  demeurer  en  leur  Pays  pour  les  in-
flruire,  &  qu'il  y  en  auroit  defia  n'eftoit  leur  vie
errante;  Ils  tefmoignerent  en  eltre  fort  contens,  &


1636]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  79

cerned, with  every  appearance of satisfaction and
contentment.

They  had,  in  fact,  a  long  and  friendly  talk  with
us,  with  the  object  in  view  of  making  us  entirely
leave  the  Country  of  the  Hurons  or  at  least  the  Na-
tion of  the  Bear,  as  the  most  wicked  of  all  the  tribes,
since  it  had  murdered  Estienne  Brusle  and  good  Fa-
ther Nicolas,  the  Recolet,  with  his  companion;  [54]
and  had  some  time  before,  for  a  blow,  slain  eight  of
their  men.  To  me  in  particular,  in  the  way  of  flat-
tery and  praise,  they  said  that,  rather  than  risk  my
life  among  a  Nation  so  perfidious,  they  would  advise
me  to  go  down  to  Kebec,  at  least  after  having  passed
another  year  here  to  learn  the  language  perfectly ;
and  that  I  would  be  a  great  Captain,  and  the  only
one  who  could  speak  in  their  councils.  Thus  these
brave  counsellors  gave  us  advice,  with  many  and
long  speeches,  to  show  the  friendship  they  had  al-
ways had  for  the  French  above  all  Nations.  We  re-
plied that  we  had  not  come  into  this  Country  to  act
as  interpreters,  nor  in  the  hope  of  getting  riches,
nor  yet  in  the  hope  of  becoming  one  day  great  Cap-
tains ;  but  that  we  had  left  behind  our  parents,  our
means,  and  all  our  possessions,  and  had  crossed  the
sea  in  order  to  come  to  teach  them  the  way  of  salva-
tion, at  the  peril  of  our  lives;  that,  for  the  rest,  we
were  trying  and  would  try  so  to  comport  ourselves
that  other  Nations  would  have  more  reason  to  love
us  than  to  do  us  harm.  In  short,  we  told  them  that
one  day  [55]  some  of  our  Fathers  might  stay  in  their
Country,  to  instruct  them ;  and  that  they  would  have
had  them  before  this,  had  it  not  been  for  their  wan-
dering life. They  declared that they were well


80  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES  [Vol.10

acquief cerent  a  nos  raif ons :  pour  comble  def quelles
nous  leur  donnafmes  vn  Canot,  auec  quelques  autres
petits  prefens,  dont  ils  demeurerent  tres-fatisfaits,  di-
fans  qu'ils  eftoient  defia  de  retour  en  leur  Pays,  &
firent  mille  remerciemens  auec  forces  promefles  de
bien  traitter  les  noftres  quand  ils  pafferont  fur  leurs
terres.  Nous  tafchons  de  nous  concilier  l'amitie  de
tous  ces  Peuples  afin  de  les  conquefter  a  Dieu.

La  Semaine  Saincte  Louys  de  faincte  Foy  nous  vint
vifiter,  &  fit  fes  Pafques  auec  nous  pour  fe  difpofer  a
aller  a  la  guerre  auec  vn  fien  oncle  contre  les  Iro-
quois ;  il  n'eft  pas  encor  de  retour ;  on  nous  veut  faire
accroire  qu'il  eft  defcendu  a  Kebec;  ie  m'en  rap-
porte.

Le  quatorziefme  d'Auril  le  fils  du  Capitaine  Aenons
apres  auoir  perdu  au  ieu  de  pailles  vne  robe  de  Caflor,
&  vn  collier  de  quatre  cens  grains  de  Pourcelaine,
eut  vne  telle  apprehenfion  de  fes  parens,  que  n'ofant
entrer  dans  la  Cabane,  il  fe  defefpera,  &  fe  pendit  a
vn  arbre.  C'eltoit  vn  efprit  [56]  fort  melancholique ;
des  cet  Hyuer  il  auoit  efte  defia  fur  le  point  de  fe  de-
faire  foy-mefme,  mais  vne  petite  fille  le  prit  fur  le
fait :  comme  on  luy  demandoit  qui  l'auoit  porte  a  cefte
mefchante  refolution,  Ie  ne  fcay,  dit-il,  mais  il  me
femble  que  i'ay  quelqu'vn  dedans  moy  qui  me  dit
continuellement,  pends  toy,  pends  toy.  Le  ieu  ne
porte  iamais  a  rien  de  bon ;  en  effet  les  Sauuages
mefmes  remarquent  que  c'eft  quafi  l'vnique  caufe  des
batteries  &  des  meurtres.

Le  huictiefme  de  May,  eftant  alle"  a  la  Rochelle,
vne  femme  qui  venoit  d'accoucher,  me  prefenta  fon
petit  enfant  a  baptifer;  comme  il  fe  portoit  bien,  &
que  noftre  couftume  eft,  finon  en  cas  de  neceffite  de


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  81

content,  and  acquiesced  in  our  reasons;  to  confirm
which,  we  gave  them  a  Canoe  with  some  other  little
presents,  with  which  they  were  very  well  satisfied, —
saying  that  they  were  already  on  their  return  to
their  own  Country,  and  uttering  a  thousand  thanks
and  many  promises  to  treat  our  Fathers  well  when
they  should  pass  through  their  territory.  We  en-
deavor to  gain  for  ourselves  the  friendship  of  all
these  Peoples,  in  order  to  obtain  them  for  God.

During  Holy  Week,  Louys  de  saincte  Foy  came  to
visit  us,  and  spent  Easter  with  us  in  order  to  prepare
himself  to  go  to  war  with  his  uncle  against  the  Iro-
quois. He  has  not  yet  returned ;  they  try  to  make
us  believe  that  he  has  gone  down  to  Kebec;  but  I
have  confidence  in  him.

On  the  fourteenth  of  April,  the  son  of  Chief
Aenons,  after  having  lost  at  the  game  of  straws5  a
Beaver  robe  and  a  collar  of  four  hundred  Porcelain
beads,  had  such  a  fear  of  meeting  his  relatives  that,
not  daring  to  enter  the  Cabin,  he  became  desperate,
and  hanged  himself  to  a  tree.  He  had  a  [56]  very
melancholy  disposition.  The  first  of  the  Winter  he
was  on  the  point  of  putting  an  end  to  himself,  but  a
little  girl  caught  him  in  the  act.  When  asked  what
had  led  him  to  this  wicked  resolution,  "  I  do  not
know,"  said  he,  "  but  some  one  within  me  seems  al-
ways to  be  saying,  '  Hang  thyself,  hang  thyself.'  "
Gambling  never  leads  to  anything  good ;  in  fact,  the
Savages  themselves  remark  that  it  is  almost  the  sole
cause  of  assaults  and  murders.

On  the  eighth  of  May,  having  gone  to  la  Rochelle,
a  woman  who  had  just  given  birth  to  a  child  pre-
sented it  to  me  for  baptism. As  it  was  well,  and  as


82  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE'SUITES [Vol.10

ne  baptifer  que  dans  noftre  Cabane  auec  les  ceremo-
nies de  l'Eglife,  pour  plus  grand  refpect  de  ce  Sacre-
ment ;  ie  fus  tout  preft  de  luy  dire  que  ce  feroit  aflez
qu'elle  nous  l'apportaft  a  la  premiere  commodite:
neanmoins  ie  me  fenty  infpire  de  paff er  outre ;  &  fans
doute  ce  fut  vne  Prouidence  toute  particuliere,  car
peu  de  iours  apres  fes  parens  nous  vinrent  apporter
la  nouuelle  de  fa  mort.

Le  huictiefme  de  Iuin,  le  Capitaine  des  Naiz  per-
cez,  ou  de  la  Nation  du  Caftor,  [57]  qui  eft  a  trois
iournees  de  nous,  vint  nous  demander  quelqu'vn  de
nos  Francois  pour  aller  auec  eux  paffer  l'Efte  dans
vn  fort  qu'ils  ont  fait,  pour  la  crainte  qu'ils  ont  des
AXeatfiXacnrrlwnon,  c'eft  a  dire,  des  gens  puants,  qui
ont  rompu  le  traicte  de  paix,  &  ont  tue  deux  des
leurs,  dont  ils  ont  fait  feftin.

Le  neufiefme  aborda  icy  vn  Sauuage  mort  fous  les
glaces.  Tout  le  village  y  accourut,  &  rendit  a  fes
parens  les  deuoirs  accouftumez  de  fi  bonne  grace,  que
parmy  les  prefens  mutuels  l'intendance  des  ceremo-
nies leur  fut  deferee  en  cefle  occafion,  le  mort  s'eftant
trouue  n'eftre  point  des  leurs.

Le  treiziefme  du  mefme  mois  nous  eufmes  nou-
uelle qu'vne  troupe  de  Hurons  qui  s'en  alloient  en
guerre,  &  s'eftoient  cabanez  a.  la  portee  d'vn  mouf-
quet  du  dernier  village,  a  vne  iournee  de  nous,  apres
auoir  paffe  pres  de  deux  nuicts  a  chanter  &  a  manger,
furent  furpris  d'vn  fi  profond  fommeil,  que  l'ennemy
furuenant  en  fendit  la  tefte  a  douze  fans  refiftance,
le  refte  fe  fauua  a  la  fuite.

I'euffe  pu  adioufter  icy  beaucoup  de  chofes  qui  fe
font  paffees  cefte  annee,  &  dont  nous  auons  efte"  tef-
moins  oculaires:  mais  [58]  i'ay  iuge  plus  a  propos  de


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  83

our  custom  is,  except  in  case  of  necessity,  to  baptize
only  in  our  Cabin  with  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church,
in  order  to  cause  the  Sacrament  to  be  more  highly
respected,  I  was  about  to  say  that  she  might  bring  it
at  her  first  convenience,  when  I  felt  inspired  to  de-
part from  our  custom ;  and  no  doubt  it  was  a  special
Providence,  for,  a  few  days  after,  its  parents  brought
us  news  of  its  death.

On  the  eighth  of  June,  the  Captain  of  the  Naiz
percez,  or  Nation  of  the  Beaver,6  [57]  which  is  three
days  journey  from  us,  came  to  request  one  of  our
Frenchmen  to  spend  the  Summer  with  them,  in  a
fort  they  had  made  from  fear  of  the  Aweatsiiuaenrrho-
non,  or  stinking  tribe,7  who  have  broken  the  treaty
of  peace,  and  have  killed  two  of  their  men,  of  whom
they  made  a  feast.

On  the  ninth,  a  Savage  who  lay  dead  under  the  ice
was  cast  ashore  here.  The  whole  village  hastened  out
and  paid  to  his  relations  the  accustomed  devoirs,  with
so  good  a  grace  that  the  management  of  the  cere-
monies was  given  over  to  the  villagers  on  this  occa-
sion, among  mutual  presents,  although  the  dead  man
had  been  found  to  be  not  one  of  their  people.

On  the  thirteenth  of  the  same  month,  we  had  news
of  a  troop  of  Hurons  who  had  gone  to  war,  and  who
were  encamped  at  the  distance  of  a  musket-shot  from
the  last  village,  a  day's  journey  from  us;  after  hav-
ing passed  two  nights  in  singing  and  eating,  they
were  overtaken  with  so  profound  a  sleep,  that  the
enemy,  coming  suddenly  upon  them,  cleft  open  the
heads  of  a  dozen  without  resistance,  the  rest  escaping
by  flight.

I  might  have  added  here  many  things  that  have


84  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  10

les  referuer  a  la  feconde  partie  de  cefte  Relation ;
I'efpere  que  i'euiteray  par  ce  moyen  plus  ayfement
la  confufion,  &  contenteray  a  mon  aduis  dauantage
tous  ceux  qui  font  curieux  de  fcauoir  les  moeurs  &  les
couftumes  de  ces  Peuples.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  /6j6  85

taken  place  this  year,  and  of  which  we  have  been
eyewitnesses,  but  [58]  I  have  thought  it  best  to  re-
serve them  for  a  second  part  of  this  Relation.  I  hope
in  this  way  more  easily  to  avoid  confusion,  and  to
satisfy  more  fully  those  who  are  curious  to  know  the
manners  and  customs  of  these  Tribes.


86  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


CHAPITRE  III.

ADUERTISSEMENT D'lMPORTANCE POUR CEUX QU'lL

PLAIRROIT A DIEU D'APPELLER EN LA NOU-

UELLE FRANCE, & PRINCIPALEMENT

AU PAYS DES HURONS.

NOUS  auons  appris  que  le  falut  de  tant  d'ames
innocentes  lauees,  &  blanchies  dans  le  Sang
du  Fils  de  Dieu,  touche  bien  fenfiblemet  le
cceur  de  plufieurs,  &  y  allume  de  nouueaux  defirs  de
quitter  l'ancienne  France,  pour  fe  tranf porter  en  la
Nouuelle.  Dieu  foit  beny  a  iamais  qui  nous  fait  pa-
roiftre  par  la  qu'il  a  enfin  ouuert  a  ces  Peuples  les
entrailles  de  fon  infinie  mifericorde.  Ie  ne  fuis  pas
pour  refroidir  cefte  genereufe  refolution ;  helas  ce
font  ces  [59]  cceurs  felon  le  cceur  de  Dieu  que  nous
attendons ;  mais  ie  defire  f eulement  leur  donner  vn
mot  d'aduis.

II  eft  vray  que  fort  is  vt  mors  dilcctio,  1' amour  de
Dieu  a  la  force  de  faire  ce  que  fait  la  mort,  c'eft  a
dire,  de  nous  detacher  entierement  des  creatures  &
de  nous  mef mes ;  neantmoins  ces  defirs  que  nous  fen-
tons  de  cooperer  au  falut  des  Infideles  ne  font  pas
toufiours  des  marques  aff eurees  de  cet  amour  epure ;
il  peut  y  auoir  quelquesfois  vn  peu  d'amour  propre,
&  de  recherche  de  nous  mefme,  fi  nous  regardons
feulement  le  bien  &  le  contentement  qu'il  y  a  de
mettre  des  ames  dans  le  Ciel,  fans  confiderer  meure-
ment  les  peines,  les  trauaux,  &  les  difficultez  qui  font
infeparables  de  ces  fonctions  Euangeliques.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  87


CHAPTER  III.

IMPORTANT  ADVICE  FOR  THOSE  WHOM  IT  SHALL  PLEASE
GOD TO CALL TO NEW FRANCE, AND ESPE-
CIALLY  TO THE COUNTRY OF
THE HURONS.

WE  have  learned  that  the  salvation  of  so  many
innocent  souls,  washed  and  made  white  in
the  Blood  of  the  Son  of  God,  is  stirring
very  deeply  the  hearts  of  many,  and  is  exciting  new
desires  in  them  to  leave  old  France  that  they  may
come  to  the  New.  God  be  forever  blessed  that  he,
as  this  shows  us,  has  at  last  opened  to  these  Tribes
the  bowels  of  his  infinite  pity.  I  wish  not  to  chill
the  ardor  of  this  generous  resolution.  Alas !  it  is
those  [59]  hearts  after  God's  own  heart  whom  we  are
expecting;  but  I  only  wish  to  give  one  word  of
advice.

It  is  true  that  fortis  ut  mors  dilectio,  the  love  of  God
has  power  to  do  what  death  does, —  that  is  to  say,  to
detach  us  entirely  from  creatures  and  from  our-
selves; nevertheless,  these  desires  that  we  feel  of
working  for  the  safety  of  Infidels  are  not  always  sure
signs  of  that  pure  love.  There  may  be  sometimes  a
little  self-love  and  regard  for  ourselves,  if  we  look
only  at  the  blessing  and  satisfaction  of  putting  souls
in  Heaven  without  considering  fully  the  pains,  the
labors  and  the  difficulties  which  are  inseparable  from
these  Evangelical  functions.

On  this  account,  in  order  that  no  one  may  be  de-


88  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.10

Doncques  afin  que  perfonnne  ne  foit  abufe  en  ce
point,  ojlendam  Mi  quanta  hie  oporteat  pro  nomine  Iefu
pati.  II  eft  vray  que  les  deux  derniers  venus,  les
Peres  Mercier  &  Pijart,  n'ont  pas  eu  tant  de  peine  en
leur  voyage,  mais  en  comparaifon  de  nous  qui  eftions
montez  l'annee  precedente ;  ils  n'ot  point  rame,  leurs
gens  n'ont  point  efte  malades  comme  les  noftres,  il
ne  leur  a  point  fallu  porter  de  pef antes  charges.  Or
nonobftant  [60]  cela  pour  facile  que  puiffe  eftre  la
trauerfee  des  Sauuages,  il  y  a  toufiours  affez  dequoy
abbatre  bien  fort  vn  cceur  qui  ne  feroit  pas  bien  mor-
tifie ;  la  facilite  des  Sauuages  n'accourcit  pas  le  che-
min,  n'applanit  pas  les  roches,  n'efloigne  pas  les  dan-
gers. Soyes  auec  qui  que  vous  voudrez  il  faut  vous
attendre  a  eftre  trois  &  quatre  femaines  par  les  che-
mins  tout  au  moins,  de  n'auoir  pour  compagnie  que
des  perfonnes  que  vous  n'auez  iamais  veu,  d' eftre
dans  vn  Canot  d'efcorce  en  vne  pofture  affez  incom-
mode, fans  auoir  la  liberie  de  vous  tourner  d'vn  cofte
ou  d' autre,  en  danger  cinquante  fois  le  iour  de  verfer,
ou  de  brifer  fur  les  roches.  Pendant  le  iour  le  Soleil
vous  brufle,  pendant  la  nuict  vous  courez  rifque
d' eftre  la  proye  des  Maringoins.  Vous  montez  quel-
quesfois  cinq  ou  fix  faults  en  vn  iour,  &  n'auez  le  foir
pour  tout  recofort  qu'vn  peu  de  bled  battu  entre  deux
pierres,  &  cuit  auec  de  belle  eau  claire ;  pour  lit  la
terre,  &  bien  fouuent  des  roches  inegales  &  raboteufes,
d'ordinaire  point  d'autre  abry  que  les  eftoiles,  &  tout
cela  dans  vn  filence  perpetuel ;  fi  vous  vous  bleffez  a
quelque  rencontre,  fi  vous  tombez  malade,  n'atten-
dez  de  ces  Barbares  d'affiftance,  [61]  car  ou  la  pren-
droient-ils.  Et  fi  la  maladie  eft  dangereufe,  &  que
vous  foyez  eloignez  des  villages,  qui  y  font  fort  rares,


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  89

ceived  in  regard  to  this,  ostendam  Mi  quanta  hie  opor-
teat  pro  nomine  Jesu  pati.  True,  the  two  who  came
last,  Fathers  Mercier  and  Pijart,  had  no  such  trouble
in  their  journey  as  those  of  us  who  came  here  the
year  before.  They  did  not  paddle,  their  men  were
not  sick,  as  ours  were;  they  had  not  to  bear  the
heavy  loads.  Yet  notwithstanding  [60]  this,  easy  as
may  be  a  trip  with  the  Savages,  there  is  always
enough  to  greatly  cast  down  a  heart  not  well  under
subjection.  The  readiness  of  the  Savages  does  not
shorten  the  road,  does  not  smooth  down  the  rocks,
does  not  remove  the  dangers.  Be  with  whom  you
like,  you  must  expect  to  be,  at  least,  three  or  four
weeks  on  the  way,  to  have  as  companions  persons
you  have  never  seen  before ;  to  be  cramped  in  a  bark
Canoe  in  an  uncomfortable  position,  not  being  free
to  turn  yourself  to  one  side  or  the  other ;  in  danger
fifty  times  a  day  of  being  upset  or  of  being  dashed
upon  the  rocks.  During  the  day,  the  Sun  burns
you ;  during  the  night,  you  run  the  risk  of  being  a
prey  to  Mosquitoes.  You  sometimes  ascend  five  or
six  rapids  in  a  day ;  and,  in  the  evening,  the  only  re-
freshment is  a  little  corn  crushed  between  two  stones
and  cooked  in  fine  clear  water;  the  only  bed  is  the
earth,  sometimes  only  the  rough,  uneven  rocks,  and
usually  no  roof  but  the  stars ;  and  all  this  in  perpet-
ual silence.  If  you  are  accidentally  hurt,  if  you  fall
sick,  do  not  expect  from  these  Barbarians  any  assist-
ance, [61]  for  whence  could  they  obtain  it?  And  if
the  sickness  is  dangerous,  and  if  you  are  remote  from
the  villages,  which  are  here  very  scattered,  I  would
not  like  to  guarantee  that  they  would  not  abandon
you,  if  you  could  not  make  shift  to  follow  them.
When  you  reach  the Hurons,  you  will  indeed  find


90  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

ie  ne  voudrois  pas  vous  affeurer,  que  fi  vous  ne  vous
pouuez  ayder  vous  mefme  pour  les  fuiure,  ils  ne  vous
abandonnent.

Quand  vous  arriuerez  aux  Hurons  vous  trouuerez  a
la  verite  des  coeurs  pleins  de  charite,  nous  vous  rece-
urons  a  bras  ouuerts  comme  vn  Ange  de  Paradis,
nous  aurons  toutes  les  bonnes  volontez  du  monde  de
vous  faire  du  bien,  mais  nous  fommes  quafi  dans  l'im-
poffible  de  le  faire ;  nous  vous  receurons  dans  vne  ft
chetiue  Cabane  que  ie  n'en  trouue  point  quafi  en
France  d'affez  miferables  pour  vous  pouuoir  dire,
voila  comment  vous  ferez  loge.  Tout  haraffe  &  fati-
gue que  vous  ferez,  nous  ne  pouuons  vous  donner
qu'vne  pauure  natte,  &  tout  au  plus  quelque  peau
pour  vous  f eruir  de  lict ;  &  de  plus  vous  arriuerez  en
vne  faifon  oil  de  miferables  petites  beftioles,  que
nous  appellons  icy  TaX/iac,  &  pulces  en  bon  Francois,
vous  empefcheront  quafi  les  nuits  entieres  de  fermer
l'ceil ;  car  elles  font  en  ces  pays-cy  incomparablement
plus  importunes  qu'en  France;  la  pouffiere  de  la  Ca-
bane les  nourrit,  les  Sauuages  nous  les  apportet,  [62]
nous  les  allons  querir  chez  eux,  &  ce  petit  martyre,
fans  parler  des  Maringoins,  Moufquites,  &  autre  fem-
blable  engeance  dure  d'ordinaire  les  trois  &  quatre
mois  de  l'Efte.

II  f aut  faire  eftat  pour  grad  maiftre  &  grad  Theolo-
gien  que  vous  ayez  efte  en  France  d'eftre  icy  petit
Efcolier,  &  encor,  6  bon  Dieu,  de  quels  maiftres!  des
femmes,  des  petits  enfans,  de  tous  les  Sauuages,  &
d'eftre  expofe  a  leur  rifee.  La  langue  Huronne  fera
voftre  fainct  Thomas,  &  voftre  Ariftote,  &  tout  habile
homme  que  vous  eftes,  &  bien  difant  parmy  des  per-
fonnes  doctes  &  capables,  il  vous  faut  refoudre  d'eftre


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  91

hearts  full  of  charity ;  we  will  receive  you  with  open
arms  as  an  Angel  of  Paradise,  we  shall  have  all  the
inclination  in  the  world  to  do  you  good ;  but  we  are
so  situated  that  we  can  do  very  little.  We  shall  re-
ceive you  in  a  Hut,  so  mean  that  I  have  scarcely
found  in  France  one  wretched  enough  to  compare  it
with ;  that  is  how  you  will  be  lodged.  Harassed  and
fatigued  as  you  will  be,  we  shall  be  able  to  give  you
nothing  but  a  poor  mat,  or  at  most  a  skin,  to  serve
you  as  a  bed;  and,  besides,  you  will  arrive  at  a  sea-
son when  miserable  little  insects  that  we  call  here
Taouhac,  and,  in  good  French,  pukes  [fleas],  will  keep
you  awake  almost  all  night,  for  in  these  countries
they  are  incomparably  more  troublesome  than  in
France;  the  dust  of  the  Cabin  nourishes  them,  the
Savages  bring  them  to  us,  [62]  we  get  them  in  their
houses;  and  this  petty  martyrdom,  not  to  speak  of
Mosquitoes,  Sandflies,  and  other  like  vermin,  lasts
usually  not  less  than  three  or  four  months  of  the
Summer.

Instead  of  being  a  great  master  and  great  Theo-
logian as  in  France,  you  must  reckon  on  being  here
a  humble  Scholar,  and  then,  good  Gcd!  with  what
masters!  —  women,  little  children,  and  all  the  Sav-
ages,—  and  exposed  to  their  laughter.  The  Huron
language  will  be  your  saint  Thomas  and  your  Aris-
totle ;  and  clever  man  as  you  are,  and  speaking  glibly
among  learned  and  capable  persons,  you  must  make
up  your  mind  to  be  for  a  long  time  mute  among  the
Barbarians.  You  will  have  accomplished  much,  if,
at  the  end  of  a  considerable  time,  you  begin  to  stam-
mer a  little.

And  then  how  do  you  think  you  would  pass  the
Winter  with  us? After  having  heard  all  that  must


92  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

affez  long-temps  muet  parmy  des  Barbares;  ce  fera
beaucoup  pour  vous,  quand  vous  commencerez  a  be-
gayer  au  bout  de  quelque  temps.

Et  puis  comment  penferiez- vous  paffer  icy  l'Hyuer?
apres  auoir  ouy  tout  ce  qu'on  endure  hyuernant  auec
les  Sauuages  Montagnets,  ie  puis  dire  que  c'eft  a  peu
pres  la  vie  que  nous  menons  icy  parmy  les  Hurons ;
ie  le  dis  fans  exaggeration,  les  cinq  &  fix  mois  de
l'Hyuer  fe  paffent  dans  ces  incommoditez  prefque
continuelles,  les  froidures  exceffiues,  la  fumee,  &
l'importunite  des  Sauuages ;  nous  auons  vne  Cabane
baftie  [63]  de  fimples  ecorces,  mais  fi  bien  iointes,
que  nous  n'auons  que  faire  de  fortir  dehors  pour  fca-
uoir  quel  temps  il  fait:  la  fumee  eft  bien  fouuent  fi
efpaiffe,  fi  aigre  &  fi  opiniaftre,  que  les  cinq  &  fix
iours  entiers,  fi  vous  n'eftes  tout  a  fait  a  l'efpreuue,
c'eft  bien  tout  ce  que  vous  pouuez  faire  que  de  co-
gnoiftre  quelque  chof e  dans  voftre  Breuiaire :  Auec
cela  nous  auons  depuis  le  matin  iufques  au  foir  noftre
foyer  quafi  tou jours  affiege  de  Sauuages ;  fur  tout  ils
ne  manquent  gueres  a  l'heure  du  repas :  que  s'il  ar-
riue  que  vous  ayez  quelque  chofe  d' extraordinaire,  fi
peu  que  ce  foit,  il  faut  faire  eftat  que  la  plus  part  de
ces  Meffieurs  font  de  la  maifon ;  fi  vous  ne  leur  en
faites  part,  vous  pafferez  pour  vn  vilain.  Pour  la
nourriture,  elle  n'eft  pas  fi  miferable,  bien  que  nous
nous  paflions  d'ordinaire  d'vn  peu  de  bled,  auec  vn
morceau  de  poiffon  fee  &  fume,  outre  quelques  fruicts
dont  ie  parleray  icy  bas.

Au  refte  iufques  a  prefent  nous  n'auons  eu  que  des
rofes,  d'orefnauant  que  nous  auons  des  Chreftiens
quafi  en  tous  les  villages ;  il  faut  bien  faire  eftat  d'y
faire  des  courfes  en  quelque  faifon  de  l'annee  que  ce


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  1636  93

be  endured  in  wintering  among  the  Montagnets  Sav-
ages, I  may  say  that  that  is  almost  the  life  we  lead
here  among  the  Hurons.  I  say  it  without  exaggera-
tion, the  five  and  six  months  of  Winter  are  spent  in
almost  continual  discomforts, — excessive  cold,  smoke,
and  the  annoyance  of  the  Savages ;  we  have  a  Cabin
built  [63]  of  simple  bark,  but  so  well  jointed  that  we
have  to  send  some  one  outside  to  learn  what  kind  of
weather  it  is;  the  smoke  is  very  often  so  thick,  so
annoying,  and  so  obstinate  that,  for  five  or  six  days
at  a  time,  if  you  are  not  entirely  proof  against  it,  it
is  all  you  can  do  to  make  out  a  few  lines  in  your  Bre-
viary. Besides,  from  morning  until  evening  our  fire-
place is  almost  always  surrounded  by  Savages, —
above  all,  they  seldom  fail  to  be  there  at  mealtimes.
If  you  happen  to  have  anything  more  than  usual,  let
it  be  ever  so  little,  you  must  reckon  on  most  of  these
Gentlemen  as  your  guests;  if  you  do  not  share  with
them,  you  will  be  considered  mean.  As  regards  the
food,  it  is  not  so  bad,  although  we  usually  content
ourselves  with  a  little  corn,  or  a  morsel  of  dry  smoked
fish,  or  some  fruits,  of  which  I  shall  speak  further  on.
For  the  rest,  thus  far  we  have  had  only  roses;
henceforth,  as  we  have  Christians  in  almost  every
village,  we  must  count  upon  making  rounds  through
them  at  all  seasons  of  the  year,  and  of  remaining
there,  according  to  necessity,  [64]  for  two  or  three
whole  weeks,  amid  annoyances  that  cannot  be  de-
scribed. Add  to  all  this,  that  our  lives  depend  upon
a  single  thread;  and  if,  wherever  we  are  in  the
world,  we  are  to  expect  death  every  hour,  and  to  be
prepared  for  it,  this  is  particularly  the  case  here.
For  not  to  mention  that  your  Cabin  is  only,  as  it
were,  chaff,  and  that  it  might  be  burned  at  any  mo-


94  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

foit,  &  d'y  demeurer  felon  les  occurrences  [64]  les
quinze  iours  &  les  trois  femaines  entieres,  dans  des
incommoditez  qui  ne  fe  peuuent  dire.  Adiouftez  a
tout  cela  que  noftre  vie  ne  tient  quafi  qu'a.  vn  filet,
&  fi  en  quelque  lieu  du  monde  que  nous  foyons  nous
deuons  attendre  la  mort  a  toute  heure,  &  auoir  tou-
fiours  noftre  ame  entre  nos  mains,  c'eft  particuliere-
ment  en  ce  pays.  Car  outre  que  voftre  Cabane  n'eft
que  comme  de  paille,  &  que  le  feu  y  peut  prendre  a.
tout  moment,  nonobftant  le  foin  que  vous  apportez
pour  deftourner  ces  accidens,  la  malice  des  Sauuages
vous  donne  fujet  de  ce  cofte-la.  d'eftre  dans  des
craintes  quafi  perpetuelles :  vn  mef contant  vous  peut
brufler,  ou  fendre  la  tefte  a.  l'efcart.  Et  puis  vous
eftes  refponfable  de  la  fterilite  ou  fecondite  de  la
terre,  fous  peine  de  la  vie ;  vous  eftes  la  caufe  des
fechereffes,  fi  vous  ne  faites  plouuoir,  on  ne  parle
pas  moins  que  de  fe  defaire  de  vous.  Ie  n'ay  que
faire  de  parler  du  danger  qu'il  y  a  du  cofte  des  enne-
mis,  c'eft  affez  de  dire  que  le  treiziefme  de  ce  mois
de  Iuin  ils  ont  tue  douze  de  nos  Hurons  aupres  du
village  de  Contarrea  qui  n'eft  qu'a  vne  iournee  de
nous;  que  peu  de  temps  auparauant  a  quatre  lieues
du  noftre,  on  defcouurit  dans  les  champs  quelques
[65]  Iroquois  en  ambufcade,  qui  n'efpioient  que  l'oc-
cafion  de  faire  vn  coup  aux  defpens  de  la  vie  de  quel-
que paffant.  Cefte  Nation  eft  fort  craintiue,  ils  ne
fe  tiennent  pas  fur  leur  garde,  ils  n'ont  pas  quafi  le
foin  de  preparer  des  armes  &  de  fermer  de  pieux
leurs  villages;  leurs  recours  ordinaire,  principale-
ment  quand  l'ennemy  eft  puiffant,  eft  a  la  fuite.
Dans  ces  alarmes  de  tout  le  Pays  ie  vous  laiffe  a  pen-
fer  fi  nous  auons  fuiet  nous  autres  de  nous  tenir  en
affeurance.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  95

ment,  despite  all  your  care  to  prevent  accidents,  the
malice  of  the  Savages  gives  especial  cause  for  almost
perpetual  fear;  a  malcontent  may  burn  you  down,
or  cleave  your  head  open  in  some  lonely  spot.  And
then  you  are  responsible  for  the  sterility  or  fecundity
of  the  earth,  under  penalty  of  your  life;  you  are  the
cause  of  droughts;  if  you  cannot  make  rain,  they
speak  of  nothing  less  than  making  away  with  you.
I  have  only  to  mention,  in  addition,  the  danger  there
is  from  our  enemies;  it  is  enough  to  say  that,  on  the
thirteenth  of  this  month  of  June,  they  killed  twelve
of  our  Hurons  near  the  village  of  Contarrea,8  which
is  only  a  day's  journey  from  us ;  that  a  short  time
before,  at  four  leagues  from  our  village,  some  Iro-
quois were  discovered  in  the  fields  [65]  in  ambuscade,
only  waiting  to  strike  a  blow  at  the  expense  of  the
life  of  some  passer-by.  This  Nation  is  very  timid, —
they  take  no  precautions  against  surprise,  they  are
not  careful  to  prepare  arms  or  to  inclose  their  villages
with  palisades ;  their  usual  recourse,  especially  when
the  enemy  is  powerful,  is  flight.  Amid  these  alarms,
which  affect  the  whole  Country,  I  leave  you  to  im-
agine if  we  have  any  grounds  for  a  feeling  of  safety.
After  all,  if  we  had  here  the  exterior  attractions
of  piety,  as  they  exist  in  France,  all  this  might  pass.
In  France  the  great  multitude  and  the  good  example
of  Christians,  the  solemnity  of  the  Feasts,  the  majes-
ty of  the  Churches  so  magnificently  adorned,  preach
piety  to  you ;  and  in  the  Houses  of  our  order  the  fer-
vor of  our  brethren,  their  modesty,  and  all  the  noble
virtues  which  shine  forth  in  all  their  actions,  are  so
many  powerful  voices  which  cry  to  you  without  ceas-
ing, respice,  et  fac  similiter.  You  have  the  consola-
tion of  celebrating  every  day  the  holy  Mass;  in  a


96  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.10

Or  apres  tout,  fi  nous  eflions  icy  pour  les  attraits
exterieurs  de  la  piete,  comme  en  France,  encore  fe-
roit-ce.  En  France  la  grande  multitude,  &  le  bon
exemple  des  Chreitiens,  la  celebrite  des  Feftes,  la
maiefte  des  Eglifes  fi  bien  parees  vous  prefchent  la
piete ;  &  dans  nos  Maifons  la  ferueur  des  noftres,  leur
modeftie,  &  tant  de  belles  vertus  qui  eclatent  en
toutes  leurs  actions,  font  autant  de  voix  puiffantes
qui  vous  crient  fans  ceffe,  re/pice,  &  fac  fimiliter.
Vous  auez  la  confolation  de  celebrer  tous  les  iours  la
faincte  Mefle ;  en  vn  mot  vous  eftes  quafi  hors  des
dangers  de  tomber,  ou  au  moins  les  cheutes  ne  font
que  fort  legeres,  &  vous  auez  incontinent  les  fecours
en  main.  Icy  nous  n'auons  rien,  ce  femble,  qui  [66]
porte  au  bien ;  Nous  fommes  parmy  des  Peuples  qui
s'eftonnent  quand  vous  leur  parlez  de  Dieu,  qui  n'ont
fouuent  que  d' horribles  blafphemes  en  la  bouche.
Souuent  il  vous  faudra  vous  priuer  du  fainct  Sacrifice
de  la  Meffe,  &  quand  vous  aurez  la  commodite  de  la
dire,  vn  petit  coing  de  voflre  Cabane  vous  feruira  de
Chapelle,  que  la  fumee,  la  neige,  ou  la  pluye  vous
empefchent  d'orner  &  embellir,  quand  mefme  vous
auriez  dequoy.  Ie  laiffe  a  part  le  peu  de  moyen  qu'il
y  a  de  vous  recolliger  parmy  des  Barbares,  qui  ne
vous  quittent  prefque  point,  qui  ne  fcauent  ce  que
c'eft  de  parler  bas.  Sur  tout  ie  n'oferois  parler  des
dangers  de  fe  perdre  parmi  leurs  impuretez,  a  qui  n'a
le  cceur  plein  de  Dieu,  pour  reietter  fortement  ce  poi-
fon.  En  voila  bien  affez,  le  refte  fe  cognoift  en  l'ex-
perience.

Mais  quoy,  me  dira  quelqu'vn,  n'y  a-il  que  cela?
Penfez-vous  par  vos  raifons  auoir  iette  de  l'eau  fur
le  feu  qui  me  brule,  &  diminue  tant  foit  peu  le  zele


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  97

word,  you  are  almost  beyond  the  danger  of  falling, —
at  least,  the  falls  are  insignificant,  and  you  have  help
immediately  at  hand.  Here  we  have  nothing,  it
seems,  which  [66]  incites  towards  good;  we  are
among  Peoples  who  are  astonished  when  you  speak
to  them  of  God,  and  who  often  have  only  horrible
blasphemies  in  their  mouths.  Often  you  are  com-
pelled to  deprive  yourself  of  the  holy  Sacrifice  of  the
Mass;  and,  when  you  have  the  opportunity  to  say
it,  a  little  corner  of  your  Cabin  will  serve  you  for
a  Chapel,  which  the  smoke,  the  snow,  or  the  rain
hinders  you  from  ornamenting  and  embellishing,
even  if  you  had  the  means.  I  pass  over  the  small
chance  of  seclusion  there  is  among  Barbarians,  who
scarcely  ever  leave  you,  who  hardly  know  what  it  is
to  speak  in  a  low  tone.  Especially  I  would  not  dare
to  speak  of  the  danger  there  is  of  ruining  oneself
among  their  impurities,  in  the  case  of  any  one  whose
heart  is  not  sufficiently  full  of  God  to  firmly  resist
this  poison.  But  enough  of  this;  the  rest  can  only
be  known  by  experience.

"  But  is  that  all?"  some  one  will  exclaim.  "  Do
you  think  by  your  arguments  to  throw  water  on  the
fire  that  consumes  me,  and  lessen  ever  so  little  the
zeal  I  have  for  the  conversion  of  these  Peoples?  I
declare  that  these  things  have  served  only  to  confirm
me  the  more  in  my  vocation ;  that  I  feel  myself  more
carried  away  than  ever  by  my  affection  for  New
France,  and  that  I  bear  a  holy  jealousy  [67]  towards
those  who  are  already  enduring  all  these  sufferings ;
all  these  labors  seem  to  me  nothing,  in  comparison
with  what  I  am  willing  to  endure  for  God ;  if  I  knew
a  place  under  Heaven  where  there  was  yet  more  to
be  suffered,  I  would  go  there." Ah!  whoever  you


98  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

que  i'ay  pour  la  conuerfion  de  ces  Peuples?  Ie  vous
declare  que  cela  n'a  feruy  qu'a  me  confirmer  dauan-
tage  dans  ma  vocation,  que  ie  me  fens  plus  porte  que
iamais  d'affection  pour  la  Nouuelle  France,  &  que
ie  porte  vne  faincte  enuie  [6y~]  a  ceux  qui  font  defia
prif es  auec  toutes  ces  f ouffrances ;  tous  ces  trauaux
ne  me  femblent  rien  en  comparaifon  de  ce  que  ie  vou-
drois  endurer  pour  Dieu;  fi  ie  fcauois  vn  lieu  fous  le
Ciel  ou  on  fouffrift  encor  dauantage  ie  voudrois  y
aller.  Ah  qui  que  vous  foyez  a  qui  Dieu  donne  ces
fentimens  &  ces  lumieres,  venez,  venez,  mon  cher
Frere,  ce  font  des  ouuriers  tels  que  vous  eftes  que
nous  demandons  icy;  c'eft  a  des  ames  femblables  a
la  voftre,  que  Dieu  a  deftine  la  conquefte  de  tant
d'autres  que  le  Diable  tient  encor  maintenant  en  fa
puiflance;  n'apprehendez  aucunes  difficultez,  il  n'y
en  aura  point  pour  vous,  puis  que  toute  voftre  confo-
lation  eft  de  vous  voir  crucifie  auec  le  Fils  de  Dieu ;
le  filence  vous  fera  doux,  puis  que  vous  auez  appris  a
vous  entretenir  auec  Dieu,  &  a  conuerfer  dans  les
Cieux  auec  les  Saints,  &  les  Anges:  les  viades  fe-
roient  bien  infipides  fi  le  fiel  de  noftre  Seigneur  ne
vous  les  rendoit  plus  douces  &  plus  fauoureufes  que
les  mets  les  plus  delicieux  du  monde.  Quel  contente-
ment  d'aller  par  ces  faults,  &  de  grauir  fur  les  roches,
a  celuy  qui  a  deuant  les  yeux  cet  aymable  Sauueur
haraffe  de  tourmens,  &  montant  le  Caluaire  charge
de  fa  Croix;  [68]  l'incommodite  du  Canot  eft  bien
aif6e  a  fouflrir  a  qui  le  confiderera  crucifie\  Quelle
confolation?  car  il  faut  que  i'vfe  de  ces  termes,  autre-
ment  ie  ne  vous  f erois  pas  plaifir ;  quelle  confolation
done  de  fe  voir  mefme  par  les  chemins  abandonn6
des  Sauuages,  languir  de  maladie,  ou  mourir  de  faim


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  99

are  to  whom  God  gives  these  sentiments  and  this
light,  come,  come,  my  dear  Brother,  it  is  workmen
such  as  you  that  we  ask  for  here ;  it  is  to  souls  like
yours  that  God  has  appointed  the  conquest  of  so  many
other  souls  whom  the  Devil  holds  yet  in  his  power ;
apprehend  no  difficulties, —  there  will  be  none  for
you,  since  it  is  your  whole  consolation  to  see  yourself
crucified  with  the  Son  of  God ;  silence  will  be  sweet
to  you,  since  you  have  learned  to  commune  with
God,  and  to  converse  in  the  Heavens  with  Saints  and
Angels;  the  victuals  would  be  very  insipid  if  the
gall  endured  by  our  Lord  did  not  render  them  sweet-
er and  more  savory  to  you  than  the  most  delicious
viands  of  the  world.  What  a  satisfaction  to  pass
these  rapids,  and  to  climb  these  rocks,  to  him  who
has  before  his  eyes  that  loving  Savior,  harassed  by
his  tormentors  and  ascending  Calvary  laden  with
his  Cross ;  [68]  the  discomfort  of  the  Canoe  is  very
easy  to  bear,  to  him  who  considers  the  crucified  one.
What  a  consolation! — for  I  must  use  such  terms,  as
otherwise  I  could  not  give  you  pleasure  —  what  a
consolation,  then,  to  see  oneself  even  abandoned  on
the  road  by  the  Savages,  languishing  with  sickness,
or  even  dying  with  hunger  in  the  woods,  and  of  be-
ing able  to  say  to  God,  "  My  God,  it  is  to  do  your
holy  will  that  I  am  reduced  to  the  state  in  which  you
see  me," — considering  above  all  that  God-man  who
expires  upon  the  Cross  and  cries  to  his  Father,  Deus
mens,  Deus  mens,  ut  quid  dereliquisti  me.  If  God  among
all  these  hardships  preserve  you  in  health,  no  doubt
you  will  arrive  pleasantly  in  the  Huron  country  with
these  holy  thoughts.  Suaviter  navigat  quern  gratia
Dei  port  at.

And  now,  as  regards  a  place  of  abode,  food,  and


100  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


dans  les  bois,  &  de  pouuoir  dire  a  Dieu;  Mon  Dieu
c'eft  pour  faire  voftre  fainte  volonte  que  ie  fuis  re-
duit  au  poinct  ou  vous  me  voyez ;  fur  tout  confide-
rant  cet  homme-Dieu  qui  expire  en  la  Croix,  &  crie
a  fon  Pere,  Deus  metis,  Deus  mens,  vt  quid  dereliquifti
inc.  Que  fi  Dieu  parmy  toutes  ces  incommoditez
vous  conferue  en  fante,  fans  doute  vous  arriuerez
doucement  au  pays  des  Hurons  dans  ces  fainctes  pen-
fees. Similiter  nauigat  quern  gratia  Dei  portat.

Maintenant  pour  ce  qui  eft  de  l'habitation,  du  viure,
&  du  coucher,  oferay-ie  dire  a  vn  cceur  fi  genereux,
&  qui  fi  mocque  de  tout  ce  que  i'en  ay  touche  cy-
deffus;  qu'encore  bien  que  nous  n'ayons  en  cecy
gueres  d'auantage  par  deffus  les  Sauuages,  neant-
moins  ie  ne  fcay  comment  la  diuine  Bonte  adoucit
tout  ce  qu'il  y  pourroit  auoir  de  difficile,  &  tous  tant
que  nous  fommes  nous  trouuons  tout  cela  quafi  auffi
peu  etrange  [69]  que  la  vie  de  France.  Le  fommeil
que  nous  prenons  couchez  fur  nos  nattes,  nous  femble
auffi  doux  que  dans  vn  bon  lit ;  les  viandes  du  Pays
ne  nous  degouftent  point,  quoy  qu'il  n'y  ait  gueres
d' autre  affaifonnement  que  celuy  que  Dieu  y  a  mis,
&  nonobftant  les  froidures  d'vn  hyuer  de  fix  mois
paffe  a  l'abry  d'vne  Cabane  d'ecorces  percee  a  iour,
nous  fommes  encor  a  en  reffentir  les  effets,  perfonne
ne  s'eft  plaint  de  mal  de  tefte  ou  d'eftomac;  nous  ne
fgauons  ce  que  c'eft  que  fluxions,  reumes,  catarres;
ce  qui  me  fait  dire  que  les  delicats  n'entendent  rien
en  France  a  fe  def endre  contre  le  froid ;  ces  chambres
fi  bien  tapiffees,  ces  portes  fi  bien  ioinctes,  &  ces
feneitres  ferm6es  auec  tant  de  foin,  ne  feruent  qu'a
en  faire  reffentir  des  effets  plus  cuifans;  c'eft  vn  en-
nemy  auec  lequel  on  gagne  quafi  plus  a  luy  tendre


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  101

beds, —  shall  I  dare  to  say  to  a  heart  so  generous,  and
that  mocks  at  all  that  of  which  I  have  already  spok-
en, that  truly,  even  though  we  have  hardly  more  of
those  necessities  than  the  Savages  have,  still,  I  know
not  how,  the  divine  Goodness  renders  every  difficult
thing  easy ;  and  all  and  every  one  of  us  find  every-
thing almost  as  comfortable  [69]  as  life  is  in  France.
The  sleep  we  get  lying  on  our  mats  seems  to  us  as
sweet  as  if  we  were  in  a  good  bed ;  the  food  of  the
Country  does  not  disgust  us,  although  there  is  scarce-
ly any  other  seasoning  than  that  which  God  has  put
into  it;  and,  notwithstanding  the  cold  of  a  winter
six  months  long,  passed  in  the  shelter  of  a  bark  Cabin
open  to  the  daylight,  we  have  still  to  experience  its
evil  effects ;  no  one  complains  of  his  head  or  his  stom-
ach ;  we  do  not  know  what  diarrhoea,  colds,  or  ca-
tarrh are.  This  leads  me  to  say  that  delicate  persons
do  not  know,  in  France,  how  to  protect  themselves
from  the  cold;  those  rooms  so  well  carpeted,  those
doors  so  well  fitted,  and  those  windows  closed  with
so  much  care,  serve  only  to  make  its  effects  more
keenly  felt ;  it  is  an  enemy  from  whom  one  wins  al-
most more  by  holding  out  one's  hands  to  him  than
by  waging  a  cruel  war  upon  him.  As  to  our  food,  I
shall  say  this  further,  that  God  has  shown  his  Provi-
dence very  clearly  to  our  eyes ;  we  have  obtained  in
eight  days  our  provision  of  corn  for  a  whole  year,
without  making  a  single  step  beyond  our  Cabin.
They  have  brought  us  dried  fish  in  such  quantities
that  we  are  constrained  to  refuse  some  of  it,  and  to
say  [70]  that  we  have  sufficient ;  you  might  say  that
God,  seeing  we  are  here  only  for  his  service,  in  order
that  all  our  work  may  be  for  him,  wishes  to  act  him-
self as  our  provider. This  same  Goodness  takes  care


102  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.10

les  bras,  qu'a  luy  faire  vne  fi  cruelle  guerre.  Pour
le  viure,  ie  diray  encor  cecy,  que  Dieu  nous  a  fait
paroiftre  a  l'oeil  fa  Prouidence  tres-particuliere,  nous
auons  fait  en  huict  iours  noftre  prouifion  de  bled  pour
toute  l'annee,  fans  faire  vn  feul  pas  hors  noftre  Ca-
bane ;  on  nous  apporte  auffi  du  poiffon  fee  en  telle
quantite,  que  nous  fommes  contraincts  d'en  refufer,
&  de  dire  [70]  que  nous  en  auons  affez;  vous  diriez
que  Dieu  voyant  que  nous  ne  fommes  icy  que  pour
fon  feruice,  arm  que  nous  ne  trauaillions  que  pour
luy,  nous  vueille  luy  mefme  feruir  de  pour[u]oyeur.
Cefte  mefme  Bonte  ne  laiffe  pas  de  nous  donner  de
temps  en  temps  quelques  rafraichiffemens  de  poifso
frais.  Nous  fommes  fur  le  bord  d'vn  grad  Lac  qui
en  porte  d'auffi  bons  que  i'aye  gueres  veu,  ou  mange
en  France;  il  eft  vray,  comme  i'ay  defia  dit,  que
nous  n'en  faifons  point  d'ordinaire;  &  encore  moins
de  la  chair,  qui  fe  void  icy  plus  rarement.  Les  fruicts
mefmes  felon  la  faifon,  pourueu  que  l'annee  foit  vn
peu  fauorable,  ne  nous  maquent  point,  les  fraifes,  les
framboifes  &  les  meures  y  font  en  telle  quantite  qu'il
n'eft  pas  croyable.  Nous  y  cueillons  force  raifms,  &
affez  bons,  les  citroiiilles  nous  durent  quelquesfois  les
quatre  &  cinq  mois,  mais  en  telle  abondance  qu'elles
fe  donnet  prefque  pour  rien;  &  fi  bonnes  qu'eftant
cuites  dans  les  cendres,  elles  fe  mangent  comme  on
fait  les  pommes  en  France :  de  forte  qu'a  vray  dire,
pour  ce  qui  touche  les  viures  nous  nous  pouuons  fort
aifement  paffer  de  la  France;  le  feul  bled  du  Pays
eft  vne  nourriture  fuffifante  quand  on  y  eft  vn  peu
habitue;  [71]  les  Sauuages  l'appreftent  en  plus  de
vingt  facons,  &  ne  fe  feruent  cependant  que  de  feu  &
d'eau ;  il  eft  vray  que  la  meilleure  faulce  eft  celle
qu'il  porte  auec  foy.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  103

to  give  us  from  time  to  time  a  change  of  provisions
in  the  shape  of  fresh  fish.  We  live  on  the  shore  of  a
great  Lake,  which  affords  as  good  fish  as  I  have  ever
seen  or  eaten  in  France;  true,  as  I  have  said,  we  do
not  ordinarily  procure  them,  and  still  less  do  we  get
meat,  which  is  even  more  rarely  seen  here.  Fruits
even,  according  to  the  season,  provided  the  year  be
somewhat  favorable,  are  not  lacking  to  us ;  strawber-
ries, raspberries,  and  blackberries  are  to  be  found  in
almost  incredible  quantities.  We  gather  plenty  of
grapes,  which  are  fairly  good ;  the  squashes  last  some-
times four  and  five  months,  and  are  so  abundant  that
they  are  to  be  had  almost  for  nothing,  and  so  good
that,  on  being  cooked  in  the  ashes,  they  are  eaten  as
apples  are  in  France.9  Consequently,  to  tell  the
truth,  as  regards  provisions,  the  change  from  France
is  not  very  great ;  the  only  grain  of  the  Country  is  a
sufficient  nourishment,  when  one  is  somewhat  accus-
tomed to  it.  [71]  The  Savages  prepare  it  in  more
than  twenty  ways  and  yet  employ  only  fire  and  wa-
ter; it  is  true  that  the  best  sauce  is  that  which  it  car-
ries with  it.10

As  for  the  dangers  of  the  soul,  to  speak  frankly,
there  are  none  for  him  who  brings  to  the  Country  of
the  Hurons  the  fear  and  love  of  God ;  on  the  contra-
ry, I  find  unparalleled  advantages  for  acquiring  per-
fection. Is  it  not  a  great  deal  to  have,  in  one's  food,
clothing,  and  sleep,  no  other  attraction  than  bare
necessity?  Is  it  not  a  glorious  opportunity  to  unite
oneself  with  God,  when  there  is  no  creature  whatso-
ever that  gives  you  reason  to  spend  your  affection
upon  it?  when  the  exercises  you  practice  constrain
you  without  force  to  inward  meditation  ?  Besides
your  spiritual  exercises,  you  have  no  other  employ-


104  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol. 10

Potir  les  dangers  de  l'ame  a  parler  nettement,  il  n'y
en  a  point  pour  celuy  qui  apporte  aux  Pays  des  Hu-
rons  la  crainte  &  l'amour  de  Dieu;  an  contraire  i'y
trouue  des  aduantages  nompareils  pour  acquerir  la
perfection.  N'efl-ce  pas  defia  beaucoup  de  n'anoir
dans  le  viure,  le  veflir  &  le  coucher  aucun  attrait  que
la  finiple  neceffit6?  N'efl-ce  pas  vne  belle  occafion
de  s'vnir  a  Dieu,  quand  il  n'y  a  creature  quelconque
qui  vous  donne  fuiet  de  vous  y  attacher  d'affection?
quand  les  exercices  que  vous  practiquez  vous  obligent
fans  violence  a  la  recollection  interieure?  Outre  vos
exercices  fpirituels  vous  n'auez  point  d'autre  employ
que  l'eftude  de  la  langue,  &  la  conuerfation  auec  les
Sauuages.  Ah!  qu'il  y  a  de  plaifir  pour  vn  cceur
felon  Dieu  de  fe  faire  le  petit  Efcolier  d'vn  Sauuage,
&  d'vn  petit  enfant  pour  les  gagner  par  apres  a  Dieu,
&  les  redre  Difciples  de  noftre  Seigneur !  Que  Dieu
fe  communique  volontiers,  &  liberalement  a  vne  ame
qui  practique  pour  fon  amour  ces  actes  heroiques  [72]
d'humilite;  autant  de  mots  qu'il  apprend  ce  luy  font
autant  de  threfors  qu'il  amaffe,  autant  de  defpoiiilles
qu'il  enleue  fur  l'ennemy  commun  du  genre  humain ;
de  forte  qu'il  auroit  fuiet  de  dire  cent  fois  le  iour,
Lcetabor  fuper  cloquia  tua  tanquam  qui  inuenit  fpolia
multa.  Pour  cefte  confideration  les  vifites  des  Sau-
uages, quoy  que  frequentes,  ne  luy  peuuent  eftre  im-
portunes; Dieu  luy  apprend  cefte  belle  lecon  qu'il  fit
autrefois  a  Saincte  Catherine  de  Sienne,  de  luy  faire
vn  cabinet  ou  vn  temple  de  fon  cceur,  ou  il  ne  manque
iamais  de  le  trouuer  toutes  &  quantesfois  qu'il  s'y  re-
tire: que  s'il  y  rencontre  des  Sauuages,  ils  ne  luy  ap-
portent  aucun  trouble  dans  fes  prieres,  ils  ne  feruent
qu'a  les  rendre  plus  feruentes;  il  prend  de  la  occafion


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  105

ment  than  the  study  of  the  language,  and  conversa-
tion with  the  Savages.  Ah !  how  much  pleasure  there
is  for  a  heart  devoted  to  God  to  make  itself  the  little
Scholar  of  a  Savage  and  of  a  little  child,  thereby  to
gain  them  for  God,  and  to  render  them  Disciples  of
our  Lord !  How  willingly  and  liberally  God  commu-
nicates himself  to  a  soul  which  practices  from  love  to
him  these  heroic  acts  [72]  of  humility !  The  words  he
learns  are  so  many  treasures  he  amasses,  so  many
spoils  he  carries  off  from  the  common  enemy  of  the
human  race ;  so  that  he  has  reason  to  say  a  hundred
times  a  day,  L<ztabor  super  eloquia  tua  tanquam  qui  in-
venit  spolia  mult  a.  Viewed  in  this  light,  the  visits  of
the  Savages,  however  frequent,  cannot  be  annoying
to  him.  God  teaches  him  the  beautiful  lesson  he
taught  formerly  to  Saint  Catherine  of  Sienna,  to
make  of  his  heart  a  room  or  temple  for  him,  where
he  will  never  fail  to  find  him,  as  often  as  he  with-
draws into  it;  that,  if  he  encounters  Savages  there,
they  do  not  interfere  with  his  prayers,  they  serve  only
to  make  them  more  fervent ;  from  this  he  takes  occa-
sion to  present  these  poor  wretches  to  this  sovereign
Goodness,  and  to  entreat  him  warmly  for  their  con-
version.

Certainly  we  have  not  here  that  exterior  solemnity
which  awakens  and  sustains  devotion.  Only  what  is
essential  in  our  Religion  is  visible,  the  holy  Sacra-
ment of  the  Altar,  to  the  marvels  of  which  we  must
open  the  eyes  of  our  Faith  without  being  aided  by
any  sensible  mark  of  its  grandeur,  any  more  than  the
[73]  Magi  were  in  the  stable.  But  it  seems  that  God,
supplying  what  we  lack, —  and  as  a  recompense  of
grace  that  he  has  given  us  in  transporting  it,  so  to
speak,  beyond  so  many  seas,  and  in  finding  a  place


106  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.10

de  pref enter  ces  pauures  miferables  a  cefte  fotmeraine
Bonte\  &  la  fupplier  inftamment  pour  leur  conuerfion.
II  eft  certain  que  nous  n'auons  point  icy  cet  appa-
reil  exterieur,  qui  r£ueille  &  entretient  la  deuotion.
Nous  n'y  voyons  proprement  que  le  fubftantiel  de
noflre  Religion,  le  fainct  Sacrement  de  l'Autel,  ou
il  faut  que  noftre Foy  ouure  les  yeux  fur  fes  mer-
ueilles,  fans  y  eftre  aidee  d'aucune  marque  fenfible
de  fa  grandeur,  non  plus  que  les  [73]  Mages  iadis  en
l'eftable. Mais  il  femble  que  Dieu  fuppleant  a  ce
qui  nous  manque,  &  comme  en  recompenfe  de  la  fa-
ueur  qu'il  nous  a  faite  de  le  tranf porter,  pour  ainfi
dire,  au  deca  de  tant  de  mers,  &  de  luy  auoir  trouue"
place  dans  ces  pauures  Cabanes,  nous  vueille  combler
des  mefmes  benedictions  parmy  ces  Peuples  infideles,
dont  il  a  accouftume  de  f auorif  er  quelques  Catholiques
perfecutez  en  Pays  heretique. Ces  bonnes  gens  ne
voyent  gueres  ny  d'Eglifes  ny  d'Autels;  mais  ce  peu
qu'ils  en  voyent  leur  fert  au  double  de  ce  qu'il  feroit
en  pleine  liberte. Quelle  confolation  a  voftre  aduis
de  fe  profterner  par  fois  deuant  vne  Croix  au  milieu
de  cefle  Barbarie?  de  porter  les  yeux  &  penetrer  au
milieu  de  nos  petites  fonctions  domeftiques,  iufques
au  departement  que  le  Fils  de  Dieu  a  daign6  prendre
dans  noftre  petite  habitatiS? N'eft-ce  pas  eftre  en
Paradis  iour  &  nuict,  de  n'eftre  fepare  de  ce  Bien-
ayme"  des  Nations,  que  de  quelque  efcorce  ou  branche
d'arbre? En  ipfe  Jlat post parietcm  nojlrum. Sub  vm-
bra  illius  quern  defideraueram,  fedi. Voila  pour  le  de-
dans. Sortons-nous  hors  du  logis,  le  Ciel  nous  eft
ouuert, &  ces  grands  baftiments, qui portent  leur
tefte  dans  les  [74]  nues,  au  milieu  des  bonnes  villes
ne  nous  en  derobent  point  la  veue ;  de  fagon  que  nous


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  107

for  it  in  these  poor  Cabins, —  wishes  to  crown  us  with
the  same  blessings,  in  the  midst  of  these  infidel
Peoples,  with  which  he  is  accustomed  to  favor  perse-
cuted Catholics  in  the  Countries  of  heretics.  These
good  people  scarcely  ever  see  either  Church  or  Altar ;
but  the  little  they  see  is  worth  double  what  they
would  see  in  full  liberty.  What  consolation  would
there  be,  in  your  opinion,  in  prostrating  ourselves  at
times  before  a  Cross  in  the  midst  of  this  Barbarism !
to  turn  our  eyes  toward,  and  to  enter,  in  the  midst
of  our  petty  domestic  duties,  even  into  the  room
which  the  Son  of  God  has  been  pleased  to  take  in  our
little  dwelling.  Is  it  not  to  be  in  Paradise  day  and
night,  that  we  are  not  separated  from  this  Well-
beloved  of  the  Nations  except  by  some  bark  or  the
branch  of  a  tree?  En  ipse  stat  post  parietem  nostrum.
Sub  umbra  illius  quern  desideraveram,  sedi.  See  what
we  have  within.  If  we  go  outside  our  cabin,  Heaven
is  open  to  us ;  and  those  great  buildings  which  lift
their  heads  to  the  [74]  clouds,  in  large  cities,  do  not
conceal  it  from  our  view ;  so  that  we  can  say  our  pray-
ers in  full  liberty  before  the  noble  Oratory  that  saint
Francois  Xavier  loved  better  than  any  other.  If  the
question  is  of  the  fundamental  virtues,  I  will  glory
not  in  myself,  but  in  the  share  which  has  fallen  to
me ;  or,  if  I  must,  acknowledge  it  humbly  beside  the
Cross  which  our  Lord  in  his  grace  gives  us  to  bear
after  him.  Certain  it  is  that  this  Country,  or  our
work  here,  is  much  more  fitted  to  feed  the  soul  with
the  fruits  of  Heaven  than  with  the  fruits  of  earth.  I
may  be  deceiving  myself,  but  I  imagine  that  here  is
a  grand  means  of  increasing  the  soul  in  Faith,  in
Hope,  and  in  Charity.  Should  we  scatter  the  seeds
of  the Faith without  ourselves  profiting  by  them?


108  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  10

poimons  faire  nos  prieres  en  toute  liberie  deuant
ce  bel  Oratoire,  que  fainct  Francois  Xauier  aymoit
mieux  qu'aucun  autre.  Que  s'il  eft  queftion  des  ver-
tus  au  fonds,  ie  me  glorifieray,  non  pas  en  moy,  mais
au  partage  qui  m'eft  efcheu,  ou  s'il  faut  le  reco-
gnoiftre  humblement  au  cofte  de  la  Croix,  que  noftre
Seigneur  de  fa  grace  nous  donne  a  porter  apres  foy ;
il  eft  certain  que  ce  Pays,  ou  1' employ  que  nous  y
auons,  eft  beaucoup  plus  propre  a  engraiffer  vne  ame
des  fruicts  du  Ciel,  que  de  ceux  de  la  terre.  Te  ne
fcay  fi  ie  me  trompe,  fi  eft-ce  que  ie  me  reprefente,
qu'il  y  a  beau  moye  d'y  croiftre  en  la  Foy,  en  l'Efpe-
rance,  &  en  la  Charite.  Y  ietterions-nous  la  femence
de  la  Foy  fans  en  profiter  pour  nous?  Seroit-il
poffible  que  nous  miffions  noftre  confiance  hors  de
Dieu  en  vne  Region,  ou  du  cofte  des  hommes  toutes
chofes  nous  manquent?  '  Pourrions-nous  fouhaitter
vne  plus  belle  occafion  d'exercer  la  Charite,  que  dans
les  afpretez  &  mef-aifes  d'vn  monde  nouueau,  que
pas  vn  art  ny  induftrie  humaine  n'a  encore  pourueu
d'aucune  commodite?  &  d'y  viure  pour  ramener  a
Dieu  des  hommes  fi  [75]  peu  hommes,  qu'il  faut  s'at-
tendre  iournellemet  de  mourir  de  leur  main,  fi  la
fantaifie  leur  en  prend,  fi  vn  fonge  les  y  porte,  fi  nous
ne  leur  fermons  &  ne  leur  ouurons  le  Ciel  a  difcre-
tion,  leur  donnant  la  pluye  &  le  beau  temps  a  com-
mandement.  Ne  nous  font-ils  pas  refponfables  de
ces  difpofitions  de  l'air?  &  fi  Dieu  ne  nous  infpire,  ou
que  nous  ne  voulions  pas  cooperer  a  la  foy  des  mi-
racles ;  ne  f ommes  nous  pas  continuellement  en  dan-
ger, comme  ils  nous  en  ont  menace,  de  les  voir  courir
fus  a  ceux  qui  n'auront  point  le  tort?  Certes  fi  celuy
qui  eft  la  Verite  mefme  ne  l'auoit  aduance,  qu'il  n'y


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  109

Could  we  put  our  confidence  anywhere  but  in  God  in
a  Region  where,  as  far  as  man  is  concerned,  every-
thing is  lacking  to  us?  Could  we  wish  a  nobler  op-
portunity to  exercise  Charity  than  amid  the  rough-
ness and  discomfort  of  a  new  world,  where  no  human
art  or  industry  has  yet  provided  any  conveniences?
and  to  live  here  that  we  may  bring  back  to  God  men
who  are  so  [75]  unlike  men  that  we  must  live  in  daily
expectation  of  dying  by  their  hand,  should  the  fancy
take  them,  should  a  dream  suggest  it  to  them,  or
should  we  fail  to  open  or  close  the  Heavens  to  them
at  discretion,  giving  them  rain  or  fine  weather  at
command.  Do  they  not  make  us  responsible  for  the
state  of  the  weather?  And  if  God  does  not  inspire
us,  or  if  we  cannot  work  miracles  by  faith,  are  we
not  continually  in  danger,  as  they  have  threatened
us,  of  seeing  them  fall  upon  those  who  have  done  no
wrong?  Indeed,  if  he  who  is  the  Truth  itself  had
not  declared  that  there  is  no  greater  love  than  to  lay
down  one's  life,  verily  and  once  for  all,  for  one's
friends,  I  should  conceive  it  a  thing  equally  noble,  or
even  more  so,  to  do  what  the  Apostle  said  to  the
Corinthians,  Quotidie  morior  per  vestram  gloriam,  fra-
tres,  quam  habeo  in  Cliristo  Jesu  Domino  nostro,  than  to
drag  out  a  life  full  of  misery,  amid  the  frequent  and
ordinary  dangers  of  an  unforeseen  death,  which  those
whom  you  hope  to  save  will  procure  for  you.  I  call
to  mind  occasionally  what  Saint  Francois  Xavier  once
wrote  to  Father  Simon,  and  wish  that  it  may  please
God  to  so  act  that  at  least  the  same  thing  may  be  said
or  written  one  [76]  day  even  of  us,  although  we  may
not  be  worthy  of  it.  Here  are  the  words:  Optimi  e
Moluco  perfernntur  nuntii,  qnippe  in  maximis  (Eriunnis
perpetuisque  vita  discriniinibus,  Joannes  Beira  eiusqne  socii


110  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

a  pas  plus  grande  charite  que  de  mourir  par  effect
vne  fois  pour  fes  amis. Ie  conceurois  quelque  chofe
d'egal ou  de  plus  releue,  a  faire  ce  que  difoit  l'A-
poftre  aux Corinthiens. Quotidie  morior  per  vcjlram
g/oriam,  fratres, quam Jiabco in Chrijlo Iefu Domino
nojlro. A  traifner  vne  vie  affez penible dans des
dangers  affez  frequens  &  ordinaires  d'vne  mort  inopi-
nee,  que  ceux-la  vous  procureront,  que  vous  preten-
diez  fauuer. Ie  me  remets  par  fois  en  memoire  ce
qu'efcriuoit  iadis  Sainct  Francois  Xauier  au  P.  Simon,
&  fouhaitte  qu'il  plaife  a  Dieu  de  faire  en  forte  que
pour  le  moins  on  puiffe  dire  ou  efcrire  vn  [76]  iour  le
mefme de nous, quoy que nous n'en foyons pas
dignes. Voicy  fes  termes. Optimi  e  Moluco  perferun-
tur  nuntij,  quippe  in  maximis  cerumnis  perpetaifque  vita
difcriminibus, Joannes Beira eiiifque focij  verfantur,
magno  cum  Chrijlianee  Religionis  incremento.

Vne  chofe,  ce  femble,  auroit  a  donner  icy  de  l'ap-
prehenfion  a  vn  Enfant  de  la  Compagnie,  de  fe  voir
au  milieu  d'vn  Peuple  brutal  &  fenfuel,  de  qui  l'ex-
emple  pourroit  ternir  le  luflre  de  la  vertu  la  plus  &
la  moins  delicate  d'entre  toutes,  qui  n'en  prendroit
vn  foin  parti culier,  c'eft  la  Chaftete.

Oferay-ie  dire  pour  effuyer  cefte  difficult^,  que  s'il
y  a  lieu  au  monde  oil  cefte  vertu  fi  precieufe  foit  en
affeurance,  pour  vn  homme  d'entre  nous  qui  veut
eftre  fur  fes  gardes,  c'eft  icy.  Nifi  Dominus  cujlodie-
rit  ciuitate,  frujlra  vigilat  qui  cujiodit  earn.  Sciui  quo-
niam  aliter  non  pojfevi  effe  continens,  nifi  Deus  det.  Et
hoc  ipfum  erat  fapientia,  fcire  cuius  effet  hoc  donum.  On
dit  que  les  victoires  que  cefte  Fille  du  Ciel  emporte
fur  f on  ennemy,  fe  gagnent  en  fuyant ;  mais  ie  croy
que  c'eft  Dieu  fans  plus,  qui  fait  fuyr  ce  mefme  enne-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  T/ON,  1636  111

versantur,  magno  cum CJiristiance  Religionis  incremento.

There  seems  to  be  one  thing  here  which  might
give  apprehension  to  a  Son  of  the  Society,  to  see  him-
self in  the  midst  of  a  brutal  and  sensual  People,
whose  example  might  tarnish  the  luster  of  the  most
and  the  least  delicate  of  all  the  virtues,  unless  espe-
cial care  be  taken  —  I  mean  Chastity.

In  order  to  obviate  this  difficulty,  I  make  bold  to
say  that  if  there  is  any  place  in  the  world  where  this
so  precious  virtue  is  safe,  for  a  man  among  us  who
wishes  to  be  on  his  guard,  it  is  here.  Nisi  Dominus
custodierit  civitatem,  frustra  vigilat  qui  custodit  earn.
Scivi  quoniam  aliter  11011  possein  esse  continens,  nisi  Deus
det.  Et  hoc  ipsum  erat  sapieiitia,  scire  cujus  essct  hoc
donum.  It  is  said  that  the  victories  which  this
Daughter  of  Heaven  gains  over  her  enemies,  are
gained  by  flight ;  but  I  believe  it  is  God  and  no  one
else  who  puts  to  flight  this  very  enemy  in  the  most
severe  encounters,  before  those  who,  fearing  nothing
so  much  as  his  approaches,  go  with  bowed  heads,  and
[77]  hearts  full  of  confidence  in  his  Goodness,  where
his  glory  calls  them.  And  where  should  we  seek
this  glory?  I  should  say,  where  find  it  more  fully
purified  and  disentangled  from  our  own  interests,
than  in  a  place  where  there  is  nothing  more  to  be
hoped  for  than  the  reward  of  having  left  all  for  the
love  of  him  of  whom  St.  Paul  said,  Scio  cuicredidi.  You
remember  that  plant,  named  "the  fear  of  God,"  with
which  it  is  said  our  Fathers  at  the  beginning  of  our
Society  charmed  away  the  spirit  of  impurity ;  it  does
not  grow  in  the  land  of  the  Hurons,  but  it  falls  there
abundantly  from  Heaven,  if  one  has  but  a  little  care
to  cultivate  that  which  he  brings  here.  Barbarism,
ignorance,  poverty,  and  misery,  which  render  the  life


112  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUTTES [Vol.10

my  aux  plus  grandes  occafions,  deuant  ceux  qui  ne
craignans  rien  tant  que  fes  approches,  vont  la  tefte
baiffee,  &  le  [77]  coeur  plein  de  confiance  en  fa  Bon-
t€,  ou  fa  gloire  les  appelle.  Et  011  pourrions  nous
chercher  celte  gloire?  ie  diray  mieux,  oil  la  trouuer
plus  epuree  &  defgagee  de  nos  propres  interefls;
qu'en  vn  lieu  auquel  il  n'y  a  rien  a  efperer  que  la
recompenfe  de  les  auoir  tous  quittes  pour  1' amour  de
celuy,  de  qui  S.  Paul  difoit.  Scio  cai  credidi.  Vous
fouuient-il  de  cefte  herbe,  nommee  la  crainte  de
Dieu,  dont  on  difoit  au  commencement  de  noftre
Compagnie,  que  nos  Peres  charmoient  l'efprit  d'im-
purete ;  elle  ne  croift  point  dans  la  terre  des  Huros,
mais  il  y  en  tombe  du  Ciel  a  foifon ;  fi  peu  qu'on  foit
foigneux  d'y  cultiuer  celle  qu'on  y  apporte.  La  bar-
barie,  l'ignorance,  la  pauurete  &  la  mifere,  qui  rend
la  vie  de  ces  Sauuages  plus  deplorable  que  la  mort,
nous  eft  vne  lecon  continuelle,  de  regreter  la  cheute
d'Adam,  &  de  nous  foufmettre  entierement  a  celuy
qui  chaftie  encore  fa  defobeyffance  en  fes  enfans,
d'vne  facon  fi  remarquable,  apres  tant  de  fiecles.
Saincte  Therefe  difoit  autrefois,  qu'elle  ne  fe  trou-
uoit  iamais  mieux  en  fes  meditations,  que  dans  les
myfteres  oil  elle  trouuoit  noftre  Seigneur  a  l'efcart,
&  fans  compagnie,  come  G  elle  euft  efte"  au  iardin  des
Oliues.  Et  [78]  elle  appelloit  cela  vne  de  fes  fimpli-
citez.  On  comptera  cecy  fi  Ton  veut  parmy  mes  fot-
tif es ;  mais  il  me  f emble  que  nous  auons  icy  d'autant
plus  de  loifir  pour  careffer,  par  maniere  de  dire,  &
entretenir  noftre  Seigneur  a  cceur  ouuert,  au  milieu
de  ces  terres  inhabitees,  que  moins  il  y  a  de  per-
fonnes  qui  s'en  mettent  en  peine.  Et  moyennant
cefte  faueur,  nous  pouuons  dire  hardimet,  Non  timebo


1636]  LE  J  RUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  113

of  these  Savages  more  deplorable  than  death,  are  a
continual  reminder  to  us  to  mourn  Adam's  fall,  and
to  submit  ourselves  entirely  to  him  who  still  chas-
tises disobedience  in  his  children,  in  so  remarkable
a  way,  after  so  many  centuries.  Saint  Theresa  said
once  that  she  never  found  her  meditations  more  prof-
itable than  in  the  mysteries  in  which  she  found  our
Lord  apart  and  alone,  as  if  she  had  been  in  the  gar-
den of  Olives;  and  [78]  she  called  this  a  part  of  her
simplicity.  You  may  reckon  this  among  my  follies,
if  you  like ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  we  have  here  so
much  the  more  leisure  to  caress,  so  to  speak,  and  to
entertain  our  Lord  with  open  heart,  in  the  midst  of
these  uninhabited  lands,  because  there  are  so  few
people  who  trouble  themselves  about  him.  And,  on
account  of  this  favor,  we  can  boldly  say,  Non  timebo
mala,  quoniam  tu  mecum  es.  In  short,  I  imagine  that
all  the  Guardian  Angels  of  these  neglected  and  aban-
doned Nations  are  continually  endeavoring  and  labor-
ing to  save  us  from  these  dangers.  They  know  well
that  if  there  were  anything  in  the  world  that  ought
to  give  us  wings,  to  fly  back  whence  we  came  both
by  obedience  and  by  our  own  inclination,  it  would
be  this  misfortune,  if  we  were  not  shielded  from  it
by  the  protection  of  Heaven.  This  is  what  excites
them  to  procure  for  us  the  means  to  guard  against
it,  that  they  may  not  lose  the  brightest  hope  they
have  ever  had,  by  the  grace  of  God,  of  the  conver-
sion of  these  Peoples.

I  finish  this  discourse  and  this  Chapter  with  this
sentence:  If,  at  the  sight  of  the  difficulties  and
Crosses  that  are  here  prepared  for  us,  some  one  feels
himself  so  fortified  from  above  that  he  [79]  can  say
it  is  too  little,  or  like  St.  Francois  Xavier,  Amplius,


114  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

mala,  guoniam  tu  mecum  es.  Bref  ie  me  reprefente
que  tous  les  Anges  Gardiens  de  ces  Nations  metrites
&  delaiffees,  font  continuellement  en  peine  &  en
action,  pour  nous  fauuer  de  ces  dangers.  lis  fcauent
bien  que  s'il  y  auoit  chofe  au  monde  qui  nous  deuft
donner  des  aides,  pour  retourner  d'ou  nous  fommes
venus,  &  par  obeyffance,  &  par  inclination  propre,
ce  feroit  ce  malheur,  fi  nous  n'en  eftions  a  couuert  fous
la  protection  du  Ciel.  C'eft  ce  qui  les  reueille  a  nous
en  procurer  les  moyens,  pour  ne  perdre  la  plus  belle
efperance  qu'ils  ayent  iamais  eue  par  la  grace  de
Dieu,  de  la  conuerfion  de  ces  Peuples.

Ie  finis  ce  difcours  &  ce  Chapitre  auec  ce  mot.  Si
dans  la  veue  des  peines  &  des  Croix  qui  nous  font
icy  preparees,  quelqu'vn  fe  fent  fi  fortifie  d'en-haut,
que  de  [79]  pouuoir  dire  que  c'eft  trop  peu,  ou  comme
S.  Francois  Xauier,  Ampliiis,  ampliiis;  i'efpere  que
noftre  Seigneur  tirera  aufH  de  fa  bouche  au  milieu
des  confolations  qu'il  luy  donnera,  cefte  autre  con-
feffion,  que  ce  fera  trop  pour  luy,  qu'il  n'en  pourra
plus. Satis  eft,  Domine,  fatis  eft.


1636]  LE  JEUNES  RELATION,  i636  115

amplius,  I  hope  that  our  Lord  will  also  draw  from  his
lips  this  other  confession,  in  the  midst  of  the  consola-
tions he  will  give  him,  that  it  will  be  too  much  for
him,  that  he  cannot  endure  more.  Satis  est,  Domine,
satis  est.


116  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


CHAPITRE  IV.

DE LA LANGUE DES HURONS.

CE  n'eft  que  pour  en  donner  quelque  petit  auant-
gouft,  &  en  marquer  quelques  particularitez,
attendant  vne  Grammaire, &  vn  Dictionnai-
re  entier.

lis  ont  vne  lettre  dont  nous  n'auons  point  la
pareille,  nous  rexprimons  par  Khi,  l'vfage  en  eft
commun  aux  Montagnes  &  Algonquins.  lis  ne  co-
gnoiffent  point  de  B.  F.  L.  M.  P.  X.  Z.  &  iamais  I.
E.  V.  ne  leur  font  confones.  La  plus  part  de  leurs
mots  font  compofez  de  voyelles.  Toutes  les  lettres
labiales  leur  manquent ;  c'eft  volontiers  la  caufe  qu'ils
ont  tous  les  levres  ouuertes  de  fi  mauuaife  grace,  &
qu'a  peine  les  entend-t'on  [80]  quand  ils  fiflent,  ou
qu'ils  parlent  bas.  Comme  ils  n'ont  prefque  ny  ver-
tu,  ny  Religion,  ny  fcience  aucune,  ou  police,  auffi
n'ont-ils  aucuns  mots  fimples  propres  a  fignifier  tout
ce  qui  en  eft.  Dela  eft  que  nous  demeuros  courts  a
leur  expliquer  plufieurs  belles  chofes  tirees  de  ces
cognoiffances.  Les  mots  compofez  leur  font  plus  en
vfage,  &  ont  la  mefme  force  que  l'adiectif  &  fubftan-
tif  ioints  enfemble  parmy  nous.  Andatarafd,  pain
frais  Achitetji,  vn  pied  long.  La  variete  de  ces  noms
compofez  eft  tres-grande,  &  c'eft  la  clef  du  fecret  de
leur  Langue.  Ils  ont  diuerfite  de  genres  comme
nous,  de  nombre  comme  les  Grecs.  De  plus  vne  cer-
taine declinaifon relatiue qui enueloppe toufiours


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  117


CHAPTER  IV.

OF THE LANGUAGE OF THE HURONS.

THIS  is  only  to  give  some  little  foretaste  of  the
language,  and  notice  some  of  its  peculiarities,
in  anticipation  of  a  Grammar  and  a  complete
Dictionary.

They  have  a  letter  to  which  we  have  nothing  to
correspond  —  we  express  it  by  Khi ;  the  use  of  it  is
common  to  the  Montagnes  and  to  the  Algonquins.
They  are  not  acquainted  with  B.  F.  L.  M.  P.  X.  Z;
and  I.  E.  V.  are  never  consonants  to  them.  The
greater  part  of  their  words  are  composed  of  vowels.
They  lack  all  the  labial  letters.  This  is  probably
the  reason  why  they  all  open  their  lips  so  awkward-
ly, and  why  we  can  scarcely  understand  them  [80]
when  they  whistle  or  when  they  speak  low.  As  they
have  hardly  any  virtue  or  Religion,  or  any  learning
or  government,  they  have  consequently  no  simple
words  suitable  to  express  what  is  connected  with
these.  Hence  it  is  that  we  are  at  a  loss  in  explain-
ing to  them  many  important  matters,  depending
upon  a  knowledge  of  these  things.  Compound  words
are  most  in  use  with  them,  and  have  the  same  force
as  the  adjective  and  substantive  joined  together,
among  us.  Andatarast,  fresh  bread;  Achitetsi,  a  foot
long.  The  variety  of  these  compound  nouns  is  very
great,  and  that  is  the  key  to  the  secret  of  their  Lan-
guage. They  have,  like  us,  a  diversity  of  genders;
and,  like  the  Greeks,  of  number;  besides  a  certain


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES [Vol.10

auec  foy  le  pronom  pofleffif ,  mens,  tuus,  fuus,  par  ex-
emple,  Iatacan,  mon  frere,  aiatacan,  mes  freres,  fata-
can,  ton  frere,  tfdtacan,  tes  freres,  otacan,  fon  frere,
atotacan,  fes  freres.

Pour  les  cas  ils  les  ont  tous,  ou  les  fuppleent  par
des  particules  fort  propres.

La  merueille  eft  que  tous  leurs  noms  vniuerfelle-
ment  fe  coniuguent;  par  exemple,  Affe",  il  eft  frais,
ajjfe  cJien,  il  eftoit  frais,  gaon,  vieux,  agaon,  il  eft
vieux,  agaonc,  il  eftoit  vieux,  agaonha,  il  va  deuenir
vieux;  &  ainfi  [81]  du  refte.  De  mefme  en  eft-il  de
ce  mot  iatacan,  qui  fignifie,  mon  frere,  oniatacan,  nous
fommes  freres,  oniatacan  ehen,  nous  eftions  freres;
cela  eft  riche.  Voicy  qui  ne  l'eft  gueres.  Vn  nom
relatif  parmy  eux  enueloppe  toufiours  la  figniflcation
d'vne  des  trois  perfonnes  du  pronom  poffeflif,  il  bien
qu'ils  ne  peuuent  dire  limplement,  Pere,  Fils,  Maiftre,
Valet,  mais  font  contraincts  de  dire  l'vn  des  trois,  mon
pere,  ton  pere,  fon  pere.  Quoy  que  i'aye  traduit  cy-
deuant  en  vne  Oraifon  vn  de  leurs  noms  par  celuy  de
Pere,  pour  plus  grande  facilite.  Suiuant  cela  nous-
nous  trouuons  empefchez  de  leur  faire  dire  propre-
ment  en  leur  Langue,  Au  nom  du  Pere,  &  du  Fils,  &
du  fainct  Efprit.  Iugeriez-vous  a  propos,  en  attendat
mieux,  de  fubftituer  au  lieu,  Au  nom  de  nojlre  Pere,
&  de  fon  Fils,  &  de  leur  fainct  Efprit.  Certes  il  f emble
que  les  trois  Perfonnes  de  la  tres-faincte  Trinite  fe-
roient  fumfamment  exprimees  en  cefte  facon,  la  troi-
fiefme  eftant  en  effect  l'Efprit  fainct  de  la  premiere
&  de  la  feconde;  la  feconde,  le  Fils  de  la  premiere;
&  la  premiere,  noftre  Pere,  aux  termes  de  1' Apoftre,
qui  luy  affecte  ces  propres  mots  aux  Ephef.  3.  Ad-
iouftez  que  noftre  Seigneur  a  donn6  exemple  de  cefte


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  119

relative  declension  which  always  includes  in  itself
the  possessive  pronoun,  meus,  tuus,  suns, —  for  ex-
ample, Iatacan,  my  brother,  aiatacan,  my  brothers;
satacan,  thy  brother;  tsdtacan,  thy  brothers;  otacan,
his  brother,  atotacan,  his  brothers.

As  to  cases,  they  have  them  all,  or  supply  them
by  very  appropriate  particles.

The  astonishing  thing  is  that  all  their  words  are
universally  conjugated,  for  example,  Ass/,  it  is  fresh,
asse  chen,  it  was  fresh;  gaon,  old,  agaon,  he  is  old,
agaonc,  he  was  old,  agaonha,  he  is  growing  old;  and
so  [81]  with  the  rest.  It  is  the  same  with  that  word
iatacan,  which  means,  my  brother ;  oniatacan,  we  are
brothers,  oniatacan  chcn,  we  were  brothers;  that  is
copious.  Here  is  one  which  is  not  so.  A  relative
noun  with  them  includes  always  the  meaning  of  one
of  the  three  persons  of  the  possessive  pronoun,  so
that  they  can  not  say  simply,  Father,  Son,  Master,
Valet,  but  are  obliged  to  say  one  of  the  three,  my
father,  thy  father,  his  father.  However,  I  have
translated  above  in  a  Prayer  one  of  their  nouns  by
the  word  Father,  for  greater  clearness.  On  this  ac-
count, we  find  ourselves  hindered  from  getting  them
to  say  properly  in  their  Language,  In  the  name  of  the
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  holy  Ghost.  Would
you  judge  it  fitting,  while  waiting  a  better  expression,
to  substitute  instead,  In  the  name  of  our  Father,  and
of  his  Son,  and  of  their  holy  Ghost?  Certainly  it  seems
that  the  three  Persons  of  the  most  holy  Trinit)^  would
be  sufficiently  expressed  in  this  way,  the  third  being
in  truth  the  holy  Spirit  of  the  first  and  of  the  sec-
ond; the  second  being  Son  of  the  first;  and  the  first,
our  Father,  in  the  terms  of  the  Apostle,  who  applies
to  him  those  fitting  words  in  Ephesians  3. It  may


120  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

facon  [82]  de  parler,  non  feulement  en  l'Oraifon  Do-
minicale,  ainfi  que  nous  la  nommons  pour  fon  re-
fpect;  mais  auffi  commandant  a  la  Magdelaine,  en
fainct  lean  20.  de  porter  de  fa  part  ces  beaux  mots  a
fes  Freres  ou  Difciples.  Ie  monte  a  won  Pere  &  au
vojlre.  Oferions-nous  en  vfer  ainfi,  iufqu'a  ce  que
la  langue  Huronne  foit  enrichie,  ou  l'efprit  des  Hu-
rons  ouuert  a  d'autres  langues?  nous  ne  ferons  rien
fans  confeil.

Or  a  propos  de  ce  nom  de  Pere,  ie  ne  veux  pas  ou-
blier  la  difficulte  qui  s'efl  auffi  rencontree  a  faire  dire,
Nojlre  Pere  qui  es  aux  Cieux,  a  ceux  qui  n'en  auoient
point  fur  terre ;  leur  parler  des  morts  qu'ils  ont  ayme,
c'eft  les  iniurer.  Peu  s'en  fallut  qu'vne  femme  a
qui  fa  mere  eftoit  morte  depuis  peu,  ne  perdift  tout
a  fait  l'enuie  de  fe  faire  baptifer,  fur  ce  qu'on  luy
auoit  aduance  par  mef garde,  Pere  &  Mere  Iwnorcras.

Quant  aux  verbes  ce  qui  eft  de  plus  remarquable
en  leur  langue  eft;  1.  Qu'ils  en  ont  d'autres  pour
fignifier  des  chofes  animees,  &  d'autres  pour  celles
qui  font  fans  vies.  2.  Qu'ils  varient  leurs  temps  en
autant  de  facons  que  les  Grecs;  leurs  nombres  auffi,
outre  que  la  premiere  perfonne  tant  du  duel  que  du
plurier,  eft  encor  double,  car  [83]  pour  dire,  par  ex-
emple,  nous  partons  toy  &  moy,  il  faut  dire,  kiarafcXa,
&  pour  dire  nous  partons  luy  &  moy,  aiarafctta.  De
mefme  au  plurier,  nous  partons  nous  autres,  plufieurs,
aXarafctta,  nous  partons  auec  vous,  cXarafcXa.

Outre  tout  cela  il  fe  remarque  double  coniugaifon,
&  ie  croy  que  cecy  eft  commun  aux  langues  Ameri-
caines:  l'vne  eft  fimple  &  abfolue  femblable  a  nos
coniugaifons  Latine  &  Francoife;  Par  exemple,  ce
verbe  ahiaton,  qui  fignifie  efcrire,  fe  coniuge  abfolu-


1636]  LE  fEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  1636  121

be  added  that  our  Lord  has  given  example  of  this
way  [82]  of  speaking,  not  only  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,
as  we  call  it  from  respect  to  him,  but  by  way  of  com-
mandment to  Mary  Magdalaine  in  saint  John  20.
to  bear  from  him  these  beautiful  words  to  his  Breth-
ren or  Disciples,  /  ascend  to  my  Father  and  to  yours.
Would  we  venture  to  employ  it  thus  until  the  Huron
language  shall  be  enriched,  or  the  mind  of  the  Hu-
rons  opened  to  other  languages?  We  will  do  noth-
ing without  advice.

Now  in  connection  with  this  name  Father  I  must
not  forget  the  difficulty  there  is  in  teaching  to  say
Our  Father  who  art  in  Heaven,  to  those  who  have  none
on  earth ;  to  speak  to  them  of  the  dead  whom  they
have  loved,  is  to  insult  them.  A  woman,  whose
mother  had  died  a  short  time  before,  almost  lost  her
desire  to  be  baptized  because  the  command,  Thou
shalt  honor  thy  Father  and  thy  Mother,  had  been  inad-
vertently quoted  to  her.

As  for  the  verbs,  what  is  most  remarkable  in  their
language  is:  1.  That  they  have  some  to  signify
animate  things,  and  others  to  signify  things  without
life.  2.  That  they  vary  their  tenses  in  as  many
ways  as  did  the  Greeks;  their  numbers  also, — be-
sides that  the  first  person,  of  both  the  dual  number
and  the  plural,  is,  moreover,  double;  thus  [83]  to
say  "  we  set  out,  thou  and  I,"  we  must  say  kiarascwa,
and  to  say  "  we  set  out,  he  and  I,"  aiarascwa.  Like-
wise in  the  plural,  "we,  several  of  us,  set  out,"  awa-
rascwa;  "  we,  together,  set  out,"  cwarascwa.

Besides  all  this,  there  is  to  be  noticed  a  double
conjugation,  and  I  believe  that  this  is  common  to  the
American  languages.  The  one  is  simple  and  absolute,
like  our  Latin  and  French  conjugations.  For  ex-
ample, the  verb  ahiaton,  meaning  "  to  write,"  is  con-


122  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

ment  de  cefle  fa9on;  ichiaton,  i'efcris,  chiehiatonc,  tu
efcris,  ihahiatonc ,  il  efcrit,  ab'ahiatonc,  nous  efcriuons,
fcXahiatonc,  vous  efcriuez,  attihiatonc,  ils  efcriuent.

L'autre  fa9on  de  coniuguer  fe  peut  nommer  reci-
proque,  d'autant  que  Taction  fignifiee  par  le  verbe  fe
termine  toufiours  a  quelque  perfonne,  ou  a  quelque
chofe ;  de  forte  que  au  lieu  que  nous  difons  en  trois
mots  ie  m'ayme,  les  Hurons  difent  feulement  iate-
nonhiie,  ie  t'ayme,  onnonhtie',  ie  vous  ayme  tous  deux,
inonhXe,  ie  vous  ayme  vous  plufieurs,  Xanonhtte,  &
ainfi  du  refte.

Ce  que  ie  trouue  de  plus  rare,  eft  qu'il  y  a  vne
coniugaifon  feminine,  au  moins  en  la  troifiefme  per-
fonne, tant  du  fmgulier  que  [84]  du  plurier;  car  nous
n'en  auons  pas  decouuert  dauantage,  ou  bien  peu.
En  voicy  vn  exemple;  ihaton,  il  dit  itfaton,  elle  dit,
ihonton,  ils  difent,  ionton,  elles  difent.  La  principale
diftinction  de  cefte  coniugaifon  feminine  d'auec  la
mafculine  eft  le  manquement  de  la  lettre  H.  dont  la
mafculine  abonde,  peut-eftre  pour  donner  a  entendre
aux  femmes  qu'il  ne  doit  y  auoir  rien  d'afpre  ny  de
feuere  en  leurs  paroles,  &  en  leurs  mceurs,  mais  que
la  grace  &  la  loy  de  clemence  doiuent  eftre  pofees
fur  leurs  langues,  fuiuant  ce  traict  du  Sage,  lex  de-
mentia in  lingua  eius.  C'eft  affez  de  ce  fuiet  pour
cefte  heure,  ft  ce  n'eft  que  quelqu'vn  foit  bien  ayfe
d'apprendre  auffi  quelque  chofe  de  leur  ltile.  Ils
vfent  de  comparaifons,  de  mots  du  temps,  &  de  pro-
uerbes  affez  fouuent.  En  voicy  vn  des  plus  remar-
quables.  Tichiout  etodtcndi;  voila,  difent-ils,  l'eftoile
cheute,  quand  ils  voyent  quelqu'vn  qui  eft  gras  &  en
bon  poinct;  c'eft  qu'ils  tiennent  qu'vn  certain  iour
vne  eftoile  tomba  du  Ciel  en  forme  d'vne  Oye  graffe.
A  mantes  fibi  /omnia  fingunt.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  123

jugated  absolutely  in  this  way:  iehiaton,  I  write;
chiehiatonc,  thou  writest,  ihahiatonc,  he  writes,  awahi-
atonc,  we  write,  scwahiatonc,  you  write,  attihiatonc,
they  write.

The  other  method  of  conjugation  may  be  called
the  reciprocal,  inasmuch  as  the  action  signified  by  the
verb  terminates  always  on  some  person  or  thing ;  so
that,  instead  of  saying,  as  we  do,  in  three  words,  "  I
love  myself,"  the  Hurons  say  only  iatenonhwe';  "  I
love  thee,"  onnonhwe";  "  I  love  you  both,"  inonhwe';
"I  love  you"  (several),  wanonhwe,  and  so  for  the
rest.

What  I  find  most  extraordinary  is  that  there  is  a
feminine  conjugation,  at  least  in  the  third  person  both
of  the  singular  and  [84]  of  the  plural ;  for  we  have
not  discovered  more  of  it,  or  very  little.  Here  is  an
example  of  it:  iliaton,  he  says;  iwaton,  she  says;
ihonton,  they  say  [masculine] ;  ionton,  they  say  [femi-
nine]. The  principal  distinction  of  this  feminine
conjugation  from  the  masculine  is  the  lack  of  the
letter  H,  in  which  the  masculine  abounds, —  perhaps
to  give  the  women  to  understand  that  there  ought  to
be  nothing  rough  or  coarse  in  their  words  or  in  their
manners,  but  that  the  grace  and  law  of  gentleness
ought  to  be  upon  their  tongues,  following  that  rule
of  the  Sage,  lex  clementice  in  lingua  ejus.  This  is
enough  of  this  subject  for  the  present,  unless  it  be
that  some  one  may  wish  to  hear  something  about
their  style.  They  use  comparisons,  time-words,  and
proverbs  very  often.  Here  is  one  of  the  most  remark-
able, Tichiout  etodtendi,  "  Behold,"  they  say,  "  the
fallen  star,"  when  they  see  some  one  who  is  fat  and
corpulent ;  for  they  hold  that  once  upon  a  time  a  star
fell  from  Heaven  in  the  form  of  a  fat  Goose.  Aman-
tes  sibi  somnia  fingunt.


124  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fJ&SUITES [Vol.10


[85]  Seconde  Partie.

De  la  creance,  des  moeurs  &  des  couftumes  des

Hurons.


CHAPITRE  PREMIER.

CE QUE PENSENT LES HURONS DE LEUR ORIGINE.

ON  s'eftonnera  de  voir  tant  d'aueuglement  pour
les  chofes  du  Ciel,  en  vn  Peuple  qui  ne
manque  point  de  raifon  &  de  lumiere,  pour
celles  de  la  terre.  C'eft  ce  que  leurs  vices  &  leurs
brutalitez  leur  ont  merite"  enuers  Dieu.  II  y  a  quel-
que  apparence  qu'ils  ont  eu  autrefois  quelque  co-
gnoiff  ance  du  vray  Dieu  pardeffus  la  nature,  comme  il
fe  peut  remarquer  en  quelques  circonftances  de  leurs
fables;  &  quand  ils  n'en  auroient  point  eu  que  celle
que  la  Nature  leur  pouuoit  fournir,  encore  euffent-ils
deu  eftre  plus  raif onnables  en  ce  fuiet,  s'il  ne  leur  fufl
[86]  arriue  felon  le  dire  de  l'Apoftre.  Cum  cogno-
uiffent  Deum,  non  ficut  Deum  glori fie auer tint,  aut  gratias
egerunt,  fed  cuanuerunt  in  cogitationibus  /tits,  &  obfcura-
tum.  eft  infipiens  cor  eorum.  Pour  n'auoir  pas  voulu
recognoiftre  Dieu  en  leurs  moeurs  &  actions,  ils  en
ont  perdu  la  penfee,  &  font  deuenus  pires  que  beftes
pour  fon  regard,  &  pour  l'eftime  qu'ils  en  ont.

Or  pour  commencer  par  ce  qui  eft  comme  le  fonde-
ment  de  leur  croyance, la  plus  part  fe  vantent  de


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  125


[85]  Part  Second.

On  the  belief,  manners,  and  customs  of  the

Hurons.


CHAPTER  FIRST.

WHAT THE HURONS THINK OF THEIR ORIGIN.

ONE  is  astonished  to  see  so  much  blindness  in
regard  to  the  things  of  Heaven,  in  a  People
who  do  not  lack  judgment  and  knowledge  in
reference  to  those  of  earth.  This  is  what  their  vices
and  brutality  have  merited  from  God.  There  are
some  indications  that  they  had  formerly  some  more
than  natural  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  as  may  be
remarked  in  some  particulars  of  their  fables;  and
even  if  they  had  had  only  that  which  Nature  can  fur-
nish to  them,  still  they  ought  to  have  been  more  rea-
sonable on  this  subject,  if  it  had  not  [86]  happened
to  them  according  to  the  word  of  the  Apostle,  Cum
cognovissent  Deum,  non  sicut  Deum  glorificaverunt,  aut
gratias  egcrunt,  sed  evanuerunt  in  cogitationibus  suis,  et
obscuratum  est  insipiens  cor  eorum.  For  not  having
been  willing  to  acknowledge  God  in  their  habits  and
actions,  they  have  lost  the  thought  of  him  and  have
become  worse  than  beasts  in  his  sight,  and  as  regards
the  respect  they  have  for  him.

Now,  to  begin  with  the  foundation  of  their  belief, —


126  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

tirer  leur  origine  du  Ciel,  ce  qu'ils  fondent  fur  cefte
fable,  qui  paffe  parmy  eux  pour  vne  verite.

lis  recognoiffent  pour  chef  de  leur  Nation  vne  cer-
taine  femme  qu'ils  appellent  Ataentfic,  qui  leur  eft,
difent-ils,  tombee  du  Ciel ;  car  ils  fuppofent  que  les
Cieux  eftoiet  long-temps  auparauant  cefte  merueille,
&  ne  fcauroient  vous  dire,  ny  quand,  ny  comment
ces  grands  corps  ont  efte  tirez  des  abyfmes  du  neant;
ils  fuppofent  mefme  que  fur  les  voutes  des  Cieux  il
y  auoit,  &  y  a  encor  maintenant,  vne  terre  femblable
a  celle-cy,  des  bois,  des  lacs,  des  riuieres  &  des
champs,  comme  nous  auons  icy  bas,  &  des  Peuples
qui  habitent  ces  terres.  Ils  ne  s'accordent  pas  en  la
faco  qu'arriua  cefte  cheute  [87]  fi  heureufe.  Les  vns
difent  qu'vn  iour  qu'elle  trauailloit  dans  fon  champ
elle  apperceut  vn  Ours,  fon  chien  fe  mit  a  le  pour-
fuiure,  &  elle  mefme  apres:  l'Ours  fe  voyant  preffe
de  pres,  &  ne  cherchant  qu'a  efquiuer  les  dents  du
chien,  toba  par  mefgarde  dans  vn  trou;  le  chien  le
fuiuit,  Aataentfic,  s'eftant  approchee  de  ce  precipice,
voyant  que  ny  l'Ours  ny  le  chien  ne  paroiffoient  plus,
touchee  de  defefpoir,  s'y  ietta  auffi;  neantmoins  fa
cheute  fe  trouua  plus  fauorable  qu'elle  n'euft  penfe;
car  elle  tomba  icy  bas  dans  les  eaux  fans  fe  bleffer,
quoy  qu'elle  fuft  enceinte,  apres  quoy  les  eaux  s'eftant
affechees  peu  a  peu,  la  terre  parut,  &  fe  rendit  ha-
bitable.

Les  autres  attribuent  cefte  cheute  a  vne  autre
caufe,  qui  femble  auoir  quelque  rapport  au  fait  d'A-
dam,  mais  le  menfonge  y  a  preualu.  Ils  difent  que
le  mary  d' 'Aataentfic  eftant  fort  malade  fongea  qu'il
f  alloit  couper  vn  certain  arbre  dont  viuoient  ceux  qui
demeuroient  dans  le  Ciel,  &  qu'il  n'auroit  pas  fi  toft


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  127

the  greater  part  boast  of  deriving  their  origin  from
Heaven,  which  they  found  on  the  following  fable,
which  passes  among  them  for  a  truth.

They  recognize  as  head  of  their  Nation  a  certain
woman  whom  they  call  Ataentsic,  who  fell  among
them,  they  say,  from  Heaven. u  For  they  think
the  Heavens  existed  a  long  time  before  this  wonder ;
but  they  cannot  tell  you  when  or  how  its  great  bodies
were  drawn  from  the  abysses  of  nothing.  They  sup-
pose, even,  that  above  the  arches  of  the  Sky  there
was  and  still  is  a  land  like  ours,  with  woods,  lakes,
rivers  and  fields,  and  Peoples  who  inhabit  them.
They  do  not  agree  as  to  the  manner  in  which  this  so
fortunate  descent  occurred.  [87]  Some  say  that  one
day,  as  she  was  working  in  her  field,  she  perceived  a
Bear;  her  dog  began  to  pursue  it  and  she  herself
afterwards.  The  Bear,  seeing  himself  closely  pressed,
and  seeking  only  to  escape  the  teeth  of  the  dog,  fell
by  accident  into  a  hole;  the  dog  followed  him.
Aataentsic,  having  approached  this  precipice,  finding
that  neither  the  Bear  nor  the  dog  were  any  longer  to
be  seen,  moved  by  despair,  threw  herself  into  it  also.
Nevertheless,  her  fall  happened  to  be  more  favorable
than  she  had  supposed ;  for  she  fell  down  into  the
waters  without  being  hurt,  although  she  was  with
child, — after  which,  the  waters  having  dried  up  little
by  little,  the  earth  appeared  and  became  habitable.

Others  attribute  this  fall  to  another  cause,  which
seems  to  have  some  relation  to  the  case  of  Adam,  but
falsehood  makes  up  the  greater  part  of  it.  They  say
that  the  husband  of  Aataentsic,  being  very  sick,
dreamed  that  it  was  necessary  to  cut  down  a  certain
tree  from  which  those  who  abode  in  Heaven  obtained
their  food ;  and  that,  as  soon  as  he  ate  of  the  fruit,


128  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

mange  de  fort  fmict  qu'il  feroit  incontinent  guery.
Aatacntfic  cognoiffant  la  volonte  de  fon  mary,  prend
fa  hache,  &  s'en  va  auec  la  refolutio  de  n'en  faire  a
deux  fois,  mais  elle  n'eut  pas  plutoit  affene  le  premier
[88]  coup,  que  l'arbre  fondit  en  mefme  temps  prefque
fous  fes  pieds,  &  tomba  icy  bas,  dequoy  elle  demeura
fi  eftonnee,  qu'apres  en  auoir  porte  la  nouuelle  a  fon
mary,  elle  retourna  &  fe  ietta  apres.  Or  comme  elle
toboit,  la  Tortue'  leuant  par  hazard  la  tefte  hors  de
l'eau  l'apperceut,  &  ne  fcachant  a  quoy  fe  refoudre,
eftonnee  qu'elle  efloit  de  cefte  merueille,  elle  appelle
les  autres  animaux  aquatiques  pour  prendre  leurs
aduis  ;  les  voila  incontinent  aflemblez,  elle  leur
monftre  ce  qu'elle  voyoit,  leur  demande  ce  qu'ils
iugent  a  propos  de  faire;  la  plufpart  s'en  rapportent
au  Caftor,  lequel  par  bienfeance  remet  le  tout  au
iugemet  de  la  Tortue,  qui  fut  done  enfin  d'aduis
qu'ils  miffent  tous  promptement  la  main  a  l'ceuure,
qu'ils  fe  plongeaflent  au  fond  de  l'eau,  &  en  appor-
taflent  de  la  terre,  &  la  miffent  fur  fon  dos.  Auffi-toft
dit,  auffi-toft  fait,  &  la  femme  tomba  fort  doucement
fur  cefte  Ifle.  Quelque  temps  apres,  comme  elle
efloit  tombee  enceinte,  elle  fe  deliura  d'vne  fille,  la-
quelle  ne  demeura  gueres  fans  eftre  groffe,  fi  vous
leur  demandez  comment,  vous  les  mettez  bien  en
peine ;  tant  y-a,  vous  difent  ils,  qu'elle  fe  trouua
groffe ;  quelques-vns  en  reiettent  la  caufe  fur  quel-
ques  eftragers  [89]  qui  aborderent  a  cefte  Ifle.  Ie
vous  prie  accordez  cecy  auec  ce  qu'ils  difent,  qu'a-
uant  qu' ' Aataentfic  fuft  tombee  du  Ciel,  il  n'y  auoit
point  d'homes  fur  la  terre.  Quoy  que  s'en  foit  elle
enfanta  deux  garcons,  TaXifcaron  &  IXskeha,  lef quels
eftant  deuenus  grands  eurent  quelque  pique  par  en-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  129

he  would  be  immediately  healed.  Aataentsic,  know-
ing the  desire  of  her  husband,  takes  his  axe  and  goes
away  with  the  resolution  not  to  make  two  trips  of  it ;
but  she  had  no  sooner  dealt  the  first  [88]  blow  than
the  tree  at  once  split,  almost  under  her  feet,  and  fell
to  this  earth ;  whereupon  she  was  so  astonished  that,
after  having  carried  the  news  to  her  husband,  she  re-
turned and  threw  herself  after  it.  Now,  as  she  fell,
the  Turtle,  happening  to  raise  her  head  above  water,
perceived  her;  and,  not  knowing  what  to  decide  upon,
astonished  as  she  was  at  this  wonder,  she  called  to-
gether the  other  aquatic  animals  to  get  their  opinion.
They  immediately  assembled ;  she  points  out  to  them
what  she  saw,  and  asks  them  what  they  think  it  fit-
ting to  do.  The  greater  part  refer  the  matter  to  the
Beaver,  who,  through  courtesy,  hands  over  the  whole
to  the  judgment  of  the  Turtle,  whose  final  opinion  was
that  they  should  all  promptly  set  to  work,  dive  to
the  bottom  of  the  water,  bring  up  soil  to  her,  and  put
it  on  her  back.  No  sooner  said  than  done,  and  the
woman  fell  very  gently  on  this  Island.  Some  time
after,  as  she  was  with  child  when  she  fell,  she  was
delivered  of  a  daughter,  who  almost  immediately  be-
came pregnant.  If  you  ask  them  how,  you  puzzle
them  very  much.  At  all  events,  they  tell  you,  she
was  pregnant.  Some  throw  the  blame  upon  some
strangers,  [89]  who  landed  on  this  Island.  I  pray
you  make  this  agree  with  what  they  say,  that,  be-
fore Aataentsic  fell  from  the  Sky,  there  were  no  men
on  earth.  However  that  may  be,  she  brought  forth
two  boys,  Tawiscaron  and  Iouskeha,  who,  when  they
grew  up,  had  some  quarrel  with  each  other;  judge  if
this  does  not  relate  in  some  way  to  the  murder  of
Abel. They  came  to  blows,  but  with  very  different


130  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.10

femble ;  iugez  fi  cela  ne  reffent  point  quelque  chofe
du  maffacre  d'Abel.  lis  en  vindrent  aux  mains;  mais
auec  des  armes  bien  differentes;  IXskeha  auoit  le  bois
d'vn  Cerf,  TaXifcaron  fe  contenta  de  quelques  fruits
de  rofier  fauuage,  fe  perfuadant  qu'il  n'en  auroit  pas
fi  toil  frappe  fon  frere,  qu'il  tomberoit  mort  a  fes
pieds;  mais  il  en  arriua  tout  autrement  qu'il  ne
s'eftoit  promis,  &  IXskeha  au  contraire  luy  porta  vn  fi
rude  coup  dans  les  flancs,  que  le  fang  en  fortit  en
abodance.  Ce  pauure  miferable  fe  miit  aum-toft  en
fuite,  &  de  fon  fang,  dont  ces  terres  furent  arroufees,
nafquirent  certaines  pierres  femblables  a  celles  dont
nous  nous  feruons  en  France  pour  battre  le  fufil,  que
les  Sauuages  appellent  encor  auiourd'huy  TaXifcara,
du  nom  de  cet  infortUne,  fon  frere  le  pourfuiuit  &
l'acheua :  voila  ce  que  la  plufpart  croyent  de  l'origine
de  ces  Nations.

[90]  II  y  en  a  qui  ne  montent  pas  fi  haut,  &  ne  font
pas  ambitieux  iufques  a  ce  poinct,  que  de  croire  qu'ils
ayent  tire  leur  origine  du  Ciel.  lis  difent  qu'au  com-
mencement du  monde  la  terre  eftoit  toute  couuerte
d'eau,  a  la  referue  d'vne  petite  Ifle  qui  portoit  toute
l'efperance  du  genre  humain,  fcauoir  eft  vn  feul
homme,  qui  n 'auoit  pour  toute  compagnie  qu'vn  Re-
nard  &  vn  petit  animal  femblable  a  vne  Foiiine,  qu'ils
appellent  TfShendaia.  L'homme  ne  fcachant  que
faire  fe  voyant  retranche  dans  vne  fi  petite  etendue
de  pays  inuita  le  Renard  a  fe  plonger  dans  l'eau  pour
voir  s'il  y  auoit  fonds,  mais  il  ne  fe  fut  fi  toft  moiiille
les  pattes  qu'il  fe  retira,  craignant  que  cefte  experi-
ence ne  luy  couftaft  la  vie.  Dequoy  l'homme  s'eftant
indigne,  Tejjfatidio  tu  n'as  point  d'efprit,  luy  dit-il,  &
le  ietta  dans  l'eau  d'vn  coup  de  pied,  ou  il  beut  vn


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  131

weapons.  Iouskeha  had  the  horns  of  a  Stag;  Tawis-
caron,  who  contented  himself  with  some  fruits  of  the
wild  rosebush,  was  persuaded  that,  as  soon  as  he  had
struck  his  brother,  he  would  fall  dead  at  his  feet.
But  it  happened  quite  differently  from  what  he  had
expected;  and  Iouskeha,  on  the  contrary,  struck  him
so  rude  a  blow  in  the  side,  that  the  blood  came  forth
abundantly.  This  poor  wretch  immediately  fled;
and  from  his  blood,  with  which  the  land  was
sprinkled,  certain  stones  sprang  up,  like  those  we
employ  in  France  to  fire  a  gun, —  which  the  Savages
call  even  to-day  Tawiscara,  from  the  name  of  this  un-
fortunate. His  brother  pursued  him,  and  finished
him.  This  is  what  the  greater  part  believe  concern-
ing the  origin  of  these  Nations.

[90]  There  are  some  who  do  not  soar  so  high,  and
are  not  so  ambitious  as  to  believe  that  they  derive
their  origin  from  Heaven.  They  say  that,  in  the  be-
ginning of  the  world,  the  land  was  quite  covered
with  water,  with  the  exception  of  a  little  Island  on
which  was  the  sole  hope  of  the  human  race, — to  wit,
a  single  man,  whose  sole  companions  were  a  Fox  and
a  little  animal  like  a  Marten,  which  they  call  Tsou-
hendaia.  The  man,  not  knowing  what  to  do,  seeing
himself  cut  off  in  so  narrow  a  range  of  country,  asked
the  Fox  to  plunge  into  the  water,  to  see  if  there  were
any  bottom  to  it ;  but  he  had  no  sooner  wet  his  paws
than  he  drew  back,  fearing  that  this  experience  would
cost  him  his  life.  Whereupon  the  man  became  in-
dignant; "  Tessandion,  thou  hast  no  sense,"  he  said  to
him,  and  kicked  him  into  the  water,  where  he  drank
a  little  more  than  his  fill.  However  he  did  not  de-
sist from  his  design,  and  so  encouraged  the  little  ani-
mal that  was  now  his  sole  companion,  that  it  finally


132  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.10

peu  plus  que  fon  faoul.  Cependant  il  ne  defifla  point
de  fon  deffein,  &  encouragea  fi  bien  ce  petit  animal
qui  luy  reftoit  de  compagnie,  qu'il  fe  refolut  en  fin
de  fe  plonger,  &  comme  il  ne  s'imaginoit  pas  qu'il  y
euft  fi  peu  de  fond,  il  le  fit  fi  rudement,  qu'il  fe  heur-
ta  bien  fort  contre  la  terre,  &  en  rapporta  le  muzeau
tout  couuert  de  vafe;  l'horame  bien  refiouy  [91]  de
cefle  heureufe  defcouuerte,  l'exhorte  de  continuer,
&  d'apporter  de  la  terre  pour  croiflre  cefle  Iflette ;  ce
qu'il  fit  auec  tant  d'affiduite,  qu'il  luy  fit  perdre  fon
nom,  &  la  changea  en  ces  vaftes  campagnes  que  nous
voyons.  Si  vous  les  preflez  encor  icy,  &  leur  deman-
dez  ce  qu'ils  penfent  de  cet  homme,  qui  luy  a  donne
la  vie?  qui  l'a  mis  fur  cefle  petite  Ifle?  comment  il  a
peu  eflre  le  pere  de  toutes  ces  Nations,  puis  qu'il
efloit  feul,  &  n'auoit  point  de  compagne ;  vous  ne
gagnerez  rien  de  leur  faire  toutes  ces  queflions,  au
moins  n'aurez  vous  que  cefle  folution,  qui  ne  feroit
pas  mauuaife,  fi  leur  Religion  efloit  bonne ;  Nous  ne
J 'gallons,  on  le  dit  ainfi,  nos  Peres  ne  nous  en  ont  pas  enf ei-
gne dauant  age.  Que  diriez  vous  a  cela?  tout  ce  que
nous  faifons  c'efl  de  leur  tefmoigner  que  nous  leur
portons  compaffion  de  les  voir  dans  vne  fi  groifiere
ignorance ;  nous  prenons  de  la  fuiet,  quand  nous  les
en  iugeons  capables,  de  leur  expliquer  quelques  vns
de  nos  Myfleres,  &  de  leur  monilrer  combien  ils  font
conformes  a  la  raifon ;  ils  les  entendent  fort  volon-
tiers,  &  en  demeurent  grandement  fatisfaits.

Mais  pour  retourner  a  Aatacntfic  &  IXskeka,  ils  tien-
nent  que  IXskeha  ell  le  Soleil,  &  [92]  Aataentfic  la
Lune,  &  toutesfois  que  leur  Cabane  eft  fituee  au  bout
de  la  terre,  c'efl  a  dire  vers  noflre  mer  Oceane :  car
au  dela  c'efl  vn  pays  perdu  pour  eux,  &  auant  qu'ils


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  133

resolved  to  plunge  in ;  and  as  it  did  not  imagine  that
the  water  was  so  shallow,  it  did  this  so  violently  as
to  dash  itself  against  the  bottom,  and  came  back  with
its  snout  all  covered  with  slime.  The  man,  very
glad  [91]  at  this  happy  discovery,  exhorts  it  to  con-
tinue, and  to  bring  up  soil  to  increase  the  size  of  the
Islet ;  which  it  did  with  so  much  assiduity,  that  the
Islet  lost  its  identity,  and  was  changed  into  these
vast  fields  that  we  see.  If  you  again  press  them
here,  and  ask  them  what  they  think  of  this  man, —
who  gave  him  life,  who  put  him  upon  this  little  Is-
land, how  he  could  become  the  father  of  all  these  Na-
tions, since  he  was  alone  and  had  no  companion ;  you
will  gain  nothing  by  asking  all  these  questions,  ex-
cept that  you  will  get  this  solution,  which  would  not
be  bad,  if  their  Religion  were  good,  We  do  not  know;
we  were  told  so;  our  Fathers  never  taught  us  any  more
about  it.  What  would  you  say  to  that?  All  that  we
do  is  to  bear  witness  to  them  that  we  feel  compassion
for  their  so  gross  ignorance;  we  take  thence  occa-
sion, when  we  judge  them  capable  of  appreciating
it,  for  explaining  some  of  our  Mysteries,  and  of
showing  them  how  fully  they  conform  to  reason.
They  listen  very  willingly,  and  are  well  satisfied
therewith.

But  to  return  to  Aataentsic  and  Iouskeha;  they  hold
that  Iouskeha  is  the  Sun vi  and  [92]  Aataentsic  the
Moon,  and  yet  that  their  Home  is  situated  at  the  ends
of  the  earth,  namely,  toward  our  Ocean  sea;  for  be-
yond that  it  is  a  lost  country  to  them,  and  before
they  had  any  commerce  with  the  French  they  had
never  dreamed  that  there  was  under  Heaven  a  differ-
ent land  from  their  own, — and,  now  that  they  are
disabused  of  this  idea,  many  still  believe  that  their


134  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.10

euflent  eu  quelque  commerce  auec  nos  Francois,  ils
ne  s'imaginoient  pas  qu'il  y  euft  fous  le  Ciel  vne
autre  terre  que  la  leur,  &  maintenant  qu'ils  font  def-
abufez  de  ce  cofte-la,  encor  croyent-ils,  au  moins  plu-
fieurs,  que  leur  terre  &  la  noftre  font  deux  pieces
tout  a  fait  detachees,  &  parties  des  mains  de  diuers
ouuriers.  Ils  difent  done  que  quatre  ieunes  hommes
entreprirent  autresfois  ce  voyage  pour  s'informer
eux-mefmes  de  la  verite,  qu'ils  trouuerent  IXskeha
tout  feul  dans  fa  Cabane  qui  les  receut  fort  humaine-
ment.  Apres  quelques  complimes  de  part  &  d'autre
a  la  mode  du  Pays,  il  leur  donna  aduis  de  fe  cacher
en  quelque  coing,  autrement  qu'il  ne  refpondoit  pas
de  leur  vie,  qu'AataentJic  eftoit  pour  leur  ioiier  vn
mauuais  tour,  s'ils  ne  fe  tenoient  fur  leur  garde.
Cefte  Megere  arriue  fur  le  foir,  &  comme  elle  prend
telle  figure  que  bon  luy  femble,  s'apperceuant  qu'il
y  auoit  de  nouueaux  hoftes  en  la  maifon,  elle  prift
la  forme  d'vne  belle  ieune  fille  bien  paree,  auec  vn
beau  collier,  &  des  bracellets  de  [93]  Pourcelaine,  &
demanda  a  f on  fils  oil  eftoient  f es  hoftes ;  il  refpond
qu'il  ne  fcauoit  ce  qu'elle  vouloit  dire,  la  deffus  elle
fort  de  la  Cabane,  ISskeka  fe  feruit  de  l'occafion  pour
auertir  fes  hoftes,  &  leur  fauua  la  vie.  Or  encor  que
leur  Cabane  foit  fi  fort  efloignee,  ils  fe  trouuent  ne-
antmoins  l'vn  &  1 'autre  aux  feftins,  &  aux  danfes  qui
fe  font  par  les  villages,  Aataentfic  y  eft  fouuent  bien
bourree,  IXskeha  en  reiette  la  faute  fur  vn  certain  0K1
cornu  appelle  Tehorreffandecn,  mais  il  fe  trouue  au
bout  du  conte  que  e'eft  luy  mefme  qui  fe  defguife,  &
outrage  ainfi  fa  mere.

Au  refte  ils  s'eftiment  grandement  obligez  a  ce  per-
fonnage;  car  premierement,  au  dire  de  quelques-vns


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  135

country  and  ours  are  two  pieces  quite  separate,  and
made  by  the  hands  of  different  workmen.  They
say,  therefore,  that  four  young  men  once  undertook
a  journey  to  find  out  the  truth  about  it ;  that  they
found  Ioiiskeha  quite  alone  in  his  Cabin,  and  that  he
received  them  very  kindly.  After  some  compliments
on  both  sides,  in  the  fashion  of  the  Country,  he  ad-
vised them  to  conceal  themselves  in  some  corner,
otherwise  he  would  not  answer  for  their  lives ;  that
Aataentsic  was  sure  to  play  them  a  bad  trick,  if  they
did  not  keep  on  their  guard.  This  Fury  arrives  to-
ward evening,  and,  as  she  assumes  any  form  she
sees  fit,  perceiving  that  there  were  new  guests  in  the
house  she  took  the  form  of  a  beautiful  young  girl,
handsomely  adorned,  with  a  beautiful  necklace  and
bracelets  of  [93]  Porcelain,  and  asked  her  son  where
his  guests  were.  He  replied  that  he  did  not  know
what  she  meant.  Thereupon  she  went  out  of  the
Cabin,  and  Iouskeha  took  the  opportunity  to  warn  his
guests,  and  thus  saved  their  lives.  Now,  although
their  Cabin  is  so  very  distant,  they  are  nevertheless
both  present  at  the  feasts  and  dances  which  take
place  in  the  villages.  Aataentsic  is  often  badly  abused
there.  Iouskeha  throws  the  blame  on  a  certain  horned
oki  named  Tehonrressandeen;  but  it  is  found  at  the
end  of  the  tale  that  it  is  he  himself  who,  under  that
disguise,  thus  insults  his  mother.

Moreover,  they  esteem  themselves  greatly  obliged
to  this  personage ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  according
to  the  opinion  of  some, —  who  hold  a  belief  quite  con-
trary to  that  of  those  whom  we  have  mentioned  thus
far, —  without  him  we  would  not  have  so  many  fine
rivers  and  so  many  beautiful  lakes.  In  the  begin-
ning of  the  world,  they  say,  the  earth  was  dry  and


136  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

qui  font  dans  vne  opinion  toute  contraire  a  ceux  dont
nous  auos  parle  iufques  a  prefent,  fans  luy  nous  n'au-
rions  pas  tant  de  belles  riuieres,  &  tant  de  beaux
lacs.  Au  commencement  du  monde,  difent-ils,  la
terre  eftoit  feiche  &  aride,  &  toutes  les  eaux  eftoient
ramaffees  fous  l'aiffelle  d'vne  grofle  grenoiiille,  de
forte  que  Itfskeha  n'en  pouuoit  auoir  vne  goutte  que
par  fon  entremife.  Vn  iour  il  fe  refolut  de  fe  deli-
urer  luy  &  toute  fa  Pofterite  de  cefte  feruitude,  &
pour  en  venir  a  bout,  il  luy  fit  [94]  vne  incifion  fous
l'aifTelle,  d'ou  les  eaux  fortirent  en  telle  abondance,
qu'elles  fe  repandirent  par  toute  la  terre,  &  de  la  les
fleuues,  les  lacs,  &  les  mers  ont  pris  naiffance.  Voies
fi  ce  n'eft  pas  fouldre  fubtilement  la  queftio  de  nos
Echoles  fur  ce  poinct.  lis  tiennent  auffi  que  fans
IXskeha  leur  chaudiere  ne  pourroit  bouillir,  &  qu'il  a
appris  de  la  Tortue  l'inuention  de  faire  du  feu.  Sans
luy  ils  ne  feroient  pas  fi  bonne  chaff e,  &  n'auroient
pas  tant  de  facilite  a  prendre,  comme  ils  font,  les
animaux  a  la  courfe ;  car  ils  font  dans  cefte  croyance
que  les  animaux  n'ont  pas  efte  en  liberie  des  le  com-
mencement du  monde,  mais  qu'ils  eftoient  renfermez
dans  vne  grande  cauerne,  oil  IXskeha  les  gardoit:
peut-eftre  y  a-il  en  cela  quelque  allufion  a  ce  que
Dieu  amena  tous  les  animaux  a  Adam.  Qu'vn  iour
il  fe  refolut  de  leur  donner  conge  arm  qu'ils  multipli-
affent,  &  rempliffent  les  forefts,  en  telle  facon  neant-
moins  qu'il  en  peuft  ayfement  difpofer  quand  bon
luy  fembleroit.  Voicy  ce  qu'il  fit  pour  en  venir  a
bout.  A  mefure  qu'ils  fortirent  de  cet  antre,  il  les
bleffa  tous  au  pied  d'vn  coup  de  fleche ;  toutesfois  le
Loup  efquiua  le  coup;  de  la  vient,  difent-ils,  qu'ils
ont  de  la  peine  a  le  prendre  a  la  courfe.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  137

arid ;  all  the  waters  were  collected  under  the  armpit
of  a  large  frog,  so  that  Iouskclia  could  not  have  a  drop
except  through  its  agency.  One  day,  he  resolved  to
deliver  himself  and  all  his  Posterity  from  this  servi-
tude; and,  in  order  to  attain  this,  he  made  [94]  an
incision  under  the  armpit,  whence  the  waters  came
forth  in  such  abundance  that  they  spread  throughout
the  whole  earth,  and  hence  the  origin  of  rivers,  lakes,
and  seas.  Behold  here  a  subtle  solution  of  the  ques-
tion of  our  Schools  upon  this  point.  They  hold  also
that  without  Iouskeha  their  kettles  would  not  boil,  as
he  learned  from  the  Turtle  the  process  of  making
fire.  Were  it  not  for  him,  they  would  not  have  such
good  hunting,  and  would  not  have  so  much  ease  in
capturing  animals  in  the  chase,  as  they  now  have.
For  they  believe  that  animals  were  not  at  liberty
from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  but  that  they  were
shut  up  in  a  great  cavern,  where  Iouskeha  guarded
them.  Perhaps  there  may  be  in  that  some  allusion
to  the  fact  that  God  brought  all  the  animals  to  Adam.
However,  one  day  he  determined  to  give  them  liber-
ty in  order  that  they  might  multiply  and  fill  the  for-
ests,—  in  such  a  way,  nevertheless,  that  he  might
easily  dispose  of  them  when  it  should  seem  good  to
him.  This  is  what  he  did  to  accomplish  his  end.
In  the  order  in  which  they  came  from  the  cave,  he
wounded  them  all  in  the  foot  with  an  arrow.  How-
ever, the  Wolf  escaped  the  shot;  hence,  they  say,
they  have  great  difficulty  in  catching  him  in  the
chase.

[95]  They  pass  yet  beyond  this,  and  regard  him  as
profane  Antiquity  once  did  Ceres.  According  to
their  story,  it  is  Iouskeha  who  gives  them  the  wheat
they  eat,  it  is  he  who  makes  it  grow  and  brings  it  to


138  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

[95]  lis  paffent  encor  plus  auant,  &  le  regardent
comme  faifoit  iadis  l'Antiquite  profane,  vne  Ceres;  a
les  entendre  c'eft  IXskeha  qui  leur  donne  le  bled  qu'ils
mangent,  c'eft  luy  qui  le  fait  croiftre,  &  le  conduit  a
maturite ;  s'ils  voyent  leurs  campagnes  verdoyates  au
Printemps,  s'ils  recueillent  de  belles  &  plantureufes
moiffons,  &  ft  leurs  Cabanes  regorgent  d'efpics,  ils
n'en  ont  l'obligation  qu'a  IXskeka.  Ie  ne  fcay  ce  que
Dieu  nous  garde  cefle  annee,  mais  a  entendre  les
bruits  qui  courent  nous  fommes  menacez  tout  de  bon
d'vne  grande  fterilite.  On  a  veu,  dit-on,  Itfske/ia,
tout-defait  &  maigre  comme  vne  fquelete,  auec  vn
epy  en  fa  main  mal  fourny;  d'autres  adiouftent  qu'il
portoit  vne  iambe  d'h'omme,  &  la  dechiroit  a  belles
dents;  tout  cela,  difent-ils,  eft  vne  marque  indubi-
table d'vne  fort  mauuaife  annee :  mais  le  plailir  eft,
qu'il  ne  fe  trouue  dans  le  Pays  qui  dife,  ie  l'ay  veu,
ou  ay  parle  a  homme  qui  l'a  veu,  &  cependant  tout
le  monde  croit  cecy  comme  vne  chofe  indubitable,  &
perfonne  ne  fe  met  en  peine  de  faire  vne  plus  curi-
eufe  recherche  de  la  verite.  S'il  plaifoit  a  la  diuine
Bonte  faire  mentir  ces  faux  Prophetes,  ce  ne  nous  fe-
roit  pas  vn  petit  auantage  pour  authorifer  noftre  [96]
croyance  dans  le  Pays,  &  donner  cours  a  la  publica-
tion du  fainct  Euangile.  Nous  auos  receu,  &  rece-
uons  tous  les  iours  tant  de  faueurs  du  Ciel,  que  nous
auons  fuiet  d'efperer  encor  celle-cy,  ft  tant  eft  que
ce  foit  la  gloire  de  Dieu.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  139

maturity.  If  they  see  their  fields  verdant  in  the
Spring,  if  they  reap  good  and  abundant  harvests,  and
if  their  Cabins  are  crammed  with  ears  of  corn,  they
owe  it  to  Iouskeha.  I  do  not  know  what  God  has  in
store  for  us  this  year ;  but,  to  judge  from  the  reports
going  round,  we  are  threatened  in  earnest  with  a
great  scarcity.  Iouskeha,  it  is  reported,  has  been  seen
quite  dejected,  and  thin  as  a  skeleton,  with  a  poor
ear  of  corn  in  his  hand.  Some  add  that  he  was  car-
rying a  man's  leg  and  was  tearing  it  with  sharp
teeth.  All  this,  they  say,  is  an  indubitable  sign  of  a
very  bad  year.  But  the  fun  of  it  is,  no  one  can  be
found  in  the  Country  who  will  say,  "  I  have  seen
him,  or  I  have  spoken  to  a  man  that  has  seen  him;  "
and  yet  every  one  deems  this  an  indubitable  fact,
and  no  man  takes  the  trouble  to  make  a  more  search-
ing inquiry  into  the  truth  of  it.  If  it  should  please
the  divine  Goodness  to  prove  these  false  Prophets
untruthful,  it  would  be  no  small  advantage  to  add
authority  to  our  [96]  faith  in  this  Country,  and  to
open  the  way  for  the  publication  of  the  holy  Gospel.
We  have  received  and  are  receiving  every  day  so
many  favors  from  Heaven  that  we  have  reason  to
hope  for  this  one  as  well,  if  it  is  for  the  glory  of  God.


140  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


CHAPITRE  II.

QUEL EST LE SENTIMENT DES HURONS TOUCHANT

LA NATURE & L'ESTAT DE L'AME, TANT EN

C'EST  VIE, qu'apres LA MORT.

CJ  EST  vn  plaifir  de  lesentendre  parler  des  ames,
cm  pour  mieux  dire,  c'eft  vne  chofe  tout  a
fait  digne  de  compaffion,  de  voir  des  hommes
raifonnables,  auoir  des'  fentimens  fi  bas,  d'vne  effence
fi  noble,  &  qui  porte  des  traicts  fi  vifs  de  la  Diuinite.
lis  luy  donnent  diuers  noms  felon  fes  diuers  eftats
ou  diuerfes  operations.  Entant  qu'elle  anime  feule-
ment  le  corps,  &  luy  donne  la  vie,  ils  l'appellent  k/«-
ondhectii;  entant  qu'elle  eft  raifonnable,  oKt  andae'randi,
femblable  a  vn  demon,  qui  contrefait  le  demon :  en-
tant qu'elle  penfe  &  delibere  [97]  fur  quelque  chofe,
ils  l'appellet  endionrra,  &  gonennoncttal,  en  tant  qu'elle
fe  porte  d 'affection  vers  quelque  obiect,  d'oii  vient
qu'ils  difent  fouuent,  ondayee  that  on  onennoncttat ;  voila
ce  que  le  cceur  me  dit,  voila  ce  que  mon  appetit  de-
fire.  Maintenant  fi  elle  eft  feparee  du  corps,  ils  l'ap-
pellent esken,  &  les  os  mefmes  des  morts  atisken ;  a
mon  auis  fur  cette  fauffe  perfuafion  qu'ils  ont,  que
l'ame  y  demeure  en  quelque  faco  attachee  quelque
temps  apres  la  mort,  au  moins  qu'elle  n'en  eft  pas
beaucoup  eloignee,  ils  fe  la  figurent  diuifibles;  &
vous  auriez  toutes  les  peines  du  monde  a  leur  faire
croire,  que  noftre  ame  eft  toute  entiere  en  toutes  les
parties  de  noftre  corps, ils  luy  donnet  mefme  vne


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  141


CHAPTER  II.

THE IDEAS  OF  THE HURONS REGARDING  THE NATURE

AND CONDITION OF THE SOUL, BOTH IN

THIS  LIFE  AND  AFTER  DEATH.

IT  is  amusing  to  hear  them  speak  of  their  souls, —
•  or  rather,  I  should  say,  it  is  a  thing  quite  worthy
of  compassion  to  see  reasonable  men,  with  senti-
ments so  low  concerning  an  essence  so  noble  and
bearing  so  distinct  marks  of  Divinity.  They  give  it
different  names  according  to  its  different  conditions
or  different  operations.  In  so  far  as  it  merely  ani-
mates the  body  and  gives  it  life,  they  call  it  kkion-
dheczvi;  in  so  far  as  it  is  possessed  of  reason,  oki  an-
datrandi,  "like  a  demon,  counterfeiting  a  demon;"
in  so  far  as  it  thinks  and  deliberates  [97]  on  any-
thing, they  call  it  endionrra;  and  gonennoncwal,  in  so
far  as  it  bears  affection  to  any  object;  whence  it  hap-
pens that  they  often  say  ondayee  that  on  onennoncwat ,
"  That  is  what  my  heart  says  to  me,  that  is  what  my
appetite  desires."  Then  if  it  is  separated  from  the
body  they  call  it  esken,  and  even  the  bones  of  the
dead,  atisken, —  in  my  opinion,  on  the  false  persua-
sion entertained  by  them  that  the  soul  remains  in
some  way  attached  to  them  for  some  time  after  death,
at  least  that  it  is  not  far  removed  from  them ;  they
think  of  the  soul  as  divisible,  and  you  would  have  all
the  difficulty  in  the  world  to  make  them  believe  that
our  soul  is  entire  in  all  parts  of  the  body.  They
give  to  it  even  a  head,  arms,  legs, —  in  short,  a  body;


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

tefte,  des  bras,  des  iambes,  en  vn  mot  vn  corps;  &
pour  les  mettre  bien  en  peine,  il  ne  faut  que  leur  de-
mander  par  oii  Tame  fort  a  la  mort,  fi  tant  eft  qu'elle
foit  corporelle,  &  ayt  vn  corps  auffi  grand  que  celuy
qu'elle  anime;  car  a  cela  ils  n'ont  point  dereponfe.

Pour  ce  qui  eft  de  l'eftat  de  l'ame  apres  la  mort,
ils  tiennent  qu'elle  fe  fepare  tellement  du  corps,
qu'elle  ne  l'abandonne  pas  incontinent:  quand  on  le
porte  au  [98]  tombeau,  elle  marche  deuat,  &  demeure
dans  le  cimetiere  iufques  a  la  fefte  des  Morts;  de
nuict  elle  fe  pourmene  par  les  villages,  &  entre  dans
les  Cabanes,  oii  elle  prend  fa  part  des  feftins,  &
mange  de  ce  qui  eft  refte  le  foir  dans  la  chaudiere;
d'oii  vient  que  plufieurs,  pour  cette  confideration,
n'en  mangent  pas  volontiers  le  lendemain;  il  y  en  a
mefme  qui  ne  fe  trouuent  point  aux  feftins  qui  fe  font
pour  les  ames,  croyans  qu'ils  mourroient  indubitable-
ment,  s'ils  auoient  feulement  goufte  des  viandes  qui
leur  font  preparees ;  d'autres  neantmoins  ne  font  pas
fi  fcrupuleux,  &  en  mangent  tout  leur  faoul.

A  la  fefte  des  Morts,  qui  fe  fait  enuiron  de  douze
en  douze  ans,  les  ames  quittent  les  cimetieres,  &  au
dire  de  quelques-vns  fe  changent  en  Tourterelles,
qu'ils  perfecutent  par  apres  a  coups  de  fleches  dans
les  bois  pour  en  faire  grillade  &  les  manger ;  neant-
moins la  plus  commune  creance  eft,  qu'apres  cette
ceremonie,  dont  ie  parleray  icy  bas,  elles  s'en  vont
de  compagnie,  couuertes  qu' elles  font  des  robbes  &
des  colliers  qu'on  leur  a  mis  dans  la  foffe,  a  vn  grand
Village,  qui  eft  vers  le  [99]  Soleil  couchant,  excepte
toutefois  les  vieillards  &  les  petits  enfans,  qui  n'ont
pas  fi  bonnes  iambes  que  les  autres,  pour  pouuoir
faire  ce  voyage :  ceux-cy  demeurent  dans  le  pays,  ou


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  143

and  to  put  them  in  great  perplexity  it  is  only  neces-
sary to  ask  them  by  what  exit  the  soul  departs  at
death,  if  it  be  really  corporeal,  and  has  a  body  as
large  as  that  which  it  animates;  for  to  that  they
have  no  reply.

As  to  what  is  the  state  of  the  soul  after  death,  they
hold  that  it  separates  in  such  a  way  from  the  body
that  it  does  not  abandon  it  immediately.  When  they
bear  it  to  the  [98]  grave,  it  walks  in  front,  and  re-
mains in  the  cemetery  until  the  feast  of  the  Dead ;
by  night,  it  walks  through  the  villages  and  enters
the  Cabins,  where  it  takes  its  part  in  the  feasts,  and
eats  what  is  left  at  evening  in  the  kettle ;  whence  it
happens  that  many,  on  this  account,  do  not  willingly
eat  from  it  on  the  morrow ;  there  are  even  some  of
them  who  will  not  go  to  the  feasts  made  for  the
souls,  believing  that  they  would  certainly  die  if  they
should  even  taste  of  the  provisions  prepared  for  them ;
others,  however,  are  not  so  scrupulous,  and  eat
their  fill.

At  the  feast  of  the  Dead,  which  takes  place  about
every  twelve  years,  the  souls  quit  the  cemeteries,
and  in  the  opinion  of  some  are  changed  into  Turtle-
doves, which  they  pursue  later  in  the  woods,  with
bow  and  arrow,  to  broil  and  eat;  nevertheless  the
most  common  belief  is  that  after  this  ceremony,  of
which  I  shall  speak  below,  they  go  away  in  company,
covered  as  they  are  with  robes  and  collars  which
have  been  put  into  the  grave  for  them,  to  a  great
Village,  which  is  toward  the  [99]  setting  Sun, —  ex-
cept, however,  the  old  people  and  the  little  children
who  have  not  as  strong  limbs  as  the  others  to  make
this  voyage;  these  remain  in  the  country,  where
they  have  their  own  particular  Villages. Some  as-


144  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£ SUITES [Vol.10

ils  ont  leurs  Villages  particuliers ;  on  entend  quel-
qnefois,  difent-ils,  le  bruit  des  portes  de  leurs  Ca-
banes,  &  les  voix  des  enfans  qui  chaffent  les  oyfeaux
de  leurs  champs,  ils  fement  des  bleds  en  la  faifon,
&  fe  feruent  des  champs  que  les  viuans  ont  abandon-
nez;  s'il  fe  brufle  quelque  Village,  ce  qui  arriue  fou-
uent  en  ce  pays,  ils  ont  foin  de  ramaffer  du  milieu  de
cette  incendie  le  bled  rofty,  &  en  font  vne  partie  de
leurs  prouifions.

Les  ames  qui  font  plus  fortes  &  plus  robuftes,  ont
leur  rendez-vous, 'comme  i'ay  deja  dit,  vers  l'Occi-
dent,  oil  chaque  Nation  a  fon  Village  particulier,  &
fi  l'ame  d'vn  Algonquin  eftoit  fi  hardie  de  fe  prefenter
au  Village  des  ames  de  la  Nation  des  Ours,  elle  n'y
feroit  pas  la  bien  venue.

Les  ames  de  ceux  qui  font  morts  en  guerre  font
bande  a  part,  les  autres  les  craignent,  &  ne  leur  per-
mettent  point  l'entree  de  leur  Village,  non  plus
qu'aux  [ioo]  ames  de  ceux  qui  fe  font  defaits  eux-
mefmes.  Quant  aux  ames  des  larrons,  elles  y  font
les  bien  venues,  &  fi  elles  en  eftoiet  bannies,  il  n'y
refteroit  ame  qui  viue.  Car,  comme  i'ay  dit,  Huron
&  larron  ne  font  qu'vn ;  &  le  plus  homme  de  bien  du
Pays  fera  tout  ce  qu'il  pourra  pour  faire  fa  main,  s'il
trouue  quelque  chofe  chez  vous  a  l'ecart  qui  luy
agree.

Ie  demandois  vn  iour  a  vn  de  nos  Sauuages,  oil  ils
penfoient  que  fuft  le  Village  des  ames,  il  me  repon-
dit  qu'il  eftoit  vers  la  Nation  du  Petun,  c'eft  a  dire
vers  l'Occident,  a  huict  lieues  de  nous,  &  que  quel-
ques-vns  les  auoient  veue's  comme  elles  y  alloient,
que  le  chemin  qu'elles  tenoient  eftoit  large,  &  affez
battu,  qu'elles  paffoient  aupres  d'vne  roche,  qu'ils  ap-


1636 J  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  163b  145

sert  that  at  times  they  hear  the  noise  of  the  doors  of
their  Cabins,  and  the  voices  of  the  children  chasing
the  birds  in  the  fields.  They  sow  corn  in  its  season,
and  use  the  fields  the  living  have  abandoned ;  if  any
Village  takes  fire,  which  often  happens  in  this  coun-
try, they  take  care  to  gather  from  the  middle  of  this
fire  the  roasted  corn,  and  lay  it  by  as  a  part  of  their
provisions.

The  souls  which  are  stronger  and  more  robust
have  their  gathering  place,  as  I  have  said,  toward
the  West,  where  each  Nation  has  its  own  Village;
and  if  the  soul  of  an  Algonquin  were  bold  enough  to
present  itself  at  the  Village  of  the  Bear  Nation's
souls,  it  would  not  be  well  received.

The  souls  of  those  who  died  in  war  form  a  band
by  themselves ;  the  others  fear  them,  and  do  not  per-
mit their  entry  into  their  Village,  any  more  than  to
the  [100]  souls  of  those  who  have  killed  themselves.
As  to  the  souls  of  thieves,  they  are  quite  welcome,
and,  if  they  were  banished  from  them,  there  would
not  be  a  soul  left ;  for  as  I  have  said,  Huron  and  thief
are  one  and  the  same  thing ;  and  the  wealthiest  man
in  the  Country  will  do  all  he  can  to  try  his  hand  at
it,  if  he  finds  something  in  your  house  lying  apart
which  he  likes.

I  asked  one  day  one  of  our  Savages  where  they
thought  the  Village  of  souls  was ;  he  answered  that
it  was  toward  the  Tobacco  Nation,13  that  is  to  say,
toward  the  West,  eight  leagues  from  us,  and  that  some
persons  had  seen  them  as  they  were  going ;  that  the
road  they  took  was  broad  and  well-beaten ;  that  they
passed  near  a  rock  called  Ecareg?iiondi,  which  has
often  been  found  marked  with  the  paint  which  they
use  to  smear  their  faces.


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

pellent  Ecaregniondi,  qui  s'eft  trouuee  fouuent  mar-
quee des  peintures,  dont  ils  ont  accouftume  de  fe  bar-
bouiller  le  vifage.

Vn  autre  me  dit,  que  fur  le  mefme  chemin,  auant
que  d'arriuer  au  Village,  on  rencontre  vne  Cabane,
ou  loge  vn  certain  nomme  Ofcotarach,  ou  Perce-tefte,
qui  tire  la  ceruelle  des  teftes  des  morts,  &  la  garde ;
il  faut  paffer  vne  riuiere,  &  pour  [101]  tout  pont
vous  n'auez  que  le  tronc  d'vn  arbre  couche"  en  trauers,
&  appuye  fort  legerement.  Le  paffage  eft  garde  par
vn  chien  qui  donne  le  fault  a  plufieurs  ames  &  les  fait
tomber;  elles  font  en  mefme  temps  emportees  par
la  violence  du  torrent,  &  etouffees  dans  les  eaux;
mais,  luy  dif-ie,  d'ou  auez  vous  appris  toutes  ces  nou-
uelles  de  l'autre  monde?  Ce  font,  me  dit-il,  des  per-
sones  refufcitees  qui  en  ont  fait  le  rapport.  C'eft
ainfi  que  le  diable  les  abufe  dans  leurs  fonges ;  c'eft
ainfi  qu'il  parle  par  la  bouche  de  quelques-vns,  qui
ayans  efte  laiffez  comme  pour  morts,  reuiennent  par
apres  en  fante,  &  difcourent  a  perte  de  veue  de  l'autre
vie,  felon  les  idees  que  leur  en  donne  ce  mauuais
maiftre :  a  leur  dire  le  Village  des  ames  n'eft  en  rien
diffemblable  du  Village  des  viuans,  on  y  va  a  la
chaffe,  a  la  pefche,  &  au  bois;  les  haches,  les  robbes,
&  les  colliers  y  font  autant  en  credit,  que  parmy  les
viuants.  En  vn  mot  tout  y  eft  pareil,  il  n'y  a  que
cette  difference,  que  iour  &  nuict  elles  ne  font  que
gemir  &  fe  plaindre ;  elles  ont  des  Capitaines,  qui  de
teps  en  temps  mettent  le  hola,  &  tafchent  d'apporter
quelque  moderation  a  leurs  [102]  foupirs,  &  a  leurs
gemiflemes.  Vray  Dieu  que  d'ignorance  &  de  ftupi-
dite !  Illuminate  his  qui  in  tenebris  &  in  vmbra  mortis
fedent.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  147

Another  told  me  that  on  the  same  road,  before  ar-
riving at  the  Village,  one  comes  to  a  Cabin  where
lives  one  named  Oscotarach,  or  "  Pierce-head,"  who
draws  the  brains  out  of  the  heads  of  the  dead,  and
keeps  them.  You  must  pass  a  river,  and  [101]  the
only  bridge  you  have  is  the  trunk  of  a  tree  laid
across,  and  very  slightly  supported.  The  passage  is
guarded  by  a  dog,  which  jumps  at  many  souls,  and
makes  them  fall ;  they  are  at  the  same  time  carried
away  by  the  violence  of  the  torrent,  and  stifled  in
the  waters.  "  But,"  said  I  to  him,  "  whence  have
you  learned  all  this  news  of  the  other  world?"  "  It
is,"  he  told  me,  "  persons  brought  back  to  life,  who
have  reported  it."  Thus  it  is  the  devil  deceives  them
in  their  dreams;  thus  he  speaks  by  the  mouth  of
some,  who  having  been  left  as  dead,  recover  health,
and  talk  at  random  of  the  other  life,  according  to  the
ideas  that  this  wretched  master  gives  them.  Accord-
ing to  them  the  Village  of  souls  is  in  no  respect  un-
like the  Village  of  the  living, —  they  go  hunting,
fishing,  and  to  the  woods;  axes,  robes,  and  collars
are  as  much  esteemed  as  among  the  living.  In  a
word,  everything  is  the  same;  there  is  only  this
difference,  that  day  and  night  they  do  nothing  but
groan  and  complain.  They  have  Captains,  who  from
time  to  time  put  an  end  to  it  and  try  to  moderate
their  [102]  sighs  and  groans.  God  of  truth,  what
ignorance  and  stupidity!  Illuminate  his  qui  in  tene-
bris,  et  in  umbra  mortis  sedent.

Now  this  false  belief  they  have  about  souls  is  kept
up  among  them  by  means  of  certain  stories  which
the  fathers  tell  their  children,  which  are  so  poorly
put  together  that  I  am  perfectly  astounded  to  see
how  men  believe them and  accept  them  as  truth.


148  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

Or  cette  fauffe  creance  qu'ils  ont  des  ames  s'entre-
tient  parmy-eux,  par  le  moyen  de  certaines  hiftoires
que  les  peres  racontent  a  leurs  enfans,  lefquelles  font
fi  mal  coufu.es,  que  ie  ne  fcaurois  affez  m'eftonner  de
voir  comme  des  hommes  les  croyent,  &  les  prennent
pour  veritez.  En  voicy  deux  des  plus  niaifes,  que  ie
tiens  de  perfonnes  d'efprit  &  de  iugement  parmy-eux.

Vn  Sauuage  ayant  perdu  vne  fienne  f  ceur  qu'il  aymoit
vniquement,  &  ayant  pleure  quelque  temps  fa  mort,
fe  refolut  de  la  chercher  en  quelque  part  du  monde
qu'elle  peufl  eftre,  &  fit  douze  iournees  tirant  vers  le
Soleil  couchant;  ou  il  auoit  appris  qu'eftoit  le  Village
des  ames,  fans  boire  ny  mager;  au  bout  def quels  fa
fceur  luy  apparut  fur  le  foir,  auec  vn  plat  de  farine
cuite  a  l'eau,  a  la  facon  du  pays,  qu'elle  luy  donna,
&  difparut  en  mefme  temps  qu'il  voulut  mettre  la
main  fur  elle  pour  l'arrefter;  il  paffa  outre,  &  che-
mina  trois  mois  entiers,  efperant  toufiours  venir  a
[103]  bout  de  fes  pretenfions;  pendant  tout  ce  temps
elle  ne  manquoit  pas  tous  les  iours  de  fe  monftrer,  &
luy  rendre  le  mefme  office  qu'elle  auoit  commence,
allant  ainfi  augmentant  fa  paffion,  fans  luy  donner
autre  foulagement,  que  ce  peu  de  nourriture  qu'elle
luy  apportoit.  Les  trois  mois  expirez,  il  rencontra
vne  riuiere,  qui  le  mit  en  peine  d'abord,  car  elle  eftoit
fort  rapide,  &  ne  paroiffoit  pas  gayable;  il  y  auoit
bien  quelques  arbres  abbatus  qui  tenoient  le  trauers,
mais  ce  pont  eftoit  fi  branlant  qu'il  n'auoit  pas  la  har-
dieffe  de  s'y  fier.  Que  fera-il?  II  y  auoit  au  dela
quelque  piece  de  terre  defrichee,  ce  qui  luy  fit  croire
qu'il  y  trouueroit  quelques  habitans.  De  fait  apres
auoir  regarde  de  cofte  &  d'autre,  il  apperceut  a  l'en-
tree  du  bois,  vne  petite  Cabane,  il  crie  a  diuerfes  re-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  149

Here  are  two  of  the  most  stupid  ones,  which  I  get
from  persons  of  intelligence  and  judgment  among
them.

A  Savage  having  lost  one  of  his  sisters,  whom  he
loved  above  all  the  rest,  and  having  wept  for  some
time  after  her  death,  resolved  to  seek  her,  in  what-
ever part  of  the  world  she  might  be ;  and  he  trav-
eled twelve  days  toward  the  setting  Sun,  where  he
had  learned  the  Village  of  souls  was,  without  eating  or
drinking.  At  the  end  of  this  time,  his  sister  ap-
peared to  him  in  the  night,  with  a  dish  of  meal
cooked  in  water,  after  the  fashion  of  the  country,
which  she  gave  to  him,  and  disappeared  at  the  moment
he  wished  to  put  his  hand  on  her  and  stop  her.  He
went  on,  and  journeyed  three  whole  months,  hoping
always  to  succeed  [103]  in  claiming  her.  During  all
this  time  she  never  failed  to  show  herself  every  day,
and  to  render  him  the  same  service  that  she  had  at
first, —  increasing  in  this  way  his  desire,  without  giv-
ing it  any  other  consolation  than  the  little  nourish-
ment which  she  brought  him.  The  three  months
expired;  he  came  to  a  river,  which  presented  great
difficulty  to  him  at  first,  for  it  was  very  rapid  and  did
not  appear  fordable.  There  were,  indeed,  some  fall-
en trees  thrown  across  it;  but  this  bridge  was  so
shaky  that  he  did  not  dare  to  trust  himself  to  it.
What  should  he  do  ?  There  was  on  the  other  side  a
piece  of  cleared  land,  which  made  him  think  there
must  be  some  inhabitants  near.  In  fact,  after  look-
ing in  all  directions  he  perceived,  on  the  outskirts  of
the  wood,  a  little  Cabin.  He  calls  several  times.  A
man  appears  and  shuts  himself  up  immediately  in
his  Cabin ;  this  gives  him  great  joy,  and  he  resolves
to  cross. Having  successfully  accomplished  this,  he


150  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.10

prifes,  vn  homme  paroift  &  fe  renferme  incontinent
en  fa  Cabane :  ce  qui  le  reioiiit,  &  le  fit  refoudre  a
franchir  le  pas,  l'ayant  fait  heureufement,  il  va  droit
a  cette  Cabane,  mais  il  y  trouue  vifage  de  bois,  il  ap-
pelle,  il  heurte  a  la  porte ;  on  luy  repond  qu'il  attende,
&  qu'il  paffe  premierement  fon  bras,  s'il  veut  entrer;
l'autre  fut  bien  eftonne  de  voir  vn  corps,  il  [104]  luy
ouure,  &  luy  demande,  ou  il  alloit,  &  ce  qu'il  preten-
doit,  que  ce  pays  n'efloit  que  pour  les  ames.  Ie  le
fcay  bien,  dit  cet  Auenturier,  c'eft  pourquoy  i'y  viens
chercher  Tame  de  ma  fceur.  Oiiy  da,  repart  l'autre,
a  la  bonne-heure ;  allez,  prenez  courage,  vous  voila
tantoft  au  Village  des  ames,  vous  y  trouuerez  ce  que
vous  defirez ;  toutes  les  ames  font  maintenant  affem-
blees  dans  vne  Cabane,  oil  elles  danfent  pour  guerir
Aataentfic,  qui  eft  malade;  ne  craignez  point  d'y  en-
trer, tenez  voila  vne  courge,  vous  y  mettrez  l'ame  de
voftre  fceur ;  il  la  prend,  &  demande  en  mefme  temps
conge  a  fon  hofte,  bien  aife  d'auoir  fait  vne  fi  bonne
rencontre.  Sur  le  depart  il  luy  demade  fon  nom:
Contente  toy,  dit  l'autre,  que  ie  fuis  celuy  qui  garde
la  ceruelle  des  morts ;  quand  tu  auras  recouure  l'ame
de  ta  fceur,  repaffe  par  icy,  ie  te  donneray  fa  ceruelle.
II  s'en  va  done,  &  arriue  qu'il  eft  au  Village  des  ames,
il  entre  dans  la  Cabane  d' 'Aataentfic,  ou  il  les  trouue
en  effet  qu' elles  danfoient  pour  fa  fante,  mais  il  ne
peut  encor  voir  l'ame  de  fa  fceur:  car  elles  furent  fi
effrayees  a  la  veue  de  cet  homme,  qu'elles  s'euanoui-
rent  en  vn  inftant ;  de  forte  qu'il  demeura  [105]
maiftre  de  la  Cabane  toute  la  iournee.  Sur  le  foir,
comme  il  eftoit  affis  aupres  du  foyer,  elles  retour-
nerent,  mais  elles  ne  fe  monftrerent  du  commence-
ment que  de  loing,  petit  a  petit  s'eftant  approch^es


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  151

goes  straightway  to  this  Cabin,  but  finds  the  door
closed ;  he  calls,  he  beats  on  the  door.  He  is  told  to
wait,  and  first  to  pass  in  his  arm,  if  he  wishes  to  en-
ter ;  the  other  one  is  much  astonished  to  see  a  living
body.  He  [104]  opens  to  him,  and  asks  him  where  he
was  going  and  what  his  purpose  was,  as  this  country
was  only  for  souls.  "  I  know  that  well,"  says  this
Adventurer,  "  and  that  is  why  I  came  here  to  seek
the  soul  of  my  sister."  "  Oh  indeed,"  replies  the
other  one,  "  well  and  good;  come,  take  courage,  you
will  be  presently  in  the  Village  of  souls,  where  you
will  find  what  you  desire.  All  the  souls  are  now
gathered  in  a  Cabin,  where  they  are  dancing  to  heal
Aatae?itsic,  who  is  sick.  Don't  be  afraid  to  enter;
stay,  there  is  a  pumpkin,  you  can  put  into  it  the  soul
of  your  sister."  He  takes  it,  and  at  the  same  time
bids  good-bye  to  his  host,  very  glad  of  so  fortunate
a  meeting.  On  his  departure  he  asks  the  host  his
name,  "  Be  satisfied,"  says  the  other,  "  that  I  am  he
who  keeps  the  brains  of  the  dead."  So  he  goes  away
and  reaches  the  Village  of  souls.  He  enters  the
Cabin  of  Aataentsic,  where  he  finds  that  they  are  in-
deed dancing  for  the  sake  of  her  health ;  but  he  can-
not yet  see  the  soul  of  his  sister,  for  the  souls  were
so  startled  at  the  sight  of  the  man  that  they  vanished
in  a  moment,  so  that  he  remained  [105]  all  day  the
master  of  the  Cabin.  In  the  evening,  as  he  was
seated  by  the  fire,  they  returned ;  but  they  showed
themselves  at  first  only  at  a  distance.  Approaching
slowly,  they  began  again  to  dance;  he  recognized  his
sister  amid  the  troop,  he  endeavored  even  to  seize
her,  but  she  fled  from  him.  He  withdrew  some  dis-
tance, and  at  last  chose  his  time  so  well  that  she  could
not  escape  him. Nevertheless, he  made  certain  of


152  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


elles  fe  mirent  de  rechef  a  danfer;  il  recogneut  fa
foeur  parmy  la  troupe,  il  s'efforca  mefme  de  la  pren-
dre, mais  elle  s'enfuit  de  luy,  il  fe  retira  a  l'6cart,  &
prit  enfin  fi  bien  fon  temps  qu'elle  ne  peut  6chapper;
neantmoins  il  ne  fut  pas  affeure  de  fa  proye  qu'a
bonnes  enfeignes ;  car  il  luy  fallut  luiter  cotre  elle
toute  la  nuict,  &  dans  le  combat  elle  diminua  tene-
ment, &  deuint  fi  petite,  qu'il  la  mit  fans  difficulte
dans  fa  courge:  l'ayant  bie  bouch6e,  il  s'en  retourne
fur  la  champ,  &  repafle  chez  fon  hofte,  qui  luy  donne
dans  vne  autre  courge  la  ceruelle  de  fa  fceur,  &  l'in-
ftruit  de  tout  ce  qu'il  deuoit  faire  pour  la  refufciter.
Quand  tu  feras  arriue\  luy  dit-il, va  t'en  au  cime-
tiere,  prends  le  corps  de  ta  fceur,  porte  le  en  ta  Ca-
bane,  &  fais  feftin :  tous  les  conuiez  eftas  affemblez,
charge  le  fur  tes  epaules,  &  fais  vn  tour  par  la  Ca-
bane,  tenant  en  main  les  deux  courges,  tu  n'auras
pas  fi  toft  repris  ta  place,  que  ta  fceur  refufcitera,
[106]  pourueu  que  tu  donne  ordre  que  tous  tiennent
la  veue  baifI6e,  &  que  pas  vn  ne  regarde  ce  que  tu
feras,  autrement  tout  ira  mal. Le  voila  done  retour-
ne" dans  fort  peu  de  temps  a  fon  Village,  il  prend  le
corps  de  fa  foeur,  fait  feftin,  &  execute  de  point  en
point,  tout  ce  qui  luy  auoit  efte  prefcrit ;  &  de  fait  il
fentoit  d6ja du  mouuement  dans  ce  cadaure  demy
pourry ;  mais  comme  il  eftoit  a  deux  ou  trois  pas  de
fa  place,  il  y  eut  vn  curieux  qui  leua  les  yeux,  &  en
mefme  temps  cette  ame  s'echappa,  &  ne  luy  demeura
que  ce  cadaure  fur  les  bras,  qu'il  fut  contrainct  de  re-
porter au  tombeau  d'oii  il  l'auoit  tire".

SI CREDERE FAS EST.

Voicy  vne  autre  de  leurs  fables  de  mefme  tiffure.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  163b  153

his  prey  only  by  securing  her  well ;  for  he  had  to
struggle  against  her  all  night,  and  in  the  contest  she
grew  so  little  that  he  put  her  without  difficulty  into
his  pumpkin.  Having  corked  her  in  well,  he  imme-
diately returns  by  way  of  the  house  of  his  host,  who
gives  him  his  sister's  brains  in  another  pumpkin,  and
instructs  him  in  all  he  must  do  to  resuscitate  her.
"  When  thou  reachest  home,"  he  says  to  him,  "  go
to  the  cemetery,  take  the  body  of  thy  sister,  bear  it
to  thy  Cabin,  and  make  a  feast.  When  all  thy
guests  are  assembled,  carry  it  on  thy  shoulders,  and
take  a  walk  through  the  Cabin  holding  the  two
pumpkins  in  thy  hands ;  thou  wilt  no  sooner  have
resumed  thy  place  than  thy  sister  will  come  to  life
again,  [106]  provided  thou  gi vest  orders  that  all  keep
their  eyes  lowered,  and  that  no  one  shall  look  at
what  thou  art  doing,  else  everything  will  go  wrong."
Soon  the  man  returns  to  his  Village ;  he  takes  the
body  of  his  sister,  makes  a  feast,  carries  out,  in  due
order,  all  the  directions  given  him, —  and,  indeed,  he
already  felt  motion  in  the  half-decayed  corpse ;  but,
when  he  was  two  or  three  steps  from  his  place,  one
curious  person  raised  his  eyes ;  at  that  moment  the
soul  escaped,  and  there  remained  to  him  only  the
corpse  in  his  arms,  which  he  was  constrained  to  bear
to  the  tomb  whence  he  had  taken  it.14

SI CREDERE FAS EST.

Here  is  another  of  their  fables,  of  like  tissue.  A
young  man  of  the  highest  standing  among  them,  be-
ing ill,  after  much  entreaty  finally  answered  that  his
dream  showed  a  bow  rolled  in  bark ;  that  if  any  one
wanted  to  go  with  him  as  an  escort,  there  was  but
one  man  on  earth  who  had  one  of  the  sort. A  com-


154  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ&SUITES [Vol.10

Vn  ietme  homme  des  plus  qualifiez  d'entr'eux  apres
s'eftre  bien  fait  prier,  repondit  enfin  eftant  malade,
que  fon  fonge  portoit  vn  arc  roule  en  ecorce,  que  fi
on  vouloit  luy  faire  efcorte,  il  n'y  auoit  qu'vn  feul
homme  fur  terre  qui  en  euft  vn.  Vne  troupe  de  deli-
berez  fe  mettent  en  chemin  auec  luy ;  mais  au  bout
de  dix  iours  il  ne  luy  refta  que  fix  compagnons,  le
refte  rebrouffa  a  cauf e  de  la  f aim  qui  les  preffoit :  les
fix  vont  auec  luy  [107]  a  grandes  iournees,  &  fur  les
piftes  d'vne  petite  befle  noire  rencontrent  la  Cabane
de  leur  homme,  qui  les  aduertit  de  ne  manger  rien
de  ce  qu'vne  femme  qui  alloit  reuenir  leur  apprefte-
roit  pour  la  premiere  f ois ;  a  quoy  ayant  obei',  &  ren-
uerfe  les  plats  par  terre,  ils  s'apperceurent,  que  ce
n'eftoient  que  beftes  venimeufes,  qu'elle  leur  auoit
prefente.  S'eftans  refaits  du  fecond  feruice,  il  fut
queftion  de  bander  l'arc  roule,  dont  pas  vn  n'ayant
pu.  venir  a  bout,  que  le  ieune  home,  pour  qui  le  voy-
age auoit  efte  entrepris:  il  le  receut  en  don  de  fon
hofle,  qui  l'inuita  de  fuer  auec  luy,  &  au  fortir  de  la
fuerie  metamorphofa  vn  de  fes  compagnons  en  Pin.
Dela  ils  aborderent  au  Village  des  ames,  d'ou  ils  ne
reuindrent  que  trois  en  vie,  &  tous  effarez  chez  leur
hofle,  qui  les  encouragea  de  retourner  chez  eux,  a  la
faueur  d'vn  peu  de  farine,  telle  que  les  ames  la  man-
gent,  &  qui  fuflente  les  corps  a  merueilles.  Qu'au
refte  ils  alloient  pafler  a  trauers  des  bois,  ou.  les  Cerfs,
les  Ours,  les  Orignacs  eftoient  aufli  communs  que  les
fueilles  des  arbres ;  &  qu'eftans  pourueus  d'vn  arc  fi
merueilleux,  ils  n'auoient  rien  a  craindre,  que  [108]
leur  chaffe  feroit  des  meilleures.  Les  voila  de  retour
en  leur  Village,  &  tout  le  monde  a  l'entour  d'eux,  a
fe  reioui'r  &  apprendre  leurs  diuerfes  rencontres.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  155

pany  of  resolute  men  put  themselves  on  the  road
with  him ;  but  at  the  end  of  ten  days  there  remained
to  him  only  six  companions,  the  rest  turning  back  on
account  of  the  hunger  which  pressed  them.  The  six
go  with  him  [107]  many  a  day's  journey,  and  in  fol-
lowing the  tracks  of  a  little  black  beast,  come  upon
the  Cabin  of  their  man,  who  warns  them  not  to  par-
take of  what  a  woman  who  was  to  be  present  should
offer  them  for  the  first  time.  Having  obeyed  him,
and  having  upset  the  dishes  upon  the  ground,  they
perceived  it  was  only  venomous  reptiles  she  had
presented  to  them.  Having  refreshed  themselves
with  the  second  course,  it  was  a  question  of  bend-
ing the  rolled  bow,  which  not  one  of  them  suc-
ceeded in  doing,  except  the  young  man  in  whose
behalf  the  journey  had  been  undertaken.  He  re-
ceived it  as  a  gift  from  his  host,  who  invited  him  to
take  a  sweat  with  him,  and,  upon  emerging  from  the
sweat-box,  metamorphosed  one  of  his  companions
into  a  Pine  tree.  From  there  they  advanced  to  the
Village  of  souls,  whence  only  three  returned  alive,
and  all  frightened,  to  the  house  of  their  host ;  he  en-
couraged them  to  return  home  with  the  help  of  a
little  meal,  such  as  the  souls  eat,  and  which  sustains
the  body  wonderfully.  He  told  them,  moreover,
that  they  were  going  to  pass  through  woods  where
Deer,  Bears,  and  Moose  were  as  common  as  the
leaves  on  the  trees;  but  that,  being  provided  with
so  marvelous  a  bow,  they  had  nothing  to  fear,  that
[108]  they  would  be  very  successful  in  the  chase.
Behold  them  returned  to  their  Village,  with  every
one  around  them  rejoicing,  and  learning  their  differ-
ent adventures.

Forsan  et  hate  olim  meminisse  juvabit, when these


156  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.10

For/an  &  hcec  olim  meminijfe  iuuabit,  lors  que  ces
patmres  gens  6clairez  du  ciel  fe  riront  de  leurs  fot-
tifes,  comme  nous  l'efperons.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  157

poor  people,  enlightened  by  heaven, will  laugh  at
their  own  stupidities,  as  we  hope.


158  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


CHAPITRE  III.

QUE LES HURONS RECOGNOISSENT QUELQUE DIUI-

NITE: DE LEURS SUPERSTITIONS, & DE LA

CREANCE QU'lLS ONT AUX SONGES.

COM  ME  ces  pauures  Sauuages  pour  eftre  hommes
n'on  pu  mecognoiftre  Dieu  tout  a  fait,  &  pour
eftre  vicieux  n'en  ont  fceu  auoir  que  des  con-
ceptions indignes  de  fa  gradeur,  ils  ne  l'ont  ny  cher-
che,  ny  recogneu  qu'en  la  furface  des  creatures,  ou
ils  ont  efpere  leur  bon-heur,  ou  redoute  quelque  mal-
heur.  Ils  s'addreffent  a  la  Terre,  aux  Riuieres,  aux
Lacs,  aux  Rochers  dangereux,  mais  fur  tout  au  Ciel,
&  croyent  que  tout  cela  eft  anime,  [109]  &  qu'il  y  re-
fide  quelque  puiffant  Demon.  Ils  ne  fe  contentent
pas  de  former  de  fimples  voeux,  il[s]  les  accompagnent
fouuent  d'vne  efpece  de  facrifice.  Ten  ay  remarque
de  deux  fortes.  Les  vns  font  pour  fe  les  rendre  pro-
pices  &  fauorables;  les  autres  pour  les  appaifer,
quand  ils  en  ont  receu,  felon  qu'il  s'imaginent,  quel-
que difgrace,  ou  fe  perfuadent  auoir  encouru  leur  ire
et  leur  indignation.  Voicy  les  ceremonies  qu'ils  gar-
dent  en  ces  facrifices.  Ils  iettent  du  Petun  dans  le
feu,  &  fi  c'eft  par  exemple  au  Ciel  qu'ils  s'addreffent,
ils  difent,  Aronhiatt  onnd  aonJlaniSas  taitenr,  Ciel  voila
ce  que  ie  t'offre  en  facrifice,  aye  pitie  de  moy,  affifte
moy :  fi  c'eft  pour  impetrer  la  fante\  taenguiaens,  gue-
ris  moy.  Ils  ont  recours  au  Ciel  prefque  en  toutes
leurs  neceffitez,  &  refpectent  ces  grands  corps  fur


1636]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  163b  159


CHAPTER  III.

THAT THE HURONS RECOGNIZE SOME DIVINITY; OF

THEIR SUPERSTITIONS, AND THEIR

FAITH IN DREAMS.

AS  these  poor  Savages,  being  men,  have  not  been
able  altogether  to  deny  God,  and,  being  given
to  vice,  could  have  only  conceptions  of  him
unworthy  of  his  greatness,- — they  have  neither  sought
nor  recognized  him  except  on  the  surface  of  created
things,  in  which  they  have  hoped  for  happiness  or
dreaded  some  misfortune.  They  address  themselves
to  the  Earth,  to  Rivers,  to  Lakes,  to  dangerous
Rocks,  but  above  all,  to  the  Sky;  and  believe  that
all  these  things  are  animate,  [109]  and  that  some
powerful  Demon  resides  there.  They  are  not  con-
tented with  making  simple  vows,  they  often  accom-
pany them  with  a  sort  of  sacrifice.  I  have  remarked
two  kinds  of  these.  Some  are  to  render  them  propi-
tious and  favorable;  others  to  appease  them,  when
they  have  received  in  their  opinion  some  disgrace
from  them,  or  believe  they  have  incurred  their  anger
or  indignation.  Here  are  the  ceremonies  they  em-
ploy in  these  sacrifices.  They  throw  some  Tobacco
into  the  fire;  and  if  it  is,  for  example,  to  the  Sky
that  they  address  themselves,  they  say,  Aronhiati
onnd  aonstaniwas  taitenr,  "  O  Sky,  here  is  what  I  offer
thee  in  sacrifice;  have  pity  on  me,  assist  me."  If  it
is  to  implore  health,  taengniaens,  "Heal  me."15
They  have  recourse  to  the  Sky  in  almost  all  their  ne-


160  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.10

toutes  les  creatures,  &  y  remarquent  particulierement
quelque  chofe  de  diuin:  auffi  eft-ce  apres  1'homnie
la  plus  viue  image  que  nous  ayons  de  la  Diuinite ;  il
n'y  a  rien  qui  nous  la  reprefente  fi  clairement :  nous
y  remarquons  fa  toute-puiffance  dans  les  prodigieux
effets  qu'ils  cauf ent  icy  bas ;  fon  immenfite  dans  leur
vafte  eftendue;  fa  fageffe  dans  l'ordre  [no]  de  leurs
mouuemens;  fa  bonte  dans  les  benignes  influences
qu'ils  verfent  continuellement  fur  toutes  les  creatures ;
&  fa  beaute  dans  le  Soleil,  &  fur  le  front  des  Eftoilles.
Ie  dis  cecy  pour  monftrer  combien  il  fera  facile  auec
le  temps,  &  l'affiflance  diuine,  de  conduire  ces  Peuples
a  la  cognoiffance  de  leur  Createur,  puis  qu'ils  hon-
norent  deja  fi  particulierement  vne  creature,  qui  en
eft  vne  fi  parfaite  image :  &  encore  puis  ie  dire  que
c'eft  proprement  Dieu  qu'ils  honnorent,  quoy  qu'a
l'aueugle,  car  ils  s'imaginent  dans  les  Cieux  vn  Oki,
c'eft  a  dire  vn  Demon,  ou  vne  puiffance  qui  regie  les
faifons  de  l'annee,  qui  tient  en  bride  les  vents,  &  les
flots  de  la  mer,  qui  peut  rendre  fauorable  le  cours  de
leurs  nauigations,  &  les  affifter  en  toutes  leurs  neceffi-
tez :  ils  redoutent  mefme  fon  ire,  &  l'appellent  a  tef-
moin  pour  rendre  leur  foy  inuiolable,  quand  ils  font
quelque  promeffe  d'importance,  ou  paffent  quelque
accord,  ou  traitte  de  paix  auec  l'ennemy.  Voicy  les
termes  dont  ils  fe  feruent,  Hakkrihotd  ekaronhiatd  t8t
IcttakJiier  ekentate,  Le  Ciel  entend  ce  que  nous  fai-
fons auiourd'huy :  &  croyent  apres  cela  que  s'ils  [in]
venoient  a  contreuenir  a  leur  parole,  ou  a  rompre
cette  alliance,  le  Ciel  les  chaftieroit  infalliblement.
Bien  dauantage,  ils  eftiment  qu'il  ne  fait  pas  bon  fe
moquer  du  Ciel.  En  voicy  vne  preuue  bien  remar-
quable. Vn  Sorcier  fort  renomme  dans  le  Pais  nous


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  tb36  161

cessities,  and  respect  the  great  bodies  in  it  above  all
creatures,  and  remark  in  it  in  particular  something
divine.  Indeed,  it  is,  after  man,  the  most  vivid
image  we  have  of  Divinity;  there  is  nothing  which
represents  him  to  us  so  clearly ;  we  remark  his  omnip-
otence in  all  the  prodigious  effects  they  cause  here
below,  his  immensity  in  their  vast  extent,  his  wis-
dom in  the  order  [no]  of  their  movements,  his  good-
ness in  the  benign  influences  they  shed  continually
over  all  creatures,  and  his  beauty  in  the  Sun  and  in
the  aspect  of  the  Stars.  I  say  this  to  show  how  easy
it  will  be,  with  time  and  divine  aid,  to  lead  these
Peoples  to  the  knowledge  of  their  Creator,  since  they
already  honor  so  especially  a  creature  which  is  so
perfect  an  image  of  him.  And,  furthermore,  I  may
say  it  is  really  God  whom  they  honor,  though  blind-
ly, for  they  imagine  in  the  Heavens  an  Oki,  that  is
to  say,  a  Demon  or  power  which  rules  the  seasons  of
the  year,  which  holds  in  check  the  winds  and  the
waves  of  the  sea;  which  can  render  favorable  the
course  of  their  voyages,  and  assist  them  in  every
time  of  need.  They  even  fear  his  anger,  and  invoke
him  as  a  witness  in  order  to  render  their  faith  invio-
lable, when  they  make  some  promise  of  importance,
or  agree  to  some  bargain  or  treaty  of  peace  with  an
enemy.  Here  are  the  terms  they  use,  Hakhrihdtt
ekaronhiate  tout  Iczuakhier  ekentatJ,  ' '  The  Sky  knows
what  we  are  doing  to-day;"  and  they  think  that  if,
after  this,  they  [in]  should  violate  their  word  or
break  their  alliance,  the  Sky  would  certainly  chas-
tise them.  More  than  that,  they  do  not  think  it  right
to  mock  the  Sky.  Here  is  a  very  remarkable  proof  of  it :
A  very  renowned  Sorcerer  of  this  Country  threatens
us  this  year  with a  great famine. The corn will


162  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.10

menace  cette  annee  d'vne  grade  famine ;  Les  bleds
croiftront,  dit-il,  &  monteront  en  epics,  les  enfans
mefmes  en  feront  roftir  en  leur  verdure ;  mais  vne
gelee  blanche  furuiendra,  qui  moiffonnera  les  efpe-
rances  du  Pais.  Au  refte  il  ne  fonde  pas  fon  dire  fur
ces.  apparitions  pretendues  dUXskeha ;  voicy  ce  qui  le
fait  parler  de  la  forte.  On  crie,  dit-il,  tous  les  iours
au  Ciel,  Aronhiatt  onne  aonftaancXas,  &  cependant  on
ne  luy  donne  rien,  cela  irrite  le  Ciel,  il  ne  manquera
pas  de  s'en  venger,  &  lors  que  les  bleds  commeceront
a  entrer  en  maturite,  il  fera  fans  doute  eclatter  les
effets  de  fa  colere.

lis  croyent  encore  que  le  Ciel  eft  courouce  quand
quelqu'vn  fe  noye,  ou  meurt  de  froid ;  il  faut  vn  facri-
fice pour  l'appaifer:  mais,  6  bon  Dieu!  quel  facrifice,
ou  pluftoft  quelle  boucherie !  La  chair  du  mort  eft
la  victime  qui  doit  eftre  immolee,  [112]  il  fe  fait  vn
concours  des  villages  circonuoifms ;  on  fait  force
feftins,  &  on  n'epargne  point  les  prefents,  comme
eftat  queftion  d'vne  chofe  a  laquelle  tout  le  Pays  a
interefl:  on  porte  le  mort  dans  le  cimetiere,  on
l'eftend  fur  vne  natte;  d'vn  cofte  eft  vne  foffe,  &  de
l'autre  vn  feu  pour  le  facrifice:  en  mefme  temps
quelques  ieunes  hommes  choifis  par  les  parens  fe
prefentent,  &  fe  rangent  autour  du  corps,  chacun  le
couteau  a  la  main ;  &  le  protecteur  du  def unt  ayant
marque  auec  du  charbon  les  parties  qui  doiuent
eftre  coupp6es,  ils  trauaillent  a  qui  mieux  mieux  fur
ce  cadaure,  &  en  enleuent  les  parties  les  plus  char-
nues ;  en  fin  ils  luy  ouurent  le  corps,  &  en  tirent  les
entrailles,  qu'ils  iettent  au  feu  auec  toutes  ces  pieces
de  chair  qu'ils  ont  coupp£es,  &  mettent  dans  la  foffe
la  carcafCe  toute  decharnee. Fay  remarque  que  pen-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3b  163

grow,  lie  says,  and  will  shoot  into  ear ;  the  children
will  even  cause  the  ears  to  be  roasted  when  they  are
green ;  but  a  white  frost  will  occur,  which  will  de-
stroy the  hopes  of  the  Country.  Moreover  he  does
not  base  his  statements  on  those  pretended  appari-
tions of  IouskeJia;  here  is  what  leads  him  to  speak  in
this  way.  "  The  people,"  he  says,  "  are  crying  every
day  to  the  Sky,  Aronliiatt  onne  aonstaancwas;  and  yet
nothing  is  given  to  it.  This  irritates  the  Sky,  it  will
not  fail  to  take  revenge ;  and,  when  the  corn  shall
begin  to  mature,  it  will  without  doubt  vent  upon  it
the  effects  of  its  wrath."

They  believe  that  the  Sky  is  angry,  when  any  one  is
drowned  or  dies  of  cold ;  a  sacrifice  is  needed  to  ap-
pease it,  but,  good  God !  what  a  sacrifice,  or  rather
what  a  butchery !  The  flesh  of  the  dead  man  is  the
victim  who  is  to  be  immolated.  [112]  A  gathering  of
the  neighboring  villages  takes  place;  many  feasts
are  made,  and  no  presents  are  spared,  as  it  is  a  mat-
ter in  which  the  whole  Country  is  interested.  The
dead  body  is  carried  into  the  cemetery,  and  is  stretched
out  on  a  mat.  On  one  side  is  a  ditch,  and  on  the
other  a  fire  for  a  sacrifice.  At  the  same  time,  some
young  men  chosen  by  the  relatives  present  them-
selves, and  station  themselves  around  the  corpse,
each  with  a  knife  in  his  hand ;  and  the  protector  of
the  dead  person  having  marked  with  a  coal  the  parts
which  are  to  be  cut,  they  vie  with  each  other  in  cut-
ting the  body,  tearing  off  the  fleshiest  parts.  At  last
they  open  the  body  and  draw  out  its  entrails,  which
they  throw  into  the  fire  with  all  the  pieces  of  flesh
they  had  cut  off,  and  throw  into  the  ditch  the  carcass
quite  stripped  of  flesh.  I  have  observed  that  during
this  butchery  the  women  walk  around  them  several


164  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

dant  cette  boucherie  les  femmes  tournent  tout  autour
a  diuerfes  fois,  &  encouragent  ces  ieunes  hommes  qui
decouppent  ce  corps  a  rendre  ce  bon  office  a  tout  le
Pais,  leur  mettant  des  grains  de  Pourcelaine  dans  la
bouche.  Quelquefois  mefme  la  mere  du  defunt  toute
baignee  dans  fes  larmes  fe  [113]  met  de  la  partie,  &
chante  d'vn  ton  pitoyable  en  fe  lamentant  fur  la  mort
de  fon  fils.  Cela  fait,  ils  croyent  fermement  auoir
appaife  le  Ciel :  s'ils  manquent  a  cette  ceremonie  ils
regardent  toutes  les  mauuaifes  difpofitions  de  l'air,
&  tous  les  finiftres  accidens  qui  leur  arriuent  par
apres  comme  autant  d'effets  de  fa  colere.

L'an  paffe  au  commencement  de  Nouembre  vn  Sau-
uage  fe  noya  retournant  de  la  pefche,  on  l'enterra  le
dix-feptieme,  fans  autres  ceremonies;  le  mefme  iour
les  neiges  tomberent  en  telle  abondance,  qu'elles  nous
cacherent  la  terre  pour  tout  l'hyuer ;  &  nos  Sauuages
ne  manquerent  pas  d'en  reietter  la  caufe  fur  ce  qu'on
n'auoit  pas  decoupe  le  mort  a  l'ordinaire.  Voila  les
facrifices  qu'ils  font  pour  fe  rendre  le  Ciel  fauorable.

Sur  le  chemin  des  Hurons  a  Kebec  il  y  a  des  Ro-
chers  qu'ils  refpectent  particulierement,  &  aufquels
ils  ne  manquent  iamais,  quand  ils  defcendent  pour
la  traitte,  d'offrir  du  Petun.  Ils  appellent  l'vn  Hihi-
JiXray,  c'eft  a  dire  vne  Roche  ou  le  Chahuan  fait  fon
nid:  mais  le  plus  celebre  eft  celuy  qu'ils  appellent,
TfanJiohi  Arafta,  la  demeure  d' '  Tfanhohi,  qui  eft  vne
[114]  efpece  d'oifeau  de  proye.  Ils  difent  des  mer-
ueilles  de  cette  Roche :  a  les  entendre  c'elioit  autre-
fois vn  homme  qui  a  efte  ie  ne  fcay  comment  change
en  pierre ;  tant  y  a  qu'ils  y  diftinguent  encore  la
tefte,  les  bras,  &  le  corps:  mais  il  falloit  qu'il  fust
merueilleuf ement  puiff ant ;  car  cette  maff e  eft  fi  vafle


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  165

times,  and  encourage  the  young  men  who  cut  up  this
body  to  render  this  good  service  to  the  whole  Coun-
try, putting  Porcelain  beads  into  their  mouths.
Sometimes  even  the  mother  of  the  deceased,  all
bathed  in  tears,  [113]  joins  the  party  and  sings  in  a
pitiful  tone,  lamenting  the  death  of  her  son.  That
done,  they  firmly  believe  they  have  appeased  the
Sky.  If  they  fail  in  this  ceremony,  they  look  upon
all  the  disastrous  changes  of  the  weather,  and  all  the
untoward  accidents  which  happen  to  them  after-
wards, as  so  many  results  of  its  anger.16

Last  year,  at  the  beginning  of  November,  a  Savage
was  drowned  when  returning  from  fishing;  he  was
interred  on  the  seventeenth,  without  any  ceremonies.
On  the  same  day  snow  fell  in  such  abundance  that  it
hid  the  earth  all  the  winter;  and  our  Savages  did
not  fail  to  cast  the  blame  on  their  not  having  cut  up
the  dead  person  as  usual.  Such  are  the  sacrifices
they  make  to  render  Heaven  favorable.

On  the  way  by  which  the  Hurons  go  to  Kebec,
there  are  some  Rocks  that  they  particularly  reverence
and  to  which  they  never  fail,  when  they  go  down  to
trade,  to  offer  Tobacco.  They  call  one  of  them  Hihi-
honray,  meaning  "  a  Rock  where  the  Owl  makes  its
nest."  But  the  most  celebrated  is  the  one  they  call
Tsanliohi  Arasta,  "the  home  of  Tsanhohi,"  which  is
a  [114]  species  of  bird  of  prey.  They  tell  marvels  of
this  Rock.  According  to  their  story,  it  was  formerly
a  man  who  was,  I  know  not  how,  changed  into  stone.
At  all  events,  they  distinguish  still  the  head,  the
arms,  and  the  body ;  but  he  must  have  been  extraor-
dinarily powerful,  for  this  mass  is  so  vast  and  so
high  that  their  arrows  cannot  reach  it.  Besides,  they
hold  that  in  the  hollow  of  this  Rock  there  is  a  De-


166  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

&  fi  haute,  que  leurs  neches  n'y  peuuent  atteindre.
Au  refte  ils  tiennent  que  dans  le  creux  de  ce  Rocher
il  y  a  vn  Demon  qui  eft  capable  de  faire  reiiffir  leur
voyage;  c'eft  pourquoy  ils  s'y  arreftent  en  paffant,  &
luy  offrent  du  Petun,  qu'ils  y  mettent  {implement
dans  vne  des  fentes,  en  luy  addreffant  cette  priere,
Oki  ca  ichikhon  condayee  aenXaen  ondayee  d'aonJlaancXas,
&c.  Demon  qui  habites  en  ce  lieu,  voila  du  Petun
que  ie  te  prefente,  affifte  nous,  garde  nous  de  nau-
frage,  defends  nous  contre  nos  ennemis,  &  fais  qu'a-
pres  auoir  fait  vne  bonne  traitte,  nous  retournions
fains  &  faufs  a  noftre  Village.  Ie  dirois  volontiers
la  deffus,  Voluntaria  oris  eorum  beneplacita  fac  Dotnine :
Mon  Dieu,  efcoutez-les,  &  vous  faites  cognoiftre  a
eux,  car  ils  veulent  s'addreffer  a  vous.

Ils  tiennent  les  poiffons  raifonnables,  [115]  comme
auffi  les  Cerfs,  &  Orignaux;  c'eft  ce  qui  fait  qu'ils
ne  iettent  aux  Chiens  ny  les  os  de  ceux  cy  quand  ils
font  a  la  chaffe,  ny  les  aretes  de  ceux  la  tandis  qu'ils
pef client:  autrement  fur  l'aduis  que  les  autres  en
auroient,  ils  fe  cacheroient,  &  ne  fe  laifferoient  point
prendre.  Ils  mariet  tous  les  ans  leur  rets  ou  Seine  a
deux  petites  filles,  qui  ne  doiuent  eftre  que  de  fix  a  fept
ans,  de  peur  qu'elles  n'ayent  deja  perdu  leur  virgi-
nite,  qui  eft  vne  qualite  bien  rare  parmy  eux.  La
ceremonie  de  ces  epoufailles  fe  fait  en  vn  bon  feftin,
oil  la  Seine  eft  placee  au  milieu  de  ces  deux  vierges :
c'eft  pour  la  rendre  heureufe  a  prendre  du  poiffon.
Encore  fuis  je  bien  aife  que  la  virginite  recoiue  par-
my eux  cette  forte  d'honneur;  cela  nous  pourra  fer-
uir  vn  iour  pour  leur  en  faire  conceuoir  le  prix.  Les
poiffons,  difent-ils,  n'aiment  point  les  morts,  &  Ik
deffus ils s'abftiennent  d'aller  a  la  pefche quand


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  167

mon,  who  is  capable  of  making  their  journey  success-
ful ;  that  is  why  they  stop  as  they  pass,  and  offer  it
Tobacco,  which  they  simply  put  into  one  of  the
clefts,  addressing-  to  it  this  prayer,  Oki  ca  ichikhon
condayee  aenwaen  ondayee  d'  aonstaancwas,  etc.,  "  Demon
who  dwellest  in  this  place,  here  is  some  Tobacco
which  I  present  to  thee ;  help  us,  guard  us  from  ship-
wreck, defend  us  from  our  enemies,  and  cause  that
after  having  made  good  trades  we  may  return  safe  and
sound  to  our  Village."15  I  could  willingly  say  there-
upon, Voluntaria  oris  eorum  beneplacita  fac  Domine:
My  God,  listen  to  them,  and  make  yourself  known
to  them,  for  they  desire  to  address  themselves  to  you.
They  hold  that  fish  are  possessed  of  reason,  [115]
as  also  the  Deer  and  Moose ;  and  that  is  why  they
do  not  throw  to  the  Dogs  either  the  bones  of  the  lat-
ter when  they  are  hunting,  or  the  refuse  of  the
former  when  fishing;  if  they  did,  and  the  others
should  get  wind  of  it,  they  would  hide  themselves,
and  not  let  themselves  be  taken.  Every  year  they
marry  their  nets  or  Seines  to  two  little  girls,  who
must  be  only  from  six  to  seven  years  of  age,  for  fear
they  may  have  lost  their  virginity,  which  is  a  very
rare  quality  among  them.  The  ceremony  of  these
espousals  takes  place  at  a  fine  feast,  where  the  Seine
is  placed  between  the  two  virgins ;  this  is  to  render
them  fortunate  in  catching  fish.  Still,  I  am  very  glad
that  virginity  receives  among  them  this  kind  of
honor;  it  will  help  us  some  day  to  make  them  un-
derstand the  value  of  it.  Fish,  they  say,  do  not  like
the  dead ;  and  hence  they  abstain  from  going  fishing
when  one  of  their  friends  is  dead.  But  lately,  when
they  took  up  from  the  cemetery  the  bodies  of  their  rel-
atives and  carried  them  into  their  Cabins,  on  the  oc-


168  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol. 10


quelqu'vn  leur  eft  mort.  Nagueres  qu'ils  tirerent
du  cimetiere  les  corps  de  leurs  pares,  &  les  porterent
dans  leurs  Cabanes,  al'occafion  de  la  fefte  des  morts,
quelques  vns  nous  apporterent  chez  nous  leurs  rets,
allegants  pour  pretexte  la  crainte  qu'ils  [i  16]  auoient
dufeu;  car  c'eft  d'ordinaire  en  cette  faifon  que  le
feu  ruine  fouuent  les  Villages  entiers ;  que  chez  nous
nous  eftions  quafi  toufiours  fur  pied,  &  dormions  fort
peu;  que  nous  eftions  eloignez  du  Village,  &  par  con-
f equent  moins  en  danger  de  ce  cofte  la :  mais  tout
cela  n'eftoit  que  difcours;  la  vraye  raifon  eftoit,
comme  nous  apprifmes  par  apres,  qu'ils  craignoient
que  leurs  rets  ne  fuffent  profanez  par  le  voifinage  de
ces  carcalles :  voila  bien  quelque  chof e ;  mais  voicy
le  fond  de  la  plus  grand  part  de  leurs  fuperftitions.

lis  ont  vne  croyance  aux  fonges  qui  furpafle  toute
croyance,  &  fi  les  Chreftiens  mettoient  en  execution
toutes  les  infpirations  diuines  auec  autant  de  foin  que
nos  Sauuages  executent  leurs  fonges,  fans  doute  ils
deuiendroient  bien  toft  de  grands  Saincts.  Ils  pren-
nent  leurs  fonges  pour  des  ordonnances  &  des  arrefts
irreuocables,  &  dont  il  n'eft  pas  permis  fans  crime  de
differer  1' execution.  Vn  Sauuage  de  noftre  Village
fongea  cet  hyuer  des  fon  premier  fommeil  qu'il  de-
uoit  faire  promptement  feftin,  &  fur  le  champ  toute
nuit  qu'il  eftoit,  fe  leua,  s'en  vint  nous  [117]  6ueil-
ler,  et  nous  emprunter  vne  de  nos  chaudieres.

Le  fonge  eft  1' oracle  que  tous  ces  pauures  Peuples
confultent  &  efcoutent,  le  Prophete  qui  leur  predit
les  chofes  futures,  la  Caffandre  qui  les  aduertit  des
malheurs  qui  les  menacent,  le  Medecin  ordinaire  dans
leurs  maladies,  l'Efculape  &  le  Galien  de  tout  le
Pays,  c'eft  le  maiftre  le  plus  abfolu  qu'ils  ayent;  fi


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6s6  169


casion  of  the  feast  of  the  dead,  some  brought  into
our  Cabin  their  nets  alleging  as  a  pretext  the  fear
they  [116]  had  of  fire, —  for  it  is  usually  in  this  sea-
son that  fire  often  ruins  entire  Villages;  that  in  our
Cabin  we  were  almost  always  moving  about,  and
slept  very  little;  that  we  were  at  some  distance
from  the  Village,  and  consequently  were  in  less  dan-
ger in  that  respect.  But  all  this  was  talk ;  the  true
reason  was,  as  we  learned  afterwards,  that  they  were
afraid  their  nets  would  be  profaned  by  the  proximity
of  these  dead  bodies.  That  is  something,  to  be
sure ;  but  here  is  the  foundation  of  the  greater  part
of  their  superstitions.

They  have  a  faith  in  dreams  which  surpasses  all
belief ;  and  if  Christians  were  to  put  into  execution
all  their  divine  inspirations  with  as  much  care  as
our  Savages  carry  out  their  dreams,  no  doubt  they
would  very  soon  become  great  Saints.  They  look
upon  their  dreams  as  ordinances  and  irrevocable  de-
crees, the  execution  of  which  it  is  not  permitted
without  crime  to  delay.  A  Savage  of  our  Village
dreamed  this  winter,  in  his  first  sleep,  that  he  ought
straightway  to  make  a  feast;  and  immediately,  night
as  it  was,  he  arose,  and  came  [117]  and  awakened  us
to  borrow  one  of  our  kettles.

The  dream  is  the  oracle  that  all  these  poor  Peoples
consult  and  listen  to,  the  Prophet  which  predicts  to
them  future  events,  the  Cassandra  which  warns  them
of  misfortunes  that  threaten  them,  the  usual  Physi-
cian in  their  sicknesses,  the  Esculapius  and  Galen  of
the  whole  Country, —  the  most  absolute  master  they
have.  If  a  Captain  speaks  one  way  and  a  dream  an-
other, the  Captain  might  shout  his  head  off  in  vain, —
the  dream  is  first  obeyed. It  is  their  Mercury  in


170  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

vn  Capitaine  parle  d'vn  cofte,  &  vn  fonge  de  1' autre,
le  Capitaine  a  beau  fe  rompre  la  tefte  a  crier,  le  fonge
eft  le  premier  obey.  C'eft  leur  Mercure  dans  leurs
voyages,  leur  Oeconome  dans  leurs  families :  le  fonge
prefide  fouuent  a  leurs  confeils;  la  traitte,  la  pefche
&  la  chaffe  s'entreprennent  ordinairement  fouz  fon
aueu,  &  ne  font  quafi  que  pour  luy  fatisfaire ;  ils  ne
traittent  rien  de  fi  precieux  dont  ils  ne  fe  priuent  vo-
lontiers  en  vertu  de  quelque  fonge:  s'ils  ont  fait  vne
heureufe  chaffe,  s'ils  retournet  de  la  pefche  leurs  Ca-
nots  chargez  de  poiffon,  tout  cela  eft  a  la  difcretion
du  fonge ;  vn  fonge  leur  enleuera  quelquefois  leur
prouifion  de  toute  vne  annee :  il  prefcrit  les  feftins,
les  danfes,  les  chanfons,  les  ieux,  en  vn  mot  le  fonge
fait  [118]  icy  tout,  &  eft  a  vray  dire  comme  le  prin-
cipal Dieu  des  Hurons.  Au  refte  qu'on  ne  penfe  pas
que  ie  face  icy  vne  amplification  ou  exaggeration  a
plaifir,  l'experience  de  cinq  ans  qu'il  y  a  que  ie  fuis
a  eftudier  les  mceurs  &  les  facons  de  faire  de  nos
Sauuages,  m'obligent  de  parler  de  la  forte.

II  eft  vray  que  tous  les  fonges  ne  font  pas  dans  ce
credit,  on  a  egard  aux  perfonnes,  &  il  y  en  a  tel  qui
aura  beau  fonger,  pas  vn  ne  s'en  remuera  pour  cela;
de  mefme  fi  c'eft  vn  pauure,  fes  fonges  font  en  fort
peu  de  confideration :  il  faut  que  ce  foit  vne  perfonne
affez  accommodee,  &  dont  les  fonges  fe  foient  trouuez
plufieurs  f  ois  veritables :  &  encor  ceux  qui  ont  le  don
de  bien  reuer  n'ecoutent  pas  tous  leurs  fonges  in-
diff eremment ;  ils  en  recognoiffent  de  faux  &  de  ve-
ritables ;  &  ceux-cy,  difent-ils,  font  affez  rares.
Toutefois  dans  la  pratique  ils  agiffent  d'vne  autre
facon,  &  en  executent  de  fi  mal  fagotez,  &  compofez
de  tant  de  pieces  qui  ont  fi  peu  de  rapport,  qu'il  ne


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  171

their  journeys,  their  domestic  Economy  in  their  fami-
lies. The  dream  often  presides  in  their  councils;
traffic,  fishing,  and  hunting  are  undertaken  usually
under  its  sanction,  and  almost  as  if  only  to  satisfy  it.
They  hold  nothing  so  precious  that  they  would  not
readily  deprive  themselves  of  it  for  the  sake  of  a
dream.  If  they  have  been  successful  in  hunting,  if
they  bring  back  their  Canoes  laden  with  fish,  all  this
is  at  the  discretion  of  a  dream.  A  dream  will  take
away  from  them  sometimes  their  whole  year's  provi-
sions. It  prescribes  their  feasts,  their  dances,  their
songs,  their  games, —  in  a  word,  the  dream  does  [1 18]
everything  and  is  in  truth  the  principal  God  of  the
Hurons.  Moreover,  let  no  one  think  I  make  herein
an  amplification  or  exaggeration  at  pleasure ;  the  ex-
perience of  five  years,  during  which  I  have  been
studying  the  manners  and  usages  of  our  Savages,
compels  me  to  speak  in  this  way.

It  is  true  that  all  dreams  are  not  held  in  such  cred-
it ;  regard  is  had  to  the  persons,  and  there  are  some
who  dream  in  vain;  for  these  no  one  will  stir  a  step.
Likewise  if  it  is  a  poor  person,  his  dreams  are  held
in  very  little  consideration.  It  must  be  a  person  in
fairly  good  circumstances,  and  one  whose  dreams
have  been  found  several  times  true.  And  even  those
who  have  the  gift  of  dreaming  well  do  not  all  give
heed  to  their  dreams  indifferently;  they  recognize
some  of  them  as  false  and  some  as  true, —  the  latter,
they  say,  being  quite  rare.  Yet  in  practice  they  act
in  another  way,  and  carry  out  some  so  badly  put  to-
gether, and  made  up  of  so  many  parts  having  so  little
connection,  that  it  would  not  be  possible  to  say  what
are  in  their  own  judgment  false,  and  what  true;  I
fancy  they  [119]  themselves  would  find  considerable


172


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  10


me  feroit  pas  poffible  de  dire  quels  font  a  leur  iuge-
ment  les  faux fonges, ou  les  veritables; ie  penfe
qu'eux  [119]  mefmes  y  feroient  bien  empefchez ;  c'eft
pourquoy,  de  peur  de  manquer  en  ce  point,  plufieurs
en  executent  la  plus  part;  s'il  y  a  quelque  obfcurite"
dans  vn  fonge,  ou  fi  les  chofes  qu'ils  ont  fongees,
font,  ou  impoffibles,  ou  difficiles  a  recouurer,  ou  hors
de  faifon,  il  fe  trouue  des  Artemidores  qui  les  inter-
pretent, &  qui  y  coupent  &  tranchent  comme  bon
leur  femble. Quand  les  enfans  font  malades, les
peres,  ou  les  meres  fongent  pour  eux ;  nous  en  vifmes
vn  exemple  cet  hyuer  dans  noftre  Village. Vn  de
nos  petits  Chreftiens  eftoit  fort  malade,  fa  mere  fongea
qu'il  luy  falloit  pour  fa  fante  cent  pains  de  Petun,  &
quatre  Cafhors,  dont  elle  feroit  feftin ;  mais  parce  que
le  Petun  eftoit  rare,  les  cent  pains  furent  reduits  a
dix,  &  les  Caftors  qui  eftoient  hors  de  faifon,  chan-
gez  en quatre  grands poiffons qui pafferent pour
Caftors  dans  le  feftin,  &  dont  les  queues  furent  don-
nees  aux  principaux  pour  des  queues  de  Caftor. Apres
cela  ce  petit  Ange  ne  laiffa  pas  de  s'enuoler  au  ciel,
au  grand  regret  de  fes  parens,  mais  auec  beaucoup
de  confolation  de  noftre  cofte. Ces  ames  innocentes
ont  fans  doute  vn  grand  pouuoir  aupres  [120]  de  Dieu,
pour  moyenner  la  conuerfion  de  leurs  peres,  &  pour
impetrer  mefme des  graces  fort  particulieres  pour
ceux  qui  s* employ ent  au  falut  de  ces  Peuples,  &  qui
leur  ont  procure  le  bien,  dont  ils  fe  voyent  en  poflef-
fion  pour  iamais. Mais  paffons,  nous  ne  fommes  pas
encor  au  bout  de  leurs  fuperftitions.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  173

difficulty  in  doing  this ;  that  is  why,  for  fear  of  fail-
ing in  this  point,  many  carry  out  the  greater  part  of
them.  If  there  be  any  obscurity  in  their  dreams,  or
if  the  things  they  have  dreamed  are  either  impossible
or  difficult  to  recover,  or  are  out  of  season,  there  are
found  Artemidores  who  interpret  them,  and  who  cut
and  slice  them  as  seems  good  to  them.  When  chil-
dren are  sick,  the  fathers  or  mothers  dream  for  them ;
we  saw  an  example  of  this  in  our  Village  this  winter.
One  of  our  little  Christians  was  very  sick ;  his  mother
dreamed  that  to  make  him  well  he  must  have  a  hun-
dred cakes  of  Tobacco,  and  four  Beavers,  with
which  she  would  make  a  feast ;  but,  because  the  To-
bacco was  very  rare,  the  hundred  cakes  were  reduced
to  ten,  and  the  Beavers  which  were  out  of  season
were  changed  to  four  large  fish  that  passed  for  Beav-
ers in  the  feast,  and  the  tails  of  which  were  given  to
the  principals  as  Beaver  tails.  But  this  little  Angel,
for  all  that,  flew  away  to  heaven,  to  the  great  grief
of  its  parents,  but  with  much  consolation  to  us.
These  innocent  souls  have  no  doubt  great  power  with
[120]  God  to  bring  about  the  conversion  of  their  fa-
thers, and  even  to  request  very  special  graces  for
those  who  employ  themselves  in  the  salvation  of  these
Peoples,  and  who  have  procured  for  them  the  good
of  which  they  see  themselves  in  possession  forever.
But  let  us  pass  on ;  we  are  not  yet  at  the  end  of  their
superstitions.


174  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.10


CHAPITRE  IV.

DES-  FESTINS, DANSES, IEUX DE PLAT, & DE CROSSE,
DE CE QU'lLS APPELLENT ONONHAROIA.

IE  n'entreprends  pas  de  deduire  par  le  menu,  tout
ce  que  nos  Sauuages  ont  couftume  de  faire  en
vertu  de  leurs  fonges,  il  faudroit  etaler  fur  ce
papier  trop  de  chimeres ,  ie  me  contenteray  de  dire
que  leurs  fonges  fe  raportent  ordinairement,  ou  a  vn
feftin,  ou  a  chater,  ou  a  danfer,  ou  a  ioiier,  ou  enfin
a.  vne  certaine  efpece  de  manie  qu'ils  appellent  en
effet  Ononharoia,  c'eft  a  dire  renuerfement  de  cer-
uelle.  Si  done  il  efchet  que  quelqu'vn  de  quelque
confideration  tombe  malade,  [121]  le  Capitaine  luy
va  demander  fi  fouuent,  de  la  part  des  Anciens,  ce
qu'il  a  fonge,  qu'enfin  il  tire  de  luy  ce  qu'il  defire
pour  fa  fante,  &  lors  ils  fe  mettent  tous  en  peine  de
le  luy  trouuer,  n'en  fut-il  point,  il  en  faut  auoir.  De
cette  facon  d'agir,  &  de  ce  qu'ils  exercent  entr'eux
l'hofpitalite  gratuitement,  ne  prenant  rien  que  de
nous,  de  qui  ils  attendent  toufiours  quelque  chofe,
i'entre  en  efperace,  qu'ils  fe  rendront  vn  iour  fufcep-
tibles  de  la  charite  Chreftienne.

L 'ononhara  eft  pour  les  fols;  quand  quelqu'vn  dit
qu'il  faut  qu'on  aille  par  les  Cabanes  dire  qu'on  a
fonge.  Alors  des  le  foir  vne  troupe  d'infenfez  s'en
vont  par  les  Cabanes,  &  renuerf  ent  tout :  le  lendemain
ils  y  retournent  crians  a  pleine  tefte,  Nous  auons
fonge,  fans  dire  quoy. Ceux  de  la  Cabane  deuinent


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  175


CHAPTER  IV.

CONCERNING FEASTS, DANCES; THE GAMES OF DISH
AND CROSSE; WHAT THEY CALL ONONHAROIA.

1DO  not  undertake  to  mention  in  detail  every-
thing our  Savages  are  accustomed  to  do  in  virtue
of  their  dreams ;  I  should  be  compelled  to  display
on  this  paper  too  many  absurdities.  I  shall  content
myself  with  saying  that  their  dreams  usually  relate
either  to  a  feast,  or  to  a  song,  or  to  a  dance,  or  to  a
game, —  or,  lastly,  to  a  certain  sort  of  mania  that  they
in  fact  call  Ononharoia,  or  "  turning  the  brain  upside
down."  If  therefore  it  happens  that  some  one  of
some  consideration  falls  sick,  [121]  the  Captain  goes
to  inquire  so  often,  on  behalf  of  the  Old  Men,  what
he  has  dreamed,  that  at  last  he  draws  from  him  what
he  desires  for  his  health,  and  then  they  all  put  them-
selves to  trouble  to  find  it  for  him ;  if  it  does  not  ex-
ist, it  must  be  found.  From  this  mode  of  acting,
and  from  the  fact  that  they  exercise  hospitality  among
themselves  gratuitously,  taking  nothing  except  from
us,  from  whom  they  always  expect  something,  I  en-
tertain the  hope  that  they  will  one  day  become  sus-
ceptible of  Christian  charity.

The  ononhara  is  for  the  sake  of  mad  persons,  when
some  one  says  that  they  must  go  through  the  Cabins
to  tell  what  they  have  dreamed.  Then,  as  soon  as
it  is  evening,  a  band  of  maniacs  goes  about  among
the  Cabins  and  upsets  everything;  on  the  morrow
they return, crying in a loud voice, "  We have


176  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

ce  que  ce  peut  eftre,  &  le  prefentet  aux  compagnos,
qui  ne  refufent  rien,  iufqu'a  ce  qu'ils  ayent  rencontre.
Vous  les  voyez  fortir  le  col  charge  de  Haches,  de
Chaudieres,  de  Pourcelaine,  &  femblables  prefens  a
leur  facon.  Quand  ils  ont  trouue  ce  qu'ils  cher-
choient,  ils  remercient  celuy  qui  le  leur  a  donne,  &
apres  auoir  receu  encore  [122]  quelques  accompagne-
mens  de  ce  prefent  myfterieux ;  comme  du  cuir,  ou
vne  aleine,  fi  c'eftoit  vn  foulier ;  ils  s'en  vont  de  com-
pagnie  au  bois  y  ietter,  difent-ils,  la  folie,  hors  du
Village ;  &  le  malade  commence  a  fe  guerir.  Pour-
quoy  non?  il  a  ce  qu'il  cherchoit,  ou  ce  que  le  Diable
pretendoit.

Pour  le  regard  des  feftins;  c'eft  vne  chofe  infinie,
le  Diable  les  y  tient  fi  fort  attachez,  qu'il  n'efl  pas
poffible  de  plus,  fcachant  bien  que  c'eft  le  moyen  de
les  rendre  toufiours  plus  brutaux,  &  moins  capables
des  veritez  furnaturelles.  Ils  en  rapportent  l'origine
a  vne  certaine  entreueue  des  Loups  &  du  Hibou,  ou
cet  animal  nocturne  leur  predit  la  venue  d'  Ontarraou-
ra,  c'eft  vne  befte  qui  retire  au  Lyon  par  la  queue;
lequel  0?itarraoura,  refufcita,  difent-ils,  vn  ie  ne  fcay
quel  bon  Veneur,  grand  amy  des  Loups,  au  milieu
d'vn  bon  feftin:  d'oii  ils  concluent  qu'ils  faut  que
les  feftins  foient  capables  de  guerir  les  malades,  puis
que  mefmes  ils  rendent  la  vie  aux  morts.  N'eft-ce
pas  bien  raif onne  pour  des  gens  de  ventre  &  de  table  ?

Tous  ces  feftins  peuuent  eftre  reduits  [123]  a  quatre
efpeces.  Athataion,  eft  le  feftin  des  adieux.  Endi-
teulitia,  d'action  de  graces  &  de  conioiiiffance.  AtXront
aochien  eft  vn  feftin  a  chanter  autant  qu'a  manger.
AXataerohi,  eft  la  quatriefme  efpece,  &  fe  fait  pour  la
deliurance  d'vne  maladie  ainfi  appellee.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  177

dreamed,"  without  saying  what.  Those  of  the  Cabin
guess  what  it  is,  and  present  it  to  the  band,  who  re-
fuse nothing  until  the  right  thing  is  guessed.  You
see  them  come  out  with  Hatchets,  Kettles,  Porcelain,
and  like  presents  hung  around  their  necks,  after  their
fashion.  When  they  have  found  what  they  sought,
they  thank  him  who  has  given  it  to  them ;  and,  after
having  received  further  [122]  additions  to  this  mys-
terious present, —  as  some  leather  or  a  shoemaker's
awl,  if  it  were  a  shoe, —  they  go  away  in  a  body  to
the  woods,  and  there,  outside  the  Village,  cast  out,
they  say,  their  madness ;  and  the  sick  man  begins  to
get  better.  Why  not?  He  has  what  he  was  seeking
for,  or  what  the  Devil  pretended.

As  regards  feasts,  it  is  an  endless  subject;  the
Devil  keeps  them  so  strongly  attached  thereto  that
they  could  not  possibly  be  more  so,  he  knowing  well
that  it  is  a  means  of  rendering  them  still  more  brutal,
and  less  capable  of  supernatural  truths.  They  as-
cribe their  origin  to  a  certain  meeting  of  Wolves  and
of  the  Owl,  in  which  that  nocturnal  creature  pre-
dicted for  them  the  coming  of  Ontarraoura,  a  beast
allied  to  the  Lion,  by  its  tail.  This  Ontarraoura  re-
suscitated, they  say,  I  know  not  what  good  Hunter,  a
firm  friend  of  the  Wolves,  in  the  midst  of  a  great
feast.17  From  this  they  conclude  that  feasts  must  be
capable  of  healing  the  sick,  since  they  even  restore
life  to  the  dead.  Is  it  not  well  reasoned  for  people
who  are  slaves  of  the  belly  and  of  the  table?

All  their  feasts  may  be  reduced  [123]  to  four  kinds.
Athataion  is  the  feast  of  farewells.  Enditeuhwa,  of
thanksgiving  and  gratitude.  Atouront  aochien  is  a
feast  for  singing  as  well  as  for  eating. Awataerohi


178  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.10

Les  ceremonies  y  font  prefque  femblables  a  celles
des  Montagnes;  c'eft  pourquoy  ie  m'en  remets  de  la
plus  part  aux  Relations  des  annees  precedentes.

Ie  rougis  de  dire  que  fouuent  ils  y  font  les  iours  &
les  nuicts  entieres:  car  enfin,  il  faut  vuider  la  chau-
diere.  Et  fi  vous  ne  pouuez  aualler  tout  ce  qu'on
vous  a  feruy  en  vn  iour,  fi  vous  ne  trouuez  qui  vous
vueille  ayder,  pour  quelque  prefent,  quand  les  autres
auront  fait  leur  deuoir,  on  vous  laiffera-la  dans  vn
petit  retranchement,  ou  perfonne  n'entrera  que  vous,
les  vingt-quatre  heures  entieres.  C'eft  vne  chofe
d'importance  qu'vn  feftin,  crient-ils,  en  chaffant  ceux
qui  fe  prefentent  quand  le  ieu  des  dents  a  commence,
&  que  le  diftributeur  a  remply  a.  chacun  fon  ecuelle,
oil  d' ordinaire  il  y  a  a  manger  depuis  le  matin  iuf-
qu'au  foir,  &  qui  a  le  pluftoft  fait;  c'eft  a.  luy  en  fer-
uir  [124]  toufiours  de  nouueau,  iufqu'a  ce  que  la  chau-
diere  foit  nette.  N'eft-il  pas  vray  a  oui'r  tout  cecy,
&  plulieurs  autres  traicts  de  gourmandife,  que  i'ob-
mets  par  bienfeance,  de  dire,  que  Jl  Regnum  Dei  non
eft  efca  &  potus;  fi  le  Royaume  de  Dieu  n'eft  pas  a
boire  &  a  manger ;  ii  eft  bien  celuy  que  le  Diable  a
vfurpe  fur  ces  pauures  aueugles.  Plaife  a  noftre
Seigneur  auoir  pitie  d'eux,  &  les  deliurer  de  cette
tyrannic

Mais  il  n'y  a  rien  de  magnifique  comme  les  feftins
qu'ils  appellent  AtXronta  ochien,  c'eft  a.  dire  feftins  a
chanter.  Ces  feftins  dureront  fouuent  les  vingt-
quatres  heures  entieres,  quelquefois  il  y  aura  trente
&  quarante  chaudieres,  &  s'y  mangera  iufques  a
trente  Cerfs:  c£t  hyuer  dernier  il  s'en  fit  vn  au  vil-
lage d' 'Andiata  de  vingt-cinq  chaudieres,  ou  il  y  auoit
cinquante  grands  poiffons,  qui  valent  bien  [que]  nos


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  179

is  the  fourth  kind,  and  is  made  for  deliverance  from
a  sickness  thus  named.

The  ceremonies  here  are  almost  like  those  of  the
Montagnes ;  on  this  account,  I  refer  for  the  most  part
to  the  Relations  of  preceding  years.

I  blush  to  say  that  they  engage  in  them  often  whole
days  and  whole  nights,  for  they  must,  at  the  last,
empty  the  kettle.  And  if  you  cannot,  in  one  day,
swallow  all  that  has  been  provided  for  you,  if  you
cannot  find  any  one  who  will  help  you  in  considera-
tion of  a  present,  when  the  others  have  done  their
utmost  you  will  be  left  there  in  a  little  enclosure,
where  no  one  but  yourself  will  enter  for  twenty-four
whole  hours.  It  is  a  matter  of  importance,  this  feast-
ing, they  cry,  driving  away  those  who  present  them-
selves when  the  game  of  teeth  has  begun,  and  when
the  distributor  has  filled  for  each  his  bowl,  in  which
usually  there  is  enough  to  keep  one  eating  from  morn-
ing until  night.  And,  whoever  soonest  accomplishes
this,  it  is  for  him  to  be  served  [124]  again  and  again,
until  the  kettle  be  empty.  Is  it  not  true,  on  hearing
all  this,  and  several  other  traits  of  gluttony,  which  I
omit  out  of  respect  for  good  taste,  to  say  that  si  Reg-
num  Dei  non  est  esca  et  potus,  verily  the  Kingdom  of
God  is  not  in  eating  and  drinking ;  such  is  indeed  the
one  which  the  Devil  has  usurped  over  these  poor
blind  beings.  May  it  please  our  Lord  to  have  pity
on  them,  and  to  deliver  them  from  this  tyranny.

But  the  most  magnificent  of  these  feasts  are  those
they  call  At  our  out  a  ochien,  that  is,  singing  feasts.
These  feasts  will  often  last  twenty-four  entire  hours ;
sometimes  there  are  thirty  or  forty  kettles,  and  as  many
as  thirty  Deer  will  be  eaten.  This  last  winter  one  was
made  in  the  village  of  Andiata,18  of  twenty-five  kettles,


180  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

plus  grands  Brochets  de  France,  &  fix  vingts  autres  de
la  grandeur  de  nos  Saulmons.  II  s'en  fit  vn  autre  a
Contarrea,  de  trente  chaudieres,  ou  il  y  auoit  vingt
Cerfs  &  quatre  Ours,  auffi  y  a  t'il  ordinairement
bonne  compagnie,  les  huict  &  neuf  villages  y  feront
fouuent  [125]  inuitez,  &  mefme  tout  le  Pais;  &  en
ce  cas  le  maiftre  du  feftin  enuoye  a  chaque  Capitaine
autant  de  buchettes  qu'il  inuite  de  perfonnes  de  cha-
que Village.

lis  font  ces  Feftins  quelquefois  purement  par  ma-
gnificence, &  pour  fe  faire  renommer ;  d'autref ois  lors
qu'ils  prennent  vn  nouueau  nom,  principalement  s'ils
reffufcitent,  comme  ils  difent,  le  nom  de  quelque
Capitaine  defunct,  qui  ait  efte  en  confideration  dans
le  Pais  pour  fa  valeur  &  fa  conduite  au  maniement
des  affaires ;  mais  fur  tout  lors  qu'ils  fe  difpofent  a
prendre  les  armes,  &  aller  a  la  guerre.  La  plus
grande  Cabane  du  Village  eft  deftinee  pour  receuoir
la  compagnie :  ils  ne  font  point  de  difficulte  de  s'in-
commoder  les  vns  pour  les  autres  en  ces  occafions;
la  chofe  eft  eftimee  de  telle  importance,  qu'en  mefme
temps  qu'on  baftit  quelque  Village,  on  dreffe  vne
Cabane  exprez,  plus  grande  de  beaucoup  que  les
autres ;  quelquefois  on  luy  donnera  iufques  a  vingt-
cinq  &  trente  braffes  de  longueur.

La  compagnie  eftant  affemblee,  quelquefois  on  fe
met  a.  chanter  auant  que  [126]  de  manger,  quelque-
fois pour  auoir  meilleur  courage  on  mange  aupara-
uant :  fi  le  f ef  tin  doit  durer,  comme  il  arriue  fouuent,
toute  la  iournee,  vne  partie  des  chaudieres  fe  vuide
le  matin,  &  l'autre  partie  fe  referue  pour  le  foir.

Parmy  ces  chants  &  ces  danfes  quelques-vns  pren-
nent occafion  d'affommer  comme  en  ioiiant  leurs  en-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  181


in  which  there  were  fifty  great  fish,  larger  than  our
largest  Pike  in  France,  and  one  hundred  and  twenty-
others  of  the  size  of  our  Salmon.  Another  took
place  at  Contarrea,  of  thirty  kettles,  in  which  there
were  twenty  Deer  and  four  Bears.  Also  there  is
usually  a  large  company,  for  eight  or  nine  villages
will  often  be  [125]  invited,  and  even  the  whole  Coun-
try. In  this  case  the  master  of  the  feast  sends  to
each  Captain  as  many  sticks  as  the  number  of  persons
he  invites  from  each  Village.

Sometimes  they  make  these  Feasts  purely  from  dis-
play, and  to  become  renowned;  at  other  times,  when
they  take  a  new  name,  principally  when  they  raise
from  the  dead,  as  they  say,  the  name  of  some  de-
ceased Captain  who  has  been  held  in  esteem  in  the
Country  for  his  valor  and  his  skill  in  the  manage-
ment of  affairs,  but  above  all  when  they  are  inclined
to  take  arms  and  go  to  war.  The  largest  Cabin  of
the  Village  is  set  aside  for  the  reception  of  the  com-
pany. They  do  not  hesitate  to  inconvenience  them-
selves for  each  other  on  these  occasions.  The  matter
is  esteemed  of  such  importance  that,  when  a  Vil-
lage is  built,  they  purposely  put  up  one  Cabin  much
larger  than  the  others,  sometimes  making  it  as  much
as  twenty-five  or  thirty  brasses  in  length.

When  the  company  is  assembled,  they  sometimes
begin  to  sing  before  [126]  eating;  sometimes,  to  have
more  courage,  they  eat  first.  If  the  feast  is  to  last,
as  is  often  the  case,  the  whole  day,  one  portion  of
the  kettles  is  emptied  in  the  morning  and  the  other
is  reserved  for  the  evening.

During  these  songs  and  dances,  some  take  occa-
sion to  knock  down,  as  if  in  sport,  their  enemies.
Their  most  usual  cries  are  hen,  hen,  or  he'e'e'e'e',  or  else


182  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


nemis.  Leurs  cris  plus  ordinaires  font  hen,  hen,  ou
hde'e'e'e',  ou  bien  Uiiiiiii.  lis  rapportent  l'origine  de
tous  ces  myfleres  a  vn  certain  Geant  plus  qu'homme,
qu'vn  des  leurs  bleca  au  front,  lors  qu'ils  habitoient
fur  le  bord  de  la  mer,  pour  n'auoir  point  repondu,
le  compliment  KXai,  qui  eft  la  repartie  ordinaire  de
ceux  qu'on  falue.  Ce  monftre  leur  ietta  la  pomme
de  difcorde  en  punition  de  fa  bleffeure,  &  apres  leur
auoir  recommande  les  feflins  de  guerre,  V  Ononharoia,
&  ce  refrain  Xiiiiiii,  il  s'enfonca  danslaterre,  &  dif pa-
rut. Auroit-ce  bien  efte  quelque  efprit  infernal?

Puis  que  nous  fommes  fur  ce  propos,  ie  diray  qu'ils
recognoiff  ent  comme  vne  efpece  de  Dieu  en  guerre :
ils  le  figurent  comme  vn  petit  Nain.  A  les  entendre
il  paroift  a  plufieurs,  lors  qu'on  eft  fur  le  [127]  poinct
d'aller  en  guerre;  il  careffe  les  vns,  &  c'eft  vn  figne,
difent-ils,  qu'ils  retourneront  victorieux;  les  autres
il  les  frappe  au  front,  &  ceux-la  peuuent  bien  dire
qu'ils  n'iront  point  a  la  guerre  fans  y  laiffer  la  vie.

Retournons  aux  f eftins.  U A Xtacrohi  eft  vn  remede
qui  n'eft  que  pour  vne  certaine  forte  de  maladie,
qu'ils  appellent  auffi  AXtaerohi,  du  nom  d'vn  petit
Demon  gros  comme  le  poing,  qu'ils  difent  eftre  dans
le  corps  du  malade,  &  fur  tout  dans  la  partie  qui  luy
fait  mal ;  ils  recognoiff  ent  qu'ils  font  malades  de  cette
maladie  par  le  moyen  d'vn  fonge,  ou  par  l'entremife
de  quelque  Sorcier.  Eftant  vn  iour  alle  vifiter  vne
femme  qui  fe  faifoit  malade  de  V  A  Xtacrohi,  comme
ie  luy  affignois  vne  autre  caufe  de  fa  maladie,  &  me
mocquois  de  f on  A  Xtaerohi,  elle  f e  mit  a  dire  apoftro-
phant  ce  Demon  AXtaerohi  hechrio  K.ihenkhon.  AXtae-
rohi,  ah !  ie  te  prie,  que  cettuy-cy  cognoilfe  qui  tu  es,
&  luy  fais  fentir  les  maux  que  tu  me  fais  fourrrir.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  183

wiiiiiii.  They  ascribe  the  origin  of  all  these  myste-
ries to  a  certain  Giant  of  more  than  human  size,
whom  one  of  their  tribe  wounded  in  the  forehead
when  they  dwelt  on  the  shore  of  the  sea,  for  not  hav-
ing given  the  complimentary  answer,  Kwai,  which
is  the  usual  response  to  a  salute.  The  monster  cast
among  them  the  apple  of  discord,  in  punishment  for
his  wound ;  and  after  having  recommended  to  them
war  feasts,  Ononharoia,  and  this  refrain  wiiiiiii,  he
buried  himself  in  the  earth,  and  disappeared.  Might
this  indeed  have  been  some  infernal  spirit?

Since  I  am  speaking  on  this  subject,  I  will  say  that
they  recognize  a  sort  of  war  God ;  they  imagine  him
as  a  little  Dwarf.  By  what  they  say,  he  appears  to
many  when  they  are  on  the  [127]  point  of  going  to
war.  He  caresses  some,  and  that  is  a  sign,  they  say,
that  they  will  return  victorious;  others  he  strikes
upon  the  forehead,  and  these  can  truly  say  that  they
will  not  go  to  war  without  losing  their  lives.

Let  us  return  to  the  feasts.  The  Aoutaerohi  is  a
remedy  which  is  only  for  one  particular  kind  of  dis-
ease, which  they  call  also  Aoutaerohi,  from  the  name
of  a  little  Demon  as  large  as  the  fist,  which  they  say
is  in  the  body  of  the  sick  man,  especially  in  the  part
which  pains  him.  They  find  out  that  they  are  sick
of  this  disease,  by  means  of  a  dream,  or  by  the  inter-
vention of  some  Sorcerer.  Having  one  day  gone  to
visit  a  woman  who  thought  herself  sick  of  Aoutaerohi,
when  I  assigned  another  cause  for  her  sickness,  and
laughed  at  her  Aoutaerohi,  she  began  to  say,  apos-
trophizing this  Demon,  Aoutaerohi  hechrio  Kihenkhon.
Aoutaerohi,  "  Ah,  I  pray  thee  that  this  one  may  know
who  thou  art,  and  that  thou  wilt  make  him  feel  the
ills  that  thou  makest  me  surfer. ' '


184  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10


Or  pour  chaffer  ce  Demon,  ils  font  des  feftins
qu'ils  accompagnent  de  quelques  chanfons,  que  fort
peu  fcauent  bien  [128]  chanter.  Voila  bien  de  quoy
pleurer  aux  pieds  des  Autels ;  mais  helas  ce  n'est  pas
encor  tout.  Outre  ce  que  ie  viens  de  dire,  ie  pour-
rois  diftinguer  encor  autant  d'efpeces  differentes  de
feftins,  qu'il  y  a  de  diuerfes  extrauagances  dans  leur
fonges;  car,  comme  i'ay  dit,  ce  font  ordinairement
les  fonges  qui  commandent  les  feftins,  &  ordon-
nent  mefmes  iufques  aux  moindres  ceremonies  qui
y  doiuent  eftre  obferuees.  De  la  viennent  ces  feftins
a  rendre  gorge,  qui  font  horreur  a  la  plus  part,  &
neantmoins,  quiconque  y  eft  inuite,  il  faut  qu'il  en
paffe  par  la,  &  fe  refolue  d'ecorcher  le  renard,  autre-
ment  le  feftin  fera  gafte.  Quelque  fois  vn  malade
fongera  qu'il  faut  que  les  conuiez  entrent  par  vne
certaine  porte  de  la  Cabane,  &  non  par  1' autre,  qu'ils
ne  paffent  que  par  vn  certain  cofte  de  la  chaudiere ;
autrement  faute  de  cela  il  ne  fera  pas  guery;  y  a  t'il
rien  de  plus  ridicule?

II  y  a  iufques  a  douze  fortes  de  danfes,  qui  font
autat  de  fouuerains  remedes  pour  les  maladies,  de
fcauoir  maintenant  fi  celle-cy,  ou  celle  la  eft  propre
pour  telle,  ou  telle  maladie,  il  n'y  a  qu'vn  fonge  qui
le  [129]  puiffe  determiner,  ou  bien  YArendioXane,  c'eft
a  dire  le  Sorcier.

De  trois  fortes  de  ieux  qui  font  particulierement
en  vfage  parmy  ces  Peuples,  fcauoir  de  croffe,  de
plat,  &  de  paille.  Les  deux  premiers  font  tout  a
fait,  difent-ils,  fouuerains  pour  la  fante.  Cela  n'eft-
il  pas  digne  de  compaffion  ?  Voila  vn  pauure  malade
qui  a  le  feu  dans  le  corps,  &  l'ame  fur  le  bout  de
levres,  &  vn  miferable  Sorcier  luy  ordonnera  pour


1636]  LE /EUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  185

Now,  to  drive  away  this  Demon,  they  make  feasts
that  they  accompany  with  songs  which  very  few  in-
deed can  [128]  sing.  There  is,  indeed,  much  to  be-
wail at  the  foot  of  the  Altars.  But  alas !  this  is  not
yet  all.  Besides  what  I  have  just  mentioned,  I  might
speak  of  as  many  different  sorts  of  feasts  as  there  are
extravagances  in  their  dreams,  for,  as  I  have  said,  it
is  usually  dreams  that  ordain  feasts,  and  fix  even  to
the  smallest  details  the  ceremonies  that  must  be
observed  there.  Hence  come  those  feasts  where  they
disgorge,  which  cause  horror  to  most  of  them ;  and
yet  whoever  is  invited  must  resign  himself,  and  re-
solve to  skin  the  fox,  otherwise  the  feast  will  be
spoiled.  Sometimes  the  sick  man  will  dream  that
the  guests  must  enter  by  a  certain  door  of  the  Cabin,
and  not  by  the  other,  or  that  they  must  pass  only  on
one  side  of  the  kettle,  else  he  will  not  be  healed.
Can  anything  be  more  ridiculous?

There  are  as  many  as  twelve  kinds  of  dances  that
are  so  many  sovereign  remedies  for  sickness ;  now  to
know  whether  this  or  that  is  the  proper  remedy  for
such  and  such  a  disease,  only  a  dream  [129]  or  else
the  Arendiowane,  or  Sorcerer,  can  determine.

Of  three  kinds  of  games  especially  in  use  among
these  Peoples, —  namely,  the  games  of  crosse,  dish,
and  straw,19 — the  first  two  are,  they  say,  most  heal-
ing. Is  not  this  worthy  of  compassion  ?  There  is  a
poor  sick  man,  fevered  of  body  and  almost  dying,
and  a  miserable  Sorcerer  will  order  for  him,  as  a
cooling  remedy,  a  game  of  crosse.  Or  the  sick  man
himself,  sometimes,  will  have  dreamed  that  he  must
die  unless  the  whole  country  shall  play  crosse  for  his
health;  and,  no  matter  how  little  may  be  his  credit,
you  will  see  then  in  a  beautiful  field,  Village  con-


186  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.10

tout  remede  refrigeratif  vn  ieu  de  croff e ;  ou  le  ma-
lade  mefme  quelquefois  aura  fonge,  qu'il  faut  qu'il
meure,  ou  que  tout  le  pays  croff e  pour  fa  fante,  &  en
mefme  temps  s'il  a  tant  foit  peu  de  credit,  vous  ver-
rez  dans  vn  beau  champ  Village  contre  Village,  a
qui  croff  era  le  mieux,  &  parient  l'vn  contre  l'autre,
pour  s'animer  dauantage,  les  robes  de  Caftor,  &  les
colliers  de  Pourcelaine.

Quelquefois  auffi  vn  de  ces  Iongleurs  dira  que  tout
le  Pays  eft  malade,  &  qu'il  demande  vn  ieu  de  croffe
pour  fa  guerifon ;  il  ne  faut  pas  en  dire  dauantage,
cela  fe  publie  incontinent  par  tout,  &  tous  les  Capi-
taines  de  chaque  Village  donnent  ordre  que  toute  la
ieuneffe  faffe  fon  deuoir  en  ce  point,  autrement  quel-
que  grand  [130]  malheur  accueilleroit  tout  le  Pays.

Le  ieu  de  plat  eft  auffi  en  grand  credit  en  matiere
de  medecine,  fur  tout  fi  le  malade  l'a  fonge.  Ce  ieu
eft  purement  de  hazard ;  ils  vous  ont  fix  noyaux  de
prunes,  blancs  d'vn  cofte  &  noirs  de  l'autre,  dedans
vn  plat  qu'ils  heurtent  affez  rudemet  contre  terre,  en
forte  que  les  noyaux  fautent,  &  fe  tournent  tantoft
d'vn  cofte,  tantoft  de  l'autre.  La  partie  confifte  a
amener  tous  blancs,  ou  tous  noirs;  ils  iouent  d'ordi-
naire  Village  contre  Village.  Tout  ce  monde  s'a-
maffe  dans  vne  Cabane,  &  fe  range  fur  des  perches
dreffees  iufques  au  haut,  de  part  &  d'autre.  On  y
apporte  le  malade  dans  vne  couuerture,  &  celuy  du
Village,  qui  doit  remuer  le  plat;  (car  il  n'y  en  a
qu'vn  de  chaque  cofte  etably  pour  cet  effet)  celuy  la
dif-ie  marche  apres,  la  tefte  &  le  vifage  enueloppe  de
fa  robe.  On  parie  fort  &  ferme  de  part  &  d'autre.
Quad  celuy  de  la  partie  aduerfe  tient  le  plat,  ils  crient
a  pleine  tefte  achinc,  achinc,  achinc,  trois, trois,  trois,


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  187

tending  against  Village,  as  to  who  will  play  crosse
the  better,  and  betting  against  one  another  Beaver
robes  and  Porcelain  collars,  so  as  to  excite  greater
interest.

Sometimes,  also,  one  of  these  Jugglers  will  say
that  the  whole  Country  is  sick,  and  he  asks  a  game
of  crosse  to  heal  it ;  no  more  needs  to  be  said,  it  is
published  immediately  everywhere ;  and  all  the  Cap-
tains of  each  Village  give  orders  that  all  the  young
men  do  their  duty  in  this  respect,  otherwise  some
great  [1 30]  misfortune  would  befall  the  whole  Country.

The  game  of  dish  is  also  in  great  renown  in  affairs
of  medicine,  especially  if  the  sick  man  has  dreamed
of  it.  This  game  is  purely  one  of  chance :  they  play
it  with  six  plum-stones,  white  on  one  side  and  black
on  the  other,  in  a  dish  that  they  strike  very  roughly
against  the  ground,  so  that  the  plum-stones  leap  up
and  fall,  sometimes  on  one  side  and  sometimes  on
the  other.  The  game  consists  in  throwing  all  white
or  all  black ;  they  usually  play  Village  against  Vil-
lage. All  the  people  gather  in  a  Cabin,  and  they
dispose  themselves  on  poles,  arranged  as  high  as  the
roof,  along  both  sides.  The  sick  man  is  brought  in
in  a  blanket,  and  that  man  of  the  Village  who  is  to
shake  the  dish  (for  there  is  only  one  on  each  side  set
apart  for  the  purpose),  he,  I  say,  walks  behind,  his
head  and  face  wrapped  in  his  garment.  They  bet
heavily  on  both  sides.  When  the  man  of  the  oppo-
site party  takes  the  dish  they  cry  at  the  top  of  their
voice  achinc,  achinc,  achinc,  "  three,  three,  three,"  or
perhaps  ioio,  ioio,  ioio,  wishing  him  to  throw  only
three  white  or  three  black.  You  might  have  seen
this  winter  a  great  crowd  returning  from  here  to  their
Villages,  having  lost  their  moccasins  [131]  at  a  time


188  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


ou  bien  ioio,  ioio, ioio,  fouhaittans  qu'il  n'amene  que
trois  blancs  ou  trois  noirs. Vous  en  euffiez  veu  cet
hyuer  vne  bonne  troupe  s'en  retourner  d'icy  a  leurs
Villages,  ayans  perdu  leurs  chauffes  [131]  en  vne  f*i-
fon,  ou  il  y  auoit  pres  de  trois  pieds  de  neige,  auffi
gaillards  neantmoins  en  apparence  que  s'ils  euffent
gagne. Ce  que  ie  trouue  de  plus  remarquable  en  ce
point,  c'eft  la  difpofition  qu'ils  y  apportent. II  s'en
trouue  qui  ieufnent  plufieurs  iours  auparauant  que  de
iouer :  la  veille  ils  s'aff  emblent  tous  dans  vne  Cabane,
&  font  feftin  pour  cognoiftre  quelle  fera  l'irlue  du
ieu. Celuy  qui  eft  choifi  pour  tenir  le  plat,  prend  les
noyaux,  &  les  met  indifferemment  dans  vn  plat,  &  le
couure,  en  forte  que  perfonne  n'y  puiffe  mettre  la
main;  cela  faict  on  chante;  la  chanfon  acheuee,  on
decouure  le  plat,  &  les  noyaux  fe  trouuent  ou  tous
blancs,  ou  tous  noirs. La  deffus  ie  demanday  a  vn
Sauuage,  fi  ceux  contre  lef quels  ils  deuoient  iouer,
ne  faifoient  pas  le  mefme  de  leur  cofte,  &  s'ils  ne
pouuoient  pas  rencontrer  les  noyaux  en  mefme  eftat ;
il me dit  qu'ouy;  & cependant  luy  dif-ie,  tous  ne
peuuent  pas  gagner ;  a  cela  il  ne  fceut  que  repondre.
II  m'apprit  encor  deux  chof es  remarquables :  premi-
erement  qu'on  choififfoit  pour  manier  le  plat,  quel-
qu'vn  qui  auoit  fonge  qu'il  gagneroit,  ou  qui  auoit
vn  fort;  au  refte  ceux  qui  en  ont  pour  quoy  que  ce
foit,  ne  s'en  cachent  point,  &  [132]  le  portent  par  tout
auec  eux;  nous  en  auos,  dit-on,  vn  dans  noftre  Vil-
lage, qui  frotte  les  noyaux  d'vn  certain  onguent,  &
ne  manque  quafi  iamais  de gagner. Secondement
qu'en  faifant  l'effay,  quelques  vns  des  noyaux  difpa-
roiffoient, & fe retrouuoient quelque temps  apres
dans  le  plat  auec  les  autres.


1636]  LE  JEUNRS  RELATION,  1636  189

when  there  was  nearly  three  feet  of  snow, —  appar-
ently as  cheerful,  nevertheless,  as  if  they  had  won.
The  most  remarkable  thing  1  notice  in  regard  to  this
matter  is  the  disposition  they  bring  to  it.  There  are
some  who  fast  several  days  before  playing :  the  even-
ing before,  they  all  meet  together  in  a  Cabin,  and
make  a  feast  to  find  out  what  will  be  the  result  of
the  game.  The  one  chosen  to  hold  the  dish  takes
the  stones,  and  puts  them  promiscuously  into  a  dish,
and  covers  it,  so  as  to  prevent  any  one  from  putting
his  hand  into  it.  That  done,  they  sing;  the  song
over,  the  dish  is  uncovered,  and  the  plum-stones  are
found  all  white  or  all  black.  On  this  point,  I  asked
a  Savage  if  those  against  whom  they  were  to  play
did  not  do  the  same  on  their  side,  and  if  they  might
not  find  the  plum-stones  in  the  same  condition.  He
said  they  did;  "  And  yet,"  said  I  to  him,  "  all  can  not
win;"  to  that  he  knew  not  what  to  answer.  He  in-
formed me  besides  of  two  remarkable  things :  in  the
first  place,  that  they  choose,  to  handle  the  dish,  some
one  who  had  dreamed  that  he  would  win,  or  who  had
a  charm ;  moreover,  those  who  have  a  charm  do  not
conceal  it,  and  [132]  carry  it  everywhere  with  them:
we  have,  they  tell  me,  one  of  these  in  our  Village,
who  rubs  the  plum-stones  with  a  certain  ointment
and  hardly  ever  fails  to  win.  Secondly,  that  in  mak-
ing the  attempt  some  of  the  plum-stones  disappear,
and  are  found  some  time  after  in  the  dish  with  the
others.

Among  all  these  fooleries,  I  dare  not  speak  of  the
infamies  and  uncleanness  which  the  Devil  makes  to
slip  into  them,  causing  them  to  see  in  a  dream  that
they  can  only  be  healed  by  wallowing  in  all  sorts  of
filth. May  he  who  has  saved  us  by  the  blood  of  the


190  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.10

Parmy  toutes  ces  niaiferies  ie  n'oferois  dire  les  in-
famies &  lubricitez,  que  le  Diable  y  fait  gliffer,  leur
faifant  voir  en  fonge,  qu'ils  ne  f9auroient  guerir,
qu'en  fe  veautrant  dans  tonte  forte  d'ordures.  Celuy
qui  nous  a  fauuez  par  le  fang  de  1' Agneau  immacule,
y  veiiille  remedier  au  pluitoft,  acceptant  pour  cet
effect,  fi  befoin  eft,  nos  ames  &  nos  vies,  que  nous
luy  offrons  de  tres-bon  cceur,  pour  le  falut  de  ces
Peuples,  &  la  remiffion  de  nos  pechez.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  191

Lamb  grant  to  remedy  this  as  soon  as  possible,  ac-
cepting for  this  purpose,  if  need  be,  our  souls  and
lives,  that  we  most  willingly  offer  to  him  for  the
salvation  of  these  Peoples,  and  the  remission  of  our
own  sins.


192  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


CHAPITRE  V.

S'lL Y A DES SORCIERS AUX HURONS.

EN  voicy  quelques  coniectures;  les  plus  fages  en
iugeront.  Premierement  ce  Peuple  n'eft  pas
fi  hebete,  qu'il  ne  cherche  &  ne  reconnoiffe
quelque  chofe  de  releue  [133]  au  deffus  des  fens:  &
d'ailleurs  fa  vie  licentieufe  &  fes  debordemens  l'em-
pefchans  de  rencontrer  Dieu;  il  eft  bien  facile  au
Diable  de  s'ingerer  &  luy  offrir  fon  feruice,  dans  les
neceffitez  preffantes  ou  il  le  void,  fe  faifant  payer  d'vn
culte  qui  ne  luy  eft  pas  deut,  &  fe  familiarifant  a.
quelques  efprits  plus  fubtils,  qui  le  mettent  en  credit
aupres  de  ces  pauures  gens.

2.  Vous  ne  voyez  icy  rien  de  plus  frequent  que
les  forts;  les  enfans  en  heritent  de  leurs  peres,  s'ils
ont  efte  trouuez  bons,  &  ils  ne  s'en  cachent  point,
comme  ie  viens  de  dire.  Nous  auons  vn  Sauuage  en
noftre  Village,  furnomme  le  Pefcheur,  pour  l'heur
qu'il  a  a  pefcher;  cet  homme  attribue  tout  fon  bien
aux  cendres  d'vn  certain  petit  oyfeau  qu'on  appelle
Ohguione;  qui  penetre,  a  l'entendre  dire,  les  troncs
des  arbres  fans  refiftance.  Allant  a  la  pefche  il  de-
mefle  auec  vn  peu  d'eau  fes  cendres,  &  en  ayant
frotte  fon  rets,  il  s'affeure,  que  le  poifTon  donnera  de-
dans en  abondance;  en  effect  il  en  a  acquis  le  renom.

3.  II  y  a  parmy  ce  Peuple  des  hommes  qui  font
eftat  de  commander  aux  pluyes  &  aux  vents ;  d'au-
tres,  de  predire  les  chofes  a  venir;  d'autres,  de  trou-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  193


CHAPTER  V.

WHETHER  THERE  ARE  SORCERERS  AMONG  THE  HURONS.

HERE  are  some  conjectures,  let  the  wiser  ones
judge  of  them.  In  the  first  place,  these  People
are  not  so  foolish  as  not  to  seek  and  to  acknowl-
edge something  [133]  above  the  senses;  and,  since
their  lewdness  and  licentiousness  hinder  them  from
finding  God,  it  is  very  easy  for  the  Devil  to  thrust  him-
self in  and  to  offer  them  his  services  in  their  pressing
necessities,  causing  them  to  pay  him  a  homage  that
is  not  due  him,  and  having  intercourse  with  certain
more  subtle  minds,  who  extend  his  influence  among
these  poor  people.

2.  You  see  nothing  more  common  here  than
charms ;  children  inherit  them  from  their  fathers,  if
they  have  been  proved  good ;  and  they  do  not  make
any  secret  of  them,  as  I  have  just  said.  We  have  a
Savage  in  our  Village,  surnamed  the  Fisher,  on  ac-
count of  his  good  fortune  in  fishing ;  this  man  attrib-
utes all  his  success  to  the  ashes  of  a  certain  little  bird
that  is  called  Ohguione,  which,  according  to  his  state-
ment, penetrates  the  trunks  of  trees  without  resist-
ance. When  he  goes  fishing,  he  mixes  his  ashes
with  a  little  water,  and,  having  rubbed  his  nets  with
them,  he  feels  confident  that  the  fish  will  enter  them
in  abundance;  in  fact,  he  has  acquired  fame  from
this.

3.  There  are  among  these  People  men  who  pre-
sume to  command  the rain  and  winds; others, to


194  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

uer  celles  qui  font  [134]  perdues;  d'autres  finalement
de  rendre  la  fante  aux  malades,  &  ce  auec  des  re-
medes,  qui  n'ont  aucun  rapport  aux  maladies.  Qu'ils
ayent  ces  dons  de  Dieu,  perfonne,  a  mon  aduis,  ne
1' of  era  dire.  Que  tout  leur  faict  foit  tromperie  ou
imagination,  cela  ne  s'accorde  gueres  bien  auec  le
credit  qu'ils  ont  acquis,  &  le  long-temps  qu'il  y  a
qu'ils  font  cette  profeffion.  Quel  moyen  que  leurs
fourbes  n'euflent  point  efte"  decouuertes  depuis  tant
d'ann^es,  ou  que  leur  meftier  euft  efte  fi  bien  accre-
dits, &  fi  bien  recompenfe  de  tout  temps,  s'il  n'euft
iamais  reiiffy  que  par  pure  fantaifie.  Perfone
n'ofe  leur  contredire;  ils  font  continuellement  en
feftins,  qui  fe  font  par  leur  ordonnance.  II  y  a  done
quelque  apparence,  que  le  Diable  leur  tient  la  main
par  fois,  &  s'ouure  a  eux  pour  quelque  profit  tempo-
rel,  &  pour  leur  damnation  eternelle.  Voyons-en
quelques  exemples.  Onditachiad  eft  renomme  en  la
Nation  du  Petun,  comme  vn  Iuppin  parmy  les  Pay-
ens  iadis,  pour  auoir  en  main  les  pluyes  &  les  vents,
&  le  tonnerre.  Ce  tonnerre,  a  fon  conte,  eft  vn
homme  femblable  a  vn  coq-d'Inde;  le  Ciel  eft  fon
Palais,  il  fe  retire  la  quand  l'air  eft  ferain;  il  en  de-
fcend  &  vient  fur  terre  faire  fa  prouifion  [135]  de  cou-
leuures  &  de  ferpens,  &  de  tout  ce  qu'ils  appellent
Oki,  quand  les  nues  grondent ;  les  eclairs  f e  font  a
mefure  qu'il  etend  ou  replie  fes  aifles.  Que  fi  le  tin-
tamarre  eft  vn  peu  plus  grand,  ce  font  fes  petits  qui
l'accompagnent,  &  1' ay  dent  a  bruire  du  mieux  qu'ils
peuuent.  Oppofant  a  celuy  qui  m'en  faifoit  le  conte,
d'ou  venoit  done  la  f eichereffe ;  ilme  repartit  qu'elle
venoit  des  chenilles,  fur  lesquelles  Ondiaachiae,  n'a
point  de  pouuoir. Et  luy  demandant  pourquoy  le


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3b  195

predict  future  events;  others,  to  find  things  that  are
[134]  lost;  and,  lastly,  others  to  restore  health  to  the
sick,  and  that  with  remedies  that  have  no  relation  to
the  sicknesses.  That  they  have  these  gifts  from  God,
nobody  in  my  opinion  will  dare  to  say ;  that  all  they
do  is  deception  or  imagination,  hardly  accords  with
the  reputation  they  have  acquired,  and  the  length  of
time  they  have  followed  this  profession.  How  is  it
that  their  tricks  have  not  been  discovered  during  so
many  years,  and  their  business  has  acquired  so  much
reputation,  and  been  always  so  well  rewarded, —  if
they  have  never  succeeded  except  by  sheer  imagina-
tion ?  No  one  dares  to  contradict  them.  They  are
continually  at  feasts,  which  take  place  at  their  com-
mand. There  is,  therefore,  some  foundation  for  the
belief  that  the  Devil  occasionally  gives  them  assist-
ance, and  reveals  himself  to  them  for  some  temporal
profit,  and  for  their  eternal  damnation.  Let  us  see
some  examples  of  it.  Onditacliiac is  renowned  among
the  Tobacco  Nation,  like  a  Jupiter  among  the  Heath-
ens of  former  times,  from  having  in  hand  the  rains,
the  winds,  and  the  thunder.  This  thunder  is,  by  his
account,  a  man  like  a  Turkey-cock;  the  Sky  is  his
Palace,  and  he  retires  there  when  it  is  serene;  he
comes  down  to  earth  to  get  his  supply  [135]  of  adders
and  serpents,  and  of  all  they  call  Oki,  when  the
clouds  are  rumbling ;  the  lightnings  occur  in  propor-
tion as  he  extends  or  folds  his  wings.3  If  the  uproar
is  a  little  louder,  it  is  his  little  ones  who  accompany
him,  and  help  him  to  make  a  noise  as  best  they  can.
Raising  the  objection  to  him  who  told  me  the  tale,
"whence,  then,  came  dryness?"  he  replied  that  it  came
from  the  caterpillars,  over  whom  Ondiaachiad  had  no
power. And  asking  him  "  why  the  lightning  struck


196  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

tonnerre  tomboit  fur  les  arbres;  c'eftla,  dit-il,  qu'il
fait  fes  prouifions.  Pourquoy  brufle-il  les  Cabanes,
pourquoy  tue  il  les  hommes.  Chieskc;  que  fcay-ie,
me  dit-il,  c'eft  leur  refrain  quand  ils  demeurent
courts.  Pour  la  prediction  du  futur,  mais  qui  n'eft
gueres  efloigne  ny  difficile  a  connoiftre  en  ces  caufes,
Louys  de  faincte  Foy  m'a  affeure,  qu'allant  a  la
guerre,  vn  de  ces  Iongleurs,  leur  predit  a  poinct  nom-
me  la  rencontre  des  Iroquois,  au  fortir  de  la  Suerie.
II  y  a  bien  de  la  probability,  que  le  Diable  eftoit  en
fentinelle  pour  luy.  I 'en  dirois  bien  d'autres  qui  a
la  verite  fe  font  trouuees  fauffes,  &  fur  lefquelles  vn
bon  vieillard  me  rauit  il  y  a  quelque  temps.  Ah,
dit-il,  il  y  a  vn  plus  grand  Mai Jlrc  [136]  que  luy;  il  par-
loit  d'vn  certain  faux  Prophete,  qui  s'eftoit  trompe
en  fon  calcul.  N'eftoit-ce  pas  bien  dit  pour  vn  Sau-
uage?  &  n'y  a-il  pas  en  cela  dequoy  efperer  quelque
chofe  de  ce  que  nous  cherchons  icy.

Les  plus  fameux  d'entre  ces  Sorciers  ou  Trompeurs
font  les  Arendib'ane,  qui  fe  meflent  de  dire  a  vn  ma-
lade  le  poinct  &  la  qualite  de  fa  maladie,  apres  vn
feitin  ou  vne  Suerie,  &  le  laiffent  la.  II  eft  vray  que
quelques-vns  ordonnent,  qui  de  faire  feftin  d'vn  chien,
qui  de  faire  croffer,  ou  ioiier  au  plat,  qui  de  dormir
fur  vne  telle  &  telle  peau,  &  autres  extrauagances  ni-
aifes  ou  diaboliques;  qui  vn  vomitoire,  pour  faire  for-
tir le  fort  s'il  y  en  a;  comme  ie  veis  moy-mefme
eitant  a  la  Rochelle  vne  pauure  femme,  qui  ietta  vn
charbon  gros  d'vn  poulce,  apres  quelques  prifes  d'eau;
&  vn  Sauuage  m'a  affeure  auoir  veu  fortir  du  fable
de  toutes  les  parties  du  corps  d'vne  autre  qui  eftoit
ethique,  apres  que  fon  Arendib'ane  l'eut  fecoiiee  comme
on  feroit  vn  crible. Autrefois  ces  offices  d' Arendib'ane


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  197


trees?"  "It  is  there,"  said  he,  "  that  it  lays  in  its
supply."  "  Why  does  it  burn  Cabins,  why  does  it
kill  men?"  Chieske  ?  "How  do  I  know?"  he  said.
That  is  their  refrain  when  they  are  driven  to  the
wall.  As  regards  predicting  the  future  which  is  not
remote,  nor  hard  to  know  for  that  reason,  I  have
been  assured  by  Louys  de  saincte  Foy  that,  when
they  were  going  to  war,  one  of  their  Jugglers,  as  he
came  forth  from  the  Sweat-box,  predicted  a  meeting
with  the  Iroquois  at  a  certain  spot.  There  is  indeed
much  probability  that  the  Devil  was  sentinel  for  him.
I  could  say  this  of  others  who,  in  truth,  have  been
found  false,  and  about  whom  a  good  old  man  enter-
tained me  some  time  ago.  Ah,  said  he,  there  is  a
greater  Master  [136]  than  he.  He  spoke  of  a  certain
false  Prophet  who  had  been  deceived  in  his  calcula-
tion. Was  it  not  well  said  for  a  Savage?  and  is  there
not  something  in  this  to  inspire  some  hope  in  regard
to  what  we  are  seeking  here  ?

The  most  famous  among  these  Sorcerers  or  Deceiv-
ers are  the  Arendiwane,  who  make  it  their  business  to
tell  a  sick  man  the  extent  and  nature  of  his  sickness,
after  a  feast  or  a  Sweat,  and  leave  him  there.  True,
they  prescribe  for  one  a  dog  feast ;  for  another,  that
a  game  of  crosse  or  dish  should  be  played ;  for  an-
other, sleep  on  such  and  such  a  skin,  and  other  stupid
and  diabolical  extravagances;  another  still,  an  emet-
ic, to  make  the  charm,  if  there  be  any,  come  forth, —
as  I  myself  saw,  when  at  la  Rochelle,  a  poor  woman
who  threw  up  a  coal  as  large  as  one's  thumb,  after
some  doses  of  water ;  and  a  Savage  assured  me  that
he  had  seen  sand  coining  forth  from  all  parts  of  the
body  of  another,  who  had  hectic  fever,  after  his  Aren-
diwane had  shaken  him  as  one  would  shake  a  sieve.


198  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J E~  SUITES [Vol.10


eftoient  a  plus  haut  prix  qu'a  pref ent ;  ils  les  ont  a
cette  heure  a  force  de  feftins. Vn  temps  fut,  qu'il
falloit  ieufner  les  trente  iours  entiers  dans  vne  Ca-
bane  a  l'efcart,  [137]  fans  que  perfonne  en  approchaft,
qu'vn  feruiteur,  qui  pour  eftre  digne  d'y  porter  du
bdis,  s'y  difpofoit  luy-mefme  en  ieufnant. Les  hon-
neurs  & les  emoluments  en font  toufiours  grands.
Ces  pauures  gens  n'ayans  rien  de  plus  cher  que  cette
vie,  faute  d'en  connoiftre  vne  meilleure,  mettent  tout
a  cela,  au  recouurement  de  leur  fante,  &  a  qui  fait
mine  de  les  ayder. II  nous  ferment  quelquefois  la
bouche,  lors  que  nous  les  voulons  defabufer  fur  ces
charlatanneries,  difans,  gueriffez  nous  done. Si  quel-
que  fage  &  vertueux  Medecin  vouloit  venir  icy,  il  y
feroit  de  belles  cures  pour  les  ames,  en  foulageant
les  corps ;  &  ie  m'affeure  que Dieu  prendroit  plaifir
vn  iour  de  luy  dire  comme  a  Abraham. Ego  cro  mer-
ccs  tua  magna  nimis. les  miracles  de  la  nature  font
de  grandes  difpofltions  a  ceux  de  la  grace,  quand  il
plaift  a  1' Autheur  des  vns  &  des  autres,  de  s'en  feruir.
Ie  laiffe  a  part  vne  infinite  d'autres  remarques  fur
ce  fujet,  pour  raconter  vne  partie  de  ce  qui  a  tenu
vn  mois  entier  tout  ce  pays  en  haleine. Vn  Sauuage
nomme  IhongXaha  fongea  vne  nuict  qu'il  deuiendroit
ArendiXanc,  e'eft  a  dire  maiftre  Sorcier,  pourueu  qu'il
ieunaft  trente  iours  fans  manger. [138] Le  lende-
main  a  fon  reueil  il  trouua  cette  qualite  fi  honorable
&  fi  aduantageufe  qu'il  fe  refolut  de  garder  ce  ieufne
tres-eftroictement. Sur  ces  entrefaites  on  l'inuite  a
vn feftin & AXtacrohi\ il y en  a  peu  qui fcachent
chanter  au gre de ce Demon;  cettuicy eft  vn des
Maiftres. II  fe  laiffe  enfin  emporter,  &  y  mangea  fi
bien  &  y  chanta  auec  telle  contention,  qu'il  en  fortit


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  199

Formerly  these  offices  of  Arcndiwane  were  more  val-
ued than  they  are  at  present ;  they  have  them  now
at  many  of  the  feasts.  Time  was  when  it  was  neces-
sary to  fast  thirty  entire  days,  in  a  Cabin  apart,  [137]
without  any  one  approaching  it  except  a  servant,
who,  in  order  to  be  worthy  of  carrying  wood  there,
prepared  himself  for  it  by  fasting.  The  honors  and
emoluments  are  always  great.  These  poor  people,
having  nothing  dearer  than  this  life,  knowing  noth-
ing of  a  better,  will  give  their  all  for  the  recovery  of
their  health,  and  to  any  one  who  pretends  to  help
them.  They  sometimes  close  our  mouths  when  we
wish  to  undeceive  them  about  this  charlatanry,  say-
ing, "  Do  you  cure  us,  then."  If  some  wise  and  up-
right Physician  would  come  here,  he  would  perform
noble  cures  for  their  souls,  in  relieving  their  bodies ;
and  I  am  certain  God  would  take  pleasure  in  saying
to  him  some  day,  as  to  Abraham,  Ego  ero  merces  tua
magna  nimis.  The  miracles  of  nature  are  great  aids
to  those  of  grace,  when  it  pleases  the  Author  of  both
to  employ  them.

I  pass  by  many  other  remarks  on  this  subject,  to
relate  a  part  of  what  has  astounded  this  country  for
a  whole  month.  A  Savage  named  Ihongwaha  dreamed
one  night  that  he  could  become  Arendiwane, —  that
is,  a  master  Sorcerer, — provided  he  could  fast  thirty
days  without  eating.  [138]  On  the  morrow,  when  he
awoke,  he  considered  this  accomplishment  so  honor-
able and  so  advantageous  that  he  resolved  to  keep
this  fast  very  strictly.  In  the  meantime,  he  was  in-
vited to  a  feast  of  Aoutaerohi.  There  are  few  who
can  sing  to  the  satisfaction  of  this  Demon ;  this  one
is  one  of  the  Masters.  He  allowed  himself,  at  last,
to  be  so  carried  away,  and  ate  so  heartily  and  sang


200  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


la  ceruelle  en  echarpe ;  le  voila  en  mefme  temps  la
tortue,  ou  pour  mieux  dire  la  marote  a  la  main,  en
la  faifon  la  plus  fafcheufe  de  l'hyuer,  en  l'eftat  qu'il
efloit  forty  du  ventre  de  fa  mere,  il  court  par  les
neiges,  &  chante  nuict  &  iour ;  le  lendemain,  c'efloit
le"vingt-huictieme  de  Ianuier,  il  alia  au  village  d'Xen-
rto,  ou  on  luy  fit  trois  ou  quatre  feftins  pour  fa  fante,
&  en  retourna  auffi  fol  qu'il  y  eftoit  alle\  Quelques
Sauuages  difoient  que  nous  eftions  caufes  de  tout
cela,  mais  les  plus  fages  remarquerent  qu'il  s'eftoit
mocque  lors  qu'expliquant  les  Commandemens  de
Dieu,  i'auois  condamne  YAXtaerohi,  &  attribuerens
fa  folie  a  vne  punition  diuine.

La  nuict  du  trente-vn  il  fongea  qu'il  luy  falloit  vn
Canot,  huict  Caftors,  deux  Rays,  fix  vingts  ceufs  de
Mauue,  vne  Tortue,  &  [139]  vn  homme  qui  l'adoptaft
pour  fon  fils;  ie  vous  prie  quelle  chimere,  &  cepen-
dant  on  luy  doit  faire  comme  vn  cataplafme  de  tout
cela  pour  luy  guerir  la  ceruelle.  De  fait  il  n'a  pas
pluftoft,  fait  recit  de  fon  fonge,  que  les  anciens  du
village  s'affemblent  pour  aduifer  la  deflus;  ils  fe
mettent  en  peine  de  luy  trouuer  ce  qu'il  auoit  deman-
de  auec  autant  de  foin  &  d'empreffement  que  s'il  euft
efte  queftion  de  la  conferuation  de  tout  le  Pays;  le
pere  du  Capitaine  le  prit  pour  fon  fils,  &  tout  ce  qu'il
auoit  fonge  luy  fur  liure  le  mefme  iour ;  pour  les  ceufs
de  Mauue,  ils  furent  changez  en  autant  de  petits  pains
qui  donnerent  de  l'exercice  a  toutes  les  femmes  du
village.  Le  feftin  fe  fit  fur  le  foir,  &  tout  cela  fans
effect :  le  Diable  n'auoit  pas  encor  tout.

Le  premier  de  Feurier  on  le  danfa  derechef ,  i'euffe
fouhaitte  que  plufieurs  Chreftiens  euffent  affifte  a  ce
fpectacle,  ie ne doute point qu'ils  n'euffent honte


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  201

with  so  much  vehemence  that  he  left  the  feast  with
his  brain  in  a  sling.  See  him  then  with  the  turtle,
or  more  correctly,  with  the  fool's  cap  in  his  hand,  in
the  most  trying  season  of  winter, —  naked  as  when
he  was  born,  running  about  in  the  snow,  and  sing-
ing night  and  day.  Next  day  —  it  was  the  twenty-
eighth  of  January  —  he  went  to  the  village  of  Wenrio,
where  they  made  three  or  four  feasts  for  his  health ;
and  he  returned  thence,  as  mad  as  when  he  went
away.  Some  Savages  said  we  were  the  cause  of  this ;
but  the  wiser  ones  remarked  that  he  had  mocked
when,  in  explaining  the  Commandments  of  God,  I
had  condemned  the  Aoutaerohi;  and  they  attributed
his  madness  to  divine  punishment.

On  the  night  of  the  thirty-first,  he  dreamed  that
he  must  have  a  Canoe,  eight  Beavers,  two  Rays,  six
score  Gull's  eggs,  a  Turtle,  and  [139]  a  man  who
would  adopt  him  as  his  son;  just  think,  what  a  fan-
cy !  and  yet  they  must  make  for  him  a  cataplasm  of
all  that,  to  heal  his  brain.  Indeed,  he  had  no  sooner
recited  his  dream  than  the  old  people  of  the  village
met  to  talk  it  over.  They  set  about  finding  what  he
had  asked  with  as  much  care  and  eagerness  as  if  it
had  been  a  question  of  preserving  the  whole  Coun-
try; the  Captain's  father  adopted  him  as  his  son,  and
everything  he  had  dreamed  was  given  up  to  him,  the
same  day;  as  for  the  Gull's  eggs,  they  were  changed
into  as  many  small  loaves,  which  kept  busy  all  the
women  of  the  village.  The  feast  took  place  in  the
evening,  and  all  without  effect.  The  Devil  had  not
everything  yet.

On  the  first  of  February,  there  was  another  feast ;
I  would  have  liked  several  Christians  to  be  present
at  this  sight;  I doubt  not  they would have been


202  LES  RELATIONS  DES JESUITES [Vol.10

d'eux-mefmes,  voyans  combien  ils  f  ymbolif  ent  auec  ces
Peuples  dans  leurs  folies  du  carnaual,  ils  fe  traueftirent
&  fe  deguiferent,  non  a  la  verite  fi  richement,  mais
a  peu  pres  auffi  ridiculement  qu'on  fait  ailleurs.

Vous  en  euffiez  veu  les  vns  auec  vn  fac  [140]  en  la
tefte,  perce  feulement  aux  yeux,  les  autres  en  auoient
vn  plein  de  paille  a  l'entour  du  ventre  pour  contrefaire
les  femmes  groffes.  Plufieurs  eftoient  nuds  comme
la  main,  blanchis  par  tout  le  corps,  noirs  par  le  vifage
comme  des  Diables,  des  plumes  ou  des  comes  a  la
tefte ;  les  autres  barboiiillez  de  rouge,  de  noir,  &  de
blanc;  enfin  chacun  fe  para  auec  le  plus  d'extraua-
gance  qu'il  peut  pour  danfer  ce  Balet,  &  contribuer
quelque  chofe  a  la  fante  du  malade.  Mais  ie  m'ou-
bliois  d'vne  circonftance  notable,  les  bruits  de  guerre
eftoient  grands,  ils  eftoient  dans  des  alarmes  continu-
elles,  on  attendoit  l'Ennemy  a  toute  heure,  on  auoit
inuite  toute  la  ieuneffe  a  fe  tranfporter  au  village
d'AngXtens,  pour  trauailler  a  vne  palliffade  de  pieux
qui  n'eftoit  qu'a  demyfaite;  le  Capitaine  eut  beau
crier  a  pleine  tefte  enonti  eienti  ccttar/iak/iion,  ieunes
gens  allons,  perfonne  ne  s'en  remua,  aymans  mieux
efcouter  ce  fol,  &  executer  toutes  f es  volontez ;  cette
medecine  n'opera  pas  plus  que  les  precedentes.

Apres  auoir  ieufne  dix-huict  iours,  fans  manger  ce
dit-on  que  du  petun,  il  me  vint  voir,  ie  luy  donnay
fept  ou  huit  raifins,  il  me  remercia,  &  me  dit  qu'il  en
mangeroit  [141]  vn  tous  les  iours,  ce  n'eftoit  pas  pour
rompre  fon  ieufne.  Le  quatorzieme  de  Feurier  fai-
fant  la  ronde  par  les  Cabanes  a  fon  ordinaire,  il  trou-
ua  qu'on  preparoit  vn  feftin,  &  alors,  Ce  fera  moy,
dit-il,  qui  feray  feftin,  ie  veux  que  ce  foit  icy  mon
feftin,  &  en  mefme  temps  il  prend  des  raquettes,  &


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63b  203

ashamed  of  themselves,  seeing  how  like  these  Peoples
they  act  in  their  carnival  follies ;  these  dress  and  dis-
guise themselves,  not  in  truth  so  richly,  but  almost
as  ridiculously  as  they  do  elsewhere.

You  would  have  seen  some  with  a  sack  [140]  on  the
head,  pierced  only  for  the  eyes;  others  were  stuffed
with  straw  around  the  middle,  to  imitate  a  pregnant
woman.  Several  were  naked  as  the  hand,  with  bod-
ies whitened,  and  faces  as  black  as  Devils,  and
feathers  or  horns  on  their  heads ;  others  were  smeared
with  red,  black,  and  white;  in  short  each  adorned
himself  as  extravagantly  as  he  could,  to  dance  this
Ballet,  and  contribute  something  to  the  health  of  the
sick  man.  But  I  would  not  forget  one  notable  cir-
cumstance. The  reports  of  war  were  serious,  they
were  in  continual  alarms,  they  expected  the  Enemy
every  hour ;  all  the  youth  had  been  invited  to  go  to
the  village  of  Angwiens,**  to  work  at  a  palisade  of
stakes,  that  was  only  half -made.  The  Captain  had
to  cry  in  vain,  as  loudly  as  he  could,  enonou  eienti
ecwarhakhion,  "  Young  men,  come."  No  one  stirred,
preferring  to  listen  to  this  fool,  and  to  carry  out  all
his  wishes.  This  medicine  accomplished  no  more
than  the  preceding.

After  having  fasted  eighteen  days  without  tasting
anything,  it  was  said,  except  tobacco,  he  came  to  see
me ;  I  gave  him  seven  or  eight  raisins ;  he  thanked
me  and  told  me  he  would  eat  [141]  one  every  day  —
that  was  in  order  not  to  break  his  fast.  On  the  four-
teenth of  February,  making  the  round  of  Cabins  as
usual,  he  found  the  people  preparing  a  feast;  "I
shall  prepare  a  feast,"  said  he  then,  "  I  wish  this  to
be  my  feast;"  and  immediately  he  took  his  snow-
shoes  and  himself  went  around  to  invite  the  people


204  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~ SUITES  [Vol.10

s'en  va  luy  mefme  pour  inuiter  ceux  des  Villages  cir-
conuoifms:  mais  il  y  a  bien  de  l'apparence  qu'il  ne
fut  pas  pluftoft  en  campagne,  qu'il  s'oublia  de  fon
deffein,  car  il  ne  retourna  que  pres  de  deux  fois  vingt-
quatre  heures  apres,  &  fit,  oil  il  fe  trouua,  fept  ou
huit  feftins  pour  vn.  II  luy  arriua  dit-on  en  cette
courfe  trois  chofes  memorables.  La  premiere,  qu'il
n'enfonca  point  du  tout  dans  les  neiges,  quoy  qu'elles
fuffent  de  trois  pieds  de  haut.  La  feconde,  qu'il  fe
ietta  du  haut  d'vne  groffe  roche  fans  fe  bleffer.  La
troifieme,  qu'eftant  de  retour  il  ne  parut  non  plus
moui'lle,  &  fes  fouliers  auffi  fees,  que  s'il  n'euft  pas
mis  le  pied  hors  la  Cabane :  celuy  qui  nous  racontoit
cecy,  adioufta  qu'il  ne  falloit  pas  s'en  eftonner,  qu'vn
Diable  le  conduifoit.  Sur  la  fin  de  fa  maladie  il  me
fit  prier  de  Taller  voir;  ie  le  trouuay  en  apparence
en  aff ez  bon  fens ;  il  me  raconta  le  progres,  &  la  caufe
de  fa  maladie,  [142]  qu'il  attribuoit  a  la  rupture  de
fon  ieufne,  &  me  dit  qu'il  eftoit  refolu  d'aller  iufques
au  bout,  e'eft  a  dire  iufques  au  terme  que  fon  fonge
luy  auoit  ordonne.  Vn  autre  iour  il  nous  vint  vifiter,
&  nous  dit,  que  c' eftoit  tout  de  bon  qu'il  eftoit  deue-
nu  oki,  e'eft  a  dire  Demon,  c' eftoit  bien  encherir  par
deffus  la  qualite  de  Sorcier,  a  laquelle  feulement  il
afpiroit,  toutefois  il  n'eftoit  pas  hors  de  fafolie;  il
luy  fallut  encor  refuer  vne  bonne  fois  pour  en  f ortir ;
il  fongea  done  qu'il  n'y  auoit  qu'vne  certaine  forte  de
danfe,  qui  luy  peuft  rendre  tout  a  fait  la  fante.  lis
l'appellent  akhrendoiaen,  d'autant  que  ceux  qui  font
de  cette  danfe,  s'entredonnent  du  poifon;  elle  n'auoit
iamais  efte  pratiquee  parmy  cette  Nation  des  Ours :  la
faifon  eftoit  fort  fafcheufe,  la  troupe  eftoit  grande,
&  ne  pouuoit  qu'apporter  beaucoup  de  defordre  dans


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  205

of  the  neighboring  Villages.  But  it  seems  probable
that  he  was  no  sooner  in  the  country  than  he  forgot
his  errand ;  for  he  only  returned  almost  forty-eight
hours  later,  and  made,  where  he  was,  seven  or  eight
feasts  for  one.  It  is  said  there  happened  to  him  on
this  journey  three  memorable  things.  The  first,
that  he  was  not  buried  in  the  snow,  though  it  was
three  feet  deep.  The  second,  that  he  threw  himself
from  the  top  of  a  large  rock,  without  being  hurt.
The  third,  that  when  he  came  back  he  was  not  at  all
wet,  and  his  shoes  were  as  dry  as  if  he  had  not  set
foot  outside  the  Cabin.  The  one  who  told  us  this
added  that  no  one  need  be  astonished, — that  a  Devil
had  guided  him.  At  the  end  of  his  sickness,  he
begged  me  to  go  to  see  him ;  I  found  him,  to  all  ap-
pearances, perfectly  right  in  his  mind.  He  told  me
the  progress  and  cause  of  his  malady,  [142]  which  he
attributed  to  the  breaking  of  his  fast;  and  he  told
me  he  had  resolved  to  go  on  to  the  end, —  that  is,
during  the  term  prescribed  by  his  dream.  Another
day,  he  visited  us,  and  told  us  that  it  was  in  earnest
he  had  become  oki,  that  is  to  say,  Demon.  This  was
to  rise  above  the  title  of  Sorcerer,  to  which  alone  he
aspired;  still  he  was  not  free  from  his  madness, —  he
must  yet  dream,  once  for  all,  to  free  himself  from  it.
He  dreamed,  therefore,  that  there  was  only  one  cer-
tain kind  of  dance  which  would  make  him  quite  well.
They  call  it  akhrcndoiaen,  inasmuch  as  those  who
take  part  in  this  dance  give  poison  to  one  another.
It  had  never  been  practiced  among  this  Nation  of  the
Bear.  The  season  was  very  disagreeable,  the  com-
pany very  large,  and  it  could  only  create  a  great  deal
of  disorder  in  a  little  Village;  all  these  considera-
tions did  not  stop  them. So, behold, couriers  are


206  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

vn  petit  Village;  on  ne  s'arrefta  point  a,  toutes  ces
confiderations.  Voila  incontinent  des  courriers  en
campagne,  quize  iours  fe  paffent  a  les  affembler;  la
bande  eftoit  compofee  d'enuiron  quatre-vingts  per-
fonnes,  il  y  auoit  fix  femmes ;  ils  fe  mettent  en  che-
min  fans  delay ;  il  faut  remarquer  icy  qu'ils  eftiment
que  le  ieufne  leur  rend  la  veue'  percante  a,  [143]  mer-
ueille,  &  leur  donne  des  yeux  capables  de  voir  les
chofes  abfentes  &  les  plus  eloignees,  n'eft  ce  pas  ren-
uerfer  toute  l'Efcole,  qui  tient,  ce  me  femble,  que
rien  n'affoiblit  tant  la  veue,  que  le  ieufne  exceffif;
quoy  que  e'en  foit,  il  y  a  bien  de  l'apparence  que
noftre  fol  n'auoit  pas  encor  affez  ieufne,  car  fa  veue
le  trompa  bien  fort,  &  commenca  fort  mal  pour  fe
mettre  en  credit  de  Prophete.  La  troupe  n' eftoit
pas  partie,  qu'il  la  faifoit  a  deux  lieues  du  Village.

Or  eftans  arriuez  enuiron  a  la  portee  d'vn  mouf-
quet,  ils  s'arrefterent  &  fe  mirent  a  chanter;  ceux
du  Village  leur  repondirent.  Des  le  foir  mefme  de
leur  arriuee  ils  danferent,  pour  prendre  cognoiffance
de  la  maladie,  le  malade  eftoit  au  milieu  de  la  Cabane
fur  vne  natte ;  la  danfe  finie,  parce  qu'il  eftoit  tombe
a.  la  renuerfe,  &  auoit  vomy,  ils  le  declarerent  tout  a
fait  de  la  Confrairie  des  fols,  &  en  vinrent  au  remede
qui  leur  eft  ordinaire  en  cette  maladie,  &  qui  feroit
capable  de  les  faire  paffer  pour  tels,  quand  ils  feroient
les  plus  fages  du  monde.  C'eft  la  danfe  qu'ils  appel-
lent  Otakrendoiac,  les  Confreres  Atirenda.  Fen  decri-
rois  les  particularitez,  fi  ie  n'auois  peur  d'eftre  trop
long.  Ce  fera  pour  vne  autre  fois,  fi  i'apprends  [144]
qu'on  defire  les  fcauoir.  Sumt  pour  le  prefent  de
dire  en  general,  que  iamais  les  Bacchantes  forcenees
du  temps  paffe  ne  firent  rien  de  plus  furieux  en  leurs


1636]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib36  207

sent  immediately  in  all  directions ;  a  fortnight  passes
in  assembling  the  company,  which  is  composed  of
about  eighty  persons,  including  six  women ;  they
set  off  without  delay.  Here  I  must  remark  that  they
think  fasting  renders  their  vision  wonderfully  pierc-
ing, [143]  and  gives  them  eyes  capable  of  seeing
things  absent  and  far  removed.  Is  not  this  to  over-
throw the  belief  of  all  that  School,  who,  if  I  am  not
mistaken,  hold  that  nothing  so  much  weakens  the
sight  as  excessive  fasting?  However  that  may  be,
there  is  considerable  ground  for  the  belief  that  our
madman  had  not  yet  fasted  enough,  for  his  sight  de-
ceived him  very  thoroughly,  and  did  not  help  in-
crease his  reputation  as  a  Prophet.  The  troop  had
not  set  out  when  he  declared  it  was  two  leagues  from
the  Village.

Now  having  arrived  within  musket-range,  they
stopped  and  began  to  sing ;  those  of  the  Village  re-
plied. From  the  evening  of  their  arrival,  they
danced,  in  order  to  get  an  understanding  of  the  dis-
ease; the  sick  man  was  in  the  middle  of  the  Cabin,
on  a  mat.  The  dance  being  ended,  because  he  had
fallen  over  backward  and  vomited,  they  declared  him
to  belong  entirely  to  the  Brotherhood  of  lunatics;
and  came  to  the  remedy  therefor  which  is  usual  in
this  disease,  and  which  would  be  sufficient  to  make
them  pass  for  fools,  even  if  they  were  the  wisest
men  in  the  world.  It  is  the  dance  they  call  Otakren-
doiae;  the  Brethren  they  call  Atirenda.  I  would  de-
scribe the  details  of  it,  were  I  not  afraid  of  being  too
long.  I  will  do  so  another  time,  if  I  learn  [144]  that
there  is  any  desire  to  know  them.  Let  it  suffice  for
the  present  to  say,  in  general,  that  never  did  fren-
zied Bacchantes  of  bygone  times  do  anything  more


208  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J ^SUITES  [Vol.10

orgyes.  C'eft  icy  a  f'entretuer,  difent-ils,  par  des
forts  qu'ils  s'entreiettent,  dont  la  compofition  eft
d'ongles  d'Ours,  de  dents  de  Loup,  d'ergots  d'Aigles,
de  certaines  pierres,  &  de  nerfs  de  Chien.  C'efb  a
rendre  du  fang  par  la  bouche,  &  par  les  narines,  ou
pluflofl  d'vne  poudre  rouge  qu'ils  prennent  fubtile-
ment,  efhans  tombez  fous  le  fort,  &  bleffez.  Et  dix
mille  autres  fottifes  que  ie  laiffe  volontiers.  Le  plus
grand  mal  eft,  que  ces  malheureux  fous  pretexte  de
charite  vengent  fouuent  leurs  iniures,  &  donnent  a
deffein  vn  boucon  a  leurs  malades  au  lieu  de  mede-
cine.  Ce  qui  y  eft  de  plus  remarquable,  eft  l'experi-
ence  qu'ils  ont  pour  guerir  les  ruptures,  a  quoy  s'en-
tendent  auffi  plufieurs  autres  en  ces  quartiers.  La
fuperitition  la  plus  notoire  eft,  que  leurs  drogues  &
leurs  onguens  fe  plaifent,  a  leur  dire,  au  filece  &  aux
tenebres.  S'ils  font  recogneus,  ou  fi  leur  fecret  eft
decouuert,  il  eft  fans  fuccez.  L'origine  de  toute
cette  folie  vient  d'vn  nomine  Oatarra,  ou  d'vne  petite
idole  en  forme  d'vne  poupee,  qu'il  demanda,  [145]
pour  fa  guerifon  a  vne  douzaine  d'Enchanteurs  qui
l'eftoient  venus  voir,  &  laquelle  ayant  mis  en  fon  fac
de  Petun,  elle  fe  remua  la  dedans,  ordonna  les  ban-
quets, &  autres  ceremonies  de  la  danfe,  a  ce  qu'ils
cotent.  Certes,  voila  bie  des  fornettes,  &  i'ay  bien
peur  qu'il  n'y  ait  quelque  chofe  de  plus  noir  &  de
plus  cache.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  209

furious  in  their  orgies.  It  is  a  question  of  killing
one  another  here,  they  say,  by  charms  which  they
throw  at  each  other,  and  which  are  composed  of
Bears'  claws,  Wolves'  teeth,  Eagles'  talons,  certain
stones,  and  Dogs'  sinews.  Having  fallen  under  the
charm  and  been  wounded,  blood  pours  from  the
mouth  and  nostrils,  or  it  is  simulated  by  a  red  pow-
der they  take  by  stealth ;  and  there  are  ten  thousand
other  absurdities,  that  I  willingly  pass  over.  The
greatest  evil  is,  that  these  wretches,  under  pretext  of
charity,  often  avenge  their  injuries,  and  purposely
give  poison  to  their  patients,  instead  of  medicine.
What  is  very  remarkable  is  their  experience  in  heal-
ing ruptures,  wherein  many  others  in  these  regions
are  also  skillful.  The  most  extraordinary  supersti-
tion is  that  their  drugs  and  ointments  take  pleasure,
so  to  speak,  in  silence  and  darkness.  If  they  are
recognized,  or  if  their  secret  is  discovered,  success  is
not  to  be  expected.  The  origin  of  all  this  folly
comes  from  one  named  Oatarra,  or  from  a  little  idol
in  the  form  of  a  doll,  which  he  asked,  [145]  for  the
sake  of  being  cured,  from  a  dozen  Sorcerers  who  had
come  to  see  him ;  having  put  it  into  his  Tobacco
pouch,  it  began  to  stir  therein,  and  ordered  the  ban-
quets and  other  ceremonies  of  the  dance,  according
to  what  they  say.  Certainly  you  have  here  many
silly  things,  and  I  am  much  afraid  there  may  be  some-
thing darker  and  more  occult  in  them.


210  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


CHAPITRE  VI.

DE LA POLICE DES HURONS, & DE LEUR GOUUERNE-

MENT.

IE  ne  pretends  pas  icy  mettre  nos  Sauuages  en  pa-
rallele  auec  les  Chinois,  Iaponnois,  &  autres
Nations  parfaitement  ciuilifees ;  mais  feulement
les  tirer  de  la  condition  des  beft.es,  ou  1'  opinion  de
quelques-vns  les  a  reduits,  leur  donner  rang  parmy
les  hommes,  &  faire  paroiftre  qu'il  y  a  mefme  parmy
eux  quelque  efpece  de  vie  Politique  &  Ciuile.  C'efi
deja  beaucoup  a  mon  aduis  de  dire  qu'ils  viuent
affemblez  dans  des  Villages,  quelquefois  iufques  a
cinquante,  foixante,  &  cent  Cabanes,  c'efb  a.  dire  trois
cens  &  [146]  quatre  cens  menages;  qu'ils  cultiuent
des  champs,  d'oii  ils  tirent  a.  fuffifance  pour  leur
nourriture  de  toute  l'annee,  &  qu'ils  s'entretiennent
en  paix  &  amitie  les  vns  auec  les  autres.  II  eft  vray
que  ie  ne  penfe  pas  qu'il  y  ayt  peut-eftre  Nation  fouz
le  ciel  plus  recomandable  en  ce  point  qu'eft  la  Nation
des  Ours ;  oftez  quelques  mauuais  efprits  qui  fe  ren-
contrent  quafi  par  tout,  ils  ont  vne  douceur,  &  vne
affabilite  quafi  incroyable  pour  des  Sauuages ;  ils  ne
fe  picquent  pas  aifement:  &  encor  s'ils  croyent  auoir
receu  quelque  tort  de  quelqu'vn,  ils  diffimulent  fou-
uent  le  reffentiment  qu'ils  en  ont;  au  moins  en
trouue-on  icy  fort  peu  qui  s'echapent  en  public  pour
la  colere,  &  la  vengeance.  Ils  fe  maintiennent  dans
cette  fi  parfaite  intelligence  par  les  frequentes  vifites,


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  211


CHAPTER  VI.

OF THE POLITY OF THE HURONS, AND THEIR GOV-
ERNMENT.

I  DO  not  claim  here  to  put  our  Savages  on  a  level
with  the  Chinese,  Japanese,  and  other  Nations
perfectly  civilized ;  but  only  to  put  them  above
the  condition  of  beasts,  to  which  the  opinion  of  some
has  reduced  them,  to  give  them  rank  among  men,
and  to  show  that  even  among  them  there  is  some
sort  of  Political  and  Civil  life.  It  is,  in  my  opinion,
a  great  deal  to  say  that  they  live  assembled  in  Vil-
lages, with  sometimes  as  many  as  fifty,  sixty,  and  one
hundred  Cabins, — that  is,  three  hundred  and  [146]
four  hundred  households;  that  they  cultivate  the
fields,  from  which  they  obtain  sufficient  for  their
support  during  the  year;  and  that  they  maintain
peace  and  friendship  with  one  another.  I  certainly
believe  that  there  is  not,  perhaps,  under  heaven  a
Nation  more  praiseworthy  in  this  respect  than  the
Nation  of  the  Bear.  Leaving  out  some  evil-minded
persons,  such  as  one  meets  almost  everywhere,  they
have  a  gentleness  and  affability  almost  incredible  for
Savages.  They  are  not  easily  annoyed,  and,  more-
over, if  they  have  received  wrong  from  any  one  they
often  conceal  the  resentment  they  feel, — at  least,
one  finds  here  very  few  who  make  a  public  display
of  anger  and  vengeance.  They  maintain  themselves
in  this  perfect  harmony  by  frequent  visits,  by  help
they  give  one  another  in  sickness,  by  feasts  and  by


212  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.10

les  fecours  qu'ils  fe  donnent  mutuellement  dans  leurs
maladies,  par  les  feftins,  &  les  alliance[s].  Si  leurs
champs,  la  pefche,  la  chaffe,  oil  la  traitte  ne  les  occupe
ils  font  moins  en  leurs  Cabanes  que  chez  leurs  amis ;
s'ils  tombent  malades,  &  qu'ils  defirent  quelque
chofe  pour  leur  fante,  c'efta  qui  fe  monftrera  le  plus
obligeant.  S'ils  ont  vn  bon  morceau,  ie  l'ay  deja
dit,  ils  [147]  en  font  feftin  a  leurs  amis,  &  ne  le  manget
quafi  iamais  en  leur  particulier.  Dans  leurs  ma-
nages il  y  a  cecy  de  remarquable,  qu'ils  ne  fe  marient
iamais  dans  la  parente  en  quelque  degre  que  ce  foit
ou  direct,  ou  collateral,  mais  font  toufiours  de  nou-
uelles  alliances,  ce  qui  n'eft  pas  vn  petit  auantage
pour  maintenir  l'amitie.  Dauantage  en  cette  fre-
quentatio  fi  ordinaire,  comme  ils  ont  la  plus  part  l'ef-
prit  affez  bon,  ils  s'eueillent  &  fe  faconnent  merueil-
leufement;  de  forte  qu'il  n'y  en  a  quafi  point  qui  ne
foit  capable  d'entretien,  &  ne  raifonne  fort  bien,  &  en
bons  termes,  fur  les  chof es  dont  il  a  la  cognoiffance :
ce  qui  les  forme  encor  dans  le  difcours  font  les  conf eils
qui  fe  tiennent  quafi  tous  les  iours  dans  les  Villages
en  toutes  occurrences :  &  quoy  que  les  anciens  y  tien-
nent le  haut  bout,  &  que  ce  foit  de  leur  iugement
que  depende  la  decifion  des  affaires;  neantmoins  s'y
trouue  qui  veut,  &  chacun  a  droit  d'y  dire  fon  aduis.
Adioutez  mefme  que  l'honneftete,  la  courtoifie  &  la
ciuilite,  qui  eft  comme  la  fleur  &  l'aggr^ement  de  la
conuerfation  ordinaire  &  humaine,  ne  laiffe  pas  encor
de  fe  remarquer  parmy  ces  Peuples;  ils  [148]  appel-
lent  vn  homme  ciuil  AiendaXasti.  A  la  verite"  vous
n'y  voyez  pas  tous  ces  baife-mains,  ces  complimens,
&  ces  vaines  offres  de  feruice,  qui  ne  paffent  pas  le
bout  des  Inures;  mais  neantmoins  ils  fe  rendent  de


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  213

alliances.  When  they  are  not  busy  with  their  fields,
hunting,  fishing,  or  trading,  they  are  less  in  their
own  Houses  than  in  those  of  their  friends ;  if  they
fall  sick,  or  desire  anything  for  their  health,  there
is  a  rivalry  as  to  who  will  show  himself  most  oblig-
ing. If  they  have  something  better  than  usual,  as  I
have  already  said,  they  [147]  make  a  feast  for  their
friends,  and  hardly  ever  eat  it  alone.  In  their  mar-
riages there  is  this  remarkable  custom, — they  never
marry  any  one  related  in  any  degree  whatever,  either
direct  or  collateral ;  but  always  make  new  alliances,
which  is  not  a  little  helpful  in  maintaining  friend-
ship. Moreover,  by  this  so  common  habit  of  fre-
quent visitation,  as  they  are  for  the  most  part  fairly
intelligent,  they  arouse  and  influence  one  another
wonderfully ;  so  that  there  are  almost  none  of  them
incapable  of  conversing  or  reasoning  very  well,  and
in  good  terms,  on  matters  within  their  knowledge.
The  councils,  too,  held  almost  every  day  in  the  Vil-
lages, and  on  almost  all  matters,  improve  their  capac-
ity for  talking ;  and,  although  it  is  the  old  men  who
have  control  there,  and  upon  whose  judgment  depend
the  decisions  made,  yet  every  one  who  wishes  may
be  present,  and  has  the  right  to  express  his  opinion.
Let  it  be  added,  also,  that  the  propriety,  the  courtesy,
and  the  civility  which  are,  as  it  were,  the  flower  and
charm  of  ordinary  human  conversation,  are  to  some
extent  observed  among  these  Peoples;  they  [148]
call  a  polite  person  Aiendawasti.  To  be  sure,  you  do
not  observe  among  them  any  of  those  hand-kissings,
compliments,  and  those  vain  offers  of  service  which
do  not  pass  beyond  the  lips;  but,  nevertheless,  they
render  certain  duties  to  one  another,  and  preserve,
through  a  sense  of  propriety,  certain  customs  in  their


214  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

certains  deuoirs  les  vns  aux  autres,  &  gardent  par
bien-fceance  de  certaines  couftumes  en  leurs  vifites,
dafes,  &  feftins,  aufquelles  fi  quelqu'vn  auoit  manque,
il  ne  manqueroit  pas  d'eftre  releue  fur  l'heure;  &
s'il  faifoit  fouuent  de  femblables  pas  de  clerc,  il
pafferoit  bien  toft  en  prouerbe  par  le  village,  &  per-
droit  tout  a  fait  fon  credit.  A  la  rencontre  pour
toute  faliiade,  ils  s'appellent  chacun  de  leur  nom,  ou
difent  mon  amy,  mon  camarade,  mon  oncle,  fi  c'eft
vn  ancien.  Si  vn  Sauuage  fe  trouue  en  voftre  Ca-
bane  lors  que  vous  mangez,  &  que  vous  luy  prefen-
tiez  voftre  plat,  n'y  ayant  encor  guieres  touche,  il  fe
contentera  d'en  goufter,  &  vous  le  rendra.  Que  11
vous  luy  prefentez  vn  plat  en  particulier,  il  n'y  por-
tera  pas  la  main  qu'il  n'en  ait  fait  part  a  fes  compa-
gnons  ;  &  ceux-cy  fe  contentent  d'ordinaire  d'en
prendre  vne  cuilleree.  Ce  font  petites  chofes  a  la
verite,  mais  qui  monftrent  neantmoins  que  ces  Peuples
[149]  ne  font  pas  tout  a  fait  fi  rudes  &  mal  polis  que
quelqu'vn  fe  pourroit  bien  figurer.  En  outre,  fi  les
loix  font  comme  la  maiftreffe  roue  qui  regie  les  Com-
munautez,  ou  pour  mieux  dire  l'ame  des  Republiques :
il  me  femble  que  i'ay  droit,  eu  egard  a  cette  11  par-
faite  intelligence  qu'ils  ont  entr'eux,  de  maintenir
qu'ils  ne  font  pas  fans  loix.  Ils  puniffent  les  meur-
triers,  les  larrons,  les  traiftres,  &  les  Sorciers:  &
pour  les  meurtriers  quoy  qu'ils  ne  tiennent  pas  la  feue-
rite  que  faifoient  iadis  leurs  anceftres,  neantmoins  le
peu  de  defordre  qu'il  y  a  en  ce  point,  me  fait  iuger
que  leur  procedure  n'eft  guieres  moins  efficace  qu'eft
ailleurs  le  f upplice  de  la  mort :  car  les  parens  du  de-
funct ne  pourfuiuent  pas  feulement  celuy  qui  a  fait
le  meurtre,  mais  s'addreffent  a  tout  le  Village,  qui


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  215


visits,  dances,  and  feasts, —  in  which  if  any  one  failed,
he  would  certainly  be  criticised  on  the  spot ;  and,  if
he  often  made  such  blunders,  he  would  soon  become
a  byword  in  the  village,  and  would  lose  all  his  influ-
ence. When  they  meet,  the  only  salutation  they
give  is  to  call  the  other  by  name,  or  say,  "  my  friend,
my  comrade," — "  my  uncle,"  if  it  is  an  old  man.  If
a  Savage  finds  himself  in  your  Cabin  when  you  are
eating,  and  if  you  present  to  him  your  dish,  having
scarcely  touched  anything,  he  will  content  himself
with  tasting  it,  and  will  hand  it  back  to  you.  But,
if  you  give  him  a  dish  for  himself,  he  will  not  put
his  hand  to  it  until  he  has  shared  it  with  his  compan-
ions ;  and  they  content  themselves  usually  with  tak-
ing a  spoonful  of  it.  These  are  little  things,  of
course ;  but  they  show  nevertheless  that  these  Peo-
ples [149]  are  not  quite  so  rude  and  unpolished  as
one  might  suppose.  Besides,  if  laws  are  like  the
governing  wheel  regulating  Communities, — or  to  be
more  exact,  are  the  soul  of  Commonwealths, — it
seems  to  me  that,  in  view  of  the  perfect  understanding
that  reigns  among  them,  I  am  right  in  maintaining
that  they  are  not  without  laws.  They  punish  mur-
derers, thieves,  traitors,  and  Sorcerers ;  and,  in  re-
gard to  murderers,  although  they  do  not  preserve
the  severity  of  their  ancestors  towards  them,  never-
theless the  little  disorder  there  is  among  them  in  this
respect  makes  me  conclude  that  their  procedure  is
scarcely  less  efficacious  than  is  the  punishment  of
death  elsewhere ;  for  the  relatives  of  the  deceased
pursue  not  only  him  who  has  committed  the  murder,
but  address  themselves  to  the  whole  Village,  which
must  give  satisfaction  for  it,  and  furnish,  as  soon  as
possible,  for  this  purpose  as  many  as  sixty  presents,


216  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.10

en  doit  faire  raifon,  &  fournir  an  pluftoit  pour  cet
effet  iufques  a  foixante  prefens,  dont  les  moindres
doiuent  eftre  de  la  valeur  d'vne  robbe  neufue  de
Caftor:  le  Capitaine  les  prefente  luy  mefme  en  per-
fonne,  &  fait  vne  longue  harangue  a  chaque  prefent
qu'il  ofTre;  de  facon  que  les  iournees  entieres  fe
pafTent  quelquefois  dans  cette  ceremonie.  [150]  II
y  a  deux  fortes  de  prefens ;  les  vns,  tels  que  font  les
neuf  premiers  qu'ils  appellent  andaonhaan,  fe  mettent
entre  les  mains  des  parens,  pour  faire  la  paix,  &  ofter
de  leur  cceur  toute  l'aigreur,  &  les  defirs  de  ven-
geance, qu'ils  pourroient  auoir  contre  la  perfonne  du
meurtrier:  les  autres  fe  mettent  fur  vne  perche,  qui
eft  etedue  au  deffus  de  la  tefte  du  mort,  &  les  appel-
let  Andaerraehaan;  c'eft  a  dire  qui  fe  mettent  fur  la
perche.  Or  chacun  de  ces  prefens  a  fon  nom  parti-
culier.  Voicy  ceux  des  neuf  premiers,  qui  font  les
plus  confiderables,  &  quelque  fois  chacun  de  mille
grains  de  Pourcelaine.  Le  Capitaine  parlant,  &
hauffant  fa  voix  au  nom  du  coulpable,  &  tenant  en
fa  main  le  premier  prefent,  comme  fi  la  hache  eftoit
encor  dans  la  playe  du  mort,  condayee  onfaJiachtitaXas;
voila,  dit-il,  dequoy  il  retire  la  hache  de  la  playe,  &
la  fait  tomber  des  mains  de  celuy  qui  voudroit  ven-
ger  cette  iniure.  Au  fecond  prefent,  condayee  ofcota-
Xeanon ;  voila  dequoy  il  effuie  le  fang  de  la  playe  de
fa  tefte :  par  ces  deux  prefens  il  temoigne  le  regret
qu'il  a  de  l'auoir  tue,  &  qu'il  feroit  tout  preft  de  luy
rendre  la  vie  s'il  eftoit  pofiible.  [151]  Toutefois
comme  fi  le  coup  auoit  reially  fur  la  Patrie,  &  comme
fi  le  Pais  auoit  receu  la  plus  grande  playe ;  il  adioufte
au  troifieme  prefent,  en  difant  condayee  onfahondechari;
voila  pour  remettre  le  Pais  en  eftat,  condayee  onfahon-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  217

the  least  of  which  must  be  of  the  value  of  a  new
Beaver  robe.  The  Captain  presents  them  in  person,
and  makes  a  long  harangue  at  each  present  that  he
offers,  so  that  entire  days  sometimes  pass  in  this
ceremony.  [150]  There  are  two  sorts  of  presents;
some,  like  the  first  nine,  which  they  call  andaonkaan,
are  put  into  the  hands  of  the  relatives  to  make  peace,
and  to  take  away  from  their  hearts  all  bitterness  and
desire  for  vengeance  that  they  might  have  against  the
person  of  the  murderer.  The  others  are  put  on  a
pole,  which  is  raised  above  the  head  of  the  murderer,
and  are  called  AndaerraeJiaan,  that  is  to  say,  "  what
is  hung  upon  a  pole."  Now  each  of  these  presents
has  its  particular  name.  Here  are  those  of  the  first
nine,  which  are  the  most  important,  and  sometimes
each  one  of  them  consists  of  a  thousand  Porcelain
beads.  The  Captain,  speaking,  and  raising  his  voice
at  the  name  of  the  guilty  person,  and  holding  in  his
hand  the  first  present  as  if  the  hatchet  were  still  in
the  death  wound,  condayee  onsahachontazvas ,  "  There,"
says  he,  "  is  something  by  which  he  withdraws  the
hatchet  from  the  wound,  and  makes  it  fall  from  the
hands  of  him  who  would  wish  to  avenge  this  injury."
At  the  second  present,  condayee  oscotaweanon,  "  There
is  something  with  which  he  wipes  away  the  blood
from  the  wound  in  the  head."  By  these  two  pres-
ents he  signifies  his  regret  for  having  killed  him,
and  that  he  would  be  quite  ready  to  restore  him  to
life,  if  it  were  possible.  [151]  Yet,  as  if  the  blow
had  rebounded  on  their  Native  Land,  and  as  if  it  had
received  the  greater  wounds,  he  adds  the  third  pres-
ent, saying,  coudayee  onsahondechari,  "  This  is  to  re-
store the  Country;"  condayee  onsahondwaronti,  ctoton-
hwentsiai,  "  This  is  to  put  a  stone  upon  the  opening


218  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


dXaronti,  etotonhXentfiai\  voila  pour  mettre  vne  pierre
deffus  l'ouuerture  &  la  diuifion  de  la  terre,  qui  s'eftoit
faite  par  ce  meurtre.  Les  metaphores  font  grande-
ment  en  vfage  parmy  ces  Peuples;  fi  vous  ne  vous  y
faites,  vous  n'entendez  rien  dans  leurs  confeils,  ou
ils  ne  parlent  quafi  que  par  metaphores.  lis  preten-
det  par  ce  prefent  reiinir  les  cceurs  &  les  volontez,  &
mefmes  les  Villages  entiers,  qui  auoient  efte  comme
diuifez.  Car  ce  n'eft  pas  icy  comme  en  France  &
ailleurs,  ou  le  public  &  toute  vne  ville  entiere  n'e-
poufe  pas  ordinairement  la  querelle  d'vn  particulier.
Icy  vous  n'y  fcauriez  outrager  qui  que  ce  foit,  que
tout  le  Pais  ne  s'en  reffente,  &  ne  fe  porte  contre
vous,  &  mefme  contre  tout  vn  Village;  c'eft  de  la
que  naiffent  les  guerres,  &  c'eft  vn  fujet  plus  que
fuffifant  de  prendre  les  amies  contre  quelque  Village,
quand  il  refufe  de  fatisfaire  par  les  prefence  [pref ents]
ordonnez  [152]  pour  celuy  qui  vous  auroit  tue  quel-
qu'vn  des  voftres.  Le  cinquieme  fe  fait  pour  appla-
nir  les  chemins,  &  en  ofter  les  broffailles,  condayee
on/a  hannonkiai,  c'eft  a  dire  arm  qu'on  puiffe  aller
dorefnauant  en  toute  feurete  par  les  chemins,  &  de
Village  en  Village.  Les  quatre  autres  s'adrefTent
immediatement  aux  pares,  pour  les  confoler  en  leur
affliction,  &  effuyer  leurs  larmes,  condayee  otifa  hohe-
ronti\  voila,  dit-il,  pour  luy  donner  a  petuner,  par-
lant  de  fon  pere,  de  fa  mere,  ou  de  celuy  qui  feroit
pour  venger  fa  mort;  ils  ont  cette  creance  qu'il  n'y
a  rien  fi  propre  que  le  Petun  pour  appaif  er  les  paffions ;
c'eft  pourquoy  ils  ne  fe  trouuent  iamais  aux  confeils
que  la  pippe  ou  calumet  a  la  bouche;  cette  fumee
qu'ils  prennent  leur  donne,  difent-ils,  de  l'efprit,  &
leur  fait  voir  clair  dans  les  affaires  les  plus  embroiiil-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  219


and  the  division  of  the  ground  that  was  made  by  this
murder." Metaphor  is  largely  in  use  among  these
Peoples ;  unless  you  accustom  yourself  to  it,  you  will
understand nothing  in  their councils, where they
speak  almost  entirely  in  metaphors. They  claim  by
this  present  to  reunite  all  hearts  and  wills,  and  even
entire  Villages,  which  have  become  estranged. For
it  is  not  here  as  it  is  in  France  and  elsewhere,  where
the  public  and  a  whole  city  do  not  generally  espouse
the  quarrel  of  an  individual. Here  you  cannot  in-
sult any  one  of  them  without  the  whole  Country  re-
senting it,  and  taking  up  the  quarrel  against  you,
and  even against  an entire  Village. Hence arise
wars ;  and  it  is  a  more  than  sufficient  reason  for  tak-
ing arms  against  some  Village  if  it  refuse  to  make
satisfaction  by  the  presents  ordained [152] for  him
who  may  have  killed  one  of  your  friends. The  fifth
is  made  to  smooth  the  roads  and  to  clear  away  the
brushwood;  condayee  onsa  hannonkiai,  that  is  to  say,
in  order  that  one  may  go  henceforth  in  perfect  secur-
ity over  the  roads,  and  from  Village  to  Village. The
four  others  are  addressed  immediately  to  the  rela-
tives, to  console  them  in  their  affliction  and  to  wipe
away  their  tears,  condayee  onsa  hoheronti,  "  Behold,"
says  he,  "  here is something for him  to  smoke,"
speaking  of  his  father  or  his  mother,  or  of  the  one
who  would avenge  his  death. They believe that
there  is  nothing  so  suitable  as  Tobacco  to  appease
the  passions;  that  is  why  they  never  attend  a  coun-
cil without  a  pipe  or  calumet  in  their  mouths. The
smoke, they  say, gives  them  intelligence, and  en-
ables them  to  see  clearly  through  the  most  intricate
matters.21 Also, following  this  present,  they  make
another  to  restore  completely  the  mind  of  the  offended


220  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

lees.  Auffi  en  fuitte  de  ce  prefent  on  en  fait  vn  autre
pour  remettre  tout  a  fait  l'efprit  a  la  perfonne  off  en-
fee,  condayee  on/a  hondionroenkhra.  Le  huictiefme  eft
pour  donner  vn  breuuage  a  la  mere  du  defunct,  &  la
guerir  comme  eftant  grief uement  malade  a.  l'occafion
de  la  mort  de  fon  fils,  condayee  on/a  aXeannoncXa  [153]
d'ociteton.  Enfin  le  neufieme  eft,  comme  pour  luy
mettre,  &  etendre  vne  natte,  fur  laquelle  elle  fe  repof e,
&  fe  couche  durant  le  temps  de  fon  deuil,  condayee
on/a  hohiendaen.  Voila  les  principaux  prefens,  les
autres  font  comme  vn  furcroift  de  confolation,  &  re-
prefentent  toutes  les  chofes  dont  fe  feruoit  le  mort
pendant  fa  vie;  l'vn  s'appellera  fa  robbe,  l'autre  fon
collier,  l'autre  fon  Canot,  l'autre  fon  auiron,  fa  rets,
fon  arc,  fes  Heches,  &  ainfi  des  autres.  Apres  cela,
les  pares  du  defunt  fe  tiennet  plainemet  fatisfaits.
Autrefois  les  parties  ne  s'accordoient  pas  fi  aifemet,
&  a  fi  peu  de  f rais :  car  outre  que  le  public  payoit
tous  ces  prefens,  la  perfonne  coupable  eftoit  obligee
de  fubir  vne  honte,  &  vne  peine  que  quelques-vns
n'eftimeroient  peut  eftre  gueres  moins  infupportable
que  la  mort  mefme.  On  etendoit  le  mort  fur  des
perches,  &  le  meurtrier  eftoit  contraint  de  fe  tenir
deffous,  &  receuoir  deffus  foy  le  pus  qui  alloit  de-
goutant  de  ce  cadaure ;  on  luy  metoit  aupres  de  luy
vn  plat  pour  fon  manger,  qui  eftoit  incontinent  plein
de  1' ordure  &  du  fang  pourry  qui  peu  a  peu  en  tom-
boit,  &  pour  obtenir  feulemet  que  le  plat  fuft  tat
[154]  foit  peu  recule,  il  luy  en  couftoit  vn  prefent  de
fept  cens  grains  de  Pourcelaine,  qu'ils  appelloient
hajfaendijia ;  pour  luy  il  demeuroit  en  cet  eftat  tant
&  fi  long  temps  qu'il  plaifoit  aux  parens  du  defunct;
&  encore  apres  cela  pour  en  fortir  luy  falloit-il  faire


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  221

person,  condayee  onsa  hondionroenkhra .  The  eighth  is
to  give  a  drink  to  the  mother  of  the  deceased,  and  to
heal  her  as  being  seriously  sick  on  account  of  the
death  of  her  son,  condayee  onsa  aweannoncwa  [153]  d'oc-
zveton.  Finally,  the  ninth  is,  as  it  were,  to  place  and
stretch  a  mat  for  her,  on  which  she  may  rest  herself
and  sleep  during  the  time  of  her  mourning,  condayee
onsa  hohiendaen.  These  are  the  principal  presents, —
the  others  are,  as  it  were,  an  increase  of  consolation,
and  represent  all  the  things  that  the  dead  man  would
use  during  life.  One  will  be  called  his  robe,  another
his  belt,  another  his  Canoe,  another  his  paddle,  his
net,  his  bow,  his  arrows,  and  so  on.  After  this,  the
relatives  of  the  deceased  regard  themselves  as  per-
fectly satisfied.  Formerly,  the  parties  did  not  come
to  terms  so  easily,  and  at  so  little  expense ;  for,  be-
sides that  the  public  paid  all  these  presents,  the  guil-
ty person  was  obliged  to  endure  an  indignity  and
punishment  that  some  will  perhaps  consider  almost
as  insupportable  as  death  itself.  The  dead  body  was
stretched  upon  a  scaffold,  and  the  murderer  was  com-
pelled to  remain  lying  under  it  and  to  receive  upon
himself  all  the  putrid  matter  which  exuded  from  the
corpse;  they  put  beside  him  a  dish  of  food,  which
was  soon  filled  with  the  filth  and  corrupt  blood  which
little  by  little  fell  into  it ;  and  merely  to  get  the  dish
[154]  pushed  back  ever  so  little  would  cost  him  a
present  of  seven  hundred  Porcelain  beads,  which  they
called  hassaendista;  as  for  the  murderer,  he  remained
in  this  position  as  long  as  the  relatives  of  the  de-
ceased pleased,  and,  even  after  that,  to  escape  it  he
had  to  make  a  rich  present  called  akhiataendista.  If,
however,  the  relatives  of  the  dead  man  avenged
themselves  for  this  injury  by  the  death  of  him  who


222  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


vn  riche  prefent  qu'ils  appelloient  akhiataendijla.  Que
fi  les  parens  du  mort  fe  vengeoient  de  cette  iniure,
par  la  mort  de  celuy  qui  auoit  fait  le  coup,  toute  la
peine  retomboit  de  leur  cofte;  c'eftoit  auffi  a  eux  a
faire  des  prefens  a  ceux  mefmes  qui  auoient  tue  les
premiers,  fans  que  ceux  cy  fuffent  obligez  a  aucune
fatisf action,  pour  montrer  combien  ils  eftiment  que
la  vengeance  eft  deteftable,  puis  que  les  crimes  les
plus  noirs,  tel  qu'eft  le  meurtre,  ne  paroiffent  quafi
rien  en  fa  prefence,  qu'elle  les  abolit,  &  attire  deffus
foy  toute  la  peine  qu'ils  meritent.  Voila  pour  ce
qui  eft  du  meurtre :  les  bleff eures  a  fang  ne  f e  gue-
riffent  auffi  qu'a  force  de  prefence  [prefents],  de  col-
liers, de  haches,  felon  que  la  playe  eft  plus  ou  moins
notable.

Ils  puniffent  auffi  feuerement  les  Sorciers,  c'eft  a
dire,  ceux  qui  fe  meflent  d'empoifonner,  &  faire  mou-
rir  par  fort;  [155]  &  cette  peine  eft  authorise  du
conf entement  de  tout  le  Pais ;  de  forte  que  quiconque
les  prend  fur  le  fait,  il  a  tout  droit  de  leur  fendre  la
tefte,  &  en  defaire  le  monde  fans  crainte  d'en  eftre
recherche,  ou  oblige  de  faire  aucune  fatisf  action.

Pour  les  larrons,  quoy  que  le  Pais  en  foit  remply,
ils  ne  font  pas-pourtant  tolerez ;  fi  vous  trouuez  quel-
qu'vn  faifi  de  quelque  chofe  qui  vous  appartienne,
vous  pouuez  en  bonne  confcience  ioiier  au  Roy  de-
poiiille,  &  prendre  ce  qui  eft  voftre,  &  auec  cela  le
mettre  nud  comme  la  main;  fi  c'eft  a  la  pefche,  luy
enleuer  fon  Canot,  fes  rets,  fon  poiffon,  fa  robbe,  tout
ce  qu'il  a:  il  eft  vray  qu'en  cette  occafion  le  plus  fort
l'emporte:  tant  y  a  que  voila  la  couftume  du  Pais,
qui  ne  laiffe  pas  d'en  tenir  plufieurs  en  leur  deuoir.
Or  s'ils  ont  quelque  efpece  de  Loix  qui  les  main-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  223

gave  the  blow,  all  the  punishment  fell  on  them ;  it
was  their  part  also  to  make  presents  to  those  even
who  were  the  first  murderers,  without  the  latter  be-
ing obliged  to  give  any  satisfaction, — to  show  how
detestable  they  regard  vengeance ;  since  the  blackest
crimes,  such  as  murder,  appear  as  nothing  in  com-
parison with  it,  as  it  does  away  with  them  and  at-
tracts to  itself  all  the  punishment  that  they  merit.
So  much  for  murder.  Bloody  wounds,  also,  are
healed  only  by  means  of  these  presents,  such  as  belts
or  hatchets,  according  as  the  wound  is  more  or  less
serious.

They  also  punish  Sorcerers  severely,  that  is,
those  who  use  poisoning,  and  cause  death  by
charms;  [155]  and  this  punishment  is  authorized  by
the  consent  of  the  whole  Country,  so  that  whoever
takes  them  in  the  act  has  full  right  to  cleave  their
skulls  and  rid  the  world  of  them,  without  fear  of  be-
ing called  to  account,  or  obliged  to  give  any  satisfac-
tion for  it.

As  to  thieves,  although  the  Country  is  full  of  them,
they  are  not,  however,  tolerated.  If  you  find  any
one  possessed  of  anything  that  belongs  to  you,  you
can  in  good  conscience  play  the  despoiled  King  and
take  what  is  yours,  and  besides  leave  him  as  naked
as  your  hand.  If  he  is  fishing,  you  can  take  from
him  his  Canoe,  his  nets,  his  fish,  his  robe,  all  he
has ;  it  is  true  that  on  such  an  occasion  the  strongest
gains  the  day, —  still,  such  is  the  custom  of  the  Coun-
try, and  it  certainly  holds  some  to  their  duty.

Besides  having  some  kind  of  Laws  maintained
among  themselves,  there  is  also  a  certain  order  estab-
lished as  regards  foreign  Nations.  And  first,  con-
cerning commerce ;  several  families  have  their  own


224  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

tiennent  entre  eux,  il  y  a  auffi  quelque  ordre  eftably
pour  ce  qui  regarde  les  Peuples  eftrangers:  &  pre-
mierement  pour  le  commerce;  plufieurs  families  ont
leurs  traittes  particulieres,  &  celuy-la  eft  cenfe  Mai-
ftre  d'vne  traitte  qui  en  a  fait  le  premier  la  decou-
uerte:  les  enfans  [156]  entrent  dans  le  droict  de  leurs
parens  pour  ce  regard,  &  ceux  qui  portent  le  mefme
nom;  perfonne  n'y  va  fans  fon  conge,  qui  ne  fe
donne  qu'a  force  de  prefens;  il  en  affocie  tant  &  fi
peu  qu'il  veut;  s'il  a  beaucoup  de  marchandife  c'eft
fon  aduantage  d'y  aller  en  fort  petite  compagnie,  car
ainfi  il  enleue  tout  ce  qu'il  veut  dans  le  Pais:  c'eft
en  cecy  que  confifte  le  plus  beau  de  leurs  richefles.
Que  fi  quelqu'vn  eftoit  fi  hardy  que  d' aller  a  vne
traitte,  fans  le  conge  de  celuy  qui  en  eft  le  Maiftre,
il  peut  bien  faire  fes  affaires  en  fecret  &  a  la  defro-
bee,  car  s'il  eft  furpris  par  le  chemin,  on  ne  luy  fera
pas  meilleur  traittement  qu'a  vn  larron,  &  il  ne  rap-
portera  que  fon  corps  a  la  maifon,  ou  il  faut  qu'il
foit  en  bonne  compagnie:  que  s'il  retourne  bagues
fauues,  on  fe  contente  de  s'en  plaindre,  fans  en  faire
autre  pourfuitte.

Dans  les  guerres  mefmes  ou  regne  fouuent  la  con-
fufion,  ils  ne  laiffent  pas  d'y  tenir  quelque  ordre:  ils
n'en  entreprennent  point  fans  fuiet,  &  le  fuiet  le  plus
ordinaire  qu'ils  ayent  de  prendre  les  armes,  eft  lors
que  quelque  Nation  refufe  de  fatisfaire  pour  quelque
mort,  &  de  [157]  four[n]ir  les  prefens  que  requierent
les  conuentions  faites  entre  eux ;  ils  prennent  ce  re-
fus  pour  vn  acte  d'hoftilite,  &  tout  le  pais  mefme
efpoufe  cette  querelle:  fur  tout  les  parens  du  mort
s'eftiment  obligez  par  honneur  de  s'en  reflentir,  &
font  vne  leuee pour  leur  courir fus. Ie  ne  parle


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  r636  225

private  trades,  and  he  is  considered  Master  of  one
line  of  trade  who  was  the  first  to  discover  it.  The
children  [156]  share  the  rights  of  their  parents  in
this  respect,  as  do  those  who  bear  the  same  name ;
no  one  goes  into  it  without  permission,  which  is  given
only  in  consideration  of  presents;  he  associates  with
him  as  many  or  as  few  as  he  wishes.  If  he  has  a
good  supply  of  merchandise,  it  is  to  his  advantage  to
divide  it  with  few  companions,  for  thus  he  secures
all  that  he  desires,  in  the  Country ;  it  is  in  this  that
most  of  their  riches  consist.  But  if  any  one  should
be  bold  enough  to  engage  in  a  trade  without  permis-
sion from  him  who  is  Master,  he  may  do  a  good  busi-
ness in  secret  and  concealment;  but,  if  he  is  sur-
prised by  the  way,  he  will  not  be  better  treated  than
a  thief, —  he  will  only  carry  back  his  body  to  his
house,  or  else  he  must  be  well  accompanied.  If  he
returns  with  his  baggage  safe,  there  will  be  some
complaint  about  it,  but  no  further  prosecution.

Even  in  wars,  where  confusion  often  reigns,  they
do  not  fail  to  keep  some  order.  They  never  under-
take them  without  reason ;  and  the  commonest  rea-
son for  their  taking  arms  is  when  some  Nation  refuses
to  give  satisfaction  for  the  death  of  some  one,  and  to
[157]  furnish  the  presents  required  by  the  agreements
made  between  them ;  they  take  this  refusal  as  an  act
of  hostility,  and  the  whole  country  espouses  the  quar-
rel ;  in  particular,  the  relatives  of  the  dead  man  con-
sider themselves  obliged  in  honor  to  resent  it,  and
raise  a  force  to  attack  them.  I  am  not  speaking  of
the  leadership  they  display  in  their  wars,  and  of
their  military  discipline ;  that  comes  better  from
Monsieur  de  Champlain,  who  is  personally  acquainted
with  it,  having  held  command  among  them. More-


226  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.10

point  de  la  conduite  qu'ils  tiennent  en  leurs  guerres,
&  de  leur  difcipline  militaire,  cela  vient  mieux  a
Monfieur  de  Champlain  qui  s'y  eft  trouue  en  per-
fonne,  &  y  a  commande ;  auffi  en  a-t-'il  parle  ample-
ment,  &  fort  pertinemment,  comme  de  tout  ce  qui
regarde  les  moeurs  de  ces  Nations  barbares.  Ie  diray
feulement,  que  fi  Dieu  leur  faifoit  la  grace  d'embraff er
la  Foy,  ie  trouuerois  a  reformer  en  quelques  vnes  de
leurs  procedures ;  car  premierement  il  y  en  a  tel  qui
leuera  vne  trouppe  de  ieunes  gens  deliberez  pluftoft,
ce  femble,  pour  venger  vne  querelle  particuliere,  &
la  mort  d'vn  amy,  que  pour  l'honneur  &  la  conferua-
tio  de  la  Patrie :  &  puis  quand  ils  peuuet  tenir  quel-
ques-vns  de  leurs  ennemis  ils  les  traittent  auec  toute
la  cruaut6  qu'ils  fe  peuuent  imaginer:  les  cinq  &  fix
iours  fe  pafferont  quelquefois  a  affouuir  leur  rage,  &
les  bruler  a  petit  [158]  feu,  &  ne  fe  contentent  pas  de
leur  voir  la  peau  toute  grillee,  ils  leur  ouurent  les
iambes,  les  cuiffes,  les  bras,  &  les  parties  les  plus
charnues,  &  y  fourrent  des  tifons  ardens,  ou  des
haches  toutes  rouges;  quelquefois  au  milieu  de  ces
tourmens  ils  les  obligent  a  chanter ;  &  ceux  qui  ont
du  courage  le  font,  &  vomiffent  mille  imprecations
cotre  ceux  qui  les  tourmentet :  le  iour  de  leur  mort
il  faut  encor  qu'ils  pafset  par  la,  s'ils  ont  les  forces;
&  quelquefois  la  chaudiere  das  laquelle  on  les  doit
mettre  boiiillir  fera  fur  le  feu,  que  ces  pauures  mife-
rables  chanteront  encore  a  pleine  tefte.  Cette  inhu-
manite  eft  tout  a  fait  intolerable ;  auffi  plufieurs  ne
fe  trouuent  pas  volontiers  a  ces  funeftes  banquets.
Apres  les  auoir  enfin  affomme\  s'ils  eftoiet  vaillas
hommes,  ils  leur  arrachet  le  cceur,  le  font  griller  fur
les  charbons,  &  le  diftribuent  en  pieces  a  la  ieuneffe ;


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  227

over,  he  has  spoken  of  it  fully  and  very  pertinently,
as  of  everything  which  concerns  the  manners  of  these
barbarous  Nations.  I  will  only  say  that,  if  God
gives  them  the  grace  to  embrace  the  Faith,  I  shall
find  certain  matters  in  some  of  their  procedures  to
reform ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  there  are  some  who
raise  a  band  of  resolute  young  braves  for  the  pur-
pose, it  seems,  of  avenging  a  private  quarrel  and  the
death  of  a  friend,  rather  than  for  the  honor  and  pres-
ervation of  the  Fatherland, —  and  then,  when  they
seize  some  of  their  enemies,  they  treat  them  with  all
the  cruelty  they  can  devise.  Five  or  six  days  will
sometimes  pass  in  assuaging  their  wrath,  and  in  burn-
ing them  at  a  slow  [158]  fire;  and  they  are  not  satis-
fied with  seeing  their  skins  entirely  roasted, — they
open  the  legs,  the  thighs,  the  arms,  and  the  most
fleshy  parts,  and  thrust  therein  glowing  brands,  or
red-hot  hatchets.  Sometimes  in  the  midst  of  these
torments  they  compel  them  to  sing;  and  those  who
have  the  courage  do  it,  and  hurl  forth  a  thousand
imprecations  against  those  who  torment  them ;  on
the  day  of  their  death  they  must  even  outdo  this,  if
they  have  strength ;  and  sometimes  the  kettle  in
which  they  are  to  be  boiled  will  be  on  the  fire,  while
these  poor  wretches  are  still  singing  as  loudly  as  they
can.  This  inhumanity  is  altogether  intolerable ;  and
so  many  do  not  go  willingly  to  these  baleful  feasts.
After  having  at  last  brained  a  victim,  if  he  was  a
brave  man,  they  tear  out  his  heart,  roast  it  on  the
coals,  and  distribute  it  in  pieces  to  the  young  men ;
they  think  that  this  renders  them  courageous.  Others
make  an  incision  in  the  upper  part  of  their  necks  and
cause  some  of  his  blood  to  run  into  it, — which  has,
they  say,  this  virtue,  that  since  they  have  mingled


228  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

ils  eftiment  que  cela  les  red  courageux:  d'autres  leur
font  vne  incifion  au  deffus  du  col,  &  y  font  couler  de
leur  fang,  qui  a,  difent-ils,  cette  vertu,  que  depuis
qu'ils  l'ont  ainfi  mefle  auec  le  leur,  ils  ne  peuuent
iamais  eftre  furpris  de  l'ennemy,  &  ont  toufiours  con-
noiffancede  fes  approches,  pour  fecrettes  [159]  qu'elles
puiffent  eftre.  On  les  met  par  morceaux  en  la  chau-
diere;  &  quoy  qu'aux  autres  feftins  la  tefte,  foit  d'vn
Ours,  foit  d'vn  Chien,  d'vn  Cerf,  ou  d'vn  grand
poiff on  eft  le  morceau  du  Capitaine ;  en  cetuy-cy  la
tefte  f e  donne  au  plus  malotru  de  la  compagnie :  en
effet  quelques-vns  ne  gouftent  de  ce  mets  non  plus
que  de  tout  le  refte  du  corps,  qu'auec  beaucoup  d'hor-
reur:  il  y  en  a  qui  en  mangent  auec  plaifir;  i'ay  veu
des  Sauuages  en  noftre  Cabane  parler  auec  appetit  de
la  chair  d'vn  Iroquois,  &  loiier  fa  bonte  en  mefmes
termes  que  Ton  feroit  la  chair  d'vn  Cerf,  ou  d'vn
Orignac:  c'eft  eftre  bien  cruel;  mais  nous  efperons
auec  l'affiftance  du  Ciel,  que  la  cognoiffance  du  vray
Dieu  bannira  tout  a  fait  de  ce  Pais  cette  barbarie.  Au
refte  pour  la  garde  du  Pais,  ils  entouret  les  princi-
paux  Villages  d'vne  forte  palliffade  de  pieux,  pour
fouftenir  vn  fiege :  ils  entretiennent  des  penfionnaires
dans  les  Nations  neutres,  ou  mefmes  parmy  les  enne-
mis,  par  le  moyen  def quels  ils  font  aduertis  fouz
main  de  toutes  leurs  menees:  il  font  bien  fi  aduifez
&  circonfpects  en  ce  poinct,  ques'il  y  a  quelque  Peu-
ple  auec  qui  ils  [160]  n'ayent  pas  entierement  rompu,
ils  leur  donnent  en  effet  la  liberie  d'aller  &  venir  dans
le  Pais ;  mais  neantmoins  pour  plus  grande  affeurance
on  leur  affigne  des  Cabanes  particulieres  oil  ils  fe  doi-
uent  retirer ;  fi  on  les  trouuoit  ailleurs  on  leur  feroit
vn  mauuais  party.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  229

his  blood  with  their  own  they  can  never  be  surprised
by  the  enemy,  and  have  always  knowledge  of  their
approach,  however  secret  [159]  it  may  be.  They
put  him  in  the  kettle  piece  by  piece ;  and  although
at  other  feasts  the  head, —  whether  of  a  Bear,  or  a
Dog,  or  a  Deer,  or  a  large  fish, — is  the  Captain's
share,  in  this  case  the  head  is  given  to  the  lowest
person  in  the  company;  indeed  some  taste  of  this
part,  or  of  all  the  rest  of  the  body,  only  with  great
horror.  There  are  some  who  eat  it  with  pleasure ;  I
have  seen  Savages  in  our  Cabin  speak  with  gusto  of
the  flesh  of  an  Iroquois,  and  praise  its  good  qualities
in  the  same  terms  as  they  would  praise  the  flesh  of  a
Deer  or  a  Moose.  This  is  certainly  very  cruel;  but
we  hope,  with  the  assistance  of  Heaven,  that  the
knowledge  of  the  true  God  will  entirely  banish  from
this  Country  such  barbarity.  Moreover,  for  the  se-
curity of  the  Country,  they  surround  the  principal
Villages  with  a  strong  palisade  of  stakes,  in  order  to
sustain  a  siege.  They  maintain  pensioners  in  the
neutral  Nations,  and  even  among  their  enemies,  by
means  of  whom  they  are  secretly  warned  of  all  their
plots;  they  are,  indeed,  so  well  advised  and  so  cir-
cumspect on  this  point  that,  if  there  be  some  People
with  whom  they  [160]  have  not  entirely  broken,  they
give  them,  in  truth,  the  liberty  of  going  and  coming
in  the  Country, —  but,  nevertheless,  for  greater  as-
surance, they  assign  to  them  special  Cabins,  to  which
they  must  retire ;  if  they  found  them  elsewhere,  they
would  do  them  grievous  harm.

As  regards  the  authority  of  commanding,  here  is
what  I  have  observed.  All  the  affairs  of  the  Hurons
are  included  under  two  heads :  The  first  are,  as  it  were,
affairs  of  State, —  whatever  may  concern  either  citi-


230  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

Pour  ce  qui  regarde  l'autorite  de  commander,  voicy
ce  que  i'en  ay  remarque.  Toutes  les  affaires  des  Hu-
rons  f e  rapportent  a  deux  chefs :  les  vnes  font  comme
les  affaires  d'Eftat,  foit  qu'elles  concernent  ou  les
citoyens,  ou  les  Eftrangers,  le  public  ou  les  particu-
liers  du  Village,  pour  ce  qui  eft  des  feflins,  danfes,
ieux,  croffes,  &  ordre  des  funerailles.  Les  autres
font  des  affaires  de  guerre.  Or  il  fe  trouue  autant
de  fortes  de  Capitaines  que  d'affaires.  Dans  les
grads  Villages  il  y  aura  quelquefois  plufieurs  Capi-
taines tant  de  la  police,  que  de  la  guerre,  lefquels  diui-
fent  entre  eux  les  families  du  Village,  comme  en  au-
tant de  Capitaineries ;  on  y  void  mefme  par  fois  des
Capitaines,  a.  qui  tous  ces  gouuernemens  fe  rapportent
a  caufe  de  leur  efprit,  faueur,  richeffes,  &  autres  qua-
litez,  qui  les  rendent  confiderables  dans  le  Pays.  II
n'y  en  a  point,  qui  en  vertu  de  leur  election  foient
plus  grands  les  vns  [161]  que  les  autres.  Ceux  la
tiennent  le  premier  rang,  qui  fe  le  font  acquis  par
leur  efprit,  eloquence,  magnificence,  courage,  &  fage
conduite,  de  forte  que  les  affaires  du  Village  s'ad-
drefTent  principalement  a  celuy  des  Capitaines,  qui
a  en  luy  ces  qualitez;  &  de  mefme  en  efl-il  des
affaires  de  tout  le  Pays,  ou  les  plus  grands  efprits
font  les  plus  grads  Capitaines,  &  d' ordinaire  il  n'y
en  a  qu'vn  qui  porte  le  faix  de  tous.  C'eft  en  fon
nom  que  fe  paffent  les  Traictez  de  Paix  auec  les  Peu-
ples  eftrangers ;  le  Pays  mefme  porte  fon  nom :  &
maintenant  par  exemple,  quand  on  parle  d'Ancnk/ii-
ondic  dans  les  Confeils  des  Eftrangers,  on  entend  la
Nation  des  Ours.  Autrefois  il  n'y  auoit  que  les
braues  hommes  qui  fuffent  Capitaines,  &  pour  cela
on  les  appelloit  Enondccha,  du  mefme  nom  qu'ils  ap-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  163b  231

zens  or  Strangers,  the  public  or  the  individuals  of  the
Village;  as,  for  example,  feasts,  dances,  games,  crosse
matches,  and  funeral  ceremonies.  The  second  are
affairs  of  war.  Now  there  are  as  many  sorts  of  Cap-
tains as  of  affairs.  In  the  large  Villages  there  will
be  sometimes  several  Captains,  both  of  administra-
tion and  of  war,  who  divide  among  them  the  families
of  the  Village  as  into  so  many  Captaincies.  Occa-
sionally, too,  there  are  even  Captains  to  whom  these
matters  of  government  are  referred  on  account  of
their  intellectual  superiority,  popularity,  wealth,  or
other  qualities  which  render  them  influential  in  the
Country.  There  are  none  who,  by  virtue  of  their
election,  are  of  higher  rank  [161]  than  others.  Those
hold  the  first  rank  who  have  acquired  it  by  intellec-
tual preeminence,  eloquence,  free  expenditure,  cour-
age, and  wise  conduct.  Consequently,  the  affairs  of
the  Village  are  referred  principally  to  that  one  of  the
Chiefs  who  has  these  qualifications ;  and  the  same  is
true  with  regard  to  the  affairs  of  the  whole  Country,
in  which  the  men  of  greatest  ability  are  the  leading
Captains,  and  usually  there  is  one  only  who  bears
the  burden  of  all ;  it  is  in  his  name  Treaties  of  Peace
are  made  with  foreign  Peoples;  the  Country  even
bears  his  name, —  and  now,  for  example,  when  one
speaks  of  Anenkhiondic  in  the  Councils  of  Foreigners,
the  Nation  of  the  Bear  is  meant.  Formerly  only
worthy  men  were  Captains,  and  so  they  were  called
Enondecha,  the  same  name  by  which  they  call  the
Country,  Nation,  district, — as  if  a  good  Chief  and
the  Country  were  one  and  the  same  thing.  But  to-
day they  do  not  pay  so  much  attention  to  the  selec-
tion of  their  Captains ;  and  so  they  no  longer  give
them  that  name,  although  they  still  call  them  atiwa-


232  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol. 10

pellent  le  Pays,  Nation,  terre,  comme  li  vn  bon  Capi-
taine  &  le  Pays  eftoient  vne  mefme  chofe ;  mais  au-
iourd'huy  ils  n'ont  pas  vn  tel  egard  en  1' election  de
leurs  Capitaines;  aufli  ne  leur  donnent-ils  plus  ce
nom  la,  quoy  qu'ils  l'appellent  encor  atittarontas,
atiXanens,  ondakhienhai,  les  groffes  pierres,  les  an-
ciens,  les  fedentaires.  Cependant  ceux  la  ne  laiffent
pas  de  tenir,  comme  i'ay  dit,  le  premier  rang  tant
dans  [162 J  les  affaires  particulieres  des  Villages,  que
de  tout  le  Pays,  qui  font  les  plus  grands  en  merites
&  en  efprit.  Leurs  parens  font  come  autant  de  Lieu-
tenans  &  de  Confeillers.

Ils  arriuent  a  ce  degre  d'honneur,  partie  par  fuc-
ceffion,  partie  par  election,  leurs  enfans  ne  leur
fuccedentpas  d'ordinaire,  mais  bien  leurs  neueux  &
petits  fils.  Et  ceux  cy  encor  ne  viennent  pas  a  la  fuc-
ceffion  de  ces  petites  Royautez,  comme  les  Dauphins
en  France,  ou  les  enfans  en  l'heritage  de  leurs  peres;
mais  en  tant  qu'ils  ont  les  qualitez  conuenables,
&  qu'ils  les  acceptent,  &  font  acceptez  de  tout
le  Pays.  II  s'en  trouue  qui  refufent  ces  honneurs,
tant  parce  qu'ils  n'ont  pas  le  difcours  en  main,
ny  affez  de  retenue  ny  de  patience,  que  pource  qu'ils
ayment  le  repos ;  car  ces  charges  font  pluftoft  de  fer-
uitudes,  qu'autre  chofe.  II  faut  qu'vn  Capitaine  faffe
eftat  d'eftre  quafi  touiours  en  campagne:  fi  on  tient
Confeil  a  cinq  ou  fix  lieues  pour  les  affaires  de  tout
le  Pays,  Hyuer  ou  Efte  en  quelque  faifon  que  ce  foit
il  faut  marcher:  s'il  fe  fait  vne  Affemblee  dans  le
Village,  c'eft  en  la  Cabane  du  Capitaine:  s'il  y  a
quelque  chofe  a  publier,  c'eft  a  luy  a  le  faire;  &  puis
le  peu  d'authorite  qu'il  a  d'ordinaire  fur  fes  fuiets,
n'eft  pas  [163]  vn  puiffant  attrait  pour  accepter  cefte


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  163b  233

rontas,  atiwanens,  ondakkienhai,  ' '  big  stones,  the  elders,
the  stay-at-homes."  However,  those  still  hold,  as  I
have  said,  the  first  rank  as  well  in  [162]  the  special
affairs  of  the  Villages  as  of  the  whole  Country,  who
are  most  highly  esteemed  and  intellectually  preemi-
nent. Their  relatives  are  like  so  many  Lieutenants
and  Councilors.

They  reach  this  degree  of  honor,  partly  through
succession,  partly  through  election ;  their  children  do
not  usually  succeed  them,  but  properly  their  nephews
and  grandsons.  And  the  latter  do  not  even  come  to
the  succession  of  these  petty  Royalties,  like  the  Dau-
phins of  France,  or  children  to  the  inheritance  of
their  fathers ;  but  only  in  so  far  as  they  have  suitable
qualifications,  and  accept  the  position,  and  are  ac-
cepted by  the  whole  Country.  Some  are  found  who
refuse  these  honors, —  sometimes  because  they  have
not  aptitude  in  speaking,  or  sufficient  discretion  or
patience,  sometimes  because  they  like  a  quiet  life ;
for  these  positions  are  servitudes  more  than  anything
else.  A  Captain  must  always  make  it  a  point  to  be,
as  it  were,  in  the  field;  if  a  Council  is  held  five  or
six  leagues  away  for  the  affairs  of  the  Country,  Win-
ter or  Summer,  whatever  the  weather,  he  must  go.
If  there  is  an  Assembly  in  the  Village,  it  is  in  the
Captain's  Cabin ;  if  there  is  anything  to  be  made
public,  he  must  do  it ;  and  then  the  small  authority
he  usually  has  over  his  subjects  is  not  [163]  a  power-
ful attraction  to  make  him  accept  this  position.
These  Captains  do  not  govern  their  subjects  by  means
of  command  and  absolute  power;  they  have  no  force
at  hand  to  compel  them  to  their  duty.  Their  gov-
ernment is  only  civil ;  they  represent  only  what  is  to
be  done  for  the  good  of  the  village,  or  of  the  whole


234  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.  10

charge.  Ces  Capitaines  icy  ne  gouuernent  pas  leurs
fuiets  par  voye  d'empire,  &  de  puiffance  abfolue;
ils  n'ont  point  de  force  en  main,  pour  les  ranger  a
leur  deuoir.  Leur  gouuernement  n'efl  que  ciuil,  ils
reprefentent  feulement  ce  qu'il  eft  queftion  de  faire
pour  le  bien  du  village,  ou  de  tout  le  Pays.  Apres
cela  fe  remue  qui  veut.  II  y  en  a  neantmoins,  qui
fcauent  bien  fe  faire  obeyr,  principalement  quand  ils
ont  l'affection  de  leurs  fuiets.  Quelques  vns  font
auffi  reculez  de  ces  charges,  pour  la  memoire  de  leurs
anceftres  qui  ont  deferuy  la  Patrie.  Que  s'ils  y  font
receus,  c'eft  a  force  de  prefens,  que  les  Anciens  ac-
ceptent  en  leur  Affemblee,  &  mettent  dans  les  coffres
du  Public.  Tous  les  ans  enuiron  le  Printemps  fe
font  ces  refurrections  de  Capitaines,  fi  quelques  cas
particuliers  ne  retardent  ou  n'aduancent  1' affaire.  Ie
demanderois  volontiers  icy  a  ceux  qui  ont  peu  d'opi-
nion  de  nos  Sauuages,  ce  qu'il  leur  femble  de  cette
conduite.

Mais  en  preuue  de  ce  que  ie  viens  de  dire  de  l'ef-
prit  de  nos  Capitaines,  il  faut  que  ie  conclue  ce  Cha-
pitre  par  vn  difcours  que  me  fit  ce  Printemps  vn
Capitaine,  nomme  [164]  Acnons,  il  pretendoit  nous
perfuader  de  tranfporter  noftre  Cabane  en  fon  Vil-
lage. Surquoy  nous  auons  a  loiier  Dieu,  de  ce  qu'il
nous  fait  la  grace  d'eftre  aymez  &  recherchez  dans
le  Pays;  c'eft  a  qui  nous  aura  en  fon  Village:  les
Arcndoronnon  nous  en  ont  fouuent  porte  la  parole,  les
Attignenonghac,  &  ceux  du  Village  Off  off  ant,  que  nous
appellons  la  Rochelle,  nous  font  encor  plus  d'in-
ftance :  mais  fi  nous  auons  egard  aux  importunitez,
affeurement  ce  Capitaine  l'emportera;  il  y  a  plus  de
fix  mois  qu'il  ne  nous  donne  aucun  repos,  quelque


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  235

Country.  That  settled,  he  who  will  takes  action.
There  are,  however,  some  who  know  well  how  to  se-
cure obedience,  especially  when  they  have  the  affec-
tion of  their  subjects.  Some,  too,  are  kept  back  from
these  positions  by  the  memory  of  their  ancestors  who
have  badly  served  their  Country.  But,  if  they  are
received  therein,  it  is  by  dint  of  presents  which  the
Old  Men  accept  in  their  Assembly  and  put  into  the
Public  coffers.  Every  year,  about  Spring,  these  res-
urrections of  Captains  take  place,  if  some  special
cases  do  not  delay  or  hasten  the  matter.  I  should
like  here  to  ask  those  who  have  a  low  opinion  of  our
Savages,  what  they  think  of  this  method  of  conduct-
ing affairs.

But,  in  proof  of  what  I  have  just  said  of  the  intel-
ligence of  our  Captains,  I  must  conclude  this  Chap-
ter with  a  speech,  made  to  me,  this  Spring,  by  a
Captain  named  [164]  Aenons.  He  was  trying  to  per-
suade us  to  transfer  our  Cabin  to  his  Village.  For
this  we  have  to  praise  God,  that  he  gives  us  the
favor  to  be  loved  and  sought  after  throughout  the
Country ;  there  is  a  strife  as  to  who  will  have  us  in
his  Village.  The  Arendoronnon^  have  often  invited
us;  the  Attignenonghac,  and  the  people  of  the  Vil-
lage of  OssossanS,  which  we  call  la  Rochelle,  have
pressed  us  still  more  earnestly ;  but,  if  we  have  re-
gard to  importunities,  assuredly  this  Chief  will  pre-
vail. For  more  than  six  months  he  has  given  us  no
rest;  whatever  Public  affair  he  may  relate  to  us,  he
never  fails  to  draw  expressly  or  tacitly  this  conclu-
sion; but  this  Spring,  more  than  ever,  he  has  em-
ployed all  his  Rhetoric  to  secure  our  promise,  and
gain  our  full  consent.  Going  then  one  day  to  Wen-
rio,  to  visit  one  of  our  Christians  sick  unto  death,  I


236  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  10

affaire  du  Pais  qu'il  nous  raconte,  il  ne  manque  point
d'en  tirer  expreffement  ou  tacitement  cette  conclu-
fion ;  mais  fur  tout  a  ce  Printemps  il  a  employe  toute
fa  Rhetorique  pour  nous  faire  dire  le  mot,  &  obtenir
tout  a  fait  noftre  confentement.  Allant  done  vn
iour  a  tfenrio,  pour  affifter  vn  de  nos  Chreftiens  ma-
lade  a  la  mort,  ie  trouuay  par  le  chemin  vn  Sauuage
qui  me  venoit  querir  de  la  part  d'Aenons;  ie  l'allay
voir  apres  auoir  fatisfait  a  noftre  malade,  qui  nous
menoit  particulierement.  II  me  fit  ce  difcours:  mais
ie  luy  feray  tort  de  le  mettre  icy,  car  ie  ne  luy  don-
neray  pas  la  grace  qu'il  auoit  en  la  bouche  [165]  de
ce  Capitaine;  n'importe,  on  verra  toufiours  fes  pen-
fees,  que  i'ay  rangees  a  mon  aduis  a  peu  pres  dans
leur  ordre. Voicy  comme  il  commenca.

Echon,  ie  vous  ay  mande  pour  fcauoir  au  vray  voftre
derniere  refolution:  ie  ne  vous  euffe  pas  donne  la
peine  de  venir  iufques  icy,  n'euft  efte  que  ie  crai-
gnois  de  ne  pas  trouuer  chez  vous  la  commodity  de
vous  parler:  voftre  Cabane  eft  toufiours  pleine  de
tant  de  perfonnes  qui  vous  vifitent,  qu'il  eft  quafi
impoffible  de  vous  y  communiquer  quelque  chofe  en
particulier :  &  puis  maintenant  que  nous  f ommes  fur
le  poinct  de  nous  affembler  pour  deliberer  touchant
l'eflabliffement  d'vn  nouueau  Village,  cette  entre-
ueue  euft  peu  eftre  fufpecte  a  ceux  qui  defirent  vous
retenir.

Les  Francois  ont  toufiours  efte  attachez  a  moy,  &
m'ont  ayme,  ie  les  ay  auffi  toufiours  affift6  en  tout  ce
que  i'ay  peu,  &  n'ont  pas  trouu6  en  toutes  ces  terres
de  meilleur  amy  que  moy:  ce  n'a  pas  efte  fans  en-
courir  l'enuie  de  tout  le  Pais,  qui  m'en  regarde  il  y
a  long  temps  de  mauuais  ceil,  &  a  fait  tout  ce  qu'il


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  237


met  by  the  way  a  Savage  who  was  coming  with  a
message  for  me  from  Aenons.  I  went  to  see  the  lat-
ter after  having  attended  to  our  sick  man,  and  he
took  me  to  one  side.  He  made  to  me  this  speech,
but  I  shall  do  him  wrong  to  put  it  here,  for  I  shall
not  give  it  the  grace  it  had  in  the  mouth  [165]  of  this
Chief ;  no  matter,  the  reader  will  see  his  ideas,  which
I  have  set  down,  as  I  think,  almost  in  their  order.
See  how  he  began.

"  Ec/wn,  I  have  sent  for  you  to  learn  your  final  de-
cision. I  would  not  have  given  you  the  trouble  to
come  here,  had  I  not  been  afraid  that  I  should  not
find  at  your  house  the  opportunity  of  speaking  to
you.  Your  Cabin  is  always  full  of  so  many  people
visiting  you,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  say  any-
thing to  you  in  private;  and  then,  now  that  we  are
on  the  point  of  assembling  to  deliberate  regarding
the  establishment  of  a  new  Village,  this  interview
might  have  aroused  the  suspicions  of  those  who  wish
to  keep  you.

"  The  French  have  always  been  attached  to  me,
and  have  loved  me ;  I  have  always  assisted  them  in
every  way  I  could,  and  they  have  not  found  in  all
this  land  a  better  friend  than  I.  This  has  not  been
without  incurring  the  envy  of  others  throughout  the
Country,  who  have  therefore  for  a  long  time  regarded
me  with  an  evil  eye,  and  have  done  all  they  could  to
prejudice  you  against  me.  They  have  even,  as  you
[166]  know,  imputed  to  me  the  death  of  Brusle;  and
immediately  after  he  was  killed,  when  the  question
of  going  down  to  Kebec  was  discussed,  it  was  said
loudly  and  distinctly  that,  if  I  went,  I  would  without
doubt  lose  my  head.  Notwithstanding  all  that,  the
following  year  (for  that  year I  went  elsewhere to


238  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.10

a  peu  pour  me  mettre  mal  aupres  de  vous ;  iufques
la  que,  comme  vous  [166]  fcauez,  on  m'a  impute  la
mort  de  Brufle,  &  incontinent  apres  qu'il  eut  efte  tue,
quand  il  fut  queftion  de  defcendre  a  Kebec,  on  difoit
haut  &  clair  que  fi  i'y  allois,  fans  doute  i'y  laifferois
la  tefle:  nonobftant  tout  cela  l'annee  fuiuante  (car
pour  cette  annee  la  i'allay  en  traite  ailleurs)  ie  ne
laiffay  pas  de  m'embarquer,  &  defcendre,  appuye
que  i'eftois  fur  mon  innocence.  Au  refte  ft  ce  mal-
heur  me  fuft  arriue,  la  hache  eftant  leuee  fur  ma
tefle,  i'euffe  demande  vn  peu  de  temps  pour  parler,
&  ie  croy  que  ie  me  fuffe  fi  bien  iuftifie,  que  i'euffe
oblige  celuy  qui  commandoit  ou  de  faire  manifefte-
ment  vne  iniuftice,  ou  me  laiffer  la  vie.  Mais  ie  n'en
fus  pas  en  la  peine,  &  ceux  qui  s'attendoient  de  me
voir  affommer  furent  bien  efhonnez,  quand  ils  virent
l'honneur  qu'on  me  fit;  iufques  la  que  quelques  vns
difoient,  que  puis  qu'on  traitoit  fi  fauorablement  vn
meurtrier,  le  vray  moyen  de  fe  faire  aimer  des  Fran-
cois efloit  de  fendre  la  tefle  a  quelqu'vn.  Tous  ces
difcours  n'ont  point  empefche  que  mon  innocence
n'ait  efte  toufiours  au  deffus  de  l'enuie:  quoy  qu'on
dife,  i'aimeray  &  obligeray  toute  ma  vie  les  Francois
en  tout  ce  que  ie  pourray.

Echon,  nous  penfions  que  voflre  Village  [167]  deuft
nous  fuiure,  &  fe  ioindre  a  nous,  maintenat  que  nous
somes  fur  le  poinct  d'en  faire  vn  autre  ailleurs,  &  il
n'a  pas  tenu  a  vous,  les  prefens  que  vous  nfles  l'an
paffe  fur  ce  fuiet  n'eftoient  que  trop  capables  de  les
porter  a  cette  refolution ;  mais  cependant,  a  ce  que
nous  voyons,  il  n'en  faut  plus  parler;  c'eft  vne  piece
tout  a  fait  detachee,  &  nagueres  que  i'allay  chez  vous
pour  fcauoir  voflre  refolution,  ie  perdis  courage,  vous


1636]  LE  JEUNES  RELATION,  1636  239

trade)  I  was  not  hindered  from  embarking  and  going
down,  supported  as  I  was  by  my  innocence.  More-
over, if  that  misfortune  had  happened  and  the  axe
been  raised  over  my  head,  I  should  have  asked  a  little
time  to  speak ;  and  I  believe  I  should  have  so  fully
cleared  myself  that  I  would  have  compelled  him  who
ordered  it  either  to  do  a  manifest  injustice,  or  to
leave  me  my  life.  But  I  had  no  trouble  about  it,
and  those  who  expected  to  see  me  struck  down  were
very  much  astonished  when  they  saw  the  honor  that
was  done  me;  so  astonished  were  they,  that  some
said,  since  a  murderer  was  so  favorably  dealt  with,
the  true  way  to  get  oneself  liked  by  the  French  was
to  cleave  some  one's  head  open.  All  these  speeches
have  not  prevented  my  innocence  from  always  being
above  suspicion ;  whatever  may  be  said,  I  shall,  all
my  life,  love  and  serve  the  French,  in  every  way  I
can.

"  Echon,  we  thought  that  your  Village  [167]  ought
to  follow  ours,  and  join  itself  to  ours,  now  that  we
are  on  the  point  of  establishing  another  one  else-
where, and  it  is  not  your  fault,  since  the  presents
you  made  on  this  account,  last  year,  were  only  too
well  calculated  to  bring  them  to  this  resolution.
Nevertheless,  as  far  as  we  can  see,  it  is  not  necessary
to  say  anything  more  regarding  this, —  it  is  a  matter
quite  aside;  and  lately  when  I  was  going  to  your
house  to  learn  your  decision,  I  lost  courage;  you  an-
swered me  so  coldly  that  I  had  almost  resolved  not
to  speak  to  you  any  more  about  it.

"  Yet  the  thing  is  of  such  importance,  as  well  for
your  interests  as  for  ours,  that  I  have  judged  it  fit-
ting to  speak  my  feelings  about  it  once  more.  If
you  do  not  answer  me  clearly  to-day,  I  shall  never


240  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

me  refpondiftes  fi.  froidement,  que  ie  m'eflois  comme
refolu  de  ne  vous  en  plus  parler.

Toutefois  la  chofe  eft  de  telle  importance,  tant
pour  vos  interefts  que  pour  les  noftres,  que  i'ay  iuge
a  propos  de  vous  en  dire  mon  fentiment  encore  vne
fois:  fi  vous  ne  me  refpondez  auiourd'huy  diftincte-
ment,  iamais  plus  ie  ne  vous  en  ouuriray  la  bouche.
Nous  nous  affemblerons  demain  cinq  Villages  que
nous  fommes  pour  conclure  le  deffein  que  nous
auons  de  nous  vnir,  &  n'en  faire  qu'vn.  Nous
auons  fuiet  de  prendre  cette  refolution,  puis  que  fi
nous  fommes  en  paix  cette  annee,  nous  ne  pouuons
manquer  le  Printemps  fuiuant  d'auoir  l'ennemy  fur
les  bras:  nous  n'en  fommes  que  trop  bien  informez;
en  l'eftat  que  [168]  vous  nous  voyez  maintenant  nous
ferions  en  peine,  au  moins  pour  nos  femmes,  &  nos
enfans,  fi  la  neceffite  nous  contraignoit  de  prendre  les
armes :  au  lieu  que  fi  nous  fommes  en  vn  bon  Village
bien  ferme  de  pieux,  noftre  ieuneffe  aura  fuiet  de
faire  paroiftre  fon  courage,  &  nous  mettrons  nos
femmes  &  nos  enfans  en  affeurance.  A  cette  occa-
fion  tout  le  Pais  iette  les  yeux  fur  vous ;  nous  nous
eftimerons  tout  a  fait  hors  de  crainte,  pourueu  que
nous  vous  ayons  auec  nous ;  vous  auez  des  armes  a
feu  dont  le  feul  bruit  eft  capable  de  donner  l'epou-
uante  a  l'ennemy,  &  le  mettre  en  fuite.

Au  refte,  il  y  va  aufii  de  vos  interefts ;  voyez  en
quelle  peine  vous  eftes  au  moindre  bruit  de  guerre :
&  puis  fi  on  vous  fait  quelque  tort,  a  qui  aurez  vous
recours  demeurans  en  ce  petit  Hameau  ou  vous  eftes?
Vous  n'auez  point  la  de  Capitaine  qui  vous  prenne  en
fa  protection,  &  vous  faffe  faire  raifon ;  il  n'y  a  per-
fonne  qui  tienne  la  ieuneffe  en  deuoir:  fi  les  bleds
vous  manquent,  qui  donnera  ordre  qu'on  vous  en  pour-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELA  TION,  i6j6  241

more  open  my  lips  to  you  about  it.  Five  of  our  Vil-
lages meet  to-morrow,  to  settle  the  plan  we  have  of
uniting  and  making  only  one  of  them.  We  have
reason  to  take  this  resolution,  since,  if  we  are  at  peace
this  year,  we  are  certain  next  vSpring  to  have  the  ene-
my on  our  hands.  We  are  only  too  well  informed
about  them;  in  the  position  in  which  [168]  we  are
now,  we  should  be  in  trouble,  at  least  for  our  wives
and  our  children,  if  necessity  should  compel  us  to
take  arms ;  whereas  if  we  are  in  one  good  Village,
well  protected  by  stakes,  our  youth  will  have  occa-
sion to  show  their  courage,  and  we  will  place  our
wives  and  children  in  safety.  On  this  account  the
whole  Country  turns  its  eyes  upon  you ;  we  shall  es-
teem ourselves  quite  beyond  fear,  if  we  have  you
with  us ;  you  have  firearms,  the  mere  report  of  which
is  capable  of  inspiring  dread  in  the  enemy,  and  put-
ting him  to  flight.

"  Moreover,  these  are  also  your  own  interests;  see
in  what  trouble  you  are  at  the  least  report  of  war;
and  then,  if  any  harm  is  done  to  you,  to  whom  will
you  have  recourse,  living  in  that  petty  Hamlet  where
you  are?  You  have  no  Captain  there  who  will  take
you  under  his  protection,  and  cause  right  to  be  done
you ;  there  is  no  one  to  keep  the  young  men  within
bounds ;  if  corn  is  lacking  to  you,  who  will  give  orders
to  provide  you  with  it  ?  for  your  Village  is  not  capable
of  furnishing  you  with  a  sufficiency  of  it,  and  how
much  trouble  it  would  be  to  go  yourselves  in  search
of  it  [169]  elsewhere.  On  the  other  hand,  if  you
were  with  us,  you  would  lack  for  nothing ;  as  we  shall
have  asked  you  to  come  with  us,  so  we  shall  be
obliged  to  support  you ;  and,  in  case  they  should  be
lax  in  furnishing  you  your  provisions,  I  give  you  my


242  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUTTES  [Vol.  10

uoye,  car  voftre  Village  n'efl  pas  capable  de  vous  en
fournir  a  fuffifance,  &  quelle  peine  d'en  aller  vous
mefmes  chercher  [169]  ailleurs.  Au  lieu  que  fi  vous
eftes  des  noltres,  rien  ne  vous  fcauroit  manquer;
come  nous  vous  aurons  voulu  auoir  aupres  de  nous,
auffi  ferons  nous  obligez  de  vous  nourrir:  &  au  cas
que  Ton  fe  portaft  lafchement  a  vous  fournir  voftre
prouifion,  ie  vous  donne  parole  que  i'employeray
tout  mon  credit  pour  repref enter  a  nos  gens  1' obliga-
tion qu'ils  vous  auront,  &  ie  fcay  bien  qu'il  n'y  en  a
pas  vn  qui  ne  fe  mette  incontinent  en  deuoir  de  vous
feruir:  de  mefme  quand  il  fera  queftion  de  dreffer
voftre  Cabane,  ie  commanderay  a  toute  la  ieuneffe
de  mettre  la  main  a  l'ceuure,  &  vous  vous  verrez  in-
continent auffi  bien  logez  que  vous  pouuez  fouhaitter
dans  le  Pais.

II  s'arrefta  icy,  &  il  me  dit  qu'il  n'auoit  pas  neant-
moins  encor  acheue,  mais  qu'il  defiroit  auant  que  de
pafTer  outre,  que  ie  communiquaffe  a  vn  de  nos  Peres
qui  eftoit  auec  moy  ce  qu'il  venoit  de  dire.  Puis  il
continua  en  ces  termes :

Eckon,  ie  vois  bien  que  vous  m'allez  dire  que  vous
craignez  d'eftre  plus  eloignez  du  Lac  que  vous  n'eftes
maintenant ;  &  moy  ie  vous  donne  parole  que  vous
n'en  ferez  pas  fi  eloignez  que  vous  pourriez  bien  pen-
fer;  [170]  &  puis  quand  ainfi  feroit,  dequoy  vous
mettez  vous  en  peine  ?  Vous  n'allez  point  a  la  pefche,
tout  le  Village  y  ira  pour  vous:  Vous  aurez  de  la
peine  a  embarquer  vos  paquets  pour  Kebec;  rien
moins,  il  n'y  aura  perfonne  dans  le  Village  qui  ne  fe
tienne  heureux  de  vous  feruir  en  cette  occafion.  II
eft  vray  que  vous  ne  ferez  pas  au  bord  du  Lac  pour  re-
ceuoir  les  paquets  qu'on  vous  enuoyera;  mais  qu'im-
porte, puis  qu'on vous  les  apportera iufques chez


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  243

word  that  I  will  use  all  my  influence  in  representing
to  our  people  the  obligations  they  are  under  to  you,
and  I  know  well  there  is  not  one  of  them  who  will
not  put  himself  immediately  to  work  to  serve  you;
in  the  same  way,  when  the  question  arises  of  erect-
ing your  Cabin,  I  shall  command  all  the  young  men
to  put  their  hands  to  the  work,  and  you  will  see  your-
self immediately  as  well  lodged  as  you  can  wish  in
this  Country."

He  stopped  at  this  point,  and  told  me  that  he  had
not  yet  finished ;  but  he  desired  that,  before  proceed-
ing further,  I  should  communicate  to  one  of  our  Fa-
thers who  was  with  me  what  he  had  just  said.  Then
he  continued  in  these  words:

"  Echon,  I  see  well  that  you  were  going  to  say  to
me  that  you  fear  to  be  further  distant  from  the  Lake
than  you  are  now ;  but  I  give  you  my  word  that  you
will  not  be  as  far  from  it  as  you  might  think;  [170]
and  then,  even  if  it  were  so,  how  could  it  inconven-
ience you?  You  do  not  go  fishing;  the  whole  Village
will  go  for  you.  You  will  have  difficulty  in  embark-
ing your  parcels  for  Kebec  ?  Not  at  all ;  there  will
be  nobody  in  the  Village  who  will  not  consider  him-
self happy  to  serve  you  in  this  matter.  It  is  true,  you
will  not  be  on  the  shore  of  the  Lake  to  receive  the  par-
cels sent  to  you ;  but  what  does  it  matter,  since  they
will  be  brought  all  the  way  to  your  house  ?  And  in  case
you  desire  to  employ  the  people  of  la  Rochelle,  if
they  love  you,  as  they  must  usually  pass  before  the
Village  we  intend  to  build,  they  will  not  give  you
the  trouble  to  go  and  seek  for  them  in  their  Village.
Echon,  this  is  what  I  had  to  say  to  you ;  I  beg  that  I
may  learn  now  your  final  decision,  in  order  that  I
may  report  it  to  the  Council  to-morrow."


244  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

vous:  &  au  cas  que  vous  defiriez  vous  feruir  de  ceux
de  la  Rochelle,  s'ils  vous  aiment,  comme  ils  doiuent
ordinairement  paffer  deuant  le  Village  que  nous  pre-
tendons  baftir,  ils  ne  vous  donneront  pas  la  peine  de
-les  aller  querir  a  leur  Village.  Echon,  voila  ce  que
i'auois  a  vous  dire :  ie  vous  prie  que  ie  f cache  main-
tenant  voftre  derniere  refolution,  afin  que  i'en  faffe
demain  le  rapport  au  Confeil.

Voila  la  harangue  de  ce  Capitaine,  qui  pafferoit,  a
mon  aduis  au  iugement  de  plufieurs  pour  vne  de
celles  de  Tite  Liue,  fi  le  fuiet  le  portoit:  elle  me
fembla  fort  perfuafme.  En  effet  ie  luy  fis  refponfe,
qu'il  nous  obligeoit  de  l'affection  qu'il  tefmoignoit
pour  nous,  qu'il  l'auoit  affez  faict  paroiftre  [171]  en
plufieurs  occafions;  mais  fur  tout  en  celle  cy:  que
nous  eftions  tres-contens  de  tranfporter  noflre  Caba-
ne  en  f on  Village :  qu'il  y  auoit  long  temps  que  nous
en  auions  le  deffein ;  que  nous  ne  nous  eftions  arreftez
a  Ihonatiria,  que  comme  en  vn  Village  qui  releuoit  de
luy,  &  qui  ne  faifoit  bande  a  part  que  pour  vn  temps:
mais  neantmoins  que  nous  ne  pouuions  pas  encor
nous  refoudre  a  engager  noflre  parole,  que  les  Capi-
taines  des  cinq  Villages  qui  fe  deuoient  affembler  ne
nous  promiffent  premierement  au  nom  de  tous  leurs
fuiets,  qu'ils  feroient  contens  de  receuoir  la  Foy,
croire  tout  ce  que  nous  croyons,  &  viure  comme  nous.
Ie  pris  de  la  occaffion  de  luy  repeter  quelques  prin-
cipaux  myfteres  de  noftre  Foy,  &  tafchay  fur  tout  de
luy  monftrer  quelle  facilite  ils  deuoient  auoir  en  ce
poinct,  puis  que  Dieu  ne  nous  commandoit  rien  qui
ne  fuft  tres-raifonnable,  &  qu'ils  ne  iugeaffent  eux
mefmes  par  apres  tres-aduantageux  pour  le  Pais.  II
m'ecouta  fort  attentiuement,  &  me  promit  d'en  faire
fidelement  fon  rapport  au  Confeil,  adiouftant  que  pour


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION, r636  245

That  is  the  harangue  of  this  Captain;  and,  in  my
opinion,  it  would,  if  the  subject  moved  him,  pass  in
the  judgment  of  many  for  one  of  those  of  Titus  Livi-
us;  it  seemed  to  me  very  persuasive.  In  effect,  I
replied  that  he  laid  us  under  obligations  by  the  affec-
tion he  showed  for  us,  which  he  had  made  apparent
[171]  on  several  occasions,  but  above  all  on  this  one;
that  we  were  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  idea  of  trans-
porting our  Cabin  to  his  Village;  that  we  had  in-
tended doing  this  for  a  long  time,  and  had  only
stayed  at  Ihonatiria  as  in  a  Village  which  was  depend-
ing on  him,  and  was  keeping  apart  only  for  a  time;
but,  nevertheless,  we  could  not  yet  resolve  to  pledge
our  word  unless  the  Captains  of  the  five  Villages
which  were  to  meet  would  promise  us,  in  the  first
place,  in  the  name  of  all  their  subjects,  that  they
would  be  content  to  receive  the  Faith,  to  believe  all
that  we  believe,  and  to  live  as  we  do.  I  then  took
occasion  to  repeat  to  him  a  few  of  the  principal  mys-
teries of  our  Faith,  and  tried  especially  to  show  him
how  easy  it  ought  to  be  for  them  on  this  point,  since
God  commanded  us  to  do  nothing  which  was  not
most  reasonable,  and  which  they  themselves  would
not  afterwards  consider  very  advantageous  for  the
Country.  He  listened  to  me  very  attentively,  and
promised  to  make  a  faithful  report  of  our  talk  to  the
Council, —  adding  that,  so  far  as  he  was  concerned,
he  was  of  a  mind  to  be  baptized,  and  that  all  in  his
Cabin  were  similarly  inclined.

[172]  The  Council  took  place  some  days  after;  this
Captain  was  there.  He  was  asked  what  was  the  final
sentiment  and  decision  of  the  French.  He  replied
that  we  made  some  objection.  They  asked  him  what
it  was. "  They  do  not  wish,"  he  said,  "  to  go  to  a


246  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

luy  il  eftoit  dans  la  refolution  de  fe  faire  baptifer,  &
que  toute  fa  Cabane  auoit  la  mefme  penfee.

[172]  Le  Confeil  fe  tint  quelques  iours  apres;  ce
Capitaine  s'y  trouua.  On  luy  demanda  quel  efloit
enfin  le  fentiment  &  la  refolution  des  Francois.  II
leur  repondit,  que  nous  faifions  quelque  difficulte.
lis  luy  demanderent,  quelle  difficulte  nous  pouuions
faire.  lis  ne  veulent  point,  dit-il,  fe  mettre  dans  vn
Village,  qu'ils  ne  foient  affeurez  d'auoir  affaire  a  des
perfonnes,  qui  ecouteront,  &  feront  tout  ce  qu'ils  en-
feignent.  A  cela  ils  repartirent.  Voila  qui  va  bien :
Nous  en  fommes  contens,  il  nous  enfeignera  puis
nous  ferons  tout  ce  qu'il  defirera.  En  effect  ils  creu-
rent  l'affaire  fi  bien  conclue,  qu'ils  nous  vindrent
dire  par  apres  qu'ils  venoient  querir  noftre  Cabane
pour  la  tranfporter :  mais  ce  ne  f era  pas  encor  pour
cette  annee,  la  fefte  des  Morts  a  trauerfe,  dit-on,  ce
deffein.  Cependant  ce  Capitaine  qui  eft  fi  echauffe
a  nous  auoir  auec  luy  en  ce  nouueau  Village,  voyant
que  noftre  Cabane  eftoit  quafi  inhabitable,  &  qu'il
fembloit  que  noftre  Village  fe  vouluft  diffiper:  &
craignant  que  nous  ne  priffions  party  ailleurs,  nous
vint  offrir  fa  Cabane,  a  peine  de  s'incommoder,  luy,
&  toute  fa  famille.  Neantmoins  nous  auons  iuge
plus  a  propos  de  paffer  encor  vn  [173]  Hyuer  ou  nous
fommes,  tant  pour  cultiuer  ces  nouuelles  plantes  que
nous  y  auons  acquifes  a.  noftre  Seigneur,  par  le  moy-
en  du  fainct  Baptefme ;  que  parce  que  nous  efperons
que  les  Chefs  de  ces  Villages  qui  pretendent  de
s'affembler,  &  font  maintenant  en  diuifion  auec  le
refte  du  Pays,  pourront  entre  cy  &  le  Printemps  fe
reiinir,  &  ainfi  nous  pourrons  plus  aifement  tourner
du  cofte  que  nous  iugerons  plus  a  propos  pour  la  gloire
de  Dieu,  fans  craindre  d'offenfer  perfonne. Ce  qui


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  247

Village  where  they  will  not  be  certain  of  having  to
do  with  persons  who  will  listen  to  them,  and  will  do
all  they  teach."  To  that  they  replied,  "  That  is  well,
we  are  satisfied.  He  will  teach  us,  and  we  will  do
all  he  desires."  In  short,  they  believed  the  matter
so  fully  concluded  that  they  came  to  tell  us  afterward
that  they  were  coming  for  our  Cabin  to  transport  it
there.  But  this  will  not  occur  this  year ;  the  feast  of
the  Dead,  they  say,  has  come  in  the  way  of  this  ar-
rangement. In  the  meantime,  this  Chief  who  is  so
anxious  to  have  us  with  him  in  this  new  Village,
seeing  that  our  Cabin  was  almost  uninhabitable,  and
that  our  Village  seemed  about  to  be  scattered,  and
fearing  lest  we  should  go  elsewhere,  came  to  offer
us  his  Cabin  at  the  risk  of  inconveniencing  himself
and  his  whole  family.  Nevertheless,  we  have  judged
it  best  to  pass  one  more  [173]  Winter  where  we  are, —
as  much  to  cultivate  these  new  plants  we  have  won
for  our  Lord  by  means  of  holy  Baptism,  as  because  we
hope  the  Captains  of  those  Villages  who  intend  to
come  together,  and  are  now  at  variance  with  the  rest
of  the  Country,  will  be  able  between  now  and  Spring
to  reunite,  and  thus  we  can  more  readily  take  such
action  as  we  shall  judge  most  proper  for  the  glory
of  God,  without  fear  of  offending  any  one,  which
would  be  very  difficult  in  the  present  condition  of
affairs.

This  resolution  taken,  we  were  obliged  to  think  of
repairing  and  enlarging  our  Cabin.  I  broached  the
matter  to  the  Captain  of  our  Village.  He  immedi-
ately assembled  the  Old  Men,  and  communicated  to
them  our  plan.  They  were  so  pleased  that  they  came
to  us  to  present  their  congratulations,  for  they  were


248  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  10

nous  feroit  maintenant  bien  difficile  en  l'eflat  oil  font
les  affaires.

Cette  refolution  prife  nous  a  obligez  de  penfer  a
reftablir  &  accroiftre  noftre  Cabane:  i'en  fis  ouuer-
ture  au  Capitaine  de  noftre  Village ;  il  aff embla  in-
continent les  Anciens,  &  leur  communiqua  noftre
deffein,  ils  en  furent  fL  contens,  qu'ils  nous  en  vin-
rent  faire  des  conioui'ffances ;  car  ils  craignoient  de
iour  en  iour  que  nous  ne  les  quitaffions.

Pour  les  encourager  ie  leur  fis  prefent  d'vne  dou-
zaine  de  pains  de  Petun,  &  quelques  peaux ;  ils  me
rendirentles  peaux,  difant  que  c'eftoit  aeuxanousen
donner ;  &  que  d'ailleurs  ils  nous  auoient  deja  affez
[174]  d' obligation,  que  nous  les  obligions  tous  les
iours  a  vne  infinite  d'occafions;  que  fi  quelques- vns
auoiet  befoin  d'vn  coufteau,  ou  d'vne  alaifne,  ils
n'auoient  qu'a  venir  chez  nous,  &  que  nous  les  leurs
donnions  incontinent.  Au  refte  ces  temoignages  de
bien-veillance  ne  furet  pas  feulement  des  paroles,  ils
furent  fuiuis  de  bons  effets;  ils  mirent  diligemment
la  main  a  l'ceuure,  &  trauailleret  auec  tat  d'affiduite,
qu'ils  nous  drefferent  prefque  en  trois  iours  vne  nou-
uelle  Cabane ;  auffi  persone  ne  s'y  epargna,  les  vieil-
lards  y  eftoient  les  premiers.  Quelques- vns  mefmes
s'oublians  de  leur  aage  montoient  iufques  au  haut  de
la  Cabane,  les  autres  alloient  querir  &  preparoient
force  ecorces  pour  lier,  ou  trauailloient  a  drefler  le
bas  de  la  Cabane.

La  diligence  du  Capitaine  empefcha  le  dernier  iour
quatre  d'entre  nous  de  dire  Meff e ;  cas  des  le  point
du  iour  il  fe  mit  en  befogne,  &  du  haut  de  la  Cabane
oil  il  eftoit  crioit  a  pleine  tefte,  &  inuitoit  au  trauail
toute  la  ieuneffe  qui  n'eftoit  pas  encor  bien  eueillee.
Mais  difons  vn  mot  de  leurs  Confeils.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  249

afraid from  day  to  day  that  we  were  going  to  leave
them.

To  encourage  them,  I  made  them  a  present  of  a
dozen  cakes  of  Tobacco,  and  some  skins.  They  gave
me  back  the  skins,  saying  that  it  was  their  duty  to
give  some  to  us,  and  that,  besides,  they  were  already
under  sufficient  [174]  obligation  to  us, —  that  we
helped  them  every  day,  in  an  infinite  variety  of  ways ;
that  if  any  had  need  of  a  knife,  or  an  awl,  they  had
only  to  come  to  us,  and  we  gave  them  to  them  at  once.
Moreover,  these  pledges  of  good  will  were  not  mere
words,  they  were  followed  by  good  results.  They
set  to  work  so  diligently  and  worked  with  so  much
zeal  that  they  erected  a  new  Cabin  for  us  in  less  than
three  days.  Indeed,  no  one  spared  himself;  the  old
people  were  foremost  in  the  work.  Some,  forget-
ting their  age,  even  climbed  to  the  top  of  the  Cabin ;
others  went  to  seek  and  prepare  plenty  of  bark  to  cover
it,  or  worked  at  setting  up  the  frame  thereof.

The  zeal  of  the  Captain  prevented  four  of  us  from
saying  Mass  on  the  last  day  ;  for,  as  soon  as  it  was
daylight,  he  set  himself  at  work ;  and  from  the  top
ridge  of  the  Cabin,  where  he  was,  he  shouted  as
loudly  as  he  could,  and  invited  all  the  youth  who
were  not  already  awake  to  come  and  get  to  work.
But  let  us  say  a  word  about  their  Councils.


250  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J E~  SUITES  [Vol.10


[175]  CHAPITRE  VII.

DE L'ORDRE QUE LES HURONS TIENNENT EN LEURS

CONSEILS.

IE  parleray  icy  principalement  des  Confeils  cm
Affemblees  generates,  les  particuliers  eftant
quafi  ordonnez  de  mefme  fa9on,  quoy  qu'auec
moins  d'appareil.

Ces  Affemblees  generales  font  comme  les  Eftats
de  tout  le  Pais,  &  partant  il  s'en  fait  autant,  &  non
plus  que  la  neceffite  le  requiert.  Le  lieu  d'iceux  eft
d'ordinaire  le  Village  du  principal  Capitaine  de  tout
le  Pais :  la  Chambre  de  Conf eil  eft  quelque  f ois  la
Cabane  du  Capitaine,  paree  de  nattes,  ou  ionchees  de
branches  de  Sapin,  auec  diuers  feux,  fuiuant  la  fai-
fon  de  l'annee.  Autrefois  chacun  y  apportoit  fa
bufche  pour  mettre  au  feu ;  maintenant  cela  ne  fe
pratique  plus,  les  femmes  de  la  Cabane  fupportent
cette  depenfe,  elles  font  les  feux,  &  ne  s'y  chauffent
pas,  fortant  dehors  pour  ceder  la  place  a  Meffieurs  le
Cofeillers.  Quelquefois  l'affemblee  fe  fait  au  milieu
du  Village,  fi  c'eft  en  Efte,  &  [176]  quelquefois  auffi
en  1'obfcurite  des  forefts  a  l'ecart,  quand  les  affaires
demandent  le  fecret:  le  temps  eft  pluftoft  de  nuict
que  de  iour,  ils  y  paffent  fouuent  les  nuicts  entieres.

Le  Chef  du  Confeil  eft  le  Capitaine  qui  l'affemble.
Les  affaires  s'y  decident  a  la  pluralite  des  voix,  ou
1'authorite  des  Chefs  en  attire  plufieurs  a  leur  opi-
nion :  de  fait  la  commune  facon  d'opiner  eft  de  dire


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  251


[175] CHAPTER VII.

OF THE ORDER THE HURONS OBSERVE IN THEIR

COUNCILS.

1  SHALL  speak  here  of  the  general  Councils  or
Assemblies,  the  special  ones  being  ordered  in
almost  the  same  way,  although  with  less  display.

These  general  Assemblies  are,  as  it  were,  the  States-
General  of  the  Country,  and  consequently  they
take  place  only  so  often  as  necessity  requires.  The
place  of  these  is  usually  the  Village  of  the  principal
Captain  of  the  whole  Country.  The  Council  Cham-
ber is  sometimes  the  Cabin  of  this  Captain,  adorned
with  mats,  or  strewn  with  Fir  branches,  with  several
fires,  according  to  the  season  of  the  year.  Former-
ly, each  one  brought  his  fagot  to  put  on  the  fire;  this
is  now  no  longer  the  custom,  the  women  of  the  Cabin
take  this  responsibility ;  they  make  the  fires,  but  do
not  warm  themselves  thereat,  going  outside  to  give
place  to  Messieurs  the  Councilors.  Sometimes  the
assembly  takes  place  in  the  midst  of  the  Village,  if
it  is  Summer;  and  [176]  sometimes  also  in  the  ob-
scurity of  the  forest,  apart,  when  affairs  demand  se-
crecy. The  time  is  oftener  night  than  day,  whole
nights  often  being  passed  in  council.

The  Head  of  the  Council  is  the  Captain  who  calls
it.  Matters  are  decided  by  a  plurality  of  votes,  in
which  the  authority  of  the  Captains  draws  over  many
to  their  views ;  in  fact,  the  usual  way  of  coming  to  a
decision  is  to  say  to  the  Old  Men,  Do  you  give  advice;
you  are  the  Masters.


252  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.10

aux  Anciens.  Aduifez  y  vons  aatres,  vous  ejles  les
Maijlres.

Les  gages  ordinaires  de  ces  Meffieurs  font  affignez
fur  la  force  de  leurs  bras,  fur  leur  diligence  &  bon
m6nage:  s'ils  effartent  mieux  que  les  autres,  s'ils
chaff ent  mieux,  s'ils  pefchent  mieux ;  bref  s'ils  font
heureux  a  la  traitte,  ils  font  auffi  plus  riches  qu'eux;
fmon  ils  font  les  plus  neceffiteux,  ainfi  comme  l'expe-
rience  le  fait  voir  en  quelques-vns.

Leurs  parties  cafuelles  font  premierement  les  meil-
leurs  morceaux  des  feftins,  oil  on  ne  manque  point  de
les  inuiter.  2.  Quand  quelqu'vn  fait  quelque  pre-
fent  ils  y  ont  la  meilleure  part.  3.  Quand  quelqu'vn
foit  Citoyen,  foit  Eftranger,  veut  obtenir  quelque
chofe  du  Pais,  la  coufiume  [177]  eft  de  graiffer  les
mains  des  principaux  Capitaines,  au  branle  defquels
tout  le  relte  fe  remue.  Ie  fuis  tres  affeure  de  ce  que
ie  viens  de  dire,  le  regret  que  quelques  particuliers
ont  de  femblables  defordres,  &  l'enuie  mefme  des
autres  Capitaines,  qui  ne  font  pas  appellez  au  butin,
en  decouuret  plus  qu'on  ne  defireroit;  ils  fe  decrient
les  vns  les  autres,  &  le  feul  foupcon  de  ces  prefents
fecrets  emeut  quelquefois  de  grands  debats  &  diui-
fions,  non  pas  tant  pour  le  defir  du  bien  public,  que
pour  le  regret  de  n'eftre  pas  de  la  partie;  &  cette  ia-
loufie  empefche  par  fois  de  bonnes  affaires.  Mais
venons  a  l'ordre  qu'ils  tiennent  en  leurs  Confeils.

Premierement  le  Chef  ayant  deja  confulte  en  par-
ticulier  auec  les  autres  Capitaines  &  Anciens  de  fon
Village,  &  iuge  que  l'affaire  merite  vne  affemblee
publique,  il  enuoye  conuier  au  Confeil  par  chaque
Village  autant  de  perfonnes  qu'il  defire ;  les  Meffa-
gers  font  ieunes  hommes  volontaires,  ou  aucunefois


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  253

The  usual  wages  of  these  Gentlemen  are  assigned
according  to  the  strength  of  their  arms,  to  their  zeal
and  good  management.  If  they  clear  the  ground
better  than  the  others,  hunt  better,  fish  better, — in
short,  if  they  are  successful  in  trading,  they  are  also
richer  than  the  others;  but  if  not,  they  are  the  most
necessitous,  as  experience  has  shown  in  the  cases  of
some.

The  incidental  advantages  are,  in  the  first  place,
the  best  portions  of  the  feasts,  to  which  they  are  sure
to  be  invited.  2.  When  any  one  makes  a  present,
they  get  the  best  part  of  it.  3.  When  some  one,
be  he  Citizen  or  Stranger,  wishes  to  obtain  some-
thing from  the  Country,  the  custom  [177]  is  to  grease
the  palms  of  the  principal  Captains,  at  whose  beck
and  call  all  the  rest  move.  I  am  quite  sure  of  what
I  have  just  said.  The  regret  that  some  private  in-
dividuals have  for  such  irregularities,  and  the  envy
of  the  other  Captains  who  have  not  been  called  upon
to  share  the  booty,  discourage  the  practice  more  than
they  like ;  they  decry  one  another,  and  the  mere  sus-
picion of  these  secret  presents  stirs  up  sometimes
great  debates  and  divisions, —  not  so  much  through
desire  of  the  public  good  as  from  regret  at  not  hav-
ing a  share  in  them ;  and  this  jealousy  sometimes
hinders  good  measures.  But  let  us  come  to  the  or-
der they  keep  in  their  Councils.

In  the  first  place,  the  Captain,  having  already  con-
sulted in  private  with  the  other  Captains  and  Old
Men  of  his  Village,  and  having  concluded  that  the
affair  warrants  a  public  assembly,  sends  invitations
to  the  Council,  to  as  many  persons  of  each  Village  as
he  desires.  The  Messengers  are  young  men  who
volunteer  or  sometimes  an  Old  Man,  in  order  that


254  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES  [Vol.10

vn  Ancien,  afin  que  la  femonce  foit  plus  efficace,
d'autant  qu'on  n'adioufte  pas  toufiours  foy  aux  ieunes
gens.  Ces  Meffagers  addreffent  leur  commiffion  au
principal  Capitaine  [178]  du  Village,  ou  bien  en  fon
abfence  a  celuy  qui  le  fuit  de  plus  pres  en  authorite,
defignant  le  iour  auquel  on  fe  doit  affembler.  Ces
femonces  font  des  prieres,  non  pas  des  commande-
mens,  &  partant  quelques-vns  s'excufent  tout  a  fait,
d'autres  dilayent  a  partir;  d'ou.  vient  que  ces  affem-
blees  font  quelquefois  longues,  car  ils  ne  fe  mettent
pas  volontiers  en  chemin  auec  le  mauuais  temps,  &
certainement  ils  ont  encor  affez  de  peine  de  venir  a
beau  pied  par  fois  de  dix  &  douze  lieues,  &  ce  en
Hyuer  &  fur  les  neiges.

Tous  eflans  arriuez,  ils  prennent  feance  chacun  en
fon  quartier  de  la  Cabane ;  ceux  d'vn  mefme  Village
ou  mefme  Nation  proche  l'vn  de  l'autre,  afin  de  con-
fulter  par  enfemble :  fi  d'auenture  quelqu'vn  maque,
on  met  en  queftion,  fi  nonobftant  fon  abfence  cette
affemblee  feroit  legitime,  &  quelquefois  faute  d'vne
ou  de  deux  perfonnes  toute  l'affemblee  fe  diffout,  &
fe  remet  a  vne  autre  fois.  Que  fi  tous  font  affem-
blez,  ou  que  nonobftant  ils  iugent  deuoir  paffer  outre,
alors  on  donne  ouuerture  au  Confeil.  Ce  ne  font  pas
touiours  les  Chefs  du  Confeil  qui  la  font,  la  difficulte
de  parler,  leur  indifpofition,  [179]  ou  mefme  leur
grauite  les  en  difpenfe.

Apres  les  falutations,  les  remerciemens  de  la  peine
qu'ils  ont  prife  a  venir,  les  actions  de  graces  rendues
ie  ne  fcay  a  qui,  de  ce  que  tout  le  monde  eft  arriue
fans  fortune,  que  perfonne  n'a  efte  furpris  des  enne-
mis,  n'eft  point  tombe  en  quelque  ruiffeau  ou  Riuiere,
ou  ne  s'eft  point  bleff£;  bref  de  ce  que  tous  font  arri-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  255

the  summons  may  be  more  efficacious,  inasmuch  as
they  do  not  always  put  faith  in  young  people.  These
Messengers  address  their  errand  to  the  principal  Cap-
tain [178]  of  the  Village,  or,  in  his  absence,  to  the
one  who  is  nearest  him  in  authority,  stating  the  day
on  which  they  are  to  assemble.  These  summons  are
entreaties,  not  commands,  and  accordingly  some  ex-
cuse themselves  entirely,  others  delay  setting  out;
whence  it  happens  that  these  assemblies  are  some-
times tedious,  for  they  do  not  like  to  set  out  in  bad
weather,  and  certainly  they  have  enough  difficulty  in
sometimes  coming  ten  or  twelve  leagues  on  foot,  and
this  in  Winter  and  over  the  snow.

All  having  arrived,  they  take  their  seats  each  in
his  own  quarter  of  the  Cabin,  those  of  the  same  Vil-
lage or  of  the  same  Nation  near  one  another,  in  order
to  consult  together.  If  by  chance  some  one  is  ab-
sent, the  question  is  raised  whether,  notwithstand-
ing this,  the  assembly  would  be  legitimate  ;  and  some-
times, from  the  absence  of  one  or  two  persons,  the
whole  gathering  is  dissolved,  and  adjourns  until  an-
other time.  But  if  all  are  gathered,  or  if,  notwith-
standing, they  think  it  their  duty  to  go  on,  the  Coun-
cil is  opened.  It  is  not  always  the  Leaders  of  the
Council  who  do  this ;  difficulty  in  speaking,  unwill-
ingness, [179]  or  even  their  dignity  dispenses  them
from  it.

After  salutations,  thanks  for  the  trouble  taken  in
coming,  thanksgivings  rendered,  I  know  not  to  whom,
that  every  one  has  arrived  without  accident,  that  no
one  has  been  surprised  by  enemies,  nor  has  fallen
into  any  stream  or  River,  nor  has  been  injured, — in
brief,  that  every  one  has  arrived  happily,  all  are  ex-
horted to  deliberate  maturely. Then  the  affair  to  be


256  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

uez  heureuf ement ;  on  exhorte  tout  le  monde  a  deli-
berer  meurement :  en  apres  on  propofe  l'affaire  dont
il  eft  queftion,  &  dit  on  a  Meffieurs  les  Confeillers
qu'ils  y  aduifent.

C'eft  alors  que  les  Deputez  de  chaque  Village,  ou
ceux  d'vne  mefme  Nation  confultent  tout  bas  ce  qu'ils
doiuent  refpondre.  Lors  qu'ils  ont  bien  confulte  par
enfemble  ils  opinent  par  ordre,  &  s'arreftent  a  la  plu-
rality des  opinions,  ou  plufieurs  chofes  font  dignes  de
remarque.  La  premiere  eft  en  la  maniere  de  parler,
laquelle  a  caufe  de  fa  diuerfite  a  vn  nom  different,  &
s'appelle  acXentonch;  elle  eft  commune  a  tous  les
Sauuages ;  ils  hauffent  &  flechiff ent  la  voix  comme
d'vn  ton  de  Predicateur  a  l'antique,  mais  lentement,
pof ement,  diftinctement,  mefmes  [180]  repetant  vne
mefme  raifon  plufieurs  fois.  La  feconde  chofe  remar-
quable  eft,  que  les  opinans  reprennent  fommaire-
ment  la  propofition,  &  toutes  les  raifons  qu'on  a
alleguees  auant  que  dire  leur  aduis.

Fay  autrefois  ouy  dire  a  quelque  Truchement,
que  ces  Nations  icy  auoient  vn  langage  particulier  en
leurs  Conseils;  mais  i'ay  experimente  le  contraire:
ie  fcay  bien  qu'ils  ont  quelques  termes  particuliers,
ainfi  qu'on  a  en  toutes  fortes  d'arts,  &  de  fciences,
comme  au  Palais,  aux  Efcoles,  &  ailleurs.  II  eft
vray  que  leurs  difcours  font  d'abord  difficiles  a  en-
tendre, a  caufe  d'vne  infinite  de  Metaphores,  de  plu-
fieurs circonlocutions,  &  autres  facons  figurees:  par
exemple  parlant  de  la  Nation  des  Ours,  ils  diront,
1'Ours  a  dit,  a  fait  cela;  l'Ours  eft  fin,  eft  mefchant;
les  mains  de  l'Ours  font  dangereufes:  quand  ils  par-
lent  de  celuy  qui  fait  le  feflin  des  Morts,  ils  difent,
celuy  qui  mange  les  ames:  quand  ilsparlent d'vne


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  257

discussed is brought forward, and Messieurs the
Councilors  are  asked  to  give  their  advice.

At  this  point  the  Deputies  of  each  Village,  or  those
of  one  Nation,  consult  in  a  low  tone  as  to  what  they
will  reply.  Then,  when  they  have  consulted  well
together,  they  give  their  opinions  in  order,  and  decide
according  to  the  plurality  of  opinions,  in  which
course  there  are  some  things  worthy  of  remark.  The
first  is  in  the  manner  of  speaking,  which,  on  account
of  its  unlikeness  [to  common  speech],  has  a  different
name  and  is  called  acwentonck;  it  is  common  to  all
Savages;  they  raise  and  quaver  the  voice,  like  the
tones  of  a  Preacher  in  olden  times,  but  slowly,  decid-
edly, distinctly,  even  [180]  repeating  the  same  rea-
son several  times.  The  second  remarkable  thing  is,
that  the  persons  giving  their  opinions  go  summarily
over  the  proposition  and  all  the  considerations
brought  forward,  before  giving  their  advice.

I  once  heard  it  said  by  some  Interpreter,  that  these
Nations  had  a  private  language  in  their  Councils;
but  I  have  learned  by  experience  that  this  is  not  so.
I  know  well  that  they  have  some  private  terms,  as
there  are  in  all  kinds  of  arts  and  sciences,  as  in  the
Palace,  the  Schools  and  elsewhere.  It  is  true  that
their  speeches  are  at  first  very  difficult  to  understand,
on  account  of  an  infinity  of  Metaphors,  of  various  cir-
cumlocutions, and  other  rhetorical  methods:  for  ex-
ample, speaking  of  the  Nation  of  the  Bear  they  will
say,  "the  Bear  has  said,  has  done  so  and  so;  the
Bear  is  cunning,  is  bad ;  the  hands  of  the  Bear  are
dangerous."  When  they  speak  of  him  who  con-
ducts the  feast  of  the  Dead,  they  say  "  he  who  eats
souls;  "  when  they  speak  of  a  Nation,  they  often  name
only  the  principal  Captain, —  thus,  speaking  of  the


258  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

Nation,  ils  n'en  nomment  fouuent  que  le  principal
Capitaine :  comme  parlant  des  Montagnets,  ils  diront,
A tfirond  dit:  c'eft  le  nom  d'vn  des  Capitaines.  Bref,
c'eft.  en  ces  lieux  ou.  ils  releuet  leur  ftile,  &  tafchet
[181]  de  bien  dire.  Quafi  tous  ces  efprits  font  natu-
rellemet  d'vne  affez  bonne  trempe,  ratiocinent  fort
bien,  &  ne  bronchent  point  en  leurs  difcours ;  auffi
font-ils  eftat  de  fe  mocquer  de  ceux  qui  bronchent:
quelques  vns  femblent  eftre  nes  a  l'eloquence.

3.  Apres  que  quelqu'vn  a  opine,  le  Chef  du  Con-
feil  repete,  ou  fait  repeter  ce  qu'il  a  dit:  de  forte  que
les  chofes  ne  peuuent  qu'elles  ne  foient  bien  enten-
dues  eftans  tant  de  fois  rebatues.  Ce  qui  m'arriua
fort  heureufement  au  Confeil  dont  ie  vous  ay  parle,
oil  ie  leur  fis  vn  prefent  pour  les  encourager  a  pren-
dre le  chemin  &  la  route  du  Ciel ;  car  vn  des  Capi-
taines repeta  fort  heureufement  tout  ce  que  i'auois
dit,  &  le  dilata,  &  amplifia  mieux  que  ie  n'auois  fait,
&  en  meilleurs  termes ;  car  en  eff et  dans  le  peu  de
cognoiffance  que  nous  auons  de  cette  Langue,  nous
ne  difons  pas  ce  que  nous  voulons,  mais  ce  que  nous
pouuons.

4.  Chacu  coclud  fon  aduis  en  ces  termes,  Con-
day  aucndi  Ierliayde  cha  nonhSicttahachen;  c'eft  a  dire,
Voila  ma  pefee  touchat  le  fuiet  de  noftre  Con-
feil: puis  toute  l'Affemblee  repond  par  vne  forte  re-
fpiratio  tiree  [182]  du  creux  de  l'eftomach,  Haau.
I'ay  remarque  que  quand  quelqu'vn  a  parle  au  gre,
ce  Haau  fe  tire  auec  beaucoup  plus  d' effort.

La  cinquieme  chofe  remarquable  elt  leur  grande
prudence  &  moderation  de  paroles:  ie  n'oferois  pas
dire  qu'ils  vfent  toufiours  de  cette  retenue,  car  ie  fgay
que  quelquefois  il  fe  picquent ;  mais  cependant  vous


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  259


Montagnets,  they  will  say,  "  Atsirond  says:"  this  is
the  name  of  one  of  their  Captains.  In  short,  it  is  in
these  places  they  dignify  their  style  of  language,
and  try  [181]  to  speak  well.  Almost  all  their  minds
are  naturally  of  very  good  quality ;  they  reason  very
clearly,  and  do  not  stumble  in  their  speeches ;  and  so
they  make  a  point  of  mocking  those  who  trip ;  some
seem  to  be  born  orators.

3.  After  some  one  has  given  his  opinion  the  Head
of  the  Council  repeats,  or  causes  to  be  repeated,  what
he  has  said ;  consequently,  matters  must  be  clearly
understood,  so  often  are  they  repeated.  This  was
very  fortunate  for  me,  at  the  Council  of  which  I
have  spoken  to  you,  where  I  made  them  a  present  to
encourage  them  to  take  the  road  to  Heaven ;  for  one
of  the  Captains  felicitously  repeated  all  that  I  had
said,  and  dilated  upon  it  and  amplified  it  better  than
I  had  done,  and  in  better  terms;  for,  in  truth,  owing
to  our  limited  knowledge  of  the  Language,  we  say
not  what  we  wish,  but  what  we  can.

4.  Each  one  ends  his  advice  in  these  terms,  Con-
dayauendi  Ierhayde  cha  nonhwicwahachen:  that  is  to
say,  "  That  is  my  thought  on  the  subject  under  Dis-
cussion:" then  the  whole  Assembly  responds  with  a
very  strong  respiration  drawn  [182]  from  the  pit  of
the  stomach,  Haau.  I  have  noticed  that  when  any
one  has  spoken  to  their  liking,  this  Haau  is  given
forth  with  much  more  effort.

The  fifth  remarkable  thing  is  their  great  prudence
and  moderation  of  speech ;  I  would  not  dare  to  say
they  always  use  this  self-restraint,  for  I  know  that
sometimes  they  sting  each  other, —  but  yet  you  always
remark  a  singular  gentleness  and  discretion.  I  have
scarcely  ever  been  present  at  their  Councils;  but,


260  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.10

remarquez  toufiours  vne  fmguliere  douceur  &  difcre-
tion.  Ie  n'ay  gueres  affifte  en  leurs  Confeils,  mais
toutes  les  fois  qu'ils  m'y  ont  inuite  i'en  fuis  forty  auec
eftonnement  fur  ce  poinct.

Vn  iour  ie  vis  vn  debat  pour  la  prefeance  entre
deux  Capitaines  de  guerre :  vn  Vieillard  qui  efpou-
foit  le  party  de  l'vn,  dit  qu'il  eftoit  fur  le  bord  de  fa
foffe,  &  que  parauenture  le  lendemain  fon  corps  fe-
roit  place  dans  le  Cimetiere ;  mais  cependant  qu'il
diroit  ingenuement  ce  qu'il  croyoit  eftre  de  iuftice,
non  pour  aucun  intereft  qu'il  y  euft,  mais  pour  l'a-
mour  de  la  verite:  ce  qu'il  fit  auec  ardeur,  quoy
qu'affaifonnee  de  difcretion.  Et  lors  vn  autre  An-
cien  reprenant  la  parole  le  reprit,  &  luy  dit  fort  a
propos:  Ne  parle  point  maintenant  de  ces  chofes,  ce
n'eneftpas  [183]  lafaifon;  voila  l'ennemy  qui  nous  va
affieger,  il  eft  queftion  de  nous  armer,  &  de  fortifier
vnanimement  nos  palliffades,  &  non  pas  de  difputer
des  rangs.  Sur  tout  ie  fus  eftonne  de  la  fage  conduite
d'vn  autre  Confeil,  ou  i'affiftay,  qui  fembloit  eftre
confit  en  humeur  condefcendante  &  belles  paroles,
nonobftant  l'importance  des  affaires  dont  il  s'agiifoit.

Ce  Confeil  eftoit  l'vn  des  plus  importans  que  les
Hurons  ayent:  fcauoir  de  leur  fefte  des  Morts:  ils
n'ont  rien  de  plus  facr6:  la  chofe  eftoit  fort  chatoiiil-
leufe ;  car  il  s'agiffoit  de  faire  que  tout  le  Pais  mit
fes  morts  en  vne  mefme  foffe,  fuiuant  leur  couftume:
&  cependant  il  y  auoit  quelques  Villages  mutinez  qui
vouloient  faire  bande  a  part,  non  fans  vn  regret  de
tout  le  Pais.  Cependant  la  chofe  fe  paffa  auec  toute
la  douceur  &  paix  imaginable :  a  tous  coups  les
Maiftres  de  la  Fefte  qui  auoient  affemble  le  Confeil
exhortoient  a  la  douceur,  difant  que  c'eftoit  vn  Con-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  261

every  time  I  have  been  invited,  I  have  come  out  from
them  astonished  at  this  feature.

One  day  I  saw  a  debate  for  precedence  between
two  war  Captains:  An  Old  Man  who  espoused  the
side  of  one,  said  that  he  was  on  the  edge  of  the  grave,
and  that  perhaps  on  the  morrow  his  body  would  be
placed  in  the  Cemetery ;  but  yet  he  would  say  frank-
ly what  he  believed  to  be  justice,  not  for  any  interest
he  had  in  the  matter,  but  from  love  of  truth :  which
he  did  with  ardor,  though  seasoned  with  discretion.
Then  another  Old  Man,  beginning  to  speak,  replied
to  him  and  said,  very  properly:  "  Do  not  speak  now
of  those  things,  this  is  no  [183]  time  for  them;  see
the  enemy,  who  is  going  to  attack  us;  the  question
is  one  of  arming  ourselves  and  fortifying  with  one
mind  our  palisades,  and  not  of  disputing  about  rank."
I  was  particularly  astonished  at  the  wise  conduct  of
another  Council,  at  which  I  was  present,  which
seemed  to  be  steeped  in  a  condescending  humor  and
fine  words,  notwithstanding  the  importance  of  the
questions  discussed.

This  Council  was  one  of  the  most  important  that
the  Hurons  have :  to  wit,  concerning  their  feast  of
the  Dead:  they  have  nothing  more  sacred.  The
question  was  a  very  delicate  one,  for  the  matter  dis-
cussed was  whether  the  whole  Country  should  put
their  dead  in  the  same  grave,  according  to  their  cus-
tom ;  and  yet  there  were  some  discontented  Villages,
who  wished  to  remain  apart,  not  without  the  regret
of  the  whole  Country.  Yet  the  thing  passed  over
with  all  the  gentleness  and  peace  imaginable:  at
every  turn  the  Masters  of  the  Feast,  who  had  as-
sembled the  Council,  exhorted  to  gentleness,  saying
that  it was  a Council of peace. They  call these


262  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  £  SUITES [Vol.10

feil  de  paix.  lis  nomment  ces  Confeils,  Endionraon-
daonc,  comme  fi  on  difoit,  Confeil  egal  &  facile  comme
les  plaines  &  rafes  campagnes.  Quoy  que  diffent  les
opinas,  les  Chefs  du  Confeil  ne  faifoient  que  [184]
dire,  Voila  qui  va  bien.  Les  mutins  excufoient  leur
diuifion,  difant  qu'il  n'en  pouuoit  arriuer  du  mal  au
Pais :  que  par  le  pafTe  il  y  auoit  eu  de  f emblables  diui-
fions,  qui  ne  l'auoient  pas  ruine.  Les  autres  addou-
ciffoient  les  affaires,  difans  que  fi  quelqu'vn  des  leurs
s'egaroit  du  vray  chemin,  il  ne  falloit  pas  inconti-
nent l'abandonner ;  que  les  freres  auoient  par  fois  des
riotes  par  enfemble.  Bref,  c'efloit  chofe  digne
d'eftonnement  de  voir  dans  des  cceurs  aigris  vne  telle
moderation  de  paroles. Voila  pour  leurs  Confeils.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  263

Councils,  Endionraondaont ',  as  if  one  should  say,  "  A
Council  even  and  easy,  like  the  level  and  reaped
fields."  Whatever  the  speakers  say,  the  Leaders  of
the  Council  always  say  only  this,  [184]  "  That  is  very
well."  The  mutinous  persons  excused  their  divi-
sion, saying  that  no  evil  could  arise  therefrom  to  the
Country ;  that  in  the  past  there  had  been  similar  divi-
sions, which  had  not  ruined  it.  The  others  softened
matters,  saying  that,  if  one  of  their  friends  went
astray  from  the  true  road,  they  must  not  immediately
abandon  him ;  that  brothers  sometimes  had  quarrels
with  each  other.  In  short,  it  was  a  matter  for  great
astonishment  to  see  in  these  embittered  hearts  such
moderation  of  words. So  much  for  their  Councils.


264  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10


CHAPITRE  VIII.

DES CEREMONIES QU'lLS GARDENT EN LEUR SEPUL-
TURE, & DE LEUR DUEIL.

NOS  Satmages  ne  font  point  Sauuages  en  ce  qui
regarde  les  deuoirs,  que  la  Nature  mefme  nous
oblige  de  rendre  aux  morts:  ils  ne  cedent
point  en  cecy  a  plufieurs  Nations  beaucoup  mieux
policees.  Vous  diriez  que  toutes  leurs  fueurs,  leurs
trauaux,  &  leurs  traittes,  ne  fe  rapportent  quafi  qu'a
amaffer  dequoy  [185]  honorer  les  Morts;  ils  n'ont
rien  d'affez  precieux  pour  cet  effet;  ils  proftituent
les  robbes,  les  haches,  &  la  Pourcelaine  en  telle  quan-
tite,  que  vous  iugeriez  a  les  voir  en  ces  occafions,
qu'ils  n'en  font  aucun  eftat,  &  toutefois  ce  font  toutes
les  richeffes  du  Pais ;  vous  les  verrez  fouuent  en  plein
hyuer  quafi  tous  nuds,  pendant  qu'ils  ont  de  belles  &
bonnes  robbes  en  leurs  quaiffes  qu'ils  mettent  en  re-
ferue  pour  les  Morts ;  auffi  eft-ce  la  leur  point  d'hon-
neur.  C'eft  en  cette  occafion  qu'ils  veulent  fur  tout
paroiftre  magnifiques.  Mais  ie  ne  parle  icy  que  de
leurs  funerailles  particulieres.  Ces  bonnes  gens  ne
font  pas  comme  beaucoup  de  Chreftiens,  qui  ne  peu-
uent  fouffrir  qu'on  leur  parle  de  la  mort,  &  qui  dans
vne  maladie  mortelle,  vous  mettent  en  peine  toute
vne  maifon  pour  trouuer  moyen  de  faire  porter  cette
nouuelle  au  malade,  fans  le  faire  mourir  par  auance.
Icy  quand  on  defefpere  de  la  fante  de  quelques-vns,
non  feulement  on  ne  fait  point  de  difficulte  de  leur


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63b  265


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF THE CEREMONIES THEY OBSERVE IN THEIR
BURIALS AND MOURNING.

OUR  Savages  are  not  Savages  as  regards  the  du-
ties that  Nature  itself  constrains  us  to  render
to  the  dead ;  they  do  not  yield  in  this  re-
spect to  many  Nations  much  more  civilized.  You
might  say  that  all  their  exertions,  their  labors,  and
their  trading,  concern  almost  entirely  the  amassing
of  something  with  which  [185]  to  honor  the  Dead.
They  have  nothing  sufficiently  precious  for  this  pur-
pose ;  they  lavish  robes,  axes,  and  Porcelain  in  such
quantities  that,  to  see  them  on  such  occasions,  you
would  judge  that  they  place  no  value  upon  them ;
and  yet  these  are  the  whole  riches  of  the  Country.
You  will  see  them  often,  in  the  depth  of  winter,  al-
most entirely  naked,  while  they  have  handsome  and
valuable  robes  in  store,  that  they  keep  in  reserve  for
the  Dead ;  for  this  is  their  point  of  honor.  It  is  on
such  occasions  they  wish  above  all  to  appear  magnifi-
cent. But  I  am  speaking  here  only  of  their  private
funerals.  These  simple  people  are  not  like  so  many
Christians,  who  cannot  endure  that  any  one  should
speak  to  them  about  death,  and  who  in  a  mortal  sick-
ness put  a  whole  house  to  trouble  to  find  means  of
breaking  the  news  to  the  sick  man  without  hastening
his  death.  Here  when  any  one's  health  is  despaired
of,  not  only  do  they  make  no  difficulty  in  telling  him
that  his  life  is  near  its  close,  but  they  even  prepare


266  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

dire,  que  c'eft  fait  de  leur  vie ;  mais  mefme  on  pre-
pare en  leur  prefence  tout  ce  qui  eft  neceffaire  pour
leur  fepulture:  on  leur  monftre  fouuent  la  robbe,  les
chauffes,  les  fouliers,  fi86]  &  la  ceinture  qu'ils  doi-
u'ent  emporter ;  fouuent  on  les  enfeuelit  a  leur  mode
auat  qu'ils  ayet  expire,  ils  font  leur  feftin  d'adieu  a
leurs  amis,  ou  ils  chantent  quelquefois  fans  moftrer
aucune  apprehenfio  de  la  mort,  qu'ils  regardent  fort
indifferemment,  ne  fe  la  figurant  que  come  vn  paffage
a  vne  vie  fort  peu  differete  de  celle  cy.  Auffi-toft
que  le  malade  a  rendu  le  dernier  foufpir,  ils  le  met-
tent  en  l'eftat  qu'il  doit  eftre  dans  le  tombeau,  ils  ne
l'etendet  pas  de  fon  long  come  nous  faifons ;  mais  ils
le  mettent  en  peloton,  quafi  en  la  mefme  poflure  que
les  enfans  font  au  vetre  de  la  mere.  Iufques  la  ils
tiennent  la  bonde  de  leurs  larmes.  Apres  luy  auoir
rendu  ces  deuoirs,  toute  la  Cabane  commence  a  reten-
tir  de  foufpirs,  de  gemiffemens,  &  de  plaintes,  les
enfans  crient  Aijlan,  fi  c'eft  leur  pere,  &  la  mere
Aien,  Aien\  mon  fils,  mon  fils.  Qui  ne  les  verroit
tout  baignez  de  leurs  larmes,  iugeroit  a  les  entendre,
que  ce  ne  font  que  pleurs  de  ceremonies;  ils  fle-
chiffent  leurs  voix  tous  d'vn  mefme  accord,  &  en  vn
ton  lugubre,  iufques  a  ce  que  quelque  perfonne  d'au-
thorite  fafle  le  hola ;  en  mefme  temps  ils  s'arreftent,
le  Capitaine  s'en  va  promptement  [187]  paries  Ca-
banes  aduertir  qu'vn  tel  eft  mort.  A  l'arriuee  des
amis  ils  recommencent  de  nouueau  a  pleurer,  &  fe
plaindre.  Souuent  quelqu'vn  des  plus  confiderables
prendra  la  parole,  &  confolera  la  mere  &  les  enfans,
tantoft  s'etendant  fur  les  loiianges  du  defunct,  loiiant
fa  patience,  fa  debonnairete,  fa  liberalite,  fa  magni-
ficence, &  s'il  eftoit  guerrier,  la  grandeur  de  fon  cou-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  267

in  his  presence  all  that  is  needed  for  his  burial ;  they
often  show  him  the  robe,  the  stockings,  the  shoes,
[186]  and  the  belt  which  he  is  to  wear.  Frequently
they  are  prepared  after  their  fashion  for  burial,  be-
fore they  have  expired;  they  make  their  farewell
feast  to  their  friends,  at  which  they  sometimes  sing
without  showing  any  dread  of  death,  which  they  re-
gard with  very  little  concern,  considering  it  only  as
the  passage  to  a  life  differing  very  little  from  this.
As  soon  as  the  sick  man  has  drawn  his  last  breath,
they  place  him  in  the  position  in  which  he  is  to  be  in
the  grave ;  they  do  not  stretch  him  at  length  as  we
do,  but  place  him  in  a  crouching  posture,  almost  the
same  that  a  child  has  in  its  mother's  womb.  Thus
far,  they  restrain  their  tears.  After  having  per-
formed these  duties  the  whole  Cabin  begins  to  re-
sound with  cries,  groans,  and  wails;  the  children  cry
Aistan,  if  it  be  their  father;  and  the  mother,  Aien,
A  ten,  "  My  son,  my  son."  Any  one  who  did  not  see
them,  quite  bathed  in  their  tears,  would  judge,  to
hear  them,  that  these  are  only  ceremonial  tears;  they
make  their  voices  tremble  all  with  one  accord,  and
in  a  lugubrious  tone,  until  some  person  of  authority
makes  them  stop.  As  soon  as  they  cease,  the  Cap-
tain goes  promptly  [187]  through  the  Cabins,  mak-
ing known  that  such  and  such  a  one  is  dead.  On  the
arrival  of  friends,  they  begin  anew  to  weep  and  com-
plain. Frequently  some  one  of  importance  begins
to  speak,  and  consoles  the  mother  and  the  children, —
at  times  launching  into  praises  of  the  deceased,  laud-
ing his  patience,  his  good-nature,  his  liberality,  his
magnificence,  and,  if  he  were  a  warrior,  the  great-
ness of  his  courage;  at  times  he  will  say,  "What
would  you  have?  there  was  no  longer  any  remedy,


268  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

rage :  Tantoft  il  dira,  Que  voulez-vous,  il  n'y  a  plus
de  remede,  il  falloit  bien  qu'il  mouruft,  Nous  fommes
tous  fujets  a  la  mort,  Et  puis  il  y  auoit  trop  long
temps  qu'il  trainoit,  &c.  II  eft  vray  qu'en  cette  occa-
fion,  ils  ne  manquent  point  de  difcours.  Ie  me  fuis
quelquefois  eftonne  de  les  voir  long  temps  fur  ce  pro-
pos,  &  apporter  auec  tant  de  difcretion,  toutes  les
confiderations  capables  de  donner  quelque  confolation
aux  parens  du  defunct.

On  enuoye  auffi  donner  auis  de  cette  mort  aux  amis
qui  demeurent  es  autres  Villages;  &  comme  chaque
famille  en  a  vn  autre  qui  a  le  foin  de  fes  Morts,  ceux-
la  viennent  au  pluftoft  pour  donner  ordre  a  tout,  &
determiner  le  iour  des  funerailles:  d'ordinaire  ils  en-
terrent  les  Morts  [i 88]  le  troifieme  iour;  &  des  le
matin  la  Capitaine  donne  ordre  que  par  tout  le  Vil-
lage on  faffe  chaudiere  pour  le  mort.  Perfonne  n'£-
pargne  ce  qu'il  a  de  meilleur.  Ils  font  cecy  a  mon
auis  pour  trois  raifons.  Premierement  pour  fe  con-
foler  les  vns  les  autres,  car  ils  s'entr'enuoyent  des
plats,  &  quafi  perfonne  ne  mange  de  la  chaudiere
qu'il  a  preparee.  Secondement,  a  l'occafion  de  ceux
des  autres  Villages,  qui  viennent  fouuent  en  affez
bon  nombre.  Tiercement,  &  principalement  pour
obliger  l'ame  du  defunct,  qu'ils  croyent  y  predre
plaifir,  &  en  mager  fa  part.  Toutes  les  chaudieres
eftant  vuidees,  ou  au  moins  diftribuees,  le  Capitaine
publie  par  le  Village,  que  Ton  va  porter  le  mort  au
Cimetiere.  Tout  le  Village  s'affemble  en  la  Cabane;
on  renouuelle  les  pleurs,  &  ceux  qui  ont  foin  des  fune-
railles appreftet  vn  brancard,  ou  le  mort  eft  couche
fur  vne  natte,  &  enueloppe  d'vne  robbe  de  Caftor,  &
puis  ils  le  leuent  &  le  portent  a  quatre :  tout  le  Vil-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  269

he  must  indeed  die,  we  are  all  subject  to  death,  and
then  he  dragged  on  too  long,"  etc.  It  is  true  that,
on  such  occasions,  they  are  never  lacking  in  speech.
I  have  sometimes  been  surprised  to  see  them  dwell-
ing a  long  time  on  this  subject,  and  bringing  for-
ward, with  much  discretion,  every  consideration
that  might  give  consolation  to  the  relatives  of  the
deceased.

Word  of  the  death  is  also  sent  to  the  friends  who
live  in  the  other  Villages ;  and,  as  each  family  has
some  one  who  takes  care  of  its  Dead,  these  latter
come  as  soon  as  possible  to  take  charge  of  every-
thing, and  determine  the  day  of  the  funeral.  Usually
they  inter  the  Dead  [188]  on  the  third  day;  as  soon
as  it  is  light,  the  Captain  gives  orders  that  through-
out the  whole  Village  a  feast  be  made  for  the  dead.
No  one  spares  what  he  has  of  the  best.  They  do
this,  in  my  opinion,  for  three  reasons:  First,  to  con-
sole one  another,  for  they  exchange  dishes,  and  hard-
ly any  one  eats  any  of  the  feast  he  has  prepared  ;
secondly,  on  account  of  those  of  other  Villages,  who
often  come  in  great  numbers.  Thirdly,  and  princi-
pally, to  serve  the  soul  of  the  deceased,  which  they
believe  takes  pleasure  in  the  feast,  and  in  eating  its
share.  All  the  kettles  being  emptied,  or  at  least  dis-
tributed, the  Captain  publishes  throughout  the  Vil-
lage that  the  body  is  about  to  be  borne  to  the  Ceme-
tery. The  whole  Village  assembles  in  the  Cabin ;
the  weeping  is  renewed ;  and  those  who  have  charge
of  the  ceremonies  get  ready  a  litter  on  which  the
corpse  is  placed  on  a  mat  and  enveloped  in  a  Beaver
robe,  and  then  four  lift  and  carry  it  away;  the  whole
Village  follows  in  silence  to  the  Cemetery.  A  Tomb
is  there,  made  of  bark  and  supported  on  four  stakes,


270  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

lage  fuit  en  filence  mfques  au  Cimetiere.  II  y  a  la
vn  Tombeau  fait  d'ecorce  &  drefTe  fur  quatre  pieux
d'enuiron  huit  a  dix  pieds  de  haut.  Cependant  que
Ton  y  accommode  le  [189]  mort,  &  qu'on  agence  les
ecorces,  le  Capitaine  publie  les  prefens  qui  ont  efte
faits  par  les  amis.  En  ce  Pais  auiTi  bien  qu'ailleurs
les  confolations  les  plus  agreables  dans  la  perte  des
pares  font  toufiours  accompagnez  de  prefens,  qui  font
chaudieres,  haches,  robes  de  Caftor,  &  colliers  de
Pourcelaine.  Si  le  defunct  eftoit  en  quelque  confide-
ration  dans  le  Pais,  non  feulement  les  amis  &  les  voi-
fms,  mais  mefmes  les  Capitaines  des  autres  Villages
viendront  en  perfonne  apporter  leurs  prefens.  Or
tous  ces  prefens  ne  fuiuent  pas  le  mort  dans  le  tom-
beau :  on  luy  mettra  quelquefois  au  col  vn  collier  de
Pourcelaine,  &  aupres  de  luy  vn  peigne,  vne  courge
pleine  d'huile,  &  deux  ou  trois  petits  pains:  voila
tout.  Vne  grande  partie  s'en  va  aux  parens  pour
effuyer  leurs  larmes :  l'autre  partie  fe  donne  a  ceux
qui  ont  donne  ordre  aux  funerailles  pour  recompenfe
de  leur  peine.  On  met  auffi  fouuent  en  referue  quel-
ques  robes,  ou  quelques  haches  pour  faire  largelle  a
la  Ieuneffe.  Et  le  Capitaine  met  entre  les  mains  de
quelqu'vn  d'entre  eux  vn  bafton  d'enuiron  vn  pied,
propofant  vn  prix  a  celuy  qui  le  luy  oitera.  lis  fe
iettent  [190]  deffus  en  troupe  a  corps  perdu,  &  de-
meurent  quelquefois  vne  heure  entiere  aux  prifes.
Cela  fait  chacun  s'en  retourne  paifiblement  en  fa
Cabane.

Ie  m'eftois  oublie"  de  dire  que  d'ordinaire  pendant
toute  cette  ceremonie  la  mere  ou  la  f emme  feront  aux
pieds  du  tombeau  appellant  le  defunct  en  chantant,
ou  pluftoft  en  fe  plaignant  d'vn  ton  lugubre.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  271

eight  to  ten  feet  high.  However,  before  the  corpse
is  put  into  it,  [189]  and  before  they  arrange  the  bark,
the  Captain  makes  known  the  presents  that  have
been  given  by  the  friends.  In  this  Country,  as  well
as  elsewhere,  the  most  agreeable  consolations  for  the
loss  of  friends  are  always  accompanied  by  presents,
such  as  kettles,  axes,  Beaver  robes,  and  Porcelain
collars.  If  the  deceased  was  a  person  of  importance
in  the  Country,  not  only  the  friends  and  neighbors,
but  even  the  Captains  of  other  Villages,  will  come  in
person  and  bring  their  presents.  Now  all  the  pres-
ents do  not  follow  the  dead  man  into  the  grave;
sometimes  a  Porcelain  collar  is  put  around  his  neck,
and  near  by  a  comb,  a  gourd  full  of  oil,  and  two  or
three  little  loaves  of  bread;  and  that  is  all.  A  large
share  goes  to  the  relatives,  to  dry  their  tears;  the
other  share  goes  to  those  who  have  directed  the  fu-
neral ceremonies,  as  a  reward  for  their  trouble.
Some  robes,  also,  are  frequently  laid  aside,  or  some
hatchets,  as  a  gift  for  the  Youth.  The  Chief  puts
into  the  hand  of  some  one  of  the  latter  a  stick  about
a  foot  long,  offering  a  prize  to  the  one  who  will  take
it  away  from  him.  They  throw  themselves  [190]
upon  him  in  a  body,  with  might  and  main,  and  re-
main sometimes  a  whole  hour  struggling.  This  over,
each  one  returns  quietly  to  his  Cabin.

I  had  forgotten  to  say  that  usually,  during  this
whole  ceremony,  the  mother  or  the  wife  will  be  at
the  foot  of  the  grave  calling  to  the  deceased  with
singing,  or  more  frequently  complaining  in  a  lugu-
brious voice.

Now  all  these  ceremonies  do  not  always  take
place ;  as  for  those  killed  in  war,  they  inter  them,
and  the  relatives  make  presents  to  their  patrons,  if


272  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

Or  toutes  ces  ceremonies  ne  fe  gardent  pas  tou-
fiours;  car  pour  ceux  qui  font  morts  en  guerre,  ils  les
mettent  en  terre,  &  les  parens  font  des  prefens  a
leurs  patrons, Vs'ils  en  auoient,  ce  qui  eft  affez  ordi-
naire dans  le  Pais,  pour  les  encourager  a  faire  vne
leuee  de  foldats,  &  venger  la  mort  du  defunct.  Pour
les  noyez  on  les  enterre  auffi  apres  auoir  enleue  par
pieces  les  parties  du  corps  les  plus  charnues,  comme
i'ay  explique  plus  en  particulier,  parlant  de  leurs
fuperftitions.  On  double  les  prefens  en  cette  occa-
fion,  &  tout  le  Pais  s'y  trouue  fouuent,  &  y  contribue
du  fien;  &  tout  cela,  difent-ils,  pour  appaifer  le  Ciel,
ou  le  Lac.

II  y  a  mefmes  des  ceremonies  particulieres  [191]
pour  les  petits  enfans  decedez  au  deffous  d'vn  mois
ou  deux ;  ils  ne  les  mettent  pas  non  plus  comme  les
autres  dans  des  fepulchres  d'ecorce  dreffez  fur  des
pieux;  mais  les  enterrent  fur  le  chemin,  afin,  difent-
ils,  que  quelque  femme  paffant  par  la,  ils  entrent  fe-
cretement  en  fon  ventre,  &  que  de  rechef  elle  leur
donne  la  vie,  &  les  enfante.  Ie  me  doute  que  le  bon
Nicodeme  y  euft  trouue  bien  de  la  difficulte,  quoy
qu'il  n'oppofaft  que  pour  les  vieillards,  Quomodo  potest
homo  nafci  ckm  fit  fenex.  Cette  belle  ceremonie  f e  fit
cet  Hyuer  en  la  perfonne  d'vn  de  nos  petits  Chre-
ftiens,  qui  auoit  efte  nomme  Iofeph  au  baptefme.
Ie  l'appris  a  cette  occafion  de  la  bouche  mefme  du
pere  de  l'enfant.

Les  funerailles  faites,  le  deiiil  ne  ceffe  pas,  la
femme  le  continue  toute  l'annee  pour  le  mary,  &  le
mary  pour  la  femme :  mais  le  grand  deiiil  propre-
ment  ne  dure  que  dix  iours:  pendant  ce  temps  ils
demeurent  couchez fur  leurs  nattes,  & enueloppez


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  273

they  had  any,  which  is  rather  common  in  this  Coun-
try, in  order  to  encourage  them  to  raise  a  force  of
soldiers,  and  avenge  the  death  of  the  deceased.  As
to  the  drowned,  they  are  interred  also,  after  the  most
fleshy  parts  of  the  body  have  been  taken  off,  piece
by  piece,  as  I  have  explained  more  in  detail  in  speak-
ing of  their  superstitions.  Double  the  presents  are
given  on  such  an  occasion,  and  people  from  the  whole
Country  often  gather  there,  and  contribute  of  their
property;  and  this  is  done,  they  say,  to  appease  the
Sky,  or  the  Lake.

There  are  even  special  ceremonies  [191]  for  little
children  who  die  less  than  a  month  or  two  old ;  they
do  not  put  them  like  the  others  into  bark  tombs  set
up  on  posts,  but  inter  them  on  the  road, — in  order  that,
they  say,  if  some  woman  passes  that  way,  they  may
secretly  enter  her  womb,  and  that  she  may  give  them
life  again,  and  bring  them  forth.  I  doubt  not  the
good  Nicodemus  would  have  found  much  difficulty
about  this,  although  he  only  raised  the  objection  in
regard  to  old  people,  Quomodo  potest  homo  nasci  ciim  sit
senex?  This  fine  ceremony  took  place  this  Winter  in
the  person  of  one  of  our  little  Christians,  who  had
been  named  Joseph  at  baptism.  I  learned  it  on  this
occasion  from  the  lips  of  the  child's  father  himself.

The  funeral  ceremonies  over,  the  mourning  does
not  cease,  the  wife  continues  it  the  whole  year  for
the  husband,  and  the  husband  for  the  wife ;  but  the
great  mourning  properly  lasts  only  ten  days.  Dur-
ing this  time  they  remain  lying  on  mats  and  envel-
oped in  furs,  their  faces  against  the  ground,  without
speaking  or  answering  anything  except  Cway,  to
those  who  come  to  visit  them.  They  do  not  warm
themselves  even  in  Winter,  they  [192]  eat  cold  food,


274  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.10

dans  leurs  robbes,  la  face  contre  terre,  fans  parler,
ny  refpondre,  que  CXay,  a  ceux  qui  les  viennent  vifi-
ter:  ils  ne  fe  chauffent  point  mefmes  en  Hyuer,  ils
[192]  mangent  froid,  ils  ne  vont  point  aux  feftins,  ne
f ortent  que  de  nuit  pour  leurs  neceffitez :  ils  f e  font
coupper  au  derriere  de  la  tefte  vne  poignee  de  che-
ueux,  &  difent  que  ce  n'eft  pas  fans  grande  douleur
principalement  quand  le  mary  pratique  cette  ceremo-
nie  a  l'occafion  de  la  mort  de  fa  femme,  ou  la  femme
a  1'occafion  de  la  mort  du  mary.  Voila  pour  ce  qui
eft  du  grand  deiiil.

Le  petit  deiiil  dure  toute  l'annee:  quand  ils  veu-
lent  vifiter  ils  ne  faluent  point,  &  ne  difent  point
CSay,  ils  ne  fe  graiff ent  point  les  cheueux ;  les  f  em-
mes  neantmoins  le  font  quand  leurs  meres  le  leur
commandent,  qui  ont  en  leur  difpofition  leur  cheue-
lure,  &  mefmes  leur  perfonnes;  c'eft  a  elles  deles
enuoyer  aux  feftins,  fans  cela  plufieurs  n'y  iroient
point.  Ce  que  ie  trouue  de  remarquable  eft  que  pen-
dant toute  l'annee  la  femme  ny  le  mary  ne  fe  rema-
nent point,  autrement  ils  feroient  parler  d'eux  dans
le  Pays.

Les  fepultures  ne  font  pas  perpetuelles ;  comme
leurs  Villages  ne  font  ftables  que  pour  quelques  an-
nees  que  dure  la  commodite  des  bois :  les  corps  ne
demeurent  dans  les  Cimetieres  que  iufques  a  la  fefte
des  [193]  Morts,  qui  fe  fait  d'ordinaire  de  douze  en
douze  ans.  Or  dans  ce  terme  ils  ne  laiffent  pas
d'honnorer  fouuent  les  defuncts:  de  temps  en  temps
ils  font  faire  chaudiere  pour  leu[r]s  ames  par  tout
le  Village,  comme  le  iour  des  funerailles,  &  reffuf-
citent  leur  nom  le  pluftoft  qu'ils  peuuent.  A  c6t  effet
ils  font  des  prefens  aux  Capitaines,  pour  donner  a


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  275

they  do  not  go  to  the  feasts,  they  go  out  only  at
night  for  their  necessities;  they  cause  a  handful  of
hair  to  be  cut  from  the  back  of  the  head ;  they  say
this  is  done  only  when  the  grief  is  profound, —  the
husband  practicing  this  ceremony  generally  on  the
death  of  his  wife,  or  the  wife  on  the  death  of  her  hus-
band. This  is  what  there  is  of  their  great  mourning.

The  lesser  mourning  lasts  all  the  year.  When
they  go  visiting  they  do  not  make  any  salutation,
not  even  saying  Cway,  nor  do  they  grease  their  hair ;
the  women  do  it,  however,  when  their  mothers  com-
mand them,  as  the  latter  have  at  their  disposal  their
hair,  and  even  their  persons ;  it  is  their  privilege  to
send  the  daughters  to  feasts,  for  without  the  command
many  would  not  go.  What  I  find  remarkable  is
that,  during  the  whole  year,  neither  the  husband  nor
the  wife  remarries ;  if  they  did,  they  would  be  talked
about  throughout  the  Country.

The  graves  are  not  permanent;  as  their  Villages
are  stationary  only  during  a  few  years,  while  the  sup-
plies of  the  forest  last,  the  bodies  only  remain  in  the
Cemeteries  until  the  feast  of  the  [193]  Dead,  which
usually  takes  place  every  twelve  years.  Within  this
time  they  do  not  cease  to  honor  the  dead  frequently ;
from  time  to  time,  they  make  a  feast  for  their  souls
throughout  the  whole  Village,  as  they  did  on  the  day
of  the  funeral,  and  revive  their  names  as  often  as
they  can.  For  this  purpose  they  make  presents  to
the  Captains,  to  give  to  him  who  will  be  content  to
take  the  name  of  the  deceased ;  and,  if  he  was  held
in  consideration  and  esteem  in  the  Country  while
alive,  the  one  who  resuscitates  him, —  after  a  magnifi-
cent feast  to  the  whole  Country,  that  he  may  make
himself  known  under  this  name, —  makes  a  levy  of


276  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

celuy  qui  f era  content  de  prendre  le  nom  du  defunct ;
&  s'il  eftoit  en  confideration  &  en  eftime  dans  le
Pais  de  fon  viuant,  celuy  qui  le  reffufcite  apres  vn
feftin  magnifique  a  tout  le  Pais,  pour  fe  faire  co-
gnoiftre  fous  ce  nom,  fait  vne  leuee  de  ieunes  gens
deliberez,  &  s'en  va  en  guerre  pour  faire  quelque
braue  coup,  qui  faffe  paroiftre  a  tout  le  Pais,  qu'il  a
non  feulement  herite  du  nom,  mais  auffi  des  vertus
&  du  courage  du  defunct.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63b  211


the  resolute  young  men  and  goes  away  on  a  war  ex-
pedition, to  perform  some  daring  exploit  that  shall
make  it  evident  to  the  whole  Country  that  he  has  in-
herited not  only  the  name,  but  also  the  virtues  and
courage  of  the  deceased.


278  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES [Vol.10


CHAPITRE  IX.

DE LA FESTE SOLENNELLE DES MORTS.

LA  fefte  des  Morts  eft  la  ceremonie  la  plus  celebre
qui  f  oit  parmy  les  Hurons ;  [  1 94]  ils  luy  donnent
le  nom  de  feftin,  d'autant  que,  comme  ie  diray
tout  maintenant,  les  corps  eftans  tirez  des  Cime-
tieres,  chaque  Capitaine  fait  vn  feftin  des  ames  dans
fon  Village:  le  plus  confiderable  &  le  plus  magni-
fique  eft  celuy  du  Maiftre  de  la  Fefte,  qui  eft  pour
cette  raifon  appelle  par  excellence  le  Maiftre  du
feftin.

Cette  Fefte  eft  toute  pleine  de  ceremonies,  mais
vous  diriez  que  la  principale  eft  celle  de  la  chau-
diere,  cette-cy  etouffe  toutes  les  autres,  &  on  ne  parle
quafi  de  la  fefte  des  Morts,  mefmes  dans  les  Confeils
les  plus  ferieux,  que  fous  le  nom  de  chaudiere :  ils  y
approprient  tous  les  termes  de  cuifine ;  de  forte  que
pour  dire  auancer  ou  retarder  la  fefte  des  Morts,  ils
diront  detifer,  ou  attifer  le  feu  deffous  la  chaudiere :
&  quand  on  eft  fur  ces  termes,  qui  diroit  la  chau-
diere eft  renuerfee,  ce  feroit  a  dire,  il  n'y  aura  point
de  fefte  des  Morts.

Or  il  n'y  a  d'ordinaire  qu'vne  feule  fefte  dans
chaque  Nation ;  tous  les  corps  fe  mettent  en  vne
mefmefoffe:  ie  dis  d'ordinaire,  car  cette  annee  que
c'eft  faite  la  fefte  des  Morts,  la  chaudiere  a  efte"  diui-
fee,  [195]  &  cinq  Villages  de  cette  pointe  ou  nous
fommes ont fait  bande a part, & ont mis leurs


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3b  279


CHAPTER  IX.

OF THE SOLEMN FEAST OF THE DEAD.

THE  feast  of  the  Dead  is  the  most  renowned  cere-
mony among  the  Hurons;  [194]  they  give  it
the  name  of  feast  because,  as  I  shall  now  fully
relate,  when  the  bodies  are  taken  from  their  Ceme-
teries, each  Captain  makes  a  feast  for  the  souls  in  his
Village, — the  most  considerable  and  most  magnifi-
cent having  been  that  of  the  Master  of  the  Feast,
who  is  for  that  reason  called  par  excellence,  the  Mas-
ter of  the  feast.

This  Feast  abounds  in  ceremonies,  but  you  might
say  that  the  principal  ceremony  is  that  of  the  kettle;
this  latter  overshadows  all  the  rest,  and  the  feast  of
the  Dead  is  hardly  mentioned,  even  in  the  most  im-
portant Councils,  except  under  the  name  of  "  the
kettle. ' '  They  appropriate  to  it  all  the  terms  of  cook-
ery, so  that,  in  speaking  of  hastening  or  of  putting
off  the  feast  of  the  Dead,  they  will  speak  of  scatter-
ing or  of  stirring  up  the  fire  beneath  the  kettle ;  and,
employing  this  way  of  speaking,  one  who  should  say
"  the  kettle  is  overturned,"  would  mean  that  there
would  be  no  feast  of  the  Dead.

Now  usually  there  is  only  a  single  feast  in  each
Nation ;  all  the  bodies  are  put  into  a  common  pit.  I
say,  usually,  for  this  year,  which  has  happened  to  be
the  feast  of  the  Dead,  the  kettle  has  been  divided;
[195]  and  five  Villages  of  the  part  where  we  are  have
acted  by  themselves,  and  have  put  their  dead  into  a


280  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

morts  dans  vne  foffe  particuliere.  Celuy  qui  eftoit
Capitaine  de  la  fefte  precedente,  &  qui  eft  comme  le
Chef  de  cette  pointe,  a  pris  pour  pretexte  que  fa
chaudiere  &  fon  feftin  auoit  efte  gafte,  &  qu'il  eftoit
oblige  d'en  refaire  vn  autre :  mais  en  effet  ce  n'eftoit
qu'vn  pretexte;  la  principale  caufe  de  ce  diuorce  eft
que  les  groffes  teftes  de  ce  Village  fe  plaignent  il  y
a  long  temps  de  ce  que  les  autres  tirent  tout  a  eux ;
qu'ils  n'entrent  pas  comme  ils  voudroient  bien  dans
la  cognoiflance  des  affaires  du  Pais,  &  qu'on  ne  les
appelle  pas  aux  Confeils  les  plus  fecrets  &  les  plus
importans,  &  au  partage  des  prefens.  Cette  diuifion
a  efte  fuiuie  de  defiance  de  part  &  d' autre;  Dieu
vueille  qu'elle  n'apporte  point  d'empefchement  a  la
publication  du  fainct  Euangile :  mais  il  faut  que  ie
touche  brief uement  l'ordre  &  les  circonftances  de
cette  fefte,  &  que  ie  finiffe.

Les  douze  ans  ou  enuiron  eftant  expirez,  les  An-
ciens  &  les  Notables  du  Pais  s'afTemblent  pour  deli-
berer  precifement  de  la  faifon  en  laquelle  fe  fera  la
fefte,  au  contentement  de  tout  le  Pais,  &  des  Nations
[196]  eftrangeres  qui  y  feront  inuitees.  La  refolu-
tion  prife,  comme  tous  les  corps  fe  doiuent  tranfpor-
ter  au  Village  ou  eft  la  foffe  commune,  chacque  fa-
mille  donne  ordre  a  fes  morts,  mais  auec  vn  foin  &
vne  affection  qui  ne  fe  peut  dire:  s'ils  ont  des  parens
morts  en  quelque  endroit  du  Pais  que  ce  foit,  ils
n'epargnent  point  leur  peine  pour  les  aller  querir:
ils  les  enleuent  des  Cimetieres,  les  chargent  fur  leurs
propres  epaules,  &  les  couurent  des  plus  belles  robes
qu'ils  ayent.  Dans  chaque  Village  ils  choififfent  vn
beau  iour,  fe  tranfportent  au  Cimetiere,  oil  chacun
de  ceux  qu'ils  appellent,  Aihconde,  qui  ont  eu  foin  de


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib36  281

private  pit.  He  who  was  Captain  of  the  preceding
feast,  and  who  is  regarded  as  the  Chief  of  this  place,
has  given  as  an  excuse  that  his  kettle  and  his  feast
had  been  spoiled,  and  that  he  was  obliged  to  make
another;  but  in  reality  this  was  only  a  pretext.  The
principal  cause  of  this  separation  is  that  the  notables
of  this  Village  have  been  complaining  this  long  time
that  the  others  take  everything  upon  themselves;
that  they  do  not  become  acquainted  as  they  would
like  with  the  affairs  of  the  Country  ;  that  they  are  not
called  to  the  most  secret  and  important  Councils,  and
to  a  share  of  the  presents.  This  division  has  been
followed  by  distrust  on  both  sides ;  God  grant  that  it
may  not  cause  any  hindrance  to  the  preaching  of  the
holy  Gospel.  But  I  must  touch  briefly  on  the  order
and  the  circumstances  of  this  feast,  and  then  I  must
finish.

Twelve  years  or  thereabout  having  elapsed,  the
Old  Men  and  Notables  of  the  Country  assemble,  to
deliberate  in  a  definite  way  on  the  time  at  which  the
feast  shall  be  held  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  whole
Country  and  of  the  foreign  Nations  [196]  that  may
be  invited  to  it.  The  decision  having  been  made,  as
all  the  bodies  are  to  be  transported  to  the  Village
where  is  the  common  grave,  each  family  sees  to  its
dead,  but  with  a  care  and  affection  that  cannot  be
described:  if  they  have  dead  relatives  in  any  part  of
the  Country,  they  spare  no  trouble  to  go  for  them;
they  take  them  from  the  Cemeteries,  bear  them  on
their  shoulders,  and  cover  them  with  the  finest  robes
they  have.  In  each  Village  they  choose  a  fair  day,
and  proceed  to  the  Cemetery,  where  those  called  A  ihe-
onde,  who  take  care  of  the  graves,  draw  the  bodies
from  the  tombs  in  the  presence  of  the  relatives,  who


282  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~ SUITES  [Vol.10

la  fepulture,  tirent  les  corps  du  tombeau  en  prefence
des  parens  qui  renotmellent  leurs  pleurs,  &  entrent
dans  les  premiers  fentimens  qu'ils  auoient  le  iour  des
funerailles.  Ie  me  trouuay  a  ce  fpectacle,  &  y  inuitay
volontiers  tous  nos  domeftiques ;  car  ie  ne  penfe  pas
qu'il  fe  puiffe  voir  au  monde  vne  plus  viue  image  &
vne  plus  parfaite  reprefentation  de  ce  que  c'eft  que
l'homme.  II  eft  vray  qu'en  France  nos  Cimetieres
prefchent  puiffamment,  &  que  tous  ces  os  entaffez
les  vns  fur  les  autres  fans  difcretion  des  pauures
[197]  d'auec  les  riches,  ou  des  petits  d'auec  les
grands,  font  autant  de  voix  qui  nous  crient  continuel-
lement  la  penfee  de  la  mort,  la  vanite  des  chofes  du
monde,  &  le  mepris  de  la  vie  prefente:  mais  il  me
femble  que  ce  que  font  nos  Sauuages  a  cette  occafion
touche  encor  dauantage,  &  nous  fait  voir  de  plus
pres,  &  apprehender  plus  f  enablement  noftre  mifere.
Car  apres  auoir  fait  ouuerture  des  tombeaux,  ils  vous
etallent  fur  la  place  toutes  ces  Carcaffes,  &  les  laiffent
affez  long  temps  ainfi  decouuertes,  donnant  tout  loifir
aux  fpectateurs  d'apprendre  vne  bonne  fois  ce  qu'ils
feront  quelque  iour.  Les  vnes  font  toutes  dechar-
nees,  &  n'ont  qu'vn  parchemin  fur  les  os;  les  autres
ne  font  que  comme  recuites  &  boucannees,  fans  mon-
ltrer  quafi  aucune  apparence  de  pourriture  ;  &  les
autres  font  encor  toutes  groiiillantes  de  vers.  Les
parens  s'eftant  fuffifamment  contentez  de  cette  veue,
les  couurent  de  belles  robes  de  Caftor  toutes  neuf ues :
en  fin  au  bout  de  quelque  temps  ils  les  decharnent,
&  en  enleuent  la  peau  &  la  chair  qu'ils  iettent  dans
le  feu  auec  les  robes  &  les  nattes  dont  ils  ont  efte
enfeuelis.  Pour  les  corps  entiers  de  ceux  qui  [198]
font  nouuellement  morts,  ils  les  laiffent  en  mefme


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  283

renew  their  tears  and  feel  afresh  the  grief  they  had
on  the  day  of  the  funeral.  I  was  present  at  the  spec-
tacle, and  willingly  invited  to  it  all  our  servants;  for
I  do  not  think  one  could  see  in  the  world  a  more
vivid  picture  or  more  perfect  representation  of  what
man  is.  It  is  true  that  in  France  our  Cemeteries
preach  powerfully,  and  that  all  those  bones  piled  up
one  upon  another  without  discrimination, —  those  of
the  poor  [197]  with  those  of  the  rich,  those  of  the
mean  with  those  of  the  great, —  are  so  many  voices
continually  proclaiming  to  us  the  thought  of  death,
the  vanity  of  the  things  of  this  world,  and  contempt
for  the  present  life :  but  it  seems  to  me  that  what
our  Savages  do  on  this  occasion  touches  us  still  more,
and  makes  us  see  more  closely  and  apprehend  more
sensibly  our  wretched  state.  For,  after  having
opened  the  graves,  they  display  before  you  all  these
Corpses,  on  the  spot,  and  they  leave  them  thus  ex-
posed long  enough  for  the  spectators  to  learn  at  their
leisure,  and  once  for  all,  what  they  will  be  some  day.
The  flesh  of  some  is  quite  gone,  and  there  is  only
parchment  on  their  bones ;  in  other  cases,  the  bodies
look  as  if  they  had  been  dried  and  smoked,  and  show
scarcely  any  signs  of  putrefaction ;  and  in  still  other
cases  they  are  still  swarming  with  worms.  When
the  friends  have  gazed  upon  the  bodies  to  their  satis-
faction, they  cover  them  with  handsome  Beaver
robes  quite  new:  finally,  after  some  time  they  strip
them  of  their  flesh,  taking  off  skin  and  flesh  which
they  throw  into  the  fire  along  with  the  robes  and
mats  in  which  the  bodies  were  wrapped.  As  regards
the  bodies  of  those  [198]  recently  dead,  they  leave
these  in  the  state  in  which  they  are,  and  content
themselves  by  simply  covering  them  with  new  robes.


284  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

eftat,  &  fe  contentent  feulement  de  les  couurir  de
robes  neufues.  lis  ne  toucherent  qu'a  vn  Vieillard
dont  i'ay  parle  cy-deuant,  qui  efloit  mort  cette  Au-
tomne  au  retour  de  la  pefche :  ce  gros  corps  n'auoit
commend  a  fe  pourrir  que  depuis  vn  mois  a  l'occa-
fion  des  premieres  chaleurs  du  Printemps;  les  vers
fourmilloient  de  toutes  parts,  &  le  pus  &  l'ordure  qui
en  fortoit  rendoit  vne  puanteur  prefque  intolerable ;
cependant  ils  eurent  bien  le  courage  de  le  tirer  de  la
robbe  ou  il  eftoit  enueloppe,  le  nettoyerent  le  mieux
qu'ils  peurent,  le  prirent  a  belles  mains,  &  le  mirent
dans  vne  natte,  &  vne  robbe  toute  neufue,  &  tout
cela  fans  faire  paroiflre  aucune  horreur  de  cette
pourriture.  Ne  voila  pas  vn  bel  exemple  pour  ani-
mer  les  Chreftiens,  qui  doiuent  auoir  des  penfees
bien  plus  releuees,  aux  actions  de  charite,  &  aux
ceuures  de  mifericorde  enuers  le  prochain.  Apres
cela  qui  aura  horreur  de  la  puanteur  d'vn  Hofpital,
&  qui  ne  prendra  vn  fmgulier  plaifir  de  fe  voir  aux
pieds  d'vn  malade  tout  couuert  de  playes,  dans  la
perfonne  duquel  il  confidere  le  Fils  de  [199]  Dieu.
Comme  ils  eftoient  a  decharner  toutes  ces  carcaffes,
ils  trouuerent  dans  le  corps  de  deux  vne  efpece  de
fort,  l'vn  que  ie  vis  de  mes  yeux  efloit  vn  oeuf  de
Tortue  auec  vne  courroye  de  cuir;  &  l'autre  que  nos
Peres  manierent  efloit  vne  petite  Tortue  de  la  groff  eur
d'vne  noix;  ce  qui  fit  croire  qu'ils  auoient  efle  enfor-
celez,  &  qu'il  y  auoit  des  Sorciers  en  noflre  Village ;
d'oii  vintla  refolution  a  quelques-vns  de  le  quitter  au
pluflofl:  en  effet  deux  ou  trois  iours  apres  vn  des
plus  riches,  craignant  qu'il  ne  luy  arriuafl  quelque
malheur,  tranfporta  fa  Cabane  a  deux  lieues  de  nous
au  Village  d ' Arontaen.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  285

Of  the latter  they  handled  only one Old  Man,  of
whom I  have  spoken  before,  who  died  this  Autumn
on  his  return  from  fishing:  this  swollen  corpse  had
only  begun  to  decay  during  the  last  month,  on  the
occasion  of  the  first  heat  of  Spring ;  the  worms  were
swarming  all  over  it,  and  the  corruption  that  oozed
out  of  it  gave  forth  an  almost  intolerable  stench ;  and
yet  they  had  the  courage  to  take  away  the  robe  in
which  it  was  enveloped, cleaned  it  as  well  as  they
could,  taking  the  matter  off  by  handfuls,  and  put  the
body  into  a  fresh  mat  and  robe,  and  all  this  without
showing  any  horror  at  the  corruption. Is  not  that  a
noble  example  to  inspire Christians,  who  ought  to
have  thoughts  much  more  elevated  to  acts  of  charity
and  works  of  mercy  towards  their  neighbor? After
that,  who  will  be  afraid  of  the  stench  of  a  Hospital ;
and  who  will  not  take  a  peculiar  pleasure  in  seeing
himself  at  the  feet  of  a  sick  man  all  covered  with
wounds,  in  the  person  of  whom  he  beholds  the  Son
of  [199]  God? As  they  had  to  remove  the  flesh  from
all  these  corpses,  they  found  in  the  bodies  of  two  a
kind  of  charm, —  one,  that  I  saw  myself,  was  a  Tur-
tle's egg  with  a  leather  strap ;  and  the  other,  which
our  Fathers  handled,  was  a  little  Turtle  of  the  size
of  a  nut. These  excited  the  belief  that  they  had
been bewitched,  and that there were Sorcerers in
our  Village, —  whence  came  the  resolution  to  some
to  leave  at  once;  indeed,  two  or  three  days  later  one
of  the  richest  men,  fearing  that  some  harm  would
come  to  him,  transported  his  Cabin  to  a  place  two
leagues  from  us,  to  the  Village  of  Arontaen.^

The  bones  having  been  well  cleaned,  they  put
them  partly  into  bags,  partly  into  fur  robes,  loaded
them  on  their  shoulders,  and  covered  these  packages


286  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

Or  les  os  eftans  bien  nettoyez,  ils  les  mirent  partie
dans  des  facs,  partie  en  des  robbes,  les  chargerent
fur  leurs  epaules,  &  couurirent  ces  pacquets  d'vne
autre  belle  robbe  pendante.  Pour  les  corps  entiers,
ils  les  mirent  fur  vne  efpece  de  bracart,  &  les  por-
terent  auec  tous  les  autres  chacun  en  fa  Cabane,  oil
chaque  famille  fit  vn  feftin  a  fes  morts.

Retournant  de  cefte  fefte  auec  vn  Capitaine  qui  a
l'efprit  fort  bon,  &  eft  pour  eftre  quelque  iour  bien
auant  dans  les  affaires  [200]  du  Pais,  ie  luy  demanday
pourquoy  ils  appelloient  les  os  des  morts  Atisken.  II
me  repondit  du  meilleur  fens  qu'il  euft,  &  ie  recueil-
ly  de  fon  difcours,  que  plufieurs  s'imaginent  que  nous
auons  deux  ames,  toutes  deux  diuifibles  &  mate-
rielles,  &  cependant  toutes  deux  raif onnables ;  l'vne
fe  fepare  du  corps  a  la  mort,  &  demeure  neantmoins
dans  le  Cimetiere  iufques  a  la  fefte  des  Morts,  apres
laquelle,  ou  elle  fe  change  en  Tourterelle,  ou  felon
la  plus  commune  opinion,  elle  s'en  va  droit  au  village
des  ames.  L'autre  eft  comme  attachee  au  corps  &
informe,  pour  ainfi  dire,  le  cadaure,  &  demeure  en
la  foffe  des  morts,  apres  la  fefte,  &  n'en  fort  iamais,
fi  ce  n'eft  que  quelqu'vn  l'enfante  de  rechef.  II
m'apporta  pour  preuue  de  cette  metempfychofe,  la
parfaite  reffemblance  qu'ont  quelques-vns  auec  quel-
ques  perfonnes  defuntes;  Voila  vne  belle  Philofophie.
Tant  y  a,  que  voila  pourquoy  ils  appellent  les  os  des
morts,  Atisken,  les  ames.

Vn  iour  ou  deux  auparauant  que  de  partir  pour  la
fefte,  ils  porteret  toutes  ces  ames  dans  vne  des  plus
grandes  Cabanes  du  Village,  ou  elles  furent  vne  par-
tie  attachee  [201]  aux  perches  de  la  Cabane,  &  l'autre
eftallee  par  la  Cabane,  &  le  Capitaine  les  traita,  &


1636]  LEJEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  287

with  another  beautiful  hanging  robe.  As  for  the
whole  bodies,  they  put  them  on  a  species  of  litter,
and  carried  them  with  all  the  others,  each  into  his
Cabin,  where  each  family  made  a  feast  to  its  dead.

Returning  from  this  feast  with  a  Captain  who  is
very  intelligent,  and  who  will  some  day  be  very  in-
fluential in  the  affairs  [200]  of  the  Country,  I  asked
him  why  they  called  the  bones  of  the  dead  Atisken.
He  gave  me  the  best  explanation  he  could,  and  I
gathered  from  his  conversation  that  many  think  we
have  two  souls,  both  of  them  being  divisible  and
material,  and  yet  both  reasonable ;  the  one  separates
itself  from  the  body  at  death,  yet  remains  in  the
Cemetery  until  the  feast  of  the  Dead, —  after  which  it
either  changes  into  a  Turtledove,  or,  according  to  the
most  common  belief,  it  goes  away  at  once  to  the  vil-
lage of  souls.  The  other  is,  as  it  were,  bound  to  the
body,  and  informs,  so  to  speak,  the  corpse ;  it  re-
mains in  the  ditch  of  the  dead  after  the  feast,  and
never  leaves  it,  unless  some  one  bears  it  again  as  a
child.  He  pointed  out  to  me,  as  a  proof  of  this  me-
tempsychosis, the  perfect  resemblance  some  have  to
persons  deceased.  A  fine  Philosophy,  indeed.  Such
as  it  is,  it  shows  why  they  call  the  bones  of  the  dead,
Atisken,  "  the  souls."

A  day  or  two  before  setting  out  for  the  feast,  they
carried  all  these  souls  into  one  of  the  largest  Cabins
of  the  Village,  where  one  portion  was  hung  [201]  to
the  poles  of  the  Cabin,  and  the  other  portion  spread
out  through  it;  the  Captain  entertained  them,  and
made  them  a  magnificent  feast  in  the  name  of  a  de-
ceased Captain,  whose  name  he  bore.  I  was  at  this
feast  of  souls,  and  noticed  at  it  four  peculiar  things.
First,  the  presents  which  the  relatives  made  for  the


288  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

leur  fit  vn  feftin  magnifique  au  nom  d'vn  Capitaine
defunct,  dont  il  porte  le  nom.  Ie  me  trouuay  a  ce
feftin  des  ames,  &  y  remarquay  quatre  chofes  parti-
culieres.  Premierement,  les  prefens  que  faifoient
les  parens  pour  la  fefte  qui  confiftoient  en  robbes,
colliers  de  Pourcelaine,  &  chaudieres,  eftoient  eten-
dus  fur  des  perches  tout  le  long  de  la  Cabane,  de  part
&  d'autre.  Secondement,  le  Capitaine  chanta  la  chan-
fon  du  Capitaine  defunct,  felon  le  defir  que  luy  mefme
auoit  temoigne  auant  fa  mort,  qu'elle  fuft  chantee  en
cette  occafion.  Tiercement,  tous  les  conuiez  eurent
la  liberie  de  fe  faire  part  les  vns  aux  autres  de  ce
qu'ils  auoient  de  bon,  &  mefmes  d'en  emporter  chez
eux  contre  la  couftume  des  feftins  ordinaires.  Qua-
triefmement,  a  la  fin  du  feftin  pour  tout  compliment
a  celuy  qui  les  auoit  traitez,  ils  imiterent,  comme  ils
difent  le  cry  des  ames,  &  fortirent  de  la  Cabane  en
criant  hate,  hat.

Le  maiftre  du  feftin,  &  mefme  AncnkJiiondic,  Capi-
taine general  de  tout  le  Pais,  nous  enuoya  inuiter
plufieurs  fois  [202]  auec  beaucoup  d'inftance.  Vous
euffiez  dit  que  la  fefte  n'euft  pas  efte  bonne  fans  nous.
I'y  enuoyay  deux  de  nos  Peres  quelques  iours  aupara-
uant  pour  voir  les  preparatifs,  &  fcauoir  au  vray  le
iour  de  la  fefte.  Anenkhiondic  leur  fit  tres-bon  accueil,
&  a.  leur  depart  les  conduifit  luy-mefme  a.  vn  quart  de
lieue  de  la  ou  eftoit  la  foffe,  &  leur  monftra  auec
grand  temoignage  d'affection  tout  l'appareil  de  la
fefte.

La  fefte  fe  deuoit  faire  le  Samedy  de  la  Pentecofte ;
mais  quelques  affaires  qui  furuindrent,  &l'incertitude
du  temps  la  fit  remettre  au  Lundy.  Les  fept  ou
huict  iours  de  deuant  la  fefte  fe  pafferent  a  affem-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  163b  289

feast,  and  which  consisted  of  robes,  Porcelain  collars,
and  kettles,  were  strung  on  poles  along  the  Cabin,  on
both  sides.  Secondly,  the  Captain  sang  the  song  of
the  deceased  Captain,  in  accordance  with  the  desire
the  latter  had  expressed,  before  his  death,  to  have  it
sung  on  this  occasion.  Thirdly,  all  the  guests  had
the  liberty  of  sharing  with  one  another  whatever
good  things  they  had,  and  even  of  taking  these  home
with  them,  contrary  to  the  usual  custom  of  feasts.
Fourthly,  at  the  end  of  the  feast,  by  way  of  compli-
ment to  him  who  had  entertained  them,  they  imi-
tated the  cry  of  souls,  and  went  out  of  the  Cabin
crying  hate,  had.

The  master  of  the  feast,  and  even  Anenkhiondic ,
chief  Captain  of  the  whole  Country,  sent  several
[202]  pressing  invitations  to  us.  You  might  have
said  that  the  feast  would  not  have  been  a  success  with-
out us.  I  sent  two  of  our  Fathers,  several  days  be-
forehand, to  see  the  preparations  and  to  learn  with
certainty  the  day  of  the  feast.  Anenkhiondic  gave
them  a  very  hearty  welcome,  and  on  their  departure
conducted  them  himself  a  quarter  of  a  league  thence,
where  the  pit  was,  and  showed  them,  with  great  dem-
onstrations of  regard,  all  the  preparations  for  the
feast.

The  feast  was  to  take  place  on  the  Saturday  of  Pen-
tecost ;  but  some  affairs  that  intervened,  and  the  un-
certainty of  the  weather,  caused  it  to  be  postponed
until  Monday.  The  seven  or  eight  days  before  the
feast  were  spent  in  assembling  the  souls,  as  well  as
the  Strangers  who  had  been  invited ;  meanwhile  from
morning  until  night  the  living  were  continually  mak-
ing presents  to  the  youth,  in  consideration  of  the
dead. On  one  side  the  women  were  shooting  with


290  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10


bier,  tant  les  ames,  que  les  Eflrangers,  qui  y  furent
inuitez ;  cependant  depuis  le  matin  iufques  au  foir,
ce  n' eftoit  que  largeffe  que  faifoient  les  viuans  a  la
ieuneffe  en  confideration  des  defuncts.  D'vn  cofte
les  femmes  tiroient  de  Tare  a,  qui  auroit  le  prix,  qui
eftoit  quelque  ceinture  de  Pore-epic,  ou  quelque  col-
lier, ou  chaifne  de  Pourcelaine;  de  l'autre  cofte  en
plufieurs  endroits  du  Village  les  ieunes  hommes
tiroient  au  bafton  a  qui  l'emporteroit.  Le  prix  de
cette  victoire  eftoit  vne  [203]  hache,  quelques  cou-
fteaux,  ou  mefme  vne  robbe  de  Caftor.  De  iour  a
autre  arriuoient  les  ames.  II  y  a  du  contentement  de
voir  ces  conuois,  qui  font  quelquefois  de  deux  &  trois
cens  perfonnes;  chacun  porte  fes  ames;  e'eft  a  dire,
fes  offemens  empacquetez  fur  fon  dos,  a  la  facon  que
i'ay  dit,  fouz  vne  belle  robbe.  Quelques-vns  auoient
accommode  leurs  pacquets  en  figure  d'homme  ornez
de  colliers  de  Pourcelaine,  auec  vne  belle  guirlande
de  grand  poil  rouge.  A  la  fortie  de  leur  Village,
toute  la  troupe  crioit  hate,  had,  &  rei'teroient  ce  cry
des  ames  par  le  chemin.  Ce  cry,  difent  ils,  les  fou-
lage  grandement;  autrement  ce  fardeau,  quoy  que
d'ames,  leur  peferoit  bien  fort  fur  le  dos,  &  leur  cau-
feroit  vn  mal  de  cofte  pour  toute  leur  vie.  Ils  vont  a.
petites  iournees ;  noitre  Village  fut  trois  iours  a.  faire
quatre  lieues,  &  a.  aller  a.  Off  off  and,  que  nous  appellons
la  Rochelle,  oil  fe  deuoient  faire  toutes  les  ceremo-
nies. Auffi-toft  qu'ils  arriuent  aupres  de  quelque
Village,  ils  crient  en  cor  leur  hate,  hae:  Tout  le  Vil-
lage leur  vient  au  deuant,  il  fe  fait  encor  a  cette  oc-
cafion  force  largeffes.  Chacun  a  fon  rendez  vous
dans  quelqu'vne  des  [204]  Cabanes,  tous  fcauent  ou
ils  doiuent  loger  leurs  ames ;  cela  f e  fait  fans  conf u-


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib3b  291

the  bow  for  a  prize, —  a  Porcupine  girdle,  or  a  collar
or  string  of  Porcelain  beads;  elsewhere  in  the  Vil-
lage, the  young  men  were  shooting  at  a  stick  to  see
who  could  hit  it.  The  prize  for  this  victory  was  an
[203]  axe,  some  knives,  or  even  a  Beaver  robe.  From
day  to  day  the  souls  arrived.  It  is  very  interesting
to  see  these  processions,  sometimes  of  two  or  three
hundred  persons;  each  one  brings  his  souls,  that  is,
his  bones,  done  up  in  parcels  on  his  back,  under  a
handsome  robe,  in  the  way  I  have  described.  Some
had  arranged  their  parcels  in  the  form  of  a  man,  or-
namented with  Porcelain  collars,  and  elegant  bands
of  long  red  fur.  On  setting  out  from  the  Village,
the  whole  band  cried  out  hae'e,  hae,  and  repeated  this
cry  of  the  souls  by  the  way.  This  cry  they  say  re-
lieves them  greatly;  otherwise  the  burden,  although
of  souls,  would  weigh  very  heavily  on  their  backs,
and  cause  them  a  backache  all  the  rest  of  their  lives.
They  go  short  journeys ;  our  Village  was  three  days
in  going  four  leagues  to  reach  Ossossane,  which  we
call  la  Rochelle,  where  the  ceremonies  were  to  take
place.  As  soon  as  they  arrive  near  a  Village  they
cry  again  hae'e,  Iiae1.  The  whole  Village  comes  to
meet  them ;  plenty  of  gifts  are  given  on  such  an  oc-
casion. Each  has  his  rendezvous  in  one  of  the  [204]
Cabins,  all  know  where  they  are  to  lodge  their  souls,
so  it  is  done  without  confusion.  At  the  same  time,
the  Captains  hold  a  Council,  to  discuss  how  long  the
band  shall  sojourn  in  the  Village.

All  the  souls  of  eight  or  nine  Villages  had  reached
la  Rochelle  by  the  Saturday  of  Pentecost;  but  the
fear  of  bad  weather  compelled  them,  as  I  have  said,
to  postpone  the  ceremony  until  Monday.  We  were
lodged  a  quarter  of  a  league  away,  at  the  old  Vil-


292  LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.10

fion.  En  mefme  temps  les  Capitaines  tiennent  Con-
feil  pour  deliberer  combie  de  temps  la  troupe  feiour-
nera  dans  le  Village.

Toutes  les  ames  de  huict  ou  neuf  Villages,  s'e-
ftoient  rendus  a  la  Rochelle  des  le  Samedy  de  la
Pentecolte;  mais  la  crainte  du  mauuais  temps  obli-
gea,  comme  i'ay  dit,  de  remettre  la  ceremonie  au
Lundy.  Nous  eftions  logez  a  vn  quart  de  lieue  de
la,  au  vieux  Village  dans  vne  Cabane,  ou  il  y  auoit
bien  cent  ames  pendues  &  attachees  a  des  perches,
dont  quelques  vnes  fentoient  vn  peu  plus  fort  que  le
mufq.

Le  Lundy  fur  le  midy,  on  vint  auertir  qu'on  fe
tinft  preft,  qu'on  alloit  commencer  la  ceremonie;  on
detache  en  mefme  temps  ces  pacquets  d'ames,  les  pa-
rens les  deueloppent  derechef  pour  dire  les  derniers
adieux ;  les  pleurs  recommencerent  de  nouueau.
I'admiray  la  tendreffe  d'vne  femme  enuers  fon  pere,
&  fes  enfans ;  elle  eft  fille  d'vn  Capitaine,  qui  eft  mort
fort  age,  &  a  effce  autrefois  fort  cofiderable  das  le
Pais ;  elle  luy  peignoit  fa  cheuelure  elle  manioit  fes
os  les  vns  apres  les  autres,  auec  la  mefme  affectio  que
fi  elle  luy  euft  voulu  [205]  rendre  la  vie;  elle  luy  mit
aupres  de  luy  fon  Atfatoneitai,  c'efl  a  dire  fon  pacquet
de  buchettes  de  Confeil,  qui  font  tous  les  liures  &
papiers  du  Pais.  Pour  fes  petits  enfans  elle  leur  mit
des  braffelets  de  Pourcelaine  &  de  raffade  aux  bras,  &
baigna  leurs  os  de  fes  larmes;  on  ne  Ten  pouuoit
quafi  feparer,  mais  on  preffoit,  &  il  fallut  incontinent
partir.  Celuy  qui  portoit  le  corps  de  ce  vieux  Capi-
taine marchoit  a  la  tefte,  les  homines  fuiuoient,  &
puis  les  femmes,  ils  marchoient  en  cet  ordre,  iufques
a  ce  qu'ils  arriuerent  a  la  foffe.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  ib36  293

lage,  in  a  Cabin  where  there  were  fully  a  hundred
souls  hung  to  and  fixed  upon  the  poles,  some  of  which
smelled  a  little  stronger  than  musk.

On  Monday,  about  noon,  they  came  to  inform  us
that  we  should  hold  ourselves  in  readiness,  for  they
were  going  to  begin  the  ceremony ;  they  took  down
at  the  same  time,  the  packages  of  souls ;  and  the  rel-
atives again  unfolded  them  to  say  their  last  adieus ;
the  tears  flowed  afresh.  I  admired  the  tenderness
of  one  woman  toward  her  father  and  children ;  she  is
the  daughter  of  a  Chief  who  died  at  an  advanced  age,
and  was  once  very  influential  in  the  Country;  she
combed  his  hair  and  handled  his  bones,  one  after  the
other,  with  as  much  affection  as  if  she  would  have
desired  [205]  to  restore  life  to  him;  she  put  beside
him  his  Atsatonewai,  that  is,  his  package  of  Council
sticks,  which  are  all  the  books  and  papers  of  the
Country.  As  for  her  little  children,  she  put  on  their
arms  bracelets  of  Porcelain  and  glass  beads,  and
bathed  their  bones  with  her  tears ;  they  could  scarce-
ly tear  her  away  from  these,  but  they  insisted,  and  it
was  necessary  to  depart  immediately.  The  one  who
bore  the  body  of  this  old  Captain  walked  at  the  head ;
the  men  followed,  and  then  the  women,  walking  in
this  order  until  they  reached  the  pit.

Let  me  describe  the  arrangement  of  this  place.  It
was  about  the  size  of  the  place  Royale  at  Paris.
There  was  in  the  middle  of  it  a  great  pit,  about  ten
feet  deep  and  five  brasses  wide.  All  around  it  was
a  scaffold,  a  sort  of  staging  very  well  made,  nine  to
ten  brasses  in  width,  and  from  nine  to  ten  feet  high ;
above  this  staging  there  were  a  number  of  poles  laid
across,  and  well  arranged,  with  cross-poles  to  which
these  packages  of  souls  were  hung  and  bound. The


294  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.10

Voicy  la  difpofition  de  cette  place,  elle  eftoit  enui-
ron  de  la  grandeur  de  la  place  Royale  a  Paris.  II  y
auoit  au  milieu  vne  grande  foffe  d'enuiron  dix  pieds
de  profondeur,  &  cinq  braffes  de  diametre ;  tout  au-
tour  vn  echaffaut  &  vne  efpece  de  theatre,  affez
bien  fait  de  neuf  a  dix  braffes  de  diamettre,  &
de  dix  a  neuf  pieds  de  hauteur;  au  deffus  du
theatre  il  y  auoit  quantite  de  perches  dreffees,  &  bien
arrangees,  &  d'autres  en  trauers  pour  y  pendre,  &
attacher  tous  ces  pacquets  d'ames.  Les  corps  entiers
comme  ils  deuoient  eftre  mis  au  fond  de  la  foffe
eftoiet  [206]  des  le  iour  precedent  fouz  l'echaffaut,
etendus  fur  des  ecorces,  ou  des  nattes  dreffees  fur  des
pieux  de  la  hauteur  d'vn  homme  aux  enuirons  de
la  foffe.

Tout  la  Compagnie  arriua  auec  fes  corps  enuiron
a  vne  heure  apres  Midy,  &  fe  departirent  en  diuers
cantons,  felon  les  families  &  les  Villages,  &  dechar-
gerent  a  terre  leurs  paquets  d'ames  a  peu  pres
comme  on  fait  les  pots  de  terre  a  ces  Foires  de  Vil-
lages: ils  deployerent  aufli  leurs  pacquets  de  robbes,
&  tous  les  prefens  qu'ils  auoiet  apporte,  &  les  eten-
diret  fur  des  perches,  qui  eftoient  de  5.  a  600.  toifes
d'etendue;  auffi  y  auoit  il  iufques  a  douze  cens  pre-
fens qui  demeurerent  ainfi  en  parade  deux  bonnes
heures,  pour  donner  loifir  aux  Eftrangers  de  voir  les
richeffes  &  la  magnificence  du  Pais.  Ie  ne  trouuay
pas  que  la  Compagnie  fuft  grade  comme  ie  m'eftois
figure:  s'il  y  auoit  deux  mille  perfonnes  c'eftoit  quafi
tout.  Enuiron  les  trois  heures  chacun  ferra  fes
pieces,  &  plia  fes  robbes.

Sur  ces  entrefaites  chaque  Capitaine  par  ordre
donna  le  fignal,  &  tout  incontinent  chargez  de  leurs


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  163b  295

whole  bodies,  as  they  were  to  be  put  in  the  bottom
of  the  pit,  had  been  [206]  the  preceding  day  placed
under  the  scaffold,  stretched  upon  bark  or  mats  fas-
tened to  stakes  about  the  height  of  a  man,  on  the  bor-
ders of  the  pit.

The  whole  Company  arrived  with  their  corpses
about  an  hour  after  Midday,  and  divided  themselves
into  different  cantons,  according  to  their  families  and
Villages,  and  laid  on  the  ground  their  parcels  of
souls,  almost  as  they  do  earthen  pots  at  the  Village
Fairs.  They  unfolded  also  their  parcels  of  robes,
and  all  the  presents  they  had  brought,  and  hung
them  upon  poles,  which  were  from  5  to  600  toises  in
extent;  so  there  were  as  many  as  twelve  hundred
presents  which  remained  thus  on  exhibition  two  full
hours,  to  give  Strangers  time  to  see  the  wealth  and
magnificence  of  the  Country.  I  did  not  find  the
Company  so  numerous  as  I  had  expected ;  if  there
were  two  thousand  persons,  that  was  about  all.
About  three  o'clock,  each  one  put  away  his  various
articles,  and  folded  up  his  robes.

Meanwhile,  each  Captain  by  command  gave  the
signal;  and  all,  at  once,  loaded  with  their  packages
of  souls,  running  as  if  to  the  assault  of  a  town,  as-
cended [207]  the  Stage  by  means  of  ladders  hung  all
round  it,  and  hung  them  to  the  cross  poles,  each  Vil-
lage having  its  own  department.  That  done,  all  the
ladders  were  taken  away ;  but  a  few  Chiefs  remained
there  and  spent  the  rest  of  the  afternoon,  until  seven
o'clock,  in  announcing  the  presents  which  were  made
in  the  name  of  the  dead  to  certain  specified  persons.

"  This,"  said  they,  "  is  what  such  and  such  a  dead
man  gives  to  such  and  such  a  relative."  About  five
or  six  o'clock,  they  lined  the  bottom  and  sides  of  the


296  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

paquets  d'ame[s]  courans  comme  a  l'affaut  d'vne  ville,
monterent  [207]  fur  ce  Theatre  a  la  faueur  des  6chelles
qui  eftoient  tout  autour,  &  les  pendirent  aux  perches :
chaque  Village  y  auoit  fon  departement.  Cela  fait,
on  ofta  toutes  les  echelles,  &  quelques  Capitaines  y
demeurerent,  &  pafferent  tout  le  refte  de  l'aprefdinee
iufques  a  fept  heures  a  publier  des  prefens  qu'ils  fai-
foient  au  nom  des  defuncts  a  quelques  perfonnes  par-
ticulieres.

Voila,  difoient  ils,  ce  qu'vn  tel  defunct  donne  a  vn
tel  fon  parent.  Enuiron  les  cinq  a  fix  heures  ils  pa-
uerent  le  fond  de  la  foffe,  &  la  borderet  de  belles
grades  robes  neufues  de  dix  Caftors,  en  telle  facon
qu'elles  s'eftendoient  plus  d'vn  pied  au  dehors  de  la
foffe.  Comme  ils  preparoient  les  robbes  qui  deuoient
eftre  employees  a  cet  vfage,  quelques-vns  defcendi-
rent  au  fond,  &  en  apporterent  leurs  mains  pleines
de  fable :  ie  m'enquis  que  vouloit  dire  cette  ceremo-
nie,  &  appris  qu'ils  ont  cette  creance  que  ce  fable  les
rend  heureux  au  ieu.  De  ces  douze  cens  prefents,
qui  auoient  efte  etallez  fur  la  place,  quarante-huit
robbes  feruirent  a  pauer  &  border  la  foffe,  &  chaque
corps  entier,  outre  la  robbe  dont  il  eftoit  enueloppe,
[208]  en  auoit  encor  vne,  &  quelques-vns  iufques  a
deux,  dont  ils  furent  couuerts.  Voila  tout;  de  forte
que  ie  ne  penfe  pas  que  chaque  corps  euft  la  fienne,
l'vn  portant  l'autre,  qui  eft  bien  le  moins  qu'il  peuft
auoir  pour  fa  fepulture ;  car  ce  que  font  les  draps  &
les  linceux  en  France,  font  icy  les  robbes  de  Caitor.
Mais  que  deuient  done  le  refte,  ie  le  diray  tout  main-
tenant.

Sur  les  fept  heures  ils  defcendoient  les  corps  en-
tiers  dans  la  foffe :  nous  eufmes  toutes  les  peines  du


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i63b  297

pit  with  fine  large  new  robes,  each  of  ten  Beaver
skins,  in  such  a  way  that  they  extended  more  than  a
foot  out  of  it.  As  they  were  preparing  the  robes
which  were  to  be  employed  for  this  purpose,  some
went  down  to  the  bottom  and  brought  up  handfuls
of  sand.  I  asked  what  this  ceremony  meant,  and
learned  that  they  have  a  belief  that  this  sand  renders
them  successful  at  play.  Of  those  twelve  hundred
presents  that  had  been  displayed,  forty-eight  robes
served  to  line  the  bottom  and  sides  of  the  pit ;  and
each  entire  body,  besides  the  robe  in  which  it  had
been  enveloped,  [208]  had  another  one,  and  some-
times even  two  more,  to  cover  it.  That  was  all;  so
that  I  do  not  think  each  body  had  its  own  robe,  one
with  another,  which  is  surely  the  least  it  can  have  in
its  burial ;  for  what  winding  sheets  and  shrouds  are
in  France,  Beaver  robes  are  here.  But  what  becomes
then  of  the  remainder?  I  will  explain,  in  a  moment.
At  seven  o'clock,  they  let  down  the  whole  bodies
into  the  pit.  We  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  get-
ting near ;  nothing  has  ever  better  pictured  for  me
the  confusion  there  is  among  the  damned.  On  all
sides  you  could  have  seen  them  letting  down  half-
decayed  bodies ;  and  on  all  sides  was  heard  a  hor-
rible din  of  confused  voices  of  persons,  who  spoke
and  did  not  listen ;  ten  or  twelve  were  in  the  pit  and
were  arranging  the  bodies  all  around  it,  one  after  an-
other. They  put  in  the  very  middle  of  the  pit  three
large  kettles,  which  could  only  be  of  use  for  souls;
one  had  a  hole  through  it,  another  had  no  handle,
and  the  third  was  of  scarcely  more  value.  I  saw
very  few  Porcelain  collars ;  it  is  true,  they  [209]  put
many  on  the  bodies.  This  is  all  that  was  done  on
this  day.


298  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

monde  d'en  aborder;  iamais  rien  ne  m'a  mieux  figure"
la  confufion  qui  eft  parmy  les  damnez.  Vous  euffiez
veu  decharger  de  tous  coftez  des  corps  a  demy  pour-
ris,  &  de  tons  coftez  on  entendoit  vn  horrible  tinta-
marre  de  voix  confufes  de  perfonnes  qui  parloient  &
ne  s'entendoient  pas :  dix  ou  douze  eftoient  en  la  fofTe
&  les  arrangeoient  tout  autour  les  vns  aupres  les
autres.  lis  mirent  tout  au  beau  milieu  trois  grandes
chaudieres  qui  n' eftoient  bonnes  que  pour  les  ames;
l'vne  eftoit  percee,  l'autre  n'auoit  point  d'anfe,  &  la
troifieme  ne  valloit  gueres  mieux:  i'y  vis  fort  peu  de
colliers  de  Pourcelaine;  il  eft  vray  qu'ils  [209]  en
mettent  beaucoup  dans  les  corps.  Voila  tout  ce  qui
fe  fit  cette  iournee.

Tout  le  monde  paffa  la  nuit  fur  la  place,  ils  allu-
merent  force  feux,  &  firent  chaudiere.  Nous  autres
nous  nous  retirafmes  au  vieux  Village  auec  refolution
de  retourner  le  lendemain  au  poinct  du  iour  qu'ils
deuoient  ietter  les  os  dans  la  foffe;  mais  nous  ne
peufmes  quafi  arriuer  affez  a  temps,  nonobftant  toute
la  diligence  que  nous  apportafmes,  a  raifon  d'vn  acci-
dent qui  arriua.  Vne  de  ces  ames  qui  n' eftoit  pas
bien  attachee,  ou  peut  eftretrop  pefante  pour  la  corde
qui  la  portoit,  tomba  d'elle  mefme  en  la  fofle:  ce
bruit  eueilla  la  Compagnie,  qui  courut  &  monta  in-
continent a  la  foule  fur  rechaffaut,  &  vuida  fans
ordre  chaque  paquet  dans  la  foffe,  referuant  neant-
moins  les  robbes  defquelles  elles  eftoient  enuelop-
pees.  Nous  fortions  pour  lors  du  Village,  mais  le
bruit  eftoit  fi  grand,  qu'il  nous  fembloit  quafi  que
nous  y  eftions.  Approchans  nous  vifmes  tout  a  fait
vne  image  de  l'Enfer:  cette  grande  place  eftoit  toute
remplie  de  feux  &  de  nammes,  &  l'air  retentiffoit  de


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  299


All  the  people  passed  the  night  on  the  spot;  they
lighted many fires, and slung their kettles. We
withdrew  for  the  night  to  the  old  Village,  with  the
resolve to  return the next morning, at daybreak,
when  they  were  to  throw  the  bones  into  the  pit ;  but
we  could  hardly  arrive  in  time,  although  we  made
great  haste,  on  account  of  an  accident  that  happened.
One  of  the  souls,  which  was  not  securely  tied,  or  was
perhaps  too  heavy  for  the  cord  that  fastened  it,  fell
of  itself  into  the  pit ;  the  noise  awakened  the  Com-
pany, who  immediately  ran  and  mounted  in  a  crowd
upon  the  scaffold,  and  emptied  indiscriminately  each
package  into  the  pit,  keeping,  however,  the  robes  in
which  they  were  enveloped. We  had  only  set  out
from  the  Village  at  that  time,  but  the  noise  was  so
great  that  it  seemed  almost  as  if  we  were  there. As
we  drew  near,  we  saw  nothing  less  than  a  picture  of
Hell. The  large  space  was  quite  full  of  fires  and
flames,  and  the  air  resounded in  all  directions  with
the  confused  voices  of  these Barbarians;  the  noise
ceased,  however,  [210] for  some  time,  and  they  be-
gan to  sing, —  but  in  voices  so  sorrowful  and  lugu-
brious that  it  represented  to  us  the  horrible  sadness
and  the  abyss  of  despair  into  which  these  unhappy
souls  are  forever  plunged.

Nearly  all  the  souls  were  thrown  in  when  we  ar-
rived, for  it  was  done  almost  in  the  turning  of  a
hand;  each  one  had  made  haste,  thinking  there
would  not  be  room  enough  for  all  the  souls ;  we  saw,
however,  enough  of  it  to  judge  of  the  rest.  There
were  five  or  six  in  the  pit,  arranging  the  bones  with
poles.  The  pit  was  full,  within  about  two  feet;  they
turned  back  over  the  bones  the  robes  which  bordered
the  edge  of  the  pit,  and  covered  the  remaining  space


300  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.10

toutes  parts  des  voix  confufes  de  ces  Barbares:  ce
bruit  neantmoins  ceffa  [210]  pour  quelque  temps,  &
fe  mirent  a  chanter,  mais  d'vn  ton  fi  lamentable  &  fi
lugubre,  qu'il  nous  reprefentoit  1' horrible  trifteffe  &
l'abyfme  du  defefpoir,  dans  lequel  font  plongees  pour
iamais  ces  ames  malheureufes.

Tout  eftoit  prefque  iette  quand  nous  arriuafmes,
car  cela  fe  fit  quafi  en  vn  tour  de  main;  chacun
s'eftoit  preffe,  croyant  qu'il  n'y  euft  pas  affez  de
place  pour  toutes  ces  ames ;  nous  en  vifmes  neant-
moins encore  affez  pour  iuger  du  refte.  lis  efloient
cinq  ou  fix  dans  la  foffe  auec  des  perches  a  arrager
ces  os.  La  foffe  fut  pleine  a  deux  pieds  pres:  ils
renuerferent  par  deffus  les  robbes  qui  la  debordoient
tout  autour,  &  couurirent  tout  le  refte  de  nattes,  &
d'ecorces.  Pour  la  foffe  ils  la  comblerent  de  fable,
de  perches,  &  de  pieux  de  bois  qu'ils  y  ietterent  fans
ordre.  Quelques  femmes  y  apporteret  quelques  plats
de  bled,  &  le  mefme  iour  &  les  fuiuants  plufieurs
Cabanes  du  Village  en  fournirent  des  manes  [ma-
nets?]  toutes  pleines  qui  furent  iettees  fur  la  foffe.

Nous  auons  quinze  ou  vingt  Chreftiens  enterrez
auec  ces  Infideles,  nous  difmes  pour  leurs  ames  vn
De profundis:  auec  vne  [2ii]ferme  efperance,  que  fi
la  diuine  bonte  n'arrefle  le  cours  de  fes  benedictions
fur  ces  Peuples,  cette  fefte  ne  fe  fera  plus,  ou  ne  fera
que  pour  les  Chreftiens,  &  fe  fera  auec  des  ceremo-
nies auffi  fainctes,  que  celles-la  font  f ottes  &  inutiles ;
auffi  commencent-elles  a  leur  eftre  a  charge,  pour  les
excez  &  depenfes  fuperflues  qui  s'y  font.

Toute  la  matinee  f e  paff a  en  largeff es ;  &  la  plus-
part  des  robbes,  dans  lefquelles  auoient  efte  toutes
ces  ames,  furent  coupees  par  pieces,  &  iett£es  du  haut


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  301

with  mats  and  bark.  Then  they  heaped  the  pit  with
sand,  poles,  and  wooden  stakes,  which  they  threw  in
without  order.  Some  women  brought  to  it  some  dishes
of  corn ;  and  that  day,  and  the  following  days,  sev-
eral Cabins  of  the  Village  provided  nets  quite  full  of
it,  which  were  thrown  upon  the  pit.

We  have  fifteen  or  twenty  Christians  interred  with
these  Infidels ;  we  said  for  their  souls  a  De  profnndis,
with  a  [211]  strong  hope  that,  if  divine  goodness
does  not  stop  the  course  of  its  blessings  upon  these
Peoples,  this  feast  will  cease,  or  will  only  be  for
Christians,  and  will  take  place  with  ceremonies  as
sacred  as  the  ones  we  saw  are  foolish  and  useless ;
they  are  even  now  beginning  to  be  a  burden  to  them,
on  account  of  the  excesses  and  superfluous  expenses
connected  with  them.

The  whole  morning  was  passed  in  giving  presents ;
and  the  greater  part  of  the  robes  in  which  the  souls
had  been  wrapped  were  cut  into  pieces,  and  thrown
from  the  height  of  the  Stage  into  the  midst  of  the
crowd,  for  any  one  who  could  get  them ;  it  was  very
amusing  when  two  or  three  got  hold  of  a  Beaver
skin,  since,  as  none  of  them  would  give  way,  it  had
to  be  cut  into  so  many  pieces,  and  thus  they  found
themselves  almost  empty-handed,  for  the  fragment
was  scarcely  worth  the  picking  up.  In  this  connec-
tion, I  admired  the  ingenuity  of  one  Savage, —  he
did  not  put  himself  to  any  trouble  to  run  after  these
flying  pieces,  but,  as  there  had  been  nothing  so  valu-
able in  this  Country,  this  year,  as  Tobacco,  he  kept
some  pieces  of  it  in  his  hands  which  he  immediately
offered  to  those  who  were  disputing  over  a  skin,  and
[212]  thus  settled  the  matter  to  his  own  advantage.

Before  going  away  from  the  place,  we  learned  that,


302  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.10

du  Theatre  au  milieu  de  l'affemblee  a  qui  les  empor-
teroit:  c'eftoit  vn  plaifir  quand  ils  fe  trouuoient  deux
ou  trois  fur  vne  peau  de  Cafhor;  car  pour  s'accorder
il  falloit  la  couper  en  autant  de  pieces ;  &  ainfi  ils  fe
trouuoient  quafi  les  mains  vuides,  car  ce  lambeau  ne
valloit  pas  quafi  le  ramaffer.  I'admiray  icy  l'induftrie
d'vn  Sauuage,  il  ne  fe  preffoit  pas  bien  fort  pour
courir  apres  ces  pieces  volantes ;  mais  comme  il  n'y
a  rien  eu  de  fi  precieux  cette  annee  dans  le  Pais  que
le  Petun,  il  en  tenoit  quelque  morceau  dans  fes
mains,  qu'il  prefentoit  incontinent  a  ceux  qui  difpu-
toient  a  qui  auroit  la  peau,  &  en  [212]  conuenoit  ainfi
a  fon  profit.

Auant  que  de  fortir  de  la  place,  nous  apprimes  que
la  nuict  qu'on  auoit  fait  des  prefens  aux  Nations
eftrangeres  de  la  part  du  maiftre  du  feftin,  on  nous
auoit  auffi  nommez ;  &  de  fait  comme  nous  nous  en
allions  AnenkJiiondic,  nous  vint  pref enter  vne  robbe
neufue  de  dix  Caftors,  en  confideration  du  collier,
dont  ie  leur  auois  fait  prefent  en  plain  Confeil,  pour
leur  faire  le  chemin  du  ciel.  Il[s]  s'efloient  trouuez  fi
fort  obligez  de  ce  prefent,  qu'ils  en  auoient  voulu  t6-
moigner  quelque  recognoiffance  en  vne  fi  belle  affem-
blee.  Ie  ne  l'acceptay  pas  neantmoins,  luy  difant,
que  comme  nous  ne  leur  auions  fait  ce  prefent,  que
pour  les  porter  a  embraffer  noflre  foy,  ils  ne  nous
pouuoient  obliger  dauantage  qu'en  nous  ecoutant  vo-
lontiers,  &  en  croyant  en  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait.  II  me
demada  ce  que  ie  defirois  done  qu'il  fift  de  la  robbe;
Ie  luy  repondis  qu'il  en  difpofaft  comme  bon  luy  fem-
bleroit,  dequoy  il  demeura  parfaitement  fatisfaict.

Pour  le  refte  des  douze  cens  prefens,  quarante  huict
robbes  furent  employees  a  parer  la  fofle. Chaque


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  303

during  the  night,  when  they  had  made  presents  to
outside  Nations  on  behalf  of  the  master  of  the  feast,
our  names  had  been  mentioned.  And  indeed,  as  we
were  going  away,  Anenkhiondic  came  to  present  to  us
a  new  robe  of  ten  Beaver  skins,  in  return  for  the  col-
lar that  I  had  given  them  as  a  present  in  open  Coun-
cil, to  open  for  them  the  way  to  heaven.  They  had
felt  themselves  under  such  obligations  for  this  srift
that  they  desired  to  show  some  gratitude  for  it  in  so
great  an  assembly.  I  did  not  accept  it,  however,
telling  him  that,  as  we  had  only  made  this  present
to  lead  them  to  embrace  our  faith,  they  could  not
render  us  greater  service  than  by  listening  to  us
willingly,  and  believing  in  him  who  made  all  things.
He  asked  me  then  what  I  desired  he  should  do  with
the  robe ;  I  replied  that  he  might  dispose  of  it  as
seemed  good  to  him,  whereat  he  remained  perfectly
satisfied.

As  to  the  rest  of  the  twelve  hundred  presents,  forty-
eight  robes  were  used  in  adorning  the  pit.  Each
whole  body  had  [213]  its  robe,  and  some  had  two  or
three.  Twenty  were  given  to  the  master  of  the  feast,
to  thank  the  Nations  which  had  taken  part  therein.
The  dead  distributed  a  number  of  them,  by  the  hands
of  the  Captains,  to  their  living  friends ;  some  served
only  for  show,  and  were  taken  away  by  those  who
had  exhibited  them.  The  Old  Men  and  the  notables
of  the  Country,  who  had  the  administration  and
management  of  the  feast,  took  possession  secretly  of
a  considerable  quantity ;  and  the  rest  was  cut  in
pieces,  as  I  have  said,  and  ostentatiously  thrown  into
the  midst  of  the  crowd.  However,  it  is  only  the  rich
who  lose  nothing,  or  very  little,  in  this  feast.  The
middle  classes  and  the  poor  bring  and  leave  there


304  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

corps  entier  emporta  [213]  fa  robbe,  &  quelques-vns
deux  &  trois.  On  en  donna  vingt  au  maiftre  du
feftin  pour  remercier  les  Nations  qui  auoient  afufte"  a
la  fefte.  Les  defuncts  en  diftribuerent  quantite,  par
les  mains  des  Capitaines,  a  leurs  amis  viuans.  Vne
partie  ne  feruit  que  de  parade,  &  fut  retire  de  ceux
qui  les  auoient  expofees.  Les  Anciens,  &  les  groffes
teftes  du  Pais,  qui  en  auoient  l'adminiftration  &  le
maniment,  en  tirerent  auffi  fouz-main  vne  affez  bonne
quantite,  &  le  refte  fut  coupe  en  pieces,  comme  i'ay
dit,  &  iette  par  magnificence  au  milieu  de  1'afTem-
blee.  Cependant  il  n'ya  que  les  riches  qui  ne  per-
dent  rien,  ou  fort  peu,  a  cette  fefte.  Les  medions,
&  les  pauures  y  apportent,  &  y  laiffent  ce  qu'ils
auoient  de  plus  precieux,  &  fouffrent  beaucoup  pour
ne  point  paroiftre  moins  que  les  autres  en  cette  cele-
brite. Tout  le  monde  fe  picque  d'honneur.

Au  refte  il  ne  s'en  eft  prefque  rien  fallu,  que  nous
n'ayons  auffi  efte  de  la  fefte :  des  cet  Hyuer  le  Capi-
taine  Aenons,  dont  i'ay  parle  cy-deuant,  nous  en  vint
faire  ouuerture  de  la  part  des  Anciens  de  tout  le
Pais.  Pour  lors  la  chaudiere  n'eftoit  pas  [214]  encor
diuifee.  II  nous  propofa  done,  fi  nous  ferions  con-
tens  de  leuer  les  corps  des  deux  Francois,  qui  font
morts  en  ce  Pais,  fgauoir  eft  de  Guillaume  Chau-
dron,  &  Eftiene  Brufle,  qui  fut  tue  il  y  a  quatre  ans,
&  que  leurs  os  fuffent  mis  das  la  foffe  commune  de
leurs  morts.  Nous  luy  repondifmes  d'abord,  que  cela
ne  fe  pouuoit  faire;  que  cela  nous  eftoit  defendu,  que
comme  ils  auoient  efte  baptifez,  &  eftoiet  comme
nous  efperions  dans  le  ciel,  nous  refpections  trop
leurs  os  pour  permettre  qu'ils  fuffent  meflez  auec  les
os  de  ceux  qui  n'ont  point  efte  baptifez ;  &  puis  que


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6s6  305

whatever  they  have  most  valuable,  and  suffer  much,
in  order  not  to  appear  less  liberal  than  the  others  in
this  celebration.  Every  one  makes  it  a  point  of
honor.

Let  me  add  that  we  narrowly  escaped  not  being
present  at  the  feast.  During  this  Winter  the  Cap-
tain Aenons,  of  whom  I  have  spoken  before,  came  to
us  to  make  an  overture  on  behalf  of  the  Old  Men  of
the  whole  Country.  At  that  time,  the  kettle  was  not
[214]  yet  divided.  They  asked,  therefore,  if  we
would  be  satisfied  to  raise  the  bodies  of  our  two
Frenchmen  who  died  in  this  part  of  the  Country,
Guillaume  Chaudron,  and  Estienne  Brusle,  who  was
killed  four  years  ago,  that  their  bones  might  be  put
in  the  common  grave  with  their  dead.  We  answered,
first  of  all,  that  that  could  not  be,  that  it  was  forbid-
den to  us;  that,  as  they  had  been  baptized  and  were,
as  we  hoped,  in  heaven,  we  respected  their  bones  too
much  to  permit  them  being  mingled  with  the  bones
of  those  who  had  not  been  baptized;  and,  besides,
that  it  was  not  our  custom  to  raise  the  bodies.

We  added,  nevertheless,  that  as  they  were  interred
in  the  woods,  and  as  they  desired  it  so  much,  we
would  be  pleased  to  raise  their  bones  if  they  would
grant  us  permission  to  put  them  into  a  private  grave,
along  with  the  bones  of  all  those  we  had  baptized  in
the  Country.

Four  principal  reasons  induced  us  to  give  this  an-
swer. 1 .  As  it  is  the  greatest  pledge  of  friendship
and  alliance  they  have  in  the  Country,  we  [215]  were
already  granting  to  them  on  this  point  what  they
wished,  and  were  making  it  appear  thereby  that  we
desired  to  love  them  as  our  brothers,  and  to  live  and
die  with  them. 2. We  hoped  that  God  would  be


306  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

ce  n'eftoit  pas  noftre  couftume  de  releuer  les  corps.

Nous  adiouftafmes  neantmoins  apres  tout  cela,  que
comme  ils  eftoient  enterrez  dans  les  bois,  &  puis
qu'ils  le  defiroiet  fi  fort,  nous  ferions  contens  de  leuer
leurs  os,  a  condition  qu'ils  nous  accordafient  de  les
mettre  en  vne  foffe  particuliere  auec  les  os  de  tous
ceux  que  nous  auions  baptifez  dans  le  Pais.

Quatre  raifons  principales  nous  porterent  a  leur
faire  cette  reponfe.  i.  Comme  c'eft  le  plus  grand
temoignage  d'amitie  &  d'alliance  qu'ils  ayent  dans  le
Pais,  nous  [215]  leur  accordions  deja  en  ce  point  ce
qu'ils  fouhaittoient,  &  faifions  paroiftre  par  la,  que
nous  defirions  les  aymer  comme  nos  freres,  &  viure
&  mourir  auec  eux.  2.  Nous  efperions  que  Dieu
en  feroit  glorifie,  principalement,  en  ce  que  feparant
par  l'aueu  de  tout  le  Pais  les  corps  des  Chreftiens,
d'auec  les  corps  des  Infideles,  il  n'euft  pas  efte  diffi-
cile par  apres  d'obtenir  des  particuliers  que  leurs
Chreftiens  fuffent  enterrez  en  vn  Cimetiere  a  part,
que  nous  benirions  pour  cet  effect.  3.  Nous  preten-
dions  les  enterrer  auec  toutes  les  ceremonies  de  l'E-
glife.  4.  Les  Anciens  de  leur  propre  mouuement
defiroient  que  nous  y  fiffions  dreffer  vne  belle  &  ma-
gnifique  Croix,  comme  ils  nous  temoignerent  par
apres  plus  particulierement.  Ainfi  la  Croix  euft  efte"
authorifee  de  tout  le  Pais,  &  honoree  en  cette  Barba-
rie,  &  ils  n'euffent  eu  garde  par  apres  de  luy  impu-
ter,  comme  ils  ont  fait  par  le  paff6,  les  malheurs  qui
leur  arriueroient.

Ce  Capitaine  trouua  noftre  proportion  fort  raifon-
nable,  &  les  Anciens  du  Pais  en  demeurerent  fort  con-
tens.  Quelque  temps  apres  la  chaudiere  fut  diuitee,
&  [216]  comme  i'ay  dit,  cinq  Villages  de  cette  pointe


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  307

glorified  thereby, —  mainly  in  this,  that,  in  thus  sep-
arating, with  the  consent  of  the  whole  Country,  the
bodies  of  Christians  from  those  of  Unbelievers,  it
would  not  have  been  difficult  afterwards  to  obtain
from  private  persons  that  their  Christians  should  be
interred  in  a  Cemetery  apart,  which  we  would  con-
secrate for  that  purpose.  3.  We  were  intending  to
inter  them  with  all  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church.
4.  The  Elders,  of  their  own  accord,  wished  us  to
erect  a  beautiful  and  magnificent  Cross,  as  they  stated
afterwards  more  particularly.  Thus  the  Cross  would
have  been  authorized  by  the  whole  Country,  and
honored  in  the  midst  of  this  Barbarism,  and  they
would  not  have  taken  pains  thereafter  to  impute  to
it,  as  they  have  done  in  the  past,  the  misfortunes  that
might  overtake  them.

This  Chief  found  our  proposition  very  reasonable,
and  the  Elders  of  the  Country  seemed  to  be  pleased
with  it.  Some  time  after,  the  kettle  was  divided,
and,  [216]  as  I  have  said,  five  Villages  of  the  part
where  we  are,  resolved  to  have  their  feast  by  them-
selves.

In  the  Spring,  a  general  Assembly  of  the  Notables
of  the  whole  Country  took  place,  to  consider  every-
thing connected  with  this  feast,  to  endeavor  to  heal
this  schism,  and  to  reunite  the  kettle.  The  disaffected
ones  were  there,  and  I  was  invited  also.  The  same
proposition  was  made  to  me ;  I  replied  that  we  would
be  quite  satisfied  provided  the  conditions  we  had
asked  should  be  fulfilled.  They  referred  to  the  divi-
sion of  the  kettle,  and  asked  me, —  since  there  were
two  kettles,  that  is,  two  pits, —  with  which  did  I  de-
sire our  private  grave  to  be.  To  this  I  answered,  in
order  not  to  offend  any  one,  that  I  referred  the  mat-


308  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  10

ou  nous  fommes,  fe  refolurent  de  faire  leur  fefte  a
part.

Au  Printemps  il  fe  fit  vne  Affemblee  generale  des
Notables  de  tout  le  Pais,  pour  aduifer  a  tout  ce  qui
concernoit  cette  fefte,  &  pour  tafcher  d'ofter  ce
fchifme,  &  reiinir  la  chaudiere.  Ces  efprits  mecon-
tens  s'y  trouuerent :  i'y  f us  auffi  inuite ;  on  me  fit  la
mefme  propofition :  ie  refpondis  que  nous  en  f erions
tres-contents,  pourueu  que  cela  fe  fift  auec  les  condi-
tions que  nous  auions  demande.  On  me  fit  inftance
fur  la  diuifion  de  la  chaudiere,  &  me  demanderent,
puis  qu'il  y  auoit  deux  chaudieres,  c'eft  a  dire  deux
foffes,  de  quel  cofte  ie  defirois  que  fuft  noitre  foffe
particuliere.  A  cela  ie  leur  fis  refponfe,  pour  n'offen-
fer  perfonne,  que  ie  remettois  la  chofe  a  leur  iuge-
ment,  qu'ils  eftoient  bons  &  fages,  qu'ils  y  aduifaffent
entre  eux.  Le  Maiftre  du  feftin  de  la  Rochelle  dit  la
deffus  par  condefcendance,  que  pour  luy  il  n'y  pre-
tendoit  rien,  &  qu'il  eftoit  content  que  l'autre,  qui
eft  le  Chef  de  cette  pointe,  euft  de  fon  cofte  les  corps
de  nos  deux  Francois.  Cetui-cy  refpondit  qu'il  ne  pre-
tendoit  rien  a  celuy  qui  auoit  [2 1 7]  efte  enterre  a  la
Rochelle;  mais  que  pour  le  corps  d'Eftienne  Brufle  il
luy  appartenoit,  que  c'eftoit  luy  qui  l'auoit  embarque
&  emmene  en  ce  Pais:  ainfi  voila  les  corps  diui-
fez  l'vn  d'vn  cofte,  l'autre  de  l'autre.  La  deffus  quel-
qu'vn  dit  fous  main,  qu'en  effet  il  auoit  droit  de  de-
mander  le  corps  d'Eftienne  Brufle,  &  qu'il  eftoit  bien
raifonnable  qu'ils  rendiffent  quelque  honneur  a  fes
os,  puis  qu'ils  l'auoient  tue.  Cecy  ne  fe  petit  dire  fi
fecrettement,  que  ce  Capitaine  n'en  euft  le  vent;  il
difiimula  neantmoins  fur  l'heure  fes  fentimens.  Apres
le  Confeil,  comme  nous  eftions  deja  fortis,  il  releua


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION, i636  309

ter  to  their  judgment ;  that  they  were  good  and  wise,
and  could  talk  over  the  affair  among  themselves.
The  Master  of  the  feast  of  la  Rochelle  then  said,
condescendingly,  that,  so  far  as  he  was  concerned,
he  claimed  nothing ;  that  he  was  perfectly  satisfied
that  the  other,  who  is  the  Chief  at  this  place,  should
have  on  his  side  the  bodies  of  our  two  Frenchmen.
The  other  replied  that  he  laid  no  claim  to  him  who
had  [217]  been  buried  at  la  Rochelle;  but,  as  for  the
body  of  Estienne  Brusle  it  belonged  to  him,  since  he
had  embarked  him  and  brought  him  into  the  Coun-
try ;  and  thus  the  bodies  were  divided,  one  on  one
side,  one  on  the  other.  Thereupon  some  one  said,
in  an  undertone,  that  he  was  quite  right  in  asking
the  body  of  Estienne  Brusle, —  that  it  was  very  rea-
sonable that  they  should  render  honor  to  his  bones,
since  they  had  killed  him.  This  was  not  said  so  dis-
creetly as  not  to  be  heard  by  the  Captain ;  he  dis-
sembled his  feelings,  however,  for  the  time  being.
After  the  Council,  when  we  had  left,  he  took  notice
of  the  reproach,  and  had  very  high  words  with  the
Captain  of  la  Rochelle ;  and  finally  ceased  to  lay  any
claim  to  the  body  of  Brusle,  in  order  not  to  irritate
and  reopen  this  wound,  from  which  those  of  this  part
have  not  yet  purged  themselves.

This  made  us  also  deem  it  best,  with  those  of  la
Rochelle,  not  to  touch  either  the  one  or  the  other.
Truly  there  is  reason  here  to  admire  the  secret  judg-
ments of  God ;  for  that  infamous  wretch  did  not  de-
serve to  have  this  honor  shown  him;  and,  to  tell  the
truth,  we  would  have  had  [218]  much  difficulty  in
resolving  to  make  on  this  occasion  a  private  Grave,
and  in  transporting  to  consecrated  Ground  a  dead
man  that  had  lived  so  scandalous  a  life  in  the  Coun-


310  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.  10

cette  reproche,  &  fe  prit  bien  fort  de  parole  auec  le
Capitaine  de  la  Rochelle ;  &  en  fin  f  e  deporta  entiere-
ment  du  corps  de  Brufle,  pour  ne  point  aigrir  &  en-
fanglanter  dauantage  cette  playe,  de  laquelle  ceux
de  cette  pointe  n'ont  pen.  encor  fe  purger.

Ce  qui  nous  fit  auffi  refoudre  a  faire  trouuer  bon  a
ceux  de  la  Rochelle,  que  nous  ne  touchaffions  ny  a
l'vn,  ny  a  l'autre.  Veritablement  il  y  a  dequoy  ad-
mirer icy  les  f ecrets  iugemens  de  Dieu ;  car  cet  in-
fame  auffi  bien  ne  meritoit  pas  cet  honneur ;  &  pour
dire  le  vray  nous  euffions  eu  [2 1 8]  aff ez  de  peine  a
nous  refoudre  de  faire  a  fon  occafion  vn  Cimetiere
particulier,  &  de  tranfporter  en  Terre  faincte  vn
corps  qui  a  mene  vne  vie  fi  fcandaleufe  dans  le  Pais,
&  donne  aux  Sauuages  vne  fi  mauuaife  impreffion  des
mceurs  des  Francois.  D'abord  quelques-vns  trou-
uerent  mauuais  que  nous  en  demeuraffions  la,  &  s'en
offenferent,  nous  alleguant  que  cela  eftant,  ils  ne
pourroient  pas  f e  vanter,  comme  ils  efperoient,  aupres
des  Peuples  eftrangers  d'eftre  parens  des  Francois;
autrement  qu'on  leur  pourroit  dire  qu'il  n'y  auoit
gueres  d'apparence,  puis  que  nous  n'auons  voulu
mettre  les  os  des  noftres  auec  les  leur[s] :  par  apres
neantmoins  ayant  ouy  toutes  nos  raifons,  ils  iugerent
que  nous  faifions  prudemment,  &  que  c'efioit  le  vray
moyen  de  nous  maintenir  en  amitie  les  vns  auec  les
autres.

Finiray-ie  la  pref ente  par  cette  ceremonie  funebre  ?
Ouy,  puis  qu'elle  eft  vne  marque  affez  claire  de  l'efpe-
rance  d'vne  vie  future,  que  la  nature  femble  nous  four-
nir  dans  l'efprit  de  ces  Peuples,  comme  vn  moyen
tres-propre  a  leur  faire  goufter  les  promeffes  de
Iefus-Chrift. N'y  a-t'il  pas  occafion  d'efperer  qu'ils


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i6j6  311

try,  and  had  given  to  the  Savages  so  bad  an  impres-
sion of  the  morals  of  the  French.  At  first,  some  felt
annoyed  that  we  did  not  join  in  the  feast,  and  were
offended, —  saying  to  us  that  our  action  prevented
them  from  boasting,  as  they  had  hoped,  to  strange
Tribes  that  they  were  relations  of  the  French ;  and
they  were  afraid  they  would  say  that  the  friendship
was  only  in  appearance,  since  we  had  not  allowed  the
bones  of  our  Frenchmen  to  mingle  with  theirs.  Af-
terward, however,  when  they  had  heard  all  our  rea-
sons, they  thought  we  had  acted  prudently,  and  that
it  was  the  true  way  to  maintain  friendship  with  both
parties.

Shall  I  finish  the  present  letter  with  this  funeral
ceremony?  Yes,  since  it  is  a  very  clear  token  of  the
hope  of  a  future  life  that  nature  herself  seems  to  fur-
nish us  in  the  minds  of  these  Tribes,  as  a  most  fitting
means  to  get  them  to  taste  the  promises  of  Jesus
Christ.  Is  there  not  reason  to  hope  that  they  will  do
so,  [219]  and  as  soon  as  possible?  Of  a  truth,  I  dare
indeed  affirm  that,  judging  from  present  appearances,
we  have  grounds  for  strengthening  our  courage,  and
saying  about  our  Hurons  what  saint  Paul  wrote  to
the  Philippians,  Confidens  hoc  ipsum,  quia  qui  ccepit  in
vobis  opus  bonum,  pcrficiet  usque  in  diem  Christi  Jesu.
These  poor  people  open  their  ears  to  what  we  say  to
them  about  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven;  they  find  it
very  reasonable,  and  dare  not  contradict  it;  they  fear
the  judgments  of  God  in  a  future  life ;  they  are  be-
ginning to  have  recourse  with  us  to  his  goodness  in
their  necessities,  and  Our  Lord  seems  to  favor  them,
at  times,  with  some  special  assistance.  They  pro-
cure Baptism  for  those  whom  they  see  in  danger  of
death ;  they  give  us  their  children  to  be  instructed,


312  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.10

le  ferront,  [219]  &  au  pluftoft.  Certes  i'oferay  bien
affeurer  que  eu  egard  a  ce  qui  paroift,  nous  auons
dequoy  fortifier  nos  courages,  &  dire  fur  nos  Hurons
ce  que  fainct  Paul  efcriuoit  aux  Philippiens:  Confi-
dens  hoc  ipfum,  quia  qui  coepit  in  vobis  opus  bonum,  per-
ficiet  vfque  in  diem  Chrijii  Iefu.  Ces  pauures  gens
ouurent  les  oreilles  a  ce  que  nous  leur  dif  ons  du  Roy-
aume  du  Ciel,  ils  le  trouuent  fort  raifonnable,  &
n'ofent  y  contredire :  ils  apprehendent  les  iugemens
de  Dieu  en  l'autre  vie,  ils  commencent  a  auoir  recours
auec  nous  a  fa  bonte  en  leurs  neceffitez ;  &  Noftre  Sei-
gneur femble  les  y  fauorifer  par  fois  de  quelque
affiftance  particuliere.  Ils  procurent  le  Baptefme  a
ceux  qu'ils  voyent  en  danger  de  mort:  ils  nous  don-
nent  leurs  enfans  pour  eflre  inftruits,  iufques  a  per-
mettre  qu'ils  faffent  les  trois  cens  lieues  a  cet  effet,
nonobftant  les  tendres  affections  qu'ils  ont  pour  eux ;
ils  fe  promettent  de  les  fuiure  vn  iour,  &  nous  temoi-
gnent  qu'ils  ne  nous  donneroient  pas  des  gages  fi  pre-
cieux,  s'ils  n'auoient  enuie  de  nous  tenir  parole.
Vous  diriez  qu'ils  ne  s'attendent  qu'a  en  voir  vn
d'entre  eux  qui  franchiffe  le  premier  ce  pas  redou-
table,  &  [220]  qui  ofe  aller  contre  la  couftume  du
Pays.  C'eft  au  refte  vn  Peuple  qui  a  fa  demeure  ar-
reftee,  iudicieux,  capable  de  raifon,  &  affez  multiplie.
Ie  fis  mention  l'an  paffe  de  douze  Nations  toutes
fedentaires  &  nombreufes,  qui  entendent  la  langue
de  nos  Hurons :  &  nos  Hurons  font  en  vingt  Villages
enuiron  trente  mille  ames ;  fi  le  refte  eft  a  propor-
tion, en  voila  plus  de  trois  cens  mille  de  la  feule
langue  Huronne.  Dieu  nous  donne  du  credit  parmy
eux,  nous  y  met  en  eftime,  &  fait  que  nous  y  foyons
aimez  iufques  la,  que  nous  ne  fcauons  a  qui  entendre,


1636]  LE  /EUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  313

even  permitting  them  to  come  three  hundred  leagues
for  that  purpose,  notwithstanding  the  tender  affection
they  have  for  them  ;  they  promise  to  follow  them  some
day,  and  declare  they  would  not  give  us  pledges  so
precious,  if  they  were  not  desirous  of  keeping  their
word.  You  might  say  they  are  only  waiting  to  see
one  of  their  number  take  the  first  dreaded  step,  and
[220]  venture  to  run  counter  to  the  customs  of  the
Country.  Let  me  add  they  are  a  People  who  have  a
settled  habitation, —  judicious,  capable  of  reason,  and
sufficiently  numerous.

I  made  mention  last  year  of  twelve  Nations,  all
being  sedentary  and  populous  and  who  understand
the  tongue  of  our  Hurons;  and  our  Hurons  make,
in  twenty  Villages,  about  thirty  thousand  souls.  If
the  remainder  is  in  proportion,  there  are  more  than
three  hundred  thousand  of  the  Huron  tongue  alone.
God  gives  us  influence  among  them,  causes  us  to  be
held  in  estimation,  makes  us  so  much  loved  that  we
do  not  know  to  whom  to  listen,  so  eager  is  every  one
to  have  us.  In  truth,  we  should  be  very  ungrateful
to  the  mercy  of  God  if  we  lost  courage  amid  all  this,
and  did  not  give  him  time  to  bring  forth  the  fruit  in
its  due  season.

It  is  true  I  have  some  little  fear  in  regard  to  the
time  when  I  must  employ  a  new  language  in  refer-
ence to  their  morals,  and  teach  them  to  keep  down
the  flesh,  and  hold  them  in  the  honesty  of  Marriage,
preventing  divorces  by  fear  of  the  judgments  of  God
on  the  lewd;  when  it  will  be  a  question  of  [221]  say-
ing to  them  on  all  occasions,  Quoniam  qui  talia  agunt
regnum  Dei  non  possidebunt.  I  am  afraid  they  will  be-
come restive  when  we  shall  speak  to  them  of  being
reclothed  in  Jesus  Christ,  of  wearing  his  livery,  and


314  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES  [Vol.10

tant  vn  chacun  eft  afpre  a,  nous  auoir.  En  verite
nous  ferions  bien  ingrats  a  la  grace  de  Dieu,  fi  nous
perdions  courage  parmy  tout  cela,  &  ne  luy  donnions
le  loifir  de  porter  fon  fruit  en  fa  faifon.

II  eft  vray  que  i'ay  quelque  peu  d'apprehenfion
pour  le  temps  auquel  il  faudra  leur  tenir  vn  langage
nouueau  fur  leurs  mceurs,  &  leur  apprendre  a  clouer
leurs  chairs,  &  les  retenir  dans  l'honneftete  du  Ma-
nage, en  retranchant  les  diffolutions  par  la  crainte
des  iugemens  de  Dieu  fur  les  luxurieux ;  lors  qu'il
fera  question  de  [221]  leur  dire  en  tout  plein  d'occa-
fions,  Quoniam  qui  talia  agunt  regnum  Dei  non  pojlide-
bunt.  Fay  peur  qu'ils  faflent  les  retifs,  quand  on
leur  parlera  de  fe  reueftir  de  Iefus-Chrift,  de  porter
fa  liuree,  &  fe  diftinguer  en  qualite  de  Chreftiens
d'auec  ce  qu'ils  auront  efte  auparauant,  par  vne  vertu
dont  a  peine  cognoiffent-ils  le  nom,  quand  on  leur
criera  auec  1'Apoftre,  C  eft  la  la  volonte  de  Dieu,  voftre
fanctificatio7i,  quvn  chacun  /cache  conf enter  fon  corps
conune  vn  vafe  precieux  en  fanctiftcation  &  en  honneur,  &
non  le  laiffant  allcr  aux  pafjions  de  fes  defirs,  comme  les
Gcntils  qui  ne  cognoiffcnt  point  Dieu.  II  eft,  dis-ie,  bien
a  craindre  qu'ils  ne  s'effrayent  fur  le  propos  de  la
purete  &  chaftete,  &  qu'ils  ne  fe  rebut ent  a  fon  occa-
fion  de  la  doctrine  du  Fils  de  Dieu,  difans  auec  les
Capharnaites  fur  vn  autre  fuiet,  Durus  eft  hie  fervw,
&  quis  potest  eum  audire?  Toutefois  puis  qu'auec  la
grace  de  Dieu  nous  auons  deia  obtenu  d'eux  par  la
profeffion  ouuerte  que  nous  auons  fait  de  cette  vertu,
qu'ils  n'ofent  ny  faire,  ny  dire  en  noftre  prefence
chofe  aucune  qui  luy  foit  contraire,  iufques  a  mena-
cer  les  Eftrangers  quand  ils  s'echappent  deuant  nous,
&  les  aduertir  que  les Francois  [222]  &  fur  tout  les


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  i636  315

of  being  distinguished  in  the  capacity  of  Christians,
from  what  they  were  previously,  by  a  virtue  of  which
they  scarcely  recognize  the  name,  when  we  shall  say
to  them  with  the  Apostle,  For  this  is  the  will  of  God,
your  sanctification;  that  every  one  of  you  should  know  how
to  preserve  his  body  as  a  precious  vessel  in  sanctification
and  in  honor,  and  not  give  way  to  the  passion  of  his  lusts,
like  the  Gentiles  that  know  not  God.  It  is,  I  say,  much
to  be  feared  that  they  will  be  alarmed  at  the  proposal
of  purity  and  chastity,  and  that  they  will  reject,
when  it  is  presented,  the  doctrine  of  the  Son  of  God,
saying  with  the  men  of  Capernaum,  on  another  subject,
Durus  est  hie  sermo,  et  quis  potest  eum  ajidire  ?  Since,
however,  by  the  grace  of  God,  through  the  open  pro-
fession we  have  made  of  this  virtue,  we  have  secured
thus  much,  that  they  dare  neither  to  do  nor  to  mention
anything  contrary  to  it  in  our  presence, —  even  going
so  far  as  to  threaten  Strangers  when  they  offend
against  propriety  before  us,  warning  them  that  the
French  [222]  and  especially  the  black  Robes,  detest
such  liberties, —  is  it  not  most  probable  that,  if  once
the  holy  Spirit  takes  them  in  hand,  he  will  impress
upon  them  so  deeply,  in  every  place  and  time,  the
respect  they  owe  to  his  divine  presence  and  immen-
sity, that  they  will  be  very  glad  to  be  chaste  in  order
to  be  Christians,  and  will  ask  earnestly  to  be  Chris-
tians in  order  to  be  chaste?  I  imagine  that  it  was
for  this  particular  purpose  that  Our  Lord  inspired  us
to  put  them  under  the  special  protection  of  saint
Joseph.  This  great  Saint, —  who  was  in  other  times
given  as  a  Spouse  to  the  glorious  Virgin,  to  conceal
both  from  the  eyes  of  the  world  and  from  the  Devil
a  virginity  that  God  honored  by  his  Incarnation, —
has  so  much  power  with  this  Holy  Lady,  in  whose


316  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.10

Robbes  noires  deteftent  ces  priuautez.  N'eft-il  pas
plus  croyable  que  fi  le  fainct  Efprit  les  entreprend
vne  fois,  il  leur  imprimera  fi  auant  en  tout  lieu  &  en
tout  temps  le  refpect  qu'ils  doiuent  a  fa  diuine  pre-
fence  &  immenfite,  qu'ils  feront  bien  aifes  d'eftre
chaftes  pour  eftre  Chreftiens,  &  demanderont  auec
inftance  d'eftre  Chreftiens  pour  pouuoir  eftre  chaftes.
Ie  me  figure  que  c'eft  pour  ce  deffein  particulier  que
Noftre  Seigneur  nous  a  infpire  de  les  mettre  en  la
protection  de  fainct  Iofeph :  Ce  grand  Sainct  qui  a
efle  donne  autresfois  pour  Efpoux  a  la  glorieufe
Vierge,  &  pour  cacher  aux  yeux  du  monde,  &  du
Diable  vne  virginite  que  Dieu  honora  de  fon  Incarna-
tion, a  tant  de  pouuoir  enuers  cette  Saincte  Dame,
entre  les  mains  de  laquelle  fon  Fils  a  mis  comme  en
depoft  nommement  toutes  les  graces  qui  concourent
a  cette  vertu  celefte,  qu'il  n'y  a  prefque  rien  a  crain-
dre  dans  le  vice  contraire  pour  ceux  qui  luy  font  de-
uots  folidement,  tels  que  nous  defirons  eftre  nos  Hu-
rons  &  nous.  C'eft  a  cet  effet,  &  pour  la  conuerfion
entiere  de  tous  ces  Peuples,  que  nous  [223]  nous  re-
commandons  cordialement  aux  prieres  de  tous  ceux
qui  aiment,  ou  veulent  aimer  Dieu,  &  en  particulier
de  tous  nos  Peres  &  Freres.

De  la  Re  fide  nee  de  S.  Iofeph,  aux  Hu-
rons,  an  Village  nomine"  Ihonatiria,
ce  16.  de  Iuillet,  1636.

Voftre  tres-humble,  &  tres-
obeiflant  feruiteur  en  noftre
Seigneur,

Iean  de  Brebevf.


1636]  LE  JEUNE'S  RELATION,  1636  317

hands  her  Son  has  placed,  as  in  deposit,  all  the  graces
which  assist  this  celestial  virtue,  that  there  is  scarce-
ly anything  to  fear  in  the  contrary  vice  for  those  who
are  fully  devoted  to  her,  such  as  we  desire  our  Hu-
rons  and  ourselves  to  be.  It  is  for  this  end,  and  for
the  complete  conversion  of  these  Tribes,  that  we  [223]
commend  ourselves  cordially  to  the  prayers  of  all
those  who  love  or  wish  to  love  God,  and  in  particu-
lar of  all  our  Fathers  and  Brothers.

From  the  Residence  of  St.  Joseph  in
the  Huron  Country,  at  the  Village  called
Ihonatiria,  this  16th  of  July,  1636.

Your  very  humble  and  very
obedient  servant  in  our
Lord,

Jean  de  Brebeuf.


NOTES  TO  VOL  X


(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  number  of  note,  refer  to  pages

of  English  text.)

Map  of  Huron  Country. — The  (subsidiary)  map  of  the  Huron
country  which  appears  on  the  large  map  accompanying  vol.  i.  of
this  series  is  substantially  the  same  as  that  given  in  Parkman's
Jesuits,  which  was  based  on  Tache's  researches.  The  map  in  the
present  volume,  facing  this  page,  embodies  the  results  of  the  archae-
ological investigations  pursued  in  the  Huron  country  during  the
thirty  years  and  more  since  Tache  (vol.  v.,  pp.  295-298),  in  the
identification  of  mission  sites  —  notably  those  of  St.  Michael,  St.
Joseph,  and  St.  Ignace,  which  are  now  more  satisfactorily  estab-
lished than  when  Parkman  wrote  his  Jesuits.  This  map  has  been
prepared  especially  for  this  work,  by  Andrew  F.  Hunter,  of  Barrie,
Ont.,  whose  careful  and  enthusiastic  researches  are  already  known
to  our  readers  through  his  notes,  contributed  to  this  series,  on  Huron
tribes  and  localities ;  and  it  will  aid  the  reader  to  follow  more  accu-
rately the  vicissitudes  of  the  ill-fated  Huron  missions.

Localities  indicated  on  this  map  are  described  in  preceding  vol-
umes as  follows :  Vol.  v. , —  country  of  the  Attignaouantan  (Bear  clan),
note  17;  Ossossane  and  Ihonatiria,  notes  60,  61.  Vol.  viii., —  Oenrio
(Wenrio),  note  31 ;  Scanonaenrat,  note  38;  Onentisati,  note  42.  See
also  vol.  viii.,  note  23,  for  location  of  the  Attiguenongha  clan  of
Hurons.

Through  an  oversight,  the  map  does  not  indicate  the  name  of  the
township  of  Tiny ;  this  lies  west  of  the  township  of  Tay,  and  ex-
tends from  Thunder  Bay,  on  the  north,  to  Cranberry  Lake  on  the
southern  end.

1  (p.  11). —  For  location  of  Scanonaenrat,  see  vol.  viii.,  note  38.

2  (p.  43).  —  Regarding  the  capture  of  the  fleet,  here  mentioned,
see  vol.  iv.,  note  46.

3  (p.  45). — The  myth  of  the  Thunder-Bird  was,  in  some  form  or
other,  common  to  all  North  American  tribes,  from  Mexico  to  Hud-
son's Bay,  and  from  the  St.  Lawrence  to  Bering  Strait;  and  it  is  still
current  among  most  of  the  northern  and  western  tribes.  They  ex-
plain the  vivid  and  (to  them)  mysterious  and  terrible  phenomena  of
the  thunderstorm  as  proceeding  from  an  immense  bird,  so  large


321  i  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JES  UITES

that  its  shadow  darkens  the  heavens ;  the  thunder  is  the  sound  made
by  napping  its  wings,  the  lightning  is  the  flashing  or  the  winking  of
its  eyes,  and  the  deadly  and  invisible  thunderbolts  are  arrows  sent
forth  by  the  bird  against  its  enemies.  The  Indians  greatly  dread
this  imaginary  bird,  often  addressing  prayers  to  it  during  a  thunder-
storm :  and  they  have  many  traditions  and  superstitions  regarding
it.  The  tribes  about  Puget  Sound  and  in  Alaska  perform  the  "black
tamahnous,"  or  "thunder-bird  ceremony," — a  rite  often  savage  and
bloody.  Many  tribes  regarded  the  thunder-bird  as  the  Creator  of
the  world,  to  which  it  brought  fire  from  heaven ;  and  Dakota  legends
relate  the  unceasing  strife  between  Unktahe,  the  god  of  waters,  and
Wauhkeon,  the  thunder-bird.  For  details  of  this  myth,  see  Eells's
"The  Thunder-Bird,"  and  Chamberlain's  "Thunder-Bird  among
the  Algonkins,"  in  Amer.  Anthropologist,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  329-336;
vol.  iii.,  pp.  51-54.  Cf.  the  legend  of  the  "  Weendigoes,"  in  School-
craft's Algic  Researches,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  114 -116;  and  that  of  the
"sacred  pole"  of  the  Omahas,  Amer.  Antiquarian,  vol.  xvii.,  pp.
265-268;  also  Mrs.  Eastman's  Dahcotah;  or,  Legends  of  the  Sioux
(N.  Y.,  1S49),  pp.  212-242.

Brmton  {Myths  of  New  World,  pp.  239,  240)  thus  explains  this
myth:  "The  intimate  connection  that  once  existed  between  the
myths  of  the  deluge  and  those  of  the  creation  is  illustrated  by  the
part  assigned  to  birds  in  so  many  of  them.  They  fly  to  and  fro  over
the  waves  ere  any  land  appears,  though  they  lose  in  great  measure
the  significance  of  bringing  it  forth,  attached  to  them  in  the  cosmog-
onies as  emblems  of  the  divine  spirit.  The  dove  in  the  Hebrew
account  appears  in  that  of  the  Algonkins  as  a  raven,  which  Michabo
sent  out  to  search  for  land  before  the  muskrat  brought  it  to  him
from  the  bottom.  A  raven  also  in  the  Thlinkit  and  derived  myths
saved  their  ancestors  from  the  general  flood,  and  in  this  instance  it
is  distinctly  identified  with  the  mighty  thunder-bird,  who  at  the  be-
ginning ordered  the  earth  from  the  depths.  Prometheus-like,  it
brought  fire  from  heaven,  and  saved  them  from  a  second  death  by
cold.  This  wondrous  bird  Yetl  was  the  central  character  of  the
myths  of  all  the  coast  tribes  from  the  Eskimos  well  into  and  beyond
Vancouver  Island;  and  under  various  names,  but  playing  the  same
role  in  the  mighty  drama  of  the  creation  and  destruction  of  things,
was  familiar  to  the  Athapascan  tribes  far  inland.  ...  In  all
these  and  similar  legends,  the  bird  is  a  relic  of  the  cosmogonal  myth
which  explained  the  origin  of  the  world  from  the  action  of  the  winds,
under  the  image  of  the  bird,  on  the  primeval  ocean."

4  (P-  75)- — Francois  Marguerie,  a  native  of  Normandy,  came  to
Canada  about  1627,  and  served  as  interpreter  for  the  Algonkins.
During  the  English  occupation  of  the  country,  he  lived  among  the


NOTES  TO VOL.  X  321

savages ;  upon  the  return  of  the  French,  he  settled  at  Three  Rivers
(still  acting  as  interpreter),  where  an  estate  was  granted  to  him.  As
Brebeuf  here  informs  us,  he  spent  the  winter  of  1635-36  at  Allu-
mettes  Island.  In  February,  1641,  Marguerie  and  Thomas  Gode-
froy  de  Normanville  were  captured  by  the  Iroquois,  who,  however,
brought  their  prisoners  back  to  Three  Rivers  in  the  following  April.
This  episode  is  described  at  length  by  Vimont  in  the  Relation  of
1 64 1,  chaps,  ix.  and  x.

Oct.  26,  1645,  Marguerie  married  Louise,  daughter  of  Zacharie
Cloutier,  a  carpenter  who  had  come  over  with  Sieur  Giffard  (vol.  vi.,
note  8).  While  crossing  the  St.  Lawrence  near  Three  Rivers  (May
23,  1648),  Marguerie  and  a  companion,  Jean  Amiot,  were  drowned  —
their  canoe  being  overturned  in  a  sudden  storm.  Marguerie  was
noted  for  his  fine  physique,  courage,  and  address.  Lalemant  praises
both  him  and  Amiot,  not  only  for  courage  and  skill,  but  because
they  "had,  in  the  opinion  of  all  the  country,  led  blameless  lives."

Marguerie' s  sister  Marie  became  the  wife  of  Jacques  Hertel  (vol.
ix.,  note  3).

5  (p.  81). — This  was  a  favorite  game  among  the  Canadian  Indians.
Boucher  {Hist,  vdrit.,  chap,  x.)  thus  mentions  it:  "The  Game  of
Straws  is  played  with  little  straws,  which  are  made  for  this  purpose,
and  which  are  divided  very  unequally  in  three  parts,  as  in  hazard.
Our  Frenchmen  have  not  yet  been  able  to  learn  this  game.  It  is
full  of  vivacity ;  and  straws  are  among  them  what  cards  are  with
us."  Perrot  (Memoire,  Tailhan's  ed.,  pp.  46-50)  gives  a  detailed
account  of  the  game ;  but  his  description  is,  according  to  Lafitau
{Maeurs  des  Sauvages,  part  2,  pp.  350-352),  "  so  obscure  as  to  be  al-
most unintelligible."  Charlevoix  and  La  Potherie  also  attempt,
but  not  very  successfully,  to  describe  the  game :  the  former  con-
fesses {Journ.  Hist.,  p.  318)  that  "he  does  not  at  all  understand  it,
except  that  sometimes  the  number  nine  wins  the  game."  Tailhan
(ut  supra,  pp.  187,  188)  cites  these  writers,  and  adds,  "I  am  not
more  fortunate  than  my  predecessors,  and  the  game  of  straws  re-
mains for  me  an  undecipherable  enigma."  In  general,  however,  it
may  be  said  that  this  was  a  game  partly  of  chance,  partly  of  skill ;
it  was  played  with  straws  or  rushes,  the  size  of  a  wheat-stalk,  and
about  ten  inches  in  length.  These  were  unequally  divided  into
small  bunches,  and  passed  to  and  fro  in  the  hands  of  the  players  —
"with  inconceivable  dexterity,"  as  Lafitau  says.  He  adds:  "Un-
even numbers  are  always  lucky,  and  the  number  nine  higher  than
all  others.  The  division  of  the  straws  makes  the  game  run  high  or
low,  and  increases  the  bets,  according  to  the  different  numbers,  until
the  game  is  won.  It  is  sometimes  so  eager,  when  the  Villages  play
against  one  another,  that  it  lasts  two  or  three  days. " This  game


322  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES

was  also  played,  at  times,  in  a  manner  resembling  that  of  the  mod-
ern "  jackstraws. "  The  writers  above  mentioned  all  confirm  the
statements  of  the  Jesuits  as  to  the  infatuation  of  the  savages  for
this  and  other  forms  of  gambling,  and  their  accompanying  evils.

6  (p.  83). — Naiz  percez  (Nez  Perces):  the  Beaver  tribe  (Algon-
kin,  Amiskou,  "a  beaver;"  French,  Nation  du  Castor).  These
were  the  Amikouas,  an  Algonkin  nation  with  headquarters  near  La
Cloche  and  the  outlet  of  Spanish  River  (in  the  present  district  of  Al-
goma),  on  the  north  shore  of  Georgian  Bay.  Their  location  is  made
clear  by  Le  Jeune  {Relation  of  1640,  chap,  x.),  and  also  on  maps
of  that  period  —  Galinee,  1670;  Senex,  1710;  etc.  They  should  not
be  confused  with  the  modern  Nez  Perces  of  the  Rockies.  —  A.  F.
Hunter.

St.  Lusson  and  Perrot,  who  at  Michilimackinac  took  possession  of
the  western  regions  in  the  name  of  France  (June  4,  1671),  spent  the
preceding  winter  with  the  Beaver  tribe.  Missions  to  these  savages
were  undertaken  by  Louis  Andre  (in  the  spring  of  1671),  and  Henri
Nouvel  (1671-72).

7  (p.  83). —  Aweatsiwaetirrhonons :  the  Nipissiriniens  (vol.  v.,
notes  19,  51).  The  French  term,  gens  puants,  was  also  applied  to
the  Winnebago  tribe.  The  confusion  thus  arising  in  the  identity
of  these  tribes  may  have  been  occasioned  from  the  fact  that  numer-
ous places  were  marked  on  the  early  maps  as  "  puant, " — presum-
ably meaning  "  alkaline. "  For  instance,  Cattaraugus  Creek,  near
Chautauqua,  N.  Y.,  is  named  on  one  of  Sanson's  maps  R.  a  la
terre  puante. — A.  F.  Hunter.

8  (p.  95).  —  Contarea,  one  of  the  principal  Huron  strongholds,
was  situated  close  to  a  small  lake  in  Tiny  township,  now  known  as
Lannigan's  Lake,  the  position  of  which  is  indicated  on  Du  Creux's
map.  Brebeuf  mentions  this  water  as  distant  from  Ihonatiria  a
day's  journey;  but  it  is  not  more  than  ten  miles  from  the  mission
headquarters.  Laverdiere,  arguing  from  a  remote  similarity  in
names,  suggests  the  identity  of  Contarea  with  Carmaron,  seen  by
Champlain  in  1615  (  Voyages,  Laverdiere's  ed.,  p.  515);  but  it  is
not  probable  that  any  Huron  town  or  village  continued  to  exist  at
one  place  for  so  long  a  period  as  twenty  years. —  A.  F.  Hunter.

9  (p.  103). —  Citrouilles  :  the  summer  squash  (Cucurbita  poly-
morpha)  ;  it  is  figured  on  Champlain's  map  of  1612.  Boucher  {Hist,
verit.,  chap,  viii.)  thus  describes  them:  "Citrouilles,  of  a  species
different  from  those  of  France;  they  are  smaller,  and  not  so  un-
substantial; their  flesh  is  firmer  and  less  watery,  and  of  a  better
flavor."

10  (p.  103). —  Concerning  the  use  and  preparation  of  corn  as  food,
^ee  vol.  v.,  note  28.


NOTES  TO VOL.  X  323


ii  (p.  127). — See  also  Brebeuf's  account  of  Ataentsic  in  the  Rela-
tion of  1635,  vol.  viii.  of  this  series.

12  (p.  133). —  For  citations  regarding  the  meaning  of  the  myths  of
Ataentsic  and  Jouskeha,  see  vol.  viii.,  note  36.

Cf.  Hewitt's  "  Cosmogonic  Gods  of  the  Iroquois,"  {Amer.  Asso.
Adv.  Set.  Proc,  1895,  pp.  241-250);  he  takes  issue  with  Brinton  as
to  the  interpretation  of  these  myths.  He  says:  "  If  the  evidence  of
language  may  be  trusted,  it  seems  safe  to  regard  these  gods  as  crea-
tions indigenous  to  the  primitive  philosophy  of  the  Iroquois  regard-
ing the  origin  of  themselves  and  their  environment  —  the  protology
of  their  existence  and  that  of  the  earth  and  the  heavens.  .  .  .
Tha-ron-hya-ivd'  -kon  was  the  ruler  of  the  sky  .  .  .  ever  benign
and  beneficent,  at  all  times  solicitous  to  promote  the  welfare  of
man,  and  in  great  emergencies  even  descending  among  men  per-
sonally to  aid  them  against  adverse  powers  and  beings  of  sinister
aspect  and  malevolent  purpose.  From  the  brief  introductory  ac-
count of  the  protology  of  the  Iroquois,  it  would  seem  to  be  erroneous
to  identify  Tha-ron-hya-wa  -kon  with  Yoskehd'  of  the  Huronian
version,  or  with  Oteh-toh-ni'-d'  of  that  of  the  Onondagas  and  other
tribes ;  for  the  latter  is  the  demiurge,  being,  strictly  speaking,  the
grandson  of  the  spouse  of  Tha-ron-hya-wa  -kon,  E-ya -ta-hen'-
tsik.  ...  It  was  the  daughter  of  E-ya  -ta-hen'-tsik  who  be-
came the  moon  which  changes  its  form  continually.  It  is  a  very
common  thing  among  writers  to  confound  E-ya  -ta-hen'-tsik  with
her  daughter,  and  hence  arises  the  erroneous  identification  of  E-yd'-
ta-hen'-tsik  with  the  moon.  .  .  .  On  both  linguistic  and  func-
tional grounds,  I  am  inclined  to  regard  E-yd' -ta-hen'-tsik  as  the
impersonation  or  goddess  of  night  and  the  earth.  .  .  .  Lastly,
the  usual  application  of  the  appellation  "grandmother"  to  the
moon  must  not  be  construed  as  evidence  that  the  grandmother  of
O-teh-toh-ni-d'  is  meant;  for  the  mother  of  O-teh-toh-ni -d',  being
born  on  the  earth,  was  in  fact  regarded  as  the  grandmother  of  the
race  in  a  stricter  sense  than  her  mother,  E-yd -ta-hen'-tsik.  .  .  .
In  the  protology  of  the  Iroquois,  Yoskehd'  or  O-teh-toh-ni-d'  is  the
demiurge  in  contrast  with  Taivis'kard  his  brother,  who  represented
the  destructive  or  Typhonic  power  in  nature,  as  exemplified  by  the
destructiveness  of  frost,  hail,  and  ice.  The  people  held  in  high
esteem  the  great  and  bounteous  benefits  they  believed  they  enjoyed
only  through  the  care  and  benevolence  of  Yoskehd'.  ...  It  is,
I  believe,  the  reproductive,  rejuvenating  power  in  nature  that  is
personified  in  Yoskehd',  and  not  the  sun,  which  is  ever  portrayed
as  retaining  the  full  vigor  of  manhood,  undiminished  by  the  lapse
of  years.  .  .  .  Tawis'kara  was  so  called  because  he  spread
forth  hail,  sleet,  and  ice, and  the  blighting  frosts;  because  he  was


324  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

the  cold  ice-king,  the  enemy  and  despoiler  of  the  planted  crops  of
man.  In  whatever  Tawis'kara'  did,  he  was  instigated  and  abetted
by  his  grandmother  E-y  a'  -t  a-henf  -t  sik ,  the  goddess  of  night  and  the
earth.  The  effects  of  frost  and  cold  are  best  seen  in  the  morning,
when  the  god  of  ice  and  cold  has  accomplished  his  nefarious  work
under  cover  of  darkness."

13  (p.  145). — The  Tobacco  Nation  adjoined  the  Huron  territory
on  the  west  (vol.  v.,  note  18).

14  (p.  153). — This  legend,  in  one  form  or  another,  was  current
among  all  the  Algonkin  nations.  Moore's  ballad,  "The  Lake  of  the
Dismal  Swamp, ' '  preserves  in  outline  the  version  of  the  Powhatans
or  some  kindred  tribe  in  Virginia.  The  version  found  among  the
Ottawas  in  Ontario  is  known  by  the  name  of  ' '  The  White  Stone
Canoe ; "  and  the  Manitoba  Algonkins  held  it  in  remembrance  in  the
beautiful  legend  of  "  Qu'appelle  ?"  ("  Who  calls  ?").— See  Maclean's
Indians;  their  Manners  and  Customs  (Toronto,  1S89),  p.  179.  The
occurrence  of  this  legend  among  the  Hurons,  in  the  form  given  by
Brebeuf  in  the  text,  suggests  their  long  residence  near  the  Algon-
kins.—  A.  F.  Hunter.

15  (p.  159). — The  offering  of  tobacco  was  one  of  the  commonest
rites  among  the  Indian  tribes,  especially  the  Algonkins.  Several
places  on  the  east  shore  of  Georgian  Bay  are  still  shown  where  until
recent  years  they  made  these  offerings ;  that  located  about  twenty
miles  north  of  Parry  Sound,  rather  than  another  on  Christian  Island,
suggests  the  place  mentioned  in  the  text. —  A.  F.  Hunter.

Cf.  Hariot's  Brief  and  true  report  of  Virginia  (DeBry'sed.,
Frankfort,  1590),  p.  16:  "  This  Vppowoc  [tobacco]  is  of  so  precious
estimation  amongest  them,  that  they  thinke  their  gods  are  maruel-
ously  delighted  therwith :  Wherupon  sometime  they  make  hallowed
fires  &  cast  some  of  the  pouder  therein  for  a  sacrifice:  being  in  a
storme  vppon  the  waters,  to  pacifie  their  gods,  they  cast  some  vp
into  the  aire  and  into  the  water:  so  a  weare  for  fish  being  newly  set
vp,  they  cast  some  therein  and  into  the  aire:  also  after  an  escape  of
danger,  they  cast  some  into  the  aire  likewise :  but  all  done  with
strange  gestures,  stamping,  some  dauncing,  clapping  of  hands,  hold-
ing vp  of  hands,  &  staring  vp  into  the  heauens,  vttering  therewithal
and  chattering  strange  words  and  noises."

Cf.  also  Perrot  (Tailhan's  ed.),  p.  20:  "In  journeys  that  they  un-
dertake, whether  short  or  long,  they  utter  invocations  after  this
fashion :  '  Thou  who  art  the  master  of  the  winds,  be  favorable  to
our  journey,  and  give  us  calm  weather.'  This  is  said  while  smok-
ing a  pipe  of  tobacco,  the  smoke  of  which  they  toss  into  the  air.
.  .  .  If  in  winter  they  have  to  make  an  extraordinary  journey
upon  the  ice,  there  is  a  certain  spirit  that  they  invoke  for  this  pur-


NOTES  TO VOL.  X  325

pose,  called  by  the  Algonkins  Mateomek,  to  whom  they  similarly
offer  tobacco-smoke,  praying  him  to  be  favorable  to  them  and  propi-
tious during  their  march."

Of  interest  in  this  connection  are  the  following  statements  regard-
ing the  tobacco  used  in  religious  rites:  Smith  says,  "It  may  be
worthy  of  remark  that  the  tobacco  burnt  as  an  offering  to  the  Hon-
do'-i,  and  in  other  religious  ceremonies,  is  not  the  ordinary  tobacco
of  commerce,  but  the  original  tobacco  of  the  Iroquois,  which  they
still  cultivate  for  that  purpose.  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  ascer-
tain whether  this  plant  is  identical  with  that  (N.  quadrivalvis? )
which  the  Prince  of  Neuwied  cites  as  being  raised  in  his  time,  and
used  only  for  similar  purposes  and  for  smoking  on  solemn  occa-
sions by  the  Mandans  and  Meunitarris  of  the  Upper  Missouri."
Beauchamp  says,  "The  small  tobacco  which  the  New  York  Onon-
dagas  raise,  and  which  all  seem  to  prefer,  is  called  O-yen-kwa  hon-
we,  or  'real  tobacco.'  It  is  N.  rustica  (Linn.),  introduced  by  the
Indians  in  Western  New  York,  and  sparingly  naturalized  there.  It
may  be  the  old  kind  from  which  the  Tobacco  Nation  of  Canada  had
its  name." — See  Jour,  of  Amer.  Folk-Lore,  vol.  i.,  pp.  193,  196.

16  (p.  165). — This  superstition  as  to  drowning  is  remarkably  simi-
lar to  that  current  among  the  Mississagas  and  other  Algonkin  tribes
of  this  region  before  their  Christianization  in  recent  years.  Susan-
na Moodie,  a  Canadian  authoress,  writing  half  a  century  ago  of  the
Mississagas  —  in  Roughing  it  in  the  Bush  (London,  1850;  Canad.  re-
print, Toronto,  1870),  p.  302  —  says:  "  The  soul  of  an  Indian  that  has
been  drowned  is  reckoned  accursed,  and  he  is  never  permitted  to
join  his  tribe  in  the  happy  hunting  grounds,  but  his  spirit  haunts
the  lake  or  river  in  which  he  lost  his  life.  His  body  is  buried  on
some  lonely  island,  which  the  Indians  never  pass  without  leaving  a
small  portion  of  food,  tobacco,  or  ammunition,  to  supply  his  wants ;
but  he  is  never  interred  with  the  rest  of  his  people." — A.  F.  Hunter.

17  (p.  177).  —  This  passage  is  obscure  in  meaning  —  as  regards
both  the  French  phrase,  qui  retire  au  Lyon  par  la  qttetie,  and  the
myth  related  of  the  origin  of  the  Hurons.  J.  N.  B.  Hewitt  explains
it  as  follows:  "  It  is  probable  that  Brebeuf  here  refers  to  a  legend
(imperfectly  comprehended  by  him)  that  is  found  to  this  day,  in
several  versions,  among  the  tribes  of  the  Six  Nations, —  which  may
be  briefly  stated  thus:  It  was  the  invariable  custom  of  a  certain
noted  hunter  to  sacrifice  to  the  fowls  of  the  air  and  the  beasts  of  the
forest  the  first  game  animal  he  might  kill,  in  every  hunting  expedi-
tion. This  was  very  acceptable  to  the  fowls  and  the  beasts.  One
day  it  came  to  pass  that  the  enemies  of  the  hunter's  people  made  an
incursion,  and  killed,  among  many  others,  this  famous  hunter.  His
death  becoming  known  to  the  birds  and  beasts  of  prey,  they  greatly


326  LES  EEL  A  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

mourned  his  loss;  and  at  a  grand  council  held  by  them,  their  chiefs
resolved  to  restore  their  friend  to  life.  The  legend  relates  that  their
purpose  was  accomplished  at  a  great  feast.  The  several  versions
of  the  legend  differ  as  to  the  chief  actors  in  this  alleged  resuscita-
tion of  a  human  being ;  but  they  all  agree  that  it  was  the  chiefs  of
the  beasts  and  birds  of  prey  who  took  part  in  the  affair.  In  the
story  here  told  by  Brebeuf,  the  panther,  the  wolf,  and  the  owl  are
the  conspicuous  figures.  The  sovereign  remedy  used  on  this  occa-
sion was,  chiefly  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  wolves,  bestowed
by  the  assembly  on  man,  as  a  gift,  and  is  still  in  great  repute  and
use  among  the  Iroquois;  it  is  called  Kami  ta'.  It  cures  wounds  and
internal  injuries.  It  is  difficult  to  identify  the  animal  called  Ontar-
raoura.  The  Hurons  probably  had,  like  the  Iroquois,  several  ver-
sions of  this  legend,  in  which  different  animals  were  given  preemi-
nence."

W.  M.  Beauchamp  suggests  another  interpretation :  "  The  whole
is  a  fable,  though  a  reference  to  the  Petun  Wolf  tribe  is  ingenious.
I  have  little  doubt  that  Ontarraoura  is  the  panther,  which  alone  of
our  Northern  quadrupeds  draws  near  or  is  allied  to  the  lion  by  its
tail  (its  distinguishing  feature  to  a  primitive  people), —  so  much  so,
that  it  is  sometimes  called  the  American  lion.  It  is  a  nocturnal
animal,  and  so  the  owl  would  be  the  one  to  observe  it.  The  Jesuits
never  mention  this  animal  elsewhere,  and  perhaps  the  Hurons  sel-
dom saw  it,  as  it  frequents  mountains.  Professor  Baird  says  that
its  habitat  extends  as  far  as  500  or  even  6o°  N.  lat. ,  in  mountains ;
but  De  Kay  thinks  its  present  northern  (iimits  in  the  East)  do  not
extend  beyond  New  York.  The  latter  also  says  that  '  the  screams
attributed  to  this  animal  during  the  night  are  supposed  by  many
hunters  to  proceed  from  some  species  of  owl' — an  odd  coincidence,
in  view  of  the  legend  related  by  Brebeuf."

18  (p.  179). —  The  village  of  Andiata  was  notable  for  the  feasts
and  minor  councils  held  there, —  chiefly  because  of  its  central  loca-
tion (near  the  center  of  Tiny  township).  This  place  and  Onentisati
were  close  to  the  fork  of  the  forest  trail  —  one  of  its  branches  lead-
ing to  Ossossane,  the  other  to  St.  Michael  and  St.  Joseph. —  A.  F.
Hunter.

19  (p.  185). —  Crosse  (from  Lat.  crux,  through  L.  Lat.  crucia ;
Eng.  "  crozier," — in  allusion  to  the  shape  of  the  implement  used  in
the  game)  was  a  favorite  sport  of  many  North  American  tribes.  It
is  thus  described  by  Perrot  (Tailhan's  ed.),  pp.  43-46:  "There  is
among  them  a  certain  game,  '  crosse, '  which  has  much  similarity  to
ours  of  tennis.  In  playing  this,  it  is  their  custom  to  set  tribe
against  tribe,  in  equal  numbers.  Each  person  is  equipped  with  a
crosse, —  that  is,  a  staff  which  has  a  great  curve  at  the  end,  laced


NOTES  TO VOL.  X  327

like  a  racket;  the  ball  that  they  use  in  playing  is  of  wood,  and
nearly  the  shape  of  a  turkey's  egg.  The  goals  of  the  game  are
marked  off  on  a  level  surface,  and  face  the  points  of  the  compass.
In  order  to  win  the  game,  one  of  the  two  parties  must,  in  its  prog-
ress, carry  its  ball  beyond  the  eastern  and  western  goals  —  the
other,  beyond  the  northern  and  southern.  .  .  .  Men,  women,
girls,  and  boys  are  admitted  to  the  games  that  take  place,  and  bet
against  one  another  —  the  wagers  being  more  or  less  valuable,  ac-
cording to  the  means  of  each.  These  games  usually  begin  after  the
melting  of  the  winter's  ice,  and  last  until  seed-time.
All  assemble  in  a  body,  in  the  middle  of  the  place  selected ;  and  one
of  the  chiefs  of  the  two  parties,  who  holds  the  ball  in  his  hands,
throws  it  in  the  air.  Each  player  undertakes  to  send  it  to  that  side
for  which  he  is  bound;  if  it  fall  to  the  ground,  he  endeavors  to
draw  it  toward  him  with  his  crosse;  and  if  it  is  sent  outside  the
crowd  of  players,  this  is  an  opportunity  for  the  most  alert  to  dis-
tinguish themselves  beyond  the  others  by  closely  following  it.  One
can  hear  the  noise  they  make  in  striking  against  one  another,  while
they  strive  to  ward  off  the  blows  in  order  to  send  the  ball  in  a
favorable  direction.  If  one  keeps  it  between  his  feet,  without  letting
it  escape,  it  is  for  him  to  avoid  the  blows  that  his  adversaries  rain
incessantly  upon  his  feet;  and  if,  in  this  encounter,  he  happens  to
be  wounded,  that  is  his  own  affair.  Some  of  them  are  seen  with
broken  legs  or  arms,  and  some  even  have  been  killed.  It  is  very
common  to  see  them  crippled  for  the  rest  of  their  days. "

Charlevoix  gives  the  following  account  of  the  game  (Journ.  Hist.,
p.  319),  as  played  by  the  Miamis:  "It  is  played  with  a  Ball,  and
with  Staffs  recurved  and  terminated  by  a  sort  of  Racket.  Two
Posts  are  set  up,  which  serve  as  Bounds,  and  which  are  distant  from
each  other  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  Players.  For  instance,
if  there  are  eighty  of  these,  there  will  be  a  half-league  between  the
Posts.  The  Players  are  divided  into  two  bands,  each  having  its
own  Post ;  and  it  is  a  question  of  driving  the  Ball  as  far  as  the  Post
of  the  opposing  Party,  without  falling  upon  the  ground  or  being
touched  by  the  hand.  If  either  of  these  happens,  the  Game  is  lost, —
unless  he  who  has  committed  the  mistake  repairs  it,  by  driving  the
Ball  with  one  stroke  to  the  Bound,  which  is  often  impossible.
These  Savages  are  so  adroit  in  catching  the  Ball  with  their  Crosses,
that  these  Games  sometimes  last  several  days  in  succession."

Lafitau  {Mcettrs  des  Sauvages,  part  2,  p.  356)  quotes  Pollux  to
show  that  crosse  is  precisely  the  same  as  the  Greek  game  of  epi-
skyros;  Tailhan  thinks  it  resembles  the  palican  of  the  Chilean  abo-
rigines; and  Clapin  (Diet.  Canad.-Fra?i.)  says  that  it  is  almost
the  same  as  the  soule  of  the  Ardennes  mountaineers  in  France,  and,


328  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

in  the  opinion  of  many,  is  but  a  modification  of  the  latter  game  as
brought  hither  by  the  first  French  colonists  of  America.

Crosse  (in  modern  phrase,  "lacrosse")  has  been  the  national
game  of  Canada  since  1859  —  adopted  from  the  Indian  game,  with
modifications  and  improvements  which  have  rendered  it  less  danger-
ous and  more  scientific.  For  description  and  history  of  the  modern
game,  see  Lowe's  "Lacrosse,"  in  Athletic  Sports  in  America,  Eng-
land, and  Australia  (Phila.,  1S89),  pp.  519-543.  The  earlier
form  of  the  game,  as  played  by  the  Indians,  is  described  by  one
of  their  own  race,  George  Copway,  in  his  Traditional  History  of
the  Ojibway  Nation  (London,  1850),  pp.  42-47.  Cf.  Hoffman's
account  of  this  sport  among  the  Menomonees,  in  Bur.  Ethn.  Rep.,
1892-93,  pp.  127-136;  and  Mooney's,  among  the  Cherokees,  in
Amer.  Anthrop.,  vol.  iii.,  pp.  105-132.

A  game  of  ball  was  made,  by  stratagem,  the  opportunity  for  the
capture  of  old  Fort  Mackinac  from  the  English,  during  the  Pontiac
uprising  (June  4,  1763).

20  (p.  203). — Angwiens  (also  written  Angoutenc)  was  the  nearest
of  all  the  towns  to  the  capital,  Ossossane,  and  was  situated  on  the
trail  leading  thence  to  the  mission  towns  in  northern  Tiny.  In
1636,  Angwiens  was  but  newly  laid  out.  —  A.  F.  Hunter.

21  (p.  219). —  Concerning  the  use  of  tobacco,  see  vol.  vi.,  note  25.
Much  curious  information  about  this  plant,  and  its  history*,  culture,
use,  manufacture,  and  commerce,  is  given  in  Tatham's  Essay  on
Tobacco  (London,  1800);  Billings's  Tobacco  (Hartford,  1875);  and
Fairholt's  Tobacco  (London,  1876).  For  bibliography  of  the  subject,
see  Bragge's  Bibliotheca  nicotiana  (Birmingham,  Eng.,  1880).

22  (p.  235). —  Arendoronnons :  see  vol.  viii.,  note  24.

23  (p.  285). — The  village  of  Aronte  (where  was  established  the
mission  of  Ste.  Madeleine)  is  located  by  Du  Creux's  map  on  the  west
shore  of  Tiny  township,  near  Dault's  Bay.  Tache  seems  to  have
regarded  it  as  farther  inland,  although  Du  Creux's  location  cor-
responds much  better  with  the  references  in  the  text.  Remains  of
sites  have  been  found,  however,  agreeing  with  both  positions
cited. —  A.  F.  Hunter.


■

:


ggfe:


.  .  .  .  . ......

.  -  -  ■■

t-I.tl
