ty
_i^—
=o
o-^
^00
o —
^CVJ
1 UJ
%—
— i—
■  *m
=CO
\  b=
=o
u-=;
1  ri —
»
=<£>
=rs.
w —
UJ^=
^■m
3 -
\0
317
v.  a,i
5MR
THE  JESUIT  RELATIONS
AND
ALLIED  DOCUMENTS
VOL.  XXI
The  edition  consists  of  sev-
en hundred  and  fifty  sets
all  numbered
No.
-i.
The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents

Travels  and  Explorations

of  the  Jesuit  Missionaries

in  New  France

1610-1791

THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL-
IAN TEXTS,  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA-
TIONS AND  NOTES  ;  ILLUSTRATED  BY
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES

EDITED  BY

REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES

Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin


Vol.  XXI

Quebec  and  Hurons:  1641-1642


Cleveland: Gbe  JBurrows  JBrotbete
Company,  publishers,  mdcccxcviii


Copyright, 1898

BY

The  Burrows  Brothers  Co


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


The  Imperial  Press,  Cleveland


EDITORIAL  STAFF


Editor


Translators


Assistant  Editor
Bibliographical  Adviser


Reuben  Gold  Thwaites
Finlow  Alexander
Percy  Favor  Bicknell
William  Frederic  Giese
Catharine  S.  Kellogg
Crawford  Lindsay
William  Price
Hiram  Allen  Sober
Emma  Helen  Blair
Victor  Hugo  Paltsits


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  XXI


Preface  to  Volume  XXI  .  .  -9

Documents: —

XLIV.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe"  en  la  Nov-
velle  France,  es  annees  1640.  et  1641.
[Chaps,  ix.-xiii.  of  Part  I.,  and  Part
II.,  concluding  the  document.]  Paul
le  Jeune;  Kebec  and  Paris,  undated.
Jerome  Lalemant;  Ste.  Marie  aux  Hu-
rons,  May  19,  164 1 .  .  19

XLV.  Lettre  au  P.  Etiehne  Charlet,  Assistant
de  France  a  Rome.  Charles  Lalemant;
Paris,  February  28,  1642  .  .  268

XLVI. Lettre  a  son  frere. Charles  Gamier;  des

Hurons,  May  22,  1642  .  . 274

XLVII. Memoire touchant les Domestiques.

[  Jerome  Lalemant ;  1642]  .  .292

Bibliographical  Data:  Volume  XXI  .  309

Notes .  .  .  .  .  .  311


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXI


Following  is  a  synopsis  of  the  documents  contained
a  the  present  volume :

XLIV.  In  Vol.  XX.,  we  gave  the  first  eight  chap-
ters of  Part  I.  of  the  Relation  of  1640-41 ;  the  re-
mainder of  this  part  (written  by  Le  Jeune  at  Quebec,
without  date)  is  herewith  presented,  also  the  whole
of  Part  II.  (the  Huron  report,  by  Jerome  Lalemant,
dated  May  19,  1641),  thus  completing  the  Relation.

Commencing  with  Chap,  ix.,  Le  Jeune  recounts
the  capture  (February,  1641)  of  Francois  Marguerie
and  Thomas  Godefroy  by  the  Iroquois,  who  take  them
away  to  their  own  country.  The  two  Frenchmen  at
first  expect  death ;  but  the  Iroquois  decide,  at  a  coun-
cil, to  liberate  the  prisoners  in  the  spring;  mean-
while, the  latter  are  treated  by  their  captors  "  like
their  own  children."  In  June,  a  numerous  band  of
Iroquois  appear  before  Three  Rivers,  with  their  pris-
oners, of  whom  they  send  Marguerie,  on  parole,  to
demand  an  interview  with  the  commandant ;  Champ-
flour  immediately  sends  to  Quebec  for  Montmagny.
The  latter  hastens,  with  armed  men  and  vessels,  to
Three  Rivers;  and  a  long  parley  ensues  between
him  and  the  Iroquois,  in  which  many  speeches  and
presents  are  mutually  made.  The  Iroquois  are  full
of  treachery ;  it  is  obvious  that  they  wish  only  to
patch  up  an  alliance  with  the French,  in  order  to


10  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXI


have  better  opportunity  for  attacking  the  allied  Hu-
rons  and  Algonkins.  Finally,  finding  Montmagny
their  match  in  sagacity  and  adroitness,  they  openly
show  their  hostility,  but  are  quickly  dispersed  by
shots  from  the  French  cannon, —  fortunately,  not  till
after  they  have  liberated  the  two  prisoners.

About  the  same  time,  Father  Brebeuf  narrowly
escapes  capture  by  another  Iroquois  band,  while  on
his  way  from  the  Huron  country  to  Quebec.  Reach-
ing his  destination  in  safety,  lie  tries  to  secure  an
escort  for  the  returning  Hurons,  to  protect  them  from
the  enemy.  He  obtains  a  few  French  soldiers,  and
some  Christian  Indians  from  St.  Joseph ;  but,  on
arriving  at  Three  Rivers,  dissensions  arise  among
the  Algonkins  who  await  them  there,  on  account  of
the  presence  of  two  Abenaki  Indians  who  have  come
to  render  satisfaction  for  the  murder  in  their  country
of  Makheabichtichiou,  the  Montagnais  chief,  for  some
time  a  resident  at  St.  Joseph.  The  Algonkins  with-
draw their  promises  to  help  escort  the  Hurons,  and
Champflour  is  unwilling  to  expose  the  Christian
Indians  to  the  danger  of  defeat ;  but  news  is  brought
that  the  Iroquois  marauders  have  gone  home,  and
the  way  is  now  clear.  The  Hurons  accordingly
return  in  peace,  accompanied  by  Ragueneau  and
Menard.  Certain  other  Hurons  who  came  down  to
Three  Rivers,  spread  calumnies  about  Brebeuf,  de-
claring that  he  has  conspired  with  the  Iroquois  to
ruin  the  Hurons.

Le  Jeune  gives  an  account  of  the  mission  recently
f <  >rmed  at  Tadoussac,  the  credit  for  which  is  mainly
due  to  the  neophytes  of  St.  Joseph,  who,  visiting
their  Tadoussac  tribesmen,  commend  to  the  latter  the
Christian faith by  both word  and  deed. In  June,


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXI  11

1640,  a  missionary  (De  Quen,  according  to  Roche-
monteix)  is  sent  to  them,  for  whom  they  erect  a  bark
house  and  chapel  combined,  and  listen  attentively  to
his  teachings.  He  spends  the  month  of  June  with
them,  finds  them  very  teachable  and  affectionate,
and  baptizes  about  fifteen.

An  important  event  occurs  late  in  the  summer  of
1641, — the  coming  of  the  Sieur  de  Maisonneuve,
with  the  first  installment  of  the  new  colony  at  Mont-
real. With  them  comes  also  the  Jesuit  De  la  Place.
But  a  little  while  before  the  coming  of  the  fleet,  the
missionaries  drape  their  altars  in  mourning  for  the
death  of  Francois  de  Gand,  one  of  the  Hundred  As-
sociates, and  a  pious  and  benevolent  man;  and  that
of  the  Chevalier  de  Sillery,  founder  of  the  Christian
Indian  settlement  at  St.  Joseph.  Le  Jeune  also
mentions  the  death,  last  year,  of  Rene  Rohault,  the
first  to  give  money  for  the  education  of  the  Indian
children.

The  death  of  De  Sillery  had  at  first  checked  the
aid  given  by  him  to  the  Canadian  missions ;  but  other
wealthy  persons  in  France,  who  "  are  not  willing  that
this  great  work  should  cease,"  are  supplying  this
deficiency.  One  of  these  wishes  to  charge  himself
with  the  settlement  of  an  Indian  family, — building
them  a  house,  and  supporting  them  during  the  first
year.  The  Father  recounts  some  of  the  acts  of  devo-
tion performed  in  Europe  for  the  benefit  of  these
missions.  Among  these,  "  there  has  been  found,
even  in  the  country,  a  Cure  so  zealous  for  the  salva-
tion of  the  poor  Savages,  and  Parishioners  so  full  of
kindness,  that  they  have  made  three  general  proces-
sions and  seventy-five  fasts;  they  have  taken  the
discipline  a  hundred  and  twenty-four  times: they


12  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXI


have  offered  eighteen  almsgivings,  and  a  great  many
prayers,  —  all  for  the  conversion  of  these  tribes;  is
not  that  delightful?  "  Being  told  of  the  deep  inter-
est thus  manifested  in  their  welfare,  the  Christian
Indians  inform  Le  Jeune  that  they  have  resolved  to
spend  a  whole  day  in  fasting  and  prayer  for  these
good  friends  across  the  sea.

He  is  encouraged,  by  the  success  already  attained
in  their  enterprise,  to  predict  great  things  for  the
future, —  the  assembling  and  colonization  of  the  St.
Lawrence  tribes  at  Quebec  and  Three  Rivers,  and  of
the  Ottawa  tribes,  the  Hurons,  "  and  even  some  Hi-
roquois,"  at  Montreal;  he  even  trusts  that  the  gospel
shall  one  day  penetrate  into  the  regions  of  the  South
and  West.  For  this  last,  as  well  as  for  the  Company's
trade,  and  the  safety  of  the  French  colonists,  it  is
absolutely  necessary  that  the  Iroquois  should  be  over-
come. Le  Jeune  mentions  their  methods  of  warfare,
and  complains  that  the  Dutch  supply  them  with  fire-
arms. He  closes  the  Relation  with  some  extracts  from
letters  he  has  received  from  Claude  Pijart,  describing
his  labors  among  the  Indians  of  Lake  Nipissing,  the
prospect  among  whom  is  encouraging;  and  from
Pierre  Pijart,  who  has  been  on  a  mission  among  the
Tobacco  tribe,  with  whom  he  finds  many  Algonkins.
He  also  hears  there  of  certain  Southern  tribes,  who
'  plant  and  harvest  Indian  corn  twice  a  year,  and
their  last  harvest  was  made  in  December."

Jerome  Lalemant  opens  the  Huron  Relation  by  stat-
ing that,  ' '  in  their  seven  missions,  they  have  preached
the  Gospel  to  16,000  or  17,000  Barbarians."  Two  of
these  missions  are  new, —  one  being  for  the  benefit
of  the  Algonkins,  and  in  the  charge  of  Raymbault  and


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXI  13


Claude  Pijart,  who  have  been  sent  from  Quebec  for
this  especial  work.  As  the  savages  are  now  in  good
health,  and  have  been  blessed  with  an  abundant
harvest,  they  have,  in  general,  become  tolerant  of
the  missionaries,  who  no  longer  encounter  serious
hindrances  to  their  efforts, —  although  they  are  sore-
ly tried  by  the  worldliness,  fickleness,  and  supersti-
tious follies  of  their  hearers.

The  evangelists  now  possess  ' '  a  little  Church  com-
posed of  about  thirty  Frenchmen,  and  about  fifty
Savages  making  profession."  These  last  have  re-
mained constant,  since  the  panic  and  storms  of  the
previous  year;  and  it  is  they  who  form  the  leaven
that  shall  yet  be  effectual  among  these  tribes.  Lale-
mant  sees  the  urgent  necessity  of  rendering  Indian
marriages  stable;  "and  —  inasmuch  as  one  of  the
principal  causes  of  their  dissolution  comes  from  this,
that  one  of  the  parties  is  not  able  to  supply  the  needs
and  necessities  of  the  other,  which  causes  that  other
to  go  and  seek  them  elsewhere  —  one  of  the  most
effective  means  of  binding  them  indissolubly  will  be
to  assist  them  in  such  a  case."  He  is  greatly  encour-
aged by  the  aid  promised  him  from  France  for  this
very  purpose.  "  Certain  persons  of  merit  have  re-
solved to  make  perpetual  foundations  of  the  ten  or
twelve  6cus  necessary  for  the  establishment  of  these
marriages,"  setting  aside  a  sum  of  money  to  produce
the  above  income.  Some  of  these  persons  are  child-
less, and  "  believe  that  they  might  here  gain  chil-
dren for  God  and  for  themselves,  by  this  manner  of
holy  adoption;  "  and,  to  keep  their  memories  green,
"  they  desire  that  their  names  should  be  given  to  the
families  proceeding  from  these  marriages  procured
by  the  efforts  of  their  charity."


14  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXI


Each  of  the  Huron  missions  has  a  chapter,  in  Lale-
mant's  report,  assigned  to  its  work  and  progress  for
the  past  year.  The  residence  of  Ste.  Marie  is  the
headquarters  of  all  the  Jesuit  missions;  hither  all  the
gospel  laborers  come  for  their  annual  reunion,  and
it  is  likely  to  become  a  refuge  for  the  Christian  In-
dians who  find  it  too  hard  to  resist  the  heathen  influ-
ences around  them.  As  it  is,  these  converts  come
on  Saturday  evenings,  from  even  twelve  leagues'
distance,  to  celebrate  the  Sabbath  with  their  teachers.

Montmagny's  prudent  and  just  treatment  of  the
savages  has  done  them  much  good ;  they  admire  his
liberality,  yet  fear  his  sternness.  Certain  tribes,
under  this  dread,  have  rendered  satisfaction  to  the
missionaries  for  the  injuries  inflicted  upon  them.

On  November  2,  the  Fathers  depart  from  Ste.  Marie
on  their  itinerant  missions,  leaving  Chastellain  alone
to  guard  the  house,  and  entertain  the  Christian
Indians  who  might  come  hither.

Most  of  the  Huron  converts  are  found  in  the  vil-
lage of  Ossossane,  where  was  established  the  first  of
these  missions,  La  Conception.  The  pillar  of  this
little  church  was  Joseph  Chihwatenhwa,  slain  last
year  by  the  Iroquois ;  but  this  disaster  seems  on  the
whole  to  have  confirmed  the  other  Christians  in  their
faith.  '  We  could  hardly  desire  more  content  and
satisfaction  than  we  receive  from  this  little  flock.
It  appears  to  us  like  a  small  lump  of  gold  refined
in  the  furnace  of  many  tribulations."  Joseph's
brother,  Teondechorren,  is  converted,  and  takes  his
dead  brother's  name;  the  missionaries  have  much
hope  from  him.  A  new  chapel  has  been  erected
there,  where  regular  services  are  held.  In  one  of
his  missionary  journeys,  Father  Le  Mercier  falls  into


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXI  15


the  water,  while  crossing  the  ice,  and  barely  escapes
death.

The  missions  of  St.  Joseph  and  of  St.  Jean  Bap-
tiste  —  respectively  the  most  southern  and  the  most
eastern  in  the  Huron  region  —  are  under  the  care  of
Fathers  Daniel  and  Le  Moyne.  This  is  a  laborious
field,  on  account  of  its  great  extent ;  and  dangerous,
because  the  forest  trails  are  infested  by  the  Iroquois.
An  Iroquois  prisoner  is  baptized,  before  his  torments
begin.  A  man  who  in  health  had  scorned  the  truth,
and  abused  its  preachers,  sends  for  these  when  he  is
about  to  die ;  and  his  soul  is,  by  baptism,  saved  from
endless  woe.

Next  is  mentioned  the  mission  to  the  Tobacco
Nation,  where  the  difficulties  of  their  work  are  unusu-
ally great,  because  this  tribe,  not  going  to  the  trad-
ing posts  of  the  French,  know  but  little  of  them,
and  look  upon  them  as  utter  strangers.  However,
the  missionaries,  who  last  year  were  driven  from  the
villages  of  these  people,  are  now  at  last  tolerated,
and  some  Indians  even  desire  instruction.

The  new  mission  to  the  Neutral  Nation  is  under-
taken by  Br6beuf  and  Chaumonot.  This  tribe  and
their  country  are  described,  as  also  their  relations
with  other  tribes  about  them,  and  their  customs.
From  this  region  the  missionaries  have  a  wide  out-
look upon  other  tribes  hitherto  unknown  to  them
except  by  name ;  and  they  recount  various  items  of
information  concerning  these.  Lalemant  mentions
the  journey  of  the  R£collet  Daillon,  in  1626,  to  this
Neutral  tribe.  He  then  relates  the  present  experi-
ences of  Br6beuf  and  Chaumonot ;  the  former,  hav-
ing a  widespread  reputation  as  a  sorcerer,  is  greatly
dreaded  by  the  Neutrals,  who  for  some  time  perse-


16  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXI


cute  the  Fathers,  and  threaten  them  with  death.
The  latter  are  compelled  to  retreat;  but  at  the  vil-
lage of  Teotongniaton,  they  find  an  oasis  in  the
desert  —  a  good  woman  receives  them  into  her  house,
and  treats  them  with  the  utmost  kindness.  This
opportunity  enables  them  to  compare  the  Neutral
language  with  the  Huron,  to  their  great  aid  in  using
the  Indian  tongues.  One  village  in  this  tribe  "  gives
them  the  hearing  that  their  Embassy  merited"  —
Khioetoa,  largely  inhabited  by  the  Awenrehronons,
part  of  which  tribe  had,  as  we  have  already  seen  (Vol.
XVII.),  earlier  fled  to  the  Hurons.  After  returning
from  this  mission,  Chaumonot  is  attacked  by  an
Indian,  who  attempts  to  kill  him;  but  the  Father
escapes  with  only  a  slight  wound.

The  final  chapter  details  the  work  among  the
Nipissing  Indians,  who  winter  in  the  Huron  country,
not  far  from  Ste.  Marie.  Raymbault  and  Claude
Pijart  minister  to  these  people  during  the  winter,
and  to  other  Algonkins  who  have  come  hither,  and
find  them  all  much  more  docile  and  receptive  than
the  Hurons.

The  Relation  ends  with  a  specimen  of  the  Huron
language  (accompanied  by  a  French  translation),  for
which  Lalemant  chooses  "  one  of  the  most  ordinary
communions  which  Joseph  Chihwatenhwa,  that  ex-
cellent Christian,  had  with  God  toward  the  end  of
his  days."

XLV.  Charles  Lalemant  writes  from  Paris  (Feb-
ruary 28,  1642)  to  Father  Charlet,  at  Rome,  in  regard
to  Le  Jeune's  request  to  the  French  government  for
assistance  in  driving  the  Iroquois  out  of  Canada,  and
the  Dutch  from  New  Amsterdam.  Lalemant  thinks
the  former  can  be  done,  and  states  that  Richelieu  is


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXI  17

well  disposed  thereto ;  but  he  thinks  the  latter  scheme
costly,  impracticable,  and  useless.  He  asks  Char-
let's  opinion  on  the  matter.

XLVI.  Charles  Gamier  writes  to  his  brother  (May
22,  1642),  from  the  Huron  country.  He  regrets  that
his  letter  of  last  year  failed  to  reach  Quebec  in  time
for  the  returning  French  fleet,  and  is  therefore  still
waiting  for  its  despatch.  After  various  religious
exhortations,  Gamier  speaks  of  another  brother
(mentioned  in  last  year's  letter),  "  the  poor  prodigal
child;"  and  he  cites  letters  written  by  the  latter,
which  indicate  much  affection,  and  a  desire  to  return
to  God.  The  writer  then  mentions  the  present  status
of  the  Huron  mission,  and  outlines  his  own  work
(apparently  in  the  village  of  St.  Joseph,  or  Teanaus-
tayae).  A  good  convert  there  has  given  one  end  of
his  cabin  for  a  chapel,  where  the  services  of  the
church  are  regularly  held.  This  man  and  his  family
are  earnest  Christians,  and  various  instances  of  their
piety  and  devotion  are  recounted.  Other  converts
are  mentioned,  and  a  baptism  for  which  he  secures
opportunity  through  a  mass  offered  in  honor  of  a
saint.

XLVII.  Jerome  Lalemant  sends  to  the  Father
General  (apparently  in  1642)  a  memoir  upon  the  don-
nes  employed  in  the  Huron  mission.  He  explains
why  these  laymen  are  more  desirable  than  the  coad-
jutors of  the  Society;  also  what  arrangements  had
been  made  with  the  provincial  of  France  (1638)  for
this  service.  The  whole  plan  has  been  opposed  by
some  of  their  superiors ;  but  Lalemant  urges  that  the
Society  accept  the  donnas, —  not  only  in  the  Huron
country  but  in all the  missions of  New  France, —


18  PREFACE  TO VOL.  XXI

binding  them  by  certain  vows,  and  providing  for
their  lifelong  support.  To  this  memoir  are  ap-
pended forms  of  acceptance  and  contract  with  a
donne\  and  of  consecration  on  the  latter's  part.

R.  G.  T.

Madison,  Wis.,  April,  1898.


XLIV (concluded)

Relation  of  1640-41

Paris:  SEBASTIEN  CRAMOISY,  1642


Chaps,  i.-viii.  of  Part  I.  were  presented  in  Volume  XX.;
we  herewith  give  chaps,  ix.-xiii.  of  Part  I.,  and  all  of  Part
II.,  thus  concluding  the  document.


20  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


[136]  CHAPITRE  IX.

DE LA PRISE DE DEUX FRANCOIS CONDUITS AU PAIS

DES  HIROQUOIS,  &  DE  LEUR  RETOUR

AUX  TROIS  RIUIERES.

SOUS  le  nom  d'Hiroquois  nous  entendons  fix  Na-
tions, ennemies  des  Hurons,  des  Algonquins,
des  Montagnais,  &  maintenant  des  Francois,
nous  auons  des  peuples  au  Sud,  tirat  du  cofte  de
l'Acadie:  ils  s'eftendent  a  l'0[u]eft  de  la  Virginie,
dedans  les  terres;  Or  comme  leurs  Bourgades  font
eloignees,  les  vnes  des  autres,  il  n'y  a  que  la  feule
Nation  des  Agnieeronons,  a  proprement  parler,  qui
fe  foit  declaree  ennemie  des  Frangois;  elle  a  trois
Bourgades  bien  peupl£es,  fituees  affes  proches  les
vnes  des  autres  fur  trois  petites  montagnes;  il  eft
vray  que  ces  Nations  fe  preftent  la  main  dans  leurs
guerres,  comme  font  auffi  celles  qui  ont  quelque  com-
merce auec  les  Francois:  Les  Agnieeronons  tuerent
vn  Francois  en  leur  pais,  il  y  a  plufieurs  annees,  con-
tre  le  droit  commun  [137]  des  peuples;  car  il  eftoit
enuoye*  auec  quelques  Sauuages,  pour  traiter  la  paix
auec  eux.  L'an  1633.  le  fecond  iour  de  Iuin,  ils
tuerent  en  trahifon  trois  autres  Francois,  fort  proche
du  fleuue  que  nous  appellons  les  Trois  Riuieres :  De-
puis  ce  temps  la  ils  ont  mafTacre'  plufieurs  Hurons,  &
Algonquins,  come  i'ay  fait  voir  6s  Relations  prece-
dentes;  En  vn  mot,  ils  font  venus  a  tel  point  d'info-
lence,  qu'il  faut  voir  perdre  le  pais,  ou  y  apporter
vn  remede  prompt  &  efficace :  Si  les  Francois  eftoient


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  21


[136] CHAPTER IX.

OF THE CAPTURE OF TWO FRENCHMEN WHO WERE

TAKEN TO THE COUNTRY OF THE HIROQUOIS,

AND THEIR RETURN TO  THE  THREE RIVERS.

UNDER  the  name  of  Hiroquois  we  include  six
Nations,  who  are  enemies  of  the  Hurons,  of
the  Algonquins,  of  the  Montagnais,  and  now
of  the  French.  We  have  these  people  at  the  South,
stretching  from  the  coast  of  Acadia;  they  extend
from  Virginia  Westward  into  the  interior.  Now,  as
their  Villages  are  distant  from  one  another,  there  is
only  the  one  Nation  of  the  Agnieeronons,  properly
speaking,  which  has  declared  itself  the  enemy  of  the
French ;  this  nation  has  three  well-peopled  Villages,
situated  rather  near  each  other,  on  three  little  moun-
tains ;  it  is  true  that  these  Nations  lend  a  hand  to
one  another  in  their  wars,  as  do  also  those  who  have
some  intercourse  with  the  French.  Several  years
ago,  the  Agnieeronons  killed  a  Frenchman  in  their
own  country,  contrary  to  the  common  law  [137]  of
peoples,  for  he  had  been  sent  with  some  Savages  to
negotiate  a  peace  with  them.  On  the  second  day  of
June,  in  the  year  1633,  they  treacherously  killed
three  other  Frenchmen,  very  near  the  stream  which
we  call  the  Three  Rivers.  Since  that  time,  they
have  massacred  many  Hurons  and  Algonquins,  as  I
have  shown  in  preceding  Relations :  in  a  word,  they
have  reached  such  a  degree  of  insolence,  that  we
must  see  the  country  lost  or  bring  to  it  a  prompt  and


22  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  21

rallies  les  vns  aupres  des  autres,  il  leur  feroit  bien
aife  de  maiftrifer  ces  Barbares ;  mais  eftans  difper-
f6s,  qui  deca,  qui  dela,  nauigeans  a  toute  heure  fur
le  grand  fleuue  dans  des  chaloupes,  ou  dans  des
canots;  ils  peuuent  eftre  aifement  furpris  de  ces
traiftres,  qui  chafTent  aux  hommes,  comme  on  fait
aux  belles,  qui  peuuent  offenfer  fans  eftre  quafi
offenfes:  car  eftans  decouuerts,  ils  n'attendent  pas
pour  l'ordinaire  le  choc ;  mais  ils  font  plutoft  hors  de
la  portee  de  vos  armes,  que  vous  n'eftes  en  difpofition
de  les  tirer.  Voyons  maintenant  ce  qu'ils  ont  fait
depuis  l'an  pafTe.

[138]  Sur  la  fin  de  l'Automne  ils  partirentde  leur
pais  enuiron  quatre  vingts  &  dix  homes,  ils  fe  r£pan-
dirent,  qui  deca  qui  dela,  dans  les  petits  fleuues,  &
dans  les  riuieres,  ou  ils  fgauent  que  les  Sauuages  nos
allies  vont  chercher  les  caftors,  vne  trentaine  ayas
trouue  leur  proie  au  deffus  de  Montreal,  l'enleuent
en  leur  pais,  les  autres  s'en  vindrent  roder  a  l'entour
de  1' Habitation  des  Trois  Riuieres.  Deux  ieunes
Francois,  l'vn  Interprete  en  la  Langue  Algonquine,
pour  Meffieurs  de  la  Nouuelle  France,  nomme  Fran-
cois Marguerie,  1' autre  appelle  Thomas  Godefroy,
qui  eft  frere  d'vn  honnefte  habitant  du  pais,  eftans
alles  faire  vn  tour  a  la  chaffe,  furent  decouuerts  par
ces  Barbares,  qui  fuiuans  la  trace  de  leurs  raquetes,
imprimees  fur  la  neige,  les  aborderent  a  pas  de  lar-
rons  pendant  la  nuidt,  &  tout  a  coup  fe  voulans  jetter
fur  eux,  flrent  des  cris  &  des  hurlemens  epouuen-
tables ;  l'vn  des  deux  Francois  eut  loifir  de  pref enter
fon  arquebufe  au  premier  qui  le  voulut  faifir;  mais
par  vn  bon-heur,  ou  plutoft  par  vne  prouidence  de
nof tre  Seigneur,  elle  fait  vne  fauffe  amorce :  Si  elle


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  23

efficacious  remedy.  If  the  French  were  gathered
near  one  another,  it  would  be  very  easy  for  them
to  master  these  Barbarians;  but  being  dispersed,
some  here,  some  there,  gliding  at  all  hours  over  the
great  river  in  shallops,  or  in  canoes,  they  can  be
easily  surprised  by  these  traitors,  who  hunt  men  as
we  do  wild  beasts,  who  can  injure  and  scarcely  be
injured, — for,  when  they  are  discovered,  they  do  not
ordinarily  await  attack,  but  are  beyond  the  reach  of
your  arms  before  you  are  in  readiness  to  discharge
them.  Let  us  see  now  what  they  have  done  within
the  last  year.

[138]  Toward  the  end  of  Autumn  about  ninety  men
set  out  from  their  country;  they  scattered  them-
selves, some  here,  some  there,  by  the  little  streams
and  by  the  rivers,  where  they  know  that  our  Savage
allies  go  in  search  of  beavers.  About  thirty  of  them
having  found  their  prey  above  Montreal,  carried  it
away  to  their  own  country ;  the  others  came  to  prowl
around  the  Settlement  of  the  Three  Rivers.  Two
young  Frenchmen, — one  an  Interpreter  of  the  Algon-
quin Tongue  for  the  Gentlemen  of  New  France,
named  Francois  Marguerie ;  the  other  called  Thomas
Godefroy,  who  is  brother  to  a  worthy  inhabitant  of
the  country,1  —  having  gone  on  a  hunting  trip,  were
discovered  by  these  Barbarians,  who,  following  the
track  of  their  snowshoes  imprinted  on  the  snow,
approached  them  with  stealthy  steps  during  the
night,  and  suddenly  attempting  to  spring  upon  them,
uttered  frightful  shrieks  and  howls.  One  of  the  two
Frenchmen  had  time  to  present  his  arquebus  to  the
first  one  who  endeavored  to  seize  him ;  but  by  good
luck,  or  rather  by  a  providence  of  our  Lord,  it  flashed
in  the  pan. If  it  had  taken  fire,  [139]  and  he  had


24  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jESUITES [Vol.21

euft  pris  feu,  [139]  &  qu'il  euft  tue  ce  Barbare,  ils
auroient  tous  deux  perdu  la  vie,  il  en  fut  quitte  pour
vn  coup  d'epee  que  luy  darda  fon  ennemy  dans  la
cuiffe;  l'autre  Francois  s'eftant  leue  promptement  au
bruit,  met  la  main  a  l'epee,  vn  Hiroquois  luy  tire  vn
coup  de  fleche,  qui  luy  paffa  fous  le  bras;  vn  autre
le  voulant  aborder,  fit  vne  mauuaife  demarche,  &
tomba  dans  la  neige,  auffi-toft  le  Frangois  luy  pre-
fente  Tepee  nue  a  la  gorge,  les  Hiroquois  le  regar-
doient  faire  fans  branler,.  pas  vn  ne  faifant  mine  de
l'empefcher,  ou  de  le  tuer,  de  peur  qu'il  ne  tranfper-
gaft.  fon  ennemy,  qu'il  auoit  a  fes  pieds:  Enfin  ce
ieune  homme  voiant  qu'il  feroit  maffacre  en  vn  in-
ltant,  s'il  paffoit  outre,  jette  bas  fon  epee  &  fe  rend,
pour  auoir  loifir  de  penfer  a  fa  confcience,  quoy  qu'il
fe  fuft  confeffe  &  communie  le  Dimanche  precedent,
aimant  mieux  eftre  brufle,  rofty,  &  mange,  que  de
mourir  dans  cette  precipitation  fans  penfer  a.  Dieu.
Voila  done  ces  deux  pauures  victimes  entre  les  mains
de  ces  Tygres,  ils  les  lient,  les  garottent,  les  emmei-
nent  en  leur  pais  auec  des  cris  &  des  huees,  ou  plu-
toft  auec  des  hurlemens  de  loups.  [140]  Aians  neant-
moins  reconnu  qu'ils  eftoient  Frangois,  ils  ne  les
traiterent  pas  comme  ils  font  les  Sauuages,  vfans
d'vne  plus  grande  douceur;  car  ils  ne  leur  arrache-
rent  ny  les  ongles  des  doigts,  ny  ne  les  meurtrirent
en  aucune  partie  de  leur  corps.

Cependant  comme  ils  ne  retournoient  point  au  iour
affigne,  on  commence  a  douter  qu'il  ne  leur  foit
furuenu  quelque  malheur:  on  attend  encor  quelque
temps,  mais  comme  ils  ne  paroiffoient  point,  les  Fran-
gois  les  vont  chercher  au  lieu  ou  ils  auoient  dit  qu'ils
iroient  chaffer, ils  rencontrerent  vne  perche  plantee


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  25

killed  this  Barbarian,  both  of  them  would  have  lost
their  lives;  he  came  off  with  only  the  stroke  of  a
javelin  which  the  enemy  thrust  into  his  thigh.  The
other  Frenchman,  having  promptly  risen  at  the  noise,
seized  his  sword;  a  Hiroquois  shot  an  arrow  at  him,
which  passed  under  his  arm.  Another,  intending  to
approach  him,  made  a  false  step  and  fell  into  the
snow;  immediately  the  Frenchman  presented  his
naked  sword  at  his  throat ;  the  Hiroquois  saw  him
do  this  without  stirring, —  not  one  made  a  show  of
hindering  him,  or  of  killing  him,  for  fear  he  might
transfix  his  enemy  whom  he  had  at  his  feet.  At
length  this  young  man  seeing  that  he  would  be  mas-
sacred in  a  moment,  if  he  went  further,  threw  down
his  sword  and  surrendered,  in  order  that  he  might
have  leisure  to  examine  his  conscience,  although  he
had  confessed  and  received  communion  the  preced-
ing Sunday, —  preferring  to  be  burned,  roasted,  and
eaten,  to  dying  in  this  headlong  haste  without  think-
ing upon  God.  Behold,  then,  these  two  poor  victims
in  the  hands  of  these  Tigers ;  they  bind  them,  pinion
them,  and  take  them  away  into  their  own  country
with  shrieks  and  yells,  or  rather  with  the  howling  of
wolves.  [140]  Nevertheless,  having  recognized  that
they  were  Frenchmen,  they  did  not  treat  them  as
they  do  the  Savages,  but  used  greater  gentleness ;  for
they  neither  tore  off  their  finger-nails,  nor  mutilated
them  in  any  part  of  their  bodies.

However,  as  they  did  not  return  on  the  day  ap-
pointed, their  friends  began  to  suspect  that  some
misfortune  had  happened  to  them ;  they  were  awaited
some  time  longer,  but  as  they  did  not  appear,  the
French  went  to  seek  them  in  the  place  where  they
said  they  were  going  to  hunt ;  they  found  a  pole  fixed


26  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  JE SUITES [Vol.21

dans  la  neige,  a  laquelle  efhoit  attache  vn  mefchant
papier,  grifonne  auec  vn  charbon ;  ils  le  prennent,  le
lifent,  treuuent  ces  paroles  efcrites:  Les  Hiroquois
nous  ont  pris  entr6s  dedans  le  bois :  Ils  entrent  dans
le  bois,  treuuent  vn  gros  arbre  duquel  on  auoit  frai-
chement  enleue  l'6corce,  fur  lequel  eftoient  efcrits
ces  mots  auec  du  charbon :  Les  Hiroquois  nous  ont
pris  la  nuidt,  ils  ne  nous  ont  fait  encor  aucun  mal,
ils  nous  emmeinent  en  leur  pais ;  il  y  auoit  quelques
autres  paroles  qu'on  ne  put  lire.  Cecy  [141]  arriua
enuiron  le  vingtiefme  de  Fevrier:  Ce  coup  eftonna  vn
peu  nos  Francois,  qui  recommanderent  a  Dieu  auec
ferueur,  ces  deux  pauures  captifs ;  on  chercha  toutes
les  voyes  poffibles  pour  les  deliurer,  mais  on  ne  voioit
point  de  iour  a  cet  affaire :  Nos  Sauuages  voifms  nous
difoient,  que  c'eftoit  fait  de  leur  vie,  qu'ils  auoient
efte  boiiillis  &  roftis,  &  manges;  mais  Dieu  qui  fe
plaift  d'exaucer  les  prieres  de  ceux  qui  ont  confiance
en  fa  bonte,  en  difpofoit  autrement;  il  nous  les  a
rendus,  &  nous  auons  appris  ce  qui  fuit,  de  leurs
bouches.

Nous  arriuafmes  dans  la  Bourgade  de  ceux  qui  nous
ont  pris,  apres  dix-fept  on  dix-huidt  iours  de  chemin ;
au  bruit  de  noflre  arriuee  chacun  accourt  pour  nous
voir,  non  feulement  les  Bourgades  voifmes,  mais
encor  les  autres  Nations  fe  vouloient  donner  ce
contentement,  de  voir  des  captifs  Francois;  on  nous
faifoit  tenir  debout  a  toute  heure,  pour  nous  contem-
pler  depuis  la  tefte  iuf ques  aux  pieds :  Quelques- vns
fe  mocquoient  de  nous,  d'autres  nous  menacoient  de
nous  brufler,  d'autres  nous  portoient  companion;
quelques  [142]  Hiroquois  qui  auoient  efte  prifon-
niers  a  Kebec,  &  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  &  qui  auoiet


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  27

in  the  snow,  to  which  was  attached  a  wretched  paper,
scribbled  upon  with  a  coal;  they  took  it,  read  it,  and
found  these  words  written :  ' '  The  Hiroquois  have
captured  us:  go  into  the  woods."  They  entered  the
woods,  and  found  a  large  tree  from  which  the  bark  had
recently  been  removed,  and  on  which  were  written
these  words  with  charcoal :  ' '  The  Hiroquois  have
captured  us  to-night ;  they  have  not  yet  done  us  any
harm, — they  are  taking  us  away  to  their  own  coun-
try; "  there  were  some  other  words  which  could  not
be  read.  This  [141]  happened  about  the  twentieth
of  February.  This  blow  somewhat  bewildered  our
Frenchmen,  who  fervently  commended  to  God  these
two  poor  captives ;  all  possible  ways  were  sought  to
deliver  them,  but  none  seemed  feasible.  Our  neigh-
boring Savages  told  us,  that  it  was  all  over  with
them,  that  they  had  been  boiled  or  roasted,  and
eaten ;  but  God,  who  is  pleased  to  grant  the  prayers
of  those  who  have  confidence  in  his  goodness,  dis-
posed of  them  otherwise;  he  restored  them  to  us,
and,  from  their  own  lips,  we  learned  what  follows:
' '  We  arrived  at  the  Village  of  those  who  captured
us,  after  a  journey  of  seventeen  or  eighteen  days.
At  the  report  of  our  arrival,  every  one  ran  to  see
us, — not  only  the  neighboring  Villages,  but  also  the
other  Nations  wished  to  have  the  satisfaction  of  see-
ing the  captive  Frenchmen ;  they  made  us  stand  up
at  all  hours,  that  they  might  look  us  over  from  head
to  foot.  Some  derided  us,  others  threatened  to  burn
us,  others  had  compassion  on  us;  some  [142]  Hiro-
quois who  had  been  prisoners  at  Kebec,  and  at  the
Three  Rivers,  and  who  had  been  favorably  treated
by  the  French,  looked  kindly  on  us,  and  told  us  that
we  should  not  die. One  among them, to whom


28  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

efte"  fauorablement  traites  des  Fran9ois,  nous  regar-
derent  de  bon  ceil,  &  nous  dirent  que  nous  ne  mour-
rions  point ;  vn  entre  autres  que  Francois  Marguerie
auoit  fort  careffe\  &  que  nos  Peres  auoient  fecouru
dans  fa  neceffite,  dit  tout  haut,  que  les  Francois
efloient  bons,  &  qu'il  ne  les  falloit  pas  faire  mourir:
Vn  bienfait  n'efl  iamais  en  oubly  deuant  Dieu,  il  en
fcait  rendre  la  recompenfe  en  fon  temps ;  il  fait  bon
exercer  des  adtes  de  charite  &  de  mifericorde  pour
fon  amour.

Vn  ieune  prifonnier  Algonquin,  a  qui  les  Hiro-
quois  auoient  donne  la  vie,  reconnoiffant  nos  Fran-
cois, leur  dit:  Prenes  courage,  vous  ne  mourres  point,
puis  que  vous  fcaues  prier  Dieu,  il  ne  manquera  pas
de  vous  fecourir.  Ie  ne  fcay  pas  fi  ce  ieune  homme
auoit  quelque  confiance  en  fon  fouuerain  Seigneur;
mais  quoy  que  e'en  foit,  il  s'eft  fauue  des  mains  de
fes  ennemis.

Nonobflant  tous  ces  difcours,  ces  ieunes  hommes
auoient  tout  fujet  de  craindre,  fe  voyans  au  milieu
de  la  barbarie  &  [143]  de  la  cruaute,  fans  fecours
d'aucune  creature.  II  n'y  alloit  pas  moins  que  du
feu,  de  la  rage,  &  de  la  dent  de  ces  barbares,  qui
exercent  des  tourmens  eftranges  fur  leurs  prif onniers.

Quelques  Sauuages  des  Nations  plus  hautes,  ne
voulans  pas  irriter  les  Francois,  firent  des  prefens,  a
ce  qu'on  deliuraft  ces  deux  pauures  captifs:  Enfin
on  tint  confeil  dans  le  pais,  &  la  conclufion  fut  prife
de  traiter  de  paix  auec  les  Francois;  cela  fait,  on
promet  aux  prif  onniers  qu'on  les  remenera  au  Prin-
temps  aux  Trois  Riuieres.  En  attendant  on  les  donne
en  garde  a  deux  chefs  de  families,  qui  les  traiterent
comme  leurs  enfans. L'vn  d'eux voyant  que  fon


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  29

Francois  Marguerie  had  been  very  kind,  and  whom
our  Fathers  had  aided  in  his  necessity,  said  aloud
that  the  Frenchmen  were  good,  and  must  not  be  put
to  death."  An  act  of  kindness  is  never  forgotten  by
God,  —  he  knows  how  to  reward  it  in  his  own  time;
it  is  well  to  practice  acts  of  charity  and  mercy,  for
the  sake  of  his  love.

A  young  Algonquin  prisoner,  whose  life  had  been
spared  by  the  Hiroquois,  recognizing  our  French-
men, said  to  them:  "  Take  courage,  you  will  not
die ;  inasmuch  as  you  know  how  to  pray  to  God,  he
will  not  fail  to  succor  you."  I  do  not  know  whether
that  young  man  had  any  confidence  in  his  sovereign
Lord;  but,  at  all  events,  he  escaped  from  the  hands
of  his  enemies.

Notwithstanding  all  these  declarations,  these  young
men  had  every  reason  for  fear,  seeing  themselves  in
the  midst  of  barbarism  and  [143]  of  cruelty,  without
help  from  any  creature.  The  question  was  of  noth-
ing less  than  fire,  and  of  the  fury  and  teeth  of  these
barbarians,  who  practice  strange  tortures  on  their
prisoners.

Some  Savages  of  the  upper  Nations,  not  wishing
to  irritate  the  French,  made  presents  that  these  two
poor  captives  might  be  set  free.  At  length  a  coun-
cil was  held  in  the  country,  and  they  concluded  to
negotiate  peace  with  the  French ;  that  being  done,
they  promised  the  prisoners  that  in  the  Spring  they
should  be  taken  back  to  the  Three  Rivers.  In  the
meantime,  they  were  given  in  keeping  to  two  heads
of  families,  who  treated  them  like  their  own  chil-
dren. One  of  these,  seeing  that  his  prisoner  prayed
to  God  night  and  morning,  and  that  he  made  the
sign  of  the  Cross  before  each  meal,  asked  him  what


30  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

prifonnier  prioit  Dieu  foir  &  matin,  &  qu'il  faifoit
le  figne  de  la  Croix  deuant  le  repas,  hiy  demanda  ce
que  fignifioit  ce  figne  facre,  ayant  eu  pour  refponfe,
que  le  Dieu  qui  a  fait  le  ciel  &  la  terre,  les  animaux
&  tous  les  bleds,  conferuoit  ceux  qui  l'honoroient,  &
qui  auoient  recours  a  luy;  ie  veux  done  faire  le
mefme,  refpond-il,  afin  qu'il  me  conferue  &  qu'il  me
nourriffe.

Vne  autre  fois  plufieurs  de  ces  Barbares  [144]  inui-
terent  l'vn  de  leurs  prifonniers  a  chanter  a  la  Fran-
goife:  tenes  vous  done  dans  le  refpect,  fit-il,  car  le
Dieu  du  Ciel  &  de  la  terre,  que  nous  honorons  par
nos  voix  &  par  nos  Cantiques,  vous  pourroit  chaftier
rudement,  fi  vous  entries  dans  quelque  mepris;  ils
promirent  tous  de  ne  point  rire,  &  de  fe  comporter
fagement;  le  Frangois  entonne  V Aue  maris  Jiella,
qu'ils  efcouterent  la  tefte  baiffee  auec  beaucoup  de
modeftie  &  de  refpect,  temoignant  par  apres  que  ce
chant  leur  auoit  aggree :  La  faincte  Vierge  qui  fai-
foit tous  les  iours  chanter  cet  Hymne  a  Kebec,  pour
la  deliurance  des  prifonniers,  preuoyoit  des  lors  leur
liberte,  &  peut-eftre  encor  demandoit  a  fon  fils  la
conuerfion  de  ces  peuples,  qui  entendront  bien-toft
le  clairon  de  l'Euangile,  fi  l'ancienne  France  ayme  la
Nouuelle,  comme  vne  fceur  aifnee  doit  aymer  fa
Cadette.

Or  ces  deux  pauures  Frangois  fe  trouuans  incom-
modes dans  les  rigueurs  du  froid/  car  ils  auoient
donne  partie  de  force,  partie  de  bon  gre\  le  meilleur
de  leurs  habits  a  ces  Barbares;  l'vn  deux  ayant
connoiffance  de  la  langue  Angloife,  [145]  6criuit  aux
Holandois  qui  fe  font  empares  d'vne  partie  de  l'Aca-
die,  qui  appartient  au  Roy,  les  fuppliant  d'auoir  pitie


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  31

this  sacred  sign  meant ;  having  had  for  answer  that
the  God  who  had  made  heaven  and  earth,  the  ani-
mals, and  all  the  grains,  preserved  those  who  honored
him  and  who  had  recourse  to  him, —  "  I  wish  then
to  do  the  same,"  responded  he,  "  that  he  may  pre-
serve me  and  feed  me."

Another  time  several  of  these  Barbarians  [144]
invited  one  of  their  prisoners  to  sing  after  the  French
fashion.  "  Then,"  answered  he,  "  be  respectful ;  for
the  God  of  Heaven  and  of  earth,  whom  we  honor  by
our  voices  and  by  our  Hymns,  could  punish  you
severely,  if  you  should  begin  any  scornful  actions;  "
they  all  promised  not  to  laugh,  and  to  conduct  them-
selves discreetly.  The  Frenchmen  intoned  the  Ave
maris  stella,  to  which  they  listened,  their  heads  being
bowed  with  much  modesty  and  respect;  they  de-
clared afterward  that  the  song  had  pleased  them.
The  blessed  Virgin  who  caused  that  Hymn  to  be  sung
every  day  at  Kebec  for  the  deliverance  of  the  pris-
oners, foresaw  from  that  time  their  liberty,  and
perhaps  also  asked  from  her  son  the  conversion  of
these  tribes,  who  will  very  soon  hear  the  clarion  of
the  Gospel,  if  old  France  love  the  New,  as  an  elder
sister  should  love  the  Younger.

Now,  these  two  poor  Frenchmen  being  distressed
by  the  severity  of  the  cold, —  for,  partly  through
force,  and  partly  out  of  good  will,  they  had  given
the  best  of  their  clothing  to  these  Barbarians, —  one
of  them,  having  a  knowledge  of  the  English  lan-
guage, [145]  wrote  to  the  Hollanders  who  have  seized
a  part  of  Acadia,  which  belongs  to  the  King,  beg-
ging them  to  have  pity  upon  their  poverty ;  he  used
a  beaver  skin  for  paper,  a  little  stick  for  a  pen,  and
some  rust  or  soot  sticking  to  the  bottom  of  a  kettle,


32  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

de  leur  mifere;  il  fe  feruit  de  la  peau  d'vn  caftor
pour  papier,  d'vn  petit  bafton  pour  plume,  &  de  la
cralTe  ou  fuie  attachee  au  deffous  d'vn  chauderon,
pour  encre ;  le  Sauuage  a  qui  appartenoit  ce  caftor,
le  portant  aux  Hollandois,  ils  reconnurent  cette  efcri-
ture,  &  touches  de  compaffion,  ils  enuoyerent  a  ces
deux  pauures  prifonniers  vne  couple  de  chemifes,
deux  couuertures,  quelques  viures,  &  vne  efcritoire,
&  du  papier,  auec  vn  mot  de  lettre.  Le  Sauuage
rendit  tout  fidelement,  excepte  la  lettre,  difant  que
l'efcriture  des  Francois  eftoit  bonne,  mais  que  celle
des  Hollandois  ne  valoit  rien.  Francois  Marguerie
aiant  du  papier,  efcriuit  toute  l'hiftoire  de  leur  prife,
&  pour  ce  qu'ils  craignoient  que  les  Hollandois  n'en-
tendiflent  pas  la  langue  Francoife,  il  coucha  fa  lettre
en  Francois,  &  en  Latin  comme  il  put,  &  en  Anglois,
il  croit  qu'elle  fut  portee;  mais  il  ne  vit  point  de
refponce,  les  Hiroquois  fans  doute  ne  leur  voulurent
pas  rendre.  Ils  ne  voulurent  auffi  iamais  leur  per-
mettre  [146]  d'aller  vifiter  les  Hollandois,  ces  gens
leur  difoient,  ils  font  cruels,  ils  nous  mettront  aux
fers,  ils  pilleront  nos  Compatriotes,  s'ils  viennent
en  ces  quartiers,  pour  vous  deliurer.  Les  Francois  ne
croioient  rien  de  tout  cela;  d'ailleurs,  ils  ne  vouloient
pas  s'efchapper  des  mains  de  ces  Barbares,  pour  les
mieux  difpofer  a  vne  bonne  paix.

Sur  la  fin  du  mois  d'Auril,  la  conclufion  de  recher-
clier  cette  paix  auec  les  Francois,  eftant  prife,  cinq
cens  Hiroquois  ou  enuiron,  partirent  de  leur  pais
bien  arm^s,  ramenant  auec  eux  les  deux  Francois:
quelques-vns  s'en  retournerent,  d'autres  fe  debande-
rent  du  gros,  pour  s'en  aller  au  deuant  des  Hurons,
&  des  Algonquins,  a  deffein  de  piller,  de  tuer,  &  de


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  33

for  ink.  The  Savage  to  whom  the  beaver  belonged
carrying  it  to  the  Dutch,  they  understood  this  writ-
ing, and,  touched  with  compassion,  they  sent  to  these
two  poor  prisoners  a  couple  of  shirts,  two  blankets,
some  provisions,  an  inkstand,  some  paper,  and  a
short  letter.  The  Savage  delivered  all  faithfully
except  the  letter,  saying  that  the  writing  of  the
French  was  good,  but  that  of  the  Hollanders  was
worth  nothing.  Francois  Marguerie,  having  paper,
wrote  the  whole  history  of  their  capture ;  and,  as
they  feared  the  Hollanders  might  not  understand  the
French  language,  he  inscribed  his  letter  in  French,
and  in  Latin  as  he  was  able,  and  in  English.  He
believed  that  it  was  carried;  but  he  saw  no  reply, —
the  Hiroquois  doubtless  were  not  willing  to  deliver
one.  Neither  would  they  ever  permit  them  [146]  to
visit  the  Dutch.  "  Those  people,"  said  they  to
them,  "  are  cruel, —  they  will  put  us  into  irons,  they
will  plunder  our  Countrymen,  if  they  come  into
these  quarters  to  liberate  you."  The  Frenchmen
believed  nothing  of  all  this;  besides,  they  did  not
wish  to  escape  from  the  hands  of  these  Barbarians,
in  order  that,  being  with  them,  they  might  better
incline  them  to  an  advantageous  peace.

Toward  the  end  of  the  month  of  April,  the  deci-
sion to  seek  this  peace  with  the  French  having  been
made,  five  hundred  Hiroquois,  or  thereabouts,  set
out  from  their  country,  well  armed,  taking  with  them
the  two  Frenchmen.  Some  went  back,  others  broke
from  the  ranks  in  great  numbers  to  go  and  meet  the
Hurons  and  the  Algonquins,  with  the  design  of  pil-
laging, killing,  and  massacring  all  those  whom  they
could  surprise ;  the  remainder  went  directly  to  the
Three  Rivers. On  the  fifth  of  June,  at  daybreak,


34  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  21

maffacrer  tout  ceux  qu'ils  pourroient  furprendre,  le
reite  tire  droit  aux  Trois  Rmieres.  Le  cinquiefme
de  Iuin,  fur  le  point  du  iour  parurent  vingt  canots,
plus  bas  que  la  demeure  des  Francois,  tous  charges
d'hommes  bien  armes;  il  en  parut  d'autres  au  milieu
de  la  riuiere  dans  le  mefme  equipage :  Voila  auffi-toft
l'alarme  parmy  les  Francois,  &  parmy  les  Algon-
quins,  qui  [147]  demeurent  aupres  de  nous,  ceux-cy
s'dcrient  que  c'eftoit  fait  de  leurs  gens,  qui  eftoient
alles  chaffer  au  caftor ;  la-deff  us  vn  canot  Algonquin
fortant  de  l'embouchure  du  rleuue,  que  nous  appel-
lons  les  Trois  Riuieres,  fut  pris  de  fes  ennemis  a  la
veue  des  Francois  &  des  Sauuages,  fans  qu'on  luy
peut  donner  aucun  fecours,  comme  on  eftoit  dans
cette  alarme  parut  vn  autre  canot,  conduit  par  vn
homme  feul,  fortant  du  quartier  de  l'ennemy,  tirant
vers  le  fort  des  Francois,  ce  canot  portoit  vn  petit
guidon  pour  marque  de  paix,  on  iette  les  yeux  fur
fon  nocher,  a  l'habit  il  paroiffoit  comme  vn  Sauuage,
mais  a  la  voix  on  reconnut  que  c' eftoit  Francois  Mar-
guerie,  l'vn  des  deux  prifonniers,  ayant  mis  pied  a
terre,  on  le  conduit  au  fort  pour  faluer  le  fieur  de
Chanflour,  qui  le  commande ;  tout  le  monde  accourt,
chacun  l'enibraffe,  on  le  regarde  comme  vn  homme
refufcite,  &  comme  vne  vidtime  echappee  du  cou-
fteau,  qui  l'alloit  facrifier,  &  du  feu  qui  l'alloit  con-
fommer;  on  luy  fait  quiter  fes  haillons,  on  le  reueft
a  la  Francoife,  chacun  eft  dans  la  ioye,  on  le  traite
auec  amour;  &  apres  les  [148]  premieres  careffes,
chacun  fe  met  dans  le  filence  pour  l'ecouter:  II  dit
done  que  les  Hiroquois  fouhaitans  1' alliance  des
Francois,  les  auoient  doucement  traites;  qu'ils
eitoient  partis  cinq  cens  du  pais,  qu'on  en  voioit  trois


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  35

twenty  canoes  appeared  below  the  habitation  of  the
French,  all  laden  with  well-armed  men;  others
appeared  in  the  middle  of  the  river,  equipped  in  like
manner ;  immediately  there  was  an  alarm  among  the
French,  and  among  the  Algonquins  who  [147]  dwell
near  us ;  these  last  cried  out  that  all  was  over  with
their  people  who  had  gone  to  hunt  beavers.  At  that
moment,  an  Algonquin  canoe,  going  out  of  the
mouth  of  the  stream  which  we  call  the  Three  Rivers,
was  taken  by  its  enemies  in  the  sight  of  the  French
and  of  the  Savages,  without  any  one  being  able  to
render  it  assistance.  While  we  were  in  this  alarm,
another  canoe  appeared,  guided  by  a  single  man,
coming  out  from  the  quarter  of  the  enemy  and  ad-
vancing toward  the  fort  of  the  French ;  this  canoe
carried  a  little  flag,  as  a  sign  of  peace.  We  cast  our
eyes  upon  the  pilot ;  in  dress  he  appeared  to  be  a
Savage,  but  by  the  voice  we  recognized  that  it  was
Francois  Marguerie,  one  of  the  two  prisoners.  Hav-
ing set  foot  on  land,  he  was  conducted  to  the  fort,
that  he  might  pay  his  respects  to  the  sieur  de  Chan-
flour,  who  commands  there.  Every  one  ran,  each
one  embraced  him, — he  was  looked  upon  as  a  man
raised  from  the  dead,  and  as  a  victim  escaped  from
the  knife  that  was  ready  to  sacrifice  him,  and  from
the  fire  that  was  ready  to  consume  him ;  they  made
him  abandon  his  rags,  and  reclothed  him  like  a
Frenchman.  All  were  full  of  joy,  and  treated  him
affectionately,  and  after  the  [148]  first  caresses  every
one  became  silent,  in  order  to  listen  to  him.  He
said  then,  that  the  Hiroquois,  desiring  the  alliance
of  the  French,  had  treated  them  mildly;  that  they
had  set  out  from  the  country  five  hundred  in  num-
ber, of  whom  three  hundred  and fifty were seen


86  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

cens  cinquante  roder  fur  la  grande  riuiere,  a  la  veue
du  fort,  qu'ils  l'auoient  depute  pour  parler  de  paix
auec  les  Francois,  &  non  auec  les  Sauuages,  Algon-
quins,  &  Montagnais,  qu'ils  hai'flent  a  mort,  &  qu'ils
veulent  exterminer  entierement;  lis  ont,  dit-il,
trente-fix  arquebufiers,  auffi  adroits  que  les  Francois,
le  refte  eft  fort  bien  arme  a  la  Sauuage ;  ils  font  munis
de  poudre,  de  plomb,  d'arcs,  &  de  fleches,  d'epees,
&  de  viures  abondamment :  Ils  s'attendent  qu'on  leur
fera  prefent  de  trente  bonnes  arquebufes,  ce  font
gens  refolus,  aufquels  il  ne  fe  faut  fier  que  de  bonne
forte;  veu  mefme  qu'vne  femme  Algonquine,  habi-
tuee  depuis  quelque  temps  dans  leur  pais,  de  laquelle
ces  Barbares  fe  cachoient  peu,  nous  a  aduertis  en  fe-
cret,  que  ces  peuples  fe  vouloient  feruir  de  nos  corps
comme  d'vne  amorce,  pour  prendre  tous  les  Sau-
uages nos  confederes,  perdre  tout  le  pais,  [149]  &  fe
rendre  maiftres  abfolus  de  la  grande  Riuiere;  i'ay
commiffion,  faifoit-il  de  retourner  fans  delay,  ils  ont
retenu  auec  eux  mon  compagnon  pour  hoftage;  &
moy  ie  leur  ay  donne  parole  que  ie  les  reuerrois  au
plutoft.  Le  fieur  de  Chanflour  donna  pour  refponfe,
que  c6t  affaire  eftant  de  grande  importance,  il  falloit
que  le  grand  Capitaine  des  Francois  en  f  uft  aduerty ;
qu'on  ne  doutoit  pas  qu'il  n'agreafl  les  recherches  de
la  paix,  qu'on  luy  alloit  deleguer  des  Meffagers,  &
qu'il  feroit  dans  peu  de  temps  aux  Trois  Riuieres.
Noftre  prifonnier  &  vn  Francois  qui  l'accompagne,  fe
rembarque  auec  cette  refponfe,  aflaifonnee  de  quan-
tity de  viures  &  de  petites  douceurs,  pour  gagner  ces
Barbares;  Ils  approuuerent  noftre  procede,  mais  ils
ne  laifferent  pas  de  fe  bien  fortifier,  en  attendant  la
venue  d'Onontio, c'eft  ainfi qu'ils appellent Mon-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  37

prowling  along  the  river,  in  sight  of  the  fort;  that
they  had  deputed  him  to  speak  concerning  peace  with
the  French,  but  not  with  the  Savages, — the  Algon-
quins,  and  the  Montagnais,  whom  they  hate  unto
death,  and  whom  they  wish  to  exterminate  entirely.
"  They  have,"  said  he,  "  thirty-six  arquebusiers,  as
skillful  as  the  French, — the  remainder  are  very  well
armed  in  Savage  fashion ;  they  are  abundantly  fur-
nished with  powder,  with  lead,  with  bows,  arrows,
and  javelins,  and  with  provisions.  They  are  hoping
that  a  present  will  be  given  them,  of  thirty  good
arquebuses;  they  are  resolute  people,  whom  you
must  trust  only  with  reserve,  since  an  Algonquin
woman, —  who  has  lived  for  some  time  in  their  coun-
try, and  from  whom  these  Barbarians  concealed
little, —  warned  us  in  secret  that  these  people  wished
to  use  our  bodies  as  a  bait,  in  order  that  they  might
take  all  the  Savages,  our  confederates,  ruin  the  whole
country,  [149]  and  make  themselves  absolute  masters
of  the  great  River.  I  am  commissioned,"  said  he,
' '  to  return  without  delay ;  they  have  retained  with
them  my  companion  as  hostage,  and  I  have  given
them  my  word  that  I  will  see  them  again  as  soon  as
possible."  The  sieur  de  Chanflour  gave  as  answer,
that,  this  matter  being  of  great  importance,  it  was
necessary  that  the  great  Captain  of  the  French  should
be  notified  of  it, —  that  they  did  not  doubt  he  would
approve  of  the  pursuit  of  peace,  that  they  were  going
to  send  Messengers  to  him,  and  that  he  would  short-
ly be  at  the  Three  Rivers.  Our  prisoner,  and  a
Frenchman  who  accompanied  him,  reembarked  with
this  answer,  set  off  by  a  quantity  of  provisions  and
little  presents,  in  order  to  win  these  Barbarians.
They  approved  our  procedure,  but  they  did  not  neg-
lect to  fortify  themselves  well,  while  awaiting  the


38  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.21


fieur  le  Gouuerneur.  lis  renuoyerent  vne  autre  fois
Francois  Marguerie  &  Thomas  Godefroy  fon  concap-
tif,  fuppliant  le  Capitaine  des  Trois  Riuieres,  de  les
venir  voir  pour  parlementer,  en  attendant  la  venue
du  grand  Capitaine.  Le  Pere  Paul  [150]  Ra[g]ueneau
&  le  fieur  Nicolet,  tous  deux  bien  verfes  en  la  Langue
Huronne,  qui  a  du  rapport  auec  la  Langue  Hiro-
quoife,  s'y  tranfporterent  au  lieu  du  Capitaine,  qui,
auec  raifon,  ne  voulut  pas  quitter  fon  fort:  Arriues
qu'ils  furent  dans  le  reduit  de  ces  Barbares,  ils  leur
temoignerent,  que  les  Francois  auoient  receu  vn
grand  contentement  a  la  veue  de  leurs  Compatriotes,
qu'ils  prenoient  tous  plaifir  aux  nouuelles  de  la  paix,
&  qu'on  les  auoit  enuoyes  fcauoir  ce  qu'ils  fouhai-
toient  du  Capitaine,  qu'ils  auoient  demande:  Ils  ref-
pondirent,  qu'ils  vouloient  parler,  c'eft  a  dire,  qu'ils
vouloient  faire  des  prefens,  tant  pour  nous  rendre
nos  prifonniers,  que  pour  nous  inuiter  a  faire  vne
Habitation  vers  leur  pais,  ou  toutes  les  Nations  Hi-
roquoif es  aborderoient  pour  leur  commerce :  II  leur
fut  refpondu,  qu'on  les  ecouteroit  volontiers,  mais
qu'on  attendoit  le  grand  Capitaine,  auquel  on  auoit
donne  aduis  de  tout  ce  qui  f e  paff oit :  Ils  firent  de
longues  harangues  de  l'eitat  de  leur  pais,  des  defirs
qu'auoient  toutes  les  Nations  Hiroquoifes,  de  fe  voir
li<§es  auec  les  Francois ;  &  pour  preuue  de  leur  parole,
[151]  ils  font  vn  petit  prefent  par  auance,  en  atten-
dant la  venue  d'Onontio.

Le  lendemain  trois  canots  ennemis  fe  vindrent
promener  deuant  le  fort,  a  la  portee  de  la  voix ;  l'vn
des  plus  ag6s  de  cette  efcoiiade  s'6cria  a  pleine  tefte,
parlant  aux  Sauuages!  Preftes  moy  l'oreille,  ie  viens
pour  traiter  la  paix  auec  toutes  les  Nations  de  ces
quartiers,  auec  les  Montagnais,  auec  les  Algonquins,


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  39

coming  of  Onontio, —  it  is  thus  they  call  Monsieur
the  Governor.  They  again  sent  back  Francois  Mar-
guerie  and  Thomas  Godefroy  his  fellow  captive,
beseeching  the  Captain  of  the  Three  Rivers  to  come
and  parley  with  them  while  awaiting  the  arrival  of
the  great  Captain.  Father  Paul  [150]  Ragueneau  and
the  sieur  Nicolet, — both  well  versed  in  the  Huron
Language,  which  is  related  to  the  Hiroquois  Lan-
guage,—  went  to  them  instead  of  the  Captain,  who,
with  reason,  was  unwilling  to  leave  his  fort.  Hav-
ing arrived  at  the  rendezvous  of  these  Barbarians,
they  stated  to  them  that  the  French  had  had  great
satisfaction  in  seeing  their  Countrymen:  that  they
all  took  pleasure  in  the  news  of  peace ;  and  that  they
themselves  had  been  sent  to  learn  what  was  desired
from  the  Captain  whom  they  had  asked  to  come.
They  replied  that  they  wished  to  talk, —  that  is  to
say,  that  they  wished  to  make  presents, —  not  only
about  restoring  our  prisoners,  but  about  inviting  us
to  make  a  Settlement  near  their  country,  to  which
all  the  Hiroquois  Nations  could  come  for  their  trade.
They  were  answered,  that  they  would  be  willingly
heard,  but  that  we  were  awaiting  the  great  Captain,
who  had  been  informed  of  all  that  had  occurred.
They  made  long  harangues  upon  the  condition  of
their  country,  and  upon  the  desire  that  all  the  Hiro-
quois Nations  had  to  see  themselves  allied  with  the
French;  and,  as  evidence  of  their  sentiments,  [151]
they  made  a  little  present  beforehand,  while  await-
ing the  coming  of  Onontio.

The  next  day  three  hostile  canoes  moved  up  and
down  before  the  fort,  within  hearing;  one  of  the  old-
est men  belonging  to  this  squadron  cried  with  a  loud
voice,  speaking  to  the  Savages:  "  Listen  to  me!  I
come  to  treat  for  peace  with  all  the  Nations  of  these


40  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.21

auec  les  Hurons,  la  terre  fera  toute  belle,  la  riuiere
n'aura  plus  de  vagues,  on  ira  par  tout  fans  crainte:
Vn  Capitaine  Algonquin  reconnoiffant  la  fourbe  de
c£t  impofteur,  luy  refpondit  d'vne  voix  plus  forte,  &
d'vn  ton  piquant:  Ie  reprefente  toutes  les  Nations
que  tu  as  nominees,  en  leur  abfence,  &  ie  te  dy  de
leur  part,  que  tu  es  vn  menteur :  Si  tu  venois  pour
parler  de  paix,  tu  deliurerois  du  moins  vn  de  nos
prifonniers,  felon  noftre  couftume ;  tu  ne  f erois  aucun
acte  d'hoftilite,  &  tous  les  iours  tu  es  aux  aguets
pour  nous  furprendre,  tu  maff acres  tous  ceux  que
tu  peux  attraper/  cela  dit,  chacun  fe  retire  en  fon
quartier.

Cependant  le  canot  qu'on  auoit  depefche"  a  Kebec,
fit  vne  tres-grande  diligence:  [152]  Monfieur  le  Gou-
uerneur  ayant  receu  les  nouuelles,  arma  en  vn  inftant
vne  barque  &  quatre  chaloupes,  prit  auec  foy  le  Pere
Vimont  noftre  Superieur,  vogue  contre  les  vents  &
contre  les  marees ;  mais  voiant  que  la  barque  n'auan-
coit  point,  il  prend  le  deuant  auec  fes  chaloupes ;  les
matelots  &  les  foldats  ramoient  a  toutes  forces :  En-
fin,  ils  arriuerent  aux  Trois  Riuieres  plutoft  qu'on
n'efperoit.  Si  toft  que  l'ennemy  les  apperceut,  il  fe
reff erra  dans  fon  fort ;  il  eftoit  neantmoins  fi  enrage
contre  les  Algonquins,  qu'vne  heure  auparauant  que
Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  les  allaft  treuuer,  ils  fe
jetterent  fur  vn  canot  Algonquin,  conduit  par  deux
hommes  &  vne  femme;  celle-cy  fut  tu£e,  l'vn  des
hommes  fut  pris  prifonnier,  &  1' autre  fe  fauua.  Le
iour  precedent  Anerab'i,  Capitaine  de  guerre  des  plus
hauts  Algonquins,  s' eftoit  fauue  de  leurs  mains,  les
ayans  apperceus  de  loin  a  remboucheure  du  grand
Lac,  voifin  des  Trois  Riuieres,  oil  ils  gardoient  toutes
les  auenues,  par  la  multitude  de  leurs  canots.


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  41

parts,  with  the  Montagnais,  with  the  Algonquins,
with  the  Hurons;  the  land  shall  be  beautiful,  the
river  shall  have  no  more  waves,  one  may  go  every-
where without  fear."  An  Algonquin  Captain,  per-
ceiving the  knavery  of  this  impostor,  answered  him
in  a  louder  voice,  and  in  a  harsh  tone:  "  I  represent,
in  their  absence,  all  the  Nations  thou  hast  named;
and  I  tell  thee,  in  their  name,  that  thou  art  a  liar.
If  thou  earnest  to  treat  for  peace,  thou  wouldst  de-
liver at  least  one  of  our  prisoners,  according  to  our
custom,  and  thou  wouldst  commit  no  act  of  hostility;
but  every  day  thou  art  on  the  watch  to  surprise  us,
and  thou  massacrest  all  whom  thou  canst  entrap."
This  being  said,  each  one  retired  to  his  own  quarters.
In  the  meantime,  the  canoe  that  had  been  sent  to
Kebec  made  all  possible  haste.  [152]  Monsieur  the
Governor,  having  received  the  news,  armed  in  a  trice
a  bark  and  four  shallops,  took  with  him  Father  Vi-
mont,  our  Superior,  and  voyaged  against  winds  and
against  tides ;  but,  seeing  that  the  bark  did  not  ad-
vance, he  took  the  lead  with  his  shallops,  the  sailors
and  soldiers  rowing  with  all  their  might.  At  length
they  arrived  at  the  Three  Rivers,  sooner  than  they
had  hoped.  As  soon  as  the  enemy  perceived  them,
they  withdrew  into  their  stronghold;  they  were,
however,  so  enraged  against  the  Algonquins  that,  an
hour  before  Monsieur  the  Governor  went  to  them,
they  fell  upon  an  Algonquin  canoe,  managed  by  two
men  and  one  woman ;  the  latter  was  killed,  one  of
the  men  was  taken  prisoner,  and  the  other  escaped.
On  the  preceding  day,  Anerawi,  a  war  Captain  of  the
upper  Algonquins,  had  escaped  from  their  hands,
having  seen  them  far  off  at  the  mouth  of  the  large
Lake  near  the  Three  Rivers,  all  the  avenues  of  which
they  guarded  with  a  multitude  of  their  canoes.


42  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.21


[153]  CHAPITRE  X.

DE  LA  DELIURANCE  DES  PRISONNIERS FRANCOIS,  &  DU

POURPARLER  DE  PAIX,  AUEC  LES

HIROQUOIS.

MONSIEUR  le  Cheualier  de  Montmagny,  ayant
appris  des  prifonniers  Francis,  l'humeur  de
ces  Barbares,  &  reconnu  leur  malice  par  leurs
adtions,  fe  comporte  auec  vne  grande  prudence  &
dexterite ;  il  s'en  va  moiiiller  l'ancre  deuant  leur  fort,
a  la  portee  du  mouf quet ;  ces  Barbares  luy  font  vn
falue  de  trente-fix  ou  quarante  coups  d'arquebufe,
fort  adroitement ;  cela  fait,  deux  canots  d'Hiroquois
le  vindrent  aborder,  dans  lefquels  ils  fit  embarquer
le  Pere  Ragueneau  &  le  fieur  Nicolet,  pour  aller
reprefenter  les  deux  prisoniers,  les  tirer  de  leurs
mains,  &  entendre  les  propofitions  de  la  paix,  qu'ils
venoient  rechercher:  Ils  entrent  done  tous  quatre
dans  le  reduit,  ou  fort  des  Hiroquois,  qu'ils  trouuent
[154]  affis  en  rond,  en  affes  bon  ordre,  fans  tumulte
&  fans  bruit ;  ils  firent  aff eoir  les  deux  mediateurs  de
la  paix  fur  vn  bouclier,  &  les  deux  prifonniers  a
terre,  les  liant  par  forme  de  contenance,  pour  mon-
ftrer  qu'ils  eftoient  encor  captifs.  La  deffus,  l'vn
des  Capitaines,  nomme  Onagan,  fe  leue,  prend  le
Soleil  a  tdmoing  de  la  fincerite  de  fon  procede,  puis
parle  en  ces  termes.

Ces deux ieunes  hommes que vous voyes,  font
Hiroquois,  ils  ne  font  plus  Francois,  le  droit  de  la


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  43


[153]  CHAPTER  X.

OF THE DELIVERANCE OF THE FRENCH PRISONERS

AND THE PARLEY CONCERNING PEACE

WITH THE HIROQUOIS.

MONSIEUR  the  Chevalier  de  Montmagny,  hav-
ing learned  from  the  French  prisoners,  the
mood  of  these  Barbarians,  and  having  dis-
covered their  malice  by  their  actions,  conducted  him-
self with  great  prudence  and  tact.  He  cast  anchor
before  their  fort,  within  musket-range;  these  Bar-
barians made,  very  adroitly,  a  salute  of  thirty-six  or
forty  shots  from  their  arquebuses.  That  being
done,  two  canoes  came  from  the  Hiroquois  to  meet
him,  on  board  of  which  were  put  Father  Ragueneau
and  the  sieur  Nicolet,  that  they  might  go  and  speak
for  the  two  prisoners,  withdraw  them  from  their
hands,  and  hear  the  propositions  for  the  peace  which
they  came  to  seek.  All  four  then  entered  the  strong-
hold or  fort  of  the  Hiroquois,  whom  they  found  [154]
seated  in  a  circle,  in  very  good  order,  without  tumult
and  without  noise.  They  had  the  two  negotiators  of
the  peace  sit  upon  a  shield,  and  the  two  prisoners
on  the  ground,  binding  these  as  a  matter  of  form,  to
show  that  they  were  still  captives.  Thereupon,  one
of  the  Captains,  named  Onagan,  arose,  took  the  Sun
as  a  witness  of  the  sincerity  of  his  proceeding,  and
then  spoke  in  these  terms:

"  These  two  young  men  whom  you  see,  are  Hiro-
quois, they  are  no  longer  Frenchmen,  the  right  of


44  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

guerre  les  a  fait  noftres ;  jadis  le  feul  nom  de  Fran-
cois nous  jettoit  la  terreur  dedans  Tame,  leur  regard
nous  donnoit  l'epouuante,  &  nous  les  fuions  comme
des  Demons,  qu'on  n'ofe  aborder;  mais  enfin,  nous
auons  appris  a  changer  les  Francois  en  Hiroquois,
ces  deux  que  vous  voy6s  deuant  vos  yeux,  ont  efte"
pris  cet  hyuer  par  vne  efcouade  de  nos  ieunes  gens.
Se  voyans  entre  nos  mains,  ils  eurent  peur  qu'on  ne
les  mal-traitaft ;  mais  on  leur  dit,  que  les  Hiroquois
recherchoient  l'alliance  des  Francois,  &  qu'on  ne
leur  feroit  aucun  tort:  Si  cela  eft,  dirent-ils,  que  l'vn
de  [155]  nous  retourne  vers  les  Francois,  pour  les
informer  de  vos  bonnes  volontes,  &  que  l'autre  s'en
aille  en  voftre  pais:  nous  repliquafmes,  qu'il  eftoit
plus  a  propos  qu'ils  vinffent  tous  deux  confoler  toutes
les  Nations  Hiroquoifes  par  leur  prefence,  puis  qu'elles
auoient  toutes  de  l'affedtion  pour  les  Francois:  En
effet,  les  peuples  les  plus  eloigned,  nous  ont  fait  des
prefens  pour  leur  fauuer  la  vie ;  il  ne  falloit  point
de  fes  attraits  pour  nous  donner  de  l'amour,  &  de
l'affedtion  vers  vous,  nos  cceurs  y  eftoient  defia  tout
portes,  vous  fcaures  d'eux  qu'on  les  a  traittes  en
amis,  &  non  en  efclaues :  fl  toft  que  le  Printemps  a
paru,  nous  nous  fommes  mis  en  chemin  pour  les
ramener ;  ils  font  encor  Hiroquois,  mais  tout  mainte-
nant  ils  feront  Francois;  difons  plutofl  qu'il  feront
Francois,  &  Hiroquois  tout  enfemble:  car  nous  ne
ferons  plus  qu'vn  peuple :  difant  cela,  il  prit  les  mains
du  Pere  Ra[g]ueneau,  &  du  fieur  Nicolet,  delegu£s
pour  traitter  la  paix,  puis  les  touchant  au  vifage,  &
fur  le  menton,  leur  dit:  Non  feulement  nos  cou-
ftumes,  feront  vos  couftumes,  mais  nous  ferons  fi
6troittement  vnis,  que  nos  mentons  [156]  fe  reuefti-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  45

war  has  made  them  ours ;  formerly  the  mere  name
of  Frenchmen  struck  terror  to  our  hearts,  their  look
appalled  us,  and  we  fled  from  them  as  from  Demons,
whom  one  does  not  dare  to  approach ;  but  at  last,  we
have  learned  to  change  Frenchmen  into  Hiroquois.
These  two  whom  you  see  before  your  eyes  were  tak-
en this  winter  by  a  squad  of  our  young  men.  Find-
ing themselves  in  our  hands,  they  feared  lest  they
should  be  ill  treated;  but  they  were  told  that  the
Hiroquois  were  seeking  the  alliance  of  the  French,
and  that  no  one  would  harm  them.  '  If  that  be  so,'
said  they,  '  let  one  of  [155]  us  return  to  the  French,  to
inform  them  of  your  good  intentions,  and  let  the
other  go  away  into  your  country.'  We  replied  that
it  would  be  more  to  the  purpose  if  both  of  them
should  come  to  comfort  all  the  Hiroquois  Nations  by
their  presence,  since  these  all  had  affection  for  the
French.  Indeed,  the  more  distant  tribes  made  us
presents,  in  order  to  save  their  lives.  Their  attrac-
tions were  not  needed  to  inspire  in  us  love  and  affec-
tion towards  you,  our  hearts  were  already  wholly
inclined  thereto ;  you  will  learn  from  them  that  they
have  been  treated  as  friends,  and  not  as  slaves.  As
soon  as  Spring  appeared,  we  set  out  upon  our  way
to  bring  them  back ;  they  are  still  Hiroquois,  but  im-
mediately they  will  be  French ;  let  us  rather  say  that
they  will  be  French  and  Hiroquois  at  the  same  time,
for  we  shall  be  only  one  people."  Saying  that,  he
took  the  hands  of  Father  Ragueneau,  and  of  the
sieur  Nicolet,  the  delegates  to  negotiate  peace,  then
touching  them  on  the  face  and  on  the  chin,  he  said
to  them:  "  Not  only  shall  our  customs  be  your  cus-
toms, but  we  shall  be  so  closely  united  that  our  chins
[156]  shall  be  reclothed  with  hair,  and  with  beards


46  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

ront  de  poil,  &  de  barbe  comme  les  voftres.  Apres
quelques  autres  ceremonies,  il  s'approche  des  captifs,
brife  leurs  liens,  les  jette  pardeffus  la  palliffade  de
leur  fort;  s'ecriant,  Que  la  riuiere  emporte  fi  loin  ces
liens,  que  iamais  il  n'en  foit  de  memoire,  ces  ieunes
gens  ne  font  plus  captifs,  leurs  liens  font  brifes,  ils
font  maintenant  tous  voftres :  Puis  tirant  vn  collier
de  Porcelaine,  il  le  prefente  aux  Mediateurs  de  la
paix,  auec  ces  paroles:  Gardes  pour  vn  iamais  ce
collier,  comme  vne  marque  de  leur  pleine  &  entiere
liberte ;  puis  faifant  apporter  deux  pacquets  de  peaux
de  caftors:  le  ne  veux  pas,  fit-il,  vous  rendre  tous
nuds  a  vos  freres,  voila  dequoy  leur  faire  chacun  vne
belle  robe.  II  fit  en  fuite  quantite  de  prefens,  felon
la  couftume  du  pais,  ou  le  mot  de  prefens  fe  nomme
parole:  Pour  faire  entendre  que  c'eft  le  prefent  qui
parle  plus  fortement  que  la  bouche,  il  en  fit  quatre
au  nom  des  quatre  Nations  Hiroquoifes,  pour  mar-
que, qu'elles  fouhaitoient  noftre  alliance;  eleuant
vne  robe  de  caflor:  Voicy,  dit-il,  l'eftendart  que  vous
planteres  fur  voflre  fort,  lors  que  vous  verres  paroiftre
nos  [157]  canots  fur  cette  grande  riuiere;  &  nous
autres  voiant  ce  fignal  de  voftre  amitie,  nous  aborde-
rons  auec  affurance  a  vos  ports;  tirant  vn  autre
collier  de  porcelaine,  il  le  mit  en  rond  fur  la  terre:
Voicy,  dit-il,  la  maifon,  que  nous  aurons  aux  Trois
Riuieres,  quand  nous  y  viendrons  traiter  auec  vous,
nous  y  petunerons  fans  crainte,  puis  que  nous  aurons
Onontio  pour  frere.

Les  Deputes  pour  la  paix,  temoignerent  a  ces  Bar-
bares  vne  grande  fatisfadtion  de  tout  ce  qui  s'eftoit
pafTe  en  ce  confeil;  ils  adioufterent,  qu'[i]ls  s'en
alloient  faire  vn  ample  rapport  de  tout  a  Monfieur  le


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  47

like  yours."  After  some  other  ceremonies,  he  ap-
proached the  captives,  broke  their  bonds,  and  tossed
these  over  the  palisades  of  their  fort,  exclaiming:
"  Let  the  river  carry  these  cords  so  far  away  that
there  may  never  be  a  remembrance  of  them ;  these
young  men  are  no  longer  captives, —  their  bands  are
broken,  they  are  now  wholly  yours."  Then  taking
a  Porcelain  collar,  he  presented  it  to  the  Negotiators
of  the  peace  with  these  words :  ' '  Keep  forever  this
collar,  as  a  sign  of  their  full  and  entire  liberty."
Then  causing  two  packages  of  beaver  skins  to  be
brought,  "  I  do  not  wish,"  said  he,  "  to  restore  you
wholly  destitute  to  your  brothers;  here  is  something
to  make  for  each  of  them  a  beautiful  robe."  He
made  then  a  number  of  presents,  according  to  the
custom  of  the  country,  in  which  the  term  "  present '
is  called  "  the  word,"  in  order  to  make  clear  that  it
is  the  present  which  speaks  more  forcibly  than  the
lips ;  he  made  four  of  these  in  the  name  of  the  four
Hiroquois  Nations,  as  a  sign  that  they  desired  our
alliance.  Lifting  up  a  beaver  robe,  "  Behold,"  said
he,  "  the  standard  that  you  shall  plant  upon  your
fort,  when  you  shall  see  our  canoes  appear  [157]
upon  this  great  river ;  and,  when  we  see  this  signal
of  your  friendship,  we  shall  land  with  confidence  at
your  ports."  Taking  another  porcelain  collar,  he
put  it  on  the  ground  in  the  form  of  a  circle;  "  See,"
said  he,  "  the  house  that  we  shall  have  at  the  Three
Rivers,  when  we  come  there  to  trade  with  you;  we
shall  smoke  therein  without  fear,  since  we  shall  have
Onontio  for  a  brother."

The  peace  Deputies  expressed  to  these  Barbarians
a  great  satisfaction  in  all  that  had  taken  place  in  this
council ;  they  added  that  they  were  going  to  make  a


48  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

Gouuerneur,  lequel  ne  leur  pourroit  parler  que  le  iour
fuiuant,  pource  qu'il  eftoit  defja  tard;  ils  emportent
les  prefens,  &  remenent  les  deux  prifonniers  mis  en
liberte" :  Comme  ils  fortoient,  ce  Capitaine  leur  cria;
Dites  a  Onontio,  que  nous  le  prions  de  cacher  les
haches  des  Montagnais  &  des  Algonquins  fous  fa  robe,
pendant  que  nous  traiterons  de  la  paix ;  Ils  promirent
de  leur  cofte,  quils  ne  courroient  aucun  canot  Algon-
quin, &  qu'ils  ne  leur  drefferoient  aucune  embufche ;
mais  leur  promeffe  n' eftoit  que  perfidie :  car  les  Fran-
cois [158]  n'eftoien[t]  quafi  pas  retires  au  port  des
Trois  Riuieres,  qu'ils  pourfuiuirent  quatre  canots
Algonquins  qui  reuenoient  de  la  chaffe,  bien  charges
de  viures  &  de  pelteries;  a  peine  les  hommes  fe
purent-ils  fauuer,  tout  leur  bagage  fut  pille,  &  vne
pauure  femme  chargee  de  fon  enfant,  fut  prife.

Monfleur  le  Cheualier  de  Montmagny  iugea  par  le
rapport  qui  luy  fut  fait,  &  par  la  contenance  qu'il
remarqua  en  cet  ennemy  rufe  &  deloyal,  que  la  crainte
des  armes  Francoifes  luy  faifoit  fouhaiter  la  paix
auec  nous,  pour  pouuoir  auec  plus  de  liberte"  maffa-
crer,  mefme  deuant  nos  yeux,  les  peuples  qui  nous
font  confederes:  Neantmoins,  comme  il  eft  prudent
&  adroit,  il  rechercha  les  moyens  d'induire  ces  Bar-
bares,  a  entrer  dans  vne  bonne  paix  vniuerfelle  auec
toutes  les  Nations  qui  nous  font  alliees :  Le  lende-
main,  iour  de  Saindt  Barnabe,  ces  Barbares,  qui  n'o-
foient  aborder  du  fort,  pour  crainte  des  Algonquins,
attendoient  auec  impatience  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur:
Mais  les  vents  &  la  pluie  l'arrefterent,  il  ne  s'embar-
qua  que  le  iour  fuiuant,  dans  fes  chaloupes,  [159]
chargees  de  foixante  &  dix  hommes  bien  armes/  il
s'en  vient  moiiiller  deuant  leur  fort:  mais  la  mau-


1641  -42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  49

full  report  of  the  whole  to  Monsieur  the  Governor,
who  would  not  be  able  to  speak  to  them  until  the
following  day,  because  it  was  already  late ;  they  car-
ried away  their  presents,  and  took  back  the  two
liberated  prisoners.  As  they  were  going  away,  this
Captain  called  to  them :  "  Say  to  Onontio  that  we  beg
him  to  conceal  the  hatchets  of  the  Montagnais  and
of  the  Algonquins  under  his  robe,  while  we  are
negotiating  peace."  They  promised,  on  their  part,
that  they  would  chase  no  Algonquin  canoe,  and  that
they  would  set  no  ambush  for  them ;  but  their  prom-
ise was  only  perfidy,  for  the  Frenchmen  [158]  had
hardly  withdrawn  to  the  port  of  the  Three  Rivers
before  they  pursued  four  Algonquin  canoes,  which
were  returning  from  the  chase  well  laden  with  pro-
visions and  with  pelts ;  the  men  were  scarcely  able  to
escape,  all  their  baggage  was  plundered,  and  a  poor
woman,  burdened  with  her  child,  was  taken.

Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de  Montmagny  judged
from  the  report  that  had  been  made  to  him,  and  from
the  behavior  that  he  had  observed  in  this  crafty  and
treacherous  enemy,  that  the  fear  of  the  French  arms
made  them  desire  peace  with  us  in  order  that  they
might  be  able  to  massacre  with  more  liberty,  even
before  our  eyes,  the  tribes  which  are  our  confeder-
ates ;  nevertheless,  as  he  is  prudent  and  skillful,  he
sought  means  of  inducing  these  Barbarians  to  enter
into  a  firm,  universal  peace  with  all  the  Nations
which  are  allied  to  us.  The  next  day,  the  feast  of
Saint  Barnabas,  these  Barbarians,  who  did  not  dare
to  approach  the  fort,  for  fear  of  the  Algonquins,
awaited  with  impatience  Monsieur  the  Governor ;  but
the  winds  and  the  rain  detained  him,  so  that  it  was
not  until  the  following  day  that  he  set  out  in  his


50  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.21

uaife  foy  de  ces  Barbares  les  rendans  coupables,  les
fit  entrer  en  deffiance,  fondee  fur  le  retardement  d'vn
iour,  qu'on  auoit  pris  pour  le  mauuais  temps,  &  fur
les  adtes  d'hoitilite"  qu'ils  auoient  commis,  fe  doutans
bien  que  nous  en  auions  connoiffance :  On  attendoit
qu'ils  viendroient  querir  les  Deputes  de  la  paix,
comme  ils  auoient  defia  fait;  mais  la  deffiance  les
arrefta:  Ils  pouffent  vn  canot  vuide  vers  nos  cha-
loupes,  inuitans  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur,  le  Pere
Ra[g]ueneau,  &  le  fieur  Nicolet,  de  s'embarque[r]
pour  les  aller  trouuer;  leur  deffein  eftoit  de  les  maffa-
crer,  a  ce  qu'vn  ieune  Algonquin,  qui  f e  fauua  de  leurs
mains,  nous  rapporta  puis  apres:  Ce  procede  tout
brutal,  fit  qu'on  fe  tint  plus  fur  fes  gardes  que  iamais:
On  inuite  les  Capitaines  de  venir  ecouter  nos  paroles,
comme  on  auoit  efte  Ecouter  les  leur ;  a  cela,  point
de  nouuelle:  on  les  preffe  d'enuoyer  quelques  Hu-
rons,  de  ceux  qui  fe  font  naturalifes  parmy  eux,  &
qui  font  deuenus  Hiroquois;  ils  en  firent  de  grandes
difficultes:  [160]  Enfin,  deux  aborderent  nos  cha-
loupes  dans  vn  canot,  ils  regardoient  par  tout,  s'ils
ne  verroient  point  quelque  Algonquin  cache  parmy
nous;  n'en  ayant  apperccu  aucun,  trois  Capitaines
Hiroquois  s'embarquerent  dans  vn  autre  canot:  nous
ayans  approches  a  la  portee  du  piftolet,  ils  inuiterent
Onontio,  c'eft  Monfieur  noftre  Gouuerneur,  a  parler,
c'eft  a  dire,  a  faire  fes  prefens.

Ie  ne  deduiray  point  la  harangue  qu'il  leur  fit  faire
par  fon  truchement,  fuffira  de  dire  deux  petits  mots  de
la  facon  qu'il  leur  fit  offrir  fes  prefens,  fe  conformant
aux  loix  de  ces  peuples,  fes  dons  furpaffoient  de
beaucoup  ceux  de  ces  Barbares.

II  en  fit  vn  pour  remerciement  de  la  bonne  chere


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  51

shallops,  [159]  laden  with  seventy  men,  well  armed.
He  came  to  anchor  before  their  fort;  but  the  bad
faith  of  these  Barbarians  making  them  guilty,  aroused
in  them  distrust,  based  upon  a  day's  delay  which  was
caused  by  the  bad  weather,  and  upon  the  acts  of
hostility  which  they  themselves  had  committed,  sus-
pecting with  reason  that  we  had  knowledge  of  them.
We  expected  that  they  would  come  for  the  Deputies
to  the  peace,  as  they  had  already  done,  but  their  mis-
trust hindered  them.  They  pushed  an  empty  canoe
towards  our  shallops,  inviting  Monsieur  the  Govern-
or, Father  Ragueneau,  and  the  sieur  Nicolet  to  em-
bark and  come  to  them ;  their  design  was  to  slay
them,  as  a  young  Algonquin  who  had  escaped  from
their  hands  told  us  afterward.  This  wholly  brutal
proceeding  caused  us  to  be  more  than  ever  on  our
guard.  The  Captains  were  invited  to  come  and  listen
to  our  words,  as  we  had  listened  to  theirs ;  no  news
from  that !  They  were  urged  to  send  some  Hurons,
those  who  had  been  naturalized  among  them,  and
had  become  Hiroquois;  to  this  they  raised  great
objections.  [160]  At  last,  two  approached  our  shal-
lops in  a  canoe;  they  looked  around  on  all  sides,  to
see  if  some  Algonquin  might  not  be  concealed  among
us ;  but  not  perceiving  any,  three  Hiroquois  Captains
embarked  in  another  canoe;  when  they  had  ap-
proached within  pistol-shot,  they  invited  Onontio,
that  is,  Monsieur  our  Governor,  to  speak, — in  other
words,  to  offer  his  presents.

I  shall  not  relate  the  speech  he  made  to  them  by
his  interpreter ;  it  will  suffice  to  say  a  few  words  of
the  manner  in  which  he  offered  his  presents  to  them,
in  compliance  with  the  code  of  these  peoples;  his
gifts  surpassed  by  far  those  of  the  Barbarians.


52  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

qu'ils  auoient  fait  a  nos  Fran9ois  en  leur  pais,  il  offrit
des  couuertures  pour  les  nattes  qu'ils  auoient  efte-
dues  fous  eux  pendant  la  nuidt,  il  donna  des  haches
pour  le  bois  qu'ils  auoient  couppe  durant  l'hiuer,
pour  les  chauffer,  des  robes  ou  des  capots  pour  les
auoir  reueftus,  des  coufteaux  en  la  place  de  ceux
dont  ils  s'eftoient  feruis,  coupant  la  tefte  aux  [161]
cerfs,  dont  ils  leur  auoient  fait  feftin:  D'autres  pre-
fens  pour  les  Nations  qui  recherchoient  noftre  alli-
ance, &  d'autres  encor  pour  marque  qu'ils  verroient
fur  nos  baftions  des  eftendarts  de  paix:  &  qu'ils
trouueroient  vne  maifon  d'affeurance  aupres  de  nous.
Tous  ces  prefens  furent  acceptes  de  ces  Barbares,
auec  de  grands  temoignages  d'affedtion  en  appa-
rence:  mais  comme  ils  ne  voyoient  point  d'arque-
bufes  dot  ils  auoient  vne  paffion  eflrange,  ils  dirent
qu'on  n'auoit  point  parle  de  la  rupture  des  liens  de
nos  captifs,  qu'ils  auoient  mis  en  liberie' ;  la-deffus  on
leur  fait  encor  d'autres  prefens  pour  auoir  couppe  ces
liens :  mais  on  ne  parloit  point  d'armes  a  feu,  qui  eftoit
le  plus  ardent  de  leurs  fouhaits,  cela  les  incita  a  par-
ler  derechef ;  ils  pref entent  done  vn  collier  de  porce-
laine  pour  nous  inuiter  a  faire  vne  habitation  dans
leur  pais.  Ils  en  donnent  vn  fecond  pour  feruir  de
traidt,  ou  de  rames  a  nos  barques  pour  y  monter ;  ils
en  offrent  vn  troifiefme  au  nom  de  la  ieuneffe  Hiro-
quoife,  a  ce  que  leur  oncle  Onontio  grand  Capitaine
des  Francois,  leur  fit  prefent  de  quelques  [162]  arque-
bufes,  ils  en  tirent  vn  quatriefme  pour  marque  de
paix  qu'ils  vouloient  contradter  auec  les  Montagnais,
auec  les  Algonquins,  &  auec  les  Hurons  nos  allies ;
ils  produifent  quelques  peaux  de  caitor  pour  affeu-
rance  qu'eltans de retour  en leurs Bourgades, ils


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  53

He  made  one  as  thanks  for  the  good  cheer  that  had
been  given  to  our  Frenchmen  in  their  country, —  he
offered  blankets,  for  the  mats  that  had  been  spread
under  them  during  the  nights ;  he  gave  hatchets,  for
the  wood  that  had  been  cut  in  order  to  warm  them
in  the  time  of  winter;  robes  or  hoods,  for  having
reclothed  them;  knives,  in  the  place  of  those  that
had  been  used  in  cutting  off  the  heads  of  [161]  deer,
of  which  they  had  made  them  feasts.  Some  other
presents  were  for  the  Nations  who  sought  our  alli-
ance, and  others  still,  as  a  sign  that  they  should  see
upon  our  bastions  the  standards  of  peace,  and  that
they  should  find  a  house  of  security  near  us.

All  these  gifts  were  accepted  by  these  Barbarians  —
apparently  with  great  evidences  of  affection ;  but  as
they  saw  no  arquebuses,  for  which  they  have  a
strange  longing,  they  said  we  had  not  spoken  of
breaking  the  bonds  of  our  captives  whom  they  had
set  at  liberty.  Thereupon,  still  other  presents  were
made  to  them  for  having  struck  off  these  bonds ;  but
as  we  did  not  mention  firearms,  which  was  the  most
ardent  of  their  wishes,  that  incited  them  to  speak
again.  They  then  presented  a  porcelain  collar  as  an
invitation  to  us  to  make  a  settlement  in  their  coun-
try ;  they  gave  a  second  one  to  serve  as  a  convey-
ance, or  as  oars  to  our  barks,  that  we  might  ascend
thither ;  they  offered  a  third  one  in  the  name  of  the
Hiroquois  youth,  that  their  uncle  Onontio,  the  great
Captain  of  the  French,  might  present  to  them  some
[162]  arquebuses;  they  brought  forward  a  fourth  one
as  a  pledge  of  the  peace  which  they  wished  to  make
with  the  Montagnais,  with  the  Algonquins,  and  with
the  Hurons,  our  allies.  They  produced  some  beaver
skins,  as  security  that  on  returning  to  their  Villages


64  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.21

feroient  vne  affembl6e  generale  des  perfonnes  plus
confiderables  de  toutes  les  Nations  Hiroquoifes,  pour
publier  par  tout  la  generofite  &  la  liberalite  des  Fran-
cois: Bref,  ils  font  vn  dernier  prefent,  pour  temoi-
gner  qu'ils  donnoient  vn  coup  de  pied  aux  Hollan-
dois,  auec  lefquels  ils  ne  vouloient  plus  auoir  de
commerce,  difoient-ils :  Remarques,  ie  vous  fupplie  en
paflant,  le  procede  de  ces  peuples,  &  ne  me  dites
plus,  que  les  Sauuages  font  des  beftes  brutes ;  affu-
rement  ils  ne  manquent  pas  de  bonne  education:
Leur  deffein  efloit  de  faire  vne  paix  fourree  auec
nous  pour  fe  deliurer  de  la  peur  qu'ils  ont  de  nos
armes,  &  pour  maflacrer,  fans  crainte,  nos  confede-
res :  Nous  pouuoient-ils  plus  nnement  induire  a  leur
donner  des  armes?  Se  pouuoient-ils  plus  nnement
infinuer  en  noftre  amitie?  qu'en  nous  rendant  nos
prifonniers,  [163]  nous  offrant  des  prefens,  qu'en
t6moignant  qu'ils  vouloient  entrer  en  bonne  intelli-
gence auec  ceux  que  nous  protegions  en  leur  pre-
fence,  qu'en  nous  inuitant  en  leur  pais,  nous  affurans
qu'ils  nous  preferoient  aux  Hollandois,  nous  extol-
lans  pardeffus  le  commun  des  hommes :  Voila  leur
conduite  qui  manque  a  la  verite,  du  vray  Efprit  des
enfans  de  Dieu;  mais  non  pas  de  1' efprit  des  enfans
du  fiecle.  Monfieur  noftre  Gouuerneur  plus  auife,
&  plus  prudent  que  ces  bonnes  gens  ne  font  rufes,
demanda  l'auis  du  Reuered  Pere  Vimont,  &  du  Pere
Ragueneau,  fur  le  prefent  fujet;  mais  s'eftans  excu-
f6s  de  parler  en  matiere  de  guerre,  il  conclud,  apres
auoir  recueilly  les  penfees  des  principaux  de  ceux
qui  l'accompagnoient,  qu'il  ne  falloit  point  faire  la
paix  auec  ces  peuples,  a  l'exclufion  de  nos  confede-
res;  autrement,  qu'onpourroit  entrer  dans  vne  guerre


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  55

they  would  call  a  general  assembly  of  the  most  dis-
tinguished persons  of  all  the  Hiroquois  Nations  in
order  to  publish  everywhere  the  generosity  and  the
liberality  of  the  French ;  in  short,  they  made  a  last
present  to  declare  that  they  would  give  a  kick  to  the
Dutch,  with  whom  they  no  longer  wished  to  have
any  intercourse,  they  said.  Observe,  I  beseech  you
by  the  way,  the  procedure  of  these  people  and  no
longer  tell  me  that  the  Savages  are  brute  beasts;  cer-
tainly they  do  not  lack  good  training.  Their  design
was  to  make  a  patched-up  peace  with  us,  so  as  to  be
free  from  the  dread  they  have  of  our  arms,  and  to
massacre,  without  fear,  our  confederates.  Could
they  more  artfully  induce  us  to  give  them  arms?
could  they  more  ingeniously  insinuate  themselves
into  our  friendship,  than  by  restoring  to  us  our  pris-
oners [163]  and  offering  to  us  gifts,  than  by  indicat-
ing their  willingness  to  be  on  good  terms  with  those
whom  we  protect  in  their  presence,  than  by  inviting
us  into  their  country,  assuring  us  that  they  prefer  us
to  the  Dutch,  extolling  us  above  the  generality  of
men?  Such  is  their  conduct,  which  lacks  indeed  the
true  Spirit  of  the  children  of  God,  but  not  the  spirit
of  the  children  of  the  world.  Monsieur  our  Govern-
or, more  discreet  and  prudent  than  these  simple
people  are  crafty,  asked  the  advice  of  the  Reverend
Father  Vimont,  and  of  Father  Ragueneau,  on  the
present  occasion;  but,  they  having  excused  them-
selves from  speaking  upon  a  matter  of  war,  he  con-
cluded, after  having  gathered  the  opinions  of  the
leading  men  who  accompanied  him,  that  he  ought
not  to  make  peace  with  these  people  to  the  exclusion
of  our  confederates, — otherwise,  we  might  enter  into
a  more  dangerous  war  than  that  which  we  wished  to


56  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  21

plus  dangereufe  que  celle  qu'on  voudroit  euiter :  car
fi  ces  peuples  auec  lefquels  nous  viuons  tous  les  iours,
&  qui  nous  enuironnent  de  tous  cofi£s  nous  atta-
quoient,  comme  il  fe  pourroit  faire,  fi  nous  les  aban-
donnions;  ils  nous  donneroient  [164]  bien  plus  de
peine  que  les  Hiroquois.  De  plus,  fi  les  Hiroquois
auoient  vn  libre  acces  dans  nos  ports,  le  commerce
des  Hurons,  des  Algonquins,  &  des  autres  peuples  qui
viennent  vifiter  les  magazins  de  Meffieurs  de  la  Nou-
uelle  France,  feroit  entierement  rompu:  le  dy  bien
dauantage,  que  des  a  prefent  le  commerce  fe  va
perdre,  fi  on  n'arrefte  les  courfes  de  ces  Barbares:
Enfin,  ny  Monfieur  noftre  Gouuerneur,  ny  aucun  des
Francois,  ne  fe  pouuoient  refoudre  a  jetter  dans  la
gueule  de  l'ennemy  les  nouueaux  Chreftiens,  qui  fe
profeffent  publiquement  Francois:  Auffi  eft-il  vray
que  noftre  bon  Roy,  que  Dieu  beniffe  dans  le  temps,
&  dans  l'eternite,  les  regarde  &  les  reconnoift  pour
fes  Sujets,  dans  le  don  qu'il  a  fait  de  ces  contrees  a
Meffieurs  de  la  Nouuelle  France.

Monfieur  le  Cheualier  de  Montmagny  penetrant  la
force  de  ces  raifons,  iugea  qu'il  falloit  faire  parler
nettement  les  Hiroquois;  il  leur  fit  dire,  que  s'ils
vouloient  vne  paix  vniuerfelle,  qu'elle  leur  feroit
accordee,  auec  vne  grande  fatisfaction  des  Francois,
&  de  [165]  leurs  confederes;  &  que  fi  le  prefent  qu'ils
auoient  fait  aux  Algonquins,  pour  entrer  en  paix  auec
eux,  efloit  fans  feintife,  qu'ils  deliuraffent  prefente-
ment  l'vn  des  prifonniers  dont  ils  s'eftoient  nouuelle-
ment  faifis,  telle  eftant  la  couftume  des  peuples  amis
&  confederes :  Ils  refpondirent,  que  le  iour  fuiuant
ils  pafferoient  le  grand  fieuue,  pour  s'en  venir  traiter
de  cet  affaire  auec  les  Algonquins  dans  noftre  fort,
&  que  nous  nous  retiraffions. Monfieur  le  Gouuer-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  57

avoid :  for  if  these  peoples,  with  whom  we  live  day
by  day,  and  who  surround  us  on  all  sides,  attacked
us,  as  they  might  do,  should  we  abandon  them,  they
would  give  us  [164]  much  more  trouble  than  the
Hiroquois.  Moreover,  if  the  Hiroquois  had  free
access  to  our  ports,  the  trade  of  the  Hurons,  of  the
Algonquins,  and  of  the  other  tribes  who  come  to  the
warehouses  of  the  Gentlemen  of  New  France,  would
be  entirely  stopped;  I  say  still  more, —  that  from
this  very  moment  the  trade  is  going  to  be  ruined
unless  the  inroads  of  these  Barbarians  be  prevented.
After  all,  neither  Monsieur  our  Governor,  nor  any
of  the  Frenchmen,  could  decide  on  throwing  into  the
jaws  of  the  enemy  the  new  Christians  who  publicly
profess  themselves  Frenchmen :  it  is  also  true  that
our  good  King,  whom  may  God  bless  in  time  and  in
eternity,  looked  upon  them  and  recognized  them  as
his  Subjects  in  the  gift  that  he  made  of  these  regions
to  the  Gentlemen  of  New  France.

Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de  Montmagny,  appre-
hending the  force  of  these  reasons,  judged  that  it
would  be  necessary  to  make  the  Hiroquois  speak
plainly ;  he  gave  notice  to  them  that,  if  they  wished
a  universal  peace,  it  would  be  granted  to  them  with
great  satisfaction  by  the  French,  and  by  [165]  their
confederates ;  and  that,  if  the  present  which  they  had
made  to  the  Algonquins  for  the  purpose  of  entering
into  a  peace  with  them  were  without  pretense,  they
would  immediately  deliver  one  of  the  prisoners  they
had  recently  seized,  such  being  the  custom  of  friend-
ly and  allied  nations.  They  replied  that  on  the  fol-
lowing day  they  would  cross  the  great  river,  in  order
to  come  and  treat  of  this  affair  with  the  Algonquins
in  our  fort,  and  that  we  should  withdraw.  Monsieur
the Governor,  seeing  well  that  their  design  was  to


58  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.21

neur  voiant  bien  que  leur  deffein  eftoit  de  s'enfuir
dans  l'obfcurite-  de  la  nuidt,  repliqua,  qu'il  fouhaitoit
remener  auec  foy  vn  captif  Algonquin,  pour  le  ren-
dre  a  fes  freres  allies,  en  temoignage  de  la  paix  qu'ils
vouloient  conclure.  lis  firent  femblant  d'en  vouloir
donner  vn ;  mais  enfin  ils  refpondirent :  qu'on  fe  reti-
raft,  &  que  cet  affaire  eftant  important,  ils  en  con-
fereroient  entr'eux  pendant  la  nuidt:  Monfieur  le
Gouuerneur  leur  fit  refpondre,  qu'ils  en  traitaffent,
a  la  bonne  heure;  mais  qu'il  ne  s'eloigneroit  point
qu'il  n'euft  veu  le  cours  de  leur  refolution.  Comme
on  parlementoit,  voila  fept  canots  Algonquins,  igno-
rans  de  la  venue  de  [166]  l'ennemy,  qui  paroiffoient
au  haut  du  grand  fleuue,  remplis  d'hommes,  &  de
chaffe,  &  de  caftors;  les  ieunes  guerriers  Hiroquois
les  ayans  apperceus,  fe  retenoient  a  peine,  les  mains
leur  demangeoient,  comme  on  dit;  mais  la  prefence
de  nos  chaloupes  armees,  &  de  la  barque,  qui  n'ayant
pu  encor  monter,  commenca  a  paroiftre,  tirant  vers
nous  auec  fes  voiles  defployes,  les  arrefta,  &  les  fit
retirer  dans  leur  fort,  auec  quelques  paroles  de  met-
tre  au  plutoft  vn  captif  Algonquin  en  liberie.  On
attend  l'effet  de  leurs  promeffes;  il  s'ecoule  vne
bonne  demie  heure  dans  vn  profond  filence,  puis  tout
a  coup  on  entend  vn  tintamarre  &  vn  cliquetis  de
haches,  fi  horrible  &  fi  epouuentable,  vne  cheute  &
vn  debris  de  tant  d'arbres,  qu'il  fembloit  que  toute  la
forefi  s'en  alloit  renuerfer;  &  alors  on  connut  leur
fourbe  plus  que  iamais.  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  les
voulant  mettre  tout  a  fait  dans  leur  tort,  deuant  que
d'en  venir  aux  mains,  fe  delibera  de  pafler  la  nuidt
fur  l'eau  auec  fa  barque  &  fes  chaloupes,  pour  les
empefcher  de  fuir  &  pour  les  fonder  encore  vne  fois
fur  leurs  penfees  de  la  paix.


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  59

escape  in  the  obscurity  of  the  night,  replied  that  he
desired  to  take  back  with  him  an  Algonquin  captive
in  order  to  restore  him  to  his  allied  brothers,  as  an
evidence  of  the  peace  which  they  wished  to  conclude.
They  pretended  a  willingness  to  give  up  one;  but
they  finally  replied  that  we  should  retire,  and  that,
this  affair  being  important,  they  would  confer  upon
it  among  themselves  during  the  night.  Monsieur
the  Governor  had  them  told  that  they  might  treat  of
it  at  their  pleasure,  but  that  he  would  not  withdraw
until  he  had  seen  the  course  of  their  resolution.
While  they  were  parleying,  lo!  seven  Algonquin
canoes, — ignorant  of  the  coming  of  [166]  the  enemy,
and  filled  with  men,  and  game,  and  beavers, — ap-
peared above  on  the  great  river.  The  young  Hiro-
quois  warriors,  having  perceived  them,  with  diffi-
culty restrained  themselves, — their  hands  itched,  as
one  says;  but  the  presence  of  our  armed  shallops
and  of  the  bark  —  which,  not  having  yet  been  able  to
ascend,  began  to  appear  drawing  toward  us  with  its
sails  unfurled  —  stopped  them,  and  caused  them  to
retire  into  their  fort  with  some  talk  of  setting  at
liberty,  as  soon  as  possible,  an  Algonquin  captive.
The  execution  of  their  promises  was  awaited ;  a  full
half -hour  slipped  by  in  profound  silence ;  then  sud-
denly was  heard  so  horrible  and  frightful  an  uproar
and  clashing  of  hatchets,  a  fall  and  wreck  of  so
many  trees,  that  it  seemed  as  if  the  whole  forest
were  being  overthrown ;  and  then  we  were  more
than  ever  aware  of  their  knavery.  Monsieur  the
Governor,  wishing  to  put  them  completely  in  the
wrong  before  coming  to  hostilities,  decided  to  spend
the  night  on  the  water  with  his  bark  and  shallops,
in  order  to  prevent  their  flight,  and  to  sound  them
yet  once  more  on  their  opinions  concerning  peace.


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


[167]  CHAPITRE  XL

DE LA GUERRE AUEC LES HIROQUOIS.

LE  lendemain  matin  Monneur  le  Cheualier  de
Montmagny,  fait  equiper  vn  canot  auec  vn
guidon  pour  inuiter  les  Capitaines  a  parler,
ils  mefprifent  le  canot,  &  le  guidon,  &  le  herault,  ils
nous  chargent  de  brocards,  auec  des  huees  barbaref-
ques,  il  nous  reprochent  qu'Onontio  ne  leur  a  point
donne  a  manger  d'arquebufes:  c'eft  leur  facon  de
parler,  pour  dire  qu'il  ne  leur  en  a  point  fait  prefent ;
ils  arborent  vne  cheuelure,  qu'ils  auoient  arrachee  a
quelque  Algonquin,  deffus  leur  fort  comme  vn  gui-
don, denotant  la  guerre;  ils  tirent  des  fleches  fur  nos
chaloupes;  toutes  ces  infolences  firent  ref oudre  Mon-
fieur  le  Gouuerneur,  de  leur  donner  a  manger  des
arquebufes,  non  a  la  facon  qu'ils  demandoient,  il  fit
d£charger  fur  leur  fort,  les  pieces  de  fonte  de  la
barque,  les  pierriers  des  chaloupes  &  toute  la  [168]
mouf queterie :  tout  cela  fe  fit  auec  vne  telle  ardeur
des  Francois,  &  auec  vn  tel  redoublement,  qu'encor
bien  que  l'ennemy  par  vne  rufe  qu'on  n'attenderoit  pas
des  Sauuages,  fe  fut  mis  en  feurete ;  neantmoins  il
prit  vne  telle  6pouuante,  qu'auffi-tofl  qu'il  fe  vit  cou-
uert  des  tenebres  de  la  nuidt,  il  emporte  fes  canots
au  trauers  du  bois,  pour  s'aller  embarquer  vn  quart
de  lieue  plus  haut  que  nous,  &  fe  fauuer  de  nos
mains;  eftant  decouuert  on  le  voulut  fuiure,  les  cha-
loupes rament  de  toutes  leurs  forces :  mais  le  vent  &


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  61


[167]  CHAPTER  XL

OF THE WAR WITH THE HIROQUOIS.

THE  next  morning,  Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de
Montmagny  had  a  canoe  equipped  with  a  flag,
in  order  to  invite  the  Captains  to  a  parley ;  they
despised  the  canoe,  the  flag,  and  the  herald.  They
assailed  us  with  jeers  and  barbaric  yells;  they  re-
proached us  that  Onontio  had  not  given  them  arque-
buses to  eat  —  this  is  their  way  of  speaking,  to  say
that  he  did  not  make  them  a  present  of  these ;  they
erected  above  their  fort,  as  a  flag  denoting  war,  a
scalp  which  they  had  taken  from  some  Algonquin;
they  shot  arrows  at  our  shallops.  All  these  acts  of
insolence  made  Monsieur  the  Governor  resolve  to
give  them  arquebuses  to  eat,  but  not  in  the  way  that
they  asked :  he  ordered  to  be  discharged  upon  their
fort  the  brass  pieces  of  the  bark,  the  swivel  guns  of
the  shallops,  and  all  the  [168]  musketry;  all  this  was
done  by  the  French  with  such  ardor,  and  so  repeat-
edly, that  although  the  enemy,  by  a  stratagem  that
would  not  be  expected  from  the  Savages,  indeed  put
themselves  in  safety,  they  nevertheless  took  such
fright  that,  as  soon  as  they  were  shielded  by  the
darkness  of  the  night,  they  carried  their  canoes
through  the  woods,  that  they  might  embark  a  quar-
ter of  a  league  further  above  us  and  escape  from  our
hands.  When  this  was  discovered,  we  resolved  to
pursue  them  ;  the  shallops  were  rowed  with  all  force,
but  the  adverse  wind  and  tide  hindered  them. Some


62  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

la  mar£e  contraires  les  arrefterent ;  quelques  canots
Algonquins  leur  voulurent  donner  la  chaffe,  comme
ils  eftoient  en  petit  nombre,  a  comparaifon  des  Hiro-
quois,  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  les  rappella :  vn  ieune
homme  Algonquin,  qui  eftoit  depuis  deux  ans  par-
my  les  Hiroquois  s'eftant  fauue  dans  cette  retraite,
nous  rapporta  que  ces  Barbares  auoient  eu  peur  de
nos  canons,  que  fi  on  les  eut  peu  aborder  qu'on
les  auroit  defaits,  c'eft  a  dire  qu'on  les  auroit  mis  en
fuite  dans  les  bois;  car  d'en  tuer  beaucoup,  c'eft  ce
que  les  Francois  ne  doiuent  pas  pretendre,  dautant
[169]  qu'ils  courent  comme  des  cerfs,  ils  fautent
comme  des  daims;  ils  connoiffent  mieux  les  eftres
de  ces  grandes  &  6pouuantables  forefts  que  les  beftes
fauuages,  qui  les  ont  pour  demeure,  les  Francois
n'oferent  s'engager  aifement  dans  ces  grands  bois.

Apres  leur  retraite  on  reconnut  leur  rufe  &  leur
adreffe  plus  que  iamais,  ils  auoient  vn  fort  afles
proche  des  riues  du  grand  fleuue;  d'oii  ils  nous  par-
loient;  ils  en  auoient  vn  autre  fecret  plus  eloigne
dans  les  bois;  mais  fi  bien  fait  &  fi  bien  muny,  qu'il
eftoit  a  l'epreuue  de  toutes  nos  batteries.  Or  fe  dou-
tant  bien  que  nous  en  pourrions  venir  aux  mains,
dans  la  refolution  qu'ils  auoient,  de  continuer  la  guerre
auec  les  Sauuages  nos  allies,  ils  mirent  pendant  la
nuidt  leurs  canots  en  fauuete ;  ils  tranfporterent  dans
leur  fecond  fort  tout  leur  bagage,  ou  ils  fe  retirerent
eux-mefmes  en  cachettes,  &  arm  que  nous  penfaffions
qu'ils  eftoient  dans  le  premier,  contre  lequel  nous
tirions,  n'ayans  pas  connoiffance  du  fecond;  ils  y
tenoient  toufiours  du  feu  allume,  ils  y  laifferent  aulii
leurs  arquebufiers,  [170]  lef  quels  apres  auoir  tire"  quel-
ques  coups, en  fortirent  pour  nous  choifir  de  plus


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  63


Algonquin  canoes  attempted  to  give  them  chase ;  but,
as  they  were  few  in  number  compared  with  the  Hir-
oquois,  Monsieur  the  Governor  called  them  back.
A  young  Algonquin,  who  had  been  for  two  years
among  the  Hiroquois,  and  who  escaped  in  this  retreat,
reported  to  us  that  these  Barbarians  were  afraid  of
our  cannon,  and  that  if  we  had  been  able  to  approach
them  they  would  have  been  defeated, —  that  is  to  say,
we  should  have  put  them  to  flight  in  the  woods ;  for,
as  to  killing  many  of  them,  that  is  something  to
which  the  French  cannot  pretend,  inasmuch  [169]  as
they  run  like  deer,  they  bound  like  harts,  and  they
know  better  the  ways  of  these  vast  and  dreadful  for-
ests than  do  the  wild  beasts,  whose  dwelling  they
are ;  the  French  did  not  lightly  venture  to  entangle
themselves  in  these  dense  woods.

After  their  retreat  we  saw,  more  than  ever,  their
cunning  and  ability ;  they  had  a  fort  rather  near  the
shore  of  the  great  river,  from  which  they  spoke  to
us;  they  had  another,  hidden  further  within  the
woods,  but  so  well  constructed  and  so  well  supplied
that  it  was  proof  against  all  our  resources.  Now,
mistrusting  that  we  might  come  to  hostilities  with
them,  on  account  of  the  resolution  they  had  made  to
continue  war  with  our  Savage  allies,  during  the
night  they  put  their  canoes  in  safety;  they  trans-
ported all  their  baggage  to  their  second  fort,  to  which
they  themselves  secretly  retired;  and,  to  the  end
that  we  should  believe  them  to  be  in  the  first  one  at
which  we  were  firing,  having  no  knowledge  of  the
second,  they  kept  therein  a  fire  continually  burning.
They  left  there  also  their  arquebusiers,  [170]  who,
after  having  fired  some  shots,  came  out  to  take  closer
aim  at  us,  skulking  behind  trees  and  shooting  very


64  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  21

pres,  fe  cachans  d'arbres  en  arbres,  tirans  fort  adroite-
ment;  ils  dechargeoient  toute  leur  fureur  fur  la
barque,  fcachans  que  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  eftoit
dedans ;  &  en  effet,  fi  elle  n'euft  efte  bien  pauoifee,  ils
auroient  bleff  e  &  tue  plufieurs  de  nos  hommes ;  vne
£pee  Frangoife  paroiffant  au  deffus  des  pauois,  fut
emportee  d'vn  coup  d'arquebuze,  plufieurs  cordages
couppes,  &  les  pauois  tous  remplis  de  bales.  Ils
firent  leur  retraite  dans  vne  bonne  conduite ;  car  ils
enchargerent  a  leurs  arquebufiers  de  combatre  vail-
lamment,  comme  ils  firent,  pendant  qu'ils  tranfporte-
rent  a  trauers  des  marais  &  des  bois,  leur  bagage  &
leurs  canots,  pour  n'eftre  point  apperceus.  La  nuidt
venue  ils  6uaderent,  comme  i'ay  remarque  cy-deflus :
Voila  comme  la  guerre,  auec  ces  peuples,  s'eft  decla-
red plus  que  iamais ;  mais  voions  ce  qui  f uit.

Ils  efhoient  partis  cinq  cens  bons  guerriers  de  leur
pais,  comme  i'ay  defia  dit,  vne  trouppe  s'en  eftoit
allee  au  deuant  des  Hurons,  pour  leur  dreffer  des
embufches,  [171]  &  les  attendre  comme  on  attend
vne  belle  a  la  fue ;  eftans  aux  aguets,  ils  apperceurent
deux  canots  qui  nous  amenoient  le  Pere  de  Brebeuf ,
&  quelques  Francois ;  mais  les  ayans  decouuerts  vn
peu  tard,  dans  vn  lieu  ou  ils  fe  pourroient  fauuer  a
force  de  rames,  ils  les  laifferent  paffer  fans  leur  donner
la  chaffe,  ny  fans  fe  decouurir:  Ce  fut  vn  grand  trait
de  la  bonte,  &  de  la  prouidence  de  noftre  Seigneur
enuers  le  Pere,  &  enuers  ceux  qui  l'accompagnoient:
car  cinq  autres  canots  de  Hurons,  venans  vn  peu
apres,  furent  attaques  de  ces  voleurs,  qui  en  maffa-
crerent  quelques-vns,  d'autres  fe  fauuerent,  d'autres
tomberent  tous  vifs  entre  leurs  mains,  pour  eitre  le
ioiiet  des  flammes  &  de  leur  rage,  &  la  pafture  de


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  65

skillfully.  They  let  loose  their  whole  fury  upon  our
bark,  knowing  that  Monsieur  the  Governor  was  there-
in ;  and  truly,  if  it  had  not  been  well  shielded,  they
would  have  wounded  and  killed  several  of  our  men, —
a  French  sword,  being  visible  above  the  screens,
was  carried  away  by  an  arquebus  shot,  many  ropes
were  cut,  and  all  the  screens  were  filled  with  balls.
They  effected  their  retreat  with  good  management,
for  they  had  charged  their  arquebusiers  to  fight  val-
iantly, as  they  did,  so  that  they  might  not  be  per-
ceived while  they  carried  across  marshes  and  woods
their  baggage  and  their  canoes.  When  night  came
they  made  their  escape,  as  I  remarked  above.  Thus
the  war  with  these  tribes  has  broken  out  more  fierce-
ly than  ever;  but  let  us  see  what  followed.

They  had  set  out  from  their  own  country  five  hun-
dred warriors  strong,  as  I  have  already  said;  one
band  had  gone  to  meet  the  Hurons,  in  order  to  set
ambushes  for  them,  [171]  and  to  await  them  as  one
awaits  a  wild  beast  in  its  flight.  While  these  were
on  the  watch,  they  perceived  two  canoes  which  were
bringing  to  us  Father  de  Brebeuf  and  some  French-
men, but  having  descried  them  rather  late,  in  a  place
where  it  was  possible  to  escape  by  vigorous  pad-
dling, they  let  them  go  on  without  pursuing  them  or
revealing  themselves.  It  was  a  great  proof  of  the
goodness  and  of  the  providence  of  our  Lord  towards
the  Father,  and  towards  those  who  accompanied  him ;
for  five  other  canoes  filled  with  Hurons,  coming
shortly  after,  were  attacked  by  these  robbers,  who
massacred  some  of  them;  others  escaped,  and  others
fell  alive  into  their  hands,  to  be  the  sport  of  flames
and  of  their  rage,  and  to  be  the  food  of  their  wretched
stomachs. Such  is  the  funeral  and  such  the  tomb


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

leurs  malheureux  eftomachs:  Voila  les  funerailles,
&  le  fepulchre  que  nous  attendons,  fi  iamais  nous  ve-
nons  a  tomber  entre  les  griffes  de  ces  tigres,  &  dans
la  fureur  de  ces  Demons.

L'vn  de  ceux  qui  fe  fauuerent  de  cette  embufcade,
tira  droit  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  les  autres  remonterent
vers  les  Hurons,  pour  auertir  ceux  qui  defcendoient,
du  danger  ou  ils  s'eftoient  perdus.  Quelque  [172]
temps  apres  cette  defaite,  le  Pere  Paul  Ragueneau,
&  le  Pere  Rene  Menard,  remontans  au  pais  des  Hu-
rons, conduits  par  quelques  canots,  firent  rencontre
de  huidt  ou  dix  Sauuages,  qui  leur  dirent,  que  c'eftoit
fait  de  leur  vie  s'ils  paff oient  outre ;  que  l'ennemy
ne  s'eftoit  pas  encor  retire.  A  cette  nouuelle  inopi-
nee,  ces  canots  retournent  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  pour
demander  fecours  aux  Algonquins ;  ceux-cy  les  ex-
hortent  de  donner  iufques  a  Kebec,  pour  obtenir
quelques  armes  du  fort,  &  quelque  affiftance  des  Sau-
uages Chreftiens  de  Saindt  Iofeph,  promettans  de  fe
ioindre  a  cette  efcorte.  Le  Pere  de  Brebeuf,  le  Pere
Ragueneau,  &  le  bon  Charles  Sondatfaa  fe  chargent
de  cette  commiffion,  ils  viennent  voir  Monfieur  le
Gouuerneur,  qui  fit  embarq[u]er  quelques  foldats  bien
armes,  &  bien  refolus,  les  recommandans  aux  nou-
ueaux  Chreftiens  de  Sain<5t  Iofeph,  qui  armerent
huidt  canots  de  leur  part,  pour  ce  mefme  deffein.
Comme  ils  eftoient  prefts  de  partir,  arriuent  deux
Sauuages,  du  pais  des  Abnaquiois,  qui  difent  pour
nouuelles,  que  tout  le  pais  des  Hiroquois  ne  refpire
que  la  [173]  guerre.  Que  les  Anglois  ont  quitte  l'ha-
bitation  qu'ils  auoient  a  Quinibequi ;  qu'vn  nomine"
Makheabichtichib',  dont  i'ay  parle  cy-deffus,  auoit
efte miferablement maffacre en leur  pais,  par  vn


1641  -  42]  RE  LA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  67

that  awaits  us,  if  ever  we  happen  to  die  by  the  claws
of  these  tigers,  and  the  fury  of  these  Demons.

One  of  those  who  had  escaped  from  this  ambuscade
went  at  once  to  the  Three  Rivers,  the  others  ascended
towards  the  country  of  the  Hurons,  to  warn  those
who  were  coming  down  of  the  danger  by  which  they
might  be  lost.  Some  [172]  time  after  this  defeat,
Father  Paul  Ragueneau  and  Father  Rene  Menard,
while  reascending  to  the  country  of  the  Hurons,
escorted  by  some  canoes,  met  eight  or  ten  Savages
who  told  them  that  their  lives  would  be  lost  if  they
went  further,  as  the  enemy  had  not  yet  withdrawn.
At  this  unexpected  news,  these  canoes  returned  to
the  Three  Rivers  for  the  purpose  of  asking  assistance
from  the  Algonquins ;  these  last  exhorted  them  to  go
as  far  as  Kebec  in  order  to  procure  arms  from  the
fort,  and  aid  from  the  Christian  Savages  of  Saint
Joseph, —  promising  themselves  to  meet  that  escort.
Father  de  Brebeuf,  Father  Ragueneau,  and  the  good
Charles  Sondatsaa  undertook  this  commission ;  they
came  to  Monsieur  the  Governor,  who  shipped  some
well-armed  and  very  resolute  soldiers,  commending
them  to  the  new  Christians  of  Saint  Joseph,  who  on
their  part  armed  eight  canoes  for  the  same  purpose.
When  they  were  ready  to  set  out,  two  Savages  arrived
from  the  country  of  the  Abnaquiois,  who  told  as  news
that  the  whole  country  of  the  Hiroquois  breathed
only  [173]  war;  that  the  English  had  abandoned
the  settlement  they  had  made  at  Quinibequi;  and
that  a  man  named  Makheabichtichiou,  of  whom  I
have  spoken  above,  had  been  wretchedly  slain  in
their  own  country,  by  an  Abnaquiois  nearer  to  the  sea.
They  said  that  this  deed  was  done  in  drunkenness ;
that  all  his  Countrymen  had  strongly  disapproved  of


68  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


Abnaquiois  plus  voifm  de  la  mer :  que  ce  coup  s'eftoit
fait  dans  l'yurognerie,  que  tous  fes  Compatriotes  l'a-
uoient  fort  improuue\  &  qu'ils  eftoient  enuoies  pour
fatisfaire  aux  parens  &  aux  allies,  &  a  toute  la  Nation
du  defundt;  Or  comme  fes  parens  eftoient  pour  la
plufpart  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  ces  deux  Abnaquiois
s'embarquerent  auec  la  flotte,  pour  les  aller  trouuer;
le  bruit  de  leur  venue  aiant  defia  couru,  nos  guer-
riers,  qui  auoient  receu  dans  leurs  canots  ces  deux
Ambaffadeurs,  furent  affes  mal  receus  des  Algon-
quins.

On  leur  dit  d'abord,  que  ces  Algonquins  fe  vou-
loient  faifir  des  Abnaquiois,  pour  les  mettre  a  mort,
contre  le  droidt  de  toutes  les  Nations ;  car  ils  venoient
pour  traiter  de  la  paix.  lean  Baptifte  EtinechKatfat,
&  Noel  Negabamat,  qui  font  les  deux  principaux
Chefs  de  Sain<5t  Iofeph,  voians  que  les  Algonquins
fe  tenoient  preffes,  &  que  quelques-vns  d'eux  eftoient
[174]  armes,  commandent  a  ceux  qui  les  fuiuoient,
de  faire  alte,  &  de  charger  leurs  arquebufes  a  balle :
La-deffus,  vn  ieune  Algonquin  s'auance  le  coufteau
en  la  main  pour  le  jetter  fur  l'vn  des  Abnaquiois;
mais  celui-cy  faifant  vne  demarche  en  arriere,  luy
prefente  le  bout  de  fon  arquebufe :  Les  Algonquins
s'6crient,  que  c'eft  vne  feinte,  que  leur  couftume  eft
d'6pouuanter  ceux  qui  apportent  nouuelle  de  la  mort
de  quelqu'vn  de  leur  Nation,  quoy  qu'ils  viennent
comme  Delegues  &  comme  Mediateurs  de  la  paix.

A  ces  paroles  chacun  s'arrefte,  on  fe  vifite,  quoy
qu'afles  froidement,  les  Abnaquiois  traitent  leur
affaire,  &  vn  Capitaine  Algonquin,  proche  parent  de
l'vn  de  nos  Chreftiens  de  Sainct  Iofeph,  l'abordant,
&  le  faliiant,  luy  dit:  Mon  nepueu,  ie  fuis  bien  aife


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  69

it,  and  that  they  had  been  sent  to  give  satisfaction  to
the  parents  and  to  the  relatives  and  to  the  whole
Nation  of  the  deceased.  Now,  as  his  relatives  were
for  the  most  part  at  the  Three  Rivers,  these  two
Abnaquiois  had  embarked  with  the  fleet  to  go  to  them ;
the  report  of  their  arrival  having  already  spread,
our  warriors,  who  had  taken  into  their  own  canoes
these  two  Ambassadors,  met  a  rather  unfriendly
reception  from  the  Algonquins.

They  were  told  at  first,  that  these  Algonquins
were  inclined  to  seize  the  Abnaquiois,  that  they
might  put  them  to  death,  contrary  to  the  law  of  all
Nations ;  for  they  came  to  treat  of  peace.  Jean  Bap-
tiste  Etinechkawat  and  Noel  Negabamat,  who  are
the  two  principal  Chiefs  of  Saint  Joseph,  seeing  that
the  Algonquins  were  crowding  together,  and  that
some  were  [174]  armed,  commanded  those  who  were
following  them  to  make  a  halt  and  to  load  their
arquebuses  with  balls.  At  these  words,  a  young
Algonquin  advanced,  knife  in  hand,  to  thrust  it  at
one  of  the  Abnaquiois,  but  this  last,  taking  a  step
backward,  presented  to  him  the  muzzle  of  his  arque-
bus. The  Algonquins  exclaimed  that  it  was  a
feint, —  that  their  custom  is  to  terrify  those  who
bring  news  of  the  death  of  any  one  of  their  Nation,
even  though  they  come  as  Delegates  and  as  Media-
tors of  peace.

At  these  words,  each  one  stood  still ;  they  looked,
although  rather  coldly,  on  the  Abnaquiois  discussing
their  affair;  and  an  Algonquin  Captain,  a  near  rela-
tive of  one  of  our  Saint  Joseph  Christians,  approach-
ing and  addressing  him,  said:  "  My  nephew,  I  am
very  glad  at  thy  coming."  "  And  I,"  said  this  young
Christian,  "  was  much  astonished,  on  landing  at  the


70


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  21


de  ta  venue:  Et  moy,  fit  ce  ieune  Chreftien,  ie  me
fuis  trouue  bien  eftonne  a  Vabord  des  Trois  Riuieres,
voyant  qu'on  mettoit  la  main  aux  armes.  Quoy
done,  faifois  je  a  part  moy,  fommes  nous  defia  arri-
u6s  au  pais  de  l'ennemy?  Ouand  ie  fuis  party  de
Sainct  Iofeph,  ie  difois  dans  mon  coeur,  ie  trouueray
mes  [175]  parens  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  ie  feray  bien
confole  de  les  voir,  &  auffi-tofl  que  i'ay  mis  pied  a
terre,  i'ay  rencontre  le  pais  des  Hiroquois;  car  on
nous  a  commande  de  charger  a  balle :  Y  as-tu  char-
ge, luy  dit  fon  oncle?  ouy,  refpond-il,  i'ay  mis  deux
balles  dans  mon  arquebufe.  Aurois-tu  tire"  fur  tes
parens?  i'aurois  obei  a  nos  Capitaines,  &  tire  a  tort
&  a  trauers ;  Ie  fuis  du  party  de  ceux  qui  croyent  en
Dieu.  Ces  refponfes  me  font  dautant  plus  voir  la
force  de  la  foy,  que  les  Sauuages  font  etroitement
lies  a  leurs  parens :  mais  Iefus-Chrift  eft  venu  rom-
pre  ce  lien.  Vent  feparare  homincm  aduerfus  patron
/num.

Ce  tumulte  eftant  appaife,  le  fieur  de  Chanfiour  fit
appeller  les  principaux  Sauuages,  Montagnais,  &
Algonquins,  il  leur  fit  demander  quand  ils  partiroient
pour  efcorter  les  Hurons.  Les  Algonquins  firent
figne  a  lean  Baptifte  EtinechKaHat  Capitaine  Monta-
gnais, que  e'eftoit  a  luy  a  parler,  fa  harangue  ne  com-
prit  qu'vn  feul  mot:  Ie  fuis  Francois,  dit-il,  ie  n'ay
rien  a  dire  dauantage,  ce  mot  en  valloit  dix-mille,  il
vouloit  dire  qu'il  eftoit  Chreftien,  &  Francois  tout
enfemble,  [176]  qu'il  eftoit  preft  d'obeir  aux  volon-
t6s  de  celuy  qui  commandoit  aux  Francois,  &  que
dans  vne  affaire  fi  preffe,  il  n'eftoit  pas  queflion  de
long  difcours,  mais  de  marcher  fans  delay.

L'Apoftat tfmafatiKeie prit la parole, dit mille


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  71

Three  Rivers,  to  see  that  arms  had  been  seized.
'  Indeed,'  said  I  to  myself,  '  have  we  already  arrived
in  the  country  of  the  enemy  ? '  When  I  left  Saint
Joseph,  I  said  in  my  heart,  '  I  shall  find  my  [175]
relatives  at  the  Three  Rivers, —  I  shall  surely  be  con-
soled by  seeing  them ; '  but  as  soon  as  I  had  set  foot
on  land  I  found  the  country  of  the  Hiroquois,  for  we
were  commanded  to  load  with  balls."  "  Didst  thou
load?"  said  his  uncle  to  him.  "Yes,"  responded
he,  "  I  put  two  balls  into  my  arquebus."  "  Wouldst
thou  have  fired  on  thy  relatives  ? '  "I  would  have
obeyed  our  Captains,  and  fired  right  and  left:  I  am
on  the  side  of  those  who  believe  in  God."  These
responses  made  me  see  the  strength  of  faith  so  much
the  more  as  these  Savages  are  closely  bound  to  their
relatives:  but  Jesus  Christ  came  to  break  this  bond.
Veni  separare  hominem  adversus  patrem  suum.

When  this  tumult  was  appeased,  the  sieur  de  Chan-
flour  ordered  the  chief  Montagnais  and  Algonquin
Savages  to  be  called,  and  to  be  asked  when  they
would  set  out  to  escort  the  Hurons.  The  Algon-
quins  made  a  sign  to  Jean  Baptiste  Etinechkawat,  a
Montagnais  Captain,  that  this  was  for  him  to  say;
his  speech  was  comprised  in  a  single  word, —  "  I  am
a  Frenchman,"  said  he,  "  I  have  nothing  more  to
say. ' '  This  word  was  worth  ten  thousand ;  he  meant
that  he  was  a  Christian  and  a  Frenchman  at  the  same
time,  [176]  that  he  was  ready  to  obey  the  will  of  him
who  commanded  the  French,  and  that,  in  so  urgent
an  affair,  it  was  not  a  question  of  much  speaking,  but
of  marching  without  delay.

The  Apostate  Oumasatikeie  began  to  speak  with  a
thousand  impertinences ;  at  last  he  came  to  the  con-
clusion that  the enemy  had  departed, and conse-


72  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

impertinences/  Enfin,  il  conclud  que  1'ennemy  eftoit
party,  &  par  confequent  qu'il  n'eftoit  pas  befoin  de
faire  efcorter  les  Hurons.

Charles  Sondatfaa  Huron,  harangue  la  deffus  puif-
famment,  reprefente  le  danger,  preffe  les  Algonquins ;
mais  il  parla  a  des  oreilles  fermees,  qui  fortirent  de
l'affemblee,  fi  toft  qu'ils  eurent  tire  leur  coup;  il
s'agit  done  maintenant  de  voir  fi  les  huidt  canots  de
Chreftiens  qui  portoient  quelques  foldats  Francois,
pafferoient  outre  auec  les  Hurons.  Leur  petit  nom-
bre,  a  comparaifon  de  l'ennemy,  eftoit  pour  les
epouuanter,  on  demande  aux  foldats  Francois,  fi  fe
voyans  deftitues  du  fecours  des  Algonquins,  ils  vou-
droient  bien  marcher  plus  auant:  ils  refpondent  auec
vne  conftance  vraiement  genereufe,  que  Monfieur  le
Gouuerneur  leur  ayant  commande  d'accompagner  les
[177]  Sauuages  Chreftiens  de  Saincft  Iofeph,  qu'ils
ne  les  quitteront  iamais  pour  aucun  danger ;  la  foy  a
ie  ne  fgay  quel  lien,  qui  vnit  les  cceurs,  les  foldats  au
retour  dirent  tout  plain  de  bien  de  nos  Neophytes,
&  nos  Neophytes  ne  fe  pouuoient  affes  loiier  des
foldats.  Voila  done  nos  foldats  Fracois  prefts  de
s'embarquer,  fi  ces  huict  canots  de  Chreftiens  veulent
marcher:  On  leur  demande,  quelle  eftoit  leur  pen-
f£e;  ils  refpondent,  que  ce  n'eit  pas  a  eux  d'en  deter-
miner, qu'ils  eftoient  tous  difpofes;  de  receuoir  l'or-
dre  &  le  commandement  des  Francois:  cela  mit  en
peine  le  fieur  de  Chanfiour  &  tous  ceux  qui  eftoient
prefens;  pas  vn  n'opina  iamais,  qu'il  leur  falluft
commander  ce  voiage,  perfonne  ne  voulant  expofer
ces  bons  Neophytes  dans  les  grands  dangers  qu'on
apprehendoit ;  Ce  petit  nombre  de  Chreftiens,  difoit
quelqu'vn,  eft  comme  le  leuain,  qui  doit  faire  leuer


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  73

quently  that  there  was  no  need  of  giving  an  escort
to  the  Hurons.

Charles  Sondatsaa,  a  Huron,  thereupon  vigorously-
harangued, —  he  pictured  the  danger  and  urged  the
Algonquins ;  but  he  spoke  to  those  who  had  closed
ears,  and  who  rushed  from  the  assembly  as  soon  as
they  had  inflicted  their  blow.  The  question  now
was,  to  see  if  the  Christians  in  these  eight  canoes,
which  also  bore  a  few  French  soldiers,  would  go  on
with  the  Hurons ;  their  small  number  in  comparison
with  the  enemy  was  enough  to  terrify  them.  The
French  soldiers  were  asked  if,  seeing  themselves
destitute  of  help  from  the  Algonquins,  they  were
willing  to  go  on  further ;  they  answered  with  a  truly
generous  firmness  that,  Monsieur  the  Governor  hav-
ing commanded  them  to  accompany  the  [177]  Chris-
tian Savages  of  Saint  Joseph,  they  would  never  aban-
don them  on  account  of  any  danger.  Faith  has  an
indescribable  bond  which  unites  hearts.  The  sol-
diers, on  their  return,  spoke  in  the  highest  terms  of
our  Neophytes,  and  our  Neophytes  could  not  suffi-
ciently praise  the  soldiers.  Here  then  were  our
French  soldiers  ready  to  embark,  if  the  Christians
in  these  eight  canoes  wished  to  go  on.  They  were
asked  what  their  opinion  was ;  they  answered  that  it
was  not  for  them  to  decide  it,  that  they  were  wholly
disposed  to  receive  the  orders  and  commands  of  the
French.  This  troubled  the  sieur  de  Chanflour,  and
all  those  who  were  present;  not  even  one  voted  that
they  ought  to  command  this  voyage,  no  person  was
willing  to  expose  these  good  Neophytes  to  the  great
dangers  that  were  dreaded.  "  This  small  number
of  Christians,"  said  someone,  "is  like  the  yeast
which  ought  to  leaven  the  whole  mass  of  Christianity


74  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

toute  la  maffe  du  Chriftianifme  en  ces  contrees;  s'il
eft  defait,  les  Infideles  fe  rendront  plus  difficiles  que
iamais,  &  nous  accuferont  d'auoir  jette  a  la  mort  ceux
qui  ontreceu  noftre  creance.  Sur  ces  difficulties,  les
pauures  [178]  Hurons  fe  voyans  abandonnes  de  tout
fecours,  eftoient  bien  en  peine,  &  nous  auffi  bien
qu'eux ;  car  le  Pere  Paul  Ragueneau,  &  le  Pere  Rene
Menart,  les  deuoient  accompagner.

Enfin,  noftre  Seigneur  nousconfola;  car  au  mefme
temps  qu'on  vouloit  partir,  arriue  vn  canot  de
Huron,  qui  nous  apprend,  que  l'ennemy  s'eftoit  reti-
re: Si  bien  que  les  Peres  font  paffes,  auec  le  bon
Charles  Sondatfaa  &  les  autres  Hurons,  fans  autre
mal  que  les  grandes  fatigues  d'vn  chemin  tres-affreux.

Quelque  temps  apres  leur  depart,  arriuerent  quel-
ques  autres  canots  de  Hurons,  qui  calomnierent  puif-
famment  le  pauure  Pere  de  Brebeuf;  ils  difoient,
qu'ayant  rencontre  vn  Huron  fauue  des  mains  de
l'ennemy,  ils  auoient  appris  de  luy  ce  que  ie  vais
raconter.  Eftant  entre  les  mains  des  Hiroquois,
difoit  ce  prifonnier  echappe\  l'vn  d'eux  m'a  tenu  ce
difcours:  Nous  auons  connoiffance,  &  bonne  intel-
ligence auec  les  Francois  veftus  de  noir,  qui  font  en
voftre  pais,  &  notamment  auec  vn  certain  que  vous
nommes  Echon,  c'eft  ainfi  qu'ils  appellent  le  Pere
lean  de  Brebeuf;  [179]  cet  homme  a  paffe  l'hyuer
dans  la  Nation  neutre,  oil  il  a  eu  communication  auec
les  Hiroquois  nos  confederes,  il  s'eit  lie  auec  eux  &
auec  nous,  pour  vous  perdre:  Courage,  leur  difoit-il,
nous  fommes  entr£s  dans  le  pais  des  Hurons  pour
les  exterminer;  nous  en  auons  defia  fait  mourir
grand  nombre  par  nos  prieres ;  comme  par  de  puif-
f ans  charmes ;  mais  nous  n '  auons  pti  les  confommer


1641 -42J  RELATION  OF  1640-41  75

in  these  regions ;  if  they  are  defeated,  the  Unbeliev-
ers will  become  more  troublesome  than  ever,  and
will  accuse  us  of  having  forced  to  their  death  those
who  have  received  our  belief. "  On  account  of  these
objections,  the  poor  [178]  Hurons,  seeing  themselves
abandoned  by  all  aid,  were  much  distressed,  and  we
as  well  as  they;  for  Father  Paul  Ragueneau  and
Father  Rene  Menart  were  to  accompany  them.

At  length,  our  Lord  consoled  us ;  for,  at  the  very
time  they  had  resolved  to  set  out,  a  Huron  canoe
arrived,  and  we  learned  that  the  enemy  had  retired ;
so  that  the  Fathers  went  on  with  the  good  Charles
Sondatsaa  and  the  other  Hurons  without  any  other
discomfort  than  the  great  fatigues  of  a  most  fright-
ful road.

A  short  time  after  their  departure,  some  other
canoes  arrived,  bearing  Hurons,  who  greatly  slan-
dered poor  Father  de  Brebeuf ;  they  said  that,  hav-
ing met  a  Huron  who  had  escaped  from  the  hands  of
the  enemy,  they  had  learned  from  him  what  I  am
going  to  relate.  ' '  Being  in  the  hands  of  the  Hiro-
quois,"  said  this  escaped  prisoner,  "one  of  them
spoke  to  me  in  this  wise :  '  We  have  an  acquaintance
and  a  good  understanding  with  the  black-robed
Frenchmen  who  are  in  your  country,  and  especially
with  a  certain  man  whom  you  call  Echon,'  " — it  is
thus  tb  ey  name  Father  Jean  de  Brebeuf ;  [  1 79]  ' '  '  this
man  spent  the  winter  among  the  neutral  Nation,
where  he  had  communication  with  the  Hiroquois,
our  confederates ;  he  combined  with  them  and  with
us  that  he  might  ruin  you.  "  Take  courage,"  said
he  to  them ;  "we  entered  into  the  country  of  the
Hurons  in  order  to  exterminate  them;  we  have  al-
ready caused  a  great  number  of  them  to  die  by  our


76  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

entierement,  il  faut  que  vous  les  acheuies  par  vos
guerres,  &  par  vos  furprifes;  quand  ils  feront  tout  a
fait  detruits,  nous  irons  demeurer  auec  vous  en  voftre
pais.  Nos  confeder6s  nous  aians  donne"  aduis  de  tout
cecy,  nous  vous  fommes  venus  dreffer  des  embufches,
nous  auons  reconnu  Echon,  nous  l'auons  vifite  pen-
dant la  nuidt,  il  nous  a  fait  des  prefens,  nous  l'auons
laiffe"  paffer,  il  nous  a  auerty  des  canots  qui  le
fuiuoient ;  &  voila  comment  vous  eftes  tomb6s  entre
nos  mains,  difoient  les  Hiroquois  a  ce  prifonnier,  au
rapport  de  ces  calomniateurs,  qui  controuuoient  ces
impoftures,  pour  nous  perdre.  Saindt  Paul  a  bien
raifon  de  dire,  que,  Si  in  hac  vita  tantiim  in  Chrijlo
/per antes  [180]  Jumus,  miferabiliores  Junius  omnibus  ho-
minibus:  Si  nous  n'attendons  rien  en  l'autre  vie,  nous
fommes  plus  miferables  que  le  refte  des  hommes:
Car  ceux  pour  qui  nous  donnons  nos  vies  dans  des
trauaux  immenfes,  nous  procurent  la  mort  par  des
voyes  les  plus  iniques  du  monde.

Auant  que  de  conclure  ce  chapitre  il  faut  que  ie
remarque  vn  traidt  de  generofrte  de  nos  Chreftiens
de  Saindt  Iofeph,  pendant  le  fejour  qu'ils  ont  fait  aux
Trois  Riuieres;  leur  Capitaine  aiant  dit  en  pleine
ailembl£e,  qu'il  eftoit  Francois,  puis  qu'il  auoit
embraff6  leur  creance:  Vn  certain  Infidele,  homme
impudent,  luy  voulut  faire  vn  affront,  &  a  tous  fes
gens;  fe  promenant  a  l'entour  de  fa  cabane,  luy  cria
tout  haut:  Va-t'en  done,  Francois,  va-t'en,  a  la  bonne
heure,  en  ton  pais,  embarque  toy  dans  les  Nauires,
puis  que  tu  es  Francois,  paffe  la  mer,  &  t'en  va  en
ta  patrie,  il  y  a  trop  long-temps  que  tu  nous  fais  icy
mourir.  Ce  Capitaine  me  vint  trouuer  tout  fur  l'heure,
fans  rien  repartir:  Mon cceur  veut  eftre  mef chant,


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  77

prayers,  as  by  powerful  charms;  but  we  have  not
been  able  to  destroy  them  entirely.  You  must  give
the  finishing  stroke  to  them,  by  your  wars  and  by
your  sudden  attacks;  when  they  shall  be  wholly
destroyed,  we  will  dwell  with  you  in  your  country."
When  our  confederates  had  informed  us  of  all  this,
we  came  to  lie  in  ambush  for  you.  We  recognized
Echon,  and  visited  him  at  night;  he  made  us  pres-
ents, and  we  let  him  go  away.  He  apprised  us  of
the  canoes  which  were  following  him,  and  thus  you
have  fallen  into  our  hands,'  '  said  the  Hiroquois  to
this  prisoner,  according  to  the  report  of  the  calumni-
ators who  contrived  these  impostures  in  order  to
ruin  us.  Saint  Paul  was  quite  right  in  saying  that,
Si  in  hac  vita  tantkm  in  Christo  sper antes  [180]  sumus,
miserabiliores  sumus  omnibus  hominibus.  If  we  expect
nothing  in  the  other  life,  we  are  more  miserable  than
the  rest  of  men ;  for  those  to  whom  we  give  our  lives
in  these  immense  labors,  procure  our  death  by  the
most  iniquitous  means  in  the  world.

Before  concluding  this  chapter,  I  must  notice  an
act  of  magnanimity  in  our  Christians  of  Saint  Joseph,
during  the  sojourn  they  made  at  the  Three  Rivers;
their  Captain  having  said  in  open  assembly  that  he
was  a  Frenchman,  since  he  had  embraced  their  be-
lief, a  certain  Unbeliever  —  an  impudent  man,  wish-
ing to  affront  him  and  all  his  people  —  walked  around
his  cabin,  and  cried  aloud  to  him:  "  Go  then,  thou
Frenchman,  that  is  right,  go  away  into  thine  own
country.  Embark  in  the  Ships,  since  thou  art  a
Frenchman ;  cross  the  sea,  and  go  to  thine  own  land ;
thou  hast  for  too  long  a  time  caused  us  to  die  here."
This  Captain  came  to  me  immediately,  without  reply-
ing a  word. "  My  heart  wishes  to  be  wicked,"  said


78


LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.21


difoit-il,  maisie  ne  luy  obeiray  pas;  fi  ie  n'auois  [181]
quitte  mes  anciennes  facons  de  faire,  i'abatrois  bien
l'orgueil  de  c£t  impudent;  mais  puis  qu'il  ne  faut
pas  eftre  Chreftien  a  demy,  ie  ne  luy  diray  mot,  ie  ne
luy  feray  aucun  mal ;  ie  fcay  bien  qu'ils  difent  que
ie  n'ay  point  d'efprit  d'auoir  embraffe  la  foy,  ils
m'accufent  de  les  faire  mourir,  pource  que  ie  les  ay
inuites  de  fe  faire  inftruire;  leurs  calomnies  m'au-
roit  troubl6  en  autre  temps:  mais  puis  que  i'ay  donn6
ma  parole  a  Dieu,  ie  veux  faire  tout  ce  qui  m'eft  com-
mande1,  ie  ne  leur  feray  aucun  reproche ;  ce  qui  me
feroit  bien  facile,  non  feulement  pource  que  leur  vie
n'eit  pas  meilleure  que  la  noftre,  mais  pource  que  ie
n'ay  iamais  receu  aucun  de  leurs  prefens,  quoyque
nous  leur  en  aions  fait  par  plufieurs  fois.  La  grace
a  d'eftranges  effets;  auffi  eft-il  vray,  que  le  Dieu
qui  la  donne,  eft  vn  Dieu  tout-puiffant.


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -41  79

he,  "  but  I  shall  not  obey  it;  if  I  had  not  [181]  given
up  my  old  habits,  I  would  certainly  lower  the  pride
of  that  impudent  man ;  but  since  one  must  not  be  a
halfway  Christian,  I  will  say  no  word  to  him,  I  will
do  him  no  harm.  I  know  well  that  they  say  I  have
no  sense,  because  I  have  embraced  the  faith;  they
accuse  me  of  causing  their  death  since  I  have  begged
them  to  be  instructed.  Their  calumnies  would  have
troubled  me,  formerly ;  but,  as  I  have  given  my  word
to  God,  I  intend  to  do  all  that  is  commanded  me.  I
will  not  cast  at  them  any  reproach,  which  would  be
very  easy  for  me  to  do, —  not  only  because  their  life
is  no  better  than  ours,  but  because  I  have  never
received  any  of  their  presents,  although  we  have
several  times  made  presents  to  them."  Grace  has
strange  effects ;  it  is  also  true  that  the  God  who  gives
it  is  an  all-powerful  God.


80  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.21


[182]  CHAPITRE  XII.
d'vne  mission  faicte  a  tadoussac.

ENCOR  que  les  Sauuages  de  Tadouffac  foient
quad  les  premiers  que  nos  vaiffeaux  rencon-
trent,  ft  eft-ce  qu'on  ne  leur  a  porte  les  bonnes
nouuelles  de  l'Euangile  qu'apres  plufieurs  autres,  &
encor  faut-il  confeffer  que  ce  n'eft  pas  nous  qui  les
auons  attires;  mais  nos  Neophytes,  ou  nouueaux
Chreitiens  de  la  Refidence  de  Saindt  Iofeph.  Comme
ils  fe  font  vifites  de  part  &  d'autre,  &  qu'ils  ont  veu
que  les  principaux  Sauuages  de  cette  Refidence,
faifoient  profeffion  publique  de  la  foy,  ils  s'en  font
mocqu^s  au  commencement:  mais  enfin,  le  bon  ex-
emple  &  le  bon  difcours  de  leurs  Compatriotes,  leur
ont  fait  aimer  ce  qu'ils  haiTfoient,  &  rechercher  ce
qu'ils  abhorroient.  L'an  paffe  nos  Neophytes,  com-
me i'ay  remarque,  les  allerent  inuiter  par  vn  beau
prefent,  de  venir  demeurer  auec  eux  a  Saindt  Iofeph,
[183]  pour  entendre  parler  des  biens  de  l'autre  vie;
Ils  refpondirent  par  vn  autre  prefent,  qu'ils  n'eltoient
point  allienes  de  la  foy;  mais  qu'ils  defiroient  qu'on
les  vint  inftruire  en  leur  pais :  En  effet,  ils  delegue-
rent  Charles  MeiachkaSat,  qui  n'eftoit  pas  encor  bap-
tife,  pour  venir  querir  vn  Pere  de  noftre  Compagnie,
&  l'emmenerent  a  Tadouffac,  oil  quelques  Sauuages
des  peuples  du  Sagne,  fe  deuoient  auffi  trouuer;
comme  le  Pere  qu'ils  demandoient  eitoit  occupe
ailleurs,  on  leur  promit  qu'on  ne  manqueroit  pas  de
les  fecourir  au  Printemps.


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -41  81


[182]  CHAPTER  XII.

OF A MISSION HELD AT TADOUSSAC.

ALTHOUGH  the  Savages  of  Tadoussac  are  al-
most the  first  ones  that  our  vessels  meet,  yet
the  good  news  of  the  Gospel  was  carried  to
them  only  after  it  had  been  taken  to  many  others ;
and  still  it  must  be  confessed  that  it  was  not  we  who
won  them,  but  our  Neophytes,  or  new  Christians  of
the  Residence  of  Saint  Joseph.  When  they  visited
one  another  on  both  sides,  and  saw  that  the  chief
Savages  of  this  Residence  made  public  profession  of
the  faith,  they  derided  them  in  the  beginning;  but,
at  length,  the  good  example  and  the  good  conversa-
tion of  their  Tribesmen  made  them  love  that  which
they  had  hated,  and  seek  that  which  they  had  ab-
horred. Last  year  our  Neophytes,  as  I  have  observed,
went  to  invite  them  by  means  of  a  fine  present  to
come  and  dwell  with  them  at  Saint  Joseph,  [183]  that
they  might  hear  of  the  blessings  of  the  other  life.
They  answered  by  another  present  that  they  were
not  estranged  from  the  faith,  but  desired  that  some
one  should  come  and  instruct  them  in  their  own
country.  Indeed,  they  appointed  Charles  Meiach-
kawat,  who  was  not  yet  baptized,  to  come  for  a  Father
of  our  Society,  and  conduct  him  to  Tadoussac,  where
would  also  be  found  some  Savages  of  the  tribes  from
the  Sagne ;  as  the  Father  for  whom  they  asked  was
occupied  elsewhere,  they  were  promised  that  we
would  not  fail  to  assist  them  in  the  Spring.


82  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£~ SUITES [Vol.21

Le  douziefme  de  May,  le  Capitaine  de  Tadouffac
vint  fommer  noftre  Reuerend  Pere  Superieur  de  fa
promeffe,  le  Pere  luy  accorda  tres-volontiers  celuy
de  noftre  Compagnie  qu'il  demandoit:  fi  toft  que  nos
Chreftiens  de  Saindt  Iofeph  eurent  connoiffance  de
ce  voyage,  ils  vindrent  trouuer  le  Pere,  le  fuppliant
de  parler  a  Tadouffac,  c'efl  a  dire,  de  faire  des  pre-
fens  pour  attirer  a  Saindt  Iofeph  le  reliqua  de  ces
pauures  peuples.  Prie  Monfieur  noftre  Capitaine,
luy  difoient-ils,  qu'il  parle  auffi,  peut-eftre  qu'ils
refpedteront  [184]  fa  parole,  s'ils  viennent  demeurer
auec  nous,  nous  parlerons  de  noftre  cofte,  c'eft  a
dire,  nous  leur  ferons  des  prefens  pour  applanir  la
terre,  fur  laquelle  ils  placeront  leurs  cabanes,  ou
leurs  maifons.  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  voiant  que
ce  deffein  tendoit  a  la  gloire  de  noftre  Seigneur,  fit
fon  prefent  auec  lequel  nous  ioignifmes  le  noftre,
pour  les  offrir  felon  l'inftrudtion  que  nos  Neophytes
nous  auoient  donnee;  car  ils  nous  informerent  par  le
menu,  comme  il  falloit  parler.  Cela  fait,  le  Pere
monte  dans  vne  barque,  qui  defcendoit  a  Tadouffac,
les  vents  contraires  le  retarderent  affes  long  temps
en  chemin,  mais  ecoutons-le  parler  de  fon  voyage.

Le  Mercredy  veille  du  tres-Saindt  Sacrement,  vn
canot  de  Sauuages  nous  vint  aborder,  comme  ie  vy  que
les  vents,  qui  fembloient  vouloir  faire  quelque  treue
auec  nous,  recommencoient  leur  guerre,  ie  m'em-
barquay  auec  eux,  promettant  a  nos  Francois,  que  ie
leur  viendrois  dire  la  faincte  Meffe  le  iour  fuiuant,
fi  le  temps  le  permettoit;  les  Sauuages  m'emmene-
rent  en  vn  lieu  oil  il  n'y  auoit  ny  terre  ny  [185]  bois;
c'eftoit  fur  des  roches,  ou  ils  auroient  paff6  la  nuidt
fans  autre  couuerture  que  le  ciel,  fi  ie  ne  me  fuffe


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  83

On  the  twelfth  of  May,  the  Captain  of  Tadoussac
came  to  our  Reverend  Father  Superior  to  claim  the
fulfillment  of  his  promise ;  the  Father  most  willingly
granted  him  the  one  of  our  Society  for  whom  he
asked.  As  soon  as  our  Saint  Joseph  Christians  were
aware  of  this  voyage,  they  came  to  the  Father  im-
ploring him  to  speak  to  Tadoussac, —  that  is  to  say,
to  make  presents  in  order  to  draw  to  Saint  Joseph
the  remains  of  these  poor  tribes.  "  Beg  Monsieur
our  Captain,"  said  they  to  him,  "to  speak  also, —
perhaps  they  will  respect  [184]  his  word;  if  they
come  to  dwell  with  us,  we  will  speak  on  our  own
part," — that  is  to  say,  "  we  will  make  them  pres-
ents,"—  "that  they  may  clear  up  the  ground  on
which  they  shall  place  their  cabins  or  their  houses."
Monsieur  the  Governor,  seeing  that  this  plan  tended
to  the  glory  of  our  Lord,  made  his  present,  with
which  we  joined  our  own,  that  we  might  offer  them
according  to  the  instructions  given  us  by  our  Neo-
phytes, for  they  informed  us  minutely  how  we  should
speak.  This  done,  the  Father  entered  a  bark  which
was  going  down  to  Tadoussac,  and  contrary  winds
detained  him  for  some  time  on  the  way ;  but  let  us
hear  him  speak  of  his  voyage.

"  On  Wednesday,  the  eve  of  the  most  Holy  Sacra-
ment, the  Savages  came  in  a  canoe  to  meet  us ;  as  I
saw  that  the  winds,  which  had  seemed  inclined  to
make  a  truce  with  us,  were  recommencing  their  war,
I  set  out  with  them,  promising  our  Frenchmen  that
I  would  come  to  say  holy  Mass  for  them  on  the  fol-
lowing day,  if  the  weather  permitted.  The  Savages
conducted  me  to  a  place  where  there  was  neither
soil  nor  [185]  tree;  it  was  on  the  rocks,  where  they
would  have  passed  the  night  with  no  other  covering


84  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

trouue  auec  eux ;  ie  les  excite  incontinent  a  chercher
quelque  mef chant  lieu  pour  nous  cabaner ;  en  ayant
fait  rencontre,  ils  jettent  leurs  ecorces  fur  cinq  ou  fix
perches :  &  bien  leur  en  prit,  &  a  moy  aufii,  dit  le
Pere ;  car  nous  fufmes  battus  toute  la  nuidt  du  vent
&  de  la  plui'e,

Le  lendemain  ne  pouuant  aborder  la  barque,  ie
paffay  la  grande  fefte  de  noftre  Seigneur  dans  cette
maifon  tres-pauure  des  biens  de  la  terre,  mais  riche-
ment  pourueue  des  biens  du  ciel :  La  meilleure  par-
tie  des  Sauuages  eftoient  Chreftiens;  ie  leur  parlay
de  l'honneur  qu'on  rendoit  ce  iour  la  au  Fils  de  Dieu
auec  pompe  &  magnificence,  dans  toute  l'Europe:
La-deffus  ie  dreffe  vn  petit  Autel  pour  dire  la  faincte
Meffe;  ils  m'aidoient  auec  tant  d'affection  que  i'en
eftois  tout  attendry :  voyans  que  le  lieu  ou  ie  deuois
marcher,  eftoit  tout  humide  &  fangeux,  ils  jettent  par
terre  vne  robe  pour  me  feruir  de  marchepied.  I'eften-
dy  vne  petite  nappe  de  communion  au  trauers  de  la
cabane,  pour  feparer  les  [186]  fideles  d'auec  les  infi-
deles:  La  deffus  ie  commence  la  faincte  Meffe,  non
fans  eftonnement,  que  le  Dieu  des  dieux  s'abaiffaft
vne  autre  fois,  dans  vn  lieu  plus  chetif  que  Tellable
de  Bethleem ;  ces  bonnes  gens  fe  vouloient  con-
feffer  &  communier,  mais  ie  les  remis  au  Dimanche
fuiuant;  les  Sauuages  qui  n'eftoient  pas  baptifes,
garderent  vn  profond  filence  pendant  ce  diuin  Sacri-
fice/ auffi  ont-ils  bonne  enuie  d'eltre  Chreftiens.

La  tempefte  nous  retint  deux  iours  &  deux  nuidts
prifonniers  fous  ces  ecorces,  plus  ouuertes  qu'vne
porte  cochere :  Comme  nous  fongions  a  noftre  depart,
le  fieur  Marfolet  qui  commandoit  la  barque,  m'efcri-
uit  ce  peu  de  mots  par  vn  ieune  Sauuage,  qui  m'ap-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  85

than  the  sky  if  I  had  not  been  with  them.  I  urged
them  immediately  to  seek  a  place,  however  poor,
where  we  might  erect  a  cabin ;  having  found  one,
they  spread  their  sheets  of  bark  on  five  or  six  poles,
and  well  it  was  for  them,  and  for  me  also,"  said  the
Father,  "  for  we  were  beaten  all  night  by  the  wind
and  the  rain.

"  The  next  day,  not  being  able  to  approach  the
bark,  I  spent  the  great  feast  of  our  Lord  in  this
house,  —  very  poor  in  worldly  goods,  but  richly  pro-
vided with  the  blessings  of  heaven.  The  greater
part  of  the  Savages  were  Christians;  I  told  them  of
the  honor  that  was  paid  on  that  day  to  the  Son  of
God,  with  pomp  and  magnificence,  in  the  whole  of
Europe.  Then  I  erected  a  little  Altar  that  I  might
say  holy  Mass ;  they  aided  me  with  so  much  affection
that  I  was  greatly  moved  thereby ;  on  seeing  that
the  place  where  I  should  walk  was  very  damp  and
muddy,  they  threw  a  robe  upon  the  ground  to  serve
me  for  a  carpet.  I  stretched  a  little  altar  cloth  across
the  cabin,  to  separate  the  [186]  faithful  from  the  un-
believers ;  then  I  began  holy  Mass,  not  without  aston-
ishment that  the  God  of  gods  should  stoop  once  more
to  a  place  more  wretched  than  the  stable  of  Bethle-
hem. These  good  people  wished  to  confess  and
receive  communion,  but  I  put  them  off  until  the  fol-
lowing Sunday.  The  Savages  who  had  not  been
baptized  maintained  a  profound  silence  during  this
divine  Sacrifice,  and  they  also  had  a  great  desire  to
be  Christians.

The  tempest  detained  us  two  days  and  two
nights,  prisoners  under  this  bark  shelter,  which  was
more  open  than  a  courtyard.  As  we  were  thinking
of our departure, the sieur Marsolet,3 who com-


86


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  21


porta  la  lettre;  le  Sauuage  furnomme'  Boyer,  eft  arri-
ue* en  noftre  barque,  il  dit,  qu'il  vous  eft  venu  querir
tout  expres,  pour  vous  mener  a  Tadouffac ;  il  vous  at-
tend icy,  faites  luy,  s'il  vous  plaift,  vn  petit  mot  de  ref-
ponfe ;  i'ay  donne"  au  prefent  porteur  vn  peu  de  pain  &
de  pruneaux,  fcachant  bien  que  vous  en  auies  befoin.
Aiant  receu  ce  petit  mot,  ie  vais  trouuer  [187]  la
barque, le Sauuage qui eftoit  venu  au deuant  de
moy,  me  preffe  d'entrer  a  Tadouffac,  difant,  que  tous
ceux  qui  eftoient  la,  fouhaitoient  ardemment  d'eftre
inftruits:  Ie  m'y  tranfporte  dans  les  canots  qui  me
vindrent  querir;  eftant  arriue,  ils  me  temoignerent
toute  forte  de  bonne  volonte,  ils  m'accueillirent  tous
auec  beaucoup  de  bienueillance ;  ie  vifite  les  malades,
ie  trouue  vne  femme  en  danger,  ie  l'inftruy,  ie  la
baptife,  &  Dieu  l'enleue  au  ciel: Cuius  vult,  mifere-
tur, Dieu  choifit  ceux  qui  luy  plaift;  cette  pauure
femme  attendoit  ce  paffeport  pour  entrer  en  Paradis.
Si  toft  que  ie  fus  arriue,  pourfuit  le  Pere,  les  Sau-
uages  me  baftirent  vne  maifon  a  leur  mode,  elle  fut
bien-toft  dreffee,  les  ieunes  hommes  vont  chercher
des  ecorces,  les  filles  &  les  femmes,  des  branches  de
fapin  pour  la  tapiffer  d'vn  beau  verd,  les  hommes
plus  ages,  en  font  la  charpente,  qui  confifte  en  quel-
ques  perches  qu'ils  arrondirent  en  berceau;  on  iette
la-deflus  des  Ecorces  de  frefne  ou  de  pruff e ;  &  voila
vne  Eglif e  &  vne  maifon  bien-toft  bailie :  Au  com-
mencement ie  fongeois,  [188]  oil  on  coupperoit  les
Scorces pour faire des feneftres: mais la maifon
eftant  faite,  ie  reconnu  qu'il  ne  falloit  point  prendre
cette  peine ;  car  il  y  auoit  aff£s  de  iour  &  de  lumiere
fans  feneftres,  ie  dreffe  la  dedans  vn  Autel,  ie  fay
ma  petite  retraite  tout  aupres,  &  ie  me  trouue  plus


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  87

manded  the  bark,  wrote  me  these  few  words,  and  a
young  Savage  brought  me  the  letter:  '  The  Savage
surnamed  Boyer  has  come  to  our  bark ;  he  says  he
has  come  expressly  for  you,  to  take  you  to  Tadous-
sac.  He  awaits  you  here;  send  him,  if  you  please,  a
word  of  reply.  I  have  given  to  the  bearer  of  this  a
little  bread  and  some  prunes,  knowing  well  that  you
have  need  of  them.'

"  When  I  received  these  few  words,  I  went  to
[187]  the  bark;  the  Savage  who  had  come  to  meet
me  urged  my  going  to  Tadoussac,  saying  that  all
who  were  there  ardently  desired  to  be  instructed ;  I
went  there  in  the  canoe  which  came  for  me.  When
I  arrived,  they  manifested  to  me  every  sort  of  good
will ;  they  all  received  me  with  great  friendliness.  I
visited  the  sick ;  I  found  a  woman  dangerously  ill ;  I
instructed  and  baptized  her,  and  God  took  her  to
heaven.  Ciijiis  vult,  miseretar,  God  chooses  whomso-
ever he  pleases.  This  poor  woman  was  waiting  for
this  passport  that  she  might  enter  Paradise.

"  As  soon  as  I  had  arrived,"  continued  the  Father,
"  the  Savages  built  me  a  house  after  their  fashion.
It  was  soon  set  up ;  the  young  men  went  to  search
for  bark,  the  girls  and  the  women  for  branches  of  fir,
to  line  it  with  a  beautiful  green;  the  older  men  did
the  carpentry,  which  consisted  of  some  poles  that
they  bent  to  form  a  bower,  and  spread  thereon  the
bark  of  ash  or  of  spruce;  and  lo!  a  Church  and  a
house  were  quickly  built.  In  the  beginning,  I  won-
dered [188]  where  they  would  cut  the  bark,  so  as  to
make  windows;  but,  when  the  house  was  finished,  I
saw  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  take  that  trouble,
for  there  was  enough  air  and  light  without  windows.
I  erected  within  an  Altar;  I  made  my  little  retreat


88  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

content,  &  auffi  bien  loge,  que  dans  vn  Louure;  la
porte  feule  me  mettoit  en  peine,  car  ie  defirois  la
pouuoir  fermer  quand  ie  fortirois,  les  Sauuages  qui  ne
fe  feruent  que  d'vne  ecorce,  ou  d'vne  peau  pour  fer-
mer leurs  cabanes,  ne  me  fembloient  pas  afles  bons
charpetiers  pour  fermer,  mon  palais;  Mais  Charles
Meiachkab'at,  me  monftra  que  fi;  il  s'en  va  chercher
deux  bouts  de  planche,  les  cloiie  par  enfemble,  fait
vne  petite  porte :  i'auois  auec  moy  vn  cadenat  pendu
a  vn  petit  fac,  il  trouue  l'inuention  de  s'en  feruir
pour  fermer  ma  maifon  a  clef:  me  voila  done  loge
comme  vn  petit  Prince  dans  vn  Palais,  bafty  en  trois
heures :  comme  ie  craignois  l'importunite  des  enfans,
le  Capitaine  fait  vn  grand  cry  par  les  cabanes,  &
recommande  a  la  ieuneffe  de  ne  point  entrer  en  ma
demeure,  que  par  ma  permiffion :  Ieuneffe,  difoit-il,
&  [189]  vous  enfans,  refpedtes  noftre  Pere,  alles  le
vifiter:  mais  quand  il  priera,  ou  qu'il  fera  empefche,
retires  vous  fans  bruit,  portes  luy  du  poifTon,  quand
vous  en  prendres ;  les  enfans  me  fuiuoient  par  tout,
&  m'appelloient  leur  Pere;  ils  m'apportoient  de  leur
pefche,  &  ie  leur  donnois  vn  peu  de  galette ;  en  vn
mot,  i'eftois  en  paix  quand  ie  voulois,  dans  ma  mai-
fon d'6corce;  car  ie  pris  la  liberte  des  le  premier
commencement,  de  renuoyer  tous  ceux  que  ie  vou-
drois,  quand  i'auois  quelque  empefchement :  encor
que  ce  foit  chofe  inoiiie,  qu'vn  Sauuage  refufe  la
porte  de  fa  cabane  a  vn  autre  Sauuage,  perfonne
neantmoins  ne  fe  formalifoit  de  la  facon  d'agir  du
Pere :  II  faut  des  voftre  premiere  entree  donner  le
ply  que  vous  defires  a  ces  bonnes  gens,  capables  de
raifon,  &  ils  ne  s'eftonnent  pas  que  nous  ayons  des
facons  de  faire  differentes  des  leurs.


1641-42]  RELATION OF  1640-41  89

hard  by,  and  I  was  more  content  than  in  a  Louvre,
and  as  well  lodged.  The  door  alone  troubled  me,
for  I  desired  the  means  of  fastening  it  when  I  went
out ;  the  Savages,  who  use  only  a  piece  of  bark  or  a
skin  to  close  their  cabins,  did  not  seem  to  me  suffi-
ciently good  carpenters  to  make  my  palace  secure ;
but  Charles  Meiachkawat  showed  me  that  they  were.
He  went  in  search  of  two  pieces  of  board,  nailed
them  together,  and  made  a  little  door;  I  had  with
me  a  padlock  dangling  from  a  small  bag,  and  he  dis-
covered a  way  of  using  it  to  lock  up  my  house.
Here  I  am,  then,  lodged  like  a  young  Prince,  in  a
Palace  built  in  three  hours.  As  I  apprehended  an-
noyance from  the  children,  the  Captain  made  a  great
shout  among  the  cabins  and  charged  the  young
people  not  to  enter  my  dwelling  except  with  my
permission:  '  O  youth!  '  said  he,  '  and  [189]  you,  O
children !  respect  our  Father.  Go  and  visit  him ;
but  when  he  is  praying,  or  is  engaged,  retire  without
noise;  carry  him  fish,  when  you  catch  them.'  The
children  followed  me  everywhere,  and  called  me
their  Father;  they  brought  me  their  fish,  and  I  gave
them  a  little  biscuit ;  in  a  word,  I  was  at  peace  in  my
house  of  bark,  when  I  chose  to  be,  for  I  took  the
liberty  from  the  very  beginning  of  sending  away  all
whom  I  would,  when  I  was  occupied."  Although
it  is  an  unheard-of  thing  for  a  Savage  to  refuse  the
door  of  his  cabin  to  another  Savage,  nevertheless,  no
one  took  offense  at  the  Father's  manner  of  dealing
with  them.  It  is  necessary  from  the  very  beginning
to  give  the  bent  you  desire  to  these  simple  people ;
they  are  reasonable,  and  are  not  surprised  that  our
ways  are  different  from  theirs.

"  Some  time  after  my  arrival,  I  made  for  the  Sav-


90  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21

Quelque  temps  apres  mon  arriu£e  ie  fis  feitin  auec
les  Sauuages  d'vn  bled  d'Inde,  qu'ils  aimet  beau-
coup,  ie  l'auois  fait  apporter  expr6s  dans  la  barque
pour  ce  fujet,  ie  voulu  parler  pendat  ce  feftin,  mais
les  Sauuages  [90  i.e.,  190]  ayans  6uente  mon  def-
fein,  me  remirent  en  vn  autre  temps;  fur  le  foir  le
fieur  Marfolet  &  moy,  voulans  produire  les  prefens
de  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  &  les  noflres,  le  Capi-
taine  nous  courut  au  deuant,  &  me  parla  en  ces  ter-
mes.  Mon  Pere,  il  n'efl  pas  befoin  de  nous  faire  des
prefens  pour  nous  inuiter  a  croire  en  Dieu,  nous  y
f ommes  defia  tous  ref olus :  le  Ciel  eft  vne  affes  grande
recompenfe,  nous  ne  defirons  point  d'eftre  orgueil-
leux,  ny  nous  vanter  d'eftre  honoris  de  vos  prefens,
pour  toute  parole  fumt,  que  vous  nous  enfeignies  le
chemin  du  ciel:  Sans  entrer  en  d'autres  difcours,
tous  ceux  que  vous  voi£s  icy  font  dans  la  refolution
de'prier,  mais  non  pas  de  quitter  leur  pais  pour  mon-
ter  la  haut;  il  apporta  plufieurs  raifons,  pour  faire
voir  qu'il  leur  eftoit  important,  de  ne  fe  point  retirer
de  Tadouffac:  En  effet,  fon  difcours  eftoit  bon,  mais
f onde  fur  les  confiderations  humaines  &  temporelles :
Voila  done  nos  prefens  arreftes,  Charles  MeiachKabiat,
qui  s'eft  retire,  comme  i'ay  defia  dit,  de  Tadouffac,
pour  viure  en  enfant  de  Dieu,  a  Sainct  Iofeph,  leur
parla  plufieurs  fois  tres-fortement,  [191]  mais  par-
deffus  leur  ported ;  car  les  hommes  ne  fe  deprennent
pas  fi  toft  des  interefts  de  la  terre,  quoy  qu'elle  ne
foit  qu'vn  point,  a  comparaifon  du  ciel.  Ah !  ie  voy
bien,  fit  ce  bon-homme,  que  le  Diable  vous  arreite
icy,  il  vous  donne  des  penfees,  que  vous  feres  pau-
ures,  fi  vous  quittes  voftre  pais,  il  vous  fait  apprehen-
der que les  richefTes de la terre font de grande


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  91

ages  a  feast  of  Indian  corn,  which  they  like  exceed-
ingly; I  had  had  it  brought  in  the  bark  expressly
for  this  purpose.  I  meant  to  speak  during  this  feast,
but  the  Savages  [90  i.e.,  190]  having  discovered  my
intention,  put  me  off  until  another  time.  Toward
evening,  when  the  sieur  Marsolet  and  I  wished  to
exhibit  the  presents  of  Monsieur  the  Governor  and
our  own,  the  Captain  ran  to  meet  us,  and  spoke  to
me  in  these  terms :  '  My  Father,  there  is  no  need  of
making  us  presents  to  invite  us  to  believe  in  God;
we  have  all  before  this  resolved  to  do  so.  Heaven
is  a  sufficiently  great  recompense ;  we  do  not  wish  to
be  proud,  nor  to  boast  of  being  honored  by  your
presents ;  let  it  suffice  for  all  speech  that  you  teach
us  the  way  to  heaven.  Without  entering  upon  fur-
ther discussion,  all  those  whom  you  see  here  have
resolved  to  pray,  but  not  to  leave  their  country  to
ascend  the  river.'  He  brought  forward  many  rea-
sons to  show  that  it  was  important  to  them,  not  to
withdraw  from  Tadoussac.  In  fact,  his  remarks
were  good,  but  based  upon  human  and  temporal  con-
siderations. Thus,  then,  we  were  checked  in  mak-
ing our  presents.  Charles  Meiachkawat  who  had
retired,  as  I  have  already  said,  from  Tadoussac,  that
he  might  live  as  a  child  of  God  at  Saint  Joseph,
spoke  to  them  several  times,  very  earnestly,  [191]
but  above  their  comprehension,  for  men  do  not
promptly  lay  aside  the  interests  of  the  world,  although
that  be  but  a  point  in  comparison  with  heaven.
'  Ah !  I  see  well, '  said  this  good  man,  '  that  the  Devil
detains  you  here ;  he  gives  you  notions  that  you  will
be  poor  if  you  abandon  your  country, — he  makes
you  imagine  that  the  riches  of  the  earth  are  of  great
importance ;  and  how  will  all  that  help  you  at  the


92


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  21


importance;  &  que  vous  feruira  tout  cela  a  l'heure
de  la  mort?  il  voit  bien  qu'il  ne  fcauroit  vous  rauir  la
volonte  que  vous  aues  de  croire  en  Dieu ;  il  vous  jet-
tera  dans  l'impofiibilite  de  l'executer,  vous  attachant
en  vn  lieu,  ou  vous  ne  pouues  eftre  inftruits:  Si  toft
que  vous  ne  verres  plus  le  Pere,  vous  ne  penfer6s
plus  a  Dieu;  qui  vous  confeillera  dans  vos  difficultes?
qui  vous  empefchera  de  retomber  dans  vos  chants
fuperftitieux,  &  dans  vos  feftins?  Si  quelqu'vn  a  vn
tambour,  qui  prendra  la  hardieffe  de  luy  ofter?  Nous
les  auons  tous  jettes,  dires-vous?  comme  fi  vous  n'en
pouui£s  pas  refaire  d'autres:  Moy  mefme,  encor  que
ie  croye  de  tout  mon  cceur,  il  me  femble  que  quand  ie
fuis  long-temps  abfent  des  [192]  Peres,  que  mes
vieilles  idees  veulent  retourner;  voila  pourquoy,
quand  ie  deurois  eftre  le  plus  pauure  du  monde,  ie  ne
les  quitteray  iamais.  Ce  bon  Neophyte  ne  ceffoit
matin  &  foir,  &  la  nuidt  mefme,  de  preffer  fes  Com-
patriotes,  de  venir  demeurer  aupres  de  ceux  qui  enfei-
gnent  le  chemin  de  falut.  Les  Sauuages  preffes  de
ces  raifons,  ne  concluoient  pas  qu'il  falluft  monter  a
Kebec,  mais  qu'il  eftoit  a  propos  que  nous  defcen-
diffions  a  TadoufTac,  pour  y  dreffer  vne  Maifon,  afin
de  les  inftruire:  Les  Nations  voifmes  y  viendront
demeurer,  difoient  ils,  elles  embrafferont  la  foy  fans
contredit:  Mais  ce  pais  eft  fi  miferable,  qu'a  peine  y
trouue-t'on  de  la  terre  pour  leurs  fepulcres,  ce  ne  font
que  rochers,  fteriles  &  affreux,  fi  neantmoins  Mon-
fieur  le  general,  &  la  flotte  de  Meffieurs  de  la  Nou-
uelle  France,  qui  paffe  tous  les  ans  quelque  mois  a
Tadouffac,  y  faifoit  baftir  vne  maifon  par  leur  ordre,
comme  Monfieur  du  PlefQs  Bochart  auoit  commence,
cela  feroit  du  bien  a  tout  fon  equipage  &  aux  pau-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  93

hour  of  death?  He  well  knows  that  he  cannot
deprive  you  of  the  determination  that  you  have  to
believe  in  God ;  but  he  will  put  you  under  the  impos-
sibility of  carrying  it  into  effect,  by  keeping  you  in
a  place  where  you  cannot  be  instructed.  As  soon  as
you  no  longer  see  the  Father,  you  will  no  longer
think  of  God ;  who  will  counsel  you  in  your  difficul-
ties? who  will  hinder  you  from  falling  back  into  your
superstitious  chants,  and  into  your  feasts?  If  any
one  have  a  drum,  who  will  have  the  hardihood  to
take  it  from  him?  "  We  have  thrown  them  all
away,"  you  say  —  as  if  you  could  not  make  others!
Although  I  myself  believe  with  all  my  heart,  yet  it
seems,  when  I  am  a  long  time  absent  from  the  [192]
Fathers,  that  my  old  ideas  are  inclined  to  return;
this  is  why,  even  should  I  become  the  poorest  crea-
ture in  the  world,  I  would  never  leave  them.'  This
good  Neophyte  did  not  cease  morning  and  evening,
and  even  at  night,  to  urge  his  Tribesmen  to  come
and  dwell  with  those  who  teach  the  way  of  salva-
tion. The  Savages,  when  urged  by  these  reasons,
concluded,  not  that  it  was  necessary  to  ascend  to
Kebec,  but  that  it  was  expedient  for  us  to  descend
to  Tadoussac,  and  set  up  a  House  there,  that  we
might  instruct  them.  '  The  neighboring  Tribes
will  come  and  dwell  there, '  they  said,  '  they  will  un-
questionably embrace  the  faith. '  But  the  country
is  so  wretched,  that  soil  is  scarcely  found  therein  for
their  graves;  there  are  only  barren  and  frightful
rocks.  If,  nevertheless,  Monsieur  the  general,  and
the  fleet  of  the  Gentlemen  of  New  France,  which
passes  some  months  of  every  year  at  Tadoussac,
should  cause  a  house  to  be  built  there  by  their  order,
like  the  one  Monsieur  du  Plessis  Bochart3  had  com-


94  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.21

ures  Sauuages ;  car  quelques  Peres  de  noftre  Compa-
gnie  fe  pourroient  retirer  la,  [193]  depuis  le  Prin-
temps  iufques  au  depart  des  vaiffeaux,  pour  fecourir
les  Francois  &  les  Satmages  dans  leurs  befoins  fpiri-
tuels;  d'y  demeurer  pendant  l'hyuer,  c'eft  chofe  que
ie  ne  conf eillerois  a  aucun  Francois ;  car  les  Sauuages
s'en  eloignent  pendant  ce  temps-la,  abandonnans  leur
rochers  au  froid,  &  a  la  neige,  &  aux  glaces,  dont  on
voioit  encor  quelques  reliquats,  cette  annee  bien
auant  dans  le  mois  de  Iuin.  Au  refte,  ie  ne  doute
nullement,  que  fi  la  fureur  des  Hiroquois  peut  eftre
arreftee,  que  tous  les  Sauuages  de  Tadouffac,  du  Sa-
gne,  &  de  plufieurs  autres  petites  Nations,  ne  montent
plus  haut,  fi  on  continue  de  les  fecourir;  mais  voions
toutes  les  remarques  du  Pere.

Pendant  le  feiour  que  i'ay  fait  la,  ces  bonnes  gens,
dit-il,  m'appelloient  ordinairement  a  leurs  confeils,
ils  me  communiquoient  leurs  petites  affaires,  ils  m'in-
uitoient  a  leurs  f eftins,  me  traitant  comme  leur  pere :
Ils  firent  vn  feftin  fur  les  foffes  de  leurs  morts,  incon-
tinent apres  mon  arriuee,  auquel  ils  emploierent
huidt  orignaux  &  dix  cafhors;  le  Capitaine  haran-
guant,  dit,  que  les  ames  des  defundts  [194]  prenoient
grand  plaifir  a  l'odeur  de  ces  bonnes  viandes,  ie  vou-
lus  parler  pour  ref uter  cet  erreur ;  mais  ils  me  dirent,
ne  te  mets  pas  en  peine,  ce  n'efl  pas  cela  qui  nous
empefchera  de  croire,  nous  allons  bien-toft  jetter  a
bas  nos  vieilles  facons  de  faire.

Voicy  comme  i'emploiois  le  temps  auec  eux,  d£s  le
petit  iour,  qui  eftoit  enuiron  trois  ou  quatre  heures  du
matin,  ie  m'en  allois  faire  prier  Dieu  par  les  cabanes;
puis  ie  difois  la  faindte  Meffe,  oil  tous  les  Chreftiens
qui eftoient defcendus  a Tadouffac, pour  aller  en


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  95


menced,  that  would  be  a  benefit  to  all  their  crews,
and  to  the  poor  Savages;  for  some  Fathers  of  our
Society  could  withdraw  there  [193]  in  the  Spring  and
remain  until  the  departure  of  the  vessels,  so  that
they  might  aid  the  Frenchmen  and  the  Savages  in
their  spiritual  needs.  To  dwell  there  during  the
winter  is  a  thing  I  should  never  advise  any  French-
man to  do ;  for  the  Savages  go  away  at  that  time,
abandoning  their  rocks  to  the  cold  and  the  snow  and
the  ice,  of  which  some  remains  are  still  seen  this
year  very  late  in  the  month  of  June.  Moreover,  I
do  not  doubt  in  the  least  that,  if  the  fury  of  the  Hi-
roquois  can  be  checked,  all  the  Savages  of  Tadous-
sac,  and  of  the  Sagne,  and  of  many  other  small
Tribes,  will  go  farther  up  the  river,  if  we  continue
to  aid  them.  But  let  us  hear  all  the  observations
of  the  Father.

"  During  the  stay  I  made  there,  these  good  peo-
ple," said  he,  "  invited  me  ordinarily  to  their  coun-
cils; they  imparted  to  me  their  little  affairs;  they
asked  me  to  their  feasts,  treating  me  as  their  father.
They  made  a  feast  over  the  graves  of  their  dead,  im-
mediately after  my  arrival,  at  which  they  served  eight
moose  and  ten  beavers;  the  Captain,  haranguing,
said  that  the  souls  of  the  deceased  [194]  took
great  pleasure  in  the  odor  of  these  good  viands.  I
wished  to  speak,  in  order  to  refute  this  error,  but
they  said  to  me :  '  Do  not  be  troubled ;  this  will  not
hinder  our  believing,  and  we  are  going  soon  to  throw
aside  all  of  our  old  customs.'

"  See  how  I  employed  my  time  among  them.  At
daybreak,  which  was  about  three  or  four  o'clock  in
the  morning,  I  went  and  offered  up  prayers  to  God
in  their  cabins;  then  I said  holy  Mass,  at  which  all


96  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.21

traicte,  aliiitoient  tous  les  iours,  fe  confeffans  &  com-
munians  affes  fouuent.  La  Meffe  eftans  dite,  ie  me
retirois  a  l'6cart,  hors  le  bruit  des  cabanes,  pour  vac-
quer  vn  petit  a  moy  mefme,  i'allois  en  fuitte  vifiter
les  malades,  puis  i'affemblois  les  enfans  pour  leur
faire  le  Catechifme,  le  Soleil  ne  regloit  ny  mon  leuer,
ny  mon  coucher,  ny  l'heure  de  mes  repas :  mais  la
feule  commodity  qui  n'efloit  guere  auantageufe  ny
fauorable  au  corps.

Ie  donnois  vn  temps  apres  le  difner,  tantoft  aux
hommes,  &  puis  aux  femmes  [195]  qui  s'affembloient
pour  eftre  inftruites,  &  fur  le  foir,  apres  m'eftre  reti-
re" quelque  temps,  ie  faifois  faire  les  prieres  auec  vne
inftrudtion  publique,  oil  les  enfans  rendoient  compte
deuant  leurs  peres  &  meres,  de  ce  qu'ils  auoient
apris  au  Catechifme,  cela  les  encourageoit,  &  confo-
loit  infmiment  leurs  parens.

Ten  ay  veu  de  fi  ardens  a  fe  faire  inftruire,  qu'ils
ont  paffe  les  nuidts  auprtis  de  nos  Chreftiens,  fe  fai-
fans  dire  &  redire  vne  mefme  chofe,  pour  la  mettre
dans  leur  memoire.  I'interrogeois  les  plus  ages
publiquement  comme  des  enfans,  &  tous  me  ren-
doient compte  de  ce  que  ie  leur  auois  enfeigne :  En
vn  mot,  fi  cette  Miffion  eft  penible,  elle  eft  affaifon-
nee  de  beaucoup  de  confolation.

Ie  leur  difois  certain  iour,  que  quelques  Francois
m'auoient  dit  a  mon  depart  de  Kebec,  que  ie  ferois
d'eux  tout  ce  que  ie  voudrois  deuant  la  venue  des
Vaiffeaux;  mais  qu'a  l'abord  des  Nauires,  on  ne  les
pourroit  plus  retenir,  qu'ils  feroiet  yures  depuis  le
matin  iufques  au  foir:  L'vn  d'eux  prenant  la  parole,
me  dit  auec  bonne  grace;  Mon  Pere,  fay  gageure
auec  [196]  ceux  qui  font  dit  cela,  &  nous  te  ferons


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  97

the  Christians  who  had  come  down  to  Tadoussac,  in
order  to  trade,  were  present  every  day, —  not  unfre-
quently  making  confession  and  receiving  commun-
ion. Mass  having  been  said,  I  withdrew  apart,  be-
yond the  noise  of  the  cabins,  in  order  to  have  a  little
time  for  myself;  afterward  I  visited  the  sick,  then  I
brought  the  children  together,  to  teach  them  the
Catechism.  The  Sun  did  not  regulate  my  rising  up,
or  my  lying  down,  or  the  hour  of  my  repasts,  but
convenience  alone,  which  was  hardly  advantageous
or  favorable  to  my  body.

"  I  gave  some  time  after  dinner, —  now  to  the  men,
and  then  to  the  women,  [195]  who  assembled  that  they
might  be  instructed ;  and  toward  evening,  after  hav-
ing retired  by  myself  for  some  time,  I  had  prayers
offered,  with  a  public  instruction,  when  the  children
gave  an  account  before  their  fathers  and  mothers  of
what  they  had  learned  in  the  Catechism ;  this  encour-
aged them,  and  infinitely  gratified  their  parents.

' '  I  have  seen  some  of  them  so  eager  to  be  instructed
that  they  have  spent  whole  nights  with  our  Christians
waiting  to  be  told  and  retold  a  single  thing,  that  it
might  be  fixed  in  their  memories.  I  questioned  pub-
licly the  most  aged,  as  I  did  the  children,  and  all
gave  me  an  account  of  what  I  had  taught  them.  In
a  word,  if  this  Mission  is  arduous,  it  is  enriched  with
much  consolation.

"Ona  certain  day,  I  told  them  that  some  French-
men had  said  to  me,  on  my  leaving  Kebec,  that  I
could  do  with  them  anything  I  would,  before  the
arrival  of  the  Vessels ;  but  that  on  the  landing  of  the
Ships  they  could  no  longer  be  restrained, —  that  they
would  be  intoxicated  from  morning  until  night.
One  of  them,  beginning  to  speak,  said  to  me  good-


98  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

gagner;  car  affurement  nous  ne  nous  enyurerons
point,  demeure  auec  nous  iufques  a  la  flotte,  &  nous
t'apporterons  toutes  les  boiffons  que  nous  aurons,  tu
en  feras  l'Echanfon  &  le  diftributeur,  tu  nous  en
verferas  de  tes  mains,  &  nous  ne  pafferons  point  la
mefure  que  tu  nous  donneras.

Ie  vy  aborder  icy  quelques  ieunes  gens  du  Sagne,
qui  n'auoient  iamais  veu  de  Francois ;  ils  furent  bien
eftonnes  de  m'entendre  parler  leur  Langue:  Ils
demandoient  de  quel  pais  i'eftois;  on  leur  dit,  que
i'eftois  de  Kebec,  &  de  leurs  parens;  mais  ils  n'en
pouuoient  rien  croire:  car  nos  barbes  mettent  vne
difference  quafi  effentielle,  pour  ainfi  dire,  entre  vn
European  &  vn  Sauuage:  I'ay  communique  auec
quelques  families,  venues  des  Terres,  ce  font  gens
fimples,  &  tres-capables  de  receuoir  le  bon  grain,  &
la  riche  femence  de  l'Euangile.

Eftant  certain  iour  en  vne  affemblee,  ou  les  Sau-
uages  traitoient  d'enuoyer  la  ieuneffe  en  marchan-
dife  vers  ces  Nations  plus  eloignees ;  ie  me  pref entay
pour  les  accompagner,  arm  de  parler  de  Dieu  a  [197]
ces  pauures  peuples :  cela  les  mit  vn  peu  en  peine,
car  ils  ne  veulent  pas  que  les  Francois  ayent  con-
noiffance  de  leur  commerce,  ny  de  ce  qu'ils  donnent
a  ces  autres  Sauuages  pour  leurs  pelteries;  &  cela  fe
garde  fi  bien  que  perfonne  ne  le  fcauroit  decouurir:
Ils  me  faifoient  les  chemins  horribles  &  epouuan-
tables,  comme  ils  le  font  en  effet;  mais  ils  en  aug-
mentoient  l'horreur  pour  m'etonner,  &  pour  me  diuer-
tir  de  mon  deffein.  Aiant  reconnu  leur  crainte,
ie  me  mets  a  difcourir  des  malheurs,  &  des  biens
eternels;  les  voiant  touches,  ie  leur  demanday,  s'ils
feroient  bien  aifes  que  ces  pauures  peuples  de  leur


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  99

naturedly:  '  My  Father,  make  a  wager  with  [196]
those  who  told  thee  that,  and  we  will  see  that  thou
dost  win,  for  assuredly  we  will  not  be  intoxicated.
Remain  with  us  until  the  fleet  comes,  and  we  will
bring  thee  all  the  liquors  that  we  have, — thou  shalt
be  the  Cupbearer  and  the  distributer  of  them ;  thou
shalt  pour  them  out  for  us  with  thine  own  hand,  and
we  will  not  exceed  the  measure  that  thou  shalt  give
us.'

"  I  saw  some  young  men  of  the  Sagne  here,  who
had  never  seen  any  Frenchmen;  they  were  much
astonished  to  hear  me  speak  their  own  Language.
They  asked  from  what  place  I  was ;  they  were  told
that  I  was  from  Kebec,  and  was  one  of  their  rela-
tives ;  but  they  could  not  believe  it  at  all,  for  our
beards  put  a  difference,  almost  essential,  so  to  speak,
between  a  European  and  a  Savage.  I  have  had  in-
tercourse with  some  families  from  the  Interior;  they
are  simple  people,  and  very  capable  of  receiving  the
good  grain  and  rich  seed  of  the  Gospel.

"  Being  present,  on  a  certain  day,  at  a  meeting
where  the  Savages  discussed  sending  their  young
men  with  merchandise  to  these  more  distant  Tribes,
I  offered  to  accompany  them,  that  I  might  speak  of
God  to  [197]  those  poor  people;  this  somewhat
troubled  them,  for  they  are  unwilling  that  French-
men should  have  a  knowledge  of  their  trade,  and  of
what  they  give  to  other  Savages  for  their  furs,  and
this  they  keep  so  secret  that  no  one  is  able  to  dis-
cover it.  They  described  to  me  the  horrible  and
frightful  roads,  as  they  are,  indeed;  but  they  mag-
nified the  horror  of  them  so  as  to  astound  me  and
divert  me  from  my  plan.  Having  perceived  their
apprehension,  I  began  to  discourse  upon  eternal  woes


100  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

connoiffance,  tombaffent  dans  ces  feux:  lis  refpon-
dent,  que  non.  II  les  faut  done  inftruire,  reparty-je,
Qui  le  fera  fi  vous  me  fermes  la  porte?  II  eft  vray,
dit  l'vn  des  principaux,  il  faut  qu'il  foit  permis  au
Pere  d'aller  par  tout,  il  n'eft  point  charge  ny  de  cou-
fteaux,  ny  de  haches,  ny  d'autres  marchandifes,  e'eft
noltre  Pere,  il  nous  aime,  ie  fuis  d'auis  qu'il  aille  ou
il  voudra.  Tous  les  autres  s'y  eftans  accordes;  vn
Capitaine  s'ecria:  Va  ou  tu  voudras,  mon  Pere,  la
porte  t'eit  ouuerte  [198]  dans  toutes  les  Nations  dont
nous  auons  connoiffance,  nous  t'y  porterons  dans  nos
canots ;  mais  demeure  auec  nous  pour  ce  Printemps :
car  eftant  venu  pour  nous  inftruire,  il  ne  faut  pas
nous  quitter  que  nous  ne  fcachions  les  prieres,  tu
pourras  aller  vifiter  ces  bonnes  gens  vne  autre  annee.
Les  voiant  dans  cette  apprehenfion  ie  leur  dis,  qu'ils
fcauoient  bien  mon  deffein:  II  eft  vray,  fit  l'vn  des
principaux,  le  Pere  ne  vient  pas  icy  pour  nos  pelte-
ries,  il  n'a  aucune  marchandife  entre  les  mains,  il
nous  aime,  e'eft  noftre  Pere,  il  faut  que  la  porte  luy
foit  ouuerte  par  toutes  les  Nations  dont  nous  auons
connoiffance ;  Tous  les  autres  f urent  de  mefme  auis ;
mais  ils  me  prierent  neantmoins  de  refter  la :  Ceux
qui  n'eftoient  pas  baptifes,  me  demanderent  des
Chreftiens  pour  les  embarquer  &  pour  parler  de  ma
part  a  ces  peuples.  Ie  mis  des  prefens  entre  les
mains  de  deux  Chreftiens  pour  inuiter  deux  Nations
a  venir  prefter  l'oreille  aux  bonnes  nouuelles  de
l'Euangile;  Ils  me  renuoyerent  d'autres  prefens  auec
parole,  que  fi  ie  voulois  m'arrelter  a  Tadouffac,  qu'ils
y  viendroient,  l'vn  de  nos  Chreftiens  de  [199]  Sainct
Iofeph,  frere  d'vn  Capitaine  des  Sauuages  qui  font
dedans les Terres, l'inuitant de venir voir leurs


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  101

and  blessings;  and, seeing  them touched, I asked
them  if  they  would  be  content  that  these  poor  peo-
ples of  their  acquaintance  should  fall  into  those  fires.
They  answered,  '  Certainly  not.' '  They  must  then  be
instructed,' I  replied:  '  who  will  do  it,  if  you  shut
the  door  to  me? ' '  It  is  true,'  said  one  of  the  chiefs;
1  the  Father  must  be  permitted  to  go  anywhere ;  he
is  not  laden  with  knives,  or  hatchets,  or  any  goods, —
he  is  our  Father,  and  he  loves  us ;  I  am  of  opinion
that  he  should  go  wherever  he  will. ' All  the  others
having  agreed  to  this, a Captain exclaimed: '  Go
whither  thou  wilt,  my  Father:  the  door  is  open  to
thee, [198]  to  all  the  Tribes  with  which we  have
acquaintance. We  will  take  thee  there  in  our  canoes ;
but  remain  with  us  for  this  Spring,  because,  having
come  to  instruct  us,  thou  oughtst  not  to  leave  us  until
we  have  learned  the  prayers ;  thou  canst  go  and  visit
these  good  people  another  year.' When  I  saw  them
thus  afraid,  I  told  them  that  they  were  well  aware
of  my  purpose. '  It  is  true,'  said  one  of  the  chiefs;
'  the  Father  does  not  come  here  for  our  furs ;  he  has
no  merchandise  in  his  hands. He  loves  us,  he  is  our
Father ;  the door  to  all  the  Tribes  with  which  we
have  acquaintance  must  be  opened  for  him. ' All  the
others  were  of  the  same  opinion, but  they,  never-
theless, besought  me  to  remain  there. Those  who
had  not  been  baptized  asked  me  for  Christians  who
might  embark  with  them,  and  speak  in  my  place  to
these  peoples. I  put  some  presents  into  the  hands
of  two  Christians  in  order  that  they  might  invite  two
Tribes  to  come  and  lend  ear  to  the  good  news  of  the
Gospel. They  sent  back  to  me  other  presents,  with
a  message  that,  if  I  would  stay  at  Tadoussac,  they
would  come  there. One  of  our  Christians  of  [199]


102  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.21

champs,  &  leurs  bleds,  pour  1' inciter  a  cultiuer  la
terre;  celuy-cy  refpondit:  Trauailles  courageufe-
ment,  pries  les  Francois  de  vous  aider  fortement  a
defricher  la  terre,  ft  toft  que  vous  aures  des  bleds,
pour  nous  pouuoir  fecourir,  nous  irons  tous  vous  voir,
&  demeurer  aupres  de  vous ;  mais  nous  craignons  les
Hiroquois.

Quelque  temps  apres  Charles  MeiachKatfat  alia  de
luy  mefme,  inuiter  vne  autre  Nation,  de  croire  en
Dieu,  il  trouua  ces  gens  fi  bien  difpofes,  qu'il  s'en
eftonna ;  voicy  comme  il  entra  en  difcours  auec  eux :
comme  ils  auoient  defia  ouy  parler  de  noftre  creance,
par  le  bruit  qui  en  court  par  tout  ces  grands  bois ;  ils
luy  demanderent  s'il  en  auoit  quelque  connoiffance :
Ouy  dea,  fit-il,  moy  mefme  ie  fuis  baptife,  &  ie  croy  en
celuy  qui  a  fait  le  ciel  &  la  terre ;  Inftruy  done,
dirent-ils,  ce  pauure  malade,  que  tu  as  vifite,  &  qui
s'en  va  mourant,  il  l'aborde,  luy  parle  du  pouuoir  de
Dieu  fur  tous  les  hommes,  du  recours  qu'il  deuoit
auoir  en  luy,  le  fait  prier,  [200]  &  demader  fecours  a
fa  bonte;  Le  malade  apres  cette  priere,  fe  trouue  a
demy  guery,  il  fe  leue,  il  marche,  auec  l'eflonnement
de  fes  Compatriotes,  Charles  les  voyant  attentifs,
leur  parle  de  la  creation  du  mode,  de  1' Incarnation
du  Verbe;  en  vn  mot,  leur  enfeigne  ce  qu'il  a  appris;
&  nous  eftans  las  de  parler,  il  fe  retiroit  feul,  recitoit
fon  chapellet,  &  s'entretenoit  en  quelque  faindte  pen-
f6e,  fe  pourmenant  a  l'6cart;  fans  auoir  6gard  fi  fes
gens  s'en  eftonnoient,  ou  non,  imitant  ce  qu'il  auoit
veu  faire  au  Pere,  qui  inftruifoit  les  Sauuages  de
Tadouffac.  Si  toft  qu'il  rentroit  dans  la  cabane  du
malade,  tous  les  autres  Sauuages  accouroient,  ils  fe
mettoient  en  rond  a  l'entour  de  luy,  dans  vn  profond


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  103

Saint  Joseph,  brother  to  a  Captain  of  the  Savages  who
are  in  the  Interior,  inviting  him  to  come  and  see
their  fields  and  their  grain,  so  that  he  might  incite
him  to  cultivate  the  land,  the  latter  responded:
'  Work  courageously;  beg  the  French  to  aid  you
energetically  in  clearing  the  land;  as  soon  as  you
shall  have  grain,  so  that  you  can  assist  us,  we  will
all  go  to  see  you  and  remain  with  you ;  but  we  fear
the  Hiroquois.'  "

Some  time  after  this,  Charles  Meiachkawat  went,
on  his  own  account,  to  invite  another  Tribe  to  be-
lieve in  God ;  he  found  these  people  so  well  disposed
that  he  was  surprised.  This  is  the  way  in  which  he
entered  upon  the  subject  with  them:  as  they  had
already  heard  of  our  faith,  by  the  report  of  it  which
had  spread  throughout  these  great  forests,  they
asked  him  if  he  had  any  knowledge  of  it:  "  Yes,
indeed,"  said  he;  "I  myself  have  been  baptized,
and  I  believe  in  him  who  made  heaven  and  earth."
"Then,"  said  they,  "instruct  this  poor  sick  man
whom  thou  hast  visited,  and  who  is  dying."  He
approached  him,  spoke  to  him  of  the  power  of  God
over  all  men,  and  of  the  recourse  he  should  have  to
him,  and  caused  him  to  pray  [200]  and  to  ask  aid  of
God's  goodness.  The  sick  man  after  this  prayer  was
half  cured ;  he  arose  and  walked,  to  the  astonish-
ment of  his  Tribesmen.  Charles,  seeing  them  atten-
tive, told  them  of  the  creation  of  the  world,  of  the
Incarnation  of  the  Word, — in  short,  he  taught  them
what  he  had  learned  from  us.  Being  weary  of
speaking,  he  went  away  alone,  recited  his  rosary,
and  communed  with  himself  in  holy  thoughts, —
walking  apart,  regardless  whether  his  people  were
astonished  at  it  or  not,  imitating  what  he  had  seen
done  by  the  Father  who  instructed  the  Savages  at


104


LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.  21


filence,  &  luy  les  inftruifoit  felon  fa  port£e,  ne  fca-
chant  plus  que  dire,  il  fe  mit  a  crier  fi  fort  contre
leurs  fuperftitions,  contre  leurs  feftins  a  tout  man-
ger, monftrant  la  brutalite  de  leurs  mceurs,  &  benif-
fant  Dieu,  d'auoir  quitte  fon  ancienne  barbarie,  il
dit  tant  de  chofe  contre  l'inutilite,  &  la  folie  de  leurs
tambours  que  tous  ceux  qui  en  auoient,  les  allerent
tout  foudainement  querir,  &  les  mirent  en  mille  [201]
pieces  en  fa  prefence,  cela  l'eftonna,  &  le  confola
fort :  quand  il  f ut  de  retour,  il  ne  fcauoit  fe  compren-
dre :  NiKanis,  me  faifoit-il,  ie  les  ay  penfe  amener  icy
auec  moy;  s'il  euffent  eu  dequoy  acheter  des  viures
pour  paffer  l'hiuer,  ils  m'auroient  fuiuy,  tous  ceux
que  i'ay  veus  font  dans  la  refolution  de  fe  faire  in-
ftruire,  &  de  quitter  leurs  anciennes  couflumes,  pour
embraffer  les  noftres.  Enfm,  ie  ne  doute  point  que
toutes  ces  pauures  petites  Nations  qui  font  dans  les
bois,  ou  nos  Chreftiens  frequentent,  ne  fe  viennent
ranger  au  bercail  de  l'Eglife,  fi  on  les  peut  fecourir.
Pour  conclufion,  le  Pere  arriua  a  Tadouffac  le
fecond  iour  de  Iuin,  &  en  fut  rappelle  le  vingt-neuf,
il  baptifa  quatorze  ou  quinze  Sauuages,  notamment
des  enf ans  &  des  perfonnes  agees ;  il  en  auroit  bap-
tife  bien  dauantage,  fi  ces  pauures  gens  euffent  efte"
en  vn  lieu,  ou  ils  pourroient  eftre  conferues  en  la
foy,  tout  cela  arriuera  en  fon  temps:  Le  Dieu  qui
les  a  touches,  &  qui  les  appelle,  leur  ouurira  la  porte,
&  leur  donnera  le  moyen  d'executer  fes  faindtes
volont6s. Ainfi  foit-il.


1641-42]  R  EL  A  TION  OF  1640  -41  105

Tadoussac.  As  soon  as  he  reentered  the  cabin  of  the
sick  man,  all  the  other  Savages  ran  toward  him;
they  placed  themselves  around  him  in  a  circle,  in
profound  silence,  and  he  instructed  them  according
to  his  ability.  No  longer  knowing  what  to  say,  he
began  so  strongly  to  denounce  their  superstitions  and
their  eat-all  feasts, —  showing  the  brutality  of  their
manners,  and  blessing  God  that  he  had  forsaken  his
old  barbarism, —  and  said  so  many  things  against  the
uselessness  and  the  folly  of  their  drums,  that  all
those  who  had  these  went  immediately  for  them,
and  broke  them  into  a  thousand  [201]  pieces  in  his
presence ;  this  astonished  him  and  greatly  consoled
him.  When  he  came  back,  he  did  not  know  how  to
contain  himself.  "  Nikanis,"  said  he  to  me,  "  I  did
think  of  bringing  them  here  with  me ;  if  they  had
had  anything  with  which  to  buy  provisions  to  suffice
for  the  winter,  they  would  have  followed  me.  All
those  whom  I  saw  are  resolved  to  be  instructed,  and
to  abandon  their  old  customs  in  order  to  embrace
ours. ' '  Indeed,  I  do  not  doubt  that  all  those  poor
little  Tribes  that  are  in  the  woods  to  which  our
Christians  resort,  will  come  and  place  themselves
within  the  fold  of  the  Church,  if  they  can  be  assisted.
To  conclude,  the  Father  arrived  at  Tadoussac  on
the  second  day  of  June,  and  was  recalled  thence  on
the  twenty-ninth.  He  baptized  fourteen  or  fifteen
Savages,  principally  children  and  aged  persons;  he
would  have  baptized  many  more,  if  these  poor  peo-
ple had  been  in  a  place  where  they  could  have  been
kept  in  the  faith ;  all  that  will  come  in  its  own  time.
God,  who  has  touched  them  and  who  calls  them,
will  open  to  them  a  door  and  will  give  them  the
means  of  accomplishing  his  holy  will. Amen.


106  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.21


[202]  CHAPITRE  XIII.

DES BONNES ESPERANCES, & DES OBSTACLES, DE LA
CONUERSION DES SAUUAGES.

LA  venue  des  Vaiffeaux  apporte  ordinairement  vn
meflange  de  ioie  &  de  trifteffe;  nous  auons
receu  du  contentement  a  la  veue  des  hommes
de  Meffieurs  de  Montreal,  pource  que  leur  deffein  eft
entierement  a.  la  gloire  de  noftre  Seigneur,  s'il  reiiffit.
Ce  contentement  a  receu  du  meflange  par  le  retarde-
ment  du  fieur  de  Maifon-neufue  qui  commande  ces
hommes,  lequel  a  relafche  trois  fois  en  France;  &
enfin  eft  arriue  fi  tard,  qu'il  ne  fcauroit  monter  plus
haut  que  Kebec  pour  cette  annee ;  &  Dieu  veiiille  que
les  Hiroquois  ne  ferment  point  les  chemins,  quand  il
fera  queftion  de  paffer  plus  auant.  Quiconque  a  pris
vne  forte  refolution  de  trauailler  pour  Iefus-Chrift,
doit  aimer  la  Croix  de  Iefus-Chrift.  Non  eft  difcipu-
lus  fuper  viagiftrnm.  La  Croix  eft  [203]  l'arbre  de
vie,  qui  porte  les  fruidts  du  Paradis,  &  folia  ligni  ad
fanitatem  gentium .  La  conuerfion  des  Sauuages  ne  fe
fera  que  par  la  Croix.

Ce  nous  eft  encor  vne  douce  confolation,  de  voir
que  les  longues  fatigues  de  la  mer  n'ont  point  alter6
la  fante  des  paffagers  qui  viennent  groffir  noftre
petite  Colonie ;  le  Pere  Iacques  de  la  Place  &  noftre
Frere  Ambroife  Broiiet  font  arriues  en  bonne  fante,
Dieu  mercy.  Vne  ieune  Damoifelle,  qui  n'auoit  pas
pour  deux  doubles  de  vie  en  France,  a  ce  qu'on  dit,


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  107


[202]  CHAPTER  XIII.

OF THE GOOD PROSPECTS FOR THE CONVERSION OF
THE SAVAGES, AND OBSTACLES THERETO.

THE  arrival  of  the  Vessels  ordinarily  brings  a
mingling  of  joy  and  sorrow.  We  took  satis-
faction in  seeing  the  men  of  the  Gentlemen  of
Montreal,  because  their  design  is  wholly  for  the
glory  of  our  Lord,  should  it  succeed.  This  satisfac-
tion was  alloyed  by  the  delay  of  the  sieur  de  Maison-
neufve,4  who  commands  these  men,  and  who  put
into  port  three  times  while  in  France ;  and,  at  last,
he  arrived  so  late  that  he  was  not  able  to  ascend  the
river  above  Kebec  this  year.  God  grant  that  the
Hiroquois  may  not  shut  up  the  roads,  when  it  shall
be  a  question  of  going  farther  forward.  Whoever
has  made  a  strong  resolution  to  work  for  Jesus
Christ  ought  to  love  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ.  Non
est  discipulus  super  magistrum.  The  Cross  is  [203]  the
tree  of  life,  which  bears  the  fruits  of  Paradise,  et
folia  ligni  ad  sanitatem  gentium.  The  conversion  of
the  Savages  will  be  made  only  by  the  Cross.

It  was  however  a  welcome  consolation  to  us  to  see
that  the  long  hardships  of  the  voyage  had  not
impaired  the  health  of  the  passengers  who  came  to
increase  our  little  Colony;  Father  Jacques  de  la
Place 5  and  our  Brother  Ambroise  Brouet  arrived  in
good  health,  thank  God.  A  young  Lady,  who  had
not  in  France  two  doubles'  worth  of  life,  as  they
say,  lost  more  than  half  of  it  on  the  Vessel,  so  much


108


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


en  a  perdu  plus  de  la  moitie  dans  le  Vaiffeau,  tant
elle  a  fouffert;  mais  elle  en  a  trouue  a  Kebec  plus
qu'elle  n'en  auoit  embarque  a  la  Rochelle ;  les  hom-
mes  de  trauail  arriuent  ordinairement  icy,  le  corps
&  la  dent  bien  faine ;  &  fi  leur  ame  a  quelque  mala-
die,  elle  ne  tarde  gueres  a  recouurer  vne  bonne  fante.
L'air  de  la  Nouuelle  France  eft  tres-fain  pour  Tame
&  pour  le  corps.  On  nous  a  dit,  qu'il  couroit  vn
bruit  dans  Paris,  qu'on  auoit  mene  en  Canada,  vn
Vaiffeau  tout  charge  de  filles,  dont  la  vertu  n'auoit
l'approbation  d'aucun  Dodteur;  c'eft  vn  faux  bruit,
i'ay  [204]  veu  tous  les  Vaiffeaux,  pas  vn  n'eftoit
charge  de  cette  marchandife.  Changeons  de  propos.
II  n'y  auoit  pas  long-temps  que  nos  Autels  auoient
porte  le  deiiil  de  la  mort  de  Monfieur  Gand,  quand  la
flotte  a  paru ;  cet  homme  de  bien  f ecouroit  f ortement
les  Sauuages  qui  f e  retirent  a  Sained  Iofeph :  Leurs
conuerfions  luy  touchoient  les  yeux,  &  gagnoient  le
cceur.  II  eft  mort  dans  vn  fublime  exercice  de  pa-
tience; en  vn  mot,  il  eft  mort  comme  il  auoit  vefcu,
c'eft  a  dire,  en  homme  qui  cherche  Dieu  auec  verite.
A  peine  auoit-on  acheue  les  derniers  deuoirs  qui  luy
eftoient  deubs,  qu'il  nous  a  fallu  vne  autre  fois  reue-
ftir  de  noir  nos  Chappelles,  pour  faire  le  feruice  de
Monfieur  le  Commandeur  de  Sillery,  Monfieur  de
Montmagny  noftre  Gouuerneur,  Monfieur  le  Cheua-
lier  de  rifle,  &  plufieurs  autres,  y  affifterent ;  Quel-
ques  Sauuages  voulurent  communier  ce  iour  la,  &
tous  prierent  pour  fon  ame,  n'ignorans  pas  les  gran-
des  obligations  qu'ils  ont  a  ce  fainct  Homme,  qui  a
jette  les  fondemens  de  l'arreft  de  ces  pauures  peuples
errans,  en  la  Refidence  de  [205]  Sainct  Iofeph.
Pleuft  a  Dieu,  que  ceux  qui  fuccederont  a  l'affedtion


1641-42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  109

did  she  suffer ;  but  she  has  found  at  Kebec  more  life
than  she  had  when  she  sailed  from  la  Rochelle.  The
workmen  generally  arrive  here  with  very  sound  bo-
dies and  teeth ;  and  if  their  souls  have  any  sickness,
it  is  not  long  before  they  recover  good  health.  The
air  of  New  France  is  very  healthy  for  the  soul  and
for  the  body.  We  have  been  told  that  it  was
reported  in  Paris,  that  there  had  sailed  to  Canada  a
Vessel  laden  with  girls  whose  virtue  had  not  the
approval  of  any  Doctor;  it  is  a  false  report, —  I  have
[204]  seen  all  the  Vessels,  not  one  was  laden  with
these  wares. Let  us  change  the  subject.

Our  Altars  had  not  been  a  long  time  in  mourning
for  the  death  of  Monsieur  Gand,6  when  the  fleet  ap-
peared. This  man  of  wealth  actively  aided  the  Sav-
ages who  retired  to  Saint  Joseph ;  their  conversion
moved  him  to  tears,  and  won  his  heart.  He  died  in
a  sublime  practice  of  patience ;  in  a  word,  he  died  as
he  had  lived, — that  is  to  say,  as  a  man  who  seeks
God  in  truth.  Hardly  had  we  finished  the  last  serv-
ices which  were  his  due,  when  we  were  again  obliged
to  drape  our  Chapels  in  black,  that  we  might  perform
the  service  for  Monsieur  the  Commander  de  Sillery ; 7
Monsieur  de  Montmagny,  our  Governor,  Monsieur  the
Chevalier  de  l'lsle,  and  many  others  were  present
thereat.  Some  Savages  wished  to  receive  commun-
ion on  that  day,  and  all  prayed  for  his  soul,  know-
ing the  great  obligations  under  which  they  are  to
this  holy  Man,  who  has  laid  the  foundations  for  the
settlement  of  these  wandering  tribes,  in  the  Resi-
dence of  [205]  Saint  Joseph.  May  it  please  God  that
those  who  shall  profit  by  the  kind  interest  of  this
noble  Man  may  see  a  slight  portion  of  the  great  re-
ward that  he  is  enjoying  in  heaven. His  death  had


110  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

de  ce  grand  Homme,  viffent  vn  petit  brin  des  gran-
des  recompenfes  dont  il  ioiiit  dedans  les  cieux.  Sa
mort  auoit  arrefte  le  fecours  qu'il  nous  donne:  Mais
i'apprens  que  quelques  perfonnes  de  merite  n'ont
pas  voulu  que  ce  grand  ouurage  ceffaft,  fortifians  nos
bras  qui  s'alloient  affoiblir  par  le  deces  de  ceux  qui
meritent  de  porter  le  nom  de  vrais  Peres  des  Chre-
ftiens  Sauuages.

Monfieur  le  Marquis  de  Gamache  defundt,  a  merite"
le  premier,  de  porter  ce  tiltre ;  car  il  a  ouuert  la  pre-
miere porte  aux  grandes  Millions  que  nous  auons  en-
treprifes  en  ces  derniers  confms  du  Monde.  Son  fils
s'eftant  donne  a  noflre  Compagnie,  finit  fes  iours
l'an  paffe,  auec  la  couronne  d'vne  riche  perfeue-
ran[c]e  en  la  vertu ;  ils  voient  maintenant  tous  deux,
combien  faindtement  &  vtilement  ces  grandes  libera-
lites  font  emploiees,  &  comme  vne  belle  adtion  faite
dans  les  temps,  fructifie  pour  l'Eternite.

On  m'a  fait  voir  vne  deuotion,  dont  ie  ne  doute
nullement  que  le  Saindt  Efprit  n'en  foit  l'autheur,
la  Charite"  eft  induftrieuf e ;  [206]  vn  homme  de  me-
rite &  de  condition,  veut  prendre  le  foin  d'vne  famille
de  Sauuages,  il  deftine  vne  centaine  d'efcus  pour  luy
baftir  vne  petite  maifon;  il  veut  qu'on  luy  efcriue  le
nombre  des  perfonnes  qui  la  compofent,  &  comme
ils  s'appellent :  II  demande  ce  qu'ils  auront  de  befoin
pour  s'eftablir,  la  premiere  annee,  &  quel  ordre  il
faut  garder  pour  la  faire  fubfiiter:  Cette  inuention
ne  vient  point  d'Archimede,  mais  d'vn  plus  grand
efprit.  Voila  iuftement  le  moien  de  donner  a  Iefus-
Chrift  tous  les  defcendans  de  cette  famille,  &  nati
natorum,  &  qui  nafcentur  ab  Mis.  Tous  les  enfans  de
leurs  enfans,  leurs  neueux, &  leurs  arriere-neueux


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  111

checked  the  aid  that  he  gave  us;  but  I  learn  that
some  persons  of  merit  are  not  willing  that  this  great
work  should  cease,  and  they  are  strengthening  our
hands  which  were  being  weakened  by  the  decease  of
those  who  are  worthy  to  bear  the  name  of  true
Fathers  of  the  Christian  Savages.

Monsieur  the  Marquis  de  Gamache,8  deceased,  was
the  first  who  deserved  to  bear  this  title,  for  he  opened
the  first  door  to  the  great  Missions  that  we  have  un-
dertaken in  these  last  limits  of  the  World.  His  son,
having  consecrated  himself  to  our  Society,  ended  his
days  last  year,  with  the  crown  of  a  rich  perseverance
in  virtue ;  both  of  them  now  see  how  devoutly  and
how  usefully  these  great  gifts  have  been  employed,
and  how  a  noble  action  performed  in  time  bears  fruit
for  Eternity.

An  act  of  piety  has  been  brought  to  my  notice,  of
which,  I  do  not  at  all  doubt,  the  Holy  Ghost  was  the
inspirer;  Charity  is  skillful.  [206]  A  man  of  merit
and  of  position  wishes  to  provide  for  a  family  of  Sav-
ages ;  he  has  set  apart  a  hundred  ecus  to  build  them
a  small  house,  he  wishes  to  be  told  the  number  of
persons  who  compose  this  family,  and  how  they  are
named;  he  asks  what  will  be  needed  to  establish
them  for  the  first  year,  and  what  rule  must  be  ob-
served for  their  support.  This  thought  did  not  come
from  Archimedes,  but  from  a  higher  spirit.  This  is
precisely  the  way  in  which  to  give  to  Jesus  Christ
all  the  descendants  of  this  family,  et  nati  natorum,  et
qui  nascentur  ab  Mis.  All  the  children  of  their  chil-
dren, their  nephews,  and  their  latest  posterity  will
believe  in  God.  He  who  converts  a  sinner  in  France,
ordinarily  converts  but  one  man ;  he  who  attracts  to
the  faith  the  head  of  a  Savage  family,  attracts  to  it


112  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


croiront  en  Dieu.  Qui  conuertit  vn  pecheur  en
France,  ne  conuertit  ordinairement  qu'vn  homme:
Qui  appelle  a  la  foy  vn  chef  de  famille  Sauuage,  y
appelle  tous  fes  defcendans ;  vfque  ad  tertiam  &  qaar-
tam  generationcm,  &  vitrei.  Ie  ne  fcaurois  croire  que
Dieu  ne  verfe  toft  ou  tard,  fes  benedictions  fur  la
famille  de  ceux  qui  procurent  l'amplincation  de  la
famille  de  Iefus  Chrift  fon  Fils.

I'vferay  de  redites,  fi  ie  fais  mention  [207]  des
grandes  prieres,  des  grandes  deuotions,  des  ieufnes,
&  des  autres  mortifications  qui  fe  font  en  beaucoup
d'endroits  de  1' Europe,  pour  la  conuerfion  de  ces
peuples,  notament  en  quelques  Maifons  de  Filles
fignalees  en  vertu.  Ie  fcay  vn  Monaftere,  ou  depuis
plufieurs  ann6es  il  y  a  inceTamment  iour  &  nuict,
quelque  Religieufe  deuant  le  S.  Sacrement,  follici-
tant  ce  Pain  de  vie,  de  fe  faire  donner  a  connoiflre,
&  de  fe  faire  goufter  aux  pauures  Sauuages.  II  s'eft
trouue  mefme  dans  la  campagne  vn  Cure  fi  zele  pour
le  falut  des  pauures  Sauuages,  des  Paroiffiens  fi  pleins
de  bonte,  qu'ils  ont  fait  trois  proceffions  generales,
foixante  &  quinze  ieufnes,  cent  vingt-quatre  difcipli-
nes,  dix-huidt  aumofnes,  &  quantite  de  prieres,  pour
la  conuerfion  de  ces  peuples;  cela  n'eft-il  pas  rauif-
fant?  Ie  prie  le  grand  Berger  d'auoir  vn  foin  tout
particulier  de  ce  bon  Pafteur,  &  de  fon  trouppeau.
Quand  on  me  dit  que  les  ames  les  plus  faindtes  de  la
France,  preffent  les  cieux  pour  pleuuoir  des  bene-
dictions fur  ces  contrees.  Quand  nous  voions  de
ieunes  filles  delicates,  renfermees  dans  leurs  maifons,
fur  les  riues  de  [208]  noftre  grand  fleuue,  prendre
part  aux  trauaux  de  ce  nouueau  Mode,  auec  vne
gaiete  nompareille :  Quand  ie  confidere  vne  Dame,


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  113

all  his  descendants,  usque  ad  tertiam  et  qnartam  gene-
rationem,  et  ultra.  I  can  only  believe  that  sooner  or
later  God  will  pour  his  blessings  upon  the  families  of
those  who  procure  the  extension  of  the  family  of
Jesus  Christ  his  Son.

I  shall  make  use  of  repetitions,  if  I  mention  [207]
the  earnest  prayers,  devotions,  fasts,  and  other  self-
denials  which  are  made  in  many  places  in  Europe,
for  the  conversion  of  these  peoples,  and  especially  in
the  Houses  of  some  Nuns  remarkable  for  piety.  I
know  a  Monastery  where  for  several  years  there  has
been,  continually,  day  and  night,  some  Nun  before
the  Blessed  Sacrament,  soliciting  this  Bread  of  life  to
make  itself  known  to  the  poor  Savages,  and  enjoyed
by  them.  There  has  been  found,  even  in  the  coun-
try, a  Cure  so  zealous  for  the  salvation  of  the  poor
Savages,  and  Parishioners  so  full  of  kindness,  that
they  have  made  three  general  processions,  and  sev-
enty-five fasts;  they  have  taken  the  discipline  a
hundred  and  twenty-four  times ;  they  have  offered
eighteen  almsgivings,  and  a  great  many  prayers, —
all  for  the  conversion  of  these  tribes;  is  not  that
delightful?  I  pray  the  great  Shepherd  to  have  a
very  special  care  of  this  good  Pastor,  and  of  his  flock.
When  I  am  told  that  the  most  saintly  souls  of  France
urge  heaven  to  pour  out  its  blessings  upon  these
countries ;  when  we  see  delicate  young  girls,  shut  up
in  their  houses  on  the  banks  of  [208]  our  great  river,
taking  part  in  the  labors  of  this  new  World  with
unparalleled  cheerfulness;  when  I  observe  a  Lady,
more  than  a  thousand  leagues  distant  from  her  own
country,  giving  her  means,  and  her  life  for  these
Barbarians,  preferring  a  roof  of  bark  to  a  ceiling  of
azure,  taking  more  pleasure  in  conversing  with  Sav-


114  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

eloignee  de  plus  de  mille  lieues  de  fon  pais,  donner
fes  biens,  &  fa  vie,  pour  ces  Barbares,  preferer  vn
toidt  d'ecorce  a  vn  lambris  d'azur,  prendre  plus  de
plaifir  a  conuerfer  des  Sauuages,  qu'a  vifiter  les  plus
Grands  de  la  Cour :  Quand  ie  contemple  vne  ieune
Damoifelle,  a  qui  vn  frimas  donnoit  le  rheume  en
France,  trauerfer  l'Ocean,  pour  venir  denier  nos
grands  hiuers :  Et  cela,  pour  dire  trois  bonnes  paro-
les a  quelque  Sauuage  deuant  fa  mort,  &  en  voir
quelqu'vn  de  fes  propres  yeux,  inuoquer  le  faindt
Norn  de  Dieu.  Quand  ie  voy  des  Sauuages  deuenus
Predicateurs,  &  des  mangeurs  de  chair  humaine,
s'approcher  de  la  Table  de  Iefus-Chrift,  auec  vne
modeftie,  &  auec  des  fentimens  de  vrais  enfans  de
Dieu ;  ie  ne  puis  quafi  douter,  que  Dieu  qui  a  com-
mence le  grand  ouurage  de  la  conuerlion  de  ces  peu-
ples,  ne  le  conduife  a  chef,  malgre  tous  les  obftacles
qui  s'y  rencontrent.

Ie  racontois  il  n'y  a  pas  long  temps  a  [209]  nos
Sauuages  Chreftiens,  les  fecours  que  les  ames  d'elite
leur  donnoient,  les  grandes  prieres  qu'on  faifoit
pour  eux  en  France ;  cela  les  toucha :  Mais  comme
ils  paroiffent  fort  froids,  ils  n'en  firent  paroiftre  pour
lors  aucun  femblant :  Le  lendemain  deux  des  princi-
paux  me  vindrent  trouuer,  &  me  dirent;  NiKanis,
nous  nous  fommes  affembles  fur  ce  que  tu  nous
difois  hier,  nous  fommes  pauures,  nous  n'auons  pas
le  moyen  de  reconnoiftre  ceux  qui  nous  affiftent;
mais  nous  auons  conclu  que  nous  ieufnerions  pour
eux,  &  que  nous  prierions  pour  ceux  qui  prient  tant
Dieu  pour  nous :  Nous  ieufnerons  fans  boire  ny  man-
ger tout  le  iour,  difoient  ces  bons  Neophytes;  cette
refolution  me  toucha,  &  me  fit  dire :  Que  ceux  qui


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  115

ages,  than  in  visiting  the  greatest  Nobles  of  the
Court;  when  I  behold  a  young  Lady,  to  whom,  in
France,  a  white  frost  would  give  a  cold,  crossing  the
Ocean,  and  coming  to  defy  our  long  winters,  and
that,  in  order  to  speak  a  few  helpful  words  to  some
Savage  before  her  death,  and  with  her  own  eyes  to
see  some  of  them  invoke  the  sacred  Name  of  God;
when  I  see  Savages  become  Preachers ;  and  when  I
see  eaters  of  human  flesh  draw  near  to  the  Table  of
Jesus  Christ  with  modesty,  and  with  the  feelings  of
true  children  of  God, —  I  can  scarcely  doubt  that
God,  who  has  begun  the  great  work  of  conversion
among  these  tribes,  will  bring  it  to  completion,  not-
withstanding all  the  obstacles  that  may  be  encoun-
tered.

Not  long  ago,  I  told  [209]  our  Christian  Savages
of  the  aid  that  elect  souls  were  giving  them,  and  of
the  fervent  prayers  that  were  offered  for  them  in
France.  That  touched  them ;  but,  as  they  appear
very  cold,  they  seemed  to  take  no  notice  of  it  then.
The  next  day,  two  of  the  leading  men  came  to  me
and  said:  "  Nikanis,  we  have  met  together  because
of  what  thou  didst  tell  us  yesterday ;  we  are  poor,
we  have  no  way  of  repaying  those  who  aid  us ;  but
we  have  decided  that  we  will  fast  for  them,  and  that
we  will  pray  for  those  who  pray  to  God  so  much  for
us.  We  shall  fast,  without  eating  or  drinking  all
daylong,"  said  these  good  Neophytes.  This  reso-
lution moved  me  and  made  me  say:  "  May  those
who  plead  before  divine  Justice  for  the  Savages  gain
their  cause,  through  the  favor  of  Jesus  Christ. ' '

I  am  neither  a  Prophet,  nor  the  son  of  a  Prophet,
as  says  the  proverb ;  but,  seeing  what  God  has  done
in  one  France  and  in  the  other  for  the  salvation  of


116  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

plaident  pour  les  Sautiages  deuant  la  diuine  Iuftice,
gagneront  leur  caufe  en  faueur  de  Iefus  Chrifl.

Ie  ne  fuis  pas  Prophete,  ny  fils  de  Prophete,  comme
dit  le  prouerbe ;  mais  voiant  ce  que  Dieu  fait  pour
le  falut  des  Sauuages,  en  l'vne  &  l'autre  France,  ie  ne
doute  quafi  pas  qu'on  ne  voie  vn  iour  ce  que  ie  vay
remarquer.

Premierement,  ie  m'attens  que  Saindl  [210]  Iofeph
fera  peuple  d'Abnaquiois,  de  Berfiamites,  de  Sau-
uages de  Tadouffac,  de  la  Nation  du  Pore-Epic,  des
b'papinachib'eKhi,  des  b'mamiHeKhi ;  ce  font  petits  peu-
ples  dans  les  Terres,  qui  fe  rallieront  auec  nos  Neo-
phytes de  Saindt  Iofeph,  &  qui  en  appelleront  encor
d'autres  petit  a  petit.  Ces  Nations  ont  oiiy  parler
de  Iefus-Chrift,  fa  Dodtrine  leur  femble  belle  &  agre-
able,  l'exemple  de  leurs  femblables,  qui  fe  font  faits
Chreftiens,  les  touche  puiffamment ;  mais  le  peu  de
fecours  que  nous  leur  pouuons  donner,  &  la  fureur
des  Hiroquois,  les  empefche  de  nous  venir  ioindre.

Secondement,  les  AttiKamegues,  &  les  autres  Na-
tions, dont  ie  ne  fcay  pas  les  noms,  qui  font  dedans
les  Terres,  prendront  place  aux  Trois  Riuieres;  ils
l'auroient  defia  fait,  n'eftoit  la  crainte  de  leurs  enne-
mis  communs,  les  Hiroquois.  Ce  font  peuples  bons
&  dociles,  bien  aifes  a  gagner  a  Iefus-Chrift.

En  troifieme  lieu,  les  Algonquins,  tant  de  l'lfle,
que  de  la  petite  Nation,  les  Onontchataronons,  &  plu-
fieurs  autres,  qui  font  en  ces  quartiers  la ;  quelques
Hurons,  &  mefme  encor  quelques  Hiroquois,  [211]
habiteront  vn  iour  en  l'lfle  de  Montreal,  &  es  lieux
circonuoifms.  Cette  Ifle  doit  eftre  vn  grand  abord
de  plufleurs  peuples.  Ie  ne  dy  pas  des  Hurons,  des
plus  hauts  Algonquins,  &  des  Hiroquois;  ce  que  i'ay


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  117

the  Savages,  I  scarcely  doubt  that  one  day  will  be
seen  what  I  am  going  to  remark.

First,  I  expect  that  Saint  [210]  Joseph  will  be
peopled  by  Abnaquiois,  by  Bersiamites,  by  Savages
from  Tadoussac,  by  the  Porcupine  Tribe,  by  the
Oupapinachiwekhi,  and  the  Oumamiwekhi  ;9  these
are  unimportant  tribes  in  the  Interior,  who  will  rally
about  our  Neophytes  of  Saint  Joseph,  and  who  will
also,  by  degrees,  call  others.  These  Tribes  have
heard  of  Jesus  Christ, — his  Doctrine  seems  to  them
beautiful  and  desirable ;  the  example  of  their  fellow
tribesmen  who  have  become  Christians,  touches  them
powerfully ;  but  the  little  assistance  that  we  can  give
them,  and  the  fury  of  the  Hiroquois,  hinder  their
coming  to  join  us.

Secondly,  the  Attikamegues,  and  other  Tribes  of
which  I  do  not  know  the  names,  who  are  in  the  Inte-
rior, will  settle  at  the  Three  Rivers;  they  would
already  have  done  so,  but  for  the  fear  of  their  com-
mon enemy,  the  Hiroquois.  They  are  good  and
docile  peoples,  very  easily  won  to  Jesus  Christ.

In  the  third  place,  the  Algonquins, —  as  well  those
of  the  Island  as  of  the  petite  Nation,  the  Onontcha-
taronons,  and  many  others  who  are  in  those  quar-
ters,—  some  Hurons,  and  even  also  some  Hiroquois,
[211]  will  one  day  dwell  on  the  Island  of  Montreal
and  in  neighboring  places.  This  Island  ought  to  be
a  great  resort  for  many  tribes.  I  do  not  say  of  the
Hurons,  the  upper  Algonquins,  and  the  Hiroquois,
what  I  have  said  of  the  Attikamegues,  of  the  Kakwa-
zakhi,  and  of  the  Bersiamites;  these  latter  are  lambs,
and  the  former  are  fierce  as  wolves;  but  habitabit
lupus  cum  agno,  et  puer  parvulus  minabit  eos.

In  the  fourth  place,  after  Montreal, Video  turbam


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jESUITES [Vol.21

dit  des  AttiKamegues,  des  KaKb'azakhi,  &  des  Berfia-
mites,  ceux-cy  font  des  agneaux,  &  ceux  la  font
farouches  comme  des  loups :  mais,  habitabit  lupus  cum
agno,  &  pucr  paruulus  minabit  cos.

En  quatriefme  lieu,  apres  Montreal:  Video  turbam
magnam  quant  dinumerare  nemo  potest  ex  omnibus  genti-
bus;  Ie  voy  au  Midy,  &  a  l'Occident,  vn  grand  nom-
bre  de  Nations  qui  cultiuent  la  terre,  qui  font  toutes
fedentaires;  mais  qui  iamais  n'ont  oiiy  parler  de
Iefus-Chrift,  la  porte  nous  eft  fermee  a  tous  ces
peuples,  par  les  Hiroquois,  il  n'y  a  dans  toutes  ces
grandes  eftendues  que  les  Hurons,  &  quelques  autres
Nations  circonuoifmes,  a  qui  nous  aions  porte  les
bonnes  nouuelles  de  l'Euangile;  mais  encor  les  faut-
il  aborder  par  des  chemins  horribles,  par  des  longs
detours,  par  des  dangers  continue! s  d'eftre  boiiillis,
&  roftis,  &  puis  deuores  a  belles  dents  par  les  mife-
rables  Hiroquois.  Nous  [212]  ne  perdons  point  cou-
rage pour  cela,  nous  croyons  que  Dieu  fera  iour  dans
ces  tenebres,  &  que  quelque  grand  Genie  ouurira  la
porte  a  l'Euangile  de  Iefus-Chrift,  dans  ces  vaftes
co trees,  &  que  l'ancienne  France  fauuera  la  vie  a  la
Nouuelle,  qui  fe  va  perdre  fi  elle  n'efl  fortement,  &
promptement  fecourue,  le  commerce  de  ces  Meffieurs,
la  Colonie  des  Francois,  &  la  Religion  qui  commence
a  fiorir  parmy  les  Sauuages  font  a  bas,  fi  on  ne
dompte  les  Hiroquois.  Cinquante  Hiroquois  font
capables  de  faire  quitter  le  pais  a  deux  cens  Francois,
non  pas  s'ils  combatoient  de  pied  ferme;  car  en  tel
cas,  cinquante  Francois  deferoient  cinq  cens  Hiro-
quois: li  les  Hollandois  ne  leur  donnoient  point
d'armes  a  feu.  Si  ces  Barbares  s'acharnet  a  nos
Francois,  iamais  ils  ne  les  laifferont  dormir  d'vn  bon


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  ib4o-4T  119

magnam  quam  dinumerare  nemo  potest  ex  omnibus  genti-
bus;  I  see  at  the  South  and  at  the  West  a  great  num-
ber of  Tribes  that  cultivate  the  land  and  that  are
entirely  sedentary,  but  have  never  heard  of  Jesus
Christ;  the  door  to  all  these  peoples  has  been  shut
against  us  by  the  Hiroquois.  In  all  these  vast  tracts
there  are  only  the  Hurons,  and  some  other  neighbor-
ing Tribes,  to  whom  we  have  carried  the  good  news
of  the  Gospel ;  but  then  we  are  obliged  to  approach
them  by  horrible  roads  and  long  detours,  and  in  con-
tinual danger  of  being  boiled  or  roasted  and  then
eagerly  devoured  by  the  wretched  Hiroquois.  We
[212]  do  not  lose  courage  on  account  of  this;  we
believe  that  God  will  make  a  light  in  this  darkness,
and  that  some  powerful  Spirit  will  open  the  door  to
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  in  these  vast  regions,  and
that  old  France  will  save  the  life  of  the  New,  which
is  going  to  be  lost,  unless  it  be  vigorously  and  speed-
ily succored;  the  trade  of  these  Gentlemen,  the
French  Colony,  and  the  Religion  which  is  beginning
to  flourish  among  the  Savages,  will  be  subverted,  if
the  Hiroquois  be  not  overcome.  Fifty  Hiroquois  are
capable  of  making  two  hundred  Frenchmen  leave  the
country, —  not  if  they  fought  unflinchingly,  for  in
that  case  fifty  Frenchmen  would  rout  five  hundred
Hiroquois,  if  the  Dutch  did  not  give  them  firearms.
If  these  Barbarians  become  enraged  at  our  French-
men, they  will  never  let  them  sleep  soundly;  a  Hiro-
quois will  remain  for  two  or  three  days  without  food
behind  a  stump,  fifty  paces  from  your  house,  in
order  to  slay  the  first  person  who  shall  fall  into  his
ambush.  If  he  be  discovered,  the  forest  serves  him
for  an  asylum ;  where  a  Frenchman  would  find  only
hindrance,  a  Savage  will  bound  as  lightly  as  a  deer.


120  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21

fommeil,  vn  Hiroquois  fe  tiendra  deux  ou  trois  iour[s]
fans  manger  derriere  vne  fouche,  a  cinquante  pas  de
voftre  maifon,  pour  maffacrer  le  premier  qui  tombera
dans  fes  embufches ;  s'il  eft  decouuert,  les  bois  luy
feruent  d'azile,  ou  vn  Francois  ne  trouuera  que  de
l'embaras,  vn  Sauuage  y  fautera  leftement  comme  vn
cerf,  le  moien  de  refpirer  dedans  ces  [213J  preffes,  fi
on  n'a  ce  peuple  pour  amy,  ou  fi  on  ne  l'extermine,
il  faut  abandonner  a  leur  cruaute  tant  de  bons  Neo-
phytes, il  faut  perdre  tant  de  belles  efperances,  &
voir  rentrer  les  Demons  das  leur  empire.

Ie  penfois  finir  ce  chapitre ;  mais  voicy  quelques
fragmens  de  lettre  qui  en  feront  vne  bonne  conclu-
fion.  Ie  party  l'an  paffe,  des  Trois  Riuieres,  dit  le
Pere  Claude  Pijart  pour  aller  au  pais  des  Nipifirini-
ens,  Dieu  nous  deliura  des  embufches  des  Hiroquois,
&  d'vn  naufrage,  oil  ie  penfay  perdre  la  vie,  les  Sau-
uages  qui  me  conduifoient  ayans  mis  le  pied  en  l'eau
dans  vn  torrent,  contre  le  courant  duquel  ils  traif-
noient  le  canot  qui  me  portoit,  la  rapidite  de  l'eau
leur  ayant  fait  quitter  prife,  ie  me  vy  emporte  par  le
torrent  dans  vne  precipitation  d'eau  toute  pleine
d'horreur,  i'eftois  tout  viuant  a  deux  doigts  de  la
mort,  quand  vn  ieune  Huron  qui  eftoit  refte  feul
auec  moy  dans  le  canot,  faute  allegrement  dans  les
bouillons  d'eau,  pouffe  le  canot  hors  du  courant,  &
en  fe  fauuant  luy-mefme,  me  fauua,  &  tout  noftre
petit  bagage:  Fay  encouru  encor  d'autres  dangers:
defquels,  Eripnit  me  Doviinus,  &  mater  miferieordicz.
Dieu  m'a  [214]  deliure\  &  la  Mere  de  Mifericorde.
Nous  auons  fait  quelques  courfes  c£t  hiuer,  Dieu  a
recompenfe  nos  petits  trauaux,  de  quelques  ames
predeftinees, qui fembloient  n'attendre que le S.


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  121

What  opportunity  is  there  to  take  breath,  in  such
[213]  anxieties?  If  we  do  not  make  friends  with
these  people,  or  if  they  be  not  exterminated,  we
must  abandon  to  their  cruelty  many  good  Neophytes ;
we  must  lose  many  beautiful  hopes,  and  see  the
Demons  reenter  their  empire.

I  thought  to  finish  this  chapter ;  but  here  are  some
fragments  of  a  letter  which  will  be  a  good  conclusion.
"  I  set  out  last  year  from  the  Three  Rivers,"  says
Father  Claude  Pijart,  "to  go  to  the  country  of  the
Nipisiriniens.  God  delivered  us  from  the  ambushes
of  the  Hiroquois,  and  from  a  shipwreck,  in  which  I
thought  I  should  lose  my  life ;  the  Savages  who  were
conducting  me  having  stepped  into  the  water,  in  a
torrent  against  the  current  of  which  they  were  drag-
ging the  canoe  that  bore  me,  and  the  rapidity  of  the
water  having  made  them  lose  their  hold,  I  saw  my-
self being  carried  away  by  the  torrent  into  a  precip-
itous rush  of  water  full  of  horror.  I  was,  while  full  of
life,  at  two  finger-lengths  from  death,  when  a  young
Huron,  who  alone  had  remained  with  me  in  the  canoe,
sprang  nimbly  into  the  seething  water,  pushed  the
canoe  out  of  the  current,  and,  in  escaping  himself,
saved  me  and  all  our  little  baggage.  I  encountered,
besides,  other  dangers,  from  which  Eripuit  me  Donii-
nus,  et  mater  misericordics.  God  [214]  and  the  Mother
of  Mercy  delivered  me.  We  have  made  several  jour-
neys this  winter;  God  has  rewarded  our  humble
labors  with  some  predestined  souls,  that  seemed  only
to  await  Holy  Baptism  that  they  might  enter  heaven.
Our  usual  dwelling  place  during  the  winter  has  been
in  the  country  of  the  Hurons,  which  we  left  on  the
eighth  of  May,  that  we  might  go  and  instruct  the
Nipisiriniens. We  say  holy  Mass  every  day  in  their


122  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

Baptefme  pour  aller  au  ciel ;  noflre  demeure  ordi-
naire pendant  l'hiuer,  a  efte  au  pais  des  Hurons  que
nous  auons  quitte  le  huictiefme  de  May,  pour  aller
inftruire  les  Nipifiriniens,  nous  difons  tous  les  jours
la  faindte  Meffe  dans  leurs  cabanes,  faifans  vn  petit
retranchement,  ou  vne  petite  Chapelle  de  nos  couuer-
tures:  ces  peuples  me  femblent  fort  doux,  bien  mo-
defies,  &  nullement  fuperbes:  ils  font  bons  mefna-
gers,  les  femmes  ne  fcauent  que  c'eft  d'oifiuete,  les
ieufnes  enfans  vont  a  la  pefche,  fi  toft  qu'ils  font  vn
peu  grandelets,  la  ieuneffe  tefmoigne  vne  grande
ardeur  a  apprendre  ce  que  nous  leur  enfeignons  de  la
doctrine  de  Iefus-Chrift,  ils  font  fort  portes  a  chan-
ter, les  hommes  vont  en  traite,  ou  en  marchandife
vers  d'autres  Sauuages,  du  cofte-  du  Nord,  d'ou  ils
rapportent  quantite  de  pelteries,  vn  feul  Sauuage
ayant  fa  prouifion  de  bleds,  auoit  de  refle  trois  cens
caflors,  qui  font  la  meilleure  monoi'e  du  pais,  fi  Dieu
donne  fa  benediction  a  ces  pauures  [215]  gens,  on
aura  befoin  d'vn  bon  nombre  de  braues  ouuriers,  qui
s'addonnent  a  la  langue  Algonquine,  tous  ces  pais  cy
font  remplis  de  gens  qui  la  parlent,  i'efpere  que  nos
Nipifiriniens  defcendront  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  auec
le  Pere  Charles  Raimbault,  trouues-vous,  s'il  vous
plaift,  en  ces  quartiers  la,  auec  les  nouueaux  Chre-
ftiens,  leur  exemple  &  leurs  difcours  auront  beaucoup
de  pouuoir  fur  nos  Sauuages.

Dans  vne  autre  lettre,  voltre  R.  ne  fgauroit  croire
combien  elle  feroit  la  bien-venue  en  ces  quartiers-
cy,  pour  y  affermir  nos  Miffions  errantes;  ie  prie
noftre  Seigneur  qu'il  difpofe  le  tout  a  fa  plus  grande
gloire.  Ie  n'ay  rien  de  nouueau  depuis  ma  derniere,
finon  que  le  Pere  Paul  Ragueneau,  &  le  Pere  Me-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  123

cabins,  making  a  little  recess,  or  a  little  Chapel,  with
our  blankets.  These  peoples  seem  to  me  very  gen-
tle, truly  modest,  and  in  no  wise  proud ;  they  are  very
thrifty, —  the  women  do  not  know  what  idleness  is,
and  the  children  go  to  fish  as  soon  as  they  are  some-
what grown.  The  young  people  show  a  great  eager-
ness to  learn  what  we  teach  them  of  the  doctrine  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  they  are  much  given  to  singing.
The  men  go  to  trade  or  barter  with  other  Savages  in
the  North,  whence  they  bring  back  a  quantity  of
furs;  one  Savage  alone,  having  his  supply  of  grain,
had  besides  three  hundred  beavers,  which  are  the
best  money  of  the  country.  If  God  give  his  blessing
to  these  poor  [215]  peoples,  we  shall  need  a  goodly
number  of  brave  workers,  who  will  devote  them-
selves to  the  Algonquin  tongue;  all  these  regions
are  filled  with  people  who  speak  it.  I  hope  that  our
Nipisiriniens  will  go  down  to  the  Three  Rivers  with
Father  Charles  Raimbault ;  I  beg  you  to  be  present,
if  you  please,  with  the  new  Christians,  in  that  neigh-
borhood; their  example  and  their  conversation  will
have  much  influence  with  our  Savages.

From  another  letter:  "  Your  Reverence  can  hard-
ly believe  how  welcome  you  would  be  in  these  parts,
for  the  establishing  of  our  itinerant  Missions ;  I  pray
our  Lord  that  he  may  order  all  things  to  his  great-
est glory.  I  have  no  news  since  my  last  letter,  ex-
cept that  Father  Paul  Ragueneau  and  Father  Menard
arrived  here  in  good  health,  on  the  day  preceding
the  Assumption;  in  the  evening,  prayers  were
chanted  in  our  Chapel  of  bark,  in  Latin,  in  Algon-
quin, and  in  Huron.  What  you  have  been  told  con-
cerning the  men  who  are  beyond  the  Sagne  is  true ;
our  Nipisiriniens,  returning  not  long  since  from  the


124  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

narcl,  font  arriues  icy  en  bonne  fante,  la  veille  de
l'Affomption;  le  foir  les  prieres  furent  chantees  en
noftre  Chapelle  d'ecorce,  en  Latin,  en  Algonquin,  &
en  Huron;  Ce  qu'on  vous  a  dit  des  hommes  qui  font
au  dela  du  Sagne,  eft  veritable,  nos  Nipifiriniens
retournes  depuis  peu  des  Kyriftinb'ns,  qui  trafiquent
en  la  mer  du  Nord,  nous  affeurent  qu'ils  ont  trouue
quatre  cens  hommes  qui  parlent  tous  Montagnais,
cela  monte  a  quatre  mille  ames.

[216J  Voicy  deux  mots  du  Pere  Pierre  Pijart;  Pay
eite  en  Miffion  a  la  Nation  du  petun :  i'ay  veu  deux
Bourgades  qui  parloient  Algonquin,  en  l'vne  def-
quelles  les  hommes  vont  tous  nuds  fans  referue ;  il
eft  affeure  que  les  peuples  de  la  Nation  de  feu,
parlent  auffi  Algonquin,  &  vne  autre  Nation  qu'on
appelle  Ab'anchronons,  voila  vne  belle  eftendue  pour
nos  Peres,  qui  apprendront  cette  langue,  voila  de-
quoy  animer  leur  zele:  vn  prifonnier  de  la  Nation
de  feu,  ma  dit,  qu'il  auoit  appris  en  fon  pais,  qu'on
trouuoit  certains  peuples  au  Mydy  de  ces  contrees,
qui  femoient  &  recueilloient  deux  fois  l'annee,  du
bled  d'Inde,  &  que  la  derniere  recolte  fe  faifoit  au
mois  de  Decembre,  ce  font  les  paroles  du  Pere.

Quiconque  arreftera  ou  domptera  la  fureur  des
Hiroquois,  ou  qui  fera  reiiffir  les  moiens  de  les  gai-
gner,  ouurira  la  porte  a  Iefus-Chrift  dans  toutes  ces
contrees,  c'eft  vn  grand  honneur  que  Dieu  fait  aux
hommes  de  les  rendre  participans  des  trauaux  de  la
Croix  de  fon  Fils,  en  la  conuerfion  des  ames.


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  125

Kyristinouns,10  who  trade  on  the  Northern  sea,  as-
sured us  that  they  found  four  hundred  men  who  all
speak  Montagnais, — that  is  equivalent  to  four  thou-
sand souls."

[216]  Here  are  a  few  words  from  Father  Pierre
Pijart:  "  I  have  been  on  a  Mission  to  the  tobacco
Nation ;  I  found  two  Villages  where  Algonquin  was
spoken,  in  one  of  which  the  men  go  entirely  nude.
It  is  asserted  that  the  people  of  the  fire  Nation,  and
of  another  that  is  called  the  Awanchronon  Nation,
also  speak  Algonquin ;  here  is  a  fine  extent  of  coun-
try for  our  Fathers  who  shall  learn  this  language, —
here  is  indeed  something  to  animate  their  zeal.  A
prisoner  belonging  to  the  fire  Nation  told  me  that  he
had  heard,  in  his  own  country,  that  there  were  found
certain  people  at  the  South  of  those  lands,  who
planted  and  harvested  Indian  corn  twice  a  year,  and
that  the  last  harvest  was  made  in  the  month  of
December." These  are  the  Father's  own  words.

Whoever  shall  check  or  vanquish  the  fury  of  the
Hiroquois,  or  shall  succeed  in  means  of  winning  them,
will  open  the  door  to  Jesus  Christ  in  all  these  regions
It  is  a  great  honor  that  God  grants  to  men,  to  make
them  partakers  in  the  labors  of  the  Cross  of  his  Son,
for  the  conversion  of  souls.


126  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.21


Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'eft  pafse  de  plus  remar-

quable  en  la  Mifsion  des  Peres  de  la  Com-

pagnie  de  Iefus  avx  Hvrons  pays  de  la

Nouuelle France, depuis le mois de

Iuin  de  1'annee  mil  fix  cens  quarante,

iufques  au  mois  de  Iuin  de  1'  an-

nee  1641. Addressee  au  R.  P.

Iacques  Dinet  Prouincial  de

la  Comp.  de Iesvs,  en

la  Prouince  de  France.

M. DC. XLII.


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  127


Relation  of  the  most  remarkable  things  that  oc-
curred in  the  Mission  of  the Fathers  of  the
Society  of  Jesus  in  the  Huron country  of
New  France,  from  the  month  of  June  in  the
year  one  thousand  six  hundred  and  forty,
to  the month  of  June in  the  year
1 64 1. Addressed  to  the  Reverend
Father  Jacques  Dinet,  Provincial
of  the Society  of  Jesus,  in
the Province of France.
M. DC. XLII.


128  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.21


PAX  CHRIST!

MON  R.  PERE,
La  Relation  de  cette  ann6e  que  i'enuoye  a
voftre  Reuerence,  luy  fera  voir  comme  nos
Peres  qui  eitoient  icy,  ont  efte  diftribuez  en  fept
Miffions,  oil  ils  ont  prefche  &  publie  l'Euangile  a
feize  ou  dix-fept  mille  Barbares.  Si  les  fouffrances
endur^es  dans  vn  li  noble  employ,  font  la  mefure  des
efperances  que  nous  deuons  auoir  de  la  conuerfion  de
ces  peuples;  nous  auons  occafion  de  croire  qu'en  fin
de  ces  pauures  infideles  nous  en  ferons  de  bons  Chre-
ftiens:  &  quelque  refiftance  que  la  terre  &  l'enfer
apportent  aux  deffeins  que  nous  auons,  nous  n'en
perdrons  pas  vn  poindt  de  noftre  confiance.  Le  fang
de  Iefus-Chrift  qui  a  efte  refpandu  pour  eux  auffi  [4]
bien  que  pour  nous,  y  fera  en  fin  adore :  &  non  feule-
ment  les  Hurons,  mais  quantite  de  nations  encore
plus  peuplees  qui  nous  enuironnent  quafi  de  toutes
parts,  s'affujettiront  a  ce  grand  Roy  de  gloire,  a  qui
toutes  les  nations  de  la  terre  doiuent  en  fin  rendre
hommage.  Ce  font  ces  feules  efperances  qui  fouftien-
nent  tous  nos  trauaux;  &  afin  qu'elles  ne  foient  pas
vaines,  ie  fupplie  V.  R.  de  nous  affifter  de  fes  SS.  &
prieres,

De  V.  R.

De  la  refidence  fixe  de  Tres-humble  &  tres-obei*f-

S  Marie aux  Hurons, fant  feruiteur  en  N.  S.
ce  19. de  May  1641.  H L'ALEMANT.


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  129


PAX  CHRIST/.

MY  REVEREND  FATHER,
The  Relation  of  this  year,  that  I  send  to
your  Reverence,  will  show  you  how  our  Fa-
thers who  were  here,  have  been  distributed  in  seven
Missions,  in  which  they  have  preached  and  published
the  Gospel  to  sixteen  or  seventeen  thousand  Bar-
barians. If  the  sufferings  endured  in  so  noble  an
employment  are  a  measure  of  the  hopes  which  we
should  entertain  for  the  conversion  of  these  tribes,
we  have  reason  to  believe  that  at  last  we  shall  make
good  Christians  of  these  poor  unbelievers :  and  what-
ever resistance  earth  and  hell  may  bring  to  the  de-
signs that  we  have,  we  shall  not  for  that  lose  a  jot  of
our  confidence.  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  which
was  shed  for  them  as  [4]  well  as  for  us,  shall  be  at
last  adored  there ;  and  not  only  the  Hurons,  but  a
multitude  of  nations  still  more  populous,  which  sur-
round us  on  almost  all  sides,  will  submit  themselves
to  this  great  King  of  glory,  to  whom  all  the  nations
of  the  earth  shall  at  last  render  homage.  It  is  these
hopes  alone  that  sustain  all  our  labors;  and  to  the
end  that  they  be  not  vain,  I  supplicate  Your  Rever-
ence to  assist  us  by  your  Holy  Sacrifices  and  prayers.

Your  Reverence's
From the permanent  Very  humble  and  very

residence  of  Ste.  Marie obedient  servant in Our
among  the  Hurons,  this Lord,
19th  of  May,  1641.  H.  L'ALEMANT.


130  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.21


[5]  CHAPITRE  I.
DE l'estat general du christianisme en ces

CONTREES.

NOS  Barbares  ayans  iouy  cette  ann6e  d'vne  par-
faite  fante\  &  des  fruidts  d'vne  belle  &  heu-
reufe  recolte,  ne  nous  ont  pas  rebute  dans  nos
vifites,  ny  fait  fi  mauuais  vifage  que  la  precedente.
Ie  ne  fcay  toutesfois  ce  que  nous  leur  deuons  pluftoft
fouhaitter,  l'aduerfite  ou  la  profperite;  lamaladie,  ou
la  fante.  Car  fi  les  fains  ne  deuiennent  pas  plus  fages
au  temps  de  l'vne  que  de  l'autre;  quelques  malades
au  moins  durant  les  maladies,  nous  donnent  en  mou-
rant,  l'affeurance,  ou  du  moins  l'efperance  de  leur
bonheur.

Depuis  le  mois  de  Iuin  de  l'annee  precedente,  iuf-
ques  au  mois  de  Nouembre  enfuiuant,  noftre  occupa-
tion a  [6]  efte,  d'entretenir  ce  peu  de  Chreftiens  qui
nous  eftoient  reflez  apres  la  bouraf que  del'hyuer  pre-
cedent: de  faire  quelques  courfes  aux  Millions  en-
commencees;  &  nous  difpofer  aux  Millions  de  l'hyuer.

Sur  le  milieu  de  l'Automne,  ayant  confidere  nos
forces  en  la  langue,  &  ce  qu'il  y  auoit  a  faire  aupres
des  peuples,  aufquels  on  auoit  par  le  pafTe  publie
TEuagile;  nous  trouuames  que  fans  faire  tort  aux
cinq  Miffions  de  l'annee  precedente,  nous  pouuions
en  entreprendre  deux  nouuelles:  l'vne  de  la  langue
Huronne,  &  l'autre  de  l'Algonquine;  &  celle-cy  a  la
faueur  de  deux  de  nos  Peres  nouuellement  arriuez
de  Quebeq,  &  enuoyez  a  ce  dellein.


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  131


[5]  CHAPTER  I.

OF THE GENERAL CONDITION OF CHRISTIANITY IN

THESE COUNTRIES.

OUR  Barbarians  having  enjoyed  this  year  perfect
health,  and  the  fruits  of  a  great  and  prosper-
ous harvest,  have  not  rebuffed  us  in  our  visits,
nor  cast  so  black  looks  upon  us  as  in  the  preceding
year.  I  do  not  know,  nevertheless,  which  we  ought
rather  to  wish  them, —  adversity,  or  prosperity;  sick-
ness, or  health.  For,  if  the  healthy  do  not  become
wiser  in  time  by  one  than  by  the  other,  some  sick
ones,  at  least  during  their  maladies,  give  us  in  dying
the  assurance  —  or,  at  all  events,  the  hope  —  of  their
happiness.

From  the  month  of  June  in  the  preceding  year,
until  the  month  of  November  following,  our  occupa-
tion [6]  was  to  keep  together  the  few  Christians  who
had  remained  with  us  after  the  violent  storm  of  the
preceding  winter ;  to  make  some  trips  to  the  Missions
already  begun ;  and  to  prepare  ourselves  for  the
Missions  of  the  winter.

Towards  the  middle  of  Autumn, —  having  consid-
ered our  proficiency  in  the  language,  and  what  there
was  to  do  among  the  peoples  to  whom  we  had
proclaimed  the  Gospel  in  the  past,  —  we  found  that,
without  doing  harm  to  the  five  Missions  of  the  pre-
ceding year,  we  could  undertake  two  new  ones, —  one
in  the  Huron  language,  and  one  in  the  Algonquin;
and this last,  with  the  help  of  two  of  our  Fathers


132  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

Nous  voila  done  incontinent  apres  diftribuez  en
fept  millions,  oil  on  a  prefche  &  publie  le  Royaume
de  Dieu  a  feize  ou  dix  fept  mille  Barbares  de  diuer-
fes  nations.  II  n'y  a  eu  bourg  ny  bourgade,  cabane
ny  feu  oil  on  a  pu.  aborder,  oil  on  ne  fe  foit  acquite"
de  fa  fondtion.  Et  fi  nous  n'y  voyons  tant  de  con-
uerfions  que  nous  defirerions,  au  moins  [7]  auons
nous  la  confolation  de  trouuer  dans  les  efprits  beau-
coup  plus  de  difpofition  a  la  Foy  que  les  annees  pre-
cedentes.

Cependant  c'efl  vne  chofe  pitoyable  que  de  voir
les  idees  &  les  imaginations  dans  lefquelles  le  malin
efprit  entretiet  encore  ces  pauures  peuples.  Les  vns
entrent  dans  des  frayeurs  auffi  toft  qu'ils  nous  voy-
ent,  &  demandent  fi  la  maladie  ne  reuient  point  auec
nous:  les  autres  apres  nous  auoir  entendu  n'ont
autre  replique  fmon  qu'ils  n'ont  point  d'efprit.
Quelques  vns  deuant  que  de  s'engager,  demandent  fi
on  leur  donne  affeurance  qu'ils  vieilliront:  d' autres
font  inftance  que  nous  entreprenions  done  tout  en-
femble  la  guerifon  de  tous  les  malades,  puis  que  nous
defendons  les  feftins  &  les  danfes  de  ceremonie,  qui
font  les  remedes  du  pays.  D 'autres  demandent  de-
quoy  ils  viuront,  &  a  quoy  ils  pafferont  leur  temps,
puis  qu'on  leur  defend  de  defrober,  &  d  entretenir
les  femmes.  D'autres  ne  ceffent  de  protefter  qu'ils
croyet,  auec  mille  complaifances  &  cajolleries,  qui
n'aboutiffent  [8]  en  fin  qu'a  demander  ou  defrober
quelque  chofe  f'ils  peuuent.

II  s'en  trouue  qui  efcoutent  ferieufement,  &  con-
fentent  volontiers  a  tout,  demeurans  couaincus  de  la
verite;  mais  preffez  d'en  venir  a  l'execution,  &  de
quitter  toutes  leurs  fuperftitions ;  &  particulierement


1641  -42]  RELA  TJON  OF  1640-41  133

recently  arrived  from  Quebeq,  and  sent  for  this  pur-
pose.

Behold  us  then,  immediately  after,  distributed
among  seven  missions,  where  we  preached  and  pub-
lished the  Kingdom  of  God  to  sixteen  or  seventeen
thousand  Barbarians  of  divers  tribes.  There  was  no
village  or  hamlet,  cabin  or  fireside,  to  which  we  could
approach,  where  we  did  not  discharge  our  duty.
And  if  we  do  not  see  in  them  so  many  conversions
as  we  might  desire,  at  least  [7]  we  have  the  consola-
tion of  finding  in  their  minds  much  more  inclination
to  the  Faith  than  in  preceding  years.

Notwithstanding,  it  is  a  pitiable  thing  to  see  the
ideas  and  imaginations  in  which  the  evil  spirit  still
keeps  these  poor  tribes.  Some  of  them  are  seized
with  fright  as  soon  as  they  see  us,  and  ask  if  the
malady  does  not  return  with  us ;  others,  after  having
heard  us,  have  no  reply  except  that  they  have  no
mind.  Some,  before  pledging  themselves,  ask  if  we
will  assure  them  that  they  shall  grow  old ;  others  en-
treat that  we  should  then  undertake  wholly  the  heal-
ing of  all  the  sick,  since  we  forbid  the  feasts  and  the
ceremonious  dances,  which  are  the  remedies  of  the
country;  others  ask  upon  what  they  shall  live,  and
how  they  shall  spend  their  time,  since  they  are  for-
bidden to  steal,  and  to  cherish  the  women;  others  do
not  cease  to  protest  that  they  believe,  with  a  thou-
sand politenesses  and  flatteries,  which  end  [8]  at  last
only  in  asking  for  something  or  in  stealing  it  if
they  can.

There  are  some  who  listen  seriously  and  consent
willingly  to  everything,  remaining  convinced  of  the
truth ;  but  on  being  urged  to  come  to  the  performance
of  it, and  to  forsake  all their  superstitions, — and


134  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21

leurs  AafKSandiKs  ou  diables  familiers,  vrais  ou  ima-
ginaires,  perdent  courage,  ne  pouuans  fe  refoudre  a
quitter  ce  que  depuis  tant  de  fiecles  ils  fe  font  per-
fuadez  eftre  le  principe  de  leur  conferuation  &  de  celle
de  leur  famille,  &  la  fource  de  tout  leur  bon-heur.

On  trouue  a  1' ordinaire  parmy  cette  pouffiere  quel-
que  perle,  ie  veux  dire  quelque  ame  predeftinee,  qui
profite  de  nos  vifites.  Mais  le  nombre  en  eft  en
eff et  tel  que  celuy  des  predeftinez,  petit  en  comparai-
fon  des  autres.  Le  nombre  de  ceux  qui  ont  eft6
baptifez  cette  annee  eft  d'vne  centaine,  dont  plu-
fieurs  font  morts  heureuf ement :  fans  parler  de  plu-
fieurs  petits  enfans  decedez  qui  auoient  efte  baptifez
les  annees  precedentes.

[9]  Apres  tout,  nous  voyons  icy  au  milieu  de  cette
grande  Barbarie,  vne  petite  Eglife  copofee  d'vne
trentaine  de  Francois,  &  d'vne  cinquantaine  de  Sau-
uages  faifans  profeffion,  affiftez  &  fauorifez  continu-
ellement  d'vne  Prouidece  de  Dieu  toute  fpeciale;
nous  ne  pouuos  penfer  autre  chofe,  finon  que  c'eft
vn  peu  de  leuain  qui  fe  forme  petit  a  petit,  qui  en
fon  temps  produira  fon  effet.

Or  en  quelque  temps  que  ce  foit  qu'il  plaife  a
Dieu  donner  benediction  pleine  &  entiere  a  cet  ou-
urage;  par  ou  il  faudra  comencer,  ce  fera  d'arrefter
&  affermir  les  manages  qui  n'ot  icy  aucune  flabilite,
&  fe  ropent  plus  facilemet  que  les  promeffes  que  les
enfans  fe  font  en  Frace  les  vns  aux  autres.  Et  d'au-
tant  qu'vne  des  principales  caufes  de  leur  diffolutio,
vient  de  ce  que  quelqu'vne  des  parties  ne  peut  four-
nir  a  l'autre  fes  befoins  &  neceffitez,  ce  qui  fait
qu'elle  les  va  chercher  ailleurs;  l'vn  des  plus  puif-
fans  moyens  de  les  lier  auec  indiffolubilite  fera  de
les  affifter  en  telle  rencontre.


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -41  135

especially  their  Aaskwandiks  or  familiar  demons,  real
or  imaginary, —  they  lose  courage,  not  being  able  to
resolve  on  abandoning  that  which  for  so  many  ages
they  have  persuaded  themselves  to  be  essential  to
their  preservation  and  that  of  their  families,  and  the
source  of  all  their  good  fortune.

We  find  generally  in  this  dust  some  pearl,  I  mean
some  predestined  soul,  which  profits  by  our  visits.
But  the  number  of  these  is  indeed  like  that  of  the
elect, —  small  in  comparison  with  the  others.  The
number  of  those  who  have  been  baptized  this  year
is  about  a  hundred,  of  whom  several  have  died  hap-
pily,—  without  speaking  of  many  little  children
deceased,  who  had  been  baptized  in  preceding  years.

[9]  After  all,  we  find  here,  in  the  midst  of  this
great  Barbarism,  a  little  Church  composed  of  about
thirty  Frenchmen,  and  about  fifty  Savages  making
profession,  assisted  and  continually  favored  by  a
very  special  Providence  of  God :  we  can  believe  no
other  thing,  but  that  it  is  a  bit  of  leaven  which,  little
by  little,  is  growing,  and  which  in  its  own  time  will
produce  its  effect.

Now  —  in  whatever  time  it  may  be  that  it  please
God  to  give  full  and  entire  blessing  to  this  work  —
the  way  by  which  we  must  begin  will  be  to  fix  and
confirm  the  marriages,  which  have  here  no  stability,
and  are  broken  more  easily  than  the  promises  which
children  make  to  one  another  in  France.  And, — in-
asmuch as  one  of  the  principal  causes  of  their  disso-
lution comes  from  this,  that  one  of  the  parties  is  not
able  to  supply  the  needs  and  necessities  of  the  other,
which  causes  that  other  to  go  and  seek  them  else-
where,—  one  of  the  most  effective  means  of  binding
them  indissolubly  will  be  to  assist  them  in  such  a  case.


136  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.21

Ie  ne  fcaurois  affez  admirer  la  Prouidence  diuine,
ny  affez  adorer  fa  bote"  &  [10]  mifericorde,  en  ce
qu'ayant  infinue  vn  petit  mot  de  ce  fuiet,  aux  prece-
dentes  Relatios,  il  luy  a  pleu  fufciter  tout  plein  de
faindtes  ames,  dont  la  charite  a  furmonte  toutes  nos
efperances:  en  forte  que  nous  auons  affeurance,  au
moins  pour  quelque  temps,  qu'il  ne  tiendra  pas  aux
moyens  d'affifter  plufieurs  de  ces  pauures  barbares,
que  leurs  manages  ne  foient  redus  ftables.  C'eft  a
quoy  moyennant  cette  affiftance,  nous  auons  com-
mence a  trauailler.

Quelques  perfonnes  de  merite  ne  fe  contentant  pas
d'vne  aumofne  paffagere,  ont  refolu  de  faire  des  fon-
dations  perpetuelles  de  ces  dix  ou  douze  efcus,  auec
lefquels  ie  difois  qu'on  pouuoit  affermir  chacun  de
ces  manages;  afin  qu'ils  y  foient  continuellement
appliquez  par  l'ordre  des  Peres  de  noftre  Compagnie,
tandis  que  la  Foy  fe  trouuera  fermemet  enracin£e
dans  les  conjoints,  &  dans  les  maifons:  &  au  cas
qu'elle  vint  a  manquer  en  eux,  qu'on  la  puiffe  proui-
gner  dans  d'autres  families  qui  fe  Chriftianiferont ;
a  quoy  le  fonds  de  telle  rente  fera  defline.  Ce  qui
eft  en  [i  i]  effet  eftablir  &  entretenir  le  Chriftianifme
dans  ces  contrees,  par  vne  deuotion  auffi  iudicieufe
que  charitable.

Entre  ceux  qui  fe  font  portez  a  cette  charite,  s'en
font  trouuez  quelques  vns,  a  ce  que  i'apprens,  defga-
gez  du  mariage  &  fans  enfans;  ou  mefme  qui  ont
toufiours  vefcu  libres  de  ce  lien,  qui  ont  creu  qu'ils
pouuoient  icy  acquerir  des  enfans  pour  Dieu  &  pour
eux,  par  cette  voye  de  faindte  adoption,  &  pour  per-
petuer  leur  nom  en  cette  terre  d'Eglife  naiffante,
lors  qu'il  fe  perd  en  la  leur. Et  faire  que  par  ce


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  137

I  cannot  sufficiently  admire  divine  Providence,  nor
sufficiently  adore  his  goodness  and  [10]  mercy, —
since,  having  slightly  alluded  to  this  subject  in  pre-
ceding Relations,  it  has  pleased  him  to  quicken  many
holy  souls,  whose  charity  has  surpassed  all  our  hopes ;
so  that  we  have  assurance,  at  least  for  some  time,
that  means  will  not  be  lacking  to  assist  many  of  these
poor  barbarians,  that  their  marriages  may  be  rendered
stable.  It  is  for  this  purpose,  with  the  help  of  this
aid,  that  we  have  begun  to  work.

Certain  persons  of  merit,  not  being  contented  with
a  temporary  alms,  have  resolved  to  make  perpetual
foundations  of  the  ten  or  twelve  ecus  with  which  I
said  that  each  of  these  marriages  could  be  established ;
so  that  they  may  be  continually  thus  employed,  by
order  of  the  Fathers  of  our  Society,  while  the  Faith
shall  be  firmly  rooted  in  these  husbands  and  wives  and
in  their  families ;  and  in  case  it  happen  to  be  lacking
in  them,  that  we  may  propagate  it  in  other  families
which  shall  be  Christianized ;  the  principal  for  such
income  shall  be  set  aside  for  this.  This  is  in  [11]
truth  to  establish  and  maintain  Christianity  in  these
regions,  by  a  devotion  as  judicious  as  charitable.

Among  those  who  are  inclined  to  this  charity  have
been  found  some,  as  I  learn,  who  are  freed  from
marriage  and  without  children,  or  even  who  have
always  lived  free  from  such  bond,  and  who  have
believed  that  they  might  here  gain  children  for  God
and  for  themselves,  by  this  manner  of  holy  adoption,
and  thus  perpetuate  their  names  in  this  land  of  a  ris-
ing Church,  when  these  are  lost  in  their  own.  And
to  cause  that  by  this  means  remembrance  of  them
may  be  always  more  present  in  the  prayers  of  these
people,  they  have  desired  that  their  names  should  be


138  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

moyen  leur  memoire  y  fuft  toufiours  plus  prefente
dans  les  prieres;  ils  ont  defire"  que  leur  nom  fuft
donne  aux  families  prouenantes  de  ces  manages,
procurez  par  les  efforts  de  leur  charite.  Nous  en
attendons  la  memoire  pour  commencer  a  executer
leur  deffein,  pendant  que  le  liure  de  vie  conferuera
le  nom  de  tous,  pour  rendre  vn  iour  a  vn  chacun
felon  fon  merite  &  charite" ;  c'eft  dequoy  nous  fuppli-
ons  tres-humblement  la  diuine  Maiefte.

Tant  de  faindtes  penfees  &  inuentions  pour  fecou-
rir  nos  pauures  Sauuages,  [12]  jointes  au  courage  de
Meffieurs  de  la  Compagnie  de  la  Nouuelle  France,
qui  ne  fe  rebuttent  d'aucune  difgrace  du  temps,
pour  faire  marcher  le  principal  de  nos  affaires,  qui
depend  beaucoup  de  leur  refolution  &  bonne  volonte\
nous  confirme  dans  la  penfee  que  Dieu  toft  ou  tard
fera  quelque  chofe  de  grand.


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -41  139

given  to  the  families  proceeding  from  these  mar-
riages, procured  by  the  efforts  of  their  charity.  We
are  awaiting  the  list  of  these,  that  we  may  begin  the
execution  of  their  design ;  while  the  book  of  life  will
preserve  the  names  of  all,  in  order  one  day  to  render
to  each  one,  according  to  his  merit  and  his  charity :
for  this  we  supplicate  most  humbly  the  divine  Maj-
esty.

So  many  holy  thoughts  and  plans  for  aiding  our
poor  Savages  [12]  joined  to  the  courage  of  Messieurs
of  the  Company  of  New  France, — which  is  never  dis-
heartened by  any  misfortune  of  the  times  in  advanc-
ing the  chief  object  of  our  work,  which  depends  much
upon  their  firmness  and  good  will, — confirm  us  in  the
opinion  that  sooner  or  later  God  will  do  some  great
thing.


140  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


CHAPITRE  II.

DE LA RESIDENCE FIXE & MISSION DE SAINCTE

MARIE.

DV  nombre  des  Peres  que  nous  eftions  dans  les
Huros,  au  temps  de  la  derniere  Relation,  le
Pere  Paul  Ragueneau,  &  le  Pere  Iofeph  Pon-
cet  defcendirent  a  QuebeK  l'Efte  dernier  pour  y
paffer  l'Hyuer,  &  fur  le  commencement  de  1' Au-
tocrine arriuerent  icy  le  Pere  Claude  Pijart,  &  le  Pere
Charles  Raymbault  pour  la  langue  Algonquine,  qui
accomplirent  le  mefme  nombre  de  [13]  tre[i]ze  Peres
que  nous  eftions  l'an  paffe\  Celt  en  cette  Maifon
de  la  Mere  de  Dieu  oil  quelquefois  l'annee  nous  nous
voyons  tous  reiinis,  &  mefme  nous  efperons  qu'elle
pourra  feruir  de  retraidte  aux  pauures  Sauuages  Chre-
ftiens,  qui  fe  fentans  emportez  par  le  torrent  des
defbauches  &  des  couftumes  barbares  &  infernales  du
Pays,  demeurans  dans  les  bourgs,  auront  moyen  de
fe  fauuer  du  naufrage  fe  retirant  proche  de  nous:
quelques  vns  l'ont  defia  fait,  &  nous  donnerons  volon-
tiers  le  voifmage  aux  families  entieres  qui  voudront
s'en  approcher,  dont  d'aucuns  nous  ont  donne  parole.
Quoy  qu'il  en  foit,  ce  nous  eft  a  tous  vne  confola-
tion  bien  fenfible  de  voir  icy  arriuer  de  deux,  trois,
&  quatre  lieue's  loin  les  Samedys  au  foir  nombre  de
nos  Chreftiens  qui  s'y  rangent  des  bourgades  plus
proches  pour  y  celebrer  le  Dimanche,  &  rendre  tous
enfemble  au  milieu  de  cette  Barbarie,  les  homages


[1641  -42  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  141


CHAPTER  II.

OF THE PERMANENT RESIDENCE AND MISSION OF

SAINTE MARIE.

OF  the  number  of  Fathers  who  were  with  us  in
the  Huron  country  at  the  time  of  the  last  Re-
lation, Father  Paul  Ragueneau,  and  Father
Joseph  Poncet  went  down  to  Quebek  last  Summer
to  spend  the  Winter  there ;  and,  toward  the  begin-
ning of  Autumn,  Father  Claude  Pijart  and  Father
Charles  Raymbault  came  here,  on  account  of  [their
knowledge  of]  the  Algonquin  language;  and  they
complete  the  same  number  of  [13]  thirteen  Fathers
which  we  had  last  year.  It  is  in  this  House  of  the
Mother  of  God  that  at  some  time  in  the  year  we  see
ourselves  all  reunited ;  and  we  even  hope  that  it  may
serve  as  a  retreat  to  the  poor  Christian  Savages,
who, —  feeling  themselves  carried  away  by  a  torrent
of  debaucheries,  and  by  the  barbarous  and  infernal
customs  of  their  Country,  while  dwelling  in  their
own  villages, —  will  have  a  means  of  escaping  ship-
wreck by  taking  refuge  near  us ;  some  of  them  have
already  done  so,  and  we  shall  willingly  welcome  as
neighbors  entire  families  who  may  wish  to  approach
us,  some  of  whom  have  given  us  their  word.

At  all  events,  it  is  a  very  great  consolation  to  us
to  see  arrive  here  from  two,  three,  and  four  leagues'
distance  on  Saturday  evenings,  a  number  of  our
Christians,  who  dispose  themselves  in  villages  very
near [the  residence],  in  order  to celebrate  Sunday


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

qui  depuis  [14]  la  creation  du  monde  y  auoient  efle
deniez  a  celuy  qui  feul  les  meritoit.  Nombre  d'Al-
gonquins  ayant  hyuerne  cet  hyuer  pres  de  nous,
c'efloit  vn  doux  motet  d'entendre  en  mefme  temps
les  loiianges  de  Dieu  en  trois  &  quatre  langues ;  en
vn  mot,  ie  puis  dire  que  cette  maifon  eft  la  maifon
de  paix,  iufques  la  mefme  que  les  Sauuages  qui  ail-
leurs  nous  font  plus  ennemis  &  les  plus  infolens
contre  nous,  prennent  ce  femble  des  fentimens  &  vne
humeur  toute  contraire,  lors  que  nous  les  voyons
chez  nous.  Nous  efperons  qu'auec  le  temps  les
chofes  s'adouciront  de  plus  en  plus,  &  qu'en  fin  on
les  verra  reduits  en  leur  deuoir.

L'ordre  que  Monfieur  le  Cheualier  de  Montmagny
noftre  Gouuerneur,  apporta  l'an  paffe  au  temps  qu'ils
eftoiet  defcendus  en  traidte  pour  punir  &  reprimer
les  infolences  qu'icy  haut  ils  auoient  commis  contre
nous,  a  eu  defia  de  bons  effects  dans  l'efprit  de  ces
Barbares,  qui  apres  leur  retour  n'ont  pas  moins  ad-
mire la  fageffe  de  fa  conduite  &  de  fa  iuflice  fur  le
paffe,  qu'ils  ont  [15]  redoute  ces  menaces  pour  l'ad-
uenir.  Iufques  la  mefme  que  quelques  nations  enti-
eres  nous  ont  icy  rendu  iuflice  du  tort  que  nous
auions  receu  de  quelques  vns  d'entr'eux  pour  euiter
la  punition  &  le  reproche  qu'ils  craignoient  de  rece-
uoir  la  bas  aux  trois  Riuieres.  C'eft  fagement  fe
feruir  de  fon  authority,  de  reduire  fous  les  loix  de  la
iuflice  vn  peuple  barbare,  efloigne  de  trois  cens
lieues  de  vous;  &  c'efl  employer  faindlement  fon
pouuoir,  de  le  rendre  efficace  pour  maintenir  en  paix
les  Predicateurs  de  la  Foy,  dans  vn  pais  ou  l'impiete
&  l'infolence  ont  regne  depuis  le  commencement  du
monde. Vn  tel  appuy  de  l'Euangile  ne  feruira  pas


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  143

therein,  and  in  the  midst  of  this  Barbarism  to  render
all  together  the  homage  which  since  [14]  the  crea-
tion of  the  world  has  been  there  denied  to  him  who
alone  has  merited  it.  A  number  of  Algonquins  hav-
ing wintered  near  11s  this  year,  it  was  a  sweet
anthem  to  hear  at  the  same  time  the  praises  of  God  in
three  or  four  languages ;  in  a  word,  I  can  say  that  this
house  is  the  house  of  peace, —  so  much  so,  that  the
very  Savages  who  elsewhere  are  most  hostile  and
most  insolent  towards  us,  take  on  an  appearance  of
feeling  and  disposition  wholly  different,  when  we
see  them  in  our  home.  We  hope  that,  with  time,
matters  will  become  more  and  more  quiet,  and  that,
at  last,  we  shall  see  the  people  brought  to  their  duty.
The  order  that  Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de  Mont-
magny,  our  Governor,  established  last  year  at  the
time  when  they  went  down  to  the  trade,  in  punish-
ing and  repressing  the  acts  of  insolence  that  had
been  committed  against  us  up  here,  has  already  had
a  good  effect  on  the  minds  of  these  Barbarians.
They,  after  their  return,  did  not  less  admire  the  wis-
dom of  his  conduct  and  of  his  justice  in  the  past  than
they  [15]  feared  his  menaces  for  the  future;  indeed,
even  a  few  entire  tribes  have  rendered  us  justice
here  for  the  wrong  we  had  received  from  some  among
them,  in  order  to  avoid  the  punishment  and  the  re-
proach which  they  feared  to  receive  down  at  the
three  Rivers.  It  is  using  his  authority  wisely  to
bring  under  the  law  of  justice  a  barbarous  people,
three  hundred  leagues  from  you,  and  it  is  a  pious
employment  of  power  to  render  it  efficacious  in  main-
taining in  peace  the  Preachers  of  the  Faith,  in  a
country  where  impiety  and  insolence  have  reigned
from  the  beginning  of  the  world. Such  a  support  of


144  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  21

moins  a  la  conuerlion  de  ces  peuples,  que  ceux  mel-
mes  qui  leur  annoncent  la  parole  de  Dieu.  II  n'y  a
que  Dieu  feul  qui  en  puille  eftre  la  iufte  recompenfe :
nous  le  prions  que  cela  foit.

Le  2.  iour  de  Nouembre  nous  quittafmes  tous  la
maifon,  nous  feparant  auec  autant  de  ioye  pour  com-
mencer  nos  Millions,  que  nous  en  auions  reffenty,
nous  voyans  tous  de  compagnie.  [16]  Le  Pere  Pierre
Chaltelain  y  fut  laifle  tout  feul  pour  y  receuoir  &
entretenir  les  Chreftiens,  &  pouruoir  a  la  paix  &  au
repos  du  dedans  &  du  dehors,  lors  que  les  Sauuages
y  aborderoient :  ce  qu'il  a  fait  auec  vne  benediction
de  Dieu  particuliere.

Le  foin  de  la  Million  qui  porte  le  nom  de  cette
Maifon,  qui  comprend  quatre  ou  cinq  bourgs  des  plus
voifins  eftoit  efcheu  au  Pere  Ifaac  Iogues,  &  au  Pere
Francois  du  Peron,  y  ayans  eu  les  mefmes  emplois  &
les  mefmes  difficultez  que  nous  verrons  dans  les
Miffions  fuiuates:  ils  ont  auffi.  participe  aux  coniza-
tions qu'il  y  a  de  trauailler  dans  la  vigne  du  grand
Maiftre  qui  nous  y  employe.


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  145

the  Gospel  will  not  avail  less  for  the  conversion  of
these  tribes  than  even  they  who  announce  to  them
the  word  of  God.  It  is  God  alone  who  can  be  there-
for the  just  reward;  we  pray  that  so  it  may  be.

On  the  2nd  day  of  November,  we  all  left  the
house, — separating,  in  order  to  begin  our  Missions,
with  as  much  joy  as  we  had  experienced  in  finding
ourselves  all  together.  [16]  Father  Pierre  Chaste-
lain  was  left  there  quite  alone,  to  receive  and  enter-
tain the  Christians,  and  provide  for  peace  and  quiet
within  and  without  when  the  Savages  should  ar-
rive,—  which  he  did  with  a  special  blessing  of  God.

The  care  of  the  Mission  which  bears  the  name  of
this  House,  and  which  includes  four  or  five  of  the
nearest  villages,  fell  to  Father  Isaac  Jogues,  and  to
Father  Francois  du  Peron ;  having  had  therein  the
same  employments  and  the  same  difficulties  that  we
shall  see  in  the  following  Missions,  they  have  like-
wise participated  in  the  consolations  that  there  are
in  laboring  in  the  vineyard  of  the  great  Master  who
employs  us  therein.


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21


[17]  CHAPITRE  III.

DE LA MISSION DE LA CONCEPTION.

LE  Pere  Francois  le  Mercier  a  eu  le  principal  foin
de  cette  Miffion ;  i'ay  eu  la  confolation  de  l'y
accompagner  &  de  voir  f  ouuent  de  mes  yeux  le
plus  agreable  obiedt,  &  le  plus  grand  threfor  que
nous  ayons  en  ces  contrees.  Celt  la  premiere
Eglife  qui  y  foit,  compofee  de  quelque  nombre  de
Chreftiens  qui  viuent  en  la  crainte  de  Dieu,  &  l'ado-
rent  en  verite  au  milieu  d'vne  nation  qui  depuis  cinq
mille  ans  n'a  recogneu  que  les  demons  pour  maiftres.
La  plus  part  de  ces  bons  Chreftiens  fe  retrouuent
dans  le  principal  bourg  de  la  Miffion,  qui  s'eftend  fur
plufieurs  autres  bourgs  &  bourgades.

C'eft  de  ce  bourg  de  la  Conception,  (qui  porte  le
nom  de  toute  la  Miffion)  qu'eftoit  ce  braue  &  gene-
reux  Chreftien  Iofeph  Chihb'atenhSa,  dont  il  a  efte"  fi
fouuent  parle  dans  les  relations  [18]  precedentes,  &
que  les  Iroquois  maffacrerent  l'Efte  paffe,  s'eftans
ruez  inopinement  deffus  luy.

Qui  n'euft  iuge  que  tout  l'edifice  ne  deuft  tomber
en  ruyne  apres  vne  mort  fi  funeite,  ce  femble,  de
celuy  que  tous,  tant  infideles  que  Chreftiens,  regar-
doiet  comme  le  pilier  &  la  colomne  de  cette  petite
Eglife  naiff ante  ?  Et  fur  qui  en  effect  nous  iettions
les  yeux  comme  fur  vn  Apoftre  de  ce  pays,  puis  que
ne  refpirant  que  la  gloire  de  Dieu,  n'ayant  de  l'amour
que  pour  luy,  &  ne  faifant  eftat  que  des  veritez  de


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  147


[17]  CHAPTER  III.

OF THE MISSION OF LA CONCEPTION.

FATHER  Francois  le  Mercier  has  had  the  prin-
cipal care  of  this  Mission ;  I  have  had  the  satis-
faction of  accompanying  him  to  it  and  of  often
seeing  with  my  own  eyes  the  most  pleasing  object,
and  the  greatest  treasure  that  we  have  in  these  re-
gions,—  that  is,  the  first  Church  which  was  planted
here  composed  of  a  small  number  of  Christians  who
live  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  adore  him  in  truth,  in
the  midst  of  a  nation  which  for  five  thousand  years
has  recognized  only  demons  as  masters.  The  great-
er part  of  these  good  Christians  are  found  in  the
chief  village  of  the  Mission,  which  extends  over
several  other  villages  and  hamlets.

It  was  to  this  village  of  la  Conception  (which
bears  the  name  of  the  whole  Mission)  that  the  brave
and  generous  Christian  Joseph  Chihwatenhwa  be-
longed, of  whom  there  has  been  so  often  mention  in
preceding  relations,  [18]  and  whom  the  Iroquois
slew  last  Summer,  having  rushed  unexpectedly  upon
him.

Who  would  not  have  thought  that  the  whole  edifice
must  fall  into  ruin  after  the  apparently  so  disastrous
death  of  him  whom  all,  unbelievers  as  well  as  Chris-
tians, regarded  as  the  pillar  and  column  of  this  little
rising  Church?  and  upon  whom,  in  truth,  we  had
looked  as  an  Apostle  of  this  country,  since  —  existing
only  for  the  glory  of  God,  having  love  only  for  him,


148  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

la  foy,  qui  fans  ceffe  efclairoient  fon  efprit,  &  ani-
moient  quafi  tous  f  es  delirs ;  non  f  eulement  il  en  auoit
les  qualitez,  mais  auffi  en  auoit  fait  fouuent  l'office
au  peril  de  fa  vie,  n'y  ayant  lieu  dans  toutes  ces  con-
trees  oil  de  fon  viuat  nous  ayons  mis  le  pied,  que  par
tout  il  n'y  ait  prefche  hautement  des  grandeurs  de
celuy  qu'ils  deuoient  adorer  pour  Dieu,  &  des  obliga-
tions que  nous  auons  au  Sang  &  a.  la  Croix  de  Iefus-
Chrift.

Mais  tant  s'en  faut  que  la  foy  ait  receu  aucun  dom-
mage  de  ce  coup  dans  le  [19]  cceur  des  Croyans  que
pluftoft  elle  femble  s'eftre  affermie  plus  qu'aupara-
uant.

Sa  femme,  qui  fembloit  deuoir  eftre  la  plus  abba-
tue  de  cet  accident,  nous  a  dit  que  lors  que  la  nou-
uelle  luy  en  fut  apportee,  elle  demeura  quelque  teps
interdite,  fans  penfer  a  rien,  &  que  la  premiere  pen-
fee  qui  luy  vint,  fut  ce  que  fi  fouuent  elle  auoit  en-
tendu  dire  au  defundt  en  plufieurs  occafions.  Celuy
qui  en  ejl  le  maijlre  en  a  dispofe"  de  la  forte,  qu  y  ferions-
nous?  Elle  s'eft  en  fuitte  comportee  de  la  forte  dans
fon  affliction,  que  ie  ne  fcai  ce  que  pourroit  faire  de
mieux  vne  des  meilleures  Chreftiennes  de  noltre
Europe.  Plufieurs  de  la  famille  nous  ont  dit  que  les
difcours  que  fi  fouuent  le  defundt  leur  auoit  faits
pendant  fa  vie,  ne  les  ayans  point  conuaincu  de  fon
viuant,  au  temps  de  fa  mort,  leur  reuindrent  dans
1' efprit,  &  les  toucherent  fi  fort,  qu'ils  conceurent  ce
que  iamais  ils  n'auoient  bien  entendu,  &  prirent  refo-
lution  de  changer  de  vie.

En  effet  fon  frere  aifne  nomme  Teondechorren,
qui  auparauant  n'auoit  fait  beaucoup  d'eftat  de  fes
inftrudtions,  [20]  &  bons  aduis,  nous  vint  trouuer  trois


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  149

relying  only  upon  the  verities  of  the  faith,  which
unceasingly  illuminated  his  mind  and  animated
almost  all  his  desires  —  he  not  only  had  the  qualities
of  one,  but  he  had  even  performed  the  office  of  one
at  the  peril  of  his  life.  There  was  no  place  in  all
these  regions,  in  which  we  had  set  foot  while  he
lived,  where  he  had  not  boldly  preached  the  great-
ness of  him  whom  they  ought  to  adore  as  God,  and
the  obligations  under  which  we  are  to  the  Blood  and
to  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ.

But  so  far  from  the  faith  having  received  any  harm
from  this  blow,  in  the  [19]  hearts  of  the  Believers,
it  seems  rather  to  have  become  firmer  than  before.

His  wife  —  who,  it  seemed,  should  have  been  the
most  cast  down  by  this  occurrence  —  told  us  that,
when  the  news  of  it  was  brought  to  her,  she  remained
some  time  speechless,  without  realizing  anything;
and  that  the  first  thought  which  came  to  her  was
what  she  had  so  often  heard  the  deceased  say  on  many
occasions.  He  zvho  is  the  master  of  it  has  thus  arranged
it;  what  could  zve  do  in  the  matter  ?  She  afterward  so
bore  herself  in  her  affliction,  that  I  do  not  know  how
any  one  of  the  best  Christians  in  our  Europe  could
have  done  better.  Several  of  the  family  told  us  that
the  conversations  which  the  deceased  had  so  often
held  with  them  while  he  lived  —  not  having  con-
vinced them  in  his  lifetime  —  came  again  into  their
minds  at  the  time  of  his  death,  and  so  forcibly
affected  them  that  they  apprehended  that  which
they  had  never  well  understood,  and  made  resolu-
tions to  change  their  lives.

In  fact,  his  elder  brother  named  Teondechorren,
who  before  had  not  had  a  high  regard  for  his  instruc-
tions  [20] and  good  advice,  came  to  us  three  days


150


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JE~SUITES [Vol.  21


iours  apres  le  maffacre,  pour  nous  demander  inftam-
ment  le  Baptefme.  On  1' examine,  on  le  fonde,  on
le  trouue  inftruit  &  informe"  de  tout  ce  qui  eftoit
neceffaire  a  cela.  On  prit  toutesfois  quelque  temps
pour  mieux  encore  recognoiftre  fa  difpofition,  a
laquelle  ne  trouuant  rien  a  redire,  il  fut  baptife  a  la
fefte  de  la  Natiuite  de  Noftre  Dame.  On  luy  donna
le  nom  de  Iofeph,  qui  eft  le  nom  du  defunct,  dans
l'efperace  que  Ton  eut  que  la  vertu  de  fon  feu  frere,
auffi  bien  que  fon  nom  refufciteroit  en  fa  perfonne.
Nous  ne  fcauons  pas  quels  en  feront  les  progrez  &
l'iffue,  mais  a  ce  commencement  nous  ne  receuons
pas  moins  de  contentement  de  luy  que  nous  en  auons
receu  autresfois  de  feu  fon  frere,  lors  qu'il  commenca
d'eftre  Chreftien,  voire  mefme  y  trouuons-nous  quel-
que chofe  de  plus,  auec  cette  difference  neantmoins,
que  fon  frere  n'auoit  eu  perfonne  deuant  foy  qu'il
eut  pu  imiter:  mais  celuy-cy  a  eu  l'exemple  de  fon
frere,  qui  femble  auoir  efte  toute  la  caufe  de  fon  bon
heur.

[21]  La  conuerfion  de  ce  nouueau  Iofeph  femble
d'autant  plus  confiderable,  qu'il  a  trempe  vingt  ans
durant  dans  l'exercice  de  l'Ab'taenhrohi  ou  feftin  &
danfe  de  feu,  le  plus  diabolique,  &  cependant  le  plus
ordinaire  remede  des  maladies  qui  foit  dans  le  pays.
II  nous  a  confirme  tout  ce  qui  en  a  defia  efte  efcrit
autrefois:  &  nous  a  raconte*  qu'enuiron  l'aage  de
vingt  ans,  il  fe  mit  par  fantafie  de  ieuneffe  a  fuiure
ceux  qui  s'en  mefloient:  mais  que  comme  il  eut  veu
qu'il  n'auoit  pas  comme  les  autres,  les  mains  &  la
bouche  a  l'efpreuue  du  feu,  il  fe  gardoit  bien  de  tou-
cher a  ce  qui  eftoit  trop  chaud,  mais  qu'il  en  faifoit


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  151

after  the  murder,  to  ask  us  urgently  for  Baptism.
He  was  examined,  was  sounded,  and  was  found
instructed  and  informed  upon  all  that  was  necessary
for  it.  However,  some  time  was  taken  in  order  the
better  further  to  observe  his  disposition,  in  which
finding  nothing  to  criticize,  he  was  baptized  on  the
feast  of  the  Nativity  of  Our  Lady.  We  gave  him
the  name  of  Joseph,  which  was  the  name  of  the
deceased,  in  the  hope  we  had  that  the  virtue  of  his
late  brother,  as  well  as  his  name,  might  be  made  to
live  again  in  his  person.  We  do  not  know  what  will
be  the  progress  and  outcome  for  him,  but  at  this  be-
ginning we  are  not  receiving  less  satisfaction  from
him  than  we  received  formerly  from  his  late  brother,
when  he  began  to  be  a  Christian ;  nay,  we  even  find
in  him  something  more, —  yet  with  this  difference,
that  his  brother  had  had  no  one  before  him  whom  he
could  imitate ;  but  this  one  has  had  the  example  of
his  brother,  which  seems  to  have  been  the  whole
cause  of  his  good  fortune.

[21]  The  conversion  of  this  new  Joseph  seems  so
much  the  more  important,  as  he  had  been  for  twenty
years  steeped  in  the  practice  of  the  Aoutaenhrohi,  or
festival  and  dance  of  fire, — the  most  diabolical,  and,
at  the  same  time,  the  most  general  remedy  for  mala-
dies that  there  is  in  the  country.  He  has  corrobo-
rated for  us  everything  that  has  been  already  written
about  it ;  and  he  related  to  us  that  when  about  twen-
ty years  old  he  began,  through  a  youthful  fancy,  to
follow  those  who  turned  their  attention  to  this ;  but
when  he  saw  that  he  had  not,  like  the  others,  hands
and  mouth  which  were  fireproof,  he  was  very  care-
ful not  to  touch  what  was  too  hot,  but  he  made  only


152  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

feulement  le  femblant,  &  couuroit  fon  ieu  du  mieux
qu'il  pouuoit.

Au  bout  de  quelque  temps  il  eut  vn  fonge,  dans
lequel  il  fe  vid  afsifter  a  vne  de  ces  danfes  ou  feftins,
&  manier  le  feu  comme  les  autres,  &  entendit  en
mefme  temps  vne  chanfon,  laquelle  il  fut  eftonne  a
fon  refueil  de  fcauoir  en  perfection.  Au  premier
feftin  qui  fe  fit  de  cette  nature,  il  fe  mit  a  chanter  fa
chanfon,  &  voila  petit  a  petit  qu'il  fe  [22]  fent  en-
trer  en  f ureur :  il  prend  les  braizes  &  les  pierres  arden-
tes  auec  les  mains  &  les  dents  du  milieu  des  braziers,
il  enfonce  fon  bras  nud  tout  au  fonds  des  chaudieres
boiiillates,  le  tout  fans  lezion  ny  douleur;  en  vn  mot
le  voila  maiftre  paffe.  Et  depuis,  l'efpace  de  vingt
ans  il  luy  eft  arriue  quelquefois  d'affifter  a  trois  &
quatre  feftins  ou  danfes  de  cette  nature  en  vn  iour,
pour  la  guerifon  des  malades.

II  nous  a  affeure  que  tant  s'en  faut  pour  lors  qu'on
fe  brufle,  qu'au  contraire  on  fent  de  la  fraifcheur  aux
mains  &  a  la  bouche,  mais  que  le  tout  fe  doit  faire
en  fuitte  &  dependemment  de  la  chanfon  qu'on  a
apprife  dans  le  fonge;  qu'autrement  rien  d'extraordi-
naire  ne  fe  fait.

II  nous  difoit  en  outre  que  pour  lors  de  temps  en
temps  il  fe  voyoit  en  fonge  affifter  a  ces  feftins,  &
que  la  on  luy  donnoit  ou  preftoit  quelque  chofe  qu'il
portoit  fur  foy  pendant  la  ceremonie.  Cela  lui  eftoit
vn  aduertiffemet  qu'il  ne  falloit  pas  qu'il  l'entreprit
la  premiere  fois,  qu'il  n'eut  fur  foy  ce  qu'il  auoit  veu
en  fonge,  [23]  ce  qui  faifoit  qu'a  la  premiere  danfe
il  declaroit  fon  defir,  &  auffi  toft  on  luy  iettoit  ce  qu'il
auoit  declare  luy  eftre  neceffaire  pour  iouer  fon  per-
fonnage. Cela  a  mon  iugement,  fe  doit  appeller  de


1641-42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  153

a  pretense  of  doing  it  and  played  his  part  to  the  best
of  his  ability.

At  the  end  of  some  time  he  had  a  dream,  in  which
he  saw  himself  present  at  one  of  these  dances  or
festivals,  and  handling  fire  like  the  others,  and  he
heard  at  the  same  time  a  song,  which  he  was  aston-
ished to  know  perfectly  on  awaking.  At  the  first
feast  of  this  kind  which  was  made,  he  began  to  sing
his  song,  and  behold,  by  degrees  he  [22]  felt  himself
becoming  frenzied, — he  took  the  burning  embers
and  the  hot  stones  with  his  hands  and  with  his  teeth
from  the  midst  of  the  live  coals,  he  plunged  his  bare
arm  to  the  bottom  of  the  boiling  kettles,  and  all  with-
out any  injury  or  pain,  in  a  word,  he  was  master  of
his  trade.  And  since  then  for  the  space  of  twenty
years,  it  has  befallen  him  sometimes  to  be  present  at
three  or  four  festivals  or  dances  of  this  kind  in  one
day,  for  the  healing  of  the  sick.

He  assured  us  that,  far  from  being  burned  then,
one  felt,  on  the  contrary,  a  coolness  of  the  hands
and  mouth ;  but  that  all  must  be  done  following  and
depending  upon  the  song  that  has  been  learned  in
the  dream;  that  otherwise  nothing  extraordinary
takes  place.

He  told  us,  besides,  that  then  from  time  to  time
he  saw  himself  in  dreams  present  at  these  feasts,  and
that  then  something  was  given  or  lent  him  that  he
should  wear  about  his  person  during  the  ceremony.
This  was  a  warning  to  him  that  he  must  not  under-
take it  the  next  time,  unless  he  had  about  him  that
which  he  had  seen  in  his  dream ;  [23]  for  this  reason,
at  the  next  dance,  he  declared  his  wish,  and  immedi-
ately there  was  thrown  him  that  which  he  had  de-
clared to  be  necessary  to  him,  in  order  that  he  might


154  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21

fon  vray  nom,  renouuellement  d'hommage  &  de  recon-
noiffance  que  le  malin  efprit  tire  de  teps  en  teps
de  ces  patmres  Peuples,  come  des  efclaues  de  fa
puiffance.

Maintenant  ce  pauure  home  eft  tout  ratiy ,  de  fe
voir  en  l'eflat  oil  il  eft.  II  va  fouuent  fe  reprefen-
tant  qu'il  eft  comme  vn  prisonier  de  guerre  de  ces
quartiers,  efchappe  de  la  main  de  fes  ennemis;  pen-
dant que  fes  compagnons  attachez  aux  liens,  font  a
la  veille  de  fouffrir  d' horribles  tourmens:  ce  font  fes
propres  penfees.  II  a  tout  d'vn  coup  rompu  auec
toutes  les  fuperftitions  du  pays ;  &  en  tous  les  f eftins
oil  il  a  efte  inuite  depuis  fon  baptefme,  il  a  gene-
reufement  garde  la  liberte  que  nous  demandons  de
nos  Chreftiens  en  telles  rencontres:  &  par  tout  ou  il
fe  trouue,  il  fait  ouuertemet  profeffion  de  ce  qu'il  eft.
II  a  voulu  que  la  volonte  du  defunct,  fut  executee,
touchant  la  petite  Therefe  fa  niepce,  [24]  &  qu'elle
fut  menee  a  QuebeK,  &  mife  entre  les  mains  des  Meres
Vrfulines,  refolu  a  tout  ce  que  Dieu  en  ordonneroit.
Et  en  vn  mot,  il  nous  donne  tout  contentement.

Ce  bon  homme  iufques  icy  n'eftoit  pas  beaucoup
confiderable  parmy  ceux  de  fa  Nation :  mais  depuis
qu'il  s'eft  fait  Chreftien  il  a  efte  regarde  de  tout
autre  ceil  par  les  Capitaines  mefmes,  &  les  plus  con-
fiderables  de  fon  bourg,  qui  l'ont  voulu  mettre  dans
les  affaires.  Or  vn  iour  comme  il  fe  fut  engage  a
nous  rendre  quelque  feruice  (c'eftoit  pour  faire  le
voyage  de  la  Nation  Neutre,  &  afsifter  au  retour  les
Peres  qui  y  eftoient  en  Mifsions)  s'eitant  en  mefme
temps  rencontre  qu'on  le  voulut  employer  pour  les
affaires  du  public,  il  tafcha  de  ioindre  l'vn  auec  l'au-
tre, &  en  propofa  les expediens au Confeil: mais


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  155

play  his  part.  This,  in  my  judgment,  ought  to  be
called  by  its  true  name,  a  renewal  of  homage  and  of
recognition  that  the  evil  spirit  now  and  then  draws
from  these  poor  Tribes,  as  from  slaves  to  his  power.

Now  this  poor  man  is  wholly  charmed  at  finding
himself  in  his  present  condition.  He  is  often  imagin-
ing that  he  is  like  a  prisoner  of  war  in  these  quarters,
escaped  from  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  while  his
companions,  bound  with  chains,  are  on  the  eve  of
suffering  horrible  torments;  these  are  his  own
thoughts.  He  broke  away,  at  once,  from  all  the
superstitions  of  his  country ;  at  all  the  feasts  to  which
he  has  been  invited  since  his  baptism,  he  has  cour-
ageously kept  the  liberty  that  we  ask  for  our  Chris-
tians on  such  occasions;  and,  wherever  he  has  been,
he  has  openly  made  profession  of  what  he  is.  He
wished  that  the  will  of  the  deceased  should  be  car-
ried out,  concerning  the  little  Therese,  his  niece, —
[24]  that  she  should  be  taken  to  Quebek  and  put  into
the  hands  of  the  Ursuline  Mothers, — saying  that  he
was  resolved  upon  anything  that  God  should  order
concerning  her;  in  a  word,  he  gives  us  complete
satisfaction.

This  good  man,  until  now,  was  not  of  much  impor-
tance among  those  of  his  Tribe;  but  since  he  has
become  a  Christian  he  has  been  looked  upon  in  a
very  different  light  by  the  Captains  themselves,  and
by  the  most  influential  men  of  his  village,  who  have
wished  to  employ  him  in  public  affairs.  Now,  one
day,  when  he  had  engaged  to  render  us  a  certain  serv-
ice (it  was  to  make  a  journey  to  the  Neutral  Nation,
and  to  attend  on  their  return  the  Fathers  who  were
there  on  Missions),  having  found  that  they  wished
to  employ  him  at  the  same  time  in  public  business,


156  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  21

n'ayant  peu  eftre  agreez  par  ceux  qui  y  prefidoient,
les  deux  affaires  eftans  deuenus  incompatibles,  il  pria
qu'on  ne  trouuaft  point  mauuais  qu'il  ne  fe  meflaft
point  de  celles  du  Public,  faifant  vne  proteftation
folemnelle,  Que  par  tout  [25]  011  il  s'agiroit  du
feruice  de  Dieu  &  du  noftre,  il  n'y  auoit  affaire  qu'il
ne  poftpofaft  a  celle  la.

Sa  femme  d'vn  tres-bon  efprit  &  d'vne  belle  hu-
meur  eftant  deuenue  Catechumene  en  mefme  temps
que  fon  mary  fut  baptif£,  fut  en  fin  baptifee  elle
mefme  a  Pafques  dernier,  &  nominee  Catherine:
nous  en  efperons  beaucoup.  Plaife  a  Dieu  benir
ce  mariage  confirme  Chref tiennement  dans  toute  la
ftabilite  fouhaitable.

Ce  n'eft  pas  feulement  fur  la  famille  du  defunct.
Iofeph  Chihb'atenhb'a,  que  les  benedictions  du  Ciel
font  tombees  heureufement  depuis  fa  mort,  mais
nous  en  voyons  des  effects  pleins  de  confolation  fur
tous  les  autres  Chreftiens  qui  compofent  cette  petite
Eglife;  car  a.  peine  pourrions  nous  defirer  plus  de
contentement  &  de  fatisfadtion  que  nous  receuons  de
ce  petit  troupeau,  qui  nous  paroift  comme  vne  petite
maffe  d'or  ef puree  a  la  fournaife  de  plufieurs  tribu-
lations, qui  ont  en  fin  fepare  le  vray  d'auec  le  faux:
de  forte  que  nous  ne  voyos  prefque  plus  perfonne
parmy  nos  Chreftiens,  [26]  de  la  fincerite  duquel
nous  ayons  fuiet  de  douter.

Le  bruit  eftat  venu  au  bourg  de  la  Coception  enui-
ron  la  my-Iauier,  que  nos  PP.  de  la  Miffio  des  Apoft.
aux  Khionotatehronons  s'eftoiet  perdus  das  les  nei-
ges,  en  retournat  ici  faire  vn  tour,  quelques  vns  de
ces  bos  Chrefties  auffi  toft  fe  miret  en  deuoir  de  les
aller  chercher  ou  fecourir;  mais  les  ayat  trouue"  a.  2.


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  157


he  endeavored  to  join  one  with  the  other,  and  pro-
posed expedients  for  that  to  the  Council.  But,  as
these  could  not  be  accepted  by  those  who  presided
thereat, —  the  two  affairs  having  been  incompatible, —
he  begged  they  would  not  take  it  amiss  should  he
not  engage  in  the  Public  business,  making  a  solemn
protestation,  that  whenever  [25]  it  was  a  question  of
the  service  of  God  or  of  ourselves,  there  was  no  busi-
ness which  he  would  not  defer  thereto.

His  wife,  who  has  a  very  good  mind  and  a  beauti-
ful disposition,  having  become  a  Catechumen  at  the
same  time  that  her  husband  was  baptized,  was  finally
herself  baptized  last  Easter,  and  named  Catherine:
we  hope  much  from  her.  May  it  please  God  to  bless
with  all  desirable  stability  this  marriage  which  has
been  confirmed  in  a  Christian  manner.

It  is  not  only  upon  the  family  of  the  deceased
Joseph  Chihwatenhwa,  that  the  blessings  of  Heav-
en have  fallen  favorably  since  his  death ;  but  we  see
its  effects,  full  of  consolation,  on  all  the  other  Chris-
tians who  compose  this  little  Church;  for  we  could
hardly  desire  more  content  and  satisfaction  than  we
receive  from  this  little  flock.  It  appears  to  us  like  a
little  lump  of  gold  refined  in  the  furnace  of  many
tribulations,  which  have  at  last  separated  the  true
from  the  false;  so  that  we  scarcely  see  any  person
among  our  Christians  [26]  whose  sincerity  we  have
reason  to  doubt.

The  report  having  reached  the  village  of  la  Con-
ception, about  the  middle  of  January,  that  our  Fa-
thers of  the  Mission  of  the  Apostles  to  the  Khionon-
tatehronons  had  been  lost  in  the  snow,  in  returning
here  to  make  a  trip,  a  few  of  these  good  Christians
immediately  set  about  going  to  seek  or  aid  them ;  but


158  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

ou  3.  lieues  du  bourg  qui  s'en  venoiet,  apres  auoir
pafTe-  la  nuit  das  les  bois  affez  heureufemet  par  vne
bone  rencontre  ou  pluftoft  coduite  de  Dieu ;  ils  priret
le  deuat  pour  faire  preparer  a  mager  a  ces  pauures
PP.  qui  n'auoiet  mange  de  ce  iour.

Le  defunt  depuis  le  trafport  de  noftre  demeure
hors  de  so  bourg,  auoit  deftine"  vne  partie  de  fa
cabane  pour  vne  chapelle.  Cela  de  fon  viuat  n'auoit
pu  eftre  execute,  fa  mort  eftat  furuenue  au  teps  que
le  bourg  chageoit  de  place,  &  que  chacun  fe  faifoit
vne  nouuelle  cabane.  Mais  au  mois  d'Odtobre  enfui-
uant,  le  tout  fe  trouuat  difpofe\  la  Chappelle  fort
comode  y  fut  dreflee,  &  la  premiere  Meffe  dite  le  14.
du  mefme  mois.  C'eft  en  cette  [27]  Chapelle  (de
laquelle  en  noftre  abfence  ce  nouueau  Chreftien  a  la
clef)  que  s'affemblet  matin  &  foir  les  Chrefties,  pour
faire  leurs  prieres,  aufquelles  prefide  le  Chreftien  le
plus  ancie  &  le  plus  cofiderable  pour  le  preset,  de
cette  petite  Eglife,  nome  Rene  TfondihS'ane.  C'eft
luy  fur  tous  qui  a  le  foin  de  remarquer  le  Saincl  lour.
c'eft  a  dire,  le  Dimanche:  ce  qu'il  fait  auec  les
autres,  difant  tous  les  iours  de  la  femaine  vne  dixaine
de  fon  chapellet  a  ce  deffein.

Ils  s'affemblent  en  cette  mefme  Chapelle,  tous  les
Dimaches,  ou  pour  entendre  la  Mefle  &  l'inftrudtio
publique  lors  que  nous  y  somes,  ou  pour  dire  en
communaute  leur  chapellet.  Quad  ils  penset  que
nous  ne  somes  pas  pour  nous  trouuer  auec  eux  le
Dimache,  raremet  quelqu'vn  d'eux  maque-il  a  fe
trouuer  chez  nous  pour  celebrer  ce  S.  iour.  Celui
dot  ie  parlois  maintenat  Rene  Tfondihb'ane  y  a  paffe
quelquefois  les  8.  iours.  Or  deuant  que  coclure  ce
qui  appartient  a  cette  petite Eglife ;  ie  ne  puis  ob-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  159

having  found  them  2  or  3  leagues  from  the  village
to  which  they  were  coming, —  after  having  passed
the  night  safely  in  the  woods  by  a  favorable  chance,
or  rather  a  leading  of  God, —  they  preceded  them,
in  order  to  have  food  prepared  for  these  poor  Fathers,
who  had  eaten  nothing  that  day.

The  deceased,  after  the  transfer  of  our  residence
from  his  village,  had  intended  to  give  a  part  of  his
cabin  for  a  chapel.  This  during  his  life  could  not
be  accomplished,  his  death  happening  at  the  time
the  site  of  the  village  was  being  changed,  and  when
every  one  was  making  himself  a  new  cabin.  But  in
the  month  of  October  following,  everything  having
been  arranged,  a  very  comfortable  Chapel  was  set  up,
and  the  first  Mass  was  said  on  the  14th  of  the  same
month.  In  this  [27]  Chapel  (of  which  in  our  absence
this  new  Christian  has  the  key)  the  Christians  as-
semble morning  and  evening  in  order  to  say  their
prayers,  at  which  the  oldest  Christian  —  and  at  pres-
ent, the  most  influential  one  of  this  little  Church  —
presides,  who  is  named  Rene  Tsondihwane.  It  is  he,
above  all,  who  has  the  care  of  observing  the  Holy
Day,  that  is  to  say,  Sunday;  which  he  does  in  the
presence  of  the  others,  saying  every  day  of  the  week
a  decade  of  his  rosary  for  this  purpose.

They  meet  together  in  this  same  Chapel,  every
Sunday,  either  to  hear  Mass  and  the  public  instruc-
tion when  we  are  there,  or  to  repeat  in  common  their
rosary.  When  they  think  that  we  are  not  to  be
with  them  on  Sunday,  some  one  of  them  rarely  fails
to  be  present  with  us,  that  he  may  celebrate  this
Holy  day.  He  of  whom  I  was  just  speaking,  Rene*
Tsondihwane,  has  sometimes  spent  8  days  with  us.
Now,  before concluding what concerns this little


160  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

mettre  ce  qui  eit  arriue  a  ce  bon  Sauuage,  qui  eitoit
bien  capable  d'6branler  la  foy,  fi  Dieu  ne  l'eut  affifte
bie  particulieremet.

[28]  II  eft  aage  d'enuiron  foixante  ans.  Au  com-
mencement qu'il  fut  en  aage  de  faire  des  feftins  &
d'y  affifter,  il  eut  vn  fonge  dans  lequel  il  luy  fut
defendu  de  faire  iamais  feftin  de  chien,  ny  fouffrir
qu'on  luy  en  fift,  qu'autrement  malheur  luy  arriue-
roit:  il  auoit  toufiours  eu  vn  grand  foin  d'obferuer
ce  fonge,  iufques  a  ce  que  l'annee  paffee  au  com-
mencement de  1  hyuer,  eftant  alle  en  vifite  en  quel-
que  bourg,  quelque  fien  amy  luy  defira  faire  feftin
de  chien:  il  fe  fouuint  auffi  toft  de  fon  fonge,  toutes-
fois  penfant  en  mefme  temps  qu'il  eftoit  Chreftien  &
que  fes  fonges  ne  luy  deuoient  plus  eftre  confide-
rables,  il  accepta  le  feftin.  II  ne  fut  pas  pluftoft  de
retour  a  fa  maifon  que  voila  vne  fienne  fille  &  vn  de
fes  fils  malades,  &  en  fuitte  qui  meurent.  Ce  coup
l'efbranfla,  &  luy  fit  faire  le  faux  pas,  que  nous  auons
remarque  en  la  precedente  Relation.  Mais  s'eftant
releue  de  fa  cheute  au  bout  de  quelques  iours,  par
l'afiiftance  &  les  bonnes  paroles  de  feu  noftre  Chre-
ftien, qui  l'ayant  premierement  gaigne  a  Dieu,  le
regaigna  derechef  cette  feconde  [29]  fois.  II  nous
auoit  depuis  done  beaucoup  de  contentement,  mais
voicy  vne  occafion  dans  laquelle  il  a  du  tout  repare
la  faute  de  fa  cheute  par  la  fermete  de  fa  foy,  &  par
la  conftance  qu'il  y  a  fait  paroiftre.

Rene  done  vn  peu  apres  fon  baptefme,  fe  trouuant
a  la  pefche  auec  noftre  feu  Chreftien  Iofeph  ChihSa-
tenhb'a;  celuy-cy  vint  a  fonger  tout  ce  qui  en  effet
luy  eft  arriue  enuiron  quatorze  mois  apres.  Scauoir
que  trois  ou  quatre  Iroquois  l'attaquoient,  que  s'eftant


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  161

Church,  I  cannot  omit  what  happened  to  this  good
Savage,  which  was  perhaps  enough  to  shake  his  faith,
if  God  had  not  very  specially  helped  him.

[28]  He  is  about  sixty  years  old.  At  the  begin-
ning, when  he  was  at  an  age  to  make  feasts  and  to
be  present  at  them,  he  had  a  dream,  in  which  he  was
forbidden  ever  to  make  a  dog  feast,  or  to  permit  that
any  one  should  make  one  for  him,  or  else  misfortune
would  happen  to  him.  He  had  always  taken  great
care  to  obey  this  dream,  until  last  year,  at  the  begin-
ning of  winter,  having  gone  on  a  visit  to  some  vil-
lage, one  of  his  friends  desired  to  make  a  dog  feast
for  him.  He  immediately  remembered  his  dream;
nevertheless,  thinking  at  the  same  time  that  he  was
a  Christian  and  that  his  dreams  ought  no  longer  to
be  important  to  him,  he  accepted  the  feast.  He  had
no  sooner  returned  to  his  house  than  he  found  one  of
his  daughters  and  one  of  his  sons  sick,  who  afterward
died.  This  stroke  unsettled  him,  and  caused  him  to
make  a  false  step,  which  we  noticed  in  the  preced-
ing Relation.  But  having  recovered  from  his  fall  at
the  end  of  a  few  days,  by  the  assistance  and  the  good
words  of  our  late  Christian, —  who,  having  first  won
him  to  God,  won  him  anew  this  second  [29]  time, —
he  has  since  given  us  great  satisfaction ;  but  here  is
an  occasion  upon  which  he  wholly  repaired  the  error
of  his  fall  by  the  firmness  of  his  faith  and  by  the
constancy  which  he  displayed.

Rene,  a  short  time  after  his  baptism,  was  fishing
with  our  late  Christian  Joseph  Chihwatenhwa,  and
the  latter  happened  to  dream  all  that  really  befell
him  about  fourteen  months  afterward, —  namely,  that
three  or  four  Iroquois  attacked  him;  that,  having
defended  himself,  he  was  thrown  to  the  ground ;  that


162  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.21

defendu  il  auoit  efte"  teraffe,  qu'on  luy  auoit  enleue"
fa  mouftache/  &  qu'on  luy  auoit  donne"  vn  coup  de
hache  a  l'endroit  de  la  tefte  d'oii  on  la  luy  auoit  en-
leuee.  Le  feu  Chreftien  s'efueillant  apres  ce  fonge,
s'addreffe  a  Rene  fon  compagnon.  Ah!  mon  cama-
rade,  dit-il,  c'eft  a  ce  coup  que  fi  nous  n'eflions
Chreftiens,  il  nous  faudroit  auoir  recours  a  nos  chan-
fons  &  feftins,  pour  effacer  le  malheur  de  mon  fonge :
mais  ce  n'eft  pas  luy  qui  a  efte"  le  maiftre  de  nos
vies;  c'eft  celuy  qu'on  nous  a  enfeigne,  &  en  qui  nous
croyons,  qui  feul  en  difpofera  [30]  felon  fon  bon  plaifir.
Et  la  deffus  luy  racote  le  fonge  que  ie  vies  de  dire.
Nous  auos  fuiet  de  pefer  que  ce  mefme  fonge  lui
reuint  plufieurs  f ois  depuis :  car  ceux  de  la  f amille
deposet  que  fouuet  le  matin  ils  l'ont  entedu  parler
en  fe  reueillant,  &  dire  (Efl-ee  toy  qui  en  es  le  maijlrel
non,  non,  il  riy  a  que  Dieu  qui  en  difpofera.  Or  ce  qu'il
auoit  fonge"  luy  eftant  arriue  de  poindt  en  poind:,  &
le  bruit  eftant  das  le  pays,  qu'il  eftoit  mort  pour
n' auoir  pas  garde"  fon  fonge,  qui  le  menacat  des
ennemis,  luy  comandoit  vn  facrifice  ou  feftin  de  2.
chiens :  cela  eftoit  bie  capable  de  reueiller  das  l'ef-
prit  du  pauure  Rene,  auffi  bien  que  des  autres  bons
Chrefties,  la  creance  generale,  &  la  deference  que
tous  ces  Peuples  rendet  en  fonge,  come  au  maiftre
de  la  vie  &  de  la  mort.  II  a  plu  toutefois  a  Dieu  le
deliurer  de  cette  fetation,  &  affermir  du  tout  fon
efprit  &  fon  courage.  II  eft  le  premier  a  foudre  les
difficultez  qui  fe  prefentent  la  deffus,  qui  ne  font  pas
petites.

Come  nous  eftions  a  fa  cabane  cet  hyuer,  on  luy
vint  apporter  la  nouuelle  qu'vn  fie  fils  auoit  efte  pris
des  ennemis,  [31]  &  emmene  vif  en  leurpays. Cette


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  163

they  took  off  his  scalp,  and  gave  him  a  blow  with  a
hatchet  on  the  head  from  which  they  had  removed
it.  The  late  Christian  awaking  after  this  dream,
spoke  to  Rene\  his  companion.  "  Ah,  my  comrade,"
said  he,  "it  is  now,  if  we  were  not  Christians,  that
we  should  be  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  our  songs
and  feasts,  in  order  to  efface  the  calamity  of  my
dream.  But  it  is  not  that  which  is  the  master  of  our
lives, — it  is  he  of  whom  they  have  taught  us,  and  in
whom  we  believe,  who  alone  disposes  of  it  [30]  ac-
cording to  his  good  pleasure."  And  thereupon  he
related  to  him  the  dream  that  I  have  just  stated.  We
have  reason  to  think  that  this  same  dream  returned
to  him  several  times  afterward ;  for  members  of  his
family  declared  that  often  in  the  morning  they  heard
him  speak  on  awaking,  and  say,  Art  thou  the  master
of  it?  No,  no,  it  is  only  God  who  shall  dispose  of  it.  Now
that  which  he  had  dreamed  having  happened  to  him
in  every  point,  and  the  report  being  abroad  in  the
country  that  he  had  died  on  account  of  not  having
observed  his  dream, —  which,  menacing  him  with
enemies,  commanded  him  to  make  a  sacrifice  or  feast
of  2  dogs, —  this  was  very  likely  to  revive  in  the
mind  of  the  poor  Rene,  as  well  as  those  of  the  other
good  Christians,  the  general  belief  and  deference
that  all  these  Tribes  render  to  a  dream,  as  to  the
master  of  life  and  of  death.  However,  it  pleased
God  to  deliver  him  from  this  temptation,  and  to
strengthen  thoroughly  his  spirit  and  his  courage.
He  was  the  first  to  solve  the  difficulties  which  are
therein  presented,  and  which  are  not  trifling.

As  we  were  in  his  cabin  this  winter,  the  news  was
brought  to  him  that  one  of  his  sons  had  been  taken
by  the  enemy, [31]  and  led  away  alive into their


164  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  JESUITES [Vol.  21

nouuelle  le  toucha  de  premier  abord,  &  come  ren-
trant  en  foy  mefme,  helas!  mon  Dieu,  dit-il,  que
puis-ie  trouuer  a  redire  apres  ce  que  vous  en  auez
ordonne?

Voila  l'eftat  de  noftre  petite  Eglife  naiflante,  das
laquelle  fi  nous  ne  voyos  pas  vn  grad  troupeau,  au
moins  auos  no9  la  cofolation  d'y  voir  la  crainte  de
Dieu,  &  le  feruice  de  fa  Maiefte  en  recomadation.
Sur  tout,  pedant  l'Aduet  &  le  Carefme  on  n'a  pas
maque  matin  &  foir  a  l'iffue  de  leurs  prieres,  de  leur
faire  vne  petite  inftrudtion  en  comun,  pour  eitablir
das  leur  efprit  &  dans  leur  cceur  les  principes  de
la  vie  Chreftiene  Le  fruidt  s'en  eft  enfuiuy  tel  que
nous  euffions  pu  fouhaitter.

Nous  auos  vifite  tous  les  autres  bourgs  &  bour-
gades  appartenates  a  cette  Miffion,  nous  en  fommes
reuenus  auec  cette  penfee,  que  toft  ou  tard  ils  feront
&  nous,  ou  pluftoft  a  Dieu.  Ie  ne  puis  obmettre  la
fmguliere  obligation  que  nous  auons  a  Dieu,  de  nous
auoir  conf erue  le  Pere  Francois  le  Mercier ;  qui  en
l'vn  des  voyages  d'hyuer  paffant  par  necemte  par
deflus  vn  lac  glac6,  fe  vid  plutot  [32]  tombe  dans
l'eau,  qu'il  ne  fe  fut  apperceu  de  la  foibleffe  de  la
glace.  Quelques  Sauuages  qui  venoient  apres  luy
s'arrefterent  tout  court,  fongeans  plus  au  danger  ou
ils  eftoient  qu'a  fecourir  le  Pere;  ce  qu'ils  ne  voy-
oient  pas  mefme  pouuoir  faire  fans  fe  mettre  dans  vn
plus  grand  danger.  Le  Pere  eftendant  fes  coudes  fe
fouftenoit  le  moins  mal  qu'il  pouuoit  de  glace  en
glace,  &  en  fin  ayant  rencontr6  vn  endroit  vn  peu
plus  ferme  que  le  relte,  fe  hazarda  de  faire  vn  effort,
&  leuer  vne  jambe  fur  la  glace.  Le  Sauuage  le
moins  efloigne  de  luy  le  voyant  en  cet  eftat,  met  bas


1641-42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  165

country.  This  news  moved  him  at  first,  and,  as  if
communing  with  himself,  "  Alas!  my  God,"  said
he,  "  what  can  I  find  amiss  in  that  which  you  have
ordered  for  him  ? ' '

This  is  the  condition  of  our  little,  growing  Church,
in  which,  if  we  do  not  see  a  great  flock,  at  least  we
have  the  consolation  of  seeing  the  fear  of  God  and
the  service  of  his  Majesty  honored.  Above  all,  dur-
ing Advent  and  Lent,  we  have  not  failed  morning
and  evening,  at  the  close  of  their  prayers,  to  give
them  a  little  instruction  in  common,  in  order  to  estab-
lish in  their  minds  and  in  their  hearts  the  principles
of  the  Christian  life.  Such  fruit  has  followed  there-
from as  we  could  have  desired.

We  have  visited  all  the  other  villages  and  hamlets
appertaining  to  this  Mission ;  we  have  returned  from
them  with  this  thought,  that  sooner  or  later  they
will  belong  to  us,  or  rather  to  God.  I  cannot  pass
over  the  peculiar  obligation  under  which  we  are  to
God,  for  having  preserved  to  us  Father  Francois  le
Mercier,  who  in  one  of  his  winter  journeys,  passing
by  necessity  over  a  frozen  lake,  happened  [32]  to  fall
into  the  water,  before  he  had  perceived  the  weak-
ness of  the  ice.  A  few  Savages  who  were  following
him  stopped  suddenly,  thinking  more  of  the  danger
in  which  they  were,  than  of  helping  the  Father,
which  they  saw  not  even  the  possibility  of  doing
without  putting  themselves  into  a  greater  danger.
The  Father,  stretching  out  his  elbows,  supported
himself  as  well  as  was  possible,  from  one  cake  of  ice
to  another;  and  at  length,  having  chanced  on  a  place
a  little  firmer  than  the  rest,  he  ventured  to  make  an
effort,  and  lifted  his  leg  upon  the  ice.  The  Savage
least  distant  from  him,  seeing  him  in  this  condition,


166  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21

vn  fac  de  bled  qu'il  auoit  fur  le  dos,  &  s'approche
doucement  du  Pere,  &  le  faififfant  par  l'efpaule  &
par  la  jambe,  il  fit  vn  effort  pour  le  tirer;  mais  y
fentant  trop  de  refinance,  il  le  quitte  pour  retourner
promptement  en  lieu  de  plus  grande  afleurance.  La
apres  auoir  confidere'  le  Pere,  qui  de  fon  coite*  conti-
nuoit  a  faire  ce  qu'il  pouuoit  pour  faciliter  le  fecours
dont  il  auoit  befoin,  il  ne  fe  put  tenir  qu'il  ne  retour-
naft  faire  vn  fecond  effort  plus  grand  que  le  premier,
par  lequel  [33]  en  fin  il  tira  le  Pere  hors  de  l'eau.

Voila  quelques-vns  des  hazards  qui  font  inf eparable-
ment  attachez  a  la  recherche  de  nos  pauures  brebis
errantes  en  ces  quartiers,  ainfi  que  nous  verrons  en-
core cy  apres,  mais  ce  font  les  delices  des  feruiteurs
du  bon  Pafteur.


1641-42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  167

put  down  a  sack  of  grain  which  he  had  on  his  back,
cautiously  approached  the  Father,  and,  seizing  him
by  the  shoulder  and  the  leg,  made  an  effort  to  draw
him  out;  but  finding  him  too  heavy,  he  left  him,
that  he  might  return  quickly  to  a  place  of  greater
safety.  There,  after  having  looked  at  the  Father,
who  on  his  part  continued  to  do  what  he  could  to
facilitate  the  help  of  which  he  had  need,  he  could
not  refrain  from  returning  to  make  a  second  effort,
greater  than  the  first,  by  which  [33]  at  last  he  drew
the  Father  out  of  the  water.

These  are  some  of  the  dangers  that  are  inseparably
attached  to  the  search  for  our  poor  wandering  sheep
in  these  regions,  as  we  shall  see  still  further  herein-
after; but  these  are  the  delights  of  the  servants  of
the  good  Shepherd.


168  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


CHAPITRE IV.

DES MISSIONS DE S. IOSEPH AUX ATTINGUEENONGNA-

HAK, & DE S. IEAN BAPTISTE. AUX

ARENDAERONONS.

CES  deux  Miffions  font  affez  heureufement  peu-
plees  pour  donner  vn  raifonnable  employ  a
fix  &  a  huict  ouuriers :  mais  le  peu  de  nombre
que  nous  fommes  dans  les  Hurons,  n'eftant  pas  mef-
me  fuffifant  de  fournir  deux  Peres  a  chaque  Miffion,
nous  nous  fommes  veus  obligez  de  reiinir  ces  deux
fous  le  foin  du  Pere  Antoine  Daniel,  &  du  Pere  Si-
mon le  Moyne.  Leur  peine  en  eft  accreue  notable-
ment,  quand  mefme  il  n'y  auroit  que  la  diitance  des
bourgs  [34]  qu'ils  doiuent  cultiuer  dont  les  chemins
de  l'vn  a  l'autre,  font  tres-fouuent  infeftez  des  Iro-
quois ennemis  des  Hurons ;  mais  leur  ioye  croift  a
proportion  puis  que  les  demarches  que  Ton  fait  a  la
conquefte  d'vne  feule  ame,  font  autant  de  pas  vers
le  Ciel.

On  va  brufler  vn  Iroquois  en  vn  bourg  affez  efloi-
gne ;  quelle  confolation  de  partir  dans  le  fort  des
chaleurs  de  l'Efte  pour  deliurer  cette  pauure  victime
de  l'enfer  qui  luy  eft  prepare.  On  l'aborde,  &  on
l'inftruit  lors  mefme  qu'il  gemit  fous  la  cruaute  des
fupplices,  incontinent  la  foy  trouue  place  dans  fon
cceur;  il  recognoilt  &  adore  pour  autheur  de  fa  vie,
celuy  dont  iamais  il  n'auoit  entendu  le  nom  qu'a
l'heure  de  la  mort. II  recoit  la  grace  du  Baptefme,


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  169


CHAPTER IV.

OF THE  MISSIONS  OF  ST.  JOSEPH TO THE ATTINGUEE-

NONGNAHAK, AND OF ST. JEAN BAPTISTE

TO THE ARENDAERONONS.

THESE  two  Missions  are  sufficiently  well  peopled
to  give  adequate  employment  to  six  or  eight
workers ;  but  the  small  number  that  we  have
among  the  Hurons  not  being  even  ample  enough  to
furnish  two  Fathers  to  each  Mission,  we  have  found
ourselves  obliged  to  unite  these  two  under  the  care
of  Father  Antoine  Daniel  and  of  Father  Simon  le
Moyne.  Their  labor  has  been  thereby  considerably
increased,  were  one  to  mention  only  the  distance  of
the  villages  [34]  in  which  they  are  to  teach,  as  the
paths  from  one  to  the  other  are  very  often  infested
by  the  Iroquois,  the  enemies  of  the  Hurons;  but
their  joy  increases  in  proportion,  since  the  steps  that
one  takes  for  the  conquest  of  a  single  soul  are  so
many  steps  towards  Heaven.

An  Iroquois  was  to  be  burned  in  a  rather  distant
village ;  what  a  consolation  to  set  out,  in  the  height
of  Summer  heat,  in  order  to  deliver  this  poor  victim
from  the  hell  which  was  prepared  for  him !  He
was  approached  and  instructed,  even  while  he  was
groaning  under  the  cruelty  of  tortures;  suddenly
faith  found  a  place  in  his  heart, —  he  recognized  and
adored,  as  the  author  of  his  life,  him  whose  name
he  had  never  heard  until  the  hour  of  his  death.  He
received  the  grace  of  Baptism,  and  then  longed  only


170  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J ^SUITES  [Vol.21

&  ne  refpire  plus  qu'au  Ciel:  on  redouble  les  feux  &
les  flammes,  &  tout  ce  que  la  cruaute  fournit  a  des
efprits  enragez  de  fureur.  Ce  nouueau,  mais  ce
genereux  Chreftien  monte  fur  l'efchafaut  qui  eft  le
lieu  de  fon  fupplice,  a  la  veue  de  mille  perfonnes  qui
font  fes  iuges,  fes  bourreaux  [35]  &  fes  enemis ;  efleue
&  fes  yeux  &  fa  voix  vers  le  Ciel,  n'y  ayant  rien  deffus
la  terre  qui  arrefte  fon  cceur;  il  s'efcrie  d'vne  voix
vigoureufe,  &  fait  fcauoir  a  tout  le  monde  les  caufes
d'vne  ioye  qui  paroift  fur  fon  front  dans  le  plus  fort
des  tourmens  qu'il  endure:  Io  fakhrihotat  de  SaraKtf-
nentai,  onne  ichien  aihei  aronhiae  eeth  de  Eihei.
Soleil  qui  es  tefmoin  de  mes  tourmens,  efcoute  mes
paroles ;  ie  f uis  fur  le  poind:  de  mourir :  mais  apres
cette  mort,  c'eft  le  Ciel  qui  fera  ma  demeure.  II
redouble  &  repete  fouuent  ces  mots,  &  meurt  dedans
ces  douces  efperances :  Quel  bon-heur  pour  cette  ame  ?
mais  quelle  ioye  reffent  celuy  qui  a  couru  huict  &
dix  lieues  pour  luy  procurer  cette  grace.  Cet  heu-
reux  prifonnier  fe  nommoit  TehondaKS'ae,  &  en  fon
baptefme  Iofeph  n5  du  bourg  das  lequel  il  fut  brule\
Dans  le  bourg  de  S.  lean  Baptifte,  vn  ieune  hom-
me  tomba  fubitement  malade,  &  malade  a  la  mort,
fouuent  depuis  quelques  annees  on  luy  auoit  parle"
de  Dieu,  foit  a  QuebeK  oil  il  [36]  auoit  efte  fept  ou
huidt  mois  dans  noftre  feminaire,  foit  apres  fon  re-
tour  au  pais  dans  les  frequentes  vifites  qu'on  auoit
fait  en  fa  cabane;  mais  iamais  ny  la  foy  ny  la  crainte
de  Dieu  n'eftoit  entree  en  cet  efprit;  fes  difcours
n'eftoient  rien  que  des  calomnies  contre  nous,  que
des  blafphemes  contre  Dieu,  &  ce  fembloit  des  mar-
ques infaillibles  d'vne  ame  reprouuee.  Que  les  pen-
tees  de  Dieu  font  efloignees  des  noftres ! Ce  ieune


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  171

for  Heaven ;  they  increased  their  fires  and  flames,
and  everything  that  cruelty  supplies  to  spirits  mad-
dened by  rage.  This  new  but  courageous  Chris-
tian,—  having  ascended  the  scaffold  which  was  the
place  of  his  torment,  in  the  sight  of  a  thousand  peo-
ple who  were  his  judges,  his  executioners,  [35]  and
his  enemies, —  raised  both  his  eyes  and  his  voice  to
Heaven,  there  being  nothing  upon  the  earth  to  at-
tract his  heart;  and,  shouting  in  a  loud  voice,  made
known  to  every  one  the  cause  of  a  joy  which  appeared
on  his  brow  in  the  fiercest  tortures  that  he  was  endur-
ing: "  Io  sakhrihotat  de  Sarakounentai,  onne  ichien
aihei  aronhiae  eeth  de  Eihei;  '  "  Sun,  who  art  wit-
ness of  my  torments,  listen  to  my  words.  I  am  at
the  point  of  death ;  but,  after  this  death,  Heaven
shall  be  my  dwelling. "  He  repeated  and  reiterated
often  these  words,  and  died  in  this  sweet  hope.
What  happiness  for  that  soul !  but  what  joy  does  he
experience  who  has  sped  eight  or  ten  leagues  that
he  may  procure  for  him  this  grace !  This  fortunate
prisoner  was  named  Tehondakwae,  and  in  his  bap-
tism, Joseph  —  the  name  of  the  village  in  which  he
was  burned.

In  the  village  of  St.  Jean  Baptiste,  a  young  man
fell  suddenly  sick,  and  sick  unto  death.  For  several
years  he  had  been  often  spoken  to  concerning  God, —
both  in  Quebek,  where  he  [36]  had  been  seven  or
eight  months  in  our  seminary,  and,  after  his  return
home,  in  frequent  visits  that  had  been  made  to  his
cabin ;  but  neither  faith  nor  the  fear  of  God  had  ever
entered  his  soul ;  his  words  were  nothing  but  calum-
nies against  us,  but  blasphemies  against  God,  and
seemed  infallible  signs  of  a  reprobate  soul.  How
remote from  ours are  the  thoughts  of  God! This


172  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

homme  n'eft  pas  pluftoft  tombe"  malade  qu'il  ouure
de  luy-mefme  les  yeux  a  la  verite:  la  crainte  de  l'en-
fer  que  iufqu'alors  il  auoit  repute  des  fables,  luy  fait
penfer  au  Paradis:  helas!  s'efcrie  il,  ie  me  meurs,  &
les  Peres  ne  font  pas  icy.  Courez,  ie  vous  en  prie,
mon  frere,  en  quelque  part  qu'ils  foient  (dit-il  a.  vn
fien  frere  aifne  principal  Capitaine  de  cette  nation)
courez  vide,  &  qu'ils  fcachent  au  pluftoft  le  peril  ou
ie  fuis.  Ce  frere  part  en  hafte  &  vient  trouuer  nos
Peres  a  12.  lieues  de  la.  Dieu  fcait  de  quelle  part
ils  volerent  a  ce  pauure  malade,  qui  leur  ouure  les
bras,  leur  demande  pardon,  &  foufpire  apres  le  Bap-
tefme.  Quand  [37]  Dieu  difpofe  vne  ame  &  luy
parle  au  profond  du  cceur,  il  ne  faut  pas  tant  de  pa-
roles. II  recoit  bien  toft  le  Baptefme,  &  enfemble
la  paix  de  l'efprit,  &  ce  peu  qui  luy  reftoit  de  vie,  il
1' employe  iufqu'au  dernier  moment  a.  le  deliurer  du
malheur  eternel.

Quelque  reuolte  que  puiffe  eftre  vn  efprit  contre
les  veritez  de  noftre  foy,  il  ne  faut  pas  defefperer  de
luy  auant  la  mort.  Si  Dieu  qui  ell:  feul  offenfe
attend  l'heure  de  noftre  falut  auec  tant  de  patience  &
de  longanimite,  c'eft  a.  nous  a  fuiure  fes  conduites,
&  adorer  en  tout  les  refforts  de  fa  diuine  prouidence.

Nous  l'auons  veu  encore  depuis  peu  en  la  perfonne
d'vn  autre  ieune  homme  du  bourg  fainct.  Ignace
nomme  Iofeph  TeS'atirhon.  Le  Seminaire  de  QuebeK
1' auoit  nourry  deux  ans  entiers,  &  n'en  eftoit  forty
qu'auec  la  grace  de  Chreftien  &  la  crainte  de  Dieu:
mais  en  cet  aage  il  eft  bien  difficile  de  conferuer  vn
fi  precieux  threfor  dans  le  regne  de  l'impudicite:  fe
reuoyat  dans  fon  pais,  il  n'eft  pas  long-temps  fans
fe  voir  engage  dans  les  vices  qui  y  paffent  pour  des


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  173


young  man  had  no  sooner  fallen  sick  than  he  of  his
own  accord  opened  his  eyes  to  the  truth ;  the  fear  of
hell,  which  until  then  he  had  considered  a  fable,
made  him  think  of  Paradise :  ' '  Alas !  '  exclaimed
he,  "I  am  dying,  and  the  Fathers  are  not  here.
Run  to  them,  I  beg  you,  my  brother,  wherever  they
may  be  "  (said  he  to  one  of  his  elder  brothers,  chief
Captain  of  this  tribe)  "run  quickly,  and  let  them
know  as  soon  as  possible  the  peril  in  which  I  am."
This  brother  set  out  in  haste  and  came  to  our
Fathers,  who  were  12  leagues  distant.  God  knows
with  what  anxiety  they  flew  to  this  poor  sick  man,
who  opened  his  arms  to  them,  asked  their  pardon,
and  longed  for  Baptism.  When  [37]  God  prepares  a
soul,  and  speaks  to  the  depths  of  a  heart,  many  words
are  not  needed.  He  very  soon  received  Baptism  and
at  the  same  time  peace  of  mind ;  and  the  little  that
remained  to  him  of  life  he  employed,  even  to  the
last  moment,  in  saving  himself  from  eternal  woe.

However  rebellious  a  soul  may  be  against  the
truths  of  our  faith,  we  must  not  despair  of  it  before
death.  If  God,  who  is  the  only  one  injured,  await
the  hour  of  our  salvation  with  so  much  patience  and
long-suffering,  it  is  for  us  to  follow  his  leadings  and
to  reverence  in  all  things  the  movements  of  his
divine  providence.

We  have  seen  this  again  recently,  in  the  person  of
another  young  man  of  the  village  of  saint  Ignace,
who  was  named  Joseph  Tewatirhon.  The  Seminary
of  Quebek  had  maintained  him  two  whole  years,  and
he  went  out  from  it  with  the  grace  of  a  Christian  and
the  fear  of  God ;  but  at  such  an  age  it  is  very  difficult
to  preserve  so  precious  a  treasure  in  the  reign  of
shamelessness, — when he was again in his own


174  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

[38]  vertus.  Nos  remonftrances  &  les  touches  de
Dieu  le  reduifoient  de  fois  a  autres  en  fon  deuoir,
mais  quoy  dans  les  Hurons  auffi  bien  qu'au  milieu
de  la  France,  qui  n'eft  pas  fortifie  d'vn  fecours  extra-
ordinaire du  Ciel,  fe  voit  bien  toft  retombe  dedans
fon  malheur;  &  le  pis  eft,  que  plus  on  tobe,  plus  on
enfonce  auant  dedas  le  precipice,  vn  abyfme  en  attire
vn  autre ;  &  bien  fouuent  la  foy  f e  voit  eftouffee  au
milieu  de  tant  de  pechez.  Nous  craignios  ce  mal-
heur pour  ce  ieune  Chreftien;  mais  le  moment  de
fon  falut  eftoit  venu.  II  eft  furpris  d'vn  accident  de
feu  qui  penfa  l'emporter  fur  le  champ:  ce  feu  en
eftouffe  vn  plus  infernal  qui  deuoroit  fon  ame :  il  ne
fallut  plus  penfer  qu'au  Ciel ;  nos  Peres  y  courent  &
luy  preftent  affiftance.  La  Mere  de  Mifericorde  qu'il
reclama  iufques  a  la  mort  sas  doute  le  fecourut  en  ce
moment,  d'ou  dependoit  l'eternite;  &  nous  fit  voir
que  pas  vn  ne  fe  perd  de  ceux  que  Dieu  choifit  pour
fes  efleus.

Noftre  confolation  parmy  nos  peines  eft  d'aller
ainfi  de  bourg  en  bourg,  [39]  de  village  en  village
recueillir  ces  efpics  de  froment  que  les  Anges  fepa-
rent  de  l'yuroye,  pour  que  dans  le  Ciel  ils  compofent
cette  couronne  des  efleus,  qui  a  coufte  tant  de  fueurs
&  de  fatigues  au  Fils  de  Dieu.


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  175

country,  it  was  not  long  before  he  was  seen  drawn
into  the  vices  which  there  are  accounted  [38]  virtues.
Our  remonstrances  and  the  strokes  of  God  brought
him  back,  from  time  to  time,  to  his  duty;  but,  among
the  Hurons  as  well  as  in  the  midst  of  France,  he  who
is  not  fortified  by  an  extraordinary  help  from  Heaven,
is  seen  to  fall  again  very  soon  into  his  wretched-
ness. And  the  worst  is,  that  the  more  he  falls,  the
more  he  plunges  forward  toward  the  precipice, —  one
abyss  leads  to  another;  and  very  often  faith  is  found
stifled  in  the  midst  of  so  many  sins.  We  feared  this
misfortune  for  this  young  Christian,  but  the  moment
of  his  salvation  had  come.  He  was  overtaken  by  an
accident  of  fire  which  was  near  destroying  him  on
the  spot;  this  fire  extinguished  a  more  infernal  one
that  was  devouring  his  soul, —  it  was  necessary  now
to  think  only  of  Heaven.  Our  Fathers  ran  to  him,
and  lent  him  assistance.  The  Mother  of  Mercy,
whom  he  implored  until  death,  without  doubt  aided
him  in  that  moment  on  which  eternity  depended,
and  made  us  see  that  not  one  of  those  whom  God
has  chosen  as  his  elect  is  lost.

Our  consolation  in  the  midst  of  our  trials  is  to  go
thus  from  town  to  town,  [39]  from  village  to  village,
gathering  these  ears  of  grain  that  the  Angels  are
separating  from  the  tares,  so  that  in  Heaven  they
may  compose  that  crown  of  the  elect,  which  has  cost
so  many  labors  and  fatigues  to  the  Son  of  God.


176  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  21


CHAPITRE  V.

DE LA MISSION DES APOSTRES AUX KHIONONTATE-
HRONONS OU NATION DU PETUN.

LE  P.  Charles  Gamier  &  le  P.  Pierre  Pijart  ont
en  le  foin  de  cette  Miffion;  a  la  culture  de
laquelle  ils  n'ont  rien  oublie  de  tout  ce  qu'on
pouuoit  attendre  de  bons  ouuriers.  Les  difficultez  fe
trouuent  d'autant  plus  grandes  en  cette  Miffion,  que
cette  Nation  n'eft  point  du  nombre  de  celles  qui  def-
cendent  [pour]  la  traite  des  Hurons,  ceux  qui  s'en
attribuent,  ne  le  permettant  pas  comme  nous  auons
defia  dit  autrefois.  Ce  qui  fait  qu'ils  nous  confiderent
comme  eft/rangers,  &  comme  perfonnes  auec  [40]
lefquelles  ils  n'ont  aucune  liaifon.  Mais  en  outre
les  calomnies  ordinaires  de  ceux  parmy  lef quels  nous
viuons,  rempliffans  tous  les  iours  leurs  oreilles,  &
leurs  efprits,  ils  ne  nous  regardent  que  d'vn  ceil  fou-
pconneux,  de  quelque  malheur  que  nous  leur  venons
apporter;  d'oii  vient  qu'ils  tournent  incontinent  en
mal  tout  ce  qu'ils  nous  voyent  faire,  &  fur  tout  les
adtionslesplusfaindtes;  n'apportans  au  refle  autre
raifon  de  leur  defiance,  que  le  fujet  que  leur  en  don-
nent  les  Hurons  par  leurs  difcours.

Pour  adoucir  &  appriuoifer  ces  efprits,  nous  iu-
geafmes  qu'il  feroit  a  propos,  que  les  Peres  allans
cette  ann6e  en  leur  Miffion,  fiffent  le  poffible  pour  y
tenir  quelque  affemblee  generale  des  principaux  du
pays,  pour  les  informer  deueme[n]t  de  nos  intentios.


1641  -42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  177


CHAPTER  V.

OF THE MISSION OF THE APOSTLES TO THE KHIO-
NONTATEHRONONS OR TOBACCO NATION.

FATHER  Charles  Gamier  and  Father  Pierre
Pijart  have  had  care  of  this  Mission,  in  the  in-
struction of  which  they  have  neglected  nothing
that  could  be  expected  of  good  workers.  The  diffi-
culties are  so  much  the  greater  in  this  Mission,  as
this  Nation  is  not  of  the  number  of  those  that  go
down  for  the  Huron  trade, — those  who  claim  the
trade  for  themselves  not  permitting  it,  as  we  have
already  said.  This  causes  them  to  look  upon  us  as
strangers,  and  as  persons  with  [40]  whom  they  have
no  connection.  But,  besides  the  ordinary  calumnies
of  those  among  whom  we  live,  which  fill  their  ears
and  minds  continually,  they  look  upon  us  only  with
an  eye  suspicious  of  some  misfortune  that  we  have
come  to  bring  them ;  for  which  reason,  they  put
forthwith  a  bad  construction  on  everything  that  they
see  us  do,  and  above  all  on  the  most  holy  acts;  never-
theless they  bring  forward  no  other  motive  for  their
mistrust,  than  the  cause  that  the  Hurons  give  them
for  it  by  their  conversation.

In  order  to  soothe  and  calm  these  minds,  we
judged  it  would  be  fitting  that  the  Fathers  when
they  went  on  their  Mission  this  year,  should  do  their
best  to  hold  there  some  general  meeting  of  the  chief
men  of  the  country,  in  order  duly  to  inform  them  of
our  intentions. And  since  they  saw  no  better  means


17S  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

Et  ne  voyans  meilleur  moyen  d'arriuer  la,  que  celuy
des  pre  fens,  ils  en  emporterent  auec  eux,  &  eftans
arriuez  au  pays  donnerent  a  entendre  leur  deffein.

Ie  ne  fcay  fi  iamais  affaire  y  a  efte  debattue
comme  celle-la;  les  vns  agreans  la  propofition,  les
autres  ne  voulans  ou'ir  [41]  parler  ny  d'affemblee,  ny
de  prefens  venans  de  noflre  main,  difans  haut  &
clair,  que  c'eftoit  le  charme  duquel  nous  nous  vou-
lions  feruir,  pour  miner  le  pais,  comme  nous  auions
fait  iufques  icy  ceux  ou  nous  auions  efte.  L'affem-
blee  toutesfois  fe  tint,  mais  les  prefens  y  furent  refu-
fez:  ce  qu'on  gaigna  fut,  qu'en  cette  affemblee  des
plus  Notables  du  Pays,  noftre  commiffion  de  la  part
de  Dieu  leur  fut  fignifiee,  &  l'obligation  intimee  de
reconnoiftre  &  honorer  fa  Maiefte  diuine,  &  N.  Seign.
Iefus-Chrift,  comme  le  maiftre  de  leur  vie  &  de  leur
falut.  Peut-eftre  y  auoit-il  la  quelque  Predeftine,
qui  en  fon  temps  fera  fon  profit  d'vn  fi  faindt
difcours.

Depuis  ce  temps,  les  Peres  n'ont  pas  laiffe  d'aller
par  tous  les  bourgs  &  bourgades  de  leur  departement,
&  y  ont  fait  leur  fondtion  auec  toute  liberte,  comme
ayans  vn  pouuoir  independant  de  toutes  ces  ceremo-
nies. Et  ils  y  ont  trouue  tout  autre  vifage  &  accueil
que  celuy  que  leur  auoit  voulu  donner  a  entendre  vn
Capitaine,  qui  en  plein  Confeil  leur  fit  commande-
ment  de  vuider  au  pluftoft  [42]  le  pais  s'ils  n'eftoient
fages;  voire  mefme  il  n'y  a  point  eu  de  bourg,  ou
depuis  ils  ayent  efte  mieux  receus  que  celuy  ou
demeure  ce  Capitaine,  les  habitans  s'efforgans,  ce
femble,  de  reparer  la  faute  de  leur  chef.  Mais  ils
en  demeurent  la  pour  le  prefent,  &  ne  parlent  point
encore  tout  de  b5  d'ebraffer  la  Foy. Nous  verrons,


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  179

of  accomplishing  this  than  that  of  presents,  they
carried  some  with  them ;  and,  after  arriving  in  the
country,  they  made  known  their  purpose.

I  do  not  know  that  ever  any  matter  was  argued
there  as  this  was, —  some  agreeing  to  the  proposi-
tion, others  not  wishing  to  hear  [41]  mentioned
either  the  meeting,  or  presents  coming  from  our
hands,  saying  boldly  and  clearly,  that  this  was  a
charm  which  we  intended  to  use  in  order  to  ruin
their  country,  as  we  had  hitherto  ruined  those  in
which  we  had  been.  However,  the  meeting  was
held,  but  the  presents  were  refused ;  what  we  gained
was  that,  in  this  assembly  of  the  most  Notable  men
of  the  Country,  our  commission  in  the  name  of  God
was  declared  to  them,  and  the  obligation  of  recogniz-
ing and  honoring  his  divine  Majesty  and  Our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  as  the  master  of  their  lives  and  their
salvation,  was  enjoined  upon  them.  Perhaps  there
was  present  some  Predestined  soul,  which  in  its  own
time  will  profit  by  so  blessed  a  discourse.

Since  that  time,  however,  the  Fathers  have  gone
through  all  the  villages  and  hamlets  of  this  district,
and  have  discharged  their  duties  therein  with  all
freedom,  as  having  a  power  independent  of  all  these
ceremonies;  and  they  have  found  in  these  people  a
totally  different  manner  and  reception  from  that
which  had  been  intimated  to  them  by  a  Captain, —
who,  in  open  Council,  gave  them  a  command  to
vacate  [42]  the  country  as  soon  as  possible,  if  they
were  wise.  Indeed,  there  has  been  no  village  in
which  they  have  since  been  better  received  than  in
the  one  where  this  Captain  dwells, — the  inhabitants
endeavoring,  it  would  seem,  to  repair  the  fault  of
their  chief ;  but  they  stop  there  for  the  present,  and


180  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

auec  le  temps,  ce  que  la  conftance  produira  dans  ces
efprits,  fi  ce  n'eft  que  Dieu  follicite  par  quelques
faindtes  ames,  ait  agreable  d'ouurir  vn  cliemin  plus
court.

Nous  commencons  a  douter  fi  les  fleaux  &  les  puni-
tions  qui  arriuent  a  ceux  qui  mefprifent  les  vifites
&  douces  femonces  du  Ciel,  ne  ferot  point  vne  des
inuentions  de  fa  bonte,  pour  faire  ouurir  les  yeux  a
ces  pauures  aueugles.  Quoy  que  s'en  foit,  il  eft
afleure  qu'au  bourg  d'Ehb'ae  furnomme  S.  Pierre  &
S.  Paul  principal  bourg  de  cette  Miffion,  d'oii  le  P.
Gamier  fut  chaffe"  l'ann6e  paffee,  tous  les  malheurs
imaginables  sot  arriuez  deuat  la  fin  de  l'annee.  La
plus  part  des  cabanes  furent  bruflees  par  les  enne-
mis,  enuiro  trois  mois  apres  [43]  Plufieurs  font  morts
de  faim,  de  froid,  ou  de  verole;  d'autres  ont  pery
dans  les  eaux ;  plufieurs  ont  efte  pris  des  ennemis.
En  fin,  la  chofe  a  paru  fi  extraordinaire,  qu'vn  Capi-
taine  d'vn  bourg  voifin  l'a  bien  fceu  remarquer,  n'at-
tribuat  a  autre  caufe  la  defolation  de  ce  bourg,  qu'au
refus  qu'ils  auoiet  fait  des  Predicateurs  de  l'Euangile
l'an  paffe.

Ie  groffirois  de  beaucoup  ce  Chapitre  fi  i'auois
entrepris  de  declarer  icy  par  le  menu  tout  ce  qu'il  a
fallu  que  les  Peres  ayent  fouffert  de  ces  Barbares
l'efpace  de  4.  ou  5.  mois  qu'a  dure  le  temps  principal
de  leur  Miffion.  Car  pour  ne  rien  dire  de  ce  qui  eft
commun  a  tous  les  Miffionnaires  de  ces  contrees,  dont
on  a  pu  voir  quelque  chofe  das  la  derniere  Relation,
&  qui  a  eft6  d'autant  plus  cofiderable  cette  annee,  que
les  neiges  icy  ont  efte  extraordinairemet  hautes.
Alias  vn  iour  d'vn  bourg  a  vn  autre,  chargez  de  leur
pacquet,  fortis  qu'ils  furent  d'vn  petit  boquet,  ils  seti-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  181

do  not  yet  speak  of  embracing  the  Faith  in  earnest.
We  shall  see,  in  time,  what  constancy  will  produce
in  these  people,  unless  God,  solicited  by  some  devout
souls,  be  pleased  to  open  a  quicker  way.

We  begin  to  question  if  the  scourges  and  punish-
ments, which  happen  to  those  who  despise  the  calls
and  sweet  invitations  of  Heaven,  may  not  be  one  of
the  expedients  of  his  goodness,  to  cause  the  eyes  of
these  poor  blind  ones  to  be  opened.  At  all  events,
it  is  certain  that  to  the  village  of  Ehwae,  surnamed
St.  Pierre  and  St.  Paul, —  the  principal  village  of  this
Mission,  whence  Father  Gamier  was  driven  last
year, —  all  imaginable  misfortunes  happened  before
the  end  of  the  year.  The  greater  part  of  the  cabins
were  burned  by  the  enemy  about  three  months
afterward.  [43]  Many  died  of  hunger,  of  cold,  or  of
smallpox;  others  perished  in  the  water,  and  many
were  taken  by  the  enemy.  In  fact,  the  matter  ap-
peared so  extraordinary  that  the  Captain  of  a  neigh-
boring village  might  well  notice  it, — attributing  the
desolation  of  this  village  to  no  other  cause  than  to
the  refusal  they  made  to  the  Preachers  of  the  Gospel,
last  year.

I  would  greatly  lengthen  this  Chapter  if  I  un-
dertook to  set  forth  here  in  detail  all  that  the  Fa-
thers were  compelled  to  suffer  from  these  Barbarians,
in  the  space  of  the  4  or  5  months  that  the  prin-
cipal term  of  their  Mission  continued, — to  say  noth-
ing of  that  which  is  common  to  all  the  Missionaries
of  these  regions,  of  which  something  could  be  seen
in  the  last  Relation,  and  which  has  been  so  much
the  more  considerable  this  year,  as  the  snow  has
been  here  extraordinarily  deep.  One  day,  as  they
were  going  from  one  village  to  another,  laden  with.


182  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  21

ret  foudain  chacu.  vne  main  les  faifir  par  les  efpaules,
&  vne  voix  criant ;  vous  eftes  morts !  Auffi  toft  ils  f e
virent  par  terre.  Ils  [44]  n'attendoient  en  fuitte  rien
moins  que  le  coup  de  hache  ou  de  coufteau;  mais
rien  autre  chofe  ne  s'enfuiuit.  Ils  fe  releuent  done,  &
apperceurent  des  Sauuages  tous  nuds,  qui  s'enfuyoient
l'vn  d'vn  code,  l'autre  de  l'autre,  fans  qu'on  ait  pu
fcauoir  ny  conjedturer  ce  qu'ils  auoient  pretendu  en
cette  action,  ou  ce  qui  auoit  arrefte  leur  deffein.

Vne  autre  fois  faifans  voyage,  ils  fe  rencontrerent
das  les  neiges  iufques  au  deffus  des  genoux,  les  pieds
dans  l'eau,  &  le  vet  fi  rude,  que  deux  Sauuages  faifans
ce  mefme  iour  le  mefme  chemin,  y  moururent  de  froid.
Vne  chofe  remarquable  fe  paffa  a  la  mort  de  l'vn  des
deux.  Celuy-cy  faifoit  le  voyage  auec  vne  fienne
fceur  iumelle:  la  voyant  en  auffi  grand  danger  de
mourir  que  luy,  il  prit  la  peau  d'Ours,  dont  eftoit
couuerte  fa  fceur,  &  luy  donna  fa  peau  ou  robe  de
Caftor,  comme  eftant  chaude :  &  en  effet  la  fille  ref-
chappa,  &  le  ieune  homme  mourut.

A  propos  de  cet  a<5te  de  piete,  i'en  diray  icy  vn
autre  arriue  a  la  Nation  Neutre  pendant  que  nos
Peres  y  eftoiet  [45]  vn  ieune  enfant  allant  puifer  de
l'eau  dans  vne  riuiere  glacee,  tomba  dans  le  trou:  vn
fien  frere  en  ayant  efte  aduerty  s'en  court  auffi  toft,
&  fe  iette  apres  luy:  il  fut  fi  heureux  que  d'attrap-
per  fon  petit  frere,  &  le  retirer  de  l'eau  par  vn  autre
trou,  encore  affez  a  temps  pour  luy  fauuer  la  vie.

La  confolation  que  les  Peres  ont  receu  a  la  fin  de
leur  voyage,  a  efte,  outre  quelques  enfans  baptizez
l'annee  paffee  qu'ils  ont  trouue  morts,  &  d'autres
qu'ils  ont  nouuellement  baptife ;  de  voir  generalement
parlant  ces  Peuples  adoucis  &  appriuoifez  de  la  moi-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  183


their  bundles,  when  they  issued  from  a  little  thicket,
each  one  felt  a  hand  seize  him  by  the  shoulder  and
a  voice  cried:  "  You  are  dead  men!  '  Immediately
they  found  themselves  upon  the  ground.  They
[44]  expected  next  nothing  less  than  a  blow  from  a
hatchet  or  a  knife ;  but  nothing  else  followed.  Then
they  arose,  and  perceived  the  naked  Savages  who
were  fleeing,  some  to  one  side,  and  some  to  the
other,  without  being  able  to  know  or  to  conjecture
what  they  had  intended  by  this  action,  or  what  had
arrested  their  design.

At  another  time,  when  they  were  making  a  jour-
ney, they  found  themselves  in  snow  above  their
knees,  their  feet  in  water,  and  the  wind  so  rough,
that  two  Savages,  taking  on  that  same  day  that  same
path,  died  therein  from  cold.  A  remarkable  thing
occurred  at  the  death  of  one  of  the  two.  This  latter
was  making  the  journey  with  a  twin  sister;  seeing
her  in  as  great  danger  of  death  as  himself,  he  took
the  Bear  skin  with  which  his  sister  was  covered,  and
gave  her  his  Beaver  skin  or  robe,  as  it  was  warm;
and,  in  fact,  the  girl  escaped,  and  the  young  man
died.

In  connection  with  this  act  of  piety,  I  will  speak
here  of  another,  that  occurred  in  the  Neutral  Nation
while  our  Fathers  were  there.  [45]  A  young  child
went  to  draw  water  from  a  frozen  river  and  fell  into
the  hole ;  one  of  his  brothers,  having  been  told  of  it,
immediately  ran  and  threw  himself  in  after  him ;  he
was  so  fortunate  as  to  seize  his  little  brother  and
draw  him  out  of  the  water  by  another  hole,  and  also
in  time  enough  to  save  his  life.

The  consolation  that  the  Fathers  had  at  the  end
of  their  stay  was, — besides  some  children  baptized


184  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  21


tie  plus  que  l'annee  paffee:  plufieurs  qui  commen-
cent  a  entendre  volontiers  parler  de  Dieu,  &  quelques
vns  mefmes  qui  fembleroient  fuffifamment  difpofez
pour  le  Baptefme,  fi  l'experience  ne  nous  auoit  fait
voir  qu'en  fait  de  Barbares,  le  pluftoft  baptifer  n'eft
pas  le  meilleur.  Quelques  Algonquins  de  ce  quar-
tier  commencent  mefme  defia  a  prier  &  chanter  les
loiianges  de  Dieu.  L'exemple  de  quelques-vns  de
leur  langue  qu'ils  ont  veu  icy  en  noftre  maifon,  &  [46]
d'autres  dont  ils  ont  entendu  parler,  leur  donne,  ce
femble  quelque  faindte  emulation.  Dieu  la  leur
veuille  accroiftre  &  confirmer.

Ces  Algonquins  nous  font  d'autant  plus  confide-
rables  que  nous  fcauons  qu'ils  ont  commerce  auec  des
Nations  Occidentales,  ou  nous  n'auons  encore  pu
trouuer  moye  d'aborder.  Peut-eftre  eft  ce  la  la  porte
que  Dieu  en  fon  temps  nous  ouurira,  fi  nous  luy
fommes  fideles  a  ce  que  nous  auons  en  main.


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  185

last  year,  who  they  found  had  died,  and  others
whom  they  recently  baptized, —  to  see,  generally
speaking,  these  People  gentler  and  more  docile  by
half  than  they  were  last  year ;  many  of  them  begin
willingly  to  hear  of  God,  and  a  few  of  them  would
even  seem  sufficiently  prepared  for  Baptism,  if  ex-
perience had  not  shown  us  that,  as  regards  Barbari-
ans, immediate  baptism  is  not  best.  Some  Algon-
quins  in  these  parts  begin  even  now  to  pray,  and  to
sing  the  praises  of  God.  The  example  of  some  of
their  own  tongue,  whom  they  have  seen  here  in  our
house,  and  [46]  of  others  of  whom  they  have  heard,
gives  them,  it  appears,  some  holy  emulation.  May
it  please  God  to  increase  and  strengthen  it  in  them !
These  Algonquins  are  especially  important  to  us,
as  we  know  that  they  have  dealings  with  the  West-
ern Nations,  which  we  have  not  yet  found  any  means
of  reaching.  Perhaps  this  is  the  door  that  God  in  his
own  time  will  open  to  us,  if  we  are  faithful  to  him
in  that  which  we  have  in  hand.


186  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.21


CHAPITRE  VIII. [i.e.,  vi.]

DE LA MISSION DES ANGES AUX ATTIKADARON

[SC. ATTI8ANDARONS] OU PEUPLES

DE LA NATION NEUTRE.

C?  EST  icy  vne  des  Miffions  nouuelles,  que  nous
auons  commence  cette  annee  a  vne  des  Na-
tions des  plus  confiderables  qui  foit  en  ces
contrees.  II  y  auoit  long-temps  que  Ton  iettoit  les
yeux  de  ce  cofte  la,  conformement  au  fouuenir  de
tout  plein  de  perfonnes.  Mais  n  ombre  d'ouuriers  en
langues  eftrangeres  ne  fe  trouuent  ou  ne  fe  forment
pas  fi  toft;  fi  le  S.  [47]  Efprit  n'y  met  la  main  d'vne
facon  extraordinaire:  lors  particulierement  qu'on  eft
deftitue-  du  fecours  &  de  l'amftance  de  Maiftres,  Tru-
chemens  ou  Interpretes  qui  les  enfeignent;  comme
nous  le  fommes  en  ces  quartiers.

En  outre,  ce  n'eftoit  pas  l'ordre  d'aller  aux  extre-
mitez,  fans  paffer  par  le  milieu;  &  de  s'appliquer  a
cultiuer  les  Nations  plus  efloignees,  deuant  que  d'a-
uoir  trauaille  aux  plus  proches.  Ce  qu'ayant  efte
fait  les  annees  precedentes,  nous  nous  trouuames  en
eftat,  au  commencement  de  l'Automne,  de  pouuoir
deftiner  deux  Ouuriers  a  cette  Mifsion,  fans  faire
aucun  tort  aux  precedentes.

Celuy  fur  lequel  le  fort  tomba,  fut  le  P.  lean  de
Brebeuf,  lequel  ayant  autrefois  efte  choifi  pour  nous
introduire  le  premier,  &  etablir  en  ces  cotrees;  &
Dieu  luy  ayant  donne  pour  ce  regard  vne  fmguliere


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  187


CHAPTER  VIII.  [i.e.,  vi.]

OF THE MISSION OF THE ANGELS TO THE ATTIWAN-

DARONS, OR PEOPLES OF THE

NEUTRAL NATION.

THIS  is  one  of  the  new  Missions  that  we  have
begun  this  year,  to  one  of  the  most  important
Nations  in  these  regions.  For  a  long  time,
according  to  the  recollection  of  many  persons,  we
had  cast  our  eyes  on  this  quarter.  But  many  work-
ers in  strange  languages  are  not  found,  or  very
quickly  trained,  unless  the  Holy  [47]  Ghost  engage
therein  in  an  extraordinary  manner ;  especially  when
one  is  destitute,  as  we  are  in  these  parts,  of  the  aid
and  assistance  of  Masters,  Dragomans,  or  Interpret-
ers, who  teach  them.

Besides,  our  orders  were,  not  to  go  to  the  limits
without  passing  through  the  centre,  or  devote  our-
selves to  teaching  more  distant  Nations  before  labor-
ing among  those  nearer.  As  this  had  been  done  in
preceding  years,  we  found  ourselves  at  the  beginning
of  Autumn  ready  and  able  to  allot  two  Workers  to
this  Mission  without  doing  any  harm  to  the  former
ones.

The  lot  fell  upon  Father  Jean  de  Brebeuf,  who
before  had  been  the  first  one  chosen  to  introduce  and
establish  us  in  these  regions ;  and  as  God  had  given
him  for  this  purpose  a  special  blessing, — namely,  in
the  language, — it  seemed  that  this  ought  to  be  to  us
a  presumption  of  what  his  divine  Majesty  demanded


188  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.21

benedidtio,  nomement  en  la  lague ;  il  sebloit  que  ce
no9  deuoit  eftre  vn  preiuge  de  ce  que  fa  diuine
Maieft6  demadoit  en  ce  rencotre,  ou  il  eftoit  queftio
d'vne  introduction  toute  nouuelle,  dans  vne  Nation
differente  de  langage,  au  moins  en  plufieurs  chofes,
[48]  &  ou  (s'il  plaifoit  a  Dieu  donner  fa  benediction)
il  feroit  neceffaire  d'eftablir  vne  demeure  fixe  &  per-
manente,  qui  feroit  la  retraitte  des  Miffionnaires  d'a-
lentour,  comme  celle-cy  ou  nous  fommes  a  prefent,
l'eft  des  Miffionnaires  des  quartiers  de  deca.

Celuy  qui  luy  fut  donne  pour  compagnon  fut  le
Pere  Iofeph  Marie  Chaumonot,  venu  de  France  l'an-
nee  d'auparauant  que  Ton  auoit  reconneu  tres-propre
pour  les  langues.

Cette  nation  eft  grandement  peuplee :  Ton  y  conte
enuiron  quarante  bourgs  ou  bourgades.  Partant  de
nos  Hurons  pour  arriuer  aux  premiers  &  plus  proches,
on  chemine  quatre  ou  cinq  iournees;  c'eft  a  dire,
enuiron  quarante  lieues,  tirant  toufiours  droit  au
Sud.  De  forte  que  nous  pouuons  dire,  que  fi.  felon
la  derniere  &  plus  exadte  obferuation  qu'on  a  pu
faire,  noftre  nouuelle  maifon  de  Saincte  Marie  (qui
eft  au  milieu  du  pais  des  Hurons)  eft  a  quarante-
quatre  degrez  &  enuiro  vingt  &  cinq  minutes  d'efle-
uation,  l'entree  de  la  Nation  Neutre  du  cofte  de  nos
[49]  Hurons,  aura  d'efleuation  42.  degrez  &  demy  ou
enuiron.  Car  de  penfer  en  faire  pour  le  prefent  vne
plus  exadte  recherche  &  obferuation  das  le  pais
mefme,  c'eft  ce  qui  ne  fe  peut.  La  veue  du  feul
inftrument  feroit  pour  porter  a  l'extremite  ceux  qui
n'ont  pu  foufrrir  celle  des  efcritoires,  comme  nous
verrons  cy  apres.

Du  premier  bourg  de  la  Nation  Neutre,  que  Ton


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  189


on  this  occasion  in  which  it  was  a  question  of  an  en-
tirely new  introduction  into  a  Nation  different  in  lan-
guage, at  least  in  many  respects,  [48]  and  in  which
(if  it  should  please  God  to  grant  his  blessing)  it
would  be  necessary  to  establish  a  fixed  and  perma-
nent dwelling,  which  should  be  the  retreat  of  the
neighboring  Missionaries,  as  this  one,  in  which  we
are  at  present,  is  for  the  Missionaries  of  the  quarters
on  this  side.

He  who  was  given  to  him  as  companion  was  Fa-
ther Joseph  Marie  Chaumonot,  who  came  from  France
the  year  before,  and  had  been  acknowledged  very
gifted  in  languages.

This  nation  is  very  populous ;  about  forty  villages
or  hamlets  are  counted  therein.  Setting  out  from
our  Huron  people  to  reach  the  first  and  nearest
villages,  we  travel  four  or  five  days, — that  is  to  say,
about  forty  leagues, — going  always  directly  South.
So  we  can  say  that  if,  according  to  the  latest  and
most  exact  observation  which  we  have  been  able  to
make,  our  new  house  at  Sainte  Marie  (which  is  in
the  midst  of  the  Huron  country)  is  in  forty-four  de-
grees and  about  twenty-five  minutes  of  latitude,  the
entrance  to  the  Neutral  Nation  from  the  side  of  our
[49]  Huron  people  will  have  a  latitude  of  42  degrees
and  a  half,  or  thereabouts.  For  to  think  of  making,
for  the  present,  a  more  exact  research  and  observation
in  the  country  itself,  is  what  cannot  be  done.  The
sight  of  the  instrument  alone  would  drive  to  extremi-
ties those  who  have  not  been  able  to  endure  that  of
inkstands,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter.

From  the  first  village  of  the  Neutral  Nation  which
one  finds  on  arriving  there  from  this  place,  and
continuing  to  travel  South  or  Southeast,  it  is  about


190  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.21

rencontre  y  arriuant  d'icy,  continuant  de  cheminer
au  Midy  ou  Sudeft,  il  y  a  enuiron  quatre  iournees  de
chemin  iufques  a  l'emboucheure  de  la  Riuiere  ft
celebre  de  cette  Nation,  dans  1' Ontario  ou  lac  de  S.
Louys.  Au  deca  de  cette  Riuiere,  &  non  au  dela,
comme  le  marque  quelque  Charte,  font  la  plus  part
des  bourgs  de  la  Nation  Neutre.  II  y  en  a  trois  ou
quatre  au  dela,  rangez  d' Orient  a  l'Occident,  vers  la
Nation  du  Chat,  ou  Erieehronos.

Cette  Riuiere  ou  Fleuue,  eft  celuy  par  lequel  fe
defcharge  noftre  grand  lac  des  Hurons,  ou  Mer
douce;  qui  fe  rend  premierement  dans  le  lac  d'Erie,
ou  de  la  Nation  du  Chat;  &  iufques  la  elle  [50]  entre
dans  les  terres  de  la  Nation  Neutre,  &  prend  le  no
d'Onguiaahra,  iufques  a  ce  qu'elle  fe  foit  defchargee
das  1' Ontario  ou  lac  de  faindt  Louys,  d'oii  en  fin  fort
le  fleuue  qui  paffe  deuant  QuebeK,  dit  de  S  Lau-
rens. De  forte  que  fi  vne  fois  on  efloit  maiflre  de  la
cofte  de  la  mer  plus  proche  de  la  demeure  des  Iro-
quois, on  monteroit  par  le  fleuue  de  fainct  Laurens
fans  danger,  iufques  a  la  Nation  Neutre,  &  au  dela
de  beaucoup;  auec  efpargne  notable  de  peine  &  de
temps.

Suiuant  l'eftime  des  Peres  qui  y  ont  efte,  il  y  a
bien  au  moins  douze  mille  ames  dans  toute  l'eftendue
du  pays  qui  fait  eftat  de  pouuoir  encore  fournir  qua-
tre mille  guerriers,  nonobftant  les  guerres,  la  famine,
&  la  maladie  qui  depuis  3.  ans  y  ont  extraordinaire-
met  regne\

Apres  tout,  ie  croy  que  ceux  qui  ont  autre  fois
donne  tant  d'eftendue  a  cette  Nation,  &  luy  ont  don-
ne"  tant  de  peuples  ont  entendu  par  la  Nation  Neutre,
toutes  les  autres  Nations  qui  font  au  Sud  &  Suroueft


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  191


four  days'  journey  to  the  entrance  of  the  so  celebrated
River  of  that  Nation,  into  the  Ontario  or  lake  of  St.
Louys.  On  this  side  of  that  River, —  and  not  beyond
it,  as  a  certain  Chart  indicates, — are  the  greater  part
of  the  villages  of  the  Neutral  Nation.  There  are  three
or  four  beyond,  ranging  from  East  to  West,  towards
the  Nation  of  the  Cat,  or  Erieehronons.

This  Stream  or  River  is  that  through  which  our
great  lake  of  the  Hurons,  or  fresh-water  Sea,  emp-
ties; it  flows  first  into  the  lake  of  Erie,  or  of  the
Nation  of  the  Cat,11  and  at  the  end  of  that  lake,  it  [50]
enters  into  the  territory  of  the  Neutral  Nation,  and
takes  the  name  of  Onguiaahra,1-  until  it  empties  into
the  Ontario  or  lake  of  saint  Louys,  whence  finally
emerges  the  river  that  passes  before  Quebek,  called
the  St.  Lawrence.  So  that,  if  once  we  were  masters
of  the  coast  of  the  sea  nearest  to  the  dwelling  of  the
Iroquois,  we  could  ascend  by  the  river  saint  Lawrence
without  danger,  as  far  as  the  Neutral  Nation,  and  far
beyond,  with  considerable  saving  of  time  and  trouble.

According  to  the  reckoning  of  the  Fathers  who
have  been  there,  there  are  at  least  twelve  thousand
souls  in  the  whole  extent  of  the  country,  which  re-
lies upon  being  still  able  to  furnish  four  thousand
warriors,  notwithstanding  the  wars,  famine,  and  sick-
ness which  for  3  years  have  been  unusually  prevalent
there.

After  all,  I  believe  that  those  who  formerly  as-
cribed such  an  extent  to  this  Nation,  and  assigned
to  it  so  many  tribes,  understood  by  the  term  "  Neu-
tral Nation,"  all  the  other  Nations  which  are  South
and  Southwest  of  our  Hurons, — which  indeed  are
very  numerous,  but  which  in  the  beginning  [51]  hav-
ing been only  confusedly  known, were comprised


192


LES  RELATIONS  DES  jESUITES  [Vol.  21


de  nos  Hurons,  qui  en  effedt  font  en  grand  nombre,
mais  qui  au  commencement  [5 1]  n'ayans  efte  connues
que  confuf6ment,  auoient  efte  prefque  coprifes  fous
vn  mefme  nom.  La  cognoiffance  plus  grande  qu'on
a  eue  depuis  ce  temps  la,  foit  de  la  langue,  foit  du
pais,  a  fait  qu'on  a  diftingue  dauantage.

Au  refte,  de  plufieurs  Nations  differentes  dont  on
a  maintenant  la  cognoiffance,  il  ne  s'en  trouue  pas
vne  qui  n'ait  commerce  ou  guerre  auec  d'autres  plus
efloignees.  Ce  qui  confirme  qu'en  effet  la  multitude
eft  grande  de  ces  Peuples  qui  nous  reftent  a  voir :  &
que  s'il  n'y  a  pas  encore  grade  moifso  a  faire  il  y  a
de  grands  champs  a  labourer  &  femer,

Nos  Francois  qui  les  premiers  ont  efte"  icy,  ont
furnomme  cette  Nation,  la  Nation  Neutre,  &  non
fans  raifon.  Car  ce  pais  eftant  le  paffage  ordinaire
par  terre  de  quelque  Natio  d' Iroquois  &  des  Huros
ennemis  iurez ;  ils  fe  coferuet  en  paix  egalemet  auec
les  deux.  Voire  mefme  autresfois  les  Hurons  &  les
Iroquois  fe  rencontrans  en  mefme  cabane  ou  mefme
bourg  de  cette  Nation,  les  vns  &  les  autres  eftoient
en  affeurance  tant  qu'ils  ne  fortoient  a  la  campagne ;
[52]  mais  depuis  quelque  temps  la  furie  des  vns  con-
tre  les  autres  eft  fi  grande  qu'en  quelque  lieu  que  ce
foit,  il  n'y  a  pas  d'affeurance  pour  le  plus  foible,
particulierement  s'il  eft  du  party  Huron,  pour  lequel
cette  Nation,  pour  la  plus  part,  femble  auoir  moins
d'inclination.

Nos  Hurons  appellent  la  Nation  Neutre  Attib'an-
daronK,  comme  qui  diroit,  Peuples  d'vne  langue  vn
peu  difference:  car  quant  aux  Nations  qui  parlent
d'vne  langue  qu'ils  n'entendent  aucunement,  ils  les
appellent  AKtfanaKe,  de  quelque Nation  qu'ils  puif-


1641-42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  193

almost  under  one  and  the  same  name.  The  greater
knowledge  that  we  have  gained  since  that  time,  both
of  the  language  and  of  the  country  has  made  us
more  discriminating.

Besides,  of  many  different  Nations  with  whom  we
now  have  acquaintance,  there  is  not  found  one  that
has  not  trade  or  war  with  others  more  distant;  this
assures  us  that  really  there  is  a  great  multitude  of
these  Tribes,  which  remain  for  us  to  see ;  and  that,
if  there  are  not  yet  abundant  harvests  to  gather,
there  are  great  fields  to  plough  and  to  sow.

Our  Frenchmen  who  were  first  here  surnamed  this
Nation  "  the  Neutral  Nation,"  and  not  without  rea-
son ;  for  this  country  being  the  ordinary  land  route
of  some  Iroquois  Tribes  and  of  the  Hurons,  who  are
sworn  enemies,  they  keep  themselves  equally  in
peace  with  both.13  Nay,  even,  formerly  the  Hurons
and  the  Iroquois,  when  they  met  in  the  same  cabin
or  in  the  same  village  of  this  Nation,  were  both  in
security  so  long  as  they  did  not  go  out  into  the  fields ;
[52]  but  for  some  time  the  rage  of  one  against  the
other  has  been  so  great  that,  in  whatever  place  they
be,  there  is  no  security  for  the  most  feeble, —  espe-
cially if  he  be  of  the  Huron  side,  for  which  this  Na-
tion, for  the  most  part,  seems  to  have  less  inclination.

Our  Hurons  call  the  Neutral  Nation  ' '  Attiwanda-
ronk,"  which  is  to  say  "  Peoples  of  a  slightly  differ-
ent language :  "  for,  as  to  the  Nations  who  speak  a
language  which  they  in  no  wise  understand,  they  call
them  "  Akwanake," — of  whatever  Nation  they  may
be, —  which  is  to  say,  "  strangers."  Those  of  the
Neutral  Nation,  reciprocally,  for  the  same  reason  call
our  Hurons  Attiwandaronk.

We  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  not  long  ago


194  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21

fent  eftre,  comme  qui  diroit  eftrangers.  Ceux  de  la
Nation  Neutre  reciproquement  pour  la  mefme  raifon
appellent  nos  Hurons  Attib'andaronK.

Nous  auons  tout  fujet  de  croire  qu'il  n'y  a  pas
long  temps  qu'ils  ne  faifoient  tous  qu'vn  Peuple,  &
Hurons  &  Iroquois,  &  ceux  de  la  Nation  Neutre ;  &
qu'ils  viennent  d'vne  mefme  famille,  ou  de  quelques
premieres  Touches  abordees  autrefois  aux  coftes  de
ces  quartiers.  Mais  que  par  fucceffion  de  temps,  ils
fe  font  efloignez  &  feparez  les  vns  [53]  des  autres,
qui  plus,  qui  moins  de  demeure,  d'interefts  &  d'af-
fedtion :  de  forte  que  quelques  vns  font  deuenus  enne-
mis,  d'autres  Neutres,  &  d'autres  font  demeurez
dans  quelque  liaifon  &  communication  plus  particu-
liere.

Ces  Peuples  qui  font  Neutres  entre  les  Hurons  &
les  Iroquois,  ont  de  cruelles  guerres  auec  d'autres
Nations  Occidentales ;  &  particulierement  auec  les
Atfiftaehronons,  ou  Nation  du  Feu :  de  laquelle  l'an
paffe  ils  prirent  cent  prifonniers,  &  cette  annee,  y
eftans  retournez  en  guerre  auec  vne  arm£e  de  deux
mille  hommes,  ils  en  ont  encore  amene  plus  de  cent
feptante:  enuers  lefquels  ils  fe  comportent  quafi
auec  les  mefmes  cruautez  que  les  Hurons  enuers
leurs  ennemis;  toutesfois  ils  ont  cela  de  plus,  qu'ils
bruflent  les  femmes  prifonnieres  de  guerre,  auffi  bien
que  les  hommes:  ce  que  ne  font  pas  les  Hurons,  qui,
ou  leur  donnent  la  vie,  ou  fe  contentent  de  les  affom-
mer  a  la  chaude,  &  emporter  quelque  partie  du  corps.

Le  viure  &  le  veftir  de  cette  Nation  ne  femble  pas
beaucoup  different  de  celuy  [54]  de  nos  Hurons.  Ils
ont  le  bled  d'Inde,  les  faizoles  &  les  citroiiilles  en
efgale  abondance. La  pefche  pareillement  y  femble


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  195

they  all  made  but  one  People, — both  Hurons  and
Iroquois,  and  those  of  the  Neutral  Nation ;  and  that
they  came  from  one  and  the  same  family,  or  from  a
few  old  stocks  which  formerly  landed  on  the  coasts
of  these  regions.  But  it  is  probable  that,  in  prog-
ress of  time,  they  have  become  removed  and  sepa-
rated from  one  [53]  another  —  some  more,  some  less  —
in  abode,  in  interests,  and  in  affection ;  so  that  some
have  become  enemies,  others  Neutral,  and  others
have  remained  in  some  more  special  connection  and
communication .

These  Tribes  which  are  Neutral  between  the
Hurons  and  the  Iroquois,  have  cruel  wars  with  other
Western  Nations,  and  especially  with  the  Atsistae-
hronons,  or  Fire  Nation, —  from  which  they  took  last
year  a  hundred  prisoners;  and  this  year,  having
returned  there  for  war  with  an  army  of  two  thousand
men,  they  again  brought  away  more  than  a  hundred
and  seventy,  toward  whom  they  conduct  themselves
with  almost  the  same  cruelties  as  the  Hurons  do
towards  their  enemies.  However,  they  practice  the
further  cruelty  of  burning  the  women  prisoners  of
war,  as  well  as  the  men, —  which  is  not  done  by  the
Hurons,  who  either  give  them  their  lives,  or  content
themselves  with  knocking  them  down  in  the  heat  of
the  moment,  and  bearing  off  some  portion  of  their
bodies.

The  food  and  the  clothing  of  this  Nation  do  not
greatly  differ  from  those  [54]  of  our  Hurons :  they
have  Indian  corn,  beans,  and  squashes  in  equal
plenty;  the  fishing  likewise  seems  equal,  as  regards
the  abundance  of  fish,  of  which  some  species  are
found  in  one  region,  that  are  not  in  the  other.  The
people  of  the  Neutral  Nation  greatly  excel  in  hunt-


196  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

efgale,  pour  l'abondance  de  poiffon,  dont  quelques
efpeces  fe  trouuent  en  vn  lieu,  qui  ne  font  point  en
l'autre.  Ceux  de  la  Nation  Neutre  l'emportent  de
beaucoup  pour  la  chaffe  des  Cerfs,  des  Vaches  &  des
Chats  fauuages,  des  loups,  des  beftes  noires,  des
Caftors  &  autres  animaux,  dont  les  peaux  &  les
chairs  font  precieufes.  L'abondace  de  chair  y  a  efte"
grande  cette  annee  pour  les  neiges  extraordinaires
qui  font  furuenues,  qui  ont  facilite*  la  chaffe.  Car
eftant  chofe  rare  que  de  voir  dans  le  pais  plus  d'vn
demy  pied  de  neige,  il  y  en  auoit  cette  annee  plus  de
trois  pieds.  lis  ont  auffi  quantite  de  coqs  d'Inde  fau-
uages, qui  vont  par  troupes  dans  les  champs  &  dans
les  bois.

Pour  le  rafraifchiffement  des  fruidts,  il  ne  s'y  en
trouue  pas  plus  qu'aux  Hurons,  fi  ce  n'eft  des  cha-
ftaignes  dont  ils  ont  quantite,  &  des  pommes  de  bois
vn  peu  plus  groffes.

Ils  vont  couuerts  d'vne  peau  fur  la  chair  nue  com-
me  tous  les  Sauuages;  mais  [55]  auec  moins  de  rete-
nue  que  les  Hurons  pour  le  braye,  dot  plufieurs  ne
fe  feruet  point  du  tout:  d'autres  s'en  feruent,  mais
pour  1' ordinaire  de  la  forte  qu'a  grad  peine  ce  qui  ne
fe  doit  voir  fe  trouue  cache.  Les  femmes  toutefois
font  ordinairement  couuertes  au  moins  depuis  la  cein-
ture  iuf ques  aux  genoux.  Ils  f emblent  plus  defbordez
&  impudents  en  leurs  impudicitez,  que  nos  Hurons.

Ils  paffent  leurs  peaux  auec  beaucoup  de  foin  &
d'induftrie,  &  s'eftudient  a  les  enjoliuer  en  diuerfes
facos ;  mais  encore  plus  leur  propre  corps,  fur  lequel
depuis  la  tefte  iufqu'aux  pieds  ils  font  faire  mille
diuerfes  figures  auec  du  charbon  picque"  dans  la  chair,
fur  laquelle  auparauat  ils  ont  trace  leurs  lignes. De


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  197

ing  Stags,  Cows,  wild  Cats,  wolves,  black  beasts,14
Beaver,  and  other  animals  of  which  the  skin  and  the
flesh  are  valuable.  The  supply  of  meat  has  been
great  there  this  year  on  account  of  the  heavy  snows
which  have  fallen  and  which  have  facilitated  hunt-
ing ;  for  it  is  a  rare  thing  to  see  in  the  country  more
than  half  a  foot  of  snow,  and  they  have  had  this  year
more  than  three  feet.  They  have  also  multitudes  of
wild  Turkeys,  which  go  in  flocks  through  the  fields
and  woods.

As  for  the  refreshment  of  fruits,  not  more  of  them
are  found  there  than  among  the  Hurons,  unless  it
be  chestnuts,  of  which  they  have  plenty;  and  wild
apples,  a  little  larger  than  these.

They  cover  the  bare  flesh  with  a  skin,  like  all  Sav-
ages; but  [55]  with  less  modesty  than  the  Hurons
as  to  the  breech  cloth,  which  many  do  not  use  at
all ;  others  use  it,  but  generally  in  such  a  way  that
with  great  difficulty  is  that  concealed  which  should
not  be  seen.  The  women,  however,  are  ordinarily
covered,  at  least  from  the  waist  as  far  as  the  knees;
they  seem  more  dissolute  and  shameless  in  their
licentious  acts  than  are  our  Hurons.

They  dress  their  pelts  with  much  care  and  skill,
and  study  to  beautify  them  in  many  ways ;  but  still
more  their  own  bodies,  upon  which,  from  the  head
even  to  the  feet,  they  cause  to  be  made  a  thousand
different  figures  with  charcoal  pricked  into  the  flesh,
upon  which  previously  they  have  traced  their  lines, —
so  that  sometimes  one  sees  the  face  and  breast  orna-
mented with  figures,  as  are  in  France  the  helmets,
breastplates,  and  gorgets  of  military  men ;  and  the
remainder  of  the  body  is  appropriately  decorated.

As  for  the  rest  of  their  customs  and  manners,  they


198  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21

forte  qu'on  leur  void  quelquefois  le  vifage  &  l'eito-
mac  figure,  come  le  font  en  France  les  morions  &  les
cuiraffes  &  les  hauffecols  des  gens  de  guerre,  &  le
refte  du  corps  a  l'aduenant.

Pour  le  refte  de  leurs  couftumes  &  facos  de  faire,
ils  font  prefque  en  tout  seblables  aux  autres  Sauuages
de  ces  contrees ;  fpecialemet  en  leur  irreligio  &  gou-
uernemet,  [56]  foit  politiq;  foit  ceconomiq;.

II  y  a  toutesfois  quelques  chofes  en  quoy  ils  fem-
blent  vn  peu  differens  de  nos  Hurons  Premierement,
ils  paroiflent  plus  grads,  plus  forts  &  mieux  faits.

Secondement,  l'affedtio  enuers  leurs  morts,  fem-
ble  eftre  bien  plus  grande.  Nos  Hurons  inconti-
nent apres  la  mort,  portent  les  corps  au  cimetiere,  &
ne  les  en  retirent  que  pour  la  fefte  des  Morts :  ceux
de  la  Nation  Neutre,  ne  portent  les  corps  au  cime-
tiere que  le  plus  tard  qu'ils  peuuent,  lors  que  la  pour-
riture  les  rendroit  infupportables.  D'ou  ce  fait  que
les  corps  paffent  fouuent  l'hyuer  entier  dans  les  ca-
banes ;  &  les  ayant  vne  fois  mis  dehors  fur  vn  ef chaf-
faut  pour  pourrir,  ils  en  retirent  les  os  le  pluftoft
qu'il  fe  peut,  &  les  expofent  en  veue,  arrangez  de  cofte
&  d'autre  dans  leurs  cabanes,  iufques  a  la  fefte  des
Morts.  Cet  objedt  qu'ils  ont  deuant  les  yeux,  leur
renouuellant  continuellement  le  reffentiment  de  leurs
pertes,  leur  fait  ordinairement  ietter  des  cris,  &  faire
des  lamentations  tout  a  fait  lugubres,  le  tout  en  chan-
fon. Mais  cela  ne  fe  fait  que  par  les  femmes.

[57]  La  troifiefme  chofe  en  quoy  ils  femblent  diffe-
rens de  nos  Hurons,  c'eft  en  la  multitude  &  qualite"
des  fols.  On  ne  trouue  autre  chofe,  allant  par  le
pays,  que  des  gens  qui  font  ce  perfonnage  auec  toutes
les  extrauagances  poffibles,  &  libertez  qu'ils  pren-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  199

are,  in  almost  all  things,  like  the  other  Savages  of
these  regions,  especially  in  their  irreligion  and
government,  [56]  whether  political  or  domestic.

However,  there  are  some  things  in  which  they
seem  a  little  different  from  our  Hurons.  First,  they
appear  taller,  stronger,  and  better  proportioned.

Secondly,  their  affection  toward  their  dead  seems
to  be  much  greater.  Our  Hurons  immediately  after
death  carry  the  bodies  to  the  burying  ground  and
take  them  away  from  it  only  for  the  feast  of  the
Dead.  Those  of  the  Neutral  Nation  carry  the  bodies
to  the  burying  ground  only  at  the  very  latest  mo-
ment possible  when  decomposition  has  rendered  them
insupportable;  for  this  reason,  the  dead  bodies  often
remain  during  the  entire  winter  in  their  cabins;  and,
having  once  put  them  outside  upon  a  scaffold  that
they  may  decay,  they  take  away  the  bones  as  soon
as  is  possible,  and  expose  them  to  view,  arranged
here  and  there  in  their  cabins,  until  the  feast  of  the
Dead.  These  objects  which  they  have  before  their
eyes,  renewing  continually  the  feeling  of  their  losses,
cause  them  frequently  to  cry  out  and  to  make  most
lugubrious  lamentations,  the  whole  in  song.  But
this  is  done  only  by  the  women.

[57]  The  third  respect  in  which  they  seem  differ-
ent from  our  Hurons,  is  in  the  multitude  and  sort  of
lunatics.  In  going  through  the  country,  one  finds
nothing  else  but  people  who  play  this  part  with  all
possible  extravagances,  and  any  liberties  they  choose,
and  who  are  suffered  to  do  all  that  is  pleasing  to
them,  for  fear  of  offending  their  demon.  They  take
the  embers  from  the  fire,  and  scatter  them  around ;
they  break  and  shatter  what  they  encounter,  as  if
they  were  raving, —  although  in  reality,  for  the  most


200  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jESUITES [Vol.21

nent,  &  qui  font  toleres  de  faire  tout  ce  qui  leur
plaiit,  crainte  de  defplaire  a  leur  demon.  lis  iettent
&  efparpillent  les  braifes  des  foyers,  rompent  &brifent
ce  qu'ils  rencontrent,  comme  s'ils  eftoient  furieux,
quoy  qu'en  effect,  pour  la  plus  part  ils  foient  auffi
prefens  a  eux  mefmes,  que  ceux  qui  ne  font  pas  ce
perfonnage.  Mais  ils  fe  comportent  de  la  forte,  pour
donner,  difent-ils,  ce  contentement  a  leur  demon
particulier,  qui  demande  &  exige  cela  d'eux :  fcauoir  a
celuy  qui  leur  parle  en  fonge,  &  qui  leur  fait  efperer
raccompliffement  de  leurs  fouhaits  pour  le  bon
fuccez  de  la  chaff e.

Les  Peres  eftans  en  ces  quartiers  apprirent  que  les
Oneiochronons  (qui  font  vne  des  cinq  Nations  d' Iro-
quois) auoiet  vne  facon  de  gouuernement  fort  particu-
lier. Les  hommes  &  les  femmes  y  [58]  manient
alternatiuement  les  affaires:  de  forte  que  fi.  c'eft
maintenat  vn  home  qui  les  gouuerne,  ce  fera  apres
fa  mort  vne  femme,  qui  de  fon  viuant  les  gouuernera
a  fon  tour,  excepte  ce  qui  regarde  la  guerre ;  &  apres
la  mort  de  la  femme,  ce  fera  vn  homme  qui  repren-
dra  derechef  le  maniement  des  affaires.

Quelques  anciens  racontoient  a  nos  Peres  qu'ils
auoient  cognoiffance  d'vne  certaine  Natio  Occidetale,
vers  laquelle  ils  alloiet  faire  la  guerre,  qui  n'eftoit
pas  beaucoup  efloignee  de  la  mer.  Que  les  habitas
du  lieu  y  pefchoiet  les  Vignots,  qui  font  vne  efpece
d'huiftres,  dont  l'efcaille  fert  a  faire  la  pourcelaine,
qui  font  les  perles  du  pais.  Voicy  la  facon  qu'ils
defcriuent  leur  pefche.  Ils  obferuent  quand  la  mer
mote  aux  endroits  ou  ces  Vignots  abondent ;  &  lors
que  la  violence  des  riots  les  pouffe  vers  le  bord,  ils  fe
iettent  a  corps  perdu  dans  les  eaux,  &  fe  faififfent


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  201

part,  they  are  as  self-collected  as  those  who  do  not
play  this  character.  But  they  conduct  themselves  in
this  way,  in  order  to  give,  they  say,  this  satisfaction
to  their  special  demon,  who  demands  and  exacts  this
of  them, —  that  is  to  say,  to  him  who  speaks  to  them
in  dreams,  and  who  makes  them  expect  the  fulfill-
ment of  their  wishes  for  good  success  in  hunting.

While  the  Fathers  were  in  these  quarters,  they
learned  that  the  Oneiochronons  (who  form  one  of  the
five  Iroquois  Nations)  had  a  very  peculiar  form  of
government.  The  men  and  the  women  therein  [58]
administer  alternately  the  affairs ;  so  that,  if  now  it
is  a  man  who  governs  them,  after  his  death  it  will
be  a  woman,  who  during  her  life  will  govern  them
in  her  turn,  except  in  what  regards  war ;  and,  after
the  death  of  the  woman,  it  will  be  a  man  who  will
resume  again  the  administration  of  affairs.

Some  old  men  related  to  our  Fathers  that  they  had
acquaintance  with  a  certain  Western  Nation,  against
which  they  were  going  to  make  war,  and  which  was
not  far  removed  from  the  sea;  that  the  inhabitants
of  the  place  fished  for  Vignots,  that  are  a  kind  of
oyster,  the  shell  of  which  serves  to  make  porcelain
beads,  which  are  the  pearls  of  the  country.  This  is
the  way  they  describe  their  fishing:  they  observe
when  the  sea  rises  in  places  where  these  Vignots
abound,  and  when  the  violence  of  the  waves  drives
them  towards  the  shore,  they  throw  themselves
headlong  into  the  water  and  seize  those  that  they
can  catch.  Sometimes  they  find  them  so  large,  that
it  is  all  they  can  do  to  stretch  their  arms  around  one
of  them.  Now,  many  affirm  that  it  must  be  [59]
young  men,  who  have  not  yet  had  knowledge  of
woman,  who  can  carry  on  this  fishery,  as  otherwise


202  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES [Vol.21

de  ceux  qu'ils  peuuent  atrapper.  lis  en  trouuent
quelquefois  de  fi  gros,  que  c'eft  tout  ce  qu'ils  peu-
uent faire  que  d'en  embraffer  vn.  Or  plufieurs
affeurent,  qu'il  faut  que  ce  foient  [59]  ieunes  gens
qui  n'ayent  encore  eu  cognoiffance  de  femme,  qui
faffent  cette  pefche,  qu'autrement  ces  animaux  fe
retiret  d'eux. Ie  m'en  rapporte  a  la  verite.

lis  racontoient  que  ces  mefmes  Peuples  ont  vne
efpece  de  guerre  auec  certains  animaux  aquatiques,
plus  grands  &  plus  legers  a  la  courfe  que  les  Ori-
gnaux.  Les  ieunes  gens  vont  agacer  das  l'eau  ces
animaux,  qui  ne  manquent  pas  auffi  toft  de  gaigner
la  terre,  &  pourfuiure  leurs  agreffeurs.  Ceux-cy  fe
fentans  fuiuis  de  trop  pres,  iettent  quelque  piece  de
cuir,  come  fouliers  fauuages,  a  ces  animaux  qui  s'ar-
reftet  &  s'amufent,  pendat  que  les  chafTeurs  gaignent
le  deuat:  qui  autant  de  fois  qu'ils  fe  fentent  fuiuis
de  trop  pres,  font  le  mefme  que  la  premiere  fois,
iufques  a  ce  qu'ils  foient  arriuez  a  vn  fort  ou  embuf-
cade  d'vne  troupe  de  leurs  gens,  qui  enuironnans  la
befte,  s'en  rendent  en  fin  les  maiftres.  Voila  ce  que
nous  auons  apris  de  plus  confiderable  de  ces  contrees.

Plufieurs  de  nos  Francois  qui  ont  efte  icy,  ont  fait
autrefois  voyage"  en  ce  pais  de  la  Natio  Neutre,  pour
en  tirer  les  [60]  profits  &  les  auantages  de  pelleterie,
&  autres  petites  denrees  qu'on  en  peut  efperer.
Mais  nous  n'auons  cognoiffance  d'aucun  qui  y  foit
paffe  a  deffein  d'y  prefcher  l'Euangile,  fmon  du
Reuerend  Pere  Iofeph  de  la  Roche  Daillon  Recolledt ;
qui  en  1626.  y  fit  vn  voyage,  &  y  paffa  l'hyuer.  Mais
les  Francois  qui  eftoient  pour  lors  icy,  ayans  appris
le  mauuais  traittement  qu'il  y  auoit  receu;  craignans
que  les  chofes  ne  paffaffent  a  l'extremite,  le  retour-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  203

these  creatures withdraw from them. I  will not
decide  the  truth  of  this.

They  related  that  these  same  Tribes  have  a  kind
of  war  with  certain  aquatic  animals  larger  and  lighter
in  running  than  the  Moose.  The  young  men  go  into
the  water  to  tease  these  animals,  which  do  not  fail
immediately  to  gain  the  land  and  pursue  their  assail-
ants. The  latter  finding  themselves  too  closely  fol-
lowed, throw  some  piece  of  leather,  as  the  shoes  of
the  savages,  to  these  animals,  which  stop  and  amuse
themselves  therewith,  while  the  hunters  gain  the
advance,  and  as  often  as  they  see  themselves  fol-
lowed too  closely  they  do  the  same  that  they  did  at
first,  until  they  have  arrived  at  a  fort  or  ambush  of
a  band  of  their  people,  who,  surrounding  the  beasts,
make  themselves  at  last  their  masters.  These  are  the
most  important  things  we  have  learned  in  these
regions.

Many  of  our  Frenchmen  who  have  been  here  have,
in  the  past,  made  journeys  in  this  country  of  the
Neutral  Nation  for  the  sake  of  reaping  [60]  profit  and
advantage  from  furs  and  other  little  wares  that  one
might  look  for.  But  we  have  no  knowledge  of  any
one  who  has  gone  there  for  the  purpose  of  preach-
ing the  Gospel,  except  the  Reverend  Father  Joseph
de  la  Roche  Daillon,  a  Recollect,15  who  in  1626  made
a  journey  thither,  and  spent  the  winter  there.  But
the  Frenchmen  who  were  then  here,  having  learned
the  evil  treatment  that  he  had  received  there,  fear-
ing lest  matters  should  go  to  the  extreme,  went  for
him,  and  brought  him  back  in  the  Spring  of  the  fol-
lowing year.  The  zeal  which  led  the  aforesaid  Fa-
ther to  make  this  journey,  as  soon  as  he  had  set  foot
in  the  Huron  country,  not  having  permitted  him  to


204  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

nerent  querir,  &  ramenerent  au  Printemps  de  l'annee
d'apres.  Le  zele  qui  porta  le  fufdit  Pere  a  faire  ce
voyage,  auffi  toft  qu'il  eut  mis  le  pied  aux  Hurons,
ne  luy  ayant  pas  permis  de  fe  former  auparauant  a
la  langue ;  &  f e  trouuant  la  plus  part  du  temps  fans
Truchement,  il  eftoit  contraint  d'inftruire  ceux  qu'il
pouuoit,  pluftoft  par  fignes  que  de  viue  voix.  comme
il  raconte  luy-mefme  en  vne  fienne  lettre  imprim6e.
Cela  ioint  aux  mauuais  tours  que  luy  ioiierent  pour
lors  les  Hurons ;  qui  craignoient  le  tranfport  de  la
traidte,  femblables  a  ceux  dont  nous  parlerons  tan-
toft,  ne  luy  permit  pas  en  fi  [61]  peu  de  temps,  de
faire  ce  qu'il  euft  defire  pour  le  feruice  de  Dieu.

Quatorze  ans  done  apres,  les  deux  Peres  de  noftre
Compagnie,  qui  ont  eu  charge  de  cette  Miffion,  par-
tirent  de  cette  Maifon  de  S.  Marie,  le  fecond  iour  de
Nouembre  de  l'annee  paff6e  1640.

Arriuez  qu'ils  furent  a  S.  Iofeph  ou  Teanauftajae
dernier  bourg  des  Hurons,  ou  ils  deuoient  faire  leurs
prouifions  pour  leur  voyage,  &  trouuer  des  guides
pour  le  chemin.  Ceux  qui  leur  auoient  donne  parole
leur  ayant  manque,  ils  ne  peurent  faire  autre  chofe,
que  de  s'addreffer  au  Ciel,  apres  quel  que  voeu  fait,
le  Pere  de  Brebeuf,  rencontra  vn  ieune  homme  qui
n'auoit  aucun  deffein  de  faire  ce  voyage,  ie  ne  fcay
par  quel  mouuement  il  s'addreffa  a  luy,  quoy  que
e'en  foit,  ne  luy  ayant  dit  que  ces  deux  mots,  Quio
acK^e :  fus  allons  nous-en  de  copagnie :  ce  ieune
homme  fans  refiftance  les  fuiuit  fur  le  champ,  &  leur
tint  fidelle  compagnie.  Ils  auoient  auec  eux  deux  de
nos  Francois  domeftiques,  tant  pour  les  affifter  en
leur  voyage  que  pour  predre  le  pretexte  de  trafiquer
par  leurs  [62]  mains,  &  paffer  comme  marchands  dans


1641  -42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  205

train  himself  beforehand  in  the  language,  and  he
being  the  greater  part  of  the  time  without  an  Inter-
preter, he  was  constrained  to  instruct  those  whom
he  could,  rather  by  signs  than  by  word  of  mouth,  as
he  himself  relates  in  one  of  his  printed  letters.  This,
joined  to  the  evil  tricks  which  were  played  on  him
then  by  the  Hurons, —  who  feared  the  removal  of
their  trade,  as  did  those  of  whom  we  shall  speak  pres-
ently,—  did  not  permit  him  in  so  [61]  short  a  time,
to  do  what  he  had  desired  for  the  service  of  God.

Then,  fourteen  years  afterward,  the  two  Fathers
of  our  Society  who  have  had  charge  of  this  Mission
set  out  from  this  House  of  Ste.  Marie  the  second  day
of  November  of  last  year,  1640.

When  they  had  arrived  at  St.  Joseph,  or  Teanaus-
taiae, — the  last  village  of  the  Hurons  where  they  were
to  make  provision  for  their  journey,  and  find  guides
for  the  way, — -those  who  had  given  them  a  promise
having  failed  them,  they  could  do  nothing  else  than
appeal  to  Heaven ;  after  having  offered  a  prayer,
Father  de  Brebeuf  met  a  young  man  who  had  no
thought  of  making  this  journey.  I  do  not  know  by
what  impulse  he  addressed  him;  however,  having
said  to  him  only  these  two  words,  "  Quio  ackwe,"
"  Come,  let  us  go  away  together,"  this  young  man,
without  opposition,  immediately  followed  them,  and
remained  their  faithful  companion.  They  had  with
them  two  of  our  French  domestics,  as  much  to  assist
them  in  their  journey  as  to  make  a  show  of  trading
with  their  [62]  help,  and  to  pass  as  merchants  in  the
country,  in  case  that  without  this  inducement  the
doors  of  the  cabins  should  be  shut  against  them,  as
in  reality  happened.

They  slept  four  nights  in  the  woods;  and  on  the


206  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

le  pais,  en  cas  que  fans  cette  cofideratio  les  portes
des  cabanes  leur  deufset  eftre  ferm6es,  comme  en
effet  il  fut  arriue\

lis  coucherent  quatre  nuidts  dans  les  bois,  &  le
cinquiefme  iour  ils  arriuerent  au  premier  bcmrg  de
la  Nation  Neutre,  nomme  KandScho,  qu'ils  furnom-
merent  de  tous  les  Saindts.

Comme  on  n'ignoroit  pas  la  mauuaife  difpofition
des  efprits  de  ces  Peuples,  abreuuez  feulement  de
tons  les  mau[u]ais  difcours  qui  s'eftoient  tenus  de
nous  en  nos  quartiers  les  annees  paffees,  &  qui  n'en
auoiet  d'ailleurs  autre  conoiffance ;  on  iugea  a  propos
d'y  aller  auec  prefens  &  de  vifer  a  quelque  affemblee
des  Capitaines  &  Anciens  que  Ton  efclairciroit  de
nos  intentions.

II  falloit  pour  ce  deffein  s'addreffer  a  celuy  des
Capitaines  qui  manie  les  affaires  du  public,  nomme'
Tfohahiffen.  Son  bourg  efloit  au  milieu  du  pais:
pour  y  arriuer  il  falloit  paffer  par  plufieurs  autres
bourgs  &  bourgades:  aufquelles  les  Peres  arriuans
ils  eftoient  tous  eflonnez,  que  l'effroy  auoit  march6
deuant  eux,  &  auoit  par  tout  fait  fermer  [63]  les
portes  des  cabanes.  Le  nom  d'Echon  (qui  eft  celuy
que  les  Sauuages  ont  done  de  tout  temps  au  P.  de
Brebeuf)  retentiffoit  par  tout,  come  celuy  d'vn  des
plus  fameux  forciers  ou  demons  qu'on  fe  fut  iamais
imagine.  Toutefois  le  pretexte  de  la  traite  adou-
ciffoit  tout,  &  cete  confideratio  les  fit  arriuer  affez
heureufemet  iufques  au  bourg  de  ce  principal  Capi-
taine,  qui  fe  trouua  eftre  alle  a  la  guerre,  pour  ne
reuenir  qu'au  Printeps.  Nos  Peres  s'adreflent  a  ceux
qui  en  fon  abfence  faifoient  les  affaires,  ils  leur  ex-
pofent  leur  deffein  de  publier  l'Euangile  par  toute


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640- 41  207

fifth  day  they  arrived  at  the  first  village  of  the  Neu-
tral Nation,  named  Kandoucho,  to  which  they  gave
the  surname  of  "  all  Saints."  10

As  we  were  not  ignorant  of  the  evil  tendency  in
the  minds  of  these  People, —  saturated  solely  with  all
the  ill-natured  remarks  that  had  been  made  concern-
ing us  in  our  quarters  in  past  years,  and  who,  besides,
had  no  other  knowledge  of  us, —  we  deemed  it  expe-
dient to  go  to  them  with  presents,  and  to  have  in
view  some  assembly  of  the  Captains  and  Aged  men
whom  we  could  enlighten  as  to  our  intentions.

For  this  purpose  it  was  necessary  to  apply  to  one
of  the  Captains,  named  Tsohahissen,  who  managed
the  public  affairs.  His  village  was  in  the  midst  of
the  country ; 17  in  order  to  reach  it,  we  were  obliged
to  pass  through  many  other  villages  and  hamlets,  on
arriving  at  which  the  Fathers  were  much  surprised
to  find  that  terror  had  gone  before  them  and  had
caused  [63]  the  doors  of  the  cabins  everywhere  to  be
closed.  The  name  of  Echon  (which  the  Savages
have  given  at  all  times  to  Father  de  Brebeuf)  re-
sounded on  all  sides,  as  that  of  one  of  the  most
famous  sorcerers  or  demons  that  had  ever  been  imag-
ined. However,  the  pretext  of  trade  made  every-
thing easy,  and  this  consideration  enabled  them  to
reach  quite  successfully  even  the  village  of  the  chief
Captain,  who  chanced  to  be  away  at  war,  and  would
not  return  until  Spring.  Our  Fathers  appealed  to
those  who  were  conducting  the  affairs  in  his  absence ;
they  explained  to  them  their  plan  of  publishing  the
Gospel  throughout  the  extent  of  these  territories,  and
of  forming,  by  this  means,  a  special  alliance  with
them. As  a  proof  of  this,  they  had  brought  a  collar


208  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  21

l'eflendue  de  leurs  terres,  &  de  contracter  par  ce
moyen  vne  particuliere  alliance  auec  eux.  Pour
preuue  dequoy  ils  auoient  apporte  vn  collier  de  deux
mille  grains  de  pourcelaine,  dont  ils  defiroient  faire
prefent  au  Public.

Les  Capitaines  apres  auoir  tenu  confeil,  diret  pour
refponfe,  Que  le  chef  du  pais  eftat  abfent,  on  ne
pouuoit  deuat  so  retour  accepter  les  Preses,  qui  fel5
leurs  couftumes,  les  obligeoient  a  en  faire  de  reci-
proques.  Que  fi  nous  voulions  attedre  iufques  la
nous  pouuions  cependant  [64]  aller  librement  dans
le  pais,  pour  y  donner  telle  inftruction  qu'il  nous
plairoit.

Rien,  ce  femble,  ne  pouuoit  arriuer  plus  a  propos
pour  donner  temps  d'informer  en  particulier  quel-
ques-vns  des  plus  Anciens,  &  commencer  a  appriuoi-
fer  ces  efprits  fauuages.  Mais  deuant  que  commen-
cer, les  Peres  iugerent  a  propos  de  retourner  fur
leurs  pas  pour  reconduire  nos  domefliques  hors  du
pais ;  puis  reprendre  pour  la  f econde  f ois  leur  che-
min,  &  commencer  leur  fondtion.  Ce  qu'ils  firent,
mais  le  pretexte  de  la  traidte  leur  manquant,  ils
eurent  bien  a  fouffrir  en  fuitte  de  mille  calomnies
qu'on  fufcitoit  a  l'occaflon  de  leur  voyage.

Nos  Hurons  difoient,  qu'Echon  mettant  pour  la
premiere  fois  le  pied  dans  leur  pais,  auoit  dit:  I'y
feray  tant  d'annees,  pedant  lefquelles  i'en  feray  mou-
rir  tant,  &  puis  i'iray  ailleurs  en  faire  autant,  iuf-
ques a  ce  que  i'aye  perdu  toute  la  terre.

D'autres  difoient,  qu'Echon  apres  auoir  fait  mou-
rir  par  maladie  vne  partie  [65]  des  Hurons,  eftoit
alle  faire  alliance  auec  les  Sonontb'ehronons,  qui
font  vne  Nation  d' Iroquois, la  plus  redoutee  &  la


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  209

of  two  thousand  porcelain  beads,  which  they  desired
to  present  to  the  Public.

The  Captains,  after  having  held  a  council,  said  in
reply  that,  as  the  chief  of  the  country  was  absent,
they  could  not  accept  the  Presents  before  he  came
back,  since  according  to  their  customs  this  would
oblige  them  to  make  others  in  return;  but,  if  we
were  willing  to  wait  until  then,  we  could  in  the  mean-
time [64]  go  freely  into  the  country,  in  order  to  give
therein  such  instruction  as  we  pleased.

Nothing,  it  seems,  could  have  happened  more  op-
portunely for  giving  time  to  instruct  in  private  some
of  the  most  Aged  men,  and  to  begin  to  tame  these
fierce  spirits.  But,  before  commencing,  the  Fathers
deemed  it  expedient  to  retrace  their  steps,  in  order
to  lead  our  domestics  out  of  the  country,  then  to  take
for  the  second  time  their  way,  and  begin  their  duties.
This  they  did,  but  the  pretense  of  trade  failing
them,  they  had  much  to  suffer  afterward  from  a
thousand  calumnies  which  were  stirred  up  on  account
of  their  journey.

Our  Hurons  related  that,  when  Echon  set  his  foot
in  their  country  for  the  first  time,  he  had  said:  "  I
shall  be  here  so  many  years,  during  which  I  shall
cause  many  to  die,  and  then  I  shall  go  elsewhere  to
do  the  same,  until  I  have  ruined  the  whole  land."

Others  related  that  Echon,  after  having  caused  the
death,  by  disease,  of  a  part  [65]  of  the  Hurons,  had
gone  to  make  an  alliance  with  the  Sonontwehronons,
who  form  one  of  the  Iroquois  Nations, — the  one  most
feared  by  the  Hurons,  and  the  one  nearest  to  them,
as  the  former  are  distant  but  a  day's  journey  from
the  last  village  of  the  Neutral  Nation,  on  the  side  of
the  East,  which  is  named  Onguiaahra,  the  same  name


210  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.21

plus  voifine  de  nos  Hurons;  comme  n'eftans  efloi-
gnez  que  d'vne  iournee  du  dernier  bourg  de  la
Nation  Neutre  du  cofte  de  l'Orient,  nomine  Onguia-
ahra,  du  mefme  nom  que  la  Riuiere.  Qu'il  les  eftoit
alle  trouuer  pour  leur  faire  prefent  de  colliers  de
pourcelaine  &  fers  de  flefche,  &  les  exciter  a  venir
acheuer  de  miner  le  pais.

D'autres  nous  aduertiffoient  a  l'oreille,  que  nous
priffions  garde  a  cette  affaire.  Qu'il  n'y  auoit  eu
autre  caufe  du  maffacre  d'vn  de  nos  Francois  fait  icy
il  y  a  quelques  annees,  que  des  voyages  femblables,
qui  mettoient  le  pais  en  ialoufie,  &  en  crainte  du
tranfport  de  la  traite.

D'autres  difoient  que  lors  qu'on  auoit  enterre  cet
excellent  Chreftien  Iofeph  Chib'atenhb'a,  Echon  fe
tournant  du  cofte  du  pais  des  Sonontb'ehronons,  qui
l'auoient  tue\  dit  tout  haut  (Sonontb'ehronon,  c'eft
fait  de  toy,  tu  es  mort)  &  qu'auffi  toft  apres  le  Pere
s'eftoit  achemine"  [66]  vers  leur  quartier  pour  leur
porter  la  maladie ;  laquelle  en  effedt  f e  trouuoit  parmy
les  ennemis  bien  forte,  pendant  le  fejour  des  Peres  a
la  Nation  Neutre.  Surquoy  les  Hurons  nous  prioient
de  prendre  bon  courage,  &  de  faire  mourir  tous  leurs
ennemis.

Ie  ne  fcay  fi  depuis  leur  depart  iufques  a  leur  re-
tour  il  s'eft  paffe  fepmaine,  qu'on  ne  nous  foit  venu
apporter  nouuelles,  qu'ayans  efte  trouuez  dans  la
Nation  Neutre  par  les  ennemis,  ils  auoient  eft6  maf-
facrez  de  leur  main.  Mais  ie  ne  fcay  s'il  y  a  a  dou-
ter,  fi  ces  bruits  ne  venoient  point  de  la  part  des  Bar-
bares  de  nos  quartiers  mefmes,  qui  couuoient  de
long  temps  quelque  mauuais  deffein,  qu'ils  voyoient
ne  pouuoir iamais executer  plus  impunement  que


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  211

as  the  River.  They  said  he  had  gone  to  visit  them,
in  order  to  make  them  a  present  of  porcelain  collars
and  arrowheads  and  to  instigate  their  coming  to  com-
plete the  ruin  of  the  country.

Some  warned  us  privately  to  beware  of  this  under-
taking, as  there  had  been  no  other  cause  for  the
murder  of  one  of  our  Frenchmen,  that  occurred  here
some  years  ago,  than  just  such  journeys  which  made
the  country  uneasy  and  fearful  of  a  transference  of
trade.

Others  said  that  when  that  excellent  Christian,
Joseph  Chiwatenhwa,  was  buried,  Echon,  turning  in
the  direction  of  the  country  of  the  Sonontwehrononsy
who  had  killed  him,  said  aloud  ("  Sonontwehronon,
it  is  all  over  with  thee, — thou  art  dead  ");  and  that,,
immediately  after,  the  Father  had  proceeded  [66]
toward  their  district,  that  he  might  carry  the  disease
to  them, —  which  in  truth  was  raging  fiercely  among
the  enemy  during  the  sojourn  of  the  Fathers  in  the
Neutral  Nation.  Upon  this,  the  Hurons  begged  us
to  have  good  courage  and  to  cause  the  death  of  all
their  enemies.

From  the  departure  of  these  Fathers  until  their
return,  I  do  not  know  that  a  week  passed  without
some  one's  coming  to  bring  us  news  that,  these  hav-
ing been  found  in  the  Neutral  Nation  by  the  enemy,
they  had  been  slain  by  their  hands.  But  I  cannot
doubt  that  these  reports  came  from  the  Barbarians
of  our  own  region,  who  for  a  long  time  were  medi-
tating some  evil  design  that  they  saw  no  possibility
of  ever  executing  with  more  impunity  than  then, —
such  a  murder  being  likely  to  be  attributed  to  any
one else  rather  than to them ;  and,  it  being  com-


212  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

pour  lors,  ce  maffacre  deviant  eftre  attribue"  a  tout
autre  pluftoft  qu'a  eux;  &  lequel  fe  faifant  dans  vne
Nation  eftrangere,  leur  pais  n'en  demeuroit  aucune-
ment  refponfable.

Quoy  que  e'en  foit,  il  eft  affeure  qu'vn  de  nos  Hu-
rons,  nomine"  AtfenhoKHi,  neveu  d'vn  des  principaux
Capitaines  de  [67]  ce  pais,  en  compagnie  d'vn  autre
Huron  a  efte  par  plufieurs  bourgs  de  la  Nation  Neu-
tre,  lors  que  nos  Peres  y  eftoient;  fe  difant  enuoye"
de  la  part  des  Capitaines  &  anciens  de  ce  quartier,
auec  prefens  de  haches  qu'il  moftroit,  pour  doner
aduis  aux  Capitaines  que  Ton  fe  defift  de  ces  Fran-
cois, s'ils  ne  vouloiet  voir  la  ruine  du  pais,  pour  ne
nous  auoir  pas  preuenu.  Et  ces  porteurs  d'aduis
adiouftoient  qu'en  cas  qu'o  fift  refus  de  faire  le  coup,
que  la  refolutio  eftoit  prife  aux  Huros,  de  l'executer
incontinent  apres  le  retour  des  Peres :  &  que  la  chofe
eut  defia  efte"  executee  fi  nous  ne  nous  fuffions  tous
raffemblez  enfemble  en  vne  mefme  maifon.

Cet  Ab'enhoKb'i  ayant  en  fon  chemin  rencotre*  les
Peres  das  vn  bourg,  leur  fit  mille  careffes,  &  les
inuitoit  &  quafi  forcoit  de  cotinuer  a  cheminer  plus
auat  das"  le  pais  auec  luy.  Mais  eux  ayas  a  faire  ail-
leurs  le  laifferent  aller.  Depuis  ayas  apris  les  dif-
cours  &  propofitios  du  perfonage  ils  ont  fait  reflexion
auec  quelques  Sauuages  du  pais,  fur  le  deffein  que
pouuoit  auoir  cet  Ab'enhoKh'i,  les  preffant  fi  fort  [68]  de
faire  voyage  auec  luy ;  &  ils  n'en  ont  rien  coniect-ure"
que  de  mauuais.

Celuy-cy,  quoy  que  le  plus  dangereux,  ne  fut  pas
toutefois  le  plus  effronte.  Mais  vn  nomine  Oentara
eftant  venu  a  la  Nation  Neutre,  apres  auoir  entre-
tenu  le  pais  de  tous  les  mauuais  difcours  &  calom-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  213

mitted  in  a  strange  Nation,  their  own  country  would
be  in  no  wise  responsible.

However,  it  is  certain  that  one  of  our  Hurons,
named  Awenhokwi,  a  nephew  of  one  of  the  chief
Captains  of  [67]  this  country,  in  company  with  an-
other Huron,  had  been  through  many  villages  of  the
Neutral  Nation  while  our  Fathers  were  there,  and
said  he  had  been  sent  in  the  name  of  the  Captains
and  aged  men  of  this  neighborhood,  with  presents
of  hatchets,  which  he  showed,  in  order  to  inform  the
Captains  that  they  should  beware  of  these  French-
men unless  they  were  willing  to  see  the  country
ruined  from  their  not  having  anticipated  us.  And
these  bearers  of  advice  added  that,  in  case  they
should  refuse  to  carry  out  the  scheme,  the  Hurons
had  resolved  to  accomplish  it  immediately  after  the
return  of  the  Fathers ;  and  that  the  thing  would  have
been  done  before  this,  had  we  not  all  been  gathered
together  in  the  same  house.

While  this  Awenhokwi  was  on  his  way,  he  met  the
Fathers  in  a  village,  showed  them  a  thousand  atten-
tions, invited  them  and  almost  forced  them  to  con-
tinue traveling  further  into  the  country  with  him;
but  they  having  business  elsewhere  let  him  go  on.
Afterward,  when  they  had  heard  of  the  speeches  and
propositions  of  this  fellow,  they  consulted  with  some
Savages  of  the  country  concerning  the  design  this
Awenhokwi  could  have  had  in  urging  them  so  strong-
ly [68]  to  make  the  journey  with  him,  and  they
surmised  nothing  but  evil  therein.

This  man,  although  the  most  dangerous,  was  not
however  the  most  shameless.  But  one  named  Oen-
tara,  who  came  to  the  Neutral  Nation,  after  having
entertained  the  country  with  all the  evil  speeches


214  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

nies,  dont  les  precedences  Relations  font  pleines:
Que  nous  nouriffions  la  maladie  a  noftre  maifon :  que
nos  efcritures  n'eftoient  que  forcelleries :  que  nous
auions  fait  mourir  tout  le  monde  dans  les  Hurons,
fous  pretexte  de  prefens:  que  nous  nous  difpofions
a  faire  mourir  tout  le  refte  de  la  terre.  Adiouftoit,
qu'on  euft  hardiment  a  nous  fermer  par  tout  les
portes  des  cabanes,  fi  on  n'en  vouloit  bien  toft  voir
la  defolation.  Et  il  fut  fi  impudent  que  de  fouftenir
le  tout  en  prefence  de  nos  Peres,  &  de  quelques  an-
ciens  du  pais,  qui  voulurent  confronter  les  vns  auec
les  autres.

Or  quoy  que  le  Pere  de  Brebeuf  refuta  pertinem-
ment  tous  ces  mauuais  efprits,  leur  fermat  a  tous  la
bouche,  &  les  rempliffant  de  conf ufion :  Si  eft-ce  que
[69]  le  venin  vne  fois  iette  ne  fortoit  pas  fi  facile-
ment  du  cceur  de  ces  pauures  barbares  qui  craignet
tout,  pour  ne  pas  conoiftre  celuy  qui  feul  merite
d'eftre  craint  &  redoute\  Et  plufieurs  autres  Hurons
furuenus  la  deffus,  qui  confLrmoient  tous  ces  difcours,
donnerent  en  fin  tant  d'ombrages  de  nous  aux  chefs
.&  aux  Capitaines;  qu'au  bout  d'enuiron  deux  mois
&  demy  que  les  Peres  auoient  commence  leur
fondtion,  ceux  a  qui  ils  s'eftoient  adreffez  au  com-
mencement, pour  tenir  confeil,  &  qui  auoient  ren-
uoye  1' affaire  au  retour  de  Tfohahiffen  principal
Capitaine,  les  manderet  &  leur  declarerent  le  pou-
uoir  qu'ils  auoient  de  decider  les  affaires  preffantes,
en  l'abfence  de  Tfohahiffen.  Qu'ils  commencoient
a  iuger  que  noftre  affaire  eftoit  de  cette  nature,  &
partant  qu'ils  en  vouloient  deliberer  fur  le  champ.
La  deffus  faifans  mine  de  tenir  confeil,  &  deliberer
fur  cet  affaire  defia  refolue  par  entr'eux,  l'vn  d'eux


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  215

and  calumnies  with  which  the  preceding  Relations
are  filled, — that  we  had  bred  the  malady  in  our  own
house;  that  our  writings  were  only  sorceries;  that
we  had  caused  every  one  among  the  Hurons  to  die,
under  pretense  of  presents;  that  we  were  arranging
to  bring  all  the  rest  of  the  world  to  the  grave, —
added  that  they  should  everywhere  boldly  close  the
doors  of  the  cabins  against  us,  unless  they  wished
shortly  to  see  desolation  therein;  and  he  was  so
impudent  as  to  affirm  everything  in  presence  of  our
Fathers,  and  some  aged  men  of  the  country,  who  had
desired  to  confront  them  with  each  other.

Now,  although  Father  de  Brebeuf  pertinently
refuted  all  these  evil  persons,  silencing  each  one  and
filling  them  with  confusion,  still  [69]  venom  once
dropped  into  the  heart  of  these  poor  barbarians  is  not
very  easily  cast  out ;  for  they  fear  everything,  since
they  do  not  know  him  who  alone  is  worthy  to  be
feared  and  dreaded.  And  many  other  Hurons  arrived
unexpectedly  at  that  time,  who  confirmed  all  these
remarks,  and,  in  fact,  inspired  the  chiefs  and  Cap-
tains with  so  many  suspicions  respecting  us,  that  at
the  end  of  about  two  months  and  a  half  after  the  Fa-
thers had  entered  upon  their  duties,  those  to  whom
they  had  spoken  at  first  about  holding  a  council,  and
who  had  deferred  the  matter  until  the  return  of
Tsohahissen,  the  chief  Captain,  sent  for  them  and
declared  that  they  had  power  to  decide  pressing
affairs  in  the  absence  of  Tsohahissen,  that  they  be-
gan to  think  our  undertaking  was  of  this  nature,  and
that,  therefore,  they  would  deliberate  upon  it  imme-
diately. Thereupon  they  made  a  pretense  of  hold-
ing a  council  to  consider  this  matter,  which  was
already  resolved  upon  among  them ;  and  one  of  them


216  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

s'approcha  des  Peres  pour  leur  intimer  le  refultat,
qui  eftoit;  qu'on  refufoit  leur  prefent.  Les  Peres
dirent  que  ce  n'efloit  pas  la  feule  [70]  chofe  qui  les
amenoit;  mais  principalement  le  defir  de  leur  don-
ner  la  conoiffance  d'vn  Dieu,  &  de  fon  Fils  Iefus-
Chrift  noftre  Seigneur,  &  partant  qu'ils  defiroient
fcauoir  s'ils  refufoient  d'eftre  enfeignez,  auffi  bien
qu'ils  refufoient  le  prefent.  A  cela  ils  refpondirent,
Que  pour  la  Foy  qu'on  leur  auoit  prefchee,  ils  l'accep-
toient,  n'y  trouuans  rien  que  de  bon:  mais  que  pour
le  prefent  ils  le  refufoient  abfolument.

Les  Peres  affez  contens  &  fatisfaits  de  cette  ref-
ponfe,  comme  penfans  auoir  le  principal  de  ce  qu'ils
pretendoient,  qui  eftoit  la  liberie  de  prefcher  &  pu-
blier  l'Euangile  dans  le  pais,  iugeret  cependat  a  pro-
pos  de  demander  la  caufe  du  refus  du  prefent,  difans
auoir  eu  commiffion  de  le  faire,  &  eftre  obligez  de
redre  copte  de  ce  refus.  Ils  dirent  au  comencement
que  le  Fife  eftoit  pauure,  &  qu'ils  n'auoiet  moyen  de
leur  en  faire  de  reciproque.  Les  Peres  firet  refponfe
que  s'il  n'y  auoit  que  cela,  ils  ne  fiffent  point  de
difficulte  d'accepter  le  preset,  qu'ils  renoncoient  au
retour,  &  a  la  recognoiffance  de  cette  nature ;  qu'il
leur  fuffifoit  [71]  qu'ils  nous  tinff ent  pour  freres.  Ils
perfifterent  au  refus,  &  ne  pouuans  apporter  de
pretexte  qui  ne  fufl  auffi  toft  leue" ;  en  fin  le  chef  du
Confeil  dit,  He !  quoy  doc,  ignorez-vous  ce  qu' Ab'en-
hoKSi  dit,  &  eft  venu  faire  icy?  &  en  fuitte  le  danger
ou  vous  eftes,  &  ou  vous  mettez  le  pais?  A  cela  on
s'efforca  de  refpondre  comme  au  refte;  mais  on  ne
trouua  plus  d'oreille  capable  d'etedre,  il  fallut  fe
retirer.

Les  Peres  cependant  ne  fe  tinrent  pas  chaffez  du


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  217

went  to  the  Fathers  to  notify  them  of  the  result,
which  was,  that  their  present  was  refused.  The  Fa-
thers said  that  this  was  not  the  only  [70]  thing  which
had  brought  them,  but  the  principal  thing  was  the
desire  to  give  them  a  knowledge  of  the  one  God,  and
of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord ;  and  therefore  they
would  like  to  know  if  they  refused  to  be  taught,  since
they  had  refused  the  present.  To  that  they  answered
that,  as  for  the  Faith  which  had  been  preached  to
them,  they  accepted  it,  finding  therein  nothing  but
good;  but  as  for  the  present,  they  refused  it  abso-
lutely.

The  Fathers  were  sufficiently  content  and  satisfied
with  this  answer,  because  they  believed  they  had
gained  the  principal  thing  to  which  they  aspired,
which  was  the  liberty  of  preaching  and  publishing
the  Gospel  in  the  country ;  however,  they  deemed  it
fitting  to  ask  a  cause  for  the  refusal  of  the  present,
saying  they  had  been  commissioned  to  give  it  and
would  be  obliged  to  render  an  account  of  this  refusal.
They  said,  at  first,  that  the  Treasury  was  poor,  and
that  they  had  no  means  of  making  one  in  return.
The  Fathers  answered  that  if  it  were  only  that,  they
should  have  no  difficulty  in  accepting  the  present,  as
they  themselves  disclaimed  a  compensation  or  reward
of  this  nature;  that  it  would  suffice  [71]  that  they
should  regard  us  as  brothers.  They  persisted  in  the
refusal,  and,  not  being  able  to  bring  forward  any
pretext  which  was  not  immediately  set  aside,  at  last
the  chief  of  the  Council  said:  "  Ah!  indeed,  do  you
not  know  what  Awenhokwi  said,  and  came  here  to
do?  and  do  you  not  know  besides,  the  danger  in
which  you  are  and  in  which  you  are  putting  the  coun-
try?" They  endeavored  to  reply  to  this  as  to  the


218  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21

Pais  par  l'iffue  de  ce  Confeil.  lis  iugerent  bien
toutefois  que  fi  par  le  paffe  ils  auoient  eu  de  la  peine,
allans  par  les  bourgs,  ils  en  auroient  d'orefnauant
plus  que  iamais.  En  effect,  ils  n'approchoient  pas
pluftoft  d'vn  bourg,  qu'on  crioit  de  tous  coftez,  voicy
les  Agb'a  qui  viennet  (c'eft  le  no  qu'ils  donnent  a
leurs  plus  grads  ennemis)  barrez  vos  portes :  de  forte
que  les  Peres  fe  prefentans  aux  cabanes  pour  y
entrer  felon  l'ordre  &  la  couftume  du  pais,  n'y  trou-
uoient  pour  l'ordinaire  que  vifage  de  bois,  n'eftans
regardez  que  comme  des  forciers  qui  portoient  la
mort  &  le  malheur  par  tout:  que  fi  [72]  d'aucuns  les
receuoient,  c'eftoit  fouuent  par  crainte  qu'ils  ne  fe
vangeaffent  du  refus,  que  pour  l'efperance  qu'on
euft  de  grand  profit,  Dieu  fe  feruant  de  tout  pour
nourrir  fes  feruiteurs.

Au  refte,  il  n'eft  pas  croyable  dans  quelles  fray-
eurs  les  difcours  de  nos  Hurons  auoient  iette  les
efprits  de  ces  pauures  Barbares,  defia  de  leur  naturel
extremement  defians,  particulierement  des  eftran-
gers,  &  fur  tout  de  nous,  def quels  ils  n'auoient  iamais
entendu  que  du  mal.  Tous  les  difcours  &  les  calom-
nies  forgees  par  nos  Hurons,  les  annees  precedentes,
ayant  des  lors  remply  leurs  oreilles  &  leurs  efprits.
La  feule  veue  des  Peres  faits  &  veitus  d'vne  facon
fi  efloignee  de  la  leur,  leurs  d-marches,  leurs  geites,
&  tous  leurs  deportemens  leur  fembloient  autant  de
conuicftion  &  de  confirmation  de  ce  qu'on  leur  auoit
dit.  Les  Breuiaires,  efcritoires  &  efcritures  eftoient
cenfez  par  eux  inltrumens  de  magie:  s'ils  fe  met-
toient  a  prier  Dieu,  c'eftoit  iuftement  dans  leur  idee,
exercice  de  forciers.  On  difoit  qu'allans  au  ruiffeau
pour  lauer  leurs [73] plats,  ils  empoifonnoient  les


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  219

rest;  but  as  no  one  was  found  willing  to  listen,  it
was  necessary  to  withdraw.

Notwithstanding,  the  Fathers  did  not  consider
themselves  driven  out  of  the  Country  by  the  result
of  this  Council.  However,  they  thought  that  if,  in
the  past,  they  had  had  trouble  in  going  through  the
villages,  they  possibly  would  have  more  than  ever  in
the  future.  Indeed,  they  no  sooner  approached  a
village,  than  from  all  sides  was  screamed:  "  These
are  the  Agwa  who  are  coming"  (this  is  the  name
they  give  to  their  greatest  enemies),  "  fasten  your
doors;  "  so  that  the  Fathers  coming  to  cabins  in
order  to  enter  them,  according  to  the  rule  and  cus-
tom of  the  country,  found  there  generally  only  closed
doors;  for  they  were  looked  upon  as  sorcerers  who
carried  death  and  misfortune  everywhere.  And  if
[72]  any  received  them,  it  was  more  often  through
fear  that  a  refusal  might  be  resented  than  for  the
hope  they  had  of  great  gain, —  God  utilizing  all
things  to  maintain  his  servants.

Besides,  it  is  inconceivable  into  what  terrors  the
reports  of  our  Hurons  had  put  the  minds  of  these
poor  Barbarians,  —  already  by  nature  extremely  sus-
picious, particularly  of  strangers;  and  above  all  of
us,  of  whom  they  have  never  heard  anything  but
evil;  all  the  reports  and  calumnies  forged  by  our
Hurons  in  preceding  years,  have,  since  that  time,
filled  their  ears  and  their  minds.  The  very  sight  of
our  Fathers,  clothed  and  arrayed  in  a  fashion  so
different  from  their  own,  their  gait,  their  gestures,
and  all  their  manners,  seemed  like  convincing  proof
and  confirmation  of  what  they  had  been  told.  Bre-
viaries, inkstands,  and  writings  were  considered  by
them  as  instruments  of  magic ;  if  the  Fathers  began


220  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  21

eaux :  que  par  toutes  les  cabanes  par  tout  ou  ils  paf-
foient,  les  enfans  eftoient  faifis  d'vne  toux  &  d'vn
flux  de  fang:  que  les  femmes  deuenoient  fteriles.
Bref,  il  n'y  auoit  malheur  prefent  &  a  venir,  dont  ils
ne  fuffent  confiderez  comme  la  fource.  Et  plufieurs
de  ceux  chez  lefquels  eftoient  logez  les  Peres,  n'en
dormoiet  ny  iour  ny  nuidt:  ils  n'ozoient  toucher  a
leur  refte,  ils  rapportoient  leurs  prefens,  tenans  tout
pour  fufpedt.  Les  bonnes  vieilles  fe  tenoient  defia
pour  perdues,  &  ne  regrettoient  que  leurs  petits
enfans,  qui  euffent  pu  repeupler  la  terre.

Les  Capitaines  intimidoient  les  Peres  de  l'arrmee
des  Sonontb'ehronons,  qu'ils  affeuroient  n'eftre  pas
loin.  D'autres  ne  diffimuloient  pas  que  nos  prefens
n'ayant  pas  efte  acceptez,  c'eftoit  a  dire,  qu'il  n'y
auoit  point  d'affeurance  pour  eux  au  pais.  L'info-
lence  fuptout,  &  la  tyrannie  de  quelques  holies  eftoit
infupportable,  qui  leur  commandoient  comme  a  des
efclaues,  &  vouloient  en  tout  eftre  obeis.  Quelque-
f ois  ils  ne  leur  [74]  donoient  prefque  rie  pour  viure ;
&  d'autresfois  ils  les  cotraignoiet  d'aller  chez  tous
leurs  parens,  pour  manger  ce  qu'on  leur  prefenteroit,
&  puis  payer  ce  qu'ils  ordonneroient.

Bref  on  ne  parloit  plus  que  de  tuer  &  mager  ces
deux  pauures  Peres.  Les  fols  cependant  couroient
par  le  bourgs  &  par  les  cabanes.  Trois  vne  fois
pour  vn  coup  entrerent  nuds  come  la  main,  das  la
cabane  oil  ils  eftoient ;  &  apres  y  auoir  fait  plufieurs
tours  de  leur  meftier,  s'en  allerent:  d'autres  fois  ces
fols  s'en  venoient  affeoir  proche  d'eux,  &  deman-
doient  a  foiiiller  dans  leurs  facs;  &  apres  leur  auoir
rauy  ce  qu'ils  auoient  entre  les  mains,  s'en  alloient
faifans  les  fols. Bref,  il  femble  que  les  Peres  fuffent


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -41  221

to  pray,  it  was,  in  their  thought,  only  the  perform-
ance of  sorcerers.  It  was  said  that  when  they
went  to  the  brook  to  wash  their  [73]  dishes,  they
poisoned  the  water ;  that  in  all  the  cabins,  wherever
they  went,  the  children  were  seized  with  a  cough
and  a  bloody  discharge ;  and  that  the  women  became
barren.  In  short,  there  was  no  misfortune  present
or  to  come,  of  which  they  were  not  considered  the
source.  And  many  of  those  persons,  in  whose  cab-
ins the  Fathers  were  lodged,  did  not  sleep  either  day
or  night :  they  dared  not  touch  the  food  they  left,
and  they  brought  back  their  presents,  holding  every-
thing in  suspicion.  The  poor  old  women  considered
themselves  as  already  lost  and  only  regretted  their
grandchildren,  who  might  have  been  able  to  repeo-
ple  the  land.

The  Captains  threatened  the  Fathers  with  the
arrival  of  the  Sonontwehronons,  who,  they  asserted,
were  not  far  away.  Others  did  not  conceal  that  as
our  presents  had  not  been  accepted,  that  meant  there
was  no  security  for  them  in  the  country.  Above  all
the  insolence  and  the  tyranny  of  some  of  their  hosts
were  insupportable,  who  commanded  them  as  slaves,
and  wished  to  be  obeyed  in  all  things.  Sometimes
they  [74]  gave  them  almost  nothing  for  food ;  and  at
other  times  they  compelled  them  to  go  to  the  cabins
of  all  their  relatives,  to  eat  what  was  set  before  them,
and  then  to  pay  what  they  should  dictate.

In  short,  they  spoke  of  nothing  but  of  killing  and
eating  these  two  poor  Fathers.  In  the  meantime,
the  madmen  were  running  through  the  villages  and
the  cabins.  Once,  three  of  them,  as  bare  as  one's
hand,  suddenly  entered  the  cabin  in  which  the  Fa-
thers were,  and,  after  having  performed  several  tricks


222  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21

comme  vne  balle  de  laquelle  fe  ioiioiet  les  demons
an  milieu  de  cette  Barbarie,  mais  auec  ordre  de  la
diuine  Prouidence,  que  rien  ne  leur  manquait.
Comme  en  effect  en  quatre  mois  qu'ils  ont  efle  la,
rien  iamais  ne  leur  a  manque  de  ce  qui  eftoit  necef-
faire  pour  la  vie,  ny  gifte,  ny  nourriture  fufnfante,
&  fe  font  toufiours  bien  portez  parmy  des  peines  [75]
&  des  incommoditez,  qui  fe  peuuent  mieux  conceuoir
qu'expliquer.  Leur  induftrie  confiftoit  a  faire  pro-
uifion  de  quelque  pain  cuit  fous  la  cendre,  a  la  mode
du  pais,  qu'ils  conferuoient  les  trente  &  quarante  iours
durant,  pour  s'en  feruir  dans  la  neceffite.

Les  Peres  ont  parcouru  en  leur  voyage  dix-huicts
bourgs  ou  bourgades,  a  toutes  lefquelles  ils  ont  donne
vn  nom  Chreftien,  duquel  nous  nous  feruirons  cy
apres  aux  occafions.  Ils  fe  font  arreitez  particuliere-
ment  a  dix,  aufquels  ils  ont  donne  autat  d'inftruction
qu'ils  ont  pu  trouuer  d'audiece.  Ils  font  eftat  d'en-
uiron  cinq  ces  feux,  &  de  trois  mille  perfonnes  que
peuuet  cotenir  ces  dix  bourgades,  aufquels  ils  ont
propofe  &  public  l'Euangile.  Mais  il  eft  bien  diffi-
cile que  le  fon  n'en  ait  retenty  dans  tout  le  pais.
Nous  ne  faifons  toutefois  eftat  dans  noftre  fupputa-
tion  que  de  ces  trois  mille.

Or  les  Peres  ne  voyans  pas  les  efprits  affez  difpo-
fez,  les  bruits  &  les  frayeurs  s'augmentans  toufiours
de  plus  en  plus,  iugerent  a  propos  de  retourner  fur
leurs  pas,  &  s'en  reuenir  au  premier  bourg  de
[67  i.e.,  76]  Kandb'cho  ou  de  tous  les  Saincts;  oil  ils
f embloient  eftre  le  moins  mal  venus ;  &  la  trauaillant
a  l'inflruction  des  habitans  du  lieu,  atendre  le  Prin-
temps  que  nous  auios  arrefle  de  les  renuoier  querir.
Mais  Dieu  en  difpofa  autrement,  &  de  leur  cofte  &  du


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  223

of  their  trade,  went  away ;  at  other  times,  these  mad-
men came  to  sit  down  by  them,  and  asked  to  search
their  pouches,  and,  after  snatching  what  they  had  in
their  hands,  went  away,  feigning  insanity.  In  a
word,  it  seemed  that  the  Fathers  were  like  a  ball
with  which  the  demons  in  the  midst  of  this  Barba-
rism were  playing,  but  with  a  command  from  divine
Providence,  that  nothing  should  be  lacking  to  them, —
for,  really,  in  the  four  months  that  they  were  there,
they  lacked  nothing  that  was  necessary  to  life,  nei-
ther lodging,  nor  sufficient  food ;  and  they  were  always
in  good  health,  amid  hardships  [75]  and  inconven-
iences which  can  be  better  imagined  than  explained.
They  showed  their  ingenuity  by  laying  in  a  supply
of  bread,  baked  under  the  cinders  after  the  manner
of  the  country,  and  which  they  kept  for  thirty  or
forty  days,  that  they  might  have  it  in  case  of  neces-
sity.

The  Fathers  in  their  journey  passed  through  eigh-
teen hamlets  or  villages,  to  all  of  which  they  gave  a
Christian  name,  which  we  shall  use  hereafter  when
occasion  arises.  They  made  a  special  stay  at  ten,
where  they  gave  instruction  as  often  as  they  could
find  a  hearing.  They  estimated  about  five  hundred
fires,  and  three  thousand  persons,  that  might  be  con-
tained in  these  ten  villages  in  which  they  set  forth
and  published  the  Gospel;  but  it  is  very  probable
that  the  tones  thereof  have  resounded  throughout  the
country.  However,  in  our  reckoning  we  rely  only
upon  the  three  thousand.

Now  as  the  Fathers  saw  that  these  people  were  not
sufficiently  willing,  and  the  reports  and  terrors  were
continually  increasing  more  and  more,  they  deemed
it  expedient  to  retrace  their  steps,  and  return  to  the


224  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE'SUITES [Vol.21

noitre.  Car  pour  eux  eftans  arriuez  a  my-chemin
de  leur  retour,  au  bourg  de  Teotongniaton,  furnom-
me"  de  S.  Guillaume;  la  neige  furuint  en  fi  grande
quantite,  qu'il  leur  fut  impoffible  de  pafler  outre.  Ce
malheur,  s'il  le  faut  ainli  appeller,  fut  caufe  du  plus
grand  bien,  &  de  la  plus  grande  confolation  qu'ils
ayent  receu  en  tout  leur  voyage.  Car  n'ayans  pu
fubfifter  en  aucun  lieu  en  paix  &  en  repos,  pour  eflu-
dier  au  moins  quelque  peu  le  langage  du  pais,  &  fe
rendre  encor  plus  capables  d'agir  al'aduenir;  ils  fe
trouuerent  dans  ce  bourg  logez  chez  vne  hofteffe,
qui  s'eftudioit  de  leur  donner  autant  de  contentement
que  tous  les  autres  par  le  paffe  leur  auoient  donne
fuiet  de  defplaifir.

Elle  auoit  vn  foin  tout  particulier  de  leur  faire  la
meilleure  chere  qu'elle  pouuoit.  Et  voyant  qu'a
caufe  du  Carefme  [77]  ils  ne  mangeoient  point  de
chair,  dont  cependant  en  cette  faifon  elle  auoit  abo-
dance,  &  de  laquelle  feule  on  faifoit  a  manger  dans
fa  cabane ;  elle  prenoit  la  peine  de  leur  faire  vn  pot
a  part,  affaifonne  de  poiffon,  beaucoup  meilleur
qu'elle  n'eut  fait  pour  elle  mefme.  Elle  prenoit  vn
fingulier  plaifir  de  les  inftruire  en  la  langue,  leur
didtant  fyllabe  par  fyllabe  les  mots,  comme  feroit  vn
maiftre  a  vn  petit  ef colier ;  leur  didtant  mefme  des
Narrations  entieres,  telles  qu'ils  les  defiroient.  A
fon  exemple  les  petits  enfans,  qui  ailleurs  par  tout
s'enfuyoient  ou  fe  cachoient  en  leur  prefence,  icy  a
l'enuy  des  vns  des  autres  leur  rendoient  mille  bons
offices;  &  ne  fe  pouuoient  laffer  de  les  entretenir,  &
leur  donner  tout  contentement,  foit  pour  la  langue,
foit  pour  quoy  que  ce  fuffc.

Ce  n'eit  pas  tout. Toutes  les  autres  cabanes  du


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  225

first  village  of  [67  i.e.,  76]  Kandoucho,  or  all  Saints,
in  which  they  seemed  to  be  the  least  unwelcome ;
and,  laboring  there  for  the  instruction  of  the  inhab-
itants of  the  place,  to  wait  until  Spring,  when  we  had
engaged  to  send  for  them.  But  God  arranged  differ-
ently both  for  them  and  for  us.  For  when  they  had
arrived  midway  on  their  return  journey,  at  the  village
of  Teotongniaton,  surnamed  St.  Guillaume,18  snow
unexpectedly  came,  in  so  great  quantity  that  it  was
impossible  for  them  to  go  further.  This  misfortune,
if  such  it  must  be  called,  was  the  cause  of  the  great-
est good  and  the  greatest  comfort  they  had  had  in
their  whole  journey :  for,  while  they  had  been  un-
able to  live  anywhere  in  peace  and  quiet, — so  as  to
study,  at  least  somewhat,  the  language  of  the  coun-
try, and  become  still  better  qualified  for  work  in  the
future, —  in  this  village  they  happened  to  lodge  in
the  cabin  of  a  woman,  who  endeavored  to  give  them
as  much  satisfaction  as  all  the  others  in  the  past  had
given  them  occasion  for  sorrow.

She  took  most  special  care  to  give  them  the  best
fare  that  she  could;  and,  when  she  saw  that  on  ac-
count of  Lent  [yy~\  they  ate  no  meat, — of  which,  not-
withstanding, she  had  an  abundance  at  that  season,
and  on  which  alone  the  inmates  of  her  cabin  lived, —
she  took  the  trouble  of  making  them  a  separate  dish
seasoned  with  fish,  which  was  much  better  than  she
would  have  made  for  herself.  She  took  rare  pleas-
ure in  teaching  them  the  language,  dictating  the
words  to  them,  syllable  by  syllable,  as  a  teacher
would  do  to  a  little  pupil ;  she  even  dictated  to  them
entire  Narrations,  such  as  they  desired.  In  imitation
of  her,  the  little  children,  who  everywhere  else  ran
away  or  kept  out  of  their  sight,  vied  with  one  another


226  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.21


bourg,  ne  ceffant  de  crier  apres  elle  qu'elle  euft  a
chaffer  les  Peres;  &  a  l'intimider  de  tous  les  mal-
heurs  dont  on  les  faif oit  les  porteurs ;  elle  fe  moc-
quoit  de  tout,  &  refutoit  fi  pertinemment  toutes  les
calomnies  qu'on  [78]  leur  impofoit,  qu'elle  recon-
noiffoit  n'eftre  qu'impoftures,  parce  qu'elle  voyoit  &
remarquoit  elle  mefme  en  leurs  facos  de  faire,  que
nous  n'euffions  pu  le  faire  plus  pertinemmet.  Lors
que  quelqu'vn  la  menacoit  de  la  mort,  &  de  la  def-
lation de  fa  famille,  qui  s'enfuiuroit  apres  le  depart
des  Peres,  &  ce  pour  les  auoir  accueillis  en  fa  mai-
fon :  elle  repliquoit  que  c'eftoit  vne  chofe  ordinaire
aux  homes  de  mourir,  &  qu'elle  s'y  attedoit  bie ;  mais
que  ceux  qui  parloient  de  la  forte,  eftoiet  ceux-la
mefme  qui  la  vouloient  enforceler,  &  faire  mourir
elle  &  fes  enfas.  Qu'au  refte,  elle  aimeroit  mieux
s'expofer  &  fa  famille  au  danger  de  la  mort,  que  de
les  congedier  en  vn  temps,  ou  ils  pourroient  perir
dans  les  neiges.

Non  feulement  elle  auoit  a  refpodre  a  ceux  de  de-
hors, mais  encore  a  quelques  vns  de  fa  propre  cabane,
qui  luy  reprochoient  entr'autres  chofes,  que  fon  pere
eftat  forcier,  ce  n'eftoit  pas  merueille  fi  elle  fe  plai-
foit  tant  a  retirer  des  forciers,  mais  cela  ne  l'efbran-
loit  non  plus  que  le  refte.  Les  petits  enfas  auoiet
d'ordinaire  des  querelles  fur  ce  mefme  fuiet  auec
leurs  copagnos ;  iufques  a  f e  battre  pour  [79]  la  de-
fefe  des  PP.  Ce  qui  eft  fur  tout  cofiderable  eft  que
cette  bone  femme  ne  fe  laffa  iamais  ny  ne  fouffrir  tat
d'importunitez,  ny  de  cotinuer  fon  foin  &  fa  bone
chere  enuers  les  Peres  iufques  au  iour  de  leur  depart.
Le  feul  regret  qui  relta  aux  Peres  fe  feparas  d'auec
elle,  fut  de  ne  lui  pouuoir  encore  doner  le  bie  que  no9


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  227

here  in  rendering  them  a  thousand  kind  services,  and
could  not  be  weary  in  talking  with  them,  and  giving
them  every  satisfaction,  either  in  the  language  or
whatever  it  might  be.

This  is  not  all.  In  all  the  other  cabins  of  the  vil-
lage, they  did  not  cease  to  cry  after  her  that  she  must
drive  away  the  Fathers,  and  they  intimidated  her
with  all  the  misfortunes  of  which  these  were  consid-
ered the  bearers.  She  laughed  at  everything,  and
so  cleverly  refuted  all  the  calumnies  that  were  [78]
loaded  upon  them, —  which  she  discovered  to  be  only
impostures,  because  she  herself  was  considering  and
observing  their  manner  of  proceeding, —  that  we  our-
selves would  not  have  been  able  to  do  so  more  perti-
nently. When  any  one  menaced  her  with  death,  and
the  desolation  of  her  family, —  which  would  follow
after  the  departure  of  the  Fathers,  and  this  for  hav-
ing welcomed  them  to  her  house, —  she  replied  that
it  was  a  common  thing  for  men  to  die,  and  that  she
indeed  expected  to  die ;  but  that  those  who  were  talk-
ing in  this  way,  were  themselves  the  ones  who  were
attempting  to  bewitch  her  and  to  cause  her  and  her
children  to  die ;  however,  she  would  prefer  exposing
herself  and  her  family  to  the  danger  of  death,  to
sending  the  Fathers  away  at  a  time  when  they  might
perish  in  the  snow.

Not  only  was  she  obliged  to  reply  to  those  with-
out, but  also  to  some  within,  her  own  cabin,  who
reproached  her,  among  other  things,  with  her  father's
being  a  sorcerer, —  saying  that  it  was  no  wonder  she
took  such  delight  in  receiving  sorcerers;  but  this
did  not  disturb  her  more  than  the  rest.  The  little
children  frequently  had  quarrels  over  this  same  sub-
ject with  their  companions;  they  even  fought  in  [79]


228  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.21

somes  venus  aporter  aux  plus  barbares  de  ces  cotrees ;
la  difpofitio  pour  ce  faire  n'eftant  pas  encore  fuffi-
fante.  lis  efperet  que  les  bones  prieres  de  ceux  qui
entendront  parler  de  cette  hofpitalite,  obtiedront
raccompliffement  de  ce  qu'ils  ont  comence  a  operer
dans  fon  efprit.

Le  plus  grad  defplaifir  que  receut  cete  feme,  fut
de  ne  pouuoir  epefcher  la  violece  qu'elle  voyoit  fou-
frir  a  ces  PP.  Vn  fol  de  fa  cabane  fe  mit  a  cracher
fur  le  p.  Chaumonot,  a  luy  dechirer  fa  fotane,  a  le
vouloir  bruler,  a  chater  tat  d'iniures,  &  a  faire  tat  de
tintamares  plufieurs  nuits  durat,  que  les  PP.  ne  puret
dormir.  D'autres  venoiet  qui  leur  enleuoiet  en  fa
prefence  par  force  ce  qu'ils  auoient  de  plus  precieux,
&  pour  toute  fatisfadtion  ne  parloient  de  rien  moins
que  de  les  brufler,  &  peut-eftre  l'euffent-ils  fait,  [80]
fi  leurs  bons  Anges  n'y  euffent  mis  la  main.

Le  pere  de  ceite  bonne  hofteffe  furuenant  fur  la
fin,  agrea  tout  ce  que  fa  fille  auoit  fait  pour  les  Peres,
&  leur  tefmoigna  vne  fort  particuliere  affedtion,  pro-
mettant  de  nous  venir  voir  a  noftre  maifon.  Ie  prie
noftre  Seigneur  que  fes  pas  ne  foient  pas  perdus.

Ce  fut  fans  doute  vne  prouidence  de  Dieu  toute
fpeciale,  que  le  retardemet  des  Peres  en  ce  lieu:  car
en  vingt  cinq  iours  qu'ils  demeurerent  en  cette  ca-
bane, ils  eurent  le  moyen  d'ajulter  le  Didtionnaire,
&  les  Peuples  [sc.  Regies]  de  la  langue  Huronne,  a
celle  de  ces  Peuples,  &  faire  vn  ouurage  qui  feul
meritoit  qu'on  fift  vn  voyage  de  plufieurs  annees
dans  le  pais :  nos  Sauuages  fe  plaifans  beaucoup  plus
auec  ceux  qui  parlent  leur  propre  langue,  qu'auec
ceux  qui  n'en  font  qu'approcher,  qu'ils  tiennent  iuf-
ques  la  pour  elirangers.


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  229

defense  of  the  Fathers.  It  was  especially  noticeable
that  this  good  woman  was  never  impatient  in  bear-
ing so  many  annoyances,  and  in  continuing  her  atten-
tions and  good  cheer  to  the  Fathers  until  the  day  of
their  departure.  The  only  regret  which  the  Fathers
experienced  in  separating  from  her,  was  their  inabil-
ity to  give  her  then  the  blessing  which  we  came  to
bring  to  the  most  barbarous  of  these  regions,  as  her
inclination  to  receive  this  was  not  yet  sufficient.
They  hope  that  the  fervent  prayers  of  those  who
shall  hear  of  this  hospitality  will  obtain  the  accom-
plishment of  that  which  they  had  begun  to  effect  in
her  mind.

The  greatest  sorrow  this  woman  had,  was  that  she
could  not  prevent  the  outrages  which  she  saw  these
Fathers  endure.  A  madman  of  her  own  cabin  began
to  spit  upon  Father  Chaumonot,  to  tear  his  cassock,
to  attempt  burning  it,  and  to  call  him  very  hard
names ;  and  during  several  nights  he  made  so  great  a
din  that  the  Fathers  were  not  able  to  sleep.  Others
came,  who  took  away  from  them  by  force,  in  her
presence,  their  most  precious  things;  and,  for  all
amends,  spoke  of  nothing  less  than  of  burning
them, —  and  perhaps  they  would  have  done  so,  [80]
had  not  their  good  Angels  interfered.

Toward  the  last,  the  father  of  this  good  hostess
came  unexpectedly,  and  approved  of  all  that  his
daughter  had  done  for  the  Fathers ;  and  he  expressed
a  very  special  liking  for  them,  promising  to  come
and  see  us  in  our  own  house.  I  pray  our  Lord  that
his  steps  may  not  be  in  vain.

The  delay  of  the  Fathers  in  this  place  was,  doubt-
less, an  exceptional  providence  of  God:  for,  in  the
twenty-five  days  that  they  remained  in  this  cabin,


230  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21

D'autre  part  nous  autres  ne  receuans  icy  que  rare-
ment  de  leurs  nouuelles ;  les  Hurons  a  qui  on  con-
fioit  les  lettres,  les  perdans  en  chemin,  ou  les  iettans
par  [81]  malice  ou  par  crainte;  nous  eftions  en  peine
de  ce  qui  fe  paffoit.  Ce  qui  nous  fit  refoudre  a  y
enuoyer  quelques  vns  qui  les  accompagnaffent  a  leur
retour,  a  quoy  s'offrirent  volontiers  nos  Chreftiens
de  la  Conception,  nonobftant  tous  les  bruits  qui  cou-
roient  de  ce  qui  fe  paffoit,  dont  deux  accompagnez
de  deux  de  nos  domeftiques  firet  le  voyage ;  Et  il
pleut  a  Dieu  nous  les  rendre  apres  huict.  iours  de
chemin  &  de  fatigue  dans  les  bois,  le  propre  iour  de
S.  Iofeph,  Patron  du  pais,  encore  affez  a  teps  pour
dire  la  Meffe,  qu'ils  n'auoient  peu  dire  depuis  leur
depart.

Pendant  toutes  ces  bourafques  &  tepefies,  les  Peres
n'ont  pas  laiffe  de  pouruoir  au  falut  des  petits  en-
fans,  vieillards,  &  malades  qu'ils  ont  peu.  aborder,
&  qu'ils  en  ont  trouue  capables.  En  tous  ces  dix-
huidt  bourgs  qu'ils  ont  vifite,  il  ne  s'en  eft  trouue
qu'vn,  fcauoir  celuy  de  Khioetoa,  furnomme  de  faint
Michel,  qui  leur  ayt  donne  l'audience  que  meritoit
leur  Ambaffade.  Dans  ce  bourg  s'eft  refugie  depuis
quelques  annees,  pour  la  crainte  de  leurs  ennemis,
[82]  vne  certaine  Nation  eftrangere,  qui  demeuroit
au  dela  d'Erie  ou  de  la  Nation  du  chat,  nominee
Atfenrehronon,  qui  femble  n'eftre  venue  en  ces  quar-
tiers  que  pour  ioiiyr  du  bonheur  de  cette  vifite,  &  y
auoir  efte*  conduite  par  la  prouidence  du  bon  Pafleur,
pour  y  entendre  fa  voix.  On  les  a  fumfamment  in-
ftruits:  mais  les  Peres  n'ont  pas  iure  a  propos  de
paffer  encore  outre  a  les  baptizer ;  le  faindt  Efprit  fera
meurir  cette  femece  qu'on  a  iette*  dedas  leurs  cceurs,


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  231

they  were  able  to  harmonize  the  Dictionary  and  the
Syntax  of  the  Huron  language  with  those  of  these
Tribes,  and  accomplish  a  work  which  of  itself  would
deserve  that  one  make  a  stay  of  several  years  in  the
country, — as  our  Savages  take  much  more  pleasure
in  those  who  speak  their  own  language  than  in  those
who  only  attempt  it,  and  whom  they  consider  for
that  reason  as  strangers.

On  the  other  hand,  we  ourselves  only  rarely  re-
ceived news  of  them, —  the  Hurons,  to  whom  they
intrusted  letters,  losing  them  on  the  journey,  or  cast-
ing them  away  through  [81]  malice  or  through  fear;
we  were  anxious  about  what  was  taking  place.  This
made  us  resolve  to  send  some  people  who  should
accompany  them  on  their  return,  for  which  service
our  Christians  of  la  Conception  willingly  offered
themselves,  notwithstanding  all  the  reports  which
were  current  of  what  was  happening.  Two  of  these,
accompanied  by  two  of  our  domestics,  made  the  jour-
ney ;  and  it  pleased  God  to  return  them  to  us  after
eight  days  of  travel  and  fatigue  in  the  forest,  the
very  day  of  St.  Joseph,  the  Patron  saint  of  the  coun-
try, and  they  even  came  early  enough  to  say  Mass,
which  they  had  not  been  able  to  say  since  their
departure.

During  all  these  gusts  and  tempests,  the  Fathers
had  not  failed  to  provide  for  the  salvation  of  the
little  children,  the  old  men,  and  the  sick,  whom  they
could  approach  and  whom  they  found  fitted  therefor.
In  all  the  eighteen  villages  which  they  visited,  there
was  found  only  one,  to  wit,  that  of  Khioetoa,  sur-
named  saint  Michel,  which  had  given  them  the  hear-
ing that  their  Embassy  merited.  Some  years  ago,
through  fear  of  their  enemies,  there  took  refuge  in


232  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

&  en  fon  teps  on  ira  recueillir  la  moiffon  qu'on  a  defia
arroufe  de  tant  de  fueurs.

C'eft  en  cette  Nation  que  les  Peres  firent  le
premier  Baptefme  d'Adultes,  en  la  perfonne  d'vne
bonne  vieille,  qui  auoit  defia  prefque  perdu  l'oiiye.
Au  Baptefme  de  laquelle  eft  remarquable  l'affect-ion
d'vne  bonne  femme  de  la  mefme  cabane,  qui  feruit
aux  Peres  de  truchement,  luy  declarant  les  myfteres
de  noftre  Foy,  plus  clairement  &  efficacement,  que
les  Peres,  difent-ils,  n'auoient  fait  auparauant  a  elle
mefme.  La  pauure  femme  n'eut  rien  a  repliquer,
fmon  que  pour  eftre  defia  vieille,  elle  [83]  auroit
trop  de  peine  d'arriuer  iufques  au  Ciel:  en  outre
qu'elle  n'auoit  rien  dont  elle  petit  faire  prefent  aux
Peres :  &  qu'il  eut  fallu  attedre  fes  enfans  qui  eftoient
a  la  chaff e,  arm  d'auoir  d'eux  les  habits  neceff aires
pour  fe  parer.  II  fut  facile  de  la  contenter  la  deffus :
&  elle  fut  en  fin  heureufement  baptizee.  Deux  ou
trois  autres  adultes  ont  auffi  participe  au  bonheur  de
cette  vifite :  Et  quelque  nombre  de  petits  enfans,  qui
par  aduance  s'en  font  allez  au  Ciel.  Entr' autres  vn
petit  Huron  aage  de  deux  ans  qui  eftoit  pour  lors  a
la  Nation  Neutre,  &  f e  trouua  malade :  il  en  refchapa
pour  ce  coup,  mais  quelques  mois  apres,  retourne
qu'il  fut  au  pais,  il  fut  tue  par  les  ennemis  entre  les
bras  de  fa  mere.

Les  Peres  ont  remarque  en  leurs  memoires,  qu'vne
des  plus  fpeciales  Prouidences  de  Dieu  en  leur  en-
droit  a  efte"  qu'on  leur  eut  enuoye*  pour  les  ramener,
vn  de  nos  domeftiques,  qui  l'annee  pafT6e  fut  atteint
&  gafte  de  petite  verole.  Car  les  Barbares  de  ces
contr6es  le  voyant  fe  defabufoient  de  la  creance  qu'on
leur  auoit  donnee,  &  das  laquelle [84] ils  eftoient;


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  233

this  village  [82]  a  certain  strange  Nation,  who  had
dwelt  beyond  the  Erie  or  cat  Nation,  called  Awen-
rehronon ;  and  they  seemed  to  have  come  into  these
quarters  only  to  enjoy  the  good  fortune  of  this  visit,
and  to  have  been  led  by  the  providence  of  the  good
Shepherd,  that  they  might  hear  his  voice  therein.
They  were  sufficiently  instructed;  but  the  Fathers
did  not  think  it  expedient  to  go  still  further,  and
baptize  them.  The  holy  Ghost  will  cause  this  seed
that  has  been  dropped  into  their  hearts  to  ripen,  and,
in  his  own  time,  the  harvest  that  has  been  already
watered  by  so  many  tears  will  be  gathered.

It  is  in  this  Nation  that  the  Fathers  administered
the  first  Adult  Baptism,  in  the  case  of  a  good  old
woman,  who  had  already  nearly  lost  her  hearing.  A
remarkable  thing  at  her  Baptism  was  the  devotion  of
a  good  woman  of  the  same  cabin,  who  served  the
Fathers  as  interpreter,  making  known  to  her  the
mysteries  of  our  Faith, — more  clearly  and  effectually
than  the  Fathers  had  to  herself,  in  the  first  place,  so
they  said.  The  poor  woman  had  nothing  to  reply,
except  that,  as  she  was  now  old,  she  [83]  would  have
too  much  trouble  to  reach  Heaven ;  besides,  she  had
nothing  of  which  she  could  make  the  Fathers  a  pres-
ent, and  she  must  await  her  children  who  were  hunt-
ing, so  as  to  have  the  necessary  garments  to  adorn
herself.  It  was  easy  to  satisfy  her  regarding  these
things,  and  she  was,  at  last,  safely  baptized.  Two
or  three  other  adults  participated  in  the  happiness  of
this  visit,  and  a  small  number  of  little  children,  who
have  gone  early  to  Heaven, — among  others,  a  little
Huron  boy  two  years  old,  who  was  then  with  the
Neutral  Nation,  and  was  sick.  He  recovered  from
that  attack,  but,  a  few  months  after,  when  he  returned


234  LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.21

Que  nous  eftions  des  demons  immortels,  &  maiitres
des  maladies,  dont  nous  difpofions  a  noftre  bon  plai-
fir,  puifque  fi  peu  de  chofe  a  efle  capable  de  com-
mencer  a.  leur  defiller  les  yeux;  ils  pourront  bien,
auec  le  temps,  fe  defabufer  entierement,  &  fe  rendre,
en  ce  faifant,  plus  capables  des  lumieres  &  des  vifites
du  ciel.  Cependant  nous  voyons  affez  que  c'eft  Dieu
feul  qui  nous  a  protegez  das  cette  nation  eftrangere,
puifque  mefme  dans  les  Hurons  qui  nous  font  alliez,
fouuent  on  y  a  attente  fur  nos  vies.  Voicy  vn  acci-
dent qui  eft  arriue  depuis  peu.

Le  Pere  Iofeph  Marie  Chaumonot  retourne  de  la
Nation  Neutre,  fut  quelque  temps  apres  donne  pour
compagnon  au  Pere  Antoine  Daniel,  qui  comencoit
en  fon  quartier  les  Miffions  d'Efte.  Arriue  qu'ils
furent  a  faindt  Michel,  bourg  de  la  Miffion  de  faindt
Iofeph,  vn  ieune  efceruele,  dont  le  diable  s'eftoit
defia  voulu  feruir  pour  plufieurs  autres  mefchants
coups  contre  nous,  prend  la  refolution  d'en  tuer  vn
des  deux.  II  fe  cache  a  cofte  d'vne  cabane,  [85]  ou
les  Peres  efloient  en  vifite,  pour  inftruire ;  de  laquelle
eftans  fortis  il  prend  fon  temps,  qu'ils  auoient  le  dos
tourne ;  &  prenant  de  la  main  gauche  le  chapeau  du
Pere  Chaumonot,  qui  marchoit  le  dernier,  luy  def-
charge  de  la  main  droite  vn  coup  de  pierre  qu'il  te-
noit,  fur  le  haut  de  la  tefte  nue.  Ie  ne  fcay  ce  qui
empefcha  le  mal  qu'il  auoit  enuie  de  faire ;  tant  y  a
que  celuy  cy  s'aperceuant  que  fon  coup  ne  reuffiffoit
pas  comme  il  auoit  pretendu,  il  court  a  vne  hache,  la
leue  pour  la  rabatre  fur  le  Pere.  Mais  dans  cet
entre-deux,  le  Pere  Daniel  fon  compagnon,  &  quel-
ques  Hurons  accourent,  qui  arrefterent  le  bras  &  le
coup. Vn  de  nos  Chreftiens  de  ce  bourg,  voyant  le


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  235

to  his  own  country,  he  was  killed  by  the  enemy  in
the  arms  of  his  mother.

The  Fathers  remarked  in  their  account  that  one  of
the  most  special  Providences  of  God,  in  respect  to
them,  was  that  one  of  our  domestics,  who  last  year
was  attacked  and  marked  by  smallpox,  had  been
sent  to  bring  them  back :  for  the  Barbarians  of  these
regions,  when  they  saw  him,  were  disabused  of  the
belief  they  had  received,  and  which  [84]  they  held, —
that  we  were  undying  demons,  and  masters  of  mala-
dies, of  which  we  disposed  at  our  good  pleasure.
Since  so  slight  a  thing  was  enough  to  begin  the  open-
ing of  their  eyes,  in  time  they  may  indeed  be  entire-
ly disabused,  and  become  thereby  more  fit  for  the
enlightenment  and  the  visitations  of  heaven.  How-
ever, we  see  well  that  it  is  God  alone  who  has  pro-
tected us  in  this  strange  nation,  since  even  among
the  Hurons,  who  are  our  allies,  our  lives  have  often
been  attempted.  Here  is  an  incident  that  happened
not  long  ago.

Shortly  after  Father  Joseph  Marie  Chaumonot
returned  from  the  Neutral  Nation,  he  was  given  as
companion  to  Father  Antoine  Daniel,  who  was  begin-
ning the  Summer  Missions  in  his  district.  When
they  had  arrived  at  saint  Michel,  a  village  of  the  Mis-
sion of  saint  Joseph,  a  harebrained  young  fellow,
whom  the  devil  had  already  attempted  to  use  in  sev-
eral other  wicked  deeds  against  us,  resolved  to  kill
one  of  these  two.  He  concealed  himself  near  a  cab-
in [85]  where  the  Fathers  were  making  a  visit  of
instruction;  when  they  went  out  and  had  turned
their  backs,  he  chose  his  time,  and  with  his  left  hand
seizing  the  hat  of  Father  Chaumonot,  who  was  walk-
ing last,  he  dealt  him  a  blow  on  his  bare  head  with


236  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

Pere  Chaumonot  en  cet  eftat,  entreprend  fa  cure  &
fa  giierifon.  En  effet  n'ayant  trouue  que  contufion
&  tremeur  en  la  partie  ofTenfee,  il  la  fcarifie  auec  vne
pierre,  la  fouffle,  &  l'abreuue  de  faliue,  puis  il  appli-
que deffus  le  maftic  de  certaines  racines,  auec  quoy
il  le  mit  en  eftat  de  nous  reuenir  voir  le  ledemain :
Quant  au  meurtrier,  la  iuftice  qui  s'en  [86]  enfuiuit
fut,  que  quelques-vns  de  fes  plus  proches  luy  dirent
qu'il  n'auoit  point  d'efprit.  Nous  fupplions  noftre
Seigneur  de  deuenir  le  Pere  de  ces  pauures  aueugles,
&  qu'ils  foient  en  fin  fes  heri tiers,  nos  coheritiers  &
confreres.


1641  -  42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  237

a  stone  tie  was  holding  in  his  right  hand.  I  do  not
know  what  prevented  the  harm  he  desired  to  do ;  how-
ever this  latter,  perceiving  that  his  act  had  not  suc-
ceeded as  he  had  expected,  ran  for  a  hatchet  and
raised  it  to  let  it  fall  upon  the  Father.  But  at  this
point,  Father  Daniel,  his  companion,  and  a  few  Hu-
rons  came  in  haste  and  kept  back  the  arm  and  the
blow.  One  of  our  Christians  in  this  village,  seeing
Father  Chaumonot  in  this  condition,  undertook  to
care  for  him  and  to  heal  him.  Having  actually  found
only  a  bruise  and  swelling  in  the  injured  part,  he
scarified  it  with  a  stone,  breathed  thereon,  and  mois-
tened it  with  saliva ;  then  he  applied  to  it  the  gum  of
certain  roots,  by  which  he  was  enabled  to  return  to
us  the  next  day.  As  for  the  murderer,  the  punish-
ment which  [86]  followed  him  was,  that  some  of  his
nearest  relatives  told  him  that  he  had  no  sense.  We
beseech  our  Lord  to  become  the  Father  of  these  poor
blind  creatures,  and  that  they  may  at  last  be  his
heirs,  and  our  fellow  heirs  and  brothers.


238  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


CHAPITRE  VII.

DE LA MISSION  DITE DV SAINCT ESPRIT AUX NIPISSI-

RINIENS.

LES  AfKiKb'anehronons  felon  nos  Hurons,  ou
Nipiffiriniens  felon  les  Algonquins,  font  vne
Nation  de  la  langue  Algonquine,  qui  tient  plus
des  errantes  que  des  fedentaires.  lis  femblent  auoir
autant  de  demeures,  que  l'annee  a  de  faifons :  au  Prin-
temps  partie  demeurent  pour  la  pefche,  ou  ils  la  pen-
fent  meilleure,  partie  s'en  va  en  traite  a  des  peuples
qui  s'affemblent  au  riuage  de  la  mer  du  Nort,  ou
glaciale  [87]  fur  laquelle  ils  voguent  dix  iours,  apres
en  auoir  fait  trente  par  les  riuieres  pour  y  arriuer.

En  efte"  ils  fe  raffemblent  tous,  fur  le  paffage  des
Hurons  aux  Francois,  au  bord  d'vn  grand  lac  qui
porte  leur  nom  efloigne  de  Quebeq  enuiron  deux  cens
lieues,  &  de  nos  Hurons  enuiron  feptante,  de  forte
que  leur  demeure  principale  eft  comme  aux  deux
tiers  du  chemin  de  Quebecq  a  nos  Hurons.

Enuiron  le  milieu  de  l'Automne  ils  partent  pour
s'aprocher  de  nos  Hurons,  fur  les  terres  defquels  ils
paffent  ordinairement  l'hyuer:  mais  deuant  que  d'y
arriuer,  ils  pefchent  du  poiffon  le  plus  qu'ils  peuuent,
lequel  ils  font  fecher:  c'eft  la  monnoye  ordinaire  de
laquelle  ils  acheptent  leur  principale  prouifion  de
bled,  quoy  qu'ils  viennent  garnis  de  toute  autre  mar-
chandife,  eftans  gens  riches  &  accommodez.  Ils  cul-
tiuent  quelque  peu  de  terre  proche  de  leur  demeure


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  239


CHAPTER  VII.

OF THE MISSION CALLED "THE HOLY GHOST," TO
THE NIPISSIRINIENS.

THE  Askikwanehronons,  according  to  our  Hu-
rons ;  or  Nipissiriniens,  according  to  the  Algon-
qmns, —  form  a  Nation  of  the  Algonquin  tongue
which  contains  more  wandering  than  settled  people.
They  seem  to  have  as  many  abodes  as  the  year  has
seasons, — in  the  Spring  a  part  of  them  remain  for
fishing,  where  they  consider  it  the  best;  a  part  go
away  to  trade  with  the  tribes  which  gather  on  the
shore  of  the  North  or  icy  sea,  [87]  upon  which  they
voyage  ten  days,  after  having  spent  thirty  days  upon
the  rivers,  in  order  to  reach  it.

In  summer,  they  all  gather  together,  on  the  road
of  the  Hurons  to  the  French,  on  the  border  of  a
large  lake  which  bears  their  name,  and  is  about  two
hundred  leagues  distant  from  Quebeq,  and  about
seventy  from  our  Hurons;  so  that  their  principal
dwelling  place  is,  as  it  were,  two-thirds  of  the  way
from  Quebecq  to  the  country  of  our  Hurons.

About  the  middle  of  Autumn,  they  begin  to  ap-
proach our  Hurons,  upon  whose  lands  they  generally
spend  the  winter;  but,  before  reaching  them,  they
catch  as  many  fish  as  possible,  which  they  dry.  This
is  the  ordinary  money  with  which  they  buy  their
main  stock  of  corn,  although  they  come  supplied
with  all  other  goods,  as  they  are  a  rich  people  and
live  in  comfort. They  cultivate  a  little  land  near


240  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J ^SUITES [Vol.21

d'Eft6:  mais  c'eft  plus  pour  delices,  &  pour  manger
en  verd,  que  pour  en  faire  mefnage.

[88]  Nos  Peres  de  Quebec,  &  des  Trois-riuieres,
ayans  par  le  paffe  heureufement  trauaille  a  la  culture
de  tous  les  peuples  errans,  qui  eftoient  les  plus
proches  d'eux,  les  ayans  tantoii  tous  rendus  homes
&  Chreftiens,  iettoient  les  yeux  fur  cette  Nation,  la
plus  proche  de  la  derniere  qui  eft  defcendue,  pour  fe
venir  habituer  proche  d'eux.  Mais  comme  ils  ne
venoient  plus  a  la  Traite,  a  raifon  de  quelque  em-
pefchement  qu'y  mettoient  les  autres  d'au-deffous,
on  ne  fcauoit  comme  entamer  cette  affaire.  L'Efte
paffe  Dieu  eut  agreable  de  difpofer  les  chofes  de  la
forte,  qu'ils  fe  refolurent  de  fonder  le  gue,  &  d'en-
uoyer  quelque  canots  a  la  Traite  aux  Francois.  Ils  y
arriuerent  heureufement,  fans  aucun  empefchement,
&  rie  ne  pouuoit  venir  plus  a  propos  pour  ce  que
nous  pretendions.

On  leur  parle  done,  non  pas  de  quitter  leur  pais,
&  fe  venir  ranger  proche  des  autres  Algonquins  defia
habituez:  mais  bien  de  receuoir  auec  eux  quelques
vns  de  nos  Peres,  pour  les  initruire.  Ils  tefmoigne-
rent  qu'ils  l'auoient  [89]  fort  agreable.  Ce  qui  fit
que  les  Peres  Claude  Pijart,  &  Charles  Raymbaut,
partans  de  la  bas  pour  nous  venir  affifter,  eurent
charge  de  s'offrir  en  paffant,  a  eux.  Mais  ne  les
ayans  pas  trouue  a  leur  demeure  d'Efte,  &  ayans  ap-
pris  qu'ils  deuoient  venir  hyuerner  en  nos  quartiers,
ils  aborderent  icy,  fans  perdre  efperance  d'y  voir
ceux  pour  lefquels  particulierement  ils  eftoient
enuoyez.

Ils  n'ont  pas  efte  fruftrez  de  leur  attente.  Ces
Sauuages  quelque  temps  apres  arriuerent,  au  nombre


1641-42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  241

their  Summer  dwelling;  but  it  is  more  for  pleasure,
and  that  they  may  have  fresh  food  to  eat,  than  for
their  support.

[88]  Our  Fathers  at  Quebec,  and  at  the  Three
rivers, — who  in  the  past  have  successfully  labored
for  the  improvement  of  all  the  wandering  tribes
which  were  nearest  to  them,  and  have  made  nearly
all  of  them  men  and  Christians, — cast  their  eyes
upon  this  Nation,  the  nearest  to  the  last  one  which
came  down  in  order  to  settle  near  them.  But  as
these  no  longer  came  for  Trade,  on  account  of  some
opposition  which  others  from  below  made  against
them,  they  did  not  know  how  to  broach  this  matter.
Last  Summer,  God  was  pleased  so  to  order  things
that  they  themselves  resolved  to  feel  their  way,  and
to  send  some  canoes  for  the  Trade  with  the  French.
They  arrived  safely,  without  any  difficulty,  and  noth-
ing could  have  happened  more  opportunely  for  that
which  we  desired.

Consequently  we  spoke  to  them,  not  of  abandon-
ing their  country  and  coming  to  place  themselves
near  the  other  Algonquins  already  settled,  but  rather
of  receiving  a  few  of  our  Fathers  among  them,  that
they  might  be  instructed;  they  declared  that  this
would  be  [89]  very  acceptable  to  them.  This  is  why
Fathers  Claude  Pijart,  and  Charles  Raymbaut,  set-
ting out  from  below  to  come  and  help  us,  had  direc-
tions to  offer  themselves,  on  the  way,  to  them.  But
not  having  found  them  at  their  Summer  dwelling,
and  having  learned  that  they  were  to  come  and  win-
ter in  our  quarters,  they  landed  here  without  losing
hope  of  seeing  those  to  whom  they  were  specially
sent.

They  were  not  disappointed  in  their  expectation.


242  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


d'enuiron  deux  cent  cinquante  ames,  &  prirent  en  ce
pais  vn  tel  departement,  pour  leur  hyuernement,
qu'il  femble  que  ce  foit  le  faindt  Efprit,  &  point  autre
qui  les  ayt  conduit.

Ce  fut  a  deux  portees  d'arquebuze  de  noftre  mai-
fon,  du  mefme  cofte  de  la  riuiere,  fur  laquelle  elle
eft  fituee,  qu'ils  prirent  leur  place.  C'eftoit  iufte-
ment  pour  n'auoir  rincommodite*  de  leur  voyfinage,
&  pour  n'en  eftre  d'ailleurs  fi  efloignez,  que  nos  Peres
ne  peuffent  commodement,  tous  les  iours,  [90]  les
aller  trouuer  pour  les  inftruire ;  a  quoy  ils  n'ont  pas
manque.

II  faut  aduoiier  que  ces  fortes  de  Nations  ont  ie  ne
fcay  quelle  difpofition  d'efprit,  plus  grade  pour  la
femence  de  la  Foy  que  nos  Hurons.  Les  Peres  ne
les  eurent  pas  entretenu  quinze  iours,  qu'ils  s'af-
fedtionneret  entieremet  a  les  efcouter:  &  n'auoient
point  plus  grand  contentement  que  lors  qu'on  leur
faifoit  chanter  les  grandeurs  de  Dieu,  les  articles  de
la  creance  &  des  Commandemens.  Bref ,  il  ne  fe  peut
rien  voir  de  plus  complaifant,  que  la  facon  &  maniere
auec  laquelle  d'abord  ils  fe  comportent  auec  les
Peres.

Le  principal  Capitaine  de  cette  Nation  nomme
SiKafoumir,  fit  au  commecement  vn  cry  public ;  que
chacun  eut  a  prier  &  honorer  Dieu,  de  la  maniere
que  l'enfeignoient  les  Francois.

Les  petits  enfans  en  fuitte  fe  mirent  &  s' applique-
rent  de  forte  a  aprendre  les  premiers  principes  de  la
Foy,  qu'en  peu  de  temps  ils  s'y  trouuerent  notable-
ment  aduancez.

Ils  ne  font  aucune  difficult^  de  laiffer  inftruire  &
baptifer  leurs  malades. [91]  Voire  mefme  quelques


1641-42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  243

These  Savages,  numbering  about  two  hundred  and
fifty  souls,  arrived  shortly  after,  and  took  such  a
district  in  this  country,  for  their  winter  quarters,  that
it  seems  to  have  been  the  holy  Ghost,  and  no  other,
who  guided  them.

They  chose  their  ground  on  the  same  side  of  the
river,  upon  which  we  were,  and  at  two  arquebus
shots  from  our  house.  It  was  precisely  from  not
being  inconvenienced  by  their  nearness  to  us,  and
also  from  our  not  being  very  distant  from  them,  that
our  Fathers  were  easily  able,  every  day,  [90]  to  go
and  instruct  them ;  which  they  did  not  fail  to  do.

We  must  admit  that  Tribes  like  these  have  an  in-
describably greater  aptitude  of  heart  for  the  seed  of
Faith  than  have  our  Hurons.  The  Fathers  had  not
talked  with  them  for  a  fortnight,  before  they  took
the  utmost  delight  in  listening  to  them;  and  they
had  no  greater  satisfaction  than  when  they  were
taught  to  chant  the  greatness  of  God,  the  articles  of
belief,  and  the  Commandments.  In  a  word,  noth-
ing more  pleasing  can  be  found,  than  the  way  and
manner  in  which,  from  the  first,  they  bore  them-
selves toward  the  Fathers.

In  the  beginning  the  chief  Captain  of  this  Tribe,
named  Wikasoumir,  made  a  public  announcement
that  every  one  should  pray  to  God  and  honor  him,
in  the  way  taught  by  the  French.

After  that,  the  little  children  began  to  learn  the
first  principles  of  the  Faith,  and  applied  themselves
so,  that  in  a  short  time  they  were  found  remarkably
advanced  therein.

They  make  no  difficulty  about  permitting  their
sick  to  be  instructed  and  baptized ;  [91]  some  of  them
even  contribute  willingly  to  their  own  instruction.


244  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jESUITES [Vol.21


vns  d'eux  contribuent  volontiers  a  leur  inftrudtion.
Quelques-vns  ont  efte  baptifez  en  cet  eftat,  a  qui  il  a
pleu  Dieu  de  rendre  la  fante\

Les  Peres  toutesfois  ne  fe  font  point  encore  pu
refoudre  d'en  baptifer  aucun  qui  fiat  en  fante,  pour
inflance  qu'ils  ayent  fait  de  l'eftre,  defirans  vne  plus
logue  efpreuue  de  leur  refolution  &  conftance:  &
pour  ce  faire  ils  ont  pris  refolution  de  les  fuiure,  la
part  ou  ils  iroient  refte  d'annee :  &  par  mefme  moyen
s'aduancer  &  fe  fortifier  toufiours  de  plus  en  plus
en  l'vfage  de  leur  lague,  qui  fe  trouue  en  plufieurs
chofes  differente  de  celle  dont  ils  ont  eu  la  premiere
teinture,  auec  les  Algonquins  des  quartiers  d'en  bas.
Ils  partirent  dicy  le  huidtiefme  de  May,  veille  de
rAfcenfion,  tous  enfemble  de  compagnie,  auec  efpe-
rance  d'arriuer  a  la  principale  demeure  de  cette
Nation  a  la  Pentecofte.  Plaife  a  cet  adorable  Efprit
dont  leur  MifQon  porte  le  nom,  prendre  en  mefme
temps  vne  parfaicte  poffeffion  des  efprits,  &  des
cceurs  de  ces  pauures  [92]  Peuples,  &  des  noftres,  y
regner  eternellement.

La  commodite  qu'il  y  auoit  d'initruire  les  Nipinl-
riniens,  a  raifon  du  voyfmage,  &  la  bonne  difpofltio
qu'ils  faifoient  paroiftre  a  receuoir  1'inftruct.ion,  fit
que  dans  le  peu  de  temps  que  dure  leur  hyuerne-
ment:  on  ne  peut  fe  refoudre  de  les  quitter,  pour
s'appliquer  a  d'autres  de  mefme  langue,  qui  eftoient
venus  auffi  hyuerner  dans  le  pais.  Le  Pere  Claude
Pijart,  toutefois  vifita  quelques  autres  endroits:  en
l'vn  def quels  il  trouua  bien  cinq  cens  perfonnes
affemblees,  de  diuerfes  Nations,  aufquelles  en  paffant
il  annoca  le  Royaume  de  Dieu,  &  leur  fit  chanter  fes
loiianges. Prefque  par  tout  il  y  trouua  quelque  pre-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  245

A  few  have  been  baptized  in  that  condition,  to  whom
it  pleased  God  to  restore  health.

Nevertheless  the  Fathers  have  not  yet  been  able
to  decide  upon  baptizing  any  one  who  is  in  health,
although  they  have  been  urgently  entreated  to  do
so,  as  they  desire  to  make  a  longer  proof  of  their  firm-
ness and  constancy;  and,  in  order  to  do  this,  they
resolved  to  follow  them  to  the  place  where  these
were  going  for  the  rest  of  the  year,  and  by  this  very
means  to  advance  and  become  still  more  and  more
proficient  in  the  use  of  their  language, —  which  in
many  respects  appears  to  be  different  from  that  of
which  they  had  the  first  smattering  with  the  Algon-
quins  in  the  districts  below.  They  set  out  from
here,  all  together,  on  the  eighth  of  May,  the  day
before  the  Ascension,  with  the  hope  of  arriving  at  the
principal  dwelling  place  of  this  Tribe  by  Whitsun-
day. May  it  please  that  adorable  Spirit  whose  name
their  Mission  bears,  to  take  perfect  possession  both
of  the  minds  and  hearts  of  these  poor  [92]  Tribes,
and  of  our  own,  and  to  reign  therein  eternally.

The  opportunity  we  had  of  instructing  the  Nipis-
siriniens,  on  account  of  their  nearness,  and  the  great
aptitude  they  showed  in  receiving  instruction  during
the  short  time  that  their  wintering  lasted,  made  us
unable  to  abandon  them  and  devote  ourselves  to
others  of  the  same  language,  who  had  also  come  to
winter  in  the  country.  However,  Father  Claude
Pijart  visited  a  few  other  places,  in  one  of  which  he
found  perhaps  five  hundred  persons  gathered  to-
gether of  different  Tribes,  to  whom,  in  passing,  he
spoke  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  caused  them  to
sing  God's  praises.  Nearly  everywhere  he  found
some  predestined  soul,  which  was  only  awaiting  his


246  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUTTES [Vol.21


deftine,  qui  n'atendoit  que  fa  vifite,  pour  s'en  aller
au  Ciel. En  voicy  vn  exemple  affez  remarquable.

Les  Tontthrataronons,  Nation  Algonquine,  hyuer-
noient  au  nombre  de  quinze  cabanes,  fur  les  terres
de  la  Million  de  faindt  lean  Baptifte  aux  Arendaehro-
nons. Le  Pere  Claude  Pijart  [93]  les  allant  vifiter,
y  receut  toute  forte  de  bon  accueil. Le  foir  eftant
venu,  comme  il  eftoit  pres  de  s'endormir,  il  entend
vne  voix  plaintiue;  il  demade  que  c'eft?  on  luy  dit
que  c'eftoit  vne  pauure  vieille  malade,  qui  eftoit  en
la  cabane  voyfme,  qui  s'en  alloit  mourir. Le  Pere
demade  a  Taller  voir,  le  chef  de  la  cabane,  Capitaine
confiderable,  fe  leue,  &  allume  vn  flambeau,  c'eft  a
dire  vne  efcorce  d'arbre:  &  le  Pere  eftant  en  peine
d'eau  pour  le  baptefme,  ce  Capitaine  luy  fait  promp-
tement  fondre  de  la  neige;  le  Pere  entre,  inftruit
cette pauure creature,  l'interroge;  elle luy donne
toute  fatisf action,  comme  fi  elle  eut  efte  inftruite  de
longue  main,  il  la  baptife,  &  vn  peu  apres  elle  meurt
heureufement.

Le  Pere  trouua  en  tous  ceux  qu'il  vifita,  vne  fem-
blable  difpofition  d'efprit,  a  celle  qu'il  auoit  trouue
aux  Nipifsiriniens ;  mais  beaucoup  meilleure  en  ceux
qui  auoient  le  plus  fait  de  voyages,  &  hante  dauan-
tage  les  magazins  de  nos  Francois  aux  Trois-riuieres,
&  a  Quebeq  depuis  quelques  annees  en  5a.  [94]
Nous  verrons  ce  qu'auec  le  teps,  &  auec  le  renfort
que  nous  efperos  de  cette  lague,  nous  pourrons  faire
dauantage  a  l'aduenir,  pour  toutes  ces  pauures  brebis
errates,  tat  de  l'vne  que  de  l'autre  lague.

Ie  ne  fcaurois  me  perfuader  que  le  manquement  du
progrez  de  cette  affaire,  doiue  venir  du  cofte  dont  on
nous  menace  en  France,  qui  eft  l'impuiffance  de  four-


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  247

visit,  that  it  might  ascend  to  Heaven.  I  will  note  a
rather  remarkable  instance  of  this.

The  Tontthrataronons,  an  Algonquin  Tribe,  num-
bering" about  fifteen  cabins,  were  wintering  upon  the
lands  of  the  Mission  of  saint  Jean  Baptiste  to  the
Arendaehronons.  Father  Claude  Pi j art,  [93]  on  go-
ing to  visit  them,  received  from  them  every  manner
of  hearty  welcome.  When  the  evening  came,  as  he
was  almost  asleep,  he  heard  a  plaintive  voice;  he
asked  what  it  was,  they  told  him  that  it  was  a  poor
sick  old  woman,  who  was  in  the  next  cabin,  and  who
was  dying.  The  Father  begged  to  go  and  see  her;
the  head  of  the  cabin,  an  important  Captain,  arose  and
lighted  a  torch, —  that  is  to  say,  a  piece  of  bark;  and,
the  Father  being  at  a  loss  for  water  for  the  baptism,
this  Captain  quickly  melted  some  snow  for  him.  The
Father  entered,  instructed  this  poor  creature,  and
questioned  her;  she  gave  him  full  satisfaction,  as  if
she  had  been  long  before  instructed ;  he  baptized  her,
and  shortly  after  she  died  happily.

The  Father  found  in  all  those  whom  he  visited,  a
disposition  of  mind  similar  to  that  which  he  found  in
the  Nipissiriniens ;  but  it  was  much  better  in  those
who  had  traveled  most,  and  had  most  frequented  the
warehouses  of  our  Frenchmen  at  the  Three  rivers
and  at  Quebeq  for  some  years  past.  [94]  We  shall
see  that  with  time,  and  with  the  reinforcement  that
we  are  hoping  for  in  this  language,  we  shall  be  able
to  do  more,  in  the  future,  for  all  these  poor  wander-
ing sheep,  as  well  of  the  one  language  as  of  the
other.

I  cannot  believe  that  the  lack  of  progress  in  this
matter  ought  to  come  from  the  quarter  whence  they
in  France  threaten  us, — which  is  their  inability  to


248  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.21

nir  aux  frais  de  l'entretien  &  entreprife  de  tous  ces
deffeins.  Le  maiftre  du  banquet  qui  nous  enuoye
pour  inuiter  &  forcer  nos  eftropiats,  d'entrer  dans  la
fale  du  feftin,  n'a  que  trop  de  puiffance  &  de  fageffe,
pour  nous  maintenir  &  fouftenir  iufques  au  bout:  &
il  n'eft  pas  croyable  qu'il  nous  vueille  laiffer  en  ft
beau  chemin.  Parmy  tant  de  faindtes  &  genereufes
ames,  qui  font  maintenant  en  France,  qui  femblet
n'auoir  autre  occupation,  que  de  voir  oil  &  en  quoy
elles  pourrot  employer,  pour  le  feruice  de  Dieu  &
de  leur  Redepteur;  &  par  ce  moyen  s'affeurer  ce  peu
de  bies  de  la  terre,  dont  la  mort  ne  leur  fait  que  trop
voir  qu'ils  n'en  peuuent  autrement  auoir  que  l'vfu-
fruidt;  quelle  apparence  [95]  de  defefperer  de  voir,
deuant  que  de  mourir,  cette  maifon  fixe  de  faindte
Marie  matrice  de  tous  les  Miffionnaires ;  &  chacune
de  ces  fept  Millions  &  celles  encore  qui  fuiuront,  Dieu
aidant,  cy  apres  eftablies  &  fondles  a  perpetuity :
particulierement  n'eftant  queftion  que  de  la  nourri-
ture  &  entretie  de  deux  ouuriers  Euangeliques  en
chaque  Miffion.  Ces  Miffions  portet  des  titres  &  des
nos  affez  capables  de  fatisfaire  a  la  deuotion  de  ceux
qui  en  voudroient  eftre  les  Peres :  mais  fi  leur  incli-
natio  les  portoit  a  les  nommer  autrement,  ie  ne  voy
aucune  loy  qui  les  peiit  empefcher  d'en  eftre  tout
enfemble  &  les  peres  &  les  parains,  Le  faindt  Efprit
au  faindt  iour  de  la  defcente  duquel  ie  ferme  cette
Relation,  fera  le  maiftre  &  le  condudteur  de  cette
affaire ;  laquelle  auffi  bien  que  toutes  les  autres  qui
regardent  ces  contrees,  ie  ne  puis  affez  recommander
aux  SS.  prieres  &  deuotions  de  ceux  qui  en  auront
quelque  cognoiffance.


1641-42]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  249

supply  means  for  undertaking  and  maintaining  all
these  plans.  The  master  of  the  feast,  who  sends  us
to  invite  and  constrain  our  crippled  ones  to  enter  the
banquet  hall,  has  only  too  much  power  and  wisdom
not  to  support  and  sustain  us  to  the  end ;  and  it  is
not  conceivable  that  he  would  forsake  us  in  so  glori-
ous a  path.  Among  the  many  devout  and  generous
souls  that  are  now  in  France, — and  that  appear  to
have  no  other  occupation  than  that  of  seeing  where
and  in  what  they  may  be  able  to  use,  for  the  service
of  God  and  their  Redeemer,  and  by  this  means  to
secure,  these  few  worldly  goods,  of  which  death  shows
them  only  too  well  that  they  can  otherwise  have  but
the  usufruct, —  what  probability  [95]  of  discourage-
ment can  there  be  of  seeing  before  death  this  perma-
nent house  of  sainte  Marie,  the  mother  of  all  the
Missionaries,  and  each  one  of  these  seven  Missions,
and  those  also  which  shall  follow  hereafter,  by  the
help  of  God,  established  and  endowed  forever;  and
especially  as  the  question  is  only  of  the  support  and
maintenance  of  two  Evangelistic  workers  in  each
Mission?  These  Missions  bear  titles  and  names
sufficiently  fitted  to  satisfy  the  devotion  of  those  who
might  wish  to  be  Fathers  of  them ;  but  if  their  in-
clination lead  them  to  change  the  names,  I  know  no
law  which  can  hinder  their  being,  at  the  same  time,
both  fathers  and  godfathers  of  them.  The  holy
Ghost,  on  the  blessed  day  of  whose  descent  I  am  clos-
ing this  Relation,  will  be  the  master  and  guide  of
this  affair, —  which,  as  well  as  all  the  others  that  con-
cern these  regions,  I  cannot  sufficiently  commend
to  the  Sacrifices,  prayers,  and  devotions  of  those  who
shall  have  any  knowledge  of  them.


250


LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.21


Q


[96]  /"~"\  VELQVES  vns  ont  sovliaitte  de  voir  vn  ef
chantillon  de  la  langue  Huronnc  pour  en
rccognoijire  V ccconomie  &  leur  facon  de  s'e-
noncer:  ie  n  ay  pit  choifir  ricn  de  meilleur  qiivn  des
entrcties  des  plus  ordinaires  qu' cut  auec  Dieu  fur  la  fin
de  fes  tours  Iofcph  ChihttatenhXa  ce  braue  Chrejlicn  dont
nous  auons  fait  mention ;  on  y  pourra  par  mefme  moyen
rccognoiflre  V Efprit  de  Dieu  qui  le  pouffoit.


s


Seigneur  Dieu

A  chietfendio  DiS

a  la  bonne  heure
ytoeKti  ichien
c'eft  toy

Ifa  ichien


connois :
tere


gnois;

terre :

que  voila,  &  ce  Ciel  que  voila:

dechen,  din  de  Ka  aronhiaie

fait  nous  autres  qui  fommes  appellez

chiae  dajontfe

Tout  ainfi  comme


en  fin  done

ie  te

onne

ichien

one-

maintenant

ie  te  co-

nonhtfa

onen-

qui  as  fait

cette  terre

"ateienonc

li de  Ka  on-

)ila:

tu

nous  as

liaie :

ifa

sKtfaati-

ppellez

hommes.

ab'aatfi.

nous  autres

fommes

To  ichien iotti

maiftres  du  canot

dio

de  la  cabane

de  anonchia

[97]  me
hiotti


onionhb'a  ichien  atfatfen-

que  nous  auons  fait  canot,  &

de  ia  aab'ahonichien,  din

que  nous  auons  fait  cabane ;  de  mef-


C'eft  peu

Oehron

de  tout  ce

de  ftan  lefta


aab'anonchichien ;
tu  es  maiftre  toy

de  fa  chieb'endio de
toutesfois  que  nous

itochien  nendi


que  nous  auons ;
nonaen ;


peu  de  temps
i'ondab'aK


to  ati
qui  nous  as  cree.

sKbaatichiai.

fommes  maiftres

dab'ab'endio

feulement
ato


1641-42]


RELA  TION  OF  1640-41


251


[96]  f*~\  ERTAIN persons  have  desired  to  see  a  specimen


C


of  the  Huron  language,  in  order  to  ascertain
its  structure  and  their  methods  of  expression.
I  ca?inot  select  a?iy  thing  better  than  one  of  the  most  ordi-
nary  communions  which  Joseph  Chihzuatenhwa,  that  excel-
lent Christian  whom  we  have  mentioned,  had  with  God
toward  the  end  of  his  days;  by  the  same  means  can  be
recognized  the  Spirit  of  God  which  animated  him.


God,
Diou


at  last,  then,
onne  ichien


I  know

onen-

I  know

onen-

this  earth

de  ka  on-

thou  hast

isa  skwaati-


SLord
A  chiewendio

thee,  happily  now

tere  outoekti  ichien  nonhwa

thee.  It  is  thou  who  hast  made

terre : Isa  ichien sateienondi

that  we  behold, and  this  Heaven  that  we  behold :

dechen,  din  de  ka  aronhiaie :

made  us  who  call  ourselves  men.

chiae  daionwe  awaatsi.

Just  as  we  ourselves  are

To  ichien  iotti onionhwa  ichien awawen-

masters  of  the  canoe which  we  have  made  a  canoe, and

dio  de  ia  aawahonichien,  din

of  the  cabin  which  we  have  made  a  cabin,  so  ai-

de anonchia  aawanonchichien ;  to  ati

[97]  so  thou  art  master,  thou who  hast  created  us.

hiotti de  sa  chiewendio de  skwaatichiai.

It  is  for  a  short  time,  however,

Oehron  itochien

of  all  that  we  have ;

de  stan  iesta nonaen ;


that  we  are  masters

nendi dawawendio

a  short  time  only

iondawak  ato


252


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  21


nous  forames  les  maiftres

ababendio

fait  canot,

chien,

fait  cabane,

chien,

nous  les  maiftres

ien.


ichien
mes  appellez

en  vie,

&  pour  lors
to  haonoe


du  canot
de  ia
&  de  la  cabane

din  de  anonchia

peu  de  temps  feulement

i'ondabak  ato

Quant  a  toy

Tan  de  fa

tu  feras  le  maiftre
chiebendio


que  nous  auons

aabahoni-

que  nous  auons

aabanonchi-

en  fommes-

ababendio

pour  touliours

aondechaon

de  nous  qui  fom-

abaton  de  aionb'e


hommes:  &  pendant  que Ton  eft  encore

abaatfi:  din  d'affon  aondhai.

pourroit  on  douter  que  tu  n'en  fois  le  maiftre

aioehron  ati  chiebendio?

principalement  tu  es  le  maiftre  quand

aat  anderaKti  chiebendio  de


nous  venons  a  mourir.

aab'enhei.

tu  es  maiftre
chiebendio


Toy  feul
Sonba
parfaitement ;
aat;


tout  a  fait

aat  aKhiaondi

il  n'y  en  a  pas  aucun

ftan  dba  tfatan


autre  auec  toy.

ta  tefti.


principalement

aat

principalement
aat
c'eft  toy
ifa  ichien
c'eft  toy auffi
ifa ichien


Tues

Ifa  ichien

deurions  craindre; tu  es

ifa  ichien
deurions  aimer ;  parce  que

hbeha ;  aerhon

[9S]  fant &  veritablement

aat  attoain  aa

extremement:  tres- veritablement

hbe :  daaK  attoain  aa

qui  font  hommes,  &  aux  autres

nonbe,  din  d'ba

ny  les  vns  ny  les  autres  ne  font  point  puiilans,

ftan  ichien  deKa  te  hattindabr,

hommes  ny  les  demons:  non  non

be  din  d'ondaKi:  ftan  ichien


celuy  que  nous
aiefatandihi ;

celuy  que  nous

aiefannon-
qui  es  tres-puif-

aat  iftabt

qui  nous  ayme

aat  sKbannon-

quant  aux  autres

atan  d'ba

qui  font  demons,

d'ondaKi,

nj  les

enon-

ils  ne-
te  hat-


1641-42]


RELA  TION  OF  1640-41


253


are  we  masters of  the  canoe

which  we  have

awawendio

deia

aawahoni-

made  a  canoe,

and

of  the  cabin

which  we  have

chien,

din de  anonchia

aawanonchi-

made  a  cabin ;

a  short  time

only

are

chien,

iondawak

ato

awawendio

we  masters  thereof. As  for  thee,

forever

ien.

Tan  de  sa

aondechaon

1

shalt  thou  be  master

of  us  who  are

ichien

chiewendio

awaton  de  aionwe

called

men:

and  while

we  are  still

awaatsi :

din  d'asson

aondhai.

in  life,

can  we  doubt

that  thou  art  the  master  of  it  ?

aioehron  ati

chiewendio  ?

And,  then,

especially

thou  art  the  master when

to  haonoe

aat  anderakti

chiewendio de

welcome  to  die

Thou  alone,

entirely,

aawenhei.

Sonwa

aat  akhiaondi

art  master

completely ;

no  other  is  there

chiewendio

aat;

stan  dwa  tsatan

beside  thee.

Thou  art

principally

he  whom  we

ta  testi.

Isa  ichien

aat

aiesatandihi ;

ought  to  fear,

thou  art

principally

he  whom  we

isa  ichien

aat

aiesannon-

ought  to  love ;

because

it  is  thou who  art  most  power-

hweha ;

aerhon isa  ichien

aat  istaout

[9S]  ful,  and  truly  thou  art also

aat  attoain  aa isa ichien

to  the  utmost.  Most  truly,  as

hwe :  daak  attoain  aa atan


who  are  men,  and

nonwe,  din

neither  these  nor  those

stan  ichien  deka  te

men  nor  demons;

we  din  d'ondaki


for  others
d'wa

are  powerful,
hattindaour,


no,  no,
stan  ichien


he  who  loves  us

aat  skwannon-

for  others

d'wa

who  are  demons,

d'  ondaki,

neither

enon-

they

te  hat-


254


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


font  point  puiffans

tindabr


les  demons,

ondaKi,


de  plus  auffi
eba  ichien


ils  ne

te  on-


nous  ayment  pas.
Kinnonhbe.

C'eft  pourquoy

Ondaie  ati

re ie  rends  graces,

atones

gnoifle.

ha.


d'vne  facon  particulie-

anderaKti

qu*il  me  co-

ahaiente-

en  fin

onne


maintenant
nonhba

de  ce  que  tu  as  voulu

d'iferi

Extremement  tu  nous  ayme

Daat  anderaKti  sKbannobe

maintenant  ie  me  confacre  a  toy  moy  que

nonb'a  onataanKbas  de  KiiK-

en  fin  maintenant ie  te  fais  mon  maiftre tu  es

hon :  onne  ichie nonhba  onbendiofti  da-

principalement  le  maiftre  de  moy  que  voicy  ordonne

aK  chiebendio  de  K'iiKhon  fen-

feulement de  moy  que  voicy : n'importe que  ie
dionran itoch  dek'iiKhon:  niane to  de

fouffre  ie  penferay  feulement,

eatonnhontaiona,  eerhon  itochien


chien

voicy :


aduifera

dionraan

[99]  que  voicy

khon.
tures


feulement

itochien

Toy

Ifa  ichien

en  noftre  famille:

d'abahbatfia:

ie  n'y  fuffes  prefent,

te  ikhontak,

en  noftre  famille  ie  penferay

d'ab'ahb'atfia,  eerhon

qui  principalement  nous


ily

ehe-

de  moy
de  K'ii-


ichien

mais  pour  moy

tan  nendi,

i'y  euffes  efte
ikhontak,


daak


le  maiftre  abfolu
daak  abendio

tu  nous  as  tous  pour  crea-

ab'etti  sKbaatab'an

encore  bien  que

abanchkran  ichien de

&  quelque  accident  nous  arriuaft

chia  flan  onataban

feulement,  celuy  la  void

itochie,  tehaagnra

a  pour  creatures :

f  onaataban  aa :


ie  ne  fuis  rien  du  tout,

ftan  ichien  ea  teen,

nonobftant

oont  ichien


quand  bien

de  te

nous  fufiions  morts,
aiabenheonnen,


1641-42]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  255

are  not  powerful, these  demons ;  moreover,  they

tindaour  ondaki, ewa  ichien  te  on-

do  not  love  us.
kinnonhwe.

For  this,  now  in  a  special  manner

Ondaie  ati  nonhwa  anderakti

I  render  thanks,  that  thou  hast  permitted  me  to

atones  d'iseri  ahaiente-

know  thee.  To  the  utmost  dost  thou  love  us :  at  last,

ha.  Daat  anderakti skwannowe :  onne

now,  I  consecrate  myself  to  thee,  myself  whom

chien nonwa  onataankwas  de  kiik-

thou  beholdest ; at  last now I  take  thee  for  my  master ;  thou  art
hon : onne  ichien  nonhwa onwendiosti  da-

entirely  the  master  of  him  who  is  before  thee.  Direct,

ak  chiewendio  de  k'iikhon.  sen-

thou  alone,  me  whom  thou  beholdest.  It  does  not  matter what  I
dionran  itoch de  k'iikhon:  nian6  to  de

suffer ;  I  shall  think  only,  ' '  He

eatonnhontaiona, eerhon  itochien  ehen-

will  order  for  me alone  — he,  the  absolute  master of  myself
dionraan  itochien  daak  awendio de  k'ii-

[99]  now  before  thee. ' ' Thou  thyself, thou  holdest  us  all  as  thy  crea-

khon.  Isa  ichien  awetti  skwaatawan

tures  in  our  family :  even  although

d'awahwatsia: awanchkran  ichien  de

I  should  not  be  present  there, and  some  accident  should  happen  to  us
te  ikhontak,  chia  stan  onatawan

in  our  family,  I  shall  think  simply,  "He  sees  it

d'awahwatsia  eerhon  itochien, tehaagnra

who above all holds us as his creatures."

ichien  daak  sonaatawan  aa:

As  for  me,  I  am  nothing  at  all ;  if,  indeed,

tan  nendi,  stan  ichien  ea  teen,  de  te

I  had  been  there,  nevertheless  we  might  have  died,

ikhontak,  oont  ichien  aiawenheonnen,


256


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  21


quand  bien  i'y  euffes  efte.
de  te  ikhontaK.
dement  ieremercie!

rakti  atones  aa!

pour  ce  qui  regarde  tes  deff  eins :
ftaat ifendionrb'ten  aa:


Voila  done
Onne  ichien

voila
onne  ichien


que  gran-

ande-

que  ie  te  cognois

onentere


ger

dionraenton
que  chofe:


ie  penferay
eerhon


ie  ne  veux  pas  f  on-

teWaftato  aen-

fi  en  noftre  famille  il  arriuera  quel-
d'ab'ahb'a[t]iia,  t'eabanK:
feulement,  il  y  aduifera

itochien, ehendionran


Dieu

de  Dib'


qui  nous  aime

fonnanhbe


nous  ayme :
nannonhb'e


[ioo]  riche:

haf  en :
tend  Dieu:
de  Diou:
prendray  garde

teienfta  itochien

bien  aife

fen  itochien


kibanne
auffi  toft
ichien


parce  que
aerhon


le  diable

oki
que  font  les  glorieux

attinaendae


en  vain

atochien

font  riches :

daie  d'ondakiouane

nous  entrefurpaffoiis  pas

tehbichegnonch


foit  qu'il  ait  deffein  qu'ils

din  d'eherhon ahat-
ie  penferay feule-
eerhon  ito-

de  Dieu  qui

de  Diou  To-

que celu)'-  la  foit
ahoivih'ane-
ie  ne  fgay  ce  que  pre-

ilan  ne  iherhai

&

ea-

ilefl

akief-

que  les  riches foient pecheurs:

d'aorrihouanderafKo  dao-

fans  qu'on  s'en  appergoiue:  voila

tebahente :  onne

qui  les  accompagne.  Helas! e'eft

hib'ei.  O! onek

quelques  hommes  qui

nonb'e  d'b'a  on-

non  affeurement  nous  ne

6  ichien  te  onata-

foit  riches  foit  pauures.

de  ondakib'at  din  d'e-


deuiennent  pauures  en  leur  famille :

tieffaha  to  d'attib'atfia:

ment  voila  le  deffein

chien kond'ihondionrb'ten

foit  qu'il  ait  deffein

din  d'eherhon
ie  penferay feulement
eerhon itochien

i'en  feray  d'autant  plus  en  crainte,
anderakti  eatandihi,

a  la  fagon  que  ie  vis:

t'iondhai:


1641-42]


RELA  T10N  OF  1640-41


257


.even  had  I  been  there.

de  te  ikhontak.

ly  I  thank  thee !

rakti atones  aa!

in  what  concerns  thy  plans.

staat  isendionrouten  aa :


Behold,  then,
Onne  ichien
Behold,
onne  ichien


how  great-

ande-

how  I  discern  thee

onentere

I  will  not
tewastato  aen-


think,

dionraenton
I  shall  think
eerhon


"What  if  in  our  family  something  should  happen?"

d'awahwa[t]sia,  t'eawank:

only,  "  He  will  attend  to  it,

itochien,  ehendionran


God,

de  Diou


who  loves  us. ' '
sonnanhwe :


If  he  intend
din  d'eherhon


shall  become  poor in  their  family,  I  shall  think

tiessaha  to  d'attiwatsia : eerhon

ly,  "  Behold  the  purpose  of  God

chien kond'ihondionrouten  de  Diou

loves  us!"  Or,  if  he  intend

nannonhwe:  din  d'eherhon


that  they

ahat-

mere-

ito-

who
SO-


[100]  rich,

hasen

God  means."
de  Diou:
would  be  careful

teiensta  itochien

very  easy

sen  itochien

because,
kiwanne:  aerhon
at  once the  devil
ichien  oki

in  vain

atochien

are  rich:

daie  d'ondakiouane

excel  one  another

tehwichegnonch


I  shall  think  only,

eerhon  itochien

Much  more  would  I  fear  this,

anderakti  eatandihi,


that  it  shall  be

ahokiwane-

"  I  do  not  know  what

stan  ne  iherhai

and

ea-


how  I  lived.  It  is

t'iondhai :  akies-

for  the  rich  to  be  sinners:

d'aorrihouanderaskon  dao-


without  their  being  aware  of  it,

tewahente :
who  accompanies  them. Alas !


hiwei
that  play  the  braggart

attinaendae


O!


behold

onne

it  is

onek

who
on-


some  men
nonwe  d'wa

surely  we  do  not

6  ichien  te  onata-

whether  rich  or  poor,

de  ondakiwant  din  d'e-


258


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  21


eflas.

pauures

kaota

heure


qui  nous  aime

ikouannonhoue


Tu  nous  ayme  egalement
Chia  te  skbannonhbe  ichien


&les
d'ab-


mercie,

nes,

moy  que  voicy
ek'iikhon,
fecoue  de  moy

hiatehoue

[101]  pendant  que

d'affon

d'eftat,  toy  feul

doron, fonhba


&  les  riches.  O

din d'aokibane. O

qu'en  fin  ie  te  cognois

onne  onentere

Dieu;

de  Dib ;

d'autant  plus

anderakti  ichien
me  voila
onne  ichien

tout  ce

enftan  iefta

nous  viuons  .•
aiond'hay :

vniquement

to  hara


que  c'eft  done  a  la  bonne

outoekti

en  tes  defTeins  toy

ti  fendionrbten de

d'autant  plus  ie  re-

anderaKti  ato-

ie  m'abandonne  a  toy

onatonchiens

maintenant  que  ie

nonhoua  aak-

que  nous  eftimons

ab'andoronkoua

en  fin  done ie  n'en  fais  plus

onne  ichien  tesKan-

difpofe  de  moy

fendionran  de


que  voicy  qui  en  es  le  maiftre.

K'iiKhon daat  chieouendio  aa.


C'eut  efte  beaucoup
AioutektiK

que  les  hommes  foient  :

onb'e  ichien  aionton,
uroit  t'en  remercier
tones


feulement
ichien

nonobftant
oont  ichien


que  tu  euffes  voulu

de  te  ferinen
on  de-
aion-


il  y  auroit  encore  beaucoup  dont

aebane  ichien  aio-

on  iouyroit  fur  la  terre  de  toutes

tenhnraKbat  deK'ondechen  iaen  de  fta

les  chofes que  tu  nous  as  laiffees: mais de  plus en  cela
iefta  skbaentandi :  onek ichie  ko-

grandement  tu  nous  as  oblige ; que  tu  as  vou-


daie

anderakti skbatharatadi ;

d'iferi,

lu,

qu'ils  aillent  au  ciel

quad  ils  mour-

aronhiaie  ichien  ahendeta

de  hendi-

ront

la  ou a  iamais

ils  vi-

hei

to  ati  de aondechahaon  ichie

n de  to

1641-42]


RELA  TION  OF  1640-41


259


Equally  thou  lovest  us,

essas.  Chia  te  skwannonhwe  ichien

poor  and  the  rich.  Ah !

kaota  din  d'aokiwane.  O

at  last  I  see  thee  in  thy  designs,

onne  onentere  ti  sendionrouten


who  lovest  us,  O  God ;

ikouannonhotie de  Diou;
thank  thee,  especially

nes,  anderakti  ichien


I  who  am  before  thee
ek'iikhon,
cast  from  me
hiatehoue

[101]  while

d'asson

care  for  them.

doron,

who  am  in  thy  presence,

k'iikhon


Behold  me

onne  ichien

all  things

enstan  iesta

we  live ;


both  the

d'aou-

happily

outoekti

thyself

de

especially  do  I

anderakti  ato-

do  I  resign  myself  to  thee,

onatonchiens

now  as  I

nonhoua aak-

that  we  value

awandoronkoua

at  last  now, I  no  longer


aiond'hay : onne  ichien teskan-

Thou  alone and  solely, do  thou  dispose of  me

sonhwa to  hara sendionran de

thou  who  art  my  master.

daat  chieouendio  aa.


we  can  enjoy
tenhnrakwat


This  alone  would  have  been  much,

Aioutektik  ichien

that  men  should  exist ;  nevertheless

on  we  ichien  aionton,  oont  ichien

to  thank  thee  that  there  is  still  much

tones  aewane  ichien

upon  the  earth
dek'ondechen

the  things which  thou  hast  given  us : but
iesta  skwaentandi : onek

especially  hast  thou  laid  us  under  obligation  —  that  thou  hast  willed

daie anderakti  skwatharatandi ;  d'iseri,

that  they  should  go  to  heaven  when  they

aronhiaie  ichien  ahendeta  de  hendi-

die,  there  where  forever  they  shall

hei  to  ati  de  aondechahaon  ichien de  to


that  thou  shouldst  will

de  te  serinen

we  ought

aion-

that

aion-

among  all

iaen  de  stan

moreover in  this
ichien kon-


260  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

uront.  Ie  ne  veux  pas maintenant examiner ce  que

aondhei. Tebaflato  nohb'a aatoretta flaat

c'eft  veritablement  du  Paradis  ie  prefumerois

ioKirren  de  aronhiae,  anaendaek

par  trop  de  moy  fi  ie  penfois,  que  ie  recherche  ce  que

itochien  de  erhai,  t'aiatoretta;

e'en  eft; aufli  bien  ie  ne  fuis  rien cela  feul  me

onek  inde  ea  te  ondaie ichien aib-

deuroit  fuffit  de  ce  que  ie  fgay  ce  que  e'eft  de  tes  com-

toektiK  de  erribatere  ti  chieben-

[102]  mandemens.  En  fin  voila que  maintenant  ie  croy

dbten.  Onne  ichien nonhba rihbiofla

&  tout  debon:  il  n'y  a  rien  du  tout  dont  ie

daak attoain  aa : flan  ichien agnaktan  ta

doute  aucunement,  car  tu  n'es

tebaendionrhatandik,  onek  inde  te

point  menteur  tu  dis  toufiours  la  verite

chiendachibane  ara  ito  ti  chrieieriata

quoy  que  tu  dife :  cela  me  fuffit,  que  tu  ayes

de  flan  chihon: ondaie is  en  to,  difen

dit:  ie  ne  vous  ref  uferay  rien  dans  le  ciel,

ftan  tebanonflatindihai  de  aronhaie :

parce  que  quoy  que  ce  foit  ne  t'eft  difficile

onek  inde  flan  iefla  te  fatandoronkban-

de  plus  tu  nous  aime.  Voila  le  fujet

diK, eba  ichien skb'annobe.  Kondaie  ne-

de  mon  efperance  ta  parole.  N'eft

akhrendaentakba  ti  chieb'endb'ten.  Ou

il pas done vray que nous deuons plus faire de difficul-
ichien  teskandoron  attoain

te  de  fouff rir  pendant  noftre  vie :  voila

ab'atonnhontaiona affon aiondhai: Kon-
ce  qui  en  arriuera:  d'autant  plus  nous  en  tire-

daie echa  aabank :  ebane  eab'ateng-

rons  de  profit  dans  le  ciel :  outre  que  on  efl

nrakbat  earo[n]haie :  eb'a  ichien tetfaon-


1641-42]


RELA  TION  OF  1640-41


261


I  do  not  intend  now

Tewastato nonhwa
Paradise ;

de  aronhiae,


live.

aondhei.

really  is

iokirren

too  much,

itochien

it  is ;  moreover,

onek  inde
to  suffice  me
toektik
[102]  mandments  are.

dcmten.

and  wholly in  earnest ;
daak  attoain  aa:

have  the  least  doubt,

tewaendionrhatandik ,

lie,
chiendachiwane

whatever  thou  sayest:  it

de  stan  chihon : ondaie

said:


to  inquire  what

aatoretta staat

I  would  presume

anaendaek


if  I  thought

de  erhai,

I  am  nothing. This

ea  te ondaie

that  I  know

de  erriwatere

At  last,  then,  now


that  I  could  search  out  what

t'aiatoretta ;

alone ought
ichien aiou-

what  thy  com-

ti  chiewen-
I  believe


Onne  ichien nonhwa rihwiosta

nothing  there  is at  all of  which  I

stan  ichien agnaktan  ta

for  thou  dost  not

onek  inde  te

always  thou  speakest  the  truth

ara  ito  ti  chrieieriata

is  enough  for  me, that  thou  hast
is  en  to,  disen

"  Nothing  will  I  refuse  you  in  heaven,"

stan  tewanonstatindihai  de  aronhaie :

because,  whatever  it  be,  it  is  not  difficult  for  thee ;

onek  inde  stan  iesta  te  satandoronkwan-

thou  lovest  us.  This is  the  cause

skwannowe. Kondaie nen-


moreover
dik,  ewa  ichien

of  my  hope,

akhrendaentakwa

then, true that
ichien

to  suffer

awatonnhontaiona
would  happen


even  thy  word.  Is  it  not,

ti  chiewendouten.  Ou

we might have more  hardships

teskandoron  attoain

during our  lives?  This

asson aiondhai :  Kon-

so  much  the  more  would  we
daie echa  aawank : ewane eawateng-

gain  thereby in  heaven ; and,  besides,  one

nrakwat earo[n]haie : ewa  ichien  tetsaon-


202


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


moins  tenant de  fa  vie  quand  on  eft  dans  l'affliction

nonfte d'aondhai  d'aotetfirati.

Ah! veritablement ce  n'eft  plus  vne  chofe a  craindre

Ou ! ichien  tesKandoron


que  la  mort,  c'eft  pour  neant

de  enheon,  onek  atochien

[103]  fi  fort de  mourir pendant  que

de  enheon t'affon

ment nous  n'auons  point  d'efprit,

te  onediont:
qu'au  ciel  on  va

aronhiae haient

precifement

aat


me  temps

noe

Nous  fommes  femblables

To  itochien  iotti

pendant  que  nous  viuons :

d'aff  on  aiondhai :

ceux  qui  vont  en  traite
ichien  d'onnonches:

fi  on  fe  refioiiit,

aontones,

voila

onne


feulement

itochien

bout

dionhia

en  deuroit il  arriuer

haiab'ank

mourir, on  deuroit  penfer

aiaenrhon

ie  feray  au  bout


quand  on  eft  fur  le  retour:

onne  tfaoonhaKe:
que  nous  allons  arriuer,
tfonaonhaK,

de  nos  fouff ranees:
nonatonnhontaionan :


que  nous  craignons

ti  aSatandiK

nous  viuons: veritable-

adiodhai: 6  ichie

en  mefme  temps

to  haonoe  ichie

en  mef-

to  hao-

au  ciel.

de  arohiae.

a  ceux  qui  vont  en  traite,

d'aononches,

ils  fouffrent  continuellement

te  hotonhontai'onach

ie  vous  laiff e  a  penfer

aioehron  ati

on  penfe

aenrhai


lors  que  l'on  meurt,

d'onna  aihei,

on  eft  heureux
aionkb'afta


nous  voicy  au

onne  abe-

de  mefme

to  ati


lors  que  l'on  eft  fur  le  poinct  de

don'ontaiheonche,

feulement  tout  maintenant


itochien
de  me  peines.


eendionhia

mon  fentiment

daie  nendi  hib'aendionrbten

Dieu:  en  fin  done

dio Dib : onne  ichien


d'atonnhontaionach.


ie  ne  crains  plus

tesKatadiK


onba  toat

Voila

Kon-

Seigneur

de  chiben-

la  mort,

enheo


1641-42]


RELA  TION  OF  1640-41


263


clings  less

nonste

Ah! truly

Ou ! ichien

death ;

de  enheon,

[103]  so  greatly


to  life  when  one  is  in  affliction.

d'aondhai  d'aotetsirati.

it  is  no  longer  a  thing  to  be  feared,

teskandoron

it  is  for  naught  that  we  fear

onek  atochien  ti  awatandik

to  die,  while we  are  living ;  tru-


iy


de  enheon t'asson  adiondhai : 6  ichien

we  have  no  mind:  for  at  the  moment


one  goes
haient


precisely

aat


te  onediont

that  to  heaven

aronhiae

moment

noe

We  are  like

To  itochien  iotti

while  we  are  living :

d'asson  aiondhai:

those  who  go  to  trade.
ichien d'onnonches:
if  one  be  happy,

aontones,

only,  "Look,

itochien onne

end

dionhia
ought  it  to  be


to  haonoe  ichien

when  one  dies,  at  that

d'onna  aihei, to  hao-

one  is  happy  in  heaven.

aionkwasta de  aronhiae.

those  who  go  to  trade,

d'aononches,

they  suffer  continually

te  hontonnhontaionach

I  leave  you  to  imagine

aioehron  ati

one  thinks

aenrhai

see,  we  are  at  the

onne  awen-

Thus

to  ati

when  one  is  at  the  point  of

don'ontaiheonche,

"Now

onwa  toat

These  are


when  one  is  returning  home :

onne  tsaoonhake:

we  are  going  to  arrive ;

tsonaonhak,

of  our  sufferings."
nonatonnhontaionan


haiawank

death ; one  ought  to  think  only,

aiaenrhon  itochien

I  shall  be  at  the  end  of  my  trials. ' '

eendionhia  d'atonnhontaionach.

my  thoughts,

daie  nendi  hiwaendionrouten

God :  at  last,  now  I  no  longer  fear

dio  Diou : onne  ichien  teskatandik


Kon-

Lord

de  chiwen-

death.

enheon


264  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE' SUITES [Vol.21

-r—

ie  me  refioUiray  quand  ie  feray fur  le poindt  de

eatones  ichien  de  K'iheonche.

[104]  mourir. Ie  ne  veux  pas  m'afniger  m'at-

Teb'aftato  eatonhontaiona eb'a-

triftant  pour  la  mort  de  quelqu'vn  de  mes

endionrachenK de  eathei  de  KennohoK,

proches, ie  penferay  feulement,  il  en  difpofe

eerhon  itochien, hendionran de

Dieu,  il aura  deffein  qu'ils  partent,  qu'en Pa-

Di8, eherhon  ichien aionrasKb'a,  aron-

radis  lis  aillent, &  pour  moy ie  penferay feu-

hiae  ichien haient, endi-de  eerho ichie,

lement,  grandement  il  les  airae,  puis  qu'il  a  voulu

anderakti faonnonhb'e,  de  hab'eri,

qu'ils  partent,  &  que  parfaidtement  ils  foient  heureux.

ahonrasKb'a,  anderadti  ahonKb'afta.


1641-42]  R  EL  A  TION  OF  1640  -41  265

I  shall  rejoice  when  I  am  at  the  point  of

eatones  ichien  de  k'iheonche.

[104] death.  I  will  not  mourn  and  be

Tewastato eatonnhontaiona ewa-

sad  at  the  death  of  any  of  my

endionrachenk  de  eathei  de  kennonhonk,

relatives; I  will  consider  only,  "  It  is  ordered

eerhon itochien, hendionran de

by  God ; he  intends that  they  should  depart, that  to  Par-

Diou, eherhon  ichien aionraskwa,  aron-

adise  they  may  go. ' '  And,  for  myself,  I  shall  think  on-

hiae  ichien haient,  endi-de eerhon ichien,

ly,  "  How  greatly  he  loves  them,  since  he  has  willed

anderakti saonnonhwe,  de  haweri,

that  they  should  depart, and  that  perfectly they  should  be  happy !"

ahonraskwa,  anderacti  ahonkwasta.


XLV  — XLVII
Miscellaneous  Documents,  1642

XLV. —  Lettre  du  P.  Charles  Lalemant  au  P.  Etienne  Char-
let,  a  Rome ;  Paris,  28  fevrier,  1642

XLVI. —  Lettre  du  P.  Charles  Gamier  a  son  Frere  ; des
Hurons,  22e  may,  1642

XLVII. —  Memoire  touchant  les  Domestiques  ;  [par  Hierosme
Lalemant,  1642]


SOURCE:  Document  XLV.,  we  obtain  from  Rochemon-
teix's  Jtsaites  et  la  Nonvelle-France,  ii.,  pp.  470,  471.
No.  XLVI.  is  from  a  contemporary  copy  of  the  original.  No.
XLVII.  is  from  a  copy  by  Rev.  Thomas  Hughes,  S.J.,  of  the
original,  ex  MSS.  Soc.  Jes.  —  this  being,  so  far  as  we  are
aware,  the  first  publication  of  the  document.


268  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


[470]  Lettre  du  P.  Charles  Lalemant  au  P.  Etienne

Charlet,  Assistant  de  France

a  Rome.

Paris,  28  feVrier  1642.

M0NR-P"

J'ai  re9u  celle  qu'il  a  plu  a  V.  R.  de  m'es-
crire  en  faveur  des  affaires  pour  lesquelles  le  P.  Le
Jeune  est  verm  faire  un  tour  en  ce  pais.  Or,  quoique
toutes  les  affaires  de  la  Nouvelle- France  me  soient
extremement  recommandees,  si  est-il  vrai  que  ce
que  votre  R.  m'en  escrit,  augmente  beaucoup  mon
affection,  suivant  laquelle  je  n'ai  pas  manque  de  l'as-
sister.  II  a  obtenu  dix  mille  escus  pour  envoyer  des
hommes  par  de  la,  afin  de  fortifier  contre  les  Iroquois
et  empescher  leurs  courses.  II  eut  bien  encore  de-
sire un  secours  plus  puissant  pour  chasser  ceux  qui
entretiennent  les  dits  iroquois  dans  cette  guerre,  en
leur  fournissant  des  armes  a  feu,  mais  cette  entre-
prise  a  este  jugee  tres  hasardeuse:  i°  parce  qu'on
ne  sait  pas  leurs  forces ;  20  quand  on  les  scauroit,  il
faudrait  une  somme  notable  pour  fournir  a  la  des-
pense  des  hommes  et  des  vaisseaux  qui  seront  n6ces-
saires  a  ce  dessein ;  30  apres  tout  cela,  on  ne  seroit
pas  asseure*  de  l'emporter,  et  si  le  coup  manquait,
voila.  une  grande  despense  que  nous  aurions  faict  au
Roy  sans  aucun  succez,  ce  qui  feroit  que  nous  ne
serions  plus  ouis, lorsque  nous  aurions  besoing  de


1641-42]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  CHARLET  269


[470]  Letter  from Father  Charles Lalemant,  to

Father  Etienne  Charlet,  Assistant

of  France  at  Rome.

Paris,  February  28th,  1642.

My  Reverend  Father,
Pax  Christi.
I  have  received  what  it  has  pleased  Your
Reverence  to  write  me  in  favor  of  the  affairs  for
which  Father  Le  Jeune  has  just  made  a  journey  to
this  country.19  Now,  although  I  am  extremely  inter-
ested in  all  the  affairs  of  New  France,  yet  it  is  true
that  what  your  Reverence  has  written  me  about  these
greatly  increases  my  affection,  according  to  which  I
have  not  failed  to  assist  him.  He  has  obtained  ten
thousand  ecus,  with  which  to  send  men  over  there  to
fortify  against  the  Iroquois,  and  prevent  their  incur-
sions. Indeed,  he  would  also  have  desired  more
effectual  assistance,  in  order  to  drive  away  those  who
are  sustaining  the  said  iroquois  in  this  war,  and  fur-
nishing them  with  firearms.  But  this  enterprise  has
been  deemed  very  hazardous:  1st,  because  their
strength  is  not  known.  2nd,  if  it  were  known,  a
considerable  sum  would  be  needed  to  defray  the  ex-
penses of  the  men  and  ships  that  would  be  necessary
for  this  purpose.  3rd,  after  all  that,  we  would  not
be  certain  of  prevailing  over  them;  and,  if  the  at-
tempt failed,  what  great  outlays  we  would  cause  the
King  without  gaining  anything,  which  would  result
in our  not  being  listened  to  when  we  might  need


270  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

quelque  secours  plus  aise;  40  je  veux  que  nous  em-
portions  la  place  par  force;  je  demande  apres  cela,
qui  est-ce  qui  asseurera  nos  flottes  contre  ceux  qui
auront  este  chassez,  et  mesme  le  pais  qu'ils  tasche-
ront  de  surprendre  comme  nous  les  aurons  surpris:
et  est  a  remarquer  que  c'est  la  Compagnie  [471]  des
Indes  qui  tient  la  cette  habitation,  qui  s'en  ressentirait
si  on  l'avait  enlevee;  50  si  le  coup  manque,  cela  ne
laissera  pas  de  les  animer  contre  ceux  de  Kebec  et
fourniront  plus  que  jamais  des  armes  aux  Iroquois  et
se  pourront  bien  joindre  a  eux  pour  nous  faire  du
mal  dans  le  pais ;  6°  quelle  assurance  certaine  avons-
nous  que  cela  obligera  les  Iroquois  de  faire  la  paix
avec  nos  sauvages ;  et  pourtant,  c'est  sur  l'asseurance
de  cette  paix  que  tout  ce  dessein  est  basty.  Or,  on
demande  si  sur  cette  seule  esperance  dont  nous
n'avons  pas  d'asseurance,  on  doibt  faire  une  despense
certaine  d'une  si  grande  somme  necessaire  pour  ce
dessein,  et  s'exposer  dans  les  dangers  ci  dessus
remarquez.  Je  prierais  volontiers  votre  R.  de  me
faire  escrire  son  sentiment  la  dessus  et  arm  qu'elle
puisse  mieux  le  donner,  voicy  les  raisons  que  le  P.
Le  Jeune  produit  pour  poursuivre  l'entreprise.

Si  on  ne  chasse  ces  gens  la  par  composition  ou  par
armes  le  pais  est  toujours  en  danger  de  ruine,  la
mission  en  danger  de  se  rompre,  les  religieuses  en
danger  de  retour  et  la  colonie  se  peut  perdre,  la  porte
de  l'evangile  est  fermee  a  quantity  de  nations  fort
peuplees,  nos  peres  dans  les  perils  d'estre  pris  et
brulez.

II  y  a  esperance  qu'on  les  peut  chasser,  M.  de
Noyers  lui  a  faict  esperer  comme  de  la  part  de  Mon-
seigneur  le  Cardinal,  et  a  comme  donne  parole  qu'on


1641-42]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  CHAR  LET  271

some  lesser  help.  4th,  I  grant  that  we  might  take
the  place  by  force;  I  ask,  after  that  is  done,  who
will  secure  our  fleets  against  those  that  have  been
driven  away,  and  likewise  the  country,  which  they
will  try  to  surprise  as  we  shall  have  surprised  them?
And  it  is  to  be  observed  that  it  is  the  Company  [471]
of  the  Indies20  that  occupies  the  settlement  there,
and  that  would  resent  it  if  that  were  removed.  5th,
if  the  attempt  failed,  that  would  certainly  incite
them  against  the  people  of  Kebec,  and  they  would
furnish  more  arms  than  ever  to  the  Iroquois;  they
might,  indeed,  join  with  them  to  do  us  harm  in  the
country.  6th,  what  certainty  have  we  that  that  will
oblige  the  Iroquois  to  make  peace  with  our  savages?
and  yet  it  is  upon  the  assurance  of  such  peace  that
this  whole  project  is  founded.  Now  we  ask  if,  upon
this  hope  alone,  of  the  fulfillment  of  which  we  have
no  certainty,  we  should  make  a  definite  outlay  of  so
great  a  sum  as  is  necessary  for  this  purpose,  and
should  expose  ourselves  to  the  dangers  mentioned
above?  I  would  like  to  request  your  Reverence  to
have  your  opinion  of  this  matter  written  to  me ;  and,
in  order  that  you  may  better  give  it,  here  are  the
arguments  that  Father  Le  Jeune  urges  in  favor  of
undertaking  the  enterprise :

If  these  people  are  not  driven  away  by  making
terms  with  them,  or  by  force  of  arms,  the  country  is
always  in  danger  of  being  ruined,  the  mission  of  be-
ing broken  up,  the  nuns  of  returning,  and  the  colony
of  being  destroyed ;  the  door  of  the  gospel  is  closed
to  many  very  populous  nations,  and  our  fathers  are
in  peril  of  being  taken  and  burned.

There  is  hope  that  they  can  be  driven  away.
Monsieur  de  Noyers  has  encouraged  him  to  expect,


272  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

donnera  ce  qu'il  faut  pour  les  chasser,  pourveu  que
leurs  forces  ne  soient  pas  excessives.

De  composition  il  n'y  a  point  d'apparence,  car  on
lui  a  dit  qu'il  n'en  fallait  point  attendre,  d'autant
que  c'estoient  des  Arabes;  il  fault  done  y  aller  par
force. Voila  ses  raisons.

Je  prie  done  V.  R.  de  me  faire  escrire  la  dessus
son  sentiment.


1641-42]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  CHARLET  273

as  if  on  the  authority  of  Monseigneur  the  Cardinal,
and  has  almost  promised,  that  whatever  is  necessary
to  expel  them  will  be  given,  provided  their  forces
are  not  too  great.

Of  making  terms  with  them  there  is  no  prospect, —
for  he  was  told  that  it  could  not  be  expected  from
them,  inasmuch  as  they  were  Arabs ;  therefore,  force
must  be  used  with  them. These  are  his  arguments.

I  pray  Your  Reverence,  then,  to  have  your  opinion
of  this  matter  written  to  me.


274  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21


Lettre  du  P.  Charles  Gamier  a  son  Frere.

MON  TRES  CHER  FRERE,
La  paix  de  N.  S.  J.  C.  soit  auec  vo
Ce  Me  fut  vne  affliction  enuoyee  du  Ciel
quand  j  appris  Tan  passe  an  mois  de  septembre  que
la  letre  que  je  vo  auois  ecri  pendant  lete  etoit  arriuee
a  quebec  auec  plusieurs  autres  apres  le  depart  des
Vaisseaux  po  retourner  en  f ranee:  Mais  il  me  fut
d'autant  plus  facil  de  me  resigner  a  la  Volont6  de
Dieu  que  j'estois  assure  que  je  n'auois  peu  faire  mes
letres  ny  les  Enuoyer  plus  tost  j'espere  que  N.  S.
aura  suplee  abondam1.  par  soy  meme  a  la  Consolaon
qu'il  vo  eut  donne  par  mes  letres  puisque  vous  dites
qu'il  s'en  sert  d'ordinaire  po  vo  en  donner  j'espere
que  Cette  letre  se  joindre  a  quebec  a  Celle  que  je
vous  ecriuais  l'an  passe  et  pour  repondre  premiere-
ment  a  Celle  que  je  recu  de  Vous  l'ete  dernier  datt£e
a  Falaix  Le  4e.  de  Mars.  Continuez  je  vo  en  prie  de
plus  en  plus  a  benir  dieu  des  graces  qu'il  ma  fait  et
me  Continue  de  faire  de  Jour  en  jours  C  est  un  des
principaux  tesmoignages  que  vous  me  puissiez  don-
ner de  votre  Amour  en  mon  endroit  ou  pour  mieux
dire  puisqu'il  ny  a  rien  a  separer  entre  nous  deux,  et
que  no  ne  sommes  q'un  Cceur,  Cest  un  tres  Sl.  et
tres  profitable  entretien  po  nous  que  de  remercier
dieu  Continuellem1  des  faueurs  qe.  no  a  fait.  Car  Je
Les  regardes  Commune  a  lun  et  a  lAutre.

II  ny  a  que  mes  peschez  et  mes  Ingratitudes  et  mes


1641-42]  GARNIER TO  HIS  BROTHER  275


Letter  from  Father  Charles  Gamier  to  his  Brother.

MY  DEAREST  BROTHER,
The  peace  of  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be
with  you.
It  was  a  Heaven-sent  affliction  to  Me  when  I
learned,  in  the  month  of  September  last  year,  that
the  letter  which  I  had  written  to  you  during  the  sum-
mer had  reached  quebec,  with  several  others,  after
the  departure  of  the  Vessels  returning  to  france ;  But
it  was  all  the  easier  for  me  to  resign  myself  to  the
Will  of  God,  because  I  was  sure  that  I  had  not  been
able  to  write  my  letters  or  Send  them  sooner.  I
hope  that  Our  Lord  will  have  abundantly  compen-
sated, through  himself,  for  the  Consolation  which  he
might  have  given  you  through  my  letters,  since  you
say  that  he  commonly  uses  them  to  afford  you  some.
I  hope  that  This  letter  will  join,  at  quebec,  That
which  I  wrote  to  you  last  year,  and  so  as  to  answer
first  That  which  I  received  from  You  last  summer,
dated  at  Falaix  The  4th  of  March.  Continue,  I  beg
you,  more  and  more  to  bless  God  for  the  favors  that
he  has  shown  me,  and  Continues  to  show  me  from
Day  to  day.  It  is  one  of  the  principal  testimonies
that  you  can  give  me  of  your  Love  toward  me ;  or  to
speak  more  correctly,  since  there  is  nothing  to  sepa-
rate us  two,  and  since  we  are  but  one  Heart,  It  is
a  very  Holy  and  very  profitable  converse  for  us  to
thank  God  Continually  for  the  favors  that  he  has
bestowed  on  us.  For  I  regard  Them  as  Common  to
us  Both.


276  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

Infidelitez  Continuelles  aux  quelles  Vous  n'auez  point
de  part  je  vous  supplie  neamoins  de  tout  mon  Coeur
dy  enprendre  par  charite"  non  pas  vous  en  chargeant,
mais  Vous  tenant  oblige  de  faire  des  Efforts  Conti-
nued po  les  Aneantir  par  vos  SS.  SS.  prieres  &c  et
je  Vo  puis  assurer  qu'en  Ce  faisant  vo  auancez  bien
la  gloire  de  Dieu  dans  les  Hurons.  Car  dieu  m'ay-
ant  donne  par  sa  bonte  quelques  Auantages  de  grace
et  de  nature  po  le  seruir  en  Cette  Mission,  je  suis
assure  qe  l'abbus  qe  je  fais  de  Ses  Graces  et  la  negli-
gence qe  j'apport  a  son  Sl.  seruice  empesche  gran-
dem1.  un  employ  fructueux  du  Talent  quil  ma  donne"
Au  reste  mon  cher  frere  je  Vous  prie  de  traiter  dou-
cem'.  Votre  Coeur  et  ne  jamais  l'humilier  par  la  Con-
sideration de  Vos  imperfections  qu'en  mesme  terns
Vous  ne  le  releuiez  par  une  Confiance  nlialle  en
notre  bon  Mre.  mais  j'espere  receuoir  Cette  Annee  de
Vos  letres  par  lesquelles  vous  me  mendrez  que  N.  S.
a  mis  Votre  Coeur  dans  un  estat  de  Consistance  et  de
fermete,  je  le  prie  quil  y  mette  le  mien  Au  plutost.
je  me  suis  apperceu  par  la  grace  De  Dieu  q'une  des
choses  qui  m'empeschoit  de  seruir  Dieu  etoit  que  Je
demandois  trop  de  moy  meme  et  qe  dans  les  desseins
que  je  me  formois  je  regardois  plutost  Ce  qui  m'e-
toit  a  desirer,  qu'a  entreprendre  et  que  je  n'auois  pas
assez  d'Egard  a  l'etat  de  perfection  et  de  Vertu  ou
j'estois,  et  a  la  mesure  de  la  grace  que  dieu  me  don-
noit  sans  doute  je  Croy  qu'il  y  faudroit  bien  Auoir
egard,  et  quil  ne  faudroit  pas  deuancer  1 'unique
guide  de  nos  Coeurs  si  je  pouuois  receuoir  de  N.  S.
quelque  bon  mot  po  votre  bien  et  po  votre  Consola-
tion je  vous  le  dirois  de  fort  bon  Coeur  par  ceque  vo
le  voulez  mais  quoy  que  Ce  sera  quand  il  plaira  a


1641-42]  GARNIER  TO  HIS  BROTHER  277

It  is  only  my  sins,  and  my  Ingratitude,  and  my
Continual  Unfaithfulness,  in  which  You  have  no
part ;  I  nevertheless  beg  you  with  all  my  Heart  to
take  some  part  therein  for  charity, — not  burdening
yourself  with  them,  but  holding  Yourself  obliged  to
make  Continual  Efforts  to  Abolish  them  by  means  of
your  Holy  Sacrifices,  prayers,  etc. ;  and  I  can  assure
You  that  by  So  doing  you  are  indeed  promoting  the
glory  of  God  among  the  Hurons.  For  God,  in  his
goodness,  having  given  me  some  Advantages  of  grace
and  nature,  to  serve  him  in  This  Mission,  I  am  sure
that  the  abuse  which  I  make  of  His  Graces,  and  the
negligence  that  I  bring  to  his  Holy  service,  greatly
hinder  a  fruitful  employment  of  the  Talent  that  he
has  given  me.  Howbeit,  my  dear  brother,  I  beg
You  to  treat  Your  Heart  gently,  and  never  to  humble
it  by  the  Survey  of  Your  imperfections  without  at
the  same  time  uplifting  it  by  a  filial  Confidence  in
our  good  Master.  But  I  hope  to  receive  letters  from
You  This  Year,  in  which  you  will  send  me  word  that
Our  Lord  has  put  Your  Heart  in  a  condition  of  Sta-
bility and  firmness;  I  pray  him  that  he  so  dispose
mine  As  soon  as  possible.  I  have  perceived,  by  the
grace  Of  God,  that  one  of  the  things  which  hindered
me  from  serving  God,  was  that  I  required  too  much
of  myself;  and  that,  in  the  plans  which  I  formed,  I
rather  considered  What  was  to  be  desired  by  me
than  to  be  undertaken ;  and  that  I  had  not  sufficient
Respect  for  the  state  of  perfection  and  Virtue  that  I
was  in,  and  for  the  measure  of  grace  which  God  was
giving  me;  undoubtedly  I  Believe  that  one  should
certainly  Consider  this,  and  not  anticipate  the  sole
guide  of  our  Hearts.  If  I  could  receive  from  Our
Lord  some  good  word  for  your  weal  and  for  your


278  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

Dieu  mais  Je  me  plains  encor  de  vous  qui  ne  me  vou-
lez  rien  mander  de  Ce  que  vo  Croyez  me  pouuoir
seruir.  etant  quitte  des  etudes  vous  auez  en  effet
plus  de  facilite  a  vous  entretenir  auec  dieu  et  moins
de  diuertissements  Dieu  dispose  tout  po  notre  bien
je  len  benis  de  tout  mon  Cceur  et  le  prie  de  vous  Con-
duire  au  point  de  perfection  ou  il  vous  appelle.  Je
vous  aduoue  p5  moy  que  j  ay  tousiours  eu  de  la  peine
a  Conceuoir  quoment  il  se  trouuoit  des  personnes
dans  de  bonnes  religions  qui  ne  trouuassent  par  le
Moyen  de  s'entretenir  soy  mesme  se  prescriuant  quel-
ques  occupations  quand  la  relligion  ne  leur  en  Impose
je  ne  scay  quels  sentiments  ont  telles  personnes  de
L'Oraison  de  la  lecture  de  la  bible  des  sts.  PP.  des
Vies  des  Saintes  et  quoy  quils  puissent  repondre
qu'ilz  ne  prennent  pas  plaisir  a  l'estude  au  moins
seroient  ils  honteux  de  repondre  qu'ils  n'ayment  l'o-
raison  et  quand  ils  en  auroient  de  l'auersion  s'y  de-
uroient  ils  s'y  adonner  vn  peu  et  au  bout  d'un  peu  de
terns  un  peu  d'auantage,  et  ainsy  faisant  je  ne  doutte
point  qu'ils  ne  vinsent  a  y  trouuer  du  Contentem1  non
habet  amaritudinem  Conversao  Illius  Pour  vo  mon
tres  cher  frere  je  vo  estime  bien  heureux  si  dieu
Vous  appelle  a  Cette  Intime  Communication  Auec
Luy  qe  s'il  vo  Jette  dans  L'Ambaras  des  affaires  je
vo  prie  prenez  bon  Courage  il  ny  a  point  de  fonction
dans  la  relligion  a  laquelle  Dieu  no  appelle  ou  no  ne
le  puissions  et  deuions  louer.  j'espere  quil  no  en
fera  la  Grace  a  tous  deux  et  quil  n5  mettra  ou  il  faut
qe.  no  soyons  ne  no  en  mettons  point  en  peine  soit  que
vo  soyez  ou  Auec  sl.  Pierre  ou  Auec  sl.  Jean  quid  ad
te  no  suffise  que  C'est  luy  qui  no  y  mettra  p5  Ce  qui
regarde  la  demande  qe  le  sl.  Esprit  fit  po  vo  le  jour


1641-42]  GARNIER  TO  HIS  BROTHER  279

Consolation,  I  would  tell  you  it  with  very  good
Heart,  because  you  wish  it:  but  what  then?  This
will  be  when  it  shall  please  God;  but  I  still  com-
plain of  you,  who  will  send  me  no  word  of  What  you
Believe  you  can  serve  me  in.  Being  free  from  stud-
ies, you  have  in  fact  more  facility  for  conversing
with  God,  and  fewer  distractions.  God  disposes
everything  for  our  good :  I  bless  him  for  it  with  all
my  Heart,  and  pray  him  to  Lead  you  to  the  point  of
perfection  whither  he  calls  you.  I  avow  to  you,  for
my  part,  that  I  have  always  found  it  difficult  to  Con-
ceive how  there  happened  to  be  persons  in  good
religions  who  could  not  discover  the  Means  to  enter-
tain themselves  by  prescribing  to  themselves  some
occupations,  when  religion  Imposes  none  on  them.
I  know  not  what  opinions  such  persons  have  of  Pray-
er, of  the  reading  of  the  bible,  of  the  holy  Fathers,
of  the  Lives  of  the  Saints ;  and  although  they  may
answer  that  they  take  no  pleasure  in  study,  at  least
they  would  be  ashamed  to  answer  that  they  do  not
love  prayer.  And,  even  though  they  had  aversion
for  it,  they  ought  to  apply  themselves  to  it  a  little, —
and,  after  a  little  time,  a  little  more ;  and  by  so  do-
ing, I  doubt  not  that  they  would  come  to  find  Con-
tentment in  it:  non  habet  amaritudinem  Conversatio
Illius.  As  for  you,  my  dearest  brother,  I  account
you  very  happy  if  God  call  You  to  This  Intimate  Com-
munication With  Him;  and,  if  he  Cast  you  into  Per-
plexity of  business,  I  beg  you,  take  good  Courage, —
there  is  no  office  in  religion  to  which  God  calls  us,
wherein  we  cannot  and  should  not  praise  him.  I
hope  that  he  will  grant  both  of  us  the  Grace  thereto,
and  that  he  will  place  us  where  we  ought  to  be ;  let
us not trouble ourselves herein, whether you be


280  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  21

de  Votre  profession  jen  remercie  sa  diuine  Bonte  de
Ce  qu'il  vo  Confirme  dans  l'esperance  de  la  voir  ac-
complie  vn  jor.  et  je  le  prie  de  tout  mon  Cceur  quil
l'accomplise  quand  ce  sera  pr.  sa  gloire  allons  mon
cher  frere  tous  deux  au  Martyr  eamus  et  nos  et  mori-
amur  Cum  illo.  helas  C'est  en  sa  bonte  et  Miseri-
corde  que  no  mettons  toutte  notre  Confiance  quand
a  Ce  qui  est  de  vo  reuoir  encor  vne  fois  Ce  me  seroit
vne  Consolaon  bien  particuliere  mais  je  prie  Dieu
qu'il  en  face  ce  que  est  po  sa  gloire  faschons  touttes
fois  et  quand  que  no  no  Ressouuiendrons  l'un  de
1' autre  de  jetter  et  arrester  no  veiie  sur  J.  C.  Et  Cest
en  luy  que  no  trouuerons  toutte  nre  Consolaon  force
et  Vertu  Si  jauois  principalem1.  egard  a  mon  Inte-
rest je  desirerois  que  vo  R.  P.  Prouincial  Vous  enuoy-
ast  souuent  accompagner  des  Predicateurs  affin  qe  ne
dependant  point  dun  sacristain  vo  me  donnassiez  plus
de  part  a  vos  sts.  SS.  Je  Vous  remercie  bien  fort  de
Ceque  Vo  lauez  fait  Comme  vous  me  le  demandez
Continuons  a  prier  po  le  pauure  Enfant  prodigue  il
est  Vray  qu'il  me  fait  grandissime  Compassion  il  me
mande  qu'il  a  ete  fort  Console  de  mes  letres  et  qu'il
les  a  lu  et  relu  po  s'entretenir  plus  longtems  dans
les  pensees  de  mes  bonnes  Instructions  et  ouurir  la
porte  de  son  Cceur  a  Dieu  qu'il  s'imaginoit  parler  a
son  Ame  par  ma  bouche.  II  m'offre  son  seruice  po
m'enuoyer  tout  Ce  que  je  luy  demanderay,  je  suis
tout  a  vous  dit  il  et  tout  Ce  que  je  possede  (que  je
ne  deurois  pas  posseder  ne  desistons  pas  de  prier  et
de  faire  prier  dieu  po  luy  taschez  de  faire  que  quel-
ques  personnes  des  Votres  Continuent  de  le  Visiter
et  moy  aussy  je  tascheray  de  luy  procurer  le  meme
ma  Cousinne  Bue,  son  gendre  et  ma  Cousinne  Chau-


1641-42]  GARNIER TO  HIS  BROTHER  281

With  st.  Peter  or  With  st.  John, —  quid  ad  te  ?
Suffice  it  for  us  that  He  is  the  one  who  will  so  be-
stow us.  Concerning  the  request  which  the  holy
Ghost  made  for  you  on  the  day  of  Your  profession,
I  thank  his  divine  Goodness  for  the  Fact  that  he
Confirms  you  in  the  hope  of  seeing  it  one  day  ful-
filled ;  and  I  pray  him  with  all  my  Heart  that  he  fulfill
it  when  it  shall  be  to  his  glory.  Let  us  both  go,
my  dear  brother,  to  Martyrdom ;  eamus  et  nos  et  mori-
amur  Cum  Mo.  Alas,  It  is  in  his  goodness  and  Mercy
that  we  put  our  entire  Confidence.  As  for  seeing
you  once  again,  This  would  be  a  very  special  Con-
solation to  me :  but  I  pray  God  that  he  do  in  the
matter  what  is  for  his  glory.  Let  us  try,  at  all
events,  whenever  we  Remember  each  other,  to  direct
and  fix  our  gaze  upon  Jesus  Christ ;  And  in  him  we
shall  find  all  our  Consolation,  strength,  and  Virtue.
If  I  had  respect  mainly  to  my  own  Interest,  I  would
desire  that  your  Reverend  Father  Provincial  would
send  You  often,  to  accompany  Preachers;  so  that,
not  depending  on  a  sacristan,  you  might  give  me
more  share  in  your  holy  Sacrifices.  I  thank  You
very  much  for  having  done  so.  As  you  request  of
me,  let  us  Continue  to  pray  for  the  poor  prodigal
Child ;  it  is  True  that  he  arouses  in  me  exceeding
great  Compassion.  He  sends  me  word  that  he  has
been  much  Consoled  by  my  letters,  and  that  he  has
read  and  reread  them,  in  order  to  maintain  himself
longer  in  the  thoughts  of  my  good  Instructions,  and
to  open  the  door  of  his  Heart  to  God, —  that  he  fan-
cied that  God  spoke  to  his  Soul  through  my  lips.
He  offers  me  his  service  to  send  me  Whatever  I  shall
ask  of  him;  "I  am  wholly  yours,"  he  says,  "and
Whatever  I  possess  (which  I  ought  not  to  possess). ' '


282  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

fourneau  m'ont  Escrit  Je  leur  recriray  dieu  aydant  —
Mais  parlons  un  peu  des  Hurons  Vo  sauez  bien  que
les  Annees  precedentes  no  auions  passe  l'hiuer  a  la
Mission  des  Apostres  ou  Nation  du  Petun  et  d'autres
auoient  ete  a  la  nation  Neutre  on  Mission  des  Anees
et  que  no  Auions  entrepris  de  Cultiuer  Ces  nations
aussy  bien  qe  Celle  des  hurons  mais  Cette  annee  no
auons  seulem1.  fait  quelques  voyages  a  la  mission  des
apostres  sans  y  guere  arrester  et  auons  quitte  la  na-
tion neutre  tant  accause  qe,  le  P.  jean  de  brebeuf  qui
y  auait  ete  l'annee  precedente  est  demeure  en  hyuer
a  Quebec  Coe  par  Ceque  l'experience  no  a  appris  que
Ces  peuples  cy  ne  se  Conuertissent  qu'apres  vne
longue  et  solide  instruction,  si  bien  que  no  auons
reuny  Cet  hyuer  no  ff.  les  reduisant  a  la  Culture
Bourgs  principaux  des  Hurons  Le  P.  Mercier  et  Le
P.  Ragneau  ont  passe"  L' Hyuer  a  Instruire  le  bourg
de  L'lmmaculee  Conception  Le  R.  P.  L'allemant  et
le  P  Chaumonetle  Bourg  de  Sl.  Michel  et  de  sl.  Jean
bapt.  Le  P.  Chatelin  et  le  P.  Pijart  faisoient  des
Courses  a  quelques  bourgs  les  plus  proches  de  Cette
Maison  et  Le  P.  Le  Moyne  et  moy  avons  eu  po  par-
tage  le  bourg  de  s4.  Joseph  par  tout  no  auons  plus
concu  d'esperance  que  jamais  mais  no  Voyons  bien
que  Ce  ne  sera  pas  sans  trauail  et  longanimity  que
dieu  veut  planter  son  Eglise  en  Ces  quartiers  il  a
plu  a  sa  bonte  de  no  donner  des  Chrestiens  en  tous
Ces  bourgs  susnommez  mais  particulierem1.  dans
Celuy  de  l'lmmaculee  Conception  et  dans  Celuy  de
Sl.  Joseph  Comme  etant  les  deux  bourgs  ou  on  a  tra-
uaill6  depuis  longtems  et  meme  ou  no  auions  eu  des
residences  lespace  de  plusieurs  annees  et  po  vo  parler
plus particulierem1.  de mon occupation no allions


1641 -42J  GARNIER TO  HIS  BROTHER  283

Let  us  not  cease  to  pray  and  to  have  others  pray  to  God
for  him ;  try  to  arrange  that  some  persons  of  Yours
Continue  to  Visit  him;  and  I,  too,  will  try  to  procure
for  him  the  same.  My  Cousin  Bue,  her  son-in-law,
and  my  Cousin  Chaufourneau,  have  Written  to  me ;  I
will  write  back  to  them,  God  helping.

But  let  us  speak  a  little  of  the  Hurons.  You  know
well  that,  in  the  preceding  Years,  we  had  spent  the
winter  in  the  Mission  of  the  Apostles,  or  Nation  of
the  Tobacco ;  and  others  had  been  in  the  Neutral
nation,  or  Mission  of  the  Angels;  and  that  we  Had
undertaken  to  Cultivate  These  nations  as  well  as  That
of  the  hurons ;  but  This  year  we  have  merely  made
some  journeys  to  the  mission  of  the  apostles, — hardly
more  than  stopping  there, —  and  have  left  the  neu-
tral nation, — both  because  Father  jean  de  brebeuf,
who  had  been  there  the  year  before,  has  remained
for  the  winter  at  Quebec;  And  Because  experience
has  taught  us  that  These  peoples  become  Converted
only  after  a  long  and  solid  instruction.  Therefore
we  have  reunited  our  brethren  This  winter, — hold-
ing them  to  the  Culture  of  the  principal  Villages  of
the  Hurons.  Father  Mercier  and  Father  Ragneau
have  spent  The  Winter  in  Instructing  the  village  of
L'Immaculee  Conception;  The  Reverend  Father
L'allemant  and  Father  Chaumonot,  the  Village  of
St.  Michel,  and  that  of  st.  Jean  baptiste.  Fa-
ther Chatelin  and  Father  Pijart  made  Excursions  to
some  villages  nearest  This  House,  and  Father  Le
Moyne  and  I  had  for  our  portion  the  village  of  st.
Joseph.  Everywhere  we  have  conceived  more  hope
than  ever;  but  we  See,  indeed,  that  It  will  not  be
without  labor  and  long-suffering,  that  God  will  plant
his  Church  in  These  quarters. It  has  pleased  his


284  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES  [Vol.21

tous  les  jours  pour  instruire  quelques  chrestiens  du
bourg  de  sl.  Joseph  mais  eux  et  no  etions  priuez  de
la  Consolation  de  la  ste.  Messe  n'y  ayant  pas  de  cha-
pelle  dans  Ce  bourg  Ce  qui  no  etoit  le  plus  sensible
en  Ce  point  etoit  de  ne  pouuoir  mettre  les  chrestiens
dans  l'exercice  de  la  Deuotion  N.  S.  suscita  vn  de
Nos  chrestiens  qui  s'offrit  de  no  donner  un  bout  de
sa  Cabanne  enfermant  la  porte  par  ou  il  sortoit  et  se
resoluant  de  sortir  par  l'Autre  bout  de  sa  Cabanne
sans  doute  s*.  Joseph  no  procura  Cette  faueur  no  fimes
done  une  petitte  chapelle  a  Ce  bout  de  Cabanne  qui
porte  Le  Nom  de  s1.  Joseph  elle  fut  preste  pour  sa
f  este  no  y  auons  depuis  assemble  nos  chrestiens  auec
bien  de  la  Consolation  et  Cet  exercice  de  deuotion
leur  a  bien  serui  ils  y  venoient  po  la  plus  part  enten-
dre la  messe  tous  les  jours  et  tous  les  Samedys  ils  sy
Venoient  Confesser  reglem1.  deux  de  Nos  francois
etant  Venus  trauailler  a  Cette  Chapelle  nomme  Es-
tienne  Totihri  leur  fit  mil  Caresses  estimant  quon
luy  faisoit  une  Grande  faueur  et  Cepandant  il  n'est
pas  Croyable  de  Combien  de  Commoditez  il  se  pri-
uoit  bouchant  Ce  bout  de  sa  Cabanne  et  donnant  la
place  ou  ils  reseruoient  d' ordinaire  leur  bled  et  leur
bois  mais  j  estois  bien  aise  de  lentretenir  dans  la  pen-
see  que  Dieu  luy  faisoit  bien  de  l'honneur  et  en  effet
en  Comme  je  luy  en  dit  a  Cette  fin  que  plusieurs  per-
sonnes  en  france  auoient  employe  tout  leur  bien  a
faire  batir  des  chapelles  je  fus  bien  etonne  q'une
demye  heur  apres  Ce  bon  jeune  homme  me  vint  ap-
porter  de  la  part  de  sa  mere  la  Robe  de  Castor  dont
elle  se  Couuroit  disant  quelle  en  faisoit  present  a
Ceux  qui  trauaillent  a  la  chapelle  Cette  action  no
toucha  d'autant  plus  qe  nous  scauions  qe  Ces  pauures


1641-42]  GARNIER TO  HIS  BROTHER  285

goodness  to  give  us  Christians  in  all  Those  above-
mentioned  villages, —  but  particularly  in  That  of
rimmaculee  Conception  and  in  That  of  St.  Joseph,
As  being  the  two  villages  in  which  we  have  worked  for
a  long  time,  and  in  which  we  even  had  had  residences
during  several  years.  Now  to  tell  you  more  especially
of  my  own  occupation,  we  went  every  day  to  instruct
some  christians  of  the  village  of  St.  Joseph;  but
they  and  we  were  deprived  of  the  Consolation  of  holy
Mass,  there  being  no  chapel  in  This  village.  What
we  felt  most  deeply  in  This  matter  was  that  we  could
not  practice  the  christians  in  the  exercise  of  Devo-
tion. Our  Lord  raised  up  one  of  Our  christians,  who
offered  to  give  us  one  end  of  his  Cabin, —  closing  the
door  by  which  he  went  out,  and  resolving  to  go  out
through  the  Other  end  of  his  Cabin;  no  doubt  st.
Joseph  procured  us  This  favor.  We  then  built  a
little  chapel  at  That  Cabin's  end,  which  bears  The
Name  of  st.  Joseph;  it  was  ready  for  his  feast.
We  have  since  then  assembled  our  christians  with
much  Consolation,  and  This  exercise  of  devotion  has
served  them  well.  They  came  to  it,  for  the  most
part,  to  hear  mass  every  day;  and  every  Saturday
they  Came  thither  to  regular  Confession.  Two  of
Our  frenchmen  having  Come  to  work  at  This  Chapel,
one  Estienne  Totihri  showed  them  a  thousand
Courtesies,  thinking  that  they  did  him  a  Great  favor;
and  Yet  it  is  Incredible,  how  Many  Conveniences  he
deprived  himself  of,  by  closing  That  end  of  his  Cab-
in, and  giving  the  place  in  which  they  usually  stored
their  corn  and  their  wood.  But  I  was  very  glad  to
maintain  him  in  the  thought  that  God  did  him  much
honor;  and  in  fact,  When  I  told  him,  to  This  end,
that  several  persons  in  france  had  employed  all  their


286  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jlSUITES  [Vol.21

Gens  etoient  fort  mal  Couuerts  et  qu'il  faisoit  bien
froid  no  luy  tesmoignasmes  que  Dieu  prenoit  plaisir
auoir  leur  bonne  volonte"  et  leur  rendisme  leur  Robe
Cette  famille  no  donne  bien  de  la  Consolaon  elle  Com-
prend  le  dit  etienne  sa  femme  Madeleine,  sa  mere
Christienne  et  Vn  jeune  Homme  frere  d'Estienne  qui
fut  Batise  a  Pasques  et  nomme  Paul  J'oubliois  de
parler  de  la  petitte  fille  d'Estienne  nomme  Catherine
elle  na  que  deux  Ans  et  fait  jolim*.  le  signe  de  la
Croix  et  prend  elle  meme  de  l'Eau  benite  et  Vne
fois  se  mit  a  Crier  sortant  de  la  chapelle  accause  que
sa  mere  qui  la  portoit  ne  luy  auoit  donne  le  loisir  d'en
prendre  il  la  f allut  reporter  en  prendre  le  bon  etienne
et  sa  femme  et  son  frere  scauent  fort  bien  leurs  pri-
eres  et  leur  Cathechisme  et  en  notre  absence  ils  pre-
nent  le  soin  de  faire  prier  Dieu  les  autres  chrestiens
de  Ce  bourg  qui  ne  sont  pas  encor  beaucoup  Car  Je
ne  tiens  Compte  que  des  bonnes  no  auons  encor  ba-
tise dieu  mercy  a  Pasques  vn  homme  de  Ce  bourg  de
40  Ans  nomme  Ahatsistari  II  a  receu  Le  nom  d'Eus-
tache  C'est  vn  homme  d  un  naturel  noble  et  gene-
reux  grand  guerrier  et  qui  dieu  aydant  en  attirera
apres  soy  plusieurs  s'il  Continue  bien  Comme  il  a
bien  Commence  priez  Dieu  pour  luy  et  pour  tous  les
autres  Coe  aussy  po  touttes  nos  Missions  il  y  a  plus
de  chrestiens  a  la  Conception  qua  Sl.  Joseph  et  Certes
il  y  en  a  qui  font  tres  bien  graces  a  Dieu  Le  frere  du
defunt  Joseph  qui  prit  au  bateme  lenom  de  son  frere
est  merueilleusem1.  change"  et  Auance  fort  en  Vertu
aussy  fait  sa  femme  Catherine  aussi  fait  Neueu  pierre
sa  Niece  Cecile  &c  On  batisa  l'An  passe  a  Quebec
vn  Jeune  homme  nomme  Tsondatsa  qui  etoit  alle
dans  le  Canot  du  P.  Brebeuf  lequel  fait  tres  bien  il


1641-42]  GARNIER  TO  HIS  BROTHER  287

wealth  in  having  chapels  built,  I  was  much  aston-
ished that,  a  half-hour  later,  This  good  young  man
came  to  bring  me,  on  behalf  of  his  mother,  the  Beaver
Robe  with  which  she  Covered  herself, —  saying  that
she  made  a  present  of  it  to  Those  who  work  at  the
chapel.  This  act  touched  us  the  more  because  we
knew  that  These  poor  People  were  very  poorly  Cov-
ered, and  that  it  was  very  cold  weather.  We  assured
him  that  God  took  pleasure  in  having  their  good
will,  and  we  gave  them  back  their  Robe.  This
family  gives  us  much  Consolation ;  it  Includes  the
said  etienne,  his  wife  Madeleine,  his  mother  Chris-
tienne,  and  A  young  Man,  Estienne's  brother,  who
was  Baptized  at  Easter  and  named  Paul.  I  was  for-
getting to  speak  of  Estienne's  little  daughter,  named
Catherine;  she  is  only  two  Years  old  and  prettily
makes  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  and  herself  takes  holy
Water;  and  Once  she  began  to  Cry,  on  leaving  the
chapel,  because  her  mother,  who  was  carrying  her,
had  not  given  her  leisure  to  take  some :  it  was  neces-
sary to  carry  her  back  to  get  it.  The  good  etienne,
his  wife,  and  his  brother  know  their  prayers  and
their  Catechism  very  well ;  and  in  our  absence  they
take  care  to  have  the  other  christians  of  This  village,
who  are  not  yet  many, —  For  I  make  Account  only
of  the  good  ones, —  pray  to  God.  We  further  bap-
tized at  Easter  —  thank  God  —  a  man  of  This  village
40  Years  old,  named  Ahatsistari.  He  received  The
name  of  Eustache.  He  is  a  man  of  a  noble  and  gener-
ous nature,  a  great  warrior,  and  one  who  —  God  help-
ing—  will  draw  after  him  many  others,  if  indeed  he
Continues  As  he  has  Begun ;  pray  to  God  for  him
and  for  all  the  others,  As  also  for  all  our  Missions.
There  are  more  christians  at  la  Conception  than  at


288  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

y  a  de  la  Consolation  a  l'entendre  parler  a  ses  Com-
patriotes  des  Misteres  de  notre  ste.  foy  mais  la  rela-
tions Vous  apprendra  le  Reste  et  le  tout  Car  Ce  que
Jay  ecrit  icy  nest  que  pour  Vous  donner  un  petit
Auant  goust  des  faueurs  que  N.  S.  no  fait  N.  S.  ma
fait  la  grace  de  batiser  Cette  automne  vn  petit  en-
fant Auec  des  Circonstances  qui  vous  donneront  de
la  Consolation.  Jauois  Euite  trois  batailles  au  Pere
et  a  la  mere  de  Cet  enfant  sans  pouuoir  obtenir  d'eux
la  permission  de  pouuoir  batiser  Ce  petit  moribond.
Je  m'addresse  a  fre.  Joseph  notre  bon  chrestien  et  a
vne  Certaine  Bienheureuse  du  Serron  d'ltalie  dont
le  P.  Poncet  ma  donne  des  reliques  elle  Auoit  vn
talent  de  batiser  les  Enfants  qui  sans  elle  fussent
morts  sans  batesme  je  dis  en  leur  Honneur  vne
messe  Votiue  le  lendemain  m'estant  arreste  Auec  vn
de  nos  Peres  deuant  vne  Cabanne  du  Bourg  Le  Pere
de  Cet  enfant  vint  a  sortir  de  sa  Cabanne  aportant
son  fils  sur  son  dos  qui  etoit  depuis  deux  jours  dans
vne  grande  oppression  auec  quelque  Espece  de  Raille
Cet  enfant  no  voyant  dit  a  son  Pere  Ceux  la,  son  Pere
luy  dit  que  Cestoit  des  francois  Cet  enfant  ajouta
ouy.  etant  rentre  dans  sa  Cabanne  la  pensee  luy
vint  de  no  enuoyer  guerir  p5  batiser  son  fils  et  Ce  a
loccasion  du  mot  qu  auoit  dit  Enfant  en  no  voyant  J  y
allay  le  batiser  dieu  mercy  II  mourut  la  nuit  sui-
uante  priez  le  et  tant  d'Autres  petites  Anges  qu'ils
auancent  la  Conuersion  de  leur  pays  et  quils  prient
Auec  vo  pour  moy  je  vo  prie  de  me  recommander
bien  particulierem1.  au  Prieres  des  RR  PP.  bernard
prosper  et  bertaud.  Le  R  P.  Lallem1.  le  P.  chaste-
lain  Le  P.  Pijart  et  N.  F.  Scot  se  recommande  bien


1641-42]  GARNIER  TO  HIS  BROTHER  289

St.  Joseph,  and  Certainly  there  are  some  who  do
excellently,  thanks  to  God.  The  deceased  Joseph's
brother,  who  at  his  baptism  took  his  brother's  name,
is  wonderfully  changed,  and  greatly  Advances  in
Virtue,  as  do  his  wife  Catherine,  his  Nephew  pierre,
his  Niece  Cecile,  etc.  They  baptized  at  Quebec  last
Year  a  Young  man  named  Tsondatsa,  who  had  gone
in  Father  Brebeuf's  Canoe — who  is  doing  very  well;
there  is  Consolation  in  hearing  him  speak  to  his  Fel-
low countrymen  about  the  Mysteries  of  our  holy
faith :  but  the  relation  will  apprise  You  of  the  Rest
and  of  everything.  For  What  I  have  written  here
is  only  to  give  You  a  little  Foretaste  of  the  favors
which  Our  Lord  shows  us.  Our  Lord  has  done  me
the  grace  of  baptizing,  This  autumn,  a  little  child
With  Circumstances  which  will  give  you  Consolation.
I  had  Undergone  three  battles  with  the  Father  and
the  mother  of  This  child,  without  being  able  to  ob-
tain from  them  the  permission  to  be  able  to  baptize
This  little  dying  one.  I  address  myself  to  brother
Joseph,  our  good  christian,  and  to  a  Certain  Blessed
du  Serron  in  Italy,21  of  whom  Father  Poncet  gave
me  some  relics :  she  Had  a  talent  for  baptizing  Chil-
dren who,  without  her,  would  have  died  without  bap-
tism ;  I  say  in  her  Honor  a  Votive  mass.  The  next
day,  having  stopped  With  one  of  our  Fathers  before
a  Cabin  of  the  Village,— The  Father  of  This  child
came  to  leave  his  Cabin,  carrying  his  son  on  his
back; — he  had  been  for  two  days  greatly  oppressed
with  some  Sort  of  Rattle  in  the  throat.  This  child,
seeing  us,  said  to  his  Father:  "  Those  yonder?  "  —
his  Father  told  him  that  They  were  french.  This
child  added,  "Yes."  Having  returned  to  his  Cabin
the  thought  came  to  him  to  send  and  fetch  us  to  bap-


290  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.21

fort  a  vos  Prieres  il  mont  promis  de  se  ressouuenir
de  Vo  dans  leurs  prieres Je  suis.

C.  G.

des  Hurons. ce  22e.  may  1642.

mon  tres  cher  fr.  je  vo  prie  de  me  mander  si  je  me
suis  autrefois  oblige  a  dire  quelques  messes  reglem*.
pour  no  chaque  mois  je  ne  m  en  souuiens  pas  et  je
ne  le  pourrois  pas  faire  no  perdons  icy  souuent  nos
messes  quoy  que  d'ailleurs  no  en  soyons  assez  char-
gez  je  ne  vo  parle  pas  des  C.  dont  je  vous  escriuis  il
y  a  deux  ans  po  vo  obtenir  vne  bonne  mort  et  vne
promte  deliurance  du  purgatoire  j'en  dis  quelques
fois  po  vous  quand  je  le  puis.


1641-42]  GARNIER TO  HIS  BROTHER  291

tize  his  son,  and  That  on  account  of  the  word  which
the  Child  had  said  on  seeing  us.  I  went  thither  to
baptize  him,  thank  God;  He  died  the  following  night.
Pray  to  him,  and  so  many  Other  little  Angels,  that
they  may  advance  the  Conversion  of  their  country,
and  that  they  pray  With  you  for  me.  I  beg  you  to
commend  me  very  particularly  to  the  Prayers  of  the
Reverend  Fathers  bernard,  prosper,  and  bertaud.
The  Reverend  Father  Lallemant,  Father  chastelain,
Father  Pijart,  and  Our  Brother  Scot  urgently  com-
mend themselves  to  your  Prayers ;  they  have  prom-
ised to  remember  You  in  their  prayers. I  am,

C.  G.

From  the  Hurons,  this  22nd  of  May,  1642.

My  dearest  brother,  I  beg  you  to  send  me  word
whether  I  formerly  bound  myself  to  say  any  masses
regularly  for  us  each  month.  I  do  not  remember  it,
and  I  could  not  do  so ;  we  often  lose  our  masses  here,
although  we  are  withal  quite  burdened  therewith.
I  do  not  speak  to  you  of  the  Rosaries  about  which  I
wrote  to  you  two  years  ago,  to  obtain  for  you  a  pious
death  and  a  prompt  deliverance  from  purgatory.  X
say  them  for  you  sometimes,  when  I  can  do  so.


292  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.21


+

Memoire  touchant  les  Domestiques

Qui  se  donnent  a  Nre  Compagnie
aux  Hurons.

LA  difficulte  qu'il  y  a  de  faire  monter  icy  haut,  et
encore  plus  d'y  entretenir  plusieurs  personnes,
a  toujours  fait  juger  entre  plusieurs  autres
raisons,  qu'outre  les  Ouvriers  Evangeliques  neces-
saires  pour  la  besongne  que  Dieu  nous  y  presenteroit,
le  moins  qu'on  pourroit  auoir  icy  d' autres  personnes
seroit  le  meilleur.  Et  d'autant  qu'un  Seculier  Do-
mestique  peut  faire  tout  ce  que  feroit  un  Frere  Coad-
iuteur ;  et  non  pas  un  Coadiuteur  ce  que  peut  faire
un  Domestique,  come  de  porter  et  se  servir  d'arque-
buze  &c  on  a  tousiours  differe  a  y  receuoir  des  Freres
Coadiuteurs,  et  a-on  souhaite  d'auoir  en  leur  place
des  Domestiques  Seculiers,  qui  se  donnassent  pour
le  reste  de  leur  vie  aux  seruices  de  nos  Peres  qui
sont  icy  aux  Hurons.

Le  Pere  Hierosme  Lallemant  partant  de  France
Tan  1638  traita  de  cette  affaire  auec  le  R.  P.  Provin-
cial le  feu  P.  Estienne  Binet,  et  receut  par  escrit  son
consentem*.  pour  la  reception  de  tels  Domestiques ;  et
de  plus  vne  forme  de  reception  011  Contract  civil  pour
telles  personnes,  fait  sur  vn  qui  auoit  autrefois  este"
passe  a  la  Province  de  Champagne,  et  aggree  de  N.
R.  P.  General.

Le  R.  P.  Binet  toutefois  laissa  libre  d'y  adiouter,
ou  retrancher  ce  qui  se  trouveroit  necessaire  sur  les


1641-42]  MEMOIR  ON  THE  DONNAS  293


+

Memoir  concerning  the  Domestics

Who  give  themselves  to  Our  Society
among  the  Hurons.

THE  difficulty  that  exists  in  bringing  many  per-
sons up  here,  and  still  more  in  maintaining
them,  has,  among  other  reasons,  always  made
us  judge  that,  beyond  the  Gospel  Laborers  necessary
for  the  work  that  God  should  present  to  us,  the  fewer
other  persons  we  could  have  here,  the  better.  And
inasmuch  as  a  Secular  Domestic  can  do  all  that  a
Brother  Coadjutor  would  do,  and  as  a  Coadjutor  can-
not do  what  a  Domestic  can,  such  as  carrying  loads,
using  an  arquebus,  etc.,  we  have  always  deferred
receiving  Brother  Coadjutors  here,  and  have  desired
to  have  in  their  places  Secular  Domestics,  who  would
give  themselves  for  the  rest  of  their  lives  to  the  serv-
ice of  our  Fathers  who  are  here  among  the  Hurons.

Father  Hierosme  Lallemant,  upon  leaving  France
in  the  year  1638,  discussed  this  matter  with  the  Rev-
erend Father  Provincial,  the  late  Father  Estienne
Binet,  and  received  in  writing  his  consent  for  the
reception  of  such  Domestics, —  and,  furthermore,  a
form  of  reception  or  civil  Contract  for  such  persons,
worded  according  to  one  which  had  formerly  been
granted  to  the  Province  of  Champagne,  and  accepted
by  Our Reverend  Father  General.

The  Reverend  Father  Binet,  however,  left  them
free  to  add  thereto,  or  take  away,  what  might  be
found  necessary  to  add  or  take  away  for  each  oc-


294  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  21

lieux  d'estre  adjoute  ou  retranche.  II  adjouta  qu'il
pensoit  que  le  dit  Donne  de  la  Prouince  de  Cham-
pagne auoit  fait  quelque  voeu.

Le  P.  Hierosme  Lalemant,  passant  par  Quebek,
communiqua  le  tout  au  R.  P.  Paul  le  Jeune,  pour  lors
Superieur;  qui  agrea  toute  1' affaire,  et  adiouta  de
luy  mesme,  qu'il  pensoit  qu'il  seroit  a  propos  de  leur
faire  faire  quelques  voeux ;  laissant  toutef ois  le  tout
a  ce  que  nos  Peres  des  Hurons  en  jugeroient.

Arrive  que  fut  le  P.  Hierosme  Lalemant  aux  Hu-
rons, il  proposa  1' affaire  aux  Peres  qui  y  etoient,  qui
tous  jugerent  convenable  qu'ils  fissent  quelques
voeux:  et  dautres  ne  semblerent  plus  a  propos  que
ceux  qui  se  font  d'ordinaire  a  nre  Compie.  et  condi-
tioned, comme  ceux  qui  s'y  font,  mais  avec  la  diffe-
rence essentielle  de  vceux  de  Religion  et  de  Devo-
tion, semblable  a  celle  qui  se  retrouve  aux  vceux  que
font  les  Novices  devant  la  fin  de  leur  Nouiciat ;  ou
de  quelque  Penitent,  qui  les  voudroit  faire  a  son
Confesseur.  En  suite  done  six  ou  sept  ont  ete  receus
de  cette  maniere.  Mais  quelques  vns  desirant  se
donner  d'une  facon  plus  devote  et  plus  despoiiillee,
que  celle  qui  etoit  portee  dans  le  Contract  Civil ;  vne
Forme  de  se  donner  fut  dressee,  conforme  a  leur
devotion,  laquelle  semblant  desgager  plustost  notre
Compie.  de  toute  obligation,  que  de  la  charger,  ne
sembloit  pas  deuoir  receuoir  plus  de  dimculte
qu'aucune  autre.

L'annee  1639,  fut  enuoye  en  France  le  memoire  de
tout  ce  qui  s' etoit  passe\  touchant  cet  article;  &  par
consequent  les  deux  sortes  de  se  Donner.  Et  l'an-
nee suivante  1640  lettres  sont  venues  de  la  part  des
Superieurs :  Qu'on  nageoit  pas  en  cette  affaire  deux


1641-42]  MEMOIR  ON  THE  DONNAS  295

casion.  He  added  that  he  thought  the  said  Donne  of
the  Province  of  Champagne  had  made  some  vow.

Father  Hierosme  Lalemant,  passing  through  Que-
bek,  communicated  all  this  to  Reverend  Father  Paul
le  Jeune,  at  that  time  Superior,  who  was  favorable
to  the  whole  matter,  and  added,  of  his  own  accord,
that  he  thought  it  would  be  well  to  have  them  make
some  vows, —  leaving  it  all,  however,  to  the  judg-
ment of  our  Fathers  who  are  among  the  Hurons.

When  Father  Hierosme  Lalemant  reached  the  Hu-
ron country,  he  proposed  the  matter  to  the  Fathers
who  were  there,  who  all  judged  it  proper  that  they
should  make  some  vows ;  and  none  seemed  more  suit-
able than  those  which  are  commonly  made  in  our
Society,  and  conditional,  like  those  which  are  made
therein, — but  with  the  essential  difference  between
vows  of  Religion  and  vows  of  Devotion,  similar  to
that  which  is  found  in  the  vows  made  by  Novices  be-
fore the  end  of  their  Novitiate,  or  by  some  Penitent
who  would  like  to  make  them  to  his  Confessor.  Ac-
cordingly, six  or  seven  were  afterward  received  in
this  way.  But,  as  some  desired  to  give  themselves
up  more  devotedly  and  unreservedly  than  in  the  man-
ner provided  by  the  Civil  Contract,  a  Form  of  dona-
tion was  arranged,  conformable  to  their  devotion, —
which,  appearing  rather  to  relieve  our  Society  of  all
obligation,  than  to  burden  it,  seemed  unlikely  to
encounter  more  objection  than  any  other.

In  the  year  1639,  the  relation  of  all  that  had  taken
place  regarding  this  matter  was  sent  to  France,  and
consequently  the  two  methods  of  Donation.  And  in
the  following  year,  1640,  letters  came  from  the
Superiors,  saying  that  they  did  not  in  this  affair,
approve  two  things, —  one, that  we  should  require


296  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES [Vol.21

choses.  L'vne  qu'on  leur  eut  fait  faire  des  vceux:
L'autre  que  dans  le  Contract  on  oblige  toute  nostre
Compagnie,  ou  il  neut  fallu  obliger  que  la  mission
des  Hurons  a  les  assister  le  reste  de  leurs  iours.

En  suite  done  de  ces  aduis,  on  a  premierement
dresse  le  Contract,  fait  sur  celui  qui  s'est  Donn6  le
de[r]nier,  cette  annee,  en  la  facon  qu'on  l'envoye,
lequel  on  renuoira  approuve  ou  improuve,  de  qui  il
appartient:  et  en  cas  d'improbation,  on  enuoyra
quelq3  autre  forme  de  Contract,  selon  laquelle  on
puisse  doresnauant  agir  auec  assurance,  &  stabilite,
quand  il  en  sera  besoin.  Car  pour  le  passe,  il  n'y
en  a  eu  aucun  de  fait,  qui  ne  puisse  estre  pris,  selon
qu'on  aura  agreable  de  1' interpreter,  &  ainsi  il  ne
sera  besoin  de  rien  reformer  aux  precedens.

Or  en  quelq3  facon  que  le  Contract  se  dresse,  il  sem-
ble  a  propos  d'aduertir  de  deux  choses.  La  premiere,
que  le  plus  aduantageux  et  charitable  qu'on  le  pour-
ra  faire,  pour  ceux  qui  se  donnent,  sera  le  plus  iuste,
et  le  meilleur,  et  le  plus  expedient  pour  nous ;  veu
la  necessite  que  nous  auons  de  telles  personnes,  qui
soient  d'aage  competent,  et  de  merite  selon  leur  con-
dition ;  et  la  difficult^  d'en  recouurer  icy  et  ailleurs,
pour  vn  pays  tel  que  celuy  cy.  La  seconde,  Qu'il  ne
semble  pas  raisonnable  d'obliger  a  eux  la  seule  mis-
sion des  Hurons,  mais  en  outre  toutes  celles  de  la
Nouvelle  France.

i°.  Parce  qu'ils  ne  se  donnent  pas  seulement  pour
les  Hurons,  mais  pour  le  service  des  Peres  de  toute
la  nouvelle  France ;  qui  en  eff et  par  tout  en  pourra
bien  auoir  besoin  ;  comme  dez  a  present  les  Peres  qui
sont  allez  aux  Nipissiriniens,  en  ont  ou  deuoient  auoir
un. Voyre  mesme  on  en  a  receu,  et  en  pourra-on


1641-42]  MEMOIR  ON  THE  BONNES  297

them  to  make  vows ;  the  other,  that  in  the  Contract
our  entire  Society  is  bound,  while  only  the  Huron
mission  should  have  been  bound,  to  assist  them  all
the  rest  of  their  days.

Accordingly,  after  these  advices,  the  Contract  was
drawn  up  this  year  for  the  first  time  in  the  manner
in  which  it  is  sent,  worded  with  reference  to  him
who  has  last  Given  himself ;  and  it  will  be  sent  back,
approved  or  disapproved,  by  him  to  whom  that  apper-
tains ;  and  in  case  of  disapproval,  some  other  form
of  Contract  will  be  sent,  according  to  which  we  can
henceforth  act  with  assurance  and  stability,  when
there  shall  be  need  therefor.  For,  in  regard  to  the
past,  there  has  been  none,  in  fact,  which  could  not
be  taken  according  to  the  approval  of  the  interpreter ;
and  thus  there  will  be  no  necessity  of  amending  any-
thing in  previous  contracts.

Now,  in  whatever  manner  the  Contract  is  drawn
up,  it  seems  wise  to  notice  two  considerations.  First,
that  the  more  advantageous  and  charitable  are  the
terms  that  can  be  offered  those  who  give  themselves,
the  more  just,  the  better,  and  the  more  expedient  it
will  be  for  us, —  considering  the  need  we  have  of
such  persons,  who  should  be  of  suitable  age,  and  of
a  merit  conformable  to  their  condition ;  and  the
difficulty  of  getting  them,  here  and  elsewhere,  for  a
country  such  as  this  is.  Secondly,  it  does  not  seem
reasonable  to  lay  the  Huron  mission  alone  under  obli-
gation to  them,  but  all  those  of  New  France  besides.

i  st.  Because  they  do  not  give  themselves  solely
for  the  Hurons,  but  for  the  service  of  the  Fathers  of
all  new  France,  who,  in  fact,  may  have  great  need  of
them  everywhere, — as,  at  present,  the  Fathers  who
have  gone  to  the  Nipissiriniens  have  or  ought  to  have


298  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£  SUITES [Vol.21

receuoir  la  bas  cy  aprez  qu'on  iugera  peut  estre  a
propos  de  nous  enuoyer  icy  haut ;  et  reciproquement
de  ceux  d'icy  haut,  la  bas:  auquel  cas,  se  trouueroit
vne  grande  confusion  dans  les  affaires,  si  quelques
missions  seulement  leur  estoient  obligees,  et  non  pas
toutes.

2°.  Par  ce  qu'il  ne  semble  juste,  que  de  jeunes
gens  a  la  fleur  de  leur  aage  se  donnent  a  la  Compie.,
pour  luy  rendre  en  ces  quartiers  de  meilleurs  ser-
vices, que  des  Freres  Coadiuteurs,  en  vn  pays  bar-
bare,  plein  de  tant  de  dangers  et  d'incommoditez ;  et
n'avoir  cependant  que  des  asseurances  de  leur  vie
si  foibles;  comme  seroit  quelques  aumosnes  qu'on
fait  a  quelq3  mission  particuliere,  ou  quelque  legere
fondation.  En  outre  en  ces  quartiers  les  missions
dependent  de  la  phantasie  de  nos  barbares :  Or  on  au-
roit  de  la  peine  de  se  justifier  deuant  Dieu,  et  deuant
le  monde,  s'il  falloit  renuoyer  telles  personnes,  pour
la  seule  rupture  d'vne  telle  mission.

3°.  Cette  procedure  tiendra  toutes  les  missions  de
la  Nouvelle  France  bien  plus  vnies,  quand  les  Peres
et  les  Domestiques  seront  communs  a  toutes  les  mis-
sions. Pour  ne  point  parler  des  inconueniens  de  la
Separation  de  biens  des  missions  de  la  Nouuelle
France,  qui  auec  le  temps  se  trouvera  impossible,  ou
suiette  a  de  grandes  disgraces,  et  diuorces  d'esprits
et  d' affections.

Quant  a  l'article  des  vceux,  on  a  retranche  toutes
les  ceremonies  exterieures :  comme  de  prononcer  la
forme  tout  haut,  le  iour  de  la  reception ;  Item  la
Renouation  publique  qui  s'en  faisoit;  et  le  tout  se
passe  maintenant  au  particulier  d'vn  chacun,  auec  la
direction  du  Confesseur.


1641-42]  MEMOIR  ON  THE  DONNES  299


one  of  them.  Indeed,  they  have  received  some,  and
may  receive  hereafter  some  down  there,  whom  it
may  be  judged  expedient,  perhaps,  to  send  to  us  up
here ;  and  likewise  some  of  those  up  here  may  be
sent  down  there, — in  which  case,  there  would  be  a
great  confusion  in  our  affairs  if  some  missions  alone
were  bound  to  them,  and  not  all.

2nd.  Because  it  does  not  seem  just  that  young
men  in  the  flower  of  their  youth  should  give  them-
selves to  the  Society, —  to  render  it  in  these  regions
better  service  than  Brother  Coadjutors,  in  a  barba-
rous country,  full  of  so  many  dangers  and  discom-
forts,—  and  yet  have  only  such  weak  assurances  of  a
livelihood,  as  would  be  the  alms  that  have  been
given  to  some  particular  mission,  or  some  trifling
fund.  Besides,  in  these  quarters,  the  missions  de-
pend upon  the  whims  of  our  barbarians.  Now  we
would  be  at  a  loss  to  justify  ourselves  before  God
and  before  the  world,  if  it  were  necessary  to  send
back  such  persons,  merely  on  account  of  breaking
up  a  certain  mission.

3rd.  This  plan  will  keep  all  the  missions  of  New
France  much  more  united,  if  the  Fathers  and  Domes-
tics are  common  to  all  the  missions, — not  to  speak
of  the  inconveniences  arising  from  a  Division  of  the
property  of  the  missions  of  New  France,  which  will
in  time  be  found  impossible,  or  will  be  subject  to
great  misfortunes,  or  to  diversity  of  ideas  and  inter-
ests.

As  for  the  matter  of  the  vow,  all  external  ceremo-
nies have  been  discontinued,  such  as  pronouncing
the  form  aloud  on  the  day  of  reception;  Also,  the
public  Renewal  of  it  which  they  made.  All  is  now
done  privately  by  each  one,  under  the  direction  of
his  Confessor.


300  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.21

Or  ces  voeux  particuliers  nous  sont  plus  aduanta-
geux  et  necessaires  en  ce  pays,  qu'on  ne  penseroit  de
premier  abord,  n'y  ayant  icy  aucun  moyen  de  retenir
le  monde  en  bride,  que  par  la  voye  de  la  conscience.
II  est  a  propos  de  se  representer  des  Domestiques
qui  ont  le  maniement  de  tout  le  temporel ;  et  d'autres
Domestiques  passagers,  qui  sont  a  la  maison:  auec
lesquels  aussi  bien  qu'auec  les  Sauvages  se  pourroient
passer  beaucoup  de  choses,  contre  le  bien  de  la
maison,  sans  beaucoup  de  scrupule  de  la  part  de  nos
Donnez,  s'ils  n'etoient  retenus  par  quelq3  lien  extra-
ordinaire de  conscience.  On  en  peut  facilement
apercevoir  plusieurs  autres  aduantages,  que  ie  serois
trop  long  de  deduire.

Voyla  pour  les  difficultez  du  passe.  Pour  le  futur,
on  est  en  peine  de  la  maniere  comme  on  pourra
rendre  les  Donations,  qu'ils  font,  valides;  veu  les
difficultez  survenues,  et  representees  par  Monsr.  le
Gouverneur,  en  la  donation  que  Cousture  faisoit  a  sa
mere,  de  tout  ce  qui  luy  apartenoit  en  France:  la
mesme  difficulte  se  retrouvera  encore  plus  grande,
leur  arrivant  quelq3  succession  de  nouveau,  de  la-
quelle  ils  voudront  disposer.

A  propos  de  cecy,  est  a  remarquer  que  ceux  qui  se
Donnent,  apres  auoir  signe  le  Contract  auec  le  Supe-
rieur,  font  vne  declaration  de  ce  qu'ils  ont,  et  leur
apartient,  et  de  ce  qu'ils  desirent  qu'il  en  soit  fait:
de  quoy  on  fait  vn  memoire  signe  de  la  main  de  celuy
qui  fait  cette  disposition,  qu'on  enuoye  aux  Procu-
reurs  de  Quebek  et  de  France,  pour  mettre  en  execu-
tion autant  qu'ils  le  peuuent.

[Endorsed:  Memoire  po  Les  Donnes  aux  Hurons
quand  le  Procr.  uiendra  a  la  Congron.

De  Canada,  Des  Oblats.]


1641-42]  MEMOIR  ON  THE  DONNE'S  301

Now  these  private  vows  are  more  advantageous
and  necessary  to  us  in  this  country,  than  one  would
at  first  suppose,  since  we  have  here  no  means  of  re-
straining people  except  by  way  of  conscience.  It  is
well  to  take  into  consideration  Domestics  who  have
the  management  of  temporal  matters,  and  other  tran-
sient Domestics  who  are  in  the  house, —  with  whom,
as  well  as  with  the  Savages,  many  things  could  take
place  contrary  to  the  good  of  the  house,  without
much  scruple  on  the  part  of  our  Donnes,  if  they  were
not  retained  by  some  extraordinary  bond  of  con-
science. One  can  easily  perceive  other  advantages,
which  it  would  take  me  too  long  to  enumerate.

These  were  the  difficulties  of  the  past.  As  to  the
future,  we  are  troubled  to  know  in  what  manner  the
Donations  that  they  make  can  be  rendered  valid, —
considering  the  difficulties  that  arose,  and  that  were
represented  by  Monsieur  the  Governor,  over  the
donation  that  Cousture-  made  to  his  mother  of  all
that  belonged  to  him  in  France.  The  same  difficulty
will  prove  still  greater,  if  some  new  inheritance
come  to  them,  of  which  they  shall  wish  to  dispose.

In  reference  to  this,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  those
who  Give  themselves,  after  having  signed  the  Con-
tract with  the  Superior,  make  a  declaration  of  what
they  have,  and  what  belongs  to  them,  and  of  what
they  wish  to  be  done  with  it, —  a  memorandum  of
which  is  made,  signed  by  the  hand  of  him  who  makes
this  disposition,  which  is  sent  to  the  Procurors  of
Quebek  and  of  France,  to  be  put  into  execution  as
soon  as  possible.-3

[Endorsed:  Memoir  concerning  the  Donnes,  among
the  Hurons,  when  the  Procuror  shall  come  to  the
Congregation.

From  Canada;  Of  the  Oblates.]


302  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.21

[Form  of  Contract,  accompanying  above  Docu-
ment ;  written  by  the  same  hand :]

+

Je  soubsigne  Superieur  des  Missions  de  la  Compie.
de  Jesus  aux  Hurons,  certifie  par  ces  presentes,
Que  Jean  Guerin  nous  ayant  instamment  represent^
son  desir,  de  se  consacrer  au  Service  de  Dieu  et  de
nostre  Compie.  en  se  voiiant  pour  le  reste  de  sa  vie,
au  service  de  nos  Peres  qui  sont  aux  Hurons,  et  autres
endroits  de  la  Nouuelle  France,  ainsy  qu'on  iugera
estre  pour  la  plus  grande  gloire  de  Dieu;  Iceluy
nous  ayant  donne  suffisante  preuve  de  sa  piete  et
fidelite;  Nous,  l'acceptons  par  ces  presentes,  comme
Donne,  en  qualite  de  Serviteur  Domestiq3  sa  vie  du-
rant,  pour  continuer  les  mesmes  services  que  pour  le
passe,  ou  autres  tels  qu'aviserons  bien  estre,  aux
dits  Hurons,  ou  ailleurs :  luy  promettant  de  nre  part,
de  l'entretenir  selon  sa  condition  en  son  viure  et  ves-
tir,  sans  autres  gages  ou  pretensions  de  sa  part,  et
de  le  soulager  charitablement  en  cas  de  maladie,  ius-
ques  a  la  fin  de  sa  vie,  sans  le  pouuoir  congedier  en
ce  cas,  sinon  de  son  consentement.  Pourueu  que  de
son  coste  il  continue  a  viure  auec  probite,  diligence
et  fidelite  a  nre  service,  ainsy  que  par  ces  presentes  il
promet  et  s'oblige.

Fait  a  la  Residence  fixe  de  Sainte  Marie  aux  Hu-
rons, ce

[In  the  copy  is  added :

19  de  Mars  1642.

hierosme Lalemant  (with  paraph)

Jean  Guerin]


1641-42]  MEMOIR  ON  THE  DONNE'S  303

[Form  of  Contract,  accompanying  above  Docu-
ment ;  written  by  the  same  hand :]

+

I,  the  undersigned,  Superior  of  the  Missions  of  the
Society  of  JESUS  among  the  Hurons,  certify  by  these
presents,  that  Jean  Guerin 24  having  earnestly  repre-
sented to  us  his  desire  to  consecrate  himself  to  the
Service  of  God  and  of  our  Society,  by  vowing  him-
self for  the  rest  of  his  life  to  the  service  of  our  Fa-
thers who  are  among  the  Hurons,  and  in  other  places
of  New  France,  as  shall  be  decided  to  be  for  the
greater  glory  of  God, —  the  Same  having  given  us
sufficient  proof  of  his  piety  and  fidelity:  We,  by
these  presents,  accept  him  as  Donne  in  the  capacity  of
a  Domestic  Servant  during  his  lifetime,  to  continue
in  the  same  services  as  in  the  past,  or  in  such  others
as  we  shall  deem  advisable,  among  the  said  Hurons,
or  elsewhere;  promising,  on  our  part,  to  maintain
him  according  to  his  condition  with  food  and  cloth-
ing, without  other  wages  or  claims  on  his  part,  and
to  care  for  him  kindly  in  case  of  sickness,  even  to
the  end  of  his  life,  without  being  able  to  dismiss  him
in  such  case,  except  with  his  own  consent ;  provided
that,  on  his  part,  he  continue  to  live  in  uprightness,
diligence,  and  fidelity  to  our  service,  even  as  by
these  presents  he  promises  and  binds  himself  to  do.

Done  at  the  permanent  Residence  of  Sainte  Marie
of  the  Hurons,  this  —

[In  the  copy  is  added:

19th  of  March,  1642.

hierosme Lalemant  (with paraph)

Jean  Guerin]


304  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.21

[Form  of  Donation ;  also  in  same  hand :]

+
Je  Soubsigne  declare  que  de  ma  propre  et  franche
uolonte,  ie  me  suis  donne  a  la  Compagnie  de  JESUS
pour  seruir  et  assister  de  tout  mon  pouuoir  et  Indus-
trie les  Peres  de  ladicte  Compagnie  qui  travaillent
au  salut  et  a  la  conuersion  des  ames,  et  particuliere-
ment  ceux  qui  sont  employez  a  la  conuersion  des
pauvres  sauvages  et  barbares  de  la  Nouuelle  France
aux  Hurons,  et  ce  en  telle  forme  et  habit  que  Ton
uoudra,  et  que  Ton  jugera  plus  a  propos  pour  la  plus
grande  Gloire  de  Dieu  —  sans  plus  rien  pretendre  au
monde  que  de  uiure  et  mourir  auec  lesdicts  Peres  en
quelque  part  du  monde  ou  il  Me  faille  trouuer  auec
eux,  laissant  en  leur  libre  disposition  tout  ce  qui  me
regarde  et  pouroit  appartenir  (sauf  ce  qui  se  trouu[e]ra
declare  dans  un  memoire  particulier  dresse  a  cette
fin)  sans  que  ie  desire  que  du  reste  on  en  fasse  aucun
inuentaire  desirant  tout  quitter  pour  Dieu  sans
aucune  reserue  ou  resource  que  de  Lui  mesme.  En
foy  dequoy  iay  signe  la  presente  declaration  que  ie
prie  Dieu  de  benir  et  d'auoir  pour  jamais  agreable;
Faict  a  la  Residence  de  Ste  Marie  aux  Hurons  ce  23
de  Decembre.  1639

le  Coq  [with  paraph]

Je  soubs-signe  Superieur  de  la  Mission  de  la  Com-
pagnie de  Jesus  aux  Hurons  certifle  auoir  accepte  la
susdite  donation  entant  que  besoin  est  a  ce  qu'elle
sortisse  son  plain  et  entier  effet  selon  les  formes  et


1641-42]  MEMOIR  ON  THE  DONNE'S  305

[Form  of  Donation ;  also  in  same  hand :]

+

I,  the  Undersigned,  declare  that  of  my  individual
and  free  will  I  have  given  myself  to  the  Society  of
Jesus,  to  serve  and  assist  with  all  my  power  and  dili-
gence the  Fathers  of  the  said  Society,  who  work  for
the  salvation  and  conversion  of  souls,  and  particular-
ly those  who  are  employed  in  the  conversion  of  the
poor  savages  and  barbarians  of  New  France  among
the  Hurons,  and  this  in  such  method  and  dress  as
shall  be  required,  and  as  shall  be  judged  most  suit-
able for  the  greater  Glory  of  God,  without  claiming
anything  else  whatever  except  to  live  and  die  with
the  said  Fathers  in  whatever  part  of  the  world  I  am
required  to  be  with  them ;  leaving  to  their  free  dis-
position all  that  concerns  me  and  may  belong  to  me
(except  what  shall  be  found  declared  in  a  special
memorandum  drawn  up  for  this  purpose),  without
desiring  that  any  inventory  besides  should  be  made
of  it, — wishing  to  give  up  all  for  God  without  any
reserve,  or  any  resource  except  Himself.  In  attesta-
tion of  which  I  have  signed  the  present  declaration
which  I  pray  God  to  bless  and  forever  find  accept-
able. Done  at  the  Residence  of  Ste.  Marie  of  the
Hurons,  this  23rd  of  December,  1639.

le  Coq25  [with  paraph]

I,  the  undersigned,  Superior  of  the  Mission  of  the
Society  of  Jesus  to  the  Hurons,  certify  that  I  have
accepted  the  aforesaid  donation,  insomuch  as  it  is
needful  that  it  should  have  its  full  and  entire  effect,


306  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.21

l'esprit  de  nostre  Compagnie  dont  le  susdit  donateur
a  este"  deiiement  informe.

Fait  au  mesme  Lieu  An,  et  Jour.

Hierosme  Lalemant  [with  paraph]

le  Coq  [with  paraph]


1641-42]  MEMOIR  ON  THE  DONNAS  307

according  to  the  forms  and  the  spirit  of  our  Society,
of  which  the  aforesaid  donator  has  been  duly  in-
formed.

Done  in  the  same  Place,  Year,  and  Day.

Hierosme  Lalemant  [with  paraph]

le  Coq  [with  paraph]


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA:  VOL  XXI

XLIV

For  particulars  of  this  document,  see  Vol.  XX.

XLV

Charles  Lalemant  writes  in  French  from  Paris,
February  28,  1642,  to  Father  Etienne  Charlet,  assist-
ant of  France,  at  Rome.  We  find  the  document  in
Rochemonteix's  J c  suites  et  la  Nouvelle- France,  ii.,  pp.
470,  471 ;  but  that  editor  does  not  give  the  location
of  the  original.

XLVI

In  publishing  this  letter  (written  in  the  Huron
country,  May  22,  1642)  of  Charles  Gamier  to  his
brother, —  see  reference  thereto,  in  Bibliographical
Data  to  Document  No.  XLII.,  in  Vol.  XX., —  we
follow  a  contemporary  copy,  presumably  by  a  member
of  the  Garnier  family  in  France ;  this  apograph  is  now
in  the  archives  of  St.  Mary's  College,  Montreal.  It
is  supposed  that  the  original  is  not  now  in  existence.

XLVII

This  is  a  memoir  written  by  Jerome  Lalemant, —
although  unsigned, —  apparently  in  the  year  1642.
The  original  is  in  the  domestic  archives  of  the  So-
ciety of  Jesus.  We  are  indebted  for  our  copy  thereof
to  Rev.  Rudolf  J.  Meyer,  S.J.,  assistant  to  the  Father
General,  and  to  Rev.  Thomas  Hughes,  S.J.,  who
have  added  two  brief  documents  in  the  same  chirog-
raphy,  which  are  attached  to  the  original  MS.


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XXI


(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  number  of  note,  refer  to  pages

of  English  text.)

i  (p.  23). —  For  sketch  of  Marguerie,  see  vol.  x.,  note  4.

Thomas  Godefroy,  sieur  de  Normanville,  was  a  brother  of  Jean
Godefroy  de  Linctot,  and  a  relative  of  Jean  Paul  Godefroy  (vol.  ix.,
note  4).  Like  them,  he  was  an  Indian  interpreter  under  Champlain.
During  the  English  occupation  of  the  country,  he  remained  in
Canada,  and  resided  at  Three  Rivers  from  1634  to  the  end  of  his
life.  On  the  occasion  described  in  our  text,  he  escaped  from  the
hands  of  the  Iroquois ;  but  in  the  summer  of  1652  he  was  slain  by
them,  near  Three  Rivers.

2  (p.  85). —  For  sketch  of  Marsolet,  see  vol.  v.,  note  35.

3  (p.  93). —  For  sketch  of  Duplessis-Bochart,  see  vol.  v.,  note  34.
It  has  generally  been  assumed  by  historians  that  Duplessis-Bochart
and  Duplessis-Kerbodo  were  the  same  person.  But  Suite  queries
this,  adducing  various  circumstances  which  render  it  probable  that
these  were  different  persons,  and  that  Duplessis-Kerbodot  did  not
arrive  in  Canada  until  165 1  (Bulletin  des  Recherches  Historiques,
vol.  ii.,  pp.  178-  182).

4  (p.  107). —  The  colony  of  Montreal  was  a  religious  enterprise.
Its  founders  were  Jerome  Royer  de  la  Dauversiere,  receiver  of  taxes
at  La  Fleche,  in  Anjou ;  and  Jean  Jacques  Olier,  a  young  priest  of
Paris.  To  both  these  men  came,  at  nearly  the  same  time  (about
1636),  the  idea  of  founding  a  religious  colony  at  Montreal;  uniting
their  designs,  they  formed  (1640)  an  association  of,  at  first,  but  six
members  —  a  number  increased,  within  two  years,  to  forty-five,
largely  persons  of  rank  and  wealth.  Notable  among  these  was
Madame  de  Bullion,  who  gave  42,000  livres  for  the  erection  and  sup-
port of  a  hospital  for  the  colony.  They  secured  from  the  intendant
Lauson  (vol.  vi.,  note  2)  a  grant  of  Montreal  Island  (vol.  xii.,  note
13) ;  and  in  1641  sent  thither  forty  soldiers  and  laborers,  to  begin  the
new  settlement.  These  men  were  under  the  command  of  Paul  de
Chomedey,  sieur  de  Maisonneuve,  an  experienced  soldier,  and  a  man
of  great  piety  and  courage.  He  was  accompanied  by  Mile.  Jeanne
Mance, —  a  young  woman belonging  to  an  honorable  family  of


312  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

Nogent-le-Roi,  near  Langres, —  who,  like  the  other  associates,  was
inspired  by  religious  zeal  for  the  conversion  of  the  savages.  At  their
arrival,  the  season  was  too  far  advanced  for  such  an  enterprise,  so
they  spent  the  winter  at  Quebec ;  proceeding  to  Montreal  in  the  fol-
lowing spring,  they  took  possession  of  the  island  on  May  17,  1642.
They  were  joined  by  Madame  de  la  Peltrie;  and,  in  1643,  additional
colonists  came  from  France,  under  command  of  Louis  d'Ailleboust,
The  new  settlement  was  named  Ville-Marie,  in  honor  of  the  Virgin
Mary,  to  whom  it  was  especially  dedicated.

Meanwhile,  two  religious  orders  were  founded  in  France  for  the
benefit  of  the  new  colony, —  by  Dauversiere,  at  La  Fleche,  the  Hos-
pital nuns  of  St.  Joseph;  and  by  Olier,  at  Vaugirard,  a  society  of
priests,  that  soon  developed  into  the  Seminary  of  St.  Sulpice,  in
Paris.  The  hospital  endowed  by  Madame  de  Bullion  was  built  in
1644;  and  the  nuns  of  St.  Joseph  came  to  Montreal  in  1659.  As  for
the  religious  interests  of  the  colony,  its  earliest  spiritual  advisers
were  Jesuits  from  Quebec;  but  in  May,  1657,  the  Sulpitians replaced
them.  Six  years  later,  the  Associates  of  Montreal  surrendered  the
colony  to  the  Sulpitians  (vol.  xii.,  tiote  13).

The  earliest  publication  concerning  the  foundation  of  Montreal
appeared  in  1643,  probably  at  Paris:  Les  Veritables  motifs  de
MM.  et  Dames  de  la  Societe  de  N.  D.  de  Montreal  pour  la  conver-
sion des  Sauvages  de  la  Nouvelle  France, —  a  defense  of  their
project,  called  forth  by  hostile  criticisms.  This  has  been  reprinted
(1880),  by  the  Societe  Historique  of  Montreal,  with  introduction  and
notes  by  Abbe  H.  A.  Verreau.  This  editor  regards  the  work  as  the
production  of  Olier;  but  Faillon  thinks  it  was  written  by  Laisne  de
la  Marguerie,  an  associate  of  Olier's.  Frangois  Dollier  de  Casson's
Histoire  de  Montreal  covers  the  period  1640-72;  this  MS.  was  pub-
lished, in  1871,  by  the  Literary  and  Historical  Society  of  Quebec.
The  same  society  had  published  (1840)  the  MS.  Histoire  du  Canada,
by  Abbe  de  Belmont  (superior  of  the  seminary  at  Montreal,
1713-24),  which  relates  many  particulars  of  the  early  history  of  this
city.  See  also  Faillon's  Col.  Frati.;  Parkman's  Jesuits;  Vie  de
Mademoiselle  Mance  (Paris,  1854;  2  vols.);  and  De  Launay's
Relig.  Hospit.  de  St.  Joseph.

5  (p.  107). —  Du  Marche  and  Turgis  (vol.  viii.,  notes  18,  19)  were
replaced  in  the  Miscou  mission  (1637)  by  Nicolas  Gondoin  and
Jacques  de  la  Place.  The  former  soon  returned  to  France ;  but  De
la  Place,  aided  by  Claude  Quentin,  remained  until  1640,  when  they
were  compelled,  by  illness  and  lack  of  means,  to  return  to  Quebec.
De  la  Place  must  have  gone  to  France  in  the  autumn  of  that  year ;
for  he  came  thence  with  Mile.  Mance  (note  4,  ante)  in  the  summer
of  1 641. He  was in Miscou the  following  year,  and  apparently


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XXI  313

remained  there  until  the  autumn  of  1647,  when  he  went  back  to
France;  but  in  August,  1649,  returned  to  Quebec,  where  he  labored
for  several  years.  In  November,  1653,  he  was  sent  to  Three  Rivers,
to  replace  Richard;  the  Journ.  des  Je" suites  mentions  his  arrival  at
Quebec  (August,  1657)  from  that  place,  but  it  is  uncertain  whether
he  spent  the  time  between  those  dates  at  Three  Rivers.  He
returned  to  France  Sept.  6,  1658.

The  brother  Ambroise  Brouet  is  mentioned  in  the  Relations  of
1656  and  1657  as  going  to  the  Iroquois  country.

6  (p.  109). —  Concerning  M.  de  Gand,  see  vol.  vii.,  note  22.

7  (p.  109). —  For  sketch  of  Chevalier  de  Sillery,  see  vol.  xiv.,  note  12.

8  (p.  in). — The  gifts  of  Marquis  de  Gamache  and  his  son  are
referred  to  in  vol.  vi.,  note  9.

9  (p.  117). —  Concerning  the  Abenaki  tribe,  see  vol.  xii.,  note  22;
the  Porcupine,  vol.  xiv.,  note  13;  the  others  here  mentioned,
vol.  xviii.,  notes  11,  13.

10  (p.  125). —  Regarding  the  Kiristinouns  (Crees),  see  vol.  xviii.,
note  15.

11  (p.  191). —  Concerning  the  Eries,  or  Cat  Nation,  see  vol.  viii.,
note  34,  p.  302.  Parkman  (Jesuits,  p.  xlvi)  thinks  that  this  tribe
were  the  Carantouans  of  Champlain.  He  also  says  of  the  Neutrals
(p.  xliv,  note  3):  "  They,  and  not  the  Eries,  were  the  Kahkwas  of
Seneca  tradition."  This  statement  gives  the  scope  of  a  considera-
ble controversy  among  antiquarians  as  to  the  identity  of  the
Kahkwas.  Marshall  agrees  with  Parkman;  he  says  (Niagara
Frontier,  p.  6,  note):  "  The  latter  [Eries]  lived  south  of  the  west-
ern end  of  Lake  Erie  until  they  were  destroyed  by  the  Iroquois,  in
1655.  The  Kah-kwas  were  exterminated  by  them  as  early  as  1651.
On  Coronelli's  map,  published  in  1688,  one  of  the  villages  of  the  lat-
ter, called  '  Kakouagoga,  a  destroyed  nation, '  is  located  at  or  near
the  site  of  Buffalo."

Several  other  writers  take  the  opposite  ground,  arguing  that  the
Eries  were  the  Kahkwas.  Morgan  says  (League  of  the  Iroquois,
p.  337)  that  the  Eries  were  known  to  the  Iroquois  by  the  name
Ga-qua-ga'-o-no  [o-no  signifying  merely  "the  people  at"];  that
"  they  were  an  offshoot  of  the  Iroquois  stock,  and  spoke  a  dialect  of
their  language."  He  adds:  "It  is  a  singular  fact  that  the
Neuter  Nation,  who  dwelt  on  the  banks  of  the  Niagara  river,  and
who  were  expelled  by  the  Iroquois  about  the  year  1643,  were
known  among  them  as  the  Je-go'-sa-sa,  or  Cat  Nation.  The  word
signifies  '  a  wild  cat  ; '  and,  from  being  the  name  of  a  woman  of  great
influence  among  them,  it  came  to  be  the  name  of  the  nation."  Cf.
Schoolcraft,  Notes  on  the  Iroquois  (N.  Y.,  1846),  pp.  176-179,  221;


314


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES


he  narrates  (as  told  him  by  an  Alleghany  chief,  Ha-yek-dyoh-kunh
—  called  by  the  English  "  Jacob  Blacksnake  ")  the  tradition  of  the
final  contest  between  the  Senecas  and  Kahkwas.  This  chief  "  stated
that  the  Kah-Kwahs  had  their  chief  residence,  at  the  time  of  their
final  defeat,  on  the  Eighteen-mile  creek.  The  name  by  which  he
referred  to  them,  in  this  last  place  of  their  residence,  might  be  writ-
ten perhaps  with  more  exactitude  to  the  native  tongue,  Gah-Gwah-
ge-o-nuh. " Cf.  vol.  viii.,  of  this  series,  note  41.

J.  G.  Henderson,  of  Chicago,  after  referring  to  above  citations,
and  to  Coronelli's  map,  writes  us  as  follows:  "On  another  map,
'  without  title  or  maker's  name,'  which  Parkman  thinks  was  of  date
about  1673  {La  Salle,  p.  452), —  but  evidently  of  later  date,  because
the  Ohio  is  laid  down  as  entering  the  Mississippi,  a  fact  not  known
until  a  later  period, —  at  the  east  end  of  Lake  Erie  we  find  the
'  Kakouagoga,  a  nation  destroyed '  (Winsor's  Narr.  and  Crit.
Hist.,  vol.  iv.,  pp.  215,  217).  So  far  as  I  know,  this  Kakouagoga  of
Coronelli's  map  (1688),  and  the  same  name  and  legend  found  on  the
anonymous  map  above  referred  to,  are  the  only  instances  where  the
Kah-kwas  are  mentioned  under  that  name  upon  any  map.  A  strong
argument  for  the  identity  of  this  tribe  with  the  Eries  is  found  in  the
Indian  name  of  Eighteen  Mile  Creek,  a  small  stream  entering  Lake
Erie  southwest  of  Buffalo.  Marshall  {Niagara  Frontier,  p.  35)
gives  its  Seneca  name  as  Gah-gwah-ge'-gd-aa/z,  '  the  residence  of
the  Kah-kwas.'  In  a  document  executed  by  the  Senecas  in  1797,  the
name  of  this  stream  is  given  as  Koghquauga  { U.  S.  Statutes  at
Large,  vol.  vii.,  p.  602);  and,  in  a  treaty  with  the  Senecas  in  1802,
we  find  it  written  Kogh-quaw-gu  {Id.,  p.  71).  Morgan  also  gives
the  Seneca  name  of  Caugwaga  Creek,  Erie  county,  N.  Y.,  as  Ga-
gwa-ga,  '  the  creek  of  the  Cat  Nation ; '  and  an  Indian  village  in
Cattaraugus  county  as  Ga-qua  -ga-o-no  Wa-a'-guen-ne-yuh,  '  the  trail
of  the  Eries'  {League  of  the  Iroquois,  p.  466).  This  village  must
have  been  thus  named  because  it  was  on  the  ancient  trail  leading
from  the  Senecas  to  the  Kahkwas.  A  careful  examination  of  all
available  data  shows  that  the  home  of  the  Eries  was  south  of  Lake
Erie,  bordering  on  the  lake ;  and  it  is  highly  probable  that  Eighteen
Mile  Creek  —  the  Kogh-quaw-gu  of  the  Senecas  —  marked  the  east-
ern limit  of  their  territory,  while  the  Neutrals  occupied  the  north
side  of  the  lake, —  their  territory  extending,  perhaps,  across  the
Niagara  river,  but  never  stretching  around  the  end  of  the  lake
westward.  But  it  is  possible,  after  all,  that  the  term  Kah-kwas
was  applied  alike  to  both  the  Neuters  and  Eries.  Morgan  states
elsewhere  that  '  it  seems  probable  that  the  two  were  bands  of  the
same  nation ; '  and  he  adds  that  both  the  Eries  and  Neutrals  spoke
dialects  so  near  the  Seneca,  that  the  three  could  understand  one


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XXI  315

another's  speech  (Systems  of  Cojisanguinity,  p.  152).  Indeed,  he
suggests  that  the  Cakwas  or  Eries,  are  supposed  to  have  been  a
subdivision  of  the  Senecas  (Indian  Miscellanies,  p.  227).  The
term  Attiwandaronk  —  signifying  '  those  who  speak  a  somewhat
different  language'  —  was  applied  to  the  Neuters  by  the  Hurons,
and  vice  versa;  and  this  name  would  be  equally  applicable  to  the
Eries,  from  either  a  Huron  or  Seneca  standpoint.  Considering  also
their  other  appellation,  'the  Cat  Nation,'  it  is  certainly  a  curious
coincidence,  if  nothing  more,  that  the  Neuters,  too,  were  known  to
the  Iroquois  as  Je-go'-sa-sa, '  the  Cat  Nation.'  "

It  is  desirable  here  to  consider  what  animal  is  meant  by  chat
sauvage,  the  "wild  cat"  so  often  mentioned  by  early  writers,  espe-
cially in  connection  with  the  Erie  tribe.  Some  suppose  it  to  be  the
common  American  wild  cat,  Lynx  rufus,  or  possibly  the  Canadian
lynx,  Lynx  Canadensis.  J.  G.  Henderson,  in  a  paper  read  before
the  Amer.  Asso.  for  Adv.  of  Science,  at  its  meeting  of  1880,  takes
issue  with  this  idea,  saying:  "  These  two  species  of  lynx  were  not
differentiated  by  the  early  French  explorers,  who  classed  both  as
wolves,  under  the  appellation  loup  cervier;  while  they  gave  to  the
raccoon  the  name  chat  sauvage.  Sagard  clearly  distinguishes  these
animals  (Canada,  Tross  ed.,  pp.  679,  680),  as  loups  cervier s
(lynxes),  named  by  the  Hurons  Toutsitonte;  common  wolves,
Anatisqua;  and  'a  species  of  leopard,  or  wild  cat,  that  they  call
Tiron.'  He  adds:  '  In  this  vast  extent  of  land  there  is  a  country
that  we  surname  "the  Nation  of  the  Cat,"  on  account  of  these
cats, —  small  wolves  or  leopards  which  are  found  in  their  country,
which  furnish  their  robes.  These  cats  are  hardly  larger  than
foxes;  but  they  have  fur  closely  resembling  that  of  the  common
wolf,  for  I  myself  was  deceived  in  choosing  between  them.'  "  This
view  is  corroborated  by  Clapin  (Diet.  Catiad.-Francais),  who  de-
fines chat  sauvage  as  the  raton  of  France  (raccoon, —  given  by
Littre  as  Ursus  lotor,  but  generally  known  to  scientists  as  Procyon
lotor,  belonging  to  Procyonidce,  a  group  coordinate  with  Ursidar).

We  may  here  note  another  animal  sometimes  called  "  wild  cat  " —
Mustela  pennanti,  of  the  Mustelida,  another  group  of  the  great
Arctoid  order ;  it  is  commonly  known  as  "fisher,"  "black  cat,"
"black  fox,"  or  "pekan."  This  last  name  is  a  Canadian-French
word,  and  was  used  as  early  as  1684,  for  it  occurs  in  a  document  of
that  date,  "Memoir  touching  the  expenses  incurred  by  Sieur  de
Lasalle  at  Fort  Frontenac," — a  translation  of  which  is  given  in
N. Y. Colon.  Docs.,  vol.  ix.,  pp.  216-221.

12  (p.  191). —  Onguiaahra:  Niagara.  Cartier,  when  at  Hochelaga
(Montreal),  heard  vague  rumors  of  the  great  cataract.  Champlain's
map  of  1632  locates  it  quite  definitely,  at  the  western  end  of  Lake


316  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

St.  Louis  (Ontario);  he  describes  it  as  "a  fall  of  water  at  the  end
of  the  falls  of  St.  Louis, —  very  high,  in  descending  which  many
kinds  of  fish  are  stunned."  Its  location  on  the  map  shows  that
"  sault  St.  Louis"  is  a  mere  slip  of  the  pen,  or  a  typographical  er-
ror, for  "  lac  St.  Louis."  Sanson's  map  of  1656  gives  it  as  "  Ongiara
Sault;  "  Coronelli  (1688)  names  it  Niagara.  O'Callaghan's  index  to
TV.  Y.  Colon.  Docs,  enumerates  thirty-nine  other  variants  on  this
name.  Ragueneau  mentions  the  cataract  (in  Huron  Relation  of
1648,  chap,  i.),  as  "of  frightful  height."

The  name  Niagara,  or  Onguiahra,  is  generally  regarded  as  of  Mo-
hawk (or  the  kindred  Neutral)  origin,  and  signifying  "  neck,"  refer-
ring to  the  strip  of  land  between  Lakes  Erie  and  Ontario,  cut  off  by
this  river.  The  easternmost  village  of  the  Neutrals,  probably  near
the  Falls,  bore  the  same  name.  Concerning  Lalemant's  statement
in  the  text,  that  the  Neutrals  had  forty  villages,  A.  F.  Hunter  says:
"  So  many  village  sites  are  found  at  the  present  day  in  the  districts
north  of  Lake  Erie  that  this  estimate  is  fully  confirmed."

Valuable  information  in  regard  to  this  region  is  given  in  Mar-
shall's Niagara  Frontier  (Buffalo,  1881);  Coyne's  Country  of  Neu-
trals; and  Holley's  Niagara  (N.  Y.,  1872).  For  the  physical  his-
tory of  the  river,  see  Gilbert's  paper  in  S?nithsonian  Rep.,  1S90,
pp.  231-258.

13  (p.  193). —  For  information  regarding  the  Neutrals,  see  vol.
viii.,  notes  34,  41,  and  vol.  xviii.,  note  19.  Cf.  Harris's  Catholic
Church  in  Niagara  Peninsula  (Toronto,  1S95),  chap.  i.-v.

14  (p.  197). — These  "black  beasts"  were  black  squirrels  (vol.
xvii.,  note  8).  Concerning  the  "cow,"  see  vol.  ix.,  note  33;  the
"wild  cat,"  note  11,  ante.

15  (p.  203). —  For  sketch  of  the  Recollet  Daillon,  see  vol.  iv.,
note  23.

16  (p.  207). —  Kandoucho  (All  Saints)  was,  according  to  Lalemant,
the  Neutral  village  nearest  the  Hurons;  but  opinions  as  to  its  loca-
tion are  conflicting.  The  most  satisfactory  suggestion  is  that  of
Arthur  Harvey  (Toronto  Mail,  Dec.  n,  1SS5)  —  that  the  site  of  Kan-
doucho was  probably  one  of  those  found  at  Lake  Medad,  Halton
county,  Ont.  Lalemant  here  states  that  this  village  was  between
four  and  five  days'  journey  from  Teanaustayae,  and  (near  the  begin-
ning of  this  chapter)  four  days  from  the  mouth  of  Niagara  River.
This  halfway  position  between  the  two  points  named  corresponds
very  closely  to  that  of  Lake  Medad.  This  locality  was  used  as  a
place  of  residence  by  the  aborigines  for  some  time  after  the  arrival
of  the  French,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the  numbers  of  French  relics
found  there. Numerous  other  remains  have  been  found,  including


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XXI  317

some  bonepits  which  were  examined  by  B.  E.  Charlton  of  Hamilton,
Ont.,  all  showing  that  it  was  a  place  occupied  for  a  long  time  by  the
Neutrals.  Lalemant's  estimate  of  the  position  of  Kandoucho  as
about  latitude  420  30'  is  inconsistent  with  our  present  knowledge,  but
he  appears  to  have  made  no  instrumental  observation.  His  men-
tion of  its  distance  from  the  Hurons,  forty  leagues,  renders  probable
its  location  at  Lake  Medad.  Ragueneau  says  that  in  1648  the  Neu-
tral village  nearest  the  Hurons  was  only  thirty  leagues  distant
(Huron  Relation  of  1648,  chap.  i.  and  iv.);  and  that  the  Senecas
captured  it  in  that  year.  But,  during  this  interval  of  eight  years,
the  Neutrals  may  have  moved  nearer  to  the  Hurons,  and  established
new  villages. — A.  F.  Hunter.

Coyne  conjectures  that  Kandoucho  may  have  been  not  far  from
the  present  Brantford;  Clark,  as  cited  by  Harris  {Niagara  Penin-
sula, p.  341),  says  that  it  was  not  far  from  Brampton,  Peel  county.
It  should  be  noted  that  Lalemant  states  its  distance  as  "  about  forty
leagues  [from  the  Hurons],  going  all  the  time  directly  South."
Daillon,  in  journeying  to  the  Neutrals  (1626),  arrived  at  their  first
village  in  six  days  from  the  Tobacco  Nation  (Sagard's  Canada,
Tross  ed.,  pp.  799,800);  he  does  not  give  its  name,  although  it  is
supposed  to  have  been  Kandoucho.

17  (p.  207). —  Tsohahissen's  village  would  seem  to  be  identical  with
the  Notre  Dame  des  Anges  of  Sanson's  map,  located  on  the  west
side  of  Grand  River,  near  Brantford,  Ont. ;  the  Jesuits  would  nat-
urally give  to  the  chief  village  of  the  Neutrals  the  name  of  their
mission  to  that  tribe,  "  Mission  des  Anges."  —  A.  F.  Hunter.

Coyne  thinks  that  N.  D.  des  Anges  was  at  the  Neutral  village  of
Kandoucho  (see  preceding  note),  and  that  the  village  of  Tsohahis-
sen  was  the  S.  Alexis  of  Sanson's  map;  and  he  conjectures  that  the
latter  was  upon  the  site  now  indicated  by  the  ' '  Southwold  Earth-
work " — an  aboriginal  fortification  still  remaining,  in  the  township
of  Southwold,  Elgin  county,  Ont.  {Country  of  Neutrals,  pp.  1-3,
13,  14.).

18  (p.  225). —  Teotongniaton  (St.  Guillaume)  was  probably  —  as
suggested  by  Coyne  {ut  supra,  p.  19)  —  the  place  mentioned  by
Ragueneau  (Huron  Relation  of  1651,  chap,  ii.)  as  captured  in  1651 ;
but  Coyne  thinks  that  it  "  was  perhaps  in  the  vicinity  of  Woodstock,
Ont."  Harris  opposes  this  view  {Niagara  Peninsula,  pp.  340,
341) ;  but  the  locations  therein  conjectured  are  equally  unacceptable.
A  more  probable  site  than  any  one  of  these  is  in  Beverley  township,
lot  12,  concession  7;  there  many  iron  tomahawks  have  been  found,
indicating  a  conflict.  This  location  for  St.  Guillaume  would  also
agree  with  the  text,  as  it  is  halfway  between  Kandoucho  and  the
village  of  Tsohahissen. Four  miles  east  of  this  site  is  another,  at


318


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES


which  300  iron  tomahawks  have  been  picked  up ;  this  is  in  the  same
township,  in  lot  26,  concession  8.  Another  Neutral  village  had  been
captured  in  the  [previous  autumn  by  the  Iroquois,  as  stated  by  Ra-
gueneau;  and  the  occurrence  of  these  two  sites  in  Beverley,  both
bearing  tokens  of  conflict,  suggests  the  strong  probability  that  here
stood  St.  Guillaume  and  the  other  captured  village  just  mentioned. —
A.  F.  Hunter.

19  (p.  269). —  Le  Jeune  mentions  this  journey,  and  his  errand,  in
the  introductory  note  at  the  beginning  of  the  Relation  of  1640-41.

20  (p.  271). —  Reference  is  here  made  to  the  Dutch  West  India
Company,  chartered  June  3,  1621 — successor  to  the  United  New
Netherland  Company,  which  received  its  charter  Oct.  11,  1614.
O'Callaghan,  in  History  of  New  Netherland  (N.  Y.,  1855),  vol.  L,
p.  89,  thus  characterizes  the  new  association:  "It  was  modelled
after  that  granted  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century  to  the
celebrated  East  India  Company,  with  which  body  it  was  designed  to
co-operate  in  extending  national  commerce,  in  promoting  coloniza-
tion, in  crushing  piracy,  but,  above  all,  in  humbling  the  pride  and
might  of  Spain."  Under  its  auspices  were  formed  the  settlements
of  New  Netherlands  on  the  Delaware  and  Hudson  rivers,  and  the
"  patroon  "  system  inaugurated  (1629).  The  West  India  Company
practically  ruled  the  Dutch  colonies  in  that  region  until  their  cap-
ture by  the  English  (1664).

21  (p.  289). —  This  was  Franchise  du  Serron,  of  St.  Severin,  Italy.

22  (p.  301). —  Guillaume  Couture,  an  interpreter,  and  for  a  time  a
Jesuit  donne,  came  from  Rouen  to  Canada,  probably  in  1641.  In
the  following  year,  he  was  captured  with  Jogues,  because  he  would
not  abandon  the  Father,  and  with  him  suffered  cruel  tortures  from
the  Iroquois, —  who,  however,  took  him  back  to  Three  Rivers,  after
a  captivity  of  two  years.  Soon  afterward,  he  returned  to  their
country  with  Iroquois  envoys,  to  negotiate  a  peace  between  them
and  the  French,  in  which  effort  he  succeeded.  Returning  to  Quebec
in  April,  1646,  he  seems  to  have  severed  his  connection  with  the
Jesuits ;  for  the  Joum.  des  Jesuites  mentions  that  the  Fathers,  at  a
consultation  held  Apr.  26,  approved  Couture's  marriage.  That
event,  however,  appears  on  the  registers  only  under  date  of  Nov.  16,
1649, —  his  wife  being  Anne  Aymard;  they  had  ten  children.  In
164S,  he  obtained  a  grant  of  land  at  Cote  de  Lauson;  he  became  a
captain  of  militia,  and  a  judge  in  his  seignior y.  In  1666,  he  was
sent  to  the  Dutch  at  Albany  on  a  mission  concerning  public  affairs.
His  death  occurred  in  1702.

23  (p.  301). — This  Me'tnoire  regarding  the  donnes  summarizes  the
reasons  for  their  employment  in  the  Canadian  missions,  and  the  con-


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XXI  319

troversy  aroused  thereby.  Notwithstanding  the  explanations  made
in  this  document  by  Lalemant,  Vitelleschi  ordered  (Jan.  25,  1643)
the  dissolution  of  this  branch  of  the  mission  service ;  but  further
remonstrance  and  explanation  from  Lalemant,  accompanied  by  a
modification  in  the  terms  and  requirements  of  the  donnes'  connec-
tion with  the  Society,  finally  procured  (Dec.  25,  1644)  the  revocation
of  this  decree.  During  the  continuance  of  the  Huron  mission,  these
donnes  rendered  it  invaluable  service.  On  this  subject,  see  Roche-
monteix' sje'sia'les,  vol.  i.,  pp.  388-395.

24  (p.  303). — Jean  Guerin  was  another  of  these  donnes;  his  name
does  not  often  occur  in  records  of  the  time,  but  Lalemant,  in  the
Relation  of  1663,  chap,  viii.,  says  that  Guerin  had  been  in  the  em-
ploy of  the  Jesuits  over  twenty  years,  and  eulogizes  his  virtue,
devotion,  and  fidelity.  He  had  served  the  missionaries  in  all  their
fields  of  labor  —  among  the  Iroquois,  Hurons,  Abenakis,  and  Algon-
kins.  His  last  voyage  was  with  the  ill-fated  Menard  (vol.  xviii.,  note
5);  they  left  Three  Rivers  in  August,  1660,  and  Menard  perished  in
the  forests  of  Wisconsin,  a  year  later.  In  September,  1662,  Guerin,
while  still  in  the  mission  service,  was  killed  by  the  accidental  dis-
charge of  a  gun.  Laverdiere,  Shea,  and  other  historians  have  made
Guerin  the  companion  of  Menard  at  the  time  of  his  death ;  but  this
opinion  is  controverted  by  Campbell,  in  his  "Menard"  (Parkman
Club  Pubs.,  Milw.,  no.  11),  pp.  11,  12;  he  maintains  that  Guerin
was  left  behind  by  Menard,  in  charge  of  the  infant  church  at
Keweenaw  Bay,  and  that  the  latter  was  accompanied  by  a  French
armorer,  or  blacksmith.

25  (p.  305). —  Regarding  Le  Coq,  see  vol.  xix.,  note  5.


□I
