THE  JESUIT  RELATIONS


AND


ALLIED  DOCUMENTS


Vol.  XXVI


The  edition  consists  of  sev-
en hundred  and  fifty  sets
all  numbered


No..


J^^'S,


The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents


Travels  and  Explorations

OF  THE  Jesuit  Missionaries

IN  New  France

1610-1791

THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL-
IAN  TEXTS,  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA-
TIONS AND  NOTES  ;  ILLUSTRATED  B¥
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES

EDITED  BY

REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES
Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin


Vol.  XXVI
LOWER  Canada,  Hurons:  1642- 1644


CLEVELAND:    Zhc  JBurtows  3Brotber0
Company,  publishers,  mdcccxcviii



BY

The  Burrows  Brothers  Co


ALL   rights    reserved


The  Imperial  Press,  Cleveland


EDITORIAL  STAFF


Editor


Translators


Assistant  Editor
Bibliographical  Adviser


Reuben  Gold  Thwaites
FiNLOw  Alexander
Percy  Favor  Bicknell
William  Frederic  Giese
Crawford  Lindsay
William  Price
Hiram  Allen  Sober
Emma  Helen  Blair
Victor  Hugo  Paltsits


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  XXVI

Preface  to  Volume  XXVI       .  .  -9

Document: —

LIII.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  pass6  en  la
Novvelle  France,  es  ann^es  1643.  &
1644.  [Chaps,  ix.-xiv.  of  Part  I.,  and
Chaps,  i.-v.  of  Part  II.,  being  the
second  installment  of  the  document.]
Barthelemy  Vimont;  Kebec,  September
5,  1644.  Hierosme  Lalemant;  September
21,   1643  .  .  .  .17

Notes        .  .  .  .  .  .315


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXVI


Document  LIII.  (the  Relation  of  1643-44)  was  com-
menced in  Vol.  XXV.,  wherein  we  presented  Chaps,
i.-viii.  of  Part  I.  (by  Vimont,  as  superior).  In  this
volume,  the  remainder  of  Part  I.  is  given,  together
with  the  first  five  chapters  of  Part  II.  (the  belated
Huron  report,  by  Lalemant).  It  will  be  remembered,
from  the  prefatory  note  in  Vol.  XXV.,  that  Part  I.
is  dated  at  Quebec,  September  5,  1644;  and  that  the
principal  portion  of  Part  II.,  dated  in  the  Huron
country,  September  21,  1643,  is  a  second  copy  of  the
Huron  report  which  had  been  intended  for  the  Rela-
tion of  1642-43, —  the  first  copy  was  captured  by  the
Iroquois,  and,  although  restored  to  Jogues,  was  left
in  his  cabin  when  he  went  to  visit  the  Dutch,  who
unexpectedly  enabled  him  to  escape.  The  conclu-
sion of  this  report,  together  with  a  closing  chapter
dated  March  31,  1644,  bringing  the  account  of  Hu-
ron affairs  up  to  that  date,  will  appear  in  Vol.  XXVII.

Continuing  his  report,  Vimont  describes  the  Huron
seminary  maintained  at  Three  Rivers  during  the
winter,  and  the  instruction  of  its  six  adult  pupils.
In  the  spring,  they  set  out  to  return  to  their  own
country,  accompanied  by  Father  Bressani ;  but  they
have  journeyed  only  six  leagues  when  they  are
captured  by  an  ambushed  band,  and  carried  prison-
ers into  the  Iroquois  country.  Ten  different  bands
of  these  ferocious  invaders  have  this  summer  ravaged


10  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXVI

the  St.  Lawrence  valley,  and  have  even  captured  sev-
eral Frenchmen,  besides  Hurons  and  Algonkins.
The  news  of  Bressani's  capture  is  brought  by  a  Hu-
ron who  escaped  from  the  Iroquois ;  later,  particu-
lars of  his  experiences  in  capti\'ity  are  given  by  '  *  a
trustworthy  person,  who  was  an  eyewitness  of  all
his  sufferings."  Bressani  is  horribly  tortured  by  his
captors,  and  is  afterward  given  as  a  slave  to  a  woman
of  their  tribe;  but  is  sent  by  her  to  the  Dutch  at
Fort  Orange,  who  pay  her  a  ransom  for  the  Father
(August  19).  The  Dutch  treat  him  with  the  utmost
kindness,  and  keep  him  until  he  has  recovered  from
his  wounds,  then  send  him  back  to  France.

A  Huron  war  party  attack  the  Iroquois  near  Fort
Richelieu,  and  capture  three  of  their  enemies,  whom
they  carry  in  triumph  to  Three  Rivers.  ^Montmagny
intercedes  for  the  prisoners ;  one  is  yielded  by  the
Algonkins,  but  the  Hurons  insist  on  taking  theirs  to
their  own  country, —  promising  not  to  harm  them,
but  through  their  means  to  negotiate  a  peace.  The
governor  consents ;  and  he  also  grants  them  the  aid
of  twenty  French  soldiers,  who  are  to  winter  in  the
Huron  villages,  and  escort  their  fleet  to  Quebec  next
summer.  With  them  go  also  three  Jesuits  —  Bre-
beuf,  Garreau,  and  Chabanel,  the  latter  to  instruct
the  Algonkins  who  dwell  near  the  Hurons.

Vimont  next  praises  the  docility  and  Christian
behavior  of  the  Attikamegues,  who  had  received  some
religious  instruction  at  Sillery,  two  years  before.
They  remember  all  they  have  been  taught ;  not  only
do  they  repeat  the  prayers,  but  "  they  observe
Sunday  as  religiously  as  if  they  had  been  with  the
French. "  They  persuade  many  of  their  pagan  coun-
trymen to  come  down  to  Three  Rivers  for  instruc-


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXVI  11

tion.  The  Christians  hold  a  formal  council  with  the
French  there,  and  declare  that  they  wish  openly  to
embrace  the  Faith.  Many  prominent  families  in
this  tribe  follow  the  example  of  their  chief,  and
emulate  one  another  in  their  pious  zeal.  They  even
exhort  those  of  other  tribes  to  become  Christians.
Upon  returning  to  their  own  country,  they  desire
that  a  Father  should  reside  among  them ;  but,  as  yet,
no  one  can  be  spared  for  that  purpose.

The  mission  at  Tadoussac  is  growing  in  impor-
tance. Buteux  had  charge  of  it  last  year;  his  ac-
count thereof,  not  reaching  Quebec  in  time,  was
omitted  from  last  year's  Relation,  but  is  given  in  that
for  this  year  (1644).  The  Christians  at  Tadoussac
have  maintained  during  the  winter  the  pious  duties
in  which  they  were  instructed  in  the  summer.  Nu-
merous instances  are  related  of  the  piety  and  devo-
tion manifested  by  these  new  converts.  A  zealous
neophyte  has  his  head  shaved  like  those  of  the
Fathers;  he  also  takes  "  a  whip  of  rope,  and  goes
through  the  cabins,  calling  the  others  to  prayers,
and  striking  those  who  do  not  promptly  obey. ' '  The
ships  bring  brick  for  building  a  mission  house;
the  Indians  carry  it  to  the  place  appointed,  and  so
eagerly  that  the  Father  has  to  warn  them  not  to  over-
load themselves, — but  they  answer  that  they  are
obeying  "  his  exhortations  to  practice  mortifications
for  their  unbaptized  brethren."

De  Quen  succeeds  Buteux,  this  year;  the  savages
come  to  Quebec  for  him.  with  a  canoe,  and  he  receives
from  them  all  a  hearty  welcome.  They  render  him
an  account  of  the  manner  in  which  they  have  spent
the  winter,  and  he  is  much  consoled  by  their  devout-
ness.     After  hearing  the  confessions  of  the  Chris-


12  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXVI

tians,  he  devotes  himself  to  the  instruction  of  the
pagans,  and  wins  many  souls;  during  the  summer,
he  baptizes  forty  persons.  With  the  ships  from
France,  comes  Father  le  Jeune,  who  is  greeted  with
joy  by  the  savages  of  Tadoussac,  and  by  Noel  Nega-
bamat,  who  goes  down  from  Quebec  expressly  to
meet  him.  Five  converts  are  presented  to  him  for
baptism,  for  some  of  whom  a  sponsor  is  found  in
Madame  de  la  Peltrie,  "  who  had  gone  to  Tadoussac
to  witness  the  fervor  of  these  Neophytes. ' '  De  Ouen
carries  on  the  work  of  instructing  the  savages  at  this
post,  and  finds  them  very  tractable.  Many  of  them
do  penance  for  their  sins;  a  public  penance  is  im-
posed by  the  priest  on  some  Christians  who  become
intoxicated.  The  Christian  idea  and  form  of  mar-
riage are  gradually  making  some  progress  among
these  savages.  When  De  Quen  is  recalled  to  Que-
bec, the  Indians  complain,  and  even  propose  to  "  shut
up  the  Father  in  the  Chapel,  until  the  shallop  that
awaits  him  has  left. ' '

Vimont  devotes  his  last  chapter  to  an  account  of
"  the  creation  of  a  Captain  at  Tadoussac," — that  is,
the  "  resuscitation  "  of  a  dead  chief,  by  conferring  his
name  and  authority  on  another.  This  ceremony  is
accompanied  by  many  presents  and  speeches,  and
followed  by  a  feast.

A  short  note  from  Vimont  introduces  the  Huron
Relation  of  1643,  explaining  that  this  is  a  second
copy,  sent  later  to  replace  the  one  captured  by  the
Iroquois.  Lalemant  relates  the  calamities  that  have
befallen  the  Huron  church,  and  the  gains  that  it  has
nevertheless  made.  One  of  the  Huron  villages,  "  the
most  impious  of  them  all,"  is  destroyed  by  the  Iro-


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXVI  13

quois.  During  the  entire  summer,  the  invaders  keep
up  their  raids  throughout  the  Huron  country;  and
so  crafty  and  alert  are  they,  that  only  two  of  their
men  are  captured  throughout  the  season.  These  are,
of  course,  tortured  and  burned;  "but  they  were
souls  destined  for  Paradise,"  for  they  are  baptized
by  the  Jesuits.

Late  in  the  summer,  the  Hurons  receive  news  of
the  capture  of  many  of  their  number,  with  some  of
the  French  (Jogues  and  others),  by  Iroquois  on  the
St.  Lawrence.  Joseph  Taondechoren,  "  the  most
faithful  and  the  best  of  our  Christians,"  escapes  from
their  hands,  and  returns  to  his  own  country,  where  he
relates  all  the  particulars  of  their  disaster  and  the
fate  of  the  prisoners.  Amid  all  the  sufferings  of
these,  they  are  greatly  aided  and  cheered  by  the
heroic  and  self-denying  ministrations  of  Father
Jogues,  who  renders  them  every  kindly  office  within
his  power.  He  also  endures  his  torments  with  the
utmost  courage  and  devotion.

Lalemant  gives  a  separate  account  of  each  of  the
Huron  missions.  The  house  at  Ste.  Marie  is  in  the
care  of  Fathers  le  Mercier  and  Chastelain.  It  is  the
center  of  the  mission  work,  and  comprises,  besides
the  residence  of  the  priests,  "  a  hospital  for  the  sick,
a  cemetery  for  the  dead,  a  church,  a  retreat  for
pilgrims,  and  a  place  where  the  infidels  can  receive
instruction."  Through  all  these,  but  especially  the
hospital,  the  Indians  are  reached  and  influenced.
The  pious  acts  and  holy  deaths  of  various  Chris-
tians are  recorded  by  the  writer.

The  church  of  the  Attignawantan  (the  Bear  clan)  —
among  whom  were  situated  the  oldest  mission  sta-
tions, Ihonatiria,  now  abandoned;  and  Ossossane,  or


14  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXVI

La  Conception  —  has  especially  suffered.  The  old-
est and  best  Christian  families  have  been  decimated
by  Iroquois  captivities  and  massacres,  and  many  are
reduced  to  dire  poverty.  But  the  fervor,  devout-
ness,  and  resignation  of  these  poor  harassed  Chris-
tians increases  with  their  sufferings  and  trials ;  and
the  unbelievers  have  been  moved  thereby  to  respect
the  Faith.  Especially  shining  examples  are  those  of
Joseph  Taondechoren,  Rene  Tsondihwannen,  and
Charles  Tsondatsaa.  The  latter  is  almost  suffocated
in  a  sweat  box  by  some  infidels,  who  think  thus  to
test  his  courage  and  his  devotion  to  his  religion ;  but
he  yields  not.

At  St.  Joseph,  the  principal  Christian  is  Etienne
Totiri,  who,  with  his  wife,  is  devoted  to  the  inter-
ests of  the  church.  A  child  of  theirs,  but  three  years
old,  "  has  so  imbibed  piety  with  her  mother's  milk
that  she  answers  the  Catechism  in  public,  knows  her
prayers,  and  takes  pleasure  in  unloosening  her
lisping  tongue  by  speaking  of  God  and  the  beauties
of  Paradise."  Several  influential  chiefs  have  been
baptized  here ;  the  character  and  experience  of  each
are  described.  One  of  these  has  renounced  his  office
as  chief,  "  for  fear  that  it  might  compel  him  to  some
offense  against  God."

The  increasing  number  of  native  converts  renders
more  conspicuous  their  opposition  to  the  pagan
customs  of  their  tribesmen ;  and  the  latter,  enraged
at  the  restraints  which  the  Christians  would  impose
upon  them,  "  redouble  their  calumnies  against  the
Faith,"  and  desire  to  suppress  the  new  religion.
The  missionaries  look  forward  to  the  possibility  of
martyrdom  for  both  themselves  and  their  neophytes ;
but  no  one,   either   priest  or  Indian,   falters   for  a


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXVI  15

moment.  Death  is,  to  each,  only  the  blessed  recom-
pense for  his  suffering  on  earth.  The  Fathers  have
induced  the  Christians  to  wear  rosaries  around  their
necks,  as  a  sign  of  their  faith ;  this  emblem  seems
also  to  be  for  them  a  defense  from  temptation.

Two  of  the  Hurons  who  had  been  under  Brebeuf's
instruction  return  to  their  own  country,  and  bring
to  the  Fathers  letters  from  Quebec.  Both  these  men
belong  to  the  village  of  St.  Michel,  where  they  make
public  announcement  of  their  conversion,  and  urge
their  countrymen  to  embrace  the  Faith.  One  of
these,  soon  afterward,  is  assailed  by  dire  calamities;
but  his  faith  and  constancy  remain  unshaken.  Striv-
ing to  save  his  dying  sister's  soul,  he  commends  her
to  God,  and  baptizes  her  five  or  six  times, — but  all
to  no  avail,  for,  "  although  water  was  not  wanting
in  her  Baptism,  he  had  forgotten  the  formula,  or  had
never  learned  it. "  But  God  has  mercy  on  them ;  the
dying  woman's  strength  revives  for  a  little  while,
and  her  brother  runs  five  leagues,  without  stopping,
to  Ste.  Marie,  to  obtain  the  aid  of  a  priest.  Two  of
the  Fathers  hasten  to  her;  they  find  her  "  quite  pre-
pared for  Heaven,  to  which  her  soul  soared,  shortly
after  she  was  baptized."  The  Christians  of  St.
Michel  are  now  sufficiently  numerous  to  warrant  a
permanent  mission  station  among  them,  of  which
Chaumonot  and  Fran9ois  du  Peron  have  charge.

An  Algonkin  chief  from  the  Island  tribe  endeavors
to  instigate  the  people  of  St.  Michel  to  hostility
against  the  "black  gowns."  This  hinders  the
conversion  of  the  infidels ;  but  those  who  are  already
believers  are  only  roused  to  greater  zeal  and  cour-
age. In  this  village,  the  infant  church  has  "  a
Preacher  of  its  own  nation,  an  Apostle  who  worthily


16  PREFACE  TO  VOL,  XXVI

upholds  its  interests. ' '     He  is  able  and  eloquent,  and

a  bold  warrior;  to   see   him  with  a  weapon  in  his

hand,  "  one  would  think  him  an  animated  portrait  of

those  ancient  Caesars  of  whom  in  Europe  we  see  but

pictures,   all  dimmed  with  smoke."     While  on  the

lake  in  a  storm,  with  infidel  companions,  their  lives

are  in  danger;    this  Barnabe  calls   upon    God,   and

immediately  the  wind  and  waves  become  calm.     The

infidels,   however,  claim   this   result  as   due   to  the

demon  whom  they  had  previously  invoked.

R.  G.  T.
Madison,  Wis.,  July,  1898.


LI  1 1    (continued)

Relation  of  1643-44

Paris:  SEBASTIEN  ET  GABRIEL  CRAMOISY,   1645


Chaps,  i.-viii.  were  given  in  Volume  XXV.;  we  herewith
present  chaps,  ix.-xiv.  of  Part  I.,  and  chaps,  i.-v.  of  Part
II.  (the  Huron  report).  The  remainder  of  the  document
will  appear  in  Volume  XXVII.


18  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26


[139  i.e.,  143]  CHAPITRE  IX.

DU  SEMINAIRE  DES  HURONS  AUX  TROIS  RIUIERES,  &  DE

LEUR  PRISE  AUEC  CELLE  DU  PERE  lOSEPH

BRESSANY,    PAR    LES    IROQUOIS.

LE  Seminaire  des  Hurons  que  nous  entretenons  icy
a  efte  cette  annee  extraordinairement  heureux,
&  a  parler  humainement,  extraordinairement
malheureux  il  a  efl6  a  vray  dire  extraordinairement
heureux  en  ce  qu'il  a  eft6  copofe  de  fix  excellens
Neophytes,  dont  les  vns  fe  font  fmgulierement  perf e-
(ftionnez  en  la  Foy  qu'ils  auoient  defia  embraff^e,
les  autres  I'ont  receue  auec  de  tres-bonnes  difpoli-
tions,  &  tant  les  vns  que  les  autres  ont  donne  &  receu
toute  forte  de  fatisfadtion  pendant  tout  le  temps  qu'ils
ont  feiourne  auec  nous.

II  a  eft6  d'vn  autre  colle  extraordinairement  mal-
heureux  en  ce  que  [144]  ces  pauures  Chreftiens  fortans
de  nos  mains  font  tombez  en  celles  des  Iroquois  pour
feruir  de  proye  aux  flammes,  &  a  leurs  eltomachs  affa-
mez  de  la  chair  &  du  fang  de  tous  ces  peuples  qui
nous  ef content.  I'ay  dit  que  ce  Seminaire  auoit  efl6
en  cette  confideration  extraordinairement  malheu-
reux  humainement  parlant,  car  nous  deuons  adorer
tous  les  deffeins  de  la  Prouidence  diuine,  &  efperer
qu'elle  tirera  fa  gloire,  &  le  bien  de  ces  peuples  des
eftranges  afflic5tions  dont  elle  les  frappe.  Peut-eflre
que  I'accident  qui  eft  arriu6  a  ceux-cy,  n'eft  qu'vn
malheur  imaginaire  dans  nos  penfees,  &  vn  veritable


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  19


[139  i.e.,    143]  CHAPTER  IX.

OF     THE    SEMINARY    OF     THE    HURONS    AT   THE    THREE

RIVERS,   AND    OF   THEIR    CAPTURE,  WITH   THAT  OF

FATHER  JOSEPH  BRESSANY,   BY  THE  IROQUOIS.

THE  Seminary  of  the  Hurons  that  we  maintain
here  has  this  year  been  extraordinarily  fortu-
nate, and,  humanly  speaking,  extraordinarily
unfortunate.  In  truth,  it  has  been  extraordinarily
fortunate,  because  it  has  consisted  of  six  excellent
Neophytes, — some  of  whom  have  perfected  themselves
to  a  wonderful  degree  in  the  Faith,  which  they  had
already  embraced ;  while  the  others  have  received  it
with  very  good  disposition,  and  all  have  given  and
have  received  the  utmost  satisfaction  during  the
whole  time  that  they  remained  with  us.

On  the  other  hand,  it  has  been  extraordinarily  un-
fortunate, because  [144]  these  poor  Christians  on  leav-
ing our  hands  fell  into  those  of  the  Iroquois,  to  serve
as  a  prey  for  the  flames,  and  for  their  stomachs  hun-
gering after  the  flesh  and  blood  of  all  these  peoples
who  hear  us.  I  have  said  that  this  Seminary  had
been  in  this  respect  extraordinarily  unfortunate,
humanly  speaking ;  for  we  must  adore  all  the  designs
of  divine  Providence,  and  trust  that  he  will  derive  his
own  glory  and  the  good  of  these  peoples  from  the
unusual  afflictions  with  which  he  smites  them.  Per-
haps the  accident  that  has  happened  to  these
persons  is  but  an  imaginary  misfortune  in  our  minds,


20  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.26

bon-heur  dans  celle  de  Dieu,  qui  auoit  attache  leur
predeftination  a  leur  prife,  &  au  genre  de  mort  que
ces  Barbares  leur  auront  fait  fouffrir.  Nous  auons
fujet  de  le  coniedlurer  de  la  forte  par  les  t6moignages
qu'ils  nous  ont  donn6  d'vne  parfaite  probite,  tandis
qu'ils  ont  fejourne  auec  nous.

Quatre  d'iceux  eltoient  partis  de  leur  pays  d6s
I'Automne  paffee,  pour  venir  hyuerner  ga  bas  &  y
eftre  inftruits  [145]  a  loifir,  efperant  de  profiter  beau-
coup  des  bons  exemples,  tant  de  nos  Frangois  que  des
Sauuages  Chreftiens,  dont  ils  auoient  appris  la  vertu
&  les  bonnes  mceurs  par  le  rapport  de  leurs  compa-
gnons  qui  auoient  hyuerne  icy  les  annees  precedentes,
&  qui  en  auoient  efte  grandement  touchez :  La  crainte
des  Iroquois,  de  la  faim,  &  de  plufieurs  autres  grands
dangers  &  trauaux  qu'il  faut  fouffrir  dans  vn  fi  long
voyage  ne  fufl  pas  affez  forte  pour  les  empefcher  de
venir  chercher  cette  perle  de  I'Euangile  qui  eft  pre-
ferable a  tous  les  biens  de  la  terre,  &  qu'on  ne  fgau-
roit  achepter  trop  cherement,  mefmes  auec  la  perte
de  la  vie.  Les  deux  autres  eftoient  deux  prifonniers
qui  vindrent  fe  letter  entre  nos  mains  apres  s'eftre
efchappez  de  celles  des  Iroquois,  qui  les  auoient  tenus
prifonniers,  I'vn  depuis  la  prife  du  Pere  logues,  par
qui  il  fufl  baptife,  1 'autre  depuis  la  funefte  defaite
des  Hurons  aupres  de  Montreal,  cauf6e  par  vne  infigne
lafcbete  &  trahifon  des  Iroquois;  qui  ayant  attire  les
Hurons  [146]  dans  leur  Fort,  fous  pretexte  de  paix  &
amitie,  en  maffacrerent  les  vns,  &  firent  les  autres
prifonniers  &,  la  referue  de  fort  peu  qui  fe  fauuerent
tous  nuds  "k  Montreal.

Ces  fix  Hurons  fe  rendirent  par  vn  heureux  ren-
contre aux  trois  Riuieres,  au  commencement  de  No-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  21

and  true  happiness  in  the  sight  of  God,  who  had  con-
nected their  predestination  with  their  capture  and
the  kind  of  death  that  these  Barbarians  may  make
them  suffer.  We  have  reason  to  suppose  this,  from
the  evidences  of  perfect  integrity  that  they  gave
while  they  dwelt  with  us.

Four  of  them  had  left  their  own  country  last  Au-
tumn, to  come  and  winter  here,  and  to  be  instructed
[145]  at  leisure,  hoping  to  derive  great  benefit  from
the  good  examples  both  of  our  French  and  of  the
Christian  Savages,  of  whose  virtue  and  good  habits
they  had  heard  through  the  reports  of  their  country-
men who  had  wintered  here  in  previous  years,  and
had  been  greatly  impressed  thereby.  The  fear  of
the  Iroquois,  of  hunger,  and  of  numerous  other  great
dangers  and  hardships  that  have  to  be  encountered
on  so  long  a  journey,  was  not  sufficient  to  prevent
them  from  coming  to  seek  that  pearl  of  the  Gospel
which  is  preferable  to  all  earthly  goods,  and  which
cannot  be  too  dearly  purchased,  even  with  the  loss
of  life.  The  two  others  were  captives  who  came  and
threw  themselves  into  our  hands,  after  escaping  from
those  of  the  Iroquois,  who  had  taken  them  prison-
ers,—  one  since  the  capture  of  Father  Jogues,  by
whom  he  was  baptized;  and  the  other,  after  the
disastrous  defeat  of  the  Hurons  near  Montreal.  This
disaster  was  caused  by  a  signal  act  of  cowardice  and
treachery  on  the  part  of  the  Iroquois,  who,  having
attracted  the  Hurons  [146]  into  their  Fort  under
pretext  of  peace  and  friendship,  massacred  some  and
made  prisoners  of  the  others,  excepting  a  very  few
who  fled,  quite  naked,  to  Montreal.

These  six  Hurons  met  together,  by  a  fortunate
coincidence,  at  the  three  Rivers,  at  the  beginning  of


22  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

uembre  apres  s'eftre  fauuez  de  diuers  hazards.  lis  y
trouuerent  le  Pere  Brebeuf  qu'ils  cherchoient,  &  qui
les  receufl  dans  noftre  maifon,  &  prit  le  foin  de  leur
inflrucftion  &  nourriture  alTift^  puiffamment  des  libe-
ralitez  de  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  qui  n'efpargne
rien  en  femblables  adtions,  comme  auffi  de  celle  de
Monfieur  de  Chamflour  qui  commande  au  Fort  &
habitation  des  trois  Riuieres,  &  mefme  des  reue-
rendes  Meres  Hofpitalieres,  qui  eftendent  bien  fou-
uent  leur  charite  hors  de  I'enceindte  de  leur  Hofpi-
tal,  particulierement  en  faueur  des  Hurons.

Incontinent  apres  leur  arriuee:  ils  s'appliquerent
a  apprendre  les  prieres,  &  le  Catechifme,  auec  vn
ardeur  qui  ne  pouuoit  prouenir  que  du  faindt  [147]
Efprit,  les  plus  auancez  aydoient  les  plus  reculez,  &
ceux  qui  eftoient  plus  ignorans  reconnoiffoient  volon-
tiers  les  plus  f gauans  pour  leur  maiftres :  ils  paff oient
dans  ces  commencemens  la  meilleure  partie  de  la  nuidt
^  dire,  &  repeter  continuellement  ce  qu'ils  auoient
apris  pendant  la  iournee,  I'vn  deux  qui  auoit  I'ef-
prit  plus  groffier,  &  la  memoire  moins  heureufe  que
les  autres  defefperoit  quafi  au  commencement  de  pou-
uoir  rien  apprendre,  neantmoins  ayd6  de  la  grace  de
Dieu,  &  encourage  par  les  paroles  du  Pere,  &  par  les
bons  exemples  &  difcours  de  fes  compagnons,  il  per-
feuera  fi  heureufement  a  fe  faire  inftruire  qu'il  apprift
non  feulement  les  prieres  &  le  Catechifme,  mais
encore  plufieurs  autres  chofes  non  fans  vn  grand
eftonnement  de  foy-mefme.  lis  affifloient  tons  les
Dimanches  au  Catechifme  qu'on  faifoit  aux  Fran9ois
en  la  Chappelle,  &  bien  qu'il  fulTent  affez  aagez,  il
auoient  neantmoins  vne  fmguliere  fatisfadtion  de
refpondre  publiquement  de  ce  qu'ils  auoient  apris


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  23

November,  after  having  escaped  many  dangers.  They
found  there  Father  Brebeuf ,  whom  they  sought ;  he
received  them  into  our  house,  and  took  charge  of
their  instruction  and  maintenance, —  being  greatly
assisted  by  the  liberality  of  Monsieur  the  Governor,
who  spares  nothing  on  such  occasions ;  also  of  Mon-
sieur de  Chamflour,  the  commandant  of  the  Fort  and
settlement  of  the  three  Rivers;  and  even  of  the
reverend  Hospital  Mothers,  whose  charity  extends
very  frequently  beyond  the  bounds  of  their  Hospital,
especially  in  favor  of  the  Hurons.

Immediately  after  their  arrival,  they  applied  them-
selves to  learning  the  prayers  and  the  Catechism
with  an  ardor  that  could  only  proceed  from  the  holy
[147]  Ghost.  Those  more  advanced  helped  those  more
backward,  and  those  who  were  ignorant  willingly
accepted  the  more  learned  for  their  masters.  In  the
beginning,  they  passed  the  greater  portion  of  the
night  in  continually  repeating  what  they  had  learned
during  the  day.  One  of  them,  who  was  of  duller
comprehension  and  had  a  less  retentive  memory  than
the  others,  almost  despaired  at  the  commencement
of  ever  being  able  to  learn  anything.  Nevertheless,
aided  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  encouraged  by  the
words  of  the  Father,  and  by  the  good  examples  and
discourses  of  his  companions,  he  persevered  in  be-
coming instructed,  with  such  success  that  he  learned
not  only  the  prayers  and  the  Catechism,  but  also  many
other  things,  to  his  own  great  astonishment.  Every
Sunday,  they  attended  Catechism,  which  was  taught
to  the  French  in  the  Chapel;  and,  although  they
were  somewhat  advanced  in  years,  they  nevertheless
experienced  great  satisfaction  in  answering  publicly
questions  on  what  they  had  learned  [148]  during  the


24  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

[148]  pendant  la  femaine  auec  I'admiration  des  Fran-
9ois,  &  de  nos  Sauuages :  enfin  ils  profiterent  tant  en
I'efpace  de  deux  mois,  &  donnerent  tant  de  tefmoi-
gnage  de  leur  bonne  volonte,  que  le  Pere  qui  les
inftruifoit,  iugea  k  propos  de  conferer  le  baptefme  k
ceux  qui  ne  I'auoient  pas  encore  receu,  &  fupleer  les
ceremonies  aux  autres:  ce  qui  fe  fiit  au  grand  con-
tentement  de  ces  bons  Neophytes.

Depuis  ce  temps-la  iufques  au  iour  dedie  a  la  me-
moire  du  glorieux  faincft  lofeph  ils  fe  difpoferent  k
la  Saindte  Communion  par  des  frequentes  Confeffions,
&  par  vne  telle  innocence  &  probite  de  vie,  que  bien
fouuent  le  Pere  qui  gouuernoit  leur  confcience  eftoit
oblige  de  leur  faire  redire  des  pechez  de  la  vie  paffee,
pour  auoir  quelque  matiere  d'abfolution ;  Car  apres
s'eftre  examinez  diligemment,  vn  chacun  difoit  inge-
nuement  &  fans  vanite :  Pour  moy,  ie  ne  me  f ouuiens
point  d'auoir  offenfe  le  fouuerain  Maiftre  de  nos
vies.  Comment  pourrions-nous  [149]  I'offencer  icy
parmy  tant  de  bons  exemples&  inftrudtions?  Ce  n'eft
point  icy  oil  demeure  le  mef chant  Oki,  c'eft  dans  nos
villages  que  le  Demon  &  le  peche  regnent,  fi  nous
pouuions  toufiours  demeurer  auec  vous,  nous  ferions
heureux,  &  nous  efpererions  de  conferuer  toufiours
I'innocence  de  noftre  baptefme,  c'eft  pour  cela  que
nous  fommes  defcendus  icy,  afin  d'apprendre  par  vos
difcours  &  exemples  h.  feruir  Dieu/  nous  n'aurions
point  d'efprit  fi  nous  I'offenfions  parmy  tant  de  fa-
ueurs  que  nous  receuons  de  luy,  car  c'eft  luy  qui  nous
fait  tout  le  bien  que  vous  nous  faites.

Pendant  tout  I'Hyuer  ils  furent  troublez  de  fonges
efpouuentables,  capables  de  les  effrayer,  &  les  faire
tomber  dans  leur  anciennes  fuperftitions,  s'ils  n'euf-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  25

week,  to  the  admiration  of  the  French  and  of  our
Savages.  Finally,  they  made  such  progress  in  the
space  of  two  months,  and  gave  such  evidence  of  their
good  will,  that  the  Father  who  instructed  them
deemed  it  advisable  to  confer  baptism  on  those  who
had  not  yet  received  it,  and  to  supply  the  rites  in  the
case  of  the  others, —  which  was  done,  to  the  great  joy
of  these  good  Neophytes.

From .  that  time  to  the  day  dedicated  to  the
memory  of  the  glorious  saint  Joseph,  they  prepared
themselves  for  Holy  Communion  by  frequent  Con-
fessions, and  by  such  innocence  and  uprightness  of
life  that  very  often  the  Father  who  directed  their
consciences  was  obliged  to  make  them  repeat  sins  of
their  past  life,  to  have  some  matter  for  absolution.
For,  after  having  diligently  examined  themselves,
each  one  would  say  ingenuously  and  without  vanity :
"  For  my  part,  I  do  not  recollect  having  offended
the  sovereign  Master  of  our  lives.  How  could  we
[149]  offend  him  here,  amid  so  many  good  examples
and  instructions?  It  is  not  here  that  the  wicked  Oki
dwells ;  it  is  in  our  villages  that  the  Devil  and  sin
reign.  If  we  could  always  live  with  you,  we  would
be  happy,  and  we  might  hope  always  to  retain  the
innocence  of  our  baptism.  That  is  why  we  came
down  here, — that  we  might  learn  from  your  dis-
courses and  your  examples  to  serve  God.  We  would
have  no  sense,  were  we  to  offend  him  in  the  midst  of
so  many  favors  that  we  receive  from  him ;  for  it  is
he  who  does  us  all  the  good  that  you  do  to  us."

Throughout  the  Winter,  they  were  troubled  by
horrible  dreams,  sufficient  to  frighten  them  and  to
make  them  relapse  into  their  old  superstitions,  had
they  not  been  steadfast  in  the  Faith.     But  in  this,


26  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

f ent  eft6  bien  fermes  en  la  Foy :  Mais  en  cela,  comme
en  toute  autre  chofe,  ils  auoient  vne  pratique  fami-
liere  d'offrir  tout  a  Dieu  &  fe  refigner  entre  fes  mains,
Seigneur,  difoient-ils,  vous  eftes  le  fouuerain  Maiftre
de  nos  vies,  faites-en  ce  qu'il  vous  [150]  plaira,  ie
vous  offre  tout  ce  dequoy  ces  f onges  me  menaff ent :
ie  fuis  pre  ft  de  Taccepter,  fi  vous  en  ordonnez  de  la
forte,  il  ne  me  peut  arriuer  que  du  bien  en  fuiuant
vos  ordres,  car  vous  eftes  mon  Pere,  &  vous  m'aymez
parfaidtement.  lis  ieufnerent  tous  fix  le  Carefme  tout
entier  dans  le  defir  qu'ils  auoient  de  fatisfaire  a  Dieu
pour  leurs  pechez  paffez,  &  dans  cette  mefme  confide-
ration  qui  leur  eftoit  fort  familiere,  ils  tafchoient  a
fupporter  ioyeufement  toutes  leurs  peines:  S'ils
alloient  a  la  chaffe,  s'ils  alloient  pefcher  fous  les
glaces,  s'ils  entreprenoient  quelque  voyage  ce  qu'ils
ont  fait  plufieurs  fois  pour  nous  faire  plaifir  pendant
les  rigueurs  de  I'Hyuer:  Mon  Dieu  difoient-ils,  nous
vous  offrons  cette  peine,  &  tout  le  mal  que  nous
allons  fouffrir,  c'eft  pour  vous  plaire,  &  pour  fatis-
faire a  vollre  luftice,  pour  nos  pechez.  Quelqu'vn
d'eux  ayant  efte  par  deux  fois  mal  traite  par  vn  de
nos  Frangois,  il  ne  s'en  vengea  point,  &  ne  refpondit
aucun  mot,  ny  ne  s'en  plaignit  a  perfonne,  mais  dit
feulement  [151]  en  fon  coeur:  Mon  Dieu,  i'accepte
volontiers  ce  defplaifir,  &  ie  vous  I'offre  de  bon  coeur
en  fatisfadtion  de  mes  pechez,  &  a  voftre  gloire,
peut-ellre  luy  ay-ie  donn^  occafion  de  fe  fafcher,
encore  bien  que  ie  n'aye  eu  aucunement  I'intention
de  le  faire:  c'elt  ainfi  que  ces  braues  Seminariftes
que  Dieu  alloit  difpofant  doucement  a  la  mort  ou  k
I'efclauage,  s'entretenoient  pendant  I'Hyuer  dans  la
pratique  de  plufieurs  faindles  &  vertueufes  adtions.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  27

as  in  all  other  things,  their  usual  practice  was  to
offer  everything  to  God,  and  to  resign  themselves
into  his  hands.  "  O  Lord,"  they  would  say,  "  you
are  the  sovereign  Master  of  our  lives;  do  with  them
as  you  [150]  please.  I  offer  you  everything  with
which  these  dreams  threaten  me ;  I  am  prepared  to
accept  it,  if  you  so  ordain.  Nothing  but  good  can
happen  to  me  while  I  obey  your  commands,  for  you
are  my  Father,  and  you  love  me  perfectly."  All  six
fasted  through  the  whole  of  Lent,  in  their  desire  to
atone  to  God  for  their  past  sins ;  and  for  this  same
reason,  which  was  quite  habitual  with  them,  they
strove  to  bear  all  their  troubles  joyfully.  If  they
went  out  to  hunt ;  if  they  went  to  fish  through  the
ice;  if  they  undertook  any  journey, —  as  they  did
several  times,  during  the  severe  Winter  weather,  to
gratify  us, —  they  would  say:  "  My  God,  we  offer
you  this  trouble,  and  all  the  ills  that  we  may  suffer.
It  is  to  please  you,  and  to  satisfy  your  Justice  for
our  sins."  One  of  them  was,  on  two  occasions,  ill-
treated  by  one  of  our  French.  He  did  not  avenge
himself ;  he  answered  not  a  word,  nor  did  he  com-
plain to  any  one,  but  merely  said  [151]  in  his  heart:
"  My  God,  I  willingly  accept  this  grievance,  and  I
cheerfully  offer  it  to  you  in  atonement  for  my  sins,
and  to  your  glory.  Perhaps  I  have  given  him  cause
to  be  angry,  although  I  had  no  intention  of  doing
so."  Thus  did  these  worthy  Seminarists,  whom  God
was  gently  preparing  for  death  or  for  slavery,  main-
tain themselves  during  the  Winter  in  the  perform-
ance of  many  holy  and  virtuous  actions.

Finally,  when  Spring  came,  and  the  river  began
to  be  somewhat  free  through  the  disappearance  of
the  ice,   they  resolved  to  embark  on  the  return  to


28  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.  ii6

Enfin  le  Prin-temps  eftant  venu,  &  la  riiiiere  com-
inen9ant  a  eftre  vn  pen  libre  par  le  depart  des  glaces,
ils  refolurent  de  s'embarquer  pour  retourner  en  leur
pays  promettans  d'y  parler  hautement  en  faueur  de
la  Foy,  &  de  rendre  leurs  parens  &  compatriotes
participans  du  mefme  bon-heur  qu'ils  auoient  receu
aupres  de  nous.  En  effecft,  il  y  auoit  de  grandes
apparences  qu'ils  euffent  fort  auance  la  Foy  dans  leur
pays,  eftant  defia  quafi  tous  hommes  faits,  &  de  bon
efprit,  bien  inftruidls,  &  grandement  zelez  pour  la
conuerfion  de  leurs  gens,  parmy  lefquels  [152]  quel-
ques-vns  d'eux  auoient  beaucoup  d'authorite,  &  par-
ticulierement  vn  qui  auoit  eft6  defia  choifi  pour  eftre
Capitaine  de  guerre,  outre  cela  ils  deuoient  parler
auantageufement  des  Frangois,  &  de  nos  Peres  qui
les  auoient  chargez  de  beaux  prefens,  &  tefmoigne
toute  forte  d'affedtion,  mais  toutes  ces  efperances  ont
efte  vaines,  &  fi  nous  n'en  anions  d'autres  plus  folide-
ment  eftablies  fur  la  prouidence  de  Dieu,  nous
aurions  fujet  de  craindre  que  Taccident  arriue  a  nos
Seminariftes  ne  gaftaft  tous  nos  affaires  dans  les  Hu-
rons,  au  lieu  de  les  auancer,  ces  peuples  fe  pouuant
figurer  par  tant  de  manuals  euenemens  aufquels  nous
donnons  ce  femble  quelque  occafion,  que  nous  leur
apportons  tous  ces  malheurs,  &  que  noftre  compa-
gnie  eft  fatale  a  leur  ruine  &  defolation,  s'ils  n'ont
pas  ces  penf6es,  c'eft  par  vne  fpeciale  Prouidence  de
Dieu  qui  pouffe  nos  affaires  en  confondant  nos  inuen-
tions  &  induftries,  &  en  nous  ouurant  d'autres  voyes
que  nous  ne  connoiffions  pas.  Tant  y  a  que  nos
Neophytes  s'embarquerent  dans  trois  canots  le  27.
d'Auril  [153]  auec  le  Pere  lofeph  Breffany  Italien  de
Nation  &  natif  de   la  Ville    de    Rome,   que    noftre


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  29

their  own  country, —  promising  to  speak  there  boldly
in  favor  of  the  Faith,  and  to  render  their  relatives
and  countrynien  sharers  of  the  same  blessing  that
they  had  received  while  with  us.  In  fact,  there  was
every  prospect  that  they  would  greatly  advance  the
Faith  in  their  country;  for  they  were  nearly  all
grown  men,  with  good  minds,  well  taught,  and  very
zealous  for  the  conversion  of  their  people,  among
whom  [152]  some  of  them  had  great  authority, —  one
especially,  who  had  already  been  chosen  as  a  war
Captain.  Besides  this,  they  would  have  spoken
favorably  of  the  French,  and  of  our  Fathers,  who
had  loaded  them  with  fine  gifts  and  shown  them
every  kindness.  But  all  these  hopes  were  vain,  and,
if  we  had  not  others,  solidly  founded  on  God's  provi-
dence, we  would  have  reason  to  fear  that  the  accident
which  has  happened  to  our  Seminarists  might  spoil
all  our  affairs  in  the  Huron  country  instead  of  ad-
vancing them;  for  these  peoples  may  imagine  —  on
account  of  so  many  unfortunate  events,  of  which  we
seem  to  be  the  cause — that  we  bring  all  these  mis-
fortunes upon  them,  and  that  our  company  is  fated
to  cause  their  ruin  and  desolation.  If  they  have  not
such  notions,  it  is  due  to  a  special  Providence  of  God,
who  guides  our  affairs  by  confounding  our  own  con-
trivances and  skill,  and  by  opening  to  us  paths  that
we  know  not  of.  At  all  events,  our  Neophytes
embarked  in  three  canoes,  on  the  27th  of  April,  [153]
with  Father  Joseph  Bressany, — an  Italian  by  Birth,
and  a  native  of  the  City  of  Rome,  whom  our  Rever-
end Father  General  had  sent  here  to  us,^  two  years
ago, —  and  a  young  French  lad,  who  was  sent  to  serve
our  Fathers.  It  was  believed  that  there  would  not,
as    yet,   be  much  danger  upon   the    river;   and  our


30  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26

Reuerend  Pere  General  nous  auoit  enuoye  icy  il  y  a
deux  ans,  &  vn  ieune  gar9on  Fran9ois  qu'on  enuoy-
oit  pour  feruir  nos  Peres,  on  ne  croyoit  pas  qu'il  y
euft  encore  grand  danger  fur  la  riuiere,  &  nos  Hurons
particulierement  eftoient  dans  cette  penfee,  que  les
glaces  n'eftans  pas  encore  entierement  parties,  les
Iroquois  n'auroient  pas  eu  le  loifir  de  venir  de  leur
pays,  outre  qu'ils  s'imaginoient  que  la  Paix  auroit
defia  eft^  conclue  entr'eux  &  les  Iroquois,  fuiuant  vn
pourparler  qu'on  auoit  commence  fur  ce  fujet  auant
qu'ils  partiffent  de  leur  pays;  ce  qui  nous  obligea  a
hazarder  plufieurs  paquets  pour  nos  Peres  des  Hurons,
dans  la  neceffite  qu'ils  fouffrent  apres  tant  de  pertes.
Toutes  ces  affeurances  n'empefcherent  pas  que  le
Pere  &  les  Hurons  ne  fe  difpofaffent  comme  des
perfonnes  qui  deuoient  bien-toft  mourir,  tons  eftoient
refolus  indifferemment  a  la  vie  ou  a  la  mort,  mais
plufloft  a  la  mort  qu'a  la  vie,  [154]  la  diuine  Proui-
dence  leur  donnant  interieurement  quelque  prefenti-
ment  de  ce  qui  leur  deuoit  arriuer,  non  fans  quelques
indices  exterieures,  car  le  canot  du  Pere  Breffany  fifl
naufrage  a  vne  lieue  des  trois  Riuieres,  en  vn  lieu
oil  il  n'y  auoit  aucun  danger,  &  en  vn  beau  temps,  le
voifmage  de  la  terre  fauna  tout  ce  qui  eftoit  dedans,
mais  cet  accident  les  arrefta,  &  les  obligea  de  cou-
cher  au  dega  de  I'entr^e  du  Lac,  d'oii  eftant  partis  le
lendemain,  le  froid  &  les  grandes  neiges  qui  tombe-
rent,  les  retarderent  beaucoup  «&:  ne  leur  permirent
pas  de  paffer  la  riuiere  Marguerie,  efloignee  de  fix
lieues  des  trois  Riuieres,  oil  les  Hurons  ayant  tir6
quelques  coups  de  fuzil  fur  des  Outardes,  fe  firent
reconnoiitre  par  trente  Iroquois,  qui  n'eftoient  pas
loin  de  Ik,  &  qui  leur  drefferent  vn  embufcade  au


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  31


Hurons  especially  were  of  opinion  that,  as  the  ice  had
not  yet  entirely  disappeared,  the  Iroquois  had  not
had  time  to  come  from  their  country.  Moreover,
they  imagined  that  Peace  had  already  been  concluded
between  them  and  the  Iroquois,  in  consequence  of
overtures  commenced  upon  this  subject  before  they
had  left  their  own  country.  This  induced  us  to  risk
several  packages  for  our  Fathers  among  the  Hurons,
owing  to  the  need  in  which  they  were,  after  so  many
losses.

All  these  assurances  did  not  prevent  the  Father
and  the  Hurons  from  preparing  themselves  as  per-
sons who  might  soon  die.  All  were  ready  alike  for
life  or  for  death, —  but  for  death  rather  than  life,
[154]  because  divine  Providence  gave  them  some
inward  presentiment  of  what  was  to  happen  to  them.
Nor  were  they  without  some  outward  indications;
for  Father  Bressany's  canoe  was  wrecked  about  a
league  from  the  three  Rivers,  at  a  place  where  there
was  no  danger,  and  in  fine  weather.  Owing  to  the
proximity  of  the  land,  all  in  the  canoe  was  saved;
but  this  accident  stopped  them,  and  compelled  them
to  sleep  at  this  side  of  the  entrance  to  the  Lake.
When  they  started  thence  on  the  following  day,  the
cold  and  the  quantity  of  snow  that  fell  greatly  de-
layed them,  and  did  not  allow  them  to  proceed  farther
than  the  Marguerie  river,  six  leagues  beyond  the
three  Rivers.^  Here  the  Hurons  fired  a  few  gun-
shots at  some  Bustards;  this  made  their  presence
known  to  thirty  Iroquois  who  were  not  far  away,
and  who  prepared  an  ambush  for  them  beyond  the
river,  behind  a  point  which  they  had  to  double.
Consequently,  on  the  third  day  after  their  departure,
when  the  canoe  which  carried  Father  Bressany,  and


32  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

de  Ik  de  la  riuiere,  derriere  vne  pointe,  laquelle  ils
deuoient  doubler,  fi  bien  que  le  troifiefme  iour  apres
leur  depart,  le  canot  ou  eftoit  le  Pere  Breffany  &  qui
alloit  le  premier,  eftant  arriue  a  cette  pointe  fe  vid
incontinent  [155]  attaque  par  trois  canots  Iroquois,  k
la  veue  def quels  le  Pere  commanda  qu'on  ne  com-
batit  pas,  la  partie  n'eftant  pas  efgale,  n'y  en  hom-
ines n'y  en  armes,  les  ennemis  s'approchent,  &  fe
faififfent  du  Pere,  &  des  deux  Hurons  qui  Taccompa-
gnoient,  &  les  declarent  leurs  prifonniers.

Cependant  les  deux  autres  canots  Hurons  taf client
de  fe  fauuer  k  la  fuite,  &  defia  ils  eftoient  fi  efloignez
qu'ils  penfoient  eftre  hors  du  danger,  lors  qu'ils
apperceurent  apres  auoir  double  vn  autre  pointe,
deux  autres  canots  Iroquois  bien  armez  qui  les  atta-
quent.  A  cette  rencontre,  vn  de  nos  Hurons  nomme
Bertrand  Sotrioskon  voulufl  fe  feruir  de  fon  fuzil,
mais  il  fufl  preuenu  par  vn  Iroquois  qui  le  coucha
roide  mort  dans  fon  canot,  &  efpouuanta  fi  fort  les
autres,  qu'ils  fe  laifferent  prendre  fans  autre  refiftance.

Les  ennemis  mettent  pied  a  terre  auec  leurs  prifon-
niers, rompent  tous  les  paquets,  ou  eftoient  les  ne-
cefTitez  de  nos  Peres,  qui  n'ont  rien  receu  depuis  trois
ans,  defchirent  les  lettres  qu'on  [156]  leur  enuoyoit
partagent  le  butin  efgalement,  &  fe  iettent  fur  le  corps
de  celuy  qui  fuft  tue,  luy  arrachent  le  coeur  de  la  poi-
trine,  luy  enleuant  la  cheuelure,  luy  coupent  les  leures,
&  les  parties  les  plus  charnues  des  cuiff  es,  &  des  jam-
bes,  les  font  boii[i]llir,  &  les  mangent  en  prefence  des
prifonniers;  mais  tandis  que  ces  Barbares  traitoient  ce
corps  de  la  forte,  il  elt  croyable  que  Dieu  couronnoit
fon  ame  de  gloire  dans  le  Ciel,  en  recompenfe  de  fa
Foy,   puret6  &  innocence    de   laquelle   le   Pere  qui


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  33


which  led  the  way,  reached  that  point,  it  was  im-
mediately [155]  attacked  by  three  Iroquois  canoes.
On  seeing  them,  the  Father  commanded  his  people
not  to  fight,  as  their  side  was  not  of  equal  strength,
in  either  men  or  arms.  The  enemies  drew  near,
seized  the  Father  and  the  two  Hurons  who  accom-
panied him,  and  declared  them  their  prisoners.

Meanwhile  the  two  other  Huron  canoes  endeavored
to  escape  by  flight,  and  were  already  so  far  away
that  they  thought  they  were  out  of  danger,  when,  on
doubling  another  point,  they  saw  two  other  Iroquois
canoes,  strongly  manned,  which  attacked  them.  In
this  encounter  one  of  our  Hurons,  named  Bertrand
Sotrioskon,  tried  to  use  his  gun,  but  was  prevented
from  doing  so  by  an  Iroquois  who  felled  him  in  his
canoe,  quite  dead;  this  so  frightened  the  others,
that  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  taken  without
further  resistance.

The  enemies  landed,  with  their  prisoners;  broke
open  all  the  packages  containing  the  articles  needed
by  our  Fathers,  who  have  received  nothing  for  three
years:  tore  up  the  letters  that  we  [156]  sent  them;
and  equally  divided  the  spoils.  They  then  threw
themselves  on  the  body  of  the  man  whom  they  had
killed;  they  tore  his  heart  out  of  his  breast,  and
scalped  him;  they  cut  off  his  lips,  and  the  most
fleshy  parts  of  his  thighs  and  legs,  which  they  boiled
and  ate  in  the  presence  of  the  captives.  But,  while
these  Barbarians  so  treated  his  body,  it  is  probable
that  God  crowned  his  soul  with  glory  in  Heaven,  as
a  reward  for  his  Faith,  his  purity,  and  his  inno-
cence,—  whereof  the  Father  who  directed  his  con-
science gives  this  testimony,  that,  from  the  moment
of   his  baptism,    he   had   never   grievously  offended


34  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.26

gouuernoit  fa  confcience  rend  ce  tefmoignage,  que
depuis  fon  baptefme  il  n'auoit  iamais  offenfe  Dieu
griefuement,  &  qu'il  auoit  pratique  plufieurs  adlions
genereufes  de  vertu.

lis  ne  firent  alors  aucun  outrage  au  Pere  Breffany,
n'y  aux  autres  prifonniers,  qu'ils  emmenerent  en  leur
pays,  a  la  referue  d'vn,  qui  fe  fauua  a  dem}'-  chemin,
ceftoit  Henry  Stontrats  homme  meur  d'aage,  &  d'ef-
prit,  &  tres-excellent  Chreftien,  qui  nous  a  raconte
toutes  les  circonftances  de  leur  prife,  &  nous  a  affeu-
r6  que  les  Iroquois  n'auoient  [157]  point  encore  def-
poiiill6  ny  lie  le  Pere  Breffany,  &  qu'ils  luy  auoient
laiffe  fon  Breuiaire,  &  tout  le  petit  meuble  qu'il  por-
toit  fur  foy,  mais  neantmoins  qu'on  menagoit  de  le
brufler  a  I'entr^e  du  vilage,  ayant  efle  donne  en  la
place  d'vn  fameux  Iroquois  tue  fraifchement  a  Mont-
real par  les  Franjois,  a  quoy  ce  bon  Pere  eftoit  tres-
bien  refolu,  &  s'en  alloit  au  raport  du  Huron  qui  s'eft
efchape,  ioyeux  &  content,  confolant,  &  animant
grandement  fes  compagnons,  il  adioufte  que  depuis
la  fin  de  I'Hyuer  en  moins  d'vn  mois  dix  bandes  de
guerriers  Iroquois  eftoient  parties  de  leur  pays  pour
venir  en  guerre  contre  les  Fran9ois,  Algonquins  &
Hurons :  les  deux  premieres  eftoient  allees  au  Sault  de
la  Chaudiere,  lieu  fameux  par  les  embufcades  des
Iroquois,  &  defaites  des  Hurons,  la  troifiefme  au  pied
du  long  Sault,  la  quatriefme  au  deffus  de  Montreal,
la  cinquiefme  dans  I'lfle  mefme  de  Montreal,  &  celle-
cy  eftoit  compof^e  de  80.  guerriers  qui  furet  trois
iours  en  embufcade  guettant  les  Fran9ois  de  cette
habitation,  lef quels  les  ayat  apperceus,  &  attaquez
[158]  genereufemet,  enfin  apres  vne  longue  refiltece
en  laquelle  ils  tuerent  quelques-vns  de  ces  Barbares,


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  35


God,  and  that  he  had  performed  many  generous  acts
of  virtue.

At  the  time,  they  committed  no  outrage  on  Father
Bressany  or  on  the  other  captives  whom  they  carried
off  to  their  country,  with  the  exception  of  one  who
escaped  halfway.  This  was  Henry  Stontrats, — a
man  of  mature  age  and  mind,  and  a  most  excellent
Christian, — who  related  to  us  all  the  circumstances
attending  their  capture.  He  assured  us  that  the
Iroquois  had  [157]  neither  stripped  nor  bound  Father
Bressany,  and  had  left  him  his  Breviary,  and  all  the
small  articles  that  he  carried  on  his  person ;  but  that
they  had,  nevertheless,  threatened  to  burn  him  at  the
entrance  of  their  village,  as  he  had  been  given  in
the  place  of  a  celebrated  Iroquois  recently  killed  at
Montreal  by  the  French.  The  good  Father  was  very
well  prepared  for  this,  and,  according  to  the  account
of  the  Huron  who  escaped,  he  went  his  way  quite
joyful  and  content,  greatly  consoling  and  encourag-
ing his  companions.  He  added  that,  since  the  end
of  the  Winter,  in  less  than  a  month,  ten  bands  of  Iro-
quois warriors  had  started  from  their  country  to  war
against  the  French,  Algonquins,  and  Hurons.  The
first  two  had  gone  to  the  Falls  of  the  Chaudiere,  a
place  famous  for  Iroquois  ambuscades,  and  Huron
defeats;  the  third,  to  the  foot  of  the  long  Sault;^
the  fourth,  above  Montreal;  the  fifth,  to  the  Island
of  Montreal  itself.  He  said  that  this  last  consisted
of  80  warriors,  who  lay  there  three  days  in  ambush,
watching  the  French  of  that  settlement,  who  saw
and  boldly  attacked  them.  [158]  Finally, —  after
a  long  resistance,  in  which  they  killed  some  of
the  Barbarians  and  wounded  many, — they  were  com-
pelled to  fall  back,  having  lost  five  out  of  their  thir-


36  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

&  en  blefferent  plufieurs,  furent  contraints  de  fe  reti-
rer,  apres  auoir  perdu  cinq  hommes  de  trente  qu'ils
efloient  dont  trois  furent  tuez,  &  deux  emmenes  pri-
fonniers  qui  depuis  furent  bruflez  tous  vifs  pendant
quatre  iours  auec  des  cruautez  ef pouuentables :  la
fixiefme  bande  copofee  de  40.  guerriez  auoit  marche
vers  la  riuiere  des  prairies  ou  elle  furprit  vne  bade
d'Algoquins  qui  furent  tous  emmenez  prifonniers,
la  plufpart  incontinent  bruflez  au  village  des  Iro-
quois, la  feptiefme  eft  celle  qui  a  pris  le  Pere  Breffa-
ny,  &  nos  Hurons  dans  laquelle  outre  les  Iroquois  il
y  auoit  fix  Hurons,  &  3  de  la  Nation  des  Loups  qui
font  naturalizez  Iroquois  la  8.  eft  vne  compagnie  de
30.  qui  rencontra  nos  prifonniers  en  chemin,  &  coupa
vn  doigt  a  Henry  qui  depuis  s'eft  fauu6,  &  vn  autre
k  Michel  Atiok8endoron,  &  efpouuenta  le  Pere  fans
luy  faire  neantmoins  aucun  mal,  cette  bade  qui  venoit
en  guerre  aux  trois  Riuieres,  deuoit  laiffer  vne  lettre
qu'elle  auoit  receu  du  Pere  Breffany  au  [159]  bout
d'vn  bafton  fur  le  bord  du  grand  fleuue,  mais  on  n'a
rien  trouu6  fmon  le  canot  dudit  Pere  qui  auoit  eft6
donne  a  cette  bande,  &  depuis  f ut  laiffe  &  reconnu  pres
des  trois  Riuieres.  La  9.  efl  vn  autre  qui  a  paru  a
Richelieu,  &  la  10.  eft  all6e  du  cofte  des  Hurons,  outre
plufieurs  autres  qui  font  parties  ou  qui  partiront
par  apres,  voila  ce  que  raporte  ce  Huron  efchap6
lequel  s'eftant  embarqu6  peu  de  temps  apres  auec
quelques  autres  fraifchement  defcendus  de  leur  pays,
eft  tomb^  derechef  auec  tous  fes  compagnons  entre
les  mains  des  Iroquois,  lefquels  ne  manqueront  pas
de  le  faire  mourir  a  leur  fagon,  tant  parce  qu'il  auoit
defia  efte  deftine  a  la  mort  des  fa  premiere  prife,
qu'en  vengeance  d'vn  autre  Iroquois  tu6  a  Montreal,


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  37

ty  men,  three  of  whom  were  killed  and  two  taken
prisoners.  The  latter  were  afterward  burned  alive,
during  four  days,  with  frightful  tortures.  The  sixth
band,  consisting  of  40  warriors,  had  marched  toward
the  river  des  prairies,  where  they  surprised  a  party
of  Algonquins,  who  were  all  carried  off  as  captives,
and  most  of  these  were  immediately  burned  at  the
Iroquois  village.  The  seventh  is  that  which  cap-
tured Father  Bressany  and  our  Hurons, —  among
whom,  in  addition  to  the  Iroquois,  there  were  six
Hurons,  and  3  of  the  Wolf  Tribe,  who  are  natural-
ized Iroquois.**  The  8th  is  a  band  of  30,  who  met
our  prisoners  on  the  way ;  they  cut  off  a  finger  from
the  hand  of  Henry,  who  afterward  escaped,  and  one
from  that  of  Michel  Atiokwendoron,  and  threatened
the  Father, — without,  however,  doing  him  any
harm.  This  band,  who  were  coming  to  attack  the
three  Rivers,  were  to  leave  a  letter  that  they  had
received  from  Father  Bressany,  at  the  [159]  end  of
a  stick,  on  the  bank  of  the  great  river ;  but  nothing
was  found  save  the  said  Father's  canoe,  that  had
been  given  to  that  band,  and  was  afterward  left  be-
hind and  recognized  near  the  three  Rivers.  The  9th
band  made  its  appearance  at  Richelieu ;  and  the
loth  went  in  the  direction  of  the  Huron  country;  be-
sides, there  are  several  others,  that  have  started  or
will  start  later.  That  is  what  the  Huron  relates  who
effected  his  escape,  and  who  —  having  reembarked
not  long  after,  with  some  others  who  had  recently
come  down  from  their  country  —  again  fell,  with  all
his  companions,  into  the  hands  of  the  Iroquois.
They  will  not  fail  to  put  him  to  death,  according
to  their  custom, — not  only  because  he  was  already
destined  for  death  at  his  first  capture,  and  in  revenge


38  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

tant  a  caufe  de  fa  fuite,  qui  eft  vn  crime  parmy  eux
qu'ils  ne  pardonnent  pas.

Telle  a  efte  I'ifTue  de  noftre  Seminaire  des  Hurons
qui  nous  feroit  bien  fenfible,  tant  a  caufe  de  la  perte
de  ces  bons  Neophytes  que  nous  cheriffions  tendre-
ment  pour  leur  vertu,  qu'a  caufe  des  grades  efpe-
rances  que  nous  donnoient  leur  zele,  [i6o]  pour
I'auancemet  de  la  Foy,  n'eftoit  que  nous  auons  vne
grande  confiance  en  la  prouidence  de  Dieu,  qui  fera
reliffir  cet  accident  &  au  bien  de  ces  pauures  prifon-
niers,  &  k  celui  de  leur  nation,  par  des  voyes  que
nous  ne  fgauons  pas,  nous  ne  pouuons  neantmoins
que  nous  ne  regretions  la  perte  du  Pere  Breffany  ex-
cellent ouurier  en  ces  Miffions,  &  duquel  nous  atten-
dions  beaucoup :  Si  toutesf ois  on  pent  regretter  auec
raifon  la  condition  d'vne  perfonne  qui  foufifre  auec
plaifir  de  grandes  chofes  pour  vne  fi  belle  occafion.
II  a  pleu  a  Noftre  Seigneur  de  nous  rendre  le  Pere
logues,  il  nous  a  ofte  le  Pere  Breffany,  fa  volonte  foit
faite,  il  eft  le  Maiftre  de  nos  vies,  &  de  nos  libertez.
Ce  nous  fera  toufiours  vn  grand  honneur  de  les
pouuoir  facrifier  a  fa  gloire.

Nous  eftios  pour  eftre  priuez  de  la  connoilTance  de
tout  ce  qui  eft  arriue  au  P.  Breffany  depuis  fa  prife,
fi  nous  ne  I'euffions  appris  d'vne  persone  digne  de  foy,
qui  a  eft6  tefmoin  oculaire  de  tout  ce  qu'il  a  fouffert
pendant  fa  captiuite.  Cette  premiere  rencontre  dont
il  eft  fait  mention  cy-delTus,  s'eftant  ainfi  paffee,
[i6i]  les  Iroquois  trauerferent  le  Lac  de  fain(5t  Pierre
&  menerent  coucher  les  prifonniers  en  vn  lieu  bien
humide,  mais  fort  retire,  ou  le  Pere  auec  fes  compa-
gnons,  tous  liez  &  garrottez  palTerent  la  nuidt  fans
autre  abry  que  le  Ciel  &  autre  lidt  que  la  terre,  ce


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  39

for  another  Iroquois  killed  at  Montreal,  but  because
of  his  flight,  which  is  a  crime  among  them  that  they
do  not  forgive.

Such  has  been  the  end  of  our  Seminary  for  the
Hurons,  which  we  would  deeply  regret, —  both  on
account  of  the  loss  of  these  good  Neophytes,  whom
we  tenderly  love  for  their  virtue,  and  of  the  great
hopes  with  which  their  zeal  [i6o]  for  the  advance-
ment of  the  Faith  inspired  us, —  had  we  not  the
utmost  confidence  in  the  providence  of  God,  who
will  cause  this  accident  to  result  to  the  benefit  both
of  these  poor  captives  and  of  their  nation,  by  ways
that  we  know  not  of.  However,  we  cannot  but
regret  the  loss  of  Father  Bressany, —  an  excellent
laborer  in  these  Missions,  of  whom  we  had  great
expectations, — if,  nevertheless,  we  can  reasonably
feel  regret  for  the  condition  of  a  person  who  cheer-
fully suffers  great  trials  for  so  good  a  cause.  It
has  pleased  Our  Lord  to  give  us  back  Father  Jogues,
and  he  has  taken  Father  Bressany  from  us.  His  will
be  done ;  he  is  the  Master  of  our  lives  and  of  our
liberties.  It  will  always  be  a  great  honor  for  us  to
be  able  to  sacrifice  them  to  his  glory.

We  would  have  been  deprived  of  all  knowledge  of
what  has  happened  to  Father  Bressany  since  the  time
of  his  capture,  had  we  not  heard  it  from  a  trust-
worthy person  who  was  an  eyewitness  of  all  that  he
suffered  during  his  captivity.  After  the  first  encoun-
ter, related  above,  [i6i]  the  Iroquois  crossed  Lake
saint  Pierre,  and  took  the  captives,  for  their  sleep,  to
a  very  damp  but  very  retired  place, —  where  the
Father  and  his  companions,  all  securely  bound,  passed
the  night  without  any  shelter  but  the  Sky,  or  other
bed  than  the  earth.     This  was  their  usual  lot,  every


40  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.26

qui  leur  fuft  ordinaire  toutes  les  nuidts  pendant  le
voyage :  Le  lendemain  on  le  lift  embarquer,  &  apres
deux  iours  de  nauigation  ils  rencontrerent  vne  autre
bande  d' Iroquois,  qui  tous  ioyeux  de  cette  prife,  def-
chargerent  quelques  coups  de  baftons  fur  le  Pere,  &
le  menacerent  de  quelque  plus  rude  traitemet.  Ceux-
cy,  ayant  racomte  aux  autres  la  mort  d'vn  de  leurs
compagnons  des  plus  confiderables,  arriuee  a  Mont-
real, furent  caufe  qu'on  n'efpargna  plus  le  Pere,  qui
apres  deux  iours  de  nauigation  fe  mit  a  terre,  &  che-
mina  fix  iours  pieds  nuds  au  trauers  des  bois,  des
broffailles  &  des  marets,  a  ieun  iufques  vers  les  quatre
heures  du  foir  qu'on  faifoit  alte  pour  prendre  vn  peu
de  repos :  mais  on  n'en  donnoit  guere  au  Pere,  qui
tout  moiiille  de  la  pluye,  des  neiges  fondues,  des  tor-
rens  &  des  [162]  fieuues  qu'il  falloit  trauerfer,  eftoit
oblige  a  toutes  les  charges  de  la  cuifme,  on  I'enuoy-
oit  a  I'eau  &  au  bois,  &  s'il  ne  faifoit  bien,  ou  s'il
n'entendoit  ce  qu'on  luy  difoit,  les  coups  de  baftons
ne  luy  manquoient  pas,  non  plus  qu'a  toutes  les  ren-
contres qu'il  faifoit  des  Chaff eurs  &  Pefcheurs.  Les
fix  iours  expirez,  il  fe  falluft  embarquer  fur  la  Lac
des  Iroquois,  qu'ils  trauerferent  en  8  iours,  puis
ayans  mis  pied  a  terre  cheminerent  encore  trois  iours,
le  quatriefme  iour  qui  eftoit  le  quinziefme  de  May
fur  les  trois  heures  du  foir  eftant  encore  a  ieun,  ils
arriuerent  "k  vn  lieu  ou  il  y  auoit  pres  de  400.
Sauuages  cabanez  pour  la  pefche.  A  deux  cents  pas
enuiron  loin  des  cabanes,  le  Pere  fuft  defpoiiili^
tout  nud,  &  les  Sauuages  s'eftans  rangez  en  haye  de
part  &  d'autre,  armez  de  baftons,  on  luy  commanda
de  marcher  le  premier  au  milieu  de  cette  trouppe,  il
n'euft  pas  pluftoft  commence  "k  leuer  le  pied,  qu'vn


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  41

night  throughout  the  journey.  On  the  following  day,
they  were  made  to  embark ;  and,  after  two  days'
navigation,  they  met  another  band  of  Iroquois,  who,
overjoyed  at  this  capture,  gave  the  Father  several
blows  with  cudgels  and  threatened  him  with  rougher
treatment.  When  the  last  comers  informed  the
others  of  the  death  of  one  of  their  most  distinguished
companions,  which  had  happened  at  Montreal,  the
Father  was  no  longer  spared.  After  two  days'  navi-
gation, he  landed,  and  walked  for  six  days  barefooted
through  the  woods,  brush,  and  swamps, —  fasting
until  about  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  a  halt
was  made  for  the  purpose  of  taking  a  rest.  But
hardly  any  was  given  to  the  Father,  who,  wet  with
rain,  with  the  water  of  melting  snows,  of  the  tor-
rents, and  of  the  [162]  rivers  that  had  to  be  crossed,
was  compelled  to  assume  all  the  tasks  of  the  cooking.
He  was  sent  for  the  water  and  wood ;  and  when  he
did  not  do  well,  or  did  not  understand  what  was  said
to  him,  blows  from  cudgels  were  not  lacking, —  nor
were  they,  whenever  the  party  encountered  Hunters
and  Fishermen.  When  the  six  days  had  expired,  he
had  to  embark  on  the  Lake  of  the  Iroquois,  which
they  crossed  in  8  days;  they  then  landed,  and  walked
for  three  days  more.  On  the  fourth  day,  which  was
the  fifteenth  of  May,  about  three  o'clock  in  the  after-
noon, while  he  was  still  fasting,  they  reached  a  place
where  there  were  about  400  Savages,  who  had  erected
their  cabins  there  for  fishing.  About  two  hundred
paces  beyond  the  cabins,  the  Father  was  stripped
quite  naked ;  and  when  the  Savages  had  ranged  them-
selves in  two  lines,  facing  each  other,  and  armed
with  cudgels,  he  was  ordered  to  march  the  first  of
all  through  the  ranks  of  the  band.     No  sooner  had


42  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.26

des  Iroquois  prill;  fa  main  gauche  &  auec  vn  coufteau
y  fit  vne  grande  f ente  entre  le  doigt  annulaire  &  le  pe-
tit doigt,  &  puis  les  autres  defchargerent  fur  luy  vne
[163]  grefle  de  coups  de  baftos  &  le  coduifirent  de
la  forte  iufques  aux  cabanes,  la  ils  le  firent  moter  fur
vn  echaffaut  (eleue  de  terre  d'enuiron  fix  pieds)  tout
nud,  trempe  das  fon  propre  fang,  qui  couloit  quafi  de
toutes  les  parties  de  fon  corps,  expofe  k  vn  vent  froid
qui  glagoit  le  fang  fur  fa  peau,  &  luy  commanderent
de  chanter  pendant  le  feltin  que  I'on  fift  a  ceux  qui
auoient  amene  les  prifonniers;  le  feftin  acheue  les
guerriers  fe  retirerent  &  laifferent  le  Pere  auec  fes
compagnons  entre  les  mains  des  ieunes  gens,  lefquels
les  firent  defcendre  de  I'efchaffaut  oti  ils  auoient  efte
deux  heures  expofez  a  la  rifee  de  ces  Barbares,  eftans
defcendus  on  les  fit  danfer  a  leur  mode,  mais  parce
que  le  Pere  ne  le  faifoit  pas  bien,  ils  le  frappoient,
ils  le  piquoient  &  luy  arrachoient  les  cheueux,  cinq
ou  fix  iours  fe  pafTerent  dans  ces  paffe-temps,  quel-
qu'vn  par  compaffion  luy  ayant  iette  quelque  lambeau
de  foftanne  pour  fe  couurir,  il  s'en  feruoit  le  iour,
mais  fur  le  foir  on  luy  oftoit  &  s'amaffant  autour  de
luy,  I'vn  le  piquoit  d'vn  bafton  fort  aigu,  I'autre  le
brufloit  auec  vn  [164]  tifon,  d'autres  le  cauterifoient
auec  des  calumez  tous  rouges  de  feu,  les  enfans
iettoient  fur  luy  de  la  cendre  chaude  &  des  charbons
ardens,  puis  le  faifoient  marcher  a  I'entour  du  feu,
ou  ils  auoient  fich6  de  petits  baflons  pointus,  &  feme
de  la  cendre  rouge  &  du  feu,  d'autres  luy  arrachoient
la  barbe  &  les  cheueux,  &  chafque  nuidt  on  recom-
mengoit  ce  beau  ieu,  &  on  luy  brufloit  a  la  fin  quelque
ongle  ou  quelque  doigt,  enuiron  I'efpace  d'vn  demy
quart-d'heure  vn  foir  on  luy  brufloit  vn  ongle,   vn


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  43

he  lifted  his  foot  than  one  of  the  Iroquois  seized  him
by  the  left  hand,  and  with  a  knife  inflicted  a  deep
gash  between  the  third  and  the  little  fingers;  and
then  the  others  discharged  on  him  a  [163]  shower  of
blows  with  cudgels,  and  led  him  thus  to  the  cabins.
There  they  made  him  ascend  a  scaffold  (raised  about
six  feet  from  the  ground), — quite  naked,  bathed  in
his  own  blood,  that  flowed  from  nearly  every  part  of
his  body,  and  exposed  to  a  cold  wind  that  congealed
his  blood  on  his  skin ;  and  they  ordered  him  to  sing
during  the  feast  that  they  gave  to  those  who  had
brought  in  the  prisoners.  When  the  feast  was  over,
the  warriors  withdrew  and  left  the  Father  and  his
companions  in  the  hands  of  the  young  men,  who
made  them  descend  from  the  scaffold,  whereon  they
had  stood  for  two  hours,  exposed  to  the  jeers  of  these
Barbarians.  When  they  had  come  down,  they  were
made  to  dance,  after  their  fashion.  But,  as  the  Fa-
ther did  not  do  it  well,  they  struck  him,  goaded  him,
and  tore  out  his  hair.  Five  or  six  days  were  spent
in  this  pastime.  Some  one  out  of  compassion  threw
him  some  shreds  of  a  gown,  wherewith  to  cover  him-
self. He  made  use  of  it  during  the  day ;  but  at  night
they  took  it  from  him,  and,  gathering  round  him,
one  goaded  him  with  a  very  sharp  stick ;  another
burned  him  with  a  [164]  firebrand;  others  seared
him  with  calumets  heated  red-hot.  The  children
threw  on  him  hot  embers  and  glowing  coals.  Then
they  made  him  walk  around  the  fire  where  they  had
stuck  short,  pointed  sticks  into  the  ground,  and  had
scattered  hot  embers  and  live  coals ;  others  tore  out
his  beard  and  his  hair.  Every  night,  they  would  begin
anew  this  diverting  sport;  and,  at  the  end,  they
would  burn  one  of  his  nails  or  one  of  his  fingers  dur-


44  LES  RELATIOXS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

autre  foir  le  premier  artere  [sc.  article]  d'vn  doigt,
vn  autre  le  fecond,  ainfi  ils  luy  appliquerent  le  feu
aux  doigts  plus  de  dix-huid:  fois,  &  luy  percerent  le
pied  gauche  auec  vn  bafton,  &  cependant  il  falloit
chanter;  ce  petit  ieu  duroit  bien  iufques  a  deux
heures  apres  minuict:  &  lors  ils  le  laiffoient-la  a
platte  terre  en  lieu  ou  la  pluye  tomboit  en  abon-
dance,  n'ayant  pour  couuerture  qu'vne  petite  peau  qui
ne  couuroit  pas  la  moitie  de  fon  corps:  vn  mois
entier  s'eft  paile  de  la  forte.

De  ce  lieu  il  full;  conduit  au  premier  Bourg  des
Iroquois  &  fouffrifl  plus  en  [165]  ce  voyage  qu'au
precedent,  eiiant  bleffe,  foible,  mal  veftu,  peu  nour-
ri,  &  la  nuidl  expofe  a  I'air  &  lie  a  vn  arbre/  de  forte
qu'au  lieu  de  dormir  il  ne  faifoit  que  trembler  de
froid.  Eftant  arriu6  au  premier  Bourg,  il  y  fuft
receu  a  grands  coups  de  baftons,  qu'on  luy  donna  fur
les  parties  du  corps  les  plus  fenfibles :  mais  les  coups
furent  fi  grands  qu'il  tomba  par  terre  a  demy  mort,
ils  ne  laiffoient  pas  pourtant  de  le  frapper  fur  la  poi-
trine  &  a  la  tefte,  &  I'eufCent  allomme  fi  vn  Capitaine
ne  I'euft  traifne  fur  I'efchaffaut  qu'on  auoit  drefCe
comme  en  la  premiere  rencontre:  Ce  fut  icy  qu'on
luy  couppa  le  poulce  gauche  &  deux  doigts  de  la  main
droite,  luy  ayant  auparauant  fendu  la  main  entre  le
fecond  doigt  &  celuy  du  milieu,  en  mefme-temps
furuint  vne  grande  pluye  accompagn^e  de  tonnerre
&  d'efclairs,  qui  donna  fujet  aux  Sauuages  de
s'enfuir,  &  ainli  le  lailTerent-lk  tout  nud,  la  nuidt
s'approchant  on  le  fait  venir  dans  vne  cabane,  on  luy
brufle  le  refte  des  ongles  &  quelques  doigts  des
mains,  on  luy  tordit  ceux  des  pieds,  on  le  forja  h.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  45

ing  seven  or  eight  minutes.  One  night,  they  would
burn  a  nail ;  another  night,  the  first  joint  of  a  finger ;
on  another,  the  second  joint.  Thus  they  applied  fire
to  his  fingers  over  eighteen  times.  They  pierced
his  left  foot  with  a  stick,  and,  meantime,  he  was  com-
pelled to  sing.  This  little  amusement  lasted  until
fully  two  hours  after  midnight;  and  then  they  left
him  there,  lying  flat  on  the  ground  in  a  spot  where
rain  fell  abundantly, —  his  only  covering  being  a
small  skin  that  did  not  cover  one  half  of  his  body.
A  whole  month  passed  in  this  manner.

From  this  place,  he  was  taken  to  the  first  Village
of  the  Iroquois,  and  suffered  more  on  [165]  this  jour-
ney than  on  the  previous  one, — being  wounded,
feeble,  poorly  clad,  with  but  little  food,  and  at  night
exposed  to  the  air  and  bound  to  a  tree ;  so  that,  in-
stead of  sleeping,  he  could  only  shiver  with  the  cold.
On  arriving  at  the  first  Village,  he  was  received  with
severe  blows,  administered  with  cudgels  on  the  most
sensitive  parts  of  his  body ;  but  the  blows  were  so
heavy  that  he  fell  to  the  ground,  half  dead.  They
still  continued  to  strike  him  on  the  chest  and  on  the
head,  and  would  have  killed  him,  had  not  a  Captain
dragged  him  on  the  scaffold  that  had  been  erected,
as  on  the  first  occasion.  Here  they  cut  off  his  left
thumb,  and  two  fingers  of  his  right  hand,  after  first
slitting  his  hand  between  the  second  and  middle
fingers.  In  the  meanwhile,  there  came  a  heavy
shower  accompanied  by  thunder  and  lightning,  which
drove  the  Savages  away,  and  so  they  left  him  there
quite  naked.  As  night  approached,  they  took  him
into  a  cabin  where  they  burned  the  remainder  of  his
nails  and  some  of  his  fingers,  twisted  his  toes,  and


46  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.26

manger  [i66]  de  I'ordure  &  le  refte  des  chiens  fans
luy  laiffer  aucun  repos.

Apres  qu'on  I'euft  tourmente  de  la  forte  dans  ce
Bourg,  on  le  mene  a  vn  autre  61oigne  de  deux  ou
trois  lieues,  ou  eftant  arriuez,  on  luy  fait  fouffrir
derechef  les  mefmes  tourmens,  &  de  plus  on  le  pend
par  les  pieds  auec  des  chaifnes,  &  puis  I'ayant  def-
pendu  on  luy  lie  des  mefmes  chaifnes  les  mains,  les
pieds  &  le  col,  fept  iours  fe  pafferent  de  la  forte,  &
y  adioufterent  de  nouueaux  tourmens,  car  il  le  firent
fouffrir  en  des  lieux,  &  en  des  fagons  que  la  bien-
feance  ne  permet  pas  d'efcrire.  On  luy  verfoit  du
fag-amite  fur  le  ventre,  &  puis  pour  manger  ce  fag-
amit6  on  appelloit  les  chiens  qui  le  mordoient  en  le
mangeant;  Toutes  ces  fouffrances  le  mirent  en  tel
eftat  qti'il  deuint  fi  puant  &  infedl  que  chacun  s'efloi-
gnoit  de  luy  comme  d'vne  charogne,  &  on  ne  I'appro-
choit  que  pour  le  tourmenter,  il  eftoit  plein  de  pus  &
d' ordure,  «&  les  vers  fourmilloient  dans  fes  playes:
apres  tout,  a  peine  pouuoit-il  trouuer  quelqu'vn  qui
luy  donnaft  vn  peu  de  bled  d'Inde  cuit  dans  I'eau/
Les  coups  qu'il  [167]  auoit  receu  luy  auoient  caufe
vne  apoltume  ^  la  cuiffe  qui  luy  empefchoit  fon  repos,
qui  d'ailleurs  eftoit  bien  trauerfe  par  la  duret6  de  la
terre,  fur  laquelle  il  eftendoit  fon  corps,  qui  n'auoit
plus  que  la  peau  &  les  os,  il  ne  f^auoit  comme  il  pour-
roit  ouurir  fon  apoftume,  mais  Dieu  conduifant  la
main  d'vn  Sauuage  qui  auoit  deffein  de  luy  donner
trois  coups  de  coufteau,  fit  en  forte  que  ce  Sauuage
le  frappa  iuftemet  dans  I'apoftume,  d'ou  il  fortifl  du
pus  &  du  fang  en  abondance  &  ainfi  le  guerit.  Qui
euft  iamais  creu  qu'vn  homme  pent  tant  fouffrir  fans
mourir,  abandonne  in  terra  alieiia,  in  loco  honoris  \_sc.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  47

forced  him  to  eat  [166]  filth  and  what  the  dogs  had
left,  without  giving  him  any  rest.

After  he  had  been  so  tortured  in  that  Village,  he
was  taken  to  another,  at  a  distance  of  two  or  three
leagues,  where  again  he  had  to  suffer  the  same
torments.  He  was,  moreover,  hung  up  in  chains,  by
the  feet;  and,  when  he  was  taken  down,  his  feet,  his
hands,  and  his  neck  were  bound  with  the  same  chains.
Seven  days  passed  in  this  manner,  and  new  tortures
were  added ;  for  he  was  made  to  suffer  in  places  and
in  ways  concerning  which  propriety  will  not  allow
us  to  write.  Sagamit6  was  poured  on  his  stomach
and  the  dogs  were  called  to  eat  the  sagamite,  biting
him  as  they  ate.  All  these  sufferings  reduced  him
to  such  a  state  that  he  became  so  offensive  and
noisome  to  the  smell,  that  all  kept  away  from  him  as
from  carrion  and  approached  only  to  torment  him.
He  was  covered  with  pus  and  filth,  and  his  sores
were  alive  with  maggots.  With  all  this,  he  could
hardly  find  any  one  who  would  give  him  a  little
Indian  corn  boiled  in  water.  The  blows  that  he  [167]
had  received  caused  an  abscess  to  form  on  his  thigh,
that  allowed  him  no  rest, —  which  was,  moreover,
difficult  to  obtain  on  account  of  the  hardness  of  the
ground,  on  which  he  stretched  his  body,  that  was
only  skin  and  bone.  He  did  not  know  how  he  could
succeed  in  opening  his  abscess,  but  God  guided  the
hand  of  a  Savage  —  who  wished  to  stab  him  three
times  with  a  knife  —  so  that  the  Savage  struck  him
directly  on  the  abscess,  whence  flowed  an  abundance
of  pus  and  blood,  and  thus  he  was  cured.  Who
would  ever  have  thought  that  any  man  could  have
suffered  so  much  without  dying  —  abandoned  in  terra
aliena,    in    loco   horroris   et  vastce  solitiidinis;    without


48  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.26

horroris]  &  vajl<z  folitudinis,  fans  langue  pour  fe  faire
entendre,  fans  amis  pour  fe  confoler,  fans  Sacremens
&  fans  aucun  remede  pour  adoucir  fes  maux.  II  ne
fgauoit  pas  pourquoy  les  Sauuages  differoient  tant  fa
mort,  fi  ce  n'eftoit  peut-eflre  pour  I'engreffer  deuant
que  de  le  manger,  mais  ils  n'en  prenoient  pas  les
moyens.  Enfin  le  19.  de  luin,  les  Iroquois  s'affem-
blerent  de  tous  les  Bourgs  au  nombre  de  2000.  dans
le  Bourg  ou  eftoit  le  Pere,  qui  croyoit  que  ce  iour
[168]  feroit  le  dernier  de  fa  vie,  apres  I'aflemblee  il
pria  le  Capitaine  qu'on  luy  changeaft  le  tourment  du
feu  en  vn  autre,  que  pour  la  mort  il  la  receuroit
volontiers,  non  feulement  tu  ne  fouffriras  pas  le  feu,
luy  repartift  ce  Capitaine,  mais  qui  plus  eft  tu  n'en
mourras  pas,  la  refolution  en  eft  prife/  ie  ne  f9ay
comme  il  la  prirent,  mais  bien,  f9ay-ie  qu'eux-mefmes
s'eftonnoient  apres  de  leur  refolution  fans  fgauoir
pourquoy,  comme  les  Hollandois  &  le  bon  Coufture,
qui  fut  pris  il  y  a  deux  ans  auec  le  Pere  logues,  &  qui
n'a  veu  le  Pere  Breffany  qu'apres  fa  deliurance,  I'ont
rapporte.

Cette  refolution  prife,  ils  le  donnerent  auec  toutes
les  ceremonies  du  pais,  a  vne  bonne  femme,  dont  le
grand  pere  auoit  efte  tue  autrefois  dans  vne  rencon-
tre par  les  Hurons,  cette  femme  le  recent,  mais  fes
fiUes  ne  le  pouuoient  fouffrir  tant  il  faifoit  horreur;
le  ne  f9ay  fi  ce  fut  cela  qui  porta  la  mere  ^  fonger  a
fa  deliurance,  ou  bien  quelque  compaffion  qu'elle  euft
de  luy,  ou  pluftoit  que  le  voyant  inutile  au  trauail
pour  la  mutilation  [169]  de  fes  doigts,  elle  fe  perfua-
da  qu'il  luy  feroit  ^  charge/  Tant  y  a  qu'elle  com-
manda  a  fon  fils  de  le  mener  aux  Hollandois,  &  tirant


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  49

language  with  which  to  make  himself  heard ;  without
friends  to  console  him;  without  Sacraments,  and
without  any  remedy  wherewith  to  alleviate  his  suffer-
ing? He  did  not  know  why  the  Savages  deferred  his
death  so  long, —  unless,  perhaps,  to  fatten  him  before
eating  him ;  but  they  did  not  take  the  means  to  do
so.  Finally,  on  the  19th  of  June,  the  Iroquois  gath-
ered together  from  all  the  Villages,  to  the  number
of  2,000,  in  the  Village  where  the  Father  was,  who
thought  that  that  day  [168]  would  be  the  last  of  his
life.  After  the  meeting,  he  begged  the  Captain  that
the  torture  by  fire  might  be  changed  for  another ;  as
for  death,  he  would  welcome  it.  "  Not  only  shalt
thou  not  suffer  by  fire,"  replied  the  Captain,  ''but
what  is  more,  thou  shalt  not  die.  That  has  been
resolved."  I  know  not  how  they  came  to  take  that
resolution;  but  I  know  well  that  they  themselves
were  afterward  astonished  at  it,  without  knowing
why,  as  the  Dutch  and  the  good  Cousture  —  who  was
taken  two  years  ago  with  Father  Jogues,  and  who
saw  Father  Bressany  only  after  his  deliverance  —  have
related.

That  resolution  taken,  they  gave  him,  with  all  the
ceremonies  usual  in  the  country,  to  a  good  woman
whose  grandfather  had  formerly  been  killed  by  the
Hurons  in  an  encounter.  This  woman  received  him :
but  her  daughters  could  not  bear  him,  because  he
inspired  them  with  such  horror.  I  know  not  whether
it  was  this  that  led  the  mother  to  think  of  his  deliver-
ance, or  whether  it  was  through  compassion  that  she
took  on  him,  or,  rather,  because  she  saw  that  he  was
unfit  for  work  owing  to  the  mutilation  [169]  of  his
fingers,  and  was  convinced  that  he  would  be  a  burden
upon  her.     In  any  case,  she  ordered  her  son  to  take


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.26

d'eux  quelque  prefent  le  remettre  entre  leurs  mains,
ce  que  le  fils  executa  fidelement.

Mais  auparauant  que  de  partir  le  Pere  euft  cette
confolation  de  baptifer  vn  Huron  qu'on  menoit  au
fupplice,  qui  luy  demanda  auec  inflance  le  Baptefme
auparauant  que  de  mourir,  ce  que  le  Pere  luy  accor-
da,  f5achant  qu'il  auoit  receu  de  nos  Peres  vne  fuffi-
fante  inftrudtion,  mais  il  ne  fe  peut  faire  li  fecrette-
ment  que  les  Iroquois  ne  s'en  apperceuffent,  c'eft
pourquoy  ils  I'obligerent  de  fortir  &  de  I'abandonner.
Apres  qu'il  fut  mort  ils  apporterent  fes  membres  en
la  cabane  ou  eftoit  le  Pere,  &  les  ayant  fait  cuire  les
mangerent  en  fa  prefence  &  mirent  la  tefte  du  mort
k  fes  pieds,  luy  demandant:  He  bien,  que  luy  a  feruy
le  Baptefme,  {\  le  Pere  euft  peu  s'expliquer  en  leur
langue,  ce  luy  eftoit  vne  belle  occafion  pour  les  in-
ftruire;  ce  luy  fuft  neantmoins  vne  confolation  [170]
bien  fenfible  de  s'eftre  trouue  Ik  fi  k  propos  pour  le
bon-heur  de  ce  pauure  Sauuage.  II  partift  peu  apres
en  compagnie  de  ce  ieune  Sauuage  fils  de  cette  bonne
veufue,  qui  le  mena  aux  Hollandois,  lefquels  le
receurent  auec  beaucoup  de  bien-veillance  &  con-
tenterent  le  Sauuage  au  deffus  de  fes  efperances,
donnerent  des  habits  au  Pere,  &  apres  I'auoir  retenu
quelque  temps  pour  reparer  fes  forces  le  firent
embarquer,  il  arriua  a  la  Rochelle  le  quinziefme  de
Nouembre  de  I'annee  1644.  en  meilleure  fante  qu'il
n'euft  iamais,  depuis  qu'il  eft  de  noftre  Compagnie.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  51

him  to  the  Dutch,  and,  on  receiving  some  present
from  them,  to  deliver  him  into  their  hands.  This
the  son  faithfully  carried  out.

But,  before  leaving,  the  Father  had  the  consola-
tion of  baptizing  a  Huron  who  was  being  taken  to
the  torture,  and  who  earnestly  begged  for  Baptism
before  dying.  This  the  Father  granted  him,  know-
ing that  he  had  received  sufficient  instruction  from
our  Fathers.  But  it  could  not  be  done  so  secretly
that  the  Iroquois  did  not  perceive  it,  so  they  com-
pelled him  to  go  out  and  leave  him.  When  he  was
dead,  they  brought  his  limbs  into  the  cabin  where
the  Father  was,  and,  after  cooking  them,  they  ate
them  in  his  presence;  then,  placing  the  head  of  the
dead  man  at  his  feet,  they  asked:  "  Well!  of  what
avail  was  Baptism  to  him?"  If  the  Father  could
have  explained  himself  in  their  language,  it  would
have  been  a  good  opportunity  for  him  to  instruct
them.  It  was,  nevertheless,  a  profound  consolation
[170]  to  have  been  there  so  opportunely  for  the
happiness  of  that  poor  Savage.  He  started  shortly
afterward,  in  the  company  of  the  young  Savage,  the
son  of  the  good  widow,  who  took  him  to  the  Dutch.
He  was  received  by  them  with  great  kindness,  and
they  satisfied  the  Savage  beyond  all  his  expectations ;
they  gave  the  Father  clothes,  and,  after  keeping  him
with  them  for  some  time,  until  his  health  was
restored,  they  put  him  on  board  a  ship.  He  reached
la  Rochelle,  on  the  fifteenth  of  November  of  the  year
1644,  in  better  health  than  he  has  ever  enjoyed  since
he  has  belonged  to  our  Society.


52  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.  26


[171]  CHAPITRE  X.

DE    LA    PRISE    DE   TROIS    IROQUOIS.

VNE  Efcoiiade  de  foixante  Hurons  eftant  defcen-
due  vers  les  Frangois  a  deffein  de  cobattre  les
Iroquois  s'ils  les  auoient  a  la  rencontre,  arriua
iufqu'aux  trois  Riuieres,  fans  trouuer  aucun  ennemy ;
mais  ils  n'y  feuret  pas  log-temps,  qu'on  leur  rapporte
que  quelques  canots  auoient  paru  dans  le  Lac  de
faindt  Pierre  qui  n'eft  qu'a  deux  lieues  au  deffus  des
trois  Riuieres;  ils  y  courent  auffi-tofl  accompagnez
de  quelques  Algonquins  qui  voulurent  eftre  de  la  par-
tie,  n'ayant  trouue  que  des  marques,  &  des  veftiges
de  I'ennemy,  ils  montent  plus  haut  «&  donnent  iuf-
qu'a  Richelieu,  qui  eft  fur  I'Emboucheure  de  la  riui-
ere  des  Iroquois/  eftans  arriuez  en  cette  habitation,
quelques-vns  fe  repoferent,  d'autres  fe  doutans  que
les  Iroquois  ne  feroient  pas  loin,  s'embarquerent
[172]  la  nuidt  fur  cette  riuiere  pour  les  aller  cher-
cher ;  ils  paffent  au  trauers  des  fentinelles  Iroquoif es
fans  eftre  apperceus:  trete  Iroquois  eftoient  comme
en  garde  au  deffous  de  leur  gros,  pour  decouurir  fi
quelques  Frangois  ou  quelques  Sauuages  de  nos  alliez
ne  paroiftroient  pas  fur  I'eau,  oil  fur  la  terre/  comme
la  nuicft  eftoit  obfcure  ils  ne  decouurirent  point  ces
ieunes  guerriers,  qui  montoient  centre  le  courant  de
la  riuiere  pour  aller  decouurir  I'ennemy/  ils  entr'oui-
rent  neantmoins  quelque  bruit,  ces  Hurons  s'eftans
done  auancez  apperceurent  quantity  de  feux  dans  les


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  53


[171]  CHAPTER  X.

OF   THE    CAPTURE    OF   THREE    IROQUOIS.

A  BAND  of  sixty  Hurons  who  had  come  down
toward  the  French  with  the  intention  of  fight-
ing the  Iroquois,  if  they  encountered  them,
reached  the  three  Rivers  without  meeting  an  enemy.
But  they  had  not  long  been  there,  when  information
was  brought  them  that  some  canoes  had  made  their
appearance  on  Lake  saint  Pierre,  which  is  only  two
leagues  above  the  three  Rivers.  They  hastened
there  at  once,  accompanied  by  some  Algonquins  who
wished  to  join  them.  Finding  only  signs  and  traces
of  the  enemy,  they  went  farther  up,  as  far  as  Riche-
lieu, which  is  at  the  Mouth  of  the  river  of  the  Iro-
quois. When  they  reached  that  settlement,  some  of
them  rested;  while  the  others,  thinking  that  the
Iroquois  were  not  far  away,  embarked  [172]  at  night
on  that  river  to  go  and  seek  them.  They  passed
through  the  Iroquois  sentinels,  without  being  noticed.
Thirty  Iroquois  were  posted  as  pickets  below  their
main  body,  to  watch  for  any  French  or  any  Savages
of  our  allies  who  might  show  themselves,  on  the
water  or  on  land.  As  the  night  was  dark,  they  did
not  perceive  those  young  warriors  who  were  ascend-
ing, against  the  current  of  the  river,  to  discover  the
enemy.  They  heard  some  noise,  however.  When  the
Hurons  had  advanced  some  distance,  they  observed
a  number  of  fires  in  the  woods.  Having  ascertained
that  they  were  enemies,  and  judging  from  the  num-


54  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26

bois,  ayant  reconnu  qu'ils  eftoient  ennemys,  &  con-
iedturans  au  nombre  de  leurs  feux  que  la  partie
n'eftoit  pas  efgalle,  ils  fe  retirerent  vn  pen  pour  con-
fulter  ce  qu'ils  feroient,  faifans  alte  ils  entendirent
derriere  eux  deux  canots  qui  voguoient  a  force  de
rames;  ils  furent  bien  eflonnez,  comme  ils  ne  les
auoient  pas  veus  paffans  au  milieu  d'eux.

C'eftoit  I'embufcade  de  ces  trente  Iroquois,  qui  fe
doutans  qu'il  y  auoit  quelqu'vn  [173]  fur  la  riuiere,
en  vouloient  auoir  connoiffance ;  voila  done  nos
Hurons  entre  le  gros  de  leurs  ennemys,  &  ces  deux
canots  bien  armez,  ils  tournent  vifage  cotre  ceux-cy
&  fe  battent  a  coups  d'Arquebufes,  &  de  fleches  fans
grand  effedt,  pource  qu'il  eftoit  nuidt,  ces  deux  canots
fe  retirans  auec  leur  gros;  vn  Huron  qui  auoit  efte
pris  en  guerre  par  les  Iroquois,  &  qui  auoit  pris  party
auec  eux,  les  quitta  k  la  faueur  de  la  nuic5t,  &  courant
fur  le  bord  de  la  riuiere  appelle  les  Hurons,  qui
eftoient  en  doute  s'ils  retourneroient  au  combat;
apres  quelque  desfiance  de  cet  homme,  ils  I'appro-
chent;  il  s'efcrie  qu'il  eft  de  leur  Nation,  &  qu'il
defire  fe  fauuer  auec  eux;  combien  eftes-vous  icy,
leur  demanda-il,  nous  ne  fommes  que  foixante  ref-
pondent  les  Hurons,  fauuez-vous  repart-il,  car  outre
les  canots  que  vous  auez  rencontr6,  qui  faifoient
trente  Iroquois,  il  y  en  a  vne  centaine  cachez  tout
proche  d'icy;  il  ne  comtoit  pas  ceux  qui  eftoient
efpars  9a  &  la  par  brigades  du  long  de  la  grande  riui-
ere; vn  autre  Huron  qui  s'eftoit  cache  fur  [174]  le
bord  du  bois,  &  qui  auoit  prefix  I'oreille  aux  Iroquois,
leur  dit  que  dix  de  cette  bande  de  trente  s' eftoient
deftachez  pour  aller  k  la  chalfe  des  Frangois;  ces  dix
chaffeurs  eftoient  tout  proche  du  fort  de  Richelieu


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  55

ber  of  their  fires  that  the  forces  were  unequal,  they
withdrew  a  little,  to  consult  as  to  what  they  should
do.  While  halting,  they  heard  in  their  rear  two
canoes,  propelled  by  many  paddles.  They  were
greatly  surprised,  because  they  had  not  observed
these  as  they  passed  through  them.

It  was  the  ambush  of  those  thirty  Iroquois  who,
suspecting  that  there  was  some  one  [173]  on  the  river,
wished  to  find  out  who  it  was.  Here,  then,  were  our
Hurons  between  the  main  body  of  their  enemies  and
these  two  well-manned  canoes.  They  turned  toward
the  latter,  and  both  sides  fired  Arquebus  shots  and
arrows  without  much  effect,  owing  to  the  darkness
of  the  night.  The  two  canoes  retreated  to  their  main
body.  A  Huron  who  had  been  captured  in  battle  by
the  Iroquois  and  had  taken  sides  with  them,  left  them
under  cover  of  night,  and,  running  along  the  bank
of  the  river,  he  called  out  to  the  Hurons,  who  were
in  doubt  as  to  whether  they  should  renew  the  fight.
After  some  distrust  of  this  man,  they  drew  near  to
him.  He  called  out  that  he  belonged  to  their  Na-
tion, and  that  he  desired  to  escape  with  them.  "  How
many  of  you  are  here?"  he  asked.  "  We  are  but
sixty,"  replied  the  Hurons.  "  Fly,"  he  said;  "  for,
besides  the  two  canoes  that  you  met,  which  contained
thirty  Iroquois,  there  are  a  hundred,  hidden  not  far
from  here."  He  did  not  include  those  who  were
scattered  here  and  there,  in  troops,  along  the  great
river.  Another  Huron,  who  had  hidden  himself  in
[174]  the  edge  of  the  wood  and  had  listened  to  the
Iroquois,  told  them  that  ten  out  of  the  band  of  thirty
had  detached  themselves  therefrom  to  hunt  for
Frenchmen.  Those  ten  hunters  were  quite  near
fort  Richelieu,  hidden  amid  the  brushwood  and  trees.


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

cachez  derriere  des  broffailles  &  des  arbres,  ou  ils
attendoient  que  les  Francois  fortiffent  le  matin  pour
aller  vifiter  des  rets  tendues  bien  proche  de  leur  fort,
ces  guerriers  fgachant  cela  s'en  vont  pour  reconoiftre
cette  embufcade,  I'ayant  defcouuerte,  ils  tafchent  de
I'enuironner/  mais  ces  efpions  fe  voyans  defcouuers  fe
leuent  comme  vne  volee  de  Perdrix  effarees,  n'ayans
pas  n'y  I'aifle,  n'y  les  pieds  affez  forts  pour  fe  fauuer
tous/  il  en  tomba  trois  entre  les  mains  de  nos  Hurons,
lefquels  en  donnerent  vn  aux  Algonquins,  qui  com-
manceret  a  le  traidter  d'vne  fa9on  eftrage;  comme  il
y  auoit  quantite  d'ennemis  a  I'entour  de  Richelieu,
ne  croyans  pas  eftre  en  affurance  ils  s'embarqueret
tous  tant  Hurons  qu'Algoquins  pour  defcendre  aux
trois  Riuieres,  ou  ils  amenerent  leurs  prifonniers  en
triomphe.  Le  26.  de  [175]  luillet  fur  les  4.  heures
du  matin  on  vit  des  trois  Riuieres  vn  canot,  qui
fuiuoit  le  courant  de  I'eau,  &  s'eftant  approche  a  la
portee  de  la  parole,  on  entendit  la  voix  lugubre  d'vn
Algonquin,  qui  crioit  que  I'vn  des  Huros  qui  eftoiet
venus  en  guerre,  eftoit  mort/  mais  il  s'eftoit  trop6,
il  eft  bie  vray  que  I'vn  de  ces  trois  Iroquois  lors  qu'on
le  prift,  auoit  donne  vn  coup  de  coufteau  au  Huron
qui  le  faifit,  &  qu'on  croyoit  que  le  coup  fut  mortel,
mais  il  ne  I'eftoit  pas,  quoy  qu'il  euft  le  poulmo  fort
offenf^,  &  qu'il  en  fortit  vne  partie,  que  le  chirurgien
couppa  &  chofe  eilrange,  I'ayant  iett6e  par  terre,  vn
Huron  la  ramaffa  la  fit  griller,  &  la  donna  a  manger
a  c6t  home  bleff6,  qui  I'aualla  en  chantant  voila  vne
medecine  bien  extraordinaire.

Bien-toft  apres  on  ouyt  de  loin  des  voix  d'allegreffe
on  vit  paroiflre  fur  la  grande  riuiere  douze  oti  quinze
canots,  qui  s'en  venoient  doucement  au  gr6  de  I'eau


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  57

where  they  were  waiting  until  the  French  should
come  out  in  the  morning  to  visit  the  nets  stretched
near  their  fort.  The  warriors,  on  hearing  this,  went
to  reconnoitre  that  ambuscade ;  and,  on  discovering
it,  they  tried  to  surround  it.  But,  when  the  spies
saw  that  they  were  found  out,  they  rose  like  a  covey
of  frightened  Partridges ;  and  having  neither  wings
nor  feet  sufficiently  swift  to  allow  of  their  all  escap-
ing, three  of  them  fell  into  the  hands  of  our  Hurons.
They  gave  one  to  the  Algonquins,  who  commenced
to  treat  him  in  a  barbarous  manner.  As  there  were
many  enemies  around  Richelieu,  they  did  not  feel
safe ;  so  both  Hurons  and  Algonquins  embarked  to
go  down  to  the  three  Rivers,  where  they  brought  their
prisoners  in  triumph.  On  the  26th  of  [175]  July,  at
4  o'clock  in  the  morning,  a  canoe  was  observed  from
the  three  Rivers  floating  down  the  current.  When
it  had  approached  within  earshot,  the  doleful  voice
of  an  Algonquin  was  heard,  calling  out  that  one  of
the  Hurons  who  had  gone  to  the  war  was  dead.  But
he  was  mistaken.  It  was  quite  true  that  one  of  those
three  Iroquois,  on  being  captured,  had  stabbed  with
his  knife  the  Huron  who  had  seized  him ;  and  that
the  wound  was  considered  mortal.  But  it  was  not
so,  although  his  lung  was  badly  injured,  and  a  por-
tion of  it  protruded.  The  surgeon  cut  this  off;  and,
strange  to  say,  when  he  threw  it  on  the  ground,  a
Huron  picked  it  up,  roasted  it,  and  gave  it  to  the
wounded  man  to  eat.  He  swallowed  it,  singing:
"  That  is  very  strange  medicine."

Soon  afterward,  joyful  voices  were  heard  from
afar ;  and  from  twelve  to  fifteen  canoes  made  their
appearance  on  the  great  river,  floating  gently  down
with  the  current,  bearing  about  eighty  warriors,  who


58  LES  RELATIONS  DBS  JESUITES         [Vol.26

portas  enuiron  quatre-vingt  foldats  qui  frappoiet  de
leurs  auirons  fur  le  bord  de  ces  canots  chantans  tous
enfemble,  &  faifans  dancer  les  prifonniers  k  la  cadece
de  leurs  voix,  &  de  leur  bruit,  ils  efloient  [176]  tous
affis  dans  ces  petits  batteaux  d'Efcorce,  excepte  les
trois  pauures  vidtimes  qui  paroiffoient  par  deffus  les
autres,  qui  chantoient  auffi  courageufement  que  les
vidtorieux,  faifans  paroiflre  au  branfle  de  leur  corps
&  au  regard  de  leurs  yeux  que  le  feu,  &  la  mort  qu'ils
attendoient,  ne  leur  faifoient  point  de  peur.

Tout  le  monde  fortit  pour  voir  ce  Triomphe  de
Sauuages,  la  ioye  poffedoit  I'ame  des  vainqueurs,  &
la  douleur  affligeoit  les  vaincus.  Ayant  tous  mis
pied  a  terre  on  les  mene  das  les  cabanes  des  Algon-
quins;  quelques-vns  fe  iettent  fur  celuy,  qu'on  leur
auoit  d6n6,  il  luy  arrachet  les  ongles,  luy  couppent
plufieurs  doigts,  luy  bruflent  les  pieds  auec  des  pier-
res  ardentes:  M  de  Chamfiour  qui  commande  en
cette  habitation,  leur  enuoye  dire  qu'ils  s'arreftent,
qu'il  faut  donner  aduis  a  M.  le  Cheualier  de  Montma-
gny  Gouuerneur  du  pays  de  la  prife  de  ces  prifon-
niers, &  que  I'affaire  eft  d' importance.

A  peine  put-on  empecher  la  rage  de  ces  efprits
vindicatifs  au  dernier  point ;  car  ce  pauure  mif erable
ayant  efte  donn6  en  la  place  d'vn  braue  Algoquin
pris,  &  brufle  [177]  des  Iroquois;  tous  ceux  qui  ai-
moient  cet  homme  mort,  d^chargeoient  leur  colere
fur  ce  demy-viuant.

Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  eftant  arriue  alTembla  les
principaux  Algonquins;  mais  comme  leur  vengeace
auoit  defia  deftine  cette  vidtime  au  feu,  ils  r^pon-
dirent  que  c'eftoit  fait  de  fa  vie,  que  le  bucher  eftoit
defia  prepare,  qu'ils  le  traiteroient  a  la  fa9on  qu'ils


1642-44J  RELATION  OF  1643-44  59

Struck  their  paddles  against  the  sides  of  the  canoes,
and  sang  all  together, — making  the  prisoners  dance
in  time  to  their  voices,  and  to  the  noise  that  they
made.  They  were  [176]  all  seated  in  these  little
Bark  boats,  with  the  exception  of  the  three  poor  vic-
tims, who  appeared  above  the  others,  and  who  sang
as  boldly  as  the  victors,  —  showing  by  the  swaying
of  their  bodies,  and  the  look  in  their  eyes,  that  the
fire  and  death  that  they  expected  caused  them  no
fear.

All  the  people  came  out  to  witness  this  Triumph
of  the  Savages.  Joy  animated  the  souls  of  the  vic-
tors, while  sorrow  afflicted  those  of  the  vanquished.
When  all  had  landed,  they  were  taken  to  the  cabins
of  the  Algonquins.  Some  threw  themselves  on  him
who  had  been  given  to  them,  tore  out  his  nails,  cut
off  several  of  his  fingers,  and  burned  his  feet  with
heated  stones.  Monsieur  de  Chamflour,  the  com-
mandant of  the  settlement,  sent  word  to  them  to
desist ;  that  information  had  to  be  given  to  Monsieur
the  Chevalier  de  Montmagny,  the  Governor  of  the
country,  of  the  capture  of  the  prisoners  and  that  the
matter  was  important.

It  was  difficult  to  control  the  fury  of  these  minds,
that  were  vindictive  to  the  last  degree,  for  this  poor
wretch  had  been  given  in  the  place  of  a  brave  Algon-
quin, taken  prisoner  and  burned  [i  77]  by  the  Iroquois.
All  those  who  loved  the  dead  man  vented  their  wrath
on  this  one  who  was  but  half  alive.

Monsieur  the  Governor  arrived,  and  assembled  the
principal  Algonquins.  But,  as  their  vengeance  had
already  devoted  the  victim  to  the  flames,  they  replied
that  his  life  was  disposed  of, —  that  the  stake  was
already  prepared ;  that  they  would  treat  him  in  the


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.26

font  traitez  par  les  Iroquois  quand  ils  tombent  entre
leurs  mains ;  en  eff et  il  auroit  efte  brufle  la  mef me
nuit,  li  Monfieur  de  Montmagny  ne  leur  euft  fait  par-
ler  d'vn  bon  accent;  on  arrefta  done  la  violence  de
leur  fureur,  &  tacitement  on  confeilla  aux  Chreftiens
de  reprefenter  a  leurs  compatriotes  I'importance  de
I'aifaire,  &  qu'on  pouuoit  traiter  de  paix  par  I'entre-
mife  de  ces  captifs,  que  la  paix  eitoit  le  bien  &  le
falut  de  tout  le  pais.  Cette  premiere  furie  eftant
appaifee,  ils  fe  rendirent  plus  traitables.

On  parle  auffi  aux  Hurons  de  rendre  leurs  prifon-
niers ;  mais  ils  font  la  f ourde  oreille :  quelques  f au-
uages  voyans  les  defirs  de  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur,
luy  [178]  font  entendre  leur  fagon  de  deliurer  leurs
prifonniers;  ils  luy  prefentent  trente-deux  ou
trente-trois  brins  de  paille,  difans  qu'vn  pareil  nom-
bre  de  prefens  parleroit  plus  efficacemet  pour  la  deli-
urance  de  ces  prifonniers,  que  les  bouches  les  plus
eloquentes  du  monde,  &  que  c'eft  ainfi  que  fe  com-
portoient  ceux  qui  vouloient  faire  la  paix.  En  effet
les  feflins,  les  prefens  &  les  harangues  font  tous  les
affaires  des  fauuages.  Monfieur  de  Montmagny  voy-
ant  cela  fit  eftaller  dans  la  cour  du  fort  par  vn  beau
iour  trois  grands  prefens  compofez  de  baches,  de  cou-
uertures,  de  chaudieres,  de  fers  de  fleche  &  de  chofes
femblables ;  Lk  deffus  il  fait  appeller  les  Chefs  &  les
principaux  des  Algonquins  &  des  Hurons,  qui  eftoient
pour  lors  aux  Trois  Riuieres.  Ayans  pris  place  cha-
cun  de  fon  colt^  il  leur  fit  expliquer  par  fon  Truche-
ment  ce  que  vouloient  dire  ces  prefens;  il  les  auoit
defia  fait  preffer  puiffamment,  &  leur  auoit  reprefente
par  de  fortes  raifons,  qu'il  eftoit  tres-importat  qu'ils
fiffent  la  paix  auec  leurs  ennemis,  &  que  I'vnique


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  61

same  manner  as  the  Iroquois  treated  them,  when  they
fell  into  their  hands.  Indeed,  he  would  have  been
burned  that  very  night,  had  not  Monsieur  de  Mont-
magny  caused  orders  to  be  given  them  in  a  very
emphatic  manner.  The  violence  of  their  fury  was
therefore  restrained ;  and  the  Christians  were  secretly
advised  to  represent  the  importance  of  the  matter  to
their  countrymen, — that  overtures  of  peace  could  be
made  only  through  those  captives,  and  that  peace
meant  the  welfare  and  salvation  of  the  whole  country.
When  their  first  feelings  of  rage  were  appeased,  they
became  more  tractable.

The  Hurons  were  also  spoken  to  about  giving  up
their  prisoners ;  but  they  turned  a  deaf  ear.  Some
savages,  who  saw  what  Monsieur  the  Governor
desired,  [178]  made  him  understand  their  fashion  of
delivering  prisoners.  They  handed  him  thirty-two  or
thirty-three  straws,  saying  that  a  similar  number  of
presents  would  speak  more  effectively  for  the  deliv-
erance of  the  prisoners,  than  the  most  eloquent
tongues  in  the  world ;  and  that  it  was  thus  that  those
who  wished  for  peace  should  act.  Indeed,  feasts,
presents,  and  harangues  do  all  the  business  of  these
savages.  When  Monsieur  de  Montmagny  saw  this,
he  caused  to  be  spread  out  in  the  courtyard  of  the
fort,  on  a  fine  day,  three  considerable  presents  con-
sisting of  axes,  blankets,  kettles,  arrowheads,  and
similar  articles.  Then  he  ordered  the  Chiefs  and
principal  men  of  the  Algonquins  and  Hurons  who
were  then  at  the  Three  Rivers  to  be  summoned
before  him.  When  they  had  taken  their  places,  each
on  his  own  side,  he  made  his  Interpreter  explain  to
them  what  those  presents  meant.  He  had  already
caused  to  be  strongly  impressed  on  them,  and  had


62  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26

[179]  moyen  eftoit  de  renuoyer  vn  de  ces  captifs,  qui
difpoferoit  fes  compatriotes  a  vn  bon  accord  &  ^  vne
bonne  paix  entre  toutes  ces  Nations.  Les  Algon-
quins  qui  s'efloient  monftrez  fi  fafcheux  au  commen-
cement, firent  apporter  leur  prifonnier,  qui  ne  pou-
uoit  plus  marcher,  &  I'vn  de  leurs  Capitaines  prenat
la  parole,  dit  qu'ils  vouloient  viure  en  bonne  intel-
ligence auec  les  Fran9ois,  veu  mefmement  que  plu-
fieurs  d'entre  eux  eftoient  de  mefme  creance,  qu'ils
ne  pouuoient  rien  refufer  a  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur,
qu'ils  nommoient  leur  Capitaine,  que  ce  n'eftoit  pas
les  prefens  qui  les  portoient  dans  cette  obeiffance,
mais  le  defir  que  le  pais  fuft  libre,  &  que  tous  les
peuples  ioiiiffent  d'vne  profonde  paix;  ils  ne  lailTe-
rent  pas  de  prendre  ce  qui  eftoit  deftine  pour  la  deli-
urance  du  prifonnier ;  vray  eft  que  la  plufpart  de  ces
dons  n'eftoit  pas  pour  eux,  mais  pour  effuyer  les
larmes  des  parens  de  celuy,  a  I'ame  duquel  deuoit
eftre  facrifi^e  cette  pitoyable  vidtime,  qui  fe  voyant
6cliappee  du  feu  qu'on  luy  auoit  prepare,  deuoroit
des  yeux  fon  [180]  liberateur,  repetant  plufieurs  fois
ce  nom  que  ces  peuples  luy  ont  donne,  Onontio,
Onontio,  c'eft  k  dire  grande  montagne,  grande
montagne,  repandant  fa  ioye  &  produifant  toutes  fes
a(5tions  de  graces  par  vn  f eul  mot,  qui  en  vaut  dix  mille.
Quant  aux  Hurons,  la  veue  des  prefens  ne  les  tou-
cha  point ;  au  contraire  ils  temoignerent  de  la  trifteff  e,
eftans  fachez  de  ne  pouuoir  accorderce  qu'on  leurde-
mandoit  auec  tant  de  preffe  &  tant  de  raifons.  Vn
de  leurs  Capitaines  fe  leuant  s'6cria  tout  fafche:  le
fuis  homme  de  guerre,  &  non  point  vn  marchand,  ie
fuis  venu  pour  combattre,  &  non  en  marchandif e ;  ma
gloire  n'eft  pas  de  rapporter  des  prefens,   mais  de


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  63

represented  to  them  by  powerful  arguments,  that  it
was  highly  important  for  them  to  make  peace  with
their  enemies;  and  that  the  only  [179]  way  to  do  so
was  to  send  back  one  of  those  captives,  who  might
prevail  upon  his  countrymen  to  come  to  a  good  un-
derstanding, and  agree  to  a  lasting  peace  between  all
these  Nations.  The  Algonquins,  who  had  shown
themselves  so  furious  at  the  beginning,  brought  their
prisoner,  who  was  no  longer  able  to  walk ;  and  one
of  their  Captains  made  a  speech,  saying  that  they
wished  to  live  on  good  terms  with  the  French,  seeing
likewise  that  many  of  them  were  of  the  same  belief ;
that  they  could  refuse  nothing  to  Monsieur  the
Governor,  whom  they  called  their  Captain ;  that  it  was
not  for  the  sake  of  the  presents  that  they  manifested
such  obedience, but  through  the  desire  that  the  country
might  be  free,  and  that  all  the  nations  might  enjoy
profound  peace.  They  did  not  fail  to  take  what  was
intended  for  the  deliverance  of  the  prisoner.  It  is
true  that  the  majority  of  these  gifts  were  not  for
them,  but  for  the  purpose  of  drying  the  tears  of  the
relatives  of  him  to  whose  soul  this  pitiable  victim
was  to  be  sacrificed.  When  he  saw  that  he  had
escaped  the  fire  that  had  been  prepared  for  him,  he
gazed  eagerly  at  his  [180]  liberator,  repeating  sev-
eral times  the  name  that  these  people  have  given
him:  "  Onontio,  Onontio, " — that  is  to  say,  "  Great
mountain,  great  mountain;  "  expressing  his  joy  and
pouring  forth  all  his  thanks  by  a  single  word  that  is
worth  ten  thousand.

As  to  the  Hurons,  the  sight  of  all  those  presents
produced  no  effect  on  them;  on  the  contrary,  they
manifested  their  regret,  being  sorry  that  they  were
not  able  to  grant  what  was  insisted  upon  so  urgently.


64  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.26

ramener  des  prifonniers,  &  partant  ie  ne  puis  tou-
cher k  vos  haches  ny  "k  vos  chaudieres ;  fi  vous  auez
tant  d'enuie  d'auoir  nos  prifonniers,  prenez-les,  i'ay
encore  alTez  de  coeur  pour  en  aller  chercher  d'autres;
li  I'ennemy  m'ofle  la  vie,  on  dira  dans  le  pais
qu'Onontio  ayant  retenu  nos  prifonniers,  nous  nous
fommes  iettez  a  la  mort  pour  en  auoir  d'autres.  [i8i]
Celuy-cy  ayant  iette  fon  feu,vn  autre  Capitaine  qui  eft
Chreftien,  nomme  Charles  parla  bien  plus  modefle-
ment.  Ne  te  fafche  pas,  Onontio,  dit-il  a  Monfieur
le  Gouuerneur,  ce  n'ell:  pas  vne  defobeiffance  qui
nous  fait  agir  de  la  forte ;  mais  la  crainte  de  perdre
I'honneur  &  la  vie.  Tu  ne  vois  icy  que  de  la  ieuneffe,
les  anciens  de  noflre  pais  determinent  des  affaires,
£i  on  nous  voyoit  retourner  au  pais  auec  les  prefens,
on  nous  prendroit  pour  des  marchands  auaritieux,
&  no  pas  pour  des  guerriers;  nous  auons  donne
parole  aux  Capitaines  des  Hurons,  que  fi  nous  pou-
uions  prendre  quelques  prifonniers,  que  nous  les  leur
remettrios  entre  les  mains,  tout  de  mefme  que  ces
foldats  qui  t'enuironnent  te  rendent  obeiffance,  auffi
faut-il  que  nous  autres  rendions  nos  deuoirs  a  ceux
de  qui  nous  dependons.  Le  moyen  de  fouffrir  le
blafme  de  tout  vn  pais,  qui  fgachant  que  nous  auons
pris  des  prifonniers,  ne  verra  que  des  haches  &  des
chaudieres.  Les  prefens  que  tu  nous  fais  font  plus
grads  qu'il  ne  faut  pour  mettre  ces  hommes  en  liber-
te,  &  ton  defir  feul  [182]  fuffiroit  pour  les  auoir,  fi  la
crainte  d'etre  tenus  pour  des  ames  lafches  «&  pour
des  etourdis  qui  n'obeiffent  pas  ^  ceux  qui  les
commandent,  ne  nous  portoit  a  les  conduire  iuf-
qu'au  pais.  Vous  me  direz  que  les  Algonquins  ont
donn6  leur  prifonnier,  &  que  nous  pouuons  donner


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  65

and  with  such  good  reasons.  One  of  their  Captains
arose,  and  exclaimed  very  angrily:  "  I  am  a  man  of
war,  and  not  a  trader ;  I  came  to  fight  and  not  to
trade.  My  glory  does  not  consist  in  bringing  back
presents,  but  prisoners;  and,  consequently,  I  cannot
touch  your  axes  or  your  kettles.  If  you  are  so  anx-
ious to  have  our  prisoners,  take  them ;  I  have  still
enough  courage  to  go  and  find  others.  If  the  enemy
kill  me,  it  will  be  said  throughout  the  country  that,
because  Onontio  kept  our  prisoners,  we  exposed  our-
selves to  death  in  order  to  capture  others."  [181]
This  man  having  exhausted  his  vehemence,  another
Captain  —  a  Christian,  named  Charles  —  spoke  much
more  modestly.  "  Be  not  angry,  Onontio,"  he  said
to  Monsieur  the  Governor.  "  It  is  not  through  diso-
bedience that  we  act  thus,  but  because  we  fear  to
lose  both  honor  and  life.  Thou  seest  here  but  young
men;  the  elders  in  our  country  govern  its  affairs.
If  we  were  to  return  to  our  country  with  the  presents,
we  would  be  taken  for  grasping  traders,  and  not  for
warriors.  We  have  given  our  word  to  the  Captains
of  the  Hurons  that,  if  we  succeeded  in  capturing  any
prisoners,  we  would  deliver  them  into  their  hands.
Just  as  those  soldiers  around  thee  obey  thee,  so  must
we  perform  our  duty  toward  those  who  are  over  us.
How  could  we  endure  the  blame  of  a  whole  country
when,  knowing  that  we  have  taken  prisoners,  they
would  see  only  axes  and  kettles?  The  presents  that
thou  givest  us  are  much  more  than  is  necessary  for
restoring  those  men  to  freedom,  and  thy  desire  alone
[182]  would  suffice  to  obtain  them  for  thee,  if  the
fear  of  being  considered  cowards,  and  heedless  per-
sons who  do  not  obey  those  who  command  them,  did
not  induce  us  to  take  them  back  to  our  country.     You


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.26

les  noftres,  ie  repons  que  les  principaux  des  Capi-
taines  Algonquins  font  icy,  que  ceux  qui  concluent
leurs  affaires  font  prefens,  &  qu'ils  ne  dependent  de
perfonne ;  &  ainfi  leur  adtion  ne  peut  eftre  improu-
uee:  mais  la  noftre  fera  condamnee,  &  on  nous  regar-
dera  comme  des  gens  fans  efprit  d'auoir  determine
d'vne  affaire  de  telle  confequence  fans  auoir  confult6
les  anciens  du  pais.  Vous  monftrez  par  vos  raifons,
que  la  paix  efl  defirable,  que  c'eft  le  bien  du  pais
que  la  riuiere  foit  libre :  nous  fommes  dans  les  mef-
mes  penfees;  c'eft  pourquoy  nous  n'auons  fait  aucun
mal  a  nos  prifonniers,  nous  les  traitons  doucement
defirans  de  les  auoir  pour  amis ;  nous  ef perons  bien
que  nos  Capitaines  ne  contrarieront  pas  les  volontez
d'Onontio,  ils  accorderont  quelque  chofe  a  nos  defirs;
[183]  quand  nous  leur  dirons  que  nous  voulos  la  paix,
ils  ne  nous  f erot  pas  rougir ;  mais  fi  nous  traitions  cet
affaire,  fans  leur  auoir  reprefent6  ces  prifonniers,  ils
nous  couuriroiet  le  vifage  de  honte;  il  n'y  va  pas
feulement  de  noftre  honneur,  mais  encore  de  noftre
vie;  le  bruit  eft  que  la  riuiere  eft  pleine  d'ennemis,
fi  nous  en  rencontrons  de  plus  forts  que  nous,  aufll
toft  nous  ferons  leuer  debout  nos  prifonniers  &  nous
leur  ferons  declarer  tout  haut  le  bon  traitement  qu'O-
nontio  leur  a  fait,  les  grands  prefens  qu'il  a  offert
pour  leur  deliurance,  &  les  bonnes  volontez  que  nous
auons  pour  eux ;  ils  temoigneront  que  nous  ne  leur
auons  fait  aucun  mal,  que  nous  les  menons  au  pais
pour  traiter  de  la  paix,  &  ainfi  nos  captifs  nous  fauue-
ront  la  vie  dans  ce  manuals  rencontre.

Cette  harangue  prononcee  d'vne  fa^on  affable  &
ferieufe,  fortifiee  de  toutes  ces  raifons,  &  de  plufieurs
autres,  qui  font  efchapp^es  de  ma  memoire,  fit  ref-


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  67

will  tell  me  that  the  Algonquins  have  given  up  their
prisoner,  and  that  we  can  give  up  ours.  I  reply  that
the  chief  Algonquin  Captains  are  here, — that  those
who  govern  their  afifairs  are  present,  and  are  depend-
ent on  no  one ;  and  that  thus  their  action  cannot  be
disapproved.  But  ours  will  be  condemned,  and  we
shall  be  looked  upon  as  persons  without  sense  for
having  decided  a  matter  of  such  consequence  without
consulting  the  elders  of  the  country.  You  prove  by
your  arguments  that  peace  is  desirable, — that  it  is  in
the  interest  of  the  country  that  the  river  be  free.
We  are  of  the  same  opinion ;  that  is  why  we  have
done  no  harm  to  our  prisoners.  We  treat  them  kind-
ly, because  we  hope  to  have  them  for  friends.  We
trust  that  our  Captains  will  not  thwart  the  wishes
of  Onontio,  They  will  concede  something  to  our
desires;  [183]  when  we  tell  them  that  we  wish  for
peace,  they  will  not  make  us  blush.  But  if  we  were
to  settle  this  matter  without  bringing  the  prison-
ers before  them,  they  would  cover  our  faces  with
shame.  Not  only  is  our  honor  at  stake,  but  our  lives
also.  It  is  rumored  that  the  river  is  full  of  enemies.
If  we  meet  any  party  stronger  than  ours,  we  will  at
once  make  our  prisoners  rise  and  declare  aloud  the
good  treatment  that  they  have  received  from  Onon-
tio, the  considerable  presents  that  he  has  offered  for
their  deliverance,  and  the  good  will  that  we  have
for  them.  They  will  testify  that  we  have  done  them
no  harm, —  that  we  are  taking  them  to  our  own  coun-
try, to  negotiate  a  peace ;  and  thus  will  our  captives
save  our  lives  in  the  event  of  such  an  unfortunate
encounter."

This  harangue,  delivered  in  a  pleasing  and  serious
manner,  supported  by  all  these  arguments,  and  by


68  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.26

pondre  a  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur,  qu'il  n'auoit  que
faire  des  prifonniers  fmon  pour  traitter  la  paix,  &  que
fi  les  [184]  Hurons  la  vouloient  traitter,  qu'il  eftoit
content,  mais  qu'ils  ne  manquaffent  pas  de  parole  en
chofes  fi  importantes.

En  fuite  de  ces  difcours  on  fit  venir  les  deux  autres
prifonniers,  on  leur  fait  letter  les  yeux  fur  ces  pre-
fens,  qu'on  faifoit  pour  leur  deliurance ;  on  leur  de-
clare combien  grande  eftoit  la  bonte  des  Franfois,  &
qu'Onontio  les  traittoit  bien  d'vne  autre  fagon,  qu'ils
n'auoient  traite  fes  gens  qu'ils  auoient  pris:  ayans
aduoiie  que  cela  eftoit  vray,  I'vn  d'eux  fe  leue  au  mi-
lieu de  toute  Taffembl^e,  &  auangant  deux  pas  auec
fes  liens  il  enuifage  le  Soleil,  puis  rabbaiffant  fes
yeux  fur  les  affiftans  auec  vn  regard  tout  plein  d'affeu-
rance,  il  s'efcrie  parlant  a  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur:
Ce  fera  ce  Soleil,  6  Onontio,  qui  rendra  tefmoignage
de  tes  bontez  en  noltre  endroit,  &  qui  defcouurira
par  tout  tes  liberalitez :  puis  fe  tournant  du  cofle  de
fon  pais;  Efcoutez  moy,  dit-il,  vous  qui  commandez
dans  le  pais  des  Iroquois;  vous  Capitaines  de  ma
chere  patrie  preltez  moy  I'oreille,  foyez  bons  &  cour-
tois  d'orefnauant,  &  tafchez  de  reconnoiltre  [185]  par
effedl  ce  que  les  Fran§ois  ont  offert  pour  ma  deli-
urance, &  encore  que  ie  meure  ne  foyez  pas  ingrats.
Non,  non,  repartit  vn  Capitaine  Huron,  tu  n'en
mourras  pas,  comme  nous  ne  fommes  point  dans  la
volont6  de  t'ofter  la  vie,  tu  ne  dois  pas  eltre  dans  le
defefpoir  de  ioiiir  bien  toll;  de  la  liberte ;  Tu  arriue-
ras  fain  &  fauf  dans  le  pais  des  Hurons,  &  tu  en  for-
tiras  fans  fouffrir  aucun  mal ;  nous  efperons  te  rame-
ner  icy  auec  ton  compagnon,  afin  d'applanir  la  terre,
&  de  rendre  douce  toute  la  grande  Riuiere ;  prenez


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  69

many  others  that  have  escaped  my  memory,  induced
Monsieur  the  Governor  to  reply  that  he  required  the
prisoners  only  for  the  purpose  of  negotiating  peace ;
and  that  if  the  [184]  Hurons  wished  to  negotiate  it,
he  was  satisfied;  but  that  they  must  not  break  faith
in  matters  so  important.

After  these  speeches,  the  two  other  prisoners  were
brought  in ;  they  were  shown  the  presents  that  were
offered  for  their  deliverance ;  they  were  told  of  the
great  kindness  of  the  French,  and  that  Onontio
treated  them  in  a  fashion  very  different  from  that  in
which  they  had  treated  his  people  whom  they  had
captured.  They  admitted  the  truth  of  this.  One  of
them  arose  in  the  middle  of  the  assembly,  and,
advancing  one  or  two  steps  with  his  fettered  limbs,
he  looked  at  the  Sun,  and  lowering  his  eyes  upon
those  who  were  present,  with  a  look  full  of  assur-
ance, he  addressed  Monsieur  the  Governor,  exclaim-
ing: "  That  Sun,  Onontio,  shall  bear  testimony  to
thy  kindness  on  our  behalf,  and  show  everywhere
thy  liberality."  Then,  turning  in  the  direction  of
his  country,  he  said:  "  Listen,  ye  who  command  in
the  land  of  the  Iroquois ;  ye  Captains  of  my  beloved
country,  lend  me  ear.  Hereafter,  be  kind  and  cour-
teous, and  endeavor  to  acknowledge  [185]  by  your
actions  what  the  French  have  offered  for  my  deliver-
ance; and,  even  if  I  should  die,  be  not  ungrateful."
"  No,  no,"  replied  a  Huron  Captain,  "  thou  shalt  not
die.  As  we  do  not  intend  to  take  thy  life,  thou  must
not  despair  of  shortly  enjoying  thy  liberty.  Thou
shalt  reach  the  country  of  the  Hurons  safe  and
sound ;  and  thou  shalt  leave  it  without  suffering  any
harm.  We  hope  to  bring  thee  back  here  with  thy
companion,  so  as  to  level  the  soil  and  make  the  whole


70  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES  [Vol.26

tons  deux   courage,   &   n'oubliez  iamais  ce   que  les
Frangois  ont  fait  pour  vous.

Le  refultat  de  ces  Confeils  ou  affetnblees  fut,  qu'on
creut,  que  fi  les  Hurons  entreprenoient  de  trailer  la
paix,  qu'ils  le  feroient  plus  efficacement  que  les  Fran-
cois, ayans  plus  de  connoiffance  que  nous,  des  fagons
d'agir  des  fauuages ;  la  feule  vengeance  &  la  rage  de
quelque  particulier  eft  a  craindre,  car  vne  fantaifie
fera  defcharger  vn  coup  de  hache  fur  ces  prifonniers,
&  voila  toutes  les  efperances  de  la  paix  a  bas,  Dieu
[i86]  veiiille  conduire  cet  affaire  pour  fa  plus  grande
gloire.

Enfin  ces  Hurons  eltants  prefts  de  retourner  en
leur  pais,  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  voyant  que  les
Iroquois  prenoient  ou  malfacroient  quafi  tons  ceux
qui  defcendoient  vers  les  Frangois,  leur  donna  plus
d'vne  vingtaine  de  braues  Soldats  du  nombre  de  ceux
que  la  Reyne  a  fait  paffer  cette  annee  en  ce  pai's-cy,
lefquels  font  montez  auec  eux  pour  hyuerner  dans
leurs  bourgades,  &  pour  leur  feruir  d'efcorte  I'an  pro-
chain  quand  ils  voudront  defcendre  a  Kebec.  Croi-
riez  vous  bien  que  quelques-vns  de  ces  Soldats,  qui
auoient  efle  autrefois  affez  manuals  gargons,  nous  tef-
moigneret  que  ce  n'eftoit  pas  le  lucre  ny  I'efperance
d'aucun  gain  qui  leur  faifoit  entreprendre  vn  voyage
ou  ils  trouueront  k  qui  parler  pour  les  difficultez  du
chemin ;  mais  ils  proteftoient  que  le  defir  de  trauail-
ler  de  leur  meftier  pour  la  Foy,  &  de  donner  leur  vie
pour  vn  fi  grand  fuiet,  les  portoit  a  fe  confier  a  ces
barbares ;  il  eft  vray  que  le  R.  Pere  lean  de  Brebeuf  eft
remonte  auec  eux,  il  entend  [187]  la  langue  Huronne,
il  les  foulagera  beaucoup  auffi  bien  que  le  Pere  Leo-
nard Garreau,  &  le   P.  Noel  Chabanel,  qui  s'en  vont


1642  -  44]  RELA  TJON  OF  1643  -44  71

of  the  great  River  smooth.  Take  courage,  both  of
you;  and  do  not  forget  what  the  French  have  done
for  you. ' '

The  result  of  these  Councils  or  meetings  was,  that
it  was  considered  that,  if  the  Hurons  undertook  to
negotiate  peace,  they  would  do  it  much  more  effect-
ively than  the  French,  as  they  have  a  better  knowl-
edge than  we  of  savage  usages.  The  only  thing  to
be  feared  is  the  vengeance  and  fury  of  some  individ-
ual ;  for  a  mere  fancy  will  suffice  to  cause  a  blow
from  a  hatchet  to  be  struck  at  these  prisoners,  and
then  all  hopes  of  peace  will  fall  to  the  ground.  May
God  [186]  be  pleased  to  direct  this  matter  for  his
greater  glory.

At  last,  when  the  Hurons  were  almost  ready  to
return  to  their  country,  as  Monsieur  the  Governor
saw  that  the  Iroquois  took  or  massacred  nearly  all
who  came  down  to  the  French,  he  gave  them  more
than  a  score  of  brave  Soldiers  from  among  those
whom  the  Queen  has  sent  over  this  year  to  this  coun-
try. These  went  with  them  to  winter  in  their  vil-
lages, and  to  serve  as  an  escort  to  them  the  following
year  when  they  should  come  down  to  Kebec.  Would
you  believe  that  some  of  these  Soldiers,  who  had
formerly  been  rather  bad  fellows,  told  us  that  it  was
not  lucre  nor  the  hope  of  any  reward  that  induced
them  to  undertake  a  journey  on  which  they  will
encounter  great  hardships  in  the  difficulties  of  the
road?  But  they  protested  that  the  desire  of  plying
their  trade  for  the  good  of  the  Faith,  and  of  giving
their  lives  for  so  great  an  object,  led  them  to  confide
themselves  to  those  barbarians.  It  is  true  that  Rev-
erend Father  Jean  de  Brebeuf  went  up  with  them.
He  understands  [187]  the  Huron  language,  and  will


72  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.  2&

en  ces  quartiers  Ik  pour  aider  a  la  conuerfion  des  Al-
gonquins  voifms  des  Hurons,  qui  demandent  inflam-
ment  qu'on  les  enf eigne ;  mais  on  ne  pent  pas  fatis-
faire  k  tons  ces  pauures  peuples ;  les  Iroquois,  &  les
grandes  depenfes  en  vn  pais  fi  efloign6  apportent  de
grands  obftacles  an  falut  de  ces  ames  abandonnees.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  73

be  of  great  assistance  to  them, — as  also  will  Father
Leonard  Garreau  and  Father  Noel  Chabanel,  who
are  going  to  that  quarter  to  aid  in  the  conversion  of
the  Algonquins  who  dwell  next  to  the  Hurons,  and
urgently  ask  to  be  taught.  But  we  cannot  satisfy
all  these  poor  peoples.  The  Iroquois,  and  the  heavy
expenses  that  have  to  be  incurred  in  so  distant  a
country,  are  great  obstacles  to  the  salvation  of  these
abandoned  souls.


74  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.26


CHAPITRE  XL

DES    BONS   DEPORTEMES    DES   ATIKAMEGUES.

DE  toutes  les  nations  que  nous  cultiuons  icy,  nous
n'en  reconnoiffons  point  qui  ait  plus  d' incli-
nation &  de  difpofition  a  la  Foy,  que  celle
des  Atikamegues.  Quoy  que  ce  foit  la  moins  in-
ftruite,  c'eft  celle  neantmoins  qui  nous  donne  de  plus
folides  marques  d'vne  bonte  vrayement  Chreftienne.
Le  petit  nombre  des  ouuriers  Euangeliques  que  nous
auons  icy,  [i88]  &  la  multitude  des  Refidences  &
MilTions  qui  nous  occupent,  n'a  pas  permis  qu'on  les
allaft  voir  en  leurs  pais,  &  depuis  deux  ans  qu'ils
partirent  de  Sillery,  ils  n'ont  paru  qu'aux  Trois
Riuieres  &  en  paffant.  Neantmoins  dans  ce  defaut
d'inftrudtion  &  affiftance  fpirituelle  ils  ont  conferue  la
Foy,  &  la  ferueur  de  leur  piete,  le  faint  Efprit  fup-
pleant  a  notre  defaut  &  leur  feruant  de  Maiftre,
comme  il  eft  aife  a  iuger  par  les  bons  fentimens  &
acftions  dans  lefquelles  ils  ont  perfeuere  depuis  leur
depart  de  Sillery.  En  voicy  quelques  particularitez.
Aucun  d'eux  n'a  oublie  les  prieres  qu'on  leur  auoit
enfeign6,  &  ceux  la  mefmes  qui  ne  les  fgauoient  pas,
les  ont  apprifes.  lis  ont  garde  les  Dimanches  auffi
religieufement  que  s'ils  euffent  efte  parmy  les  Fran-
9ois.  D6s  le  famedy  au  foir  on  donnoit  I'ordre  pour
folemnifer  ce  faindt  iour  auec  tout  le  refpedl  poffible.
Vn  des  principaux  Chreftiens  crioit  hautement  par  les
cabanes  qu'vn  chacun  fift  fa  petite  prouifion  de  bois,


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  75


CHAPTER  XL

OF  THE  GOOD  CONDUCT  OF  THE  ATIKAMEGUES.

OF  all  the  tribes  among  whom  we  sow  the  seed
here,  we  know  of  none  with  better  inclination
and  disposition  for  the  Faith  than  that  of  the
Atikamegues.  Although  the  least  instructed,  they
are,  nevertheless,  the  tribe  who  give  us  the  strongest
evidence  of  truly  Christian  goodness.  The  small
number  of  Evangelistic  laborers  that  we  have  here,
[188]  and  the  great  number  of  Residences  and  Mis-
sions that  occupy  our  attention,  have  not  allowed  of
our  going  to  see  them  in  their  own  country;  and,
during  the  two  years  since  they  left  Sillery,  they
have  made  their  appearance  at  the  Three  Rivers  only
in  passing.  Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  this  lack  of
instruction  and  spiritual  assistance,  they  have  pre-
served the  Faith  and  the  fervor  of  their  piety ;  for
the  holy  Ghost  has  supplied  our  place,  and  has
served  as  their  Master,  as  may  easily  be  seen  from
their  good  sentiments  and  actions,  in  which  they
have  persevered  since  their  departure  from  Sillery.
Here  are  some  particulars  of  these.

Not  one  of  them  has  forgotten  the  prayers  that
had  been  taught  to  them ;  and  even  those  who  did
not  know  these  have  learned  them.  They  have  ob-
served the  Sundays  as  religiously  as  if  they  had  been
with  the  French.  Every  Saturday  night,  orders  were
given  to  solemnize  that  holy  day  with  all  possible
respect.      One    of    the   principal   Christians   would


76  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.26

&  preparat  tout  ce  qui  luy  eftoit  neceffaire  pour  le
iour  fuiuant,  afin  qu'on  ne  fuft  [189]  pas  oblige  de  le
violer  par  aucun  trauail  qui  fuft  defendu.  Le  Di-
manche  matin  ils  s'affembloient  tous  dans  vne  cabane,
&  pendoient  a  vne  perche  plantee  au  milieu,  vn
Crucifix  en  boffe  qu'vn  chacun  adoroit  les  genoux  en
terre  &  les  mains  iointes,  auec  autant  de  refpedt
comme  s'ils  euffent  efle  deuant  I'Autel  ou  fe  garde
le  faindt  Sacrement.  lis  difoient  1^  denotement  tout
ce  qu'ils  f^auoient  de  prieres,  apres  lefquelles  ils  reci-
toient  enfemble  hautement  tout  le  chapelet,  &  puis
vn  chacun  fe  retiroit  chez  foy.  Que  fi  quelqu'vn
n'auoit  rien  a  manger,  il  euft  pluftoft  ieufne  tout  ce
iour,  que  d'aller  a  la  pefche  ou  a  la  chaff e,  bien  qu'on
leur  euft  enf eigne  que  Dieu  ne  les  obligeoit  pas  a  ces
rigueurs.  Vne  bonne  femme  ne  pouuant  difcerner
de  deux  iours  quel  eftoit  celuy  du  Dimanche,  pour
ne  fe  tromper  pas,  ne  trauailla  point  pendant  ces
deux  iours,  &  s'impofa  cette  penitence  pour  vne
faute  innocente,  de  reciter  a  chacun  de  ces  deux  iours
deux  fois  le  chapelet,  &  les  paffer  tous  deux  fans  rien
manger.

Vn  autre  fauuage  donna  auffi  affez  k  [190]  connoiftre
I'eftat  qu'il  faifoit  du  faindt  Dimanche,  &  le  defir
qu'il  auoit  de  I'honorer.  Paffant  vn  faut  auec  fa
famille,  il  fut  emport6  par  la  violence  du  courant,  &
eut  bien  de  la  peine  a  fe  fauuer  auec  fes  enfans,  fon
meuble  &  par  confequent  tout  fon  bien  fut  englouty
dans  les  ondes.  Ce  n'eft  pas  ce  qu'il  regrette  le  plus,
fon  papier  qui  luy  feruoit  de  Calendrier  pour  recon-
noiftre  les  Feftes,  luy  eft  plus  ^  coeur  que  tout  le
refte.  Mais  e'en  eft  fait,  il  eft  perdu,  que  ferons-
nous,    dit-il    a    fa    femme   qui  n' eftoit    pas   encore


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43- 44  "7

announce  aloud  through  the  cabins  that  each  one
should  secure  his  little  supply  of  wood,  and  prepare
everything  that  he  would  need  on  the  following  day,
that  he  might  not  be  [189]  obliged  to  violate  it  by
any  forbidden  labor.  On  Sunday  morning,  they  met
all  together  in  a  cabin,  and  hung  to  a  pole,  planted
in  the  middle  of  it,  an  embossed  Crucifix,  which  all
venerated  on  bended  knees,  and  with  clasped  hands, —
with  as  much  respect  as  if  they  were  before  the  Altar
on  which  the  blessed  Sacrament  is  kept.  There  they
repeated  devoutly  all  the  prayers  that  they  knew,
after  which  they  recited  together,  aloud,  the  whole
of  the  rosary ;  and  each  one  withdrew  to  his  own
home.  If  any  one  of  them  had  nothing  to  eat,  he
would  rather  fast  the  whole  day  than  go  out  to  fish
or  to  hunt,  although  they  had  been  taught  that  God
did  not  exact  such  strictness.  A  good  woman,  who
could  not  ascertain  which  of  two  days  was  Sunday,
would,  so  as  not  to  make  a  mistake,  not  work  at  all
during  those  two  days;  and  for  an  innocent  error
she  imposed  this  penance  on  herself,  to  recite  her
rosary  twice  on  each  of  those  two  days  and  to  spend
both  without  eating.

Another  savage  also  gave  sufficient  [190]  evidence
of  the  esteem  that  he  had  for  holy  Sunday,  and  of
his  desire  to  honor  it.  While  he  was  running  a
rapid  with  his  family,  he  was  carried  away  by  the
violence  of  the  current,  and  had  much  difficulty  in
saving  himself  with  his  children ;  his  small  effects,
and  consequently  all  that  he  possessed,  were  swal-
lowed up  by  the  waters.  That  was  not  what  he
regretted  most;  the  loss  of  his  paper  that  served
him  as  a  Calendar,  and  enabled  him  to  distinguish
all  the  Festival  days,  affected  him  more  than  that  of


78  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jlSUITES         [Vol.26

Chreftienne?  Ayons  confiance  en  Dieu,  tafchons  de
prendre  quelques  Caftors  en  chalTant,  &  puis  nous
defcendrons  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  le  Pere  qui  y  eft
nous  donnera  vn  autre  Maffinahigan,  auffi  feray-ie
bien  aife  de  me  confeffer  par  mefme  moyen.  En
effet  il  vient,  &  rencontrant  le  P.  Buteux  fur  le  bord
de  leur  fleuue,  ie  viens  de  bien  loin,  luy  dit-il,  c'eft
pour  te  demander  vn  autre  Maflinahigan,  celuy  que
tu  m'auois  donne  a  eil;e  perdu  dans  mon  naufrage.
On  luy  en  donne  vn  autre,  il  fe  confeffe,  &  s'en
retourne  content.

[191]  Vne  femme  Chreftienne  de  la  mefme  nation
eftant  interrog6e  comment  elle  faifoit  parmy  les  bois
pour  fuppleer  a  la  MelTe  qu'elle  n'entedoit  pas  ;
le  me  perfuade,  dit-elle,  que  ie  fuis  tantoft  dans
I'Eglife  de  Sillery,  tantoft  en  celle  de  I'hofpital,  vne
autre  fois  en  celle  des  Vrfulines,  &  puis  a  celle  de
Quebec  auec  les  Fran9ois,  &  dans  cette  penfee  ie
recite  mon  chapelet,  difant  a  Dieu  que  fi  i'eftois
prefente  en  quelqu'vn  de  ces  lieux,  i'affifterois  a  la
Meffe  par  effedt  comme  i'y  affifte  par  defir:  Qu'il
fgait  bien  que  ie  me  priue  de  cette  confolation  pour
fon  amour,  &  celuy  de  mes  compatriotes,  lefquels  ie
ne  pourois  inftruire  comme  ie  fais,  fi  ie  ne  les  fuiuois
dans  les  bois,  &  ainfi  ie  le  prie  de  m'aider,  comme  il
feroit  fi  effedtiuement  i'affiftois  a  la  Meffe  dans  I'vne
de  ces  Eglifes  ou  ie  fuis  prefente  par  defir  &  par
penfee.

Vne  autre  eftant  furprife  d'vn  grand  mal  de  gorge
qui  I'empefchoit  de  proferer  aucune  parole,  difoit  "k
Dieu  dans  le  fonds  de  fon  coeur :  Toy  qui  fgais  tout,
tu  vols  bien  ma  penfee.  Si  ie  defire  recouurer  [192]
ma  fant6  &  la  parole,  ce  n'eft  pas  pour  mon  plaifir,


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  79


the  Other  things.  "  But  it  is  gone,  it  is  lost;  what
shall  we  do?  "  he  said  to  his  wife,  who  was  not  yet
a  Christian ;  "let  us  have  confidence  in  God ;  let
us  take  some  Beavers  by  hunting,  and  then  we  shall
go  down  to  the  Three  Rivers.  The  Father  who  is
there  will  give  us  another  Massinahigan ;  and  I  shall
also  be  very  glad  to  make  confession  at  the  same
time."  Indeed,  he  came;  and,  meeting  Father  Bu-
teux  on  the  bank  of  their  river,  he  said  to  him:  "  I
come  from  a  great  distance  to  ask  thee  for  another
Massinahigan ;  that  which  thou  gavest  me  was  lost
when  I  was  wrecked. ' '  He  was  given  another ;  made
his  confession,  and  went  away  satisfied.

[191]  A  Christian  woman  of  the  same  tribe  was
asked  how  she  managed  in  the  woods  to  supply  the
place  of  the  Mass  that  she  did  not  hear.  "  I  im-
agine myself,"  she  said,  "to  be  sometimes  in  the
Church  of  Sillery,  sometimes  in  that  of  the  hospital,
sometimes  in  that  of  the  Ursulines,  and  again  in  that
of  Quebec,  with  the  French ;  and  with  that  thought  I
repeat  my  rosary, —  saying  to  God  that,  if  I  were
present  in  any  of  those  places,  I  would  attend  Mass
in  fact,  as  I  assist  in  desire.  He  knows  very  well  that
I  deprive  myself  of  that  consolation  through  love
for  him  and  for  my  countrymen,  whom  I  could  never
teach  as  I  do  if  I  did  not  follow  them  in  the  woods;
and  thus  I  pray  him  to  aid  me  as  effectively  as  he
would  do  were  I  to  be  present  at  Mass  in  one  of
those  Churches,  where  I  am  present  in  wish  and  in
thought."

Another,  who  had  a  violent  attack  of  sore  throat
which  prevented  her  from  uttering  a  word,  said  to
God  in  the  depths  of  her  heart :  ' '  Thou  who  know-
est  all  things,  thou  seest  well  what  my  thoughts  are.


80  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26

mais  afin  de  pouuoir  repondre  aux  prieres  auec  les
autres,  &  principalement  pour  pouuoir  enfeigner  ce
que  ie  f§ay  aux  autres  qui  ne  le  fgauent  pas.  C'eft
pour  cela  que  ie  te  demande  d'eftre  guerie.  Tu  feras
pourtant  ce  que  tu  voudras.  Tout  cecy  nous  affeure
que  la  Foy  efl  bien  auant  dans  ces  coeurs,  puifque  le
zele  de  la  gloire  de  Dieu  &  le  refpedt  des  chofes
faintes  y  eft  graue  fi  profondement.  En  voicy  vne
autre  marque.

Ces  bons  fauuages  eflans  partis  au  milieu  de  I'hy-
uer  de  Sillery,  s'en  allerent  chaff  ant  dans  les  bois,  &
s'approchans  toufiours  de  I'emboucheure  de  leur
fleuue,  ou  eftans  arriuez  ils  fe  trouuerent  meflez  auec
plufieurs  autres  qui  n'eftoient  pas  encore  Chreftiens,
&  dont  quelques-vns  mefme  n'auoient  iamais  oiiy  par-
ler  de  la  Foy.  Le  nombre  des  mecreans  eftant  beau-
coup  plus  grad  que  celuy  des  fideles,  il  femble  qu'il
deuoit  auoir  plus  de  force  &  d' authority :  Neantmoins
cettuy-cy  preualut  en  forte  que  les  mefcreans  fe  lailTe-
rent  perfuader  [193]  par  les  difcours  &  exemples  des
bons  a  quitter  leurs  tambours,  iongleries,  feftins  a
tout  mager,  &  a  venir  tous  enfemble  aux  Trois  Ri-
uieres  pour  fe  faire  inftruire.  lis  defcendirent  done
au  nombre  de  trente-cinq  canots  bien  fournis.  La
premiere  chofe  que  firent  les  Chreftiens  fut  d'entrer
dans  noflre  Chapelle  &  y  amener  les  autres,  apr^s
quoy  ils  demanderent  de  tenir  Confeil  auec  Monfieur
des  Rochers  qui  commandoit  pour  lors  au  fort  des
Trois  Riuieres,  &  auec  le  P.  Buteux,  auquel  le  Capi-
taine  parla  en  cette  forte.  Efcoute  ma  parole,  toy
qui  f9ais  bien  le  Maffmahigan ;  tiens,  regarde  ce  que
tu  vois  Ik,  ce  font  les  lettres  que  i'enuoye  au  Capi-
taine  des  Frangois  qui  eft  a  Quebec.     Mes  ieunes  gens


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  81

If  I  wish  to  recover  [192]  my  health  and  my  speech,
it  is  not  for  my  own  pleasure,  but  in  order  to  be  able
to  answer  at  prayers  with  the  others,  and  above  all
to  be  able  to  teach  what  I  know  to  the  others  who
know  it  not.  That  is  why  I  ask  thee  to  cure  me.
However,  thou  wilt  do  as  thou  choosest."  All  this
convinces  us  that  Faith  has  penetrated  far  into  these
souls,  since  zeal  for  God's  glory  and  respect  for  holy
things  are  so  deeply  engraved  in  them.  Here  is
another  proof  of  this.

These  good  savages  left  Sillery  in  the  middle  of
the  winter,  to  hunt  in  the  woods,  all  the  time
approaching  the  mouth  of  their  river.  When  they
arrived  there,  they  found  themselves  intermingled
with  many  others  who  were  not  yet  Christians,  some
of  whom  had  never  even  heard  the  Faith  mentioned.
The  number  of  the  ungodly  was  much  greater  than
that  of  the  faithful,  and  it  would  seem  that  the
former  should  have  had  more  power  and  authority.
However,  the  latter  so  prevailed  that  the  ungodly
allowed  themselves  to  be  persuaded  [193]  by  the  dis-
courses and  examples  of  the  faithful  to  give  up  their
drums,  their  sorceries,  and  their  eat-all  feasts,  and
to  come  down  to  the  Three  Rivers  to  be  instructed.
They  came  down,  therefore,  to  the  number  of  thirty-
five  canoes  well  filled.  The  first  thing  that  the  Chris-
tians did  was  to  enter  our  Chapel  and  bring  thither
the  others,  after  which  they  asked  to  hold  a  Council
with  Monsieur  des  Rochers,  who  was  then  in  com-
mand of  the  fort  of  the  Three  Rivers,  and  with
Father  Buteux,  to  whom  the  Captain  spoke  as  follows :
"  Listen  to  my  words,  thou  who  knowest  well  the
Massinahigan.  Here,  look  at  what  thou  seest  before
thee ;  these  are  the  letters  that  I  send  to  the  Captain


82  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.26


les  porterot,  mais  toy  qui  a  plus  d'efprit  qu'eux,  ecris
luy  ce  que  ie  te  diray.

L'an  paffe  il  nous  fit  vn  beau  prefent  pour  nous
donner  de  I'efprit,  nous  en  auons  receu  vn  peu.   Nous
voulons  repondre  a  fon  prefent  embraffant  la  Foy,  &
nous  luy  t6moign6s  que  ce  que  nous  difons  eft  veri-
table par  cette  lettre   que   [194]   tu  luy  enuoyeras,
(c'efloit  vn  paquet  de  Caftors.)     II  pourfuit,  on  nous
a  fait  plaifir  de  nous  enfeigner  &  baptifer  cet  hyuer
paffe,  nous  en  faifons  des  remercimes,  &  demandons
la  cotinuation  de  ce  bien  par  cette  autre  lettre,  (c'eftoit
vn   autre  paquet   de   foixate-quatre   Caftors.)     Vous
auez  pitie  de  nous,  adioufta-t'il,  les  ennemis  trou-
bloient  noftre  riuiere  par  leurs  courfes,  vous  la  bou-
chez  par  le  moyen  des  forts  que  vous  baftiffez  contre
les  Iroquois.     Voila  dequoy  affermir  ces  forts,    &  en
difant  cela  il  iette  vn  autre  paquet  de  Caftors.     II  ne
refte  plus,  dit-il,  qu'^  viure  come  freres  &  ne  fe  pas
quereler,   puifque  nous  prios  tous.     Mais  parce  que
cela  efl  difficile  quand  il  s'agit  de  traite,  voila  des
peaux  pour  adoucir  les  efprits,  &  iette  vn  quatrieme
paquet  de  Caftors.

Nous  refpondifmes  a  tous  ces  prefens,  &  luy  fifmes
entendre  qu'on  ne  les  enfeignoit  pas  fous  efpoir  de
quelque  recompenfe,  au  contraire  qu'on  defiroit  les
affifter  corporellement  auffi  bien  que  fpirituellemet.
Ie  le  f9ay  bien,  dit-il,  mais  ce  n'eft  que  pour  vous
faire  voir  que  [195]  nous  ne  mentons  point,  lors  que
nous  difons  que  nous  voulons  fortement  embraller  la
Foy.  Ie  parle  au  nom  de  tous  ceux  qui  font  icy,  qui
font  de  mefme  aduis  que  moy.

Si  les  paroles  de  ce  Capitaine  promettent  beaucoup,
fes  actions  ne  le  dementent  pas.     II  auoit  efte  fort


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  83

of  the  French  who  is  at  Quebec.  My  young  men  will
carry  them ;  but  thou  who  hast  more  wit  than  they, —
write  to  him  what  I  shall  tell  thee.

"  Last  year  he  made  us  a  fine  present,  to  give  us
sense ;  we  have  received  a  little  of  it.  We  wish  to
acknowledge  his  present  by  embracing  the  Faith ;  and
we  will  prove  to  him  that  what  we  say  is  true,  by
this  letter  which  [194]  thou  wilt  send  him  "  (it  was  a
package  of  Beaver  skins).  He  continued:  "  We  were
given  the  pleasure  of  being  taught  and  baptized  last
winter.  We  return  thanks  for  this,  first ;  and  we  ask
the  continuation  of  that  favor  by  this  other  letter"
(this  was  another  package  of  sixty-four  Beaver  skins).
"  You  have  pity  on  us,"  he  added.  "  The  enemies
troubled  our  river  by  their  incursions ;  you  close  it
by  means  of  the  forts  that  you  erect  against  the  Iro-
quois. Here  is  something  with  which  to  strengthen
those  forts."  As  he  said  this,  he  threw  down
another  package  of  Beaver  skins.  "  Nothing  further
remains,"  he  said,  "  but  to  live  as  brothers,  and  not
to  quarrel,  since  we  all  pray.  But,  inasmuch  as  that
is  difficult  when  trade  is  being  carried  on,  here  are
furs  to  soothe  the  minds,"  and  he  threw  down  a
fourth  package  of  Beaver  skins.

We  replied  to  all  these  presents,  and  gave  him
to  understand  that  we  did  not  teach  them  in  the
hope  of  any  reward, — that,  on  the  contrary,  we  wished
to  assist  them  corporally  as  well  as  spiritually.  "  I
know  that  very  well,"  he  said,  "  but  this  is  only  to
show  you  that  [195]  we  do  not  lie,  when  we  tell
you  that  we  ardently  desire  to  embrace  the  Faith.
I  speak  in  the  name  of  all  here,  who  are  of  the  same
opinion  as  myself."

If  the  words  of  this   Captain   promise  much,  his


84  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JltSUITES  [Vol.26

mal  traite  par  vn  foldat  Fran9ois,  qui  I'auoit  pouff6,
renuerfe,  &  traifne  par  terre,  cette  iniure  faite  a  vn
fauuage  de  credit  parmy  fes  gens,  deuant  qui  cela  fe
paffoit,  luy  deuoit  eflre  fans  doute  fort  fenfible  felon
la  nature,  &  s'il  n'euft  eu  la  Foy  bien  auant  dans  le
coeur,  ne  pouuant  fe  vanger  de  fon  ennemy,  il  s'en
fuft  pris  a  la  religion,  comme  ont  fait  quelques  autres
en  femblables  occafions,  qui  I'ont  abandonnee  par
defpit,  au  moins  pour  quelque  temps.  Mais  I'affedtion
qu'il  portoit  a  la  priere  &  reftime  qu'il  en  faifoit  luy
fit  fouffrir  cet  affront  genereufement,  &  remporter
vne  glorieufe  vidtoire  fur  foy  mefme.  II  s'addreffa
au  P.  Buteux,  &  luy  demanda  s'il  fgauoit  bien  ce  qui
luy  eftoit  arriue.  Oiiy,  refpondit  le  P.  ie  le  f9ay,  il
eft  vray,  repliqua-t'il,  [196]  qu'on  m'a  fait  tort,  mais
la  Foy  que  i'ay  dans  le  coeur,  &  que  ie  defire  confer-
uer,  m'empefclie  d'en  auoir  aucun  reffentiment.  Ie
pardonne  volontiers  a  ce  foldat,  il  n'a  pas  d'efprit,  il
ne  faut  pas  pour  cela  que  ie  luy  reffemble,  ny  que  ie
quitte  la  priere,  ou  que  ie  penfe  que  tons  les  Fran-
9ois  ne  valent  rien,  parce  qu'vn  n'eft  pas  bon.  Mon
coeur  eft  en  paix.  Affeure  toy  que  ie  n'ay  aucune
mauuaife  penf^e,  fi  ie  fuiuois  mon  naturel  ie  ferois
vn  manuals  coup.  Mais  ie  ne  veux  pas  fafcher  Dieu.
Ceux  qui  connoiffent  I'humeur  des  fauuages,  &  com-
bien  la  vengeance  leur  eft  naturelle,  admireront  cette
adtion,  &  aduoiieront  que  la  grace  de  Dieu  fait
d'eftranges  changemens  dans  leurs  coeurs.

La  femme  de  ce  mefme  Capitaine  nous  a  grande-
ment  edifiez.  Elle  eftoit  frapee  d'vne  dangereufe
maladie,  fe  trouuant  dans  cet  eftat  dans  les  bois,  elle
pria  fon  mary  de  la  porter  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  oil
ertant  arriu^e  elle  fit  appeller  le  P.  Buteux,  auquel


1642 -44 J  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  85

actions  do  not  belie  them.  He  had  been  very  badly-
treated  by  a  French  soldier,  who  had  pushed  him,
thrown  him  down,  and  dragged  him  along  the
ground.  Such  an  insult  to  a  savage  of  high  rank
among  his  people,  in  whose  presence  this  occurred,
must  beyond  doubt  have  been  deeply  felt,  according
to  nature ;  and  had  not  the  Faith  penetrated  very  far
into  his  heart,  he,  being  unable  to  revenge  himself
upon  his  adversary,  would  have  blamed  religion  for
it,  as  others  have  done  on  similar  occasions  who  have
abandoned  it  out  of  spite,  at  least  for  a  time.  But
his  love  for  prayer,  and  the  esteem  that  he  had  for  it,
led  him  to  bear  this  insult  bravely,  and  to  win  a  glori-
ous victory  over  himself.  He  addressed  himself  to
Father  Buteux,  and  asked  him  if  he  knew  what  had
happened  to  him.  "  Yes,"  replied  the  Father,  "  I
do  know."  "It  is  true,"  he  said,  [196]  "  that  an
injury  has  been  done  to  me;  but  the  Faith  that  I
have  in  my  heart,  and  that  I  desire  to  preserve,  pre-
vents me  from  feeling  any  resentment.  I  willingly
pardon  that  soldier;  he  has  no  sense.  For  that
reason,  I  must  not  be  like  him,  nor  must  I  abandon
prayer,  nor  think  that  all  the  French  are  worthless
because  one  of  them  is  not  good.  My  heart  is  at
peace.  Rest  assured  that  I  harbor  no  evil  thoughts.
Were  I  to  follow  my  natural  feeling,  I  would  do  a
wicked  deed;  but  I  do  not  wish  to  offend  God."
Those  who  know  the  temper  of  the  savages,  and  how
natural  revenge  is  to  them,  will  admire  this  action,
and  admit  that  the  grace  of  God  works  wonderful
changes  in  their  hearts.

The  wife  of  this  same  Captain  greatly  edified  us.
She  was  attacked  by  a  dangerous  illness.  When  she
found  herself  in  that  condition  in  the  woods,   she


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26


elle  tint  ce  difcours :  Tu  vols  en  quel  eftat  la  mala-
die   m'a  reduit,  elle  ne  me  laiffe  rien  de  [197]  libre
que  la  parole,  de  laquelle  ie  me  fers,  non  pas  pour  te
demander  quelque  chofe,   mais  feulement  pour  me
confeffer.     Ceil  a  ce  deflein  que  i'ay  defire  qu'on
me  portaft  icy.     Depuis  mon  Baptefme  ie  n'ay  eu
gueres  de  fant6,  mais  ie  n'ay  iamais  creu  pour  cela
que  mon  mal   prifl   fa   fource   de  la  priere,  comme
difent  quelques-vns  qui  n'ont  pas  d'efprit.     Ie  crois
fortement,  &  Ie  mal  que  ie  fouffre  ne  me  fera  iamais
quiter  la  Foy.     Ie  feray  malade  tant  qu'il  plaira  a
Dieu.     Si  tu  connois  que  la  mort  s'approche  de  moy,
ne  me  cache  pas  la  verite,  ie  ne  crains  pas  la  mort.
Mais  ie  feray  bien  aife  de  f9auoir  fi  elle  eft  proche,
afin  que  i'apprenne  ce  qu'il  faut  faire  pour  bien  mou-
rir.     La  plus  grande  plainte  qu'elle  faifoit  pendant
qu'elle  fut  aux  trois  Riuieres  eftoit  de  ce  qu'on  ne  la
vifitoit  pas  affez  fouuent  pour  I'enfeigner  &  difpofer
^  la  mort.     Elle  venoit  tous  les  iours  a  la  Meffe,  quoy
qu'auec  de  grades  difficultez  tantoft  fe  trainant  par
terre,  d'autres  fois  s'appuyant  fur  fon  baft  on,  ou  fe
faifant    porter  par   fa    fille.     II   fallut  luy  defendre
abfolument  [198]  de  fe  donner  cette  peine,  pour  Ie
moins  les  iours  ouuriers.     II  a  pleu  a  notre  Seigneur
de  luy  prologer  la  vie  pour  I'exemple  des  autres,  &
pour  meriter  dauantage.     Auffi  eft-elle  grandement
vtile  a  ceux  de  fa  nation,  ayant  vn  foin  tres-particu-
lier  de  les  faire  prier  Dieu  par  tout  oil  elle  fe  trouue.
L'adieu  qu'elle  dit  au  P.  Buteux  k  fon  depart  fut  pa-
thetique.     Adieu  done,  luy  dit-elle,  ie  m'en  vay  mou-
rir  dans  les  bois,  ie  ne  te  reuerray  iamais  plus  que
dans  Ie  Ciel,  ie  te  recommande  ceux  de  noftre  nation.
Ne    viendras  tu  iamais   dans   noftre    pais   pour   les


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  87


begged  her  husband  to  carry  her  to  the  Three  Riv-
ers. As  soon  as  she  arrived  there,  she  sent  for  Fa-
ther Buteux  to  whom  she  said :  ' '  Thou  seest  to  what
a  condition  illness  has  reduced  me ;  it  has  deprived
me  of  everything  [197]  but  speech,  which  I  use  not
for  the  purpose  of  asking  thee  for  anything,  but  only
to  confess  me.  It  was  for  that  object  that  I  desired
to  be  brought  here.  Ever  since  my  Baptism  I  have
had  but  little  health;  still,  for  all  that,  I  have  never
thought  that  my  illness  was  caused  by  prayer,  as
some  say  who  have  no  sense.  I  believe  firmly,  and
the  pain  that  I  suffer  will  never  make  me  abandon
the  Faith.  I  shall  be  ill  so  long  as  God  pleases.  If
thou  knowest  that  my  death  is  drawing  near,  do
not  hide  the  truth;  I  do  not  fear  death,  but  I  would
like  to  know  if  it  be  near,  so  that  I  may  learn
what  I  should  do,  to  die  a  good  death."  The  chief
complaint  that  she  made  while  she  was  at  the
three  Rivers  was,  that  we  did  not  visit  her  often
enough  to  instruct  her  and  prepare  her  for  death.
She  came  every  day  to  Mass,  although  with  great
difficulty;  at  times,  she  would  drag  herself  on  the
ground;  at  others,  she  would  lean  upon  a  stick,
or  have  herself  carried  by  her  daughter.  She  had
to  be  absolutely  forbidden  [198]  to  take  that  trouble,
at  least  on  working  days.  Our  Lord  has  been  pleased
to  prolong  her  life  for  the  example  of  the  others,  and
in  order  that  she  might  have  more  merit.  And  she
is  of  great  use  to  the  members  of  her  tribe,  for  she
takes  most  special  pains  to  make  them  pray  to  God,
wherever  she  is.  Her  adieu  to  Father  Buteux  at  her
departure  was  very  pathetic.  "  Farewell,"  she  said;
"  I  am  going  to  die  in  the  woods.  I  shall  never  see
thee  again  except  in  Heaven.     I  commend  to  thee


88  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26

infbruire,  que  t'auons  nous  fait  pour  nous  abandonner
de  la  forte?  II  y  a  fi  long-temps  qu'on  t'inuite,  tous
nos  gens  defirent  de  croire.  II  ne  tient  qu'a  toy  qu'ils
ne  foient  tous  baptifez.  Prens  courage,  viens  chez
nous,  &  au  pluftoft,  ayes  pitie  de  tant  d'ames  qui  fe
perdent,  prie  Dieu  pour  moy.  le  n'ay  plus  qu'vne
demande  a  te  faire,  c'eft  que  tu  faffes  communier  ma
fille.  II  me  femble  que  ie  m'en  irois  plus  contente
&  de  ce  lieu  &  de  ce  monde,  fi  ie  la  voyois  participer
a  ce  Sacrement:  elle  n'eft  [199]  plus  folle  comme
elle  eftoit  auant  fon  Baptefme.  Ne  crains  pas,  elle
eft  toute  autre.  En  effet  elle  difoit  vray.  Cette
fille  auant  fon  Baptefme  eftoit  extremement  remu-
ante  &  volage,  maintenant  fa  modeftie  eft  admirable,
&  I'a  fait  iuger  digne  de  ce  Sacrement,  qui  eft  le  pain
des  grands  &  le  vin  qui  fait  germer  les  Vierges.

II  ne  reftoit  plus  en  cette  famille  qu'vn  ieune
homme  de  vingt  ans  k  baptifer,  on  n'ofoit  luy  confier
ce  Sacrement,  apprehendant  ce  qui  efl  a  craindre  en
tous  les  autres  ieunes  hommes,  qu'il  ne  fe  mariaft
contre  les  loix  de  I'Eglife,  mais  enfin  fon  importunite
luy  fit  obtenir  ce  qu'il  demandoit.  Le  P.  Buteux
eftoit  pour  lors  affez  occupe,  &  feignoit  encore  de
I'eftre  dauantage.  II  le  renuoyoit  fouuent  a  deffein
pour  I'efprouuer,  cela  ne  le  rebutoit  pas,  il  reuenoit
cinq  &  fix  fois  le  iour  pour  eftre  inftruit,  &  ne  s'in-
quietoit  point  quand  on  le  faifoit  attendre,  s' occupant
pour  lors  a  dire  fon  chapelet  &  repeter  a  part  ce  qu'on
luy  auoit  appris,  &  perfiftoit  demandant  toufiours  la
mefme  chofe:  [200]  Quand  fera-ce  que  ie  feray  bap-
tife?  Ie  ne  partiray  pas  d'icy,  ny  mon  oncle.  (c'eftoit
le  Capitaine  de  cette  nation)  que  ie  ne  fois  baptife.
II  le  fut,  &  le  zele  qu'il  a  monllre  cet  hyuer  "k  enfei-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  89

those  who  belong  to  my  tribe.  Wilt  thou  never
come  to  our  country  to  teach  them?  What  have  we
done  to  thee,  that  thou  shouldst  abandon  us?  We
have  been  inviting  thee  for  so  long  a  time.  All  our
people  wish  to  believe ;  it  depends  only  on  thee  that
they  be  all  baptized.  Take  courage,  come  to  us  as
soon  as  possible ;  have  pity  on  so  many  souls  that  are
going  to  destruction.  Pray  to  God  for  me.  I  have  but
one  request  to  make  thee ;  that  is  to  let  my  daugh-
ter receive  communion.  It  seems  to  me  that  I  could
leave  this  spot  and  this  world  with  greater  content,
if  I  saw  her  receive  that  Sacrament.  She  is  no  [199]
longer  flighty,  as  she  was  before  her  Baptism.  Fear
not.  She  is  quite  different."  Indeed,  what  she  said
was  true.  That  girl  before  her  Baptism  was  very
fickle  and  giddy;  while  now  her  modesty  is  ad-
mirable, and  has  made  her  worthy  of  that  Sacra-
ment which  is  the  bread  of  the  great  and  the  wine
that  brings  forth  Virgins.

In  that  family  there  remained  to  be  baptized  only
a  young  man  twenty  years  of  age.  We  did  not  ven-
ture to  administer  that  Sacrament  because  we  appre-
hended—  what  is  to  be  feared  in  the  case  of  all  the
other  young  men  —  that  he  might  marry  contrary  to
the  laws  of  the  Church.  But,  in  the  end,  his  impor-
tunity obtained  for  him  what  he  demanded.  Father
Buteux  was  very  busy  at  the  time,  and  also  pretended
to  be  still  more  so.  He  frequently  turned  him  away
on  purpose,  to  try  him.  That  did  not  repel  him ;  he
came  back  five  or  six  times  a  day  to  be  instructed,
and  was  not  uneasy  if  he  was  kept  waiting;  he
occupied  the  time  in  reciting  his  rosary,  and  in
repeating  to  himself  what  had  been  taught  him.  He
always  persisted  in  asking  for  the  same  thing:  [200]


90  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

gner  fes  compatriotes  a  fait  voir  que  c'eft  I'efprit  de
Dieu  qui  le  pouffoit  h.  demander  fi  fermement  le
Baptefme.  II  s'efl  rendu  catechifte  parmy  ceux  de
fa  nation,  &  fon  zele  &  capacite  a  fupple^  au  defaut
de  fon  aage  pour  exercer  cette  fondlion.

Les  plus  confiderables  de  cette  nation  fuiuent  le
branle  de  leur  Capitaine  &  de  fa  famille.  lis  s'apper-
ceurent  que  quelques  ieunes  folaftres  d'vne  autre  na-
tion entroient  la  nuidl  dans  leurs  cabanes,  ils  prierent
le  P.  Buteux  d'empefcher  ce  defordre.  Dis  leur  de
noftre  part,  firent-ils,  que  nous  ne  prions  pas  k  demy,
ou  par  feintife,  &  partant  que  nous  ne  fgaurions  fup-
porter  les  libertez  de  leurs  ieunes  gens.  S'ils  veulent
faire  mal,  que  ce  foit  parmy  ceux  de  leur  nation,  &
non  pas  chez  nous,  ou  nous  auons  droit  d'empefcher
ces  defordres.  Dieu  &  le  Diable  ne  s'accordent  pas
[201]  bien  dans  vne  mefme  cabane.  Fais  en  forte
que  leurs  Capitaines  falfent  vne  criee  publique  pour
arrefter  I'infolence  des  ieunes  gens.

lis  ne  fe  contentent  pas  d'empefcher  le  mal  quand
I'occafion  s'en  prefente,  ils  procurent  encore  du  bien
aux  autres  peuples,  foit  en  les  enfeignant  &  exhor-
tant  par  eux  mefmes,  foit  en  nous  les  amenant  pour
eflre  inftruits.  Quelques-vns  de  la  nation  des  Oura-
manichek  eftant  defcendus  icy  en  traite,  les  princi-
paux  des  Atikamegues  les  amenerent  incontinent
chez  nous.  Efcoutez,  leur  dirent-ils,  ce  qu'on  vous
dira,  &  fgachez  que  c'eft  la  chofe  la  plus  importante
de  toutes  celles  qui  vous  touchent.  C'eft  ce  que  nous
eflimons,  &  que  vous  deuez  eftimer  vniquement:  ne
vous  eftonnez  pas  fi  vous  ne  conceuez  pas  d'abord  ce
qu'on  vous  dira,  on  vous  repetera  fouuent  la  mefme
chofe;  &  enfin  vous  aurez  de  I'efprit  fi  vous  en  vou-


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  91

' '  When  shall  I  be  baptized  ?  I  will  not  leave  here  nor
shall  my  uncle  "  (this  was  the  Captain  of  the  tribe),
* '  until  I  am  baptized. ' '  He  was  baptized,  and  the  zeal
that  he  displayed  last  winter  in  teaching  his  country-
men has  shown  that  it  was  the  spirit  of  God  that
impelled  him  to  ask  so  urgently  for  Baptism.  He
became  a  catechist  among  his  tribe,  and  his  zeal  and
ability  supplied  what  was  wanting  in  years  for  the
performance  of  the  duties  of  that  office.

The  chief  persons  of  the  tribe  followed  the  impulse
given  by  their  Captain  and  his  family.  They  noticed
that  some  wanton  youths  from  another  tribe  came
into  their  cabins  at  night.  They  begged  Father
Buteux  to  prevent  such  disorderly  conduct.  "  Tell
them  from  us, ' '  they  said,  ' '  that  we  do  not  pray  by
halves,  or  as  a  pretense ;  and,  consequently,  that  we
cannot  endure  the  liberties  taken  by  their  young
men.  If  they  wish  to  do  evil,  let  them  do  it  among
those  of  their  own  tribe,  and  not  here  among  us,
where  we  have  the  right  to  prevent  such  dissolute
behavior.  God  and  the  Devil  do  not  agree  [201]
together  in  the  same  cabin.  Arrange  that  their  Cap-
tains give  public  notice,  so  as  to  stop  the  disorderly
conduct  of  their  young  men."

They  are  not  content  with  preventing  evil  when
the  opportunity  presents  itself;  they  also  do  good
to  other  tribes,  either  by  themselves  teaching  and
exhorting  them,  or  by  bringing  them  to  be  instructed.
Some  of  the  tribe  of  the  Ouramanichek  having  come
down  here  to  trade,  the  chief  men  of  the  Atikame-
gues  brought  them  at  once  to  us.  "  Listen,"  they
said,  "  to  what  you  shall  be  told,  and  know  that  it  is
the  most  important  of  all  the  things  that  concern
you.     It   is  what  we  esteem,   and  what   you   must


92  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  26

lez  auoir,  le  crois  que  ceux-cy  porteront  des  nou-
uelles  de  la  Foy  plus  haut  vers  le  Nort  a  plufieurs
autres  peuples  qui  ne  nous  font  pas  encore  conneus,
[202]  &  auec  lefquels  ils  traitent.

La  bonte  de  Dieu  eft  admirable  dans  les  change-
mens  qu'elle  fait  tous  les  iours  dans  les  coeurs  de  ce
peuple.  Vn  fauuage  n'auoit  iamais  voulu  permettre
autrefois  qu'on  baptifa  vn  de  fes  enfans;  craignat
que  le  Baptefme  ne  luy  caufaft  la  mort.  Eftant  arri-
ue  quelque  temps  apres  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  il  fit  de
grandes  inftances  au  P.  Buteux  pendant  plufieurs
iours  pour  le  baptefme  de  trois  de  fes  enfans.  Vne
femme  pareillement  qui  auoit  d'autrefois  rebute  le
mefme  Pere  &  empefcli6  de  baptifer  vn  de  fes  enfans
qui  mouruft  fans  baptefme  dans  les  bois,  vient  par
apres  le  preffer  d'elle  mefme  pour  eftre  baptifee  auec
quattre  autres  de  fes  enfans,  hcec  mutatio  dextercB
Excelji.

Paul  Ouetamourat  craignant  que  luy  &  fes  gens  ne
retournaffent  k  leurs  furperftitions  qu'ils  auoient  quit-
tees  k  Sillery,  ordonna  qu'on  n'appellaft  point  feftin
quand  ils  s'inuiteroient  mutuellement,  &  qu'on  ne
mangeroit  pas  enfemble,  mais  qu'vn  chacun  ayant
receu  fa  part  dans  fon  plat  fe  retireroit  [203]  chez
foy.  II  y  auroit  k  craindre,  difoient-ils,  que  le
Diable  ne  nous  trompaft,  &  d'vn  feftin  d'amitie  ne
nous  induififl  peu  ^  peu  a  vn  feftin  de  fuperitition.
Le  bon  home  ayant  rencontre  vn  ieune  gargon  de  fes
parens  malade,  le  prit  &  le  porta  par  des  faults  &  pre-
cipices effroiables  iufques  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  011  il
le  mit  entre  les  mains  du  P.  Buteux  pour  receuoir  de
luy  le  baptefme,  auquel  luy  mefme  I'auoit  defia  tres-
bien  difpofe.      II  parla  fouuent   &    incita    par    fon


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  93


esteem,  above  all.  Be  not  surprised  if  you  do  not  at
first  understand  what  shall  be  said  to  you ;  the  same
thing  will  be  often  repeated  to  you,  and  finally  you
will  have  sense,  if  you  wish."  I  think  that  they  will
carry  the  news  of  the  Faith  further  toward  the  North,
to  several  other  tribes  who  are  not  yet  known  to  us,
[202]  and  with  whom  they  trade.

God's  goodness  is  admirable  in  the  changes  that  it
effects  daily  in  the  hearts  of  these  people.  A  savage
had  formerly  never  allowed  one  of  his  children  to  be
baptized,  fearing  that  Baptism  would  cause  his  death.
When  he  came  to  the  Three  Rivers,  some  time  after-
ward, he  strongly  urged  Father  Buteux  for  several
days  to  baptize  three  of  his  children,  A  woman  like-
wise, who  had  formerly  repelled  the  same  Father,
and  had  prevented  him  from  baptizing  one  of  her
children  that  died  in  the  woods  without  baptism,
afterward  came  of  her  own  accord  to  be  baptized,
with  four  others  of  her  children.  Hcbc  mutatio  dex-
ter (2  Excelsi.

Paul  Ouetamourat  feared  that  he  and  his  people
might  revert  to  their  superstitions  which  they  had
abandoned  at  Sillery.  He  ordered  that  they  should
not  call  it  a  feast  when  they  invited  one  another,  and
that  they  should  not  eat  together;  but  that,  when
each  one  had  received  his  portion  on  his  plate,  he
should  withdraw  [203]  to  his  own  house.  "  It  is  to
be  feared,"  they  said,  "  that  the  Devil  might  deceive
us,  and  friendly  feasts  might  gradually  lead  us  back
to  superstitious  feasts."  The  good  man  found  a
young  boy,  one  of  his  relatives,  who  was  sick.  He
took  him  up,  and  carried  him  through  rapids  and  by
frightful  precipices  as  far  as  the  Three  Rivers,  where
he  placed  him  in  the  hands  of  Father  Buteux  in  order


94  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ&SUITES  [Vol.26

exemple  les  autres  veillards  a  parler  publiquement  en
faueur  de  la  Foy,  &  neantmoins  il  n'eftoit  encore  que
Catechumene.  Mais  il  defiroit  auec  tant  d'ardeur
d'eflre  baptife,  que  le  P.  Buteux  eflant  entr6  vn  iour
dans  fa  cabane  &  1' ay  ant  trouue  extraordinairement
trifle  &  afflig6,  comme  il  luy  en  demandoit  la  raifon ;
N'ay-ie  pas  fuiet,  dit-il,  de  m'attrifter?  tu  m'auois
promis  de  m'enfeigner  fouuent,  &  tu  ne  m'as  dit  mot
auiourd'huy.  Que  f§ay-ie  ce  qui  m'arriuera?  peut
eftre  les  Iroquois  font  ils  proches.  le  fuis  en  danger
de  mourir  fans  baptefme,  ou  de  le  receuoir  auec  fort
peu  de  [204]  conoiffance  &  de  fruidt  fi  tu  ne  te  haftes
de  m'enfeigner.  II  fallut  luy  doner  cette  confola-
tion,  &  le  baptifer  auec  fes  deux  filles,  dont  I'aifnee
eft  d'vn  naturel  grandement  porte  ^  la  deuotion,
qu'elle  a  communique  k  fon  mary,  le  rendat  autant
affedtionne  a  la  priere  qu'il  en  6toit  efloigne  aupara-
uant,  &  aliene.  Elle  fe  feruit  d'vne  fainte  trompe-
rie  pour  hater  fon  baptefme,  perfuadant  au  Pere
qu'elle  s'en  iroit  bien  toft  dans  les  bois.  Voy  tu
bien,  luy  dit-elle,  ie  me  difpofe  k  partir  au  premier
iour,  ie  comence  a  plier  mes  efcorces,  ie  mourray  fans
baptefme,  &  tu  en  auras  du  regret  auffi  bien  que  moy.
Attends,  luy  dit  le  P  Buteux,  tu  n'as  pas  plus  de
hafte  que  ton  Pere.  Ie  f^ay  les  prieres  mieux  que
luy,  repliqua-t'elle,  pourquoy  I'attendrois-ie?

Si  on  euft  accorde  le  Baptefme  ^  tons  ceux  qui  le
demandoient,  ils  feroient  defia  quafi  tons  baptifez.
On  n'a  peu  neantmoins  le  refufer  ^  vne  bonne  fem-
me,  qui  "k  vray  dire  femble  vne  autre  S'®  Monique,
ayant  autant  de  zele  pour  le  baptefme  de  so  fils  que
celle-la  en  auoit  pour  la  conuerfion  de  S.  Auguftin.
Auffi  [205]   en   vint-elle  k  bout,  &  fut  baptifee  auec


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  95

to  receive  baptism  from  him,  for  whicli  he  himself
had  already  very  well  prepared  him.  He  frequently
spoke,  and  by  his  own  example  incited  the  other
old  men  to  speak  boldly  in  favor  of  the  Faith,
although  he  was,  as  yet,  but  a  Catechumen.  Still,
he  so  ardently  desired  to  be  baptized  that,  when
Father  Buteux  entered  his  cabin  one  day,  he
found  him  very  sad  and  sorrowful,  and  asked  him
the  reason  of  it.  "  Have  I  not  cause  to  be  sorrow-
ful?" he  said;  "thou  hadst  promised  me  to  teach
me  often,  and  thou  hast  not  said  a  word  to  me  to-day.
Do  I  know  what  may  happen  to  me?  Perhaps  the
Iroquois  are  near.  I  am  in  danger  of  dying  without
baptism,  or  of  receiving  it  with  very  little  [204]
knowledge  and  profit,  if  thou  dost  not  hasten  to  teach
me."  It  was  necessary  to  give  him  that  consolation,
and  to  baptize  him  with  his  two  daughters, —  the
elder  of  whom  has  naturally  a  great  inclination  for
devotion,  which  she  has  communicated  to  her  hus-
band, making  him  as  fond  of  prayer  as  he  was  for-
merly opposed  and  hostile  to  it.  She  made  use  of
a  holy  deception  to  hasten  her  baptism.  She  per-
suaded the  Father  that  she  would  go  to  the  woods,  be-
fore long.  "  Thou  seest  very  well,"  she  said,  "  that
I  am  preparing  to  start  at  any  day ;  I  have  begun  to
fold  up  my  bark.  I  shall  die  without  baptism,  and
thou  wilt  be  sorry  for  it,  as  well  as  I."  "  Wait,"
Father  Buteux  said  to  her ;  ' '  thou  art  in  no  greater
haste  than  thy  Father."  "  I  know  the  prayers  bet-
ter than  he  does,"  she  replied;  "  why  should  I  wait
for  him  ? ' '

If  we  had  granted  Baptism  to  all  who  asked  for  it,
they  would  nearly  all  be  baptized.  Nevertheless,
we  could  not  refuse  it  to  a  good  woman,  who  really


96  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  26

fon  fils,  auquel  pendant  les  ceremonies  elle  repetoit
fouuent,  Prends  courage  mon  fils,  fais  bien,  dis  en
ton  coeur,  ie  renonce  k  toutes  mes  mefchancetez,  ie
ne  veux  pas  aller  dans  les  feux,  ie  defire  eftre  bien-
lieureux,  &  amy  de  Dieu.  A  mefme  temps  furent
baptifez  trois  ieunes  gar9ons,  dont  Ie  dernier  eftant
vn  petit  orfelin  Ie  plus  ieune  de  tous,  mais  non  pas  Ie
moins  feruent,  Et  comment,  difoit-il,  pourquoy  ne
feray-ie  pas  baptife,  ie  fgay  les  prieres,  ie  fuis  auec
mon  grand  frere  oii  Ton  prie  Dieu,  ie  ne  fuis  defcen-
du  icy  que  pour  eftre  baptife,  a  quoy  tient-il  que  ie
ne  Ie  fois.  II  plaida  fa  caufe  fi  efficacement  qu'il  la
gagna.

Voicy  deux  ou  trois  marques  de  la  bont6  du  bap-
tefme  de  quelques  adultes.  I'eftois  fuiete,  difoit
vne  femme,  auant  mon  baptefme  a  dire  de  mauuaifes
paroles ;  depuis  quatre  k  cinq  mois  que  ie  fuis  bapti-
f6e,  ie  ne  f9ache  pas  d'en  auoir  dit  qu'vne,  &  encore
ce  fut  par  furprife  &  fans  deilein.  Cette  mefme
femme  difcourant  vn  iour  auec  vne  autre  de  la  [206]
cruaute  des  Iroquois,  &  du  danger  qu'il  y  auoit  de
tomber  entre  leurs  mains,  II  en  fera,  dit  elle,  ce  qui
plaira  k  Dieu.  Auant  mon  baptefme  ie  n'eftois
iamais  fans  peur.  Maintenant  mon  coeur  eft  en
affeurance,  n'importe  que  ie  fois  prife,  bruflee,  &
mangee,  cela  paffe,  apres  cela  ie  ioiiiray  d'vne  vie
qui  ne  palfera  iamais.

Vne  autre  demandant  au  P.  Buteux  quelque  remede
contre  vne  fluxion  qui  I'incommodoit  fort,  eftant  in-
terrog6e  s'il  luy  feroit  fafcheux  de  mourir  maintenant.
Oiiy,  dit-elle,  non  pas  que  ie  craigne  la  mort,  mais
parce  que  i'ay  fi  mal  feruy  Dieu  iufques  k  prefent.
C'etoit  vn  adte  d'humilite  en  cette  femme,  car  elle


1642 -44J  RELATION  OF  1643-44  97

seems  another  Ste.  Monica, —  having  as  much  zeal
for  the  baptism  of  her  son  as  that  saint  had  for  St.
Augustine's  conversion.  [205]  She  succeeded  in  this,
and  was  baptized  with  her  son,  to  whom  during  the
ceremony  she  frequently  repeated :  "  Have  courage,
my  son,  do  well;  say  in  thy  heart:  '  I  renounce  all
my  wickedness.  I  do  not  wish  to  go  into  the  flames;
I  wish  to  be  blessed,  and  a  friend  of  God.'  "  At  the
same  time,  three  young  boys  were  baptized,  the  last
of  whom  was  a  little  orphan,  the  youngest  of  all  but
not  the  least  fervent.  "How!"  said  he,  "why
should  I  not  be  baptized?  I  know  the  prayers;  I  am
with  my  elder  brother,  where  they  pray  to  God.  I
have  come  down  here  solely  to  be  baptized.  What
is  to  prevent  me?"  He  pleaded  his  cause  so  effec-
tually that  he  won  it.

Here  are  two  or  three  proofs  of  the  efficacy  of  the
baptism  of  some  adults.  "  Before  my  baptism,"  said
a  woman,  "  I  was  addicted  to  saying  evil  words.
During  the  past  four  or  five  months,  since  I  have
been  baptized,  I  do  not  remember  having  said  more
than  one,  and  then  it  was  through  surprise  and  with-
out intention."  This  same  woman  was  speaking  one
day  to  another  about  the  [206]  cruelty  of  the  Iro-
quois, and  the  danger  of  falling  into  their  hands.
"  Whatever  God  pleases  will  happen,"  she  said.
"  Before  my  baptism,  I  was  never  without  fear;  now
my  heart  feels  secure.  No  matter  if  I  be  taken,
burned,  and  eaten ;  when  that  is  over,  I  shall  after-
ward enjoy  a  life  that  will  never  end."

Another  asked  Father  Buteux  for  some  remedy  for
a  flux  that  troubled  her  greatly.  She  was  asked
whether  she  would  be  sorry  to  die  then.  "Yes,"
she  said,  "  not  because  I  fear  death,  but  because  I


98  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.26

eft  vne  excellente  Chreftienne.  Vne  autre  k  qui  on
demandoit  li  elle  aimoit  Dieu  &  la  priere  plus  que  la
vie,  refpondit  qu'oiiy.  Car,  dit-elle,  fi  quelqu'vn  me
vouloit  tuer  ou  faire  quitter  la  priere,  ieluydirois,  tue
moy,  "k  la  bonne  heure,  i'iray  au  Ciel.

II  arriua  trois  ou  quatre  diuerfes  fois  pendant  que
le  Pere  inftruifoit  dans  notre  Chapelle  les  fauuages,
qu'on  donna  [207]  I'alamie,  comme  fi  les  Iroquois
euflent  paru,  Le  Pere  fortit  pour  voir  ce  que  c'eftoit,
&  les  auditeurs  demeuroient  attentifs  "k  repeter  ce
qu'on  venoit  de  leur  enfeigner  fans  ietter  feulement
la  veue  dehors,  &  attendoient  paifiblement  le  retour
de  leur  Maiftre.

lis  abhorrent  tellement  leurs  anciennes  iongleries,
qu'vn  Chrefhien  malade  s'eftat  mis  a  chanter  la  nuidt
en  refuant,  les  autres  qui  I'entendirent,  I'efueillerent
foudain,  luy  difant  qu'il  faifoit  mal  d'obei'r  au  Diable.

Vn  ieune  homme  battit  fa  femme  a  caufe  de  quel-
que  defobei'ffance,  &  luy  fit  fortir  le  fang  des  narines :
le  P.  Buteux  en  eftant  aduerty  I'enuoye  querir,  il
refpond  qu'il  falloit  attendre  qu'il  euft  expi6  fa  faute,
ce  qu'il  feroit  le  lendemain  des  qu'il  feroit  iour,
eftant  pour  lors  trop  tard  pour  le  faire.  En  effet  le
lendemain  il  fut  fe  confeffer  de  grand  matin,  &  s'offrit
a  en  faire  vne  penitence  publique,  &  d'eftre  foiiett6
ou  baftonne  publiquement  par  la  main  des  Frangois,
qu'il  auoit  fcandalifez  par  cette  adtion.  II  en  fut
quitte  a  meilleur  marche,  &  fe  [208]  reconcilia  chre-
ftiennemet  auec  fa  femme.  Voila  vne  petite  partie
des  bons  fentimens  &  adtions  des  Atikamegues,  qui
font  communs  a  plufieurs  Chref liens  de  cette  nation.
Depuis  ces  remarques  que  nous  venous  de  coucher,
ils  ont  paffe  quafi  vn  an  tout  entier  fans  eftre  initruits


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  99

have  served  God  so  badly  tintil  now."  This  was  an
act  of  humility  on  the  part  of  that  woman,  for  she  is
an  excellent  Christian.  Another,  who  was  asked
whether  she  loved  God  and  prayer  more  than  life,
replied  that  she  did.  "  For,"  said  she,  "  if  any  one
should  wish  to  kill  me,  or  make  me  abandon  prayer,
I  would  say:  '  Kill  me;  it  will  be  better  for  me, —  I
shall  go  to  Heaven.'  "

It  happened  on  three  or  four  different  occasions,
while  the  Father  was  instructing  the  savages  in  our
Chapel,  that  [207]  an  alarm  was  given,  as  if  the  Iro-
quois had  made  their  appearance.  The  Father  went
out  to  see  what  it  was,  and  his  hearers  remained,
attentively  repeating  what  they  had  just  been  taught,
without  even  looking  out,  and  quietly  awaited  the
return  of  their  Master.

They  have  such  an  abhorrence  for  their  former
sorceries  that,  when  a  Christian  who  was  sick  began
to  sing  in  his  dreams  during  the  night,  the  others
who  heard  him  awoke  him  at  once,  telling  him  that
he  did  wrong  to  obey  the  Devil.

A  young  man  beat  his  wife,  on  account  of  some
act  of  disobedience  and  made  blood  flow  from  her
nose ;  Father  Buteux  was  told  of  it,  and  sent  for  him.
He  replied  that  he  must  wait  until  he  had  atoned  for
his  fault,  which  he  would  do  on  the  following  morn-
ing, as  soon  as  daylight  should  appear,  for  it  was
then  too  late  to  do  so.  Indeed,  he  went  to  confes-
sion very  early  in  the  morning  on  the  following  day,
and  offered  to  submit  to  a  public  penance,  and  to  be
publicly  whipped  or  beaten  with  a  stick  by  the  hands
of  the  French,  whom  he  had  scandalized  by  that
deed.  He  escaped  more  easily  than  that,  and  [208]
became  reconciled  with  his  wife  in  a  Christianlike


100  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jflSUITES  [Vol.26

qu'vne  ou  deux  fois  fort  legerement  &  en  paffant,
nos  Peres  eftant  occupez  ailleurs :  ils  ont  neantmoins
continue  dans  leur  ferueur,  comme  nous  ecrit  le  P.
Brebeuf  qui  les  a  veus  ce  Printemps  aux  Trois  Riui-
eres.  Les  Atikamegues,  dit-il,  font  defcendus  icy-
en  nombre  de  neuf  canots  la  veille  de  Pentecofte.
lis  fgauoient  bien  que  le  lendemain  eftoit  vn  Diman-
che  qu'on  refpedtoit  extraordinairement.  D6s  qu'ils
eurent  mis  pied  a  terre,  ils  demanderent  de  prier  Dieu
dans  noflre  Chapelle,  &  de  fe  confeffer.  Le  Capi-
taine  mefme  demanda  de  communier,  difant  qu'il
s'y  eftoit  prepare  durat  tout  I'hyuer.  Vn  ieune  hom-
me  fe  confefTa  par  trois  diuerfes  fois,  craignat  tou-
fiours  d'auoir  oublie  quelque  chofe  Ceux  qui  ne  font
pas  encore  baptifez  demandent  [209]  fort  inftamment
le  Baptefme.  Ils  promettent  de  defcendre  encore
icy  fur  la  fin  de  Septembre,  &  defirent  de  rencontrer
vn  Pere  qui  les  inftruife.  En  voila  alTez  pour  veri-
fier ce  que  i'ay  dit  au  commencement  de  ce  Chapitre,
que  cette  nation  a  de  grandes  inclinations  &  difpofi-
tions  k  la  Foy.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  101

manner.  These  are  a  small  portion  of  the  good  sen-
timents and  good  actions  of  the  Atikamegues,  which
are  common  to  many  Christians  of  that  tribe.  Since
the  events  of  which  we  have  just  written,  they  have
passed  nearly  a  whole  year  without  receiving  instruc-
tion,—  except  on  one  or  two  occasions,  to  a  slight
extent  and  in  passing,  for  our  Fathers  were  occupied
elsewhere.  Nevertheless,  they  have  persevered  in
their  fervor  as  Father  Brebeuf ,  who  saw  them  last
Spring  at  the  Three  Rivers,  writes  us:  "  The  Atika-
megues," he  says,  "  came  down  here  to  the  number
of  nine  canoes  on  the  vigil  of  Pentecost.  They  knew
that  the  next  day  was  a  Sunday  that  is  observed  in
an  extraordinary  manner.  As  soon  as  they  landed,
they  asked  to  be  allowed  to  pray  to  God  in  our  Chap-
el, and  to  confess  themselves.  The  Captain  even
asked  to  be  permitted  to  receive  communion,  saying
that  he  had  prepared  himself  for  it  during  the  whole
winter.  A  young  man  went  to  confession  three
separate  times,  fearing  always  that  he  had  forgotten
something.  Those  who  are  not  yet  baptized  ask
[209]  most  urgently  for  Baptism.  They  promise  to
come  back  here  at  the  end  of  September,  and  are
anxious  to  meet  a  Father  to  instruct  them."  This  is
sufficient  to  prove  what  I  said  at  the  beginning  of
this  Chapter, — that  this  tribe  has  a  great  inclination
and  disposition  toward  the  Faith.


102  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26


CHAPITRE  XII.

DE    LA    MISSION    DE    SAINCTE    CROIX   A   TADOUSSAC.

LE    Pere    Buteux    fucceda   I'Eft^   palT6   au    Fere
Dequen   dans  le  foin  de  cette  Miffion :   le  Pere
Dequen  I'a  cultiuee  cette  ann6e.      Voicy  les
memoires  du  P.   Buteux,  qui  n'ayant  pu  eftre  cou-
chees  dans  la  derniere  Relation  pour  eftre  venues
trop  tard,  ne  doiuent  eftre  obmifes  dans  celle-cy.

Arriuant  k  TadoufCac  il  trouua  vn  bon  nombre  de
fauuages  Chreftiens  &  Payens.  Ceux-la  eftoient
dans  I'attente  d'vn  de  nos  Peres  pour  ioiiir  du  bien
de  la  faindte  MelTe  &  des  Sacremens,  la  [210]  plus
grand  part  de  ceux-cy  defiroient  voir  des  Peres  qu'ils
n'auoient  pas  encore  veu,  &  dont  ils  auoient  tant  oiiy
parler.  Les  Chreftiens  &  Catechumenes  continuoient
dans  les  exercices  de  piet6,  comme  a  prier  Dieu  foir
&  matin,  reciter  le  Chapelet,  chanter  des  Cantiques
fpirituels,  s'affembler  trois  fois  ^  la  Chapelle  les  Di-
manches  &  les  Feftes,  &  autres  femblables  fondtions
fpirituelles,  qui  les  entretiennent  en  deuotion.  Le
refpedt,  I'obeiffance,  la  ferueur  &  raffiduite  auec
laquelle  ils  s'acquitent  de  ces  faints  exercices  eft
telle,  que  les  Franyois  qui  les  ont  veus,  mefme  les
Heretiques  les  ont  admirez,  &  ont  dit  qu'on  ne
croyoit  pas  en  France  ce  qu'ils  ont  veu  de  leurs  yeux.
Entre  autres  vn  Capitaine  d'vn  nauire  de  la  Religion
pretendue  eftant  entr6  par  curiofit6  dans  la  Chapelle
pour   y   voir   prier  les  fauuages,    fut   fi    furpris   les


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  103


CHAPTER  XII.

OF  THE  MISSION  OF   THE   HOLY    CROSS   AT   TADOUSSAC.

FATHER  Buteux  succeeded  last  Summer  to
Father  Dequen  in  the  care  of  this  Mission,
Father  Dequen  has  had  charge  of  it  this  year.
Here  are  Father  Buteux's  notes,  which  could  not  be
written  in  the  last  Relation,  because  they  came  too
late,  but  which  must  not  be  omitted  from  this  one.
When  he  reached  Tadoussac  he  found  a  good  many
savages,  both  Christians  and  Pagans.  The  former
were  there  awaiting  the  arrival  of  one  of  our  Fathers,
to  enjoy  the  blessing  of  holy  Mass  and  of  the  Sacra-
ments. The  [210]  majority  of  the  latter  wished  to
behold  the  Fathers,  whom  they  had  not  yet  seen,
and  of  whom  they  had  heard  so  much.  The  Chris-
tians and  Catechumens  continued  their  pious  prac-
tices, such  as  praying  to  God  night  and  morning,
reciting  the  Rosary,  singing  Hymns,  meeting  three
times  in  the  Chapel  on  Sundays  and  Festival  days,
and  other  like  spiritual  exercises  which  maintain
them  in  the  feeling  of  devotion.  Such  are  the  respect,
obedience,  fervor,  and  assiduity  with  which  they
acquit  themselves  of  these  holy  exercises,  that  the
French  who  have  seen  them,  and  even  the  Heretics,
have  admired  them,  and  have  asserted  that  what
they  had  seen  with  their  own  eyes  would  not  be
believed  in  France.  Among  others,  a  ship  Captain  —
who  is  of  the  pretended  Religion,  and  who  entered
the  Chapel  through  curiosity  to  see  the  savages  at


104  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.26

voyant  flechir  les  genoux  &  faire  le  figne  de  la  Croix,
qu'il  fe  mit  luy  mefme  a  genoux  &  fit  le  figne  de  la
Croix  anec  eux,     Defcendons  plus  en  particulier.

Nous  anions  fouuent  deiire  que  ceux  [211]  qui  ont
quelque  authorite  particuliere  parmy  les  fauuages,
&  que  I'aage  on  la  valeur  rendent  confiderables,
embraffaffent  la  Foy  &  en  fiffent  vne  genereufe
profeffion,  pour  la  perfuader  plus  facilement  a  la
ieuneffe,  qui  fuit  ordinairement  les  fentimens  de  ceux
qui  luy  commandent.  Noftre  Seigneur  a  exauce  par
tout  nos  defirs,  &  nous  fait  voir  maintenant  auec  plai-
fir  des  Capitaines  Barbares,  qui  n'auoient  eu  iufqu'k
prefent  d' authorite  qu'en  faueur  du  vice  &  de  la  cru-
aute,  deuenir  des  Apoflres  &  Predicateurs  tres-zelez
pour  la  gloire  du  Dieu  qu'ils  ne  commencent  qu'a
connoiftre.      En  voicy  vn  exemple.

Le  Pere  Buteux  ayant  fait  vn  difcours  aux  fau-
uages pour  leur  enfeigner  ce  que  Dieu  demandoit
d'eux,  &  ayant  infifte  particulierement  fur  ce  que
Dieu  defiroit  que  les  Capitaines  qui  tiennent  fa  place
eullent  fon  honneur  en  recommendation,  empechat
le  mal  qui  le  deshonore,  vn  Capitaine  fe  leue,  &  luy
dit:  Attens,  Pere  Buteux,  ne  fors  pas,  ecoute  moy.
le  veux  parler,  &  vous  ieunes  gens  ecoutez.  Voicy
la  refolution  que  [212]  i'ay  prife  des  mon  baptefme,
&  que  ie  renouuelle  maintenant ;  ie  veux  aimer  tant
que  ie  viuray  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait,  ie  veux  m'abfte-
nir  de  tout  ce  qu'il  defend,  &  veux  que  tons  ceux  qui
me  reconoiffent  pour  Capitaine  s'en  abftiennent.
Efcoute  toy  mefme  Pere  Buteux,  &  regarde  ce  que
diront  &  ce  que  ferot  nos  ieunes  gens.  Si  quelqu'vn
deshonore  la  priere  par  quelque  parole  ou  adlion
mauuaife,  ordonne  toy  mefme  le  chaftiment,  &  ie  le


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  105

prayer  —  was  so  astonished  when  he  saw  them  kneel
and  make  the  sign  of  the  Cross,  that  he  himself  knelt
and  made  the  sign  of  the  Cross  with  them.  Let  us
enter  into  further  particulars.

We  had  often  desired  that  those  [211]  who  have
any  special  authority  among  the  savages  and  whose
age  or  valor  gives  them  some  importance,  should  em-
brace the  Faith,  and  boldly  profess  it,  in  order  better
to  lead  thereto  the  young  people,  who  generally  fol-
low the  opinions  of  those  who  command  them.  Our
Lord  has  granted  our  desires  everywhere,  and  now
enables  us  to  see  with  pleasure  Barbarian  Captains,
whose  authority  has  hitherto  been  only  in  favor  of
vice  and  cruelty,  become  Apostles  and  Preachers,
most  zealous  for  the  glory  of  God,  whom  they  are
only  beginning  to  know.     Here  is  an  example :

Father  Buteux  preached  a  sermon  to  the  savages,
to  teach  them  what  God  required  of  them ;  and  he
laid  particular  stress  upon  the  fact  that  God  desires
that  the  Captains,  who  hold  his  place,  should  have
his  honor  in  high  esteem  and  prevent  the  evil  that
affronts  him.  A  Captain  arose  and  said:  "Wait,
Father  Buteux,  do  not  go  out ;  I  wish  to  speak ;  and
you,  young  men,  listen  to  me.  This  is  the  resolu-
tion that  [212]  I  took  at  my  baptism,  and  that  I  now
renew:  *  I  intend,  as  long  as  I  live,  to  love  him  who
has  made  all;  I  intend  to  abstain  from  everything
that  he  forbids,  and  I  desire  that  all  who  acknowl-
edge me  as  Captain  should  abstain  from  such  things. '
Listen,  thyself,  Father  Buteux,  to  what  our  young
men  say,  and  observe  what  they  do.  If  any  of  them
should  dishonor  prayer  by  any  evil  word  or  action,
order  thyself  his  chastisement,  and  I  will  make  the
guilty  one  suffer  it.     They  will  accept  it  willingly,


106  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.26

feray  fubir  a  celuy  qui  fera  coupable,  ils  I'accepterot
d'eux  mefmes  fi  ie  le  commande,  &  quand  la  faute
meritera  qu'vn  autre  y  mette  la  main,  fi  mefme  il  en
faut  venir  iufques  la  que  de  les  pendre,  comme  Ton
fait  en  France,  ie  le  feray  moy  mefme  fi  aucun  autre
ne  le  veut  faire.  Quelque  faute  que  mes  gens  com-
mettent  contre  Dieu,  ie  les  puniray  comme  le  Capi-
taine  des  Frangois  puniroit  les  fiens.  Efcoutez  mes
neueux,  efcoutez  mes  freres,  ieunes  &  vieux,  ie  le
dis,  ie  le  feray,  &  rien  ne  m'en  empefchera,  non  pas
mefme  la  crainte  de  la  mort :  il  faut  mourir  toft  ou
tard,  fi  ie  meurs  de  cette  [213]  fagon  ie  ne  mouray
pas  d'vne  autre,  &  pourois-ie  mourir  d'vne  mort  plus
glorieufe,  qu'en  defendant  I'honneur  de  noftre  grand
Capitaine?  Ie  ne  diray  iamais  comme  quelques  yuro-
gnes,  que  la  priere  fait  mourir ;  fi  bien  que  ie  veux
mourir  pour  la  defenfe  de  la  priere.  Voila  ce  que  ie
dis  &  ce  que  ie  penfe,  penfez  y  de  voftre  cofl6.  Du
difcours  que  le  Pere  vient  de  nous  faire,  i'ay  pris  ce
qu'il  auoit  dit  pour  moy,  &  y  ay  repondu.  Voyez  ce
que  vous  auez  ^  faire  touchant  ce  que  luy  &  moy
venons  de  dire  pour  vous.

Cette  harangue  animee  d'vne  voix  extraordinaire-
ment  forte,  &  affiftee  de  la  grace  du  S.  Efprit  qui
I'auoit  infpiree,  fit  vne  merueilleufe  impreffion  dans
les  coeurs  des  auditeurs,  autant  qu'on  pouuoit  iuger
de  Teftonnement  qui  paroiffoit  fur  leur  vifage.  Vn
Frangois  qui  eftoit  prefent  &  n'entendoit  rien  de  ce
qui  fe  difoit,  fut  neantmoins  autant  attentif  que  tout
autre,  rauy  du  zele  du  Predicateur,  &  de  I'attention
des  auditeurs.  En  effet  ceux  qui  connoiffent  la  liber-
t6  des  fauuages,  &  la  peine  qu'ils  [214]  ont  a  fouffrir
toute  forte  de  violence,  s'eftonnerot  de  la  hardielTe


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  1 07

if  I  command  it ;  and  if  the  fault  require  that  another
should  interfere,  even  if  it  come  to  hanging  them,  as
is  done  in  France,  I  will  do  it  myself  if  no  one  else
will.  Whatever  sin  my  people  may  commit  against
God,  I  will  punish  them  as  the  Captain  of  the  French
would  punish  his  people.  Listen,  my  nephews;
listen,  my  brothers, — both  young  and  old;  I  say  it,  I
will  do  it;  and  nothing  shall  prevent  me,  not  even
the  fear  of  death.  I  shall  have  to  die  sooner  or  later.
If  I  die  in  that  [213]  fashion,  I  shall  not  die  in  an-
other; and  how  could  I  die  a  more  glorious  death
than  in  defending  the  honor  of  our  great  Captain?
I  will  never  say,  as  some  drunkards  do,  that  prayer
causes  death;  indeed,  I  am  willing  to  die  in  the
defense  of  prayer.  That  is  what  I  say,  and  what  I
think;  think  of  it,  on  your  part.  From  the  sermon
that  the  Father  has  just  preached  to  us,  I  have  taken
what  he  has  said  for  me,  and  I  have  replied  to  it.
See  what  you  have  to  do  with  reference  to  what  he
and  I  have  just  said  for  you."

This  harangue  —  delivered  in  an  extraordinarily
powerful  voice,  and  assisted  by  the  grace  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  who  had  inspired  it  —  produced  a  wonderful
impression  on  the  hearts  of  those  who  heard  it,  judg-
ing from  the  astonishment  that  showed  itself  on  their
faces.  A  Frenchman  who  was  present,  and  who
understood  nothing  of  what  was  said,  was  neverthe-
less as  attentive  as  any  other,  and  was  delighted  with
the  zeal  of  the  Preacher  and  the  attention  paid  by
his  hearers.  Certainly,  those  who  know  the  freedom
of  the  savages,  and  the  difficulty  that  they  [214]  have
in  submitting  to  any  kind  of  constraint,  will  be  aston-
ished at  that  man's  boldness,  and  at  the  silence  of
the  others ;  but  not  they  who  know  the  saying  of  the


108  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES  [Vol.26

de  cet  homme,  &  du  filence  des  autres,  mais  non  pas
ceux  qui  fgauent  ce  mot  de  I'Apoftre,  vbi  fpiritus  Do-
mini, ibi  libertas,  &  qu'il  n'y  a  point  d'empire  fur  les
coeurs  ny  plus  doux  ny  plus  fort  que  celuy  de  la  grace.

Vne  femme  dangereufement  malade  demandant
quand  elle  fe  confefferoit,  le  Pere  luy  determina  le
iour,  &  I'alTeura  qu'il  iroit  la  confeffer  dans  fa  cabane ;
mais  elle  ne  I'attendit  pas,  &  ne  pouuant  cheminer
fe  traina  fur  le  ventre  iufques  a  la  Chapelle.  Le
Pere  la  voyant  hors  d'haleine  luy  demanda  pourquoy
elle  eftoit  venue:  le  refpedle,  dit-elle,  la  Confeffion,
ma  cabane  n'efl  pas  vn  lieu  conuenable  k  la  faintete
de  ce  myftere,  i'auray  icy  plus  de  deuotion.  Mais,
repliqua  le  Pere,  tu  te  mets  en  danger  de  mourir?
He  bien,  dit-elle,  a  la  bonne  heure  que  ie  meure,  le
baptefme  a  efface  de  mon  efprit  toutes  les  appreben-
lions  de  la  mort,  puifque  tu  nous  enfeignes  qu'il  y  a
vne  autre  vie,  d'ou  sot  bannies  toutes  les  fouffrances,
&  oil  fe  rencontre  [215]  toute  forte  de  plaifirs,  ie
n'aurois  point  d'efprit  fi  ie  craignois  la  mort.

La  foeur  de  cette  bonne  femme  auoit  vne  petite
fille  griefuement  malade.  Le  Pere  luy  demanda.
Quelle  eft  ta  penf ee  voyant  ta  fille  mourante  ?  Quelle
penfee  pourrois-ie  auoir,  dit-elle,  fmon  qu'elle  eft  a
Dieu,  &  qu'il  en  difpofera  comme  il  luy  plaira.  C'eft
ta  fille,  luy  dis-ie,  elle  t'appartient  plus  qu'a  moy,  ie
te  I'offre  de  bo  coeur.  Ie  ne  te  demande  point  qu'elle
vine,  ny  qu'elle  meure,  mais  que  tu  faffes  ce  que  tu
veux.  Si  elle  vit,  a  la  bonne  heure,  elle  croiftra,  elle
aura  de  I'efprit,  ie  I'enfeigneray,  elle  croira  en  toy,
elle  t'aimera.  Si  elle  meurt,  a  la  bonne  heure,  elle
eft  baptif^e,  elle  eft  encore  innocente,  elle  te  verra  au
Ciel,  &  fera  bien-heureufe.     C eftoit  bien  affez  pour


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  109


Apostle,  Ubi  spiritus  Domini,  ibi  libertas,  and  that
there  is  no  sweeter,  no  gentler,  no  stronger  influence
over  the  heart  than  that  of  grace.

A  woman,  who  was  dangerously  ill,  asked  when
her  confession  could  be  heard.  The  Father  fixed
the  day,  and  promised  to  go  and  confess  her  in  her
cabin;  but  she  did  not  wait  for  him,  and  as  she  could
not  walk,  she  crawled  on  her  belly  as  far  as  the
Chapel.  When  the  Father  saw  her  arrive,  all  out  of
breath,  he  asked  her  why  she  had  come.  "  I  respect
Confession,"  she  replied;  "my  cabin  is  not  a  fit
place  for  the  holiness  of  that  mystery.  I  shall  feel
more  devotion  here."  "  But,"  replied  the  Father,
' '  thou  endangerest  thy  life. "  "  Well, ' '  she  said,  ' '  it
is  better  that  I  should  die.  Baptism  has  removed  all
fear  of  death  from  my  mind  because  thou  teachest
that  there  is  another  life,  whence  all  sufferings  are
banished,  and  wherein  we  enjoy  [215]  pleasures  of
all  kinds.  I  would  have  no  sense  were  I  to  fear
death."

The  sister  of  that  good  woman  had  a  little  daugh-
ter, who  was  seriously  ill.  The  Father  asked  her :
"  What  thinkest  thou,  when  thou  seest  thy  daughter
dying?"  "What  can  I  think,"  she  said,  "except
that  she  belongs  to  God,  and  that  he  will  dispose  of
her  as  he  wills?  '  She  is  thy  daughter,'  I  say  to  him ;
*  she  belongs  to  thee  more  than  to  me.  I  offer  her
to  thee  willingly.  I  do  not  ask  that  she  live,  or
that  she  die ;  but  that  thou  mayst  do  as  thou  wilt.  If
she  live,  it  is  well ;  she  will  grow  up  and  will  have
sense.  I  shall  teach  her;  she  will  believe  in  thee
and  love  thee.  If  she  die,  it  is  well ;  she  is  baptized ;
she  is  still  innocent;  she  will  see  thee  in  Heaven,
and  will  be  happy.'  "     This  was  certainly  enough.


110  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ^SUITES  [Vol.26

vne  pauure  femme  baptifee  depuis  cinq  iours,  mais
le  S.  Efprit  eft  vn  grand  Maiftre,  &  il  femble  qn'il
fe  plaift  particulierement  a  fe  communiquer  a  ces
bonnes  ames  dans  lefquelles  il  trouue  la  fimplicit6
qu'il  aime  tant,  «&  qui  eft  vne  excellente  difpofition  a
fes  Itiniieres.  Ayes  bone  volonte,  [216]  difoit  cette
mefme  femme  a  vne  fienne  compagne,  &  Dieu  t'ai-
dera.  Le  iour  que  ie  fus  baptifee  ie  ne  f9auois  pas
men  Credo,  ie  n'auois  peu  I'apprendre,  ie  priay  Dieu,
&  le  lendemain  m'eftant  eueillee  ie  le  dis  toute  feule.
Celuy  qui  I'inftruit  de  la  forte  interieurement,  la
renforce  pareillement  centre  les  aduerfitez,  «&  luy
donne  autant  de  courage  qu'il  luy  en  faut,  pour
fupporter  vne  extreme  pauurete,  &  la  perte  qu'elle
a  fait  depuis  peu  de  fon  mary  &  de  trois  petits  enfans.

Vne  autre  voyant  le  Breuiaire  du  Pere,  luy  difoit
vn  iour:  Deuine  ce  que  ie  penfe,  i'ay  enuie  de  dero-
ber,  ie  voudrois  ffauoir  ce  que  tu  fgais,  &  tout  ce  qui
eft  dans  ton  liure,  fi  ie  te  pouuois  derober  tout  cela,
ie  ne  cefferois  de  prier  Dieu.  Mais  quoy,  luy  dit  le
Pere,  ne  fgais-tupas  bien  ton  chapelet?  Otiy  dea,  r6-
pondit-elle,  ie  le  fgay  bien.  Ne  le  dis  tu  pas?  Ie  le
dis  trois  fois  chaque  iour,  le  matin  pendant  la  Meffe,
apres  midy,  &  le  foir  auant  que  de  me  coucher.  C'eft
affez,  luy  dit  le  Pere,  continue.  Auffi  feray  ie :  mais
fi  outre  cela  ie  f9auois  quelque  autre  [217]  chofe,
6  que  ie  ferois  aife !  Ainfi  ne  te  lafles  point  de
m'enfeigner.

En  voicy  vne  autre  qui  n'eft  pas  moins  feruente,
elle  a  vn  zele  admirable  pour  le  refpecft  qu'on  doit
porter  aux  chofes  faintes,  &  ne  fgauroit  fouffrir  qu'on
parle  tant  foit  peu  pendant  les  prieres,  ou  qu'on  y
commette  la  moindre  immodeftie.      Lors  que  le  Pere


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  HI

for  a  poor  woman  who  had  been  baptized  five  days
before.  But  the  Holy  Ghost  is  a  great  Master ;  and
he  seems  to  take  a  special  pleasure  in  communicat-
ing himself  to  these  good  souls,  in  which  he  finds
the  simplicity  that  he  loves  so  well,  and  which  is  an
excellent  preparation  for  his  enlightening  influences.
"  Be  of  good  will,"  [216]  said  this  same  woman  to  a
companion,  "  and  God  will  help  thee.  On  the  day
that  I  was  baptized,  I  did  not  know  my  Credo;  I  had
not  been  able  to  learn  it.  I  prayed  to  God,  and,
when  I  awoke  on  the  following  day,  I  said  it  all
alone."  He  who  instructs  her  inwardly  also  gives
her  strength  to  bear  adversity,  and  as  much  courage
as  she  needs  to  endure  extreme  poverty,  and  the  loss
of  her  husband  and  of  her  three  little  children,  that
she  has  recently  experienced.

Another,  on  seeing  the  Father's  Breviary  one  day,
said  to  him:  "  Guess  my  thoughts.  I  am  inclined  to
steal  it ;  I  would  like  to  know  what  thou  knowest,  and
all  that  is  in  thy  book.  If  I  could  steal  all  that  from
thee,  I  would  not  cease  to  pray  to  God."  "  But,"
said  the  Father,  ' '  dost  thou  not  know  thy  rosary
well?"  "  Yes,  indeed,"  she  said,  "  I  do  know  it
well."  "  Dost  thou  not  say  it?"  "I  say  it  three
times  a  day, —  in  the  morning,  during  Mass;  in  the
afternoon ;  and  at  night,  when  I  am  about  to  lie  down
to  sleep."  "That  is  enough,"  the  Father  said  to
her;  "  continue  to  do  so."  "I  will;  but  if,  in  ad-
dition to  that,  I  knew  something  else,  [217]  Oh,  how
pleased  I  would  be!  Therefore,  do  not  weary  of
teaching  me."

Here  is  another,  who  is  no  less  fervent.  She  has
an  admirable  zeal  concerning  the  respect  that  should
be  paid  to  holy  things,  and  cannot  endure  that  any


112  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26

confelToit,  elle  fe  tenoit  a  la  porte  de  la  Chapelle,  &
difoit  k  ceux  qui  entroient  pour  fe  confeffer;  Efcoute,
ne  cache  rien,  dis  tout,  &  fois  bien  marry  d'auoir
offenf6  Dieu ;  voila  comme  il  faut  dire  tes  pechez,  &
la  porture  en  laquelle  tu  te  dois  mettre.  Apr6s  leur
confeffion  elle  les  faifoit  mettre  a  genoux,  &  ecoutoit
ce  qu'ils  difoient,  pour  voir  s'ils  fgauoient  les  prieres,
&  s'ils  ne  les  fgauoient  pas  elle  les  difoit  auec  eux
pour  les  leur  apprendre.  Vn  iour  come  le  Pere  fe
plaignoit  qu'il  n'auoit  rien  a  mettre  de  I'eau  benifte
pour  la  Chapelle,  cette  bonne  femme  incontinent
apres  la  Meffe  s'en  va  faire  vn  petit  baffin  d'efcorce
qu'elle  pendit  h.  vn  clou  a  I'entree  de  la  Chapelle.
le  croy  que  Dieu  agrea  fon  pref ent  autant  [2 1 8]  que
celuy  des  Princes,  la  bonne  volonte  fuppleant  le  prix
que  luy  oftoit  la  matiere.

Sa  fille  fut  contrainte  de  s'en  aller  dans  le  Sagne
k  la  follicitation  des  parens  de  fon  mary.  Elles  ne
fe  feparerent  pas  fans  pleurer,  le  fuiet  de  ces  larmes
eftoit  que  la  fille  feroit  priu6e  d'inltrudtion,  des  facre-
mens,  &  de  la  confolation  d'affifter  aux  prieres  com-
munes. Sa  mere  luy  procura  tout  fon  petit  meuble
de  deuotion,  vn  papier  pour  reconnoiftre  les  feftes,
&  les  iours  d'abflinence  de  chair,  deux  chapelets,
afin  que  fi  elle  en  perdoit  vn,  elle  puft  fe  feruir  de
I'autre,  &  luy  ayant  recommande  I'affedlion  h.  la
priere  luy  dit  adieu.

Le  fainc5t  Efprit  mene  les  hommes  par  diuerfes
voyes.  Vn  fauuage  Chreflien  apprehendant  la  com-
pagnie  de  quelques  Infideles,  qui  peut-eftre  luy  euffent
donne  occalion  d'offenfer  Dieu,  s'en  alia  tout  feul
auec  fa  femme  chaffer  tout  I'hyuer  dans  les  bois.  Vn
autre  au  contraire  par  principe  de  charity  fe   iette


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  113

one  should  speak  a  word  during  prayers,  or  manifest
the  slightest  irreverence.  When  the  Father  heard
confessions,  she  stood  at  the  door  of  the  Chapel,  and
said  to  those  who  entered  it  for  the  purpose  of
confessing  themselves:  "  Listen,  hide  nothing;  tell
everything,  and  be  very  sorry  for  having  offended
God.  This  is  how  thou  must  tell  thy  sins,  and  this
is  the  position  in  which  thou  must  place  thyself."
After  their  confession,  she  made  them  kneel  down,
and  listened  to  what  they  said,  to  see  whether  they
knew  their  prayers;  and,  if  they  did  not  know  these,
she  said  them  with  such  persons,  to  teach  them.  One
day,  the  Father  complained  that  he  had  nothing  in
which  to  put  holy  water  for  the  Chapel.  The  good
woman  went  immediately  after  Mass,  and  made  a
little  basin  of  bark,  which  she  hung  from  a  nail  at
the  entrance  of  the  Chapel.  I  believe  that  God  was
as  pleased  with  her  present  as  [218]  with  the  gifts  of
Princes,  for  her  willingness  compensated  for  the
slight  value  of  the  material.

Her  daughter  was  obliged  to  go  to  the  Sagne,  at
the  solicitation  of  her  husband's  relatives.  They  did
not  part  without  weeping;  and  the  cause  of  their
tears  was  that  the  daughter  would  be  deprived  of
instruction,  of  the  sacraments,  and  of  the  consolation
of  assisting  at  the  prayers  in  common.  Her  mother
supplied  her  with  all  the  small  articles  for  devotion, —
a  paper,  showing  the  festivals  and  days  of  abstinence
from  meat,  and  two  rosaries,  so  that  if  she  lost  one
she  might  use  the  other ;  and,  after  having  recom-
mended her  to  love  prayer,  she  bade  her  adieu.

The  holy  Ghost  leads  men  by  various  ways.  A
Christian  savage  dreaded  the  company  of  certain
Infidels  who  might  perhaps  have  given  him  occasion


114  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  26

dans  vne  compagnie  meflee  de  Chreftiens  &  Infi-
deles  pour  atiancer  la  gloire  [219]  de  Dieu,  traiiail-
lant  a  la  conuerfion  des  mefchans,  &  retenant  les
bons  dans  leur  deuoir.  le  te  viens  dire  adieu,  dit-il
au  P.  Buteux,  iufques  au  Printemps,  &  me  recom-
mander  a  tes  prieres,  ie  vois  bien  le  danger  oil  ie
m'expofe  me  feparant  de  toy.  II  me  femble,  lors
que  ie  me  vois  efloigne  de  vous  autres,  que  ie  fuis
comme  vn  enfant  grandement  foible  qui  n'eft  foufle-
nu  de  perfonne.  Neantmoins  ie  me  refous  k  fuiure
nos  gens,  pour  tafcher  a  les  conferuer  dans  leur  de-
uoir, &  difpofer  ceux  qui  ne  font  pas  encore  baptifez
"k  fe  rendre  dignes  du  Baptefme.  Pour  cet  effedt  ie
te  demande  premierement  vn  CruciJSx  deuant  lequel
nous  puiffions  faire  nos  prieres,  de  la  bougie  pour
brufler  en  I'honeur  du  Crucifix,  vn  papier  oil  tu  mar-
queras  les  iours  aufquels  on  doit  s'abftenir  de  chair,
les  Dimanches,  &  les  fefles,  &  particulierement  la
nuidt  de  Noel,  afin  que  nous  la  paffions  en  prieres,  vn
chapelet,  car  bien  que  i'en  aye  vn,  ie  le  puis  perdre
dans  les  bois,  ou  quelque  autre  pent  perdre  le  fien :
que  fi  tu  fgais  quelque  autre  chofe  neceffaire,  donne-
la  [220]  moy,  &  enfeigne  moy  comment  ie  me  dois
comporter.  Ce  bon  ieune  homme  difoit  cela  quafi  la
larme  a  I'oeil,  &  auec  vne  tendreffe  de  deuotion  tres-
particuliere.  Voicy  vn  autre  trait  de  ce  mefme  ieune
homme  affez  remarquable.  Lors  que  les  vailTeaux
furent  arriuez  a  Tadouffac,  le  P.  Buteux  s'addreffa  k
luy  pour  I'enuoyer  a  Quebec  en  porter  la  nouuelle,
luy  reprefentant  les  offres  qu'on  faifoit  a  celuy  qui
entreprendroit  ce  voyage,  &  luy  temoignant  qu'il
feroit  bien  aife  que  cela  luy  efcheuft,  puis  qu'il  eftoit
affez  mal  couuert.     A  ce  difcours  il  s'arrefte  vn  peu,


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  115

to  offend  God ;  he  went  alone,  with  his  wife,  to  hunt
during  the  whole  winter  in  the  woods.  Another,
on  the  contrary,  from  a  spirit  of  charity  joined  a
mixed  company  of  Christians  and  Infidels,  in  order
to  advance  the  glory  [219]  of  God,  working  for  the
conversion  of  the  wicked,  and  maintaining  the  good  in
their  duty.  "  I  am  come  to  bid  thee  adieu,"  he  said
to  Father  Buteux,  "until  Spring,  and  to  commend
myself  to  thy  prayers.  I  see  well  the  danger  to
which  I  am  exposed  by  separating  myself  from  thee.
It  seems  to  me,  when  I  am  far  from  you  all,  that  I
am  like  a  very  feeble  child  who  is  not  supported  by
any  one.  Nevertheless,  I  am  resolved  to  follow  our
people  to  endeavor  to  keep  them  in  their  duty,  and
to  induce  those  who  are  not  yet  baptized  to  make
themselves  worthy  of  Baptism.  For  that  purpose,  I
ask  thee  first  of  all  for  a  Crucifix,  before  which  we
may  say  our  prayers ;  tapers,  to  burn  in  honor  of  the
Crucifix ;  a  paper,  on  which  thou  shalt  mark  the  days
when  we  must  abstain  from  meat,  the  Sundays,
and  the  festivals, —  and  especially  Christmas  eve,  so
that  we  may  pass  it  in  prayer ;  a  rosary,  for  although
I  have  one  I  may  lose  it  in  the  woods,  or  some  one
else  may  lose  his.  If  thou  knowest  of  anything  else
that  may  be  needed,  give  it  [220]  to  me  and  teach
me  what  I  should  do."  The  good  young  man  said
this  almost  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  with  an  ex-
ceedingly great  devotion.  Here  is  another  rather
remarkable  trait  of  this  same  young  man.  When
the  ships  arrived  at  Tadoussac,  Father  Buteux  ad-
dressed him,  desiring  to  send  him  to  Quebec  with
the  news.  He  informed  him  of  the  offers  that  were
made  to  the  person  who  would  undertake  the  jour-
ney, and  told  him  that  he  would  be  much  pleased  if


116  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.26

&  puis  regardat  le  Pere,  le  feray,  luy  dit-il,  tout  ce
que  tu  voudras.  Mais  que  penfes  tu  me  voyat  ainfi
mal  veftu?  Tu  te  figures  peut  eflre  que  c'eft  par  ne-
celTite,  ou  faute  d'induflrie  a  prendre  des  Caftors?
Tu  te  trompes,  ie  n'ay  encore  dit  mon  deffein  a  per-
fonne  qu'a  toy.  Sgache  que  ie  fuis  bien  aife  d'eftre
mal  veftu,  afin  de  n'auoir  pas  fuiet  de  vaine  gloire,
&  pour  eftre  mefprif6,  &  imiter  lefus-Chrift  qui  a
eft6  fi  pauure.  Mais  ie  m'eftonne  fort  que  toy  qui
nous  enfeignes  qu'il  faut  [221]  aimer  la  pauurete,  tu
me  paries  neantmoins  d'auoir  vne  bonne  robe,  &  de
me  la  procurer,  comme  fi  c'eftoit  vne  meilleure  chofe
d'eftre  bien  veftu  que  de  1' eftre  pauurement.  Si
doncques  ie  t'obeis,  c'eft  ^  caufe  que  Dieu  me  le  com-
mande,  &  non  pas  pour  aucune  autre  confideration,

II  s'imagina  que  la  couronne  que  nous  portons  fur
la  tefte  influoit  beaucoup  pour  faire  prier  Dieu  les
autres,  &  eftoit  neceffaire  a  ceux  qui  fe  meflent  d'in-
ftruire.  II  s'en  fit  faire  vne  femblable  aux  noftres,
&  prenant  vn  foiiet  de  corde  s'en  alloit  par  les  caba-
nas appellant  les  autres  aux  prieres,  &  frapant  ceux
qui  n'obeiffoient  pas  proptement.  Ie  fais,  difoit-il,
I'office  des  Peres,  allons  vifte,  il  eft  temps  de  prier
Dieu.  C'eftoit  bien  en  effedt  ce  que  faifoient  nos
Peres  d'appeller  les  fauuages  aux  prieres,  mais  non
pas  de  fraper.  AuCQ  n'eftoit-il  pas  neceffaire:  car  ^
peine  auoient-ils  oiiy  la  voix  du  Pere  qui  les  appel-
loit,  qu'ils  repondoient  incontinent,  ho,  &  le  Capi-
taine  fortant  de  fa  cabane  redoubloit  la  criee  &  fe
faifoit  promptement  obeir.

[222]  Quoy  que  les  Capitaines  des  fauuages  foient
fort  mal  obei's  de  leurs  gens,  pource  qu'ils  n'vfent
point  de  violence,  cettuy-cy  neantmoins  s'eft  acquis


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  117

it  fell  to  his  lot,  for  he  was  rather  poorly  clad.  On
hearing  this,  he  hesitated  a  little  and,  looking  at  the
Father,  he  said:  "  I  will  do  all  that  thou  wishest.
But  what  thinkest  thou  on  seeing  me  thus  meanly-
clad?  Thou  imaginest,  perhaps,  that  it  is  through
necessity,  or  through  lack  of  skill  in  catching  Beavers.
Thou  art  mistaken ;  I  have  not  yet  said  a  word  of
my  purpose  to  any  one  but  thee.  Know  that  I  am
well  pleased  to  be  ill  clad,  so  as  to  have  no  cause  for
vainglory,  and  so  as  to  be  despised,  and  to  imitate
Jesus  Christ,  who  was  so  poor.  But  I  am  surprised
that  thou  who  teachest  us  that  we  should  [221]  love
poverty,  shouldst  nevertheless  speak  to  me  of  having
a  good  robe  and  of  getting  one  for  me,  as  if  it  were
better  to  be  well  than  to  be  badly  clad.  If,  there-
fore, I  obey  thee,  it  is  because  God  commands  me  to
do  so,  and  not  for  any  other  consideration."

He  imagined  that  the  tonsure  that  we  have  on  our
heads  had  a  great  influence  in  making  the  others
pray  to  God  and  was  necessary  for  those  who  under-
take to  teach.  He  had  his  head  shaved  like  ours,
and,  taking  a  whip  of  rope,  he  went  through  the
cabins  calling  the  others  to  prayers,  and  striking
those  who  did  not  promptly  obey.  "  I  am  doing  the
Fathers'  office,"  he  cried;  "hasten;  it  is  time  to
pray  to  God."  It  was  this,  in  fact,  that  our  Fathers
did,  to  summon  the  savages  to  prayers,  but  they  did
not  strike  them.  Nor  was  this  necessary,  for  hardly
did  they  hear  the  Father's  voice  calling  them  than
they  answered  at  once  "Ho!"  and  the  Captain,
issuing  from  his  cabin,  repeated  the  call  and  made
himself  promptly  obeyed.

[222]  Although  the  Captains  of  the  savages  are
very  poorly  obeyed  by  their  people,  because  they  use


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

tant  d'authorit6  depuis  fon  Baptefme,  que  perfonne
ne  luy  ofe  refufer  robeiffance.  Vn  ieune  homme
n'executoit  pas  vn  iour  aflez  promptement  ce  qu'il
luy  auoit  commande,  He  comment  luy  dit-il,  tu  pries,
&  tu  n'obeis  pas.  Viens  §a  que  ie  te  donne  trois
coups  de  bafton  fur  le  dos.  Cettuy-cy  s'approche,
les  revolt  paifiblement  &  s'en  va  faire  ce  qui  luy
eftoit  commande.

Le  Pere  defirat  qu'on  portail  la  brique  qu'on  auoit
amenee  pour  baftir  la  maifon  de  Tadouffac,  le  Capi-
taine  commanda  h.  tout  fon  monde  de  trauailler.
Quelques-vns  fe  chargeans  trop,  le  Pere  les  en
voulut  aduertir,  &  moderer  leur  ferueur;  laiile  nous
faire,  dirent-ils,  c'elt  la  pratique  de  ce  que  tu  nous
difois  hier  lors  que  tu  nous  exhortois  de  faire  des
mortifications  pour  nos  freres  qui  ne  font  pas  bapti-
fez,  k  I'exemple  des  Fran9ois  qui  en  font  tant  h.
noftre  occafion.  Cecy  fait  voir  que  les  ames  [223]  des
fauuages  font  capables  de  la  perfedtion,  autant  que
celles  des  Europeans.     En  voicy  vne  autre  marque.

Le  Pere  Buteux  auoit  fait  vn  petit  difcours  de  la
purete  d' intention  qu'il  faut  auoir  en  toutes  fes
a(5tions.  Vn  iour  apres  il  oiiit  quelques  femmes  qui
s'entretenoient  fur  ce  fuiet,  As  tu  bien  retenu,  difoit
vne,  ce  qu'on  nous  difoit  hier.  Oiiy,  dit  I'autre,
mais  neantmoins  i'ay  beu  vne  fois  fans  faire  le  figne
de  la  Croix,  &  offrir  cette  ac5tion  h.  Dieu.  Et  moy,
dit  vne  autre,  i'eftois  h.  demy  chemin  pour  aller
querir  du  bois,  lors  que  ie  n'auois  pas  encore  penf6  a
Dieu.  Ie  n'ay  pas  manque  k  cela,  difoit  celle  qui
auoit  fait  1' interrogation,  mais  ie  n'ay  pas  remercie
Dieu  en  retournat  du  bois,  &  i'ay  encore  ioiie  auiour-
d'huy  vn  pen  de  temps  fans  offrir  cette  adtion  h.  Dieu.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  119

no  violence,  this  one  nevertheless  has  acquired  such
authority,  since  his  Baptism,  that  no  one  dares  to
refuse  obedience  to  him.  One  day,  a  young  man  did
not  execute  with  sufficient  promptness  what  he  had
commanded.  "  Ha!  "  he  said  to  him,  "  thou  pray-
est,  and  thou  obeyest  not.  Come  here,  that  I  may
give  thee  three  blows  on  the  back  with  a  stick. ' '  The
other  drew  near,  received  them  quietly,  and  went  to
do  what  he  was  ordered.

The  Father  wished  to  have  the  bricks  carried  up
that  had  been  brought  for  building  the  house  at
Tadoussac.  The  Captain  ordered  all  his  people  to
work.  Some  of  them  overloaded  themselves,  and
the  Father  tried  to  warn  them  and  to  moderate  their
eagerness.  "  Let  us  do  it,"  they  said,  "  we  are  put-
ting into  practice  what  thou  toldst  us  yesterday,  when
thou  didst  exhort  us  to  practice  mortifications  for  our
brothers  who  are  not  baptized,  in  imitation  of  the
example  of  the  French  who  perform  so  many  for
us."  This  shows  that  the  souls  [223]  of  the  sav-
ages are  as  capable  of  perfection  as  those  of  Europe-
ans.    Here  is  another  proof  of  this :

Father  Buteux  had  preached  a  short  sermon  on
the  purity  of  intention  that  should  guide  all  our
actions.  One  day,  he  listened  to  some  women  who
were  conversing  on  this  subject.  "  Dost  thou  remem-
ber well,"  said  one,  "  what  was  said  to  us  yester-
day?" "  Yes, "  replied  the  other;  "but,  neverthe-
less, I  drank  once  without  making  the  sign  of  the
Cross,  and  without  offering  that  action  to  God."
"  And  I,"  said  another,  "  had  gone  halfway  to  get
some  wood,  without  having  yet  thought  of  God."
"  I  did  not  fail  to  do  that,"  said  the  one  who  ques-
tioned her;  "  but  I  did  not  thank  God  when  I  came


120  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.26

Parmy  ces  bons  Chreftiens  il  s'en  trouua  d'autres
qui  n'auoient  encore  iamais  veu  auctin  de  nos  Peres,
&  oyant  difcourir  le  Pere  qui  les  enfeignoit  des  cho-
fes  de  la  Foy,  s'efcrierent,  6  que  ce  que  tu  nous  dis
eft  admirable !  &  k  quoy  penf  ons  nous  ?  II  y  a  fi  long
temps  que  [224]  nous  viuons,  &  nous  n'auons  pas  en-
core connu  celuy  qui  nous  a  fait.  Ce  n'eft  pas  tout,
dit  le  Pere,  il  faut  quiter  vos  tambours,  vos  pierres,
&  vos  iongleries.  Pour  moy,  dit  vne  bonne  vieille,
ie  n'ay  point  de  tambour,  ny  de  pierre,  ie  n'ay  qu'vn
embrion  de  Cerf  feicli6.  Le  manitou  me  le  donna
cet  hiuer  paffe  durant  vne  grande  maladie,  de  la-
quelle  il  m'a  guery.  Ce  n'eft  pas  le  bon  manitou,
dit  le  Pere,  fi  tu  veux  eftre  baptifee,  il  faut  brufler
cet  embrion,  &  reconnoitre  vn  autre  conferuateur  de
ta  vie,  qui  eft  le  Dieu  que  nous  prefchons,  &  qui  te
bruflera  eternellement  fi  tu  ne  crois  en  luy.  Tien
done,  dit-elle,  le  voila.  Brufle-le  toy  mefme,  &
baptife  moy.  Elle  le  fut  auec  fept  ou  hui(5t  autres  de
fa  cabane.

Tous  les  autres  ne  fe  rendent  pas  fi  aifement,  il  y
en  a  que  Dieu  pouffe  dans  fon  Eglife  a  coups  de  ba-
ftons.  Tefmoin  vn  ieune  gar9on  qui  eftoit  I'vnique
qui  reftoit  k  baptifer  d'vne  grande  famille :  il  deman-
doit  bien  le  Baptefme,  mais  fes  adtions  d^mentoient
fes  paroles.  II  alia  k  Miskou  au  printemps,  ou  la
traite  [225]  de  la  boiffon  fe  permet  au  grand  preiu-
dice  de  la  Foy.  II  s'enyure  auec  quelques  autres ;
vn  de  labande  entre  en  furie,  fait  le  Demon  defchaif-
n6,  menace  de  tuer,  frape  tous  ceux  qu'il  rencontre,
renuerfe  les  cabanes,  perfonne  ne  luy  r6pond,  il
prend  vn  arquebufe,  la  leue  en  haut,  &  en  defcharge
trois  ou  quatre  grands  coups  fur  la  face  de  celuy  dont


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  121

back  from  the  woods,  and  to-day  I  played  for  a  short
time  without  offering  that  action  to  God."

With  these  good  Christians  there  were  others,  who
had  never  seen  any  of  our  Fathers ;  and  when  they
heard  the  Father  who  instructed  them  speak  of  mat-
ters pertaining  to  the  Faith,  they  exclaimed:  "  Oh,
how  admirable  is  what  you  tell  us!  but  of  what  are
we  thinking?  We  have  lived  for  so  long,  [224]  and
have  never  yet  known  him  who  made  us."  "  That
is  not  all,"  said  the  Father;  "  you  must  give  up  your
drums,  your  stones,  and  your  sorceries."  "  For  my
part,"  said  a  good  old  woman,  "  I  have  no  drum  nor
stone ;  I  have  nothing  but  a  dried  embryo  of  a  Deer.
The  manitou  gave  it  to  me  last  winter,  during  a
severe  illness,  of  which  he  cured  me. "  "  That  is  not
the  good  manitou,"  said  the  Father.  "  If  thou
wouldst  be  baptized,  thou  must  burn  that  embryo,
and  acknowledge  another  preserver  of  thy  life,  who  is
the  God  whom  we  preach  and  who  will  burn  thee  in
eternal  fire,  if  thou  do  not  believe  in  him."  "  Well,
then,"  she  said,  "there  it  is.  Burn  it  thyself,  and
baptize  me."  She  was  baptized,  with  seven  or  eight
others  of  her  cabin.

Not  all  the  others  submit  so  easily.  There  are
some  whom  God  drives  into  his  Church  by  dint  of
blows.  For  instance,  there  was  a  young  boy,  the
only  one  out  of  a  large  family,  who  was  not  baptized.
It  is  true  that  he  asked  for  Baptism,  but  his  actions
belied  his  words.  In  the  spring  he  went  to  Miskou,
where  [225]  intoxicating  liquor  is  allowed,  to  the
great  detriment  of  the  Faith.  He  becomes  intoxi-
cated, with  some  others.  One  of  the  band  becomes
furious, —  he  behaves  like  an  unchained  Demon,
threatens   to   kill   every   one,  strikes   all    whom   he


122  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.26


ie  parle :  il  luy  abbat  quatre  ou  cinq  dents,  luy  caffe
la  machoire  d'vn  coft6,  luy  fend  la  levre,  &  luy  cou-
ure  tout  le  vifage  de  fang  &  de  playes.  On  croit
que  e'en  eft  fait,  &  le  pis  eft  que  luy  mefme  eftant
yure  ne  connoift  pas  fon  malheur.  Enfin  il  reuient  k
foy,  on  le  penfe  fi  bien  qu'il  en  guerit,  mais  en  telle
forte  qu'il  demeuraft  defigur^,  fans  que  ceux  qui
I'auoient  connu  le  peuffent  reconnoitre,  non  pas
mefme  k  la  voix.  Vqila  vn  effedt  de  I'yurognerie,  qui
fut  pourtant  heureux  en  luy,  &  peut-eftre  vn  effecft
de  fa  predeftination.  Car  reconnoiffant  la  main
fecrete  qui  I'auoit  frape,  il  commenga  ^  la  redouter,
&  fe  mit  dans  I'eftat  qu'il  falloit  pour  receuoir  le
Baptefme,  que  M.  de  Courpon  Admiral  de  [226]  la
flotte  honora  comme  il  auoit  fait  plufieurs  autres
de  quelques  coups  de  canon.

La  protedlion  diuine  efclate  fur  nos  Neophytes
aulTi  bien  que  la  iuftice.  Vne  ieune  femme  baptifee
k  mefme  iour  s'en  alia  le  lendemain  auec  vn  autre,
&  vn  petit  enfant  emmaillote  chercher  des  fruidls  du
pais.  A  fon  retour  fon  canot  renuerfe,  que  fera-
t'elle?  de  laiffer  perir  fon  enfant,  ce  luy  eft  vne  affli-
(5tion  plus  fenfible  que  de  perdre  la  vie.  De  le  vou-
loir  fauuer,  c'eft  perdre  la  mere  &  I'enfant.  Elle  fe
recommande  a  Dieu,  &  fe  met  a  nager  d'vne  main,
&  k  poufler  de  I'autre  la  planche  oil  eftoit  li6  I'enfant
a  leur  mode,  qui  par  malheur  auoit  la  face  tourn^e  &
plongee  dans  I'eau.  Dieu  eut  piti6  de  tons  deux,
quelques  Fran9ois  qui  n'eftoient  pas  loin  courent  au
fecours,  &  fauuent  ce  petit  Moyfe.  La  mere  le  porte
foudain  k  I'Eglife  &  remercie  celuy  dont  elle  &  fon
fils  tiennent  la  vie.

Ie   finiray  ce   Chapitre   par  le  raifonnement  d'vn


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  123

meets,  and  overthrows  the  cabins.  No  one  answers
him.  He  takes  an  arquebus,  raises  it,  and  fires  three
or  four  shots  into  the  face  of  the  boy  of  whom  I
speak, — knocking  out  four  or  five  teeth,  breaking
his  jaw  on  one  side,  splitting  his  lip,  and  covering
his  face  with  blood  and  wounds.  They  think  that  it
is  all  over  with  him ;  and  the  worst  of  it  is  that  he
does  not  know  of  his  misfortune,  because  he  is  intoxi-
cated. Finally,  he  recovered  his  senses,  and  so  well
were  his  wounds  dressed  that  he  was  cured  of  them ;
but  he  remained  so  disfigured  that  none  of  those
who  knew  him  could  recognize  him,  even  by  his
voice.  That  was  an  effect  of  drunkenness  that  was,
nevertheless,  fortunate  in  his  case,  and  perhaps  a
result  of  his  predestination.  For,  acknowledging
the  hidden  hand  that  had  struck  him,  he  commenced
to  fear  it,  and  made  himself  fit  to  receive  Baptism,
which  Monsieur  de  Courpon  the  Admiral  of  [226]  the
fleet,  honored  as  he  had  done  several  others,  by
having  some  rounds  fired  from  the  cannon.

Divine  protection  is  manifested  in  the  case  of  our
Neophytes,  as  well  as  justice.  A  young  woman  who
was  baptized  one  day,  went  on  the  following  one,
with  another,  and  a  little  child  in  swaddling  clothes,
to  gather  some  of  the  fruits  of  the  country.  On  her
return,  the  canoe  upset.  What  was  she  to  do?  To
let  her  child  perish  would  have  been  a  greater  afflic-
tion than  to  lose  her  own  life.  To  try  and  save  it
would  cause  the  death  of  both  mother  and  child.  She
recommended  herself  to  God,  and  swam  with  one
hand,  pushing  with  the  other  the  board  on  which  the
child  was  bound,  according  to  their  fashion ;  ^  but,
unfortunately,  he  had  turned  over  on  his  face,  and
was  immersed  in  the  water.     God  had  pity  on  both


124  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.26

fauuage,  qui  peut-eftre  defabufera  quelques  perfonnes
de  France  [227]  qui  veulent  faire  paffer  nos  fauuages
pour  des  hommes  qui  n'ont  rien  d'humain  que  la  face.
D'autres  qui  en  font  vn  peu  plus  d'eflat,  les  comparent
^  certains  bons  paifans  qui  demeurent  muets  lors
qu'on  parle  d' autre  chofe  que  de  leurs  boeufs,  &  de
leur  charrue.  Nous  auons  couche  dans  cette  Relation
&  das  les  precedentes  plufieurs  de  leurs  difcours  &
harangues  qui  tefmoignent  le  contraire.  le  le  confir-
meray  icy  par  vn  petit  difcours  philofophique  d'vn
fauuage  non  encore  baptif6.  Le  Pere  Buteux  parloit
vn  iour  dans  vne  cabane  de  rimmortalite  de  I'ame,
apportant  des  raifons  de  conuenance,  tiroes  mefme
de  quelques-vns  de  leurs  principes.  Comme  de  ce
qu'ils  difoient  autres  fois  que  les  ames  des  trefpaffez
vont  habiter  dans  vn  village  au  Soleil  couchant,  oi:
elles  chaffent  aux  Caftors  &  aux  Eflans,  font  la  guerre,
&  font  les  mefmes  operations  qu' elles  faifoient  en
cette  vie  par  le  miniftere  des  fens.  Apres  ce
difcours,  ce  fauuage  qui  n'auoit  encore  iamais  oUy
parler  nos  Peres  de  cette  matiere,  prenant  la  parole :
Dequoy  te  mets  [228]  tu  en  peine,  dit-il,  de  nous  prou-
uer  cela.  II  faudroit  eflre  fol  pour  en  douter.  Nous
voyons  bien  que  noflre  ame  eft  autre  que  celle  d'vn
chien:  celle-1^  n'a  de  I'efprit  que  par  les  yeux  &  les
oreilles,  &  ne  connoift  rien  fmon  ce  qui  tombe  fous
fes  fens.  Mais  Tame  d'vn  homme  connoift  plufieurs
chofes  qui  ne  s'apper9oiuent  point  par  les  fens,  &
ainfi  elle  peut  agir  fans  le  corps  &  fans  les  fens.  Que
li  elle  peut  agir  fans  le  corps,  elle  peut  eltre  fans  le
corps.  Doncques  elle  n'eft  pas  corporelle,  &  partant
immortelle.  le  n'examine  pas  la  verit6  de  toutesces
confequences,  ie  rapporte  feulement  la  fuite  de  fon


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  125

of  them.  Some  Frenchmen,  who  were  not  far  dis-
tant, hastened  to  help  them,  and  rescued  the  little
Moses.  The  mother  carried  him  at  once  to  the
Church,  and  thanked  him  to  whom  she  and  her  son
were  indebted  for  their  lives.

I  shall  conclude  this  Chapter  with  the  reasoning
of  a  savage  which  will  perhaps  undeceive  some
persons  in  France  [227]  who  seek  to  make  our  savages
pass  for  men  who  have  nothing  human  about  them
except  their  faces.  Others,  who  think  a  little  more
highly  of  them,  compare  them  to  certain  good  peas-
ants, who  remain  mute  when  one  speaks  to  them  of
anything  besides  their  oxen  and  plows.  We  have
reported  in  this  Relation,  and  in  the  preceding  ones,
several  of  their  speeches  and  harangues,  which  prove
the  contrary.  I  shall  confirm  this  now  by  a  short
philosophical  discourse,  delivered  by  a  savage  not  yet
baptized.  Father  Buteux  was  speaking  one  day  in
a  cabin  on  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  adducing
arguments  of  convenience,  and  even  taking  these
from  some  of  their  own  principles, — as,  for  instance,
what  they  said  formerly,  that  the  souls  of  the  de-
ceased went  to  reside  in  a  village  toward  the  setting
Sun,  where  they  hunt  Beavers  and  Elk,  carry  on  war,
and  do  the  same  things  that  they  did  in  this  life
through  the  agency  of  the  senses.^  After  this  dis-
course, the  savage,  who  had  never  heard  our  Fathers
speak  on  that  subject,  said:  "  Why  dost  thou  take
[228]  the  trouble  of  proving  that  to  us?  One  would
be  very  foolish  to  doubt  it.  We  see  very  well  that
our  soul  is  different  from  that  of  a  dog ;  the  latter
can  perceive  nothing  except  through  the  eyes  and
ears,  and  knows  nothing  that  does  not  come  under
its  senses.     But  the  soul  of  a  man  knows  many  things


126  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26

raifonnement,  qui  ne  prouenant  que  de  la  feule  force
du  fens  commun  de  cet  homme,  fans  aucune  eflude,
eft  fuffifant  pour  faire  croire  que  les  fauuages  que
nous  cultiuons  ne  font  pas  des  fatyres  errans  par  les
bois,  &  que  la  parole  du  Prophete  eft  veritable,  que
Dieu  a  imprim6  dans  les  ames  les  plus  barbares  vn
charadtere  de  raifon  qui  eft  vn  rayon  eman6  des  lu-
mieres  de  fa  face.  Voila  ce  qui  fe  fit  1' an  paff6  de  plus
remarquable  en  cette  Miffion:  [229]  voyons  mainte-
nant  quels  fruidts  on  y  a  recueilly  cette  annee.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  127

that  are  not  perceived  by  the  senses ;  and  so  it  can
act  without  the  body,  and  without  the  senses.  And
if  it  can  act  without  the  body,  it  can  exist  without  the
body.  Therefore  it  is  not  material,  and  consequent-
ly it  is  immortal."  I  do  not  examine  the  truth  of
all  these  conclusions.  I  merely  repeat  the  course  of
his  reasoning  which,  arising  as  it  does  from  the  sole
force  of  that  man's  common  sense,  without  any  study,
is  sufficient  to  lead  us  to  believe  that  the  savages
whom  we  instruct  are  not  satyrs  roaming  through
the  woods,  and  that  the  saying  of  the  Prophet  is  true
that  God  has  impressed  upon  the  most  barbarous
souls  a  quality  of  reason,  which  is  a  ray  emanating
from  the  light  of  his  countenance.  Such  are  the
most  remarkable  events  that  occurred  last  year  in
that  Mission.  [229]  Let  us  now  see  what  fruits  we
have  gathered  there  this  year.


128  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26


CHAPITRE  XIII.

CONTINUATION    DE    LA    MISSION    DE    SAINCTE    CROIX    A

TADOUSSAC.

ON  cultiue  cette  pauure  petite  vigne  pendat  I'eft^
afin  qu'elle  porte  du  fruidt  pendant  I'hyuer.
C'eft  "k  dire  qn'vn  Pere  de  noftre  Copagnie  fe
trouue  en  ce  quartier  1^  fi  toft  que  ces  peuples  s'y
aJTemblet  pour  les  inftruire,  iufques  k  ce  qu'ils  s'en
aillent  a  leurs  grandes  chaffes  &  a  leurs  grandes  pef-
ches  de  Caftor  &  de  I'Eflan,  &  des  autres  animaux
qui  leur  feruent  de  nourriture,  I'hyuer  ils  en  man-
gent  la  chair,  &  I'efte  ils  en  vendent  les  peaux  aux
Franjois  qui  viennent  trafiquer  en  ces  contrees.

Si  toft  que  le  cours  de  la  riuiere  a  eft6  libre,  &  que
les  glaces  n'en  ont  plus  ferm6  le  paffage,  vne  efcoii-
ade  de  fauuages  de  Tadouffac  s'en  vint  k  Kebec  dans
vne  chaloupe,  pour  demander  &  pour  [230]  emmener
vn  Pere  auec  eux,  tant  pour  entendre  de  confeffion
les  nouueaux  Chrefties,  que  pour  enfeigner  ceux  qui
ne  I'eftoient  pas  encore,  en  vn  mot  pour  leur  enfei-
gner le  chemin  du  Ciel.  Le  Pere  lean  Dequen  leur
fut  accorde,  ils  I'enleuent  dans  leur  bateau,  &  I'em-
menet  au  plutoft  pour  la  maladie  d'vn  Capitaine  qui
ne  vouloit  point  mourir  fans  baptefme.  Get  homme
n'efloit  pas  proprement  de  Tadouffac,  il  y  auoit  deux
ans  que  les  Chreftiens  nouuellemet  regenerez  dans
le  fang  de  lefus-Chrift  luy  auoiet  fait  vn  prefent  afin
qu'il  amenaft  ceux  de  fa  nation  qui  font  plus  auant


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  129


CHAPTER  XIII.

I

CONTINUATION    OF   THE    MISSION   OF   THE   HOLY   CROSS

AT   TADOUSSAC.

WE  cultivate  this  poor  little  vine  during  the
summer  in  order  that  it  may  bear  fruit
during  the  winter.  That  is  to  say  that  a
Father  of  our  Society  goes  to  that  quarter  as  soon  as
the  tribes  are  gathered  there,  for  the  purpose  of
instructing  them  until  they  start  on  their  great  hunt-
ing and  fishing  expeditions  for  Beaver,  Elk,  and  the
other  animals  that  serve  as  their  food.  In  winter,
they  eat  the  meat;  and  in  summer  they  sell  the
skins  to  the  French  who  come  to  these  countries  to
trade.

As  soon  as  the  course  of  the  river  was  free  and  the
ice  no  longer  barred  its  passage,  a  party  of  savages
from  Tadoussac  came  to  Kebec  in  a  shallop,  to  ask
for  and  [230]  take  back  a  Father  with  them,  both  to
hear  the  confessions  of  the  new  Christians,  and  to
instruct  those  who  were  not  yet  Christians, —  in  a
word,  to  teach  them  the  way  to  Heaven.  They  were
given  Father  Jean  Dequen,  whom  they  placed  in
their  boat,  and  took  away  with  them  as  soon  as  they
could,  on  account  of  the  illness  of  a  Captain  who  did
not  wish  to  die  without  baptism.  This  man  did  not
properly  belong  to  Tadoussac.  Two  years  ago,  the
Christians  recently  regenerated  in  the  blood  of  Jesus
Christ  had  made  him  a  present,  for  the  purpose  of


130  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.26

dans  les  terres  pour  entendre  parler  de  I'Euangile:
le  pen  de  conoiffance  qu'on  luy  donna  de  cette  dodlrine
toute  celefte  le  fit  refoudre  de  fe  venir  pref enter  luy
mefme  tout  malade  qu'il  eftoit:  fi  toft  qu'il  vit  le
Pere,  le  voila  plein  de  ioye,  &  encore  qu'il  euft  la
mort  entre  les  dents  comme  Ton  dit,  il  voulut  eftre
porte  k  la  Chapelle  afin  de  receuoir  le  baptefme  auec
toutes  les  faintes  ceremonies,  conuiant  tous  fes  gens
de  s'y  trouuer  pour  rendre  vn  t^moignage  public
[231]  de  I'eftat  qu'il  faifoit  de  la  Foy  &  de  la  priere.
Voila  par  oil  le  Pere  commenja  fa  Miffion.

Le  Capitaine  de  Tadouffac  ne  fut  pas  moins  content
de  fa  venue  que  ce  bon  Neophyte.  II  fit  le  foir  vne
belle  harangue  en  ces  termes ;  Reioiiiff ons  nous  tous,
voila  noftre  Pere  arriue,  il  eft  auec  nous,  vous  fgauez
combien  il  nous  aime,  il  ne  fera  pas  icy  pour  vn  peu
de  temps,  nous  en  ioiiirons  tous.  Que  tout  le  monde
aflifle  aux  prieres  tous  les  iours,  &  k  I'inftrudtion
qu'il  nous  donnera,  confeffons  nos  pechez  nous  qui
fommes  baptifez,  &  puis  tafchons  de  marcher  droit,
ne  I'attriflons  point  pendant  qu'il  eft  auec  nous.
Tout  ce  monde  repondit  a  ce  difcours  par  vn  cry
public,  pour  marque  qu'ils  auoient  volonte  d'obeir  au
defir  de  leur  Capitaine,  &  de  ioiiir  du  bon-heur  qu'ils
receuoient  de  la  prefence  du  Pere.

Apres  cette  commune  reioiiiffance  les  fauuages
commencerent  ^  rendre  compte  de  tout  ce  qui  s'efloit
paffe  pendant  leur  grande  chaff e  de  I'hyuer.  lis  out
couftume  de  demander  vn  papier  ou  vn  [232]  Calen-
drier  pour  reconnoill;re  les  iours  qu'on  refpedte:  c'eft
ainfi  qu'ils  nomment  les  Dimanches  &  les  Feftes.  lis
difoient  done  que  leur  couftume  eftoit  d'eftendre  ces
iours-lk  &  de  mettre  en  veue  vne  belle  grande  image


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  131

bringing  his  tribe,  who  live  further  inland,  to  hear
the  Gospel.  The  slight  knowledge  that  was  given
him  of  that  most  heavenly  doctrine  induced  him  to
come  himself,  sick  as  he  was.  When  he  saw  the
Father,  he  was  filled  with  joy;  and,  although  he  had
death  between  his  teeth,  as  the  saying  is,  he  wished
to  be  carried  to  the  Chapel,  to  receive  baptism  with
all  the  holy  rites ;  and  he  invited  all  his  people  to  be
present,  to  give  public  testimony  [231]  of  the  esteem
that  he  had  for  the  Faith  and  for  prayer.  Thus  the
Father  commenced  his  Mission.

The  Captain  of  Tadoussac  was  no  less  pleased  at
his  coming  than  that  good  Neophyte,  He  showed  it
by  an  eloquent  harangue,  in  these  words:  "  Let  us
all  rejoice;  see,  our  Father  has  arrived,  and  is  with
us.  You  know  how  he  loves  us.  He  will  not  be
here  for  a  little  while ;  we  shall  all  enjoy  his  pres-
ence. Let  every  one  attend  the  prayers  every  day,
and  the  instruction  that  he  will  give  us.  Let  us  who
are  baptized  confess  our  sins,  and  endeavor  to  walk
straight.  Let  us  not  cause  him  any  sorrow  while  he
is  with  us."  All  the  people  replied  to  this  discourse
by  a  general  exclamation,  to  show  that  they  were
willing  to  obey  the  wish  of  their  Captain,  and  desired
to  enjoy  the  happiness  caused  them  by  the  presence
of  the  Father,

After  this  general  rejoicing,  the  savages  began  to
give  an  account  of  all  that  had  happened  during  their
great  winter  hunt.  They  are  in  the  habit  of  asking
for  a  paper,  or  a  [232]  Calendar  to  distinguish  the
days  that  are  honored  —  thus  they  call  the  Sundays
and  Festivals.  They  therefore  said  that  it  was  their
custom  on  those  days  to  spread  out  and  expose  to
view  a  fine,  large  picture  in  the  best  cabin ;  to  light


132  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

dans  la  plus  belle  cabane,  d'allumer  deux  cierges
comme  on  fait  dans  nos  Chapelles,  de  s'affembler
tous  &  de  chanter  des  Hymnes  &  des  Cantiques  fpiri-
tuels,  de  faire  leurs  prieres  k  haute  voix,  &  de  reciter
leur  chapelet,  &  de  prefler  I'oreille  ^  ceux  qui  leur
parlent  quelquefois  de  la  priere,  c'efl  ^  dire  de  la
docftrine  de  lefus-Chrift.  Si  quelqu'vn  a  commis
quelque  defaut  qui  foit  venu  k  la  connoiffance  des
autres,  il  eft  afleure  que  le  Pere  en  fera  aduerty:
c'eft  pourquoy  ils  s'en  accufent  les  premiers,  &  fi  par
quelque  negligence  ils  ont  manque  k  ces  prieres
publiques,  ils  s'en  confeffent  auec  autant  de  regret
comme  feroient  de  bonnes  ames  qui  auroient  man-
qu6  k  la  fainte  Meffe.  Ces  bonnes  gens  racontoient
qu'ils  auoient  fait  rencontre  d'vne  troupe  d'Algon-
quins,  dont  quelques-vns  auoient  eft6  baptifez  vn  pe-
tit [233]  k  la  hafte,  lef quels  les  inuiterent  ^  des  feftins
fuperftitieux,  mais  ces  Neophytes  n'y  voulurent
iamais  affifter.  lis  s'^tonnoient  que  ces  gens  qui  fe
difoient  Chreftiens  ne  fe  mettoient  point  ^  genoiiil  le
foir  &  le  matin  pour  prier  Dieu,  &  ce  qui  les  indigna
bien  fort,  fut  que  dans  le  debris  de  leurs  cabanes
delaiffees  ils  trouuerent  des  images  qu'ils  auoiet  iet-
tees  la,  ou  du  moins  oubliees,  ils  les  ramafferent  &
les  rapporterent  au  Pere  Dequen  auec  vne  grande
reuerence.  II  ne  fe  faut  pas  precipiter  ny  trop  hafter
de  baptifer  les  fauuages,  ny  croire  ^  la  ferueur  de
quatre  iours.

Apres  que  le  compte  des  chofes  qui  s'eftoient
paffees  publiquement  depuis  qu'ils  n'auoient  veu  au-
cun  Pere  fut  rendu,  il  fallut  defcendre  plus  en  parti-
culier,  ils  fe  preparent  tous  ^  la  confeffion.  La
France  ne  ffauroit  croire  auec  quelle  candeur,  net-


1642 -44 J  RELATION  OF  1643-44  133


two  tapers,  as  we  do  in  our  Chapels;  to  meet  all
together,  and  to  sing  Hymns  and  Canticles;  to  say
their  prayers  aloud;  to  recite  their  rosary,  and  to
listen  to  those  who  sometimes  spoke  to  them  of  pray-
er—  that  is,  of  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ.  If  any
one  committed  a  sin  that  came  to  the  knowledge  of
the  others,  he  was  assured  that  the  Father  would  be
told  of  it.  Consequently,  they  are  the  first  to  accuse
themselves  thereof ;  and,  if  through  neglect  they  have
failed  to  attend  these  public  prayers,  they  make  con-
fession of  it,  with  as  much  regret  as  good  souls  would
do  who  had  missed  holy  Mass.  These  good  people
related  that  they  had  met  a  band  of  Algonquins,
some  of  whom  had  been  baptized  somewhat  [233]
hastily.  The  latter  invited  them  to  superstitious
feasts,  but  these  Neophytes  would  never  attend
them.  They  were  surprised  that  these  people,  who
called  themselves  Christians,  did  not  kneel  night  and
morning  to  pray  to  God ;  and  what  made  them  very
indignant  was,  that  in  the  debris  of  their  abandoned
cabins  they  found  pictures  that  the  former  had  thrown
away  or  at  least  forgotten.  They  picked  these  up,
and  brought  them  very  reverently  to  Father  Dequen,
One  must  not  be  too  precipitate  or  too  hasty  in
baptizing  savages,  nor  trust  a  four  days'  fervor.

After  rendering  an  account  of  what  had  publicly
occurred  since  they  had  seen  a  Father,  it  was  neces-
sary to  enter  into  more  minute  details,  and  all  pre-
pared themselves  for  confession.  Frenchmen  could
not  believe  with  what  candor,  clearness,  and  knowl-
edge of  their  sins  the  savages  confess  themselves ;  it
is  what  we  could  hardly  have  hoped  for.  Parents
bring  their  children  to  enjoy  that  blessing;  they
teach  them  what  they  should  say,  [234]  remind  them


134  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.26


tete  &  connoiflance  de  leurs  fautes  les  fauuages  fe
confeffent,  c'eft  ce  que  nous  n'euffions  quafi  ofe  efpe-
rer.  Les  parens  amenent  leurs  enfans  pour  ioiiir  de
cette  benedidtion,  ils  les  inflruifent  de  ce  qu'ils  doiuet
dire,  leur  [234]  remettent  leurs  fautes  en  memoire,
ils  leur  font  faire  la  penitence  qu'on  leur  donne.

Certain  iour  vne  bonne  femme  difoit  a  fa  fille,  en
forte  que  le  Pere  qui  n'eftoit  pas  loin  le  pouuoit
entendre:  Allez  vous  confeffer  ma  fille,  dites  tout,
n'oubliez  rien,  accufez  vous  que  vous  eftes  vne  opini-
aflre,  que  vous  aimez  trop  ^  ioiier,  que  vous  n' eftes
pas  affez  portee  k  prier  Dieu  foir  &  matin,  allez,  foyez
trifle  d'auoir  offenfe  Dieu,  &  ne  le  fafcbez  plus.

Vn  bon  fauuage  voyant  que  fon  fils  affez  ieune  ne
fe  mettoit  point  a  genoiiil  apr6s  la  confeffion,  fe  dou-
ta  qu'il  auroit  oublie  ce  qu'on  luy  auroit  ordonn^
pour  la  penitence;  il  s'en  alia  tout  fimplement  le
demander  au  Pere  afin  d'en  faire  refouuenir  fon  fils,
&  de  luy  faire  accomplir :  le  Pere  ayma  la  candeur
&  la  bont6  de  ce  Neophyte  &  donna  I'inftrudlion
neceffaire  h.  fon  fils.

Vne  bonne  mere  ne  voyant  pas  fa  fille  parmy  les
autres  qui  s'alloient  confeffer,  I'alla  querir  &  luy  dit
qu'il  ne  falloit  pas  qu'elle  fut  priuee  de  ce  bon-heur;
fa  fille  quoy  que  mariee  ne  fut  point  bonteufe  [235]
de  cet  aduertiffement  que  luy  donnoit  fa  mere ;  elle
s'en  va  ^  la  Chapelle,  &  encore  que  ces  bonnes  gens
foient  affez  portez  ^  receuoir  les  Sacremens,  fa  mere
ne  fortit  point  de  I'Eglife  qu'elle  n'eut  veu  de  fes
yeux  fa  fille  au  pied  du  Confeffeur.

Le  Pere  ayant  oiiy  de  Confeffion  tous  les  Chre-
fliens,  &  ayant  repeu  de  la  fainte  Communion  tous
ceux  qui  en   eftoient  capables,  s'occupa  fortement  k


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  135

of  their  sins,  and  see  that  they  perform  the  penances
assigned  them.

One  day,  a  good  woman  said  to  her  daughter,  so
that  the  Father,  who  was  not  far  off,  could  hear:
"  Go  and  confess  yourself,  my  daughter;  tell  every-
thing; accuse  yourself  of  being  stubborn,  of  being
too  fond  of  play,  of  not  being  ready  enough  to  pray
to  God  night  and  morning.  Go ;  be  sorry  for  hav-
ing offended  God,  and  anger  him  no  more."

A  good  savage  observed  that  his  son,  who  was
rather  young,  did  not  kneel  down  after  his  confes-
sion ;  he  thought  that  he  might  have  forgotten  what
had  been  ordained  him  as  a  penance.  He  went  in
all  simplicity  to  ask  the  Father  about  it,  so  as  to
remind  his  son  and  make  him  do  it.  The  Father
admired  the  candor  and  goodness  of  the  Neophyte,
and  gave  the  necessary  instruction  to  his  son.

A  good  mother,  who  did  not  see  her  daughter
among  the  others  who  were  going  to  confession,  went
to  seek  her  and  told  her  that  she  must  not  be
deprived  of  that  happiness.  Her  daughter,  though
married,  was  not  ashamed  [235]  of  being  so  warned
by  her  mother.  She  went  to  the  Chapel,  and,  al-
though these  good  people  are  very  ready  to  receive
the  Sacraments,  her  mother  did  not  leave  the  Church
until  with  her  own  eyes  she  had  seen  her  daughter
at  the  feet  of  the  Confessor.

When  the  Father  had  heard  the  Confessions  of  all
the  Christians,  and  had  administered  holy  Com-
munion to  all  who  were  capable  of  receiving  it,  he
vigorously  applied  himself  to  impressing  the  fear  of
God  on  their  minds  and  to  beget  Jesus  Christ  in  the
souls  of  those  who  had  not  yet  received  him  in  the
waters  of  Baptism.     He  baptized  forty  persons,  during


136  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.26


leur  imprimer  dans  I'efprit  la  crainte  de  Dieu,  &  k
engendrer  lefus-Chrifk  dans  I'ame  de  ceux  qui  ne
I'atioiet  pas  encore  receu  dans  les  eaux  du  Baptefme.
II  a  baptife  quarante  perfonnes  dans  le  pen  de  temps
qu'il  a  efte  k  Tadouffac.  Les  meres  apportent  elles
mefmes  leurs  enfans,  &  fi  quelque  fauuage  arriue  de
quelque  endroit  plus  efloigne,  les  femmes  plus  deno-
tes prennent  garde  s'il  n'y  a  point  dans  la  troupe
quelques  enfans  qui  ne  foient  pas  encore  baptifez,
afin  d'en  donner  aduis  au  Pere.  Quelques-vns  d'en-
tre  eux  ne  fgauroient  fouffrir  qu'on  laifle  vn  enfant
fans  baptefme,  tant  ils  ont  peur  qu'ils  ne  meurent
fans  [236]  ce  Sacremet:  d'autres  diset  par  vne  cha-
rite  erronee,  qu'il  ne  fe  faut  pas  haller,  que  ces  en-
fans ferot  peut-eftre  mechas,  &  que  Dieu  fe  fafchera
qu'on  leur  ait  done  le  baptefme.  lis  adioutet  que
leurs  parens  n'eftants  point  Chreftiens  feront  peut-
eftre  des  fuperftitions,  &  commettront  des  crimes
qui  cauferont  la  mort  k  leurs  enfans,  &  puis  on  accu-
fera  le  baptefme,  on  criera  que  la  Foy  tue  les  homes,
&  que  la  priere  eft  mauuaife.  Le  Pere  les  appaifa
aifement,  leur  faifant  voir  la  grade  neceffite  de  ce
bain  celefte.

Toutes  les  perfonnes  adultes  qui  ont  efte  purifi6es
das  ces  eaux  falutaires  ont  receu  vne  pleine  inftru-
dtion,  elles  ont  tefmoigne  de  grands  defirs  de  viure
conformement  aux  loix  de  lefus-Chrift  &  de  fon
Eglife  On  n'accorde  pas  ce  Sacrement  de  falut  &
de  lumiere  a  tons  ceux  qui  le  demandent.  II  y  a
trois  ans  qu'vn  certain  iongleur  preffe  qu'on  le
baptife,  il  f9ait  toutes  les  prieres,  il  a  connoilTance
des  principaux  articles  de  noftre  croyance,  il  eft  venu
depuis  peu  a  faindt  lofeph  pour  fe  lier  auec  les  princi-


1642  - 44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  137

the  short  time  he  was  at  Tadoussac.  The  mothers
themselves  bring  their  children ;  and,  if  any  savages
come  from  some  more  distant  place,  the  most  devout
women  find  out  whether  there  are  among  the  band
any  children  not  yet  baptized,  in  order  to  inform  the
Father  of  it.  Some  of  them  cannot  bear  to  leave  a
child  unbaptized,  so  great  is  their  fear  lest  it  die  with-
out [236]  that  Sacrament.  Others  say,  through
mistaken  charity,  that  there  should  be  no  haste, —  that
these  children  will  perhaps  be  wicked,  and  that  God
will  be  angry  because  they  have  been  baptized.
They  add  that,  as  their  parents  are  not  Christians,
they  will  perhaps  be  guilty  of  superstitious  prac-
tices, and  commit  crimes  that  will  cause  the  death  of
their  children;  then  baptism  will  be  blamed  for
it,  and  it  will  be  said  that  Faith  kills  men,  and  that
prayer  is  a  bad  thing.  The  Father  easily  pacified
them  by  showing  them  the  great  necessity  of  being
cleansed  in  that  heavenly  font.

All  the  adults  who  have  been  purified  in  those
health-giving  waters  have  been  fully  instructed.
They  have  manifested  a  great  desire  to  live  conform-
ably to  the  laws  of  Jesus  Christ  and  of  his  Church.
We  do  not  grant  that  Sacrament  of  salvation  and
light  to  all  those  who  ask  for  it.  Three  years  ago,  a
sorcerer  pressed  us  to  baptize  him.  He  could  say  all
the  prayers,  and  had  a  knowledge  of  the  principal
articles  of  our  belief.  He  came  recently  to  saint
Joseph  to  form  a  friendship  with  the  leading  men  of
that  Residence;  but  as  [237]  we  mistrusted  him  on
account  of  his  rather  fickle  mind,  and  feared  a  relapse
on  his  part,  we  have  always  refused  him  what  he
asked.

Tadoussac  is  the  first  port  at  which  the  ships  stop


138  LES  RELATIOxWS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

paux  de  cette  Refidence;  mais  comme  [237]  on  fe
defie  de  fon  efprit  alTez  leger,  &  que  Ton  craint  la
cheute,  on  luy  a  toufiours  refuf6  ce  qu'il  demande.

TadoulTac  ell  le  premier  port  ou  s'arreltent  les
vailleaux  qui  viennent  de  France.  C'eft  icy  ou  les
fauuages  virent  arriuer  le  Pere  Paul  le  leune  qui
retournoit  vne  autre  fois  de  France,  oil  les  affaires  de
ces  pauures  peuples  I'auoient  fait  repailer.  Dieu  f9ait
auec  quelle  ioye  &  auec  quel  contentement  ils  le  re-
ceurent.  Ceux  de  Tadouffac  I'allerent  aulTi  toft  \'ifiter
dans  le  nauire  qui  le  portoit.  Noel  Negab[a]mat
rvn  des  principaux  Capitaines  des  fauuages  de  Kebec
I'allat  embraffer  luy  fit  cette  petite  harangue  vraye-
ment  Clireilienne :  Voila  qui  va  bien  mon  Pere  que
tu  fois  de  retour,  ie  fuis  defcendu  exprez  de  Kebec
pour  te  voir;  ayat  appris  des  premiers  vaiffeaux  que
tu  deuois  retourner,  ie  me  fuis  mis  en  chemin  pour
te  voir  le  premier,  nous  auons  tons  prie  pour  ton
voyage,  nous  difions  a  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait,  Conferue
nollire  Pere,  ouure  les  oreilles  de  ceux  a  qui  il  doit  parler
en  fon  pais,  &  dirige  fes  paroles  afin  qu'elles  aillent
[238]  tout  droit,  &  que  pas  vne  ne  foit  perdue;  c'eft
luy  qui  t'a  conduit,  c'ell:  luy  qui  t'a  ramene,  c'efl
luy  qui  a  calm6  la  mer,  6  que  nous  fommes  contens
de  ce  que  tu  parois  encore  vne  fois  en  notre  pais!
Cela  confola  fort  le  Pere,  qui  mettant  pied  a  terre
augmenta  fa  ioye,  voyant  cinq  fauuages  que  le  Pere
Dequen  luy  preseta  pour  les  faire  enfans  de  Dieu.
Madame  de  la  Pelterie  qui  s'elloit  tranfporttSe  k
TadoulTac  pour  voir  la  ferueur  de  ces  Neophytes,  fut
la  maraine  de  quelques-vns,  les  deux  Vrfulines  nou-
uellement  arriu6es  defcendans  du  vaiffeau  pour  la
premiere  fois  depuis  qu'elles  s'ertoient  embarquees  a


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  139

that  come  from.  France.  It  is  here  that  the  savages
witnessed  the  arrival  of  Father  Paul  le  Jeune,  who
came  back  once  more  from  France,  whither  the
affairs  of  these  poor  peoples  had  taken  him.  God
knows  with  what  joy  and  with  what  satisfaction  they
received  him.  Those  of  Tadoussac  went  at  once  to
visit  him,  on  board  the  ship  that  carried  him.  Noel
Negabamat,  one  of  the  chief  Captains  of  the  Kebec
savages,  who  went  to  embrace  him,  made  this  short
and  truly  Christian  speech  to  him :  "It  is  a  good
thing,  my  Father,  that  thou  hast  returned.  I  came
down  from  Kebec  expressly  to  see  thee.  When  I
learned  from  the  first  ships  that  arrived  that  thou
wert  coming  back,  I  set  out,  so  as  to  be  the  first  to
see  thee.  We  have  all  prayed  for  a  safe  journey  for
thee.  We  said  to  him  who  has  made  all :  '  Preserve
our  Father.  Open  the  ears  of  those  to  whom  he  is
to  speak  in  his  own  country,  and  direct  his  words  so
that  they  may  go  [238]  straight,  and  that  not  one  of
them  may  be  lost.'  He  it  is  who  has  guided  thee,
who  has  brought  thee  back,  who  has  calmed  the  sea.
Oh,  how  happy  we  are  to  see  thee  appear  once  more
in  our  country  I  "  This  greatly  consoled  the  Father,
whose  joy  was  increased  when,  on  landing.  Father
Dequen  presented  to  him  five  savages  to  be  made
children  of  God.  Madame  de  la  Pelterie,  who  had
gone  to  Tadoussac  to  witness  the  fervor  of  these
Neophytes,  was  godmother  for  some  of  them.  The
two  Ursulines  who  had  recently  arrived,  and  who
landed  from  the  ship  for  the  first  time  since  they  had
embarked  at  la  Rochelle,  were  greatly  edified  when
they  saw  with  their  own  eyes  what  they  had  so  long
and  so  ardently  desired.

I  shall  exceed  the  length  of  a  Chapter  if  I  dilate


140  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  26

la  Rochelle,  furet  extr6mement  confolees  de  voir  de
leurs  yeux  ce  qu'elles  auoient  fouhait^  depuis  vn
long-temps  auec  tant  d'ardeur.

I'excederay  la  longueur  d'vn  Chapitre  fi  ie  m'eftens
dans  les  doux  fentimens  de  piete  de  ces  nouuelles
plantes,  &  dans  la  ferueur  de  leur  deuotion.  On  a
de  couftume  de  les  appeller  le  matin  k  la  faindte
Meffe,  &  de  les  affembler  vne  autre  fois  deuant  la
nuidt  pour  leur  faire  reciter  quelques  oraifons,  &
notammet  [239]  le  chapelet.  Le  P.  Dequen  leur  fai-
foit  reciter  fort  pofement,  &  a  chaque  dizaine  leur
faifoit  chanter  vn  Cantique  fpirituel,  fi  bien  que  cela
tirat  en  longueur,  il  fe  voulut  contenter  de  leur  en
faire  dire  la  moiti6,  de  peur  de  les  ietter  dans  le  de-
gouft;  mais  ces  bonnes  gens  e'en  apperceuans  s'ecri-
eret:  II  femble  que  nous  ne  foyons  Chreftiens  qu'a
demy,  difons  tout,  mon  Pere,  difons  tout,  ne  feruons
pas  Dieu  a  demy.  Oiiy  mais,  repart  le  Pere,  quel-
ques-vns  d'entre  vous  font  peut-eftre  prelTez  de  quel-
que  affaire :  Que  ceux-la  fortent  qui  font  appellez  ail-
leurs,  r6pondirent  ils,  pour  nous  c'eft  la  raifon  que
nous  n'obmetions  rien  de  nos  prieres.  Comme  cette
deuotion  leur  eft  fort  agreable,  elle  fe  communique
iufques  aux  plus  petits  enfans,  lefquels  voyans  quel-
que  fois  leurs  parens  fortir  de  leurs  cabanes  fans
leurs  chapelets,  leur  crient  qu'ils  ne  I'oublient  s'ils
vont  a  la  maifon  de  priere.

Quelques  fauuages  que  nous  appellons  du  Sagne,
pource  qu'ils  viennent  voir  les  Frangois  par  vn  fleuue
qui  porte  ce  nom,  ayans  veu  prier  leurs  compatriotes
[240]  prelToient  fi  ardemment  &  fi  importun6ment
qu'on  leur  enfeignaft  k  prier  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait,  que
le  iour  mefme  de  leur  depart  ils  venoient  trouuer  le


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  141

upon  the  sweet  sentiments  of  piety  of  these  new-
plants,  and  upon  the  fervor  of  their  devotion.  It  is
the  custom  to  summon  them  in  the  morning  to  holy-
Mass,  and  to  assemble  them  once  more  before  night,
to  make  them  recite  some  prayers  and  especially
[239]  the  rosary.  Father  Dequen  made  them  say  it
very  slowly,  and  after  each  decade  he  made  them
sing  a  Hymn.  This  took  some  time,  and,  in  order
not  to  make  it  distasteful  to  them,  he  intended  to
content  himself  with  their  reciting  only  one  half  of
it.  But  these  good  people  noticed  this,  and  ex-
claimed :  "  It  looks  as  if  we  were  only  half  Christians.
Let  us  say  the  whole  of  it,  my  Father ;  let  us  say  the
whole  of  it.  Let  us  not  serve  God  only  by  halves."
"  Yes,"  said  the  Father,  "  but  perhaps  some  of  you
have  pressing  business  to  attend  to."  "  Let  those
depart  who  are  called  elsewhere,"  they  replied.
*  *  For  us,  it  stands  to  reason  that  we  should  not  omit
any  of  our  prayers. "  As  that  devotion  is  very  agree-
able to  them,  it  communicates  itself  even  to  the
youngest  children,  who,  when  they  sometimes  see
their  parents  going  out  of  their  cabins  without  their
rosaries,  call  out  to  them  not  to  forget  these  if  they
are  going  to  the  house  of  prayer.

When  some  whom  we  call  the  savages  of  the  Sag-
ne — because  they  come  to  see  the  French  by  a  river
bearing  that  name  —  saw  their  countrymen  pray,
[240]  they  begged  so  earnestly  and  with  such  impor-
tunity to  be  taught  to  pray  to  him  who  has  made  all,
that,  on  the  very  day  of  their  departure,  they  came
to  the  Father,  and,  kneeling  with  most  delightful
simplicity,  they  made  him  recite  the  prayers,  in  order
the  better  to  impress  them  on  their  memories.  When
they  had  said  them  two  or  three  times,  they  revolved


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.26

Pere,  &  fe  mettans  "k  genoiiil  auec  vne  fimplicit6
toute  rauifsate,  ils  luy  faifoient  reciter  les  prieres
pour  les  grauer  plus  auant  dans  leur  memoire,  les
ayant  recitez  deux  ou  trois  fois  ils  les  rouloiet  dans
leur  efprit,  portant  leur  bagage  fur  le  bord  de  I'eau
oil  ils  fe  deuoient  embarquer,  s'ils  oublioient  quelque
mot  ils  quittoient  tout  &  s'en  courroient  au  Pere.
Ils  fe  iettoient  vne  autre  fois  k  genoiiil  demandant
qu'on  leur  fifl  encore  dire  les  prieres.  Vn  Chreftien
de  Tadouffac  les  ayant  veu  dans  cette  ferueur  leur
dit :  Prenez  courage  mes  amis,  fi  vous  aymez  la  pri-
ere,  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait  ne  vous  abandonnera  pas,
allez  k  la  bonne  heure,  priez-le  tous  les  iours,  fur
tout  n'ayez  plus  de  comunication  auec  les  Demons,
&  tafchez  de  retourner  icy  au  printemps  prochain
afin  que  vous  foyez  bien  inftruits.

Le  Pere  inftruifant  vne  autre  efcoiiade  d'vne  petite
nation  venue  du  profond  [241]  des  terres,  leur  mon-
ftroit  I'image  d'vne  ame  damn6e.  Vn  bon  Neophyte
I'ayant  oiiy  difcourir  fur  ce  fuiet,  poufT6  d'vn  zele  du
falut  de  ces  bones  gens,  s'ecrie,  Donnez  moy  mon
Pere,  donez  moy  cette  image  &  me  laiffez  parler:  il
la  prend,  &  s'adreffant  a  tout  I'auditoire,  Regardez,
leur  dit-il,  ce  tableau,  vous  ne  connoiffez  pas  celuy
que  vous  y  voyez  depeint,  c'eft  vn  Magicien,  c'eft  vn
batteur  de  tambour  tels  que  vous  eftes  pour  la  pluf-
part.  Voyez  vous  comme  il  eft  enchaifne.  Regar-
dez ces  flammes  qui  I'enuironnent  &  qui  le  bruflent,
il  eft  tout  plein  de  rage  &  de  fureur,  voila  comme
vous  ferez,  voila  comme  vous  traitera  le  Demon  k  qui
vous  obeiflez.  Le  Capitaine  de  cette  efcoiiade  6pou-
uante  de  ce  difcours  luy  repartit  tout  haut,  II  eft
vray  que  ie  me  fuis  mefle  autre  fois  de  ce  meftier.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  143

them  in  their  minds  while  they  carried  their  bag-
gage to  the  water's  edge,  at  the  place  where  they
were  to  embark.  If  they  forgot  a  word,  they  dropped
everything,  ran  to  the  Father,  and  threw  themselves
once  more  on  their  knees  asking  that  he  would  again
make  them  recite  the  prayers.  A  Christian  of  Ta-
doussac  who  witnessed  this  fervor  on  their  part,  said
to  them:  "Take  courage,  my  friends.  If  you  love
prayer,  he  who  has  made  all  will  not  abandon  you.
Go ;  it  is  all  right.  Pray  to  him  every  day :  above
all,  hold  no  communication  with  the  Demons;  and
try  to  return  here  next  spring,  so  that  you  may  be
properly  instructed."

While  the  Father  was  teaching  another  party,  be-
longing to  a  small  tribe  that  had  come  from  far  [241]
inland,  he  showed  them  the  picture  of  a  damned
soul.  A  good  Neophyte  who  had  heard  him  speak
on  the  subject,  and  was  animated  with  zeal  for  the
salvation  of  these  good  people,  exclaimed:  "Give
me,  my  Father,  give  me  that  picture,  and  let  me
vSpeak."  He  took  it  and,  addressing  the  whole  audi-
ence, said :  "  Look  at  that  picture.  You  do  not  know
what  is  depicted  on  it.  It  is  a  Magician,  a  beater  of
drums,  such  as  most  of  you  are.  Do  you  see  how
he  is  chained?  Look  at  the  flames  that  surround
and  burn  him.  He  is  filled  with  rage  and  fury.  See
what  you  will  be ;  see  how  the  Demon  whom  you
obey  will  treat  you. ' '  The  Captain  of  the  band  was
frightened  by  this  discourse,  and  exclaimed  aloud :
"It  is  true  that  formerly  I  engaged  in  such  prac-
tices, but  I  have  cast  them  off.  I  have  burned  my
drum  and  all  the  instruments  that  I  used.  I  love
prayer,  and  I  declare  to  you  that  I  wish  to  be  in-
structed with  my  people."


144  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

mais  ie  I'ay  iett6  par  terre,  i'ay  brufle  mon  tambour,
&  tons  les  inftrumens  dont  ie  me  feruois,  i'ayme  la
priere,  &  vous  declare  que  ie  veux  eftre  inflruit  auec
mes  gens.

Vne  bonne  femme  Chreflienne  eftant  bien  auant
dans  les  bois  auec  vn  fien  [242]  fils  attaque  d'vne  ma-
ladie  qui  donnoit  de  I'exercice  a  la  Mere  auffi  bien
qu'k  I'enfant,  confola  bien  fort  Ie  Pere,  luy  expliquant
comme  Ie  pauure  ieune  homme  efloit  party  de  cette
vie  pour  aller  au  Ciel.     Ie  difois  fouuent  k  mon  fils,
racontoit  cette  pauure  Mere,  prends  courage  mon  en-
fant, fouffre  patiemmet  tes  douleurs,  tu  les  vas  bien-
toft  changer  en  des  contentemens  eternels,  ne  croy
tu  pas  en  Dieu?  ne  te  fouuiens  tu  pas  bien  qu'on  t'a
enf eigne   qu'il   y   a   vne   autre   vie,  &  que   ceux   qui
aiment  Dieu  feront  bien-heureux.     Ie  m'en  fouuies
tres-bien,  repartit  Ie  malade,  mais  helas!  ie  fuis  bien
trifle  de  ne  me  pouuoir  confeffer,  ah !  que  ie  me  con-
fefferois  volontiers  s'il  y  auoit  icy  quelque  Pere :  ne
t'afflige  pas  mon  enfant,   Dieu  te  fera  mifericorde,
aime  Ie,  il  eft  tout  bon,  fois  marry  de  I'auoir  fafche.
I'ay  vne  grande  efperance  en  fa  bonte,  repliquoit  ce
pauure  gar9on,  ie  mouray  dans  cette  efperace  qu'il
aura  pitie  de  moy ;  &  iettant  f es  yeux  fur  cette  pau-
ure Mere  qui  s'afifiigeoit  voyant  que  fon  fils  I'alloit
quitter,  Ne  vous  fafchez  point  ma  mere,  luy  difoit-il
dans  [243]  fes  douleurs,  ne  pleurez  point  ma  mort
puifque  ie  vay  dans  vne  meilleure  vie  que  celle  que
ie  quitte,  recommandez  mon  ame  a  Dieu  afin  qu'elle
ne  s'ecarte  point  du  bon  chemin.     Enfin  ce  bon  en-
fant eflant  mort,  les  fauuages  qui  eftoient  1^  prefens
I'enterrerent,  ils  fe  mirent  k  genoiiil  fur  fa  foffe,  firent


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  145

A  good  Christian  woman  was  very  far  away  in  the
woods,  with  a  [242]  son  of  hers,  who  was  attacked
by  a  disease  that  caused  both  the  Mother  and  the
child  a  great  deal  of  trouble.  She  gave  the  Father
great  consolation,  when  she  explained  to  him  how
the  poor  young  man  had  quitted  this  life  to  go  to
Heaven.  "  I  often  said  to  my  son,"  related  the  poor
Mother,  "  *  Have  courage,  my  child;  endure  thy
sufferings  patiently ;  thou  wilt  soon  exchange  them
for  eternal  content.  Dost  thou  not  believe  in  God?
Dost  thou  not  remember  that  thou  hast  been  taught
that  there  is  another  life,  and  that  those  who  love
God  will  be  happy?'  "  "I  remember  it  very  well,"
replied  the  sick  youth,  "but,  alas!  I  am  very  sad
because  I  cannot  make  my  confession.  Ah !  how
willingly  would  I  confess  myself,  if  there  were  a
Father  here."  "  Be  not  afflicted,  my  child;  God
will  have  mercy  on  thee.  Love  him ;  he  is  all  good-
ness: be  sorry  for  having  offended  him."  "  I  have
great  hope  in  his  goodness,"  replied  the  poor  boy,
"  I  shall  die  in  the  hope  that  he  will  have  pity  on
me."  And,  casting  his  eyes  on  the  poor  Mother,
who  was  so  sorrowful  because  her  son  was  about  to
leave  her,  "  Be  not  sad,  my  mother,"  he  said  to  her
in  the  midst  of  [243]  his  sufferings.  "  Weep  not
because  of  my  death,  for  I  am  going  to  a  better  life
than  that  which  I  now  leave.  Commend  my  soul  to
God  so  that  I  may  not  stray  from  the  right  path."
Finally,  when  the  good  child  was  dead,  the  savages
who  were  present  there  buried  him.  They  knelt  at
his  grave,  said  their  prayers,  and  recited  the  rosary
for  the  repose  of  his  soul.

The  Father  who  instructed  them  fell  ill  and  threw
himself  on  his  bed, — that  is,  on  a  Bearskin  spread


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUJTES  [Vol.26

leurs  prieres,   &  reciterent   leurs  chapelets  pour  le
foulaeement  de  fon  ame.

Le  Pere  qui  les  inllruifoit  s'eftant  trouue  mal  fe
ietta  fur  fon  lict,  c'ell  a  dire  fur  vne  peau  d'Ours
eftendue  fur  la  terre.  Vn  Chreftien  le  venant  vifiter
fit  en  so  endroit  vne  partie  des  chofes  qu'il  luy  auoit
veu  pratiquer  vifitant  les  malades,  il  fe  mit  a  genoiiil
au  cheuet  de  fon  lict,  leue  les  yeux  au  Ciel  &  pre-
fente  cette  priere  ^  Dieu  d'vne  voix  all ez  haute :  Toy
qui  a  tout  fait,  tu  vols  bien  que  noftre  Pere  eft  ma-
lade,  or  fus  guery-le  done,  car  nous  auons  befoin  de
luy,  c'efl  luy  qui  nous  inftruit  &  qui  nous  enf eigne
comme  il  faut  croire  en  toy.  Cela  dit  il  prend  fon
chapelet  &  le  recite  en  I'honneur  de  la  fainte  Vierge,
mais  comme  il  eftoit  vn  peu  long,  &  que  [244]  le
Pere  auoit  befoin  de  repos,  fa  maladie  prouenant
peut-eflre  d'vn  trop  grad  trauail,  il  congedia  ce  bon
Neophyte,  &  le  remercia  de  fa  vifite.

Quelques  fauuages  ayant  oiiy  parler  des  oeuures
fatisfa<5toires  &  des  penitences  &  macerations  du
corps,  dirent  qu'il  falloit  aulTi  qu'ils  appaifaffent
Dieu,  que  ceux  qui  eftoient  baptifez  le  faifoient ;  les
vns  choifirent  le  ieufne,  les  autres  fe  chaftierent  eux
mefmes  &  fe  battirent  auec  des  efpines,  pour  payer
celuy  qui  a  tout  fait  comme  ils  parlent,  &  pour  fe
venger  de  ceux  qui  I'ont  offenfe.  Ces  penitences
furent  particulieres,  mais  en  voicy  vne  publique.

Comme  il  n'elt  pas  poffible  d'arrefter  I'auarice  de
quelques  Francois,  lefquels  nonobflant  les  defenfes
&  les  dangers  d'eftre  chaliiez,  ne  laifTent  pas  de
vendre  de  I'eau  de  vie  ou  du  vin  aux  fauuages;  aufii
efl-il  tres-difficile  d'empefcher  que  ces  barbares  qui  ne
font  point  accouftumez  a  ces  boillons  ne  s'enyurent


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  147

on  the  ground.  A  Christian  who  came  to  see  him
did  for  him  some  of  the  things  that  he  had  seen  him
do  when  visiting  the  sick.  He  knelt  at  his  bedside,
raised  his  eyes  to  Heaven,  and  offered  this  prayer  to
God  in  a  rather  loud  voice :  * '  Thou  who  hast  made  all,
thou  seest  well  that  our  Father  is  sick.  Pray,  then,
cure  him,  for  we  need  him.  It  is  he  who  instructs
us,  and  who  teaches  how  we  should  believe  in  thee."
Having  said  this,  he  took  his  rosary,  and  recited  it
in  honor  of  the  blessed  Virgin.  But,  as  he  was
rather  long  about  it,  and  [244]  the  Father  needed
rest, —  probably  because  his  illness  was  due  to  over-
work,—  he  dismissed  the  good  Neophyte,  and  thanked
him  for  his  visit.

Some  savages,  who  had  heard  of  works  of  atone-
ment, penances,  and  mortification  of  the  body,  said
that  it  was  necessary  that  they  also  should  appease
God;  that  those  who  were  baptized  did  so.  Some
chose  fasting;  others  chastised  themselves,  and  beat
themselves  with  thorns,  to  atone  to  him  who  has
made  all,  as  they  say,  and  to  be  avenged  on  those
who  have  offended  him.  These  penances  were  per-
formed privately,  but  here  is  one  that  was  public.

It  is  impossible  to  hinder  the  avarice  of  some  of
the  French  who,  in  spite  of  the  prohibitions  and  of
the  risk  of  being  punished,  still  sell  brandy  and  wine
to  the  savages.  It  is  likewise  very  difficult  to  pre-
vent barbarians,  who  are  not  accustomed  to  these
liquors,  from  sometimes  becoming  intoxicated.  Some
Christians  offended  in  this  respect  and  the  Father
wished  to  punish  them  publicly,  in  order  to  give
[245]  an  example  to  the  others.  It  is  proper  at  the
very  outset,  in  such  matters,  to  punish  public  offenses
by  public  chastisements,  so  as  to  make  the  Infidels


148  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26


par  fois.     Quelques  Chreftiens  eftans  tombez   dans
ce  defordre,  le  Pere  les  voulut  publiquemet  chaftier
pour  donner  [245]  exemple  aux  autres.     II  eft  bon
en  ces  premiers  commencemens  de  punir  les  pechez
publics  par  quelque  penitence  publique,  pour  faire
entendre  aux  Infideles  que  I'Eglife  ne  fouffre  point
ces  defauts.     Quant  aux  Fran9ois  &  aux  autres  Chre-
ftiens qui  n'attribuet  point  les  f antes  a  la  dodtrine  &
"k  la  Religion,  mais  aux  perfonnes  qui  les  commettet,
on  fe  contente  de  leur  donner  des  peniteces  en  parti-
culier  ou  en  fecret.     On  fit  done  tenir  ces  bones  gens
par  trois  iours  confecutifs  ^  la  porte  de  la  Chapelle,
auec  defenfes  d'entrer  dedans,  comme  eftans  indignes
de    communiquer    auec  les   autres,   on  les  voyoit  k
genoiiil  bors  de  I'Eglife.     Et  quand  on  auoit  inftruit
ceux  qui  eftoient  entrez,  on  faifoit  prier  ces  penitens
hors  de  I'Eglife,  ils  ne  manquerent  iamais  tons  ces
iours  Ik  de  fe  trouuer  foir  &  matin  au  lieu  qu'on  leur
auoit  deftine,  cela  donnoit  de  I'edification  aux  fau-
uages  &  de  I'edification  aux  Fran9ois,  qui  venans  k
la  Mefie  &  les  rencontrans  "k  genoiiil  aupr6s  de  I'Eglife
beniffoient  Dieu  de  leur  conftance.     II  y  auoit  entre
autres  vn  Catechumene,  [246]  qui  pour  I'apprehenfion
qu'il  auoit  que  fa  faute  ne  I'empefcha  d'eftre  receu
au  S.  Baptefme,  fe  monftroit  beaucoup  plus  feruet
que   les  autres.       II   fe   fit   Chreftien   le   iour  de   S.
Ignace,  &  le  nom  de  ce  grand  Saint  luy  fut  donne.
Se  fentant  oblig6  de  la  faueur  que  le  Pere  luy  auoit
fait,  il  le  vint  trouuer  apr6s  fon  baptefme,  &  luy  dit
en  luy  faifant  vn  petit  prefent,  Tu  me  fais  vn  tres-
grand  plaifir,  ie  n'ay  pas  moyen  de  le  reconnoiftre,
le  pen  que  i'offre  part  d'vn  tres-bon  coeur.     Si  i'auois
de  grands  biens  ie   les  voudrois  tous   donner  pour


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  149

understand  that  the  Church  does  not  tolerate  such
errors.  With  respect  to  the  French  and  to  the  other
Christians, — who  do  not  attribute  faults  to  the
doctrine  and  to  Religion,  but  to  the  persons  who  com-
mit them, —  we  content  ourselves  with  giving  them
penances  to  be  performed  privately  and  in  secret.
These  good  people  were  kept  for  three  consecutive
days  at  the  door  of  the  Chapel,  and  were  forbidden
to  enter  it,  as  being  unworthy  to  hold  communication
with  the  others.  They  were  seen  kneeling  outside
the  Church ;  and,  when  we  had  instructed  those  who
had  entered,  we  made  these  penitents  pray  outside
the  Church.  They  never  failed  every  day,  night
and  morning,  to  be  at  the  place  assigned  to  them.
This  edified  both  the  savages  and  the  French,  who,
when  they  came  to  Mass  and  saw  them  kneeling  near
the  Church,  blessed  God  for  their  constancy.  Among
others,  was  a  Catechumen  [246]  who,  on  account
of  the  apprehension  that  he  felt  that  his  fault  would
prevent  his  being  admitted  to  Holy  Baptism,  showed
himself  much  more  fervent  than  the  others.  He
became  a  Christian  on  the  feast  of  St.  Ignatius  and
was  given  the  name  of  that  great  Saint.  Feeling
himself  under  an  obligation  for  the  favor  that  the
Father  had  done  him,  he  went  to  him  after  his  bap-
tism, and  offered  him  a  small  gift,  saying:  "  Thou
grantest  me  a  very  great  kindness ;  I  have  no  means
of  acknowledging  it.  The  little  that  I  have  is  offered
with  all  my  heart.  If  I  had  great  wealth,  I  would
wish  to  give  it  all  to  receive  Holy  Baptism."  The
Father  thanked  him,  and  gave  him  to  understand  that
no  return  was  expected  for  such  a  gift.

Marriages  after  the  Christian   fashion   are  looked
upon  as  miracles  by  the  Infidels;  this  is  a  very  heavy


150  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.


26


receuoir  le  S.  Baptefme.  Le  Pere  le  remercia  &  luy
fit  entendre  qu'vn  tel  prefent  ne  demandoit  aucune
recompenfe.

Les  mariages  ^  la  fa9on  des  Chrefties  paffent  pour
des  miracles  chez  les  Infideles,  c'eft  vn  ioug  bien  dur  &
bien  fafcheux  aux  hommes  de  chair.  Les  Chreftiens
s')^  accommodent  petit  a  petit.  Les  ieunes  gens  y  ont
bien  de  la  peine.  Ceux  qui  ont  la  Foy  plus  forte
prefCent  les  autres  de  les  retarder  iufques  au  prin-
temps  que  le  Pere  viendra  en  MifTion ;  &  quand  il  eft
auec  eux  on  recherche  [247]  ceux  qui  font  en  difpo-
fition  de  fe  lier  enfemble,  afin  que  cela  fe  faffe
deuant  f on  depart :  les  parens  ont  cette  deuotion  de
faire  tenir  leurs  enfans  debout  dans  la  Chapelle,  c'eft
^  dire  de  les  faire  marier  en  face  de  I'Eglife.  Et
pource  que  I'efpoux  &  I'efpoufe  font  debout  I'vn  au-
pres  de  I'autre  deuant  le  Preftre,  s'ils  veulent  f9auoir
quand  quelqu'vn  fe  mariera,  ils  demandent  quand  on
le  fera  tenir  debout  ^  I'Eglife.

Vn  ieune  gargon  &  vne  vefue  eftans  amenez  a
I'Eglife  pour  fe  marier,  les  publications  eftoient
faites,  il  ne  falloit  plus  que  leur  confentement  en  pre-
f ence  du  Cur6  &  des  temoins ;  comme  on  le  demanda
au  gar9on,  il  ne  voulut  iamais  r6pondre.  Le  Pere
ferme  fon  liure,  declare  tout  haut  qu'il  n'y  a  rien  de
fait,  qu'ils  ne  font  point  mariez,  perfonne  ne  s'en
eftonne,  chacun  s'en  retourne  chez  foy.

Vn  Capitaine  ne  garda  pas  ce  profond  filence,  car
comme  on  luy  euft  demande  fon  confentement,  &
qu'il  I'eut  donn6,  fa  femme  comme  plus  vergon-
gneufe  ne  r6pondit  pas  affez  vifte,  il  luy  dit,  Prenez
[248]  garde  ^  ce  que  vous  direz,  ie  ne  vous  diffimule
point  mes  humeurs,    ie  fuis  vn  homme  prompt  &


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  151


and  galling  yoke  for  carnal  men.  The  Christians
are  gradually  becoming  accustomed  to  it ;  the  young
men  find  it  very  difficult  to  do  so.  Those  who  have
the  most  Faith  urge  the  others  to  delay  until  the
spring,  when  the  Father  will  come  here  on  a  Mis-
sion; and  when  he  is  with  them,  they  seek  out  [247]
those  who  are  disposed  to  be  joined  together,  so  that
it  may  be  done  before  his  departure.  The  parents
have  the  devout  practice  of  making  their  children
"  stand  up  in  the  Chapel," — that  is,  of  making  them
marry  with  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church.  And,
because  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride  stand  side  by
side  before  the  Priest,  if  they  wish  to  know  when
such  a  one  is  to  be  married,  they  ask  when  he  will
be  made  to  stand  up  in  Church.

A  young  man  and  a  widow  were  brought  to  the
Church,  to  be  married.  The  banns  had  been  pub-
lished, and  all  that  remained  was  to  express  their
consent  in  the  presence  of  the  Pastor  and  of  the
witnesses.  When  the  young  man  was  questioned,  he
would  not  answer.  The  Father  closed  his  book,  and
declared  aloud  that  nothing  was  done,  and  that  they
were  not  married.  No  one  was  surprised,  and  all
returned  to  their  homes.

A  Captain  did  not  maintain  such  profound  silence,
for  when  he  was  asked,  and  had  given  his  consent
and  when  his  bride,  who  was  more  bashful,  did  not
respond  with  sufficient  promptitude,  he  said  to  her:
"  Be  [248]  careful  of  what  you  are  about  to  say.  I
do  not  conceal  my  bad  temper  from  you.  I  am  a
hasty  and  irritable  man ;  I  make  all  serve  me ;  I  wish
my  wife  to  obej'-  me.  Do  not  bind  yourself  in-
advisedly. Consider  whether  you  will  take  me  with
those  defects."     The  woman  gave  her  consent  and


152  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.26

colere,  ie  me  fais  feniir,  ie  veux  que  ma  femme  m'o-
bei'ffe,  ne  vous  engagez  pas  mal  a  propos,  confiderez
fi  vous  voulez  me  prendre  auec  ces  qualitez.  Cette
femme  ayant  donne  fon  confentement  verifia  Ie  Pro-
uerbe  qui  dit,  que  qui  efpoufe  vn  mary  efpoufe  fes
humeurs.  Au  refte  cet  homme  eft  d'vn  tres-bon
naturel.

II  eft  temps  de  terminer  ce  Chapitre.  Le  Pere
eftant  occupe  dans  cet  employ,  auffi  faint  qu'il  eft
penible,  fut  rappelle  k  Kebec :  les  fauuages  en  ayant
eu  le  vent  s'en  plaignent,  Pourquoy  nous  quittes  tu,
tu  es  noftre  Pere  iufques  k  noftre  depart,  voila  tant
de  monde  "k  inftruire,  nous  fommes  tes  enfans,  ne
nous  abandonne  pas.  Enfermons-le  dans  la  Cha-
pelle,  difoient  quelques-vns,  iufques  k  ce  que  la
chaloupe  qui  1' attend  foit  partie.  Fut-il  ainfi  qu'il  s'6-
leua  vn  vent  qui  le  contraignift  de  refter  auec  nous.
Enfin  il  fe  fallut  feparer,  auec  promeffe  de  fe  reuoir
quand  il  plairoit  k  notre  Seigneur.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  ^  53

verified  the  Proverb  which  says  that  she  who  marries
a  husband  also  marries  his  humors.  Apart  from
this,  the  man  is  of  a  very  good  disposition.

It  is  time  to  close  this  Chapter.  The  Father  who
was  engaged  in  this  employment,  that  was  as  holy
as  it  is  arduous,  was  recalled  to  Kebec.  When  the
savages  heard  of  it,  they  complained,  saying:  "  Why
dost  thou  leave  us?  Thou  art  our  Father  until  our
departure.  There  are  so  many  to  instruct.  We  are
thy  children ;  do  not  abandon  us. "  "  Let  us  shut
him  up  in  the  Chapel,"  said  some  of  them,  "  until
the  shallop  that  awaits  him  has  gone  away.  Oh,
that  a  wind  might  arise  that  would  compel  him  to
remain  with  us !  "  Finally,  they  had  to  part,  with
the  promise  that  they  would  see  each  other  again
when  it  should  please  our  Lord.


154  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.26


[249]  CHAPITRE  XIV.

DE    LA    CREATION   D'VN    CAPITAINE    A    TADOUSSAC.

LE  defir  de  1' immortality  regne  dans  les  efprits
des  fauuages  auffi  bien  que  dans  I'ame  des  na-
tions plus  policees ;  quand  vn  homme  de  me-
rite  parmy  eux  eft  enleu6  par  la  mort,  ils  le  refufci-
tent  &  le  font  reuiure  a  la  fagon  qu'on  a  remarque
dans  les  Relations  precedentes.  Voulant  done  reti-
rer  du  tombeau  vn  de  leurs  Capitaines,  voicy  les  cere-
monies qu'ils  garderent.

On  donne  aduis  aux  nations  voifmes  de  fe  trouuer,
fi  elles  I'ont  pour  agreable,  au  lieu  ou  fe  doit  faire
cette  ac5tion,  ou  bien  on  prend  vn  temps  oil  ordinaire-
ment  ils  s'entreuifitent.  Le  monde  eitat  affemble
on  dreffe  vn  beau  feftin  dans  la  plus  grande  cabane
oil  tous  les  principaux  fauuages  font  inuitez.  Pen-
dant que  le  feftin  fe  prepare,  on  cree  le  Capitaine
en  cette  forte.

Celuy  qui  eft  le  Maiftre  des  ceremonies  [250]  tient
aupres  de  foy  quelques  perfonnes  plus  remarquables
qui  luy  feruent  d'officiers,  ils  etallent  premierement
&  mettent  en  veue  les  prefens  qu'on  doit  faire  aux
Capitaines  des  nations  qui  fe  trouuet  k  cette  creation,
lis  etendet  par  apr6s  quelques  peaux  d'Eflan  bien
paffees  &  bien  douces,  &  bien  peintes  k  leur  mode,
pour  feruir  de  fiege  ou  de  trone  ^  ce  nouueau  Capi-
taine. Cela  fait,  celuy  qui  le  doit  creer  I'enuoye  que-
rir  par  deux  de  fes  officiers,  ils  le  vot  prendre  dans


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  155


[249]  CHAPTER  XIV.

OF  THE  CREATION  OF  A  CAPTAIN  AT  TADOUSSAC.

THE  desire  of  immortality  reigns  in  the  minds  of
savages  as  well  as  in  the  souls  of  the  most  civi-
lized nations.  When  a  man  of  mark  among
them  is  removed  by  death,  they  resuscitate  him  and
bring  him  back  to  life  in  the  manner  described  in
the  previous  Relations.  As  they  wished  to  bring
back  one  of  their  Captains  from  his  grave,  they
observed  the  following  ceremonies.

The  neighboring  tribes  are  notified  to  be  present,
if  they  desire,  at  the  spot  where  the  event  is  to  take
place;  or  a  time  is  selected  when  they  are  in  the
habit  of  visiting  one  another.  When  all  are  assem-
bled, a  fine  feast  is  made  ready  in  the  largest  cabin,
to  which  all  the  principal  savages  are  invited.  While
the  feast  is  being  prepared,  the  Captain  is  created  in
this  manner:

He  who  acts  as  Master  of  ceremonies  [250]  keeps
near  him  some  of  the  chief  personages,  who  serve  as
his  officers.  In  the  first  place,  they  set  out  and  ex-
pose to  view  the  presents  that  are  to  be  given  to  the
Captains  of  the  tribes  who  are  present  at  the  cere-
mony of  creation.  They  afterward  spread  out  some
Elk  skins,  well  dressed,  very  soft,  and  handsomely
painted  in  their  fashion,  to  serve  as  a  seat  or  throne
for  the  new  Captain.  When  this  is  done,  he  who  is
to  create  him  sends  two  of  his  officers  to  bring  him.
They  seek  him  in  the  cabin  where  he  is  conversing


156  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES         [Vol.26

la  cabane  ou  il  s'entretient  auec  quelques-vns  de  fes
proches  en  attendant  qu'on  le  faffe  venir;  I'vn  des
deux  le  prend  par  la  main  &  le  conduit  au  lieu  qui
luy  eft  prepare,  I'autre  luy  ofte  modeftement  la  robe
qu'il  porte,  &  le  couure  d'vne  autre  bien  plus  belle  &
plus  riche,  il  luy  paffe  au  col  vn  grand  colier  de  por-
celaine,  luy  met  en  main  vn  beau  Calumet  &  luy  pre-
fente  du  petun  pour  en  vfer.  Tout  cela  fe  fait  fi
grauement  &  dans  vn  fi  profond  filece,  qu'on  pren-
droit  ces  hommes  pour  des  ftatues  qui  fe  remuent
fans  parler.

Le  Capitaine  eftant  reueftu  felon  fa  [251]  qualite,
vn  troifieme  officier  richement  couuert  &  peint  par  le
vifage  felon  leur  couftume  fe  leue  tout  debout,  &
faifant  I'oflice  d'vn  Herault  declare  le  fuiet  de  toute
la  ceremonie.  Que  tout  le  monde  demeure  en  paix,
s'ecrie  t'il,  ouurez  vos  oreilles  &  fermez  vos  bouches,
ce  que  ie  vay  dire  eft  d'importance.  II  s'agit  de
refufciter  vn  mort  &  de  faire  reuiure  vn  grand  Capi-
taine; Ik  deffus  il  le  nomme  &  toute  fa  pofterite,  il
rapporte  le  lieu  &  le  genre  de  la  mort,  puis  fe  tour-
nat  vers  celuy  qui  doit  fucceder,  il  rehauffe  la  voix :
Le  voila,  dit-il,  couuert  de  cette  belle  robe.  Ce  n'eft
plus  celuy  que  vous  voyiez  fes  iours  paffez  qui  fe
nomoit  Nehap.  II  a  donn6  le  nom  k  vn  autre  fau-
uage,  il  s'appelle  Etouait  (c'eftoit  le  nom  du  defundt)
regardez-le  comme  le  vray  Capitaine  de  cette  nation,
c'eft  a  luy  k  qui  vous  deuez  obeir,  c'eft  luy  que  vous
deuez  efcouter,  &  que  vous  deuez  honorer.  Pendant
que  ce  Heraut  difcoure,  tous  les  affiftans  font  dans
vne  grande  retenue,  on  ne  dit  pas  vn  mot,  ce  nou-
ueau  Capitaine  fe  tient  dans  vne  granite  qui  ne  fent
rien  de  fon  barbare.


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  157

with  some  of  his  relatives,  and  waiting  until  he  is
summoned.  One  of  the  two  takes  him  by  the  hand,
and  leads  him  to  the  spot  prepared  for  him ;  the  other
respectfully  removes  the  robe  that  covers  him,  and
clothes  him  with  another,  much  finer  and  richer ;  he
hangs  about  his  neck  a  collar  of  porcelain  beads,
places  in  his  hand  a  handsome  Calumet,  and  presents
him  with  tobacco  to  put  in  it.  All  this  is  done  so
gravely,  and  in  such  profound  silence,  that  one  would
take  these  men  for  statues,  as  they  move  about  with-
out speaking.

When  the  Captain  is  clothed  as  befits  his  [251]
dignity,  a  third  officer, — richly  clad,  with  his  face
painted  according  to  their  custom, —  rises  and,  acting
as  Herald,  declares  the  object  of  all  this  ceremony.
"  Let  every  one  remain  quiet,"  he  calls  out;  "  open
your  ears,  and  close  your  mouths.  What  I  have  to
tell  you  is  important.  We  are  here  to  resuscitate  a
dead  man,  and  to  bring  a  great  Captain  back  to  life."
Thereupon,  he  mentions  him,  and  all  his  posterity;
relates  the  place  and  manner  of  his  death,  and  then,
turning  toward  him  who  is  to  succeed  him,  he  raises
his  voice  and  says:  "  There  he  is,  he  who  is  clothed
with  that  fine  robe.  It  is  no  longer  he  whom  you
lately  saw,  and  whose  name  was  Nehap.  He  has
given  his  name  to  another  savage.  His  name  is
Etouait  "  (that  was  the  name  of  the  deceased).  "  Look
upon  him  as  the  true  Captain  of  this  tribe.  It  is  he
whom  you  must  obey ;  it  is  he  to  whom  you  must
listen,  and  whom  you  must  honor."  While  the
Herald  delivers  this  discourse,  all  present  remain
perfectly  still,  and  not  a  word  is  said.  The  new
Captain  maintains  a  gravity  that  indicates  nothing  of
his  barbarism.


158  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES         [Vol.  26

[252]  Bref  cet  homme  pourfuiuant  fon  difcours  ad-
drelTe  fa  parole  aux  principaux  des  diuerfes  nations,
&  touchant  les  prefens  qui  leur  font  deftinez  &  pofez
en  vn  lieu  eminent,  il  leur  dit  nommant  les  Capitaines
les  vns  apres  les  autres,  Vn  tel,  ce  collier  de  porce-
laine  fera  entendre  k  voftre  nation  qu'il  y  a  vn  Capi-
taine  dans  Tadouffac,  &  que  Etouait  eft  refufcit^.
Monftrant  vn  paquet  de  Caftors,  il  dit  ^  vn  autre,  Ce
prefent  qui  vous  eft  deftine  publiera  dans  voftre  pais
que  nous  auons  vn  Chef,  &  que  la  mort  n'a  point
extermine  le  nom  d' Etouait.  Ce  Heraut  toucha  autat
de  prefens  qu'il  y  auoit  de  Chefs  de  diuerfes  nations;
mais  remarquez  qu'ils  n'eftoiet  pas  tons  egaux,  les
vns  eftoiet  plus  riches  que  les  autres,  comme  il  y  a
des  nations  plus  ou  moins  eftimees  parmy  eux  Le
difcours  acheue  le  Heraut  s'affit  come  pour  fe
repofer,  &  vn  autre  officier  prit  ces  beaux  dons  &  les
diftribua  felon  qu'ils  auoient  efte  deftinez.  Cela  fait,
le  Heraut  reprend  la  parole,  Refioiiiffons  nous,  la
premiere  adtion  de  noftre  Capitaine  eft  de  nous  inui-
ter  tous  au  feftin,  &  en  disat  [253]  cela  il  leur  mon-
ftre  les  chaudieres  remplies  de  bled  d'Inde,  de  pru-
neaux  &  de  raifms.  On  fe  met  h.  chanter  &  k  danfer,
chacun  felo  la  couftume  de  fa  nation,  les  Capitaines
finiffant  leurs  chanfons,  difent  vn  petit  mot  a  la  loU-
ange  de  celuy  qu'on  viet  de  refufciter;  I'vn  s'ecrie,
Prenons  courage,  ce  braue  homme  fauuera  le  pais ;
I'autre  adioute,  que  fa  liberalite  bannira  la  pauuret6
&  fera  viure  long-temps  ceux  qui  feront  fous  fa
conduite.  Refioiiiffez  vous  ieunes  gens,  chantoit  vn
autre,  vous  auez  vn  braue  Capitaine  qui  vous  enfei-
gnera  k  dompter  nos  ennemis.  Le  Pere  fe  trouuant
en  cette  ceremonie  fut  honore  d'vn  prefent  auffi  bien


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  159

[252]  Then  that  man  continues  his  discourse,  briefly
addresses  the  principal  men  of  the  various  tribes,
and,  referring  to  the  presents  that  are  intended  for
them,  and  are  displayed  in  a  prominent  place,  he
names  the  Captains,  one  after  the  other,  saying:  "  So
and  so,  that  collar  of  porcelain  beads  will  tell  your
tribe  that  there  is  a  Captain  in  Tadoussac,  and  that
Etouait  has  come  back  to  life."  Pointing  to  a  pack-
age of  Beaver  skins,  he  says  to  another:  "  This  pres-
ent, intended  for  you,  will  proclaim  in  your  country
the  fact  that  we  have  a  Chief,  and  that  death  has  not
utterly  destroyed  the  name  of  Etouait."  The  Her-
ald points  to  as  many  presents  as  there  are  Chiefs  of
various  tribes;  but  observe  that  they  are  not  all
equal, —  some  being  richer  than  others,  as  there  are
tribes  more  or  less  highly  esteemed  among  them.
When  he  has  finished  his  discourse,  the  Herald  sits
down,  as  if  to  rest;  and  another  officer  takes  these
fine  gifts,  and  distributes  them  as  they  have  been
allotted.  When  this  is  done,  the  Herald  resumes  his
discourse.  '*  Let  us  rejoice ;  our  Captain's  first  act  is
to  invite  us  all  to  a  feast ;  ' '  and,  as  he  says  [253]  this,
he  shows  them  the  kettles  full  of  Indian  corn,  of
plums  and  grapes.  They  then  begin  to  sing  and
dance,  each  according  to  the  custom  of  his  tribe.  As
the  Captains  conclude  their  songs,  they  say  a  few
words  in  praise  of  him  who  has  just  been  brought
back  to  life.  One  calls  out:  "  Let  us  take  courage;
this  brave  man  will  save  the  country."  Another
adds  that  his  liberality  will  banish  poverty,  and  cause
those  who  shall  be  under  his  direction  to  live  a  long
life.  "  Rejoice,  young  men,"  another  will  sing;
"  you  have  a  brave  Captain,  who  will  teach  you  to
overcome  your  enemies. ' '     The  Father  was  present


160  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES         [Vol.  26

que  les  autres,  c'eft  pourquoy  il  voulut  dire  fon  petit
mot.  C'eft  maintenant,  fit-il,  que  lefus-Chrift  fera
honore  dans  Tadouffac,  &  qu'il  fera  reconnu  das  ces
vaftes  forefts,  puifque  le  Capitaine  eft  Chreftien,  &
qu'il  fait  plus  d'eftat  de  fa  Foy  que  de  fa  vie:  il
pourfuiuit  fon  difcours  qui  fut  efcoute  auec  vn  grand
filence  &  auec  vne  approbation  de  toute  I'affiftance.
Le  Capitaine  qui  iufques  alors  n'auoit  [254]  point
ouuert  la  bouche  que  pour  y  mettre  fon  Calumet  ou
fon  petunoir,  qui  fert  d'entretien  &  de  contenance
aux  fauuages,  dit  k  toutes  les  natios  qui  eftoiet  Ik
pref entes :  le  ne  fuis  pas  digne  de  I'honneur  que  vous
me  faites,  ie  ne  meritois  pas  le  nom  d'vn  homme  qui
ne  deuoit  pas  mourir,  d'vn  homme  que  vous  aymiez
tant,  &  que  vous  honoriez  d'vn  fi  grand  refpect.
Get  homme  auoit  deux  conditions  qui  me  manquent,
il  eftoit  liberal  &  tout  plein  d'efprit  &  de  conduite,
vous  me  donnerez  cette  feconde  qualite  par  vos  bons
cofeils,  &  ie  m'efforceray  de  trouuer  la  premiere
par  mon  induftrie :  fi  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait  me  donne
quelque  chofe  ie  vous  affeure  qu'il  fera  plus  a  vous
qu'k  moy  Ces  quatre  paroles  eftant  prononcees  on
commence  le  feftin,  on  fait  entrer  les  femmes  &
les  filles,  on  danfe,  on  fe  reioiiit,  on  mange,  tout  fe
paffe  fans  debat,  fans  difpute,  fans  infolence.  Pour
conclufio  vn  vieux  Capitaine  enfonc6  dans  les  monta-
gnes  du  Nort,  qui  paroiffoit  h.  Tadouffac  pour  la  pre-
miere fois,  animat  fa  parole  fit  cette  petite  harangue.
La  [255]  faim  &  la  mifere  a  tu6  vne  partie  de  mes
gens  dans  les  grands  froids  oh  nous  habitons,  mais
nous  ne  craindrons  plus  dorefnauant,  le  Capitaine
Etouait  va  bannir  tous  nos  malheurs  par  fes  libera-
litez.     Ie  porte  les  marques  de  fes  bontez  (il  mon-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  161

at  the  ceremony,  and  was  honored  with  a  present  as
well  as  the  others ;  he  therefore  wished  to  say  a  few
words.  "  Now,"  said  he,  "  Jesus  Christ  will  be
honored  in  Tadoussac,  and  will  be  acknowledged  in
these  vast  forests,  because  the  Captain  is  a  Christian,
and  holds  his  Faith  in  higher  esteem  than  his  life."
He  continued  his  discourse  which  was  listened  to  in
great  silence,  and  approved  by  all  present.

The  Captain,  who  until  then  had  [254]  not  opened
his  mouth  except  to  place  in  it  his  Calumet  or  tobac-
co pipe, — which  with  the  savages  takes  the  place  of
conversation,  and  serves  to  sustain  their  demean-
or,—  said  to  all  the  tribes  present  there:  "  I  am
not  worthy  of  the  honor  that  you  do  me.  I  do  not
deserve  to  bear  the  name  of  a  man  who  should  not
have  died,  of  a  man  whom  you  loved  so  much,  and
whom  you  honored  with  so  great  respect.  That  man
had  two  qualities  in  which  I  am  deficient, —  he  was
liberal,  and  he  had  abundance  of  wisdom  and  of  abili-
ty to  manage  affairs.  You  will  confer  this  latter
quality  on  me  by  your  good  counsels,  and  I  will
endeavor  to  gain  the  first  by  my  own  industry.  If  he
who  has  made  all  gives  me  anything,  you  may  rest
assured  that  it  will  belong  more  to  you  than  to  me."
When  he  had  pronounced  these  words,  the  feast  be-
gan. The  women  and  girls  were  brought  in.  All
danced,  enjoyed  themselves,  and  feasted;  every-
thing passed  without  discussion,  without  dispute,  and
without  any  insolent  acts.  At  the  end,  an  old  Cap-
tain—  living  far  within  the  mountains  of  the  North,
who  had  come  to  Tadoussac  for  the  first  time  —  deliv-
ered, in  animated  language,  this  short  harangue:
[255]  "  Hunger  and  hardships  have  killed  a  portion
of  my  people  in  the  very  cold  region  that  we  inhabit ;


162  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES  [Vol.26

flroit  le  collier  qu'on  luy  auoit  donne,)  ie  le  feray
voir  'k  ceux  qui  font  efchapez  de  la  mort  pour  leur
donner  enuie  de  fe  venir  ranger  fous  vn  fi  braue
Capitaine.  Puiffiez  vous  viure  longues  annees,  braue
Capitaine,  puiffiez  vous  conferuer  ceux  qui  font  fous
voftre  conduite.

Cette  harangue  finie  chacun  fe  retire  en  fon  quar-
tier,  &  ce  Capitaine  refufcit6  voulant  commencer  fa
charge  fit  venir  k  foy  les  principaux  de  fa  nation  &
quelques  pauures  vefues,  &  fur  I'heure  mefme  leur
donne  ce  qu'il  auoit  de  meilleur  en  fa  cabane.  A
I'vn  il  donne  vne  couuerture,  ^  I'autre  vne  robe  de
Caflor,  k  celuy-cy  vn  Calumet,  k  ces  autres  vn  fac  de
bled  d'Inde,  aux  pauures  femmes  quelques  peaux  de
Caftor  pour  fe  faire  des  robes.  II  donna  a  quelques
guerriers  fon  epee,  fon  poignart  &  fon  piftolet,  &
[256]  puis  les  congedia  auec  ces  troismots:  Tandis
que  ie  viuray  ie  vous  affifteray  &  vous  aideray  de  tout
mon  pouuoir.  Voila  les  reuenus  des  charges  des
Seigneurs  &  des  principautez  des  fauuages.

FIN.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43-44  163

but  hereafter  we  shall  fear  nothing, —  Captain  Etou-
ait  will  banish  all  our  misfortunes  by  his  liberality.
I  carry  the  marks  of  his  goodness  ' '  (he  showed  the
collar  that  had  been  given  to  him).  "  I  shall  show
this  to  all  who  have  escaped  death,  to  make  them
wish  to  range  themselves  under  so  brave  a  Captain.
May  you  live  many  years,  brave  Captain,  and  pre-
serve those  who  are  under  your  government."

When  this  harangue  was  ended,  each  withdrew  to
his  own  quarters;  and  the  resuscitated  Captain,  who
wished  to  begin  the  duties  of  his  office,  sent  for  the
leading  men  of  his  tribe,  and  for  some  poor  widows,
and  forthwith  gave  them  the  best  that  his  cabin  con-
tained. To  one  he  gave  a  blanket,  to  another  a  robe
of  Beaver  fur,  to  a  third  a  Calumet,  and  to  others  a
sack  of  Indian  corn.  To  the  poor  women  he  gave
some  Beaver  skins,  with  which  to  make  dresses.  To
some  of  the  warriors,  he  presented  his  sword,  his
dagger,  and  his  pistol,  and  [256]  then  he  dismissed
them  with  these  words:  "  As  long  as  I  live,  I  will
assist  and  help  you,  as  far  as  lies  in  my  power."
Such  are  the  revenues  of  the  offices  of  the  Seigniors
and  princes  of  the  savages.

END.


164  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26


Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'eft  paffe  dans

le  pays  des  Hvrons,  pays  de

la  Novvelle  France.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  165


Relation  of  what  occurred  in  the

Huron    country,    a    country

of  New  France.


166  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.26


Av  Reverend  Pere  lean   Filleav,   Provincial   de

la  Compagnie  de  1  E  s  v  s ,  en  la

Prouince  de  France.

MON  REVEREND  PERE,
La  premiere  coppie  de  la  Relation  de  nos  Peres
des  Hurons  de  r  an  paffe,  ay  ant  ejle  furpris  par
les  Iroquois,  La  feconde  me  vint  trap  tard  entre  les  mains,
pour  V emioyer  a  vojlre  Reuerence,  les  vaiffeaux  ejlant
defia  partis:  ie  V enuoye  cette  ann^e,  auec  vne  nouuelle
Lettre  venue  de  leur  part,  touchant  ce  qui  s' eji  paffe  de-
puis  de  leurs  affaires  e7i  geyieral:  La  prefente  n  ejlant  h
autre  fin,  ie  me  recommande  tres-humblement  a  fes  SS.
SS.  &  prieres,

De  V.  R.

De  Kedec,  cei.de  Septembre,  1644.

Tres-hutnble,  &  tres-obeyffant
feruiteur  en  N.  Seigneur.
Barthelemy  Vimont.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  167


To  the  Reverend  Father  Jean  Filleau,  Provin-
cial of  the  Society  of  J ES US  in  the
Province  of  France.

MY  REVEREND  FATHER,
The  first  copy  of  the  Relation  of  otir  Fathers
among  the  Hurons  for  last  year  was  taken  by  the
Iroquois;  and  the  second  reached  me  too  late  to  send  it  to
your  Reverence,  as  the  ships  had  already  sailed.  I  send
it  this  year,  with  a  new  Letter  that  has  come  from  them
respecting  what  has  since  occurred  in  connection  ivith  their
affairs  generally.  As  the  present  one  is  intended  for  no
other  purpose,  I  most  humbly  recommend  myself  to  your
Holy  Sacrifices  and  prayers.

Your  Reverence's

From  Kebec,  this  ist  of  September,  1644.

Very  humble  and  very  obedient
servant   in  Our  Lord,

Barthelemy  Vimont.


168  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.26


Table  des  Chapitres  contenvs  en  cette  Relation.


Chapitre  I.    T'^E  T ejiat  du  Pays,  .  .  4.

Chap.    II.      I J      De  la  Mai/on  &  mij^ion  de

Sain^e  Marie,  .  .        23.

Chap.  III.    De  la  MiJ^ion  de  la    Conception  aux

Atinniai^entan,  .  .  .  •         35-

Chap.  IV.    De  la  MiJ^ion  de  Sainft  lofeph   aux

Atingueennonniakak,  .  .  .67.

Chap.  V.    De  la  MiJ^ion  de  Sainfl   Michel  aux

Tahontaenrat,  .  .  .  .93.

Chap.  VI.    De  la  MiJ^ion  des  Anges  aux  Ati^en-

daronk  ou  Nation  neutre,        .  .  .       iio.

Chap.  VII.    De  la  MiJ^ion  de  Sainfi  lean  Bap-

tijle  aux  Arendaronnons,       .  .  .116.

Chap.  VIII.    De  la  MiJ^ion  de  Sain  fie  Elizabeth

aux  Algonquins  Atontrataronnons,     .  .       121.

Chap.  IX.    De  la  Mif^ion  du  Sainfl  Efprit  aux

Algonquins  NipiJ^iriniens,      .  .  .128.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  169


Table  of  the  Chapters  contained  in  this  Relation.


Chapter  I,    /^"^F the  state  of  the  Country,         .  4.

Chap.  II.      \^^      0/  the  House  and  mission  of

Saint e  Marie,  .  .        23.

Chap.  III.    Of  the  Mission  of  la  Conception  among

the  Atinniawentan,  .  .  .        35.

Chap.  IV.    Of  the  Mission  of  Saint  Joseph  among

the  Atingueenno7iniahak,         .  .  .        6"/.

Chap.  V.    Of  the  Mission  of  Saint  Michel  among

the  Tahontaenrat,      .  .  .  •        93*

Chap.  VI.    Of  the  Mission  of  the  Angels  among

the  Atiwendaronk  or  neutral  Nation,  .       no.

Chap.  VII.    Of  the  Mission  of  Saint  Jean  Baptiste

among  the  Arendaronnons,     .  .  .116.

Chap.  VIII.    Of  the  Mission  of  Saint e  Elizabeth

among  the  Atontrataronnon  Algonquins,  .       12 1.

Chap.  IX.    Of  the  Mission    of   the  Holy   Ghost,

among  the  Nipissirinien  Algonquins,  .       128.


170  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26


[I]  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'eft  paffe  de  plus  remarqua-

ble  en  la  Miffion  des  Peres  de  la  Compagnie

de  I  E  s  V  s ,  avx  Hvrons  pais  de  la  Nov-

velle  France  :  Depuis  le  mois  de  luin

de  I'annee  1642.  iufqu'au  mois

de   luin   de  I'annee  1643.

Adrefsie  ate  R.  P.  lean  Filleau  Prouincial  de  la  Compagnie  de
Iesvs  en  la  Prouince  de  France.

MON  Reverend  Pere,
La  premiere  piece  qui  I'an  paffe  nous  vint
de  France,  fut  le  tableau  d'vn  Crucifix,  qui
nous  donna  en  mefme  temps  ces  deux  [2]  penfees,
que  nous  deuions  nous  difpofer  &  noflre  Eglife  ^
quelque  Croix  plus  pefante  qu'^  I'ordinaire,  &  en
fuite  qu'il  falloit  efperer  que  le  fang  du  Sauueur  du
monde  repandu  pour  ces  barbares  auffi  bien  que  pour
nous,  leur  feroit  plus  abondamment  applique.  En
vn  mot  que  nos  croix  iointes  ^  celle  de  lefus-Chrift
auanceroient  le  falut  de  ces  peuples.  La  fuite  de
cette  Relation  fera  voir  k  V.  R.  que  nos  penf6es
n'eftoient  pas  beaucoup  eloignees  des  deffeins  de
Dieu ;  qu'en  effet  il  nous  a  eprouu^,  qu'il  nous  a  rauy
ce  qui  paroiffoit  icy  haut  de  plus  floriffant  pour  la
foy,  que  nos  meilleurs  Chreftiens  font  morts,  les  vns
de  maladie,  les  autres  maffacrez  par  les  ennemis ;  &
que  ce  qui  eftoit  de  plus  choifi  a  6prouu6  la  cruaut6
des  Iroquois,  auec  le  P.  Ifaac  logues  &  deux  autres
de  nos  Franyois.     Mais  auffi  V.  R.  y  verra  en  mefme


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  1^1


[i]  Relation  of  the  most  remarkable  events  that

occurred  in  the  Mission  of  the  Fathers  of  the

Society  of  Jesus  in  the  Huron  country, a

country  of  New  France,  from  the  month

of  June,  of  the  year  1642,  to  the

month  of  June,  of  the  year  1643.

Addressed  to  the  Reverend  Father  Jean  Filleau,  Provincial  of
the  Society  of  J^svs  in  the  Province  of  France.

MY  Reverend  Father,
The  first  thing  that  came  to  us  last  year
from  France  was  the  picture  of  the  Crucifixion,
which  inspired  us  at  the  same  time  with  these  two
[2]  thoughts, —  that  we  must  prepare  ourselves  and
our  Church  for  some  Cross  that  would  be  heavier
than  usual;  and  also  that  we  must  hope  that  the
blood  of  the  Savior  of  the  world,  which  was  shed
for  these  barbarians  as  much  as  for  us,  would  be
more  abundantly  applied  to  them.  In  a  word,  that
our  crosses,  united  to  that  of  Jesus  Christ,  would
further  the  salvation  of  these  peoples.  The  sequel
of  this  Relation  will  show  Your  Reverence  that  our
thoughts  were  not  far  different  from  the  designs  of
God;  that,  in  fact,  he  has  tried  us;  that  he  has  taken
from  us  what  appeared  up  here  to  be  the  most  flour-
ishing for  the  faith;  that  our  best  Christians  are
dead, —  some  of  illness,  the  others  massacred  by  the
enemies;  and  that  the  choicest  among  them  have
endured  the  cruelty  of   the   Iroquois,   with    Father


172  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

temps  que  Dieu  a  tir6  nos  auantages  de  nos  pertes,
que  noftre  Eglife  y  eft  accreue  &  en  nombre  &  en
faintete:  que  plufieurs  Capitaines  &  gens  d'authorit^
ont  pris  le  party  de  la  Foy :  que  le  feu  eft  aux  quatre
coins  du  pais,  &  que  le  Chriftianifme  [3]  y  trouue
plus  d'honneur  &  plus  de  refpedt  que  iamais.  le  prie
noftre  Seigneur  de  ne  nous  pas  epargner  ces  croix,
de  nous  en  enuoyer  quantite  de  femblables,  &  nous
6prouuer  iufqu'au  fang,  pourueu  qu'il  n'en  tire  pas
moins  fa  gloire,  &  que  nos  vies  confommees  en  fon
faindt  feruice  aillent  toufiours  luy  augmentant  ce
Royaume  des  coeurs  qu'il  s'eft  acquis  par  le  merite  de
fon  fang.  Ce  font  les  defirs  de  tons  nos  Peres  qui
font  icy,  &  "k  quoy  nous  auons  befoin  des  prieres  de
toute  la  France.  Nous  fupplions  V.  R.  de  nous  les
procurer,  &  d'y  ioindre  plus  particulierement  les
liennes  &  fes  SS.  SS.

De  V.  R.

Tres-humble  &  obe'ijfant
feruiteur  en  nojire  Seigneur
HiEROSME    LaLEMANT.

Des  Hurons  ce  21.
de  Septembre  1643.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  173

Isaac  Jogues  and  two  others  of  our  French.  But
Your  Reverence  will  also  see,  at  the  same  time,  that
God  has  turned  our  losses  to  our  advantage;  that
our  Church  has  increased,  both  in  number  and  in
godliness;  that  many  Captains  and  persons  of  au-
thority have  adopted  the  Faith;  that  the  fire  has
been  lighted  at  the  four  corners  of  the  country,  and
that  Christianity  [3]  is  held  in  higher  honor  and
respect  than  ever.  I  beg  our  Lord  not  to  spare  us
such  crosses,  to  send  us  many  similar  ones,  and  to
try  us  even  to  bloodshed,  provided  that  they  be  none
the  less  for  his  glory,  and  that  our  lives,  expended
in  his  holy  service,  continue  ever  to  increase  for  his
behalf  that  Kingdom  of  hearts  that  he  has  acquired
through  the  merits  of  his  blood.  Such  are  the
desires  of  all  our  Fathers  who  are  here,  and  for  this
we  need  the  prayers  of  all  France.  We  beg  Your
Reverence  to  obtain  them  for  us,  and  to  add  to  them
more  particularly  your  prayers  and  your  Holy
Sacrifices.

Your  Reverence's

Very  humble  and  very  obedient
serva?it  in  our  Lord,

HiEROSME    LaLEMANT.
From    the    Huron    country,
this  2  1st  of  September,  1643.


174  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.26


[4]  CHAPITRE  PREMIER.

DE    L'ESTAT   DU    pais.

LE  fleau  de  la  guerre  qui  cy  deuant  a  emporte  bon
nombre  de  ces  peuples,  a  continue  li  fortement
depuis  vn  an,  qu'on  peut  dire  que  ce  pais  n'efl
qu'vne  image  de  maffacres.

A  peine  auois-ie  termine  la  precedente  Relation,
qu'vne  troupe  de  barbares  Iroquois  ayant  furpris  vne
de  nos  bourgades  frontieres,  n'y  pardonna  k  aucun
fexe,  non  pas  mefme  aux  enfans,  &  reduifit  le  tout  en
feu,  k  la  referue  d'vne  vingtaine  de  perfonnes,  qui
trouuant  iour  au  milieu  de  ces  flammes,  &  des  fl^ches
ennemies,  nous  vint  aprendre  en  mefme  temps  leur
mine,  que  la  venue  de  cet  orage  qui  difparut  auant
le  leuer  du  foleil.  C'eftoit  le  bourg  le  plus  impie  &
le  plus  reuolt6  contre  les  veritez  de  la  foy  de  toutes
ces  contrees,  «&  qui  plus  d'vne  fois  auoit  dit  aux  Peres
qui  les  alloient  inftruire,  que  fi  tant  eft  qu'il  y  eut
vn  Dieu  vangeur  des  crimes,  ils  le  deficient  [5]  de
leur  faire  fentir  fon  courroux,  &  qu'^  moins  que  cela
ils  refufoient  de  recognoiftre  fon  pouuoir.

Quafi  en  mefme  temps  nos  Hurons  partoient  en
armee  pour  aller  au  rencontre  de  quelque  autre  troupe
ennemie.  lis  confultent  vn  fameux  Magicien  pour
receuoir  fes  ordres.  Ce  fupoft  de  Satan  fe  fait  baftir
vn  tabernacle  tenebreux  de  deux  ou  trois  pieds  de
hauteur  &  autant  de  largeur,  le  remplit  de  cailloux
enflammez  de  feu,  &  fe  iettant  au  milieu  de  cette


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  ib43- 44  175


[4]  CHAPTER  FIRST.

OF   THE    STATE   OF   THE    COUNTRY.

THE  scourge  of  war,  that  has  hitherto  carried  off
a  great  number  of  these  tribes,  has  continued  to
such  an  extent,  for  a  year  past,  that  one  may-
say  that  this  country  is  but  one  scene  of  massacre.

Hardly  had  I  concluded  the  preceding  Relation
when  a  band  of  barbarous  Iroquois  having  surprised
one  of  our  frontier  villages,  spared  neither  sex,  not
even  the  children,  and  destroyed  all  by  fire,  except
a  score  of  persons.  These  succeeded  in  effecting
their  escape  from  amid  the  flames  and  the  enemies'
arrows,  and  came  to  tell  us  at  the  same  time  of  their
ruin  and  of  the  coming  of  the  storm  that  disappeared
before  the  rising  of  the  sun.  It  was  the  most  im-
pious of  the  villages,  and  that  which  had  been  most
rebellious  against  the  truths  of  the  faith  in  all  these
countries;  and  its  inhabitants  had  more  than  once
told  the  Fathers  who  had  gone  to  teach  them  that,
if  there  were  a  God  who  avenged  crimes,  they  defied
him  [5]  to  make  them  feel  his  anger,  and  that,  for
anything  less  than  that,  they  refused  to  acknowledge
his  power.

Almost  at  the  same  time,  an  army  of  our  Hurons
started  to  meet  some  other  band  of  enemies.  They
consulted  a  famous  Magician,  for  the  purpose  of  re-
ceiving his  orders.  That  instrument  of  Satan  caused
a  dark  tabernacle  to  be  erected  for  him,  two  or  three
feet  in  height,  and  as  many  in  width;  filled  it  with


176  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

fournaife,  commande  qu'on  I'y  tienne  enferme  iuf-
qu'k  ce  que  fon  Demon  luy  ayt  donne  refponfe.  II
chante  ou  pluftoft  heurle  Ik  dedans,  comme  vne  ame
damnee,  toute  I'armee  Huronne  danfant  autour  de
luy,  &  rendant  I'echo  de  fa  voix  afin  qu'elle  foit  en-
tendue  iufqu'au  plus  profond  des  Enfers.  En  fin  le
magicien  change  de  ton,  &  s'efcrie  d'vn  accent  tout
remply  de  ioye,  Vidtoire !  vidtoire !  ie  voy  les  ennemis
qui  viennent  a  nous  du  cofte  du  midy,  ie  les  voy  qui
prennent  la  fuite,  ie  vous  voy  tous  mes  camarades  qui
les  prenez  captifs.  A  ce  mot  vn  chacun  fe  prepare  &
cherche  [6]  plus  ardemment  des  cordes  pour  lier
I'ennemy,  que  des  armes  pour  le  combatre.  Jamais
ce  magicien  ne  parla  plus  affeur^ment,  iamais  on  ne
rendit  plus  volontiers  a  fon  Demon  les  hommages
qu'il  defiroit,  &  iamais  les  infideles  ne  triompherent
auec  plus  d'infolence  qu'k  ce  iour,  que  leur  impiete
I'emportoit  au-deffus  de  la  foy  de  quelques  bons
Chreftiens  qui  les  auoient  repris  d'auoir  recours  k  des
Demons  impuiffans  de  les  alTifter.  lis  partent  au
mefme  moment,  &  courent  du  cofte  du  midy,  fuiuant
I'aduis  du  magicien.

Les  feuls  Chreftiens  s'arreftent  long-temps  fans
parler  ne  pouuans  fe  refoudre  d'obeyr  k  vn  condudteur
fi  impie.  Enfin  I'vn  d'eux  des  plus  feruens  s'ad-
dreffe  k  Dieu  au  milieu  de  ces  crys  de  vidtoire.  Mon
Seigneur,  luy  dit-il,  il  s'agit  icy  de  voftre  honneur,
c'eft  vous  feul  qui  eftes  le  maiftre  de  nos  vies,  &  qui
difpofez  des  vidtoires.  fi  les  promeffes  du  Demon  fe
trouuent  veritables,  luy  feul  en  tirera  fa  gloire,  &
voftre  nom  en  fera  blafphem^.  Ie  vous  off  re  ma  vie
pour  eflre  tue  de  I'ennemy  pluftoft  que  de  me  voir
vidtorieux''[7]^en  cette  fa9on.     Apres  cela  il  s'adrelle


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  177

stones  heated  in  the  fire ;  and,  throwing  himself  into
the  middle  of  this  furnace,  he  commanded  that  he  be
kept  shut  up  in  it  until  his  Demon  had  given  him  an
answer.  He  sang,  or  rather  he  yelled,  therein  like
a  damned  soul ;  while  the  whole  Huron  army  danced
around  him,  and  reechoed  his  voice  so  that  it  might
be  heard  in  the  lowest  pit  of  Hell.  Finally,  the
magician  changed  his  tone,  and  called  out  in  most
joyful  accents,  "Victory!  victory!  I  see  the  ene-
mies coming  toward  us  from  the  south.  I  see  them
take  to  flight.  I  see  all  of  you,  my  comrades,  making
prisoners  of  them."  At  these  words,  each  one  made
ready,  and  sought  [6]  more  eagerly  for  ropes  to  bind
the  enemy  than  for  weapons  wherewith  to  fight
them.  Never  had  that  magician  spoken  more  con-
fidently ;  never  had  his  Demon  been  more  willingly
accorded  the  homage  that  he  desired ;  and  never  did
the  infidels  triumph  with  more  insolence  than  on
that  day,  when  their  ungodliness  overcame  the  faith
of  some  good  Christians,  who  had  reproved  them
for  having  recourse  to  Demons  who  were  powerless
to  assist  them.  They  started  at  the  same  time,  and
hastened  toward  the  south,  in  accordance  with  the
magician's  advice.

The  Christians  stood  by  themselves  for  a  long  time,
without  speaking,  being  unable  to  make  up  their
minds  to  obey  so  impious  a  guide.  Finally,  one  of
the  most  fervent  among  them  addressed  himself  to
God  amid  those  shouts  of  victory.  "  My  Lord,"  he
said,  "  your  honor  is  at  stake.  You  alone  are  the
master  of  our  lives,  and  dispose  of  victories.  If  the
promises  of  the  Demon  are  fulfilled,  he  alone  will
derive  glory  therefrom,  and  your  name  will  be  blas-
phemed for  it.     I  offer  you  my  life,  that  I  may  be


178  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

aux  autres  Chrefliens,  &  quoy  que  le  plus  ieune  de
la  troupe  fon  zele  luy  fait  prendre  I'authorit^  de  leur
parler.  Mes  freres,  leur  dit-il,  nous  pecherions  de
fuiure  la  route  qu'a  monftre  le  Demon,  tirons  plu-
ftoft  vers  roccident  d'oii  plus  fouuent  les  ennemis
abordent:  fi  Dieu  nous  veut  fauorifer,  le  diable
n'aura  point  de  part  k  fa  gloire:  fi  nos  camarades
infideles  ont  le  fuccez  qu'ils  fe  promettent,  renon9ons
y  tous  de  bon  coeur,  pluftoft  que  de  rien  deuoir  a  leur
impiete.  Auffi  toft  il  eft  obey,  les  infideles  fuiuant
leur  route  d'vn  coft6,  les  Chreftiens  vont  de  I'autre.

le  ne  fcay  fi  Dieu  eut  egard  aux  prieres  de  ce
ieune  Chreftien :  quoy  qu'il  en  foit,  fans  qu'il  luy  en
couftaft  la  vie,  les  Infideles  &  leur  Demon  fe  trouue-
rent  confus:  ils  rencontrerent  en  effet  I'ennemy,
mais  ils  n'en  tuerent  pas  vn  feul,  la  perte  entiere
ayant  efle  de  leur  cofte,  &  la  peur  les  ayant  tellemet
faifi,  que  quoy  qu'ils  fuffent  fix  fois  en  plus  grand
nombre  toute  I'armee  fe  diffipa,  &  Ik  fe  terminerent
les  deffeins  de  leur  guerre.

[8]  En  fuite  de  cela  tout  le  long  de  I'efle  ce  n'e-
ftoient  rien  que  nouueaux  bruits  de  maffacres  arriuez
I'vn  fur  I'autre  iufqu'au  cceur  du  pays,  &  proche  des
bourgades  plus  efloignees  de  I'ennemy,  fans  que
iamais  on  n'ait  pu  prendre  que  deux  de  ces  Auantu-
riers,  qui  s'eftant  aduancez  trop  indifcretement  furent
furpris  dans  leurs  embuches.  Ce  furent  des  vidtimes
deftinees  pour  le  feu,  &  vn  obiet  de  la  cruaut6  natu-
relle  "k  toutes  ces  Nations  barbares;  mais  c'eftoient
des  ames  deftinees  pour  le  Paradis.  Ils  n'eurent
pas  pluftoft  entendu  les  paroles  des  Peres  qui  y
coururent  pour  les  inflruire,  qu'ils  fe  rendirent  aux
veritez    de    noftre   foy,    receurent   le    Baptefme,    &


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643 -44  179

killed  by  the  enemy  rather  than  see  myself  victorious
[7]  in  that  fashion."  After  that,  he  addressed
himself  to  the  other  Christians,  and,  although  the
youngest  of  the  band,  his  zeal  made  him  assume
authority  to  speak  to  them.  "  My  brothers,"  he
said,  "  we  would  sin  were  we  to  follow  the  road
pointed  out  by  the  Demon.  Let  us  rather  go  to-
ward the  west,  whence  our  enemies  most  frequently
come.  If  God  choose  to  favor  us,  the  devil  will  have
no  share  in  his  glory.  If  our  infidel  comrades  meet
with  the  success  that  they  expect,  let  us  cheerfully
renounce  it,  rather  than  owe  anything  to  their
impiety."  He  was  at  once  obeyed;  the  infidels
went  their  way  in  one  direction,  and  the  Christians
in  another.

I  know  not  whether  God  granted  the  prayer  of
that  young  Christian.  At  all  events,  without  his
losing  his  life,  the  Infidels  and  their  Demon  were
defeated.  In  fact,  they  met  the  enemy  but  did  not
kill  one  of  them,  the  entire  loss  being  on  their  side;
and  they  were  so  overcome  by  fright  that,  although
they  were  six  times  more  numerous,  the  whole  army
melted  away,  and  thus  ended  the  plans  of  their  war.

[8]  Afterward,  throughout  the  whole  summer,
there  was  nothing  but  fresh  rumors  of  massacres
happening  one  after  the  other,  in  the  heart  of  the
country,  and  close  to  the  villages  that  were  most
remote  from  the  enemy ;  and  yet  it  never  was  possi-
ble to  capture  more  than  two  of  those  Adventurers,
who,  having  pushed  ahead  too  recklessly,  were
surprised  in  their  ambushes.  They  were  victims
doomed  to  the  flames,  and  the  objects  of  the  cruelty
that  is  natural  to  all  these  barbarous  Nations;  but
they  were  souls  destined   for   Paradise.     No   sooner


180  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26

chantoient  dans  le  plus  fort  de  leurs  fupplices  qu'ils
feroiet  heureux  dans  le  Ciel:  mais  plus  cruelle  en
deuenoit  la  rage  des  Hurons  infideles,  qui  n'ayant  pu
empefcher  leur  bonheur,  quelque  oppofition  qu'ils  y
eullent  apport^,  vouloient  leur  faire  fouffrir  en  cette
vie  vne  image  des  peines  que  fouuent  on  leur  dit
qu'endurent  les  Ames  en  enfer.

Sur  la  fin  de  I'efte  nous  receumes  enfin  [9]  la  nou-
uelle  du  malheur  arriue  deffus  la  riuiere  en  la  defaite
&  en  la  prife  de  quelques  vns  de  nos  Francois,  &
d'vne  flote  des  Chrefties  plus  choifis  que  nous  euffions
dans  les  Hurons;  qui  reuenans  des  Trois  riuieres
tomberet  dans  les  embuches  d'vne  troupe  Iroquoife,
ainfi  qu'on  I'aura  pu  appredre  comme  ie  croy,  par  la
Relation  de  I'an  paffe  enuoy^e  de  Kebec.  Crainte
d'vfer  maintenant  de  redites  ie  ne  parleray  point  de
ce  defaftre,  feulement  ie  diray  que  la  perte  des
perfonnes  qui  y  demeurerent  a  efl6  le  coup  le  plus
fenfible  qui  iufqu'icy  foit  arriue  au  Chriftianifme  des
Hurons.

Nous  auons  palle  enuiron  I'efpace  d'vn  an  dans
I'incertitude  des  chofes  qui  leur  pourroient  eftre  arri-
u6es,  dans  la  crainte  que  ces  barbares  n'euffent  exer-
c€  delTus  eux  la  cruaute  de  leurs  fupplices ;  dans  les
defirs,  d'en  f9auoir  les  particularitez  &  les  chofes  qui
auroient  rendu  leurs  fouffrances  plus  precieufes  aux
yeux  de  Dieu ;  Enfin  dans  les  efperances  que  quel-
qu'vn  d'eux  k  qui  on  auroit  pu  donner  la  vie,  s'ef-
cbapant  de  fa  captiuite,  nous  en  apporteroit  des  nou-
uelles  affeur^es,  qui  [10]  nous  feroient  benir  la  bonte
de  Dieu  dedans  toutes  nos  pertes.  Ces  attentes  n'ont
pas  eft6  fans  leur  effet,  le  plus  fidele  &  le  meilleur  de
nos  Chreftiens   lofeph   Taondechoren  ayant  trouue


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  181

had  they  heard  the  words  of  the  Fathers  who  has-
tened to  instruct  them,  than  they  surrendered  to  the
truths  of  our  faith,  received  Baptism,  and,  at  the
height  of  their  tortures,  sang  that  they  would
be  happy  in  Heaven.  But  all  the  more  cruel  was
the  fury  of  the  infidel  Hurons,  who,  because  they
had  been  unable,  with  all  the  opposition  they  could
make,  to  deprive  these  men  of  their  happiness,
wished  to  make  them  suffer  in  this  life  a  semblance  of
the  torments  that,  as  they  are  often  told,  are  suffered
by  Souls  in  hell.

About  the  end  of  the  summer,  we  at  last  received
[9]  news  of  the  misfortune  that  had  happened  on  the
river  through  the  defeat  and  capture  of  some  of  our
French,  and  of  a  fleet  of  the  choicest  Christians  that
we  have  among  the  Hurons.  As  they  were  return-
ing from  the  Three  rivers,  they  fell  into  the  ambush
of  a  band  of  Iroquois,  as  may  have  been  learned,  I
believe,  from  the  Relation  of  last  year  that  was  sent
from  Kebec.  For  fear  of  repetition,  I  will  not  speak
of  that  disaster,  but  will  merely  say  that  the  loss  of
the  persons  who  were  involved  therein  was  the
heaviest  blow  that  has  yet  been  dealt  to  the  Chris-
tianity of  the  Hurons.

We  have  been  almost  a  year  in  uncertainty  as  to
what  may  have  happened  to  them ;  in  dread  that
those  barbarians  may  have  made  them  feel  the
cruelty  of  their  tortures;  in  the  desire  of  hearing
particulars,  and  all  that  may  have  made  their  suffer-
ings more  precious  in  the  sight  of  God ;  finally,  in
the  hope  that  some  one  of  them  whose  life  might
have  been  spared  would  escape  from  his  captivity,
and  bring  us  back  positive  information  which  [10]
would  cause  us  to  bless  God's  goodness  in  the  midst


182  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

moyen  de  s'efchaper  des  mains  de  Tennemy,  &  eftant
enfin  arriue  icy  aux  Hurons  au  commencement  du
mois  d'Aouft,  vn  an  apr6s  fa  prife:  qui  dans  le  recit
qu'il  nous  a  fait  des  chofes  dont  il  a  eft6  tefmoing
plus  qu'oculaire,  nous  a  fait  reconnoiftre  que  Dieu
tire  le  bien  du  mal,  &  que  fa  diuine  prouidence  va
difpofant  egalement  &  les  biens  &  les  maux  pour  le
falut  &  la  gloire  de  fes  Efleus.

Le  iour  auant  leur  prife,  comme  preuoyans  leur
malheur,  fi  toutefois  il  le  faut  ainfi  appeller,  ils
s'eftoient  confeffez,  &  auoient  tenu  vn  Confeil  expres
pour  s'animer  les  vns  les  autres.  He  quoy,  mes
freres,  auoit  dit  le  plus  ancie  de  tons,  y  auroit-il  quel-
qu'vn  de  nous  qui  defiflaft  de  croire  en  Dieu  quad
bien  il  fe  verroit  brufl6  des  ennemis?  nous  auons
embraffe  la  foy  pour  eftre  heureux  Ik  haut  au  Ciel,
&  non  pas  icy  bas  en  terre.  Tons  promettoient
d'eftre  fideles  a  [ii]  Dieu:  I'vn  difoit  que  la  penf^e
du  Paradis  adouciroit  fes  peines ;  vn  autre  adiouftoit
k  cela  que  ces  tifons  ardents,  &  ces  baches  enflam^es
de  feu  qu'on  luy  appliqueroit  fur  le  corps,  luy  renou-
uelleroiet  la  memoire  du  feu  d'enfer  qui  brufle  k
iamais  les  pecheurs.  Euftache  Ahatfiftari  ce  Capi-
taine  Neophyte  &  la  terreur  des  ennemis,  dont  I'an
paff6  ie  parlay  dans  la  Relation,  ayant  pris  la  parole,
Mes  freres,  leur  dit-il,  fi  ie  tombe  entre  les  mains  des
Iroquois,  ie  ne  puis  efperer  de  vie,  mais  auant  que
mourir  ie  leur  demanderay  ce  que  viennent  apporter
les  Europeans  en  leur  terre,  des  haches,  des  chau-
dieres,  des  couuertes,  des  arquebufes,  voila  tout:  ie
leur  diray  qu'on  ne  les  ayme  pas,  qu'on  leur  cache
la  plus  precieufe  marchandife  que  les  Fran9ois  nous
donnent  fans  la  vendre:  qu'on  nous  vient  annoncer


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  j643- 44  183

of  all  our  losses.  These  expectations  have  not  been
vain.  The  most  faithful  and  the  best  of  our  Chris-
tians, Joseph  Taondechoren,  found  means  to  escape
from  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and  arrived  here
among  the  Hurons  at  the  beginning  of  August,  a
year  after  his  capture.  By  his  recital  of  those  things
of  which  he  has  been  more  than  an  eyewitness,  he
has  shown  us  that  God  derives  good  from  evil,  and
that  his  divine  providence  disposes  equally  of  good
and  evil  for  the  salvation  and  glory  of  his  Elect.

The  day  before  the  capture,  as  if  they  foresaw
their  misfortune  —  if,  however,  it  should  be  called
one  —  they  had  confessed  themselves,  and  had  held
a  Council  for  the  express  purpose  of  encouraging  one
another.  "  What!  my  brothers,"  the  oldest  of  all
had  said,  "  is  there  one  of  us  who  would  cease  to
believe  in  God  even  if  he  were  burned  by  the  ene-
mies? We  have  embraced  the  faith  to  be  happy  in
Heaven  above,  and  not  here  below  on  earth."  All
promised  to  remain  faithful  to  [ii]  God.  One  said
that  the  thought  of  Paradise  would  alleviate  his
sufferings;  another  added  to  this  that  the  burning
firebrands,  and  the  axes  heated  red-hot,  that  would
be  applied  to  his  body,  would  remind  him  of  hell-
fire,  that  burns  sinners  forever.  Eustache  Ahatsis-
tari, —  that  Captain  who  was  a  Neophyte  and  the
terror  of  his  enemies,  whom  I  mentioned  last  year
in  the  Relation, —  began  to  speak,  and  said:  "  My
brothers,  if  I  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Iroquois,  I
cannot  hope  for  life.  But,  before  I  die,  I  will  ask
them  what  the  Europeans  bring  into  their  country, —
axes,  kettles,  blankets,  arquebuses,  that  is  all.  I  will
tell  them  that  those  people  do  not  love  them, —
that   they    conceal    from    them    the   most   precious


184  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26

vne  vie  eternelle,  vn  Dieu  qui  a  tout  fait,  vn  feu  qui
eft  fous  terre  prepare  pour  tous  ceux  qui  ne  rhon-
noret  pas,  vn  lieu  de  bon-heur  dans  le  Ciel,  vn  feiour
immortel  de  nos  Ames  &  de  nos  corps  qui  refufcite-
ront  impaffibles.  Apres  cela  ie  leur  diray  que  [12]
c'eft  la  ma  confolation ;  qu'ils  exercent  fur  moy  toutes
leurs  cruautez;  qu'ils  pourrot  a  force  de  fupplices
arracher  I'ame  de  mon  corps,  mais  non  pas  cette
efperace  de  mon  coeur,  qu'apres  ma  mort  ie  feray
bien-heureux.  C'eft  ainfi  que  ie  les  prefcheray  lors
qu'ils  me  brufleront.  Apres  cela  il  s'addrelTe  k
Charles  Tfondatfaa;  Mon  frere,  luy  dit-il,  £i  Dieu
permet  que  ie  fois  pris  des  ennemis,  &  que  toy  tu
t'efchapes,  eftant  arriue  au  pays  va  trouuer  de  ma
part  mes  freres  &  mes  parens;  tu  leur  diras  que  s'ils
ont  de  I'amour  pour  moy,  &  encore  plus  pour  eux
mefmes,  ils  embraffent  la  Foy,  ils  adorent  cette
diuine  Maiefle  qui  eft  inuifible  k  nos  yeux,  mais
qui  fe  fait  fentir  dans  le  plus  profond  de  nos
ames,  lors  que  nous  ne  refufons  pas  fes  lumieres,  &
que  nous  foumettons  nos  volontez  k  fes  commande-
mes.  Dy  leur  que  ie  fuis  conuaincu  des  veritez  de
noftre  foy,  &  que  pour  vn  iamais  nous  feros  feparez
d'enfemble  s'ils  ne  fuiuent  le  party  de  Dieu;  que  luy
feul  eft  mon  efperance,  &  qu'en  quelque  lieu  que  ie
fois  ie  veux  viure  &  mourir  en  luy.

[13]  Le  lendemain  ce  bon  courage  n'eut  pas  plu-
ftoft  veu  I'ennemy,  qu'il  fe  mit  en  prieres,  &  parmy
les  crys  du  combat  on  entendit  fa  voix  qui  furmon-
toit  les  autres;  Grand  Dieu  c'eft  ^  vous  feul  que  i'ay
recours.  II  fut  pris  le  premier  de  tous  comme  il  s'e-
ftoit  plus  auance,  mais  ce  grand  Dieu  qu'il  inuoquoit
I'a  fecouru  d'vne  fa9on  bien  plus   aymable,   car  il


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  185

merchandise  of  all,  which  the  French  give  without
selling  it  to  us ;  that  the  latter  come  to  tell  us  of  an
eternal  life;  of  a  God  who  has  made  all;  of  a  fire
that  is  under  the  earth,  prepared  for  those  who  do
not  honor  him ;  of  a  place  of  happiness  in  Heaven,
an  immortal  abode  for  our  Souls,  and  for  our  bodies,
which  will  rise  again,  freed  from  suffering.  Then
I  will  tell  them  that  [12]  herein  is  my  consolation;
that  they  may  inflict  all  their  torments  on  me ;  that
they  may  by  dint  of  torture  tear  my* soul  from  my
body,  but  not  from  my  heart  this  hope  that  after
death  I  shall  be  happy.  Thus  will  I  preach  to
them,  while  they  are  burning  me."  After  that,  he
addressed  himself  to  Charles  Tsondatsaa:  "  My
brother,"  he  said  to  him,  "if  God  should  permit
that  I  be  taken  by  the  enemy,  and  that  thou  shouldst
escape, —  when  thou  shalt  reach  our  country,  go
and  see  my  brothers  and  my  relatives  on  my  behalf ;
thou  shalt  tell  them  that  if  they  have  any  love  for
me,  and  still  more  for  themselves,  they  must  em-
brace the  Faith,  and  adore  that  divine  Majesty  which
is  invisible  to  our  eyes,  but  which  makes  itself  felt
in  the  very  depths  of  our  souls,  when  we  do  not
refuse  to  see  its  light,  and  when  we  submit  our  wills
to  its  commands.  Tell  them  that  I  am  convinced  of
the  truths  of  our  faith,  and  that  we  shall  be  sepa-
rated from  each  other  forever,  if  they  are  not  among
the  followers  of  God ;  that  he  alone  is  my  hope ;  and
that,  wherever  I  may  be,  I  wish  to  live  and  to  die
in  him."

[13]  On  the  following  day,  no  sooner  had  this  cour-
ageous heart  perceived  the  enemy  than  he  began  to
pray,  and,  amid  the  cries  of  the  combat,  his  voice
was  heard  above  all  the  others :  ' '  Great  God,  to  thee


186  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26

mouriit  en  bon  Chreftien,  &  parmy  toutes  les  cruautez
qti'il  fouffrit  du  depuis  auant  fon  dernier  fupplice,
iamais  il  ne  fit  paroiftre  qu'vn  courage  plus  fort  que
les  tourmens,  &  digne  des  enfans  de  Dieu.

Le  P.  Ifaac  logues  fut  auffi  pris  tout  des  premiers,
comme  en  effet  il  ne  fongeoit  pas  a  fe  fauuer  foy
mefme,  mais  a  pouruoir  au  falut  de  tant  de  pauures
ames,  pour  lefquelles  Dieu  le  referuoit.  Au  moins
ce  fut  Ik  fa  premiere  penfee  au  moment  que  parut
I'ennemy,  de  baptifer  fon  Pilote,  qui  feul  de  ce  canot
n'eftoit  pas  encore  Chreftien.  Cette  adtion  eft  la  der-
niere  qu'il  ayt  fait  eftant  encore  en  liberte,  mais
Dieu  I'a  tellement  benie,  que  ce  bon  Neophyte  qui
du  depuis  fe  [14]  fauua  du  peril,  ne  pent  comprendre
I'excez  de  cette  charite,  il  la  raconte  a  tout  le  monde,
il  fe  confole,  &  benit  Dieu  de  I'auoir  appelle  en
I'Eglife  par  vne  voye  que  iamais  il  n'euft  efpere;  il
ne  pent  oublier  ce  iour,  il  s'en  confirme  dans  la  foy,
&  excite  les  autres  h.  croire  par  ce  motif  de  charite ;  II
faut,  dit-il,  que  ces  gens  qui  nous  viennent  inflruire
ne  doutent  aucunement  des  veritez  qu'ils  nous  enfei-
gnent,  il  faut  bien  que  Dieu  feul  foit  leur  vnique
recompenfe,  Ondefonk  (c'eft  le  nom  qu'auoit  icy  dans
les  Hurons  le  P.  logues)  s'oublia  de  foy  mefme  k  la
veue  du  danger,  il  ne  penfa  qu'k  moy,  &  me  parla  de
me  faire  Chreftien,  Les  balles  d'arquebufe  frifoient
nos  oreilles,  la  mort  etoit  deuat  nos  yeux,  il  fongeoit
k  me  baptifer,  non  pas  a  fe  fauuer:  c'eft  qu'il  m'ai-
moit  plus  que  foy  mefme,  &  qu'il  ne  craignoit  pas  la
mort,  penfant  que  fi  ie  mourrois  fans  baptefme
i'eftois  perdu  pour  vn  iamais.

Ce  Chreftien  baptife  au  milieu  des  alarmes,  &  k  la
veue  de  mille  cruautez  ineuitables  h.  celuy  qui  Ten-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  187

alone  I  have  recourse."  He  was  the  first  to  be  taken
prisoner,  as  he  was  the  foremost  in  the  fight;  but
the  great  God  whom  he  invoked  assisted  him  in  a
much  more  pleasing  fashion,  for  he  died  a  good
Christian ;  and,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  cruelties  that
he  endured  from  that  time  until  the  final  torture,  he
manifested  a  courage  greater  than  the  torments,  and
worthy  of  the  children  of  God.

Father  Isaac  Jogues  was  also  one  of  the  first  taken,
for  indeed  his  thought  was  not  to  save  himself,  but
to  provide  for  the  salvation  of  so  many  poor  souls  for
which  God  reserved  him.  At  least,  his  first  impulse
when  the  enemy  approached  was  to  baptize  his  Pilot,
who  was  the  only  one  in  that  canoe  that  was  not  a
Christian.  This  was  the  last  act  that  he  performed
while  still  at  liberty,  but  God  has  so  blessed  it  that
this  good  Neophyte,  who  has  since  [14]  escaped  from
peril,  cannot  understand  such  an  excess  of  charity.
He  relates  it  to  every  one ;  he  consoles  himself  and
blesses  God  for  having  called  him  into  the  Church  in
a  manner  for  which  he  would  never  have  hoped ;  he
cannot  forget  that  day ;  and  through  it  he  confirms
himself  in  the  faith,  and  incites  the  others  to  believe
through  that  motive  of  charity.  "  It  must  be,"  he
says,  ' '  that  these  people  who  come  to  instruct  us
have  no  doubt  whatever  of  the  truths  that  they  teach
us.  It  must  be  that  God  alone  is  their  sole  reward.
Ondesonk"''  (that  is  the  name  by  which  Father
Jogues  is  called  here  in  the  Huron  country)  '■"  forgot
himself  at  the  moment  of  danger ;  he  thought  only
of  me,  and  spoke  to  me  of  becoming  a  Christian.
The  arquebus  balls  whistled  past  our  ears ;  death  was
before  our  eyes.  He  thought  of  baptizing  me,  and
not  of  saving  himself.     It  was  because  he  loved  me


188  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JJ^SUJTES         [Vol.  26

fantoit  en  lefus-Chrift,  [15]  a  du  depuis  icy  receu  les
ceremonies  du  baptefme  &  le  nom  de  Bernard,  que
Monfieur  de  Montmagny  noftre  Gouuerneur  luy  auoit
deftin6,  lors  qu'echape  des  mains  des  Iroquois,  &
retournant  icy  il  fe  trouua  ^  la  benedidtion  du  fort  de
Richelieu,  &  a  la  Meffe  qui  s'y  celebra  pour  la
premiere  fois  le  iour  de  S.  Bernard.  Son  furnom  eft
Atieronhonk,  il  s'eft  du  depuis  tellement  comport^,
que  nous  voyons  en  fa  perfonne  qu'il  n'appartient
qu'k  la  charite  de  faire  des  miracles,  d'vn  infidele  &
d'vn  barbare  vn  excellent  Chreftien.

Mais  reuenons  au  Pere,  lors  qu'il  fe  vit  entre  les
mains  de  I'ennemy,  comme  ils  vouloiet  le  lier  h.  leur
ordinaire.  Non,  leur  dit-il,  ces  Fran9ois  &  Hurons
que  vous  auez  pris  auec  moy  font  les  liens  qui  me
tiendront  voftre  captif,  ie  ne  les  quitteray  qu'^  la
mort,  ie  les  fuiuray  par  tout,  &  tenez  vous  tout  affeu-
rez  de  ma  perfonne,  tandis  qu'il  en  reftera  quelqu'vn
d'eux  parmy  vous.  II  le  dit  de  fi  bon  accent  k  ces
barbares,  qu'ils  virent  bien  qu'il  parloit  plus  de  coeur
que  de  bouche,  &  ainfi  ils  fe  contenterent  pour  [16]
lors  de  le  bafhonner  puiffamment,  &  luy  arracher
quelques  ongles  des  mains,  puis  le  laifferent  en  liber-
ty. Mais  fes  pas,  fes  mouuemens  &  fes  penfees
eftoient  toutes  pour  ces  pauures  Hurons  captifs :  II
ne  fongea  qu'a  leur  falut,  &  Dieu  donna  tant  de
benedidtion  h.  vn  zele  fi  faint  &  fi  adtif  au  milieu  des
fouffrances,  que  des  ce  premier  iour  de  fa  captiuit6
il  baptifa  quatorze  Hurons,  dont  vn  mourut  k  I'heure
mefme  entre  fes  mains  ayant  efte  blefle  h.  mort  en  ce
rencontre ;  il  confeffa  les  autres  qui  eftoient  defia
Chreftiens,  &  les  anima  tons  ^  fouffrir  genereufement
&  pour    Dieu   les   cruautez  qui  leur  eftoient  ineui-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  189

more  than  himself,  and  he  feared  not  death  while  he
thought  that,  if  I  died  without  baptism,  I  would  be
lost  forever."

This  Christian,  who  was  baptized  in  the  midst  of
alarms  and  in  view  of  a  thousand  inevitable  cruelties
to  him  who  begat  him  in  Jesus  Christ,  [15]  has  since
received  the  rites  of  baptism  here  and  the  name  of
Bernard,  which  Monsieur  de  Montmagny ,  our  Govern-
or, had  destined  for  him  when  —  after  his  escape
from  the  Iroquois,  and  while  on  his  way  here  —  he
was  present  at  the  blessing  of  fort  Richelieu,  and  at
the  Mass  that  was  celebrated  there  for  the  first  time,
on  the  feast  of  St.  Bernard.  His  surname  is  Atieron-
honk.  Since  then  his  conduct  has  been  such  that
we  see  in  his  person  that  charity  alone  can  work  mir-
acles in  making,  out  of  an  infidel  and  a  barbarian,
an  excellent  Christian.

But  let  us  return  to  the  Father.  When  he  saw
himself  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and  when  they
wished  to  bind  him  in  their  usual  manner,  he  said  to
them :  '  *  No,  no ;  those  French  and  Hurons  whom
you  have  taken  with  me  are  the  bonds  that  will  keep
me  captive ;  I  will  leave  them  only  at  death.  I  will
follow  them  everywhere,  and  you  may  be  assured  of
my  person  so  long  as  one  of  them  remains  with
you."  He  said  this  to  those  barbarians  so  emphat-
ically that  they  saw  that  his  words  came  more  from
his  heart  than  from  his  lips ;  and  they  therefore  con-
tented themselves  for  the  [16]  time  with  giving  him
a  severe  beating,  and  tearing  some  nails  from  his
fingers ;  then,  they  left  him  at  liberty.  But  his  steps,
his  actions,  and  his  thoughts  were  all  for  the  poor
Huron  captives.  He  thought  only  of  their  salvation,
and  so  well  did  God  bless  so  holy  and  so  active  a  zeal


190  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ^SUITES         [Vol.26

tables,  n'y  en  ayant  aucun  qui  ne  s'eftimaft  heureux
dans  fon  malheur,  de  voir  vn  homme  qui  auoit  fi  toft
enleue  tous  leurs  coeurs,  &  leur  rendoit  le  chemin  du
Ciel  fi  court  &  {v  facile.

Le  Pere  alloit  toufiours  continuant  ces  exercices  de
charite,  &  ce  d'autant  plus  ardemment  qu'il  f9auoit
bien  que  le  temps  s'approchoit  des  plus  grandes
fouffrances.  En  effet  apres  enuiron  fix  ou  fept  iour-
nees  de  chemin  ils  firent  rencontre  [17]  d'vne  troupe
de  trois  cens  guerriers  Iroquois,  qui  d6poiiilleret  nos
Francois,  &  exercerent  mille  cruautez  en  leur  en-
droit,  &  deffus  les  Hurons.  On  leur  arrache  ^  tous
les  ongles,  on  coupe  aux  vns  les  doigts,  on  tranfperce
aux  autres  les  mains,  &  pour  tarir  le  fang  on  leur
applique  fur  leurs  playes  des  tifons  &  des  torches
ardentes,  des  pierres  toutes  rouges  de  feu ;  on  leur
fcie  les  bras  auec  des  cordes  qu'on  leur  fait  entrer
iufques  aux  os.  On  leur  decoupe  les  cuiffes  k  coups
de  coufteaux  &  d'efpees.  Enfin  il  n'y  en  eut  pas  vn
qui  ne  receuft  quafi  autant  de  coups  qu'il  y  auoit  \k
d' Iroquois,  a  la  referue  de  deux  ieunes  enfans  &
d'vne  ieune  fille  qui  reuenoit  du  Seminaire  des
Vrfulines  de  Kebec,  qui  ne  furent  point  offenfez.  Ce
fut  1^  le  premier  traitement  de  ces  pauures  captifs,
qui  toufiours  animez  par  le  Pere  beniffoient  Dieu  dans
leurs  fouffrances,  &  fe  preparoient  k  quelque  chofe
de  plus  cruel.

Trois  iours  apres  ils  arriuerent  aux  bourgades
ennemies,  ou  on  fe  comporta  auec  tant  de  rage  en  leur
endroit,  qu'il  n'y  eut  aucune  partie  de  leurs  corps  qui
[18]  ne  fut  offenfee.  Ces  barbares  firent  marcher
nos  Frangois  les  premiers,  afin  qu'ils  receuffent  les
premieres  decharges.     En  fuite  on  les  fit  monter  tous


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  191

in  the  midst  of  sufferings  that,  on  the  first  day  of
his  captivity,  he  baptized  fourteen  Hurons, — one  of
whom  died  at  the  very  hour  in  his  arms,  for  he  had
been  mortally  wounded  in  the  fight.  He  confessed
the  others  who  were  already  Christians,  and  urged
them  all  to  suffer  bravely,  and  for  the  love  of  God,
the  tortures  that  would  inevitably  be  inflicted  on
them.  There  was  not  one  who  did  not  consider  him-
self happy  in  his  misfortune,  at  seeing  a  man  who
had  so  soon  inspired  all  their  hearts,  and  made  the
road  to  Heaven  so  short  and  so  easy  for  them.

The  Father  continued  always  to  perform  these
charitable  acts,  and  he  did  so  all  the  more  eagerly
because  he  knew  very  well  that  the  time  of  the  great-
est sufferings  was  approaching.  In  fact,  after  six
or  seven  days'  journey  they  met  [17]  a  band  of  three
hundred  Iroquois  warriors,  who  stripped  our  French
and  practiced  a  thousand  cruelties  on  them  and  on
the  Hurons.  They  tore  off  the  nails  of  all  of  them ;
they  cut  off  the  fingers  of  some,  and  pierced  the
hands  of  others ;  to  dry  the  blood,  they  applied  to
their  wounds  lighted  firebrands  and  torches,  and
stones  heated  red-hot  in  the  fire ;  they  sawed  their
arms  with  ropes  until  these  reached  the  bone ;  they
slashed  their  thighs  with  knives  and  swords.  Final-
ly, there  was  not  one  who  did  not  receive  almost  as
many  blows  as  there  were  Iroquois,  with  the  excep-
tion of  two  young  children  and  a  young  girl  return-
ing from  the  Seminary  of  the  Ursulines  in  Kebec,
who  were  not  injured.  This  was  the  first  treatment
received  by  those  unfortunate  captives,  who,  ever
encouraged  by  the  Father,  blessed  God  amid  their
sufferings,  and  prepared  themselves  for  still  greater
cruelties.


192  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26


nuds  fur  vn  echaffaut  prepare  qui  efloit  k  1' entree  du
Bourg :  ils  y  demeurerent  depuis  le  matin  iufques  au
foir;  &  pour  commencer  ce  ieu  de  cruaute,  vn  vieil-
lard  fameux  magicien  parmy  ces  nations  Iroquoifes,
qui  leur  a  promis  depuis  plufieurs  ann^es  qu'elles  fe
rendroiet  vidlorieufes  de  tons  leurs  ennemis,  monta
tout  le    premier   fur   ce   theatre.      C'eft,    dit-il,    les
Francois   que   i'ay   pour   ennemis,    les    Hurons    ne
meritent  pas  ma  colere,  i'ay  de  la  compaffion  pour
eux,  &  en  difant  cela  il  baftonne  rudement  nos  Fran-
9ois  les  vns  apres  les  autres:  puis  ordonne  k  vne
femme  de  monter,  &  de  couper  le  poulce  au  Pere:
car  c'eft  icy  celuy  que  ie  hais  le  plus,   adiouta-t'il.
Apres  cela  vn  tourment  fuccede  a  vn  autre,  &  toute
la  iourn^e  ne  fut  qu'vn  fpec5tacle  de  cruaute.     Le  len-
demain  il  falut  recommencer  tout  de  nouueau,  mais
i'ay  horreur  de  parcourir  tons  ces  tourmens,  quoy
qu'ils  foient  plus  horribles  a  fouffrir  que  non  pas  k
^crire.     II  [19]  fuffit  pour  nous  confoler,  de  fgauoir
que  Dieu  anima  tellement  le  Pere  d'vn  courage  tout
i  fait  heroique,  qu'au  lieu  de  fe  plaindre  dans  le  plus
fort  de  ces  barbares  cruautez,  il  eleuoit  les  yeux  au
Ciel,  d'oti  il  attendoit  fon  fecours,  offrant  luy  mefme
fans  refiftance  aucune  les  parties  de  fon  corps,  fur
lefquelles  ces  bourreaux  vouloient  d^charger  la  rage
de  leur  coeur,   &  iamais   ils  ne   purent  tirer   de    fa
bouche  aucun  cry,  comme  s'il  euft  efte  infenfible  ^
toutes  ces  fouffrances.

Enfin  on  refolut  de  ne  le  faire  pas  mourir,  on  luy
donna  la  vie  aulTi  bien  qu'aux  deux  autres  Franyois,
&  k  la  plufpart  de  tons  ces  bons  Chrelliens  Hurons.
II  n'y  eut  qu'Euftache  Ahatfiftari  qui  fut  brule  &
mis  a  mort,  &  auec  luy  vn  fien  neueu,  qui  depuis  fon


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  193

Three  days  afterward,  they  reached  the  enemies'
villages,  where  such  was  the  fury  vented  on  them
that  there  was  hardly  a  portion  of  their  bodies  that
[18]  was  not  injured.  The  barbarians  made  the
French  walk  in  front,  in  order  that  they  might  receive
the  first  blows.  Afterward  they  were  made  to  ascend,
quite  naked,  a  scaffold  erected  at  the  entrance  of  the
Village.  There  they  remained  from  morning  until
night,  and,  in  order  to  commence  this  cruel  game,
an  old  man  —  a  famous  magician  among  the  Iroquois
tribes,  who  had  for  many  years  promised  them  that
they  would  be  victorious  over  all  their  foes  —  was
the  first  to  mount  upon  the  stage.  "It  is  the
French,"  he  said,  "  whom  I  consider  my  enemies.
The  Hurons  do  not  deserve  my  anger.  I  have  com-
passion on  them;  "  and,  as  he  said  this,  he  severely
beat  our  French,  one  after  the  other,  with  a  cudgel.
Then  he  ordered  a  woman  to  come  up  and  cut  off  the
Father's  thumb.  "  For,"  added  he,  "I  hate  him
the  most."  After  that,  one  torture  succeeded  an-
other, and  the  entire  day  was  but  a  scene  of  cruelty.
On  the  following  day,  the  whole  had  to  be  commenced
anew.  But  I  have  a  horror  of  repeating  all  these  tor-
tures, although  they  are  more  horrible  to  suffer  than
to  write  of.  It  [19]  is  sufficient  for  our  consolation  to
know  that  God  animated  the  Father  with  a  courage
altogether  heroic ;  that,  instead  of  complaining  at  the
height  of  these  barbarous  torments,  he  raised  his  eyes
to  Heaven,  whence  he  expected  succor,  himself  offer-
ing, without  any  resistance,  the  parts  of  his  body  on
which  the  executioners  wished  to  vent  the  rage  of
their  hearts;  and  they  could  never  draw  from  his
lips  a  single  cry,  as  if  he  had  been  insensible  to  all
those  sufferings.


194  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.26

Baptefme  n'auoit  point  quafi  eu  d'autres  paroles  en
bouche,  mefme  dedans  fes  chanfons,  linon  qu'il  alloit
eftre  heureux  dans  le  Ciel.  C'efloit  vn  ieune  hom-
me  des  plus  accomplis  qui  fuft  icy  dans  les  Hurons,
&  qui  ayant  touliours  fait  promelle  k  fon  oncle  de
I'accompagner  dans  les  plus  [20]  forts  dangers  de  la
guerre,  ne  pouuoit  mieux  le  fuiure  que  iufques  dans
le  Ciel,  qui  ne  pouuoit  long-temps  luy  eftre  differe,
ayant  trouue  fi  proche  de  fa  mort  vn  fi  heureux
Baptefme.

En  mefme  temps  que  le  Pere  arriua  aux  bour-
gades  ennemies,  il  trouua  moyen  de  baptifer  quatre
autres  Hurons  captifs,  qui  auoient  eft6  pris  le  mefme
iour  que  luy,  mais  "k  foixante  lieues  plus  haut  dans  la
riuiere,  dont  I'vn  fut  bien  toft  brufle,  apres  auoir
receu  les  eaux  du  fainc5t  Baptefme.

Du  depuis  le  Pere  a  cultiue  courageufemet  cette
vigne  qu'il  auoit  arrofee  de  fon  fang  au  point  de  fa
naiffance,  &  qui  dans  ce  teps  d'orages  &  de  tempefles
ne  femble  pas  pouuoir  croiftre  dans  I'efprit  de  la  foy,
que  parmy  les  fouffrances  de  fa  captiuite.  C'efloit
a  ces  bons  Chrefties  vne  afflidtion  bien  fenfible  de
voir  leur  bon  Pere  dans  les  miferes  &  les  incommodi-
tez  tout  le  log  d'vn  Hyuer  tres-fafcheux,  qui  n'auoit
pour  tout  habit  qu'vn  morceau  d'vne  couuerture,  qui
^  peine  luy  couuroit  la  moitie  du  corps,  &  que  le  feu
de  fa  charite  obligeoit  au  plus  fort  des  plus  [21]
grandes  froidures  de  fe  traifner  de  bourg  en  bourg,
pour  y  vifiter  les  enfans  qu'il  auoit  enfante  en  noftre
Seigneur.  Mais  auffi  il  faut  confelfer,  nous  adioulte
lofeph  Taondechoren,  que  fes  difcours  animez  de  cette
cbarite,  au  milieu  de  toutes  ces  fouffrances  enflara-
moient  tous  les  coeurs,  &  leur  faifoit  prifer  le  bon-heur


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  i643'44  195

Finally  it  was  decided  not  to  put  him  to  death.
His  life  was  spared,  as  well  as  those  of  the  two  other
Frenchmen,  and  of  most  of  all  the  good  Huron  Chris-
tians. Eustache  Ahatsistari  alone  was  burned  and
put  to  death,  and  with  him  one  of  his  nephews,  who,
ever  since  his  Baptism,  had  hardly  ever  had  other
words  in  his  mouth,  even  while  singing,  than  that
he  would  be  happy  in  Heaven.  He  was  one  of  the
most  accomplished  young  men  among  the  Hurons ;
and,  as  he  had  always  promised  his  uncle  to  accom-
pany him  amid  the  [20]  greatest  dangers  of  war,  he
could  not  do  better  than  follow  him  to  Heaven, — a
blessing  which  could  not  long  be  deferred,  for  he
had  found,  so  near  his  death,  so  happy  a  Baptism.

At  the  same  time  when  the  Father  arrived  at  the
enemies'  villages,  he  found  means  to  baptize  four
other  Huron  captives  who  had  been  taken  on  the
same  day  as  himself,  but  sixty  leagues  higher  up  the
river, — one  of  whom  was  burned,  shortly  after
having  received  the  waters  of  holy  Baptism.

After  that,  the  Father  bravely  cultivated  this  vine,
which  he  had  watered  with  his  blood  at  its  very  birth,
and  which  in  such  a  time  of  tempests  and  of  storms
seems  not  to  be  able  to  grow  in  the  spirit  of  faith,
except  amid  the  sufferings  of  its  captivity.  It  was  a
profound  affliction  for  these  good  Christians  to  see
their  good  Father  in  such  misery  and  inconvenience
throughout  a  very  severe  Winter, —  when  his  sole
covering  consisted  of  a  piece  of  blanket,  which  barely
covered  one  half  of  his  body ;  and  when  the  ardor  of
his  charity  impelled  him,  even  in  the  worst  of  the
[21]  coldest  weather,  to  drag  himself  from  village  to
village  to  visit  the  children  whom  he  had  begotten  in
our  Lord.     "  But  it  must  be  confessed,"  adds  Joseph


196  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26

qu'ils  poffedoient  dans  leur  captiuite,  que  Dieu  leur
euft  donn6  vn  homme  qui  leur  feruoit  8c  de  pere  &  de
mere,  de  confolateur  &  de  tout,  en  vn  lieu  oii  toute
confolation  leur  manquoit,  finon  celle  que  Dieu  leur
donnoit  par  fa  bouche.  II  alloit  fouuent  les  confeffer
&  les  inftruire,  en  vn  mot  il  faifoit  I'office  d'Apoftre,
&  pouuoit  dire  apres  S.  Paul,  Verbum  Dei  non  ejl  alli-
gatum,  ideb  omnia  fu^ineo  propter  ele£los.  La  parole
de  Dieu  ne  peut  eftre  captiue,  &  ie  fouffre  tout  pour
le  falut  des  ames  predeftin^es,  que  Dieu  a  choifies  &
mifes  en  liberte  par  mon  moyen  au  milieu  de  mes
liens  &  de  leurs  chaifnes.

Nous  ne  fgauons  pas  ou  tout  cela  aboutira,  &  iuf-
qu'ou  ces  barbares  luy  permettront  de  viure,  feule-
ment  fgauons  nous  qu'il  attend  la  mort  de  iour  en
iour  &  [22]  d'heure  en  heure,  &  que  tandis  qu'il  luy
reftera  vn  brin  de  vie  il  I'employera  pour  I'auance-
ment  de  la  gloire  de  Dieu,  &  fera  vne  Miffion  plus
glorieufe  que  la  noftre  au  milieu  de  nos  plus  cruels
ennemis,  puis  qu'elle  y  eft  plus  remplie  de  croix  &
heriffee  d'efpines.  Sugit  mel  de  petra,  oleiimque  de
faxo  durijlimo.  II  n'appartient  qu'au  grand  Maiftre
que  nous  feruons  de  tirer  des  amertumes  la  douceur,
&  de  flechir  les  coeurs  plus  endurcis  que  la  pierre  &
le  diamant.

I'obmets  des  chofes  bien  confiderables  qui  font  ar-
riu6es  S.  cette  Eglife  fouffrante  dans  la  feruitude  des
Iroquois.  Ie  ne  parle  point  aulTi  de  la  mort  d'vn  de
ces  deux  Fran9ois  qui  furet  pris  captifs  auec  le  Pere,
&  lequel  fut  tue  fur  la  fin  de  I'Automne  par  la  paflion
d'vn  particulier  Iroquois;  Ie  crains  de  repeter  icy  ce
qui  en  auroit  eft6  dit  dans  la  Relation  de  Kebec,  &
me  referue  k  I'an  prochain  k  en  rapporter  dauantage.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  197

Taondechoren,  "  that  his  discourses,  animated  by
such  charity  in  the  midst  of  all  those  sufferings,  in-
flamed all  hearts,  and  made  them  prize  this  blessing
that  they  enjoyed  in  their  captivity  —  that  God  had
given  them  a  man  who  was  to  them  a  father,  a
mother,  a  consoler,  indeed  all,  in  a  place  where  all
consolation  failed  them  except  what  God  gave  them
through  his  mouth,"  He  frequently  went  to  con-
fess and  instruct  them ;  in  a  word,  he  filled  the  office
of  an  Apostle,  and  could  say  with  St.  Paul,  Ver-
bum  Dei  non  est  alligatum^  ideb  omnia  sustineo  propter
electos, — "The  word  of  God  is  not  bound,  therefore  I
endure  all  things  for  the  sake  of  the  elect  whom  God
has  chosen,  and  has  freed  through  me,  in  the  midst
of  my  bonds  and  of  their  chains."

We  know  not  where  all  this  will  end,  nor  how  long
those  barbarians  will  allow  him  to  live ;  we  know
only  that  he  expects  death  from  day  to  day,  and  [22]
from  hour  to  hour ;  and  that,  while  a  breath  of  life
remains,  he  will  employ  it  for  the  advancement  of
the  glory  of  God  and  will  fulfill  a  more  glorious  Mis-
sion than  ours,  in  the  midst  of  our  crudest  enemies,
for  it  contains  more  crosses  and  is  more  beset  with
thorns.  Sugit  mel  de  petra,  oletlmqjie  de  saxo  durissimo.
The  great  Master  whom  we  serve  can  alone  extract
sweetness  from  bitterness,  and  touch  hearts  that  are
harder  than  stone  and  adamant.

I  omit  many  important  things  that  have  happened
to  that  suffering  Church  in  its  slavery  to  the  Iro-
quois. I  say  nothing,  also,  of  the  death  of  one  of
those  two  Frenchmen  who  were  taken  prisoners  with
the  Father,  who  was  killed  at  the  end  of  the  Au-
tumn through  the  passion  of  an  individual  Iroquois.
I  fear  to  repeat  here  what  may  have  been  related  of


198  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26

n'ayant  pas  le  teps  maintenant  de  le  faire,  &  toute-
fois  y  ayat  quantite  de  chofes  qui  meritent  de  n'eftre
pas  obmifes,  puis  qu'elles  font  k  la  gloire  de  Dieu.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  199

it  in  the  Relation  of  Kebec,  and  will  wait  next  year
to  say  more  about  it,  as  I  have  no  time  now  to  do  so ;
and,  moreover,  there  are  many  things  that  cannot  be
omitted,  for  they  are  to  the  glory  of  God.


200  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.26


[23]  CHAPITRE  II.

DE    LA    MAISON   &    MISSION    DE    SAINCTE    MARIE.

QVOY  que  cette  Maifon  ne  foit  pas  la  demeure
ordinaire  des  Peres  de  noftre  Compagnie  qui
font  icy  dans  les  Hurons,  c'eft  toutefois  le
lieu  ou  ils  fe  rendent  de  fois  a  autres  apres  le  trauail
des  Miffions,  dans  lequel  autrement  on  ne  pourroit
pas  fubfifter.

Le  fecours  que  I'an  paff6  nous  demandions  de
Kebec  &  de  France,  non  feulement  nous  a  manque,
mais  de  quatorze  que  nous  eftions,  le  P.  Ifaac  logues
&  le  P.  Charles  Raimbaut  eftans  defcendus  a  Kebec,
&  le  premier  eftant  tombe  entre  les  mains  des  enne-
mis,  le  fecond  ayant  efle  emport6  d'vne  maladie  na-
turelle,  noftre  nombre  s'eft  veu  reduit  a  douze;  dont
dix  ont  trouue  leur  employ  dans  les  Miffions  Huron-
nes,  &  Algonquines,  &  ainfi  le  foin  de  la  Maifon
eft  demeure  en  partage  "k  deux  f  euls  qui  reftoient,  au  P.
Fran9ois  le  Mercier,  &  au  P.  Pierre  Chaftelain.

[24]  Cette  Maifon  n'eftant  pas  feulement  pour  rece-
uoir  les  noffcres,  mais  eftant  vn  abord  continuel  de
toutes  les  nations  voifines,  &  plus  encore  des  Chre-
ftiens  qui  y  viennent  de  toutes  parts  pour  diuerfes
neceliitez,  mefme  pour  y  mourir  auec  plus  de  repos
d'efprit,  &  dans  les  veritables  fentimens  de  la  Foy;
nous  nous  fommes  veus  obligez  d'y  faire  vn  hofpital
pour  les  malades,  vn  cemetiere  pour  les  morts,  vne
Eglife  pour  les  deuotions  du  public,  vne  retraite  pour
les  pelerins,  enfin  vn  lieu  plus  fepare,  ou  les  infideles


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  201


[23]  CHAPTER  II.

OF   THE    HOUSE   AND    MISSION    OF   SAINTE    MARIE.

ALTHOUGH  this  House  is  not  the  usual  resi-
dence of  the  Fathers  of  our  Society  who  are
here  in  the  Huron  country,  it  is  nevertheless
the  place  to  which  they  repair  from  time  to  time,
after  the  work  of  the  Missions,  in  which  otherwise
they  could  not  live.

Not  only  has  the  aid  from  Kebec  and  from  France
that  we  asked  for  last  year  failed  us,  but,  out  of  four-
teen that  we  were,  Father  Isaac  Jogues  and  Father
Charles  Raimbaut  went  down  to  Kebec ;  the  former
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemies,  and  the  latter  was
carried  off  by  a  natural  disease.  Thus  our  number
was  reduced  to  twelve,  ten  of  whom  found  employ-
ment in  the  Huron  and  Algonquin  Missions ;  and  the
care  of  this  House  fell  to  the  share  of  the  only  two
who  remained.  Father  Frangois  le  Mercier  and  Father
Pierre  Chastelain.

[24]  This  House  is  not  only  an  abode  for  ourselves,
but  it  is  also  the  continual  resort  of  all  the  neighbor-
ing tribes,  and  still  more  of  the  Christians  who  come
from  all  parts  for  various  necessities, —  even  with  the
object  of  dying  there  in  greater  peace  of  mind,  and
in  the  true  sentiments  of  the  Faith.  We  have,  there-
fore, been  compelled  to  establish  a  hospital  there  for
the  sick,  a  cemetery  for  the  dead,  a  Church  for  pub-
lic devotions,  a  retreat  for  pilgrims,  and,  finally,  a
place  apart  from  the  others,  where  the  infidels  —  who


202  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.26

qui  n'y  font  admis  que  de  iour  au  paffage,  y  puilTent
toufiours  receuoir  quelque  bon  mot  pour  leur  falut ;
il  faut  en  ces  pays  plus  qu'en  aucun  lieu  de  la  terre,
fe  rendre  tout  a  tous,  pour  les  gagner  "k  lefus-Chrift.

Cet  hofpital  eft  tellement  fepare  de  noftre  de-
meure,  que  non  feulement  les  hommes  &  enfans,
mais  les  f emmes  y  peuuent  eftre  admif es ;  Dieu  nous
ayant  donne  quelques  bons  domeftiques  capables  de
les  fecourir  en  leurs  maladies,  en  mefme  temps  que
nous  les  affiftons  pour  le  bien  de  leur  ame.  Si  ce
foing  eft  [25]  fuiet  a  des  peines,  les  fruidts  nous  en
ont  efte  fi  fenfibles,  que  nous  fouhaiterions  vn  nom-
bre  de  malades  encore  plus  grand  que  nous  n'auons
eu,  le  trauail  deut-il  croiftre  au  centuple.  Cette  Mai-
fon  eft  vrayement  la  maifon  de  Dieu,  &  non  pas  des
infirmes,  difoit  vn  fauuage  Chreftien  nomme  Thomas
Sab'enhati  du  bourg  de  S.  lofeph,  iamais  ie  n'auois
reconnu  que  la  maladie  fuft  vn  bien,  &  maintenant
ie  la  prefere  a  la  fante,  les  dons  du  Ciel  me  font
venus  auec  mon  mal,  &  c'eft  icy  que  Dieu  me  fait
connoiftre,  que  luy  feul  eft  capable  de  contenter  tous
nos  defirs.  Ie  ne  fouhaite  pas  la  vie,  qui  me  retarde
la  poffeffion  des  grands  biens  que  la  Foy  me  fait  efpe-
rer ;  ie  ne  recherche  pas  la  mort,  car  celuy  feul  qui  eft
le  Maiilre  &  de  nos  corps  &  de  nos  ames  doit  difpo-
fer  de  ce  qui  eit  a  luy :  mais  quand  il  luy  plaira  m'ap-
peller  de  ce  monde,  il  m'eft  aduis  que  ie  fuis  preft
d'obeir  a  fes  volontez.

Dieu  alloit  difpofant  ce  Chreftien  non  pas  "k  mourir
en  noftre  Maifon,  oti  il  fut  I'efpace  d'vn  mois,  mais
"k  vne  mort  moins  preueue,  qui  le  trouua  prepare  [26]
pour  le  Ciel  peu  de  iours  apres.  lis  eftoiet  allez  en-
uiron  quarate  perfonnes  cueillir  quelques  herbes  fau-
uages  dont  ils  font  vne  efpece  de  fil  ^  rets  qui  leur


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  203


are  only  admitted  by  day,  when  passing  that  way  —
can  always  hear  some  good  words  respecting  their  sal-
vation. In  these  countries,  more  than  in  any  other
spot  on  earth,  it  is  necessary  to  become  all  things  to
all  men,  in  order  to  win  them  to  Jesus  Christ.

The  hospital  is  so  distinct  from  our  dwelling  that
not  only  men  and  children,  but  even  women,  can  be
admitted  to  it.  God  has  given  us  some  good  serv-
ants who  are  able  to  attend  them  in  their  sickness,
while  we  assist  them  for  the  good  of  their  souls.  If
such  care  be  [25]  accompanied  by  trouble,  the  results
have  been  so  obvious  that  we  could  have  wished  for
a  larger  number  of  sick  than  we  have  had,  even  if
the  work  had  increased  a  hundredfold.  "  This  House
is  truly  the  house  of  God  and  not  of  the  infirm,"  said
a  Christian  savage  named  Thomas  Sawenhati,  of  the
village  of  St.  Joseph.  "  I  would  never  have  ad-
mitted that  sickness  is  a  good  thing,  but  now  I
prefer  it  to  health.  Heaven's  gifts  have  come  to  me
with  my  illness,  and  it  is  here  that  God  shows  me
that  he  alone  is  capable  of  satisfying  all  our  desires.
I  do  not  wish  for  life,  which  keeps  me  back  from  the
possession  of  the  great  gifts  that  Faith  leads  me  to
hope  for,  I  do  not  seek  death,  for  he  alone,  who  is
the  Master  of  our  bodies  and  of  our  souls,  can  dispose
of  what  belongs  to  him.  But,  when  he  is  pleased  to
call  me  from  this  world,  I  think  that  I  am  ready  to
obey  his  wishes."

God  prepared  this  Christian  not  for  death  in  our
House,  where  he  remained  for  the  space  of  a  month,
but  for  a  less  expected  death,  which  found  him  ready
[26]  for  Heaven  a  few  days  after.  About  forty  per-
sons went  to  gather  some  wild  plants,  of  which  they
make  a  kind  of  twine  for  the  nets  that  they  use  in


204  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

fert  pour  la  pefche.  La  nuidt  dans  le  plus  fort  de
leur  fommeil,  vne  vingtaine  d'Iroquois  fe  vient  letter
fur  eux,  en  maffacre  les  vns,  prend  les  autres  captifs,
quelque  nombre  s'eftant  fauue  plus  heureufemet  "k  la
fuite.  Noftre  Chreftien  tomba  des  premiers  fous  la
hache  de  I'enneniy,  II  ne  preuoyoit  pas  fa  mort,
mais  il  n'euft  pu  s'y  difpofer  plus  faintemet.  Allant
en  ce  lieu  il  ne  parloit  par  le  chemin  que  des  biens
qu'apporte  la  Foy  a  vn  coeur  qui  I'embraffe;  il  ex-
bortoit  fes  camarades  k  fe  rendre  Chreftiens,  afin
leur  difoit-il  que  nous  allions  de  compagnie  au  Ciel.
Tout  le  foir,  &  vne  partie  de  la  nuidt  accommodant
fa  chanure  il  offroit  fon  trauail  a  noftre  Seigneur  auec
tant  de  ferueur,  que  ne  pouuant  pas  retenir  cette
deuotion  en  foy  mefme,  fa  voix  faifoit  entendre  aux
infideles  les  paroles  que  fon  coeur  addreffoit  ^  Dieu.
Vn  Capitaine  de  fon  bourg  qui  concha  cette  nuic5t
pres  de  luy,  &  fe  fauna  de  ce  maffacre,  [27]  nous  a
rapporte  que  le  voyat  parler  fi  ardemment  de  Dieu,
il  luy  difoit,  Mon  amy  donne  moy  ta  Foy.  Ce  bon
Chreftien  luy  fous-rioit  fans  luy  refpondre ;  mais  en
effet  il  le  fit  heritier  de  fes  vertus,  &  de  fa  foy  incon-
tinant  apres  fa  mort;  &  du  depuis  ce  Capitaine  a
pris  fon  nom  dans  le  Baptefme,  &  s'eft  tellement
comporte  que  nous  beniffons  Dieu  de  ce  que  par  des
voyes  efloignees  de  nos  preuoiances,  il  enrichit  en
mefme  temps,  &  auec  auantage  I'Eglife  &  triom-
phante  &  militante  des  Hurons.  Nous  deuons  par-
ler en  fon  lieu  de  ce  Capitaine  nouuellement  conuerty
nomme  Thomas  Sondakb'a  des  plus  confiderables  de
tout  ce  pays.

Vne  femme  Chreftienne  du  bourg  de  la  Conception
eftant  allee  vifiter  fes  plus  proches  parens  a  douze
lieiies   de   noftre   Maifon,  s'y  fentit  attaqu6e   d'vne


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  205


fishing.^  During  the  night,  while  they  were  sound
asleep,  about  twenty  Iroquois  fell  on  them,  mas-
sacred some,  and  took  the  others  prisoners;  a  few,
more  fortunate,  escaped  by  flight.  Our  Christian
was  one  of  the  first  to  fall  under  the  hatchet  of  the
enemy.  He  had  not  foreseen  his  death,  but  he  could
not  have  prepared  himself  for  it  more  holily.  As  he
was  going  to  the  place,  he  spoke  on  the  way  of  noth-
ing but  the  benefits  that  Faith  brings  to  a  heart  which
embraces  it.  He  exhorted  all  his  companions  to  be-
come Christians,  "  So  that,"  he  said,  "  we  shall  all  go
to  Heaven  in  company."  During  the  whole  evening
and  a  portion  of  the  night,  while  he  was  preparing
his  hemp,  he  offered  his  work  to  our  Lord  with  such
fervor  that  he  could  not  contain  his  devotion  within
himself,  and  his  voice  conveyed  to  the  infidels  the
words  that  his  heart  addressed  to  God.  A  Captain
of  his  village,  who  slept  near  him  that  night,  and
who  escaped  from  the  massacre,  [27]  related  to  us
that,  when  he-  heard  him  speak  so  earnestly  of  God,
he  said  to  him,  "  My  friend,  give  me  thy  Faith."
The  good  Christian  smiled  at  him,  without  answer-
ing ;  but  in  truth  he  made  him  the  inheritor  of  his
virtues  and  of  his  faith,  immediately  after  his  death.
Since  then,  that  Captain  has  taken  his  name  in
Baptism,  and  has  behaved  in  such  a  manner  that  we
bless  God  because,  by  ways  far  remote  from  our  pre-
visions, he  enriches  at  the  same  time,  and  with  ad-
vantage, both  the  Church  triumphant  and  the  Church
militant  of  the  Hurons.  We  will  speak  in  due  time
of  this  newly-converted  Captain,  named  Thomas
Sondakwa,  one  of  the  leading  men  of  all  this  country.
A  Christian  woman,  of  the  village  of  la  Concep-
tion, went  to  visit  her  nearest  relatives  at  a  distance


206  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26

maladie  qui  ne  fembloit  pas  dangereufe.  le  ne  fgay
d'oii  luy  vint  le  prefentiment  de  fa  mort;  quoy  qu'il
en  foit  elle  fe  remit  en  chemin.  le  vous  quitte,  dit-
elle  a  fes  parens,  parce  que  ie  veux  mourir  parmy
les  fideles  &  proche  de  mes  freres  qui  portent  [28]  les
paroles  de  la  vie  eternelle.  lis  m'affifteront  k  la
mort,  &  ie  dellre  qu'ils  ayent  foin  de  ma  f epulture :
ie  refufciteray  auec  eux ;  &  ne  veux  point  auoir  de
part  auec  les  os  de  mes  parents  defuncfts,  qui  ne  me
feront  rien  dedans  I'eternit^.  Ie  n'ayme  que  la  Foy
&  ceux  qui  font  aymez  de  Dieu.  Ie  le  prie  qu'il
vous  efclaire,  &  qu'apres  ma  mort  vous  foyez  tons
plus  fages  que  vous  n'eftes  durat  ma  vie.  Si  vous
voyiez  ce  que  ie  voy !  mais  Dieu  ne  fait  pas  ^  tout  le
mode  cette  grace.  La  deffus  elle  monte  en  canot,
arriue  le  mefme  iour  au  bourg  de  la  Conception,  &
fans  s'arrefter  en  fa  propre  maifon,  fait  a  pied  trois
lieiies  qui  luy  reftent,  &  vient  fe  rendre  icy.  Dieu
feul  dreffe  les  pas  de  fes  efleus,  &  tient  leurs  cceurs
entre  fes  mains.  Cette  bonne  Chreflienne  depuis  fon
baptefme  auoit  efle  vne  des  perles  de  cette  Eglife,
mais  plus  elle  s'approchoit  de  la  mort,  plus  elle  de-
uenoit  precieufe.  Si  ie  craignois  la  mort,  nous  difoit-
elle,  ie  ne  penferois  pas  croire  vn  Paradis  qui  m'at-
tend.  II  n'y  a  rien  en  terre  qui  retienne  mon  cceur;
fi  i'ay  agree  la  mort  de  mes  enfans  dans  la  penf6e
qu'ils  alloient  [29]  dans  le  Ciel,  pourquoy  refuferois-
ie  de  mourir  deuant  ioiiyr  d' vn  femblable  bon-heur :  ie
m'aymerois  moins  qu'eux,  puifque  ie  me  voudrois
moins  de  bien.  Sa  patience  fut  en  tout  heroique
en  cette  maladie  qui  fut  longue,  &  accompagn6e
d'exceffiues  douleurs,  &  elle  fit  en  tout  paroiftre  vn
courage  digne  d'vne  ame  vrayement  Chreftienne.
A  peine  auoit-elle  aucun  mouuement  lors  que  ie  luy


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  207

of  twelve  leagues  from  our  House.  She  felt  herself
attacked  by  an  illness,  that  did  not  seem  dangerous.
I  know  not  whence  the  presentiment  of  her  death
came  to  her,  but,  at  all  events,  she  set  out  on  her
return.  "  I  leave  you,"  she  said  to  her  relatives,
"  because  I  wish  to  die  among  the  faithful,  and  near
my  brothers  who  bring  [28]  the  words  of  eternal
life.  They  will  assist  me  at  death,  and  I  desire  that
they  attend  to  my  burial.  I  shall  rise  again  with
them,  and  I  do  not  wish  my  bones  to  be  mingled
with  those  of  my  deceased  relatives,  who  will  be
nothing  to  me  in  eternity.  I  love  only  the  Faith,
and  those  who  are  beloved  of  God.  I  pray  him  to
enlighten  you,  and  that,  after  my  death,  you  may  be
wiser  than  you  are  during  my  life.  If  you  could  see
what  I  see !  But  God  does  not  grant  such  grace  to
everyone."  Thereupon  she  embarked  in  a  canoe,
reached  the  village  of  la  Conception  on  the  same  day,
and,  without  stopping  at  her  own  house,  walked
the  three  remaining  leagues  and  came  here.  God
alone  guides  the  steps  of  his  elect,  and  holds  their
hearts  in  his  hands.  This  good  Christian  had,  from
her  baptism,  been  one  of  the  pearls  of  this  Church;
but  the  nearer  death  approached,  the  more  precious
did  she  become.  "  If  I  feared  death,"  she  said  to
us,  "  I  would  not  think  of  believing  in  a  Paradise
that  awaits  me.  There  is  nothing  on  earth  that
keeps  back  my  heart.  If  I  was  resigned  to  the  death
of  my  children,  in  the  thought  that  they  went  [29]
to  Heaven,  why  should  I  refuse  to  die  when  I  am
about  to  enjoy  similar  happiness?  I  would  love
myself  less  than  I  love  them,  since  I  would  wish  less
good  for  myself. ' '  Her  patience  was  heroic  through-
out her  illness,  which  was  a  long  one  and  was  accom-


208  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26


portay  le  viatique,  mais  fa  foy  luy  donna  des  forces,
elle  fort  de  fon  lidt,  fe  iette  ^  deux  genoux  en  terre,
&  d'vne  voix  motirate:  Icy  mon  Seigneur,  s'ecria-
t'elle,  ie  croy  fermement  que  c'eft  vous  qui  venez
pour  me  vifiter,  ie  meurs  dans  cette  Foy,  &  dans  le
repetir  d'auoir  efte  vn  fi  log-temps  fans  vous  con-
noiftre,  ayez  pitie  de  moy.  Plufieurs  des  affiflans
ne  purent  contenir  leurs  larmes,  elle  feule  faifoit
paroiftre  fur  fon  vifage  la  ioye  que  reffentoit  fon
coeur,  &  les  contentements  d'vne  ame  qui  ne  refpiroit
que  le  Ciel.  Elle  tomba  le  lendemain  dans  vn  affou-
piffement  mortel,  &  n'eut  plus  ny  d'yeux,  ny  d'o-
reilles,  fmon  lors  qu'on  luy  parloit  de  prier  Dieu,  car
alors  [30]  reuenant  a  foy,  elle  prenoit  plaifir  iufque
dans  I'agonie  d'adorer  celuy  dont  elle  ioiiyt  mainte-
nant.

Elle  eftoit  groffe  de  cinq  mois,  &  c'etoit  Ik  noftre
vnique  regret  que  la  mort  d'vne  fi  fainc5te  mere  priuaft
fon  fruidt  du  bon-heur  que  nous  luy  fouhaitions.
Nous  fifmes  vn  voeu  d'vne  Neufuaine  en  I'honneur
de  faindte  Anne,  afin  qu'elle  luy  obtinfl  le  Baptefme.
II  plut  a  Dieu  exaucer  nos  prieres  au  point  mefme
que  nous  en  anions  perdu  I'efperance.  Get  enfant
vint  au  monde,  &  n'eut  de  vie  qu'enuiron  vn  demy-
quart  d'heure,  mais  toutefois  affez  pour  le  faire  viure
a  iamais  dans  le  Ciel.  Nous  le  nommames  Ignace
en  fon  baptefme,  la  mere  fuiuit  bien  tol^  ce  petit
Ange,  &  leurs  corps  s'accompagnerent  iufqu'au  tom-
beau,

Ce  fut  lors  que  nous  nous  vifmes  obligez  de  confa-
crer  vn  cemetiere  aupr6s  de  noftre  Eglife,  qui  deuoit
receuoir  pour  fes  premices  vn  fi  heureux  depoft.  L'en-
terrement  fut   folemnel,  &   fi    remply   de    deuotion,


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  209

panied    by    excessive    pain;    and    she    displayed    a
courage  worthy  of  a  truly  Christian  soul.

She  could  hardly  move  when  I  brought  her  the
viaticum,  but  her  faith  gave  her  strength.  She  rose
from  her  bed,  knelt  on  the  ground,  and,  in  a  dying
voice,  exclaimed:  "  Here,  my  Lord;  I  firmly  believe
that  it  is  you  who  come  to  visit  me.  I  die  in  that
Faith,  and  in  repentance  for  having  been  so  long
without  knowing  you.  Have  pity  on  me."  Sev-
eral of  those  who  were  present  could  not  restrain
their  tears.  She  alone  showed  on  her  countenance
the  joy  that  she  felt  in  her  heart,  and  the  content  of
a  soul  that  breathed  only  Heaven.  On  the  following
day,  she  fell  into  a  deathlike  stupor,  and  had  neither
eyes  nor  ears  except  when  they  spoke  to  her  of  pray-
ing to  God;  for  then  [30]  she  would  revive,  and,
even  in  her  death  agony,  took  pleasure  in  adoring
him  whom  she  now  enjoys.

She  was  pregnant  five  months,  and  that  was  our
sole  regret,  that  the  death  of  so  saintly  a  mother
should  deprive  her  child  of  the  happiness  that  we
hoped  for  it.  We  made  a  vow  of  a  Novena  in  honor
of  saint  Anne,  that  she  might  obtain  Baptism  for  it.
God  was  pleased  to  grant  our  prayers,  at  the  very
moment  when  we  had  lost  all  hope.  The  child  came
into  the  world,  and  lived  only  a  few  minutes,  but
still  long  enough  to  make  him  live  forever  in  Heav-
en. We  named  him  Ignace  at  his  baptism.  The
mother  soon  followed  this  little  Angel,  and  their
bodies  went  together  to  the  grave.

It  was  then  that  we  saw  ourselves  compelled  to
consecrate  a  cemetery  near  our  Church,  which  was  to
receive  as  its  first  seed  so  blessed  a  deposit.  The  buri-
al was  solemn,  and  so  replete  with  devotion  that  the


210  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.26

que  les  Chrefliens  qui  eftoient  accourus  chez  nous  au
bruit  de  cette  mort,  n'en  fortirent  que  les  larmes  [31]
aux  yeux  &  les  delirs  au  coeur  de  viure  &  de  mourir
comme  elle.

Ce  n'eft  pas  tout,  cette  bonne  femme  a  plus  fait
dans  le  Ciel  pour  fes  parens  qu'elle  n'auoit  fait  en
terre.  lis  ont  tons  defir  de  la  fuiure,  &  defia  vne
fienne  foeur,  qui  gouuerne  toute  la  famille  a  voulu
preuenir  les  autres,  &  a  receu  dans  le  baptefme  le
nom  de  la  defundte.

En  fuite  de  cela  les  Chrefliens  qui  font  morts,  tant
au  bourg  de  la  Conception  qu'au  bourg  de  Saindt
lofeph  a  cinq  lieiies  de  noftre  Maifon,  ont  defire  eftre
enterrez  chez  nous,  Et  la  deuotion  des  viuans  a  eft6
fi  feruente,  que  les  grands  froids  du  plus  fort  de
I'hyuer,  &  la  hauteur  des  neiges  n'ont  pu  les  empef-
cher  d'apporter  deffus  leurs  efpaules  vne  charge
qu'ils  ne  trouuoient  qu'aymable,  dans  la  penfee  qu'ils
rendoient  ce  dernier  deuoir  "k  des  corps  qui  vn  iour
deuoient  refufciter  auec  eux  dans  la  gloire.

De  plus  tous  les  Dimanches  de  I'efte  de  quinze  en
quinze  iours,  &  les  grandes  feftes  de  I'annee  5 'a  eft6
vne  confolation  bien  fenfible  de  voir  arriuer  en  cette
[32]  Maifon  de  dix  &  douze  lieiies  a  la  ronde  les
Chrefliens  qui  s'y  affembloient,  fouuent  pour  trois
&  quatre  iours,  au  moins  ceux  a  qui  la  force  &  I'aage
le  permet.  C'efl  alors  que  fe  voyant  tous  d'vn
efprit  ils  fe  parlent  au  coeur,  ils  s'animet  les  vns  les
autres,  ils  tiennent  des  Confeils  pour  auancer  le  Chri-
flianifme,  pour  eftablir  la  Foy  dans  leur  pays,  &  y
voir  Dieu  feul  adore.  Les  fermons  ne  leur  manquent
pas,  &  nous  tafchons  alors  de  les  mettre  dans  la  pra-
tique de  ce  qui  efl  de  plus  fainc^  en  I'Eglife:  car  ie


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  211


Christians,  who  had  flocked  to  our  place  at  the  news
of  her  death,  left  it  only  with  tears  [31]  in  their  eyes,
and  in  their  hearts  the  desire  to  live  and  to  die  like  her.

That  is  not  all.  This  good  woman  has  done  more
in  Heaven  for  her  relatives  than  she  had  done  on
earth.  They  all  wish  to  follow  her ;  and  already  one
of  her  sisters,  who  is  the  head  of  the  whole  family,
has  forestalled  the  others,  and  has  received  the  name
of  the  deceased  in  baptism.

Since  then,  the  Christians  who  have  died  not  only
at  the  village  of  la  Conception,  but  at  that  of  Saint
Joseph,  five  leagues  from  our  House,  have  wished  to
be  buried  in  our  cemetery.  And  the  devotion  of
the  living  has  been  so  fervent  that  the  intense  cold
in  the  severest  part  of  winter,  and  the  depth  of  the
snows,  have  not  prevented  them  from  carrying  on
their  shoulders  a  burden  that  they  considered  only
an  agreeable  one,  because  they  thought  that  they
were  paying  this  last  duty  to  bodies  which  would
one  day  rise  again  with  them  in  glory.

Moreover,  on  every  Sunday  in  the  summer,  from
fortnight  to  fortnight,  and  on  the  great  festivals  of
the  year,  it  was  very  consoling  to  witness  the  arrival
at  this  [32]  House  of  the  Christians  from  a  distance
of  ten  or  twelve  leagues  around,  who  assembled
there  often  for  three  or  four  days, — at  least,  those
whose  strength  and  age  permitted  of  their  so  doing.
It  is  then  that,  seeing  themselves  all  of  one  mind,
they  speak  heart  to  heart ;  they  animate  one  another ;
they  hold  Councils  for  the  advancement  of  Christian-
ity, for  the  establishment  of  Faith  in  their  country,
and  for  plans  that  God  alone  may  be  adored  therein.
Sermons  are  not  wanting,  and  we  then  endeavor  to
make  them  practice  what  is  most  holy  in  the  Church.


212  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  26

puis  dire  en  verite,  que  iamais  ie  n'ay  veu  en  France
des  ges  fans  lettres  plus  fufceptibles  des  myfteres  de
noftre  Foy.  lis  les  penetrent  auec  tant  de  viuacit^,
&  en  tirent  des  fentimens  fi  folides  des  chofes  du
Ciel,  que  cela  feul  m'eft  vne  conuidlion  d'efprit,  que
Dieu  veut  eftre  reconnu  au  milieu  de  cette  barbarie,
qu'il  y  a  fes  efleus,  &  que  deuffions  nous  y  mourir
mille  fois,  il  faut  que  I'Euangile  y  foit  prefche.  Et
vrayement  c'eil;  icy  que  nous  voyons  k  I'oeil,  que  fa
main  n'eft  pas  racourcie,  &  que  des  pierres  &  des
cailloux  il  en  tire,  felon  qu'il  luy  plaift,  des  enfans
[33]  d' Abraham,  des  ames  choifies  pour  le  Ciel.  En
vn  mot  il  n'y  a  point  de  coeur  barbare  quand  la  Foy
en  a  pris  poffelTion.

De  plufieurs  qui  fe  font  prefentez  au  Baptefme
nous  en  auons  differe  vn  grand  nombre  pour  les
^prouuer  dauantage,  &  accroiftre  par  ce  delay  I'eftime
qu'ils  doiuent  auoir  de  nos  myfteres.  Ceux  qui  nous
ont  parus  plus  choifis  &  mieux  difpofez  ^  receuoir  le
charadtere  des  enfans  de  Dieu,  font  plus  d'vne  cen-
taine.  Qui  d'vn  cofte  ayant  deuant  les  yeux  I'exem-
ple  &  la  ferueur  des  anciens  Chreftiens,  ont  beau-
coup  moins  de  peine  de  fuiure  ce  qu'ils  voyent  defia
pratique,  &  d'ailleurs  eftant  mieux  informez  des  veri-
tez  de  noftre  Foy  fe  trouuet  auffi  plus  forts  contre
les  tentatios,  qui  cy  deuat  ebranloient  les  meilleurs  cou-
rages, &  ont  caufe  la  mine  de  plufieurs,  qui  auoient
alTez  bien  comence.  Que  puis-ie  rechercher  autre
chofe  que  le  Paradis,  r^pondoit  vn  Catechumene,
maintenat  excellent  Chreftien?  Si  vous  me  promet-
ties  vne  longue  vie  ie  vous  dementirois  publique-
ment,  n'y  ayant  pas  vn  qui  ne  fgache  que  les  meil-
leurs Chreftiens  [34]  apres  auoir  perdu  tout  le  fuport


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  213

For  I  can  truly  say  that  never  in  France  have  I  seen
illiterate  people  more  susceptible  to  the  mysteries  of
our  Faith.  They  penetrate  them  with  so  much  spirit,
and  derive  from  them  such  well-grounded  opinions
of  Heavenly  things,  that  this  alone  convinces  my
mind  that  God  wills  to  be  acknowledged  in  the  midst
of  this  barbarism;  that  he  has  his  elect  here,  and
that,  even  if  we  should  have  to  die  a  thousand  times,
the  Gospel  must  be  preached  here.  And  truly  it  is
here  that  we  are  eyewitnesses  that  his  arm  is  not
shortened  and  that  from  rocks  and  stones  he  brings
forth,  as  it  pleases  him,  children  [33]  of  Abraham
and  souls  destined  for  Heaven.  In  a  word,  no  heart
continues  to  be  barbarous  when  Faith  has  taken
possession  of  it.

Of  the  many  who  have  presented  themselves  for
Baptism,  we  have  put  off  a  goodly  number,  the
better  to  try  them,  and  by  that  delay  to  increase
the  esteem  that  they  should  have  for  our  mysteries.
Those  who  have  appeared  to  us  to  be  the  choicest,
and  the  best  disposed  to  receive  the  character  of  chil-
dren of  God,  are  over  one  hundred.  These,  on  the
one  hand,  having  before  their  eyes  the  example  and
fervor  of  the  older  Christians,  have  much  less  diffi-
culty in  observing  what  they  see  already  practiced;
and  moreover,  being  better  informed  regarding  the
truths  of  our  Faith,  have  also  more  strength  to  with-
stand the  temptations  that  formerly  made  the  most
courageous  waver,  and  caused  the  ruin  of  many  who
had  begun  fairly  well.  "  What  else  should  I  seek
but  Paradise?"  replied  a  Catechumen  who  is  now  an
excellent  Christian.  "  If  you  were  to  promise  me  a
long  life,  I  would  publicly  give  you  the  lie,  for  there
is  not  one  who  does  not  know  that  the  best  Chris-


214  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26


de  leurs  enfans,  eux  mefmesont  eft6  rauis  de  la  mort,
au  plus  fort  de  leur  aage.  D'efperer  que  la  Foy
m'apporte  des  rieheffes,  ou  les  contentemens  de  cette
vie,  aurois-ie  perdu  la  memoire  de  cette  fiote  de  Chre-
ftiens,  fur  qui  fraichement  le  malheur  eft  tomb6;  les
vns  foufpirent  maintenant  fous  la  cruaute  des  fup-
plices,  &  la  fureur  des  Iroquois,  qui  n'a  pour  eux
rien  que  des  flammes ;  les  autres  ont  eft6  trop  heu-
reux  de  fe  fauuer  tout  nuds  de  ce  peril.  Non  non,
adiouftoit-il,  ie  ne  voy  rien  deffus  la  terre  qui  m'at-
tire  a  la  Foy.  C'eft  vn  feu  que  ie  ne  voy  pas,  mais
que  ie  crains,  ce  feu  qui  brufle  dans  I'enf er,  qui  fait  que
ie  fuis  refolu  d'obeir  a  Dieu:  c'eft  vn  paradis  que  ie
croy  fans  le  voir  qui  me  fait  Chreftien.

Le  foin  de  la  Miffion  qui  porte  le  nom  de  cette  Refi-
dence,  &  qui  comprend  les  bourgades  les  plus  voifmes
eft  efcheue  en  partage  au  P.  Pierre  Piiart.  Comme
le  nombre  des  Chreftiens  n'y  eft  pas  fi  confiderable,
que  nous  ayons  iuge  k  propos  de  leur  baflir  vne  Cha-
pelle  dans  leurs  bourgs,  c'eft  en  cette  Maisoqu'ils  fe
[35]  rendent  les  Feftes  &  Dimanches,  pour  y  faire
leurs  deuotions.  Vn  iour  d'hyuer  que  les  vents
eftoient  defchainez,  que  Fair  eftoit  remply  de  neiges,
d'orages  &  tempeftes,  le  Pere  reprit  vn  de  fes
Neophytes  d'eftre  venu  d'vne  lieiie  &  demie,  par  vne
baye  d'vn  lac  glace,  ou  plufieurs  y  demeurent  quel-
quefois  morts  de  froid,  ou  enfoncez  dans  les  eaux
fous  le  plancher  qui  leur  eft  infidele.  Ce  bon  homme
luy  refpondit,  Ie  ne  regrette  point  ces  pas  qui  me
feront  contez  dedans  le  Ciel,  ie  priois  Dieu  dedans
mon  chemin,  &  luy  offrois  ma  peine,  i'eftime  trop
le  faint  iour  pour  ne  pas  me  trouuer  icy.  Dieu  les
conferue  toufiours  dans  cet  efprit.


1642  -  44J  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  215

tians,  [34]  after  having  lost  all  the  support  of  their
children,  have  themselves  been  ravished  by  death  in
the  prime  of  life.  If  I  hoped  that  Faith  would  bring
me  wealth  or  content  in  this  life,  could  I  forget  that
fleet  of  Christians  upon  whom  misfortune  has  recent-
ly fallen?  Some  of  them  now  groan  under  the  cruel
torments  and  fury  of  the  Iroquois,  who  have  nothing
but  flames  for  them.  The  others  have  been  only  too
fortunate  to  save  themselves,  quite  naked,  from  such
danger.  No,  no,"  he  added,  "  I  see  nothing  on  earth
to  attract  me  to  the  Faith.  It  is  a  fire  which  I  do  not
see,  but  which  I  fear,  that  fire  that  burns  in  hell,
which  makes  me  resolve  to  obey  God ;  it  is  a  para-
dise, in  which  I  believe  without  seeing  it,  that  makes
me  a  Christian."

The  care  of  the  Mission  which  bears  the  name  of
this  Residence,  and  which  comprises  the  nearest
villages,  has  fallen  to  the  lot  of  Father  Pierre  Pijart.
As  the  number  of  Christians  is  not  so  great  as  to
make  us  consider  it  necessary  to  build  Chapels  for
them  in  their  villages,  it  is  to  this  House  that  they
[35]  come  on  Festivals  and  Sundays,  to  perform  their
devotions.  On  a  winter's  day,  when  the  winds  raged
furiously  and  the  air  was  full  of  snow,  of  storms,  and
of  tempests,  the  Father  rebuked  one  of  his  Neophytes
for  having  come  a  league  and  a  half  over  a  bay  of
a  frozen  lake,  where  sometimes  several  perish  by
the  cold,  or  are  plunged  into  the  waters  under  the
treacherous  floor.  The  good  man  replied:  "  I  do
not  regret  these  steps,  which  will  be  counted  to  me
in  Heaven.  I  prayed  to  God  on  the  way,  and  offered
him  my  hardships.  I  esteem  the  holy  day  too  high-
ly not  to  be  here."  May  God  ever  preserve  him  in
that  state  of  mind.


216  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.26


CHAPITRE  III.

DE     LA      MISSION     DE     LA     CONCEPTION   AUX   ATINNIA-

8ENTAN.

IL  femble  que  Dieu  ne  veiiille  eftablir  fon  Eglife
en  ces  contrees  barbares,  que  par  les  mefmes
voyes  qui  ont  donne  les  commencemens  a  la  Foy
dans  tout  le  refte  de  la  terre.  le  veux  dire,  qu'eftre
excellent  [36]  Chreftien,  &  eftre  en  mefme  temps
dans  les  epreuues  des  fouffrances,  ce  font  deux  chofes
infeparables.  Nous  I'auons  veu  particulierement  dans
cette  Miffion,  ou  Dieu  s'eft  plu  de  nous  rauir  les  vns
apres  les  autres  ceux  qu'il  auoit  le  plus  forme  felon
fon  coeur,  ou  les  families  les  plus  Chreftiennes  fe
voyet  depeuplees,  oil  la  pauurete  les  accueille,  &  tout
leur  manque  hormis  la  foy  qui  feule  les  fouftient,  &
qui  croift  k  mefme  mefure  que  croifTent  leurs  fouf-
frances.

le  penfe,  nous  difoit  vn  iour  a  ce  propos  vn  ieune
homme  qui  prefque  feul  fe  voit  refle  d'vne  famille
nombreufe  de  Chreltiens,  que  la  mort  ou  la  guerre
ont  efleue  a  cette  Eglife:  le  penfe,  difoit-il,  que  Dieu
veut  voir  fi  vrayement  noftre  Foy  efl  fincere,  &  fi
nous  defirons  de  luy  autre  chofe  que  le  Paradis.  II
m'a  ofle  I'vn  apres  I'autre  tout  le  fuport  de  mes  pares,
&  pour  m'efprouuer  iufqu'au  bout,  il  vient  fraichement
de  permettre  que  le  chef  de  notre  famille  I'vnique
appuy  qui  nous  reftoit,  &  tous  nos  biens  foiet  tombez
entre  les  mains  des  Iroquois.    le  fuis  k  me  plaindre


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  217


CHAPTER  III.

OF     THE     MISSION     OF     LA     CONCEPTION     AMONG     THE

ATINNIAWENTAN.

IT  seems  that  God  intends  to  establish  his  Church
in  these  barbarous  countries  solely  by  the  same
ways  which  have  given  birth  to  the  Faith
throughout  the  remainder  of  the  earth.  I  mean  to
say  that  to  be  an  excellent  [36]  Christian,  and  to  be
at  the  same  time  in  the  ordeal  of  sufferings,  are  two
inseparable  things.  We  have  observed  this  particu-
larly in  this  Mission,  where  God  has  been  pleased  to
take  away  from  us,  one  after  the  other,  those  whom
he  had  best  formed  according  to  his  own  heart;
where  the  most  Christian  families  are  decimated;
where  poverty  assails  them,  and  they  lack  everything
but  faith,  which  alone  sustains  them,  and  which
grows  in  proportion  as  their  sufferings  increase.

"  I  think,"  said  one  day  to  us,  in  regard  to  this,  a
young  man  who  was  almost  the  only  one  left  of  a
large  family  of  Christians,  whom  death  or  war  had
removed  from  this  Church,  "  I  think,"  said  he,
"  that  God  wishes  to  see  whether  our  Faith  is  truly
sincere,  and  whether  we  desire  any  other  thing  from
him  but  Paradise.  He  has  taken  away  from  me,
one  after  the  other,  all  the  assistance  of  my  relatives ;
and,  in  order  to  try  me  to  the  end,  he  has  recently
permitted  the  head  of  our  family,  the  sole  support
that  was  left  us,  and  all  our  goods,  to  fall  into  the
hands  of  the  Iroquois.     I  complain  to  him,  or  rather


218  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES         [Vol.  26

de  luy,  plutoft  ie  luy  dy  en  [37]  mon  coeur  qu'il
acheue  de  me  depoiiiller  s'il  le  veut,  qu'il  coupe,  &
qu'il  decharne  iufqu'aux  os,  &  qu'il  m'ofte  ma  femme
que  i'ayme  plus  que  moy:  il  me  femble  qu'alors  ie
le  feruirois  encore  plus  parfaitement,  car  plus  les
malheurs  m'accueillent,  les  veritez  de  noftre  Foy  me
femblent  plus  aymables,  &  les  chofes  de  Dieu  font
plus  claires  k  mes  yeux.

Charles  Tfondatfaa,  qui  I'an  paffe  s'efchapa  des
mains  de  I'ennemy,  y  ayant  perdu  tout  fon  bien,  &
de  plus  vn  lien  frere,  &  vn  fils,  qu'il  cherilToit  vnique-
ment,  parlant  vn  iour  aux  Infideles,  Non,  difoit-il,
iamais  ie  n'eftois  reuenu  fi  riche  d'aucun  voyage;
mais  Dieu  m'a  tout  rauy  en  vn  moment,  k  dellein  de
m'apprendre  que  tout  cela  n'eft  rien,  &  que  c'eft  dans
le  Ciel  que  doiuent  eftre  mes  efperances.  Vous  ne
f9auez,  leur  difoit-il,  vous  autres  Infideles  ce  qu'il
faut  dire  &  faire  pour  confoler  vn  afflige,  vos  paroles
font  fans  efifet,  &  il  n'y  a  rien  que  la  Foy  qui  fauorife
les  veritables  ioyes.  Apres  nofhre  deroute  m'eftant
rendu  aux  Trois  Riuieres  ie  m'y  vis  entoure  de  mes
freres  les  Chreftiens  Montagnais  Algonquins  [38]  &
Franfois.  Tous  me  parloient  d'vn  langage  inconnu,
&  toutefois  ils  confoloient  mon  coeur.  I'en  voyois
I'vn  qui  leuant  la  main  vers  le  Ciel  me  difoit  ce  que
ie  conceuois  fans  le  pouuoir  entendre,  &  en  ce  mefme
temps  ie  fentois  vne  main  inuifible  qui  racommodoit
mon  efprit,  qui  appaifoit  fes  troubles,  &  me  faifoit
trouuer  vn  bonheur  indicible  dedans  toutes  mes
pertes.  Noftre  Foy  ne  nous  a  pas  eft6  rauie  auec  nos
biens,  elle  eft  entiere  en  noftre  coeur,  &  noftre  con-
ftance  fera  voir  k  tous  les  Infideles  que  nous  fommes


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  219

I  tell  him  in  [37]  my  heart,  to  finish  despoiling
me, —  to  cut  and  strip  off  my  flesh  to  my  bones,  and
to  take  away  my  wife,  whom  I  love  more  than  my-
self. It  seems  to  me  that  I  should  serve  him  still
more  perfectly ;  for  the  more  do  misfortunes  fall  on
me,  the  more  do  the  truths  of  our  Faith  seem  lov-
able to  me,  and  things  pertaining  to  God  are  clearer
to  my  eyes.

Charles  Tsondatsaa,  who  last  year  escaped  from
the  hands  of  the  enemy  after  having  lost  all  his
goods,  and  also  a  brother,  and  a  son  whom  he  loved
above  all,  while  speaking  one  day  to  the  Infidels,
said,  "  No,  I  never  came  back  so  rich  from  any
journey ;  but  God  took  everything  from  me  in  one
moment,  in  order  to  teach  me  that  all  that  is  noth-
ing, and  that  my  hopes  should  be  in  Heaven.  You
do  not  know,  you  Infidels,"  he  said  to  them,  "what
should  be  said  and  done  to  console  one  who  is
afflicted.  Your  words  are  without  effect,  and  Faith
alone  promotes  true  joy.  After  our  defeat,  I  went
down  to  the  Three  Rivers,  where  I  saw  myself  sur-
rounded by  my  brothers,  the  Montagnais,  Algonquin,
[38]  and  French  Christians.  All  spoke  to  me  in  an
unknown  tongue,  and  nevertheless  they  consoled  my
heart.  I  saw  one  raise  his  hand  to  Heaven,  and  he
told  me  what  I  could  conceive  without  being  able  to
understand  him;  and  at  the  same  time  I  felt  an
invisible  hand  which  soothed  my  mind,  calmed  my
troubles,  and  made  me  find  an  ineffable  happiness  in
spite  of  all  my  losses.  Our  Faith  has  not  been  taken
away  from  us  with  our  goods ;  it  is  still  entire  in  our
hearts,  and  our  constancy  will  show  all  the  Infidels
that  we  are  so  sure  of  Paradise  that,  to  speak  truly,
we  esteem  nothing  else."


220  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.  26

fi  affeurez  du  Paradis,  qu'^  vray  dire  nous  n'eftimons
rien  que  cela.

En  effet  les  anciens  Chrefliens  de  cette  Miffion  ont
augmente  leur  ferueur  au  milieu  de  toutes  ces  efpreu-
ues ;  leur  exemple  a  plus  f eruy  que  nos  paroles,  pour
donner  vne  vraye  idee  de  la  Foy  k  ceux  qui  de  nou-
ueau  fe  font  rangez  au  Chriftianifme.  Les  Infideles
les  refpedtent  pour  la  plufpart,  &  quantite  fouhaite-
roit  d'auoir  affez  de  forces  pour  fuiure  leur  party.

Voicy  quelques  acftions  &  fentimens  [39]  de  piete
que  ie  rapporteray  fans  ordre,  afin  qu'on  puiffe  recon-
no[i]fl:re  ce  que  fait  la  grace  en  vn  coeur,  quoy  que  nay
dans  la  barbaric.  I'ay  efte  temoin  de  leur  zele  y
ayant  paffe  la  plus  grande  partie  de  I'hyuer  auec  le
Pere  Paul  Ragueneau.

Vn  Chreflien  d'enuiron  foixante  &  dix  ans  eltant
interroge  des  penfees  qu'il  falloit  auoir  dans  les
douleurs  qui  nous  affligent.  II  n'y  a  pas  long-temps,
dit-il,  que  bruflant  de  la  fievre  ie  ne  pus  prendre
aucun  repos  toute  la  nuit:  alors  ie  remerciois  Dieu,
fongeant  que  dans  le  Ciel  ces  douleurs  n'auroient
point  de  lieu;  ie  luy  offrois  mon  corps  qui  s'alloit
ainfi  confommant,  &  iugeois  qu'il  deuoit  aggreer
cette  oifrande,  m'imaginant  que  c'eftoit  luy  qui
prenoit  fon  plaifir  a  me  faire  fentir  I'ardeur  du  feu
qui  me  bruloit.

Le  mefme  fe  bruflant  vn  iour  a  deffein,  fut  aduer-
ty  par  vn  de  fes  amis  de  fe  retirer  de  la  flamme.
Non  non,  dit-il,  c'eft  ainfi  que  i'apprens  qu'il  fait
manuals  offenfer  Dieu,  fi  on  n'eft  refolu  de  brufler
dans  vn  feu  dont  iamais  on  ne  pourra  fe  retirer,  &
dont  cecy  n'eft  rien  qu'vne  ombre.

[40]  Vn    autre    quafi   de   mefme   aage  venant  aux


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  221

Indeed,  the  older  Christians  of  this  Mission  have
increased  their  fervor  in  the  midst  of  all  these  trials.
Their  example  has  served,  better  than  our  words,  to
give  a  true  idea  of  the  Faith  to  those  who  have
recently  joined  the  ranks  of  Christianity.  Most  of
the  Infidels  respect  them,  and  many  would  like  to
have  sufficient  strength  to  follow  their  example.

Here  are  some  pious  actions  and  sentiments  [39]
which  I  shall  relate  without  any  order,  that  it  may
be  seen  what  grace  can  do  in  a  heart,  although  it  be
born  in  barbarism.  I  have  been  a  witness  of  their
zeal,  for  I  passed  the  greater  part  of  the  winter  there
with  Father  Paul  Ragueneau.

A  Christian,  about  seventy  years  of  age,  was  ques-
tioned regarding  the  thoughts  that  one  should  have
amid  the  sorrows  that  afflict  us.  "  Not  long  ago,"
he  said,  "  I  burned  with  fever,  and  could  get  no  rest
all  night.  Then  I  thanked  God,  for  I  thought  that
in  Heaven  there  would  be  no  such  pains.  I  offered
him  my  body,  that  was  being  consumed ;  and  I  con-
sidered that  he  should  grant  my  request,  because  I
imagined  that  it  was  he  who  took  pleasure  in  making
me  feel  the  heat  of  the  fire  that  burned  me."

The  same  man  burned  himself  one  day,  purposely,
and  was  told  by  one  of  his  friends  to  withdraw  him-
self from  the  flames.  "  No,  no,"  said  he,  "  thus  do  I
learn  that  it  is  a  bad  thing  to  offend  God,  unless  we  are
resolved  to  burn  in  a  fire  from  which  we  can  never
withdraw,  and  of  which  this  one  is  but  a  shadow."

[40]  Another,  almost  as  old,  while  coming  to  the
public  prayers,  nearly  killed  himself  by  a  fall  that
tore  all  the  flesh  of  one  arm:  "  My  God,"  he  said,
"  I  offer  you  this  accident,  and  I  accept  it  willingly,
since  you  have  permitted  it  to  happen."     After  that,


222  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES         [Vol.  26

prieres  publiques  penfa  fe  tuer  d'vne  cheute  qui  luy
decharna  tout  vn  bras.  Mon  Dieu,  s'ecria-t'il,  ie
vous  offre  cet  accident,  &  ie  I'accepte  volontiers,  puis
qu'ainfi  vous  I'auez  permis.  Apres  cela  il  pourfuit
fon  chemin  fans  rien  dire  autre  chofe,  entre  dans  la
Chapelle,  &  iamais  n'y  fit  fes  prieres  auec  plus  grande
deuotion.  Eftant  forty  il  nous  monftre  vne  playe
qui  nous  fait  k  tous  de  I'horreur:  on  tafche  k  luy
donner  quelque  fecours,  mais  k  peine  eftoit-il  reforty
qu'il  retombe  pour  la  feconde  fois,  &  fe  bleffe  rude-
ment  a  la  tefte.  Ceil  ce  Dieu  tout  puiffant  que  tu
viens  de  prier,  qui  t'a  recompenfe  de  cette  cheute,
luy  reprochent  les  Infideles,  Oiiy  dea,  replique  ce
bon  homme,  il  n'a  que  de  Tamour  pour  moy,  &  fe
contentera  de  cette  douleur  paffagere  pour  la  punition
de  mes  fautes,  mais  il  vous  prepare  "k  vous  autres
qui  blafphemez  fans  ceffe  contre  luy  des  fupplices
eternels  qui  n'auront  que  du  defefpoir.

Vn  de  nos  Peres  prenoit  vn  iour  plaifir  k  entendre,
fans  eftre  apperceu,  vn  bon  [41]  Chreftien  malade
qui  exhortoit  fa  fille  k  embraffer  la  Foy.  Oiiy  ma
fille,  luy  difoit-il,  ne  doute  aucunement  qu'il  n'y  ait
vn  Dieu  que  les  Chreftiens  adorent.  Autre  que  luy
ne  pourroit  me  donner  la  confolation  que  ie  fens
maintenant  dans  mon  mal :  ie  fuis  aulfi  content,  que
fi  ie  me  voyois  guery,  &  ie  luy  dis  auec  plaifir  qu'il
ordonne  comme  il  luy  plaira  de  ma  vie,  parce  que  ie
reffens  en  mon  coeur  vne  affeurance  toute  certaine
que  ie  ne  perdray  rien  perdant  ce  corps.  C'eft  fans
doute  que  noftre  ame  a  quelque  chofe  qui  luy  eft
plus  precieux  que  cette  vie,  quelque  amour  que  nous
ayons  pour  elle,

Les  exhortations  de  ce  pere  ont  eu  leur  effet,  il  a


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  "  44  223

he  continued  on  his  way  without  saying  anything
else;  he  entered  the  Chapel,  and  never  did  he  say
his  prayers  with  greater  devotion.  When  he  came
out,  he  showed  us  a  wound  that  horrified  us  all.
We  tried  to  give  him  some  relief,  but  hardly  had  he
gone  out  when  he  fell  a  second  time,  and  hurt  his
head  badly.  "It  is  the  all-powerful  God,  to  whom
thou  hast  just  prayed,  who  has  rewarded  thee  by  that
fall,"  the  Infidels  said,  reproaching  him.  "Yes,
indeed,"  replied  the  good  man,  "  he  has  nothing  but
love  for  me,  and  will  be  satisfied  with  this  passing
pain  as  a  punishment  for  my  sins;  but  he  prepares
for  you,  who  blaspheme  unceasingly  against  him,
eternal  torments  that  will  be  accompanied  by  noth-
ing but  despair."

One  of  our  Fathers  took  pleasure  one  day  in  listen-
ing, without  being  perceived,  to  a  good  [41]  sick
Christian  who  was  exhorting  his  daughter  to  embrace
the  Faith.  "Yes,  my  daughter,"  he  said  to  her,
"  do  not  at  all  doubt  that  there  is  a  God  whom  the
Christians  adore.  No  other  than  he  could  give  me
the  consolation  that  I  now  feel  in  my  illness.  I  am
as  satisfied  as  if  I  were  cured ;  and  I  tell  him  with
pleasure  to  dispose  of  my  life  as  he  pleases,  because
I  feel  quite  sure  in  my  heart  that  I  shall  lose  nothing
by  losing  this  body.  It  is  undoubtedly  because  our
souls  possess  something  more  precious  than  this  life,
whatever  may  be  our  love  for  it."

The  exhortations  of  the  father  had  their  effect.
He  first  won  his  daughter  to  God,  and  afterward  one
of  his  sons,  who  was  still  older.  Finally,  the  mother
wished  to  follow  her  children ;  and  they  all  live
together  in  a  sweet  state  of  innocence  that  would  be
delightful  in  the  midst  of  France.


224  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26

gagne  premierement  fa  fille  h.  Dieu,  puis  vn  fien  fils
encore  plus  aage;  enfin  la  mere  a  voulu  fuiure  fes
enfans,  &  viuent  tous  dans  vne  douceur  d 'innocence
qui  fe  rendroit  aimable  au  milieu  de  la  France.

A  peine  y  auoit-il  trois  iours  qu'vne  famille  entiere
auoit  pris  refolution  d'embraffer  la  Foy,  que  la  mai-
ftreffe  de  la  cabane  trauaillant  en  plein  midy  en  fon
[42]  champ  auec  vne  de  fes  nieces,  deux  Iroquois
cachez  1^  proche  dans  les  bois  fortirent  de  leurs  em-
bufches,  «&  k  la  veue  de  tout  le  monde  fe  ietterent  fur
elles  a  coups  de  hache,  leur  enleuent  la  cheuelure  &
la  peau  de  la  tefte,  &  ayans  fait  leur  coup  fe  retirent
a  la  fuite  auec  tant  de  viteffe  que  iamais  on  ne  put
les  atteindre.  On  vient  de  trois  lieues  nous  querir
en  hafte ;  nous  y  courons  de  mefme  pas  aff ez  ^  temps
pour  mettre  ces  pauures  femmes  maffacr6es  dans  le
chemin  du  Paradis.  Ce  font  1&,,  difoit  I'vne,  les  pen-
fees  que  i'auois  dans  mon  champ,  ie  defirois  d'aller
au  Ciel,  &  Dieu  m'a  prife  au  mot:  ie  voulois  viure,
&  maintenant  ie  veux  mourir  Chreftienne,  ne  me
refufez  pas  le  Baptefme.  Celle-cy  en  a  rechappe,  &
du  depuis  s'eft  toufiours  comport6e  tres-Chreftienne-
ment,  I'autre  fut  bien  toft  dans  le  Ciel.

Vne  ieune  femme  Neophyte  fentat  en  fes  premi-
eres couches  de  cruelles  tranch6es  n'auoit  recours
qu'a  Dieu,  fes  douleurs  redoublant  elle  redouble  fes
prieres,  &  fe  deliure  enfin  tres-heureufement  de  fon
frui(5t  a  mefme  temps  qu'elle  acheue  [43]  fon  chape-
let.  Apres  fix  iours  elle  fe  fent  reueill^e  fubitement
au  milieu  de  la  nuit,  &  trouue  fon  enfant  qui  tiroit  h.
la  fin,  defia  faifi  d'vne  froideur  mortelle:  fans  fonger
k  aucun  remede,  Helas!  il  meurt  fans  eflre  baptife,
s'ecrie  cette  pauure  mere  defolee,  il  n'ira  pas  dedans


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  225

Hardly  three  days  after,  an  entire  family  had
taken  the  resolution  to  embrace  the  Faith.  While
the  mistress  of  the  cabin  was  working  in  broad
daylight  in  her  [42]  field,  with  one  of  her  nieces,
two  Iroquois,  who  were  hidden  close  by  in  the
woods,  rushed  from  their  ambush;  in  the  sight  of
every  one  these  threw  themselves  upon  them  with
their  hatchets,  tore  off  their  hair  and  their  scalps,
and,  after  committing  the  deed,  retreated  so  rapidly
that  it  was  impossible  to  overtake  them.  They
came  from  a  distance  of  three  leagues  to  summon  us
in  haste.  We  hurried  thither,  and  were  in  time
to  place  these  poor  butchered  women  on  the  road  to
Paradise.  "These,"  said  one,  "are  the  thoughts
that  I  had  while  in  my  field.  I  wished  to  go  to
Heaven,  and  God  took  me  at  my  word.  I  wished  to
live,  and  now  I  wish  to  die,  a  Christian.  Do  not
refuse  me  Baptism."  This  one  recovered,  and  ever
since  then  has  behaved  in  a  most  Christian  manner ;
the  other  was  soon  in  Heaven.

A  young  woman,  a  Neophyte,  who  experienced
cruel  agony  in  her  first  confinement,  had  recourse
only  to  God.  As  her  pains  increased,  she  redoubled
her  prayers,  and  finally  was  delivered  very  happily
of  her  child,  at  the  same  time  that  she  finished  [43]
her  rosary.  After  six  days,  she  suddenly  awoke  in
the  middle  of  the  night,  and  found  that  her  child
was  about  to  breathe  his  last,  and  was  already  seized
with  a  deathlike  chill,  while  she  could  think  of  no
remedy.  "Alas!"  exclaimed  the  poor  disconsolate
mother,  "if  he  die  without  being  baptized,  he  will
not  go  to  Heaven."  We  were  notified  at  once.  No
sooner  had  this  little  innocent  been  bathed  in  the
sacred  waters  of  Baptism,   than  he  received  at  the


226  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.26

le  Ciel.  On  vient  nous  aduertir  fur  I'heure,  ce  petit
innocent  ne  fut  pas  pluftoll;  ondoye  dans  les  eaux
faeries  du  Baptefme,  qu'il  recent  au  mefme  moment,
&  la  vie  du  corps  &  de  I'ame.

Vn  autre  enfant  dans  le  berceau,  dont  le  pere  &  la
mere  eftoient  morts  excellens  Chreftiens,  deuant
tomber  dans  les  foins  d'vne  fienne  tante  infidele,  fut
porte  k  dix  lieues  de  nous  ou  cette  tante  demeuroit,
&  ou  bien  toft  on  le  vit  atteint  a  la  mort.  Les  Infi-
deles  prelTent  fortement  cette  femme  d'auoir  recours
k  des  remedes  diaboliques.  Non,  leur  dit-elle,  c'eft
vn  enfant  deltine  pour  le  Ciel,  &  le  voyant  a  I'ago-
nie,  Dieu  des  Chreftiens,  s'ecria-t'elle,  ie  ne  vous
connois  pas,  mais  ie  vous  offre  cette  petite  baptifee,
puis  qu'on  dit  qu'elle  eft  voftre  fille;  fi  ceux  qui
enfeignent  le  chemin  du  Ciel  eftoiet  [44]  icy,  ils  luy
diroient  quelle  route  doit  tenir  fon  ame  a  la  fortie  du
corps;  vous  qui  eftes  fon  pere  conduifez-la  vous
mefme,  crainte  qu'elle  ne  s'egare:  pour  moy  i'en-
terreray  fon  corps  en  vn  lieu  fepare,  &  il  n'aura  rien
de  commun  auec  les  Infideles.  Cette  petite  ame
innocente  eft  maintenant  dedans  le  Ciel,  &  celle  qui
luy  auoit  rendu  ces  charitez  fans  quafi  les  connoiftre,
nous  vint  trouuer  de  fon  pais  par  deux  ou  trois  diuer-
fes  fois,  nous  fit  entendre  fon  defir,  &  enfin  recent  le
Baptefme  auec  tant  de  confolation,  qu'alors  fon  coeur
fe  repandant  par  fes  levres,  Mon  Dieu,  s'ecria-t'elle,
feroit-il  polTible  que  iamais  ie  m'oubliaffe  de  ce  iour,
&  des  faintes  promeffes  que  ie  viens  maintenant  de
vous  faire,  rien  ne  vous  eft  cache,  &  vous  voyez  dans
le  fond  de  mon  ame  que  pluftoft  ie  foulerois  aux
pieds  mille  coliers  de  pourcelaine,  que  de  commettre
vn  peche  contre  vous.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  227

same  moment  both  the  life  of  the  body  and  that  of
the  soul.

Another  child  in  the  cradle,  whose  father  and
mother  had  died  excellent  Christians,  was  about  to
come  under  the  care  of  an  aunt  who  was  an  infidel.
She  was  carried  a  distance  of  ten  leagues  from  us,  to
the  place  where  this  aunt  resided,  and  where  she
soon  became  sick  unto  death.  The  Infidels  urged
the  woman  to  have  recourse  to  diabolical  remedies.
"  No,"  she  said  to  them,  "  she  is  a  child  destined
for  Heaven;"  and  when  she  saw  her  in  the  agony  of
death,  she  cried  out:  "  God  of  the  Christians,  I  do
not  know  you;  but  I  offer  you  this  little  baptized
one,  because  they  say  that  she  is  your  daughter.
If  those  who  teach  the  road  to  Heaven  were  [44]
here,  they  would  tell  her  what  road  her  soul  must
follow  when  it  quits  the  body.  You,  who  are  her
father,  lead  her  yourself,  for  fear  that  she  may  stray.
For  my  part,  I  shall  bury  her  body  in  a  separate
place,  and  it  will  have  nothing  in  common  with
the  Infidels."  This  little  innocent  soul  is  now  in
Heaven,  and  she  who  had  manifested  such  charity  on
her  behalf,  almost  without  knowing  it,  came  to  us
from  her  country  on  two  or  three  different  occasions,
told  us  her  desire,  and  finally  received  Baptism,  with
so  much  consolation  that  her  heart  spoke  out  of  her
lips.  "  My  God,  "she  exclaimed,  "  could  it  be  possi-
ble that  I  should  ever  forget  this  day  and  the  holy
promises  that  I  have  just  made  to  you.  Nothing  is
hidden  from  you,  and  you  see  in  the  depths  of
my  soul  that  I  would  rather  trample  under  foot  a
thousand  porcelain  collars,  than  commit  a  single  sin
against  you. ' '

Some  days  after  his  Baptism,  a  Christian  met  an


228  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26

Vn  Chreftien  quelques  iours  apres  fon  Baptefme
fit  rencontre  d'vne  femme  infidele,  qui  le  tirant  dou-
cement  par  la  robe  luy  dit,  le  fuis  a  toy.  Tu  me
prens  pour  vn  autre,  luy  repliqua-t'il,  tu  es  au  diable,
[45]  ie  n'ay  point  de  part  auec  luy.

Vn  ieune  Payen  ayant  eu  fouuent  le  refus  d'vne
fille  Chreftienne,  epia  roccafion  de  la  trouuer  feule  k
I'ecart  lors  qu'elle  alloit  querir  du  bois  dans  la  foreft
voifine.  Pas  vn  maintenat  ne  te  void,  luy  dit-il,
pourquoy  rougirois-tu  de  pecher  auec  moy?  Maffa-
cre-moy  au  milieu  de  ces  bois,  luy  repond  la  fille
Chreftienne,  pas  vn  maintenant  ne  te  void,  pourquoy
aurois-tu  horreur  de  ton  crime?  pour  moy  ie  fouffri-
ray  plus  volontiers  la  mort,  que  de  commettre  le
peche  dont  tu  me  folicite.  Ce  fripon  n'y  eft  pas
retourne,  Maudite  race  de  Chreftiens,  difoit-il,  en  fe
retirant,  ils  font  par  tout  inexorables.  Nous  ne  f9a-
uons  pas  en  plufieurs  rencontres  femblables  la  fidelite
de  nos  Chreftiens,  qui  fouuent  fe  contentent  que  le
Ciel  feul  foit  leur  temoin,  fi  les  Infideles  mefme
n'eftoient  les  premiers  a  publier  ces  adtions  de  vertu:
d'aucuns  en  s'en  mocquant  comme  d'vne  fimplicite
trop  grande,  de  perdre  (difent-ils)  les  plaifirs  d'vn
aage  qui  iamais  ne  peut  retourner,  pour  vne  crainte
imaginaire  d'vn  feu  que  iamais  ils  n'ont  veu,  d'autres
en  font  touchez  [46]  iufqu'au  coeur,  &  n'en  parlent
qu'auec  refpedt,  iugeans  de  1^  que  la  puret6  de  la
Foy  a  des  plaifirs  qui  furpaffent  les  fens,  &  qui
releuent  vne  ame  au  deffus  du  commun.

Ce  propos  me  fait  refouuenir  des  larmes  que  ver-
foit  il  y  a  quelques  iours  vn  ieune  homme  Chreftien,
pleurant  le  peche  d'vne  fienne  tante  qui  s'oublioit  de
fon  falut:  Vous  ne  f9auez,  nous  difoit-il,  quel  tour-


1642-44J  RELATION  OF  1643-44  229

infidel  woman,  who  pulled  him  gently  by  his  robe,
and  said  to  him:  "  I  am  thine."  "  Thou  takest  me
for  another,"  he  replied.  "Thou  belongest  to  the
devil;   [45]  I  have  nothing-  to  do  with  him."

A  young  Pagan,  who  had  frequently  been  refused
by  a  Christian  girl,  sought  for  an  opportunity  of
meeting  her  alone,  when  she  went  for  wood  in  the
adjacent  forest,  "  No  one  sees  thee,"  he  said  to  her,
"  why  shouldst  thou  be  ashamed  to  sin  with  me?"
"  Kill  me  in  the  midst  of  these  woods,"  replied  the
Christian  maiden.  "  No  one  sees  thee  now.  Why
shouldst  thou  have  a  horror  of  thy  crime?  For
my  part,  I  would  more  willingly  suffer  death  than
commit  the  sin  to  which  thou  solicitest  me."  The
scoundrel  did  not  repeat  his  request;  "  Cursed  race
of  Christians!"  he  said  as  he  withdrew;  "  they  are
everywhere  inexorable."  We  would  never  learn  of
the  fidelity  displayed  on  many  similar  occasions  by
our  Christians,  who  are  often  content  that  Heaven
alone  should  be  their  witness,  were  it  not  that  the
Infidels  themselves  are  the  first  to  proclaim  these
virtuous  deeds.  Some  do  this  by  laughing  at  what
they  consider  excessive  simplicity  in  losing  (so  they
say)  the  pleasures  of  an  age  that  can  never  return,
through  fear  of  an  imaginary  fire  that  they  have
never  seen ;  others  are  touched  [46]  to  the  heart  by
it,  and  speak  of  it  only  with  respect,  judging  thereby
that  the  purity  of  the  Faith  has  pleasures  that
surpass  those  of  the  senses  and  raise  the  soul  above
the  common.

This  reminds  me  of  the  tears  shed  some  days  since
by  a  Christian  young  man,  who  wept  for  the  sin  of
an  aunt  who  was  forgetful  of  her  salvation,  "  You
do  not  know,"  he  said  to  us,  "  what  a  torment  it  is


230  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.26

ment  il  y  a  d'auoir  la  Foy,  &  s'abandonner  au  peche,
vous  qui  auez  toufiours  vefcu  dans  1' innocence.  le
f9ay  ce  qui  en  eft  ayant  demeure  quelques  iours  de-
puis  mon  Baptefme,  dans  ces  debauches  de  ieuneffe,
ce  m'eftoit  vn  fuppli[c]e,  mon  efprit  n'eftoit  rien  que
trouble,  &  ces  plaifirs  de  beftes  n'eftoient  plus  tels
pour  moy  qu'ils  m'auoiet  paru  autrefois  auant  que
i'eulTe  les  connoilTances  de  la  Foy.  I'y  setois  plus
d'amertume  que  de  douceur,  mon  coeur  n'auoit  point
de  repos,  &  au  milieu  de  ces  delices,  il  n'y  trouuoit
que  des  degouts.  C'eft  fans  doute  que  Dieu  eft  bon
mefme  aux  mefchans,  qu'il  a  piti6  de  ceux  qui  ont
efte  k  luy,  &  ne  veut  pas  qu'apres  auoir  goufl6  les
douceurs,  [47]  qu'il  y  a  dans  la  Foy,  ils  trouuent
quelque  paix  ou  contentement  hors  de  luy ;  Helas,
adiouftoit-il,  fon  peche  luy  fert  de  tourment,  &  luy
donne  plus  de  trifteffe  que  de  ioye !  Parlous  "k  Dieu
plutoft  qu'k  elle,  car  toutes  les  paroles  du  monde  ne
peuuent  entrer  au  fond  d'vne  ame  qui  eft  dedans  ces
troubles.  Elle  voit  fon  malheur,  elle  fent  fa  mifere
non  pas  alTez  pour  en  fortir,  mais  alTez  pour  iamais
ne  iouyr  d'aucun  bien  ny  en  ce  monde,  ny  en
r autre,  fi  Dieu  luy  mefme  ne  fait  le  coup  de  fon  falut.
Vne  Chreftienne  ayant  appris  qu'vn  fien  fils,  toute
fa  ioye  &  le  fupport  de  fa  vieillefle,  eftoit  tombe
entre  les  mains  de  I'ennemy,  ne  put  pas  contenir  fes
larmes:  mais  reuenant  incontinant  k  foy,  apres  auoir
rendu  &.  la  nature  ce  que  le  coeur  tranfperf6  d'vne
mere  ne  pouuoit  pas  luy  donner,  Helas  mon  Dieu,
s'efcria-t'elle,  pourquoy  n'ay-ie  pas  mon  recours  k
voflre  bont6,  n'eft-ce  pas  maintenant  que  ie  dois  vous
tenir  parole,  &  garder  dans  I'afflidtion  ce  que  ie  vous
ay  promis  dans  la  profperite?  continuez  fi  vous  vou-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  231

to  have  the  Faith,  and  to  abandon  oneself  to  sin,  you
who  have  always  lived  in  innocence.  I  know  what
it  is,  for  I  lived,  for  some  days  after  my  Baptism,
in  the  debauchery  of  youth.  It  was  a  torture  to  me;
my  mind  was  greatly  troubled  by  it,  and  those  bestial
pleasures  were  no  longer  for  me  such  as  they  had
formerly  seemed,  before  I  had  any  knowledge  of  the
Faith.  I  found  in  them  more  bitterness  than  sweet-
ness ;  my  heart  had  no  rest,  and  in  the  midst  of  those
pleasures  it  experienced  nothing  but  disgust."  It  is,
beyond  a  doubt,  because  God  is  good  even  to  sinners,
that  he  has  pity  on  those  who  belong  to  him,  and
does  not  wish  that  after  having  tasted  the  joys  [47]
of  Faith,  they  should  find  any  peace  or  content
outside  of  it.  "  Alas  I  "  he  added,  "  her  sin  is  her
torment,  and  brings  her  more  sorrow  than  joy.  Let
us  speak  to  God  rather  than  to  her,  for  all  the  words
in  the  world  cannot  enter  into  a  soul  that  is  in  such
troubles.  She  sees  her  misfortune;  she  feels  her
misery, —  not  enough  to  extricate  herself  from  it,
but  enough  to  prevent  her  from  ever  enjoying  any
good,  either  in  this  world  or  in  the  next,  if  God
himself  do  not  work  her  salvation."

A  Christian  woman,  who  learned  that  one  of  her
sons,  the  sole  joy  and  support  of  her  old  age,  had
fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  could  not  restrain
her  tears.  But  she  at  once  recovered  herself  after
rendering  to  nature  what  the  transfixed  heart  of  a
mother  could  not  forbear  giving.  "Alas!  my  God,"
she  exclaimed,  "  why  have  I  not  recourse  to  your
goodness?  Is  not  this  the  time  when  I  should  keep
my  word  to  you,  and  perform  in  affliction  what  I
promised  you  in  prosperity?  Continue  to  try  me,  if
you  will,  provided  that,  at  [48]  the  same  time,  you


232  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^ISUITES         [Vol.26

lez  k  m'efprouuer,  pourueu  qu'en  [48]  mefme  temps
voTis  augmentiez  ma  foy:  quand  bien  vous  m'auriez
rendue  la  plus  miferable  du  mode,  i'efpereray
toufiours  en  vous.  Paffons  ^  quelques  vns  plus  en
particulier.

lofeph  Taondechoren  qui  fraichement  s'eft  efchape
des  mains  des  Iroquois,  me  fourniroit  la  matiere
d'vne  Relation  toute  entiere,  fi  i'auois  le  loifir  de
m'arrefler  k  ce  qui  s'eft  paff^  en  fa  perfonne,  &  aux
graces  que  Dieu  luy  a  fait  tout  le  temps  de  fa  capti-
uit6,  mais  eftant  trop  preffe,  ie  me  contenteray  de
faire  voir  icy  comme  Dieu  I'auoit  faindtement  difpofe
auant  fon  depart  des  Huros,  aux  malheurs  qui  depuis
luy  font  arriuez,  &  I'eftat  dans  lequel  nous  I'auons
veu  'k  fon  retour.  Ce  braue  Chreftien  auat  que  de
nous  quitter  pour  defcendre  a  Kebec,  le  mefme  iour
qu'il  s'embarqua,  fit  k  tons  les  Chreftiens  prefens  vne
harangue  qui  merite  de  trouuer  icy  quelque  lieu.
Mes  freres,  leur  dit-il,  me  voicy  fur  mon  depart,  &
pent  eflre  iamais  n'aurons  nous  icy  bas  en  terre  la
conf olation  de  nous  voir :  cela  fait  que  ie  defire  vous
parler,  comme  fi  ie  me  voyois  [49]  fur  le  point  de
mourir,  dans  les  plus  veritables  fentiments  de  mon
coeur.  Quelque  malheur  qui  nous  arriue,  fouuenons
nous  que  nous  fommes  Chreftiens,  que  I'obied:  de
nos  efperaces  eft  dans  le  Ciel,  que  la  terre  n'a  rien
qui  foit  digne  de  nous,  &  capable  de  contenter  vne
ame  qui  s'eft  donnee  a  Dieu.  L'eternite  nous  don-
nera  tout  le  loifir  de  goufter  cette  verite,  c'eft  affez
maintenant  que  la  Foy  nous  I'enfeigne,  quand  bien
les  fentimens  que  Dieu  nous  donne  ne  nous  en
feroient  pas  des  preuues.  Mes  freres  ne  perdons
iamais  cette  grace  que  vous  &  moy  auons  receu  dans


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  233

increase  my  faith.  Even  if  you  should  make  me  the
most  miserable  being  in  the  world,  I  would  always
hope  in  you."  Let  us  pass  on  to  some  others,  in
more  detail.

Joseph  Taondechoren,  who  has  recently  escaped
from  the  Iroquois,  would  furnish  me  with  enough
matter  for  an  entire  Relation,  had  I  leisure  to  con-
sider here  what  happened  to  him  personally,  and  the
graces  that  God  gave  him  throughout  the  time  of  his
captivity.  But,  as  I  am  too  much  pressed  for  time,
I  will  content  myself  with  showing  here  in  how  holy
a  manner  God  had  prepared  him,  before  his  departure
from  the  Huron  country,  for  the  misfortunes  that
have  since  happened  to  him,  and  the  condition  in
which  we  saw  him  on  his  return.  This  brave  Chris-
tian, before  leaving  us  to  go  down  to  Kebec,  on  the
same  day  that  he  embarked,  delivered  a  harangue
to  all  the  Christians  present  which  deserves  to  find
place  here.  "  My  brothers,"  he  said  to  them,  "  here
I  am,  about  to  depart;  and  perhaps  we  shall  never
have  the  consolation  of  seeing  one  another  again
here  on  earth.  This  makes  me  feel  a  desire  to  speak
to  you,  as  if  I  saw  myself  [49]  about  to  die,  with  the
truest  sentiments  of  my  heart.  Whatever  misfortune
may  befall  us,  let  us  remember  that  we  are  Chris-
tians; that  the  object  of  our  hopes  is  in  Heaven;
that  earth  contains  nothing  worthy  of  us,  and  noth-
ing capable  of  satisfying  a  soul  that  has  given  itself
to  God.  Eternity  will  give  us  every  leisure  to
experience  that  truth.  It  is  sufficient,  for  the  pres-
ent, that  Faith  teaches  it  to  us,  even  if  the  sentiments
that  God  gives  us  were  not  proofs  of  it.  My  brothers,
let  us  never  lose  that  grace  that  you  and  I  have
received  in  the  sacred  waters  of  Baptism.     It  is  the


234  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.26

les  eaux  facrees  du  Baptefme,  c'eft  le  gage  de  noftre
falut,  la  beaiite  de  noftre  ame,  qui  en  a  efface  les
laideurs  du  peclie,  qui  en  a  chaffe  les  demons,  &  nous
a  fait  enfans  de  Dieu.  Que  ce  foit  la  noftre  threfor,
que  ce  foient  nos  richeffes,  &  fi  le  diable  &  tout
I'enfer  s'efforce  de  nous  les  rauir,  aymons  plus  noil;re
bien,  qu'ils  ne  fouhaitent  noftre  mal;  foyons  iour  &
nui(5t  fur  nos  gardes,  inuoquons  le  fecours  du  Ciel,
I'affiftance  des  Anges,  ayons  recours  a  la  priere  au-
tant  de  fois  [50]  que  nous  fentirons  noftre  coeur  atta-
qu6.  En  vn  mot  eftimons  le  don  de  la  Foy,  aymons
vn  Dieu  qui  nous  a  ayme  le  premier,  &  que  tout
I'effort  de  nos  haynes  ne  foit  rien  que  pour  le  peche.
Refoluos  nous  &  k  la  mort  &  aux  douleurs,  de  cette
vie,  offrons  d6s  maintenant  le  tout  a  Dieu,  afin  qu'il
en  tire  fa  gloire,  &  que  pour  vn  moment  qui  nous
refte  h.  fouffrir  en  terre,  nous  en  receuions  dans  le
Ciel  vne  recompenfe  eternelle.  Apres  ce  difcours
que  fa  foy  &  fon  zele  enflammoit,  &  qu 'autre  que  le
S.  Ef prit  ne  luy  auoit  pu  fuggerer ;  Mes  freres,  leur
dit-il,  mettons  nous  k  genoux,  offrons  nous  tous  h.
Dieu  &  pour  la  vie  &  pour  la  mort,  fuiuez  tous  mes
paroles,  afin  que  n'ayans  tous  qu'vn  coeur  nous  n' ay-
ons auffi  qu'vne  langue  &  la  mefme  priere  en  bouche.
Lk  deffus  il  s'adreffe  a  Dieu,  mais  auec  des  fentimes
de  deuotion  fi  tendres,  que  le  coeur  les  goufte  mieux,
que  le  papier  ne  les  exprime.

Ce  furent  Ik  fes  dernieres  paroles  lors  qu'il  fe  fepa-
ra  d'auec  nous  il  y  a  pres  d'vn  an;  &  les  graces  de
Dieu  que  nous  voyons  en  luy  nous  font  maintenant
reconnoiftre  [51]  qu'en  effet  les  tourmens,  la  capti-
uite,  &  la  mort  n'ont  rien  qui  puiffe  nuire  k  vn  coeur
vrayement  Chreftien.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  235

pledge  of  our  salvation ;  the  beauty  of  our  souls,
which  has  removed  from  them  the  deformities  of  sin,
which  has  driven  from  them  the  demons,  and  has
made  us  children  of  God.  Let  that  be  our  treasure,
that  our  wealth ;  and  if  the  devil  and  all  hell  should
endeavor  to  take  them  away  from  us,  let  us  love  our
welfare  more  than  they  wish  us  evil.  Let  us  be  on
our  guard  night  and  day ;  let  us  pray  for  succor  from
Heaven,  and  for  aid  from  the  Angels.  Let  us  have
recourse  to  prayer  whenever  [50]  we  feel  our  hearts
assailed.  In  a  word,  let  us  esteem  the  gift  of  Faith ;
let  us  love  the  God  who  has  first  loved  us,  and  let  all
our  hatred  be  directed  against  sin  alone.  Let  us  make
up  our  minds  to  die  and  to  endure  the  pain  and  sor-
row of  this  life.  Let  us  even  now  offer  the  whole  to
God,  so  that  he  may  turn  it  to  his  glory;  and,  in
exchange  for  a  moment  that  remains  to  us  to  suffer
on  earth,  we  may  receive  an  eternal  reward  in
Heaven."  After  this  discourse,  which  was  animated
by  his  faith  and  zeal,  and  with  which  none  other
than  the  Holy  Ghost  could  have  inspired  him,  he
said:  "  My  brothers,  let  us  kneel  and  all  offer  our-
selves to  God  both  for  life  and  for  death ;  let  all  of
you  follow  my  words,  so  that,  having  but  one  heart,
we  may  also  have  but  one  tongue,  and  the  same
prayer  in  our  mouths."  Thereupon,  he  addressed
himself  to  God,  but  with  such  tender  sentiments  of
devotion  that  the  heart  felt  them  more  than  can  be
expressed  on  paper.

These  were  his  last  words  when  he  left  us,  about
a  year  ago;  and  God's  graces  that  we  see  in  him
now  show  us  [51]  that  torture,  captivity,  and  death
cannot  harm  a  truly  Christian  heart.

While  he  was  returning  here  to  the  Huron  coun-


236  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26


Remontant  icy  aux  Hurons,  Dieu  de  nouueau  I'a
voulu  efprouuer.  lis  eftoient  cent  de  compagnie,
&  ayans  fait  enuiron  cent  lieiies  de  chemin,  ils  fe
croyoient  hors  les  dangers  des  Iroquois ;  lors  que  cet
ennemy  qui  eftoit  aux  embufches  les  furprend  au
paffage  en  vn  lieu  ou  la  riuiere  tombant  en  precipice
d'vne  hauteur  efpouuentable  oblige  nos  Hurons  de
mettre  pied  ^  terre,  &  porter  leurs  canots  &  leurs
meubles  fur  leurs  efpaules,  pour  reprendre  plus  haut
le  lidt  de  la  riuiere  oil  elle  fe  retrouue  plus  paifible
en  fon  cours.  Dans  I'embaras  de  ce  paffage  les  Hu-
rons furent  furpris  a  Timpourueu,  &  attaquez  fi  viue-
ment,  que  les  premiers  ayant  efte  ou  tuez  fur  la
place,  ou  pris  captifs  de  I'ennemy,  les  derniers  per-
dirent  courage,  &  fe  fauuerent  a  la  fuite,  laiffans  en
proye  toutes  leurs  marchandif es  qui  defia  leur  auoient
couft6  la  mort  ou  la  captiuite  d'vne  vingtaine  de  per-
fonnes  qu'ils  auoient  perdue  en  vne  autre  rencontre
il  y  auoit  fort  pen  de  iours.

[52]  En  ce  combat  ce  bon  Chreftien  eut  vne  efpaule
tranfperc^e  de  part  en  part  d'vne  balle  de  moufquet,
&  comme  en  fuite  il  fut  abandonn6  fans  aucune
affiftance  de  deux  ou  trois  iours,  quafi  tout  fon  fang
refpandu,  auec  la  fatigue  d'vn  chemin  qui  de  foy
mefme  fait  horreur,  le  reduifirent  dans  le  defefpoir
de  la  vie.  Mon  Dieu,  s'efcrioit-il,  ie  continue  ^
efprouuer  que  par  tout  vous  eftes  mon  Dieu,  autat
fur  ces  rochers  oil  ie  me  voy  abandone,  que  vous
I'eftiez  au  milieu  de  ma  captiuite,  puifque  par  tout
mon  coeur  efl  confol6  dans  la  feule  penfee  que  vous
eftes  en  tout  lieu  t6moin  de  mes  fouffrances.  Ie
m'eftois  ef chape  des  mains  de  I'ennemy  pour  mourir
aupr6s  de  mes   Peres  qui  m'ont  engendre  dans  la


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  237

try,  God  chose  to  try  him  again.  They  were  a  com-
pany of  a  hundred,  who  had  journeyed  about  one
hundred  leagues,  and  believed  themselves  beyond
danger  from  the  Iroquois ;  when  the  enemy,  who  lay
in  ambush,  surprised  them  at  a  place  where  the
river  falls  over  a  precipice  of  dreadful  height,  and
compels  our  Hurons  to  land  and  to  carry  their  canoes
and  their  effects  on  their  shoulders,  to  embark  on
the  channel  of  the  river  higher  up,  where  its  course
is  once  more  smooth.  In  the  midst  of  the  confusion
caused  by  this  passage,  the  Hurons  were  overtaken
unawares,  and  so  swiftly  attacked  that,  when  the
first  had  either  been  killed  on  the  spot,  or  had  been
taken  prisoners  by  the  enemy,  those  behind  lost
courage,  and  escaped  by  flight,  leaving  behind  them
as  plunder  all  their  goods;  these  had  already  cost
them  the  death  or  captivity  of  about  twenty  persons,
whom  they  had  lost  in  another  encounter,  a  few
days  before.

[52]  In  this  fight,  the  good  Christian  had  a  shoulder
pierced  through  and  through  by  a  musket  ball ;  and
as  he  was  afterward  abandoned  without  any  assist-
ance for  two  or  three  days,  the  loss  of  nearly  all  his
blood,  with  the  fatigues  of  a  journey  that  of  itself  is
horrible,  reduced  him  so  low  that  he  despaired  of
his  life.  "  My  God,"  he  exclaimed,  "  I  continue  to
feel  that  you  are  everywhere  my  God, —  as  much
upon  these  rocks,  where  I  see  myself  abandoned,  as
you  were  in  the  midst  of  my  captivity ;  for  every-
where my  heart  receives  consolation  in  this  thought
alone,  that  you  are  in  all  places  a  witness  of  my
sufferings.  I  had  escaped  from  the  hands  of  the
enemy,  that  I  might  die  near  my  Fathers  who  have
begotten  me  in  the  Faith.     But  O  my  God!  if  you


238  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.26

Foy :  mais  mon  Dieu  li  vous  me  refeniez  ce  plailir
pour  le  Ciel,  foyez  beny  pour  vn  iamais;  ie  meurs
auffj  volontiers  fur  ces  rochers,  que  dans  le  pays  des
Hurons,  puis  qu'en  quelque  lieu  que  ie  meure,  c'eft
vous  f  eul  qui  difpof  erez  de  ma  vie.  Ces  paroles  iointes
"k  fa  mifere  toucherent  enfin  fes  camarades  Infideles,
apr^s  que  leur  efprit  fe  fut  remis  de  I'efpouuente  oil
1^  [53]  terreur  de  I'ennemy  les  auoit  iette.  lis  pri-
rent  foin  de  luy,  &  enfin  apres  bien  des  fatigues  ils
aborderent  icy  en  noftre  Maifon.  Ce  fut  bien  lors
que  ce  bon  Chreftien  ne  pouuoit  contenir  fa  ioye,  &
les  reffentimens  qu'il  auoit  des  graces  de  Dieu  nous
parurent  d6s  fon  abord.  Vrayement,  nous  dit-il
pour  premieres  paroles,  le  Dieu  que  vous  prefchez,
&  que  ie  croy  eft  feul  le  tout  puiffant  &  le  tout  bon :
il  m'a  conduit  &  protege  depuis  vn  an  ^  trauers  mille
perils  de  ma  vie,  &  s'il  a  voulu  que  mon  corps  ait
fouffert,  ce  n'a  efte  que  pour  faire  fentir  ^  mon  ame
qu'il  y  a  des  plaifirs  mefme  dans  les  fouffrances,  &
que  rien  n'eft  terrible  a  celuy  qui  efpere  en  luy.

Mais  les  difcours  qu'il  fit  aux  Infideles  furpaffent
ce  qu'on  peut  croire  d'vn  fauuage,  s'il  n'efloit  vray
que  le  faindt  Efprit  rend  difertes  mefme  les  langues
des  enfans.  Mes  freres,  leur  dit-il,  fi  vous  reffentez
de  la  ioye  de  me  voir  deliur6  des  cruautez  des
Iroquois,  ie  fuis  trifle  de  vous  trouuer  encore  fous  la
captiuite  des  diables,  &  moy  mefme,  ie  ne  m'eftime
pas  encore  entierement  en  liberty,  [54]  tandis  que  ie
fuis  en  ce  monde,  oil  le  peche  me  peut  rendre  plus
malheureufement  captif  que  ie  n'eflois?  Les  cruau-
tez que  i'ay  fouffert  font  tout  k  fait  horribles;  que
fera-ce  d'vn  feu  eternel?  mais  i'ay  crainte  que  plu-
fieurs  de  vous  ne  fe  mocquent  de  moy  en  leur  coeur,


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  239

reserve  this  pleasure  for  me  in  Heaven,  be  blessed
forever.  I  die  as  willingly  on  these  rocks  as  in  the
country  of  the  Hurons,  since,  wherever  I  may  die,
you  alone  dispose  of  my  life."  These  words,  added
to  his  unfortunate  condition,  finally  touched  his
Infidel  comrades,  after  their  minds  had  recovered
from  the  fright  which  [53]  terror  of  the  enemy  had
caused  them.  They  took  care  of  him,  and  in  the
end,  after  many  hardships,  they  landed  here  at  our
House.  Then  the  good  Christian  could  not  restrain
his  joy,  and  his  gratitude  for  the  favors  of  God
manifested  itself  to  us  at  his  very  approach.  His
very  first  words  to  us  were,  "  The  God  whom  you
preach  to  us,  and  in  whom  I  believe,  alone  is  all-
powerful  and  all-good.  He  has  guided  and  protected
me  for  a  year  through  a  thousand  dangers  of  my
life;  and,  if  he  has  chosen  that  my  body  should
suffer,  it  was  only  to  make  my  soul  feel  that  there
are  pleasures  even  in  the  midst  of  suffering,  and  that
nothing  is  terrible  to  whomsoever  hopes  in  him."

But  the  discourses  that  he  addressed  to  the  Infidels
surpass  what  could  be  expected  from  a  savage,  were
it  not  true  that  the  holy  Ghost  makes  even  the
tongues  of  children  eloquent.  "  My  brothers,"  he
said  to  them,  "  if  you  feel  joy  at  seeing  me  delivered
from  the  cruelties  of  the  Iroquois,  I  am  sorry  to  see
you  still  in  the  captivity  of  the  devils ;  and  even  I  do
not  yet  consider  myself  entirely  at  liberty  [54]  as
long  as  I  am  in  this  world,  where  sin  can  make  me
a  more  miserable  captive  than  I  was.  The  suffer-
ings that  I  endured  were  altogether  horrible ;  what
will  be  those  of  an  eternal  fire?  But  I  fear  that
many  of  you  are  scoffing  at  me  in  your  hearts,  and
think  me  too  simple,  because  I  fear  a  fire  that  I  have


240  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J /^SUITES  [Vol.  26

&  ne  me  croyent  trop  fimple  de  craindre  vn  feu  que
iamais  ie  n'ay  veu,  plus  que  les  flammes  &  les  tour-
mens  que  i'ay  fouffert  eftant  aux  Iroquois.  On  m'a
dit  mefme  que  plufieurs  fe  font  refioiiis  a  la  nouuelle
de  ma  captiuite,  qu'ils  s'en  prenoient  au  Dieu  que
i'adore,  qu'ils  difoient  qu'il  eftoit  fans  pouuoir,  &  que
ie  n'eftois  pas  ^  plaindre  dans  les  malheurs  qui  m'a-
uoient  accueilly,  puifque  la  mifere  ou  il  m'auoit  aban-
donne  retiendroit  les  autres  de  fuiure  mon  exemple,
de  fe  faire  Chreftiens,  &  de  feruir  vn  Maiftre  qui
fans  doute  n'auroit  pas  la  puiffance  ou  la  volonte  de
nous  rendre  heureux  pour  vn  iamais,  puis  qu'il  ne
commen9oit  pas  des  cette  vie  k  nous  faire  fentir  les
effets  de  ce  fien  amour.

Mes  freres,  adioufta-t'il,  ie  ne  fgay  pas  les  deffeins
de  Dieu  deffus  moy:  eftant  [55]  dans  Ie  plus  fort  de
mes  miferes,  ie  n'ofois  pas  luy  demander  ny  la  mort
ny  la  vie,  penfant  que  i'eftois  vn  enfant  qui  ignorois
mon  bien,  &  que  luy  qui  eftoit  mon  Pere  auoit  plus
de  fageffe  pour  ma  conduite  que  moy  mefme,  &  qu'il
ne  manqueroit  point  d' amour  pour  moy,  tandis  que
ie  ne  manquerois  point  de  confiance  en  luy.  Me  voi-
la  deliure  quafi  contre  mes  efperances,  ie  ne  fgay  fi  ce
n'eft  point  vous  qui  en  auez  efte  la  caufe  par  I'hor-
reur  de  vos  blafphemes.  Ie  croy  que  Dieu  a  voulu
vous  confondre  dans  vos  penfees,  qu'il  a  voulu  fe
iuftifier  en  ma  perfonne,  &  vous  monftrer  qu'il  ne
m'auoit  pas  delailTe,  &  que  iamais  il  ne  manquera  ny
de  pouuoir  ny  d' amour  pour  ceux  qui  font  a  luy.  Ie
croy  que  ceux  qui  fe  refioiiiffent  de  ma  prife  fentent
leur  coeur  maintenant  dans  la  confufion,  qu'ils  rou-
gifCent  de  honte,  qu'ils  condamnent  eux  mefmes  leur
fageffe,  voyans  que   Dieu  a  tire  fa  gloire  mefme  de


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  241

never  seen,  more  than  the  flames  and  torments  that
I  suffered  while  with  the  Iroquois.  I  have  even  been
told  that  several  rejoiced  at  the  news  of  my  cap-
tivity, and  blamed  for  it  the  God  whom  I  adore ;
that  they  said  that  he  was  powerless ;  and  that  I  was
not  to  be  pitied  for  the  misfortunes  that  had  befallen
me,  because  the  calamity  in  which  he  had  abandoned
me  would  prevent  others  from  following  my  exam-
ple, from  becoming  Christians,  and  from  serving  a
Master  who  would  doubtless  have  neither  the  power
nor  the  will  to  make  us  happy  forever,  inasmuch  as
he  did  not  begin  even  in  this  life  to  make  us  feel  the
effects  of  this  love  of  his.

"  My  brothers,"  he  added,  "  I  do  not  know  what
God's  designs  are  respecting  me.  When  [55]  my
misfortunes  were  at  their  height,  I  did  not  dare  to
ask  him  either  for  death  or  for  life,  because  I  thought
that  I  was  a  child,  who  did  not  know  what  was  good
for  me ;  that  he  who  was  my  Father  had  more  wis-
dom for  guiding  me  than  I ;  and  that  he  would  not
fail  in  love  for  me,  so  long  as  I  did  not  fail  to  have
confidence  in  him.  I  am  now  delivered,  almost
against  my  hopes.  I  know  not  whether  it  is  not  you
who  have  been  the  cause  of  it,  through  your  horrible
blasphemies.  I  think  that  God  has  chosen  to  con-
found you  in  your  thoughts ;  that  he  has  intended  to
do  justice  to  himself  in  my  person,  and  to  show
you  that  he  had  not  abandoned  me,  and  that  he  will
never  fail,  either  in  power  or  in  love,  for  those  who
belong  to  him.  I  am  sure  that  those  who  rejoiced  at
my  capture  must  now  feel  confusion  in  their  hearts;
that  they  must  blush  with  shame ;  that  they  them-
selves condemn  their  own  wisdom,  when  they  see
that    God   has    derived    his    glory    even    from   my


242  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

mes  malheurs  dont  ils  s'eftoient  feruis  pour  I'accufer.
le  ne  fgay  pas  a  quelle  mort  il  me  referue,  mais  quel-
que  malheur  qui  me  puiffe  arriuer,  ne  vous  en  [56]
prenez  plus  a  luy,  c'eft  affez  qu'il  vous  ait  confondu
vne  fois  auant  voftre  mort,  voftre  impiete  ne  doit  pas
I'obliger  de  faire  toufiours  des  miracles.  Si  vous  ne
reconnoiffez  &  fon  pouuoir  &  fa  bonte  en  cette  vie,
ce  fera  au  iour  du  iugement  ou  il  fe  iuflifiera  pour
vn  iamais,  &  ou  ceux  qui  auront  le  plus  blafpheme
contre  luy  dans  les  miferes  qui  feront  arriuees  aux
iuftes  icy  bas  en  terre,  feront  plus  dans  la  confufion
lors  qu'ils  verront  les  eternelles  recompenfes  qu'il
nous  preparoit  alors  mefme  qu'il  fembloit  nous  aban-
donner,  n'y  ayant  plus  pour  les  impies  que  des  tour-
mens  &  vn  defefpoir  eternel.

Charles  Tfondatfaa  s'eftant  aufli  efchappe  du  peril
oil  ce  bon  lofeph  demeura,  nous  a  fait  voir  en  fa  per-
fonne  que  vrayement  Dieu  eft  bon,  mefme  lors  qu'il
afflige,  &  qu'a tousles  coeurs  qui  I'aiment  tout  coopere
pour  leur  bien.  Ce  bon  Chreftien  eftoit  vn  des  plus
riches  de  fon  bourg,  maintenant  il  eft  vn  des  plus
pauures,  mais  fa  foy,  fon  zele  &  fa  vertu  n'ont  iamais
eu  plus  d' eclat :  la  parole  de  Dieu  eft  animee  dedans  fa
bouche,  [57]  pas  vn  n'ofe  luy  refifter,  il  confond  tous
les  Infideles,  enfeigne  les  Chrefties,  &  par  tout  oil  il  va
on  voit  en  fes  difcours  &  en  fa  vie  que  I'eftime  des
chofes  du  Ciel,  la  crainte  de  Dieu,  I'horreur  du  peche,
&  le  zele  du  falut  des  ames  font  les  quatre  elemens
d'vn  coeur  vrayement  Chreftien.

Vn  iour  quelques  Infideles  le  voyans  inflexible  a
toutes  leurs  prieres,  lors  qu'il  s'agiffoit  de  quelque
offenfe  cotre  Dieu,  &  iamais  n 'ayant  pu  tirer  de  luy
d'autre  reponfe,   finon  qu'il  redoutoit  moins  le  feu


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  J643-44  243

misfortunes,  of  which  they  had  availed  themselves  to
blame  him.  I  know  not  what  death  he  reserves  for
me;  but,  whatever  misfortune  may  happen  to  me,
do  not  [56]  blame  him.  It  is  enough  that  he  should
have  confounded  you  once  before  your  death ;  your
impiety  cannot  oblige  him  to  be  ever  performing
miracles.  If  you  do  not  acknowledge  both  his
power  and  his  goodness  in  this  life,  then  will  he  do
justice  to  himself  forever  on  the  day  of  judgment,
when  those  who  have  blasphemed  most  against  him,
on  account  of  the  misfortunes  that  may  have  hap-
pened to  the  just  here  below  on  earth,  will  feel
greater  confusion  when  they  shall  see  the  eternal
rewards  that  he  prepared  for  us  even  when  he
seemed  to  abandon  us,  and  that  he  reserves  for  the
impious  but  torments  and  eternal  despair."

Charles  Tsondatsaa,  who  also  escaped  from  the  peril
in  which  the  good  Joseph  remained,  has  shown  us  in
his  person  that  God  is  truly  good,  even  when  he
afflicts;  and  that,  in  all  the  hearts  that  love  him,
everything  cooperates  for  their  welfare.  This  good
Christian  was  one  of  the  richest  of  his  village ;  now
he  is  one  of  the  poorest;  but  his  faith,  his  zeal,  and
his  virtue  have  never  shone  out  more  brilliantly.
The  word  of  God  becomes  vivified  in  his  mouth.
[57]  No  one  dares  to  resist  him.  He  confounds
all  the  Infidels;  he  teaches  the  Christians;  and,
wherever  he  goes,  one  sees  in  his  discourses  and  in
his  life  that  esteem  for  Heavenly  things,  fear  of  God,
horror  at  sin,  and  zeal  for  the  salvation  of  souls,  are
the  four  elements  of  a  truly  Christian  heart.

One  day,  some  Infidels  —  who  found  him  inflexible
against  all  their  entreaties,  when  they  wished  him  to
commit  some   offense   against   God,  and   who  never


244  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

que  le  peche,  prirent  deffein  d'eprouuer  fon  courage,
&  de  voir  en  effet  s'il  feroit  plus  fort  que  le  feu.  lis
I'inuitent  d'entrer  dans  vn  bain:  (c'eft  vne  efpece  de
four  &  vne  forte  d'hypocaufte  ou  incontinet  tout  le
corps  fe  refout  en  fueur,  &  on  feroit  pour  y  eftre
bien  toft  etouffe,  fi  fouuent  on  ne  la  faifoit  decouurir
pour  refpirer  vn  air  plus  libre)  ce  bo  Chreftien  qui
ne  fgait  rien  de  leur  deffein,  prend  cela  comme  vne
faueur  ordinaire  a  ces  peuples  quand  ils  veulent
careffer  quelqu'vn.  II  entre  dans  ce  bain,  mais  il  y
fent  des  fon  abord  vne  chaleur  fi  exceffiue,  [58]  qu'il
les  prie  de  luy  permettre  d'en  fortir.  Camarade,  luy
repond  celuy  qui  I'auoit  inuit^,  i'ay  fonge  cette  nuit
qu'il  falloit  que  tu  diffes  trois  mots  en  I'honneur  de
mon  demon  familier,  autrement  quelque  malheur
m'arriuera:  ie  te  prie  oblige  ton  amy,  &  fi  tu  defire
fortir  ne  me  refufe  pas  trois  paroles.  Charles  voit
bien  qu'on  le  veut  obliger  par  force  a  ce  que  la  dou-
ceur n'auoit  iamais  peu  emporter  de  luy.  Camarade,
luy  replique-t'il,  le  feu  d'enfer  eft  plus  chaud  que
celuy-cy,  pour  Suiter  I'vn  ie  ferois  fol  de  me  letter
dans  r autre;  Tu  pourras  bien  me  faire  icy  mourir  fi
tu  veux,  mais  non  pas  tirer  de  ma  bouche  aucun  mot
qui  foiiille  mon  coeur.  Tu  fgauras  que  ie  n'ay  point
de  langue  lors  qu'il  faut  commettre  vn  pecli6.  On
le  coniure  de  n' eftre  pas  fi  roide  en  vne  chofe  qui  luy
couftant  fi  peu  doit  tellement  obliger  fon  amy :  on
luy  remonftre  qu'il  ne  pent  y  auoir  de  fa  faute,  &
que  la  contrainte  oii  il  eft  I'excufera  deuant  tout
homme;  on  luy  protefte  que  iamais  il  n'en  fera  parle,
&  que  s'il  redoute  les  reprimandes  des  Fran9ois,  ils
ne  pourront  pas  le  fgauoir:  Enfin  fi  tu  crains,  [59]
luy  dit-on,  vne  ombre  mefme  du  pecli6,  ton  mal  ne


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  245

received  any  other  answer  from  him  than  that  he
feared  fire  less  than  sin  —  resolved  to  test  his  courage,
and  to  see  whether  he  would  really  be  stronger  than
fire.  They  invite  him  to  enter  a  bath  (this  is  a  kind
of  oven  or  hypocaust,  in  which  the  whole  body  is  at
once  bathed  in  sweat,  and  in  which  one  would  soon
be  suffocated,  were  it  not  often  uncovered  to  allow
fresh  air  to  be  breathed).  The  good  Christian,  who
is  ignorant  of  their  design,  considers  this  as  a  favor
usual  among  these  peoples  when  they  intend  to
gratify  any  one.  He  enters  the  bath,  but  at  the
very  first  he  feels  a  heat  so  excessive  [58]  that  he
begs  them  to  allow  him  to  come  out.  "  Comrade,"
replies  he  who  had  invited  him,  "  I  dreamed  last
night  that  thou  must  say  three  words  in  honor  of
my  familiar  demon,  or  otherwise  some  misfortune
would  happen  to  me.  I  beg  thee  to  oblige  thy
friend,  and,  if  thou  wishest  to  come  out,  refuse  me
not  those  words."  Charles  sees  very  well  that  they
wish  to  compel  him  by  force  to  do  what  gentleness
could  never  obtain  from  him.  "  Comrade,"  he  re-
plies, "  the  fire  of  hell  is  hotter  than  this.  To
avoid  one  I  would  be  very  foolish  to  throw  myself
into  the  other.  Thou  canst  make  me  die  here  if
thou  wilt,  but  thou  canst  not  get  a  word  out  of  my
mouth  that  will  soil  my  soul.  Thou  must  know  that
I  have  no  tongue,  when  a  sin  has  to  be  committed."
He  is  urged  not  to  be  so  strict  in  a  matter  which
will  cost  him  so  little,  and  so  greatly  oblige  his
friend.  He  is  told  that  the  fault  cannot  be  his,  and
that  the  compulsion  used  against  him  will  excuse  him
before  all  men.  He  is  promised  that  it  will  never  be
mentioned ;  and  that,  if  he  dread  the  reproaches  of  the
French,  they  can   never  know   of  it.     "  Finally,   if


246  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

fera  pas  hors  de  remede,  puifque  tous  les  pechez
s'effacent,  &  qu'on  nous  dit  qu'il  y  a  dans  le  Ciel  plus
de  pecheurs  que  d'innocens.  Mes  camarades,  leur
dit-il,  ie  ne  crains  pas  les  hommes  ny  les  Fran9ois,
mais  I'oeil  d'vn  Dieu  qui  penetre  &  vos  confciences
&  la  mienne,  &  qui  condamneroit  ma  faute  quand
bien  toute  la  terre  m'en  loiieroit,  I'efperance  que  nos
pechez  foiet  effacez  fe  doit  auoir  apres  qu'ils  font
commis,  mais  non  pas  nous  les  faire  commettre,  fl
vous  ne  voulez  excufer  de  folie  celuy  qui  fous  I'efpe-
rance de  guarir  d'vne  playe  mortelle  fe  mettroit  le
coufleau  dans  le  fein.  Cependant  la  chaleur  redou-
ble, il  fe  voit  au  milieu  d'vn  amas  de  pierres  toutes
rouges  de  feu  &  de  charbons  qui  s'enflamment  de
plus  en  plus,  &  ne  peut  pas  fe  remuer  s'il  ne  veut
marcher  fur  les  braifes.  Mes  camarades,  leur  dit-il,
le  coeur  me  manque,  mais  non  pas  le  courage,  i'e-
ftouffe  icy  &  ne  puis  refpirer,  mais  fgachez  que  quel-
que  violence  qu'on  m'apporte,  iamais  ie  ne  plieray  "k
vos  defirs.  \Jk  deffus  celuy  qui  I'auoit  inuit^  change
[60]  de  ton,  &  prend  celuy  de  la  colere,  vomit  mille
blafphemes  contre  Dieu,  maudit  la  Foy  &  les  croy-
ans,  renonce  "k  I'amiti^  qu'ils  auoient  depuis  leur  ieu-
nelTe;  mais  plus  il  entre  en  rage  plus  il  voit  qu'vn
courage  vrayement  Chreflien  n'a  de  crainte  que  pour
le  pech6.  Enfin  les  autres  Infideles  fe  rangent  du
cofle  le  plus  iufte,  prennent  la  caufe  de  I'innocent,
tancent  cet  infolent  d'en  venir  k  ces  extremitez,  &
luy  mefme  eft  confus  lors  qu'ayant  d6couuert  I'hypo-
caufte,  il  voit  ce  bon  Chreftien  qui  n'auoit  plus  quafi  ny
de  poux  ny  de  force,  &  qui  eftat  forty  &  reuenu  k  foy
n'eut  point  d 'autres  paroles  pour  fe  vanger  de  toutes
ces  iniures,  finon  que  le  regardant  d'vn  oeil  auffi  amy


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  247

thou  fearest,"  [59]  they  say  to  him,  "  even  the
shadow  of  the  sin,  thy  injury  will  not  be  beyond
remedy,  since  all  sins  are  forgiven,  and  we  are  told
that  in  Heaven  there  are  more  sinners  than  inno-
cents." "  My  comrades,"  he  says  to  them,  "  I  fear
neither  men  nor  the  French,  but  the  eye  of  God,
which  penetrates  both  your  consciences  and  mine,
and  which  would  condemn  my  offense  even  if  the
whole  earth  should  praise  me  for  it.  It  is  right  to
hope  that  our  sins  will  be  forgiven  after  they  are
committed,  but  not  in  order  that  we  may  commit
them ;  unless  you  wish  to  excuse  folly  in  a  person
who,  in  the  hope  of  curing  a  mortal  wound,  plunges
a  knife  into  his  breast."  Meanwhile,  the  heat
becomes  more  intense ;  he  finds  himself  in  the  midst
of  a  heap  of  stones  all  heated  red-hot,  and  of  coals
that  flame  more  and  more ;  and  he  cannot  stir  with-
out walking  on  the  embers.  "  My  comrades,"  he
says  to  them,  "  my  heart  fails  me,  but  not  my  cour-
age. I  am  stifled  here,  and  cannot  breathe ;  but
know  that,  whatever  violence  may  be  done  to  me,  I
will  never  yield  to  your  desires."  Thereupon  he
who  had  invited  him  changes  [60]  his  tone,  and,
assuming  an  angry  one,  he  utters  a  thousand  blas-
phemies against  God;  curses  the  Faith  and  the
believers;  renounces  the  friendship  that  had  existed
between  them  from  their  youth ;  but  the  more  furi-
ous he  becomes,  the  more  he  sees  that  a  truly
Christian  heart  has  no  fear  except  of  sin.  Finally
the  other  Infidels  range  themselves  on  the  fairer
side ;  they  take  up  the  cause  of  the  innocent ;  they
upbraid  this  insolent  man  for  going  to  such  extremes.
He  himself  is  filled  with  confusion  when,  on  uncov-
ering the  hypocaust,  he  sees  the  good  Christian  with-


248  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.  26

qu'k  I'ordinaire,  Mon  camarade,  luy  dit-il,  tu  m'as
tue,  mais  cela  me  confole  que  ie  n'ay  pas  offenfe
Dieu.  Si  iamais  il  t'ouure  I'efprit  &  que  tu  ayes  la
Foy,  tu  f9auras  que  luy  feul  merite  les  honneurs  que
les  diables  s'vfurpent  iniquement,  &  que  nos  vies  ne
peuuent  eftre  mieux  confommees  qu'en  fon  feruice.

I'ay  parle  bien  amplement  dans  les  [6i]  prece-
dentes  Relations  d'vn  excellent  Chreftien,  dont  la  foy,
le  zele  &  la  piete  ont  efle  depuis  cinq  annees  vne
lumiere  bien  eclatante  en  cette  Eglife.  II  fe  nomme
Ren6  Sondihb'annen.  Ie  n'en  diray  qu'vn  mot  pour
le  prefent.  Get  homme  va  toufiours  croiffant  dans
I'efprit  de  la  Foy,  qui  anime  fi  puiffammet  fes  adtions,
&  fes  difcours  &  plus  encore  fes  fouffrances,  qu'k
voir  la  fuite  de  fa  vie,  &  entendant  fes  fentimens  on
ne  pent  pas  douter  qu'il  ne  foit  tout  k  Dieu.  II  palle
bien  fouuent  les  nuidts  quafi  entieres  en  la  priere
auec  tant  de  douceur,  qu'^  peine  reffent-il  aucune
diftra(5tion.  Non,  difoit-il,  vn  iour,  ce  n'eft  pas  moy
qui  prie,  au  moins  ie  ne  f9ay  pas  ce  que  ie  dis  k  Dieu:
ie  voy  bien  qu'il  me  parle,  mais  ie  ne  f9ay  pareille-
ment  ce  qu'il  me  dit.  II  m'eft  aduis  qu'il  prend  mon
coeur,  &  le  retient  aupres  de  foy,  comme  fait  vne
mere  lors  qu'elle  careffe  fon  enfant.  Si  on  demande
^  cet  enfant  ce  que  fa  mere  luy  a  dit,  il  ne  pent  rien
refpondre,  &  ne  pent  dire  que  deux  mots,  qu'il  ayme
fa  mere,  &  qu'elle  a  de  I'amour  pour  luy.

Ce  bon  Chreftien  eftoit  alle  fur  la  fin  [62]  de
I'automne  k  la  chaffe  du  caftor,  oil  il  gagna  k  Dieu
fon  fils  aifne,  que  feul  il  auoit  mene  auec  foy,  expres
pour  auoir  le  moyen  dans  cette  folitude  d'vn  mois,
de  luy  parler  plus  a  loifir  &  plus  au  coeur.  Alors
vne  chofe  luy  arriua  qui  merite  pent  eftre  de  trouuer


1642  -  44J  RELA  TION  OF  1643  "  44  249

out  pulse  and  strength ;  and  that,  on  coming  out  and
recovering  himself,  the  latter  has  no  other  words
with  which  to  avenge  himself  for  all  these  wrongs
than  to  say,  while  looking  at  him  with  as  friendly
regard  as  usual,  "  My  comrade,  thou  hast  killed  me;
but  what  consoles  me  is  that  I  have  not  offended
God.  If  ever  he  opens  thy  mind,  and  thou  hast
Faith,  thou  wilt  know  that  he  alone  deserves  the
honors  that  the  devils  iniquitously  usurp,  and  that
our  lives  cannot  be  better  sacrificed  than  in  his
service."

I  have  spoken  at  great  length,  in  the  [61]  preced-
ing Relations,  of  an  excellent  Christian,  whose  faith,
zeal,  and  piety  have  for  five  years  been  indeed  a
shining  light  in  this  Church ;  his  name  is  Ren6
Sondihwannen.  I  will  say  only  one  word  of  him  for
the  present.  This  man  continues  to  grow  in  the
spirit  of  Faith,  which  so  powerfully  animates  his
actions,  his  discourses,  and  still  more  his  sufferings,
that,  on  seeing  the  course  of  his  life,  and  on  hearing
his  sentiments,  one  cannot  doubt  that  he  belongs
wholly  to  God.  He  very  often  passes  almost  the
whole  night  in  prayer,  with  such  enjoyment  that  he
hardly  notices  any  distraction.  "  No,"  he  said  one
day,  "  it  is  not  I  who  pray,  at  least  I  know  not  what
I  say  to  God.  I  see  well  that  he  speaks  to  me,  but  I
do  not  know  so  well  what  he  says  to  me.  I  think
that  he  takes  my  heart  and  keeps  it  near  him,  as  a
mother  does  when  she  caresses  her  child.  If  we  ask
the  child  what  his  mother  has  srid  to  him,  he  cannot
answer,  and  can  say  only  two  things  —  that  he  loves
his  mother  and  that  she  loves  him."

This  good  Christian  had  gone  away,  about  the
end  [62]  of    the  autumn,    to  hunt  beaver.     During


250  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES         [Vol.  26

icy  quelque  lieu.  Dans  le  plus  fort  de  fon  fommeil
il  luy  fembla  que  tout  le  Ciel  eftoit  remply  de  ton-
nerres,  &  d'eclairs;  «&  que  les  foudres  venoient  de
tous  coftez  fondre  fur  luy.  La  crainte  I'auoit  faifi  fi
puiffammet,  qu'il  eftoit  das  le  defefpoir  de  fa  vie.
Vne  perfonne  d'vn  vifage  inconnu,  mais  d'vne  ma-
iefl6  pleine  d'amour  &  de  douceur,  qui  eftoit  defcen-
due  du  Ciel,  luy  dit  en  s'approchant  de  luy,  Prens
ton  chapelet,  &  prie  Dieu.  II  n'eut  pas  plutoft  obey
que  ces  images  difparoiffent,  &  que  I'orage  fe  diffipe.
Le  mefme  luy  arriue  par  trois  diuerfes  fois,  il  eft
aduerty  chaque  fois  d'auoir  recours  a  la  mefme  pri-
ere,  &  touiours  il  en  reffent  le  mefme  effet.  Le  len-
demain  fur  le  midy,  le  Ciel  qui  etoit  tres  pur  8c  ferain
fe  change  tout  d'vn  coup:  ce  ne  font  que  foudres  &
tonnerres,  &  il  femble  que  tout  cet  orage  [63]  vienne
fe  defcharger  fur  eux.  Prions  Dieu,  dit-il  k  fon  fils,
dis  auec  moy  ton  chapelet.  lis  n'auoient  pas  finy
que  les  nuages  fe  retirent,  le  Ciel  eft  plus  effuy6  que
iamais,  &  ne  voyent  plus  deuant  leurs  yeux  aucun
refte  de  cette  tempefte.  A  quelques  heures  de  Yk,
le  Soleil  fe  recouure,  &  de  tous  coftez  les  efclairs  &
les  foudres  les  enuironnent.  Reprenons  noftre  cha-
pelet, dit  le  pere  k  fon  fils,  Dieu  veut  nous  obliger  k
la  priere :  le  Ciel  retourne  incontinant  en  fa  beaute.
Enfin  pour  la  troifiefme  fois  ils  fe  voyent  derechef
accueillis  de  I'orage,  la  nuee  va  creuer  fur  leur  tefte,
&  les  foudres  du  Ciel  n'en  veulent  ce  femble  qu'a
eux.  Ce  bon  vieillard  alloit  encore  recourir  &,  la
mefme  priere,  &  defia  tenoit  en  main  fon  chapelet,
lors  qu'il  s'auife  qu'il  obeiffoit  a  fon  fonge.  Fay
peche,  dit-il  h.  fon  fils,  mais  9 'a  efte  fans  y  penfer,
ne  difons  pas  pour  maintenant  cette  priere,  autrement


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  251

that  time  he  won  over  to  God  his  eldest  son,  whom
alone  he  had  taken  with  him,  expressly  to  have  an
opportunity,  in  that  solitude  of  a  month's  duration,
of  speaking  to  him  more  leisurely,  and  more  to  his
heart.  A  thing  happened  to  him  then,  that  deserves
to  be  mentioned  here.  In  his  soundest  sleep,  it
seemed  to  him  that  the  whole  Sky  was  full  of  thunder
and  lightning,  and  that  the  thunderbolts  threatened
to  fall  on  him  from  all  sides.  So  forcibly  had  fear
taken  possession  of  him,  that  he  was  in  despair  of  his
life.  A  person  —  whose  face  was  unknown,  but  full
of  majesty,  mingled  with  love  and  gentleness  —  came
down  from  Heaven,  and  drawing  near  him,  said:
"  Take  thy  rosary,  and  pray  to  God."  No  sooner
had  he  obeyed  than  these  images  disappeared,  and
the  storm  passed  away.  The  same  thing  happens
to  him  on  three  different  occasions ;  he  is  told  each
time  to  have  recourse  to  the  same  prayer,  and  he
always  experiences  the  same  effect  from  it.  On  the
following  day  about  noon,  the  Sky,  that  was  clear
and  serene,  suddenly  becomes  overcast;  there  is
nothing  but  thunder  and  lightning,  and  it  seems  as
if  all  this  storm  [63]  were  about  to  burst  on  them.
"  Let  us  pray  to  God,"  he  says  to  his  son;  "  repeat
thy  rosary  with  me."  They  have  no  sooner  finished
than  the  clouds  disappear;  the  Sky  is  clearer  than
ever,  and  they  no  longer  see  before  their  eyes  any
vestige  of  the  tempest.  Some  hours  afterward,  the
Sun  is  again  obscured,  and  they  are  surrounded  on
all  sides  by  thunder  and  lightning.  "Let  us  say
our  rosary  again,"  says  the  father  to  his  son;  "  God
wishes  to  constrain  us  to  prayer."  At  once  the  Sky
is  again  visible  in  its  beauty.  Finally,  for  the  third
time,  they    again    see   themselves   assailed   by   the


252  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JJ^SUITES         [Vol.  26

i'accomplirois  mon  fonge:  prions  Dieu  feulement  de
coeur;  s'il  veut  nous  preferuer  de  cet  orage  il  n'eft
pas  attache  plus  a  vne  priere  qu'a  vne  autre:  ie  ne
fcay  pas  fi  en  cela  il  y  euft  quelque  chofe  [64]  extra-
ordinaire, mais  la  nuee  fe  diuifa,  &  s'eftant  dechar-
g6e  de  part  &  d'autre  proche  du  lieu  oii  ils  eftoient,
ils  n'eurent  pas  vne  goute  de  pluye,  &  benirent  notre
Seigneur  de  les  auoir  garde.

II  arriue  affez  fouuent  plufieurs  chofes  a  ces  bonnes
gens,  qui  fans  doute  font  affez  remarquables,  mais
leur  fimplicite  fait  qu'ils  n'y  font  pas  d'autre  refle-
xion que  fur  I'lieure,  fe  contentant  d'en  auoir  remer-
ci^  Dieu  lors  qu'ils  ont  receu  le  benefice.  Pour  celle-
cy  ie  ne  I'ay  fceu  que  par  rencontre,  ce  bon  homme
long-temps  apres  nous  ayant  demande  fi  fon  peche
auoit  efte  grief  d'auoir  obey  du  commencement  k
fon  fonge,  &  comment  en  cela  il  fe  deuoit  comporter
felon  Dieu.

Ie  me  fuis  refolu  d'eftre  court  en  cette  Relation,  &
il  faut  laiffer  place  pour  les  fuiuans  Chapitres.  Si
ie  dis  que  d'aucuns  ont  efle  delaiffez  de  leurs  propres
parens  en  haine  de  la  Foy ;  que  d'autres  ellant  folli-
citez  au  mal  ont  imitez  le  S.  lofeph  &  la  chafte
Sufanne ;  que  plufieurs  prennent  plaifir  dans  les
fouffrances  «&  en  remercient  Dieu;  que  la  plufpart
menent  [65]  vne  vie  auifi  innocente  au  milieu  d'vne
nation  toute  infidele,  que  s'ils  viuoient  parmy  vn
peuple  tout  Chreftien:  Si  i'adioufte  a  cela  qu'ils
prient  tous  Dieu  publiquement  matin  &  foir,  qu'ils
con9oiuent  &  gouftent  nos  myfleres;  qu'ils  fe  con-
feffent  du  moins  tous  les  huit  iours;  qu'ils  font  dans
la  pratique  des  vertus  &  dans  I'horreur  du  vice;  en
vn   mot    que    leur    vie  prefche    plus    haut    que    nos


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  253

Storm;  the  clouds  are  about  to  burst  over  their
heads,  and  the  thunderbolts  of  Heaven  seem  to  seek
only  them.  The  good  old  man  again  was  about  to
resort  to  the  same  prayer,  and  already  held  his
rosary  in  his  hand,  when  he  reflected  that  he  was
obeying  his  dream.  "  I  have  sinned,"  he  said  to
his  son,  "  but  without  thinking  of  it.  Let  us  not
say  that  prayer  now,  for  otherwise  I  should  fulfill  my
dream.  Let  us  only  pray  to  God  in  our  hearts.  If
he  wishes  to  preserve  us  from  this  storm,  he  is  not
attached  to  one  prayer  more  than  another. ' '  I  know
not  whether  there  is  anything  [64]  extraordinary  in
this,  but  the  cloud  parted  and  discharged  itself  on
either  side  near  the  spot  where  they  were.  Not  a
drop  of  rain  fell  on  them,  and  they  thanked  our
Lord  for  having  protected  them.

Very  often  many  things  happen  to  these  good
people  which  are,  without  doubt,  rather  remarkable ;
but,  owing  to  their  simplicity,  they  reflect  on  it  only
for  the  moment,  and  content  themselves  with  thank-
ing God  when  they  have  derived  any  benefit  from  it.
This  one  I  only  heard  by  accident,  when  the  good
man,  long  afterward,  asked  us  whether  he  had  com-
mitted a  grievous  sin  in  obeying  his  dream  at  first,
and  how  he  should  have  behaved  on  that  occasion,
according  to  God's  will.

I  am  resolved  to  be  brief  in  this  Relation,  and
space  must  be  left  for  the  following  Chapters.  If  I
say  that  some  have  been  abandoned  by  their  own
parents,  through  hatred  of  the  Faith ;  that  others,
who  have  been  solicited  to  do  evil,  have  imitated  the
Holy  Joseph  and  the  chaste  Susanna;  that  many
take  pleasure  in  sufferings,  and  thank  God  for  them ;
that  most  of  them  lead  [65]  as  innocent  a  life,  in  the


254  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES         [Vol.26

paroles,  &  contraint  les  plus  Infideles  de  refpedter  la
Foy,  quelque  haine  qu'ils  en  con^oiuent;  c'eft  ce
qu'icy  nous  voyons  de  nos  yeux,  ce  que  Dieu  opere
en  leur  coeur,  ce  que  le  Ciel  admire  dans  vn  pais  bar-
bare,  qui  depuis  cinq  mille  ans  n'auoit  iamais  connu
fon  Createur,  &  puis  que  le  fang  de  lefus-Chrift  a
efte  r^pandu  pour  eux  auffi  bien  que  pour  nous,  pour-
quoy  n'efpererons-nous  pas  que  la  conuerfion  de  ces
peuples  ira  touliours  croiffant,  que  la  Foy  y  fera  en
fon  regne,  &  que  la  Croix  fe  verra  enfin  arbor^e  par
tout  ce  nouueau  monde?  Ne  perdez  pas  courage,
nous  difoit,  il  y  a  quelque  teps,  vn  fauuage  Chre-
ftien,  noflre  nombre  va  s'augmentant  de  iour  en  iour,
celuy  des  [66]  Infideles  s'amoindrit,  la  plufpart  con-
noilTent  affez  la  verity,  &  font  les  premiers  a  fe  moc-
quer  des  fuperftitions  du  pais,  ils  redoutent  le  feu
d'enfer,  les  feuls  refpedts  humains  retiennet  ceux  qui
ont  I'efprit  mieux  fait;  quand  nous  ferons  vn  peu
plus  forts,  vous  verrez  que  tout  d'vn  coup  ils  pren-
dront  noftre  party,  tout  notre  bourg  fera  Chreflien,
&  c'eft  alors  que  la  Foy  fe  fera  iour  fans  refiftance
dans  tous  les  autres  qui  ont  les  yeux  fur  nous.

le  me  fouuiens  a  ce  propos  d'vne  harangue  que
faifoit  cet  hyuer  vn  Capitaine  Infidele  de  ce  mefme
bourg,  inuitant  fes  fuiets  a  vne  danfe  fuperflitieufe
du  pais,  &  encourageant  en  mefme  temps  les  Chre-
ftiens  de  tenir  bon  dedans  leur  Foy.  Courage  mes
neueux  (difoit-il)  vous  autres  qui  n'auez  point  de  Foy
venez  a  cette  danfe  que  nos  anceflres  ont  lionor6e,
venez  querir  vne  malade  qui  vous  demande  ce  fe-
cours.  Courage,  adiouftoit-il,  vous  qui  efles  Chre-
ftiens,  retirez  vous  dans  vos  cabanes  qui  font  faintes,
ie  n'y  mets  pas  le  pied  pour  auiourd'huy  que  nous


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  255


midst  of  an  entirely  infidel  nation,  as  if  they  lived
with  a  wholly  Christian  people ;  if  to  this  I  add  that
they  all  pray  to  God  publicly,  morning  and  evening;
that  they  understand  and  enjoy  our  mysteries;  that
they  confess  themselves  at  least  once  a  week ;  that
they  practice  virtue,  and  have  a  horror  of  vice ;  in  a
word,  that  their  lives  preach  more  eloquently  than
our  utterances,  and  force  the  most  Infidel  to  respect
the  Faith,  whatever  hatred  they  may  have  of  it;  it  is
because  here  we  see  with  our  own  eyes  what  God  is
working  in  their  hearts,  and  what  Heaven  admires
in  a  barbarous  country,  which  for  five  thousand  years
had  never  known  its  Creator.  And  since  the  blood
of  Jesus  Christ  has  been  shed  for  them  as  well  as  for
us,  why  should  we  not  hope  that  the  conversion  of
these  peoples  will  go  on  increasing,  that  the  Faith
will  reign  among  them,  and  that  the  Cross  will  in
the  end  be  planted  everywhere  in  this  new  world?
"  Do  not  lose  courage,"  a  Christian  savage  said  to
us,  some  time  ago.  "  Our  number  increases  daily;
that  of  the  [66]  Infidels  decreases.  Most  of  them
know  the  truth  well  enough,  and  are  the  first  to
laugh  at  the  superstitions  of  the  country.  They
dread  the  fire  of  hell.  Human  considerations  alone
keep  back  those  who  have  the  best  minds.  When
we  shall  be  a  little  stronger,  you  will  see  that  they
will  join  us  all  of  a  sudden.  The  whole  of  our  village
will  be  Christian,  and  then  Faith  will  make  its  way,
without  resistance,  among  all  the  others  who  have
their  eyes  on  us. ' '

I  remember,  in  connection  with  this,  a  harangue
delivered  last  winter  by  an  Infidel  Captain  of  the
same  village,  inviting  those  who  were  under  him
to  a  superstitious  dance  of  the  country,  and  at  the


256  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26

pechons,  nous  n'auons  [67']  point  d'efprit,  ne  nous
imitez  pas  &  foyez  plus  fages  que  nous.  S'il  eft  ve-
ritable ce  qu'a  dit  la  mefme  Verite,  que  tout  Royaume
qui  fe  diuife  contre  foy  mefme  eft  proche  de  fa  mine,
ne  pourrois-ie  pas  dire  icy  que  le  Royaume  de  Satan
n'eft  pas  loin  de  fa  decadence,  puis  que  ceux  qui  font
plus  engagez  en  fon  party  trauaillent  eux  mefmes  ^
leur  perte,  fouftenans  le  party  de  Dieu.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  257

same  time  encouraging  the  Christians  to  remain
firm  in  the  Faith.  "  Courage,  my  nephews,"  (said
he).  "  You  that  have  not  Faith,  come  to  this  dance,
that  your  ancestors  have  honored;  come,  and  cure
a  sick  person  who  asks  from  you  that  assistance.
Courage,"  he  added;  "  you  who  are  Christians,
withdraw  into  your  cabins,  that  are  holy.  I  do  not
set  foot  in  them,  because  to-day  we  sin.  We  have
[67]  no  sense.  Do  not  imitate  us,  and  be  wiser  than
we."  If  what  the  same  Truth  has  said  be  true,  that
a  Kingdom  divided  against  itself  is  near  its  ruin,
may  I  not  say  here  that  the  Kingdom  of  Satan  is  not
far  from  its  decadence,  since  those  who  are  its
strongest  partisans  are  themselves  working  for  their
own  ruin  by  sustaining  the  party  of  God?


258  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.26


CHAPITRE  IV.

DE    LA    MISSION    DE    S.    lOSEPH    AUX    ATINGUEENNON-

NIAHAK.

1L  femble  que  le  Ciel  voulut  partager  auec  nous
dans  la  defaite  de  cette  flotte  de  Chreftiens  qui
Tan  palTe  tomberent  entre  les  mains  des  Iro-
quois :  ou  pour  mieux  dire,  il  femble  que  le  deffein
de  Dieu  ne  fut  autre  que  de  moiffonner  ce  qui  eftoit
de  plus  meur  pour  I'eternite,  &  ne  nous  laiffer  de  ce
nombre  que  ceux  dont  il  vouloit  faire  a  chacune  des
Eglifes  de  ce  pais  vn  Predicateur  pour  la  [68]  Foy.
Ce  fut  la  penfee  que  leur  donna  k  tous  le  premier
fentiment  de  leur  coeur,  &  le  falut  qu'ils  fe  donnerent
les  vns  aux  autres,  lors  qu'ils  fe  virent  efchapez  du
peril.  Allons,  ce  dirent-ils,  publier  les  grandeurs  de
celuy  qui  nous  a  deliurez,  &  fi  nous  y  manquons  re-
nongons  a  la  vie,  ref oluons-nous  tous  de  mourir :  car
maintenant  nous  ne  viuons  plus  pour  nous  mefmes,
mais  pour  prefcber  la  Foy  &  rendre  noftre  pais  Chre-
flien.  Des  I'heure  mefme  ils  en  firent  promefTe  "k
Dieu,  &  du  depuis  leur  zele  nous  a  bien  fait  con-
noiflre,  que  cet  efprit  de  verite  qui  fouffle  ou  il  luy
plaift,  ne  met  aucune  difference  entre  le  barbare  &
le  Grec,  &  fe  fait  des  Apoftres  en  quel  que  lieu  qu'il
fe  veliille  faire  adorer.

le  commenceray  ce  Chapitre  par  I'vn  de  ces  Chre-
fliens  nomm^  Eflienne  Totiri.  Remontant  icy  haut
apres  la  perte  quafi  de  tout  fon  bien  qu'il  venoit  de


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  259


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  THE  MISSION    OF   ST.   JOSEPH  AMONG  THE  ATINGUE-

ENNONNIAHAK.

IT  seems  as  if  Heaven  wislied  to  share  with  us  in
the  rout  of  that  fleet  of  Christians  who  last  year
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Iroquois ;  or  rather,  it
seems  as  if  God's  design  were  none  other  than  to
garner  what  was  ripest  for  eternity,  and  to  leave  us
of  the  number  only  those  out  of  whom  he  wished  to
make  a  Preacher  of  the  Faith  for  each  of  the
Churches  of  this  country.  [68]  This  was  the  thought
that  inspired  all  of  them  with  the  first  sentiment
of  their  hearts,  and  the  salutation  that  they  gave
each  other,  when  they  found  that  they  had  escaped
from  the  peril,  "  Let  us  go,"  they  said,  "  and  pub-
lish the  greatness  of  him  who  has  delivered  us,  and,
if  we  fail  to  do  so,  let  us  renounce  life;  let  us  all
resolve  to  die,  for  now  we  no  longer  live  for  our-
selves, but  to  preach  the  Faith  and  to  make  our
country  Christian."  From  the  very  hour  that  they
made  this  promise  to  God,  and  ever  since,  their  zeal
has  shown  us  clearly  that  this  spirit  of  truth,  who
breathes  where  he  pleases,  makes  no  distinction
between  barbarian  and  Greek,  and  secures  his
Apostles  wheresoever  he  chooses  to  be  adored.

I  shall  commence  this  Chapter  with  something
relating  to  one  of  these  Christians,  named  Estienne
Totiri.  When  he  was  returning  up  hither, —  after
having  lost  nearly  all  his  property  near  the  Three


260  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26

faire  proche  des  Trois  Riuieres  au  rencontre  des
Iroquois,  il  apprit  pour  premiere  nouuelle  que  fa  mere
eftoit  decedee  depuis  fon  depart.  Son  coeur  en  fut
touche  d'abord,  comme  il  I'aymoit  vniquement:  [69]
mais  ayant  rompu  fon  filence,  il  s'enquift  auant
toutes  chofes,  fi  elle  eftoit  morte  en  bonne  Chrefti-
enne?  oiiy,  luy  dit-on.  A  ce  mot  il  ioignit  les  mains,
&  efleuant  les  yeux  au  Ciel,  Mon  Dieu,  dit-il,  qui
pourroit  fe  plaindre  de  vous,  elle  eft  heureufe  dans
le  Ciel,  &  maintenant  elle  ne  pent  plus  vous  offenfer.
Pourueu  que  moy  &  mes  parens  mourions  tous  dans
la  Foy,  ie  ne  puis  regreter  ny  pour  eux  ny  pour  moy
cette  vie.  Haftez,  s'il  vous  plaift  noftre  mort,  puis
qu'ainfi  vous  hafterez  noftre  bon-heur.  Eftant  arri-
u6  en  fon  bourg,  les  Chreftiens  qui  venoient  pour  le
confoler  fe  trouuerent  plus  defolez  que  luy,  auffi
fut-ce  luy  qui  les  confola.  Mes  freres,  leur  dit-il,  ne
parlous  pas  de  ce  que  i'ay  perdu,  mais  fongeons  aux
grands  biens  qui  nous  attendent  dans  le  Ciel;  vos
larmes  auffi  bien  que  les  miennes  fe  changeront  en
ioye,  &  les  Infideles  connoiftront  fur  nos  vifages  que
nous  auons  la  Foy  &  I'efperance  du  Paradis  dedans
le  coeur:  Entrons  dans  la  Chapelle,  &  lotions  Dieu
de  tout.

C'eft  luy  qui  eft  le  gardien  de  cette  Chapelle,  oil
tous  les  Chreftiens  &  Catechumenes  [70]  viennent
prier  foir  &  matin;  &  comme  plufieurs  ont  befoin
d'inftrudtion,  il  prend  le  foin  des  hommes  en  I'abfence
ou  trop  grande  occupation  des  Peres  qui  ont  charge
de  cette  Miffion ;  &  fa  femme  qui  ne  luy  cede  en  rien,
foit  en  efprit,  foit  en  vertu,  prend  le  foin  d'inftruire
les  femmes,  auec  tant  d'amour  &  de  ioye  que  c'eft
vn  plaiflr  de  les  voir  das  vne  fainte  ialouHe  d'auan-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  261

Rivers,  in  the  encounter  with  the  Iroquois, —  the
first  news  that  he  heard  was  that  his  mother  had
died  since  his  departure.  At  first,  his  heart  was
touched,  because  he  loved  her  dearly;  [69]  but,  as
soon  as  he  broke  his  silence,  he  asked  first  of  all  if
she  had  died  a  good  Christian.  "  Yes,"  he  was  told.
At  this  word  he  clasped  his  hands  and,  raising  his
eyes  to  Heaven,  he  said,  "  My  God,  who  could
complain  of  you?  She  is  happy  in  Heaven,  and  now
she  can  no  longer  offend  you.  Provided  that  I  and
my  relatives  all  die  in  the  Faith,  I  cannot  regret
this  life,  either  for  them  or  for  me.  Hasten  our
death,  if  it  please  you,  for  thereby  you  will  hasten
our  happiness."  When  he  arrived  at  his  own  village,
the  Christians  who  went  to  console  him  were  more
disconsolate  than  he  was,  and  it  was  he  who  consoled
them.  "My  brothers,"  he  said  to  them,  "let  us
not  speak  of  what  I  have  lost,  but  let  us  think  of  the
great  blessings  that  await  us  in  Heaven.  Your  tears
as  well  as  mine  will  be  changed  into  joy,  and  the
Infidels  will  see  by  our  faces  that  we  have  Faith  and
the  hope  of  Paradise  in  our  hearts.  Let  us  enter  the
Chapel,  and  praise  God  for  everything."

It  is  he  who  is  the  custodian  of  this  Chapel,  in
which  all  the  Christians  and  Catechumens  [70]  pray,
night  and  morning.  Moreover,  as  many  of  them
need  instruction,  he  takes  care  of  the  men  when  the
Fathers  who  have  charge  of  this  Mission  are  absent,
or  are  too  much  occupied ;  and  his  wife,  who  is  not
inferior  to  him,  either  in  intelligence  or  in  virtue,
undertakes  the  instruction  of  the  women,  with  such
love  and  joyfulness  that  it  is  a  pleasure  to  see  their
holy  rivalry,  each  duly  promoting  the  concerns  of
God.     By  day,  he  visits  all  those  whom  he  considers


262  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

cer  chacun  de  fon  cofte  les  affaires  de  Dieu.  Sur
iour  il  vifite  tous  ceux  qu'il  iuge  auoir  quelque  bonne
difpofition,  &  leur  tient  des  difcours  fi  animez  de  cet
efprit  qui  le  poffede,  qu'il  penetre  iufqu'au  fond  de
Tame,  &  fait  fentir  aux  autres  vne  partie  de  ce  qu'il
set.  Auffi  iamais  ne  va-t'il  enfeigner  qu'il  ne  rentre
en  foy  mefme,  &  ne  demande  k  Dieu  qu'il  luy  mette
la  parole  en  bouche :  car,  dit-il,  ie  voy  bien  que  ce
n'eft  pas  moy  qui  leur  parle,  mais  ie  fens  qu'on  me
dit  au  coeur  des  chofes  dont  ie  ne  puis  exprimer  que
la  moindre  partie.

I 'ay  dout6  li  ie  deuois  icy  rapporter  vne  vifion,  ou
fi  vous  voulez,  vn  fonge  de  cet  homme:  quelque
nom  qu'on  luy  donne,  [71]  voicy  le  rapport  que  luy
jnefme  en  a  fait.  Ie  voyois,  difoit-il,  vne  croix  dans
le  Ciel  toute  empourpree  de  fang,  &  noftre  Seigneur
eftendu  dellus,  la  tefte  'k  I'Orient,  les  pieds  ^  I'Occi-
dent.  Ie  voyois  vne  foule  de  monde  qui  s'aduangoit
de  r  Occident,  que  noftre  Seigneur  attiroit  par  des
regards  d'amour,  &  qui  n'ayant  ofe  s'approcher  de
fa  tefte  facree,  fe  tenoient  en  refpedt  aux  pieds.  De-
meurant  en  filence  &  tout  eftonne  au  milieu  de  cette
compagnie,  i'entendy  vne  voix  qui  me  commanda
de  me  mettre  en  prieres:  ie  le  fis  dans  vn  faindt
effroy,  &  fentois  en  mon  ame  des  mouuemens  &  de
crainte  &  d'amour  qui  furpaffent  toutes  mes  penf6es.
II  a  eu  cette  mefme  vifion  par  trois  diuerfes  fois,  mais
ie  n'en  euffe  pas  fait  plus  d'eftat  que  d'vn  fonge,
n'efloit  que  les  imprei3ions  qu'elle  a  laiff6  dedans  fon
coeur  font  au  deffus  de  la  nature.  II  faut  que  ces
peuples  d' Occident  aillent  adorer  la  croix  de  lefus-
Chrifl.  Nous  verrons  en  fon  lieu  comme  il  a  efl6  cet
hyuer  dans  la  nation  neutre,  comme  il  a  prefche  la


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  263

as  having  some  good  inclination,  and  addresses  dis-
courses to  them,  so  filled  with  the  spirit  that  pos-
sesses him  that  he  penetrates  into  the  very  depths
of  their  hearts,  and  makes  the  others  feel  a  portion
of  what  he  himself  feels.  Therefore,  he  never  goes
to  teach  without  first  retiring  within  himself,  and
asking  God  to  put  the  words  into  his  mouth :  ' '  For, ' '
he  says,  "  I  see  very  well  that  it  is  not  I  who  speak
to  them,  but  I  feel  that  things  are  said  to  me  in  my
heart  of  which  I  can  only  express  the  smallest  por-
tion."

I  have  wondered  whether  I  should  relate  here  a
vision,  or  if  you  will,  a  dream  that  this  man  had.
Whatever  be  the  name  by  which  it  is  called,  [71]
here  is  the  account  he  himself  has  given  of  it.  "I
saw,"  he  said,  "  a  cross  in  the  Sky,  all  red  with
blood ;  and  our  Lord  stretched  thereon,  with  his  head
to  the  East  and  his  feet  to  the  West.  I  saw  a  crowd
of  people  advancing  from  the  West,  whom  our  Lord
attracted  by  his  loving  looks,  and  who  did  not  dare
to  approach  his  sacred  head,  but  remained  respect-
fully at  his  feet.  Remaining  silent  and  quite
astounded  in  the  midst  of  that  company,  I  heard  a
voice  commanding  me  to  pray.  I  did  so,  in  holy
awe,  and  felt  in  my  soul  emotions  of  fear  and  of
love  that  surpass  all  my  thoughts."  He  had  the
same  vision  on  three  different  occasions ;  but  I  would
have  paid  no  more  heed  to  it  than  to  a  dream,  were
it  not  that  the  impressions  that  it  has  left  in  his  heart
are  supernatural.  These  peoples  of  the  West  must
come  to  adore  the  cross  of  Jesus  Christ.  We  shall
see  in  due  time  how  he  went  last  winter  to  the
neutral  nation,  and  how  he  preached  the  Faith.
Meanwhile,  I  will  content  myself  with   saying  that


264  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.26

Foy :  cependant  il  me  fuffit  de  dire  qu'il  ne  veut  &
ne  peut  quafi  parler  d'autre  chofe.

\y2\  Sa  femme,  fes  freres,  fes  enfans,  tout  fe  reffent
de  cet  efprit.  Dieu  eft  leur  entretien,  le  Paradis
leur  efperance,  leur  crainte  n'eft  que  pour  le  peche,
enfin  fi  les  benedidlions  de  la  terre  leur  manquent,
celles  du  Ciel  y  decoulent  abondamment.  II  n'y  a
pas  iufqu'^  vne  petite  fille  ^  peine  de  trois  ans,  qui
ne  participe  k  ces  graces.  Cet  enfant  a  tellement
fucc6  la  piete  auec  le  laidt,  qu'elle  repond  publique-
ment  du  Catechifme,  fgait  fes  prieres,  &  prend  plaifir
k  d^noiier  fa  langue  beguayante  parlant  de  Dieu,  &
des  beautez  du  Paradis,  parce  que  n'entendant  quafi
que  femblables  difcours,  a  peine  pourroit-elle  aimer
autre  chofe.

Le  P.  Charles  Garnier  &  le  P.  Simon  le  Moyne
ont  eu  le  foin  de  cette  MilTion.  Le  nombre  des  Chre-
ftiens  y  eft  accreu  notablement.  Entre  ceux  qui  ont
receu  le  S.  Baptefme,  ont  efte  trois  Capitaines  de
confideration.  Le  premier  fe  nomme  Thomas  Son-
dak«a.  II  auoit  des  defirs,  il  y  a  defia  quelques  an-
nees  de  fe  faire  Chreftien:  iamais  n' auoit  eu  que  de
r  amour  &  pour  nous  &  pour  les  chofes  de  la  Foy,
&  toufiours  a  vefcu  dans  vne  [73]  innocece  morale,  &
vne  bonte  qui  le  rendoit  aymable  k  tous;  mais  come
il  voyoit  les  Chreftiens  mal  voulus,  &  que  d'ailleurs
fa  charge  I'obligeoit  de  tenir  la  main  aux  fuperfti-
tions  du  pais,  qui  font  la  plus  grande  part  de  leurs
Confeils,  fon  courage  n'eftoit  pas  affez  fort  pour
vouloir  tout  de  bon  ce  qu'il  ne  vouloit  qu'^  demy.
Apr6s  la  mort  d'vn  fien  amy  Chreftien,  dont  i'ay
parle  dans  quelqu'vn  des  premiers  Chapitres,  Dieu
luy  toucha  plus  fortement  le  coeur:  il  commence  k  fe


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  265

he  neither  wishes  nor  hardly  is    able  to  speak  of
anything  else.

[72]  His  wife,  his  brothers,  his  children,  all  mani-
fest the  same  spirit,  God  is  their  subject  of  conver-
sation; Paradise  is  their  hope,  and  sin  their  only
fear;  finally,  if  earth's  gifts  fail  them,  those  of
Heaven  flow  abundantly.  Even  a  little  girl,  barely
three  years  old,  participates  in  these  graces.  This
child  has  so  imbibed  piety  with  her  mother's  milk
that  she  answers  the  Catechism  in  public,  knows  her
prayers,  and  takes  pleasure  in  unloosening  her
lisping  tongue  by  speaking  of  God  and  of  the
beauties  of  Paradise,  because,  as  she  hears  almost
nothing  but  such  discourses,  she  could  hardly  love
anything  else.

Father  Charles  Garnier  and  Father  Simon  le
Moyne  have  had  charge  of  this  Mission.  The  num-
ber of  Christians  in  it  has  increased  in  a  marked
degree.  Among  those  who  have  received  Holy  Bap-
tism, were  three  Captains  who  are  persons  of  con-
sideration. The  first  is  named  Thomas  Sondakwa.
Some  years  ago  he  had  already  a  desire  to  become  a
Christian ;  he  never  felt  anything  but  love  for  us,
and  for  the  things  of  the  Faith,  and  has  always  lived
in  a  [73]  state  of  moral  innocence  and  of  goodness
that  made  him  loved  by  all.  But  as  he  saw  that
there  was  ill  will  against  the  Christians,  and,  more-
over, as  his  office  compelled  him  to  uphold  the  super-
stitions of  his  country,  which  constitute  the  greater
portion  of  their  Councils,  his  courage  was  not  strong
enough  to  choose  altogether  what  he  only  partly
desired.  After  the  death  of  a  friend  of  his,  who
was  a  Christian,  and  of  whom  I  have  spoken  in  one
of  the  earlier  Chapters,  God  touched  his  heart  more


266  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SUITES  [Vol.26

faire  inftruire,  il  prend  gouft  aux  chofes  du  Ciel,  &
fe  refout  "k  embraffer  publiquement  la  Foy.  Le
Diable  Ik  deffus  refpouuante  en  fonge ;  tantoft  il  voit
deuant  fes  yeux  vn  Capitaine  de  fes  anciens  amis,  qui
reuenant  de  1 'autre  monde  luy  reproche  fon  peu
d' amour,  de  vouloir  ainli  fe  feparer  pour  vn  iamais  de
tous  ceux  qui  auoient  tant  d'amour  pour  luy.  Vne
autre  fois  il  aper9oit  vn  vifage  inconu,  qui  luy  met
en  bouche  vn  morceau  qui  doit  le  rendre  bien  heu-
reux ;  &  en  effet  fe  reueillant  il  trouue  fur  fa  langue  ie
ne  f9ay  quoy  qu'il  ne  pent  recognoifhre ;  qu'vn  Hu-
ron Infidele  euft  tenu  pour  [74]  vne  marque  de  bon-
beur,  &  qu'il  euft  conferue  comme  vn  prefent  de  quel-
que  Demon  familier:  car  c'eft  ainfi  que  les  demons
fe  comuniquent  en  ces  pais  fous  des  formes  emprun-
t6es,  tantoft  d'vn  ongle  de  hibou,  tantoft  d'vne  peau
de  quelque  ferpent  monftrueux,  ou  de  chofes  fem-
blables  qui  apportent  auec  foy  le  bon-heur  pour  la
pefche  &  la  chaffe,  pour  le  trafiq  &  le  ieu;  d'aucuns
mefmes  font  en  vfage  comme  des  philtres  pour  atti-
rer  a  foy  1' amour.

Noftre  Catechumene  eftoit  defia  trop  auant  dans
les  fentimens  de  la  Foy  pour  s'eftonner  de  ces
menaces,  ou  fe  rendre  aux  promeffes  du  Diable.  II
renonce  a  tout  ce  commerce  d'enfer,  fon  recours  eft
k  Dieu ;  &  depuis  fon  Baptefme  tous  ces  phantofmes
difparurent.  II  fait  incontinant  profeffion  publique
de  la  Foy,  refufe  d'affifter  aux  Confeils  ou  il  s'agiroit
de  quelque  chofe  defendue  par  les  loix  de  Dieu,  &  veut
que  tout  le  pais  f9ache  qu'il  prefere  les  deuoirs  de
Chreflien  a  toute  autre  chofe ;  &  le  bon  eft  qu'en
tout  eel  a,  quoy  qu'il  faffe  paroiftre  vn  courage  vraye-
ment  heroique,    [75]   foulant  aux  pieds  tous  les  ref-


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  267

deeply.  He  commenced  to  receive  instruction,  he
took  pleasure  in  Heavenly  things,  and  resolved
publicly  to  embrace  the  Faith.  Thereupon  the  Devil
frightens  him  in  dreams.  Sometimes  he  sees  before
his  eyes  a  Captain,  who  had  been  one  of  his  old
friends,  who  comes  back  from  the  other  world,  and
reproaches  him  with  his  want  of  affection  in  seeking
thus  to  separate  himself  forever  from  all  those  who
had  such  affection  for  him.  On  another  occasion,  he
sees  one  whose  face  he  does  not  know,  who  puts  in
his  mouth  a  morsel  that  is  to  make  him  very  fortu-
nate ;  and  indeed,  on  awakening,  he  finds  something
on  his  tongue  that  he  cannot  recognize,  and  that  an
Infidel  Huron  would  have  considered  as  [74]  a  sign
of  good  fortune,  and  would  have  preserved  as  a  gift
from  some  familiar  Demon.  For  it  is  thus  that  the
demons  manifest  themselves  in  these  countries,
under  assumed  shapes, —  sometimes  an  owl's  claw,
sometimes  the  skin  of  a  hideous  serpent,  or  similar
things,  that  bring  with  them  good  luck  in  fishing
and  hunting,  in  trading  and  gambling.  Some  of
them  are  even  used  as  philters  to  attract  love.

Our  Catechumen  was  already  too  far  advanced  in
the  sentiments  of  the  Faith  to  be  frightened  by  such
threats,  or  to  yield  to  the  Devil's  promises.  He
renounces  all  such  hellish  intercourse;  he  has  re-
course to  God;  and  after  his  Baptism  all  these  phan-
toms disappear.  He  at  once  makes  a  public  profes-
sion of  Faith,  refuses  to  attend  the  Councils  when
anything  forbidden  by  the  laws  of  God  is  to  be
discussed,  and  wishes  the  entire  country  to  know  that
he  prefers  the  duty  of  a  Christian  to  everything
else.  And  the  best  part  of  all  is,  that  in  all  this, —
although  he  has  manifested  a  truly  heroic  courage,


268  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.26

pedis  humains,  qui  ne  regnent  pas  moins  icy  qu'en
France,  c'efl  toutefois  auec  vn  efprit  de  douceur  fi
aymable,  que  les  plus  ennemis  de  la  Foy  ne  peuuent
rien  reprendre  en  luy.  Auffi  a-t'il  a  coeur  cette  vertu
de  manfuetude,  comme  la  voye  la  plus  puiffante  de
gagner  les  Infideles  k  lefus-Chrift.

Mes  freres,  dit-il  fouuent  aux  Chrefliens  qu'il
exhorte,  prefchons  aux  Infideles  par  nos  exemples,  &
fur  tout  prenons  garde  a  ne  les  pas  aigrir.  Vn  efprit
altere  fe  reuolte  contre  foy  mefme  &  centre  Dieu;  la
verite  ne  luy  paroift  qu'au  milieu  d'vn  nuage,  &  il  ne
pent  auoir  d'amour  pour  la  vertu,  quelque  beaute
qu'elle  ayt  tandis  qu'il  la  regarde  comme  ennemie  de
fon  peche.  Gagnons  les  a  Dieu  par  amour,  fuppor-
tons  leur  foibleffe,  ayons  compaffion  de  leurs  f antes,
ne  parlons  point  fi  vous  voulez  de  nos  myfteres,
pourueu  que  nous  rendions  noftre  vie  fi  aymable  par
fon  innocence,  qu'ils  foient  contraints  en  nous  aymant
d'aymer  la  Foy.

Le  fecond  de  ces  Capitaines  fe  nomme  \j6'\  Mathu-
rin  Aftiskb'a.  C'eft  vne  humeur  toute  cotraire  k
celuy  dont  ie  vies  de  parler:  ce  n'eft  qu'ardeur,  ce
n'eft  que  feu  &  flamme,  &  comme  il  eft  d'vn  excellent
efprit  &  naturellement  eloquent,  il  ne  pent  cotenir
fon  zele,  il  faut  qu'il  reprenne  le  vice,  qu'il  faffe  la
guerre  au  peche,  qu'il  confonde  les  Infideles,  qu'il  fe
mocque  de  tons  leurs  demons,  qu'il  parle  des  gran-
deurs de  Dieu,  des  beautez  de  la  Foy,  du  miferable
eftat  des  hommes  en  cette  vie,  fi  I'attente  d'vn  bon-
heur  eternel  n'adoucilToit  leurs  peines,  ne  moderoit
les  craintes  ineuitables  d'vne  mort  qu'ils  ont  toufiours
deuant  les  yeux,  &  ne  contentoit  les  defirs  infatiables
qu'ils  reffentent  de  fe  voir  bien-heureux.     Mon  coeur,


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  269


[75]  by  trampling  on  all  human  considerations,  which
prevail  here  not  less  than  in  France, —  he  nevertheless
acts  with  such  loving  gentleness  that  those  who  are
most  hostile  to  the  Faith  can  find  nothing  to  blame
in  him.  For  this  reason,  this  virtue  of  mildness  is
dear  to  his  heart  as  the  most  powerful  means  of
winning  the  Infidels  to  Jesus  Christ.

"  My  brothers,"  he  often  says  to  the  Christians
whom  he  exhorts,  "  let  us  preach  to  the  Infidels  by
our  examples,  and  let  us,  above  all,  be  careful  not  to
embitter  them.  A  mind  that  is  offended  turns  against
itself  and  against  God.  Truth  appears  to  it  only  in
the  midst  of  a  cloud ;  and  it  can  have  no  love  for
virtue,  however  beautiful  it  may  be,  while  it  looks
upon  that  as  hostile  to  its  own  sin.  Let  us  win  them
over  to  God  by  love ;  let  us  bear  with  their  weak-
ness ;  let  us  have  compassion  on  their  faults ;  let  us
not  speak  of  our  mysteries,  if  you  will,  provided  that
we  make  our  lives  so  lovable  by  their  innocence  that
the  Infidels  shall  be  constrained,  in  loving  us,  to
love  the  Faith."

The  second  of  these  Captains  is  named  [76]
Mathurin  Astiskwa.  He  is  of  an  altogether  different
humor  from  him  whom  I  have  just  mentioned.  He
is  all  ardor,  all  fire  and  flame,  and  as  he  has  an  excel-
lent mind,  and  is  naturally  eloquent,  he  cannot
restrain  his  zeal.  He  must  reprove  vice;  he  must
make  war  on  sin;  he  must  confound  the  Infidels;
he  must  scoff  at  all  their  demons ;  he  must  speak  of
the  greatness  of  God,  of  the  beauty  of  the  Faith,  of
the  miserable  condition  in  which  men  would  be  in
this  life,  if  the  hope  of  eternal  happiness  did  not
lighten  their  troubles,  did  not  moderate  the  inevita-
ble fear  of  a  death  that  is  ever  before  their  eyes,  and


270  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  26

dit-il,  eft  tout  a  Dieu,  &  ne  fongeant  qu'a  luy  ie  ne
puis  parler  que  de  luy.  Le  Ciel  &  la  terre  &  les
eaux,  tout  m'inuite  ^  le  louer  fans  ceffe:  &  quand
mefme  ie  cellerois  de  regarder  les  ouurages  qu'il  a
expof6  a  nos  yeux,  pour  fe  faire  connoiftre,  iamais
ie  ne  cefferay  de  I'aymer.  Mais  ce  qui  eft  d'excel-
lent  en  cet  homme,  fes  adtions  parlent  plus  haut
que  fes  paroles.  II  a  renonc6  ^  fa  charge  \j']'\  de
Capitaine,  crainte  de  s'y  voir  engage  a  quelque
offenfe  centre  Dieu :  fa  mere,  fa  femme,  fes  parens,
tout  fon  bourg  s'eft  bande  contre  luy ;  rien  de  tout
cela  ne  I'a  pu  efbranler.  La  pauurete,  nous  difoit-
il,  ne  m'eftonnera  pas,  Dieu  me  feruira  de  parens,  &
de  mere  &  luy  feul  fera  mon  appuy.  Que  ma  femme
s'eloigne  de  moy  &  me  rauiffe  mes  enfans;  ie  les
ayme  en  effet  plus  que  chofe  du  monde,  mais  iamais
leur  amour  n'empefchera  celuy  de  Dieu.  Mon  coeur
eft  difpof6  k  tout,  vn  regard  vers  le  Ciel  me  fait  pa-
roiftre  come  vn  rien  tout  ce  que  ie  voy  fur  la  terre,
&  la  Foy  que  i'ay  d'vn  enfer  me  fait  enuifager  les
miferes  de  cette  vie  comme  de  petits  maux,  qui  ne
meritent  pas  nos  craintes,  lors  qu'il  eft  queftion  d'e-
uiter  vn  malheur  eternel.  Enfin  fa  patience  a  gagne
les  plus  Infideles,  fon  courage  les  a  contraint  d'ad-
uoiier  que  la  Foy  efleue  vn  coeur  au  deffus  &  des  biens
&  des  malheurs  de  cette  vie :  &  fa  ioye  qui  paroilToit
dans  le  plus  fort  de  toutes  ces  trauerfes  leur  a  fait
reconnoiftre  qu'il  y  a  des  plaifirs  en  I'homme  autres
que  ceux  du  corps,  &  ou  les  fens  n'ont  point  de  part.
[78]  Le  troifiefme  de  ces  Capitaines  Neophytes  eft
chef  d'vne  bande  d'enuiron  trois  cens  hommes  de
guerre,  qui  demeuroient  k  vne  iourn6e  des  Iroquois
plus  proches  des  Hurons,  mais  fe  voyans  trop  expo-


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  27 1

did  not  satisfy  the  insatiate  desire  that  they  feel,  of
seeing  themselves    happy.     "  My  heart,"    he   said,
"  belongs  entirely  to  God,  and,  as  I  think  but  of  him,
I  can  speak  of  him  alone.       Heaven  and  earth  and
the  waters,  all  call  on  me  to  praise  him  continually;
and,  even  if  I  should  cease  to  look  upon  the  works
that  he  exhibits  before  our  eyes,  in  order  to  manifest
himself,  I   would  never   cease    to    love    him."     But
what    is    excellent  in   this  man   is,  that  his  actions
speak    more    loudly  than    his    words.      He    has   re-
nounced his  office  \y']'\  of  Captain,  for  fear  that  it
might  compel  him  to  some  offense  against  God.     His
mother,  his  wife,   his  relatives,   all  his  village,   are
leagued   against   him;  but    nothing  of    all  this  has
shaken  him.     "  Poverty,"  he  said  to  us,  "  will  not
frighten  me.     God  shall  take  the  place  of  relatives
and  of  my  mother,  and  he  alone  shall  be  my  support.
Let  my  wife  leave  me,  and  deprive  me  of  my  chil-
dren.    It  is  true  that  I  love  them  above  all  else  in
the  world,  but  their  love  shall  never  prevent  my  love
for  God.     My  heart  is  prepared  for  everything.     A
glance  toward  Heaven  makes  all  that  I  see  on  earth
appear  to  me  as  nothing ;  and  the  Belief  that  I  have
in  a  hell  causes  me  to  look  upon  the  miseries  of  this
life  as  slight  evils,  which  are  unworthy  of  fear  when
there  is  a  question  of  avoiding  eternal  unhappiness."
At    last,    his    patience    has   won    over   the    greatest
Infidels;  his  courage  has  compelled  them  to  admit
that  Faith  lifts  the  heart  above  both  the  blessings
and   the   misfortunes  of  this  life;  and  his  joy,  that
manifested  itself  in  the  midst  of  all  these  trials,  has
made  them  acknowledge  that  there  are  pleasures  for
mankind  other  than  those  of  the  body,  and  in  which
the  senses  have  no  share.


272


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JASUITES  [Vol.  26


fez  k  I'ennemy  abandonnerent  leur  pais  il  y  a  enui-
ron  cinq  ans,  amenerent  icy  leurs  families,  &  depuis
fe  font  r^pandus  9^  &  Ik  dans  les  bourgades  Huron-
nes.  Ce  Capitaine  fe  nomme  Martin  Tehoachiak^an.
C'efl:  vn  courage  qui  ne  refpire  que  la  guerre,  &  fa
vie  n'eft  qu'vne  fuite  de  combats.  II  eftoit  amy  in-
time  de  ce  grand  guerrier  Euftache  Ahatfiflari  dont
nous  auons  defia  parle,  &  luy  auoit  promis  de  fon
viuant  qu'il  le  fuiuroit  en  la  Foy.  Mais  le  malheur
arriue  k  ce  fien  amy  fi  peu  de  teps  apres  qu'il  auoit
receu  le  Baptefme,  nous  faifoit  croire  que  ces
promelfes  n'auroient  pas  leur  effet,  que  pluftofl  il
auroit  auerfion  de  la  Foy,  qu'il  redouteroit  le  Baptef-
me, &  feroit  confirme  dans  vne  opinion  commune  en
ces  pais,  que  fe  faire  Chreftien  c'eft  renoncer  a  cette
vie  &  appeller  a  foy  la  mort.  Dieu  toutefois  a  tir6
nos  aduantages  de  nos  pertes,  fes  voyes  font  [79]
efloignees  de  nos  penfees,  &  il  veut  que  la  mort  d'vn
Chreftien  foit  la  femance  &  le  germe  d'vn  autre.  Ce
fut  alors  que  ce  Capitaine  encore  Infidele  fe  fentit
plus  touche  au  coeur,  qu'il  commen9a  k  redouter  plus
le  feu  d'enfer  que  la  mort,  &  que  la  penfee  de  fe
voir  vn  iour  bien-heureux  dans  le  Ciel  auec  I'ame
de  cet  amy  qu'il  regrettoit,  luy  en  fit  prendre  le
chemin.  Non,  difoit-il  au  Pere  qui  I'inaruifoit,  tu
m'aurois  defia  baptize  fi  tu  voyois  mon  coeur,  tu  ferois
conuaincu  que  ie  defire  bien  faire,  &  que  quoy  qu'il
arriue  ie  veux  viure  &  mourir  Chreftien.  Veux  tu
done  que  ie  fois  damne,  adiouftoit-il  vne  autre  fois;
ie  fuis  continuellement  ou  k  la  chalfe  dans  les  bois,
ou  aux  prifes  auec  I'ennemy;  en  quelque  part  que
i'aille  ie  fuis  en  danger  de  ma  vie,  &  le  feu  pluftoft
que  la  vieilleffe  confommera  cette  charogne  que  tu


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  273

[78]  The  third  of  these   Neophyte  Captains  is  the
chief    of  a  band  of  about  three    hundred    warriors,
who  lived  a  day's  journey  from  the  Iroquois  that  are
nearest   to   the    Hurons,   but   who,   when    they   saw
themselves  exposed  to  the  enemy,  left  their  country
about  five    years    ago,  brought  their  families  here,
and  since  then  have  been  scattered  here  and  there
among  the  Huron  villages.     This  Captain  is  named
Martin  Tehoachiakwan.      He   is  a  brave  man,   who
breathes  but  war;  and  his  life  is  but  a  series  of  com-
bats.    He  was  the  intimate  friend  of  the  great  war-
rior Eustache  Ahatsistari,  of  whom  Ave  have  already
spoken,  and  had  promised  him  during  his  lifetime
that  he  would  follow  him  in  the  Faith.      But  the
misfortune  that  happened  to  his  friend,  so  soon  after
he  had  received  Baptism,  made  us  suppose  that  those
promises  would  not  be  fulfilled, — that,  on  the  con-
trary, he  would  have  an  aversion  to  the  Faith ;  that
he  would  dread  Baptism,  and  would  be  confirmed  in
the  general  opinion  of  these  countries,  that  to  be-
come a  Christian  is  to  renounce  life,  and  to  call  down
death  upon  oneself.     God  however  has  turned  our
losses  to  our  advantage.     His  ways  are  [79]  remote
from  our  thoughts  and  he  ordains  that  the  death  of
one  Christian  shall  be  the  seed  and  germ  of  another.
It  was  then  that  this  Captain,  while  still  an  Infidel,
felt  his  heart  more  deeply  touched,  and  began  to  fear
hell-fire  more  than  death ;  and  then  the  thought  of
being  one  day  happy  in  Heaven,  with  the  soul  of  the
friend  whom  he  regretted,  induced  him  to  enter  upon
the  road  to  it.     "  No,"  he  said  to  the   Father  who
taught  him,    "  thou  wouldst  already  have  baptized
me  if  thou  couldst  have  seen  my  heart ;  thou  wouldst
have  been  convinced  that  I  wish  to  do  right,  and


274  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jiSUITES  [Vol.26

voy:  que  deuiendra  mon  ame  fi  tu  n' effaces  mes
pechez?  veux  tu  que  d'vn  malheur  ie  me  precipite
en  vn  autre,  &  que  ie  meure  fans  eftre  baptize?

Ayant  eu  iour  pour  fon  Baptefme  il  affembla  fes
gens.  Mes  neueux,  leur  dit-il,  [80]  les  ennemis  font
k  nos  portes,  fe  fauue  qui  pourra:  reprochez  moy
fi  iamais  vous  m'auez  veu  paflir  au  milieu  des  perils;
mais  a  ce  coup  ie  vous  confeffe  que  i'ay  perdu  cou-
rage, ie  me  retire  du  malheur,  me  fuiue  qui  voudra,
nos  affaires  font  au  defefpoir.  On  iuge  k  I'entendre
parler  qu'vne  armee  ennemie  eft  aux  frontieres  du
pais,  qu'il  en  a  eu  quelque  aduis  affeure:  les  vns
fonofent  aux  armes,  les  autres  k  la  retraite,  tons  font
faifis  de  crainte.  Enfin  les  voyant  dedans  I'emotion
il  reprend  la  parole.  Mes  neueux,  leur  dit-il,  ie  ne
Grains  pas  les  Iroquois,  ie  redoute  les  cruautez  plus
inhumaines  des  demons  de  I'enfer,  d'vn  feu  qui  iamais
ne  s'efteint;  ie  vous  quitte  fans  vous  quitter,  ou  plu-
ftoft  ie  quitte  vos  fotifes,  i'abandonne  nos  mauuaifes
couflumes,  ie  renonce  des  ce  moment  a  toute  forte
de  peche,  &  f9achez  que  demain  ie  feray  Chreftien.

Ces  Baptefmes  de  perf onnes  fi  confiderables  en  ont
attire  plufieurs  autres,  mais  ce  qui  nous  confole
dauantage,  eft  de  voir  que  I'efprit  de  la  Foy  prenne
touiours  de  plus  en  plus  I'afcendat  dans  leurs  [81]
ames,  que  la  grace  trouue  entree  dans  leurs  coeurs
autant  que  dans  les  noftres,  &  que  pour  eltre  nez  bar-
bares  ils  n'en  font  pas  moins  bons  Chreitiens.

Mon  fils,  difoit  vn  iour  vn  de  ces  bons  fauuages  "k
vn  fien  fils  qu'il  exhortoit  au  bien,  maintenant  que
ie  fuis  au  monde  ie  crains  que  ta  foy  ne  foit  appuyee
furlamienne.  Quoy  qu'il  m'arriue  ne  defifte  iamais
du  feruice  de  Dieu,  &  quand  bien  ie  ferois  maffacre,


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  275

that,  whatever  happens,  I  desire  to  live  and  to  die  a
Christian."  "Dost  then  wish  me  to  be  damned?"
he  said  another  time ;  "  I  am  continually  either  hunt-
ing in  the  woods  or  fighting  the  enemy.  Wherever
I  go,  I  am  in  danger  of  my  life;  and  fire,  rather  than
old  age,  will  consume  this  carcass  that  thou  seest.
What  will  become  of  my  soul,  if  thou  dost  not  wash
away  my  sins?  Dost  thou  wish  me  to  throw  myself
from  one  misfortune  into  another,  and  to  die  without
being  baptized  ? ' '

A  day  having  been  fixed  for  his  Baptism,  he  gath-
ered all  his  people  together.  "  My  nephews,"  he
said  to  them,  [80]  "  the  enemies  are  at  our  doors.
Let  all  escape  who  can.  Reproach  me,  if  you  have
ever  seen  me  pale  in  the  midst  of  peril;  but,  this
time,  I  confess  to  you  that  I  have  lost  courage.  I
withdraw  from  misfortune;  let  who  will,  follow  me;
our  affairs  are  in  a  desperate  state."  They  thought,
when  they  heard  him,  that  a  hostile  army  was  at  the
frontiers  of  the  country,  and  that  he  had  received
sure  news  of  it.  Some  thought  of  fighting,  others
of  retreating;  all  were  seized  with  fear.  Finally,
when  he  saw  them  thus  moved,  he  began  again  to
speak.  "  My  nephews,"  he  said,  "  I  do  not  fear  the
Iroquois ;  I  dread  the  more  inhuman  cruelties  of  the
devils  in  hell,  in  a  fire  that  is  never  extinguished.  I
abandon  you,  without  abandoning  you,  or  rather  I
abandon  your  follies;  I  abandon  our  evil  customs;
from  this  moment,  I  renounce  all  kinds  of  sin,  and
know  ye  that  to-morrow  I  shall  be  a  Christian."

These  Baptisms  of  persons  of  such  importance
have  brought  about  many  others.  But  what  consoles
us  still  more  is,  to  see  that  the  spirit  of  Faith  gains
more  and  more  the  ascendancy  in  their  [81]  souls;


276  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

dy  toufiours  d'vn  mefme  vifage,  Noftre  Pere  qui  es
au  Ciel,  ne  fonge  pas  ^  moy  difant  cette  priere,  mais
fouuiens-toy  que  celuy-la  ne  peut  mourir  qui  doit
eftre  I'vnique  appuy  &  de  ta  foy  &  de  la  mienne,  qui
eft  ton  Pere  &  le  mien,  &  qui  feul  doit  fouflenir  tes
efperances,  quad  bien  tu  te  verrois  abandonne  de
tous  les  hommes.  le  ne  f9ay  pas  fi  Dieu  auoit  donne
'k  ce  bon  fauuage  quelque  veue  de  fa  mort  prochaine,
quoy  qu'il  en  foit  il  fut  affaffin^  peu  de  iours  apres
d'vne  bande  Iroquoife;  &  I'enfant  a  peine  aag6  de
quatorze  ans  a  tellement  fuiuy  la  vertu  de  fon  pere,
ces  dernieres  paroles  ont  fait  tant  d'impreffion  dedans
fon  ame,  que  ie  ne  puis  douter  que  cet  [82]  efprit  di-
uin  qui  touche  fortement  d'vne  extremity  a  I'autre,
&  va  difpofant  toutes  chofes  auec  douceur  potir  le
falut  de  fes  efleus,  n'euft  anime  &  le  coeur  &  la  voix
de  ce  pere,  afin  qu'en  mefme  temps  il  le  difpofaft  "k
vne  faindte  mort,  &  le  fils  k  vne  faindtete  de  vie  digne
du  nom  de  Chreftien,  &  de  la  Foy  que  toufiours  il  a
du  depuis  conferue  malgr6  fa  mere  &  tous  fes  parens
Infideles,  en  vn  aage  qui  ne  peut  auoir  de  refolution
pour  vn  fuiet  fi  efloigne  des  fentimens  de  la  nature,
fmon  celle  qui  vient  du  Ciel.

Cet  enfant  n'a  pas  efte  feul  vex6  de  fes  parens
k  caufe  de  la  Foy:  plufieurs  ont  eu  befoin  d'vn
femblable  courage.  Tel  a  efte  contraint  de  fe  voir
errant  9^  &  1^,  &  de  chercher  ailleurs  fa  vie,  eftant
chaffe  de  fa  cabane  oil  on  ne  pouuoit  le  fupporter
das  I'exercice  de  Chreftien.  D'autres  fe  font  bannis
eux  mefmes  de  leur  propre  maifon,  fe  font  priuez
des  contentemens  de  la  vie,  &  du  fuport  de  leurs
parens,  aimans  mieux  renoncer  aux  douceurs  de
cette  amiti6,  &  abandonner  cet  appuy  de  la  nature.


1642-44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-44  111

that  grace  finds  entrance  into  their  hearts  as  much
as  into  ours;  and  that,  although  they  are  born
barbarians,  they  are  none  the  less  good  Christians.

"  My  son,"  said  one  of  these  good  savages  one  day
to  his  son,  whom  he  was  exhorting  to  good,  "  now
that  I  am  in  the  world  I  fear  that  thy  faith  is  founded
on  mine.  Whatever  may  happen  to  me,  never  desert
the  service  of  God ;  and,  even  if  I  should  be  slain,
say  always,  with  the  same  countenance,  '  Our  Fa-
ther who  art  in  Heaven.'  Do  not  think  of  me  while
saying  that  prayer;  but  remember  that  he  cannot
die  who  should  be  the  sole  prop  of  thy  faith  and  of
mine, —  who  is  thy  Father  and  mine,  and  who  alone
should  sustain  thy  hopes,  even  if  thou  shouldst  see
thyself  abandoned  by  all  men."  I  know  not  whether
God  had  given  this  good  savage  some  presentiment
of  his  approaching  death.  In  any  case,  he  was  assas-
sinated a  few  days  afterward  by  a  band  of  Iroquois.
The  child,  who  was  barely  fourteen  years  old,  has  so
well  imitated  the  virtue  of  his  father,  and  his  last
words  have  produced  such  an  impression  on  his
mind,  that  I  cannot  doubt  that  this  [82]  divine  spirit,
who  so  profoundly  influences,  from  one  extremity  to
the  other,  and  who  disposes  of  all  things  with  gentle-
ness for  the  salvation  of  his  elect,  had  inspired  both
the  heart  and  the  voice  of  the  father.  Thus,  at  the
same  time,  he  prepared  himself  for  a  holy  death,
and  the  son  for  a  godliness  of  life  worthy  of  the  name
of  Christian  and  of  the  Faith,  that  he  has  since  pre-
served in  spite  of  his  mother  and  of  all  his  Infidel
relatives,  at  an  age  which  has  no  resolution  in  a
matter  so  remote  from  the  feelings  of  nature  except
that  which  comes  from  Heaven.

This  child  has  not  been  the  only  one  who  has  been


278  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

que  de  foiiiller  la  beaute  de  la  grace  qu'ils  auoient
receue  [83]  au  Baptefme.  Car  plus,  difoient-ils,
nous  fentons  d'inclination  pour  nos  parens,  moins
d'horreur  auons  nous  naturellement  de  leurs  fautes,
&  plus  auffi  deuons  nous  craindre  qu'en  les  aimant
nous  n'aimions  enfin  leurs  pechez.

Tons  les  Chreftiens  de  cette  Miffion  ont  efte  forte-
ment  dans  I'efpreuue,  principalement  fur  la  fin  de
I'hyuer.  Car  comme  leur  nombre  s'eftoit  rendu  con-
fiderable,  qu'ils  tenoient  bon  ^  ne  point  vouloir  affi-
fler  aux  fuperftitions  du  pais,  qu'en  fuite  de  cela  ces
ceremonies  diaboliques  eftoiet  delaiff^es  de  plufieurs,
que  les  debauches  deuenoient  vn  peu  refroidies ;  on
redoubla  les  calomnies  contre  la  Foy,  qu'elle  tendoit
k  la  fubuerfion  du  pais,  que  les  malades  demeuroient
fans  fecours,  que  la  guerre  alloit  tout  rauageant  de
plus  en  plus,  que  la  famine  les  mena9oit,  que  les  plus
innocentes  recreations  (c'eft  ainfi  qu'ils  appellet
leurs  crimes)  ne  trouuoient  plus  quafi  de  lieu,  &  que
par  tout  ou  fe  rencontroit  vn  Chreftien,  il  falloit  ou
rougir  de  honte,  ou  abandonner  la  penfee  du  pech6,
que  leurs  anceftres  ne  viuoient  pas  dans  ces  [84]  re-
ferues,  qu'en  ce  temps  la  le  pais  eftoit  floriffant,  que
tous  les  malheurs  les  accueilloient  depuis  qu'on  auoit
commence  de  publier  icy  la  parole  de  Dieu,  que  les
croyans  (c'eft  icy  le  nom  des  Chreftiens)  deuoient  ou
bien  fe  retirer  k  part,  ou  conferuer  leur  Foy  dans  le
fond  de  leur  ame,  fans  condamner  fi  publiquement
les  couftumes  de  leurs  peres,  qu'il  ne  falloit  plus
les  inuiter  ny  aux  confeils,  ny  aux  feflins,  qu'on  de-
uoit  rompre  le  commerce  auec  eux :  ou  pluftoft  fi  on
vouloit  conferuer  le  pais,  aflembler  fans  delay  vn
Confeil  general  pour  faire  renocer  la  Foy  ou  de  gr6


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  279


persecuted  by  his  relatives  on  account  of  the  Faith.
Many  have  had  need  of  similar  courage.  One  has
been  compelled  to  wander  here  and  there,  and  to
seek  his  livelihood  elsewhere,  after  having  been
driven  from  his  cabin  where  they  could  not  bear  his
observance  of  Christian  duties.  Others  have  banished
themselves  from  their  own  dwellings ;  have  deprived
themselves  of  the  comforts  of  life,  and  of  the  aid  of
their  parents, —  preferring  to  renounce  the  pleasures
of  such  friendship,  and  to  abandon  this  natural
support,  rather  than  soil  the  beauty  of  the  grace  that
they  had  received  [83]  in  Baptism.  "  For,"  they
said,  "the  more  affection  we  feel  for  our  parents,
the  less  horror  we  naturally  have  for  their  faults;
and  the  more  also  should  we  fear  that,  in  loving
them,  we  may  in  the  end  love  their  sins."

All  the  Christians  of  this  Mission  were  greatly
tried,  especially  at  the  end  of  the  winter.  For,  as
their  number  had  become  considerable,  and  they  firm-
ly persisted  in  refusing  to  join  in  the  superstitious
practices  of  the  country, — so  that  those  diabolical
ceremonies  were  given  up  by  many,  and  the  de-
baucheries moderated  to  some  extent, — the  calum-
nies against  the  Faith  redoubled.  They  asserted
that  it  tended  to  the  subversion  of  the  country ;  that
the  sick  remained  without  succor ;  that  war  ravaged
everything  more  and  more ;  that  famine  threatened
them ;  that  the  most  harmless  amusements  (thus  they
called  their  crimes)  could  hardly  be  indulged  in;
that  wherever  a  Christian  happened  to  be,  they  had
to  blush  with  shame  or  give  up  the  thought  of  sin ;
that  their  ancestors  did  not  live  in  such  [84]  restraint.
They  claimed  that  in  those  days  the  country  flour-
ished ;  that  all  these  misfortunes  had  fallen  on  them


280  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jASUJTES  [Vol.  26

ou  de  force  k  ceux  qui  fe  trouuoient  defia  dans  ce
party.  En  vn  mot  les  calomnies  en  viennent  fi  auat,
&  cette  haine  contre  la  Foy  eft  rendue  fi  publique,
que  les  Chreftiens,  qui  du  commencement  ne  croy-
oient  pas  que  les  affaires  en  deuffent  venir  k  ce  point,
iugerent  qu'il  falloit  au  pluftoft  coniurer  cet  orage.
lis  s'afCemblent  pour  cet  effet  &  cherchent  les
moyens  de  parer  h.  ce  coup :  mais  plus  ils  parlent  Ik
deffus,  plus  ils  y  voyent  d'obfcurit6.  Enfin  I'vn
d'eux  [85]  prend  la  parole.  Mes  freres,  leur  dit-il,  ce
font  les  affaires  de  Dieu  plus  que  les  noftres,  c'eft  S.
luy  d'appaifer  ces  tempeftes,  &  a  nous  de  fouffrir
auec  ioye,  ou  du  moins  auec  patience  autant  qu'il  le
voudra.  Voila  les  fentimens  que  Dieu  me  donne,
faites  moy  part  des  voflres,  puifque  nos  coeurs  n'e-
ftans  qu'vn  dans  la  Foy  ne  doiuet  auoir  rien  de  fecret
lors  qu'on  s'attaque  k  nous  comme  Chrefties.  Pour
moy,  dit  I'vn,  lors  que  i'entends  ces  calomnies,  &
que  les  iniures  me  fuiuent,  ie  paffe  mon  chemin,  ie
penfe  que  ces  pauures  Infideles  font  comme  des
chiens  qui  abayent.  Que  m'importe  quoy  qu'ils
difent  ou  faffent  contre  moy,  pourueu  que  i'aille  au
Ciel.  Ie  me  tourne  vers  eux,  replique  vn  autre,  ie
leur  dis  qu'ils  prennent  courage,  qu'ils  continuent  a
me  maudire,  que  Dieu  me  fait  du  bien  lors  qu'ils  me
font  du  mal,  &  qu'en  me  difant  ces  iniures,  ils  atti-
rent  fur  moy  vn  amas  de  benedidtions  qui  leur  font
inconnues.  Mon  coeur,  dit  vn  troifieme,  voudroit
bien  quelquefois  fe  vanger,  mais  quand  ie  fonge  que
lefus-Chrift  eftant  fur  terre  a  plus  endure  que  cela,
ie  me  confole,  &  [86]  ie  le  prie  qu'il  me  donne  cou-
rage iufqu'k  la  fin.  Chacun  auance  fes  penfees,  &
apr6s  tout  ils  reconnoiffent  que    Dieu   eft   toufiours


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  281

since  the  word  of  God  had  commenced  to  be  preached
here;  that  the  believers  (such  is  the  name  of  the
Christians  here)  should  either  withdraw  apart,  or
retain  their  Faith  in  the  depths  of  their  own  souls,
without  condemning  the  customs  of  their  forefathers
in  so  public  a  manner ;  that  these  should  not  be  in-
vited either  to  councils  or  to  feasts,  and  that  all  rela-
tions with  them  should  be  broken  off, — or  rather,  if
it  were  desired  to  preserve  the  country,  a  general
Council  should  be  called  at  once,  to  make  those  who
were  already  of  that  party  renounce  the  Faith,  either
willingly  or  by  force.  In  a  word,  these  calumnies
went  so  far,  and  this  hatred  against  the  Faith  became
so  public,  that  the  Christians  —  who,  at  the  begin-
ning, did  not  think  that  matters  would  come  to  such
a  pass  —  considered  it  necessary  to  avert  the  storm
as  soon  as  possible.

They  assemble  for  that  purpose,  and  seek  means
whereby  to  parry  the  blow.  But  the  more  they  speak
of  it,  the  less  clearly  do  they  see.  Finally,  one  of
them  [85]  addressing  the  others,  says,  "  My  broth-
ers, these  are  God's  affairs  more  than  ours.  It  is  for
him  to  allay  these  tempests,  and  for  us  to  suffer  joy-
fully, or  at  least  patiently,  as  long  as  he  chooses.
Such  are  the  sentiments  that  God  gives  me ;  tell  me
yours,  because,  as  our  hearts  are  but  one  in  the
Faith,  they  should  have  no  secrets  from  one  another
when  we  are  attacked  as  Christians."  "For  my
part,"  said  one,  "  when  I  hear  those  calumnies,  and
when  insults  follow  me,  I  go  on  my  way;  I  look  upon
those  poor  Infidels  as  baying  hounds.  What  mat-
ters it  to  me  what  they  say  or  what  they  do  to  me,
provided  I  go  to  Heaven?"  "I  turn  toward  them,"
says  another,  "  and  tell  them  to  take  courage,  to  con-


282  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES         [Vol.  26

femblable  k  foy  mefme,  qu'il  eft  le  Dieu  de  paix,  &
le  Dieu  de  confolation,  &  que  plus  on  endure  pour
luy,  moins  on  s'eilonne  des  fouffrances.

Pour  conclufion,  Mes  freres,  leur  dit  Eftienne
Totiri,  puis  qu'en  cette  affemblee  vous  me  regardez
comme  voftre  Capitaine,  voicy  le  refultat  de  ce  Con-
feil,  &  la  penfee  que  Dieu  me  donne,  Ne  craignons
rien  que  le  peche.

le  ne  fgay  pas  ou  aboutiront  ces  orages,  mais  ie  ne
fuis  pas  hors  d'efperance  de  voir  en  ces  pais,  dans  peu
d'annees,  des  martyrs  pour  la  Foy,  &  pent  eftre  ne
ferons-nous  pas  les  premiers.  La  ferueur  de  quel-
qu'vn  de  ces  bons  Neophytes  meritera  cette  faueur
du  Ciel;  au  moins  i'en  voy  que  Dieu  ce  femble  va
difpofant  k  cette  grace,  qui  mefprifent  leur  vie,  &
enuifagent  cette  mort  comme  vne  recompenfe  de  ce
qu'ils  font  &  voudroient  faire  pour  I'auancement  de
la  Foy.  Quoy  qu'il  en  foit,  ces  defirs  ne  font  pas  dans
la  portee  de  la  nature,  &  les  voy  ant  dedans  [87]  vn
coeur  barbare,  nous  fommes  contraints  de  reconnoiftre
que  c'eft  vn  ouurage  de  Dieu,  qu'il  y  trauaille  plus
que  nous,  &  qu'il  veut  en  tirer  fa  gloire,  c'eft  a  nous
de  le  fuiure,  &  d'affermir  fur  luy  nos  efperances,
quelque  oppofition  que  I'enfer  &  la  terre  puilfent
apporter  k  la  conuerfion  de  ces  peuples.

Ie  m'eftois  referue  fur  la  fin  de  ce  Chapitre  k
rapporter  quelques  fentimens  de  ces  bons  Chreftiens,
mais  la  crainte  de  la  longueur  me  les  fera  obmettre ;
c'efl  afCez  que  le  Ciel  les  voit,  &  que  1' Eternity  nous
donne  tout  le  loifir  de  benir  I'Autheur  de  ces  graces,
qui  par  tout  eft  luy  mefme,  riche  &  abondant  en  fes
mifericordes.  Encore  vne  ou  deux  chofes  auant  que
le  finir.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  283

tinue  to  curse  me ;  that  God  does  good  to  me  when
they  do  evil  to  me ;  and  that,  by  uttering  such  insults
to  me,  they  call  down  on  me  a  multitude  of  blessings
that  are  unknown  to  them."  "My  heart,"  says  a
third,  "would  sometimes  like  to  be  revenged;  but
when  I  think  that  Jesus  Christ,  while  on  earth,  en-
dured more  than  that,  I  console  myself,  and  [86]  beg
him  to  give  me  courage  to  the  end. ' '  Each  one  tells
his  thoughts,  and,  after  all,  they  acknowledge  that
God  is  ever  true  to  himself ;  that  he  is  the  God  of
peace  and  the  God  of  consolation ;  and  that  the  more
we  endure  for  him  the  less  shall  we  be  afraid  of
suffering.

In  conclusion,  "My  brothers,"  says  Estienne  Toti-
ri  to  them,  "since  in  this  meeting  you  look  upon  me
as  your  Captain,  here  is  the  result  of  this  Council,
and  the  thought  that  God  gives  me:  let  us  dread
nothing  but  sin."

I  know  not  how  these  storms  will  end ;  but  I  am
not  without  hope  of  seeing,  in  a  few  years,  martyrs
for  the  Faith  in  these  countries,  and  perhaps  we  shall
not  be  the  first.  The  fervor  of  some  one  of  these
good  Neophytes  will  deserve  that  favor  from  Heaven.
At  least,  I  see  some  whom  God  seems  to  be  preparing
for  that  grace,  who  disregard  their  lives,  and  look
upon  such  a  death  as  a  reward  for  what  they  do  and
wish  to  do  for  the  advancement  of  the  Faith.  In
any  case,  such  desires  are  not  within  the  scope  of
nature ;  and,  when  we  see  them  in  [87]  the  heart  of
a  barbarian,  we  are  compelled  to  admit  that  it  is  a
work  of  God,  who  does  more  for  it  than  we,  and  who
wishes  to  derive  from  it  his  glory.  It  is  for  us  to
follow  him,  and  to  rest  our  hopes  firmly  on  him,


284  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.26

Vn  bon  homme  aage  de  foixante  ans,  fa  femme,  &
deux  de  leurs  enfans,  tons  Chreftiens,  ayant  appris
qu'vne  de  leur  parente  fe  mouroit  au  milieu  des  bois,
&  qu'vn  petit  enfant  encore  k  la  mamelle  ne  pouuoit
furuiure  k  fa  mere,  furent  touchez  de  charite,  &  du
defir  de  fauuer  &  la  mere  &  I'enfant,  au  moins  pour
le  Ciel.  lis  fe  font  tous  inftruire  de  la  formule  [88]
du  Baptefme,  partent  de  compagnie  dans  vn  temps
bien  fafcheux  fur  la  fin  de  I'hyuer,  font  trois  iour-
n6es  entieres  de  chemin  fur  des  neiges  profondes,  &
la  plufpart  fur  les  glaces  d'vn  lac,  qui  eftant  percees
ga  &  Ik  eftoient  remplies  d'autant  de  precipices.  A
peine  faifoient-ils  cent  pas  fur  ce  lac,  qu'ils  ne  fe
vilTent  en  danger  de  la  mort,  &  mefme  quelques-vns
enfoncerent  bien  auant  dedans  I'eau.  Enfin  apres
bien  des  trauaux,  &  bien  des  craintes,  ils  trouuent
cette  pauure  femme  malade,  baptifent  fon  enfant,
fecourent&  I'vn  &  I'autre  des  rafraichiffemens  qu'ils
ont  porte ;  &  ie  ne  doute  point  que  le  Ciel  ne  prilt
plaifir  k  cette  charite,  &  que  Dieu  n'ait  voulu  la  be-
nir.  Maintenant  &  la  mere  &  I'enfant  font  pleins  de
vie,  &  cette  famille  Chreftienne  va  s'auan9ant  de  iour
en  iour  dans  les  fentimens  de  la  Foy.  Non,  difoient-
ils  a  leur  retour,  iamais  nous  n'euffions  cru  qu'il  y
eut  des  plaifirs  fi  remplis  de  douceur  au  milieu  des
perils,  nous  craignions  tous  la  mort  quafi  a  chaque
pas  que  nous  faifios  deffus  ces  glaces,  mais  cette
crainte  eftoit  aimable,  nous  eflions  en  mefme  [89]
temps  &  dans  la  peur  &  dans  la  ioye,  &  iamais  nous
n'auons  prie  Dieu  de  fi  bon  cceur  &  auec  tant
d'amour:  Nous  n'ofions  luy  demander  ny  la  mort  ny
la  vie.  Mon  Dieu,  luy  difions-nous  fans  ceffe,  vous
voyez    noftre    cceur,    &    pourquoy   nous    fommes  en


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  285

whatever  opposition  hell  and  earth  may  offer  to  the
conversion  of  these  peoples.

I  had  intended,  at  the  end  of  this  Chapter,  to  relate
some  sentiments  of  these  good  Christians,  but  fear
of  being  tedious  induces  me  to  omit  them.  It  is
enough  that  Heaven  sees  them,  and  that  Eternity
will  give  us  every  leisure  to  bless  the  Author  of  such
graces,  who  is  everywhere  true  to  himself,  and  rich
and  abundant  in  his  mercies.  One  or  two  things
more  before  finishing.

A  good  man,  sixty  years  of  age,  his  wife,  and  two
of  their  children,  all  Christians,  heard  that  one  of
their  relatives  was  dying  in  the  midst  of  the  woods,
and  that  a  little  child,  still  at  the  breast,  could  not
outlive  her  mother.  They  were  filled  with  compas-
sion, and  with  the  desire  to  save  the  mother  and  the
child  at  least  for  Heaven.  They  all  had  themselves
taught  the  formula  [88]  of  Baptism;  started  in  com-
pany, in  very  bad  weather,  at  the  end  of  the  winter ;
performed  a  three  days'  journey  through  deep  snow
and,  during  most  of  the  time,  on  the  ice  of  a  lake
which  was  broken  here  and  there, — presenting  so
many  pitfalls  that  they  could  hardly  go  a  hundred
paces  on  that  lake  without  seeing  themselves  in  dan-
ger of  death,  and  some  of  them  even  sank  deep  into
the  water.  Finally,  after  great  labor  and  many  fears,
they  found  the  poor  sick  woman,  baptized  her  child,
and  succored  both  of  them  with  the  restoratives  that
they  carried  with  them ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  that
Heaven  took  pleasure  in  that  act  of  charity,  and  that
God  has  chosen  to  bless  it.  At  present,  the  mother
and  child  are  full  of  life,  and  this  Christian  family  is
making  daily  progress  in  the  sentiments  of  Faith.
"No,"  they  said  on  their  return,  "we  would  never


286  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [Vol.26

chemin,  difpofez  de  nos  vies  felon  vos  volontez,  que
noftre  peine  vous  aggr^e,  apr^s  cela  quoy  qu'il  arriue
noftre  efprit  eft  content,  fi  nous  nous  noyons  dedans
ces  eaux  nous  ferons  heureux  dans  le  Ciel.

Nous  auons  introduit  icy  dans  les  Hurons  que  les
Chreftiens  portaffent  leur  chapelet  au  col  comme  vne
marque  de  leur  Foy :  nous  en  voyons  de  bons  effets.
le  ne  fgay,  difoit  vn  iour  vne  femme  infidele  k  vn
ieune  Chreftien,  ce  qui  a  pu  changer  la  beaute  de  ton
naturel:  depuis  que  tu  porte  ce  chapelet  tu  n'es  plus
ce  que  tu  as  eft6,  &  moy  mefme  ie  n'ay  pas  I'affeu-
rance  de  te  porter  ces  paroles  de  douceur  dont  autre-
fois tu  m'as  fi  fouuent  preuenue:  c'eft  fans  doute  que
ce  chapelet  t'enforcele;  ofte-le  de  ton  col  &  ie  te
parleray.  En  effet  la  deuotion  que  reffentent  tons
nos  Chreftiens,  foit  h.  dire  [90]  leur  chapelet,  foit  k
le  porter  fur  eux  comme  vn  gage  facre  de  ce  que
Dieu  leur  eft,  &  de  ce  qu'ils  veulent  luy  eftre;  cet
amour  qu'ils  ont  pour  la  Vierge,  merite  que  le  Ciel
les  protege  d'vn  fecours  plus  puiffant,  qu'il  foit  leur
bouclier  &  leur  defenfe,  notamment  pour  la  chaftet6,
en  vn  pais  oil  on  met  au  rang  des  vertus  d' eftre  im-
pudique.  Mais  fur  tout  les  Feftes  &  Dimanches  ils
s'affemblent  fur  le  midy  pour  le  reciter  tons  enfem-
ble,  ils  le  font  k  deux  choeurs  fe  repondant  les  vns
aux  autres  auec  tant  de  douceur,  qu'on  voit  bien  que
leur  ame  a  des  attraits  particuliers  k  cette  forte  de
priere.

Ie  finiray  ce  Chapitre  par  vne  mort  d'vne  Chre-
ftienne,  qui  fans  doute  aura  efle  tres-pretieufe  aux
yeux  de  Dieu:  elle  fe  nommoit  Chriftine  Tforihia  &
auoit  efte  baptizee  en  I'annee  1639.  ^^^^  eftoit  mere
de   cet   excellent    Chreftien    dont   i'ay    defia    parle,


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  287

have  thought  that  there  were  pleasures  so  sweet  in
the  midst  of  perils.  We  all  feared  death,  at  almost
every  step  that  we  took  on  the  ice ;  but  that  fear  was
a  pleasant  one.  We  were  at  the  same  [89]  time  both
in  fear  and  in  joy,  and  we  never  prayed  to  God  so
heartily  and  so  lovingly.  We  did  not  venture  to  ask
him  either  for  death  or  for  life.  '  My  God,'  we  said
to  him  continually,  'you  see  our  hearts  and  why  we
are  on  this  journey.  Dispose  of  our  lives  according
to  your  will.  May  our  troubles  be  agreeable  to  you.
After  this,  whatever  may  happen,  our  minds  are  con-
tent. If  we  are  drowned  in  these  waters,  we  shall
be  happy  in  Heaven.'  "

We  have  introduced  here  in  the  Huron  country,
among  the  Christians,  the  custom  of  wearing  their
rosaries  around  their  necks  as  a  sign  of  their  Faith.
We  see  the  good  effects  of  it.  "I  know  not,"  said
an  infidel  woman  one  day  to  a  young  Christian,  ' '  what
can  have  altered  the  beauty  of  thy  character.  Since
thou  wearest  that  rosary,  thou  art  no  longer  what
thou  wert ;  and  I  myself  have  not  the  assurance  to
say  to  thee  those  soft  words  with  which  thou  didst
formerly  so  often  forestall  me.  It  is  doubtless
because  that  rosary  bewitches  thee.  Remove  it  from
thy  neck,  and  I  will  speak  to  thee."  In  fact,  the
devotion  felt  by  all  our  Christians  either  for  saying
[90]  their  rosary,  or  for  wearing  it  as  a  sacred  pledge
of  what  God  is  to  them,  and  of  what  they  wish  to  be
to  him,  and  the  love  that  they  have  for  the  Virgin,
deserve  that  Heaven  should  protect  them  with  most
powerful  assistance, —  that  it  should  be  their  shield
and  their  defense,  especially  as  regards  chastity  in  a
country  where  shamelessness  is  classed  as  a  virtue.
But,  above   all,    they   meet  about  noon   on   Festival


288  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES         [\'ol.  26


Eftienne  Totiri :  &  ie  puis  dire  en  verite,  que  depuis
le  moment  de  fa  conuerllon  elle  auoit  efte  touliours
montant  dans  la  pratique  des  vertus  les  plus  hautes
qui  foient  au  Chriltianifme ;  mais  fur  tout  dans  vn
amour  des  fouff races  [91]  &  afflictions  de  cette  \'ie,
qui,  difoit-elle,  luy  fembloient  pleTiJnes  de  douceur,
depuis  qu'elle  auoit  fceu  que  ce  corps  afflige  deuoit
enfin  refufciter  pour  ioiiir  d'vne  gloire  qui  n'auroit
point  de  fin.  Elle  recent  fes  Sacremens  auec  des
fentimens  de  piete  remplis  d'amour;  entre  autres
elle  fentoit  vne  affection  tres  tendre  enuers  la  faincte
Vierge;  Ie  ne  doute  point  que  dans  le  Ciel  elle  ne
goulte  ^  iamais  les  fruits  de  cette  deuotion :  mais  ie
ne  fcay  fi  mefme  auant  la  mort  elle  n'en  a  point
rellenty  les  douceurs:  au  moins  voicy  ce  qui  luy
arriua  quelques  heures  auant  que  de  mourir;  lors
qu'elle  eltoit  proche  de  I'agonie  ayant  defia  perdu
I'vfaore  &  le  fentiment  de  la  veue,  elle  s'efcria  tout
d'vn  coup  comme  eltonnee  &  rauie  dans  I'admiration,
O  mon  fils  ne  voy  tu  pas  cette  rare  beaute  de  cette
grade  Dame  eclatante  en  lumiere  qui  eft  icy  k  mon
colte;  ne  voy  tu  pas  ce  beau  liure  qu'elle  porte
ouuert  entre  fes  mains,  n'entens  tu  pas  ces  paroles
d'amour:  6  qu'elle  me  parle  bien  mieux  que  nos
freres  les  Francois,  que  fes  difcours  penetrent  bien
plus  auant  dedans  mon  coeur,  [92]  qu'elle  eft  aymable
&  qu'il  fait  beau  la  voir!  Cette  bonne  femme  par-
loit  a  vn  de  fes  enfans  excellent  Chreltien  nomme
Paul  Okatak^an;  Ma  mere  vous  refuez,  luy  dit  ce
ieune  homme,  ie  ne  voy  rien,  &  vous  comment  pour-
riez  vous  voir  ce  que  vous  dites  ayant  defia  les  yeux
fermez?  Non,  non,  mon  fils,  replique  cette  mere,  ie
ne  me  trompe  aucunement.  ny  ne  te  veux  tromper.


1 642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  289

days  and  on  Sundays,  to  recite  it  all  together ;  they
do  this  in  two  choirs,  who  respond  to  each  other
with  such  sweetness  that  it  is  easy  to  see  that  that
sort  of  prayer  causes  special  delights  to  their  souls.

I  shall  conclude  this  Chapter  with  the  death  of  a
Christian  woman,  which,  without  doubt,  must  have
been  most  precious  in  the  sight  of  God.  Her  name
was  Christine  Tsorihia,  and  she  had  been  baptized
in  the  year  1639.  She  was  the  mother  of  that  excel-
lent Christian  of  whom  I  have  already  spoken,  Es-
tienne  Totiri;  and  I  can  truly  say  that,  from  the
moment  of  her  conversion,  she  had  always  progressed
in  the  practice  of  the  highest  virtues  of  Christian-
ity,—  but,  above  all,  in  a  love  for  the  sufferings  [91]
and  afflictions  of  this  life,  which,  she  said,  seemed  to
her  full  of  sweetness  since  she  had  known  that  this
afflicted  body  will  one  day  rise  again,  to  enjoy  a
glory  that  will  be  without  end.  She  received  the
Sacraments  with  sentiments  of  a  piety  full  of  affec-
tion. Among  other  things,  she  had  a  very  tender
devotion  to  the  blessed  Virgin.  I  have  no  doubt
that  in  Heaven  she  will  enjoy  forever  the  fruits  of
that  devotion ;  but  I  know  not  whether,  even  before
death,  she  did  not  feel  the  sweetness  thereof.  At
least,  this  is  what  happened  to  her  some  hours  before
her  death.  When  her  agony  approached,  she  had
already  lost  the  use  and  sense  of  her  sight.  She
suddenly  exclaimed,  as  if  astonished  and  ravished
with  admiration:  "  O  my  son,  seest  thou  not  the  rare
beauty  of  that  great  Lady,  all  brilliant  with  light,
who  stands  at  my  side  ?  Seest  thou  not  that  beautiful
book  that  she  carries  open  in  her  hands?  Hearest
thou  not  those  words  of  love?  Oh,  how  much  better
she  speaks  to  me  than  our  brothers,   the  French!


290  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.26

Regarde  de  Taiitre  cofte  ces  ieunes  Francois  qui
raccompagnent,  les  plus  beaux  que  i'aye  iamais  veu,
que  leurs  habits  font  riches,  mais  plufloft  prefte
I'oreille  k  ce  que  me  dit  cette  Dame,  6  qu'il  fait  beau
la  voir!  Ik  deflus  elle  encline  k  la  mort.  Elle  fut  la
feconde  enterree  en  noftre  Cemetiere  de  fainte  Marie,
y  ayant  efl6  tranfportee  de  fon  bourg  oil  elle  mou-
rut,  efloigne  de  fix  lieiies,  ainfi  que  de  fon  viuant
elle  I'auoit  defire.

Nous  auons  efte  plus  de  huidl  mois  sas  fgauoir  cette
particularity  de  fa  mort,  fon  fils  Paul  n' ayant  pas
tenu  plus  de  conte  de  cette  vifion  que  d'vne  refuerie,
dans  la  penf6e  qu'il  auoit  qu'il  ne  pouuoit  y  auoir  d'au-
tre  veue  que  celle  des  [93]  yeux.  Vn  iour  par  vn
rencontre  il  raconta  le  tout  h.  fon  aifne  Eftienne
Totiri,  qui  enfin  nous  le  declara  il  y  a  quelques  iours
fur  le  point  qu'il  eftoit  de  partir  pour  la  guerre,  nous
difant  qu'il  croyoit  pour  luy  que  ces  ieunes  Frangois
d'vne  beaute  li  rare  eftoient  des  Anges  du  Ciel  qui
tenoient  compagnie  a  la  tres-fainte  Vierge,  pour  qui
fa  mere  auoit  eu  des  deuotions  fi  tendres.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  291

How  her  words  penetrate  deep  into  my  heart !  [92]
How  amiable  she  is,  and  how  beautiful  it  is  to  see
her!  "  The  good  woman  spoke  to  one  of  her  sons,
an  excellent  Christian  named  Paul  Okatakwan.  "  My
mother,  you  are  dreaming, ' '  said  the  young  man  to
her;  "  I  see  nothing,  and  how  can  you  see  what  you
say  you  do,  since  your  eyes  are  closed?"  "  No,  no,
my  son,"  replied  the  mother;  "  I  am  not  at  all  mis-
taken, nor  do  I  wish  to  deceive  thee.  See  on  the
other  side  those  young  Frenchmen  who  accompany
her;  they  are  the  handsomest  I  have  ever  seen.
What  rich  clothes  they  wear !  But  listen  rather  to
what  that  Lady  says  to  me !  Oh,  how  beautiful  it  is
to  see  her."  Thereupon  she  passed  away  in  death.
She  was  the  second  who  was  buried  in  our  Cemetery
of  sainte  Marie,  for  she  was  carried  there  from  her
own  village,  where  she  died,  about  six  leagues  dis-
tant, according  to  the  wish  that  she  had  expressed
in  her  lifetime.

We  were  more  than  eight  months  without  know-
ing these  particulars  of  her  death ;  for  her  son  Paul
did  not  pay  more  heed  to  that  vision-  than  if  it  had
been  a  dream,  thinking  that  there  could  be  no  other
sight  but  that  of  the  [93]  eyes.  One  day,  by  acci-
dent, he  related  the  whole  story  to  his  elder  brother,
Estienne  Totiri,  who  finally  told  it  to  us  some  days
ago,  as  he  was  about  to  leave  for  the  war,  saying
that,  as  for  him,  he  believed  that  those  young
Frenchmen  of  such  rare  beauty  were  Angels  from
Heaven,  who  accompanied  the  most  blessed  Virgin,
for  whom  his  mother  always  had  such  a  tender
devotion.


292  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES         [Vol.26


CHAPITRE  V.

DE   LA   MISSION    DE   SAINCT    MICHEL  AUX    TAHON-

TAENRAT.

L*i  AN  paff6  nous  receumes  les  premieres  nouuelles
de  Quebec  par  deux  Huros,  qui  y  ayant  hyuer-
ne  remonterent  icy  haut  fur  la  fin  du  prin-
temps,  aborderent  a  nos  portes,  nous  rendiret  quel-
ques  pacquets  de  lettres  qu'ils  auoient  fauuez  d'vn
naufrage  ou  ils  firent  perte  de  tout  leur  bien :  mais
dirent  ils  nous  n'auons  pas  perdu  ce  que  nous  efti-
mons  plus  que  nos  biens  &  que  nos  vies.  Le  Pere
Brebeuf  a  efte  noftre  maiftre,  la  Foy  a  trouue  [94]
entree  dans  nos  coeurs,  les  exemples  que  nous  auons
veu  des  Francois  &  des  Algonquins  conuertis,  le  zele
&  la  charity  des  faintes  filles  Religieufes,  1 'amour
que  les  Capitaines  Fran9ois  portent  aux  Chreftiens,
«&  ces  femmes  de  grad  courage  qui  ont  palT6  les  mers
pour  auancer  les  momens  de  noftre  conuerfion,  I'ap-
puy  qu'Onontio  donne  a  la  Foy  (c'eft  Monfieur  de
Montmagny  noftre  Gouuerneur)  &  I'eftime  qu'il  en
fait  paroiftre  par  deffus  toutes  chofes,  fa  vertu  que
nous  voyions  auffi  fouuet  que  fon  vifage.  Tout  cela,
difoient-ils,  font  des  preuues  qui  nous  ont  contraint
d'auoiier  que  les  veritez  que  tant  de  monde  nous
annonce  meritent  vniquementd'eftre  adorees,  &  qu'il
faut  que  le  Dieu  des  Chreftiens  foit  vrayement  tout
puifTant,  puifque  tant  de  perfonnes  de  merite  s'em-
ployent  fi  faintement  en   fon   feruice.     En   vn   mot


1 642  -  44 J  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  293


CHAPTER  V.

OF   THE    MISSION    OF   SAINT    MICHEL   AMONG   THE
TAHONTAENRAT.

LAST  year  we  received  the  first  news  from  Que-
bec through  two  Hurons  who,  after  wintering
there,  returned  up  here  at  the  end  of  the  spring,
landed  at  our  doors,  and  handed  us  some  packages
of  letters  that  they  had  saved  from  a  wreck  in  which
they  lost  all  their  own  property.  "  But,"  they  said,
"  we  have  not  lost  what  we  value  more  than  our
property  and  our  lives.  Father  Brebeuf  has  been
our  master.  The  Faith  has  found  [94]  entrance  to
our  hearts.  The  examples  of  the  French  and  con-
verted Algonquins  that  we  have  seen ;  the  zeal  and
charity  of  those  holy  women,  the  Nuns;  the  love
borne  to  the  Christians  by  the  French  Captains,  and
by  those  women  of  great  courage  who  have  crossed
the  seas  to  hasten  the  moment  of  our  conversion ;  the
support  that  Onontio  gives  to  the  Faith  ' '  (that  is,
Monsieur  de  Montmagny,  our  Governor)  "  and  the
esteem  that  he  manifests  for  it  above  all  things;  his
virtue,  that  we  saw  as  often  as  his  face, —  all  these,"
said  they,  "  are  proofs  which  have  compelled  us  to
admit  that  the  truths  announced  to  us  by  so  many
people  deserve  above  all  things  to  be  adored;  and
that  the  God  of  the  Christians  must,  in  truth,  be  all-
powerful,  since  so  many  persons  of  merit  exert  them-
selves so  holily  in  his  service.      In   a  word,"  they


294  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES  [Vol.26

dirent  ils,  nous  ellions  defcendus  h.  Quebec  infideles,
&  nous  en  reuenons  Chreftiens.

Ils  eftoient  tous  deux  du  bourg  de  S.  Michel,  I'vn
fe  nomme  Paul  Atondo,  I'autre  lean  Baptifte  Aotio-
kHandoron:  [95]  auffitoll;  qu'ils  y  furent  arriuez,  on
les  accueille  de  toutes  parts,  on  leur  demande  leur
fortune,  Paul  Atondo  prend  la  parole,  comme  il  eft
Capitaine:  Sgacliez  mes  freres,  leur  dit-il,  que  i'ay
promis  ^  Dieu  de  viure  &  de  mourir  en  fon  feruice,
que  ie  fuis  baptize,  que  ma  gloire  eil:  d'eftre  Chre-
ftien.  Si  i'ay  elle  d'vn  naturel  facheux,  &  fi  plu-
fieurs  m'ont  redoute,  attendez  quelques  mois  h.  por-
ter iugement  de  moy,  les  Fran9ois  en  me  baptizant
ont  tire  tout  le  mal  qui  eftoit  en  mon  ame,  mon  coeur
eft  tout  change,  &  vous  verrez  que  la  douceur  eft
entree  dans  mon  efprit  auec  la  Foy.  Faites  vous
baptizer  mes  freres,  que  tous  craignent  I'enfer,  nos
malheurs  celTeront,  nous  n'aurons  plus  de  traiftres  en
nos  confeils  qui  re9oiuent  penfion  de  I'ennemy  pour
luy  defcouurir  nos  defleins,  le  larcin  fera  banny  d'a-
uec  nous,  on  ne  fgaura  que  le  nom  de  I'enuie,  la  m^-
difance  n' of  era  paroiftre,  nos  haynes  ne  feront  plus
que  pour  le  vice,  &  d'vne  terre  de  malheur  nous  en
ferons  vn  pais  de  benedic5tion.  lA  defCus  il  prend  vn
Crucifix  en  main;  Mes  freres,  adioute-t'il,  i'ay  cru
auec  vous  [96]  que  c'eil;oit  Ik  celuy  qui  nous  caufoit
les  maladies,  &  qui  depeuploit  nos  bourgades,  i'ay
efte  des  premiers  k  dire  que  les  regars  en  eftoient
venimeux  &  apportoient  la  mort.  Nos  pechez  fer-
ment nos  yeux  k  la  lumiere,  la  Foy  a  fait  tomber
les  tayes,  qui  caufoient  mon  aueuglement:  mainte-
nant  c'eft  ce  Crucifie  que  i'adore,  c'eft  luy  feul  que  ie
reconnois  pour  maiilre  de  nos  vies,  pour  auteur  de
noftre  falut.


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  295

said,  "  we   went   down   to   Quebec   infidels,    and   we
come  back  Christians."

They  both  belonged  to  the  village  of  St.  Michel.
One  was  named  Paul  Atondo  and  the  other  Jean
Baptiste  Aotiokwandoron.  [95]  As  soon  as  they  had
arrived,  they  were  welcomed  on  all  sides,  and  were
asked  what  fortune  they  had  had.  Paul  Atondo  spoke,
as  he  is  a  Captain.  "  Know,  my  brothers,"  he  said,
"  that  I  have  promised  God  to  live  and  to  die  in  his
service :  that  I  am  baptized ;  that  I  glory  in  being  a
Christian.  If  I  have  been  of  an  irritable  temper,
and  if  many  have  feared  me,  wait  some  months
before  pronouncing  judgment  on  me.  The  French,
by  baptizing  me,  have  taken  away  all  the  evil  that
was  in  my  soul.  My  heart  is  quite  changed,  and
you  will  see  that  gentleness  has  entered  into  my
mind  with  Faith.  Have  yourselves  baptized,  my
brothers;  let  all  fear  hell.  Our  misfortunes  will
cease ;  we  shall  no  longer  have  traitors  in  our  coun-
cils, who  receive  pensions  from  the  enemy  for  dis-
covering our  plans  to  him.  Theft  will  be  banished
from  among  us ;  envy  will  be  known  only  by  name ;
calumny  will  hide  its  head ;  our  hatred  will  exist  but
for  vice;  and,  out  of  a  land  of  misfortune,  we  shall
make  a  country  of  blessedness."  Thereupon  he
took  a  Crucifix  in  his  hand.  "  My  brothers,"  he
added,  "  I  have  believed  with  you  [96]  that  it  was
this  that  caused  sickness  and  that  depopulated  our
villages.  I  was  one  of  the  first  to  say  that  its  looks
were  venomous  and  caused  death.  Our  sins  close  our
eyes  to  the  light.  Faith  has  made  the  scales  drop
that  caused  my  blindness.  Now  it  is  this  Crucified
one  that  I  adore.  Him  alone  I  acknowledge  as  the
master  of  our  lives,  as  the  author  of  our  salvation."


296  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES         [Vol.26

Ce  changement  d'vn  homme  qu'on  euft  creu  de-
uoir  eftre  vn  des  derniers  a  embraffer  la  Foy  eftonne
les    efprits,    mais    fa    conftance    leur    donna     plus
d'admiration  quelques  iours  apr6s.     Le  malheur  tout
d'vn  coup  Taccueille,  la  mort  luy  rauit  vn  enfant  qui
efloit  fon  vnique;  vne  niepce,  qui  en  ce  pais  eft  vn
appuy  plus  alTeure  ^  vn  homme  que  fes  propres  en-
fans,  eft  emport^e  en  mefme  temps  de  maladie ;  deux
Iroquois  cachez  derriere  vn  arbre   fortent  de  leurs
embuches  aflaffment  au  milieu   de   fon   champ   vne
foeur  qui  feule  luy  reftoit.     Ces  defaftres  m'eulTent
eftonnez  fi  ie  n'auois  la  Foy,  dit-il  aux  Infideles,  &
c'eft  maintenant  que  ie   [97]  voy  que  les  richeffes
d'vn  Chreftien  ne  font  pas  hors  de  luy,  qu'il  porte
fon  threfor  en  fon  coeur,  &  que  I'efperance  du  Ciel
affermit  plus  vne  ame  que  tous  les  malheurs  de  la
terre    n'auront    de    force    pour    I'abatre.      II    reftoit
encore  a  fa  foeur  affez  de  vie  pour  fon  falut ;  Ce  bon
Neophyte  luy  parle  du  Paradis  &  de  I'enfer,  luy  fait
detefter  fes  pechez,   elle  fouhaite  le  Baptefme,  luy
qui  n'auoit  iamais  fait  ce  meftier  la  recommande  k
Dieu,  la  baptize  autant  qu'il  le  pent,  &  afin,  difoit-il,
que  plus  affeurement  elle  foit  baptifee,   il  luy  fait
renouueller   fes   adtes,   &  renouuelle   fon   Baptefme
iufqu'a  cinq  &  fix  fois.     Mais  tous  n'eurent  pas  plus
d'effet  I'vn  que  I'autre:  car  quoy  que  I'eau  ne  man-
quaft  pas  k  fon  Baptefme,  il  auoit  oublie  la  formule,
ou  iamais  ne  I'auoit  apprife.     Tu  es  le  Maiftre  de  fa
vie  toy  qui  as  fait  le  Ciel  &  la  terre,  n'importe  qu'elle
meure  pourueu  que  so  ame  foit  bien-heureufe  dans
le  Ciel:  c'eft  toy  qui  as  mis  la  Foy  dans  fon  coeur,  &
maintenant  ie  la  baptife,  afin  que  luy  faifant  miferi-
corde  tu  luy   efface   fes  pechez.     Voila  les  paroles


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  297

Such  a  change,  in  a  man  whom  one  would  have
believed  to  be  among  the  last  to  embrace  the  Faith,
astonished  the  minds  of  all,  but  his  constancy  excited
more  admiration  in  them,  a  few  days  later.     Misfor-
tune suddenly  came  upon  him ;  death  deprived  him
of  his  only  child;  a  niece  —  who  in  this  country  is
a  surer   support   for  a  man  than  are  his  own  chil-
dren—  was  carried  off  at  the  same  time  by  sickness;
two  Iroquois,  who  were  hidden  behind  a  tree,  rushed
from  their  ambush  and  murdered,  in  the  middle  of
her  field,  the  only  sister  that  remained  to  him.   ' '  Such
disasters  would  have  stunned  me  if  I  had  not  Faith,"
he  said  to  the  Infidels;  "  and  now  I  [97]  see  that  a
Christian's    riches   are    not    without    him, —  that  he
carries  his  treasure  in  his  heart ;  and  that  the  hope
of  Heaven  fortifies  a  soul  more  than  all  the  misfor-
tunes on  earth  can  have  strength  to  cast  it  down.
Enough  life  yet  remained  to  his  sister  to  secure  her
salvation.     The  good  Neophyte  spoke  to  her  of  Para-
dise and  of  hell,  and  made  her  detest  her  sins.     She
asked  for  Baptism,  and  he,  who  had  never  adminis-
tered that  rite,  commended  her  to  God;  baptized  her,
as  far  as  he  was  able ;  and,  in  order,  as  he  said,  that
she  might  be   more   surely  baptized,   he  made  her
renew  her  acts,  and  repeated  her  Baptism  five  or  six
times.     But  none  of  them  had  any  effect,  one  more
than  another ;  for,  although  water  was  not  wanting
in  her  Baptism,  he  had  forgotten  the  formula,  or  had
never  learned  it.     "  Thou  art  the  Master  of  her  life,
thou  who  hast  made   Heaven  and  earth.     It  matters
not  if  she  die,  provided  that  her  soul  be  happy  in
Heaven.     It  is  thou  who  hast  placed  Faith  in  her
heart,    and  now   I  baptize    her,    in    order   that  thou
mayst  have  mercy  on  her  and  wipe  out  her  sins."


298  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

dont  il  fe  feruoit  au  [98]  Baptefme.  Mais  ce  Dieu  de
mifericorde  qui  iamais  ne  manque  aux  efleus  eut
egard  h.  fa  charite,  &  a  la  Foy  fmcere  de  cette  pauure
femme,  qui  auoit  plus  de  defir  d'eftre  toute  h.  luy  k
la  mort,  qu'elle  n'auoit  de  regret  de  la  vie;  les  forces
luy  reuiennent  vn  peu ;  ce  feruent  Neophyte  court
cinq  lieues  d'vne  mefme  halaine  pour  venir  en  noflre
Maifon  querir  quelqu'vn  des  noflres.  Deux  de  nos
Peres  y  courent  en  hafte,  trouuent  cette  femme  toute
difpofee  pour  le  Ciel,  ou  fon  ame  s'enuola  bien  toft
apres  auoir  efte  baptifee.

le  ne  fais  pas  moins  d'eftat  de  lean  Baptifte  Aotio-
kSandoron,  que  de  Paul  Atondo:  il  efl  vray  qu'il
n'eft  pas  de  fi  grand  credit,  qu'il  a  moins  de  paroles,
mais  ie  croy  que  fon  coeur  n'eft  pas  moins  touche,  &
nous  voyons  en  fon  procede  ie  ne  fgay  quoy  qui  pa-
roift  plus  anime  du  S.  Efprit.  Quoy  qu'il  en  foit  ces
deux  bons  Neophytes,  &  quelque  nombre  de  Chre-
fliens  qui  eftoient  defia  dans  leur  bourg  auec  plu-
fieurs  Catechumenes,  nous  prefferent  ^i.  fortement  fur
la  fin  de  I'Automne  de  faire  vn  plus  long  feiour  [99]
auec  eux,  de  les  inftruire  plus  a  loifir,  &  ne  pas  les
priuer  de  la  mefme  confolation  que  nous  donnios  aux
bourgs  de  la  Conception,  de  S.  lofeph,  &  de  S.  lean
Baptifte,  que  nous  ne  pufmes  refifter  k  de  fi  faints
defirs.  II  y  fallut  dreffer  vne  Chapelle,  &  y  eftablir
vne  Miffion  plus  a  demeure  que  nous  n'auions  fait
iufques  alors.

Le  Pere  lofeph  Marie  Chaumonot  &  le  Pere  Fran-
§ois  du  Peron  en  ont  eu  le  foin,  &  Dieu  m'a  donne
la  confolation  enuiron  deux  mois  de  I'hyuer  d'y  voir
les  premieres  ferueurs  de  cette  Eglife.

Les  Chreftiens  fe  voyant  reiinis  apres  le  retour  de


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  299

Such  are  the  words  that  he  used  at  the  [98]  Baptism.
But  the  God  of  mercy,  who  never  fails  the  elect,  had
consideration  for  his  charity,  and  for  the  sincere
Faith  of  this  poor  woman,  who  had  more  desire  to
belong  to  him  entirely  at  death  than  she  felt  regret
for  life.  Her  strength  returned  for  a  little  while.
The  fervent  Neophyte  ran  five  leagues  without  stop-
ping, to  our  House,  to  get  one  of  us.  Two  of  our
Fathers  hastened  thither;  they  found  the  woman
quite  prepared  for  Heaven,  to  which  her  soul  soared,
shortly  after  she  was  baptized.

I  think  no  less  highly  of  Jean  Baptiste  Aotiokwan-
doron  than  of  Paul  Atondo.  It  is  true  that  he  is  not
a  person  of  as  much  importance;  that  he  is  less
fluent  of  speech.  But  I  think  that  his  heart  is  none
the  less  touched,  and  in  his  manner  of  acting  we  see
something,  I  know  not  what,  that  seems  more  vivi-
fied by  the  Holy  Ghost.  At  all  events,  these  two
good  Neophytes  and  a  number  of  other  Christians,
who  were  already  in  their  village,  with  several  Cate-
chumens, urged  us  so  strongly  at  the  end  of  the
Autumn  to  make  a  longer  stay  [99]  with  them,  to
instruct  them  more  at  leisure,  and  not  to  deprive
them  of  the  same  consolation  that  we  gave  to  the
villages  of  la  Conception,  of  St.  Joseph,  and  of  St.
Jean  Baptiste,  that  we  could  not  resist  such  holy
desires.  It  was  necessary  to  erect  a  Chapel  and  to
establish  a  more  permanent  Mission  than  we  had
hitherto  had  there.

Father  Joseph  Marie  Chaumonot  and  Father  Fran-
9ois  du  Peron  have  had  charge  of  it;  and  God  gave
me  the  consolation,  during  about  two  months  of  the
winter,  of  seeing  the  first  fervor  of  that  Church.

When  the  Christians  were  again  united,  after  their


300  LES  RELATIONS  DBS /^SUITES  [Vol.26

leurs  pefches  &  voyages,  firent  vn  Confeil  entre  eux
pour  s'animer  plus  puiffamment  au  bien,  &  s'y  obli-
ger  de  nouueau  par  vne  proteftation  publique  de  leur
Foy.  En  fuite  ayant  appell6  ceux  qui  fe  difpofoient
au  Baptefme:  Mes  freres,  leur  dirent-ils,  ce  n'eft  pas
fur  vos  levres  qu'on  doit  reconnoiftre  la  Foy  qui  efl
dans  voftre  coeur,  vos  oeuures  en  feront  des  temoins
plus  fideles  que  vos  paroles ;  quittez  des  maintenant  la
[lOo]  penf6e  que  vous  auez  d'eftre  Chreftiens,  li  vous
n'eftes  tous  refolus  d'en  maintenir  le  nom  par  la
purete  de  vos  vies.  Vous  auez  a  combattre  les
Demons  de  I'enfer,  qui  tant  de  fiecles  nous  ont  tenu
dans  leur  captiuite,  nous  auons  autant  d'ennemis  de
noftre  falut  qu'il  y  a  d'hommes  en  ces  contrees,  faites
eftat  que  vos  peres  &  meres  &  mef me  vos  enfans  font
ceux  que  vous  auez  le  plus  a  craindre,  renoncez  aux
mouuemens  de  la  nature,  &  n'efcoutez  pas  voftre
coeur  qui  le  premier  vous  trahira  fi  vous  vous  fiez  trop
a  luy:  en  vn  mot  eflre  Chreftien,  mes  freres,  c'eft
deteiler  le  mal,  &  pluftoft  mourir  que  pecher.  A
ces  paroles  les  Catechumenes  s'6crient  qu'ils  eftoient
done  Chreftiens,  qu'ils  font  tous  refolus  de  croire  en
Dieu,  &  luy  obeir  iufqu'^  la  mort.  En  effet  ils  pref-
ferent  de  telle  fa§on  leur  Baptefme  qu'on  ne  put  pas
le  differer.  Mais  il  faut  que  la  Foy  trouue  par  tout
des  refiftances,  &  fi  elle  ne  prend  fa  naiffance  dans  la
perfecution,  il  eft  ^  craindre  qu'elle  n'euft  pas  affez
de  vigueur  pour  fe  fouftenir  elle  mefme,  &  croiftre
dans  les  adtions  de  faintet6.

[loi]  Quelques  Algonquins  de  I'lfle  ayant  hyuerne
cette  ann6e  aux  Hurons,  vn  de  leurs  Capitaines
appelle  Ag^achimagan,  &  par  les  Fra^ois  le  Charbon,
ne  manqua  pas  de  faire  icy  vn  coup  de  fon  meftier.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  301

return  from  fishing  and  from  their  journeys,  they
held  a  Council  among  themselves  to  incite  one  an-
other more  strongly  to  virtue ;  and  they  bound  them-
selves to  it  anew,  by  a  public  protestation  of  their
Faith.  Afterward,  they  called  those  who  were  pre-
paring for  Baptism,  and  said  to  them,  "  My  brothers,
not  by  your  lips  alone  must  you  testify  to  the  Faith
that  is  in  your  hearts.  Your  works  will  be  surer
evidence  than  your  words.  Abandon  at  once  the
[100]  idea  that  you  have  of  becoming  Christians,  if
you  are  not  all  resolved  to  maintain  the  name  by  the
purity  of  your  lives.  You  have  to  fight  against  the
Demons  of  hell,  who  for  so  many  ages  have  kept  us
in  their  bondage.  We  have  as  many  enemies  of  our
salvation  as  there  are  men  in  these  countries.  Con-
sider that  your  fathers  and  mothers,  and  even  your
children,  are  those  whom  you  have  most  to  fear.
Resist  the  emotions  of  nature,  and  listen  not  to  your
hearts,  that  will  be  the  first  to  betray  you  if  you  rely
too  much  upon  them.  In  a  word,  to  be  a  Christian,
my  brothers,  is  to  detest  evil ;  and  it  is  better  to  die
than  to  sin."  At  these  words,  the  Catechumens
exclaimed  that  therefore  they  were  Christians ;  that
they  were  all  resolved  to  believe  in  God,  and  to  obey
him  unto  death.  Indeed,  they  begged  so  earnestly
for  Baptism  that  we  could  not  defer  it.  But  it  is  nec-
essary that  Faith  meet  with  resistance  everywhere ;
and,  if  it  be  not  born  in  persecutions,  it  is  to  be
feared  that  it  will  not  have  enough  strength  to
sustain  itself,  and  to  grow  in  holy  actions,

[loi]  Some  Island  Algonquins  wintered  here  this
year  with  the  Hurons;  and  one  of  their  Captains,
called  Agwachimagan,  and  by  the  Frenchmen  le
Charbon  ["  the  Coal  "],  did  not  fail  to    play  one  of


302  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JASUITES  [Vol.26

Cet  homme  malheureux  plus  noir  en  Tame  mille  fois
que  le  nom  qu'il  porte,  &  vray  boutefeu  contre  la
Foy  &  les  Frangois,  eftant  arriue  au  bourg  de  faint
Michel  y  allemble  fecretemet  les  Capitaines:  Mes
freres,  leur  dit-il,  i'ay  touiours  eu  autant  d'amour
pour  vous,  que  de  hayne  contre  les  Iroquois  nos
ennemis  communs,  dont  vous  fgauez  que  Tan  paffe  ie
reffenty  la  cruaute,  m' eftant  veu  deux  fois  leur  cap-
tif ,  &  ayant  chaque  fois  efchape  de  leurs  mains  lors
qu'ils  eftoiet  k  la  veille  de  me  brufler  tout  vif,  I'en-
tends  que  voftre  bourg  eft  efbranle  par  les  difcours
des  robes  noires,  que  plufieurs  ont  defia  receu  le
Baptefme,  qu'vn  plus  grand  nombre  le  fouhaitent,  &
que  vous  mefmes  preftez  I'oreille  a  ces  difcours  qui
charment  en  effedt  a  I'abord.  Mais  sas  doute  vous
ignorez,  mes  freres,  oil  aboutiront  ces  promeffes  d'vne
vie  eternelle.  I'ay  efte  parmy  les  Fran9ois  ^  [102]
Quebec  &  aux  Trois  Riuieres;  ils  m'ont  enfeigne  le
fond  de  leur  dodtrine,  ie  n'ignore  rien  des  chofes  de
la  Foy:  mais  plus  i'ay  aprofondy  leurs  myfteres,  &
moins  y  ay-ie  veu  de  iour.  Ce  font  des  fables  con-
trouu6es  pour  nous  donner  de  veritables  craintes  d'vn
feu  imaginaire,  &  fous  vne  fauffe  efperance  d'vn  bien
qui  iamais  ne  nous  doit  arriuer,  nous  engager  dans
des  malheurs  ineuitables.  Ie  ne  parle  pas  fans  en
auoir  I'experience.  Vous  auez  veu  il  y  a  quelques
annees  les  Algonquins  en  fi  grad  nombre  que  nous
eftions  la  terreur  de  nos  ennemis ;  maintenant  nous
fommes  reduits  au  neant,  les  maladies  nous  ont  ex-
termine,  la  guerre  nous  depeuple,  la  famine  nous  va
pourfuiuant  en  quelque  lieu  que  nous  allions.  C'eft
la  Foy  qui  nous  apporte  ces  malheurs;  qu'ainfi  ne
foit  lors  que  ie  defcendis  il  y  a  deux  ans  a  Quebec


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  44  303

the  tricks  of  his  trade.  When  this  wretched  man  —
whose  soul  is  a  thousand  times  blacker  than  the  name
that  he  bears,  and  who  is  a  very  firebrand  against
the  Faith  and  the  French  —  arrived  at  the  village  of
saint  Michel,  he  secretly  gathered  the  Captains
together,  and  said  to  them :  ' '  My  brothers,  I  have
always  had  as  much  love  for  you  as  I  have  had  hate
for  the  Iroquois,  our  common  enemies, —  whose  cru-
elty I  experienced,  as  you  know,  last  year,  when  I
was  their  prisoner  on  two  occasions,  and  escaped  each
time  from  their  hands,  when  they  were  about  to  burn
me  alive.  I  learn  that  your  village  is  moved  by  the
discourses  of  the  black  gowns;  that  several  have
already  received  Baptism ;  that  a  larger  number  de-
sire it ;  and  that  you  yourselves  lend  ear  to  discourses
that,  in  sooth,  charm  them  at  first.  But  you  are
doubtless  ignorant,  my  brothers,  to  what  these  prom-
ises of  eternal  life  tend.  I  have  been  among  the
French  at  [102]  Quebec  and  at  the  Three  Rivers.
They  have  taught  me  the  very  substance  of  their
doctrine.  I  know  everything  about  matters  of  the
Faith.  But,  the  more  I  fathomed  their  mysteries,
the  less  clearly  did  I  see.  They  are  fables,  invented
to  inspire  us  with  real  fear  of  an  imaginary  fire ;  and,
in  the  false  hope  of  good  that  can  never  come  to  us,
we  involve  ourselves  in  inevitable  dangers.  I  do  not
speak  without  having  had  experience  of  it.  Some
years  ago,  you  saw  the  Algonquins  in  such  numbers
that  we  were  the  terror  of  our  enemies.  Now  we
are  reduced  to  nothing ;  disease  has  exterminated  us ;
war  has  decimated  us ;  famine  pursues  us,  wherever
we  go.  It  is  the  Faith  that  brings  these  misfortunes
upon  us.  That  you  may  not  doubt  that  what  I  say  is
true,  when  I  went  down  to  Quebec  two  years  ago,  to


304  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES  [Vol.  26

pour  voir  oil  auroit  abouty  la  Foy  des  Montagnets  &
Algonquins  qui  auoient  receu  le  Baptefme,  on  me  fit
voir  vne  maifon  remplie  de  borgnes  &  de  boiteux,
d'eftropiats  &  d'aueugles,  de  fquelettes  toutes  dechar-
nees,  &  de  gens  qui  tous  portoient  la  mort  fur  [103]
leur  vifage.  Ce  font  la  les  appanages  de  la  Foy,  c'eft
cette  Maifon  qu'ils  eftiment,  (il  parloit  de  I'hofpital
bafly  proche  de  Quebec  pour  les  malades)  ce  font  ces
ges-la  qu'ils  careffent,  parce  que  fe  refoudre  a  eftre
Chreftien  c'eft  prendre  le  party  de  toutes  ces  miferes.
Outre  cela,  il  faut  s'attendre  de  n'eftre  plus  heureux
ny  a  la  pefche  ny  a  la  chalTe.  Enfin,  mes  freres,  ad-
ioufta-t'il,  fi  auiourd'huy  ie  voyois  tout  vofkre  bourg
Chreftien,  ie  fuis  content  d'eftre  eftime  le  plus  grand
impofteur  du  monde  s'il  en  refloit  aucun  de  vous  qui
ne  f uft  mort  auant  la  fin  de  la  troifieme  annee :  pour
moy  i'ay  prefenty  ces  malheurs  de  la  Foy,  en  vain
I'ay-ie  predit  a  ceux  qui  ayant  refufe  de  me  croire,
ont  trop  tard  apres  leurs  miferes  reconnu  qu'ils
eftoient  trompez.  Aucun  Chreftien  s'eft-il  echappe
comme  moy  des  mains  de  mille  morts  qui  m' eftoient
preparees;  fi  leur  Dieu  eft  en  effet  le  Tout-puiffant,
pourquoy  les  laiffe-t'il  dedans  I'opprobre,  que  ne
rompt-il  leurs  chaifnes,  que  n'eft-il  leur  liberateur,
que  ne  fait-il  paroiftre  en  vn  pais  ou  il  veut  eftre  re-
connu, que  vrayement  il  fait  bon  [104]  de  I'auoir  pour
fon  Souuerain?  Mais  puifque  ceux  qui  refufent  de
I'adorer  font  plus  heureux  que  ne  font  fes  fuiets,  fi
vous  auez,  mes  freres,  quelque  reite  de  fentiment  &
d'amour  pour  vous  mefmes,  pour  vos  enfans,  &  pour
voftre  patrie,  choififlez  auec  moy  de  le  prendre
pluiloft  pour  ennemy  que  pour  amy,

Ce  malheureux  difgracie  de  la  nature,  eftant  plus


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  305

see  what  had  been  the  result  of  the  Faith  of  the  Mon-
tagnais  and  Algonquins  who  had  received  Baptism,
I  was  shown  a  house  full  of  one-eyed,  lame,  crippled,
and  blind  persons ;  of  fieshless  skeletons ;  and  of  peo-
ple who  all  carried  death  on  [103]  their  countenances.
Such  are  the  appanages  of  the  Faith.  That  is  the
House  that  they  esteem  "  (he  spoke  of  the  hospital
built  near  Quebec  for  the  sick) ;  ' '  those  are  the  peo-
ple upon  whom  they  fawn,  because  to  resolve  to  be
a  Christian  is  to  resign  oneself  to  all  those  miseries.
Besides  that,  one  must  expect  to  be  no  longer  lucky
either  in  fishing  or  in  hunting.  Finally,  my  broth-
ers," he  added,  "  if  to-day  I  saw  the  whole  of  your
village  become  Christian  I  would  be  satisfied  to  be
considered  the  greatest  impostor  in  the  world  if  one
of  you  remained  alive  before  the  end  of  the  third
year.  For  my  part,  I  foresaw  those  misfortunes
caused  by  the  Faith.  In  vain  did  I  predict  them  to
those  who,  after  refusing  to  believe  me,  acknowl-
edged but  too  late,  after  their  misfortune,  that  they
were  deceived.  Has  any  Christian  escaped,  as  I
have,  from  the  clutches  of  a  thousand  deaths  pre-
pared for  him?  If  their  God  be  in  reality  the  Al-
mighty, why  does  he  leave  them  in  opprobrium,  why
does  he  not  break  their  chains?  why  is  he  not  their
liberator?  why  does  he  not  show  in  a  country  where
he  wishes  to  be  acknowledged  that  it  is  truly  good
[104]  to  have  him  for  one's  Sovereign?  But  since
those  who  refuse  to  worship  him  are  happier  than
those  who  are  his  subjects,  if  you,  my  brothers,  like
me,  have  any  feeling  and  love  for  yourselves,  for
your  children,  and  for  your  country,  choose  with  me
to  consider  him  rather  as  an  enemy  than  as  a  friend."
This  wretched  being,  ill  favored  by  nature,  was  more


306


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.  26


que  demy  fourd,  portoit  en  fa  perfonne  la  reponfe  a
la  plus  forte  calomnie.     Mais  n'y  ayant  pas  vn  qui
foutinfl   le  party  de   Dieu,  &  qui  luy  demandaft  fi
c'eftoit  ou  fa  foy  ou  fon  impiete  qui  luy  caufaft  cette
difgrace,  &  luy  eufl  rauy  fes  enfans,  fes  freres  &  fes
neueux,   que  la  mort  auoit  trouu^  dedans  les  bois,
lors  qu'ils  fuyoient  auec  luy  les  femonces  qu'on  leur
faifoit  de  leur  falut,  il  ebranla  tellement  les  efprits,  &
leur  donna  des  craintes  fi  puiffantes  de  ces  malheurs
dot  il  les  menafoit,  que  la  terreur  en  fut  incontinent
repandue  dans  le  bourg.     Les  impies  triompherent
alors,  les  foibles  perdirent  courage,  &  plufieurs  qui
fembloientn'eftre  pas  eloignez  du  Royaume  de  Dieu
prirent  deffein  d'attendre  &  de  [105]  voir  quel  fuc-
cez  auroit  la  Foy  dans  les  autres  qui  y  demeuroient
engagez.     Les  Chreftiens  cependant  tiennent  bon,  leur
courage  s'anime,  ils  parlent  auffi  haut  que  iamais,  &
nous  voyons  en  cette   Eglife  que  fi  le   Diable  a  du
pouuoir  fur  ceux  qui  ne  font  pas  fortis  encore  de  fa
captiuite  par  le   facrement   du    Baptefme,   ces  eaux
facrees  eleuent  vne  ame  au  deffus  des  craintes  terre-
ftes,  &  font  qu'elle  ne  redoute  que  Dieu  &  le  peche.
le  voy  bien  que  ie  diray  vne  partie  des  mefmes
chofes  qu'aux    precedens  Chapitres,    fi   ie   veux   icy
rapporter  les  fentimens  des  Chreftiens  de  cette  Mif-
fion:    car    noftre   Seigneur  leur    donne    les    mefmes
affedtions  &  les  mefmes  volontez.     Ie  diray  feule-
ment  en  paffant  que  Dieu  a  auffi  donne  a  cette  Eglife
vn  Predicateur  de  fa  nation,  &  fi  vous  voulez  vn  Apo-
ftre  qui  fouflient  dignement  fon  party,  il  fe  nomme
Barnabe   Otfinonannhont.      Get   homme    a  toufiours
efte  des  plus  confiderables  de  toute  fa  nation  a  caufe
de  fa  naiffaace,  (car  ils  ont  icy  leur  nobleffe  auffi


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  307

than  half  deaf,  and  bore  in  his  own  person  the  an-
swer to  his  greatest  calumny.  But,  as  there  was  no
one  to  take  part  for  God,  and  to  ask  this  man  whether
it  was  his  faith  or  his  impiety  that  had  caused  such
infirmity,  and  had  deprived  him  of  his  children,  his
brothers,  and  his  nephews, —  whom  death  had  found
in  the  woods,  when  they  fled  with  him  from  those
appeals  for  their  salvation, —  he  produced  such  an
effect  on  the  minds  of  his  auditors  and  inspired  them
with  so  great  fear  of  the  misfortunes  that  threatened
them,  that  the  terror  thereof  spread  at  once  through
the  village.  Then  the  ungodly  triumphed;  the
weak  lost  heart ;  and  many  who  seemed  not  far  from
the  Kingdom  of  God  decided  to  wait,  and  [105]  see
what  success  the  Faith  would  have  with  the  others
who  remained  attached  to  it.  Meanwhile,  the  Chris-
tians continued  steadfast;  their  courage  rose;  they
spoke  as  boldly  as  ever;  and  we  could  see  in  this
Church  that,  if  the  Devil  has  power  over  those  who
are  not  yet  freed  from  his  slavery  by  the  sacrament
of  Baptism,  those  sacred  waters  lift  a  soul  above
earthly  fears,  and  cause  it  to  dread  only  God  and  sin.
I  see  very  well  that  I  shall  repeat  a  portion  of  the
same  things  that  have  been  said  in  the  preceding
Chapters,  if  I  undertake  to  relate  here  the  sentiments
of  the  Christians  of  this  Mission,  for  our  Lord  gives
them  the  same  affection  and  the  same  will.  I  shall
merely  say,  in  passing,  that  God  has  also  given  to
this  Church  a  Preacher  of  its  own  nation,  and  if  you
wish,  an  Apostle  who  worthily  upholds  its  inter-
ests; his  name  is  Barnabe  Otsinonannhont.  This
man  has  always  been  one  of  the  leading  personages
of  his  tribe,  on  account  of  his  birth  (for  they  have
their  nobility  here,  as  well  as  in   France,  and  are  as


308  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.26

bien  qu'en  France,  &  en  font  auffi  ialoux)  mais  fon
efprit  qui  eft  tout  a  fait  [io6]  excellent,  &  fon  cou-
rage qui  I'a  rendu  la  terreur  du  pais  ennemy,  I'ont
fait  plus  remarquable.  En  vn  mot  il  eft  de  ces  per-
fonnes  qui  portent  fur  le  front  ie  ne  f9ay  quoy  digne
d' empire,  &  a  le  voir  vn  arc  ou  vne  epee  en  main,
on  diroit  que  c'eft  vn  portrait  anime  de  ces  anciens
Cefars  dont  nous  ne  voyons  en  Europe  que  des
images  toutes  enfumees :  la  Foy  en  a  fait  vn  excellet
Chreftien.  Nous  dirons  dans  quelqu'vn  des  fuiuans
Chapitres  come  il  a  efte  cet  hyuer  prefcher  le  nom
de  Dieu  dans  les  parties  plus  eloignees  de  la  Nation
neutre.  Auant  que  de  partir  d'icy,  &  depuis  fon
retour  par  tout  ou  il  fe  trouue  il  faut  que  1' impiety
foit  confondue  &  Dieu  glorifie.  II  touche  iufqu'au
cceur  &  parle  fi  fortement  des  myfteres  de  noftre
Foy,  que  les  plus  infideles  qui  I'entendent  k  loifir
font  contraints  d'aduoiier  qu'ils  fouhaiteroient  que
tout  le  pais  fuft  Chreftien:  mais  tous  ceux  qui
approuuoient  ce  que  difoit  noftre  Seigneur  ne  fe  ran-
geoient  pas  de  fon  party,  C'eft  alTez,  &  nous  deuons
nous  contenter  qu'appellant  a  la  Foy  tout  le  monde,
ceux-lk  feulement  s'y  reduifent  [107]  qui  ont  la
marque  des  efleus.

Auant  que  de  finir  ce  Chapitre  ie  ne  puis  oublier
vne  chofe  ailez  remarquable,  qui  arriua  il  y  a  quel-
que  temps  a  ce  bon  Chreftien.  II  eftoit  au  milieu
d'vn  grand  lac  dans  vn  petit  canot  d'efcorce  en
compagnie  des  Infideles:  vne  tempefte  les  furprend,
le  Ciel  eft  tout  couuert  de  tonnerres  «&  d'efclairs,  &
I'eau  d'autant  de  precipices  qu'ils  voyent  de  vagues
deuant  eux.  Apres  auoir  en  vain  efpuife  &  leur
induftrie  &  leur  force  pour  refifter  k  la  tempefte,  ils


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  309

proud  of  it);  but  his  mind,  which  is  most  [io6]  ex-
cellent, and  his  courage,  which  has  made  him  the
terror  of  the  enemy's  country,  have  made  him  still
more  remarkable.  In  a  word,  he  is  one  of  those  per-
sons who  bear  on  their  foreheads  something,  I  know
not  what,  that  is  worthy  of  empire,  and  to  see  him
with  a  bow  or  a  sword  in  his  hand,  one  would  think
him  an  animated  portrait  of  those  ancient  Caesars  of
whom  in  Europe  we  see  but  pictures  all  dimmed
with  smoke.  Faith  has  made  an  excellent  Chris-
tian of  him.  We  shall  relate  in  some  of  the  follow-
ing Chapters  how  he  went  last  winter  to  preach  the
name  of  God  in  the  most  distant  parts  of  the  neutral
Nation.  Before  leaving  here  and  since  his  return,
wherever  he  goes,  impiety  must  be  confounded  and
God  glorified.  He  penetrates  to  the  very  heart,  and
speaks  so  strongly  of  the  mysteries  of  our  Faith,  that
the  greatest  infidels  who  listen  to  him  at  leisure  are
compelled  to  admit  that  they  would  wish  the  entire
country  to  be  Christian.  But  not  all  those  who  ap-
proved of  what  our  Lord  said,  ranged  themselves  on
his  side.  This  is  sufficient,  and  we  must  be  content
that,  in  calling  all  to  the  Faith,  only  those  submit  to
it  [107]  who  bear  the  mark  of  the  elect.

Before  concluding  this  Chapter,  I  cannot  omit  a
rather  remarkable  incident  that  happened,  some  time
ago,  to  this  good  Christian.  He  was  in  the  middle  of
a  great  lake  in  a  small  bark  canoe,  in  company  with
some  Infidels.  A  storm  surprised  them ;  the  Sky  was
full  of  thunder  and  lightnings;  and  the  water  pre-
sented as  many  precipices  as  they  saw  waves  before
them.  After  having  in  vain  exhausted  both  their  skill
and  their  strength  in  resisting  the  tempest,  they  began
to  despair ;  they  invoked  a  certain  Demon  named  Ian-


310  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  26

en  viennet  au  defefpoir,  ils  inuoquent  vn  certain
Demon  nomme  lannaoa,  qui  difent-ils,  s'eftant  par
defefpoir  iette  autrefois  dans  ce  lac,  y  excite  tons  ces
orages  lors  qu'il  fe  veut  vanger  des  hommes,  &  les
appaife  apres  qu'on  luy  a  rendu  quelque  hommage;
ils  iettet  en  fon  honneur  du  petun  dedans  I'eau,  qui
eft  en  ces  contrees  vne  fagon  de  facrifice.  Courage,
mes  camarades,  leur  dit  ce  bon  Neophyte,  nous  peri-
rons  bien  toft,  puifque  vous  appellez  le  malheur  k
voftre  aide :  pour  moy  ie  mourray  volontiers  pluftoft
que  de  deuoir  ma  vie  a  des  Demons  pour  qui  ie  [io8]
n'ay  que  de  la  haine.  Malheureux,  luy  difent  ces
Infideles,  inuoque  done  ton  Dieu,  &  nous  reconnoi-
ftrons  fon  pouuoir  s'il  nous  deliure  de  la  mort.  Le
canot  cependant  fait  eau,  les  vagues  viennent  fondre
fur  eux,  &  celuy  qui  gouuerne  abandonne  le  foin  de
fon  vaiffeau,  &  fa  vie.  Barnabe  la  deffus  s'efcrie,
Grand  Dieu  qui  eftes  obey  des  tempeftes  ayez  pitie
de  nous.  A  ce  moment  la  furie  des  vents  s'appaifa,
ces  montagnes  d'eau  s'aplaniffent,  ils  voyent  vn  calme
fur  tout  le  lac  fi  fauorable  k  leur  dellein,  qu'inconti-
net  ils  aborderet.  Mais  quoy,  ces  efprits  Infideles
en  refufent  la  gloire  "k  Dieu,  ils  difent  que  c'ell  le
Demon  qu'ils  ont  inuoqu6  qui  a  exauce  leurs  prieres,
&  que  c'eft  Ik  fon  ordinaire  de  les  retirer  du  peril
lors  qu'ils  font  plus  auant  dans  le  defefpoir.  Apres
tout  la  famine  les  prelle,  ils  n'ont  point  d'autres  pro-
uifions  que  leur  arc  &  leurs  Arches :  Que  ton  Dieu  te
faffe  prendre  vn  cerf,  difent-ils  k  ce  bon  Chreilien,
puifque  tu  dy  qu'il  eft  auffi  puiflant  dans  les  bois
que  fur  I'eau.  Que  vos  Demons,  leur  refpond-t'il,
vous  faflent  tuer  auiourd'huy  quelque  vache  [109]
fauuage.      lis  fortent  chacun  de  fon  coft6,   &   vont


1642-44]  RELATION  OF  1643-44  311

naoa,  who,  they  say,  once  cast  himself  into  this  lake
in  his  despair,  and  causes  all  these  storms  when  he
wishes  to  revenge  himself  upon  men;  and  he  calms
them  after  men  have  paid  him  some  homage.  In
his  honor,  they  throw  tobacco  into  the  water,  which
in  these  countries  is  a  kind  of  sacrifice.  "  Courage,
my  comrades,"  said  the  good  Neophyte  to  them.
"  We  shall  soon  perish,  since  you  call  misfortune  to
your  aid.  For  my  part,  I  would  willingly  die,  rather
than  owe  my  life  to  the  Demons,  for  whom  I  [108]
have  nothing  but  hatred."  "  Wretched  man,"  said
the  Infidels  to  him,  "  invoke  then  thy  God,  and  we
will  acknowledge  his  power,  if  he  delivers  us  from
death."  Meanwhile  the  canoe  took  in  water,  the
waves  came  pouring  upon  them,  and  the  steersman
abandoned  the  care  of  his  vessel  and  of  his  life.
Thereupon  Barnabe  called  out,  "  Great  God,  who
art  obeyed  by  tempests,  have  pity  on  us. ' '  At  that
moment  the  fury  of  the  winds  was  appeased;  the
mountains  of  water  fell  to  their  level ;  they  saw  all
over  the  lake  a  calm,  that  was  so  favorable  to  their
designs  that  they  reached  the  shore  without  difficul-
ty. But  those  Infidel  minds  refused  to  give  the
glory  thereof  to  God ;  they  said  that  it  was  the  Demon
whom  they  had  invoked  that  had  granted  their  pray-
ers ;  and  that  it  was  his  custom  to  save  them  from
danger,  even  when  they  were  in  still  deeper  despair.
After  that  they  were  pressed  by  famine  and  had  no
other  provisions  than  their  bows  and  arrows.  "  Let
thy  God  make  thee  catch  a  deer,"  they  said  to  the
good  Christian,  ' '  since  thou  say  est  that  he  is  as  power-
ful in  the  woods  as  on  the  water."  "  Let  your
Demons,"  he  replied,  "  make  you  kill  a  wild  cow  to-
day."    [109]  They  started  off  in  different  directions,


312  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.  26


chercher  dans  ces  vaftes  forefts  dequoy  fubuenir  k
leur  faim.  A  peine  Barnab^  auoit-il  fait  vn  quart  de
lieiie,  qu'il  trouue  h.  fon  rencontre  vn  ieune  cerf,  il  le
perce  de  fes  fleches,  il  le  defpoiiille  fur  la  place,  fe
charge  de  ce  doux  fardeau,  retourne  au  lieu  oil  eftoit
leur  bagage,  prepare  le  fouper  qui  attend  tons  les
autres  abfents.  Sur  le  foir  mes  chaffeurs  arriuent
plus  affamez  &  moins  chargez  qu'ils  n'eftoient  par-
tis; le  Chreftien  les  attend  au  chemin,  &  comme  ils
ne  luy  voyent  que  fon  carquois  en  main.  Ton  Dieu,
luy  difent-ils,  a  efle  fourd  pour  cette  fois  a  tes  pri-
eres,  quelque  autre  iour  que  tu  auras  efte  plus  heu-
reux,  alors  il  t'aura  entendu.  Non  non,  dit-il,  nous
ne  viuons  qu'a  fes  defpens,  voftre  impiete  ne  I'a  pas
empefche  de  nous  faire  du  bien ;  mais  vous  merite-
riez  de  mourir  icy  de  famine ;  il  vous  traite  comme
vn  bon  pere  fait  de  mef chants  enfans  qu'il  efpere
quelque  iour  deuoir  fe  reconnoiftre.


1642  -  44]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -44  313

to  seek  in  the  vast  forests  for  something  wherewith
to  satisfy  their  hunger.  Hardly  had  Barnabe  gone
a  quarter  of  a  league  than  he  came  upon  a  young
deer.  He  pierced  it  with  his  arrows,  skinned  it  on
the  spot,  loaded  himself  with  the  pleasant  burden,
returned  to  the  place  where  their  baggage  had  been
left,  and  prepared  supper,  which  awaited  the  absent
ones.  At  night  my  hunters  returned,  hungrier  and
less  burdened  than  when  they  started.  The  Chris-
tian waited  for  them  on  the  road;  and,  when  they
saw  only  his  quiver  in  his  hand,  they  said,  "  Thy
God  has  been  deaf  to  thy  prayers  this  time.  Some
other  day,  when  thou  shalt  be  more  fortunate,  then
he  will  have  heard  thee."  "  No,  no,"  he  said,  "  we
live  only  at  his  expense ;  your  impiety  has  not  pre-
vented him  from  doing  good  to  us ;  but  you  deserve
to  die  here  of  hunger ;  he  treats  you  as  a  kind  father
treats  wicked  children,  who  he  hopes  will  one  day
acknowledge  their  errors."


NOTES  TO  VOL  XXVI

(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  number  of  note,  refer  to  Pages

of  English  text.)

1  (p.  2g). —  See  sketch  of  Bressani,  vol.  xxiii.,  note  lo.

2  (p.  31). —  Riviere  Marguerie:  evidently  named  for  the  inter-
preter Fran§ois  Marguerie  (vol.  x.,  ftoie  ^).  Martin  observes  (Bres-
safty,  p.  18,  note):  "This  little  river  has  not  retained  its  name;
but  we  think  it  may  be  recognized  in  the  stream  now  known  as
Riviere  aux  Glaises."

3  (P-  35)- — Concerning  these  rapids,  see  vol.  viii.,  note  25;  and
vol.  xii.,  note  29.

4  (P-  37)- — This  Wolf  tribe  seems  to  have  been  the  Wolf  clan  of
the  Mohegan  tribes, —  Algonkins,  allied  to  the  Pequots  and  Narra-
gansetts  of  New  England.  These  Mohegans  (Mohicans,  Mahicans)
occupied  the  banks  of  the  Hudson,  between  the  Iroquois  on  the
north  and  the  Lenape  tribes  on  the  south ;  and,  later,  the  valley  of
the  Connecticut  River.  Two  noted  chiefs  among  them  were  Uncas
and  Konkapot, —  the  latter  a  chief  in  the  Housatonic  tribe,  occupy-
ing the  river  valley  of  that  name,  and  (after  1736)  the  town  of
Stockbridge,  Mass.,  by  the  name  of  which  the  tribe  was  afterward
known.  Missionary  work  among  these  Indians  was  begun  in  1734,
by  Rev.  John  Sergeant,  a  tutor  at  Yale  College,  and  continued  by
David  Brainerd  and  Jonathan  Edwards.  In  1785,  the  Stockbridges
removed  to  land  given  them  by  the  Oneidas,  in  Madison  county,
N.  Y. ;  and  finally,  in  1822-29,  to  Wisconsin,  where  they  now  occupy
the  Stockbridge  reservation,  in  Shawano  county.  See  Davidson's
Muh-he-ka-ne-ok,  a  History  of  the  Stockbridge  Nation  (Milw.,  1893).

5  (p.  123). —  All  the  aborigines  of  America  have  used,  from  the
earliest  times,  various  styles  of  cradles  or  cradle  boards  for  infants,
serving  at  once  as  bed,  vehicle,  and  playhouse.  The  cradle  board
here  referred  to  is  thus  described  by  Sagard  (  Voy.  Hurons,  Tross
ed.,  pp.  118,  119):  "During  the  day,  they  swaddle  their  children
upon  a  small  board, —  on  which  there  is  sometimes  a  rest,  or  little
strip  of  wood,  bent  half  round  under  the  feet.  This  they  set  up-
right against  the  side  of  the  Cabin,  except  when  they  carry  the
children  while  walking,  with  this  board  behind  the  mother's  back,


316  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES

attached  by  a  collar  worn  over  her  forehead.  .  .  .  The  child  is
swaddled  upon  this  board,  which  is  usually  adorned  with  little
Matachias  [vol.  ii.  of  this  series,  note  17]  and  strings  of  Porce-
lain; .  .  .  they  place  under  it  very  soft  down,  from  certain  reeds,
upon  which  the  child  sleeps  very  comfortably."  Lafitau  gives  a
similar,  but  more  minute,  description  {Mceurs  des  Sauvages,  vol.
i.,  pp.  593-595).  The  subject  is  fully  treated  by  Mason,  in  his
"  Cradles  of  the  American  Aborigines,"  U.  S.  Natl.  Museum  Rep.,
1887,  pp.  161-235.  Cf.  additional  information  thereon,  given  by  the
same  writer,  in  Id.,  1894,  pp.  490-537.

6  (p.  125). —  Cf.  accounts  of  Huron  belief  in  regard  to  the  souls  of
the  departed,  and  their  occupations  in  their  own  land,  given  by
Brdbeuf  (vol.  x.,  pp.  141 -155)  and  Le  Jeune  (vol.  xii.,  p.  29).

7  (p.  187). —  Ondesonk:  this  Huron  appellation  of  Jogues  is  said
by  Beschefer  (in  a  letter  dated  Oct.  4,  1666,  preserved  in  the  archives
of  St.  Mary's  College,  Montreal)  to  mean  "a  bird  of  prey."  The
same  name  was  given  to  Beschefer  also.

8  (p.  205). —  See,  regarding  Indian  textile  fabrics,  vol.  x
