• ■
m m
n 4
m im
tL-.i  :T  c  t_i  i  j '  ]  ^O^P  DQQQC
*
■
■  k9  BSfifi  SSfiH  '■  i ■  '■  •
t «
* •
k *
■ r
m. m
m ■
1  "IJ&QnTjlrwJT  ,_c !  t '  r{  : *  {  B^
ft *
■ «
* ■
•!  1Q4GQQ -1" r  "C:  1 1 1  1 I
'_■_"_• •■  *-«»  »_»■  m.
5/7
\2U
V\  «C  1
s  M
THE  JESUIT  RELATIONS
AND
ALLIED  DOCUMENTS
VOL.  XXIX
The  edition  consists  of  sev-
en hundred  and  fifty  sets
all  numbered
ncAIL
The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents
Travels  and  Explorations
of  the  Jesuit  Missionaries
in  New  France
1610-1791
THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL-
IAN TEXTS,  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA-
TIONS AND  NOTES  ;  ILLUSTRATED  BY
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES

EDITED  BY

REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES

Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin


Vol.  XXIX

Iroquois,  Lower  Canada,  Hurons

1646


Cleveland: Zbc  ^Burrows  ;»3rotbers
Company,  publishers,  mdcccxcviii


Copyright, 1S98

BY

The  Burrows  Brothers  Co


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


The  Imperial  Press,  Cleveland


EDITORIAL  STAFF


Editor


Translators  .


Assistant  Editor


Reuben  Gold  Thwaites
f  Finlow  Alexander
Percy  Favor  Bicknell
Crawford  Lindsay
William  Price
Hiram  Allen  Sober
Emma  Helen  Blair


Bibliographical  Adviser Victor  Hugo  Paltsits


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  XXIX

Preface  to  Volume  XXIX .  .  .9

Document: —

LX.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe  ....  en  la
Novvelle  France,  esannees  1645.  &  1646.
[Chaps,  iii.-x.,  of  Part  I. ;  Chaps,  i.-iii.,
of  Part  II., —  second  installment  of  the
document.]  Hierosme  Lalemant,  Quebek,
October  28,  1646;  Paul  Ragueneau,  Des
Hurons,  May  1,  1646 .  .  .15

Notes f  .  .  .  .  .293


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIX


As  stated  in  the  Preface  to  Vol.  XXVIII. ,  the  Re-
lation of  1645-46  (Doc.  LX.)  is  in  two  parts  —  Part  I.
(dated  at  Quebec,  October  28,  1646)  being  by  the  new-
superior  of  the  Canadian  missions,  Jerome  Lalemant;
Part  II.  (dated  in  the  Huron  country,  May  1,  1646)
being  the  annual  report  on  the  Huron  mission,  this
time  by  Ragueneau.  In  Vol.  XXVIII.  we  published
the  first  two  chapters  of  Part  I. ;  there  are  herewith
presented  the  remaining  eight  chapters  of  that  part,
and  the  three  opening  chapters  of  Part  II. — leaving
the  remainder  of  the  document  (five  chapters)  to  form
the  opening  portion  of  Vol.  XXX.

Continuing  his  Relation,  Lalemant  describes  the
"blessed  deaths "  of  Fathers  Anne  de  Noue  and
Enemond  Masse.  The  former  was  frozen  to  death
on  the  St.  Lawrence,  while  on  an  errand  of  charity;
a  sketch  of  his  life  and  character  is  given.  Masse  —
who,  with  Biard,  had  first  of  the  Jesuits  come  to  the
Canadian  mission  (161 1)  —  died  at  St.  Joseph,  an  old
man.  His  adventurous,  toilsome,  and  self-denying
career  is  described,  and  his  purity  and  devoutness
are  eulogized.

A  mission  is  at  last  begun  in  the  Iroquois  country.
Jogues  goes  to  the  Mohawks,  with  Bourdon,  as  envoy
from  the  French  governor;  his  journey,  and  the
proceedings  of  the  Mohawk  council,  are  related.
Having  been  received  there  in  a  friendly  manner,  the


10  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIX

devoted  missionary  resolves  to  return  thither,  that  he
may  preach  the  Gospel  to  his  former  tormentors;  he
therefore  departs  on  this  fateful  journey,  shortly
before  the  present  Relation  is  sent  to  France.

The  residence  of  St.  Joseph,  at  Sillery,  is  next
discussed.  Almost  all  the  Indians  who  frequent  this
place  are  now  baptized.  They,  in  turn,  have  influ-
enced the  Attikamegues  and  Abenakis  to  seek  the
truth,  and  have  sent  to  those  tribes  some  of  their
own  number  to  preach  the  Gospel.  The  Abenakis
having  asked  for  a  missionary  to  reside  among  them,
Druillettes  has  gone  to  winter  with  that  tribe.  Some
conversions  have  occurred  among  the  Algonkins  of
the  Island,  but  many  of  these  savages  "  are,  in  a
sense,  reprobate."  The  Sillery  Indians  watch  over
not  only  their  neighbors,  but  themselves;  they  will
not  harbor  persistent  infidels;  no  obstacles  hinder
them  from  daily  attendance  at  mass;  they  spend
whole  days  quite  without  eating,  rather  than  break
the  prescribed  fasts;  they  punish  themselves  most
severely  for  petty  faults.  "  The  Fathers  newly
arrived  tell  us  that  in  France  one  has  no  conception
of  what  they  here  see  with  their  own  eyes."  At  the
Christmas  season  they  march  —  in  piercing  cold,  and
fasting  —  to  Quebec,  and  back  to  Sillery,  to  celebrate
a  jubilee  ordered  the  previous  year.

At  Three  Rivers, —  the  central  point  of  intercourse
and  trade  with  all  the  upper  tribes, — there  are  a
considerable  number  of  Christians ;  but  they  are  so
exposed  to  annoyance  and  temptation,  from  the  many
pagans  who  come  and  go  at  that  settlement,  that  the
missionaries  experience  great  difficulty  in  maintain-
ing their  station  there,  and  in  cultivating  the  Chris-
tian virtues  in  their  converts. The  latter,  in  their


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIX  11

annual  hunt,  form  a  band  separate  from  that  of  the
pagans,  and  are  thus  enabled  to  practice  their  Chris-
tian duties.

The  Attikamegues  at  times  come  to  Three  Rivers
for  confession  and  communion :  these  are  a  simple
and  innocent  folk,  who  give  much  comfort  to  the
missionaries.  Through  them,  the  knowledge  of  the
faith  is  beginning  to  spread  to  even  more  distant
tribes. Some  conversions  are  recounted  in  detail.

The  savages  at  Tadoussac  are  so  devoted  to  their
religion  that  their  ignorant  zeal  carries  them  into
several  indiscretions,  and  their  spiritual  director  is
obliged  to  administer  reproofs;  they  acknowledge,
thereupon,  that  "  the  devil  has  led  them  astray,"  and
penitently  confess  their  faults,  —  also  offering  the
Father  "  a  present  to  take  away  his  sadness"  there-
at. As  at  Sillery,  many  hitherto  pagan  tribes  are
attracted  by  the  new  religion  that  is  preached  to
those  at  Tadoussac,  and  many  individuals  go  thither
to  receive  instruction  and  baptism.  When  they
return  to  their  homes,  the  Father  gives  them  a  set
of  variously  notched  and  colored  sticks,  to  remind
them  of  their  prayers  and  other  duties.

In  the  island  of  Montreal,  "  peace,  union,  and  con-
cord have  nourished  this  year."  Some  Indian  bands
have  settled  there,  intending  to  become  sedentary;
others  would  do  the  same,  if  it  were  not  for  rumors
of  Iroquois  hostilities.  The  Mohawks  keep  the
peace;  but  the  Oneidas  and  Onondagas  are  still
enemies,  and  make  raids  into  the  Huron  country.
Several  interesting  conversions  at  Montreal  are  here
described.  Some  Huron  families  talk  of  coming
down  to  live  on  that  island.  It  is  hoped  that  Jogues
will  succeed  in  persuading  the  Mohawks  to  restrain


12  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIX

the  upper  Iroquois  from  passing  through  their  lands
to  harass  the  French  and  their  allies.

Lalemant  relates  numerous  instances  of  the  cour-
age and  fidelity  of  the  neophytes  in  resisting  tempta-
tion and  repelling  the  superstitious  follies  of  the
pagans.  Various  cures  of  sickness  are  effected  by
certain  relics  applied  by  the  Fathers.

In  the  Tadoussac  mission,  the  children  are  em-
ployed, by  the  Father  in  charge  there,  to  search  for
the  drums,  fetiches,  and  other  instruments  of  super-
stition, which  "  the  children  have  rendered  so  ridic-
ulous that  there  is  no  longer  any  one  who  dares  to
use  them,  unless  perhaps  at  night  and  in  the  depths
of  the  woods."

The  writer  recounts  various  savage  customs,  regard-
ing death  and  mourning,  marriage,  etc.  He  describes
the  firefly,  tree-toad,  elk,  and  other  creatures, —  also
certain  traits  of  the  savage  character.  He  mentions
the  wretched  deaths  of  the  Iroquois  who  had  slain
Goupil,  and  tortured  Jogues  and  Bressani.

The  Queen  of  France  sends  to  the  Sillery  Indians  a
portrait  of  herself,  her  husband,  and  their  heir;  this
is  presented  to  them  with  speeches  and  gifts,  after
their  own  custom,  and  they  are  overcome  with
admiration  at  their  kindness.

Part  II.  is  Ragueneau's  report,  to  the  provincial  in
Paris,  of  the  Huron  mission  for  the  year.  The  tribes
therein  have  had  some  little  respite  from  the  calami-
ties that  have  so  long  oppressed  them.  Their  crops,
fisheries,  and  trade  have,  Ragueneau  says,  all  been
successful ;  and  the  epidemic  has,  for  the  time,
ceased.  Their  only  serious  difficulty  is  in  the  hos-
tilities still  carried  on  by  the  Iroquois  tribes  nearest


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XXIX  13

them, —  the  Mohawks  alone  having  made  a  treaty  of
peace.  Several  encounters  between  the  Hurons  and
Iroquois  are  related, — one  of  these  following  a  crafty
and  treacherous  pretense  of  peace  on  the  part  of  the
latter,  by  which  the  Hurons  were  surprised  and
defeated.  In  other  cases,  they  have  been  victorious, —
routing  their  enemies,  and  burning  captives  to  death
in  retaliation  for  their  own  losses.  Deeds  of  great
courage  are  performed  on  both  sides.

All  the  missions  in  Huronia,  except  that  to  the
wandering  Algonkins  therein,  have  been  made
permanent  residences.  Each  of  these  is  in  charge  of
two  missionaries, —  Ragueneau,  the  superior,  going
about  to  visit  each  in  turn,  and  remaining  at  each
residence  as  long  as  its  special  needs  require.  At
each  of  these  stations  a  chapel  has  been  built,  where-
in mass  and  vespers  are  said  daily.  In  all,  164
persons  have  been  baptized.  These  Huron  converts
exhibit  much  zeal  and  devotion,  of  which  several
instances  are  recounted.  One  of  them  takes  occa-
sion, at  the  burning  of  an  Iroquois  captive,  to  ha-
rangue his  tribesmen  on  the  like  punishment  in  hell
which  their  sins  are  bringing  upon  them ;  and  he
then  proceeds,  at  the  risk  of  his  own  life,  to  instruct
and  baptize  the  poor  victim.  Another  spends  many
hours,  and  sometimes  almost  whole  nights,  in
prayer;  often  he  cannot  find  words  wherewith  to
express  the  devotion  that  fills  his  soul.

R.  G.  T.

Madison,  Wis.,  August,  1S9S.


LX (continued)

Relation  of  1645-46

PARIS:  SEBASTIEN  ET  GABRIEL  CRAMOISY, 164;


This  document  was  commenced  in  Volume  XXVIII. ;  we
herewith  publish  the  second  installment  —  chaps,  iii.-x.  of
Part  I.,  and  chaps,  i.-iii.  of  Part  II.  The  remainder  of  the
document  will  appear  in  Volume  XXX.


16  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol..  29


[27]  CHAPITRE  III.

DE L'HEUREUSE MORT DU  PERE  ANNE  DE  NOUE,  &  DU
PERE ENEMOND MASSE.

PVIS  que  dans  le  Chapitre  precedent  nous  auons
fait  mention  de  la  mort  du  Pere  de  Noiie,  nous
en  parlerons  icy  plus  au  long ;  &  tout  enf emble
de  celle  du  Pere  Maffe,  arriu£e  cette  mefme  ann6e.
L'vne  des  grandes  faueurs  que  Dieu  ait  faite  aux
faindts  Apoftres  &  aux  faindts  Martyrs,  a  efte  de  les
ietter  dans  les  occafions,  &  comme  dans  vne  heureufe
[28]  neceffit6  d'agir  &  de  fouffrir  fortement  pour  leur
Maiftre ;  les  deux  Peres  dont  ie  vay  parler,  femblent
auoir  participe  a  cette  benedidtion.

Le  30.  de  Ianuier  de  cette  prefente  annee  1646.  le
Pere  Anne  de  Noiie  partit  de  la  refidence  des  trois
Riuieres,  en  la  compagnie  de  deux  foldats  &  d'vn
Huron  pour  s'en  aller  a  Richelieu,  eloigne  de  douze
lieues  des  trois  Riuieres,  pour  dire  la  Meffe  &  pour
adminiftrer  les  Sacremens  de  Penitence  &  de  l'Eu-
chariftie  aux  Francois  qui  font  la.  Toutes  les  riuieres
&  tous  les  lacs  n'eftoient  qu'vne  glace,  &  la  terre
eftoit  couuerte  par  tout  de  trois  ou  quatre  pieds  de
neige  a  fon  ordinaire,  pendant  l'hyuer.  Ce  bon  Pere
&  fes  compagnons  marchans  fur  des  raquettes  pour
ne  point  enfoncer  dans  les  neiges,  ne  firent  que  fix
lieues  la  premiere  iournee,  &  encor  auec  bien  de  la
peine :  car  jacoit  que  les  raquettes  f oient  vn  f oulage-


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  17


[27]  CHAPTER III.

OF  THE  BLESSED DEATHS  OF  FATHER ANNE DE NOUE
AND FATHER ENEMOND MASSE.

SINCE  in  the  preceding  Chapter  we  have  men-
tioned the  death  of  Father  de  Noiie,  we  will
here  speak  of  it  more  at  length ;  and  at  the
same  time,  of  that  of  Father  Masse,  which  occurred
in  this  same  year.  One  of  the  great  favors  which
God  has  granted  to  the  holy  Apostles  and  the  blessed
Martyrs  has  been  to  place  them  within  the  oppor-
tunities—  and,  as  it  were,  under  the  happy  [28]
necessity  —  of  bold  action  and  of  great  suffering  for
their  Master.  The  two  Fathers  of  whom  I  am  about
to  speak,  seem  to  have  shared  in  this  blessing.

On  the  30th  of  January  in  this  present  year,  1646,
Father  Anne  de  Noiie  left  the  residence  at  three  Riv-
ers, in  the  company  of  two  soldiers  and  one  Huron,
to  go  away  to  Richelieu,  twelve  leagues  distant  from
three  Rivers,  in  order  to  say  Mass,  and  to  adminis-
ter the  Sacraments  of  Penance  and  the  Eucharist  to
the  French  who  are  there.  All  the  rivers  and  all  the
lakes  were  but  one  expanse  of  ice,  and  the  earth  was
everywhere  covered  with  three  or  four  feet  of  snow,
as  is  usual  during  the  winter.  This  good  Father
and  his  companions,  walking  on  snowshoes  so  as
not  to  sink  into  the  snows,  made  only  six  leagues
the  first  day,  and  even  that  with  much  difficulty:
for  although  the snowshoes  are a relief, they  are


18  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

ment,  elles  ne  laiffent  pas  d'eftre  comme  des  entraues
a  ceux  qui  n'en  ont  pas  vn  fi  grand  vfage.

lis  fe  baftirent  vne  petite  maifon  dans  la  neige,
abriee  des  arbres  &  couuerte  du  Ciel,  pour  paffer  la
nuidt.  Le  Pere  ayant  remarqu6  que  les  deux  foldats
qui  l'accompagnoient  [29]  pour  eftre  nouueaux  dans
le  pais,  auoient  bien  de  la  peine  de  marcher  auec  des
pieds  bridez,  &  de  traifner  encor  auec  cela  tout  leur
bagage  apres  eux,  fe  leue  enuiron  les  deux  heures
apres  minuit  pour  gagner  le  deuant  &  donner  aduis
aux  foldats  de  Richelieu  de  venir  fecourir  leurs  cama-
rades.  Cette  charite"  luy  a  oi\6  la  vie,  heureux
martyre  de  mourir  des  mains  de  la  charite !  il  quitte
fa  compagnie,  luy  donne  aduis  de  fuiure  fes  piftes,
l'affeurant  qu'on  les  viendroit  bientoft  fecourir,  il  ne
prit  ny  fon  fufil  pour  battre  du  feu,  ny  fa  couuerture,
ny  autres  viures  qu'vn  peu  de  pain  &  cinq  ou  fix  pru-
neaux,  qu'on  a  encor  trouue  fur  luy  apres  fa  mort.
II  faut  porter  en  ce  pays-cy,  les  hoftelleries  auec  foy,
c'eft  a  dire  fon  lidt  &  fes  viures,  pour  la  maifon,  on
la  trouue  par  tout  oil  la  nuit  fe  rencontre.

Comme  c6t  homme  de  feu  marchoit  fur  les  glaces
du  Lac  faindt  Pierre  qui  fe  rencontre  entre  les  trois
Riuieres&  Richelieu,  n'ayantpour  guide  que  fon  bon
Ange  &  la  clarte"  de  la  Lune,  le  Ciel  fe  couurit,  &  les
nuees  luy  d6robant  fon  flambeau,  fe  changerent  en
neige,  mais  fi  abondante  que  les  tenebres  de  la  nuit
[30]  toufiours  affreufes,  l'eltoient  au  double ;  on  ne
voyoit  ny  les  bords  du  Lac,  ny  les  Ifles  dont  il  eft
parfeme  en  quelques  endroits.  Le  pauure  Pere  n'ay-
ant  point  de  boufole  ny  de  quadran  pour  fe  guider,
s'6gara;  il  marcha  beaucoup  &  auanca  peu.  Les
foldats  qu'il  auoit  quittez,  fe  leuant  pour  fe  mettre  en


1640]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  19

nevertheless  somewhat  of  a  hindrance  to  those  who
have  no  great  experience  with  them.

They  built  for  themselves  a  little  house  in  the
snow,  sheltered  by  the  trees  and  covered  with  the
Sky,  in  which  to  spend  the  night.  The  Father  —
having  remarked  that  the  two  soldiers  who  accom-
panied him  [29]  had,  on  account  of  being  new  in  the
country,  much  difficulty  in  walking  with  trammeled
feet,  and,  in  addition  to  that,  dragging  after  them
all  their  baggage  —  rose  about  two  hours  after  mid-
night, in  order  to  gain  the  start  and  give  notice  to
the  soldiers  at  Richelieu  to  come  and  aid  their  com-
rades. This  charity  took  away  his  life;  happy  mar-
tyrdom, to  die  at  the  hands  of  charity!  He  left  his
companions,  and  directed  them  to  follow  his  trail,
assuring  them  that  relief  would  soon  come  to  them ;
he  took  neither  his  steel  for  striking  fire,  nor  his  cov-
ering, nor  other  provisions  than  a  little  bread  and
five  or  six  prunes,  which  were  still  found  upon  him
after  his  death.  It  is  necessary,  in  this  country,  to
carry  one's  hostelries  with  one,  —  that  is  to  say,  one's
bed  and  provisions;  as  for  the  house,  one  finds  it
wherever  one  encounters  the  night.

While  this  man  of  fire  was  walking  on  the  ice  of
Lake  saint  Pierre,  which  lies  between  three  Rivers
and  Richelieu,  having  for  guide  only  his  good  Angel
and  the  brightness  of  the  Moon,  the  Sky  became
overcast,  and  the  clouds,  depriving  him  of  his  torch,
were  changed  into  snow.  But  this  was  so  abundant
that  the  shades  of  night,  [30]  always  frightful,  were
doubly  so, — one  saw  neither  the  shores  of  the  Lake,
nor  the  Islands  with  which  it  is  in  some  places
studded.  The  poor  Father,  having  no  compass  or
quadrant  to  guide  him,  lost  his  way ;  he  walked  much


20  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  29

chemin,  furent  bien  eitonnez  quand  ils  ne  virent
point  les  traces  ou  les  veftiges  du  Pere,  la  neige  qui
eftoit  tomb£e  de  nouueau  les  auoit  d6rob6;  ne  fca-
chant  quelle  route  tenir,  l'vn  d'eux  qui  auoit  efte"  vne
feule  fois  a  Richelieu,  tire  vn  quadran  &  fe  guide  a
peu  pr£s  fur  le  rumb  ou  rayon  de  vent  fur  lequel  il  le
croyoit  eftably :  ils  cheminent  tout  le  iour,  fans  qu'on
leur  vienne  au  fecours;  enfin  recrus  du  trauail,  ils
paffent  la  nuit  dans  l'lfle  de  S.  Ignace,  non  pas  bien
loin  du  lieu  ou  eftoit  le  Pere,  mais  ils  n'en  fcauoient
rien ;  le  Huron  plus  fait  a  ces  fatigues  que  les  Fran-
cois, fe  reconnoiffant,  donne  iufques  a  Richelieu,  il
demande  fi  le  Pere  n'eft  point  arriue,  on  dit  que  non,
le  voila  bien  eftonne,  &  le  Capitaine  de  cette  place
encor  plus,  apprenant  qu'il  eftoit  party  fi  matin  pour
faire  feulement  fix  lieues;  comme  il  eftoit  nuit,  on
attend  [3 1  ]  au  lendemain  matin  pour  enuoyer  au  deuant
de  luy,  les  foldats  de  la  garnifon  courent,  ils  le  cher-
chent  du  cofte  Sud,  &  il  eftoit  du  cofte  du  Nord;  ils
crient,  ils  appellent,  ils  tirent  des  coups  d'arquebufes,
mais  en  vain,  le  pauure  Pere  eftoit  bien  loin  de  la;
pour  les  deux  foldats  qu'on  attendoit,  le  Huron  ayant
dit  le  lieu  ou  ils  eftoient,  furent  bien-tolt  trouuez  &
amenez  au  fort,  tout  ce  iour  fe  paffa  a  courir  deca  &
dela,  a  crier,  &  a  chercher,  fans  rien  trouuer

Enfin  le  2.  iour  de  Feurier,  vn  foldat  affez  adroit
prend  deux  Hurons  de  quatre  qui  fe  trouuoient  pour
lors  en  cette  habitation,  il  s'en  va  chercher  le  gifte
ou  le  Pere  &  fes  compagnons  auoient  paffe  leur  pre-
miere nuit,  l'ayant  trouue\  ces  Hurons  bien  verfez  a
demefler  les  piftes  cachees  fous  la  neige,  fuiuent  les
traces  du  pauure  Pere,  remarquant  les  tours  &  les
deftours  qu'il  auoit  fait,  trouuent  le  lieu  ou  il  auoit


L646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  21


and  advanced  little.  The  soldiers  whom  he  had  left,
on  rising  to  proceed  on  their  journey,  were  much
astonished  when  they  saw  not  the  tracks  or  the  foot-
prints of  the  Father;  the  newly-fallen  snow  had  con-
cealed these.  Not  knowing  which  route  to  take,  one
of  them  who  had  been  only  once  at  Richelieu,  draws
forth  a  quadrant,  and  guides  himself  nearly  by  the
rhumb  or  line  of  wind  along  which  he  believed  it
fixed.  They  journey  the  whole  day,  without  assist-
ance reaching  them;  finally,  worn  out  with  toil,
they  spend  the  night  on  the  Island  of  St.  Ignace,  not
very  far  from  the  place  where  the  Father  was, —  but
they  knew  naught  of  that.  The  Huron,  better  quali-
fied for  these  fatigues  than  the  French,  getting  his
bearings,  reaches  Richelieu;  he  asks  if  the  Father
has  not  arrived.  They  say  "  No;  "  he  is  much  aston-
ished,—  and  the  Captain  of  that  place  still  more  so,
on  learning  that  he  had  started  so  early  to  make  only
six  leagues.  As  it  was  now  night,  they  wait  [31]
till  the  next  morning,  to  send  to  meet  him.  The
soldiers  of  the  garrison  run ;  they  seek  him  on  the
South  shore,  and  he  was  on  the  North  shore ;  they
shout,  they  call,  they  fire  arquebus  shots,  but  in
vain, —  the  poor  Father  was  very  far  from  there.  As
for  the  two  soldiers  whom  they  were  expecting,  the
Huron  having  described  the  place  where  they  were,
they  were  soon  found  and  led  to  the  fort.  All  that
day  was  spent  in  running  hither  and  thither,  in
shouting,  and  in  seeking,  but  finding  nothing.

Finally,  on  the  2nd  day  of  February,  a  clever
soldier  takes  two  Hurons,  out  of  four  who  happened
to  be  just  then  in  that  settlement ;  he  goes  in  search
of  the  shelter  where  the  Father  and  his  companions
had  spent  their  first  night. Having  found  it,  these


22  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

pafT6  la  feconde  nuit  depuis  fon  depart;  c'efloit  vn
trou  dedans  la  neige,  au  fonds  duquel  il  auoit  mis
quelques  branches  de  fapin  fur  lefquelles  il  auoit  pris
fon  repos,  fans  feu,  fans  maifon,  fans  couuerture,
n'ayant  qu'vne  fimple  fotanne  [32]  &  vne  vieille
camifolle.  Comme  ce  lieu  n'eft  pas  bien  frequente
des  Francois,  le  Pere  ne  s'y  put  reconnoiftre,  de  la
il  trauerfe  la  riuiere  deuant  l'habitation  de  Richelieu
qu'il  n'apperceut  point,  foit  qu'il  neigeaft  fort,  ou
que  le  trauail  &  les  neiges  luy  euffent  affoibly  la
veue.  Ce  foldat  fuiuant  toufiours  les  piftes  que  les
Hurons  decouuroient,  vid  au  Cap  nomine"  de  maffacre
a  vne  lieue  plus  haut  que  Richelieu,  vn  endroit  ou  ce
bon  Pere  s'eftoit  repofe,  &  trois  lieues  plus  haut  vis
a  vis  de  rifle  platte  &  la  terre-ferme,  entre  deux  pe-
tits  ruiffeaux,  ils  trouuerent  fon  corps  a  genoux  tout
roide  &  engele  fur  la  terre  qu'il  auoit  decouuerte,  en
ayant  vuide  la  neige  en  rond  ou  en  cercle,  fon  cha-
peau  &  fes  raquettes  eftoient  aupres  de  luy,  il  eftoit
panche  fur  le  bord  de  la  neige  releu^e :  il  eft  croyable
qu'ayant  expire  a  genoux,  le  poids  de  fon  corps  l'auoit
fait  pancher  fur  cette  muraille  de  neige,  il  auoit  les
yeux  ouuerts  regardant  vers  le  Ciel  le  lieu  de  fa
demeure,  &  les  bras  en  croix  fur  la  poitrine.

Le  foldat  le  voyant  en  cette  pofture,  touche  d'vn
faindt  refpecl;,  fe  iette  a  genoux,  fait  fa  priere  a  Dieu,
honore  ce  facre  depoft,  [33]  entaille  vne  croix  fur
l'arbre  le  plus  proche,  enueloppe  ce  corps  tout  roide
&  tout  glace  das  vne  couuerture  qu'il  auoit  portee,  le
met  fur  vne  traifne  &  le  conduit  a  Richelieu,  &  de  la
aux  trois  Riuieres:  il  croit  qu'il  rendit  Tame  le  iour
de  la  Purification  de  la  Vierge,  a  laquelle  il  auoit
vne  deuotion  tres-particuliere. II  ieufnoit  tons  les


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645- 4&  23

Hurons,  well  trained  in  distinguishing  trails  hidden
beneath  the  snow,  follow  the  poor  Father's  tracks,
observing  the  turns  and  windings  that  he  had  made,
and  find  the  place  where  he  had  spent  the  second
night  after  his  departure.  This  was  a  cavity  in  the
snow,  at  the  bottom  of  which  he  had  put  some
branches  of  fir,  upon  which  he  had  taken  his  rest, —
without  fire,  without  a  house,  without  covering:  hav-
ing only  a  single  cassock  [32]  and  an  old  jacket.  As
this  place  is  not  much  frequented  by  the  French,  the
Father  could  not  ascertain  where  he  was.  Thence
he  crossed  the  river,  in  front  of  the  settlement
at  Richelieu,  which  he  did  not  perceive, —  either
because  it  snowed  very  hard,  or  because  toil  and  the
snows  had  weakened  his  sight.  The  soldier,  con-
tinually following  the  trail  which  the  Hurons  uncov-
ered, saw  at  the  Cape  called  "  massacre,"  a  league
above  Richelieu,1  a  place  where  this  good  Father  had
rested;  and  three  leagues  higher,  facing  flat  Island
and  the  mainland,  between  two  little  brooks,  they
found  his  body  on  its  knees,  quite  stiff  and  frozen
upon  the  ground  which  he  had  laid  bare,  having
cleared  away  the  snow  in  a  ring  or  circle ;  his  hat
and  his  snowshoes  were  near  him;  he  was  leaning
over  the  edge  of  the  heaped-up  snow.  It  is  probable
that,  having  expired  on  his  knees,  the  weight  of  his
body  had  caused  him  to  lean  upon  this  wall  of  snow ;
he  had  his  eyes  open, — looking  toward  Heaven,  the
place  of  his  dwelling, — -and  his  arms  crossed  on  his
breast.

The  soldier,  seeing  him  in  that  posture,  touched
with  a  devout  respect,  falls  on  his  knees,  makes  his
prayer  to  God,  and  honors  this  sacred  trust.  [33]
He  notches  a  cross  on  the  nearest  tree ;  wraps  the


24  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

Samedis  en  fon  honeur,  recitoit  tous  les  iours  vn  petit
office  pour  honorer  fon  immacul6e  Conception,  il  ne
parloit  d'elle  qu'auec  vn  langage  tout  de  cceur:  il  eft
croyable  que  cette  grande  &  tres-fidelle  MaiftrefTe  luy
a  obtenu  cette  mort  fi  purifiante,  ii  faindte  &  fi  eloi-
gnee  de  tous  les  fecours  de  la  terre,  pour  le  receuoir
plus  hautement  au  Ciel.

Les  foldats  de  Richelieu  &  les  habitans  des  trois
Riuieres,  ne  fcauoient  a  qui  donner  leur  cceur,  ou  a
l'admiration  d'vne  fi  heureufe  mort,  ou  a  la  trifteffe,
fe  voyans  priuez  d'vn  homme  qui  eftoit  tout  aux  autres
&  rien  a  foy.  II  fut  enterre  auec  le  concours  de  tous
les  Francois  &  de  tous  les  Sauuages  qui  eftoient  aux
trois  Riuieres.  Quelques  ames  vlcer6es  ne  purent
cacher  plus  long-temps  leurs  playes  a  la  veue  de  ces
faindtes  depoiiilles,  ils  fe  vinrent  [34]  confeffer  au
pluftoft,  difans  qu'il  leur  fembloit  que  ce  bon  Pere
les  en  preffoit;  d'autres  ne  pouuoient  prier  pour  luy,
mais  bien  fe  recommander  a  fes  prieres.

En  vn  mot  cette  belle  mort  eft  le  terme  d'vne
faindte  vie:  ce  bon  Pere  eftoit  fils  d'vn  honnefte
Gentil-homme  Seigneur  de  Villers  en  Priere,  ou  pour
mieux  dire,  en  Prairie,  qui  eft  vn  Chafteau  &  vn  vil-
lage ou  vn  bourg  diftant  fix  ou  fept  lieue's  de  la  ville
de  Rheims  en  Champagne ;  En  fa  ieuneffe  il  fut  fait
Page,  &  fe  trouuant  en  la  Cour  il  fut  follicite-  par  des
courtifanes  pour  fa  beautd,  mais  fa  bonne  MaiftrefTe
le  conTerua  vierge  trente  ans  dans  le  monde,  &  trente-
trois  ans  en  Religion ;  il  eftoit  rude  &  f euere  en  fon
endroit,  tout  de  cceur  pour  les  autres ;  les  chofes  les
plus  baffes  &  les  plus  viles  luy  eftoient  grandes  &
releuees,  &  tout  ce  qui  eft  dans  l'dclat  luy  fembloit
remply de  tenebres :  il a  trauaille feize  ans  en  la


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-  46  25

body,  all  stiff  and  frozen,  in  a  blanket  which  he  had
brought;  puts  it  on  a  sledge;  and  conveys  it  to
Richelieu,  and  thence  to  three  Rivers.  He  believes
that  he  gave  up  his  soul  on  the  day  of  the  Purifica-
tion of  the  Virgin,  for  whom  he  had  a  most  special
devotion.  He  fasted  every  Saturday  in  her  honor,
recited  every  day  a  brief  office  to  honor  her  immacu-
late Conception,  and  spoke  of  her  only  in  wholly
affectionate  terms.  It  is  credible  that  this  great  and
most  faithful  Mistress  obtained  for  him  that  death, —
so  purifying,  so  saintly,  and  so  removed  from  all
earthly  helps, — in  order  to  receive  him  on  a  higher
plane  in  Heaven.

The  soldiers  of  Richelieu  and  the  people  of  three
Rivers  knew  not  whether  they  should  give  their
hearts  to  the  admiration  of  so  happy  a  death,  or  to
sorrow  at  seeing  themselves  deprived  of  a  man  who
was  all  for  others  and  nothing  for  himself.  He  was
buried  with  the  attendance  of  all  the  French  and  all
the  Savages  who  were  at  three  Rivers.  Some  ulcer-
ated souls  could  no  longer  conceal  their  sores  at  the
sight  of  those  blessed  remains;  they  came  [34]  to
confession  as  soon  as  possible,  saying  that  it  seemed
to  them  that  this  good  Father  was  urging  them  to
it;  others  were  not  able  to  pray  for  him,  but  could
indeed  commend  themselves  to  his  prayers.

In  a  word,  this  glorious  death  is  the  end  of  a
holy  life.  This  good  Father  was  the  son  of  a
worthy  Gentleman,  Seignior  of  Villers  en  Priere, —
or  rather,  en  Prairie, — which  is  a  Castle  and  a  vil-
lage, or  a  market  town,  distant  six  or  seven  leagues
from  the  city  of  Rheims  in  Champagne.  In  his
youth  he  was  made  a  Page,  and,  finding  himself  at
Court,  he  was solicited by  courtesans  on  account  of


26  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.29

Million  de  la  nouuelle  France  toufiours  auec  courage,
tou jours  auec  ferueur,  &  toufiours  dans  vne  profonde
humility.  Comme  il  vid  que  fa  memoire  ne  luy
permettoit  pas  d'apprendre  les  langues,  il  fe  donna  &
dedia  tout  entierement  au  feruice  des  pauures  Sau-
uages  [35]  &  de  ceux  qui  les  inftruifoient,  s'abbaiffant
auec  vne  ardeur  nompareille  aux  offices  les  plus
rudes  &  les  plus  raualez.  Nos  Francois  &  nos  Peres
s'eftans  rencontrez  certain  temps  dans  vne  grande
neceffite  de  viures,  il  alloit  chercher  des  racines  par
les  bois :  il  apprit  11  bien  a  pef cher  qu'il  foulageoit
toute  vne  maifon  par  fon  trauail,  autant  innocent  que
charitable.

II  eftoit  extremement  delicat  en  l'obei'ffance,  quel-
que  empreffement  qu'il  eut  dans  les  affaires  occur-
rentes,  quelque  difficulte  qui  fe  prefentaft  a  fes  yeux,
il  eftoit  preft  de  tout  quitter  &  de  tout  embraffer  a  la
voix  de  fon  Superieur,  fans  examiner  fon  pouuoir  ou
fon  induftrie,  delirant  que  la  feule  volote  de  Dieu
donnaft  le  branle  a  fes  actions,  rebutant  ie  ne  fcay
quelle  prudence  qui  a  force  d'ouurir  les  yeux  aux  rai-
fons  trop  humaines,  les  ferme  a  la  beaute  de  l'obeif-
fance, que  s'il  choquoit  tant  foit  peu  cette  vertu,  on
luy  voyoit  a  l'age  de  foixante  ans,  des  larmes  &  des
tendreffes  d'vn  ieune  enfant,  qui  auroit  defagree  en
quelque  cliofe  a  fon  pere.

Quelqu'vn  le  voyant  entrer  dans  la  caducite,  [36]
luy  propofa  de  retourner  en  France  pour  y  paffer  plus
doucement  fa  vieilleffe:  Ie  fcay  bien,  repartit-il,  que
la  Minion  eft  charged  &  que  ie  tiens  la  place  d'vn  bon
ouurier,  ie  fuis  preft  de  la  foulager  &  d'obeir  en  tout;
mais  ie  ferois  bien  aife  de  mourir  dans  le  champ  de
bataille:  ce  n'eft  pas  que  ie  n'approuue  la  charite  de


1 646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -  46  27

his  beauty ;  but  bis  good  Mistress  kept  him  chaste
for  thirty  years  in  the  world,  and  thirty-three  years
in  Religion.  He  was  harsh  and  severe  toward
himself,  but  full  of  affection  for  others ;  things  the
lowest  and  most  vile  were  great  and  lofty  to  him ;
and  all  that  there  is  in  splendor  seemed  to  him  filled
with  darkness.  He  toiled  sixteen  years  in  the
Mission  of  new  France,  always  with  courage,  always
with  fervor,  and  always  in  deep  humility.  When  he
saw  that  his  memory  did  not  allow  him  to  learn
languages,  he  gave  and  dedicated  himself  entirely  to
the  service  of  the  poor  Savages  [35]  and  of  those
who  instructed  them, — lowering  himself,  with  an
ardor  unparalleled,  to  the  hardest  and  most  humiliat-
ing offices.  Our  French  and  our  Fathers  having
chanced  to  be,  at  a  certain  time,  in  great  necessity
for  provisions,  he  went  to  seek  roots  in  the  woods ;
and  he  learned  to  fish  so  well  that  he  relieved  a
whole  house  by  his  toil,  as  innocent  as  charitable.

He  was  extremely  sensitive  in  regard  to  obedi-
ence. Whatever  urgency  he  had  in  the  affairs  at
hand,  whatever  difficulty  presented  itself  to  his
sight,  he  was  ready  to  leave  everything  or  to  em-
brace everything  at  the  voice  of  his  Superior,  with-
out examining  his  own  power  or  his  own  skill, —
desiring  that  only  the  will  of  God  should  give  the
impulse  to  his  actions,  and  rejecting  that  indefinable
prudence  which,  by  dint  of  opening  the  eyes  to  argu-
ments too  human,  closes  them  to  the  beauty  of  obedi-
ence. Accordingly,  if  he  offended  this  virtue,  even
in  the  least,  one  saw  in  him,  at  the  age  of  sixty
years,  the  tears  and  tenderness  of  a  young  child  who
had  in  some  manner  displeased  his  father.

Some  one,  seeing  him  begin  to  grow  infirm,  [36]


28  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.29

ceux  qui  fe  voyans  infirmes  ou  trop  agez  pour  appren-
dre  a  parler  Sauuage,  font  place  a  quelque  bon
ouurier  Euangelique.  Mais  pour  moy  ie  fens  cette
inclination  d'employer  icy  ma  vie  au  feruice  des
pauures  Sauuages,  &  de  ceux  qui  les  couertiffent,  &
au  fecours  que  ie  peux  rendre  aux  Francois.  Cette
benedidtion  luy  a  efte  accordee,  le  defir  de  fouffrir  a
fait  de  fon  corps  vne  vidtime,  l'obeiffance  l'a  egorge,
&  la  charite  en  a  fait  vn  holocaufte  qu'elle  a  brule  &
confomme  en  l'honneur  de  fon  Dieu,  qui  feul  auec  fes
Anges  fut  fpedtateur  de  ce  grand  facrifice ;  A  tant  du
Pere  de  Noiie.

Pour  le  Pere  Enemond  Maffe,  il  eftoit  natif  de  la
ville  de  Lion;  il  entra  en  noftre  Compagnie  a  1' age
de  vingt  ans,  il  y  a  trauaille  cinquante-deux,  en  fuite
def quels  il  eft  mort  le  douziefme  de  May  de  [37]  cette
prefente  annee,  en  la  refidence  de  S.  Iofeph,  age  de
72.  ans.  II  s'eft  trouue  dans  vne  grande  variete  de
temps  &  d'occupations  bien  differences,  mais  rien  n'a
paru  dans  le  cours  de  fa  vie,  que  l'ardeur  qu'il  auoit
de  fouffrir  dans  les  Millions  eftrangeres :  c'eft  ce  defir
qui  le  fit  entrer  en  noftre  Compagnie ;  ayant  receu  les
Ordres  facrez,  on  le  donna  pour  compagnon  au  R.  P.
Pierre  Coton,  Confeffeur  pour  lors  &  Predicateur  du
Roy  Henry  le  Grand  Le  zele  de  conuertir  les  Sau-
uages luy  faifoit  preferer  leurs  grandes  forefts  a  l'air
de  la  Cour,  il  preffa  auec  tant  d' amour  qu'enfin  il  fut
enuoye  en  l'Acadie,  auec  le  P.  Pierre  Biart.  lis
s'embarquerent  a  Dieppe  l'an  161 1.  &  furent  les  deux
premiers  de  tous  les  Ordres  Religieux  qui  entrerent
dans  cette  partie  de  l'Amerique,  qui  porte  le  nom  de
la  Nouuelle  France. II  n'eft  pas  croyable  combien  ces


1646]  RELA  T10N  OF  1645  -46  29

proposed  to  him  to  return  to  France,  that  he  might
there  spend  his  old  age  more  comfortably.  "  I  know
well,"  he  answered,  "  that  the  Mission  is  burdened,
and  that  I  hold  the  place  of  a  good  workman.  I  am
ready  to  relieve  it,  and  to  obey  in  everything ;  but  I
would  be  very  glad  to  die  in  the  field  of  battle.  It
is  not  that  I  do  not  approve  the  charity  of  those  who,
seeing  themselves  infirm,  or  too  old  to  learn  to  speak
the  Savage  tongue,  make  place  for  some  good  Gospel
laborer;  but,  as  for  myself,  I  feel  this  inclination,
to  employ  my  life  here  in  the  service  of  the  poor
Savages  and  of  those  who  are  converting  them,  and
in  the  aid  that  I  can  render  to  the  French."  This
blessing  was  granted  to  him ;  the  desire  to  suffer  has
made  a  victim  of  his  body ;  obedience  has  slain  him,
and  charity  has  made  of  him  a  sacrifice  which  it  has
burned  and  consumed  in  the  honor  of  his  God,  who
alone,  with  his  Angels,  was  spectator  of  this  great
offering. So  much  for  Father  de  Noiie.

As  for  Father  Enemond  Masse,  he  was  a  native  of
the  city  of  Lion,  and  entered  our  Society  at  the  age
of  twenty  years.  He  toiled  therein  fifty-two  years,
at  the  end  of  which  time  he  died,  on  the  twelfth  of
May  in  [37]  this  present  year,  at  the  residence  of  St.
Joseph,  aged  72  years.  He  lived  in  a  great  variety
of  times,  and  in  very  different  occupations;  but
nothing  has  appeared  in  the  course  of  his  life  save
the  ardor  that  he  had  for  suffering  in  foreign  Mis-
sions,—  it  was  this  desire  that  caused  him  to  enter
our  Society.  Having  received  sacred  Orders,  he
was  appointed  companion  to  Reverend  Father  Pierre
Coton,  at  that  time  Confessor  and  Preacher  to  the
King,  Henry  the  Great.  His  zeal  for  converting  the
Savages  caused  him  to  prefer  their  great  forests  to


SO  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.29

deux  patmres  Peres  fouffrirent  en  ce  nouueau  monde :
le  gland  fut  quelques  mois  leur  nourriture,  ceux  qui
les  deuoient  proteger,  les  couuroient  d'iniures;  ils
furent  emprifonnez  &  calomniez  par  ceux-la  mefmes
aufquels  ils  rendoient  tous  les  deuoirs  d'amour  &  de
charite;  [38]  l'vn  des  principaux  d'entre  ceux  qui  les
ont  naal  traitez,  mourant  par  apres  fans  le  fecours
d'aucun  Ecclefiaftique,  difoit  auec  regret  &  auec
douleur,  qu'il  payoit  bien  rudement  les  tourmens
qu'il  auoit  fait  fouffrir  a  ces  pauures  Peres.

S'eftans  6cartez  de  cette  habitation,  vn  pirate  An-
glois  les  prit,  &  les  ayant  pillez,  les  amena  dans  fon
vaiffeau;  ce  nauire  eftant  contraint  d'entrer  dans  vn
port  Catholique,  fut  pris  pour  vn  ecumeur  de  mer,
les  Officiers  de  la  marine  y  entrent,  le  vifitent,  vne
feule  parole  de  ces  deux  prifonniers  eut  fait  prendre
le  vaiffeau  &  pendre  tous  les  nautonniers ;  mais  non
feulement  ils  ne  parlerent  point,  mais  fe  cacherent  fi
bien  qu'ils  ne  furent  iamais  apperceus ;  quand  les  vifi-
teurs  eftoient  d'vn  cofte,  les  Peres  fe  gliffoiet  de
1' autre ;  les  Heretiques  voyant  cette  adtion  s'ecrierent
tout  haut  qu'ils  auroient  fait  vn  grand  crime  de  tuer
ces  deux  Innocens,  comme  ils  l'auoient  penfe  faire,
quand  la  tempefte  les  ietta  dans  ce  port  habite  par
des  Catholiques.

Au  fortir  de  la,  ces  pirates  fe  retirent  en  Angle-
terre,  oil  ils  furent  accufez  de  quelques  vols ;  mais
eux  ayant  efprouue  la  [39]  bonte  de  leurs  prifonniers,
ils  les  produifirent  pour  tefmoins,  les  Peres  affeurent
qu'ils  n'auoient  point  veu  commettre  Taction  dont
on  les  blafmoit.

Enfin  ils  repafferent  en  France  en  1' equipage  de


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  31

the  air  of  the  Court ;  he  urged  with  so  much  love
that  finally  he  was  sent  to  Acadia,  with  Father
Pierre  Biart.  They  embarked  at  Dieppe  in  the  year
161 1,  and  were  the  first  two,  of  all  the  Religious
Orders,  to  enter  that  part  of  America  which  bears
the  name  of  New  France.  It  is  not  credible  how
much  these  two  poor  Fathers  suffered  in  this  new
world.  Acorns  were,  for  several  months,  their
food ;  those  who  were  bound  to  protect  them  covered
them  with  insults;  they  were  imprisoned  and  slan-
dered by  those  very  persons  to  whom  they  were  ren-
dering all  the  duties  of  love  and  charity.  [38]  One
of  the  principal  among  those  who  treated  them  ill,
dying  afterward  without  the  assistance  of  any  Eccle-
siastic, said,  with  regret  and  grief,  that  he  was  pay-
ing very  severely  for  the  torments  that  he  had  caused
these  poor  Fathers  to  suffer.

Having  removed  from  that  settlement,  an  English
pirate  seized  them,  and,  after  plundering  them,  took
them  aboard  his  vessel.  This  ship,  being  compelled
to  enter  a  Catholic  port,  was  taken  for  a  sea-rover;
the  Officers  of  marine  boarded  and  inspected  her.  A
single  word  of  those  two  prisoners  would  have  caused
the  capture  of  the  vessel,  and  the  hanging  of  all  the
sailors;  but  not  only  did  they  not  speak,  but  they
concealed  themselves  so  well  that  they  were  never
perceived.  When  the  visitors  were  on  one  side,  the
Fathers  slipped  to  the  other ;  the  Heretics,  seeing  this
action,  exclaimed  aloud  that  they  would  have  com-
mitted a  great  crime  in  killing  those  two  Innocent
men,  as  they  had  thought  of  doing  when  the  storm
drove  them  into  that  port  inhabited  by  Catholics.

On  departing  thence,  those  pirates  withdrew  to  Eng-
land,  where  they  were  accused  of  some  robberies;


32  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.29

deux  pauures  gueux  tout  delabrez,  le  Pere  Enemond
MafTe  ayant  veu  le  pays  de  la  Croix  &  les  pauures
Sauuages  fans  fecours,  ne  pouuoit  viure.  Son  corps
eftoit  en  l'ancienne  France,  &  fon  cceur  en  la  nou-
uelle ;  voyant  que  les  portes  luy  eftoient  ferm6es  du
coite"  de  la  terre,  il  prend  le  chemin  du  Ciel,  comme
le  plus  feur  en  toutes  bonnes  entreprifes.  II  appelle
les  Croix  &  les  fouffrances  de  ce  nouueau  monde  fa
Rachel,  &  dit  que  pour  la  rauoir,  il  s'en  va  feruir
Dieu  auffi  fidellement  &  auffi  long-temps  que  Iacob
feruit  Laban,  &  pour  mieux  affermir  fes  refolutions,
il  les  efcriuit  dans  vn  papier  qu'on  a  veu  &  leu  a  fon
deceu. En  voicy  les  principaux  articles.

Si  Iacob  a  feruy  quatorze  ans  pour  Rachel,  a  com-
bien  plus  forte  raifon  dois-ie  feruir  nion  cher  Maiflre
deux  fois  7.  ans  pour  la  nouuelle  France,  mon  cher
Canadas,  embelly  d'vne  grade  variete  de  Croix  tres-
aymables  &  tres-adorables?  vn  ft  [40]  grand  bien,  vn
fi  grand  employ,  vne  vocation  ft  fublime:  en  vn  mot,
le  Canadas  &  fes  delices  qui  font  la  Croix,  ne  fe
peuuent  obtenir  que  par  des  difpofitions  conformes  a
la  Croix,  c'eft  pourquoy  il  fe  faut  refoudre  a  garder
inuiolablement  ce  qui  fuit,

1.  Iamais  ne  coucher  que  fur  la  dure,  c'eft  a  dire
fans  draps,  fans  mattelas,  fans  paillaffe,  il  en  faut
neantmoins  auoir  en  fa  chambre  pour  n'eftre  veu
que  des  yeux,  aufquels  on  ne  fe  peut  cacher.

2.  Ne  porter  point  de  linge,  ftnon  au  col.

3.  Ne  dire  iamais  lafaindte  Meffe  fans  eftre  reueftu
d'vne  haire :  ces  armes  te  feront  fouuenir  de  la  Paffion
de  ton  Maiftre,  dont  ce  Sacrifice  eft  le  grand  me-
morial.


1646]  RELATION  OF  164J -46  33

but  having  experienced  the  [39]  magnanimity  of
their  prisoners,  they  produced  them  as  witnesses;
the  Fathers  gave  assurance  that  they  had  not  seen  the
act  committed  with  which  their  captors  were  charged.

Finally,  they  crossed  over  to  France  in  the  plight
of  two  poor  beggars,  all  in  rags.  Father  Enemond
Masse,  having  beheld  the  country  of  the  Cross  and
the  poor  Savages  in  need  of  help,  could  not  live ;  his
body  was  in  the  old  France,  and  his  heart  in  the
new.  Seeing  that  the  doors  were  closed  to  him  on
the  side  of  earth,  he  takes  the  way  of  Heaven,  as
the  surest  in  all  good  enterprises.  He  calls  the
Crosses  and  sufferings  of  this  new  world  his  Rachel,
and  says  that,  to  recover  her,  he  is  going  away  to
serve  God  as  faithfully  and  as  long  as  Jacob  served
Laban ;  and,  in  order  better  to  strengthen  his  resolu-
tions, he  wrote  them  in  a  paper  which  was  seen  and
read  at  his  death. Here  follow  its  principal  articles :

"  If  Jacob  served  fourteen  years  for  Rachel,  with
how  much  stronger  reason  ought  I  to  serve  my  dear
Master  twice  7  years  for  new  France, — my  dear
Canadas,  embellished  with  a  great  variety  of  most
lovable  and  adorable  Crosses !  So  [40]  great  a  bless-
ing, so  lofty  an  employ,  so  sublime  a  vocation, —  in
a  word,  Canadas  and  its  delights,  which  are  the
Cross, —  can  be  obtained  only  through  a  frame  of
mind  conformed  to  the  Cross.  For  this  reason,  one
must  resolve  to  observe  inviolably  that  which  follows :
"  1 .  Never  to  lie  down  except  on  the  bare  ground, —
that  is,  without  sheets,  without  mattress,  without
straw  bed ;  one  nevertheless  must  have  some  of  these
in  his  room,  that  he  may  be  seen  only  by  the  eyes
from  which  one  cannot  hide  oneself.
"2. To  wear  no  linen,  save  about  the  neck.


34  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESU/TES [Vol.29

4.  Prendre  tous  les  iours  la  difcipline.

5.  Toutes  les  fois  que  tu  difneras  fans  auoir  fait  au
prealable  ton  examen  de  confcience,  quelque  empef-
chement  d'affaires  que  tu  ayes,  tu  ne  mangeras  qu'vn
deflert  comme  on  peut  faire  a  la  collation  6s  iours  de
ieufnes.

6.  Tu  ne  donneras  iamais  a  ton  gouft  ce  qu'il  ap-
peteroit  par  delices.

[41]  7.  Tu  ieufneras  trois  fois  la  femaine  fans  que
perfonne  s'en  appercoiue,  fmon  celuy  qui  en  doit
auoir  connoiff ance ;  comme  tu  ne  prends  ordinaire-
ment  ton  repas  qu'a  la  feconde  table,  tu  peux  facile-
ment  cacher  ces  petites  mortifications.
8.  Si  tu  laiffes  fortir  de  ta  bouche  quelque  parole
qui  choque  tant  foit  peu  la  charite,  tu  ramafferas
fecrettement  auec  ta  langue  les  crachas  &  les  flegmes
fortis  de  la  bouche  d'autruy.

Voila  les  brebis  que  gardoit  ce  Iacob  pour  efpoufer
la  belle  Rachel,  voila  la  monnoye  auec  laquelle  il  a
achept6  les  Croix  de  la  nouuelle  France ;  Dieu  ne
put  refifier  a  tant  de  defirs,  ny  £conduire  vne  11  fidelle
perfeuerance,  il  fut  renuoye  en  Canadas  1'an  1625.  il
y  trouua  fa  Rachel,  c'eft  a  dire  les  Croix  en  abon-
dance,  les  vaiffeaux  manquans  de  venir,  la  famine
accueillit  les  Francois  qui  eftoient  en  ce  pays  cy.
C'eft  en  ce  temps-la  que  le  Pere  Enemond  MafTe  &
le  Pere  Anne  de  Noiie  fon  compagnon  cherchoient
des  racines  pour  conferuer  leur  vie,  &  qu'ils  fe  firent
l'vn  Iardinier  &  Laboureur,  &  1' autre  Pefcheur  &
Bucheron,  pour  pouuoir  [42]  fubfiiter  en  ce  bout  du
monde,  ou  les  ames  ont  coufte  auffi  cher  a  Iesvs-
Christ,  que  les  ames  des  Princes  &  des  Monarques.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  35

"3.  Never  to  say  holy  Mass  without  being  clad
in  a  hair  shirt;  that  armor  will  make  thee  re-
member the  Passion  of  thy  Master,  of  whom  this
Sacrifice  is  the  great  memorial.
"4.  To  take  the  discipline  every  day.
"5.  Whenever  thou  shalt  dine  without  having  pre-
viously made  thine  examination  of  conscience,  no
matter  how  circumstances  may  hinder  thee,  thou  shalt
eat  only  a  dessert,  as  one  may  do  at  the  collation  on
days  of  fasting.

"6. Thou  shalt  never  give  to  thy  taste  that  which
it  might  crave  as  a  delight.

[41]  "7.  Thou  shalt  fast  three  times  in  the  week,
but  so  that  none  may  perceive  it  save  that  one  who
must  have  knowledge  thereof.  As  thou  usually
takest  thy  meal  only  at  the  second  table,  thou  canst
easily  conceal  these  little  mortifications.
"8.  If  thou  suffer  to  issue  from  thy  lips  any  word
which  offends  charity,  however  little,  thou  shalt
gather  up  secretly  with  thy  tongue  the  spittle  and
phlegm  proceeding  from  the  mouths  of  others."

Behold  the  sheep  which  this  Jacob  tended  in  order
to  espouse  the  beautiful  Rachel ;  such  was  the  money
with  which  he  bought  the  Crosses  of  new  France.
God  could  not  resist  so  many  desires,  nor  deny  so
faithful  a  perseverance ;  he  was  sent  back  to  Canadas
in  the  year  1625.  He  found  there  his  Rachel, — that
is  to  say,  Crosses  in  abundance;  the  vessels  failing
to  come,  famine  assailed  the  French  who  were  in
this  country.  It  was  then  that  Father  Enemond
Masse  and  Father  Anne  de  Noue,  his  companion,
sought  roots  to  preserve  their  lives ;  and  that  they
made  themselves,  the  one  a  Gardener  and  Plough-
man, and  the  other,  Fisherman  and  Woodcutter,  in


36  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

La  fin  de  cette  Croix  fut  le  commencement  d'vne
autre.  Vn  Francois  Anglif6  ayant  pris  Kebec  fit
repaffer  ce  pauure  Pere  en  France;  que  fera-il?  tous
ces  rebuts  feront-ils  pas  capables  de  luy  ofter  la  pen-
f£e  &  l'amour  d'vne  Rachel  qui  luy  auoit  paru  ft  belle
&  qui  effort  fi  laide,  fi  difforme,  &  fi  affreufe?  Les
yeux  &  les  efprits  des  hommes  font  bien  differents :
ce  que  l'vn  appelle  grandeur,  l'autre  l'appelle  baf-
feff  e :  ces  rigueurs  eftoient  la  douceur  &  la  beaute"
de  fa  Rachel ;  le  poltron  f uit  fentant  les  coups,  &  le
bon  foldat  s'anime  a  la  veue  de  fon  fang.

Ce  pauure  Pere  fe  tenant  comme  vn  banny  dans
fon  pays  natal,  fait  vne  promeffe  &  vn  vceu  a  Dieu
tout  folemnel  de  faire  tous  fes  efforts  pour  mourir  en
la  Croix  de  la  nouuelle  France.  Dieu  efc  le  plus
grand  guerrier  du  monde,  l'amour  neantmoins  &  la
perfeuerance  le  defarment,  le  Pere  emporta  ce  qu'il
demandoit,  il  rentre  dans  fon  pays  de  benedidtion
Pan  1633.  il  y  meurt  Tan  1646.  tout  [43]  charge1
d'ans  &  de  merites  au  milieu  des  Sauuages,  au  falut
defquels  il  auoit  confacre  toute  fa  vie  &  tous  fes
trauaux;  il  receut  tous  les  Sacremens  de  l'Eglife,
&  donna  des  preuues  a  fa  mort  de  la  tendreffe  qu'il
auoit  pour  fa  faindte  Maiftreff e :  car  ne  pouuant  pour
fon  extreme  debilite  ny  parler,  ny  ouurir  les  yeux,
ny  fe  mouuoir  qu'auec  de  grandes  peines,  fi  toft
qu'on  luy  parloit  de  la  faindte  Vierge  ou  de  fon  cher
Epoux  S.  Iofeph,  il  donnoit  des  indices  que  cela  luy
agreoit  extremement,  priant  qu'on  luy  donnaft  fou-
uent  cette  douce  nourriture,  &  ce  reftaurant  qui  le
faifoit  viure.

Ceux qui  l'ont  connu  plus  particulierement,  ont


1


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  37

order  to  be  able  [42]  to  subsist  in  this  end  of  the
world,  where  the  souls  have  cost  Jesus  Christ  as
dear  as  the  souls  of  Princes  and  Monarchs.

The  end  of  that  Cross  was  the  beginning  of
another;  an  Anglicized  Frenchman,  having  taken
Kebec,  sent  this  poor  Father  back  to  France.  What
will  he  do?  Can  all  these  rebuffs  take  from  him  the
thought  and  the  love  of  a  Rachel  who  had  appeared
to  him  so  beautiful,  but  who  was  so  ugly,  so
deformed,  and  so  frightful?  The  eyes  and  minds  of
men  are  very  different, — what  one  calls  grandeur,
another  calls  baseness;  these  rigors  were  the  soft-
ness and  beauty  of  his  Rachel.  The  coward  flees  on
feeling  the  blows,  and  the  good  soldier  is  inspirited
at  the  sight  of  his  own  blood.

This  poor  Father,  regarding  himself  as  an  exile  in
his  native  land,  makes  to  God  a  promise  and  a  most
solemn  vow,  that  he  will  exert  every  effort  to  die  on
the  Cross  of  new  France.  God  is  the  greatest
warrior  in  the  world;  nevertheless,  love  and  perse-
verance disarm  him.  The  Father  gained  what  he
asked, — he  returns  to  his  land  of  blessing  in  the
year  1633;  he  dies  there  in  the  year  1646,  all  [43]
laden  with  years  and  merits  in  the  midst  of  the
Savages,  to  whose  salvation  he  had  consecrated  his
whole  life  and  all  his  labors.  He  received  all
the  Sacraments  of  the  Church,  and,  at  his  death,
gave  proofs  of  the  tenderness  which  he  had  for  his
blessed  Mistress;  for, — unable,  through  his  extreme
debility,  either  to  speak  or  to  open  his  eyes,  or  to
stir  except  with  great  pains, — as  soon  as  they  spoke
to  him  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  or  of  her  dear  Spouse
St.  Joseph,  he  made  signs  that  that  pleased  him
extremely,  begging  that  they  should  often  give  him


38  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29

remarque"  en  luy  deux  ou  trois  chofes  fort  notables :
il  auoit  vn  naturel  vif,  prompt,  &  ardent;  ce  luy  fut
vn  exercice  de  vertu  tout  le  cours  de  fa  vie ;  cette
ardeur  donoit  vn  feu  &  vne  promptitude  admirable
a  fon  obei'fTance  &  a  fa  charite\  &  les  cheutes  qu'il
faifoit  par  fragility,  engendroient  dans  fon  ame  vne
profonde  humilite"  &  vn  fi  grand  m6pris  de  foy-
mefme,  qu'il  fe  reputoit  moins  qu'vn  chien,  quand  la
nature  luy  faifoit  faire  quelque  faillie.  II  naquit
auec  l'amour  de  [44]  la  mortification:  car  des  fa
petite  ieuneffe  il  faifoit  du  mal  a  fon  corps,  notam-
ment  quand  quelque  petit  bouillon  de  cholere  vouloit
^chauffer  fon  cceur.

Ayant  oiiy  parler  des  trauaux  du  grand  faindt  Fran-
cois Xauier  dans  les  Indes,  il  eut  quelque  penfee  de
r£pandre  fon  fang,  ou  du  moins  d'employer  fa  vie  en
quelque  pays  eftranger  pour  le  falut  des  ames.  Cette
penfee  fe  change  en  defir,  ce  defir  en  refolution,  cette
refolution  croiffant  auec  l'age,  luy  fit  demander  l'en-
tree  en  noftre  Compagnie,  en  laquelle  il  fut  admis;
mais  comme  il  auoit  la  veue  extremement  foible,  on
parla  de  le  renuoyer  de  la  maif on  de  probation :  cela
l'epouuente,  il  a  recours  a  fa  faindte  Mere,  la  coniure
auec  vne  fimplicite  d'enfant  de  luy  donner  vne  mar-
que de  la  volonte"  qu'elle  a  de  fa  perfeuerance  en  la
Compagnie,  il  prie  auec  ardeur,  prend  vn  Liure,  l'ou-
ure,  lit  fans  difficulte  les  plus  petits  caracteres;  cela
le  confole  &  le  furprend,  &  efface  de  l'efprit  de  fes
Superieurs  la  penfee  de  le  reuoyer.  Comme  c'efl
l'vne  des  efpreuues  que  noftre  Compagnie  prend  de
ceux  qui  s'y  veulent  enrooller,  de  les  enuoyer  en
quelques  pelerinages  demandans  l'aumofne,  [45]  le


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  39

that  sweet  nourishment,  and  that  restorative  which
made  him  live.

Those  who  knew  him  most  intimately  remarked
in  him  two  or  three  very  notable  characteristics.
He  had  a  vivacious,  ready,  and  ardent  nature,  which
was  to  him  an  exercise  in  virtue  all  the  course  of  his
life.  This  ardor  gave  a  fire  and  an  admirable
promptness  to  his  obedience  and  his  charity;  and
the  falls  that  he  incurred  through  frailty  engendered
in  his  soul  a  profound  humility,  and  so  great  a  con-
tempt for  himself  that  he  esteemed  himself  less  than
a  dog,  when  nature  caused  him  to  commit  some  fail-
ing. He  was  born  with  the  love  of  [44]  mortifica-
tion ;  for,  from  his  early  youth,  he  treated  his  body
harshly  —  especially  when  some  little  ebullition  of
anger  would  vex  his  heart.

Having  heard  mention  of  the  labors  of  the  great
saint  Francois  Xavier  in  the  Indies,  he  had  some
thought  of  shedding  his  blood,  or  at  least  employing
his  life,  in  some  foreign  country  for  the  salvation  of
souls.  This  thought  becomes  changed  into  desire,
this  desire  into  resolution ;  this  resolution,  increasing
with  age,  causes  him  to  ask  admission  into  our
Society,  into  which  he  was  received ;  but,  as  his  sight
was  extremely  feeble,  there  was  talk  of  sending  him
back  from  the  house  of  probation.  That  terrifies
him ;  he  has  recourse  to  his  blessed  Mother,  and  en-
treats her  with  the  simplicity  of  a  child  to  give  him
a  sign  of  her  will  that  he  should  remain  in  the  So-
ciety. He  prays  with  ardor;  he  takes  a  Book,  opens
it,  and  reads  without  difficulty  the  smallest  charac-
ters; that  consoles  and  surprises  him,  and  effaces
from  the  minds  of  his  Superiors  the  thought  of  send-
ing him  away. As  it  is  one  of  the  tests  which  our


40  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

bon  Enemond  Made  y  flit  enuoye*  auffi  bien  que  les
autres,  auec  les  defirs  du  mepris  &  des  peines  qui
accompagnent  cette  efpreuue.  Or  il  luy  arriua  dans
fon  pelerinage  qu'vn  Ecclefiaftique  de  piete  &  de
condition  le  receut  &  fes  compagnons  auffi,  auec  des
tefmoignages  d'vn  refpect  &  d'vn  amour  extraor-
dinaire: luy  qui  ne  cherchoit  que  le  mepris  &  la
Croix  fut  d'abord  faifi  de  crainte,  s'imaginant  que  les
rebuts  du  monde  deuoiet  eftre  la  marque  de  l'vnion
qu'il  vouloit  auoir  auec  Dieu,  il  rentre  dans  fa  fim-
plicite  ordinaire,  a  recours  a  la  faindte  Vierge,  la
coniure  de  changer  les  careffes  de  cet  honnefte
homme  en  des  froideurs,  &  fa  charite  en  des  rebuts,
&  qu'il  prendroit  ce  changement  pour  vn  figne  de  fa
perfeuerance  en  la  compagnie  de  fon  Fils:  cette
priere  peut-eftre  moins  difcrete  &  moins  reglee
qu'innocente,  fut  oiiye  de  la  fain(5te  Vierge:  les  pa-
roles tariffent  en  la  bouche  de  cet  homme,  fon  feu
fe  change  en  glace,  il  renuoye  ces  pelerins  par
procureur  fans  leur  ietter  aucun  regard.  Depuis  ce
temps  ce  bon  Nouice  fe  tint  affeure  de  fa  perfeue-
rance au  feruice  de  fon  Seigneur  &  de  fa  bonne
Maiftreffe,  laquelle  luy  a  fait  vn  [46]  prefent  tres-
particulier  &  tres-rare  de  la  purete\  Les  Peres  qui
l'ont  frequente"  &  communique  plus  intimement,
affeurent  que  iamais  il  n'a  reffenty  aucune  rebellion
en  la  chair.  Ceux  qui  combattent  &  qui  domtent  cet
aiguillon,  come  S.  Paul,  ne  font  pas  moindres,  mais
il  faut  auoiier  que  c'eft  vne  grande  douceur  d' eftre
deliure"  de  1'importunite  de  ces  mouches  d'Enfer.

Si  fa  purete"  fut  grande,  fa  charite  ne  fut  pas  moin-
dre:  elle  le  fit  fcieur  d'aix  &  charpentier  de  nauire,


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  41

Society  makes  of  those  who  wish  to  be  enrolled  in
it,  to  send  them  on  certain  pilgrimages,  asking  alms,
[45]  the  good  Enemond  Masse,  as  well  as  the  others,
was  sent  out  thus,  with  desires  for  the  contempt  and
the  hardships  which  accompany  that  probation.
Now  it  happened  to  him,  in  his  pilgrimage,  that  an
Ecclesiastic  of  piety  and  rank  received  him,  and  his
companions  also,  with  manifestations  of  extraordinary
respect  and  love ;  he,  who  sought  only  contempt  and
the  Cross,  was  at  first  seized  with  dread, —  imagining
that  the  rebuffs  of  the  world  must  be  the  mark  of  the
union  with  God  which  he  wished  to  have.  He
resumes  his  usual  simplicity,  has  recourse  to  the
blessed  Virgin,  and  entreats  her  to  change  this  man's
kindness  into  coldness,  and  his  charity  into  repul-
sion—  and  that  he  would  take  this  change  for  a  sign
of  his  continuance  in  the  society  of  her  Son.  This
prayer  —  perhaps  less  discreet  and  less  conformable
to  rule  than  innocent  —  was  heard  by  the  blessed
Virgin;  the  words  dry  up  in  that  man!s  mouth,  his
fire  is  changed  to  ice, —  he  sends  these  pilgrims  away
by  his  agent,  without  casting  a  glance  at  them.
From  that  time  this  good  Novice  held  himself  assured
of  his  continuance  in  the  service  of  his  Lord  and  of
his  good  Mistress,  who  made  him  a  [46]  present  most
special  and  most  rare,  that  of  purity.  The  Fathers
who  most  intimately  visited  and  conversed  with  him
affirm  that  he  never  experienced  any  rebellion  in  the
flesh.  Those  who  combat  and  subdue  this  sting,  like
St.  Paul,  are  not  inferior;  but  it  must  be  acknowl-
edged that  it  is  a  great  privilege  to  be  delivered
from  the  annoyance  of  those  flies  of  Hell.

If  his  purity  was  great,  his  charity  was  not  less;  it
made  him  a  wood-sawyer  and  ship's  carpenter,  along


42  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  29

auec  le  Pere  Biart  fon  compagnon,  ils  firent  des  plan-
ches &  baitirent  vne  chaloupe  ou  vn  batteau  pour
aller  pefcher  de  la  molue,  afin  de  fecourir  l'habita-
tion  ou  ils  eftoient  preflez  d'vne  extreme  neceflite\
Ce  bon  Pere  a  fait  toute  forte  de  meftiers,  mais  no-
tamment  celuy  auec  lequel  on  gagne  le  Paradis :  il  a
fi  bien  couru  qu'il  a  emporte"  le  prix  ou  la  couronne,
il  a  nauige  fi  heureufement,  qu'il  eft  enfin  arriue-
mal-gre  toutes  les  tempeftes,  au  port  d'vne  glorieufe
eternite\


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  43

with  Father  Biart,  his  companion.  They  made
planks  and  built  a  shallop  or  boat,  in  order  to  go  fish-
ing for  cod,  so  as  to  succor  the  settlement  in  which
they  were,  which  was  under  the  pressure  of  extreme
necessity.  This  good  Father  plied  all  sorts  of  trades,
but  especially  that  by  which  one  gains  Paradise ;  he
has  run  so  well  that  he  has  carried  off  the  prize  or
the  crown ;  he  has  navigated  so  prosperously  that  he
has  at  last  arrived,  in  spite  of  all  the  storms,  at  the
port  of  a  glorious  eternity.


44  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  29


[47]  CHAPITRE  IV.

DE LA MISSION DES MARTYRS COMMENCEE AU PAYS

DES IROQUOIS.

QVAND  ie  parle  d'vne  Miffion  aux  Iroquois,  il
me  femble  que  ie  parle  d'vn  fonge,  &  neant-
moins  c'eft  vne  verite:  c'eft  a  bon  droit  qu'on
luy  fait  porter  le  nom  des  Martyrs:  car  outre  les
cruautez  que  ces  Barbares  ont  defia  fait  fouffrir  a
quelques  perfonnes  amoureufes  du  falut  des  ames,
outre  les  peines  &  les  fatigues  que  ceux  qui  font
deftinez  a  cette  Miffion  doiuent  encourir,  nous  pou-
uons  dire  auec  verit6  qu'elle  a  defia  efte"  empourpree
du  fang  d'vn  Martyr:  car  le  Fracois  qui  fut  tue  aux
pieds  du  Pere  Ifaac  Iogues,  perdit  la  vie  pour  auoir
fait  exprimer  le  figne  de  noftre  creance  a  quelques
petits  enfans  Iroquois :  ce  qui  choqua  tellement  leurs
parens,  que  s'imaginant  qu'il  y  pouuoit  auoir  quelque
fort  dans  cette  action,  ils  en  firent  vn  crime  &  vn
martyre  tout  enfemble.

[48]  Adiouftez  que  s'il  eft  permis  de  coniecfturer  en
des  chofes  qui  donnent  de  grandes  apparences,  il  eft
croyable  (fi  cette  entreprife  reiiffit)  que  les  deifeins
que  nous  auons  contre  1' empire  de  Satan  pour  le  falut
de  ces  peuples,  ne  porteront  point  leurs  fruidts  qu'ils
ne  foient  arroufez  du  fang  de  quelques  autres  Mar-
tyrs. Le  deffein  toutesfois  principal  de  cette  deno-
mination, eft  que  cette  Miffion  foit  affift£e  du  credit


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  164J-46  45


[47]  CHAPTER  IV.

OF THE MISSION OF THE MARTYRS, BEGUN IN THE
COUNTRY OF THE IROQUOIS.

WHEN  I  speak  of  a  Mission  among  the  Iro-
quois, it  seems  to  me  that  I  speak  of  a
dream,  and  yet  it  is  a  truth.  It  is  with  good
right  that  it  is  made  to  bear  the  name  of  the
Martyrs;  for  —  besides  the  cruelties  which  those
Barbarians  have  already  inflicted  upon  some  persons
impassioned  for  the  salvation  of  souls;  besides  the
pains  and  fatigues  which  those  who  are  destined  to
this  Mission  are  bound  to  incur  —  we  may  say  with
truth  that  it  has  already  been  crimsoned  with  the
blood  of  one  Martyr;  for  the  Frenchman  who  was
slain  at  the  feet  of  Father  Isaac  Jogues  lost  his  life
for  having  expressed  the  sign  of  our  creed  to  some
little  Iroquois  children,  which  so  greatly  offended
their  parents  that  they  —  imagining  that  there  might
be  some  spell  in  this  action  —  made  of  it  at  once  a
crime  and  a  martyrdom.

[48]  Add  this,  that  —  if  it  be  permitted  to  conjec-
ture, in  things  which  indicate  great  probabilities  —
it  is  credible  (if  this  enterprise  succeed)  that  the
designs  which  we  have  against  the  empire  of  Satan,
for  the  salvation  of  these  peoples,  will  not  yield
their  fruits  before  they  be  sprinkled  with  the  blood
of  some  other  Martyrs.  Nevertheless,  the  principal
design  of  this  denomination  is  that  this  Mission  may
be  assisted with  the influence  and favor  of  those


46  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUJTES [Vol.29

&  faueur  de  ces  faindtes  &  facr6es  vidtimes  qui  ont
l'honneur  d'approcher  de  plus  pr6s  l'Agneau  &  de
le  fuiure  par  tout :  mais  entrons  en  difcours.

Monfleur  noftre  Gouuerneur  ayant  refolu  d'en-
uoyer  deux  Francois  au  pays  des  Annierronnons,
pour  leur  porter  fa  parole  &  pour  leur  tefmoigner  fa
ioye  &  fon  contentement  fur  la  paix  heureufement
conclue.  Le  Pere  Ifaac  Iogues  luy  fut  prefente  pour
eftre  de  la  partie,  comme  il  auoit  defia  achete  la  con-
noifTance  de  ces  peuples  &  de  leur  langue  auec  vne
monnoye  plus  precieufe  que  l'or  &  que  Target,  il  fut
bien-toft  accepte,  les  Iroquois  l'agr£eret,  &  luy  qui
auoit  fouftenu  le  poids  de  la  guerre,  n'eftoitpas  pour
reculer  dans  la  paix.  II  fut  bien  aife  de  fonder  leur
amitie,  [49]  apres  auoir  6prouu6  la  rage  de  leur
inimitie:  il  n'ignoroit  pas  neantmoins  rinconflance
de  ces  Barbares,  la  difficult^  des  chemins  luy  eftoit
prefente,  comme  a  vn  homme  qui  l'auoit  experimen-
ted, il  voyoit  les  dangers  oil  il  f e  iettoit :  mais  qui
ne  rifque  iamais  pour  Dieu,  ne  fera  iamais  gros
marchand  des  richeifes  du  Ciel.  II  fut  pluftoft  preft
qu'on  ne  luy  eut  fait  la  propofition.  Monfieur  le
Gouuerneur  iugea  a  propos  d'enuoyer  de  plus  le  fieur
Bourdon  habitant  du  pays,  qui  monftra  d'autant  plus
de  courage  pour  le  bien  public,  qu'il  abandonna  fa
famille,  pour  fe  ietter  dans  des  hazards  qui  ne  font
iamais  petits  parmy  ces  Barbares.

Les  Algonquins  voyant  qu'vn  Pere  s'embarquoit,
luy  donnent  aduis  de  ne  point  parler  de  la  Foy  de
prime-abord :  car  il  n'y  a  rien,  difoient-ils,  de  fi  rebu-
tant  au  commencement  que  noftre  dodtrine,  qui  fem-
ble  exterminer  tout  ce  que  les  hommes  ont  de  plus


1646J  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  47

blessed  and  consecrated  victims  who  have  the  honor
to  approach  nearest  to  the  Lamb,  and  to  follow  him
everywhere. But  let  us  begin  the  discourse.

Monsieur  our  Governor  having  resolved  to  send
two  Frenchmen  to  the  country  of  the  Annierron-
nons, —  in  order  to  convey  to  them  his  word,  and  to
betoken  to  them  his  joy  and  satisfaction  over  the  peace
happily  concluded, —  Father  Isaac  Jogues  was  pre-
sented to  him,  to  be  of  the  party.  As  he  had  already
purchased  an  acquaintance  with  these  peoples  and
their  language,  with  a  coin  more  precious  than  gold
or  silver,  he  was  soon  accepted ;  the  Iroquois  welcomed
him,  and  he  who  had  sustained  the  weight  of  war,
was  not  for  retreating  in  time  of  peace.  He  was  very
glad  to  sound  their  friendship,  [49]  after  having
experienced  the  rage  of  their  enmity.  He  was  not
ignorant,  however,  of  the  inconstancy  of  these
Barbarians;  the  difficulty  of  the  roads  was  patent
to  him,  as  a  man  who  had  experienced  it;  he  saw  the
dangers  into  which  he  was  throwing  himself ;  but  he
who  never  risks  for  God  will  never  be  an  extensive
dealer  in  the  riches  of  Heaven.  He  was  ready  soon-
er than  the  proposition  was  made  to  him.  Monsieur
the  Governor  thought  proper  to  send,  besides,  the
sieur  Bourdon,  a  settler  in  the  country, —  who  showed
his  zeal  for  the  public  welfare  all  the  more  that  he
forsook  his  own  family,  in  order  to  throw  himself
into  hazards  which  are  never  small  among  these
Barbarians.

The  Algonquins,  seeing  that  a  Father  was  em-
barking, gave  him  warning  not  to  speak  of  the  Faith
at  the  very  first;  "  for  there  is  nothing,"  said  they,
"  so  repulsive  at  the  beginning  as  our  doctrine,  which
seems  to  exterminate  everything  that  men  hold  most


48  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

cher,  &  pource  que  voftre  longue  robe  pr6che  auffi
bien  que  voftre  bouche,  il  feroit  a  propos  de  marcher
en  habit  plus  court.  Cet  aduis  fut  ecoute\  &  Ton
crut  qu'il  falloit  traiter  les  malades  en  malades,  &  fe
comporter  parmy  [50]  les  impies  comme  on  fait
parmy  les  heretiques,  qu'il  falloit  fe  faire  tout  a
tous,  pour  les  gagner  tous  a  Iesvs-Christ.

lis  partirent  le  16.  de  May  des  trois  Riuieres,  &  le
18.  veille  de  la  Pentecofte,  ils  s'embarquerent  a
Richelieu  fur  la  riuiere  des  Iroquois:  ils  eftoient
conduits  par  quatre  Iroquois  Annierronons,  deux
ieunes  Algonquins  les  accompagnoiet  dans  leur  canot
particulier  charge"  des  prefens  qu'ils  alloient  faire
pour  la  confirmation  de  la  paix.  Le  Saindt  Efprit
auquel  eft  dedi6  le  plus  grand  bourg  des  Iroquois,
la  fefte  duquel  s'alloit  commencer  en  l'Eglife,  au
moment  de  leur  depart,  leur  donnoit  defia  vn  auant-
gouft  du  bon-heur  de  leur  voyage.

Ils  arriuerent  la  veille  du  S.  Sacrement  au  bout  du
lac  qui  eft  ioint  au  grand  lac  de  C[h]amplain.  Les
Iroquois  le  nomment  Andiatarodte,  comme  qui  diroit
la  ou  le  lac  fe  ferme.  Le  Pere  le  nomma  le  lac  du
S.  Sacrement.

Ils  le  quitterent  le  iour  de  cette  grande  Fefte,
pourfuiuans  leur  chemin  par  terre  auec  de  grandes
fatigues :  car  il  falloit  porter  fur  leur  dos  leurs  pac-
quets  &  leur  bagage,  les  Algonquins  furent  contrains
[51]  d'en  laiffer  fur  le  bord  de  ce  lac  vne  grande
partie.

A  fix  lieues  de  ce  lac,  ils  paff  erent  vne  petite  riuiere
que  les  Iroquois  appellent  Ologue,  les  Hollandois
qui  font  placez  deffus,  mais  plus  bas,  la  nomment
Riuier[e]  van  Maurice.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  49

dear ;  and,  because  your  long  robe  preaches  as  well
as  your  lips,  it  would  be  expedient  to  walk  in  shorter
apparel."  This  warning  was  heeded,  and  it  was
considered  necessary  to  treat  the  sick  as  sick,  and  to
behave  among  [50]  the  impious  as  one  does  among
the  heretics, —  that  one  must  become  all  things  to
all  men,  in  order  to  gain  all  to  Jesus  Christ.

They  started  on  the  16th  of  May  from  three
Rivers;  and  on  the  18th,  the  eve  of  Pentecost,2  they
embarked  at  Richelieu  on  the  river  of  the  Iroquois.
They  were  conducted  by  four  Annierronnon  Iro-
quois; two  young  Algonquins  accompanied  them,  in
their  own  separate  canoe,  laden  with  the  gifts  which
they  were  going  to  make  for  the  confirmation  of  the
peace.  The  Holy  Ghost, — to  whom  is  dedicated  the
largest  village  of  the  Iroquois, — whose  feast  was
about  to  begin  in  the  Church  at  the  moment  of  their
departure,  gave  them  even  then  a  foretaste  of  the
good  fortune  of  their  voyage.

They  arrived,  on  the  eve  of  the  Blessed  Sacra-
ment, at  the  end  of  the  lake  which  is  joined  to  the
great  lake  of  Champlain.  The  Iroquois  name  it  An-
diatarocte\  as  if  one  should  say,  "there  where  the
lake  is  shut  in."  The  Father  named  it  the  lake  of
the  Blessed  Sacrament.3

They  left  it,  the  day  of  that  great  Feast,  continu-
ing their  way  by  land  with  great  fatigues,  for  they
had  to  carry  on  their  backs  their  bundles  and  their
baggage;  the  Algonquins  were  obliged  [51]  to  leave
a  great  part  of  theirs  on  the  shore  of  the  lake.

Six  leagues  from  this  lake,  they  crossed  a  small
river  which  the  Iroquois  call  Oiogue;  the  Dutch,
who  are  located  along  it,  but  lower  down,  name  it
the  River  van  Maurice.4


50  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

Le  premier  iour  de  Iuin,  leurs  guides  accablez  fous
leur  faix  &  fous  le  trauail,  quitterent  le  chemin  qui
conduit  a  leurs  bourgs,  pour  paffer  par  vn  certain
endroit  appell6  en  leur  langue  Oflarague' :  ce  lieu  (au
rapport  du  Pere)  eft  fort  remarquable  pour  la  pefche
d'vn  petit  poiffon  gros  comme  le  harang.  lis  efpe-
roient  trouuer  la  quelque  fecours:  en  effet  on  leur
prefta  des  canots  pour  porter  leur  bagage  iufques  a
la  premiere  habitation  des  Hollandois,  eVLoignee  de
cette  pefche  d'enuiron  dix-huidt  ou  vingt  lieues.

Dieu  a  vne  conduite  toute  pleine  d'amour:  fa  bonte"
fit  faire  ce  deftour  pour  donner  quelque  fecours  a  la
pauure  Therefe,  jadis  Seminarifle  des  Vrfulines:  ils
la  rencontrerent  en  cet  endroit.  Le  Pere  luy  rafrai-
chift  la  memoire  de  fon  deuoir,  &  la  confeffa,  auec
vne  grande  fatisfadtion  de  fon  ame.

[52]  Le  4.  de  Iuin,  ils  mirent  pied  a  terre  a  la
premiere  habitation  des  Hollandois,  oil  ils  furent  Fort
bien  receus  par  le  Capitaine  du  fort  d' Orange:  ils  en
fortirent  le  feizieme  du  mefme  mois,  accompagnez
&  foulagez  des  Iroquois  qui  fe  trouuerent  en  ce  quar-
tier  la.  Le  lendemain  au  foir  ils  arriuerent  en  leur
premiere  bourgade  appellee  OneugiS're,  jadis  Offer-
rion.  La  il  fallut  demeurer  deux  iours  pour  eftre
confiderez  &  bien-veignez  de  ces  peuples  qui  venoient
de  toutes  parts  pour  les  voir :  ceux  qui  auoient  autres-
fois  maltraite  le  Pere,  n'en  faifoient  plus  aucun
femblant,  &  ceux  que  la  compaffion  naturelle  auoit
touchez  a  la  veue  de  fes  tourmens,  receuoient  vne
ioye  fenfible  de  le  voir  dans  vne  autre  poflure,  &  dans
vn  employ  conilderable.

Le 10. de Iuin,  honore  par  la  fefte  de  la  faindte


1646J  RELATION  OF  7643-46  51

On  the  first  day  of  June,  their  guides,  overcome  by
their  burdens  and  the  toil,  turned  aside  from  the  road
which  leads  to  their  villages,  in  order  to  pass  by  a
certain  place  called  in  their  language  Ossaragu6;
this  spot  (according  to  the  Father's  report)  is  very
remarkable  as  abounding  in  a  small  fish,  the  size  of
the  herring.  They  were  hoping  to  find  some  assist-
ance there ;  and  indeed  they  were  loaned  some  canoes
to  carry  their  baggage  as  far  as  the  first  settlement
of  the  Dutch,  distant  from  this  fishery  about  eighteen
or  twenty  leagues.

God  has  a  guidance  all  full  of  love :  his  goodness
caused  this  detour  to  be  made  in  order  to  give  some
assistance  to  the  poor  Therese,  a  former  Seminarist
of  the  Ursulines;  our  party  met  her  at  this  place.
The  Father  refreshed  her  memory  concerning  her
duty,  and  heard  her  confession,  to  the  great  satisfac-
tion of  her  soul.

[52]  On  the  4th  of  June,  they  landed  at  the  first
settlement  of  the  Dutch,  where  they  were  Very  well
received  by  the  Captain  of  the  fort  of  Orange ;  they
departed  thence  on  the  sixteenth  of  the  same  month,
accompanied  and  assisted  by  the  Iroquois  who  hap-
pened to  be  in  that  quarter.  The  next  day,  at  even-
ing, they  arrived  at  their  first  small  village,  called
Oneugioure,  formerly  Osserrion.5  There  it  was
necessary  to  stay  two  days,  in  order  to  be  gazed  at
and  welcomed  by  those  peoples,  who  came  from  all
parts  to  see  them ;  those  who  had  formerly  ill-used  the
Father  no  longer  showed  any  inclination  to  do  so ;  and
those  whom  natural  compassion  had  touched  at  the
sight  of  his  torments,  were  evidently  delighted  to  see
him  in  another  position  and  employed  in  an  impor-
tant office.


52  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29

Trinity,  il  donna  ce  nom  Sacro-faindt  a  cette  bour-
gade.  II  fe  fit  a  mefme  temps  vne  affembl^e  gene-
rale  de  tous  les  principaux  Capitaines  &  des  anciens
du  pays:  la  furent  exhibez  les  prefens  que  le  fieur
Bourdon  portoit  auec  le  Pere :  la  f e  trouuerent  auffi
les  deux  Algonquins  qui  les  accompagnoient.

[53]  Le  filence  fait,  le  Pere  expofe  la  parole  d'O-
nontio  &  de  tous  les  Francois,  marquee  par  les
prefens,  dont  i'ay  donne  1' explication  au  Chapitre
precedent :  il  tefmoigne  la  ioye  qu'on  a  receue  a  la
veue  des  Ambaffadeurs.  &  le  contentement  de  tout
le  monde  pour  la  conclufion  de  la  paix  entre  les
Francois,  les  Iroquois,  les  Hurons  &  les  Algonquins:
il  afleure  que  le  feu  de  confeil  eft  allume  aux  trois
Riuieres,  il  prefente  vn  collier  de  5000.  grains  de
Porcelaine,  pour  brifer  les  liens  du  petit  Francois
captif  en  leur  pais,  &  autant  pour  la  deliurance  de
Therefe :  il  les  remercie  de  ce  qu'ils  auoient  refufe  les
teftes  des  montagnais  ou  des  Algonquins  maffacrez
par  les  Sokoquiois.  II  fit  en  particulier  vn  prefent  de
3000.  grains  de  Porcelaine  a  l'vne  des  groffes  families
des  Annierronnons  repandue  dans  leurs  trois  bour-
gades,  pour  tenir  vn  feu  toufiours  allume,  quand  les
Francois  les  viendroient  vifiter.

Sa  harangue  fut  bien  ecoutee  &  fes  prefens  tres-
bien  receus,  il  parla  en  fuite  pour  les  Algonquins,
qui  n' auoient  pas  connoiffance  de  la  langue  Iroquoife,
&  qui  eftoient  vn  peu  honteux  pour  le  defaut  [54]
d'vne  grande  partie  de  leurs  prefens:  car  de  24.
robes  de  peaux  d'Elan,  ils  en  auoiet  laiffe  14.  en  che-
min,  comme  nous  auons  remarque,  le  Pere  les  excufa
fur  la  bleffeure  de  l'vn  de  ces  deux  ieunes  hommes,


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  53

On  the  10th  of  June,  honored  by  the  feast  of  the
holy  Trinity,  he  gave  this  Most  holy  name  to  that
village.  There  was  held,  at  the  same  time,  a  general
assembly  of  all  the  principal  Captains  and  elders  of
the  country ;  there  were  exhibited  the  gifts  which
the  sieur  Bourdon  brought  with  the  Father ;  there
were  also  present  the  two  Algonquins  who  accom-
panied them.

[53]  Silence  procured,  the  Father  sets  forth  the
word  of  Onontio  and  of  all  the  French,  betokened  by
the  gifts  of  which  I  have  given  the  explanation  in
the  preceding  Chapter.  He  indicates  the  joy  that
was  caused  by  the  sight  of  the  Ambassadors,  and  the
satisfaction  of  all  the  people  at  the  conclusion  of  the
peace  between  the  French,  the  Iroquois,  the  Hurons,
and  the  Algonquins.  He  assures  them  that  the  coun-
cil fire  is  lighted  at  three  Rivers ;  he  presents  a  neck-
lace of  5000  Porcelain  beads,  in  order  to  break  the
bonds  of  the  little  Frenchman  captive  in  their  coun-
try, and  the  like  for  the  deliverance  of  Therese ;  he
thanks  them  for  having  refused  the  heads  of  the  mon-
tagnais  or  of  the  Algonquins  massacred  by  the  Soko-
quiois.  He  made  a  special  present  of  3000  Porcelain
beads  to  one  of  the  great  families  of  the  Annierron-
non  scattered  through  their  three  villages,  in  order
to  keep  a  fire  always  lighted  when  the  French  should
come  to  visit  them.6

His  harangue  was  favorably  heard,  and  his  gifts
very  well  received.  He  spoke  next  for  the  Algon-
quins, who  were  not  acquainted  with  the  Iroquois
language,  and  who  were  somewhat  ashamed  at  the
lack  [54]  of  a  great  part  of  their  presents;  for,  of  24
robes  of  Elk  skins,  they  had  left  14  on  the  way,  as
we  have  remarked. The Father  excused  them  by


64  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

fur  la  pefanteur  du  fardeau,  &  fur  la  difficult^  des
chemins :  il  ne  laifTa  pas  de  donner  le  fens  de  toutes
ces  paroles,  de  fpecifier  tous  ces  prefens,  en  forte
que  l'afTemblee  en  fut  fatisfaite;  fi  bien  que  par
apres  les  Iroquois  refpondirent  par  deux  prefens
qu'ils  firent  aux  Algonquins,  &  en  enuoyerent  deux
autres  aux  Hurons.

Pour  ce  qui  concernoit  Onontio  &  les  Francois,  en
faueur  defquels  ils  auoient  fait  la  paix  auec  leurs
alliez,  ils  refpondirent  auec  plus  de  pompe  &  auec  vn
grand  tefmoignage  d'affedtion.

A  la  demande  du  petit  Francois,  ils  tirerent  vn
collier  de  2000.  grains :  Voila,  dirent-ils,  le  lien  qui  le
tenoit  captif,  prenez  le  prifonnier  &  fa  cadene,  &  en
faites  felon  la  volonte"  d' Onontio.

Pour  Therefe,  qu'ils  auoient  mariee  depuis  fa
captiuite,  ils  refpondirent  qu'elle  feroit  rendiie,  ft  toft
qu'elle  feroit  de  retour  dans  leur  pays,  &  pour  tef-
moignage de  la  verite  de  leur  parole,  ils  offrirent  vn
[5  5 J  collier  de  1500.  grains  de  Porcelaine.  La  famille
dont  nous  auos  parle,  qui  fe  nomme  la  famille  des
Loups,  afleura  les  Francois  par  vn  beau  prefent  de
36.  palmes  de  Porcelaine,  qu'ils  auroient  toufiours
vne  demeure  affeur£e  parmy  eux,  &  que  le  Pere  en
particulier  trouueroit  toufiours  fa  petite  natte  toute
prefte  pour  le  receuoir,  &  vn  feu  allume  pour  le
chauffer:  tout  cela  fe  fit  auec  de  grands  tefmoi-
gnages  de  bienueillance.

Mais  quelques  efprits  deffians  ne  regardoient  pas  de
bon  ceil  vn  petit  coffre  que  le  Pere  auoit  laifTe*  pour
affeurance  de  fon  retour:  ils  s'imaginoient  que  quel-
que  mal-heur  funefte  a  tout  le  pais  effort  renferme


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  55

reason  of  the  injury  received  by  one  of  those  two
young  men,  through  the  weight  of  his  burden,  and
the  difficulty  of  the  roads.  He  failed  not  to  give  the
sense  of  all  these  speeches,  and  to  specify  all  these
gifts,  insomuch  that  the  assembly  was  satisfied  there-
with,—  to  the  extent  that  afterward  the  Iroquois
responded  with  two  gifts  which  they  made  to  the
Algonquins;  and  they  sent  two  others  for  the
Hurons.

As  for  what  concerned  Onontio  and  the  French, —
as  a  favor  to  whom  they  had  made  peace  with  their
allies, — they  answered  with  more  pomp  and  with  a
great  manifestation  of  affection.

At  the  request  of  the  little  Frenchman,  they  drew
forth  a  necklace  of  2000  beads.  "  There,"  said  they,
' '  is  the  bond  which  held  him  captive ;  take  the  pris-
oner and  his  chain,  and  do  with  them  according  to
the  will  of  Onontio."

As  for  Therese,  whom  they  had  given  in  marriage
after  her  captivity,  they  answered  that  she  would  be
restored  as  soon  as  she  should  return  to  their  coun-
try ;  and,  in  token  of  the  truth  of  their  word,  they
offered  a  [55]  necklace  of  1500  Porcelain  beads.  The
family  of  which  we  have  spoken  —  which  is  named
"  the  Wolf  family  " — assured  the  French,  by  a  beau-
tiful gift  of  36  palms7  of  Porcelain,  that  they  should
always  have  a  secure  dwelling  among  them,  and  that
the  Father,  in  particular,  would  always  find  his  little
mat  all  ready  to  receive  him,  and  a  fire  lighted  to
warm  him.  All  this  was  done  with  great  demonstra-
tions of  good  will.

But  some  distrustful  minds  did  not  look  with  favor
on  a  little  chest,  which  the  Father  had  left  as  an
assurance of  his return;  they  imagined that some


56  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

dans  cette  cafTette:  le  Pere  pour  les  def-abufer,
l'ouurit,  &  leur  fit  voir  qu'il  ne  contenoit  autre
myftere  que  quelques  petits  befoins  dont  il  pourroit
auoir  affaire.

Ie  m'oubliois  quafi  de  dire  que  le  Pere  ayant  remar-
que"  dans  l'affembl^e  quelques  Iroquois  du  pais  des
Onondaeronnons,  il  leur  fit  publiquement  vn  prefent
de  2000.  grains  de  Porcelaine,  pour  leur  faire  enten-
dre le  deffein  qu'auoient  les  Francois  de  les  aller
voir  en  leur  pais,  &  [56]  que  par  auance  il  leur  faifoit
ce  prefent,  afin  qu'ils  ne  fuffent  point  furpris  a  la
veue  de  leurs  vifages.  Ou'au  refte  les  Francois
auoient  trois  chemins  pour  les  aller  vifiter,  l'vn  par
les  Annierronnons,  l'autre  par  le  grand  Lac  qu'ils
nomment  Ontario,  ou  Lac  de  S.  Louys;  le  troifieme
par  le  pays  des  Hurons.  Quelques-vns  des  anciens
firent  paroiitre  de  la  furprife  a  cette  propofition,  il
faut,  dirent-ils,  prendre  le  chemin  qu'a  fraye  Onon-
tio,  les  autres  font  trop  dangereux:  on  n'y  rencontre
que  des  gens  de  guerre,  des  homes  peints  &  figurez
par  le  vifage,  des  maffes  &  des  haches  d'armes  qui
ne  demandent  qu'a  tuer,  que  la  voye  qui  conduit  en
leur  pais  eftoit  maintenant  toute  belle  &  toute  appla-
nie,  &  bien  affeuree ;  mais  le  Pere  pourfuiuit  fa  pointe,
ne  croyant  pas  qu'il  fut  a  propos  de  dependre  des
Annierronnons,  pour  monter  dans  les  Nations  plus
hautes,  il  mit  fon  prefent  entre  les  mains  des
Iroquois,  qui  promirent  en  prefence  des  Onondae-
ronnons de  Taller  pref enter  aux  Capitaines  &  aux
anciens  de  leur  pays.  Voila  comme  les  affaires  pu-
bliques  fe  terminerent,  dans  lefquelles  le  Pere  ne
s'oublioit  pas  des  plus  fecretes  &  des  plus  importantes,


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  57

misfortune  disastrous  to  the  whole  country  was  shut
up  in  that  little  box.  The  Father,  to  undeceive
them,  opened  it,  and  showed  them  that  it  contained
no  other  mystery  than  some  small  necessaries  for
which  he  might  have  use.

I  was  almost  forgetting  to  say  that  the  Father,  hav-
ing remarked  in  the  assembly  some  Iroquois  from
the  country  of  the  Onondaeronnons,  made  them  in
public  a  gift  of  2000  Porcelain  beads,  in  order  to
make  them  understand  the  design  which  the  French
had  in  going  to  see  them  in  their  country ;  and  told
them  [56]  that  he  made  them  this  gift  in  advance,  so
that  they  would  not  be  surprised  at  seeing  the  faces
of  the  French.  He  said  that,  furthermore,  the
French  had  three  roads  by  which  to  go  to  visit
them, —  one  through  the  Annierronnons ;  another,
by  the  great  Lake  which  they  name  Ontario,  or  Lake
of  St.  Louys;  the  third,  through  the  land  of  the  Hu-
rons.  Some  of  the  elders  manifested  surprise  at  this
proposition.  "  It  is  necessary,"  they  said,  "  to  take
the  road  which  Onontio  has  opened ;  the  others  are
too  dangerous ;  one  meets  in  them  only  people  of
war,  men  with  painted  and  figured  faces,  with  clubs
and  war  hatchets,  who  seek  only  to  kill,"  — adding
that  the  way  which  leads  into  their  country  was  now
excellent,  entirely  cleared,  and  very  secure.  But
the  Father  followed  up  his  point,  not  considering  it
expedient  to  depend  on  the  Annierronnons,  in  order
to  go  up  into  the  Nations  above.  He  put  his  gift
in  the  hands  of  the  Iroquois,  who  promised,  in  pres-
ence of  the  Onondaeronnons,  to  go  and  present  it
to  the  Captains  and  elders  of  their  country.  Thus
ended  the  public  affairs,  in  which  the  Father  was  not
forgetful  of  those  more  private  and  important. [57]


58  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.29

[57]  il  ramafla  quelque  peu  de  Chreftiens  qui  font
encor  la,  les  inftruifit  &  leur  adminiftra  le  Sacrement
de  Penitence,  il  fit  fouuent  la  ronde  par  les  cabanes,
vifita  les  malades,  &  enuoya  au  Ciel  par  les  eaux  du
Baptefme  quelques  pauures  creatures  mourantes,
mais  des  riches  predeltinez.

Apres  toutes  ces  affemblees  les  Annierronnons
prefferet  le  depart  des  Francois,  difans  qu'vne  troupe
d' Iroquois  d'enhaut  eftoit  partie  pour  attendre  au
paflage  les  Hurons  qui  deuoient  defcendre  aux
Francois,  &  que  ces  guerriers  tireroient  de  la  a
Montreal  pour  venir  paffer  deuant  Richelieu,  &  re-
monter  en  leur  pais  par  la  riuiere  des  Iroquois :  Nous
ne  croyons  pas,  difoient-ils,  qu'ils  vous  faffent  aucun
mal  quand  ils  vous  rencontreront,  mais  nous  craignons
pour  les deux  Algonquins  qui  font  auec  vous.

Le  Pere  leur  dift  la  deffus  fort  a  propos,  qu'il  s'e-
ftonnoit  comme  ils  permettoient  a  ces  hauts  Iroquois
de  defcendre  dans  leur  diftrict,  &  de  venir  faire  la
guerre  dans  leurs  limites,  defcendans  les  fauts  &
les  cheutes  d'eau  qui  eftoient  du  reffort  &  dans  les
marches  des  Annierronnons.  [58]  Nous  leur  en  auons
donne^  aduis,  refpondent-ils.  Quoy  done,  fit  le  Pere,
m£prifent-ils  voftre  parole!  ne  voyez-vous  pas  qu'on
vous  imputera  tous  les  defordres  qu'ils  pourroient
commettre?  Ils  ouurirent  les  yeux  a.  cette  raifon,  &
promirent  d'y  apporter  vn  remede  efficace.

Pour  conclufion,  le  Pere,  nos  Francois  &  leurs
guides  partirent  du  bourg  dela  faindte  Trinite,  le  16.
de  Iuin,  ils  cheminerent  quelques  iours  par  terre,  non
fans  peine:  car  il  faut  faire  comme  les  cheuaux
d'Arabie, porter  fes viures  &  fon  bagage, les  ruif-


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  59

He  gathered  some  few  Christians, —  who  are  still
there, — instructed  them,  and  administered  to  them
the  Sacrament  of  Penance ;  he  often  made  the  round
of  the  cabins,  visited  the  sick,  and  sent  to  Heaven  by
the  waters  of  Baptism  some  poor  dying  creatures, —
predestined,  however,  to  riches.

After  all  these  assemblies,  the  Annierronnons
urged  the  departure  of  the  French, —  saying  that  a
band  of  Iroquois  from  above  had  started  in  order  to
await,  at  the  passage,  the  Hurons  who  were  to  come
down  to  the  French ;  and  that  those  warriors  would
move  thence  to  Montreal,  in  order  to  come  and  cross
before  Richelieu,  and  go  back  to  their  own  country
by  the  river  of  the  Iroquois.  "  We  do  not  believe,"
said  they,  "  that  they  will  do  you  any  harm  when
they  meet  you ;  but  we  fear  for  the  two  Algonquins
who  are  with  you."

The  Father  thereupon  told  them,  very  pertinently,
that  he  was  astonished  to  see  how  they  permitted
those  upper  Iroquois  to  come  down  into  their  dis-
trict, and  proceed  to  make  war  within  their  limits,
descending  the  rapids  and  waterfalls  which  were
of  the  jurisdiction  and  within  the  marches  of  the
Annierronnons.  [58]  "  We  have  given  them  warning
of  this,"  they  answered.  "What  then?'  said  the
Father,  "  do  they  despise  your  commands?  Do
you  not  see  that  all  the  lawless  acts  that  they  may
commit  will  be  imputed  to  you?"  They  opened
their  eyes  at  this  argument,  and  promised  to  apply
to  the  matter  an  efficacious  remedy.

In  conclusion,  the  Father,  our  French,  and  their
guides  left  the  village  of  the  holy  Trinity  on  the
1 6th  of  June.  They  journeyed  for  several  days  by
land,  not  without  difficulty:  for  it  is  necessary  to  do


60  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  2»

feaux  font  les  hoftelleries  qu'on  rencontre.  Eftans
arriuez  fur  le  bord  du  Lac  du  S.  Sacrement,  ils  firent
des  canots  ou  de  petits  batteaux  d'6corces,  dans  lef-
quels  s'eftans  embarquez,  ils  ramenent  &  voguerent
iufques  au  27.  du  mefme  mois  de  Iuin,  qu'ils  mirent
pied  a  terre  a  la  premiere  habitation  des  Francois
fitu£e  fur  la  d6charge  de  la  riuiere  des  Iroquois  dans
le  grand  fleuue  de  S.  Laurens.

Voila  le  commencement  d'vne  Million  qui  doit  don-
ner  de  l'ouuerture  a  quantite  d'autres  parmy  des
Nations  bien  peupl^es.  Si  ces  chemins  font  parfemez
de  Croix,  auffi  font-ils  tous  remplis  de  miracles:  [59]
car  il  n'y  a  point  d'induftrie  ny  de  puiffance  humaine
qui  ait  pu  changer  la  face  des  affaires  fi  foudaine-
ment,  &  nous  tirer  du  dernier  defefpoir  oil  nous
eftions  reduits :  il  n'y  a  ny  pref ens  ny  eloquence  qui
ait  pu  conuertir  en  fi  peu  de  temps  des  cceurs  enra-
gez  depuis  tant  d'ann6es:  ie  ne  fcay  ce  qu'on  ne  doit
point  efperer  apres  ces  coups  de  la  main  du  Tout-
puiffant,  qu'il  foit  beny  au  dela  des  fiecles,  &  au  dela
de  l'eternite\

Le  Pere  Ifaac  Iogues  entierement  applique"  &  affedt6
a  cette  Million,  apres  auoir  rendu  compte  de  fa  com-
miffion,  ne  fongeoit  qu'a  renoiier  vn  fecond  voyage,
pour  s'y  en  retourner,  &  fur  tout  auparauant  l'hy-
uer,  ne  pouuant  fouffrir  d'eftre  fi  long-temps  abfent
de  fon  6poufe  de  fang.  Enfin  il  fit  fi  bien  qu'il  en
trouua  l'occafion  fur  la  fin  de  Septembre,  &  partit  des
trois  Riuieres  le  24.  de  ce  mois,  en  compagnie  d'vn
ieune  homme  Francois  &  de  quelques  Iroquois,  &
autres  Sauuages;  nous  auons  appris  qu'il  auoit  efte
abandonne" en  chemin  de  la  plufpart  de  fes  compa-


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  61

like  the  horses  of  Arabia, — carry  one's  own  provi-
sions and  baggage;  the  brooks  are  the  hostelries
that  one  meets.  Having  arrived  on  the  shore  of  the
Lake  of  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  they  made  canoes  or
little  boats  of  bark;  having  embarked  in  these,  they
made  their  way  by  paddling,  until  the  27th  of  the
same  month  of  June,  when  they  landed  at  the  first
settlement  of  the  French,  situated  where  the  river
of  the  Iroquois  empties  into  the  great  flood  of  St.
Lawrence.

Such  is  the  beginning  of  a  Mission  which  must
furnish  an  opening  to  many  others  among  well-
peopled  Nations.  If  these  roads  are  strewn  with
Crosses,  they  all  are  also  filled  with  miracles;  [59]
for  there  is  no  human  skill  or  power  which  could
have  changed  the  face  of  affairs  so  suddenly,  and
have  drawn  us  out  of  the  utmost  despair,  to  which  we
were  reduced.  There  are  neither  gifts  nor  eloquence
which  could  have  converted,  in  so  short  a  time,
hearts  enraged  for  so  many  years.  I  know  not  what
may  not  be  hoped  for,  after  these  acts  at  the  hand  of
the  Almighty ;  may  he  be  blessed  beyond  ages  and
beyond  eternity.

Father  Isaac  Jogues,  entirely  attentive  and  devoted
to  this  Mission,  after  having  rendered  account  of  his
commission,  thought  of  nothing  but  undertaking  a
second  voyage  in  order  to  return  thither  and  especial-
ly before  the  winter ;  for  he  could  not  endure  to  be  so
long  absent  from  his  spouse  of  blood.  At  last,  he
succeeded  so  well  that  he  found  the  opportunity
therefor,  toward  the  end  of  September;  and  he
started  from  three  Rivers  on  the  24th  of  that  month,
in  company  with  a  young  Frenchman,  and  some  Iro-
quois and  other  Savages. We  have  learned  that  he


62


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29


gnons,  &  qu'il  continuoit  fon  voyage :  il  va  a  deffein
d'y  pafTer  l'hyuer,  &  dans  toutes  les  occalions  qui  fe
prefenteront,  [60]  m6nager  l'efprit  &  1'affect.ion  des
Sauuages,  mais  fur  tout  les  affaires  de  Dieu,  &  les
richelTes  du  Paradis;  il  a  bien  befoin  de  bonnes
prieres,  pour  le  fuccez  d'vne  entreprife  fi  difficile.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  63

was  abandoned  on  the  way  by  most  of  his  compan-
ions, but  that  he  continued  his  voyage.  He  goes
intending  to  spend  the  winter  there,  and,  on  all  the
occasions  which  shall  present  themselves,  [60]  to
influence  the  minds  and  affections  of  the  Savages, —
but  especially  to  care  for  the  affairs  of  God  and  the
riches  of  Paradise.  He  has  much  need  of  earnest
prayers  for  the  success  of  an  enterprise  so  difficult.


64  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESU/TES  [Vol.29


CHAPITRE  V.

DE LA RESIDENCE DE SAINCT IOSEPH A SILLERY.

LA  Refidence  de  S.  Iofeph  a  recueilly  les  premiers
fruidts  de  la  graine  de  l'Euangile  femee  en  ce
nouueau  monde,  elle  a  imite  les  chofes  bonnes
qui  fe  communiquent  d'autant  plus  qu'elles  ont  de
bonte\  Son  flambeau  a  repandu  fa  lumiere  bien  loin
au  deca  &  au  dela  des  riues  du  grand  fleuue,  fon
ardeur  &  fon  feu  ont  fait  reflentir  leur  chaleur  dans
des  regions  quafi  inconnues  a  l'Efte,  ou  l'Hyuer  tient
tou jours  vn  magazin  de  neige  &  de  glace.

Les  fuperftitios  &  les  Sorciers  font  bannis  de  cette
Refidence,  il  ne  refle  quafi  plus  perfonne  a  baptifer
de  ceux  qui  s'y  retirent  ordinairement,  le  peu  de
Chreftiens  [61]  qui  la  compofent,  fait  vn  efcadron
merueilleufement  puiffant  deuant  Dieu.  Leur  courfe
a  porte  la  Foy  en  diuers  endroits,  &  leur  bon  exemple
a  gagne  quantite  de  Sauuages.  Ceux  de  Tadouffac
fe  mocquans  d'eux  au  commencement,  furent  enfm
touchez  de  leur  patience  &  de  leur  conftance ;  fi  bien
qu'ils  vinrent  demander  a  Kebec  qu'on  leur  enuoyaft
des  Peres  pour  les  inftruire.  Cela  leur  fut  accord6
Tan  1 64 1.  depuis  ce  temps-la,  on  a  toufiours  continue
de  les  vifiter  &  de  leur  enfeigner  la  vraye  dodtrine
de  Iesvs-Christ.  lis  l'ont  embraffee  auec  tant
de  ferueur,  &  l'ont  publiee  auec  tant  de  zele  dans  les
Nations  du  Nord,  que  ces  grandes  foreils  qui  n'en-
tendoient  que  les  hurlemens  des  loups,  retentiffent


1646J  RELATION  OF  1643-46  65


CHAPTER V.
OF THE RESIDENCE OF SAINT JOSEPH AT SILLERY.

THE  Residence  of  St.  Joseph  has  gathered  the
first  fruits  of  the  Gospel  grain  sown  in  this
new  world ;  it  has  resembled  the  good  things
which  are  communicated  all  the  more  in  proportion
to  their  goodness.  Its  torch  has  spread  abroad  its
light  very  far  along  both  banks  of  the  great  river;
its  fervor  and  zeal  have  made  their  warmth  felt  in
regions  almost  unknown  to  the  Summer,  where  the
Winter  always  keeps  a  storehouse  of  snow  and  ice.
Superstitions  and  the  Sorcerers  are  banished  from
this  Residence ;  there  now  remains  hardly  any  one
to  be  baptized  of  those  who  usually  retreat  thither ;
the  few  Christians  [61]  who  compose  it  form  a
squadron  marvelously  powerful  before  God.  Their
march  has  carried  the  Faith  into  various  places,  and
their  good  example  has  gained  many  Savages.  Those
of  Tadoussac,  who  mocked  them  at  the  start,  were
finally  touched  by  their  patience  and  constancy, —
insomuch  that  they  came  to  ask  at  Kebec,  that  some
Fathers  should  be  sent  to  them  in  order  to  instruct
them.  That  was  granted  them  in  the  year  1641  ;  since
that  time,  we  have  always  continued  to  visit  them,
and  to  teach  them  the  true  doctrine  of  J  E  s  u  S
Christ.  They  have  embraced  it  with  so  much
fervor,  and  have  published  it  with  so  much  zeal  in
the  Nations  of  the  North,  that  these  great  forests,
which heard  but  the howlings of  the  wolves,  now


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

maintenant  des  voix  &  des  Cantiques  de  Iesvs-
Ch  rist.

Les  Attikamegues  qui  habitent  au  Nord  des  trois
Riuieres,  ont  receu  la  Foy  des  Chreftiens  de  S.  Io-
feph:  l'vn  des  Capitaines  de  cette  refldence  a  tire"  fon
origine  de  cette  nation,  les  vifites  qu'ils  ont  fait  de
part  &  d'autre  leur  ont  donne  vne  nouuelle  alliance
qui  regarde  l'Eternite.

Vne  bone  vefue  defia  bien  £g6e  a  fait  des  [62]  mer-
ueilles  en  ce  pais-la,  allant  vifiter  fes  neueux  &  fes
nieces,  elle  fe  mit  a  precher  auec  tant  de  fuccez,  &  a
inftruire  fes  compatriottes  auec  tant  de  bon-heur,  que
plufieurs  venans  par  apres  en  nos  habitations  pour
demander  le  Baptefme,  fcauoient  non  feulement  les
principaux  articles  de  noftre  creance;  mais  encor  les
prieres  &  les  petits  exercices  d'vn  bon  Chreftien.
Cette  pauure  femme  a  fait  trois  voyages  parmy  ces
peuples,  non  pas  tant  pour  voir  fes  parens  &  fes
Alliez,  que  pour  les  engendrer  en  Iesvs-  Christ.
I'ayme  bien  mes  parens  &  mes  enfans,  difoit-elle,
mais  ie  les  quitterois  tous  tres-volotiers,  &  toutes  les
richeffes  des  Francois,  pour  la  conuerfion  d'vne  feule
ame.  Ces  fruidts  font  fortis  du  parterre  du  glorieux
S.  Iofeph.

Ce  n'efl  pas  tout,  les  Abnaquiois  que  nous  auons
entre  l'Orient  &  le  Midy,  ont  fait  vne  telle  alliance
auec  nos  Neophytes,  que  quelques-vns  d'entr'eux
s'eftans  fait  baptifer  demeurent  maintenant  a  S.
Iofeph ;  &  pour  autant  que  le  feu  eft  toujours  feu,
c'eft  a  dire  toufiours  agiffant,  ces  nouueaux  Chre-
ftiens prirent  refolution  ce  Printemps  dernier  de  faire
vne  [63]  courfe  en  leur  pais,  d'y  publier  la  Foy,  &  de
fcauoir  des  principaux  de  leur  nation,  s'ils  n'auroient


1646J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  67

resound  with  voices  and  Hymns  concerning  Jesus
Christ.

The  Attikamegues,  who  live  North  of  three  Riv-
ers, have  received  the  Faith  from  the  Christians  of
St.  Joseph.  One  of  the  Captains  of  this  residence
derived  his  origin  from  that  nation ;  the  visits  which
they  have  made  on  both  sides  have  given  them  a
new  alliance,  which  regards  Eternity.

A  good  widow,  already  quite  aged,  has  done  [62]
wonders  in  that  country ;  going  to  visit  her  nephews
and  nieces,  she  began  to  preach  with  so  much  suc-
cess, and  to  instruct  her  fellow-countrymen  with
such  good  results,  that  several,  coming  afterward
into  our  settlements  to  ask  for  Baptism,  knew  not
only  the  principal  articles  of  our  creed,  but  also  the
prayers  and  the  little  exercises  of  a  good  Christian.
This  poor  woman  has  made  three  journeys  among
those  peoples, —  not  so  much  to  see  her  kinsfolk  and
her  Friends,  as  to  give  them  birth  in  Jesus  Christ.
"  I  love  well  my  relatives  and  my  children,"  said
she,  "  but  I  would  leave  them  all  very  gladly,  and
all  the  riches  of  the  French,  for  the  conversion  of  a
single  soul."  These  fruits  have  issued  from  the
garden  of  the  glorious  St.  Joseph.

This  is  not  all;  the  Abnaquiois,  whom  we  have
between  the  East  and  the  South,  have  made  such  an
alliance  with  our  Neophytes,  that  some  among  them,
having  been  baptized,  now  dwell  at  St.  Joseph.
And,  forasmuch  as  fire  is  always  fire, —  that  is  to
say,  always  active, —  these  new  Christians  took  the
resolution,  this  last  Spring,  to  make  an  [63]  excur-
sion into  their  own  country,  to  publish  the  Faith
there,  and  to  ascertain  from  the  principal  persons  of
their  nation  whether  they  would  consent  to  lend  ear


68  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES [Vol.  29

point  pour  agreable  de  prefler  l'oreille  aux  Predica-
teurs  de  l'Euangile:  ils  ont  tenu  leur  parole,  &  enfin
font  retournez  le  14.  du  mois  d'Aouft,  &  le  quin-
zi6me,  apres  auoir  amfte"  a  vne  folennelle  procemon
qu'on  fait  a  Kebec  ce  iour  la  en  l'honneur  de  la
faindte  Vierge,  pour  luy  prefenter  la  perfonne  du
Roy  &  tous  fes  Eftats,  le  plus  confiderable  d'entr'eux
nous  parla  en  ces  termes.  Ie  vous  auois  promis  ce
Printemps  que  ie  me  tranfporterois  en  mon  pais,  que
i'y  porterois  les  bonnes  nouuelles  de  l'Euangile,  &
que  ie  fcaurois  des  anciens  quel  amour  ils  pourroient
auoir  pour  noftre  creance.  Comme  ils  ont  beaucoup
d'inclination  pour  mon  frere  Noel  Negabamat  que
voila,  i'ay  iette  dans  leurs  oreilles,  les  paroles  qu'il
m'auoit  mifes  en  bouche,  ie  leur  ay  dit  que  mon  frere
faifoit  grand  eftat  de  leur  amitie\  mais  que  cette
amitie  eftoit  bien  courte  qui  fe  terminoit  auec  la  vie,
qu'il  fe  falloit  encor  aymer  apres  la  mort,  &  que  s'ils
ne  croyoient  en  Dieu,  leur  feparation  feroit  eternelle :
ie  leur  ay  parle  de  la  beaute  du  Ciel  &  des  [64]  hor-
reurs  de  l'Enfer,  apres  m'auoir  entendu,  trente  hom-
ines me  dirent  qu'ils  embrafferoient  noftre  creance.
Dix  femmes  me  donnerent  la  mefme  affeurance.
Tous  les  autres  m'exhorterent  de  venir  querir  vn
Pere,  &  qu'ils  feroient  bien  aifes  de  l'ecouter  deuant
que  d'engager  leur  parole.

Vn  Capitaine  qui  a  veu  la  piete  des  Chreftiens  de
S.  Iofeph,  fe  trouuant  en  cette  affemblee,  dill  des
merueilles  de  noftre  creance,  proteftant  qu'il  fe  feroit
baptifer  au  plufloft,  &  qu'il  ne  fouffriroit  aupres  de
foy  aucune  perfonne  qui  n'eut  volonte  de  fe  faire  in-
ftruire.  Voila,  difoit  cet  Ambaffadeur  Chreftien,  les
penfees  &  les  refolutions  de  mon  pais ;  voyez  fi  vous


1646 J  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  69

to  the  Preachers  of  the  Gospel.  They  have  kept
their  word,  and  finally  returned  on  the  14th  of  the
month  of  August;  and,  on  the  fifteenth, —  after
having  attended  a  solemn  procession  which  is  made
at  Kebec  that  day,  in  honor  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  in
order  to  present  to  her  the  person  of  the  King  and  all
his  Estates, —  the  most  influential  person  among
them  addressed  us  in  these  terms:  "  I  had  promised
you  last  Spring  that  I  would  proceed  to  my  own
country,  that  I  would  carry  thither  the  good  tidings
of  the  Gospel,  and  that  I  would  learn  from  the  elders
what  love  they  might  have  for  our  belief.  As  they
are  greatly  attached  to  my  brother  Noel  Negabamat,
whom  you  see  here,  I  cast  into  their  ears  the  words
which  he  had  put  into  my  mouth.  I  told  them  that
my  brother  made  great  account  of  their  friendship,
but  that  that  friendship  was  very  short  which  ended
with  life;  that  friends  should  love  even  after  death;
and  that  if  they  did  not  believe  in  God,  their  separa-
tion would  be  eternal.  I  told  them  of  the  beauty  of
Heaven,  and  of  the  [64]  horrors  of  Hell;  after  hav-
ing heard  me,  thirty  men  informed  me  that  they
would  embrace  our  belief.  Ten  women  gave  me
the  same  assurance.  All  the  others  exhorted  me  to
come  and  seek  a  Father, — and  said  that  they  would
be  very  glad  to  listen  to  him  before  pledging  their
word."

A  Captain  who  has  seen  the  piety  of  the  Chris-
tians of  St.  Joseph,  happening  to  be  in  this  assembly,
told  wonders  of  our  belief,  —  protesting  that  he  would
be  baptized  as  soon  as  possible,  and  that  he  would
not  suffer  near  him  any  person  who  had  no  wish  to
become  instructed.  "  Such,"  said  this  Christian
Ambassador,  "  are  the opinions  and  resolutions  of


70  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.29

me  voulez  donner  vn  Pere,  mes  gens  fe  doiuent  afTem-
bler  tous  en  mefme  endroit  pendant  l'hyuer  prochain,
pour  entendre  en  paix  &  en  repos  la  voix  de  celuy
que  vous  enuoyerez.

Cette  demande  a  paru  fi  faincte  &  fi  raifonnable,
qu'on  n'a  pu  l'econduire.  Le  Pere  Gabriel  Dreuil-
lettes  qui  a  defia  vefcu  partny  les  Algonquins  dans
leurs  grandes  courfes,  eft  alle"  pafler  le  plus  fafcheux
temps  de  l'ann£e  auec  ces  Abnaquiois,  [65]  bien
refolu  de  viure  &  de  mourir  en  la  Croix  de  Iesvs-
Christ.  II  pourra  pleinement  f atisf aire  aux  defirs
qu'il  a  de  fouffrir,  c'eft  ce  qu'il  peut  attendre  de  plus
conftant  &  de  plus  afleure  parmy  ces  peuples.  Les
fruidts  qu'on  pourra  recueillir  de  cette  Million  auec
le  temps,  prouiendront  originairement  des  enfans  du
grand  S.  Iofeph :  cette  Million  a  efte  furnomm^e  de
l'Aflomption.

Les  Algonquins  de  l'lfle  ont  eu  beaucoup  d'occa-
fion  de  profiter  de  la  vertu  &  du  bon  exemple  de  ces
premiers  Chreftiens,  auffi  eft-il  vray  que  quelques-vns
ont  marche  fur  leurs  piftes ;  mais  on  diroit  qu'vne  par-
tie  de  ces  miferables,  font  dans  vn  fens  reprouue.  Les
Huronsplus  eloignez  defcendats  vers  les  Francois,  ont
admire"  la  Foy  de  ces  bonnes  ames,  &  quelques-vns
ont  efte  touchez  iufques  a  les  vouloir  imiter.

Vn  Capitaine  de  leur  nation  qui  a  paffe  l'hyuer  a
Kebec,  difoit  ce  Printemps  a  Montreal,  que  les  Chre-
ftiens de  S.  Iofeph  eftoient  les  vrays  creans.  En
effet,  c'eft  le  nom  que  leur  donnent  tous  les  autres
Sauuages,  &  fi  quelqu'vn  d'entr'eux  veut  temoigner
de  la  ferueur,  ie  m'en  iray,  dit-il,  [66]  demeurer
parmy  les  creans,  c'eft  a  dire  parmy  les  Chreftiens
de  S.  Iofeph.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  71

my  country.  See  if  you  are  willing  to  give  me  a
Father;  my  people  are  all  to  assemble  in  the  same
place  during  the  next  winter,  in  order  to  hear,  in
peace  and  at  leisure,  the  voice  of  him  whom  you  shall
send."

This  request  appeared  so  devout  and  so  reason-
able that  it  could  not  be  denied.  Father  Gabriel
Dreuillettes,  who  has  already  lived  among  the  Algon-
quins  in  their  extensive  rovings,  has  gone  to  spend
the  most  trying  season  of  the  year  with  those  Abna-
quiois,  [65]  fully  resolved  to  live  and  to  die  at  the
Cross  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  will  be  able  to
satisfy  in  full  the  desires  that  he  has  for  suffering ;
that  is  the  most  unquestionable  and  certain  result
which  he  can  expect  among  these  peoples.  The
fruits  which  may  be  gathered  from  this  Mission,  in
course  of  time,  will  proceed  in  the  first  instance
from  the  children  of  the  great  St.  Joseph :  this  Mis-
sion has  been  surnamed  that  "  of  the  Assumption."

The  Algonquins  of  the  Island  have  had  much
opportunity  to  profit  by  the  virtue  and  the  good
example  of  these  first  Christians, —  accordingly,  it  is
true  that  some  of  them  have  followed  their  trail ;
but  one  might  say  that  a  part  of  these  wretches  are,
in  a  sense,  reprobate.  The  Hurons,  still  more  dis-
tant, coming  down  toward  the  French,  have  admired
the  Faith  of  these  good  souls ;  and  some  have  been
influenced,  even  to  the  wish  to  imitate  them.

A  Captain  of  their  nation  who  has  spent  the  win-
ter at  Kebec,  said  this  Spring,  at  Montreal,  that  the
Christians  of  St.  Joseph  were  the  true  believers.  In
fact,  this  is  the  name  which  all  the  other  Savages  give
them ;  and  if  any  one  among  those  would  show  his
fervor,  he  says :  "  I  will  go  [66]  to  dwell  among  the


72  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

II  faut  confeffer  que  fi  plufieurs  Sauuages  auoient
la  politeffe  des  Fran9ois,  &  s'ils  fe  produifoient  auec
autant  de  graces,  qu'ils  rauiroient  les  yeux  &  les  cceurs
de  ceux  qui  verroient  le  fond  de  leurs  ames.  lis  ne
peuuent  fouffrir  qu'aucun  infidele  demeure  dans  leurs
cabanes,  qu'il  ne  donne  des  indices  de  fa  conuerfion;
ils  vifitent  ceux  qui  ont  quelque  differend,  leur
donnent  de  bons  aduis,  leur  font  des  prefens  pour  les
f aire  rentrer  en  leur  deuoir ;  les  parens  commencent
de  prendre  vn  foin  tout  particulier  d'apprendre  les
prieres  a  leurs  enfans,  de  les  amener  a  confeffe,  de
les  faire  fouuenir  de  leurs  pechez.  Vne  bonne  femme
difoit  a  fa  petite  fille,  mon  enfant,  voila  les  offenfes
que  tu  as  commifes,  ne  t'en  oublie  pas,  demandes  en
pardon  a  Dieu,  &  me  dis  au  retour  de  confeffe,  fi  tu
n'as  rien  oublie\

Leur  deuotion  a  la  faindte  Meffe  eft  toute  aymable
&  toute  particuliere,  ils  l'entendent  tous  les  iours
auec  vne  grande  modeftie.  II  n'y  a  Cafuifte  fi  rigou-
reux  qui  obligeaft  aucun  homme  de  fe  tranfporter  a
l'Eglife  dans  les  rigueurs  d'vn  [67]  froid  eftrange-
ment  picquant,  lors  que  la  diftance  eft  notable,  ny
les  montagnes,  ny  les  vallees,  ny  la  longueur  du  che-
min,  ny  les  glaces,  ny  les  neiges,  ny  le  vent,  ny  le
froid  n'empefchent  ny  les  hommes,  ny  les  femmes,
ny  les  enfans  de  venir  tous  les  iours  a  la  Chappelle
pour  y  entendre  la  faindte  Meffe.  Les  Peres  nouuel-
lement  arriues  nous  difent  qu'on  ne  concoit  nulle-
ment  en  France  ce  qu'ils  voyent  de  leurs  yeux.  Ces
bonnes  gens  viennent  de  fois  a  autre  pendant  le  iour,
vifiter  le  faindt  Sacrement,  ils  apportent  leurs  enfans,
les  prefentent  a  Dieu  auec  des  tendreffes  veritable-
ment  amoureuf es :  voicy  la  priere  de  quelques  pares.


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  73

believers," — that  is  to  say,  "among  the  Christians
of  St.  Joseph."

It  must  be  acknowledged  that  many  Savages, — if
they  had  the  politeness  of  the  French,  and  if  they
presented  themselves  with  equal  grace, — would  rav-
ish the  eyes  and  hearts  of  those  who  should  see  the
depth  of  their  souls.  They  cannot  endure  that  any
infidel  shall  dwell  in  their  cabins,  unless  he  give
signs  of  his  conversion;  they  visit  those  who  have
any  quarrel,  give  them  good  advice,  and  make  them
presents,  in  order  to  bring  them  back  to  their  duty;
and  the  parents  begin  to  take  a  very  special  care  to
teach  the  prayers  to  their  children,  bring  them  to
confession,  and  make  them  remember  their  sins.  A
good  woman  said  to  her  little  daughter:  "  My  child,
see  the  offenses  that  thou  hast  committed :  do  not
forget  them.  Ask  God's  pardon  for  them,  and  tell
me  on  thy  return  from  confession,  if  thou  didst  not
forget  something."

Their  devotion  to  holy  Mass  is  altogether  de-
lightful, and  quite  singular:  they  hear  it  every
day,  with  great  modesty.  There  is  no  Casuist  so
strict  that  he  would  oblige  any  man  to  betake  him-
self to  Church  in  the  severities  of  an  [67]  unusually
piercing  cold,  when  the  distance  is  considerable ;  but
neither  the  mountains  nor  the  valleys,  nor  the  length
of  the  way,  nor  the  ice,  nor  the  snows,  nor  the  wind,
nor  the  cold,  prevent  them  —  either  the  men,  or  the
women,  or  the  children  —  from  coming  every  day  to
the  Chapel  in  order  to  hear  there  holy  Mass.
The  Fathers  newly  arrived  tell  us  that  in  France  one
has  no  conception  of  what  they  here  see  with  their
own  eyes.  These  good  people  come  from  time  to
time  during  the  day  to  visit  the  blessed  Sacrament ;


74  LES  RELATIONS  DES /J&SUITES [Vol.29

Toy  qui  as  tout  fait,  tu  fcais  tout,  tu  vois  au  dela  bien
loing  tout  ce  qui  arriuera;  voicy  mon  enfant,  fi  tu
connois  qu'il  ne  vueille  point  auoir  d'efprit  quand  il
fera  grand,  s'il  ne  veut  point  croire  en  toy,  prends  le,
deuant  qu'il  t'offence ;  tu  me  l'as  prefix,  ie  te  le  rends,
mais  comme  tu  es  tout  puiffant,  fi  tu  luy  veux  donner
de  l'efprit,  &  me  le  conferuer,  tu  me  feras  plaifir.

La  pauurete  des  Sauuages  eft  11  grande,  &  leurs
viures  fi  miferables,  excepte  quelques  iours,  qu'ils
tuent  des  animaux  en  [68]  abondance,  &  encore  en
mangent-ils  la  viande  fans  pain,  fans  fel,  &  fans  autre
faulce  que  l'appetit,  qu'on  n'a  point  creu  iufques  a
prefent  qu'il  fallut  leur  parler  de  ieufnes,  ny  d'abfti-
nence  de  chair,  fi  non  par  deuotion.  Cependant  ils
fe  rendet  par  fois  fi  religieux  en  ce  poindt,  qu'ils  paf-
feront  des  iours  entiers  fans  manger  quoy  que  ce  foit,
pluftoft  que  de  manger  de  la  chair  qui  en  verite*  eft
pire  que  le  plus  pauure  pain  du  monde,  tant  elle  eft
feiche  &  dure,  ayant  efte  boucanee  a  la  fum6e.

Si  quelqu'vn  tombe  dans  quelque  faute  publique,
oil  il  en  tire  luy  mefme  le  chaftiment,  ou  les  autres
ne  manqueront  pas  de  luy  en  faire  porter  la  peine  &
la  penitence.  II  n'y  a  pas  long-temps  qu'vn  Capitaine
venant  a  l'Eglife,  appella  le  Pere  qui  s'en  alloit  a
l'Autel,  il  luy  dit  mon  Pere,  i'entendray  la  Meffe
hors  l'Eglife,  ie  ne  merite  pas  d'y  entrer:  pourquoy
luy  fit  le  Pere.  I 'ay  beu  auec  des  gens  qui  ont
excede.  As-tu  excede  toy-mefme,  dift  le  Pere,  non,
mais  i'ay  beu  auec  ceux  qui  l'auoient  fait:  cela  ne
doit  point  empefcher  que  tu  n'entres  en  l'Eglife,  ie
te  prie  mon  Pere,  repart  ce  bon  Neophyte  [69]  que
ie  fois  puny  afin  que  les  autres  hayffent  la  boiffon  qui
nous  perd. Au  refte,  qu'il  pleuue,  qu'il  grefle,  que


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  75

they  bring  their  children,  and  offer  them  to  God
with  a  tenderness  truly  loving.  Here  follows  the
prayer  of  some  parents:  "  Thou  who  hast  made  all,
thou  knowest  everything ;  thou  seest,  very  far  away,
whatever  will  happen.  Here  is  my  child;  if  thou
knowest  that  he  will  not  have  sense  when  he  shall
be  grown  up,  if  he  will  not  believe  in  thee,  take  him,
before  he  offend  thee.  Thou  hast  lent  him  to  me ;
I  give  him  back  to  thee ;  but  as  thou  art  all-power-
ful, if  thou  wilt  give  him  sense  and  preserve  him  to
me,  thou  wilt  do  me  a  favor."

The  povert)^  of  the  Savages  is  so  great,  and  their
provisions  are  so  wretched,  except  on  some  days
when  they  kill  animals  in  [68]  abundance, — and,
even  then,  they  eat  the  meat  of  these  without  bread,
without  salt,  and  without  other  sauce  than  the  appe-
tite,—  that  it  has  not  hitherto  been  believed  neces-
sary to  speak  to  them  of  fasts,  or  of  abstinence  from
meat,  unless  by  reason  of  devotion.  However,  they
sometimes  become  so  devout  on  this  point,  that
they  will  spend  whole  days  without  eating  anything
whatever,  rather  than  to  eat  meat  which  in  truth  is
worse  than  the  poorest  bread  in  the  world, — so  dry
and  hard  it  is,  after  being  dried  by  smoke.

If  any  one  commits  a  notorious  fault,  either  he
himself  receives  punishment  from  it,  or  the  others
will  not  fail  to  make  him  bear  the  penalty  and  the
penance  therefor.  Not  long  ago,  a  Captain,  coming
to  the  Church,  called  the  Father,  who  was  on  his
way  to  the  Altar,  and  said,  to  him,  "  My  Father,  I
will  hear  Mass  outside  the  Church ;  I  do  not  deserve
to  enter  it."  "  Why?  "  said  the  Father  to  him.  "  I
have  drunk  with  people  who  have  indulged  to  ex-
cess." "Hast  thou  thyself  drunk  to  excess?"  said


76  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.29

le  lieu  foit  fale  ou  fangeux,  ils  fe  tiennent  d£couuerts
a  la  veue  de  tout  le  monde.

II  y  auoit  quelque  different  dans  vn  mefnage :  la
difpute  fe  rendit  publique  en  forte  qu'ils  fe  vouloient
quitter  l'vn  l'autre,  felon  leur  ancienne  couftume.
Vn  des  principaux  Chreftiens  fcachant  que  le  diuorce
prouenoit  pluftoft  du  cofte  du  mari,  que  de  la  femme,
fe  leua  a  la  fin  de  la  Meffe.  Arreftez-vous,  dift-il  a
l'affemblee,  nous  auons  icy  vn  homme  qui  defhon-
nore  la  priere,  il  parle  de  quitter  fa  femme,  qu'il
feache  que  nous  ne  fouffrirons  iamais  qu'il  en  prenne
vn  autre.  Nous  fommes  Chreftiens,  nous  croyrons.
Mais  ou  eft-il  qu'il  paroiffe,  ie  le  puniray  moy  mefme
s'il  ne  rentre  en  fon  deuoir.  Toute  l'afli fiance  ap-
prouua  ce  difcours,  le  Pere  fe  tournant  fut  bien  efton-
ne"  d'entendre  ce  Predicateur,  le  coupable  encore
plus:  il  ne  dift  iamais  mot,  il  s'en  retourna  douce-
ment  vers  fa  femme :  cet  exces  qu'on  fcait  bien  reduire
a  fon  poincl,  donne  plus  de  ioye  que  de  trifleffe.  La
conclufion  fuft  que  le  mari  &  la  [70]  femme  fe  vinrent
confeffer  &  communier  au  premier  iour.

On  a  beau  deffendre  le  commerce  de  vin,  &  d'eau
de  vie  auec  les  Sauuages,  il  fe  trouue  toufiours  quel-
que ame  lafche  qui  pour  tirer  vn  peu  de  poil  de
Cailor,  fait  paffer  au  clair  de  la  Lune  quelques  bou-
teilles  dans  leurs  cabanes.  Les  Capitaines  crient  &
tempeflent,  mais  il  eft  tres- difficile  de  bannir  entiere-
ment  ce  defordre.  Quelques-vns  ayans  done  exce-
de,  fe  voulurent  punir  &  chaftier  eux  mefmes.  L'vn
d'eux  a  l'yffue  du  facrifice  de  la  Meffe,  s'ecria,  mes
freres,  puis  que  vous  auez  eu  connoiffance  de  noftre
pech6,  il  faut  que  vous  en  voyez  la  penitence ;  ca,  ca,
dift-il  a  fes  complices,  payons  a  Dieu  ce  que  nous  luy


1646]  RELA  T10N  OF  1643-46  77

the  Father.  "  No,  but  I  have  drunk  with  those  who
have  done  so."  "  That  ought  not  to  prevent  thee
from  entering  the  Church."  "  I  beg  thee,  my
Father,"  answers  this  good  Neophyte,  [69]  "  that  I
be  punished,  so  that  the  others  may  hate  the  drink
which  destroys  us."  Moreover,  whether  it  rain  or
hail,  or  the  place  be  dirty  and  muddy,  they  stand
uncovered,  in  the  sight  of  every  one.

There  was  some  contention  in  a  household ;  the
dispute  became  public,  in  such  sort  that  they  wished
to  leave  each  other,  according  to  their  former  cus-
tom. One  of  the  principal  Christians,  knowing  that
the  separation  was  proceeding  rather  from  the  hus-
band's side  than  from  the  wife's,  rose  at  the  end  of
Mass.  "  Stop,"  said  he  to  the  assembly;  "  we  have
here  a  man  who  dishonors  prayer, — he  talks  of  leav-
ing his  wife ;  let  him  know  that  we  will  never  suffer
him  to  take  another.  We  are  Christians;  we  will
believe.  But  where  is  he?  Let  him  appear;  I  will
punish  him  myself,  if  he  does  not  return  to  his  duty."
All  who  were  present  approved  this  speech;  the
Father,  turning  round,  was  much  astonished  to  hear
this  Preacher, — the  culprit,  still  more ;  he  said  never
a  word,  but  returned  thence  quietly  to  his  wife.
This  excess,  which  can  easily  be  reduced  within
bounds,  gives  more  joy  than  sorrow.  The  conclu-
sion was,  that  the  husband  and  the  [70]  wife  came
to  confess  and  receive  communion  at  the  first  oppor-
tunity.

It  is  useless  to  forbid  the  trade  in  wine  and  brandy
with  the  Savages ;  there  is  always  found  some  base
soul  who,  to  gain  a  little  Beaver  fur,  introduces  by
Moonlight  some  bottles  into  their  cabins.  The  Cap-
tains complain  and  storm,  but  it  is  very  difficult  to


78  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

auons  d£rob6  par  noftre  offenfe:  ie  fcay  bien  que
cettx  qui  ne  croyent  pas,  fe  mocqueront  de  nous,  mais
il  ne  faut  pas  que  leurs  gaufleries  nous  empefchet  de
fatisfaire  pour  nos  offences:  cela  dit,  il  tire  vn  grand
foiiet,  il  fe  fait  rudement  fuftiger  par  vn  autre,  &  puis
il  n'epargne  non  plusles  6paules  des  coupables,  qu'on
n'auoit  pas  6pargn6  les  fiennes.  Les  femmes  faifoient
voir  ce  fpedtacle  a  leurs  enfans :  he  bien  leur  dif oient-
elles,  [71]  ferez-vous  mechans?  mentirez-vous  iamais,
voyez  comme  on  traite  les  defobeyffans.

Vn  payen  enueloppe  dans  la  mefme  faate,  fe  pre-
fenta  pour  l'expier  par  la  peine :  mais  on  luy  dift  que
l'Eglife,  ne  luy  eftoit  point  encore  ouuerte.  Ce  qui
confola  les  Chrefliens,  croyans  que  Dieu  les  preferoit
aux  Infideles  acceptant  leur  penitence.

Vn  ieune  garcon  ayant  beu  auec  les  autres,  &
voyant  qu'on  ne  luy  difoit  mot,  s'en  alia  par  apres
fe  plaindre  au  Pere  de  ce  qu'on  ne  l'auoit  pas  puny
comme  les  coupables,  demandant  du  moins  la  per-
miffion  de  fe  battre  foy-mefme  en  particulier.  La
nature  apprend  aux  plus  barbares  que  tout  peche
merite  chaftiment ;  mais  il  faut  aduoiier  que  ceux  qui
connoiffent  bien  les  Sauuages,  qui  font  eloignez
depuis  tant  de  liecles  de  toute  foumiffion  &  de  tout
adte  de  iuftice,  ne  font  pas  peu  eftonnez  de  voir  ce
changement  fi  peu  attendu.  Dieu  vueille  que  cette
ferueur  leur  dure  vn  long-temps.

Vn  Sauuage  etranger  qui  fe  trouua  enueloppe  dans
cette  penitence,  demanda  pourquoy  les  Francois  qui
commettoient  [72]  les  mefmes  fautes,  ne  fubiffoient
pas  les  mefmes  peines.  Les  autres  Sauuages  luy  ref-
pondirent,  que  la  Iuftice  ou  le  Capitaine  des  Francois
prenoit connoiffance de leurs crimes,  & qu'ils en


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  79

banish  altogether  this  illegal  practice.  Some  per-
sons having  accordingly  drunk  to  excess,  wished  to
punish  and  chastise  themselves.  One  of  them,  at  the
end  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  exclaimed:  "  My
brothers,  since  you  have  had  knowledge  of  our  sin,
it  is  necessary  that  you  see  our  penance  for  it.  Come
now,"  he  says  to  his  fellow-sinners,  "  let  us  repay  to
God  what  we  have  stolen  from  him  by  our  offense.
I  know  well  that  those  who  do  not  believe  will  mock
us,  but  their  jeerings  must  not  prevent  us  from  aton-
ing for  our  offenses."  That  said,  he  draws  forth  a
great  whip ;  he  has  himself  severely  flogged  by
another,  and  then  he  also  spares  not  the  shoulders  of
the  culprits,  any  more  than  they  had  spared  his  own.
The  women  showed  this  sight  to  their  children.
"  How  now?"  said  they,  [71]  "  will  you  be  naughty?
will  you  ever  lie?  See  how  they  treat  the  disobe-
dient."

A  pagan,  involved  in  the  same  fault,  presented
himself  to  expiate  it  by  the  penalty ;  but  they  told
him  that  the  Church  was  not  yet  open  to  him.  This
consoled  the  Christians,  who  believed  that  God  pre-
ferred them  to  the  Infidels,  by  accepting  their
penance.

A  young  lad,  having  drunk  with  the  others,  and
seeing  that  not  a  word  was  said  to  him,  went  after-
ward to  the  Father,  to  complain  that  they  had  not
punished  him  like  the  guilty, — asking  at  least  per-
mission to  beat  himself  in  private.  Nature  teaches
the  most  barbarous,  that  all  sin  deserves  punish-
ment ;  but  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  those  who
are  well  acquainted  with  the  Savages, — who  have
been  removed  for  so  many  centuries  from  all  sub-
mission, and  from every  act  of  justice, — are  not  a


80  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J /'.SUITES  [Vol.29

auoient  veu  chattier  de  leurs  yeux,  mais  qu'ils
aymoient  mieux  eftre  punis  dans  l'Eglife  par  l'ordre
des  Peres.

II  eft  vray  que  ces  penitences  publiques  font  necef-
faires  en  ces  premiers  commencemens,  &  notamment
parmy  des  Sauuages.  Premierement,  pource  que
les  Payens  fe  fcandalifent  fort  ayf6ment  des  fautes
des  nouueaux  Chreftiens,  &  li  on  n'en  tiroit  quelque
chaftiment  public,  ils  attribueroient  le  peche\  non
pas  tant  a  la  perfonne  qui  le  commet,  comme  a
la  dodtrine  que  les  Neophytes  embraffent,  &  qu'ils
profeffent.  En  fecond  lieu,  les  Capitaines  Sauuages
n'ayans  aucune  Iuftice  regime,  ny  aucune  authority
de  punir  les  defauts  de  leurs  gens,  nous  fommes
contrains  de  leur  feruir  de  peres  &  de  luges,  em-
pefchans  les  defordres  par  quelques  chaftimens
qu'ils  acceptent  fort  volontiers ;  mais  les  dereglemens
que  les  vaiffeaux  a  l'ordinaire  apportent  par  leurs
boiffons,  nous  font  abandonner  cette  [73]  charite,  &
remettre  a  la  Iuftice  du  pays  la  punition  des  yurongne-
ries  trop  frequentes,  pendant  qu'ils  font  ancrez  en  nos
ports.

Les  Relations  precedentes  ont  fait  mention  de  la
mort  toute  faindte  d'vn  Neophyte  nomine"  Francois
Xauier  NenafkS'mat :  c'eft  celuy  qui  auec  Noel  Nega-
bamat  a  iette  les  premiers  fondemens  du  Chriftia-
nifme  en  la  refidence  de  S.  Iofeph.  II  laiffa  deux
enfans,  vn  garcon  &  vne  fille:  celle-cy  eft  mariee  &
mene  vne  vie  fort  Chreftienne ;  Son  fils  qui  fe  nom-
moit  Vincent  Xauier  Nipiki^igan,  fut  miferablement
bleffe  a  mort  c6t  Automne  dernier  par  les  Sokoquiois,
dont  nous  auons  parle  cy  deffus;  ce  pauure  homme
fut  rapporte*  a  Kebec  &  conduit  a  l'Hofpital,  ou  il  a


1646]  RELATION  OF  i64s -46  81

little  astonished  to  see  this  change,  so  little  expected.
God  grant  that  this  fervor  may  last  them  a  long  time.

A  stranger  Savage,  who  happened  to  be  involved
in  this  penance,  asked  why  the  French  who  com-
mitted [72]  the  same  faults  did  not  undergo  the  same
penalties.  The  other  Savages  answered  him  that
Justice,  or  the  Captain  of  the  French,  took  knowl-
edge of  their  crimes,  and  that  they  had  seen  with
their  own  eyes  some  of  them  chastised;  but  that
they  themselves  preferred  to  be  punished  in  the
Church,  by  order  of  the  Fathers.

It  is  true  that  these  public  penances  are  necessary
in  these  first  beginnings,  and  especially  among
Savages, —  first,  because  the  Pagans  are  very  easily
scandalized  by  the  faults  of  the  new  Christians ;  and,
unless  some  public  punishment  were  inflicted  for
these,  they  would  attribute  the  sin  not  so  much  to  the
person  who  commits  it,  as  to  the  doctrine  which  the
Neophytes  embrace  and  profess.  In  the  second
place, —  as  the  Savage  Captains  have  no  regular  Jus-
tice, or  any  authority  to  punish  the  failings  of  their
people, — we  are  constrained  to  serve  them  as  fathers
and  Judges,  preventing  disorders  by  certain  punish-
ments which  they  accept  very  willingly.  But  the
irregularities  which  the  vessels  usually  occasion  by
their  liquors,  cause  us  to  abandon  this  [73]  charity,
and  to  refer  to  the  Justice  of  the  country  the  punish-
ment of  the  too  frequent  cases  of  drunkenness,  while
they  are  anchored  in  our  ports.

The  preceding  Relations  have  made  mention  of
the  most  blessed  death  of  a  Neophyte  named  Fran-
cois Xavier  Nenaskoumat;  it  was  he  who,  in  com-
pany with  Noel  Negabamat,  laid  the  first  founda-
tions of  Christianity  in  the  residence  of  St.  Joseph.


82  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

efte"  receu  &  traite  auec  vne  grande  charite ;  voyant
que  fes  playes  efloient  incurables,  il  voulut  mourir
auec  les  Chreftiens  de  S.  Iofeph,  il  a  rauy  &  en  fa
maladie  &  en  fa  mort  tous  ceux  qui  connoiffoient  les
touches  de  fon  coeur.  L'vne  des  plus  eftranges
paffions  des  Sauuages,  c'eft  la  vengeance  contre  leurs
ennemis:  on  ne  pouuoit  au  commencement  leur
perfuader  que  ce  fut  bien  fait  [74]  de  prier  pour  eux,
ils  en  eftoient  fcandalifez;  Tu  ne  nous  aymes  pas,
dif oiet-ils  au  Pere  qui  leur  donnoit  ce  conf eil :  cette
priere  ne  vaut  rien,  quel  bien  nous  peut-il  arriuer
que  Dieu  beniffe  ou  f ecoure  nos  ennemis ;  ceux  qui
croyet,  ont  bien  change  de  langage:  celuy-cy  trai-
treufement  maffacre,  fans  iamais  auoir  commis  aucun
adte  d'hoftilite  contre  cette  nation  qu'ils  ne  ^ouloient
point  auoir  pour  ennemie,  non  feulement  pardona  a
fes  meurtriers,  mais  il  pria  fouuent  Dieu  qu'il  les
benift,  qu'il  leur  fit  la  grace  de  fe  conuertir,  &  lors
qu'on  luy  porta  le  Viatique,  apres  auoir  reitere  les
prieres  qu'il  faifoit  pour  eux,  il  promit  d'vn  accent
qui  touchoit  tous  les  affiftans  qu'il  fe  fouuiedroit
d'eux  au  Ciel  &  qu'il  demanderoit  a  Dieu  leur  falut,
&  la  connoiff ance  de  Iesvs-Christ  a  toute  leur
nation ;  cette  mort  a  efte  precieufe  deuant  Dieu  &
deuant  les  hommes.

Sa  femme  a  monftre  vne  charite  &  vne  conftance
admirable  a  feruir  fon  pauure  mari :  elle  auoit  receu
vn  coup  de  hache  de  ces  traiftres,  ils  luy  auoient
enleue  vne  partie  de  la  peau  de  la  tefte  auec  fes  che-
ueux,  bref  ils  l'auoient  laiffee  pour  morte,  [75]  mais
fes  bleffeures  n'eftant  pas  mortelles,  ft  toft  qu'elle
fe  peuft  traifner,  elle  donna  de  l'eftonnement  a  tous
ceux  qui  connoiffent  le  genie  des  Sauuages. Si  toft


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  83

He  left  two  children,  a  boy  and  a  girl;  the  latter  is
married,  and  leads  a  very  Christian  life.  His  son,
who  was  named  Vincent  Xavier  Nipikiwigan,  was
miserably  wounded  to  death  this  last  Autumn  by  the
Sokoquiois,  of  whom  we  have  spoken  herein  above.
This  poor  man  was  brought  back  to  Kebec,  and
taken  to  the  Hospital,  where  he  was  received  and
treated  with  great  charity;  seeing  that  his  wounds
were  incurable,  he  wished  to  die  with  the  Christians
of  St.  Joseph.  He  delighted,  both  in  his  sickness
and  at  his  death,  all  those  who  knew  the  emotions  of
his  heart.  One  of  the  strangest  passions  of  the  Sav-
ages is  vengeance  against  their  enemies ;  it  was  not
possible,  at  the  beginning,  to  persuade  them  that  it
was  well  done  [74]  to  pray  for  these, —  they  were
scandalized  at  that.  "  Thou  dost  not  love  us,"  they
said  to  the  Father  who  was  giving  them  this  coun-
sel;  "  that  prayer  is  of  no  use ;  what  good  can  come
to  us,  if  God  bless  or  succor  our  enemies?"  Those
who  believe  have  indeed  changed  their  tone;  this
man — treacherously  murdered,  without  ever  having
committed  any  act  of  hostility  against  that  nation,
which  they  did  not  wish  to  have  as  an  enemy  —  not
only  forgave  his  murderers,  but  often  prayed  God  to
bless  them,  and  to  do  them  the  favor  of  converting
them.  And  when  the  Viaticum  was  brought  to
him,  after  having  reiterated  the  prayers  that  he  made
for  them,  he  promised,  in  a  tone  that  touched  all
the  bystanders,  that  he  would  remember  them  in
Heaven,  and  that  he  would  ask  from  God  their
salvation,  and  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  for
their  whole  nation.  This  death  was  precious  in  the
sight  of  God  and  of  men.

His  wife showed an admirable charity and con-


84  LIS  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.29

qu'vn  man  eft  en  eftat  de  ne  plus  recouurer  fa  fante,
fa  femme  le  quitte  &  l'abandonne,  le  laiffant  entre
les  mains  de  fes  parens,  s'il  en  a;  s'il  n'en  a  point,
elle  luy  auance  fes  iours  pour  le  deliurer,  &  elle  auffi
de  la  peine  que  caufe  vne  grande  maladie :  le  mari
en  fait  autant  a  fa  femme  en  cas  pareil :  cette  barba-
rie  n'eft  plus  parmy  ceux  qui  recoiuet  &  qui  confer-
uent  la  Foy :  ce  flambeau  leur  fait  voir  la  beauts  de
la  charite  coniugale,  mais  il  n'ofte  pas  pourtant  les
inclinations  d'vne  nature  nourrie  dedans  ces  habi-
tudes depuis  la  naiffance  des  fiecles.  Cette  femme
vrayement  forte  &  fidele  panfoit  tous  les  iours  fon
mari,  fouffrant  la  puanteur  de  fes  playes,  dont  elle
eff uyoit  continuellement  le  pus ;  Elle  dif oit  par  f ois
en  elle-mefme,  ie  fens  bien  que  ie  fuis  Chreftienne ;
car  fans  cela  il  ne  me  feroit  pas  pofQble  de  demeurer
vn  iour  aupres  d'vn  homme  qui  me  choque  les  fens
G.  rudement,  &  cependant  ie  ne  fcaurois  m'eloigner
de  luy.  C'eftoit  fans  doute  vne  [76]  grace  bien
particuliere,  &  vn  effet  du  Sacrement  de  Mariage.

Ce  pauure  patient  auoit  vne  petite  fille  qu'il  auoit
confacre  a  Dieu,  des  le  iour  de  fa  naiffance,  luy  pro-
mettant  qu'il  la  porteroit  a  eftre  vierge  toute  fa  vie.
II  la  donna  des  fa  petite  enfance  aux  Meres  Vrfu-
lines:  il  n'eft  pas  croyable  combien  ces  bonnes  Meres
faifoient  eftat  de  ce  petit  enfancon,  elles  admiroient
fes  bonnes  inclinations,  &  la  douceur  de  fon  naturel ;
on  eut  dit  que  fa  plus  grande  recreation  eftoit  de
prier  Dieu,  iamais  en  quelque  humeur  qu'elle  fut,
elle  ne  refufoit  de  le  faire;  quand  elle  pleuroit,
comme  font  les  enfans,  fi  on  luy  difoit :  prions  Dieu,
auffi-toft  ioignant  fes  petites  mains  elle  arreftoit
fes  larmes  &  prononcoit  fes  prieres  qu'elle  fcauoit


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  85

stancy  in  attending  her  poor  husband.  She  had
received  a  blow  from  a  hatchet,  at  the  hands  of  those
traitors;  they  had  removed  a  part  of  her  scalp,  with
her  hair, —  in  short,  they  had  left  her  for  dead;  [75]
but,  her  wounds  not  being  mortal,  as  soon  as  she
could  drag  herself  along,  she  caused  astonishment  in
all  those  who  know  the  character  of  the  Savages.
As  soon  as  a  husband  is  in  a  condition  where  he  can
no  longer  recover  his  health,  his  wife  quits  and  aban-
dons him,  leaving  him  in  the  hands  of  his  relatives,
if  he  has  any;  if  he  has  none,  she  hastens  his  days,
to  deliver  him,  and  herself  also,  from  the  trouble
which  a  severe  illness  causes;  the  husband  does  the
like  to  his  wife,  in  similar  case.  This  barbarism  no
longer  exists  among  those  who  receive  and  preserve
the  Faith :  that  torch  makes  them  see  the  beauty  of
conjugal  charity;  but  it  does  not  take  away,  how-
ever, the  inclinations  of  a  nature  reared  in  those
habits  since  the  beginning  of  the  ages.  This  wife,
truly  strong  and  faithful,  nursed  her  husband  every
day,  enduring  the  stench  of  his  wounds,  from  which
she  continually  wiped  away  the  pus.  She  said  some-
times, within  herself:  "  I  feel  indeed  that  I  am  a
Christian, —  for  without  that  it  would  not  be  possible
for  me  to  remain  one  day  near  a  man  who  so  rudely
offends  my  senses;  and  yet  I  cannot  withdraw  from
him."  This  was,  without  doubt,  a  [76]  very  special
grace,  and  an  effect  of  the  Sacrament  of  Marriage.

This  poor  patient  had  a  little  daughter,  whom  he
had  consecrated  to  God  from  the  day  of  her  birth,
promising  him  that  he  would  influence  her  to  be  a
virgin  all  her  life.  He  gave  her  from  her  early
childhood  to  the  Ursuline  Mothers;  it  is  not  credible
how  much  these  good  Mothers  made  account  of  that


86  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jASUITES  [Vol.29

parfaitement  des  l'aage  de  trois  ou  quatre  ans;  fon
pere  fe  voyant  proche  de  la  mort,  la  voulut  voir:  on
la  tire  du  Seminaire,  on  la  conduit  vers  ce  pauure
mourat,  on  la  luy  prefente.  Elle  eftoit  fi  gentiment
veftue,  &  elle  le  falua  auec  tant  de  graces  qu'il  en
fut  rauy.  II  ne  fe  peuft  contenir  de  l'embraffer,  il
la  baife,  il  la  prend  fur  fon  licit,  la  tient  dans  fon
fein,  luy  donne  mille  benedictions,  luy  [77]  congra-
tule  d'eftre  tobee  en  fi  bone  main,  il  luy  parle
comme  fi  elle  euft  eu  cinquate  ans :  Adieu  ma  fille  ie
m'en  vay  au  Ciel,  ne  t'attrifte  point  de  ma  mort,  fois
bien  obeiifante  aux  filles  vierges,  elle  font  tes  plus
proches  parentes,  ne  les  quitte  iamais:  quand  tu
feras  grande,  elles  te  diront  ce  qu'il  te  faudra  faire.
Cet  amour  trop  ardent  fit  mourir  cette  pauure  enfant,
elle  prift  la  fiebvre  dans  l'haleine  &  dans  la  bouche
mourante  de  fon  pere,  comme  elle  eftoit  fort  tendre,
n'ayant  pas  plus  de  cinq  ans,  l'air  corrompu  s'em-
para  bien  ayfement  de  fon  petit  corps,  &  luy  caufa
vne  maladie  qui  l'enuoya  fix  mois  apres  au  tombeau.

Son  pere  eftant  mort,  on  en  fceut  bien-toft  la  nou-
uelle  au  Seminaire  ou  on  l'auoit  reportee.  Sa  mai-
ftreffe  la  mena  deuant  le  faindt  Sacrement,  pour  la
faire  prier  Dieu  pour  fon  ame.  Ayant  fait  fa  priere,
elle  fe  tourna  elle-mefme  vers  fa  maiftreffe  &  luy
dift,  Iesvs  fera-il  pas  mon  pere,  puifque  ie  n'en  ay
plus?  La  Vierge  fera  auffi  ma  mere,  &  vous  ferez
mes  parentes,  mon  pere  me  la  dit.  Elle  raconta  aux
Meres  tout  ce  que  fon  pere  luy  auoit  recommande.

[78]  Sa  fievre  fe  faifant  de  plus  en  plus  connoiftre,
l'allita  en  forte  qu'elle  n'en  releua  plus.  Elle  fe
voulut  confeffer,  le  Pere  qui  l'ecouta,  en  fut  rauy,
ne  croyant  pas  qu'vn  enfant  qu'il  vouloit  confoler,


1646]  RELATION  OF  164J- 46  87

little  child.  They  admired  her  good  inclinations  and
the  gentleness  of  her  nature ;  one  would  have  said
that  her  greatest  recreation  was  to  pray  to  God;
never,  in  whatever  humor  she  was,  did  she  refuse  to
do  this.  When  she  wept,  as  children  do,  if  one  said
to  her,  "  Let  us  pray  to  God,"  immediately  joining
her  little  hands,  she  checked  her  tears  and  uttered
her  prayers,  which  she  knew  perfectly  from  the  age
of  three  or  four  years.  Her  father,  seeing  himself
nigh  to  death,  wished  to  see  her;  they  took  her  from
the  Seminary,  conducted  her  to  that  poor  dying  man,
and  presented  her  to  him.  She  was  so  prettily
dressed,  and  she  greeted  him  with  so  many  graces
that  he  was  charmed  with  her.  He  could  not  satisfy
himself  with  embracing  her;  he  kisses  her,  takes
her  on  his  bed,  holds  her  to  his  bosom,  gives  her  a
thousand  blessings,  [77]  and  congratulates  her  on
having  fallen  into  such  good  hands;  he  speaks  to
her  as  if  she  had  been  fifty  years  old:  "  Good-by,  my
daughter,  I  am  going  away  to  Heaven :  do  not  grieve
over  my  death.  Be  very  obedient  to  the  virgin
sisters, —  they  are  thy  nearest  relatives;  never  leave
them;  when  thou  art  grown  up,  they  will  tell  thee
what  thou  must  do."  This  love,  too  ardent,  caused
that  poor  child  to  die ;  she  caught  the  fever  from
the  breath  and  from  the  dying  lips  of  her  father.
As  she  was  very  tender,  being  no  more  than  five
years  old,  the  corrupt  air  very  easily  seized  upon  her
little  body,  and  caused  her  a  sickness  which  sent  her,
six  months  afterward,  to  the  grave.

Her  father  being  dead,  they  soon  learned  the  news
of  it  at  the  Seminary,  where  they  had  carried  her
back.  Her  teacher  led  her  before  the  blessed  Sacra-
ment, in  order  to  have  her  pray  to  God  for  his  soul.


88  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.29

eut  eu  iamais  tant  de  iugement.  On  luy  demanda  fi
elle  ne  feroit  pas  bien  aife  de  voir  Noflre  Seigneur,
napik  nifadkiJia  mifii  kakichitdtz,  r6pondit-elle,  entiere-
ment  i'ayme  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait;  &  la  deffus  elle
expira,  auec  la  ioye  &  les  regrets  de  toutes  ces
bonnes  Meres.

L'embarras  que  la  venue  des  vaiffeaux  apporte,
nous  fit  reietter  le  Iubile  de  l'an  paffe  en  vn  temps
plus  commode  pour  le  gagner  auec  plus  de  repos,  on
le  publia  quelques  iours  deuant  la  naiffance  du
Sauueur.  Les  Chreftiens  de  S.  Iofeph  qui  n'auoient
point  encor  oiiy  parler  de  cette  deuotion,  s'y  prepa-
rent  auec  vne  affection  toute  extraordinaire.  On
leur  dift  que  les  difpofitions  pour  obtenir  ce  pardon,
eftoient  le  ieufne,  l'aumofne,  &  la  priere  ou  l'oraifon:
pour  le  ieufne,  ils  le  garderent  bien  aifement:  car
ils  n'auoient  pas  beaucoup  de  chofes  a  mager  en  ce
temps-la,  vn  bon-heur  neantmoins  le  rendit  plus  me-
ritoire  &  plus  remarquable.  Vn  Chaff eur  [79]  ayant
fait  rencontre  d'vn  Caribou,  qui  n'eft  pas  tout  a  fait
fi  gros  qu'vn  de  nos  bceufs  de  France,  le  pourfuiuit
&  le  rua  par  terre :  la  famine  eltoit  en  leurs  cabanes,
le  defir  de  manger  de  la  viande  fraifche  les  tentoit
fortement,  iamais  neantmoins  aucun  Chreftien  n'en
voulut  goufter,  les  iours  qu'on  leur  auoit  ordonne  de
ieufner,  non  pas  le  Chaff  eur  mefme;  bien  dauantage,
quelques  Payens  de  fa  cabane  voyans  cet  exemple,
ne  toucherent  non  plus  a  cette  chair,  que  fi  elle  eut
efte  empoifonnee.

Pour  l'aumofne  ils  auoient  plus  de  peine:  car  ils
ne  fcauoient  que  donner,  l'or  &  l'argent  n'ont  point
de  cours  parmy  ces  peuples,  &  leur  pauurete  les  dif-
penfa  ayfement  d'eftre  prodigues. Si  fallut-il  pour


It5461  RELATION  OF  1643-46  89

Having  offered  her  prayer,  she  turned  toward  her
teacher,  and  said  to  her:  "Will  Jesus  be  my
father,  since  I  no  longer  have  any  other?  The  Virgin
likewise  will  be  my  mother,  and  you  will  be  my
relatives ;  my  father  told  me  so. ' '  She  related  to  the
Mothers  all  that  her  father  had  recommended  to  her.

[78J  Her  fever,  becoming  more  and  more  evident,
prostrated  her  so  that  she  rose  from  it  no  more.  She
wished  to  confess;  the  Father  who  heard  her  was
delighted  therewith,  not  supposing  that  a  child
whom  he  wished  to  console  could  ever  have  had  so
much  judgment.  They  asked  her  if  she  would  not
be  very  glad  to  see  Our  Lord;  napik  nisadkiha  missi
kakichitdtz,  she  answered, —  "  Entirely  I  love  the  one
who  has  made  all;"  and  thereupon  she  expired,  to
the  joy  and  the  regret  of  all  those  good  Mothers.

The  confusion  which  the  coming  of  the  vessels
occasions  made  us  postpone  the  Jubilee  of  last  year
to  a  time  more  convenient  for  obtaining  it  with  more
leisure ;  it  was  announced  some  days  before  the
nativity  of  the  Savior.  The  Christians  of  St.  Joseph,
who  had  not  yet  heard  mention  of  this  devotion,
prepared  for  it  with  most  extraordinary  affection.
They  were  told  that  the  preparations  for  obtaining
this  pardon  were  fasting,  alms,  and  prayer  or  orisons ;
as  for  fasting,  they  observed  it  very  easily,  for  they
had  not  many  things  to  eat  at  that  time ;  a  piece  of
good  fortune  nevertheless  rendered  it  more  meritori-
ous and  more  remarkable.  A  Hunter  [79]  having
encountered  a  Caribou,  which  is  not  quite  so  large
as  one  of  our  oxen  in  France,  pursued  it  and  felled
it  to  the  ground.  Famine  was  in  their  cabins,  and
the  desire  to  eat  fresh  meat  strongly  tempted  them ;
yet  never  did  any  Christian  consent  to  taste  it  on  the


90  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SU/TES  [Vol.29

contenter  leur  deuotion  qu'ils  accompliffent  c6t  ar-
ticle. Les  vns  apportoient  quelques  grains  de  Pour-
celaine,  les  autres  vn  petit  morceau  de  chair;  il  y  en
eut  vn  qui  prefenta  vn  petit  plat  d'ecorce,  plein  de
raifms  qu'il  auoit  achepte"  des  Francois.  En  vn  mot,
on  donna  toutes  leurs  aumofnes  a  l'vn  des  Capitaines
plus  zelez  pour  les  diftribuer  aux  plus  neceffiteux.

[80]  Quant  a  l'oraifon,  ils  ne  manquerent  pas  de
faire  leurs  Stations,  &  auec  cela  d'affifter  toutes  a  vne
Proceffion  affez  facheufe  &  difficile  qu'ils  firent  de-
puis  faindt  Iofeph  iufques  a  Kebec,  il  y  a  enuiron  vne
lieue  &  demie  de  chemin :  elle  fe  fit  le  iour  de  faindt
Eitienne  le  landemain  de  Noel  par  vn  temps  extreme-
ment  froid,  ils  marchoient  tous  deux  a  deux  en  bel
ordre,  les  enfans  voulurent  eftre  de  la  partie.  La
croix  &  la  banniere  marchoient  deuant,  les  Peres  qui
ont  foin  de  cette  petite  Eglife,  conduifoient  leur
troupeau,  ils  entonnent  des  Hymnes  en  fortant  de
l'Eglife,  ils  continuent  leur  Proceffion,  recitans  leur
Chappelet,  &  faifants  d'autres  prieres.  Arriuans  a
Kebec  ils  rauirent  les  Francois,  leur  premiere  Sta-
tion fut  en  l'Eglife  des  Meres  Vrfulines,  oil  ayans
prie  Dieu,  &  chante  quelques  Cantiques  fpirituels,
ils  tirerent  droit  a  la  Paroiffe,  ou  le  faindt  Sacrement
eftoit  expofe.  Ils  furent  receus  auec  des  motets
plein  de  piete  qu'on  chanta  en  l'honneur  de  celuy
qu'ils  venoient  adorer,  lequel  leur  ayant  donne  fa
benedidtion  par  les  mains  du  Preftre,  ils  pafferent  a.
la  troifiefme  Station  qui  eftoit  a  l'Hofpital,  ou  fem-
blablement  [81]  ils  prierent  pour  les  fujets  contenus
en  la  Bulle,  touftours  conduits  &  dirigez  par  leurs  Pa-
iteurs.  Au  fortir  de  la,  ils  s'en  retournent  a  ieun  deux
a  deux,  come  ils  eftoient  venus,  concluans  la  derniere


164(5]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  91

days  which  had  been  appointed  to  them  for  fast-
ing,—  not  even  the  Hunter  himself.  Nay,  more, —
some  Pagans  of  his  cabin,  seeing  this  example,
touched  that  flesh  no  more  than  if  it  had  been
poisoned.

As  for  alms,  they  had  more  difficulty;  for  they
knew  not  what  to  give.  Gold  and  silver  have  no
currency  among  these  peoples,  and  their  poverty
easily  dispensed  them  from  being  wasteful.  Yet  it
was  necessary,  in  order  to  satisfy  their  devotion,
that  they  should  fulfill  this  clause.  Some  brought  a
few  Porcelain  beads,  others  a  little  piece  of  flesh ;
there  was  one  who  presented  a  small  dish  of  bark,
full  of  raisins  that  he  had  bought  from  the  French.
In  a  word,  we  gave  all  their  alms  to  one  of  the
more  zealous  Captains,  to  distribute  them  to  the  most
necessitous.

[80]  As  for  the  prayers,  they  failed  not  to  perform
their  Stations,  and  all,  besides,  to  take  part  in  a
somewhat  arduous  and  difficult  Procession,  which
they  made  from  saint  Joseph  even  to  Kebec, — the
distance  is  about  a  league  and  a  half.  It  was  held
on  the  day  of  saint  Stephen,  the  day  after  Christ-
mas, in  extremely  cold  weather;  they  all  walked,
two  by  two,  in  fine  order;  the  children  wished  to  be
of  the  company.  The  cross  and  the  banner  marched
before ;  the  Fathers  who  have  charge  of  that  little
Church  led  their  flock.  They  intoned  Hymns  on
issuing  from  the  Church ;  they  continued  their
Procession,  reciting  their  Rosaries,  and  offering  other
prayers.  Arriving  at  Kebec,  they  delighted  the
French ;  their  first  Station  was  in  the  Church  of  the
Ursuline  Mothers;  having  there  prayed  to  God,  and
sung  some  spiritual  Songs,  they  moved  straight  to


92  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ESUITES  [Vol.29

adtion  du  Iubile"  dans  leur  Eglife.  Ceux  qui  auoient
veu  le  pays  dans  fa  barbarie,  iettans  les  yeux  fur
vne  telle  deuotion,  fur  vne  modeftie  fi  grande,  voy-
ans  des  Barbares  faire  trois  lieues  a  pied,  dans  vn
froid  tres-piquant,  &  a  ieun,  pour  gagner  la  remiffion
de  leurs  offences,  rendoient  mille  loiianges  au  Dieu
du  Ciel,  qui  verfe  fes  benedictions  oil  il  luy  plaift.


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  93

the  Parish  church,  where  the  blessed  Sacrament  was
exposed.  They  were  received  with  motets  full  of
piety,  which  were  sung  in  honor  of  him  whom  they
came  to  adore ;  when  he  had  given  them  his  bless-
ing, by  the  hands  of  the  Priest,  they  proceeded  to
the  third  Station,  which  was  at  the  Hospital,  where
likewise  [81]  they  prayed  for  the  objects  contained
in  the  Bull,  being  continually  led  and  directed  by
their  Pastors.  Upon  departing  thence,  they  returned
fasting, — two  by  two,  as  they  had  come, —  conclud-
ing the  last  act  of  the  Jubilee  in  their  own  Church.
Those  who  had  seen  the  country  in  its  barbarism  —
casting  their  eyes  on  such  devotion,  and  so  great  a
modesty ;  seeing  Barbarians  make  three  leagues  on
foot,  in  a  most  piercing  cold,  and  fasting,  in  order
to  gain  the  remission  of  their  sins  —  rendered  a
thousand  praises  to  the  God  of  Heaven,  who  pours
his  blessings  where  he  pleases.


94  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29


CHAPITRE VI.

DE LA RESIDENCE DE LA CONCEPTION AUX TROIS

RIUIERES.

LES  trois  Riuieres  font  l'abord  de  tous  les  peuples
de  ces  contr6es  bons  &  mauuais :  on  y  voit  de
temps  en  temps  des  Sauuages,  de  toutes  les
nations  qui  voguent  fur  le  grand  fleuue  de  faindt
Laurens,  depuis  fon  emboucheure  iufques  [82]  aux
Hurons,  &  au  dela:  cefke  eftendue  fait  peut-eftre
quatre  cens  lieues,  &  dauantage.

Ce  ramas  de  tant  de  peuples  fi  differents  fait  vne
grande  confufion,  &  encore  que  les  feuls  Chreftiens
foient  les  plus  cheris  des  Francois,  on  eft  contraint
de  tolerer  les  autres,  &  d'attendre  le  moment  de  leur
conuerfion.

Toutes  les  affemblees  qu'on  a  faites  auec  les
Iroquois,  ont  efte  tenue's  aux  trois  Riuieres :  deux  ou
trois  infignes  Apoftats  s'y  font  retirez:  tous  les
fripons  des  autres  endroits  y  font  venus  paffer  vne
partie  de  leurs  temps :  tous  les  curieux  de  fcauoir  des
nouuelles  yabordent:  ce  n'eft  qu'vn  flux  &  reflux
qui  empefche  beaucoup  que  la  Foy  ne  prene  racine.
Les  Chreftiens  cependant  n'ont  pas  laifle  de  donner
des  preuues  de  leur  foy,  &  de  leur  conftance,  nonob-
ftant  les  mauuais  exemples  qu'ils  ont  deuat  les  yeux,
&  qui  font  quelquesfois  trebucher  les  foibles.

Vn  Infidelle  cajola  fi  bien  vne  femme  Chreftienne,
qu'il  la  prift  pour  fa  feconde  femme,  les  Francois
indignez  de  cefte  action,  luy  deffendent  1 'entree  du


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  95


CHAPTER  VI.

OF THE RESIDENCE OF LA CONCEPTION AT THREE

RIVERS.

THREE  Rivers  is  the  landing-place  of  all  the
peoples  of  these  regions,  good  and  bad :  one
sees  there  from  time  to  time  Savages  of  all  the
nations  which  navigate  the  great  river  of  saint  Law-
rence, from  its  mouth  even  [82]  to  the  Hurons,  and
beyond;  this  length  makes  perhaps  four  hundred
leagues  and  more.

This  gathering  of  so  many  tribes,  so  different,
causes  great  confusion;  and  though  only  the  Chris-
tians are  most  cherished  by  the  French,  one  is
constrained  to  tolerate  the  others,  and  to  await  the
time  for  their  conversion.

All  the  assemblies  which  have  been  convened  with
the  Iroquois  have  been  held  at  three  Rivers ;  two  or
three  notorious  Apostates  have  retreated  thither ;  all
the  rogues  from  other  places  have  come  to  that  place
to  spend  a  part  of  their  time ;  and  all  those  who  are
curious  to  learn  the  news  land  there ;  all  this  is  but
an  ebb  and  flow,  which  greatly  hinders  the  Faith
from  taking  root.  The  Christians,  however,  have
not  failed  to  give  proofs  of  their  faith  and  of  their
constancy,  notwithstanding  the  bad  examples  which
they  have  before  their  eyes,  and  which  sometimes
cause  the  weak  to  stumble.

An  Infidel  so  successfully  cajoled  a  Christian
woman,  that he took her for  his  second  wife ; the


96  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

fort,  &  de  leurs  maifons:  c£t  homme  forcene"  [83]  s'en
va  dans  le  quartier  des  Sauuages,  faire  vn  cry  public
contre  la  priere,  c'eft  a  dire  contre  la  Foy,  vfant  de
menaces  contre  tous  ceux  qui  fortiroient  de  leurs
Cabanes  pour  aller  a  la  Meffe,  ou  a  l'mftruction.  Vn
Chreftien  entendant  ce  difcours  de  fa  Cabane,  en  fort
arme"  d'vne  faindte  cholere,  il  anime  fa  voix,  il  crie,
il  tempefte  contre  cet  infolent,  parle  hautement  de
la  foy,  donne  courage  aux  Chreftiens,  protefte  que
les  menaces  des  impudents  ne  l'ebranleront  iamais,
en  vn  mot  le  Pay  en,  voyant  ce  torrent,  fe  retire
de  peur  que  des  paroles  on  ne  vint  a  la  violence,
n'efperant  pas  trouuer  tant  de  courage  parmy  les
fiens  pour  le  menfonge,  qu'il  en  croyoit  dans  les
Chreftiens  pour  la  verite.

Vne  autre  fois  vn  Chreftien  voyant  les  defordres
qui  fe  commettoient  dans  ce  melange  de  toute  forte
de  nations,  &  n'ayant  pas  d'autres  armes  que  fa
parole,  pour  y  refifter,  il  fortit  en  public,  &  fe  pour-
menant  felon  leur  couftume,  parmy  les  Cabanes  de
fes  compatriottes,  il  harangua  en  ces  termes.

Efcoutez,  mes  freres,  c'eft  a  vous  tous  que  i'ad-
dreffe  ma  parole,  vous  feauez  [84]  que  ie  fuis  bap-
tife:  fi  quelqu'vn  l'ignore,  qu'il  l'apprene  auio[u]r-
d'huy  de  ma  bouche,  ie  n'ayme  ny  les  biens,  ny
l'honneur,  i'ayme  la  priere,  i'honore  la  Foy,  ie  vou-
drois  que  tout  le  monde  l'honoraft,  tout  n'eft  rien:  la
creance  eft  de  prix,  &  de  valeur:  h  vos  oreilles
eftoient  percees,  la  dodtrine  qu'on  nous  enfeigne,  y
entreroit,  &  fi  vous  n'auiez  les  yeux  fermez,  vous  en
verriez  la  beaute:  on  ne  voit  qu'infolences  dans  nos
cabanes,  les  ieunes  gens  courent  toutes  les  nuits,  i'ar-
refterois  bien  ces  defordres,  fi  i'auois  du  pouuoir  fur


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  97

French,  indignant  at  that  action,  forbid  him  entrance
to  the  fort  and  to  their  houses.  This  furious  man
[83]  proceeds  to  the  quarter  of  the  Savages,  making
a  public  denunciation  against  prayer,  —  that  is  to  say,
against  the  Faith, —  using  threats  against  all  those
who  should  issue  from  their  Cabins  in  order  to  go  to
Mass  or  to  instruction.  A  Christian,  hearing  this
speech  from  his  Cabin,  leaves  it,  armed  with  a  holy
anger;  he  raises  his  voice,  he  shouts,  he  storms
against  that  insolent  man ;  he  speaks  highly  of  the
faith,  gives  courage  to  the  Christians,  protests  that
the  threats  of  the  impudent  will  never  shake  him.
In  a  word,  the  Pagan,  seeing  this  torrent,  with-
draws, for  fear  that  from  words  they  might  come  to
violence, — not  hoping  to  find  so  much  courage  among
his  own,  in  behalf  of  lies,  as  he  believed  there  was
among  the  Christians  for  the  truth.

Another  time,  a  Christian,  seeing  the  lawless  acts
which  were  committed  in  this  mixture  of  every  sort
of  nations,  and  having  no  other  arms  than  his
speech,  in  order  to  resist  them,  went  out  in  public,
and  —  walking,  according  to  their  custom,  among  the
Cabins  of  his  fellow-countrymen  —  he  harangued  in
these  terms:

"  Listen,  my  brothers,  it  is  to  you  all  that  I  ad-
dress my  speech.  You  know  [84]  that  I  am  bap-
tized ;  if  any  one  be  ignorant  thereof,  let  him  learn
it  to-day  from  my  lips.  I  love  neither  goods  nor
honor;  I  love  prayer,  and  I  honor  the  Faith, —  I
would  that  all  people  might  honor  it.  All  is  of  no
importance, —  belief  is  of  price  and  of  value.  If
your  ears  were  pierced,  the  doctrine  which  is
taught  us  would  enter  them ;  and,  if  you  had  not
your  eyes closed,  you would see its  beauty. One


98  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

vous.  Tenez  pour  conftant  que  ces  malices  attireront
deffus  nos  tefles  la  cholere,  &  la  vengeance  de  celuy
qui  a  tout  fait.  Pour  vous  autres  qui  auez  receu  le
Baptefme,  &  qui  ne  tenez  pas  voftre  parole,  vous
eftes  des  trompeurs,  ou  renoncez  a  voftre  foy,  ou
viuez  conformement  aux  promeffes  que  vous  auez
faites  en  voftre  Baptefme.  Si  Ton  vous  retranche
de  l'Eglife,  fi  on  vous  chafle  comme  des  chiens,  ie
me  banderay  le  premier  contre  vous,  fi  vous  ne  quit-
tez  vos  defordres.  Ses  paroles  pouffees  d'vn  bon
accent,  &  par  vn  homme  d'authorite"  eftonna  les
inconftans,  &  confola  bien  fort  les  plus  feruens,  &
les  plus  courageux.

[85]  La  nuit  fuiuante  vn  Chreftien  qui  auoit  elte
banny  de  l'Eglife  pour  vn  fcandale  public,  &  qui
s'eftoit  reconcilie"  apres  vne  bonne  penitence,  emeu
de  la  force  de  ce  difcours,  en  fit  vn  autre  deuant  des
apoftats,  auec  vn  accent  tout  plein  de  cceur.  Les
Sauuages  font  fort  retenus  en  leurs  paroles,  deuant
leurs  compatriotes.  C'eft  vne  chofe  rare  qu'vn  Capi-
taine  mefme  fe  donne  la  liberte  de  reprendre  les
fautes  de  fes  gens,  fi  ce  n'eft  peut-eftre  de  quelque
ieuneffe.  Cet  home  parla  deuant  les  plus  huppez,
&  deuant  les  plus  fuperbes  de  fa  nation,  en  cette
forte.  Celuy  qui  a  promene  fa  parole  dans  la  harague
qu'il  nous  a  faite  auiourd'huy,  a  parle"  comme  vne
perfonne  qui  croit  veritablement :  fon  aage  &  fa
grande  authority  meritent  que  les  fideles  &  les  infi-
deles  obei'ffent  a  fa  voix,  &  fa  perfeuerance  en  la  Foy
oblige  tous  les  Chreftiens  de  garder  les  promeffes
qu'ils  ont  faites  a  Dieu:  pour  moy  qui  ay  donne
mauuais  exemple,  ie  ne  puis  doner  aucun  poids  a
mes  paroles; fi  neantmoins vous les  regardez de


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  99

sees  only  insolent  actions  in  our  cabins;  the  young
people  run  about  every  night ;  I  would  certainly  stop
these  disorders  if  I  had  power  over  you.  Hold  it  as
certain  that  these  mischiefs  will  draw  upon  our  heads
the  wrath  and  vengeance  of  him  who  has  made  all.
As  for  you  others  who  have  received  Baptism,  and
who  do  not  keep  your  word,  you  are  deceivers;
either  renounce  your  faith,  or  live  conformably  to
the  promises  which  you  have  made  in  your  Baptism.
If  you  are  cut  off  from  the  Church,  if  you  are  driven
out  like  dogs,  I  will  be  the  first  to  take  sides  against
you  unless  you  cease  your  disorders."  His  words  —
uttered  with  much  emphasis,  and  by  a  man  of  au-
thority—  astonished  the  inconstant,  and  very  greatly
consoled  the  more  fervent  and  courageous.

[85]  On  the  following  night,  a  Christian  who  had
been  banished  from  the  Church  for  a  public  scandal,
and  who  had  become  reconciled  after  a  thorough
penance,  moved  by  the  force  of  this  address,  made
another  before  some  apostates,  in  a  most  earnest
tone.  The  Savages  are  very  reserved  in  their  words,
before  their  fellow-countrymen ;  it  rarely  occurs
that  even  a  Captain  gives  himself  the  liberty  of
reproving  the  faults  of  his  people,  unless  perhaps  of
some  youth.  This  man  spoke  before  the  most
adorned  and  the  proudest  of  his  nation,  in  this  wise:
'  He  who  has  uttered  his  thoughts  in  the  harangue
which  he  has  made  to  us  to-day,  has  spoken  like  a
person  who  truly  believes:  his  age  and  his  great
authority  deserve  that  the  faithful  and  the  unfaith-
ful should  obey  his  voice ;  and  his  perseverance  in
the  Faith  obliges  all  the  Christians  to  keep  the
promises  which  they  have  made  to  God.  As  for
me,  who  have  set  a  bad  example,  I  can  give  no  weight


100  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESU/TES [Vol.29

bien  pr£s,  vous  trouuerez  qu'elles  ne  s'6cartent  ny
d'vn  colte"  ny  d'autre,  mais  que  leur  route  eft  toute
droite:  i'ay  peche,  tout  le  [86]  monde  le  fcait  bien,
i'en  ay  demand^  pardon  a  Dieu,  ie  m'en  fuis  con-
fefTe,  ie  croy  qu'il  m'a  fait  raifericorde,  &  que  le
peu  de  temps  qui  me  relate  iufques  a  la  mort,  m'eil
donne  pour  faire  penitence  de  mes  crimes,  ie  ne
puis  affez  admirer  fa  bonte.  Mais  ne  dites  pas  que
C  vous  fuiuez  mon  exemple  dans  le  vice,  vous  le
f uiurez  par  apres  dans  la  penitence :  ces  paroles  font
dangereufes,  il  les  entend,  il  vous  ecoute.  s'il  ne  m'a
pas  liure"  au  mauuais  demon,  c'efl  vne  bonte  qui  m'e-
flonne,  de  laquelle  il  n'a  pas  vfe  enuers  vne  infinite
d'autres  qui  fe  font  perdus.  Ne  dites  pas  auffi  que
vous  aurez  de  l'efprit,  quand  vous  aurez  la  telle
blanche,  le  demon  vous  preuiendra,  il  ne  fera  plus
temps  de  vouloir  eftre  fage  quand  vous  ferez  dans  les
feux,  les  guerres,  les  maladies,  &  la  mort  mefme,  font
les  punitions  de  nos  offenfes,  &  non  pas  de  mauuais
effects  de  la  Foy  &  des  prieres,  comme  difent  quel-
ques-vns:  c'efl  la  priere  qui  dit  a  Dieu,  arrefte  ta
colere,  ne  decoche  point  tes  fleches  deffus  nous,
donne  nous  le  loifir  d'auoir  de  l'efprit,  chaffe  les
maladies,  deliure  nous  de  la  guerre:  voila  ce  que
demandent  iour  &  nuit  les  Peres  pour  nous  autres,
c'efl  ce  [87]  qu'ils  nous  confeillent  de  faire  &  de
pratiquer:  fans  la  priere  de  ceux  qui  ayment  Dieu,  le
demon  qui  a  enuie  de  nous  perdre,  nous  auroit  bien-
toft  precipite  dans  la  foffe  pleine  de  feu.  Ceux-la
font  bien  abufez  qui  croyent  que  la  priere  caufe  les
maladies  &  auance  la  mort :  celuy  que  nous  prions,
c'eit  celuy-la  mefme  qui  donne  la  fante  &  la  vie,
l'honneur  qu'on  luy  rend,  ne  le  prouoque  pas  a  nous


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  101

to  my  words ;  if,  nevertheless,  you  look  at  them  very
closely,  you  will  find  that  they  turn  to  neither  one
side  nor  the  other,  but  that  their  course  is  entirely
straight. I  have sinned, —  every  [86]  one  knows  it
well ;  I have  asked pardon for  it from  God,  and  I
have  confessed. I believe  that  he  has  shown me
mercy,  and  that  the  little  time  which  remains  to  me
until  death  is  given  me  to  do  penance  for  my  crimes ;
I  cannot  enough  admire  his  goodness. But  say  not
that,  if  you  follow  my  example  in  vice  you  will  fol-
low it  afterward  in  penance ;  such  words  are  danger-
ous,— -he  hears  them,  he  listens  to  you. If  he  has
not  delivered  me  to  the  wicked  demon,  it  is  a  kind-
ness which astonishes  me, and which  he  has  not
showed  toward countless  others  who have ruined
themselves. Do  not  also  say  that  you  will  have  sense
when  you  shall  have  white  heads;  the  demon  will
prevent  you, —  there  will  no  longer  be  time  to  wish
for  wisdom  when  you  are  in  the  fires. Wars,  sick-
nesses, and  death  itself,  are  the  punishments  for  our
offenses, and  not evil effects of  the Faith  and  of
prayers, as  some say. It  is  prayer  which says  to
God :  '  Arrest  thy  wrath ;  do  not  shoot  thine  arrows
upon  us. Give  us  the  leisure  to  have  sense;  drive
out diseases, and deliver  us from war.' That  is
what  the  Fathers  ask  day  and  night  for  us ;  that  is
[87] what they advise us to do and to  practice.
Without the prayer of those who love God, the
demon  who  desires  to  destroy  us  would  soon  have
plunged  us  into  the  pit  full  of  fire. Those  are  much
deceived  who  believe  that  prayer  causes  diseases  and
hastens  death, —  he  to  whom we  pray  is  the  very
one  who  gives  health  and  life ;  the  honor  which  is
rendered  him  does  not  provoke  him  to  do  us  injury.


102  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

faire  du  mal.  Sus  done,  que  ceux  qui  ont  peche,
facent  penitence  auec  moy,  &  ceux  qui  n'ont  point
faly  leur  Baptefme  gardent  conftamment  leur  parole
iufques  a  la  mort.

Ie  crois  qu'il  fera  bien  a  propos  de  dire  icy  deux
mots  de  la  conuerfion  de  cet  home. Eftant  follicite"
par  vne  femme,  il  la  prit  pnbliquement  auec  fa  legi-
time: Dieu  l'ayat  chatie  par  vne  bonne  maladie,  il
ouurit  les  yeux,  mais  pource  que  Ton  craignoit  fon
inconftance,  dont  il  auoit  defia  donne"  des  indices,  on
le  laiffa  fort  long-temps  comme  vn  excommunie :  il
enuoya  querir  plufieurs  fois  quelques-vnsde  nos  Peres,
a  toutes  fes  demandes  point  de  refponfe :  enfin  comme
on  creut  qu'il  eftoit  veritablement  touch  e\  vn  Pere  le
va  voir  [88] dans  fes  grandes  douleurs: Ah, mon
Pere,  luy  dift-il,  ayez  pitie  de  moy :  ie  ne  puis,  luy
repliqua  le  Pere, te  faire  entrer  en  l'Eglife,  tu  as
donne  vn  trop  grand  fcandale:  Helas!  mon  Pere,  ie
ne  demande  pas  cela,  ie  ne  fuis  pas  digne  d'y  ren-
trer,  ie  demande  que  mes  pechez  foient  effacez  par
la  confeffion ;  ie  fuis  extremement  malade ;  la  mort
me  fait  peur,  eftant  encor  charge  de  tous  mes  crimes :
le  Pere  voyant  bien  qu'il  n'eftoit  pas  encor  dans  vn
fi  grand  danger, luy  donna  iour, le  va  trouuer  au
temps  prefix,  luy  prefte  l'oreille:  ce  pauure  homme
tire  vn  petit  faiffeau  de  bois  c5me  vne  botte  d'allu-
mette,  &  le  monftrant  au  Pere,  luy  dift:  voila  tous
mes  pechez,  ie  les  ay  efcrits  deffus  ces  bois  a  noftre
mode,  de  peur  de  m'en  oublier:  il  fe  confeffe  auec
de  grads  regrets  les  yeux  pleins  de  larmes,  la  bouche
pleine  de  fanglots,  &  le  cceur  tout  remply  de  regrets
&  de  douleur. Apres  fa  confeffion, il  raconta  au
Pere comme il  eftoit  tombe  dans l'abyfme  de  fes


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  103

Up  then  !  let  those  who  have  sinned  do  penance  with
me ;  and  let  those  who  have  not  defiled  their  Baptism
keep  their  word  steadfastly,  even  till  death."

I  think  that  it  will  be  quite  proper  to  say  here  a
few  words  about  this  man's  conversion.  Being  en-
ticed by  a  woman,  he  took  her  publicly,  along  with
his  lawful  wife.  God  having  punished  him  with  a
wholesome  sickness,  he  opened  his  eyes;  but,  be-
cause they  feared  his  inconstancy,  of  which  he  had
already  given  indications,  he  was  abandoned  a  long
time,  like  one  excommunicated.  He  sent,  several
times,  to  ask  for  some  of  our  Fathers, — to  all  his
requests,  no  response  at  all ;  finally,  as  they  believed
that  he  was  truly  touched,  a  Father  went  to  see  him
[88]  in  his  great  pains.  "Ah,  my  Father,"  said
this  man  to  him,  "  have  pity  on  me."  "  I  cannot,"
the  Father  replied  to  him,  "take  thee  into  the
Church:  thou  hast  given  too  great  a  scandal."
"  Alas,  my  Father,  I  do  not  ask  that, —  I  am  not
worthy  to  enter  it ;  I  ask  that  my  sins  be  blotted  out
by  confession.  I  am  extremely  sick ;  death  makes
me  afraid,  since  I  am  still  burdened  with  all  my
crimes."  The  Father,  seeing  well  that  he  was  not
yet  in  so  great  a  danger,  assigns  him  a  day,  goes
to  find  him  at  the  appointed  time,  and  listens  to  him.
This  poor  man  draws  forth  a  little  bundle  of  wood,
like  a  bunch  of  matches,  and  showing  it  to  the
Father,  said  to  him:  "  There  are  all  my  sins,  I  have
written  them  upon  these  pieces  of  wood,  after  our
fashion,  for  fear  of  forgetting  them."  He  confesses
with  great  remorse,  his  eyes  filled  with  tears,  his
utterance  choked  with  sobs,  and  his  heart  full  of
regret  and  grief.  After  his  confession,  he  related  to
the  Father  how  he  had  fallen  into  the  abyss  of  his


104  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.29

pechez.  I'ay,  difoit-il,  conferue"  long-temps  la  blan-
cheur  de  mon  Baptefme,  i'ay  porte  long-temps  le
flambeau  qu'on  me  fit  tenir  tout  allume  fans  l'eftein-
dre:  cette  femme  qui  m'a  perdu  [89]  me  recherchant,
ie  la  fuyois  au  commencement,  mais  petit  a  petit  ie
pris  plaifir  en  fon  amide" :  ie  ne  penfois  en  aucun
mal,  iufques-la  que  fentant  que  mon  cceur  vouloit
eftre  mef chant,  ie  la  chaff ois  d'aupres  de  moy,  mais
elle  n'alloit  pas  loin;  auffi-toft  elle  paroiffoit  deuant
mes  yeux:  enfin  ie  commen9ay  a  l'aymer,  mon  cceur
trembloit,  me  reprochant  que  ie  quitterois  la  priere,
ie  m'allois  confeffer  auffi-toft. ;  mais  ce  demon  me
pourfuiuant  me  perdit,  ie  vins  a  l'aymer  tout  de  bon,
&  voyant  bien  que  ie  ne  ferois  pas  en  repos  aupres
de  vous  autres,  ie  vous  quittay  &  m'en  allay  a
l'lfle,  &  de  la  aux  Hurons:  l'amour  m'aueugloit;  ie
pechois  quelquefois  fans  remords,  le  plus  fouuent  la
crainte  faififloit  mon  ame,  ie  m'en  voulois  quelque-
fois prendre  a  vous  autres,  tantoft  ie  vous  meprifois,
puis  ie  vous  exaltois,  admirant  voflre  patience  &
voftre  bonte :  car  vos  freres  qui  font  dans  les  Hu-
rons, font  la  haut  ce  que  vous  faites  icy  bas ;  ils  paci-
fient  toutes  les  diffentions,  ils  font  des  prefens  pour
appaifer  les  mefchans,  ils  enfeignent  le  chemin  du
Ciel:  tout  cela  m'eftonnoit,  &  ie  difois  a  mon  ame,
tu  t'en  vas  dans  le  feu,  tu  defobeis  [90]  a  celuy  qui  a
tout  fait.  Eftant  dans  ces  angoifTes  ie  tombe  malade,
me  voila  dans  des  craintes  £pouuentables,  tous  mes
pechez  fe  prefentent  a.  mes  yeux,  comme  fi  on  me  les
euft  dit  les  vns  apres  les  autres :  ie  les  marquay  tous
fur  ces  petits  bois,  ie  demanday  qu'on  me  rapportafl
icy  bas,  ie  ne  penfois  qu'a  vous  autres  que  i'auois  tant
m6prifez:  ie  difois  a  Dieu,  tu  fais  bien  de  me  faire


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  105

sins.  "  I  did,"  said  he,  "  preserve  for  a  long  time
the  whiteness  of  my  Baptism;  I  carried  a  long  time
the  torch  which  they  made  me  hold,  well  lighted,
without  extinguishing  it.  When  that  woman  who
has  ruined  me  [89]  was  endeavoring  to  gain  me,  I  fled
from  her,  at  first ;  but  little  by  little  I  took  pleasure
in  her  friendship.  I  thought  of  no  harm  in  that,
until  I  realized  that  my  heart  desired  to  be  wicked ;
I  drove  her  away  from  me,  but  she  went  not  far, —
very  soon,  she  appeared  before  my  eyes.  Finally  I
began  to  love  her;  my  heart  trembled,  reproaching
me  that  I  would  forsake  prayer.  I  was  going  to  con-
fess at  once ;  but  this  demon,  pursuing  me,  ruined  me.
I  came  to  love  her  in  good  sooth;  and,  seeing  well
that  I  would  have  no  peace  near  you,  I  left  you  and
went  away  to  the  Island,  and  thence  to  the  Hurons;
love  was  blinding  me.  I  sinned  sometimes  without
remorse;  more  often,  fear  seized  my  soul.  I  some-
times wished  to  apply  to  you, —  again,  I  despised
you.  Then  I  exalted  you,  admiring  your  patience
and  your  goodness ;  for  your  brothers  who  are  among
the  Hurons  do  up  there  what  you  do  down  here, —
they  pacify  all  the  dissensions,  they  make  presents
to  appease  the  wicked,  they  teach  the  way  to  Heav-
en. All  that  astonished  me,  and  I  said  to  my  soul:
'  Thou  art  going  into  the  fire ;  thou  disobeyest  [90]
him  who  has  made  all.'  Being  in  such  anguish,  I
fell  sick;  indeed,  I  was  in  awful  fears.  All  my
sins  presented  themselves  to  my  eyes,  as  if  they  had
been  told  to  me  one  after  another;  I  marked  them
all  on  these  bits  of  wood.  I  asked  to  be  brought
down  here, —  I  thought  only  of  you,  whom  I  had  so
much  despised.  I  said  to  God:  '  Thou  doest  well  to
make  me  sick, —  I  have  been  the  first  to  leave  thee;  I


106  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29

malade,  ie  t'ay  quitte"  le  premier,  ie  n'ay  point  d'ef-
prit,  ie  fentois  des  dotileurs  horribles,  ie  criois  dans
mon  mal,  i'ay  merite"  tout  cela,  tu  faits  bien,  mais  ne
me  tue  pas  que  ie  ne  me  fois  confeffe\  Ie  croyois  a
tous  coups  que  i'allois  defcendre  au  pais  des  demons:
Enfin  quand  ie  me  fuis  veu  proche  de  vous  autres,
mes  angoiff  es  ont  efte"  vn  peu  f  oulagees :  car  encor
que  vous  me  rebutaffiez,  ie  difois  toufiours,  ils  ont
raifon,  ils  craignent  que  ie  ne  les  trompe.  Nikanis,
difoit-il  au  Pere,  prie  pour  moy,  dis  luy  qu'il  aug-
mente  mon  mal,  fi  iamais  il  me  prend  enuie  de  le
quitter.  On  le  tint  encor  fort  long- temps  dans  cet
eftat  de  penitent,  deuant  que  de  le  faire  entrer  dans
l'Eglife:  il  y  eft  maintenant  bien  refolu  de  n'en
fortir  iamais,  il  difoit  il  n'y  a  pas  long-temps  [91]  a
quelques  ames  froides :  ah !  fi  vous  fcauiez  quel
grand  mal-heur  c'eft  d'eftre  chaffe  de  l'Eglife,  &
combien  cela  coufte  d'angoiffes,  vous  vous  donneriez
bien  de  garde  de  commettre  chofe  aucune  qui  vous  fit
iamais  tomber  dans  ce  precipice:  Dieu  luy  vueille
donner  la  perfeuerance.

Pour  rentrer  dans  noftre  difcours,  les  Chreftiens
fe  voyans  enuironnez  de  tant  de  difficultez,  prirent
refolution  pour  fe  mieux  conferuer,  de  faire  bande
a  part  dans  leur  grande  chaffe  pendant  l'hyuer,  &
dans  les  autres  voyages  qu'ils  feroient  pour  leur
comerce.  Vn  Francois  les  ayant  accompagnez,  nous
tefmoigna  au  retour  qu'il  auoit  efte  rauy  les  voyant
viure  en  vrays  Chreftiens,  ne  manquans  iamais  de
prier  Dieu  tous  enfemble,  gardans  auffi  eftroitement
le  faindt  Dimanche,  comme  s'ils  euffent  efte  proches
de  nos  petites  Eglifes.

Au  retour  de  leur  chaffe,  ils  fe  caperent  le  plus


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  107

have  no  sense.'  I  felt  horrible  pains;  I  cried  out  in
my  trouble:  '  I  have  deserved  all  this, —  thou  doest
well;  but  kill  me  not  until  I  have  confessed.'  I
thought  every  time  that  I  was  about  to  go  down  into
the  country  of  the  demons.  Finally,  when  I  saw  my-
self near  you,  my  agonies  were  somewhat  relieved;
for,  although  you  rejected  me,  I  still  said:  '  They  are
right;  they  fear  that  I  may  deceive  them.'  Nika-
nis,"  said  he  to  the  Father,  "  pray  for  me;  tell  him
that  he  shall  increase  my  pain,  if  ever  the  desire
seize  me  to  leave  him."  They  kept  him  still  very
long  in  that  state  of  penitence,  before  having  him
enter  the  Church ;  he  is  in  it  now,  firmly  resolved
never  to  go  out  of  it.  He  said,  not  long  ago,  [91]  to
some  cold  souls :  ' '  Ah !  if  you  knew  what  a  great
misfortune  it  is  to  be  driven  out  of  the  Church,  and
how  many  pangs  that  costs,  you  would  be  very  care-
ful not  to  commit  anything  which  might  ever  cause
you  to  fall  over  this  precipice."  God  grant  to  give
him  perseverance.

To  return  to  our  discourse ;  the  Christians,  seeing
themselves  surrounded  with  so  many  difficulties,
took  resolution,  in  order  better  to  preserve  them-
selves, to  form  a  separate  band  in  their  great  hunt
during  the  winter,  and  in  the  other  journeys  which
they  should  make  for  their  trade.  A  Frenchman  hav-
ing accompanied  them,  testified  to  us,  on  the  return,
that  he  had  been  delighted  at  seeing  them  live  as
true  Christians, — never  failing  to  pray  to  God  all
together;  also  strictly  keeping  holy  Sunday,  as  if
they  had  been  near  our  little  Churches.

On  returning  from  their  hunt,  they  camped  as  near
as  they  could  to  our  Chapel ;  the  Pagans  took  offense
at  this,  casting  at  them  a  thousand  taunts  because


108  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

pres  qu'ils  puret  de  nollre  Chappelle:  les  Payens
s'en  formaliferent,  leur  donans  mille  brocards  de  ce
qu'ils  ne  s'eftoiet  pas  voulus  ioindreaeux;  c' eft  la
couftume  parmy  ces  peuples  que  les  filles  eftant
malade  de  leur  maladie  ordinaire,  fe  feparent  [92]  des
autres,  comme  faifoient  les  Iuifues.  Les  Infidelles
voyant  nos  Neophytes  vnis  enfemble,  leur  difoient  en
gauffant  qu'ils  faifoient  bien  a  la  fa9on  des  femmes
de  cabaner  a  part,  ils  fouffroient  patiemment  ces
rifees,  portans  compaffion  a  leur  aueuglement :  que
pouuons  nous  apprendre  de  vous  autres,  refpondit  vn
Chreftien,  fmon  des  medifances  &  des  gaufferies?  ne
vous  eftonnez  done  pas  fi  nous  nous  mettons  a  l'ecart.
II  n'y  a  terre  au  monde  fi  feche  &  fi  aride  ou  il  ne
paroiffe  quelque  petit  brin  de  verdure.  La  petite
Eglife  des  trois  Riuieres  voit  das  ce  flus  &  reflus  des
Sauuages,  qui  l'abordent,  vne  nation  toute  fimple,
toute  candide  &  bien  eloignee  de  la  fuperbe:  ce
peuple  vient  du  fonds  de  terre,  il  paffe  fa  vie  dans
l'innocence  de  la  chaffe  &  de  la  pefche,  ne  voyant
les  Francois  qu'vne  ou  deux  fois  l'annee  pour  achep-
ter  quelques  neceffitez  en  contr'ef change  de  leurs
pelteries.  Ils  tirent  leur  nom  du  mot  Attikameg,  qui
fignifie  vne  efpece  de  poiffon  que  nous  appellons  le
poiffon  blanc,  pource  qu'en  effet  il  eft  tout  luifant,
&  tout  blanc.  Ces  pauures  poiffons  blancs  fe  vien-
nent  ietter  dans  les  filets  [93]  de  l'Euangile,  autant
de  fois  qu'ils  approchent  des  riues  du  grand  fleuue  de
fainct  Laurens.  Ils  compofent  maintenant  vne  pe-
tite Eglife  volante,  qui  n'a  rien  de  plus  ferme  ny  de
plus  conftant  que  la  Foy,  &  que  l'exercice  des  vertus
qu'ils  conferuent  d'autant  plus  ayfement  qu'ils  font
eloignez  des  ennemis,  qui  les  leur  pourroient  derober.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  109

they  had  not  desired  to  join  them.  It  is  the  custom
among  these  peoples  that  the  girls,  when  sick  with
their  usual  illness,  separate  themselves  [92]  from
the  others,  as  did  the  Jewish  women.8  The  Infidels,
seeing  our  Neophytes  united  together,  said  to  them,
jeering,  that  they  were  acting  quite  in  the  manner
of  the  women,  to  lodge  apart.  They  suffered  these
mockeries  patiently,  feeling  compassion  for  their
blindness.  "  What  can  we  learn  from  you  others,"
answered  a  Christian,  "  except  slanders  and  jeers?
Be  not  astonished,  then,  if  we  place  ourselves  apart."

There  is  no  land  in  the  world  so  dry  and  so  arid
where  there  does  not  appear  some  little  spray  of
green.  The  little  Church  of  three  Rivers  sees,  amid
this  ebb  and  flow  of  the  Savages  who  approach  it,  a
nation  altogether  simple  and  candid,  and  very  far
from  haughtiness :  these  people  come  from  an  inland
region;  they  spend  their  lives  in  the  innocence  of
hunting  and  fishing,  seeing  the  French  only  once  or
twice  in  the  year,  in  order  to  buy  some  necessaries
in  exchange  for  their  peltries.  They  derive  their
name  from  the  word  Attikameg,  which  signifies  a
kind  of  fish  that  we  call  "  the  white  fish,"  because
it  is,  in  truth,  all  shining  and  all  white.  These  poor
white  fish  come  to  cast  themselves  into  the  nets  [93]
of  the  Gospel,  as  many  times  as  they  approach  the
banks  of  the  great  river  of  saint  Lawrence.  They
now  compose  a  little  migratory  Church,  which  has
nothing  more  fixed  or  more  constant  than  the  Faith,
and  the  practice  of  virtue, —  which  they  preserve  all
the  more  easily  since  they  are  removed  from  the
enemies  who  might  steal  these  from  them.

They  carry  with  them  a  list  or  calendar  of  Feasts
and  of Sundays,  and  of  all  the days  of  the  week;


110  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

lis  portent  auec  eux  vn  catalogue,  on  vn  calendrier
des  Feftes,  &  des  Dimanches,  &  de  tous  les  iours  de
la  femaine:  pas  vn  d'eux  ne  s'eft  trompe  cette  ann6e
en  fon  calcul.  Outre  les  prieres  du  foir,  &  du
matin,  ils  s'affemblent  touts  les  Dimanches  dans  vne
cabane,  pour  chanter  quelques  Hymnes  fpirituels,  &
pour  reciter  tous  enfemble  leur  chappelet.  Que  fi
quelqu'vn  d'entr'eux  a  la  parolle  en  main,  il  anime
les  autres  a  obeir  a  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait,  &  a  quitter
leur  anciennes  fuperftitions.

Tout  l'hyuer,  ils  fe  confolent  dansl'efperance  qu'ils
ont  de  fe  venir  confeffer  &  communier  au  Printemps,
ils  en  font  de  mefme  pendant  l'Efte\  fe  difpofans  de
nous  venir  voir  a  l'Automne:  ils  decouurent  leur
faute  auec  vne  candeur  admirable.  [94]  On  diroit
veritablement  que  le  peche  d'Adam  n'eft  point  par-
uenu  iufques  a  ces  peuples,  tant  ils  font  eloignez  des
malices  qui  fe  retreuuent  parmy  les  plus  ieunes
enfans.

Leur  premier  Capitaine,  nomme  Paul  de  Tam^rat,
eflant  arriue"  aux  trois  Riuieres,  s'en  alia  vifiter  le
Pere  qui  a  foin  de  cette  refidence,  &  luy  dift  deuant
tous  fes  gens.  Mon  Pere,  fera-ce  done  a  ce  coup
que  ie  communieray?  tu  m'as  toufiours  refuf6  ce
bon-heur;  tu  m'as  remis  du  Printemps  a.  l'Automne,
i'ay  eu  peur  pendant  tout  l'Elte  de  mourir  deuant
que  Ton  m'ait  porte  a  la  bouche  cette  nourriture  de
nos  ames.  Dieu  m'a  conferue  la  vie,  me  voicy  de
retour,  que  diras-tu  maintenant?  ne  m'afflige  pas
plus  long-temps.  Voyla  le  compliment  que  fit  cet
homme  a  fon  abord,  plus  aymable  cent  fois  que  ces
mines,  &  ces  grands  abaiffemens  de  la  Cour  qui  n'ont
bien  fouuent  que  de  l'apparence.


1 646J  R  EL  A  TION  OF  1645  -46  111

and  not  one  of  them  has  erred  this  year  in  his
reckoning.  Besides  the  evening  and  the  morning
prayers,  they  assemble  every  Sunday  in  a  cabin  in
order  to  sing  some  spiritual  Hymns,  and  to  recite,
all  together,  their  rosaries.  If  there  is  among  them  a
good  speaker,  he  incites  the  rest  to  obey  him  who  has
made  all,  and  to  give  up  their  former  superstitions.

All  winter,  they  console  themselves  in  the  hope
which  they  have  of  coming  to  confess  and  receive
communion  in  the  Spring;  they  do  likewise  during
the  Summer,  preparing  themselves  to  come  and  see
us  in  the  Autumn ;  they  reveal  their  faults  with  an
admirable  candor.  [94]  One  might  truly  say  that
the  sin  of  Adam  has  not  reached  these  peoples,  so
far  are  they  removed  from  the  mischiefs  which  are
encountered  among  the  youngest  children.

Their  first  Captain,  named  Paul  de  Tamourat,  hav-
ing arrived  at  three  Rivers,  went  to  visit  the  Father
who  has  charge  of  that  residence,  and  said  to  him,
before  all  his  people :  ' '  My  Father,  shall  it  be  at
this  time,  then,  that  I  shall  receive  communion?
Thou  hast  always  refused  me  this  happiness;  thou
hast  put  me  off  from  Spring  to  Autumn ;  I  was  afraid
during  all  the  Summer  of  dying  before  they  had  con-
veyed to  my  lips  that  food  of  our  souls.  God  has
preserved  my  life;  now  that  I  am  here  again,  what
wilt  thou  say  now?  Do  not  grieve  me  longer."
Such  was  the  salutation  made  by  that  man  at  his
landing, — a  hundred  times  more  pleasing  than  those
airs  and  those  great  abasements  of  the  Court,  which
very  often  have  nothing  but  appearance.

The  wife  of  this  Captain  wastes  no  more  words
than  does  her  husband ;  she  brings  to  the  Father  her
two  daughters,  and  urges  him  with  all  her  power  to


112  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

La  femme  de  ce  Capitaine,  ne  perdit  non  plus  de
paroles  que  fon  mary :  elle  amene  au  Pere  fes  deux
filles,  le  preffe  tant  qu'elle  peut  d'accorder  a  la  mere,
&  aux  enfans  ce  pain  de  vie,  elle  demande  [95]  qu'on
l'inftruife,  ft  elle  ne  l'eft  pas  fuffifament. Vn  Same-
dy  au  foir,  le  Pere  l'ayant  fort  examinee  auec  quel-
ques  autres,  elles  creurent  que  c'eftoit  pour  Commu-
nier  le  landemain,  elles  viennent  done  a  la  Meffe  en
noftre  Chappelle,  fe  prefentent  a  vn  Pere  pour  les
confeffer: mais comme il n'entendoit point leur
langue,  il  les  renuoya. Elles  fe  tirent  a quartier,
entendent  deux  Meffes,  demeurent  en  la  Chappelle
iufques  a  Vefpres,  le  Pere,  qu'elles  attendoient,  &  qui
auoit  celebre  la  Meffe,  en  la  Paroilfe,  furuenant,  les
trouue les  mains iointes deuant l'Autel. II  leur
demande ce qu'elles  font  la,  nous  t'attendons,  mon
Pere, pour nous confeffer, & communier. Quoy
done  fit  le  Pere,  ne  fcauez  vous  pas  bien  qu'on  ne
communie  pas  apres  auoir  mange?  (il  croyoit  qu'elles
vinffent  de  leur  cabanes)  nous  le  fcauons  bien,  ref-
pondent-elles,  nous  n'auons  point  mang6  depuis  hier
amidy:  nous  fommes  icy  depuis  le  matin,  efperans
toufiours  que  tu  nous  ferois  communier. Mais  pour-
quoy  demeuriez  vous  fi  long-temps,  voyas  que  ie  ne
venois  pas:  helas!  dift  vne  bonne  vefue,  nous  y  re-
fterions  volontiers  tout  le  iour  pour  [96]  remercier  le
bon  Iesvs  des  graces  qu'il  nous  a  fait:  nous  y  vien-
drons  fouuent,  nous  ne  fcaurions  nous  ennuyer  en  la
maifon des  prieres. Le Pere  touche iufques  aux
larmes  leur  accorda  le  lendemain  matin,  ce  qu'elles
fouhaittoient  auec  tant  d'ardeur.

Ayant  donne  iour  a  quelques-vns  de  fe  venir  con-
feffer, vne  bonne  femme  fe  vint  excufer  demandant


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  113

grant  the  mother  and  the  children  that  bread  of  life ;
she  asks  [95]  to  be  instructed,  if  she  is  not  sufficient-
ly so.  One  Saturday  evening,  the  Father  having
thoroughly  examined  her,  along  with  some  others,
they  supposed  that  it  was  in  order  to  receive  Com-
munion the  next  day:  they  came,  accordingly,  to
Mass  in  our  Chapel,  and  presented  themselves  to  a
Father  to  confess  them ;  but,  as  he  did  not  under-
stand their  language,  he  sent  them  away.  They
withdraw  to  one  side,  hear  two  Masses,  and  remain
in  the  Chapel  until  Vespers.  The  Father  whom
they  were  expecting,  and  who  had  celebrated  Mass
in  the  Parish  church,  coming  in,  finds  them  with  their
hands  joined  before  the  Altar;  he  asks  them  what
they  do  there.  "  We  are  awaiting  thee,  my  Father,
for  confession,  and  to  receive  communion."  "  What
then?'  said  the  Father,  "do  you  not  know  well
that  one  does  not  receive  communion  after  having
eaten  ? '  (He  supposed  that  they  came  from  their  cab-
ins.) "  We  know  it  well,"  they  answer;  "  we  have
not  eaten  since  yesterday  at  noon;  we  have  been
here  since  morning,  continually  hoping  that  thou
wouldst  have  us  receive  communion."  "  But  why
did  you  stay  so  long,  seeing  that  I  did  not  come? '
"  Alas!  "  said  a  good  widow,  "we  would  gladly  stay
here  all  day,  in  order  [96]  to  thank  the  good  Jesus
for  the  favors  which  he  has  granted  us.  We  will
come  here  often ;  we  cannot  grow  weary  in  the
house  of  prayers."  The  Father,  touched  even  to
tears,  granted  them  the  next  morning  what  they
desired  with  so  much  ardor.

Having  set  a  day  for  some  to  come  and  confess,  a
good  woman  came  to  excuse  herself,  asking  a  longer
term in order  to prepare herself. ' '  How  ? ' said


114  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29


vn  plus  long  terme  pour  fe  preparer.  Comment,  dift
le  Pere,  ne  fcauois  tu  pas  bien  des  hyer  que  tu  deb-
uois  te  confeffer  auiourdhuy?  ne  t'ays-je  pas  veu
quafi  toute  I'apr6difn6e  a  la  Chappelle!  qu'as-tu  fait
pendant  tout  ce  temps-la?  I 'ay  penfe\  repond-elle,  a
mes  pechez,  i'y  penfay  hier  quafi  tout  le  iour,  i'y
veux  penfer  iufques  a  demain,  &  apres  tout  peut-
eftre  que  ie  ne  fairay  pas  comme  il  faut.  Ie  vou-
drois  bien  que  mon  coeur  ne  fut  plus  mechant  du
tout,  ie  fuis  bien  marrye  d'auoir  fafche  Dieu.  Au
refte  comme  ces  bonnes  ames  ne  font  point  de  diffi-
culty de  s'ouurir,  fes  plus  gros  pechez  efkoient  d'a-
uoir efte"  trop  trifle,  voyant  quelques-vns  moins  por-
tez  a  prier  Dieu,  de  s'eftre  voulu  fafcher  contre  eux.
Elle  fe  confeffa  auec  vne  candeur  [97]  rauiffante :  &
comme  le  Pere  luy  donnoit  vne  penitence  trop  legere
a  fon  gre,  elle  s'en  plaignit,  &  luy  dift:  ie  ne
laifferay  pas  d'adioufter  d'autres  prieres;  en  effet
elle  demeura  plus  d'vne  heure  a  l'Eglife,  apres  fa
confeffion.

Elle  a  gagne*  fon  mari  a  Iesvs-Christ,  cet  homme
qui  eftoit  fort  rude  auant  fon  Baptefme,  eft  deuenu
docile  &  pliable  comme  vn  enfant:  la  benediction
du  Ciel  eft  veritablement  fur  cette  famille,  cette
bonne  femme  amena  fa  fille  au  Pere  qui  l'auoit
baptifee,  pour  receuoir  fa  benediction:  cet  enfant  qui
n'a  que  trois  ans  portoit  vn  petit  pacquet  fur  fa  tefte.
La  mere  prit  la  parole,  voicy  mon  Pere,  ta  petite
fille  qui  te  fait  ce  prefent,  pour  te  faire  fouuenir  de
prier  Dieu  pour  elle,  arm  qu'il  luy  donne  de  l'efprit
pour  bien  retenir  les  prieres:  c'eftoit  vne  peau  de
Cerf,  gentiment  accommodee  que  le  Pere  rendit  a
P enfant  pour  luy  faire  vne  petite  robe. La  veritable


1646J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  115

the  Father,  "  didst  thou  not  know  well,  as  early  as
yesterday,  that  thou  wert  to  confess  to-day?  Did  I
not  see  thee  nearly  all  the  afternoon  at  the  Chapel?
What  hast  thou  done  during  all  that  time?"  "I
have  been  thinking,"  she  answers,  "  of  my  sins;  I
thought  of  them  yesterday,  nearly  all  the  day.  I
intend  to  think  of  them  even  till  to-morrow ;  and,
after  all,  perhaps  I  shall  not  do  as  I  ought.  I  would,
indeed,  that  my  heart  were  no  longer  wicked  at  all ;
I  am  very  sorry  to  have  displeased  God."  However,
as  these  good  souls  make  no  difficulty  in  revealing
themselves,  her  greatest  sin  was,  that  she  had  been
too  sad  at  seeing  certain  persons  less  inclined  to  pray
to  God, —  so  that  she  had  allowed  herself  to  be  angry
at  them.  She  confessed  with  a  charming  candor;
[97]  and,  when  the  Father  gave  her  a  penance  too
light  to  suit  her,  she  complained  of  it,  and  said  to
him,  "  I  will  not  fail  to  add  other  prayers;  "  indeed,
she  remained  more  than  an  hour  at  the  Church,  after
her  confession.

She  has  gained  her  husband  to  Jesus  Christ.
This  man,  who  was  very  rough  before  his  Baptism,
has  become  docile  and  pliable  as  a  child :  the  bless-
ing of  Heaven  is  truly  upon  this  family.  The  good
woman  brought  her  daughter  to  the  Father  who  had
baptized  her,  in  order  to  receive  his  blessing;  this
child,  who  is  only  three  years  old,  carried  a  little
bundle  on  her  head.  The  mother  began  to  speak:
"  Here,  my  Father,  is  thy  little  girl,  who  makes
thee  this  present,  in  order  to  remind  thee  to  ask  God
for  her,  that  he  may  give  her  sense  to  retain  the
prayers  well."  It  was  a  Deerskin,  neatly  prepared,
which  the  Father  gave  back  to  the  child  in  order  to
make  a  little  dress  for  her. True  innocence  is  among


116  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

innocence  eft  parmy  ces  peuples,  ie  dirois  volontiers
que  dans  la  France  on  deuient  ignorant  pour  trop
fcauoir,  &  que  pour  trop  vouloir  on  ne  veut  rien :  car
en  verite  ce  qu'o  pourfuit  auec  tant  de  feu,  n'eft
rien  qu'vn  neant.

[98]  La  belle-mere  de  cette  bonne  femme,  paffe
encore  fa  bru  en  deuotion,  en  candeur,  &  en  piete\
Le  fainCt  Efprit  luy  a  donne  vne  telle  aff edtion  pour
conferuer  la  purete  de  fon  cceur,  qu'elle  ne  manque
pas  de  fe  cofeffer  tous  les  huidt  iours,  non  pas  aux
prefixes:  car  elle  n'en  a  point  dans  ces  grands  bois;
mais  au  Souuerain  Pontife.  La  nuidt  qui  precede  le
Dimanche,  lors  que  tout  le  monde  eft  dans  vn  pro-
fond  fommeil,  elle  fe  leue,  fe  met  a  genoux,  examine
fa  confcience,  &  puis  elle  fait  fa  confeffion  a  Dieu,  en
la  mefme  facon  qu'elle  fait  deuant  vn  Pere:  elle  de-
mande  pardon,  elle  fait  vne  penitence,  elle  prie  Dieu
qu'il  luy  face  la  grace  de  fe  fouuenir  de  toutes  fes
offenfes  pour  les  dire  puis  apres  a  fon  confeffeur.
On  ne  croiroit  pas  auec  quels  fentimens  elle  les
explique:  ie  fuis,  dit-elle,  par  fois  vne  vraye  chienne,
ie  fais  plufieurs  actions  fans  diriger  mon  intention.
Ie  vay  querir  du  bois  fans  penfer  que  c'eft  pour  Dieu.
Ie  fuis  comme  ces  pourceaux  qui  grongnent  inceffa-
ment:  car  ie  me  plainds  par  fois  d'vn  mal  de  tefte
qui  me  trauaille,  &  qui  me  fait  fouffrir  affez  fouuent.

Elle  a  vne  fi  grande  tendreffe  de  confcience,  [99]
que  la  feule  ombre  du  peche  luy  fait  peur.  L'eftime
qu'elle  fait  des  perfonnes  qui  luy  parlent  de  Dieu,  &
qui  l'inftruifent,  eft  fi  grande,  que  vous  diriez  qu'elle
ecoute  vn  Ange,  quand  elle  prefte  l'oreille  a  vn
Pere :  c'eft  ce  qui  la  rend  zelee  pour  le  falut  de  fes
compatriotes,  notament  de  fa  famille,  qui  eft  affez
nombreufe.


1 646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  117

these  peoples:  I  would  fain  say  that  in  France  one
becomes  ignorant  through  knowing  too  much,  and
that  for  wishing  too  much,  one  wishes  nothing;  for,
in  truth,  what  is  pursued  with  so  much  ardor  is  only-
nothingness.

[98J  The  mother-in-law  of  that  good  woman  sur-
passes even  her  daughter-in-law  in  devotion,  in  can-
dor, and  in  piety.  The  holy  Ghost  has  given  her
such  a  desire  to  preserve  the  purity  of  her  heart,
that  she  fails  not  to  confess  every  week, —  not  to  the
priests,  for  she  has  none  of  them  in  those  great
woods,  but  to  the  Sovereign  Pontiff.  In  the  night
which  precedes  Sunday,  when  every  one  is  in  pro-
found sleep,  she  rises,  kneels,  examines  her  con-
science, and  then  makes  her  confession  to  God  in  the
same  way  that  she  does  before  a  Father ;  she  asks
pardon,  she  does  a  penance,  she  asks  God  that  he
may  give  her  the  grace  to  recall  all  her  offenses,
in  order  to  tell  them  afterward  to  her  confessor.  One
would  not  believe  with  what  feelings  she  explains
them;  "  I  am,"  she  says,  "  sometimes  a  very  dog;  I
do  many  acts  without  directing  my  intention :  I  go  to
fetch  wood,  without  thinking  that  it  is  for  God.  I
am  like  those  swine  which  incessantly  grunt ;  for  I
sometimes  complain  of  a  headache  which  worries
me,  and  which  very  often  makes  me  suffer."

She  has  so  great  a  tenderness  of  conscience  [99]
that  the  mere  shadow  of  sin  makes  her  afraid.  The
esteem  in  which  she  holds  persons  who  speak  to  her
of  God,  and  who  instruct  her,  is  so  great  that  you
would  say  that  she  listens  to  an  Angel,  when  she
lends  ear  to  a  Father ;  this  is  what  renders  her  zealous
for  the  salvation  of  her  fellow-countrymen, —  nota-
bly of  her  own  family,  which  is  quite  numerous.


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

Son  mari  n'a  pas  moins  de  ferueur,  il  fait  plus
pour  la  gloire  de  Noftre  Seigneur,  dans  fon  pays,
que  le  plus  zele  Miffionnaire  de  la  Nouuelle-France.
II  n'y  a  pas  long-temps  que  de  ieunes  frippons  Algon-
quins,  eftans  entrez  fur  le  foir  dans  fa  cabane,  pour
badiner  &  cajoler,  il  les  aduertift  doucement  de  leur
deuoir:  mais  voyant  qu'ils  ne  s'arreftoient  point  pour
fa  douceur,  il  leur  dift  d'vn  ton  fee:  fortez  d'icy,  &
apprenez  qu'il  n'y  a  perfonne  en  ma  cabane  qui  ne
croye,  &  qui  ne  craigne  Dieu.  Les  paroles  rudes
font  parmy  les  Sauuages,  ce  que  les  baftonnades
fairoient  en  France  parmy  les  infolens.

La  bonne  vie,  &  le  zele  de  ces  nouueaux  Chre-
ftiens,  repand  la  Foy  de  Iesvs-Christ,  bien
auant  dans  les  nations  plus  eloigners.  Des  perfonnes
qui  n'ont  [ioo]  iamais  oiiy  parler  aucun  Pere  de  noftre
compagnie,  nous  demandent  le  faindt  Baptefme.
Quand  nous  les  voulons  inftruire,  nous  trouuons
qu'ils  ont  la  connoiffance  de  nos  myfteres,  &  qu'ils
fcauent  les  prieres,  &  l'exercice  d'vn  bon  Chreftien:
cela  fans  mentir,  eft  de  grande  confolation.

Vn  Capitaine  d'vn  pays  plus  haut  que  les  Attika-
megues,  s'eft  venu  prefenter  au  Pere,  auec  toute  fa
famille,  pour  apprendre  de  fa  bouche  ce  dont  il  auoit
oiiy  parler  dans  les  grands  bois  de  fon  pays.  II  eft
demeure  tout  exprez  trois  fepmaines,  aupres  de  luy,
pour  fe  faire  inftruire.  On  n'a  baptife  que  fa  fille
aifnee,  a  laquelle  on  a  donne  commiffion  d'apprendre
les  prieres  a  fon  pere,  a  fon  mari,  &  atous  ceux  de  fa
cabane.  Deux  Canots  font  arriuez  d'vne  autre  nation
dont  nous  n'auons  point  encore  oiiy  parler:  ce  font
des  vifages  nouueaux  qui  paroiflent  pour  la  premiere
fois  parmy  les  Francois. Si  toft  qu'ils  ont  mis  pied


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -46  119


Her  husband  has  no  less  fervor ;  he  does  more  for
the  glory  of  Our  Lord  in  his  country  than  the  most
zealous  Missionary  of  New  France.  Not  long  ago,
some  young  rogues  of  Algonquins,  having  entered
his  cabin  toward  evening,  in  order  to  banter  and
cajole,  he  warned  them  gently  of  their  duty ;  but,
seeing  that  they  did  not  stop  for  his  gentleness,  he
said  to  them  in  a  dry  tone:  "  Go  out  from  here,  and
learn  that  there  is  no  one  in  my  cabin  who  does  not
believe,  and  who  does  not  fear  God."  Severe  words
effect  among  the  Savages  what  good  drubbings  would
do  in  France  among  the  insolent.

The  good  life  and  the  zeal  of  these  new  Christians
spread  the  Faith  of  Jesus  Christ  far  within  the
more  distant  nations.  Persons  who  have  [100]  never
heard  any  Father  of  our  society  speak,  ask  us  for
holy  Baptism.  When  we  wish  to  instruct  them,  we
find  that  they  have  knowledge  of  our  mysteries,  and
that  they  know  the  prayers  and  the  practice  of  a
good  Christian ;  that,  without  deceit,  is  a  source  of
great  consolation.

A  Captain,  from  a  country  above  the  Attikamegues,
came  to  present  himself  to  the  Father,  with  his  whole
family,  in  order  to  learn  from  his  lips  that  which  he
had  heard  mentioned  in  the  great  woods  of  his  own
country.  He  remained  three  weeks  near  him,  ex-
pressly in  order  to  be  instructed.  We  baptized  only
his  eldest  daughter,  whom  we  commissioned  to  teach
the  prayers  to  her  father,  to  her  husband,  and  to  all
those  of  her  cabin.  Two  Canoes  have  arrived  from
another  nation  of  which  we  have  not  yet  heard  men-
tion ;  these  are  new  faces,  which  appear  for  the  first
time  among  the  French.  As  soon  as  they  landed,
they  came to seek  "  the one who prays  and who


120  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

a  terre,  ils  font  venus  chercher  celuy  qui  prie,  &  qui
initruit :  c'eft  le  nom  que  les  Eftrangers  donnent  aux
Peres,  afin,  difoient-ils,  d'apprendre  le  chemin  du
Ciel:  cette  enuie  leur  a  [101]  pris  pour  auoir  veu  &
entendu  quelques  Sauuages,  qui  ont  communication
auec  nos  Neophytes.  Dieu  eft  la  bonte  mefme,  qu'il
foit  beny  a  iamais:  comme  il  connoit  qu'il  n'y  a  force
humaine  qui  puiffe  courir  ces  grandes  forefts,  &
ramaffer  ces  pauures  brebis  6garees,  &  cachees  dans
des  montagnes,  dans  des  bois,  &  dans  des  froids  epou-
uentables,  il  les  touche  luy  mefme,  &  les  conduit
comme  par  la  main  aux  fources  de  la  vie,  qui  font
les  Sacrements  de  fon  Eglife.

De  trente  cinq  Canots  qui  font  venus  de  ces  con-
trees,  on  n'a  baptife  que  37.  ou  38.  perfonnes.  On
ne  fcauroit  croire :  combien  il  eft  important  de  ietter
de  folides  fondements  de  la  Foy.

Entre  ces  Canots  il  en  eft  venu  quelques-vns  d'vne
nation  appellee  Kapiminakb'etiik,  lefquels  nous  ont
affurez  que  leurs  voifms  auoient  efte"  vifitez  par  des
Sauuages,  qui  iamais  n'ont  paru  en  ces  contrees,  &
qui  iamais  n'auoient  veu  aucune  des  marchandifes
qu'on  apporte  en  ce  nouueau  monde.  Ils  difent
plufieurs  chofes  de  la  multitude  des  hommes  de  leur
nation,  &  de  leurs  f aeons  de  faire:  nous  en  appren-
drons  des  nouuelles  auec  [102]  le  temps :  ils  font  fujets
du  grand  Dieu,  ils  le  viendront  reconnoiftre  auffi  bien
que  les  autres,  il  n'y  a  point  de  clairon  fi  retentiffant
que  celuy  de  l'Euangile,  il  faut  qu'il  fe  face  entendre
aux  quatre  coins  du  monde.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  121

instructs," — that  is  the  name  which  the  Strangers
give  to  the  Fathers, —  for  the  purpose,  they  said,  of
learning  the  way  to  Heaven.  This  desire  has  [101]
possessed  them  through  having  seen  and  heard  some
Savages  who  have  communication  with  our  Neo-
phytes. God  is  goodness  itself;  may  he  be  blessed
forever.  As  he  knows  that  there  is  no  human
might  which  can  scour  these  great  forests  and  gather
up  these  poor  sheep, — gone  astray  and  hidden  in
the  mountains,  in  the  woods,  and  in  frightful  cold, —
he  touches  them  himself,  and  leads  them,  as  by
his  hand,  to  the  sources  of  life,  which  are  the  Sacra-
ments of  his  Church.

Of  thirty-five  Canoes  which  have  come  from
those  regions,  we  have  baptized  only  37  or  38  per-
sons. One  cannot  believe  how  important  it  is  to  lay
solid  foundations  for  the  Faith.

Among  these  Canoes,  there  have  come  some  from
a  nati'  n  called  Kapiminakwetiik,  who  have  assured
us  that  their  neighbors  had  been  visited  by  Savages
who  have  never  appeared  in  these  regions,  and  who
had  never  seen  any  of  the  wares  which  are  brought
into  this  new  world.  They  relate  many  things
concerning  the  multitude  of  the  men  of  their  nation,
and  of  their  customs;  we  shall  learn  tidings  of  them,
in  course  of  [102]  time.  They  are  subject  to  the
great  God;  they,  as  well  as  the  others,  will  come  to
acknowledge  him.  There  is  no  bugle  so  resonant
as  that  of  the  Gospel ;  it  must  make  itself  heard  in
the  four  corners  of  the  world.


122  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29


CHAPITRE  VII.

DE LA MISSION DE SAINCTE CROIX, A TADOUSSAC.

CE  que  nous  appellons  Tadouffac,  eft  nome  des
Sauuages  Sadilege,  c'eft  vn  lieu  plein  de
rochers  &  fi  hauts,  qu'on  diroit  que  les  Geans
qui  vouluret  autresfois  combatre  les  Cieux,  auroient
iette  en  cet  endroit,  les  fondemens  de  leur  efcalade.
Le  grand  fleuue  S.  Laurens  fait  quafi  dans  ces  rochers
vne  baye  ou  vne  ance  qui  fert  de  port  &  d'affeurance
aux  nauires  qui  voguent  en  ces  contrees :  nous  appel-
los  cette  baye  Tadouffac.  La  nature  la  rendue  fort
commode  pour  l'ancrage  des  vaiffeaux;  elle  la  baftie
en  rond  &  mife  a  l'abry  de  tous  les  vents:  on  comp-
toit  autresfois  [103]  fur  les  riues  de  ce  port,  trois
cens  guerriers  ou  chaff eurs  effedtifs,  qui  faifoient
enuiron  auec  leurs  families  douze  ou  quinze  cens
ames.  Ce  petit  peuple  eftoit  fort  fuperbe ;  mais  Dieu
le  voulant  difpofer  a  receuoir  fon  Fils,  l'a  humilie
par  des  maladies  qui  l'ont  quafi  tout  extermin6:  ces
coups  neantmoins  font  fauorables,  pendant  que  fa
iuftice  maffacroit  les  corps  au  grand  deluge  du
monde,  fa  mifericorde  alloit  ramaffant  les  ames  peni-
tentes:  nous  pourrions  dire  le  mefme  auec  propor-
tion, que  fa  colere  mettant  a  mort  vne  partie  des
Sauuages  par  les  guerres  &  par  les  epidimies,  fa
bonte  donnoit  aux  autres  vne  vie  qu'il  faudroit
chercher  au  trauers  de  mille  morts.

C'eft  ce  que  nous  auons  veu  de  nos  yeux:  car  ces


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  123


CHAPTER  VII.

OF THE HOLY CROSS MISSION AT TADOUSSAC.

WHAT  we  call  Tadoussac  is  named  by  the  Sav-
ages Sadilege;  it  is  a  place  full  of  rocks,
and  so  high,  that  one  might  say  that  the
Giants  who  formerly  sought  to  combat  the  Heavens,
might  have  laid  in  this  place  the  foundations  of  their
escalade.  The  great  river  St.  Lawrence  makes,  as
it  were,  in  these  rocks  a  bay  or  cove,  which  serves  as
a  secure  harbor  for  the  ships  which  sail  in  these
regions;  we  call  this  bay  Tadoussac.9  Nature  has
rendered  it  very  convenient  for  the  anchorage  of
vessels ;  she  has  formed  it  like  a  circle,  and  sheltered
it  from  all  the  winds.  There  were  reckoned,  for-
merly, [103]  on  the  shores  of  this  port,  three  hun-
dred warriors  or  effective  hunters,  who  made  with
their  families  about  twelve  or  fifteen  hundred  souls.
This  little  people  was  very  proud ;  but  God,  wishing
to  incline  it  to  receive  his  Son,  has  humbled  it  by
diseases  which  have  almost  entirely  exterminated  it.
These  blows,  nevertheless,  are  beneficent ;  while  his
justice  was  slaying  bodies  at  the  great  deluge  of  the
world,  his  mercy  continued  to  gather  up  the  peni-
tent souls.  We  might  say  relatively  the  same, —
that,  his  wrath  putting  to  death  a  part  of  the  Sav-
ages by  wars  and  epidemics,  his  kindness  gave  to
others  a  life  which  must  be  sought  amid  a  thousand
deaths.

That  is  what  we  have  seen  with  our  own  eyes :  for


124  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.  29

pauures  gens  battus  de  quatite*  de  maladies  &  recrus
des  fatigues  de  la  guerre,  fe  font  enfin  iettez  au  port
de  la  vie  &  de  la  paix :  ils  fe  font  rendus  a  I  E  s  v  s  -
Christ,  qui  f emble  les  vouloir  repeupler  par  vn
bon  nombre  de  Sauuages  qui  abordet  la  de  diuers
endroits,  pour  voir  de  leurs  yeux  ce  qu'ilsapprennent
par  leurs  oreilles  qu'il  y  a  des  hommes  baftis  comme
eux  qui  prechent  &  qui  publient  [104]  les  grandeurs
de  Dieu,  &  qui  enfeignent  le  chemin  du  Ciel.  II
faut  confeffer  que  depuis  cinq  ans  ces  bons  Neophytes
ont  excelle  en  ferueur  &  en  deuotion,  mais  voulant
cette  ann6e  courir  trop  vifte,  ils  ont  bronche,  exce-
dans  du  colte  qu'on  n'auroit  pas  attendu.

Ie  penfe  auoir  leu  autresfois  que  le  fieur  de  Ioin-
uille  qui  a  efcrit  la  vie  de  S.  Louys,  fe  treuuant  dans
vne  grande  tempefte  fur  la  mer,  fes  foldats  &  fes
mattelots  crians  que  le  vaifTeau  alloit  perir,  fe  iette-
rent  a  fes  pieds  &  luy  demanderent  l'abfolution  de
leurs  pechez:  mais  penfez-vous,  leur  dift-il,  que  i'aye
ce  pouuoir?  Qui  l'aura  done,  Monfieur,  repondent-
ils,  puis  qu'il  n'y  a  point  de  Preflre  dans  le  nauire?
A  cette  repartie,  il  eleua  fa  voix:  Or  fus  ie  vous
abfous  de  tout  le  pouuoir  que  i'en  ay,  ie  ne  fcay  pas
fi  i'en  ay,  mais  fi  i'en  ay,  vous  eftes  abfous.  Cette
bonne  fimplicite  Gauloife,  quoy  que  iointe  auec  vn
peu  trop  d'ignorance,  pouuoit  eftre  agreable  a  Dieu,
pour  l'humilite  qui  l'accompagnoit.  Les  Sauuages
de  Tadouffac  font  tombez  cet  hyuer  dans  le  mefme
erreur :  fe  voyans  dans  leurs  grands  bois  eloignez  de
leur  Pere,  &  fouhaitans  d'ailleurs  auec  [105]  paffion
d'entendre  la  faindte  Meffe,  l'vn  d'eux  fe  prefenta
pour  en  exprimer  les  faindtes  ceremonies,  auec  tout
l'appareil &  toute la deuotion que peut auoir  vn


1646J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  125

these  poor  people,  assailed  by  many  diseases,  and
worn  out  with  the  fatigues  of  war,  have  finally  thrown
themselves  into  the  haven  of  life  and  peace.  They
have  given  themselves  up  to  Jesus  Christ,  who
seems  to  wish  to  repeople  this  tribe  with  a  goodly
number  of  Savages  who  land  there  from  various
places,  in  order  to  see  with  their  own  eyes  that  which
they  learn  with  their  ears, — that  there  are  men
formed  like  them,  who  preach  and  who  publish  [104]
the  greatness  of  God,  and  who  teach  the  way  to
Heaven.  It  must  be  admitted  that,  for  five  years,
these  good  Neophytes  have  excelled  in  fervor  and  in
devotion;  but  wishing,  this  year,  to  run  too  fast,
they  have  stumbled, — going  to  excess  in  a  direction
that  one  would  not  have  expected.

I  think  that  I  once  read  this  about  the  sieur  de
Joinville,  who  wrote  the  life  of  St.  Louys.10  Being
in  a  great  storm  on  the  sea,  his  soldiers  and  sailors,
crying  out  that  the  vessel  was  about  to  perish,  cast
themselves  at  his  feet,  and  asked  him  for  absolution
from  their  sins.  "  But  think  you,"  said  he  to  them,
"that  I  have  this  power?'  "Who  will  have  it,
then,  Monsieur,"  they  answer,  "  since  there  is  no
Priest  in  the  ship?"  At  this  reply,  he  raised  his
voice:  "  Well  then,  I  absolve  you  with  all  the  power
that  I  have  for  it ;  I  know  not  whether  I  have  any,
but,  if  I  have  it,  you  are  absolved."  That  good
Gallic  simplicity,  though  joined  with  a  little  too
much  ignorance,  might  be  acceptable  to  God  for  the
humility  which  accompanied  it.  The  Savages  of
Tadoussac  have  fallen  this  winter  into  the  same
error;  seeing  themselves  in  their  great  forests,  at  a
distance  from  their  Father,  and  passionately  desir-
ing, moreover, [105] to hear holy Mass,  one of


126  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29

efprit  trop  feruent;  ce  n'eft  pas  tout,  le  defir  de  fe
confefler  les  preffant,  vne  femme  aag£e  voyant  que
les  hommes  ne  leur  preftoient  point  l'oreille,  fe
prefente  pour  exercer  cet  office.  Ce  zele  indifcret  fut
approuue"  de  quelques-vns,  auec  plus  de  fimplicite'  &
d'ignorance  que  de  Theologie:  mais  feulement  pour
les  perfonnes  de  fon  fexe.

De  cette  indifcretion  ils  paflent  a  vne  autre:  fi
quelqu'vn  faifoit  quelque  faute,  ils  le  faifoient  venir
publiquement  en  leur  affemblee,  &  apres  luy  auoir
reproche  fon  peche  deuant  tout  le  monde,  ils  le
fufligeoient  auec  vne  cruaute  qui  refTentoit  encor
fa  barbaric

Leur  ieufne  paffoit  les  deux  ou  trois  iours  fans
manger :  en  vn  mot  le  zele  fans  la  fcience  eft  vn  mau-
uais  guide.  Leur  ferueur  indifcrete  paffa  de  la  piete*
dans  la  police  exterieure :  ils  f e  vont  imaginer  que
pour  eftre  bons  Chreftiens,  ils  doiuent  viure  tout  a
fait  a  la  Francoife,  &  fur  cette  penfee  ils  font  les
polis,  ils  rendent  les  [106]  honneurs  a  leur  Capitaine
qu'ils  voyent  rendre  a  Mr  le  Gouuerneur  par  les  Fran-
cois, ils  font  vne  cabane  a  part  pour  prendre  leurs
repas,  ils  dreffent  des  tables,  ils  font  manger  les
hommes  enfemble,  &  les  femmes  a  part:  Et  comme
ils  auoient  remarque  que  les  Francois  ne  mangeoient
pas  tout  ce  qui  leur  eftoit  prefente,  ceux  qui  fer-
uoient  a  table,  ne  donnoient  pas  le  loifir  notamment
aux  femmes  de  prendre  fuffifamment  leur  refection ;
perfonne  cependant  ne  difoit  mot,  toutes  ces  fmgeries
paffoient  pour  des  myfteres.  Les  Sauuages  &  les
Francois  en  matiere  de  complimens  tiennent  les  deux
extremitez:  ceux-la  font  fades  &  ruftaux  dans  le  peu
de  refpedt  qu'ils  fe  portent  les  vns  aux  autres,  &  les


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  127

them  presented  himself,  in  order  to  express  its
sacred  ceremonies  with  all  the  solemn  preparation
and  all  the  devotion  that  an  over-fervent  mind  can
experience.  This  is  not  all;  the  desire  for  confes-
sion urging  them,  an  aged  woman,  seeing  that  the
men  did  not  lend  ear  to  them,  presents  herself  to  ex-
ercise that  office.  This  indiscreet  zeal  was  approved
by  some,  with  more  simplicity  and  ignorance  than
Theology, —  but  only  in  behalf  of  persons  of  her  own
sex.

From  this  indiscretion  they  passed  to  another :  if
any  one  committed  some  fault,  they  made  him  come
publicly  to  their  assembly;  and,  after  having
reproached  him  with  his  sin  before  all  the  people,
they  flogged  him  with  a  cruelty  which  still  savored
of  its  barbarism.

Their  fasting  covered  two  or  three  days  without
eating ;  in  a  word,  zeal  without  knowledge  is  a  bad
guide.  Their  indiscreet  fervor  passed  from  piety
into  external  discipline ;  they  begin  to  imagine  that,
in  order  to  be  good  Christians,  they  ought  to  live
altogether  in  the  French  fashion;  and,  upon  this
thought,  they  act  the  polite.  They  render  the  [106]
honors  to  their  Captain  which  they  see  rendered  to
Monsieur  the  Governor  by  the  French ;  they  make  a
cabin  apart,  in  which  to  take  their  meals;  they  set
up  tables ;  they  make  the  men  eat  together,  and  the
women  separately ;  and,  as  they  had  remarked  that
the  French  did  not  eat  all  that  was  offered  them,
those  who  served  at  table  did  not  give  the  leisure,
especially  to  the  women,  to  take  a  sufficient  meal.
No  one,  however,  said  a  word;  all  these  apish  tricks
passed  for  mysteries.  The  Savages  and  the  French,
in  the  matter  of  compliments,  hold  the  two  extremes :


128  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.29

Francis  font  importuns  dans  l'excez  de  leurs  cere-
monies, &  bien  fouuent  diffimulez  dans  les  trop  grands
tefmoignages  de  leur  amitie\  La  candeur  ruftique
eft  preferable  a  vne  feinte  courtoifie,  l'excez  ne  fut
iamais  bon  en  quoy  que  ce  foit:  fi  ces  bons  Neo-
phytes le  prennent,  ils  en  feront  bien-toft  las.

Le  Pere  qui  a  foin  de  cette  Miffion,  retournant  au
Printemps  pour  la  cultiuer,  trouua  vn  nouueau  peu-
ple:  il  eft  accueilly  [107]  auec  quantit6  de  reuerences
&  de  complimes ;  il  ne  treuue  plus  de  vifages  peints,
ny  de  cheueux  oints  ou  graiffez,  felon  leur  ancienne
couftume :  on  le  vient  receuoir  a  la  Francoife,  auec
vne  grace  &  vne  gentilleffe  qui  n'efloit  pas  des  plus
accomplies,  auffi  ne  faifoit-elle  que  de  naillre:  en  vn
mot,  il  treuue  que  ces  difciples  auoient  appris  trois  fois
plus  de  chofes  qu'il  ne  leur  en  auoit  enfeigne.  Quel-
ques  bonnes  femmes  difent  qu'elles  fe  font  con-
ferees; d'autres  qu'ils  ont  aflifte  alaMeffe;  tout  le
monde  affeure  qu'on  a  prie  en  public  &  en  particu-
lier  tout  le  temps  de  l'hyuer ;  chacun  rend  compte  de
fes  petites  deuotions,  &  le  pauure  Pere  bien  eftonne
commence  a  les  accufer  de  fuperbe,  il  reprend  leur
indifcretion,  il  leur  fait  entendre  la  griefuet6  de  leur
crime,  non  qu'il  ne  vid  bien  que  l'ignorance  &  la  fim-
plicite  couuroit  la  moitie  de  leurs  fautes,  mais  pour
leur  donner  vn  pref eruatif  pour  le  f utur :  ces  bones
gens  bien  eftonez  baiffent  la  tefte,  ils  s'en  vont  tous
a  la  Chappelle  pour  demander  pardon  a  Dieu :  celuy
qui  auoit  commence  cette  nouueaute,  prenant  la
parole  deuant  tous  les  autres,  s'ecrie:  Le  diable  m'a
[108]  feduit,  &  ie  vous  ay  trompez,  c'efloit  fait  de
nous,  fi  Dieu  ne  nous  eut  rappell6  au  bon  chemin  par
la  voix  de  noftre  Pere :  la  Foy  s'en  alloit  perdue  dans


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  129

the  former  are  insipid  and  boorish  in  the  little  respect
which  they  bear  for  one  another;  and  the  French
are  annoying  in  the  excess  of  their  ceremonies,  and
very  often  deceptive  in  the  too  great  demonstrations
of  their  friendship.  Rustic  candor  is  preferable  to  a
feigned  courtesy;  excess  was  never  good,  in  what-
ever it  be ;  if  these  good  Neophytes  adopt  it,  they
will  soon  be  weary  of  it.

The  Father  who  has  charge  of  this  Mission,  return-
ing in  the  Spring  to  cultivate  it,  found  a  new  people.
He  is  welcomed  [107]  with  many  bows  and  compli-
ments; he  finds  no  more  painted  faces,  or  hair
anointed  or  greased  according  to  their  former  cus-
tom ;  they  come  to  receive  him  in  the  French  fash-
ion, with  a  grace  and  a  politeness  which  was  not  the
most  accomplished,  as,  indeed,  it  was  but  newly
born ;  in  a  word,  he  finds  that  these  disciples  had
learned  three  times  as  many  things  as  he  had  taught
them.  Some  good  women  say  that  they  have  con-
fessed; others,  that  they  have  attended  Mass;  every
one  affirms  that  there  has  been  prayer,  in  public  and
in  private,  all  the  winter  season;  each  one  renders
account  of  his  little  devotions.  The  poor  Father,
much  astonished,  begins  to  accuse  them  of  arrogance ;
he  reproves  their  indiscretion,  he  makes  them  under-
stand the  seriousness  of  their  crime, —  not  that  he
did  not  plainly  see  that  ignorance  and  simplicity
covered  the  half  of  their  faults,  but  in  order  to  give
them  a  safeguard  for  the  future.  These  simple  peo-
ple, quite  astounded,  bow  their  heads;  they  all  go  to
the  Chapel  to  ask  pardon  of  God.  He  who  had  be-
gun that  innovation,  starting  to  speak  before  all  the
others,  exclaims :  ' '  The  devil  has  [  1 08]  led  me  astray,
and I  have  deceived  you;  it  was  all  over  with  us,  if


130  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29

TadoufTac,  &  nous  euffions  bien-toft  communique
noftre  venin  aux  nations  du  Nord  qui  nous  viennent
voir  &  que  nous  allons  vifiter:  comme  le  vent  fe  joiie
d'vne  paille,  ainfi  le  demon  nous  balotte  &  nous  fait
aller  ou  il  veut,  quand  nous  fommes  eloignez  de  nos
Pafteurs;  c'efl  moy  qui  luy  ay  prefte  l'oreille  le
beau  premier,  c'efl  moy  qui  vous  ay  empeftez,  mes
freres,  mon  crime  eft  fi  grand  que  ie  n'ofe  quafi  en
efperer  le  pardon,  chaffez  moy  de  l'Eglife,  ie  ne  fuis
pas  digne  d'y  rentrer:  le  Ciel  eft  ferme  pour  moy,
i'ay  trop  offenfe  celuy  qui  eft  mort  pour  nous,  que
faut-il  que  ie  face?  que  feray-je,  mon  Pere,  pour  de
fi  grands  pechez?  II  parloit  auec  tant  de  ferueur
qu'il  n'y  auoit  perfonne  en  cette  affemblee  qui  ne
fut  touch6;  les  larmes  couloient  de  leurs  yeux,  les
regrets  de  leur  cceur  parloient  vn  langage  bien  agre-
able  a  Dieu,  tous  demandoient  de  faire  penitence  de
leurs  pechez.  Le  Pere  leur  ayant  fait  comprendre
la  griefuete  de  leur  offence,  place  vne  Croix  en  vn  lieu
de  l'Eglife,  [109]  comme  on  fait  le  Vendredy  faindt,
&  leur  ordonne  d'aller  faire  amande  honorable  a
Iesvs-Christ,  en  fon  Image,  de  luy  demander
pardon,  &  de  protefter  folemnellement  qu'ils  ne  fe
laifferont  plus  iamais  aller  a  de  femblables  nou-
ueautez :  il  leur  commande  auffi  de  ieufner  a  la
facon  de  l'Eglife,  &  de  tranf porter  vne  grande  Croix
qu'ils  auoient  dreffee  proche  de  leurs  cabanes,  en
vn  lieu  plus  eminent  &  plus  decent,  afin  d'aller  la
tous  les  Vendredis  protefter  qu'ils  reconnoiffoient
Iesvs-Christ,  pour  leur  Sauueur  &  pour  leur
Redempteur.  Tout  cela  fut  bien-toft  execute,  mais
deuant  toute  autre  chofe,  ils  fe  confefferent  auec  vne
cadeur  admirable :  quelques-vns  portoient  de  petits


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  131

God  had  not  recalled  us  to  the  right  way  by  the  voice
of  our  Father.  The  Faith  was  going  to  destruction
in  Tadoussac,  and  we  would  soon  have  communicated
our  poison  to  the  nations  of  the  North,  who  come  to
see  us,  and  whom  we  go  to  visit.  As  the  wind  plays
with  a  straw,  so  the  demon  tosses  us  and  makes  us
go  where  he  will,  when  we  are  absent  from  our
Pastors.  I  am  the  one  who  listened  to  him  the  very
first;  it  is  I  who  infected  you,  my  brothers.  My
crime  is  so  great  that  I  hardly  dare  hope  for  its  par-
don;  drive  me  out  of  the  Church, —  I  am  not  worthy
to  return  to  it.  Heaven  is  closed  for  me, —  I  have
too  greatly  offended  him  who  has  died  for  us ;  what
must  I  do?  What  shall  I  do,  my  Father,  for  so  great
sins?'  He  spoke  with  so  much  fervor  that  there
was  no  one  in  that  assembly  who  was  not  touched ;
the  tears  flowed  from  their  eyes ;  the  sorrows  of  their
hearts  spoke  a  language  truly  agreeable  to  God, — all
asked  to  do  penance  for  their  sins.  The  Father,  hav-
ing caused  them  to  understand  the  gravity  of  their
offense,  places  a  Cross  in  a  space  of  the  Church,  [109]
as  is  done  on  good  Friday,  and  commands  them  to
go  and  make  honorable  amends  to  Jesus  Christ,
in  his  Image, — to  ask  his  pardon,  and  to  protest
solemnly  that  they  will  never  again  allow  themselves
to  follow  such  innovations.  He  commands  them
also  to  fast,  in  the  manner  of  the  Church ;  and  to
transfer  a  great  Cross,  which  they  had  set  up  near
their  cabins,  to  a  place  more  eminent  and  proper,  so
as  to  go  there  every  Friday  to  declare  that  they
acknowledged  Jesus  Christ  for  their  Savior  and
their  Redeemer.  All  that  was  soon  accomplished ;
but  before  everything  else,  they  made  confession
with an admirable candor. Some carried little


132  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

battos,  pour  fe  fouuenir  de  leurs  pechez:  d'autres  les
marquoiet  fur  les  grains  de  leur  Chappelet :  d'autres
les  efcriuoient  a  leur  mode  fur  de  petits  morceaux
d'6corce  d'arbre;  ils  donnoient  tous  des  indices  de
leurs  regrets,  &  de  leur  penitece.  La  Croix  que  le
Pere  leur  auoit  ordonne'  de  tranfporter,  auoit  bien
enuiron  trente  ou  trente-cinq  pieds  de  long:  le
Capitaine  la  voulut  porter  luy-mefme  fur  fes  efpaules,
il  affemble  fes  gens,  fait  [no]  prendre  les  armes  a
quelques-vns,  conduit  les  autres  en  la  Chappelle,  ou
il  leur  tint  ce  difcours.  Mes  freres,  vous  fcauez  que
nous  auons  erre  dedans  nos  deuotions,  &  que  noftre
peche  nous  rend  indignes  de  pardon :  mais  celuy  qui
a  efte  pour  nous  cloue"  en  vne  Croix,  eft  tout  plein
de  mifericorde,  ie  ne  perdray  iamais  l'efperance  que
i'ay  en  luy ;  fi  nous  auons  quitte  le  vray  chemin,  nous
y  fommes  rentrez,  ne  perdons  point  courage,  obeif-
fons  plus  fidelement  que  iamais.  Puis  fe  tournant
vers  quelques  Sauuages  du  Nord  non  encor  baptif ez :
Mes  freres,  leur  dift-il,  tous  ceux  qui  font  egarez,  ne
font  pas  perdus,  fi  noftre  peche  vous  a  fcandalifez,
que  noftre  penitence  vous  edifie,  &  vous  face  dire  en
voftre  pays  que  la  Foy  ny  la  Priere  ne  font  pas  ban-
nis  de  Tadouffac,  nous  ferons  auffi  fermes  en  la  Foy
que  iamais,  &  pour  moy  quand  vn  Ange  viendroit  du
Ciel  m'enfeigner  vne  doctrine  contraire  a  ce  que  le
Pere  nous  enfeigne,  ie  ne  le  croirois  pas.  Pour  vous
qui  portez  encor  vos  pechez  dans  voftre  ame,  faites
vous  bien- toft  baptif  er,  afin  que  nous  foyons  veritable-
ment  tous  freres,  &  que  nous  n'ayons  qu'vn  Pere  &
[hi]  vne  mefme  maifon  dans  le  Ciel.

Cela  dit,  il  charge  cette  grande  Croix  fur  fes  efpau-
les: la proceffion fe commence, ils marchent tous


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  133

sticks,  in  order  to  remember  their  sins ;  others  marked
them  on  the  beads  of  their  Rosaries;  others  wrote
them,  after  their  fashion,  on  small  pieces  of  the  bark
of  trees;  they  all  gave  indications  of  their  regret  and
penitence.  The  Cross  which  the  Father  had  ordered
them  to  transfer,  was  probably  about  thirty  or  thirty-
five  feet  long;  the  Captain  wished  to  bear  it  himself
on  his  shoulders.  He  assembles  his  people,  makes
[no]  some  take  arms,  and  leads  the  others  into  the
Chapel,  where  he  addresses  them  in  these  words:
"  My  brothers,  you  know  that  wre  have  erred  in  our
devotions,  and  that  our  sin  renders  us  unworthy  of
pardon ;  but  he  who  was  nailed  to  a  Cross  for  us  is
full  of  mercy, —  I  shall  never  lose  the  hope  that  I
have  in  him.  If  we  have  left  the  true  road,  we  have
returned  to  it;  let  us  not  lose  courage, —  let  us  obey
more  faithfully  than  ever."  Then  turning  toward
some  Savages  of  the  North,  not  yet  baptized,  "  My
brothers,"  said  he  to  them,  "  not  all  those  who  have
gone  astray  are  lost;  if  our  sin  has  scandalized  you,
may  our  penance  edify  you,  and  cause  you  to  say  in
your  own  country  that  the  Faith  and  Prayer  are  not
banished  from  Tadoussac.  We  shall  be  as  firm  in
the  Faith  as  ever;  and  as  for  me,  though  an  Angel
should  come  from  Heaven  to  teach  me  a  doctrine
contrary  to  what  the  Father  teaches  us,  I  would  not
believe  him.  As  for  you  who  still  bear  your  sins  in
your  souls,  do  you  soon  become  baptized, —  so  that
we  may  indeed  be  all  brothers,  and  that  we  may  have
but  one  Father  and  [in]  one  house  in  Heaven."

That  said,  he  loads  that  great  Cross  upon  his
shoulders:  the  procession  starts,  and  they  all  march,
two  by  two,  with  a  modesty  truly  Christian.  Hav-
ing arrived  at  the  place  where  this  Tree  which  has


134  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  29

deux  a  deux  auec  vne  modeftie  vrayement  Chre-
flienne.  Arriuez  au  lieu  oil  cet  Arbre  qui  a  porte"  le
fruidt  de  vie,  deuoit  eftre  plante,  ils  l'eleuent  &  le
placent  au  bruit  des  coups  d'arquebufades,  qu'ils
font  retentir  auec  vne  grande  allegreffe.  La  Croix
eftant  planted,  ils  fe  iettent  a  genoux,  adorent  le
Crucirie-  en  fon  Image,  &  pour  concluGon  le  Pere  leur
fait  entendre  que  pour  les  adtios  de  ciuilite  ou  de
police,  qu'ils  eftoient  libres  de  fuiure  leurs  idees,
pourueu  qu'elles  ne  cotrariaffent  point  a  la  loy  de
Dieu,  mais  que  les  ordres  de  Dieu  &  de  fon  Eglife
leur  deuoiet  eftre  a  iamais  inuiolables.

I'ay  defia  dit  que  c'eft  la  cou flume  des  Sauuages,
quand  quelqu'vn  a  quelque  fujet  de  trifleffe  ou  de
douleur,  ou  mefme  encor  de  colere,  qu'ils  luy  font
vn  prefent  pour  foulager  fon  cceur.  Le  Capitaine  de
Tadouffac,  voyant  bien  que  le  Pere  eiloit  trifle  &
afflige  de  leur  offenfe,  voulut  appaifer  fa  douleur  auec
cette  petite  harangue:  Mon  Pere,  ce  petit  prefent
vous  eft  fait  pour  tirer  du  fond  de  voflre  [112]  ame
toute  la  triflefle  que  vous  pourriez  auoir  conceue  de
nos  pechez  &  de  noflre  tromperie,  il  efluyera  toute
voflre  douleur,  &  pour  moy  ie  vous  affeure  que  ie
tiendray  la  main  qu'vn  chacun  marche  d'orefnauant
par  le  chemin  que  vous  nous  auez  monilre.  Si  quel-
qu'vn refufoit  de  toucher  le  prefent,  il  donneroit  a
entendre  qu'il  n'accorde  pas  ce  de  quoy  il  eft  requis,
le  meilleur  eft  de  le  prendre  &  de  1' employer  au  fou-
lagement  des  plus  pauures.  Ceux  qui  en  fuitte  de
cette  proceffion  eurent  le  bon-heur  de  s'approcher  de
la  faindte  Table,  s'y  preparerent  auec  la  priere  &
le  ieufne,  &  non  contens  de  fe  confefler  vne  fois,
ils  retournent ordinairement pour  la feconde  fois


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  135

borne  the  fruit  of  life  was  to  be  planted,  they  raise
it  and  put  it  in  position,  with  the  noise  of  arquebus
shots,  which  they  cause  to  resound  with  great  de-
light. The  Cross  being  planted,  they  fall  on  their
knees,  and  adore  the  Crucified  in  his  Image;  and,  in
conclusion,  the  Father  gives  them  to  understand
that,  as  for  acts  of  civility  or  of  social  discipline,
they  were  free  to  follow  their  own  ideas,  provided
they  should  not  oppose  the  law  of  God, — but  that
the  orders  of  God  and  of  his  Church  must  be  to
them  forever  inviolable.

I  have  already  said  that  it  is  the  custom  of  the
Savages,  when  any  one  has  some  cause  of  sadness
or  pain,  or  even  withal  of  anger,  for  them  to  make
him  a  present,  in  order  to  comfort  his  heart.  The
Captain  of  Tadoussac,  seeing  well  that  the  Father  was
sad  and  afflicted  by  their  offense,  undertook  to
appease  his  sorrow  with  this  little  harangue:  "  My
Father,  this  little  present  is  made  to  you,  in  order
to  draw  from  the  depth  of  your  [112]  soul  all  the
sadness  that  you  might  have  conceived  for  our  sins
and  for  our  deception ;  it  will  wipe  away  all  your  grief.
And,  as  for  me,  I  assure  you  that  I  will  take  care
that  each  one  shall  henceforth  walk  in  the  way  that
you  have  pointed  out  to  us."  If  one  refused  to  touch
the  present,  he  would  give  to  understand  that  he
does  not  grant  that  for  which  he  is  asked ;  the  best
way  is,  to  take  it  and  to  use  it  for  the  relief  of  the
very  poor.  Those  who,  after  this  procession,  had
the  happiness  to  approach  the  sacred  Table,  prepared
themselves  for  it  with  prayer  and  fasting ;  and,  not
content  with  confessing  once,  they  usually  returned
for  the  second  time,  a  few  days  after  their  first
confession,  "for  fear," they  said,  "lest  something


136  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

quelques  iours  apres  leur  premiere  confeffion,  de
peur,  difent-ils,  qu'il  ne  refte  quelque  chofe  par  oubly
dans  noftre  ame.  Cette  candeur  eft  fort  ordinaire
quafi  a  tous  les  Sauuages.

Vn  bon  Neophyte  ne  fe  potmant  contenir  apres  la
Communion,  difoit  ail  Pere :  mon  coeur  eft  tout  autre
qu'il  n'eftoit,  ie  fens  ie  ne  fcay  quelle  douceur,  ie
ne  fcay  quelle  ioye  que  ie  ne  puis  exprimer  de
parole,  deuant  la  Communion  i'eftois  [113]  comme  vn
petit  animal  renferme  dans  fon  trou  qui  n'en  ofe
fortir,  il  fe  prefente,  il  fort  a  demy,  mais  la  peur  le
fait  relancer  dans  fa  taniere :  voila  comme  i'eftois
deuant  que  d'auoir  receu  ce  mets  facre,  la  confeffion
auoit  calme  mon  cceur/  mais  il  n'ofoit  fortir,  la
crainte  &  l'affeurance  le  partageoient,  fi  toft  que  mon
Sauueur  l'a  vifite,  il  a  brife  tous  les  obftacles,  il  m'a
mis  en  liberte,  vous  diriez  qu'il  n'eft  plus  dedans
moy,  qu'il  vole  dedans  l'air  tout  preft  de  faire  la
volonte  de  Dieu,  en  quoy  que  ce  foit.

Vne  femme  defia  aagee  a  monftre  ie  ne  fcay  quoy
de  plus  haut  que  le  commun  dedans  fes  deuotions :
fa  ferueur  luy  fit  apprendre  en  vne  demie  heure  vne
Oraifon  affez  logue  qu'on  leur  fait  faire  apres  la  Com-
munion, a  peine  l'eut-on  proferee  deux  fois,  qu'elle
la  recita  de  mot  a  mot,  &  la  fit  apprendre  aux  autres:
elle  a  vn  extreme  defir  de  fcauoir  tout  ce  qu'il  faut
faire  pour  contenter  Dieu,  elle  fort  de  fa  cabane  &
fe  retire  quelquesfois  a  l'ecart  pour  faire  fa  priere,
fon  cceur  parle  vn  langage  que  perfonne  ne  luy  a
appris:  Vous  fcauez,  dit-elle,  6  mon  Dieu,  que  ie
n'ayme  que  vous,  que  tout  ce  qui  eft  fur  la  [114]
terre,  ne  m'eft  rien,  vous  feul  connoiffez  l'eftonne-
ment  &  la  ioye  que  i'ay  de  ce  que  vous  m'auez  donne


164GJ  RELATION  OF  1645-46  137

remain,  through  forgetfulness,  in  our  souls."  This
candor  is  very  usual  with  nearly  all  the  Savages.

A  good  Neophyte,  unable  to  contain  himself  after
the  Communion,  said  to  the  Father:  "  My  heart  is
quite  other  than  it  was ;  I  feel  an  indescribable  sweet-
ness, an  indescribable  joy,  that  I  cannot  express  in
speech.  Before  the  Communion,  I  was  [113]  like  a
little  animal  shut  up  in  its  hole,  not  daring  to  come
out  of  it, —  it  appears,  it  comes  out  half  way,  but
fear  causes  it  to  dart  back  into  its  den ;  I  was  like
that,  before  I  had  received  that  sacred  food.  Confes-
sion had  calmed  my  heart,  but  it  dared  not  come
out, —  fear  and  confidence  divided  it.  As  soon  as
my  Savior  visited  it,  he  broke  all  the  obstacles,
he  set  me  at  liberty.  You  would  say  that  it  is  no
longer  within  me, —  that  it  flies  in  the  air,  all  ready
to  do  the  will  of  God,  in  whatever  it  be."

A  woman  already  old  has  shown  something  strange-
ly above  the  common  in  her  devotions:  her  fervor
caused  her  to  learn  in  half  an  hour  a  very  long
Prayer  which  they  are  made  to  say  after  Commun-
ion :  hardly  had  it  been  uttered  twice,  when  she
recited  it  word  for  word,  and  taught  it  to  the  others.
She  has  an  extreme  desire  to  know  all  that  must  be
done  in  order  to  satisfy  God;  she  leaves  her  cabin
and  sometimes  withdraws  aside  in  order  to  say  her
prayer ;  her  heart  speaks  a  language  which  no  one
has  taught  her.  "  You  know,"  she  says,  "  O  my
God,  that  I  love  only  you, —  that  all  that  is  on  the
[114]  earth  is  nothing  to  me;  you  alone  know  the
astonishment  and  joy  that  I  experience  because  you
have  given  me  the  Faith  and  the  grace  to  know  you.
It  seems  to  me  that  nothing  in  the  world  could  sepa-
rate me  from  you;  I  fear  neither  poverty,  nor  pain,


138  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

la  Foy  &  la  grace  de  vous  connoiitre,  il  me  femble
que  rien  du  monde  ne  me  fcauroit  feparer  de  vous,
ie  ne  crains  ny  la  pauurete,  ny  la  douleur,  ny  la
mort:  ie  fens  neantmoins  que  i'ayme  ma  petite  fille,
mais  ie  vous  ayme  bien  dauantage ;  car  fi  vous  la
voulez,  prenez  la,  mon  Seigneur,  ie  ne  vous  quitte-
ray  pas  pour  cela,  ny  pour  chofe  aucune  qui  foit  au
monde.

II  n'eft  pas  croyable  comme  les  Sauuages  qui  vien-
net  des  autres  contrees  a  Tadouffac,  font  eftonnez:
les  peuples  renfermez  dans  les  froids  du  Nord,  en-
tendans  parler  de  cette  nouuelle  creace,  s'en  viennent
par  petites  troupes  les  vnes  apres  les  autres.  On  en
a  compte  cette  annee  deux  cens  d'vne  feule  nation,
qui  voyans  que  des  Sauuages  prechent  la  Foy,  ils
ecoutent,  fe  prefentent  eux-mefmes  &  leurs  enfans
au  Baptefme.  Le  Pere  en  a  fait  Chreftiens  vne
foixantaine  cette  annee,  ils  fe  font  inftruire,  ils  offrent
leurs  prieres  a  Dieu  dans  la  Chappelle  qu'ils  admi-
rent,  quoy  qu  il  n'y  ait  rien  de  fi  pauure:  en  vn
mot,  ils  viendront  tous  petit  a  petit  [115]  fe  chauffer
&  fe  bruler  au  feu  que  Iesvs-Christ  eft  venu
allumer  deffus  la  terre ;  leur  vie  eft  eftrange,  ils  ne
paroiffent  que  quelques  mois  de  l'annee  fur  les  riues
du  grand  fleuue,  &  quelques-vns  ne  s'y  arreftent  que
fort  peu  de  iours.  Tout  le  refte  du  temps  ils  rentrent
dans  ces  grandes  forefts,  pour  faire  la  guerre  aux
poiffons  &  aux  belles:  apres  tout,  l'experience  nous
apprend  qu'ils  menent  vne  vie  fort  innocente,  &
qu'ils  conferuent  tres-bien  les  graces  qu'ils  viennent
puifer  dans  les  Sacremens  de  l'Eglife,  auffi  faut-il
auoiier  qu'ils  font  eloignez  de  tout  ce  qui  fert
d'aliment  au  vice  &  au  peche.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  139

nor  death.  I  feel,  nevertheless,  that  I  love  my  little
daughter,  but  I  love  you  much  more, — for,  if  you
desire  her,  take  her,  my  Lord;  I  will  not  leave  you
for  that,  nor  for  anything  that  is  in  the  world."

It  is  not  credible  how  full  of  wonder  are  the  Sav-
ages who  come  from  the  other  districts  to  Tadous-
sac;  the  peoples  shut  up  in  the  cold  of  the  North,
hearing  mention  of  this  new  belief,  come  in  small
bands,  one  after  another.  There  were  counted  of
these,  this  year,  two  hundred  from  a  single  nation, —
v/ho,  seeing  that  Savages  preach  the  Faith,  listen
and  present  themselves  and  their  children  for  Bap-
tism. The  Father  has  made  about  sixty  of  them
Christians  this  year;  they  become  instructed,  they
offer  their  prayers  to  God  in  the  Chapel, — which
they  admire,  though  there  is  nothing  so  poor :  in  a
word,  they  will  all  come,  little  by  little,  [115]  to
warm  themselves  and  set  themselves  on  fire  by  the
flame  which  Jesus  Christ  has  come  to  kindle  upon
the  earth.  Their  life  is  strange;  they  appear  only
in  certain  months  of  the  year  on  the  banks  of  the
great  river,  and  some  remain  there  only  a  very  few
days.  For  the  rest  of  the  time,  they  return  to  those
great  forests,  in  order  to  make  war  on  the  fish  and
the  beasts.  After  all,  experience  teaches  us  that  they
lead  a  very  innocent  life,  and  that  they  preserve  very
well  the  graces  which  they  come  to  draw  from  the
Sacraments  of  the  Church ;  it  must  be  also  acknowl-
edged that  they  are  averse  to  everything  which
serves  as  food  for  vice  and  sin.

The  Father,  when  obliged  to  separate  from  these
good  Neophytes,  left  them  five  Books,  or  five
Chapters  of  a  Book,  composed  after  their  manner;
these  Books  were  no  other  than  five  sticks  variously


140  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29

Le  Pere  fe  voulant  feparer  de  ces  bons  Neophytes,
leur  laiffa  cinq  Liures  ou  cinq  Chapitres  d'vn  Liure
compofe  a  leur  mode;  ces  Liures  n'eftoient  autres
que  cinq  baftons  diuerfement  faconnez,  dans  lefquels
ils  doiuent  lire  ce  que  le  Pere  leur  a  fortement
inculque.

Le  premier  eft  vn  ballon  noir,  qui  leur  doit  faire
fouuenir  de  l'horreur  qu'ils  doiuent  auoir  de  leurs
notuieautez  &  de  leurs  anciennes  fuperftitions.

Le  fecond  eft  vn  bafton  blanc,  qui  leur  marque  les
deuotions  &  les  prieres  qu'ils  [116]  feront  tous  les
iours,  &  la  facon  d'offrir  &  de  prefenter  a  Dieu  leurs
petites  actions.

Le  troifieme  eft  vn  bafton  rouge,  fur  lequel  eft
efcrit  ce  qu'ils  doiuent  faire  les  Dimanches  &  les
Feftes,  comme  ils  fe  doiuent  affembler  tous  dans  vne
grande  cabane,  faire  les  prieres  publiques,  chanter
des  Cantiques  fpirituels,  &  fur  tout  ecouter  celuy
qui  tiendra  ces  Liures  ou  ces  Baftons,  &  qui  en
donnera  1' explication  a  toute  l'affemblee.

Le  quatrieme  eft  le  Liure  ou  le  bafton  du  chafti-
ment,  auffi  eft-il  entoure  de  petites  cordeletes:  ce
Liure  prefcrit  la  facon  de  corriger  les  delinquans
auec  amour  &  charite :  il  f aut  accorder  a  leur  f erueur
ce  qui  eft  raifonnable,  &  retrancher  les  excez  ou  ils
fe  portent  ayfement.

Le  cinquieme  Liure  eft  vn  bafton  entaille  de  diuer-
fes  marques,  qui  fignifie  comme  ils  fe  doiuent  com-
porter  dans  la  difette  &  dans  l'abondance,  le  recours
qu'ils  doiuent  auoir  a  Dieu,  les  adtions  de  graces
qu'ils  luy  doiuent  rendre,  &  l'efperance  qu'ils  doiuent
toufiours  auoir  en  fa  bonte,  notamment  pour  l'eter-
nite.


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  141


fashioned,  in  which  they  are  to  read  what  the  Father
has  earnestly  inculcated  upon  them.

The  first  is  a  black  stick,  which  is  to  remind  them
of  the  horror  that  they  must  have  for  their  innova-
tions and  their  former  superstitions.

The  second  is  a  white  stick,  which  marks  for  them
the  devotions  and  the  prayers  which  they  [116]  shall
say  every  day,  and  the  manner  of  offering  and
presenting  to  God  their  minor  actions.

The  third  is  a  red  stick,  on  which  is  written  that
which  they  are  to  do  on  Sundays  and  Feasts, —
how  they  are  all  to  assemble  in  a  great  cabin,  hold
public  prayers,  sing  spiritual  Songs,  and  above  all,
listen  to  the  one  who  shall  keep  these  Books  or  these
Sticks,  and  who  will  give  the  explanation  of  them
to  the  whole  assembly.

The  fourth  is  the  Book  or  the  stick  of  punishment,
therefore  it  is  wound  with  little  ropes.  This  Book
prescribes  the  manner  of  correcting  the  delinquents
with  love  and  charity ;  to  their  fervor  must  be  granted
what  is  reasonable,  and  the  excesses  to  which  they
are  easily  inclined  must  be  cut  off.

The  fifth  Book  is  a  stick  notched  with  various
marks,  which  signifies  how  they  are  to  behave  in
dearth  and  in  plenty, —  the  recourse  which  they  must
have  to  God,  the  thanksgivings  that  they  must
render  him,  and  the  hope  which  they  must  always
have  in  his  goodness,  especially  as  regards  eternity.

These  poor  people,  withdrawing  into  their  forests,
usually  separate  themselves  into  three  [117]  bands;
the  Father  has  given  to  the  chief  of  each  squad  these
five  Books,  or  these  five  Chapters,  which  contain  all
that  they  must  do.  It  is  a  truly  innocent  pleasure
to  see  these  new  Preachers  hold  these  Books  or  these


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUJTES [Vol.29

Ces  pauures  gens  fe  retirans  dans  les  bois,  fe  diui-
fent  ordinairement  en  trois[ii7]  bandes:  le  Pere  a
donne  au  chef  de  chaque  efcouade  ces  cinq  Liures  cm
ces  cinq  Chapitres  qui  contiennent  tout  ce  qu'ils  doi-
uent  faire.  C'eft  vn  plaifir  bien  innocent  de  voir  ces
nouueaux  Predicateurs  tenir  ces  Liures  ou  ces  baftos
d'vne  main,  en  tirer  vn  de  l'autre,  le  prefenter  a  leur
auditoire,  auec  ces  paroles.  Voila  le  bafton  ou  le
Maffmahigan,  c'eft  a  dire  le  liure  des  fuperititions,
c'eft  noftre  Pere  qui  l'a  efcrit  luy-mefme,  il  vous  dit
qu'il  n'y  a  que  les  feuls  Preftres  qui  puiflent  dire  la
Meile  &  entendre  les  Confeffions,  que  nos  tambours,
nos  fueries  &  nos  fremifTemes  de  mammelles,  font
des  inuentions  du  manitou  ou  du  mauuais  demon  qui
nous  veut  tromper ;  &  ainfi  de  tous  ces  autres  Liures
de  bois  qui  leur  feruent  autant  que  les  volumes  les  plus
dorez  d'vne  Biblioteque  Royale :  Dieu  parle  auffi  bien
aux  petits  qu'aux  grands,  leur  docilite  les  met  a
l'abry  des  foudres  qui  renuerfent  les  efprits  pleins
d'eux-mefmes.


1646J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  143


sticks  in  one  hand,  draw  forth  a  stick  with  the  other,
and  present  it  to  their  audience  with  these  words:
"  Behold  the  stick  or  the  Massinahigan," — that  is  to
say,  "  the  book  of  the  superstitions;  "  "  our  Father
has  written  it  himself.  He  tells  you  that  it  is  only
the  Priests  who  can  say  Mass  and  hear  Confessions;
that  our  drums,  our  sweatings,  and  our  throbbings
of  the  breast  are  inventions  of  the  manitou  or  of  the
evil  spirit,  who  wishes  to  deceive  us;  "  and  so  of  all
those  other  Books  of  wood,  which  serve  them  as  well
as  the  most  gilded  volumes  of  a  Royal  Library.  God
speaks  as  well  to  the  small  as  to  the  great;  their
docility  shelters  them  from  the  strokes  of  lightning
which  overthrow  minds  filled  with  self.


144  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.29


[118]  CHAPITRE VIII.

DE L'HABITATION DE VILLE- MARIE, EN L'lSLE DE

MONTREAL.

LA  paix,  l'vnion  &  la  concorde,  ont  fleury  cette
ann6e  dans  l'lfle  de  Motreal,  l'affeurance  a  efte
parmy  les  Francois,  &  la  crainte  a  trouble  de
temps  en  temps  les  Sauuages.  Auant  que  d'en  ren-
dre  la  raifon,  il  fera  bon  de  remarquer  que  tout  ainfi
que  fous  le  nom  d' Iroquois,  nous  comprenons  diuers
peuples,  les  Annierronons,  les  Onibetchanbns,  [sc.
Onibetchronons]  les  Onontagueronons,  les  Sbntbaro-
nons,  &  quelques  autres,  de  mefme  auffi  fous  le  nom
&  fous  la  langue  des  Algonquins  nous  logeons  quan-
tity de  nations,  dont  quelques-vnes  font  fort  petites,
&  d 'autres  fort  peuplees,  les  babiechkarinibek,  les
Kichefipirinibek,  ou  les  Sauuages  de  l'lfle,  pource
qu'ils  habitent  vne  Ifle  qui  fe  rencontre  fur  le  chemin
des  Hurons,  les  Onontchataronons,  ou  la  nation
d'Iroquet,  les  Nipifiriniens,  les  Matabchkairinib[e]k,
[119]  les  Sagachiganirinib'ek,  les  Kinb'chebiirinib'ek,  &
pluQeurs  autres  depuis  la  paix  faite  entre  les  Annier-
ronnons,  les  Francois  &  leurs  alliez:  il  s'eft  trouue
pour  r ordinaire  quelques-vns  de  toutes  ces  nations  a
Montreal.

Tefbehat,  autrement  le  Borgne  de  l'lfle,  Tabichka-
ron  Capitaine  des  Onontchataronons,  &  Makatebana-
kifitch  Capitaine  des  Matabchkairinibek,  s'eftoient
refolus de demeurer la, d'y  paffer l'hyuer &  d'y


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  145


[Il8] CHAPTER VIII.

OF THE SETTLEMENT  OF  VILLE-MARIE, IN  THE  ISLAND

OF MONTREAL.

PEACE,  union,  and  concord  have  nourished  this
year  in  the  Island  of  Montreal ;  confidence  has
prevailed  among-  the  French,  and  fear  has,
from  time  to  time,  troubled  the  Savages.  Before
giving  a  reason  for  this,  it  will  be  well  to  remark
that,  just  as  under  the  name  of  Iroquois  we  include
various  peoples, —  the  Annierronons,  the  Oniwetch-
ronons,  the  Onontagueronons,  the  Sountwaronons,
and  some  others, —  likewise,  also,  under  the  name  and
the  language  of  the  Algonquins  we  include  many  na-
tions. Some  of  these  are  very  small,  and  others  very
populous:  the  Wawiechkariniwek,  the  Kichesipirini-
wek  or  the  Savages  of  the  Island  —  because  they
inhabit  an  Island  which  is  encountered  on  the  way  to
the  Hurons, — the  Onontchataronons  or  the  Iroquet
nation,  the  Nipisiriniens,  the  Mataouchkairiniwek,
[119]  the  Sagachiganiriniwek,  the  Kinouchebiirini-
wek,  and  several  others.  Since  the  peace  made
between  the  Annierronnons  and  the  French  and
their  allies,  there  have  been  found  at  Montreal,  as
a  rule,  some  persons  from  all  these  nations.

Teswehat, —  otherwise  le  Borgne  of  the  Island, —
Tawichkaron,  Captain  of  the  Onontchataronons,  and
Makatewanakisitch,  Captain  of  the  Mataouchkairini-
wek, had  resolved  to  dwell  there,  to  spend  the
winter  there,  and  there  to  plant  Indian  corn  in  the


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.29

planter  du  bled  d'Inde  au  Printemps,  les  faux  bruits
qui  coururent  que  les  Annierronnons  n'auoient  fait
qu'vne  paix  feinte,  donnerent  l'alarme  au  camp  &
firent  deloger  Tefb'ehat  &  fa  troupe  pour  fe  retirer
aux  trois  Riuieres.  Les  Onontchataronons,  dont  les
anceftres  ont  autresfois  habite  l'lfle  de  Montreal,  &
qui  femblent  auoir  quelque  defir  de  la  reprendre  pour
leur  pais,  tinrent  ferme,  &  a  leur  exemple,  les  Mata-
Schkairinib'ek.

A  ces  faux  bruits  il  en  furuint  vn  autre  mieux
fonde,  qui  penfa  bannir  de  Montreal  tons  ces  pauures
Sauuages.  Les  Iroquois  Annierronnons  leur  dirent
que  les  Oneiochronons  &  les  Onontagueronons  n'e-
ftoient  point  entrez  dans  le  traite  de  [120]  paix  qu'ils
auoient  fait  auec  les  Algonquins  &  auec  les  Hurons,
&  partant  qu'ils  fe  tinffent  fur  leurs  gardes,  pource
que  ces  peuples  eftoient  partis  pour  furprendre  les
Hurons,  &  de  la  venirfondre  a  Montreal.  Laterreur
en  faifit  quelques-vns,  qui  s'enfuirent  comme  les
autres.  Teftfehat  qui  s'eftoit  retire  des  premiers,
enuoye  des  meffagers  coup  fur  coup,  pour  preffer  ceux
qui  reftoient,  de  defcendre  au  pluftoft,  qu'autrement
ils  font  tous  morts;  mais  la  chaff e,  comme  il  eft
croyable,  les  retient:  en  effet  elle  eft  excellente  en
ces  quartiers,  a  caufe  que  les  animaux  pendant  la
guerre,  eftoient  comme  en  vn  pays  neutre,  oil  les  en-
nemis  ne  battoient  ny  la  campagne,  ny  les  bois.  Ces
deux  efcoiiades  ayans  pris  refolution  de  refter,
nonobftant  tous  les  dangers  dont  on  les  menacoit,  ont
pafle  l'hyuer  fans  aucun  mal,  maffacre  des  animaux
en  abondance,  &  cultiue  quelques  terres  au  Prin-
temps. Cela  ne  s'eft  pas  fait  fans  crainte  &  fans
terreur: car  de temps en temps ils  prenoient des


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  147

Spring.  The  false  reports  which  were  current,  that
the  Annierronnons  had  made  only  a  feigned  peace,
gave  the  alarm  to  the  camp,  and  caused  Teswehat  and
his  troop  to  dislodge  in  order  to  withdraw  to  three
Rivers.  The  Onontchataronons,  whose  ancestors
formerly  inhabited  the  Island  of  Montreal,  and  who
seem  to  have  some  desire  to  recover  it  as  their  coun-
try, remained  firm,  and,  after  their  example,  the
Mataouchkairiniwek.

These  false  reports  were  followed  by  another,
better  founded,  which  was  likely  to  banish  from
Montreal  all  these  poor  Savages.  The  Annierronnon
Iroquois  told  them  that  the  Oneiochronons  and  the
Onontagueronons  had  not  entered  into  the  treaty  of
[120]  peace  which  the  former  had  made  with  the
Algonquins  and  the  Hurons;  and  that,  consequently,
they  should  hold  themselves  on  their  guard,  because
those  tribes  had  set  out  to  surprise  the  Hurons,  and
thence  come  to  attack  Montreal.  Terror  seized  some
of  them,  who  fled  like  the  others.  Teswehat,  who
had  withdrawn  among  the  first,  sends  messengers,
one  after  another,  in  order  to  urge  those  who  remained
to  come  down  as  soon  as  possible, — that  otherwise
they  are  all  dead;  but  the  chase,  it  is  to  be  supposed,
detained  them.  Indeed,  it  is  excellent  in  these
quarters,  because  the  game,  during  the  war,  was
as  in  a  neutral  region,  where  the  enemy  scoured
neither  the  open  country  nor  the  woods.  Those
two  squads,  having  taken  resolution  to  remain,  not-
withstanding all  the  dangers  with  which  they  were
threatened,  have  passed  the  winter  without  any
harm,  slain  animals  in  abundance,  and  cultivated
some  lands  in  the  Spring.  That  has  not  been  done
without dread and  terror, —  for from time to  time


148  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.29

ombres  pour  des  homes,  &  des  phantofmes  pour
des  veritez.  II  eft  vray  neantmoins  que  ces  peuples
dont  on  les  auoit  menacez,  eftoient  en  arme.
Nous  auons  [121]  appris  ce  Printemps  qu'ils  ont
quafi  deftruit  vne  bourgade  d'Hurons,  &  que
Tefb'ehat  remontant  en  fon  pays,  a  perdu  l'vn  de
ceux  qui  l'accompagnoient  dans  vne  embufcade  qu'ils
luy  ont  dreflee.  C'eft  vn  ieune  homme  qui  eftant
frappe  d'vn  coup  d'arquebufe,  fut  rapporte  a  Mont-
real: iamais  il  n'auoit  receu  aucune  inftruction,  &
neantmoins  il  ouurit  tellement  les  oreilles  aux  pa-
roles delESVS-CHRiST,  qu'il  fit  quafi  croire  a  celuy
qui  le  baptifa  qu'il  n'auoit  receu  ce  coup  de  la  mort
que  pour  paffer  auffi-toft  dans  la  vie  par  le  moyen
de  ce  diuin  Sacrement,  qui  le  porta  en  vn  inftant
de  la  terre  au  Ciel.  Si  ces  peuples  ne  font  la  paix,
comme  on  efpere  qu'ils  la  feront,  ou  fi  les  Annierron-
nons  ne  les  empefchent  de  paffer  dans  leurs  terres,
comme  on  les  a  priez,  ils  ne  donneront  aucun  repos
aux  Sauuages  qui  fe  retireront  a  Montreal.  Ces
barbares  ont  tefmoigne  qu'ils  eftoient  amis  des
Francois,  mais  s'ils  venoient  chercher  des  Algonquins
ou  des  Hurons,  &  qu'ils  n'en  trouuaffent  point,  ie  ne
voudrois  pas  qu'ils  rencontraffent  des  Europeans
a  leur  aduantage:  car  lors  qu'ils  viennent  en  guerre,
ils  ne  prennent  point  [122]  plaifir  de  retourner  les
mains  vuides  en  leur  pays ;  ils  f e  font  bien  f ouuent
des  ennemis,  quand  ils  n'en  ont  pas.  Defcendons
maintenant  vn  petit  plus  en  particulier:  comme
cette  Ifle  eft  en  quelque  facon  frontiere  des  Iroquois
Annierronnons,  elle  a  quafi  tout  l'hyuer  quelques
ieunes  gens  de  ces  peuples  qui  viennent  voir  par
curiofite  les Francois  &  les  Algonquins:  ce fut  vn


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  149

they  mistook  shadows  for  men,  and  phantoms  for
realities.  It  is  true,  nevertheless,  that  those  tribes
with  which  they  were  threatened  were  in  arms.  We
have  [121]  learned  this  Spring  that  they  have  nearly
destroyed  a  village  of  Hurons;  and  that  Teswehat,
going  back  to  his  own  country,  lost  one  of  those
who  accompanied  him,  in  an  ambush  that  they  set
for  him, —  this  was  a  young  man  who,  being  hit  by
an  arquebus  shot,  was  carried  back  to  Montreal.
Never  had  he  received  any  instruction,  and  yet  he
opened  his  ears  in  such  a  way  to  the  words  of
Jesus  Christ,  that  he  almost  persuaded  him  who
baptized  him  that  he  had  received  that  shot  from
death,  only  to  pass  immediately  into  life  by  the
means  of  that  divine  Sacrament,  which  bore  him  in
an  instant  from  earth  to  Heaven.  Unless  those
tribes  make  peace,  as  it  is  hoped  that  they  will  do,
or  unless  the  Annierronnons  prevent  them  from
crossing  through  their  lands,  as  they  have  been
requested,  they  will  give  no  rest  to  the  Savages  who
shall  withdraw  to  Montreal.  Those  barbarians  have
shown  that  they  were  friends  to  the  French ;  but  if
they  came  to  seek  Algonquins  or  Hurons,  and  found
none  of  them,  I  would  not  like  them  to  encounter
Europeans  when  they  had  the  advantage, —  for,  when
they  come  to  war,  they  take  no  [122]  pleasure  in
returning  empty-handed  to  their  own  country ;  they
very  often  make  enemies  for  themselves,  when  they
have  none.  Let  us  now  come  down  somewhat  more
to  particulars.  As  this  Island  is,  in  some  sort,  a
frontier  of  the  Annierronnon  Iroquois,  it  has,  nearly
all  the  winter,  some  young  men  of  those  tribes  who
come  through  curiosity  to  see  the  French  and  the
Algonquins. It  was  very  fortunate  that  Father  Isaac


150


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29


bon-heur  que  le  Pere  Ifaac  Iogues  fe  trouua  en  cette
habitation,  car  il  les  entretenoit  dans  l'affection  &
dans  le  defir  de  continuer  la  paix,  les  difpofant  petit
a  petit  a  lny  prefter  l'oreille,  quand  il  les  iroit  voir
en  leur  pays.

Ces  Barbares  regardoient  les  lieux  ou  ils  eftoient
venus  en  guerre,  ou  ils  auoient  maffacre  des  Francois
&  des  Algoquins,  ou  ils  auoiet  pris  des  prifonniers,
&  quand  on  leur  demandoit  comme  ils  auoient  traite
ceux  qu'ils  auoient  emmenez  en  leur  pays:  nous
n'eftions  point  prefens,  difoient-ils,  quand  on  les  em-
mena  das  nos  bourgades,  on  ne  les  a  point  tourmen-
tez.  Nous  fcauions  bien  le  contraire:  car  vn  ieune
Algonquin  qui  s'eft  fauue  d'entre  leurs  mains,  nous
a  affeurez  qu'il  les  auoit  veu  bruler  tout  vifs,  que  les
Iroquois  [123]  n'ont  iamais  traite  aucun  prifonnier
auec  plus  de  rage,  qu'ils  firent  tous  leurs  efforts  pour
les  faire  pleurer,  que  ces  pauures  Francois  ioignoient
les  mains  au  milieu  des  flammes,  &  qu'ils  regardoient
vers  le  Ciel;  que  les  Algonquines  captiues  en  ce
pays-la  les  voyant  dans  ces  horribles  fouffrances,  ne
pouuoient  contenir  leurs  larmes,  fe  baiflant  &  fe
cachant  pour  pleurer.  Ce  temps  de  fureur  eft  paffe,
ces  monftres  fe  changeront  en  hommes,  &  d'hommes
ils  deuiendront  des  enfans  de  Dieu.  Ce  peuple  enrle
de  fes  vidtoires,  eft  fuperbe  iufques  dans  le  pays
de  fes  ennemis;  l'vn  d'eux  difoit  en  chantant  ces
paroles  en  face  des  Algonquins :  le  voulois  tuer  des
Algonquins,  mais  Onontio  a  arrefte  ma  colere,  il  a
applany  la  terre,  il  a  fauue"  la  vie  a  quantite  d'hommes,
voulant  fignifier  que  fans  la  paix,  il  auroit  terraffe
grand  nombre  de  fes  ennemis.

Quelques  autres  ayans  rencontre  vne  petite  cabane


K546J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  151

Jogues  happened  to  be  in  this  settlement,  for  he
maintained  their  kindly  feeling  and  their  desire  to
continue  the  peace, — preparing  them,  little  by  little,
to  lend  ear  to  him,  when  he  should  go  to  visit  them
in  their  own  country.

Those  Barbarians  looked  at  the  places  where  they
had  come  in  war,  where  they  had  massacred  French
and  Algonquins,  where  they  had  taken  prisoners;
and  when  they  were  asked  how  they  had  treated
those  whom  they  had  led  away  into  their  country,
"  We  were  not  present,"  they  said,  "  when  they  were
taken  into  our  villages;  they  were  not  tortured."
We  know  quite  the  contrary ;  for  a  young  Algonquin
who  has  escaped  from  their  hands,  has  assured  us
that  he  had  seen  them  actually  burned  alive;  that
the  Iroquois  [123]  have  never  treated  any  prisoner
with  greater  rage ;  that  they  used  all  their  efforts  to
make  them  weep ;  that  those  poor  Frenchmen  were
joining  their  hands  in  the  midst  of  the  flames,  and
were  looking  toward  Heaven;  that  the  Algonquin
women,  captive  in  that  country,  seeing  them  in  those
horrible  sufferings,  were  unable  to  contain  their
tears, —  stooping  and  hiding  themselves  in  order  to
weep.  That  time  of  fury  is  passed;  those  monsters
will  become  changed  into  men,  and  from  men  they
will  become  children  of  God.  This  people,  elated
with  its  victories,  is  haughty  even  in  the  land  of  its
enemies.  One  of  them  was  singing  these  words  in
the  presence  of  the  Algonquins:  "  I  wished  to  kill
some  Algonquins,  but  Onontio  has  arrested  my
anger,  he  has  leveled  the  earth,  he  has  saved  the
lives  of  many  men," — intending  to  signify  that,  but
for  the  peace,  he  would  have  struck  down  a  great
number  of  his  enemies.


152  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.29

d'Algonquins  qui  chaffoient,  les  femmes  les  ayans
apperceus,  s'enfuirent  dans  le  fonds  des  bois,  excepte"
vne  bonne  vieille,  qui  n'ayant  plus  de  jambes,  fit  de
la  refolue:  ces  Iroquois  luy  crient  qu'ils  font  amis:  a
la  bonne  heure,  [124]  repond-elle,  entrez  dans  noftre
cabane  pour  vous  delaffer:  les  hommes  arriuans  fur
le  foir,  trouuerent  ces  hoftes  qui  fe  gauffoient  de  la
crainte  des  Algonquins ;  mais  ceux-cy  leur  repartirent
gentiment :  nous  ne  craignons  que  les  medians,  vous
eftes  bons,  ce  n'efl  pas  vous  qui  nous  donnez  de  la
peur,  mais  les  Onotagueronons  qui  manquent  d'efprit,
vous  ayant  refufe  d'entrer  dans  le  traite  de  paix  que
vous  auez  fait  auec  nous.

L'vn  de  ces  Iroquois  qui  fembloit  auoir  quelque
bonne  inclination  pour  les  Algonquins,  voyant  que
quelques-vns  d'entr'eux  prioient  Dieu,  fe  glifloit
ordinairement  parmy  eux,  quand  ils  venoient  a  la
faindte  Meffe:  le  Pere  qui  la  difoit,  s'en  eftant  apper-
ceu,  le  voulut  faire  fortir,  il  repond  qu'il  croit  en
Dieu,  &  qu'il  a  vn  chappelet  auffi  bien  que  les  autres.
Les  Algonquins  voyans  cela,  difent  qu'il  eft  Chre-
ftien:  demandez  luy,  fit  le  Pere,  s'il  eft  baptife,  &
comme  il  s'appelle;  qu'eft-ce,  repartit-il,  que  d'eftre
baptife?  c'eft,  luy  dit  le  Sauuage  qui  l'interrogeoit,
receuoir  vne  eau  de  grande  importance  qui  efface
toutes  les  taches  &  toutes  les  foiiilleures  de  noftre
ame:  luy  qui  s'imaginoit  [125]  que  cette  eau  d'im-
portance,  dont  ils  vouloit  parler,  eftoit  de  l'eau  de
vie,  &  qu'il  n'y  en  auoit  point  de  meilleure  au  mode:
Ah!  s'ecria-il,  les  Hollandois  m'ont  fouuent  donne
de  cette  eau  d'importance,  i'en  ay  tant  beu  que  i'en
eftois  fi  yure  qu'il  me  falloit  lier  les  pieds  &  les
mains,  de  peur  que  ie  ne  fifle  mal  a  perfonne,  tout  le


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  153

Some  others  having  encountered  a  small  cabin  of
Algonquins  who  were  hunting,  the  women,  having
perceived  them,  fled  into  the  depth  of  the  woods,
except  one  old  woman,  who  having  no  more  use  of
her  legs,  acted  the  resolute.  Those  Iroquois  shout
to  her  that  they  are  friends;  "  Very  well,"  [124]
she  answers,  "  come  into  our  cabin  to  refresh  your-
selves." The  men,  arriving  toward  evening,  found
these  guests,  who  were  making  sport  of  the  dread
of  the  Algonquins;  but  the  latter  answered  them
gently:  "  We  dread  only  the  wicked;  you  are  good.
It  is  not  you  who  give  us  fear,  but  the  Onontague-
ronons,  who  are  wanting  in  sense,  since  they  have
refused  you  to  enter  into  the  treaty  of  peace  which
you  have  made  with  us."

One  of  those  Iroquois,  who  seemed  to  have  some
kindly  inclination  for  the  Algonquins,  seeing  that
some  among  them  were  praying  to  God,  usually
slipped  in  among  them  when  they  came  to  hear  holy
Mass;  the  Father  who  was  saying  it,  having  per-
ceived this,  wished  to  make  him  go  forth.  He
answers  that  he  believes  in  God,  and  that  he  has  a
rosary  as  well  as  the  others ;  the  Algonquins,  seeing
that,  say  that  he  is  a  Christian.  "  Ask  him,"  said
the  Father,  "  if  he  is  baptized,  and  what  he  is  called. ' '
"What  is  that,"  he  replies,  "to  be  baptized?"
"  That,"  the  Savage  who  was  questioning  him  said,
"is  to  receive  a  water  of  great  importance,  which
effaces  all  the  spots  and  stains  from  our  souls."
He  —  who  imagined  [125]  that  this  water  of  impor-
tance of  which  they  meant  to  speak  was  brandy,  and
that  there  was  none  better  in  the  world  —  exclaimed,
' '  Ah !  the  Dutch  have  often  given  me  of  that  water
of  importance ; I  drank  so  much  of  it  and  became


154  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.29

monde  fe  mit  a  rire  de  ce  beau  baptefme :  il  adioufta
que  les  Hollanders  luy  auoient  auffi  donn6  vn  nom ;
l'ayant  prononce,  on  trouua  que  c'efloit  vn  fobriquet,
comme  nos  Francois  en  donnent  quelquesfois  aux
Sauuages.

Pour  ce  qui  touche  les  Algonquins,  le  Pere  qui  a
eu  foin  de  cette  Miffion,  les  a  preffez  fi  fortement  de
fe  rendre  a  Dieu  &  de  tirer  de  la  terre  vne  partie  de
leur  nourriture,  que  fi  la  crainte  des  Iroquois  fupe-
rieurs  &  quelque  mauuais  genie  ne  les  fait  remonter
en  leur  pais,  il  eft  a  croire  qu'ils  compoferont  auec  le
temps,  s'ils  font  fecourus,  vne  petite  Eglife  pleine
de  piete.  II  ne  s'eft  pas  hafte  d'en  baptifer  grand
nombre,  les  Payens  mefmes  Ten  loiient  publiquement,
difans  que  rien  ne  les  eloignoit  tant  du  Chriftianifme
que  la  langueur  de  ceux  dont  la  Foy  n'a  point  [126]
d'ame.  Les  fleurs  &  les  fruidts  qui  fe  precipitent,
font  fouuent  accueillis  du  froid  &  de  la  gel6e.

Entre  ceux  qu'il  a  baptifez,  il  y  en  a  vn  qui  merite
vne  loiiange  tres-particuliere :  il  a  pourfuiuy  fon  Bap-
tefme auec  vne  conftance  toute  aymable,  il  a  donne
des  preuues  de  fa  Foy  toutes  particulieres,  i'en
rapporteray  quelques-vnes  confufement.

Sa  femme  luy  voulant  procurer  le  Baptefme,  car
elle  eft  fort  bien  difpofee,  le  loiioit  de  fa  fidelite;  il
ne  fe  met  point  en  cholere,  il  ne  va  point  courir  la
nuidt  dans  les  autres  cabanes,  helas!  dit-il  deuant
que  d'entendre  parler  de  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait,  ie
commettois  ces  fautes:  mais  depuis  que  i'ay  apris
que  cela  luy  defplaifoit,  ie  n'y  fuis  point  tombe\  il  y
a  trois  ans  que  ie  demande  le  Baptefme,  ie  ne  me
faf che  pas  contre  ceux  qui  me  le  refuf ent ;  mais  bien
contremoy:  car  i'ay  beaucoup  offenfe'  Dieu. Vou-


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  155


so  tipsy  that  it  was  necessary  to  bind  my  feet  and
hands,  for  fear  lest  I  should  injure  some  one."
Every  one  began  to  laugh  at  that  fine  baptism ;  he
added  that  the  Dutch  had  also  given  him  a  name, —
having  pronounced  it,  they  found  that  it  was  a  nick-
name, such  as  our  French  sometimes  give  to  the
Savages.

As  touching  the  Algonquins,  the  Father  who  has
had  charge  of  that  Mission,  has  urged  them  so  ear-
nestly to  yield  themselves  to  God,  and  to  obtain  from
the  earth  a  part  of  their  food,  that  —  if  the  dread  of
the  upper  Iroquois  and  some  evil  genius  do  not
cause  them  to  go  back  to  their  own  country  —  it  is
to  be  believed  that  they  will  compose,  in  course  of
time,  if  they  are  assisted,  a  little  Church  full  of
piety.  He  has  not  made  haste  to  baptize  a  great
number  of  them ;  the  Pagans  themselves  praise  him
openly  for  this, —  saying  that  nothing  estranged
them  so  much  from  Christianity  as  the  languor  of
those  whose  Faith  has  no  [126]  soul.  The  flowers
and  fruits  which  are  too  early  are  often  greeted  with
cold  and  frost.

Among  those  whom  he  has  baptized,  there  is  one
who  deserves  most  special  praise ;  he  has  sought  for
his  Baptism  with  altogether  delightful  constancy.
He  has  given  quite  extraordinary  proofs  of  his  Faith ;
I  will  report  some  of  these  at  length.

His  wife,  wishing  to  procure  him  Baptism, — for
she  is  very  well  disposed, —  was  praising  him  for  his
fidelity:  "  He  does  not  grow  angry,  he  does  not  go
running  about  at  night  in  the  other  cabins."
"  Alas!  "  he  said,  "  before  hearing  mention  of  him
who  has  made  all,  I  committed  those  faults ;  but  since
I  have  learned  that  they  were  displeasing  to  him,  I


156  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

lant  certain  iour  tefmoigner  le  defir  qu'il  auoit  d'eftre
Chreftien:  ie  n'ayme  rien  tant  au  monde  que  le  pe-
tun  ou  le  tabac,  difoit-il,  ie  ne  l'ayme  plus,  quand  on
me  parle  du  Baptefme:  cell  a  dire,  que  fi  pour  eftre
baptife"  il  le  [127]  falloit  quitter,  ie  n'aurois  plus  d'en-
uie  de  petuner:  oiiy,  mais  luy  replique  Mademoifelle
d'Allibout,  fi  ta  femme  te  vouloit  empefcher  d'eflre
Chreftien,  que  ferois-tu?  ie  ne  l'ayme  pas,  repond-il,
i'ayme  le  Baptefme:  c'eft  leur  faeon  de  s'enoncer
pour  tefmoigner  leur  ardeur,  ie  n'ayme  perfonne,
i'ayme  le  Baptefme:  le  Pere  peut  bien  me  le  refufer;
mais  il  ne  fcauroit  m' empefcher  de  prier,  &  quad  il
me  chafferoit  d'aupres  de  luy,  ie  ne  laifferois  pas  de
croire  en  Dieu,  en  quelque  endroit  que  ie  me  trou-
uaffe.  Ses  ges  l'ont  fouuent  tente,  &  follicite  de  fe
trouuer  dans  leurs  fuperftitions,  dans  leurs  feftins  a
tout  manger,  dans  leurs  fueries,  ou  dans  leurs  eftuues:
ils  luy  difoient  qu'il  n'eftoit  pas  encore  baptife,  que
cela  luy  eftoit  permis:  non,  dit-il,  ie  ne  feray  iamais
rien  qui  d^plaife  a  Dieu,  quand  ie  ne  ferois  point
baptife.  Comme  il  n'eftoit  pas  beaucoup  plonge
dans  le  vice,  ce  flambeau  qui  6claire  tous  les  hommes,
qui  viennent  au  monde,  luy  faifoit  voir  quelques  ray-
ons de  fa  lumiere  deuant  qu'il  eut  iamais  oiiy  parler
de  Dieu:  allant  a  la  chaff e,  difoit-il,  ie  formois  cette
penfee  dans  mon  cceur,  &  quelquesfois  [128]  ie  la
proferois  de  ma  bouche,  quiconque  tu  fois  qui  deter-
mines de  la  vie,  &  de  la  mort  des  animaux,  faits
que  i'en  tue  pour  ma  nourriture,  tu  me  feras  plaifir.
Depuis  qu'on  m'eut  inftruit,  ie  luy  parlois  auec  bien
plus  d'amour,  &  de  confiance.  Pourfuiuant  cet  Au-
tomne  dernier  vn  ours,  &  ne  le  pouuant  attraper,  ie
m'arrefte  tout  court,  ie  me  mets  a  genoux,  &  fais  ma


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  1T7

have  not  fallen  into  them.  It  is  three  years  since  I
have  been  asking  for  Baptism ;  I  am  not  angry  at
those  who  refuse  me  it,  but  indeed  at  myself,  for  I
have  greatly  offended  God. ' '  Wishing,  on  a  certain
dav,  to  indicate  the  desire  that  he  had  to  be  a  Chris-
tian,  "  I  love  nothing  in  the  world  so  much  as  petun
or  tobacco,"  said  he;  "I  love  it  no  more,  when
they  speak  to  me  of  Baptism, —  that  is  to  say,  if,  in
order  to  be  baptized,  it  [127]  were  necessary  to  give
it  up,  I  would  have  no  more  desire  to  smoke."
"  Yes,  but,"  Mademoiselle  d'Allibout  answers  him,
"  if  thy  wife  wished  to  prevent  thee  from  being  a
Christian,  what  wouldst  thou  do?  "  "  I  do  not  love
her,"  he  answers,  "I  love  Baptism;"  this  is  their
manner  of  expressing  themselves,  in  order  to  show
their  ardor.  "I  love  no  one,  I  love  Baptism;  the
Father  can  indeed  refuse  it  to  me,  but  he  cannot
hinder  me  from  praying;  and,  though  he  should
drive  me  away  from  him,  I  would  nevertheless
believe  in  God,  in  whatever  place  I  might  happen  to
be."  His  people  have  often  tempted  and  solicited
him  to  take  part  in  their  superstitions, —  in  their  eat-
all  feasts,  and  in  their  sweats  or  vapor-baths;  they
told  him  that  he  was  not  yet  baptized,  and  that  these
were  permitted  to  him.  "  No,"  said  he,  "  I  will
never  do  anything  which  displeases  God,  even
though  I  should  not  be  baptized."  As  he  was  not
deeply  plunged  into  vice,  that  torch  which  lights  all
men  who  come  into  the  world,  was  causing  him  to
see  some  rays  of  its  light  before  he  had  ever  heard
mention  of  God.  Going  to  the  chase,  he  said:  "  I
would  form  this  thought  in  my  heart,  and  sometimes
[128]  I  would  utter  it  with  my  lips,  — '  Whoever
thou  art  who  ordainest the life and  the death of


158  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

priere.  Mon  Pere,  cet  animal  t'appartient,  fi  tu  me
le  veux  donner,  donne  le  moy,  ie  me  leue,  ie  le
pourfuis,  ie  l'attrape,  ie  luy  lance  mon  efp£e  &  ie  le
faits  demeurer  fur  la  place.

Cet  hyuer  fe  treuuant  mal  au  milieu  des  bois,  il
fut  contraint  de  fe  coucher  fur  la  neige :  comme  il
effcoit  £chauffe,  la  neige  fe  fondoit  fous  luy,  mais  le
f roid  la  tournoit  incontinent  en  glace :  fe  voyant  dans
cette  extremity,  il  fe  met  a  genoux,  poufle  de  fon
cceur  ce  peu  de  paroles:  fecoure  moy,  mon  Pere,  fi
tu  veux,  tu  le  peus  faire;  mais  fcache  que  tu  ne  me
fafcheras  point,  fi  tu  ne  le  fais  pas:  fi  i'eftois  baptif6,
ie  ne  ferois  pas  marry  d'eftre  malade,  ie  ne  craindrois
point  la  mort,  fais  moy  receuoir  le  Baptefme  deuant
que  ie  meure.  Ces  paroles  dites,  il  fe  fent  fortified
[129]  il  fe  leue,  pourfuit  vn  cerf:  mais  comme  les
forces  luy  manquoient,  il  fe  met  de  rechef  a  genoux,
toy  qui  as  tout  fait,  donne  moy  cet  animal ;  fi  tu  me
le  veux  donner  tu  l'as  cree,  il  eft  a  toy;  fi  tu  ne  veux
pas  me  le  donner,  ie  ne  laifferay  pas  de  croire  en
toy.  II  n'auoit  pas  acheue  fa  priere  que  la  befte  fe
tourne  du  cofte  ou  il  efloit,  il  fe  cache  pour  ne  la
point  epouuanter,  s'aproche  de  fon  embufcade,  il  la
tue  fans  beaucoup  de  difficulte,  puis  fe  mettant  a  ge-
noux deflus,  il  en  remercia  celuy  qui  luy  auoit  donnee.

Le  Pere  qui  l'inftruifoit,  fe  trouuant  mal,  il  le  vint
vifiter,  &  luy  dift:  mon  Pere,  conferue  ta  vie:  fi  tu
meurs,  qui  nous  inftruira?  qui  me  baptifera?  fi  nous
eftions  tous  baptifez,  ie  ne  me  foucierois  pas  que  tu
mouruffes,  &  nous  auffi:  car  la  mort  n'eft  point
mauuaif e  pour  ceux  qui  croyet  en  Dieu,  puis  qu'ils  vot
au  Ciel :  mais  ne  te  hafte  pas  tant,  mon  Pere,  attend


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  159

animals,  cause  that  I  kill  some  for  my  food ;  thou
wilt  do  me  a  favor.'  After  I  had  been  instructed,  I
spoke  to  him  with  much  more  love  and  confidence.
Pursuing,  this  last  Autumn,  a  bear,  and  not  being
able  to  overtake  it,  I  stop  quite  short,  I  fall  on  my
knees,  and  make  my  prayer:  '  My  Father,  that  ani-
mal belongs  to  thee ;  if  thou  wilt  give  it  to  me,  give
it  to  'me.'  I  rise;  I  pursue  and  overtake  it;  I  hurl
my  javelin  at  it,  and  cause  it  to  remain  on  the  spot."

This  winter,  chancing  to  be  sick  in  the  midst  of
the  woods,  he  was  constrained  to  lie  down  upon  the
snow;  as  he  was  heated,  the  snow  melted  under  him,
but  the  cold  straightway  turned  it  into  ice.  Seeing
himself  in  this  extremity,  he  kneels,  and  utters  from
his  heart  these  few  words:  "  Help  me,  my  Father;
if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  do  so ;  but  know  that  thou
wilt  not  anger  me  if  thou  doest  it  not.  If  I  were
baptized,  I  would  not  be  grieved  to  be  sick,  and  I
would  not  fear  death ;  cause  me  to  receive  Baptism
before  I  die."  These  words  being  said,  he  feels
himself  strengthened;  [I29]  ^e  rises»  and  pursues  a
stag;  but,  as  his  strength  fails  him,  he  kneels
again.  "  Thou  who  hast  made  all,  give  me  this
animal ;  if  thou  wilt  give  it  to  me,  thou  hast  created
it, —  it  is  thine;  if  thou  wilt  not  give  me  it,  I  will
none  the  less  believe  in  thee."  He  has  not  finished
his  prayer  before  the  beast  turns  in  the  direction
where  he  is;  he  hides  himself,  in  order  not  to
frighten  it,  approaches  from  his  ambush,  and  kills  it
without  much  difficulty.  Then,  kneeling  over  it,  he
thanked  him  who  had  given  it  to  him.

The  Father  who  instructed  him  chancing  to  be
sick,  he  came  to  visit  him  and  said:  "My  Father,
preserve  thy  life;  if  thou  die,  who  will  instruct  us?


160  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESU1TES [Vol.29


que  nous  ayons  tous  de  l'efprit,  il  y  en  a  beaucoup
qui  en  veulent  auoir:  car  ils  commencent  de  prier
Dieu.  Le  Pere  luy  repartit,  tu  prefTes  tant  qu'on  te
baptife,  peut-eflre  que  tu  ne  feras  rien  qui  vaille,
quand  tu  le  feras?  peut-eflre  que  non,  refpondit-il,
[130]  car  ie  n'ay  quafi  point  d'efprit:  mais  neatmoins
fi  ie  n'auois  peur  de  parler  en  fuperbe,  ie  dirois  que
ie  tiendray  bon,  &  que  ie  feray  conftant,  du  moins
i'en  ay  bonne  enuie.

Ces  efpreuues  ont  augmente  fa  ferueur,  &  reflably
Teftime  de  noftre  creance  dans  l'efprit  des  Payens.
La  dodtrine  de  Iesvs-Christ  eft  adorable  en  foy:
mais  fi  on  ne  la  voit  reluire  dans  les  actions  des
Chreftiens,  fon  luftre  ne  paroift  que  tenebres  aux
yeux  des  infidelles.

Ce  bon  Neophyte  fut  baptife  le  iour  de  fainct  lean
Baptiite.  Monfieur  d'Allibout,  qui  commandoit  a
ville-marie,  luy  fit  porter  le  nom  de  ce  grand  precur-
feur  de  I e s v s-C hrist:  les  Francois  &  les  princi-
paux  Sauuages  fe  treuuerent  a  fon  Baptefme,  fa
modef  tie  vrayment  Chreftienne  ne  l'empefcha  pas  de
refpondre  d'vne  voix  forte  &  conftante  a  toutes  les
interrogations  qu'on  luy  fit,  paffant  mefme  les  limites
qu'on  luy  auoit  prefcrites,  de  peur  de  trop  de
logueur,  dans  les  ceremonies :  il  donnoit  a  tous  coups
des  marques  de  fa  foy,  proteftat  qu'il  la  conferueroit,
&  deffedroit  au  peril  de  fa  vie.  Quad  on  luy  deman-
da  s'il  renoncoit  a  fes  fuper[fti]tions,  [131]  au  lieu  de
refpondre  par  vn  feul  mot,  il  les  nomma  toutes  en
particulier  deuant  fes  compatriottes.  Pay,  dit-il,
iette  par  terre  toutes  ces  fottifes,  i'ay  quitte  la  pyro-
mantie ou  la  diuination  par  le  feu;  i'ay  quitte  les


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  161

who  will  baptize  me?  If  we  were  all  baptized,  I
would  not  be  concerned  if  thou  shouldst  die,  and  we
also ;  for  death  is  not  evil  for  those  who  believe  in
God,  since  they  go  to  Heaven.  But  be  not  in  such
haste,  my  Father;  wait  until  we  all  have  sense;
there  are  many  who  will  have  some,  for  they  begin
to  pray  to  God."  The  Father  answered  him:
"  Thou  urgest  so  much  to  be  baptized:  perhaps  thou
wilt  do  nothing  of  any  account  when  thou  art."
"  Perhaps  not,"  he  answered,  [130]  "  for  I  have
hardly  any  sense;  but  nevertheless,  if  I  were  not
afraid  of  speaking  arrogantly,  I  would  say  that  I  will
remain  firm,  and  that  I  will  be  constant, —  at  least,  I
have  a  strong  desire  to  be."

These  probations  have  increased  his  fervor,  and
restored  esteem  for  our  belief  in  the  minds  of  the
Pagans.  The  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ  is  adorable
in  itself;  but,  unless  one  sees  it  reflected  in  the
deeds  of  Christians,  its  luster  appears  only  darkness
to  the  eyes  of  infidels.

This  good  Neophyte  was  baptized  on  the  day  of
saint  John  the  Baptist.  Monsieur  d'Allibout,  who
commanded  at  ville-marie,  made  him  bear  the  name
of  that  great  forerunner  of  Jesus  Christ;  the
French  and  the  principal  Savages  were  present  at
his  Baptism.  His  modesty,  truly  Christian,  did  not
prevent  him  from  answering  in  a  strong  and  steady
voice  to  all  the  questions  that  were  put  to  him, —
even  passing  the  limits  that  were  prescribed  for  him,
for  fear  of  too  much  length  in  the  ceremonies.  He
gave,  at  every  step,  marks  of  the  faith,  protesting
that  he  would  preserve  and  defend  it  at  the  risk  of
his  life.  When  they  asked  him  if  he  renounced  his
superstitions,  [131]  instead  of  answering  by  a  single


162  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

feftins  a  tout  manger;  i'ay  quitte"  les  eftuues  ou  les
fueries  fuperftitieufes,  les  veues  des  chofes  eloigners,
les  chafons  agreables  au  demo;  i'ay  quitte  la  diuina-
tion  par  le  fremiffement  de  la  mammelle,  &  s'il  faut
abandonner  quelqu'autre  chofe,  ie  fuis  preft  de  le
faire:  ie  n'ayme  rien,  ie  ne  m'ayme  pas  moy-mefme,
i'ayme  la  creance  &  la  priere,  ce  font  fes  termes.
Vn  Capitaine  Huron,  nomme  lean  Baptifte  Atironta,
fe  treuuant  a  fon  Baptefme,  demanda  de  parler.
Apres  la  ceremonie,  la  permiffion  luy  en  eftant  faite,
il  apoftropha  noftre  Neophyte  en  cette  forte:  Mon
frere  efcoute  moy,  ie  te  nomme  ainfi :  car  en  verite
tu  es  mon  frere,  tant  pour  ce  que  nous  n'auons  plus
qu'vn  mefme  Pere,  que  pour  autant  que  nous  portons
tous  deux  le  nom  de  celuy  que  les  croyans  honorent
prefentement :  tenons  ferme  en  la  Foy,  ne  t'eftonne
point  pour  les  crieries  de  tes  gens,  &  ne  te  mets  pas
dans  l'efprit  qu'ils  doiuent  [132]  tous  croire:  car  tu
ferois  trompe,  ils  ne  font  pas  tous  bien  difpofez:  (i
tu  te  regies  fur  eux,  tu  feras  bien-toft  ebranle,  pour
moy  ie  t'affeure  que  quand  ie  ferois  perfequute  de  tout
le  monde,  &  que  ie  me  verrois  a  deux  doigts  de  la
mort,  iamais  ie  ne  reculeray  en  arriere.  Le  Neo-
phyte luy  refpondit  en  peu  de  paroles  fort  modeftes,
i'efpere  que  ie  refpedteray  toute  ma  vie  mon  Bap-
tefme, &  que  la  mort  n'ebranlera  point  ma  creance.
Cecy  fe  paffa  deuant  la  Meffe,  que  ce  nouueau  Chre-
ftien  entendit  pour  la  premiere  fois,  auec  vne  tres-
grande  confolation.  Comme  il  eftoit  fort  feruent,  on
1'inftruifit  en  forte  qu'il  fut  trouue  capable  de  com-
munier  le  mefme  iour  de  fon  Baptefme.  Dieu  n'a
aucun  egard  aux  grands  ny  aux  petits,  en  la  diftri-


164(5]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  163

word,  he  named  them  all  in  detail,  before  his  fellow-
countrymen.  "  I  have,"  said  he,  "  flung  to  the
ground  all  that  foolishness.  I  have  given  up  pyro-
mancy, or  divination  by  fire;  I  have  given  up  eat-all
feasts ;  I  have  given  up  the  vapor  baths,  or  supersti-
tious sweats,  the  visions  of  distant  things,  and  the
songs  agreeable  to  the  demon ;  I  have  given  up
divination  by  the  throbbing  of  the  breast;  and,  if  it
is  necessary  to  abandon  anything  else,  I  am  ready  to
do  so.  I  love  nothing, —  I  love  not  myself;  I  love
faith  and  prayer;  "  such  are  his  own  expressions.
A  Huron  Captain,  named  Jean  Baptiste  Atironta,
chancing  to  be  at  his  Baptism,  asked  to  speak.  After
the  ceremony,  this  permission  being  given  him,  he
addressed  our  Neophyte  in  this  fashion:  "  My  broth-
er, listen  to  me.  I  call  thee  so,  for  in  truth  thou  art
my  brother, —  both  because  we  now  have  but  one
and  the  same  Father,  and  since  we  both  bear  the
name  of  him  whom  the  believers  are  now  honoring.
Let  us  hold  firm  in  the  Faith ;  be  not  astonished  at
the  shoutings  of  thy  people,  and  do  not  get  it  into
thy  mind  that  they  must  [132]  all  believe,  for  thou
wouldst  be  in  error, — they  are  not  all  well  disposed.
If  thou  rule  thyself  by  them,  thou  wilt  soon  be  shak-
en. As  for  myself,  I  assure  thee  that  —  though  I
should  be  persecuted  by  all  the  world,  and  should
see  myself  within  two  finger-lengths  of  death  —  never
will  I  retreat  backward."  The  Neophyte  answered
him  in  a  few  words,  very  modestly:  "  I  hope  that  I
shall  respect  my  Baptism  all  my  life ;  and  that  death
will  not  shake  my  belief."  This  occurred  before
Mass,  which  this  new  Christian  heard  for  the  first
time,  to  his  very  great  consolation.  As  he  was  very
fervent,  they  instructed  him  so  that  he  was  found  fit


164  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

bution  de  f es  graces :  ces  deux  Sacrements  firent  vn
changement  fi  notable  en  cet  homme  qu'encore  qu'il
ne  fut  pas  ordinairement  bien  refpandu,  on  remarqua
neantmoins  vne  modeftie  en  luy  extraordinaire  qui
luy  a  continue  iufques  a  maintenant.

Sur  le  foir  eftant  venu  voir  le  Pere  qui  l'auoit  bap-
tife; c'eft  maintenant,  difoit-il,  que  ie  ne  crains  plus
la  mort,  i'ay  depuis  [133]  ce  matin  que  mes  pechez
m'ont  efte  pardonnez,  vne  fi  grande  enuie  de  voir
mon  Pere,  qu'il  me  vient  des  defirs  de  mourir;  mais
que  ie  vine  ou  que  ie  meure,  ie  tafcheiay  de  ne  point
foiiiller  mon  Baptefme.

Vn  Chreftien  vn  peu  plus  aage  luy  dift :  mon
cadet,  prenons  courage,  le  chemin  du  Ciel  femble  vn
petit  fafcheux,  mais  il  ne  l'ell  pas,  quand  on  croid
fortemet:  c'eft  vne  chofe  bien  importante  de  le
fuiure,  &  bien  mauuaife  de  le  quitter:  ce  n'efl  pas
pour  viure  long-temps  en  terre  qu'on  nous  baptife ;  ce
qu'on  nous  promet,  eft  au  Ciel,  n'ayme  done  plus  ce
qui  eft  5a  bas,  puifque  tu  es  baptife  pour  aller  la
haut.

I'ay  donne  ma  parole,  i'ay,  fit-il,  refpondu  a  celuy
qui  a  tout  fait,  ie  luy  ay  dit  que  ie  croirois  en  luy
toute  ma  vie,  ie  n'ay  pas  enuie  de  mentir;  ie  l'ay-
mois  deuant  que  d'eftre  baptife.  S'il  me  venoit  quel-
que  soge,  ie  le  priois  d'empefcher  le  diable  qu'il  ne
me  trompaft.  S'il  me  venoit  vne  penfee  de  prendre
vne  feconde  femme,  il  m'en  venoit  vne  autre  que  ie
le  fafcherois,  &  auffi-toft  ie  quittois  ma  penfee:  fi
i'eftois  malade,  ie  ne  luy  demandois  la  guerifon  [134]
que  pour  eftre  baptife:  maintenant  que  ie  le  fuis,
mon  cceur  n'a  autre  penfee  que  d'eltre  auec  luy.


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  165

to  receive  communion  the  same  day  of  his  Baptism.
God  does  not  consider  either  the  great  or  small,  in
the  distribution  of  his  favors;  these  two  Sacraments
made  so  notable  a  change  in  this  man  that,  although
he  was  not  usually  very  conspicuous,  there  was,
nevertheless,  remarked  in  him  an  extraordinary
modesty  which  has  continued  with  him  even  until
now.

Toward  evening,  having  come  to  see  the  Father
who  had  baptized  him,  "  It  is  now,"  he  said,  "  that  I
no  longer  fear  death;  I  have  since  [133]  this  morn-
ing, when  my  sins  were  pardoned,  so  great  a  wish
to  see  my  Father,  that  there  come  to  me  desires  of
dying;  but,  whether  I  live  or  die,  I  will  try  not  to
stain  my  Baptism."

A  Christian,  somewhat  older,  said  to  him:  "  My
younger  brother,  let  us  take  courage;  the  way  to
Heaven  seems  rather  difficult,  but  it  is  not  so  when
one  believes  thoroughly.  It  is  a  very  important
thing  to  follow  that  road,  and  very  dangerous  to
leave  it.  It  is  not  in  order  to  live  long  on  earth  that
we  are  baptized;  what  they  promise  us  is  in  Heaven.
Therefore,  love  no  more  that  which  is  here  below,
since  thou  art  baptized  in  order  to  go  there  above."

"  I  have  given  my  word;  I  have,"  said  he,  "an-
swered to  him  who  has  made  all ;  I  have  told  him
that  I  would  believe  in  him  all  my  life.  I  have  no
wish  to  lie;  I  loved  him  before  being  baptized.  If
there  came  to  me  any  dream,  I  entreated  him  to  pre-
vent the  devil  from  deceiving  me.  If  there  came  to
me  a  thought  of  taking  a  second  wife,  there  came
to  me  another, —  that  I  should  offend  him;  and  im-
mediately I  gave  up  my  thought.  If  I  was  sick,
I  asked  him  for  health,  [134]  only  in order to be


166  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

Quelques  iours  apres  fon  Baptefme,  vn  certain  Sau-
uage  qui  eft  en  quelque  confideration  parmy  ces  ges,
&  qui  a  pris  noftre  Neophyte  pour  fon  fils  adoptif,
depuis  vn  affez  long-temps,  comit  quelque  infolece
que  le  Pere  iugea  digne  d'vne  bonne  reprehenfion.
Ce  barbare  extremement  fuperbe,  fe  voulut  fafcher
cotre  noftre  Neophyte,  l'aborda  &  luy  dift:  Si  vous
ne  reconnoiflez  Dieu  pour  voftre  pere,  ie  ne  vous
feray  plus  enfant :  fi  vous  luy  obei'ffez,  ie  vous  obei-
ray :  fi  vous  le  quittez,  ie  vous  quitteray :  vous  fuyez
le  Pere  qui  nous  inftruit,  quand  il  me  frapperoit,  ie
l'irois  voir:  qu'eft-ce  qu'il  vous  a  iamais  demande,
fmon  que  vous  aymamez  la  paix,  &  que  vous  obei'mez
a  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait?  Son  Pere  luy  refpondit,  pour
toy  mon  enfant,  tu  peux  croire,  tu  peux  aymer  la
priere,  car  tu  n'es  point  mechant;  c'eft  en  vain  pour
moy  que  ie  prierois,  i'ay  [t]rop  de  colere  &  trop  de
malice,  il  me  [fjaudroit  aller  tous  les  iours  a  confeffe,
&  encor  ne  pourroi-ie  m'amender.

Vn  fien  oncle  defia  bien  aage,  eftant  arriue  [135]  a
Montreal,  aum-toft  noftre  Neophyte  l'aborde,  le  pr6-
che,  l'incite  a  £couter  les  difcours  du  Pere,  il  l'amene
doucement,  &  pour  l'engager,  il  luy  dift:  mon  oncle,
iamais,  fi  vous  croyez  en  Dieu,  ie  ne  me  fepareray
d'auec  vous  ny  en  terre,  ny  au  Ciel;  vous  ne  ferez
pas  ft  toft  baptife  que  ie  vous  obei'ray  en  tout  ce  que
vous  voudrez ;  que  fi  vous  perfeuerez  au  feruice  des
demons,  il  nous  faudra  feparer  de  bonne  heure;
efcoutez  le  Pere,  &  vous  apprendrez  qu'il  y  a  vne
autre  vie  que  celle  que  nous  menons  en  terre,
bien  differente  des  contes  qui  nous  difent  que  les
ames  s'en  vont  ou  le  Soleil  fe  couche. Cet  oncle  luy


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  167

baptized; now that I  am, my heart has  no  other
thought  than  to  be  with  him."

Some  days  after  his  Baptism,  a  certain  Savage  —
who  is  in  some  consideration  among  these  people,  and
who  has  taken  our  Neophyte  for  his  adopted  son,
for  a  long  time  past  —  committed  some  insolent  act
which  the  Father  judged  worthy  of  a  suitable  rebuke.
That  barbarian,  extremely  haughty,  chose  to  be
angry  with  our  Neophyte,  who  accosted  him  and
said:  "  If  you  do  not  acknowledge  God  as  your
father,  I  will  no  longer  be  a  son  of  yours ;  if  you
obey  him,  I  will  obey  you;  if  you  leave  him,  I  will
leave  you.  You  shun  the  Father  who  instructs  us;
though  he  should  strike  me,  I  would  go  to  see  him.
What  has  he  ever  asked  of  you,  but  that  you  should
love  peace,  and  that  you  should  obey  him  who  has
made  all  ? '  His  Father  answered  him :  "  As  for
thee,  my  child,  thou  canst  believe,  thou  canst  love
prayer,  for  thou  art  not  wicked.  As  for  me,  it  is  in
vain  that  I  should  pray, —  I  have  too  much  anger
and  too  much  malice ;  I  would  have  to  go  every  day
to  confession,  and  even  then  I  could  not  reform
myself."

An  uncle  of  his,  already  quite  aged,  having  arrived
[135]  at  Montreal,  forthwith  our  Neophyte  accosts
him,  preaches  to  him,  and  incites  him  to  listen  to
the  discourses  of  the  Father.  He  leads  him  gently,
and  in  order  to  pledge  him,  he  said  to  him:  "  My
uncle,  never,  if  you  believe  in  God,  will  I  separate
myself  from  you,  either  on  earth  or  in  Heaven.
You  will  no  sooner  be  baptized  than  I  will  obey  you
in  all  that  you  shall  wish ;  but  if  you  persevere  in
the  service  of  the  demons,  we  shall  have  to  separate
soon. Listen  to  the  Father,  and  you  will  learn  that


168  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.29

promit  qu'il  fe  feroit  inftruire,  mais  en  ce  temps-la
on  fit  defcendre  a  Kebec  pour  quelques  affaires  le
Pere  qui  entendoit  la  langue  Algonquine :  celuy  qui
deuoit  aller  en  fa  place,  tardant  trop  au  gre"  de  ce  bon
Chreitien,  il  monte  dans  fon  canot,  fait  enuiron
foixate  lieues  de  chemin  auec  vn  bon  vieillard,  vient
trouuer  le  Pere,  &  luy  dit:  Tu  t'en  es  alle  fans  nous
dire  adieu,  pendant  que  nous  eftions  a  la  chaffe,  nous
te  venons  requerir,  retourne,  mon  Pere,  tout  le
monde  eft  trilte  la  haut,  chacun  baiffe  la  tefte,  per-
fonne  [136]  ne  dit  mot:  ceux  qui  parlent,  difent  que
tu  n'as  point  d'efprit  de  quitter  tes  enfans.  Le  Pere
fut  touche  &  leur  promit  qu'il  remonteroit,  quand
les  vaiffeaux  pour  lefquels  il  eftoit  defcendu,  feroient
fur  leur  depart.  Ce  bon  Neophyte  remontant  a
Montreal,  fut  faifi  en  chemin  d'vne  fievre  chaude,  fi
violente  qu'il  le  fallut  decharger  du  canot,  comme
vn  corps  mort.  Sa  femme  accourt  &  fe  lamente,
tous  ceux  qui  le  regardoient,  crioient  que  e'en  eftoit
fait :  deux  Sorciers  &  Iongleurs  le  viennent  voir,  &
luy  font  offre  de  leurs  chants  &  de  leurs  tambours
pour  le  guerir:  le  fuis  Chreitien,  refpondit-il,  ie  ne
crains  point  la  mort :  quand  voftre  art  me  pourroit
guerir,  ie  ne  m'en  voudrois  pas  feruir.  Vn  Payen
qui  fe  trouua  prefent,  &  qui  a  quelque  bonne  inclina-
tion pour  la  Foy,  luy  dift:  Ie  te  fcay  bon  gre,  e'eft
ainfi  qu'il  faut  garder  la  parole  qu'on  a  donnee  a  celuy
qui  a  tout  fait.  Ce  pauure  malade  fut  rapporte  la
veille  de  S.  Ignace,  &  le  lendemain  matin  vn  Pere  de
noftre  Compagnie  l'allant  vifiter,  luy  dift,  qu'a  tel
iour  eftoit  mort  vn  grad  Sainct.  qui  auoit  grandement
ayme  la conuerfion de  tout  le monde, qu'il eftoit


1646J  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  169

there  is  another  life  than  the  one  that  we  lead  on
earth,  very  different  from  the  tales  which  tell  us  that
souls  go  away  to  the  place  where  the  Sun  goes
down."  This  uncle  promised  him  that  he  would
become  instructed ;  but  at  that  time  the  Father  who
understood  the  Algonquin  language  was  obliged  to
go  down  to  Kebec  on  some  business.  The  Father
who  was  to  go  in  his  place  delaying  too  long  to  suit
that  good  Christian,  he  embarks  in  his  canoe,  makes
about  sixty  leagues  of  distance  with  a  good  old  man,
comes  to  find  the  Father  and  says  to  him:  "Thou
wentest  away  without  saying  good-by  to  us,  while
we  were  at  the  hunt.  We  come  to  claim  thee;  re-
turn, my  Father.  Every  one  is  sad  up  there ;  each
lowers  his  head,  and  no  one  [136]  says  a  word;  those
who  speak  say  that  thou  hast  no  sense,  to  leave  thy
children."  The  Father  was  touched,  and  promised
them  that  he  would  go  up  again  when  the  vessels,
for  which  he  had  come  down,  should  take  their
departure.  This  good  Neophyte,  going  back  to
Montreal,  was  seized  on  the  way  with  a  burning
fever, —  so  violent  that  it  was  necessary  to  remove  him
from  the  canoe,  like  a  dead  body.  His  wife  hastens
to  him  and  laments;  all  those  who  looked  at  him
cried  that  it  was  all  over  with  him.  Two  Sorcerers
and  Jugglers  come  to  see  him,  and  make  him  an  offer
of  their  songs  and  of  their  drums,  to  cure  him.  "  I
am  a  Christian,"  he  answers;  "  I  do  not  fear  death;
and,  even  if  your  art  could  heal  me,  I  would  not  use
it."  A  Pagan  who  happened  to  be  present,  and  who
has  some  kindly  inclination  for  the  Faith,  said  to
him:  "  I  am  pleased  with  thee;  that  is  the  way  one
must  keep  the  word  that  one  has  given  to  him  who
has  made  all." This  poor  patient  was  brought  back


170  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  29

puiffant  aupr£s  [137]  de  Dieu,  qu'il  luy  confeilloit
d'implorer  fon  fecours;  qu'au  refte  il  s'en  alloit  cele-
brer  la  faindte  MefTe,  &  qu'il  fe  fouuiendroit  de  prier
Dieu  pour  luy.  Le  malade  fe  confeffe,  il  a  recours
a  Dieu  par  1'interceffion  de  S.  Ignace,  &  la  fievre  en
vn  moment  le  quitte:  il  eftoit  ardent  comme  le  feu,
il  fe  trouue  frais,  comme  vn  poiffon,  il  repofe  fort
doucement,  en  vn  mot  il  eft  guery.  Cela  le  toucha
fi  fort  qu'il  voulut  en  donner  la  louange  a  Dieu  de-
uant  ceux  qui  l'auoient  condamne  a  mort,  il  prepare
vn  feftin  du  premier  bled  d'Inde  cuitiue  par  les
Sauuages:  les  conuiez  croyoient  que  c'eftoit  vn  feftin
d'adieu,  &  qu'il  eftoit  aux  abois:  ils  entrent  en  fa
cabane,  le  voyent  fain  &  gaillard,  l'ecoutent  auec
eflonnement.  Ce  ne  font  pas,  dit-il,  les  tambours
qui  m'ont  rendu  la  vie,  ie  n'ay  plus  de  commerce
auec  les  demons;  c'eft  le  Dieu  du  Ciel  qui  m'a  retire
de  la  mort:  ils  conf efferent  tous  que  cette  guerifon
eftoit  extraordinaire,  &  qu'vn  trefpaffe,  comme  ils  le
faifoient,  ne  pouuoit  pas  refufciter  de  foy-mefme  &
en  ft  peu  de  temps.

Ie  coucheray  en  paffant  vne  gentille  refponfe  que
fit  fa  femme:  elle  fe  nomme  [138]  en  fa  langue  Ka-
makatetfingb'etch,  c'eft  a  dire  qui  a  la  face  noire.  Le
Pere  voyant  qu'elle  fe  cabanoit  auec  fes  gens  fur  vn
petit  ruiffeau,  luy  dift  en  riant:  Ie  voy  bien  que  tu
te  loges  expres  fur  le  bord  de  ces  eaux,  pour  te  lauer,
en  forte  qu'on  ne  te  nomme  plus  la  face  noire:  tu
veux  changer  de  nom,  tu  veux  eftre  appellee  KaSbin-
gb'etch,  c'eft  a  dire  la  face  blanche.  Helas!  mon
Pere,  refpondit-elle,  il  n'y  a  que  les  eaux  du  Bap-
tefme que tu me refufes, qui me puiffent faire


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  171

on  the  eve  of  St.  Ignace ;  and  the  next  morning  a
Father  of  our  Society,  going  to  visit  him,  told  him
that  on  such  a  day  had  died  a  great  Saint,  who  had
earnestly  desired  the  conversion  of  all  the  world;
that  he  was  powerful  with  [137]  God.  The  Father
advised  him  to  implore  his  help;  and  said  that,
furthermore,  he  was  on  his  way  to  celebrate  the
holy  Mass,  and  that  he  would  remember  to  pray
to  God  for  him.  The  sick  man  confesses;  he  has
recourse  to  God,  through  the  intercession  of  St.
Ignace,  and  the  fever  in  a  moment  leaves  him :  he
was  burning  like  fire,  but  finds  himself  cool  as  a  fish ;
he  rests  very  quietly ;  in  a  word,  he  is  cured.  That  so
deeply  touched  him  that  he  wished  to  give  the  praise
for  it  to  God  before  those  who  had  doomed  him  to
death.  He  prepares  a  feast  of  the  first  Indian  corn
cultivated  by  the  Savages:  the  guests  believed  that
it  was  a  farewell  feast,  and  that  he  was  in  extremity.
They  enter  his  cabin,  see  him  sound  and  merry,  and
listen  to  him  with  astonishment.  "  It  was  not,"  he
says,  "the  drums  which  restored  my  life,— I  have
no  more  dealings  with  the  evil  spirits ;  it  is  the  God
of  Heaven  who  has  delivered  me  from  death."  They
all  acknowledged  that  this  cure  was  extraordinary,
and  that  a  man  deceased,  as  they  regarded  him,
could  not  revive  by  himself,  and  in  so  little  time.

I  will  indite,  in  passing,  a  neat  answer  made  by
his  wife;  she  is  named,  [138]  in  her  own  language,
Kamakatewingwetch, — that  is  to  say,  "  who  has  the
face  black. ' '  The  Father,  seeing  that  she  had  a  cabin
with  her  people  at  a  little  brook,  said  to  her,  laugh-
ing: "  I  see  well  that  thou  lodgest  on  the  edge  of
these  waters  expressly  to  wash  thyself,  so  that  thou
may st  no  more  be  named  '  the  black  face.' Thou


172


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  29


changer  de  nom:  cette  riuiere  ne  fcauroit  blanchir
mon  ame:  ce  qu'elle  defiroit  fi  ardemment,  luy  a  efte
accorde  depuis  peu.

Pendant  que  le  Pere  eftoit  abfent,  vn  ieune  Chre-
ftien  fe  voulant  marier,  s'addreffa  a  Madamoifelle
d'Allibout  qui  entend  affez  gentiment  la  langue  Al-
gonquine:  Puifque  tu  nous  entends  bien,  luy  dit-il,
ne  pourrois-tu  pas  bien  f uppleer  au  deffaut  du  Pere  ?
nous  nous  fommes  donnez  parole  vne  ieune  fille
Chreftienne  &  moy,  ie  te  fupplie,  marie  nous  publi-
quement  en  l'Eglife:  carle  Pere  nous  deffend  de
nous  marier  en  fecret.  Cette  fimplicite  fit  lire  cette
bonne  Damoifelle,  qui  luy  repartit,  non  fans  quelque
rougeur  [139]  qu'il  falloit  ou  attendre  le  Pere,  ou
defcendre  iufques  a  Kebec.

Vn  vieillard  aage  peut-eftre  de  80.  ans,  s'eft  retire
a  Montreal :  Voicy,  dit-il,  mon  pays,  ma  mere  m'a
raconte  qu'eitant  ieunes  les  Hurons  nous  faifant,  la
guerre  nous  chafferent  de  cette  Ifle,  pour  moy  i'y
veux  eftre  enterre  aupres  de  mes  anceftres.  Cet
homme  a  efte  guerrier,  fa  penfee  eftoit  bien  eloignee
de  noftre  creance;  eftant  tombe  malade  le  Pere  le
vifite,  luy  parle  d'vne  autre  vie  pleine  de  plaifirs,  ou
de  douleurs:  mais  comme  il  ne  penfoit  qu'a  la  terre,
il  n'auoit  point  d'oreilles  ny  pour  le  Paradis,  ny  pour
l'Enfer.  Le  Pere  voyat  que  la  douceur  n'entroit
point  dans  cette  ame,  le  prechant  certain  iour  fort
extraordinairement  auec  des  menaces  d'vn  fupplice
eternel,  cela  ne  l'ebranla  point.  Les  Sauuages  Chre-
ftiens  de  fa  cabane  epouuantez  de  cette  opiniaftrete,
s'ecriet:  Prions  pour  luy,  mon  Pere,  afin  que  Dieu
luy  donne de l'efprit, il  ne fcait  pas  ce  que  c'eft


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  173

wishest  to  change  thy  name ;  thou  wouldst  like  to  be
called  Kaoubingwetch," — that  is,  "  the  white  face."
"Alas!  my  Father,"  she  answered,  "nothing  but
the  waters  of  Baptism,  which  thou  refusest  me,  can
cause  me  to  change  my  name;  this  river  cannot
whiten  my  soul."  What  she  desired  so  ardently
was  granted  her  not  long  ago.

While  the  Father  was  absent,  a  young  Christian,
wishing  to  marry,  addressed  himself  to  Madamoiselle
d'Allibout,  who  has  a  very  ready  knowledge  of
the  Algonquin  language.  "  Since  thou  understand-
est  us  well,"  he  says  to  her,  "  canst  thou  not  indeed
supply  the  lack  of  the  Father?  We  have  given  our
word  to  each  other,  a  young  Christian  girl  and  I ;  I
beseech  thee,  marry  us  publicly  in  the  Church:  for
the  Father  forbids  us  to  marry  in  secret."  This
simplicity  made  that  good  Damoiselle  laugh;  she
answered  him,  not  without  some  blushes,  [139]  that
it  was  necessary  either  to  await  the  Father,  or  go
down  to  Kebec.

An  old  man,  aged  perhaps  80  years,  has  retired  to
Montreal.  "  Here,"  said  he,  "  is  my  country.  My
mother  told  me  that  while  we  were  young,  the
Hurons  making  war  on  us,  drove  us  from  this  Island ;
as  for  me,  I  wish  to  be  buried  in  it,  near  my  ances-
tors. ' '  This  man  has  been  a  warrior ;  his  mind  was
very  averse  to  our  belief.  Having  fallen  sick,  the
Father  visits  him,  and  speaks  to  him  of  another  life,
full  of  pleasures  or  of  pains ;  but,  as  he  was  thinking
only  of  the  earth,  he  had  no  ears  either  for  Paradise
or  for  Hell.  The  Father,  seeing  that  mildness  en-
tered not  into  that  soul,  preached  to  him  on  a  certain
day  with  unusual  force,  and  with  threats  of  an  eter-
nal torture ;  but  that  moved  him  not. The  Christian


174  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J^SU/TES  [Vol.29

d'eftre  brule"  pour  iamais  au  pays  des  demons.  Le
Pere  fe  met  a  genoux,  &  en  fuitte  tous  les  Chreftiens,
&  mefme  encore  tous  les  Payens,  il  prie  d'vne  voix
forte,  il  coniure  celuy  qui  a  tant  fouffert  [140]  pour
les  hommes  d'auoir  pitie  de  ce  pauure  miferable,
qu'on  ne  croyoit  pas  deuoir  paffer  la  nuidt,  tout  le
monde  repete  mot  a  mot  la  mefme  priere.  Ce
pauure  vieillard  eftone"  de  cette  facon  de  faire,  fut
touched  les  larmes  luy  tombent  des  yeux,  il  s'ecrie
en  fanglotant :  le  fuis  mefchant,  ie  n'ay  point  d'efprit,
ie  quitteray  bien  aifement  les  feftins  a  tout  manger,
les  chants  fuperftitieux ;  mais  ma  colere  m'a  rendu
mefchat  par  toute  la  terre,  iufques  aux  riuages  de
l'autre  mer:  Priez  pour  moy,  difoit-il,  pleurant  a
chaudes  larmes,  arm  que  toutes  mes  malices  foient
effacees.  Le  Pere  le  voyat  bien  difpofe,  le  careffe,
le  penfe  luy-mef me :  En  vn  mot  ce  pauure  homme
retourne  encor  en  fant6,  il  dit  maintenant  par  tout
que  le  Pere  l'a  guery,  &  qu'il  luy  a  enfeigne  des
chofes  qui  le  font,  reuiure.

Quand  on  luy  difoit  qu'il  feroit  vn  iour  dans  la
fleur  de  fon  aage,  &  que  cette  fleur  ne  flaitriroit  ia-
mais, &  que  le  Fils  de  Dieu  s'eftant  fait  homme,  nous
auoit  acquis  ce  bon-heur,  il  ne  pouuoit  contenir  fa
ioye :  O  Nicanis,  ce  que  tu  dis,  eft  admirable,  parle
bien  haut  &  m'enfeigne  fouuent,  c'eft  tout  de  bon
que  ie  veux  croire.

On  ne  pouuoit  deuant  cette  touche,  luy  [141]  faire
reconnoiftre  fes  offenfes,  il  eftoit  le  plus  innocent
homme  du  monde:  I'eftois  bon,  difoit-il,  deuant  que
tous  les  Sauuages  qui  font  fur  la  terre,  fuffent  nez,
il  fe  croyoit  le  plus  aage  des  hommes. Si  toll  qu'il


1646J  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  175

Savages  of  his  cabin,  frightened  at  this  obstinacy,
exclaim:  "  Let  us  pray  for  him,  my  Father,  to  the
end  that  God  may  give  him  sense;  he  knows  not
what  it  is  to  be  burned  forever  in  the  country  of
the  demons."  The  Father  kneels  down,  and  after-
ward all  the  Christians,  and  even  all  the  Pagans  also ;
he  prays  in  a  loud  voice, — he  entreats  him  who  has
so  greatly  suffered  [140]  for  men,  to  have  pity  on
this  poor  wretch,  who,  it  was  believed,  could  not
survive  the  night;  every  one  repeats,  word  for  word,
the  same  prayer.  The  poor  old  man,  astonished  at
such  a  proceeding,  was  touched;  the  tears  fall  from
his  eyes,  he  exclaims,  with  sobs:  "  I  am  wicked,  I
have  no  sense.  I  shall  very  easily  give  up  the  eat-
all  feasts  and  the  superstitious  songs;  but  my  anger
has  rendered  me  wicked  throughout  the  earth,  even
to  the  shores  of  the  other  sea.  Pray  for  me, "  he
said,  weeping  with  hot  tears,  "  to  the  end  that  all
my  evil  acts  be  washed  away."  The  Father,  seeing
him  well  disposed,  soothes  him,  and  himself  nurses
him.  In  a  word,  that  poor  man  again  returns  to
health ;  he  now  says  everywhere  that  the  Father  has
cured  him,  and  that  he  has  taught  him  things  which
make  him  live  again.

When  he  was  told  that  some  day  he  should  be  in  the
flower  of  his  youth,  and  that  this  bloom  would  never
wither;  and  that  the  Son  of  God,  having  been  made
man,  had  acquired  for  us  that  happiness,  he  could
not  contain  his  joy.  "  O  Nicanis,  what  thou  sayest
is  admirable ;  speak  very  loud,  and  teach  me  often :
it  is  in  good  earnest  that  I  wish  to  believe."

One  could  not,  before  this  stroke,  [141]  make  him
acknowledge  his  offenses, —  he  was  the  most  inno-
cent man  in  the  world. "  I  was  good,"  he  would


176  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

fut  touche,  il  parla  bien  vn  autre  langage,  il  fe  difoit
le  plus  mefchant  qui  fut  fous  le  Ciel/  il  inuitoit  tous
fes  gens  a  6couter  la  dodtrine  de  Iesvs-  Ch  rist;
on  l'entendoit  la  nuidt  prier  Dieu,  rei'terant  par  vn
long-temps  vne  mefme  priere  toute  pleine  d'affedtion,
il  fe  faifoit  inftruire  comme  vn  enfant ;  fe  glorifiant
quand  il  retenoit  quelque  poindt  de  noftre  creance,
il  repetoit  fa  lecon  pendant  la  nuidt,  fouhaitant  de
fcauoir  bien-toft  ce  qui  eftoit  neceffaire  pour  receuoir
le  Baptefme.

II  auoit  efte  pris  plufieurs  fois  des  Iroquois:  le
priois,  difoit-il,  celuy  qui  nourrit  &  qui  conferue  les
homes,  &  ie  croyois  toufiours  qu'il  m'ayderoit  a  me
fauuer,  lors  mefme  que  mes  amis  me  bruleroient
defia.

Les  abyfmes  de  la  prouidence  de  Dieu,  font  ex-
tremement  profonds.  Cet  homme  qui  a  paffe  toute
fa  vie  dans  vne  liberte  de  Sauuage,  &  dans  la  fureur
de  la  guerre,  [142]  deuint  vn  petit  agneau  deuant  fa
mort,  tout  prefl  de  lauer  les  taches  de  fon  ame  dans
le  fang  de  celuy  qui  a  voulu  eftre  la  vidtime  &  le
facrifice  pour  nos  pechez.

L'vne  des  chofes  que  nous  inculquons  plus  forte-
ment  aux  Sauuages,  eft  d'auoir  recours  a  Dieu  du
fonds  de  leur  cceur,  de  le  prier  dans  les  befoins,  &
de  fe  confier  en  fa  bonte  &  en  fa  toute-puiffance :
voicy  ce  quelques-vns  d'entr'eux  nous  ont  rapporte.

Deux  Sauuages  Payens  eftans  affamez  pourfui-
uoient  vn  Cerf ;  l'vn  le  fuiuoit  a  la  pifte  dans  le  bois,
l'autre  trauerfoit  vne  riuiere  glacee  pour  luy  couper
chemin,  fe  voyant  tous  deux  hors  d'haleine,  ils  fe
mettent  a  genoux,  l'vn  fur  la  neige  &  l'autre  fur  la


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  111

say,  "  before  all  the  Savages  who  are  on  the  earth
were  born," — he  believed  himself  the  oldest  of  men.
As  soon  as  he  was  stricken,  he  spoke  a  very  differ-
ent language, — he  called  himself  the  most  wicked
person  beneath  the  Sky.  He  invited  all  his  people
to  listen  to  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ;  he  was
heard  at  night,  praying  to  God,  reiterating  a  long
time  the  same  prayer,  all  full  of  affection ;  he  became
instructed,  like  a  child.  Glorying  when  he  retained
some  point  of  our  belief,  he  repeated  his  lesson
during  the  night, —  desiring  to  know  very  soon  what
was  necessary  in  order  to  receive  Baptism.

He  had  been  captured  several  times  by  the  Iro-
quois. "  I  prayed,"  he  said,  "  to  him  who  feeds
and  preserves  men ;  and  I  always  believed  that  he
would  aid  me  to  escape,  even  though  my  friends
should  already  be  burning  me."

The  depths  of  the  providence  of  God  are  extreme-
ly profound.  This  man,  who  has  spent  all  his  life
in  a  Savage's  freedom,  and  in  the  fury  of  war,  [142]
became  a  little  lamb  before  his  death, —  all  ready  to
wash  the  stains  from  his  soul  in  the  blood  of  him
who  consented  to  be  the  victim  and  the  sacrifice  for
our  sins.

One  of  the  things  which  we  inculcate  most  strongly
upon  the  Savages,  is  to  have  recourse  to  God  from
the  depths  of  their  hearts,  to  pray  to  him  in  their
needs,  and  to  trust  themselves  to  his  goodness  and
to  his  omnipotence.  Here  follows  what  some  among
them  have  related  to  us.

Two  Pagan  Savages,  being  famished,  were  pur-
suing a  Stag ;  the  one  was  following  it  by  the  trail
in  the  woods,  the  other  was  crossing  a  frozen  river
in  order  to cut  off  its  course. Finding  themselves


178  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

glace,  fans  que  l'vn  fceut  le  deffein  de  l'autre;  leur
priere  eflant  faite,  ils  fe  fentent  fortifiez,  ils  repren-
nent  courage,  pourfuiuent  leur  proye  auec  plus  d'ar-
deur,  l'ayants  laff6e,  la  tuent,  &  fe  mettent  a  genoux
fur  fon  corps,  remerciants  Dieu  de  leur  auoir  donn6
a  manger.

Deux  ieunes  Chreftiens  ayant  pourfuiuy  trop  opi-
niaitrement  vn  Elan,  fansrien  porter  auec  eux  qu'vne
epee,  furent  quatre  iours  dans  la  neige  &  dans  la
rigueur  [143]  d'vn  froid  eftrange,  fans  feu  &  fans
autre  abry  qu'vn  mef chant  bout,  de  coauerture  tout
vfe  qui  leur  feruoit  de  robe,  de  lict,  de  feu  &  de  mai-
fon.  Se  trouuans  dans  cette  extremite,  le  plus  foible
des  deux  dit  a  fon  compagnon,  ie  n'en  puis  plus,  ie
fuis  mort,  fe  tournant  vers  Dieu  au  fond  de  fon  ame.
II  nous  dift  apres  qu'il  fentit  tout  a  coup  vne  chaleur
qui  fe  repandit  par  tout  fon  corps,  &  qui  luy  conti-
nua  toute  la  nuidt,  &  par  ce  moyen  luy  fauua  la  vie
&  a  fon  compagnon :  car  il  le  rechauff oit  par  cette
ardeur,  qui  le  faifoit,  difoit-il,  quad  fuer.

Vn  Sauuage  Payen,  &  d'vn  tres-mauuais  naturel,
voyant  fon  enfant  aux  abois,  vient  treuuer  le  Pere,  &
luy  dit:  tu  nous  dis  que  ceux  qui  font  baptifez,  vont
au  Ciel,  &  qu'ils  font  remplis  de  delices,  viens  done,  ie
te  prie,  baptifer  deuant  fa  mort  mon  enfant :  car  ie
luy  veux  procurer  ce  bon-heur,  1' amour  naturel  auec
vn  petit  grain  de  Foy,  font  capables  de  faire  fauuer
vne  ame.  Le  Pere  luy  dit,  pourquoy  ne  te  procures
tu  pas  ce  mefme  bon-heur  a  toy-mefme?  attends,
dit-il,  encore  quelque  temps,  ie  fuis  maintenant  trop
mef  chant.  Le  premier  iour  de  l'an,  [144]  on  tira
quelques  pieces  de  canon  des  le  poindt  du  iour  pour


1 646J  RELA  T10N  OF  1643  -46  179

both  out  of  breath,  they  kneel  down, —  the  one  on
the  snow,  and  the  other  on  the  ice,  without  knowing
each  other's  purpose.  Their  prayer  being  done,
they  feel  themselves  strengthened ;  they  take  fresh
courage  and  pursue  their  prey  with  more  ardor.
Having  fatigued  it,  they  kill  it,  and  kneel  over  its
body,  thanking  God  for  having  given  them  food.

Two  young  Christians  —  having  too  obstinately
pursued  an  Elk,  without  carrying  with  them  any-
thing but  a  javelin  — were  four  days  in  the  snow  and
in  the  rigor  [143]  of  an  unusual  cold,  without  fire
and  without  other  shelter  than  a  sorry  piece  of  blan-
ket, all  worn,  which  served  them  as  robe,  bed,  fire,
and  house.  Finding  themselves  in  this  extremity,
the  weaker  of  the  two  said  to  his  companion:  "  I
can  do  no  more;  I  am  dead," — turning  toward  God
in  the  depth  of  his  soul.  He  told  us  afterward,  that
he  felt  all  at  once  a  warmth  which  spread  itself  over
all  his  body,  and  which  continued  with  him  the
whole  night,  and  thus  saved  his  life  and  his  com-
panion's, for  he  warmed  him  also  with  that  heat,
which  made  him,  he  said,  almost  sweat.

A  Pagan  Savage,  and  one  of  a  very  evil  nature,
seeing  his  child  in  extremity,  comes  to  find  the  Fa-
ther and  says  to  him:  "Thou  tellest  us  that  those
who  are  baptized  go  to  Heaven,  and  that  they  are
filled  with  rapture.  Come  then,  I  beg  thee,  to  bap-
tize my  child  before  its  death ;  for  I  wish  to  procure
it  this  happiness."  Natural  love,  with  a  little  grain
of  Faith,  is  able  to  effect  the  salvation  of  a  soul.
The  Father  said  to  him :  ' '  Why  dost  thou  not  pro-
cure this  same  happiness  for  thyself?"  "  Wait,"
said  he,  "  some  time  longer;  I  am  now  too  wicked."
The first day of the year, [144] some pieces of


180  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.29

honorer  la  Fefte :  les  Sauuages  allarmez  accourent,
demandent  ce  que  c'efl,  on  leur  dit  qu'a  mefme  iour
le  Fils  de  Dieu  auoit  efte"  nomme  Iesvs:  c'efl  a  dire
Sauueur,  &  que  le  bruit  des  canons  donnoit  a  enten-
dre qu'il  le  falloit  honorer:  allons,  fe  dirent-ils,  les
vns  aux  autres,  &  luy  rendons  ce  mefme  honneur:
ils  chargent  leurs  arquebufes,  &  font  vne  falue  fort
gentille.

Le  iour  du  faindt  Sacrement,  ils  vouliirent  afiifter
a  la  Proceffion:  on  fit  marcher  vne  efcoiiade  d'arque-
bufiers  Francois,  les  Payens  eftoient  de  la  partie  auffi
bien  que  les  Chreftiens.  Ils  marcherent  tous  deux  a
deux,  auec  vn  bel  ordre  &  vne  belle  modeftie,  depuis
la  Chappelle  iufques  a  l'Hofpital,  ou  on  auoit  dreffe
vn  beau  Repof oir.  II  eft  bien  difficile  de  voir  Iesvs-
Christ  honore  par  des  Barbares,  fans  en  reff entir
de  la  ioye  iufques  au  profond  du  cceur.

Pour  conclufion  de  ce  Chapitre,  ie  diray  deux  mots
de  grande  confolation.  Le  Capitaine  Huron,  dont
i'ay  fait  mention  cy-deffus,  ayant  veu  la  beaute  des
bleds  d'Inde  de  Montreal,  a  pris  refolution  d'aller
[145]  querir  fa  famille,  &  d'en  amener  encore  vne
autre  pour  y  venir  faire  leur  demeure ;  s'il  continue
dans  fa  penfee,  il  ebranlera  beaucoup  d'Hurons,  &
ie  ne  puis  douter  que  fi  les  Iroquois  plus  hauts  ne
defcendent  point  iufques  a  Montreal,  cette  Ifle  ne  fe
peuple  de  Sauuage[s]  auec  le  temps,  &  que  Dieu  n'y
foit  honore.

Le  Pere  Ifaac  Iogues  qui  eft  retourne  aux  Iroquois
pour  y  paffer  l'hyuer,  a  dans  fes  ordres  de  faire  tout
fon  poffible  d' inciter  a  la  paix  tous  les  Iroquois  fupe-
rieurs,  qu'il  verra  dans  les  bourgades  des  Annierron-


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  181

cannon  were  fired  at  daybreak,  to  honor  the  Feast;
the  Savages  run  up  in  alarm,  and  ask  what  that  is.
They  are  told  that  on  that  day  the  Son  of  God  had
been  named  Jesus, — that  is,  "  Savior;  '  and  that
the  noise  of  the  cannon  signified  that  he  should  be
honored.  "  Come,"  they  said  to  one  another,  "  and
let  us  render  him  that  same  honor ;  ' '  they  load  their
arquebuses,  and  fire  a  very  neat  salute.

On  the  day  of  the  blessed  Sacrament,  they  wished
to  be  present  in  the  Procession ;  there  was  in  the  march
a  squad  of  French  arquebusiers,  and  the  Pagans,  as
well  as  the  Christians,  took  part  therein.  They  all
marched  two  by  two,  in  fine  order  and  with  becom-
ing modesty,  from  the  Chapel  even  to  the  Hospital,
where  had  been  set  up  a  beautiful  temporary  Altar.
It  is  very  difficult  to  see  Jesus  Christ  honored  by
Barbarians,  without  feeling  joy  thereat,  even  to  the
depth  of  the  heart.

As  conclusion  to  this  Chapter,  I  will  make  two
statements  of  great  consolation.  The  Huron  Captain
whom  I  mentioned  above,  having  observed  the  fine
appearance  of  the  Indian  corn  at  Montreal,  has  taken
the  resolution  to  go  [145]  and  fetch  his  family,  and
to  bring  still  another,  in  order  to  come  and  make
their  dwelling  there.  If  he  continues  in  his  pur-
pose, he  will  influence  many  Hurons;  and  I  cannot
doubt  that,  unless  the  upper  Iroquois  come  down  as
far  as  Montreal,  that  Island  will  be  peopled  with  Sav-
ages in  course  of  time,  and  that  God  will  be  honored
there.

Father  Isaac  Jogues,  who  has  returned  to  the
Iroquois  to  pass  the  winter  there,  has  among  his
orders  to  do  all  in  his  power  to  incline  to  peace  all
the  upper  Iroquois  whom  he  shall  see  in  the  villages


182  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.29

nons;  &  en  cas  de  refus,  il  a  commifllon  de  preffer
fortement  les  Annierronnons  de  les  empefcher  de
venir  fur  la  Riuiere  des  prairies,  par  oil  paffent  les
Hurons  bornans  leurs  guerres  fur  le  grand  fleuue  de
faindt  Laurent  bien  loing  au  dela  de  Montreal,  ou  du
moins  de  leur  deffendre  de  ne  point  approcher  de
cette  Ifle,  ny  des  pays  qui  font  vis  a  vis  de  leurs  bour-
gades:  comme  eftant  en  quelque  facon  de  leur
diftridt.  Si  Dieu  nous  accorde  cette  benediction,
cette  Ifle  fera  le  centre  de  la  paix :  comme  elle  a  efte"
l'objet  de  toutes  les  guerres.  La  patience,  &  la
confiance  emportent  tout.


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  183

of  the  Annierronnons ;  and,  in  case  of  refusal,  he  has
commission  strongly  to  urge  the  Annierronnons  to
prevent  the  former  from  coming  upon  the  River  des
prairies,  where  the  Hurons  pass, —  limiting  their
wars  on  the  great  river  of  saint  Lawrence  very  far
beyond  Montreal, —  or  at  least  to  forbid  them  to
approach  that  Island,  or  the  countries  which  are
opposite  their  villages,  as  being  in  some  sense  of
their  own  district.  If  God  grant  us  this  blessing,
that  Island  will  be  the  center  of  the  peace,  as  it  has
been  the  object  of  all  the  wars.  Patience  and  confi-
dence overcome  everything.


184  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29


[146]  CHAPITRE  IX.

DE QUELQUES BONNES ACTIONS, & DE QUELQUES
BONS SENTIMENS DES SAUUAGES CHRESTIENS.

VN  Francis  ne  pouuant  tirer  vangeance  d'vn  tort
qu'il  croyoit  liiy  auoir  efte  fait,  prit  refolution
de  faire  tomber  en  peche  le  plus  de  Sauuages
qu'il  pourroit,  afin  de  perdre  le  pays,  n'ignorant  pas
non  plus  que  ce  mal-heureux  Confeiller  dont  il  eft
parle  dans  l'Efcriture,  que  le  moyen  de  perdre  vn
peuple,  c'eft  de  le  faire  bander  contre  fon  Dieu:  il
caiole  quelques  filles,  les  inuite  a  boire  a  deffein  de
les  enyurer  pour  paffer  d'vn  crime  a  vn  autre.  Les
femmes  Sauuages  ne  font  non  plus  blafmees  de  leurs
compatriottes,  pour  fcauoirtenir  vne  tace  en  main  que
les  Angloifes,  ou  les  Flamandes:  celles-cy  ayant  beu,
cet  impie  s'approche  pour  les  careffer:  mais  vne
Chreftienne  qui  eftoit  de  la  bande,  prit  la  parole.  Ie
voy  bien  ton  deffein,  mal-heureux  que  [147]  tu  es:
c'eft  le  peche,  &  non  la  charite  qui  t'anime:  Va  mef-
chant,  n'a-tu  point  de  honte,  toy  qui  es  baptife  des
ta  naiffance,  de  nous  porter  au  mal,  ne  penfe  pas  nous
perdre  par  tes  bien-faits,  nous  craignons  celuy  qui  a
tout  fait,  nous  ne  voulons  pas  l'offencer.  Cet  homme
bien  eftonne  perdit  la  parole,  Dieu  le  toucha  par  la
voix  d'vne  femme,  il  va  trouuer  le  Pere  qui  a  foin
des  Sauuages,  il  s'accufe  ingenuement  de  fa  faute,
proteftant  qu'il  alloit  changer  de  vie,  &  de  brifee,  &
qu'au  lieu  de  fcandalifer  les  Sauuages,  il  feroit  fon
poffible  pour  cooperer  a  leur  conuerfion.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  185


[146]  CHAPTER  IX.

OF SOME GOOD DEEDS AND SOME GOOD SENTIMENTS
OF THE CHRISTIAN SAVAGES.

A  FRENCHMAN,  unable  to  take  revenge  for
a  wrong  which  he  believed  had  been  done
him,  took  the  resolution  to  entice  into  sin  as
many  Savages  as  he  could,  so  as  to  ruin  the  coun-
try,—  not  being  ignorant,  any  more  than  that  miser-
able Counselor  of  whom  there  is  mention  in  Scrip-
ture, that  the  way  to  ruin  a  people  is  to  cause  it  to
take  sides  against  its  God.  He  cajoles  some  girls,
and  invites  them  to  drink,  on  purpose  to  intoxicate
them,  in  order  to  pass  from  one  crime  to  another.
The  Savage  women  are  not  more  blamed  by  their
fellow-countrymen  for  knowing  how  to  hold  the  cup
in  their  hands,  than  the  English  women  or  the  Flem-
ish. These  girls  having  drunk,  that  impious  one
approaches  to  caress  them ;  but  a  Christian  girl  who
was  of  the  company  began  to  speak :  "  I  see  well  thy
design,  wretch  that  [147]  thou  art;  it  is  sin,  and  not
charity,  that  animates  thee.  Begone,  base  man;
hast  thou  no  shame,  thou  who  art  baptized  from  thy
birth,  to  incline  us  to  wrong?  Do  not  think  to  ruin
us  by  thy  favors ;  we  fear  him  who  has  made  all, —
we  do  not  wish  to  offend  him."  That  man,  much
astonished,  had  no  more  to  say;  God  touched  him  by
the  voice  of  a  woman.  He  goes  to  find  the  Father
who  has  charge  of  the  Savages;  he  frankly  accuses
himself  of  his  sin,  protesting  that  he  was  going  to


186  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

Vn  infidele  aymant  paffionn6ment  vne  fille  Cate-
chumene,  la  vifite  fouuent,  luy  donne  des  indices  de
fon  amour,  mais  en  vain :  car  il  eft  toufiours  conftam-
ment  rebute.  Ce  miferable  croyant  que  la  Foy  feule
conferuoit  la  purete"  dans  cette  ame,  ne  parle  plus  de
fa  paflion :  mais  il  s'efforce  de  faper  doucement  ce
qui  luy  fait  refiftance.  II  iette  des  brocars  contre  la
Foy,  il  fe  gauffe  de  ceux  qui  croyent  a  des  eftran-
gers,  en  vn  mot  il  reuoque  noftre  creance  en  doute.
Cette  bonne  fille  decouurant  fa  malice,  luy  dit:  tu
te  [148]  trompes  bien  fort,  n'ayant  pu  m'6branler
d'vn  cofte\  tu  m'attaques  de  l'autre.  Scache  que  la
priere  eft  la  chofe  la  plus  precieufe  que  i'aye  au
monde,  tu  m'ofterois  pluftoft  la  vie  que  la  Foy.  Ce
frippon  eftoit  nepueu  d  vne  femme  veritablement
Chreftienne  qui  luy  feruoit  de  mere,  elle  defeichoit
tous  les  iours  voyant  fes  debauches.  Le  Pere  qui  la
conduifoit  s'eftant  apperceu  de  fon  ennuy,  luy  en
demanda  laraifon,  helas!  dit-elle,  fi  quand  quelqu'vn
de  nos  amis  eft  pris  des  Iroquois  pour  eftre  brule\
nous  en  reffentons  de  la  douleur  quafi  iufques  a  la
mort:  comment  pourrois-je  viure  voyant  l'vn  de  mes
plus  proches,  lie"  par  les  demons,  qui  s'efForcent  de
le  ietter  dans  vn  feu  eternel?

Vn  autre  infidele  fecourant  vne  pauure  veufue
Chreftienne,  luy  demanda  pour  recompenfe  ce  que
la  pudeur  &  la  loy  de  Dieu  deffendent  de  donner:
helas!  fit-elle,''ce  que  tu  defires,  eft  hors  de  ma  puif-
fance,  ie  ne  puis  plus  fafcher  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait :
car  ie  fuis  Chreftienne:  oily  mais,  repart-il,  qui  te
preftera  f ecours  dans  ta  neceffite  ?  ou  trouueras-tu  des
robes,  &  des  viures?  la  Foy  ne  t'en  donnera  [149]
pas. Ta  parole  ne  vaut  rien,  les  robes  &  les  viures


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  187

change  the  conduct  and  course  of  his  life ;  and  that,
instead  of  scandalizing  the  Savages,  he  would  do  his
utmost  to  cooperate  in  their  conversion.

An  infidel,  passionately  loving  a  girl  who  was  a
Catechumen,  visits  her  often  and  gives  her  indica-
tions of  his  love,- -but  in  vain,  for  he  is  always
steadfastly  rejected.  This  wretch,  believing  that
the  Faith  alone  preserved  purity  in  that  soul,  speaks
no  more  of  his  passion ;  but  he  strives  quietly  to  un-
dermine that  which  offers  him  resistance.  He  casts
taunts  at  the  Faith,  he  jeers  at  those  who  believe  in
strangers ;  in  a  word,  he  calls  in  question  our  belief.
That  good  girl,  discovering  his  malice,  says  to  him:
"  Thou  [148]  art  very  much  deceived;  not  having
been  able  to  unsettle  me  in  one  direction,  thou
attackest  me  in  the  other.  Know  that  prayer  is  the
most  precious  thing  that  I  have  in  the  world :  thou
shouldst  sooner  take  away  my  life  than  the  Faith."
This  deceiver  was  nephew  to  a  truly  Christian  wom-
an, who  was  to  him  as  a  mother;  she  was  wasting
away  every  day,  seeing  his  debauches.  The  Father
who  directed  her,  having  perceived  her  trouble,
asked  her  the  reason  of  it.  "  Alas!  "  she  said,  "  if,
when  one  of  our  friends  is  taken  by  the  Iroquois,  to
be  burned,  we  feel  grief  for  it,  almost  even  unto
death,  how  could  I  live,  seeing  one  of  my  nearest
kindred  bound  by  the  demons,  who  are  striving  to
cast  him  into  an  eternal  fire  ? ' '

Another  infidel,  helping  a  poor  Christian  widow,
asked  her,  as  recompense,  that  which  decency  and
the  law  of  God  forbid  to  give.  "Alas!"  she  said,
'  what  thou  desirest  is  beyond  my  power;  I  cannot
further  offend  him  who  has  made  all,  for  I  am  a
Christian." "Yes," he answers, "but who will


L88  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  fiSUITES  [Vol.29

ne  font  pas  d' importance,  la  Foy  eft  de  prix  &  de
valeur;  cela  dit,  elle  s'eloigne  de  cet  impudent,  &
Dieu  ne  l'abandonna  pas.

Comme  elle  eft  d'vne  affez  belle  humeur,  quelque
temps  apres  vn  autre  l'attaqua,  tu  ne  fcais  peut-eftre
pas  luy  dit-elle,  que  ie  prie  &  que  ie  fuis  baptifee.
A  ces  paroles  il  tire  vn  collier  de  7.  ou  800.  grains
de  Porcelaine  pour  1'ebloiiir,  elle  luy  repart  en  fe
moquantde  luy,  ny  toy  ny  tesprefens  ne  valent  rien,
la  parole  de  Dieu  eft  confiderable,  fi  tu  te  veux  dam-
ner,  damne  toy  tout  feul,  n'en  traifne  point  d'autres
apres  toy.

Vn  ieune  homme  Chreftien,  auoit  parle  dans  les
bois  a.  vne  autre  f emme  que  la  fienne :  il  ne  fut  pas
fi  toft  arriue  en  la  demeure  des  Francois,  que  ceux
qui  l'auoient  veu,  l'accuferent  publiquement  au  Pere.
Ce  pauure  homme  affez  coupable  demande  pardon
de  fon  offence,  fe  vient  confeffer  auec  de  groffes
larmes,  proteftant  que  iamais  plus  il  ne  cauferoit  vn
tel  fcandale.  Son  feul  regret  fut  que  le  Pere  luy
auoit  done  vne  trop  legere  penitence,  il  demandoit
permiffion  de  fe  battre  foy-mefme.

[150]  Vne  fille  affez  pauure  ayant  efte  contrainte
par  la  neceffite,  d'epoufer  vn  infidele,  fe  voyant  mal
traitee  pour  ce  qu'elle  prioit  Dieu,  fe  contenta  de
faire  fes  prieres  en  fecret,  fans  fe  mettre  a.  genoux
deuant  les  Payens:  les  Chreftiens  s'en  eftant  apper-
ceus  en  font  fcandalifez,  l'vn  d'eux  fe  leue  publique-
ment dans  la  Chappelle,  &  apoftrophant  le  Pere,  luy
dit,  Mon  Pere,  ecoute  ma  parolle:  cette  femme  que
tu  vois  deuant  tes  yeux  s'eft  laiffee  tromper  par  le
diable,  elle  s'eft  mariee  a.  vn  mefchant  homme,  qui
la rendue fole, regarde  maintenant  ce  que  tu  luy


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  189

lend  thee  aid  in  thy  necessity?  Where  wilt  thou
find  clothing  and  provisions?  the  Faith  will  not  give
thee  these."  [149]  "Thy  word  is  worth  nothing,
and  clothing  and  provisions  are  of  no  importance;
the  Faith  is  of  price  and  of  value."  That  said,  she
withdraws  from  that  shameless  man,  and  God  did
not  abandon  her.

As  she  has  a  very  amiable  disposition,  another  man
attacked  her,  some  time  afterward.  "  Thou  dost  not
perhaps  know,"  she  says  to  him,  "  that  I  pray,  and
that  I  am  baptized."  At  these  words,  he  draws
forth  a  necklace  of  7  or  800  Porcelain  beads,  to  dazzle
her.  She  answers,  mocking  him,  "  Neither  thou
nor  thy  presents  are  of  any  value ;  the  word  of  God
is  most  important.  If  thou  wilt  damn  thyself,  damn
thyself  all  alone, —  do  not  drag  others  after  thee."

A  Christian  young  man  had  spoken  in  the  woods
to  another  woman  than  his  wife ;  he  had  no  sooner
arrived  at  the  residence  of  the  French  than  those  who
had  seen  him  accused  him  publicly  to  the  Father.
This  poor  man,  guilty  enough,  asks  pardon  for  his
offense,  and  comes  to  confession  with  great  tears,—
protesting  that  never  more  would  he  cause  a  like
scandal.  His  only  regret  was  that  the  Father  had
given  him  too  light  a  penance ;  he  asked  permission
to  beat  himself.

[150]  A  girl  who  was  quite  poor,  having  been
constrained  by  necessity  to  marry  an  infidel,  finding
that  she  was  ill-treated  because  she  prayed  to  God,
contented  herself  with  saying  her  prayers  in  secret,
without  kneeling  before  the  Pagans.  The  Chris-
tians, having  perceived  this,  are  scandalized ;  one  of
them  rises  publicly  in  the  Chapel,  and  addressing
the  Father,  says  to  him:  "  My  Father,  listen  to  my


190  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

doibs  dire,  puis  fe  tournant  vers  elle,  viens  ca,  luy
dit-il,  leue  toy,  feras  tu  fage  dorefnauant?  confeffe
toy,  &  ouure  tes  oreilles  aux  paroles,  que  te  dira  le
Pere.  La  pauure  creature  qui  auoit  defia  quitte'  ce
Payen,  fouffrit  cette  confufion  auec  vn  grand  regret
de  fon  offenfe,  elle  fe  confeffa  fi  candidement,  &  don-
na tant  de  preuues  de  fa  douleur,  &  de  fa  conftance
en  la  Foy,  que  le  Pere  en  fut  tout  edifie\

Ce  zele  fait  que  les  Chreftiens  fe  tiennent  en  leur
deuoir,  &  que  les  Payens  refpectent  la  docftrine  de
Iesvs-Christ,  [151]  &  qu'ils  ne  l'embraffent  point
qu'auec  vn  defir  de  la  garder.

On  ordonna  a  vn  Chreftien  qui  auoit  fait  quelque
faute  en  public,  de  baifer  trois  fois  la  terre  en  la
Chappelle;  comme  il  s'en  acquittoit,  vne  femme
defia  aagee,  luy  dift,  ne  fais  point  cela  pour  fatis-
faire  a  nos  yeux,  il  faut  que  tu  fois  marry  au  fond  de
ton  cceur  d'auoir  fache  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait;  &
iettant  les  yeux  fur  fon  camarade,  qu'elle  fcauoit
eft  re  coupable  de  la  mefme  faute,  elle  luy  dift,  &  toy
vn  tel,  tu  penfes  peut-eftre  que  ton  peche  n'eft  plus
dans  ton  ame,  pource  qu'il  n'eft  pas  connu  du  Pere;
La,  la,  baife  la  terre  auffi  bien  que  ton  compagnon,
tu  n'es  pas  plus  fage  que  luy,  appaifons  Dieu  quand
nous  l'auons  offenfe.  Ce  pauure  garcon  n'vfa  d'au-
cune  replique,  il  ne  fe  fit  point  tirer  1'oreille,  &  fut
pluftoft  a  terre  que  la  parole  ne  ceffa  en  la  bouche
de  cette  femme:  dont  on  modera  doucement  la  fer-
ueur.

A  mefme  temps  vn  homme  fe  leuant,  s'ecria:  puif-
que  nos  fautes  font  publiques,  c'eft  bien  fait  d'en
crier  mercy  a  Dieu  publiquement :  mon  deffein  n'eft
pas  de  bleff er,  mais  de  guerir :  Leuez  vous  vne  telle,


1646J  RELATION  OF  1643-46  191

word.  This  woman,  whom  thou  seest  before  thine
eyes,  has  allowed  herself  to  be  deceived  by  the
devil;  she  has  married  a  wicked  man,  who  has  ren-
dered her  a  fool.  Consider  now  what  thou  oughtst
to  say  to  her."  Then,  turning  toward  her,  he  says:
"Come,  now;  stand  up.  Wilt  thou  be  discreet
hereafter?  Confess,  and  open  thine  ears  to  the
words  that  the  Father  will  say  to  thee."  The  poor
creature,  who  had  already  left  that  Pagan,  suffered
this  embarrassment  with  great  regret  for  her  offense ;
she  confessed  so  candidly,  and  gave  so  many  proofs
of  her  sorrow  and  of  her  constancy  in  the  Faith,  that
the  Father  was  altogether  edified  thereby.

This  zeal  causes  the  Christians  to  remain  in  their
duty,  and  the  Pagans  to  respect  the  doctrine  of
Jesus  Christ;  [151]  and  it  leads  them  to  embrace
it  only  with  a  desire  to  observe  it.

A  Christian,  who  had  committed  some  fault  in
public,  was  ordered  to  kiss  three  times  the  earth  in
the  Chapel.  While  he  was  performing  this,  a  woman
already  aged  said  to  him :  ' '  Do  not  do  that  in  order
to  satisfy  our  eyes;  thou  must  be  grieved  in  the
depth  of  thy  heart  at  having  offended  him  who  has
made  all."  Then,  casting  her  eyes  upon  his  com-
rade, whom  she  knew  to  be  guilty  of  the  same  fault,
she  said  to  him:  "And  thou," — calling  him  by
name, — -"  thinkest  thou  perhaps  that  thy  sin  is  no
more  in  thy  soul,  because  it  is  not  known  to  the  Fa-
ther? There,  there,  kiss  the  earth  as  well  as  thy
companion, — thou  art  no  better  than  he;  let  us
appease  God,  when  we  have  offended  him."  That
poor  lad  made  no  answer;  he  did  not  need  to  have
his ears  pulled, and touched  the  earth  before  the


192  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JES UITES  [Vol.29

[152]  chacun  f9ait  que  vous  eftes  vne  acariaftre.
Vous  mon  Pere,  qui  determinez  des  prieres  &  des
fautes,  ordonnez  du  remede  neceff  aire  pour  faire  reue-
nir  l'efprit  a  cette  fille :  elle  a  des  compagnes,  qui  ne
font  pas  plus  fages  que  les  garcons,  fi  elles  ne  s'amen-
dent,  il  les  faudra  punir  auffi  bien  que  les  autres.

Vne  pauure  vefue  compatiffant  a  f on  fils  fort  malade
qu'elle  aymoit  comme  l'vnique  fouftien  de  fa  vieil-
leffe,  ne  fcachant  a  quel  Medecin  auoir  recours,  vne
Sorciere  fe  prefenta  pour  le  guerir.  C'eftoit  puiffam-
ment  tenter  vne  pauure  femme  qui  n'a  autre  appuy
que  fon  enfant:  mais  la  grace  fut  plus  forte  que  la
nature,  &  Dieu  plus  puiilant  que  les  demons.  Cette
bonne  mere  refpondit  doucement,  nous  autres  qui
croyons  en  Dieu,  ne  nous  feruons  point  de  demons,
i'ayme  mieux  perdre  la  veue  de  mon  fils  que  de  per-
dre  mon  ame  &  la  fienne ;  fi  ie  fuis  pauure  &  delaif-
fee,  ce  ne  fera  pas  pour  long-temps,  il  faut  fouffrir
en  ce  monde,  pour  ne  point  fouffrir  en  l'autre.  La
Sorciere  fe  mit  en  cholere  entendant  la  refponfe  de
cette  pauure  affligee,  l'appellant  vne  cruelle  de  ne
vouloir  pas  fauuer  la  vie  a  fon  enfant;  [153]  a  cela
point  de  repartie,  la  patience  eft  muette,  quand  fes
paroles  donneroient  de  l'aigreur.

Dieu  a  confondu  nos  penfees  &  renuerfe  les  fonde-
mens  ou  les  principes  fur  lefquels  nous  baftiffions.
Nous  n'arroufions  au  commencement  que  les  ieunes
plantes,  meprifant  quafi  ces  vieilles  fouches  qui
paroiffoient  incapables  de  porter  aucun  frui<5t,  mais
Dieu  les  a  fait  reuerdir  tres-auantageufemet.  Nous
auons  veu  des  homes  &  des  femmes  tres-aagez  auffi
feruens  dans  le  Chriftianifme  qu'vn  Nouice  de  vingt
ans  dans  vne  maifon Religieufe. Vne  vieille  aagee


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  193

words  ceased  on  that  woman's  lips;  while  her  fervor
was  gently  moderated.

At  the  same  time,  a  man  rose  and  exclaimed:
' '  Since  our  faults  are  public,  it  is  well  done  to  cry  for
mercy  on  them  publicly  to  God.  My  design  is  not
to  wound,  but  to  heal.  Stand  up,  such  a  one;  [152]
every  one  knows  that  you  are  a  bad-tempered  girl.
You,  my  Father,  who  decide  upon  prayers  and  upon
faults,  order  some  needful  remedy  for  bringing  back
sense  to  this  girl.  She  has  companions  who  are  no
better  than  the  lads;  unless  they  reform,  it  will  be
necessary  to  punish  them  as  well  as  the  others."

A  poor  widow  sympathizing  with  her  invalid
son,  whom  she  loved  as  the  sole  support  of  her  old
age,  not  knowing  to  what  Physician  to  have  recourse,
a  Sorceress  presented  herself  to  cure  him.  This  was
a  strong  temptation  to  a  poor  woman,  who  has  no
other  support  than  her  child ;  but  grace  was  stronger
than  nature,  and  God  more  powerful  than  the  de-
mons. This  good  mother  gently  answered:  "  We
who  believe  in  God  do  not  avail  ourselves  of  demons.
I  prefer  losing  sight  of  my  son  to  losing  my  soul
and  his.  If  I  am  poor  and  forsaken,  it  will  not  be
for  long;  it  is  necessary  to  suffer  in  this  world  in
order  not  to  suffer  in  the  other."  The  Sorceress
became  angry,  on  hearing  the  answer  of  that  poor
afflicted  one,  and  called  her  a  cruel  woman  for  not
consenting  to  save  the  life  of  her  child.  [153]  To
that  she  made  no  reply;  patience  is  mute  when  its
words  might  cause  acrimony.

God  has  confounded  our  thoughts  and  overthrown
the  foundations  or  the  principles  on  which  we  were
building.  We  watered,  at  the  start,  only  the  young
plants, —  despising, as it were, those old stumps


194  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ESUITES  [Vol.29

d'enuiron  80.  ans,  auoit  vn  fils  tres-bon  Chreftien,
c'eftoit  le  bafton  de  fa  vieilleffe  &  l'appuy  de  toute
fa  famille,  ayant  efte'  miferablement  tue,  fa  pauure
mere  apporta  fix  peaux  de  Caftor  pour  faire  prier
Dieu  pour  fon  ame,  mais  on  luy  fit  l'aumofne  de  fon
propre  bien :  car  a  peine  eut-on  pu  trouuer  vne  per-
sone  plus  pauure,  il  n'eft  pas  croyable  combien  cette
femme  a  la  confcience  tendre,  &  combien  grand  eft
le  foulagement  qu'elle  trouue  dans  les  Sacremens  de
la  Penitece  &  de  l'Euchariitie.  Celt,  la  qu'elle  noye
toutes  fes  angoiffes  &  tous  [154]  fes  ennuys,  c'eft  la
ou  elle  puife  des  forces  pour  fouffrir  l'abfence  de
quantite  d'enfans  que  la  mort  luy  a  rauy,  1' ayant
laiffee  feule  dans  l'extremite  de  fon  aage:  en  vn  mot
qui  la  veut  refioiiyr,  il  luy  faut  parler  du  Ciel,  elle  a
vne  confiance  fi  fimple  &  fi  droite,  qu'on  diroit  qu'elle
eft  toute  afleuree  d'y  entrer.  Cela  ne  luy  eft  pas
particulier,  plufieurs  Sauuages  marchans  dans  les
voyes  qu'on  leur  prefcrit,  fe  feruans  des  remedes  que
Dieu  a  laiffez  en  fon  Eglife,  s'en  vont  a  la  mort
comme  a  l'entree  de  la  vie,  fans  peur,  fans  crainte,
fans  aucun  trouble,  fe  tenans  affeurez  qu'ayans  garde
de  bonne  foy  les  conditions  que  Dieu  demande  dans
le  contradt  qu'il  a  paffe  auec  nous  de  nous  donner
fon  Paradis,  cette  bonte  fupreme  ne  nous  manquera
pas  de  fon  cofte\  La  droiture  &  la  fimplicite
donnent  de  grandes  affeurances  aux  ames  dociles.

Vne  pauure  femme  fouffrant  de  grandes  douleurs
dans  vn  corps  languiffant,  difoit  a  celuy  qui  luy
demandoit,  fi  elle  n'auoit  point  apprehenfion  de  la
mort,  pourquoy  la  craindrois-ie ?  puis  qu'en  mou-
rant  ie  verray  celuy  qui  a  tout  fait,  helas !  c'eft  mon
bon-heur: mais neantmoins [155] ie ne demande


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  195

which  appeared  incapable  of  bearing  any  fruit ;  but
God  has  made  them  put  forth  green  shoots  again,  to
great  advantage.  We  have  seen  very  aged  men  and
women  as  fervent  in  Christianity  as  a  Novice  of
twenty  years  in  a  Religious  house.  An  old  woman,
aged  about  80  years,  had  a  very  good  Christian  son ;
he  was  the  staff  of  her  old  age,  and  the  support  of
her  whole  family.  Having  been  miserably  slain,
his  poor  mother  brought  six  Beaver  skins,  in  order
to  have  prayers  offered  to  God  for  his  soul ;  but  she
was  given  alms  of  her  own  property, —  for  hardly
could  one  have  found  a  person  more  destitute.  It
is  not  credible  how  tender  a  conscience  this  woman
has,  and  how  great  is  the  solace  that  she  finds  in  the
Sacraments  of  Penance  and  the  Eucharist.  In  them
she  drowns  all  her  anguish  and  all  [154]  her  weari-
ness ;  from  them  she  derives  strength  to  endure  the
absence  of  many  children,  of  whom  death  has  robbed
her,  having  left  her  alone  in  the  extremity  of  her
age.  In  a  word,  he  who  would  gladden  her  must
speak  to  her  of  Heaven;  she  has  a  confidence  so
simple  and  so  upright  that  one  might  say  that  she
is  wholly  assured  of  entering  that  place.  That  is
not  peculiar  to  her;  many  Savages,  walking  in  the
ways  which  are  prescribed  for  them,  using  remedies
which  God  has  left  in  his  Church,  go  hence  to  death
as  to  the  entrance  into  life, —  without  fear,  without
dread,  without  any  agitation.  They  hold  themselves
assured  that  —  having  kept  in  good  faith  the  condi-
tions which  God  requires  in  the  contract  which  he
has  made  with  us,  to  give  us  his  Paradise  —  that
supreme  goodness  will  not  fail  us  on  his  side.  Up-
rightness and  simplicity  give  great  assurances  to
docile  souls.


196  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

rien;  Voicy  toute  ma  priere:  tu  es  mon  maiftre,
difpofe  de  moy  felon  ta  volont6,  ie  ne  veux  rien
autre  chofe.

Ce  Chapitre  reflemble  a  ces  ouurages  faits  a  la
Mofai'que,  il  eft  compofe  de  pieces  rapportees.

Vn  Iroquois  faifant  du  Thrafon,  fe  mocquoit  de  la
mort  deuant  les  Algonquins:  il  vouloit  paroiftre  vn
Guillaume  fans  peur,  ou  comme  vn  Samfon  qui  feul
brauoit  les  Philiftins  dans  leur  propre  pais.  Vn  Al-
gonquin a.  qui  la  Foy  auoit  defille  les  yeux  &  donn6
de  la  modeftie,  luy  dit,  on  void  bien  mon  cher  amy,
que  vous  ne  connoiffez  pas  bien  celuy  qui  abaiffe  &
qui  eleue  quand  il  luy  plaift,  il  n'y  a  pas  long-temps
que  1' ombre  des  Algonquins  vous  faifoit  peur,  vous
les  meprifez  maintenant,  pour  ce  que  leurs  pechez
les  ont  exterminez :  mais  ne  faites  pas  le  fuperbe,  la
main  qui  les  a  frappez  eft  capable  de  les  guerir  &  de
vous  maffacrer.  Ce  langage  nouueau  en  la  bouche
d'vn  Sauuage  Chreltien,  n'eut  point  de  repartie  en
celle  d'vn  fuperbe  Iroquois.

Vne  femme  ne  pouuant  fe  deliurer  de  fes  couches,
foufrrit  quatre  iours  [156]  des  douleurs  extremes:
celles  qui  la  gardoient,  accourent  aux  Peres :  car  ils
font  en  toutes  chofes  le  refuge  &  le  confeil  de  ce
pauure  peuple.  On  leur  donna  quelques  reliques  de
defunct.  Monfieur  Bernard  bien  connu  dans  la  France :
a  peine  la  gifante  les  eut-elle  pendues  a  fon  col,
qu'elle  accoucha  d'vn  bel  enfant,  cela  donna  bien  de
l'eftonnement  a  tous  les  Sauuages;  Si  bien  qu'vn
autre  eftant  trauaille  d'vne  violente  fievre,  &  follicite
par  quelques  Payens  d'auoir  recours  a  leurs  fuperfti-
tions  diaboliques,  leur  ferma  l'oreille  pour  l'ouurir
aux  confeils des Peres  qui  luy  firent  porter  cette


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  197

A  poor  woman,  suffering  great  pains  in  a  languish-
ing body,  said  to  one  who  was  asking  her  whether
she  had  no  fear  of  death:  "  Why  should  I  dread  it?
since  on  dying  I  shall  see  him  who  has  made  all.
Alas!  that  is  my  happiness;  but,  nevertheless,  [155]
I  ask  nothing.  This  is  all  my  prayer:  '  Thou  art
my  master, —  dispose  of  me  according  to  thy  will;
I  wish  no  other  thing.'  "

This  Chapter  resembles  those  works  composed  in
Mosaic ;  it  is  made  up  of  related  fragments.

An  Iroquois  acting  the  Thraso,  mocking  at  death
before  the  Algonquins,  wished  to  appear  a  Guil-
laume  without  fear, —  or  as  a  Samson  who,  alone,
defied  the  Philistines  in  their  own  country.  An
Algonquin,  whose  eyes  the  Faith  had  opened,  and  to
whom  it  had  given  modesty,  said  to  him:  "  One  sees
well,  my  dear  friend,  that  you  are  not  well  acquainted
with  him  who  brings  down  and  who  lifts  up  when  he
pleases.  Not  long  ago,  the  shadow  of  the  Algon-
quins made  you  afraid ;  you  now  despise  them  be-
cause their  sins  have  exterminated  them.  But  do
not  act  haughtily ;  the  hand  which  has  struck  them
is  able  to  heal  them,  and  to  massacre  you."  This
language,  new  on  the  lips  of  a  Christian  Savage,  met
no  reply  from  those  of  an  arrogant  Iroquois.

A  woman,  unable  to  deliver  herself  in  her  confine-
ment, suffered  four  days  [156]  with  extreme  pains;
those  who  were  attending  her  hasten  to  the  Fathers ;
for  they  are  in  all  things  the  refuge  and  the  counsel
of  this  poor  people.  They  were  given  some  relics
of  the  late  Monsieur  Bernard,  well  known  in  France;
hardly  had  the  woman  in  travail  suspended  them  to
her  neck  when  she  was  delivered  of  a  fine  child.
That  greatly  surprised  all  the  Savages, —  insomuch


198  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

mefme  Relique.  Le  pauure  homme  defia  condamne'
a  mort  de  tous  les  fiens,  parut  fain  &  gaillard  en  fort
peu  de  temps.

Cell  la  couftume  des  Sauuages,  d'amfter  fur  le
foir  aux  prieres  dans  la  Chappelle,  &  de  les  faire
encor  dans  leurs  cabanes  deuant  que  de  prendre  leur
fommeil;  Vn  ieune  garcon  eitant  a  genoux  en  ce
temps-la,  tomba  foudainement  en  fyncope;  fes  pa-
rens orient,  l'appellent,  le  tirent  tantoft  d'vn  cofte*
&  tantoft  de  l'aut[r]e,  ils  luy  iettent  de  l'eau  froide
pour  le  faire  reuenir  a  foy:  ce  pauure  homme  ne
[157]  branle  point,  il  demeure  iufques  a  minuit,  fans
donner  aucun  figne  de  vie :  on  va  donner  nouuelle
aux  Peres  qu'il  eft  mort,  s'ils  ne  trouuent  quelque
nouueau  remede,  on  luy  met  ces  faindtes  Reliques
fur  la  poitrine,  a  peine  les  a-il  touchees,  qu'il  ouure
les  yeux,  reuient  a  foy,  &  donne  de  l'epouuante  a
tous  les  affiftans,  qui  ne  pouuoient  affez  remercier
Noftre  Seigneur  d'vne  guerifon  fi  foudaine.

On  donna  la  mefme  medecine  a  deux  petits  enfans
malades:  elle  n'eut  pas  vn  mefme  effet,  mais  peut-
efhre  vn  meilleur.  Les  parens  ayans  appelle"  la  nuidt
precedente  vn  Sorcier  pour  chanter  &  pour  fouhier
ces  pauures  petits,  fe  rendirent  indignes  des  faueurs
de  ce  grand  Seruiteur  de  Dieu  pour  la  fante  de  ces
petits  innocens:  mais  leurs  ames  receues  au  Ciel
ioignant  leurs  prieres  auec  les  fiennes,  obtinrent  la
conuerfion  de  leurs  peres  &  meres  qui  apporterent  de
douze  lieue's  loin  ces  petits  corps  pour  eftre  enterrez
auec  les  Chreftiens,  &  promirent  de  fuiure  Iesvs-
Christ,  &  de  iamais  plus  ne  f e  f eruir  d'aucunes
fuperftitions.  Le  Sorcier  mefme  ietta  fon  tambour
au  feu,  fe  fit  inftruire  &  baptifer,  &  de  l'heure  [158]


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  199

that  another,  being  racked  with  a  violent  fever,  and
solicited  by  some  Pagans  to  have  recourse  to  their
diabolical  superstitions,  closed  his  ear  to  them,  in
order  to  open  it  to  the  counsels  of  the  Fathers,  who
had  him  wear  that  same  Relic.  The  poor  man,
already  condemned  to  death  by  all  his  people,  ap-
peared sound  and  sprightly  in  a  very  short  time.

It  is  the  custom  of  the  Savages  to  be  present,
toward  evening,  at  the  prayers  in  the  Chapel;  and
to  say  them  again,  in  their  cabins,  before  taking  their
sleep.  A  young  lad,  being  on  his  knees  at  that  time,
fell  suddenly  into  a  swoon.  His  parents  shout,  call
him,  and  pull  him  now  to  one  side,  now  to  the  other;
they  throw  cold  water  on  him,  in  order  to  bring  him
back  to  himself.  This  poor  fellow  [157]  stirs  not  at
all;  he  remains  even  till  midnight  without  giving
any  sign  of  life.  A  message  is  carried  to  the
Fathers  that  he  is  dead,  unless  they  find  some  new
remedy.  They  put  those  sacred  Relics  on  his
breast ;  hardly  has  he  touched  them  when  he  opens
his  eyes,  comes  back  to  himself,  and  inspires  awe  in
all  those  present,  who  could  not  sufficiently  thank
Our  Lord  for  a  cure  so  sudden.

They  gave  the  same  medicine  to  two  sick  little
children ;  it  had  not  the  same  effect,  but  perhaps  a
better.  The  parents,  having  called,  the  night  preced-
ing, a  Sorcerer  to  sing  and  to  breathe  upon  those
poor  little  ones,  rendered  themselves  unworthy  of
the  favors  of  that  great  Servant  of  God  in  behalf  of
the  health  of  those  little  innocents.  But  their  souls,
received  in  Heaven,  and  joining  their  prayers  to  his,
obtained  the  conversion  of  their  fathers  and  mothers,
who  brought  from  a  distance  of  twelve  leagues  those
little  bodies  to  be  buried  with  the  Christians,  and


200  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

que i'efcry ces  remarques, ils  viuent  tous dans  la
crainte  de  Dieu,  &  dans  l'obeiffance  de  fon  Eglife.

Saindt  Xauier  fe  feruoit  aux  Indes  Orietales  des
petits  enfans,  pour  donner  la  chafle  aux  Idoles  qu'il
faifoit  mettre  en  pieces  par  ces  mains  innocentes.
Le  Pere  qui  a  eu  la  charge  de  la  Million  de  Tadouf-
fac,  en  a  fait  de  mefme  pour  trouuer  les  tambours  &
les  petits  manitous,  ou  les  demons  cachez  dans  les
facs  des  Sauuages.  Ces  enfans  ont  rendu  tous  ces
inftrumens  de  fuperftition  fi  ridicules  qu'il  n'y  a  plus
perfonne  qui  s'en  ofe  feruir,  fi  ce  n'eit  peut  eitre  la
nuidt  &  dans  la  profondeur  des  bois.  Ces  petites
creatures  decouurent  tous  les  mylteres  de  ces  charla-
tans, ils  reprennent  hardiment  ceux  qui  font  quel-
que  adtion  meffeante.  Entr'autres,  vne  petite  fille
inftruite  au  Seminaire  des  Meres  Vrfulines,  ne
manquoit  point  d'auertir  le  Pere  des  deffauts  qu'elle
apperceuoit  parmy  fes  compagnes,  auec  vn  zele  &
vne  douceur  enfantine  toute  aymable.

Vn  Abnaquiois  eftant  tombe  malade  a  fainct
Iofeph,  fut  fail!  d'vne  fievre  chaude  qui  le  ietta  bien-
toft  dans  vn  delire.  [159]  Ses  difcours,  &  fes  ref-
ponfes  n'auoient  aucune  fuitte:  mais  ce  qui  eltonna
fes  compagnons,  &  les  autres  Sauuages,  fut  que
iamais  il  ne  perdit  la  connoiffance  des  chofes  qui
concernoient  fon  falut,  Q  toft  qu'on  luy  parloit  du
Baptefme,  fa  raifon  eftoit  toute  pleine,  fi  vous  enta-
miez  vn  autre  difcours,  il  fermoit  les  yeux,  &  ne
rendoit  aucune  refponfe  a  propos:  il  demanda  le
Baptefme  par  Hgnes,  &  par  paroles,  &  par  de  grands
tefmoignages  qu'il  en  connoiffoit  la  valeur.  On
l'interroge,  il  refpond  nettement  &  fans  broncher.
On  l'examine,  il  fatisfait,  en  vn  mot,  on  le  baptife,


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  201

promised  to  follow  Jesus  Christ,  and  never
more  to  use  any  superstitions.  The  Sorcerer  him-
self threw  his  drum  into  the  fire,  and  became  in-
structed and  baptized;  and  at  the  hour  [158]  when  I
write  these  remarks,  they  are  all  living  in  the  fear
of  God,  and  in  obedience  to  his  Church.

Saint  Xavier  employed,  in  the  East  Indies,  little
children  for  hunting  out  the  Idols,  which  he  caused
to  be  shattered  by  those  innocent  hands.  The
Father  who  has  had  charge  of  the  Mission  at  Tadous-
sac,  has  done  likewise  in  order  to  find  the  drums,
and  the  little  manitous  or  demons  concealed  in  the
pouches  of  the  Savages.  Those  children  have  rendered
all  these  instruments  of  superstition  so  ridiculous  that
there  is  no  longer  any  one  who  dares  to  use  them,
unless  perhaps  at  night  and  in  the  depth  of  the
woods.  These  little  creatures  reveal  all  the  mys-
teries of  those  impostors ;  they  boldly  reprove  those
who  do  any  unseemly  deed.  Among  others,  a  little
girl,  instructed  at  the  Seminary  of  the  Ursuline
Mothers,  did  not  fail  to  notify  the  Father  of  the
failings  that  she  perceived  among  her  companions,
with  a  zeal  and  childish  sweetness  wholly  lovable.

An  Abnaquiois,  having  fallen  sick  at  saint
Joseph,  was  seized  with  a  burning  fever,  which  soon
threw  him  into  a  delirium.  [159]  His  words  and  his
answers  had  no  connection ;  but  what  astonished  his
companions  and  the  other  Savages  was,  that  he
never  lost  the  knowledge  of  the  things  which  con-
cerned his  salvation.  As  soon  as  one  spoke  to  him
of  Baptism,  his  reason  was  quite  complete;  if  you
broached  another  topic,  he  closed  his  eyes,  and  ren-
dered no  fitting  answer.  He  requested  Baptism  by
signs  and  by  words,  and  by  clear  indications  that  he


202  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.29

il  meurt,  &  nous  laiffant  vne  croyance  que  I  e  s  v  s  -
Christ  luy  auoit  conferue"  la  raifon  quafi  miracu-
leufement  pour  le  faire  entrer  dans  la  terre  de
promiffion,  apres  auoir  efte"  lau6  dans  la  mer  rouge
de  fon  fang.  II  plaide  maintenant  dans  les  Cieux  la
caufe  de  fon  peuple  qui  femble  fe  vou[loir]  faire
inflruire  tout  de  bon.

Vne  efcoiiade  de  Hurons  eftans  defcendus  a  faindt
Iofeph,  les  Chreftiens  eftans  dans  vne  grande  ne-
cefflte-  de  viures,  fe  demandoient  l'vn  l'autre,  pour-
rons-nous  bien  donner  a  manger  a  tous  ces  gens-la?
[160]  comme  ils  difoiet  cela,  en  voila  vne  partie  qui
fortans  de  leurs  petits  batteaux  s'en  vont  droit  a  la
Chappelle,  fe  mettent  a  genoux,  &  font  leurs  prieres.
Vn  Algonquin  qui  eftoit  alle"  faliier  le  faindt  Sacre-
ment,  les  ayant  apperceus,  vient  donner  aduis  a  fon
Capitaine  que  ces  Hurons  prioient  Dieu.  Eft-il  vray,
fit-il,  fus,  fus,  il  ne  faut  plus  confulter  fi  on  leur  don-
nera  dequoy  difner,  ils  font  nos  parens,  puis  qu'ils
croyent  auffi  bien  que  nous,  &  qu'ils  honorent  la
priere.  La  deffus  ils  fe  carefferent  a  la  mode  de  la
charite,  par  des  adtions  pluftoft  que  par  des  paroles.

Dieu  nous  epouuante  quelquesfois  par  des  ombres,
pour  nous  faire  exercer  de  veritables  adtions.  Vne
famille  Chreftienne  chaffoit  au  Caflor,  le  bon-heur
qu'elle  auoit  dans  la  chaffe,  fut  trauerfe  par  vne
terreur  qui  fit  du  mal  &  du  bien.  Voicy  comme  l'hi-
floire  nous  fut  racontee  par  vne  femme  fort  honnefte,
&  fort  vertueufe.  Ayant  pris  noftre  refedtion  fur  le
foir,  &  remercie  Dieu  felon  noftre  couftume:  mon
mari,  difoit-elle,  fortant  de  noftre  petite  maifon  d'6-
corce,  oiiyt  vn  bruit,  comme  d'vne  perfonne  qui  nous
ayant  reconnu,  trauerfoit  la  riuiere  [161]  fur  laquelle


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  203

knew  its  value.  He  is  interrogated;  he  answers
distinctly,  and  without  tripping.  He  is  examined,
and  gives  satisfaction  ;  in  a  word,  he  is  baptized.  He
dies,  leaving  us  a  belief  that  Jesus  Christ  had
preserved  his  reason  almost  miraculously,  in  order
to  have  him  enter  the  land  of  promise  after  having
been  washed  in  the  red  sea  of  his  blood.  He  now
pleads  in  the  Heavens  the  cause  of  his  people,  who
seem  willing  to  become  instructed  in  good  earnest.

A  squad  of  Hurons  having  come  down  to  saint
Joseph,  the  Christians,  being  in  great  need  of  provi-
sions, asked  one  another,  "  Shall  we  indeed  be  able
to  feed  all  those  people?"  [160]  While  they  were
saying  that,  lo,  part  of  these  guests,  leaving  their
little  boats,  go  straight  to  the  Chapel,  kneel  down,
and  say  their  prayers.  An  Algonquin  who  had  gone
to  salute  the  blessed  Sacrament,  having  perceived
them,  comes  to  give  notice  to  his  Captain  that  those
Hurons  were  praying  to  God.  "Is  it  true?"  said
he;  "well,  well,  we  must  no  longer  deliberate
whether  they  shall  be  given  something  for  dinner;
they  are  our  kinsfolk,  since  they  believe  as  well  as
we,  and  honor  prayer."  Thereupon  they  caressed
one  another  in  the  manner  of  charity,  by  actions
rather  than  by  words.

God  sometimes  frightens  us  by  shadows,  in  order
to  make  us  practice  genuine  actions.  A  Christian
family  was  hunting  the  Beaver;  the  good  fortune
which  it  met  in  the  chase  was  crossed  by  a  terror
which  caused  evil  and  good.  The  story  was  thus
related  to  us  by  a  woman,  very  honest  and  very
virtuous.  "  Having  taken  our  meal  toward  evening,
and  thanked  God,  according  to  our  custom,  my  hus-
band," she  said,  "  going  out  of  our  little  bark  house,


204  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.29

nous  eftions,  il  demande  fi  tous  les  chiens  eftoient
dans  la  cabane,  fe  doutant  qu'ils  pourroient  bien
auoir  caufe"  ce  bruit :  les  ayant  veu  proche  de  moy,
ie  luy  refpondis  que  pas  vn  n'eftoit  dehors.  II  prefte
l'oreille,  il  ecoute  comme  ce  bruit  continuoit.  Nous
fommes  decouuerts,  il  s'6crie:  Sauuez  vous  &  vos
enfans,  l'ennemy  nous  enuironne,  fuyez  a  la  faueur
de  la  nuidt,  nous  fouitiendrons  le  choc,  &  nous  mour-
rons  icy,  pour  vous  donner  le  loifir  d'euader.  I'em-
braffe  auffi-toft  l'vn  de  mes  enfans,  dit  cette  femme,
ie  donne  l'autre  a  porter  a  vne  miene  parente  qui
m'accompagnoit,  mon  mary  court  aux  armes,  le  ieune
homme  qui  chaffoit  auec  luy,  fe  faifit  en  mefme
temps  de  fon  epee  &  de  fon  arquebufe,  &  pendant
qu'ils  fe  mettent  en  pofture  de  combattre  pour
arrefter  l'ennemy,  s'il  approchoit,  nous  fuyons  toutes
£plor6es  nous  dechirans  les  pieds  &  les  jambes  nues
dans  les  halliers,  heurtans  les  pierres  &  les  bois
abbatus  que  nous  rencontrions.  Les  tenebres  aug-
mentoiet  noftre  frayeur,  nous  auons  chemine  &  couru
toute  la  nuidt  &  tout  le  iour:  enfin  n'en  pouuans
plus,  nous  nous  fommes  repofees  fur  le  [162]  bord  du
grand  fleuue,  &  par  bonne  auanture,  voyans  voguer
vn  canot  de  nos  gens  nous  l'auons  appelle.  II  nous
a  prifes,  &  apportees  icy,  ou  il  eft  vray  que  nous
fommes  en  affeurance :  mais  non  pas  fans  douleur.
Mon  pauure  mari,  &  fon  parent  font  pris,  &  peut-
eftre  a  demy  brulez,  &  a  demy  roftis;  &  la  deffus
cette  pauure  creature,  &  tous  fes  enfans,  &  fes  plus
proches  parentes,  iettoient  des  cris  &  des  larmes  qui
auroient  amolly  vn  cceur  de  bronze.  Le  Pere  qui
eftoit  a  faindt  Iofeph,  entendant  ces  cris,  y  court
auffi-toft. Ce  trifle  fpeclacle  l'emeut: quoy  done,


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  205

heard  a  noise,  as  of  a  person  who,  having  recognized
lis,  was  crossing  the  river  [161]  at  which  we  were.
He  asked  if  all  the  dogs  were  in  the  cabin,  suspect-
ing that  they  had  probably  caused  this  noise :  hav-
ing seen  them  near  me,  I  answered  him  that  not  one
was  outside.  He  listens;  he  hears  this  noise  con-
tinuing. '  We  are  discovered, '  he  exclaims ;  '  save
yourselves  and  your  children ;  the  enemy  surrounds
us.  Flee  by  the  favor  of  the  night ;  we  will  sustain
the  shock,  and  we  will  die  here,  in  order  to  give  you
leisure  to  escape.'  I  straightway  embrace  one  of
my  children,"  said  this  woman;  "  I  give  the  other
to  be  carried  by  a  kinswoman  of  mine  who  accom-
panied me.  My  husband  runs  to  arms,  and  the
young  man  who  was  hunting  with  him  seizes  at  the
same  time  his  javelin  and  his  arquebus ;  and  while
they  put  themselves  in  position  to  fight,  in  order  to
stop  the  enemy  if  he  approached,  we  flee  all  in
tears, —  tearing  our  feet  and  bare  legs  in  the  thick-
ets, knocking  against  the  stones  and  the  fallen  trees
that  we  encountered.  The  darkness  increased  our
fright;  we  journeyed  and  ran,  all  night  and  all  day.
Finally,  having  no  more  strength,  we  rested  our-
selves on  the  [162]  bank  of  the  great  river;  and,  by
good  fortune  seeing  a  canoe  of  our  people  journey-
ing, we  called  it.  It  took  us  and  brought  us  here,
where  it  is  true  that  we  are  in  safety,  but  not  with-
out pain.  My  poor  husband  and  his  kinsman  are
taken,  and  perhaps  half  burned  and  half  roasted ;  "
and  thereupon  that  poor  creature  and  all  her  chil-
dren, and  her  nearest  kinswomen,  gave  way  to  cries
and  to  tears  that  would  have  softened  a  heart  of
bronze.  The  Father  who  was  at  saint  Joseph,  hear-
ing those  cries,  runs  thither  immediately;  this  sad


206


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  29


fit-il,  ces  douleurs  &  ces  cris  refufciteront-ils  des
hommes  morts?  il  faut  prier  pour  eux,  &  non  pas
s'affliger  fans  mefure:  helas!  mon  Pere,  refpondit-
elle,  ce  qui  me  trouble  &  ce  qui  m'affiige  iufques  au
fond  du  coeur:  c'eft  qu'ils  font  morts  fans  fe  Con-
feffer,  le  moyen  de  ne  pas  pleurer  vne  telle  mort?
ne  crains  point  ma  fille,  luy  dit  le  Pere,  ie  connois
la  vertu  de  ton  mari,  non  feulement  il  eft  d'vne
humeur  paifible,  &  douce,  comme  tu  f9ay:  mais  ie
t'affeure  qu'il  a  vne  Foy  tres-viue,  vne  tres-grande
crainte  du  peche,  &  vn  tres-ardent  amour  de  fon
Dieu,  [163]  l'as-tu  iamais  veu  en  cholere,  l'as-tu  veu
manquer  vne  feule  fois  de  faire  fes  prieres  depuis
qu'il  eft  Chreftien?  helas!  nenny,  refpondit-elle,
nenny ;  tous  les  matins,  &  tous  les  foirs,  &  a  chaque
fois  que  nous  prenios  nos  repas,  nous  faifions  enfem-
ble  nos  prieres,  nous  viuions  comme  des  enfans.  II
faut  confeffer  que  cet  homme  a  vn  don  de  prieres
qu'il  n'entend  pas  luy-mefme,  &  que  cette  famille
eft  l'vne  des  plus  fauorifees  du  Ciel,  de  toutes  celles
qui  fe  font  donnees  a  Iesvs-Christ.

Ceffons  de  pleurer,  adioufta  le  Pere,  prions  Dieu
qui  \sc.  qu'il]  les  fortifie,  s'ils  font  encore  viuans,  &
qu'il  les  loge  en  fon  Paradis,  s'ils  font  morts;  mes
larmes  ny  mes  trauaux,  n'ont  point  empefche"  mes
prieres,  repart-elle,  ie  t'affeure  mon  Pere  que  dans
noftre  fuitte,  mon  cceur  eftoit  toujours  auec  Dieu;
ie  ne  penfois  pas  tant  a  mes  peines  que  ie  penfois  a
Dieu.  Ie  luy  difois  du  fond  de  mon  ame,  loge  les
auec  toy,  fortifie  les,  aye  pitie  d'eux,  ecoute  leurs
prieres,  eleue  les  au  Ciel,  &  maintenant  dans  tous
les  cris  que  tu  as  entendus,  &  dans  mes  plus  fortes
angoiffes,  Dieu  a  toufiours  efte  dedans  mon  cceur,  ie


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  207

sight  disturbs  him.  "  What  then?"  said  he,  "  will
these  griefs  and  these  cries  revive  dead  men  ?  You
must  pray  for  them,  and  not  afflict  yourselves  with-
out measure."  "  Alas!  my  Father,"  she  answered,
"  what  troubles  and  afflicts  me,  even  to  the  depth  of
the  heart,  is  that  they  have  died  without  Confessing;
how  can  one  not  mourn  such  a  death?"  "  Fear  not,
my  daughter,"  replies  the  Father;  "  I  know  the  vir-
tue of  thy  husband ;  not  only  is  he  of  a  peaceful  and
gentle  temper,  as  thou  knowest,  but  I  assure  thee
that  he  has  a  very  lively  Faith,  a  very  great  dread
of  sin,  and  a  very  ardent  love  for  his  God.  [163]
Hast  thou  ever  seen  him  in  anger?  hast  thou  seen
him  omit,  a  single  time,  to  say  his  prayers  since  he
is  a  Christian?"  "Alas!  nay,"  she  answered,
"nay;  every  morning  and  evening,  and  each  time
that  we  took  our  meals,  we  said  our  prayers  together :
we  lived  like  children."  It  must  be  acknowledged
that  this  man  has  a  gift  for  prayers,  which  he  him-
self does  not  understand ;  and  that  this  family  is  one
of  the  most  favored  by  Heaven,  of  all  those  which
have  given  themselves  to  Jesus  Christ.

"  Let  us  cease  to  weep,"  added  the  Father;  "  let  us
ask  God  to  strengthen  them,  if  they  are  still  living,
and  to  lodge  them  in  his  Paradise  if  they  are  dead."
"  My  tears  or  my  toils  have  not  prevented  my
prayers,"  she  answers;  "  I  assure  you,  my  Father,
that  in  our  flight  my  heart  was  always  with  God, —
I  thought  not  so  much  of  my  pains  as  I  thought  of
God.  I  would  say  to  him  from  the  depth  of  my
soul,  'Lodge  them  with  thyself;  strengthen  them;
have  pity  on  them,  listen  to  their  prayers,  and  lift
them  up  to  Heaven.'  And  now,  in  all  the  cries  that
you  have  heard,  and  in  my  deepest  anguish,  God  has


208  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  29

luy  dis  en  pleurant:  tu  es  le  maiftre,  fais  ce  [164]
que  tu  voudras,  fauue-les,  voila  tout  ce  que  ie  te
demande,  il  n'importe  que  ie  fouffre,  ie  t'ay  fafch6:
mais  tu  es  bon :  aye  pitie  de  moy,  ie  ne  puis  empef-
cher  mes  larmes,  mon  mal  eft  trop  recent :  mais  ie
ne  voudrois  pour  rien  du  monde  fafcher  Dieu.  Prie
pour  eux  mon  Pere  afin  qu'ils  foient  bien-toft  au
Ciel.

Ces fentimens  donnerent  de  l'eftonnement  au  Pere:
comme  ces  ames  font  toutes  ieunes  en  la  Foy,  il
craignoit  quelque  murmure  contre  le  Ciel,  ou  quel-
que  rage  contre  leurs  ennemis,  veu  mefme  que  le
diable  s'efforce  de  perfuader  a  ces  peuples  que  noftre
creance  n'apporte  que  des  mal-heurs  a  ceux  qui  quit-
tent  leurs  anciennes  facons  de  faire  pour  la  receuoir.
Adjouftez  a  cela  qu'vne  femme  qui  eft  chargee  de
quatre  petits  enfans,  &  qui  n'a  pour  toute  richefle,
que  les  bras  &  les  jambes  de  fon  mari,  fe  trouue  bien
defolee  dans  vn  tel  rencontre:  mais  la  Foy  eft  vn
grand  threfor,  elle  a  de  puiffants  effets  dans  Tame
de  ces  bons  Neophytes.

Au  refte  fi  toft  qu'elle  eut  raconte"  fon  auanture,
l'vn  des  Capitaines  de  fainct,  Iofeph,  arma  bien  vifte
vne  efcoiiade  de  fes  gens  qu'il  conduifrt  en  la  Chap-
pelle,  [165]  oil  ils  firent  cette  petite  priere.  Iesvs
prends  de  bonnes  penfees  pour  nous,  tu  fcais  bien  que
nous  ne  voulons  point  de  mal  a  nos  ennemis,  donne
leur  de  l'efprit  afin  qu'ils  viuent  en  repos.  Nous
t'auons  prie  pour  eux :  mais  ils  ne  te  veulent  pas
6couter.  Fortifie  nous,  &  nous  ayde  a  leur  coupper  les
jambes,  afin  qu'ils  ne  viennent  plus  nous  chercher  a
mort.  Nous  croyons  en  toy,  regarde  nous,  com-
mande  a  tes  Anges  de  nous  accompagner  afin  que


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  209

always  been  within  my  heart.  I  say  to  him,  weep-
ing: '  Thou  art  the  master, —  do  that  [164]  which
thou  wilt.  Save  them ;  that  is  all  that  I  ask  thee.
It  matters  not  that  I  suffer, —  I  have  offended  thee ;
but  thou  art  good;  have  pity  on  me.'  I  cannot  pre-
vent my  tears, —  my  hurt  is  too  recent;  but  I  would
not  for  anything  in  the  world  offend  God.  Pray  for
them,  my  Father,  so  that  they  may  soon  be  in
Heaven."

These  feelings  gave  astonishment  to  the  Father;
as  these  souls  are  quite  young  in  the  Faith,  he  feared
some  murmur  against  Heaven,  or  some  rage  against
their  enemies, —  seeing,  moreover,  that  the  devil
strives  to  persuade  these  peoples  that  our  belief
brings  only  misfortunes  to  those  who  give  up  their
former  customs  in  order  to  receive  it.  Add  to  this,
that  a  woman  who  is  burdened  with  four  little  chil-
dren, and  who  has  for  total  riches  only  the  arms  and
the  legs  of  her  husband,  finds  herself  very  desolate
in  such  an  emergency.  But  the  Faith  is  a  great
treasure ;  it  has  powerful  effects  in  the  souls  of  these
good  Neophytes.

In  fine,  as  soon  as  she  had  related  her  adventure,
one  of  the  Captains  of  saint  Joseph  very  quickly
armed  a  squad  of  his  people,  whom  he  led  into  the
Chapel,  [165]  where  they  made  this  brief  prayer:
"Jesus,  think  favorably  of  us.  Thou  knowest
well  that  we  wish  no  ill  to  our  enemies ;  give  them
sense,  to  the  end  that  they  may  live  in  peace.  We
have  prayed  to  thee  for  them ;  but  they  will  not
listen  to  thee.  Strengthen  us,  and  help  us  to  cut
their  legs,  so  that  they  may  come  no  more  to  seek
us  to  death.  We  believe  in  thee;  consider  us;  com-
mand thine  Angels  to  accompany  us,  to  the  end  that


210  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29


nous  ne  te  fafchions  point. Ces  paroles  dites,  &  quel-
ques  autres  pleines  de  ferueur,  ils  courent a  leurs
canots  pour  s'embarquer,  &  pour  donner  la  chaffe  a
leurs  ennerais. A  peine  approchoient  ils  des  riues  du
grand  fleuue,  qu'ils  apperceurent  deux  canots,  l'vn
defquels entendant le bruit qu'on faifoit, s'ecria,
arreftez-vous,  nous  fommes  viuans. Tout  le  monde
accourut  au  lieu  de s'arrefter: ces  deux trefpaflez
fans  mourir,  ou  ces  prifonniers  fans  ennemis,  diset
qu'vn loup ceruier  par fon  hurlement, & par fes
allies  &  venues  a  l'entour  de  leurs  cabanes,  les  a
trompez. A  ces  paroles  la  guerre  fut  termin6e,  cha-
qu'vn  fe  mit  a  rire,  on  reporta  les  armes  &  le  bagage,
dans  les  cabanes. La  defolation  [166]  de  ces  bonnes
gens  fe  changea  en  ioye,  &  en  adtion  de  graces  qu'ils
rendirent  a  Noftre  Seigneur. Ils  croyoient  que  ces
ennemis  fuffent  non  des  Annierronnons  ou  des  Iro-
quois auec  lef  quels  la  paix  continue :  mais  des  Soko-
quiois  qui tuerent  l'an  paffe  quafi  a  mefme  temps
deux ou trois des meilleurs Chreftiens de faindt
Iofeph :  comme  il  a  efte"  remarque  es  chapitres  prece-
dens :  mais  on  nous  dit  que  ces  peuples  ne  font  pas
pour  fouftenir  la  guerre  contre  nos  Sauuages,  &  qu'ils
fe  tiendront  en  repos.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  211

we  may  not  offend  thee."  These  words  being  said,
and  some  others  full  of  fervor,  they  run  to  their
canoes  in  order  to  embark,  and  to  give  chase  to  their
enemies.  Hardly  were  they  approaching  the  banks
of  the  great  river,  when  they  perceived  two  canoes,
one  of  which,  hearing  the  noise  that  was  going  on,
cried:  "  Stop,  we  are  alive."  Every  one  ran  thither,
instead  of  stopping;  those  two  men,  deceased  with-
out dying,  or  those  prisoners  without  enemies,  said
that  a  lynx,  by  its  howling,  and  by  its  goings  and
comings  about  their  cabins,  deceived  them.  At
these  words,  the  war  was  ended ;  each  one  began  to
laugh,  and  they  carried  back  their  arms  and  baggage
into  the  cabins.  The  desolation  [166]  of  these  good
people  was  changed  into  joy,  and  into  thanksgiving,
which  they  rendered  to  Our  Lord.  They  believed
that  those  enemies  were  not  Annierronnons  or  Iro-
quois, with  whom  the  peace  continues,  but  Sokoqui-
ois,  who  killed  last  year,  almost  at  the  same  season,
two  or  three  of  the  best  Christians  of  saint  Joseph,
as  it  has  been  remarked  in  the  preceding  chapters.
We  are,  however,  told  that  those  tribes  are  not  in
favor  of  maintaining  the  war  against  our  Savages,
and  that  they  will  remain  quiet.


212  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.29


CHAPITRE  X.

DE QUELQUES PARTICULARITEZ DU PAYS, & AUTRES

CHOSES QUI N'ONT PU ESTRE RAPPORTEES

SOUS LES CHAPITRES PRECEDENS.

VN  Sauuage  d'vne  nation  fort  eloignee  de  Kebec,
nous  a  dit  que  quad  quelque  perfonne  de
confideration  eft  morte  en  fon  pais,  ceux  qui
ont  le  coufteau  &  la  hache  mieux  en  main ,  taillent  [167]
fon  portrait,  comme  ils  peuuent  &  le  plantent  fur  la
foffe  du  trefpaffe,  oignant  &  graiffant  c6t  homme  de
bois,  comme  s'il  eftoit  viuant.  Ils  appellent  cette
figure  Tipaiatik,  comme  qui  diroit  le  bois  ou  le  portrait
d'vn  trefpaffe.

Ils  ont  encore  vne  autre  couftume  remarquable  en
ce  pays  la.  Vn  homme  eftant  mort,  li  fon  pere  ou
fon  frere,  ou  quelqu'vn  de  fes  proches  parens,  ou  de
fes  amis,  eft  alle  en  quelque  voyage  bien  eloigne,  ils
luy  font  fcauoir  la  mort  de  fon  parent  ou  de  fon  amy,
en  cette  forte :  ils  vont  pendre  la  chof e  fignifiee  par
le  nom  du  def undt  fur  le  chemin  par  ou  il  doit  paffer :
par  exemple,  s'il  fe  nomme  Pire,  c'eft  a  dire  la  per-
drix,  ils  pendent  la  peau  d'vne  perdrix ;  s'il  fe  nomme
Siktfas,  c'eft  a  dire  de  l'6corce  de  bouleau,  ils  en
attachent  vn  morceau  a  quelque  branche  d'arbre,
pour  fignifier  que  celuy  qui  portoit  ce  nom,  n'eft  plus
au  nombre  des  viuans.  Voicy  qui  femble  bien
eftrange,  fi  le  parent  a  reconnu  le  fignal,  il  entrera
dans  fa  cabane fans iamais  parler  du defundt ny


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  213


CHAPTER  X.

OF  SOME  PECULIARITIES  OF  THE  COUNTRY,  AND  OTHER

THINGS WHICH COULD NOT BE RELATED

UNDER  THE  PRECEDING  CHAPTERS.

A  SAVAGE  of  a  nation  very  distant  from  Kebec
has  told  us  that,  when  any  person  of  emi-
nence has  died  in  his  country,  those  who  can
best  use  the  knife  and  hatchet  cut  out  [167]  his  like-
ness, as  well  as  they  can,  and  fix  it  upon  the  grave
of  the  deceased, — •  anointing  and  greasing  this  man
of  wood  as  if  he  were  alive.  They  call  this  figure
Tipaiatik, —  as  if  they  said,  "  the  head  or  portrait  of
one  deceased."

They  have  still  another  remarkable  custom  in  that
country.  A  man  having  died,  if  his  father,  or
brother,  or  any  one  of  his  near  kinsmen  or  his  friends
has  gone  on  some  very  distant  journey,  they  inform
him  of  the  death  of  his  kinsman  or  of  his  friend  in
this  wise :  they  go  and  suspend  the  thing  signified
by  the  name  of  the  deceased  along  the  way  by  which
this  man  is  to  pass.  For  instance,  if  he  is  named
Pire, —  that  is  to  say,  "the  partridge," — they  sus-
pend the  skin  of  a  partridge;  if  he  is  named  Sikwas, —
that  is  to  say,  "  birch-bark," — they  fasten  a  piece  of
it  to  some  branch  of  a  tree,  in  order  to  indicate  that
he  who  bore  that  name  is  no  longer  numbered  among
the  living.  Here  is  a  usage  that  seems  very  strange :
if  the  kinsman  has  recognized  the  signal,  he  will
enter  into  his  cabin  without ever  speaking  of  the


214  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.29

demander  comme  il  eft  mort,  fes  parens  n'en  feront
aucune  mention :  car  on  ne  parle  plus  des  morts,  de
peur  d'attrifter  [168]  les  viuans,  fi  toutesfois  on  croit
qu'il  n'ait  pas  veu  le  lignal,  on  luy  dira  vn  tel  eft
mort,  &  voila  tout.

Si  vn  Sauuage  eft  tombe  en  quelque  defaftre,  s'il  a
perdu  quelqu'vn  de  fes  proches,  il  laiffe  croiftre  fes
cheueux  fur  fon  front,  pour  marque  de  fon  deuil  &
de  fon  ennuy :  Que  fi  vous  le  voulez  deliurer  de  cette
peine,  faites  luy  vn  prefent  auec  ces  paroles  ou  d'au-
tres  femblables:  voila  des  cifeaux  pour  coupper  les
cheueux  qui  pendent  fur  ton  front,  s'il  touche  voftre
prefent,  il  couppe  fes  cheueux,  &  quitte  fon  ennuy.

On  a  defia  dit  dans  les  Relations  precedentes,  que
fi  quelque  homme  de  confideration  ou  fort  ayme  de
fes  parens  eft  mort,  on  le  fait  refufciter  en  cette
forte :  on  offre  a  quelque  autre  le  nom  du  defundt
auec  vn  beau  prefent,  s'il  l'accepte  il  quitte  fon  an-
cien  nom,  &  en  prend  vn  nouueau,  &  s'il  n'eft  pas
marie  il  efpoufe  la  vefue,  prenant  vn  foin  de  fes
enfans,  comme  s'ils  eftoient  les  Hens  propres:  que  fi
la  vefue  ne  l'aggree  pas,  il  ne  laiffe  pas  de  fe  porter
pour  pere  de  fes  enfans.  II  n'y  a  pas  long-temps
que  cette  couftume  nous  donna  vne  fauffe  alarme  &
vn  faux  fcandale.  [169]  Le  mary  d'vne  femme  affez
ieune  eftant  mort,  on  fit  porter  fon  nom  a  vn  ieune
homme  qui  depuis  peu  auoit  perdu  fa  femme :  celuy-
cy  prend  fon  bagage  &  fe  va  loger  en  la  cabane  de
la  vefue,  &  fe  place  aupres  d'elle  &  de  fes  enfans:
comme  ils  eftoient  tous  deux  Chreftiens,  cela  nous
eftonna :  car  on  difoit  qu'ils  eftoient  mariez  enfemble.
On  appelle  cette  ieune  femme,  on  luy  demande  fi  elle
n'eft  pas  Chreftienne,  & fi  elle  n'a  point  quitte-  la


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  215

dead,  or  asking  how  he  has  died,  and  his  relatives
will  make  no  mention  of  it, —  for  they  speak  no  more
of  the  dead,  for  fear  of  saddening  [168]  the  living.
If,  however,  it  is  believed  that  he  has  not  seen  the
signal,  they  will  tell  him  that  such  a  one  is  dead ;  and
that  is  all.

If  a  Savage  has  fallen  into  any  disaster,  or  if  he
has  lost  one  of  his  near  kinsmen,  he  lets  his  hair
grow  over  his  forehead,  in  token  of  his  mourning
and  sorrow.  But  if  you  wish  to  deliver  him  from
that  distress,  make  him  a  present,  with  these  words,
or  others  similar :  ' '  There  are  some  scissors  to  cut
the  hair  which  hangs  over  your  forehead ;  "  if  he
receive  your  present,  he  cuts  his  hair  and  forsakes
his  sadness.

It  has  already  been  told,  in  the  preceding  Rela-
tions, that  if  any  man  of  consideration,  or  one  much
loved  by  his  kinsfolk,  have  died,  he  is  made  to  revive
in  this  manner :  they  offer  to  some  one  else  the  name
of  the  deceased,  together  with  a  valuable  present.  If
he  accept  it,  he  gives  up  his  former  name,  and  takes
the  new  one ;  and,  if  he  be  not  married,  he  espouses
the  widow,  taking  care  of  her  children  as  if  they
were  his  own ;  but,  if  the  widow  accept  him  not,  he
nevertheless  acts  as  father  to  her  children.  Not  long
ago,  this  custom  gave  us  a  false  alarm,  and  a  false
scandal.  [169]  The  husband  of  a  quite  young  wife
having  died,  his  name  was  transferred  to  a  young
man  who  had  recently  lost  his  wife ;  this  one  takes
his  baggage  and  goes  to  lodge  in  the  widow's  cabin,
and  places  himself  beside  her  and  her  children.  As
they  were  both  Christians,  that  astonished  us ;  for  it
was  said  that  they  were  married  together.  That
young  woman  is  called ;  she  is  asked  if  she  is  not  a


216  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

Foy:  Ie  fuis  Chreftienne,  refpond-elle,  &  pour  rien
du  monde  ie  ne  voudrois  quitter  la  Foy.  Eftes-vous
remariee?  non;  Vn  tel  ieune  home,  n'eft-il  pas  auec
vous  dans  voftre  cabane  ?  ouy .  Le  voulez-vous  efpou-
fer?  non.  D'ou  vient  done  que  vous  le  logez  auec
vous?  Ie  ne  l'ay  point  appelle,  demandez  a  ceux  qui
luy  ont  donne"  le  nom  de  mon  mary,  pourquoy  ils  me
l'ont  enuoye.  Le  Pere  qui  faifoit  ces  interrogations
ne  dift  que  deux  mots  a  fa  predication  de  cette
couftume,  en  l'improuuant  comme  trop  dangereufe:
auffi-toft  deux  Capitaines  le  vinrent  trouuer,  1'afTeu-
rant  qu'ils  faifoient  cela  pour  fecourir  la  vefue  &  fes
enfans:  que  s'il  y  auoit  quelque  mal,  qu'ils  banni-
roient  cette  [170]  fa9on  de  faire  comme  ils  ont  fait
toutes  les  autres  qu'on  a  iuge  blafmables.  On  leur
dit  que  s'il  fe  vouloient  marier  on  les  efpouferoit,
autrement  qu'ils  fe  deuoient  feparer;  ce  qui  n'em-
pefcheroit  pas  que  ce  ieune  homme  ne  fit  du  bien  a
ces  pauures  orphelins:  cela  fut  aufli-tofl  execute.

On  donne  en  France  vne  fomme  d'argent  ou  quel-
que autre  chofe  pour  marier  vne  fille.  Icy  tout  au
contraire  vn  homme  voulant  efpoufer  vne  fille  fait  des
prefens  a  fes  parens.  Que  fi  la  fille,  fe  marie  deuant
que  les  prefens  foient  faits,  &  que  le  mari  tarde  a
les  faire,  les  parens  retirent  leur  fille,  &  le  mari  de-
meure  tout  feul,  comme  s'il  n'auoit  point  efte  marie.
De  plus  fi  vn  Sauuage  efpoufe  vne  fille  d'vne  autre
nation  ou  d'vne  autre  bourgade  que  la  fienne,  s'il  ne
la  renuoye  quand  elle  eft  malade  pour  mourir  aupres
de  fes  parens,  il  doit  enuoyer  des  prefens  pour  les
confoler  fur  fa  mort.

On  a  bien  parle  les  annees  precedentes  de  quel-
ques  mouches  qui brillent la nuit pendant l'Efte:


1646)  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  217

Christian,  and  if  she  has  not  forsaken  the  Faith.
"  I  am  a  Christian,"  she  answers;  "  and  for  nothing
in  the  world  would  I  forsake  the  Faith."  "  Are  you
married  again?"  "No."  "Such  a  young  man, —
is  he  not  with  you  in  your  cabin?"  "  Yes."  "  Do
you  wish  to  espouse  him?"  "No."  "Whence
comes  it  then  that  you  lodge  him  with  you?"  "  I
have  not  called  him, — ask  those  who  have  given  him
my  husband's  name,  why  they  have  sent  him  to  me."
The  Father  who  put  these  questions,  said  only  a  few
words  at  his  preaching,  about  this  custom,  reproving
it  as  too  dangerous.  Immediately  two  Captains  came
to  find  him,  assuring  him  that  they  were  doing  that
in  order  to  help  the  widow  and  her  children ;  that,  if
there  were  any  wrong  in  it,  they  would  abolish  this
[170]  way  of  doing,  as  they  have  done  with  all  the
others  that  have  been  judged  blameworthy.  They
are  told  that,  if  these  persons  wished  to  marry,  we
would  espouse  them ;  otherwise,  that  they  ought  to
separate, —  which  would  not  hinder  that  young  man
from  doing  good  to  those  poor  orphans.  That  was
quickly  accomplished.

They  give  in  France  a  sum  of  money,  or  some-
thing else  of  value,  in  order  to  have  a  young  girl
marry.  Here,  on  the  contrary,  a  man  wishing  to
espouse  a  girl  makes  presents  to  her  parents.  But,
if  the  girl  marry  before  the  presents  are  given,  and
the  husband  be  slow  to  make  them,  the  parents  take
away  their  daughter,  and  the  husband  remains  all
alone,  as  if  he  had  not  been  married.  Moreover,  if
a  Savage  espouse  a  girl  of  another  nation  or  of  an-
other village  than  his  own,  he  must  —  unless  he  send
her  back  when  she  is  sick,  in  order  to  die  near  her  par-
ents—  send  presents  to  console  them  upon  her  death.


218  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  29

comme  des  eftoiles  cm  de  petits  flambeaux :  fi  vous
en  prenez  vne  par  fa  petite  aile,  &  fi  vous  la  paffez
doucement  [171]  fur  vn  liure,  vous  lirez  dans  le  fond
de  la  nuit,  comme  au  milieu  du  iour.  II  eft  vray  que
ce  flambeau  fe  cache  &  paroift  felon  le  mouuement
de  ce  petit  animal.  Outre  cefte  efpece  de  mouches,
il  y  en  a  d'autres  qui  au  Printemps,  paroiffent  en
quelques  endroits  en  fi  grande  quantite  qu'on  diroit
en  verite  qu'il  neiges  des  mouches,  tant  l'air  en  eft
remply :  il  eft  vray  qu'elles  font  innocentes,  que  fi
elles  picquoient,  comme  les  coufms  qu'on  nomme  icy
des  maringoins,  ce  feroit  vn  des  fleaux  d'Egypte.
Homme  du  monde  n'oferoit  porter  le  vifage  ny  les
mains  a  decouuert  pendant  quelque  peu  de  temps
que  cette  pluye,  &  ces  tenebres  durent:  l'air  en  ce
temps-la  n'a  nonplus  de  iour  que  lors  qu'il  tombe  vne
neige  fort  drue,  &  fort  efpaiffe.  Ie  n'ay  point  veu  a
Kebec  de  ces  armees :  mais  vn  petit  plus  haut  dans
quelques  Iiles  oil  on  trouue  de  quatre  fortes  de  cra-
paux.  II  y  en  a  de  noirs,  &  de  iaunes  fort  vilains,
il  y  en  a  de  blancs  affez  gros,  &  d'autres  affez  petits
qui  branchent  comme  les  oyf eaux ;  ils  grimpent  fur
les  arbres  fautans  de  branche  en  branche,  leurs  pates
font  propres  a  s'aggraffer.  Ils  ont  vn  cry  refonnant
qui  [172]  approche  bien  plus  du  chant  d'vn  oyfeau,
que  du  croacement  des  grenoiiilles.  En  effet  le  pre-
mier qu'o  entedit,  fut  pris  pour  vn  oyfeau;  mais
l'ceil  nous  apprit  que  c'eftoit  vn  crapaux.  Ie  ne
fcay  fi  on  a  remarque"  qu'il  y  a  icy  des  grenoiiilles
que  quelques  perfonnes  ont  prifes  pour  des  taureaux,
les  entendant  croacer :  ce  bruit  eft  prodigieux  pour
la  petiteffe  de  leur  corps. Elles  font  mediocres  dans


1646]  RELATION  OF  164s -46  219

There  has  surely  been  mention,  in  the  preceding
years,  of  some  flies  which  shine  at  night  during  the
Summer,  like  stars  or  little  torches;  if  you  take  one
by  its  little  wing,  and  if  you  move  it  slowly  [171]
over  a  book,  you  will  read  in  the  depth  of  the  night
as  in  the  middle  of  the  day. It  is  true  that  this  torch
conceals  itself  and  appears  according  to  the  motion
of  this  little  animal. Besides  this  kind  of  flies,  there
are  others  which in  Spring  appear  in  some  places  in
so  great  number  that  one  might  in  truth  say  that  it
snows  flies,  to  such  a  degree  is  the  air  filled  with
them. It  is  true  that  they  are  harmless;  but,  if  they
stung, —  like  the  gnats  which  are  here  named  mos-
quitoes,—  it  would  be  one  of  the  plagues  of  Egypt;
no  man  in  the  world  would  dare  to  leave  his  face  or
his  hands  exposed  during  some  little  time  that  this
rain  and  this  darkness  prevail ;  the  air  at  that  time
has  no  more  light  than when  a  very  compact  and
heavy  fall  of  snow  occurs. I  have  not  seen  any  of
these  armies  at  Kebec;  but  have  seen  them  a  little
above,  in  some  Islands  where  one  finds  four  sorts  of
toads. There  are  black  ones,  and  yellow  ones,  very
ugly;  there  are  some  white  ones, quite  large, and
others  rather  small, which  perch  like  the  birds, —
these  climb  on  the  trees, jumping  from  branch  to
branch ;  their  feet  are  adapted  to  hooking  fast. They
make  a  resounding  cry  which  [172]  approaches  much
more  to  the  song  of  a  bird  than  to  the  croaking  of
the  frogs. Indeed,  the  first  one  that  we  heard  we
mistook for a  bird;  but  the  eye  taught  us  that  it
was  a  toad. I  know  not  whether  it  has  been  remarked
that  there  are  frogs  here  which  some  persons  have
mistaken  for  bulls,  on  hearing  them  croak ;  this  noise
is  prodigious  for  the  littleness  of  their  body. They


220  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES  [Vol.29


leur  genre, on en voit  d'autres  incomparablement
plus  groffes  qui  ne  font  pas  tant  de  bruit.

II  fe  trouue  icy  vne  efpece  de  cerfs  differens  des
communs  de  France. Nos  Francois  les  appellent  des
vaches  fauuages: ce  font  veritablement des cerfs:
leurs  branches  n'ont  point  de  rapport  aux  comes  de
nos bceufs,  & leurs corps font bien diffemblables
& bien plus haut montez: ces  animaux vont en
trouppes :  mais  pour  f e  f oulager  pendant  l'hyuer,  ils
fe  fuiuent  les  vns  apres  les  autres,  les  premiers  frayas
le  chemin  a  ceux  qui  viennent  apres. Et  quand  ce-
luy  qui  ropt  &  qui  ouure  la  neige,  eft  las,  il  fe  met
le  dernier  dans  la  route  battue. Les  cerfs  en  France
font  le  mefme  en  paffant  quelque  riuiere  quand  ils  fe
trouuent  en  troupe,  a  ce  qu'on  dit,  ceux-cy  [173]  ne
s'arreftent guiere en  vn  endroit  marchans  toufiours
dans  ces  grandes  forefts. Les  Elans  font  le  contraire,
quoy  qu'ils  marchent  enfemble,  ils  ne  gardent  point
d'ordre  brouttans  ca  &  la,  fans  s' eloigner  beaucoup
d'vn  mefme  gifte. C'eft  ce  qui  faifoit  dire  il  y  a
quelques  iours  a  vn Sauuage  qui  fe  vouloit  retirer,
que  les Elans  eftoient  des Francois,  &  cette  autre
forte de cerfs errans  des  Algonquins; pource  que
ceux  cy  vont  chercher  leur  vie  deca  dela  dedans  ces
grands  bois,  &  les  Francois  tiennent  ferme  cultiuans
la  terre  au  lieu  ou  ils  font  leur  demeure. Outre  ces
cerfs  il  y  en  a  de  deux  autres  efpeces ;  l'vne  qui  eft
femblable  ou  qui  a  beaucoup  de  rapport  a  nos  cerfs
de  France. L'autre,  qu'on  croit  eftre  cet  Onager  ou
cet  afne  fauuage  de  l'Efcriture. Ce  feroit  vfer  de
redites  que  d'en  vouloir  parler  en  cet  endroit. Ces
bonnes  gens voyent  maintenant  en  leur  pays  vne
autre  efpece d'animaux, dont  ils  n'auoient  iamais


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  221

are  not  large,  of  their  kind ;  one  sees  others  incom-
parably bigger,  which  do  not  make  so  much  noise.

There  is  found  here  a  species  of  deer,  different
from  the  common  ones  of  France.  Our  French  call
them  "  wild  cows,"  but  they  are  really  deer;  their
branching  horns  have  no  likeness  to  the  horns  of  our
oxen,  and  their  bodies  are  very  dissimilar,  and  of
much  greater  height.  These  animals  go  in  troops ;
but,  to  assist  one  another  during  the  winter,  they
follow  one  after  another,  the  first  ones  breaking  the
way  for  those  that  come  after;  and,  when  the  one
which  breaks  and  opens  up  the  snow  is  tired,  it
places  itself  last  in  the  beaten  path.  The  deer  in
France  do  the  same  in  crossing  a  river,  when  they
happen  to  be  in  a  herd.  According  to  report,  these
animals  [173]  hardly  stop  in  one  place,  continually
traveling  within  these  great  forests.  The  Elks  do  the
contrary;  though  they  walk  together,  they  observe
no  order,  browsing  here  and  there,  without  straying
far  from  the  same  shelter.  This  is  what  prompted,
some  days  ago,  a  Savage  who  wished  to  become
sedentary,  to  say  that  the  Elks  were  French,  and  that
other  sort  of  roving  deer,  Algonquins:  because  the
latter  go  to  seek  their  living  hither  and  thither  with-
in these  great  forests,  and  the  French  are  stationary,
tilling  the  earth  at  the  place  where  they  make  their
abode.  Besides  these  deer,  there  are  two  other
species, —  one  of  which  is  similar,  or  which  has  much
likeness,  to  our  deer  of  France;  the  other  of  which  is
believed  to  be  the  Onager  or  wild  ass  of  the  Scrip-
ture. It  would  be  using  repetitions,  to  attempt  to
speak  of  them  in  this  place.  These  good  people  now
see  in  their  country  another  kind  of  animals,  of
which  they  had  never had knowledge; these  are


222  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

eu  connoiffance.  Ce  sot  de  petits  taureaux,  &  de  pe-
tites  genifTes  qu'on  y  a  fait  porter  auec  de  grands  tra-
uaux :  leur  eftonnement  fera  bien  plus  grand,  quand
ils  verront  ces  animaux  labourer  la  terre,  &  traifner
de  gros  [174]  fardeaux  fur  des  neiges  hautes  de  trois
&  de  quatre  pieds, fans  enfoncer.

Dans  ce  Chapitre  ie  donneray  place  a  la  peur  &  a
la  force  de  deux  femmes.  Le  troifi6me  de  Iuillet
deux  femmes  toutes  moiiillees  depuis  les  pieds
iufques  a  la  tefte,  entreret  dans  1' habitation  de
Montreal ;  elles  eftoient  abbatues  &  toutes  eplorees,  on
leur  demande  le  fujet  de  leur  triftefle ;  comme  nous
defcendions  9a  bas  moy  &  ma  fille,  dit  la  plus  aagee,
nous  auons  apperceu  des  hommes  que  nous  croyons
eftre  de  nos  ennemis;  la  peur  nous  faififlant  nous
auons  abandonne  noftre  petit  bateau  d'ecorce  &  tout
noftre  bagage,  marchans  &  courans  huidt  iours  en-
tiers  dans  ces  grands  bois,  de  peur  de  tomber  entre
leurs  mains.  Qu'auez-vous  mange  depuis  ce  temps-
la,  leur  dit-on  ?  Rien  du  tout  que  des  f ruidts  f au-
uages  que  nous  rencontrions  par  fois,  &  encore  ne
les  cueillions  nous  qu'en  courant.  Mais  comment
auez  vous  pu  aborder  cette  Ifle  fans  canot?  nous
auons  ramaile  des  bois  que  nous  auons  lie  par  enfem-
ble  auec  des  ecorces  de  bois  blanc,  nous  nous  fommes
mif es  fur  ces  bois  ramans  auec  des  baftons  &  nous  con-
fians  a  la  mercy  des  eaux,  aymans  [175]  mieux  eftre
noy6es  que  de  tomber  entre  les  mains  de  perfonnes  11
cruelles,  comme  font  nos  ennemis.  Ces  bois  venant
a  fe  rompre,  nous  fommes  tombees  dans  le  courant,
&  apres  nous  eftre  bien  debatues,  nous  auos  ratrappe"
nos  bois  qui  nous  ont  conduit  iufqu'au  bord  de  voftre
Ifle. Remarquez,  s'il  vous  plaift,  qu'elles  firent  plus


1646J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  223

little  bulls  and  heifers,  which  have  been  brought
hither  with  great  labors.  Their  astonishment  will
be  much  greater  when  they  shall  see  these  animals
working  the  earth,  and  drawing  huge  [174]  burdens
over  snows  three  and  four  feet  deep,  without  sink-
ing in.

In  this  Chapter  I  will  give  space  to  the  fear  and
the  strength  of  two  women.  On  the  third  of  July,
two  women,  all  wet  from  the  feet  even  to  the  head,
entered  the  settlement  of  Montreal ;  they  were  de-
jected and  all  in  tears.  They  are  asked  the  reason
of  their  sadness.  ' '  As  we  were  coming  down  hither,
my  daughter  and  I,"  said  the  elder,  "  we  perceived
some  men  whom  we  believed  to  be  of  our  enemies ;
fear  seizing  us,  we  abandoned  our  little  bark  boat
and  all  our  baggage,  walking  and  running  eight
entire  days  in  these  great  woods,  for  fear  of  falling
into  their  hands."  "  What  have  you  eaten  since  that
time?"  they  are  asked.  "Nothing  at  all,  but  wild
fruits  that  we  came  across  at  times ;  and  even  then
we  gathered  them  only  while  running."  "  But  how
have  you  been  able  to  land  on  this  Island  without  a
canoe?  "  "  We  picked  up  pieces  of  wood,  which  we
bound  together  with  bark  of  white-wood ;  we  placed
ourselves  on  this  raft,  paddling  with  sticks,  and
trusting  to  the  mercy  of  the  waters, — choosing  [175]
rather  to  be  drowned  than  to  fall  into  the  hands  of
persons  so  cruel  as  are  our  enemies.  Those  pieces
of  wood  beginning  to  break  apart,  we  fell  into  the
current;  but,  after  having  struggled  hard,  we  over-
took our  raft,  which  brought  us  even  to  the  shore
of  your  Island."  Notice,  if  you  please,  that  they
made  more  than  two  leagues  on  those  floating
sticks,  awaiting  only  the  hour  when  they  should  be


224  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.29

de  deux  lieues  fur  ces  bartons  flottans,  n' attendant
que  l'heure  d'eftre  englouties  dans  la  profondeur
d'vn  fleuue  qui  paroift  corame  vne  mer  au  deffus  de
cette  Ifle.  Apres  tout,  il  ne  fallut  point  de  faign6e
pour  les  guerir  de  la  peur:  on  leur  donna  a  manger,
elles  firent  feicher  leurs  robes,  &  les  voila  hors  de
leurs  ennuys.  La  perte  de  leur  canot,  de  leurs
marchandifes,  de  leurs  viures,  de  tout  leur  bagage,
ne  les  affligea  pas  beaucoup.  Ce  qui  ne  tient  guere,
s'arrache  aifement:  comme  les  biens  ne  font  pas  pro-
fondement  logez  dans  le  coeur  des  Sauuages,  la  perte
en  eft  moins  amere,  ils  fe  rient  dans  les  naufrages,
&  fe  mocquent  du  feu  qui  confomme  leurs  biens.

I'ay  defia  pretendu  vne  excufe  fur  la  bigarure  de
ce  Chapitre,  voicy  vne  fimplicite  innocente.  Vn  Atti-
camegue  qui  n'auoit  [176]  point  frequente  les  Fran-
cois, voyant  qu'vn  Pere  regardant  vn  papier  pronon-
coit  des  prieres,  ce  Sauuage  fut  rauy,  il  s'imagine
qu'il  entendroit  bien  ce  papier,  il  le  demande:  tu  n'y
connoiftras  rien,  luy  dit  le  Pere,  comment  fit-il,  il
parle  ma  langue?  Le  Pere  luy  donne,  il  le  regarde,
il  le  tourne  &  retourne  de  tous  coftez  puis  fe  mettant
a  rire,  il  s'efcrie  en  fon  Montagnais,  Tap  de  Nama
Nitirinifin,  Nama  NinifitaSabaten,  en  verite"  ie  n'ay
point  d'efprit,  ie  n'entend  point  par  les  yeux.  C'eft
vn  beau  mot  qu'ils  ont  donne  pour  fignifier  qu'on
fcait  lire,  NinifitaSabaten:  c'eft  proprement  a  dire,
i'entends  par  les  yeux.  Ce  mot  eft  compofe  de  Nini-
fitb'ten,  i'entends,  &  de  Nittabaten,  ie  voy,  de  ces  deux
mots  ils  en  compofent  vn  qui  fignifie  i'entends  en
voyant:  c'eft  a  dire  ie  lis  bien,  ie  connoy  ce  que  ie
voy.  Leurs  compofitions  font  admirables,  &  ie  puis
dire  que  quand  il  n'y  auroit  point  d' autre  argument


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  22b

swallowed  up  in  the  depth  of  a  flood  which  appears
like  a  sea  above  this  Island.  After  all,  it  required
no  bleeding  to  cure  them  of  their  fright ;  they  were
given  something  to  eat,  they  dried  their  clothing,  and
at  once  they  were  free  from  care.  The  loss  of  their
canoe,  their  wares,  their  provisions,  and  all  their
baggage,  afflicted  them  not  much.  What  is  lightly
attached  is  easily  torn  away ;  as  goods  are  not  deeply
lodged  in  the  hearts  of  the  Savages,  the  loss  of  them
is  less  bitter ;  they  make  merry  in  shipwrecks,  and
mock  at  the  fire  which  consumes  their  possessions.

I  have  already  given  an  excuse  for  the  medley  of
this  Chapter, — here  follows  an  instance  of  innocent
simplicity.  An  Atticamegue  who  had  not  [176]
visited  the  French,  seeing  that  a  Father,  looking  at
a  paper,  uttered  some  prayers, —  this  Savage  was
charmed ;  he  imagines  that  he  would  well  understand
that  paper,  and  asks  for  it.  "  Thou  wouldst  under-
stand nothing  upon  it,"  the  Father  answers  him.
"How  so?"  he  said,  "it  speaks  my  language."
The  Father  gives  it  to  him ;  he  looks  at  it,  and  turns
and  turns  it  again  on  all  sides;  then,  beginning  to
laugh,  he  exclaims  in  his  Montagnais,  Tap  de  Nama
Nitirinisin,  Nama  Ninisitazvabaten, —  "  In  truth,  I  have
no  sense;  I  do  not  hear  with  the  eyes."  It  is  an
excellent  word  that  they  have  employed  to  signify
that  one  knows  how  to  read,  Ninisitazvabaten;  this
correctly  means,  "  I  hear  with  the  eyes."  This
word  is  composed  of  Ninisitouten,  "  I  hear,"  and
Niwabaten,  "I  see;"  from  these  two  words  they
compose  one  which  signifies  "I  hear  by  seeing:'
that  is  to  say,  "  I  read  well,"  "  I  know  what  I  see."
Their  compounds  are  admirable;  and  I  may  say
that,  though  there  should  be  no  other  argument  to


226  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

pour  monftrer  qu'il  y  a  vn  Dieu,  que  l'oeconomie  des
langues  Sauuages,  cela  fufnroit  pour  nous  conuaincre.
Car  il  n'y  a  prudence  ny  induftrie  humaine  qui  puifle
raffebler  tant  d'hommes  pour  leur  faire  tenir  l'ordre
qu'ils  [177]  gardent  dans  leurs  langues  toutes  difre-
rentes  de  celle  d'Europe:  c'eft  Dieu  feul  qui  en
maintient  la  conduite.  Au  refte  il  ne  faut  pas  s'e-
ftonner  qu'vn  Sauuage  admire  l'inuention  de  peindre
la  parole  des  hommes:  c'eft  veritablement  vn  fecret
digne  d'eftonnement.  Quoy  que  les  Sauuages  foient
fujets  a  la  crainte,  comme  les  autres  hommes,  &
qu'ils  foient  moins  refolus,  &  moins  courageux  dans
leurs  attaques  que  nos  Europeans,  fi  eft-ce  qu'ils  font
gloire  de  ne  point  branler,  &  de  ne  point  reculer,
quand  on  les  veut  frapper,  ou  tout  de  bon,  ou  par
feinte.  Vn  Francois  tenant  vne  pertuifane,  &  fai-
fant  femblant  d'en  donner  vn  coup  a  vn  Sauuage,  le
bleca  en  effet,  pour  ce  qu'il  fe  tint  roide,  fans  efqui-
uer  le  coup/  il  ne  fe  fafcha  pas  neantmoins,  voyant
que  le  Francois  auoit  fait  cela  en  riant :  ce  qui  nous
eftonna,  fut  qu'il  cacha  fa  bleffure,  d'ou  il  fut  par
apres  fort  incommode,  iamais  neantmoins  il  ne  voulut
aucun  mal  a  celuy  qui  l'auoit  offenfe,  difant  qu'il
auoit  fait  cela  par  ieu.

On  auroit  peu  remarquer  ailleurs  ce  qui  fuit.  Les
voyages  qu'on  a  fait  aux  pays  des  Annierronnons,  &
la  communication  qu'on  a  eue  auec  eux,  nous  ont  ap-
pris  [178]  vn  exemple  affez  remarquable  de  la  iuftice
de  Dieu.  Les  deux  Iroquois  qui  tuerent  de  fang
froid  vn  pauure  Francois,  aux  pieds  du  Pere  Ifaac
Iogues  font  morts  d'vne  mort  inconnue ;  l'vn  des  deux
eftoit  le  plus  grand,  &  peut-eftre  le  plus  fort  homme
de  fon  pays.


1646J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  227

show  that  there  is  a  God  than  the  economy  of  the
Savage  languages,  that  would  suffice  to  convince  us.
For  there  is  no  human  wisdom  nor  skill  which  can
unite  so  many  men,  so  as  to  make  them  observe  the
order  which  they  [177]  maintain  in  their  languages,
wholly  different  from  those  of  Europe;  it  is  God
alone  who  holds  the  guidance  thereof.  Indeed,  we
should  not  be  astonished  that  a  Savage  admires  the
invention  of  depicting  the  speech  of  men ;  it  is  truly
a  secret  worthy  of  astonishment.  Although  the
Savages  are  subject  to  fear,  like  other  men,  and
though  they  are  less  resolute  and  courageous  in  their
attacks  than  our  Europeans,  yet  they  take  pride  in
not  wavering  or  recoiling  when  one  tries  to  strike
them,  either  in  earnest  or  in  feint.  A  Frenchman,
holding  a  halberd,  and  pretending  to  give  a  thrust
with  it  at  a  Savage,  wounded  him  in  fact,  because
he  held  still,  without  dodging  the  blow ;  he  was  not
offended,  however,  seeing  that  the  Frenchman  had
done  that  in  sport.  What  astonished  us  was  that  he
concealed  his  wound,  from  which  he  was  afterward
much  inconvenienced ;  yet  he  never  wished  any  ill
to  the  one  who  had  injured  him, —  saying  that  he
had  done  that  in  play.

The  reader  may  have  observed  elsewhere  this
which  follows.  The  journeys  which  have  been  made
to  the  countries  of  the  Annierronnons,  and  the
communication  that  has  been  held  with  them,  have
informed  us  [178]  of  a  very  remarkable  instance  of
the  justice  of  God.  The  two  Iroquois  who  killed,  in
cold  blood,  a  poor  Frenchman  at  the  feet  of  Father
Isaac  Jogues,  have  died  by  an  unknown  death;  one
of  the  two  was  the  tallest  and  perhaps  the  strongest
man  of  his  country.


228  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29

Cette  femme  qui  couppa  le  poulce  au  mefme  Pere,
ne  l'a  pas  fait  longue  apres  cette  rage,  &  ceux  qui
luy  rongerent  les  doigts,  &  a  fes  compagnons,  &  qui
les  traiterent  auec  plus  de  rage,  ont  eft[e]  tuez  des
Algonquins  en  leurs  derniers  combats.  On  nous  dit
que  la  mefme  iuitice  a  pris  connoiffance  de  ceux  qui
ont  ft  miferablement  dechire"  le  Pere  Breffany :  le  pays
qui  a  confenty  a  ces  cruautez  eft  afflige  de  maladies
qui  peut-eitre  donneront  la  vraye  fante  a  ce  pauure
peuple.

Voicy  vn  rencontre  nouuellement  amue.  Dix-
fept  foldats  Dononiiote  \sc.  d'Ononiiote]  s'eftas  mis
en  embufcade  bl efferent  a  mort  vn  ieune  garcon  de
la  bande  de  Teftfehat  Capitaine  de  rifle,  comme
nous  auons  dit  cy-deffus,  &  en  outre  prirent  deux
femmes  dont  l'vne  eftoit  defia  fort  aagee :  comme  ils
s'en  retournoient  en  leurs  pays,  traifnans  auec  eux
ces  deux  pauures  creatures,  ils  apperceurent  de  [179]
loin  vn  canot  d'Hurons,  &  furent  a  mefme  temps
decouuerts  par  ceux  qui  conduifoient  ce  canot ;  auffi-
toit,  les  Hurons  qui  faifoient  trente  foldats,  fe  defem-
barquent  pour  aduifer  a  ce  qu'ils  feroient.  Ceux
Dononiiote  font  le  mefme.  Les  vns  ne  fcauoient  pas
le  nombre  des  autres,  les  Capitaines  de  ces  deux
petites  trouppes  donnent  courage  a  leurs  gens,  ils  les
exhortent  a  ne  point  reculer,  &  a  mourir  pluftofl  que
de  lafcher  le  pied.  C'eft  la  coufhime  de  ces  Capi-
taines quand  ils  fe  trouuent  proches  des  occafions,  de
tirer  des  baftons  qu'ils  portet  expres  auec  eux,  &  de
les  prefenter  a  leurs  foldats  pour  les  richer  en  terre,
afm  de  protefler  par  cette  action  que  ces  baftons
fortiront  plufioft  de  leur  place,  qu'ils  ne  tourneront
vifage. II  arriue  neantmoins  tres-fouuent  que  les


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  229

That  woman  who  cut  the  same  Father's  thumb,
had  no  long  career  after  that  rage;  and  they  who
gnawed  his  fingers  and  those  of  his  companions,  and
who  treated  them  with  most  fury,  have  been  killed
by  the  Algonquins  in  their  latest  combats.  We  are
told  that  the  same  justice  has  taken  cognizance  of
those  who  so  pitiably  lacerated  Father  Bressany ;  the
country  which  consented  to  those  cruelties  is  afflicted
with  diseases  which  perhaps  will  give  true  health  to
that  poor  people.

Here  is  an  incident  which  recently  happened.
Seventeen  warriors  from  Ononiiote,  having  placed
themselves  in  ambush,  wounded  to  death  a  young
lad  of  the  band  of  Teswehat,  Captain  of  the  Island, —
as  we  have  said  herein  above, — and  besides  took  two
women,  one  of  whom  was  already  very  aged.  While
they  were  returning  thence  to  their  own  country,
dragging  after  them  those  two  poor  creatures,  they
perceived  from  [179]  afar  a  canoe  of  Hurons,  and
were  at  the  same  time  discovered  by  those  who  were
guiding  that  canoe.  Straightway  the  Hurons,  who
numbered  thirty  warriors,  disembark,  in  order  to
take  counsel  as  to  what  they  should  do.  Those  of
Ononiiote  do  the  same.  Neither  party  knew  the
number  of  the  other.  The  Captains  of  these  two
little  bands  encourage  their  people ;  they  exhort  them
not  to  recede,  and  to  die  rather  than  to  give  way.
It  is  the  custom  of  those  Captains,  when  they  find
themselves  on  the  verge  of  combat,  to  draw  forth
sticks  which  they  purposely  carry  with  them,  and  to
present  these  to  their  men  that  they  may  fix  them
in  the  ground, —  that  they  may  protest  by  this  act  that
these  sticks  will  sooner  leave  their  place  than  they
will  retreat. However,  it  happens  very  often  that,


230  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

bartons  demeurans  fermes,  les  foldats  ne  laiffent  pas
de  s'enfuir.  Cenx-cy  ayans  fich6  bien  auant  leurs
baftons,  &  jure  a  leur  mode  qu'ils  mourroient  plu-
ltoft  que  de  branfler  dans  le  combat,  ceux  Dononiio-
te"  viennent  les  premiers  pour  attaquer  les  Hurons
qui  eftoient  derriere  vne  pointe.  A  leur  abord  il  fe
fit  vn  grand  cry  de  part  &  d' autre,  felo  la  couftume
des  Sauuages,  a  qui  ce  bruit  fert  de  trompettes,  &  de
[180]  tambours;  les  Hurons  s'imaginans  que  leurs
ennemis  les  preuenans  eftoient  en  grand  nombre,
s'enfuirent  auffi-toil  dans  les  bois,  a  la  referue  de  ceux
qui  tinrent  ferme  auffi  bien  que  leurs  bartons,  refolus
de  mourir  fur  la  place :  ceux  Dononiiote  ayans  recon-
nu  que  le  cry  des  Hurons  a  l'abord  eftoit  plus  grad
que  le  leur,  s'enfuirent  tous,  fans  qu'il  en  reftaft  pas
vn  feul,  les  cinq  Hurons  qui  n'auoient  pas  lafche'  le
pied,  fe  trouuerent  fans  amys  ny  ennemys,  ils  fe
regardent  les  vns  les  autres  bien  eftonnez :  les  deux
femmes  prifonnieres  voyans  que  tout  le  monde  cou-
roit  qui  deca  qui  dela  fe  delient  l'vne  1' autre,  &  fe
f  auuent  dans  les  bois  auffi  bien  que  les  autres :  comme
ils  fuyoient  fans  ordre  l'vne  de  ces  femmes  va  ren-
contrer  vn  Huron,  ils  fe  reconnoiff ent :  cette  pauure
prifonniere  raconte  fa  fortune,  dit  que  ceux  Dononi-
iote n'eftoient  que  dix-fept.  Le  Huron  tout  furpris
court  auffi-toft  aduertir  fes  camarades,  il  crie  tant
qu'il  peut,  ils  fe  ralient,  &  commencent  a  courir  &
a  coupper  chemin  a  leurs  ennemis :  ils  font  fi  bien
qu'ils  en  attraperent  vn  qu'ils  ameneret  a  Montreal,
donnant  la  liberte"  a  cette  Algonquine  prifonniere.
Sa  c5pagne  plus  aag6e  s'en  eftoit  fuye  fi  loin  [181]
que  iamais  ils  ne  la  purent  trouuer :  elle  reuient  quel-
ques  iours  apres  toute  feule  auec  l'eftonnement  des


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645 '-46  231

the  sticks  remaining  firm,  the  warriors  nevertheless
flee.  These  latter  having  fastened  their  sticks  well
forward,  and  sworn,  after  their  fashion,  that  they
would  die  sooner  than  waver  in  the  combat,  those  of
Ononiiote  come  the  first,  in  order  to  attack  the  Hu-
rons,  who  were  a  point  behind.  At  their  approach,
there  arose  a  great  shout  on  both  sides,  according  to
the  custom  of  the  Savages,  to  whom  this  noise  serves
for  trumpets  and  [180]  drums.  The  Hurons  —  imag-
ining that  their  enemies,  forestalling  them,  were  in
great  number  —  fled  straightway  into  the  woods,  with
the  exception  of  those  who  held  firm  as  well  as  their
sticks,  and  were  resolved  to  die  on  the  spot.  Those
of  Ononiiote"  having  recognized  that  the  shout  of  the
Hurons  at  the  start  was  greater  than  their  own,  all
fled,  so  that  not  a  single  one  was  left;  the  five  Hu-
rons who  had  not  given  way  found  themselves  with-
out friends  or  enemies,  and  they  looked  at  one  another
in  astonishment.  The  two  captive  women  —  seeing
that  all  the  people  were  running,  some  hither,  some
thither  —  unbind  each  other  and  escape  into  the
woods,  as  well  as  the  rest.  While  they  were  fleeing
in  disorder,  one  of  these  women  encounters  a  Huron ;
they  recognize  each  other,  and  that  poor  prisoner
relates  her  fortune,  and  says  that  those  of  Ononiiote"
were  only  seventeen.  The  Huron,  quite  surprised,
immediately  runs  to  notify  his  comrades;  he  shouts
with  all  his  might :  they  rally  themselves  and  begin
to  run,  to  cut  off  their  enemies'  path.  They  succeed
in  catching  one  of  them,  whom  they  bring  to
Montreal ;  and  they  gave  liberty  to  that  captive
Algonquin  woman.  Her  older  companion  had  fled  so
far  [181]  that  they  could  never  find  her:  she  returns
some  days  later,  all  alone, to  the  astonishment  of


232  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

Francois  &  des  Sauuages,  qui  admiroient  come  vne
vieille  auoit  pu  trauerfer  tant  de  terre,  &  tant  d'eau,
fans  viures,  &  fans  batteau,  n'ayant  ny  coufteau,  ny
hache,  ny  forces  pour  faire  vn  pont  permanent  ou
flottant  fur  vne  eftendue  d'eau  de  plus  de  trois
lieue's.  L'amour  de  la  vie  ou  la  crainte  de  la  mort  a
plus  de  force,  &  plus  d'induftrie  que  le  feu  &  le  fer.
Monfieur  d'Allibout  s'efforca  tant  qu'il  put,  de  tirer
ce  prifonnier  des  mains  des  Hurons,  pour  faire  la
paix  auec  fa  nation,  il  offrit  de  grands  prefens  pour
fa  deliurance :  mais  voyant  que  ces  ieunes  f oldats  le
vouloient  mener  en  leur  pays,  il  les  pria  par  vn  pre-
fent  de  luy  fauuer  la  vie,  &  de  le  ramener  Tan  pro-
chain  a  Onontio,  a  deffein  de  faire  alliance  auec  ces
peuples  par  l'entremife  de  ce  prifonnier.  Quelque
temps  apres  trois  cens  Hurons  eftans  defcendus
aux  trois  Riuieres,  Monfieur  noftre  Gouuerneur  leur
recommanda  de  ne  point  mal-traitter  ce  prifonnier
qu'on  auoit  mene  en  leur  pays,  &  de  le  reprefenter
en  fon  temps,  fuiuat  la  parole  qu'en  auoient  done  ceux
qui  l'auoient  entre  leurs  mains.  Soixante  braues
Chreltiens  Hurons  parurent  en  cette  affemblee,  [182]
ou  de  la  part  des  Iroquois  furent  faits  des  prefens
pour  marque  qu'ils  gouitoient  la  douceur  de  la  paix,
&  pour  affeurer  les  Hurons  &  les  Algonquins,  que
s'ils  tuoient  quelqu'vn  de  leur  nation  dans  leurs  com-
bats auec  les  SXntXaronons,  que  le  pays  ne  prendroit
point  leur  deffenfe.  Dans  ce  confeil  les  Hurons
deflinerent  quelques  prefens  pour  les  Iroquois,  fup-
plias  Ondeffon:  c'eft  le  nom  qu'ils  donnent  au  Pere
Ifaac  Iogues,  de  porter  leur  parole  a  ces  peuples:  ce
qui  leur  ayant  elle  accorde,  ce  bon  Pere  partit  bien-
toft  apres  pour  aller  paffer  l'hyuer  au  pays  de  ces


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  233

both  the  French  and  the  Savages.  These  marveled
how  an  old  woman  had  been  able  to  traverse  so  much
land  and  so  much  water,  without  provisions  and
without  a  boat;  having  neither  knife  nor  axe,  nor
strength  to  make  a  bridge,  either  permanent  or  float-
ing, over  an  extent  of  water  of  more  than  three
leagues.  The  love  of  life  or  the  fear  of  death  has
more  strength  and  more  skill  than  fire  and  iron.
Monsieur  d'Allibout  strove,  as  well  as  he  could,  to
release  that  prisoner  from  the  hands  of  the  Hurons,
in  order  to  make  peace  with  his  nation;  he  offered
great  presents  for  his  deliverance.  But,  seeing  that
those  young  warriors  wished  to  take  him  into  their
own  country,  he  begged  them,  by  a  gift,  to  save  his
life,  and  to  conduct  him  back  the  next  year  to  Onon-
tio, —  intending  to  make  alliance  with  those  tribes
by  the  mediation  of  that  prisoner.  Some  time  later,
three  hundred  Hurons  having  come  down  to  three
Rivers,  Monsieur  our  Governor  urged  them  not  to
ill-use  that  prisoner  whom  they  had  taken  into  their
country,  and  to  bring  him  back  in  due  time,  accord-
ing to  the  promise  that  had  been  given  him  by  those
who  had  the  prisoner  in  their  hands.  Sixty  worthy
Huron  Christians  appeared  in  this  assembly,  [182]
where  on  behalf  of  the  Iroquois  presents  were  made, —
in  token  that  they  were  enjoying  the  quietness  of
the  peace ;  and  in  order  to  assure  the  Hurons  and
the  Algonquins  that,  if  they  killed  any  one  of  their
nation  in  their  combats  with  the  Sonntwaronons,  the
country  would  not  undertake  the  defense  of  such.
In  this  council  the  Hurons  set  aside  some  presents
for  the  Iroquois,  beseeching  Ondesson  —  this  is  the
name  which  they  give  to  Father  Isaac  Jogues  —  to
convey  their  word  to  those  peoples. This  having


234  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jfiSUITES  [Vol.29

Barbares,  ou  l'adorable  Crucifie luy a fait & fera
encore  joiiyr  des  fruiets  de  fa  Croix.

Les  vaifTeaux  arriuez  extraordinairement  tard,  me
contraignent  de  mettre  en  ce  Chapitre  vne  action  qui
meriteroit  vn  volume  tout  entier.  Nous  auons  receu
cette  ann£e  vn  magnifique  Tableau  du  Roy  de  la
Reyne,  &  de  Monfieur:  c'eft  vn  prefent  Royal  de
cette  augufte  PrincefTe,  qui  ne  fe  pouuant  faire  voir
en  perfonne  a  fes  fujets  nouuellement  conuertis  a
Iesvs-Christ,  leur  enuoye  vne  Image  des  pre-
mieres grandeurs  du  monde.  Cette  bonte"  eft  rauif-
fante:  tous  les  Francois  en  ont  reffenty  des  ioyes
toutes  pleines  de  refpedt,  &  les  Sauuages  en  ont
temoigne'  de  1' admiration  au  dela  de  nos  penftSes.  Le
Pere,  a  qui  ce  Tableau  eftoit  enuoye  pour  le  produire
a  la  veue  de  ce  peuple,  ayant  affemble  les  principaux
de  ceux  qui  font  en  la  refidence  de  S.  Iofeph,  leur  fit
vne  petite  harangue,  [183]  t6moignant  que  ces  grandes
majeftez  demandoient  le  fecours  de  leurs  prieres,
pour  eux  &  pour  leurs  Eftats.  Que  ne  pouuant  pa-
roiftre  en  perfonne  en  ce  nouueau  monde,  ils  fe  fai-
foient  voir  dans  leurs  Portraits,  pour  affeurer  par  la
bouche  de  leur  Interprete,  que  leur  plus  grand  defir
eftoit  que  tous  les  peuples  de  la  terre  reconneuffent,  &
adoraffent  Iesvs-Christ.  Or  comme  c'eft  la  cou-
ftume  de  ne  point  parler  en  public  que  les  prefens
en  la  main,  Monfieur  noftre  Gouuerneur  auoit  donne
trois  robes,  &  trois  arquebufes,  que  le  Pere  offrit  aux
trois  Capitaines  qui  fe  trouuerent  en  cette  affembl£e:
le  ne  fuis  que  l'organe,  leur  dit-il,  de  ceux  que  vous
voyez  d£peints  auec  tant  de  grace,  &  de  majefte  das
ce  riche  Tableau :  Ils  vous  pref entent  des  robes  pour
conferuer  la  chaleur de voftre piete" & de voftre


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  235

been  granted  them,  this  good  Father  departed  soon
after,  in  order  to  go  and  spend  the  winter  in  the
country  of  those  Barbarians, —  where  the  adorable
Crucified  has  caused  him,  and  will  still  cause  him,
to  enjoy  fruits  of  his  Cross.

The  vessels  having  arrived  unusually  late,  con-
strain me  to  place  in  this  Chapter  a  deed  which  would
deserve  a  whole  entire  volume.  We  have  received
this  year  a  magnificent  Portrait  of  the  King,  of  the
Queen,  and  of  Monsieur:  it  is  a  Royal  gift  from  that
august  Princess,  who,  not  being  able  to  show  herself
in  person  to  her  subjects  newly  converted  to  Jesus
Christ,  sends  them  an  Image  of  the  chief  dignitaries
of  the  world.  This  kindness  is  delightful ;  all  the
French  have  experienced  from  it  the  most  reveren-
tial joy,  and  the  Savages  have  shown  for  it  admira-
tion beyond  what  we  would  have  supposed.  The
Father  to  whom  this  Picture  was  sent,  in  order  to
exhibit  it  to  the  view  of  this  people,  having  assembled
the  principal  persons  of  those  who  are  at  the  resi-
dence of  St.  Joseph,  made  them  a  little  harangue,
[183]  indicating  that  those  great  majesties  asked  the
help  of  their  prayers,  for  them  and  for  their  Estates ;
and  that,  not  being  able  to  appear  in  person  in  this
new  world,  they  showed  themselves  in  their  Portraits,
in  order  to  give  assurance,  by  the  mouth  of  their
Interpreter,  that  their  greatest  desire  was  that  all  the
peoples  of  the  earth  should  acknowledge  and  adore
Jesus  Christ.  Now,  since  it  is  the  custom  not  to
speak  in  public  but  with  gifts  in  hand,  Monsieur  our
Governor  had  given  three  robes  and  three  arque-
buses, which  the  Father  offered  to  the  three  Captains
who  were  present  in  this  assembly.  "  I  am  only  the
voice,"  he  said  to  them,  "  of  those  whom  you  see


236  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29

deuotion,  &  des  armes  pour  proteger  la  Foy,  &  def-
fendre  tous  ceux  qui  l'ont  embraffee,  &  qui  l'embraf-
feront.  L'vn  des  Capitaines  fe  leuant  repartit  en
ces  termes.  Mon  Pere,  ce  que  tu  dis,  eft  admirable :
mais  pleut  a  Dieu  que  nous  puiffios  voir  en  perfonnes
ceux  qui  nous  rauiffent  en  leurs  portraits.  II  eft  vray
que  nous  les  croyons  quafi  viuans,  leurs  yeux  nous
regardet,  &  vous  diriez  que  leur  bouche  nous  veut
parler:  Mon  Pere,  tu  nous  empefche  d'eftre  recon-
noiffans:  car  tu  dis  des  chofes  trop  grades;  qui  fom-
mes  nous  pour  obtenir  de  Dieu  des  benedidtions  pour
noftre  grand  Capitaine,  &  pour  fon  frere,  &  pour
cette  grande  Capitaineffe  leur  mere?  C'eft  a  vous
qui  conoiffez  la  priere,  de  parler  a  Dieu.  II  n'y  a  que
3.  iours  que  nous  fommes  baptifez,  nous  ne  fcauons
pas  bien  ce  qu'il  luy  faut  dire  pour  de  fi  grads
perfonnages  nous  l'aymons  neantmoins,  &  nous  luy
dirons  tout  ce  que  nous  feauons :  mais  nous  f cauons
peu.  [184]  Pour  la  Foy,  nous  la  garderons  &  la
deffendrons  toute  noftre  vie:  encore  qu'il  n'y  ait  pas
long-teps  que  ie  l'aye  receue,  il  me  femble  que  ie  l'ay
auffi  forte  que  fi  i'auois  efte*  baptize  des  ma  naiff[a]n-
ce:  mais,  mon  Pere,  inftruy-nous,  &  nous  apprend  ce
qu'il  faut  dire  a  Dieu  pour  ceux  qui  nous  donnent
tant  de  fecours,  noftre  cceur  ayme,  mais  noftre
bouche  ne  fcait  pas  ce  qu'il  faut  dire.  La  deffus  ils  fe
mirent  a  genoux,  &  firet  tout  haut  leurs  prieres  par
plufieurs  reprifes,  entremelant  des  Cantiques  qu'ils
chantoiet  auec  vn  accord  qui  n'a  rien  de  fauuage.
Cela  fait,  ils  fe  leuent  tous  bien  eftonnez  de  que  ces
portraits  les  regardoient  de  quelque  cofte  qu'ils  fe
tournaffent.  Ils  paffoient  &  repaffoient  en  diuers  en-
droits,  prenans  garde  s'ils  ne  verroient  point  mouuoir


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1643-46  237

depicted  with  so  much  grace  and  majesty  in  this  rich
Picture.  They  present  you  with  robes,  in  order  to
preserve  the  warmth  of  your  piety  and  devotion ;  and
with  arms,  to  protect  the  Faith  and  to  defend  all
those  who  have  embraced  it  and  who  shall  embrace
it."  One  of  the  Captains,  rising,  answered  in
these  terms:  "  My  Father,  what  thou  sayest  is  ad-
mirable; but  would  to  God  that  we  might  see  in
person  those  who  delight  us  in  their  portraits.
Indeed,  we  almost  believe  them  living;  their  eyes
look  at  us,  and  you  would  say  that  their  lips  wish  to
speak  to  us.  My  Father,  thou  hinderest  us  from
being  grateful;  for  thou  sayest  things  too  grand.
Who  are  we,  that  we  should  obtain  from  God  bless-
ings for  our  great  Captain  and  his  brother,  and  for
that  great  Captainess,  their  mother?  It  is  for  you
who  understand  prayer,  to  speak  to  God.  It  is  only
3  days  since  we  were  baptized;  we  do  not  well
know  what  is  necessary  to  say  to  him  for  personages
so  great.  Nevertheless,  we  love  him,  and  we  will
say  to  him  all  that  we  know ;  but  we  know  little.
[184]  As  for  the  Faith,  we  will  keep  it  and  defend  it
as  long  as  we  live.  Although  it  is  not  long  since  I
received  it,  it  seems  to  me  that  I  hold  it  as  strongly
as  if  I  had  been  baptized  from  my  birth.  But,  my
Father,  instruct  us,  and  teach  us  what  we  ought  to
say  to  God  for  those  who  give  us  so  much  help ;  our
hearts  love,  but  our  lips  know  not  what  ought  to  be
said."  Thereupon  they  placed  themselves  on  their
knees,  and  repeatedly  said  aloud  their  prayers, —
intermingling  some  Hymns,  which  they  sang  with  a
harmony  far  from  savage.  That  done,  they  all
arose,  much  astonished  that  those  portraits  looked  at
them  in  whatever  direction  they  turned. They  passed


238  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29


leurs  yeux,  puis  fe  mettans  a  rire  ils  s'6crioient,  en
verity,  ils  nous  fuiuent  des  yeux  en  quelques  endroits
que  nous  allions.

Le  Pere  les  voyant  dans  1' admiration,  demanda  a
l'vn  de  nos  Capitaines  combien  de  Caflors  il  eftime-
roit  bien  vn  Tableau  fi  magnifique :  fi  ie  refpondois,
repliqua-il,  ie  dirois  vne  mauuaife  parole:  il  n'y  a
point  de  prix,  mais  bien  du  refpedt  pour  des  chofes
fi  grandes.  Les  Caflors  ne  font  rien,  cela  eft  quelque
chofe.  Leurs  yeux  ne  fe  pouuoient  fouler  dans  les
regards  d'vn  objet  fi  Royal.  Ils  expliquoient  a  leur
mode  toutes  les  particularitez  de  ce  bel  ouurage,
temoignans  des  fatisfadtions  que  le  papier  ne  peut
reprefenter.  Ces  adtions  leur  donnent  dans  la  veue,
&  leur  font  croire  que  le  Dieu  que  les  Grands  adorent,
eft  grand,  &  que  la  priere  paffe  leur  eftime,  puifque
les  Roys  de  la  terre  en  demandent  le  fecours  de  fi
loin,  &  de  leurs  fujets.

FIN.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  239

and  passed  again,  in  various  places,  taking  notice
whether  they  might  not  see  their  eyes  move ;  then,
beginning  to  laugh,  they  exclaimed:  "  In  truth,  they
follow  us  with  their  eyes  in  whatever  places  we  go. ' '
The  Father,  seeing  them  in  admiration,  asked
one  of  our  Captains  at  how  many  Beavers  he  would
probably  value  a  Picture  so  magnificent.  "If  I
answered,"  he  replied,  "  I  would  not  speak  correctly;
there  can  be  no  price,  but  only  reverence,  for  things
so  great.  Beavers  are  nothing;  that  is  something. "
Their  eyes  could  not  be  satiated  with  the  sight  of  an
object  so  Royal.  They  explained,  after  their  fash-
ion, all  the  details  of  that  beautiful  work, — betoken-
ing a  satisfaction  which  writing  cannot  represent.
These  acts  appeal  to  their  sight,  and  make  them
believe  that  the  God  whom  the  Great  adore  is  great,
and  that  prayer  is  beyond  estimation,  since  the
Kings  of  the  earth  request  its  help  from  so  far,  and
from  their  subjects.

END.


240  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29


Relation  de  ce  qvi s'eft  paffe  de  plvs  remar-

qvable  en  la  Miffion  des  Peres  de  la  Com-

pagnie  de  lESVS. Avx  Hvrons,  pais

de  la Novvelle  France,  depvis  le

mois  de  May  de  l'annee  164^.

iufqu'au  mois  de  May  de

l'annee 1646.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  241


Relation  of  what  occurred  most  noteworthy  in

the  Mission  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Society

of  Jesus,  among  the  Hurons,  a  country

of  New France, from  the  month

of  May  in  the  year  164^,  until

the  month  of  May  in  the

year  1646.


242  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29


[3]  Av  Reverend  Pere  Eftienne  Charlet Provin-
cial de  la  Compagnie  de  Iesvs,  en
la  Prouince  de  France.

MON  REVEREND  PERE,
L'obligation  que  i'ay  d'informer  V.  R.  de
l'eftat  du  Chriftianifme  en  ces  pais,  &  de
V  employ  qu'y  trouuent  les  Peres  de  noftre  Compa-
gnie, demanderoit  de  moy  vne  Relation  plus  longue
que  n'en  ont  fourny  les  annees  precedentes,  fi  mon
deflein  eftoit  de  vous  faire  vn  recit  de  toutes  les
graces  que  Dieu  va  continuant  fur  nos  trauaux  au
milieu  de  cette  barbarie:  Mais  fcachant  bien  qu'on
attend  des  chofes  nouuelles,  &  qu'on  prendroit  pour
des  redites  les  actions  de  ferueur,  &  les  fentimens
de  piete  de  nos  Neophytes  [4]  Chreftiens,  qui  peu-
uent  auoir  quelque  reffemblance  aux  faueurs  que
cette  Eglife  auroit  receu  de  Dieu,  ces  premier[e]s
annees;  ie  me  fuis  refolu  d'obeir  en  cela  au  fenti-
ment  le  plus  commun,  &  me  retrancher  dans  vne
brieuete"  plus  etroite,  n'efcriuant  qu'vne  partie  des
chofes  qui  pourront  paroiftre  nouuelles.  Quoy  que
ie  n'ignore  pas  que  le  Ciel  a  bien  d'autres  veues  que
la  terre,  que  le  couronnement  des  graces  de  Dieu  eft
la  continuation  des  mefmes  graces,  &  que  noftre
amour,  nos  ferueurs,  &  nos  fidelitez  luy  font  d'autant
plus  agreables  qu'elles  font  moins  nouuelles.  Ainfi
pour  les  annees  fuiuantes  nous  nous  condamnerions
volontiers  au  filence, s'il  ne  fe  prefentoit  rien  de


1646J  RELA  T10N  OF  1645-46  243


[3]  To  the  Reverend Father Estienne Charlet,

Provincial  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,

in  the  Province  of  France.

MY  REVEREND  FATHER,
The  obligation  which  I  have,  to  inform
Your  Reverence  of  the  state  of  Christianity
in  these  countries,  and  of  the  employment  which  the
Fathers  of  our  Society  find  therein,  would  require  of
me  a  Relation  longer  than  the  preceding  years  have
furnished,  if  my  design  were  to  make  you  a  recital
of  all  the  favors  which  God  still  continues  upon  our
labors  in  the  midst  of  this  barbarism.  But  —  know-
ing well  that  new  tidings  are  expected,  and  that  one
might  regard  as  old  repetitions  the  acts  of  fervor  and
the  sentiments  of  piety  of  our  Neophyte  [4]  Chris-
tians, which  may  have  some  resemblance  to  the
favors  which  this  Church  received  from  God  in  those
first  years  —  I  have  resolved  to  obey,  in  this  matter,
the  most  common  feeling,  and  to  restrict  myself
within  even  greater  brevity,  writing  only  a  part  of
the  things  which  will  possibly  appear  new.  At  the
same  time,  I  am  not  ignorant  that  Heaven  has  many
other  objects  of  vision  than  the  earth;  that  the
crowning  act  of  the  graces  of  God  is  the  continuation
of  the  same  graces;  and  that  our  love,  our  fervor,
and  our  acts  of  fidelity  are  all  the  more  agreeable  to
him  that  they  are  less  new.  Thus,  for  the  years
following,  we  would  gladly  condemn  ourselves  to
silence,  if  there arose  nothing  new, — provided  that


244  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.  29

nouueau;  pourueu  que  nous  viffions  toujours  cette
petite  Eglife  fortified  de  ce  mefme  efprit  qui  l'anime
dans  fa  naiflance,  que  les  mefmes  graces  du  Ciel
d6coulaffent  fur  elle ;  &  que  les  cceurs  des  nouueaux
Chreftiens  conceuffent  les  m6mes  fentimens  que  nous
aurons  pu  remarquer  en  ceux  qui  les  ont  preceded
Dieu  fans  doute  en  tireroit  fa  gloire,  &  nous  aurions
fuiet  d'eftre  contens  en  vn  ouurage,  oil  il  y  auroit
plus  du  lien  que  du  noftre;  &  [5]  alors  ie  m'afTeure
que  les  voeux  de  l'vne  &  1' autre  France,  du  Ciel
&  de  la  terre  fe  verroient  richement  accornplis.  Nous
auons  befoin  pour  cet  efifet  des  prieres  de  toute  la
France,  V.  R.  nous  les  procurera  s'il  luy  plaift,  &  y
ioindra  les  fiennes  &  fes  SS.  SS.  de  V.  R.

Tres-humble  &  obeyffant  feruiteur
en  N.  S.  Paul  Rag[ue]neav.

Des  Hurons  ce  1.  May  1646.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  245

we  might  always  see  this  little  Church  fortified  with
that  same  spirit  which  animates  it  in  its  nativity ;
that  the  same  graces  of  Heaven  should  flow  down
upon  it;  and  that  the  hearts  of  the  new  Christians
should  conceive  the  same  sentiments  which  we  have
been  able  to  remark  in  those  who  have  preceded
them.  God,  no  doubt,  would  derive  his  glory  from
it,  and  we  would  have  cause  to  be  content  in  a  work
wherein  there  would  be  more  of  his  doing  than  of
ours;  and  [5]  then,  I  assure  myself,  the  wishes  of
the  one  and  the  other  France,  of  Heaven  and  of  the
earth,  would  see  themselves  richly  fulfilled.  We
have  need,  for  this  purpose,  of  the  prayers  of  all
France ;  Your  Reverence  will  procure  them  for  us  if
you  please,  and  will  add  to  them  your  own  and  your
Holy  Sacrifices. Your  Reverence's

Very  humble  and  obedient  servant
in  Our  Lord, Paul  Ragueneau.

From  the  Hurons,  this  1st  of  May,  1646.


246  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.29


CHAPITRE  I.

DE L'ESTAT DU PAYS.

QVOY  qu'a  vray  dire  cette  derniere  annee  ne
puiffe  pas  eftre  appellee  heureufe  pour  nos
Hurons,  toutefois  leurs  malheurs  ayans  efte
moins  frequents  que  par  le  paff<§,  ie  les  puis  compa-
rer a  ceux  qui  ayans  eit.6  abyfmez  pour  vn  temps
dans  l'orage  de  quelque  tempefte,  commencent  a
refpirer  de  leur  naufrage.  La  terre  leur  a  efte  plus
liberale  que  l'an  pafle,  le  bled  d'Inde,  qui  ell  le  prin-
cipal de  [6]  leurs  richeffes,  eftant  venu  quafi  par  tout
a  vne  heureufe  maturity.  Les  lacs  &  les  riuieres  leur
ont  fourny  du  poifTon  auec  abondance.  Le  trafic
qu'ils  ont  eu  auec  les  nations  eloignees,  ne  leur  a  pas
mal  reiiffy.  Tous  ceux  qui  defcendirent  l'Efte
dernier  au  magazin  de  Quebec  &  des  Trois  Riuieres,
ayans  trouue  tout  le  chemin  paifible,  par  les  foings
de  Monfieur  de  Montmagny  noftre  gouuerneur,  ont
remply  le  pais  de  ioye,  autant  que  de  nos  marchan-
difes  Francoifes,  dont  ils  s'eftoient  veus  d6pouillez
depuis  cinq  ou  fix  ans,  par  les  Iroquois  ennemis,  qui
rendoient  ce  commerce  impofLible,  ou  du  moins  fi
terrible,  qu'il  a  coufte"  la  vie  &  des  martyres  de  feu,  a
la  plufpart  de  ceux  qui  font  tombez  entre  leurs
mains.  Les  maladies  contagieufes  qui  alloient  de-
peuplants  nos  bourgades,  les  laiflent  maintenant  en
repos.

II  n'y  a  que  la  guerre  qui  tient  les affaires en
balance :  car  elle  continue  toufiours  auec  les  quatre


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  247


CHAPTER  I.

OF THE STATE OF THE COUNTRY.

ALTHOUGH,  truly  speaking,  this  past  year  can-
not be  called  a  happy  one  for  our  Hurons,
yet,  their  misfortunes  having  been  less  fre-
quent than  in  the  past,  I  may  compare  them  to  those
who,  having  been  submerged  for  a  time  in  the  storm
of  some  tempest,  begin  to  breathe  again  from  their
shipwreck.  The  earth  has  been  more  liberal  than
last  year, — the  Indian  corn,  which  is  the  chief  of  [6]
their  riches,  having  come  almost  everywhere  to  a
fortunate  maturity.  The  lakes  and  the  rivers  have
furnished  them  with  fish  in  abundance.  The  trade
which  they  have  had  with  distant  nations  has  brought
them  no  little  gain.  All  those  who  went  down,  last
Summer,  to  the  warehouses  at  Quebec  and  Three
Rivers,  having  found  the  entire  road  at  peace,
through  the  care  of  Monsieur  de  Montmagny,  our
governor,  have  filled  the  country  with  joy  as  well  as
with  our  French  wares,  of  which  last  they  had  seen
themselves  robbed,  during  five  or  six  years  past,  by
the  hostile  Iroquois,  who  were  rendering  that  com-
merce impossible, — or,  at  least,  so  perilous  that  it
cost  life  and  martyrdoms  of  fire  most  of  those  who
fell  into  their  hands.  The  contagious  diseases  which
were  depopulating  our  villages  now  leave  them  at
rest.

It  is  only  the  war  that  keeps  affairs  in  suspense,
for  it  still  continues  with  the  four  Iroquois  nations


248  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29

nations  Iroquoifes  plus  voifmes  de  nos  Hurons,  n'y
ayant  que  la  cinquiefme  &  la  plus  eloigned  d'icy,
qui  ait  entre"  das  le  traite"  de  paix  qui  fe  comeca  l'an
pafse\  le  veux  dire  que  dans  les  diuers  [7]  rencon-
tres que  nos  Hurons  ont  eu  depuis  vn  an  auec  leurs
ennemys,  les  fuccez  de  leurs  armes  ont  efte*  partagez.

D6s  le  commencement  du  Printemps  vne  bande
d'Iroquois  eflant  abord6e  proche  d'vne  de  nos  bour-
gades  frontieres,  a  la  faueur  d'vne  nuidt  tres-obfcure,
&  s'eftant  cachee  dans  les  bois,  enueloppa  vne
trouppe  de  femmes  qui  ne  faifoient  que  fortir  pour
le  trauail  des  champs,  &  les  eurent  enleu£es  fi
promptement  dans  leurs  canots,  que  deux  cens
hommes  en  armes,  qui  accoururent  aux  premiers  cris;
ne  peurent  arriuer  affez  toft  pour  en  fauuer  aucune,
fi  bien  pour  eftre  les  t6moins  des  triltes  larmes  de
leurs  femmes,  de  leurs  meres,  &  de  leurs  enfans  qu'on
emmenoit  captifs.

Sur  la  fin  de  l'Efte,  les  Iroquois  &  nos  Hurons
ayans  pris  la  campagne  de  part  &  d'autre,  &  s'eftant
trouu6e  au  rencontre  dans  le  milieu  des  bois;  nos
Hurons  s'eftoient  iettez  d'vne  contenance  fi  refolue
fur  l'ennemy  retranche'  dans  vn  fort,  ou  il  auoit  paffe
la  nuidt,  que  la  vidtoire  eftoit  de-ja  demy  gaignee,  fi
leur  conduite  eut  refpondu  a  leur  courage.  Les  Iro-
quois demandent  a  parlementer,  proteftent  [8]  qu'ils
n'ont  que  des  deffeins  de  paix,  ils  jettent  bas  leurs
arquebufes,  &  les  lient  en  pacquet,  pour  t6moigner
que  mefme  ils  n'ont  pas  defTein  de  combatre,  quand
bien  on  voudroit  tous  les  maffacrer :  ils  font  paroiftre
de  grands  coliers  de  pourcelaine  qui  6bloui'ffent  les
yeux  de  nos  Capitaines  Hurons,  ils  prefentent  a  la
ieuneffe  plus  affamee  quantite  d'orignac,  des  Cerfs


1046]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  249

nearest  to  our  Hurons;  it  is  only  the  fifth,  the  most
distant  from  here,  which  has  entered  into  the  treaty
of  peace  that  began  last  year.  I  mean  to  say  that,
in  the  various  [7]  encounters  which  our  Hurons  have
had  within  a  year  with  their  enemies,  the  successes
of  their  arms  have  been  divided.

At  the  beginning  of  Spring,  a  band  of  Iroquois  —
having  landed  near  one  of  our  frontier  villages,  by
favor  of  a  very  dark  night,  and  having  concealed
itself  in  the  woods  — surrounded  a  company  of  women
who  were  just  going  out  for  work  in  the  fields,  and
so  quickly  carried  them  off  in  their  canoes,  that  two
hundred  men  in  arms,  who  ran  up  at  their  first  cries,
could  not  arrive  soon  enough  to  save  one  of  them,
but  were  only  in  time  to  witness  the  sad  tears  of
their  wives,  their  mothers,  and  their  children,  who
were  taken  captive.

Toward  the  end  of  the  Summer, —  the  Iroquois
and  our  Hurons  having  taken  the  field  on  both  sides,
and  having  come  to  hostilities  in  the  midst  of  the
woods, — our  Hurons  had  so  resolutely  thrown  them-
selves upon  the  enemy  intrenched  in  a  fort,  where  he
had  passed  the  night,  that  the  victory  was  already
half  won,  if  their  tactics  had  corresponded  to  their
courage.  The  Iroquois  demand  a  parley,  and  protest
[8]  that  they  have  only  designs  of  peace ;  they  throw
down  their  arquebuses  and  tie  them  in  bundles,  to
show  that  they  have  not  even  the  intention  to  fight,
even  should  the  Hurons  choose  to  massacre  them  all ;
they  display  great  porcelain  collars,  which  dazzle
the  eyes  of  our  Huron  Captains;  they  present  to
the  young  men,  who  are  quite  famished,  many
elk,  Deer,  and  Bears,  entire,  which  they  had  taken
by  the  way;  they  invite  the  elders  to  an  amicable


250  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

&  des  Ours  entiers  qu'ils  auoient  pris  faifants  che-
min ;  ils  inuitent  les  plus  anciens  a  vne  conferance
amiable,  &  diitribuent  quantite  de  petun,  pour  cepen-
dant  entretenir  le  refle  de  l'armee.

Durant  ce  pour-parler  vn  Iroquois  qui  autrefois
auoit  demeure  fort  long-temps  icy  captif  dans  les
Hurons,  &  s'eftoit  naturalize  auec  eux ;  mais  depuis
ces  dernieres  annees  auoit  efte  recouure  par  les  enne-
mis,  leur  donna  luy  feul  la  vicftoire.  Cet  homme  fe
detache  des  liens,  fe  iette  dans  l'armee  Huronne,  ou
ayant  apperceu  quelques-vns  de  remarque,  mefcontens
de  n'auoir  point  efte"  appellez  a  ce  confeil  de  paix,  il
iette  la  defiance  en  leur  efprit,  fait  entendre  aux
vns  qu'il  y  a  de  la  trahifon,  corropt  les  autres  par
prefens,  [9]  enfin  il  ioue  fi  bien  fon  perfonnage,  que
ceux-cy  s'eitans  retirez  de  l'armee,  &  les  autres
ayans  pris  l'efpouuante,  tout  fe  trouuant  dans  le  def-
ordre,  l'ennemy  reprit  fes  efprits,  &  fe  ietta  fur  ceux
qui  ayans  perdu  les  penfees  de  combattre,  fe  virent
vaincus  dans  leur  vidtoire,  les  vns  eitans  maffacrez
fur  le  lieu,  les  autres  entraifnez  en  captiuite,  la  plus
grande  part  n' ayant  trouue  fon  afTeurance  que  dans
la  fuitte.

Nos  Hurons  auffi  a  leur  tour  ont  eu  du  fuccez  en
leurs  armes,  ont  mis  en  fuitte  l'ennemy,  en  ont  rem-
porte  des  defpouilles,  &  quelque  nombre  de  captifs,
qui  ont  ferui  de  victimes  a  leurs  flames,  &  aux  feux
de  ioye  qu'ils  en  ont  fait,  auec  les  cruautez  ordinaires
a  ces  peuples.

Ie  ne  parle  point  de  diuers  maffacres  qui  fe  font
faits  de  part  &  d'autre,  comme  a  la  derobee;  quoy
que  ie  ne  puiffe  taire  deux  actions  de  courage  qui
meritent  de  trouuer  icy  quelque  lieu.


1646J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  251

conference;  and  they  distribute  much  tobacco,  in
order  meanwhile  to  entertain  the  rest  of  the  army.

During  this  negotiation,  an  Iroquois — -who  had
formerly  sojourned  a  very  long  time  here,  a  captive
among  the  Hurons,  and  had  become  naturalized  with
them  ;  but  within  these  last  years  had  been  recovered
by  the  enemies, — gave  them,  himself  alone,  the  vic-
tory. This  man  detaches  himself  from  his  people,
and  makes  his  way  into  the  Huron  army,  where  —
having  perceived  certain  men  of  note,  dissatisfied  at
not  having  been  called  to  that  council  of  peace  —  he
scatters  distrust  in  their  minds,  persuades  some  that
there  is  treason,  and  corrupts  others  by  presents.
[9]  Finally,  he  acts  his  character  so  well  that  —
these  latter  having  withdrawn  from  the  army,
others  having  taken  flight,  and  everything  being  in
disorder — the  enemy  recovered  their  spirits,  and  fell
upon  those  who,  having  lost  the  thoughts  of  fight-
ing, saw  themselves  conquered  in  their  victory.
Some  were  massacred  on  the  spot,  and  others  dragged
into  captivity, —  most  having  found  their  safety  only
in  flight.

Our  Hurons  too  have  had,  in  their  turn,  success  in
warfare,  have  put  to  flight  the  enemy,  and  have
carried  off  their  spoils  and  some  number  of  captives ;
these  have  served  as  victims  to  their  flames,  and  to
the  bonfires  that  they  have  made  of  them,  with  the
cruelties  common  to  these  peoples.

I  speak  not  of  various  massacres  which  have  oc-
curred on  both  sides,  in  secret,  as  it  were  —  though
I  cannot  pass  over  in  silence  two  acts  of  courage
which  deserve  to  find  some  room  here.

Our  Hurons,  having  had  information  of  an  army
which  had designs  on  the  Village  of  Saint  Joseph,


252  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

Nos  Hurons  ayans  eu  aduis  d'vne  arraee  qui  auoit
deffein  fur  le  Bourg  de  Saindt  Iofeph,  y  attendoient
c6t  ennemy  bien  refolu  de  le  combattre.  La  ieuneffe
fait  la  garde  de  nuidt  montant  au  haut  de  [10]  leurs
guerittes,  &  pouffant  diuers  chants  de  guerre  d'vne
voix  fi  terrible,  que  les  campagnes  &  les  forefts
voifines  la  portants  encore  plus  loin,  on  ne  peut  pas
douter  qu'on  ne  foit  prepare  au  combat.  Quelques
auanturiers  Iroquois  qui  nonobftant  ces  cris,  auoient
fecretement  fait  leurs  approches,  firent  vn  coup  aflez
refolu.  Voyans  que  le  fommeil  faifoit  taire  ces
fentinelles,  l'aube  du  iour  qui  commencoit  a  poindre,
leur  ayant  entierement  oite  les  defiances  de  l'enne-
my:  vn  d'eux  grimpe  feul  comme  vn  efcurieu,  au
haut  de  la  gueritte,  y  trouue  deux  hommes  endormis,
il  fend  la  teft[e]  a  l'vn,  precipite  le  fecond  en  bas,  &
le  iette  a  fes  compagnons  qui  luy  ecorchent  &  luy
enleuent  la  peau  de  la  tefte,  tandis  que  le  meurtrier
defcendoit,  &  fe  fauuerent  tous  d'vne  courfe  fi  prompte
que  les  Hurons  accourus  a  la  voix  de  ceux  qu'on
6gorgeoit,  ne  peurent  iamais  les  atteindre.

Pour  vanger  cet  affront,  trois  Hurons  quelque
temps  apres,  firent  vn  coup  non  moins  refolu.  Apres
vingt  iourn£s  de  chemin,  ils  arriuent  a  Sonnontouan,
le  plus  peuple  des  villages  ennemys,  y  trouuans  les
cabanes  fermees,  ils  en  percent  [n]  vne  par  le  cofte,
y  entrent  dans  le  filence  &  l'obfcurite  de  la  nuidt,  y
rallument  les  feux  qui  s'y  eftoient  efteints:  a  la
faueur  de  cette  nouuelle  lumiere,  chacun  choifit  fon
homme  pour  luy  fendre  la  tefte,  leur  enleuent  la  che-
uelure,  a  1' ordinaire  des  vainqueurs,  mettent  le  feu
dans  la  cabane  &  l'efpouuante  dans  le  Bourg,  d'oii  ils
fe  retirent  auec  tant  de  bon-heur  &  d'adreffe  que


1646 J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  253

were  awaiting  that  enemy  there,  fully  resolved  to
combat  him.  The  young  men  keep  guard  at  night,
mounting  aloft  on  [10]  their  watch-towers,  and  utter-
ing various  war  songs  in  voices  so  terrible  that,  the
fields  and  the  neighboring  forests  bearing  them  still
further,  no  one  can  doubt  that  they  are  prepared  for
the  combat.  Some  Iroquois  adventurers  who,  not-
withstanding these  cries,  had  secretly  made  their
approaches,  performed  an  act  sufficiently  resolute.
Seeing  that  sleep  was  causing  those  sentinels  to  be
silent, —  the  dawn  of  day,  which  was  beginning  to
break,  having  entirely  removed  their  distrust  con-
cerning the  enemy, —  one  of  these  Iroquois  climbs
alone,  like  a  squirrel,  to  the  top  of  the  watch-tower,
and  finds  two  men  asleep  there.  He  splits  the  head
of  one,  dashes  down  the  second  and  throws  him  to
his  companions,  who  cut  and  remove  the  skin  from
his  head,  while  the  murderer  was  descending;  and
all  escaped  by  running,  so  swiftly  that  the  Hurons,
hastening  to  the  voices  of  those  who  were  being
slaughtered,  could  never  catch  them.

To  avenge  this  affront,  three  Hurons,  some  time
after,  struck  a  blow  not  less  daring.  After  twenty
days'  march,  they  arrive  at  Sonnontouan,  the  most
populous  of  the  hostile  villages;  finding  there  the
cabins  closed,  they  break  [11]  into  one  of  them,  at
the  side,  and  enter  it  in  the  silence  and  darkness  of
the  night.  They  rekindle  the  fires  therein,  which
had  gone  out;  by  favor  of  this  new  light,  each  one
chooses  his  man,  in  order  to  split  his  head.  They
remove  their  hair,  as  is  usual  with  the  victors,  set
fire  to  the  cabin,  and  inspire  terror  in  the  Village, —
whence  they  withdraw,  with  so  much  good  fortune


254  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  29

iamais  plus  de  neuf  cent  guerriers  ne  peurent  arrelter
leur  firitte.

Ce  font  les  guerres  de  ces  peuples,  dont  le  fleau
n'a  pas  tombe  fur  les  feuls  infideles:  plufieurs  de  nos
Chreftiens  ayans  efte  tuez  ou  pris  dans  ces  rencontres,
&  nous  ayans  laiffe  cette  feule  confolation,  que  le  Ciel
fe  trouue  chaque  annee  enrichy  de  nos  pertes.


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -  4&  2&5

and  skill  that  more  than  nine  hundred  warriors  could
never  arrest  their  flight.

Such  are  the  wars  of  these  peoples,  the  scourge  of
which  has  not  fallen  upon  the  infidels  alone, —  sev-
eral of  our  Christians  having  been  killed  or  taken  in
these  encounters,  and  having  left  us  only  this  con-
solation, that  Heaven  finds  itself  each  year  enriched
by  our  losses.


256  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29


CHAPITRE  II.
DE  l'estat  du  christianisme.

L?IDEE  que  ie  puis  donner  de  cette  petite  Eglife,
naiffante  au  milieu  de  la  barbaric,  eft  de  la
comparer  a  vne  armee  qui  eft  dans  le  combat,
&  qui  eftant  partagee  [12]  en  diuers  efcadrons,  fe
void  affoiblie  d'vn  cofte,  enfonce  l'ennemy  de  l'autre;
&  quoy  qu'elle  fouffre  des  pertes,  fe  fouftient  inuin-
cible  en  fon  corps,  &  demeure  victorieufe  dans  le
camp  de  bataille ;  non  pas  exterminant  fon  ennemy,
qui  toujours  va  renouuelant  fes  combats,  mais  fe  for-
tifiant  elle  mefme  auec  gloire,  plus  elle  eft  attaquee.
Nous  auons  change  en  refidences,  les  Miffions
que  nous  faifions  aux  Bourgs  de  la  Conception  de  S.
Iofeph,  de  S.  Ignace,  de  S.  Michel,  &  de  S.  lean
Baptifte,  qui  ont  occupe  cette  annee  dix  des  noftres.
La  miffion  du  S.  Efprit  ne  peut  auoir  de  demeure
affeuree,  n 'eftant  pas  vne  chofe  poffible  de  fixer  cinq
ou  fix  nations  Algonquines&  errantes,  qui  font  ref pan-
due's  fur  les  coftes  de  noftre  grand  lac,  a  plus  de  cent
cinquante  lieues  d'icy ;  &  a  la  conquefte  def quels  nous
n'auons  pu  toutefois  enuoyer  que  deux  de  nos  Peres.
Deux  autres  font  demeurez  en  noftre  maifon  de  Sainte
Marie,  qui  eft  le  centre  du  pais,  &  le  cceur  de  toute
nos  miffions:  d'oii  nous  tafchons  de  fournir  aux
necemtez  de  toutes  nos  Eglifes,  &  ou  trois  fois  depuis
vn  an,  nous  auons  eu  la  confolation  [13]  de  nous  voir
relinis,  pour  y  conferer  des  moyens  neceff aires  a  la


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  257


CHAPTER II.
OF THE STATE OF CHRISTIANITY.

THE  idea  that  I  can  give  of  this  little  Church,
rising  in  the  midst  of  barbarism,  is  to  com-
pare it  to  an  army  which  is  in  the  fight,  and
which,  being  separated  [12]  into  various  squadrons,
sees  itself  weakened  on  one  side,  but  breaks  through
the  enemy  on  the  other;  and,  though  it  suffers  losses,
maintains  itself  invincible  in  its  organization,  and
remains  victorious  in  the  field  of  battle, —  not  exter-
minating its  enemy,  which  still  goes  on  renewing  the
combat,  but  strengthening  itself  with  glory,  the
more  it  is  attacked.

We  have  changed  into  residences  the  Missions
which  we  were  conducting  at  the  Villages  of  la
Conception,  St.  Joseph,  St.  Ignace,  St.  Michel,  and
St.  Jean  Baptiste ;  these  have  occupied  this  year  ten
of  our  number.  The  mission  of  the  Holy  Ghost  can
have  no  fixed  abode,  as  it  is  not  possible  to  settle
five  or  six  Algonquin  and  roving  nations,  which  are
spread  along  the  shores  of  our  great  lake,  more  than
one  hundred  and  fifty  leagues  from  here, — and  for
whose  conquest  we  have,  nevertheless,  been  able  to
send  only  two  of  our  Fathers.  Two  others  have
remained  in  our  house  of  Sainte  Marie,  which  is  the
center  of  the  country  and  the  heart  of  all  our  mis-
sions :  whence  we  try  to  supply  the  necessities  of  all
our  Churches.  There,  too,  three  times  within  a
year, we have had the consolation  [13] of  seeing


LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.29

conuerfion  de  ces  peuples,  &  nous  y  animer  mutuelle-
ment  a  tout  fouffrir,  &  faire  ce  que  nous  pourrons,
afin  que  Dieu  y  foit  Adore\

Pour  moy  qui  refte  le  dernier  de  quinze  de  nos
Peres  qui  font  icy,  ie  n'ay  point  eu  de  partage  arrefte,
afin  de  pouuoir  me  detacher  plus  librement,  parcourir
toutes  les  miffions,  &  demeurer  en  chaque  lieu  autant
que  les  neceffitez  prefentes  m'obligeoient  d'y  faire
fejour.  D'ou  en  fuitte  i'ay  eu  la  confolation  d'eftre
tefmoin  des  ferueurs  de  ce  nouueau  Chriftianifme
refpandu  au  milieu  de  l'infidelite\  d'y  admirer  le  cou-
rage de  ces  bons  Neophytes,  &  d'y  voir  des  fentimens
de  piete  fi  detachez  de  la  nature,  qu'il  faut  de  neceffite-
aduoiier  que  vrayement  Dieu  eft  le  maiftre  des  cceurs,
que  la  Foy  ne  dedaigne  point  les  barbares,  &  que  le
faindt  Efprit  ne  met  point  la  difference  entre  nos
ames,  que  l'ceil  pourroit  trouuer  entre  nos  corps.

En  chacune  de  fes  Eglifes,  nous  y  auons  bafty  des
Chapelles  afTez  raifonnables,  nous  y  auons  pendu  des
Cloches  qui  fe  font  entendre  affez  loin,  &  par  tout  la
plufpart  des  Chreftiens  font  fi  foigneux  [14]  d'affifler
a  la  Meffe  qui  fe  f onne  au  leuer  du  Soleil ;  &  le  f oir
de  venir  aux  prieres,  auant  mefme  que  le  fon  de  la
Cloche  les  en  ait  aduerty,  qu'il  eft  aise  de  voir  que
cette  diligence  eft  enfemble  vne  des  caufes  &  vn
fruit  de  leur  ferueur.

Les  Dimanches  ils  redoublent  leurs  deuotions,  s'y
difpofans  deux  &  trois  iours  auparauant,  nommement
ceux  qui  ont  deflein  &  permiffion  d'approcher  de  la
Sainte  Table :  &  tous  les  Chreftiens  ayans  pris  cette
fainte  couftume  de  iamais  ne  paffer  la  Semaine,  fans
s'eftre  confeffez.

Sur  le  Midy  ils  s'affemblent  au  fon  de  la  cloche


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  259

ourselves  reunited,  in  order  to  confer  there  upon
means  necessary  to  the  conversion  of  these  peoples,
and  there  to  animate  one  another  to  suffer  everything,
and  to  do  what  shall  be  in  our  power,  to  the  end  that
God  may  be  Adored.

As  for  me,  who  remain  the  last  of  fifteen  of  our
Fathers  who  are  here,  I  have  not  had  a  definite  share
of  the  work,  that  I  might  be  able  to  detach  myself
more  freely,  to  go  the  round  of  all  the  missions,  and
to  remain  in  each  place  as  long  as  its  present  neces-
sities obliged  me  to  sojourn  there.  In  consequence
of  this  arrangement,  I  have  had  the  consolation  of
witnessing  the  fervors  of  this  new  Christianity  that
has  spread  abroad  in  the  midst  of  infidelity;  of
admiring  in  it  the  courage  of  these  good  Neophytes ;
and  of  seeing  among  them  sentiments  of  piety  so
detached  from  nature  that  one  must  needs  avow  that
God  is  truly  the  master  of  hearts,  that  the  Faith  does
not  disdain  the  barbarians,  and  that  the  holy  Ghost
does  not  make  the  difference  between  our  souls  which
the  eye  might  find  between  our  bodies.

In  each  one  of  these  Churches,  we  have  built  fairly
adequate  Chapels;  we  have  suspended  Bells  therein,
which  make  themselves  heard  at  a  considerable  dis-
tance; and,  everywhere,  most  of  the  Christians  are
so  solicitous  [14]  to  attend  the  Mass  which  rings  at
Sunrise,  and  at  evening  to  come  to  prayers, — even
before  the  sound  of  the  Bell  has  given  them  notice
thereof, —  that  it  is  easy  to  see  that  this  assiduity  is
at  once  a  cause  and  a  result  of  their  fervor.

On  Sundays  they  increase  their  devotions,  prepar-
ing for  the  same  two  or  three  days  before, —  especially
those  who  intend  and  have  permission  to  approach
the  Holy  Table;  and  all  the  Christians  have  adopted


260  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.29

pour  le  Sermon  ou  Catechifme,  &  en  fuitte  ils  diffent
leur  chapellet,  quelquefois  tous  de  compagnie,  quel-
quefois  partagez  en  deux  chceurs,  &  plus  fouuent  fe
fuccedans  les  vns  aux  autres,  arm  de  remplir  plus
faindtement  tous  les  momens  de  ce  Saint  jour.

Cette annee nous  auons  baptize  cent foixante  &
quatre  perfonnes.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  261

that  devout  custom  of  never  passing  the  Week  with-
out having  confessed.

Toward  Noon,  they  assemble  at  the  sound  of  the
bell  for  the  Sermon  or  Catechism,  and  then  they  say
their  rosaries,  sometimes  all  together,  sometimes
divided  into  two  choirs, — and  more  often  succeeding
one  another,  so  as  to  occupy  more  sacredly  all  the
moments  of  that  Holy  day.

This  year  we  have  baptized  one  hundred  and
sixty-four  persons.


262  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.29


[15]  CHAPITRE  III.

ACTIONS REMARQUABLES DU ZELE DE QUELQUES

CHRESTIENS.

IVSQU'A  maintenant  le  zele  de  nos  Chreftiens
s'eftoit,  ce  femble,  retenu  dans  les  cabanes  au
milieu  de  quelques  affemblees,  du  moins  n'auoit-
il  pas  paru  fi  publiquement  &  auec  tant  d'efclat  qu'il
s'eft  fait  du  depuis  reconnoiftre :  Lors  que  le  feu
embraze  puiffamment  vn  cceur,  il  faut  enlin  qu'il  fe
faffe  ouuerture,  &  qu'il  pouffe  fes  flammes  au  dehors,
pour  embrazer  les  autres  des  mefmes  ardeurs  qui  le
confomment.

Eflienne  Totiri  de  la  Minion  de  faindt  Iofeph  f ut  le
premier  qui  commenca.  Tout  le  pais  eftoit  ailemble
dans  le  Bourg  de  S.  Ignace  pour  y  bruler  vn  pauure
miferable  captif ,  qui  ayant  quafi  autant  de  bourreaux
que  de  fpedtateurs,  eflancoit  des  cris  effroyables,  qui
alloient  animants  la  rage  &  la  cruaute  des  Hurons,
bien  loin  de  tirer  de  leur  coeur  aucun  mouuement  de
pitie.  Au  milieu  de  ces  cris  &  de  ces  [16]  feux
barbares,  ce  bon  Chreftien  anime  d'vn  feu  plus  diuin,
s'ecrie  publiquement  a  tout  ce  monde.  Efcoutez  infi-
deles  &  voyez  en  cet  homme  1' image  du  mal-heur  qui
vous  accueillira  pour  vne  eternite.-  qui  pourra  de
vous  autres  fouftenir  la  cholere  d'vn  Dieu,  la  rage
des  demons,  &  s'apriuoifer  a  des  flammes  toujours
impitoyables,  pour  ceux  qui  auront  refuse  en  ce
monde  d'eprouuer  les  bontez  de  Dieu,  d'obe'ir  a  fes
loix,  &  reconnoiftre  fon  pouuoir?


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  263


[15] CHAPTER III.

REMARKABLE INSTANCES OF THE ZEAL OF SOME

CHRISTIANS.

UNTIL  recently,  the  zeal  of  our  Christians  had
apparently  confined  itself  within  the  cabins,
in  the  midst  of  some  assemblies, — at  least,  it
had  not  appeared  so  publicly  and  with  so  much
luster  as  it  has  since  made  itself  manifest.  When
the  fire  powerfully  kindles  a  heart,  it  must  needs  at
last  have  vent,  and  must  drive  its  flames  outward,  in
order  to  kindle  the  others  with  the  same  ardors  which
consume  itself.

Estienne  Totiri,  of  the  Mission  of  saint  Joseph,
was  the  first  to  begin.  The  whole  country  was
assembled  in  the  Village  of  St.  Ignace,  in  order  to
burn  there  a  poor  miserable  captive, — who,  having
almost  as  many  executioners  as  spectators,  was  utter-
ing frightful  cries,  which,  far  from  drawing  from
their  hearts  any  impulse  of  pity,  only  tended  to  ex-
cite the  rage  and  the  cruelty  of  the  Hurons.  In  the
midst  of  these  cries  and  these  [16]  barbarous  fires,
that  good  Christian,  animated  with  a  more  divine  fire,
exclaims  publicly  to  all  that  company:  "  Listen,  infi-
dels, and  see  in  this  man  the  image  of  the  woe  that
will  greet  you  for  an  eternity.  Who  of  you  people
will  be  able  to  endure  the  anger  of  a  God,  and  the
rage  of  demons,  and  accustom  himself  to  flames  that
are  forever  inexorable  to  those  who  shall  have
refused  in  this  world  to  experience  the  kindness  of


264  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJESUITES [Vol.29

Iamais  on  n'auoit  entendu  au  milieu  de  ces  cruau-
tez  de  femblables  harangues:  on  eft  arrelte"  des
menaces  fi  eftonnantes  de  ce  nouueau  predicateur.
Non,  non,  mes  freres,  adioufte-il;  ne  croyez  pas
que  ie  veille  arracher  ce  captif  de  vos  mains,  ny
procurer  fa  liberie :  le  temps  de  tout  fon  bon-heur  eft
pafse,  &  maintenant  qu'il  brule  dans  les  flammes,  la
feule  mort  peut  mettre  fin  a  fes  miferes:  Mes  com-
paffions  font  pour  vous  mefmes ;  car  ie  crains  pour
vous,  infideles,  des  mal-heurs  mille  fois  plus  terribles,
&  des  flammes  plus  deuorantes,  a  qui  voitre  mort
donnera  le  commencement,  &  qui  iamais  n'auront
de  fin.

Apres  auoir  long-temps  parle  des  horreurs  [17]  de
l'Enfer,  &  fur  tout  de  l'eternite  de  fespeines:  Mes
freres,  leur  dit-il,  ce  n'eft  pas  encore  pour  vous  vn
malheur  fans  remede :  adorez  ce  grand  Dieu  qui  a
cree  &  les  cieux  &  la  terre,  &  tremblez  a  la  veue  de
fes  iugements  effroyables ;  alors  l'Enfer  n' aura  plus
de  flammes  pour  vous:  mais  fl  la  mort  vous  furprend
dans  rinfldelite,  ces  fournaifes  ardentes,  &  ces  feux
foufterrains  feront  voftre  partage,  le  defefpoir  vous
faifira  pour  vn  iamais,  &  alors  trop  tard  vous  croirez,
eftans  tombez  dans  ce  malheur,  que  noftre  foy  eft
veritable,  que  les  Chreftiens  ont  choifi  le  meilleur
party,  &  qu'ils  ont  raifon  de  trembler,  &  craindre
pour  vous,  autant  que  pour  eux  mefmes,  vn  peril
dont  tous  les  hommes  ne  peuuent  auoir  aflez  de
crainte.

Plufieurs  des  affiftans  furent  touchez  d'vn  fi  faindt
zele  d'autres  l'apellerent  folie;  mais  ie  ne  doubte
point  que  les  Anges  du  Ciel  ne  rallumaffent  puiffam-
met,  du  moins  parut-il  emcace  pour  le  falut  de  ce


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1643  -46  265

God,  to  obey  his  laws,  and  acknowledge  his  power? '
Never  had  there  been  heard,  in  the  midst  of  these
cruelties,  the  like  harangue ;  the  tormentors  desist  at
the  threats,  so  astonishing,  of  this  new  preacher.
"  No,  no,  my  brothers,"  he  adds,  "  do  not  think  that
I  wish  to  seize  that  captive  from  your  hands,  or  to
procure  his  liberty ;  the  time  of  all  his  happiness  is
past,  and,  now  that  he  burns  in  the  flames,  death
alone  can  put  an  end  to  his  miseries.  My  compas-
sion is  for  yourselves ;  for  I  fear  for  you,  infidels,
woes  a  thousand  times  more  terrible,  and  flames  more
devouring, —  for  which  your  death  will  furnish  a
beginning,  and  which  will  never  have  an  end."

After  having  a  long  time  spoken  of  the  horrors  [17]
of  Hell,  and  especially  of  the  eternity  of  its  pains,
"  My  brothers,"  he  said  to  them,  "it  is  not  yet  for
you  a  woe  without  remedy.  Adore  that  great  God
who  has  created  both  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and
tremble  at  the  sight  of  his  awful  judgments ;  then
Hell  will  have  no  more  flames  for  you.  But,  if  death
surprise  you  in  infidelity,  those  burning  furnaces,
and  those  subterranean  fires,  will  be  your  portion;
despair  will  seize  you  forever.  And  then  —  too  late,
having  fallen  into  that  misfortune  —  you  will  believe
that  our  faith  is  true ;  that  the  Christians  have  chosen
the  better  part ;  and  that  they  have  reason  to  tremble
and  fear  for  you,  as  much  as  for  themselves,  a  peril
whereof  all  men  cannot  have  sufficient  dread."

Several  of  those  present  were  touched  by  so  holy
a  zeal ;  others  called  it  madness.  But  I  doubt  not
that  the  Angels  of  Heaven  kindled  it  potently, — at
least,  it  appeared  efficacious  for  the  salvation  of  this
poor  captive,  who,  at  the  climax  of  his  miseries,
found  the  beginning  of  his  happiness.


266  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

pauure  captif,  qui  au  plus  fort  de  fes  miferes,  trouua
le  commencement  de  fon  bon-heur.

Eftienne  s'approche  de  luy:  Mon  camarade,  [18]
luy  dit-il,  ie  n'ay  point  de  flammes  &  de  tifons  en
main,  ny  de  tourmens  pour  toy;  ne  crains  point  mes
approches,  ie  ne  fonge  qu'a  te  faire  du  bien.  Ton
corps  eft  en  vn  eftat  deplorable,  ton  ame  eft  pour
bien-toft  s'en  feparer,  elle  feule  viura  pour  lors,  &
fera  capable  ou  de  bon-heur,  ou  de  mal-heur,  felon
l'eftat  auquel  tu  te  trouueras  a  la  mort.  Si  tu  veux
inuoquer  auec  moy  vn  efprit  tout-puifiant,  qui  luy
feul  a  cree  nos  ames,  qui  veut  le  bien  de  tous  les
hommes,  &  qui  les  ayme ;  il  t'aymera  pour  vn  iamais,
attirera  ton  ame  a  foy,  &  dans  le  Ciel  tu  feras  a
iamais  bien-heureux  auec  luy.  Ceux  qui  manquent
de  l'honnorer,  n'ont  point  de  part  dans  ce  lieu  de
bon-heur,  les  demons  qui  habitent  fous  terre,  en-
trainent  leurs  ames  captiues,  &  comme  elles  font
immortelles,  ils  leur  font  fouffrir  des  cruautez  &  des
tourmens,  qui  iamais  ne  trouueront  de  fin.

Ce  pauure  homme  demy  rofty,  commence  a  refpi-
rer  a  ces  nouuelles:  Helas,  dit-il,  eft-il  done  vray
qu'il  y  ayt  vn  lieu  de  bon-heur  dans  le  Ciel,  pour
ceux  mefmes  qui  font  miferables  en  ce  monde?
Quelques  Hurons  de  ceux  que  nous  auos  [19]  brule,
nous  racontoient  ces  chofes,  &  fe  confoloient  dans  les
flammes,  attendans,  difoient-ils,  ce  grand  bon-heur
du  Ciel:  nous  penfions  que  e'eftoient  des  fables;
eft-il  done  vray  que  ce  foient  veritez?

Eftienne  continue  a  l'inftruire,  &  trouue  vn  cceur
tout  difpofe  a  nos  myfteres,  qui  ne  foufpire  que  le
Ciel,  &  qui  quatre  ou  cinq  fois  demande  le  Baptefme.
A ces mots les Hurons infideles commencent a


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  267

Estienne  approaches  him;  "  My  comrade,"  [18]
he  says  to  him,  "  I  have  no  flames  and  firebrands  in
hand,  or  torments  for  thee ;  do  not  fear  my  approaches ;
I  think  only  of  doing  thee  good.  Thy  body  is  in  a
deplorable  state ;  thy  soul  is  about  to  separate  from
it,  and  then  alone  will  remain  alive,  and  be  suscep-
tible to  either  happiness  or  woe,  according  to  the  con-
dition in  which  thou  shalt  find  thyself  at  death.  If
thou  wilt  invoke  with  me  an  all-powerful  spirit, —
who  himself  alone  has  created  our  souls ;  who  desires
the  good  of  all  men,  and  who  loves  them, — he  will
love  thee  forever,  and  will  draw  thy  soul  to  himself ;
and  in  Heaven  thou  wilt  be  forever  blessed  with  him.
Those  who  fail  to  honor  him,  have  no  part  in  that
place  of  happiness;  the  evil  spirits  who  dwell
beneath  the  earth  lead  their  souls  captive,  and,  as
they  are  immortal,  cause  them  to  suffer  cruelties  and
torments  which  will  never  find  an  end."

This  poor  man,  half  roasted,  begins  to  breathe
afresh  at  these  tidings.  "Alas!"  he  says,  "is  it
then  true  that  there  is  a  place  of  happiness  in  Heav-
en for  those  very  ones  who  are  miserable  in  this
world?  Some  Hurons,  of  those  whom  we  have  [19]
burned,  told  us  these  things,  and  consoled  them-
selves in  the  flames, —  awaiting,  they  said,  that  great
happiness  of  Heaven.  We  thought  that  those  were
fables ;  is  it  then  true  that  they  were  realities  ? '

Estienne  continues  to  instruct  him,  and  finds  a
heart  wholly  disposed  to  our  mysteries, —  which  longs
only  for  Heaven,  and  which  four  or  five  times  asks
for  Baptism.  At  these  words,  the  infidel  Hurons
begin  to  offer  resistance,  and  vigorously  to  oppose
themselves  to  the  salvation  of  their  enemy, — shout-
ing that  his  soul  must  be  burned  forever by  the


268  I  I'S  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

apporter  des  refiftances,  &  a  s'oppofer  puiffamment
an  falut  de  leur  ennemy,  crians  qu'il  falloit  que  fon
ame  ftit  bruise  a  iamais  des  Demons  de  l'Enfer,  &  que
fi  eux  mefmes  pouuoient  perpetuer  fes  peines,  iamais
elles  n'auroient  de  fin.  Eftienne  voulant  hafter  fon
coup,  cherchant  de  l'eau  pour  ce  Baptefme,  ne  trouue
pres  de  foy  que  des  feux  &  des  flammes.  II  fend  la
prefle  &  court  en  hafte  dans  les  cabanes  querir  de
l'eau:  enfin  ayant  effuye  mille  iniures  &  bon  nombre
de  coups,  vn  chacun  le  pouffant  pour  luy  faire  repan-
dre  fon  eau,  fa  charite  fut  plus  forte  que  leur  malice,
&  fon  zele  fe  rendit  vidtorieux  de  tout,  &  embraza  fi
puiffamment  le  cceur  de  ce  pauure  home  de  douleurs,
qu'il  fembloit  s'oublier  de  fon  mal,  ayant  [20]  receu
le  faindt  Baptefme,  &  n'auoir  plus  de  voix,  finon  pour
s'£crier  qu'il  feroit  heureux  dans  le  Ciel.

Au  retour,  comme  les  Chreftiens  vouloient  fe
conioiiir  auec  Eftienne  de  fon  zele :  Helas,  mes  freres,
leur  dit-il,  ie  fuis  vn  ver  de  terre,  ce  n'eft  pas  Eftienne
qui  a  fait  ce  Baptefme,  mais  noftre  Seigneur  qui
fortifioit  ma  foibleffe,  &  me  mettoit  dans  le  coeur  les
paroles  qui  fortoient  de  ma  bouche:  i'auois  Commu-
nis ce  matin,  &  delors  i'ay  fenti  vn  feu  qui  me  bru-
loit,  &  que  ie  n'euffe  pas  pu  contenir  en  moy-mefme:
fi  Dieu  ne  me  pouffoit  au  peu  de  bien  que  ie  puis
faire,  ie  ne  ferois  puiffant  que  pour  le  mal  &  le
peche.

A  propos  de  cet  Iroquois  baptize,  ie  me  fouuiens
du  zele  d'vne  pauure  vefue  Chreftienne,  nominee
Anne  Outennen,  qui  quoy  que  moins  public,  n^ant
quafi  eu  que  Dieu  feul  pour  tefmoin,  ne  me  paroift.
pas  moins  aimable.  On  parloit  de  bruler  vn  captif :
nos  Peres  auoient  de  la  peine  a  trouuer  accez  pr6s  de


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  269

Demons  of  Hell,  and  that,  if  they  themselves  could
perpetuate  his  pains,  they  would  never  have  an  end.
Estienne  wishing  to  hasten  his  deed,  and  seeking
water  for  this  Baptism,  finds  near  him  only  fires  and
flames.  He  breaks  through  the  press  and  runs  in
haste  into  the  cabins  to  fetch  some  water;  finally,
having  undergone  a  thousand  insults  and  numerous
blows, —  each  man  pushing  him,  in  order  to  make
him  spill  his  water, — his  charity  was  stronger  than
their  malice,  and  his  zeal  rendered  him  victorious
over  everything.  So  powerfully  did  it  kindle  the
heart  of  that  poor  man  of  griefs  that  he  seemed  to
forget  his  pain,  having  [20]  received  holy  Baptism,
and  to  have  no  more  voice,  except  to  exclaim  that
he  would  be  happy  in  Heaven.

At  his  return,  when  the  Christians  wished  to  con-
gratulate Estienne  upon  his  zeal,  "  Alas!  my  broth-
ers," he  said  to  them,  "  I  am  an  earthworm;  it  is  not
Estienne  who  has  performed  this  Baptism,  but  our
Lord  who  strengthened  my  weakness,  and  put  in  my
heart  the  words  which  issued  from  my  lips.  I  had
received  Communion  this  morning,  and  from  that
time  I  felt  a  fire  which  was  burning  me,  and  which  I
could  not  have  contained  within  myself.  If  God  did
not  impel  me  to  the  little  good  that  I  can  do,  I  would
not  be  powerful  except  for  evil  and  sin."

In  connection  with  this  baptized  Iroquois,  I  remem-
ber the  zeal  of  a  poor  Christian  widow,  named  Anne
Outennen,  which  —  though  less  public,  having  had
almost  no  one  but  God  alone  for  witness  —  appears  to
me  not  less  lovable.  There  was  talk  of  burning  a
captive ;  our  Fathers  had  difficulty  in  finding  access
to  him,  the  infidel  Hurons  applying  more  and  more
all  their  efforts to prevent the Baptisms of their


270  LES  RELATIONS  DES  //'.SUITES [Vol.  29

luy,  les  Hurons  infideles  apportans  de  plus  en  plus
tous  leurs  efforts,  pour  empefcher  les  Baptefmes  de
leurs  ennemis.  Cette  bonne  Chreitienne  touchee  du
falut  de  cette  [2 1]  ame,  s'eftant  mife  a  prier  pour  elle,
fe  fent  pouffee  d'aller  prendre  vne  hache,  qui  luy
reftoit,  &  qui  eftoient  fes  plus  grandes  richeffes:  la
va  fecretement  offrir  a  ceux  qui  auoient  foin  de  ce
captif,  tachant  de  leur  gaigner  le  cceur,  afin  qu'ils  ne
s'oppofaffent  plus  au  Baptefme  de  c£t  homme  deftine
a  la  mort.  Mais  fans  doute  que  cette  charite  gaigna
encore  plus  puiffamment  le  cceur  de  Dieu;  car  en
fuitte  nos  Peres  trouuerent  non  feulement  vn  accez
fauorable  aupres  de  ce  captif,  mais  luy  trouuerent
vne  ame  fi  difpofee  a  receuoir  la  foy,  qu'ils  virent
bien  que  le  faindt  Efprit  y  trauailloit  plus  qu'eux,  &
qu'il  falloit  qu'vn  fi  faindt  zele  luy  euft  merite*  cette
grace.

Quelques  Chreftiens  du  Bourg  de  S.  Ignace,  crai-
gnans  cet  Automne  dernier,  que  les  Capitaines  infi-
deles ne  follicitaffent  les  plus  foibles  de  cette  Eglife
aux  fuperftitions  du  pais,  &  ne  deftournaffent  de  la
foy  ceux  qui  n'y  auroient  pas  encore  affez  de  ferme-
te\  fe  refolurent  d'eux  mefmes  de  preuenir  la  tenta-
tion.  lis  vont  trouuer  ces  Capitaines,  leur  portent
des  prefens  pour  le  fifque  public,  &  les  prient  de
laiffer  leur  Eglife  en  repos.  Nos  Peres  [22]  en  ayans
appris  la  nouuelle,  au  lieu  de  s'en  conioiiir  auec  eux,
temoignent  n'en  eftre  pas  contens,  &  craindre  au
moins  qu'on  n'euft  fait  ouuerture  a  vne  chofe  qui
peut  tirer  en  confequence;  les  infideles  pouuans
predre  de  la  fujet  de  vexer  les  Chreftiens,  fous  l'efpe-
rance  de  tirer  d'eux  de  femblables  prefens.

Et  quoy,  Dieu  ne  voit-il  pas  noftre  cceur,  reparti-


1646 J  RELATION  OF  1645-46  271

enemies.  This  good  Christian  woman,  moved  for
the  salvation  of  that  [21]  soul,  having  begun  to  pray
for  it,  feels  herself  impelled  to  take  a  hatchet  that
still  remained  to  her,  and  that  was  her  greatest
riches ;  she  goes  secretly  to  offer  it  to  those  who  had
charge  of  this  captive, —  trying  to  win  their  hearts,
so  that  they  should  no  longer  oppose  themselves  to
the  Baptism  of  this  man  destined  to  death.  But,
without  doubt,  this  charity  gained  still  more  mightily
the  heart  of  God;  for,  in  consequence,  our  Fathers
found  not  only  easy  access  to  this  captive,  but  in
him  a  soul  so  disposed  to  receive  the  faith,  that
they  saw  well  that  the  holy  Ghost  was  working  in  it
more  than  they,  and  that  it  must  needs  be  that  a  zeal
so  holy  had  deserved  for  him  this  grace.

Some  Christians  of  the  Village  of  St.  Ignace  —  fear-
ing, this  last  Autumn,  that  the  infidel  Captains  might
solicit  the  weaker  ones  of  that  Church  to  the  super-
stitions of  the  country,  and  might  turn  aside  from
the  faith  those  who  should  not  yet  have  sufficient
firmness  in  it  —  resolved,  of  themselves,  to  prevent
temptation.  They  go  to  find  these  Captains,  convey
to  them  presents  for  the  public  treasury,  and  beg
them  to  leave  their  Church  at  rest.  Our  Fathers,
[22]  having  learned  news  of  this,  instead  of  congratu-
lating them,  show  that  they  are  not  satisfied  there-
with, and  that  they  fear,  at  the  least,  that  the  way
has  been  opened  for  something  that  may  lead  to  con-
sequences,—  as  the  infidels  may  thence  take  occasion
to  annoy  the  Christians,  in  the  hope  of  drawing  from
them  similar  presents.

' '  But  what  ?  does  not  God  see  our  hearts  ? ' '  replied
these  good  Christians;  "is  it  not  for  him  to  take
account  of  these  losses, and  to  restore  them  to  us


272  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

rent  ces  bons  Chreftiens,  n'eft-il  pas  pour  tenir  copte
de  ces  pertes,  &  nous  les  rendre  auec  vfure,  &  les
prefens  que  nous  auons  fait,  font-ils  plus  precieux
que  Tame  de  nos  frere[s].^  Ceux  qui  font  foibles  cet
hyuer,  &  pour  qui  nous  craignons  la  cheute,  feront
plus  forts  auec  le  temps,  &  rendront  a  leur  tour  vne
femblable  charit6  a  ceux  qui  en  auront  befoin.  Tu
nous  as  dit,  &  nous  le  croyons,  que  les  biens  de  la
terre  ne  font  que  pour  le  Ciel,  &  que  fi  nous  n'en
faifons  vn  bon  vfage,  ils  feront  noftre  plus  grand
malheur.-  Les  pouuons  nous  mieux  employer  que
pour  le  falut  de  quelqu'vn?  Si  pour  nous,  tu  as
quitte"  la  France,  tes  parens,  tes  plaifirs,  tes  amis,
&  tout  le  bien  que  tu  auois:  pourquoy  trouues  tu
mauuais  que  nous  ayons  quitte  vne  fi  petite  partie  du
noftre  ?

[23]  Dans  vn  des  Bourgs  des  plus  attaches  de  ces
pais  aux  danfes  deffendues,  &  aux  abominations
infames,  que  ceux  qui  paffent  icy  pour  Magiciens,
ordonnent  de  la  part  des  Demons,  afin  de  detourner
les  malheurs  qu'ils  predifent:  Les  Capitaines  n'y
voyans  plus  la  chaleur  des  ann£es  precedentes,
entreprirent  d'y  mettre  remede.  Ils  parcourrent  les
rues,  crians  a  haute  voix  qu'on  ait  pitie  d'vn  pays
qui  fe  va  perdant,  a  caufe  qu'on  neglige  les  ancien-
nes  couftumes:  que  la  foy  eft  trop  rigoureufe  de
iamais  ne  donner  de  difpenfe  a  fes  loix,  &  qu'au
moins  on  cefle  pour  vne  nuidt  &  pour  vn  iour  de  faire
office  de  Chreftien.  Ils  penetrent  dans  les  cabanes,
ils  follicitent  tout  le  monde,  &  fur  tout  ceux  qu'ils
iugent  les  plus  foibles  en  la  foy.

Vn  bon  Chreftien  ne  pouuant  plus  long-temps
fupporter  cet  opprobre;  &  quoy,  dit-il,  le  diable  aura


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  273

with  usury?  and  the  presents  that  we  have  made, —
are  they  more  precious  than  the  souls  of  our  brothers?
Those  who  are  weak,  this  winter,  and  whose  fall  we
dread,  will  be  stronger  in  course  of  time,  and  will
extend,  in  their  turn,  a  similar  charity  to  those  who
shall  need  it.  Thou  hast  told  us, —  and  we  believe
it, — that  the  goods  of  earth  are  only  for  Heaven ;  and
that,  if  we  do  not  make  a  good  use  of  them,  they
will  be  our  greatest  misfortune.  Can  we  employ
them  better  than  for  the  salvation  of  some  one?  If
for  us  thou  hast  left  France,  thy  relatives,  thy  pleas-
ures, thy  friends,  and  all  the  property  that  thou
hadst,  why  dost  thou  take  it  ill  that  we  have  given
up  so  small  a  portion  of  ours  ? ' '

[23]  In  one  of  the  Villages, —  of  those  most  attached,
in  these  countries,  to  the  forbidden  dances,  and  to
the  infamous  abominations  which  those  who  here
pass  for  Magicians  order  on  the  part  of  the  Demons,
so  as  to  avert  the  misfortunes  which  they  predict, —
the  Captains,  no  longer  seeing  the  fervor  of  preced-
ing years,  undertook  to  apply  a  remedy  thereto.
They  traversed  the  streets,  shouting  in  loud  voices
that  pity  be  taken  on  a  country  which  is  going  to
ruin  because  the  old  customs  are  neglected ;  that  the
faith  is  too  rigorous,  in  never  granting  dispensation
from  its  laws;  and  that,  at  least,  people  may  cease
for  one  night  and  one  day  to  perform  Christian
service.  They  make  their  way  into  the  cabins ;  they
solicit  every  one,  and  especially  those  whom  they
judge  weakest  in  the  faith.

A  good  Christian,  who  could  no  longer  endure  this
reproach,  says:  "  What?  shall  the  devil  have  tongues
hired  for  his  service,  and  shall  God,  who  is  the  mas-
ter, not  be  served ? ' He  leaves  his  cabin,  entirely


'274


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  jESUITES  [Vol.  29


des  langues  gag£es  pour  fon  feruice,  &  Dieu  qui  eft
le  maiftre,  ne  fera  pas  feruy.  II  fort  de  fa  cabane
tout  tranfporte  de  zele,  il  va  fuiure  ces  Capitaines,
entre  dans  les  maifons  des  infideles  &  des  Chreftiens ;
&  par  tout  y  va  annoneant  les  menaces  de  Dieu,
contre  [24]  les  pecheurs  &  leurs  crimes,  auec  vne
eloquence  &  vne  force  de  raifons  ft  preffantes,  que
tous  les  Chreftiens  demeurerent  dans  leur  deuoir,  &
mefme  plufieurs  infideles,  qui  admiroient  vne  fi  fainte
liberie,  en  vn  homme  particulier,  qui  n'auoit  de  foy
aucune  a[u]thorite,  fmon  celle  que  l'amour  de  fa  foy
&  de  fon  zele,  luy  faifoient  prendre.

Nos  Peres  de  la  miffion  de  S.  Iofeph  voyans  croiftre
le  nombre  de  leurs  morts,  pour  rendre  leur  cemetiere
plus  augufte,  y  porterent  en  proceffion  vne  grande
croix,  fortans  de  la  Chappelle  &  trauerfans  le  Bourg,
a  la  veue  de  tous  les  infideles.  Les  Chreftiens  qui  y
affiftoient  effuyerent  beaucoup  de  mocqueries,  des
langues  blafphemantes  qui  fe  rioient  de  leur  fimpli-
cite,  de  porter  auec  tant  de  refpedt  vn  tronc  de  bois,
qui  en  effet  n'auoit  point  de  plus  rare  beaute,  que
celle  qu'vne  viue  foy  y  retrouue,  &  qu'vn  ceil  infidele
ne  peut  enuifager.

Dans  quelque  temps  de  la,  les  enfans  de  ces  infi-
deles, imitants  l'impiete  de  leurs  peres,  ietterent  a
cette  croix  des  pierres  &  des  ordures  qui  y  gatterent
quelque  chofe.  Eftienne  Totiri,  qui  en  l'abfence  de
[33  i.e.,  25]  nos  Peres,  fert  de  dogique  a  cette  Eglife,
s'eftima  oblige  de  fouftenir  en  cette  iniure  l'honneur
de  Dieu.  Le  foir  venu  il  monte  en  haut  fur  le  toit
de  fa  cabane,  &  pour  affembler  tout  le  Bourg,  fait  vn
cry  d'vne  voix  eftonnante,  femblable  a  ceux  qui  fer-
uent  de  fignal,  lors  que  quelqu'vn  vient  d'apperceuoir


1646]  RELA  TION  OF  1645-46  275

carried  away  with  zeal ;  he  goes  to  follow  those  Cap-
tains, and  enters  into  the  houses  of  the  infidels  and
of  the  Christians.  He  goes  everywhere,  announcing
the  threats  of  God  against  [24]  sinners  and  their
crimes,  with  an  eloquence  and  a  force  of  arguments
so  urgent  that  all  the  Christians  remained  in  their
duty ;  and  even  several  infidels  did  so,  admiring  so
holy  a  freedom  in  a  private  individual, — who  had,  of
himself,  no  authority  except  that  which  his  love  for
the  faith  and  his  zeal  caused  him  to  assume.

Our  Fathers  of  the  mission  of  St.  Joseph  —  seeing
that  the  number  of  their  dead  increased  —  in  order  to
render  their  cemetery  more  august,  carried  thither  in
a  procession  a  great  cross,  issuing  from  the  Chapel
and  passing  through  the  Village,  in  the  sight  of  all
the  infidels.  The  Christians  who  took  part  therein
endured  many  mockeries  from  blasphemous  tongues,
which  made  sport  of  their  simplicity  in  bearing  with
so  much  respect  a  trunk  of  wood, —  which  indeed
had  no  rarer  beauty  than  that  which  a  living  faith
discovers  in  it,  and  which  an  infidel  eye  cannot
contemplate.

Some  time  after  that,  the  children  of  these  infi-
dels, imitating  the  impiety  of  their  fathers,  cast  at
this  cross  stones  and  filth,  which  somewhat  injured
it.  Estienne  Totiri,  who  in  the  absence  of  [33  i.e.,  25]
our  Fathers,  serves  as  dogique u  to  this  Church,
deemed  himself  obliged  to  maintain,  in  regard  to
this  insult,  the  honor  of  God.  Evening  having  set
in,  he  mounts  aloft  on  the  roof  of  his  cabin,  and,  in
order  to  assemble  the  whole  Village,  he  gives  a  shout
in  an  astounding  voice, — similar  to  those  which  serve
as  signals  when  some  one  has  just  perceived  the  ene-
my, or  some  army  which  hastens  its  approaches. All


276  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUJTES  [Vol.29

l'ennemy,  ou  quelque  arm6e  qui  hafte  fes  approches.
Tout  le  monde  accourt  a  la  foulle  &  en  armes,  pour
entendre  de  quel  cofte"  vient  l'ennemy.  Tremblez,
mes  freres,  leur  dit-il,  le  mal  eft  a  nos  portes,  &  l'en-
nemy dans  noitre  Bourg.  On  profane  le  cemetiere
des  Chreftiens,  Dieu  en  vengera  l'infolence :  ceflez
d'irriter  fa  colere,  arreftez  vos  enfans,  autrement
vous  participez  a  leur  crime,  &  la  punition  en  tom-
bera  egalement  fur  tous.  Les  corps  morts  font  des
chofes  facrees,  &  mefme  parmy  vous  infideles,  on
leur  porte  refpedt,  &  on  fait  crime  de  toucher  a  vn
auiron  pendu  a  vn  fepulchre.  Qu'on  rompe  ma  mai-
fon,  qu'on  me  frappe,  &  qu'on  me  tue  moy-mefme;
ie  le  verray  fans  refiftance,  &  le  fupporteray  auec
amour:  mais  lors  qu'on  s'attaquera  aux  chofes  con-
facrdes  a  Dieu,  tandis  que  i'auray  [26]  quelque  refte
de  voix,  ie  vous  feray  fgauoir  I'enormite  de  voftre
crime,  &  vous  diray  que  c'eft  vne  chofe  terrible  de
prendre  Dieu  pour  ennemy.  En  vn  mot  il  leur  parla
fi  puiflamment,  que  du  depuis  les  parens  ont  reprime"
l'infolence  de  leurs  enfans,  &  fe  font  retenus  eux-
mefmes  en  leur  deuoir.

Mais  le  zele  des  Chreftiens  qui  nous  paroift  plus
efficace  &  plus  adtif,  eft  celuy  qui  les  porte  a  procu-
rer la  conuerfion  de  ceux  de  leur  famille.  Vn  Pere
gagnera  fes  enfans  a  Dieu,  vne  mere  fes  filles;  le
mari  couertira  fa  femme,  &  la  femme  Chreftienne
rendra  fon  mari  Chreftien;  &  fouuent  mefmes  les
enfans  qui  les  premiers  ont  embraffe  la  foy,  fandti-
fient  leurs  parens  infideles,  auec  des  attraits  &  des
charmes,  que  la  nature  fortinee  de  la  grace,  &  le
Saint  Efprit  leur  enfeigne  fans  autre  maiftre.  Et  le
bon  eft,  que  l'experience  nous  apprend,  que  la  pluf-


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  277

the  people  run  in  a  crowd,  and  with  arms,  to  hear  from
which  direction  the  enemy  comes.  "  Tremble,  my
brothers,"  he  says  to  them;  "  the  evil  is  at  our  doors
and  the  enemy  in  our  Village.  The  cemetery  of  the
Christians  is  profaned;  God  will  avenge  this  inso-
lence. Cease  to  provoke  his  wrath ;  check  your  chil-
dren ;  otherwise  you  participate  in  their  crime,  and
the  punishment  for  it  will  fall  alike  on  all.  Dead
bodies  are  sacred  things;  and  even  among  you  infi-
dels they  are  shown  respect,  and  one  commits  a  crime
if  he  touch  a  paddle  suspended  to  a  sepulchre.  Let
them  break  down  my  house,  let  them  strike  me,  and
let  them  even  kill  me, —  I  will  see  it  without  resist-
ance, and  will  endure  it  with  love ;  but  when  they
shall  attack  things  consecrated  to  God,  as  long  as  I
shall  have  [26]  any  remnant  of  voice  I  will  make  you
know  the  enormity  of  your  crime,  and  will  tell  you
that  it  is  a  terrible  thing  to  take  God  as  an  enemy."
In  a  word,  he  spoke  to  them  so  forcibly  that  since
then  the  parents  have  repressed  the  insolence  of  their
children,  and  have  kept  themselves  within  their  duty.
But  the  zeal  of  the  Christians  which  appears  to  us
most  efficacious  and  most  active  is  that  which  inclines
them  to  procure  the  conversion  of  those  of  their  own
families.  A  Father  will  win  his  children  to  God, —
a  mother,  her  daughters ;  the  husband  will  convert
his  wife,  and  the  Christian  wife  will  render  her  hus-
band Christian;  and  frequently  even  children,  who
have  first  embraced  the  faith,  sanctify  their  infidel
parents  with  attractions  and  charms  which  nature,
fortified  by  grace,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  teach  them
without  other  master.  And  the  best  of  it  is,  that
experience  teaches  us  that  most  of  those  who  are  won
to  God  by  this  means  have  in  their  faith  something


278  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.29

part  de  ceux  qui  font  gaignez  a  Dieu  par  cette  voye,
ont  en  leur  foy  ie  ne  fcay  quoy  de  plus  inebranlable,
&  qui  mefme  fe  fortifie,  pluftoft  que  d'eftre  affoibly,
par  la  mort  tant  des  vns,  que  des  autres.

Vn  bon  vieillard  du  Bourg  de  la  Conception,  [27]
ayant  enfin  gaigne  a  Dieu  par  fes  difcours,  par  fes
exemples,  &  plus  encore  par  la  force  de  fes  prieres  &
de  fes  larmes,  vne  famille  tres-nombreufe,  fa  femme,
fes  enfans,  &  les  enfans  de  fes  enfans;  voyant  vn
iour  en  fa  maifon  quelque  faute  aflez  pardonnable,
&  pluftoft  vn  fimple  manquement  de  ferueur,  qu'vn
peche\  Et  quoy,  dit-il,  font-ce  la  les  promelfes  que
vous  auez  donne  a  Dieu,  receuant  le  Baptefme?
Songez-vous  que  nous  fommes  Chreftiens,  &  qu'il
faut  que  noftre  foy  paroiffe  dans  nos  ceuures?  Vou-
lez-vous  en  offencant  Dieu  me  chaffer  d'icy?  Ie  fuis
vieil  &  fans  forces,  mais  i'auray  moins  de  peine  de
traifner  vne  vie  miferable,  errant  quelque  part  dans
les  bois,  que  de  me  voir  aupres  de  vous,  fi  vous  penfez
a  quitter  Dieu :  la  mort  me  fera  plus  douce,  eftant
abandonne  des  homes,  que  de  viure  en  vne  maifon
d'impiete.  Ce  peu  de  mots  entrecouppez  des  fotipirs
&  des  larmes  d'vn  pere,  vaut  mieux  que  dix  mille  de
nos  fermons.

Le  mefme  defcendant  l'an  pafCe  a  Quebec,  pour
tout  Adieu  a  fa  famille,  ne  leur  parla  que  de  l'eftime
qu'ils  deuoient  auoir  de  leur  foy :  &  en  finiffant  fon
difcours;  [28]  Si  ie  fuis  pris  des  Iroquois,  dit-il,
n'ayez  pas  la  penfee  que  Dieu  m'ait  delaifle:  ie
l'aimeray  dedans  ces  feux,  &  vous  croyez  auffi  qu'il
m'aura  ay  me  dans  ces  flammes.  Ne  pleurez  pas  ma
mort;  ie  verrois  vos  larmes  du  Ciel,  &  ne  pourrois
les  approuuer;  puis  qu'alors  mes  douleurs  feroient


1646]  RELATION  OF  1645-46  279

indefinably  more  steadfast,  which  even  becomes
strengthened,  rather  than  weakened,  by  the  death  of
one  or  the  other.

A  good  old  man  of  the  Village  of  la  Conception,
[27]  having  at  last  gained  to  God,  by  his  words,  by
his  example,  and  still  more  by  the  force  of  his  prayers
and  his  tears,  a  very  numerous  family, —  his  wife,
his  children,  and  his  children's  children, —  seeing
one  day  in  his  house  some  rather  pardonable  fault,
and  rather  a  simple  want  of  fervor  than  a  sin,  says:
"  How  now?  are  those  the  promises  that  you  gave
to  God  on  receiving  Baptism?  Do  you  realize  that
we  are  Christians,  and  that  our  faith  must  appear
in  our  works?  Will  you,  by  offending  God,  drive
me  away  from  here?  I  am  old  and  without  strength,
but  I  shall  have  less  pain  in  protracting  a  wretched
life,  wandering  somewhere  in  the  woods,  than  in
seeing  myself  near  you,  if  you  think  of  forsaking
God.  Death  will  be  sweeter  to  me,  abandoned  by
men,  than  living  in  a  house  of  impiety."  These  few
words,  interrupted  by  a  father's  sighs  and  tears,  are
worth  more  than  ten  thousand  of  our  sermons.

The  same  man,  going  down  last  year  to  Quebec,
for  all  his  Adieu  to  his  family,  spoke  to  them  only
of  the  esteem  which  they  ought  to  have  for  their
faith;  and,  in  finishing  his  remarks,  [28]  "  If  I  am
taken  by  the  Iroquois,"  he  said,  "  do  not  have  the
idea  that  God  has  forsaken  me ;  I  will  love  him  in
those  fires,  and  do  you  also  believe  that  he  will  love
me  in  those  flames.  Do  not  mourn  my  death;  I
would  see  your  tears  from  Heaven,  and  could  not
approve  them:  since  my  griefs  would  then  be  all
wiped  away,  and  you  would  be  failing  either  in  faith,
or  in  love  for  me,  to  weep  for  me  when  I  should  be


•J  m  ,  LES  EEL  A  TIONS  1  > ES  JES  UI TES  [Vol.  29


toutes  effuy£es,  &  que  vous  manqueriez,  ou  de  foy,
ou  d'amour  pour  moy,  de  me  pleurer  lors  que  ie
f erois  bien-heureux :  laiffons  les  larmes  aux  infideles,
ou  du  moins  employons  les  a  pleurer  leur  mal-heur,
pourueu  que  nous  mourrions  Chreftiens,  &  que  noltre
ame  foit  pour  le  Ciel,  qu'importe  ou  noltre  corps  foit
confomme;  icy,  ou  dans  le  feu  des  Iroquois?  A  ces
mots  fa  femme  &  fes  enfans  ne  peuuent  plus  tenir
leurs  larmes;  ce  bon  vieillard  eft  luy  mefme  touche,
la  nature  ne  pouuant  fe  trahir  plus  long-temps  foy-
mefme ;  ils  fe  parlent  &  fe  refpondent  par  leurs  yeux.
Enfin  la  plus  agee  des  filles,  prenant  la  parole  pour
tous  les  autres,  luy  refpondit:  Mon  Pere,  fi  vous
mourrez,  attirez  nous  au  Ciel,  &  obtenez  de  Dieu  que
noftre  foy  foit  auffi  viue  que  la  voftre :  pour  moy  ie
quitteray  pluftoft  la  vie,  que  de  m'oublier  &  de  vous,
&  de  Dieu.

[29]  Les  Sauuages  ne  font  pas  fi  fauuages  qu'on
les  croit  en  France,  &  ie  puis  dire  auec  verite  que
l'efprit  de  plufieurs  ne  cede  en  rien  aux  noftres.
I'aduoue  que  leurs  couftumes  &  leur  naturel  a  ie  ne
fcai  quoi  de  choquant,  au  moins  [pour]  ceux  qui  n'y
font  pas  appriuoifez,  &  qui  les  rebuttent  trop  toft,
fans  affez  les  connoiftre.  Mais  fi  d'vn  Cheual  fou-
gueux  &  qui  n'a  rien  que  la  nature,  en  le  domtant,  on
en  fait  vn  Cheual  de  prix,  qui  ne  cede  en  rien  a  tous
ceux,  qui  d'vn  long-temps  font  eleuez  dans  le  menage ;
peut-on  s'eftonner  que  la  foy  entrant  dans  l'efprit
d'vn  barbare,  corrige  en  luy  ce  qu'il  y  a  de  vicieux,
&  luy  donne  les  fentimens  de  la  raifon  &  de  la  grace,
qu'eprouuent  ceux  qui  font  nez  dans  le  Chriftianifme.
II  eft  vray  que  leur  facon  de  s'enoncer  eft  differente
de  la  noftre :  mais  comme  la  parole  du  cceur  eft  la


1646]  RELA  TION  OE  1645-46  281


blessed.  Let  us  leave  tears  to  the  infidels;  or,  at
least,  let  us  employ  them  in  weeping  for  their  mis-
fortune. Provided  that  we  die  Christians  and  that
our  souls  be  for  Heaven,  what  matters  it  where  our
bodies  be  consumed, —  here,  or  in  the  fire  of  the  Iro-
quois?" At  these  words,  his  wife  and  his  children
can  no  longer  contain  their  tears ;  this  good  old  man
is  himself  touched, —  for  nature  can  no  longer  deny
itself;  they  hold  mutual  intercourse  with  their
eyes.  Finally,  the  eldest  of  the  daughters,  speaking
for  all  the  others,  answered  him:  "My  Father,  if
you  die,  draw  us  to  Heaven,  and  obtain  from  God
that  our  faith  be  as  living  as  yours;  as  for  me,  I  will
sooner  give  up  life  than  forget  either  you  or  God."
[29]  The  Savages  are  not  so  savage  as  is  supposed
in  France ;  and  I  may  say  with  truth  that  the  intel-
ligence of  many  yields  in  nothing  to  ours.  I  admit
that  their  customs  and  their  natural  tendencies  are
extremely  shocking,  —  at  least  to  those  who  are
not  accustomed  to  them,  and  who  reject  them  too
quickly,  without  sufficiently  knowing  them.  But  if
of  a  spirited  Horse,  which  has  nothing  about  him  but
nature,  one  makes,  by  taming  him,  a  valuable  Steed,
which  yields  in  no  respect  to  all  those  which  for  a
long  time  have  been  trained  in  the  riding-school, —
can  one  be  astonished  that  the  faith,  entering  the
mind  of  a  barbarian,  corrects  in  him  what  is  vicious,
and  gives  him  the  sentiments  of  reason  and  grace
which  those  experience  who  are  born  in  Christianity  ?
It  is  true  that  their  manner  of  expression  is  different
from  ours :  but,  since  the  word  of  the  heart  is  the
same  in  all  men,  one  cannot  doubt  that  their  tongue
has  also  its  beauties  and  its  graces,  as  much  as  ours.


282  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESULTES  [Vol.29

mefme  dans  tous  les  hommes,  on  ne  peut  pas  douter
que  leur  langue  n'ait  auffi  fes  beautez,  &  fes  graces,
autant  que  la  noftre.  Quoy  qu'ils  habitent  dans  les
bois,  ils  n'en  font  pas  moins  hommes.  Mais  reue-
nons  a  noftre  fuiet.

I 'ay  admire  fouuent  la  conftance  du  [30]  zele  d'vne
ieune  femme  Chreftienne,  nommee  Noelle  Aouendous
de  la  Million  de  fainct  lean  Baptifte,  &  fa  piete  infa-
tigable  a  conuertir  fa  mere.  Dieu  l'eprouuoit  de
tous  coftez,  &  tous  les  mal-heursraccueilloient;  mais
au  plus  fort  de  fes  miferes,  il  fembloit  a  la  voir,
qu'elle  n'euft  point  de  fentiment  pour  foy :  du  moins
eftoient  ils  etouffez  dans  les  defirs  violens,  que  fans
ceff e  elle  reff  entoit,  de  hafter  cette  conuerfion :  &
nuidt  &  iour  c'eftoient  fes  entretiens,  fes  efperances,
&  le  bon-heur  qu'elle  attendoit,  pour  fe  confoler  de
fes  peines;  fon  plus  grand  mal,  &  a  l'entendre,  fon
vnique  afflidtio,  eftant  de  voir  les  retardemens  de  fa
mere  dans  les  affaires  de  fon  falut.  Mais  quoy,  luy
difoit-on,  n'es  tu  point  affligee  de  te  voir  dans  vne  fi
grande  pauurete?  Nenny,  refpondoit-elle,  ie  ne  puis
defirer  les  richeffes ;  ie  porte  mes  miferes  auec  ioye,
&  ne  puis  demander  a  Dieu  qu'il  me  mette  plus  a
mon  aife:  quand  il  m'auroit  rendue  la  plus  riche
de  ce  pais,  pourroy-ie  luy  offrir  quelque  chofe  plus
agreable  que  ma  pauurete,  &  l'eftat  dans  lequel  il  me
veut?  mais  c'eft  ma  Mere  qui  m'afflige,  n'ayant  pas
pitie  de  foy-mefme,  &  refufant  [31]  la  foy,  qui  luy
vaudroit,  auffi-bien  qu'a  moy,  toutes  les  richeffes  du
monde.

Enfin  la  conftance  de  cette  bonne  rllle  l'efpace  de
quatre  ans,  fes  exhortations,  fes  prieres  auoient
conuerty  cette  mere  infidele. C'eftoit vne femme


It546]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  283

Although  they  live  in  the  woods,  they  are  none  the
less  men. But  let  us  return  to  our  subject.

I  have  often  admired  the  constancy  of  the  [30]  zeal
of  a  Christian  young  woman,  named  Noe'lle  Aouen-
dous,  of  the  Mission  of  saint  Jean  Baptiste,  and  her
indefatigable  piety  in  converting  her  mother.  God
was  trying  her  on  all  sides,  and  all  misfortunes  were
assailing  her;  but  at  the  climax  of  her  miseries  it
seemed,  to  look  at  her,  that  she  had  no  feelings  for
herself, —  at  least,  they  were  stifled  in  the  strong
desires  which,  without  ceasing,  she  felt  for  hastening
that  conversion.  Both  night  and  day,  that  was  the
.subject  of  her  conversations,  her  hopes,  and  the
happiness  that  she  was  awaiting  in  order  to  console
herself  for  her  pains,  her  greatest  misfortune  —  and,
to  hear  her,  her  only  affliction  —  being  to  see  her
mother's  delays  in  the  affairs  of  her  salvation.  "  But
what?"  they  said  to  her,  "are  you  not  afflicted  to
see  yourself  in  so  great  poverty?  "  "  Nay,"  she  an-
swered, "  I  cannot  desire  riches;  I  bear  my  miseries
with  joy,  and  cannot  ask  of  God  that  he  put  me  more
at  my  ease.  Even  though  he  should  have  rendered
me  the  richest  in  this  country,  could  I  offer  him  any-
thing more  agreeable  than  my  poverty,  and  the  state
in  which  he  chooses  to  place  me?  But  it  is  my
Mother  who  afflicts  me,  not  having  pity  for  herself,
and  refusing  [31]  the  faith, —  which  would  be  worth
to  her,  as  well  as  to  me,  all  the  riches  in  the  world."

Finally,  the  constancy  of  this  good  daughter  for
the  space  of  four  years,  her  exhortations,  and  her
prayers,  had  converted  that  infidel  mother.  She  was
a  woman  extremely  attached  to  the  superstitions  of
the  country,  and  one  who  always  had  had  an  aversion
for  Christianity,  as  well  as  love  for  her  life, — -which


284  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.  29

attached  au  poffible  aux  fuperititions  du  pais,  &  qui
toufiours  auoit  eu  des  auerfions  du  Chriftianifme,
autant  que  d'amour  pour  fa  vie,  qu'elle  croyoit  ne
pouuoir  eftre  longue,  fi  iamais  elle  embraffoit  la  foy.

Les  iugemens  de  Dieu  font  par  tout  adorables :  car
en  effet  auffi-toft  qu'elle  fe  fut  rendue  a  la  foy,  vne
mort  fi  fubite  nous  l'emporta,  que  les  infideles  nous
l'ont  reproch6e  mille  fois,  comme  fi  la  feule  foy  en
euft  efte  la  caufe.  Quoy  qu'il  en  foit,  celuy  feul  qui
tient  en  fes  mains  les  ames  de  fes  eleus,  &  qui  difpofe
pour  leur  bien  des  heures  &  des  minutes  de  leur  vie,
auoit  change  fi  a  propos  le  cceur  de  cette  femme,  que
le  foir  mefme,  auant  que  de  mourir,  comme  fi  elle
eufl  eu  vn  preffentiment  de  ce  qui  deuoit  arriuer,
quoy  qu'elle  parut  en  tres-bonne  fante,  elle  adioufta
d'elle-mefme  aux  prieres  qu'elle  faifoit,  qu'il  plufl  a
Dieu  luy  donner  vne  heureufe  mort,  qu'elle  n'auoit
[32]  plus  aucune  attache  pour  la  vie.

Dans  les  larmes  de  toute  la  famille,  la  feule  fille
fongeant  que  fa  mere  eitoit  das  le  Ciel,  beniffoit
Dieu  de  l'auoir  fi  toft  prife  a  foy,  &  quelques  iours
apres  eftant  interrogee  d'vn  de  nos  Peres,  quel  fenti-
ment  il  luy  reitoit  de  cette  mort:  le  croy,  refpondit-
elle,  que  Dieu  me  l'a  oft6e,  parce  que  ie  cherchois  plus
a  la  contenter  que  Dieu  mefme;  car  quoy  que  ie
tachaffe  de  luy  offrir  tout  mon  trauail,  toutefois  le
contentement  de  ma  mere  me  donnoit  ce  femble  plus
de  ioye,  que  la  penfee  que  i'euffe  deu  auoir  que  Dieu
eftoit  content.

Durant  fon  deiiil,  qui  pour  les  femmes,  confifte  en
ces  pays,  a  ne  vifiter  perfonne,  a  marcher  la  tefte  &
les  yeux  baiffees,  a  eftre  mal  veftues,  mal  peign^es,
&  auoir  vn  vifage  craffeux,  &  mefme  quelquefois  tout


1646]  /:  EL  A  TION  OF  1645  -  4*>


she  believed  could  not  be  long,  if  ever  she  embraced
the  faith.

The  judgments  of  God  are  everywhere  adorable :
for,  in  fact,  as  soon  as  she  had  surrendered  to  the
faith,  she  was  carried  away  from  us  by  a  death  so
sudden  that  the  infidels  have  reproached  us  with  it  a
thousand  times,  as  if  the  faith  alone  had  been  the
cause  of  it.  Be  this  as  it  may,  he  alone  who  holds  in
his  hands  the  souls  of  his  elect,  and  who  ordains  for
their  good  the  hours  and  minutes  of  their  lives,  had
so  seasonably  changed  the  heart  of  this  woman  that
the  very  evening  before  dying, — as  if  she  had  had  a
presentiment  of  what  was  to  happen,  although  she
appeared  in  very  good  health, —  she  added,  of  her-
self, to  the  prayers  that  she  was  saying,  that  it  might
please  God  to  give  her  a  happy  death,  and  that  she
had  no  [32]  longer  any  attachment  to  life.

Amid  the  tears  of  the  whole  family,  the  daughter
alone,  reflecting  that  her  mother  was  in  Heaven,
blessed  God  for  having  so  soon  taken  her  to  himself.
Several  days  later,  being  asked  by  one  of  our  Fathers
what  feeling  was  left  to  her  as  a  result  of  this  death,
"  I  believe,"  she  answered,  "  that  God  has  taken  her
from  me  because  I  was  seeking  more  to  satisfy  her
than  God  himself;  for,  although  I  tried  to  offer  him
all  my  toil,  nevertheless  the  satisfaction  of  my  mother
seemed  to  give  me  more  joy  than  the  thought  that  I
ought  to  have  had,  that  God  was  pleased."

During  her  mourning, —  which  in  this  country,  for
the  women,  consists  in  not  visiting  any  one,  in  walk-
ing with  the  head  and  eyes  lowered,  in  being  ill-
clad,  ill-combed,  and  having  a  dirty  face,  and  even
sometimes  all  blackened  with  charcoal, —  this  good
Christian  could  not  then  express  the  joys  of  her  heart.


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JJESUITES  [Vol.  29

noircy  de  charbon.-  Cette  bonne  Chreftienne  ne
pouuoit  alors  exprimer  les  ioyes  de  fon  coeur.  C'eft
maintenant,  difoit-elle,  que  ie  reconnois  qu'il  eft  vray
que  Dieu  careffe  ceux  que  le  monde  meprife ;  car  ne
me  reftant  que  luy  feul,  auquel  ie  puiffe  &  veille
plaire,  depuis  la  mort  de  mon  mari,  &  de  ma  mere
(mes  freres  &  mes  parens  m'ayants  abandonnee,
[33]  a  caufe  que  ie  fuis  Chreftienne)  ie  voy  bien  que
luy  feul  me  fuffit,  &  qu'il  me  tient  abondamment
lieu  de  pere  &  de  mere,  de  parens  &  de  tout.

FinifTons  ce  Chapitre  par  les  larmes,  mais  des
larmes  de  zele,  d'vn  bon  Chreitien  du  Bourg  de  la
Conception,  nomme  Rene  Tfondihouonne.  Ce  bon
homme  n'eft  rien  que  charite  &  amour  pour  la  foy:
il  va  parcourant  les  cabanes,  vifitant  les  malades,
inftruifant  les  Chreftiens,  prechant  aux  infideles,
confondant  les  impies;  en  vn  mot  ie  le  puis  appeller
l'appuy  de  cette  Eglife  &  l'Apoftre  de  ion  pais.  Cet
hyuer  s'eftant  mis  a  faire  oraifon,  en  fuitte  d'vn  recit
qu'il  auoit  entendu  des  fatigues,  &  des  fouffrances  de
Saint  Paul,  trauaillant  a  la  conuerfion  des  gentils;  il
ne  put  contenir  f es  larmes ;  &  tout  tranfporte  hors
de  foy,  s'adreffant  a  Noftre  Seigneur,  luy  fit  fes
plaintes  de  foy  mefme,  auec  autant  de  foy  &  de  fer-
ueur,  que  s'il  l'euft  veu  de  fes  yeux.  Oiiy  mon  Sau-
ueur,  luy  difoit-il,  il  eft  vray  que  ie  fuis  fans  zele
&  fans  amour  pour  vous,  &  que  ie  porte  fans  effet  le
nom  de  Chreftien.  Ie  n'ay  rien  fouffert  en  ce  monde,
&  n'ay  rien  fait  pour  vous  faire  connoiftre.  [34]  Le
Paradis  eft  bien  donne  a  ces  grands  Saints,  qui  ont
verfe  leur  fang,  &  qui  font  morts  pour  la  deffence  de
la  foy ;  Saint  Paul  l'a  merite :  Mais  comment  y  puis-ie
pretendre  ne  fouffrant  rien  pour  vous? Non,  mon


1 646 1  RELA  TION  OF  1645  -46  287

"It  is  now,"  she  said,  "  that  I  recognize  the  truth,
that  God  cherishes  those  whom  the  world  despises;
for,  he  alone  remaining  to  me, — -whom  I  can  and
will  please  since  the  death  of  my  husband  and  my
mother  (my  brothers  and  my  relatives  having  aban-
doned me  [33]  because  I  am  a  Christian), —  I  see  well
that  he  alone  suffices  me,  and  that  he  abundantly
takes  for  me  the  place  of  father  and  mother,  of  rela-
tives, and  all."

Let  us  finish  this  Chapter  with  the  tears  —  but  tears
of  zeal  —  of  a  good  Christian  of  the  Village  of  la  Con-
ception, named  Rene  Tsondihouonne.  This  good
man  is  nothing  but  charity  and  love  for  the  faith :  he
goes  the  rounds  of  the  cabins,  visiting  the  sick,
instructing  the  Christians,  preaching  to  the  infidels,
confounding  the  impious;  in  a  word,  I  may  call  him
the  support  of  this  Church  and  the  Apostle  of  his
country.  This  winter,  having  begun  to  offer  his
prayers, —  after  a  recital  that  he  had  heard  of  the
fatigues  and  sufferings  of  Saint  Paul,  while  working
for  the  conversion  of  the  gentiles, —  he  could  not
contain  his  tears;  and,  wholly  transported  outside
himself,  and  addressing  Our  Lord,  he  made  to  him
complaints  of  himself,  with  as  much  faith  and  fervor
as  if  he  had  seen  him  with  his  own  eyes.  ;  Yes,
my  Savior,"  he  said  to  him,  "it  is  true  that  I  am
without  zeal  or  love  for  you,  and  that  I  bear  without
result  the  name  of  Christian.  I  have  suffered  noth-
ing in  this  world,  and  have  done  nothing  in  it  to
make  you  known.  [34]  Paradise  is  indeed  given  to
those  great  Saints,  who  have  shed  their  blood  and
who  have  died  for  the  defense  of  the  faith;  Saint
Paul  has  deserved  it.  But  how  can  I  lay  claim  to  it,
when  I  suffer  nothing  for  you? No,  my Lord,  I  do


J<s  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.29

Seigneur,  ie  ne  le  merite  pas:  Deliberez  de  ma
demeure  apres  la  mort;  ie  ne  lairray  pas  de  vous
benir  dans  les  enfers,  fi  vous  m'y  voulez  enuoyer:
I'y  loiieray  vos  mifericordes,  &  l'amour  que  vous
aurez  eu  pour  moy,  &  ie  diray  que  ie  m'en  fuis  rendu
indigne :  ie  vous  y  aimeray,  &  alors  ie  vous  y  offriray
mes  peines:  faites  fur  moy  vos  volontez:  Mais
puifque  les  grands  Saints  ont  tant  fouffert  pour  vous
des  cette  vie,  faites  au  pluftoft  que  ie  fois  digne  de
fouffrir  ce  qu'ils  ont  fouffert,  que  ie  patiffe  &  que  ie
meure  pour  la  foy.

Ce  bon  homme  ne  penfoit  pas  alors  eftre  entendu,
eftant  luy  feul  dans  la  Chappelle:  mais  vn  de  nos
Peres  qui  furuint  a  la  fin  de  fon  oraifon,  eut  aflez
bonne  oreille  pour  en  recueillir  quelques  reftes,  &
entr'autres  ce  peu  que  ie  viens  de  dire.  Et  quelque
temps  apres  le  Pere  luy  ayant  demande,  qui  [35]  luy
auoit  enfeigne  cette  priere:  Perfonne,  refpondit  il;
mais  ie  fentois  dans  le  fond  de  mon  cceur,  que  Noftre
Seigneur  me  reprochoit  le  peu  que  i'ay  fait  pour  luy:
&  me  faifant  connoiftre  en  mefme  temps  l'amour
qu'il  m'a  porte,  &  l'amour  que  luy  ont  porte  Saint
Paul  &  tant  de  Saints  Martyrs,  i'auois  honte  de  l'aimer
fi  peu,  &  ne  fcauois  ou  me  cacher  dans  cette  confu-
fion,  finon  dedans  l'Enfer;  ie  n'en  auois  aucune
horreur,  ne  fongeant  alors  a  aucune  autre  chofe,
finon  que  i'euffe  tout  voulu  fouffrir  pour  Dieu.

Ce  bon  homme  fera  les  heures,  &  quelquefois  les
nuidts  quafi  entieres  en  Oraifon,  &  d'ordinaire  deux,
trois  &  quatre  fois  le  iour,  au  milieu  de  la  Chappelle,
nonobftant  les  plus  grandes  rigueurs  du  froid;  la
telle,  les  pieds  &  les  iambes  toutes  nues,  couuert
feulement d'vne peau de quelque belie fauuage:


16461  RELATION  OF  1645-46  289

not  deserve  it.  Ordain  my  abode  after  death, —  I
will  not  fail  to  bless  you  in  hell,  if  you  choose  to
send  me  thither ;  I  will  there  praise  your  mercies  and
the  love  that  you  will  have  had  for  me,  and  I  will  say
that  I  have  rendered  myself  unworthy  of  it.  There
I  will  love  you,  and  then  I  will  offer  you  my  pains
there ;  accomplish  your  will  with  respect  to  me.  But
since  the  great  Saints  have  suffered  for  you  so  much
in  this  life,  cause  that  I  as  soon  as  possible  be  worthy
to  suffer  what  they  have  suffered, —  that  I  may  endure
and  die  for  the  faith."

This  good  man  did  not  then  think  that  he  was
heard,  being  entirely  alone  in  the  Chapel ;  but  one
of  our  Fathers,  who  happened  to  come  in  at  the
end  of  his  prayer,  had  sufficiently  good  ear  to  gather
some  fragments  of  it, — and,  among  others,  this  little
that  I  have  just  related.  And,  some  time  after,  the
Father  having  asked  him  who  [35]  had  taught  him
that  prayer,  he  answered:  "  No  one;  but  I  felt  in
the  depth  of  my  heart  that  Our  Lord  was  reproaching
me  at  the  little  that  I  have  done  for  him.  As  he
made  me  see,  at  the  same  time,  the  love  which  he
has  borne  for  me,  and  the  love  which  Saint  Paul  and
so  many  Holy  Martyrs  have  borne  for  him,  I  was
ashamed  to  love  him  so  little ;  and  I  knew  not  where
to  hide  myself,  in  that  confusion,  if  not  in  Hell.  I
had  no  horror  of  it,  not  thinking  then  of  any  other
thing  save  that  I  would  be  willing  to  suffer  every-
thing for  God."

This  good  man  will  remain  for  hours,  and  some-
times almost  whole  nights,  in  Prayer, — and  that
usually  two,  three,  or  four  times  a  day,  in  the  middle
of  the  Chapel,  notwithstanding  the  greatest  rigors  of
the  cold, his  head,  feet,  and  legs  all  bare,  covered


290  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  29

mais  quafi  toufiours  auec  des  fentimens  de  deuotion
fi  tendres  &  fi  puiffans,  qu'il  dit  n'auoir  point  de
paroles  pour  nous  les  donner  a  entendre.  Souuent,
dit-il,  ie  parle,  &  ie  ne  fcay  ce  que  ie  dis:  On  me
parle  dans  le  fond  [36]  de  mon  ame,  i'entends  ce  qu'on
me  dit,  &  ne  puis  toutefois  le  redire :  alors  ie  fens
comme  vn  feu  dans  mon  cceur,  que  ie  prends  plaifir
d'y  fentir,  &  que  ie  n'ofe  efteindre;  il  me  femble  que
ie  fuis  tout  proche  de  Dieu,  &  qu'il  eft  plus  proche
de  moy,  &  alors  ie  croy  qu'il  y  a  vn  Dieu,  a  caufe
que  ie  le  fens.  Plus  ie  l'aime  plus  ie  le  veux  aimer,
&  il  m'eft  aduis  que  ie  ne  l'aime  pas.  Ie  crains  de
quitter  la  priere,  comme  vn  homme  affame\  qui  crain-
droit  qu'on  ne  luy  of taft  ce  qu'il  mange :  mais  plus
ie  continue,  plus  il  me  femble  que  ie  ne  fais  que
commencer.

A  tout  cela  nous  n'auons  rien  a  dire,  fmon :  Bcatus
quern  tu  crudieris  Domme,  &  de  lege  tud  docueris  eum :
car  ce  bon-homme,  depuis  huidt  ans  qu'il  embraffa  la
foy,  nous  fait  reconnoiftre  en  fa  vie  exemplaire  &
plus  pleine  de  faindtete,  que  ne  font  fes  paroles,  que
Dieu  feul  eft  fon  maiftre.


1646]  RELATION  OF  1643-46  291

only  with  a  skin  of  some  wild  beast;  but  nearly
always  with  sentiments  of  devotion  so  tender  and  so
powerful,  that  he  says  he  has  no  words  with  which
to  make  us  understand  them.  "  Often,"  he  says,  "  I
speak,  and  I  know  not  what  I  say.  Some  one  speaks
to  me  in  the  depth  [36]  of  my  soul ;  I  hear  what  is
said  to  me,  and  yet  I  cannot  say  it  again ;  then  I  feel,
as  it  were,  a  fire  in  my  heart,  which  I  take  pleasure
in  feeling  there,  and  which  I  dare  not  quench.  It
seems  to  me  that  I  am  quite  near  to  God,  and  that  he
is  nearer  to  me ;  and  then  I  believe  that  there  is  a
God,  because  I  feel  him.  The  more  I  love  him,  the
more  I  wish  to  love  him,  and  methinks  I  do  not  love
him.  I  fear  to  cease  prayer,  like  a  famished  man
who  should  fear  lest  one  might  take  from  him  what
he  is  eating;  but,  the  more  I  continue,  the  more  it
seems  to  me  that  I  am  only  beginning."

To  all  that  we  have  nothing  to  say,  unless,  Beat  us
qucm  tu  erudieris,  Domine,  et  de  lege  tud  docueris  eum;
for  this  good  man,  within  the  eight  years  since  he
has  embraced  the  faith,  makes  us  recognize  in  his
exemplary  life,  even  more  filled  with  holiness  than
are  his  words,  that  God  alone  is  his  instructor.


NOTES  TO  VOL  XXIX

(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  number  of  note,  refer  to  pages

of  English  text.)

i  (p.  23). —  This  place  was  on  the  south  shore  of  the  St.  Law-
rence, near  St.  Ignace  Island,  a  little  above  the  mouth  of  Richelieu
River.  Laverdiere  (Champlain,  p.  361,  note)  cites  Sagard  and  other
early  writers  to  show  that  the  names  Cap  de  la  Victoire  and  Cap  au
Massacre  were  given  to  the  place  in  commemoration  of  the  crush-
ing defeat  there  of  the  Iroquois,  by  Champlain  and  his  savage
allies,  in  1610.

2  (p.  49). —  May  18  is  here  mentioned  as  "  the  eve  of  Pentecost;  "
but  the  calendar  for  that  year  places  this  festival  on  May  20.  A
little  farther  on,  June  10  is  given  as  a  day  "  honored  by  the  feast  of
the  Holy  Trinity,"  which,  however,  apparently  refers  only  to  its
being  the  third  Sunday  after  Trinity.

3  (p.  49). —  Reference  is  here  made  to  Lake  George.

4  (p.  49). —  Oiogue:  the  Hudson  River  (vol.  xxviii.,  note  2).
Beauchamp  (Ind.  Names,  p.  85)  defines  this  word  as  "beautiful
river,"  but  admits  that  Bruyas's  definition,  "  at  the  river,"  may  be
preferable.

5  (p.  gj). —  Oneugioure  (also  known  as  Ossernenon):  situated  a
little  S.  E.  of  the  present  Auriesville,  N.  Y. ;  the  scene  of  Jogues's
martyrdom,  a  few  months  later.

0  (P«  53)- — The  "families"  mentioned  by  Jogues  are  subdivi-
sions of  the  tribe,  founded  upon  the  relations  of  consanguinity  among
its  members;  these  divisions  are  variously  termed,  by  modern
writers,  "clans"  and  "gentes,"  and,  in  one  form  or  another,  are
fundamentally  characteristic  of  the  social  organization  of  savage  life
in  all  times  and  countries.  This  organization  among  the  Iroquois
peoples,  from  the  gens  to  the  confederacy,  is  fully  treated  by  L.  H.
Morgan  (himself  an  Iroquois),  in  his  Ancient  Society  (N.  Y.,  1877),
chaps,  ii.-v.  He  defines  the  gens  as  "  a  body  of  consanguinei  de-
scended from  the  same  common  ancestor,  distinguished  by  a  gentile
name,  and  bound  together  by  affinities  of  blood."  Cf.  Powell's
"Kinship  and  the  Tribe;  Kinship  and  the  Clan,"  in  U.  S.  Bur.
Ethnol.  Rep.,  1881-82,  pp.  xxxviii.-lxii.  His  definition  recognizes


294  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES

two  principles  of  organization,  based  respectively  on  enatic  kinship
(reckoning  descent  exclusively  through  females),  and  agnatic  (reck-
oning only  through  males).  The  former  group  Powell  distinguishes
as  "  clan;  "  the  latter,  as  "  gens."

Each  clan  or  gens  had  its  own  distinctive  name  and  symbol, —  the
latter  called  its  "  totem, "  among  the  Algonkin  tribes.  This  totem
was  "  the  mythical  animal  after  whom  the  clan  or  gens  was  named;
and  from  which,  in  the  mythic  philosophy,  it  was  genealogically
descended"  (Brinton).  With  this  idea  of  descent  is  connected  the
worship,  prevalent  in  so  many  savage  tribes,  of  animals  or  of  ances-
tors,— the  two  being  often  synonymous.  Among  the  Iroquois,  there
have  been  eight  different  clans, —  the  only  ones  common,  however,
to  all  of  the  Six  Nations  being  those  of  the  Wolf,  Bear,  and  Turtle.
To  the  Wolf  clan,  among  the  Mohawks,  Jogues  made  a  special  and
valuable  present ;  those  who  killed  him  belonged  to  another  clan.

7  (P-  55)- — The  palm  was  a  measure  of  length,  of  ancient  origin,
and,  as  the  name  implies,  derived  from  the  space  occupied  by  the
human  hand.  From  it  came  the  measure  of  that  name  employed
in  some  parts  of  Southern  Europe.  The  palm  of  Nice  was  261.5
millimeters;  that  of  Sardinia,  248.4  (Littre).

8  (p.  109). —  Concerning  this  seclusion  of  Indian  women,  see  vol.
ix.,  note  23.

9  (p.  123). —  For  information  as  to  Tadoussac  and  its  trade,  see
vol.  ii.,  note  51;  vol.  ix.,  note  4.

10  (p.  125). — Jean,  sire  de  Joinville,  was  a  noted  French  historian
(1224- 1319),  belonging  to  one  of  the  most  illustrious  families  of
Champagne;  see  A.  F.  Didot's  sketch  of  his  life  and  works  in
Hoefer's  Biog.  Ghiirale,  t.  26.  His  principal  work,  and  that  re-
ferred to  in  the  text,  is  E  Histoire  et  chronique  du  tres-chrestien
roy  S.  Eoys  IXe  du  nom  (Poitiers,  1547).

11  (p.  275). —  Dogique:  see  vol.  xxvii.,  note  1.


HDGC'


SSS?


K§&


Sir?*


i
