BBKBc
?CM
"CO
<";
ru
3)
THE  JESUIT  RELATIONS
AND
ALLIED  DOCUMENTS
Vol.  xx
The  edition  consists  of  sev-
en hundred  and  fifty  sets
all  numbered
No.
SM
The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents
Travels  and  Explorations
of  the  Jesuit  Missionaries
in  New  France
1610-1791
THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL-
IAN TEXTS,  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA-
TIONS AND  NOTES  ;  ILLUSTRATED  BY
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES
EDITED  BY
REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES
Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin
Vol.  XX
HURONS  AND  QUEBEC: 1640-1641
Cleveland. Gbe  JBurrows  JBrotbers
Company,  publishers,  mdcccxcviii
Copyright, 1898
BY
The  Burrows  Brothers  Co
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


The  Imperial  Press,  Cleveland


EDITORIAL  STAFF


Editor


Translators


Assistant  Editor
Bibliographical  Adviser


Reuben  Gold  Thwaites
Finlow  Alexander

Percy  Favor  Bicknell

William  Frederic  Giese

Catharine  S.  Kellogg

Crawford  Lindsay

William  Price

Hiram  Allen  Sober

Emma  Helen  Blair

Victor  Hugo  Paltsits


CONTENTS  OF  VOL  XX


Preface  to  Volume  XX

Documents: —
XLI.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe  en  la  Nov-
velle  France,  en  l'annee  1640.  [Chaps.
ix.,  x.  of  Part  II.,  and  postscript,  com-
pleting the  document.]  Jerome  Lale-
mant;  Des  Hurons,  May  27  and  August
3,  1640  ....

XLI  I.  Lettre  a  son  Frere.  Charles  Gamier;
Sainte-Marie  aux  Hurons,  June  23,
1 64 1

XLIII.  Excerpta  Epistola  ad  R.  P.  Mutium
Vitelleschi,  Praepositum  Generalem
Societatis  Jesu,  Romae.  Joannes  de
Brt!beuf;  Kebec,  August  20,  164 1

XLIV.  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe  en  la  Nov-
velle  France,  es  annees  1640.  et  1641.
[Introduction,  and  Chaps,  i.-viii.  of
Part  I.]  Paul  le  Jeune;  Kebec  and
Paris,  undated

Bibliographical  Data:  Volume  XX .

Notes ......


17


88


102


107
301

305


ILLUSTRATION  TO  VOL.  XX


I. Photographic  facsimile  of  title-page,  Relation

of  1640-41  .  .  •  .110


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XX


Following  is  a  synopsis  of  the  documents  contained
in  the  present  volume :

XLI.  The  Relation  of  1640  is  the  joint  product  of
Le  Jeune,  who  wrote  at  Quebec  (under  date  of  Sep-
tember 10)  the  portion  dealing  with  the  field  of  the
lower  St.  Lawrence,  and  of  Jerome  Lalemant,  who
wrote  from  the  Huron  country  (under  date  of  May
27)  of  the  year's  work  in  that  far-away  mission.  In
Vol.  XVIII. ,  we  gave  the  first  ten  chapters  of  Le
Jeune's  narrative  (Part  I.  of  the  document);  in  Vol.
XIX.  this  part  was  concluded,  and  eight  chapters
were  published  of  Lalemant's  report  (Part  II.).  We
herewith  give  Chapters  ix.  and  x.,  thus  closing  the
document.

In  Chapter  ix.,  Lalemant  describes  the  founding  of
the  mission  of  St.  Jean  Baptiste.  At  first,  the  Fa-
thers are  welcomed;  but  soon  their  troubles  begin, —
the  demons  prompt  the  natives  to  perform  all  their
customary  superstitious  rites  more  freely  than  ever,
and  to  drive  out  the  strangers.  A  friendly  chief  calls
a  council  at  which  the  missionaries  may  refute  the
slanders  spread  about  them ;  fortunately,  Joseph
Chihwatenhwa  arrives  in  time  to  speak  at  this  con-
clave, and  his  eloquence  appeases  the  tumult  for  a
season.  As  usual,  most  of  their  converts  are  among
the  dying;  of  these,  is  an  Algonkin  whose  tribe  are
wintering  with  the  Hurons.


10  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XX

The  final  chapter  of  this  Relation  describes  the
new  mission  to  the  Tobacco  Nation,  conducted  by
Gamier  and  Jogues ;  ' '  this  mission  has  been  the
richest  of  all,  since  crosses  and  sufferings  have  been
most  abundant  therein."  There  the  Fathers  are  per-
secuted on  every  side, —  they  can  with  difficulty  obtain
sufficient  food  to  support  life;  they  are  feared  and
reviled  by  almost  all  the  people;  they  are  driven
from  village  to  village,  sometimes  forced  to  leave  a
house  in  the  middle  of  the  night ;  and  are  repeatedly
threatened  with  death.  Many  bands  from  the  Neu-
tral Nation  flee  hither  for  refuge  from  the  famine
that  prevails  in  their  own  country,  and  many  die  of
hunger ;  but  the  Fathers  succeed  in  baptizing  nearly
all  of  these  unfortunates,  thus  ensuring  their  future
blessedness.  While  thus  wandering  through  the
villages  of  the  Tobacco  Nation,  the  missionaries  re-
ceive an  unexpected  reinforcement  in  the  good  Chih-
watenhwa,  who  leaves  his  own  family  to  God's  care,
that  he  may  join  and  aid  the  Fathers  in  their  itiner-
ancy. While  the  smallpox  epidemic  was  at  its  height,
these  Jesuits  were  in  excellent  health ;  but,  now  that
it  is  decreasing,  they  are  attacked  by  scurvy,  but
fortunately  recover.

Lalemant  had  closed  his  narrative  May  27,  and,
according  to  custom,  sent  it  to  his  superior  (Vimont)
by  the  spring  fleet  of  canoes  which  proceeded  down
the  Ottawa  River  to  the  great  fur  market  at  Three
Rivers.  He  was  able,  this  year,  to  send  a  postscript
dated  August  3,  which  reached  Quebec  before  the
Relation  for  the  year  had  been  forwarded  to  France
(in  September).  This  letter  relates  the  sad  death  of
Joseph  Chihwatenhwa,  who  had  been  killed  and
scalped  by  the  Iroquois. This  is  a  grief  to  the  mis-


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XX  11


sionaries,  but  they  console  themselves  by  saying:
"  Since  the  Saints  have  more  power  when  they  are
in  heaven  than  here  below  on  earth,  we  are  bound
to  believe  that  we  have  gained  more  than  we  have
lost  by  his  death."

XLII.  This  is  a  letter  written  by  Father  Charles
Gamier,  from  the  mission  of  Ste.  Marie,  in  the  Huron
country,  under  date  of  June  23,  1641,  to  one  of  his
brothers  in  France.  After  many  pious  exhortations
and  reflections,  and  a  reference  to  another  brother,
"  a  prodigal,"  the  writer  describes  missionary  work
among  the  savages,  mentioning  the  frequent  hard-
ships and  dangers  to  which  the  Jesuits  are  exposed.
He  closes  with  a  request  that  his  brother  will  send
him  some  medicinal  seeds,  with  instructions  as  to
their  use  and  culture.

XLIII.  This  is  a  letter  by  Brebeuf  to  the  Father
General,  written  at  Quebec,  August  20,  1641.  Only
fragments  thereof  have  been  preserved  to  us,  and
these  chiefly  relative  to  the  Huron  mission.  He
praises  the  peace,  strict  discipline,  and  order  that  pre-
vail in  the  missionary  household,  especially  among
their  donnes.  The  Huron  church  contains  about
sixty  members, — a  number  slowly  increasing.  The
two  new  missions  —  to  the  Algonkins  and  the  Neutral
Nation  —  are  mentioned;  and  the  writer  praises
Chaumonot's  zeal,  and  his  ability  in  learning  the
native  tongues.

XLIV.  Although  Vimont  is  now  superior  of  the
Jesuit  missions  in  New  France,  the  Quebec  portion
(Part  I.)  of  the  Relation  of  1640-41  is  written  by  Le
Jeune,  and  the  Huron  narrative  (Part  II.)  by  Jerome
Lalemant, — the  same  as  with  the  preceding  Relation,


12  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XX


of  1640.  In  the  present  volume,  we  give  the  first
eight  chapters  of  Part  I.,  leaving  the  document  to  be
concluded  in  our  Vol.  XXI.

Le  Jeune's  narrative  is  without  date;  Lalemant's
was  concluded  May  16,  1641,  and  sent  down  by  the
spring  fleet  to  Quebec.  Le  Jeune  was  despatched  to
Paris  in  the  autumn,  as  an  envoy  from  the  governor
and  colonists,  on  various  matters  touching  their  in-
terests, and  took  with  him  the  MS.  of  the  Relation  of
1640-41.  In  an  introductory  note,  written  in  Paris,
he  explains  this  circumstance.  In  the  Relation  prop-
er, he  begins  by  describing  the  work  of  the  Ursulines ;
they  not  only  teach  the  French  girls  of  the  colony,  but
have  a  little  seminary  of  young  Indian  girls.  One  of
these  has  married,  and  was  given  her  clothes  and
furniture  by  the  nuns ;  four  others  are  nearly  ready
to  marry,  and  donations  are  needed  for  aiding  them.
Two  more  nuns,  who  could  furnish  some  funds  for
the  support  of  the  convent,  would  be  welcomed.  Ex-
tracts from  the  letters  of  the  nuns  are  given,  showing
the  intelligence,  amiability,  and  piety  that  character-
ize these  Indian  girls.  They  are  quite  weaned  from
savage  customs,  and  even  from  their  own  mothers.
Madame  de  la  Peltrie  sustains  this  enterprise  with
undiminished  ardor,  and  does  all  she  can  for  the
Indian  families  as  well.

Le  Jeune  then  narrates  the  progress  of  affairs  at
St.  Joseph  de  Sillery,  the  new  settlement  of  Indian
converts.  The  Christians  are  zealous,  and  resolve
(unknown  to  the  Fathers)  that  any  Indian  in  this
village  who  commits  a  fault,  however  slight,  shall  be
punished  by  imprisonment  and  fasting.  Several
instances  are  given  of  their  enforcement  of  this  rule, —
sending  the  offender  to  Quebec,  with  a  request  to  the


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XX  13

governor  that  he  be  placed  in  a  dungeon.  Some,
indeed,  are  so  eager  to  defend  the  faith  before  unbe-
lievers, that  they  provoke  the  latter  to  rage ;  and  the
Fathers  find  it  necessary  to  recommend  to  them  more
discretion  and  mildness.  The  Algonkins  of  the  Island
endeavor  to  beguile  these  Christians  away  from  St.
Joseph,  but  they  refuse  to  leave  the  place.  One
young  woman  is  full  of  grief  because  she  had  chosen
marriage,  instead  of  becoming  a  nun.  A  man,  who
has  not  yet  received  instruction,  abandons  the  use  of
tobacco,  and  the  "  eat- all "  feasts  and  other  supersti-
tions ;  he  also  begins  to  preach  to  his  countrymen  that
they  must  believe  in  God  and  listen  to  the  mission-
aries. He  induces  the  Tadoussac  Indians  to  send  to
Quebec  for  Jesuit  teachers;  and  when  one  is  sent
there,  "  this  good  Neophyte,"  armed  with  a  pistol,
stands  guard  over  the  Father  when  he  goes  for  a
walk,  lest  some  harm  should  befall  him.  He  is,  after
a  time,  duly  instructed  and  baptized;  and  Charles
Meiachkawat  becomes  a  notable  and  influential
Christian.

Le  Jeune  proceeds  to  give  detailed  accounts  of
various  conversions,  baptisms,  and  pious  acts  among
the  neophytes  both  at  Sillery  and  Three  Rivers.
One  of  these,  named  Achilles,  "  was  very  haughty
before  his  baptism,  but  God  has  changed  him  into  a
little  lamb."  He  refuses  to  leave  St.  Joseph  with
Makheabichtichiou, —  a  quasi  convert,  mentioned  in
earlier  Relations;  the  latter  "  is  wretchedly  slain
in  the  country  of  the  Abnaquiois,  and  his  family
is  ruined."  Another  notable  convert  is  a  Huron,
who  has  come  down  to  Quebec  with  Brebeuf  and  Du
Peron ;  he  is  baptized  at  Sillery  with  great  ceremony,
as  Charles  Sondatsaa. Montmagny,  who  acts  as  his


14  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XX

sponsor,  presents  to  him  a  handsome  arquebus,  and
exhorts  him  to  spread  the  faith  among  his  country-
men ;  while  the  Sillery  converts  give  him  powder  to
use  with  his  gun.  He  is  very  grateful,  and  avers
that  he  will  never  give  up  the  faith  he  has  professed.
"  We  have  nothing,"  he  says,  "  so  precious  as  our
porcelain  collars;  if  I  were  to  see  a  score  of  them
glittering  before  me,  to  entice  me  into  sin,  I  would
turn  away  my  eyes,  and  my  heart  would  loathe  them.
In  our  Villages,  we  value  highly  certain  garments
and  robes ;  if  what  we  call  beauty  should  present  me
with  one  of  these  robes,  in  order  to  corrupt  me,  I
would  say  to  her,  '  If  the  God  whom  I  adore  wishes
me  to  use  these  garments,  he  will  cause  me  to  find
them  by  other  ways, —  sin  is  banished  from  my  heart ;
it  must  never  reenter  there. '  "

The  narrator,  commenting  on  the  influence  of  these
converts,  says:  "  Indeed,  I  have  observed  that  one
truly  Christian  Savage,  who  is  zealous  for  the  faith,
accomplishes  more  among  his  people  than  do  three
Jesuits."  He  next  describes  the  good  work  that  the
Hospital  nuns  are  performing,  at  their  house  near
Sillery.  They  not  only  aid  the  savages  in  illness,
but  through  this  are  doing  much  to  keep  them  seden-
tary, as  the  missionaries  desire.  Aid  has  generously
been  given  to  the  hospital  by  a  lady  of  rank  in
France,  by  the  Hundred  Associates,  and  by  another
friend.  The  Sisters  gather  in  old  persons  who  have
been  abandoned  by  the  savages;  they  care  for  all
who  are  sick,  both  French  and  Indians;  they  succor
many  needy  poor ;  and  even  instruct  several  children
who  are  too  far  away  to  go  to  the  Ursulines  at  Que-
bec. They  have  cared  for  sixty-eight  sick  persons
during  the  past  year,  of  whom  only  four  have  died,


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XX  15

and  seven  have  been  baptized.  The  Indians  show  in
sickness  astonishing  patience  and  gentleness,  and
often  most  pious  devotion.  The  Sillery  savages  are
in  many  ways  under  the  care  of  the  nuns ;  and  vari-
ous instances  of  their  simplicity  and  naivete"  are
recounted.  Accustomed  to  divide  with  one  another
their  food,  they  also  think  it  necessary  to  share  the
medicines  prescribed, —  all  impartially  drinking  from
the  cup  allotted  to  one.  A  portrait  of  the  Duchess
d'Aiguillon  is  sent  to  the  hospital,  and  the  women
and  children  all  imitate  the  posture  of  prayer  in
which  the  lady  is  depicted;  then,  bowing  low  to  her
picture,  they  kiss  it  "  with  more  simplicity  and  can-
dor than  grace.  It  is  not  the  custom  of  the  savages
to  salute  one  another  with  a  kiss ;  but  as  Madame  de
la  Peltrie  often  embraces  and  kisses  these  poor  girls
on  meeting  them,  these  good  creatures  imagine  that
they  must  imitate  her,  in  order  to  do  right."  The
death  of  one  of  the  nuns  is  recorded  —  Mother  de
Sainte  Marie,  "  a  dear  dove,"  whose  health  has  been
frail  during  all  her  stay  in  Canada;  she  dies  (March
5)  apparently  from  consumption,  but  her  physician
states  that  "  she  had  three  mortal  diseases."

The  writer  proceeds  to  relate  the  history  of  the
mission  at  Three  Rivers,  which  "  has  been  beaten
this  year  by  more  kinds  of  winds  than  pilots  and
mariners  have  marked  on  their  wind  roses  or  on  their
charts."  Three  Rivers  is  a  rendezvous  for  all  the
tribes  of  the  upper  St.  Lawrence  and  Ottawa  region,
who  are  not  only  often  ignorant  of  the  missionaries  and
their  designs,  but  are  usually  involved  in  jealousies
and  quarrels  with  one  another.  They  also  practice
the  pagan  superstitions  and  customs  that  the  Fathers
have  labored  to  suppress  among  their  neophytes,  and


1  PREFACE  TO  VOL.  XX

thus  greatly  disturb  the  little  church  at  this  place.
Father  Buteux,  in  attempting  to  stop  one  of  these
heathen  rites,  is  roughly  treated,  and  threatened  with
death.  The  church  now  numbers  about  eighty  per-
sons, many  of  whom  console  the  Fathers  by  their
steadfastness  in  the  truth.  On  the  whole,  "  in  spite
of  the  attacks  of  the  Devil,  the  Unbelievers  are  open-
ing their  eyes  by  degrees,  so  that  they  are  becoming
softened  and  tamed,  giving  us  hopes  of  their  con-
version."

A  beginning  is  made  in  reaching  the  Attikamegues,
a  peaceful  tribe,  who  occasionally  "  make  their  ap-
pearance like  flashes  of  lightning  "  at  Three  Rivers,
for  trading.  Some  of  these  Indians  are  baptized,
and  thus  carry  news  of  the  faith  to  their  tribesmen.
Detailed  accounts  are  given  of  various  baptisms  at
Three  Rivers ;  among  these  is  Pieskars  (Piescaret),  a
chief  of  the  Island  tribe,  a  man  of  much  influence
and  ability.

The  following  have  recentlv  rendered  valuable
assistance  to  the  editor,  in  addition  to  those  already
mentioned:  Mgr.  C.  A.  Marois,  vicar-general  of  the
archdiocese  of  Quebec;  Rev.  B.  Th.  Garneau,  secre-
tary to  the  archbishop  of  Quebec;  Rev.  A.  Lalle-
mand,  S.J.,  Societe  des  Bollandistes,  Brussels,  Bel-
gium; Rev.  Dr.  S.  H.  Frisbee,  S.J.,  of  Woodstock
College,  Woodstock,  Md. ;  Rev.  T.  Charaux,  S.J.,
Sault-au-Recollet,  P.  0. ;  Rev.  C.  M.  Widman,  S.J.,
of  St.  Charles  College,  Grand  Coteau,  La. ;  Hon.
John  Russell  Young,  librarian  of  Congress,  Washing-
ton; and  Richard  R.  Elliott,  Esq.,  Detroit.

R.  G.  T.

Madison,  Wis.,  April,  1898.


XLI (concluded)

Relation  of  1640

Paris:  SEBASTIEN  CRAMOISY, 1641


Chaps,  ix.,  x.  of  Part  II.,  completing  the  document.  The
earlier  portions  of  this  document  will  be  found  in  Volumes
XVIII.  and  XIX.


18  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~ SUITES [Vol.  2a


[145]  CHAPITRE  IX.

DE LA MISSION DE SAINCT IEAN BAPTISTE AUX
ARENDARONONS.

LES  Arendaronons  font  vne  des  quatre  nations  qni
compofent  ceux  qu'a  proprement  parler  on
nomme  Hurons :  elle  eft  la  plus  Orientale  de
toutes,  &  eft  celle  qui  la  premiere  a  decouuert  les
Francois,  &  a  qui  en  fuite  appartenoit  la  traitte  felon
les  loix  du  pays.  lis  en  pouuoient  iouir  feuls,  neant-
moins  ils  trouuerent  bon  d'en  faire  part  aux  autres
[146]  nations,  fe  retenant  toutefois  plus  particuliere-
ment  la  quality  de  nos  aliez,  &  fe  portans  en  cette
confideration  a  la  protection  des  Francois,  lors  que
quelque  mallieur  eft  arriue.  C'eft  oil  feu  monfieur
de  Champlain  s'arrefta  plus  long  temps  au  voyage
qu'il  fit  icy  haut,  il  y  a  enuiron  22.  ans,  &  oil  fa
reputation  vit  encore  dans  l'efprit  de  ces  peuples
barbares,  qui  honorent  mefme  apres  tant  d'annees
plufieurs  belles  vertus  qu'ils  admiroient  en  luy,  &
particulierement  fa  chaftete  &  continence  enuers  les
femmes.  Pleuft  a  Dieu  que  tous  les  Francois  qui
les  premiers  font  venus  en  ces  contrees  luy  euffent
efte'  femblables:  nous  n'en  rougirions  pas  fi  fouuent
aupres  de  nos  Sauuages,  qui  nous  obie<5tent  les  impu-
dicitez  &  les  desbauches  de  plufieurs,  comme  fi  c'eftoit
vne  marque  infaillible  que  ce  dont  nous  les  menacons
de  l'enfer  ne  foient  rien  que  des  fables,  puis  que  ces
premiers  Francois  qu'ils  ont  cogneu  n'en  auoient
point  de  crainte.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  19


[145]  CHAPTER  IX.

OF THE MISSION OF "  SAINT JEAN BAPTISTE TO THE

ARENDARONONS.

THE  Arendaronons  are  one  of  the  four  nations
which  compose  those  whom,  properly  speaking,
we  call  Hurons ;  it  is  the  most  Eastern  nation  of
all,  and  is  the  one  which  first  encountered  the  French,
and  to  which,  in  consequence,  the  trade  belonged,
according  to  the  laws  of  the  country.  They  could
enjoy  this  alone;  nevertheless,  they  found  it  good  to
share  it  with  the  other  [146]  nations, — retaining  for
themselves,  however,  more  especially  the  character
of  our  allies ;  and  on  this  account  inclining  to  protect
the  French  when  some  disaster  has  happened.  This
is  where  the  late  monsieur  de  Champlain  stopped
longest  on  the  voyage  that  he  made  up  here,  about
22  years  ago;  and  where  his  reputation  still  lives  in
the  minds  of  these  barbarous  peoples, —  who  honor,
even  after  so  many  years,  many  excellent  virtues
which  they  admired  in  him,  and  in  particular  his
chastity  and  continence  with  respect  to  the  women.
Would  to  God  that  all  the  French  who  first  came  to
these  regions  had  been  like  him !  we  would  not  so
often  blush  for  them  in  the  presence  of  our  Savages,
who  oppose  to  us  the  immodesties  and  the  debauches
of  several,  as  if  this  were  an  infallible  proof,  that
what  we  threaten  them  with,  concerning  hell,  is
nothing  but  fables, —  inasmuch  as  those  first  French-
men whom  they  knew  had  no  fear  thereof.


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE'SUITES [Vol.  20

Cette  alliance  h  particuliere  que  ces  peuples  Aren-
daronons  ont  auec  les  Francois  nous  auoit  fouuent
donne"  la  penfee  [147]  de  leur  aller  communiquer  les
richeffes  de  1'Euangile,  mais  le  deffaut  de  langue
nous  auoit  toufiours  empefche  de  pouffer  iufques  la,
nous  eftant  trouuez  engagez  de  premier  abord  a
noftre  premiere  demeure,  qui  efhoit  fituee  a  l'autre
extremity  du  pays  toute  oppofee.

Cette  annee  nous  eftant  trouuez  affez  forts  pour
cette  entreprife,  nous  y  auons  commence  vne  miffion,
qui  a  eu  dans  fon  reffort  trois  bourgs:  de  S.  lean
Baptiite,  de  S.  Ioachim,  &  de  Saindte  Elizabeth.  Les
Peres  Antoine  Daniel  &  Simon  le  Moine  en  ont  eu  le
foin.

lis  firent  leur  premiere  demeure  &  la  plus  ordinaire
dans  le  bourg  plus  peuple  de  S.  lean  Baptifte,  y  ayant
plus  a  trauailler:  D' abord  ils  expoferent  en  plein
confeil  le  deffein  de  leur  venue,  qui  fut  approuue
&  receu  vniuerfellement  de  tout  le  monde:  on  ne
parloit  rien  que  de  croire  &  d'embraffer  la  Foy,  les
cabanes  leur  eftoient  ouuertes,  &  mefme  a  l'enuy  l'vn
de  l'autr[e] :  ces  bonnes  gens  les  venoient  inuiter,
&  leur  prefentoient  auec  vn  cceur  d'amy  toutes  les
douceurs  dont  ils  peurent  s'imaginer.

[148]  La  maladie  qui  auoit  defia  commence  dans  ce
bourg,  fe  rengregea  apres  l'arriuee  de  nos  Peres:
l'affedtion  &  la  confiance  de  ces  pauures  barbares  fem-
bloit  en  mefme  temps  f'accroiftre  en  leur  endroit:  vn
ou  deux  grains  de  raifms  fees,  plein  le  paulme  de  la
main  d'eau  a  demy  fucr6e,  l'afiiitance  qu'on  tafchoit
de  donner  aux  malades  foit  par  confeil,  foit  allant
demander  l'aumofne  dans  les  cabanes  des  plus  riches
pour  ceux  qui  eftoient  dans  la  pauurete\  e'eftoient


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  21

This  so  special  alliance  which  these  Arendaronon
peoples  have  with  the  French  had  often  given  us  the
thought  [147]  of  going  to  impart  to  them  the  riches
of  the  Gospel;  but  our  deficiency  in  the  language
had  always  prevented  us  from  advancing  to  that
point, —  having  found  ourselves  occupied  from  the
outset  in  our  first  abiding  place,  which  was  situated
at  the  other  end  of  the  country,  quite  opposite  to
these.

This  year,  having  found  ourselves  strong  enough
for  this  enterprise,  we  began  a  mission  there,  which
has  had  three  villages  in  its  department, —  St.  Jean
Baptiste,1  St.  Joachim,  and  Sainte  Elizabeth.2  Fa-
thers Antoine  Daniel  and  Simon  le  Moine  have  had
the  care  of  them.

They  made  their  chief  and  most  usual  abode  in
the  more  populous  village  of  St.  Jean  Baptiste,  hav-
ing most  work  to  do  there.  At  the  first,  they  set
forth  in  open  council  the  purpose  of  their  coming,
which  was  approved  and  universally  received  by
every  one :  people  spoke  of  nothing  but  believing,
and  embracing  the  Faith ;  the  cabins  were  open  to
them,  and  even  emulously  so:  these  good  people
came  to  invite  them,  and  offered  them  with  a  friend-
ly heart  all  the  kindnesses  they  could  imagine.

[148]  The  disease,  which  had  already  begun  in  this
village,  increased  after  the  arrival  of  our  Fathers:
the  affection  and  the  confidence  of  these  poor  barba-
rians seemed  at  the  same  time  to  increase  toward
them ;  one  or  two  raisins,  the  palm  of  the  hand  full
of  half-sweetened  water,  the  assistance  which  they
tried  to  give  the  sick,  either  by  counsel  or  by  going
to  ask  alms  in  the  cabins  of  the  more  wealthy  for
those  who  were  in  poverty, —  these  were  the  charms


-  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

des  charmes  d'vne  charite"  qui  iamais  n'auoit  efte"  veue
dans  ces  bourgs.

Cependant  on  faifoit  doucement  les  affaires  de
Dieu,  les  enfans  eftoient  baptifez  lors  qu'on  les
iugeoit  en  danger,  les  adultes  receuoient  a  cceur
ouuert  les  paroles  du  ciel,  &  a  peine  s'en  trouuoit-il
qui  dans  le  peril  de  la  mort  ne  voulut  f onger  au  falut
de  fon  ame:  les  parens  mefmes  lors  qu'ils  auoient
quelque  malade  venoient  en  aduertir  nos  Peres.

Quelques  effects  de  la  bonte  de  Dieu  fur  ces
pauures  barbares  leur  redoublerent  encore  l'affediion
qu'ils  auoient  pour  nous.  Vn  ieune  homme  des  plus
grands  [149]  chaff eurs  &  guerriers  du  pays,  &  des
mieux  aparentez  de  tout  ce  bourg,  fuft  mis  li  bas  par
la  maladie  qu'on  defefperoit  entierement  deluy;  il
fuft  inftruit  &  baptife  par  vn  de  nos  Peres,  qui  fit  la
vne  courfe  fur  la  fin  du  mois  de  Septembre:  peu
apres  il  retourne  en  fante  contre  toute  efperance:
mais  il  demeure  aueugle,  &  il  luy  refte  vne  fluxion
infuportable  qui  luy  gafle  les  yeux.  Vn  mois  apres
nos  deux  miffionnaires  eftant  arriuez  en  ce  bourg  vifi-
terent  ce  Neophyte,  il  benift  Dieu  d'eftre  guery,
mais  il  deplore  fa  mifere  d'auoir  perdu  la  veue,  fans
laquelle  il  ne  peut  plus  aymer  la  vie :  on  l'exhorte  a
efperer  en  Dieu  a  qui  rien  n'eft  impoffible ;  il  pro-
tefle  qu'il  croit,  en  preuue  de  fa  croyance  il  fe  defait
d'vne  tortue,  qui  eft  comme  le  luth  &  le  violon  de
leur  concerts,  dont  il  fe  feruoit  a  la  chaffe  pour  inuo-
quer  l'affiftance  de  fon  demon :  on  luy  applique  fur
les  yeux  de  l'eau  benifte  auec  vn  figne  de  croix.  pro-
ferant  ces  paroles :  Celuy  que  tu  as  pris  pour  maiftre,
Noftre  Seigneur,  le  Pere,  le  Fils,  &  le  S.  Efprit  te
gueriffe : II  pleuft  a  Dieu  benir  fa  Foy,  la  fluxion


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  23

of a charity which  had  never been  seen  in  these
villages.

Meanwhile,  the  affairs  of  God  were  quietly  man-
aged; the  children  were  baptized  when  they  were
considered  in  danger ;  the  adults  received  with  open
heart  the  words  of  heaven,  and  hardly  was  one  found
who  in  the  peril  of  death  would  not  think  of  the  sal-
vation of  his  soul ;  even  the  relatives,  when  they  had
some  sick  patient,  would  come  to  notify  our  Fathers
thereof.

Some  effects  of  God's  goodness  over  these  poor
barbarians  increased  still  more  their  affection  for  us.
A  young  man, —  one  of  the  greatest  [149]  hunters
and  warriors  in  the  country,  and  one  of  the  best
connected  in  all  this  village, —  was  brought  so  low
by  the  disease  that  they  wholly  despaired  of  him ;  he
was  instructed  and  baptized  by  one  of  our  Fathers,
who  made  a  journey  thither  toward  the  end  of  the
month  of  September.  Shortly  after,  he  returns  to
health,  contrary  to  all  hope ;  but  he  remains  blind,
and  there  stays  with  him  an  intolerable  inflammation
which  spoils  his  eyes.  A  month  later,  our  two  mis-
sionaries, having  arrived  in  this  village,  visited  this
Neophyte :  he  blesses  God  that  he  is  cured,  but  he
bewails  his  misery  for  having  lost  his  sight,  without
which  he  can  no  longer  love  life.  They  exhort  him
to  hope  in  God,  with  whom  nothing  is  impossible ;  he
protests  that  he  believes ;  in  proof  of  his  belief,  he
gives  up  a  tortoise  shell, —  which  is,  as  it  were,  the
lute  and  the  violin  of  their  concerts, —  which  he  used
in  hunting,  in  order  to  invoke  the  aid  of  his  demon.3
They  apply  to  his  eyes  some  holy  water,  with  a  sign
of  the  cross,  uttering  these  words:  "  May  he  whom
you  have  taken  for  master,  Our  Lord, —  the  Father,


24  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

fe  [150]  diffippe,  la  douleur  ceffe,  il  n'y  a  plus  d'aueu-
glement,  la  veue  retourne  en  fon  entier.  II  luy
reftoit  encore  quelques  fiftules  fur  le  vifage  &  fur  le
corps :  on  luy  laiff a  quelque  peu  de  cette  eau  benifte
pour  s'en  feruir  de  temps  en  temps,  inuoquant  Noftre
Seigneur,  l'efpace  de  neuf  iours,  en  l'honneur  des
neuf  chceurs  des  Anges,  auec  promeffe  d'en  venir
rendre  grace  a  Dieu  dans  la  Chappelle  que  nos  Peres
auoient  dreffe  dans  la  cabane  du  principal  capitaine
de  ce  bourg  chez  lequel  ils  eftoient  logez.  Le  ciel
continua  fes  faueurs  fur  ce  pauure  ieune  homme,  il
fe  trouua  du  tout  guary  auant  le  temps,  &  pour  n'en
eftre  pas  ingrat  il  fit  vn  feflin  folemnel,  oil  le  monde
eftant  affemble,  il  protefta  publiquement  qu'il  tenoit
du  Dieu  des  croyans  la  veue,  la  fante,  &  la  vie.  Ce
ieune  homme  s'appelle  Ononrouten,  &  fut  nomme
Charles  en  fon  baptefme.

Les  faueurs  de  Dieu  n'en  demeurent  pas  la ;  vne
fienne  petite  fille  tomba  malade  &  en  danger  de  mort,
pour  vn  certain  charbon  qui  la  mangeoit  iufques  aux
os:  il  prie  qu'on  la  baptife,  on  ne  peut  pas  [151]  luy
refufer,  elle  fe  trouue  apres  fon  baptefme  entierement
guerie.

Vne  autre  femme  de  la  mefme  cabane  efloit  fuffo-
qu6e  d'vne  cholique  furieufe  qui  luy  fit  rendre  par
des  vomiffemens  eftranges  tout  ce  qu'elle  auoit  dans
le  corps :  apres  cela  elle  perdit  le  f entiment,  &  defia
fes  parens  la  comptoient  pour  morte.  Nos  Peres  y
accoururent  &  luy  mirent  deuant  les  yeux  vne  image
de  Noftre  Seigneur ;  on  eft  tout  eftonne  que  les  fens
luy  reuiennent,  elle  parle  &  entend,  on  la  baptife
auec  toute  forte  de  fatisf action.  Apres  cela  on  luy
donne  vn  peu  d'eau  benifte,  &  on  l'exhorte  a  mettre


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  25


the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  cure  you."  It  pleased
God  to  bless  his  Faith;  the  inflammation  [150]  is  scat-
tered, the  pain  ceases,  there  is  no  more  blindness,
sight  returns  entire.  There  still  remained  to  him
some  sores  on  the  face  and  on  the  body ;  they  left  with
him  a  little  of  that  holy  water  to  use  from  time  to
time, —  invoking  Our  Lord  for  the  space  of  nine  days,
in  honor  of  the  nine  choirs  of  Angels, —  with  the
promise  to  come  and  render  thanks  to  God  in  the
Chapel  which  our  Fathers  had  erected  in  the  cabin  of
the  principal  captain  of  that  village,  with  whom  they
were  lodged.  Heaven  continued  its  favors  upon  this
poor  young  man ;  he  found  himself  altogether  cured
before  the  time,  and,  in  order  not  to  be  thankless,  he
made  a  solemn  feast,  at  which,  the  company  being
assembled,  he  openly  declared  that  he  had  from  the
God  of  the  believers  his  sight,  his  health,  and  his
life.  This  young  man  is  called  Ononrouten,  and  he
was  named  Charles  at  his  baptism.

The  favors  of  God  do  not  stop  there.  A  little  girl
of  his  fell  sick,  and  into  danger  of  death,  from  a  cer-
tain carbuncle  which  was  consuming  her  even  to  the
bone;  he  begs  them  to  baptize  her  —  they  cannot
[151]  refuse  him;  after  her  baptism  she  finds  herself
entirely  cured.

Another  woman  of  the  same  cabin  was  oppressed
by  a  violent  colic,  which  made  her  yield  up,  by
strange  vomitings,  everything  that  she  had  in  her
body :  after  that,  she  lost  feeling,  and  her  kinsmen
already  accounted  her  dead.  Our  Fathers  hastened
thither,  and  put  before  her  eyes  an  image  of  Our
Lord;  they  are  utterly  astonished  that  her  senses
come  back  to  her, —  she  speaks  and  hears;  they  bap-
tize her  with  entire  satisfaction. After  that, they


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

fa  confiance  en  Dieu.  Le  lendemain  elle  eft  fur  pied,
elle  trauaille  comme  auparauant,  &  dit  tout  haut  a
tout  le  monde  que  c'eft  Dieu  feul  qui  l'a  guerie.
Elle  fut  nommee  Marie  en  fon  baptifme,  fon  nom
Huron  eit  Atatafe\

Chez  l'hofte  oil  logeoient  nos  Peres,  deux  y  receu-
rent  vne  femblable  guerifon,  &  pour  adtion  de  grace
les  parens  firent  deux  feftins  publics  a  la  Chreftiente,
ou  au  lieu  de  leurs  chanfons  de  guerre  ou  de  fonges,
le  Pater  nojler  en  Huron  y  [152]  fut  chante,  &  quel-
ques  autres  prieres,  qui  rauirent  en  admiration  toute
raffiftance.  Vne  voix  Francoife  qui  a  de  l'liarmonie
l'emporte  au  deffus  de  tous  leurs  heurlemens.

Ouelques  autres  coups  du  ciel  femblables  a  ceux
cy,  retentirent  bien  haut  par  toutes  les  cabanes,  ou
en  fuitte  nos  Peres  eftoient  receus  &  veus  d'vn  ceil
qui  n'auoit  du  tout  rien  de  Sauuage.

La  maladie  ne  laiffe  pas  d'y  faire  fes  rauages,  tout
ce  beau  &  grand  bourg  deuient  vn  hofpital  funefte.

C'euft  efte  bien  merueille  fi  les  puiffances  de  l'en-
fer  n'euffent  point  trauerfe  les  affaires  de  Dieu:  il
faut  bien  que  le  diable  deffende  fon  royaume  qu'il  a
poffede  de  tout  temps,  &  ce  n'eft  pas  fans  refiftance
qu'il  en  doit  eftre  expulfe.

Vn  homme  de  ce  mefme  bourg  eftoit  durant  tout
ce  temps  la  occupe  a  la  pefche,  vn  demon  s'apparut
a  luy  fous  la  forme  d'vn  beau  &  grand  ieune  homme :
Ne  crains  point,  dit  cet  efprit  fuperbe,  ie  suis  le
maiftre  de  la  terre  que  vous  autres  Hurons  honorez
fous  le  nom  de  Ioufkeha,  c'eft  moy  que  les  Francois
[153]  appellent  mal  a  propos  Iefus,  mais  ils  ne  me
cognoiffent  pas.  Pay  pitie  de  voftre  pays  que  i'ay
pris  foubs  m'a  protection,  ie  te  viens  enfeigner  &  les


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  27

give  her  a  little  holy  water,  and  they  exhort  her  to
put  her  trust  in  God.  The  next  day  she  is  on  her
feet, —  she  works  as  before,  and  says  aloud  to  every
one  that  it  is  God  alone  who  has  cured  her.  She  was
named  Marie  at  her  baptism;  her  Huron  name  is
Atatase\

With  the  host  with  whom  our  Fathers  lodged,  two
received  a  similar  cure,  and  by  way  of  thanksgiving
the  parents  made  two  public  feasts  in  the  Christian
style, —  at  which,  instead  of  their  war  songs  or  songs
of  dreams,  the  Pater  noster  in  Huron  [152]  was  sung,
and  some  other  prayers,  which  carried  away  all  those
present,  in  admiration.  A  French  voice  with  har-
mony in  it  excels  all  their  howlings.

Some  other  acts  of  heaven,  similar  to  these,  were
loudly  sounded  through  all  the  cabins, —  where,  in
consequence,  our  Fathers  were  received  and  regarded
with  an  eye  which  had  no  Savage  aspect  whatever.

The  disease,  nevertheless,  makes  its  ravages  there;
this  entire  village,  flourishing  and  large,  is  becoming
a  woeful  hospital.

It  would  have  been  a  wonder  indeed,  if  the  powers
of  hell  had  not  crossed  the  affairs  of  God ;  the  devil
must  needs  defend  his  kingdom  which  he  has  pos-
sessed from  all  time,  and  it  is  not  without  resistance
that  he  is  to  be  expelled  from  it.

A  man  of  this  same  village  was,  during  all  that  time,
engaged  in  fishing ;  a  demon  appeared  to  him  under
the  form  of  a  tall  and  handsome  young  man.  "  Fear
not, ' '  said  this  haughty  spirit ;  "  I  am  the  master  of
the  earth,  whom  you  Hurons  honor  under  the  name
of  Iouskeha;4  I  am  the  one  whom  the  French  [153]
wrongly  call  Jesus,  but  they  do  not  know  me.  I  have
pity  on  your  country,  which  I  have  taken  under  my


28  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  20

cauf es  &  les  remedes  de  voflre  mal-heur :  ce  font  les
eftrangers  qui  feuls  en  font  la  caufe;  ils  courent
maintenant  deux  a  deux  par  tout  le  pays  auec  deffein
de  refpandre  le  mal  par  tout:  ils  n'en  demeureront
pas  la,  apres  cette  verole  qui  maintenant  depeuple
vos  cabanes,  fuiurot  de  certaines  choliques  qui  en
moins  de  trois  iours  emporteront  tous  ceux  que  cette
maladie  n'aura  pas  enleue\  Vous  pouuez  preuenir  ce
mal-heur;  chaff ez  de  voftre  bourg  les  deux  robes
noires  qui  y  font.  Pour  ceux  qui  maintenant  font
attaquez  de  la  verole,  ie  veux  que  tu  me  ferue  a  les
guerir :  fais  quantite  d'vne  telle  eau,  cours  au  pluftoft
au  bourg,  &  dis  aux  anciens  qu'ils  portent  &  diftri-
buent  cette  potion  pendant  toute  la  nuict.,  &  alors
toute  la  ieuneffe  &  les  Capitaines  de  guerre  iront  fai-
fant  les  f urieux  par  toutes  les  cabanes :  mais  ie  veux
qu' on  continue  iufques  a  l'aube  du  iour:  apres  cela
le  demon  difparoiffc.

[154]  Ce  pauure  homme  accourt  incontinent  au
bourg,  donne  aduis  de  tout  ce  qu'il  fcait:  la  deffus
les  Anciens  affemblent  deux  &  trois  fois  le  confeil:
ces  ceremonies  diaboliques  font  receues  auec  appro-
bation ;  fur  le  foir  on  n'entend  par  toutes  les  rues  que
le  cry  des  Capitaines,  qui  exhortent  la  ieuneffe  a  faire
brauement  les  fols.  Ce  fut  alors  que  cet  efprit  de
trouble  triompha  dans  fon  regne :  Comme  nos  mif-
fionnaires  eftoient  logez  dans  la  cabane  du  principal
Capitaine,  ce  fut  la  que  commenca  le  premier  adte  de
cette  comedie,  il  falut  que  nos  Peres  rompiffent  leur
petite  retraitte  pour  la  faindte  Meffe,  afin  de  preue-
nir ce  qu'euffent  fait  ces  fols:  car  on  iuge  le  plus
vaillant  celuy  qui  fait  mieux  1' enrage.  Ce  n'eftoient
qu'heurlemens par  tout,  rien que  trouble  & folie:


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  29

protection ;  I  come  to  teach  you  both  the  reasons  and
the  remedies  for  your  misfortune.  It  is  the  stran-
gers who  alone  are  the  cause  of  it ;  they  now  travel
two  by  two  throughout  the  country,  with  the  design
of  spreading  the  disease  everywhere.  They  will  not
stop  with  that ;  after  this  smallpox  which  now  depop-
ulates your  cabins,  there  will  follow  certain  colics
which  in  less  than  three  days  will  carry  off  all  those
whom  this  disease  may  not  have  removed.  You  can
prevent  this  misfortune ;  drive  out  from  your  village
the  two  black  gowns  who  are  there.  As  for  those
who  are  now  attacked  by  the  smallpox,  I  wish  you  to
serve  me  in  curing  them ;  prepare  a  quantity  of  such
a  water,  run  as  fast  as  possible  to  the  village,  and
tell  the  elders  to  carry  and  distribute  this  potion  dur-
ing the  whole  night.  Then  all  the  youth  and  the
war  Captains  will  go  acting  like  madmen  through  all
the  cabins;  but  I  wish  them  to  continue  even  till  the
dawn  of  day, —  after  that,  the  demon  disappears."

[154]  This  poor  man  straightway  hastens  to  the
village,  and  gives  warning  of  all  that  he  knows;
thereupon  the  Elders  twice  and  thrice  assemble  the
council.  These  diabolical  ceremonies  are  received
with  approbation ;  toward  evening,  one  hears  in  all
the  streets  nothing  but  the  shout  of  the  Captains,  who
exhort  the  youth  to  act  bravely  as  madmen.  Then  it
was  that  this  spirit  of  trouble  triumphed  in  his  reign.
As  our  missionaries  were  lodged  in  the  cabin  of  the
principal  Captain,  it  was  there  that  the  first  act  of  this
comedy  began ;  our  Fathers  were  obliged  to  break  up
their  little  retreat  for  the  holy  Mass,  to  the  end  of
preventing  what  these  mad  fellows  would  have  done,
for  he  is  judged  the  most  valiant  who  best  acts  the
maniac. Everywhere  were  heard  only  howlings, —


30  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

mais  la  rigueur  du  froid  facroift,  ces  mafcarades  fe
retirent  vn  peu  apres  my-nuidt,  qui  fut  caufe  que  ces
nouueaux  Apothiquaires  (c'eftoient  fix  des  Anciens
qui  portoient  en  filence  vne  grande  chaudiere  pleine
de  cette  eau  diabolique,  dont  ils  faifoient  boire  tous
les  malades.)  Ces  medecins  [155]  d'enfer  cefferent
de  faire  leur  ronde,  pource  que  les  folies  des  ieunes
gens  auoient  ceffe.  La  nuidt  du  lendemain  il  falut
fatisfaire  au  diable,  &  recommencer  tout  de  nouueau.
Cette  nuidt  fut  celle  de  Noel,  durant  laquelle  le
demon  fut  obey  pundtuellement.

En  fuite  de  cela  ce  Prince  de  luxure  commanda
des  danfes  &  des  feftins  infames  durant  tous  ces
faindts  iours  confacrez  a  la  memoire  du  petit  Iesvs,
Roy  de  purete,  &  de  fon  cher  difciple  le  bien  aime*
pour  fa  virginite.

Voila  les  ames  de  ces  pauures  barbares  poffedees
du  demon,  les  ver[i]tez  de  noftre  Foy  ne  trouuent
plus  paffage  en  leur  efprit,  leur  affection  pour  nous
fe  change  en  haine.  Cet  efprit  de  menfonge  qu'ils
honorent  comme  le  maiftre  de  leur  terre  les  ayant
afleurez  que  nous  feuls  eftions  la  caufe  de  leur  ruine,
les  portes  des  cabanes  commencet  a  eftre  fermdes  a
nos  Peres,  on  redoute  leur  veue,  comme  fi  vn  feul  de
leurs  regards  faifoit  mourir  tous  les  enfans,  on  les  a
en  horreur,  &  a  peine  trouuent-ils  quelqu'vn  qu[i  les
fupjporte.

[156]  De  iour  en  iour  les  efprits  f'aigriffent  dauan-
tage,  les  faux  bruits  qui  venoient  des  nations  voifmes
augmentent  leurs  foupcons,  eftant  receus  pour  veri-
tables :  &  de  certains  fuppofts  du  diable  confirmoient
toutes  ces  medifances,  affeurant  auoir  veu  en  fonge
des  robes  noires, maintenant  hors  la  paliffade du


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  31

nothing  but  agitation  and  madness ;  but  the  rigor  of
the  cold  increases, — these  masqueraders  withdraw  a
little  after  midnight.  On  that  account  these  new
Apothecaries  (they  were  six  of  the  Elders  who  bore
in  silence  a  great  kettle  full  of  that  diabolical  water,
whereof  they  made  all  the  sick  people  drink),  these
physicians  [155]  of  hell,  ceased  to  make  their  round,
because  the  follies  of  the  young  men  had  ceased.  The
morrow  night  it  was  necessary  to  satisfy  the  devil,
and  begin  again,  quite  afresh.  This  night  was  that
of  Christmas,  during  which  the  demon  was  punctu-
ally obeyed.

In  consequence  thereof,  this  Prince  of  wantonness
ordered  infamous  dances  and  feasts  during  all  those
holy  days,  consecrated  to  the  memory  of  the  infant
Jesus,  King  of  purity,  and  of  his  dear  disciple,  the
well-beloved  for  his  virginity.

Behold,  then,  the  souls  of  these  poor  barbarians
possessed  by  the  demon ;  the  truths  of  our  Faith  no
longer  find  access  to  their  mind ;  their  affection  for
us  is  changed  into  hatred.  This  spirit  of  deceit,
whom  they  honor  as  the  master  of  their  land,  having
assured  them  that  we  alone  were  the  cause  of  their
ruin,  the  doors  of  the  cabins  begin  to  be  closed  to  our
Fathers ;  the  sight  of  them  is  dreaded,  as  if  a  single
one  of  their  looks  caused  all  the  children  to  die ;  they
are  held  in  abomination,  and  they  hardly  find  any
one  who  tolerates  them.

[156]  From  day  to  day,  their  minds  become  further
embittered ;  the  false  reports  which  came  from  the
neighboring  nations  augment  their  suspicions,  being
received  as  true ;  and  certain  tools  of  the  devil  con-
firmed all  these  slanders, —  declaring  that  they  had
seen black gowns  in a  dream,  —  now  without  the


32  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.20

bourg,  ores  fur  le  bord  du  lac;  qui  deueloppoient  de
certains  liures  d'ou  fortoiet  des  efteincelles  de  feu
qui  fe  refpandoient  par  tout,  &  fans  doute  caufoient
cette  maladie  peftilentielle.

II  n'y  a  pas  iufques  dans  la  cabane  ou  nos  deux
miffionnaires  fe  retiroient  qu'on  ne  les  regarde  de
mauuais  oeil,  que  nuidt  &  iour  on  leur  obiedte  les
bruits  qui  courent  d'eux,  que  tout  le  monde,  &  prin-
cipalement  vne  megere,  qui  eft  la  maiftreffe  de  la
maifon,  ne  les  traitte  de  pis  en  pis,  afin  deles  obliger
de  fortir  au  pluftoft :  leur  hofte  eft  feul  qui  les  fup-
porte :  mais  il  les  prie  en  amy  de  fe  tenir  clos  &
couuerts  pour  la  crainte  qu'il  a  de  quelque  mauuais
coup.

Vn  fi  grand  &  fi  fubit  changement  n'eft  pas  diflcile
a  comprendre  a  qui  fongera  [157]  que  le  Sauueur  du
monde  fut  blafpheme  de  tous  les  Iuifs,  &  traitte
comme  vn  mal-faicteur,  qui  peu  de  iours  auparauant
l'auoient  receu  dedans  leur  ville,  &  auoient  recogneu
vne  partie  de  fes  grandeurs.

Au  refte  c'eft  vne  chofe  eftrange  que  mefme  ceux
qui  peu  auparauant  auoient  receu  leur  guerifon  du
ciel,  &  qui  n'ofoient  pas  le  nier,  fe  refroidiffent  dans
la  Foy  apres  toutes  ces  menees  de  fatan,  &  perdent
les  id6es  de  Dieu  &  des  obligations  qu'ils  ont  en  fa
bonte.  Comme  vn  de  nos  Peres  en  faifoit  vn  iour  des
reproches  a.  celuy  qui  auoit  fi  heureufement  recouure"
la  veue  par  la  force  de  l'eau  benifte:  Mais,  luy  dit
ce  barbare,  comment  luy  ay-ie  vne  fi  grande  obliga-
tion ?  que  luy  a-il  coufte  a  me  rendre  la  veue  ?  tu  ne
t'es  feruy  que  d'eau  froide :  ce  n'eft  pas  la  vn  remede
bien  difficile.  C'eft  pour  cela  mal  heureux,  luy  dit-
on  que  tu  deurois  admirer  fon  pouuoir,  &  aimer  fa


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  33


palisade  of  the  village,  now  on  the  shore  of  the
lake,  —  who  were  unfolding  certain  books,  whence
issued  sparks  of  fire  which  spread  everywhere,  and
no  doubt  caused  this  pestilential  disease.

Even  in  the  cabin  whither  our  two  missionaries
retreated,  they  are  looked  upon  with  an  evil  eye;
night  and  day  they  are  confronted  with  the  rumors
which  are  current  about  them.  Every  one,  and
especially  a  Megera  who  is  the  mistress  of  the  house,
treats  them  worse  and  worse,  in  order  to  oblige  them
to  leave  as  soon  as  possible ;  their  host  is  the  only
one  who  tolerates  them,  but  he  begs  them,  as  a
friend,  to  remain  shut  in  and  concealed,  because  of
the  dread  which  he  feels,  of  some  evil  deed.

So  great  and  sudden  a  change  is  not  difficult  to
understand,  if  one  will  reflect  [157]  that  the  Savior
of  the  world  was  blasphemed  by  all  the  Jews,  and
treated  like  a  malefactor, —  although  a  few  days
before  they  had  received  him  in  their  city,  and  had
acknowledged  a  part  of  his  dignities.

Howbeit,  it  is  a  strange  thing  that  even  those  who
shortly  before  had  received  their  cure  from  heaven,
and  who  dared  not  deny  it,  grow  cold  in  the  Faith
after  all  these  intrigues  of  satan,  and  lose  their  ideas
of  God  and  of  the  obligations  which  they  are  under
to  his  goodness.  When  one  of  our  Fathers  was  one
day  reproaching  with  this  the  man  who  had  so  hap-
pily recovered  sight  by  the  virtue  of  holy  water,  this
barbarian  said  to  him :  ' '  But  how  am  I  so  greatly
obliged  to  him  ?  what  did  it  cost  him  to  restore  my
sight  ?  You  used  nothing  but  cold  water :  that  is  not
a  very  difficult  remedy  to  obtain. "  "  That,  wretched
man,"  he  says  to  him,  "  is  why  you  ought  to  admire
his  power  and  love  his  goodness,  which  has  rendered


34  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

bonte\  qui  t'a  rendu  fi  facile  ta  guerifon,  fans  te  com-
mader  comme  font  vos  demons,  qui  toutefois  font
impuiffans,  des  cerfs,  des  chiens  &  des  ours  en  facri-
fice.  [158]  Scache  done  que  s'il  a  tant  de  pouuoir  a
te  faire  du  bien,  il  n'en  aura  pas  moins  a  te  chaftier,
fi  tu  ne  le  fers  fuiuant  ta  promeffe.  A  cela  point  de
repartie:  vn  efprit  dont  le  diable  a  repris  poffeffion,
n'eft  plus  capable  d'eftimer  les  grandeurs  de  Dieu,
qu'auparauant  il  adoroit.

Nonobftant  tout  cela  nos  miffionnaires  fuiuent  leur
pointe  Atironta  leur  hofte  qui  les  ayme,  &  qui
portant  le  nom  du  premier  Capitaine  Huron  qui  ait
rencontre  les  Francois,  en  a  auffi  la  charge  &  le  pou-
uoir; les  affifte  de  tout  ce  qu'il  peut  pour  affembler
vn  confeil  des  Anciens  du  bourg,  ou  ils  puiffent
publiquement  faire  paroiftre  leur  innocence,  &  refuter
ces  calomnies.

Par  vn  heureux  rencontre  Iofeph  Chihouatenhoua,
c6t  excellent  Chreftien  dont  nous  auons  parle  au
chapitre  precedent,  arriue  en  ce  mefme  bourg  pour
affiiter  nos  Peres  en  ce  dont  ils  voudront  fe  feruir  de
luy  pour  la  publication  de  l'Euangile:  le  confeil  fe
tient,  le  P.  Antoine  Daniel  refute  les  calomniateurs,
&  parle  d'vn  accent  fi  fort,  que  pas  vn  ne  luy  ofe  ref-
pondre.  Iofeph  Chihouatenhoua  [159]  prend  apres
la  parole,  &  paffe  plus  de  deux  heures  entieres  a
parler  des  myfteres  de  noftre  Foy.  Ces  anciens
Capitaines  fe  trouuent  tout  furpris  de  voir  vn  ieune
homme  parler  en  maiftre  vn  langage  nouueau :  ils  ne
peuuent  que  l'admirer,  ils  approuuent  les  veritez  de
noftre  Foy,  tous  les  commandemens  de  Dieu  leur
f emblent  raif onnables :  en  vn  mot  ils  fe  condamnent
eux-mefmes, & d'aucuns  f'6crioient qu'il faudroit


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  35

your  cure  so  easy,  without  commanding  you  —  as  do
your  demons,  who  nevertheless  are  impotent  —  the
sacrifice  of  stags,  dogs,  and  bears.  [158]  Know,
then,  that  if  he  has  so  much  power  to  do  you  good,
he  will  not  have  less  power  to  chastise  you  if  you  do
not  serve  him  according  to  your  promise."  To  that,
no  reply;  a  mind  whereof  the  devil  has  regained
possession  is  no  longer  capable  of  estimating  the
greatness  of  God,  whom  he  before  adored.

Notwithstanding  all  that,  our  missionaries  pursue
their  point;  Atironta,  their  host,  who  loves  them, —
and  who,  bearing  the  name  of  the  first  Huron  Cap-
tain who  met  the  French,  has  also  his  charge  and  his
power,5  —  assists  them  as  far  as  he  can  to  assemble  a
council  of  the  Elders  of  the  village,  at  which  they
can  publicly  demonstrate  their  innocence  and  refute
these  calumnies.

By  a  happy  coincidence,  Joseph  Chihouatenhoua  —
that  excellent  Christian  of  whom  we  spoke  in  the
preceding  chapter  —  arrives  in  this  same  village,  to
assist  our  Fathers  in  such  manner  as  they  shall
choose  to  employ  him  for  the  publication  of  the  Gos-
pel. The  council  is  held;  Father  Antoine  Daniel
refutes  the  slanderers,  and  speaks  with  so  much  em-
phasis that  not  one  dares  to  answer  him.  Joseph
Chihouatenhoua  [159]  afterward  begins  to  speak,  and
passes  more  than  two  entire  hours  in  discoursing  on
the  mysteries  of  our  Faith.  Those  old  Captains  are
greatly  surprised  to  see  a  young  man  speak  like  a
master,  in  a  new  language ;  they  can  but  admire  him.
They  approve  the  truths  of  our  Faith,  all  the  com-
mandments of  God  seem  reasonable  to  them,  —  in  a
word,  they  condemn  themselves ;  and  some  exclaim
that  all  the  earth  ought  to  heed  such  great  concerns,


36  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESU1TES [Vol.20

que  toute  la  terre  6coutaft  de  fi  grandes  affaires,  &
des  difcours  d'vne  telle  importance.  Mais  an  bout,
quel  aueuglement!  pas  vn  n'embraffe  les  veritez
qu'il  recognoift,  pas  vn  ne  prend  pour  luy  le  confeil
qu'il  approuue.

Toutefois  cette  affemblee  &  le  fuccez  qui  en  fut
fauorable  pour  nous,  appaifa  quelque  peu  les  efprits ;
les  ombrages  qu'ils  auoient  contre  nous  fe  diminueret
de  beaucoup:  on  commence  a  receuoir  nos  Peres
affez  paifiblemet  dans  la  plufpart  des  cabanes,  &  eux
continuent  a  annoncer  le  nom  de  Dieu  aux  fains  &
aux  malades.  Quelques  efprits  de  ceux  qui  ne  font
point  en  maladie  le  gouftent,  &  [160]  mefmes  quel-
ques-vns  defirent  le  baptefme:  mais  nous  n'y  allons
pas  fi  vifte,  il  faut  les  efprouuer,  autrement  nous
nous  mettrions  en  danger  de  faire  plufieurs  baptifez,
mais  bien  peu  de  Chreftiens.

La  mifericorde  de  Dieu  parut  dauantage  fur  les
malades,  dans  le  feul  bourg  de  fainct,  lean  Baptifte
plus  de  140.  y  furent  baptifez,  dont  la  plufpart  font
morts,  &  entr'autres  40.  petits  enfans,  dont  le  falut
eft  hors  de  doute.  Les  iugemens  de  Dieu  font  tou-
fiours  adorables.  Voicy  ce  que  m'en  efcriuent  les
Peres  de  cette  miffion.

D'aucuns  recoiuent  le  baptefme  auec  vne  ioye  indi-
cible,  &  ne  fcauent  comme  exprimer  la  grace  qu'ils
reffentet  par  des  coloques  amoureux,  tantoft  a  noftre
Crucifix,  tantoft  a  1' Image  du  Sauueur  du  monde.
Helas!  (difoit  entr'autres  vn  ieune  homme  de  25.
ans)  6!  le  maiftre  de  nos  vies,  tu  voy  que  ie  n'ay
point  d'efprit,  &  que  ie  ne  puis  parler:  dy  moy  done
ce  qu'il  te  plaift  que  ie  te  die.  Et  d'autres  quafi  en
mefme  temps  blafphement  contre  Dieu,  ayant  leur


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  37

and  speeches  of  such  importance.  But,  at  the  end,
what  blindness !  not  one  embraces  the  truths  which
he  acknowledges,  not  one  adopts  for  himself  the
advice  which  he  approves.

Nevertheless,  this  assembly  and  its  result,  which
was  favorable  to  us,  appeased  their  minds  somewhat ;
the  grievances  which  they  had  against  us,  greatly
diminished ;  they  begin  to  receive  our  Fathers  quite
peaceably  in  most  of  the  cabins,  and  the  latter  con-
tinue to  announce  the  name  of  God  to  them,  to  the
whole  and  to  the  sick.  Some  minds,  of  those  who
are  not  in  disease,  relish  this,  and  [160]  some  even
desire  baptism;  but  we  do  not  proceed  so  fast, —  they
must  be  tried ;  otherwise  we  should  run  the  risk  of
having  many  people  baptized,  but  very  few  Chris-
tians.

The  mercy  of  God  further  appeared  over  the  sick ;
in  the  single  village  of  saint  Jean  Baptiste,  more  than
140  were  baptized,  most  of  whom  are  dead, —  and
among  others,  40  little  children,  whose  salvation  is
beyond  doubt.  The  judgments  of  God  are  always
adorable.  Here  follows  what  the  Fathers  of  this
mission  write  to  me  in  the  matter.

"  Some  receive  baptism  with  an  unspeakable  joy,
and  know  not  how  to  express  the  grace  that  they
experience,  by  means  of  loving  colloquies,  now  be-
fore our  Crucifix,  now  before  the  Image  of  the  Savior
of  the  world.  '  Alas!  '  (said,  among  others,  a  young
man  of  25  years)  '  O!  thou  master  of  our  lives!  thou
seest  that  I  have  no  sense,  and  that  I  cannot  speak;
tell  me,  then,  what  it  would  please  thee  that  I  should
say. '  And  others,  almost  at  the  same  time,  blas-
pheme against  God,  having  their  souls  on  their  lips.
Lately,  a  war  Captain,  when  we  spoke  to  him  of  hell,


38  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

ame  fur  leurs  leures.  Dernierement  vn  Capitaine
de  guerre,  lors  que  nous  luy  parlions  de  l'enfer,  fe
[161]  mocquoit  de  ces  feux.  Ces  flammes  la  ne  bru-
flent  pas  pour  moy,  difoit  ce  brauache,  la  mort  me
redoute,  ie  la  cherche  partout,  &  elle  me  fuit:  ma
plus  ordinaire  prouifion  eft  la  chair  de  nos  ennemis.
Ce  pauure  mal-heureux  fut  bien  toft  emporte-  de  la
mort,  fans  iamais  fe  vouloir  recognoiftre.  Vn  pau-
ure enfant  eft  mort  au  milieu  de  noftre  cabane,  fans
que  iamais  nous  ayons  pu  le  baptifer.  Plufieurs
autres  bien  eloignez  de  nous  en  des  cabanes  efcartees
au  milieu  des  campagnes,  n'attendoient  que  noftre
venue  pour  expirer  quafi  entre  nos  mains,  &  font  allez
ioiiir  au  Ciel  de  celuy  qui  ne  les  auoit  fait  que  pour
les  fauuer.  D'aucuns  nous  fermant  leurs  cabanes
nous  contraignent  d'entrer  en  vne  autre  ou  nous  ne
pretendions  pas  d'aller:  nous  y  trouuons  vne  ame  a
qui  rien  ne  manque  finon  le  baptefme  pour  qu'elle
foit  le  mefme  iour  en  paradis.  D'autres  que  nous
ne  cherchions  pas  nous  appellent  chez  eux,  &  fans  y
penfer  nous  donnent  le  moyen  de  procurer  le  falut
d'vn  pauure  homme  qui  defia  auoit  vn  pied  dedans
l'enfer.  En  vn  mot,  les  Anges  [162]  nous  affiftent  a
acroiftre  le  nombre  des  bien-heureux.  Nous  ne
pouuons  attribuer  a  d' autre  puiffance  qu'a  des  efprits
tutelaires  des  hommes  le  cas  qui  fuit.

Pendant  que  le  fonge  ou  pluftoft  le  diable  fe  fait
obeyr  dans  noftre  propre  cabane  par  vn  defordre  ou
folie  vniuerfelle  de  tout  le  peuple,  &  qu'en  fuitte  il
nous  interromp[e]  le  cours  de  noftre  exercice,  vn  capi-
taine des  Algonquins  qui  hiuernent  a  vn  demy  quart
de  lieue*  d'icy,  nous  vient  chercher  en  hafte:  vn  mien
frere,  nous  dit-il,  fe  meurt  de  la  contagion,  venez  ie


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  39

[161]  mocked  those  fires.  '  Those  flames  do  not  burn
for  me,'  said  this  braggart;  '  death  dreads  me;  I  seek
it  everywhere,  and  it  shuns  me;  my  most  usual  pro-
vision is  the  flesh  of  our  enemies. '  This  poor  wretch
was  soon  carried  off  by  death,  without  ever  consent-
ing to  acknowledge  himself  in  error.  A  poor  child
died  in  the  midst  of  our  cabin,  and  we  were  never
able  to  baptize  it.  Several  others,  far  removed  from
us,  in  isolated  cabins  in  the  midst  of  the  fields,  await-
ed only  our  coming  in  order  to  expire  almost  in  our
hands;  and  they  have  gone  to  enjoy  in  Heaven  him
who  had  made  them  only  to  save  them.  Some,  clos-
ing their  cabins  to  us,  constrain  us  to  enter  another,
into  which  we  were  not  intending  to  go;  we  find
there  a  soul  which  lacks  nothing  but  baptism,  in
order  to  be  the  same  day  in  paradise.  Others,  whom
we  were  not  seeking,  call  us  to  their  house,  and,
without  realizing  it,  give  us  the  means  to  procure
the  salvation  of  a  poor  man  who  already  had  one  foot
in  hell.  In  a  word,  the  Angels  [162]  assist  us  to  in-
crease the  number  of  the  blessed.  We  cannot  attrib-
ute to  other  power  than  to  guardian  spirits  of  men,
the  following  occurrence:

"While  the  dream,  or  rather  the  devil,  is  being
obeyed  in  our  own  cabin  by  a  tumult  or  general  mad-
ness of  the  whole  people,  and  while  he  consequently
interrupts  the  course  of  our  exercise,  a  captain  of
the  Algonquins,  who  are  wintering  an  eighth  of  a
league  from  here,  comes  to  seek  us  in  haste.  '  A
brother  of  mine,'  he  tells  us,  '  is  dying  of  the  con-
tagion ;  come,  I  beg  you,  and  visit  him  while  he  is
still  alive;  come  and  teach  him  the  way  to  heaven,
for  he  desires  it.'  We  hasten  thither;  we  instruct
him, more  from  the  heart  than  from the  lips;  his


40  LES  RELATIONS  DES  /^SUITES [Vol.20

vous  prie  le  vifiter  tandis  qu'il  eft  encore  en  vie:
venez  luy  enfeigner  le  chemin  du  ciel,  car  il  le  defire.
Nous  y  courons,  on  l'inftruit  plus  de  cceur  que  de
bouche :  fon  frere  voyant  qu'il  ne  nous  entendoit
qu'a  demy,  fe  met  de  la  partie,  (car  il  entend  paffable-
ment  le  Huron)  &  nous  fert  d'interprete.  Nous  nous
feruons  de  quelques  prieres  Algonquines  que  nous
auions  par  efcrit  de  nos  Peres  qui  font  aux  Trois
Riuieres,  &  entre  autres  de  l'adte  de  contrition,  que
ce  moribond  repetoit  de  fi  bon  cceur,  qu'enfin  nous
l'appellons  Felix  aubaptefme,  [163]  de  fait  il  mourut
peu  d'heures  apres.  Ces  bonnes  gens  nous  parlerent
de  l'enterrer  a  noftre  mode,  comme  nos  Peres  font
aux  Trois  Riuieres:  mais  la  faifon  n'en  eft  pas
encore  venue. Iufques  icy  la  lettre.

I'efpere  que  dans  quelque  temps  nous  aurons  icy
haut  des  ouuriers  qui  fcauront  la  langue  Alguonquine,
&  qui  pouront  non  feulement  afiifter  quelques  bandes
d'Algonquins  qui  viennent  hyuerner  chaque  ann6e
proche  de  nos  Hurons :  mais  patter  outre  a  deux  &
trois  cens  lieue's  d'icy,  ou  la  langue  des  Algonquins
fe  fait  entendre.

Les  deux  bourgs  de  faindt  Ioachim  &  de  faindte
Elizabeth  donnerent  auffi  de  l'exercice  a  nos  ouuri-
ers euangeliques,  la  maladie  ayant  regne  efgalement
par  tout.  La  plus  grande  peine  que  nous  y  auons,
m'efcrit  vn  de  nos  Peres,  n'eft  pas  a  deuorer  les  pau-
uretez  de  ces  miferables:  mais  c'eft  d'entrer  dans
leurs  efprits,  que  nous  voyons  manifeftement  eftre
la  plufpart  poffedez  de  quelque  demon:  iufques  la
que  d'aucuns  a  noftre  abord  heurlent  par  fois  come
des  loups;  [164]  lefquels  i'ay  experimente  fe  taire
court  lors  qu'exterieurement  nous  les  exhorcif ons  per
Dominum  nojirum  Iefum  Chrijlum.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  41

brother,  seeing  that  he  only  half  understood  us,  joins
the  party  (for  he  passably  understands  Huron),  and
serves  us  as  interpreter.  We  use  some  Algonquin
prayers  that  we  had  in  writing  from  our  Fathers  who
are  at  the  Three  Rivers, —  and,  among  others,  the
act  of  contrition,  which  this  dying  man  repeated  with
so  good  a  heart  that  at  last  we  called  him  Felix,  in  bap-
tism: [163]  in  fact,  he  died  a  few  hours  later.  These
good  people  spoke  to  us  of  burying  him  in  our  man-
ner, as  our  Fathers  do  at  the  Three  Rivers:  but  the
time  for  that  has  not  yet  come." Thus  far  the  letter.

I  hope  that  after  a  while  we  shall  have  workmen
up  here  who  shall  know  the  Alguonquin  language,
and  who  will  be  able  not  only  to  assist  some  bands
of  Algonquins  who  come  to  winter  each  year  near
our  Hurons,  but  to  pass  beyond,  two  and  three
hundred  leagues  from  here,  where  the  language  of
the  Algonquins  is  generally  understood.

The  two  villages  of  saint  Joachim  and  sainte  Eliza-
beth also  gave  exercise  to  our  evangelistic  workers,
the  disease  having  prevailed  in  all  places  alike.
"  The  greatest  difficulty  we  have,"  one  of  our  Fathers
writes  to  me,  "  is  not  that  of  consuming  the  poverty
of  these  wretches,  but  that  of  entering  into  their
minds,  which  we  see  manifestly  possessed,  for  the
most  part,  by  some  demon, — even  to  the  extent  that
some,  at  our  approach,  sometimes  howl  like  wolves:
[164]  these,  as  I  have  proved,  quickly  become  silent
when  we  outwardly  exorcise  them  per  Dominum
nostrum  Jesmn  Christum.


42  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20


CHAP. X.

DE LA MISSION SURNOMMEE DES APOSTRES AUX
KHIONONTATERONONS.

LES  K[h]ionontater[on]ons,  qu'on  appelle  la  na-
tion du  Petun,  pour  l'abondance  qu'il  y  a  de
cette  herbe,  font  eloignez  du  pays  des  Hurons,
dont  ils  parlent  la  langue,  enuiron  douze  ou  quinze
lieue's  tirant  a  1' Occident:  ils  ont  eu  autresfois  de  cru-
elles  guerres  les  vns  contre  les  autres ;  mais  ils  font
maintenant  en  tres-bonne  intelligence,  &  depuis  peu
ont  renouuelle"  leur  alliance,  &  fait  nouuelle  confede-
ration contre  quelques  autres  peuples  leurs  ennemis
communs.

Nous  auons  pris  cette  occafion  pour  y  annoncer
l'euangile,  &  y  arborer  fi  nous  pouuons  le  drappeau
de  Iefus-Chrift.  [165]  C'a  efte  la  cinquiefme  de  nos
miffions,  que  nous  auons  nomme  la  million  des
Apofkres.  Le  fort  en  eft  efcheu  au  Pere  Charles
Gamier,  &  au  P.  Ifaac  Iacques  [sc.  Iogues].  Voicy
les  noms  qu'ils  ont  donne  a  neuf  bourgs  qu'ils  y
ont  rencontre,  faindt  Pierre  &  faindt  Paul,  faindt  An-
dre, faindt  Iacques,  faindt  Thomas,  faindt  lean,  faindt
Iacques  &  faindt  Philippe,  faindt  Barthelemy,  faindt
Matthieu,  faindt  Simon  &  faindt  Iude.

Cette  miffion  a  efte  la  plus  riche  de  toutes,  puis
que  les  croix  &  les  fouffrances  y  ont  efte  plus  abon-
dantes.  Voicy  ce  que  m'efcriuirent  nos  Peres  des
commencemens  qu'ils  y  eurent.

Enfin  nous  voila  arriuez,  Dieu  mercy,  au  dernier


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  43


CHAP. X.

OF THE MISSION SURNAMED "  OF  THE  APOSTLES, "  TO
THE  KHIONONTATERONONS.

THE  Khionontateronons,  who  are  called  "  the  na-
tion of  the  Tobacco,"  from  the  abundance  of
that  plant  there,  are  distant  from  the  country
of  the  Hurons  —  whose  language  they  speak  —  about
twelve  or  fifteen  leagues  toward  the  West.  These
nations  formerly  waged  cruel  wars  against  one  an-
other ;  but  they  are  now  on  very  good  terms,  and  have
recently  renewed  their  alliance,  and  made  a  new
confederation  against  some  other  peoples,  their  com-
mon enemies.

We  have  taken  this  opportunity  to  announce  the
gospel  to  them,  and  to  plant  there,  if  we  can,  the
standard  of  Jesus  Christ.  [165]  This,  which  we  have
named  the  mission  of  the  Apostles,  has  been  the  fifth
of  our  missions.  The  lot  for  it  fell  to  Father  Charles
Gamier  and  to  Father  Isaac  Jogues.  Here  are  the
names  which  they  have  given  to  nine  villages  that
they  have  encountered  there :  saint  Pierre  and  saint
Paul,6  saint  Andre,  saint  Jacques,  saint  Thomas,  saint
Jean,  saint  Jacques  and  saint  Philippe,  saint  Barthe-
lemy,  saint  Matthieu,  saint  Simon  and  saint  Jude.

This  mission  has  been  the  richest  of  all,  since  the
crosses  and  the  sufferings  have  been  most  abundant
therein.  Here  is  what  our  Fathers  write  to  me  of
their  beginnings  in  it.

"  Here  we  have  at  last  arrived,  thank  God,  at  the


44  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  20

&  principal  bourg  de  noftre  diftridt,  auquel  nous
auons  donne  le  nom  de  faindt  Pierre  &  faindt  Paul.
N'ayant  peu  trouuer  aucun  Sauuage  au  bourg  de  la
Conception  pour  venir  auec  nous,  les  chemins  eftans
alors  trop  mauuais  pour  des  gens  qui  ne  cherchent
pas  Dieu ;  nous  fuf mes  contraints  de  partir  feuls  pre-
nant  nos  bons  Anges  pour  guides.  Sur  le  milieu  du
chemin,  n'ayant  [166]  pti  trouuer  vn  certain  deftour
qui  nous  euft  conduit  a  quelques  cabanes  qui  font  vn
peu  a  l'efcart,  nous  fuf  mes  furpris  de  la  nuidt  dans
vne  fapiniere :  nous  eftions  en  vn  lieu  humide  &  ne
pouuions  en  aller  chercher  vn  plus  fee :  nous  eufmes
affez  de  peine  a  nous  amaffer  quelques  morceaux  de
bois  pour  faire  vn  peu  de  feu,  &  quelques  branches
feiches  pour  nous  coucher  deffus:  la  neige  nous
menacoit  d'efteindre  noftre  feu,  mais  elle  ceffa  incon-
tinent. Dieu  foit  beny,  nous  paffafmes  la  nuidt  fort
doucement.  Le  lendemain  matin  nous  rencontrafmes
quelques  pauures  cabanes  dans  les  champs,  mais  ils
n'auoient  point  de  bled.  Y  trouuant  compagnie
pour  venir  dans  le  pays  nous  ne  la  voulufmes  perdre,
pource  que  les  chemins  eftoient  fort  difhciles  a  raifon
des  neiges  nouuellement  tombees  qui  auoient  efface*
les  pifles,  Nous  partifmes  done  &  allafmes  par  de
bien  mauuais  chemins  en  vn  bien  mauuais  temps  a
vn  petit  village  que  nous  nommafmes  S.  Thomas;
nous  fifmes  bien  vne  lieue  a  la  feule  clartd  de  la
neige,  &  arriuafmes  vers  les  huidt  heures  du  foir
auec  bon  [167]  appetit,  n'ayant  pas  mange  en  toute
la  iournee  que  chacun  vn  morceau  de  pain.  Nous
n'auions  aucun  deffein  fur  ce  bourg  la  pluftoft  que
fur  vn  autre :  mais  ayant  pris  la  compagnie  des  Sau-
uages  qui  fe  prefenta,  &  les  ayant  fuiuis,  nous  arri-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  45

farthest  and  principal  village  of  our  district,  to  which
we  have  given  the  name  of  saint  Pierre  and  saint
Paul.  Not  having  been  able  to  find  any  Savage  at
the  village  of  la  Conception  to  come  with  us, —  the
roads  being  then  too  bad,  for  people  who  are  not
seeking  God,  —  we  were  constrained  to  start  alone ;
taking  our  good  Angels  for  guides.  About  the  mid-
dle of  the  journey,  not  having  [166]  been  able  to  find
a  certain  detour  which  would  have  led  us  to  some
cabins  which  are  a  little  isolated,  we  were  surprised
by  night  in  a  fir  grove.  We  were  in  a  damp  place,
and  could  not  go  from  it  to  seek  a  drier  one ;  we  had
trouble  enough  to  pick  up  some  pieces  of  wood  to
make  a  little  fire,  and  some  dry  branches  to  lie  down
upon :  the  snow  was  threatening  to  put  out  our  fire,
but  it  suddenly  ceased.  God  be  blessed,  we  spent
the  night  very  quietly.  The  next  morning  we  came
across  some  poor  cabins  in  the  fields,  but  they  had
no  corn.  Finding  company  there  to  come  into  the
country  with,  we  were  not  willing  to  lose  it,  because
the  roads  were  very  difficult  on  account  of  the  new-
ly-fallen snows,  which  had  obliterated  the  trails.
Accordingly,  we  set  out,  and  went  by  many  bad
roads,  at  a  very  bad  season,  to  a  little  village  which
we  named  St.  Thomas;  we  made  easily  a  league  by
the  mere  light  of  the  snow,  and  arrived  about  eight
o'clock  in  the  evening,  with  good  [167]  appetite, —
not  having  eaten  all  day,  save  each  a  morsel  of  bread.
We  had  no  design  on  that  village,  rather  than  on
another :  but  having  taken  what  company  of  Savages
there  offered,  and  having  followed  them,  we  arrived, —
no  doubt,  where  God  was  leading  us,  for  the  salva-
tion of  a  predestined  soul  which  awaited  nothing
but  our  coming,  in  order  to  die  to  all  its  miseries.


46  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

uafmes  fans  doute  ou  Dieu  nous  conduifoit,  pour  le
faint  d'vne  ame  predeftinee,  qui  n'attedoit  rien  que
noftre  venue*  pour  mourir  a  toutes  fes  miferes.  Lors
que  nous  eftions  en  peine  de  fgauoir  f'il  n'y  auoit
point  quelque  malade  qui  preffat,  vn  ieune  homme
nous  vint  prier  d'aller  doner  quelque  douceur  a
vne  de  fa  cabane;  nous  y  allons,  &  trouuons  vne
pauure  femme  qui  n'en  peut  plus;  elle  fut  inftruite,
&  receut  heureufement  auec  la  Foy  la  grace  du  Bap-
tefme,  peu  apres  elle  fe  vit  dans  la  gloire.  II  n'y
auoit  dans  tout  le  village  que  celle-la  qui  eufb  befoin
de  noftre  fecours.  Nous  courufmes  a  quelques  autres
petits  bourgs,  ou  on  nous  dit  qu'il  y  auoit  des  ma-
lades  :  nous  en  auons  baptife  quelques-vns :  les  brebis
de  Noftre  Seigneur  font  bien  efgarees  ca  &  la.  Nous
auons  rencontre  quelques  perfonnes  qui  d'abord  gou-
ftent  bien  l'euangile,  [168]  Dieu  leur  faffe  la  grace
de  1'embraffer  tout  a  fait.  Nous  receufmes  de  la  con-
folation  il  y  a  deux  ou  trois  iours,  voyant  qu'vne  fille
qui  fe  venoit  engager  de  parole  a  vn  ieune  garcon,
ayant  vn  peu  apres  entendu  parler  de  Dieu  &  des
peines  d'enfer,  f'alla  coucher  feule,  difant:  II  nous
void  mefme  la  nuidt.

Arriuant  en  ce  bourg  nous  ne  fgauions  pas  qu'il  y
auoit  vn  petit  enfant  de  la  nation  neutre,  aage  de
cinq  ans,  que  fes  parens  ont  apporte"  fraichement  icy,
ou  la  faiin  les  fait  refugier;  il  y  auoit  long  temps
que  chaque  iour  on  croyoit  que  ce  feroit  le  dernier  de
fa  vie:  de  45.  ou  50.  cabanes,  fans  penfer  a  luy,  nous
vifitafmes  d'abord  celle  ou  eftoit  ce  petit  eftranger,
&  le  baptifafmes:  il  fe  vit  incontinent  hors  de  ban-
niffement,  &  heureux  dedans  fa  patrie.  Ce  font  la
les  premices  de  cette  nation  neutre  &  celuy  qui  tout
le  premier  a  efte  arroufe  du  fang  de  Iefus-Chrift.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  47

While  we  were  at  a  loss  to  know  whether  there  was
not  some  person  critically  ill,  a  young  man  came  to
beg  us  to  go  and  give  some  relief  to  one  in  his  cabin.
We  go  thither,  and  find  a  poor  woman  at  the  last
pass :  she  was  instructed,  and  happily  received  with
the  Faith  the  grace  of  Baptism ;  shortly  after,  she
beheld  herself  in  glory.  In  the  whole  village  there
was  only  that  one  who  had  need  of  our  help.  We
ran  to  some  other  little  villages,  where  they  told  us
that  there  were  sick  people:  we  baptized  some  of
them, —  Our  Lord's  sheep  are  much  scattered,  hither
and  yon.  We  have  met  some  persons  who  at  first
indeed  relished  the  gospel :  [168]  God  grant  them  the
grace  to  embrace  it  altogether.  We  received  conso-
lation two  or  three  days  ago,  seeing  that  a  girl,  who
came  to  pledge  herself  to  a  young  man,  having  a  little
later  heard  mention  of  God  and  the  pains  of  hell,
went  to  lie  down  alone,  saying,  '  He  sees  us  even  at
night.'

"  On  arriving  in  this  village,  we  knew  not  that
there  was  a  little  child  of  the  neutral  nation,  aged
five  years,  whom  its  parents  have  recently  brought
here,  where  hunger  causes  them  to  take  refuge;  for
a  long  time,  it  was  each  day  believed  that  that  would
be  the  last  of  its  life.  Out  of  45  or  50  cabins,  with-
out thinking  of  it,  we  first  visited  the  one  in  which
was  this  little  stranger,  and  baptized  him ;  he  straight-
way saw  himself  out  of  exile  and  happy  in  his  native
land.  Those  are  the  first  fruits  of  this  neutral  nation,
and  this  was  the  very  first  one  to  be  sprinkled  with
the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.

"  This  whole  country  is  filled  with  evil  reports
which  are  current  about  us.  The  children,  seeing
us  arrive  at  any  place,  exclaim  that  famine  and  dis-


48  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

Tout  ce  pays  eft  remply  de  mauuais  bruits  qui
courent  contre  nous,  les  enfans  nous  voyant  arriuer
quelque  part,  f'efcrient  que  la  famine  &  la  maladie
[169]  viennent:  quelques  femmes  f'enfuyent,  d'autres
nous  cachent  leurs  enfans,  quali  tous  nous  refufent
l'hofpitalit6,  qu'ils  accordent  a  des  peuples  les  plus
incogneus.  Nous  n'auons  pu  trouuer  maifon  pour
Noftre  Seigneur,  n'ayant  pu  trouuer  aucun  lieu  ou
nous  puiffions  dire  la  Meffe.  Noftre  hofte  qui  eft  le
premier  Capitaine  de  ce  pays,  &  qui  par  vne  prudence
naturelle  auoit  paru  affez  paifible,  nous  voyant  prier
Dieu  les  matins  &  les  foirs  a  genoux,  en  fin  ne  put
fe  tenir  vne  fois  de  nous  faire  paroiftre  ce  qu'il  auoit
fur  le  cceur.  II  commence  done  a  parler,  mais  d'vne
voix  de  confeil,  e'eft  a  dire  haute  &  intelligible.  C'eft
veritablement  maintenant  que  ie  crains  &  que  ie
parle :  Que  font  maintenant  ces  demons  autre  chofe
que  des  forts  pour  nous  faire  mourir,  &  acheuer  ce
que  la  maladie  a  laiff e  de  refte  en  cette  cabane :  on
me  l'auoit  bien  dit  que  e'eftoient  des  forciers,  mais  ie
le  croy  trop  tard :  c'eft  vne  chofe  que  Ton  ne  voit  point,
que  des  perfonnes  qui  viennent  loger  chez  quel-
qu'vn,  paffent  la  nuict.  dans  des  poftures  aufquelles
nos  yeux  ne  font  aucunement  accouftumez.  [170]
Iugez  de  quel  ceil  on  nous  voit  en  vne  cabane  oil  on
a  de  fi  belles  idees  de  nous?  a  peine  peufmes  nous
remettre  cet  efprit.  On  nous  traitte  tres-mal  pour
nous  obliger  de  fortir.  C'eft  bien  tout  k  nous  auons
ce  qui  f uffit  a  viure :  noftre  faim  nous  accompagne
d'ordinaire  depuis  le  matin  iufques  au  foir:  mais  ces
bonnes  gens  ne  voyent  pas  que  ce  qui  nous  arrefte
eft  plus  precieux  que  tout  ce  qu'ils  concoiuent  de
douceurs  en  ce  monde. II  n'y  a  point  prefque  de


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  49

ease  [169]  are  coming;  some  women  flee,  others  hide
their  children  from  us ;  almost  all  refuse  us  the  hos-
pitality which  they  grant  even  to  the  most  unknown
tribes.  We  have  not  been  able  to  find  a  house  for
Our  Lord, — not  having  been  able  to  find  any  place
where  we  can  say  Mass.  Our  host, —  who  is  the  chief
Captain  of  this  country,  and  who  through  a  natural
prudence  had  appeared  quite  peaceable, —  on  seeing
us  pray  to  God  mornings  and  evenings  on  our  knees,
finally  could  not  refrain,  on  one  occasion,  from  reveal-
ing to  us  what  he  had  on  his  heart.  He  begins,
therefore,  to  speak,  but  in  a  council  voice, —  that  is
to  say,  loud  and  distinct:  '  Truly,  it  is  now  that  I
fear  and  speak.  What  are  now  these  demons  but
spells  to  make  us  die,  and  finish  what  the  disease  has
left  over,  in  this  cabin?  They  had  told  me,  indeed,
that  these  were  sorcerers,  but  I  believe  it  too  late.
This  is  a  thing  unknown  —  that  persons  who  come  to
lodge  at  one's  house  pass  the  night  in  postures  to
which  our  eyes  are  nowise  accustomed.'  [170]  Imag-
ine with  what  looks  they  regard  us  in  a  cabin  where
they  have  such  fine  ideas  of  us!  —  we  could  hardly
tranquilize  this  mind  again.  They  treat  us  very  ill,
in  order  to  oblige  us  to  leave.  It  is,  in  sooth,  all,  if
we  have  what  suffices  for  life, —  our  hunger  usually
attends  us  from  morning  till  evening;  but  these
simple  people  do  not  see  that  what  retains  us  here  is
more  precious  than  all  that  they  conceive  in  the  way
of  pleasures  in  this  world.  There  is  hardly  any  corn
in  this  village,  and,  nevertheless,  every  day  some
Attiouandarons  arrive  (they  are  those  of  the  neutral
nation), —  bands  of  men,  women,  and  children,  all
pale  and  disfigured,  whom  famine  drives  hither.
Fleeing  famine,  they here  find death, or  rather  a


50  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

bled  en  ce  bourg,  &  neantmoins  tous  les  iours  arri-
uent  des  Attiouandarons  (ce  font  ceux  de  la  nation
neutre)  des  bandes  d'hommes,  de  femmes  &  enfans,
tous  haures  &  defigurez,  que  la  famine  chaffe  icy:
fuyant  la  famine  ils  trouuent  icy  la  mort,  ou  pluftoft
vne  vie  bien-heureufe ;  car  nous  auons  1' ceil  que  pas
vn  ne  meure  fans  baptefme.  Entre  ceux-la  a  efte  vn
petit  enfant  d'vn  an,  qui  fembloit  pluftoft  vn  monftre
qu'vn  homme:  il  fut  heureufement  baptife,  Dieu  ce
femble  ne  luy  conferuoit  la  vie  que  par  miracle,  arm
qu'eftant  laue  dans  le  fang  de  Iefus-Chrift  il  benift  a
iamais  fes  mifericordes.

[171]  Tandis  que  nous  tafchons  de  rendre  quelque
honneur  a  Dieu,  le  diable  continue  de  fe  faire  adorer:
encore  hier  dans  noftre  cabane  on  luy  fit  vn  facrifice
folennel:  tout  le  monde  y  eftant  affembl6,  on  ietta
plufieurs  fois  du  petun  &  de  la  graiffe  dans  le  feu,
faifant  plufieurs  inuocations:  &  tout  cela  pour  la
guerifon  d'vn  maiheureux  que  fon  demon  priue  amige
d'vne  certaine  maladie,  pource  qu'il  ne  luy  a  pas
obey  en  quelques  feftins  qu'il  luy  auoit  ordonne.

Eft-ce  merueille  qu'on  nous  ait  en  horreur  dans  vn
lieu  ou  les  diables  font  recogneus  pour  maiftres.
Noftre  liofte  veut  qu'on  y  baricade  fa  porte  tous  les
foirs,  crainte  que  de  nuidt  on  ne  nous  faffe  quelque
violence :  car  fi  on  nous  tuoit  dans  fa  maifon  il  en
auroit  les  reproches,  mefme  de  ceux  qui  ne  fouhai-
tent  que  noftre  mort.  Ce  n'eft  pas  ce  qui  nous
affeure:  nous  auons  vne  protection  plus  puiffante,
quoy  que  moins  vifible  a  ces  pauures  infideles

Iufques  icy  les  Peres.

Ce  ne  furent  la  que  les  commencemens  de  leurs
fouffrances:  dans  les  autres  [172]  bourgs  comme  les


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  51


blessed  life,  for  we  see  to  it  that  not  one  dies  with-
out baptism.  Among  those  people  was  a  little  child
of  one  year,  who  seemed  rather  a  monster  than  a
human  being.  It  was  happily  baptized;  God,  it
seems,  preserved  its  life  only  by  miracle,  so  that,
being  washed  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  might
bless  his  mercies  forever.

[171]  While  we  try  to  render  some  honor  to  God,
the  devil  continues  to  be  adored;  even  yesterday,  in
our  cabin,  they  made  him  a  solemn  sacrifice.  All
the  people  being  assembled  there,  they  repeatedly
threw  tobacco  and  fat  into  the  fire,  making  several
invocations ;  and  all  that  for  the  cure  of  a  wretch
whom  his  private  demon  afflicts  with  a  certain  dis-
ease, because  he  has  not  obeyed  him  in  the  matter  of
some  feasts  which  he  had  commanded  him.

'  Is  it  a  wonder  that  we  are  held  in  abomination
at  a  place  where  the  devils  are  acknowledged  as  mas-
ters? Our  host  orders  that  his  door  be  barricaded
every  evening,  fearing  lest  they  do  us  some  violence
by  night ;  for,  if  they  killed  us  in  his  house,  he  would
have  the  reproaches  to  bear  for  it,  even  from  those
who  desire  naught  but  our  death.  It  is  not  this
which  assures  us ;  we  have  a  more  powerful  protec-
tion, although  less  visible  to  these  poor  infidels."

Hitherto  the  Fathers.

Those  were  only  the  beginnings  of  their  sufferings :
in  the  other  [172]  villages,  since  the  rumors  were
continually  increasing,  they  had  more  to  endure ;  they
had  not  been  two  days  in  a  place  before  people  could
no  longer  suffer  them,  and  it  was  necessary  to  change
their  location.  Some  Hurons,  who  went  thither  from
time  to  time  to  effect  some  trades,  incensed  minds
against  them,  and  even  did  their  utmost  to  the  end


52  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESU1TES [Vol.20

bruits  alloient  toufiours  f  'augmentant,  ils  eurent  plus
a  endurer :  ils  n'auoient  pas  efte  deux  iours  en  vn
lieu  qu'on  ne  pouuoit  plus  les  fouffrir,  &  qu'il  falloit
changer  de  place.  Quelques  Hurons  qui  alloient  la
de  fois  a  autres  y  faire  quelques  traittes  animoiet  les
efprits  contre  eux,  &  mefme  firent  leur  poffible  afin
que  Ton  fen  deffift  au  pluftoft.  Tantoii  vn  homme
qui  fe  refueille  auec  effroy  au  milieu  de  la  nuidt,  leur
commande  de  fortir  hors  de  fa  cabane :  tantoft  on
vient  de  dehors  auffi  en  pleine  nuidt  crier  a,  leur  porte
que  le  lendemain  matin  ils  ne  paroiffent  pas  dans  le
bourg :  comme  ils  f ortent  d'vn  bourg  prenant  la  route
de  quelque  autre,  on  les  preuient,  &  on  va  donner
aduis  aux  vilages  prochains  qu'on  ait  a  leur  en  refu-
fer  l'entree :  les  Capitaines  viennent  qui  leur  defen-
dent  d'y  mettre  le  pied,  &  les  menacent  qu'on  leur
fendroit  la  telle  fi  feulement  ils  en  approchoient.

Leur  plus  grand  crime  eft  qu'ils  portent  la  Foy  &
le  nom  de  Iefus  par  tout,  qu'ils  defendent  les  cere-
monies diaboliques;  que  faifant  leurs  prieres  ils
enforcellent  [173]  les  villages.  Mais  leur  ioye  &  con-
folation  eft  celle-la  mefme,  de  fe  voir  ainfi  rebutez
pour  le  nom  de  Iefus,  non  feulement  dans  les  con-
feils,  mais  des  bourgs  &  des  maifons  particulieres,
de  fe  voir  en  l'horreur  de  ceux  dont  ils  recherchent
le  falut  au  peril  de  leur  vie,  endurant  la  faim,  le
froid,  les  pluyes  &  les  neiges:  en  vn  mot  toutes
les  iniures  des  faifons  &  des  temps:  de  fe  voir
menacez  quafi  a  tout  moment  de  mourir  comme  des
malfaidteurs.  Non  eft  feruns  maior  domino  fuo.  Si  le
Sauueur  du  monde  a  efte  traitte  de  la  forte,  les
feruiteurs  n'ont-ils  pas  fujet  de  fe  glorifier  felon  Dieu
portant  les  liur^es  de  leur  maiftre.


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  53

that  they  be  got  rid  of  as  soon  as  possible.  At  one
time  a  man  who  awakens  with  terror  in  the  middle  of
the  night,  commands  them  to  go  forth  from  his  cab-
in; again,  some  one  comes  from  ontside, —  also  in
the  dead  of  night, — to  shout  at  their  door  that  the
next  morning  they  shall  not  appear  in  the  village.
As  they  leave  one  village,  taking  the  way  to  some
other,  they  are  forestalled,  and  one  goes  to  give
warning  to  the  next  villages  that  they  are  to  refuse
them  entrance ;  the  Captains  come  to  forbid  them  to
set  foot  there,  and  threaten  them  that  their  heads
would  be  split  if  they  so  much  as  approached.

Their  greatest  crime  is  that  they  carry  the  Faith
and  the  name  of  Jesus  everywhere ;  that  they  forbid
the  diabolical  ceremonies;  that  while  saying  their
prayers  they  bewitch  [173]  the  villages.  But  their
joy  and  consolation  is  that  very  thing, —  to  see  them-
selves thus  repelled  for  the  name  of  Jesus,  not  only
in  the  councils,  but  also  by  the  villages  and  private
houses ;  to  see  themselves  the  abomination  of  those
whose  salvation  they  seek,  at  the  peril  of  their  own
lives;  enduring  hunger,  cold,  the  rains,  and  the
snows, —  in  a  word,  all  the  inclemencies  of  the  seasons
and  weather:  to  see  themselves  threatened,  almost  at
every  moment,  with  dying  as  malefactors.  Non  est
servus  major  domino  suo.  If  the  Savior  of  the  world
was  treated  like  that,  have  not  his  servants  cause  to
glorify  themselves  in  God,  while  bearing  their  mas-
ter's livery?

Thereupon,  one  of  our  missionaries  falls  sick, — the
fever  seizes  him,  and  some  other  inconveniences;
God  must  indeed  be  their  physician,  their  food,  and
their  all,  on  these  occasions, — since  everything  fails
them  therein.


54  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

La  defTus  vn  de  nos  miffionnaires  tombe  malade,  la
fieure  le  faifit,  &  quelques  autres  incommoditez :  il
faut  bien  que  Dieu  foit  leur  medecin,  leur  nourriture,
&  leur  tout  en  ces  rencontres,  puis  que  la  tout  leur
manque.

A  peine  eit-il  aucunement  foulage  de  fon  mal,
qu'il  faut  partir  a  ieun  des  les  trois  heures  du  matin,
pour  aller  a  vn  autre  bourg  a  vnze  &  douze  lieues  de
la,  [174]  ou  les  affaires  de  Dieu  les  appellent.  Vn
peu  de  pain  du  pays,  fi  toutefois  c'eft  pain  vne  mafle
de  farine  de  bled  d'Inde  detrempee  dedans  l'eau  fans
leuain,  qui  ne  vaut  pas  le  pain  qu'on  fait  en  France
pour  les  chiens,  quelque  nom  qu'on  luy  donne:  ce
peu  qu'ils  portent  de  nourriture  fe  gelle  en  chemin,
&  toutefois  il  faut  fen  contenter,  &  faire  par  neceffite
onze  lieues  n'ayant  pas  mange  en  toute  la  iournee
gros  comme  le  poing  de  ce  manger  fi  delicat :  peu
s'en  faut  qu'ils  ne  demeurent  de  foibleffe:  mais
Noftre  Seigneur  les  affifte,  &  enfin  ils  fe  traifnent
parmy  les  neiges,  &  arriuent  bien  tard  au  lieu  qu'ils
pretendoient,  remplis  de  fueur  d'vn  cofte,  &  de
l'autre  plus  qu'a  demy  gelez.  Quelques  ames  efga-
rees  ea  &  la  qu'on  met  dans  le  chemin  du  ciel  lors
qu'elles  font  fur  le  poind:  d'eftre  abyfmees  dedans
l'enfer,  meritent  mille  fois  plus  que  ces  trauaux,  puis
qu'elles  ont  coufte  plus  cher  au  Sauueur  du  monde.

Lors  que  nos  Miffionnaires  eftoient  dans  ces  perfe-
ctions, Iofeph  Chihouatenhoua,  dont  nous  parlons
fouuent,  [175]  parce  que  fon  zele  &  fon  courage  luy
ont  fait  prendre  bonne  part  en  toutes  nos  f ouffrances ;
ce  bon  Chreftien  voulant  eftre  de  la  partie  quitte  fa
femme  &  fes  enfans,  abandonne  entre  les  mains  de
Dieu  le foin  de  fa  maifon  au  temps  que  tout  leur


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  55

Hardly  is  he  somewhat  relieved  from  his  sickness,
when  it  is  necessary  to  start, — fasting,  as  early  as
three  o'clock  in  the  morning, —  in  order  to  go  to
another  village  eleven  or  twelve  leagues  thence,  [174]
whither  the  affairs  of  God  call  them.  A  little  bread
of  the  land, —  if,  however,  that  be  bread;  a  mass  of
Indian  corn  meal  soaked  in  water  without  leaven,
which  is  not  worth  the  bread  which  in  France  they
make  for  the  dogs;  whatever  name  one  give  it, —  this
little  food  which  they  carry  freezes  on  the  way ;  and
yet  they  must  be  content  with  it,  and  of  necessity
make  eleven  leagues  without  having  eaten  in  the
whole  day  a  lump  as  large  as  the  fist,  of  this  so  deli-
cate fare.  They  almost  stop,  from  weakness,  but
Our  Lord  assists  them ;  and  finally  they  drag  them-
selves through  the  snows,  and  arrive  very  late  at  the
place  whither  they  are  bound  —  on  the  one  hand,  cov-
ered with  sweat,  and,  on  the  other,  more  than  half
frozen.  Some  souls  gone  astray  here  and  there,
which  are  put  in  the  way  to  heaven  when  they  are
on  the  point  of  being  swallowed  up  in  hell,  deserve
a  thousand  times  more  than  these  labors ;  since  they
have  cost  the  Savior  of  the  world  dearer  than  that.

While  our  Missionaries  were  under  these  persecu-
tions, Joseph  Chihouatenhoua, —  of  whom  we  often
speak,  [175]  because  his  zeal  and  his  courage  have
caused  him  to  take  a  good  share  in  all  our  suffer-
ings,—  this  good  Christian,  wishing  to  be  of  the  par-
ty, leaves  his  wife  and  his  children,  and  gives  over
into  the  hands  of  God  the  care  of  his  house  at  the
time  when  all  their  village  was  most  afflicted  with
disease.  This  poor  family  was  every  day  expecting
the  visitation  of  Our  Lord ;  the  poor  mother,  in  par-
ticular was  in  apprehension  for  her  children, —  well


56  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

bourg  eftoit  plus  amige  de  maladie.  Cette  pauure
famille  attendoit  tous  les  iours  la  vifite  de  Noflre
Seigneur:  la  pauure  mere  particulierement  eftoit
dans  l'apprehenfion  pour  fes  enfans,  voyant  bien  que
fon  mary  eftant  eloigne  elle  demeuroit  priuee  d'vn
fort  appuy,  &  fpirituel  &  temporel.  Vn  de  nos  Peres
qui  eftoit  la  voulant  la  confoler  luy  dit  que  ce  voyage
feroit  court,  de  douze  ou  quinze  iours  au  plus.  He-
las,  dit-elle,  nos  enfans  feront  morts  dans  cet  efpace
de  temps  fans  qu'il  ait  appris  la  nouuelle  de  leur  ma-
ladie. Ma  femme,  refpondit  le  mary,  pour  qui  me
prenez-vous?  ie  ne  fuis  rien  du  tout,  he  de  quoy  fer-
uiroit  icy  ma  pref ence  ?  Ouand  mes  enfans  f eroient
malades  tout  ce  que  ie  pourrois  faire  ce  feroit  d'en
auoir  du  reffentiment,  &  donner  de  la  peine  a  mon
efprit  pour  tafcher  de  les  [176]  foulager:  mais  cela
&  rien  c'eft  tout  vn:  c'eft  a  Dieu  feul  qu'il  appar-
tient  de  conferuer  ou  rendre  la  fante  a  qui  il  luy
plaift;  pour  nous  nous  n'auons  qu'a  tafcher  de  luy
plaire  en  toutes  nos  actions:  c'eft  ce  qui  me  fait
feparer  maintenant  d'auec  vous ;  il  me  fuffit  que  ce
foit  fa  volonte :  pour  ce  qui  eft  de  noftre  famille,  il
en  aura  le  foin,  s'il  luy  plaift :  &  puis  voila  mes  freres
les  Ief uites  qui  demeurent  auec  vous ;  quand  ie  ferois
icy,  le  meilleur  que  ie  peuffe  faire  ce  feroit  de  fuiure
leur  confeil:  tenez  voftre  efprit  en  repos.  Deuant
que  de  partir  il  fe  confeffa  &  communia,  &  fur  le
poinct.  de  la  feparation  il  fe  mit  a  deux  genoux  dans
fa  cabane,  pour  offrir  a  Dieu  &  luy  recommander  fa
famille.

II  partit  la  deffus,  lors  qu'il  faifoit  vn  temps  ter-
rible, le  froid  fendoit  les  arbres,  vn  vent  furieux  luy
donnoit  en  face,  mais  le  feu  de  fa  charite"  fut  plus


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  57

seeing  that,  her  husband  being  at  a  distance,  she
would  remain  deprived  of  a  strong  support,  both
spiritual  and  temporal.  One  of  our  Fathers  who  was
there,  wishing  to  console  her,  said  to  her  that  this
journey  would  be  brief, —  twelve  or  fifteen  days  at
most.  "  Alas,'"  she  said,  "  our  children  will  have
died  in  that  space  of  time,  without  his  having  learned
the  news  of  their  illness."  "  My  wife,"  answered
the  husband,  "  whom  do  you  take  me  for?  I  am  noth-
ing at  all,  and  what  would  my  presence  avail  here?
Should  my  children  be  sick,  all  that  I  could  do  would
be  to  feel  distressed  for  them,  and  grieve  my  spirit,
in  order  to  try  to  [176]  relieve  them;  but  that  and
nothing  are  all  one.  To  God  alone  it  belongs  to
preserve  or  to  restore  health  to  whom  he  pleases ;  as
for  us,  we  have  only  to  try  to  please  him  in  all  our
actions.  That  is  what  makes  me  leave  you  now ;  it
is  enough  for  me  that  it  is  his  will.  As  for  our  fam-
ily, he  will  take  care  of  it,  if  he  please:  and  then
here  are  my  brothers  the  Jesuits  who  remain  with
you.  Even  if  I  were  here,  the  best  that  I  could  do
would  be  to  follow  their  advice ;  keep  your  mind  at
rest. ' '  Before  starting  he  confessed  and  received
communion ;  and  at  the  moment  of  the  separation  he
knelt  down  in  his  cabin,  to  offer  and  commend  his
family  to  God.

Thereupon  he  went  away,  while  it  was  terrible
weather;  the  cold  was  cracking  the  trees;  a  furious
wind  was  blowing  in  his  face ;  but  the  fire  of  his
charity  was  stronger  than  all  these  inclemencies.
Having  joined  our  missionaries,  they  begin  to  scour
the  hamlets  and  villages ;  having  arrived  at  the  first
one,  very  weary  and  fatigued,  they  present  them-
selves to  enter  a  [177]  cabin,  but  the  door  is  shut  on


58  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.20

fort  que  toutes  ces  froidures.  S'eftant  joint  a  nos
miffionnaires  ils  commencent  a  parcourir  les  bourgs  &
vilages ;  eftans  arriuez  an  premier,  bien  las  &  fati-
guez,  ils  fe  prefentent  pour  entrer  en  vne  [177]
cabane,  on  leur  ferme  la  porte :  ils  f 'addreffent  a  vne
autre,  ils  y  recoiuent  vn  pareil  refus:  enfin  ce  Chre-
ftien  les  mene  chez  quelques  fiens  parens,  mais  ils
font  contrains  de  defloger  le  ledemain,  apres  auoir
fait  en  ce  bourg  quelques  baptefmes.  Eftans  abor-
dez  en  vne  autre  bourgade,  la  porte  du  Capitaine
leur  eft  incontinent  f ermee ;  il  falut  que  ce  bon  Chre-
ftien  euft  encore  recours  chez  vn  de  fes  parens :  ce
ne  fut  pas  fans  des  reproches  qu'on  luy  fit  de  fe  ran-
ger auec  des  gens  qui  eftoient  les  plus  grands  forciers
de  la  terre:  mais  il  fceut  bien  les  releuer.  Cela
n'empefcha  pas  que  la  nuidt  eftant  venue  vn  ieune
homme  de  la  cabane  ne  fe  mit  en  furie,  foit  qu'il  fut
poffede  du  diable,  foit  qu'il  le  contrefit.  II  iette  les
tifons  des  feux  de  cofte  &  d'autre,  il  brufle  ce  qu'il
trouue,  mefme  de  plus  precieux;  les  barbares  fe
cachent  ou  ils  peuuent.  Ce  phrenetique  vient  iufte-
ment  f e  ietter  en  la  place  ou  font  nos  miffionnaires :
mais  par  bon-heur  ils  venoient  de  s'en  retirer.  Comme
ce  fol  eftoit  la  a  faire  mille  tours  d'enrage,  cherchant
des  yeux  ceux  a  qui  il  en  vouloit,  [178]  on  l'aduertit
doucement  du  lieu  ou  ils  s'eftoient  retirez.  Noftre
Iofeph  ayant  eu  affez  bonne  oreille  pour  entendre  cet
aduis:  Quoy  done,  s'efcria-il,  ce  fol  a  de  l'efprit,  &
vous  confpirez  auec  luy?  Nonobftant  ce  frenetique,
foit  vray,  foit  contrefait,  va  de  fureur  au  lieu  ou
eftoit  vn  de  nos  Peres,  qui  fe  retire  en  mefme  temps,
&  fort  de  la  cabane  pour  trouuer  quelque  gifte  ail-
leurs  au  milieu  de  la  nuidt.  Dieu  fcait  quels  eftoient
les  deff eins  de  ce  fol :  mais  il  fut  incontinent  guery.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  59

them;  they  apply  at  another,  they  receive  there  a
like  refusal.  Finally,  this  Christian  leads  them  to
some  relatives  of  his,  but  they  are  constrained  to
dislodge  the  next  day,  after  having  effected  some
baptisms  in  this  village.  Having  reached  another
village,  the  Captain's  door  is  immediately  closed  to
them ;  this  good  Christian  is  again  obliged  to  have
recourse  to  one  of  his  kinsmen.  This  was  not  without
reproaches  which  they  administered  to  him  for  tak-
ing the  part  of  people  who  were  the  greatest  sorcerers
on  earth ;  but  he  knew  well  how  to  meet  them .  That
did  not  prevent,  when  night  had  come,  a  young  man
of  the  cabin  from  falling  into  a  fury ;  either  he  was
possessed  by  the  devil,  or  he  pretended  to  be.  He
throws  all  the  firebrands  hither  and  thither ;  he  burns
what  he  finds,  even  things  most  precious ;  the  bar-
barians hide  themselves  where  they  can.  This  fren-
zied man  then  comes,  to  fall  upon  the  very  place
where  our  missionaries  are;  but  by  good  fortune
they  had  just  withdrawn  from  it.  As  this  lunatic
was  in  the  act  of  performing  a  thousand  mad  freaks
there,  looking  for  those  against  whom  he  had  a
grudge,  [178]  he  is  quietly  informed  of  the  place
whither  they  had  withdrawn.  Our  Joseph,  having
had  good  enough  ears  to  hear  this  information,  ex-
claimed: "  What,  then?  this  lunatic  has  his  senses,
and  you  are  conspiring  with  him!"  Nevertheless
this  madman,  true  or  counterfeit,  goes  in  fury  to  the
place  where  one  of  our  Fathers  was,  who  at  the  same
time  withdraws  and  leaves  the  cabin,  in  order  to  find
some  shelter  elsewhere,  in  the  middle  of  the  night.
God  knows  what  were  this  crazy  man's  designs:  but
he  was  forthwith  cured.

In  another  village, where  some  days  before  our


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

En  vn  autre  bourg,  ou  quelques  iours  auparauant
nos  Peres  auoient  efte  affez  bien  accueillis,  tout  le
monde  leur  refufoit  le  gifte,  &  toutefois  la  nuidt
eftoit  bien  proche:  lors  qu'ils  ne  fcauoient  ou  aller,
eftant  tous  tranfis  de  froid  &  tous  moui'llez,  vn  bon
vieillard  qu'ils  auoient  autrefois  inftruit,  &  qui  auoit
goufte  la  parole  de  Dieu,  fapproche  d'eux:  &  quoy
ta  porte  nous  fera  elle  auffi  fermee,  luy  dirent-ils?
Venez,  a  la  bonne  heure,  refpondit  ce  vieillard.
C'eftoit  vn  eftranger  d'vne  nation  ennemie,  qu'ils
appellent  Atfiftaehronons,  Nation  du  feu,  qui  [179]
ayant  efte  pris  captif  des  fon  bas  aage,  receut  la  vie,
&  f'habitua  parmy  eux.  Non  eft  inuentus  nifi  hie  alie-
nigena  qui  daret  laudem  Deo.  Ce  bon  homme  receut
auidemment  les  paroles  de  falut,  toutesfois  comme
nous  ne  nous  preffons  pas  tant  pour  les  baptefmes,
on  le  remit  a  vne  autre  fois.

Ce  fut  dans  le  bourg  principal  de  faindt  Pierre  &
faindt  Paul  oil  eftans  retournez  y  faire  vne  feconde
vifite,  ils  ne  peurent  trouuer  aucun  qui  voulut  les
admettre :  les  portes  leur  font  fermees  d'abord,  mefme
de  ceux  qui  du  commencement  auoient  tefmoigne'
quelque  pieufe  affection  pour  la  Foy :  ils  n'entendent
que  des  menaces  &  des  maledidtions ;  les  femmes  s'ef-
crient  tout  haut,  ou  font  maintenant  ceux  qui  difoient
que  fi  ces  habillez  de  noir  retournoiet  ils  leur  fen-
droient  la  tefte.  Les  heures  fe  paffent,  &  plus  ils  fe
prefentent  a  de  cabanes,  plus  ils  font  refufez.  Les
enfans  crient  apres  eux  comme  apres  des  forciers:
enfin  la  nuidt  s'approche  &  les  oblige  de  fortir  de  ce
bourg,  ou  pas  vn  n'auoit  efte  trouue"  digne  de  les
receuoir;  ils  n'eftoient  pas  bien  [180]  loin,  qu'vne
trouppe  infolente de ieunes  gens les fuit  la  hache


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  61

Fathers  had  been  quite  well  received,  every  one
refused  them  shelter;  and  yet  the  night  was  very
near,  while  they  knew  not  where  to  go,  being  chilled
through  Avith  cold,  and  all  wet.  A  good  old  man
whom  they  had  formerly  instructed,  and  who  had
relished  the  word  of  God,  approaches  them.  "  How
now,"  they  said  to  him,  "  will  your  door  be  closed
to  us  also?"  "  Come,  and  be  welcome,"  answered
this  old  man.  He  was  a  stranger, —  from  a  hostile
nation  which  they  call  Atsistaehronons,  "  Nation  of
fire,"7 — who,  [179]  having  been  taken  captive  in  his
early  years,  received  his  life,  and  came  to  be  at  home
among  them.  Non  est  inventus  nisi  hie  alienigena  qui
daret  laudem  Deo.  This  good  man  eagerly  received
the  words  of  salvation ;  however,  as  we  make  no  great
haste  about  baptisms,  he  was  put  off  till  another
time.

It  was  in  the  principal  village  of  saint  Pierre  and
saint  Paul,  where,  having  returned  to  make  a  second
visit,  they  could  find  no  one  who  would  admit  them.
The  doors  are  at  first  closed  to  them,  even  by  those
who  at  the  start  had  shown  some  pious  affection  for
the  Faith :  they  hear  naught  but  threats  and  maledic-
tions. The  women  exclaim  aloud,  "  Where  are  now
those  who  said  that,  if  these  black-robed  men  returned,
they  would  split  their  heads?"  The  hours  pass,  and
the  more  they  appear  before  the  cabins,  the  more
they  are  refused;  the  children  scream  after  them,  as
after  sorcerers.  Finally,  night  comes  on,  and  obliges
them  to  leave  this  village,  where  not  one  had  been
found  worthy  to  receive  them ;  they  were  not  very
[180]  far  when  an  insolent  band  of  young  men  pur-
sues them,  hatchet  in  hand,  to  massacre  them.  The
captain  of  this  village  had  exhorted  them  to  that  at  a


62  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.20


en  main  pour  les  maffacrer.  Le  capitaine  de  ce  bourg
les  auoit  exhorte  a  cela  dans  vn  feftin  ou  ils  eftoient
tous  affemblez.  Ie  ne  fcay  fi  ce  fut  vn  bon-heur  ou
mal-heur  pour  nous,  que  ces  barbares  fe  mirent  vn
peu  trop  tard  en  chemin,  &  ne  peurent  pas  les  attein-
dre :  peut-eftre  nofkre  fang  f eroit  plus  pour  la  con-
uerfion  de  ces  peuples,  que  toutes  nos  fueurs.

Le  lendemain  le  capitaine  de  ce  mal-heureux  bourg
vint  trouuer  nos  Miffionnaires  au  vilage  ou  ils  s' eftoi-
ent retirez  pour  f aire  f es  excuf es :  mais  il  auoit  bien  de
la  peine  a  fe  purger.  Ce  fut  lors  que  noftre  Iofeph
Chiouatenhoua  fit  plus  paroiftre  fon  courage,  &  rele-
ua  bien  ce  capitaine,  qui  s'eftonnoit  de  ce  que  nous
appellions  les  chofes  de  la  Foy  affaires  d'importance.
Ce  Chreftien  done  prenant  la  parole,  luy  dit:  C'eft
bien  vous  autres  capitaines  qui  ignorez  ce  que  c'eft
qu'affaires  d'importance;  c'eft  vous  qui  auez  ren-
uerfe"  noftre  pays  nous  feparant  des  maximes  &  bons
reglemens  de  nos  anceftres ;  ce  font  ces  robes  noires
icy  [181]  que  vous  mefprifez  qui  fcauent  ce  que  c'eft
qu'affaires  d'importance,  &  qui  viennent  pour  nous
l'apprendre.  Ie  veux  bien  que  tu  fcache  que  c'eft
moy  que  par  derifion  on  appelle  partout  Le  croyant :
on  penfe  me  maudire,  &  c'eft  la  ma  plus  grande
gloire:  ie  fuis  vn  tel,  i'ay  tels  &  tels  parens  en  ton
bourg,  ie  fais  profeffion  de  fuiure  les  bons  enfeigne-
mens  que  ces  miens  maiftres  me  donnent:  nous  n'a-
uons  point  d'efprit  tous  tant  que  nous  fommes;  nous
[sc.  nos]  penfees  ne  s'eftendent  pas  plus  loing  que
cette  vie ;  ceux  qui  croyent  iettent  leurs  efperances
fur  vne  eternite  de  biens  qui  affeurement  les  atten-
dent ;  pour  vous  autres  qui  eftes  toufiours  infidelles,
vous  n'attendez  pas  des  miferes  apres  vc-ftre  mort,  &


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  63

feast  where  they  were  all  assembled.  I  know  not
whether  it  was  a  good  fortune  or  a  bad  fortune  for
us,  that  these  barbarians  set  forth  a  little  too  late,
and  could  not  overtake  them;  perhaps  our  blood
would  do  more  for  the  conversion  of  these  peoples
than  all  our  sweat.

The  next  day,  the  captain  of  this  wretched  village
came  to  find  our  Missionaries  in  the  village  whither
they  had  retreated,  in  order  to  make  his  excuses ;  but
he  had  much  difficulty  in  clearing  himself.  Then  it
was  that  our  Joseph  Chiouatenhoua  most  revealed
his  courage,  and  finely  criticized  this  captain,  who
was  astonished  that  we  called  the  things  of  the  Faith
matters  of  importance.  This  Christian,  then  taking
up  the  matter,  said  to  him:  "It  is  really  you  cap-
tains, who  know  not  what  are  matters  of  importance ;
you  are  the  ones  who  have  overturned  our  country
by  separating  us  from  the  maxims  and  good  regula-
tions of  our  ancestors ;  it  is  these  black  gowns  here,
[181]  whom  you  despise,  who  know  what  matters  of
importance  are,  and  who  come  to  teach  us  the  same.
I  would  have  thee  know  that  I  am  the  one  who  am
everywhere,  in  derision,  called  '  The  believer:  '  they
think  to  curse  me,  and  that  is  my  greatest  glory.  I
am  that  man ;  I  have  such  and  such  kinsmen  in  thy
village;  I  make  profession  of  following  the  good
instructions  which  these  my  teachers  give  me.  We
have  no  sense,  as  many  as  we  are;  our  thoughts
extend  no  further  than  this  life.  Those  who  believe
found  their  hopes  upon  an  eternity  of  good  things
which  assuredly  await  them;  as  for  you  who  are
always  infidels,  you  do  not  expect  miseries  after  your
death,  and  yet  they  will  be  inevitable  for  you  unless
you  open your  eyes to your  wretchedness. You


64  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jESUITES  [Vol.20

toutefois  elles  vous  feront  ineuitables  fi  vous  n'ouurez
les  yeux  a  voftre  mal-heur:  vous  chaff ez  ceux  qui
vous  ayment  plus  qu'eux  mefmes,  puis  que  leur  vie
leur  eft  moins  precieufe  que  voftre  falut  qu'ils  vien-
nent  procurer  de  fi  loing  auec  tant  de  trauaux.  Nos
anceftres  ont  efte  en  quelque  facon  excufables  s'ils
n'ont  pas  adore  ce  grand  maiftre  qui  a-cree  le  monde,
pas  vn  ne  [182]  leur  enfeignoit:  mais  vous  ferez  cent
mille  fois  plus  punis  qu'eux,  puis  que  vous  voulez
demeurer  dedans  voftre  mifere,  quoy  qu'on  tafche
a  vous  en  retirer.  Tout  ce  que  put  refpondre  ce
capitaine  fut  de  dire,  Cela  eft  vray,  &  deftourner  le
propos  ailleurs.

Voila  comme  l'Euangile  a  efte  receue  de  ces  pau-
ures  barbares:  Ce  n'eft  pas  qu'on  ne  trouue  quali
toufiours  en  quelque  bourg  qu'on  aille  quelque  ame
a  retirer  du  precipice,  &  dont  le  falut  qu'on  procure
rend  pleines  de  douceur  toutes  les  amertumes  qu'il
faut  par  necefute  deuorer:  &  en  cela  ce  qui  confole
dauantage  eft  qu'on  y  void  fenfiblement  la  main  de
Dieu.

Entrant  dedans  vn  bourg  (m'efcrit  le  Pere  Gamier)
i'apprens  qu'on  preparoit  feftin  en  vne  cabane,  au
nom  d'vn  enfant  qui  fe  meurt,  ie  m'y  prefente,  i'y
trouue  auffi-toft  mon  refus;  ie  me  retire  &  recom-
mande  a  Noftre  Seigneur  ce  petit  innocent :  quelque
temps  apres  fes  parens  m'enuoyent  inuiter  au  feftin,
&  ce  auant  qu'on  allaft  inuiter  le  commun:  i'entre,
ie  trouue  place  tout  proche  du  [183]  malade:  faifant
femblant  de  luy  tafter  la  veine  de  la  tempe  pour  re-
cognoiftre  l'eftat  de  fa  fante,  i'arroufe  heureufement
fon  ame  du  fang  de  Iefus-Chrift,  qui  l'appella  a  foy
pour  affifter  au  banquet  eternel.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  65

drive  out  those  who  love  you  more  than  themselves,
since  their  lives  are  less  precious  to  them  than  your
salvation,  which  they  come  to  obtain,  from  so  great
a  distance,  with  so  many  labors.  Our  ancestors  have
been  in  some  sort  excusable  if  they  have  not  adored
this  great  master  who  has  created  the  world,  for  no
one  [182]  taught  them;  but  you  will  be  a  hundred
thousand  times  more  severely  punished  than  they,
since  you  choose  to  remain  in  your  misery,  although
one  try  to  draw  you  out  of  it."  All  that  this  captain
could  answer  was  to  say,  "  That  is  true,"  and  turn
the  subject  of  conversation  elsewhere.

You  see  how  the  Gospel  has  been  received  by  these
poor  barbarians.  Not  that  we  do  not  almost  always
find,  in  whatever  village  we  go  to,  some  soul  to  draw
away  from  the  precipice,  and  whose  salvation,  which
we  procure,  fills  with  sweetness  all  the  bitterness
which  must  needs  be  swallowed.  And  what  further
consoles  us  in  that  is,  that  we  see  manifestly  the
hand  of  God  therein.

"  On  entering  a  village  "  (Father  Gamier  writes  to
me)  "  I  learn  that  a  feast  is  being  prepared  in
a  cabin,  in  the  name  of  a  dying  child.  I  present
myself  there;  I  straightway  meet  with  a  refusal.
I  withdraw,  and  recommend  this  little  innocent  to
Our  Lord ;  some  time  after,  his  parents  send  to  invite
me  to  the  feast;  and  that  before  they  went  to
invite  the  public.  I  go  in,  and  find  a  place  quite
near  the  [183]  patient;  pretending  to  feel  the  vein
of  his  temple,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  state  of  his
health,  I  fortunately  sprinkle  his  soul  with  the  blood
of  Jesus  Christ,  who  called  him  to  himself  to  be  pres-
ent at  the  feast  everlasting.

"  In  another  village,  shortly  after  I  had  arrived,  I


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

Dans  vn  autre  vilage,  pen  apres  y  eflre  arrittez,  ie
fais  rencontre  d'vn  petit  enfant  de  dix  iours;  ie  voy
bien  qu'il  n'eft  pas  pour  cette  vie  mortelle,  ie  le
baptife  le  lendemain  il  eft  au  ciel.

Faifant  vne  excurfion  en  vn  autre  petit  bourg,  ie
trouue  vn  enfant  de  deux  iours,  dont  la  mere  eftoit
venue  d'vn  autre  bourg  faire  fes  couches  en  celuy-
cy :  cet  enfant  n'eftoit  ne  que  pour  eftre  heureux,  car
il  mourut  bie  toft  apres  le  fain<5t  baptefme  que  ie  luy
conferay  a  la  faueur  d'vne  bonne  femme,  qui  a  de
bonnes  inclinations  pour  la  Foy,  &  que  Dieu  en
mefme  temps  n'auoit  ce  femble  amene  de  dix  lieues
loin  pour  autre  fujet  que  pour  me  rendre  cette  afsi-
ftance. Iufques  icy  le  Pere.

Ces  prouidences  fi  aimables  de  Dieu,  &  plufieurs
autres  femblables  coups  de  falut  pour  quelques  ames
predeftinees,  [184]  nous  font  bien  recognoiftre  que
nous  ne  fommes  pas  tout  feuls,  &  qu'il  y  a  mille  per-
fonnes  dans  la  France  qui  leuent  les  mains  au  ciel,
tandis  que  nous  fommes  au  combat:  Ce  fera  dans
l'eternite  oil  nous  verrons  a  qui  appartiennent  les  def-
poiiilles  que  nous  emportons  icy  fur  les  puiffances  de
l'enfer.  Tant  de  vceux  &  tant  de  faindts  defirs  pour
la  conuerfion  de  ces  peuples,  des  mortifications  fi  fre-
quentes  &  fi  continues  qui  fe  font  a  cette  intention,
&  particulierement  trois  mille  Meffes  qui  fe  difent
pour  le  mefme  fujet  le  fecond  Dimanche  de  chaque
mois,  &  des  communions  innombrables  qui  fe  font  a
mefme  iour :  (faueur  qui  nous  a  eft6  faindtement  moy-
ennee  par  vne  perfonne  de  grand  merite,  qui  femble
n' eftre  au  monde  que  pour  obliger  le  ciel  &  la  terre.)
c'eft  fans  doute  ce  qui  flechit  le  cceur  de  Dieu,  &  luy
fait  verfer  deffus  nous  tant  de  graces. II  eft  ce  fern-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  67

run  across  a  little  child  of  ten  days ;  I  well  see  that
it  is  not  for  this  mortal  life ;  I  baptize  it,  and  the
next  day  it  is  in  heaven.

"  Making  an  excursion  to  another  little  village,  I
find  a  child  of  two  days,  whose  mother  had  come
from  another  village  to  be  confined  in  this  one.  This
child  had  been  born  only  to  be  happy,  for  it  died
soon  after  holy  baptism,  which  I  conferred  on  it  by
the  favor  of  a  good  woman  who  is  well  disposed
toward  the  Faith,  and  whom  God,  it  seems,  had  at
the  same  time  brought  from  ten  leagues'  distance,
for  no  other  purpose  than  to  render  me  this  assist-
ance." Thus  far  the  Father.

These  so  gracious  providences  of  God,  and  several
other  like  acts  of  salvation  for  some  predestined
souls,  [184]  cause  us  plainly  to  discern  that  we  are
not  all  alone,  and  that  there  are  a  thousand  persons
in  France  who  lift  their  hands  to  heaven  while  we  are
in  the  fight.  In  eternity  we  shall  see  to  whom  the
spoils  belong  which  we  conquer  here  from  the  powers
of  hell.  So  many  vows  and  so  many  holy  desires
for  the  conversion  of  these  peoples;  so  frequent
and  so  continuous  mortifications,  which  are  borne
for  this  object ;  and  especially  three  thousand  Masses
which  are  said  for  the  same  purpose  on  the  second
Sunday  of  each  month,  and  countless  communions
which  are  received  on  the  same  day  (a  favor  which
has  been  devoutly  obtained  for  us  by  a  person  of
great  merit,  who  seems  to  be  in  the  world  only  to
oblige  heaven  and  earth), —  all  this,  no  doubt,  is  what
moves  God's  heart,  and  causes  him  to  pour  upon  us
so  many  graces.  He  is,  it  would  seem,  gently  com-
pelled,—  this  great  God, —  not  to  refuse  to  so  power-
ful an effort  of  prayers,  a  number  of  souls. Who


68  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

ble  doucement  force*  ce  grand  Dieu  a  ne  pas  refufer
a  vn  fi  puiffant  effort  de  prieres  vn  nombre  d'ames.
Qui  fcait  fi  voyant  que  ces  peuples  n'euffent  pas  fait
profit  dans  la  fante  des  paroles  de  [185]  leur  falut,  il
n'a  point  permis  toutes  ces  maladies,  pour  attirer  a
foy  par  cette  voye  ceux  qu'il  auoit  choifis?  N'eft-il
pas  raifonnable  de  croire  que  450.  enfans  qui  font
morts  apres  le  baptefme,  ont  efte"  rauis  de  ce  monde,
crainte  que  la  malice  n'alteraft  la  blancheur  de  leur
innocece :  &  pourquoy  ne  penf  erons  nous  pas  que  des
peuples  eftrangers  ou  iamais  nous  n'auons  mis  le
pied,  qui  cette  annee  font  venus  mourir  entre  nos
mains,  chaffez  de  leur  pays  par  la  famine,  n'ayent
efte  conduits  fans  qu'ils  y  penfaffent  du  faindt  Efprit,
qui  a  voulu  part  ce  moyen  fournir  &  accomplir  ce
nombre  d'ames  qu'il  deuoit  mettre  au  ciel  en  vertu
de  toutes  ces  prieres.

II  faut  confeffer  que  nous  ne  pouuons  pas  refpondre
du  futur,  &  qu'enuifageant  ces  affaires  des  yeux  de
la  chair,  on  n'y  voit  pas  le  iour  que  plufieurs  y  defire-
roient.  Mais  quoy,  c'eft  l'ouurage  de  Dieu,  c'eft  luy
feul  qui  en  voit  le  terme,  &  qui  en  cognoift  les  moy-
ens:  c'eft  a  nous  a  le  fuiure,  &  non  pas  a  le  preuenir.
II  faut  feruir  vn  maiftre  felon  fa  volonte,  &  quoy
qu'arriue,  eftre  content  pourueu  [186]  qu'il  le  foit:
c'eft  la  gloire  de  Dieu  que  les  chofes;  aillent  comme
il  le  veut.  Souuent  nous  auancons  le  plus  lors  que
nous  croyons  eftre  bien  reculez :  nous  auons  veu  en
plufieurs  malades  que  nous  auons  beaucoup  gaigne"  a
les  inftruire  lors  qu'ils  eftoient  en  fante,  quoy  qu'a-
lors  il  nous  fembloit  auoir  perdu  tout  noftre  temps :
plufieurs  ont  adore  a  l'heure  de  la  mort  celuy  qu'ils
blafphemoient  durant  leur  vie. La  parole  de  l'Euan-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  69

knows  whether  —  seeing  that  these  peoples  would
not  have  profited  in  health  by  the  words  of  [185]
their  salvation  —  he  has  not  permitted  all  these  dis-
eases in  order  to  draw  to  himself  in  this  way  those
whom  he  had  chosen?  Is  it  not  reasonable  to  believe
that  450  children,  who  have  died  after  baptism,  have
been  snatched  from  this  world  for  fear  that  mischief
should  alter  the  whiteness  of  their  innocence  ?  And
why  shall  we  not  think  that  strange  tribes,  among
whom  we  have  never  set  foot, —  who  this  year  have
come  to  die  in  our  hands,  being  driven  from  their
country  by  famine, —  have  been  led,  without  their
thinking  of  it,  by  the  holy  Ghost,  who  has  wished  by
this  means  to  furnish  and  complete  that  number  of
souls  which  he  was  destined  to  put  in  heaven  by
virtue  of  all  these  prayers?

It  must  be  acknowledged  that  we  cannot  answer  for
the  future,  and  that  by  contemplating  these  affairs
with  eyes  of  the  flesh,  one  does  not  see  the  light  in
them  which  many  would  desire  therein.  But  what
then?  this  is  God's  work;  he  alone  sees  the  end  of  it
and  knows  the  means  for  it;  it  is  for  us  to  follow
him,  and  not  to  anticipate  him.  One  must  serve  a
master  according  to  his  will,  and,  whatever  betides,
be  content,  provided  [186]  that  he  be  so:  it  is  the
glory  of  God  that  things  go  as  he  wills.  Often  we
advance  the  most  when  we  think  we  are  far  behind ;
we  have  seen,  in  the  case  of  several  sick  people,  that
we  have  gained  much  by  instructing  them  when  they
were  in  health,  although  at  the  time  it  seemed  to  us
that  we  had  lost  all  our  labor ;  several  have  adored,
at  the  hour  of  death,  him  whom  they  blasphemed  dur-
ing their  lives.  The  word  of  the  Gospel  germinates
when  the  holy  Ghost  wills  to  render  it  fruitful ;  it  is


70  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  20

gile  germe  quad  le  f  aindt  Ef  prit  la  vent  rendre  f  econde :
c'eft  a  nous  feulement  a  la  femer  auec  fidelity,  &  at-
tendre  les  momens  du  ciel.  PlufLeurs  qui  ne  voyent
nos  Hurons  que  de  quinze  cens  lieues  d'icy,  s'impa-
tientent  qu'ils  ne  foient  defia  tous  conuertis,  &  pen-
fent  qu'il  ne  faut  que  parler  des  grandeurs  de  la  Foy
pour  les  rendre  adorables:  d'autres  defefperent  quafi
du  falut  de  ces  pauure  barbares,  voyant  qu'ils  font  fi
efloignez  des  fentimens  non  feulement  de  la  Foy,
mais  mefme  de  la  raifon,  le  prierois  volontiers  les
premiers  de  fonger  qu'il  n'y  a  point  de  pays  fur  la
terre  qui  fe  foit  fi  toft  conuerty.  Si  des  peuples  ciui-
lifez  ont  efte  des  fiecles  [187]  entiers  a  recognoiftre
Iesvs  Christ,  peut-on  raifonnablemet  exiger  vne
plus  prompte  obei'ffance  des  peuples  qui  font  nez  dans
labarbarie?  S'ils  les  confideroient  de  pres,  ils  pren-
droient  pour  vn  vray  miracle  que  mefme  vn  feul  euft
efte1  conuerty:  car  il  femble  que  ny  l'Euangile,  ny
l'Efcriture  faindte  n'ayent  efte  compofez  pour  eux.
Non  feulement  les  mots  leur  manquent  pour  expri-
mer  la  faindtete  de  nos  myfteres,  mais  mefme  les
paraboles  &  les  difcours  plus  familiers  de  Iefus-Chrift
leur  font  inexplicables:  ils  ne  fcauent  ce  que  c'eft
que  fel,  leuain,  chafteau,  perle,  prifon,  grain  de
moutarde,  tonneaux  de  vin,  lampe,  chandelier,  flam-
beau :  ils  n'ont  aucune  idee  des  Royaumes,  des  Roys,
&  de  leur  majefte:  non  pas  mefme  de  pafteurs,  de
troupeaux  &  de  bergerie:  en  vn  mot  l'ignorance
qu'ils  ont  des  chofes  de  la  terre  femble  leur  fermer
le  chemin  du  ciel.  Les  motifs  de  credibility  pris  de
l'accompliffement  des  propheties,  des  miracles,  des
Martyrs,  des  Conciles,  des  faincts  Dodteurs,  des
hiftoires  tant  facrees  que  profanes,  de  la  faindtete'  de


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  71

for  us  merely  to  sow  it  with  fidelity,  and  await
heaven's  moments.  Many  who  only  see  our  Hurons
fifteen  hundred  leagues  from  here  are  impatient  that
they  are  not  already  all  converted,  and  think  that  one
must  simply  speak  of  the  grandeur  of  the  Faith  in
order  to  render  it  adorable ;  others  almost  despair  of
the  salvation  of  these  poor  barbarians, — seeing  that
they  are  so  removed  from  the  sentiments  not  only  of
the  Faith,  but  even  of  reason.  I  would  earnestly
entreat  the  former  to  reflect  that  there  is  no  country
on  earth  which  has  been  converted  so  soon.  If  civi-
lized peoples  have  been  whole  centuries  [187]  in
acknowledging  Jesus  Christ,  can  one  reasonably
demand  a  readier  obedience  from  the  peoples  who
have  been  born  in  barbarism?  If  they  considered
them  closely,  they  would  accept  for  a  real  miracle
the  fact  that  even  a  single  one  had  been  converted ;
for  it  seems  that  neither  the  Gospel  nor  holy  Scrip-
ture has  been  composed  for  them.  Not  only  do  words
fail  them  to  express  the  sanctity  of  our  mysteries,
but  even  the  parables  and  the  more  familiar  discourses
of  Jesus  Christ  are  inexplicable  to  them.  They  know
not  what  is  salt,  leaven,  stronghold,  pearl,  prison,
mustard  seed,  casks  of  wine,  lamp,  candlestick,  torch ;
they  have  no  idea  of  Kingdoms,  Kings,  and  their
majesty;  not  even  of  shepherds,  flocks,  and  a  sheep-
fold, —  in  a  word,  their  ignorance  of  the  things  of  the
earth  seems  to  close  for  them  the  way  to  heaven.
The  grounds  for  credence,  taken  from  the  fulfill-
ment of  the  prophecies;  from  miracles,  Martyrs,
Councils,  holy  Doctors,  histories  both  sacred  and
profane;  from  the  holiness  of  [188]  the  Church,  and
from  the  external  splendor  which  renders  it  vener-
able to  the  greatest  Monarchs  of  the  world, —  all  that


72  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20


[188]  l'Eglife,  &  de  l'6clat  exterieur  qui  la  rend  vene-
rable aux  plus  grands  Monarques  du  monde;  tout
cela  n'a  point  icy  de  lieu :  par  ou  la  Foy  peut-elle
entrer  dans  leur  efprit?

Mais  toutefois  ce  feroit  impiete"  de  defefperer  du
falut  de  ces  peuples,  le  fang  de  Iefus-Chrift  a  efte"
refpandu  pour  eux :  la  main  de  Dieu  n'eft  pas  racour-
cie; fi des pierres  il  en peut fufciter  des enfans
d' Abraham,  s'il  peut  rendre  les  fteriles  fecondes,  pour-
quoy  ne  pourra-il  pas  tirer  de  ces  deferts,  &  du  pro-
fond  de  cette  barbarie  des  hommes  qu'il  formera  felon
fon cceur,  & qu'il placera parmy les Choeurs des
Anges? Ce  qu'on  a  veu  dans  les  autres  contrees  du
monde,  ce  que  nous  mefmes  nous  voyons  icy  de  nos
yeux  doit  animer  nos  efperances,  &  faire  que  nous
prenions  des  fentimens  dignes  de  la  bonte  de  Dieu.
II  eft  vray  que  la  plufpart  de  ces  pauures  barbares
s'endurciffent dans  leurs pechez, &  fe  rendent  de
iour  en  iour  plus  indignes  des  graces  de  Dieu ;  il  eft
vray  qu'ils  fe  mutinent  a  toute  occafion  contre  la  main
du  medecin  qui  veut  guerir  leur  [189]  mal,  nous  pre-
nant  pour  la  caufe  de  toutes  leurs  miferes,  &  s'  exci-
tant les  vns  les  autres  a  nous  faire  mourir ;  il  eft  fans
doute  que  toutes  les  raifons  humaines  nous  font  pa-
roiftre  de  plus  en  plus  de  nouuelles  difficultez  en  cet
ouurage:  mais  c'eft  de  cela  mefme  que  nous  tirons
nos  plus  pui flans  motifs  pour  efperer  contre  toute
efperance, auffi  bien que faifoit Abraham. Nous
recognoiffons  euidemment  que  c'eft  Dieu  qui  conduit
nos  affaires,  &  pas  vn  ne  le  peut  nier  qui  ouurira  les
yeux  [aux] chofes  que  nous  voyons  iournellement.
Ces  barbares  defiroient  quafi  tous  noftre  mort,  auffi
paffionnement  qu'ils  fouhaittent la  confer uation de


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  73

has  no  place  here ;  where  can  the  Faith  enter  their
minds?

But,  nevertheless,  it  would  be  impiety  to  despair
of  the  salvation  of  these  peoples, —  the  blood  of  Jesus
Christ  has  been  shed  for  them ;  the  hand  of  God  is
not  shortened.  If  from  stones  he  can  raise  up
children  to  Abraham,  if  he  can  render  the  barren
fruitful,  why  will  he  not  be  able  to  draw  from  these
deserts,  and  from  the  depth  of  this  barbarism  men
whom  he  will  train  according  to  his  heart,  and  whom
he  will  place  among  the  Choirs  of  Angels?  What
has  been  seen  in  the  other  regions  of  the  world,  what
we  ourselves  see  here  with  our  own  eyes,  should
animate  our  hopes,  and  cause  us  to  entertain  senti-
ments worthy  of  the  goodness  of  God.

It  is  true  that  most  of  these  poor  barbarians  grow
hardened  in  their  sins,  and  become  from  day  to  day
more  unworthy  of  God's  graces;  it  is  true  that  they
rebel,  on  every  occasion,  against  the  hand  of  the
physician  who  wishes  to  cure  their  [189]  disease, —
taking  us  to  be  the  cause  of  all  their  miseries,  and  urg-
ing one  another  to  make  us  die.  It  is  beyond  doubt
that  all  human  reasons  more  and  more  disclose  to  us
new  difficulties  in  this  work :  but  from  that  very  thing
we  derive  our  most  powerful  motives  for  hoping
against  all  hope,  as  well  as  did  Abraham.  We  mani-
festly discern  that  it  is  God  who  guides  our  affairs,
and  not  one  can  deny  this  who  will  open  his  eyes  to
things  which  we  see  daily.  These  barbarians  near-
ly all  desired  our  death  as  passionately  as  they
craved  the  preservation  of  their  own  lives ;  in  their
speeches  they  talked  of  nothing  but  slaughtering
us, —  that  was  an  ordinary  theme  of  their  councils ;
nothing  in  the  world  is  so  easy  to  them,  and  even


74  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

leur  vie ;  ils  ne  parloient  dans  leurs  dif cours  que  de
nous  maffacrer,  c'eftoit  vn  fujet  ordinaire  de  leurs
confeils:  rien  au  monde  ne  leur  eft  fi  facile,  &  mefme
ils  euffent  pu  le  faire  fans  que  deuant  les  hommes  on
leur  euft  impute  ce  crime.  Nous  ne  viuons  que  de
ce  qu'eux  mefmes  nous  vendent  &  nous  viennent
apporter  en  noftre  maifon :  qui  les  a  contraint  de  le
faire?  Ils  ont  l'vfage  du  poifon;  ne  pourroient-ils
pas  [190]  chaque  iour  en  mefler  dans  ce  qu'ils  nous
apportent?  Ils  fe  tuent  affez  fouuent  les  vns  les
autres,  &  ces  meurtres  s'imputent  aux  ennemis,  qui
tout  le  long  de  l'efl6  &  de  l'automne  font  aux
embufches  fur  les  chemins ;  qui  les  retient  de  nous
maffacrer  durant  ces  temps,  que  nous  courons  de
bourg  en  bourg  fans  armes  ny  defenfe,  quelquefois
feuls,  &  au  plus  deux  de  compagnie?  N'eft-ce  pas
Dieu  qui  leur  ferme  les  yeux?  n'eft-ce  pas  luy  qui
nous  protege,  &  qui  veut  que  nous  ne  doutions  pas
du  foin  qu'il  a  de  nous;  &  que  luy  feul  eft  noftre
fortereffe,  nos  canons,  nos  arm6es,  noftre  pouruoy-
eur,  noftre  tout.  Nous  voyons  qu'il  prend  fon  temps
&  fes  momens  a  l'heure  mefme  qu'il  le  faut:  il  nous
donne  l'accez  aupres  de  ceux  qu'il  veut  tirer  a  foy,
quoy  que  la  terre  &  l'enfer  s'y  oppofe,  &  cela  fe  fait
auec  tant  de  fuauite  &  d'emcace,  qu'il  eft  aife  de
iuger  que  c'eft  vn  coup  de  cette  main  qui  touche  for-
tement  d'vne  extremite  a  vne  autre,  &  va  difpofant
de  tout  auec  douceur.

Lors  que  la  maladie  rauageoit  ce  pays,  nos  ouuriers
Euangeliques  iouyffoient  [191]  d'vne  fante  plus
robufte  que  iamais  en  leur  vie  ils  n'auoient  eu:  la
maladie  ay  ant  ceff6,  &  par  confequent  la  neceffite
n'eftant  plus  de  courir  de  bourgade  en  bourgade  pour


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  75

they  might  have  done  it  without  having  had  this
crime  imputed  to  them  before  men.  We  live  only
on  what  they  themselves  sell  us,  and  come  to  bring
us  in  our  house:  who  has  constrained  them  to  do
this?  They  have  the  use  of  poison;  could  they  not
[190]  each  day  mix  some  in  what  they  bring  us?
They  kill  one  another  quite  frequently,  and  these
murders  are  imputed  to  the  enemies,  who  through-
out the  summer  and  autumn  are  in  ambushes  along
the  roads ;  who  restrains  them  from  slaughtering  us
during  those  times  when  we  journey  from  village  to
village, — without  arms  or  defense,  sometimes  alone,
and,  at  most,  two  together?  Is  it  not  God,  who
shuts  their  eyes?  is  it  not  he  who  protects  us,  and
who  wills  that  we  shall  not  doubt  the  care  that  he
has  for  us ;  and  that  he  alone  is  our  fortress,  our  can-
nons, our  armies,  our  purveyor,  our  all?  We  see
that  he  takes  his  opportunity  and  his  moments  at
the  very  hour  when  there  is  need  of  it ;  he  gives  us
access  to  those  whom  he  wishes  to  draw  to  himself,
though  earth  and  hell  oppose ;  and  that  is  done  with
so  much  ease  and  effectiveness  that  it  is  easy  to
judge  that  this  is  an  act  of  that  hand  which  strongly
influences  from  one  extremity  to  the  other,  and
continues  to  arrange  everything  quietly.

While  the  disease  was  ravaging  this  country,  our
Evangelistic  workers  enjoyed  [191]  a  more  robust
health  than  they  had  ever  had  in  their  lives;  the
disease  having  ceased, —  and  consequently  there
being  no  longer  necessity  to  hasten  from  village  to
village,  in  order  to  succor  those  poor  infidels  at  the
hour  of  death, —  we  saw  ourselves  caught  by  the  legs,
and  attacked  by  the  land  disease  [scurvy].  Did  not
that  adorable  providence  thus  ordain  ? In  a  word,  we


76  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20


fecourir  ces  pauures  infideles  a  l'heure  de  la  mort,
nous  nous  fommes  veus  arreftez  par  les  jambes,  &
attaquez  du  mal  de  terre.  N'eft-ce  pas  cette  adorable
prouidence  qui  en  a  ordonne  de  la  forte  ?  En  vn  mot
nous  ne  fommes  que  les  inftrumens  de  ce  bras  tout-
puiffant,  c'eft  Dieu  qui  ell  le  maiftre,  fes  deffeins  ne
demeurent  iamais  imparfaits :  puis  done  que  iufques
icy  les  commencemens  font  de  luy,  ne  deuons  nous
pas  efperer  qu'il  accomplira  fon  ouurage.  Et  ainfi
que  les  Hurons  confpirent  noftre  mort,  que  les  moyens
humains  nous  manquent  pour  fouftenir  icy  nos  vies,
que  les  ennemis  de  ces  peuples  f'accroiffent  comme
ils  font  toutes  les  annees,  leur  coupent  le  chemin
qu'ils  tiennent  pour  defcendre  a  Kebec,  &  en  ce  fai-
fant  nous  priuent  du  peu  de  fecours  que  nous  tirons
de  la.  Que  tout  l'enfer  &  les  demons  fe  foufleuent
contre  la  Foy  &  contre  ceux  qui  la  publient,  nos  con-
fiances  &  nos  [192]  penf6es  de  paffer  plus  auant  n'en
diminueront  pas  d'vn  poind:,  puis  qu'elles  ont  pour
appuy  la  Croix  de  Iefus-Chrift,  qui  doit  en  fin  fub-
iuguer  tout  le  monde,  &  fe  faire  adorer  des  Anges,
des  hommes  &  des  enfers.

Depuis  la  Relation,  voicy  vne  lettre  venue  des
Hurons,  addreffee  au  R.  P.  Vimont,  qui  merite  de
faire  partie  de  ce  prefent  narre\

Mon  Reuerend  Pere,
Pax  Chrijii.
II  femble  que  les  derniers  canots  qui  doiuent  def-
cendre n'attendent  a  partir  que  pour  nous  donner
moyen  de  faire  fcauoir  a  V.  R.  vne  nouuelle  qui  ie
m'affeure  la  furprendra  autant  qu'elle  nous  a  furpris:


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  77

are  but  the  instruments  of  that  almighty  arm ;  God
is  the  master;  his  designs  never  remain  unperfected.
Since,  then,  hitherto  the  beginnings  are  from  him,
should  we  not  hope  that  he  will  complete  his  work?
And  thus,  while  the  Hurons  conspire  for  our  death ;
while  human  means  fail  us  to  maintain  our  lives
here ;  while  the  enemies  of  these  peoples  increase  as
they  do,  every  year;  while  they  cut  off  for  them  the
way,  which  they  hold,  for  going  down  to  Kebec,  and
by  so  doing  deprive  us  of  the  little  aid  which  we
derive  thence ;  while  all  hell  and  the  demons  rise  up
against  the  Faith  and  against  those  who  announce
it;  our  confidence,  and  our  [192]  thoughts  of  passing
on  beyond,  will  not  diminish  by  one  jot,  since  they
have  for  support  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  must
finally  subjugate  all  the  world,  and  be  adored  by
Angels,  men,  and  the  regions  of  hell.

Since  the  Relation,  here  follows  a  letter  which  has
come  from  the  Hurons,  addressed  to  Reverend  Fa-
ther Vimont ;  which  deserves  to  go  with  the  present
narrative.

My  Reverend  Father,
Pax  Christi.

It  seems  that  the  last  canoes  which  are  to  go  down
are  waiting  to  start,  only  to  give  us  means  of  acquaint-
ing Your  Reverence  with  a  piece  of  news  which  I
am  sure  will  surprise  you  as  much  as  it  has  surprised
us, —  and  will  cause  you  to  put  in  the  number  of  the
profound  secrets  and  of  the  adorable  dispensations
of  the  divine  providence,  that  which  we  cannot
consider  without  astonishment.

I  was  preparing  to  write  to  Your  Reverence  for


78  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  20

&  luy  fera  mettre  au  nombre  des  fecrets  profonds  &
des  difpofitions  adorables  de  la  diuine  prouidence,  ce
<^ue  nous  ne  pouuons  confiderer  fans  eftonnement.

Ie  me  difpofois  a  efcrire  a  V.  R.  pour  la  derniere
fois  de  cette  prefente  annee,  [191  i.e.,  193]  par  la
voye  de  Iofeph  Chihouatenhoua  noftre  bon  Chreftien,
&  voila  que  le  mefme  papier  dont  il  deuoit  eftre  le
porteur,  eft  employe  pour  porter  a  V.  R.  la  nouuelle
de  fa  mort.

Hier  fur  le  foir,  deuxiefme  du  courant,  lors  qu'il
trauailloit  en  fon  champ  a  couper  quelques  arbres,
deux  Hiroquois,  ennemis  des  Hurons  fortirent  du
bois  prochain  ou  ils  fe  tenoient  en  embufche,  &  s'e-
ftans  ruez  deffus  luy,  le  percerent  d'vne  longue  efpee,
puis  l'ayat  abbattu  de  deux  coups  de  hache  fe  retire-
rent  promptement  a  la  fuite,  apres  luy  auoir  enleue
fa  cheuelure  felon  leur  couftume,  pour  l'emporter  en
triomphe  dans  leur  pays.  Comme  on  vit  en  fa  mai-
fon  qu'il  tardoit  a  reuenir,  on  fe  douta  de  ce  qui  eftoit
arriu£;  &  en  effect  ayant  efte"  pour  le  chercher,  on
trouua  au  lieu  mefme  fon  cadaure  eftendu  roide  mort,
&  enfeuely  dans  fon  fang.  II  y  a  de  l'apparence  qu'ils
ne  l'eurent  pas  fans  refiftance,  &  les  anciens  du  bourg
apres  la  vifite  du  lieu,  ont  iuge  par  le  foulement  de
la  place  &  le  p[i]etillement  du  bled,  qu'il  auoit  rendu
du  combat,  &  [192  i.e.,  194]  que  les  ennemis  n'en
fuffent  venus  a  bout  s'ils  n'euffent  eu  vne  lono;ue
efpee  dont  ils  l'atteignirent.  Sans  doute  que  cette
mort,  quoy  que  fubite  a  ce  bon  &  excellent  Chreftien,
ne  le  prit  pas  a  l'impourueu:  car  outre  qu'il  eftoit
continuellement  en  la  grace  de  Dieu,  comme  affeu-
rent  ceux  qui  ont  eu  foin  de  fon  ame,  &  entendu  fes
confeffions,  qui  d'vn  cofte  f'eftonnoient  des  lumieres


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  79

the  last  time  in  this  current  year,  [191  i.e.,  193]  by
the  hand  of  Joseph  Chihouatenhoua,  our  good  Chris-
tian ;  and  now  the  same  paper  of  which  he  should
have  been  the  bearer  is  used  to  carry  to  Your  Rever-
ence the  news  of  his  death.

Yesterday,  toward  evening,  the  second  of  this
month,  while  he  was  working  in  his  field  to  cut  down
some  trees,  two  Hiroquois,  enemies  of  the  Hurons,
issued  from  the  neighboring  wood,  where  they  lay  in
ambush,  and  having  rushed  upon  him,  pierced  him
with  a  long  javelin.  Then,  having  felled  him  with
two  blows  of  a  hatchet,  they  promptly  retreated  in
flight,  after  having  removed  his  scalp  according  to
their  custom,  in  order  to  carry  it  away  in  triumph  to
their  country.  When  it  was  seen,  in  his  house,  that
he  was  late  in  coming  back,  they  suspected  what  had
happened;  and  in  fact,  having  gone  to  look  for  him
they  found  at  the  very  place  his  body  outstretched,
stone-dead,  and  covered  with  his  blood.  There  are
indications  that  they  did  not  take  him  without  re-
sistance ;  and  the  elders  of  the  village,  after  visiting
the  place,  have  inferred  by  the  marks  of  feet  round
about,  and  from  the  trampling  of  the  corn,  that  he
had  shown  fight,  and  [192  i.e.,  194]  that  the  enemies
would  not  have  succeeded  if  they  had  not  had  a  long
javelin  with  which  they  reached  him.  No  doubt  this
death,  although  sudden  for  this  good  and  excellent
Christian,  did  not  take  him  unprepared :  for,  besides
the  fact  that  he  was  continually  in  the  grace  of  God, —
as  those  affirm  who  had  charge  of  his  soul  and  heard
his  confessions,  who  on  the  one  hand  were  astonished
at  the  enlightenment  which  God  gave  him  concern-
ing his  least  failings ;  and  on  the  other  hand  admired
the  tenderness  of  his  conscience  and  his  fidelity  in


80  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

que  Dieu  luy  donnoit  de  fes  moindres  deffauts:  &
d'aiitre  part  admiroient  la  tendreffe  de  fa  confcience,
&  fa  fidelite  a  refpondre  aux  graces  de  Dieu.  Ce  iour
la  mefme  des  le  matin  il  s'eftoit  mis  a  deux  genoux  a
fon  ordinaire  au  milieu  de  la  cabane,  recommendant
fon  ame  a  Dieu,  &  s'orfrant  auec  toute  fa  famille  a
tout  ce  qu'il  plairoit  a  Noftre  Seigneur  difpofer  de
luy  ou  des  liens.  Sur  le  midy  eftant  forty  de  fa
cabane  auec  trois  de  fes  petits  niepces  pour  aller  en
fon  champ,  il  ne  fift  que  les  inftruire  par  le  chemin,
puis  eftant  arriue  fur  le  lieu,  &  y  voyant  les  fruidts
de  la  terre  extraordinairement  beaux ;  Mettons  nous
a  genoux,  dit-il,  &  remercions  Dieu  de  ces  biens  qu'il
nousdonne:  [193  i.e.,  195]  c'eft  bien  le  moins  que
nous  puiffions  faire,  puis  que  fans  ceffe  il  continue
fes  benedictions  deffus  nous.  Apres  qu'ils  eurent
prie  Dieu  il  leur  fift  cueillir  quelques  citrouilles,  &  au
pluftoft  les  renuoya  toutes  trois  chargees  a  la  maif on,
leur  difant  qu'ils  n'eftoient  pas  en  lieu  affeure;  que
pour  luy  il  alloit  dans  les  bois  coupper  quelques
baftons  de  Cedre  pour  acheuer  le  canot  qui  le  deuoit
porter  a  Kebec,  &  qu'au  retour  il  continueroit  a  tra-
uailler  dans  fon  champ  le  relte  de  la  iournee,  ce  tra-
uail  eftant  neceffaire.  Mais  quoy!  c'eftoit  la  mefme
ou  quelques  heures  apres  la  mort  le  deuoit  trouuer.
Dimanche  dernier  il  eftoit  venu  en  noftre  maif  on,
efloign^e  maintenant  de  la  fienne  d'enuiron  trois
lieues,  auec  fa  femme  &  fes  deux  enfans,  pour  y  faire
fes  deuotions  a  fon  ordinaire.  Apres  s'eftre  confeffe
&  communie  il  auoit  fait  venir  &  auoit  offert  a  Noftre
Seigneur  les  premiers  fruidts  de  ce  mefme  champ  ou
depuis  il  a  efte  tue :  &  Dieu  fans  doute  accepta  des
lors  &  le  don  &  celuy  qui  faifoit  l'offrande,  l'ayant


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  81

responding  to  the  graces  of  God, —  on  that  very  day,
promptly  in  the  morning,  he  had  knelt  as  was  his
wont  in  the  middle  of  the  cabin,  commending  his
soul  to  God  and  offering  himself,  together  with  his
whole  family,  to  whatever  it  should  please  Our  Lord
to  dispose  for  him  or  his.  Toward  noon,  having  left
his  cabin  with  three  of  his  little  nieces,  to  go  to  his
field,  he  did  nothing  but  instruct  them  by  the  way ;
then  having  reached  the  place,  and  seeing  there  the
fruits  of  the  earth,  uncommonly  flourishing:  "  Let
us  kneel,"  he  said,  "  and  thank  God  for  these  good
things  which  he  gives  us;  [193  i.e.,  195]  it  is  the
very  least  that  we  can  do,  since  he  continues  his
blessings  upon  us  without  ceasing. ' '  After  they  had
prayed  to  God,  he  had  them  gather  some  squashes;
and,  as  soon  as  possible,  he  sent  them  back,  all  three
burdened,  to  the  house, — telling  them  that  they  were
not  in  a  secure  place ;  that,  as  for  him,  he  was  going
into  the  woods  to  cut  some  sticks  of  Cedar  to  finish
the  canoe  which  was  to  carry  him  to  Kebec ;  and  that
on  his  return  he  would  continue  to  work  in  his  field
for  the  rest  of  the  day,  this  work  being  necessary.
But  what!  there  it  was,  in  fact,  where  death  was  to
find  him  several  hours  later.

Last  Sunday,  he  had  come  to  our  house, —  now
distant  about  three  leagues  from  his, —  with  his  wife
and  his  two  children,  in  order  to  offer  his  devotions
there  as  usual.  After  having  confessed  and  received
communion,  he  had  sent  for  and  had  offered  to  Our
Lord  the  first  fruits  of  that  same  field  in  which  he
has  since  been  killed ;  and  God  no  doubt  even  then
accepted  both  the  gift  and  him  who  was  making  the
offering, — having  found  him  ripe  [194  i.e.,  196]  for
heaven, —  inasmuch  as  so  few  days  later  he  has  willed


82  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

trouu£  meur  [194  i.e.,  196]  pour  le  ciel;  puis  que  11
peu  de  iours  apres  il  a  voulu  le  cueillir  du  parterre
de  fon  Eglife  militante  pour  le  mettre  dans  la  triom-
phante.  Ceux  qui  auront  leu  les  Relations  prece-
dentes,  &  celles  de  cette  annee  n'auront  pas  de  la
peine  a  le  croire;  Dieu  n'auoit  pas  commence  &  con-
duit fi  auant  vn  ouurage  fi  rare  pour  ne  pas  continuer
deffus  luy  fes  mifericordes  autant  &  plus  a.  l'heure  de
la  mort  qu'il  n'auoit  fait  pendant  fa  vie.  Ceux  qui
ont  cogneu  de  plus  pres  ce  bon  Chreftien,  &  qui  l'ont
pratique  eux  mefmes,  me  rendent  tefmoignage  qu'il
auoit  vne  prefence  de  Dieu  quafi  continuelle,  qu'il
agiffoit  en  tout  auec  des  intentions  dignes  d'vn  cceur
vrayement  Chreftien :  &  que  fi  quelquesfois  fon  efprit
s'efgaroit  le  moins  du  monde  hors  de  la  voye  des
Saindts,  il  fe  retrouuoit  incontinent,  &  fe  confondoit
de  fes  fautes  legeres  comme  d' autant  de  crimes  qu'il
commettoit  dans  1 'amour  de  celuy  fans  lequel  il
n'euft  pas  voulu  refpirer  vn  moment.  Pour  moy  ie
puis  dire  en  verite,  que  i'admirois  en  luy  de  iour  en
iour  les  puiffans  effects  de  la  grace  qui  pofledoit
entierement  [195  i.e.,  197]  fon  cceur,  &  que  ie  ne  fou-
haitte  point  d' autre  recompenfe  apres  cette  vie,  que
le  lieu  ou  ie  crois  affeurement  que  foit  fon  ame.

II  eft  vray  que  nous  efperions  beaucoup  de  luy  pour
la  conuerfion  de  ces  peuples,  dont  il  s'eftoit  rendu
Apoftre  durant  le  cours  de  cette  annee;  mais  puis
que  les  Saindts  ont  plus  de  pouuoir  lors  qu'ils  font
dans  le  ciel  qu'icy  bas  fur  terre,  nous  deuons  croire
que  nous  auons  plus  gaigne  que  perdu  a  fa  mort.
Nous  verrons  en  fon  temps  ce  qu'elle  produira.

Puis  que  le  temps  me  preffe,  &  que  les  canots  font
fur  le  point  de  partir,  ie  fuis  contraint  de  rompre  icy,


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  83

to  gather  him  from  the  garden  of  his  Church  militant,
in  order  to  put  him  in  the  one  triumphant.  Those
who  may  have  read  the  preceding  Relations  and  the
ones  for  this  year  will  have  no  difficulty  in  believing
this ;  God  had  not  begun  and  conducted  so  far  for-
ward so  rare  a  work  not  to  continue  upon  him  his
mercies  as  much  and  more,  at  the  hour  of  death,  than
he  had  done  during  his  life.  Those  who  have  been
most  closely  acquainted  with  this  good  Christian,  and
who  have  themselves  tested  him,  render  me  the  evi-
dence that  he  had  an  almost  continual  sense  of  the
presence  of  God,  that  in  everything  he  acted  with
intentions  worthy  of  a  truly  Christian  heart.  They
say  that  if,  at  times,  his  mind  strayed  in  the  least
from  the  way  of  the  Saints,  he  straightway  recovered
himself,  and  was  confounded  by  his  slight  faults  as
by  so  many  crimes  that  he  was  committing  against
the  love  of  him  without  whom  he  would  not  have
wished  to  breathe  a  moment.  As  for  me,  I  can  say
in  truth  that  I  admired  in  him  from  day  to  day  the
powerful  effects  of  the  grace  which  wholly  possessed
[195  i.e.,  197]  his  heart;  and  that  I  desire  no  other
recompense  after  this  life  than  the  place  in  which  I
certainly  believe  his  soul  is.

It  is  true  that  we  hoped  much  from  him  for  the
conversion  of  these  tribes,  whose  Apostle  he  had
made  himself  during  the  course  of  this  year;  but
since  the  Saints  have  more  power  when  they  are
in  heaven  than  here  below  on  earth,  we  are  bound
to  believe  that  we  have  gained  more  than  lost  at
his  death.  We  shall  see  in  due  time  what  it  will
produce.

Since  time  presses  me,  and  as  the  canoes  are  on
the  point  of  starting,  I  am  constrained  to  stop  here,


84  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

&  n'en  pas  dire  dauantage,  quoy  qu'il  y  ait  des  chofes
qui  n'ayant  deu  eftre  publiee  d'vn  homme  auant  fa
mort,  couronnee  dubon  de  perfeuerance,  meriteroient
d'eftre  ic)^  adiouft6e,  pour  faire  aduoiier  a  tout  le
monde  que  Dieu  eft  admirable  dans  fes  Saindts,
autant  en  cette  barbarie  qu'en  autre  lieu  du  monde :
mais  fi  elles  ne  font  cogneues  en  terre  elles  le  feront
dans  le  ciel :  c'eft  la  oil  fans  ceffe  nous  benirons
[196  i.e.,  198]  Dieu  de  fes  mifericordes  qu'il  va  exer-
cant  fur  cette  pauure  barbarie,  &  fur  ceux  qu'il  veut
y  employer.  V.  R.  continue,  s'il  luy  plaift,  par  fes
faindts  facrifices  &  prieres  de  nous  ayder  a  ne  nous
en  pas  rendre  indignes.
De  V. R.

Tres-humble  &  obeiflant  feruiteur,  felon
Dieu,  Hierosme  Lalemant.

Des  Hurons,  ce  3.
d'Aouft  1640.


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  85

and  say  no  more ;  although  there  are  things  which  —
though  not  proper  to  publish  of  a  man  before  his
death,  crowned  with  the  good  of  perseverance  —  would
deserve  to  be  added  here,  in  order  to  cause  all  the
world  to  admit  that  God  is  admirable  in  his  Saints,
no  less  in  this  land  of  barbarism  than  in  any  other
place  in  the  world.  But,  if  these  things  are  not
known  on  earth,  they  will  be  in  heaven:  there  we
shall  ceaselessly  bless  [196  i.e.,  198]  God  for  his
mercies  which  he  continues  to  exercise  over  this  poor
barbarous  people,  and  over  those  whom  he  wills  to
employ  for  them.  Your  Reverence  will  continue,  if
you  please,  by  your  holy  sacrifices  and  prayers  to  aid
us  to  render  ourselves  not  unworthy  thereof.
Your  Reverence's

Very  humble  and  obedient  servant  in
God,  Hierosme  Lalemant.

From  the  Hurons,  this  3rd
of  August,  1640.


XLII  —  XLIII

Two  Letters  of  1641

XLII. —  Lettre  du  P.  Charles  Gamier  a  son  Frere  ;  Sainte-
Marie  aux  Hurons,  23  juin,  1641

XLIII. —  Excerpta Epistola Patris Joannis de Brebeuf ad
Praspositum  Generalem;  Kebec,  August  20,  164 1


SOURCE  :  Document  XLII.  is  from  a  contemporary  copy
of  the  original  letter,  in  French,  made  by  a  member  of  the
Gamier  family,  in  France.  Document  XLIII.  consists  of
extracts  from  Brebeuf s  letter  in  Latin,  made  from  the
original  in  1858,  by  Father  Felix  Martin  ;  this  apograph  is  in
the  archives  of  St.  Mary's  College,  Montreal ;  an  indorse-
ment thereon,  by  Father  Martin,  shows  that  the  letter  was
written  at  Quebec,  August  20,  1641.


88  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20


Lettre  du  P.  Charles  Gamier  a  son  Frere.

MON  TRES  CHER  FRERE
Notre  Sgr.  Vous  remplisse  le  Cceur  de  son
S1.  amour
Jay  de  la  Consolation  o  [sc.  non]  seulement  a  receuoir
de  Vos  letres  mais  aussy  a  vous  enuoyer  des  miennes.
Cest  pour  quoy  Ce  ma  ete  vne  Mortification  que  vous
nayez  recu  celles  que  Je  vous  auois  ecrites  il  y  a  deux
ans  je  Croy  quelles  auront  ete  perdues  dieu  soit  beni
de  tout  j  aurois  sans  doute  bien  plus  de  Consolation  a
vous  ecrire  si  j  auois  a  vo  [sc.  vous]  mander  quelque
Notable  auancemt.  que  j  eusse  fait  ou  po  [sc.  pour]
ma  perfection  particuliere  ou  pour  la  Conuersion  des
Sauuages  Coe  [sc.  comme]  Vous  Croyez  que  jay  fait,
mais  patience  ma  Consolation  est  que  de  tout  Ce  que
je  vo  manderay  vous  entirerez  sujet  de  louer  honorer
et  aymer  Dieu  dauantage.  Je  suis  dans  vn  employ
tout  diuin  Benissez  en  dieu  a  jamais  et  de  tout
votre  Cceur  son  Innnie  misericorde  me  fait  mil  et  mil
graces  po  me  Conduire  a  la  perfection  que  requiert
Cet  Employ  qe  Votre  Cceur  defaille  dans  les  Elans  d'a-
mour  qe  vo  jettez  vers  Cette  souueraine  bonte  Je  suis
tres  Infidel  a  Correspondre  a  Ces  graces  Innombrables
fachez  vo  Contre  moy  auec  Dauid  admirez  la  patience
de  Dieu  et  Consolez  Vous  de  Ce  qe  no  auons  a  faire
a  vn  si  bon  Mr. ,  qui  ne  se  lasse  point  et  no  appelle  a
soy  II  ne  se  rebute  point  de  Nos  stupidites  Imperti-
nences et  Malices Courage  mon  tres  cher  frere  si


1640-41]  GARNIER TO  HIS  BROTHER  89


Letter  from  Father  Charles  Gamier  to  his  Brother.

MY  DEAREST  BROTHER,—
May  Our  Lord  fill  Your  Heart  with  his
Holy  love.
I  feel  Consolation  not  only  in  receiving  Your  let-
ters, but  also  in  sending  you  my  own.  Therefore  It
was  a  Mortification  to  me  that  you  did  not  receive
those  that  I  had  written  to  you  two  years  ago :  I  Sup-
pose they  may  have  been  lost;  God  be  blessed  in
all.  I  would,  no  doubt,  have  much  more  Consolation
in  writing  to  you  if  I  had  some  Notable  progress  to
announce  to  you  that  I  might  have  made, —  either
toward  my  individual  perfection,  or  toward  the
Conversion  of  the  Savages, —  As  You  Think  I  have
done.  But  patience!  my  Consolation  is  that  from
Whatever  I  shall  communicate  to  you,  you  will  de-
rive reason  to  praise,  honor,  and  love  God  the  more.
I  am  in  an  occupation  wholly  divine:  Bless  God  for
it  forever,  and  with  all  your  Heart ;  his  Infinite  mer-
cy shows  me  a  thousand,  thousand  favors  to  Lead  me
unto  the  perfection  which  This  Occupation  requires.
Let  Your  Heart  break  in  the  Transports  of  love  that
you  pour  forth  toward  That  sovereign  goodness.  I
am  very  Faithless  in  Responding  to  These  Innumer-
able favors;  be  angry  At  me,  with  David  admire  the
patience  of  God,  and  Console  Yourself  That  we  have
to  deal  with  so  good  a  Master,  who  wearies  not,  and
calls  us  to  himself.  He  is  not  repelled  by  Our  stu-
pidities, Impertinences,  and  Evil  actions. Courage,


90  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

nous  auons  passe  deux  ans  Voir  six  Voir  trente  a
faire  la  sourde  Oreille,  Croyons  et  Esperons  qe  demain
nous  Commencerons  a  ouvrir  l'oreille  a  Cette  Voix  si
aymable  et  si  patiente  Et  pour  quoy  je  Vous  prie  ne
le  Croyrions  no  pas  aynsy  puisque  no  voyons  et  sca-
uons  que  le  patient  Iesus  no  appelle  encore  Mais
d'un  appel  amoureux  et  qui  l'emportera  mais  nous  ne
scauons  pas  quand  esperons  tousjours  que  Ce  sera  au
plutost  6  je  ne  Croy  pas  que  no  fassions  plus  grande
faute  au  seruice  de  Dieu  que  de  perdre  Courage  que
de  laisser  a  battre  no  Cceur  par  la  deffiance  et  la  pusil-
lanimity tous  les  autres  pechez  ne  sont  rien  au  prix
de  Celuy  la  au  moins  il  ny  en  a  point  qui  empesche
tant  no  \sc.  notre]  auancemt  que  Ces  bas  sentimens
de  la  Bonte  de  Dieu  enuers  no,  et  bien  souuent  Cest
par  Ce  peche  que  le  Diable  Ce  \sc.  Se]  saisit  de  Notre
Cceur  po  y  faire  entrer  par  apres  tous  les  autres  mon
Cher  frere  no  [n']effrayons  point  po  n'auoir  auance"
ny  meme  po  auoir  recule  il  ny  a  presque  point  d'ame
a  qui  Cela  n'arriue  quelque  fois  mais  Courons  aux
desseins  que  Dieu  a  detirer  sa  Gloire  de  Ces  Infideli-
tez  Vos  souffrances  et  Incommoditez  purgeront  vo  \sc.
votre]  Cceur  Esperez  le  ainsy  quoy  quil  Vous  sem-
ble  que  Vo  les  preniez  bien  mal  Je  prie  dieu  qu'il
no  face  la  grace  de  trouuer  par  tout  la  paix  de  Votre
Cceur  Je  Croy  que  vo  deuez  auoir  de  la  Consolation
a  lire  les  autres  de  Mr.  de  Salles  Je  ne  scay  si  vous
auez veu vn Certain petit liure Intitule  ....

C  est  Vn  petit  tresor  de  Consolation

que  Ce  Petit  liure  mais  la  source  de  toutte  douceur
et  tout  le  soutien  de  Nos  Cceur  C  est  Jesvs  au  st.
sacremt.  et  ne  dittes  point  qe  Vous  ne  s  auouerez  point
Ce  pain  de  Vie  tenez  seulemt. bon  a  vo  entretenir


1640 -41 J  GARNIER  TO  HIS  BROTHER  91

my  dearest  brother;  if  we  have  spent  two  years  —
Even  six,  Even  thirty  —  in  turning  a  deaf  Ear,  let  us
Believe  and  Hope  that  to-morrow  we  shall  Begin  to
open  our  ears  to  This  Voice,  so  gracious  and  so
patient.  And  why,  I  beg  You,  should  we  not  thus
Believe,  since  we  see  and  know  that  the  patient  Jesus
still  calls  us?  But  with  a  loving  call,  and  one  which
will  gain  the  day,  only  we  know  not  when ;  let  us  hope,
at  all  events,  that  It  will  be  as  soon  as  possible.  Oh,
I  do  not  Believe  that  we  can  commit  a  greater  fault
in  the  service  of  God,  than  to  lose  Courage,  and  to
allow  our  Hearts  to  be  cast  down  by  distrust  and
pusillanimity.  All  the  other  sins  are  nothing  in
comparison  with  That  one, —  at  least,  there  is  none
which  so  much  impedes  our  progress  as  These  low
opinions  of  the  Goodness  of  God  toward  us ;  and  very
often  It  is  by  That  sin  that  the  Devil  seizes  Our
Hearts  in  order  to  let  into  them  afterward  all  the
others.  My  Dear  brother,  let  us  not  be  alarmed  for
not  having  advanced  nor  even  for  having  receded ;
there  is  hardly  any  soul  to  which  That  does  not
sometimes  happen.  But  let  us  Hasten  to  the  pur-
poses which  God  has  for  deriving  his  own  Glory  from
These  Unfaithful  acts;  Your  sufferings  and  Incon-
veniences will  purge  your  Heart.  Hope  this,  there-
fore, although  it  seem  to  You  that  You  take  them
very  ill.  I  pray  God  to  grant  you  the  grace  to  find
everywhere  the  peace  of  Your  Heart.  I  Think  that
you  must  find  Consolation  in  reading  the  other
[works]  of  Monsieur  de  Salles.8  I  know  not  whether
you  have  seen  a  Certain  little  book  Entitled  ....

It  is  A  little  treasure  of  Consolation,

This  Little  book;  but  the  source  of  all  sweetness,
and  the  whole  support  of  Our  Hearts  is  Jesus  in  the


92  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.20

quelque  temps  apres  la  St.  Messe  et  a  quelques  Visites
du  st.  sacremt.  auec  Cet  Hoste  tout  aymable  selon
que  Vos  occupations  Vous  le  permettent  adorons  le
et  Embrassons  le  protestons  luy  que  no  sommes  a  luy
malgre  no  meme,  et  quil  fasse  de  Nous  ce  quil  luy
plaira  pardonnez  moy  mon  Cher  frere  prenez  que
Cest  a  moy  seul  que  je  parole  en  Cette  lettre  et  non
a  vous  et  ainsy  prenez  moy  po  vn  f  ol  Car  il  est  vray
que  jextrauague  mais  priez  dieu  quil  me  change  et
alors  Comme  je  Croy  je  vo  ecriray  quelque  chose  de
bon  tel  que  je  suis  je  ne  laisse  pas  de  prier  dieu  po
vo  et  po  notre  pauure  frere  prodigue  et  je  le  fais  sou-
uefit  Je  ne  scay  si  vo  auez  recu  tous  deux  l'an  passe
mes  letres  par  lesquelles  je  vo  mandois  qe  Je  priois
N.  S.  d'auoir  po  agreable  1' Intention  que  j'auois  que
Certain  nombre  de  messes  que  je  dirois  au  temps  de
Votre  mort  a  tous  deux  si  d  auanture  vo  partez  de-
uant  moy  Vous  fussent  appliquez  Helas  Ce  pauure
prodigue  ne  rentrera  til  point  dedans  soy  prions  le
Pere  et  la  Mere  des  misericordes  d'auoir  pitie  de  luy.
Po  vo  dire  quelques  nouuelles  de  Ce  pays  vo  scau-
rez  que  no  auons  ete  Cette  annee  treize  prestres  de
Notre  Compagnie  scauoir  est  les  R.  P.  hierosme  Lal-
lemant  N.  superieur  Le  P.  Brebeuf  le  P  Lemercier
Le  P.  Daniel  Le  P.  Raimbault  et  le  P.  Claude  Pijart
qui  vinrent  l'an  passe"  de  Quebec  po  Instruire  quel-
ques Nations  Algonquinnes  et  non  huronnes  qui  sont
en  Ces  quartiers  Cy  le  P.  Jogues  Le  P  Le  Moyne  Le
P.  du  Peron  Le  P.  Chaumonot  Le  P.  Chastelin  Le  P.
Pierre  Pijart  et  moy  qui  no  sommes  partages  l'hiuer
dernier  en  six  Missions  Le  P.  brebeuf  et  Le  P.  Chau-
monet  sont  allez  a  la  Nation  Neutre  nation  ou  on  n'a-


1640-41]  GARNIER  TO  HIS  BROTHER  93

blessed  sacrament.  And  say  not  that  You  do  not
relish  This  bread  of  Life :  deem  it  only  good  to  con-
verse for  some  time  after  the  Holy  Mass,  and  at  some
Visits  to  the  blessed  sacrament,  with  This  wholly
gracious  Host,  according  as  Your  occupations  allow
You  this.  Let  us  adore  and  Embrace  him;  let  us
protest  to  him  that  we  are  his  in  spite  of  ourselves,
and  let  him  do  with  Us  what  he  shall  please.  Par-
don me,  my  Dear  brother, — assume  that  It  is  myself
alone  to  whom  I  speak  in  This  letter,  and  not  to  you,
and  thus  take  me  for  a  lunatic;  For  it  is  true  that
I  rave;  but  pray  to  God  to  change  me,  and  then,  As
I  Believe,  I  shall  write  to  you  something  good.  Such
as  I  am,  I  do  not  fail  to  entreat  God  for  you,  and  for
our  poor  prodigal  brother;  and  I  do  so  often.  I
know  not  whether  you  both  received  my  letters  last
year,  by  which  I  informed  you  that  I  was  entreating
Our  Lord  to  accept  the  Intention  which  I  had,  that  a
Certain  number  of  masses  that  I  would  say  at  the
time  of  Your  death, —  in  case  of  you  both,  if  per-
chance you  depart  before  me, —  should  be  applied  to
You.  Alas,  will  This  poor  prodigal  not  return  to
himself?  Let  us  pray  the  Father  and  the  Mother  of
mercies  to  have  pity  on  him.

To  tell  you  some  news  of  This  country,  you  shall
know  that  we  have  been  thirteen  priests  of  Our  So-
ciety This  year :  to  wit,  the  Reverend  Father  hierosme
Lallemant,  Our  superior;  Father  Brebeuf,  Father
Lemercier,  Father  Daniel ;  Father  Raimbault,  and
Father  Claude  Pijart,  who  came  from  Quebec  last
year  to  Instruct  some  Algonquin  and  non- Huron
Nations  in  These  quarters;  Father  Jogues,  Father
Le  Moyne,  Father  du  Peron,  Father  Chaumonot,
Father  Chastelin,  Father  Pierre  Pijart,  and  myself, —


94  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20


uoit  point  encor  ete"  porter  1  Euangile  qui  est  Eloi-
gnee  de  Notre  Maison  de  Cinq  ou  six  Journees  de
Chemin  dont  il  en  faut  coucher  4  dans  la  Campagne
Cette  nation  Comprend  enuiron  40  bourgs  nos  peres
en  ont  parcourus  enuiron  vne  douzaine,  mais  auec
bien  des  souffrances  et  des  Calomnies,  qui  produiront
quelques  30  [sc.  jour]  leurs  fruits  C'est  no  Esperance
Cette  Mission  a  po  Patrons  les  SS.  Anges.  le  P.
Daniel  et  le  P.  le  Moyne  ont  Continue  la  mission
qu'ils  auoient  Commence  l'an  passe  aux  Arendaen-
hronon  et  de  plus  ont  pris  charge  du  bourg  de  St.
Joseph  ou  ils  ont  entretenus  quelques  bons  chrestiens
quy  y  sont  Le  RP.  lalemant  auec  le  P.  LeMercier
on[t]  pris  po  partage  la  mission  de  la  Conception  qui
tire  son  nom  du  bourg  de  la  Conception  que  les  sau-
uages  appelle  Ossossahe  ou  no  auons  eu  autre  fois
vne  Cabanne  et  maintenant  ny  auons  plus  q'une
petitte  chapelle  ou  n5  assemblons  quelques  bons
chrestiens  que  no  auons  dans  Ce  bourg.  Cest  a  leur
Instruction  que  s'est  occupe  Cette  hyuer  Le  R.  P.
Lallement  auec  Le  P.  Le  Moine  auec  bien  de  la  Con-
solaon.  Vous  auez  appris  par  la  Rellation  que  l'an
passe  le  bon  Joseph  Chiohoarehra  qui  a  ete  Notre
premier  et  notre  bon  Chrestien  demeurant  en  Ce
bourg  fut  tue  l'Este  passe  par  les  Ennemis  dans  son
Champ  Cestoit  dans  Ce  Chrestien  que  no  auions  notre
Esperance  apres  Dieu  et  si  nous  n'auions  l'Experi-
ence  de  la  prouidence  particuliere  dont  dieu  no  Con-
duit icy  no  eussions  pense  que  l'Eglise  naissante  de
Cette  pauure  barbarie,  alloit  etre  estoufe  par  la  mort
de  son  fils  aine"  mais  dieu  nous  Conduit  icy  par  la
Voye  aymable  du  depouillemt.  des  Creatures  et  II  veut
que  notre  apuy  soit  en  luy  seul. II  a  done  suscite  le


1640-41]  GARNIER TO  HIS  BROTHER  95

who  distributed  ourselves  last  winter  among  six  Mis-
sions. Father  brebeuf  and  Father  Chaumonet  went
to  the  Neutral  Nation, —  where  we  had  not  yet  been
to  carry  the  Gospel, —  which  is  Five  or  six  Days'
Journey  Distant  from  Our  House ;  on  4  of  which
one  must  sleep  in  the  Field.  This  nation  Includes
about  40  villages ;  our  fathers  have  made  the  round
of  about  a  dozen  of  these,  but  with  many  sufferings
and  Calumnies,  which  will  some  day  produce  their
fruits, —  such  is  our  Hope.  This  Mission  has  for
Patrons  the  Holy  Angels.  Father  Daniel  and  Father
le  Moyne  have  Continued  the  mission  which  they
had  Begun  last  year  among  the  Arendaenhronon,
and  have  furthermore  taken  charge  of  the  village  of
St.  Joseph,  where  they  have  sustained  some  good
Christians  who  are  there.  The  Reverend  Father
lalemant  and  Father  Le  Mercier  have  taken  for  their
portion  the  mission  of  la  Conception,  which  takes  its
name  from  the  village  of  la  Conception,  which  the
savages  call  Ossossahe,  where  we  formerly  had  a
Cabin ;  now  we  have  there  only  a  little  chapel,  where
we  assemble  some  good  Christians  that  we  have  in
That  village.  It  is  in  their  Instruction  that  The
Reverend  Father  Lallement  has  been  occupied  This
winter,  with  Father  Le  Moine,  to  their  great  Con-
solation. You  have  learned  by  the  Relation  that
last  year  the  good  Joseph  Chiohoarehra,  who  was
Our  first  and  our  good  Christian,  dwelling  in  This
village,  was  killed  the  past  Summer  by  the  Enemies,
in  his  own  Field.  It  was  in  This  Christian  that  we
had  our  Hope,  after  God;  and  if  we  had  not  Experi-
ence of  the  special  providence  with  which  God  Guides
us  here,  we  might  have  thought  that  the  incipient
Church  of  This  poor  barbarian  land  was  about  to  be


96  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

frere  de  ce  ch.  Chrestien  qu'il  no  a  este  po  prendre
sa  place  et  se  faire  bon  Chrestien ;  toutte  leur  famille
no  donne  bien  de  la  Consolaon  Cest  au  bout  de  leur
Cabanne  que  no  auons  fait  vne  petitte  chapelle  ou  no
allons  de  temps  en  temps  leur  dire  la  messe.

Le  P.  Jogues  et  Le  P.  du  Peron  ont  eu  po  partage
la  mission  de  Ste.  Marie  qui  Comprend  5  bourgs  dicy
alentour,  ou  ils  ont  travaille  auec  bien  de  la  peine  et
de  la  patience.  Le  P.  Raimbaut  et  le  P.  Pierre  Pi-
jart  demeurant  a  la  maison  alloient  tous  les  jours
Voir  les  nipissiriniens  C  est  une  nation  Algonquine
qui  etoit  Venu  passer  l'hiuer  en  Ce  pays  a  Cent  pas
de  Notre  Maison.  ils  y  alloient  pour  apprendre  leur
langue  et  leur  donner  1  Instruction  quils  pouuoient
en  Ce  Commencemt  d  estude  qu'ils  font  de  leur
langue  ils  leur  ont  apprise  a  chanter  quelques  belles
prieres,  que  les  bonnes  gens  ont  appris  fort  Volon-
tiers  quelquns  d'entre  eux  tesmoignent  auoir  quel-
ques dispositions  a  la  foy,  les  deux  Peres  s'en  sont
allez  auec  eux  en  leur  pays  quy  est  a  Cinq  Journees
d'icy  ou  y  passerent  lete  a  les  Instruire  Le  P.  Pierre
Pijart  et  Moy  auons  ete  enuoyes  a  la  mission  des
Apostres  Cest  a  La  Nation  du  Petun  ou  jauois  desja
passe  l'hyuer  precedent  nous  y  auons  ete  fort  mal
recus  la  iere.  annee  la  seconde  nous  y  auons  ete  vus
d'assez  bon  ceil  dieu  mercy  nous  en  trouuons  qui  no
ecoutent.  la  patience  et  la  perseuerence  l'emporte-
ront  Dieu  aydant  il  est  vray  que  Ces  Missions  sont
remplies  de  Croix  et  dans  la  difficulte  des  Chemins
pendant  l'hyuer  et  po  le  viure  le  vestir  le  logem1.  la
fum6e  &c  mais  la  principalle  peine  Cest  la  Captiuite
dans  laquelle  on  est  po  faire  ses  prieres  et  prendre
un  peu  de  repos  hors  le  tracas,  outre  la  priuation  de


1640-41]  GARNIER  TO  HIS  BROTHER  97

smothered  by  the  death  of  her  eldest  son ;  but  God
Guides  us  here  through  the  gracious  Way  of  depriv-
ing us  of  Creatures,  and  He  desires  that  our  support
be  in  him  alone.  He  has  therefore  raised  up  the
brother  of  this  dear  Christian, —  as  he  was  to  us, — to
take  his  place,  and  become  a  good  Christian;  their
whole  family  gives  us  much  Consolation.  In  the  end
of  their  Cabin  we  have  made  a  little  chapel,  whither
we  go  from  time  to  time  to  say  mass  for  them.

Father  Jogues  and  Father  du  Peron  have  had  for
their  portion  the  mission  of  Ste.  Marie,  which
Comprises  5  villages  hereabout,  where  they  have
labored  with  much  difficulty  and  patience.  Father
Raimbaut  and  Father  Pierre  Pijart,  remaining  at  the
house,  went  every  day  to  See  the  nipissiriniens  —
This  is  an  Algonquin  nation  which  had  Come  to
spend  the  winter  in  This  country,  a  Hundred  paces
from  Our  House.  They  went  thither  to  learn  their
language,  and  give  them  what  Instruction  they  could
at  This  Beginning  of  their  own  study  of  their  lan-
guage ;  they  have  taught  them  to  chant  some  excel-
lent prayers,  which  the  good  people  have  learned
very  Willingly.  Some  among  them  bear  witness  of
having  some  inclination  for  the  faith;  the  two
Fathers  have  gone  with  them  to  their  own  country,
which  is  Five  Days'  Journey  from  here,  where  they
spent  the  summer  in  Instructing  them.  Father
Pierre  Pijart  and  I  have  been  sent  to  the  mission  of
the  Apostles;  This  is  in  The  Tobacco  Nation,
where  I  had  already  spent  the  preceding  winter.  We
were  received  very  ill  there  the  1st  year;  in  the  sec-
ond, we  have  been  regarded  in  a  tolerably  favorable
manner ;  thank  God,  we  find  some  who  listen  to  us.
Patience  and perseverance  will  win  the day, God


98  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.20

la  messe  qu  on  ne  dit  point  ou  fort  rarem1.  no  auons
pense  mourir  deux  fois  dans  les  chemins  vne  fois  Ce
fut  sur  Vn  lac  glac6  ou  le  soir  meme  que  no  1' auons
passe  deux  sauuages  moururent  de  froid  O  Mon
cher  frere  priez  pour  no  qu'il  no  Conserue  et  fortifie
le  Courage  qu  il  no  donne  no  en  auons  bien  besoin
no  auons  par  sa  Bonte  anonce  son  nom  cet  hyuer  a
quinze  mil  sauuages  et  il  y  en  a  eu  fort  peu  de  Con-
uertis  on  en  a  batise  en  tout  enuiron  vne  Centaine
presque  tous  dans  la  Maladie  mais  Cependant  no  voy-
ons  le  progrez  qui  se  fait  no  sommes  assurez  que
dieu  est  auec  no  no  le  voyons  Clairem1.  mais  il  nous
Conduit  pas  a  pas  il  no  a  donne  beaucoup  de  benedic-
tions sur  no  Maison  ou  nous  sommes  trente  francoise.
il  y  a  de  la  Consolation  auoir  nos  domestiques  secu-
liers  d'habit  mais  religieux  de  Cceur  sa  prouidence
no  paroist  bien  particuliere  a  no  faire  trouuer  Ce  qui
no  est  necessaire  po  la  viure  le  jr.  de  St.  Joseph  notre
bon  patron  no  visme  dans  notre  maison  notre  proui-
sion  de  Bled  po  vn  An  esperons  esperons  mon  cher
frere  que  Ces  benedictions  seront  suiuies  de  la  grande
benediction  que  no  attendons  sur  Ces  terres  maudites
priez  po  no  et  priez  tous  Ceux  quy  ayment  J.  C.  de
l'lnteresser  dans  1'affaire  qu'il  no  amise  entre  leur
mains  no  remercions  entre  autres  bien  particulieremt.
le  R  P.  Prosper  de  Sa  charite  no  le  prions  de  Conti-
nues nos  PP.  m'ont  promis  de  prier  pour  vo  Comme
vous  les  en  priez  je  vo  remercie  du  memoir  que  vo
maues  enuoye  des  remedes  les  plus  faciles  vous  ne
Croyez  pas  qui  ne  laisent  pas  de  no  etre  difficiles  po
la  plus  part  dans  la  disette  de  Ce  pays  neamoins  je
vo  en  remercie  d'aussy  bon  Cceur  que  si  no  les
pouuions  pratiquer  mais  je  vous  prie  de  m'enuoyer


1640-41]  GARNIER  TO  HIS  BROTHER  99

helping.  It  is  true  that  These  Missions  are  rilled
with  Crosses, —  both  in  the  difficulty  of  the  Roads
during  the  winter,  and  as  regards  food,  clothing,
lodging,  the  smoke,  etc. ;  but  the  chief  trouble  is  the
Bondage  that  one  is  in  with  reference  to  saying  one's
prayers  and  taking  a  little  rest  away  from  the  bustle,
besides  the  privation  of  mass,  which  is  said  not  at
all,  or  very  seldom.  We  have  twice  come  near
dying  in  the  roads :  once  It  was  on  A  frozen  lake,
where  two  savages  died  from  cold  on  the  very  even-
ing when  we  passed.  O  My  dear  brother,  pray  for
us  that  he  may  Preserve  us  and  strengthen  the  Cour-
age which  he  gives  us;  we  have  much  need  of  it.
We  have,  through  his  Goodness,  announced  his  name
this  winter  to  fifteen  thousand  savages,  and  there
have  been  very  few  Converted ;  we  have  baptized  in
all  about  a  Hundred, — nearly  all  during  the  Disease.
But  Yet  we  see  the  progress  which  is  being  made ;
we  are  assured  that  God  is  with  us, — we  see  it  Clear-
ly,—  but  he  Guides  us  step  by  step.  He  has  given
us  many  blessings  upon  our  House  in  which  we
have  been  thirty  Frenchmen:  there  is  Comfort  in
having  our  domestics,  —  laymen  in  dress  but  reli-
gious in  Heart.  His  providence  appears  to  us  very
special  in  causing  us  to  find  What  is  necessary  to  us
for  living;  on  the  day  of  St.  Joseph,  our  good
patron,  we  saw  in  our  house  our  provision  of  Corn
for  a  Year.  Let  us  hope,  let  us  hope,  my  dear  broth-
er, that  These  blessings  will  be  followed  by  the  great
blessing  which  we  expect  upon  These  accursed  lands.
Pray  for  us,  and  entreat  all  Those  who  love  Jesus
Christ,  to  Interest  him  in  the  matter  which  he  has
placed  for  us  in  their  hands ;  among  others,  we  very
especially  thank  the  Reverend Father  Prosper  for


100  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

quelques  graines  medicinales  Come  les  purges,  et
quelques  autres  semblables  si  vo  en  Cultiuez  les
plantes  chez  vous  et  me  mendez  la  Culture  et  l'usage
je  termine  ora  pro  me  sine  fine  qui  suis  &c

C.  G.

de  S1?  Marie  aux  hurons  ce  23
juin  1 64 1.


1640-41]  GARNIER TO  HIS  BROTHER  101

His  charity ;  we  beg  him  to  Continue.  Our  Fathers
have  promised  me  to  pray  for  you  As  you  beseech
them  to.  I  thank  you  for  the  memorandum  which  you
have  sent  me  of  the  easiest  remedies:  you  do  not
Realize  that  they  are  nevertheless,  for  the  most  part,
difficult  for  us,  in  the  dearth  of  This  country ;  how-
beit,  I  thank  you  for  them  with  just  as  good  a  Heart
as  if  we  could  employ  them.  But  I  beg  you  to  send
me  some  medicinal  seeds,  As  the  purgatives,  and
some  other  like  sorts ;  if  you  Cultivate  the  plants  at
home,  please  inform  me  of  their  Cultivation  and
use. I  close:  ora  pro  me  sine  fine,  who  am,  etc.

C.  G.

From  Ste. Marie, of  the  hurons,  this  23rd
of  June,  1641.


102  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20


Excerpta  Epistola  Patris  Joannis  de  Brebeuf  ad

Reverendissimum  Patrem  Mutium  Vitel-

leschi,  Praepositum  Generalem

Societatis  Jesu,  Romas.

QUOAD  nostros  qui  apud  hurones  degunt  magna
pax  et  unio  inter  eos  viget.  .  .  .  Dis-
ciplina  religiosa  non  solum  ut  in  magnis
collegiis  profecto  observatur,  augetur  q.  in  dies  regu-
larum  omnium  exacta  custodia.

Nostri  etiam  domestici  omnes  ad  perfectionem  pro
viribus  contendunt,  maxime  vero  qui  se  socios  dede-
runt.  Ceeterum  quod  ad  id  genus  houm  omnino
hisce  in  regionibus  non  solum  utile  sed  necessari-
um ....

habemus  apud  hurones  ecclesiam  60  circiter  capiti-
bus  constantem  et  quorum  virtute  et  fervore  magnam
consolationem  accipimus.  crescit  autem  paulatim
numerus,  et  perget,  ut  speramus,  in  dies  si  modo
constantes  fuerimus.

Prseterea  major  quotidie  campus  sese  aperit  in  quo
excurrat  nostrorum  zelus  et  industria.  Duas  hoc
anno  de  novo  instituimus  missiones  unam  ad  eos
Algonquinos  quos  Nipissirini  nominamus  quorum
ingenia  satis  .  .  .  videntur:  alteram  ad  earn
nationem  quam  Neutram  vocamus  in  qua  magna  est


1640-41]  BR&BEUF  TO  THE  GENERAL  103


Extracts  from  a  Letter  of  Father  Jean  de  Brebeuf

to  the  Very  Reverend  Father  Mutius Vi-

telleschi,  General  of  the  Society

of  Jesus,  at  Rome.

CONCERNING  ours  who  live  with  the  Hu-
rons,  great  peace  and  union  prevails  among
them.  .  .  .  Religious  discipline  is  not
only  observed,  in  fact,  as  in  the  great  colleges, — but
the  punctual  observance  of  all  the  rules  is  also
increased  from  day  to  day.

Indeed  all  of  our  household  strive  toward  perfec-
tion according  to  their  powers, —  chiefly,  of  course,
those  who  have  given  themselves  to  be  associates
[Fr.  donnes].  For  the  rest,  as  for  this  class  of  men,
who  in  these  regions  are  certainly  not  only  useful,
but  necessary ....

We  have  among  the  Hurons  a  church  consisting
of  about  60  members,  whose  virtue  and  fervor  give
us  great  consolation.  Moreover,  the  number  increases
little  by  little,  and  will  continue,  as  we  hope,  from
day  to  day, —  if  only  we  are  steadfast.

Besides,  a  greater  field  opens  daily,  wherein  the
zeal  and  activity  of  ours  may  exercise  itself.  We
have  established  two  new  missions  this  year, —  one
among  those  Algonquins  whom  we  name  Nipissirini,
whose  native  qualities  seem  sufficiently  ;

the  other,  in  that  nation  which  we  call  Neutral,  in
which  there  is  a  great  harvest:  for  there  are  in  it


104  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.20


messis  sunt  enim  in  ea  fere  40  pagi  frequentibus  in-
colis  referti.  Postrema  autem  haec  missio  P.  Calmo-
noto  mihiq.  obtigit.  Quinque  menses  in  ea  degimus
et  sane  multa  passi  sumus,  a  pancis  quidem  bene  au-
diti,  a  pluribus  vero  moleste,  et  calumniis  et  injuriis
arlecti,  sed  tamen  digressi  a  primoribus  ad  reditum
invitati.  Egregiam  ut  spero  Xo  navabit  operam  P.
Calmonotus  in  has  regiones  magnos  enim  jam  fecit
progressus  in  lingua  hujus  gentis  non  parum  diversa  ab
lingua  huronica. Vir  est  omnino  egregius.


1640-41]  BREBEUF  TO  THE  GENERAL  105

almost  40  villages,  filled  with  many  inhabitants.
Now  this  last  mission  fell  to  the  portion  of  Father
Calmonotus  [Fr.  Chaumonot]  and  me.  We  spent
five  months  therein,  and  in  truth  we  suffered  much.
Few,  indeed,  lent  us  a  willing  ear;  many  vexed,
calumniated,  and  wronged  us;  yet,  when  we  left
them,  we  were  invited  by  the  principal  men  to  return.
Father  Calmonotus  will,  I  hope,  render  distinguished
service  to  Christ  in  these  regions :  for  he  has  already
made  great  progress  in  the  language  of  this  people, —
not  a  little  different  from  the  Huron  language.  He
is  altogether  a  superior  man.


XLIV

Relation  of  1640-41

Paris:  SEBASTIEN  CRAMOISY,  1642


SOURCE:  Title-page  and  text  reprinted  from  a  copy  of  the
original  Cramoisy  edition,  in  the  possession  of  The  Burrows
Brothers  Company,  Cleveland.

The  document  consists  of  two  parts:  Part  I.  (with  an
introduction  written  in  Paris)  is  by  Le  Jeune,  and  the  first
eight  chapters  thereof  are  herewith  given;  Part  II.  (the
Huron  report)  is  by  Jerome  Lalemant,  and  will  be  given  in
Volume  XXI.,  together  with  the  remainder  of  Part  I.


,- .


• ?


E


3S*


DECE  QVI  STST  PASSE*
'EN LA  •

NG^  WLLE  FRANCE,

ES  ANNE'ES  1640.  ET  1641.

i
■  i

Enuoyee  au  R.  Pere  Prouincial  de  la

Com  pagnie  de  I  e  s  v  s  ,  de  la

Pcpuince,  de  France.

jP^r/fP.BAR.THELEMY  Vimont  de U  me/me
Compagnie  ,S  u^erteur  de  la  Refidance  de  Kehec.


— .--i


1


maaKmska


A


A PARIS, ;

Chcs  SebastIen Cramoisy,  I mprimeur  ordinaire
duRoy^rui  S.Iacques.auxCicognes.

M.  DC.  XLII. ~
Ay  EC  PRIVILEGE  QV  ZOTj, j


RELATION

OF  WHAT  OCCURRED
IN

NEW  FRANCE,

IN  THE  YEARS  1640  AND  1641.

Sent  to  the  Reverend  Father  Provincial  of

the  Society  of  Jesus,  of  the

Province  of  France.

By  Father  Barthelemy  VlMONT  of  the same
Society,  Superior  of  the  Residence  of  Kebec.


PARIS,

Sebastien  Cramoisy,  Printer  in  ordinary  to  the
King,  rue  St.  Jacques,  at  the  Sign  of  the  Storks.

M.  DC.  XLII.
BY  ROYAL  LICENSE.


112  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.20


Table  des  Chapitres  contenvs  en  cette  Relation.

DE  la  Refidence  de  Nojlre  Dame  de  Recouurance
a Kebec, & du Seminaire  des Vrfulines,
Chapitre  I.  .  .  . page 5

De  la  Refidence  de  Saincl  Iofeph,  Chap.  II.  . 17

Continuation  de  ce  qui  s'efl  pafie'  entre  les  Sauuages

de  la  Refidence  de  S.  Iofeph,  Ch.  III.  . 34.

De  quelqucs  baptefmes  plus  fignale's,  en  la  Refidence

de  S.  Iofepli,  Chap.  IV.  .  .  -49

Du  baptefme  d'vn  Huron  e?i  la  Refidence  [de~]  S.

Iofeph,  proche  Kebec,  Chap.  V.  .  J2

De  VHofpital,  Chap.  VI.  .  .  85

De  la  Refidence  de  la  Conception,  aux  Trois  Riuieres,

Ch.  VII.  .  .  .  .  . 106

De  quelques  baptefmes  en  la  Refidence  de  la  Concep-
tion, aux  Trois  Riuieres,  Chap.  VIII.  ///  [i.e.,  122]
De  la  prife  de  deux  Francois, conduits  au  pais  des
Hiroquois,  &  de  leur  ret  our  aux  Trois  Riuieres,
Chap.  IX. .  .  .  .  . 136

De  la  deliurance  des prifonniers  Francois,  &  du  pour-
parler de  paix,  auec  les  Hiroquois,  Chapit.  X. 133
De  la  guerre  des  Hiroquois,  Ch.  XI.  .  . 167

D'vne  Mifiion  faite  a  Tadouffac,  Chap.  XII.  . 182

Des  bonnes  efperances, &  des  obfiacles, de  la  con-

uerfion  des  Sauuages,  Ch.  XIII.  .  . 202


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  113


Table  of  Chapters  contained  in  this  Relation.

OF  the  Residence  of  Nostre  Dame  de  Reccuvrance
at  Kebec,  and  the  Seminary  of  the  Ursulines,
Chapter  I.  .  .  . page 5

Of  the  Residence  of  Saint  Joseph,  Chap.  II.  . iy

Continuation  of  ivJiat  occurred  among  the  Savages

of  the  Residence  of  St.  Joseph,  Ch.  III.  . 34.

Of  some  very  remarkable  baptisms  at  the  Residence

of  St.  Joseph,  Chap.  IV. .  .  -49

Of  the  baptism  of  a  Huron  at  the  Residence  of  St.

Joseph,  near  Kebec,  Chap.  V.  .  J2

Of  the  Hospital,  Chap.  VI.  .  .  85

Of  the Residence of  la Co7iception at  the Three

Rivers,  Ch.  VII.  .  .  .  . 106

Of  some  baptisms  at  the  Residence  of  la  Conception

at  the  Three  Rivers,  Chap.  VIII. /// [i.e.,  £22]
Of  the  capture  of  two  Frenchmen,  who  were  taken

to  the  country  of  the  Hiroquois,  and  their  return

to  the  Three  Rivers,  Chap.  IX.  .  . 136

Of  the  deliverance  of  the  French  prisoners,  and  the

parley concerning  peace with the Hiroquois,

Chapter  X.  .  .  .  . 153

Of  the  war  with  the  Hiroquois,  Ch.  XL .  . 16 J

Of  a  Mission  held  at  Tadoussac,  Chap.  XII.  . 182

Of  the  good  prospects  for the  conversion of  the

Savages,  and  obstacles  thereto,  Ch.  XIII.  . 202


114  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20


Table  des  Chapitres  contenus  en  la  Relation,  de

ce  qui  s'eft  paffe  dans  le  pais  des  Hurons,  de-

puis  le  mois  de  Iuin  de  l'annee  1640.

iufques  au  mois  de Iuin 1641.

DE  V  eft  at  general  du Chriftianifme  en  ces  con-
trees,  Ch.  I.  .  .  .5
De  la Re  fide  nee  fixe, &  Mi  ft  ion  de  Saincle

Marie,  Ch.  II.  .  .  12

De  la  Miftion  de  la  Conception  aux  AttignaXantans

ou  Nation  des  Ours,  Ch.  III.  .  . ij

Des  Miftions  de  S.  Iofteph  aux  Attingueenongnahak
&  de  S.  lean  Baptifte  aux  Arenderonons
Ch.  IV.  ...

De  la  Miftion  des  Apoftres  aux  Khionontatchronons

ou  Nation  du  petun,  Ch.  V.
De  la Miftion des Anges  aux  AttiXandarons, ou

Nation  neutre,  Ch.  VI.
De  la  Miftion  du  Samel  Efprit  aux  Nipifiriniens
Ch.  VII.  ....


33

39

[46)
186]


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  115


Table  of Chapters  contained  in  the  Relation  of

what  occurred  in  the  country  of  the  Hurons,

from  the  month  of  June,  in  the  year  1640,

to the month of  June,  1641.

OF  the  general  condition  of  Christianity  in  these
countries,  Ch.  I.  .  .  jr

Of  the  permanent  Residence  and  Mission  of

Sainte  Marie,  Ch.  II.  .  . 12

Of  the Mission of  la Conception,  to  the  Attigna-

wantans,  or  Nation  of  the  Bear,  Ch.  III. . 17
Of  the  Missions  of  St.  foscph  to  the  Attingueenongna-
hak,  and  of St.  Jean  Baptist e  to  the  Aren-
deronons,  Ch.  IV. .  .  .  -33

Of  the  Mission  of  the  Apostles  to  the  Khionontatehro-

nons,  or  tobacco  Nation,  Ch.  V.  .  • 39

Of  the  Mission  of  the  Angels  to  the  Attiwandarons,

or  neutral  Nation,  Ch.  VI. .  .  . [4.6]

Of  the  Mission  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  Nipisiri-

niens,  Ch.  VII.  .  .  .  .[<$#]


116  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.20


Permiffion  d'imprimer.

NOUS  Iacqties  Dinet,  Prouincial  de  la  Compagnie
de  Iesvs,  en  la  Prouince  de  France,  fuiuant  le
Priuilege  qui  nous  a  efte"  odtroye  par  les  Roys
Tres  Chreftiens  Henry  III.  le  10.  May  1583.  Henry
IV.  le  10.  Decembre  1605.  &  Louys  XIII.  a  prefent
regnant,  le  14.  Fevrier  1612.  par  lequel  il  eft  defendu
a  tous  Libraires  &  Imprimeurs,  de  n'imprimer  aucun
Liure  de  ceux  qui  font  compofes  par  quelqu'vn  de
noftre  Compagnie,  fans  permiffion  des  Superieurs
d'icelle:  Permettons  a  Sebaftien  Cramoify  Marchand
Libraire,  &  Imprimeur  ordinaire  du  Roy,  d'imprimer
la  Relation  de  ce  qui  s' ejl  pafie'  en  la  Nonuelle  France,  e"s
anne's  1640.  &  164.1.  tant  de  fois,  &  en  telle  forme  &
caractere  que  bon  luy  femblera,  auec  pouuoir  auffi
d'imprimer  toutes  autres  Relations  de  ladite  Nouuelle
France,  qui  feront  enuoyees  de  par  deca.  En  foy
dequoy  nous  auons  figne  la  pref ente :  A  Paris  ce  20.

Decembre  1641.

Iacqves  Dinet.


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  117


Permission  to  print.

WE,  Jacques  Dinet,  Provincial  of  the  Society  of
Jesus,  in  the  Province  of  France,  pursuant  to
the  Privilege  which  has  been  granted  to  us
by  the  Most  Christian  Kings,  Henry  III.,  May  10,
1583;  Henry  IV.,  December  10,  1605;  and  Louys
XIII.,  now  reigning,  February  14,  16 12,  by  which
all  Booksellers  and  Printers  are  forbidden  to  print
any  of  those  Books  which  are  composed  by  any  one
of  our  Society,  without  permission  from  the  Supe-
riors of  the  same, — permit  Sebastien  Cramoisy,
Bookseller,  and  Printer  in  ordinary  to  the  King,  to
print  the  Relation  de  ce  qui  s 'est  passe"  en  la  Nouvelle
France,  /s  amies  1640.  et  1641.,  as  many  times,  and
in  such  form  and  type  as  shall  seem  good  to  him ;
with  power  also  to  print  all  other  Relations  of  the
said  New  France,  which  shall  be  sent  therefrom.
In  testimony  of  which  we  have  signed  the  present :
At  Paris,  this  20th  of  December, 1641.

Jacques  Dinet.


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.20


[i]  Relation  de  ce  qvi  s'eft  paffe  en  la  Nouuelle
France,  es  annees  1640.  &  1641.

Mon  R.  Pere,
Ie  fais  quafi  comme  celuy,  qui  ayant  efcrit
fes  lettres,  en  eftoit  luy-mefme  le  porteur:
Fay  trace  en  la  Nouuelle  France  les  Chapitres  fui-
uans,  &  ie  les  viens  moy-mefme  prefenter  a  V.  R.
La  flotte  qui  a  fait  trauerfer  1' Ocean  a  ce  peu  de
lignes,  nous  a  embarques  trois  de  noflre  Compagnie,
le  Pere  Nicolas  Adam,  que  la  charite  de  V.  R.  a  r'ap-
pelle  pour  fes  infirmites;  le  Pere  Claude  [2]  Quentin,
qu'elle  a  auffi  mande  pour  trauailler  aux  affaires  de
la  Miffion:  Et  moy  qui  parois  fans  eftre  attendu,
mais  non  pas  fans  eftre  enuoye.  Monfieur  le  Cheua-
lier  de  Montmagny  noftre  Gouuerneur,  les  princi-
paux  Francois  de  noflre  Colonie,  le  R.  P.  Vimont
noflre  Superieur,  &  tous  nos  Peres;  les  Sauuages
mefmes  m'ont  condamne  d'entreprendre  ce  voyage
pour  le  bien  public  &  commun.  Nous  eflions  quatre
vaiffeaux  de  compagnie  commandes  par  le  fieur  de
Courpon,  homme  vaillant  &  bon  nauigateur:  Vne
tempefle  nous  fepara  au  fortir  du  golfe  de  fainct
Laurens,  de  forte  que  nous  ne  nous  fommes  point
veus  depuis,  ny  rencontres  en  mer.  Le  vaiffeau  qui
portoit  le  Pere  Claude  Quentin  ayant  pris  la  manche
de  fainct  Georges  pour  celle  qui  fepare  l'Angleterre
de  la  France,  a  demeure  longtemps  fans  paroiflre;
mais  enfin Dieu  l'a  conduit  a  bon  port. Nous  ren-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640- 41  119


[1]  Relation  of  what  occurred  in  New  France,  in
the  years  1640  and  1641.

My  Reverend  Father,
I  do  almost  as  he  who,  having  written  his
letters,  should  be  himself  the  bearer  of  them.
I  sketched  in  New  France  the  following  Chapters,  and
I  come  myself  to  present  them  to  Your  Reverence.
The  fleet  which  conveyed  these  few  lines  across  the
Ocean  took  on  board  three  of  our  Society, —  Father
Nicolas  Adam,  whom  the  kindness  of  Your  Rever-
ence has  recalled  on  account  of  his  infirmities ;  Father
Claude  [2]  Quentin,  whom  you  have  also  summoned
that  he  may  labor  in  the  affairs  of  the  Mission ;  and
myself,  who  appear  without  being  expected,  but  not
without  having  been  sent.  Monsieur  the  Chevalier
de  Montmagny,  our  Governor,  the  principal  French-
men of  our  Colony,  the  Reverend  Father  Vimont,  our
Superior,  and  all  our  Fathers, —  the  Savages,  even, —
have  sentenced  me  to  undertake  this  voyage  for  the
public  and  common  good.  We  were  a  company  of
four  vessels  commanded  by  the  sieur  de  Courpon,  a
brave  man,  and  a  good  sailor.  A  storm  separated  us
on  leaving  the  gulf  of  saint  Lawrence,  so  that  we
neither  saw  each  other  afterward,  nor  met  at  sea.
The  vessel  which  carried  Father  Claude  Quentin,
having  taken  the  channel  of  saint  George  for  that
which  separates  England  from  France,  did  not  appear
for  a  long  time ;  but,  at  last,  God  has  brought  it
safely  to  port. We  met  on  nearing  land  a  great  mast


120  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

contrafmes  aux  approches  des  terres  vn  grand  mafl,
&  d'autres  pieces  du  debris  de  quelques  nauires  per-
dus  aux  coftes  de  France  ou  d'Angleterre.  Quoy
que  e'en  foit,  ie  ne  voy  qu'vn  feul  bien  fur  la  mer,
e'eft  que  vous  [3]  efles  a  tous  moments  dans  vne
dependance  de  Dieu  plus  grande  &  plus  immediate,
pour  ainfi  dire;  &  par  confequent  plus  douce  que  fur
la  terre :  Mais  pourfuiuons  noftre  route,  V.  R.  verra
dans  la  fuitte  de  ce  difcours,  comme  Dieu  va  exau-
cant  les  grandes  prieres  qu'on  fait  pour  les  pauures
Sauuages,  comme  il  va  beniffant  les  fecours  qu'on
leur  donne ;  mais  elle  verra  auffi  comme  les  Demons
ne  dorment  pas,  comme  ils  s'eflorcent  de  tout  perdre;
ces  maudits  efprits  voyans  que  leurs  anciens  fujets
les  quittent,  que  les  ames  faindtes,  &  que  les  grands
de  la  terre  &  bien  cheris  du  ciel,  s'employent  pour
faire  ouurir  la  porte  a  l'Euangile  dans  de  vaftes  con-
tr6es  que  nous  decouurons  tous  les  iours,  remplies  de
Nations  bien  peuplees,  &  toutes  fedentaires,  arment
tous  leurs  fuppofts  tant  qu'ils  peuuent,  pour  detruire
ce  qui  eft  fi  faindtement  commence,  pour  miner  la
Colonie  Francoife,  &  pour  fermer  toutes  les  auenues
de  falut  a  toutes  ces  ames  qui  n'ont  iamais  ouy
parler  de  Iefus-Chrift.  Les  Chapitres  fuiuans  feront
voir  les  grandes  oppofttions  qu'ils  nous  forment.
Cependant  ie  confoleray  voftre  R.  l'affurant  [4]  qu'elle
a  des  fujets  en  ce  Nouueau  Monde,  qui  courent  a
grands  pas  a  la  faindtete:  Dieu  leur  depart  fes
faueurs  en  abondance,  les  difficulty  les  animent,  la
difette  eft  leur  trefor,  les  dangers  leur  affurance,  les
fouffrances  leurs  delices,  la  mort  en  la  Croix  leur
attente,  &  le  Dieu  des  viuans  leur  grande  recom-
penfe. I'efpere  qu'auffi-toft  que  ie  me  feray  acquitte-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  121

and  other  pieces  of  wreckage,  from  ships  lost  on  the
coasts  of  France  or  of  England.  At  all  events,  I  see
but  one  single  good  upon  the  sea,  which  is,  that  you
[3]  are  every  moment  in  a  dependence  upon  God
greater  and  more  immediate,  so  to  speak,  and  conse-
quently sweeter,  than  when  upon  land.  But  let  us
pursue  our  way.  Your  Reverence  will  see  in  the  con-
tinuation of  this  narrative  how  God  continues  to  heed
the  fervent  prayers  that  are  offered  for  the  poor  Sav-
ages, how  he  blesses  the  help  that  is  given  them;
but  you  will  also  see  that  the  Demons  do  not  sleep,
that  they  exert  themselves  to  ruin  everything.  These
accursed  spirits, —  seeing  that  their  old  subjects  are
forsaking  them,  that  the  holy  souls,  and  the  great
ones  of  earth,  and  those  well  beloved  by  heaven,
are  employed  in  opening  a  door  to  the  Gospel  in  the
vast  regions  that  we  discover  every  day,  filled  with
very  populous  and  sedentary  Nations, —  strengthen,  as
much  as  is  possible,  all  their  agents  to  destroy  that
which  is  so  devoutly  begun,  to  ruin  the  French  Colo-
ny, and  to  close  every  avenue  of  salvation  to  all  these
souls  that  have  never  heard  of  Jesus  Christ.  The
following  Chapters  will  show  the  great  opposition
that  they  raise  against  us.  However  I  will  comfort
your  Reverence,  assuring  you  [4]  that  you  have  sub-
jects in  this  New  World,  who  make  rapid  progress
in  holiness ;  God  bestows  his  favors  upon  them  abun-
dantly, difficulties  stimulate  them,  dearth  is  their
treasure,  dangers  their  security,  sufferings  their  de-
light, death  for  the  Cross  their  expectation,  and  the
God  of  the  living  their  great  reward.  I  hope  that,
as  soon  as  I  have  executed  my  mission,  Your  Rever-
ence will  give  me  my  Passport,  that  I  may  return  to
the  New  World  and  die  in  a  new  country,  or  among


122  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

de  ma  commiffion,  V.  R.  me  donnera  mon  Paffeport
pour  retourner  en  ce  Nouueau  Monde,  &  mourir  dans
vn  nouueau  pais,  ou  parmy  ces  bons  Neophytes  qui
m'ont  rauy  le  coeur  par  leur  piete,  &  par  leur  deuo-
tion ;  ie  les  recommande  tous,  &  tous  les  ouuriers  de
l'Euangile,  &  toute  la  Colonie  Francoife,  a  fes  faindts
Sacrifices,  &  aux  prieres  des  ames  fainctes,  qui  hono-
rent  le  tres  aimable  Iefus.
De  V.  R.

Tres-humble  &  obeiffant  feruiteur  en
noftre  Seigneur,  Paul  le  Ieune.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640 -41  123

these  good  Neophytes  who  have  ravished  my  heart
by  their  piety  and  their  devotion.  I  commend  them
all,  and  all  the  laborers  of  the  Gospel,  and  all  the
French  Colony,  to  your  holy  Sacrifices,  and  to  the
prayers  of  the  holy  souls  who  honor  the  most  lovable
Jesus.

Your  Reverence's

Very  humble  and  obedient  servant  in
our  Lord, Paul  le  Jeune.


124  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.20


[5]  CHAPITRE  PREMIER.

DE  LA  RESIDENCE  DE NOSTRE-DAME  DE  RECOUURANCE

A KEBEC, & DU SEMINAIRE DES

VRSULINES.

C?  EST  en  ce  Chapitre  que  ie  deurois  parler  de  la
vertu  de  nos  Francois,  mais  il  fuffit  de  dire,
que  la  paix,  le  repos,  &  la  tranquillite  que
nous  poffedons,  &  le  bon  exemple  de  ceux  qui  nous
commandent,  auec  l'eloignement  des  occafions  du
pech6,  nous  mettent  dans  le  chemin  du  Ciel  fans
grande  recherche:  fi  bien  que  ii  quelqu'vn  de  ceux
qui  meurent  en  ces  contr6es,  fe  damne,  ie  croy  qu'il
f  era  doublement  coupable :  car  tout  nous  porte  a  la
Vertu,  &  le  chemin  du  vice  eft  icy  tout  plein  de
honte,  &  de  vergongne,  c'eft  affez  pour  cet  article.
Difons  deux  mots  du  Seminaire  des  Meres  Vrfulines.
Deux  braues  filles  armees  d'vn  bon  dot,  [6]  pour  ay-
der  a  baftir  la  Maifon  qu'elles  font  commencer  cette
annee  a  Kebec,  &  qui  leur  couftera  bon,  feroient  bien
receiies  en  leur  Monaftere  qui  renferme  plus  de  ioye
dans  fon  petit  pourpris,  que  les  Palais  des  Cefars
dans  leur  grande  eftendue.  On  dit  qu'a  peine  fe
trouuera-t'il  des  filles  feculieres  qui  veiiillent  porter
leurs  biens,  &  paffer  leur  vie  en  ce  Nouueau  Monde,
foit  parmy  les  Filles  de  la  Mifericorde  dans  l'Hofpi-
tal,  foit  dans  la  maifon  des  Vrfulines.  Quoy  done?
eft-il  poffible  que  tout  ce  qu'il  y  auoit  de  filles  gene-
reufes  en  l'ancienne  France,  foit  paffe  en  la  Nou-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  125


[5]  CHAPTER  FIRST.

OF THE RESIDENCE OF NOSTRE DAME DE RECOU-

VRANCE AT KEBEC, AND THE SEMINARY

OF THE URSULINES.

IN  this  Chapter  I  ought  to  speak  of  the  virtue  of
our  French  people ;  but  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that
the  peace,  the  repose,  and  the  tranquillity  that
we  possess,  and  the  good  example  of  those  who  rule
us,  with  the  absence  of  opportunities  for  sin,  put  us
in  the  way  to  Heaven  without  great  effort, —  so  that,
if  any  one  of  those  who  die  in  these  lands  be  lost,  I
believe  that  he  will  be  doubly  guilty ;  for  everything
inclines  us  to  Virtue,  and  the  path  of  vice  is  here
altogether  full  of  shame  and  disgrace.  Enough  of
this  matter.  Let  us  say  a  few  words  about  the  Semi-
nary of  the  Ursuline  Mothers.  Two  courageous
sisters,  provided  with  a  suitable  endowment, —  [6]
to  aid  in  building  the  House  which  they  are  com-
mencing this  year  at  Kebec,  and  which  will  cost  them
dear, —  would  be  well  received  in  their  Monastery,
which  contains  more  joy  in  its  little  enclosure  than
the  Palaces  of  the  Cesars  in  their  great  extent.  It
is  said  that  there  will  scarcely  be  found  secular  sis-
ters who  would  consent  to  bring  their  fortunes  and
spend  their  lives  in  this  New  World,  either  among
the  Sisters  of  Mercy  in  the  Hospital,  or  in  the  house
of  the  Ursulines.  Indeed !  is  it  possible  that  all  the
generous  sisters  that  were  in  old  France  have  come
over into the New?  and  that  there  are  no  longer


126


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20


uelle  ?  &  qu'il  ne  f e  trouue  plus  de  cceurs  aftes  hardis,
pour  fuiure  les  veftiges  de  ces  premieres  Amazones?
c'eft  ce  que  ie  ne  puis  croire ;  du  moins  puis-je  affurer
que  fi  on  vouloit  des  Religieufes  profeffes,  qu'on  en
trouueroit  dix pour  vne: Ouy,  mais  elles  manque-
roient  d'employ;  non  pas  fi  les  Sauuages  s'arreftent,
comme  ils  s'y  prennent  fort  bien,  Dieu  mercy. Ma-
dame de  la  Pelterie  qui  a  vn  coeur  vrayement  gene-
reux, &  toutes fes filles font leur poffible pour
auancer  ce  deffein,  auffi  me  femble-t'il  que  noftre  [7]
Seigneur  les  fauorife : car  il  fe  trouue  quelques  per-
fonnes  en  France  de  merite  &  de  vertu,  qui  prennent
cette deuotion, vrayement chreftienne, de marier
quelques Seminariftes ; ils enuoyent,  par  exemple,
cent  efcus  pour  luy  faire  vne  petite  maifonnette,  &
voila  vne  famille  arreftee,  auec  quelque  autre  aide
qu'on  luy  donne,  de  cultiuer  vn  peu  de  terre  pour
fon  viure. Ils  ont  quatre  Seminariftes  quafi  toutes
preftes  a  marier,  ie  prie  Dieu  qu'il  les  fauorife  d'vn
heureux  rencontre. Si  cette  piete  touche  le  cceur  de
plufieurs,  les  Sauuages  quitteront  les  bois  pour  nous
venir  ioindre,  &  les  parens  donneront  leurs  enfans
au  Seminaire,  pour  pouuoir  entrer  dans  ces  maifons,
&  pour  ioiiyr  de  cette  aumofne  enregiftree  dans  les
cahiers  du  grand  Dieu.

Au  reite,  l'occupation  de  ces  bonnes  Meres  eft
tres-vtile,  &  le  fera  encor  plus  dorefnauant,  quand
elles  feront  bafties.  Outre  les  petites  Frangoifes
qu'elles  inftruifent,  elles  ont  de  petites  Seminariftes
f edentaires ;  ces  enfans  feront  bien  plus  f ermes  en  la
foy  que  les  autres;  car  elles  font  dans  vne  continu-
elle  inftruction,  elles  [8]  ne  voyent  rien  qui  ne  les
porte  a  la  vertu. Nous  auons  marie  cette  annee  Mag-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  127

found  hearts  brave  enough  to  follow  the  footprints
of  these  first  Amazons?  That  is  what  I  cannot  be-
lieve ;  at  least,  I  can  affirm  that  if  we  wished  professed
Nuns,  we  could  find  ten  for  one.  "  Yes,  but  they
would  lack  employment."  Not  if  the  Savages  become
sedentary,  to  which  they  are  very  well  disposed,
thank  God.  Madame  de  la  Pelterie,  who  has  a  truly
generous  heart,  and  all  her  sisters,  do  their  best  to
advance  this  plan ;  also  it  seems  to  me  that  our  [7]
Lord  favors  them ;  for  there  are  found  in  France
some  persons  of  merit  and  virtue,  who  perform  this
truly  christian  office  of  providing  for  the  marriage
of  some  Seminarists.  They  send,  for  instance,  one
hundred  ecus  to  build  one  of  them  a  little  house ;  and
behold  a  household  established,  with  some  other  help
that  may  be  given  it,  to  cultivate  a  little  land  for  its
support.  There  are  four  Seminarists,  very  nearly
ready  to  marry.  I  pray  God  that  he  will  favor  them
with  a  fortunate  opportunity.  If  such  piety  touch
the  hearts  of  many,  the  Savages  will  quit  the  forests
to  come  to  us ;  and  the  parents  will  give  their  chil-
dren to  the  Seminary,  that  they  may  be  able  to  enter
these  houses,  and  to  enjoy  this  charity  recorded  in
the  books  of  the  great  God.

Moreover,  the  work  of  these  good  Mothers  is  very
useful,  and  will  be  still  more  so  hereafter,  when  they
shall  be  established.  Besides  the  little  French  girls
whom  they  teach,  they  have  the  little  permanent
Seminarists;  these  children  will  be  much  firmer  in
the  faith  than  the  others;  for  they  are  under  con-
tinual instruction,  they  [8]  see  nothing  that  does  not
influence  them  to  virtue.  We  have  married  this  year
Magdeleine  de  saint  Joseph  Amiskweian,  who  was
taken  from  their  Seminary ;  this  young  woman  went


128  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

deleine  de  faindt  Iofeph  AmifKtfeian,  tir£e  de  leur
Seminaire ;  Cette  ieune  f emme  fortit  bien  cotmerte
de  leur  maifon,  les  Meres  luy  donnerent  fon  petit
ameublement ;  bien-toft  apres  elle  donna  des  pretmes
d'vne  foy  viue  &  animee  de  la  charite,  eftant  aux
trois  Riuieres  elle  fut  recherchee  &  follicitee  de  plu-
fieurs  ieunes  hommes  payens ;  mais  fa  conftance  les
rebutta,  &  fit  voir  que  Iefus-Chrift  a  des  graces  plus
fortes  que  la  nature :  comme  elle  vit  que  certains  Ion-
gleurs  fouffioient  &  chantoient  vn  fien  frere  malade,
elle  ne  fit  que  pleurer:  fi  toft  qu'on  eut  chaff  e  ces
Charlatans,  la  pauure  enfant  fe  mit  a  rire,  temoignant
par  fes  larmes  l'horreur  qu'elle  auoit  de  leurs  an-
ciennes  fuperftitions,  &  monftrant  par  fa  ioye  le  plai-
fir  qu'elle  prenoit  de  voir  fon  frere  dans  les  penfees
d'auoir  recours  a  Dieu.  Elle  porte  le  nom  de  la  B.
Mere  Magdeleine  de  fainct.  Iofeph  Carmelite,  cette
ame  faindte  honoree  de  Dieu  par  plufieurs  miracles,
a  procure  fur  la  terre  le  dot  du  mariage  de  cette  ieune
Neophyte,  ie  ne  doute  nullement  [9]  qu'elle  ne  parle
puiffamment  pour  elle  dedans  les  cieux,  &  pour  ceux
qui  trauaillent  en  cette  vigne,  qu'elle  a  tant  cherie.
Outre  ces  Serninarifhes  arreftees,  nous  en  enuoyons
d'autres  paffageres,  veftues  a  la  Sauuage,  qui  demeu-
rent  quelque  temps  en  cette  petite  maifon,  pour  y
eftre  inftruit.es  fur  les  Myfteres  de  noftre  creance.
Ces  ieunes  filles  ayant  pris  quelque  bonne  teinture  en
cette  Maifon,  s'en  retournent  par  apres  ches  leurs  pa-
rens. Quand  ces  bonnes  Meres  feront  logees  plus  au
large,  elles  auront  encor  vne  autre  occupation,  les
filles  &  les  femmes  qu'on  voudra  baptifer,  iront  paffer
quelque  iours  deuant  leur  baptefme  en  leur  Mona-
ftere,  pour  y  apprendre  auec  plus  de  repos  la  dodtrine


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  129


out  from  their  house  well  clothed,  and  the  Mothers
gave  her  her  little  furniture.  Very  soon  after,  she
gave  proofs  of  a  faith  strong  and  animated  by  love ;
while  she  was  at  the  three  Rivers  she  was  courted
and  entreated  by  several  young  pagans,  but  her  con-
stancy repelled  them,  and  showed  that  Jesus  Christ
has  attractions  stronger  than  nature.  When  she  saw
certain  Jugglers  breathe  upon  her  sick  brother,  and
sing  to  him,  she  only  wept;  as  soon  as  these  Char-
latans had  been  driven  away,  the  poor  child  began
to  laugh,  indicating  by  her  tears  the  horror  that  she
had  for  their  ancient  superstitions,  and  showing  by
her  joy  the  pleasure  she  took  in  seeing  her  brother
inclined  to  have  recourse  to  God.  She  bears  the
name  of  the  Blessed  Mother  Magdeleine  de  saint
Joseph,  the  Carmelite.  That  holy  soul,  honored  of
God  by  many  miracles,  has  procured  upon  earth  the
marriage  portion  of  this  young  Neophyte ;  I  am  quite
sure  [9]  that  she  speaks  powerfully  for  her  in  the
heavens  and  for  those  who  labor  in  this  vineyard,
which  she  so  greatly  loved.

Besides  these  permanent  Seminarists,  we  send  oth-
ers, who  are  transient,  and  clothed  in  Savage  fashion,
who  remain  some  time  in  this  little  house,  that  they
may  be  instructed  in  the  Mysteries  of  our  belief.
These  young  girls,  having  received  some  good  im-
pression in  this  House,  go  back  afterwards  to  their
parents.  When  these  good  Mothers  shall  dwell  in
more  spacious  quarters,  they  will  have  still  another
occupation, —  the  girls  and  women  who  are  admitted
to  baptism  will  go  to  spend  several  days  in  their  Mon-
astery, before  their  baptism,  in  order  to  learn  there
with  more  quiet  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ ;  even
the  Neophytes  can  go  there,  to  prepare  themselves


130  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J ^SUITES [Vol.20

de  Iefus-Chrift ;  voire  mefme  les  Neophytes  y  pour-
ront  aller,  pour  fe  preparer  plus  faindtement  a  la
faincte  Communion:  Or  encor  qu'elles  foient  logees
a  l'eftroit,  elles  ne  laiffent  pas  d  eftre  fouuent  vifit6es
par  de  bonnes  femmes  Sauuages  preffees  de  la  faim,
les  Meres  les  font  prier  Dieu,  leur  difent  vn  bon  mot,
les  font  manger,  puis  les  renuoyent  auec  cette  double
aumofne:  Mais  defcendons  plus  [10]  en  particulier,  &
difons  deux  mots  des  petites  Seminariftes,  fuiuant  le
memoire  que  leurs  bonnes  Meres  m'ont  enuoye\

Ces  petites  creatures  ont  vn  fi  grand  defir  de  fe
faire  inftruire,  qu'elles  difent  par  fois  a  leur  maiftreffe
qu'elleles  chaflie,  fi  elles  manquent  a  leur  deuoir;  &
fi  quelqu'vne  tombe  en  quelque  faute,  elle  fe  jette
auffi-toft  a  genoux  pour  en  demander  pardon.  Vn  de
nos  Peres  eftant  defcendu  ce  Printemps  a  Tadouffac,
a  la  requefte  des  Sauuages,  les  deux  plus  grandes
Seminariftes  luy  efcriuirent  de  leur  propre  main,
temoignant  d'vn  cofte  vne  grande  confolation  de  ce
qu'il  inftruifoit  leurs  compatriotes ;  &  de  l'autre,  vn
defir  de  f on  retour ;  le  Pere  leut  ces  deux  lettres  en  la
prefence  des  Sauuages,  leur  monftrant  comme  leurs
enfans  eftoient  capables  du  Maffmahigan  auffi  bien
que  les  noftres ;  ils  prenoient  ces  lettres,  les  tournoient
de  tous  coftes,  les  regardoient  auec  attention  comme
s'ils  les  euifent  pu  lire,  ils  faifoient  dire  &  redire  ce  qui
eftoit  couche  dedans,  bien  ioyeux  de  voir  que  noftre
papier  parloit  leur  langue,  car  ces  enfans  efcriuoient
en  Sauuage.  C'eft  vn  plaifir  de  voir  les  [u]  filles
plus  grandelettes  &  les  mieux  inftruites,  s'accofter
des  Seminariftes  paffageres,  leur  expliquer  la  doctrine
de  Iefus-Chrift,  fe  feruir  des  mefmes  interrogations
qu'on  leur  fait,  dechiffrer  vne  image,  raconter  genti-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  131

more  devoutly  for  holy  Communion.  Now,  although
they  are  straitened  for  room,  they  are  sure  to  be
often  visited  by  the  simple  Savage  women  when
goaded  by  hunger ;  the  Mothers  have  them  pray  to
God,  speak  a  good  word  to  them,  feed  them,  and
then  send  them  away  with  this  double  alms.  But
let  us  come  down  more  [10]  to  details,  and  let  us  say
a  few  words  of  the  little  Seminarists,  following  the
account  that  the  good  Mothers  have  sent  me.

These  little  creatures  have  so  great  a  desire  to  be
instructed,  that  they  sometimes  tell  their  teacher  that
she  may  chastise  them,  if  they  fail  in  their  task;
and,  if  one  of  them  commit  any  fault,  she  throws
herself  immediately  on  her  knees  to  ask  pardon  for
it.  One  of  our  Fathers  having  gone  down  to  Tadous-
sac  this  Spring,  at  the  request  of  the  Savages,  the
two  tallest  Seminarists  sent  letters  to  him  in  their  own
writing, —  expressing  on  the  one  hand  a  great  satis-
faction that  he  was  instructing  their  countrymen;
and,  on  the  other,  a  desire  for  his  return.  The  Fa-
ther read  these  two  letters  in  the  presence  of  the  Sav-
ages, showing  them  that  their  children  were  capable
of  Massinahigan  as  well  as  ours.  They  took  these
letters,  turned  them  on  all  sides,  and  looked  at  them
with  attention,  as  if  they  had  been  able  to  read  them ;
they  made  him  read  over  and  over  what  was  written
therein,  and  were  very  glad  to  see  that  our  paper
spoke  their  language,  for  the  children  wrote  in  the
Savage  tongue.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  see  the  [11]  largest
and  the  best-taught  girls  approach  the  transient  Sem-
inarists, explain  to  them  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ,
use  the  same  questions  that  have  been  put  to  them,
study  out  a  picture,  relate  prettily  a  story,  and  win
the  attention  of  those  who  listen  to  them.


132  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.  20

ment  vne  hiftoire,  &  fe  concilier  l'attention  de  celles
qui  les  ecoutent.

Si  les  adtions  exterieures  font  des  indices  des  mou-
uemens  &  des  affections  du  coeur,  ces  enfans  croifTent
tous  les  iours  en  la  deuotion  &  en  la  vertu,  elles  font
tous  les  foirs  l'examen  de  leur  confcience,  &  s'entr'ad-
uertiff ent  auec  paix  de  leurs  petits  defauts ;  elles  ont
vn  tres-grand  foin  de  rechercher  leurs  offenfes  quand
il  fe  faut  confeffer;  il  y  en  a  vne  qui  n'a  pas  plus  de
huidt  ans,  qui  parle  aux  plus  petites,  les  aide  a  s'exa-
miner,  &  leur  recommande  fur  tout  de  ne  cacher  au-
cun  peche.  Ie  puis  rendre  bon  temoignage  de  leur
confcience ;  mais  ie  puis  affurer  auec  fmcerite,  que  ie
n'ay  entendu  aucun  enfant  Francois  de  leur  age,  ny
deca  ny  dela  1' Ocean,  qui  ouurit  fon  cceur  plus  nette-
ment,  &  qui  en  reconntit  mieux  les  petits  plis  &  replis ;
en  vn  mot,  les  Sauuages  fe  confeffent  parfaitement
bien;  c'eft  chofe  admirable  [12]  comme  ils  concoi-
uent  l'importance  de  ce  Sacrement,  cela  m'a  par  fois
donne  de  l'etonnement,  de  voir  que  les  barbares
connoiffent  ce  que  les  heretiques  ignorent,  ou  veulent
ignorer.

La  veille  de  l'Affomption  de  la  faindte  Vierge,  vn
Pere  ayant  ouy  en  confeffion  la  petite  Anne  Marie
Negabamat,  cette  enfant  luy  dit  apres  l'abfolution,
NXfai  eapitch  ni-Xich  tiffaratti;  Mon  pere,  ie  veux  tou-
fiours  eftre  vierge,  ne  me  faites  point  fortir  de  cette
Maifon,  ie  defire  d'y  demeurer  toute  ma  vie;  fes  pa-
roles toucherent  le  Pere,  fe  reffouuenant  des  refiftan-
ces  qu'elle  luy  auoit  faites,  iufques  la  qu'il  la  prit
vne  fois,  &  fit  femblant  de  la  jetter  dans  la  riuiere,
voyant  qu'elle  ne  vouloit  pas  obei'r  a  fes  parens,  qui
luy  commandoient  de  demeurer  auec  ces  bonnes
Filles.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  133


If  outward  acts  be  an  index  of  the  motions  and
affections  of  the  heart,  these  children  are  growing
every  day  in  devotion  and  in  virtue;  they  make
every  evening  their  examination  of  conscience,  and
quietly  warn  one  another  of  their  little  faults.
They  take  great  care  to  search  out  their  offenses,
when  they  must  confess ;  there  is  one  who  is  no  more
than  eight  years  old,  who  speaks  to  the  smallest
ones,  helps  them  to  examine  themselves,  and  charges
them  above  all  not  to  conceal  any  sin.  I  can  render
good  testimony  to  their  conscientiousness;  and  in-
deed I  can  affirm  with  sincerity,  that  I  have  heard  no
French  child  of  their  age,  either  on  this  side  of  the
Ocean,  or  on  the  other,  who  opens  the  heart  more
frankly,  and  who  knows  better  its  most  hidden
recesses.  In  a  word,  the  Savages  make  a  thoroughly
good  confession;  it  is  admirable,  [12]  their  appre-
hension of  the  importance  of  this  Sacrament.  I  am
sometimes  amazed  to  see  that  barbarians  know  what
heretics  ignore  or  wish  to  ignore.

On  the  eve  of  the  Assumption  of  the  blessed  Vir-
gin, a  Father  having  heard  the  confession  of  little
Anne  Marie  Negabamat,  this  child  said  to  him  after
absolution :  Nonsai  eapitch  ni-wic/i  tissarawi.  ' '  My
father,  I  wish  to  be  always  a  virgin ;  do  not  make
me  leave  this  House,  I  wish  to  live  here  all  my
life."  Her  words  touched  the  Father,  as  he  remem-
bered the  opposition  that  she  used  to  make  to  him,
until  he  took  her  once  and  pretended  to  throw  her
into  the  river,  seeing  that  she  was  not  willing  to
obey  her  parents,  who  bade  her  remain  with  these
good Sisters.

Agnes  Chabwekwechich,  hearing  the  Mother  Su-
perior speak  of  the  great  sufferings of our  Lord,


134  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

Agnes  Chab&ek&echich  entendant  parler  la  Mere
Superieure  des  grandes  fouffrances  de  noftre  Sei-
gneur, s'ecria;  helas !  s'il  n'eufl  paye  pour  nous,  nous
ferions  tombees  au  feu  apres  noftre  mort,  en  verite
ie  l'aime  plus  que  moy-mefme ;  les  autres  temoigne-
rent  auffi  qu'elles  l'aimoient:  [13]  quelqu'vne  s'en-
quefta  fi  Dieu  n'eftoit  pas  affes  bon  pour  pardonner
aux  medians  Manitb's,  la  Mere  leur  repondit,  que  les
Demons  eftoient  fuperbes,  &  que  s'ils  fe  pouuoient
humilier  que  Dieu  leur  feroit  mifericorde.

Les  grandes  neiges  &  les  froids  tous  glaces  ne  font
pas  capables  d'eteindre  l'ardeur  d'vne  ame  qui  aime
Iefus-Chrift ;  Madame  de  la  Pelterie,  qui  n'a  point
de  confolation  plus  fenfible  que  de  vifiter  les  Sau-
uages,  s'en  vint  a  S.  Iofeph  au  trauers  des  neiges
pour  affifter  a  la  Meffe  de  minuict,  auec  les  nouueaux
Chreftiens,  elle  amena  auec  foy  deux  ou  trois  Semi-
nariftes;  ces  enfans  eftans  de  retour  en  la  Maifon,
Agnes  fe  mit  a  raconter  ce  qu'vn  Pere  auoit  dit  de
la  Naiffance  du  petit  Iefus,  en  la  Predication  qu'il  fit
aux  Sauuages  fur  ce  Myftere;  elle  exprimoit  les
geftes,  difoit  la  Mere  Superieure,  monftroit  le  rebut
que  les  Bethleemites  faifoient  de  la  faindte  Vierge,
auec  vne  indignation  contr'eux,  &  vne  compaffion
pour  la  Mere  &  pour  1' Enfant,  elle  decriuoit  le  petit
Iefus  dedans  fa  creiche  auec  des  paroles  qui  atten-
driffoient  les  bonnes  Meres.

[14]  On  auoit  dreffe  dans  le  Seminaire  vne  petite
creiche,  les  enfans  ne  ceffoient  d'aller  voir  le  petit
Iefus  qui  y  repofoit,  elles  fe  tenoient  a  genoux
aupres  de  luy,  portoient  de  petites  ecorces  allumees,
faute  de  chandelles  de  cire;  fouuent  elles  font  des
bouquets  & des  chappeaux de fleurs qu'elles  vont


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  135

exclaimed:  "  Alas!  if  he  had  not  atoned  for  us,  we
would  fall  into  the  fire  after  our  death ;  truly,  I  love
him  more  than  I  do  myself."  The  others  also  de-
clared that  they  loved  him.  [13]  Some  one  inquired
if  God  were  not  good  enough  to  pardon  the  wicked
Manitous;  the  Mother  answered  that  the  Demons
were  proud,  and  that,  if  they  could  humble  them-
selves, God  would  be  merciful  to  them.

Heavy  snows  and  freezing  cold  are  not  able  to
extinguish  the  ardor  of  a  soul  which  loves  Jesus
Christ.  Madame  de  la  Pelterie,  who  has  no  greater
solace  than  to  visit  the  Savages,  went  to  St.  Joseph
through  the  snows,  so  as  to  be  present  at  the  mid-
night Mass  with  the  new  Christians ;  she  took  with
her  two  or  three  Seminarists.  When  these  children
had  returned  to  the  House,  Agnes  began  to  relate
what  a  Father  had  said  of  the  Birth  of  the  little  Jesus,
in  the  Sermon  that  he  preached  to  the  Savages  on
this  Mystery.  "  She  reproduced  his  gestures,"  said
the  Mother  Superior,  "  and  showed  how  the  Bethle-
hemites  repulsed  the  blessed  Virgin,  with  indigna-
tion against  them  and  compassion  for  the  Mother
and  for  the  Child ;  ' '  she  described  the  little  Jesus  in
the  manger,  with  words  which  moved  the  good
Mothers.

[14]  They  had  set  up  in  the  Seminary  a  little  man-
ger: the  children  went  incessantly  to  see  the  little
Jesus  that  was  lying  there,  they  remained  upon  their
knees  near  him,  and  carried  little  pieces  of  lighted
bark,  for  want  of  wax  candles.  They  often  make
bouquets  and  garlands  of  flowers  which  they  offer  to
the  image  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  upon  whom  they
call  with  the  most  tender  love.

One  day,  having  met  together,  they  made  a  little


136  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

prefenter  a  1'image  de  la  faindte  Vierge,  qu'elles
apoftrophent  auec  des  affections  fort  tendres.

S'eftant  vn  iour  raffemblees  elles  firent  vne  petite
cabane  de  feiiillages,  la  tapifferent  de  verdure,  a  leur
facon,  puis  allerent  demander  conge  a  la  Mere  Supe-
rieure  dy  paffer  la  nuict,,  la  Mere  les  en  voulant
deftourner,  leur  dit  qu'elles  auroient  peur,  &  que  la
porte  de  cette  cabane  ne  fermoit  point.  Nous  ne
craignons  rien,  firent-elles,  nous  porterons  auec  nous
l'image  de  Iefus  &  de  la  faindte  Vierge,  &  le  mef-
chant  ManitS  ne  nous  pourra  aborder ;  nous  n'auons
pas  peur  des  ames  des  trefpaff  ez ;  car  ceux  qui  meu-
rent,  s'ils  font  bien  bons,  s'en  vont  au  Ciel;  s'ils
n'ont  pas  paye  &  fatisfait  pour  leurs  offenfes,  ils
vont  en  Purgatoire,  s'ils  font  bien  mefchans,  ils  vont
en  Enfer;  ils  ne  fortiront  pas  de  la  [15]  pour  nous
venir  trouuer,  fl  le  Diable  s'approche  de  noftre  cabane
nous  prierons  Dieu,  &  il  le  fera  fuir:  la  Mere
adjoufte  dans  fon  memoire,  cette  refponfe  m'eftonna,
il  s'en  faut  beaucoup  que  nos  petites  Francoifes
foient  fi  prefentes  a  elles,  quoy  qu'on  les  inflruife
fans  ceffe.

II  y  a  vne  petite  Huronne  parmy  les  Algonquines,
eftant  interrogee  fi  elle  auoit  encor  fa  mere,  celle
que  i'ay  en  mon  pais  n'eft  plus  ma  chere  mere,  ref-
pond  cet  enfant,  parce  qu'elle  ne  croit  point  en  Dieu,
c'eft  vous  qui  eftes  mes  vrayes  Meres  puis  que  vous
m'inftruifes,  cette  petite  Neophyte  fut  long-temps
auec  le  bon  Charles  Sondatfaa  la  veille  de  fon  Bap-
tefme,  elle  luy  parloit  des  biens  qu'on  recoit  dans
ces  eaux  facrees,  des  grandes  recompenfes  que  Dieu
donne  a  ceux  qui  luy  obei'ffent,  des  horribles  chafli-
mens  qu'il  exerce  fur  les  fuperbes,  &  fur  les  rebelles;


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  13^


cabin  of  boughs,  lined  it  with  green  leaves,  in  their
own  fashion,  and  then  went  to  ask  leave  of  the  Mother
Superior  to  spend  the  night  there.  The  Mother,
wishing  to  dissuade  them  from  it,  told  them  they
would  be  afraid,  and  that  the  door  of  this  cabin  did
not  shut.  "  We  fear  nothing,"  said  they,  "  we  shall
carry  with  us  the  Images  of  Jesus  and  the  blessed
Virgin,  and  the  wicked  Manitou  will  not  be  able  to
come  near  us.  We  do  not  fear  the  souls  of  the
departed;  for  those  who  die,  if  they  are  truly  good,
go  to  Heaven ;  if  they  have  not  expiated  their  sins
and  atoned  for  them,  they  go  to  Purgatory ;  if  they
are  very  wicked,  they  go  to  Hell, —  they  will  not
leave  that  place  [15]  to  come  to  us.  If  the  Devil
come  near  our  cabin,  we  will  pray  to  God,  and  he
will  make  him  flee."  The  Mother  adds  in  her  ac-
count: "  This  reply  astonished  me ;  our  little  French
girls  are  far  from  being  so  self-possessed ;  although
they  are  continually  instructed."

There  is  a  little  Huron  girl  among  the  Algonquins ;
on  being  asked  if  she  had  still  her  mother,  "  She
whom  I  have  in  my  country  is  no  longer  my  dear
mother,"  answered  the  child,  "  because  she  does  not
believe  in  God;  it  is  you  who  are  my  true  Mothers,
since  you  instruct  me."  This  little  Neophyte  was
a  long  time  with  the  good  Charles  Sondatsaa,  the
night  before  her  Baptism ;  she  spoke  to  him  of  the
benefits  that  are  received  from  the  holy  water,  the
great  rewards  that  God  gives  to  those  who  obey  him,
and  the  horrible  chastisements  that  he  visits  upon
the  proud  and  upon  the  rebellious;  she  urged  him
strongly  to  induce  the  little  Huron  girls  to  come  and
stay  at  the  Seminary;  she  said  a  thousand  good
things of it. "  These virgin Sisters love us so


138  LES  RELA  TJONS  DES  JE SUITES  [Vol.  20


elle  le  preffe  fort  d'exciter  les  petites  Huronnes  de
venir  demeurer  au  Seminaire,  elle  en  difoit  mille
biens:  Ces  Filles  vierges  nous  ayment  tant,  difoit-
elle,  ce  font  vrayement  nos  meres,  nous  ne  manquons
de  rien  auec  [16]  elles;  Cet  homme  fage  &  ferieux
fe  plaifoit  fi  fort  au  difcours  &  a  la  conuerfation  de
cette  ieune  fille,  agee  d'enuiron  douze  ou  treize  ans,
qu'il  y  paffa  plus  de  deux  heures  &  demie.

Si  quelque  perfonne  de  fon  pais  la  vient  vifiter,
elle  ne  s'enquefte  point  de  fes  parens,  ny  de  ce  qui
fe  paffe  parmy  fes  proches,  mais  elle  demande  fi  les
Hurons  n'ont  point  enuie  de  croire  en  Dieu,  s'ils  ne
quittent  point  leurs  dances  &  leurs  chants  fuperfti-
tieux,  s'ils  confultent  toufiours  les  Diables.

Vn  fien  parent  l'interrogeant,  fi  elle  ne  vouloit
point  retourner  en  fon  pais:  Non,  dit-elle,  ie  n'y
penfe  plus,  ie  me  trouue  fort  bien  oil  ie  fuis:  Ma
fille  tu  ne  fais  pas  bien,  luy  dit-il,  il  ne  faut  pas  que
tu  penfes  a  toy  feule  quand  tu  feras  bien  inflruite,  il
faut  venir  inftruire  tes  compatriotes :  voila  comme
les  enfans  les  plus  Sauuages  deuiennent  enfans  de
Dieu;  qu'il  foit  beny  a  iamais  par  toutes  les  nations
de  la  terre.

La  bonne  Madame  de  la  Pelterie  qui  a  iett6  les
fondemens  de  ce  petit  Seminaire,  a  fujet  de  benir
Dieu  de  ce  qu'il  l'a  [17]  choifie  pour  vn  ouurage  qui
luy  eft  fi  agreable :  Mais  fon  cceur  eft  grand,  les  de-
firs  qu'elle  a  de  raffembler  les  peres  &  meres,  encor
errants,  pour  ayder  a  fauuer  les  enfans,  luy  font  fou-
haitter  vn  tref or  deffus  fes  forces ;  elle  ne  ceff e  de
vifiter  ces  bonnes  gens,  elle  leur  parle  des  yeux,  ne
pouuant  leur  parler  de  la  langue,  elle  leur  parleroit
bien plus  volontiers des  mains;  Et  fi  elle  pouuoit


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  139

much,"  said  she;  "  they  are  truly  our  mothers,  we
lack  for  nothing  with  [16]  them."  This  wise  and
serious  man  was  so  extremely  pleased  with  the  dis-
course and  the  conversation  of  this  young  girl,  about
twelve  or  thirteen  years  old,  that  he  spent  more  than
two  hours  and  a  half  with  her.

If  any  one  from  her  own  country  comes  to  see  her,
she  does  not  inquire  for  her  parents,  nor  about  what
happens  among  her  relatives;  but  she  asks  if  the
Hurons  have  no  desire  to  believe  in  God,  if  they  do
not  give  up  their  dances  and  their  superstitious
chants,  and  if  they  still  consult  the  Devils.

When  one  of  her  relatives  asked  her  if  she  did  not
wish  to  return  to  her  own  country,  "  No,"  said  she,
"I  no  longer  think  of  it,  I  am  very  well  satisfied
where  I  am."  "  My  daughter,  you  are  not  doing
right,"  said  he  to  her;  "  you  must  not  think  only  of
yourself;  when  you  are  well  instructed  you  must
come  and  teach  your  countrywomen."  Behold  how
the  most  Savage  children  become  the  children  of
God ;  may  he  be  blessed  forevermore  among  all  the
nations  of  the  earth !

Good  Madame  de  la  Pelterie,  who  laid  the  founda-
tion of  this  little  Seminary,  has  cause  to  bless  God
that  he  has  [17]  chosen  her  for  a  work  which  is  so
acceptable  to  him.  But  her  heart  is  large ;  the  wish
that  she  has  to  gather  together  the  still  wandering
fathers  and  mothers,  in  order  to  aid  in  saving  the
children,  makes  her  long  for  a  treasure  beyond  her
own  means.  She  does  not  cease  to  visit  these  poor
people ;  she  speaks  to  them  with  her  eyes  not  being
able  to  speak  to  them  in  their  language.  She  would
speak  to  them  much  more  willingly  with  her  hands :
and  if  she  were  able  to  practice  the  trades  of  a  mason


140  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

exercer  le  meftier  de  maflon  &  de  charpentier  pour
leur  drefler  de  petites  demeures,  &  de  laboureur  pour
les  ayder  a  cultiuer  la  terre,  elle  s'y  employeroit  auec
autant  d'ardeur  qu'elle  voit  de  bonnes  difpofitions  en
ces  peuples  pour  s'arrefter;  mais  fes  bras  font  foibles
auffi.  bien  que  les  noftres.  Dcus  Dominus  fortitudo
nojira  in  (Zternum.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  141

and  of  a  carpenter,  so  as  to  erect  for  them  little
dwellings,  and  to  plough,  in  order  to  aid  them  in  cul-
tivating the  land,  she  would  exert  herself  therein
with  an  ardor  in  proportion  to  the  good  disposition
she  sees  in  these  peoples  to  settle  down;  but  her
arms  are  weak,  as  well  as  ours.  Deus  Dominus  forti-
tudo  nostra  in  (sternum.


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J E SUITES  [Vol.  20


CHAPITRE  II.

DE LA RESIDENCE DE SAINCT IOSEPH.

LE  nombre  des  Chreftiens  croift  tous  les  iours,  le
refte  de  ceux  qui  ne  font  [18]  point  baptifes,  &
qui  fe  retirent  en  cette  Bourgade  encomman-
c6e,  n'ont  point  d'alienation  de  la  foy,  les  prieres  fe
font  publiquement,  &  dans  les  cabanes,  &  dans  les
maifons,  &  dans  la  chapelle,  les  Sacremens  font  en
honneur,  &  plufieurs  ne  fcauroient  garder  aucune
offenfe  qu'ils  croyent  tant  foit  peu  grief ue,  fur  leur
cceur,  fi  toft  qu'ils  penfent  eftre  bleff6s,  quoy  que
legerement,  ils  ont  recours  aux  remedes  facres,  que
Dieu  a  laiffes  en  fon  Eglife.  On  ne  fourfre  aucun
deffaut  public,  les  Neophytes  font  fortement  \\€s
par  enfemble,  auec  vn  zele  qu'on  n'auroit  iamais
oz6  efperer  des  Sauuages:  car  c'eft  chofe  eftrange
comme  ces  peuples  font  froids,  &  efloignes  de  noftre
chaleur,  &  de  noftre  promptitude ;  mais  defcendons
plus  en  particulier :  a  fruclibus  eorum  cognofcetis  eos.

Les  Chreftiens  plus  zeles  s'affemblerent  a  noftre
defceu  durant  cet  hyuer,  pour  traiter  par  entr'eux,
des  moyens  de  fe  conferuer  en  la  foy;  l'vn  d'eux
hara[n]guant,  dit,  qu'il  faifoit  plus  d'eftat  des  prieres,
c'eft  ainfi  qu'ils  parlent,  que  de  la  vie,  &  qu'il  mour-
roit  plutoft  que  de  les  quitter;  [19]  l'autre  dit,  qu'il
defiroit  qu'on  le  punift  &  qu'on  le  chaftiaft,  en  cas
qu'il  fe  dementilt  de  la  parole  qu'il  auoit  donn6e  a
Dieu;  vn  troifiefme  s'efcria,  qu'il  falloit  mettre  en
prifon celuy  qui  tomberoit  dans  quel  que  faute, &


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  143


CHAPTER  II.

OF THE RESIDENCE OF SAINT JOSEPH.

THE  number  of  Christians  is  increasing  every  day ;
the  rest  of  the  people,  who  are  [18]  not  bap-
tized, and  who  have  taken  refuge  in  this  Vil-
lage just  started,  have  no  alienation  from  the  faith.
Prayers  are  offered  publicly ;  also  in  cabins,  and  in
houses,  and  in  the  chapel  the  Sacraments  are  honored.
Many  are  unable  to  bear  upon  their  hearts  any  trans-
gression that  they  consider  in  the  least  serious;  as
soon  as  they  think  that  they  have  offended,  even
slightly,  they  have  recourse  to  the  sacred  remedies
which  God  has  left  to  his  Church.  No  public  fault
is  allowed;  the  Neophytes  are  strongly  bound  to-
gether with  a  zeal  that  one  would  not  have  dared  to
hope  for  from  Savages, — for  it  is  strange  how  cold
these  peoples  are,  and  how  far  removed  from  our
warmth  and  hasty  disposition.  But  let  us  come  down
to  more  details :  h  fructibus  eorum  cognoscetis  eos.

The  most  zealous  Christians  met  during  this  win-
ter, unknown  to  us,  in  order  to  confer  together  upon
the  means  of  keeping  themselves  in  the  faith.  One
of  them,  in  making  an  address,  said  that  he  thought
more  highly  of  prayers  —  it  is  thus  that  they  speak  —
than  of  life,  and  that  he  would  rather  die  than  give
them  up;  [19]  another  said  that  he  wished  he  might
be  punished  and  chastised  in  case  he  forfeited  the
word  he  had  given  to  God ;  a  third  exclaimed  that
he  who  should  fall  into  any  error  must  be  put  into


144  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES [Vol.20

qu'il  le  falloit  faire  ieufner  quatre  iours  fans  boire
ny  manger:  les  adtions  de  iuftice,  qu'ils  voyent  par
fois  exercer  contre  les  delinquans,  leur  donnent  ces
penfees:  Charles  MeiachKatfat  tout  nouuellement
baptife  fe  trouua  dans  cette  affembl6e,  non  feulement
cela  ne  l'epouuenta  point,  ains  au  contraire  il  en  fut
confole:  ie  fuis  des  voftres,  leur  dit-il,  tout  ce  que
vous  conclueres  m'aggreera,  c'eft  tout  de  bon  que  ie
croy  en  Dieu,  &  fi  vous  aues  quelque  croyance,  que
ie  doiue  perdre  coeur,  ie  vous  donne  des  a  prefent  la
liberte  de  me  lier,  &  de  me  tenir  en  prifon:  mais
mon  coeur  me  dit  que  ie  marcheray  droit,  &  que  ce
que  i'ay  embraffe  auec  tant  d'affedtion,  ne  fortira.
iamais  de  ma  penfee.

Cette  aff embl£e  f e  fit  dans  le  filence  de  la  nuict :  &
le  matin  ils  nous  en  vindrent  donner  aduis ;  nous  re-
partifmes  qu'ils  procedoient  auec  trop  de  feuerite,  que
la  douceur  [20]  auoit  plus  de  pouuoir  fur  les  efprits,
que  la  force;  qu'vne  femme  tout  fraichement  nous
auoit  dit,  que  ce  qui  la  retardoit  de  preffer  fon  bap-
tefme  eftoit,  qu'elle  ne  croyoit  pas  pouuoir  viure  fi
faindtement  que  les  Chreftiens,  &  qu'elle  ne  fcauroit
venir  tous  les  iours  a  la  Meffe,  comme  ils  faifoient
dans  les  rigueurs  de  l'hyuer,  eftans  par  fois  aff£s
efloignes  de  l'Eglife;  &  la  neige,  &  la  grefle,  &  le
froid,  affiegeant  le  chemin;  Que  fera-ce  done,  leur
difions  nous,  fi  on  parle  de  prifon  a  des  gens  foibles,
&  non  encor  eclaires  du  flambeau  de  la  f oy ;  ils  ne
laifferent  pas  de  pourfuiure  leur  pointe,  &  de  dire  tout
haut,  qu'ils  auoient  fait  vn  complot  par  entr'eux,
que  le  premier  de  leur  nombre  qui  tomberoit  dans
quelque  faute,  tant  foit  peu  notable,  fubiroit  la  pri-
fon  &  le  ieufne: cela  epouuenta  les foibles, &  le


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  145

prison,  and  made  to  fast  four  days  without  eating  or
drinking.  The  acts  of  justice  that  they  see  from
time  to  time  exercised  on  delinquents,  give  them
these  ideas.  Charles  Meiachkawat,  who  was  very
recently  baptized,  was  in  this  assembly ;  not  only  did
that  not  frighten  him,  but,  on  the  contrary,  he  was
comforted  by  it:  "I  am  one  of  you,"  said  he  to
them;  "all  that  you  shall  decide  upon  will  please
me.  It  is  in  earnest  that  I  believe  in  God;  and  if
you  have  any  conviction  that  I  shall  lose  courage,  I
now  give  you  liberty  to  bind  me  and  to  hold  me  in
prison ;  but  my  heart  tells  me  that  I  shall  walk
straight,  and  that  what  I  have  embraced  with  so
much  affection  will  never  leave  my  mind."

This  meeting  took  place  in  the  silence  of  the  night,
and  in  the  morning  they  came  to  give  us  information
of  it.  We  answered  that  they  proceeded  with  too
much  severity;  that  mildness  [20]  had  more  power
over  souls  than  force ;  that  a  woman  had  very  recent-
ly said  to  us  that  what  hindered  her  from  urging  her
baptism  was,  that  she  did  not  believe  she  could  live
so  devoutly  as  did  the  Christians,  and  she  would  not
be  able  to  come  every  day  to  Mass  as  they  did,  in  all
the  severity  of  the  winter,  when  they  were  some-
times rather  far  from  the  Church,  and  snow,  hail,
and  cold  besetting  the  way.  "  What  will  happen,
then,"  we  said  to  them,  "  if  you  speak  of  prisons  to
people  who  are  weak,  and  not  yet  enlightened  by  the
torch  of  faith  ? ' '  They  did  not  cease  to  pursue  their
point,  and  to  say  resolutely  that  they  had  formed  a
plan  among  themselves,  that  the  first  of  their  number
who  should  commit  any  fault,  however  inconsider-
able, should  suffer  imprisonment  and  fasting.  This
frightened  the  weak,  and  the  report  spread  among


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

bruit  courut  parmy  les  infidelles,  que  les  Sauuages
Chreftiens  auoient  des  chaifnes,  &  des  liens  tout
prefts  pour  garotter  les  refractaires.  Quelques  Pay-
ens  nous  dirent  qu'on  ioiioit  a  tout  perdre,  &  que  les
Sauuages  fe  tueroient  les  vns  les  autres ;  tout  cela  nous
confoloit  fort:  car  nous  [21]  prenions  plaifir  de  voir
l'vnion  des  Chreftiens;  il  eft  bien  plus  aife  de  tem-
perer  la  ferueur  que  de  l'allumer:  II  eft  bon  que  les
Sauuages  fentent  ces  feux,  mais  il  ne  faut  pas  con-
defcendre  a  tous  leurs  defirs,  les  facons  de  faire  d'vn
peuple  ne  fe  changent  pas  fi  toft,  il  faut  proceder
auec  dexterite,  douceur,  &  patience.

Quelque  temps  apres  ces  refolutions  prifes,  vn  de
nos  Peres  eftant  entre  dans  la  cabane  d'vn  des  princi-
paux  Sauuages  qui  les  auoient  receues  &  approuuees ;
ce  bon-homme  enuifagea  le  Pere  d'vn  ceil  trifle,  &
luy  dit,  NiKanis,  ie  fuis  en  cholere,  i'ay  fafche  Dieu,
i'ay  penfe  m'en  aller  rendre  prifonnier  a  Kebec,
pour  paffer  quatre  iours  fans  boire  ny  manger,  fui-
uant  ce  que  nous  auons  refolu,  mais  i'attens  que  tu
m'y  enuoyes;  le  Pere  a  ces  paroles  fut  furpris,  ne
fcachant  que  refpondre ;  cet  homme  le  voyant  penfif ,
luy  dit,  tu  n'as  point  de  cceur,  tu  te  deffies  de  nous
autres,  tu  ne  tiens  pas  affes  ferme;  tu  t'imagines  que
fi  tu  nous  enioignois  ces  penitences,  que  nous  ne  les
f erions  pas ;  eprouue-le  tout  maintenant  en  ma  per-
fonne,  commande  moy  d'aller  en  prifon,  donne  moy
[22]  vn  mot  d'efcrit  arm  que  la  porte  me  foit  ouuerte,
&  tout  a  l'heure  ie  parts  en  ta  pre  fence.  Le  Pere
luv  demande,  fi  fa  faute  meritoit  bien  vn  tel  chafti-
ment:  ouy,  dit-il,  i'ay  fafche  Dieu,  mon  peche  eft
grand,  i'ay  frappe  ma  femme  auec  cholere,  il  eft  vray
qu'elle m'a  irrite; car  ce matin  m'en allant a la


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  147

the  unbelievers  that  the  Christian  Savages  had  chains
and  bonds  all  ready  to  bind  the  refractory.  Some
Pagans  told  us  that  they  were  risking  the  ruin  of
everything,  and  that  the  Savages  would  kill  one  an-
other. All  this  consoled  us  much,  for  we  [21]  took
pleasure  in  seeing  the  union  of  the  Christians ;  it  is
much  more  easy  to  temper  fervor  than  to  kindle  it.
It  is  well  that  the  Savages  feel  these  ardors,  but  we
must  not  yield  to  all  their  desires ;  the  customs  of  a
people  do  not  change  so  soon, —  it  is  necessary  to
proceed  with  skill,  gentleness,  and  patience.

Some  time  after  these  resolutions  were  taken,  one
of  our  Fathers  having  entered  the  cabin  of  one  of
the  chief  Savages  who  had  received  and  approved
them,  this  simple  man  looked  at  the  Father  with  a
sad  eye,  and  said  to  him:  "  Nikanis,  I  am  angry,  I
have  grieved  God.  I  have  thought  of  going  to  Kebec
to  surrender  myself  as  a  prisoner,  that  I  may  spend
four  days  without  food  or  drink,  according  to  that
upon  which  we  resolved ;  but  I  am  waiting  for  thee
to  send  me  there. "  The  Father  was  surprised  at  these
words,  not  knowing  what  to  reply;  this  man,  seeing
him  thoughtful,  said  to  him:  "  Thou  hast  no  cour-
age ;  thou  art  distrustful  of  us  all ;  thou  art  not  firm
enough ;  thou  imaginest  that  if  thou  enjoinest  these
penances  upon  us,  we  would  not  do  them.  Make  the
trial  now,  in  my  case, —  command  me  to  go  to  prison;
give  me  [22]  a  note,  so  that  the  door  may  be  opened  to
me,  and  this  instant  I  will  set  off  in  your  presence."
The  Father  asked  him  if  his  fault  really  merited
such  a  chastisement.  "  Yes,"  said  he,  "  I  have
grieved  God;  my  sin  is  great.  I  struck  my  wife  in
anger;  it  is  true  that  she  irritated  me,  for,  this  morn-
ing, in  going  to  Mass,  I  told  her  that  she  should  fol-


148  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

Meffe,  ie  luy  ay  dit  qu'elle  y  vint  apres  moy,  ne
l'ayant  point  veue,  ie  l'ay  frappee  a  mon  retour;  ie
ne  veux  perfonne  auec  moy,  difoit-il,  qui  ne  prie
Dieu:  ouy  mais,  luy  fit  le  Pere,  tu  fcais  bien  qu'il
n'eft  pasiourde  fefte,  &  qu'elle  n'a  point  d'obligation
d'affifter  auiourd'huy  a  la  faindte  Mefle?  II  eft  vray,
refpond-il,  mais  puis  que  c'eft  mieux  fait  d'y  affifter,
elle  le  deuoit  faire,  veu  mefme  que  ie  l'y  auois  inui-
t6e,  &  que  c'eft  noftre  couftume  de  l'entendre  tous
les  iours,  ie  merite  neantmoins  chaftiment,  car  ie  me
fuis  laiffe  emporter  a  ma  cholere,  donne  moy  vn  mot
de  lettre  afin  que  ie  fafTe  penitence  de  mon  peche ;  le
Pere  fe  mit  la-deffus  a  excufer  cette  faute,  &  a  temoi-
gner  que  cette  bonne  femme  eftoit  bien  marrie  d'a-
uoir  defobey,  qu'elle  aimoit  fon  mary,  &  que  iamais
cliofe  femblable  ne  luy  arriueroit:  [23]  Cette  pauure
creature  prenant  la  parole,  dit,  d'vne  voix  pleine  de
douceur  &  de  regret,  mon  Pere,  i'ay  en  mon  cceur  ce
que  vous  aues  en  la  bouche,  &  puis  fe  teut:  La  con-
clufion  fut,  que  d6s  le  lendemain  au  poind:  du  iour,
ils  fe  vindrent  conf effer  tous  deux :  mais  ce  qui  nous
eftonna  fort,  fut  que  cette  bonne  femme  iamais  ne
s'excufa,  quoy  que  fon  mary  luy  dit  ou  reprochaft,
&  cependant  elle  auoit  vn  grand  fujet  d'excufe;  car
elle  nous  dit  depuis  que  quand  fon  mary  l'appella
pour  aller  a  la  Meffe,  qu'elle  ne  l'auoit  pas  entendu,
neantmoins  de  peur  de  le  fafcher,  elle  aima  mieux
fe  rendre  coupable,  que  de  s' excufer.

A  quelque  temps  de  la,  vn  ieune  homme  eftant
tombe"  dans  vne  faute  affes  lourde,  car  il  s' eftoit  eny-
ure\  vn  Chreftien  fon  parent  delibera  de  le  faire
mettre  en  prifon :  comme  on  en  demandoit  aduis  a
celuy dont  ie  viens  de  parler, il  repliqua, ie  n'ay


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640- 41  149


low  me ;  not  having  seen  her,  I  struck  her  on  my
return.  I  wish  no  person  with  me,"  said  he,  "  who
does  not  pray  to  God."  "  Yes,"  the  Father  answered
him,  "  but  you  know  well  that  it  is  not  a  holy  day
and  that  she  is  under  no  obligation  to  be  present  to-
day at  holy  Mass."  "  It  is  true,"  he  replied,  "  but,
since  it  is  better  to  be  present  there,  she  ought  to
have  gone  —  considering  too  that  I  had  invited  her,
and  that  it  is  our  custom  to  hear  it  every  day.
Nevertheless,  I  merit  chastisement,  for  I  have  let
myself  be  carried  away  by  my  indignation ;  give  me
a  note,  so  that  I  may  do  penance  for  my  sin."  The
Father  thereupon  began  to  excuse  this  fault,  and  to
show  that  this  good  woman  was  indeed  grieved  at
having  disobeyed,  that  she  loved  her  husband,  and
that  a  similar  thing  would  never  happen  to  her
again.  [23]  This  poor  creature,  beginning  to  speak,
said,  with  a  voice  full  of  mildness  and  regret:  "  My
Father,  I  have  in  my  heart  what  you  have  on  your
lips ;  '  and  then  she  was  silent.  The  conclusion
was  that  the  very  next  day  at  dawn  they  both  came
to  confession ;  but  what  extremely  astonished  us  was
that  this  good  woman  never  excused  herself,  what-
ever her  husband  said  to  her,  or  however  he  re-
proached her.  Notwithstanding,  she  had  an  excel-
lent reason  for  excuse;  for  she  told  us  afterwards
that  when  her  husband  called  her  to  go  to  Mass,  she
did  not  hear  him ;  nevertheless  for  fear  of  off  ending1
him,  she  had  preferred  to  appear  guilty,  rather  than
to  excuse  herself.

Some  time  thereafter,  a  young  man  having  fallen
into  a  somewhat  gross  fault,  for  he  became  intoxicated,
one  of  his  Christian  relatives  resolved  to  have  him
put  into  prison. When they  asked  the opinion  of


150  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

point  de  parole  fur  ce  fujet,  i'ay  merite  chaftiment,
on  ne  me  l'a  pas  donne,  ie  n'y  puis  condamner  vn
autre.  En  effet,  il  ne  voulut  iamais  declarer  fon
aduis;  on  ne  laiffa  pas  d'enuoyer  ce  ieune  etourdy  a
[24]  Kebec,  monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  le  fit  mettre
dans  vne  baffe  foffe,  a  la  requefte  des  Sauuages,  il  y
fut  mis  iuftement  la  veille  de  Noel,  &  le  lendemain
de  cette  grande  fefte,  cinq  des  principaux  Chreftiens
allerent  trouuer  monfieur  de  Montmagny,  &  l'vn
d'eux  luy  tint  ce  difcours:  Voila  les  deux  plus  pro-
ches  parens  du  prifonnier,  fcauoir  eft  Noel  Negaba-
mat,  &  Charles  MeiachKab'at,  il  y  a  long-temps  que
le  premier  eft  deliure  des  chaifnes  du  Diable ;  pour
le  fecond,  il  a  efte  mis  tout  recemment  en  liberte
par  le  faindt  Baptefme ;  mais  quant  a  celuy  que  vous
auds  fait  emprifonner,  il  eft  garotte  de  tous  coftes,
le  Diable  le  tient  fortement  lie,  car  il  n'eft  pas  encor
baptife,  &  fon  peche  merite  vne  double  prifon ;  au
refte,  fes  parens  vous  prient  d'en  faire  iuftice,  car
eftans  Chreftiens  ils  veulet  garder  toutes  les  loix  de
Dieu,  ils  fe  departent  entierement  de  fa  parente.
Voila  vn  coup  capable  d'etonner  tous  ceux  qui  con-
noiffent  les  facons  de  faire  des  Sauuages,  lefquels  ne
fcauroient  fouffrir  qu'on  touche  leurs  allies;  mais
Dieu  a  plus  de  force  que  la  nature :  Monfieur  le  Gou-
uerneur repartit,  qu'il  le  [25]  feroit  venir  deuant  foy,
qu'il  luy  donneroit  de  bons  aduis,  &  de  la  terreur;  &
que  s'il  retomboit  dans  fa  faute,  qu'il  ne  manqueroit
pas  de  le  faire  reprendre  vne  autre  fois ;  tout  fe  paffa
auec  prudence,  &  auec  fruidt:  Ce  pauure  homme
eftant  forty  de  prifon,  nous  vint  auffi-toft  trouuer  a.
faindt  Iofeph,  il  nous  dit,  qu'il  n'improuuoit  point  ce
que  les  Francois  &  les  Sauuages  auoient  fait,  qu'au


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  151

him  whom  I  have  just  mentioned,  he  replied:  "  I
have  not  a  word  to  say  on  the  subject.  I  merited
chastisement,  it  was  not  given  to  me ;  I  cannot  con-
demn another  to  it."  Indeed,  he  was  never  willing
to  declare  his  opinion;  however,  they  sent  the
thoughtless  young  man  to  [24]  Kebec.  Monsieur  the
Governor  had  him  put  in  a  dungeon,  at  the  request
of  the  Savages :  he  was  put  there  on  the  very  eve  of
Christmas,  and  the  day  following  that  great  festival
five  of  the  principal  Christians  went  to  monsieur  de
Montmagny  and  one  of  them  made  this  speech  to
him :  ' '  Here  are  the  two  nearest  relatives  of  the  pris-
oner, that  is  to  say,  Noel  Negabamat,  and  Charles
Meiachkawat ;  it  is  a  long  time  since  the  first  one  was
delivered  from  the  chains  of  the  Devil ;  as  for  the  sec-
ond one,  he  has  been  very  recently  set  at  liberty  by
holy  Baptism.  But  as  for  him  whom  you  have  had
imprisoned,  he  is  pinioned  on  all  sides, —  the  Devil
holds  him  fast  bound,  for  he  is  not  yet  baptized,  and
his  sin  merits  a  double  prison ;  nevertheless,  his  rela-
tives pray  you  to  do  justice  to  him,  for,  being  Chris-
tians, they  wish  to  keep  all  the  laws  of  God;  they
entirely  renounce  his  relationship."  This  is  an  act
fit  to  astonish  all  those  that  know  the  customs  of  the
Savages,  who  cannot  endure  that  any  one  should
touch  their  kinsmen ;  but  God  has  more  power  than
nature.  Monsieur  the  Governor  replied  that  he  [25]
would  have  him  brought  before  him,  and  that  he
would  give  him  good  advice,  and  would  frighten
him ;  and  that,  if  he  should  again  commit  the  fault,
he  would  not  fail  to  have  him  again  arrested.  All
went  on  with  discretion  and  profit.  This  poor  man
having  left  the  prison,  came  immediately  to  us  at
saint  Joseph ;  he  said  to  us  that  he  did  not  disap-


152  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

commencement  cela  l'auoit  fort  irrite\  mais  qu'ayant
connu  que  c'eftoit  pour  fon  bien,  qu'il  s'eftoit  appai-
{6;  ie  m'amenderay,  difoit-il,  le  Capitaine  m'a  donne
de  bons  aduis,  ie  les  garderay;  il  m'a  fait  entendre
qu'il  auoit  de  longs  bras,  &  qu'encor  que  i'allafTe  a
Tadouffac  ou  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  qu'il  atteignoit
iufques  la,  &  encor  plus  loing ;  ie  luy  ay  promis  que
ie  ne  le  mecotenterois  plus,  &  que  ie  me  rendrois
obeiflant,  c'eft  la  parole  que  ie  vous  donne  auffi,  &
que  ie  garderay;  mais  haftes-vous  de  me  baptifer,
afin  que  ie  deuienne  plus  fage.

Eftant  de  retour  en  fa  cabane,  les  principaux  Sau-
uages  l'allerent  trouuer  fur  la  nuidt,  &  luy  parlerent
en  cette  forte:  Tu  fcais  bien  que  tu  t'es  mefle  de  for-
tileges,  [26]  mais  comme  nous  fommes  maintenant
Chreftiens,  nous  ne  craignons  plus  tes  inuocations  de
Demon,  tes  menaces  &  tes  forts  ne  nous  donnent
plus  l'epouuante;  au  refte,  il  faut  que  tu  fcaches  que
c'eft  nous  qui  t'auons  fait  mettre  en  prifon,  c'eft  nous
qui  auons  prie  noftre  Capitaine  de  t'arrefter,  fois
maintenant  plus  fage,  quitte  tes  facons  de  faire;  fi
tu  veux  croire  en  Dieu  &  receuoir  fa  Loy,  nous  t'ai-
merons,  &  te  protegerons  par  tout;  finon,  des  a  pre-
fent  nous  renoncons  a  ta  parente,  &  a  ton  amitie :  fi
tu  veux  perfeuerer  en  ta  malice,  tu  feras  bien  de
t'eleigner;  car  fi  quelqu'vn  te  met  a  mort,  comme
tu  en  as  efte  defia  dans  les  dangers,  nous  ne  ven-
gerons  point  ta  mort.  A  ces  paroles,  cet  homme
qui  auoit  coutume  de  donner  de  la  terreur  aux  autres
par  fes  iongleries,  &  par  fon  impudence,  fe  trouua
bien  eftonne :  Vous  m'aues  fait  plaifir,  refpondit-il,
ce  que  vous  aues  fait  ne  tend  qu'a  mon  bien,  ie  l'ay
defja  dit  a  noftre  Capitaine,  ie  feray  plus  retenu  &


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  153

prove  of  what  the  Frenchmen  and  the  Savages  had
done, —  that  in  the  beginning  it  had  greatly  irritated
him,  but,  having  known  that  it  was  for  his  good,  he
was  appeased.  "I  shall  improve,"  said  he;  "the
Captain  has  given  me  good  advice,  and  I  shall  pay
attention  to  it.  He  has  made  me  understand  that
he  has  long  arms,  and  that,  although  I  might  go  to
Tadoussac  or  to  the  Three  Rivers,  he  could  reach  as
far  as  there,  and  still  further;  I  have  promised  him
that  I  would  no  longer  displease  him  and  that  I  would
become  obedient.  That  is  the  word  I  give  you  also,
and  which  I  shall  keep;  but  hasten  to  baptize  me,
so  that  I  may  become  wiser. ' '

Having  returned  to  his  cabin,  the  chief  Savages
went  to  him  toward  night,  and  spoke  to  him  in  this
manner :  ' '  Thou  knowest  well  that  thou  hast  meddled
with  sorcery;  [26]  but  as  we  are  now  Christians,  we
no  longer  fear  thy  invocations  of  the  Demon, —  thy
threats  and  thy  charms  no  longer  give  us  dismay.
Besides,  thou  must  know  that  it  is  we  who  have  had
thee  put  in  prison,  it  is  we  who  have  begged  our
Captain  to  arrest  thee;  be  wiser  now,  abandon  thy
usages.  If  thou  wilt  believe  in  God,  and  accept  his
Law,  we  will  love  thee  and  protect  thee  everywhere ;
if  not,  from  this  time  forth  we  renounce  thy  kinship
and  thy  friendship.  If  thou  wilt  persist  in  thy  wick-
edness, thou  wouldst  do  well  to  go  away ;  for,  if  any
one  put  thee  to  death,  of  which  thou  hast  been  already
in  danger,  we  will  not  avenge  thy  death."  At  these
words,  this  man,  who  was  wont  to  give  terror  to
others  by  his  deceit  and  by  his  impudence,  was  quite
confounded.  "  You  have  done  me  a  kindness,"  he
responded;  "  what  you  have  done  tends  only  to  my
good. I  have  already  said  this  to  our  Captain. I


154  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.20

plus  difcret  d'orefenauant,  la  refolution  en  eft  prife;
pour  mes  fortileges,  c'eft  vne  chofe  que  i'ay  defia
abandonnee,  &  que  ie  ne  reprendray  iamais:  Voila  le
[27]  premier  coup  de  iuftice  que  les  Sauuages  ayent
fait  exercer;  il  les  faut  petit  a  petit,  &  auec  adreffe,
ranger  dans  la  foufmiffion.

Voicy  d'autres  actions  auffi  remarquables  que  les
precedentes,  quelques  Sauuages  de  l'lfle,  &  autres
endroits,  eftans  defcendus  a  faindt  Iofeph,  les  Chre-
ftiens  voyans  que  ces  nouueaux  hoftes  n'auoient  pas
dequoy  difner,  firent  vne  cueillette  par  entr'eux,  &
fournirent  iufques  a  douze  cens  anguilles  boucannees,
diuifees  en  douze  gros  pacquets;  ayans  raffemble
cette  aumofne  ils  nous  enuoyent  querir,  pour  fcauoir
fi  elle  feroit  agreable  a  Dieu;  les  pauures  gens  n'a-
uoient pas  trop  de  viures  pour  eux ;  mais  comme  on
leur  recommande  les  actions  de  charite,  ils  fe  cottife-
rent  ioyeufement  les  vns  les  autres:  Ayans  done
enuoye  querir  quatre  des  principaux  Sauu[a]ges  nou-
uellement  venus,  ils  leur  mirent  cette  aumofne  entre
les  mains,  pour  eflre  diftribuee  a  tous  ceux  qui  en
auoient  befoin ;  nous  approuuafmes  fort  cette  bonte,
elle  ne  fera  pas  fans  recompenfe,  Dieu  la  benira  au
centuple.

[28]  Cette  charite  n'empefcha  pas,  que  ces  nou-
ueaux hoft.es,  naturellement  fuperbes  &  orgueilleux,
n'euffent  diuerfes  prifes  auec  les  Chrefliens  de  faindl
Iofeph,  &  quaG  toufiours  pour  la  Religion;  voicy
trois  ou  quatre  paroles  qui  donnent  a.  connoiflre  la
grande  vanite,  &  l'infuportable  fuperbe  du  Capitaine
de  ces  Infulaires.  Nous  eftant  venu  voir  pendant  le
fejour  qu'il  fit  a.  St.  Iofeph,  il  nous  tint  ce  difcours:
I'auois  quelque  deffein  de  paffer  icy  l'hyuer,  mais  on


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  155

shall  be  more  restrained  and  more  discreet  hereafter ;
my  resolution  is  made.  As  for  my  sorcery,  it  is  a
thing  that  I  have  already  abandoned,  and  which  I
shall  never  take  up  again.  This  is  the  [27]  first  act
of  justice  that  the  Savages  have  administered ;  little
by  little,  and  with  tact,  they  must  be  brought  into
submission.

Here  are  other  deeds  as  remarkable  as  the  preced-
ing ones.  Some  Savages  of  the  Island,  and  of  other
places,  having  come  down  to  saint  Joseph,  the  Chris-
tians, seeing  that  the  new  guests  had  nothing  for
dinner,  made  a  collection  among  themselves,  and
furnished  as  many  as  twelve  hundred  smoked  eels,
divided  into  twelve  large  packages ;  having  gathered
together  this  alms,  they  sent  for  us  to  know  if  it
would  be  acceptable  to  God.  The  poor  people  had
not  too  many  provisions  for  themselves;  but,  as  acts
of  charity  are  recommended  to  them,  every  one  con-
tributed joyfully.  Having  then  sent  for  four  of  the
chief  of  the  recently-arrived  Savages,  they  put  this
gift  into  their  hands,  to  be  distributed  to  all  those
who  were  in  need.  We  greatly  approved  this  kind-
ness; it  will  not  be  without  reward, —  God  will  bless
it  a  hundredfold.

[28]  This  charity  did  not  prevent  these  new  guests,
naturally  haughty  and  proud,  from  having  several
quarrels  with  the  Christians  of  saint  Joseph,  and
almost  always  on  account  of  Religion.  The  few  fol-
lowing words  reveal  the  great  vanity  and  insupport-
able pride  of  the  Captain  of  these  Islanders.  Having
come  to  see  us  during  the  stay  that  he  made  at  St.
Joseph,  he  held  this  discourse  with  us:  "I  had  some
intention  of  spending  the  winter  here,  but  I  am  told
that  neither  your  Captain  loves  me  nor  do  you. Per-


156  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.20

me  dit  que  voftre  Capitaine,  ny  vous  autres  auffi,  ne
m'aim6s  pas;  peut-eftre  ne  f9au6s  vous  pas  que  ie
commande  d£s  ma  ieuneffe,  que  ie  fuis  nay  pour
commander,  fi  toft  que  i'ouure  la  bouche,  tout  le
monde  m'6coute;  auffi  eft-il  vray  que  ie  fouftiens,  &
que  ie  conferue  tout  le  pais  pendant  la  vie  de  mes
petits  enfans,  &  de  mes  neueux,  c'eft  ainfi  qu'il
nomme  fes  gens,  les  Hurons  mefmes  me  preftent
l'oreille,  &  ie  commande  parmy  eux,  ie  les  regie,
comme  eftant  Capitaine,  ie  ne  dy  mot  9a  bas,  les
autres  parlent,  mais  il  ne  fe  fait  rien  que  ce  que  i'ay
dans  la  penf£e ;  ie  fuis  comme  vn  arbre,  les  hommes  en
font  les  branches,  [29]  aufquellesie  donne  la  vigueur:
Voir  vn  homme  tout  nud,  qui  n'a  ny  chauffure  aux
pieds,  ny  autre  habit  qu'vn  m6chant  bout  de  peau,
qui  n'abrie  que  la  moitie"  de  fon  corps,  difgracie"  de
la  nature  n'ayant  que  la  moitie  de  fes  yeux,  car  il  eft
borgne,  fee  come  vn  vieil  arbre  fans  feiiilles;  voir,
dif-je,  vne  fquelette,  ou  plutoft  vn  gueux,  marcher
en  Prefident,  &  parler  en  Roy,  c'eft  voir  l'orgueil  &
la  fuperbe  fous  des  haillons:  Ce  Thrafon,  &  vne  par-
tie  de  fes  gens  eftans  dans  cette  difpofition,  furent
bien-toft  aux  prifes  auec  nos  Chreftiens,  ils  leur
reprochoient  que  la  foy  &  les  prieres  faifoient  mou-
rir  les  hommes;  que  depuis  que  quelques-vns  s'e-
ftoient  fait  baptifer;  que  les  maladies  auoient  regne"
parmy  eux;  &  qu'a  mefme  temps  qu'on  leur  a  enfei-
gn6  vne  autre  croyance  que  celle  de  leurs  peres,  a
mefme  temps  la  mort  les  a  extermines;  qu'vne  partie
de  ceux  qui  fe  font  faits  Chreftiens,  s'entendent  auec
les  Francois  pour  perdre  tout  le  pais  des  Sauuages ;
ils  apportent  des  exemples  qu'ils  croyent  fort  puif-
fans:  Vn  tel,  difoit-il,  ayant  deux  femmes,  &  n'ay-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  157

haps  you  do  not  know  that  I  have  ruled  from  my
youth,  that  I  was  born  to  rule.  As  soon  as  I  open
my  mouth,  every  one  listens  to  me ;  it  is  also  true
that  I  bear  up  and  maintain  the  whole  country  during
the  life  of  my  grandchildren  and  my  nephews," — it
is  thus  he  calls  his  people.  "  Even  the  Hurons  give
ear  to  me,  and  I  command  among  them ;  I  rule  them,  as
if  I  were  Captain.  I  say  not  a  word  over  there, —  the
rest  speak;  but  there  is  nothing  done  except  that
which  I  have  in  my  mind.  I  am  like  a  tree, — men
are  the  branches  thereof,  [29]  to  which  I  give  vigor."
To  see  a  man  wholly  nude,  who  has  neither  covering
for  the  feet,  nor  other  raiment  than  a  wretched  bit
of  pelt,  which  screens  only  the  half  of  his  body ;  ill-
favored  by  nature,  having  only  half  his  eyes,  for  he
is  blind  in  one,  and  dried-up  like  an  old  tree  without
leaves, — to  see,  I  say,  a  skeleton,  or  rather  a  raga-
muffin, bear  himself  like  a  President,  and  speak  like
a  King,  is  to  see  haughtiness  and  pride  under  rags.
This  Thraso  and  part  of  his  people  being  in  this
mood,  very  soon  came  to  disputing  with  our  Chris-
tians. They  taunted  them,  saying  that  faith  and
prayer  made  men  die ;  that  since  some  had  been  bap-
tized, maladies  had  prevailed  among  them,  and  that,
when  they  were  taught  another  belief  than  that  of
their  fathers,  at  that  very  time  death  exterminated
them ;  that  a  part  of  those  who  have  become  Chris-
tians are  concerting  with  the  French  to  ruin  the
whole  country  of  the  Savages.  They  cite  examples
that  they  consider  very  forcible.  "Such  a  one,"
they  said,  "  having  two  wives,  and  not  being  inclined
to  obey  the  Captain  of  the  French,  fell  [30]  sick  im-
mediately ;  others  died  suddenly,  who  had  abandoned
their  ancient  customs." The  Christians  thereupon


158  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.20

ant  pas  voulu  obe'ir  au  Capitaine  des  Francois,  eft
tombe  [30]  malade  tout  fur  l'heure,  d'autres  font
morts  fubitement  ayans  quitte  leurs  anciennes  facons
de  faire ;  Les  Chreftiens  la-deffus  fe  def endent,  quel-
ques-vns  auec  trop  de  zele ;  fi  les  prieres  vous  tuent,
alles  vous-en  ailleurs,  &  ne  demeures  point  auec
nous,  chacun  fe  trouue  bien  icy  de  croire  en  Dieu,  &
d'auoir  quitte  fes  vieilles  malices.  Ce  n'eit  pas  la
foy  qui  nous  extermine,  mais  nos  peches,  &  notam-
ment  voftre  infidelite;  c'eft  vous  qui  vous  faites
mourir,  retenans  les  Demons  au  milieu  de  vous  par
vos  mechantes  actions ;  f  caches  que  nous  ne  vous  crai-
gnons  nullement,  &  que  nous  ne  quitterons  iamais  la
croyance  que  nous  auons  embraffee.  L'affaire  en
vint  a.  tel  point  fans  que  nous  en  euffions  connoiffance,
que  les  Infidelles  parlerent  d'affommer  quelques-vns
des  croyans:  Ce  qu'eftant  venu  aux  oreilles  d'vn  des
principaux  Chreftiens,  il  s'en  alia  fur  la  nuidt  trouuer
les  ieunes  gens  baptifes,  &  leur  dit;  on  parle  de
meurtre,  tenes  ferme  en  la  foy,  fi  on  veut  maffacrer
quelqu'vn  pour  fa  croyance,  il  ne  faut  point  mettre
la  main  aux  armes,  fouffrons  la  mort  pour  Iefus-
Chrift  noftre  Capitaine :  [31]  mais  fi  on  nous  veut  tuer
par  inimitie  particuliere,  ou  par  enuie,  il  fe  faut
def endre  courageuf ement :  Nous  ne  fceumes  point  ce
procede  que  long-temps  apres,  &  encor  par  accident;
ie  vous  laiffe  a  penfer  fi  la  refolution  des  Chreftiens
nous  confola.  Benediclus  Dens  in  ceternum,  les  Sau-
uages  paroiffent  froids  comme  la  glace,  mais  Dieu  ne
laiffe  pas  d'echauffer  &  de  brufler  leur  coeur  quand  il
luy  plaift.

Dans  ces  entrefaites,  vn  Chreftien  ayant  parle  fort
hautement,  les  autres  nous  en  vindrent  donner  aduis,


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  159

defended  themselves,  some  with  too  much  zeal:  "  If
prayers  kill  you,  go  away  elsewhere,  and  do  not
remain  with  us ;  every  one  here  finds  his  advantage
in  believing  in  God,  and  in  having  forsaken  his  old
wickedness.  It  is  not  faith  that  exterminates  us,  but
our  sins,  and  especially  your  unbelief;  it  is  you  who
cause  your  own  death,  retaining  the  Demons  in  your
midst  by  your  wicked  acts ;  know  that  we  do  not  fear
you  at  all,  and  that  we  shall  never  forsake  the  faith
that  we  have  embraced."  The  matter  came  to  such
a  point,  without  our  having  knowledge  of  it,  that
the  Infidels  spoke  of  beating  to  death  some  of  the
believers.  When  this  was  heard  by  one  of  the  lead-
ing Christians,  he  went  towards  night  to  the  baptized
young  men,  and  said  to  them:  "  They  are  talking  of
murder;  keep  firm  in  the  faith.  If  they  wish  to
massacre  any  one  for  his  belief,  he  must  not  touch
his  arms, — let  us  suffer  death  for  Jesus  Christ  our
Captain.  [31]  But  if  they  try  to  kill  us  from  indi-
vidual enmity,  or  from  envy,  we  must  defend  our-
selves courageously."  We  knew  this  proceeding
only  a  long  time  afterwards,  and  even  then  by  acci-
dent ;  I  leave  you  to  imagine  how  much  the  firmness
of  the  Christians  consoled  us.  Bencdictus  Dais  in
ceternam  ;  the  Savages  appear  as  cold  as  ice,  but  God
is  sure  to  warm  and  fire  their  hearts  when  it  pleases
him.

In  the  meantime,  a  Christian  having  spoken  very
boldly,  the  others  came  to  inform  us  of  it,  saying
that  he  provoked  the  Unbelievers  too  much ;  we  sent
for  him  that  we  might  recommend  to  him  mildness
and  discretion.  He  said  these  words  to  us:  "  Are
you  now  teaching  us  another  doctrine  than  that  which
you  taught  us  formerly?' "  No,  indeed,"  said  we


160  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.20

difans  qu'il  prouoquoit  trop  les  Infidelles:  nous  le
nfmes  venir  pour  luy  recommander  la  douceur  &  la
difcretion :  II  nous  dit  ces  paroles ;  Enf  eign6s-vous
maintenant  vne  autre  dodtrine  que  celle  que  vous
nous  au6s  enfeignee  par  cy-deuant?  Non  pas,  luy
difmes-nous ;  Ne  nous  aues-vous  pas  dit,  repliqua-t'il,
que  quand  il  s'agiffoit  de  la  foy,  il  falloit  tenir  bon,
&  parler  hardiment,  &  monftrer  qu'on  ne  craignoit
point  la  mort ;  &  que  fi  on  mourroit  pour  fa  creance,
qu'on  iroit  tout  droit  au  ciel;  C'eft  cela,  adioufta-t'il,
qui  m'a  fait  parler  haut,  ils  nous  reprochent  que  nous
les  faifons  mourir,  [32]  quittans  les  couftumes  de  nos
anceftres,  &  que  nos  prieres  tuent  les  Sauuages,  &
la-deffus  ils  nous  menacent ;  ie  leur  ay  dit  que  ie  ne
les  craignois  pas,  ny  tous  leurs  Demons,  que  ie  les
deffiois  de  me  tuer,  que  ie  croirois  malgre  qu'ils  en
euffent,  &  qu'ils  s'en  allaffent  d'auec  nous,  s'ils  auoient
peur  de  nos  prieres :  Son  zele  nous  pleut ;  mais  nous
luy  recommandafmes  de  l'affaifonner  de  douceur,  &
que  cette  rigueur  n'attiroit  pas  des  efprits  aigris  par
leurs  malheurs.

A  quelques  mois  de  la,  le  mefme  Chreftien  ayant
f feu  que  fa  liberte"  en  auoit  fortement  irrite  quelques-
vns,  &  qu'ils  machinoient  fa  mort,  a  ce  qu'on  luy  rap-
portoit,  il  s'en  alia  trouuer  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur,
pour  luy  demander  vn  cas  de  confcience,  car  comme
il  s'agiffoit  de  mort,  &  qu'il  fcait  bien  que  nous  ne
portons  point  les  armes,  il  s'imagina  que  c'eftoit  a
celuy  qui  commande  aux  foldats,  &  qui  fait  profeffion
des  armes,  de  fatisfaire  a  fa  demande,  vn  de  nos
Peres  de  faindt  Iofeph,  fe  trouua  par  rencontre  ce
iour  la  a  Kebec,  l'ayant  apperceu  il  le  pria  de  l'intro-
duire ch£s Monfieur  le Gouuerneur,  [33] auquel  il


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  161

to  him.  "  Did  you  not  tell  us,"  he  replied,  "  that
when  it  was  a  question  of  faith,  we  must  stand  fast,
and  speak  boldly,  and  show  that  we  did  not  fear
death?  and  that  if  we  died  for  our  belief,  we  should
go  straight  to  heaven  ?  It  is  that, ' '  added  he,  ' '  which
made  me  speak  boldly.  They  reproach  us  with  caus-
ing their  death  [32]  by  forsaking  the  customs  of  our
ancestors,  and  with  killing  the  Savages  by  our  pray-
ers; and  for  that  reason  they  menace  us.  I  told
them  that  I  did  not  fear  them,  nor  all  their  Demons, —
that  I  dared  them  to  kill  me ;  that  I  should  believe,
however  much  they  might  dislike  it ;  and  that  they
should  go  away  from  us,  if  they  feared  our  prayers."
His  zeal  pleased  us,  but  we  exhorted  him  to  temper
it  with  mildness,  and  told  him  that  this  severity
would  not  attract  hearts  embittered  by  their  misfor-
tunes.

Some  months  after,  the  same  Christian  —  having
learned  that  his  freedom  had  greatly  irritated  some
of  them,  and  that  they  were  plotting  his  death,  as  he
had  been  told  —  went  to  Monsieur  the  Governor  to
ask  him  about  a  case  of  conscience ;  for,  as  it  was  a
question  of  death,  and  knowing  well  that  we  do  not
carry  arms,  he  imagined  that  it  belonged  to  him  who
commands  soldiers,  and  has  a  military  profession,  to
answer  his  question  satisfactorily.  One  of  our  Fa-
thers of  saint  Joseph  was  present  by  chance  that  day
in  Kebec,  and  this  man,  seeing  him,  begged  to  be
conducted  to  the  residence  of  Monsieur  the  Governor,
[33]  to  whom  he  had  a  few  words  to  say.  Being  in
his  presence,  he  asked  how  he  ought  to  comport  him-
self in  case  any  one  attacked  him  and  wished  to  put
him  to  death.  "  Since  I  am  a  Christian,"  said  he,
"  I  wish  to  do  all  that  a  good  Christian  should  do;  if


162  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

auoit  vn  petit  mot  a  dire ;  eflant  en  fa  prefence  il  hiy
demanda  comme  il  fe  deuoit  comporter,  en  cas  que
quelqu'vn  l'attaquaft,  &  le  voulufl  mettre  a  mort:
Puis  que  ie  fuis  Chreftien,  difoit-il,  ie  veux  faire  tout
ce  que  doit  faire  vn  bon  Chr[e]ftien;  s'il  fe  faut
defendre,  ie  me  defendray;  s'il  faut  pofer  les  armes,
ie  les  poferay :  Monfieur  le  Cheualier  de  Montmagny
luy  demanda  s'il  auoit  des  ennemis,  &  a  quel  propos
il  faifoit  cette  demande:  ie  fuis  le  premier  de  ma
nation,  refpondit-il,  qui  me  fuis  fait  Chreftien,  ceux
de  mon  pais,  voyant  que  i'ay  quitte  leur  party,  croy-
ent  que  les  prieres  &  la  foy  que  i'ay  embraffee  leur
caufe  les  grandes  maladies  qui  les  ont  quafi  tous
extermines,  voyla  pourquoy  ils  me  haiff ent  a  mort :
Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  luy  ayant  donne"  la  refolution
de  f on  doute,  ce  bon  homme  luy  dit :  tous  les  iours,
fi  toft  que  ie  fuis  leue  ie  dy  a  Dieu,  fi  on  me  tue  pour
ce  que  ie  croy  en  toy,  i'en  feray  bien  aife,  ie  feray
bien  content  de  mourir,  ie  luy  dy  le  mefme  a  la
Meffe  tous  les  iours,  &  ie  fens  dans  mon  cceur  que  ie
ne  les  crains  pas  tous  tant  qu'ils  font ;  car  ils  ne  fcau-
roient  [34]  toucher  a  mon  ame,  leur  rage  ne  peut
tomber  que  fur  mon  corps;  fi  quelqu'vn  m'attaque
pour  quelque  autre  fujet  que  pour  la  foy,  il  ne  fera
pas  le  bien  venu.  II  difoit  cela  d'vne  facon  fi  gaye
&  fi  refolue,  qu'il  recrea  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur,
lequel  admirant  fon  courage  &  fa  bonne  difpofition,
luy  tefmoigna  que  fi  on  l'attaquoit  pour  la  foy,  qu'on
s'attaquoit  a  fa  propre  perfonne,  n'ayant  qu'vne
mefme  creance  &  qu'vn  mefme  Dieu  auec  luy:  cela
refioiiit  merueilleufement  ce  pauure  Neophyte,  qui
s'en  alia  auffi  content  que  s'il  euft  gaigne  vn  grand
Empire. En  voyla  fuffifamment  pour  ce  Chapitre.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  163

he  must  defend  himself,  I  will  defend  myself ;  if  he
must  lay  down  arms,  I  will  lay  them  down."  Mon-
sieur the  Chevalier  de  Montmagny  asked  him  if  he
had  any  enemies,  and  why  he  made  this  inquiry.
"  I  am  the  first  of  my  nation,"  he  answered,  "to
become  a  Christian ;  those  of  my  country,  seeing  that
I  have  left  their  party,  believe  that  the  prayers  and
the  faith  which  I  have  embraced  cause  the  great  dis-
eases that  have  almost  exterminated  them ;  this  is
why  they  hate  me  unto  death."  Monsieur  the  Gov-
ernor having  given  him  the  solution  of  his  doubt,
this  good  man  said  to  him :  ' '  Every  day,  as  soon  as
I  have  risen,  I  say  to  God,  '  If  they  kill  me  because  I
believe  in  thee,  I  shall  be  very  glad, —  I  shall  be  well
pleased  to  die. '  I  tell  him  the  same  every  day  at
Mass ;  and  I  feel  in  my  heart  that  I  do  not  fear  the
whole  of  them  however  many  there  be,  for  they  will
not  be  able  [34]  to  touch  my  soul, —  their  rage  can
fall  only  upon  my  body.  If  any  one  attack  me  for
other  cause  than  for  the  faith,  he  will  not  be  received
with  open  arms."  He  said  this  in  so  cheerful  and
determined  a  manner,  that  he  delighted  Monsieur  the
Governor,  who,  admiring  his  courage  and  his  good
disposition,  let  him  know  that,  if  he  were  attacked
for  the  faith,  he  himself,  in  his  own  person  would  be
attacked, — since  he  had  the  same  faith  and  the  same
God  as  he.  That  wonderfully  cheered  this  good
Neophyte,  who  went  away  as  content  as  if  he  had
gained  a  great  Empire.  Enough  of  that  for  this
Chapter.


164  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.20


CHAPITRE  III.

CONTINUATION DE CE QUI S'EST PASSE ENTRE LES
SAUUAGES  DE  LA  RESIDENCE  DE  SAINCT  IOSEPH.

LE  Diable  qui  voit  bien  que  Tarred  des  Sauuages
errans,  eft  le  plus  court  chemin,  &  le  plus
allure  de  leur  falut,  bande  toutes  fes  forces
pour  detruire  ce  [35]  que  Dieu  a  fi  heureufement
commence.  Les  Sauuages  de  l'lfle  dont  i'ay  parle
cy-deffus,  eftans  fur  le  point  de  fe  retirer  de  Sainct.
Iofeph,  ou  ils  eftoient  venus  pour  vn  peu  de  temps,
ne  vouloiet  pas  fe  feparer  auec  aigreur  de  nos  Chre-
ftiens,  &  de  nos  Catechumenes :  Ils  firent  ioiier  vn
reffort  qui  auroit  bien  fait  du  mal,  fi  Dieu  n'euft  don-
n6  de  la  conftance  a  ces  bons  Neophytes ;  ils  les  inui-
tent  done  a  vn  feftin,  &  leur  difent,  que  la  priere  eft
bonne,  qu'il  eft  vray  que  noftre  doctrine  eft  vn  peu
rude,  notamment  touchant  les  Mariages,  mais  qu'e-
flant  receue  de  quelques  vns,  les  autres  la  pouuoient
auffi  embraffer  auec  le  temps,  &  que  pour  faciliter
l'affaire,  &  pour  vne  plus  grande  vnion  des  vns  auec
les  autres,  il  feroit  a  propos  qu'ils  demeuraffent  tous
enfemble,  qu'il  falloit  choifir  quelque  lieu  plus  61oi-
gne  de  Kebec,  que  n'eftoit  Sainct.  Iofeph  pour  mille
raifons  qu'ils  alleguoient,  que  les  Peres  feroient  auec
eux  pour  les  inftruire,  &  que  petit  a  petit  chacun  fe
rendroit  aux  facons  de  faire  des  Francois:  bref  ils
tefmoignerent  vne  grande  amiti6,  &  vn  grand  defir
que  les  Chreftiens  quittaffent  leur  demeure  [36]  pour


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  165


CHAPTER  III.

CONTINUATION OF WHAT OCCURRED AMONG THE
SAVAGES OF THE RESIDENCE OF SAINT JOSEPH.

THE  Devil,  who  sees  well  that  the  settling  down
of  the  roving  Savages  is  the  shortest  and  sur-
est way  of  their  salvation,  bends  all  his  ener-
gies to  destroy  that  [35]  which  God  has  so  happily
begun.  The  Savages  of  the  Island,  of  whom  I  have
spoken  above,  being  upon  the  point  of  withdrawing
from  Saint  Joseph,  whither  they  had  come  for  a
little  time,  did  not  wish  to  depart  on  bad  terms  with
our  Christians  and  our  Catechumens.  They  put  in
operation  a  scheme  which  would  have  done  much
harm,  if  God  had  not  given  constancy  to  these  good
Neophytes ;  they  invited  them  to  a  feast,  and  said  to
them,  that  prayer  was  good,  that  our  doctrine  was
indeed  rather  harsh,  particularly  touching  Mar-
riages,—  but,  as  it  had  been  received  by  some  of
them,  the  others  might  also  embrace  it  in  time.
They  said  that,  in  order  to  facilitate  the  matter,  and
to  bring  about  a  closer  union  with  each  other,  it
would  be  fitting  that  they  should  all  live  together,
and  that  they  must  choose  some  place  more  distant
from  Kebec  than  Saint  Joseph  was,  for  a  thousand
reasons  which  they  pleaded ;  that  the  Fathers  should
be  with  them,  to  instruct  them ;  and  that,  by  degrees,
each  one  would  yield  himself  to  the  customs  of  the
French.  In  short,  they  expressed  a  great  friendship
and  a  great  desire  that  the  Christians  should  aban-


106  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  20

s'en  aller  loger  auec  eux  en  quelque  autre  endroit;
c'eftoit  vn  coup  fourre  de  l'Ennemy  de  Dieu  &  des
hommes,  qui  fe  feruoit  de  la  bouche  de  l'eloquence
d'vn  miferable  borgne,  qui  ne  voit  que  la  moitie  de  la
terre,  &  rien  du  tout  de  la  beaute"  du  ciel.  Nos  Neo-
phytes ayans  entendu  ce  difcours,  nous  en  vindrent
faire  le  rapport:  II  ne  fut  pas  difficile  de  leur  faire
voir  la  malice  de  Satan,  &  l'inconftance  de  ceux  qui
les  inuitoient;  c'eft  pourquoy  l'vn  d'eux  dans  vne
affemblee  qu'ils  firent  fur  ce  fujet,  leur  dit  ces  pa-
roles: Si  ie  ne  croyois  pas  en  Dieu  ie  vous  pourrois
fuiure,  mais  le  coup  eft  donne ;  i'ay  refpondu  a  Dieu,
&  luy  ay  dit,  que  ie  luy  obei'rois;  &  ainfi  ie  ne  puis
m'eloigner  du  lieu  ou  nous  fommes  inftruits  de  fes
volontes :  Vn  autre  adioufta,  vous  dites  que  vous  tien-
dres  ferme  au  lieu  que  vous  voules  choifir,  &  ie  vous
auife  que  la  foy  feule  vous  donnera  de  la  conftance,
ie  vous  connois  bien,  vos  teftes,  ny  vos  pieds  n'auront
point  d'arrefl  iufques  a  ce  que  vous  croyes  en  Dieu.
Ces  Algonquins  eftans  retournes  aux  trois  Riuieres,
enuoyerent  inuiter  les  Sauuages  [37]  de  Saindt  Iofeph
d' aller  a  la  guerre  auec  eux :  celuy  qui  porta  la  pa-
role, vfa  de  ces  termes:  Voicy  vn  coup  d'Eftat  pour
les  prieres  &  pour  la  foy  que  vous  aues  embraffee,  les
Algonquins  de  rifle,  &  de  la  petite  Nation,  difent
que  fi  vous  les  voules  accompagner  a  la  guerre,  qu'ils
fe  feront  tous  baptifer  au  retour,  &  qu'ils  embraffe-
ront  les  prieres.  lean  Baptifte  Etinechkab'at  refpon-
dit  au  nom  de  tous ;  voitre  harangue  n'eft  pas  dans
fon  luftre,  vous  l'aues  mife  a  l'enuers:  vous  dites,
allons  a  la  guerre,  &  puis  nous  nous  ferons  baptifer;
renuerfes  voftre  parole,  &  dites;  Faifons  nous  bapti-
fer, &  puis  allons  tous  de  compagnie  a  la  guerre ;  fi


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  167

don  their  abode  [36]  and  go  to  dwell  with  them  in
some  other  place.  It  was  an  underhand  thrust  of
the  Enemy  of  God  and  man,  who  used  the  eloquent
speech  of  a  wretched  one-eyed  man,  who  sees  only
half  of  the  earth,  and  nothing  at  all  of  the  beauty  of
heaven.  Our  Neophytes,  having  heard  this  dis-
course, came  to  give  us  an  account  of  it.  It  was  not
difficult  to  make  them  see  the  malice  of  Satan,  and
the  instability  of  those  who  invited  them;  that  is
why  one  of  them,  in  a  council  they  held  concerning
this  matter,  said  these  words  to  them :  "  If  I  did  not
believe  in  God,  I  might  follow  you,  but  the  step  is
taken,  —  I  have  responded  to  God,  and  told  him  that
I  would  obey  him ;  and  thus  I  cannot  leave  the  place
where  we  are  taught  his  will."  Another  added:
' '  You  say  that  you  will  remain  firm  in  the  place  that
you  shall  choose;  but  I  warn  you  that  faith  alone
will  give  you  steadfastness.  I  know  you  well ;  nei-
ther your  head  nor  your  feet  will  have  any  check
until  you  believe  in  God."

These  Algonquins  having  returned  to  the  three
Rivers,  sent  to  invite  the  Savages  [37]  of  Saint
Joseph  to  go  with  them  to  war:  he  who  brought  the
word,  used  these  terms:  "  Here  is  a  Masterly  stroke
for  the  prayers  and  the  faith  that  you  have  chosen ;
the  Algonquins  of  the  Island  and  of  the  petite  Nation
say  that,  if  you  will  accompany  them  to  the  war,
they  will  all  be  baptized  on  their  return,  and  they
will  adopt  the  prayers."  Jean  Baptiste  Etinechka-
wat  responded  in  the  name  of  all :  "  Your  argument
is  not  properly  stated, — you  have  inverted  your
words :  you  say,  '  Let  us  go  to  the  war,  and  then  we
will  be  baptized ;  '  reverse  your  language,  and  say :
'  Let  us  be  baptized,  and  then  let  us  all  go  together


168  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

vous  paries  ainfj,  voftre  difcours  ira  droit,  vous  ne
vous  mettr6s  pas  en  danger  de  vous  perdre ;  &  Dieu
noftre  pere  voyant  fes  enfans  enfemble,  aura  de
bonnes  penf ees  pour  nous :  Ce  difcours  en  fon  lan-
gage  n'a  rien  de  barbare,  &  ces  fentimens  ne  fe
trouuent  que  dans  vn  cceur  vrayement  Chreftien.

Quelques  vns  de  nos  Neophytes  ne  laifferent  pas
de  les  accompagner,  quoy  qu'auec  peine,  a  caufe  de
leurs  fuperftitions :  Voicy  ce  que  l'vn  d'eux  nous  en
racontoit  [38]  a  fon  retour.  Partant  de  Saindt  Iofeph :
nous  allafmes  prier  Dieu  a  la  Chapelle :  paffant  par
les  trois  Riuieres  nous  confeffafmes  nous  autres  qui
eftions  baptifes,  &  vn  peu  au  dela  les  mefcroyans
firent  vn  feftin  de  deux  chiens,  ils  chanterent  &
hurlerent  felon  nos  anciennes  couftumes,  &  tout  cela
pour  tuer  des  ennemis.  Ie  leur  difois  prou  que  cela
ne  feruoit  de  rien,  mais  ils  s'en  mocquoient;  ils  con-
fulterent  cinq  fois  les  Diables  dans  leur  tabernacles,
pendant  tout  ce  temps  la  nous  nous  retirafmes  a  part
faifant  nos  prieres  a  genoux,  vn  Sauuage  non  encor
baptife  fe  mit  de  noftre  cofte,  renoncant  au  Sabbat
des  infideles.  A  la  derniere  confulte  les  ennemis
nous  enuironnerent,  fi  toft  que  nous  en  eufmes  le
vent  mes  Iongleurs  quittent  leurs  tabernacles,  &
gaignent  au  pied ;  Ie  leur  criay  tout  haut,  &  leur  de-
manday  ce  que  leur  auoient  feruy  leurs  demons;  mon
difcours  ne  fut  pas  long,  car  il  fe  fallut  fauuer  auffi
bien  que  les  autres,  les  vns  gaignent  les  bois,  les
autres  les  eaux,  nous  nous  embarquafmes  fur  le  grand
lac,  fur  lequel  voguoit  l'Ennemy,  nous  paffafmes  &
repaffafmes  [39]  dans  les  dangers  fans  eftre  defcou-
uerts;  Ie  priois  Dieu  dans  mon  ame  de  tout  mon
coeur,  il  me  fembloit  que  ie  fentois  dans  moy  ie  ne


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  169

to  the  war.'  If  you  speak  thus,  your  speech  will  be
straightforward ;  you  will  not  put  yourselves  in  dan-
ger of  being  lost,  and  God  our  father,  seeing  his
children  together,  will  have  favorable  opinions  of
us."  This  speech,  in  his  own  language,  was  not  at
all  barbarous;  and  these  sentiments  are  found  only
in  a  truly  Christian  heart.

Some  of  our  Neophytes,  however,  accompanied
them, —  although  with  sorrow,  on  account  of  their
superstitions.  This  is  what  one  of  them  related  to
us  [38]  on  his  return :  ' '  Setting  out  from  Saint  Joseph,
we  went  to  the  Chapel  to  pray  to  God;  passing
through  the  three  Rivers,  we  who  were  baptized  con-
fessed; and  a  little  further  on  the  unbelievers  made
a  feast  of  two  dogs ;  they  chanted  and  howled  accord-
ing to  our  old  customs,  and  all  that  for  the  sake  of
killing  the  enemy.  I  said  plainly  to  them  that  that
would  avail  nothing,  but  they  mocked  at  it;  five
times  they  consulted  the  Devils  in  their  tabernacles.
During  all  that  time  we  withdrew  apart,  kneeling  in
prayer;  a  Savage  not  yet  baptized  sided  with  us,
renouncing  the  Sabbat  of  the  infidels.  At  the  last
consultation,  the  enemies  surrounded  us;  as  soon  as
we  had  wind  of  it,  my  Jugglers  quitted  their  tents,
and  took  to  their  heels.  I  cried  aloud  to  them  and
asked  them  of  what  use  their  demons  had  been  to
them ;  my  speech  was  not  long,  for  I  had  to  escape,
as  well  as  the  others.  Some  made  for  the  woods,
others  for  the  water;  we  embarked  upon  the  great
lake,  on  which  the  Enemy  was  paddling;  we  passed
and  repassed  each  other  [39]  in  these  dangers,  with-
out being  discovered.  I  prayed  to  God  in  silence
with  all  my  heart ;  it  seemed  to  me  that  I  felt  within
me an unknown power  which sustained me, and


170  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

fcay  quelle  force  qui  me  fouftenoit,  &  qui  me
donnoit  l'efperance  de  mon  falut.  Voila  comme  fe
termina  noftre  guerre  difoit  ce  bon  Neophyte.  Mais
touchons  quelques  adtions  particulieres  des  plus
fermes  Chreftiens.

Vn  ieune  homme  nous  parlant  d'[e]fpoufer  vne  fille
Chreitienne,  nous  luy  confeillafmes  de  prendre  aduis
de  fon  frere  aifne,  homme  de  confideration  parmy  les
Algonquins:  II  n'eft  pas  Chreftien,  refpondit  il,  il  eft
ennemy  des  prieres,  ie  ne  le  reconnois  point  pour
mon  frere,  s'il  croyoit  en  Dieu  ie  luy  obei'rois  de  tout
mon  cceur;  quel  bon  aduis  me  pourroit  donner  vn
homme,  qui  ne  prend  pas  pour  foy  les  bons  aduis
qu'on  luy  donne  de  fon  falut?  c'eft  a  vous  de  me  con-
feiller,  vous  m'aues  donne  la  vie  de  l'ame,  ie  fuiuray
auffi  voftre  direction  pour  le  bien  de  mon  corps.  Sa
mere  s'eftant  mife  vn  iour  en  cholere,  luy  dit,  qu'elle
vouloit  fe  retirer  de  Saindt  Iofeph  pour  demeurer
ailleurs  oil  elle  efperoit  plus  grand  fecours :  Son  his
[40]  luy  repliqua;  Ma  mere,  nous  n'auons  pas  receu
la  foy  pour  les  biens  de  la  terre,  quand  tout  le  monde
s'en  iroit  ie  demeurerois  toufiours  aupres  de  ceux  qui
nous  enfeignent  le  chemin  du  ciel;  c'eft  tout  de  bon
que  ie  croy  en  Dieu,  ie  tiendray  ferme  iufques  a  la
mort.  Vn  fien  parent  le  voulant  enleuer  apres  fon  ma-
nage, luy  dit,  qu'il  s'embarquaft  au  plutoft  pour  em-
pefcher  le  defordre  de  fa  femme,  laquelle  eftant  all6e
voir  fes  parens  aux  trois  Riuieres,  s'y  gouuernoit  mal,
au  dire  de  c6t  impofteur:  Ce  bon  ieune  homme  nous
vint  trouuer  la-deffus,  &  nous  dit;  Ie  viens  d'ap-
prendre  des  nouuelles  qui  affligent  mon  cceur,  on  m'a
rapporte  que  ma  femme  n'obeiffoit  pas  a  Dieu ;  mais
il  n'importe,  qu'elle  quitte  Dieu  fi  elle  veut,  que  tous


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  171

which  gave  me  hope  for  my  safety.  So  this  is  the
way  our  war  ended, ' '  said  this  good  Neophyte.  But
let  us  touch  upon  some  special  actions  of  the  most
steadfast  Christians.

A  young  man  spoke  to  us  of  marrying  a  Christian
girl  and  we  counseled  him  to  take  advice  of  his  elder
brother,  a  man  of  consideration  among  the  Algon-
quins:  "  He  is  not  a  Christian,"  he  responded,  "  he
is  an  enemy  of  prayer ;  I  do  not  acknowledge  him
for  my  brother.  If  he  believed  in  God,  I  would  obey
him  with  all  my  heart:  what  good  advice  could  a
man  give  me  who  does  not  accept  for  himself  the
good  counsels  that  are  given  him  for  his  salvation?
It  belongs  to  you  to  counsel  me ;  you  have  given  me
the  life  of  my  soul, —  I  will  also  follow  your  direc-
tion for  the  good  of  my  body."  His  mother,  losing
her  temper  one  day,  said  to  him  that  she  wished  to
leave  Saint  Joseph,  and  dwell  in  some  other  place
where  she  hoped  for  more  assistance.  Her  son  [40]
replied  to  her :  ' '  My  mother,  we  have  not  received  the
faith  for  the  sake  of  earthly  riches;  though  every
one  should  go  away,  I  shall  always  remain  with  those
who  have  taught  us  the  way  to  heaven;  I  believe
earnestly  in  God, —  I  shall  hold  fast  even  to  death."
One  of  his  relatives,  wishing  to  take  him  away  after
his  marriage,  told  him  that  he  should  set  out  as  soon
as  possible  in  order  to  prevent  the  ill  conduct  of  his
wife, — who,  having  gone  to  visit  her  parents  at  the
three  Rivers,  was  behaving  badly,  according  to  the
report  of  this  impostor.  Thereupon  this  good  young
man  came  to  us,  and  said:  "  I  have  just  heard  news
that  afflicts  my  heart, —  I  have  been  told  that  my  wife
has  disobeyed  God.  But  no  matter, — let  her  forsake
God  if  she  will,  let  all  my  relatives  leave  and  abandon


172  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jtSUITES [Vol.20

mes  parens  me  quittent  &  m'abandonnent,  ie  ne  quit-
teray  iamais  la  foy;  ce  qui  m'attrifte  dauantage,
c'eft  l'offenfe  qu'elle  commet,  &  le  peu  d'eftat  qu'elle
fait  de  fon  ame.  De  bonne  fortune  nous  venions  de
receuoir  des  lettres  des  Peres  qui  font  aux  trois  Ri-
uieres,  qui  rendoient  vn  grand  temoignage  de  l'hon-
neftete,  &  de  la  conftance  en  la  foy,  de  cette  ieune
f emme ;  [41]  fon  mary  entendant  la  ledture  de  ces
lettres  s'6cria:  Ah !  ie  voy  bien  maintenant  le  defTein
de  mes  parens,  ils  ont  forge"  cette  calomnie  pour  me
perdre;  ils  s'imaginent  que  s'ils  me  tenoient  parmy
eux  qu'ils  me  feroient  quitter  la  foy,  ils  font  bien
loin  de  leur  conte,  ie  ne  la  quitteray  qu'auec  la  vie;
La  refolution  de  ce  ieune  homme  me  toucha  le  cceur.
I'entendois  certain  iour  vn  Sauuage  Chreftien  pref-
cher  dans  vne  cabane,  ou  vn  ieune  homme  baptife
mouroit,  les  raifons  que  l'Efprit  de  Dieu  luy  fugge-
roit,  m'eftonnoient,  il  ne  me  voyoit  pas,  car  i'eftois
derriere  la  cabane  ou  ie  m'arreftay  pour  l'efcouter:  II
parloit  du  mefpris  de  la  terre,  &  du  bon-heur  du  Ciel,
auec  des  paroles  de  feu;  ce  que  nous  croyons  eft
vray,  difoit-il,  c'eft  porter  enuie  a  ceux  qui  vont  en
Paradis,  de  s'attrifter  de  leur  mort:  Vne  autre  fois
preffant  vn  infidele  de  fe  rendre  a  Dieu;  Ie  n'ay  pas
aff6s  d'efprit,  luy  dit  cet  homme,  pour  eftre  baptife,
ie  ne  fcaurois  retenir  tout  ce  qu'on  m'enf eigne,  ie
fuis  muet  deuant  Dieu,  ie  ne  fcay  que  luy  dire.  II
n'eft  pas  befoin,  luy  fit  ce  Neophyte,  de  beaucoup
parler  [42]  des  levres,  fuffit  que  ton  cceur  foit  a  Dieu ;
quand  i'eftois  encor  petit  garcon,  &  que  mon  pere
s'en  allant  a  la  chaff e  ou  en  quelque  autre  endroit,  me
laiffoit  en  la  cabane,  ie  ne  faifois  que  penfer  a  luy,
i'y  penfois  le  foir  en  me  couchant,  &  le  matin  en  me


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  173

me,  I  will  never  renounce  the  faith.  What  saddens
me  more,  is  the  fault  she  commits,  and  the  little
regard  that  she  has  for  her  soul."  Fortunately,  we
had  just  received  letters  from  the  Fathers  who  are
at  the  three  Rivers,  which  bore  full  proof  of  the
modesty,  and  the  constancy  in  the  faith,  of  this  young
woman ;  [41]  her  husband,  hearing  these  letters  read,
exclaimed:  "  Ah!  now  I  see  well  the  design  of  my
relatives;  they  have  forged  this  calumny  to  ruin
me, — they  imagine  that,  if  they  keep  me  among
them,  they  will  make  me  forsake  the  faith.  They
are  far  from  their  reckoning,  I  will  give  it  up  only
with  my  life."  The  firmness  of  this  young  man
touched  me  to  the  heart.

One  day  I  heard  a  Christian  Savage  preach  in  a
cabin  where  a  baptized  young  man  was  dying;  the
arguments  that  the  Spirit  of  God  suggested  to  him
astonished  me.  He  did  not  see  me,  for  I  was  behind
the  cabin,  where  I  had  stopped  to  listen.  He  spoke
of  contempt  for  earth,  and  of  the  happiness  of  Heav-
en, with  words  of  fire:  "  That  which  we  believe  is
true,"  said  he;  "  it  is  envying  those  who  go  to  Para-
dise, to  be  saddened  by  their  death."  Another  time
he  urged  an  unbeliever  to  give  himself  up  to  God,
and  the  man  said  to  him:  "  I  have  not  mind  enough
to  be  baptized.  I  cannot  retain  all  that  they  teach
me,  I  am  dumb  before  God,  I  do  not  know  what  to
say  to  him."  "  There  is  no  need,"  said  the  Neo-
phyte to  him,  "  of  much  speaking  [42]  with  the  lips,
it  is  enough  that  your  heart  belongs  to  God.  When
I  was  still  a  little  boy,  and  my  father,  going  to  the
chase  or  somewhere  else,  left  me  in  the  cabin,  I  did
nothing  but  think  of  him ;  I  thought  of  him  at  night
on  lying  down,  and  in  the  morning  on  rising  up;


174  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES [Vol.20

leuant,  &  ie  difois  en  mon  cceur,  quand  le  verray-ie ;
ma  bouche  ne  parloit  point,  tout  ce  paffoit  dans  ma
penfee ;  voila  comme  il  te  faut  comporter,  difoit-il,
enuers  Dieu ;  il  importe  peu  que  tu  paries,  fuffit  que
ton  coeur  penfe  a  luy,  le  foir  deuant  que  prendre  ton
repos,  le  matin  a  ton  reueil,  penfe  a  luy,  &  luy  dy
feulement  ces  quatre  paroles;  fi  ie  fcauois  ce  qu'il  te
faut  dire,  ie  te  le  dirois,  cela  fuffit,  il  n'en  demande
pas  dauantage.  La  langue  du  coeur  eft  la  plus  intel-
ligible en  Paradis.  Noel  Negabamat  voguant  ce
printemps  dans  vn  canot  auec  vn  de  nos  Peres,  luy
raconta  ce  que  ie  vay  dire :  II  y  a  deux  hyuers  que  ie
penfay  perdre  la  vie  en  ce  lieu  cy,  le  Pere  demandant
la  raifon,  il  pourfuit,  comme  ie  trauerfois  le  grand
fleuue  auec  mes  gens  pour  aller  a  la  chaff e  de  1' autre
bord,  nous  fufmes  enuironnes  d'vn  grand  banc  de
glaces,  qui  fe  fracaffoient  [43]  d'vne  telle  impetuofite
dans  la  rencontre  de  deux  courans  d'eaux,  que  nous
penfions  tous  efhre  perdus:  Voyant  le  danger  eui-
dent,  nous  montafmes  fur  vne  glace,  fur  laquelle
nous  tirafmes  auffi  nos  canots,  le  malheur  eft  qu'elle
eftoit  fi  petite,  qu'a  peine  y  pouuions  nous  eftre
debout :  Nous  voila  tous  fur  vn  pont  flottant,  mais  fi
eftroit,  &  fi  volage,  qu'au  moindre  heurt  nous  atten-
dions  vne  mort  fans  reffource;  ie  m'6criay,  c'eft  fait
de  nous,  prions  Dieu  pour  la  derniere  fois :  Toy  qui
as  tout  fait,  tu  es  tout-puiffant,  fauue  nous  fi  tu  nous
veux  fauuer;  fi  tu  veux  que  nous  mourions,  nous  le
voulons  bien ;  puis  que  nous  croyons  en  toy,  nous
irons  au  ciel,  &  nous  te  verrons,  nous  ne  croyons  pas
en  toy  pour  viure  long-temps  fur  la  terre :  ayant  fait
ma  priere  tout  haut,  ie  dis  a  mes  gens ;  Ne  craignons
point,  mourons  courageufement,  nous  fommes  bapti-


1640  -  41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  175

and  I  said  in  my  heart,  'When  shall  I  see  him?'
My  mouth  did  not  speak,  all  this  went  on  in  my
mind.  It  is  thus,"  said  he,  "  that  you  must  conduct
yourself  towards  God.  It  matters  little  what  you
say, —  it  is  sufficient  that  your  heart  should  speak  to
him :  at  night  before  taking  rest,  in  the  morning  on
awaking,  think  of  him,  and  say  to  him  only  these  few
words:  '  If  I  knew  what  I  ought  to  say  to  thee,  I
would  say  it ; '  that  is  enough,  he  asks  no  more. ' '  The
language  of  the  heart  is  the  most  audible  in  Para-
dise. Noel  Negabamat,  while  sailing  in  a  canoe  this
spring  with  one  of  our  Fathers,  related  to  him  what
I  am  going  to  mention :  ' '  Two  winters  ago  I  thought
I  should  lose  my  life  in  this  place."  The  Father
asking  the  reason,  he  continued:  "  While  I  was
crossing  the  great  river  with  my  people,  going  to
hunt  on  the  other  shore,  we  were  surrounded  by  a
great  bank  of  ice,  which  broke  to  pieces  [43]  with
such  impetuosity,  from  the  meeting  of  two  currents
of  water,  that  we  thought  we  were  all  lost.  Seeing
danger  imminent,  we  climbed  upon  a  cake  of  ice,  upon
which  we  also  drew  our  canoes;  unfortunately,  it
was  so  small  that  we  could  scarcely  stand  thereon.
There  we  all  were  on  a  floating  bridge,  but  so  narrow
and  wavering,  that  at  the  least  shock,  we  expected
death  without  resource.  I  exclaimed:  '  It  is  all  over
with  us,  let  us  pray  to  God  for  the  last  time. '  '  Thou
who  hast  made  all  things,  thou  art  all-powerful,  save
us  if  thou  will  to  save  us;  if  thou  will  that  we
should  die,  we  are  indeed  willing;  since  we  believe
in  thee,  we  shall  go  to  heaven,  and  we  shall  see  thee;
we  do  not  believe  in  thee  in  order  to  live  a  long  time
on  earth.'  Having  offered  my  prayer  aloud,  I  said  to
my  people :  '  Let  us  not  fear,  let  us  die  courageous-


176  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

f6s:  Courage,  nous  irons  au  ciel:  Au  commencement
du  peril,  i'eus  grand  peur,  mais  ayant  fait  ma  priere
ie  ne  craignois  plus  la  mort :  Ie  n'auois  pas  acheu6  la
parole  qu'il  fe  fit  vne  grande  6claircie  deuant  nos
yeux,  les  glaces  s'ecartans  pour  [44]  nous  faire  paf-
fage;  auffi-toft  nous  mettons  noftre  canot  a  l'eau,
nous  fautons  dedans  plus  vifte  que  le  vent,  nous
voguons  fans  fcauoir  ou  nous  allions,  car  les  glaces
nous  d£roboient  la  veue  des  bords  de  la  riuieres,  en
fin  cette  eclaircie  nous  conduifit  iufques  aux  riues  ou
nous  defirions  aller,  nous  fufmes  fi  6pouuant6s  de
cette  merueille,  que  fans  nous  dire  mot  les  vns  aux
autres,  chacun  fe  mit  a  genoux  fur  le  bord  du  fleuue,
pour  remercier  Dieu  du  peril  que  nous  venions  d'eui-
ter  par  fa  faueur.  Ce  bon  homme  ne  nous  auoit
point  encor  raconte"  ce  grand  benefice  de  noftre  Sei-
gneur, les  Sauuages  parlent  peu  de  ce  qui  fe  paffe
ch£s  eux,  fi  les  occafions  ne  s'en  prefentent.

Vne  pauure  femme  eftant  venue  deux  ou  trois  fois
pour  fe  confeffer,  &  n'ayant  peu  le  faire  pour  l'ab-
fence  du  Pere  qui  la  put  entendre,  elle  s'en  retourna
fi  trifle  qu'elle  paffa  vne  grande  partie  de  la  nuict,
en  larmes;  le  matin  eftant  retourn£e,  elle  dit  au
Pere,  ie  n'ay  point  eu  de  repos  depuis  mon  offence,
ie  ne  m'en  retourneray  plus  que  ie  ne  fois  confeflee,
i'ay  defia  remarque  que  quelques  vns  ne  fcauroient
[45]  fouffrir  fur  leur  cceur  aucune  offenfe  qu'ils
ayent  commife  volontairement,  quoy  que  fort  legere.
Vn  ieune  Sauuage  Chreftien  s' eftant  eueille  la  nuict,
&  voyant  vne  femme  indecemment  couuerte  dans  fon
fommeil,  fut  faifi  de  frayeur,  tant  roccafion  de  pecher
touche  ces  bonnes  gens,  ne  fcachant  comme  aduertir
cette  femme,  de  peur  de  luy  donner  de  la  confufion,


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  177

ly.  We  are  baptized ;  be  of  good  cheer,  we  shall  go
to  heaven.'  In  the  beginning  of  the  danger,  I  was
much  afraid;  but,  having  said  my  prayer,  I  no
longer  feared  death.  I  had  not  finished  the  sentence,
when  a  great  opening  was  made  before  our  eyes, —
the  ice  scattering  to  [44]  open  a  way  for  us ;  imme-
diately we  put  our  canoe  in  the  water,  and  leaped
into  it  more  swiftly  than  the  wind.  We  paddled
without  knowing  whither  we  went,  for  the  ice  pre-
vented our  seeing  the  banks  of  the  river ;  in  short,
this  opening  led  us  up  to  the  shores  which  we  desired
to  reach.  We  were  so  appalled  by  this  wonder  that,
without  speaking  to  one  another,  each  one  knelt
on  the  bank  of  the  stream  to  thank  God  that  we  had
escaped  from  this  peril  by  his  favor."  This  good
man  had  not  before  related  to  us  this  great  mercy  of
our  Lord;  the  Savages  speak  little  of  what  happens
among  them,  if  opportunities  are  not  offered  for  it.
A  poor  woman,  having  come  two  or  three  times  to
confess,  and  not  having  been  able  to  do  so,  on  account
of  the  absence  of  the  Father  who  could  hear  her,
went  away  so  sad,  that  she  passed  a  great  part  of  the
night  in  tears.  Having  returned  in  the  morning,
she  said  to  the  Father :  ' '  I  have  had  no  rest  since
my  transgression;  I  will  not  go  back  until  I  have
confessed."  I  have  already  observed  that  some  of
them  cannot  [45]  bear  upon  their  hearts  any  offense,
however  trifling,  which  they  have  voluntarily  com-
mitted. A  young  Christian  Savage  having  awaked
in  the  night,  and  seeing  a  woman  immodestly  cov-
ered in  her  sleep,  was  seized  with  fright, —  so  much
does  the  opportunity  for  sinning  affect  these  good
people.  Not  knowing  how  to  warn  this  woman,  for
fear  of  putting  her  to  confusion,  he  bethought  him-


178  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

il  s'aduifa  de  battre  rudement  vn  chien,  &  de  le  faire
crier  bien  haut,  afin  que  cette  femme  s'6ueillant  fe
remit  dans  la  bienfeance.  Si  ie  dy  que  des  filles  &
des  femmes  &  des  ieunes  hommes  folicit£s  au  mal
iufques  aux  menaces,  ont  unite"  le  Saindl  Iofeph  &  la
chafte  Sufanne,  i'vferay  de  redites,  ces  adtions  eftant
reiterees  meritent  d'eftre  publiees,  car  en  verite  elles
font  heroiques.

Vn  ieune  pay  en  s'eftant  gliffe  la  nuidt  dans  vne
cabane,  s'adreffa  a  vne  ieune  fille  Chreftienne,  &  luy
dit  ces  quatre  paroles:  Crois-tu  en  Dieu;  Ouy,  dit-
elle,  i'y  croy:  y  crois-tu  tout  de  bon?  c'eft  tout  de
bon,  refpond  la  fille:  adieu  done,  dit  ce  frippon,  ie
n'ay  rien  a  te  dire.

Vn  bon  Neophyte  nous  difoit  vn  iour,  [46]  qu'il
s'ennuyoit  de  cette  vie,  qu'il  fentoitbien  maintenant
qu'il  eftoit  prifonnier,  &  qu'il  penfoit  inceflamment
a  la  vie  qui  ne  meurt  iamais;  que  fon  cceur  eftoit
toufiours  en  Dieu.

Vn  de  nos  Peres  ayant  parle  de  noftre  Seigneur
dans  vne  maifon  de  Sauuages,  &  recommande  l'hon-
neftete\  vne  ieune  femme  mariee  depuis  peu,  le  fui-
uit,  &  luy  demanda  en  fecret,  fi  elle  ne  pouuoit  pas
bien  fe  feparer  de  fon  mary,  &  coucher  auec  vne
fienne  parente :  Le  Pere  luy  demanda  fi  elle  haiffoit
fon  mary,  &  s'il  la  traitoit  mal :  Non  pas,  fit-elle,
mais  ie  voudrois  bien  me  fauuer.

La  mefme  eftant  allee  communier  aux  Vrfulines
auec  fes  compagnes,  les  Meres  leur  firent  vn  petit
feftin :  celle-cy  ne  fit  que  pleurer  pendant  que  les
autres  mangeoient:  On  la  preffe  d'en  donner  la  rai-
fon,  mais  iamais  elle  n'en  voulut  parler;  Cela  eftant
venu  a  nos  oreilles,  nous  luy  demandafmes  le  fujet


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  179

self  of  roughly  beating  a  dog,  and  making  it  yelp
aloud,  so  that  the  woman  on  awaking  should  again
cover  herself  properly.  If  I  told  you  how  many
girls  and  women  and  young  men,  entreated  to  evil
even  by  menaces,  have  imitated  Saint  Joseph  and
the  chaste  Susanna,  I  should  use  repetitions ;  these
acts,  being  reiterated,  deserve  to  be  published,  for,
in  truth,  they  are  heroic.

A  young  pagan,  having  stolen  by  night  into  a  cab-
in, addressed  a  young  Christian  girl,  and  said  these
four  words  to  her :  "  Believest  thou  in  God?"  "Yes,"
said  she,  "  I  do  believe  in  him."  "  Dost  thou  believe
in  him  in  earnest?"  "In  earnest,"  answered  the
girl.  "  Good-bye,  then,"  said  the  rogue,  "  I  have
nothing  to  say  to  thee."

A  good  Neophyte  said  to  us  one  day,  [46]  that  he
was  weary  of  this  life,  and  felt  that  now  indeed  he
was  a  prisoner, —  that  he  thought  incessantly  of  the
life  that  never  ends ;  that  his  heart  was  always  with
God.

One  of  our  Fathers  having  spoken  of  our  Lord  in
a  household  of  Savages,  and  recommended  modesty,
a  young  woman,  recently  married,  followed  him  and
asked  him  in  private,  if  she  could  rightly  be  sepa-
rated from  her  husband  and  lodge  with  a  female
relative.  The  Father  asked  her  if  she  hated  her
husband,  and  if  he  treated  her  ill:  "  By  no  means,"
said  she,  "  but  I  would  gladly  be  saved."

The  same  person,  having  gone  with  her  compan-
ions to  receive  communion  at  the  house  of  the  Ursu-
lines,  the  Mothers  made  them  a  little  feast ;  this  one
only  wept  while  the  others  ate.  They  urged  her  to
give  the  reason  for  doing  so,  but  she  would  in  no
wise  speak  of  it. This  having  come  to  our  ears,  we


180  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.20

de  fes  larmes;  enfin  apres  vn  long  filence:  I'eftois
trifle,  refpondit-elle,  de  ce  que  vous  m'auies  marine,
ie  voyois  ces  bonnes  Religieufes  auec  lefquelles  i'ay
demeure\  &  i'euffe  bien  voulu  [47]  viure  comme  elles,
&  ie  ne  fcaurois  plus  maintenant:  Mais  ne  vous  ay-je
pas  demande,  luy  dit  vn  de  nous,  fi  vous  defiries  eftre
Religieufe?  ne  m'aues  vous  pas  refpondu  que  vous
voulies  eftre  mariee?  Vous  m'aues  bien  demande,
fit-elle,  fi  ie  voulois  eftre  Religieufe:  Ie  ne  vous  ay
pas  refpondu  que  ie  voulois  eftre  mariee ;  mais  bien
que  ie  ne  penfois  pas  pouuoir  faire  comme  ces  bonnes
Filles,  &  voila  le  fujet  de  ma  douleur,  de  ce  que  ie
n'ay  pas  affes  d'efprit  pour  viure  comme  elles.

Vne  ieune  femme  Chreftienne  penfant  mourir  en
fes  couches,  &  fa  petite  fille  nouuellement  nee,  eftat
fi  malade  que  les  femmes  Sauuages  difoiet  qu'elle
s'en  alloit  expirer;  le  pere  &  la  mere  de  l'enfant
promirent  a  Dieu  qu'elle  feroit  toufiours  vierge,  c'eft
a  dire,  qu'ils  la  feroiet  Religieufe  quad  elle  feroit
grande,  fi  elle  le  vouloit  eftre:  Dieu  fauua  la  mere
&  la  fille :  Maintenant  ces  bonnes  gens  offrent  fou-
uent  leur  fruit  a  noftre  Seigneur,  &  le  fupplient  de
l'aggreer  pour  fa  Maifon.  Le  fieur  Giffard  fauua  la
vie  a  la  mere ;  &  noftre  Seigneur  refuf cita,  pour  ainfi
dire,  le  petit  enfant.

Vne  bonne  Chreftienne  eftant  accouchee  [48]  dans
les  bois,  voyant  fon  enfant  nouuellement  ne  bien  ma-
lade, &  ne  fcachant  que  luy  faire,  confulta  quelques
autres  Chreftiennes ;  mais  comme  ces  bonnes  gens
ne  fcauoient  pas  la  formule  du  Baptefme,  ils  s'aduife-
rent  de  pendre  leurs  chappelets  au  col  du  petit  en-
fant; &  peut-eftre  que  noftre  Seigneur  aggreant  leur
foy  &  leur  fimplicite  a  conferue  cette  petite  creature,


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640 -41  181

asked  her  the  cause  of  her  tears;  at  length,  after  a
long  silence,  "  I  was  sad,"  answered  she,  "  because
you  had  married  me;  I  saw  those  good  Nuns,  with
whom  I  had  lived,  and  I  would  indeed  have  wished
[47]  to  live  as  they  do,  and  now  I  no  longer  can."
"  But  did  I  not  ask  you,"  said  one  of  us  to  her,  "  if
you  desired  to  be  a  Nun?  did  you  not  answer  that
you  wished  to  be  married?"  "  You  did  indeed  ask
me,"  said  she,  "  if  I  wished  to  be  a  Nun;  I  did  not
reply  that  I  wished  to  be  married,  but,  really,  that  I
did  not  think  I  was  able  to  do  as  these  good  Sisters
do ;  and  this  is  the  cause  of  my  grief,  that  I  had  not
enough  spirit  to  live  like  them."

A  young  Christian  woman  thinking  she  would  die
in  her  confinement,  and  her  little  newborn  girl  being
so  sick  that  the  Savage  women  said  she  was  about  to
expire,  the  father  and  mother  of  the  child  promised
God  that  she  should  always  be  a  virgin, —  that  is,
that  they  would  make  her  a  Nun  when  she  was
grown  up,  if  she  wished  to  be  one.  God  saved  the
mother  and  the  child.  Now  these  good  people  often
present  their  offspring  to  the  Lord,  and  beg  him  to
accept  it  for  his  House.  The  sieur  Giffard 9  saved
the  life  of  the  mother;  and  our  Lord  resuscitated,  so
to  speak,  the  little  child.

A  good  Christian  woman  having  been  confined  [48]
in  the  woods,  seeing  her  newly-born  child  very  sick,
and  not  knowing  what  to  do  for  it,  consulted  some
other  Christian  women ;  but  as  these  good  people  did
not  know  the  formula  of  Baptism,  they  bethought
themselves  of  hanging  their  rosaries  on  the  neck  of
the  little  child;  and  perhaps  our  Lord,  accepting
favorably  their  faith  and  their  simplicity,  preserved
that  little  creature,  who  since  has  received  holy  Bap-


182  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.20

qui  depuis  a  receu  le  fainct  Baptefme,  &  fe  porte  fort
bien :  I'aurois  quantity  d'autres  adtions  f emblables  a
dire  de  nos  Neophytes,  mais  il  faut  euiter  la  lon-
gueur. En  verite,  Dieu  eft  bon,  &  fa  Bont6  n'a
point  de  limites :  Le  Scythe  &  le  Tartare  font  auffi
bien  a  luy  que  les  Grecs,  ie  voudrois  que  toutes  les
langues  du  ciel  &  de  la  terre  le  beniffent  pour  les
merueilles  qu'il  a  opere,  &  qu'il  opere  tous  les  iours
deuant  nos  yeux,  au  milieu  de  la  Barbarie:  qui  n'ad-
mire  point  ces  Metamorphofes,  ne  les  voit  pas ;  ou  qui
les  voit,  &  ne  les  admire  pas,  n'a  point  de  coeur,  ne
conceuant  pas  ce  qu'il  a  coufte  a  Iefus-Chrift  pour
changer  des  enfans  de  Sathan  des  enfans  du  grand
Dieu.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  18$

tism  and  is  very  well.  I  would  have  many  other
like  acts  to  relate  of  our  Neophytes,  but  I  must  avoid
tediousness.  Truly,  God  is  good,  and  his  Goodness
has  no  bounds.  The  Scythians  and  the  Tartars  be-
long to  him  as  well  as  the  Greeks ;  I  would  that  all
tongues  in  heaven  and  on  earth  might  bless  him  for
the  wonders  that  he  has  worked  and  is  working  every
day  before  our  eyes,  in  the  midst  of  Barbarism.  He
who  does  not  wonder  at  these  Metamorphoses  does
not  see  them ;  or  he  who  sees  them,  and  does  not
wonder  at  them,  has  no  heart, —  not  apprehending
what  it  cost  Jesus  Christ  to  change  the  children  of
Satan  into  children  of  the  great  God.


184  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20


[49]  CHAPITRE  IIII.

DE  QUELQUES BAPTESMES PLUS SIGNALES  EN  LA  RESI-
DENCE DE SAINCT IOSEPH.

LE  nombre  de  ceux  qu'on  a  fait  Chreftiens  cette
annee,  es  Refidences  de  la  Conception  &  de  S.
Iofeph,  n'eft  pas  moindre  que  celuy  des  annees
precedentes;  nous  auons  maintenant  cette  confola-
tion  qu'on  ne  baptife  pas  feulement  les  enfans  &  les
malades,  mais  encor  les  adultes  qui  font  pleins  de
vie  &  de  fante" ;  les  graces  que  Dieu  fait  a  quelques
vns  de  ces  bons  Neophytes  font  hgnalees ;  i'en  touche-
ray  quelques-vnes  en  ce  chapitre,  que  ie  prefenteray
comme  vne  riche  recompenfe  a  tous  ceux  qui  procu-
rent  deuant  Dieu  &  deuant  les  hommes,  la  conuerfion
de  ces  peuples.

Nous  baptifafmes  a  mefme  iour  trois  chefs  de
families  qui  fe  retiroient  ordinairement  a  Tadouffac,
mais  le  defir  de  leur  falut  leur  a  fait  prendre  party
auec  le[s]  [50]  Chreftiens  de  la  Refidence  de  Sainct
Iofeph,  le  plus  fignale  des  trois  fe  nomme  Charles
MeiachKab'at.  Monfieur  le  Cheualier  de  Montmagny,
noftre  Gouuerneur  le  voyant  fi  zele  pour  noftre  croy-
ace,  voulut  eftre  fon  parrain:  Ie  dirois  volontiers  de
luy  ce  que  noftre  Seigneur  difoit  de  Nathanael :  Ecce
vere  Ifra'clita  in  quo  dolus  non  ejl,  ce  bon  homme  eft  vn
vray  Ifraelite,  il  n'eft  compofe  ny  de  fraude  ny  de
fupercherie,  c'eft  la  mefme  candeur  il  a  toufiours
efte  porte  au  bien,  mais  depuis  enuiron  deux  ans
Dieu  l'a  fortement  touche ;  II  nous  a  raconte,  qu'e-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  185


[49] CHAPTER  IIII.

OF SOME  VERY REMARKABLE BAPTISMS AT THE RESI-
DENCE OF SAINT JOSEPH.

THE  number  of  those  who  have  become  Chris-
tians this  year,  at  the  Residences  of  la  Con-
ception and  of  St.  Joseph,  is  not  less  than  that
of  previous  years ;  we  have  now  this  consolation  that
not  only  children  and  the  sick  are  baptized,  but  even
adults  who  are  full  of  life  and  health.10  The  mercies
that  God  shows  to  some  of  these  simple  Neophytes
are  striking ;  I  shall  touch  upon  some  of  them  in  this
chapter,  which  I  shall  offer  as  a  rich  recompense  to
all  those  who  procure,  before  God  and  before  men,
the  conversion  of  these  peoples.

We  baptized  on  one  day  three  heads  of  families
who  generally  have  withdrawn  to  Tadoussac,  but  the
desire  for  their  salvation  made  them  join  the  [50]
Christians  of  the  Residence  of  Saint  Joseph.  The
most  remarkable  of  the  three  is  named  Charles  Mei-
achkawat;  Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de  Montmagny,
our  Governor,  seeing  him  so  zealous  for  our  belief,
wished  to  be  his  godfather.  I  would  willingly  say
of  him  what  our  Lord  said  of  Nathanael :  Ecce  vere
Israelite/,  in  quo  dolus  11011  est;  this  good  man  is  a  true
Israelite, —  he  is  made  up  neither  of  fraud  nor  deceit,
he  has  the  same  candor,  he  has  always  been  inclined
to  good ;  but  about  two  years  ago  God  touched  him
mightily.  He  related  to  us  that,  being  one  day  in
the woods,  he  saw a  man clothed  like  us,  and  he


186  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  20

flant  certain  iour  dans  les  bois,  il  vit  vn  homme
veftu  comme  nous,  &  qu'il  entendoit  vne  voix  qui
luy  difoit:  Quitte  tes  anciennes  facons  de  faire,
prefte  l'oreille  a  ces  gens  la,  &  fais  comme  eux;  &
quand  tu  feras  inftruit,  enf eigne  tes  Compatriotes :
Ie  ne  fcay,  difoit-il,  fi  c'eftoit  la  voix  du  grand  Capi-
taine  du  ciel,  mais  ie  voyois  &  conceuois  des  chofes
grandes;  ie  tins  au  commencement  tout  ce  difcours
pour  vne  reuerie  de  Sauuage,  &  i'ay  paffe  plus  d'vn
an  fans  y  faire  autre  reflexion  que  celle  que  ie  ferois
fur  vn  fonge:  Mais  enfin  [51]  voyant  que  ce  bon-
homme  s'efforcoit  de  nous  imiter  le  plus  pres  qu'il
luy  eftoit  poffible,  felon  fa  condition,  voyant  fa  fer-
ueur  a  embraffer  &  publier  la  foy,  quoy  qu'il  en  foit
de  cette  vifion  ou  de  ce  fonge,  i'ay  creu  que  ces  bons
effets  ne  pouuoient  prouenir  que  de  la  grace  de  Iefus
Chrift:  Si  toft  qu'il  eut  entendu  cette  voix,  il  quitta
de  foy-mefme  fans  nous  parler,  car  il  eftoit  bien  loin
de  nous,  toutes  les  folies  de  fa  Nation,  les  feftins  a
tout  manger,  les  chants  fuperftitieux ;  il  quitta  mefme
les  chofes  indifferentes,  comme  de  fe  peindre  le
vifage,  de  s'oindre  &  de  fe  graiffer  les  cheueux  &  la
face,  a  la  facon  des  autres  Sauuages,  il  quitta  la
petun,  dont  les  Sauuages  font  paffionnes  au  dela  de
ce  qui  s'en  peut  dire:  II  fe  mit  a  prefcher  fes  gens,
difant,  qu'il  falloit  croire  en  Dieu,  qu'il  nous  falloit
prefter  l'oreille,  qu'il  falloit  faire  le  figne  de  la
Croix;  c'eft,  difoit-il,  tout  ce  que  ie  fcay;  il  le  fai-
foit  a  tous  propos  fans  prononcer  aucune  parole,
n'ayant  pas  encor  efte  inftruit:  II  parla  fi  bien  aux
Sauuages  de  Tadouffac,  &  a  quelques-vns  du  Sagne,
qu'ils  le  deleguerent  a  Kebec  pour  venir  querir  quel-
que [52] Pere de noftre Compagnie,  afin  de leur


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  187

heard  a  voice  which  said  to  him :  ' '  Forsake  thine  old
ways ;  lend  an  ear  to  these  people,  and  do  as  they
do;  and,  when  thou  shalt  be  instructed,  teach  thy
Countrymen."  "I  do  not  know,"  said  he,  "if  it
were  the  voice  of  the  great  Captain  of  heaven,  but  I
saw  and  conceived  great  things."  In  the  beginning,
I  took  all  this  talk  for  the  reverie  of  a  Savage ;  and  I
passed  more  than  a  year  without  giving  any  other
thought  to  it  than  that  which  I  would  have  given  to
a  dream.  But,  at  length, —  [51]  seeing  that  this  art-
less man  exerted  himself  to  imitate  us,  as  nearly  as
was  possible  for  him  according  to  his  nature,  and
seeing  his  ardor  in  espousing  and  proclaiming  the
faith,  whatever  it  might  be,  of  that  vision  or  dream, —
I  believed  that  these  good  effects  could  only  proceed
from  the  grace  of  Jesus  Christ.  As  soon  as  he  had
heard  that  voice,  he  abandoned  of  his  own  accord  —
without  speaking  to  us,  for  he  was  far  distant  from
us  —  all  the  follies  of  his  Nation,  the  eat-all  feasts,
and  the  superstitious  chants ;  he  even  gave  up  indif-
ferent things,  like  painting  his  visage,  anointing  his
body,  hair,  and  face,  after  the  manner  of  other  Sav-
ages ;  he  left  off  tobacco,  to  which  the  Savages  are
devoted  beyond  all  that  can  be  said.  He  began  to
preach  to  his  own  people,  saying  that  they  must
believe  in  God,  that  they  must  give  ear  to  us,  and
must  make  the  sign  of  the  Cross, —  "  This,"  said  he,
"is  all  that  I  know."  He  did  this  at  every  turn,
without  pronouncing  another  word,  not  having  yet
been  instructed.  He  spoke  so  well  to  the  Savages
of  Tadoussac  and  to  some  of  the  Sagne*  region,  that
they  commissioned  him  to  come  to  Kebec  for  some
[52]  Father  of  our  Society,  "  that  he  might  teach
them the prayers," — it is thus that they spoke.


188  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.20

enfeigner  les  prieres; c'eft  ainfi  qu'ils  parloient: Ce

bon-homme  voyant  que  le  Pere  qu'il  demandoit  n'y

pouuoit  aller, fe tourmentoit: le  penfe, faifoit  il,

qu'on  s' imagine  que  ie  fuis  vn  menteur;  il  s'adreffe

au  fieur  Oliuier,  &  le  coniure  de  faire  en  forte  aupres

de  Monfieur  noftre Gouuerneur,  qu'on  enuoyaft  ce

Pere a Tadouffac, affurant que les Sauuages qui

eftoient  la,  vouloient  croire  en  Dieu;  il  n'y  eut  point

moyen  de  luy  fatisfaire  pour  lors:  II  s'en  retourne

done porter  refponfe, qu'on  ne  les pourroit  aller

vifiter ;  qu'au  Printemps  le  Pere  quils  demandoient  les

iroit  voir :  Ayant  fait  f on  meffage  il  s'en  reuint  en  la

Refidence  de  Sainct.  Iofeph, amenant  auec  foy  deux

families :  Nous  prenions  plaifir  de  voir  la  naif uete  de

ce  bon  Neophyte,  il  ne  iettoit  point  les  yeux  fur  les

autres  Francois,  mais  fur  nous,  tafchant  de  nous  imi-

ter  felon  f es  forces ;  il  nous  vint  demander  vn  papier,

nous  priant  d'y marquer  tous  les iours: Marques,

difoit-il,  les  iours  de  fefte, les  iours  de  trauail,  les

iours  qu'on  ne  mange  point  de  chair, les  iours  de

ieufne,  les  iours  que  [53]  vous  ieufnes  vous  autres,  &

non  pas  les  Compagnes,  c'eft  ainfi  qu'ils  nomment

les  hommes  de  trauail,  car  ie  veux  faire  entierement

comme  vous :  Luy ayant  donne  ce  papier,  il  remar-

quoit  fort  bien  la  difference  des  iours. Vn  honnefte

Fracois  ayat fait  quelque  voyage  auec  luy,  nous  a

rapporte,  qu'il  fe  contentoit  les  iours  de  poiflon  d'vn

peu  de  galette  boiiillie  dedans  de  l'eaupure;  il  s'eft

comporte  fi  religieufement  en  ce  point  que  le  pauure

homme  a  quelquefois  paffe  deux  iours  fans  manger,

n'ayant  autre  chofe  que  de  la  chair,  ne  voulant  pas

violer  le  Commandement  de  l'Eglife,  auquel  il  n'eft

nullement  oblige  dans  la  neceffite  de  leurs  viures:


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  189

This  simple  man,  seeing  that  the  Father  for  whom
he  asked  could  not  go,  was  distressed. "  I  think,"
said  he,  "  that  they  imagine  I  am  a  liar." He  made
application  to  sieur  Olivier,  and  conjured  him  so  to
arrange  with  Monsieur  our  Governor,  that  this  Father
should  be sent to Tadoussac, —  affirming that the
Savages  who  were  there  wished  to  believe  in  God.
There  was  no  way  of  satisfying  him  at  that  time.
Accordingly,  he  returned  home,  bearing  the  answer
that  we  could  not  visit  them,  but  that  in  the  Spring
the Father  for  whom  they  asked  would  go  to  see
them. Having  given  his  message,  he  came  back  to
the  Residence  of  Saint  Joseph,  bringing  with  him
two  families. We  took  pleasure  in  seeing  the  artless-
ness  of  this  good  Neophyte ;  he  did  not  cast  his  eyes
upon  the  other  Frenchmen,  but  upon  us,  trying  to
imitate  us  according  to  his  power. He  came  to  ask
us  for  a  paper,  begging  us  to  mark  all  the  days  upon
it. "  Mark,"  said  he,  "  the  feast  days,  the  working
days,  the  days  when  meat  is  not  eaten,  the  fast  days;
the  days  when  [53]  you  yourselves  fast,  and  not  the
Companions," — it  is  thus they call the workmen;
"  for  I  wish  to  do  exactly  as  you  do." Having  given
him  this  paper,  he  observed  very  well  the  difference
of  the  days. A  worthy  Frenchman  having  made  a
journey  with  him,  told  us  that  on  fish  days  he  was
contented with a  little  sea biscuit  boiled in clear
water ;  he  conducted  himself  so  religiously  in  this
respect  that  the  poor  man  sometimes  passed  two  days
without  food,  having  nothing  but  meat,  and  not  wish-
ing to  violate  the  Command  of  the  Church,  to  which
he  was  by  no  means  bound  in  the  destitution  of  his
provisions. Being  invited  to  feasts  on  days  when
meat  was  not  eaten,  he  kept  his  portion  for  his  fam-


190  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.20

Eftant  inuite  au  feftin  les  iours  qu'on  ne  mangeoit
point  de  viande,  il  gardoit  fon  mets  pour  fa  famille,
fans  y  toucher;  mais  comme  nous  luy  auions  dit
feulement  qu'on  ne  mangeoit  point  de  chair  les  iours
marques  dans  fon  papier ;  Luy  prenant  cela  au  pied
de  la  lettre,  fans  philofopher  plusauant,  ne  mangeoit
point  de  chair,  mais  ne  laiffoit  pas  de  boire  du  bouil-
lon ou  la  viande  auoit  cuit :  Nous  en  eftans  apperceus,
nous  ne  luy  voulufmes  [54]  point  defendre,  ayans
copaffion  de  fa  pauurete;  car  il  n' auoit  le  plus  fou-
uent  ces  iours  la  qu'vn  morceau  de  galette,  ou  vn
morceau  de  pain  pour  tout  mets,  &  encor  bien  petit.

II  a  tellement  dans  l'efprit  d'imiter  nos  facons  de
faire,  qu'il  nous  demanda  fi  nous  le  voudrions  bien
receuoir  parmy  nous,  qu'auffi  bien  il  vouloit  quitter
fa  femme,  puis  qu'elle  ne  preffoit  point  fon  bap-
tefme;  la  voix  que  i'ay  entendue  difoit-il,  m'exhorte
a  vous  imiter,  ie  ne  me  foucie  point  d'eftre  marie\  ie
donneray  ma  petite  fille  aux  Vrfulines,  &  ie  demeure-
ray  auec  vous;  ce  deffein  nous  fit  rire:  Comme  il
nous  voit  par  fois  retirer  feuls  a  l'efcart,  pour  nous
entretenir  auec  Dieu,  il  fait  le  mefme,  fe  promenant
tout  feul,  contre  la  couflume  de  fa  nation,  recitant
fon  chappelet,  ou  ruminant  quelque  point  de  la
doctrine  qu'on  luy  a  enfeignee.

Vn  Pere  de  noftre  Compagnie,  eftant  defcendu  ce
Printemps  a  Tadouffac,  comme  il  s'eloignoit  tous  les
iours  des  cabanes,  pour  fe  recueillir  quelque  temps,
ce  bon-homme  le  fuiuoit  fans  mot  dire,  fe  promenant
a  part  fans  l'interrompre:  [55]  Enfin  le  Pere  s'eftant
apperceu  qu'il  portoit  vn  piftolet  fous  fa  robe,  luy
demanda  ce  qu'il  venoit  faire,  &  ce  qu'il  vouloit  faire
de  ces  armes:  I'y  viens,  fit-il,  pour  faire  mes  prieres,


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  191


ily,  without  touching  it ;  but  as  we  had  simply  said
to  him  that  meat  was  not  eaten  on  the  days  indicated
upon  his  paper,  he  —  taking  this  literally  without
reflecting  further  —  ate  none,  but  did  not  fail  to  drink
the  broth  in  which  the  meat  had  been  cooked.  We,
having  perceived  this,  did  not  wish  [54]  to  forbid  it
to  him,  having  compassion  on  his  poverty;  for  very
often  on  those  days  his  only  food  was  but  a  bit  of
biscuit  or  bread,  and  even  that  very  scanty.

He  had  it  so  much  in  his  heart  to  imitate  our  cus-
toms, that  he  asked  if  we  would  really  receive  him
among  us ;  for  he  would  like  to  leave  his  wife,  since
she  did  not  urge  her  baptism.  "  The  voice  that  I
heard,"  said  he,  "  exhorted  me  to  imitate  you.  I  do
not  care  to  be  married ;  I  will  give  my  little  girl  to
the  Ursulines,  and  I  will  stay  with  you."  This  pro-
posal made  us  laugh.  As  he  saw  us  sometimes  with-
draw apart  to  commune  with  God,  he  did  the  same, —
walking  alone,  contrary  to  the  custom  of  his  nation,
reciting  his  rosary,  or  revolving  in  his  mind  some
point  of  doctrine,  that  he  had  been  taught.

A  Father  of  our  Society  having  gone  down  to
Tadoussac  this  Spring,  as  he  withdrew  every  day
from  the  cabins,  in  order  to  meditate  a  while,  this
artless  man  followed  him  without  speaking,  walking
apart  without  interrupting  him.  [55]  At  length  the
Father,  perceiving  that  he  carried  a  pistol  under  his
robe,  asked  for  what  he  came,  and  what  he  intended
to  do  with  those  arms:  "  I  am  come,"  said  he,  "  to
say  my  prayers,  and  to  watch  over  thee.  This  place
to  which  thou  retirest  is  dangerous, — some  Etechi-
min  or  other  evil-minded  Savage  may  come  even
here,  and  kill  thee  without  our  perceiving  him;  if
that  should  happen  thou  wouldst  sadden  all  the  Sav-


192  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

&  pour  te  garder,  ce  lieu  ou  tu  te  retires  eft  dange-
reux,  quelque  Etechimin  ou  autre  Sauuage  mal
affeddonne  peut  venir  iufques  icy,  &  te  tuer  fans  que
nous  nous  en  apperceuions ;  fi  cela  arriuoit  tu  attri-
fterois  tous  les  Sauuages,  voila  pourquoy  ie  viens
arme  pour  te  proteger,  tu  ne  deurois  pas  t'eloigner
des  cabanes  iufques  a  la  venue  des  nauires,  qui  nous
mettront  en  affurance.

On  l'entend  affes  fouuent  exhorter  les  Sauuages  a
fuiure  nos  facons  de  faire :  Iettes  les  yeux,  leur  fait-
il,  fur  les  principaux  Francois,  fur  les  Capitaines,
fur  les  Peres,  ce  font  ceux-la  qu'il  faut  imiter,  s'il  y
a  quelque  Compagnes  qui  ne  marche  pas  droit,  il  n'y
faut  pas  prendre  garde,  ils  ne  fcauent  pas  tous  le
Maffmahigan,  c'eft  a  dire  le  Liure  qui  enf eigne
comme  il  fe  faut  bien  comporter:  Si  toft  qu'il  fut
touche  de  Dieu,  voyant  des  Sauuages  du  Sagne  arri-
uer  a  Tadouffac,  il  les  alia  vifiter,  les  exhorta  a  em-
braffer  la  foy  dont  il  [56]  n'auoit  quafi  aucune  co-
gnoiffance,  &  pour  ce  que  les  prefents  font  les  paroles
de  ce  pai's-cy,  il  leur  offre  vn  grand  collier  de  porce-
laine,  pour  les  engager  a  croire  en  noftre  Seigneur,
ie  n'appris  cela  qu'vn  an  apres  &  encor  par  accident.

Ces  trois  chefs  de  families  dont  i'ay  parle,  eftoient
fi  ardens  a  fe  faire  inftruire,  qu'ils  nous  laffoient.
Ayans  efte  certain  iour  long  temps  auec  nous,  on  les
vint  inuiter  au  feftin,  ils  fe  dirent  l'vn  l'autre,  n'y
allons  pas,  nous  voicy  en  repos  aupres  des  Peres  qui
nous  inftruifent,  efcoutons  les  pendant  que  nous
auons  le  temps.  Qui  a  connoiffance  du  genie  des
Sauuages,  iugera  que  cette  action  eft  remarquable  en
eux,  i'ay  veu  entr'autres  Charles  dont  ie  parle  main-
tenant,  fe  bander  fi  fort  pour  retenir  les  prieres,  qu'il


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  193

ages.  This  is  why  I  come  armed  to  protect  thee ;
thou  oughtst  not  to  go  far  from  the  cabins  until  the
coming  of  the  ships,  which  will  give  us  confidence."

He  was  not  unfrequently  heard  exhorting  the  Sav-
ages to  follow  our  customs :  "Cast  your  eyes,"  he
said  to  them,  "  on  the  principal  Frenchmen,  on  the
Captains,  on  the  Fathers, —  they  are  the  ones  we
must  imitate.  If  there  is  any  Companion  who  does
not  walk  straight,  we  must  beware  of  him ;  they  do
not  all  know  the  Massinahigan,"  that  is,  the  Book
which  teaches  how  one  must  conduct  himself  prop-
erly. As  soon  as  he  was  touched  by  God,  seeing  the
Savages  of  the  Sagne  come  to  Tadoussac,  he  went  to
visit  them,  and  exhorted  them  to  embrace  the  faith,
of  which  he  [56]  had  scarcely  any  knowledge ;  and
since  presents  are  the  language  of  this  country,  he
offered  them  a  great  porcelain  collar,  that  he  might
win  them  to  believe  in  our  Lord.  I  learned  this
only  a  year  afterward,  and  even  then  by  accident.

These  three  heads  of  families  of  whom  I  have
spoken,  were  so  zealous  to  be  instructed  that  they
wearied  us.  On  a  certain  day  when  they  had  been  a
long  time  with  us,  they  were  invited  to  a  feast ;  they
said  to  one  another :  ' '  Let  us  not  go ;  here  we  are
in  quiet  with  the  Fathers  who  instruct  us,  let  us  listen
to  them  while  we  have  the  time."  He  who  has  a
knowledge  of  the  nature  of  the  Savages,  will  deem
that  this  action  was  remarkable  in  them.  I  have
seen,  among  others,  Charles,  of  whom  I  am  now
speaking,  struggle  so  hard  to  remember  his  prayers,
that  it  caused  him  great  drops  of  sweat,  in  rather
cold  weather.  He  had  himself  taught  by  children ;
he  wrote,  or  rather  he  made  marks  upon  bark,  to
impress  upon  his  mind  what  he  had  been  taught.


194  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES [Vol.20

en  fuoit  a  groffes  gouttes  en  vn  temps  affes  froid :  II
fe  faifoit  inftniire  par  des  enfans,  efcriuoit,  ou  plutoft
faifoit  des  marques  fur  de  l'efcorce,  pour  s'imprimer
dans  l'efprit  ce  qu'on  luy  enfeignoit;  ils  ont  tous
trois  paffe  plufieurs  nuidts,  ou  peu  s'en  falloit,  pour
fe  faire  dire  &  redire  le  Pater  &  VAue,  &  le  Credo  en
leur  langue,  afin  de  pouuoir  reciter  [57]  leur  chap-
pelet;  ils  eurent  de  grands  fentimens  en  leur  bap-
tefme,  ie  m'eftonnay  du  courage  de  l'vn  d'eux;  car
deuant  qu'il  fuft  Chreftien  il  auoit  de  grandes  craintes
que  fa  femme  ne  le  quittaft:  eftant  baptife,  non
feulement  il  perdit  cette  crainte,  mais  voyant  qu'elle
ne  preffoit  pas  fon  baptefme  affes  fortement  a  fon
gre,  il  luy  dit  nettement,  que  fi  elle  ne  fe  haftoit  de
croire  en  Dieu,  qu'il  la  banniroit  de  fes  coftes,  &
qu'il  efpouferoit  vne  C[h]reftienne:  Ces  trois  families
font  pour  le  prefent  regenerees  dans  le  Sang  de
l'Agneau,  il  n'y  a  que  la  femme  de  Charles  qui  fe  fait
maintenant  inftruire,  quoy  qu'affes  lentement;  c'eft
vn  naturel  brufque  &  agard,  qui  donne  bien  de  l'exer-
cice  a  ce  pauure  homme :  II  nous  vint  trouuer  certain
iour  tout  afflige;  Vous  m'aues  dit  que  ceux  qui  font
du  mal  y  font  bien  fouuent  incites  par  les  Demons,
helas!  faifoit-il,  ie  fuis  done  toufiours  auec  quelque
Demon,  car  ma  femme  eft  inceffamment  en  cholere,-
i'ay  peur  que  les  Demons  qu'elle  retient  en  ma
cabane  ne  faffent  tort  au  bien  que  i'ay  receu  dans  le
fainct  Baptefme ;  &  la  deffus  mettant  les  bras  fur  fon
cceur:  Ie  [58]  vous  affure,  difoit-il,  que  c'eft  tout  de
bon  que  ie  croy  en  Dieu,  &  que  ie  luy  veux  obeir;  &
comme  i'ay  appris  que  le  peche  chaff oit  Dieu  de
noftre  ame,  quand  vn  autre  fait  mal  en  ma  prefence,
ie  crains  que  cela  ne  porte  dommage  a  mon  cceur.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  195

All  three  have  several  times  passed  the  night,  or
little  short  of  it,  in  being  told  and  retold  the  Pater,
Ave,  and  the  Credo  in  their  own  language,  so  that
they  could  recite  [57]  their  rosary.  They  had
deep  feeling  at  their  baptism ;  I  was  amazed  at  the
courage  of  one  of  them,  for  before  he  was  a  Christian
he  had  great  fears  that  his  wife  would  leave  him.
When  he  was  baptized,  he  not  only  lost  this  fear,
but  —  seeing  that  she  did  not  urge  her  own  baptism
quite  strongly  enough,  in  his  opinion  —  he  told  her
plainly,  that  if  she  did  not  hasten  to  believe  in  God,
he  would  banish  her  from  his  side,  and  would  marry
a  Christian.  These  three  families  are  for  the  pres-
ent regenerated  in  the  Blood  of  the  Lamb ;  the  wife
of  Charles  is  the  only  one  who  is  now  being  in-
structed, although  rather  slowly;  she  is  a  rough  and
wild  creature,  who  gives  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to
the  poor  man.  He  came  to  us  one  day  quite  dis-
tressed. "  You  have  told  me  that  those  who  do  evil
are  very  often  incited  to  it  by  Demons ;  alas ! ' '  said
he,  "then  I  am  always  with  some  Demon,  for  my
wife  is  always  angry;  I  fear  that  the  Demons  she
keeps  in  my  cabin  are  perverting  the  good  that  I
received  in  holy  Baptism."  And  thereupon,  folding
his  arms  over  his  heart,  "  I  [58]  assure  you,"  said  he,
"  that  I  earnestly  believe  in  God  and  I  wish  to  obey
him;  and,  since  I  have  learned  that  sin  drove  God
from  our  hearts,  when  another  does  evil  in  my  pres-
ence, I  fear  that  may  bring  loss  to  my  soul."

Another  time  his  wife  aimed  a  knife  at  his  thigh,
and  he,  evading  the  blow,  had  only  his  robe  injured,
in  which  this  Megera  made  a  great  slash.  There-
upon he  came  to  us ;  meeting  some  Savages  on  the
way, he  began  to  laugh. "See," said  he, "the


196  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

Vne  autre  fois  fa  femme  luy  portant  vn  coufteau
dans  la  cuiffe,  luy  efquiuant  le  coup,  il  n'y  euft  que  fa
robe  offenfee,  a  laquelle  cette  Megere  fit  vne  grande
eftafilade ;  la  deffus  il  nous  vint  trouuer,  rencontrant
des  Sauuages  en  chemin  il  f e  mettoit  a  rire :  Voila
difoit-il,  la  cholere  de  celle  qui  me  tient  pour  fon
valet,  elle  penfoit  me  pouuoir  fafcher,  mais  i'ay  plus
de  pouuoir  fur  moy  que  d'entrer  en  fureur  pour  la
cholere  d'vne  femme;  &  regardant  fa  robe  toute
defchiree:  En  verite,  difoit-il,  cette  femme  n'a  point
d'efprit,  c'eft  chofe  eftrange  comme  les  Sauuages  font
ennemis  de  la  cholere,  &  comme  ce  pech6  les  choque.

Ie  ne  fcay  ce  que  ce  bon-homme  n'a  point  fait  pour
la  gaigner  a  Dieu:  fi  tu  veux  croire,  luy  difoit-il,  ie
t'aymeray  vniquement,  ie  te  feruiray  a  tous  tes  be-
foins,  ie  feray  mefme  les  petits  offices  que  [59]  font
les  femmes,  i'iray  querir  de  l'eau  &  du  bois,  ie  te
cheriray  plus  que  moy-mef me ;  il  f e  pincoit  le  bras,
&  luy  difoit:  Vois-tu  cette  chair,  ie  ne  l'aime  pas,
c'eft  Dieu  que  i'aime,  &  ceux  qui  croyent  en  luy;  fi
tu  ne  luy  veux  pas  obeir,  il  te  faut  eloigner  de  moy,
car  ie  ne  puis  aimer  ceux  qui  n'aiment  pas  Dieu.

Sa  femme  fe  mocquoit  de  luy/  Ne  vois-tu  pas  que
nous  mourons  tous  depuis  qu'on  nous  a  parle  de  prier
Dieu ;  oil  font  tes  parens,  ou  font  les  miens,  la
plufpart  font  morts,  il  n'eft  plus  temps  de  croire.

Tu  n'as  pas  d'efprit,  luy  repartoit-il,  celuy  qui
nous  a  donne  la  vie,  &  qui  nous  la  conferue  lors  que
nous  ne  croyons  pas  en  luy,  nous  l'oftera-t'il  mainte-
nant  que  nous  voulons  luy  obei'r?  &  quand  il  nous
l'ofteroit  ie  ne  laifferois  pas  de  l'aimer;  car  ie  ne
l'aime  pas  pour  viure  long-temps  5a  bas  en  terre,
mais  pour  le  voir  au  ciel :  fi  tu  ne  veux  croire  en  luy,


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  197

anger  of  her  who  considers  me  her  servant;  she
thought  she  would  be  able  to  irritate  me,  but  I  have
more  power  over  myself  than  to  fall  into  a  passion  at
the  anger  of  a  woman."  And  looking  at  his  badly-
torn  garment,  "  Truly,"  said  he,  "  that  woman  has
no  sense."  It  is  strange  what  enemies  the  Savages
are  of  anger,  and  how  this  sin  shocks  them.

I  know  not  what  this  simple  man  has  not  done  to
win  her  over  to  God.  "  If  thou  wilt  believe,"  he
said  to  her,  ' '  I  will  love  thee  above  all  things ;  I  will
wait  upon  thee  in  all  thy  needs,  I  will  even  perform
the  little  duties  that  [59]  the  women  do, —  I  will  go
for  water  and  wood ;  I  will  love  thee  more  than  my-
self." He  pinched  his  arm  and  said  to  her:  "  Dost
thou  see  this  flesh  ?  I  do  not  love  it ;  it  is  God  whom
I  love,  and  those  who  believe  in  him.  If  thou  art
not  willing  to  obey  him,  thou  must  go  away  from
me;  for  I  cannot  love  those  who  do  not  love  God."

His  wife  derided  him :  ' '  Dost  thou  not  see  that  we
are  all  dying  since  they  told  us  to  pray  to  God?
Where  are  thy  relatives,  where  are  mine?  the  most
of  them  are  dead;  it  is  no  longer  a  time  to  believe."

"  Thou  hast  no  sense,"  he  replied;  "  he  who  has
given  us  life,  and  who  preserves  it  when  we  do  not
believe  in  him,  will  he  take  it  away  now  when  we
wish  to  obey  him  ?  And  even  should  he  take  it  away,
I  would  not  cease  to  love  him ;  for  I  do  not  love  him
in  order  to  live  a  long  time  here  on  earth,  but  to  see
him  in  heaven.  If  thou  art  not  willing  to  believe  in
him,  leave  me;  if  my  Father  who  has  instructed  me
tells  me  to  live  alone,  I  shall  obey  him ;  if  he  allows
me  to  be  married  again,  to  a  Christian,  I  shall  take
her."  When  he  had  been  given  a  list  of  feast  days,
and  when  he  [60]  observed  them  in  the  woods,  his


198  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.20

retire  toy  d'aupres  de  moy;  fl  mon  Pere  qui  m'a
inftruit,  dit  que  ie  viue  feul,  ie  luy  obei'ray,  s'il  me
fait  remarier  a  vne  Chreftienne,  ie  la  prendray.
Comme  on  luy  auoit  donne  vn  catalogue  des  iours  de
feftes,  &  qu'il  [60]  les  gardoit  dans  les  bois,  fa  femme
luy  reprochoit  qu'il  eftoit  pareffeux,  qu'il  ne  chaff oit
point,  qu'il  ne  feroit  qu'vn  gueux,  qu'il  n'auroit  pas
dequoy  viure,  ny  dequoy  fe  couurir.  Tes  paroles,
luy  difoit-il,  ne  m'eftonnent  pas,  quand  tout  ce  que
tu  dis  deuroit  arriuer  ie  ne  laifferois  pas  d'obei'r  a  Dieu,
ie  n'attens  pas  de  luy  des  richeffes  en  terre,  i'efpere
neantmoins  qu'il  m'affiftera,  &  quoy  que  Ton  me  die,
ie  luy  obeiray:  Quelques  Sauuages  voyans  qu'il  jet-
toit  aux  chiens  les  os  de  caftor  qu'il  prenoit,  l'accu-
foient  de  follie,  difant  qu'il  n'en  prendroit  plus :  C'efl
l'vne  de  leurs  fuper ftitions  anciennes  de  jetter  dans
la  riuiere  ou  dans  le  feu  les  os  de  certains  animaux,
afin  qu'ils  ayent  bonne  chaffe.  Luy  leur  reprochoit
leur  ignorance:  Ces  animaux  font  faits  pour  nous,
difoit-il,  c'eft  vne  troperie  du  Diable  de  s'arrefter  a
ces  fuperftitions,  vous  vous  arreft6s  a  des  menfonges,
&  vous  fermes  les  yeux  a  la  verite.

Si  on  l'incitoit  a  embraffer  quelque  chofe  ou  il  dou-
taft  qu'il  y  eut  peche;  ie  ne  fcay  pas,  faifoit-il,  fi
cela  m'eft  permis,  ie  le  demanderay  a  mon  Pere,  &
ie  feray  ce  qu'il  me  dira  fur  ce  fujet.

[61]  Quand  il  s'en  alia  faire  fa  chaffe  pendant  l'hy-
uer,  nous  luy  donnafmes,  comme  i'ay  remarque  cy-
deffus,  vn  petit  calendrier,  ou  il  marquoit  tous  les
iours;  nous  l'exhortafmes  auffi  de  fe  trouuer  le  iour
du  grand  Vendredy  a  Kebec,  s'il  y  auoit  moy  en,  il
n'y  manqua  pas,  il  s'y  trouua  parmy  les  Francois,
& fut  plus  de  trois  heures  a l'Eglife,  affiftant  au


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  199

wife  reproached  him  for  being  lazy,  and  for  not
hunting, —  telling  him  he  would  be  only  a  beggar,
and  that  he  would  have  neither  food  nor  raiment.
"  Your  words,"  said  he  to  her,  "  do  not  shake  me;
though  all  you  say  should  happen,  I  would  not  cease
to  obey  God.  I  do  not  expect  from  him  riches  on
earth ;  nevertheless,  I  hope  that  he  will  aid  me,  and,
whatever  may  be  said  to  me,  I  shall  obey  him."
Some  Savages,  seeing  that  he  threw  to  the  dogs  the
bones  of  a  beaver  that  he  had  caught,  accused  him
of  folly,  saying  that  he  would  catch  no  more;  it  is
one  of  their  ancient  superstitions  to  throw  into  the
river  or  into  the  fire  the  bones  of  certain  animals,  in
order  that  they  may  have  a  successful  hunt.11  He
reproached  them  for  their  ignorance :  ' '  These  ani-
mals are  made  for  us,"  he  said;  "it  is  a  deception
of  the  Devil  to  remain  in  these  superstitions;  you
are  dwelling  in  falsehoods,  and  you  shut  your  eyes
to  the  truth."

If  he  were  urged  to  undertake  anything  in  which
he  suspected  there  might  be  sin,  "  I  do  not  know,"
he  would  say,  "  if  that  be  permitted  me;  I  will  ask
my  Father,  and  I  will  do  what  he  tells  me  in  the
case."

[61]  When  he  went  to  hunt  during  the  winter,  we
gave  him,  as  I  stated  above,  a  little  calendar,  on
which  he  marked  all  the  days ;  we  exhorted  him  also
to  be  in  Kebec  on  good  Friday,  if  it  were  possible.
In  this  he  did  not  fail ;  he  was  there  with  the  French,
and  was  more  than  three  hours  in  the  Church,  being
present  at  the  Service  and  at  the  Passion,  although
he  understood  nothing  of  it.  After  dinner,  he  came
to  confess;  and,  after  his  confession,  he  was  still  an
hour  and  a  half  in  the  chapel. He  had  eaten  noth-


200  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES [Vol.20

Semice  &  a  la  Paffion,  quoy  qu'il  n'y  entedit  rien;
apres  le  difner  il  fe  vint  confeffer,  &  apres  fa  con-
feffion  il  fut  encor  vne  heure  &  demie  a  la  chappelle,
il  n'auoit  mage  pendat  le  Carefme  qu'vn  peu  de
galette,  &  vn  peu  d'huile  de  loup-marin,  qu'il  auoit
expreffement  conferuee  pour  ce  temps-la:  s'eftant
confeffe  &  communie,  il  s'en  retourna  a  la  chaffe;
le  temps  luy  eftant  encor  fauorable,  il  fit  bonne
prouifion  de  chair  d'Eflan,  mais  ay  ant  donne  charge
a  fes  gens  de  Taller  requerir  auec  fa  chalouppe,  &
les  vents  eftans  contraires,  il  fut  long-temps  comme
prifonnier  dans  ces  grands  bois,  fans  nous  pouuoir
venir  voir ;  a  fon  retour  il  nous  tira  quafi  les  larmes
des  yeux,  nous  racontant  comme  il  fe  comportoit
dans  ce  petit  banniffement.

[62]  le  difois  a  Dieu,  faifoit-il,  toy  qui  commandes
aux  vents,  arrefte-les,  afin  que  ie  puiffe  aller  en  ta
Maifon,  ie  m'ennuie  d'eflre  fi  long-temps  fans  me
confeffer,  &  fans  voir  la  Maifon  de  priere.  Quand  il
faifoit  quelque  chofe  qu'il  penfoit  eftre  peche,  auffi-
toft  il  fe  mettoit  a  genoux,  en  demandoit  a  Dieu  par-
don, &  fe  frappoit  foy-mefme,  pour  tirer  vengeance
de  ce  qu'il  penfoit  eftre  faute,  &  qui  bien  fouuent  ne
l'eftoit  pas,  prenant  la  crainte  du  peche  pour  le  peche-
mefme.

Sa  petite  fille  eftant  tombee  malade,  en  forte  qu'il
penfoit  qu'elle  en  deuft  mourir;  fa  femme  ne  man-
qua  pas  de  luy  reprocher  que  le  baptefme  la  faifoit
mourir;  ce  bon  homme  mettant  fon  efperance  en
Dieu,  prend  fon  chappelet,  luy  pend  au  col,  &  la  pre-
f ente  a  Dieu  auec  ces  paroles ;  cet  enfant  eft  a  toy,
tu  me  l'as  donnee,  &  ie  te  l'ay  rendue,  determine
de  fa  vie  comme  tu  voudras,  tu  en  es  le  maiftre;  fi


1640  -  41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  201


ing  during  Lent  but  a  little  biscuit,  and  a  little  seal
oil,  which  he  had  kept  specially  for  that  season.
Having  confessed  and  received  communion,  he  went
away  to  hunt ;  the  weather  being  still  favorable  to
him,  he  laid  in  a  good  supply  of  Elk  meat,  but,  hav-
ing given  his  people  orders  to  come  back  for  him
with  his  shallop,  the  winds  being  contrary,  he  was
for  a  long  time,  as  it  were,  a  prisoner  in  those
great  forests,  without  being  able  to  come  to  us;  on
his  return,  he  almost  drew  tears  from  our  eyes,  relat-
ing to  us  how  he  bore  himself  in  that  short  banish-
ment.

[62]  "  I  said  to  God,"  declared  he,  "  '  Thou  who
commandest  the  winds,  stay  them,  that  I  may  go  to
thy  House ;  I  am  weary  of  being  so  long  without  con-
fessing, and  without  seeing  the  House  of  prayer.'  "
When  he  did  anything  he  thought  a  sin,  he  immedi-
ately fell  upon  his  knees,  asked  pardon  of  God  for  it,
and  smote  himself,  in  order  to  take  vengeance  upon
what  he  thought  a  fault,  and  which  very  often  was
not, — taking  the  fear  of  sin  for  the  sin  itself.

His  little  girl  having  fallen  ill,  so  that  he  thought
she  must  die,  his  wife  reproached  him,  saying  that
baptism  was  making  her  die;  this  good  man,  put-
ting his  hope  in  God,  took  his  rosary,  hung  it  on  her
neck,  and  presented  her  to  God  with  these  words:
"  This  child  is  thine,  thou  gavest  her  to  me,  and  I
have  returned  her  to  thee.  Decide  upon  her  life  as
thou  wilt, —  thou  art  the  master  of  it;  if  thou  will
that  she  die,  I  will  submit  to  it ;  if  thou  wilt  give
her  to  me  again,  I  will  thank  thee, — and,  as  soon  as
she  is  grown,  I  will  give  her  to  the  virgin  Sisters,
that  she  may  be  instructed.  Do  as  thou  [63]  wilt;
whatever  may  happen,  I  shall  not  cease  to  believe  in


202  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

til  veux  qu'elle  meure,  ie  l'aggreeray,  fi  tu  me  la
veux  encor  donner  vne  fois,  ie  t'en  remercieray,  &  fi
toft  qu'elle  fera  grande,  ie  la  donneray  aux  Filles
vierges,  pour  la  faire  inftruire,  fais-en  comme  tu  [63]
voudras,  quoy  qu'il  arriue,  ie  ne  laifferay  pas  de
croire  en  toy,  l'enfant  guerit  auec  l'eftonnement,  &
auec  la  confolation  de  fes  parens.

Ayant  appris  qu'vn  certain  homme  parloit  mal  de
luy,  il  luy  vint  quelque  penfee  de  le  payer  en  mefme
monnoye,  &  de  diuulguer  quelque  mal  qu'on  luy
auoit  appris  de  cette  perf onne ;  faifant  reflexion  fur
fa  penfee,  il  deuint  tout  confus,  &  fe  mit  a  genoux,
demanda  pardon  a  Dieu,  difant  en  foy  mefme:  fi
ceux  qui  ne  font  pas  baptifes  font  du  mal,  il  ne  faut
pas  que  ceux  qui  le  font ;  les  imitent,  &  la  deffus  il
fe  mit  a  prier  pour  celuy  qui  le  calomnioit,  la  nature
ne  va  pas  fi  auant,  ces  fruicfts  ne  fe  cueillent  qu'au
iardin  de  la  grace,  au  milieu  duquel  eft  plante  l'arbre
de  la  faindte  Croix,  fur  lequel  Iefus-Chrift  prioit  pour
fes  ennemis.

Exhortant  vn  malade,  &  luy  reprefentant  les  biens
de  l'autre  vie ;  ne  penfe  pas,  difoit-il,  que  les  eaux
du  Baptefme  fe  verfent  pour  guerir  ton  corps,  c'eft
pour  purifier  ton  ame,  &  te  donner  vne  vie  qui  ne
peut  mourir,  le  Baptefme  n'eft  pas  inftitue  pour  vne
chofe  fi  baffe  que  noftre  vie,  [64]  noftre  Pere  qui  eft
dans  les  cieux,  ne  nous  tient  pas  au  rang  des  chiens
pour  ne  nous  donner  que  la  vie  commune  aux  beftes.

De  verite,  ie  luy  ay  ouy  dire  tant  de  biens  de  la
foy,  &  tenir  des  difcours  fi  deuots  &  fi  tendres,  que
i'en  eftois  tout  eftonne;  ie  me  veux  mal,  d'auoir
laiffe  efchapper  de  ma  memoire,  les  bons  fentimens
que  Dieu  luy  donne,  &  a  plufieurs  autres,  mais  comme


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  203

thee."  To  the  astonishment  and  the  consolation  of
her  parents,  the  child  recovered.

Having  heard  that  a  certain  man  spake  ill  of  him,
the  thought  came  to  him  of  paying  this  person  off  in
his  own  coin,  and  of  divulging  some  evil  that  he  had
learned  of  him.  Upon  reflecting  over  this  idea,  he
became  quite  confused,  and  kneeling  down,  he  asked
pardon  of  God,  saying  within  himself:  "  If  those
who  are  not  baptized  do  evil,  those  who  are  must  not
imitate  them:  "  and  thereupon  he  began  to  pray  for
the  one  who  calumniated  him.  Human  nature  does
not  go  so  far  as  this ;  these  fruits  are  gathered  only
in  the  garden  of  grace,  in  the  midst  of  which  is
planted  the  tree  of  the  holy  Cross,  upon  which  Jesus
Christ  prayed  for  his  enemies.

When  he  was  exhorting  a  sick  man,  and  pointing
out  to  him  the  blessings  of  the  other  life,  "  Do  not
think,"  said  he,  "  that  the  water  of  Baptism  is  poured
out  to  heal  thy  body :  it  is  to  purify  thy  soul,  and  to
give  thee  a  life  which  cannot  die.  Baptism  was  not
instituted  for  a  thing  so  low  as  our  life ;  [64]  our  Fa-
ther who  is  in  heaven  does  not  place  us  in  the  rank
of  dogs,  that  he  should  give  us  only  the  life  common
to  the  beasts."

Truly,  I  have  heard  him  say  so  much  about  the
blessings  of  faith,  and  speak  in  so  devout  and  tender
a  manner,  that  I  have  been  greatly  astonished ;  I  am
vexed  with  myself,  that  I  have  let  escape  from  my
memory  the  good  sentiments  that  God  gives  him,
and  many  others;  but  as  these  good  people  expose
the  impulses  of  their  hearts  only  when  opportunities
are  offered,  and  as  we  then  have  neither  pen  nor  ink
to  note  them  down,  we  let  slip  away  many  of  the
holy affections of these good Neophytes without


204  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

ces  bonnes  gens  ne  decouurent  les  mouuements  de
leur  coeur,  que  dans  les  occafions  qui  fe  prefentent,  &
que  nous  n'auons  pour  lors,  ny  plume,  ny  encre,  pour
les  remarquer,  nous  laiffons  ecouler  quantity  de
faindtes  affedlions  de  ces  bons  Neophytes,  fans  les
remarquer;  Adiouftes  que  la  reffemblance  de  fes
actions,  me  fait  craindre  le  degouft,  pour  ce  que  cela
femble  des  redites.

L'vn  de  ces  trois  chefs  de  famille  fut  nomme
Achilles  par  Monfieur  le  Cheualier  de  rifle,  lequel
prend  grand  plaifir  de  voir  ces  bonnes  gens  fe  ranger
au  bercail  de  l'Eglife:  Tant  que  des  hommes  de  ver-
tu  &  de  merite  tiendront  icy  le  timon,  la  foy  y  florira:
Si  ceux  qui  doiuent  eflre  [65]  comme  les  yeux,  s'a-
ueuglent  iamais  dans  les  vices,  le  beau  iour  dont
maintenant  nous  iotiiflons,  fera  bien-toft  change  en
des  tenebres.  Mais  pour  parler  de  noftre  Neophyte,
ie  ne  f ais  pas  moins  de  cas  de  celui-cy  que  de  Charles ;
il  eft  vray  qu'il  n'a  pas  fi  grande  authorite,  qu'il  a
moins  de  parole,  mais  ie  croy  que  fon  cceur  n'eft  pas
moins  touche ;  il  eftoit  fort  orgueilleux  deuant  fon
baptefme,  nous  en  efperions  peu  de  chofe,  Dieu  l'a
conuerty  en  vn  petit  agneau ;  fon  pere  eftoit  Capi-
taine,  plus  aime  des  Francois  qu'il  ne  les  aimoit,  il  a
efte  miferablement  maffacre  par  les  Hiroquois;  fon
fils  a  maintenant  autant  de  bonnes  qualites  que  fon
pere  en  auoit  de  mauuaifes:  II  fut  baptife  en  No-
uembre,  &  tomba  malade  au  mois  de  Decembre ;  on
le  tenoit  pour  mort:  La  crainte  que  nous  auions  qu'il
n'attribuaft  fa  maladie  a  fon  baptefme  come  font  les
infideles,  nous  portoit  a  le  vifiter  fouuent,  nous  en
retournions  toufiours  tres-confoles:  Ie  ne  m'attrifte
point  de  ma  maladie,  ie  ne  crains  point  la  mort ;  ie


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  205

noticing  them.  Add  to  this,  that  the  similarity  of
these  acts  makes  me  fear  being  tiresome,  because
they  seem  repetitions.

One  of  these  three  heads  of  families  was  named
Achilles  by  Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de  l'lsle,  who
takes  great  pleasure  in  seeing  these  good  people  come
into  the  fold  of  the  Church.  While  men  of  virtue  and
merit  shall  hold  the  helm  here,  the  faith  will  flourish :
if  those  who  should  be  [65]  eyes,  as  it  were,  are  ever
blinded  by  vice,  the  glorious  day  we  now  enjoy  will
soon  be  changed  into  darkness.  But,  speaking  of
our  Neophyte,  I  do  not  think  less  of  him  than  of
Charles.  It  is  true,  he  has  not  so  much  influence,  he
has  less  eloquence,  but  I  believe  his  heart  to  be  no
less  touched ;  he  was  very  haughty  before  his  bap-
tism, and  we  did  not  hope  much  from  him,  but  God  has
changed  him  into  a  little  lamb.  His  father  was  a
Captain,  more  beloved  by  the  French  than  they  were
by  him,  and  was  wretchedly  massacred  by  the  Hiro-
quois;  the  son  has  now  as  many  good  qualities  as
the  father  had  bad  ones.  He  was  baptized  in  Novem-
ber, and  fell  sick  in  the  month  of  December;  they
gave  him  up  for  dead.  The  fear  we  had  that  his
malady  would  be  attributed  to  baptism,  as  it  is  by
the  unbelievers,  induced  us  to  visit  him  often;  we
always  came  away  much  consoled.  "  I  am  not  sad
on  account  of  my  sickness;  I  do  not  fear  death.  I
think  continually  of  God,"  said  he;  "I  rejoice  that
my  sins  are  blotted  out;  if  I  die,  [66]  I  hope  that  I
shall  go  to  heaven ;  this  is  what  consoles  my  heart. ' '

He  had  only  one  little  girl,  whom  God  took  from
him  some  time  after  his  baptism ;  this  blow  did  not
unsettle  him,  nevertheless  he  avowed  to  us  that  he
had suffered from it. "  My sickness," said he,


206  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  20

penfe  inceffamment  a  Dieu,  faifoit-il,  ie  me  rejouys
de  ce  que  mes  peches  font  effaces ;  fi  ie  meurs,  [66]
i'efpere  que  i'iray  au  ciel,  voila  ce  qui  confole  mort
cceur.

II  n'auoit  qu'vne  petite  fille,  Dieu  luy  rauit  quel-
que  temps  apres  fon  baptefme;  ce  coup  ne  l'efbranla
point;  il  nous  aduoiia  neantmoins  qu'il  l'auoit  reffen-
ty :  Ma  maladie,  difoit-il,  ne  m'a  caufe  aucune  trifteffe,
mais  la  mort  de  mon  enfant  m'a  vn  peu  touche" ;  Dieu
luy  a  rendu  depuis  vn  beau  fils.

Pendant  la  Meffe  de  minuidt,  comme  il  eftoit  ma-
lade,  il  demeura  dans  fa  cabane,  mais  il  ne  voulut
iamais  dormir;  il  paffa  tout  ce  temps-la  en  prieres,
faifant  fes  plaintes  a  noftre  Seigneur  de  ce  qu'il  ne
pouuoit  point  aller  a  l'Eglife  comme  les  autres.

Vn  Sauuage  me  menant  de  grand  matin  a  Kebec,
fon  canot  faifant  eau,  il  defcend  deuant  l'Hofpital
pour  demander  vn  peu  de  feu  afin  de  radouber  fon
petit  vaiffeau ;  i'entray  cependant  a  la  Chappelle,  i'y
trouuay  noftre  nouueau  Chreftien  a  deux  genoux,  les
mains  iointes,  &  les  yeux  au  ciel ;  mais  fi  attentif  a
fa  priere  qu'il  ne  m'apperceut  point,  quoy  que  ie
demeuraffe  la  quelque  temps,  &  que  i'en  \6j~\  fortiffe
auec  aff  es  de  bruit ;  fon  attention  m'attendriff oit ;  en
effet,  fes  deportemens  font  voir  que  fon  cceur  eft  a
Dieu.

II  nous  a  dit  par  rencontre,  ce  qui  l'auoit  porte"  k
embraff er  la  f oy :  vn  Chreftien  parlant  hardiment  de
Dieu  deuant  les  infidelles,  &  priant  publiquement,
quoy  qu'on  l'improuuaft,  &  qu'on  fe  mocquafl  de  luy,
fut  caufe  qu'il  conclud  quelque  chofe  de  grand  de
noftre  creance,  puis  qu'vn  homme  la  defendoit  fi
courageufement  aux  depens  de  fon  honneur.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  207

"  caused  me  no  sadness,  but  the  death  of  my  child
somewhat  affected  me.  '  God  has  since  given  him
a  fine  son.

During  the  midnight  Mass,  as  he  was  sick,  he
remained  in  his  cabin,  but  was  not  at  all  willing  to
sleep ;  he  passed  all  that  time  in  prayer,  making  his
laments  to  our  Lord  that  he  could  not  go  to  Church
as  the  others  did.

A  Savage  was  taking  me  to  Kebec  very  early  in
the  morning,  and,  his  canoe  springing  a  leak,  he
landed  in  front  of  the  Hospital  to  ask  for  some  fire,
that  he  might  repair  his  little  vessel.  Meantime,  I
entered  the  Chapel,  and  found  there  our  new  Chris-
tian on  his  knees, —  his  hands  joined,  and  his  eyes
raised  to  heaven,  but  so  attentive  to  his  prayer,  that
he  did  not  perceive  me,  although  I  remained  there
some  time,  and  [67]  went  out  with  considerable  noise.
His  devotion  moved  me;  truly,  his  conduct  shows
that  his  heart  belongs  to  God.

He  told  us,  by  chance,  what  had  led  him  to  em-
brace the  faith, —  a  Christian  speaking  boldly  of  God
before  unbelievers,  and  praying  publicly,  although
disapproved  and  derided  by  them,  was  the  cause  of
his  inferring  our  belief  to  be  a  wonderful  thing,  since
a  man  defended  it  so  courageously  at  the  expense  of
his  honor.

Another  man, —  his  relative,  not  yet  baptized, —
being  sick  unto  death,  sent  for  his  friends  and  said
to  them:  "  I  have  been  to  Kebec;  I  heard  such  a
Father  speak  concerning  the  things  of  the  other  life,
and  all  that  he  said  seems  to  me  true.  I  greatly
regret  dying  before  being  instructed ;  go,  all  of  you,
to  this  Father  after  my  death ;  listen  to  him,  believe
what  he  will  tell  you,  and  be  baptized :  for  what  those


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

Vn  autre  homme  fon  parent,  non  encor  baptife,
eftant  malade  a  la  mort,  fit  venir  fes  amis,  &  leur
dit:  I'ay  efte  a  Kebec,  i'ay  entendu  parler  vn  tel
Pere,  des  chofes  de  l'autre  vie;  tout  ce  qu'il  dit  me
femble  veritable,  i'ay  vn  grand  regret  de  mourir
deuant  que  d'eftre  inftruit;  vous  autres,  alles  trouuer
ce  Pere  apres  ma  mort,  ecoutes-le,  croyes  ce  qu'il
vous  dira,  &  vous  faites  baptifer;  car  ce  que  ces
gens-la  enfeignent,  eft  bon :  Ce  pauure  homme  meurt
la-deffus;  &  noflre  Neophyte  defja  tout  difpofe  dans
l'ame,  ayant  fait  rencontre  de  Charles  fon  Compatri-
ote,  qui  l'inuitoit  a  croire  en  Dieu,  fe  ioint  auec  [68]
luy  pour  venir  faire  fa  refidence  a  Sainct  Iofeph,
Dieu  luy  a  rendu  la  fante,  mais  il  ne  l'a  pas  forte,  &
s'il  peine  beaucoup,  il  n'eft  pas  pour  viure  long-
temps.

Charles  1'emmenant  ce  Printemps  a  Tadouffac,  il
me  difoit  en  fecret:  O  que  i'ay  eu  de  peine  a  me
refoudre  a  ce  voyage,  il  me  fembloit  quand  ie  quit-
tay  la  Chappelle  pour  m'embarquer,  qu'on  m'arra-
choit  le  cceur,  &  iamais  ie  ne  m'euffe  pu.  refoudre  a
partir,  n'eftoit  que  i'efperois  de  te  trouuer  a  Tadouffac,
&  que  i'aurois  le  moyen  de  me  confeffer  &  commu-
nier.

II  difoit  vn  iour  apres  auoir  receu  noftre  Seigneur :
Mon  cceur  eft  plein  de  ioye,  ie  ne  fcay  ce  qu'il  dit,  ie
fcay  bien  qu'il  parle,  mais  ie  ne  l'entens  pas,  il  va
plus  vifte  que  ma  penfee ;  il  me  femble  que  ce  que
Dieu  me  fait,  eft  admirable,  ie  tremble  tant  i'ay  peur
de  fallir  ce  qui  eft  en  moy,  il  m'eft  auis  qu'on  me  dit
dans  l'ame,  qu'il  faut  que  ie  fois  bon,  puis  que  ie  croy
en  luy,  &  que  ie  ne  commette  plus  aucun  mal:  Si
vous  fcauies,  difoit-il,  combien  i'aime  mon  baptefme,


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  209

people  teach  is  good."  Then  this  poor  man  died;
and  our  Neophyte,  already  quite  willing  in  his
heart, —  having  met  Charles,  his  Countryman,  who
invited  him  to  believe  in  God, —  joined  [68]  him  to
come  and  dwell  at  Saint  Joseph.  God  has  restored
his  health,  but  it  is  not  strong;  and,  if  he  becomes
greatly  fatigued,  he  has  not  long  to  live.

After  Charles  brought  him  away  this  Spring  to
Tadoussac,  he  said  to  me  privately:  "  Oh,  what  diffi-
culty I  had  in  resolving  upon  this  voyage !  It  seemed
to  me  when  I  left  the  Chapel  to  go  on  board,  that
my  heart  was  being  torn  out,  and  I  never  could  have
resolved  upon  starting,  had  it  not  been  that  I  hoped
to  find  you  at  Tadoussac,  and  that  I  should  be  able
to  confess  and  receive  communion."

One  day  after  having  received  our  Lord,  he  said:
"  My  heart  is  full  of  joy ;  I  do  not  know  what  it  says,
I  know  well  that  it  speaks,  but  I  do  not  understand
it, —  it  goes  faster  than  my  thought.  It  seems  to  me
that  what  God  does  for  me  is  wonderful ;  I  tremble,
so  greatly  do  I  fear  to  soil  what  is  within  me.  I
think  some  one  tells  me  within  my  heart  that  it  must
be  that  I  am  good,  since  I  believe  in  him,  and  no
longer  commit  any  evil.  If  you  knew,"  said  he,
"how  much  I  delight  in  my  baptism,  and  what  great
joy  I  experience  from  it  in  my  heart!  it  seems  to  me
that  I  have  no  longer  anything  to  fear."  As  soon  as
he  had  a  desire  [69]  to  be  converted,  the  Devil  laid
a  great  snare  for  him.  The  wretched  Makheabichti-
chiou  12  of  whom  I  have  often  spoken  in  preceding
Relations,  ashamed  to  remain  among  the  Christians,
who  put  him  out  of  countenance  by  their  example,
resolved  to  go  away  with  his  two  wives,  whom  he
could  not  give  up. He  used  every  endeavor  to  take


210  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.20

&  combien  i'en  reffens  de  ioye  dans  mon  cceur,  il  me
femble  que  ie  n'ay  plus  rien  a  craindre.  Si  toft  qu'il
eut  enuie  [69]  de  fe  conuertir,  le  Diable  luy  dreffa
vne  forte  embufche,  le  miferable  Mathembichtichid
\sc.  Makheabichtichiou],  dont  i'ay  fouuent  parle  es
Relations  precedentes,  honteux  de  demeurer  parmy
les  Chreftiens,  qui  le  conf  ondoient  par  leurs  exemples,
prit  refolution  de  s'eloigner  auec  fes  deux  femmes,
qu'il  ne  pouuoit  quitter ;  il  fit  fes  efforts  pour  emme-
ner  ce  bon-homme  auec  luy  dans  le  pais  des  Abna-
quiois,  luy  promettant  monts  &  merueilles,  comme
on  dit :  mais  ce  braue  Neophyte  luy  refpondit,  qu'ay-
at  ouy  parler  d'vne  autre  vie,  il  vouloit  aller  voir
ceux  qui  en  ouuroient  le  chemin,  que  la  chofe  eltoit
de  trop  grande  confequence  pour  la  negliger :  peut-
eftre  que  ie  n'auray  pas  affes  d'efprit,  difoit-il,  pour
comprendre  ce  qu'on  me  dira,  mais  toufjours  eft-il
bon  d'oiiir  parler  de  ces  merueilles;  II  s'en  vint  a
Saindt  Iofeph,  &  Mathembichtichid  s'en  alia  au  pais
des  Abnaquiois,  oil  il  a  efte  miferablement  tue  cet
hyuer,  fes  femmes  font  reuenues  fort  miferables,  fon
fils  aifne  mort  comme  vn  chien,  fans  baptefme,  fa
famille  renuerfee ;  voila  la  fin  de  ceux  qui  ferment
l'oreille  a  la  voix  de  Dieu  qui  les  appelle.

[70]  Ie  voy  bien  que  ie  diray  la  mefme  chofe,  fi  ie
veux  rapporter  les  bons  fentimens  des  autres  que
nous  auons  baptifes ;  car  noftre  Seigneur  leur  donne
les  mefmes  affections,  &  les  mefmes  volontes.  Ie
diray  feulement  en  paffant,  que  deux  ieunes  hommes
a  marier  nous  preffant  fort  pour  leur  baptefme ;  enfin
comme  nous  les  remettions  apres  leur  mariage,  a
caufe  que  nous  auons  de  la  peine  a  marier  les  ieunes
Chreftiens,  dautant  que  le  mariage  des  Sauuages  ne


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  211


this  artless  man  away  with  him,  into  the  country  of
the  Abnaquiois,  promising  him  mountains  and  mar-
vels, as  they  say;  but  this  worthy  Neophyte  re-
sponded to  him  that,  having  heard  of  another  life,
he  intended  going  to  see  those  who  were  opening  the
way  to  it, —  that  the  thing  was  of  too  great  conse-
quence to  be  neglected.  "  Perhaps  I  shall  not  have
enough  intelligence,"  said  he,  "  to  comprehend  what
they  shall  tell  me ;  but,  at  least,  it  is  good  to  hear  of
these  wonders."  He  came  to  Saint  Joseph,  and
Makheabichtichiou  went  away  to  the  country  of  the
Abnaquiois,  where  he  was  wretchedly  slain  this  win-
ter; his  wives  have  returned  very  poor,  his  eldest
son  died  like  a  dog,  without  baptism, —  his  family  is
ruined.  Behold  the  end  of  those  who  shut  their  ears
to  the  voice  of  God  who  is  calling  them.

[70]  I  see  well  that  I  shall  say  the  same  things,  if
I  endeavor  to  report  the  good  thoughts  of  others  whom
we  have  baptized ;  for  our  Lord  gives  them  the  same
affections  and  the  same  inclinations.  I  will  only  say,
by  the  way,  that  two  marriageable  young  men  urged
us  strongly  to  baptize  them ;  finally  when  we  put
them  off  until  after  their  marriage,  because  we  have
trouble  in  marrying  the  young  Christians, —  inas-
much as  the  marriage  of  Savages  generally  becomes
confirmed  only  by  a  similarity  of  dispositions,  or  by
the  children  whom  God  gives  them,  or  by  a  lapse  of
time  and  long-continued  and  reciprocal  intercourse
with  each  other, —  so  when  we  put  off  our  young  peo-
ple, promising  them  baptism  when  they  should  be
married,  they  often  came  to  us  and  said:  "  Either
baptize  us  without  marrying  us,  or  else  find  maidens
suitable  for  us.  Dost  thou  wish  to  cause  our  perdi-
tion ? If  we  should  die  in  the  woods,  or  if  some  acci-


212  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

s'affermit  pour  l'ordinaire  que  par  vne  reffemblance
d'humeurs,  ou  par  les  enfans  que  Dieu  leur  donne,
ou  par  vn  long-temps,  &  par  vne  longue  &  mutuelle
conuerfation  par  enfemble:  Comme  done  nous  rejec-
tions nos  ieunes  gens,  leur  promettant  le  baptefrne
quand  ils  f eroient  maries ;  ils  nous  venoient  fouuent
trouuer  &  nous  difoient :  Ou  baptife  nous  fans  nous
marier,  ou  nous  trouue  des  filles  propres  pour  nous/
veux-tu  nous  perdre,  fi  nous  mourions  dans  les  bois,
s'il  nous  arriue  quelque  accident  allans  a  la  chaffe,
que  deuiendront  nos  ames,  tu  nous  fais  trembler  par
le  recit  des  feux  &  des  tourmens  de  l'Enfer,  &  tu  ne
[71]  veux  pas  nous  deliurer  de  ce  peril :  Enfin,  comme
il  falloit  ce  Printemps  partir  pour  aller  a  la  guerre,
ils  dirent  tous  deux  a  leurs  Capitaines,  qu'ils  ne  mar-
cheroient  point  s'ils  n'eftoiet  baptifes,  &  qu'ils  crai-
gnoient  de  mourir  deuant  que  de  receuoir  ce  Sacre-
ment,  ils  promirent  de  plutoft  iamais  ne  fe  marier,
s'ils  ne  trouuoient  des  Chreitiennes :  le  me  foucie
bien  de  mariage,  difoit  l'vn  d'eux,  vous  ne  procedes
pas  bien,  nous  difoit-il,  ie  vous  parle  du  ciel  &  du
Baptefrne,  &  vous  me  paries  de  me  marier;  Vne
femme  effacera-t'elle  mes  peches?  II  fe  fafcha  fi  bie
qu'il  nous  dit:  Ie  voy  bien  ce  que  c'efl,  vous  voul£s
que  ie  fois  damne,  vous  me  faites  perdre  cceur:  mais
vous  refpondres  de  mon  ame.  Enfin  nonobftant  les
peines  que  nous  apprehendons  pour  leurs  manages,
nous  les  baptifafmes  a  leur  grand  contentement :  Le
plus  ieune  a  efte  efleu  Capitaine ;  &  noftre  Seigneur
depuis  qu'il  eft  Chreftien,  luy  a  donne  vne  ieune
femme  Chreftienne,  qui  ne  le  pouuoit  aimer  deuant
qu'il  full  enfant  de  Dieu ;  ils  ont  efte  maries  publique-
ment  a  la  venue  des  Vaiffeaux.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  213

dent  should  happen  to  us  in  hunting,  what  will  be-
come of  our  souls?  Thou  makest  us  tremble  by  thy
account  of  the  fires  and  torments  of  Hell,  and  thou
[71]  wilt  not  deliver  us  from  this  peril."  Finally,
this  Spring,  when  they  were  obliged  to  set  out  for
the  war,  they  both  told  their  Captains  they  would
not  march  unless  they  were  baptized,  and  that  they
feared  they  might  die  before  receiving  this  Sacra-
ment; they  declared  they  would  not  marry  at  all,
unless  they  found  Christian  wives.  "  Much  do  I  care
about  marriage!  "  said  one  of  them.  "  You  are  not
conducting  yourselves  well,"  said  he  to  us;  "I  speak
to  you  of  heaven  and  of  Baptism,  and  you  talk  to  me
of  my  marrying:  will  a  wife  blot  out  my  sins?"  He
was  so  thoroughly  irritated  that  he  said  to  us:  "I
see  well  how  it  is,  you  wish  that  I  may  be  lost,  you
make  me  lose  courage ;  but  you  shall  answer  for  my
soul."  At  last,  notwithstanding  the  troubles  that
we  dread  on  account  of  their  marriages,  we  baptized
them,  to  their  great  joy.  The  younger  one  has  been
chosen  Captain;  and,  since  he  has  become  a  Chris-
tian, our  Lord  has  given  him  a  young  Christian  wife,
who  could  not  love  him  before  he  became  a  child  of
God.  They  were  married  publicly,  on  the  arrival  of
the  Ships.


214  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20


[72]  CHAPITRE  V.

DU BAPTESME D  VN HURON EN LA RESIDENCE DE
SAINCT IOSEPH PROCHE DE KEBEC.

LE  Pere  lean  de  Brebetif  eftant  defcendu  des  Hu-
rons  auec  le  Pere  Francois  du  Peron,  fut  con-
duit iufques  a  Kebec  par  des  Sauuages,  en  par-
tie  Chreftiens,  en  partie  Catechumenes,  il  y  en  auoit
vn  de  coniideration,  homme  de  bon  fens,  fils  du  Capi-
taine  de  fa  Bourgade ;  mais  comme  en  ces  quartiers
la,  les  enfans  ne  fuccedent  pas  a  leurs  peres  dans  ces
charges  honorables,  fi  bien  les  neueux  du  cofte  de  la
fceur:  cet  homme  mene  vne  vie  priuee  en  fon  pais,
neantmoins  comme  il  eft  adroit,  &  reconnu  pour  vn
homme  d'efprit,  il  eft  ecoute  &  bien  voulu  de  fes
Compatriotes.  Monfieur  le  Cheualier  de  Montmagny
ayant  appris  de  la  bouche  du  Pere  de  Brebeuf,  les
belles  qualites  de  ce  bon  Catechumene,  demanda  fi
on  ne  [73]  le  pouuoit  pas  bien  baptifer  deuant  fon  de-
part, le  Pere  repartit  que  ce  bon-homme  n'auoit  pas
de  plus  ardens  defirs,  qu'on  ne  le  retardoit  que  pour
l'6prouuer  dauantage:  Iamais,  difoit  le  Pere,  il  n'a
combatu  formellement  la  foy.  Au  plus  fort  de  nos
perfecutions,  lors  qu'on  nous  banniffoit  de  tous  coftes,
&  que  les  portes  des  cabanes,  &  l'entree  des  Bour-
gades  nous  eftoient  fermees,  il  nous  receuoit  chari-
tablement,  &  nous  permettoit  de  faire  baptifer,  non
pas  f eulemet  fes  pares,  mais  encor  fes  propres  enfans ;
ce  Printemps  dernier,  il  a  iette  au  feu  les  forts  qu'il


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  215


[72]  CHAPTER  V.

OF THE BAPTISM OF A HURON AT  THE  RESIDENCE  OF
SAINT JOSEPH, NEAR KEBEC.

FATHER  Jean  de  Brebeuf  having  come  down
from  the  country  of  the  Hurons  with  Father
Francois  du  Peron,  was  conducted  as  far  as
Kebec  by  the  Savages,  partly  Christians,  partly
Catechumens.  There  was  among  them  a  man  of
importance  and  of  good  sense,  a  son  of  the  Cap-
tain of  his  Village;  but,  since  in  those  regions  chil-
dren do  not  succeed  their  fathers  in  these  honorable
posts  as  regularly  as  do  nephews  on  the  sister's  side,
this  man  leads  a  private  life  in  his  own  country.
Nevertheless,  as  he  is  clever,  and  recognized  as  a
man  of  ability,  he  is  listened  to  and  is  much  beloved
by  his  Countrymen.  Monsieur  the  Chevalier  de
Montmagny  having  learned  from  the  lips  of  Father
de  Brebeuf  the  fine  qualities  of  this  good  Catechu-
men, asked  if  they  [73]  could  not  properly  baptize
him  before  his  departure ;  the  Father  answered  that
this  worthy  man  had  not  the  most  ardent  desires  for
it,  that  they  delayed  it  only  to  test  him  further.
"  He  has  never,"  said  the  Father,  "  positively  opposed
the  faith.  In  our  severest  persecutions, —  when  on
all  sides  they  were  banishing  us,  and  the  doors  of  the
cabins  and  admission  to  the  Villages  were  being
closed  to  us,  he  received  us  charitably,  and  permitted
us  to  baptize  not  only  his  relatives,  but  even  his  own
children. This  last  Spring,  he  cast  into  the  fire  the


216  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

auoit  pour  la  chaffe,  declarant  tout  haut  qu'il  vouloit
croire  en  Dieu,  mais  tout  de  bon,  &  fans  feintife;
renoncant  publiquement  a  toutes  les  anciennes  cou-
ftumes,  &  a  toutes  les  fuperftitions  de  fes  anceftres.
Eftant  alle  en  guerre,  il  s'accofta  de  deux  Chreftiens,
&  les  voyant  retirer  dans  le  bois,  pour  fuir  les  fuper-
ftitions de  leurs  Compatriotes,  &  faire  a  part  leur
petites  prieres,  il  les  fuiuoit  &  prioit  comme  eux.
Dans  tout  le  voyage  depuis  les  Hurons  iufques  a
Kebec,  qui  eft  fort  long,  il  n'a  paffe  iour  qu'il  n'ait
inuoque  le  faindt  Nom  de  Dieu,  [74]  &  iamais  il  ne
s'engageoit,  dans  aucun  faut,  &  dans  aucun  danger,
qu'il  n'euft  fait  fa  priere  &  qu'il  ne  fe  fut  arme  du  figne
de  la  faincte  Croix ;  II  difoit  par  fois  au  Pere,  que  s'il
s'en  retournoit  en  fon  pais  fans  eftre  baptife,  qu'il
apprehendoit  l'abord  de  fa  femme:  elle  ne  manquera
pas,  faifoit  il,  de  me  faire  ce  reproche,  on  voit  bien
qu'il  y  a  quelque  chofe  qui  manque  en  ta  foy,  fi  les
Peres  auec  lefquels  tu  as  efte  fi  long  temps,  pendant
vn  fi  grand  voyage,  t'auoient  iuge  digne  du  baptefme,
ils  ne  te  l'auroient  pas  refufe?  Peut-eftre  que  l'a-
mour  de  quelque  autre  femme,  t'a  empefche  de  pour-
fuiure  vn  fi  grand  bien ;  Voila,  difoit-il,  le  premier
falut  que  i'attens  de  ma  femme,  a  mon  arriuee  au
pais.  Monfieurle  Gouuerneur  voyant  vne  ame  fi  bien
difpofee,  dit  pour  ce  bon  Neophyte,  ce  que  l'Eu-
nuque  de  la  Reine  de  Candace  difoit  a  faindt  Phi-
lippe. Ecce  aqua  quid  prohibet  eum  baptifari.  II  y  a
tant  d'eau  fur  le  pais,  qu'y  a-t'il  done,  qui  puiffe
retarder  fon  baptefme?  Puis  qu'il  croit  de  tout  fon
cceur  en  Iefus  Chrift?  Les  Peres  y  condefcendent
aifement,  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  voulut  eftre  fon
Parrain,  le  [75]  iour  eft  pris  au  vingt-fixiefme  de  Iuin,


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  217

charms  which  he  had  for  hunting, —  declaring  aloud
that  he  would  like  to  believe  in  God,  but  earnestly,
and  without  pretense, —  renouncing  publicly  all  his
old  customs  and  all  the  superstitions  of  his  ancestors.
Having  gone  to  the  war,  he  became  acquainted  with
two  Christians ;  and.  seeing  them  retire  to  the  woods
to  flee  the  idolatrous  rites  of  their  Countrymen,  and
offer  up  apart  their  little  prayers,  he  followed  them
and  prayed  as  they  did.  In  all  the  voyage  from  the
country  of  the  Hurons  to  Kebec,  which  is  very  long,
he  passed  no  day  without  invoking  the  holy  Name
of  God ;  [74]  and  he  never  undertook  any  rapid,  or
any  dangerous  effort,  without  offering  up  a  prayer
and  being  armed  with  the  sign  of  the  holy  Cross.
He  said  sometimes  to  the  Father,  that  if  he  returned
to  his  own  country  without  being  baptized,  he  would
dread  meeting  his  wife.  "  She  will  not  fail,"  said
he,  "  to  cast  at  me  this  reproach:  '  It  is  easily  seen
that  there  is  something  lacking  in  thy  faith ;  if  the
Fathers  with  whom  thou  hast  been  a  great  while,
during  so  long  a  journey,  had  judged  thee  worthy  of
baptism,  they  would  not  have  refused  it  to  thee,
Perhaps  the  love  of  some  other  woman  has  hindered
thee  from  pursuing  so  great  a  good.'  This,"  said  he,
"  is  the  first  salutation  that  I  expect  from  my  wife
on  arriving  at  home."  Monsieur  the  Governor  see-
ing a  soul  so  well  disposed,  said  for  this  good  Neo-
phyte what  the  Eunuch  of  Queen  Candace  said  to
saint  Philip :  Ecce  aqua:  quid  proliibet  eum  baptisari?
' '  There  is  sufficient  water  in  the  country,  what  then
should  hinder  his  baptism  since  he  believes  with  all
his  heart  in  Jesus  Christ?'  The  Fathers  readily
acquiesced ;  Monsieur  the  Governor  wished  to  be  his
Godfather,  and  the  [75]  day  was  fixed  for  the  twen-


218  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.20

on  en  porte  la  nouuelle  a.  ce  bon  Catechumene,  on
luy  dit  que  le  grand  Capitaine  des  Francois  a  inter-
ced6  pour  fon  baptefme,  il  eft  tout  raui,  la  ioye
poflede  fon  coeur  tout  entier,  la  ceremonie  fe  paJIa
en  1' Eglife  de  faindt  Iofeph,  ou  fe  retirent  les  Sau-
uages,  il  y  en  auoit  pour  lors  vn  bon  nombre,  chacun
accourt  pour  voir  vn  Sauuage  de  trois  cens  lieues,  fe
venir  prefenter  au  baptefme  en  vne  Eglife  de  nou-
ueaux  Chreftiens :  Ces  bons  Neophytes  prennent  vn
fouuerain  plaifir  a  ce  doux  fpedtacle,  &  pour  marque
de  leur  ioye  ils  font  retentir  1'air  de  leurs  Cantiques
Spirituels:  de  forte  que  ce  bon  Catechumene  s'efcria:
Si  vous  chanties  ces  Airs  en  mon  pais,  vous  enleue-
ries  tous  les  cceurs  de  mes  Compatriotes.  Enfin  le
Reuerend  Pere  Vimont  commence  les  faindtes  cere-
monies, &  le  Pere  de  Brebeuf  l'interroge  fur  fa  cre-
ance,  &  fur  fes  volontes:  comme  il  eft  homme  de
iugement,  il  ne  fe  troubla  point,  il  repondit  pof€-
ment,  &  refolument  a  toutes  les  demandes,  proteftant
touthaut  qu'il  vouloit  viure  &  mourir  Chreftien,  dans
l'obferuance  des  volontes  [76]  &  des  Commandemens
de  Dieu,  &  de  fon  Eglife,  Monfieur  de  Montmagny
le  nomme  Charles,  luy  faifant  porter  fon  nom  il  fe
nommoit  en  fa  langue  Sondatfaa,  du  Bourg  d'Ofo-
fane,  fi  toft  que  les  eaux  faeries  eurent  touche"  fon
corps,  &  purifi6  fon  ame,  fon  parrain  le  careffe,  &
luy  dit :  le  me  refiouis  de  vous  voir  maintenant  au
nombre  des  enfans  de  Dieu;  puis  que  vous  eftes
anranchy  des  liens  des  Demons,  combattes  genereufe-
ment,  ten6s  la  parole  que  vous  aues  donn6e  a  Dieu,
le  Baptefme  vous  a  donne  des  armes  &  des  forces
contre  vos  ennemis  inuifibles,  ferues-vous-en  cou-
rageufement;  Et  pour  ce  que  les  peuples  qui  vous


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  219

ty-sixth  of  June.  The  news  was  carried  to  this  good
Catechumen,  and  he  was  told  that  the  great  Captain
of  the  French  had  interceded  for  his  baptism ;  he
was  enraptured, —  joy  wholly  possessed  his  heart.
The  ceremony  took  place  in  the  Church  of  saint
Joseph,  to  which  the  Savages  go;  there  was,  at  the
time,  a  goodly  number  of  them.  Each  one  ran  in
haste,  to  see  a  Savage  from  three  hundred  leagues
away  come  to  offer  himself  for  baptism  in  a  Church
of  the  new  Christians.  These  good  Neophytes  took
supreme  delight  in  this  pleasing  spectacle,  and  as  a
mark  of  their  joy  they  made  the  air  resound  with
their  Spiritual  Songs, —  so  that  this  good  Catechumen
exclaimed:  "  If  you  should  sing  these  Airs  in  my
country,  you  would  captivate  the  hearts  of  all
my  Countrymen."  At  length,  Reverend  Father
Vimont  began  the  holy  ceremonies,  and  Father  de
Brebeuf  questioned  him  upon  his  belief  and  upon  his
desires;  as  he  is  a  man  of  judgment,  he  was  not  con-
fused, but  responded  sedately  and  firmly  to  all  ques-
tions, avowing  distinctly  that  he  wished  to  live  and
die  a  Christian,  in  the  observance  of  the  will  [76]
and  of  the  Commandments  of  God  and  of  his  Church.
Monsieur  de  Montmagny  named  him  Charles,  mak-
ing him  bear  his  own  name;  he  was  called  in  his
own  language  Sondatsaa,  of  the  Village  Ososane.  As
soon  as  the  sacred  waters  had  touched  his  body,  and
purified  his  soul,  his  godfather  caressed  him,  and
said  to  him:  "  I  rejoice  to  see  you  now  in  the  num-
ber of  God's  children;  inasmuch  as  you  are  freed
from  the  bonds  of  the  Demons,  fight  valiantly,  and
keep  the  word  that  you  have  given  to  God.  Baptism
has  given  you  arms  and  strength  against  your  unseen
enemies, —  use them courageously; and since  the


220  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

font  la  guerre  defirent  de  vous  detruire,  ie  vous  veux
armer  contre  eux:  la-deffus  il  luy  fait  prefent  d'vne
belle  arquebufe,  qui  eftonna  ce  bon  Neophyte,  car
ces  armes  leur  font  toutes  nouuelles:  A116s,  luy  dit-
il,  exhorted  vos  Compatriotes  a  embraffer  la  foy  que
vous  aues  receue,  &  les  affures  de  ma  part,  que  ie  les
protegeray,  s'ils  fe  rangent  au  giron  de  l'Eglife:  Ce
difcours  finy,  le  Capitaine  de  nos  Chreftiens  de  Saindt
Iofeph  fe  leue,  &  [77]  apoftrophant  ce  nouueau  Chre-
ftien,  luy  dit.

Mon  frere,  tousles  Sauuages  que  tu  vois  icy  a  l'en-
tour  de  toy  font  Chreftiens,  nous  auons  tous  quitte
nos  vieilles  couftumes,  nous  auons  jette  bas  les  fot-
tifes  &  les  fuperftitions  de  noftre  Nation,  tu  ne  fcau-
rois  conceuoir  la  ioye  de  nos  cceurs,  voyans  que  tu
embraffes  noftre  creance,  &  que  tu  as  choifi  cette  pe-
tite Eglife  pour  y  eftre  fait  noftre  frere:  oiiy,  tu  l'es
maintenant,  nous  n'auons  plus  qu'vn  Pere,  qui  eft
Dieu,  &  qu'vne  Mere  commune,  qui  eft  l'Eglife;  voi-
cy  done  tes  freres  qui  te  declarent,  que  tes  amis  font
leurs  amis,  &  que  tes  ennemis  font  leurs  ennemis;
&  pource  que  noftre  Capitaine  t'a  fait  prefent  d'vne
arme  a  feu,  tes  freres  te  prefentent  par  mes  mains  de
la  poudre  pour  t'en  feruir  dans  les  befoins,  en  ton
retour.

A  ces  harangues  le  bon  Charles  Sondatfaa  refpon-
dit:  Onontio  grandc  Montague,  (e'eft  ainfi  que  les
Hurons  &  les  Hiroquois  nomment  Monfieur  noftre
Gouuerneur,  a  caufe  qu'il  s'appelle  de  Montmagny)
le  nom  que  vous  m'aues  donn6  eft  vn  riche  prefent,
e'eft  vne  obligation  [78]  quim'eft  particuliere,  de  la-
quelle  ie  me  reffentiray  toute  ma  vie,  ce  canon  que
vous  au6s  adjoufte\  fera  vn  grand  bruit  dedans  noftre


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640 -4 1  221

people  that  make  war  upon  you  desire  to  destroy  you,
I  will  arm  you  against  them."  Thereupon  he  pre-
sented him  with  a  handsome  arquebus,  which  aston-
ished this  good  Neophyte,  for  these  arms  are  wholly
new  to  them.  "  Go,"  said  he  to  him,  "  exhort  your
Countrymen  to  embrace  the  faith  which  you  have
received;  and  assure  them,  for  me,  that  I  will  pro-
tect them  if  they  put  themselves  within  the  pale  of
the  Church."  This  speech  being  finished,  the  Cap-
tain of  our  Christians  of  Saint  Joseph  stood  up,  and,
\_J7~]  addressing  this  new  Christian,  said  to  him:

"  My  brother,  all  the  Savages  whom  thou  seest
around  thee  here  are  Christians ;  we  have  all  forsak-
en our  old  customs,  we  have  thrown  off  the  follies
and  the  superstitions  of  our  Nation.  Thou  canst  not
imagine  the  joy  of  our  hearts  in  seeing  that  thou  hast
adopted  our  belief,  and  hast  chosen  this  little  Church
in  which  to  be  made  our  brother.  Yes,  thou  art  so
now,  —  we  have  henceforth  but  one  Father,  who  is
God,  and  but  one  common  Mother,  which  is  the
Church;  behold,  then,  thy  brothers  who  declare  to
thee,  that  thy  friends  are  their  friends,  and  that  thy
enemies  are  their  enemies.  And,  since  our  Captain
has  made  thee  the  gift  of  a  firearm,  thy  brothers
present  thee  by  my  hands  with  powder,  that  thou
mayst  use  it  in  thy  needs,  on  thy  return."

To  these  harangues  the  good  Charles  Sondatsaa
responded :  ' '  Onontio,  great  Mountain  ' '  (it  is  thus
that  the  Hurons  and  the  Hiroquois  call  Monsieur  our
Governor,  because  his  name  is  de  Montmagny),  "  the
name  you  have  given  me  is  a  rich  present, —  it  is  an
obligation  [78]  that  is  peculiar  to  me,  and  which  I
shall  feel  all  my  life.  This  gun  which  you  have
added  will  make  a  great  talk  in  our  country, — it  will


222  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  20

pais,  il  fera  voir  l'eftime  que  vous  faites  des  croyans;
cet  affaire  eft  important,  voftre  an  thorite  en  touchera
plufieurs,  &  voftre  prefent  ne  fera  iamais  mis  en  ou-
bly :  Pnis  fe  tournant  vers  les  Sauuages ;  Mes  freres,
fi  voftre  coenr  a  de  la  ioye  me  voyant  fait  enfant  de
Dien,  le  mien  en  doit  reffentir  dauantage,  vous  voy-
ant tous  dans  la  pofleffion  de  ce  bon-heur ;  vous  m'a-
ues  deuance'  &  ie  vous  veux  fuiure  &  imiter:  fi  vous
defires  d'aller  au  ciel,  i'ay  les  mefmes  volontes;  fi
vous  faites  profeffion  de  garder  les  Commandemens
de  Dieu,  c'eft  ce  qu'auiourd'huy  i'ay  publiquement
promis  &  protefte,  i'efpere  que  iamais  ie  ne  me  de-
mentiray  de  ma  parole:  Nous  n'auons  rien  de  fi
precieux  que  nos  colliers  de  porcelaine,  fi  i'en  voyois
briller  vne  vingtaine  deuant  mes  yeux  pour  m'allecher
au  peche,  ie  detournerois  ma  veue,  &  mon  cceur
auroit  du  degouft  de  ce  qu'il  a  tant  aime.  Nous
faifons  eftat  dans  nos  Bourgades  de  quelques  habits,
&  de  quelques  robes  qui  font  en  eftime  parmy  [79]
nous ;  fi  ce  que  nous  appellons  beaute  me  prefentoit
vne  de  ces  robes  pour  me  corrompre,  ie  luy  dirois:
Si  le  Dieu  que  i'adore  veut  que  ie  me  ferue  de  ces
habits,  il  m'en  fera  trouuer  par  d'autres  voyes,  le
pech6  eft  banny  de  mon  cceur,  il  n'y  doit  iamais  ren-
trer;  &  fi  par  les  mefmes  attraits  on  m'ofrroit  vn  ba-
ril  de  poudre,  &  des  armes  toutes  de  feu  pour  deftruire
nos  ennemis,  ie  refpondrois ;  celuy  qui  a  purifie  mon
ame  ne  veut  pas  que  ie  la  falliffe  de  rechef ,  il  a  bien
d'autres  moyens  de  me  proteger,  i'aymerois  mieux
perdre  la  vie  que  de  l'offenfer;  Voila,  mes  freres,  les
refolutions  que  ie  prens  dans  mon  baptefme,  au  refte
ma  famille  eft  defia  toute  baptifee,  mes  enfans  &  mes
neueux font Chreftiens,  il ne refte plus que ma


1640  -  41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  223

show  the  regard  that  you  have  for  believers ;  this  affair
is  important,  your  power  will  touch  many,  and  your
present  will  never  be  forgotten."  Then  turning
around  to  the  Savages :  ' '  My  brothers,  if  your  heart
has  joy  in  seeing  me  made  a  child  of  God,  mine  ought
to  have  more,  seeing  you  all  in  possession  of  this
happiness.  You  have  preceded  me,  I  wish  to  follow
and  imitate  you;  if  you  desire  to  go  to  heaven,  I
have  the  same  desire ;  if  you  make  profession  of  keep-
ing the  Commandments  of  God,  that  is  what  I  have
to-day  publicly  promised  and  vowed ;  I  hope  I  shall
never  belie  my  word.  We  have  nothing  so  precious
as  our  porcelain  collars ;  if  I  were  to  see  a  score  of
them  glittering  before  me,  to  entice  me  into  sin,  I
would  turn  away  my  eyes,  and  my  heart  would  have
loathing  for  that  in  which  it  has  so  much  delighted.
In  our  Villages,  we  value  highly  certain  garments
and  certain  robes,  which  are  in  favor  among  [79]  us ;
if  what  we  call  beauty  should  present  me  with  one
of  these  robes,  to  corrupt  me,  I  would  say  to  her :  '  If
the  God  whom  I  adore  wishes  me  to  use  these  gar-
ments, he  will  cause  me  to  find  them  by  other  ways:
sin  is  banished  from  my  heart,  it  must  never  reenter
there. '  And  if  with  the  same  allurements  one  offered
me  a  barrel  of  powder,  and  plenty  of  firearms,  to
destroy  our  enemies,  I  would  reply:  '  He  who  has
purified  my  soul  does  not  wish  that  I  should  sully  it
anew ;  he  has  surely  other  ways  of  protecting  me ;  I
would  prefer  losing  life  to  offending  him.'  These,
my  brothers,  are  the  resolutions  that  I  take  in  my
baptism.  Moreover,  my  whole  family  is  already
baptized,  my  children  and  my  nephews  are  Chris-
tians,—  there  remains  but  my  wife.  Not  only  will
she  follow  my  example,  but,  as  I  am  of  some  impor-


224  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

femme,  laquelle  non  feulement  fuiura  mon  exemple,
mais  comme  ie  fuis  en  quelque  cofideration  dans  mon
pais,  i'efpere  que  d'autres  encor  prendront  enuie  de
m'imiter,  notamment  qnand  ie  leur  auray  fait  le  recit
de  l'honneur  que  le  grand  Capitaine  des  Francois
fait  aux  Croyans,  &  que  ie  leur  parleray  de  la  con-
uerfion  des  peuples  qui  nous  font  femblables.

[80]  Apres  ces  harangues  on  fait  feftin,  chacun  pre-
nant  part  a  cette  ioye,  beniffoit  Dieu,  de  voir  de  fes
yeux  des  changemens  fi  eftranges ;  que  Ton  en  die  ce
qu'on  voudra,  mais  ie  croy  que  quelques  Sauuages
s'enoncent  mieux  en  leur  langue,  que  ie  ne  fais  en  la
noftre,  &  leurs  fentimens  de  Dieu,  font  par  fois  fi
tendres  que  le  cceur  les  goufte  mieux,  que  le  papier
ne  les  exprime,  le  mal  eft  qu'il  n'y  a  que  ceux  qui
les  entendent,  qui  connoiffent  plus  particulierement
ces  merueilles  du  grand  Dieu.

Quelque  temps  apres  ce  bon  Neophyte  parlant
familierement  au  Pere  de  Brebeuf,  luy  difoit:  Si  ma
femme  retarde  tant  foit  peu  fon  baptefme,  ie  luy
feray  le  mefme  reproche  que  i'attendois  d'elle,  ie  la
piqueray  iufques  au  vif,  i'aduoue  qu'elle  eft  plus
fage,  &  plus  iufte  que  moy,  il  y  a  long-temps  que  i'ay
des  preuues  de  la  fidelite  qu'elle  m'a  gardee:  mais
comme  ie  la  defire  voir  au  plutoft  dans  le  bon-heur
d'ont  i'ay  fait  rencontre;  Si  elle  ne  preffe  fon
baptefme,  ie  luy  diray  que  la  veue  des  ieunes  homes
l'aueugle,  &  l'empefche  de  voir  la  beaute  de  la  loy
de  Dieu:  [81]  ie  ne  croy  pas  que  i'en  vienne  la,  car
elle  eft  plus  portee  au  bien  que  moy.

A  peine  eftoit-il  baptife  qu'il  fe  mit  dans  l'exercice
du  Chriftianifme,  &  dans  la  frequentation  des  Sacre-
mens,  il  fe  confeffa  trois  fois  deuant  que  de  remonter


1640  -  41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  225

tance  in  my  own  country,  I  hope  that  others  also
will  be  seized  with  the  desire  of  imitating  me, —
especially  when  I  shall  have  related  to  them  the
honor  that  the  great  Captain  of  the  French  pays  to
Believers,  and  when  I  shall  tell  them  of  the  conver-
sion of  peoples  who  are  like  us."

[80]  After  these  harangues  they  made  a  feast ;  each
one  taking  part  in  this  joy  blessed  God  for  seeing
with  his  own  eyes  transformations  so  strange.  The
world  may  say  what  it  will  of  them,  but  I  believe
that  some  Savages  express  themselves  better  in  their
own  language  than  I  do  in  ours ;  and  their  thoughts
of  God  are  sometimes  so  tender  that  the  heart  enjoys
them  more  than  pen  can  express.  The  thing  to  be
regretted  is,  that  it  is  only  those  who  hear  them,
who  know  most  fully  these  wonders  of  the  great
God.

Some  time  after,  this  good  Neophyte,  speaking
familiarly  to  Father  de  Brebeuf,  said  to  him:  "  If
my  wife  put  off,  ever  so  little,  her  baptism,  I  shall
cast  at  her  the  same  reproach  that  I  expected  from
her ;  I  shall  sting  her  even  to  the  quick.  I  confess
that  she  is  wiser  and  more  correct  than  I ;  long  ago
I  had  proofs  of  her  fidelity  to  me ;  but  since  I  desire
to  see  her  as  soon  as  possible  in  the  happiness  which
I  have  encountered,  if  she  do  not  urge  her  bap-
tism, I  shall  say  to  her  that  the  sight  of  the  young
men  blinds  her,  and  hinders  her  from  seeing  the
beauty  of  the  law  of  God;  [81]  I  do  not  believe  that
I  shall  come  to  that,  for  she  is  more  inclined  to  the
right  than  I."

Hardly  was  he  baptized  when  he  began  the  prac-
tice of  Christian  living,  and  the  frequent  receiving  of
the Sacraments; he confessed three times before


226  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

en  fon  pais.  Ayant  fait  vn  tour  aux  trois  Riuieres,
comme  i'eftois  fur  le  point  de  mettre  le  pied  dans  le
canot,  pour  defcendre  a  Saindt  Iofeph,  ce  bon  Neo-
phyte s'adreffa  au  Pere  de  Brebeuf,  &  le  pria  de  me
dire  ce  qui  fuit,  ie  prie  le  Pere  de  dire  a  Onontio
grand  Capitaine  des  Francois,  que  ie  n'ay  point  de
paroles  pour  le  remercier,  mais  que  i'en  trouueray
pour  publier  dans  mon  pais,  les  riches  obligations
que  ie  luy  ay,  il  eft  vray  que  l'honneur  qu'il  m'a  fait,
&  fes  riches  prefents  me  touchent  au  coeur,  mais  tout
cela  n'approche  de  la  ioye,  &  du  contentement  que  ie
reffens  d'eflre  Chreftien,  il  m'a  recommande  de  pu-
blier cette  faueur,  ie  ne  la  fcaurois  taire,  ie  reporte
ma  langue  toute  entiere,  voire  elle  eft  accreiie  de
beaucoup  en  ce  voyage,  ie  l'employeray  toute,  &  en
tous  lieux,  a  publier  les  Veritas  de  noftre  creance.
Ce  difcours  m'attendrit,  [82]  ie  l'embraffay  la-deffus,
&  m'embarquay  auec  vn  Nocher  Chreftien,  &  vn
autre  Catechumene,  bien  edifies  de  la  foy  de  ce  bon
Neophyte.  II  adjoufta  au  Pere,  qu'il  eftoit  bien  mar-
ry, de  ce  qu'il  ne  pouuoit  reconnoiftre  par  quelque
prefent  reciproque,  les  faueurs  de  Monfieur  le  Gou-
uerneur,  l'amitie  des  Francois,  &  la  charite  des
Sauuages  Chreftiens :  mais  le  Pere  luy  ayant  reparty,
que  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur  n'attendoit  autre  chofe
de  luy  qu'vne  conflance  en  la  foy,  &  vne  fidele  obe-
iffance  aux  Commandemens  de  Dieu:  I'efpere,  repli-
qua-t'il,  que  ie  luy  donneray  toute  fatisfadtion  en  ce
point;  car  il  me  femble,  felon  la  difpofition  de  mon
coeur,  que  rien  ne  me  peut  efbranler:  neantmoins,
comme  ie  fuis  fragile,  fi  ie  venois  a  chopper,  le  fou-
uenir  de  la  proteftation  publique  &  folennelle  que
i'ay  faite  a  mon  baptefme,  de  vouloir  viure  &  mourir


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640  -41  227

going  up  to  his  own  country.  Having  made  a  trip
to  the  three  Rivers,  just  as  I  was  setting  foot  in  the
canoe,  to  go  down  to  Saint  Joseph,  this  good  Neo-
phyte spoke  to  Father  de  Brebeuf  and  begged  him
to  tell  me  this  which  follows :  "  I  pray  the  Father  to
tell  Onontio,  the  great  Captain  of  the  French,  that  I
have  no  words  to  thank  him,  but  that  I  shall  find
some  to  declare  in  my  own  country  the  great  obliga-
tions under  which  I  am  to  him.  It  is  true  that  the
honor  he  has  done  me,  and  his  valuable  presents,
touch  my  heart ;  but  all  that  does  not  approach  the
joy  and  contentment  which  I  experience  in  being  a
Christian ;  he  has  charged  me  to  make  known  this
favor,  and  I  would  not  know  how  to  be  silent.  I
take  back  my  own  language  all  entire,  it  has  even
improved  much  in  this  journey,  I  shall  use  it  all,  and
in  all  places,  to  publish  the  truths  of  our  belief. "
These  words  touched  me,  [82]  whereupon  I  embraced
him,  and  set  out  with  a  Christian  Pilot  and  another
Catechumen ;  we  were  much  edified  by  the  faith  of
this  good  Neophyte.  He  added  to  the  Father,  that
he  was  truly  grieved  at  not  being  able  to  acknowledge,
by  some  present  in  return,  the  favors  of  Monsieur  the
Governor,  the  amity  of  the  French,  and  the  love  of  the
Christian  Savages.  But  the  Father  having  replied
to  him  that  Monsieur  the  Governor  expected  from
him  nothing  but  constancy  in  the  faith  and  steadfast
obedience  to  the  Commandments  of  God,  "  I  hope,"
responded  he,  "  that  I  shall  give  him  complete  satis-
faction on  this  point ;  for  it  seems  to  me,  from  the
state  of  my  heart,  that  nothing  can  shake  me.  Nev-
ertheless, as  I  am  frail,  if  I  should  happen  to  stumble,
the  remembrance  of  the  public  and  solemn  profes-
sion which  I  made  at  my  baptism,  of  wishing  to  live


228  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

dans  l'obferuance  des  Commandemens  de  Dieu,  me
rappelleroit  a  mon  deuoir ;  &  vous  mon  Pere,  faif oit
ce  bon  Neophyte,  fi  iamais  vous  me  voyes  chanceler
tant  foit  pen,  remettes  moy  en  memoire  cette  promeffe
faite  a  Dieu,  &  vous  [83]  me  verres  bien-tofl  dans
mes  premieres  refolutions,  comme  i'efpere.

II  difoit  que  trois  chofes  l'auoient  fortement  tou-
ch.6  a  Kebec:  Premierement,  la  prompte  obei'ffance,
&  le  grand  refpect  qu'on  rendoit  a  Monfieur  noftre
Gouuerneur:  Cet  eclat  &  cette  bonte  n'eft  point  ches
les  Sauuages;  les  Capitaines  ont  beau  commander,
les  Sujets  n'en  font  pas  plus  obeiffans,  s'ils  ne
veulent.

Secondement,  la  piete  &  la  charite"  des  Religieufes
le  rauiffoit;  en  effet  c'eft.  l'vn  des  puiffans  motifs  que
nous  ayons,  pour  faire  paroiitre  l'eftime  que  nous  fai-
fons  de  Dieu,  &  des  actions  qui  luy  font  agreables,
de  monftrer  comme  de  ieunes  Filles,  tendres  &  deli-
cates,  ont  quitte  leurs  parens  &  leurs  amis,  &  leur
patrie  fi  douce  &  fi  agreable,  pour  venir  en  vn  pais
pauure  &  fafcheux,  fous  l'efpoir  d'vne  vie  eternelle,
&  pour  agreer  a  celuy  qui  la  leur  doit  donner;  cela
leur  fait  croire  qu'en  effet  cette  autre  vie  doit  eftre,
puis  que  fans  attendre  autre  recompenfe,  ces  bonnes
Filles  cheriffent,  medicamentent,  &  nourriffent  leurs
malades,  auec  vne  nettete  &  vne  charite  admirable,
inftruifent  leurs  [84]  enfans  auec  des  affections  de
vrayes  Meres.  Les  Sauuages  nous  demandent  affes
fouuent,  fi  ces  filles  de  Capitaines,  car  c'eft  ainfi  que
par  fois  ils  les  appellent,  ont  encor  leurs  peres  &
leurs  meres;  &  quand  on  leur  en  monftre  quelques-
vnes  dont  les  parens  font  encor  viuans,  ils  s'efton-
nent  comment  elles  ont  pu  prendre  la  refolution  de


1640  -  41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  229


and  die  in  the  observance  of  the  Commandments  of
God,  will  recall  me  to  my  duty;  and  you,  my
Father,"  said  this  good  Neophyte,  "  if  you  ever  see
me  wavering  in  the  least,  put  me  in  mind  of  this
promise  made  to  God,  and  you  [83]  as  I  hope,  shall
soon  see  me  with  my  former  firmness."

He  said  that  three  things  had  deeply  affected  him
at  Kebec,  first,  the  prompt  obedience  and  the  great
respect  that  was  paid  to  Monsieur  our  Governor.
This  splendor  and  this  attention  do  not  exist  among
the  Savages;  it  is  in  vain  that  the  Captains  com-
mand,—  the  Subjects  are  not  for  that  more  obedient,
unless  they  choose  to  be.

Secondly,  the  piety  and  the  charity  of  the  Nuns
charmed  him.  In  fact,  one  of  the  most  powerful
motives  we  have,  in  manifesting  our  esteem  for  God
and  for  the  acts  which  are  pleasing  to  him,  is  to  show
how  young  Maidens,  tender  and  delicate,  have  for-
saken their  parents,  and  their  friends,  and  their  coun-
try so  mild  and  pleasant,  to  come  into  a  barren  and
rugged  land,  through  the  hope  of  an  eternal  life,
and  in  order  to  please  him  who  is  to  give  it  to  them.
This  makes  them  believe  that  the  other  life  must  really
exist;  since,  without  expecting  any  other  recom-
pense, these  good  Sisters  nurse  their  sick,  give  them
remedies  and  food,  with  wonderful  neatness  and
love,  and  instruct  their  [84]  children  with  the  affec-
tion of  true  Mothers.  The  Savages  not  unfrequently
ask  us,  if  these  daughters  of  Captains, — for  it  is  thus
they  sometimes  call  them, — have  still  their  fathers
and  mothers ;  and,  when  some  of  them  are  pointed
out  whose  parents  are  yet  living,  they  marvel  how
these  could  have  resolved  upon  leaving  them.  There-
upon they  are  made  to  see  that  Grace  has  more  power


230  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

les  quitter:  La-deffus  on  leur  fait  voir  que  la  Grace  a
plus  de  force  que  la  Nature;  &  que  les  feux  d'vn
cceur  qui  aime  Dieu,  font  plus  ardens  que  leurs
grandes  glaces,  &  leurs  profondes  neiges,  n'ont  de
froideur.

La  troifieme  chofe,  qui  a  grandement  edifie"  ce
bon  Neophyte  &  fes  Compatriotes,  c'eft  la  deuotion
&  la  charite  des  nouueaux  Chreftiens,  les  Sauuages
ne  s'eftonnent  pas  tant  de  voir  des  Francois  portes  au
bien,  &  croire  fortemet  en  Dieu,  ils  penfent  que  cela
nous  eft  acquis  des  noftre  naiff ance :  mais  de  voir  des
Sauuages  qui  leur  font  femblables,  accouftumes  a
leurs  fuperftitions,  plong6s  dans  les  vices  de  leur
Natio,  fortir  du  Baptefme  tous  purs  &  tous  nets,  em-
braffer  la  foy  &  la  publier  fans  crainte,  detefter  ce
qu'ils  ont  aime,  &  fouler  [85]  aux  pieds  ce  que  les
autres  adoret;  c'eft  ce  qui  les  eftonne,  &  qui  leur  fait
dire:  Si  ceux-la  qui  nous  reffemblent,  fe  paffent
d'vne  feule  femme,  s'ils  font  fermes  &  conftans  dans
leurs  manages,  s'ils  aiment  ceux  mefme  qui  ne  font
pas  de  leur  Nation ;  s'ils  prient  Dieu,  &  fi  les  prieres
ne  leur  font  point  de  mal,  pourquoy  ne  les  imiterons
nous  pas:  En  effet,  i'ay  remarque  qu'vn  bon  Sau-
uage  Chreftien,  &  zele  pour  la  foy,  fait  plus  parmy
fes  gens  que  trois  Iefuites.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  231

than  Nature,  and  that  the  fires  of  a  heart  which  loves
God  are  more  ardent  than  their  great  fields  of  ice
and  their  deep  snows  are  frigid.

The  third  thing  which  extremely  edified  this  good
Neophyte  and  his  Countrymen  was  the  devotion  and
the  love  of  these  new  Christians.  The  Savages  are
not  so  much  astonished  to  see  the  French  inclined  to
virtue  and  to  believe  firmly  in  God, — they  think
that  is  secured  to  us  even  at  our  birth.  But  to  see
Savages  who  are  like  themselves, — accustomed  to
their  own  superstitions,  and  plunged  into  the  vices
of  their  own  Nation, — come  forth  from  Baptism
every  one  pure  and  clean ;  embrace  the  faith,  and
publish  it  without  fear ;  detest  that  which  they  have
loved,  and  trample  [85]  under  foot  that  which  others
adore,  —  that  is  what  amazes  them,  and  makes  them
say:  "  If  those  who  are  like  us  are  content  with  one
wife  only,  if  they  are  firm  and  constant  in  their  mar-
riages, if  they  love  those  even  who  are  not  of  their
own  Nation,  if  they  pray  to  God,  and  if  prayers  do
them  no  harm,  why  should  we  not  imitate  them?"
Indeed,  I  have  observed  that  one  truly  Christian
Savage,  who  is  zealous  for  the  faith,  accomplishes
more  among  his  people  than  do  three  Jesuits.


232  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20


CHAPITRE  VI.

DE L*  HOSPITAL.

I? AY  creu  que  ce  chapitre  deuoit  eftre  place"  en
fuitte  de  ce  que  nous  auons  dit  de  la  Refidence
de  S.  Iofeph,  non  feulement  pour  ce  que  cette
Maifon  eft  baftie  aupres  des  Sauuages,  mais  auffi  pour
autant  que  la  charite  de  ces  bonnes  Filles  coopere
puiffammet  a  l'arrefh  de  ceux  qui  fe  retirent  en  cette
Bourgade  encommancee.  [86]  C'eft  chofe  eftrange,
comme  ces  peuples  font  froids,  &  comme  ils  paroillent
exempts  des  admirations  qui  nous  eftonnent,  ils  ne
le  font  pas  neantmoins,  leur  cceur  eft  touche  auffi
bien  que  le  noftre,  mais  ilne  fe  produit  pas  tant:  Fay-
par  fois  ouy  des  Sauuages  tenir  ce  langage;  NiKanis
nous  nous  eftonnons  comme  ces  bonnes  Filles  ft  deli-
cates  ont  quitte"  vn  fi  bon  pais  comme  tu  nous  le
depeins,  comme  elles  ont  abandonn6  leurs  parens
pour  venir  demeurer  aupres  de  nous,  &  ce  qui  eft  plus
admirable,  elles  nous  donnent  a  manger,  &  nous
penfent  dans  nos  maladies,  CheKher,  c'eft  a  dire  fans
attente  d'aucune  recompenfe.

Noftre  Seigneur  qui  a  donne  les  penfees  a  Madame
la  Duchefle  d'Aiguillon,  de  fonder  vne  Maifon  de
Mifericorde  en  ce  bout  du  Monde,  luy  auoit  auffi
infpire"  le  lieu  ou  elle  deuoit  eftre  baftie :  or  comme
elle  s'eftoit  prudemment  r'apportee  de  c6t  affaire,  a
ceux  qui  font  fur  le  pais :  Ils  prirent  au  commence-
ment des  penfees  contraires  a  fes  inclinations,  mais
apres auoir confidere" meurement l'affaire deuant


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  233


CHAPTER  VI.

OF THE HOSPITAL.

I  HAVE  thought  that  this  chapter  ought  to  be  put
next  to  what  we  have  said  concerning  the  Resi-
dence of  St.  Joseph,  not  only  because  this  House
is  built  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Savages,  but  also
because  the  charity  of  these  good  Sisters  cooperates
powerfully  with  the  settling  down  of  those  who  with-
draw to  this  newly-begun  Village.  [86]  It  is  a
strange  thing  how  cold  these  people  are,  and  how
exempt  they  appear  from  marveling  at  those  things
which  astonish  us;  however  they  are  not  so,  their
heart  is  touched  as  well  as  ours,  but  does  not  betray
itself  so  much.  I  have  sometimes  heard  Savages  use
this  language:  "  Nikanis,  we  are  amazed  that  these
good  Sisters,  so  delicate,  have  left  so  goodly  a  coun-
try as  you  have  described  to  us ;  that  they  have  aban-
doned their  parents  to  come  and  dwell  among  us;
and,  what  is  more  wonderful,  that  they  give  us  food,
and  take  care  of  us  in  our  sickness,  Chekher, ' '  that
is  to  say,  without  expectation  of  any  recompense.

Our  Lord,  who  has  given  to  Madame  the  Duchess
d'Aiguillon  the  thought  of  founding  a  House  of  Mer-
cy at  this  end  of  the  World,  also  suggested  to  her  the
place  where  it  ought  to  be  built.  Now,  as  she  had
wisely  referred  the  matter  to  those  who  were  in  the
country,  they,  in  the  beginning,  conceived  thoughts
contrary  to  her  inclinations ;  but,  after  having  care-
fully considered  the  affair  before  God,  they  judged


234  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.  20

Dieu;  ils  iugerent  que  les  raifons,  [87]  que  ces  bonnes
Filles  alleguoient,  pour  auoir  quelque  demeure  au-
pres  des  Sauuages,  l'emportoient  par  deffus  ces  pen-
fees  contraires.  En  effet,  ft  elles  euffent  efte  eloi-
gnees  des  Sauuages,  ces  pauures  gens  ne  fe  fuffent
iamais  fait  porter  a  l'Hofpital,  qu'a  l'extremite  de
leur  vie ;  &  ainfi  les  Barbares  auroient  appelle  cette
Maifon,  la  Maifon  de  mort,  &  non  la  Maifon  de  fan-
te\  ou  de  Mifericorde,  comme  quelques-vns  l'appel-
lent.  Cette  grande  Dame  6criuant  fur  ce  fujet  parle
en  ces  termes :  I'ay  vne  ioye  bien  grande  de  ce  qu'on
a  refolu  que  la  Maifon  de  ces  bonnes  Filles  s'eftabli-
roit  a  Saindt  Iofeph,  fans  doute  le  fruidt  en  fera  plus
grand:  car  il  me  femble  que  les  conuerfions  qui  fe
font  au  commencement  des  maladies,  font  plus  affeu-
r£es  que  celles  qui  arriuent  fi  proches  de  la  mort ;  &
fi  la  fatisfadtion  qu'en  auront  les  pauures  Sauuages,
contribuera  fans  doute  beaucoup  a  leur  falut,  cela  eft
tres- veritable.

Ces  bonnes  gens  furent  tellement  6pris,  quand  ils
fceurent  le  iour  que  les  Religieufes  deuoient  venir
en  leur  nouuelle  Maifon,  que  les  principaux  dentre
eux  [88]  monterent  incontinent  en  leurs  canots,  pour
les  aller  querir  eux-mefmes :  ils  prirent  noflre  Reue-
rend  Pere  Superieur,  &  quelques  autres  de  nos  Peres
dans  vn  de  leurs  petits  vaiffeaux,  &  ces  bonnes  Filles
dans  vn  autre,  &  les  rendirent  bien-toft  oil  eftoient
defia  leurs  fouhaits:  Si  toft  que  les  Sauuages  qui
eftoient  reft£s  a  S.  Iofeph  apperceurent  les  canots,  ils
accourent  au  deuant,  temoignent  des  ioyes  tres-fenfi-
bles,  emportent  en  vn  inftant  tout  leur  petit  bagage  ;
c'eftoit  a  qui  leur  rendroit  quelque  petit  feruice,  Dieu
fcait  quelles  eftoient  les  penfees  &  les  affedtions  de


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  235

that  the  reasons  [87]  which  these  good  Sisters  ad-
vanced for  having  some  dwelling  place  near  the  Sav-
ages, would  outweigh  those  contrary  opinions.  In
fact,  if  they  had  been  sent  away  from  the  Savages,
these  poor  people  might  never  have  had  themselves
carried  to  the  Hospital,  but  in  their  last  moments ;
and  thus,  the  Barbarians  would  have  called  this
House  "  the  House  of  death,"  and  not  "  the  House
of  health,"  or  "of  Mercy,"  as  some  call  it.  This
great  Lady,  writing  upon  this  subject,  speaks  in  these
words :  "  I  am  indeed  very  glad  because  they  have
decided  that  the  House  of  these  good  Sisters  shall
be  established  at  Saint  Joseph.  Without  doubt,  the
fruit  thereof  will  be  greater,  for  it  appears  to  me
that  conversions  which  take  place  in  the  beginning
of  sicknesses  are  more  assured  than  those  which  take
place  so  near  death ;  '  and  as  the  comfort  which  the
poor  Savages  have  therein  will  doubtless  contribute
much  to  their  recovery,  that  is  very  true.

These  good  people  were  so  overjoyed  when  they
knew  the  day  the  Nuns  were  to  come  into  their  new
House,  that  the  chief  men  among  them  [88]  leaped
forthwith  into  their  canoes,  to  go  themselves  and
bring  them.  They  took  our  Reverend  Father  Supe-
rior, and  some  of  our  other  Fathers,  in  one  of  their
little  boats,  and  these  good  Sisters  in  another,  and
soon  brought  them  to  the  place  where  their  desires
already  were.  As  soon  as  the  Savages  who  had
remained  at  St.  Joseph  perceived  the  canoes,  they
ran  to  meet  them,  expressed  the  most  lively  joy,  and
carried  away  in  an  instant  all  their  little  baggage ;
every  one  was  eager  to  render  them  some  slight  serv-
ice. God  knows  what  were  the  thoughts  and  feel-
ings of these  good  Mothers,  when they  saw  that


236  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

ces  bonnes  Meres,  voyans  que  des  Barbares,  dont  le
feul  nom  fait  peur,  &  le  regard  epouuante,  au  com-
mencement couroient  deuant  elles  auec  leurs  robes
faites  a  la  Saindt  lean  Baptifte,  pour  marque  de  leur
bien-veillance,  plus  remplis  d'affedtion  &  de  candeur
que  de  politeffe.

Elles  entrerent  en  cette  nouuelle  Maifon  le  pre-
mier de  Decembre  de  l'an  paffe;  fi  elles  n'euffent  efte
fortement  fecourues,  cette  Maifon,  dans  vn  fi  pauure
pais,  euft  traifne  bien  plus  long-temps,  elle  n'eft
pas  encor  acheuee;  qui  commence  a  baftir  [89]  n'eft
pas  fi  toft  au  bout ;  on  a  beau  faire  comme  cet  homme
qui  vouloit  baftir  vne  tour:  Sedens  computabat  fump-
tus  fiws.  On  a  beau  confer  fon  fonds  &  fes  reuenus,
on  fe  trouue  toufiours  court  en  ces  entreprifes,  notam-
ment  en  vn  pais  ou  tout  eft  cher  au  double  de  la
France,  ou  les  Ouuriers  qui  s'y  rencontrent  en  petit
nombre,  ne  fe  louent  pas  a  prix  d'argent,  mais  au
poids  d'or.

Ie  fcay  bon  gre  a  vne  Dame  de  merite  &  de  condi-
tion, dont  la  vertu  eft  bien  connue  par  fes  efTets,  d'a-
uoir  donne  la  premiere  aumofne  a  cet  Hofpital  apres
fa  fondation,  elle  fcait  bien  que  Madame  la  Ducheffe
d'Aiguillon  a  vn  grand  cceur;  mais  elle  n'ignore  pas
auffi  que  ce  cceur  aime  &  cherit  l'vne  &  1 'autre
France;  &  que  les  miferes  qui  frappent  fes  yeux
dans  vn  temps  fi  deplorable,  luy  font  auffi  fenfibles,
que  celles  qui  paffent  1' Ocean  pour  venir  iufques  a
fes  oreilles;  elle  a  tant  de  modeftie  &  d'humilite\-
difons  plutoft  de  charit6,  qu'elle  tient  a  faueur  que
les  ames  d'eflite  faffent  des  biens  iufques  au  bout  du
Monde.  Ie  me  fuis  trompe  en  mon  calcul,  ce  font
Meffieurs  de  la  Nouuelle  France  [90]  ce  qui  ont  les


1640  -  41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  237


Barbarians,  whose  very  name  causes  fear,  and  whose
gaze,  at  first,  appals,  were  running  to  meet  them, —
in  raiment  fashioned  like  that  of  Saint  John  the  Bap-
tist,—  as  a  sign  of  their  good  will,  more  replete  with
affection  and  sincerity  than  with  politeness.

They  entered  into  this  new  House  on  the  first  of
December,  last  year.  If  they  had  not  been  vigor-
ously assisted,  this  House,  in  so  destitute  a  country,
would  have  dragged  on  for  a  much  longer  time ;  it
is  not  yet  finished.  He  who  begins  to  build  [89]
does  not  so  soon  come  to  the  end.  It  is  useless  to  do
as  did  that  man  who  wished  to  build  a  tower :  Sedens
computabat  sumptus  suos;  it  is  useless  to  count  one's
principal  and  income ;  one  always  finds  himself  short
in  these  undertakings, —  especially  in  a  country  where
everything  is  twice  as  dear  as  in  France,  and  where
the  few  Workmen  who  are  to  be  found,  do  not  hire
themselves  for  a  price  in  silver,  but  for  loads  of  gold.

I  am  grateful  to  a  Lady  of  merit  and  rank,  whose
goodness  is  well  known  by  its  effects,  for  having
given  the  first  alms  to  this  Hospital  since  its  founda-
tion. She  knows  well  that  Madame  the  Duchess
d'Aiguilion  has  a  large  heart;  but  she  is  also  not
ignorant  that  this  heart  loves  and  cherishes  both  the
new  and  the  old  France ;  and  that  the  distress  which
in  so  deplorable  a  time  meets  her  eye,  is  as  grievous
to  her  as  that  which  crosses  the  Ocean  to  come  to  her
ear.  She  has  so  much  modesty  and  humility  —  rath-
er let  us  say  charity  —  that  she  considers  it  a  favor
that  the  elect  souls  should  accomplish  good  even  at
the  ends  of  the  World.  I  am  mistaken  in  my  reck-
oning, it  was  the  Gentlemen  of  New  France  [90]  who
first  cooperated  in  this  great  Work,  notwithstanding
the  slight  success  of  their  temporal  affairs.


238  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

premiers  coopere"  a  ce  grand  Ouurage,  nonobftant  le
peu  de  fucc£s  de  leurs  affaires  temporelles.

I'apprens  qu'ils  ont  encor  aumofne  cette  ann£e
quelques  toiles  pour  les  pauures  Sauuages  de  Saindt
Iofeph,  &.  pour  les  malades  de  l'Hofpital,  ie  prie
Dieu  qu'il  foit  leur  grande  recompenfe.  Vne  per-
fonne  de  vertu  leur  a  enuoye  cette  ann6e  vn  beau
Soleil  &  vn  beau  Ciboire  d' argent  dore  pour  leur
Chappelle.  Ie  croy  que  tous  ceux  qui  aiment  les
ceuures  de  Mifericorde,  feront  confoles,  lifant  ce  que
ie  vais  dire  de  cette  petite  Maifon.

Premierement,  ces  bonnes  Filles  accouftum6es  a
exercer  les  ceuures  de  charite  les  plus  repugnantes
au  fens  &  a  la  nature,  recueillent  tous  les  pauures
Sauuages  abandonnes:  II  y  a  peu  de  iours  que  le
Pere  de  Quen  efcriuoit  en  ces  termes  au  R.  P.  Supe-
rieur:  I'enuoye  a  l'Hofpital  Adam  ce  bon  vieillard,
le  plus  aage  des  Sauuages,  ie  l'ay  retire"  de  la  mort,
que  ces  Barbares  luy  vouloient  caufer  par  vn  cordeau,
pour  fe  defaire  d'vn  fardeau  qui  les  charge  fort;  l'ay
pri6  nos  Francois  qui  defcendoient  la-bas  de  le  met-
tre  dans  leur  barque:  [91]  Ie  ne  doute  pas  que  les
Meres  ne  le  recoiuent  volontiers;  elles  l'ont  defia
nourry  &  fecouru  tout  l'hiuer  paffe;  ce  bon-homme
n'a  point  d'autre  maladie  que  celle  qu'il  a  commen-
ced de  contradter  il  y  a  plus  de  cent  ans.

Secondement,  tous  les  malades  Francois  &  Sau-
uages font  bien  venus  en  cette  Maifon,  &  le  feul
regret  des  Meres  en  leurs  fondtions,  eft  rimpuilfance
qu' elles  ont  de  les  fecourir  auec  la  mefme  affiftace
qu'elles  auroient  en  France,  le  pais  eftant  encor  tout
neuf ,  &  tout  pauure,  &  deftitue  de  biens,  dont  regorge
1' Europe.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  239

I  learn  that  they  have  also  contributed  some  linen
for  the  poor  Savages  of  Saint  Joseph,  and  for  the  sick
of  the  Hospital ;  I  pray  God  that  he  may  be  their
great  reward.  A  worthy  person  sent  them  this  year
a  beautiful  Sun,  and  a  beautiful  Pyx,  silver-gilt,  for
their  Chapel.  I  believe  that  all  those  who  love  works
of  Mercy,  will  be  consoled  in  reading  what  I  am
going  to  say  of  this  little  House.

First,  these  good  Sisters,  accustomed  to  practice
deeds  of  charity  most  repugnant  to  their  feelings  and
to  nature,  gather  in  all  the  abandoned  Savages.  Not
many  days  ago,  Father  de  Quen  wrote  in  these  terms
to  the  Reverend  Father  Superior:  "  I  sent  to  the
Hospital  that  good  old  man,  Adam,  the  most  aged  of
the  Savages.  I  rescued  him  from  the  death  which
these  Barbarians  intended  to  cause  him  by  a  rope,  in
order  to  rid  themselves  of  a  burden  that  greatly
oppressed  them.  I  begged  our  Frenchmen  who  were
going  down  there  to  take  him  in  their  bark:  [91]  I
do  not  doubt  that  the  Mothers  will  receive  him  will-
ingly; they  have  already  fed  and  aided  him,  during
the  whole  of  last  winter.  This  worthy  man  has  no
other  malady  than  that  which  he  began  to  contract
more  than  a  hundred  years  ago."

Secondly,  all  sick  persons,  both  French  and  Sav-
age, are  welcome  in  this  House,  and  the  only  regret
of  the  Mothers  in  the  discharge  of  their  duties  is
their  powerlessness  to  relieve  them  with  the  same
ministrations  that  they  would  have  in  France, —  the
country  being  still  wholly  new,  bare,  and  destitute
of  the  wealth  with  which  Europe  overflows.

In  the  third  place,  as  soon  as  a  Savage  feels  ill,  he
goes  to  the  Hospital  to  be  purged  and  bled ;  some  of
them  go  to  ask  for  medicine,  which  they  take  in  their


240  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JJ&SUITES [Vol.  20

En  troifieme  lieu,  fi  toft  qu'vn  Sauuage  fe  trouue
mal,  il  fe  va  faire  purger  &  faigner  a  l'Hofpital;
quelques-vns  vont  demander  medecine,  qu'ils  pren-
nent  en  leurs  cabanes:  I'apprens  que  les  Meres  en
ont  fait  cette  annee  plus  de  cent  cinquante.

En  quatriefme  lieu,  cette  Maifon  n'eft  pas  feule-
ment  l'appuy  des  malades,  mais  encor  des  pauures
neceffiteux :  Quand  ces  bonnes  Meres  voient  que  la
difette  preffe  ces  pauures  gens,  elles  font  a  manger
aux  plus  pauures,  &  les  font  venir  en  la  Sale  des
malades,  ou  le  R.  Pere  Superieur,  ou  [92]  quelqu'vn
de  nos  Peres  qui  fcauent  la  Langue,  fe  trouue  pour
ioindre  l'aumofne  fpirituelle  auec  la  corporelle.

En  cinquieme  lieu,  comme  Saindt  Iofeph  eft  eloi-
gne  d'enuiron  vne  lieue  &  demie  de  Kebec,  ou  fe
font  retirees  les  Meres  Vrfulines,  pour  mieux  retenir
&  inftruire  leurs  petites  Seminariftes,  tant  fedentaires
que  paffageres,  qui  feroient  moins  foupples  &  plus
volages  aupres  de  leurs  parens :  Les  petites  Sauuages
qui  ne  fcauroient  aller  fi  loin  trouuer  ces  bonnes
Meres,  s'affemblent  ch£s  les  Hofpitalieres  pour  y
eftre  inftruites ;  elles  ont  tant  de  zele  pour  apprendre,
qu'elles  paffent  iufques  a  l'importunite:  Voila  les
fruicts  que  cette  faincte  Maifon  produit;  &  fi  les
forces  viennent  a  croiftre,  les  fruidts  croiftront  a  pro-
portion :  car  les  grandes  actions  de  charite  font  les
vrais  Miracles  qui  touchent  les  cceurs  des  Grecs  &
des  Barbares;  bref,  on  peut  dire  des  Sauuages,  ce
que  difoit  Iacob,  parlant  de  Dieu:  Si  dcderit  mihi
pattern  ad  vefcendum,  &  veftimentum  ad  induendum,  erit
mihi  Dominus  in  Denm.  Si  vous  fecoures  les  Sau-
uages, vous  les  aures  tous.

[93]  Voicy  ce que ie ly  dans  vn  papier  que  m'a


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640 -4t  241

own  cabins.  I  learn  that  the  Mothers  have  treated
more  than  one  hundred  and  fifty  of  them  this  year.

In  the  fourth  place,  this  House  is  not  only  a  refuge
for  the  sick,  but  also  for  the  needy  poor.  When
these  good  Mothers  see  that  dearth  oppresses  these
poor  people,  they  provide  food  for  the  poorest,  and
make  them  come  into  the  sick  Ward,  where  the
Reverend  Father  Superior,  or  [92]  some  one  of  our
Fathers  who  knows  the  Language,  is  found,  to  join
the  spiritual  alms  to  the  material.

In  the  fifth  place,  as  Saint  Joseph  is  about  a  league
and  a  half  distant  from  Kebec, —  where  the  Ursuline
Mothers  have  made  their  retreat,  the  better  to  retain
and  instruct  their  little  Seminarists,  permanent  as
well  as  temporary,  who  would  be  less  yielding  and
more  inconstant  if  with  their  relatives, —  the  little
Savages,  who  would  not  be  able  to  go  so  far  to  those
good  Mothers,  meet  together  at  the  house  of  the
Hospital  Sisters,  to  be  instructed  there ;  they  have  so
much  zeal  for  learning,  that  they  even  become  im-
portunate. Such  are  the  fruits  that  this  holy  House
produces,  and,  if  their  forces  increase,  fruits  will
increase  in  proportion, —  for  great  acts  of  love  are  the
true  Miracles  which  touch  the  hearts  of  Greeks  and
of  Barbarians.  In  short,  one  can  say  of  the  Savages,
what  Jacob  did  in  speaking  of  God:  Si  dederit  mihi
panem  ad  vescendum,  ct  vestimcntum  ad  indnendum,  erit
mihi  Dominus  in  Deum.  If  you  help  the  Savages,  you
will  possess  them  all.

[93]  The  following  is  what  I  read  in  a  paper  which
the  Mother  Superior  gave  me:  "  We  have  received
and  helped  in  our  Hospital  sixty-seven  sick  Savages,
and  one  Frenchman ;  we  have  maintained,  during
the  winter,  the  poor  and  the  infirm  who  were  not


242  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J E^  SUITES [Vol.20

done"  la  Mere  Superieure,  nous  auons  regeu  &  affifte*
foixante  fept  malades  Sauuages  en  noftre  Hofpital,
&  vn  Francois,  nous  auons  nourry  pendant  l'hyuer
les  pauures,  &  les  innrmes  qui  ne  pouuoient  fuiure
leurs  compatriotes  a  la  chaffe,  fept  perfonnes  ont  efte
baptifees  en  noftre  Maifon,  &  quatre  feulement  de
nos  malades  font  paffes  a  l'autre  vie,  auec  des  mar-
ques plus  que  probables  de  leur  falut.  Le  Francois
qui  nous  a  quitte,  pour  entrer  dans  vn  repos  eternel,
auoit  vne  patience  de  lob;  fes  plaintes  n'eftoient  pas
du  pauure  fecours  que  nous  luy  rendions  dans  nos
difettes:  mais  de  ce  qu'il  ne  pouuoit  s'acquitter  de
fes  deuotions  ordinaires;  &  cependant  nous  remar-
quions  qu'il  recitoit  tout  les  iours  l'Omce  de  Noftre
Dame,  &  fon  chappelet ;  ie  ne  doute  nullement  que
Dieu  ne  l'ait  fait  paffer  en  ce  bout  du  monde,  pour
le  mettre  au  ciel :  ce  ieune  homme  a  honore  &  chery
la  vertu  depuis  fon  arriuee  a  Kebec,  &  iamais  il  ne
s'eft  dementy  depuis  qu'il  s'eft  fortement  donne"  a
Dieu.

lean  SaKit8neg8chit  n'a  iamais  efte  [94]  abbatu,
ny  a  la  mort,  ny  dans  fa  maladie,  les  nouueaux  Chre-
ftiens  ont  ie  ne  fcay  quelle  force  qui  les  anime,  &
qui  les  confole  dans  leurs  afflictions;  ce  bon  Neo-
phyte voulant  euiter  les  occafions  du  peche"  parmy
ceux  de  fa  nation,  s'eftoit  retire  quelques  mois  auec
les  Peres  de  noftre  Compagnie,  qui  font  aux  trois
Riuieres,  il  a  rendu  des  preuues  d'vne  foy  viue,  &
conftance.  Au  point  qu'on  le  vouloit  marier  il  eft
tombe  malade  d'vne  pleurefie  baftarde,  il  s'eft  forme
vn  abces  dans  fon  cofte,  il  ne  pouuoit  refpirer,  la
fievre  le  tourmentoit  fort,  tout  ces  maux  ne  l'ont
iamais  iette*  dans  l'impatience  ny  dans  les  plaintes ;  on


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  243

able  to  follow  their  tribesmen  to  the  hunt;  seven
persons  have  been  baptized  in  our  House,  and  only
four  of  our  sick  ones  have  passed  away  to  the  other
life, —  and  these,  with  more  than  probable  signs  of
their  salvation.  The  Frenchman  who  left  us  to
enter  into  eternal  rest,  had  the  patience  of  Job :  his
complaints  were  not  of  the  paltry  help  that  we  in
our  poverty  gave  him,  but  that  he  could  not  perform
his  usual  devotions ;  and  notwithstanding,  we  observed
that  he  recited  every  day  the  Office  of  Our  Lady,
and  his  rosary.  I  do  not  in  the  least  doubt  that  God
inspired  his  coming  to  this  end  of  the  world,  in  order
to  lead  him  to  heaven."  This  young  man  honored
and  loved  righteousness  from  his  arrival  at  Kebec,
and  never  did  he  belie  his  profession,  after  he  gave
himself  wholly  to  God.

Jean  Sakitounegouchit  was  never  [94]  cast  down,
either  at  death,  or  in  his  sickness.  The  new  Chris-
tians have  an  inexpressible  strength  which  animates
them,  and  consoles  them  in  their  afflictions.  This
good  Neophyte  wishing  to  avoid  temptations  to  sin
among  those  of  his  nation,  had  gone  to  be  for  some
months  with  the  Fathers  of  our  Society,  who  are  at  the
three  Rivers ;  he  gave  proofs  of  a  lively  faith  and  of
constancy.  At  the  time  they  intended  to  marry  him,
he  fell  sick  with  a  sort  of  pleurisy, — an  abscess
formed  in  his  side,  he  was  unable  to  breathe,  the
fever  greatly  tormented  him ;  but  his  troubles  never
drove  him  into  impatience,  or  complaints.  They
often  asked  him  if  he  were  not  sad;  "  Not  at  all,"
replied  he.  It  is  a  great  blessing  of  God,  and  a  very
great  mercy,  to  see  a  young  man  in  the  prime  of  life
go  to  the  tomb  with  as  much  joy  as  he  would  go  to
marriage. The  Mother  Superior  speaks  thus  of  him :


244  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.20

luy  demandoit  fotment  s'il  n'eftoit  point  trifle;  point
dutout,  refpondoit-il,  c'eft  vne  grande  benedidtion  de
Dieu,  &  vne  grace  bie  particuliere,  de  voir  vn  ieune
homme  a  la  fleur  de  fon  age  aller  au  tombeau  auec
autant  de  ioye  qu'il  alloit  au  mariage :  voicy  comme  en
parle  la  Mere  Superieure,  c'eftoitla  douceur  mefme,  il
ne  demandoit  iamais  rien,  il  prenoit  auec  vne  tres-
prompte  obei'ffance,  tout  ce  qu'on  luy  donnoit,  fans
s'enquerir  s'il  eftoit  amer  ou  doux;  il  prenoit  vn
tres-grand  [95]  plaifir  d' entendre  parler  de  Dieu,  &
fouuent  on  le  voyoit  prier  auec  grande  attention,  il
fe  confeffoit  &  communioit  tous  les  huidt  iours,  il
affiftoit  tous  les  iours  a  la  faindte  Meff e ;  bref  il  le
falloit  moderer  quelque  temps  deuant  fa  mort,  pour
ce  que  fa  ferueur  augmentoit  fon  mal.  Quand  il  fe
vit  hors  d'efperance  de  recouurer  fa  fante,  il  dit  qu'il
auoit  laiffe  quelques  pelteries  aux  trois  Riuieres,  il
pria  les  Meres  de  tenir  la  main  qu'on  en  payaft  fes
dettes,  &  que  du  furplus  on  fit  vne  aumofne  aux
pauures  Sauuages  de  fon  pais,  il  receut  dans  vne
grande  paix  le  S.  Viatique,  &  l'Extreme  Ondtion;
bref  ny  en  fa  maladie,  ny  en  fa  mort,  il  ne  fit  pa-
roiftre  aucune  crainte,  paffant  de  cette  vie  comme  s'il
eut  efte  affure  d'aller  tout  droit  au  ciel.

La  petite  Anne  &pitabantfK8e  ag6e  d'enuiron,  13.
ou  14.  ans  nous  a  fort  confole  dans  fa  maladie,  elle
auoit  vn  tres-grand  defir  d'eftre  baptif£e,  fi-toft  qu'on
l'inftruifoit  fur  ce  Sacrement,  elle  fe  monftroit  atten-
tiue,  &  fa  maladie  quoy  que  tres-fafcheufe  ne  la
diuertiffoit  point  de  prefter  l'oreille,  encor  qu'es
autres  difcours  [96]  elle  n'eut  quafi  point  d'attention,
eftant  regeneree  dans  le  Sang  du  Fils  de  Dieu,  on
luy  parla  de  receuoir  fon  faindt  Corps,  cette  dodtrine
luy  fit  redoubler  fon  affedtion  comme  elle  auoit  l'efprit


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  245

"  He  was  meekness  itself;  lie  never  asked  for  any-
thing, he  took  with  a  most  ready  obedience  all  that
was  given  him,  without  asking  if  it  were  bitter  or
sweet.  He  took  very  great  [95]  pleasure  in  hearing
of  God,  and  often  he  was  seen  praying  with  great
devotion;  he  confessed  and  received  communion
every  week ;  he  was  present  every  day  at  holy  Mass.
In  brief,  it  was  necessary  to  restrain  him  some  time
before  his  death,  as  his  fervor  augmented  his  suffer-
ing." When  he  saw  himself  without  hope  of  recover-
ing his  health,  he  said  he  had  left  some  pelts  at  the
three  Rivers ;  he  begged  the  Mothers  to  see  to  it  that
his  debts  should  be  paid  from  these,  and  that  with
the  surplus  they  should  grant  an  alms  to  the  poor
Savages  of  his  country.  He  received  in  great  peace
the  Holy  Viaticum  and  Extreme  Unction;  in  a
word,  neither  in  his  sickness,  nor  in  his  death,  did
he  show  any  fear, — passing  from  this  life  as  if  he
had  been  assured  of  going  straight  to  heaven.

"The  little  Anne  Oupitabanoukwe,  about  13
or  14  years  old,  consoled  us  much  in  her  illness;
she  had  a  great  desire  to  be  baptized.  As  soon
as  she  had  been  instructed  in  regard  to  this  Sacra-
ment, she  showed  herself  attentive,  and  her  malady,
although  very  distressing,  did  not  hinder  her  from
listening;  yet  to  other  conversation  [96]  she  gave
almost  no  attention.  Having  been  regenerated  by
the  Blood  of  the  Son  of  God,  we  spoke  to  her  of
receiving  his  sacred  Body ;  this  doctrine  caused  her
affection  to  be  redoubled,  and,  as  she  had  an  excel-
lent mind,  she  was  soon  capable  of  receiving  this
blessed  food.  Being  in  an  agony  she  appeared  neith-
er to  see  nor  hear ;  but,  as  soon  as  she  was  spoken  to
of  God,  she  seemed  to  recover  her  senses, —  showing


246  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES [Vol.20

excellent,  elle  fut  bien-toft  capable  de  receuoir  cette
viande  facree;  eftant  a  l'agonie,  elle  paroiffoit  n'a-
uoir  plus  d'yeux  ny  d'oreilles,  mais  fi  toft  qu'on  luy
parloit  de  Dieu,  elle  fembloit  reuenir  a  foy,  mon-
ftrant  par  figne  qu'elle  prenoit  plaifir  d'oiiir  parler
de  celuy  dont  elle  ioli.it  maintenant.

Francoife  tfnatchiganiKtfe  apprehendoit  grande-
ment  la  mort  au  commencement  de  fa  maladie,  fi
toft  qu'elle  fut  baptif6e;  &  qu'on  luy  eut  enfeigne\
qu'apres  cette  vie  il  y  en  auroit  vn  autre  pleine  de
bon-heur,  elle  perdit  cette  crainte,  quoy  que  fa  ma-
ladie fut  fort  langoureufe,  &  qu'elle  n'eut  point  de
forces,  elle  eftoit  fi  honnefte  que  iamais  on  n'a  remar-
que  en  elle  la  moindre  indecence.  Toutes  les  filles
Sauuages,  dit  la  Mere,  font  tres-verecondes,  &  rem-
plie  de  pudeur,  iamais  on  ne  les  voit  ioiier  auec  les
petits  garcons,  &  comme  vn  certain  iour  vn  enfant
affes  [97]  ieune  fut  entre  en  la  fale  des  malades  auec
fa  parete,  qui  venoit  pour  fe  faire  inftruire ;  les  autres
filles  demanderent  a  la  Mere,  permiffion  de  le  faire
fortir,  alleguant  que  c' eftoit  vn  gargon;  elles  le
traiterent  fi  rudement,  qu'il  n'y  retourna  pas  vne
autre  fois.

L'vne  des  ioyes  que  nous  auons  d'eftre  log£es  a
Sainct.  Iofeph,  difent  ces  bonnes  Meres,  c'eft  la  con-
folation  de  voir  tous  les  iours  des  Sauuages,  leur
denotion  nous  rauit :  Ce  Printemps,  comme  ils  reue-
noient  de  la  chaffe,  tirant  apres  eux  leurs  grades
traifnes,  ils  s'arrefterent  deuant  noftre  Hofpital,  &
s'en  vindrent  faire  leur  petite  priere  en  noftre  Chap-
pelle,  puis  ils  pourfuiuirent  leur  chemin;  ces  actions
font  pleines  de  ioie.  II  ne  s'eft  paffe  aucun  iour  de
l'Efte,  que  quelqu'vn  d'eux  n'ait  entendu  la  faindte
Meffe  en  noftre  Eglife. I 'ay  veu,  dit  la  Mere  Supe-


1640  -  41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  247

by  a  sign  that  she  took  pleasure  in  hearing  of  him
whom  she  now  enjoys."

Francoise  Ounatchiganikwe  feared  death  extreme-
ly, at  the  beginning  of  her  sickness;  as  soon  as  she
was  baptized,  and  was  taught  that  after  this  life  there
would  be  another  full  of  happiness,  she  lost  this  fear,
although  her  malady  was  very  tedious,  and  she  had
no  strength.  She  was  so  modest  that  they  never
noticed  in  her  the  least  impropriety.  "  All  the  Sav-
age maidens  are  very  modest,"  said  the  Mother,  "  and
filled  with  bashfulness.  They  are  never  seen  play-
ing with  little  boys;  and  when,  one  day,  a  quite
young  child  [97]  was  brought  into  the  sick  ward  with
its  parent,  who  came  to  be  instructed,  the  girls  asked
the  Mother  for  permission  to  make  it  go  away,  plead-
ing that  it  was  a  boy ;  they  treated  him  so  rudely
that  he  did  not  come  back  again.

"  One  of  the  delights  that  we  have  in  dwelling  at
Saint  Joseph,"  say  these  good  Mothers,  "is  the
comfort  of  seeing  the  Savages  every  day;  their
devotion  charms  us.  This  Spring,  when  they  re-
turned from  the  hunt,  dragging  after  them  their
great  sleds,  they  stopped  before  our  Hospital,  and
came  to  offer  up  their  little  prayers  in  our  Chapel,
then  they  went  on  their  way ;  these  acts  are  replete
with  joy  for  us.  No  day  has  passed,  this  Summer,
without  some  one  of  them  hearing  holy  Mass  in  our
Church.  I  have  seen,"  said  the  Mother  Superior,
"little  girls  so  attentive  in  reciting  their  rosary,
that  —  their  companions  coming  for  them  to  go  and
play,  or  to  return  home  —  they  would  not  leave  the
Chapel  until  they  had  finished  them.  Often  these
little  souls  come  to  us  [98]  and  say :  '  My  Mother,
hear  us  repeat  what  the  Fathers  have  taught  us  of


248  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

rieure,  de  petites  filles  fi  attentiues  a  reciter  leurs
chappellets,  que  leurs  compagnes  les  venans  appeller
pour  aller  ioiier,  ou  pour  retourner  a  la  maifon,
elles  ne  partoient  point  de  la  Chappelle  qu'elles  ne
les  euflet  acheu^s.  Souuent  ces  petites  ames  nous
viennent  [98]  dire;  Ma  Mere,  faites  nous  repeter  ce
que  les  Peres  nous  ont  enfeigne  au  Catechifme,  afin
que  nous  fcachions  bien  noftre  leeon.  C'eft  affds
pour  c6t  article,  difons  deux  mots  de  la  fimplicite  &
de  la  candeur  de  ces  bonnes  gens.  Quand  quelqu'vn
d'eux  s'eft  bien  trouue  d'vne  medecine,  tous  les  autres
malades  en  demandent  vne  femblable,  quoy  que
leur  maladie  foit  bien  differente :  Vne  bonne  femme
s'eftant  venue  rendre  a  l'Hofpital,  auec  deux  de  fes
enfans,  dont  l'vn  fe  portoit  mal;  on  ordonna  deux
medecines,  l'vne  pour  l'enfant,  &  l'autre  pour  la
mere ;  le  matin  on  prefenta  les  deux  gobelets  a  la
mere:  Or  comme  c'eft  la  couftume  parmy  eux,  de  fe
faire  part  les  vns  aux  autres  de  ce  qu'ils  boiuent,  ou
de  ce  qu'ils  mangent ;  cette  bonne  creature  prend  en
main  la  medecine  de  fa  fille,  elle  y  goufte  la  pre-
miere, puis  elle  en  donne  a  boire  a  fes  deux  enfans
l'vn  apres  l'autre;  ayant  vuide  le  premier  gobelet,
elle  prend  le  fecond,  &  le  diftribue  a  la  mefme  fagon,
chacun  y  beuuant  a  f on  tour ;  voila  vne  bonne  fagon
de  prendre  medecine.

Madame  la  Duchefle  d'Aiguillon  aiant  [99]  enuoye"
en  la  Chappelle  de  fon  Hofpital  vn  beau  Crucifix,  ou
d'vn  corte"  eft  la  faindte  Vierge,  qui  prefente  a  noilre
Seigneur  cette  bonne  Dame;  &  de  l'autre  Saindt  lean,
qui  prefente  Monfeigneur  le  Cardinal,  &  de  petits
Sauuages  peints  tout  a  l'entour:  Ces  bonnes  gens,
notamment  les  femmes  &  les  filles,  accouroient  pour
voir  ce Tableau  viuant. Or  comme  les  Meres  leur


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640-41  249

the  Catechism,  so  that  we  may  know  our  lesson
well.'  That  is  enough  of  this  subject;  let  us  say  a
few  words  about  the  simplicity  and  the  candor  of
these  good  people.  When  any  one  of  them  has  been
cured  by  a  remedy,  all  the  other  sick  ask  for  a  simi-
lar one,  although  their  disorders  maybe  quite  differ-
ent. A  poor  woman  having  repaired  to  the  Hospital,
with  two  of  her  children,  of  whom  one  was  sick,  two
medicines  were  ordered,  one  for  the  child,  and  the
other  for  the  mother ;  in  the  morning  the  two  cups
were  offered  to  the  mother.  Now  as  it  is  the  cus-
tom among  these  people  to  share  with  each  other
what  they  eat,  or  what  they  drink,  this  good  crea-
ture took  her  daughter's  potion  in  her  hand,  first
tasted  it  herself,  then  gave  it  to  her  two  children  to
drink,  one  after  the  other;  having  emptied  the  first
cup,  she  took  the  second,  and  distributed  it  in  like
manner,  each  one  drinking  in  turn.  A  fine  way,
that,  of  taking  medicine !

Madame  the  Duchess  d'Aiguillon,  having  [99]  sent
to  the  Chapel  of  her  Hospital  a  beautiful  Crucifix, —
on  one  side  of  which  is  the  blessed  Virgin,  who
points  out  to  our  Lord  this  good  Lady,  and  on  the
other  Saint  John,  who  points  out  Monseigneur  the
Cardinal,  and  the  little  Savages  painted  all  about
him, —  these  good  people,  especially  the  women  and
young  girls,  ran  to  see  this  lifelike  Picture.  Now,
as  the  Mothers  had  made  known  to  them  the  obliga-
tions under  which  they  were  to  this  great  Lady,
these  good  people  were  not  content  with  simply  look-
ing at  this  beautiful  Portrait, — they  were  obliged  to
express  the  actions  that  impressed  their  eyes.  The
little  girls  said  to  each  other,  speaking  of  Madame
the  Duchess,  "  She  is  on  her  knees;  ' forthwith  all


250  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.  20

declaroient  les  obligations  qu'ils  ont  a  cette  grande
Dame,  ces  bonnes  gens  ne  fe  contenterent  pas  de
regarder  fimplement  ce  beau  Portrait,  il  fallut  expri-
mer  les  adtions  qui  frappoient  leurs  yeux.  Les  filles
fe  difoient  l'vne  a  l'autre,  parlans  de  Madame  la
Ducheffe:  Elle  eft  a  genoux;  la-deffus  elles  s'y
mettoient  toutes:  Elle  ioint  les  mains,  toutes  les
ioignoient  auffi-toft :  elle  regarde  noftre  Capitaine  qui
eft  mort  en  Croix  pour  nous,  toutes  leuoient  les  yeux,
&  regardoient  attentiuement  le  Crucifix:  elle  prie
Dieu,  elles  fe  mettoient  auffi-toft  a  reciter  les  oraifons
qu'elles  fcauent:  puis  aiant  fait  leurs  prieres,  elles
fe  leuoient  debout,  &  faifans  vne  grade  reuerence  a
cette  Dame,  l'alloient  baifer  auec  plus  de  fimplicite
[ioo]  &  de  candeur,  que  de  grace;  &  puis  s'en  retour-
noient  bien  contentes.  Ce  n'eft  pas  la  couftume  des
Sauuages  de  f e  f aluer  par  vn  baifer :  mais  comme
Madame  de  la  Pelterie  embraffe  affes  fouuent,  &
baife  ces  pauures  filles  a  la  rencontre,  ces  bonnes
creatures  s'imaginet  que  cette  action  eft  de  prix  &  de
valeur,  comme  ils  parlent,  &  qu'il  la  faut  imiter  pour
bien  faire.

Les  Meres  ne  parlent  en  leur  memoire  que  de  ceux
qui  font  trefpaffes  en  leur  Maifon,  elles  ne  voient
pas  le  fruit  qui  prouient  de  leur  Hofpital :  car  ceux
qui  recouurent  leur  fante,  s'en  retournent  dans  leurs
cabanes,  fans  leur  donner  ce  bien  fouuent  a  connoiftre
que  la  charite  a  opere  dans  leurs  ames:  Vne  partie
de  ce  que  nous  auons  dit,  au  chapitre  de  la  Refidence
de  Saindt  Iofeph,  fe  doit  rapporter  a  cette  Maifon  de
Mifericorde;  car  les  Sauuages  y  ayans  receu  du
fecours  dans  leurs  maladies,  ont  efte  fortement  gai-
gn6s  a  Dieu.  Ten  fcay  vn  entre  autres,  lequel  fut
porte*  en  cette  Maifon  par  l'vn  de  nos  Peres,  qui  l'alla


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  251

fell  upon  their  knees.  "Her  hands  are  folded;"
immediately  all  folded  theirs.  "  She  is  looking  at
our  Captain,  who  died  on  the  Cross  for  us;  "  all
raised  their  eyes  and  looked  attentively  at  the  Cruci-
fix. "  She  is  praying  to  God; '  at  once  they  began
to  repeat  the  prayers  they  knew.  Then,  having
made  their  petitions,  they  stood  up,  and  making  a
low  courtesy  to  this  Lady,  proceeded  to  kiss  her,  with
more  simplicity  [100]  and  candor  than  grace;  and
then  they  went  away  quite  content.  It  is  not  the
custom  of  the  Savages  to  salute  each  other  with  a
kiss;  but  as  Madame  de  la  Pelterie  quite  often  em-
braces and  kisses  these  poor  girls  on  meeting  them,
these  good  creatures  imagine  that  this  act  is  of  price
and  value,  as  they  say,  and  that  they  must  imitate
her,  in  order  to  do  right.

The  Mothers  speak  in  their  account  only  of  those
who  have  died  in  their  House.  They  do  not  see  the
results  that  proceed  from  their  Hospital :  for  those
who  recover  their  health,  go  back  to  their  cabins,
without  often  letting  them  know  the  good  which  this
charity  has  wrought  in  their  souls.  A  part  of  what
we  related  in  the  chapter  on  the  Residence  of  Saint
Joseph  ought  to  be  attributed  to  this  House  of  Mercy ;
for  the  Savages,  having  received  therein  help  in  their
sicknesses  have  been  firmly  won  to  God.  I  know  one,
among  others,  who  was  taken  to  this  House  by  one
of  our  Fathers,  who  went  for  him  to  the  woods,
where  his  Countrymen  had  abandoned  him :  this  good
young  man,  [101]  having  recovered  his  health  through
the  care  of  these  good  Mothers,  was  so  deeply  affected,
that  he  not  only  urgently  solicited  his  baptism,  but
resolved  to  remain  all  his  life  among  us,  in  order  to
be  more  fully  instructed  therein ;  and  his  relatives


252  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

querir  dans  les  bois,  ou  fes  Compatriotes  l'auoient
abandonne" :  ce  bon  ietme  homme  [101]  aiant  recouuert
la  fante  par  les  foins  de  ces  bonnes  Meres,  fut  fi  puif-
famment  touche,  que  non  feulement  il  pourfuiuit
fortement  fon  baptefme ;  mais  il  prit  refolution  de
demeurer  toute  fa  vie  aupres  de  nous,  pour  y  eftre
plus  pleinement  inflruit;  &  iamais  fes  parens  ne  luy
ont  pu  faire  quitter  cette  penf ee ;  ils  ont  fait  leur
poffible  pour  Ten  diuertir,  mais  tous  leurs  efforts
n'ont  feruy  qu'a  faire  paroiftre  fa  conftance:  Ce  n'eft
pas  tout;  comme  S.  Bernard  gaigna  fes  freres,  qui
le  vouloient  diuertir  d'entrer  en  Religion;  de  mefme,
ce  ieune  homme  appellera  &  attirera  auec  foy  ceux
qui  le  vouloient  empefcher  d'ecouter  Iefus-Chrift ;  car
i'apprens,  que  l'vn  des  principaux  d'entr'eux  chan-
cele  defia,  difant,  qu'il  veut  croire  en  Dieu  comme
fon  cadet-

Ie  conclueray  ce  chapitre  par  la  mort  d'vne  petite
colombe,  c'eft  la  Mere  de  faindte  Marie  que  Dieu
nous  a  rauy:  Pretiofa  in  confpeclu  Domini:  Mors
fanclorum  eins.  O  que  la  mort  de  cette  Efpoufe  de
Iefus-Chrift  eft  precieufe  deuant  Dieu:  elle  fe  trou-
uoit  vn  peu  mal  des  la  France,  d'vn  rheume  ou  d'vne
defluxion  qui  la  faint  au  [102]  temps  de  l'embarque-
ment,  le  mal  creut  fur  mer,  &  encor  plus  fur  terre ;
Depuis  fon  arriuee  elle  a  prefche  plus  fortement  les
Sauuages,  par  fa  patience,  par  fa  refignation,  par  fa
gaiete,  dans  vne  maladie  traifnante  &  douloureufe,
que  ne  fgauroient  faire  trois  Predicateurs,  auec  toute
leur  eloquence ;  elle  f e  traifnoit  fouuent  dans  la  fale
des  malades  pour  auoir  la  confolation  de  les  voir,
nous  prenions  plaifir  de  nous  y  rencontrer,  auec  vne
bande  de  ces  pauures  Barbares,  pour  leur  apprendre
la  refignation  par  l'exemple  de  cette  pauure  malade,


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  253

were  in  no  wise  able  to  make  him  renounce  this  proj-
ect. They  did  their  best  to  dissuade  him  from  it,
but  all  their  efforts  only  served  to  make  his  constancy
apparent.  This  is  not  all;  as  St.  Bernard  won  his
brothers,  who  endeavored  to  prevent  him  from  enter-
ing the  Religious  life,  even  so,  this  young  man  will
call  and  will  bring  with  him  those  who  wished  to
hinder  him  from  listening  to  Jesus  Christ :  for  I  learn
that  one  of  the  chief  among  them  already  wavers,
saying  that  he  is  inclined  to  believe  in  God  as  does
his  younger  brother.

I  shall  conclude  this  chapter  with  the  death  of  a
dear  dove, —  this  is  Mother  de  sainte  Marie,  whom
God  has  taken  from  us :  Pretiosa  in  conspectu  Domini
mors  sanctorum  ejus.  Oh,  how  precious  before  God
is  the  death  of  this  Bride  of  Jesus  Christ !  She  was
somewhat  ill  after  leaving  France,  from  a  cold  or
congestion  which  seized  her  at  the  [102]  time  of  set-
ting sail ;  the  illness  increased  upon  the  sea,  and  still
more  upon  land.  Since  her  arrival  here  she  has
preached  more  forcibly  to  the  Savages  by  her  pa-
tience, and  by  her  resignation,  and  by  her  cheerful-
ness in  a  lingering  and  painful  sickness  than  three
Preachers  could  have  done  with  all  their  eloquence.
She  often  dragged  herself  into  the  ward  for  the  sick,
to  have  the  comfort  of  seeing  them ;  we  took  pleas-
ure in  meeting  her  there,  with  a  group  of  these  poor
Barbarians,  in  order  to  teach  them  resignation  by
the  example  of  this  poor  sick  woman.  They  could
not  comprehend  how  a  young  girl,  so  affectionate  and
delicate,  was  able  to  forget  her  country  and  her  par-
ents, with  such  cheerfulness  as  she  showed  in  her
face  and  in  her  words.

Sieur Giffard,  who treated her in  her sickness,


254  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.20

ils  ne  pouuoient  comprendre  comme  vne  ieune  fille  fi
tendre  &  fi  delicate,  put  oublier  fon  pais  &  fes  parens,
auec  la  gaiety  qu'elle  faifoit  paroiftre  en  fon  vifage,
&  en  fes  paroles.

Le  fieur  Giffard  la  traittant  dans  fa  maladie,  luy
dit:  que  c'eftoit  fait  de  fa  vie,  qu'elle  auoit  trois  ma-
ladies mortelles :  cette  ame  innocente,  fe  mit  a  rire,
fe  monftrant  auffi  ioieufe  de  la  nouuelle  de  la  mort,
qu'vn  autre  eut  fait  de  la  nouuelle  de  la  vie ;  nous  ne
manquions  pas  de  rapporter  tout  cela  aux  Sauuages,
qui  prenoient  [103]  vn  fingulier  plaifir  de  Taller  voir,
elle  les  careffoit  en  foufriant,  ce  qui  les  touchoit  fort.
La  vertu  a  plus  d'eloquence  que  l'Ariftote  ou  le
Ciceron.

Quelqu'vn  de  nous  luy  demandant,  certain  iour,  fi
elle  n'auoit  point  de  regret  d'auoir  pafle  la  mer,  d'a-
uoir  quitte  vne  maifon  qui  la  pouuoit  fecourir,  &  qui
auroit  trouue  des  remedes  propres  pour  la  remettre
en  fante,  fi  la  pauurete  du  pais,  l'incommodite  du
logement,  l'abfence  de  tant  de  bonnes  nlles,  le  de-
faut  de  viures,  propres  pour  vne  perfonne  malade,
ne  luy  cauf oient  point  quelque  trifteff e ;  cette  petite
colombe  le  regardant  d'vn  ceil  qui  faifoit  voir  la  fin-
cerite  de  fon  cceur,  luy  dit;  Mon  Pere  fi  i'eflois  en
France,  &  qu'on  me  prefentaft  toutes  les  grandeurs,
capables  d'allecher  vn  cceur,  ie  les  quitterois  toutes,
pour  venir  en  Canada,  quand  mefme  ie  ferois  afleuree
d'y  trouuer  la  maladie  qui  afflige  mon  corps;  car  il
me  femble  que  la  refignation  que  ie  refens  dans  mon
cceur,  &  la  patience  que  i'ay  dans  vne  maladie  bien
longue  &  bien  douloureufe,  m'a  efte  donnee  de  Dieu,
en  confideration  du  Canada,  pour  m'eftre  offerte  a  fa
[104]  Maiefte,  fans  referue,  prenant  plaifir  de  luy
venir  facrifier  ma  vie,  au  feruice  des  pauures  Sau-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  255

told  her  that  there  was  no  hope  for  her  life, —  that
she  had  three  mortal  diseases;  this  innocent  soul
began  to  laugh,  showing  herself  as  joyous  at  the
news  of  death,  as  another  would  have  done  at  the
news  of  life.  We  did  not  fail  to  report  all  this  to
the  Savages,  who  took  [103]  rare  pleasure  in  going
to  see  her;  she  caressed  them,  smiling,  which  moved
them  exceedingly.  Virtue  has  more  eloquence  than
Aristotle  or  Cicero.

One  of  us  asked  her,  one  day,  if  she  had  no
regret  at  having  crossed  the  sea,  at  having  left  a
house  that  could  relieve  her,  and  that  would  have
found  the  proper  remedies  to  restore  her  health ;  if
the  poverty  of  this  country,  the  inconvenience  of  the
dwelling,  the  absence  of  so  many  good  sisters,  the
lack  of  food  suitable  for  a  sick  person,  did  not  cause
her  some  sadness.  This  dear  dove,  looking  at  him
with  an  eye  which  revealed  the  sincerity  of  her  heart,
said  to  him:  "  My  Father,  if  I  were  in  France,  and  I
should  be  offered  all  the  honors  capable  of  enticing
a  heart,  I  would  leave  them  all  that  I  might  come  to
Canada,  even  if  I  were  sure  of  finding  here  the  dis-
ease that  afflicts  my  body ;  for  it  seems  to  me  that
the  resignation  I  experience  in  my  heart,  and  the
patience  that  I  have  in  a  very  long  and  very  painful
sickness,  have  been  given  me  by  God,  for  the  sake
of  Canada,  to  be  offered  by  me  to  his  [104]  Majesty,
without  reserve,  taking  pleasure  in  coming  to  sacri-
fice my  life  to  him  in  the  service  of  the  poor  Sav-
ages." If  an  Angel  were  capable  of  our  desires,  he
would  wish  for  ability  to  speak  and  to  suffer  like  this
maiden.

At  last  this  beautiful  soul  was  released  from  its
body,  on  the  fifth  of  the  month  of  March ;  she  filled


256  LES  EEL  A  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  20

uages :  fi  vn  Ange  efloit  capable  de  nos  defirs,  il  fou-
haitteroit  de  pouuoir  parler,  &  fouffrir  comme  cette
vierge.

Enfin  cette  belle  ame  fe  detacha  de  fon  corps  le
cinquiefme  du  mois  de  Mars,  elle  remplit  fes  pau-
tires  fceurs  de  douleur,  &  noflre  cceur  de  ioie ;  elle
laiffa  vne  douce  odeur  de  fes  vertus  aux  Francois  &
aux  Sauuages;  eflant  a  l'agonie  comme  la  fluxion  la
fuffoquoit  de  temps  en  temps,  puis  luy  donnoit  quel-
que  liberte"  de  refpirer,  elle  efloit  fi  prefente  en  elle
mefme,  qu'elle  difoit  par  fois;  ce  dernier  coup  tarde
bien  a  venir:  on  luy  demandoit  de  fois  a  autre,  fi  le
coeur  efloit  en  paix,  mais  il  ne  falloit  que  regarder
fon  vifage,  pour  voir  la  paix  de  fon  ame :  Enfin  fen-
tant  la  mort  prochaine,  elle  s'ecria;  c'efl  a  ce  coup.
Adieu  ma  Mere,  dit-elle,  a  fa  Superieure,  &  le  refpir
ceffa  auec  fa  vie.  Quelques  habitans  nous  dirent
apres  fa  mort,  qu'ils  tenoient  a  faueur  que  cette
faindte  eut  paffe"  la  mer,  pour  venir  laiffer  vn  fi  facre"
depofl  en  leur  pais,  &  qu'ils  [105]  croioient  que  par
fes  merites,  &  par  fes  prieres,  noftre  Seigneur  beni-
roit  ces  contrees:  Si  deux  braues  Filles  auec  leur
dot,  pour  n'eflre  point  a  charge,  venoient  prendre
la  place  de  cette  colombe,  elles  trouueroient  encor  le
parfum  de  fes  vertus.  Nous  fommes  en  trop  petit
nombre,  difent  ces  bonnes  Meres,  pour  tous  les  tra-
uaux  qu'il  faut  fubir  en  ce  bout  du  monde,  deux
ames  genereufes  pourroient  icy  cueillir  des  palmes
approchantes  d'vn  petit  Martir;  car  les  dangers  de
l'Ocean,  la  prifon  fiottante  au  gre  des  tempeftes,  la
pauurete  d'vn  pais  tout  neuf,  la  rigueur  des  hiuers,
font  les  tirans,  qui  n'oflent  par  la  ioi'e  des  ames  con-
flantes;  mais  qui  etoffent  leurs  guirlandes  de  lis,  de
rofes,  &  de  palmes.


1 640  -  41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640  -  41  257

her  poor  sisters  with  grief,  and  our  hearts  with  joy ;
she  left  a  sweet  perfume  of  her  virtues  to  the  French
and  to  the  Savages.  Being  in  an  agony  as  the  par-
oxysm suffocated  her  from  time  to  time,  then  gave
her  some  freedom  of  breath,  she  was  so  composed
that  she  said,  at  times,  ' '  This  last  stroke  is  indeed
long  in  coming."  She  was  asked  now  and  then  if
her  heart  were  at  peace ;  but  one  needed  only  to  look
at  her  face  to  see  the  peace  of  her  soul.  At  length,
feeling  death  near,  she  exclaimed:  "  This  is  the
stroke!  Adieu,  my  Mother,"  said  she  to  her  Supe-
rior, and  with  that  breath  her  life  ended.  Some  of
the  inhabitants  told  us,  after  her  death,  that  they
looked  upon  it  as  a  favor  that  this  saint  had  crossed
the  sea,  to  come  and  leave  so  sacred  a  deposit  in  their
country;  and  they  [105]  believed  that,  by  her  merits
and  by  her  prayers,  our  Lord  would  bless  these
regions.  If  two  brave  Sisters  —  with  their  dowry,  so
as  not  to  be  a  burden  —  would  come  to  take  the
place  of  this  dove,  they  would  still  find  the  perfume
of  her  virtues.  "  We  are  too  few  in  number,"  say
these  good  Mothers,  ' '  for  all  the  burdens  that  must
be  borne  at  this  end  of  the  world."  Two  generous
souls  could  here  gather  palms  that  would  approach
to  a  minor  Martyrdom :  for  the  dangers  of  the  Ocean,
the  prison  floating  at  the  will  of  the  tempests,  the
poverty  of  a  wholly  new  country,  the  rigor  of  the
winters,  are  tyrants  which  do  not  take  away  the  joy
of  steadfast  souls ;  but  which  fill  their  garlands  with
lilies,  roses,  and  palms.


258  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20


[i 06]  CHAPITRE  VII.

DE LA RESIDENCE DE LA CONCEPTION, AUX TROIS

RIUIERES.

IE  croy  que  la  pauure  Eglife  des  Trois  Riuieres,  a
efte  plus  battue  cette  ann6e  de  toutes  fortes  de
vents,  que  les  pilotes  ou  nautonniers  n'en  mar-
quent  dedans  leurs  rofes,  ou  dedans  leurs  cartes  ma-
rines: II  s'eft  fait  la  de  temps  en  temps,  vn  ramas  de
diuerfes  Nations,  qui  a  bien  donne  de  l'exercice  a
nos  Peres:  On  y  a  veu  des  Sauuages  de  l'lfle  de  la
petite  nation  des  AttiKamegues,  des  Montagnais,  des
tfKotoemis,  des  blnatchataronons,  &  plufieurs  autres,
dans  la  paix,  dans  la  guerre,  dans  de  petites  jalou-
fies  les  vns  enuers  les  autres ;  fi  bien  que  les  mau-
uais  gaftoient  les  bons,  &  les  Demons  reueilloient
les  fuperftitions,  qu'on  ne  voit  plus  a  Saindt  Iofeph,
&  qui  fembloient  eftre  eteintes  aux  Trois  Riuieres:
Mais  ecoutons  ce  qu'en  efcriuent  le  Pere  Iacques
Buteux  &  [107]  le  Pere  lean  de  Quen,  dedans  les  let-
tres  qu'ils  ont  enuoiees  a  noftre  R.  Pere  Superieur,  &
dedans  les  memoires  qu'ils  m'ont  communiques:  Les
Chreliiens  de  Sainct  Iofeph  qui  font  monies  icy,
font  tres-bien,  le  moins  qu'il  en  pourra  venir  pour  le
prefent,  ce  fera  le  meilleur  pour  eux:  car  les  Sau-
uages venus  nouuellement  des  terres  de  diuerfes  con-
trees,  n'aiant  encor  eu  aucune  inltrudtion,  refufcitent
les  vieilles  fuperftitions ;  ils  font  bruire  les  tambours,
dont  il  n'eftoit  quafi  plus  de  memoire,  ils  r^ueillent


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  259


[106]  CHAPTER  VII.

OF THE RESIDENCE  OF  LA  CONCEPTION  AT  THE  THREE

RIVERS.

1  BELIEVE  that  the  poor  Church  of  the  Three
Rivers  has  been  beaten  this  year  by  more  kinds
of  winds  than  pilots  and  mariners  have  marked
on  their  wind  roses  or  on  their  charts.  There  has
occurred  there,  from  time  to  time,  a  gathering  of
different  Nations,  who  have  indeed  given  exercise
to  our  Fathers.  They  have  seen  there  Savages  from
the  Island,  those  of  the  petite  nation,  of  the  Attika-
megues,  of  the  Montagnais,  of  the  Oukotoemis,13  of
the  Ounatchataronons,  and  many  others, —  in  peace,
in  war,  and  in  little  jealousies,  one  toward  another;
so  that  the  bad  harmed  the  good,  and  the  Demons
revived  superstitions  that  are  no  longer  seen  at  Saint
Joseph,  and  which  seemed  to  be  extinguished  at  the
Three  Rivers.  But  let  us  listen  to  what  Father
Jacques  Buteux  and  [107]  Father  Jean  de  Que  a  write
of  this  in  the  letters  which  they  have  sent  to  our  Rev-
erend Father  Superior,  and  in  the  accounts  they  have
transmitted  to  me.  "  The  Christians  of  Saint  Joseph
who  have  come  up  here  are  doing  very  well.  The
fewer  of  them  that  can  come,  for  the  present,  the
better  it  will  be  for  them ;  for  the  Savages  recently
arrived  from  lands  of  divers  countries,  not  having
yet  had  any  instruction,  resuscitate  the  old  supersti-
tions; they  make  the  drums  rattle,  of  which  there  was
almost  no  longer  remembrance ;  they  revive  the  be-


260  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~  SUITES  [Vol.20

la  creance  aux  fonges,  que  Ton  ignoroit  quafi  du
tout :  Ceux  qui  font  venus  des  endroits  plus  voifins
des  Hurons,  ont  apporte  ie  ne  fcay  quelle  dance,  ou
fuperftition  diabolique,  qui  nous  a  donne  bien  de  la
peine.  L'orgueil  eft  icy  en  fon  regne,  &  la  famine
qui  preffe  ces  pauures  miferables,  ne  le  fcauroit  ab-
batre;  la  crainte  qu'ils  ont  de  leurs  ennemis,  les
empefche  d'aller  a  la  chaffe,  pour  conferuer  leur  vie:
ils  ont  tous  les  iours  &  toutes  les  nuidts  des  vifions;
ils  voient,  difent-ils,  des  Hiroquois  derriere  leurs
bleds,  ils  en  voient  dans  les  bois,  ils  voient  des  canots
vogans,  ils  en  voient  a  l'ancre,  ils  en  [108]  voient
qui  les  pourfuiuent ;  ils  remarquent  la  pifte  de  leurs
ennemis  fur  le  fable,  ils  reconnoiffent  le  lieu  ou  ils
ont  couche,  les  arbres  ou  ils  ont  cueilly  des  fruidts,
ils  les  entendent  mefme  crier  dans  le  profond  des
bois ;  ils  donnent  mille  fauffes  allarmes  a  nos  Fran-
cois: Et  dans  tout  cela  il  n'y  a  qu'vne  feule  verite,
fcauoir  eft,  qu'vne  vaine  crainte  de  la  mort  engendre
tous  ces  phantofmes  dans  leur  imagination,  &  les  de-
tourne  de  la  vraye  peur  qu'ils  deuroient  auoir,  d'offen-
fer  Celuy  qui  feul  peut  affermir  leur  cosur.  Fugit
impitis  netnine  perfequente.  Les  reproches  qu'on  nous
faifoit  jadis,  recommencent  icy ;  ces  nouueaux  hoftes
nous  difent  que  les  prieres  les  font  mourir,  que
d'eftre  baptife  &  voir  bietoft  la  fin  de  fa  vie,  c'eft
vne  mefme  chofe;  fi  vn  Chreftien  eft  malade,  ou  s'il
vient  a  mourir,  c'eft  le  Baptefme  qui  luy  ofte  la  vie:
on  a  beau  leur  dire  qu'il  en  meurt  beaucoup  plus  d'ln-
fideles  que  de  Croyans,  le  Diable  prend  fon  temps,  &
leur  bande  les  yeux  contre  la  verite  connue*.  Cet
hiuer  paffe,  tous  les  Sauuages  qui  font  icy  s'eftans
ioints  enfemble,  &  renfermes  comme  dans  vn  fort,


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640- 41  261

lief  in  dreams,  that  had  been  almost  wholly  forgotten.
Those  who  have  come  from  places  nearer  to  the  Hu-
rons  have  brought  I  know  not  what  dance  or  diabolic-
al superstition,  which  has  given  us  much  trouble.
Pride  is  reigning  here,  and  the  famine  which  is
pinching  these  poor  wretches  will  not  succeed  in
bringing  it  down.  The  fear  that  they  have  of  their
enemies,  prevents  their  going  to  the  hunt  so  that
their  lives  may  be  sustained.  Every  day  and  every
night  they  have  visions;  they  see,  so  they  say,  the
Hiroquois  behind  their  corn,  they  see  them  in  the
woods ;  they  see  canoes  floating,  they  see  them  lying
still;  they  [108]  see  those  that  pursue  them;  they
observe  attentively  the  tracks  of  their  enemies  on  the
sand ;  they  identify  the  place  where  they  have  slept,
the  trees  from  which  they  have  gathered  fruit,  they
even  hear  them  yelling  in  the  depth  of  the  forest, —
they  give  a  thousand  false  alarms  to  our  Frenchmen.
And  in  all  this  there  is  but  a  single  truth  —  to  wit,
that  a  vain  fear  of  death  engenders  all  these  phan-
toms in  their  imagination,  and  turns  them  from  the
true  fear  which  they  ought  to  have  of  offending  Him
who  alone  can  strengthen  their  hearts.  Fugit  impius
nemine  persequente.  The  reproaches  that  were  former-
ly made  to  us  are  being  recommenced  here :  these
new  visitors  tell  us  that  prayers  cause  them  to  die,
that  to  be  baptized  and  to  see  very  soon  the  end  of
life  are  the  same  thing.  If  a  Christian  be  sick,  or  if
he  happen  to  die,  it  is  Baptism  which  has  deprived
him  of  life ;  it  is  in  vain  to  tell  them  that  many  more
Unbelievers  die  than  Believers, — the  Devil  takes  his
opportunity,  and  blinds  their  eyes  to  the  known  truth.
This  last  winter,  all  the  Savages  who  are  here  hav-
ing met  together,  and  being  shut  up  as  in  a  fort,  the


262  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jESUITES  [Vol.20

les  pauures  Chreftiens  fouffroient  [109]  l'infolence  &
les  matmais  exemples  des  Payens.  Entre  leurs
fuperftitions  ils  en  commencerent  vne,  tiree  des  pais
plus  hauts,  qui  deuoit  durer  trois  nuidts,  pendant  lef-
quelles  les  Sauuages  vont  courans  par  les  cabanes,
auec  des  cris  &  des  hurlemens  de  Demons :  le  plus
bel  adte  de  cette  tragicomedie  confifte  en  ce  point,  les
filles  &  les  femmes  vont  dancant,  &  quelques  hommes
menent  le  Iongleur  ou  le  Sorcier  par  deffous  les  bras,
&  le  font  marcher  par  deffus  des  charbons  ardens
fans  qu'il  fe  brufle.  Le  Pere  Buteux  ayant  eu  fecret-
tement  aduis  par  vn  Chreftien,  du  temps  que  cette
farce  diabolique  fe  deuoit  iouer  pour  la  guerifon
d'vne  femme  malade;  porte  d'vn  zele  de  la  gloire  de
noftre  Seigneur,  s'en  alia  dans  les  cabanes  fur  les  dix
heures  du  foir,  accompagne  du  Pere  Poncet,  crie  tant
qu'il  peut  contre  ces  infolences,  aborde  le  Capitaine
des  Sauuages  de  l'lfle,  qui  feul  pouuoit  arrefter  ces
defordres,  comme  en  eftant  le  premier  autheur  &
promoteur:  cet  homme  plus  froid  naturellement  que
la  glace,  s'echauffe,  reproche  au  Pere  que  le  Bap-
tefme  &  les  prieres  faifoient  mourir  les  [no]  Sau-
uages.- Le  Pere  luy  replique,  que  leurs  pectus  &
leurs  f ortileges  eftoient  la  cauf e  de  leur  mort :  A  ce
bruit  les  Sauuages  accourent  de  tous  coft.es,  1'allarme
fe  met  dans  leur  camp,  les  Chreftiens  ne  difent  mot,
eftant  en  petit  nombre,  les  Paiens  orient  a  pleine
telle,  ie  ferois  trop  long  de  raconter  tout  ce  qui  fe
paff a  pour  lors :  Bref ,  ce  Capitaine  tranfporte  de  cho-
lere,  jette  des  cendres  bruflantes  aux  yeux  du  Pere,
&  prend  vne  corde,  comme  s  il  euft  voulu  le  garot-
ter,  le  menacant  de  le  tuer :  Le  Pere  tend  le  col  tout
f  roidement,  mais  ce  Barbare  ne  paff  a  pas  plus  outre :


1640  -  41]  EEL  A  TION  OF  1640  -  41  263

poor  Christians  suffered  [109]  the  insolence  and  the
evil  example  of  the  Pagans. Among  their  supersti-
tions they  had  begun  one,  brought  from  the  upper
countries, which  was  to  last three  nights, during
which  the  Savages  run  through  the  cabins  with  the
shrieks  and  yells  of  Demons. The  finest  act  of  this
tragi-comedy  consists  in this  point, —  the  girls  and
women  begin  to  dance,  and  some  men  take  the  Jug-
gler or  Sorcerer  under  the  arms,  and  make  him  walk
over  the  glowing  coals  without  being  burned. Fa-
ther Buteux, —  having  secretly had  notice, from a
Christian,  of  the  time  when  this  diabolical  farce  was
to  be played for the healing of a  sick  woman, —
prompted  by  zeal  for  the  glory  of  our  Lord,  went  to
the  cabins  about  ten  o'clock  at  night,  accompanied  hj
Father  Poncet;  and, inveighing as  strongly as  he
could  against  these  insolencies,  accosted  the  Captain
of  the Savages  from  the Island, who  alone could
check  these  disorders,  as  being  the  chief  author  and
promoter  of  them. This  man,  naturally  colder  than
ice,  became  excited,  and  reproached  the  Father,  say-
ing to  him  that  Baptism  and  prayers  made  the  [no]
Savages  die;  the  Father  replied  to  him  that  their
sins  and  sorceries  were  the  cause  of  their  death. At
this  clamor,  the  Savages  ran  in  haste  from  all  sides,
and  alarm  was  manifest  in  their  camp ;  the  Christians
said  nothing,  being  few  in  number,  but  the  Pagans
yelled  at  the  top  of  their  voices ;  I  would  be  too  diffuse
in  relating  all  that  took  place  then. In  short,  this
Captain, carried  away  with anger, threw  burning
cinders  at  the  eyes  of  the  Father,  and  took  a  rope  as
if  he  intended  to  strangle  him,  threatening  to  kill
him. The  Father  very  coolly  presented  his  neck,
but  this  Barbarian  proceeded  no  further. At  last,


264  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES [Vol.20

Enfra,  quelques  Sauuages  prierent  les  Peres  de  fe
retirer,  ce  qu'ils  firent,  &  cette  fuperftition  diabo-
liqiie  fut  arreftee  pour  ce  coup  la.

Les  Francois  ayans  appris  1'afTront  qu'on  auoit  fait
au  Pere  a  leur  porte,  s'alterent.  Monfieur  de  Chan-
flour  commandant  aux  Trois  Riuieres,  fait  venir  ce
Capitaine,  pour  tirer  fatisf action,  contre  la  priere
que  le  Pere  luy  faifoit,  de  ietter  tout  cela  dans  l'ou-
bly ;  comme  ce  Barbare  eft  fubtil  &  rufe,  il  trouua
fa  deffaite,  il  auoua  bien  qu'il  auoit  iette"  des  cendres
fur  le  [in]  Pere,  &  qu'il  eftoit  tout  pre  ft  d'en  rece-
uoir  autant  pour  reparation  de  fa  faute ;  mais  pour  le
cordeau  que  i'ay  pris  en  main,  faifoit-il,  ce  n'a  iamais
efte"  ma  penf6e  de  lier  le  Pere,  beaucoup  moins  de
l'etrangler:  mais  comme  il  me  reprochoit  que  ie  fai-
fois  mourir  les  Sauuages  par  mes  forts,  &  que  ie  luy
reprochois  dans  ma  cholere,  qu'il  les  faifoit  mourrir
par  les  prieres:  i'ay  pris  vn  licol  pour  luy  monftrer,
que  fi  nous  difions  tous  deux  vray,  que  nous  men-
tions tous  deux  la  mort;  d'auoir  attend  fur  fa  vie,
c'eft  ce  qui  n'eft  iamais  entre  dans  ma  penfee:  la
cataftrophe  de  cette  tragedie  fut,  que  ces  beaux  Me-
decins  ne  purent  iamais  guerir  leur  malade;  voila
vne  partie  des  bourafques  &  des  tempeftes  qui  font
arriuees  cette  annee  en  diuers  temps,  aux  Trois
Riuieres:  Ces  6pines  n'ont  pas  empefche"  la  naiflance
des  rofes,  prefentons  en  quelques  vnes  fur  l'autel  de
noftre  Seigneur.

L'Eglife  qui  commence  a  naiftre  en  cette  Refi-
dence,  eftoit  compofee  de  quatre-vingt  Neophytes,
au  mois  de  Ianuier;  ceux  qui  font  capables  d'in-
ftruction,  viennent  [112]  tous  les  iours  vne  fois  a  la
Chapelle,  pour  entendre  la  faindte  Meffe;  les  medi-


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640- 41  265

some  Savages  begged  the  Fathers  to  withdraw,  which
they  did ;  and  this  diabolical  superstition  was  stopped
for  that  time."

The  French,  having  learned  of  the  affront  that  had
been  made  to  the  Father  at  their  very  door,  were  much
troubled.  Monsieur  de  Chanflour,  the  commandant
at  the  Three  Rivers,14  sent  for  this  Captain  in  order
to  obtain  satisfaction,  notwithstanding  the  entreaty
the  Father  made  him  to  cast  all  this  into  oblivion.
As  this  Barbarian  was  subtle  and  crafty,  he  perceived
his  defeat ;  he  admitted,  indeed,  that  he  had  thrown
cinders  at  the  [1 1 1]  Father,  and  that  he  was  ready  to
receive  the  same,  in  reparation  for  his  fault :  "But
as  for  the  rope  which  I  took  in  my  hand,"  said  he,
"  it  was  never  in  my  mind  to  bind  the  Father,  much
less  to  strangle  him.  But,  when  he  reproached  me
with  making  the  Savages  die  by  my  charms,  and  I,
in  my  anger,  reproached  him  with  making  them  die
by  prayers,  I  took  a  noose,  to  show  him  that,  if  we
both  spoke  truly,  we  both  merited  death;  to  have
made  an  attempt  upon  his  life,  that  is  what  never
entered  my  head."  The  catastrophe  of  this  tragedy
was,  that  these  fine  Physicians  were  not  at  all  able
to  cure  their  patient.  This  is  one  specimen  of  the
squalls  and  tempests  which  have  occurred  this  year
at  divers  times,  at  the  Three  Rivers.  These  thorns
have  not  prevented  the  upspringing  of  roses :  let  us
offer  some  of  these  upon  the  altar  of  our  Lord.

' '  The  Church  which  is  beginning  to  grow  in  this
Residence  was  composed  of  eighty  Neophytes,  in  the
month  of  January.  Those  who  are  capable  of  instruc-
tion come  [112]  once  every  day  to  the  Chapel  to
hear  holy  Mass;  the  slanders  of  their  unbelieving
Countrymen  have  not  been  able  thus  far  to  hinder


266  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  20


fances  de  leurs  Compatriotes  infidelles,  ne  les  en  ont
pen  empefcher  iufques  a,  prefent,  la  rigueur  du  froid,
les  neiges  &  les  glaces,  &  l'eloignement  de  leurs
cabanes  ny  l'heure  de  la  Mefle,  qui  efl  au  point  du
iour,  ne  les  retiennent  point ;  ils  f requentent  f ouuent
les  Sacremens,  c'eft  ce  qui  les  nourrit  &  qui  les  entre-
tient  en  la  foy:  bref  ils  fe  comportent  fort  bien,  &
feroient  encor  mieux,  fl  leurs  yeux  n'e[fh]oient  point
bleffes  par  le  mauuais  exemple  de  leurs  parens  &  de
leurs  Compatriotes  infidelles:  I'ay  fceu  que  trente
deux  Neophytes  s'eftoient  communies  a  la  fefte  de
S.  Pierre,  &  Saindt  Paul,  ce  n'eft  pas  peu  pour  vne
Eglife  qui  ne  fait  que  de  naiflre,  &  qui  ne  fe  nourrit
encor  que  de  pain  paiftri  dans  les  larmes ;  mais  def  -
cendons  plus  en  particulier.

Vn  ieune  Chreftien  fe  trouuant  a  plus  de  cent
lieiies  des  Trois  Riuieres,  dans  vne  cabane  de  pay-
ens,  introduifoit  les  prieres,  &  les  prononcoit  le  pre-
mier &  tous  les  autres  refpondoient  fl  quelqu'vn  tuoit
quelque  caftor  ou  quelque  autre  animal,  [113]  il  fe
iettoit  a  genoux  fur  la  place,  &  en  rendoit  graces  a
Dieu.

Vne  femme  extremement  fuperbe,  a  efte  tellement
changed  par  le  baptefme,  qu'elle  eft  deuenue  docile
comme  vn  petit  agneau,  elle  a  vne  ardeur  incroyable
de  fe  faire  inftruire,  fi  elle  pafle  quelque  temps  fans
frequenter  les  Sacremens,  elle  reuient  alteree  de  ces
eaux  viues,  comme  le  cerf  pourfuiuy  des  chafleurs ;
vn  ieune  homme  de  fa  famille  eltant  tombe  malade,
la  pria  de  faire  venir  l'vn  de  leurs  Iongleurs,  pour  le
faire  chanter  &  foufner  a  leur  mode,  cette  bonne
femme  fe  fafcha  contre  luy,  i'aymerois  mieux,  luy
fit  elle,  te  voir  mourir,  que  Dieu  fut  iamais  offence;


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  267

them  from  it,  neither  does  the  severity  of  the  cold,
the  snow,  the  ice,  the  distance  of  their  cabins,  or  the
hour  of  Mass,  which  is  at  daybreak,  keep  them  away.
They  often  receive  the  Sacraments ;  it  is  this  which
nurtures  them  and  sustains  them  in  the  faith ;  in  a
word,  they  conduct  themselves  very  well,  and  would
do  better  still,  if  their  eyes  were  not  shocked  by  the
evil  example  of  their  relatives  and  unbelieving  Coun-
trymen." I  have  been  informed  that  thirty-two
Neophytes  received  communion  on  the  feast  of  St.
Peter  and  Saint  Paul ;  that  is  not  a  few  for  a  Church
which  has  just  been  founded,  and  which  is  still  nour-
ished only  by  bread  mingled  with  tears :  but  let  us
come  down  more  to  details.

A  young  Christian,  being  more  than  a  hundred
leagues  from  the  Three  Rivers,  and  in  a  cabin  of  the
pagans,  introduced  prayers;  he  pronounced  them
first,  and  all  the  others  responded.  If  any  one  killed
a  beaver,  or  some  other  animal,  [113]  he  knelt  down
on  the  spot,  and  returned  thanks  to  God.

An  extremely  proud  woman  was  so  changed  by  her
baptism,  that  she  has  become  as  docile  as  a  little
lamb :  she  has  an  incredible  eagerness  to  be  instructed.
If  she  goes  some  time  without  receiving  the  Sacra-
ments, she  comes  back  longing  for  these  living
waters,  like  a  deer  pursued  by  hunters.  A  young
man  of  her  family  having  fallen  sick,  begged  her  to
send  for  one  of  their  Jugglers,  that  he  might  chant
and  breathe  upon  him,  after  their  fashion;  this  good
woman  was  angry  at  him.  "  I  would  rather,"  said
she  to  him,  "  see  thee  die,  than  that  God  be  offended
through  my  instrumentality ;  have  recourse  to  him
who  made  thee ;  these  deceivers  could  not  cure  thee. "

She exhorts  the new  Christians  to give  a  good


268  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

par  mon  entremife  aye  recours  a  celuy  qui  t'a  fait,
ces  trompeurs  ne  te  fcauroient  guerir.

Elle  exhorte  les  nouueaux  Chreftiens,  a  dormer
bon  exemple  aux  Fidelles,  &  Infidelles,  afin  que  le
fainct,  Nom  de  Dieu  ne  foit  point  blafpheme-

La  crainte  de  Dieu  &  du  peche,  fe  graue  f enable-
ment dans  les  coeurs  de  ces  bons  Neophytes,  les
enfans  mefme  commencent  a  prendre  le  party  de  la
vertu,  [i  14]  fi  leurs  peres  &  meres  par  mef  garde,  ou  par
vne  vieille  habitude,  laiffent  fortir  de  leurs  bouches
quelques  paroles  mefchantes,  ces  pauures  petits  leurs
difent  qu'ils  s'en  doiuent  confeffer,  &  qu'ils  offencent
Dieu,  qu'ils  le  chaffent  de  leurs  cabanes,  pour  y  faire
entrer  le  mef  chant  Manit8.

Les  Dimanches  &  les  Feftes  ils  affiftent  tous  en-
femble  a  vne  MefTe,  qui  fe  dit  expreffdment  pour
eux:  car  comme  la  Chappelle  eft  trop  petite  pour
tenir  les  Francois  &  les  Sauuages,  on  les  appelle
f eparement  au  diuin  Seruice :  Au  commencement  on
les  fait  prier  tout  haut,  puis  on  leur  fait  vne  petite
inftrudtion  en  leur  langue;  en  fuite  on  chante  l'eau
benifte :  Pendant  l'eleuation  on  leur  fait  faire  quel-
ques adtes  de  foy,  d'efperance,  &  d'amour;  &  apres
le  facre  Office  on  leur  fait  chanter  quelque  Cantique
fpirituel,  qui  nourrit  en  leurs  cceurs  la  deuotion.

Vne  bonne-femme  nouuellement  baptif6e,  eftant
inuitee  a  vn  feftin,  voiant  qu'on  parloit  de  tout  man-
ger, fuiuat  leur  ancienne  fuperflition,  fe  voulut  reti-
rer,  difant,  qu'il  n'eftoit  pas  permis  aux  Chreftiens
d'entrer  aux  banquets,  ou  Dieu  eftoit  offenfe:  [115]
Celle  qui  faif oit  le  feftin  luy  dit ;  Les  Peres  ne  vous
defendent  pas  d'amfler  a  ces  feftins,  mais  bien  d'en
faire :  Les  Peres,  refpondit-elle,  defendent  nos  exces/


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  269

example  to  Believers  and  Unbelievers,  to  the  end  that
the  holy  Name  of  God  may  not  be  blasphemed.

The  fear  of  God  and  of  sin  is  so  perceptibly  im-
pressed upon  the  hearts  of  these  good  Neophytes  that
even  the  children  begin  to  take  the  side  of  virtue ;
[114]  if  their  fathers  and  mothers,  through  inadver-
tence or  through  old  habit,  let  any  bad  words  escape
from  their  lips,  these  poor  little  ones  tell  them  that
they  ought  to  confess,  and  that  they  are  offending
God  and  chasing  him  from  their  cabins,  so  as  to  let
in  the  wicked  Manitou.

On  Sundays  and  Feast  days  they  are  all  present
together  at  a  Mass,  which  is  said  expressly  for  them ;
for,  as  the  Chapel  is  too  small  to  hold  the  French
and  the  Savages,  they  are  called  separately  to  divine
Service.  First,  they  are  made  to  pray  aloud,  then
they  are  given  a  little  instruction  in  their  own  lan-
guage ;  afterward,  they  chant  the  aspersion.  During
the  elevation  of  the  host  they  are  made  to  perform
some  acts  of  faith,  of  hope,  and  of  charity;  and,  after
the  holy  Office,  they  are  made  to  sing  some  spiritual
Hymn,  which  fosters  devotion  in  their  hearts.

A  worthy  woman,  recently  baptized,  having  been
invited  to  a  feast,  and  seeing  that  they  talked  of  eat-
ing everything,  according  to  their  old  superstition,
wished  to  decline,  saying  that  Christians  were  not
permitted  to  partake  of  feasts  by  which  God  was
offended.  [115]  She  who  made  the  feast  said  to  her:
"  The  Fathers  do  not  forbid  you  to  be  present  at
these  feasts,  but  forbid  you  to  make  them."  "  The
Fathers,"  replied  she,  "  forbid  us  excess."  "  Very
well  then,"  said  she  who  had  invited  her;  "  commit
no  excess ;  eat  only  what  you  please ;  '  the  good
creature  agreed  to  this,  protesting  that  she  would


270  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  20

He  bien  done,  fit  celle  qui  l'auoit  conuiee,  ne  faites
aucun  exces,  ne  manges  que  ce  qu'il  vous  plaira;  la
bonne-femme  s'y  accorde,  proteftant  qu'elle  ne  vou-
loit  contreuenir  a  aucune  des  loix  de  fon  baptefme.

Vne  ieune  fille  de  la  Nation  d'Iroquet,  ayant  eu
quelque  interaction  9a  bas  pendant  l'Automne,  a
paffe"  l'hiuer  aux  Hurons,  &  voiant  que  dans  la  Bour-
gade  ou  elle  eftoit,  on  vomiffoit  mille  blafphemes
contre  Dieu,  &  contre  nous;  elle  prit  la  caufe  de
Dieu  en  main  &  noftre  deffence,  iamais  on  ne  la  put
empefcher  de  faire  fes  prieres,  fes  parens  nous
difoient,  qu'ils  auoient  apris  a  prier  Dieu  par  fon
moyen.

Malgre"  toutes  les  attaques  du  Diable,  les  Infidelles
ne  laiffent  pas  d'ouurir  les  yeux  petit  a  petit;  En
forte  qu'ils  s'adouciffent  &  s'apriuoifent,  nous  don-
nans  de  bonnes  efperances  de  leur  conuerfion.  Vn
certain  qui  paroiffoit  autat  opiniaftre,  que  [116]  les
autres,  eftant  pourfuiuy  des  Hiroquois,  eut  recours  a
la  priere;  &  comme  on  luy  demanda  ce  qu'il  difoit,
il  recita  le  Pater  &  YAue,  qu'il  auoit  apris  en  deux
iours  d'vne  pauure  femme  aueugle,  inflruite  &
baptifee  a  l'Hofpital.

Ce  que  ie  vais  dire  des  AttiKamegues,  appartient
a  cette  Refidence,  pource  que  les  Peres  qui  font  la,
les  inftruif  ent ;  mais  fort  peu:  car  ils  ne  paroiffent
que  comme  des  dclairs :  Les  Sauuages  de  ce  pais  les
nomment  AttiKamegues,  du  mot  AttiKamegtf,  qui
fignifie  vn  certain  poiffon  blanc :  Ie  n'en  ay  point  veu
en  France  de  femblables,  il  eft  d'vn  fort  bon  gouft ;
&  peut-eftre,  que  s'en  trouuant  quantite  au  pais  de
ces  bonnes  gens,  on  leur  a  fait  porter  le  nom  de  ce
poiffon. Ils  demeurent  dans  les  terres,  au  Nord  des


1640-41]  RELA  TION  OF  1640 - 41  271

never  act  contrary  to  the  obligations  of  her  baptism.

A  young  girl  of  the  Iroquet  Nation  having  had
some  instruction  down  there  during  the  Autumn,
spent  the  winter  among  the  Hurons;  and,  seeing
that  in  the  Village  where  she  was,  a  thousand  blas-
phemies were  spit  forth  against  God,  and  against  us,
she  took  up  personally  the  cause  of  God,  and  our  de-
fense. They  were  never  able  to  prevent  her  saying
her  prayers ;  her  parents  told  us,  that  through  her
means  they  had  learned  to  pray  to  God.

In  spite  of  all  the  attacks  of  the  Devil,  the  Unbe-
lievers are,  however,  opening  their  eyes  by  degrees, —
so  that  they  are  becoming  softened  and  tamed,  giv-
ing us  hopes  of  their  conversion.  A  certain  man
who  appeared  as  obstinate  as  [116]  the  others,  being
pursued  by  the  Hiroquois,  had  recourse  to  prayer;
and  when  he  was  asked  what  he  said,  he  repeated
the  Pater  and  the  Ave,  which  he  had  learned  in  a
few  days  from  a  poor  blind  woman  who  had  been
instructed  and  baptized  at  the  Hospital.

What  I  am  going  to  say  of  the  Attikamegues,  con-
cerns this  Residence,  because  the  Fathers  who  are
here  instruct  them, — but  very  seldom,  for  they  make
their  appearance  only  like  flashes  of  lightning.  The
Savages  of  this  country  call  them  Attikamegues,
from  the  word  "  Attikamegou,"  which  signifies  a
certain  white  fish.  I  have  not  seen  in  France  any
like  this ;  it  has  a  very  good  flavor ;  and  perhaps  it
was  through  finding  abundance  of  it  in  the  country
of  these  good  people,  that  they  were  given  the  name
of  the  fish.  They  dwell  in  the  lands  to  the  North  of
the  Three  Rivers;  they  have  dealings  with  other
Nations  still  more  distant  from  our  settlements ;  they
come  down  by  the  river  which  we  call  in  the  Savage


272  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

Trois  Riuieres,  ils  ont  commerce  auec  d'autres  Na-
tions, encor  plus  efloignees  de  nos  habitations;  ils
defcendent  par  le  fleuue  que  nous  appellons  en  Sau-
uage,  MetaberHtin,  en  Francois,  les  Trois  Riuieres,
pour  venir  tramquer  au  magazin  de  Meffieurs  de  la
Nouuelle  France.  Pendant  le  fejour  qu'ils  font  la,
nos  Peres  qui  font  en  la  Refidence  [117]  de  la  Concep-
tion, aux  Trois  Riuieres,  font  vn  autre  trafic  auec
eux :  Ils  leur  promettent,  au  nom  de  Iefus-Chrift,
vne  Eternite  de  grandeur,  pour  vne  obei'ffance  paffa-
gere.  Ces  bonnes  gens  auoient  donne  parole  qu'ils
s'approcheroient  plus  pr6s  de  nous,  pour  eftre  in-
ftruits ;  mais  la  crainte  des  Hiroquois,  ennemis  com-
muns  de  tous  les  Sauuages,  qui  ont  commerce  auec
les  Francois,  leur  a  fait  quitter  cette  penfee :  Si  bien
qu'eftans  defcendus  au  Printemps  aux  Trois  Riuieres,
voicy  comme  ils  parlerent  au  Pere  Iacques  Buteux.
Nous  te  promifmes  l'an  paffe,  dit  leur  Capitaine,  que
nous  viendrions  demeurer  a  vne  iournee  de  voftre
Habitation,  tant  pour  apprendre  le  chemin  du  ciel,
que  pour  cultiuer  la  terre ;  nous  nous  fommes  aff ena-
bles fur  ce  fujet  en  noftre  pais,  tout  le  monde
approuuoit  ce  deffein:  mais  l'orgueil  des  Hiroquois
nous  en  fait  fufpendre  1' execution;  nous  ne  fommes
pas  gens  de  guerre,  nous  manions  mieux  l'auiron
que  l'efp£e,  nous  aimons  la  paix,  c'eft  pourquoy
nous  nous  eloignons  le  plus  que  nous  pouuons,  des
occafions  de  combatre;  fi  on  pouuoit  dompter  [118]
ces  peuples,  qui  nous  veulent  maffacrer,  nous  ferions
bien-toft  aupr6s  de  vous,  car  nous  auons  vn  grand
defir  d'eftre  inftruits:  En  effet,  ces  bonnes  gens  font
plus  fouuent  ch£s  nous,  qu'au  magazin  oil  ils  vont
acheter  leurs  denrees.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  273

tongue,  "  Metaberoutin,"  and  in  the  French,  "  the
Three  Rivers,"15  to  trade  at  the  warehouse  of  the
Gentlemen  of  New  France.  During  the  stay  which
they  make  there,  our  Fathers  who  are  at  the  Resi-
dence [117]  of  la  Conception,  at  the  Three  Rivers,
carry  on  a  different  traffic  with  them, —  they  promise
them  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  an  Eternity  of
glory  for  an  obedience  of  short  duration.  These
good  people  had  promised  that  they  would  come
nearer  to  us,  in  order  to  be  instructed ;  but  the  fear
of  the  Hiroquois,  the  common  enemy  of  all  the  Sav-
ages, who  have  relations  with  the  French,  has  made
them  abandon  this  idea;  so  much  so,  that,  having
come  down  to  the  Three  Rivers  this  Spring,  this  is
what  they  said  to  Father  Jacques  Buteux :  ' '  We
promised  thee  last  year,"  said  their  Captain,  "  that
we  would  come  and  dwell  a  day's  journey  from  your
Settlement,  as  much  in  order  to  learn  the  way  to
heaven  as  to  cultivate  the  land.  We  had  a  meeting
concerning  this  subject  in  our  country,  and  every
one  approved  of  this  design ;  but  the  boasts  of  the  Hi-
roquois made  us  suspend  its  execution.  We  are  not
men  of  war, —  we  handle  the  paddle  better  than  the
javelin ;  we  love  peace ;  that  is  why  we  keep  as  far
as  possible  from  occasions  for  fighting.  If  we  could
overcome  [118]  these  people  who  wish  to  massacre
us,  we  would  very  soon  be  near  you,  for  we  have  a
great  desire  to  be  instructed."  In  fact,  these  good
people  are  more  often  with  us  than  at  the  warehouse
where  they  buy  their  provisions.

After  the  speech  of  this  Captain,  one  of  his  people
came  to  the  Father  in  private,  in  order  to  be  more
fully  instructed.  The  Father  having  explained  to
him  at  various  times  a  good  part  of  our  belief,  this


274  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

Apres  le  difcours  de  ce  Capitaine,  l'vn  de  fes  gens
vint  trotmer  le  Pere  en  particulier,  pour  fe  faire  plus
pleinement  inflruire :  Le  Pere  luy  ayant  explique  a
diuerfes  fois  vne  bonne  partie  de  noflre  creance :  ce
bon-homme  le  pria  a  fon  depart,  de  luy  donner  vn
chappellet,  &  vne  Image,  deuant  laquelle  il  put  faire
fes  prieres :  De  plus,  il  luy  demanda  vn  papier  oil  les
prieres  qu'il  deuoit  faire,  fuffent  efcrites:  Le  Pere
voiant  la  nai'fuet6  de  ce  bon-homme,  luy  accorda
tout  ce  qu'il  demandoit;  encor  bien  qu'il  n'ignoraft
pas,  que  ce  pauure  Sauuage  ne  fcauoit  pas  lire:
mais  affes  fouuent  ils  prennent  leurs  papiers,  &
les  prefentent  a  Dieu,  &  luy  difent:  Lay  enuie  de
te  dire  tout  ce  qui  eft  la  dedans,  fi  ie  le  fcauois,  ie
te  le  dirois  tout  au  long.  A  quelques  mois  de  la,
ce  bon-homme  eftant  de  retour,  vint  voir  le  Pere,
luy  prefente  l'image  qu'il  luy  auoit  donnee:  [119]
Elle  n'eft  pas  fi  blanche,  dit-il,  que  lors  que  ie  la
receu  de  ta  main,  c'efl  la  fumee  de  la  cabane,  qui  l'a
noircie,  ie  la  tirois  tous  les  iours  de  mon  fac,  ie  l'at-
tachois  a  ma  cabane,  &  ma  femme  &  moy,  &  toute
ma  famille,  nous  nous  mettions  a  genoux  pour  faire
nos  prieres  foir  &  matin.  Ie  difois  fouuent  a  ma
femme,  Ie  fuis  bien  fache  de  ce  que  ie  ne  fcay  pas
tout  ce  qu'il  faut  dire,  a  noftre  Pere  qui  a  fait  le  ciel
&  la  terre:  Ie  n'ay  point  d'efprit,  tu  me  ferois  grand
plaifir,  difoit-il  au  Pere  Buteux,  fi  tu  me  donnois  le
moyen  d'en  auoir,  &  ft  tu  m'enfeignois  la  facon  de
bien  retenir  toutes  les  prieres  qu'il  faut  faire  a  Dieu,
prens  courage,  enfeigne  moy  tous  les  iours  pendant
que  ie  feray  aupres  de  vous ;  ne  me  parle  point  d'au-
tre  chofe  que  de  mon  falut;  c'eft  cela  que  ie  veux
fcauoir,  ce feu qui eft  la  bas, eft  bien  a  craindre,


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  275

worthy  man  at  departing  begged  that  he  would  give
him  a  chaplet  and  an  Image,  before  which  he  could
say  his  prayers;  besides,  he  asked  for  a  paper  on
which  the  prayers,  that  he  ought  to  say,  should  be
written.  The  Father,  seeing  the  simplicity  of  this
honest  man,  granted  him  all  that  he  requested,
although  he  knew  well  that  this  poor  Savage  could
not  read ;  but,  not  unfrequently,  they  take  their
papers,  offer  them  to  God,  and  say  to  him:  "  I  have
a  desire  to  tell  thee  all  that  is  here  within ;  if  I  knew
how,  I  would  say  it  to  thee  at  full  length."  Some
months  afterward,  this  good  man,  having  returned,
came  to  see  the  Father  and  showed  the  image  that
had  been  given  him.  [119]  "It  is  not  as  white, "
said  he,  ' '  as  when  I  received  it  from  thy  hand,  it  is
the  smoke  of  the  cabin  that  has  blackened  it.  I  took
it  out  of  my  pouch  every  day,  and  hung  it  up  in  my
cabin ;  and  my  wife,  and  I,  and  all  my  family,  knelt
down  to  say  our  prayers  night  and  morning.  I
often  said  to  my  wife :  '  I  am  very  sorry  that  I  do
not  know  all  that  ought  to  be  said  to  our  Father  who
has  made  heaven  and  earth. '  I  have  no  understand-
ing; thou  wouldst  do  me  a  great  favor,"  said  he  to
Father  Buteux,  "  if  thou  wouldst  give  me  the  means
of  having  some,  and  if  thou  wouldst  teach  me  the
way  to  remember  rightly  all  the  prayers  I  must  offer
to  God.  Take  courage!  teach  me  every  day  while  I
am  with  you ;  do  not  speak  to  me  about  anything
but  my  salvation, —  that  is  what  I  wish  to  know.
The  fire  that  is  below  is  much  to  be  feared ;  I  hope  I
shall  not  go  there,  for  He  who  is  good  will  help  me
to  believe  in  him."  Having  said  this,  he  drew  forth
his  paper:  "  Now  then,  my  Father,"  said  he,  "  see
if  I  have  remembered  well  the  prayers  which  thou


276  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.20

i'efpere  que  ie  n'iray  pas,  car  Celuy  qui  eft  bon,
m'aidera  a  croire  en  luy.  Ayant  dit  cela,  il  tire  fon
papier:  Or  9a  mon  Pere,  fit-il,  regarde  fi  i'ay  bien
retenu  les  prieres  que  tu  m'as  enfeignees,  &  que  ie
t'ay  fait  efcrire  en  ce  papier;  regarde-le,  &  m'ef-
coute,  pour  voir  fi  ie  n'ay  rien  oublie.  Le  Pere  [120]
fut  bien  en  peine,  car  il  n'auoit  mis  que  les  lettres
initiales  de  plufieurs  prieres,  &  de  plufieurs  adtes  de
vertus,  qu'il  luy  auoit  enfeignes,  dont  il  ne  fe  fouue-
noit  plus.  II  s'auifa  de  cette  def aite ;  Mais  plutoft,
commence  toy  le  premier,  luy  dit-il,  dy  tout  haut  ce
que  ie  t'ay  enf eigne,  pour  voir  n  tu  n'as  rien  change:
Ce  bon  Sauuage  fe  mit  a  reciter,  non  feulement  ce
qui  eftoit  marque  en  fon  papier,  mais  tout  ce  qu'on
luy  auoit  enf  eigne,  auec  vne  telle  fidelite  que  le  Pere
en  refta  tout  r6joiiy,  &  tout  eftonne.  II  faut  que  ie
confeffe,  adjoufte  le  Pere,  que  iamais  Sauuage  ne
m'a  plus  touche  que  celui-cy,  foit  pour  la  candeur  &
la  fimplicite  auec  laquelle  il  agiffoit,  foit  pour  les
fentimes  de  deuotion  qu'il  faifoit  paroiftre  foit  pour
l'attetion  qu'il  apportoit  a  ma  parole,  &  pour  l'auidite"
qu'il  auoit  de  fcauoir  la  dodtrine  de  falut:  Si  toft
que  ie  luy  parlay  du  Baptefme,  il  me  le  demanda  auec
vne  tres-grande  ardeur:  Ne  crains  point,  me  faifoit-
il,  ie  ne  retourneray  point  en  arriere,  ie  croy  tout  de
bon,  mon  Pere  m'aidera  a  luy  obei'r:  Ie  le  voulus
6prouuer  deuant  fes  gens,  dit  le  Pere;  il  fe  monftra
toufiours  ferme  &  conftant;  fi  [121]  bien  que  ie  luy
auois  donne  iour  pour  fon  baptefme:  mais  arriuant
la-deffus  vne  alarme  des  Hiroquois,  ces  gens  s'enfui-
rent  incontinent  dans  les  terres,  &  luy  auec  eux,
redoutant  ces  guerriers,  plus  que  les  Demons.

Les Neophytes nouuellement baptif^s, aident


1640-41]  'RELATION  OF  1640-41I  277


didst  teach  me,  and  which  I  had  thee  write  on  this
paper:  look  at  it,  and  listen  to  me,  so  as  to  see  if  I
have  forgotten  anything."  The  Father  [120]  was
quite  at  a  loss ;  for  he  had  put  only  the  initial  letters
of  several  prayers  and  of  several  acts  of  virtue  which
he  had  taught  him,  but  which  he  no  longer  remem-
bered. He  bethought  himself  of  this  evasion:  "  But
rather,"  said  he  to  him,  "begin  first  thyself;  say
aloud  what  I  have  taught  thee,  that  I  may  see  if  thou
hast  changed  anything. ' '  This  good  Savage  began
to  recite  not  only  what  was  marked  on  his  paper,  but
all  that  he  had  been  taught,  with  such  fidelity,  that
the  Father  remained  much  delighted,  and  greatly
astonished  at  him.  "  I  must  confess,"  adds  the
Father,  "  that  no  Savage  has  ever  touched  me  more
than  this  one,  not  only  by  the  candor  and  simplicity
with  which  he  acted,  and  the  feeling  of  devotion
which  he  manifested,  but  by  the  attention  that  he
gave  to  my  words,  and  the  eagerness  that  he  had  to
know  the  doctrine  of  salvation.  As  soon  as  I  spoke
to  him  of  Baptism,  he  asked  for  it  with  the  greatest
ardor.  '  Do  not  fear,'  said  he  to  me,  '  I  shall  not
turn  back ;  I  earnestly  believe,  and  my  Father  will
aid  me  to  obey  him.'  I  wished  to  test  him  before
his  people,"  says  the  Father;  "he  always  proved
himself  to  be  firm  and  steadfast, —  so  [121]  that  I  had
appointed  a  day  for  his  baptism ;  but  an  alarm  about
the  Hiroquois  coming  on  that  very  day,  these  people
fled  immediately  into  the  country,  and  he  with  them,
fearing  those  warriors  more  than  Demons."

The  newly-baptized  Neophytes  greatly  help  their
Countrymen  ;  one  of  those  who  had  retired  to  Sillery,
being  at  the  Three  Rivers  during  the  stay  of  these
Attikamegues,  who  are  of  his  kindred,  said  to  one  of


278  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

grandement  leurs  Compatriotes,  l'vn  de  ceux  qui  fe
retirent  a  Sillery,  eftant  aux  Trois  Riuieres  pendant
le  fejour  de  ces  AttiKamegues,  qui  luy  font  parens,
difoit  a  quelqu'vn  d'eux,  qui  fe  faifoit  inftruire:
Nous  ferons  bientoft  parens  tout  de  bon,  mes  vrais
parens  font  ceux  qui  croient  en  Dieu,  &  qui  font  bap-
tifes;  car  ie  feray  eternellement  auec  eux.  Nous
n'auons  qu'vn  Pere,  qui  eft  Dieu,  puis  que  tu  le  veux
connoiftre,  tu  feras  bien-toft  de  mes  parens.  La
parente  que  nous  auons  felon  la  chair,  n'eft  pas
grand'  chofe,  il  faut  que  tu  fois  baptife\  pour  eftre
mon  vray  parent.  La  chair  ne  connoifl  point  ce  lan-
gage,  il  ne  fe  parle  point  en  terre,  il  vient  du  ciel.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  279

them  who  was  being  instructed :  ' '  We  shall  be  very-
soon  relatives  indeed ;  my  true  relatives  are  those  who
believe  in  God,  and  who  are  baptized,  for  I  shall  be
eternally  with  them.  We  have  only  one  Father,
who  is  God ;  since  thou  desirest  to  know  him,  thou
wilt  very  soon  be  among  my  relations.  The  kin-
ship that  we  have  according  to  the  flesh,  is  a  trifling
matter;  thou  must  be  baptized,  to  be  my  true  rela-
tive." Flesh  does  not  know  this  language;  it  is  not
spoken  on  earth,  it  comes  from  heaven.


280  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20


[122]  CHAPITRE  VIII.

DE QUELQUES BAPTESMES EN LA RESIDENCE DE LA
CONCEPTION AUX TROIS RIUIERES.

IL  fe  trotme  vn  certain  Apoftat  dans  le  diftridt  de
cette  Refidence,  nomme  des  fies  8mafatik8eie,
c'eit  a  dire  le  crapaut,  ce  mefchant  homme  a
plus  de  venin  en  fon  coeur,  &  en  fa  langue,  que
cette  vilaine  befte  n'en  a  en  toutes  les  parties  de  fon
corps;  il  a  efte  baptife-  dans  vne  grande  maladie,
eftant  guery  il  n'a  pas  imite-  ceux  qui  ont  publique-
ment  confefle  dans  leur  fante  la  foy,  qu'ils  auoient
receue  dans  leur  maladie,  il  s'eft  declare  publique-
ment  ennemy  de  Dieu  &  du  Chriftianifme,  faifant
tous  fes  efforts  pour  diuertir  ceux  qui  le  voudroient
embraffer:  II  a  voulu  empefcher  qu'vn  certain  nom-
ine" Piefcars,  dont  ie  veux  parler,  homme  afles  con-
neu  des  fiens,  ne  receut  le  f  aindt  Baptefme ;  mais  le
Diable  a  eft£  vaincu  dans  l'vn  de  [123]  fes  plus  grands
fuppots  &  Dieu  a  triomphe  dans  vne  ame  qui  s'eft
rendue  fidele ;  ce  bon  Neophyte  a  eft6  nomme  Simon
par  Monfieur  de  Chanflour  commandant  au  fort  des
Trois  Riuieres,  comme  il  vit  que  les  Infidelles,  &
notamment  ce  miferable  Apoftat,  le  piquotoient  fur
le  deffein  qu'il  auoit  de  fe  faire  baptifer;  il  voulut
rendre  fon  baptefme  le  plus  folemnel  qu'il  luy  fut
poffible,  protectant  par  cette  action  toute  publique,
qu'il  ne  vouloit  point  croire  en  cachette  comme  Nico-
deme  propter  metum  Iudceorum ;  mais  qu'il  vouloit  fans


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  281


[122]  CHAPTER  VIII.

OF  SOME BAPTISMS  AT  THE  RESIDENCE OF LA  CONCEP-
TION AT THE THREE RIVERS.

THERE  is  a  certain  Apostate  in  the  district  of
this  Residence,  called  by  his  own  people  Ou-
masatikweie,  that  is  to  say,  "  the  toad:  "  16  this
wicked  man  has  more  venom  in  his  heart  and  in  his
tongue  than  that  unsightly  creature  has  in  its  whole
body.  He  was  baptized  during  a  severe  sickness;
having  recovered,  he  did  not  imitate  those  who  open-
ly confessed  in  health  the  faith  which  they  had
received  in  their  sickness, — he  has  publicly  declared
himself  the  enemy  of  God  and  of  Christianity,  using
his  utmost  efforts  to  dissuade  those  who  would  be
inclined  to  embrace  it.  He  wished  to  prevent  a  cer-
tain man  named  Piescars,  of  whom  I  shall  speak,  a
man  somewhat  noted  among  his  people,  from  receiv-
ing holy  Baptism ;  but  the  Devil  has  been  overcome
in  one  of  [123]  his  most  powerful  instruments,  and
God  has  triumphed  in  a  soul  which  has  borne  faith-
ful witness ;  this  good  Neophyte  was  named  Simon
by  Monsieur  de  Chanflour,  the  commandant  of  the
fort  at  the  Three  Rivers.  When  he  saw  that  the
Unbelievers,  and  especially  this  wretched  Apostate,
tormented  him  about  the  plan  he  had  for  being  bap-
tized, he  desired  to  make  his  baptism  as  solemn  as
was  possible,— protesting  by  this  very  public  act
that  he  did  not  wish  to  believe  in  secret  like  Nicode-
mus,  propter  metum  Judtzorum, but  that  he  wished


282  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  20

crainte  efleuer  l'6tendart  de  la  Croix,  par  tout  ou  il  fe
trouueroit:  quelque  temps  deviant  fon  baptefme,  il
affembla  les  principaux  Sauuages,  &  leur  dit:  Fay
pris  refolution  d' eftre  Chreftien,  ie  ne  fuis  pas  vn
enfant,  ie  fcay  bien  ce  que  ie  fay,  ie  ne  doute  pas
que  plufieurs  n'improuuent  mon  deffein,  mais  la
doctrine  qu'on  m'a  enfeignee,  me  femble  fi  belle  &
fi  veritable,  que  quand  bien  tout  le  monde  l'a  rebute-
roit,  ie  l'embrafferois  de  tout  mon  coeur,  deuff  'ay-ie
eftre  feul  dans  mes  refolutions.  Voiant  que  quel-
ques-vns  baiffoient  la  tefte,  pour  marque  que  ces
[124]  paroles  auoient  bleff6  leurs  oreilles,  le  lende-
main  il  recharge  de  nouueau,  il  fort  en  public,  s'en
va  faire  vn  grand  cry  a  l'entour  des  cabanes  felon  la
couftume  du  pais;  les  Capitaines  &  les  principaux
Sauuages,  voulans  annoncer  quelque  chofe  publique-
ment,  n'ont  point  d'autres  trompettes  que  leurs  voix,
qu'ils  font  retentir  dans  leurs  Bourgades,  ou  dans  les
lieux  oil  ils  raffemblent  leurs  cabanes.  Celui-cy  s'en
alia  crier  a  pleine  tefte :  hommes,  £cout6s  ma  parole ;
aufli-toft  chacun  fe  taift  dans  les  cabanes,  &  pour
marque  qu'on  ecoute,  quelques  vns  r6pondent:  ho
ho!  i'ay  defia  dit  a  quelques- vns,  que  ie  croiois  en
Dieu,  que  ie  voulois  eftre  baptife,  ie  le  dy  publique-
met,  ie  ne  fais  rien  en  cachette,  la  chofe  eftant  de
foy  bonne  &  faindte,  il  ne  la  faut  point  cacher:  l'im-
prouue  qui  voudra,  la  conclufion  en  eft  prife,  ie  feray
demain  baptife;  ayant  dit  cela  il  rentre  dans  fa
cabane,  &  l'Apoftat  fort  de  la  fienne  vomiffant  de  fa
bouche  du  poifon,  dont  il  s'efforca  d'empefter  tous  fes
Compatriotes ;  ie  voy  bien,  s'ecria-t'il,  que  celuy  qui
viet  de  haranguer,  fe  veut  laiffer  tromper  par  les
Francois,  [125]  qu'il  foit  trompe\  a  la  bonne  heure,


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  283

fearlessly  to  raise  the  standard  of  trie  Cross  wherever
he  might  happen  to  be.  Some  time  before  his  bap-
tism he  called  together  the  chief  Savages,  and  said
to  them :  "  I  have  resolved  to  be  a  Christian ;  I  am
no  child, —  I  know  well  what  I  am  doing.  I  do  not
doubt  that  many  will  disapprove  of  my  intention;
but  the  doctrine  which  has  been  taught  me  seems  to
me  so  beautiful  and  so  true,  that,  although  the  whole
world  should  spurn  it,  I  would  embrace  it  with  all
my  heart,  even  should  I  be  alone  in  my  resolve. ' '
Seeing  that  some  of  them  bent  down  their  heads,  as
a  sign  that  these  [124]  words  had  shocked  their  ears,
the  next  day  he  made  a  second  charge  upon  them ;
he  went  out  in  open  view,  and  began  shouting  aloud
among  the  cabins,  according  to  the  custom  of  the
country.  When  the  Captains  and  chief  Savages  wish
to  announce  anything  publicly,  they  have  no  other
trumpets  than  their  voices,  which  they  make  resound
through  their  Villages,  or  in  the  places  where  they
have  gathered  their  cabins.  This  man  went  about,
shouting  at  the  top  of  his  voice:  "  Men,  listen  to  my
words !  '  Immediately  every  one  was  silent  in  the
cabins,  and,  as  a  sign  that  they  were  listening,  some
responded  "  Ho,  ho!  "  "I  have  already  told  some
of  you  that  I  believed  in  God,  and  that  I  wished  to
be  baptized :  I  now  say  it  publicly.  I  am  doing  noth-
ing secretly, — the  matter  being  of  itself  good  and
holy,  it  is  not  necessary  to  conceal  it.  Let  whoever
will  disapprove,  my  decision  is  made,  I  shall  be  bap-
tized to-morrow."  Having  said  this  he  reentered
his  cabin ;  and  the  Apostate  came  out  from  his,  vomit-
ing from  his  mouth  poison,  with  which  he  endeav-
ored to  infect  all  his  Countrymen.  "  I  see  indeed,"
he  exclaimed,  "that  he  who  has  just  spoken  is  willing


284  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.  20

puis  qu'il  le  veut  eftre:  mais  il  fera  fetil  de  fa  bande,
car  perfonne  n'a  ermie  de  le  fuiure:  c'eft  quelque
vain  efpoir  qui  le  pouffe,  dont  nous  ne  faifons  point
d'eftat,  on  m'a  baptife  lors  que  i'eftois  malade  a  la
mort,  fi  toft  que  l'efprit  m'eft  reuenu,  i'ay  defauoue"
tout  ce  que  i'auois  dit  pour  lors.  Noftre  Catechu-
mene  entendant  ce  difcours,  s'anime  dauantage,  il  va
trouuer  le  Pere  Buteux,  luy  raconte  tout  ce  qui
s'eftoit  paff£:  Allons,  luy  dit-il,  a  la  Chappelle,  ie
veux  faire  vn  autre  cry  public  contre  1' impudence  de
cet  Apoftat:  mais  deuant  que  l'entreprendre,  ie  veux
recommander  l'affaire  a  noftre  Seigneur,  ayant  fait
fa  priere,  il  s'en  va  vers  les  cabanes,  eleue  fa  voix,
crie  auec  vn  zele  de  feu:  Ie  vous  ay  defia  dit  plu-
£ieu[r]s  fois,  que  ie  voulois  eftre  baptif6,  ie  perfeuere
dans  ma  refolution;  fi  quelqu'vn  a  quelque  chofe  a
dire  contre  moy,  qu'il  fe  hafte;  car  c'eft  demain  que
ie  le  dois  eftre:  Ie  le  deuois  eftre  auiourd'huy,  mais
pource  que  la  ieuneffe  eft  abfente,  i'attens  fon  re-
tour,  arm  qu'elle  apprenne  par  mon  exemple,  a  ne
point  redouter  les  langues  medif antes,  [126]  quand  il
s'agfit  d'vne  fi  faindte  adtion.

Le  lendemain  il  fe  vint  prefenter  au  faindt  Bap-
tefme,  deuant  que  de  le  receuoir  il  tint  ce  difcours  a
ceux  qui  eftoient  prefens:  Efcout£s  ieuneffe,  peut-
eftre  que  quand  vous  me  voies  a  la  porte  de  cette
Eglife,  vous  dites  dans  vos  cceurs;  voila  qui  va  bien,
PiefKars  va  eftre  amy  des  Francois,  il  nous  fera  fauo-
rable,  il  ne  manquera  pas  de  belles  robes,  il  aura  des
viures  en  abondance,  voila  peut-eitre  vos  penfees;
mais  vous  vous  abuf<§s,  fcaches  que  Pief Kars  ne  fe  fait
pas  Chreftien  pour  aucune  confideration  humaine,
c'eft  pour  Suiter  les  feux  de  l'autre  vie,  c'eft  pour


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  285

to  let  himself  be  deceived  by  the  French.  [125]
Well  and  good ;  let  him  be  deceived,  since  he  wishes
to  be,  but  he  will  be  the  only  one  of  his  company,
for  no  one  desires  to  follow  him;  some  vain  hope
urges  him,  for  which  we  care  nothing.  They  bap-
tized me  when  I  was  sick  unto  death ;  as  soon  as  my
mind  returned  to  me,  I  disavowed  all  that  I  had  then
said."  Our  Catechumen  hearing  this  speech,  became
the  more  aroused;  he  went  to  Father  Buteux,  and
related  to  him  all  that  had  taken  place.  "  Let  us  go
to  the  Chapel,"  he  said  to  him,  "  I  mean  to  make
another  public  denunciation  of  this  Apostate's  inso-
lence ;  but  before  undertaking  it,  I  wish  to  commend
the  matter  to  our  Lord."  Having  offered  his  prayer,
he  went  toward  the  cabins,  raised  his  voice,  and  cried
with  fiery  zeal :  "  I  have  already  told  you  many  times
that  I  intended  to  be  baptized,  I  persevere  in  my
resolution.  Whoever  has  anything  to  say  against
me,  let  him  hasten,  for  it  is  to-morrow  that  I  shall
be  baptized ;  I  was  to  be  to-day,  but,  as  the  young
men  are  absent,  I  am  awaiting  their  return,  so  that
they  may  learn  by  my  example  not  to  fear  slander-
ous tongues,  [126]  when  so  holy  an  act  is  in  ques-
tion."

The  next  day,  he  came  to  present  himself  for  holy
Baptism,  before  receiving  which,  he  made  this  ad-
dress to  those  who  were  present:  "  Listen,  young
men !  Perhaps,  while  you  see  me  at  the  door  of  this
Church,  you  are  saying  in  your  hearts,  '  Here  is  one
who  is  doing  well ;  Pieskars  is  going  to  be  a  friend
of  the  Frenchmen.  He  will  be  favorable  to  us,  he
will  not  lack  beautiful  robes,  he  will  have  provisions
in  abundance.'  These  perhaps  are  your  thoughts ;
but  you  are  mistaken. Know  that  Pieskars  does  not


286  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  20

eftre  parent  de  Dieu,  &  pour  aller  vn  iour  au  ciel;
voila  les  deff eins  de  Pief Kars :  Ayant  dit  cela,  il  fe
jette  aux  pieds  du  Pere,  demandant  le  faindt  Bap-
tefme,  qui  luy  fut  accorde  auec  la  ioye  de  tous  ceux
qui  aiment  le  falut  de  ces  peuples.  Depuis  fon  Bap-
tefme  il  a  vefcu  dans  l'exercice  du  Chriftianifme,
marchant  la  tefte  leuee,  confolant  les  Chreftiens,  &
confondant  les  Infideles  par  fon  exemple :  Cet  homme
eft  de  1  Ifle ;  En  voicy  vn  autre  de  la  petite  Nation
des  Algonquins,  moins  contrarie  [127]  des  hommes,
mais  peut-eftre  plus  fortement  attaqu6  des  Demons.
Eftant  encore  Catechumene,  le  Pere  Buteux  luy
dit,  qu'il  ne  falloit  iamais  plus  manier  fon  tambour:
car  il  efioit  du  meftier  des  Iongleurs,  ou  des  Charla-
tans du  pais,  que  quelques-vns  appellent  Sorciers ;  ce
bon-homme  prit  refolution  d'obeir:  mais  il  voulut
faire  vn  traidt  de  gentilleffe  a  la  fepulture  de  fon  tam-
bour ;  il  pria  done  le  Pere  de  le  venir  voir  le  iour  fui-
uant,  le  Pere  approchant  de  fa  cabane,  ce  Charlatan
prend  fon  tambour,  &  s'anime  a  la  facon  des  Ion-
gleurs, il  le  fait  fi  fortement  retentir,  que  le  Pere
l'ayant  entendu  de  bien  loin,  s'arrefte  tout  court:  Vn
Sauuage  apofte  par  noitre  Catechumene,  l'aborde
fans  faire  femblant  de  rien,  le  Pere  luy  demande  qui
eftoit  celuy  qui  faifoit  ioiier  ce  tambour:  e'eft  dit-il,
vn  nomme  &abirini8ich  qui  fouffle  &  qui  chante  quel-
que  malade:  Le  Pere  entendant  nommer  fon  Cate-
chumene, s'en  va  tout  indigne,  s'imaginant  que  c<§t
homme  luy  auoit  donne  de  belles  paroles :  Le  Sau-
uage l'inuite  d'entrer,  mais  le  Pere  ne  le  voulut  point
dcouter.  Le  pauure  Catechumene  voyant  [128]  cela,
prend  fon  tambour,  le  met  en  pieces,  &  le  jette  a  fes
chiens:  le  voulois,  dit-il,  recreer  le  Pere,  &  le  faire


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  287

become  a  Christian  for  any  human  consideration, —
it  is  to  avoid  the  flames  of  the  other  life ;  it  is  to  be
the  child  of  God,  and  to  go  some  day  to  heaven :  this
is  the  purpose  of  Pieskars."  Having  said  this,  he
threw  himself  at  the  feet  of  the  Father,  asking  for
holy  Baptism,  which  was  granted  him,  to  the  joy  of
all  those  who  delight  in  the  salvation  of  these  peo-
ples. Since  his  Baptism,  he  has  lived  in  the  practice
of  Christianity, —  going  about  boldly,  consoling  the
Christians,  and  confounding  the  Unbelievers  by  his
example.  This  man  is  from  the  Island.  The  other
one  of  whom  I  shall  speak  is  of  the  petite  Nation  of
the  Algonquins,  —  less  thwarted  [127]  by  men,  but
perhaps  more  violently  attacked  by  Demons.

While  he  was  still  a  Catechumen,  Father  Buteux
told  him  he  must  no  longer  beat  his  drum, —  for  his
trade  was  that  of  the  Jugglers,  or  Charlatans  of  the
country,  whom  some  call  Sorcerers.  This  good  man
resolved  to  obey  him,  but  he  intended  to  play  a  wit-
ty little  trick  at  the  burial  of  his  drum,  so  he  begged
the  Father  to  come  and  see  him  the  following  day.
As  the  Father  was  approaching  the  cabin,  this  Char-
latan took  his  drum,  and  exciting  himself  after  the
manner  of  the  Jugglers,  he  made  it  resound  so  loudly
that  the  Father,  hearing  it  far  away,  stopped  sud-
denly. A  Savage,  set  to  watch  by  our  Catechumen,
accosted  him,  without  seeming  to  notice  anything
unusual ;  the  Father  asked  who  was  beating  the
drum.  "  It  is,"  said  he,  "  one  named  Wabiriniwich,
who  is  breathing  upon  some  sick  person,  and  sing-
ing to  him."  The  Father,  hearing  him  name  his
Catechumen,  turned  away  thoroughly  indignant,
imagining  that  this  man  had  deceived  him.  The
Savage  invited  him  to  enter,  but  the  Father  would


288  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

fpectateur  de  l'eflat  que  ie  fais  de  mon  tambour,
le  donnant  aux  chiens  en  fa  prefence :  mais  puis
qu'il  n'a  pas  voulu  entrer,  il  ne  laiffera  pas  d'eftre
jette  dans  vn  oubly  eternel.  Le  Pere  ayant  appris
rhiftoire,  fut  bien  aife  d'auoir  efte  faindtement  trompe
par  ce  bon  Neophyte,  qui  fut  nomme  Paul  en  fon
baptefme.

Si  toft  qu'il  fut  Chreftien,  il  inuita  les  principaux
Sauuages  a  vn  banquet,  pour  leur  rendre  raifon  de  ce
qui  l'auoit  meu  a  rechercher  fi  ardemment  le  bap-
tefme, la  vie  que  nous  menons  9a  bas,  eft  courte;  on
nous  enf eigne  qu'il  y  en  a  vne  autre  remplie  de  biens
eternels,  qu'on  ne  peut  obtenir,  qu'on  ne  foit  laue
dans  les  eaux  du  baptefme,  il  faut  done  que  ces  eaux
f oient  de  grande  importance ;  on  nous  dit  que  ceux
qui  les  mefprifent,  ne  doiuent  attendre  qu'vn  feu
eternel,  fi  cela  eft,  comme  ie  croy  qu'il  eft,  car  nos
ames  eftans  immortelles,  doiuent  eftre  recompenses
felon  leurs  ceuures,  il  me  femble  que  i'ay  eu  raifon,
de  rechercher  les  [129]  moyens  d' entrer  dans  ces
biens,  &  d'euiter  ces  grands  maux;  ne  penfes  point
que  l'intereft  temporel  me  touche,  ou  que  ie  faffe
eftat  de  la  parente  &  de  l'alliance  des  Francois,  ma
penfee  va  plus  loing  que  tout  cela.

Au  refte  i'ay  refolu  de  quitter  pour  iamais  nos
anciennes  facons  de  faire;  ie  n'ay  plus  de  voix  pour
les  chants  fuperftitieux,  mon  tambour  n'a  plus  de
fon,  &  ma  bouche  n'a  plus  de  foume,  pour  tromper
les  malades ;  car  toutes  ces  niaif eries  ne  leur  fcau-
roient  rendre  la  fante,  ie  veux  obeir  a  Dieu,  &  tout  ce
qu'il  defend,  me  fera  interdit  pour  toufiours.

Le  Capitaine  de  rifle,  qui  ne  frappe  que  de  tra-
uers,  &  a  coups  fourres,  voulant  raualer  cette  faindte


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640- 41  289

not  listen  to  him.  The  poor  Catechumen,  seeing
[128]  that,  took  his  drum,  broke  it  into  pieces,  and
threw  it  to  his  dogs.  "I  wished,"  said  he,  "to
entertain  the  Father,  and  make  him  an  eyewitness
of  the  value  that  I  set  upon  my  drum,  by  giving  it
to  the  dogs  in  his  presence ;  but,  although  he  would
not  enter,  it  shall  nevertheless  be  cast  into  eternal
oblivion."  When  the  Father  heard  this  story,  he
was  really  pleased  at  having  been  piously  deceived
by  this  good  Neophyte,  who  was  named  Paul  at  his
baptism.

As  soon  as  he  became  a  Christian,  he  invited  the
chief  Savages  to  a  feast,  in  order  to  give  them  an
account  of  the  motives  that  had  induced  him  to  seek
baptism  so  earnestly :  ' '  The  life  that  we  lead  here
below  is  short ;  we  are  taught  that  there  is  another,
filled  with  eternal  blessings,  which  cannot  be  ob-
tained unless  we  be  washed  in  the  water  of  baptism ;
this  water  then  must  be  of  great  importance, —  we
are  told  that  those  who  despise  it  must  expect  only
an  eternal  fire.  If  this  be  true,  as  I  believe  it  to
be, —  for  our  souls,  being  immortal,  ought  to  be
rewarded  according  to  their  works, —  it  seems  to  me
that  I  have  been  right  to  search  out  the  [129]  way
of  entering  into  these  blessings,  and  of  avoiding
those  great  evils.  Do  not  think  that  temporal  inter-
est moves  me,  or  that  I  value  highly  the  connection
and  the  alliance  with  the  French,  my  thought  goes
much  farther  than  that.

"  Besides,  I  have  resolved  to  abandon  forever  our
old  customs;  I  no  longer  have  any  voice  for  the
superstitious  chants,  my  drum  no  longer  has  any
sound,  and  my  mouth  no  longer  has  any  breath  to
deceive  the  sick ;  for  all  these  follies  cannot  restore


290  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

action,  &  monftrer  qu'il  n'appartenoit  qu'aux  vieilles
femmes  &  aux  enfans, de  fe  faire  baptifer,  s'ecria
par  les  cabanes:  Alles  bonnes  vieilles,  alles,  &  vous
petits  enfans,  qui  n'aues  pas  le  moyen  de  trouuer  a
manger,  alles  vous  en  trouuer  les  Robes  noires,  &
vous  faites  baptifer,  afin  que  vous  ne  mouries  pas  de
faim ;  que  ceux  qui  vous  reffemblent,  vous  imitent.
Le  Pere  de [130] Quen  voyant  que  ce  cry  fe  faifoit
au  mefpris  de  la  foy,  &  pour  eloigner  les  Sauuages
du  Baptefme,  rendit  le  change  a  ce  miferable  borgne ;
car  allant  le  lendemain  appeller  les  Chreftiens  pour
venir  a  la Meffe, adjoufta  ces paroles  d'vne  voix
haute: Hommes  &  femmes,  qui  n'eftes  pas  baptifes,
alles  trouuer  TefSehat,  c'eft  le  nom  de  ce  borgne,
il vous donnera  tous a  manger c'eft  luy  qui  tue
les  caftors  &  qui  fcait  bien  attraper  l'orignac;  Cet
homme  fuperbe  au  dernier  point  fe  croyant  offenfe,
s'en  vint  tout  fumant  de cholere, trouuer  le  fieur
Nicolet  &  le Pere Buteux fe plaignant de  l'affront
qu'on  luy  auoit  fait;  mais  on  luy  demanda  11  quand
il  renuoyoit  les  vieilles femmes  &  les enfans  aux
Peres  pour  fe  faire  baptifer,  afin  d'auoir  a  manger,
s'il  pretendoit  mefprif er  les  prieres  &  le  Baptefme :
II  dit,  que  non;  On  luy  repart,  que  le  Pere  de  Quen
ne  pretendoit  pas  auffi  de  l'ofrenfer,  luy  adreffant  les
hommes  &  les  femmes  pour  les  fecourir,  veu  mefme
qu'il  eftoit  Capitaine: ce  bon  homme  voyant  bien
qu'il  perdroit  foil  proces  s'il  paffoit  outre,  aima  mieux
fe  taire,  que  de  plaider  dauantage.

[131]  Pour  reuenir  a  noftre  Neophyte,  il  a  fait  bap-
tifer toute  fa  famille ;  fa  f emme  eftant  bien  inftruite,
fe  vint  pref enter  au  Baptefme, trois  iours  apres  fa


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  291


their  health.  I  intend  to  obey  God,  and  all  that  he
forbids  shall  be  interdicted  to  me  forever."

The  Captain  of  the  Island,  who  strikes  only  unfair-
ly, and  with  underhand  thrusts,  wishing  to  disparage
this  holy  action,  and  to  show  that  it  belonged  only
to  old  women  and  children  to  be  baptized,  cried  out
among  the  cabins:  "  Go,  good  old  women,  go;  and
you,  little  children,  who  have  no  way  of  finding  food,
go  to  the  black  Robes  and  be  baptized,  so  that  you
may  not  die  from  hunger ;  let  those  who  resemble  you,
imitate  you."  Father  de  [130]  Quen,  seeing  that
this  outcry  was  made  in  contempt  of  the  faith,  and
to  alienate  the  Savages  from  Baptism,  paid  off  this
wretched  one-eyed  man  in  his  own  coin ;  for,  on
going  the  next  day  to  summon  the  Christians  to  Mass,
he  added  these  words  in  a  loud  voice:  "  Men  and
women  who  are  not  baptized,  go  to  Teswehat  "  —
that  is  the  name  of  the  one-eyed  man; 17  —  "  he  will
give  you  all  food ;  it  is  he  who  kills  beavers,  and
knows  well  how  to  catch  the  moose."  This  man,
proud  to  the  last  degree,  believing  himself  insulted,
went  raging  with  anger  to  sieur  Nicolet  and  to
Father  Buteux,  and  complained  of  the  affront  that
he  had  received ;  but  he  was  asked  if,  when  he  had
sent  away  the  old  women  and  children  to  the  Fathers
to  be  baptized  in  order  that  they  might  have  food,
he  intended  to  set  at  naught  prayers  and  Baptism ;
he  said,  "  No,  indeed."  They  replied  to  him  that
neither  did  Father  de  Quen  purpose  to  offend  him  in
sending  the  men  and  women  to  him  to  be  helped,
inasmuch  as  he  was  their  Captain.  This  clever  man,
seeing  well  that  he  should  lose  his  case  if  he  went
on,  preferred  silence  to  further  argument.

[131] To  return  to  our  Neophyte. He  had  his


292  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

couche,  fans  que  la  longueur  du  chemin,  ny  que
la  rigueur  du  froid,  Ten  puft  empefcher.  Si  toft
que  fon  fils  fut  ne,  fon  pere  vint  preffer  pour  fon
baptefme;  ce  pauure  petit  eftant  malade,  tous  les
Chreftiens  mirent  leurs  chappelets  fur  fon  berceau,
efperant  que  Dieu  luy  rendroit  la  fante  par  cette
deuotion ;  il  fe  porte  bien  a  prefent,  Dieu  mercy.

Tous  les  iours  on  prie  Dieu  dans  fa  famille,  foir  &
matin,  chacun  fe  mettant  a  genoux;  ils  frequentent
les  Sacremens  auec  vne  candeur  admirable ;  ils  obe-
lffent  aux  loix  de  Dieu  &  de  fon  Eglife  auec  fidelite.
On  preffoit  certain  iour,  ce  bon  Neophyte,  de  faire
acheuer  fes  raquetes  vn  iour  de  fefte,  la  neige  eftant
tres-propre  pour  la  chaffe ;  il  ne  voulut  iamais  qu'on
y  trauaillaft :  Ie  ne  fuis  pas,  dit-il,  Chreftien  a  demy,
il  faut  obei'r  a  tout  ce  qu'on  nous  commande.

S'en  allant  a  la  chaffe  d'Eflan  dans  les  bois,  il
demandoit  auec  inftance;  ft  quelqu'vn  [132]  de  ceux
qui  le  pourroient  inftruire  &  entretenir  en  deuotion,
ne  le  voudroit  pas  bien  accompagner ;  &  Simon  Pief -
Kars  preffoit  qu'on  l'inftruifift  pleinement  de  tout  ce
qu'il  falloit  faire,  quand  on  eftoit  eloigne"  de  l'Eglife,
fentant  vn  regret  de  s'en  abfenter,  quoyque  pour  vn
peu  de  temps.

Vn  certain  Paien  difoit  vn  iour,  qu'il  fe  feroit
volontiers  baptifer,  fi  apres  eftre  purifie  dans  les
eaux  du  Baptefme,  on  l'affuroit,  qu'il  iroit  au  ciel :
Mais  vous  me  dites,  faifoit-il,  qu'on  peut  eftre  dam-
ne,  quoy  qu'on  foit  baptife;  &  que  la  recheute  au
peche  nous  precipite  dans  les  Enfers :  Qui  doute  que
nous  ne  retombions  dans  nos  offenfes  par  la  violence
de  nos  vieilles  habitudes,  qui  nous  entrainent:  II  eft


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  293


whole  family  baptized;  his  wife,  having  been  well
instructed,  came  to  present  herself  for  Baptism  three
days  after  her  confinement, —  neither  the  length  of
the  way,  nor  the  severity  of  the  cold  could  prevent
her  coming.  As  soon  as  her  son  was  born,  his  father
came  to  urge  his  baptism ;  the  poor  little  fellow  being
sick,  all  the  Christians  put  their  chaplets  on  his  bed,
hoping  that  God  would  restore  his  health  for  the
sake  of  this  devotion;  he  is  very  well  at  present,
thank  God.

Prayer  is  offered  to  God  in  his  family  every  day,
night  and  morning,  each  one  kneeling  down ;  they
frequent  the  Sacraments  with  an  admirable  sincer-
ity; they  obey  with  fidelity  the  laws  of  God  and  of
his  Church.  One  day  this  good  Neophyte  was  urged
to  have  his  snowshoes  finished  on  a  feast  day,  the
snow  being  in  a  good  condition  for  hunting ;  he  was
never  willing  that  any  one  should  work  on  those
days.  "  I  am  not  a  halfway  Christian,"  said  he,
"  we  must  obey  all  that  is  commanded."

When  going  to  an  Elk  hunt  in  the  woods,  he  asked
earnestly  if  some  one  [132]  of  those  who  could  in-
struct him  and  keep  alive  his  devotion,  would  not  be
willing  to  accompany  him ;  and  Simon  Pieskars  urged
that  he  should  be  fully  instructed  in  all  that  was
necessary  to  be  done  when  he  was  remote  from  the
Church,  as  he  felt  regret  at  absenting  himself,  even
for  a  short  time.

A  certain  Pagan  said  one  day,  that  he  would  will-
ingly be  baptized  if,  after  having  been  purified  by
the  waters  of  Baptism,  he  could  be  assured  that  he
would  go  to  heaven.  "  But  you  tell  me,"  said  he,
"  that  one  may  be  damned,  although  he  have  been
baptized,  and  that  a  relapse  into  sin  plunges  us  into


294  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

vray  que  les  habitudes  ont  vn  poids  6pouuentable  fur
nos  coeurs :  mais  il  eft  vray  auffi  que  le  Baptefme  eft
puiffant,  &  qu'il  fait  d'eftranges  metamorphof es ;  ce
qui  n'empefche  pas  que  qu[e]lques-vns  ne  retombent
dans  les  occafions  puiffantes,  &  dans  les  fortes  tenta-
tions :  ce  qui  arriua  a  ce  pauure  Neophyte  dont  nous
parlons :  car  eftant  tombe  malade,  &  fe  trouuant  dans
des  [133]  douleurs  tres-cruelles :  Vn  Charlatan  fe
prefentant  pour  le  chanter,  a  la  facon  du  pais,  il  y
condef cendit :  Le  bon  Charles  Sondatfaa  Huron,  en-
cor  Catechumene,  voiant  cette  fuperftition,  en  vint
donner  aduis  a  nos  Peres :  Auffi-toft  le  Pere  de  Quen
court  aux  cabanes,  trouue  le  Charlatan  en  adtion,  &
plufieurs  Infideles  a  l'entour  du  patient;  il  commence
a  fulminer  contre  ces  remedes,  plus  propres  a  tuer
les  malades  qu'a  les  guerir:  vn  de  la  trouppe  leue  la
main  pour  le  frapper;  mais  il  fe  retint:  Le  Pere
demande  au  malade,  s'il  auoit  quelque  creance  a  ces
badineries,  qu'il  auoit  exercees  luy-mefme,  &  dont  il
ne  connoiffoit  que  trop  l'impuifTance,  le  pauure
homme  repentant  de  fa  faute,  chaffe  le  Sorcier:  A
quelques  iours  de  la,  fe  trouuant  mieux,  il  s'en  vint
en  l'Eglife,  &  en  la  prefence  des  Francois  &  des  Sau-
uages,  il  demanda  publiquement  pardon,  du  fcandale
qu'il  auoit  donne,  fuppliant  a  deux  genoux  tous
les  Chreftiens  de  prier  Dieu  pour  luy,  a  ce  qu'il
luy  pleuft  oublier  fon  peche,  promettant  de  iamais
plus  n'y  retomber.  II  eft  bon  de  tenir  ferme  au
commencement,  pour  des  fautes  mefmes  [134]  affes
legeres,  on  ne  f e  relaf che  que  trop  aif ement :  Ce  bon
Neophite  eft  maintenant  dans  l'exercice  de  la  pa-
tience, &  de  la  refignation  a  la  volonte  de  Dieu,  aiant


1640 -41 J  RELATION  OF  1640-41  295

Hell.  Who  doubts  that  we  may  fall  again  into  our
transgressions,  through  the  force  of  our  old  habits
which  overpower  us  ?  "  It  is  true  that  habits  have  a
frightful  influence  on  our  hearts ;  but  it  is  also  true
that  Baptism  is  powerful,  and  that  it  makes  strange
metamorphoses.  But  this  does  not  prevent  some
from  relapsing  under  stress  of  circumstances,  and
under  strong  temptations, —  which  thing  happened
to  this  poor  Neophyte  of  whom  we  are  speaking;
for,  having  fallen  sick,  and  being  in  [133]  most  severe
pain,  and  a  Charlatan  offering  to  chant  for  him  after
the  fashion  of  the  country,  he  consented  thereto.
The  good  Charles  Sondatsaa,  a  Huron,  and  at  the
time  a  Catechumen,  seeing  this  superstition,  came  to
inform  our  Fathers.  Immediately  Father  de  Quen
hastened  to  the  cabins  and  found  the  Charlatan  per-
forming, and  many  Unbelievers  around  the  patient ;
he  began  to  inveigh  against  these  remedies  better
adapted  to  kill  the  sick  than  to  heal  them ;  one  of
the  company  raised  his  hand  to  strike  him,  but  re-
strained himself.  The  Father  asked  the  sick  man  if
he  had  any  belief  in  this  trifling,  which  he  had  him-
self practiced,  and  of  which  he  knew  only  too  well
the  powerlessness:  the  poor  man,  repenting  of  his
fault,  dismissed  the  Sorcerer.  Some  days  there-
after, being  better,  he  came  to  the  Church,  and  in
the  presence  of  the  French  and  of  the  Savages  he
publicly  asked  pardon  for  the  scandal  he  had  caused ;
and  on  his  knees  he  implored  all  of  the  Christians  to
pray  that  God  might  be  pleased  to  forgive  his  sin,
and  promised  never  to  fall  into  it  again.  It  is  well
to  resist  firmly  in  the  beginning,  for,  even  [134]  to
very  slight  faults,  one  gives  way  only  too  easily.
This  good  Neophyte  is  now  in  the  practice  of  pa-


296  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES [Vol.20

fait  voir  par  phifieurs  actions,  qu'il  auoit  la  foy  forte-
ment  grauee  au  cceur.

Celuy  qui  auoit  leue*  la  main  fur  le  Pere  pour  le
frapper,  fut  touche  de  Dieu  a  quelque  temps  de  la;
il  demanda  fouuent  le  Baptefm[e] :  mais  comme  il  s'eft
monltre  contraire  a  la  foy,  on  veut  tirer  de  luy  de
fortes  epreuues;  il  en  donna  vne  il  n'y  a  pas  log-
temps,  qui  nous  rejoiiit  bien  fort:  Ayant  fait  afTem-
bler  ceux  qu'il  croyoit  les  plus  eloignes  de  la  foy,  il
leur  dit,  qu'il  auoit  pris  refolution  de  fe  faire  bap-
tifer;  &  que  la  penfee  d'vne  recompenfe,  ou  d'vn
chaftiment  eternel,  luy  touchoit  le  coeur:  L'Apoftat,
dont  i'ay  parle  cy  deffus,  eftant  prefent,  ne  put  fup-
porter  ce  difcours;  il  fe  leua  incontinen[t],  &  fortit,
quittant  la  compagnie  fans  mot  dire :  Paul  ^abirin&ich
releua  le  courage  de  ce  nouueau  athlete:  Si  nous
faifons  de  grandes  feftes  lors  que  nous  refufcitons
quelque  trefpaffe,  donnant  fon  nom  a  quelqu'vn  des
viuans,  il  me  femble  qu'il  y  a  bien  plus  [135]  de  fuiet
de  fe  rejoiiir  quand  vn  homme  deuient  enfant  de
Dieu,  &  qu'on  luy  fait  porter  le  nom  de  l'vn  des  Bien-
heureux  qui  font  en  Paradis.

Ie  ne  fais  pas  profeffion  de  parler  de  tous  ceux
qu'on  a  baptifes,  mais  feulement  de  ceux  qui  font  en
eftime  parmy  leurs  Compatriotes,  &  qui  ont  le  plus
d'empefchemens  &  plus  d'obftacles,  pour  receuoir
noftre  creance.

Ie  ne  parleray  point  d'vn  certain,  nomme  Arimyfti-
g&an,  qui  fut  nomme  Claude  en  fon  baptefme;  il
eftoit  excellent  Iongleur ;  quelque  temps  apres  s'eftre
fait  Chreftien,  vn  malade  luy  enuoya  vn  prefent,  le
fuppliant  de  le  venir  penfer  auec  fes  chants,  &  auec
fon  tambour;  le  bon  Neophite  refpond,  qu'il  a  quitte"


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640 -41  297

tience,  and  of  resignation  to  the  will  of  God,  having
manifested  by  many  acts  that  he  has  the  faith  strong-
ly impressed  upon  his  heart.

He  who  had  raised  his  hand  against  the  Father  to
strike  him,  was  touched  by  God  some  time  after
that;  he  often  asked  for  Baptism,  but,  as  he  had
shown  himself  averse  to  the  faith,  we  wished  to
draw  from  him  strong  proofs ;  not  long  ago  he  gave
one  which  rejoiced  us  very  greatly.  Having  gath-
ered together  those  whom  he  believed  most  averse
to  the  faith,  he  said  to  them  that  he  had  resolved  to
be  baptized,  and  that  the  thought  of  an  eternal  reward
or  punishment  affected  his  heart.  The  Apostate  of
whom  I  spoke  above,  being  present,  could  not  endure
this  speech ;  he  rose  forthwith  and  went  out,  leaving
the  company  without  speaking  a  word.  Paul  Wa-
birinwich  revived  the  courage  of  this  new  athlete:
"  If  we  make  great  feasts  when  we  resuscitate  a  de-
parted one  by  giving  his  name  to  some  one  of  the
living,  it  seems  to  me  there  is  much  greater  [135]
cause  for  rejoicing  when  a  man  becomes  a  child  of
God,  and  is  made  to  bear  the  name  of  one  of  the
Blessed  who  are  in  Paradise."

I  do  not  profess  to  speak  of  all  those  who  have
been  baptized,  but  only  of  those  who  are  esteemed
among  their  Countrymen,  and  who  have  the  most
hindrances  and  obstacles  to  receiving  our  belief.

I  shall  not  speak  of  a  certain  man  called  Arimous-
tigwan,  who  was  named  Claude  at  his  baptism.  He
was  an  excellent  Juggler;  some  time  after  he  had
become  a  Christian,  a  sick  man  sent  him  a  present,
begging  that  he  would  come  and  treat  him  with  his
chants  and  with  his  drums.  The  good  Neophyte
answered  that  he  had  forsaken  these  follies,  never


298  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.20

ces  f olies,  pour  ne  les  iamais  reprendre :  le  meffager
laifla  le  prefent  en  la  cabane  du  Neophite,  mais  voiant
que  ce  medecin  ne  venoit  point,  il  le  renuoya  querir,
&  laiffa  en  repos  ce  bon-homme,  auquel  ie  prie  noftre
Seigneur  de  donner  perfeuerance.


1640-41]  RELATION  OF  1640-41  299

to  take  them  up  again.  The  messenger  left  the  pres-
ent in  the  cabin  of  the  Neophyte,  but,  seeing  that
the  physician  did  not  come,  the  sick  person  sent  him
back  for  it,  and  left  this  good  man  in  peace.  I  pray
our  Lord  to  give  him  perseverance.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA  : VOL  XX

XLI

For  particulars  of  this  document,  see  Vol.  XVIII.

XLII

This  is  a  letter,  in  French,  written  by  Charles  Gar-
nier  to  one  of  his  brothers  in  France,  and  dated  at
Ste.  Marie,  in  the  Huron  country,  June  23,  1641.
We  follow  a  contemporary  copy  presumably  by  a
member  of  the  Gamier  family  in  France,  and  now  in
the  archives  of  St.  Mary's  College,  Montreal.  The
copy  fails  to  intimate  which  of  the  brothers  is  ad-
dressed ;  but  evidently  it  is  one  of  the  two  who  were
in  holy  orders  —  Henri,  the  Carmelite,  or  Joseph,  the
Capuchin  (see  vol.  viii.,  note  52).

XLIII

Jean  de  Br6beuf  writes  in  Latin  to  the  Father
General  (Vitelleschi),  from  Quebec,  under  date  of
August  20,  1641.  The  original  is  in  the  MSS.
Soc.  Jes.,  where  Father  Martin  saw  it  in  1858,  and
copied  therefrom  such  portions  as  he  deemed  of  his-
torical interest.  A  rather  free  French  translation
of  these  extracts  was  made  by  Father  Martin,  and
appears  as  Letter  XVII.  in  Carayon's  Premiere  Mis-
sion, pp.  216,  217.  We  follow  the  Martin  apograph
in  Latin,  preserved  in  the  archives  of  St.  Mary's
College,  Montreal;  our  translation  is  made  directly
therefrom.


302  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

XLIV

In  reprinting  the  text  of  the  Relation  of  1640-41,
we  follow  the  original  Cramoisy  edition,  from  a  copy-
in  the  possession  of  The  Burrows  Brothers  Company,
Cleveland.  It  is  generally  referred  to  by  bibliog-
raphers as  "  H.  77,"  because  described  in  Harrisse's
Notes,  no.  77.  The  volume  purports  to  have  been
sent  to  the  provincial  in  France  by  Barthelemy  Vi-
mont,  the  superior  of  the  Society  in  New  France.
But  his  part  in  this  volume  seems  to  have  been  that
only  of  nominal  editor.  Part  I.,  undated,  is  by  Paul
Le  Jeune ;  it  was  addressed  to  the  Provincial,  and
carried  by  Le  Jeune,  personally,  to  France.  Like-
wise, Part  II.  (on  the  Huron  mission)  is  addressed
directly  to  the  provincial  by  Jerome  Lalemant,  who
dates  his  preface  "  De  la  rehdence  fixe  de  S.  Marie
aux  Hurons,  ce  19.  de  May  1641."  There  is  no
Privilege  to  this  volume,  but  it  contains  a  "  Permis-
sion d'imprimer,"  signed  "  Iacqves  Dinet,"  and
dated  at  Paris,  December  20,  1641.

Collation:  Title,  with  verso  blank,  1  leaf;  "  Table
des  Chapitres  "  to  Part  I.,  pp.  (3);  "  Table  des  Cha-
pitres "  to  Part  II.,  pp.  (2);  "Permission  d'impri-
mer," p.  (1) ;  epistle  from  Le  Jeune  to  the  Provincial,
pp.  1-4;  text  of  Part  I.,  by  Le  Jeune,  pp.  5-216;
special  title  to  Part  II.,  with  verso  blank,  1  leaf;
epistle  from  H.  Lalemant  to  the  Provincial,  pp.  3  and
4;  text  of  Part  II.  (Lalemant's  Huron  Relation),  pp.
5-95;  specimen  prayer  in  Huron,  with  interlinear
French  translation,  pp.  96-104.  In  Part  I.,  page
190  is  misnumbered  90,  and  in  Part  II.,  p.  76  is  mis-
paged 67;  in some copies p. 77 is mispaged 68.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA: VOL.  XX  303

Chapter  vi.,  on  p.  46  of  Part  II.,  is  misprinted  viii.,
but  it  appears  correctly  in  the  table  of  contents.

Copies  of  "  H.  77  '  have  been  sold  or  priced  as
follows:  O'Callaghan  (1882),  no.  1220,  $20,  it  having
cost  him  $30.50  in  gold;  Harrassowitz  (1882),  100
marks;  Barlow  (1890),  no.  1282,  $22.50;  Dufosse,  of
Paris,  priced  (1891-1893)  at  125  and  150  francs.
Copies  may  be  found  in  the  following  libraries :  Len-
ox, Harvard  College,  St.  Mary's  College  (Montreal),
Laval  University  (Quebec),  Brown  (private),  and  Brit-
ish Museum.


NOTES  TO  VOL  XX

(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  number  of  note,  refer  to  pages

of  English  text.)

i  (p.  21 ).  —  St.  Jean  Baptiste  was  almost,  if  not  quite,  identical
with  the  Cahiague  described  by  Champlain.  Du  Creux  places  it
near  a  small  lake, —  evidently  that  now  called  Bass  Lake,  in  the
N.  E.  part  of  Oro  township,  the  outlet  of  which  is  North  River ;  in  the
vicinity  of  this  lake  are  many  remains  of  Huron  villages.  Martin
and  Tache  identify  St.  Jean  Baptiste  with  Cahiague,  but  mistake
Bass  Lake  and  North  River  (as  indicated  on  Du  Creux 's  map)  for
Lake  Couchiching  and  the  Severn.  But  the  latter  are  several  miles
farther  east ;  the  vicinity  of  those  waters  was  less  habitable,  from  a
Huron  point  of  view ;  and  they  do  not  correspond  so  well  with  the
references  in  the  text.  Ragueneau  (Huron  Relation  of  1648,  chap.
iv. )  says  that  the  Arendaenronnons,  among  whom  this  mission
was  located,  were  so  harassed  by  the  Iroquois  (to  whose  attacks
they  were  more  exposed  than  the  other  Huron  clans)  that  in  1647
they  abandoned  their  territory,  and  withdrew  to  other  Huron  vil-
lages that  were  more  populous  and  better  able  to  resist  the  enemy.
One  of  their  villages  in  the  vicinity  of  Bass  Lake  even  shows  indica-
tions, in  its  remains,  of  having  been  attacked. —  A.  F.  Hunter.

Martin  says  of  this  site  (in  Geographie  du  Pays  des  Hurons,
1855 —  a  MS.  in  the  archives  of  St.  Mary's  College,  Montreal):  "I
am  inclined  to  place  it  to  the  south  of  the  present  village  of  Orillia,
but  nearer  to  the  head  of  Lake  Simcoe  than  is  the  latter."  Father
Jones,  of  St.  Mary's  College,  (vol.  xix.,  fiote  9)  places  St.  Jean  Bap-
tiste in  Oro  township,  on  Mill  Creek,  about  a  mile  above  Hawkstone.

Champlain  says  of  Cahiague  {Voyages,  Laverdiere's  ed.,  p.  518)
that  in  it  were  200  large  cabins,  and  that  it  was  the  principal  village
of  the  country.

2  (p.  21). —  St.  Joachim  is  located  by  Du  Creux  on  the  east  side  of
Sturgeon  River,  next  to  St.  Jean.  This  is  in  a  locality  still  wooded
to  a  considerable  extent,  and  where  the  sites  have  not  yet  been
revealed  by  plowing.

Although  Ste.  Elizabeth  is  included  among  the  missions  to  the
Arendaronons,  other  references  to  it  in  the  Relations  show  that  it
was  a  mission  to  Indians  who  spoke  the  Algonkin  tongue. Du  Creux


306  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J E SUITES

places  it  on  the  west  side  of  North  River,  erroneously  interpreted
by  Martin  and  Tache  (see  note  i,  ante)  as  Severn  River;  the  latter,
however,  have  not  attempted,  so  far  as  we  know,  to  identify  any
one  site  as  that  of  Ste.  Elizabeth.  The  Huron  Relatio7i  of  1644
(chap.  viii. )  describes  it  as  only  a  quarter  of  a  league  from  St.  Jean
Baptiste;  but  Du  Creux's  map  indicates  a  greater  distance  between
those  points.  So  numerous  are  the  sites  west  of  North  River,  that
no  one  of  them  can  as  yet  be  certainly  identified  as  that  of  Ste.
Elizabeth. —  A.  F.  Hunter.

The  Relation  of  1644,  as  above  cited,  states  that  many  Algonkins
had  been  driven  by  the  Iroquois  every  winter,  for  several  years  past,
from  the  neighborhood  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  and  that  these  Algon-
kins had  fled  for  safety  to  the  Huron  country.  "  Having  found  an
entire  village  of  these  poor  wandering  and  fugitive  Nations  near  the
village  of  Saint  Jean  Baptiste,  we  [the  Jesuits]  felt  constrained  to
give  them  some  assistance,"  and  thereupon  Fathers  Daniel  and
Menard  were  placed  in  charge  of  this  Algonkin  mission,  which  was
called  Ste.  Elizabeth.  In  all  probability  this  was  a  different  village
from  the  Ste.  Elizabeth  of  1640;  it  is  a  fair  inference,  from  the
above-cited  account,  that  the  village  of  1644  had  been  in  large  part
formed  between  that  date  and  1640.  Father  Jones  locates  the  mis-
sion near  the  north  end  of  Lake  Couchiching,  about  ]/z  mile  S.  W.
of  Washago.

3  (p.  23). —  This  tortoise-shell  drum  is  described  by  Lalemant  in
vol.  xvii.,  p.  157.  Cf.  Lafitau  {Ma>urs  des  Sanvages,  t.  i.,  p.  215),
who  says  their  drums  are  made  from  a  gourd,  or  from  "a  Tortoise
dried  and  neatly  scooped  out,  without  injuring  the  head,  tail,  and
feet,  or  the  skin  which  unites  the  animal's  two  shells;  so  that  it
looks  as  if  whole.  They  fill  the  cavity  of  the  Gourd,  or  Tortoise,
with  some  beads  of  their  porcelain;  then  pierce  it  with  a  stick,"
which  serves  at  once  to  hold  and  to  shake  the  drum.

These  drums  —  or  more  properly,  tambourines  —  are  character-
istic of  the  "  medicine  "  performances  among  all  the  North  Ameri-
can tribes,  as  indeed  among  many  savage  tribes  in  other  parts  of
the  world.  Mallery  quotes  the  following  statement  by  an  Ojibwa
medicineman  {Bur.  Ethnol.  Rep.,  1838-89,  P-  492):  "  When  Minabo'-
sho,  the  first  man,  had  been  for  some  time  upon  the  earth,  two  great
spirits  told  him  that,  to  be  of  service  to  his  successors,  they  would
give  to  him  several  gifts,  which  he  was  to  employ  in  prolonging  life
and  extending  assistance  to  those  who  might  apply  for  it.  The  first
present  consisted  of  a  sacred  drum,  which  was  to  be  used  at  the
side  of  the  sick,  and  when  invoking  the  presence  and  assistance  of
the  spirits.  The  second  was  a  sacred  rattle,  with  which  he  was
enabled  to  prolong  the  life  of  a  patient. The  third  gift  was  tobacco,


NOTES  TO  VOL.  XX  307


which  was  to  be  an  emblem  of  peace;  and,  as  a  companion,  he  also
received  a  dog.'1  Hoffman  obtained  a  similar  statement  from  the
Menomonees  (Id.,  1892-93,  p.  93):  "  Then  the  good  mysteries  gave
him  the  small  flat  rattle,  that  he  might  invoke  the  good  ma'nidos
when  he  required  their  assistance,  or  when  he  was  fasting  or  dream-
ing." He  also  states  of  the  medicine  men  and  their  practices
(p.  63):  "A  tambourine  drum  is  necessary  as  an  accompaniment  to
the  chant,  as  the  personal  manido  is  thus  invoked  for  aid  in  the
accomplishment  of  whatever  task  may  have  been  assigned  to  the
performer."

4  (p.  27). —  Concerning  Iouskeha,  see  vol.  viii.,  note  36;  vol.  x.,
note  12.

5  (P-  35)- — This  transfer  of  name  and  authority,  from  the  dead
man  to  one  living,  accompanies  the  Indian  ceremony  of  "  resuscita-
tion "  (vol.  xvii.,  note  7).

6  (p.  43). — St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  —  the  headquarters  of  the  Mis-
sion of  the  Apostles,  to  the  Tobacco  Nation  —  was  located  at  the
village  of  Ehwae,  the  most  populous  in  that  tribe.  Its  exact  location
has  not  yet  been  determined, —  it  may  be  any  one  of  several  adja-
cent sites  in  Nottawasaga  township ;  and  there  is  no  map  to  indicate
the  relative  positions  of  the  Tobacco  missions,  like  Du  Creux's  of
the  Huron.  Sanson's  map  of  1656,  however,  shows  this  place  at  the
south  end  of  the  Tobacco  country,  and  St.  Simon  and  St.  Jude  at  the
north  end.  From  this  circumstance,  we  conjecture  that,  at  the  time
of  the  establishment  of  the  Apostles'  Mission,  the  nine  villages  of
the  text  were  named,  beginning  at  the  southernmost  village  and
ending  at  the  northernmost,  the  order  of  the  names  in  the  text
being  preserved  throughout.  The  only  objection  to  this  hypothesis
might  arise  from  Ragueneau's  mention  of  St.  Jean  (Relation  of
1650,  chap,  iii.)  as  then  the  most  southerly  or  frontier  village.  But
Sanson's  map  gives  the  particulars  as  they  existed  about  1640;  and
it  ought  to  be  remembered  also  that  during  the  next  ten  years  the
inhabitants  of  the  frontier  villages  had  to  take  refuge  among  those
farther  north,  leaving  St.  Jean,  the  fifth  village  on  the  list  of  1640,
as  Ragueneau's  frontier  village  in  1650.  Coyne  considers  the  S.
Pierre  of  Sanson's  map  as  "near  the  south  end  of  the  county  of
Bruce;"  also  (though  with  some  reserve  of  doubt),  that  it  might
have  been  intended  for  S.  Pierre  and  S.  Paul,  of  the  Tobacco  mis-
sion (Count?-)1  of  Neutrals,  pp.  9,  11,  44).  The  rudeness  of  Sanson's
map  and  the  smallness  of  its  scale  make  it  difficult  to  say  what  part
was  Bruce  County,  and  what  part  Simcoe  County ;  but  it  is  doubtful
whether  any  of  the  nine  villages  were  outside  of  Nottawasaga  town-
ship. And  it  may  also  be  observed  that  the  latter  part  of  the  name,


308  LES  REE  A  TIONS  DES  j£SUITES

"S. Paul," is  not  wanting  on  the  map,  being  spelled  "  S.  Pol."

St.  Jean  (called  by  the  Indians  Etarita)  was  located  among  the
Wolf  clan  of  the  Tobacco  Nation  (Huron  Relation  of  1648,  chap,
ix.),  and  was  in  1650  the  most  southerly  or  frontier  town  of  this
tribe  (see  preceding  paragraph). It  has  not  yet  been  identified.

St.  Mathias  (Ekarenniondi)  was  among  the  Deer  clan  of  the  tribe;
its  location  cannot  be  determined.  Cf.  the  name  Ecaregniondi,
applied  to  a  rock  which  departed  souls  must  pass,  in  going  to  their
abode  (vol.  x.,  p.  145);  also  Karegnondi,  given  to  Lake  Huron  on
Sanson's  map  of  1656.

St.  Simon  and  St.  Jude  appear  on  Sanson's  map  at  the  extreme
north  end  of  the  Tobacco  country. — A.  F.  Hunter.

Harris  {Miss.  West.  Canada,  p.  26)  locates  the  Tobacco  tribe
within  the  limits  of  Collingwood,  Nottawasaga,  and  Sunnidale
townships.

7  (p.  61). —  Atsistaekronons  :  the  Huron  name  of  the  Mascoutins
(vol.  v.,  note  20),  an  Algonkin  tribe.  Located,  on  Sanson's  map,  in
Eastern  Michigan,  between  Saginaw  Bay  and  the  Maumee  River ;
on  Franquelin's  (1684),  in  Northern  Illinois,  from  Lake  Michigan  to
the  Rock  River, — having  fled  thence  from  their  enemies.  Allouez,
who  conducted  missionary  work  among  them,  mentions  them  {Rela-
tion of  1670,  chap,  xii.)  as  being  a  day's  journey  from  the  Outaga-
mies  (Foxes);  and,  in  the  Relation  of  1671,  he  describes  his  journey
to  the  Mascoutins,  up  the  Fox  River  from  Green  Bay,  as  lasting
nine  days. Cf.  Butterfield's  Disc,  of  Northwest,  p.  64,  note  3.

8  (p.  91). —  Francois  de  Sales  was  born  Aug.  21,  1567,  near  Anne-
cy,  France.  His  studies  were  pursued  in  that  city,  and  in  the  Jesuit
college  at  Paris  (1580-86).  He  then  took,  at  Padua,  a  course  in
civil  law,  his  father  intending  that  he  should  enter  the  legal  profes-
sion; but  a  clerical  kinsman  secured  permission  for  Frangois  to
become  a  preacher.  Ordained  in  1593,  he  spent  three  years  in
preaching,  at  Geneva,  and  in  the  province  of  Chablais,  where  he  is
said  to  have  won,  in  that  time,  800  converts ;  his  reputation  for
eloquence  and  piety  was  great.  In  1602,  he  became  bishop  of  Gene-
va ;  several  other  dignities  were  offered  him,  at  various  times,  but
refused.  He  died  at  Lyons,  Nov.  28,  1622,  from  an  attack  of  apo-
plexy; he  was  canonized  Jan.  29,  1665.

The  most  noted  of  De  Sales's  works  is  E Introduction  a  la
Vie  devote  (1608),  which,  it  is  said,  was  translated  into  nearly  all
the  languages  of  Europe,  and  reached  its  fortieth  edition  in  1656.
Another  popular  work  was  Traite  de  I'  Amour  de  Dieu  (1616).

9  (p.  181). —  It  will  be  remembered  that  Giffard  was  a  physician
(vol.  vi.,  note  S).


NOTES  TO  VOL. XX  309


10  (p.  185). — A  letter  from  Buteux  to  Vitelleschi,  dated  Sept.  13,
1 641  (of  which  Father  Martin's  apograph  is  in  the  archives  of  St.
Mary's  College,  Montreal),  states  that  the  residence  of  La  Concep-
tion at  Three  Rivers  (of  which  he  was  superior)  then  maintained
five  missionaries  —  three  priests  and  two  brethren.  He  also  states
that  about  100  Algookins  had  been  baptized  during  the  year,  and
praises  the  piety  and  fidelity  of  the  converts.

Of  great  interest,  in  connection  with  the  residence  of  St.  Joseph,
is  its  register  of  baptisms  for  the  years  1638-40;  this  MS.  (written
in  Latin)  is  preserved  in  the  archives  of  the  archiepiscopal  palace
at  Quebec.  It  begins  with  the  following  introductory  note :  "The
Commander  de  Sillery,  a  knight  of  Malta,  and  not  long  ago  ordained
a  Priest,  a  man  of  notable  piety,  provided  for  the  erection,  at  his
own  Expense,  of  the  Reduction  of  Saint  Joseph,  a  league  and  a  half
above  Kebec,  on  the  shore  of  the  great  river  St.  Lawrence.  He
then  placed  it  in  charge  of  the  Fathers  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  that
they  might  call  hither  the  barbarous  Natives,  and  teach  them  the
Law  of  Christ.  The  foundations  of  the  house  were  laid  on  the  [blank]
day  of  July,  1637;  and,  on  the  14th  of  April  of  the  year  1638,  two
Fathers  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  came  here  to  reside,  and  to  instruct
two  families  of  the  savages  who  had  established  here  their  perma-
nent abode.  Another  family  of  the  Savages  also  built  their  dwell-
ings about  it,  asking  assistance  to  change  the  wandering  life  they
had  hitherto  led,  for  the  Christian  Religion  and  civilized  life.  From
this  time,  those  baptized  are  recorded  below,  unless  they  were  bap-
tized at  Kebec,  as  were  Noel  Tekderimar  and  frangois  Xavier  nenas-
koumar,  the  first  Dwellers  in  this  reduction.  These  will  be  found
recorded  in  the  Register  of  those  baptized  at  Kebec."

During  the  entire  period  covered  by  this  register,  Le  Jeune's
name  appears  frequently.  Other  priests  officiating  at  these  baptis-
mal rites  were:  1638,  De  Quen,  Masse,  Claude  Quentin,  Frangois  du
Peron;  1639,  Claude  Pi j art;  1640,  Vimont  and  Menard.  Among
those  baptized,  were  ' '  a  girl  of  ten  years,  daughter  of  the  late  Capi-
tenal ;  "  Cecilia  Natoukwabekwe,  "  wife  of  the  late  La  grenouille  "
(vol.  ix  ,  note  18);  Jerome  Oukwe,  "an  orphan  Lad  about  eleven
years  old;  "  Agatha  Khisipikiwam,  "  daughter  of  the  late  Makhate-
webichtichi "  {note  12,  post).  In  many  cases,  the  sponsors  were
Christian  Indians;  but  this  office  was  often  performed  by  French-
men. Among  these,  may  be  found  the  names  of  Montmagny,  Le
Gardeur  de  Repentigny,  Pierre  de  Puiseaux,  and  Olivier  le  Tardif.
Another  is  Achille  de  Lisle,  doubtless  Montmagny's  lieutenant  of
that  name  (vol.  ix  ,  note  7) ;  others  still  were  Francois  Boulle  and
Rene  Goupil  (Jesuit  donnes),  and  (Christmas  eve,  1639)  Madame  de
la  Peltrie  and  her  maid  Carola. This  last  was  Charlotte  Barre,


310  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

whose  name,  as  well  as  that  of  her  mistress,  may  also  be  found  in
1640.  The  baptismal  rite  was  often  bestowed  upon  those  "  in  dan-
ger of  death;"  and  often  is  appended  to  the  record,  mortuus  est,
"he  is  dead."

The  entries,  though  written  in  the  first  person,  are  not,  as  a  rule,
autographs  of  the  Fathers  officiating ;  most  of  them  are  written  in
the  same  hand  —  perhaps  by  a  brother  in  charge  of  the  church.  In
four  places,  however,  the  name  of  the  priest  has  been  cut  or  torn  out
of  the  MS., — apparently  to  secure  autograph  signatures.

11  (p.  199).— Cf.  Le  Jeune's  statement  of  this  superstition  (vol.
vi.,  p.  211,  213).  Brinton  (Myths  of  New  World,  1st  ed.,  1868,  pp.
257-261)  thus  explains  this  belief:  "The  opinion  underlying  all
these  [burial]  customs  was,  that  a  part  of  the  soul,  or  one  of  the
souls,  dwelt  in  the  bones ;  that  these  were  the  seeds  which,  planted
in  the  earth,  or  preserved  unbroken  in  safe  places,  would,  in  time,
put  on  once  again  a  garb  of  flesh,  and  germinate  into  living  human
beings.  The  Iroquois  word  for  bone  is  esken —  for  soul,  atisken,
literally  that  which  is  within  the  bone.  .  .  .  Even  the  lower  ani-
mals were  supposed  to  follow  the  same  law.  Hardly  any  of  the
hunting  tribes,  before  their  original  manners  were  vitiated  by  for-
eign influence,  permitted  the  bones  of  game  slain  in  the  chase  to  be
broken,  or  left  carelessly  about  the  encampment.  They  were  col-
lected in  heaps,  or  thrown  into  the  water."  James,  in  Long's  Expe-
dition to  the  Rocky  Mountains  (Phila.,  1823),  vol.  i.,  p.  278,  says:
"  Many  of  the  Minnetarees  believe  that  the  bones  of  those  bisons
which  they  have  slain  and  divested  of  flesh,  rise  again  clothed  with
renewed  flesh,  and  quickened  with  life."  Brinton  also  says  (pp.  144,
145):  "As  the  path  to  a  ^higher  Hfe  hereafter,  the  burning  of  the
dead  was  first  instituted.  .  .  .  Those  of  Nicaragua  seemed  to
think  it  the  sole  path  to  immortality,  holding  that  only  such  as
offered  themselves  on  the  pyre  of  their  chieftain  would  escape  anni-
hilation at  death,  and  the  tribes  of  upper  California  were  persuaded
that  such  as  were  not  burned  to  death  were  liable  to  be  transformed
into  the  lower  orders  of  brutes."

12  (p.  209). — This  Makheabichtichiou  was  an  influential  Algon-
kin,  whose  partial  conversion  is  detailed  by  Le  Jeune  in  vol.  xi.,  pp.
149-1S3.

13  (p.  259). —  Oukotoemis :  probably  the  Kotakouemis  (vol.  xviii.,
note  14). Uunatchataronons  :  the  Iroquet  tribe  (vol.  v., note  52).

14  (p.  265). —  Francois  de  Champflour  was  governor  at  Three
Rivers  from  December,  1639,  to  August,  1642,  and  again  from  the
autumn  of  1643,  to  October,  1645  —  the  intervening  year  being  spent
as  commandant  of  Fort  Richelieu  on  the  Sorel. He  returned  to


NOTES  TO VOL.  XX  311

France  in  October,  1645 ;  and  in  the  following  year,  at  Paris,  ob-
tained a  grant  of  a  fief  near  Three  Rivers,  which,  however,  he  sold
to  Le  Neuf  de  la  Poterie,  three  years  later.  He  seems  not  to  have
returned  to  Canada.

15  (p.  273). —  Concerning  the  Metaberoutin River, see  vol. ii.,
note  52.

16  (p.  281). — This  was  probably  the  successor  of  the  chief  men-
tioned in  vol.  ix.,  note  18. Cf.  vol.  xii.,  note  31.

17  (p.  291). —  Concerning  Teswehat,  see  vol.  viii.,  note  30.
