The  edition  consists  of  sev-
en hundred  and  fifty  sets
all  numbered
No...<d/..U..<J.......
Jean  de  Brebeuf,  S.J.
£ -M ^  THE  PROPERTY  OF
l-J^fS  THE  LAW  SOCIETY
The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents
Travels  and  Explorations
of  the  Jesuit  Missionaries
in  New  France
1610-1791
THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH,  LATIN,  AND  ITAL-
IAN TEXTS,  WITH  ENGLISH  TRANSLA-
TIONS AND  NOTES  ;  ILLUSTRATED  BY
PORTRAITS,  MAPS,  AND  FACSIMILES
EDITED  BY
REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES
Secretary  of  the  State  Historical  Society  of  Wisconsin
Vol.  IV
ACADIA  AND  QUEBEC: 1616-1629
CLEVELAND: Zbe  JBurrows  JBrotbera
Company  publishers,  mdcccxcvii
* *«»
COFYRIGHT, 1S97
BY
The  Burrows  Brothers  Co
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
The  Imperial  Press,  Cleveland
EDITORIAL  STAFF
Editor  .  .  Reuben  Gold  Thwaites
Translator  from  the
French .  .  John  Cutler  Covert
Assistant  Translator  from
the  French  .  Mary  Sifton  Pepper
Translator  from the
Latin .  .  William  Frederic  Giese
Translator  from  the
Italian .  .  Mary  Sifton  Pepper

Assistant  Editor .  Emma  Helen  Blair


CONTENTS OF  VOL  IV


Preface  to  Volume  IV  .  .  i

Documents: —

XIV.  Relation  de  la  Novvelle  France,  de  fes
Terres,  Natvrel  dv  Pais,  &  de  fes  Ha-
bitans.  [Chapters  xxvi.-xxxvii.  and
Index,  completing  the  document.]
Pierre  Biard ; Lyons,  1616 .  . 7

XV. Lettre  au  Sievr  de  Champlain. Charles

Lalemant ; Kebec,  July  28,  1625  . 170

XVI.  Lettre  au  R.  P.  Prouincial  des  RR.
Peres  Recolledts.  Charles  Lalema?it  ;
Kebec,  July  28,  1625 .  .  .172

XVII.  Epistola  ad  R.  P.  Mutium  Vitelleschi,
Praepositum  Generalem  Societatis
Jesu,  Romae.  Carolus  Lalemant ;  Nova
Francia,  August  1,  [1626] .  .176

XVIII.  Lettre  au  Pere  Hierofme  l'Allemant.
Charles  Lalemant ;  Kebec,  August  1,
1626 .  .  .  .  .185

XIX.  Lettre  au  R.  P.  Superieur  du  College
des  Iefuites  a  Paris.  Charles  L^ale-
mant ; Bordeaux,  November  22,  1629  229

Bibliographical  Data  : Volume  IV .  .  247

Notes .  .  .  .  .  -253


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  VOL.  IV


I.  Portrait  of  Jean  de  Brebeuf,  S.J. ;  photo-
engraving from  oil  portrait  by  Donald
Guthrie  McNab  .  .  Frontispiece

II. Photographic  facsimile  of  title-page,  Charles

Lalemant  to  Jerome  .  .  1 88


PREFACE  TO  VOL.  IV


Following  is  a  synopsis  of  the  documents  contained
in  the  present  volume :

XIV.  In  the  concluding  portion  ( Chapters
xxvi.-xxxvii.)  of  the  Relation  of  1616,  Biard  re-
lates how  he  and  Father  Quentin  were  taken  to
Virginia,  where  they  narrowly  escaped  death ;  they
then  were  sent  to  England,  and  finally  to  France,  ar-
riving there  after  a  captivity  of  over  nine  months,  and
being  subjected  to  many  perils  by  sea  and  land.  The
annalist  records  what  progress  the  Christian  religion
has  made  in  New  France.  The  missionaries  have
now  learned  the  nature  of  the  country,  and  the  char-
acter and  needs  of  the  people ;  and  the  colonists  have
established  friendly  relations  with  the  savages.  The
latter  have  some  general  knowledge  of  religion,  and
are  anxious  to  be  baptized.  Several  miracles  are  re-
counted, in  the  cure  of  persons  given  up  as  dying.
Biard  then  discusses  at  length  the  respective  terri-
torial claims  of  the  French  and  English  in  the  New
World,  and  contends  that  New  France  should  extend
southward  at  least  to  390.  He  concludes  by  urging
that  more  attention  should  be  given  in  France  to  both
the  temporal  and  religious  interests  of  Canada,  espe-
cially to  the  conversion  of  the  savages.

Between  the  dates  of  Documents  XIV.  and  XV.  in
our  series,  there  is  a  break  of  nine  years. The  Jesuit


PREFACE  TO VOL.  IV


mission  in  Acadia  had  abruptly  closed  with  the  attack
by  Argall,  so  fully  described  in  the  writings  of  Biard,
who,  in  his  Relation  of  1616,  appears  for  the  last  time
upon  our  stage.  Meantime,  the  Recollet  friars  were
conducting  their  missions  upon  and  beyond  the  St.
Lawrence ;  but, —  as  related  in  the  Introduction  (Vol-
ume I.  of  this  series)  and  in  Notes  to  this  Volume,
post, —  finding  themselves  unequal  to  the  great  task,
they  invited  the  Jesuits  to  return  to  New  France  and
aid  them  in  the  conversion  of  the  savages.  The  first
of  the  "black  gowns"  to  arrive  (April,  1625)  were
Charles  Lalemant,  Masse,  and  Brebeuf.

XV.  Lalemant,  as  superior  of  the  mission,  writes
(July  28,  1625)  to  the  governor,  Champlain,  announc-
ing the  arrival  of  the  Jesuits  at  Quebec,  the  hospital-
ity of  the  Recollets  to  them,  and  the  death  of  Nicholas
Viel,  of  the  latter  order.

XVI.  On  the  same  date,  Lalemant  writes  to  the
provincial  of  the  Recollets,  thanking  him  for  the
kindness  and  hospitality  shown  the  Jesuits  by  himself
and  others  of  his  order  in  Canada.

XVII.  Lalemant  writes  (Aug.  1,  no  year  men-
tioned, but  without  doubt  1626)  to  his  general,  at
Rome.  He  tells  what  the  Jesuit  missionaries  have
accomplished  during  the  past  year:  they  have  spent
most  of  the  time  studying  the  language  of  the  natives,
for  which  purpose  Brebeuf  spent  the  winter  among
the  savages ;  they  had  learned  all  they  could  of  the
people  and  the  country;  and  had  preached  to  and
confessed  the  French  colonists.  They  had  established
one  residence  among  the  Indians.  He  announces
that  he  sends  Noyrot  back  to  France,  to  look  after  the
interests  of  their  mission.


PREFACE  TO VOL.  IV


XVIII.  On  the  same  date  as  the  foregoing,  Lale-
mant  writes  to  his  brother  Jerome,  in  France,  who  is
also  a  Jesuit.  The  missionary  gives  a  short  descrip-
tion of  the  country  and  the  climate ;  then  of  the
people,  their  customs,  religious  belief,  clothing,  etc. ;
describes  the  extent  of  the  Canadian  trade  with
France ;  and  tells  of  the  establishment  of  a  residence
for  the  Jesuits,  near  that  of  the  Recollets.  The  diffi-
culties encountered  by  the  missionaries  in  acquiring
the  native  languages,  are  mentioned,  together  with
their  relations  with  a  certain  interpreter,  and  the
help  received  from  him.  The  writer  tells  of  Brebeuf
passing  the  entire  winter  among  the  savages  of  the
vicinity;  Lalemant  went  on  a  similar  trip,  and  had
to  return  in  eleven  days,  as  his  improvident  hosts  had
no  food.  He  announces  his  probable  departure  for  a
longer  stay  among  the  natives.  He  sends  Noyrot
back  to  France,  in  the  interests  of  the  mission,  and
Brebeuf  and  De  Noue  to  the  Huron  country.  The  na-
tives are  ready  to  be  taught,  the  writer  says,  and  he
sends  a  little  Huron  boy  to  be  instructed  in  France.
Champlain  and  Gaumont  have,  he  says,  chosen  him
as  their  confessor.  He  wishes  to  name  their  first
church,  "Our  Lady  of  the  Angels,"  and  asks  his
brother  to  send  him  therefor  "A  fine  picture  sur-
rounded by  angels."  The  busy  superior  mentions
this  as  the  sixty-eighth  letter  he  has  just  written  to
France, —  chiefly  to  benefactors  of  the  mission,  and
"  those  who  have  written  to  me."

Lalemant  (see  note  20,  post,  for  details)  had  gone  to
France  for  supplies  for  the  colony,  in  November,
1627;  and  upon  his  return  in  May,  1628,  was  with
others  captured  by  the  English  Admiral  Kirk,  to
whom,  a  year  later,  Quebec  capitulated. The  Jesuits


PREFACE  TO VOL.  IV


were  sent  to  England,  and  thence  allowed  to  return
to  France.  Lalemant,  with  a  party  of  missionaries,
again  attempted  to  return  to  Canada  (June,  1629),  but
they  were  shipwrecked  on  the  Canso  rocks.  Two  of
the  adventurous  Jesuits  were  drowned,  another  re-
mained in  the  country,  but  Lalemant  returned  to
France.

XIX.  Lalemant  writes  (Nov.  22,  1629),  from  Bor-
deaux to  the  superior  of  the  Jesuit  college  at  Paris,
describing  the  shipwreck  he  had  recently  experi-
enced, in  which  Father  Noyrot  and  Brother  Louis
Malot  were  drowned ;  and  announcing  his  own  safe
arrival  at  Bordeaux.

July  5,  1632,  Emery  de  Caen,  the  French  fur-trade
monopolist,  arrived  at  Quebec,  commissioned  to  re-
claim that  stronghold  from  Kirk.  With  him  were
the  Jesuits  Le  Jeune  and  De  Noue,  who  had  been
sent  hither  to  reopen  the  mission  of  their  order  in
New  France.

The  Editor  gratefully  acknowledges  the  receipt  of
information  from  the  following  gentlemen,  relative
to  annotations  in  this  volume :  Dr.  John  G.  Bourinot,
Dr.  Douglas  Brymner,  Capt.  E.  Deville,  and  Mr.  L.
P.  Sylvain,  of  Ottawa;  Mr.  William  McLennan,  Mr.
C.  H.  Gould,  and  Rev.  Arthur  E.  Jones,  of  Montreal ;
and  Mgr.  T.  E.  Hamel,  Dr.  N.  E.  Dionne,  and  Mr.  E.
E.  Tache,  of  Quebec.  To  the  list  of  persons  named
in  the  General  Preface  to  this  series,  as  having  fur-
nished valuable  suggestions  in  the  prosecution  of  the
work,  the  Editor  takes  pleasure  in  adding  the  follow-
ing: Rev.  Joseph  Le  Halle,  S.  J.,  president  of  St.
Ignatius  College,  Cleveland;  Rt.  Rev.  Ignatius  F.
Horstmann,  R.  C.  bishop  of  Cleveland; Rev.  E.  A.


PREFACE  TO VOL.  IV


Higgins,  S.  J.,  of  St.  Mary's  College,  St.  Mary's,
Kans. ;  Rev.  A.  A.  Hartmann,  S.  J.,  of  Canisius  Col-
lege, Buffalo,  N.  Y. ;  and  Mr.  James  H.  Coyne,  of  St.

Thomas,  Ont.

R.  G.  T.

Madison,  Wis.,  January,  1897.


XIV (concluded)

Biard's  Relation  de  la  Nouvelle  France

LYONS: LOUIS  MUGUET,  1616


Chaps,  xxvi.-xxxvii.,  and  Index, completing  the docu-
ment ;  Chaps,  i.-  xxv.  appeared  in  Volume  III.


LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE XXVIII. [i.e.,  xxvi.]

LE PILLAGE DE NOSTRE NAUIRE, & DE NOS GENTS,
LES ANGOISSES OU NOUS ESTIONS.

L?ANGLOIS  vidtorieux  s'en  vint  a  terre,  ou
eftoyent  nos  tentes,  &  alogements  commen-
ces, &  fit  rechercher  noftre  Capitaine  de  tous
tous  coftes,  difant,  qu'il  vouloit  voir  nos  commiffios;
que  cefte  terre  leur  appartenoit,  &  que  pour  cela  ils
s'eftoyet  rues  fur  nous  nous  y  trouuats,  neantmoins
que  fi  nous  faifions  apparoiftre  de  noftre  bonne  foy,
&  que  nous  fuffions  la  venus  fous  l'autorite  de  [238]
noftre  Prince,  qu'ils  y  auroyent  efgard,  ne  voulants
en  rien  contreuenir  a  la  bonne  confederation  de  nos
deux  Rois.  Le  malheur  fut  qu'on  ne  trouua  point
la  Sauffaye,  a  l'occafion  de  quoy  l'Anglois  fin,  &  fub-
til  fe  faifit  de  fes  coffres,  les  crocheta  induftrieufe-
ment,  &  y  ayant  trouuee  nos  commiffios,  &  lettres  roy-
aux,  les  faifit ;  puis  remettant  toutes  les  bef  ongnes  en
fa  place,  chafque  chofe  tout  ainfi  qu'il  l'auoit  trouu6e,
referma  lefdits  coffres  gentiment.  Le  lendemain  la
Sauffaye  eftant  venu,  le  Capitaine  Anglois,  qui  feauoit
fort  bien  fa  lecon,  l'accueillit  humainement,  &  luy
fit  les  premiers  interrogats  auec  belles  ceremonies:
Puis  vint  au  point :  luy  demandant  fes  commiffions,
a  celle  fin  qu'il  n'y  euft  aucune  doute,  quand  reelle-
ment  on  verroit,  &  confidereroit  les  paroles,  &  auto-
rite  [239]  du  Roy  noftre  Sire.  La  Sauffaye  refpon-
dit  que  fes  lettres  eftoyent  dans fes  coffres. On


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616


CHAPTER XXVIII. [i.e.,  xxvi.]

THE PLUNDERING  OF OUR  SHIP, AND  OF  OUR  PEOPLE,
AND THE DISTRESSES WE ENDURED.

THE  victorious  Englishman  came  on  shore,  where
we  had  our  tents  and  our  houses  just  begun,
and  had  our  Captain  searched  for  in  all  direc-
tions, saying  that  they  wished  to  see  our  commis-
sions; that  this  land  belonged  to  them,  and  hence
they  had  fallen  upon  us  when  they  found  us  there ;
nevertheless,  if  we  could  show  our  good  faith  in  the
matter,  and  that  we  had  come  there  under  the  au-
thority of  [238]  our  Prince,  that  they  would  show
some  regard  for  it,  wishing  in  no  wise  to  violate  the
alliance  between  our  two  Kings.  But  the  trouble
was,  la  Saussaye  could  not  be  found,  and  on  this  ac-
count the  shrewd  and  cunning  Englishman  seized  his
trunks,  skillfully  picked  the  locks,  and,  having  found
therein  our  commissions  and  royal  patents,  took  pos-
session of  them ;  then,  putting  everything  back  in  its
place,  each  article  just  as  he  had  found  it,  nicely
fastened  the  trunks  again.  The  next  day,  la  Saus-
saye having  returned,  the  English  Captain,  who  knew
his  lesson  remarkably  well,  received  him  kindly  and
made  his  first  inquiries  with  a  fine  show  of  courtesy ;
then  he  came  to  the  point  and  demanded  his  commis-
sion, so  there  might  be  no  doubt  when  the  words  and
authority  [239]  of  the  King,  our  Sire,  were  actually
seen  and  considered.  La  Saussaye  answered  that  the
letters  were  in  his  trunks. These  were  brought,  and


10  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

luy  apporta  fes  coffres,  &  atiant  qu'il  les  otmrift  auec
fes  clefs,  on  l'aduifa  qu'il  regardafl  bien  fi  perfonne
y  auroit  touche ;  car  quant  a  eux  ils  y  alloyent  fort
fimplement.  La  Sauffaye  recognoiffoit  tout  eftre
en  fort  bon  ordre,  mais  malheur!  il  n'y  retrouuoit
pas  .  fes  lettres.  Icy  le  Capitaine  Anglois  chagea
de  mine,  &  de  ton,  &  fe  refroignant  comm'il  falloit,
quoy  done  (dit-il)  vous  nous  impof ez  icy  ?  Vous  don-
nes  a  entendre  qu'auez  commiffion  de  voftre  Roy,
&  n 'en  pouuez  produire  aucun  tefmoignage?  Vous
eftes  des  Forbas  &  Pirates  treftous;  vous  merites  la
mort.  Et  des  lors,  il  fit  la  part  du  butin  aux  foldats:
En  quoy  il  confuma  toute  l'apres-difnee.  Nous  de
la  terre  confiderions  le  guafpillement  [240]  de  tous
nos  biens:  car  les  Anglois  nous  laiffoyent  a  terre,
eux  fe  tenants  en  mer,  &  ayats  ioints  par  enfemble
nos  vaiffeaux  au  leur,  car  nous  en  auions  deux,  fca-
uoir  eft  noftre  nauire,  &  vne  barque  conitruidte  fur
le  lieu,  &  equippee  de  neuf .  Nous  eftions  reduits  en
piteux  eflat:  mais  ce  n'eftoit  pas  la  fin.  Le  iour  fui-
uant  on  vint  a  terre,  &  on  nous  pilla  encores  ce  qu'y
auions :  non  pas  tout  du  commencement,  ains  a  paf-
fades,  &  a  chafque  fois  qu'on  defcedoit  a  terre,  touf-
iours  quel  que  detrouffe  de  nos  manteaux,  habits,  &
autres  cliofes.  Vne  fois  on  fit  quelques  violences,  &
atrocitez  de  traidtement  fur  la  perfonne  de  deux  de
nos  gents,  ce  qui  efpouuanta  tellemet  vne  partie  des
autres,  qu'ils  s'enfuirent  par  les  bois  comme  pauures
beftes  efgarees,  demy  nuds,  &  fans  [241]  aucuns
viures,  ne  fcachants  ce  qu'ils  pourroyent  deuenir.

Venons  aux  Iefuites.  Ie  vous  ay  dit,  que  Gilbert
du  Thet  fut  outre  d'vne  mofquetade  durant  le  com-
bat. Les  Anglois  entrants  dans  le  nauire  le  mirent


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  11

before  he  unlocked  them  he  was  advised  to  look  close-
ly to  see  if  they  had  been  tampered  with,  for,  as  to
them,  they  were  acting  with  all  sincerity.  La  Saus-
saye  found  that  all  was  in  good  order,  but  alas!  he
could  not  find  the  letters.  Hereupon  the  English
Captain  changed  his  mien  and  his  voice,  and,  frown-
ing in  the  most  proper  manner,  "How  now  (said  he),
are  you  imposing  on  us?  You  give  us  to  understand
that  you  have  a  commission  from  your  King,  and  you
cannot  produce  any  evidence  of  it.  You  are  Outlaws
and  Pirates,  every  one  of  you,  and  merit  death."
Then  he  set  his  soldiers  to  plundering,  and  in  this
the  whole  afternoon  was  consumed.  From  the  shore
we  looked  on  at  the  pillage  [240]  of  our  property:
for  the  English  had  left  us  on  shore  while  they  re-
mained on  the  water,  where  they  joined  our  vessels
to  theirs,  for  we  had  two,  our  ship  and  a  barque  con-
structed at  this  place  and  newly  equipped.  We  were
reduced  to  a  pitiful  state,  but  this  was  not  the  end.
The  next  day  they  came  on  shore,  and  robbed  us  also
of  what  we  had  there.  Not  all  at  one  time,  but  at
intervals,  and  whenever  they  came  on  shore,  always
appropriating  some  of  our  mantles,  clothes,  and  other
things.  Once  they  maltreated  and  abused  two  of
our  men,  which  so  frightened  part  of  the  others  that
they  fled  to  the  woods  like  poor  hunted  beasts,  half-
naked  and  without  [241]  food,  not  knowing  what
would  become  of  them.

Let  us  speak  of  the  Jesuits.  I  have  told  you  that
Gilbert  du  Thet  was  struck  down  by  a  musket  ball
during  the  fight.  When  the  English  boarded  our
ship,  they  put  him,  together  with  all  the  other
wounded  men,  into  the  hands  of  their  Surgeon .  This
Surgeon  was a  Catholic, and  known  as  such. He


12  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

entre  les  mains  de  leur  Chirurgien  &  luy,  &  tous  les
autres  bleffes.  Ce  Chirurgien  eftoit  Catholique,  &
recognu  pour  tel ;  &  perfonne  fort  charitable,  &  qui
nous  a  faict  mille  bons  offices.  Or  le  P.  Biard  ayant
fceu  la  bleffure  de  Gilbert  du  Thet  fit  demander  au
Capitaine,  que  les  bleffes  fuffent  portes  a  terre,  ce  qui
fut  accorde,  &  par  ainfi  ledit  Gilbert  euft  le  moyen
de  fe  confeffer,  &  de  benir  &  louer  Dieu  iufte,  &
mifericordieux  en  la  Compagnie  de  fes  Freres,  mou-
rat  entre  leurs  mains.  Ce  qu'il  fit  auec  grande  con-
fiance,  refignation,  &  deuotion,  [242]  vingt  &  quatre
heures  apres  fa  bleffure,  il  euft  fon  fouhait,  car  au
defpart  de  Honfleur,  en  prefence  de  tout  1' equipage
il  auoit  hauffe  les  mains,  &  les  yeux  vers  le  Ciel  pri-
ant  Dieu,  qu'il  ne  reuint  iamais  plus  en  France,  ains
qu'il  mouruft  trauaillat  a  la  conquefte  des  ames,  &
au  falut  des  Sauuages.  II  fut  enterre  le  mefme  iour
au  pied  d'vne  grande  Croix  que  nous  auions  dreffee
du  commencement.

Les  Iefuites  n'eftoyent  iufques  alors  recognus  des
Anglois,  fmon  que  pour  Prefixes.  Or  le  P.  Biard  &
le  P.  Enemond  Maffe  s'en  alleret  au  nauire  parler  au
Capitaine  Anglois,  &  luy  expliqueret  ouuertement
comm'ils  efloyet  Iefuites,  venus  en  ces  quartiers-la
pour  la  couerfio  des  Sauuages,  puis  le  fupplierent  par
le  fang  de  celuy,  qu'il  recognoiffoit  pour  Sauueur,  &
[243]  par  les  mifericordes  qu'il  en  attendoit,  qu'il  luy
pleufl  auoir  pitie  de  ces  pauures  Francois,  fur  lef-
quels  Dieu  luy  auoit  done  puiffance,  &  qu'en  leur
mifere  il  recognufl  combien  les  affaires  de  ce  monde
varient:  qu'il  luy  pleufl  leur  donner  &  leur  moyen-
ner  retour  en  leur  pays  de  France.  Le  Capitaine  les
ouyt  fort  paifiblement,  &  leur  refpondit  auec  pareil


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  13

was  very  charitable,  and  did  us  a  thousand  kind  serv-
ices. Now  as  soon  as  Father  Biard  learned  about
Gilbert  du  Thet's  wound,  he  sent  a  request  to  the
Captain  to  have  all  the  wounded  carried  on  shore;
this  was  granted,  and  so  the  said  Gilbert  had  an  op-
portunity to  confess,  and  to  bless  and  praise  a  just
God,  full  of  mercy  to  the  Society  of  his  Brothers ;
and  he  died  in  their  arms.  He  passed  away  with
great  steadfastness,  resignation,  and  devotion,  [242]
twenty-four  hours  after  he  was  wounded.  He  had
his  wish ;  for  when  leaving  Honfleur,  in  the  presence
of  the  whole  crew,  he  had  raised  his  hands  and  eyes
to  Heaven,  praying  God  that  he  might  never  again
return  to  France,  but  that  he  might  die  working  for
the  conquest  of  souls  and  for  the  salvation  of  the  Sav-
ages. He  was  buried  the  same  day  at  the  foot  of  a
large  Cross  which  we  had  erected  when  we  first  went
there.

Up  to  this  time  the  Jesuits  had  not  been  recognized
by  the  English,  except  as  Priests.  Now  Father  Biard
and  Father  Enemond  Masse  went  to  the  ship  to  speak
with  the  English  Captain,  and  explained  to  him  open-
ly that  they  were  Jesuits,  who  had  come  to  these
regions  to  convert  the  Savages ;  then  they  implored
him,  by  the  blood  of  him  whom  he  acknowledged  as
his  Savior,  and  [243]  by  the  mercy  which  he  expected
from  him,  that  he  might  be  pleased  to  have  pity  upon
these  poor  French,  over  whom  God  had  given  him
power ;  and  that  in  their  wretched  condition  he  might
see  how  changeable  are  the  affairs  of  this  world,  allow
them  to  return  to  France,  their  native  country,  and
furnish  them  means  therefor.  The  Captain  listened
to  them  very  kindly,  and  answered  them  with  like
courtesy:  "But,"  (said  he)  dissembling,  "I  am  very


14  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

honneur:  mais  (dit-il)  diffimulant,  ie  m'eftonne  fort
comme  vous  atitres  Iefuites,  lefquels  on  tient  com-
munement  pour  gens  de  confcience,  &  de  Religion,
vous  vous  retrouuiez  icy,  neantmoins  en  la  compagnie
des  forbans,  &  picoreurs,  gens  fans  adueu  &  fans  loy,
ny  honneur.  Le  P.  Biard  refpondit  &  preuua  auec
tant  d'arguments,  que  toute  leur  troupe  eftoit  de
gens  de  bien,  &  recommandes  par  fa  Majefhe  [244]
tres-Chreftienne :  &  refuta  fi  peremptoirement  toutes
objections  contraires,  que  le  Capitaine  Anglois  fut
contraincl;  de  faire  femblant,  qu'il  s'y  accordoit,  vain-
cu  par  fes  raifons.  Certes  (adioufla-il)  il  y  a  bien  eu
de  la  faute,  a  ce  que  ie  voy,  d'ainfi  perdre  vos  lettres.
Neantmoins  ie  traidteray  de  voftre  retour  auec  voftre
Capitaine,  &  des  lors  iufques  au  depart,  il  fit  touf-
iours  manger  a  fa  table  lefdits  deux  Peres,  leur  mo-
ftrant  beaucoup  de  refpedt  &  honeftete.  Or  il  auoit
vn'efpine  au  pied,  qui  le  tourmentoit;  c'eftoit  le  Pi-
lote,  &  les  Matelots,  qui  eftoyent  euades,  &  defquels
il  ne  pouuoit  fcauoir  nouuelles.  Ce  Pilote  appelle  le
Bailleur,  de  la  ville  de  Rouen,  s'en  eftant  alle"  pour
recognoiftre  (ainfi  que  vous  a  efte  dit)  ne  peut  point
retourner  a  temps  au  nauire  pour  le  defedre,  [245]  &
partant  il  retira  fa  chaloupe  a  l'efcart,  &  la  nuit  ve-
nue print  encores  auec  foy  les  autres  Matelots,  &  fe
mit  en  fauuete  hors  la  veue,  &  le  pouuoir  des  An-
glois. De  nuidt  il  nous  venoit  trouuer  pour  auifer
auecques  nous  ce  qui  feroit  de  faire.  II  fit  en  parti-
culier  ce  bon  office  aux  Iefuites :  car  il  vint  trouuer  le
P.  Biard,  &  le  prenant  par  la  main  le  coniura  de  ne
fe  point  meffier  de  luy,  pource  qu'il  eftoit  de  la  Pre-
tendue,  l'affeurant  qu'il  ne  manqueroit  ny  a  luy,  ny
a  aucun  des  Peres:  &  qu'il  fupplioit  Dieu,  que  tout


1616-20]  BIARD' S  RELATION,  i6ib  15

much  astonished  at  you  Jesuits,  who  are  generally  re-
garded as  conscientious  and  Religious  men,  being  here,
nevertheless,  in  the  company  of  pirates,  marauders,
and  idle  wanderers,  who  are  men  without  calling,  with-
out law,  and  without  honor. ' '  Father  Biard  answered,
and  proved  by  many  arguments,  that  their  whole  com-
pany were  honest  people  and  were  recommended  by
his  most  Christian  [244]  Majesty,  and  so  summarily  re-
futed all  opposing  arguments,  that  the  English  Cap-
tain had  to  seem  to  agree  with  him,  conquered  by  his
logic.  "Certainly  (he  added)  there  has  been  indeed
some  fault,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  in  thus  losing  your  let-
ters. Nevertheless,  I  shall  consider  the  matter  of
your  return  with  your  Captain. ' '  And  from  that  time
until  our  departure,  he  always  had  the  two  Fathers
eat  at  his  table,  showing  them  great  respect  and
courtesy.  Now  he  had  a  thorn  in  his  side,  which
caused  him  much  uneasiness;  it  was  the  Pilot  and
Sailors  who  had  escaped,  and  of  whom  he  could  get
no  news.  This  pilot,1  called  "  le  Bailleur, "  from  the
city  of  Rouen,  had  gone  out  to  reconnoitre  (as  has
been  stated),  and  could  not  return  to  the  ship  in
time  to  defend  it;  [245]  therefore  he  turned  his  boat
aside,  and  when  night  came  took  in  with  him  the
other  Sailors,  and  withdrew  to  a  place  of  safety,  out  of
sight  of  the  English  and  beyond  their  power.  At
night  he  came  to  see  us  and  to  talk  over  with  us  what
was  to  be  done.  He  performed  this  kind  act  espe-
cially for  the  Jesuits;  for  he  came  to  Father  Biard
and  taking  him  by  the  hand  implored  him  not  to
mistrust  him  because  he  was  of  the  Pretended™
Religion,  assuring  him  that  he  would  not  fail  him,
nor  any  of  the  Fathers,  and  that  he  should  pray  God
not  to  forsake  him  also, as  he was speaking from


16  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

ainfi  il  ne  l'abandonnaft  point,  comm'il  le  difoit  de
cceur  fyncere.  Le  P.  Biard  le  remercia  de  bonne
affedtion,  &  luy  promit  de  fe  fouuenir  de  cefte  fi
bonne  volontd:  il  luy  dit  neantmoins  qu'il  ne  vouloit
encores  penfer  a  foy,  iufques  a  ce  qu'il  vit  tous  les
autres  en  beau  [246]  chemin.  Que  lors  il  deuien droit
ce  qu'a  Dieu  plairoit,  admonneltant  ledit  Pilote  de  fe
garder  de  tomber  es  mains  des  Anglois :  parce  que  le
Capitaine  buttoit  fort  a  le  pouuoir  attraper.  Ledit
Pilote  fit  fagement  fon  profit  de  cefl  aduertiffement,
&  de  celuy  des  autres.  Car  de  la  a  deux  ou  trois
iours,  il  paffa  a  la  barbe  des  Anglois,  comme  fe  fau-
uant,  &  s'en  allant  chercher  nauire,  &  leur  difant
que  ce  n'eftoit  pas  pour  cefte  fois  la,  qu'il  le  falloit
attedre.  Mais  il  fe  retira  feulement  derriere  quel-
ques  Ifles  non  loin  de  la  pour  y  eftre  aux  efcoutes  &
confiderer  quelle  fortune  nous  arriueroit.  Cela  fit  a
mon  aduis,  que  le  Capitaine  Anglois  fe  refolut  pluf-
toft  a  ne  nous  pas  faire  pis,  toutesfois  il  en  auoit
quelque  volote,  ce  que  ie  ne  fcay.  De  vray  par  les
coniedtures  de  ce  que  nous  auons  experimete  [247]
defpuis,  il  eftoit  bien  Capitaine  fort  fage  &  rufe,  mais
neatmoins  gentil-homme  ayat  le  courage  noble :  fes
gents  auffi  n'eftoyet  point  inhtimains,  ny  cruels  contre
perfonne  de  nous.

Or  ne  fcauroit-on  croire  les  angoiffes  aufquelles
nous  eftions  en  ce  temps,  car  nous  ne  fcauions  ou
donner  de  la  tefte.  Du  cofte  des  Anglois,  nous  n'at-
tendions  que  la  mort,  ou  du  moins  la  feruitude :  auffi
d'arrefter  fur  le  pays,  &  viure  parmi  les  Sauuages
a  leur  facon  tout  vn  an  entier,  &  tant  de  gens,  nous
fembloit  eftre  vne  mort  bien  longue  &  miferable.
Ces  bons  Sauuages  ayants  ouy  noftre  defaftre  s'en


1610-29]  WARD'S  RELATION,  ibib  17


a  sincere  heart.  Father  Biard  thanked  him  very
affectionately,  and  on  his  part  promised  to  remem-
ber his  good  will;  he  told  him,  however,  that  he
did  not  wish  to  think  of  himself,  until  he  saw  all
the  others  on  a  safe  [246]  road,  and  then,  let  happen
to  him  what  God  willed.  He  admonished  the  Pilot  to
be  careful  not  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  English,
for  the  Captain  was  trying  very  hard  to  catch  him.
The  Pilot  wisely  profited  by  this  advice,  and  by  that
of  the  others.  For,  during  the  next  two  or  three
days,  he  went  about  in  defiance  of  the  English,  as  if
making  his  escape  and  going  for  a  ship,  seeming  to
say  to  them  that  they  need  not  count  upon  him  this
time.  But  he  only  withdrew  behind  some  Islands
not  far  off,  to  be  on  the  lookout  and  to  see  what  fortune
might  befall  us.  I  believe  this  made  the  English
Captain  decide  not  to  subject  us  to  any  worse  treat-
ment, however  much  he  might  have  wished  to  do  so,
in  regard  to  which  I  know  nothing.  Certainly,  judg-
ing from  what  we  experienced  [247 J  afterwards,  lie
was  indeed  a  very  shrewd  and  cunning  Captain,  but
nevertheless  a  gentleman  of  truly  noble  courage  ;  nor
were  his  men  inhuman  or  cruel  to  any  of  us.

Now  it  is  impossible  to  imagine  the  anxiety  we  en-
dured at  that  time,  for  we  knew  not  which  way  to
turn.  From  the  English,  we  expected  only  death  or
at  least  slavery;  but  to  remain  in  this  country,  and
for  so  many  men  to  live  among  the  Savages  in  their
way  for  a  whole  year,  looked  to  US  like  a  long  and
miserable  death.  These  good  Savages,  having  heard
about  our  misfortune,  came  and  offered  to  do  their
best  for  us,  promising  to  feed  us  during  the  Winter,
and  showing  a  great  deal  of  sympathy  for  us.  But
we  could  hope  for  nothing  better  |  248  ]  than  they  had  ;


18  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

vindrent  a  nous,  &  nous  offroyent  leur  poffible,  pro-
mettants  de  nous  alimenter  durant  l'Hyuer,  &  mon-
ftrants  vne  grande  copaffion.  Mais  nous  ne  pou-
uions  pas  efperer  mieux,  [248]  qu'ils  n'ont.  Auffi
de  trouuer  autres  expedients  en  vn  tel  defert:  nous
n'en  voyons  point.  Voicy  en  fin  comme  Dieu  nous
pourueut.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  19

also  we  could  see  no  prospect  of  finding  any  other
expedients  in  such  a  desert.  Now  see  how  God  pro-
vided for  us.


20  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE XXIX. [i.e.,  xxvii.]

LES EXPEDIENTS  TROUUEZ  POUR  REUENIR  EN  FRANCE,

& COMME TRENTE DE NOS GENS Y ARRIUERENT

APRES PLUSIEURS TRAUAUX.

LE  Capitaine  Anglois  appelle  Samuel  Argal,  &  fon
Lieutenant,  dit  Guillaume  Turnel,  commen-
cerent  a  traidter  de  noftre  retour  felon  leur  pro-
meffe  auee  noftre  Capitaine  la  Sauffaye.  Les  Anglois
offroyent  des  conditions  bien  iniques,  mais  pour  le
faire  court,  la  conclufion  fut  qu'vne  [249]  chaloupe
nous  reftant  de  deux,  q  nous  en  auions,  ils  nous  en
l'aifferoyent  vne,  &  qu'auee  icelle  nous  allaflions  oil
Dieu  nous  conduiroit.  Le  Capitaine  Anglois,  caute-
leux  qu'il  eft;  voulut  auoir  vn  efcrit,  figne  de  la  main
de  la  Sauffaye,  par  lequel  il  tefmoignalt,  que  c'eftoit
de  fon  choix,  que  ce  parti  auoit  efte  prins.

Celte  conclufion  ouve,  le  P.  Biard  s'en  alia  trouuer
ledit  Capitaine,  &  luy  reprefenta,  qu'ils  reftoyent
trente  perfonnes,  &  qu'il  eltoit  impoflible  que  tant  de
gens  peuffent  eftre  entaffez  dans  vn  11  petit  vaiffeau,
tant  s'en  faut  qu'ils  peuffent  dans  iceluy  faire  cent
cinquante  lieiies,  &  trauerfer  des  bayes  de  dix  &
douze  lieue's,  comme  il  leur  conuenoit  faire,  auant  que
trouuer  aucu  nauire  Francois,  auquel  ils  fe  peuffent  re-
fugier:  que  cela  eftoit  manifeftement  [250]  nous  ietter
a.  la  mort,  &  au  defefpoir.  L' Anglois  refpondit,  q  la
Sauffaye  ne  le  croyoit  pas  ainfi :  mais  que  fi  on  vou-
loit  def charger  ladicle  chaloupe,  qu'il  en  ouuriroit
bien  vn  moyen : qu'il  conduiroit  a  la  Yirginie  les  ar-


161tf-2y]  B/ARD'S  RELA  T/ON,  1616  21


CHAPTER XXIX. [i.e.,  xxvii.]

THE MEANS WHICH WERE FOUND TO RETURN TO
FRANCE, AND HOW THIRTY OF OUR PEOPLE AR-
RIVED THERE AFTER MANY TRIALS.

THE  English  Captain,  whose  name  was  Samuel
Argal,  and  his  Lieutenant,  William  Turnel,*
began,  as  they  had  promised,  to  treat  with  our
Captain  la  Saussaye  about  our  return.  The  English
offered  some  very  unfair  conditions,  but  to  make  the
story  short,  the  conclusion  was  that  as  one  [249]  boat
remained  to  us  of  the  two  we  had  had,  they  would
leave  it  for  us,  and  with  it  we  could  go  where  God
directed  us.  The  English  Captain,  crafty  as  he  was,
wished  to  have  a  written  acknowledgement  signed
by  la  Saussaye,  in  which  he  should  testify  that  it  was
by  his  own  choice  that  this  course  had  been  taken.

When  this  decision  was  heard,  Father  Biard  went
to  see  the  Captain,  and  represented  to  him  that  there
remained  thirty  persons,  and  that  it  was  not  possible
for  so  many  people  to  crowd  into  so  small  a  vessel,
and  still  less  possible  that  they  could  therein  make
one  hundred  and  fifty  leagues,  and  cross  bays  of  ten
and  twelve  leagues,  which  would  be  necessary  before
they  found  any  French  ship  in  which  they  could  take
refuge:  that  such  a  thing  was  plainly  [250]  throwing
ourselves  into  the  jaws  of  death  and  of  despair.  The
Englishman  answered  that  la  Saussaye  did  not  think-
so.  but  if  they  wished  to  lighten  the  said  boat  he
would  find  a  means  of  doing  so;  that  he  would  take


22  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

tifants  qui  votidroyent  y  venir  fous  promeffe,  qu'on
ne  les  forceroit  point  en  leur  Religion,  &  que,  apres
vn  an  de  feruice,  on  les  feroit  repaffer  en  France.
Trois  accepterent  cefte  offre.

Pareillement  le  fieur  de  la  Mote  des  le  commence-
ment auoit  confenti  de  s'en  aller  a  la  Virginie  auec
ledit  Capitaine  Anglois,  qui  l'honnoroit  beaucoup,
parce  qu'il  l'auoit  trouue  l'efpee  au  poing,  &  voyoit
en  luy  plufieurs  autres  bones  qualitez,  ce  qui  profitoit
de  beaucoup  a  toute  noftre  troupe.  On  luy  auoit  aufii
permis  de  mener  auec  foy  aucuns,  qui  de  mefme
[251]  feroyent  affeurez  fous  fa  faueur.  Le  Capitaine
Flory  fe  refolut  pareillement  de  tenter  la  mefme  for-
tune, parce  qu'on  luy  donnoit  efperance  qu'il  y  pour-
roit  recouurer  fon  nauire.  Le  P.  Biard  pria,  que
quatre  qu'ils  eftoyent,  fcauoir  eft  deux  Iefuites,  &
deux  autres  fuffent  portez  au  Ifles  de  Pencoit,  &  que
la.  on  les  recommandaft  aux  pefcheurs  Anglois,  qui  y
font  d' ordinaire,  a.  celle  fin  que  par  leur  moyen  ils
peuffent  repaffer  en  France,  ce  que  le  Capitaine  An-
glois luy  odtroya  fort  volontiers.

En  cefte  faeon  la  chaloupe  fe  trouua  conpetemment
defchargee,  &  toute  noftre  troupe  fut  diuisee  en  trois
egales  bandes:  Car  quinze  eftoyent  auec  la  Pilote:
quinze  reftoyent  auec  les  Anglois ;  &  quinze  entroyent
dans  la  chaloupe  accordee.  De  ces  quinze  [252]  le
P.  Enemond  Mafse  en  eftoit  l'vn,  car  le  choix  ayant
efte  bailie  a.  la  troupe  de  ceux,  qui  deuoyent  entrer
dans  la  chaloupe  a.  ce  qu'ils  peuffent  eflire  de  tous
les  trois  Iefuites  celuy  qu'ils  aimeroient  mieux  pour
leur  faire  compagnie;  ce  fut  luy,  qu'ils  agreerent
le  plus.

Cefte  chaloupe  done  fut  deliuree  entre  les  mains


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  23

to  Virginia  the  workmen  who  wished  to  go  there,
tinder  promise  that  they  would  not  force  them  in  the
matter  of  Religion,  and  that,  after  one  year  of  serv-
ice, they  would  send  them  back  to  France.  Three
accepted  this  offer.

Sieur  de  la  Mote  likewise  had  from  the  first  con-
sented to  go  to  Virginia  with  the  English  Captain,
who  honored  him  greatly,  because  he  had  found  him
sword  in  hand,  and  saw  in  him  many  other  good  qual-
ities, which  proved  a  great  advantage  to  all  our  com-
pany. He  was,  moreover,  permitted  to  take  with  him
some  who  were  [251]  to  enjoy  the  same  favor  as  he
did.  Captain  Flory  also  decided  to  try  the  same  for-
tune, because  he  was  encouraged  to  hope  that  he  might
thus  recover  his  ship.  Father  Biard  begged  that  four
of  them,  namely  two  Jesuits  and  two  others,  might
be  taken  to  the  Pencoit  Islands  and  recommended  to
the  English  fishermen,  who  are  usually  there,  that
they  might,  with  their  help,  return  to  France.  This
the  English  Captain  granted  very  willingly.

Thus  the  boat  was  sufficiently  lightened,  and  our
whole  company  was  arranged  in  three  equal  divi-
sions ;  for  fifteen  were  with  the  Pilot,  fifteen  with  the
English,  and  fifteen  had  embarked  in  the  boat  left  to
them.  Of  this  fifteen,  [252]  Father  Enemond  Masse"
was  one,  for,  it  having  been  granted  to  the  company
who  were  to  go  in  that  boat  to  choose  the  one  of  the
three  Jesuits  whom  they  preferred  to  accompany
them,  it  was  he  whom  they  favored  the  most.

This  boat  was  then  given  in  charge  of  la  Saussaye,
and  of  Father  Enemond  Masse,  Jesuit,  whom  the
English  Captain  highly  honored.  He  delivered  it
over  to  them  with  a  small  supply  of  food,  and  other
provisions. But  our  poor  men  were  in  great  trouble


24  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

de  la  Sauffaye,  &  dudit  P.  Enemond  Mafse,  Iefuite,
que  le  Capitaine  Anglois  honora  beaucoup.  II  la
liura  quelque  pen  amonitionnee  de  viures,  &  autres
prouifions.  Mais  nos  pauures  gens  furent  bien  en
peine,  quand  il  la  fallut  eonduire :  ear  ils  n'eftoyent
pour  tout,  que  deux,  on  trois  mariniers,  &  iceux
n'auoyent  ny  carte,  ny  cognoiffanee  des  lieux.  En
cefte  deftreffe  Dieu  les  fecourut  fort  a  poind: :  car  le
Pilote,  qui  auoit  mis  fes  gens  en  [253]  feurte,  defi-
reux  de  f9auoir  en  quel  eftat  eltoit  le  refte  de  la
troupe,  fe  defguifa  en  Sauuage  &  s'en  vint  efpier  fur
les  lieux.  L'Ange  de  Dieu  le  eonduifit  par  le  bon
endroit ;  car  il  rencontra  tout  a  propos  cefte  chaloupe,
qui  s'en  alloit,  &  ne  fcauoit  comment  cefte  bonne
fortune  parut  de  fi  bon  augure  aux  rencontres,  qu'ils
s'affeurerent  des  lors,  que  Dieu  leur  vouloit  faire  mi-
fericorde,  mefmes  que  pour  furcroit  de  grace,  ils
firent  vne  fort  belle  pefche  de  gros  Aumars  ou  Can-
chres  de  mer,  &  les  Sauuages  leur  donnerent  libe-
ralement  force  oyfeaux,  &  poiffons,  &  de  tout  ce
qu'ils  auoyent  auec  grande  fignincation  de  eompaf-
fion.

En  cefte  faco  ils  fe  vindret  ioindre  a.  la  chaloupe
des  Matelots,  &  de  compagnie  gagnerent  l'lfle  de
Menano.  C'eft'Ifle  eft  a  l'emboucheure  [254]  de  la
Baye  Fran9oife,  &  d'icelle  iufques  a  l'lfle  Longue,  oil
f alloit  qu'ils  trauerfaffent  dix  lieiies  de  pleine  mer  fort
fafcheufes  a  caufe  des  grandes  marees,  qui  y  courent,
&bouillent:  &  de  mal'heur,  mauuais  temps  les  re-
tint  icy  huidt,  ou  neuf  iours.  Leurs  maux  &  appre-
henlions  les  firent  recourir  a  Dieu  par  vceus,  &  pri-
eres,  qui  furent  exaucees,  comme  il  parut  par  le  beau
temps  qui  vint  felon  leur  fouhait :  a  la  faueur  duquel


1C16-29J  BIAXD'S  RELATION,  1616  25


when  they  had  to  sail  their  vessel;  for  in  all,  there
were  only  two  or  three  sailors,  and  these  had  neither
map  nor  knowledge  of  the  country.  In  this  distress
God  sent  them  relief  in  the  very  nick  of  time  ;  for  the
Pilot,  who  had  placed  his  men  in  [253]  security,  anx-
ious to  know  how  the  rest  of  the  company  were  far-
ing, disguised  himself  as  a  Savage  and  went  spying
about  the  place.  The  Angel  of  God  guided  him
through  the  right  path,  for  he  very  opportunely  en-
countered this  boat,  which  was  sailing  off  with  no
knowledge  of  navigation.  This  good  luck  seemed
such  a  favorable  omen  to  those  in  the  boat,  that  they
were  sure  from  that  time  on  that  God  would  be  merci-
ful to  them ;  and,  as  a  superabundance  of  grace,  they
had  great  success  in  catching  large  Lobsters  or  Sea
crabs,  and  the  Savages  generously  gave  them  quan-
tities of  birds  and  fish  and  all  other  things  they  had,
with  great  exhibitions  of  sympathy.

Thus  they  fell  in  with  the  boat  containing  the  Sail-
ors, and  in  their  company  reached  the  Island  of  Menano.
This  Island  is  at  the  entrance  [254]  to  French  Bay,
and  thence  they  went  as  far  as  Long  Island ;  in  this  pas-
sage they  had  to  cross  ten  leagues  of  a  very  angry
sea  caused  by  the  strong  and  violent  currents  which
flow  between,  and  unfortunately,  bad  weather  kept
them  there  eight  or  nine  days.  Their  sorrows  and
apprehensions  made  them  have  recourse  to  God  with
vows  and  prayers,  which  were  heard,  as  was  evident
from  the  beautiful  weather  which  followed,  according-
to  their  wish,  and  bv  means  of  which  thev  reached
Long  Island.  Here,  in  order  to  keep  their  promise,
they  planted  a  Cross,  celebrated  Holy  Mass,  and
marched  in  procession.  Here  also  God  had  prepared
a  storehouse;  for  they  found  in  this  place  a  good  pile


26  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

ils  paruindrent  a.  l'lfle  Longue,  oil  pour  tenir  leur  pro-
meffe  ils  planterent  vne  Croix,  celebrerent  la  Saindle
Meffe,  &  firent  vne  proceffio.  La  auffi  Dieu  leur
auoit  prepare  vn  magafin :  car  ils  y  trouuerent  vn
bon  monceau  de  fel,  que  le  fieur  de  Biencourt  y  auoit
autrefois  delaifse,  &  pour  1' employer  ils  firent  vne
fort  bonne,  &  heureufe  pefche.  Ainfi  prouifionnez
[255]  ils  pafferet  au  Cap  Forchu,  auquel  lieu  ils  trou-
uerent  le  Sagamo  Louys  Membertou,  qui  fit  grand
accueil  au  P.  Enemond  Mafse,  &  le  vouloit  retenir
a  toute  force.  Mais  ledit  Pere  s'excufa  fur  la  necef-
fite  de  ne  point  delaiffer  fa  compagnie.  Le  Sauuage
leur  fit  a  treftous  Tabagie  d'vn  Orignac,  ce  qui  leur
fit  grand  bien,  &  en  doublerent  plus  ioyeufement
defpuis  le  Cap  de  Sable.  Eftants  ja  proches  du  Port
au  Mouton,  ils  eurent  au  deuant  d'eux  quatre  cha-
loupes  de  Sauuages,  qui  reuenoyent  de  la  trocque.
C'eftoit  Roland,  &  autres  Sagamos,  qui  auffi  toft  re-
cogneurent  ledit  P.  Enemond,  &  luy  firent  leurs
liberalitez  bien  grandes  certes  :  demie  Galette  de
pain  a  chacun  des  copagnons,  &  vne  entiere  a  luy.
C'eftoit  le  monde  renuerse,  les  Sauuages  fourniffoyent
du  pain,  aux  [256]  Francois  gratuitement.  Ce  pain
fembloit  de  la  Manne  a  nos  tribulez :  car  de  trois  fep-
maines  ils  n'en  auoyent  mange.  Et  pour  le  comble
de  fouhait,  les  Sauuages  leur  dirent,  que  non  guieres
loin  de  la  y  auoit  deux  natures  Fracois,  l'vn  a  Se-
zambre,  &  l'autre  a  Paffepec.  Ce  qui  fit  diligenter
nos  Pelerins  a  ce  qu'ils  ne  les  perdiffent.

Ces  deux  nauires  eftoyent  Maloiiins,  l'vn  apparte-
nant  au  Ieune  Dupont,  duquel  nous  auons  fouuent
parle  cy  deuant,  d'enuiron  cinquante  tonneaux  feule-
ment :  le  Capitainc  Yible  Bullot  commandoit  a  l'autre,


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  ibib  27

of  salt,  which  sieur  de  Biencourt  had  previously  left
there,  and  to  find  use  for  it  they  caught  a  fine  lot  of
fish.  Thus  provisioned,  [255]  they  passed  on  to
Cape  Forchu,  where  they  found  the  Sagamore,
Louys  Membertou,  who  gave  Father  Enemond  Masse
a  hearty  welcome  and  tried  by  all  means  to  keep  him
there.  But  the  Father  excused  himself,  giving  as
his  reason  the  necessity  of  remaining  with  his  com-
pany. The  Savage  made  Tabagie  for  them  all  with
Moose  Meat,  which  was  a  great  blessing  to  them,  and
then  they  doubled  Cape  Sable  more  cheerfully.  When
they  were  in  the  neighborhood  of  Port  au  Mouton,
they  saw  before  them  four  boats  filled  with  Savages,
who  were  returning  from  the  trading  station.  It
was  Roland  and  other  Sagamores,  who  immediately
recognized  Father  Enemond,  and  showed  him  a  gen-
erosity truly  wonderful;  namely,  by  giving  half  a
Sea  Biscuit  to  each  of  his  companions,  and  a  whole
one  to  him.  Behold  the  world  turned  upside  down,
the  Savages  freely  furnishing  bread  to  the  [256]
French.  This  bread  seemed  like  Manna  to  our  af-
flicted (Frenchmen),  for  they  had  tasted  none  for  three
weeks.  And  to  complete  the  fulfillment  of  their
wish,  the  Savages  told  them  that  not  far  from  there
were  two  French  ships,  one  at  Sezambre  and  the  other
at  Passepec.  This  caused  our  Pilgrims  to  hasten,
that  they  might  not  fail  to  see  them.

These  two  ships  were  from  Saint  Malo,  one  belong-
ing to  Dupont  the  Younger,  whom  we  have  frequently
mentioned  before,  this  ship  being  only  about  fifty  tons
burthen ;  Captain  Vible  Bullot  commanded  the  other,
of  a  hundred  tons,  and  (a  good  augury)  called  the
"  Sauveur."  Each  of  these  two  took  its  half  of  the
whole  band,  but  those  in  the  smaller  vessel  suffered


28  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol..  4


qui  eltoit  de  cent  tonneaux,  &  (de  bon  augure)  s'a-
pelloit  le  Sauueur.  Chacun  de  ces  deux  print  fa
moiti6  de  toute  la  troupe,  mais  ceux  du  petit  vaiffeau
patirent  beaucoup:  car  tout  leur  defailloit  :  place,
viures,  eau:  &  furent  horriblement  agitez  de  [257  j
tempeftes  &  contrariete  de  vents :  noftre  mefchef  ne-
antmoins  arriua  profperemet  pour  ce  vaiffeau,  parce
qu'il  auoit  perdu  beaucoup  de  fes  gens,  &  a.  peine
s'en  fut-ils  peu  reuenir  fans  ce  rencontre,  &  nouueau
renfort  de  nos  desbandez.

Au  grand  vaiffeau,  appelle  le  Sauueur,  on  fut
mieux,  mefmes  que  les  Matelots  furent  fi  charitables,
que  de  leur  propre  gre  ils  retrancherent  leur  ordi-
naire, &  quitterent  plufieurs  bonnes  places  pour  ac-
commoder  leurs  hoftes.  Le  P.  Enemond  Mafse  fut
retire  en  ceftuy-cy,  &  le  Pilote  Alain  Yeon  luy  fit
beaucoup  de  charitez.  Ils  furent  accueillis  pareille-
ment  de  tempeftes,  &  experimenterent  eftre  vray,  ce
qu'on  dit  du  feu  S.  Elme,  ou  Freres  confolants,  que
quand  ils  apparoiffent  deux  a  la  fois,  c'eft  bon  figne.
Car  deux  apparuret  [258]  vn  quart  d'heure  fur  leurs
Antemnes,  &  bien  toft  apres  les  bourrafques  &  furies
de  mer  s'accoiferent.

Tous  les  deux  nauires  arriuerent  en  fauuete  a  S.
Malo,  quafi  en  mefme  temps  quoy  que  le  Sauueur
fuft  parti  douze  iours  plus  tard.  La  ioye,  qu'ils  re-
ceurent  vous  la  pouuez  el  timer,  repaffant  par  la  me-
moire  les  dangers  dont  ils  fe  voyoyent  efchappez.
Le  P.  Enemond  Mafse.  &  toute  la  troupe  fe  loiient
beaucoup  de  l'humanite  &  bon  accueil,  qu'ils  re-
ceurent  en  ladidte  ville  de  Saindt  Malo,  de  mon  Sei-
gneur l'Euefque,  de  Monfieur  le  Gouuerneur,  de  MM.
les  Magiftrats,  Marchands,  &  generalement  de  tous.


1616-2y]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616  29


a  great  deal,  being  in  need  of  everything,  room,  food,
and  water,  and  being  horribly  shaken  up  by  [257]
tempests  and  adverse  winds;  our  disaster,  however,
happened  very  opportunely  for  this  vessel,  because
it  had  lost  many  of  its  crew,  and  could  scarcely  have
returned  without  this  chance  meeting  and  fresh  rein-
forcement afforded  by  our  wanderers.

In  the  larger  vessel,  called  the  Sauveur,  they  fared
better,  as  the  Sailors  were  so  kind-hearted  that,  of  their
own  free  will,  they  stinted  themselves  of  their  rations,
and  left  several  good  places  for  the  accommodation  of
their  guests.  Father  Enemond  Masse  had  taken  ref-
uge in  this  one;  and  the  Pilot,  Alain  Yeon,  showed
him  great  kindness.  They  were  likewise  assailed  by
tempests,  and  experienced  the  truth  of  the  saying
about  St.  Elmo's  fire,  or  the  consoling  Brothers, —
that  when  two  appear  at  once,  it  is  a  good  omen.  For
two  appeared  [258]  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  upon  the
Lateen  Sailyard,  and  soon  after,  the  fury  of  the  tem-
pest and  the  sea  abated.

Both  ships  arrived  safe  at  St.  Malt)  almost  at  the  same
time,  although  the  "  Sauveur"  had  departed  twelve
days  later.  You  may  imagine  their  joy  in  recalling
to  memory  the  dangers  from  which  they  had  escaped.
Father  Enemond  Masse  and  the  whole  company
greatly  praised  the  kindness  and  welcome  they  re-
ceived in  the  city  of  Saint  Malo,  from  my  Lord  the
Bishop,  from  the  Governor,  the  Magistrates,  Mer-
chants, and  all  the  citizens  in  general.


30  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE XXX. [i.e.,  xxviii.]

[259] LE VOYAGE DE LA VIRGINIE ; & LE RETOUR EN
LA NOUUELLE FRANCE.

IEV  foit  beny.  Voyla  ja  les  deux  tiers  de  noftre
troupe  reconduits  en  France  fains  &  fauues
parmi  leurs  parents,  &  amis,  qui  les  oyent
conter  leurs  grandes  auantures.  Ores  confequem-
ment  vous  defirez  fcauoir  que  deuiendra  l'autre  tiers,
qui  eft  encores  demeure  entre  les  Anglois.  Certes
bien  plus  longue,  &  plus  variable  fortune  les  attend,
&  tous  n'en  fortiront  pas  bagues  fauues.

Les  Anglois  auoyent  trois  vaiffeaux,  fcauoir  eft  le
leur,  auec  lequel  ils  nous  auoyent  prins,  de  cent
trente  tonneaux.  Le  noftre,  qu'ils  auoyent  fain  de
cent  tonneaux,  [260]  &  vne  barque  de  douze  tonneaux,
laquelle  pareillement  ils  tenoyet  de  nous,  &  ne  la  nous
auoyent  point  voulu  quitter,  pour  fournir  a  noftre
retour.  Ils  remplirent  ces  trois  vaiffeaux  de  leurs
gens,  &  nous  partagerent  entre  eux.  Le  fieur  de  la
Mote,  le  Capitaine  Flory,  &  le  refte  d'vne  moitie  fai-
fant  en  tout  huict  perfonnes,  furent  logez  en  la  Capi-
taneffe,  &  les  autres  en  nombre  de  fept,  demeurerent
dans  le  nauire  captif ,  duquel  le  Lieutenant  Turnel
eftoit  faict  Capitaine.

Or  pour  commencement  de  mal-heur,  on  ne  con-
duifit  point  les  Iefuites  aux  Ifles  de  Peucoit,  felon  la
promeffe,  ains  on  les  mena  droit  a  la  Virginie  auec
le  refte  de  la  troupe,  laquelle  on  confoloit  par  belles


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6/6  31


CHAPTER XXX. [i.e.,  xxviii.]

[259] THE VOYAGE TO VIRGINIA; AND THE RETURN

TO NEW FRANCE.

GOD  be  praised.  Here  were  now  two-thirds  of
our  company  conducted  back  to  France,  safe
and  sound,  among  their  friends  and  kindred,
who  listen  to  them  as  they  relate  the  stories  of  their
wonderful  adventures.  Consequently  you  will  wish  to
know  what  became  of  the  other  third,  who  remained
behind  in  the  hands  of  the  English.  In  truth,  a
longer  and  more  varied  fate  awaits  them,  and  all  will
not  emerge  therefrom  unharmed.

The  English  had  three  vessels;  namely,  their  own,
with  which  they  had  captured  us,  of  a  hundred  and
thirty  tons;  ours,  which  they  had  seized,  of  a  hun-
dred tons;  [260]  and  a  barque  of  twelve  tons,  which
they  had  likewise  taken  from  us,  and  would  not  give
back  to  be  used  for  our  return.  They  filled  these
three  vessels  with  their  people,  and  distributed  us
among  them.  vSieur  de  la  Mote,  Captain  Flory,  and
half  of  the  rest,  making  in  all  eight  persons,  were
placed  in  the  "Capitanesse,"  and  the  others,  seven
in  number,  remained  in  the  captured  ship,  of  which
Lieutenant  Turnel  was  made  Captain.

Now  as  the  beginning  of  their  ill  luck,  the  Jesuits
were  not  taken  to  the  Peucoit  Islands,  according  to
promise,  but  were  taken  straight  to  Virginia  with
the  rest  of  the  crowd,  who  were  consoled  with  bright
hopes,  inasmuch  us  (said  they)  Hie Marshal  of  Yir-


32  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JllSUITES  [Vol.  4

efperances  d'autant  que  (difoit-on)  le  Marefchal  de
la  Virginie,  qui  a  toute  charge,  [261]  &  autorite  de
iurifdidtion,  eitoit  grand  amy  des  Francois,  come
ayant  obtenu  tous  les  principaux  honneurs  par  la  re-
commandation  de  feu  Henry  le  Grand,  &  ayant  elte
fon  foldat,  &  fon  penfionnaire.  Cela  nous  prefchoit
on  fouuent.

Mais  nos  prefcheurs  ne  prenoyent  pas  leur  texte
de  l'Euangile.  Car  ce  beau  Marefchal,  qui  a  leur
dire  auoit  le  fil,  &  la  trempe  II  Francoife,  ayant  ouy
nouuelles  de  nous,  ne  parloit  que  de  harts  &  gibets,
&  de  nous  faire  pendre  treflous.  L'efpouuante  nous
en  fut  donnee,  &  aucuns  en  perdirent  le  repos,  ne
s'attendants  plus  qu'a  monter  ignominieufement  par
vne  efchelle,  &  deualer  mif erablement  par  vne  corde.
Mais  le  Capitaine  Argal  fe  moflra  genereux  a  nous
defendre :  car  il  refiita  audit  Marefchal,  oppofant  la
[262]  foy  par  luy  donnee.  Et  comm'il  fe  vid  trop
foible  en  celte  oppofitio;  il  publia  nos  commiffions,
&  lettres  Royaux,  dont  ie  vous  ay  parle  cy  deuant,
qu'il  auoit  fubtilement  enleue  des  coffres  de  la  Sauf-
faye.  Et  c'elt  par  ce  moyen  que  nous  auons  fceu
qu'il  auoit  vfe  de  telle  rufe,  car  autremet  nous  n'en
euffions  pen  rien  defcouurir.  Le  Marefchal  voyant
ces  autoritez  de  fa  Majeite  tres-Chreftienne,  &  la  re-
folution  du  Capitaine,  n'ofa  paffer  plus  outre,  ainfi
apres  quelques  iours  &  quelques  autres  apprehen-
fions,  on  nous  fit  fcauoir,  que  parole  nous  feroit
garde  e.

Or  comment  on  nous  la  garderoit,  &  quel  moyen
on  nous  trouueroit  de  nous  renuoyer  en  France,  c'ef-
toit  vne  grande  queition.  Le  General,  le  Marefchal
&  tous  les  Principaux  chefs  de  la  Virginie  s'affem-


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  33

ginia,4  who  has  full  power  [261]  and  authority  of
jurisdiction,  was  a  great  friend  of  the  French,  as  he
had  secured  all  his  more  important  honors  through
the  recommendation  of  the  late  Henry  the  Great,
having  been  his  soldier  and  pensioner.  This  was
preached  to  us  frequently.

But  our  preachers  did  not  take  their  text  from  the
Gospels.  For  this  charming  Marshal,  who  had  the
fibre  and  character  of  a  Frenchman,  as  they  said,
when  he  heard  an  account  of  us,  talked  about  nothing
but  ropes  and  gallows,  and  of  having  every  one  of  us
hanged.  We  were  badly  frightened,  and  some  lost
their  peace  of  mind,  expecting  nothing  less  than  to
ignominiously  walk  up  a  ladder  to  be  let  down  dis-
gracefully by  a  rope.  But  Captain  Argal  showed
great  magnanimity  in  defending  us:  for  he  opposed
the  Marshal,  urging  the  [262]  promise  given  by  him.
And  as  he  found  himself  too  weak  in  this  opposition,
he  published  our  commissions  and  Royal  patents,  of
which  I  have  spoken  before,  which  he  had  surrepti-
tiously removed  from  la  Saussaye's  trunks.  And  it
was  in  this  way  we  learned  that  he  had  made  use  of
such  a  trick,  for  otherwise  we  should  never  have
found  it  out.  The  Marshal,  seeing  these  warrants  of
his  most  Christian  Majesty,  and  the  determination  of
the  Captain,  did  not  dare  go  any  farther;  so,  after
several  days  spent  in  great  apprehension,  we  were
informed  that  their  promise  would  be  kept.

Now  how  they  were  going  to  keep  it,  and  what
means  would  be  found  to  send  us  back  to  France,
was  the  great  question.  The  General, B  the  Mar-
shal, and  all  the  other  Important  personages  of  Vir-
ginia assembled  in  Council.  [263]  The  result  and
conclusion  of  their  consultation  was  to  act  still  worse


34  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

blerent  en  Confeil.  [263]  Sur  icelle  le  refultat  &  con-
clufion  des  opinions  fut  de  pis  faire  que  iamais,  puis
qu'il  leur  fembloit  d'en  auoir  le  moyen.  Car  il  fut
ordonne  que  le  Capitaine  Argal  auec  fes  trois  vaif-
feaux  retourneroit  en  la  nouuelle  France,  pilleroit,  &
raferoit  toutes  les  fortereffes,  &  habitations  des  Fran-
cois qu'il  trouueroit  en  toute  la  cofte  jufques  a  Cap
Breton:  c'eft  a  dire  iufques  au  46  degre,  &  demy:
(parce  qu'ils  pretendent  a  tout  tat  de  pays:  qu'il
feroit  pendre  la  Sauffaye,  &  tous  ceux  de  fes  gens,
lefquels  il  trouueroit  eftre  demeurez  dans  ces  con-
fins;  pilleroit  de  mefme  tous  les  vaiffeaux,  qu'il  ren-
contreroit,  trouuant  toutesfois  moyen  aux  perfonnes
de  fe  pouuoir  retirer  en  France:  en  cas  qu'ils  ne
fiffent  point  de  refiftance;  &  qu'on  nous  mettroit
nous  autres  vieux  prifonniers  en  compagnie  [264]  de
ceux  a  qui  en  cefte  facon  Ion  feroit  grace  de  la  vie.
Telle  fut  la  deliberation.  Mais  Dieu  eftoit  par  deffus,
&  come  vous  orres,  il  en  difpofa  autrement,  quant  a
plufieurs  articles.

Selon  cefte  eonclufion,  Argal  reprint  vn 'autrefois
la  route  de  la  nouuelle  France,  plus  fort  que  deuat,
car  il  auoit  trois  vaiffeaux,  &  auec  meilleure  efpe-
rance:  parce  que  le  butin,  qu'il  auoit  faict.  fur  nous
luy  accroiffoit,  &  la  cupidite,  &  l'efpoir.  II  ne  print
cependant  auec  foy  la  moitie  de  nos  gens,  ie  ne  fcay
pourquoy.  Dans  fon  vaiffeau  eftoit  le  Capitaine
Flory,  &  quatre  autres;  dans  celuy  du  Lieutenant
Turnel  (qui  eftoit  le  noftre  captif)  les  deux  Iefuites,
&  un  garcon.

Le  premier  lieu  ou  ils  tirerent  fut  S.  Sauueur.  Car
ils  s'attendoyet  d'y  trouuer  la  Sauffaye:  &  vn  nauire
[263  i.e.,  265]  nouuellement  venu. Ils  furet  trompez,


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  35

than  ever,  since  it  seemed  to  them  they  had  the
power  to  do  so.  For  it  was  decreed  that  Captain
Argal,  with  his  three  vessels,  should  return  to  new
France,  plunder  and  demolish  all  the  fortifications
and  settlements  of  the  French  which  he  should  find
along  the  entire  coast  as  far  as  Cape  Breton :  namely,
to  46  and  one  half  degrees  north  latitude,  (for  they
lay  claim  to  all  this  territory :  that  he  was  to  have  la
Saussaye  hanged,  with  all  those  of  his  men  whom  he
found  remaining  within  these  limits ;  that  he  should
likewise  plunder  the  ships,  which  he  encountered,
finding  means,  however,  to  allow  their  people  to  re-
turn to  France,  in  case  they  showed  no  resistance;
and  that  we  old  prisoners  should  be  placed  in  com-
pany [264]  with  those  whose  lives  had  thus  been
spared.  Such  was  the  decision.  But  God  was  on
high,  and,  as  you  will  hear,  he  decreed  otherwise  in
regard  to  a  number  of  things.

In  accordance  with  this  decision,  Argal  again
started  for  new  France,  stronger  than  before,  for  he
had  three  vessels,  and  higher  expectations ;  because
the  booty  he  had  taken  from  us  strengthened  both
his  cupidity  and  his  hopes.  However,  he  did  not
take  with  him  the  half  of  our  people,  I  know  not
why.  In  his  vessel  were  Captain  Flory  and  four
others ;  in  that  of  Lieutenant  Turnel,  (which  was  the
one  captured  from  us)  the  two  Jesuits  and  a  boy.

They  directed  their  course  first  to  St.  Sauveur,  for
they  expected  to  find  la  Saussaye  and  a  newly  arrived
[263  i.e.,  265]  ship  there.  They  were  mistaken,  inas-
much as  la  Saussaye  was  in  France,  as  has  been  said.
They  burned  our  fortifications  and  tore  down  our
Crosses,  raising  another  to  show  they  had  taken  pos-
session of  the  country,  and  were  the  Masters  thereof.


36  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

d'autant  que  la  Sauffaye  eftoit  en  France,  ainfi  qu'a
efte  dit :  ils  bruflerent  nos  fortifications,  &  abbatirent
nos  Croix,  en  dreffants  vne  pour  marque,  qu'ils  fe
faififfoyet  du  pays,  comme  Seigneurs.

Cefte  Croix  portoit  le  nom  graue  du  Roy  de  la
grande  Bretaigne.  Ils  pendirent  auffi  vn  de  leurs
hommes,  pour  caufe  d'vne  confpiration  au  mefme
endroidt,  ou  huidt  iours  au  parauant  ils  auoyent  ab-
batu  la  premiere  de  nos  Croix.

De  faincT:  Sauueur  ils  addrefferent  a  S.  Croix,  an-
cienne  habitation  du  fieur  de  Monts,  &  parce  qu'ils
auoyent  fceu,  que  le  P.  Biard  y  auoit  efte,  Argal
vouloit  qu'il  les  y  conduifit,  mais  ledit  Pere  ne  le
voulut  point,  ce  qui  le  mit  entierement  en  la  difgrace
dudit  [264  i.e.,  266]  Argal,  &  en  grand  danger  de
fa  vie.  Ce  neantmoins  Argal  roda  tant  en  haut
qu'en  bas,  &  rechercha  tant  tous  leurs  endroits,  les
confrontans  auec  les  cartes,  qu'il  nous  auoit  prinfes,
qu'en  fin  il  la  trouua  de  foy-mefme;  il  en  enleua  vn
bon  monceau  de  fel,  qu'il  y  trouua,  brufla  1' habita-
tion, &  deitruifit  toutes  les  marques  du  no  &  droidt
de  France,  ainfi  qu'il  auoit  eu  commandement.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELA  TION,  1616  37

This  Cross  had  carved  upon  it  the  name  of  the  King
of  great  Britain.  Also,  on  account  of  a  conspiracy,
they  hanged  one  of  their  men  in  the  very  place  where,
eight  days  before,  they  had  torn  down  the  first  of  our
Crosses.

From  saint  Sauveur  they  sailed  for  Ste.  Croix,
sieur  de  Monts's  old  settlement;  and,  as  they  knew
that  Father  Biard  had  been  there,  Argal  wished  him
to  conduct  them  thither;  but  the  Father  would  not
consent  to  do  so.  This  caused  him  to  be  in  complete
disgrace  with  [264  i.e.,  266]  Argal,  and  in  great  danger
of  his  life.  Notwithstanding  this,  Argal  wandered
about,  up  and  down,  and,  by  dint  of  searching  all  places
thoroughly  and  comparing  them  with  the  maps  which
he  had  taken  from  us,  he  at  last  found  the  place  him-
self. He  took  away  a  good  pile  of  salt,  which  he
found  there,  burned  the  settlement,  and  destroyed  all
traces  of  the  name  and  claims  of  France,  as  he  had
been  commanded  to  do.


38  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE XXXII. [i.e.,  xxix.]

LA PRINSE, & INCENDIE DE PORT ROYAL, DEUX
GRANDS DANGERS DU P. BIARD.

LE  Capitaine  Argal  ayant  ruine  faindte  Croix ;  ne
fcauoit  comment  addreffer,  &  faire  voile  a  Port
Royal  felon  la  commiffion  qu'il  en  auoit,  d'au-
tant  qu'il  [265  i.e.,  267]  doutoit  de  s'aller  engouffrer
en  fi  dangereufe  plage  fans  condudteur  bien  cognoif-
fant  des  lieux,  &  par  l'exemple  frais,  qu'il  auoit  du
P.  Biard,  il  n'ofoit  attendre  qu'aucun  Francois  l'y
vouluft  coduire,  ou  l'y  confeiller  fincerement.  A
cefle  caufe  il  fe  mit  en  quelle  de  quelque  Sauuage,
&  fit  tant  par  fes  courfes,  embufches,  enqueft.es,  &
induftries,  qu'il  furprint  le  Sagamo,  homme  tres-ex-
perimente,  &  entendant  au  faidt  du  pays;  a  la  con-
duidte  d'iceluy  il  vint  a  Port  Royal.  Or  il  y  euft  eu  la
fans  doute  du  mal-heur  pour  le  regard  des  Francois,
parce  que  l'Anglois  entrant  a  la  Lune,  dans  le  Port
comm'il  fit,  &  venat  anchrer  a  la  veue  de  l'habitation
a  plus  de  deux  lieues  loin,  fi  les  Fracois  euffent  veil-
16,  ils  auoyet  beau  moyen  ou  de  fe  preparer  au  com-
bat, ou  de  fe  defbagager:  car  a  [266  i.  e.,  268]  caufe
de  la  maree,  l'Anglois  ne  fut  deuant  l'habitation  qu'a
dix,  ou  onze  heures  du  iour  fuiuant.  Ie  ne  fcay  ce
qu'on  fit.  Tant  y  a  que  l'Anglois  mettant  pied  a.
terre  ne  trouua  perfonne  dans  le  fort,  &  vit  des  fou-
liers  &  des  hardes  efparfes.  Par  ainfi  il  euft  double
ioye  en  cefte  prinfe:  l'vne  qu'il  ne  trouua  aucune  re-


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6/6  39


CHAPTER XXXII. [i.e.,  xxix.]

THE TAKING  AND BURNING  OF PORT ROYAL; FATHER
BIARD TWICE IN GREAT DANGER.

CAPTAIN  Argal,  having  destroyed  sainte  Croix,
did  not  know  in  what  direction  to  sail  to  reach
Port  Royal,  according  to  his  commission,
and  hesitated  all  the  more  as  he  [265  i.e.,  267]  was
afraid  of  being  stranded  upon  such  a  dangerous  coast
without  a  guide  who  was  very  familiar  with  the
locality;  and,  judging  from  the  recent  example  of
Father  Biard,  he  did  not  dare  expect  that  any
Frenchman  would  consent  to  guide  him,  or  give  him
sincere  advice  in  the  matter.  For  this  reason,  he  be-
gan to  look  for  a  Savage,  and  by  dint  of  much  run-
ning about,  lying  in  ambush,  inquiring,  and  skillful
maneuvering,  he  caught  the  Sagamore,  a  very  experi-
enced man,  and  well  acquainted  with  the  country;
under  his  guidance,  he  reached  Port  Royal.  Now
there  was  certainly  bad  luck  for  the  French,  as
the  English  entered  the  Port  by  Moonlight,  and
dropped  anchor  in  sight  of  the  settlement,  at  a  dis-
tance of  more  than  two  leagues;  so,  if  the  French
had  been  on  their  guard,  they  would  have  had  an
excellent  opportunity  to  prepare  for  a  fight,  or  to  run
away,  for  on  [266  i.e.,  268]  account  of  the  tide,  the
English  were  not  in  front  of  the  settlement  until  ten
or  eleven  o'clock  the  next  day.  I  do  not  know  what
they  were  doing.  At  all  events,  when  the  English
landed,  they  found  no  one  in  the  fort,  and  saw  shoes


40  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

fiftance,  ce  que  iamais  il  n'euft  penfe;  l'autre  qu'il
rencontra  vn  affez  bon  butin,  a  quoy  il  ne  s'attendoit
pas.

Ce  rencontre  de  butin  non  attendu,  penfa  coufter
la  vie  au  P.  Biard:  voicy  comment.  Les  Anglois
ayant  ja  perdu  beaucoup  de  temps  a  chercher  fain«5te
Croix:  &  defpuis  a  attraper  vn  Sauuage,  qui  fuft
leur  condudteur,  le  Lieutenat  Turnel  eftoit  d'aduis  de
laiffer  le  voyage  de  Port  Royal,  &  s'en  retourner  au
pluftoft  a  la  Virginie,  alleguant  pour  raifons,  que  le
lieu  [267  i.e.,  269]  eftoit  tres-dangereux,  &  la  faifon
par  trop  auancee  (car  c'eftoit  la  fin  d'Odtobre,)  &
qu'au  bout  de  tant  de  peines,  ils  n'y  auroit  point  de
profit,  parce  qu'on  n'y  trouueroit  rien,  finon  mifere,  &
la  haine  des  Francois,  qu'ils  s'acquerroyent  bien  me-
ritoirement  par  le  bruflement  qu'ils  y  alloyent  faire,
fans  recompenfe  d'aucun  emolument.  Le  Lieutenat
Turnel  auoit  ouy  ces  raifons  du  P.  Biard,  auec  le-
quel  il  prenoit  fouuet  plaifir  de  deuifer,  &  les  eftimoit
fort  valides.  Or  le  Capitaine  Argal  ayant  eu  le  bo-
heur  d'vne  facile  entree,  &  defpuis  dans  Port  Royal
(ainfi  qu'a  efte  dit)  vn  affez  bon  butin,  en  viures,
hardes,  &  vtenfiles  dans  1' habitation;  il  reprochoit  a
fon  dit  Lieutenant,  fon  confeil,  &  la  croyance  qu'il
auoit  eu  au  Iefuite:  &  mefmes  pour  cefte  caufe  luy
faifoit  moindre  part  de  la  proye.  [268  i.e.,  270]  Le
Lieutenant  en  eftoit  en  grande  cholere,  &  d'autant
plus  qu'on  l'auoit  toufiours  en  reputation  d'homme
d'efprit,  &  de  bon  confeil,  de  quoy  il  fe  voyoit  deceu
a  l'occafion  comm'il  penfoit,  du  Iefuite.

Or  il  y  auoit  vn  Puritain  Anglois,  maiftre  du  grand
nauire  plus  malin  que  tous  les  autres,  diffrmule  ne-
antmoins,  car  ils  faifoit  les  plus  beaux  femblants  du


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  41


and  clothing-  all  scattered  about ;  so  they  were  doubly
pleased  by  this  capture,  first,  because  contrary  to  all
their  expectations,  they  met  no  resistance ;  and  sec-
ond, because  they  found  a  fair  supply  of  booty,  which
they  were  not  anticipating.

This  unlooked-for  capture  of  booty  nearly  cost
Father  Biard  his  life,  in  this  way.  As  the  English
had  already  lost  a  great  deal  of  time  looking  for
sainte  Croix,  and  afterward  in  finding  a  Savage  who
might  act  as  their  guide,  Lieutenant  Turnel  was
of  the  opinion  that  it  would  be  better  to  abandon  the
voyage  to  Port  Royal,  and  return  as  soon  as  possible
to  Virginia;  giving  as  his  reasons  that  the  place  [267
i.e.,  269]  was  very  dangerous  and  the  season  too  far
advanced  (for  it  was  the  end  of  October) ;  that,  after  so
much  trouble,  there  would  be  no  profit  in  the  end,
because  they  would  find  nothing  there  but  misery
and  French  hatred,  which  they  would  very  deserved-
ly draw  down  upon  them  by  the  conflagration  they
were  going  to  kindle  there,  without  being  requited
for  it  by  any  reward.  Lieutenant  Turnel  had  heard
these  arguments  from  Father  Biard,  with  whom  he
often  took  pleasure  in  conversing,  and  considered
them  very  good.  Now  when  Captain  Argal  had
such  an  easy  entry,  and  afterwards  at  the  settlement
of  Port  Royal  (as  we  have  said)  found  such  a  quantity
of  booty  in  food,  clothes  and  utensils,  he  reproached
his  Lieutenant  for  his  advice,  and  for  his  confidence
in  the  Jesuits:  and  on  that  account  gave  him  a  small-
er part  of  the  plunder.  [268  i.e.,  270]  The  Lieutenant
was  very  angry,  and  so  much  the  more  so,  as  he  had
always  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  man  of  intelli-
gence and  good  judgment,  which  he  had  now  for-
feited, as  he  thought,  on  account  of  the  Jesuit.


42  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

monde :  mais  les  autres  Anglois  nous  aduertiff  oiet  de
ne  no9  point  fier  en  luy,  d'autant  qu'il  eftoit  maligne-
ment  enuenime  contre  nous.  Ceftuy-cy  done  voyant
fon  coup,  perfuadoit  au  Capitaine,  &  au  Lieutenant,
lefquels  il  voyoit  efmeus,  d'abandonner  a  terre  le
Iefuite,  difant,  qu'il  eftoit  eftoit  indigne  que  les  An-
glois, luy  donnaffent  des  viures,  puis  qu'il  les  auoit
voulu  empefcher  d'e  auoir,  [269  i.e.,  271]  &  mille
autres  raifons  qu'il  alleguoit.  Ie  ne  fcay  qui  fecou-
ruft  tant  a  propos  le  Iefuite  en  ce  danger,  que  fa  fim-
plicite.  Car  tout  de  mefme,  que  s'il  euft  efte  bien
fauorife,  &  qu'il  euft  peu  beaucoup  enuers  ledit  An-
glois, il  fe  mit  a  genoux  deuat  le  Capitaine  par  deux
diuerfes  fois,  &  a  deux  diuerfes  occafions,  a.  celle  fin
de  le  flechir  a  mifericorde  enuers  les  Francois  dudit
Port  Royal  efgares  par  les  bois,  &  pour  luy  perfuader
de  leur  laiffer  quelques  viures,  leur  chaloupe,  &  quel-
qu'autre  moyen  de  paffer  l'Hyuer.  Et  voyez  combien
differentes  petitions  on  faifoit  audit  Capitaine :  car  au
mefme  temps,  que  le  P.  Biard  le  fupplioit  ainfi  pour
les  Francois,  vn  Francois  crioit  de  loin  auec  outrages,
&  iniures  tres  indignes  a  haute  voix,  qu'il  le  falloit
maffacrer.  Or  Argal  (qui  eft  d'vn  cceur  [270  i.e.,  272]
noble,)  voyant  cefte  tant  fyncere  affedtion  du  Iefuite,
&  de  1 'autre  cofte  cefte  tant  beftiale  &  enragee  inhu-
manity de  ce  Francois,  laquelle  ne  recognoiffoit  ny  fa
propre  nation,  ny  biens-faidts,  ny  Religion,  ny  eftoit
domtee  par  l'amidtion  ^&  ^verges  de  Dieu,  eftima  que
ce  luy  feroit  toufiours  reproche,  &  impropere,  fi  fans
iugement,  &  fans  auoir  ouy  parties,  il  venoit  a  de-
laiffer  pour  vne  accufation  fubtile,  celuy  a  qui  il  auoit
donne  fa  parole.  Et  par  ainfi  reietta  tout  enfemble,
&  la  fuafion  de  1' Anglois,  &  la  forcenerie  du  Fran-


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616  43

Now  there  was  an  English  Puritan,  master  of  the
larger  vessel,  more  malicious  than  all  the  others,  yet
hypocritical,  for  he  made  the  finest  pretensions  in
the  world :  but  the  other  Englishmen  advised  us  not
to  trust  him,  as  he  was  wickedly  prejudiced  against
us.  So  this  man,  seeing  his  opportunity,  persuaded
the  Captain  and  Lieutenant,  who  he  saw  were  aroused,
to  leave  the  Jesuit  on  shore,  saying  he  did  not  de-
serve that  the  English  should  give  him  food  since  he
had  tried  to  prevent  them  from  obtaining  it,  [269  i.e.,
271]  and  offering  a  thousand  other  arguments .  I  know
not  what  rescued  the  Jesuit  so  opportunely  from  this
danger,  unless  it  were  his  simplicity.  For  just  as  if
he  had  been  highly  favored,  and  had  great  influence
with  these  English,  he  dropped  upon  his  knees  before
the  Captain,  two  different  times  and  upon  two  differ-
ent occasions,  to  move  him  to  pity  towards  the  French
of  Port  Royal  who  were  wandering  about  through
the  woods,  and  to  persuade  him  to  leave  them  some
food,  their  boat,  and  other  means  of  passing  the
Winter.  And  see  now  what  different  requests  were
being  made  to  this  Captain :  for  at  the  same  time  that
Father  Biard  was  thus  petitioning  him  in  behalf  of
the  French,  a  Frenchman  was  shouting  out  from
afar,  with  most  scandalous  insults  and  abuse,  that  he
ought  to  be  slain.  Now  Argal  (who  has  a  noble  [270
i.e.,  272]  heart),  seeing  the  so  sincere  affection  of  the
Jesuit,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  so  brutal  and  infu-
riated inhumanity  of  this  Frenchman,  who  remem-
bered neither  his  own  country,  nor  kindnesses,  nor
Religion,  nor  was  crushed  by  God's  afflicting  rod,
considered  that  it  would  always  be  a  reproach  and
disgrace  to  him,  if,  without  trial  and  hearing  from
both  sides,  he  should  cast  off,  on  account  of  a  sly  and


44  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

cois,  d'autant  plus  appaife  enuers  le  Iefuifte,  que
plus  il  le  voyoit  attaque  fans  qu'il  remarquafl  en  luy
changement,  ou  alteration.

Or  ledit  Capitaine  ayant  enleue  de  Port  Royal  tout
ce  qui  luy  fembla  commode,  iufques  aux  [271  i.e.,
273]  ais,  verroils,  ferrures,  &  cloux;  il  y  mit  le  feu.
Chofe  certes  bien  pitoyable,  car  dans  vn'heure  ou
deux  on  vit  reduit  en  cendres  le  trauail  &  defpenfe
de  plufieurs  annees  &  perfonnes  de  merite.  Et
plaife  a  noftre  Seigneur  que  ce  mefme  feu  aye  telle-
ment  deftruit  tous  les  peches,  qui  peuuent  auoir  efte"
commis  en  cefte  place,  que  iamais  ils  ne  refufcitent
plus  en  aucune  part,  ny  ne  prouoquent  la  iufte  &  re-
doutable  vengeance  de  noftre  Dieu.  L'Anglois
(comme  i'ay  dit  autre  part)  effacoit  par  tout,  tous  mo-
numents, &  indices  de  la  puiffance  Francoife  :  ce
qu'il  n'oublia  pas  icy  iufques  a  faire  vfer  du  pic,  &
cifeau  fur  vne  groffe  &  maffme  pierre,  en  laquelle
eftoyent  entailles  les  nos  du  fieur  de  Monts,  &  autres
Capitaines  auec  les  fleurs  de  lys.  Ce  faidt,  il  leua
l'anchre  pour  s'en  aller;  mais  [272  i.e.,  274]  il  fut
retenu  par  le  mauuais  temps  a  l'emboucheure  du  Port
trois,  ou  quatre  iours.

Tandis  qu'il  feiournoit  icy  a  l'Anchre,  vn  Francois
de  ceux  dudit  Port  demanda  de  parlementer:  ce  qui
luy  fut  accorde.  Or  entre  les  bos  affaires,  que  ce
beau  parlementateur  vint  traidter,  fut  de  dire  au  Ca-
pitaine Anglois,  qu'il  s'efmerueilloit  bien  fort,  com-
ment il  n'auoit  pieca  deliure  le  monde  du  pernicieux
Iefuite,  qui  eitoit  en  fes  nauires,  Si  ce  n'efioit,  peut-
eftre  que  le  mal-heur  l'y  conferuaft  pour  reuancher
les  Francois  par  quelque  trahifon  mefchante,  que
ledit Iefuite ioiieroit  a fon coup, & occafion. Car


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  45

cunning  accusation,  him  to  whom  he  had  given  his
word.  And  so  he  rejected  both  the  persuasions  of
the  Englishman,  and  the  rage  of  the  Frenchman,
looking  upon  the  Jesuit  all  the  more  favorably  as  he
saw  that,  however  much  he  was  attacked,  there  was
no  change  or  deterioration  in  his  conduct.

Now  this  Captain,  having  taken  away  from  Port
Royal  everything  that  seemed  convenient  to  him,  even
to  the  [271  i.e.,  273]  boards,  bolts,  locks,  and  nails,  set
the  place  on  fire.  A  truly  pitiable  thing,  for  in  an
hour  or  two  the  work  of  several  worthy  people,  during
a  number  of  years,  was  reduced  to  ashes.  And  may
our  Lord  grant  that  this  same  fire  has  so  completely
destroyed  all  sins,  which  may  have  been  committed
in  this  place,  that  they  may  never  again  arise  in  any
other  place,  nor  ever  provoke  the  just  and  dreadful
vengeance  of  our  God.  The  English  (as  I  have
stated  elsewhere)  destroyed,  everywhere,  all  monu-
ments and  evidences  of  the  dominion  of  the  French ;
and  this  they  did  not  forget  to  do  here,  even  to  mak-
ing use  of  pick  and  chisel  upon  a  large  and  massive
stone,  on  which  were  cut  the  names  of  sieur  de  Monts
and  other  Captains,  with  the  fleurs-de-lys.  This
done,  they  weighed  anchor  to  sail  away,  but  [272  i.e.,
274]  bad  weather  detained  them  three  or  four  days
at  the  mouth  of  the  Harbor.

While  they  remained  anchored  here,  a  Frenchman
from  among  those  at  the  Port  asked  to  confer  with
them ;  his  request  was  granted.  Now  among  the  nice
things  which  this  fine  parliamentarian  did,  was  to  say
to  the  English  Captain  that  he  was  very  much  sur-
prised indeed  that  he  had  not  already  rid  the  world
of  the  pernicious  Jesuit,  who  was  in  one  of  his  ships.
If  he  were  not  despatched,  perhaps  some  ill  luck  might


46  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

c'eftoit  (difoit-il)  vn  vray, &  naturel  Efpagnol,  qui
ayant  commis  plufieurs  forfaidts  en  France,  a  caufe
defquels  il  en  eftoit  fuitif,  leur  auoit  encores  donne
beaucotip  [273  i.e.,  275]  de  fcandales  a  Port  Royal,
&  qu'il  ne  falloit  aucunement  douter,  qu' encores  ne
fit-il  pis  aux  Anglois. Argal  oyant  dire,  que  le  P.
Biard  eftoit  naturel  Efpagnol,  ne  le  pouuoit  croire;
mais  on  luy  donna  ceft'accufation  par  efcrit,  &  foub-
figne  de  cinq  ou  fix:  &  le  preffoit-on  fort  a  ce  qu'il
iettaft  en  terre  a  1' abandon  ledit  P.  Biard. Mais  tant
plus  qu'on  Ten  preffoit,  tant  moins  1' Anglois  y  con-
fentoit,  parce  que  y  confentant  il  ne  pouuoit  fuir  le
deshonneur  d'auoir  manque  de  foy,  &  de  iuftice ;  la
ou  le  gardant  pour  la  Virginie,  il  s'attendoit  de  l'y
faire  mourir  en  acquerant  loiiange  de  fidelity  a  fon
office,  &  de  patience  a  fupporter. Car  en  communi-
quant  au  Marefchal  cefte  depofition  des  Fran9ois,  &
adiouftant  par  deffus  comme  ledit  Pere  n' auoit  voulu
monftrer  rifle  S. [274  i.e.,  276] Croix,  &  auoit  taf-
che  de  diuertir  les  Anglois  d'aller  a  Port  Royal;  il
n'auoit  garde defchapper  des  mains  du Marefchal,
defquelles  a  peine  l'auoit-on  peu  arracher,  lors  mef-
me,  qu'on  n'auoit  aucune  prinfe  fur  luy. Ainfi  Uieu
le  voulut  fauuer  pour  lors,  &  encores  pi9  merueil-
leufement  defpuis, comme  vous  orrez. Cependant
vous remarquerez fagement iufques a  quelle rage
le  malin  efprit  agite  ceux,  qui  fe  vendent  a  luy,  &
combien  il  faut eflre  referue a  croire  les  delations
&  detractios,  puis  que  le  P.  Biard  auoit  vefcu  dans
Port  Royal,  &  auoit  toufiours  efte notoirement  re-
cogneu  pour  ce  qu'il  eft,  c'eft  a  dire  bon  Francois
naturel,  &  qui  iamais  ne  fut  en  Efpagne  ny  luy,  ny
fon  pere,  ou  mere,  ou  aucun  de  fes  parens. Or  que


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  47

keep  him  there  to  take  revenge  for  the  French  upon
the  English  by  some  wicked  treason,  which  the  Jesuit
would  be  guilty  of,  in  his  way  and  at  his  opportunity.
For  he  was  (said  he)  a  true  and  native  Spaniard,  who,
having  committed  several  crimes  in  France,  on  ac-
count of  which  he  was  a  fugitive  from  justice,  had  also
been  the  cause  of  a  great  deal  [273  i.e. ,  275]  of  scandal
at  Port  Royal,  and  there  could  not  be  the  slightest
doubt  that  he  would  do  something  still  worse  to  the
English.  Argal,  when  he  heard  it  said  that  Father
Biard  was  a  native  Spaniard,  could  not  believe  it ;
but  this  charge,  made  in  writing  and  signed  by  five
or  six  persons,  was  handed  to  him ;  and  they  urged
him  strongly  to  put  on  shore  and  desert  Father  Bi-
ard. But  the  more  they  urged  him,  the  less  the  Eng-
lishman would  yield  to  them,  because  in  giving  his
consent,  he  could  not  escape  the  dishonor  of  having
broken  faith  and  failed  in  doing  justice;  whereas,  if
he  kept  him  until  he  got  to  Virginia,  he  could  count
upon  having  him  executed  there,  at  the  same  time
receiving  praise  for  his  fidelity  to  his  word,  and  for
his  patience  in  bearing  with  him.  For  when  he  would
communicate  to  the  Marshal  this  statement  of  the
French,  and  add  to  it  that  the  Father  would  not  con-
sent to  guide  them  to  the  Island  of  Ste.  [274  i.e.,  276]
Croix,  and  had  tried  to  keep  the  English  from  going
to  Port  Royal,  there  would  be  no  danger  of  his  escap-
ing from  the  hands  of  the  Marshal,  from  which  they
had  hardly  rescued  him  before,  although  then  they
had  no  claim  upon  him.  Thus  God  willed  that  he
should  be  saved  that  time,  and  still  more  wonderful-
ly since  then,  as  you  will  hear.  Meanwhile,  you  will
wisely  observe  to  what  madness  the  evil  spirit  in-
cites those  who sell themselves to  him, and how


48  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.4

ce  neantmoins  vn  Francois  fe  foit  trouue  fi  poffede"
par  l'efprit  [275  i.e.,  277]  fanguinaire,  que  pour  le
faire  mourir  il  foit  venu  a  impofturer  fi  furieufe-
ment,  &  receuant  le  chaftiment  de  Dieu  n'en  aye
faidt  autre  profit,  que  de  fe  proftituer  fi  defefpere-
ment  a  Sathan,  &  a  calomnie,  cela  furpaffe  toute  ap-
prehenfion  commune  de  malice,  &  a  peine  peut-on
conceuoir,  qu'vn  homme  puiffe  deuenir  fi  vendu,  &
fi  defefperement  afferui  a  peche.


1616-29]  RIARD'S  RELATION  i6i6  49


necessary  it  is  to  be  cautious  in  believing  slanders
and  detractions;  for  Father  Biard  had  lived  in  Port
Royal,  and  had  always  been  universally  recognized
for  what  he  is;  namely,  a  good,  native-born  French-
man, who  had  never  even  been  in  Spain,  neither  he,
nor  his  father,  nor  his  mother,  nor  any  of  his  kin-
dred. Now  notwithstanding  all  this,  a  Frenchman
was  found  so  possessed  with  the  spirit  of  [275  i.e.,
277]  bloodshed,  that  to  have  him  killed  he  was  led  to
commit  such  a  monstrous  act  of  imposition,  and  while
under  the  chastisement  of  God,  derived  no  other  ad-
vantage therefrom  than  to  sell  himself  so  hopelessly
to  Satan  and  to  calumny.  This  exceeds  all  ordinary
conceptions  of  wickedness,  and  it  is  difficult  to  con-
ceive how  a  man  can  be  so  desperately  given  up  to
and  enslaved  by  sin.


50  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE XXXI. [i.e., xxx.]

LE DEPART DE PORT ROYAL, LES DIUERSES AUEN-

TURES DES NAUIRES; & COMME NOUS EUSMES

CONTRAINTS DE RELASCHER AUX ACORES.

LE  neufuiefme  de  Nouembre  de  cefte  annee  1613.
les  Anglois  departiret  de  Port  Royal  en  inten-
tion de  s'aller  rendre  a  [276  i.e.,  278]  leur  Vir-
ginie,  &  y  ioui'r  du  butin  l'hyuer  fuiuant.  Or  des  ce
temps  le  Lieutenant  Turnel,  ne  regardoit  plus  le  P.
Biard,  que  comme  vn  pendard  abominable :  il  le  de-
teftoit  encores  d'auantage,  quand  il  repenfoit  au  paf-
se :  car  par  le  pafse,  il  auoit  faict  eftat  de  le  prifer,
&  l'aymer  pour  fa  nai'fue  fimplicite,  &  ouuerte  can-
deur.  Mais  ayant  veu  le  tefmoignage  par  efcrit  de
tant  de  Francois,  qui  l'affeuroyent  eftre  naturel  Efpa-
gnol,  &  mefchant  homme,  il  aimoit  mieux  croire,
que  le  Iefuite  fuft  menteur,  que  non  pas  tant  d'autres,
qui  l'accufoyent.  Par  ainfi  il  haiffoit  d'autant  plus
irreconciliablement  cefte  fi  profonde  &  impenetrable
diffimulation  (comme  il  penfoit)  d'vn  Efpagnol,  con-
trefaifant  le  Frangois,  laquelle  luy,  homme  repute
pour  accort,  &  bien  aduise,  n' auoit  fceu  defcouurir
[277  i.e.,  279]  en  tant  de  temps;  ains  a  laquelle  il
s'eftoit  laifse  furprendre  iufques  a  vne  familiarite,  &
amiti6  grande.  Telle  eftoit  la  cholere  du  Capitaine
Turnel,  lequel  d'ores  en  auant  i'appelleray  abfolue-
ment  Capitaine  &  non  plus  Lieutenant,  parce  que
nous  allons  nous  feparer : efcoutez  comment.

Le  fecond  iour  apres  noftre  depart, veille  de  S.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  51


CHAPTER XXXI. [i.  e.,  xxx.]

THE DEPARTURE FROM PORT ROYAL; VARIOUS AD-
VENTURES OF THE SHIPS; AND HOW WE WERE
COMPELLED TO STOP AT THE AgORES.

ON  the  ninth  of  November  of  this  year,  1613,  the
English  left  Port  Royal,  intending  to  go  back
to  [276  i.e.,  278]  Virginia,  and  there  to  enjoy
their  booty  during  the  following  winter.  Now  from
this  time  on,  Lieutenant  Turnel  only  looked  upon
Father  Biard  as  an  abominable  rascal :  he  hated  him
still  more  when  he  thought  of  the  past,  for  then  he
had  openly  shown  his  esteem  and  love  for  him  on  ac-
count of  his  nai've  simplicity  and  open  candor.  But
having  seen  the  testimony  in  writing  of  so  many
Frenchmen,  who  assured  him  that  he  was  a  native
Spaniard,  and  a  wicked  man,  he  preferred  to  believe
that  the  Jesuit  was  a  liar,  rather  than  to  disbelieve  so
many  others  who  accused  him.  Therefore  his  hatred
was  all  the  more  irreconcilable  against  the  deep  and  im-
penetrable hypocrisy  (as  he  thought)  of  a  Spaniard,
pretending  to  be  a  Frenchman,  which  he,  reputed  to  be
a  man  of  sagacity  and  wisdom,  had  not  been  able  to
discover  [277  i.e.,  279]  in  so  long  a  time,  but  had  al-
lowed himself  to  be  drawn  by  it  into  great  familiarity
and  friendship.  Such  was  the  wrath  of  Captain  Tur-
nel, whom  I  shall  hereafter  call  simply  Captain  and
no  longer  Lieutenant,  because  we  are  going  to  be
separated  [from  the  other  ships];  hear  in  what  way.
On  the  second  day  after  our  departure,  on  the  eve


52  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

Martin,  vn  fi  grand  orage  s'efleua,  qu'il  ef carta  nos
trois  vaiffeaux  en  telle  facon,  que  defpuis  ils  ne  fe
font  point  reueus  enfemble;  ains  ont  tire  treftous
bien  diuerfes  routes.

La  barque  n'a  point  comparu  defpuis,  &  nouuelles
aucunes  n'en  ayant  efte  ouyes  aucuns  fe  doutent
qu'elle  foit  perie,  auec  les  fix  Anglois,  qui  eftoyent
dedans.

La  Nau  Capitaneffe,  ou  commendoit  Argal,  non-
obftat  le  contrafte,  vint  a  port  heureufement  [278
i.e.,  280]  a  la  Virginie  das  trois  fepmaines,  ou  enui-
ron.  Le  Marefchal  (duquel  nous  vous  auons  parle  cy
deuant)  ouyt  fort  volontiers  du  Capitaine  Argal,  tout
ce  qui  s'eftoit  pafse,  &  attendoit  en  bonne  deuotion
le  P.  Biard  pour  luy  toft  accourcir  les  voyages,  luy
faifant  trouuer  au  milieu  d'vne  efchelle  le  bout  du
monde ;  mais  Dieu,  maiftre  de  la  vie,  &  des  puiffances
difpofe  a  fon  bon  plaifir  de  fes  creatures,  &  non  a  la
fantafie  du  bras  humain;  prenant  plaifir  au  tiltre,
que  luy  donne  fon  Pfalmifte,  d'eftre  le  Seigneur,  qui
deliurc  le  pauure  des  mains  des  plus  forts,  &  le  dejlitue,
de  la  puijfance  de  ccux,  qui  le  pillcnt,  comme  ie  m'en
vais  vous  monitrer,  qu'il  a  faidt.

Les  deux  Iefuites,  &  vn  garcon  Francois  eftoyent
dans  le  nauire  captif ,  fur  lequel  auoit  efte  commis  le
Capitaine  Turnel;  ce  nauire  [279  i.e.,  281]  fepare
d'auec  Argal  par  la  tepefte  en  fut  tant  inceffamment
pourfuiuy  feize  iours  durant,  que  le  Capitaine  per-
dant  efperace  de  pouuoir  aborder  la  Virginie,  appella
tous  fes  gents,  &  mit  en  deliberation,  qu'eft-ce  qu'il
faudroit  faire  pour  fauuer  leurs  vies.  Car  de  com-
battre  les  orages  plus  long  temps  pour  ne  fe  pas
efloigner  de  ladidte  Virginie,  il  n'y  auoit  point  d'ap-


1616-29]  BJARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  53

of  St.  Martin,  so  terrible  a  storm  arose  that  our  three
vessels  were  scattered  so  effectually  that  they  never
came  together  afterwards,  but  all  sailed  away  in
different  directions.

The  barque  was  never  seen  again,  and,  no  news  of
it  having  been  heard,  no  one  doubts  that  it  was  lost
with  the  six  Englishmen  who  were  on  board.

The  Ship  "Capitanesse,"  which  Argal  commanded,
notwithstanding  its  hindrances,  safely  reached  port
[278  i.e.,  280]  in  Virginia,  after  three  weeks  or  there-
about. The  Marshal  (of  whom  we  have  spoken  above)
listened  very  willingly  to  Captain  Argal  as  he  related
all  that  had  taken  place,  and  in  a  proper  spirit  of  de-
votion awaited  Father  Biard,  to  shorten  for  him  his
voyages  and  to  make  him  find  the  end  of  the  world
from  the  middle  of  a  ladder ;  but  God,  master  of  life
and  all-powerful,  disposes  of  his  creatures  according
to  his  own  good  pleasure,  and  not  according  to  the
whims  of  human  authority;  taking  pleasure  in  the
title  given  him  by  the  Psalmist,  of  being  the  Lord,
II  'ho  delivers  the  poor  from  the  hands  of  the  strong,  and
the  destitute  from  the  power  of  those  who  strip  him,  as  I
am  going  on  to  show  you  he  did.

The  two  Jesuits  and  a  French  boy  were  in  the  cap-
tured ship  which  had  been  committed  to  the  care  of
Captain  Turnel;  this  .ship,  [279  i.e.,  281]  separated
from  Argal  by  the  tempest,  was  so  incessantly  fol-
lowed by  it  for  sixteen  days,  that  the  Captain,  losing
hope  of  being  able  to  reach  Virginia,  called  together  all
his  people,  and  took  counsel  with  them  upon  the  best
way  to  save  their  lives.  For  there  seemed  to  be  no
probability  that  they  would  longer  be  able  to  combat
the  storms  so  as  to  keep  near  Virginia,  because  they
had  in  the  ships  the  horses  taken  from  Port  Royal,


54  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

parence,  parce  que  on  auoit  dans  le  nauire  des  che-
uaux  prins  a  Port  Royal,  qui  les  ruinoyent  d'eau  tant
ils  en  beuuoyent,  les  tourbillons  rompoyet  tant  de
voiles,  aufuents,  &  cordages,  qu'il  n'y  auoit  plus  de
quoy  les  refaire,  &  les  viures  eftoyent  bien  bas,  hors
la  moulue  feulement,  de  laquelle  y  auoit  affez ;  mais
de  pain  on  n'en  auoit  eu,  par  l'efpace  de  trois  mois,
que  deux  onces  chafque  iour  pour  tefte,  [280  i.e.,
282]  bien  rarement  trois:  &  fi  il  en  reftoit  fort  peu.
En  cefte  deliberation  les  mariniers  furet  d'aduis  qu'il
falloit  fouitenir  encores  quelques  iours  pour  leur
honeur.  Et  (approbation  de  leur  confeil)  le  bon
temps  leur  arriua  au  iour  fuiuant,  &  les  conduifit  fi
auant  qu'ils  ne  s'eflimoyent  pas  eftre  a  plus  de  vingt
&  cinq  lieues  de  leur  port.

Pour  en  confeffer  la  franche  verite,  les  Iefuites  ne
prioyent  point  pour  ce  bon  temps,  car  ils  feauoyent
affez  oil  c'eft  qu'il  les  conuoyoit.  Or  Dieu,  croy-ie,
ay  at  pitie  d'eux,  fufcita  vn  gaillard,  &  fougueux
furoiieft,  qui  vint  donner  droidt  en  face  a  nos  An-
glois,  &  les  contraignifl  de  mettre  le  nauire  en  cappe
(comme  Ton  dit)  de  plier  toutes  les  voiles,  &  de  pen-
fer  a.  leur  confcience.

Le  Capitaine  voyant  cefte  rage  [281  i.e.,  283]  de
vents,  &  de  vagues  ne  voulut  plus  s'opiniaflrer,  ains
conclud,  qu'il  falloit  relafcher  aux  Acores  a  7.  cents
lieues  de  la,  pour  s'y  pouruoir  de  leurs  neceffitez,  &
attendre  le  bon  temps.  II  fit  tourner  le  cap  pour
adreffer  la,  &  auffi  toft  apres  on  tua  les  cheuaux  qui
nous  auoyent  gaffe  &  confume  noftr'eau,  de  maniere
qu'elle  eftoit  toute  infedte,  &  puante,  &  encores  la
donnoit  on  en  bien  petite  mefure.  Mais  la  chair  de
cheual  eltoit  fort  bonne,  au  gouft  des  Iefuites.

Or durant  ces  furieufes,  &  horrib[l]es  tempeftes,


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616  55

and  these  spoiled  as  much  of  the  water  as  they
drank ;  the  winds  had  so  torn  their  sails  and  broken
their  gunwales  and  ropes,  that  they  had  nothing
left  with  which  to  repair  them;  the  stock  of  food
was  low,  except  the  codfish,  of  which  they  had
enough ;  but  as  to  bread,  they  had  had,  during  three
months,  only  two  ounces  a  day  to  each  person,  [280
i.e.,  282]  very  rarely  three;  and  so  there  remained
but  little  of  it.  In  this  consultation,  the  sailors
were  of  the  opinion  that  their  honor  demanded  them
to  hold  out  some  days  longer.  And  (in  approval  of
their  decision)  fair  weather  came  the  next  day,  and
bore  them  so  far  ahead  that  they  judged  they  were
no  more  than  twenty-five  leagues  from  their  port.

To  tell  the  honest  truth,  the  Jesuits  did  not  pray
for  this  fair  weather,  knowing  very  well  to  what  fate
it  was  carrying  them.  Now  God,  taking  pity  on  them,
as  I  believe,  aroused  a  lively  and  vigorous  south-
wester,  which  blew  right  in  the  Englishmen's  teeth,
and  forced  them  to  lie  to  (as  the  saying  is),  to  reef  the
sails,  and  to  examine  their  consciences.

The  Captain,  seeing  this  fury  [281  i.e.,  283]  of  the
winds  and  waves,  thought  it  well  not  to  persist  in  his
course,  but  decided  to  make  for  the  Acores,  7  hundred
leagues  from  there,  to  provide  for  their  necessities
and  to  wait  for  good  weather.  He  turned  the  prow
in  that  direction,  and  immediately  thereafter  they
killed  the  horses  which  had  been  spoiling  and  drink-
ing the  water,  so  that  it  was  all  infected  and  had  a
bad  smell ;  and  even  this  was  measured  out  to  us  in
small  quantities.  But  the  horseflesh  was  very  good,
according  to  the  taste  of  the  Jesuits.

Now  during  these  furious  and  horrible  tempests,
when all had good reason to look into  their  con-


56  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  4

comme  tous  auoyent  bien  occafion  de  penfer  a.  leur
confcience,  Dieu  particulierement  difpofoit  le  Capi-
taine.  De  maniere,  qu'vne  fois  bien  repentant,  il
appella  le  P.  Biard,  &  luy  tint  ces  difcours,  que  ie
vais  inferer  quafi  de  mot  a  mot:  car  ce  [282  i.e.,  284]
Capitaine  parloit  bon  Francois,  &  beancoup  d'autres
lagues  vulgaires,  outre  le  Latin  &  le  Grec,  qu'il  en-
tendoit  bien,  homme  de  grand  efprit,  &  qui  a  bien
eftudie:  P.  Biard,  (difoit-il)  Dieu  eft  courrouce  contre
nous,  ie  le  voy  bie ;  il  eft  courrouce  contre  nous,
di-je,  mais  non  pas  contre  vous;  contre  nous,  parce
que  nous  vous  somes  alles  faire  la  guerre,  fans  la
vous  premierement  denocer,  ce  qu'eft  contre  le  droict
des  gens.  Mais  ie  protefte,  que  c'a  efte  contre  mon
aduis,  &  mon  gre.  Ie  n'euffe  fceu  qu'y  faire,  il  me
falloit  fuiure,  i'eftois  feruiteur.  Ainfi  ie  vous  dy,
que  ie  voy  bie  que  Dieu  eft  courrouce  contre  nous,
mais  non  pas  contre  vous,  ains  a  l'occafion  de  vous:
car  vous  ne  faidtes  que  patir.  Le  Capitaine  s'arreftat
icy,  vo9  pouues  eftimer  fi  le  Iefuite  manqua  de  ref-
podre  a  propos.  Le  Capitaine,  [283  i.e.,  285]  le  prit
d'vn  autre  endroit,  mais,  P.  Biard  (dit-il)  c'eft  chofe
eftrange,  que  vos  Francois  de  Port  Royal  vous  ac-
cufent  ainfi.  Le  Pere  refpondit,  Mais  mofieur,  m'a-
ues-vous  iamais  ouy  mefdire  d'eux?  Nenny,  dit-il;
ains  i'ay  fort  bien  remarque  que  quand  on  mefdifoit
d'eux,  &  deuant  le  Capitaine  Argal,  &  deuant  moy,
toufiours  vous  les  aues  defendus,  i'en  fuis  bon  tef-
moin.  Monfieur  (dit  le  Pere)  prenez  argument  de  la,
&  iuges,  qui  a  Dieu,  &  la  verite  de  fon  cofte ;  ou  les
mefdifants,  ou  bien  les  charitables.  Ie  l'entends  bien,
dit  le  Capitaine:  mais,  Pere  Biard,  la  charite  ne  vous
a  elle point fait  mentir,  quad  vous  me difiez, que


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6/6  57

sciences,  God  especially  inclined  the  Captain  to  do  so,
in  such  a  manner,  that  once,  when  he  was  feeling  very-
repentant,  he  called  Father  Biard  and  held  with  him
the  following  conversation,  which  I  here  insert  almost
word  for  word:  for  this  [282  i.e.,  284]  Captain  spoke
good  French,  and  many  other  common  languages,
besides  Latin  and  Greek,  which  he  understood  very
well ;  he  was  a  man  of  great  intelligence  and  a  thor-
ough student.  "Father  Biard'  (said  he)  "God  is
angry  at  us,  I  see  it  clearly ;  he  is  angry  at  us,  I  say,
but  not  at  you ;  angry  at  us,  because  we  went  to  make
war  upon  you  without  first  giving  you  notice,  which
is  contrary  to  the  rights  of  nations.  But  I  protest
that  it  was  contrary  to  my  advice,  and  my  inclination.
I  did  not  know  what  to  do,  I  had  to  follow,  I  was
merely  a  servant.  But  I  tell  you  I  see  very  clearly
that  God's  wrath  is  kindled  against  us,  but  not  against
you,  although  on  your  account:  for  you  do  nothing
but  suffer."  The  Captain  pausing  here,  you  may
judge  whether  or  not  the  Jesuit  failed  to  make  a  suit-
able answer.  The  Captain  [283  i.e.,  285]  took  up  an-
other phase  of  the  question.  "But,  Father  Biard'
(says  he)  "it  is  strange  that  your  countrymen  from
Port  Royal  should  accuse  you  thus."  The  Father
answers,  "But,  Sir,  have  you  ever  heard  me  slander
them?"  "By  no  means,"  he  says,  "but  I  have  clear-
ly observed  that  when  evil  things  are  said  of  them,
both  before  Captain  Argal  and  before  me,  you  have
always  defended  them,  of  which  I  am  a  good  wit-
ness." "Sir"  (the  Father  says)  "draw  your  own  con-
clusions from  that,  and  judge  which  have  God  and
truth  on  their  side,  whether  the  slanderers,  or  the
charitable. ' '  "I  know  that  very  well, ' '  says  the  Cap-
tain, "but,  Father  Biard,  did  not  charity  make  you


58  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

nous  ne  trouuerions  que  mifere  a  Port  Royal?  Le
Pere  repartit,  Pardonnez  moy,  monfieur,  vous  priant
de  vous  fouuenir,  que  ie  ne  vous  ay  dit  [284  i.e.,
286]  finon  que  moy  eftant  la,  ie  n'y  auois  veu,  &
trouue  que  mifere.  Cela  feroit  bon,  dit  le  Capitaine,
fi  vous  n'efties  Efpagnol,  comme  Ton  dit  que  vous
eftes,  car  l'eftat,  ce  que  vous  defires  tant  de  bien  aux
Fracois  n'efl  pas  pour  amour  que  vous  leur  portes,
ains  pour  haine  des  Anglois.  a  cecy  le  Pere  Biard
refpondit  fort  au  long :  mais  il  ne  luy  peut  iamais  de-
fraciner  ceft'opinion,  difant,  qu'il  n'eftoit  point  croy-
able,  que  cinq,  ou  fix  Francois  conftitues  en  affliction
euffent  voulu  figner  vne  fauffe  accufation  contre  vn
leur  concitoyen  Preftre:  n'y  ayants  autre  profit  que
de  le  faire  perdre,  &  par  ce  moyen  fatis-faire  a  leur
maudite  paffion.

Ie  vous  ay  faidt  ce  recit  a  fin  que  la  fuaue  difpofi-
tion  de  la  diuine  prouidence  foit  recogneue,  &  que
vous  entendiez,  come  Dieu  [285  i.e.,  287]  alloit  pre-
parant  peu  a  peu  le  cceur  du  Capitaine.  Car  il  fe
trouua  bie  perplex,  &  luy  &  fes  gens,  quand  ils  fe
virent  pres  des  A£ores.  La  caufe  en  eftoit,  parce
que  ces  Ifles  font  habitees  des  Portugais  Catholiques ;
par  ainfi  les  Anglois  confideroyent,  que  venants  a  y
anchrer,  il  faudroit  fouffrir  la  vifite  du  nauire.  Que
fi  en  la  vifite  on  defcouuroit  les  Iefuites  que  c' eftoit
faidt  d'eux,  parce  qu'on  deliureroit  lefdits  Iefuites,
comme  Catholiques:  &  qu'eux  feroyent  pendus,  ou
pour  le  moins  mis  a  la  cadene  comme  voleurs  de
Preftres.

Le  remede  a  ce  mal  eftoit  facile,  faifant  faire  auf-
dits  Iefuites  vn  faut  dans  la  mer.  Neantmoins
comme  ie  vous  ay  monftre,  la  crainte  de  Dieu  s'ef-


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  ibib  59

lie,  when  you  told  me  we  should  find  nothing  but
misery  at  Port  Royal?"  "  Pardon  me,"  answers  the
Father,  "I  beg  you  to  remember  that  I  told  you  only
[284  i.e.,  286]  that  when  I  was  there,  I  saw  and  found
nothing  but  misery."  "That  would  be  all  right,"
says  the  Captain,  "  if  you  were  not  a  Spaniard,  as
they  say  you  are  ;  for,  being  one,  the  great  good
which  you  desire  for  the  French  is  not  on  account  of
the  love  you  bear  them,  but  on  account  of  your
hatred  of  the  English."  Upon  this  Father  Biard
entered  into  a  long  explanation ;  but  he  could  never
eradicate  this  opinion  from  the  Captain's  mind,  who
said  it  was  not  credible  that  five  or  six  Frenchmen,
surrounded  by  afflictions,  would  have  consented  to
sign  a  false  accusation  against  a  Priest,  one  of  their  own
fellow-citizens,  deriving  no  other  profit  therefrom
than  to  destroy  him,  and  in  this  way  to  satisfy  their
evil  passions.

I  have  narrated  this  to  you  that  the  kindly  disposi-
tions of  providence  may  be  recognized,  and  that  you
may  understand  how  God  [285  i.e.,  287]  proceeded,  lit-
tle by  little,  to  prepare  the  heart  of  the  Captain.  For
both  he  and  his  crew  were  greatly  perplexed,  when
they  found  themselves  near  the  Acores.  The  reason
for  this  was,  that  these  Islands  are  inhabited  by  Catho-
lic Portuguese,  so  the  English  judged  that,  in  anchor-
ing there,  they  would  have  to  allow  the  ship  to  be
visited;  and  if  in  this  visit  the  priests  were  discov-
ered, it  would  be  all  over  with  them,  for  the  Jesuits,
as  Catholics,  would  be  liberated,  and  they  [the  Eng-
lish] would  be  hanged,  or  at  least  condemned  to  the
chain  and  ball,  as  robbers  of  Priests.

The  remedy  for  this  evil  was  an  easy  one;  namely,
to  make  the  Jesuits  take  a  leap  into  the  sea. Never-


60  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

toit  refueillee,  qui  combattoit  pour  eux.  Noilre
Seigneur  en  fin,  qui  les  [286  i.e.,  288]  protegeoit
aux  prieres  de  fa  glorieufe  Mere,  fit  que  le  Capitaine
fe  refolut  de  les  cacher  au  fonds  du  nauire,  efperant
que  cela  fufifiroit  pour  feurte:  comme  il  fuffit  auffi,
mais  la  bone  foy  des  Iefuites  y  aydant,  ainfi  que  vous
entendres  tout  a  ceft'heure.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  61

theless,  as  I  have  shown  you,  the  fear  of  God  was
awakened,  and  this  contended  for  them.  Our  Lord  in-
deed who  [286  i.e.,  288]  protected  them  through  the
prayers  of  his  glorious  Mother,  caused  the  Captain  to
decide  to  conceal  them  in  the  hold  of  the  ship,  hoping
this  would  suffice  for  their  security,  as  it  did ;  but  the
good  faith  of  the  Jesuits  assisted  therein,  as  you  will
soon  hear.


62  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE  XXXII. [i.e.,  xxxi.]

COMME LE NAUIRE FUT VISITE AUX AgORES, & LA

BONNE FOY, QUE LES IESUITES GAR-

DERENT AUX ANGLOIS.

LA  main  de  Dieu  eftoit  euidemment  fur  les  Ie-
fuites  pour  les  proteger,  ainfi  que  vous  auez
peu  apperceuoir  par  cy  deuant :  Et  f ut  manifefte
en  vn  autre  danger,  qu'ils  pafferent;  que  nous  ne  ra-
contons  pas  icy,  pour  n'eflre  longs,  auquel  neant-
moins  [287  i.e.,  289]  ils  confeffent  d'auoir  eu  plus
de  peur,  qu'en  beaucoup  d'autres,  &  non  fans  caufe.
Cefte  protection  diuine  fe  monftra  encores  clairement
en  ce  quell'ofta  l'apprehenfion  du  peril  au  Capitaine.
Car  s'il  euft  preueu  les  grands  dangers  qu'il  courut
puis  apres,  ie  ne  fcay  s'il  euft  efte  affez  confcien-
tieux,  ou  fes  gens  pour  ne  fe  point  refoudre  au
meurtre,  auant  que  de  tomber  aux  perplexites,  auf-
quelles  ils  furent  reduits,  en  cefte  facon.

Ils  arriuerent  a  l'lfle  de  Faeal,  qui  eft  vne  des
Acores,  &  ne  fe  penfoyent  a  leur  arriuee,  que  d'an-
chrer  aupres  de  la  ville,  d'enuoyer  leur  batteau  pour
fe  charger  d'eau,  de  laquelle  ils  auoyent  principale-
ment  befoin,  &  achepter  quelque  peu  de  bifcuit,  &
autres  neceffitez  plus  preffantes.  En  cefte  facon  il
eftoit  fort  facile  [288  i.e.,  290]  de  cacher  les  Iefuites,
parce  qu'on  ne  vifite  gueres,  que  fort  legerement
ceux  qui  font  loin  de  terre,  &  puis  la  vifite  paffee :
tout  le  peril  eft  paffe.  Cefte  confideration  fit  re-
foudre tant  facilemet  le  Capitaine  a  ne  pas  vfer  de


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  63


CHAPTER XXXII. [i.e.,  xxxi.]

HOW THE SHIP WAS VISITED AT THE AgORES, AND

HOW THE JESUITS KEPT THEIR PROMISE

TO THE ENGLISH.

GOD'S  hand  was  evidently  stretched  over  the  Jes-
uits for  their  protection,  as  you  have  been  able
to  see  heretofore.  It  was  also  manifest  in
another  danger  through  which  they  passed,  and  which
we  do  not  relate  here,  lest  we  be  tedious,  in  which,
nevertheless,  [287  i.e.,  289]  they  confess  to  have  felt
more  fear  than  in  many  others,  and  not  without
cause.  This  divine  protection  was  even  more  evi-
dent in  removing  all  apprehensions  of  danger  from
the  Captain.  For  if  he  had  foreseen  the  great  risks
which  he  ran  afterwards,  I  am  not  sure  that  he  or  his
crew  would  have  been  so  conscientious  as  not  to  have
resolved  upon  murder,  before  falling  into  the  perplex-
ities to  which  they  were  in  this  way  reduced.

They  came  to  the  Island  of  Faeal,  one  of  the  Ac-
ores,  where,  upon  their  arrival,  they  intended  only  to
anchor  near  the  town,  to  send  their  boat  for  a  supply
of  water,  which  they  needed  most,  and  to  buy  a  few
biscuit  and  other  very  necessary  articles.  In  this  way
it  was  quite  easy  [288  i.e.,  290]  to  conceal  the  Jesuits;
for  those  vessels  which  are  some  distance  from  the
land  are  only  slightly  visited,  and,  this  visit  over,  all
danger  is  past.  This  was  the  reason  why  the  Cap-
tain so  readily  resolved  not  to  use  cruelty.  But  fate
found  other  ways  and  means,  which  he  had  not  con-


64  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

cruaute.  Mais  la  fortune  trouua  bien  autres  tours,
&  deftours  qu'il  ne  pefoit:  car  il  luy  falluft  entrer
dans  le  haure,  &  fe  tenir  a  la  veue  de  la  ville,  &  des
autres  nauires.  La  de  fmiftre  accident,  noftre  nauire
s'alla  heurter  contre  vne  carauelle  Efpagnolle,  char-
gee  de  fuccre,  &  luy  rompit  fon  beau-pre;  l'Efpagnol
penfa  que  ce  fut  vn  guet  a  pens,  a  celle  fin  de  fur-
prendre  fon  vaiffeau,  &  le  voler:  tout  ainfi  qu'auoit
faidt  vn  Francois  dans  le  mefme  port,  cinq  femaines
au  parauat,  &  partant  fe  print  a  crier  au  courfaire,
faifant  armer  fes  gens,  &  peu  s'en  fallut  que  Ion
[289  i.e.,  291]  ne  vinft  aux  mains.  Grand  bruit  &
grande  efmeute  dans  la  ville,  &  par  tous  les  nauires
qui  eftoyent  la,  grand  alarme.  II  falluft  que  le  Capi-
taine  allaft  a  terre,  &  y  demeuraft  pour  gages,  &
affeurance:  encores  ne  pouuoit-on  croire,  qu'il  fut
autre  que  Pirate,  on  vint  vifiter  &  reuifiter  le  na-
uire, &  les  Iefuites  ioiioyent  comme  Ton  dit  a  efcon-
failles,  de  trou  en  cachot,  &  de  cachot  en  fonds,  touf-
iours  en  quelque  nouuelle  muffe.  Or  fur  le  vif,  &
le  chaud  des  foupcons,  &  grabuge,  les  Efpagnols
venants  vifiter  les  pauures  Peres  &  le  garcon  Francois
eftoyent  derriere  vne  chaloupe  fe  tenant  coys  &  fans
foufner,  car  fi  feulement  ils  euffent  foume  vn  peu
gros,  ou  remue  la  main  ou  le  pied,  ils  euffent  efte
defcouuerts.  La  chofe  eftoit  fi  hazardeufe,  que  nos
Anglois  en  tranfiffoyent  de  [290  i.e.,  292]  male-peur.
Mais  les  Iefuites  leur  voulurent  conftamment  garder
la  foy  pour  plufieurs  raisos,  &  entre  autres,  pour  faire
voir  par  effect  aux  calomniateurs  de  l'Eglife  Catho-
lique,  qu'a  tort,  &  contre  verite  ils  luy  impofent  d' en-
feigner,  qu'il  ne  faut  point  garder  la  foy  aux  here-
tiques. Ce  qu'eft  totalement  faux,  &  contre  fa  doc-


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  65

sidered ;  for  he  was  obliged  to  enter  the  harbor  and
remain  in  full  view  of  the  town,  and  of  other  ships.
There,  by  an  unlucky  accident,  our  ship  ran  foul  of
a  Spanish  caravel,  loaded  with  sugar,  and  broke  its
bowsprit ;  the  Spaniards  thought  this  was  a  ruse  by
means  of  which  to  surprise  their  vessel  and  rob  it,
just  as  a  French  ship  had  done  in  the  same  port  five
weeks  before;  and  so  they  began  to  cry  "pirates!'
at  the  same  time  arming  their  crew;  just  a  [289  i.e.,
291]  little  more  and  they  would  have  come  to  blows.
There  was  great  commotion  and  noise  in  the  town,
and  considerable  alarm  throughout  all  the  ships  in
the  harbor.  The  Captain  had  to  go  on  shore,  and  re-
main there  as  a  hostage  and  security ;  and  even  then,
no  one  could  believe  that  he  was  other  than  a  Pirate.
They  came  to  visit  and  revisit  the  ship,  and  the  Jes-
uits played,  as  the  saying  is,  at  hide  and  seek,  from
top  to  bottom,  from  dungeon  to  hold,  always  finding
some  new  hiding  place.  Now  during  the  liveliest  and
fiercest  suspicions,  and  disputes,  the  Spaniards  came
to  visit  the  ship,  and  the  poor  Fathers  and  the  French
boy  were  huddled  behind  a  boat,  still  and  breathless ;
for  if  they  had  even  breathed  a  little  loud,  or  moved
hand  or  foot,  they  would  have  been  discovered.  The
thing  was  so  dangerous  that  our  English  were  seized
with  a  [290  i.e.,  292]  panic.  But  the  Jesuits  wished  to
continue  to  keep  faith  with  them  for  several  reasons,
and  among  others  to  make  the  slanderers  of  the  Catho-
lic Church  really  see  that  they  ascribed  to  it  wrong-
fully and  untruthfully  the  doctrine  that  it  is  not
necessary  to  keep  faith  with  heretics ;  which  is  totally
false  and  contrary  to  its  belief.  But  let  us  return
to  the  Spaniards.  They  never  discovered  the  said
fathers  in  their  visit,  and  went  away  with  a  very  high


66  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J E~  SUITES  [Vol.4

trine.  Mais  reuenons  aux  Efpagnols,  ils  n'apper-
ceurent  iamais  lefdits  peres  en  leur  vifite,  &  s'en
allerent  en  fort  bonne  opinion  des  Anglois,  qui  les
voyants  dehors,  &  reuenants  a  foy  de  la  grande  ap-
prehenfion  en  laquelle  ils  auoyent  efle,  fe  prindrent
a  faire  tant  de  carefTes  aux  Peres,  &  tant  de  fefte  en
recognoiffance  de  leur  fincerite,  qu'en  pourroyet  faire
vne  troupe  de  bons  parents  &  amys  s'entre  rencon-
trants  en  paix  apres  vne  abfence,  &  feparation  [291
i.e.,  293]  de  bien  long  temps.  Les  mefmes  Anglois
ont  fouuent  depuis  loiiange  lefdidts  Peres  en  la  pre-
fence  de  leurs  Miniflres  en  Angleterre  de  cefte  leur
fidelity,  &  les  Miniflres  en  demonflroiet  grands
fignes  d'eflonnement  &  admiration.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  16/6  67

opinion  of  the  English.  The  latter,  when  they  saw
them  outside,  recovering  from  the  panic  into  which
they  had  been  thrown,  began  to  embrace  the  Fathers
as  effusively,  and  to  make  as  great  a  celebration  in
acknowledgment  of  their  sincerity,  as  a  company  of
kind  kindred  and  friends  would  make  at  a  peaceful  re-
union after  a  very  long  [291  i.e.,  293]  absence  and  sep-
aration. These  same  English  have  often  since  then
praised  the  Fathers  for  this  their  fidelity,  in  the
presence  of  their  Ministers  in  England;  and  the
Ministers  have  thereupon  made  great  demonstrations
of  astonishment  and  admiration.


68  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE XXXII.

LA VENUE EN ANGLETERRE : & LA DELIURANCE DES

IESUITES.

LES  Anglois  demeurerent  trois  fepmaines  entieres
engagez  en  cefte  Ifle,  que  nous  difons  de  Fseal,
pendant  lequel  teps  les  pauures  Iefuites  ne
peurent  point  voir  le  Soleil.  Or  parce  que  lefdidts
Anglois  auoyent  faute  d'argent,  ils  ne  peuret  guieres
s'y  remplumer,  ce  qui  les  fit  du  tout  [292  i.e.,  294]
refoudre  a  ne  plus  retenter  la  Virginie,  ains  s'en  re-
uenir  en  Angleterre,  attendu  mefmemet  que  ja  ils
fe  voyoient  dans  la  prefente  annee  16 14.  qui  eftoit  le
terme  de  leur  feruice.

Or  eftants  en  la  courfe  &  voye  d' Angleterre,  la
tempefte  nous  ietta  hors  la  marche  (qu'on  appelle)
c'eft  a  dire,  hors  le  Canal  qui  eft  entre  France  &  An-
gleterre, &  nous  fallut  refugier  au  Port  de  Milfier,  en
la  Prouince  de  Galles.  La  vne  autre  fois  toutes  pro-
uifios  nous  defaillirent,  ce  qui  contraignit  noftre  Capi-
taine  d'aller  a  Pembroch,  ville  principale  de  ceft
endroit,  &  Viceadmiraute,  mais  a  Pembroch  il  fut
arrefte  prifonnier,  fur  le  foupcon  qu'on  auoit  qu'il  ne
fuft  Pirate.  Le  foupcon  naiffoit  de  ce  que  luy,  &  fes
gens  eftoient  Anglois,  &  leur  nauire  toutesfois  eftoit
faict  a  la  [293  i.e.,  295]  Fracoife,  ce  qui  faifoit  pre-
fumer,  qu'il  venoit  du  Port  de  Gryp  aux  Ides  de
l'Arcin,  pardega  le  Cap  Efcumant.  Le  Capitaine  fe
iuftifia  du  mieux  qu'il  peuft,  difant  la  verite :  mais  on


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  69


CHAPTER XXXII.

THE ARRIVAL IN ENGLAND; AND THE DELIVERANCE

OF THE JESUITS.

THE  English  were  occupied  three  entire  weeks  at
this  Island,  which  we  call  Faeal,  and  during
this  time  the  poor  Jesuits  were  not  able  to  see
the  Sun.  Now  as  these  English  were  in  need  of
money,  they  could  not  fit  themselves  out  there,  and
this  made  them  firmly  [292  i.e. ,  294]  decide  to  make  no
further  attempt  to  return  to  Virginia,  but  to  go  back
to  England,  especially  as  they  now  found  themselves
in  the  present  year,  16 14,  which  was  the  term  of
their  service.

Now  on  our  way  to  England  the  tempest  cast  us
out  of  la  ma[n]che 6  (as  it  is  called) ;  that  is,  out  of
the  Channel  between  France  and  England,  and  we
were  obliged  to  take  refuge  in  the  Harbor  of  Milfier
[Milford],  in  the  Province  of  Wales.  There  again
all  provisions  failed  us,  which  compelled  our  Captain
to  go  to  Pembroch  [Pembroke],  the  principal  city  of
this  place,  and  a  Vice-admiralty.  But  at  Pembroke
he  was  taken  prisoner,  as  they  suspected  him  of  be-
ing a  Pirate.  The  suspicion  arose  from  the  fact  that
he  and  his  crew  were  English,  yet  their  ship  was  made
after  French  [293  i.e.,  295]  models,  which  made  them
think  he  came  from  Port  de  Gryp  on  the  Arcin
Islands,  this  side  of  Cape  Escumant.  The  Captain
justified  himself  as  well  as  he  could,  by  telling  the
truth; but  they did  not  believe  him, inasmuch  as


70  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

ne  luy  croyoit  pas,  d'autant  qu'il  n'auoit  point  de
Commiffions :  &  n'en  pouuoit  auoir,  parce  que  n'eftant
que  Lieutenant,  il  fuiuoit  fon  Capitaine,  &  ne  s'eftoit
fepare"  d'auec  luy  que  par  accident  de  tempefte,  ainfi
qu'auez  ouy.  A  cefte  caufe  il  fut  contraindt  de  pro-
duire  pour  tefmoins  de  fa  preud'homie  les  deux
Iefuites,  qu'il  auoit  dans  fon  nauire,  gens  irrepro-
chables,  ce  difoit-il,  &  difoit  vray.

Auffi  toft  par  commandement  du  Magiftrat  lefdits
Iefuites  furet  appelles  a  terre ;  &  interroges  en  Iuf-
tice,  auec  grand  refpedt.  Eux  conterent  la  verite  du
faidt,  &  a  leur  depofition  le  Capitaine  fut  [294  i.e.,
296]  tenu  gentil-homme  d'honneur,  &  de  bien;  fauf
a  demefler  nos  differents  touchant  la  nouuelle  Frace
par  deuat  le  Roy.  Neantmoins  il  fallut  feiourner  vn
grand  long  temps  audit  Pembroch  attendat  refponfe
de  Londres,  car  il  fut  neceffaire  d'y  enuoyer  tant  pour
auoir  de  l'argent,  que  pour  aduertir  de  ceft  affaire  le
grand  Admiral,  &  la  compagnie  des  Marchands,  qui
ont  charge  de  la  Virginie.

Et  ceft  icy,  ou  l'admiration  arrefte,  &  mon  haleine,
&  mon  pas;  pour  m'ef crier  auec  le  Sage,  Que  les  dif-
pojitions  de  la  Diuinc  prouidence  font  veritablement  dref-
fe'es  au  compas,  articule'es  au  nombre,  &  mcfiirccs  mi
poids,  &  trebuchet,  iufqties  a  vn  demy  grain.  Car  ceft
appel  des  Iefuites  fut  fans  doute,  vne  induftrie  de
cefte  paternelle  prouidece,  qui  les  affiftoit  par  tout:
d'autant  que  [295  i.e.,  297]  s'ils  fuffent  demeures
dans  le  nauire,  comm'ils  y  eftoyent,  deftitues  de  tout,
au  cceur  de  l'hyuer  (car  c'eftoit  en  Feurier)  &  ce,
quatre  fepmaines  durant,  il  eft  vrayfemblable  qu'ils
fuffent  morts  de  froid,  &  de  mifere :  mais  au  moyen
de  ceft  appel,  ils  furent  cogneus  par  le  luge,  lequel


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  71

he  had  no  Commission,  and  could  not  have  had,  be-
cause being  nothing  but  a  Lieutenant  he  followed
his  Captain,  from  whom  he  was  accidentally  sepa-
rated by  the  storm,  as  you  have  heard.  For  this  rea-
son he  was  obliged  to  produce,  as  witnesses  of  his
honesty,  the  two  Jesuits  whom  he  had  in  his  ship,
irreproachable  men,  as  he  said,  and  said  truly.

Immediately,  by  command  of  the  Magistrate,  the
Jesuits  were  summoned  to  come  on  shore,  where  they
were  very  respectfully  interrogated  in  a  Court  of
Justice.  They  stated  the  real  facts  of  the  case,  and
upon  their  testimony  the  Captain  was  [294  i.e.,  296]
acknowledged  to  be  a  gentleman  of  honor  and  of
worth;  as  to  the  disentanglement  of  our  difficulties
about  new  France,  these  were  to  be  reserved  for  the
King.  Nevertheless,  we  had  to  make  a  very  long
sojourn  at  Pembroke,  awaiting  an  answer  from  Lon-
don, for  it  was  necessary  to  send  there,  partly  to  ob-
tain money,  partly  to  make  known  the  affair  to  the
high  Admiral,  and  the  company  of  Merchants  who
have  charge  of  Virginia.

And  here  admiration  makes  me  pause  and  hold  my
breath,  to  cry  out  with  the  Wise  Man,  That  the  dispen-
sations of  Divine  providence  are  truly  arranged  by  com-
pass, joined  harmoniously,  and  measured  by  weight  and
balance  even  to  the  half  of  a  grain.  For  this  call  of  the
Jesuits  was  without  doubt  a  contrivance  of  this  pater-
nal providence,  which  everywhere  assisted  them;  in-
asmuch as,  [295  i.e.,  297]  if  they  had  remained  in  the
ship,  as  they  were  doing,  in  want  of  everything,  in  the
depths  of  winter  (for  it  was  February),  and  had  con-
tinued to  do  this  during  four  weeks,  it  is  probable
that  they  would  have  died  of  cold  and  starvation;
but,  by  means  of  this  summons,  they  became  known


72  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

fort  honefte  &  graue  perfonnage  qu'il  eft,  ayant  en-
tendu  combien  ils  eftoyent  mal  dans  le  nauire,  les  fit
loger  chez  le  Maire  de  la  ville,  &  paya  pour  eux,  di-
fant,  que  s'ils  auoyent  dequoy,  ils  le  luy  rendroyent:
finon  que  cela  f eroit  donne  pour  Dieu :  car  autrement
ce  nous  f eroit  trop  de  honte,  (difoit-il)  fi  gens  tant
honneftes,  &  fcauants  ne  trouuoyet  de  la  courtoifie
parmy  nous.  Ce  bon  Seigneur  s'appelle  Nicolas
Adams,  Vice-admiral  dudit  Pembroch.

Or  pendant  ce  fejour  toute  [296  i.e.,  298]  forte  de
gens  les  alloient  voir,  &  de  bien  loin,  par  curiofite  de
voir  des  Iefuites  en  leur  habit,  ainfi  qu'ils  eftoient,  &
ont  toufiours  efte  iufques  a  leur  retour  en  Frace.
Miniftres,  Iufticiers,  Gentilshommes,  &  autres  ve-
noyent  conferer  auec  eux;  Vn  Milord  mefmes  du
grad  Confeil  voulut  auoir  le  plaifir  de  les  accarer  en
difpute  rangee  auec  quatre  Miniftres.  Ie  dy  Miniftres
pour  m'accommoder  a  1' intelligence  Francoife:  car
en  Angleterre  ils  les  appellent  Preftres :  Et  le  Chef
de  la  difpute  eftoit  vn  Archidiacre,  parce  que  les  An-
glois  retiennent  encores  beaucoup  de  l'Eglife  Catho-
lique,  comme  l'Ordre  de  la  Hierarchie  Ecclefiaftique,
Archeuefques,  Euefques,  Preftres,  Archipreftres,
Archidiacres,  Curez,  Chanoines,  &c.  L'impofition
Epifcopale  des  mains  en  la  creation  des  Preftres,  [297
i.e.,  299]  &  moindres  Ordres,  &  en  la  confirmatio
des  enfans,  Le  Crefme,  &  les  ceremonies,  le  figne  de
la  Croix,  &  1' Image  d'icelle,  &  d' autres:  La  Pfalmo-
die,  &  culte  ordinaire,  les  feftes  ordonnees  des  Saindts,
&  Saindtes,  les  Vigiles,  les  Ieufnes,  le  Carefme,
l'Abftinence  des  viandes  au  Vendredy,  &  Samedy,
les  habits  Sacerdotaux,  &  vaiffeaux  facrez:  Et  ceux
qui  condamnent  toutes ces  chofes, comme  font  les


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  73

to  the  Judge,  honorable  and  grave  personage  as  he
is,  and  he,  having  heard  how  badly  off  they  were  in
the  ship,  had  them  lodged  in  the  house  of  the  Mayor
of  the  city,  and  paid  for  them  himself,  saying  they
might  pay  it  back  if  they  had  the  means,  otherwise
it  would  be  given  to  God.  "For'  (said  he),  "it
would  be  a  great  disgrace  to  us  if  such  honorable
and  learned  men  were  not  received  among  us  with
courtesy."  This  kind  Gentleman's  name  is  Nico-
las Adams,  Vice  admiral  of  Pembroke.

Now  during  this  sojourn  [296  i.e.,  298]  all  kinds  of
people  went  to  see  them,  and  some  from  a  great  dis-
tance, through  curiosity  to  see  Jesuits  dressed  in  their
robes,  as  they  were  then  and  always  have  been  until
their  return  to  France.  Ministers,  Justices,  Gentle-
men, and  others  came  to  confer  with  them;  even  a
Lord  of  the  great  Council  wished  to  have  the  pleas-
ure of  pitting  four  Ministers  against  them  in  debate.
I  say  Ministers,  to  make  myself  intelligible  to  the
French,  for  in  England  they  call  them  Priests.  And
the  Chief  one  in  the  debate  was  an  Archdeacon,  for
the  English  still  have  a  great  many  things  in  com-
mon with  the  Catholic  Church,  as  the  Order  of
the  Ecclesiastical  Hierarchy,  Archbishops,  Bishops,
Priests,  Archpriests,  Archdeacons,  Curates,  Canons,
etc. ;  the  Episcopal  laying  on  of  hands  in  the  ordination
of  Priests,  [297  i.e.,  299]  and  lesser  Orders,  and  in  the
confirmation  of  children;  the  Chrism  and  its  cere-
monies, the  sign  of  the  Cross,  the  Image  of  this  a  ad
of  other  things;  the  Psalmody  and  usual  form  of
worship,  the  prescribed  Saints'  days,  the  Vigils,
Fasts,  Lent,  Abstinence  from  meat  on  Friday  and
Saturday ;  Priestly  robes,  and  consecrated  vessels.
And  those  who  condemn  all  these  things,  as  the  Cal-


74  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

Caluiniftes  de  France  &  d'Efcoffe,  &  les  appellent
fivperftitions  damnables,  &  inuentions  de  l'Antechrift,
font  nommez  des  Anglois,  Puritains,  &  les  deteftent
comme  pefkes  execrables.

Or  en  fin,  refponfe  venant  de  Londres,  on  fceut,
que  Monfieur  l'Ambaffadeur  de  France  auoit  efte  ad-
tierty  de  l'arriuee  de  ce  nauire,  &  en  pourfuiuoit  la
reddition,  [298  i.e.,  300]  &  particulierement  des  Ie-
fuites,  ayant  eu  commandement  de  ce  faire  de  fa
Majefte  tres-Chreftienne.  Ce  fut  vn  autre  effect,  de
la  Prouidence  diuine,  lors  qu'elle  moyenna  ce  noflre
arreft,  en  la  Prouince  de  Galles,  a  celle  fin  qu'il  full
cogneu  de  tous :  car  nous  auons  de  grands  indices :  &
vous  en  verrez  tantoft  aucuns,  que  fi  les  Marchands,
qui  ont  furintendance  de  la  Virginie,  en  pouuoient
faire  a  leur  gre,  pas  vn  eftranger,  qui  auroit  efte  en
ladidte  Virginie,  ne  reuiendroit  iamais  en  fon  pays.

Pour  toft  finir  noftre  difcours,  notez  que  les  Iefuites
furent  conduits  par  vn  long  circuit  au  Port  de  San-
duidts ;  &  de  la  ramenez  a  Douure  par  le  commande-
ment du  Roy,  &  de  Douure  a  Calais,  oil  ils  rendirent
graces  a  Dieu  pour  tant  de  fignalez  benefices,  [299
i.e.,  301]  &  prouidence  fienne,  &  en  auoyent  bien
occafion,  ayants  demeure  neuf  mois  &  demy  entre
les  mains  des  Anglois.  Le  fieur  d'Arquien,  Gouuer-
neur  dudit  Calais,  &  Monfieur  la  Baulaye,  Doyen,
leur  firent  de  leur  grace  fort  bon  accueil,  &  leur  au-
mofnerent  affez  pour  fe  conduire  iufques  a  leur  Col-
lege d'Amiens.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616  75

vinists  of  France  and  of  Scotland  do,  and  call  them
damnable  superstitions,  and  inventions  of  the  Anti-
christ, are  by  the  English  called  Puritans,  and  are
detested  by  them  as  abominable  plagues.

When  at  last  an  answer  came  from  London,  it  was
learned  that  the  Ambassador  of  France7  had  heard
about  the  arrival  of  this  ship,  and  was  negotiating  its
surrender,  [298  i.e.,  300]  especially  the  surrender  of
the  Jesuits,  having  had  orders  to  do  so  from  his  most
Christian  Majesty.  This  was  another  effect  of  divine
Providence,  since  it  caused  this  our  arrest  in  the
Province  of  Wales  to  the  end  that  it  might  be  known
to  all ;  for  we  have  strong  proofs,  and  you  will  soon  see
some  of  them,  that  if  the  Merchants  in  whose  hands
lay  the  administration  of  Virginia,  had  been  able  to
have  their  own  way,  not  one  foreigner  who  was  to  be
found  in  Virginia,  would  ever  have  returned  to  his
own  country.

To  finish  our  story  as  quickly  as  possible,  note  that
the  Jesuits  were  taken  by  a  long  roundabout  way  to
the  Harbor  of  Sanduicts  [Sandwich],  and  from  there
sent  to  Dover  by  order  of  the  King,  and  from  Dover
to  Calais,  where  they  rendered  thanks  to  God  for  such
signal  blessings  [299  i.e.,  301]  and  providences,  for
which  they  had  good  cause,  having  been  nine  months
and  a  half  in  the  hands  of  the  English.  Sieur  d'Ar-
quien,  Governor  of  Calais,  and  Monsieur  la  Baulaye,
Dean,  gave  them  a  very  warm  reception  and  provided
them  with  means  to  return  to  their  College  at  Amiens.


76  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE XXXIV. [i.e.,  xxxiii.]

LE RETOUR DU SIEUR DE LA MOTE, DU CAPITAINE

FLORY,  & DE QUELQUES  AUTRES. ET LA

REDDITION DU NAUIRE.

PEV  apres  cefte  deliurance  des  Iefuites,  Dieu  re-
cueillit  encores  par  fa  mifericorde,  quail  tout
le  refte  du  naufrage  en  cefte  fagon.

Le  gargon  qui  eftoit  auec  les  Iefuites,  appelle  Guil-
laume  Crito,  [300  i.e.,  302]  fut  conduit  a  Londres,  &
de  la  renuoye  a  fon  Pere  a  Honfleur.

Sur  ce  mefme  temps  le  fieur  de  la  Mote  reuint
auffi  en  Angleterre  dans  vn  vaiffeau  de  la  Bermude,
qui  auoit  paffe  par  la  Virginie.

Le  Capitaine  Argal  combatit  genereufement  contre
le  Marefchal  Thomas  Deel  (que  vous  auez  ouy  eitre
fort  afpre  en  fes  humeurs)  a  fin  d'obtenir  de  luy  per-
miffion  du  retour,  pour  ledit  fieur  de  la  Mote,  &  l'ob-
tint  en  fin.

Or  ledict  fieur  la  Mote  fut  fort  eftonne,  que  fubite-
ment  eitant  arriue  en  Angleterre,  perfonne  ne  luy
parloit  plus,  perfonne  ne  le  voyoit,  il  eftoit  delaiffe
de  tous ;  &  le  pis  eft,  que  fur  ce  il  tomba  malade  dans
le  nauire.  II  fe  foupgonna  incontinent  du  danger  oil
il  eftoit,  &  d'ou  il  venoit:  fgauoir  eft,  des  marchands
de  la  Virginie,  [301  i.e.,  303]  qui  euffent  defire  fe
deffaire  de  luy,  &  ne  fgauoyent  comment.  II  tafcha
done  par  fubtilite,  &  en  trouua  le  moyen,  de  faire
fgauoir  de  fes  nouuelles  a  Monfieur  de  Biffeaux,  digne
Ambaffadeur  de  fa  Majeite  tres-Chreftienne,  qui  auffi


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  77


CHAPTER XXXIV. [i.e.,  xxxiii.]

THE RETURN OF SIEUR DE LA MOTE, OF CAPTAIN
FLORY AND OTHERS, AND THE SUR-
RENDER  OF THE SHIP.

SHORTLY  after  this  liberation  of  the  Jesuits,  God
in  his  mercy  rescued  nearly  all  the  others  who
had  been  shipwrecked,  and  in  the  following
way.

The  boy  who  was  with  the  Jesuits,  called  Guil-
laume  Crito,  [300  i.e.,  302]  was  taken  to  London  and
thence  sent  to  his  Father  at  Honfleur.

At  the  same  time  sieur  de  la  Mote  also  returned  to
England  in  a  vessel  from  the  Bermudas,  which  had
stopped  at  Virginia.

Captain  Argal  generously  contended  with  Marshal
Thomas  Deel 4  (of  whose  great  asperity  of  temper
you  have  heard  us  speak)  to  obtain  from  him  permis-
sion for  sieur  de  la  Mote  to  return,  and  at  last  it  was
granted.

Now  this  sieur  la  Mote  was  very  much  astonished
when  suddenly,  on  arriving  in  England,  no  one
spoke  to  him  any  more,  nor  looked  at  him,  and  he
found  himself  forsaken  by  all ;  and  the  worst  of  it
was  that  he  was  taken  sick  on  board  the  ship.  He
immediately  suspected  the  nature  of  the  danger  which
threatened  him,  and  whence  it  came ;  namely,  from
the  Virginia  merchants,  [301  i.e.,  303]  who  would
have  liked  to  get  rid  of  him,  and  did  not  know  how.
Therefore  he  tried  by  secret  means,  and  finally  sue-


78  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

toft  luy  manda  deux  Gentilshommes,  &  le  fit  deli-
urer,  &  bien  traicter,  ainfi  qu'il  meritoit  pour  fon
courage,  &  valeur.

En  ce  mefme  temps  auffi  Madame  la  Marquife  de
Guercheuille  enuoya  la  Sauffaye  a  Londres,  a  celle
fin  de  folliciter  la  reddition  du  nauire,  &  la  reparation
des  torts  receus  par  vn  vol  tant  inique.  Le  nauire  a
efte  rendu,  mais  on  n'a  rien  obtenu  d'auantage
iufques  a  maintenant.

Or  ainfi  que  noftre  nauire  ayat  mainleuee  prenoit
ja  le  vol  en  France,  pais  de  fon  origine :  voicy,  que
le  Capitaine  Flory  fon  Maiftre  [302  i.e.,  304]  arriua
comme  a  poind:  nomme,  pour  entrer  dedans,  &  y
commander.

Le  Capitaine  Argal  s'en  reuenant  en  Angleterre
l'auoit  encores  arrache  des  mains  du  Marefchal,  &
luy,  &  deux  autres  Francois.  Certes  ledit  Argal
s'eft  monftre  tel,  que  nous  auons  occafion  de  luy  fou-
haitter,  qu'il  ferue  d'ores-en-auant  vne  meilleure
caufe,  &  ou  fa  nobleffe  de  cceur  puiffe  paroiftre,  non
a  la  perte,  ains  a  la  manutention  des  gens  de  bien.

De  tout  noftre  nombre,  trois  font  morts  a  la  Vir-
ginie,  &  quatre  y  reftet  encores,  a  la  deliurance  def-
quels  on  trauaille  autant  que  faire  fe  peut.  Dieu
par  fa  mifericorde  leur  donne  patience,  &  tire  de
noftre  affliction  le  bien  que  fa  prouidence,  &  bonte
aggreent. Ainfi  foit-il.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  79

ceeded  in  having  his  story  made  known  to  Monsieur
de  Bisseaux,  worthy  Ambassador  of  his  most  Chris-
tian Majesty,  who  immediately  sent  to  him  two  Gen-
tlemen who  had  him  liberated  and  well  treated,  as
he  deserved  to  be  for  his  courage  and  his  valor.

At  the  same  time  also  Madame  la  Marquise  de
Guercheville  sent  la  Saussaye  to  London,  to  request
the  surrender  of  the  ship,  and  reparation  for  the
wrongs  involved  in  this  iniquitous  robbery.  The
ship  has  been  given  up,  but,  up  to  the  present,  noth-
ing else  has  been  obtained.

And  now,  just  as  our  ship,  having  been  set  free,
was  about  to  wing  her  way  to  France,  her  native  land,
behold,  Captain  Flory,  her  Master,  [302  i.e.,  304]  as
if  by  appointment,  arrives  upon  the  scene  to  step  in
and  take  command  of  her.

Captain  Argal,  about  to  return  to  England,  had
rescued  him  and  two  other  Frenchmen  from  the
hands  of  the  Marshal.  Certainly  this  Argal  has
shown  himself  such  a  person  that  we  have  reason  to
wish  for  him  that,  from  now  on,  he  may  serve  a  bet-
ter cause  and  one  in  which  his  nobility  of  heart  may
appear,  not  in  the  ruin,  but  in  the  preservation  of
honest  men.

Of  all  our  number,  three  died  in  Virginia,  and
four  still  remain  there,  for  whose  liberation  every-
thing possible  is  being  done.  May  God  in  his  mercy
give  them  patience,  and  may  he  derive  from  our
affliction  whatever  good  is  acceptable  to  his  provi-
dence and  mercy. Amen.


80  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE XXXV. [i.e.,  xxxiv.]

[303  i.e.,  305]  QUEL PROFIT  A  ESTE  FAICT  QUANT  A  LA
RELIGION  CHRESTIENNE  EN  LA  NOUUELLE  FRANCE.

MAINTENANT  quelqu'vn  ayant  ouy  tout  noftre
recit  a  bon  droidt  nous  dira:  Or  fus,  voila
beaucoup  de  trauaux,  que  vous  nous  auez
conte,  plufieurs  entreprinfes  loiiables,  &  diuers  acci-
dents bien  fauuages;  Mais  quoy?  Eft-ce  la  tout  le
profit  quant  a  rauancement  du  culte  de  Dieu?  N'a-
uez-vous  couru  que  pour  ainfi  vous  laffer?  defpendu
que  pour  confumer,  paty  fmon  pour  encores  par  deffus
en  eftre  diffamez  en  France?  Car  fi  Canada  ne  rend
point  autre  reuenu,  nous  vous  dirons,  qu'aucun,  s'il
n'eft  fol,  ne  trauaille  pour  feulement  patir;  [304  i.e.,
306]  &  ne  defpend  pour  feulemet  s'efpuifer.  Ains  a
tres-bie  dit  le  faindt  Apoflre,  Que,  qui  laboure,  c' 'eft  en
efperance  de  recueillir  du  fruicl.  Quel  fruidt  doncques
nous  apportez-vous  de  vos  trauaux.

A  ce1a  ie  ref ponds  que  par  tout,  &  auffi  bien  en
France,  qu'en  Canada,  il  faut  femer  auant  que  moyf-
{ onner,  &  planter  auant  que  recueillir,  &  ne  point  tant
eftre  ou  auare,  ou  impatient,  qu'on  vueille,  comme
les  vfuriers,  auffi  toft  le  profit  que  le  preft.  Combie
que  certes  au  feruice  de  Dieu  il  n'y  auroit  que  def-
penfes,  &  trauaux,  elles  ont  de  foy-mefme  affez
grand  emolument,  &  falaire ;  non  ja  pour  eftre  def-
penfes  &  trauaux,  ains  pour  eftre  preuues,  &  exer-
cices  de  noftre  deuoir,  &  pieufe  volonte  enuers  noftre


1616-29]  BJARD'S  RELATION,  1616  81


CHAPTER  XXXV. [i.e.,  xxxiv.]

[303  i.e.,  305] WHAT PROGRESS THE CHRISTIAN RE-
LIGION HAS  MADE IN NEW FRANCE.

NOW  some  one,  having  heard  all  our  story,  with
good  reason  will  say :  ' '  Come  now,  here  is  a
gfreat  deal  of  labor  you  have  told  us  about,
several  laudable  enterprises,  and  various  rough  and
violent  accidents,  but  is  this  all  the  profit  there  is  in
the  advancement  of  the  worship  of  God?  Have  you
run,  only  to  thus  wear}'  yourselves?  expended,  only
for  the  sake  of  consuming?  endured  suffering,  only
to  be  abused  for  it  in  France?  For  if  Canada  does
not  furnish  any  other  revenue,  we  can  tell  you  that
no  one,  unless  he  be  a  fool,  works  simply  for  the
sake  of  suffering,  [304  i.e.,  306]  or  expends  only
to  exhaust  himself.  But  very  truly  says  the  holy
Apostle,  That  he  who  planteth  Jiopctk  to  gather  fruit.
What  fruit  then  do  you  bring  us  from  your  labors  ? '
To  this  I  answer,  that  everywhere,  in  France  as
well  as  in  Canada,  it  is  necessary  to  sow  before  reap-
ing, and  to  plant  before  gathering,  and  not  to  be  so
avaricious  or  impatient  as  to  wish,  like  usurers,  the
profit  at  the  same  time  as  the  loan.  How  true  it  is
that,  in  the  service  of  God,  there  should  be  nothing
but  expense  and  labor,  these  of  themselves  being  a
great  enough  reward  and  salary ;  not  because  they
are  expenses  and  labors,  but  because  they  are  proofs
and  exercises  of  our  duty  and  pious  willingness  to-
wards the  liberal  donor  of  all  gifts,  our  all-powerful


82  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

liberal  donateur  de  toutes  chofes  noftre  Dieu  tout-
puiffant.  Car  il  [305  i.e.,  307]  ne  poife  pas,  ny  n'ef-
time  nos  confeils,  &  deffeins  a  la  balance  &  au  poids
des  euenements,  qui  font  en  fa  main,  &  ordonnance ;
ains  a.  la  folidite  de  noflre  vouloir,  a  la  maffiuete  de
l'entreprinfe,  a  l'integrite  de  la  deuotion,  &  delibera-
tion.

II  difpofe  les  euenements  comme  il  luy  plaift,  les
rendant  fouuent  plus  heureux,  &  plus  frudtueux,  que
moins  on  les  recognoit  pour  tels.  Car  celuy,  qui
plantc  n  eft  ricn,  ny  celui  qui  arroufc ;  ains  celui,  qui
domic  accroiffement ;  lequel  accroiffement  fe  fait  pre-
mierement  foubs  terre,  &  hors  la  veiie  des  hommes.

Quantamoy,  i'eftime  vn  tres-grand  profit  en  ce  que
nous  auos  toufiours  mieux,  &  mieux  defcouuert  le
nature  1  de  ces  terres,  &  pais:  la  difpofition  des  habi-
tans:  le  moyen  de  les  pouuoir  ayder:  [306  i.e.,  308]
les  contrarietez,  qui  peuuent  furuenir  au  progrez  de
l'oeuure:  &  les  fecours,  qu'il  faut  oppofer  a  l'ennemy.
L/architedte  qui  fait,  &  deffaidt  fes  plans  &  modeles
iufques  a  la  cinq,  &  fixiefme  fois,  ne  fe  penfe  pas  pour
cela  n'auoir  rien  faidt  en  fon  premier,  &  fecond  effay,
lefquels  il  aura  deffaits  pour  s'arreiter.  au  fixiefme ;
Parce  que,  dira-il,  ce  dernier  n'a  fa  perfedtio,  que  de
l'imperfectio  des  premiers.  De  mefme  en  eft-il  de
l'orateur,  qui  efface  &  raye  deux,  &  trois  fois  ce  qu'il
auoit  efcrit  de  premiere  ardeur,  parce  que  la  beaute,
&  force  des  concepts,  &  paroles,  qu'il  fubftitue  pour
la  quatriefme  fois,  luy  naift  de  la  reiedtion,  &  du  def-
plaifir  des  precedentes.  Auffi  de  vray,  ce  n'eft  pas
autrement,  que  Dieu  nous  donne  pour  l'ordinaire  la
prudence,  &  l'ameliorement  des  chofes;  finon  [307
i.e.,  309]  par  diuerfes  experiences,  &  pour  la  plufpart


161W-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  83

God.  For  he  [305  i.e.,  307]  does  not  weigh  nor  judge
our  counsels  and  designs  in  the  balance  and  by  the
weight  of  the  results,  which  are  in  his  hand  and  or-
dinance ;  but  by  the  firmness  of  our  desire,  the  great-
ness of  the  enterprise,  and  the  honesty  of  our  devo-
tion and  purpose.

He  arranges  events  as  it  pleases  him,  often  render-
ing them  the  more  happy  and  the  more  fruitful,  the
less  one  recognizes  them  as  such.  For  he  that  plant  -
etk  is  nothing,  nor  he  that  watereth  ;  but  lie  who  giveth
the  increase  ;  and  this  increase  is  first  made  under  the
ground,  and  out  of  the  sight  of  men.

For  my  part,  I  consider  it  a  great  advantage  that  we
have  learned  more  and  more  about  the  nature  of  these
territories  and  lands,  the  character  of  the  inhabitants,
the  means  of  helping  them,  [306  i.e.,  308]  the  ob-
stacles which  are  liable  to  arise  against  the  progress  of
the  work,  and  the  help  that  must  be  given  to  oppose
the  enemv.  The  architect  who  makes  and  unmakes
his  plans  and  models  even  to  the  fifth  and  sixth  time,
does  not  think,  for  all  that,  that  he  has  not  accom-
plished anything  in  his  first  and  second  trials,  which
he  has  destroyed  to  stop  at  the  sixth ;  for  he  will  say
that  the  perfection  of  the  last,  lies  only  in  the  imper-
fections of  the  first.  It  is  thus  also  with  the  orator,
who  erases  and  scratches  out  twice  and  three  times
what  he  has  written  in  his  first  enthusiasm,  because
the  beauty  and  force  of  the  ideas  and  words,  which
he  substitutes  for  the  fourth  time,  come  to  him  from
his  rejection  of,  and  dissatisfaction  with,  the  preced-
ing ones.  So,  in  truth,  it  is  not  otherwise  that  God
usually  gives  us  prudence  and  the  better  management
of  things,  only  [307  i.e.,  309]  through  various  experi-
ences, and  for  the  most  part  through  our  own  faults


84  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

de  nos  fautes  &  de  celles  d'autruy.  Nous  auons  done
vne  partie  de  nos  pretenilons,  nous  auons  experi-
menter nous  fcauos  ce  qu'il  faut,  &  ce  qui  nuit:  &  ou
gift  le  poind:  principal  de  l'affaire.  Les  moyens,
qu'on  a  employe  n'ont  point  efte  fi  grands,  ne  fi  pro-
portionnez  a  plus  haute  fin,  qu'il  faille  nous  beaucoup
mefcotenter  de  ce  que  Dieu  nous  done.

Mais  encores  d'autre  cofte  e'eit  vn  grand  fruidt,
que  la  confiance  &  amitie  que  les  Sauuages  ont  prinfe
auecques  les  Francois,  par  la  grande  familiarite,  &
hantife,  qu'ils  ont  eu  auec  eux.  Car  toufiours  faut-il
mettre  cefte  bafe  auant  que  d'efleuer  le  chapiteau;
fcauoir  eft,  de  les  nous  rendre  ou  citoyens,  ou  bons
holies,  &  amis  auant  que  de  les  auoir  pour  freres.
Or  cefte  confiance,  &  cefte  [308  i.e.,  310]  priuaute
eft  ja  fi  grande,  que  nous  viuons  entr'eux  auec
moins  de  crainte,  que  nous  ne  ferions  dans  Paris.
Car  dans  Paris  nous  n'oferions  dormir,  que  la  porte
bien  verrouillee;  mais  la  nous  ne  la  fermons  que
contre  le  vent,  &  fi  n'en  dormons  pas  pour  cela
moins  affeurez.  An  commencement  ils  nous  fuyoiet,
&  craignoyent:  ores  ils  nous  defiret.  A  noftre  pre-
miere defcente,  &  vifite  de  S.  Sauueur,  nous  fifmes
femblant,  que  la  place  ne  nous  agreoyt  pas,  &  que
voulions  aller  autrepart,  ces  bonnes  gents  du  lieu  en
pleuroyent,  &  lamentoyent.  Au  contraire,  le  Saga-
mo  de  Kadefquit,  appelle  Betfabes,  s'en  vint  pour
nous  y  attirer  auec  mille  promeffes,  ayant  ouy  que
nous  pretendios  de  nous  y  aller  loger.  Eft-ce  peu
que  d' auoir  ce  fi  bon  fondement  de  Iuftice  en  nos  peu-
plades,  &  ce  tant  [309  i.e.,  311]  affeure  gage  de  bon
fuccez?  Et  ne  faut  point  eftimer  que  les  autres  Na-
tions ayent  porte  cefte amitie  auffi  bien  que  nous.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELA  TION,  tbi6  85

and  those  of  others.  We  have  done,  then,  a  part  of
what  we  intended  to  do ;  we  have  experimented,  we
know  what  is  necessary  and  what  is  harmful,  and
wherein  lies  the  principal  part  of  the  work.  The
means  which  have  been  employed  have  not  been
so  great,  nor  so  proportioned  to  a  higher  purpose,
that  we  should  be  greatly  dissatisfied  with  what  God
gives  us.

But  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  a  great  result  that
the  French  have  won  the  confidence  and  friendliness
of  the  Savages,  through  the  great  familiarity  and  fre-
quent intercourse  which  they  have  had  with  them.
For  the  foundation  must  always  be  laid  before  raising
the  capital;  that  is,  we  must  make  them  citizens,  or
good  hosts  and  friends,  before  making  them  brothers.
Now  this  confidence  and  this  [308  i.e.,  310]  intimacy
is  already  so  great  that  we  live  among  them  with  less
fear  than  we  would  in  Paris.  For  in  Paris  we  can
not  sleep  without  having  the  doors  well  bolted ;  but
there  we  close  them  against  the  wind  only,  and
sleep  no  less  securely  for  keeping  them  open.  At
first  they  fled  from  us,  and  feared  us ;  now  they  wish
us  with  them.  When  we  first  disembarked  and
visited  St.  Sauveur,  and  pretended  that  we  did  not
like  the  place,  and  that  we  thought  of  going  else-
where, these  simple  natives  wept  and  lamented.
On  the  other  hand,  the  Sagamore  of  Kadesquit,
called  "Betsabes,"8  came  to  persuade  us,  with  a  thou-
sand promises,  to  go  to  his  place,  having  heard  that
we  had  some  intention  of  making  a  settlement
there.  Is  it  a  small  thing  to  have  such  a  founda-
tion of  Justice  in  our  colonies,  and  this  so  [309  i.e.,
31  ]  )  sure  pledge  of  great  success?  And  we  must
not conclude that other nations have borne this


86  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

Car  nous  fommes  tefmoins  oculaires,  comme  lefdicts
Sauuages  ayants  rencontre  vn  auantage  (a  leur  aduis)
contre  les  Anglois,  fe  ruerent  fur  eux  furieufement,
penfants  comme  ie  croy  tirer  quelque  reuenche  de
l'iniure,  qui  nous  auoit  efte  faidle:  mais  le  bon-heur
ne  les  feconda  pas  en  leur  attaque.  Pareillement,
fur  la  fin  de  l'an  1611.  les  Holandois  voulans  feule-
ment  defcendre  au  Cap  de  la  Heue,  pour  y  faire
aiguade,  nos  Sauuages  les  affaillirent  brufquement,
&  en  defirent  fix,  entre  lef quels  eftoit  le  Capitaine
du  nauire.  II  me  femble,  que  nous  ferons  indignes
de  celte  bienvueillance,  fi  nous  ne  faifons,  qu'elle  leur
profite  a  aymer  celuy,  de  qui  nous  [310  i.e.,  312]  re-
ceuons  tous  nos  biens.

Outre  plus,  quoy  que  les  Iefuites  n'ayent  pas  bap-
tife  communement  les  adultes  pour  les  raifons  cy-
deuant  deduites:  fi  les  ont-ils  catechife  tant  qu'ils  ont
peu,  &  par  les  yeux,  &  par  les  oreilles.  Par  les  yeux,
dy-ie,  leur  faifant  voir  nos  vs  &  ceremonies,  &  les  y
accouftumants.  En  nos  Proceffions  nous  faifios  aller
les  petits  enfans  au  deuat  de  la  Croix,  &  faire  quelque
feruice,  comme  de  porter  les  luminaires,  ou  autres
ehofes;  &  tant  eux  que  leurs  peres  y  prenoyent  du
plaifir,  comme  s'ils  euffent  efte  vrayement  Chreftiens.
Dieu  mercy  cela  eft  ja  communement  gaigne,  qu'ils
ne  veulent  point  mourir  fans  baptefme,  fe  croyans
eftre  miferables  a  iamais,  s'ils  trefpaffent  fans  iceluy,
ou  du  moins,  fans  vne  forte  volonte  d' iceluy,  &  fans
douleur  de  leurs  pechez.

[311  i.e.,  313]  Le  Patriarehe  Flefche  (comme  a
efte  dit)  en  auoit  baptife  peut  eftre  quatre  vingts,  les
Iefuites  feulemet  vne  vingtaine,  &  iceux  petits  enfans,
hormis  trois,  qui  ont  efte  baptif^s  en  extreme  necefilte


1616-29]  WARD'S  RELATION,  1616  .87

friendship  as  well  as  we,  for  we  are  eyewitnesses
to  the  fact  that  these  Savages,  having  (as  they  sup-
posed,) some  advantage  over  the  English,  threw  them-
selves upon  them  with  fury,  thinking,  I  believe,  to
get  revenge  for  the  injury  that  had  been  done  us;
but  they  were  not  successful  in  their  attack.  Like-
wise, towards  the  end  of  the  year  161 1,  the  Holland-
ers merely  wishing  to  land  at  Cap  de  la  Heve  to
take  in  some  fresh  water,  our  Savages  assailed  them
fiercely,  and  made  away  with  six  of  them,  among
whom  was  the  Captain  of  the  ship.  It  seems  to  me
that  we  will  be  unworthy  of  this  friendliness,  if  we
do  not  so  act  that  it  may  avail  them  in  learning  to
love  him,  from  whom  we  [310  i.e.,  312]  receive  all
our  blessings.

Furthermore,  although  the  Jesuits  have  not  usual-
ly baptized  adults,  for  the  reasons  heretofore  stated,
yet  they  have  catechized  them  as  well  as  they  could,
both  through  the  eyes  and  the  ears.  Through  the
eyes,  I  say,  making  them  see  our  usages  and  cere-
monies and  accustoming  them  thereto.  In  our  Pro-
cessions we  had  the  little  children  march  before  the
Cross,  and  perform  some  service,  such  as  carrying
the  lights,  or  other  things;  and  both  they  and  their
fathers  take  pleasure  in  this,  as  if  they  were  really
Christians.  Thank  God  this  much  has  already  been
accomplished,  that  they  do  not  wish  to  die  without
baptism,  believing  that  they  will  be  forever  miser-
able, if  they  pass  away  without  it,  or  at  least  a  strong
desire  for  it,  and  without  sorrow  for  their  sins.

[311  i.e.,  313]  The  Patriarch  Flesche  (as  has  been
.said)  baptized  perhaps  eighty  of  them,  the  Jesuits  only
about  twenty,  and  these  were  little  children,  except
three,  who  were  baptized  in  the  last  extremity  of  sick-


88  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

de  maladie,  &  font  alles  iouir  de  la  vie  bien-heureufe,
apres  auoir  efle  regeneres  a  icelle,  comme  auffi  aucus
des  petits  en  fans.  Nous  auions  compofe  noftre  Cate-
chifme  en  Sauuageois,  &  commencions  aucunement  a
pouuoir  iargonner  auec  nos  Catechumenes.  Nous
dreffions  vne  nouuelle  peuplade  fort  commode:  c'ef-
toit  noftre  Automne,  noftre  temps  des  fruidts:  &
voila  que  fur  ce  poinct.  l'enuieux  de  tout  bien,  &  fpe-
cialement,  du  falut  humain  eft  venu  de  malice  a
mettre  le  feu  a  nos  trauaux,  &  nous  emporter  hors
du  champ.  Le  vidtorieux  Iefus  de  fa  puiffante  main :
&  inuincible  [312  i.e.,  314]  fapience  le  confonde.
Ainfi  foit-il.


1616-29]  PHARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  89

ness,  and  thence  have  gone  to  enjoy  a  life  of  bliss,
after  having  been  born  again  in  this  life ;  as  have  also
some  of  the  little  children.  We  had  composed  our
Catechism  in  the  Savage  language,  and  had  begun
to  be  able  to  talk  some  kind  of  a  jargon  with  our
Catechumens.  We  were  founding  a  new  and  very-
pleasant  colony,  it  was  our  Autumn,  our  time  of
harvest.  And  lo,  at  this  moment,  the  one  who  is  jeal-
ous of  all  good,  and  particularly  of  human  salvation,
came  and,  wickedly  setting  fire  to  all  our  work,  bore
us  away  from  the  field.  May  the  victorious  Jesus,
with  his  powerful  hand,  and  invincible  [312  i.e.,  314]
wisdom,  confound  him. Amen.


90  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESU1TES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE  XXXVI. [i.e.,  xxxv.]

AUCUNES MERUEILLES, QUE DIEU A OPERE EN LA
GUERISON DES SAUUAGES.

MAIS  comme  Dieu  appelle  cefte  nation  de  Sau-
uages  par  fa  mifericorde,  &  douceur  conue-
nablement  a  leur  portee,  &  neceffites,  ainfi  luy
a-il  pleu  fe  monftrer  a  eux  benin  &  fecourable.  Ie
vous  remarqueray  icy  trois  de  ces  marques  bien  eui-
dentes,  &  certaines,  faidtes  en  la  guerifon  des  mala-
dies corporelles.

La  premiere  foit  ceile-cy.  Le  P.  Biard  eftant  alle
a  la  riuiere  de  l'Eplan  (ainfi  qu'a  efte  dit  cy-deffus,)
on  luy  dit,  qu'£  deux  lieiies  [313  i.e.,  315]  de  la  en
la  Baye  S.  Marie  y  auoit  vne  femme  proche  de  la
mort,  laquelle  defiroit  fort  de  le  voir,  &  luy  parler.
Le  Pere  pria  vn  certain  nomme  la  Pierre,  de  l'y  con-
duire:  ce  qu'il  fit.  lis  treuuerent  cefte  femme  felon
la  coultume  de  leurs  malades,  eftendue  au  long  du
feu,  &  trauaillee  de  mal  defpuis  trois  fepmaines.  Le
Pere  la  Catechife  du  mieux  qu'il  peut,  &  l'encourage,
faifant  quelques  prieres,  puis  s'en  reuint,  luy  laiffant
vne  croix  pendue  au  col,  par  ce  qu'il  ne  reftima  point
eftre  fi  bas,  qu'il  la  falluft  baptifer,  feulement  il  ad-
uertit  les  affiftants,  que  h  elle  continuoit  en  maladie
trois  ou  quatre  iours,  ou  qu'elle  empiraft,  qu'o  le  vint
appeller.  II  n'en  fut  pas  de  befoin:  car  le  iour  fui-
uant  laditte  femme  fe  leua  faine,  &  gaillarde,  &  s'en
alia  trouuer  fon  mary  chargee  d'vn  pefant  fac,  &  fa


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6j6  91


CHAPTER XXXVI. [i.e.,  xxxv.]

SOME MIRACLES WHICH GOD PERFORMED IN THE
CURE OF THE SAVAGES.

BUT  as  God,  being  merciful  and  gentle,  calls  this
nation  of  Savages  according  to  their  capacity
and  needs,  so  he  has  been  pleased  to  show
himself  kind  and  helpful  to  them.  I  shall  call  to
your  attention  here  three  proofs  of  this,  very  evident
and  sure,  which  were  shown  in  the  cure  of  bodily  ills.
Let  the  first  be  this  one.  Father  Biard  having
gone  to  the  river  of  Smelts9  (as  has  been  said  before),
was  told,  that  two  leagues  [313  i.e.,  315]  from  there  at
the  Baye  Ste.  Marie,  there  was  a  woman  very  near
death,  who  had  a  strong  desire  to  see  and  speak  with
him.  The  Father  begged  a  certain  man  named
Pierre  to  accompany  him  thither,  which  he  did.
They  found  this  woman,  who  had  been  afflicted  by
disease  for  three  weeks,  stretched  out  by  the  fire,
according  to  the  custom  of  their  sick  people.  The
Father  Catechized  her  as  well  as  he  could,  and  en-
couraged her,  offering  some  prayers;  then  he  re-
turned, leaving  a  cross  hanging  around  her  neck,
for  he  did  not  consider  her  so  low  that  it  was  neces-
sary to  baptize  her;  he  only  advised  those  present
that  if  she  continued  ill  three  or  four  days,  or  if  she
became  worse,  they  should  summon  him.  There  was
no  need,  for  the  next  day  this  woman  arose  healthy
and  happy,  and,  laden  with  a  heavy  bag,  went  to
find  her  husband  four  leagues  away,  with  her  cross


i>2  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

croix  au  [314  i.e.,  316]  col;  iufques  a  quatre  lieiies
de  la.  Celuy  qui  premier  la  vit  fut  vn  huguenot  de
Dieppe,  appelle  lea  Bachelard,  qui  en  vint  porter  les
nouuelles  au  fufdit  Iefuite.

La  feconde  fut  a  Pentegoet :  le  Pere  Biard  y  eftant
en  la  compagnie  du  Sieur  de  Biencourt,  &  felon  fa
couftume  vifitant  les  malades  du  lieu,  &  recitant  fur
eux  les  faindts  Euangiles,  on  luy  en  monftra  vn,  du-
quel  on  n'attendoit  plus  vie,  malade  defpuis  trois
mois.  II  eftoit  pour  lors  en  vn  fort  accez,  ne  parlant
qu'a  grande  peine,  &  fuant  d'vne  fueur  froide,  pre-
fage  de  la  mort.  Le  Iefuite  luy  fit  baifer  par  plu-
fieurs  fois  vne  croix,  qu'il  luy  attacha  au  col,  luy  an-
noncant  le  mieux  qu'il  pouuoit  les  bonnes  nouuelles
du  falut  acquis  en  icelle ;  il  y  auoit  bonne  compagnie
de  Sauuages,  qui  efcoutoyent,  &  a  leur  contenance
monitroyent  [315  i.e.,  317]  grand  contentement  en
ce  qui  f e  difoit :  le  Pere  les  laiffa  ainfi  bien  aff ection-
nes,  &  s'en  reuint  a  la  barque.  Or  ce  que  Dieu  fit
en  fon  abfence  apparoit,  de  ce  que  nous  vifmes  vn
iour  apres.  Car  le  Sieur  de  Biencourt  faifant  la
trocque  en  fa  barque,  ce  Sauuage  y  vint  auec  les
autres,  fain,  &  gaillard  portant  fa  croix  en  parade,  &
fit  recognoiffance  au  Pere  Biard  deuant  tous  auec
grande  ioye.

La  tierce  eft  bien  fignalee,  &  partant  ie  la  deduiray
au  long.  Comme  nous  auons  raconte  cy-deuant  le
Sieur  de  la  Mote,  Simon  l'interprete,  &  le  Pere  Biard
efloyent  alles  vifiter  le  lieu  de  S.  Sauueur,  pour  re-
cognoiftre  s'il  feroit  bon  pour  leur  demeure.  Or  re-
uenants  de  cefte  vifite,  &  rctournants  aux  Cabannes
des  Sauuages,  ils  ouyrent  de  bien  loin,  deux  ou  trois
f ois  vn  grand,  &  [316  i.e.,  318]  lamentable  hurlement,


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  93-

hanging  around  her  [314  i.e.,  316]  neck.  The  one
who  first  saw  her  was  a  huguenot  of  Dieppe,  called
Jean  Bachelard,  who  came  to  bring  the  news  to  the
Jesuit.

The  second  was  at  Pentegoet ;  Father  Biard  being
there  in  company  with  Sieur  de  Biencourt,  and,  ac-
cording to  his  custom,  visiting  the  sick  people  of  the
place,  and  reciting  over  them  passages  from  the  holy
Gospels,  they  showed  him  a  certain  one  who  was  not
expected  to  live,  having  been  sick  for  three  months.
He  was  then  having  a  violent  attack,  speaking  only
with  great  difficulty,  and  bathed  in  a  cold  perspira-
tion, the  forerunner  of  death.  The  Jesuit  had  him
kiss  a  cross  several  times,  which  he  attached  to  his
neck,  announcing  as  well  as  he  could  the  good  tidings
of  the  salvation  acquired  thereby ;  there  were  a  num-
ber of  Savages  present,  who  listened,  and,  by  their
countenances,  showed  [315  i.e.,  317]  great  satisfaction
in  what  was  being  said.  The  Father  left  them  thus
kindly  disposed,  and  returned  to  the  barque.  Now
what  God  did  in  his  absence  was  apparent  from  what
we  saw  a  day  later.  For  when  Sieur  de  Biencourt
was  trading  in  his  barque,  this  Savage,  with  several
others,  came  there  healthy  and  happy,  parading  his
cross,  and,  with  great  demonstrations  of  joy,  ex-
pressed his  gratitude  to  Father  Biard  before  them
all.

The  third  is  very  remarkable,  and  therefore  I  shall
tell  it  at  length.  As  we  have  related  above,  Sieur  de
la  Mote,  Simon  the  interpreter,  and  Father  Biard  had
gone  to  visit  the  place  called  St.  Sauveur,  to  find  out
whether  it  would  be  suitable  for  a  settlement.  Now
coming  back  from  this  visit,  and  returning  to  the
Cabins  of  the  Savages,  they  heard  two  or  three  times


•94  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  4

&  demandans  au  Sauuage,  qui  les  conduifoit,  qu'eft-ce
que  cela  pourroit  eftre:  le  Sauuage  leur  refpondit:
que  quelqu'vn  eftoit  mort:  &  que  e'en  eftoit  les
plaintes,  qui  fut  caufe,  que  nous  ne  nous  en  mifmes
point  en  efmoy.  Or  comme  nous  eftions  ja  fort  a  la
portee  de  la  voix,  voicy  que  ce  mugiffement  s'entend
<le  nouueau ;  &  de  fortune  vn  ieune  gar90.11  Sauuage
fe  rencontrant  fur  le  chemin,  la  curiofite  pouffa  le  P.
Biard  a  luy  demander,  qui  eftoit  ce  mort,  que  Ton
lamentoit?  Le  gar9on  refpondit,  que  ce  n'eftoit  pas
vn  mort,  ains  vn  mourant :  &  adioufte  de  foy-mefme :
court  vifte,  a  laduenture  le  pourras-tu  baptifer  auant
qu'il  meure  tout  a  faidt;  lors  comme  fi  Dieu  l'euit  dit
de  fa  bouche,  nous  nous  mifmes  a  courir  de  tout
noftre  poffible.  Arriues,  nous  [317  i.e.,  319]  trouuaf-
mes  tous  les  Sauuages  hors  de  leurs  Cabannes  ranges
en  haye  comme  des  foldarts  en  vne  perte  de  ville,  au
milieu  fe  promenoit  vn  miferable  Pere  tenant  fon  en-
fant, qui  fe  mouroit  entre  fes  bras.  Or  quand  l'en-
fant  venoit  a  ietter  des  fanglots  croyant  qu'il  vouloit
rendre  l'Ame,  le  Pere  fe  prenoit  a  hurler  pitoyable-
ment,  &  toute  la  compagnie  le  fuiuoit  de  mefme  ton ;
car  telle  eft  leur  couftume.  Doncques  le  P.  Biard
voyant  ce  fpe<5tacle,  s'adreffa  au  defconforte  Pere,  &
luy  demanda  s'il  luy  plairoit  bien,  qu'il  baptifaft  fon
fils:  le  bon  homme,  qui  eftoit  prefque  hors  de  foy,
ne  luy  refpondit  rien  de  parole ;  mais  en  effect,  il  luy
mit  fon  enfant  entre  les  bras.  Le  P.  cria  que  toft
Ion  apportaft  de  l'eau,  ce  qu'on  fit,  &  remettant  l'en-
fant  entre  les  mains  du  Sieur  de  la  Mote  (qui  de  grand
[318  i.e.,  320]  zele  defiroit  d'en  eftre  parrain,  le
baptifa,  l'appellant  Nicolas,  du  nom  dudidt  Sieur.
Les Sauuages attendants quelque grand effect, fe


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  95

cries  and  [316  i.e.,  318]  lamentations  in  the  distance,
and,  asking  the  Savage  who  guided  them  what  this
might  mean,  he  answered  that  some  one  was  dead
and  this  was  the  mourning ;  hence  we  did  not  hasten
our  footsteps.  Now  as  we  were  already  within  easy-
hearing  distance  of  the  voice,  lo,  this  howling  begins
anew;  and,  by  chance,  a  young  Savage  boy  being
met  upon  the  way,  curiosity  impelled  Father  Biard
to  ask  him  who  this  dead  person  was  that  was  being
mourned.  The  boy  answered  that  no  one  was  dead,
but  that  some  one  was  dying,  and  added,  of  his  own
accord,  "Run  fast,  perhaps  you  can  baptize  him  be-
fore he  really  dies;"  then,  as  if  God  had  said  this
with  his  own  lips,  we  began  to  run  with  all  our
might.  When  we  arrived  we  [317  i.e.,  319]  found  all
the  Savages  outside  their  Huts,  drawn  up  in  line  like
soldiers  on  the  surrender  of  a  city ;  in  front  of  them
walked  an  unhappy  Father  holding  his  child,  who
was  dying,  in  his  arms.  Now  when  the  child  hap-
pened to  sob,  the  Father,  supposing  that  its  Life  was
departing,  began  to  groan  pitifully ;  and  the  whole
company  followed  him  in  the  same  tone,  for  such  is
their  custom.10  Accordingly,  when  Father  Biard  saw
this  spectacle,  he  addressed  the  disconsolate  Father,
and  asked  him  if  he  would  be  glad  to  have  his  son
baptized ;  the  poor  simple  fellow,  who  was  almost
beside  himself,  answered  him  not  a  word,  but  put
the  child  in  his  arms.  The  Father  cried  that  they
should  bring  him  some  water  immediately,  which  was
done,  and  putting  the  child  in  the  arms  of  Sieur  de
la  Mote  (who  was  very  [318  i.e.,  320]  zealous  to  be
its  godfather,  baptized  him,  calling  him  Nicolas,
the  name  of  the  said  Sieur.  The  Savages,  expecting
some  great  results,  crowded  round  to  see  what  would


96  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

prefferent  pour  voir  ce  qu'en  aduiendroit.  Or  le  P.
Biard  apres  auoir  recite  quelques  oraifons  a  ce  qu'il
pleuft  a  Dieu  d'illuminer  ces  pauures  Payens,  print
le  baptife  des  mains  du  Sieur  de  la  Mote,  &  le  donna
a  fa  mere,  qui  eftoit  la,  qui  comme  Mere,  prefenta  in-
continent le  tetin  a  fon  fils,  lequel  teta  de  bon  appetit.
Quand  les  Sauuages  virent  ainfi  cet  enfant  pendu  aux
mamelles  de  fa  mere;  fi  la  terre  euft  fondu  deffous
leurs  pieds,  ie  ne  fcay  s'ils  euffent  efte  plus  eftonnes.
lis  demeuroyent  la  fixes,  &  immobiles,  fans  fonner
mot  comme  des  Engeles.  Le  Pere  leur  dit  quelques
paroles  d' edification,  puis  leur  fignifia  de  fe  retirer  en
leurs  Cabanes.  Et  fcauez  [319  i.e.,  321]  vous  s'il
fut  obey?  Ces  bonnes  gens  le  regardoient  lors
comme  s'il  euft  efte  plus  qu'homme,  tremblants  de-
uant  luy,  auec  demonftration  d'eftre  grandement  tou-
chez  de  Dieu.  Ceft  enfant  eftoit  encores  fain  &  dif-
pos  vn  mois  apres  cefte  fienne  guerifon,  pen  auant
noftre  prinfe  par  les  Anglois:  car  fa  mere  l'apporta  a
nos  tentes,  &  fut  veu  de  la  plufpart  de  nos  gens.
Voyla  comme  Dieu  ne  laiffe  point  fa  loy  fans  authen-
tique  tefmoignage  ;  ny  fa  bonte  fans  admirables
effedts.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616  97

happen.  Now  Father  Biard,  after  having  recited
some  prayers  to  the  effect  that  God  might  be  pleased
to  enlighten  these  poor  Heathen,  took  the  baptized
child  from  the  hands  of  Sieur  de  la  Mote,  and  gave
him  to  his  mother,  who  was  there;  she,  as  Mother,
immediately  offered  the  child  the  breast,  and  he  re-
ceived nourishment  with  great  eagerness.  When  the
Savages  saw  this  child  thus  hanging  upon  the  mother's
breasts,  if  the  earth  had  sunk  beneath  their  feet,  I
do  not  think  they  could  have  been  more  astonished.
They  remained  there,  fixed  and  immovable,  without
saying  a  word,  and  as  if  Frozen.  The  Father  uttered
a  few  words  of  instruction  to  them  and  then  motioned
to  them  to  return  to  their  Cabins.  Do  you  [319  i.e.,
32 1  ]  know  whether  he  was  obeyed  or  not?  These  good
people  looked  upon  him  as  though  he  were  more
than  man,  trembling  before  him,  and  seeming  to
have  been  strongly  touched  by  God.  This  child  was
still  healthy  and  active  a  month  after  this,  its  recov-
ery, a  little  while  before  we  were  taken  by  the  Eng-
lish ;  for  the  mother  brought  him  to  our  tents,  and
was  seen  by  the  greater  part  of  our  people.  See  now
that  God  does  not  leave  his  law  without  authentic
testimonies,  nor  his  goodness  without  admirable  re-
sults.


98  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE XXXVII. [i.e.,  xxxvi.]

LES RAISONS DES FRANgOIS, PAR LESQUELLES ILS
S'APPROPRIENT A BON DROICT  LES  TERRES  DE
LA NOUUELLE FRANCE,  CONTRE LA PRE-
TENSION DES ANGLOIS.

MAINTENANT,  que  i'ay  fatisfaict  aux  deux
premieres  [320  i.e.,  322]  parties  de  ma  pro-
meffe,  fgauoir  eft,  que  i'ay  faidt  ma  Relation
du  naturel  des  terres  &  des  habitans  de  la  nouuelle
France:  &  vous  ay  raconte  les  comportemes  des  Ie-
fuites,  &  les  accidents,  qui  leur  y  font  furuenus;
Refle  la  tierce,  d'expofer  en  quoy  confifte  la  difpute,
qui  eft  ores  furuenue  entre  les  Francois,  &  Anglois,
touchant  ces  contrees,  &  les  raifons  de  l'vn  &  de
l'autre  party.  Car  le  curieux  Ledteur,  a  mon  aduis,
fera  bien  aife,  d'entendre  en  quoy  gift  ce  poind:  coten-
tieux:  &  les  raifons  qu'on  apporte  de  part  &  d' autre;
mefmes  que  cela  appartient  a  l'honneur  des  Francois,
de  faire  cognoiftre  a  toutes  nations  a  combien  iuftes
tiltres,  pertinentes  raifons,  &  fyncere  confcience,  nos
Roys  fe  font  faits  Maiftres,  &  ont  poffede"  ces  terres
iufques  a  ce  temps.

[321  i.e.,  323]  II  faut  doncques  fgauoir  tout  pre-
mierement,  que  les  Anglois  ne  nous  difputent  point
toute  la  nouuelle  France;  Car  ils  n'ofent  nous  denier,
ce  que  tout  le  monde  nous  accorde ;  ains  f eulement
ils  conteftent  des  confins.  Ils  nous  accordent  donc-
ques vne  nouuelle  France,  mais  limitee  par  les  bords


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  99


CHAPTER XXXVII. [i.e.,  xxxvi.]

THE REASONS  WHY  THE  FRENCH  HAVE APPROPRIATED

BY GOOD RIGHT THE LANDS OF NEW FRANCE,

AGAINST THE PRETENSIONS OF

THE ENGLISH.

NOW  as  I  have  fulfilled  the  first  two  [320  i.e.,  322]
parts  of  my  promise,  that  is,  I  have  given  an
Account  of  the  character  of  the  lands  and  the  in-
habitants of  new  France,  and  have  described  to  you
the  conduct  of  the  Jesuits,  and  the  adventures  that
befell  them ;  there  remains  then  the  third  topic :  the
explanation  of  the  dispute  that  has  now  arisen  be-
tween the  French  and  English  in  regard  to  these
countries,  and  the  arguments  for  and  against  both
sides.  For  the  curious  Reader,  I  believe,  will  be
glad  to  learn  just  what  the  point  of  contention  is,
and  the  arguments  which  are  advanced  by  both  par-
ties ;  it  is  even  due  to  the  honor  of  the  French  people,
to  make  known  to  all  nations  how  just  are  the  titles,
how  suitable  the  reasons,  and  in  what  sincerity  of
conscience  our  Kings  have  made  themselves  Masters,
and  have  taken  possession  of  these  lands  up  to  the
present.

[321  i.e.,  323]  Accordingly  it  must  be  understood
that  the  English  do  not  dispute  with  us  all  of  new
France.  For  they  dare  not  refuse  what  everybody
grants  us,  but  they  only  contest  some  of  the  bounda-
ries. They  grant  us  then  a  new  France,  but  bound


100  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

du  Golfe,  &  grande  riuiere  de  fainct  Laurens,  &  nous
reftreignent  dans  les  47.  48.  &  49.  degres  d'eleuatio
polaire.  Du  moins  ils  ne  nous  permettent  pas  de  def-
cendre  plus  bas  vers  le  midy,  que  du  quarantefixiefme
degre ;  s'attribuans  tout  ce  qui  eft  des  la  Floride,  &
le  33.  degre  iufques  a  Campfeau,  &  les  Lies  de  Cap
Breton.

Les  fondements  de  cefte  leur  pretenfion  font  parce
que  enuiron  l'an  1694.  il  y  a  vingt  deux  ans,  eftants
entrez  dans  ce  grand  fein  [322  i.e.,  324]  de  la  mer
Americane,  que  les  Anciens  appelloyent  de  Mocofa.
&  y  ayants  trouue  vne  riuiere,  &  pais,  qui  leur  agrea:
ils  commencerent  a  le  vouloir  habiter,  luy  impofants
le  nom  de  Virginie :  mais  ayants  efle  contrariez  par
les  naturels,  &  autres  accidents  leur  eftoyent  arriuez,
ils  furet  en  fin  contraints  de  le  quitter  entierement,
n'y  ayants  pas  demeure  plus  de  deux,  ou  trois  ans.
Neantmoins  defpuis  le  Sereniffime  Roy  Iacques  a  pre-
fent  regnant,  venu  a  la  couronne,  ils  ont  prins  refo-
lution  de  le  reconquefter,  &  cultiuer.  A  quoy  ledit
Roy  fauorifant,  a  bailie  des  grands  Priuileges  a  ceux,
qui  entreprenoyent  cefte  peuplade,  &  entre  autres  a
eftendu  le  droidt  de  leur  tenue  des  le  33.  degre  d'ele-
uation  iufques  au  45.  leur  donnat  puiffance  de  courir
fus  a  tous  eftrangers,  qu'ils  trouueroyet  dans  [323
i.e.,  325]  ce  deftroi(5t  de  terre,  &  cinquante  mille
auant  dedans  la  mer.  Ces  lettres  du  Roy  on  efte  ex-
pediees  l'an  quatriefme  de  fon  regne,  &  de  grace  1607.
le  10.  d'Auril,  il  y  a  fept  ans:  car  ie  defcry  cecy  l'an
1614.

Voyla  ce  que  i'en  ay  peu  apprendre  de  toutes  les
parchartes  &  enfeignements,  que  nos  contendants  ap-
portent  pour  fe  maintenir  en  droi<5t,  &  caufe;  &  nous


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616  101

it  by  the  shores  of  the  Gulf  and  great  river  saint
Lawrence,  and  restrict  us  within  the  47th,  48th,  and
49th  degrees  of  north  latitude.  At  least  they  do  not
allow  us  to  go  farther  south  than  the  forty-sixth  de-
gree, claiming  all  that  country  from  Florida  and  the
33rd  degree  up  to  Campseau  and  the  Islands  of  Cape
Breton.

The  reasons  for  these  their  pretensions  are,  that
about  the  year  1694  [sic],  twenty-two  years  ago,  hav-
ing entered  that  great  gulf  [322  i.e.,  324]  of  the  Amer-
ican sea  which  was  formerly  called  Mocosa,  and  there
having  found  a  river  and  country  which  pleased  them,
they  made  attempts  at  settlement,  giving  it  the  name
of  Virginia;  but,  having  been  opposed  by  the  na-
tives, and  other  accidents  having  overtaken  them,
they  were  at  last  obliged  to  give  it  up  entirely,  not
having  lived  there  more  than  two  or  three  years.
Nevertheless  since  the  Most  Serene  King  James,  now
reigning,  came  to  the  throne,  they  resolved  to  re-
conquer and  cultivate  it.  The  King,  favoring  this
project,  granted  some  important  Privileges  to  those
who  undertook  this  colony,  and,  among  other  things,
extended  their  right  of  occupation  from  the  33rd  de-
gree of  north  latitude  up  to  the  45th,  giving  them
power  to  attack  all  foreigners  whom  they  might  find
within  [323  i.e.,  325]  these  limits,  and  fifty  miles  out
into  the  sea.  These  patents  of  the  King  were  drawn
up  during  the  fourth  year  of  his  reign,  and  in  the
year  of  grace  1607  on  the  10th  of  April,  seven  years
ago,  for  I  am  writing  this  in  1614.11

So  that  is  what  I  have  been  able  to  learn  from  all
the  charters  and  instructions  which  our  contestants
bring  forth  to  support  them  in  their  rights  and
claims;  and,  while  we  are  being  confined  within  the


102  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

confiner  dans  le  deftroidt  de  la  vieille  Canada,  eux  fe
tenants  au  large,  &  a  f ranches  coudees,  nous  faifants
la  part  a  leur  bon  plaifir.  Voicy  ce  que  nous  leur
repartiffons  legalement.

i.  En  premier  lieu,  que  par  vne  prouidence  admi-
rable de  Dieu  leurs  propres  lettres  Royaux  fur  lef-
quelles  ils  fe  fondent,  les  defdifent  de  leur  preten-
tion: Parce  qu'il  eft  dit  expreffement  dans  [324  i.e.,
326]  icelles  auec  exception  fpecifique:  Nous  leur  don-
nons  toutcs  les  terres  iufques  au  4.5.  degre",  lefquelles  ne
font  point  aEluellement  poffedees  par  aucun  Prince  Chrcf-
tien.  Or  eft-il,  que  lors  de  la  datte  de  ces  lettres,  le
Roy  de  France  adtuellement  &  reellement  poffedoit
pour  le  moins  iufques  au  39.  degre  defdidtes  terres.
Tout  le  monde  le  f gait  par  les  voyages  de  Champlain :
car  il  confte  pariceux,  que  l'an  1607.  le  fieur  de  Mots
eftoit  a  port  Royal,  &  par  fes  gens,  &  au  thorite  gou-
uernoit  tout  iufques  au  39.  degre,  comme  Lieutenant
de  fa  Majefte  tres-Chreftienne.

2.  En  apres,  fi  les  Anglois  veulet  dire,  qu'ils  n'ont
pas  commence  de  poffeder  leur  Virginie  des  l'an
feulement  1607,  ains  des  l'an  1594.  qu'ils  la  trou-
uerent  (comme  nous  auons  dit :)  Nous  refpondos,  que
la  riuiere,  laquelle  ils  commencerent  [325  i.e.,  327]
lors  a  poffeder  eft  au  36.  degre,  &  que  cefte  leur  al-
legation a  l'auenture  pourroit  valoir,  s'il  n'eftoit
queftion,  que  de  retenir  cefte  didte  riuiere,  &  fept  ou
huidt  lieiies  de  l'vn,  &  l'autre  cofte  d'icelle:  car  au-
tant  loin  fe  peut  porter  noftre  veue  pour  1' ordinaire;
mais  que  fubitement  vn  vaiffeau  pour  entrer  dans  vn
fieuue  enjambe  par  dominatio  trente  fois  plus  loin,
qu'il  ne  peut  eftendre  fa  veue;  c'eft  vouloir  auoir  les
bras,  ou  pluftoft  la  conuoitife  bien  monftrueufe,  mais
pofons  que  cela  fe  puiffe  faire.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616  103

limits  of  old  Canada,  they  are  holding  themselves  at
large  with  plenty  of  elbow  room,  giving  tis  our  share
at  their  good  pleasure.  Now  this  is  how  we  would
answer  them  according  to  law :

1.  In  the  first  place,  as  by  an  admirable  providence
of  God,  their  own  Royal  patents,  upon  which  they
found  their  claims,  contradict  them  in  their  preten-
sions. Because  it  is  said  expressly  in  these,  [324 i.e.,
326]  with  specific  exception  :  We  give  them  all  the  lauds
up  to  the  45th  degree,  which  do  not  actually  belong  to  any
Christian  Prince.  Now  it  happens  that  at  the  time  of
the  date  of  these  letters,  the  King  of  France  actually
and  really  possessed  the  said  lands  at  least  up  to  the
39th  degree.  Every  one  knows  this  through  the
voyages  of  Champlain,  for  he  relates  in  these  that,
in  the  year  1607,  sieur  de  Monts  was  at  port  Royal,
and,  through  his  people  and  authority,  ruled  all  the
country  to  the  39th  degree  as  Lieutenant  of  his  most
Christian  Majesty.

2.  Again,  if  the  English  wish  to  say  that  they  did
not  begin  to  take  possession  of  their  Virginia  from
the  year  1607  only,  but  from  the  year  1 594,  when  they
discovered  it  (as  we  have  said),  we  answer  that  the
river,  which  they  began  [325  i.e.,  327]  then  to  possess
[the  James  riverj,  is  in  latitude  36  degrees,  and  that
this  their  claim  might  perchance  be  of  some  value,
if  it  were  only  a  question  of  retaining  this  said  river,
and  seven  or  eight  leagues  on  either  side  of  it,  for
our  eyes  can  generally  reach  as  far  as  that ;  but  that
a  ship,  merely  because  it  had  entered  a  river,  should
claim  dominion  thirty  times  farther  than  the  eye  can
reach  —  this  is  wishing  to  have  arms,  or  rather  greedi-
ness, indeed  monstrous.  But  let  us  suppose  it  could
be  done.


104  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

II  s'enfuiura  done,  que  Ribaud  &  Laudoniere  eftans
allez  a  la  Floride  en  tres-bel  arroy,  par  authorite  du
Roy  Charles  IX.  l'an  1564.  1565.  &  1566.  pour  culti-
uer  le  pais ;  &  y  ayant  edifie  la  Caroline  au  30.  degre
d'eleuation:  ils  prindrent  poffeffion  iufques  au  38.  &
[326  i.e.,  328]  39.  degre,  &  par  ainfi  voila  les  An-
glois  hors  de  leur  Virginie,  fuiuat  leurs  propres  max-
imes.

3.  Quoy  que,  fi  pour  eftre  en  vn  lieu,  Ion  poffede
auffi  toft  (felon  la  prefuppofition  des  Anglois)  huidt
ou  neuf  degrez  plus  auant;  Pourquoy  eft-ce,  qu'eux
eftants  au  36.  auanceront  pluftoft  iufques  au  45.  que
nous  (comme  ils  confeffent)  eftans  ja  au  46.  ne  def-
cendrons  iufques  au  37.  Quel  droidt  y  ont-ils  plus
que  nous?  Voila  done  ce  que  nous  refpondons  aux
Anglois.

4.  Mais  pour  mieux  declarer  le  fonds  de  noftre
iuftice;  il  faut  fe  reffouuenir  de  ce  que  nous  auons
monftre  cy-deuant;  fcauoir  eft,  que  fa  Majefte  tres-
Chreftienne  a  prins  poffeffion  de  ces  terres,  auant
tout  autre  Prince  Chreftie,  par  droidt  d'inuention
premiere.  Car  il  eft  affeure,  &  confeffe  de  [327  i.e.,
329]  tous,  que  les  Bretons  &  Normads  trouuerent
premierement  le  grad  Banq,  &  les  Terres  Neufues,
rangeants  la  cofte  iufques  au  Cap  de  Sable,  qui  eft.
au  43.  degre,  iufques  ou  le  grand  Banq  s'eftend.
Cefte  inuention  fut  faidte  l'an  1504.  il  y  ja  cent  &
dix  ans.

5.  D'auantage  tous  confeffent,  que  par  le  com-
mandement  du  grad  Roy  Francois  lean  Verazan  print
poffeffion  de  cefdidtes  terres  au  nom  de  la  France;
commencant  des  le 33. degre  d'eleuation  iufques  au


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616  105

It  will  follow,  then,  that  Ribaud  and  Laudoni-
ere,12  —  having  gone  to  Florida  in  fine  array  by  the
authority  of  King  Charles  IX.,  in  the  years  1564,
1565,  and  1566,  to  cultivate  the  land,  and  there  hav-
ing extended  Carolina  to  the  30th  parallel  of  north
latitude, —  took  possession  as  far  as  the  38th  and  [326
i.e.,  328]  39th  parallels;  and  so  behold  the  English
out  of  their  Virginia  according  to  their  own  maxims.

3.  Yet  if  being  in  a  place  gives  possession  (as  the
English  presuppose)  of  eight  or  nine  degrees  farther
on,  why  is  it  that  they,  being  at  the  36th,  can  advance
to  the  45th,  better  than  we  (as  they  acknowledge)
being  at  the  46th,  can  go  down  to  the  37th?  What
greater  rights  have  they  than  we?  So  thus  we  an-
swer the  English.

4.  But  to  better  declare  the  justice  of  our  cause,
what  we  have  explained  above  must  be  recalled;
namely,  that  his  most  Christian  Majesty  took  pos-
session of  these  lands  before  any  other  Christian
Prince,  by  right  of  first  discovery.  For  it  is  true,
and  is  acknowledged  by  [327  i.e.,  329]  all,  that  the
Bretons  and  Normans  first  discovered  the  great  Bank,
and  Newfoundland,  sailing  along  the  coast  to  Cape
Sable,  which  is  in  the  43rd  degree,  up  to  where  the
great  Bank  extends.  This  discovery  was  made  in  the
year  1 504,  one  hundred  and  ten  years  ago.

5.  Furthermore,  all  acknowledge  that,  by  the  com-
mand of  the  great  King  Francis,  Jean  Verazan  took
possession  of  these  countries  in  the  name  of  France,
beginning  at  the  33rd  degree  of  north  latitude  up  to
the  47th.  This  was  done  in  two  voyages,  the  last
of  which  was  made  in  the  year  1523,  ninety  years
ago.

6.  In  addition  to  this,  Jacques  Cartier 18  first  en-
tered the  great  river  in  two  voyages  that  he  made,


106  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

47. Ce  fut  par  deux  voyages  def quels  le  dernier  fut
faidt  l'an  1523.  il  y  a  quatre  vingts  &  dix  ans.

6.  Outre  plus,  Iacques  Cartier  entra  premier  dans
la  grande  riuiere  par  deux  voyages,  qu'il  y  fut,  &
defcouurit  les  terres  de  Canada.  Son  dernier  voyage
fut  l'an  1534.  Done  e'eft  merueille  [328  i.e.,  330]
que  les  Anglois  nous  accordent  les  terres  de  la  def-
couuerture  de  Iacques  Cartier,  nous  voulants  oiler  le
45.  degre:  car  il  eft  affeure,  que  cefte  defcouuerture
eft  de  beaucoup  pofterieure  aux  autres  cy-deuant
didtes  des  parties  plus  meridionales.  Et  la  grande
riuiere  eft  tellement  fituee,  que  la  poffeffion  de  fes
terres  eft  prefque  inutile  a  qui  ne  tiet  du  moins  iuf-
ques  au  40.  degre. Qu'on  regarde  la  charte.

7.  Auffi  eft-ce  merueille  comme  lefdidts  Anglois
difent  nous  accorder  les  Terres  Neufues,  &  cepen-
dant  ils  y  font  allez  habiter  defpuis  quatre  ans,  enui-
ron  le  48.  ou  49.  degre.

8.  Or  eft-ce  le  commun  confentement  de  toute
1' Europe,  que  de  depeindre  la  nouuelle  France,  l'ef-
tendant  au  moins  iufques  au  38.  ou  39.  degre,  ainfi
qu'il  appert  [329  i.e.,  331]  par  les  mappemondes,
imprimees  en  Efpagne,  Italie,  Holande,  Allemagne,
&  Angleterre  mefme.  Ce  font  auffi  les  Francois,  qui
en  ont  faidt  defcription,  ont  impofe  les  noms,  ont  ap-
priuoifez  les  Sauuages,  ont  trocque,  &  toufiours  con-
uerfe  auec  eux  des  la  premiere  inuention  iufques  a
ce  temps,  &  non  point  autres.  Et  ce  fut  au  quarante
troifiefme  degre,  que  le  Marquis  de  la  Roche  s'alla
loger,  dreffant  fa  peuplade  l'an  1598.  Et  defpuis  l'an
1603.  le  fieur  de  Mots  receut  en  don  toutes  ces  terres
des  le  40.  degre  iufques  au  46.  de  feu  d'heureufe  me-
moire  Henry  le  Grand,  lequel  auffi  declara  par  lettres
expreffes,  que  rien  de  ce  qu'on  apportoit  de  la,  ou


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  ibib  107

and  discovered  the  lands  of  Canada.  His  last  voyage
was  in  the  year  1534.  Now  it  is  a  wonder  [328  i.e.,
330]  that  the  English  grant  us  the  lands  of  Jacques
Cartier's  discovery,  wishing  as  they  do  to  deprive  us
of  the  45th  degree;  for  it  is  very  certain  that  this
discovery  dates  back  much  farther  than  the  others
heretofore  cited  of  the  more  southern  parts.  And
the  great  river  is  so  situated  that  the  possession  of
these  lands  is  almost  useless  to  any  one  who  does  not
possess  at  least  as  far  as  the  40th  degree.  Look  at
the  map.

7.  Also  it  is  wonderful  how  these  English  say  they
have  granted  us  Newfoundland,  and  nevertheless
went  there  to  live  four  years  ago,  near  the  48th  or
49th  degree.14

8.  Now,  by  the  common  consent  of  all  Europe,  new
France  is  represented  as  extending  at  least  as  far  as
the  38th  or  39th  degree,  as  it  appears  [329  i.e.,  331]  on
the  maps  of  the  world  printed  in  Spain,  Italy,  Hol-
land, Germany,  and  England  itself.15  Also,  it  is  the
French,  and  not  others,  who  have  made  a  description
of  it,  have  given  it  its  names,  have  tamed  the  Sav-
ages, have  traded  and  always  had  communication
with  them  from  the  first  discovery  up  to  the  present
time.  And  it  was  in  the  forty-third  degree  that  the
Marquis  de  la  Roche  went  to  settle,  establishing  his
colony  in  the  year  1598.13  And,  since  the  year  1603,
sieur  de  Monts  received  as  a  gift  all  the  lands  from
the  40th  degree  to  the  46th  degree,  from  the  late
Henry  the  Great,  of  happy  memory,  who  also  de-
clared by  express  letters,  that  nothing  which  was
brought  away  from  there,  or  taken  there,  was  liable
to  foreign  custom  duty,  as  that  country  was  a  just  part
and  legitimate  outgrowth  of  this  Kingdom,  and  in
no  wise  a  foreign  one.


108  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.4

qu'on  y  emportoit  ne  dettoit  traidte  foraine,  comme
eftant  ce  pais  vne  partie  iufte,  &  legitime  accreiie  a
ce  Royaume,  &  nullemet  eftragere.

[330  i.e.,  332]  9  Et  certes,  outre  les  raifons  appor-
tees,  requite  naturelle  fauorife  a  cefte  declaration;
parce  que  ces  terres  la  font  paralleles  a  noftre  France,
&  non  point  a  1'Angleterre.  Elles  font  dy-ie  tout
d'vne  tenue  auecques  nous:  de  maniere,  qu'ayant
efte  trouuees  vaquates  par  nous  au  dela  de  noftre
riuage;  elles  accroiffent  a  noftre  heritage,  ainfi  que
la  loy  des  Alluuions  en  determine,  ff.  acq.  rer.  domin.
I.  29.  inter  multos.  &  I.  30.  Ergo.

10.  En  effedt,  feu  Monfieur  le  Comte  de  SoyfTons
fut  pourueu  du  gouuernement  defdites  contrees,  &
en  a  porte  le  tiltre  de  fon  viuant;  &  auiourd'huy
Monfieur  le  Prince  met  cefte  la  au  rang  de  fes  autres
prerogatiues,  &  principaux  honneurs.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  109

[330  i.e.,  332]  9.  And  surely,  in  addition  to  the  rea-
sons here  given,  common  justice  favors  this  declara-
tion ;  for  those  lands  are  parallel  to  our  France,  and  not
to  England.  They  are,  I  say,  contiguous  with  us,  so
that  having  been  found  unoccupied  by  us  and  beyond
our  shores  they  accrue  to  our  inheritance,  as  the  law
of  Alluvions  determines,  ff.  acq.  rer.  domin.  I.  29.  inter
multos.  &  I.  30.  Ergo.™

10.  Finally  the  late  Comte  de  Soyssons  was  in-
vested with  the  government  of  the  said  countries,17  and
bore  the  title  to  it  in  his  lifetime;  and  to-day  the
Prince  places  this  in  the  rank  of  his  other  preroga-
tives and  principal  honors.18


110  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


CHAPITRE  XXXVIII. [i.e.,  xxxvii.]

[331  i.e.,  333] RAISONS  POUR  LESQUELLES  ON  DEUROIT

ENTREPRENDRE A BON ESCIENT LE CULTI-

UAGE DE LA NOUUELLE FRANCE.

ICY  deuant  que  finir,  ie  fuis  contraindt  de  cotter  au-
cunes  raifons  qui  m'efmeuuent  l'ame,  quand  ie
confidere  comme  nous  delaiffons  cefte  pauure
nouuelle  Frace  en  frifche,  &  quant  au  temporel,  &
quant  au  fpirituel,  en  barbarie,  &  paganifme.  Ie
fcay  prou,  que  ie  profite  bie  plus  de  les  alleguer  aux
oreilles  de  noftre  Seigneur  par  feruente  priere;  que
de  les  marquer  aux  yeux  des  hommes  par  efcriture
morte.  Neantmoins  tant  plus  ardamment  ie  m'efcrie
deuat  Dieu  en  les  pefant,  tant  plus  ie  me  fens  [332
i.e.,  334]  preffe  a  les  fpecifier  aux  hommes,  les  efcri-
uant.

Et  premierement,  fi  Ion  confidere  le  temporel,  c'eft
vne  autre  France  en  influence,  &  condition  du  ciel,
&  des  elements:  en  eftendue  de  pays  dix  ou  douze
fois  plus  grande,  ft  nous  voulons:  en  qualite,  auffi.
bonne,  fi  elle  eft  cultiuee,  du  moins,  il  n'y  a  point
d'apparence  qu'elle  doiue  eftre  pire;  en  lituation;  a
l'autre  bord  de  noftre  riuage,  pour  nous  donner  la
fcience,  &  la  feigneurie  de  la  mer,  &  nauigage ;  ie  dy
mille  biens,  &  vtilitez.  En  vn  mot,  quad  ie  dy  vne
autre  France,  &  vne  autre  Efpagne  a  cultiuer.

2.  En  apres,  les  tentatiues,  que  nous  auons  ja  faidt
tant  de  fois  des  cent,  &  dix  ans,  nous  obligent  a  con-


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6/6  111


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. [i.e.,  xxxvii.]

[331 i.e., 333] REASONS WHY THE CULTIVATION OF

NEW FRANCE OUGHT TO BE UNDERTAKEN

IN EARNEST.

HERE,  before  finishing,  I  am  obliged  to  set  down
some  reasons  which  agitate  my  soul,  when  I
consider  how  we  are  letting  this  poor  new
France  lie  fallow,  both  as  to  the  temporal  and  the
spiritual,  in  savagery  and  paganism.  I  know  well
that  I  may  accomplish  much  more  by  advancing  these
reasons  to  the  ear  of  our  Lord  in  earnest  prayer,
than  by  presenting  them  to  the  eyes  of  men  in  cold
letters.  Nevertheless,  the  more  ardently  I  cry  to
God  in  considering  them,  so  much  the  more  I  feel
myself  [332  i.e.,  334]  urged  to  specify  them  to  men  in
writing.

And  first,  if  the  temporal  is  considered,  this  country
is  another  France  in  the  influences  and  conditions  of
the  heavens  and  of  the  elements ;  in  extent  of  country,
ten  or  twelve  times  larger,  if  you  wish;  in  quality,
as  good  if  it  be  cultivated,  at  least  there  is  no  reason
why  it  should  be  worse;  in  situation,  upon  the  shore
opposite  to  ours,  to  give  us  the  knowledge  and  mas-
tery of  the  sea,  and  of  navigation ;  I  say  there  are  a
thousand  blessings  and  advantages.  In  a  word,  as
it  were,  another  France  and  another  Spain  to  be  cul-
tivated.

2.  Next,  the  attempts  which  we  have  already  made
so  many  times  for  a  hundred  and  ten  years,  oblige  us


112  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

fiance;  fi  nous  ne  voulons  auec  la  mocquerie  des
eftrangers  perdre  encores  le  fruict.  de  [333  i.e.,  335]
tant  de  temps  confume,  &  des  pertes  de  tant  &
d'hommes,  &  de  biens,  qu'il  a  conuenu  faire  pour  ac-
querir  la  cognoiffance  de  ces  terres,  Coftes,  Golfes,  &
diuers  endroits,  laquelle  (Dieu  mercy)  nous  auons  ac-
quis auec  la  bienvueillance,  &  familiarite  du  peuple.
Peuple  debonnaire,  qui  nous  tend  les  mains  auec  vn
defir  incroyable,  &  vne  douleur  bien  grande  de  nous
y  voir  maftines;  non  pour  autre  raifon,  fmon  que  les
entreprinfes,  qui  ont  efte  faidtes  iufques  a  mainte-
nant,  ayant  efte  quafi  fouftenues  par  des  particuliers ;
il  n'eft  pas  de  merueille  s'ils  ont  fuccombe  au  faix,  &
aux  frais,  qu'vne  telle  ceuure  requiert.

3.  Que  fi  nous  nous  laffons,  011  languiffons,  nous
auons  deuant  les  yeux  prou  d'autres,  qui  nous  ont
monftre  d'auoir  courage.  Et  certes  en  cas  que  nous
n'y  faifions  [334  i.e.,  336]  noftre  deuoir,  il  n'y  a
point  de  raifon  d'empefcher  autruy.  Confiderons
done  fi  cela  nous  eft  fort  aduantageux  de  perdre  le
profit,  que  rapportent  de  ces  contrees  to9  les  ans  plus
de  cinq  ces  de  nos  nauires,  qui  y  vont,  foit  a  la
pefche  des  baleines,  foit  a  celle  des  monies  &  autres
poiffons,  foit  a  la  traidte,  de  la  pelleterie  des  Caftors,
Elans,  Martres,  Loups  marins,  Loutres,  &c.  Car  il  ne
faut  pas  attendre  d'y  auoir  part,  fi  d'autres  faififfent
le  domaine,  ainfi  qu'a  bien  declare  ces  annees  la  dif-
pute  arriuee  a.  Spitsbergen,  &  autrepart.

4.  Voila  pour  le  temporel:  mais  pour  le  fpirituel,
auquel  l'indicible,  grace  de  Dieu  nous  furhauife
iufques  au  furnom  &  gloire  de  tres-Chreftiens.  Cal-
culons  &  fupputons  les  benefices  qui  nous  accom-
paignent  &  obligent  [335  i.e.,  337]  inceffamment  en


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  113

to  continue,  unless  we  wish,  to  the  scorn  of  strangers,
to  yet  lose  the  fruit  of  [333  i.e.,  335]  so  much  time  con-
sumed, and  to  suffer  the  loss  both  of  so  many  men
and  so  much  wealth,  as  has  been  necessary  in  acquir-
ing a  knowledge  of  these  lands,  Coasts,  Gulfs  and
different  places,  which  (thank  God)  we  have  obtained,
as  well  as  the  good  will  and  intimacy  of  the  people, —
a  gentle  people,  who  extend  to  us  their  hands  with
an  incredible  longing,  and  with  a  profound  grief  to
.see  us  defeated, —  for  no  other  reason  than  that  the
enterprises  which  have  been  undertaken  up  to  the
present,  having  been  almost  entirely  sustained  by
private  individuals,  have  sunk  —  and  it  is  not  to  be
wondered  at  —  under  the  burden  and  the  expenses,
which  such  a  work  requires.

3.  If  we  give  up  or  become  indifferent,  we  have
before  our  eyes  many  others,  who  have  shown  us
that  they  have  courage.  And  certainly,  in  case  we
did  not  do  [334  i.e.,  336]  our  duty,  there  is  nothing  to
prevent  others  from  doing  theirs.  Now  let  us  consid-
er whether  it  is  very  advantageous  to  lose  the  profit,
which  is  brought  from  these  countries  every  year  by
more  than  five  hundred  of  our  ships,  which  go  there,
either  on  whaling  expeditions,  or  for  cod  and  other
fish,  or  for  trade  in  furs  of  the  Beaver,  Elk,  Marten,
Seal,  Otter,  etc.10  For  we  must  not  expect  to  have
any  share  in  this,  if  others  seize  the  property,  as  has
been  very  clearly  shown  during  these  years  by  the
disputes  which  occurred  at  Spitsbergen  and  else-
where.

4.  So  much  for  the  temporal ;  but  as  to  the  spirit-
ual, in  which  the  inexpressible  grace  of  God  raises
us  to  the  surname  and  glory  of  "most  Christian,"  let
us  calculate  and  sum  up  the  benefits  which  accom-


114  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  4

f trite  de  ce  premier  la  vocation  a  l'Eglife  Saindte  &
cognoiffance  de  noflre  Sauueur  Iefus- Christ;  &  lors
nous  pourrons  fommer  combien  grande  feroit  1' ingrati-
tude, &  combie  horrible  chaftiment  elle  porteroit  en-
croupe,  fi  nous  ne  tafchions  de  faire  prifer  cefte  grace,
la  communiquant  a  nos  proches  a.  la  proportion  de  nos
moyens,  &  redeuances.  Tel  chaftiment  a  efte  fage-
ment  remarque  par  le  venerable  Bede.  Car  quelque
peu  auant  fon  aage,  les  Efcoffois  furent  illuftres  de  di-
uine  lumiere,  a  ce  qu'ils  fe  recogneuffent  eftre  tombes
en  herefie  par  illufion,  &  mefgarde:  la  ou  les  Bretons,
ou  ceux  de  la  Prouince  de  Galles,  furent  precipites
en  1'abyfme,  &  tenebres  des  faux-bourgs  d'Enfer,  les
herefies,  defquels  deux  effedts  fi  contraires,  &  h  op-
pofes  ce  grand  Saindt,  [336  i.e.,  338]  &  cognoiffant
veritable  des  ceuures  de  la  prouidence,  &  Iuftice  Eter-
nelle ;  en  rapporte  les  cauf es  a  deux  difpofitions  di-
uerfes  de  l'vn,  &  l'autre  peuple.  Parce,  dit-il,  que
les  Efcoffois  auoyent  aumofne  aux  Anglois  aupara-
uant  par  grande  charite,  &  deuotion  ce  qu'ils  auoyent
receu  de  la  verite  Euangelique ;  &  partant  Dieu  leur
volut  faire  mifericorde  a  mefure  combie,  &  entaffee,
leur  ouurant  les  yeux,  pour  y  fe  voir  deceus,  &
trompes.  La  ou  les  Bretons,  foit  par  negligence,  foit
par  autre  intemperie  d'ame,  ne  s'eftoient  guieres  fou-
ciez  de  voir  lefdidts  Anglois  perir  miferablement  en
leur  infidelite ;  Et  partant  meriterent  come  feruiteurs
ingrats  de  perdre  le  talent  de  la  foy  Catholique,  lequel
ils  n'auoyent  daigne  mettre  a  profit,  &  d'autruy,  &
d'eux  mefmes.  O  que  [337  i.e.,  339]  de  chofes  nous
aurions  a  penfer,  &  dire  fur  ce  fujet.

Mais  foit  affez  d'auoir  au  deuant  de  nos  yeux  que
ces  pauures  peuples,  ces  images  de  noftre  Dieu  comme


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  115

pany  and  favor  us  [335  i.e.,  337]  continually  after  this
first  one,  which  is  our  calling  to  the  Holy  Church  and
knowledge  of  our  Savior,  Jesus  Christ ;  and  then  we
shall  be  able  to  estimate  how  great  would  be  our  in-
gratitude, and  how  horrible  the  chastisement  it  would
bring  with  it,  if  we  do  not  try  to  enhance  the  value
of  this  grace  by  communicating  it  to  our  fellow-men
in  proportion  to  our  means  and  opportunities.  Such
chastisement  has  been  wisely  commented  upon  by
the  venerable  Bede.  For,  shortly  before  his  age,  the
Scotch  were  illuminated  by  a  divine  light,  so  that  they
saw  themselves  fallen  into  heterodoxy  by  delusions
and  inadvertence;  while  the  Bretons,  or  those  people
of  the  Province  of  Wales,  were  cast  into  the  abyss
and  shadows  of  the  outskirts  of  Hell,  the  heresies;  of
these  two  so  contrary  and  opposite  effects  this  great
and  Saintly  Man,  [336  i.e.,  338]  so  truly  acquainted
with  the  works  of  providence  and  Eternal  Justice,  at-
tributes the  causes  to  the  two  different  dispositions
of  the  two  nations.  "For,"  says  he,  "the  Scotch
had  previously  given  to  the  English,  through  great
charity  and  devotion,  what  they  had  received  of
Evangelical  truth  ;  and  therefore  God  wished  to
show  them  mercy  in  a  full  and  overflowing  measure,
opening  their  eyes  that  they  might  see  themselves
deceived  and  mistaken.  While  the  Bretons,  either
through  negligence  or  other  lack  of  spiritual  modera-
tion, were  quite  indifferent  when  they  saw  the  Eng-
lish perishing  miserably  in  their  infidelity ;  therefore
they  deserved,  as  ungrateful  servants,  to  lose  the
talent  of  the  Catholic  faith,  which  they  had  not
deigned  to  profit  by,  either  for  others  or  for  them-
selves." Oh,  what  [337  i.e.,  339]  food  there  is  for
reflection  and  discourse  upon  this  subject!


116  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

nous,  &  capables  de  fa  iouyffance,  ces  conforts  de
noftre  efpece,  &  prefque  de  mefme  qualite  auec  nous,
font  fur  le  bord  de  1' horrible  gouffre  des  feux  infer-
naux,  voire  plufieurs  centaines  d'iceux  precipitez
chaque  iour  dans  les  peines  eternelles,  &  abyfmes  de
damnation,  fans  efpoir  de  deliurance.  O  Dieu!  nous
nous  eftonnons  de  ces  iugements  efpouuentables ;
comme  il  y  a  bien  dequoy  s'eftonner;  mais  nous  n'a-
uons  pas  le  fens  pour  apperceuoir,  ny  l'entendemet
pour  recognoiftre,  que  le  fang  de  cefte  fi  cruelle  exe-
quution  eft  deffus  nos  mains,  qui  ne  nous  euertuons
pas  de  l'empefcher:  deffus  nos  [338  i.e.,  340]  pieds,
qui  ne  nous  remuons  point  pour  y  remedier;  deffus
nos  maifons,  qui  les  baftiffons  tant  fuperbement,  fans
nous  foucier  de  l'eternelle  demeure  de  nos  freres;
deffus  nos  bourfes,  nos  poffeffios,  nos  moyens,  &
noftre  coeur  qui  fommes  fi  peu  efmeus  de  tels  fpec-
tacles  &  contribuons  fi  peu,  la  011  le  Fils  de  Dieu,
noftre  Sauueur,  n'a  point  efpargne  fa  vie.  Plaife
luy  nous  faire  mifericorde,  &  receuoir  de  nous,  &  de
toute  creature  loiiange,  &  benediction,  a  tous  les
fiecles  des  fiecles. Ainfi  foit-il.

FIN.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  117

But  let  it  be  enough  to  keep  before  our  eyes  the
vision  of  these  poor  natives,  these  images  of  our  God
as  we  are,  and  as  capable  of  enjoying  him,  these
companions  of  our  own  species,  and  almost  of  the
same  quality  as  we,  who  are  upon  the  edge  of  the
horrible  gulf  of  the  fires  of  hell,  many  of  them  even
precipitated  every  day  into  eternal  torments,  and
profound  depths  of  everlasting  punishment,  without
hope  of  deliverance.  O  God!  we  are  amazed  at  these
frightful  judgments,  as  there  is  much  in  them  to
cause  our  amazement ;  but  we  have  not  the  sense  to
perceive,  nor  the  understanding  to  appreciate,  that
the  blood  of  this  so  cruel  execution  is  upon  our
hands,  who  do  not  exert  ourselves  to  prevent  it;
upon  our  [338  i.e.,  340]  feet,  which  do  not  move  to
remedy  it ;  upon  our  houses,  which  we  build  so  mag-
nificently without  caring  for  the  eternal  dwellings
of  our  brothers ;  upon  our  purses,  our  possessions,  our
wealth,  and  our  hearts,  which  are  so  little  moved  by
such  spectacles  and  contribute  so  little  to  that  for
which  the  Son  of  God,  our  Savior,  did  not  spare
even  his  life.  May  it  please  him  to  grant  us  mercy,
and  to  receive  from  us  and  from  all  his  creatures,
praises  and  blessings  forever  and  ever. Amen.

END.


118  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4


Table  des  Choses  Plvs  Remarqvables.

ABSENCE  du  P.  Biard  occafidne  les  Francois
de  ne  s ' expofer  an  danger  de  fe  perdre. p.  178.
Acadie, pays des Souriquois, proche de

Canada.  .  .  .  p. 4.

Azores,  Isles  de  la  couronne  d '  Efpaigne. .  p.  281.

Aguigueou,  AJiicou, Betfabes  Capitaines  Canadois

ojfrent  aux  Francois  prins  par  V  Anglois,  de  les

retirer  &  entretenir. .  .  .  p. 35.

Alain  Yeon  Pilote  de  S.  Mala  charitable  enuers  les

Francois  de  S.  Sauucnr.  .  .  p.  257.

Atnbaffadeur  de  France  en  Anglelerrc,  follicite  la

liberie'  des  Iefuites  de  Canada  captifs.  p.  296.

Anglo  is  auancent  quatre  vingts  lieu'e's  fur  la  nou-

uelle  France.  .  .  .  p.  228.

Anglois  desfaicl par  V Armouchiquois ,  & ponrqnoy.  p.  179.
A  nglois  habitues  en  la  Virginic  a  deux  ecus  cinquante

licucs  des  Fra?icois  de  S.  Sauueur. .  p.  227.

Anglois  conduicls  a  S.  Sauueur  par  mcf garde  des

Cauadins,  qui  les  croyoyent  ejlre  Francois. p.  229.
Anglois  enuabiffent  le  nauire  des  Francois  de  S.

Sauueur, pillent F habitation, captiuent les

Francois.  .  .  .  .  p.  235.

Anglois  defrobe  finemoit  aux  Francois  leurs  lettres

Royaux,  pour  les  priuer  de  iujle  defenfe  en  leur

captiuite.  .  .  .  .  p.  238.

Anglois pouuant  letter  en  mcr  les  Iefuites  captifs,

pour  ne  fe  perdre  a  leur  occajion,  fe  contente

de  les  cacher.  p.  286.


161Q-29]  EURO'S  RELATION,  i6i6  119


Index  of  the  Most  Important  Subjects.

ABSENCE  of  Father  Biard  causes  the  French
not  to  expose  themselves  to  danger  of  ruin. p.  178

Acadia,  country  of  the  Souriquois,  near
Canada.  .  .  .  p- 4

Acores,  Islands  of  the  Spanish  crown.  .  p.  281

Aguigueou,  Asticou,  Betsabes,  Canadian  Captains,
offer  to  the  French,  captured  by  the  English,
to  take  them  away  and  maintain  them.  p. 35

Alain  Yeon,  Pilot  of  St.  Malo,  charitable  towards

the  French  of  St.  Sauveur. .  .  P-  2$7

Ambassador of France in England, solicits the

liberation  of  the  captive  Jesuits  of  Canada. p.  296

Advancement  of  the English eighty leagues into

new  France.  .  .  .  p.  22%

English  defeated  by  the  Armouchiquois,  and  why.  p.  179

English  settled  in  Virginia, two  hundred  leagues

from  the  French  of  St.  Sauveur.  .  p.  227

English  guided  to  St.  Sauveur  through  a  misunder-
standing of  the  Canadians,  who  supposed  them
to  be  French.  .  .  .  P-  229

English  invade  the  ship  of  the  French  of  St.  Sauveur,

plunder  the  settlement,  and  capture  the  French,  p.  235

English  cunningly  rob  the  French  of  their  Royal
patents,  to  prevent  their  making  an  honest  de-
fense in  their  captivity.  .  .  A  238

English,  having  power  to  throw  the  captive  Jesuits
into  the  sea,  not  to  ruin  themselves  on  their  ac-
count, content  themselves  with  hiding  them. p.  286


120  LES  RELATIONS  DES  f£SUITES  [Vol.4

Anglois  contraints  d ' aborder  aux  Acores,  font  ga-
rentis  par  la  charity  des  Icfuites  /airs  prifon-
niers.  p.  289.

Anglois  recognoiffans  du  bon  office  receu  des  Iefuites.  p.  290.

Anglois  tenant  captifs  les  Icfuites,  foupconne'  d ' eflre

pirate  par  les  fens  me fmes.  .  pag.  29

Anglois  foupconne  d' eflre  pirate,  fe  iuflifie  par  le

tefmoignage  des  Iefuites  fes prifonniers.  p.  293.

Anglois  appreliendent  d 'aborder  aux  tcrres  de  I'Ef-
pagnol,  aucc  des  Iefuites  captifs.

Anglois  n'ont  que pretendre  en  la  nouuelle  F K  ranee,  p.

Anguilles  fe pef client  en  my-Septcmbre.

Arbrcs  fruicliers  fort  rares  en  Canada.

Arbres  fore  fliers  de  Canada.

Arcs  & pauois  fur  la  tom.be  des  homines.

Ardoife  en  Canada.

Argal  Capita inc  Anglois  fe  faijit  fecrettement  des

commiffions  des  Francois  de  S.  Sauueur.  p.  238.

Argal  Capitaine  Anglois  veut  renuoyer  en  France
tons  les  Francois  dans  vnc  clialoupe,  auec  eui-
dent  danger  de  leur pertc, .  .  p.  251.

Argal  Capitaine  Anglois  s ' oppofe  fort  au  Maref
chal  de  la  Virginie,  a  ce  que  fes  prifonniers  les
Francois  ne  foyeut  peudus. .  .  p.  262.

Argal  Capitaine  Anglois  equitable.  .  p.  270.

Amies  des  Canadois.  I 'arc  &  la  targuc. .  p. 55-

Armoiries  de  Madame  de Giierche-ville  pofe'es  an

Cap  de  la  Heue,  en  figne  de  poffeffion.  p.  216.

Armouchiquois  bailie nt  grand foupcon  aux  Francois

de  les  vouloir  piller  fous  pretexte  de  trocque. p.  178.

Armouchiquois  affe's  difpofes  au  Chriflianifme. p. 180.

Afjis. Eflre ajffis, figne de rcucrence entre les

Canadois. .  .  .  .  p. 91.


•

p.  285.

Fra

nee.  p.  320.

A 47-

A 3i.

A 32.

A 92-

A 32.

p.

285

p.

320

p.

47

p.

3i

p.

32

p.

92

p.

32

1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616  121

English,  compelled  to  land  at  the  Acores,  are  ren-
dered safe  through  the  charity  of  the  Jesuits,
their  captives.  .  .  .  p.  289

English  acknozv  ledge  this  kind  service  of  the  Jesuits,  p.  2  90

English,  holding  the  Jesuits  captive,  themselves  sus-
pected of  being  pirates  by  their  own  countrymen,  pag.  29

English,  suspected  of  being  pirates, are  acquitted

on  the  evidence  of  the  Jesuits,  their  prisoners,  p.  293

English  are  afraid  to  land  upon  Spanish  territory,
with  their  Jesuit  prisoners.

English  merely  pretenders  to  new  France.

Eel-fishing  in  the  middle  of  September.

Fruit  trees  very  rare  in  Canada.

Forest  trees  of  Canada.

Boivs  and  shields  upon  the  men  s  graves.

Slate  in  Canada.

Argal,  an  English  Captain,  secretly  seises  the  com-
missions of  the  French  of  St.  Sauveur.  p.  238

Argal,  an  English  Captain,  wishes  to  send  all  the
French  to  France  in  a  small  boat,  with  evident
danger  of  their  being  lost. .  .  p.  25  1

Argal,  an  English  Captain,  strongly  opposes  the
Marshal  of  Virginia,  so  that  his  French  pris-
oners should  not  be  hanged. .  .  p.  262

Argal,  an  English  Captain,  a  just  man. .  p.  270

Arms  of  the  Canadians,  the  bow  and  the  shield. p. 55

Armorial  Bearings  of  Madame  de  Gucrche-ville
placed  at  Cap  de  la  Hevc,  as  a  sign  of  posses-
sion. .  .  .  .  p.  216

A  rmouchiquois  strongly  suspected  by  the  French  of  hi  -

tending to  plunder them,  under  pretext  of trade,  p. 178

Armouchiquois  disposed  favorably  to  Christianity, p. 180

Seated. To  be  seated,  a  sign  of  reverence  among

the  Canadians.  .  .  .  p. 91


122  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  4

Affociation  de  la  Mar  qui Je  de  GucrcJieville  aucc  le

Jieur  de  Potrincourt  au  faicl  dc  Canada.  p.  188

AJlicou  Sagamo  en  la  cojle  d'Acadie.  .  p.  222

Aumars,  on  Cancres  de  mer,  furent  pe Joke's  par  les

Francois  de  S.  Sanneur  en  lenr grande  difette.  p.  253

Anoir  chien  &  fac,  en  Canada,  cjl  iouyr  dn  droicl

de  propriete.  .  .  .  p. 5 1

Autmoins  font  les  Prejlres  dcs  Canadois, .  /. 54

Autmoins,  Medecins  &  Sorciers  cngeollent  les  Jim-
pies  Canadois.  .  .  .  P- 79

Autmoins  fe  font  donner  force  prefents  pour  la

cure  des  malades.  .  .  .  p. 87

Autmoins  inuocans  Dieu  par  le  nom  du  Soleil,  en

cas  de  ncceffitd.  .  .  .  p. 96

B.

Bale  de Chiniclou en Canada,  cflcnduc  en belles

prairies.  .  .  .  .  p. 27.

Bate  Francoife  entrc  Port  Royal,  &  la  riuiere  S.

Jean.  .  .  .  .  p.  165.

Bate  des  mines  a  vingt  &  deux  licu'es  de  Port  Royal,  p.  203.
Baye  de  Genes,  ainfi  appellee  par  Chaplain.  p.  204.

Baye  des  mines  large  de  huicl  licu'es.  .  p.  205.

Baptefme  tr  op  facile  incut  con  fere  au  Mexique,  anec

7iotablc  dommagc  des  baptifcs.  .  p.  106.

Baptefme  confere aux  Canadois  uou inftruits  au

deuoir dc Chriflianijmc, & le ma  I qui en

reuffit.  .  .  .  .  p. \\\.

Baptefme  dcs  pcrfonncs  aagc'cs,  uon  bien  injlruitcs,

differ e  auec  grande  con fiderat ion.  .  p.  115.

Baptefme  dc  fire  dcs  Canadins  audt  la  mort.  p.  310.

Baptefme  guerit  vn  enfant Canadin malade  a la

mort.  .  .  .  .  p.  318.

Baptife's en Canada  fans  precedente inflruclion,

ne  fcauoyent  ricu  du Chrcflicu,  uon  pas  mef


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  123

Association  of  the  Marquise  de  Guercheville  with

sieur  de  Potrincourt  in  Canadian  affairs.  p.  1 88

A st icon,  a  Sagamore  on  the  coast  of  Acadia.  p.  222

Lobsters,  or  sea  Crabs,  were  caught  by  the  French  of

St.  Sauveur  in  their  great  poverty. .  p.  253

To  have  a  dog  and  a  bag,  in Canada, is  to  enjoy

the  rights  of  property .  .  .  p. 5  l

Atltmoins  are  the  Priests  of  the  Canadians.  p. 54

Autmoins,  Medicine  men and  Sorcerers  dupe  the

simple  Canadians. .  .  .  P- 79

Autmoins  require  many  presents  for  the  cure  of

the  sick.  .  .  .  .  p. 87

Autmoins  invoke  God  by  the  name  of  the  Sun,  when

they  are  in  need.  .  .  .  p. 96

B.

Bay  of  Chinictou  in  Canada,  surrounded  by  beauti-
ful meadows.  .  .  .  p. 27
French  Bay,  between  Port  Royal  and  the  river  St.

John.  .  .  .  .  p.  165

Bay  of  mines,  twenty-two  leagues  from  Port  Royal,  p.  203
Baye  de  Genes,  thus  called  by  CJiamplain.  p.  204

Bay  of  mines  eight  leagues  wide. .  .  p.  205

Baptism too  easily  administered  in  Mexico,  with

notable  detriment  to  those  baptized. .  p.  106

Baptism  administered  to  the  Canadians  not  yet
instructed  in  the  duties  of  Christianity,  and
the  evils  which  result  therefrom.  .  p. ill

Baptism  of  aged  persons,  not  well  instructed, de-
ferred with  great  consideration.  .  p.  115
Baptism  desired  by  Canadians  before  dying. p.  310
Baptism  cures  a  Canadian  child  sick  unto  death, p.  318
Those  baptized  in  Canada  without  previous  instruc-
tion, know  nothing  of  Christianity,  not  even


124  LES  RELATIONS  DES  f£SUITES  [Vol.4

mes  leur  nom  de  Baptcfme. .  .  p.  109.

Bafqucs  ont  alienes  les  Excomminquois  en Canada

de  nos  Francois.  .  .  .  p. 33.

Biencourt  &  Robin  en  fauenr  des  Cahiiniftes,  con-

fentent  que  les  Iefuites rientrent dans leur

nauire.  p. 134.

Biencourt  par  le  moyen  des  Iefuites  fait  voile  en

Canada, beaucoup  pluflofl qii  il ne  pouuoit

autrement.  p.  138.

Biencourt  foupconne  que  Madame  de  Guerche-villc

le  veut  defpoililler  des  droicls  de  Canada.  p. 197.

Bretons  ont  dcfcouucrt  la  France  nouuelle.  p. 2.

Bretons  fouucnt  maladcs  en  Canada.  .  p. 15.

Cabanes  d' ' Hyuer  des Canadois,  d'vn  clos  rond  de

perches  fermees  en  poiuclc  par  le  haut,  cou-

uertes  de  peaux,  nattes,  ou  efcorces.  p.  40.  41.

Cabanes  des Canadois  toujiours  en bcl  afpeel, &

prc's  des  bonnes  eaux.  .  .  p. 41.

Cabanes  d'Efic  des  Canadois,  largcs  &  longues,  &

coiiuertes  de  nattes,  ou  efcorces.  .  p. 42.

Calais.  Le  Gouucmeiir,  &  Doyen  de  Calais  accueil-

Icnt, &  fecourent  charitablement  les  Iefuites

de  Canada  rcnuoyes  d ' Angleterrc, .  p.  299.

Caluinijlcs  ne  pcuuent  trouuer  bon  que  les  Iefuites

pajfent  en  Canada,  ouy  bic  tons  autre s  Eccleji-

ajliqucs.  .  .  .  .  p. 133.

Canada  n  efl  qii'vne  par  tic  de  la France  nouuelle,

fcauoir eft, la coftc  du long  de la  grande

riuicre  Canadas.  .  .  .  p.  3.  4.

Canada,  Prouince  de  la  France  nouuelle  prcmiere-

ment  dcfcouucrt e par  Iaqucs  Cartier  V an  1  524.  p.  4.
Canada  parallclc  a  la  France,  en  mefme  climat,  &

cleuation  de  Pole.  .  .  .  p. 9.

Canada  plus  froidc  que  nojlrc  France,  &  pourquoy.  p.  10.
Canada  fujeele  an  Scurbot,  on  maladie  de  la  terre.  p. 14.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616  125

their  Baptismal  names .  .  .  p.  109

Basques have alienated the Excomminqnois in

Canada  fr 07ii  onr  French.  .  *  p. 33

Biencourt  and  Robin,  out  of  regard  for  the  Calvin-
ists,  agree  that  the  Jesuits  must  not  enter  their
ship.  .  .  .  .  p.  134

Biencourt  by  means  of  the  Jesuits  sails  for  Canada,
much  sooner  than  he  cotdd  have  done  withotct
them.  .  .  .  .  p.  138

Biencourt  suspects  that Madame  de  Guerche-ville

wishes  to  rob  him  of  his  rights  in  Canada. p. 197

Bretons  discovered  new  France. .  .  p. 2

Bretons  often  sick  in  Canada.  .  .  p. 15

Winter  Cabins  of  the  Canadians  ;  a  circle  of  poles
closed  at  the  top  and  covered  with  skins,  mats,
or  pieces  of  bark.  .  .  .p.  40,  41

Cabins  of  the  Canadians  always  in  a  beautiful  loca-
tion, and  near  good  water. .  .  p. 41

Summer  Cabins  of  the  Canadians  long  and  wide,

and  covered  with  mats  or  bark.  .  p. 42

Calais.  The  Governor  and  Dean  of  Calais  welcome
and  kindly  assist  the  Jesuits  of  Canada  sent
back  from  England. .  .  .  p.  299

Calvinists  are  not  satisfied  to  have  the  Jesuits  go  to
Canada,  but  arc  willing  to  take  all  other  Ec-
clesiastics. .  .  .  .  p.  133

Canada  is  only  a  part  of  new  France,  namely,  the

land  along  the  great  river  Canadas. .  p.  3,  4

Canada,  a  Province  of  new  France,  first  discovered

by  Jaques  Cartier,  in  the  year  1524. .  p. 4

Canada  parallel  to France, in the  same climate

and  Polar  elevation. .  .  .  P- 9

Canada  colder  than  our  France,  and  why.  .  p. 10

Canada  subject  to  Scurvy  or  land  disease. .  p. 14


126  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4

Canada  apportc  maladie  aux  oifeux.  .  p. 16.

Canada  germe  auffitojl  an Print emps qne no/ire

France.  .  .  .  .  p. 18.

Canada  ds  endroits  les  plus  froids  rend  les  bleds

meurs  en  /on  temps. .  .  .  p. 19.

Canada  n  a  point  de  haute s  mont agues. .  p. 20.

Canada  fort  entrccoupe'e  de  riuieres,  &  bras  de  mer,

en  ejl  r endue  plus  froide.  .  .  p. 23.

Canada  a  caufc  des  continuelles  forejls  eft  moins

efchaufft'c  du  Soleil,  &  pource  plus  froide  que

les  campagnes  ouuertes.  .  .  p. 24.

Canada  pour  n  cftre  labouree  eft  couuerte  d'vne  dure

croufte,  quafi  impenetrable  au  Soleil,  &  part  ant

beaucoup  plus  froide.  .  .  p, 24

Canada  prodnicl la vigne  fauuage en beaucoup

d' endroits,  qui  meurit  en  fou  temps.  p. 3 1

Canada e's terres cogncues  des  Francois,  u 'a  que

dix  mille  habit ans. .  .  .  p. 73

Canada,  hor /mis  Port  Royal,  donne  a  Madame  de

Gucrchcuille.  .  .  .  p.  190

Canada  du  Gouuernement  du  Prince  de  Soijfons.  p.  330
Canada  pourquoy  doit  cftre  cultiue'e  des  Francois,  p.  331
Canadois  fidcles  au  Francois  cotre  V Anglois.  p. 34

Canadois  charitables  enuers  les  Francois  captifs  de

r Anglois. .  .  .  . p.  35.  36

Canadois  out  honne  memoire  des  chofes  fenfibles.  p.  36
Canadois  comprennent,  & iugent bieu les chofes

fenfibles.  .  .  .  .  p. 36

Canadoifes  ccintcs  deffus,  &  deffous  le  ventre.  p,  37
Canadois  quafi  tons  fans  barbc,  horfmis  les  bien

robuftes.  .  .  .  .  P- 37

Canadois  nc peuuent  rctenir  la  memoire  d'vne  fuitte

de  paroles. .  .  .  .  p. 27


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  127

Canada  brings  sickness  to  those  who  are  idle.  p. 16

Canada  shows  vegetation  as  early  in  Spring  as  our

France.  .  .  .  .  /. 18

Canada  in  the  coldest  places  yields  the  wheat  crop

in  its  season.  .  .  .  p. 19

Canada  has  no  high  mountains. .  .  p. 20

Canada,  very  much  intersected  by  rivers  and  arms

of  the  sea,  is  thereby  rendered  colder.  p. 23

Canada,  on  account  of  the  continuous  forests,  is  less
heated  by  the  Sun,  and  therefore  colder  than
the  open  countries. .  .  .  p. 24

Canada,  not  being  cultivated,  is  covered  with  a
hard  crust,  almost  impenetrable  to  the  Sun,
and  therefore  much  colder. .  .  p. 24

Canada  produces  the  wild  grape  in  many  places,

which  ripens  in  its  season. .  .  p. 31

Canada, in the  lands  known to the  French,  has

only  ten  thousand  inhabitants.  .  p. 73

Canada,  with  the  exception  of  Port  Royal,  given  to

Madame  de  Gucrchcvillc.  .  .  p. 190

Canada  under  Authority  of  the  Prince  de  Soissons.  p.  330

Canada,  why  the  French  should  cultivate  it.  p.  331

Canadians  faithful  to  French  against  English. p. 34

Canadians  kind  to  French  made  prisoners  by  Eng-
lish. .  .  .  /.  35,  36

Canadians have  a  good  memory  for  visible  and

material  things.  .  .  .  p. $6

Canadians  comprehend  and  estimate  well  the  things

known  tJirough  the  senses.  .  .  p. 36

Canadian  women  wear  belts  above  and  below  the

stomach.  .  .  .  .  p. 37

Canadians nearly  all beardless, except the more

robust.  .  .  .  .  p. 37

Canadians  have  no  memory  for  a  consecutive  ar-
rangement of  words.  .  .  p. 27


128  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

Canadois  mocqueurs  des  perfonnes  contrefaites. p. 37

Canadois  n  out  point  le  corps  contrefaict,  ny  de-
fect ueux. .  .  .  .  P- 37

Canadois  vejius  de  peanx  couroye'es  auec  le  poil,  &

bigarre'es  de  coulenrs.  .  .  p. 39

Canadois  paoureux,  &  grands  vanteurs. .  p. 55

Cafiadois  forts,  &  addroicls  a la  luttc,  &  non  a

autre  combat.  .  .  .  p. 55

Canadois  liber aux  &  rccognoiffans.  .  p. 58

Canadois  prattiquct  la  Polygamic  plus  pour  le  prou-

fit,  que  pour  I 'incontinence.  .  p. 62.

Canadois  maladifs  depuis  la  hatife  des  Yrdcois,  a
caufe  de  leurs  exec's  a  manger  viandes  non
accoujlumc'es.  .  .  .  p. 69.

Canadois ue  fe  foucient  du  lendemain,  viuas  du

iour  a  la  iourne'e.  .  .  .  /. 70.

Canadois  oincls  dWiuile  de  loup  marin  fentent  mal.  p. yy.

Canadois  fc  font  Chrefliens,  feulement  pour  marque

d'amitie  auec  les  Francois. .  .  p.  109.

Canadois  fe  plaignent  fort  qu  'on  ne  les  ait  aduerty
des  deuoirs  du  Chriflianifme  audt  leur  bap-
tefme,  auf quels  Us  ne  fe  fuffent  obliges,  s'ils
les  euffent  cogneus. .  .  .  p.  ill.

Canadins  baptifh  a  la  pourfuitte  du  fieur  de  Po-

trincourt.  p.  126.

Cafiadois  ne  peuuet exprimer  par  parole  que  les

chofes  fort  fenfebles,  &  mat  eric  lies. .  p.  151.

Canadins  fuj eels  d'Aflicou inuitcnt  les  Iefuites  a

prendre  logis  en  leur  terre.  .  p.  222.

Canadins  careffent  les  Anglois,  les  croyans  eflre
Yrancois,  &  par  ignorance  les  menent  a  S.
Sauueur,  ou  Us  pillcnt  &  captiuent  les  Fran-
cois, p.  229.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  129


Canadians  scoffers  at  ill-shapen  people. .  p


37
37


Canadians'  bodies  are  not  ill-shapen  or  defective, p

Canadians  dressed  in  skins  wJiich  have  been  curried

and  decorated  in  various  colors.  .  p. 39

Canadians  cowardly  and  great  boasters. .  p. 55

Canadians  strong  and  skillful  in  wrestling, and

not  in  any  other  kind  of  combat.  .  p. 55

Canadians  generous  and  grateful.  .  p. 58

Canadians  practice  Polygamy  more  for  profit  than

for  incontinence.  .  .  .  p. 62

Canadians  sickly  since  their  intercourse  with  the
French,  on  account  of  their  excesses  in  eating
food  to  which  they  are  not  accustomed.  p. 69

Canadians  not  anxious  about  to-morrow,  only  liv-
ing from  day  to  day.  .  .  p. 70

Canadians,  when  they  rub  themselves  with  seal  oil,

have  a  bad  smell.  .  .  .  P- 77

Canadians  embrace  Christianity  only  as  a  sign  of

friendship  with  the  French. .  .  p.  109

Canadians  complain  greatly  that  they  were  not  ad-
vised of  the  duties  of  Christianity  before  their
baptism,  to  which  they  would  not  have  bound
themselves  if  they  had  known  them. .  p.  ill

Canadians  baptized  through  the  instrumentality  of

sieur  de  Potrincourt.  .  .  p.  126

Canadians  can  express  in  words  only  the  more  vis-
ible and  material  tilings.  .  .  p.  151

Canadian  subjects  of  Asticou  invite  the  Jesuits  to

locate  in  their  territory.  .  .  p.  222

Ca?iadians  embrace  the  English,  believing  them  to
be  French,  and  through  ignorance  guide  them
to  St.  Sauveur,  where  they  plunder  and  cap-
ture the  French.  .  .  .  p.  229


130  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  4

Canadin  s '  attrifle  fort,  ayant  rccogneu  que  par
mef garde  il  auoit  mis  les  Yrancois  de  Samel
Sauucur  entre  les  mains  de  V Anglois.  p.  231.

Canadins  portent  grande  compafjion  aux  Francois
captifs  de  V Anglois,  &  leur  offrent  toute  ami-
tie'.  ....  p.  246.

Canadins donnent largement de leur  proyc aux

Francois  de  S.  Sauueur  necef/iteux.  p.  253.

Canadins bien recogneus  peuuent cjlre cy apres

mieax  aide's  au  falut  de  leur  ame. .  p.  306

Canadins  ayans  grande  confiance  aux  Francois,
peuuent  ejlre  mieux  aidez  par  cux,  que  par
autres  en  leur  conucrfion.  .  .  p.  307

308

309
310


Canadins  grandement  fideles  aux  Yrancois.  p

Canadins  ennemis  de  V Anglois,  &  Holandois.  p

Canadins  affeclionncz  au  Baptcfmc.  .  p

Cauadine  malade  a  la  mort,  guerie  par  le  Cate-

cJiifme,  &  vne  Croix  pefidue  au  col  p

Canadois  ne  portent  point  de  hauts  de  cliauffcs.  p
Canadois  portent  greues,  &  foulicrs  de  peaux  d ' cf-

lan.  p

Canadois  plantet  nouuellcs  cabanes  a  chaque  change-
men  t  de  lieu,  &  de  re  fide  nee.  .  p
Canadois  fe  cabanent  en  bel  afpeel, &  pre's des

bonnes  eaux.  p

Canadois  fe  couchent  a  I '  cntour  du  foyer,  fur  des

peaux  de  loups  marins,  la  tcfte  fur  vn  fac.  p
Canadois  a  cliacune  des  treize  lunes  annuclles  ont

nouuelle  cliaffc,  on  pefche. .  .  p

Canadois  ne  viucnt  que  de  ehaffc,  &  de  pefche.  p
Canadois meurent de  faim quand la  cliaffe, &

pefche  ne  rciiffit.  p

Canadois  font  fort  incomodds  de  pluyc,  &  de  negc,

quand  elle  ne  gele  pas.  .  .  p


313
39

39
40

4i

4i

42
42

43
44


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  131

Canadians  very  sorrowful  when  they  recognized
that  through  inadvertence  they  had  delivered
the  French  of  Saint  Sauveur  into  the  hands  of
the  English. .  .  .  .  p.  231

Canadians  sJioiv  great  sympathy  for  the  Fretich
taken  prisoners  by  the  English,  and  offer  them
ma?iy  favors.  p.  246

Catiadians  give  generously  of  their  game  to  the

needy  French  of  St.  Sauveur.  .  p.  253

Canadians,  well  understood,  can  afterwards  be  bet-
ter assisted  in  the  salvation  of  their  souls.  p.  306
Canadians,  having  great  confidence  in  the  French,
can  be  better  aided  by  tliem,  than  by  others,  in
their  conversion. p.  307
Canadians  very  faitJifid  to  the  French. . p.  308
Canadians  ene7nies  of  the  English  and  Dutch. p.  309
Canadians  fond  of  Baptism. . . p.  310
Canadian  woman  sick  unto  death, cured  by the

Catechism  and  a  Cross  hung  around  her  neck.  p.  313
Canadians  do  not  wear  trousers. .  .  p. 39

Canadians  wear  leggings  a?id  shoes  of  elk  skin. p. 39
Canadians  erect  new  houses  at  every  change  of  place

and  residence.  .  .  .  p. 40

Canadians  camp  in  pleasant  localities  and  near  good

water.  .  .  .  .  p. 41

Canadians  lie  around  the  fire,  upon  seal  skins,  their

heads  upon  bags.  .  .  .  p. 41

Canadians  have  new  game  or  fish  for  every  one  of

their  thirteen  moons. .  .  .  p. 42

Canadians  live  only  upon  game  and  fish. .  p. 42

Canadians  die  of  starvation  when  hunting  and  fish-
ing are  not  successful.  .  .  p. 43
Canadians  are  very  greatly  inconvenienced  by  the

rain  and  snow  when  it  does  not  freeze.  p. 44


132  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4

Canadois  portent  des  raquettes  au  pied  fur  la  nege

molle,  pour  cJiaffer. .  .  .  p. 44

Canadois  riches  en  gibier  d'eau,  non  de  terre.  p. 46

Canadois  en  my-Septembre  de  la  mer vont  a la

pcfchc  des  riuieres. .  .  .  ^.47

Canadois  ne  poffedent  rien  en  propriety  auant  leur

mariage.  .  .  .  .  /. 5 1

Canadois  ont  des  quereles  fur  le  refus  des  droicls

les  vns  enuers  les  autrcs.  ,  .  p. 52

Canadin  guery  par  la  Croix,  &  CatecJiifme.  p.  3 1 5

Canadins hurlcnt Jwrriblcment auprcs de leurs

malades  mourans. .  .  .  p.  317

Campfeau  cojle  de  mer  loin  de  fix  vingts  lieues  de

Port  Royal. .  .  .  .  p.  139

Cap  de  la  Heue  en  la  cojle  de  V Acadie. . pag.  216
Cap  de  fable.  .  .  .  .  A  255

Cap  Breton.  p.  263

Cap  Y orchu.  .  .  .  .  p.  255

Caribous,  vioitie  afne,  moitie'  cerf,  bons  a  manger,  p. 43
Cafiors  &  E flans  ont  leur  fecondc  cliaffc  en  Oclobre,

&  Nouembre.  .  .  .  p. 47

Cafiors  fc  prennent  en  Yeurier  &  Mars,  pour  la

premiere  chaffe.  .  .  .  p. 43

CatecJiifme  exaclement  pracliquc  cfl  tref-neceffaire

aux  Canadins  a  caufe  de  leur  facon  de  viure

vagabondc. .  .  .p.  102.  103,  104.

CatecJiifme  &  Croix  p endue  au  col  d'vne  Canadine

la  guerit  de  maladie  mortelle.  .  p.  313.

CatecJiifme guerit  vn  Canadin  malade. .  pag-  215.

Cauots,  efquifs  des  Canadois,  faicls, d'efcorcc  de

boulcau,  fort legers, capable s de toute vne

famille,  &  vtenfiles  neceffaires  .  p. 48

Cauot  fort  commode  pour  la  pcfcJie,  &  voiture. p. 48.
Cauot  faicl  quarante  lieues  en  vn  tour. .  p<*g- 49-

CJia7Jiplain  fonde  V Jiabitation  de  Kcbec. .  p.  121.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  /6i6  133

Canadians  wear  snow  shoes  upon  the  feet  when  the

snow  is  soft,  for  hunting.  .  .  p. 44

Canadians  rich  in  marine,  not  in  forest  game.  p. 46

Canadians,  in  the  middle  of  September,  come  from

the  sea  to  fish  in  the  rivers. .  .  p. 47

Canadians  possess  no  property  before  marriage.  p.  51
Canadians  quarrel  when  some  refuse  dues  to  oth-
ers. .  .  .  p.  52
Canadian  cured  by  the  Cross  and  Catechism.  p.  315
Canadians  howl  terribly  around  their  dying  friends,  p.  317
Campseau  seacoast  distant  one  hundred  and  twenty

leagues  from  Port  Royal.  .  .  p.  139

Cap  de  la  Heve  on  the  coast  of  Acadia.  . pag.  2  16

Cape  sable.  .  .  .  .  p.  255

Cape  Breton.  p.  263

Cape  Forchu.  .  .  .  .  p.  255

Caribou,  half  ass,  half  deer,  good  to  eat. .  p. 43

Chase,  the  second  time  for  the  Beaver  and  Elk  in

October  and  November.  .  .  p. 47

Capture  of  the  beaver  in  the  first  hunt,  in  February

and  March. .  .  .  .  p. 43

Catechism  exactly  attended  to  is  very  necessary  to
the  Canadians,  on  account  of  their  wandering
mode  of  life. .  .  .p.  102,  103,  104

Catechism  and  Cross,  hung  from  the  neck  of  a  Cana-
dian woman,  cure  her  of  a  mortal  illness.  p.  3 1 3
Catechism  cures  a  sick  Canadian. . . pag-  215
Canoes,  the  skiffs  of  the  Canadians,  made  of  birch-
bark,  very  light,  capable  of  holding  an  entire
family  and  their  necessary  utensils. .  p. 48
Canoe  very  convenient  for  fishing  and  conveyance . p. 48
Canoe  makes  forty  leagues  in  one  day. . P<ig- 49
Champ  lain  establishes  the  settlement  of Kebec.  p.  121


134  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

Champlain  defcouure  la  cojle  de  la  riuiere  S.  Lau-
rens. .  .  .  .  p. 121.

Champlain  Lieutenant  du  Jicur  de  Monts.  p.  121.

Champlain allant  a Kcbcc  paffe a trailers des

glacons  de  mer  enorme'ment  gros  &  affreux. p.  139.

Charbon  de  terre  en  Canada.  .  .  p. 32.

Chair boucane'e, 011  feche'e  a la  fume'e, mife  en

referue.  .  .  .  .  p. 70.

Charmes,  Chefnes,  Hejlres,  &  Peupliers  en  Ca-
nada. .  .  .  .  p. 32.

Chaff c  &  pefche  font  tout  le  reuenu  des  Canadois.  p. 42.

Chafjfe  premiere  des  Caflors  en  Feurier,  &  Mars.  p. 43.

Chaff c  feconde  des  Caflors,  &  Eslans  en  Oclobre  &

Nouembre.  p. 47.

Chenille  plant ee  en  terre  par  I ' Autmoin  faignant

de  chaffer  le  Diable.  .  .  p.  82.  83.  84.

Chiens  du  malade  manges  en  Tabagie. . pag- §9-

Chiniclou  efl  vne  Bayc  en  Canada  fort  belle  en

prairies.  .  .  .  .  p. 27.

Chiniclou  pays  de  Canada  fertile  &  aggreable. p.  204.

Chiquebi  racine  a  guife  de  truffes,  dont  les  Iefuites

viuoyent  en  temps  de  famine.  .  p.  213.

Chirurgieu  Anglois  Catholique,  charitable enucrs

les  Francois  de  S.  Sauueur  blcffez.  p.  241.

Coquilles,  &  poiffons  de  toutc  forte  foifonnent  en

la  mer  de  Canada  durant  cinq  mois. .  p. 45.

Cofle  de  la  riuiere  Saincl  lean  en  Canada,  abon-

dante  en  vigne  fauuage,  &  noycrs. .  p. 3 1 .

Cofle  de  S.  Sauueur  fort  aggreable,  .  p.  225.

Croix pendu'e  au  col  d'vu  Canadin  le  guerit  d'vue

longue  maladie.  .  .  .  p.  3 1 5 .

Croix  plant e"e  au  Cap  de  la  Heue.  .  p.  216.

Croix  plantce  au  Port  S.  Sauueur.  .  p.  226.

Coudriers  font  frequents  en  Canada.  .  A31*

Counibas  pays  inhabitable  a  caufe  du  froid.  p. 21.


1616-29] BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  135

Champlain explores  the  shores of  the river  St.

Lawrence.  .  .  .  .  p.  121
Champlain,  Lieutenant  of  sieur  de  Monts.  p.  121
Champlain,  going  to  Kebec,  passes  through  enor-
mous and  fright fid  masses  of  ice.  .  p.  139
Coal  in  Canada.  .  .  .  .  p.  32
Smoked  meat,  or  meat  dried  in  smoke,  stored  away  p.  70
Elm,  Oak,  Beech,  and  Poplar  in  Canada.  p.  32
Hunting  and  fishing  arc  the  only  resources  of  the

Canadians. . . . . p.  42

First  hunt  for  Beavers  in  February  and  March. p.  43
Second  hunt  for  Beavers  and  Elk  in  October  and

November.  .  .  .  .  p.  47
Stick  planted  in  the  ground  by  the  Autmoin,  feign-
ing to  chase  away  the  Devil.  .  p.  82,  83,  84
Dogs  of  the  sick  man  eaten  in  the  Tabagie.  pag.  89
Chinictou  is  a  Bay  in  Canada  surrounded  by  beauti-
ful meadozvs.  .  .  .  p.  27
Chinictou  a  country  of  Canada  fertile  and  pleasant .  p.  204
Chiquebi,  a  root  something  like  truffles,  upon  which

the  Jesuits  lived  in  time  of  famine. . p.  213
English Surgeon, a  Catholic,  charitable  towards

the  wounded  French  of  St.  Sauveur. . p.  241
Shellfish, and  fish  of  all  kinds, swarm in the

Canadian  sea  during  five  months. . p.  45
Banks  of  the  river  Saint  John  in  Canada  abound-
ing in  wild  grapes  and  nuts. . . p.  31
Coast  of  St.  Sauveur  very  agreeable. . p.  225
Cross  hung  from  the  neck  of  a  Canadian  cures  him

of  a  long  illness. . . . p.  3 1 5

Cross  planted  at  Cap  de  la  Heve. . p.  216

Cross  planted  at  the  Port  of  St.  Sauveur. p.  226

Hazel  trees  very  abundant  in  Canada. . P-  ll
Counibas  country  uninhabitable  on  account  of  the

cold. . . . . . p.  21


136  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4

D

Defunct  enfeuely  anec  fon  fac,  fes  pcanx,  fieches,

&  autres  menblesjiens,  & prefents  de  fes  amis.  p. 92
Viable  familier  a  Membertou  encores  Pay  en.  p. 95

Viable  trauaillant  les  Canadois  anant  la  venue  des

Yrancois. .  .  .  .  p. 95

Dieu  entre  les  Canadois  eft  nomme  du  nom  du  Soleil.  p. 96
Dix  mille  perfonnes  fenlement  en  toutes  les  terres

de  Canada. .  .  .  .  P- 73

Droicl  de  propriety  en  Canada  fc  practique  par  la

poffeffion  du  chien,  &  du  fac.  .  p. 5  1

Ducil  a  la  mort  des  parens  &  amis,  eft  de  fe  broii-

iller  la  face  de  noir.  .  .  p. go

Du  Pont  le  ieune  reconcilie'  au  fieur  de  Potrincourt

a  la  requefte  du  P.  Biard. .  . pag.  147

Du  Pont  le  ieune  reconcilie  au  fieur  de  Potrincourt

fe  confeffe,  &  faicl  fes  Pafques  au  bord  de  la

mer,  auec  grande  edification  des  afjiftans. p.  148.
Du  Pont  perd  fon  uauire,  &  le  recouure  a  la  requefte

du  P.  Biard.  .  .  .  p.  148.

Du  Pont  le  ieune  employe  pour  traduire  le  Cate-

chifme  en  langue  Canadine. .  .  p.  \J$.

Du  Pont  le  ieune  retire  en  fon  nauire  vne  par  tie  des

Francois  de  S.  Saimeiir.  .  .  p.  256.

E

Enfans  en  grand  nombre  font  la  force  des  Sagamos

Canadois. .  .  .  .  p. 62.

Enfant  Canadin  maladc  a  la  mort  guery  par  le

Baptefme. .  .  .  .  p.  318.

Eplan  de  Canada  fc  prend  en  Mars.  .  /. 45.

Eplan,  petit  poiff on  comme  Sardine.  .  p.  213.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION.  i6i6  137

D

Dead  men  buried  zvith  their  bags,  skins,  arrows,
and  other  possessions,  and  presents  from  their
friends.  .  .  .  .  /. 92

Devil  familiar  to  Member  ton  while  yet  a  Pagan, p. 95

Devil  tormenting  the  Canadians  before  the  coming

of  the  French.  .  .  .  p. 95

God,  among  the  Canadians,  is  known  by  the  same

name  as  the  Sun.  .  .  .  p. 96

Ten thousand people only in all the lands of

Canada.  .  .  .  .  p. 73

Right  of  property  in  Canada  evidenced  by  the  pos-
session of  the  dog  and  of  the  bag.  .  p. $  l

Dead  kindred  or  friends  mourned  by  smearing  the

face  with  black.  .  .  .  p. go

Du  Pont  the  younger  reconciled  to  sicur  de  Potrin-

court  at  the  request  of  Father  Biard. . pag.  147

Du  Pont  the  younger,  reconciled  to  sicur  de  Potrin-
court,  confesses,  and  receives  the  Easter  Sac-
rament on  the  seashore,  to  the  great  edifica-
tion of  those  present. .  .  .  p.  148

Du  Pont  loses  his  ship  and  recovers  it  at  the  re-
quest of  Father  Biard.  .  .  p.  148

Du  Pont  the  younger  employed  to  translate  the  Cate-
chism into  the  Canadian  language. .  P-  l7S

Du  Pout  the  younger  takes  into  his  ship  part  of  the

French  of  St.  Sauveur.  .  .  p.  256


Large  families  the  strength  of  Canadian  Sagamores,  p.  62
Canadian  child  sick  unto  death  cured  by  Baptism.  ^.318
Canadian  smelts  taken  in  March.  .  p. 45

Smelt,  a  little  fish  like  a  Sardine.  .  p.  213


138  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4

EJIans,  &  Cajlors  ont  leur  fcconde  chaff e  en  Oclobre,

&  Nouembre.  .  .  .  p. 47.

Eslans  fc prenncnt  pour  la  fecondc  chaff e  en  Oclobre

&  Nouembre.  .  .  .  p. 47.

Efpoux  Canadois  donne  a  Jon  beau-pere,  &  ne  rccoit

riendeluy. .  .  .  .  p. 61.

Eftuues  frictions,  fucurs  vfitc'cs  en  Canada  pour  la

/ante.  p. JJ.

EJlourgeon  fe pefche  en  Auril. .  .  p. 45.

Eteminquois, Montaguets, Souriquois  allicz aux

Francois  en  Canada.  .  .  p. 34.

Excomminquois  ennemis  des  Francois  en  Canada,

a  V occafwn  des  Bafques.  .  .  p. 33.


Fceal  Vvne  des  IJles  des  A  cores. .  .  p.  287.

Femmes  Canadoifes  portent  le  fais  du  mefnage,  &

font  de  pire  condition,  que  chambriercs.  p. 62.

Yemmcs  Canadoifes  pudiqucs.  .  .  p. 66.

Femmes Canadoifes durement traicle'es  de leurs

maris.  .  .  .  .  p. 65.

Femmes  Candoifes  pcu  fecoudes  a  caufe  de  leurs

trauaux  continucls. .  .  .  p. 72.

Y leurs  de  lis  rafe'es  en  Canada  par  V Anglois.  p.  271.
Foin  de  Canada  Jiaut  de  la  longueur  d'vn  hommc.  p.  26.
Francois  de  S.  Sauueur  accufes  d'eflre  bannis  &

pirates,  pour  ne  pouuoir  produire  leur  com-

mifjion  fur prinfe par  V Anglois.  .  p.  239.

France  nouucllc  efl  propre  des  Francois  priuatuie-

ment  aux  Anglois.  p.  320.

Francois\ont  enfeignd  Vvfage  du  poifon,  &  autres

vial-heurs  aux  Canadois.  .  .  p. 68.

Francois doiuent entreprendre la culture de


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELA  TION,  1616  139

Second  chase  for  Elk  and  Beaver  in October  atid

November. .  .  .  .  p. 47

Elk  are  captured  in the  second  chase  in October

and  November.  .  .  .  p. 47

Canadian  husband  gives  to  his  father-in-law,  in-
stead of receiving  from  him.  .  p. 61

Rubbing  and  vapor-baths used  in Canada  for  the

health.  .  .  .  .  P- 77

Sturgeon  are  caught  in  April.  .  .  p. 45

Eteminquois,  Montaguets,  Souriquois ,  allies  of  the

French  in  Canada. .  .  .  p. 34

Excomminquois,  enemies  of  the  French  in  Canada,

on  account  of  the  Basques. .  .  p. 33


Fceal,  one  of  the  Islands  of  the  A  cores.  .  p.  287

Canadian  women  bear  the  burdens  of  the  household,
and  are  in  a worse  condition  than  chamber-
maids. .  .  .  .  p. 62

Canadian  women  modest.  .  .  p. 66

Canadian  women  badly  treated  by  their  husbands, p. 65
Canadian  women not  fruitful  on  account  of  their

continual  hardships. .  .  .  p. 72

Fleurs-de-lis  erased  in  Canada  by  the  English.  p.  2yi

Hay  in  Canada  as  high  as  a  man.  .  p. 26

Frencli  of  St.  Sauveur  accused  of  being  outlaws  and
pirates,  because  they  could  not  produce  their
commission,  whicli  had  been  seized  by  the  Eng-
lish. .  .  .  .  .  p.  239

New  France  is  owned  by  the  French  exclusive  of

the  English.  .  .  .  p.  320

French have  taught  the  use  of  poison  and  other

evils  to  the  Canadians.  .  .  p. 68

French ought to undertake the cultivation of


140  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

Canada.  .  .  .  .  p.  331.

Francois  en  danger  de  fe  perdre parmy  les  Armou-

cJiiquois,  par  vn  foupcon  fonde'  en  apparence.  p.  178.

Francois  pretendcnt  iuftement  defbouttcr  I 'Anglois

de  la  nouuellc  France.  .  .  p.  320.

France  nounelle  eji  vne  for  eft  perpetnelle .  p. 4

France  nouuellc,  partie  Occidentale  de  V  Amerique .  p. 1 .

France  nounelle  dcfcouuerte  V an  1 504.  par  les  Bre-
tons. .  .  .  .  p. 2.

Francois  Bretons  ont  les  premiers defcotiuert la

noauclle  France.  .  .  .  p. 2.

France  nouuellc  pourquoy  doit  cftre  cultiuee  par  les

Francois. .  .  .  .  p.  331.


Glacons  eftrangement  gros ,  charriez  coit  licux  dans

la  mer  par  les  riuieres.  .  .  p.  139.

Garcons,  ou  non  encores  mariez  n  acquierent  rien

a  eux-mefmes,  ains  a  leur  Sagamo. .  p. 51.

Gilbert  du  Thct  Iefuite  tue"  par  les  Anglois  a  S.

Sauueur.  p.  241.

Greues,  &  fouliers  des  Canadois. .  .  p. 39.

Guerres  des  Canadois  fe  prattiquent par  furprifes.  p. 55.

H

Habit ans  des  terres  de  Canada  dix  mille  en  tout.  p.  73.
Habitans  de  S.  Malo  fort  charitables  enuers les

Francois  reuenans  de  Canada.  .  /.25s.

Habits  de peaux  velu'cs  des  Canadois. . p.  39.

Harcnc  fe pefclie  en  Auril. . . p.  45.

Hauls  de  chauffes  ne  font  en  vfage  en  Canada.  p.  29.
Henry  I II I.  fe  fafcJie  que  le  fieur  de  Potrincourt

ne  fe  hafte  pour  Canada. . . p.  125.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  141

Canada.  .  .  .  .  p.  331

French in danger  of  ruin  among  the  Armouchi-
quois,  on  account  of  a  suspicion  based  upon  ap-
pearances. .  .  .  .  p.  178
French  justly  assume  to  overrule  the  claims  of  the

English  in  new  France.  .  .  p.  320

New  France  is  an  interminable  forest.  .  p. 4

New  France,  Western  part  of  America.  .  p. 1

New  France  discovered  in  the  year 1504,  by  the

Bretons.  .  .  .  .  p. 2

French  Bretons  the  first  discoverers  of  new  France,  p. 2
New  France,  why  it  ought  to  be  cultivated  by  the

French.  .  .  .  .  p.  331

G

Masses  of  ice,  wonderfully  large,  drifted  a  hundred

leagues  into  the  sea  through  the  rivers.  p.  139

Boys,  or  those  not  yet  married,  can  acquire  nothing

for  themselves,  but  for  their  Sagamore.  p. 51

Gilbert  du  Thst,  Jesuit,  killed  by  the  English  at

St.  Sauveur.  .  .  .  p.  241

Leggings  and  shoes  of  the  Canadians .  .  p. 39

Wars  of  the  Canadians  are  carried  on  by  strategy,  p. 55

H

Inhabitants  of  the  lands  of  Canada,  ten  thousand

in  all. . . . . p.  73
Inhabitants  of  St.  Malo  very  charitable  towards

the  French  returning  from  Canada. . p.  258

Clot  lies  of  the  Canadia?is  made  of  hairy  skins. p.  39

Herring  fishing  in  April. . . p.  45

Trousers  are  not  used  in  Canada. . . p.  29
Henry  IIII.  is  angry  because  sieur  de  Potrincourt

does  not  hasten  to  Canada. . . p.  125


142  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4

Henry  Till. Roy  de  France,  dejline  les  Iefuites

en  Canada. .  .  .  .  p. 123

Henry  Membcrtou malade  meurt  a Port  Royal,

fort  Chrcjliennement.  .  .  p.  162

Herbes  potageres  fort  grandes,  &  bonnes  en  Ca-
nada. .  .  .  .  p. 27

Huguenot  de  Dieppe  rcmarque  vne  guerifon  mcr-

ueilleufe  d 'vne  Canadine :  .  .  p.  314

Huile  de  graiffe  de  loup  marin,  fanffe  annuelle  des

Canadois. .  .  .  .  ^.43


laques Carttcr defeouure Canada en la France

nouuelle  V an  1524.  &  1534.  .  p. 4.

lean  Denys  de  Honfleur,  va  en  la  France  nouuelle

Van  1506. .  .  .  p. 3.

lean  Verazan  prend poffefjion  de  la  France  nouuelle

au  nom  de  Francois  I.  Roy  de  France.  p. 3.

Iefuites  captifs  en  Angleterre  vifitez  honor ablement

par  les  habitans  du  lieu.  .  .  p.  296.

Iefuites  exhortent  les  Canadois  baptifez  auant  leur
venue  en  Canada,  de  relet ter  la  Polygamic,  &
ce  qii  on  leur  rcf pond.  .  .  p.  ill.

Iefuites  ne  veulcnt  baptifer  les  adult es  qii  apres
auoir  efle  deuement  inflruicls,  dont  Us  font
calomniez  a  tord.  .  . p.  no.  ill.  112.

Iefuites  taf client  a  tourner  en  Canadois  les principes
de  la  Foy,  mais  les  mots  ne  fe  trouuent  fuffi-
fans  pour  ce  fair e. .  .  .  p.  112.

Iefuites  ne  baptifent  point  les  perfonnes  aage'es  fans
eflre  deuement  catecliife'es,  &  a  fort  bonne
raifon.  .  .  .  .  p.  114.

Iefuites  deflinez  en  Canada  par  le  Roy  Henry  III  I.  p.  123.

Iefuites  exclus  de  V entre'e  d'vn  nauire,  en  faueur


1616-29] BIARD'S  RELA  TION,  1616  143

Henry  I  III. ,  King  of  France,  appoints  the  Jesuits

to  Canada. . . . . p.  123

Henry  Membertou,  being  sick,  dies  at  Port  Royal

in  a  very  Christian  Manner. . p.  162

Pot  herbs  very  large  and  good  in  Canada. p.  27

Huguenot  of  Dieppe  notices  the  marvelous  cure  of  a

Canadian  Woman. . . . p.  314

Seal  oil  the  Canadian  sauce  the  year  round. p.  43


Jaqucs  Carticr  explores  Canada  in  new  France  in

the  years  1524  and  1534.  .  .  p. 4

Jean  Denys,  of  Honfleur,  goes  to  new  France  in

the  year  1506.  .  .  .  p. 3

Jean  Verazan takes  possession  of  new  France  in

the  name  of  Francis  I. ,  King  of  France.  p. 3

Jesuit  prisoners  in  England  receive  honorable  visits

from  the  inhabitants  of  the  place.  .  p.  296

Jesuits  exhort  the  Canadians,  baptized  before  they

came to Canada,  to  discard  Polygamy,  a?id

what  they  answer  thereto.  .  .  p. 1 1 1

Jesuits  do  not  zvish  to  baptize  the  adults  until  they

have  been  properly  instructed,  for  which  they

are  unjustly  slandered.  . /.  no,  in, 112

Jesuits  try  to  change  into  the  Canadian  tongue  the
principles  of  the  Faith,  but  suitable  words  for

this  purpose  cannot  be  found. .  .  p.  112

Jesuits  do  not  baptize  aged  persons  unless  they  are

properly  catechized,  and  with  very  good  reason,  p.  114
Jes  Jtits  appointed  to  Canada  by  King  Henry  I  I II.  p.  123
Jesuits  excluded  fro)n  entering  a  ship,  out  of  regard

for  the  Calvinists. .  .  .  p.  1 34

Jesuits  sail  for  Canada  in  January,  161 1.  p.  138


144  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4

des  Caluinifles.  p.  134.

Iefuites  dcfmarent  pour  Canada  en  Ianuier.  161 1.  p.  138.
Iefuites  arrinez  a  Port  Royal  en  Iuin  161 1.  p.  149.

Iefuites  dcfcndus  de  calomnie  par  le  tefmoignage

me  fine  des  Caluinijies.  .  .  p.  142

Iefuites  s'efiudient  a  la  langue  Canadine,  mais  les

Canadins  ne  les  y  feruent  fidelemcnt ;. p.  151. 152
Iefuites  font  empefchez  de  proufiter  en  la  langue  Can-
adine, par  ceux  mefmes,  qui  les  dcuoyent  aider,  p.  154
Iefiites  ne  veulent  confentir  que  Membertou  foit

entcrre  auec  fes  predeceffeurs  infideles.  p.  161

Iefuites  bafliffent  de  leurs  mains  vne  cJialoupe  pour

allcr  a  la  que  fie  des  viures  en  temps  de  famine,  p.  210
Iefuites  cueillent  le  Chiquebi racine,  &  pefchent

V Eplan,  &  le  Harenc  en  temps  de  famine. p.  213
Iefuites &  autres Francois  de  S. Sauueur  font

menez  a  la  Virginie.  .  .  p.  260

Iefuites  garentiffcnt  V Anglois  qui  les  tenoit  eaptifs,

de  la  main  de  V Efpagnol. .  .  p.  289

Iefuites des Ifles A  cores  font portez en Galles

Prouince  d'Angleterre.  .  .  p.  292

Iefiites  mettcnt  e's  mams  du  fieur  de  Biencourt  en

fa  necefjite  toutes  leurs  prouifions  pour  le  fou-

lager,  &  les  fens.  p.  209.

Iefuites  font  retirez  de  Port  Royal,  &  tranf portez

pre"s  de  V Ifle  de  Pemetiq  pour  dreffer  nouuelle

habitation. .  .  .  .  p.  219.

Iefuites  produits  tcfmoins  en  Angleterre,  pour  la

iuflification  du  Capitaine  qui  les  tient  eaptifs,

le  dcliurent  de  foupqon.  .  .  p.  293.

Iefuites  eaptifs  defrayez  en  Galles  par  le  luge  du

lieu  fort  charitablement .  .  .  p.  295.

Iefuites  de  Canada  eaptifs  en  Angleterre,  renuoyez

libres  a  Calais.  p.  298.


1616-29]  BIARI7S  RELATION,  i6i6  145

Jesuits  arrive  at  Port  Royal  in  June,  161 1.  p.  149

Jesuits  acquitted  of  slander  by  the  evidence  of  Cal-

vinists  themselves.  .  .  .  p.  142

Jesuits  study  the  Canadian  language,  but  the  Cana-
dians do  not  serve  them  faithfully.  p. 151,  152

Jesuits  arc  prevented  from  making  progress  in  the
Canadian  language  by  the  very  ones  who
ought  to  aid  them. .  .  .  p.  154

Jesuits  do  not  wish  to  consent  that  Membertou  be

buried  with  his  infidel  ancestors.  .  p. 161

Jesuits  build  with  their  own  hands  a  boat,  to  go  in

search  of  food  in  time  of  famine.  .  p.  2\0

Jesuits  gather  the  Chiquebi  root,  and  fish  for  Smelts

and  Herring,  in  time  of  famine.  .  p.  213

Jesuits  and  other  FrcncJi  of  St.  Sauveur  are  taken

to  Virginia. .  .  .  .  p.  260

Jesuits  save  the  English,  who  hold  them  prisoners,

from  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards.  .  p.  289

Jesuits  are  carried  from the  Acorcs Islands to

Wales,  a  Province  of  England.  .  p.  292

Jesuits  place  in  the  hands  of  sieur  de  Biencourt,  in
his  need,  all  their  provisions,  to  nourish  him
and  his  people.  .  .  .  p.  209

Jesuits  are  withdrawn  from  Port  Royal,  and  taken
to  the  Island  of  Pemetiq,  to  establish  a  new
settlement. .  .  .  .  p.  219

Jesuits,  produced  as  witnesses  in  England,  for  the
justification  of  the  Captain  who  holds  them
prisoners,  deliver  him  from  suspicion.  p.  293

Jesuit  prisoners'  expenses  in  Wales  very  kindly  paid

by  the  Judge  of  the  place.  .  .  p.  295

Jesuits  of  Canada, prisoners  in  England,  liberated

and  sent  to  Calais.  p.  298


146  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.4

Ingres,  c  eft  a  dire  Anglois,  hays  dcs  Canadois. p. 35.
IJle  longue  a  dix  lieiies  de  Baye  Francoife  p.  254

K

Kadefqtiit,  port  d'Acadie  deftinc  au  nouueau  logis

des  Francois.  .  .  .  p.  221

Kebec  habitation  fondce  par  Champlain.  p.  121

Kinibequi,  riuierc  proche  dcs  Armouehiquois,  a  foix-
ante  &  dix  lieiies  de  port  Royal.  .  p.  \j6

L

La  Marquife  de  Guercheuille  impctre  en  don  Ca-
nada, horfmis port  Royal.  .  .  p.  190
Langage  Canadois  fort  manque  a  cxprimer  vnc  in-
finite de  chafe  fort  ordinaires. .  p. 151
La  Marquife  cntrc  en  affectation  pour  le  fait  de

port  Royal  auec  Ic  jieur  de  Potrincourt.  p.  188

La  Motte,  Lieutenant  de  la  Sauffayc.  .  p.  223

Le  fieur  de  Potrincourt  va  en  Canada,  &faicl  bap-

tifcr  au  pluftoft  des  Sauuages.  .  p.  126

La  Motte Gentilhomme Francois, captif  auec  les

Iefuites  de  Canada,  mis  en  liberie. .  /.  301

Langues  dijfercntes  cntrc  les  peuplcs  de  Canada. p. 54
Lapins,  &  leuraux  affez  rares  en  Canada.  p. 46

La  Roy ne  donne  aux  Iefuites  cinq  ecus  efcus  pour

le  voyage  de  Canada.  .  .  .130

Legumes  croiffent  fort  grands,  &  bons  en  Canada.  27

Le  fieur  de  Potrincourt  emprunte  dcs  proiiifions  de
bouclic  des  Francois  fes  voifiiis,  &  leur  fait
recognoiftre  foil  fi Is  pour  Vice-admiral.  . 146

Le  fieur  de  Potrincourt  rctourne  de  Canada  en
France  vn  mois  apres  qi/'il y  cftoit  arriud pour
enuitailler  port  Royal.  .  .  .149


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  147

Ingres,  that  is  English,  hated  by  the  Canadians. p. 35
Long  Island,  ten  leagues  from  French  Bay.  p.  254

K

Kadesquit,  a  port  of  Acadia,  intended  as  a  new  resi-
dence for  the  French. .  .  .  p.  221
Kebec  settlement,  founded  by  Chan/plain.  p.  121
Kinibequi,  a  river  near  the  ArmoucJiiquois,  seventy

leagues  from  port  Royal.  .  .  p.  176

L

The  Marquise  dc Guercheville  given  the  grant  of

Canada,  with  the  exception  of  port  Royal.  p.  190

Canadian  Language  very  weak  in  expressing  an  in-
finite number  of  very  ordinary  things.  p.  1  5  1
The  Marquise  enters  into  partnership  in  the  affairs

of  port  Royal  with  sieur  dc  Potrincourt.  p. 188

La  Motte,  Lieutenant  of  la  Saussayc.  .  p.  223

Sieur  de  Potrincourt  goes  to  Canada  and  has  a
number  of  the  Savages  baptized  as  quickly  as
possible.  .  .  .  .  p.  126

La  Motte,  a  French Gentleman,  prisoner  with  the

Jesuits  of  Canada,  set  at  liberty.  .  p.  301

Different  languages  among  the  tribes  of  Canada. p. 54
Rabbits  and  hares  rather  scarce  in  Canada.  p. 46

The  Queen  gives  to  the  Jesuits  five  hit  ml  red  Sens  for

the  Canadian  voyage.  .  .  .130

Vegetables  grow  very  large  and  are  good  in  Canada.  27

Sieur  de  Potrincourt  borrows  some  provisions  from
his  French  neighbors,  and  makes  them  recognize
his  son  as  Vice-admiral.  .  .  .146

Sieur  de  Potrincourt  returns  from  Canada  to
France  a  month  after  he  had  come  to  repro-
vision  port  Royal.  .  .  .  .149


148  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

Louys  Membertou  Sagamo  faicl  Tabagie  a  quinze
Francois de  faiucl Sauueur retournans en
France.  .  .  .  .  .255

Loups  mar  ins  fe  prennent  a  foifon  en  Ianuicr.  . 42

Loup marin,  poiffon  fraye  fur terre es  Ijlcs  de

Canada.  .  .  .  .  .43

Loutres  ont  leur  chaffe  principale  en Feurier, &

Mars.  .  .  .  .  .43

Lugubres  hurlements  a  la  mort  des  Canadois.  . 90

Lunes. Var  Luncs  les Canadois  font  affortis  de

nouuelle  cJiaffe,  on  pefclie. .  .  .42

M

Madame la Marquife de Guercheuille zelce en

r affaire  de Canada.  .  .  .127

Madame  de Guercheuille  defraye  les Iefuites  au

chemin  de  Canada. .  .  .  .130

Madame  de  Guercheuille  trouuc  I 'expedient  d 'ex-
clure  les  Caluiniflcs  du  nauire  oh  ils  ne  vou-
loyent  admettre  les  Iefuites.  .  135

Madame  dc  Guercheuille  trouue  le  fonds  d'vne  rente
perpetuelle  en  Canada,  pour  y  entretenir  les
Iefuites.  .  .  .  .  137

Madame  de  Sourdis  fournit  aux  Iefuites  le  linge

pour  Canada.  .  .  .  .130

Madame  la  Marquife  de  Vernueil  fournit  aux  Ie-
fuites les  habits  d' Eglife,  &  autrcs  vtcnfiles
pour  Canada.  .  .  .  .130

Magafins  des  Canadois,  font  quclqucs  facs  de  pro-

uifion  peudus  en  vn  arbre. .  .  Ji

Magiciens  frequents  en  Canada. .  .  .94

Magiflrats  de  la  Virginic  prennent  refolution  de
ruiner  toutes  les  places  des  Francois  en  Canada,
piller  tons  les  nauires,  &  rcnuoyer  les perfonnes


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  ibib  149

Louys  M ember  tou,  Sagamore,  makes Tabagie  for
fifteen  Frenchmen  of  saint  Sauveur  returning
to  France.  .  .  .  .  . 255

Seals  arc  caught  in  abundance  in  January.  . 42

Sea/,  fish  which  breeds  upon  the  Islands  in  Canada. 43
Otters are hunted chiefly in February and

March.  .  .  .  .  -43

Doleful  howls  at  the  death  of  Canadians.  . 90

Moons. The  Canadians  arrange  their  hunting  and

fishing  by  Moons.  .  .  .  .42

M

Madame  la  Marquise  de Guercheville  zealous  in

the  affairs  of  Canada.  .  .  .127

Madame  de  Guercheville  defrays  the  expenses  of  the

Jesuits  on  their  journey  to  Canada. .  .130

Madame  de  Guercheville  devises  an  expedient  to  ex-
clude the  Calvinists  from  the  ship  in  which  they
did  not  wish  to  admit  the  Jesuits.  .  135

Madame  de  Gzierchcvillc  raises  a  fund  for  a  con-
tinual income  in  Canada,  to  maintain  the
Jesuits  there.  .  .  .  137

Madame  de  Sourdis  furnishes  the  Jesuits  with  the

linen  for  Canada.  .  .  .  .130

Madame  la  Marquise  de  Vernneil  furnishes  the
Jesuits  with  the  Ecclesiastical  robes  and  other
utensils,  for  Canada.  .  .  .130

Magazines  of  the  Canadians  arc  bags  of  provisions

hung  to  a  tree.  .  .  .  7 1

Magicians  very  common  in  Canada.  .  . 94

Magistrates  of  Virginia  decide  to  ruin  all  t lie  places
of  the  French  in  Canada,  to  plunder  their  ships,
and  to  send  the  people  back  to  France.  . 264


150  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

en  France.  .  .  .  .264

Maladcs  cruellement  trait  tec  en  Canada.

Malade  tarda ut  a mourir  cflouffe  a  force  d 'can

froide  qu 'on  luy  verfe  fur  le  ventre.  . 85

Malade  ayant tefilc  fans rien donner, recoit des

prefents.  .  .  .  .  .89

MarefcJial dc la Virginie  vent  faire  pendre les

Francois  dc  faincl  Sauueur.  .  .261

Mariagcs  come  fc  trait tet  entre  Canadois.  . 61

Matachias,  chaines,  &  parures  des  fennnes Cana-

doifes.  .  .  .  .  -37

Matachias,  ioyaux,  cncillic'es  fur  la  foffc  des  fan-
nies. .  .  .  .  .92

Medcciues  ordinaircs  des  Canadois,  efiuues  &  fric-
tions. .  .  .  .  '77

Member  ton,  Sagamo,  &  Autmoin  tout  cnfemblc.  54

Membertou  na  iamais  en  quvnc  fennne  a  la  fois,
mefm.es  cfilant  Pay  en,  iugeant  la  Polygamic  in-
fante &  incommode .  .  .  .65

Membertou,  &  f  on  fits  retire z  des  mains  dc  V Aut-
moin, qui  les  auoit  condamnez  dc  maladic  mor-
telle.  .  .  .  .  .87

Membertou  appclle  le  Capitaine,  aprcs  fa  mort. . 93

Membertou  feul  d"  entre  les  Oanadies  baptifcz  auoit

fait  profit  du  baptcf  me.  .  .  .109

Membertou  premier  baptife  des  Sagamos.  . 158

Membertou  logd  &  ferui  par  les  Iefuites  dans  leur

cabane  iufques  a  fa  mort. .  .  .158

Membertou  demande  d'ejlrc  entcrrc  auec  fes  ma-
fcurs,  les  Iefuites  luy  remoujlrent  que  eel  a  re-
pugne  an Chriflianifme : il  pcrfiflc  quelque
temps,  puis  en  fin  acqniefec.  .  1 60. 162

Membertou defire  d'cflre  bien injlruiel ,  pour  fe

rendre  Predicate// r  dc  V Euangile. .  .163


1616-29]


BIARD'S  RELATION,  ibib


151


Sick  people  cruelly  treated  ill  Canada.

Sick  people  who  are  slow  to  die,  smothered  by  pour-
ing a  quantity  of  cold  water  upon  their
stomachs. .  .  .  .  .85

Sick  person  having  made  his  will  without  giving

anything,  himself  receives  gifts.  .  . 89

Marshal  of  Virginia  wishes  to  have  the  French  of

saint  Sauveur  hanged.  .  .  .261

Marriages,  how  arranged  among  Canadians.  . 61

Matachias,  chains, and  adornments of Canadian

women.  .  .  .  .  -37

Matachias,  jewels,  collected  upon the  graves  of  the

women.  .  .  .  .  .92

Medicines  in  use  among  the  Canadians,  vapor-baths

arid  rubbing.  .  .  .  -77

Membertou,  both  Sagamore  and Autmoin.  . 54

Membertou  had  only  one  wife  at  a  time,  even  when
a  Pagan,  considering  Polygamy  both  zvicked  and
inconvenient.  .  .  .  .65

Membertou  and  his  son  withdrawn  from  the  hands
of  the  Autmoin,  who  had  pronounced  their  ill-
nesses fatal.  .  .  .  .87

Membertou  called  "the  Captain  "  after  his  death.  93

Membertou,  of  all  the  Canadians  who  were  bap-
tised, profited  by  his  baptism.  .  .109

Membertou  the  first  Sagamore  to  be  baptised.  . 158

Membertou  lodged  and  cared  for  by  the  Jesuits  in

their  cabin  up  to  the  time  of  his  death.  . 158

Membertou  asks  to  be  buried  with  his  fathers  ;  the
Jesuits urge that this would  be contrary  to
Christianity ; he insists  for some time,  then
finally  yields. .  .  .  . 1 60, 162

Membertou ivishes to be well  instructed,  to make

himself  a  Preacher  of  the  Gospel.  .  .163


152  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESU/TES  [Vol.4

Mcmbcrtou  confcille  an  P.  Eucmoud  ma  lade  d'  cf-
crirc  a  Biencourt  qii  on  nc  V a  point  tue,  mats
qu'il  eft  mort  de  maladie. .  .  .202

Memoir es  de  France  efface es  en Canada,  par  les

Anglois.  ....  265.  271

Merueille,  Capitainc  natif  de  S.  Malo,  eftant  pri-
fonnicr,  fail  tout  deuoir  de  bon Chrejlien.  173

Meuano,  IJlc  a  V emboucheure  de  la  Bayc  Francoife. 254

Mine  d 'argent  en  la  Baye  faincle  Marie,  en  Canada.

Mine  de  fer  a  la  riuiere  S.  lean.  .  .32

Mines  de  cuynrc  a  port  Royal,  & a la Baye  des

mines.  .  .  .  .  .32

Mocofa  tcrrc  ferine,  oh  cfl  fitne'e  la  Virginic  des

Anglois.  .  .  .  .  .227

Mois.  Chaqne  mois  de  /' ' anne'e  les  Canadois  out
pefche,  on  cJiaffc  abondante,  on  tons  les  denx.

Montagnets, Sonriqnois, Etechemins allies aux

Francois  en  Canada.  .  .  .34

Monts  defcrts,  IJle,  appellee  Pemetiq.  .  .219

Morts  enterrez  ajjis,  les  genonx  contrc  le  ventre,  la

tcfle  fur  les  genonx.  .  .  .91

Moulucs  foifonnent  en  la  cofte  de  mcr  dds  le  com-
mencement de  May  infqncs  a  la  my-Scptcmbrc.  45

N

Nattcs de rozeau,  fort menues, & Hen tiffues,

deffendent  les  cabancs  de  la  pluye.  .  . 42

Nauire  arriue  a  propos  a  ceux  deport  Royal  en  lenr

grande  difette.  .  .  .  1 86

Nauire  captif  des  Francois  de  S.  Sauucur  com-
mande' par  Turne I  Anglois  cfl  port 'e' par  le  vent
aux  Acores  Ifles  de  la  coronne  d'Efpagne.  281

Nauire  de  la  Sauffayc  arriue  en  Canada.  . 216


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELA  TION,  1616  153

Membcrtou  advises  Father  Euemoud,  who  is  sick,  to
zvrite  to  Biencourt,  that  they  did  not  kill  him,
but  that  he  died  of  illness. .  .  .202

Mementos  of  France  effaced  in  Canada,  by  Eng-
lish. ....  265,271

Mervcille,  Captain,  a  native  of  St.  Malo,  being
a  prisoner,  performs  all  the  duties  of  a  good
Christian. .  .  .  .  1 73

Meuano,  Island  at  the  mouth  of  French  Bay.  . 254

Mine  of  silver  at  Baye  saint c  Marie,  in Canada.

Mine  of  iron  at  the  river  St.  John.  .  . 32

Mines  of  copper  at  port  Royal  and  Bay  of  mines.  32

Mocosa,  the  mainland  in  which  the  Virginia  of  the

English  is  situated.  .  .  .227

Months.  Every  month  of  the  year  in  Canada  has
an  abundance  of  fish  or  game,  or  both.

Montagucts,  Souriquois,  Etechcmins,  allies of  the

French  in  Canada. .  .  .  .34

Mount  desert,  Island,  called  Pemetiq.  .  .219

Dead  people buried  in  a  sitting  posture,  the  knees

against  the  stomach,  the  lie  ad  upon  the  knees.  91

Codfish  abound  near  the  scacoast  from  the  begin-
ning of  May  until  the  middle  of  September. . 45

N

Mats  of  reeds,  well  woven,  and  very  fine,  protect

the  cabins  from  rain.  .  .  .42

Ship arrives very  opportunely  for those at  port

Royal  in  their  great  need. .  .  .186

Ship  captured  from  the  French  of  St.  Sauvcur,
commanded  by  Turncl,  an  Englishman,  is  car-
ried by  the  wind  to  the  A  cores  Islands  of  the
crown  of  Spain.  .  .  .  .281

Ship  of  la  Saussaye  arrives  in  Canada. .  .216


154


LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES


[Vol.  4


Nicolas  Adams  luge  de  Pembrocli  en  Anglcterre,
charitable  outers  les  Iefuitcs  captifs.

Noyers  frequents  en  la  cojle  de  la  riuiere  faincl
lean.  .

Novis  changes  aux  trefpaffez  apres  qiiils  font  en-
terre. ,c.  .

Nopces  des  C ana  do  is  auec  folc  vine  lie  Tabagie,  chants,
&  danfes. .

Norembegne,  terre  de  Canada  aufji  bonne  que  no  fire
France.  .  .  .  .  .

Norembegne,  &  Acadie  pais  de  la  France  noun e lie.

Normans  font  allez  en  la  France  nouuelle,  V an
i  500. deux  ans  apres  les  Bretons.

Nouuelle  France  fepare'e  de  la  Guienne  de  Jiuicl
cens,  ou  millc  lieiles  par  mer.

Nouuelle  France,  partie  occidental  de  I'A  merique.


295

9
62

26
4


O

Oeufs  d1  oyfeaux  deproye  d' eau  abondent  en  Canada.  45
Oyes  blanches,  &  grifes,  paffageres  en  Canada.  .  46
Oyfeaux  de  proyc  de mer couurcnt les Isles de

Canada  de  leurs  eeufs.  .  .  .45

Oyfeaux  originaires,  & paffagers  rares  en  Canada  ;

ceux  de  proye  font  frequents.  .  . 46

Onclion  d ' huyle  de  Loup marin  vfite'e  en Canada

contrc  le  chaud,  &  le  froid.  .  -77

Orignacs  font  de  fa  if  on  en  Feurier  &  Mars.  . 43

Ours  bons  a  manger  en  Canada  aux  mois  de  Feu-
rier &  Mars.  .  .  .  .43
Outardes,  ou  Canes  fauuages  fe prennent  en  Auril. 45
Outardes  paffageres  en  Canada . . .46


Pembroch,  ville principale  de  Galles  en  Anglcterre. 292


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  155

Nicolas  Adams,  Judge,  of  Pembroch  in  England,

kind  to  the  captive  Jesuits. .  .  . 295

A7uts  abundant  upon the  banks  of  the  river  saint

John.  .  .  .  .  .31

Names  of  the  dead  changed  after  they  are  buried.  9

Nuptials  of  the Canadians  with  solemn  Tabagie,

songs,  and  dances. .  .  .  .62

Norembegua,  country  of  Canada,  as  good  as  France. 26
Norembegua  and  Acadia,  countries  of  new  France.  4

Normans  went  to  new  France  in  the  year  1500,  two

years  after  the  Bretons.  .  .  .3

New  France  separated  from  Guienne  by  eight  hun-
dred or  one  thousand  leagues  of  the  sea.
Nezv  France,  the  tvestern  part  of  America.  .  1

O

Eggs  of  marine  birds  of  prey  abundant  in  Canada. 45
White  and  grey  geese,  birds  of  passage  in  Canada.  46

Marine  birds  of  prey  cover  the  Islands  of  Canada

with  their  eggs.  .  .  .  .45

Native  birds  and  birds  of  passage  rare  in  Canada  ;

birds  of  prey common.  .  .  .46

Anointing  with  Seal  oil  used  in Canada  against

heat  and  cold.  .  .  .  -77

The  season  for  moose  is  in  February  and  March.  43

Bears  good  to  cat  in  Canada  in  the  months  of  Feb-
ruary and  March. .  .  .  .43
Bustards,  or  wild  Ducks,  are  taken  in  April. . 45
Bustards,  birds  of  passage  in  Canada. . . 46

P

Pembroke,  the  principal  city  of  Wales in  England. 292
Pentcgoet  river  has  a  Sagamie  along  its  banks. . 53


156  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4


Pentegoet  riuiere,  a  vne  Sagamie  du  long  de  fon

riuage.  .  .  •  •  -53

Pencoit,  Ijles  a  vingtciuq  lieiies  de  faincl  Sauueur. 228
Perdrix  grifes  a  grdd  queue  en  Canada.  . 46

Pere  Enemond  Majjre  fe  loge  aucc  Membertou  pour

apprcndrc  la  langue  Canadinc.  .  .200

Vere  Enemond  yLaJjfc,  hty  quinziefme  renuoye  par

V Anglois  en  France  dans  vne  chaloupc.  . 252

P.  Biard  tient  auec  foy  vn  Canadin,  pour  apprendre

la  langue  fauuage. .  .  .  .201

Vere  Biard, &  P.  Enemond  MaJjTe  dcjlinez  pour

Canada.  .  .  .  •  .129

Ycrc  Biard  nc  veut  enfeigner  aux  Anglois  le  logis

de  faincl 'e  Croix,  dont  il  court  peril  de  fa  vie. 264

P.  Biard  court  fortune  d'eflre  iettc  en  tcrre  deferte,

on  en  mer  par  les  foupcons  de  V Anglois.  . 268

Pere  Biard prcuue  efficacement  an  Capitaine  Ang-
lois, que  les  Francois  de  S.  Sauucur  font  Men
aduoiics  du  Roy  de  Y ranee. .  .  p.  24.4.

Pefchc  abondantc  dcpuis  May,  iufqucs  a  my-Sep-

tcmbre.  .  .  •  •  P- 45-

Pefchc  fuccefjiue  de  diners  poiffons  dc's  la  my-Mars

iufques  en  Oclobre. .  .  p-  44-  45-  4^-

Petun,  &  fujuee  d'icelny  pracliqucc  par  les  Cana-
dois,  contrc  le  manuals  temps,  la  faim,  &
autrcs  maux.  .  .  •  P- 7°

Peuples  de  Canada  trois  en  tout  allies  des  Francois,  p. 34

Pierre  du  Gas,  ficur  de  Monts  Lieutenant  du  Roy

Henry  IIII.  en  la  France  nouuclle. .  p. 5

Pilotois,  Mcdcciu  f order.  .  .  /. 80

Pilot c  Francois Caluiniflc  offre  toute  amitie  aux

Iefuitcs  captifs  des  Anglois. .  .  p-  245

Plajlricr  recognoijl  le  ficur  de  Biencourt.  . 1 5  7


1616-29]  BIARD' S  RELATION,  i6i6  157

Pencoit, Islands twenty-five leagues from saint

Sauveur.  .  .  .  .  .228

Gray  partridges  with  large  tails,  in  Canada.  . 46

Father  Enemond  Masse"  goes  to  live  zvith  Member-

tou  to  learn the Canadian language.  . 200

Father  Enemond  Masse,  one  of  fifteen  sent  by  the

English  to  France  in  a  shallop.  .  .252

Father  Biard  keeps  with  him  a  Canadian,  to  learn

from  him  the  language  of  the  savages.  . 20  r

Father  Biard  and  Father  Enemond  Masse"  ap-
pointed to  Canada. .  .  .  .129

Father  Biard  refuses  to  disclose  to  tlie  English  the
position  of  sainte  Croix,  for  which  he  is  in
danger  of  losing  his  life.  .  .  .264

Father  Biard  runs  the  risk  of  being  cast  upon  a
desert  land,  or  into  the  sea,  through  the  sus-
picions of  the  English.  .  .  .268

Father  Biard  proves  satisfactorily  to  the  English
Captain,  that  the  French  of  St.  Sauveur  are
under  the  protection  of  the  King  of  France. p.  244

Fish  abundant  from  May  to  the  middle  of  Septem-
ber. .  .  .  p. 45

Continuous  fishing  for  different  kinds  of  fish  from

the  middle  of  March  until  October.  p.  44,  45,  46

Tobacco  used  among  the  Canadians  as  a  protection

against  bad  tveat her,  famine,  and  other  evils, p. 78

Tribes  of  Canada, only three arc allies of  the

French.  .  .  .  .  p. 34

Pierre  du  Gas,  sieur  de  Monts,  Lieutenant  of  King

Henry  IIII.  in  new  France.  .  p. 5

Pilotois,  Medicine  man  and  sorcerer.  .  p. 80

French  Pilot,  a Calvinist,  shoivs  great  friendliness

to  the  fesuit  prisoners  of  the  English.  p.  245

Plastrier  acknowledges  sieur  de  Biencourt.  157


158


LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES


[Vol.  4


202.

47-

8.
24.


Plaifant  difcours  dc  Louys  Membcrtou  anec  le  P.

Enemond  Maffc  malade.
Ponamo  poiffon  de  Canada  fraye  fous  la  glace  en

Decem.br e. .  .  .  .  p.

Port  Royal  &  Sainclc  Croix,  deux  logis  bajlis  par

le  Jieur  de  Motifs  en  la  France  nouuelle.  p.

Port  Royal  a  forme  de  Pcninfule.  .  p.

Puritain  procure  tout  le  mal  qu'il  pent  aux  Iefui-

tes.  p.  268

Port  Royal  vial  cnuitaille  fur  V Hyuer,  pour  grand

nonibrc  dc  pcrfonncs.  .  .  p.  144

Port  aux Coquilles  a  vingt  &  vnc  lieu'es  de  Port

Royal.  ....

Port  au  Moutou.
Port  Royal  brufe par  I'Anglois.
Port  Royal  a  quelles  conditions  cede  au  Jieur  dc

Potrincourt  par  le  Jieur  dc  Monts.
Port  Royal  fans  aucunc  defefe  perdu  pour  les  Frd-

cois,  &  pille'  &  brujle" par  V  Anglois.
Port  de  S.  Sauueur  nouuellement  appelle  de  ce  nom,

&  defline'  a  nouuelle  habitatio  de  Francois.
Port  de  S.  Sauueur  fort  capable,  &  a  I'abry  du  vent.
Prefage  manuals  d'vn  figne  paroiffant  au  ciel.
Propriete'  dc  Canadois  cfl  en  la  poffeffwn  du  ckien,

&  du  fac. ....
Prouifion  pour  Port  Royal  mal  mefnage'e  a  Dieppe,

&  dans  le  nauire.
Pyramides  de  perches  fur  les  tombeaux  des  nobles  de

Canada.  ....


155.

255.

271.

122.

266

220.
225.
167.

5i-

194.


92.


R.

Racine  Chiquebi  a  guife  de  trujfes.  .  .213.

Raifons  obliged tes  le  Francois  a  eultiuer  Canada. 331.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  159

Amusing  talk  of  Loiiys  Membertou with Father

Euemond  Masse,  when  he  teas  ill. .  .202

Ponamo,  a  fish  of  Canada,  spawns  under  the  ice  in

December. .  .  .  .  p. 47

Port  Royal  and  Sainte  Croix,  two  stations  estab-
lished by  sieur  de  Monts,  in  new  France.  p. 8
Port  Royal  in  t  lie  form  of  a  Pen  insula. . p. 24
Puritan  makes  all  the  trouble  he  can  for  the  Jesuits,  p.  268
Port Royal  badly  provisioned  for the  Winter,  on

account  of  the  great  number  of  persons.  p. 144

Port  aux  Coquilles,  twenty-one  leagues  from Port

Royal.  .  .  .  .  155

Port  au  Mouton.  .  .  .  .255

Port  Royal  burned  by  the  English.  .  .271

Port  Royal,  on what  conditions  ceded  to  sieur  dc

Potrincourt  by  sieur  de  Monts.  .  .122

Port  Royal,  defenseless,  is  lost  to  the  French,  and

pillaged  and  burned  by  the  English. .  .266

Port  of  St.  Sauvcur  newly  called  by  this  name,  and

intended  as  a new  habitation  for  the  French. 220
Port  of  St.  Sauveur  very  spacious,  and  protected

from  the  wind.  .  .  .  .225

Presage  of  evil  in  a  phenomenon  appearing  in  the

heavens.  ....

Property  of  the Canadians  lies  in  the  possession  of

a  dog  a) id  a  bag.
Provisions  for  Port  Royal  badly  managed  at  Dieppe

and  in  the  ship.
Pyramids  of  poles  upon  the  tombs  of  the  grandees

of  Canada. ....


R.


167

194
92


Rooty  Chiquebi,  resembles  truffles.  .  .213

Reasons  why  the  French  ought  to  cultivate  Canada. 331


160  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

Religion  des  Canadois,  pure  for celerie.  .  -93-

Riniercs & bras de mer  fort  frequens, rendent

Canada  beaucoup  plus  froid.  .  . 24.

Robe  facre'e,  & pretieufe  des  Autmoins. .  .96.

Roland  Sagamo,  &  autres  donnent  du  pain aux

Francois  de  S.  Sauueur.  .  .  .255.


Sac,  fleches,  peaux, c/iiens, &  autres  meubles  du

de  fundi  enfeuelis  auec  luy. .  .  .92.

Sagamie  au  riuage  de  Saincle  Croix.  .  . 53.

Sagamie  au  bord  de  la  riuiere  S.  lean. .  . 53.

Sagamochin,  petit  Sagamo.  .  .  .52.

Sagamo, eft le chef, & Capitaine de quelque

puiffante  famille. .  .  .  51.

Sagamos  rccogncus  de  leurs  fujccls  en  payant  le

droicl  de  chaff c,  &  de  pefche.  .  . 51.

S agamies diuifees  felon la  porte'e des  Bayes &

Cojles  de  riuicres. .  .  .  -53-

Sagamos  tiennent  les  Eflats  en  Efle.  .  . 53.

Sagamos  &  A  utmoins  feuls  out  voix  e's  affemble'es

publiques. .  .  .  .  53.  54.

Sagamos  Armouchiquois  retirent  bien  a  propos  leurs

gens  du  nauirc  Francois,  pour  euiter  qucrellc.  179
Saincl  lean,  riuiere  en  Canada. .  .  .31

Saincl  lean,  riuiere  fort  pcrilleufe  en  fon  embou-

chcure.  .  .  .  .  .165

Saincl  Laurens,  riuiere  charrie  des  glaces  enormes

bien  auant  en  haute  mer.  .  .  .139

Saincl  Sauueur,  habitation  des  Francois  en  Canada,

en  la  terre  de  la  Norembegue.  .  .19

Saincl  Sauueur,  port  ainfi  nomme  de  nouueau  en  la

cofle  d'Acadie,  define  a  vne  habitation  nou-

uelle,  ..... 229


1616-29]  BJARD'S  RELATION,  ibib  161

Religion  of  the  Canadians >  pure  sorcery . .  -93

Rivers,  and  many  arms of  the sea,  make  Canada

much  colder.  .  .  .  .24

Robe  of  tlic  Autmoins,  sacred  and  precious.  . 96

Roland,  a  Sagamore,  and  others  give  bread  to  the

French  of  St.  Sauveur.  .  .  .255

S.

Sack,  arrows,  skins,  dogs,  and  other  property  of  the

deceased  buried  with  him. .  .  .92

Sagamie  on  the  banks  of  Sainte  Croix. .  -53

Sagamie  on  the  banks  of  the  river  St.  folin.  . 53

Sagamochin,  little  Sagamore.  .  .  .52

Sagamore  is  the  chief  and  Captain  of  some  power-
ful family.  .  .  .  .51

Sagamores  acknoivledged  by  their  subjects  by  paying

a  tax  of  game  and  of  fish. .  .  .51

Sagamies  divided  according  to  the  extent  of  the  Bays

and  river  Banks.  .  .  .  53

Sagamores  hold  State  Councils  in  Summer.  . 53

Sagamores  and  Autmoins  alone  have  a  voice  in  the

public  assemblies.  .  .  .  53»  54

Sagamores  of  the  Armouchiquois  very  opportunely
zvithdraw  their  people  from  the  French  ship  to
avoid  a  quarrel.  .  .  .  1 79

Saint  fohn,  a  river  of  Canada. .  .  .31

Saint  fohn,  a  river  which is  very  dangerous  at  its

mouth.  .  .  .  .  .165

Saint  Lawrence,  a  river  whose  drift  ice  extends  far

out  into  the  open  sea.  .  .  .139

Saint  Sauveur,  a  settlement  of  the  French  in  Can-
ada, in  the  land  of  Norembegua.  .  .19
Saint  Sauveur,  a  port so named  recently,  on  the

coast  of  Acadia,  intended  for  a  new  settlement. 229


162


LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES


[Vol.  4


Saincl  Sauueur,  prins  & pille par  les  Anglois,  .  237
5.  Sauueur  bruflc  par  les  Anglois.  .  . 265

Saincl  c  Croix  eft  au  pais  des  Eteminquois.  .  7

Saiucle  Croix,  IjJe  en  la  France  nouuelle,  premiere

demcure  du  Jieur  de  Wonts,  Lieutenant  pour  le

Roy.  .....  7

Sain  el  e  Croix,  Ijle  de  riuiere  a  fix  lie  ties  de  port

aux  Coquilles.  .  .  .  .156

Sauffaye  arriuc  en  Canada  pour  dreffer  nouuelle

habitation, &  feparer les Icfuites de port

Royal.  .  .  .  .  .215

Sauffaye  Capitaiue  s'amufe  trap  a  eultiuer  la  terrc,

&  neglige  le  b  aft  intent ,  caufc  de  de  la  pcrte  de

S.  Sauueur.  .  .  .  .226.

Sauffaye  Capitaiue  de  S.  Sauueur  ne  pent  produire

fes lettres de Connnifjion, luy ayans efte

fecretteinent  enleuees  par  VAnglois. .  . 239.

Sauffaye  Capitaiue  renuoye  en  Y  ranee  par  V  Auglois,

auee  quatorze  Francois.  .  .  .252.

Schoudon  Sagamo,  nomine  I c  Fere  apres  fa  mort.  .  93.
Scurbot, on maladie  de la terrc, couftumier en

Canada.  .  .  .  .  .14.

Sepuleres  des  Cauadois  voutc's  aucc  des  baftons,  &

de  la  terrc  deffus. .  .  .  .92.

Soifous. Le  Vrince  de Soifj'ons Gouucrneur  de

Canada.  ..... 330.

Soulicrs,  &  grcnes  des  Cauadois. .  .  39.

Souriquois, Montaguets  & Etechemins alliis

des  Francois  en  Canada.  .  .  . 34.

Tabagie,  banquet  des  Cauadois.  .  . 46.

Tabagie  des  prouifions  du  ma  lade  ay  ant  tcfte.  . 89.

Teftamcut  des  Cauadois  auaut  la  mort. .  . 88.

Thomas  Aubert ,  Norma nd  va  en  la  France  nouuelle


1616-29]


BIARD'S  RELATION,  1616


163


Saint  Sauveur,  taken  and  pillaged  by  the  English

St.  Sauveur  burned  by  the  English.

Sainte  Croix  is  in  the  country  of  the  Eteminquois.

Sainte  Croix,  an  Island  in  nezv  France,  first  resi-
dence of  sieur  de  Monts,  Lieutenant  for  the
King.  ....

Sainte  Croix,  an  Island  of  the  river,  six  leagues
from  port  aux  Cog ui lies.

Saussaye  arrives  in  Canada  to  establish  a  nezv  set-
tlement, and  take  the  fesuits  from  port  Royal.

Saussaye,  Captain,  in  amusing  himself  too  much
with  the  cultivation  of  the  land,  neglects  the
construction  of  buildings,  and  causes  the  loss
of  St.  Sauveur.

Saussaye,  Captain  of  St.  Sauveur,  cannot  produce
the  letters  containing  his  Commission,  these
having  been  secretly  appropriated  by  the  Eng-
lish. ....

Saussaye,  Captain,  sent  back  to  France  by  the  Eng-
lish with  fourteen  Frenchmen.

Schoudon,  Sagamore,  called  "the  Father  "  after  his
death.  ....

Scurvy,  or  land  disease,  common  in  Canada.

Sepulchres  of  the  Canadians  arched  over  with
sticks,  with  earth  on  top.

Soissons.  The  Prince  de  Soisso?is,  Governor  of  Can-
ada. ....

Shoes  and  leggings  of  the  Canadians.

Soitriquois,  Monta^uets,  and  Etechemins,  allies
of  the  French  in  Canada.

Tabagic,  a  Canadian  banquet.

Tabagie  from  t lie  provisions  of  a  sick  man  who  has
made  his  will.

Testament  of  the  Canadians  before  death.


237
265

7


7
156

215


226


239
252

93

92

330
39

34
46

89

88


164  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

Tan  1508. .  .  .  .  .2

TJiomas  Dee/,  Marefchal cT Angleterre  a  la  Virginie,

Jiommc  fort  a/pre  enuers  les  Francois  captifs.  261.  300
TJiomas  Robin  affocie  du  Jieur  de  Potrincourt  an

negoce  de  Canada. ,  .  .  .127

Tortues  abondcnt  en  Decembrc. .  .  .47

Trocquc  dcs  pcanx  de  Caflors,  Ejlants, Martres,

hups  mar  ins  en  EJlc.  .  .  33

Trots peuplcs  allies  aux  Francois  en  Canada.  . 34

Turnel, Capitaine  Anglois  tournc  Jon amour  en

haine  contre  le  P.  Biard,  &  pourquoy.  . 276

Turnel  Lieutenant  Anglois  foupconne  de  Jon Capi-
taine pour  auoir  confer e  auec  le  P.  Biard. . 267
Turnel  Capitaine  Anglois portc  cotrc  fon  grc  aux
terres  d'Efpaguc,  fe  rcconcilie  aux  lefuites,
pour  y  auoir  leur  faueur.  .  .  .282.

V.

Veffics  d'orignac  a  garder  Vhuile  du  loup  marin.  43
Vible  Bullot recoit  en  fon uauire  vne  par  tie  des

Francois  de  S.  Sauueur.  .  .  .256

Virginie. Fort  dcs  Anglois  en  la  terre  ferme  de

Mocofa  a  250.  lieues  de  S.  Sauueur.  . 227

Vigne  fa  image  en  plufieurs  endroits  de  Canada,  qui

/neurit  en  fa  faifon.  .  .  .31.

F  I  N.


1616-29]  BIARD' S  RELATION, ibi6  165

Thomas Aubert,  Norman, goes  to  new  France  in

the  year  1508.  ....  2

Thomas  Dee/,  English  Marshal  in  Virginia,  a  man

very  severe  to  the  French  captives.  .  261,  300

Thomas  Robin  associated  with  sieur  de  Potrincourt

in  the  affairs  of  Canada.  .  .  .127

Turtles  abundant  in  December. .  .  .47

Trade in the skins of  Beavers, Elks,  Martens,

and  seals,  in  Summer.  .  .  -33

Three  tribes  allied  with  the  French  in  Canada.  34

Turnel,  English  Captain,  has  his  love  for  Father

Biard  changed  into  hate,  and  why. .  .276

Turnel,  English  Lieutenant,  suspected  by  his  Cap-
tain, for  having  conferred  with  FatJier  Biard. 267

Turnel,  English  Captain,  carried  against  his  will
to  the  lands  of  Spain,  becomes  reconciled  to  the
fesuits,  in  order  to  have  their  favor.  . 282

V.

Bladders  of  moose  skin  in  which  to  keep  the  seal  oil.  43
Vible Bullot receives in his ship a  part  of  the

French  of  St.  Sauve?tr.  .  .  .256

Virginia. A  fort  of  the  English  on  the  mainland

of  Mocosa,  250  leagues  from  St.  Sauveur.  . 227

Vine,  wild,  in  many  places  in  Canada,  which  ripens

in  its  seas on.  .  .  .  .31

END.


J6ti  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


Privilege.

MICHEL  COYSSARD,  Vice-[pro]uincial  de  la
Compagnie  de  Iesvs,  en  la  Prouince  de  Lyon,
permet,  (fuiuant  le  Pritiilege  done  par  les
Roys  tres-Chreftiens  a  la  mefme  Compagnie)  a  Lows
Mvgvet  de  faire  imprimer,  &  vendre  la  Relation  de
la  nouuelle  France  en  Canada,  &  ce  pour  le  terme
de  quatre  ans. Faidt  a  Lyon,  ce  23.  Ianuier  16 16.

M. COYSSARD.


1616-29]  BIARD'S  RELATION,  i6i6  167


License.

MICHEL  COYSSARD,  Vice-provincial  of  the
Society  of  Jesus,  in  the  Province  of  Lyons,
permits,  (according  to  the  License  granted
by  the  most  Christian  Kings  to  the  same  Society)  to
Louys  Muguet  to  have  printed,  and  to  sell,  the
Relation  of  new  France  in  Canada,  and  this  for  the
term  of  four  years.  Done  at  Lyons,  this  23rd  of
January,  1616.

M. COYSSARD.


XV— XVII
Three  Letters  by  Charles  Lalemant

XV. —  Au  Sievr  de  Champlain  ; Kebec,  Juillet  28,  1625

XVI. —  Au  R.  P.  Prouincial  des  RR.  Peres  Recolledts  ;  Kebec,
Juillet  28,  1625

XVII. —  Epistola  ad  Praepositum  Generalem  ; Nova  Francia,
Augustus  1,  [1626]


SOURCE  :  Documents  XV.  and  XVI.,  are  reprinted  from
Sagard's  Histoirc  du  Canada  (Paris,  1636),  pp.  868  -  870.  In
Document  XVII.,  we  follow  Father  Felix  Martin's  apograph
(now  in  the  Archives  of  St.  Mary's  College,  Montreal)  of
the  original  Latin  MS.  in  the  Archives  of  the  Gesu,  Rome.


170  LES  RELATIONS  DES  j£SUITES  [Vol.  4


Lettre  du  R.  P.  Charles  Lallemant  Superievr

des  Miffions  en  Canada  au  Sievr

de  Champlain.

[868] TV  yf  ONSIEVR,

1  V  i.  Nous  voicy  graces  a  Dieu  dans  le  rcfort

de  vojlre  Licutcnancc  oh  nous  fovimes  heu-
reufement  arriuez,  aprc's  auoir  eu  vne  dcs  belles  traucrfes
[869]  quon  aye  encor  experiments.  Monjieur  le  General
apre's  nous  auoir  declare  quil  luy  cjloit  impofsible  de  nous
loger  oil  dans  V habitation  oh  dans  le  fort,  &  qu ' il  faudroit
ou,  repaffer  en  France,  ou  nous  retirer  chez  les  Peres  Recol-
lecls,  nous  a  contrainCi  d'  accepter  ee  dernier  offre.  Les  Peres
nous  out  receus  auec  tant  de  charite qu'il  nous  out  obliges
pour  vn  iamais.  Nojlre  Seigneur  /era  leur  recompence.
V?i  de  uos  Peres  cjloit  alle  a  la  traicle  en  intention  de  paf-
fer  aux  Hurons  ou  aux  Hiroquois,  auec  le  Pcre  Recollect
qui  cjl  vcnu  de  Frdce,  felon  qu'ils  aduifcroient  auec  le  Pcre
Nicolas,  qui  fe  deuoit  treuuer  a  la  traicle  &  confer cr  auec
eux,  niais  il  cjl  arriue  que  le  pauure  Pcre  Nicolas  au
dernier  faut  s'efl  uoye,  ee  qui  a  cfle  caufe  qu ' ils  font
retournez,  u'ayaus  uy  cognoiffance,  ny  languc,  uy  infor-
mation :  nous  attendons  done  vojlre  venue,  pour  refoudre
ce  qui  f era  a  propos  de  fa  ire.  Vous  fcaurez  tout  ee  que
vous  pourrez  defirer  de  ce  pays  du  P.  lofcph,  c' cjl  pour -
quoy  ic  me  content e  de  vous  affeurcr  que  ie  fins,
Monjieur,  Vojlre  tres-affeclionne"  feruiteur,

Charles  Laleniant.
De  Kebec  ce  28.  I  it  il  let  1625.


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  CHAMPLAIN  171


Letter  from  the  Reverend  Father  Charles  Lalle-
mant,30  Superior  of  the  Missions  in  Can-
ada, to  Sieur  de  Champlain.

[868]  Q/tf,

y^  Thanks  to  God,  here  we  are  in  the  district

of  your  Lieutenancy,  where  we  arrived  after
having  one  of  the  most  successful  voyages  [869]  ever  yet  ex-
perienced. Monsieur  the  General,"1  after  having  told  us
that  it  was  impossible  to  give  its  lodging  either  in  the  settle-
ment or  in  the  fort,  and  that  we  must  either  return  to
France,  or  withdraw  to  the  Recollect  Fathers1  ~~  obliged  us
to  accept  the  latter  offer.  The  Fathers  received  us  with  so
much  charity,  that  we  feel  for  ever  under  obligations  to  them.
Our  Lord  will  be  their  reward.  One  of  our  Fathers,  to-
gether with  the  Recollect  Father  who  came  from  France,"
went  to  the  trading  station***  with  the  intention  of  going  to
the  Hurons  or  to  the  Hiroquois,  as  they  should  think  best  af-
ter consulting  Father  Nicolas,  who  was  to  be  at  this  station
to  confer  with  them.  But  it  happened  that  poor  Father
Nicolas  was  drowned  in  the  last  of  the  rapids?*  for  ivhich
reason  they  returned,  as  they  knew  no  one  there,  and  had
no  knowledge  of  the  language  or  of  the  country.  We  are
therefore  awaiting  your  arrival,  to  determine  what  it  will
be  well  to  do.  You  will  hear  all  you  wish  to  know  of  this
country  from  Father  Joseph,'*'  therefore  I  am  content  to
assure  you  that  lam.
Sir,  Your  very  affectionate  servant,

Charles  Lalemaut.
Rebec,  this  2&th  of  July, 1625.


172  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fASUITES  [Vol.4


Lettre  du  R.  P.  Charles  Lallemant  Superievr

des  Miffions  en  Canada  au  R.  P.

Prouincial  des  RR.  Peres

Recolle&s.

MON  Reuerend  Pere,
Pax  Chnjli.
Cc  fcroit  ejire  par  trop  mcfcognoiffant  dc  ne
point  cfcrirc  a  voftrc  Reuerence,  pour  la  remercier,  tant
des  lettres  qui  furent  dernierement  efcritcs  en  nojire
faueur  aux  Peres  qui  font  icy  en  [870]  la  nouuelle  France,
commc  de  la  char  it  e"  que  nous  auons  receues  defdits  Peres,
qui  nous  ont  obliges  pour  vn  iamais,  ie  fupplie  nojire  bon
Dicu  qu'il  foit  la  grande  rccompence  &  des  vns  &  des
autres,  pour  mon  particulicr  i  efcris  a  nos  Superieurs,  que
i 'en  ay  vn  tel  reffenti merit  que  Voccafion  ne  fc  prefentera
point  que  ie  ne  le  faffe  paroijlre,  &  les  fupplie  quoy  que
d'ailleurs  bien  affeclionnez  dc  tefmoigner  a  tout  vojlre
faincl  Ordrc  le  me/me  reffcutiment.  Le  P.  Iofcph  dira  a
vojlre  Reuerence  le  fuiet  de  fon  voyage  pour  le  bon  fuccez
duquel,  nous  ne  cefferons  d'offrir  &  prieres  &  facrificcs  a
Dicu,  il  faut  ccjle  fois  aduanccr  a  bon  efcient  les  affaires
de  nojire  Maijlre,  &  ne  ricu  obmettrc  dc  cc  qu'on  pourra
s 'aduifer  cjire  ncceffairc,  1  en  ay  ejerit  a  tons  ccux  que
1  ay  cren  y  pouuoir  contribuer  que  ie  in  affair c  s'y  em-
ploieront  Ji  les  affaires  de  France  le  permettent,  ie  ne  doute
point  que  voflre  Reuerence  ne  s'y  porte  auec  affection,  &
ainji  virtus  vnita,  fera  beaucoup  d'effet,  en  attendant  le


1816-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO THE  PROVINCIAL  173


Letter  from  the  Reverend  Father  Charles  Lalle-

mant,  Superior  of  the  Missions  of  Canada,

to  the  Reverend  Father  Provincial  of

the  Reverend  Recollect  Fathers.

My  Reverend  Father:
The  peace  of  Christ  be  with  you.
It  would  be  altogether  too  ungrateful  not  to
write  to  your  Reverence  to  tliank  you,  both  for  the  letters
which  were  recently  written  in  our  behalf  to  the  Fathers
who  are  here  in  [870]  new  France,  and  for  the  kindness
ivhicli  we  have  received  from  these  Fathers,  who  have
placed  us  under  everlasting  obligations  to  them.  I  pray
our  good  Lord  that  he  may  be  an  ample  recompense  for
both.  As  to  me,  I  write  to  our  Superiors  that  I  am  so
grateful  for  this  that  I  shall  lose  no  opportunity  to  show
my  appreciation  of  it ;  and  I  implore  them,  although  they
are  already  very  much  attached  to  your  Fathers,  to  express
the  same  gratitude  to  all  your  holy  Order.  Father  Joseph
will  tell  your  Reverence  the  purpose  of  his  voyage,27  for  the
success  of  which  zoc  shall  not  cease  to  offer  prayers  and
sacrifices  to  God.  The  affairs  of  our  Master  must  be  ad-
vanced in  earnest  this  time,  and  nothing  must  be  omitted
which  may  be  deemed  necessary.  I  have  written  to  all  of
those  who,  I  thought,  could  contribute  to  this  enterprise,  and
who,  I  believe,  will  occupy  themselves  zaith  it,  the  affairs
of  France  permitting.  I  do  not  doubt  that  your  Reverence
will  take  an  interest  in  the  work,  and  thus  virtus  unita
will  achieve  good  results. In  awaiting  our  success,  I  com-


174  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  4

fuccez  ic  me  rccornmande  aux  faincls  Sacrifices  de  vojlre
Ratercnce,  de  laquclle  ie  fais.
De  Kebec  ce  28.  Iuillet
1625.

Tres-humble  feruiteur
Charles  Lalemant.

A  mon  Reuerend  Pere  le  P.  Prottincial
des  RR.  Peres  Recollects.


1616-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO  THE  PROVINCIAL  175

mend  myself  to  the  holy  Sacrifices  of  your  Reverence,  of
whom  I  am,

Kebec,  this  28th  of  July,
1625.

The  very  humble  servant,

Charles  Lalemant.

To  my  Reverend  Father,  the  Father  Provincial
of  the  Reverend  Recollect  Fathers.


176  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J E~  SUITES  [Vol.4


Epistola  Patris  Caroli  Lalemant  Superioris  Missio-

nis  Canadensis  ad  Reverendissimum  Patrem

Mutium  Vitelleschi,  Praepositum  Ge-

neralem  Societatis  Jesu,  Romae.

(Transcripsit  Pater  Felix  Martinus  ex  codice  Latino  qui  in
Archivis  Jesti,  Roma,  conservatur).

ADMODUM  REVERENDE  IN  CHRISTO  PATER.
Pax  Christi.
Non  miretur  Paternitas  vestra  si  nullas  a  pos-
tremis,  hoc  est  ab  anno  litteras  habuerit  a  nobis,  adeo
enim  remoti  sumus  a  littore  maris,  ut  semel  dnntaxat
singulis  annis  visitemur  a  Gallis  et  quidem  ab  iis  tan-
tum  quibus  libera  est  ad  nos  navigatio,  nam  cseteris
est  interdicta ;  quo  fit  ut  si  casu  aliquo  perirent  naves
illae  onerarise  vel  certe  a  prsedonibus  caperentur,  ab
una  Dei  providentia  expectanda  essent  alimenta  qui-
bus vitam  sustentare  possemus;  a  barbaris  enim
hominibus  vix  necessaria  ad  vitam  habentibus  nihil
sperandum,  sed  qui  hactenus  providit  Gallis,  hie  jam
tot  annis  commorantibus  et  nihil  nisi  lucrum  tempo-
rale  quserentibus  non  deerit  suis  uni  Dei  gloriae  et
animarum  saluti  invigilantibus.  Hoc  igitur  anno  toti
pene  fuimus  in  perdiscendo  barbaro  idiomate,  uno  aut
altero  mense  excepto  quibus  terram  coluimus  unde
tenuem  nobis  victum  comparare  utcumque  possemus.
Pater  Joannes  Brebeuf  vir  et  pins  et  prudens  et  cor-


1616-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO THE  GENERAL  177


Letter  from  Father  Charles  Lalemant,  Superior  of
the  Missions  of  Canada,  to  the  Very  Rever-
end Father  Mutio  Vitelleschi,28  General
of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  at  Rome.

(Transcribed  by  Eat  her  Felix  Martin  from  the  original  Latin
MS.,  preserved  i?i  the  Archives  of  the  Gesii,  Rome.)

Very  Reverend  Father  in  Christ:
The  peace  of  Christ  be  with  you.
Your  Paternity  need  not  be  surprised  to
have  received  no  letters  from  us  during  the  year
since  our  last;  for  we  are  so  remote  from  the  sea-
coast  that  we  are  visited  only  once  a  year  by  French
vessels,  and  then  only  by  those  to  whom  navigation
hither  is  allowed,  for  to  others  it  is  interdicted;  so
that,  if  by  any  mischance  those  merchant  ships  should
be  wrecked,  or  be  taken  by  pirates,29  we  could  look  to
Divine  providence  alone  for  our  daily  bread.  For
from  the  savages,  who  have  scarcely  the  necessaries
of  life  for  themselves,  nothing  is  to  be  hoped ;  but
he  who  has  hitherto  provided  for  the  needs  of  the
French,  who  have  dwelt  here  so  many  years  only
with  a  view  to  temporal  gain,  will  not  abandon  his
faithful  ones  who  seek  only  the  glory  of  God  and  the
.salvation  of  souls.  During  the  past  year  we  have
devoted  ourselves  almost  entirely  to  learning  the  dia-
lect of  the  savages,  excepting  a  month  or  two  spent
in  cultivating  the  soil,  in  order  to  obtain  such  slight
means  of  subsistence  as  we  could.  Father  Jean  Bre-
beuf,30  a  pious  and  prudent  man,  and  of  a  robust  con-


178  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

pore  robustus  acerbum  hyemis  tempus  cum  barbaris
transegit,  unde  maximam  peregrinae  linguae  cogniti-
onera  hausit  ;  nos  interim  ab  interpretibus  licet
maxime  alienis  a  communicando  barbaro  hoc  idio-
mate  obtinuimus,  praeter  spem  et  expectationem  om-
nium, quod  sperare  poteramus.  Sed  haec  sunt  tantum
gemini  idiomatis  rudimenta,  multo  plura  supersunt.
Ad  multiplicationem  quippe  nationum  multiplicantur
idiomata;  ac  terrain  hanc  longe  lateque  diffusam  in-
colunt  quinquaginta  ut  minimum  nationes,  ingens
sane  campus  in  quo  nostra  excurrat  industria ;  messis
multa  operarii  pauci  qui  tamen  eo  sunt  animo,  per
Dei  gratiam,  ut  nullis  terreantur  difficultatibus,
quamvis  fructus  spes  magna  nondum  affulgeat,  adeo
rudes  sunt  incolae  et  proxime  at  bestias  accedentes.
Certe  hoc  unum  solatur  nos  quod  Deus  optimus,  max-
imus,  in  repetenda  mercede,  fructus  non  tarn  sit  hab-
iturus  rationem  quam  voluntatis  nostras  et  laboris  im-
pensi,  modo  grata  sit  ipsi  haec  nostra  qualiscumque
voluntas,  non  est  quod  male  locatam  operam  nostram
existimemus:  nullus  ergo  alius  hoc  anno  fructus
quam  loci,  personarum  et  idiomatis  duarum  nationum
cognitio,  si  barbarorum  ratio  habeatur,  nam  Gallis
nostris  qui  tres  hie  tantum  supra  quadraginta  nume-
rantur  praesto  fuimus,  quorum  generales  totius  vitae
confessiones  audivimus,  habita  prius  exhortatione  de
ejus  confessionis  necessitate,  singulis  praeterea  men-
sibus  geminam  ad  eos  concionem  habuimus;  his
majora  dabit  sequens  annus  Deo  bene  juvante  et  to-


1616-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO  THE  GENERAL  179

stitution,  passed  the  sharp  winter  season  among  the
savages,  acquiring  a  very  considerable  knowledge  of
this  strange  tongue.  We,  meantime,  learning  from
interpreters  who  were  very  unwilling  to  communi-
cate their  knowledge,  made  as  much  progress  as  we
could  hope,  contrary  to  the  expectation  of  all.  But
these  are  only  the  rudiments  of  two  languages  ;
many  more  remain.  For  the  languages  are  multi-
plied with  the  number  of  the  tribes;  and  this  land,
extending  so  far  in  every  direction,  is  inhabited  by
at  least  fifty  different  tribes,  truly  an  immense  field
for  our  zeal.  The  harvest  is  great,  the  laborers  are
few;  but  they  have,  by  God's  grace,  a  courage  un-
daunted by  any  obstacles,  although  the  promise  of
success  is  not  yet  very  great,  so  rude  and  almost
brutish  are  the  natives.  We  have,  truly,  this  one
consolation,  that  God  in  his  goodness  and  power,  in
the  distribution  of  his  rewards  will  not  so  much  con-
sider our  success  as  our  good  will  and  our  efforts.
Provided  only  that  our  desires,  such  as  they  may  be,
be  pleasing  in  his  sight,  we  shall  have  no  reason  for
deeming  our  efforts  misspent.  Our  labors  this  year
have  had  no  further  fruit  than  a  knowledge  of  the
country,  of  the  natives,  and  of  the  dialects  of  two
tribes,  if  the  savages  alone  be  considered.  As  re-
gards the  French,  whose  number  does  not  exceed
forty-three,  we  have  not  been  negligent.  We  have
heard  their  general  confessions,  relating  to  their
whole  past  life,  after  first  holding  an  exhortation  on
the  necessity  of  this  confession.  Each  month,  more-
over, we  have  preached  two  sermons  to  them.  To
these  efforts  the  following  year  will  add  still  greater
ones,  if  God  help  and  promote  our  enterprise  as  he
has  done  hitherto.


180  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

turn hoc negotium ut hacterms fecit promovente.

Valent  nostri  omnes,  per  Dei  gratiam

Vix  unus  utitur  linteis  cum  decumbit.  Quod  super-
est  nobis  temporis  a  propria  et  proximorum  salute  id
totum  in  excolenda  terra  insumitur.  Longe  alia  fuis-
sent  virtutum  incrementa,  si  alium  Nostri  non  desi-
derassent  superiorem.  Facile  est  Paternitati  Vestrse
remedium  adhibere,  longe  melius  obsequentis  quam
imperantis  personam  sustineo.  Dabit  hoc  mihi  ut  be-
ne spero  Paternitas  Vestra  a  qua  id,  qua  possum  ani-
mi  demissione,  peto,  nee  hujus  remedii  defectu  re-
morabitur  diutius  alacritatem  nostrorum  in  augen-
dis  virtutibus.  E  Gallia  missi  sunt  ad  nos  hoc  anno
operarii  primum  hie  domicilium  Societatis  erecturi
quod  omnino  necessarium  indicavimus  propter  Gallos
nostros  hie  commorantes  et  nusquam  alibi.  Erigentur
postea  in  aliis  nationibus  in  quibus  major  speratur
fructus.  Certas  enim  et  statas  sedes  habent,  ad  eas
brevi  missuri  sumus  unum  e  nostris  vel  duos  potius,
nimirum  Patrem  Joannem  de  Brebeuf  et  Patrem  An-
nam  de  Noue,  quorum  missio  si  succedat  laetissimus
aperitur  Evangelio  campus ;  barbarorum  opera  eo  de-
ducendi  sunt,  neque  enim  aliis  vectoribus  uti  possunt.
Cum  bona  superiorum  venia  redit  in  Galliam  Pater
Philibertus  Noyrot,  hoc  totum  negotium  ut  hactenus
fecit  promoturus.  Indiget  Paternitatis  Vestrae  auc-
toritate  ut  libere  possit  agere  cum  iis  qui  res  nos-
tras curant.  Facessunt  ipsi  aliquid  negotii  Lutetise
Patres  nostri,  nescio  quam  ob  rem,  nonnihil  videntur


1616-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO THE  GENERAL  181


We are, God be thanked, all well

Hardly  one  of  us  uses  bed-linen  when  he  sleeps.
All  our  time  that  is  not  devoted  to  seeking  the  salva-
tion of  our  fellow-men  and  of  ourselves  is  occupied  in
tilling  the  soil.  Far  greater  would  be  our  growth  in
virtue,  if  another  of  Our  Brothers  were  not  more  de-
sirable as  superior.  This  it  is  easy  for  Your  Pater-
nity to  remedy,  as  I  feel  myself  far  better  fitted  for
obedience  than  for  command.  I  truly  hope  that  Your
Paternity,  from  whom  I  ask  it  with  all  possible  sub-
mission, will  grant  me  this,  and  will  not  longer
hinder,  for  lack  of  this  remedy,  the  eagerness  of  our
brethren  to  increase  their  virtues.  Some  workmen
have  been  sent  to  us  this  year  from  France,  to  construct
the  first  dwelling  of  the  Society  here,  which  we  con-
sidered as  quite  indispensable  on  account  of  our
French,  who  settle  here  and  nowhere  else.  Others
will  be  built  later  among  other  tribes  from  whom  we
expect  greater  results.  To  those  that  have  fixed  set-
tlements we  shall  in  a  short  time  send  one  of  our  num-
ber or  rather  two ;  Father  Jean  de  Brebeuf  and  Father
Anne  de  Noue.*1  If  their  mission  is  successful,  a
most  promising  field  will  be  opened  for  the  Gospel.
They  must  be  taken  there  by  the  savages,  for  they
can  not  use  any  other  boatmen.  With  consent  of  his
superiors,  Father  Philibert  Noyrot32  returns  to  France
to  promote  as  hitherto  the  interests  of  our  enterprise.
He  stands  in  need  of  the  influence  of  Your  Pater-
nity in  order  to  negotiate  freely  with  those  who
have  charge  of  our  affairs.  Our  own  Fathers  at  Paris,
for  some  reason,  put  difficulties  in  our  way,  and  seem
rather  unfriendly  to  our  mission ;  so  that,  but  for
the  favor  of  Father  Cotton, w  of  blessed  memory,  our
affairs  would  have  fallen  to  the  ground


182  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  4

alieni  ab  hac  missione,  cui  nisi  favisset  bonae  memo-
riae Pater Cottonus omnino jacuissent res nos-
trae. . . . Verum  quia  reditums  est  ineunte  vere
Pater  Noyrot,  omnino  alius  e  nostris  erit  necessarius
Lutetiae  vel Rothomagi  qui  in  ipsius  locum  sufficia-
tur  et  rerum  nostrarum  curam  suscipiat,  necessaria
singulis  annis  mittat  et  litteras  nostras  accipiat ;  si  ta-
men  ita  judicaverit  Paternitas  Vestra. Septem  ergo  hie
residui  erimus. Patres  quatuor :  P.  Enemundus  Masse,
admonitor  et  confessarius,  P.  Joannes  de  Brebeuf,  P.
Annas  de  Noue  et  ego. Coadjutores  vero  tres :  Gil-
bertus  Burel,  Joannes  Goffestre  et  Franciscus  Charre-
ton,  parati  omnes  ad  quosvis  labores  pro  Dei  gloria
suscipiendos. Sanctissimis  Paternitatis  Vestras  Sac-
rificiis  commendant  se  omnes.

P.  V.  nlius  humillimus

Carolus  Lalemant.
E  Nova  Francia

Cal.  Aug.


1616-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO  THE  GENERAL  183

As  Father  Noyrot  is  to  return  at  the  beginning  of
spring,  another  of  our  members  will  be  absolutely
necessary  at  Paris,  or  at  Rouen,  to  fill  his  place  and  to
look  after  our  interests,  sending  us  yearly  what  sup-
plies we  need,  and  receiving  our  letters,  if  Your  Pa-
ternity so  decide.  There  thus  remain  seven  of  us
here ;  four  priests,  Father  Enemond  Masse, u  as  ad-
monitor  and  confessor,  Father  Jean  de  Brebeuf ,  Fa-
ther Anne  de  Noue,  and  myself;  and  three  lay  broth-
ers, Gilbert  Burel,  Jean  Goffestre,  and  Francois
Charreton,  all  of  us  ready  to  undertake  any  labors
whatsoever  for  the  glory  of  God.  We  all  commend
ourselves  to  the  Most  Holy  Sacrifices  of  Your  Pater-
nity.

Your  Paternity's  most  humble  son

Charles  Lalemant.
New  France,

August  i  st.


XVIII

Charles  Lalemants

Lettre  au  Hierosme  l'Allemant

Kebec,  Aouit  i,  1626
Paris: JEAN BOUCHER, 1627


SOURCE : Title-page and  text reprinted from original in

Lenox  Library.


-


Lfil'IKH

DV  PERE


■


CHARLES

I/ALLEMANT

SVPERIEVR  DE  LA  MI5-

£on  de  Canadasj  de  laCom-

pag-niede  Iesvs.

Enuoyetau  Pere  Hierofme  I'AUemant
fonfrcre^  de  la  mefme  Compagnie

Gu.  font contcnus  les  raoeurs&  facons  de  vi*

urc  des  Sauuages  habitans  de  ce  pais lh,

&  comme  lis  fe  component  auec

jes  Chreftiens  Francoisquiy

demeurenc.

FfifcmbU  U  defcrht  ion  des  <vides  de  cefte  centres*


A PARIS,.-
Par  Uan Bo  ych*  *.,  lucdes  Amandiers
a  la  Verne  Roy  ale.  16x7.


LETTER

FROM  FATHER

CHARLES

L'ALLEMANT

SUPERIOR  OF  THE  Mis-
sion of  the  Canadas ;  of
the  Society  of  Jesus.

Sent  to  Father  Jerome  I' Alternant,  his  brother,
of  the  same  Society

In  which  are  contained  the  manners  and
customs  of  the  Savages  inhabiting  that
country ;  and  on  what  terms  they
live with the French Chris-
tians who reside there.

Together  with  the  description  of  the  towns  of
that country.


PARIS,

Jean  Boucher,  rue  des  Amandiers
Verite"  Royale.  1627.


190  LES  RELATIONS  DES  jESUITES  [Vol.4


[i  i.e., 3]  Lettre  dv  Pere  Charles  L'Allemant  Supe-

rieur  de  la  Miffion  de  Canadas,  de  la  Com-

pagnie  de  Iesvs. Au  Pere  Hierofme

l'Allemant  fon  frere.

Pax  Chrifti.

1JESCRIVIS  Tan  paffe  a  Voftre  Reuerence  (enui-
ron  la  my-Iuillet)  le  fucces  de  noftre  voyage;
depuis  ce  temps  ie  n'ay  pen  vous  efcrire,  a
caufe  que  les  vaiffeaux  n'abordent  icy  qu'vne  fois
l'an.  C'eft  pourqtioy  il  ne  faut  attendre  des  nouuelles
de  nous  que  d'annee  en  annee:  Et  fi  ces  vaiffeaux  ve-
noient  vne  fois  a  manquer,  ce  feroit  bien  merueille
li  vous  en  receuiez  deuant  deux  ans;  outre  qu'il  nous
faudroit  cefte  annee  attendre  de  l'vnique  prouidence
de  Dieu  les  chofes  neceffaires  a  l'entretien  de  cefte
vie.  Done  depuis  mes  dernieres,  voicy  ce  que  i'ay
peu  recognoiftre  de  ce  pais,  &  ce  qui  s'eft  paffe:  Ce
pais  eft  d'vne  grande  eftendue,  ayant  bien  mille  ou
douze  cens  lieues  de  longueur;  fa  largeur,  enuiron
le  40.  degrez  vers  1' Orient;  il  eft  borne  de  la  mer
Oceane,  &  vers  1' Occident,  de  la  mer  de  la  Chine.
Plufieurs  Nations  l'habitent:  Ion  m'en  a  nomme  38.
ou  40.  fans  celles  que  Ion  ne  eognoift  pas,  que  les
Sauages  neantmoins  affeurent.  Le  lieu  oil  les  Fran-
cois fe  font  habituez  appelle  Kebec,  eft  par  les  46.
degrez  &  demy,  fur  le  bord  d'vn  des  plus  beaux
fleuues  du  monde,  appelle  par  les  Francois,  la  riui-
ere de faincT:  Laurens, efloigne  pres de deux cens


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  191


[i  i.e., 3]  Letter35  from  Father  Charles  L'Allemant,

Superior  of  the  Mission  of  Canadas,  of

the  Society  of  Jesus. To  Father

Jerome  l'Allemant,  his  brother.36

The  peace  of  Christ  be  with  you.

LAST  year  (about  the  middle  of  July)  I  wrote  to
Your  Reverence  in  regard  to  the  success  of  our
voyage.  I  have  not  been  able  to  communicate
with  you  since  then,  because  the  ships  touch  here
only  once  a  year ;  and  therefore  news  can  be  expected
from  us  only  from  year  to  year.  And  if  these  ships
failed  once,  it  would  not  be  surprising  if  you  did  not
receive  news  before  two  years;  besides,  during  the
intervening  year  we  should  be  obliged  to  look  en-
tirely to  the  providence  of  God  for  the  necessaries  of
life.  Now,  since  my  last  letters,  the  following  is
what  I  have  been  able  to  learn  about  this  country,
and  what  has  been  done  here.  This  country  is  of
vast  extent,  being  easily  a  thousand  or  twelve  hun-
dred leagues  long,  and  in  width  extending  about
40  degrees  toward  the  Orient.  It  is  bounded  by
the  Ocean  sea,  and  towards  the  West  by  the  sea  of
China.  Many  Tribes  inhabit  it,  about  38  or  40  hav-
ing been  named  to  me,  besides  those  which  are  un-
known ;  of  the  existence  of  which,  however,  the  Sav-
ages assure  us.  The  place  inhabited  by  the  French,
called  Kebec,  is  in  46  and  one-half  degrees,  upon  the
shore  of  one  of  the  most  beautiful  rivers  in  the
world,  called  by  the  French  the  river  saint  Lawrence.


192  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

lieues  de  l'emboucheure  du  dit  fleuue,  &  cepedat  le
flot  monte  encore  35.  ou  40.  lieues  au  defTus  de  nous.
[4]  L'endroit  le  plus  eftroit  de  cefte  riuiere  eft  vis  a
vis  de  l'habitation,  &  toutesfois  fa  largeur  y  eft  plus
d'vn  quart  de  lieue.  Or  quoy  que  le  pais  oil  nous
fommes  foit  par  les  46  degrez  &  demy  plus  Sud
que  Paris  de  pres  de  deux  degrez,  fi  eft-ce  que  l'Hy-
uer,  pour  l'ordinaire,  y  eft  de  5.  mois  &  demy;  les
neiges  de  3.  ou  4.  pieds  de  hauteur;  mais  fi  obftinees
qu'ellesne  fondent  point  pour  l'ordinaire  que  vers  la
my-Auril,  &  commencent  toufiours  au  mois  de  No-
uembre,  pendant  tout  ce  temps  on  ne  void  point  la
terre;  voire  mefme  nos  Francois  m'ont  dit,  qu'ils
auoient  traifne  le  may  fur  la  nege,  au  premier  iour
de  May:  L'annee  mefme  que  nous  arriuafmes,  &  ce
auec  des  raguettes;  car  c'eft  la  couftume  en  ce  pais
de  marcher  fur  des  raguettes  pendat  l'Hyuer,  de
peur  d'enf oncer  dans  la  neige,  a  1' imitation  des  Sau-
uages,  qui  ne  vont  point  autremet  a  la  chafle  de
l'orignac.  Le  plus  doux  Hyuer  qu'on  ait  veu,  eft  ce-
luy  que  nous  y  auons  paffe  (difent  les  Anciens  habi-
tans)  &  cependant  les  neiges  commencerent  le  16.
Nouembre,  &  vers  la  fin  de  Mars  commencerent  a
fondre,  la  longueur  &  continuation  des  neiges  eft
caufe  que  Ion  pourroit  douter  fi  le  froment  &  le  feigle
reufiiroit  bien  en  ce  pais ;  i'en  ay  veu  neatmoins  d'auffi
beau  qu'en  voftre  France,  &  mefme  le  noftre  que
nous  y  auons  feme,  ne  luy  cede  en  rien;  pour  plus
grande  aff eurance  il  faudroit  y  femer  du  bled  mefteil ;
l'orge  &  l'auoine  y  viennent  le  mieux  du  monde,  plus
grainues  beaucoup  qu'en  France.  C'eft  merueille  de
voir  nos  pois  tant  ils  font  beaux.  Ainfi  la  terre  n'eft
pas  ingrate  (comme  voftre  Reuerence  peut  voir.)  Plus
on  va  montant  la  riuiere,  &  plus  on  f'appercoit  de  la


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  193

Kebec  is  about  two  hundred  leagues  from  the  mouth
of  this  river,  and  yet  the  tide  ascends  35  or  40  leagues
above  us.  [4]  The  narrowest  part  of  this  river  is  oppo-
site the  settlement,  and  yet  its  width  here  is  more  than
one-fourth  of  a  league.  Now  although  the  country
where  we  are,  being  in  latitude  about  46  and  one-half
degrees,  is  farther  South  than  Paris  by  nearly  two  de-
grees, yet  the  Winter  generally  lasts  here  5  months
and  a  half;  the  snow  is  3  or  4  feet  deep,  but  it  is  so
firm  that  it  does  not  usually  melt  until  near  the  mid-
dle of  April,  and  it  always  begins  in  the  month  of
November.  During  all  this  time  the  earth  is  never
seen ;  indeed  our  Frenchmen  have  even  told  me  that
they  dragged  their  maypole  over  the  snow  on  the  first
day  of  May,  in  the  very  year  of  our  arrival,  and  that
with  snowshoes ;  for  it  is  the  custom  in  this  country
to  walk  on  snowshoes  during  the  winter,  for  fear  of
sinking  into  the  snow,  in  imitation  of  the  Savages;
who  never  go  otherwise  to  hunt  the  moose.  The
mildest  Winter  that  has  been  seen  is  the  one  that
we  have  passed  here  (say  the  Old  inhabitants),  and
yet  the  snow  began  to  fall  on  the  16th  of  Novem-
ber and  to  melt  towards  the  end  of  March.  The  long
duration  of  the  snow  might  cause  one  to  somewhat
doubt  whether  wheat  and  rye  would  grow  well  in
this  country.  But  I  have  seen  some  as  beautiful  as
that  produced  in  your  France,  and  even  that  which
we  have  planted  here  yields  to  it  in  nothing.  To  bet-
ter provide  against  scarcity,  it  would  be  well  to  plant
some  meslin ; :i7  rye  and  oats  grow  here  the  best  in
the  world,  the  grains  being  larger  and  more  abun-
dant than  in  France.  Our  peas  are  so  beautiful ;  it  is
wonderful  to  see  them.  So  the  earth  is  not  ungrate-
ful (as  your  Reverence  may  see.) The  farther  up  the


194  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4


bonte  d'icelle. Les  vents qui  regnent  en  ce  pais,
font,  le Nor-d'Eft,  le Nor-Oueft, & le Sur-Oueft.
Le Nor-d'Eft ameine les  neges en Hyuer, & les
pluyes en  autre faifon Le Nor-Oueft  eft fi froid
qu'il  penetre  iufques  aux  mouelles  des  os;  le  Ciel  eft
fort  ferein  quand  il  fouffle. Depuis  l'emboucheure
de  cefte  Riuiere  iufques  icy,  il  n'y  a  point  de  terre
defrichee,  ce  ne  font  que  bois. Cefte  Nation  icy  ne
f'occupe  point  a  cultiuer  la  tetre  [terre],  il  n'y  a  que  3.
ou  4.  families  qui  en  ont  defriche  2.  ou  3.  arpens  ou
ils  fement  du  bled  d'Indes ;  &  ce  depuis  peu  de  temps.
On  m'a  dit  que  c'eftoit  les  RR.  PP.  Recoledts  qui
leurs  auoient  perfuade. Ce  qui  a  efte  cultiue  en  ce
lieu  par  les  Francois  eft  peu  de  chofe,  f'il  y  a  18.  ou
20.  arpens  de  terre  [5]  c'eft  tout  le  bout  du  monde.
A  deux  cens  lieues  d'icy  en  montant  la  Riuiere,  il  fe
trouue  des  Nations  plus (tables  que  celles  cy, qui
baftiffent  de grands  villages,  lefquels  ils  fortifient
contre  leurs  ennemis,  &  trauaillent  a  bon  efcient  a
la  terre ;  d'ou  vient  qu'elles  ont  quantite  de  bled  d'ln-
de,  &  ne  meuret  pas  de  faim  comme  celles  cy,  fi  font-
elles  plus  fauuages  en  leurs  mceurs,  commettans  fans
fe  cacher,  &  fans  honte  aucune,  toute  fortes  d'impu-
dences. Or  quoy  que  cefte  Riuiere  nous  conduife  a
ces  Nations  la,  fi  eft-ce  pourtant  qu'il  y  a  bien  de  la
difficulte  a  y  aller,  a  caufe  des  faults  qui  fe  trouuet  fur
la  Riuiere  (qui  font  de  certains  precipices  d'eau,  qui
empefchet  tout  a  fait  qu'on  ne  puiffe  nauiger.) C'eft
pourquoy  lors  que  les  Sauuages  arriuent  a  ces  faults
la,  il  faut  qu'ils  portent  leurs  batteaux  fur  leurs  ef-
paules,  auec  tout  leur  bagage,  &  qu'ils  fen  aillent
par  terre  quelquesfois  2.  3.  4.  &  8  lieues,  &  ainfi  que
paffent  les  Francois  lors  qu'ils  y  vont. Les  RR.  PP.
Recoledts  y  font  allez  quelquesfois,  &  y  ont  port6


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  195

river  we  go,  the  more  we  see  of  the  fertility  of  the
soil.  The  prevailing  winds  in  this  country  are  the
Northeast,  Northwest,  and  Southwest.  The  North-
east brings  the  snows  in  Winter,  and  the  rains  in
other  seasons.  The  Northwest  is  so  cold  that  it  pene-
trates even  to  the  marrow  of  the  bones ;  yet  the  Sky
is  very  serene  when  it  blows.  From  the  mouth  of
the  River  to  this  place,  none  of  the  land  is  cleared,
there  being  nothing  but  forests.  This  Tribe  does  not
occupy  itself  in  tilling  the  soil ;  there  are  only  3  or  4
families  who  have  cleared  2  or  3  acres,  where  they  sow
Indian  corn,  and  they  have  been  doing  this  for  only  a
short  time.  I  have  been  told  that  it  was  the  Rever-
end Recolect  Fathers  who  persuaded  them  to  do  it.
That  cultivated  by  the  French  in  this  place  is  of  small
area,  only  18  or  20  acres  [5]  at  the  most.38  Two  hun-
dred leagues  from  here,  ascending  the  River,  Tribes  are
found  which  are  more  sedentary  than  those  which
are  here ;  they  build  large  villages  which  they  fortify
against  their  enemies,  and  cultivate  the  land  in  ear-
nest. It  thus  happens  that  they  have  stores  of  Indian
corn,  and  do  not  die  of  starvation  like  those  here.
Yet  they  are  more  savage  in  their  customs,  and  com-
mit all  kinds  of  shameless  acts,  without  disgrace  or
any  attempt  at  concealment.  Now,  although  this  River
takes  us  to  these  Tribes,  yet  truly  the  difficulty  in  get-
ting there  is  very  great,  on  account  of  the  rapids  which
are  found  in  the  River ;  (these  are  certain  falls  of  water
which  entirely  prevent  navigation.)  Therefore,  when
the  Savages  reach  these  rapids,  they  are  compelled  to
carry  their  boats  upon  their  shoulders  with  all  their
baggage,  and  to  go  overland,  sometimes  2,  3,  4,  or  8
leagues;  and  the  French  have  to  do  the  same  when
they  go  there. The  Reverend  Recolect  Fathers  made


196  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.  4

tous  leurs  viures  pour  vn  an,  ou  dequoy  en  acheter;
car  d'attendre  que  les  Sauuages  vous  en  donnet
c'eft  folie,  fi  ce  n'eft  qu'ils  vous  ayent  pris  fous  leur
protedlion,  &  que  vous  vouliez  demeurer  dans  leurs
villages  &  cabanes ;  car  alors  il  vous  nourriront  pour
rien;  Mais  qui  f'y  pourroit  refoudre!  les  yeux  reli-
gieux  ne  peuuent  fupporter  tant  d'impudicitez  qui  f'y
commettent  a  defcouuert:  c'eft  pourquoy  les  RR.  PP.
Recoledts  ont  efte  contraints  de  baftir  des  Cabanes  a
part;  mais  auffi  falloit  il  qu'ils  achetaffent  leurs
viures.  En  ces  Nations  il  n'y  a  eu  cefle  annee  aucun
Religieux;  quand  nous  arriuafmes  icy  l'an  paffe  il  y
auoit  vn  P.  Recolet  qui  fen  venoit  auec  les  Sauuages,
au  lieu  de  la  traitte  35.  lieues  au  deffus  de  cefle  habi-
tation; mais  au  dernier  fault  qu'il  paffa  fon  canal  fe
renuerfa  &  fe  noya :  En  def cendant  les  Sauuages  ne
mettent  pied  a  terre  pour  les  fauls ;  mais  f eulemet  en
montant.  Ainfi  ces  faults  font  que  ces  Nations  font
de  difficile  abord.  Or  bien  qu'il  n'y  ait  point  eu  de
Religieux  en  ces  Nations,  les  marchands  n'ont  pas
laiffe  d'y  enuoyer  des  Francois  pour  entretenir  les
Sauuages,  &  les  amener  tous  les  ans  a  la  traitte  Ces
Francois  par  confequent  n'ont  oiiy  la  Meffe  toute
l'annee,  ne  fe  font  ny  confeffez,  ny  communiez  a
Pafques,  &  viuent  dans  des  occafions  tres-grandes  de
pecher.  Quceritur,  f 'ils  peuuent  en  cofcience  y  aller
de  la  forte;  Voftre  [6]  Reuerece  me  fera  plaifir  de
confulter  quelqu'vn  de  nos  Peres  pour  en  fcauoir  la
refolution  &  me  l'efcrire.

Quant  aux  facons  de  faire  des  Sauuages,  c'eft
affez  de  dire  qu'elles  font  tout  a  fait  fauuages.  De-
puis  le  matin  iufques  au  foir,  ils  n'ont  autre  foucy
que  de  remplir  leur  ventre  Ils  ne  viennent  point
nous  voir  fi  ce  n'eft  pour  demander  a  manger,  &  fi


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  197

this  journey  occasionally  and  carried  all  their  food
for  a  year,  or  the  means  of  buying  it ;  for  to  expect
the  Savages  to  give  it  to  you  is  folly,  unless  they
have  taken  you  under  their  protection,  and  you  wish
to  live  in  their  villages  and  cabins ;  then  they  would
feed  you  for  nothing.  But  who  could  make  up  his
mind  to  do  this?  Religious  eyes  could  not  support
the  sight  of  so  much  lewdness,  carried  on  openly.
Therefore,  the  Reverend  Recolect  Fathers  were  com-
pelled to  build  their  cabins  apart ;  but  they  also,  on
that  account,  had  to  buy  their  food.  There  has  been
no  Religious  among  these  Tribes  this  year.  When
we  arrived  here  last  year,  there  was  one  Recolet  Fa-
ther who  came  with  the  Savages  to  the  trading
station,  35  leagues  above  this  settlement ;  but  when
coming  down  the  last  of  the  rapids,  his  canoe  upset
and  he  was  drowned.25  In  descending  the  river,  the
Savages  do  not  land  on  reaching  the  rapids,  but  only
in  going  up.  Thus  the  rapids  make  these  Tribes  diffi-
cult of  access.  Although  there  have  been  no  Reli-
gious among  these  Tribes,  the  merchants  have  not
failed  to  send  Frenchmen  there  to  gain  the  good  will
of  the  Savages,  and  to  induce  them  to  come  yearly  to
the  trading  station.  As  a  consequence,  these  French-
men have  not  heard  Mass  during  the  entire  year,
have  not  confessed  nor  taken  the  Easter  Sacrament,
and  their  surroundings  are  such  that  there  are  fre-
quent opportunities  for  sin.  Qnczritiir :  can  they  con-
scientiously go  thither  under  these  circumstances?
Your  [6]  Reverence  will  do  me  the  favor  to  consult
some  one  of  our  Fathers,  to  know  his  decision  and
to  write  to  me  about  it.

As  to  the  customs  of  the  Savages,  it  is  enough  to
say  that  they  are  altogether  savage. From  morning


198  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

vous  ne  leur  en  donnez  ils  tefmoignent  du  mefcon-
tentement.  Ils  font  de  vrais  gueux  f 'il  en  fut  iamais,
&  neantmoins  fuperbes  an  poffible.  Ils  eftiment  que
les  Francois  n'ont  point  d'efprit  au  prix  d'eux;  les
vices  de  la  chair  font  fort  frequets  chez  eux;  tel
qui  y  efpoufera  plufieurs  femmes  qu'il  quittera  quand
bon  luy  femblera  &  en  prendra  d'autres.  II  y  en  a  icy
vn  qui  a  efpoufe  fa  propre  fille ;  mais  tous  les  autres
Sauuages  s'en  font  trouuez  indignez;  de  nettete
chez  eux  il  ne  s'en  parle  point,  ils  font  fort  fales  en
leur  manger  &  dans  leurs  cabanes,  ont  force  vermine
qu'ils  mangent  quand  ils  l'ont  prife  La  couftume
de  cefte  Nation  eft  de  tuer  leurs  peres  &  meres  lors
qu'ils  font  fi  vieux  qu'ils  ne  peuuet  plus  marcher,
penfans  en  cela  leur  rendre  de  bons  feruices;  car
autrement  ils  feroient  contraints  de  mourir  de  faim,
ne  pouuans  plus  fuiure  les  autres  lors  qu'ils  changent
de  lieu;  &  comme  ie  fis  dire  vn  iour  a  vn  qu'on  luy
en  feroit  autant  lors  qu'il  feroit  deuenu  vieil;  il  me
refpondit  qu'il  f'y  attendoit  bien  La  facon  de  faire
la  guerre  auec  leurs  ennemis  c'eft  pour  l'ordinaire
par  trahifon,  les  allans  efpier  lors  qu'ils  font  a
l'efcart;  &  s'ils  ne  font  affez  forts  pour  emmener
prifonniers  ceux  ou  celuy  qu'ils  rencontreut,  ils
tirent  des  fieches  deffus,  puis  leur  couppet  la  tefte,
qu'ils  emportent  pour  monftrer  a  leurs  gens,  que
s'ils  les  peuuent  emmener  prifonniers  iufques  en  leurs
cabanes  ils  leur  font  endurer  des  cruautez  nompa-
reilles,  les  faifant  mourir  a  petit  feu :  &  chofe  etrange !
pendant  tous  ces  tourmens,  le  patient  chante  touflours,
refputansa  defhonneur  f'ils  crient  &  s'ils  fe  plaignent
Apres  que  le  patiet  eft  mort,  ils  le  mangent,  &  n'y
a  fi  petit  qui  n'en  ait  fa  part,  ils  font  des  feftins  auf-
quels  ils  fe  conuient  les  vns  les  autres,  &  mefme  ils


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  199

until  night  they  have  no  other  thought  than  to  fill
their  stomachs.  They  come  to  see  us  only  to  ask  for
something  to  eat;  and  if  you  do  not  give  it  to  them
they  show  their  dissatisfaction.  They  are  real  beg-
gars, if  there  ever  were  any,  and  yet  proud  as  they
can  be.  They  consider  the  French  less  intelligent
than  they.  Vices  of  the  flesh  are  very  common  among
them.  One  of  them  will  marry  several  women,
and  will  leave  them  when  he  pleases,  and  take
others.  There  is  one  here  who  married  his  own
daughter,  but  all  the  other  Savages  were  indignant
at  him  for  it.  As  to  cleanliness  among  them,  that
never  enters  into  the  question ;  they  are  very  dirty
about  their  eating,  and  in  their  cabins  they  are  covered
with  vermin,  which  they  eat  when  they  catch  them.
It  is  a  custom  of  this  Tribe  to  kill  their  fathers  and
mothers  when  they  are  so  old  that  they  can  walk  no
longer,  thinking  that  they  are  thus  doing  them  a  good
service;  for  otherwise  they  would  be  compelled  to
die  of  hunger,  as  they  have  become  unable  to  follow
the  others  when  they  change  their  location.  When
I  had  it  explained  to  one  of  them  one  day  that  the
same  thing  would  be  done  for  him  when  he  be-
came old,  he  answered  that  he  certainly  expected  it.
Their  method  of  making  war  against  their  enemies
is  generally  through  treachery,  watching  to  find  them
alone;  and,  if  they  are  not  strong  enough  to  make
prisoners  of  those  whom  they  encounter,  they  shoot
them  with  their  arrows,  then  cut  off  their  heads,
which  they  bring  back  to  show  their  people.  But,  if
they  can  take  them  to  their  cabins  as  prisoners,  they
subject  them  to  unparalleled  cruelties,  killing  them
by  inches;  and,  strange  to  say,  during  all  of  these
tortures,  the  victim  sings  constantly,  considering  it  a


200  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J&SUITES  [Vol.4

conuient  quelques  Francois  de  leur  cognoiffance,  &
en  ces  fefti[n]s  ils  donnent  a  chacun  fa  part  dans  des
plats  ou  efcuelles  d'efcorce  &  lors  que  ce  font  feftins
a  tout  manger,  il  ne  faut  rien  laiffer,  autremement
vous  eftes  obligez  a  payer  quelque  chofe,  &  perdriez
la  reputation  de  braue  [7]  homme.  Aux  feftins  qu'ils
font  pour  la  mort  de  quelqu'vn  ils  font  la  part  au
defunt  auffi  bien  qu'aux  autres,  laquelle  ils  iettent
dans  le  feu,  &  fe  donnent  bien  garde  que  les  chiens
ne  participet  a  ce  f eftin ;  &  pource  ramaff ent  tous  les
os  &  les  iettent  dans  le  feu.  Ils  enterrent  les  morts
&  auec  eux  tout  ce  qu'ils  auoient,  comme  chandeliers,
peaux,  coufteaux,  &c  Et  comme  ie  demaday  vn  iour
a  vn  vieillard  pourquoy  ils  mettoient  tout  ce  bagage
dans  les  foffes,  il  me  refpondit  qu'ils  le  mettoient  afin
que  le  mort  s'en  feruift  dans  1' autre  monde ;  &  comme
ie  luy  repartis  que  toutes  les  fois  que  Ion  regardoit  das
les  foffes  on  y  trouuoit  toufiours  le  bagage,  qui  eftoit
vn  temoignage  que  le  mort  ne  s'en  feruoit  pas;  il  me
refpodit,  qu'a  la  verite  le  corps  des  chaudieres,  peaux,
coufteaux,  &c.  demeuroit;  mais  que  l'ame  des  chau-
dieres, coufteaux,  &c.  s'en  alloit  dans  l'autre  monde
auec  le  mort,  &  que  la  il  s'en  feruoit.  Ainfi  ils  croyent,
(comme  V.R.  void)  l'immortalite  de  nos  Ames;  &  de
fait  ils  affeurent  qu'apres  la  mort,  ils  vont  au  Ciel  ou
elles  mangent  des  champignons,  &  fe  communiquent
les  vnes  auec  les  autres.  Ils  appellent  le  Soleil  Iesvs  ;
&  Ion  tient  en  ce  pais  que  ce  font  les  Bafques  qui  y
ont  cy-deuant  habite,  qui  font  Autheurs  de  cefte  de-
nomination. De  la  vient  que  quand  nous  faifons  nos
Prieres,  il  leur  femble  que  comme  eux  nous  addreffons
nos  Prieres  au  Soleil.  A  ce  propos  du  Soleil,  ces
Sauuages  icy  croyent  que  la  terre  eft  percee  de  part
en  part,  &  que  lors  qu'il  fe  couche,  il  eft  cache  en  vn


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  201

dishonor  if  he  cries  out  or  complains.  After  the  vic-
tim is  dead,  they  eat  him,  and  no  one  is  so  insignifi-
cant that  he  does  not  get  his  share.  They  have  feasts
to  which  they  invite  each  other,  and  even  some  of  their
French  acquaintances;  at  these  feasts  they  give  to
each  one  his  part  on  a  dish  or  plate  of  bark;  and
when  they  are  "  eat-all ' '  feasts,  nothing  must  be  left,
otherwise  you  would  be  compelled  to  pay  something,
and  would  lose  your  reputation  as  a  brave  [7]  man.
At  the  feasts  which  are  given  in  honor  of  the
death  of  some  one,  they  set  aside  a  part  for  the  de-
ceased as  well  as  for  the  others,  which  they  throw
into  the  fire ;  they  are  very  careful  that  the  dogs
shall  not  share  in  this  feast,  and  to  this  end,  they
gather  up  all  the  bones  and  throw  them  into  the  fire.
They  bury  the  dead,  and  with  them  all  their  be-
longings, such  as  candlesticks,  furs,  knives,  etc.
When  I  asked  an  old  man  one  day  why  they  placed  all
this  baggage  in  the  grave,  he  replied  that  they  did  so
in  order  that  the  deceased  might  use  it  in  the  other
world ;  and  when  I  answered  him  that  when  any  one
looked  into  the  grave  all  the  baggage  was  seen  there,
which  was  a  proof  that  the  deceased  did  not  use  it,
he  replied,  that  in  truth  the  body  of  the  kettles,  furs,
knives,  etc.,  remained,  but  that  the  soul  of  the  ket-
tles, knives,  etc.,  went  off  to  the  other  world  with
the  deceased,  and  that  he  made  use  of  them  there.
Thus  they  believe  (as  Your  Reverence  sees)  in  the
immortality  of  our  Souls ;  and,  in  fact,  they  assure  you
that  after  death  they  go  to  Heaven,  where  they  eat
mushrooms  and  hold  intercourse  with  each  other.
They  call  the  Sun  Jesus  ;89  and  it  is  believed  that  the
Basques,40  who  formerly  frequented  these  places,  In-
troduced this  name. It  thus  happens  that  when  we


202  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

trou  de  la  terre,  &  fort  le  lendemain  par  l'autre.  lis
n'ont  aucun  culte  diuin,  ny  aucunes  fortes  de  Prieres
lis  croyent  neantmoins  qu'il  y  en  a  Vn  qui  a  tout  fait;
mais  pourtant  ils  ne  luy  rendent  aucun  honneur.
Entr'eux  ils  ont  quelques  perfonnes  qui  font  eftat
de  parler  au  Diable ;  ceux  la  font  auffi  les  Medecins,
&  guariffent  de  toute  maladie.  Les  Sauuages  crai-
gnent  grandement  ces  gens-la,  &  les  carefset  de
peur  qu'ils  n'en  recoiuent  du  mal.  Nous  apprendrons
peu  a  peu  ce  qui  eft  des  autres  Nations,  lefquelles
font  plus  ftables  en  leurs  demeures ;  Car  pour  celles-
cy  ou  nous  fommes  maintenant  auec  les  Francois,
elle  eft  feulement  vagabonde  fix  mois  l'annee,  qui
font  les  fix  mois  d'Hyuer,  errans  ca  &  la  felon  la  chaff e
qu'ils  trouuent,  &  ne  fe  cabanent  que  deux  ou  trois
families  enfemble  en  vn  endroit,  deux  ou  trois  en
l'autre,  &  les  autres  de  mefme.  Ez  autres  [8]  fix
mois  de  l'annee,  vingt  ou  trente  s'affemblent  fur  le
bord  de  la  Riuiere  pres  de  noftre  habitation,  autant  a
Thadouffac,  &  autant  a  quarante  lieues  au  deffus
de  nous,  &  la  ils  viuent  de  la  chaffe  qu'ils  ont  faicle
l'Hyuer,  c'eft  a  dire,  de  viande  d'orignac,  boucanee,
&  de  viures  qu'ils  ont  traite  auec  les  Francois.  Ie
croy  auoir  efcrit  l'an  paffe  ce  qui  eft  de  leurs  ve-
ftemens,  &  comme  'ils  font  toufiours  nud  telle,  leurs
corps  font  feulemet  couuerts  d'vne  peau,  ou  d'ori-
gnac, ou  d'vne  robbe  de  Caflor,  qui  font  5.  ou  6.  Ca-
ftors  coufus  enfemble,  &  veflent  ces  peaux,  comme
fans  comparaifon,  les  Ecclefiafliques  les  Chappes,  n'e-
flans  attachez  par  deuant  que  d'vne  courroye :  quelque-
fois  ils  fe  ceignent  d'vne  ceinture,  quelquefois  ils  n'en
ont  point  du  tout,  &  neantmoins  pour  lors  on  ne  void
rien  de  deshonnefle,  cachans  fort  decemment  les  par-
ties que  l'honneflete  veut  eflre  couuertes. En  Hyuer


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  203

offer  Prayers,  it  seems  to  them  that  we  address  our
Prayers  to  the  Sun,  as  they  do.  While  on  the  sub-
ject of  the  Sun,  the  Savages  here  believe  that  the
earth  is  pierced  through  and  through ;  and  that,  when
the  sun  sets,  it  hides  in  one  hole  in  the  earth,  and
comes  out  next  morning  through  the  other.  They
have  no  form  of  divine  worship,  nor  any  kind  of
Prayers.  They  believe,  however,  that  there  is  One
who  made  all,  but  they  do  not  render  him  any  homage.
Among  them  there  are  persons  who  make  a  profes-
sion of  talking  to  the  Devil ;  these  are  also  the  Phy-
sicians, and  cure  all  kinds  of  diseases.  The  Savages
have  great  fear  of  these  people,  and  humor  them  lest
they  do  them  some  injury.  Little  by  little  we  shall
learn  more  of  the  other  Tribes,  who  are  more  seden-
tary in  their  habits;  but,  as  to  these  where  we  now
are  with  the  French,  they  are  wanderers  only  during
six  months  of  the  year,  which  are  the  six  Winter
months, —  roving  here  and  there,  according  as  they
may  find  game,  only  two  or  three  families  erecting
their  cabins  together  in  one  place,  two  or  three  in
another,  and  so  on.  The  other  [8]  six  months  of  the
year,  twenty  or  thirty  come  together  upon  the  shore
of  the  River  near  our  settlement,  part  at  Thadoussac,
and  the  same  number  forty  leagues  above  us;  and
there  they  live  upon  the  game  which  they  have  cap-
tured during  the  Winter;  that  is  to  say,  on  smoked
moose  meat,  and  food  for  which  they  have  traded
with  the  French.  I  believe  I  wrote  something  about
their  clothing  last  year,  and  how  they  always  go  bare-
headed ;  they  wear  no  other  clothes  than  a  moose  skin
or  a  Beaver  robe,  which  consists  of  5  or  6  Beaver  Skins
sewed  together ;  and  they  wear  these  skins  as,  without
making  any  comparison,  the  Ecclesiastics  wear  their


204  LES  RELATIONS  DES  J  ^SUITES  [Vol.4

ils  ont  des  chauffes  &  des  fouliers  faits  de  peau  d'ori-
gnac;  mais  les  fouliers,  tant  deffus  que  deffous  font
fouples  comme  vn  gand.  Ils  ont  la  plus  part  du  temps
leurs  vifages  peints  de  rouge  ou  de  gris  brun  &  ce  en
diuerfes  fagons,  felon  la  fantaifie  des  femmes,  qui
peignent  leurs  maris  &  leurs  enfans,  defquels  ils
graiffent  auffi  les  cheueux  de  graiffe  d'ours,  ou
d'orignac.  Les  hommes  n'ont  non  plus  de  barbe  que
les  femmes,  ils  fe  l'arrachent  arm  de  plaire  dauan-
tage  aux  femmes.  Ie  n'en  ay  veu  que  trois  ou  quatre
qui  ne  fe  la  font  point  arrachee  depuis  peu  de  temps
a,  1' imitation  des  Francois  ;  mais  pourtant  ils  n'en
font  pas  fournis.  La  couleur  de  leur  chair  tire  fort
fur  le  noir;  on  n'en  void  pas  vn  qui  aye  la  charnure
blanche,  neantmoins  il  n'y  a  rien  de  fi  blanc  que
leurs  dents.  Ils  vot  fur  les  riuieres  dans  de  petits
canaux  d'efcorce  de  bouleau,  fort  proprement  faits:
dans  les  moindres  il  y  petit  tenir  4  ou  5.  perfonnes,
encore  y  mettent-ils  leurs  petits  bagages.  Les  auirons
font  proportionnez  aux  canaux  l'vn  deuant  l'autre
derriere,  c'eft  d'ordinaire  la  femme  qui  tient  celuy  de
derriere,  &  par  confequent  qui  gouuerne.  Ces  pauures
femmes  font  de  vrais  mulets  de  charge,  portant  toute
la  fatigue ;  f ont-elles  accouchees,  deux  heures  apres
elles  s'en  vont  aux  bois  pour  fournir  au  feu  de  la  ca-
bane.  En  Hyuer  lors  qu'ils  decabanent  elles  trainent
les  meilleurs  pacquets  fur  la  neige ;  bref  les  hommes
ne  f  emblent  auoir  pour  partage  que  la  chaff  e,  la  guerre,
&  la  traitte.  A  propos  de  la  [9]  traitte,  ie  n'en  ay
encores  rien  dit,  auffi  eft-ce  l'vnique  chofe  qui  me
refte  touchant  les  Sauuages.  Toutes  leurs  richeffes
font  les  peaux  de  diuers  animaux;  mais  principale-
ment  de  Caftors.  Auparauant  l'affociation  de  ces
Meffieurs  aufquels  le  Roy  a  donne  cefte  traitte  pour


1616-29]  C. LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  205

Capes,  attached  in  front  only  by  a  leather  strap.
Sometimes  they  wear  a  belt,  sometimes  none  at  all,
and  nevertheless  nothing  improper  is  noticed  on  that
account,  as  they  very  modestly  cover  the  parts  which
decency  demands  should  be  covered.  In  Winter
they  have  leggings  and  shoes  made  of  moose  skin,
but  the  shoes,  the  uppers  as  well  as  the  soles,  are
as  pliable  as  a  glove.  Their  faces  are  usually  painted
red  or  grayish  brown,  and  this  is  done  in  different
styles,  according  to  the  fancy  of  the  women,  who
paint  their  husbands  and  children,  whose  hair  they
also  oil  with  bear  or  moose  grease.  The  men  are  no
more  bearded  than  the  women ;  they  pull  their  beards
out  in  order  to  be  more  agreeable  to  the  women.  I
have  seen  only  three  or  four  who  had  not  done  so,
and  this  but  recently  in  imitation  of  the  French ;  yet
they  did  not  have  beards.  The  color  of  their  skin  is
strongly  inclined  to  black;  not  one  is  seen  whose
skin  is  white,  and  yet  nothing  is  so  white  as  their
teeth.  They  go  upon  the  rivers  in  light  birch-bark
canoes,  very  neatly  made;  the  smallest  of  them  can
hold  4  or  5  persons  and  leave  room  for  their  little
baggage.  The  oars  are  proportioned  to  the  canoes,
one  at  the  bow  and  one  at  the  stern ;  ordinarily,  the
woman  holds  the  one  at  the  stern,  and  consequently
steers.  These  poor  women  are  real  pack  mules,  endur-
ing all  hardships.  When  delivered  of  a  child,  they
go  to  the  woods  two  hours  later  to  replenish  the  fire  of
the  cabin.41  In  the  Winter,  when  they  break  camp,
the  women  drag  the  heaviest  loads  over  the  snow ;
in  short,  the  men  seem  to  have  as  their  share  only
hunting,  war,  and  trading.  Apropos  of  [9]  trading,  I
have  as  yet  said  nothing,  and  it  is  also  the  last  thing
which  remains  to  be  said  in  regard  to  the  Savages.


206  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

certain  temps,  moi'ennant  quelques  conditions  portees
par  les  Articles,  les  Sauuages  eftoient  vifitez  de  plu-
fieurs  perfonnes,  iufques  la  qu'vn  des  Ancies  m'a  dit
qu'il  a  veu  iufques  a  vingt  nauires  dans  le  port  de
Tadouffac ;  mais  maintenant  que  cefte  traitte  a  efte
accordee  a  l'affociation  qui  eft  auiourd'huy  priuatiue-
ment  a  tous  autres,  Ion  ne  void  plus  icy  que  deux
nauires  qui  appartiennent  a  l'Affociation,  &  ce,  vne
fois  l'an  feulement,  enuiron  le  commencement  du  mois
de  Iuin.  Ces  deux  nauires  apportent  toutes  les  mar-
chandifes  que  ces  Meffieurs  traidtent  auec  les  Sau-
uages, c'eft  a  fcauoir  des  capaux,  des  couuertures,
bonnets  de  nuidt,  chapeaux,  chemifes,  draps,  haches,
fers  de  fleches,  aleines,  efpees,  des  tranches  pour
rompre  la  glace  en  Hyuer,  des  coutteaux,  des  chau-
dieres,  pruneaux,  raifins,  du  bled  d'Inde,  des  pois,  du
bifcuit,  ou  de  la  galette,  &  du  petun ;  &  outre  ce  qui
eft  neceffaire  pour  le  viure  des  Francois,  qui  demeuret
en  ce  pais  la,  en  efchange  ils  emportent  des  peaux
d'orignac,  de  loup  ceruier,  de  regnard,  de  loutre,  &
quelquefois  il  fen  rencontre  de  noires,  de  mattre,  de
blaireau,  &  de  rat  mufque;  mais  principalement  de
Caftor,  qui  eft  le  plus  grand  de  leur  gain :  On  m'a  dit
que  pour  vne  annee  ils  en  auoient  remporte  iufques  a
22000.  L'ordinaire  de  chaque  annee  eft  de  15000.
ou  12000.  a  vne  piftole  la  piece,  ce  n'eft  pas  mal  alle ;
il  eft  bien  vray  que  les  frais  qu'ils  font  font  affez
grands,  ayant  icy  quarante  perfonnes  &  plus  qui  font
gagez  &  nourris;  outre  les  frais  de  tout  1' equipage  de
deux  nauires,  oil  il  fe  retrouue  bien  150.  homes  qui
recoiuent  des  gages  &  fe  nourriffent.  Ces  gages  ne
font  pas  tous  d'vne  facon:  L'ordinaire  eft  de  106.
liures,  il  y  en  a  qui  ont  cent  efcus.  Ie  cognois  vn
Truchement  qui  a  cent  piftoles,  &  quelque  nombre


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  207

All  of  their  wealth  consists  in  the  furs  of  different  ani-
mals, but  principally  of  the  Beaver.  Before  the  time
of  the  association  of  those  Gentlemen  to  whom  the
King  gave  this  trade  for  a  certain  time  in  consideration
of  certain  conditions  mentioned  in  the  Articles,21  the
Savages  were  visited  by  many  people,  to  such  an  extent
that  an  Old  Man  told  me  he  had  seen  as  many  as  twenty
ships  in  the  port  of  Tadoussac.  But  now  since  this  busi-
ness has  been  granted  to  the  association,  which  to-day
has  a  monopoly  over  all  others,  we  see  here  not  more
than  two  ships  which  belong  to  it,  and  that  only  once
a  year,  about  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  June.
These  two  ships  bring  all  the  merchandise  which
these  Gentlemen  use  in  trading  with  the  Savages ;
that  is  to  say,  the  cloaks,  blankets,  nightcaps,  hats,
shirts,  sheets,  hatchets,  iron  arrowheads,  bodkins,
swords,  picks  to  break  the  ice  in  Winter,  knives,
kettles,  prunes,  raisins,  Indian  corn,  peas,  crackers
or  sea  biscuits,  and  tobacco ;  and  what  is  necessary
for  the  sustenance  of  the  French  in  this  country  be-
sides. In  exchange  for  these  they  carry  back  hides  of
the  moose,  lynx,  fox,  otter,  black  ones  being  en-
countered occasionally,  martens,  badgers,  and  musk-
rats;  but  they  deal  principally  in  Beavers,  in  which
they  find  their  greatest  profit.  I  was  told  that  dur-
ing one  year  they  carried  back  as  many  as  22,000.
The  usual  number  for  one  year  is  15,000  or  12,000,
at  one  pistole  each,  which  is  not  doing  badly.19  It
is  true  their  expenses  are  very  heavy,  as  they  keep
here  forty  persons  and  more,  who  are  paid  and
maintained;  this  in  addition  to  the  expense  of  the
crews  of  two  ships,  which  consist  of  at  least  150
men,  who  receive  their  wages  and  food.  These
wages are  not  all the  same. They  are  generally


208  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

de  peaux  qu'il  luy  eft  permis  d'emporter  chaque  an-
nee.  II  eft  vray  qu'il  les  traidte  de  fa  marchadife.
Voftre  Reuerence  le  verra  cefte  annee,  c'eft  vn  de
ceux  qui  nous  ont  grandement  aide.  Voftre  Reue-
rence lui  fera,  f'il  luy  plaift,  bon  raqueil;  il  eft  pour
retourner  &  rendre  icy  de  grands  feruices  a  N.  Sei-
gneur. Refte  maintenant  [10]  a  mander  a  voftre  Re-
uerence ce  que  nous  auons  fait  depuis  noftre  arriuee
en  ce  pais,  qui  fut  a  la  fin  de  Iuin.  Le  mois  de  Iuillet
&  d'Aouft  fe  pafferent,  partie  a  efcrire  des  lettres,
partie  a  nous  recognoiftre  vn  peu  dans  le  pais,  &  a
chercher  quelque  lieu  propre  pour  y  eftablir  noftre
demeure :  Afin  de  tefmoigner  aux  RR.  PP.  Recoledts,
que  nous  defirios  les  deliurer  au  pluftoft  de  rincomo-
dite  que  nous  leur  apportions.  Apres  auoir  bien  con-
fidere  tous  les  endroits,  &  apres  auoir  pris  langue  des
Francois,  &  principalement  des  Reuerends  Peres
Recoledts  le  i.  iour  de  Septembre  nous  plantafmes
la  faindte  Croix,  au  lieu  que  nous  auions  choifi,  auec
toute  la  folemnite  qui  nous  fut  poffible.  Les  Re-
uerends Peres  Recoledts  y  affifterent  auec  les  plus  ap-
parens  des  Francois,  qui  apres  le  difner  fe  mirent  tous  a
trauailler.  Nous  auons  depuis  toufiours  continue,
nous  cinq,  a  defraciner  ler  [les]  arbres,  &  a  befcher
la  terre  tant  que  le  teps  nous  a  permis.  Les  neiges
venantes  nous  fufmes  contraints  de  furfoir  iufques
au  Prin-temps  pendant  le  trauail  nous  ne  laiffions
pas  de  penfer  comment  nous  viendrions  a  bout  du
langage  du  pais;  car  des  Truchemens,  difoit-on  il  ne
faut  rien  attendre ;  fi  eft-ce  neantmoins  qu'apres  auoir
recommande  l'affaire  a  Dieu,  i'ay  pris  refolution  de
m'addreffer  au  Truchement  de  cefte  Nation,  quitte,
difie  en  moy-mefme  pour  eftre  refufe  auffi  bien  que
les  autres. Done  apres  m' eftre  efforce  par  des  ex-


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  209

106  livres,  but  some  receive  a  hundred  ecus.  I
know  an  Interpreter  who  receives  one  hundred  pis-
toles, and  a  certain  number  of  hides  which  he  is  per-
mitted to  carry  away  each  year.42  It  is  true  that
he  trades  them  off  as  his  own  merchandise.  Your
Reverence  will  see  him  this  year ;  he  is  one  of  those
who  have  very  effectively  assisted  us.  Your  Reverence
will,  if  you  please,  give  him  a  kind  greeting;  for  he
is  going  to  return,  and  do  great  service  here  for  Our
Lord.  It  remains  now  [10]  to  tell  your  Reverence
what  we  have  done  since  our  arrival  in  this  country,
which  was  the  last  of  June.  The  months  of  July  and
August  passed  by,  partly  in  writing  letters,  partly  in
getting  a  little  acquainted  with  the  country,  and  in
seeking  a  proper  place  for  our  settlement,  that  we
might  show  the  Reverend  Recolect  Fathers  that  we
desired  to  relieve  them  as  soon  as  possible  of  the  in-
convenience which  we  caused  them.  After  having
carefully  considered  all  the  places,  and  after  having
consulted  with  the  French  people,  and  especially  with
the  Reverend  Recolect  Fathers,  we  planted  the  holy
Cross  on  the  ist  day  of  September,  with  all  possible
solemnity,  upon  the  place  which  we  had  chosen.
The  Reverend  Recolect  Fathers  took  part  in  the  cere-
mony with  the  most  prominent  of  the  French,  and
after  dinner  all  of  them  went  to  work.  We  have
continued  this  work  ever  since,  we  five,  uprooting
trees  and  breaking  the  ground  whenever  we  had
time.  The  snow  intervened,  and  we  were  compelled
to  give  up  our  work  until  Spring.  During  the  work,
the  thought  of  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  language
of  this  country  was  constantly  in  our  minds ;  for  it  was
vSaid  that  we  could  expect  nothing  from  the  Interpret-
ers. Nevertheless,  after  having  commended  the  mat-


210  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

hortations  que  ie  faifois  &  par  noflre  cormerfation,  de
donner  d'autres  impreffios  de  noflre  Compagnie,  qu'on
n'auoit  en  ce  pais,  Voftre  Reuerence  croiroit-elle  bien
que  nous  y  auos  trouue  l'Anti-Coton,  que  Ion  fai-
foit  courir  de  chambre  en  chambre,  &  qu'enfin  Ion
a  brufle  quatre  mois  apres  noftre  arriuee ;  ayant,
difie,  tafche  de  donner  d'autres  impreffions.  Ie
m'adreffay  done  au  Truchement  de  cefte  Nation,  &
le  priay  de  nous  donner  cognoiffance  du  langage.
Chofe  eftrage,  il  me  promift  fur  l'heure,  qu'il  me
donneroit  pendant  l'hyuer  tout  le  cotentement  que
ie  pourrois  defirer  de  luy.  Or  e'eft  icy  oil  il  faut  ad-
mirer vne  particuliere  prouidence  de  Dieu:  car  il
faut  remarquer,  que  le  General  eftoit  charge  de  fes
affociez  de  repaffer  en  France,  ou  bien  de  luy  dimi-
nuer  fes  gages  &  luy  preffoit  fi  fort  de  retourner  la
mefme  annee  que  nous  arriuafmes  qu'il  fallut  que  le
General  vfaft  de  commandement  abfolu  auec  affeu-
rance  que  fes  gages  ne  luy  feroient  [n]  point  dimi-
nuees,  pour  le  faire  demeurer  cette  annee ;  &  de  fait
il  eft  demeure  a  noftre  grand  contentement.  Sccundo
notandum ;  Que  ce  Truchement  n'auoit  iamais  voulu
communiquer  a  perfonne  la  cognoiffance  qu'il  auoit  de
ce  langage,  non  pas  mefme  aux  RR.  PP.  Recoledts,
qui  depuis  dix  ans  n'auoient  ceffe  de  Ten  impor-
tuner;  &  cependant  a  la  premiere  priere  que  ie  luy
fis,  me  promift  ce  que  ie  vous  ay  dit,  &  f'eft  acquite
fidelement  de  fa  promeffe  pendant  cet  Hyuer.  Or
neantmoins  parce  que  nous  n'eftions  pas  affeurez
qu'il  deuft  eftre  fidele  en  fa  promeffe,  craignans  que
1' Hyuer  fe  paffaft  fans  rien  auancer  en  la  cognoif-
fance de  la  langue.  Ie  confultay  auec  nos  Peres,  f 'il
ne  feroit  point  a  propos  que  deux  de  nous  allaffent
paffer  1' Hyuer  auec  les  Sauuages,  bien  auant  dans  les


161&-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  211


ter  to  God,  I  made  up  my  mind  to  speak  to  the  Inter-
preter of  this  Tribe,  saying  to  myself  that  at  the
worst,  I  could  only  be  refused  as  the  others  had  been.
So,  after  having  striven  by  my  exhortations  and  our
conversation  to  correct  the  impressions  concerning  our
Society  that  exist  in  this  country,  can  Your  Rever-
ence believe  that  we  have  found  here  the  "Anti-
Coton,"43  which  was  circulated  from  chamber  to
chamber,  and  which  was  finally  burned,  about  four
months  after  our  arrival?  Having,  I  say,  tried  to
give  other  impressions,  I  applied  then  to  the  Inter-
preter of  this  Tribe  and  begged  him  to  teach  us  the
language.  Strange  to  say,  he  at  once  promised
me  that,  during  the  winter,  he  would  give  me
all  the  help  that  I  could  ask  of  him.  Now  in  this  a
special  providence  of  God  must  be  admired,  because
it  must  be  observed  that  the  General 21  was  ordered
by  his  associates  to  send  him  back  to  France,  or  else
to  reduce  his  wages ;  and  he  [the  interpreter]  begged
him  so  earnestly  to  return  the  same  year  that  we  ar-
rived, that  the  General  was  compelled  to  use  impera-
tive authority,  and  to  tell  him  that  his  wages  would
[i  i]  not  be  reduced,  to  make  him  stay  this  year;  and,
in  fact,  he  remained,  to  our  great  satisfaction.  Se-
cundo  notandum  ;  This  Interpreter  had  never  wanted
to  communicate  his  knowledge  of  the  language  to
any  one,  not  even  to  the  Reverend  Recolect  Fathers,
who  had  constantly  importuned  him  for  ten  years;
and  yet  he  promised  me  what  I  have  told  you,  the
first  time  I  urged  him  to  do  so,  and  he  kept  his
promise  faithfully  during  that  Winter.  However,  as
we  did  not  feel  certain  that  he  would  keep  his
word,  and  fearing  the  Winter  would  pass  and  we
would  make  no  progress  in  the  language,  I  consulted


212  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

bois,  afin  que  leur  hantife  nous  donnaft  la  cognoif-
fance  que  nous  cherchions;  nos  Peres  furet  d'auis
que  ce  feroit  affez  qu'vn  y  allaft,  &  que  l'autre  de-
meureroit  pour  fatisfaire  a  la  deuotion  des  Francois.
Ainfi  ce  fut  le  P.  Brebeuf  qui  eut  ce  bonheur ;  il  partit
le  20.  d'Odtobre,  &  retourna  le  27.  de  Mars,  ayant
toufiours  efte  efloigne  de  nous  de  20.  ou  25.  lieux.
Pendant  fon  abfence  ie  fommay  le  Truchement  de
fa  promeff  e  a  laquelle  il  ne  manqua  point ;  A  peine
eufie  tire  de  luy  ce  que  ie  defirois,  que  ie  me  refolus
d'aller  paffer  le  refte  de  l'Hyuer  auec  le  premier
Sauuage  qui  nous  viendroit  voir;  Ie  m'y  en  allay
done  le  8.  de  Ianuier;  mais  ie  fus  contraint  de  re-
tourner  1 1 .  iours  apres ;  car  ne  trouuans  pas  dequoy
viure  eux-mefme,  ils  furent  contraints  de  retourner
voir  les  Francois.  A  mon  retour,  fans  perdre  temps,
ie  follicitay  le  Truchement  d'vne  autre  Nation  de
me  communiquer  ce  qu'il  feauoit;  dont  ie  m'eftonne
comme  il  le  fit  fi  franchement,  ayant  efte"  par  le
paffe  fi  referue  a  l'endroit  des  Reuerends  Peres  Re-
colets.  II  nous  donna  tout  ce  que  nous  luy  de-
mandafmes ;  il  eft  bien  vray  que  nous  ne  luy  deman-
dafmes  pas  tout  ce  qu'euffions  bien  defire;  car
comme  nous  recogneufmes  en  luy  vn  efprit  affez
groffier,  ce  n'euft  pas  efte  noftre  aduantage  de  le
preffer  par  de  la  fa  portee,  nous  fufmes  neantmoins
tres  contens  de  ce  qu'il  nous  donna:  &  ce  qui  eft  a
remarquer  afin  de  recognoiftre  d'auantage  la  proui-
dence  de  Dieu  en  ce  fait,  cedit  Truchement  s'en  de-
uoit  retourner  en  France  la  mefme  annee  que  nous
ariuafmes,  &  ce  par  l'entremife  des  Peres  Recolets,
&  de  nous  qui  le  iugios  neceffaire  pour  [12]  le  bien
de  fon  ame,  &  de  fait  nous  l'emportafmes  pardeffus
le  General  de  la  flotte,  qui  a  toute  force  le  vouloit


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  213

with  our  Fathers  as  to  the  propriety  of  two  of  us  go-
ing to  spend  the  Winter  with  the  Savages,  far  into
the  depths  of  the  forest,  in  order  that,  by  constant
association  with  them,  we  might  gain  the  knowledge
we  sought.  Our  Fathers  were  of  the  opinion  that  it
would  be  sufficient  for  one  to  go,  and  that  the  other
ought  to  remain  to  attend  to  the  spiritual  needs  of
the  French.  So  this  good  fortune  fell  to  the  lot  of
Father  Brebeuf.30  He  left  on  the  20th  of  October  and
returned  on  the  27th  of  March,  having  been  distant
from  us  20  or  25  leagues  all  the  time.  During  his
absence  I  reminded  the  Interpreter  of  his  promise,
which  he  did  not  fail  to  keep.  I  had  hardly  learned
from  him  what  I  desired,  when  I  determined  to  go
and  spend  the  remainder  of  the  Winter  with  the  first
Savage  who  should  come  to  see  us.  So  I  went  off
with  one  on  the  8th  of  January,  but  I  was  compelled
to  return  1 1  days  later ;  for,  as  they  could  not  find
enough  for  themselves  to  eat,  they  were  compelled
to  come  back  to  the  French.  As  soon  as  I  returned,
I  lost  no  time  in  urging  the  Interpreter  of  another
Tribe  to  teach  me  what  he  knew ;  and  I  was  aston-
ished that  he  should  do  it  so  freely,  as  in  the  past
he  had  been  so  reserved  in  regard  to  the  Reverend
Recolet  Fathers.  He  gave  us  all  that  we  asked  for;
it  is  quite  true  that  we  did  not  ask  all  that  we  would
have  wished ;  as  we  noticed  in  him  a  mind  somewhat
coarse,  it  would  not  have  been  to  our  advantage
to  have  urged  him  beyond  his  depth.  We  were,
however,  highly  pleased  with  what  he  gave  us;  and
what  is  noteworthy,  in  order  to  better  recognize  the
providence  of  God  in  this  matter,  this  very  Inter-
preter was  to  return  to  France  the  same  year  that  we
arrived,  and  this  was  to  be  done  through  the  inter-


214  LES  RELATIONS  DES /^SUITES  [Vol.4

renuoyer  en  la  Nation  de  laquelle  il  eft  Truchement,
le  voila  done  arriue  icy  ou  nous  fommes  auec  des
Francois  qui  reuenoient  de  la  traitte,  en  refolution  de
fen  retourner  en  France,  les  vaiffeaux  font  fur  le
point  de  partir :  la  veille  du  depart  il  vint  nous  voir
chez  les  Reuerends  Peres  Recolets  pour  nous  dire
Adieu.  Ce  grand  Dieu  fit  ioiier  tout  a  propos  vn  ref-
fort  de  fa  Prouidence,  comme  il  eftoit  chez  nous  voila
vne  forte  pleurefie  qui  le  prend  &  le  voila  couche  au
lidt,  fi  bien  &  fi  beau  qu'il  fallut  que  les  vaiffeaux
s'en  retournaffent  fans  luy ;  &  par  ce  moyen  le  voila
qui  nous  demeure,  hors  des  dangers  neantmoins  de
fe  perdre,  ce  qui  nous  auoit  fait  folliter  fon  retour.
Ie  vous  laiffe  a  penfer  fi  pendant  fa  maladie  nous
oubliafmes  de  luy  rendre  tout  deuoir  de  charite ;  il
fufnt  de  dire  qu'auparauant  qu'il  fuft  releue  de  cefte
maladie,  pour  laquelle  il  n'attendoit  que  la  mort;  il
nous  affeura  qu'il  eftoit  entierement  a  noftre  deuo-
tion,  &  que  s'il  plaifoit  a  Dieu  luy  rendre  la  fante,
l'Hyuer  ne  ce  pafferoit  iamais  fans  nous  donner  tout
contentement,  dequoy  il  s'eft  fort  bien  acquitte,
graces  a  Dieu.

Ie  me  fuis  peut-eftre  eftendu  plus  que  de  raifon  a
racopter  cecy ;  mais  ie  me  plais  tant  a  racompter  les
traits  de  la  prouidence  particuliere  de  Dieu,  qu'il  me
fe  f emble  que  tout  le  mode  y  doit  prendre  plaifir ;  &
de  fait  s'il  s'en  fuft  retourne  en  France  cefte  annee
la,  nous  eftions  pour  n'auancer  gueres  plus  que  les
Reuerends  Peres  Recolets  en  10.  ans.  Dieu  foit  loiie
de  tout,  voila  done  a  quoy  fe  paffa  la  meilleure  partie
de  l'hyuer.  Outre  ces  occupatios  ie  n'ay  point  man-
que a  mon  tour  d'aller  les  feftes  &  Dimanches  dire  la
Meffe  aux  Francois,  aufquels  i'ay  fait  exhortation
toutes  les  fois  que  i'y  ay  efte  :  le  Pere  Brebeuf  de  fon


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  215

vention  of  the  Recolet  Fathers  and  through  our  influ-
ence, as  we  deemed  it  necessary  for  [12]  the  good  of
his  soul ;  and  in  fact  we  carried  the  day  over  the  head
of  the  General  of  the  fleet,  who  was  resolved  in  any
event  to  send  him  back  to  the  Tribe  whose  Inter-
preter he  was.  So  he  arrived  here  where  we  are,  with
the  French  who  were  returning  from  the  trading
station,  resolved  to  go  back  to  France,  the  ships  be-
ing on  the  point  of  leaving.  The  evening  before  his
intended  departure,  he  came  to  see  us  at  the  Reverend
Recolet  Fathers',  to  bid  us  Farewell.  The  great  God
showed  his  Providential  designs  very  propitiously
then ;  while  he  was  with  us  he  was  taken  with  a  severe
attack  of  pleurisy  and  was  put  to  bed,  so  nicely  and
comfortably,  that  the  ships  were  obliged  to  go  back
without  him,  and  by  this  means  he  remained  with
us,  out  of  all  danger  of  ruining  himself;  for  it  was
the  fear  of  this  which  had  caused  us  to  urge  his  re-
turn. You  will  readily  understand  that  during  his
sickness  we  performed  every  act  of  charity  for  him.
It  suffices  to  say  that,  before  he  recovered  from  this
sickness,  in  which  he  expected  to  die,  he  assured  us
that  he  was  entirely  devoted  to  us;  and  that  if  it
pleased  God  to  restore  his  health,  the  Winter  would
never  pass  by  without  his  giving  us  assistance,  a
promise  which  he  kept  in  every  respect,  thank  God.
I  have,  perhaps,  dwelt  longer  upon  this  than  was
necessary,  but  I  am  so  pleased  to  relate  the  special
acts  of  God's  providence,  as  it  seems  to  me  every  one
must  take  pleasure  in  them;  and  in  fact,  if  he  had
gone  back  to  France  that  year,  we  would  have  made
hardly  any  more  progress  than  the  Reverend  Reco-
let Fathers  did  in  10  years.  May  God  be  praised  for
all! In  this  way  we  passed  the  greater  part  of  the


216  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

cofte  en  faifoit  autant,  &  auons  fi  bien  auance  par  la
grace  de  Dieu,  que  nous  auons  gaigne  le  coeur  de
tous  ceux  de  l'habitation,  auons  fait  faire  des  con-
f effions  generales  a  la  plus  part,  &  auons  vefcu  en  tres-
bonne  intelligence  auec  le  Chef.  Enuiron  le  milieu
du  Carefme  ie  m'hazarday  de  prier  le  Capitaine  de
nous  donner  les  Charpentiers  de  1' habitation  pour
nous  aider  a  dreffer  vne  petite  cabane  au  lieu  que
nous  auons  commence  a  def  richer,  ce  qu'il  m'ac-
corda  auec  beaucoup  de  courtoifie:  les  charpentiers
ne  fouhaitoient  [13]  rien  tant  que  de  trauailler  pour
nous ;  &  de  fait  ils  nous  auoient  donne  le  mot  aupara-
uant:  auffi  trauaillerent-ils  auec  tant  d'affedtion,  que
nonobftant  l'incommodite  du  temps  &  de  la  faifon
(car  il  y  auoit  encore  vn  pied  &  demy  de  neige)  ils
eurent  acheue  noftre  cabane  le  Lundy  de  la  femaine
Saindte,  &  cependant  ils  cierent  plus  de  250.  aix,
tant  pour  la  couuerture,  que  pour  le  tour  de  la
cabane;  vingt  cheurons,  &  dolerent  plus  de  vingt-
cinq  groffes  pieces  neceff aires  pour  1' erection  de
la  cabane.  Voila  des  commencemens  affez  heur-
eux  graces  a  Dieu,  ie  ne  fcay  quel  fera  le  progres
a  caufe  de  la  continuation  de  mes  imperfections.
Au  refte  parmy  ces  Sauuages  nos  vies  ne  font  pas
affeurees.  Si  quelque  Francis  leur  a  fait  quelque
deplaifir  ils  s'en  vengent  par  la  mort  du  premier
qu'ils  rencontrent,  fans  auoir  efgard  a  plaifir  aucun
qu'ils  ayent  receu  de  celuy  qu'ils  attaquent.  S'ils  ont
fonge"  la  nuict  qu'il  faut  qu'ils  tuent  quelque  Francois,
gar[d]e  le  premier  qu'ils  rencontrent  a  l'efcart.  Ils
ajouftent  grande  croyance  a  leurs  fonges.  Quelques-
vns  deux  vous  diront  deux  iours  auparauant  la  venue
des  vaiffeaux  l'heure  a  laquelle  ils  arriueront,  &  ne
vous  diront  autre  chofe  fmon  qu'ils  l'ont  veu  en  dor-


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  111

winter.  Besides  these  occupations,  I,  in  my  turn,
have  not  failed  to  go,  on  holydays  and  Sundays,  to
say  Mass  for  the  French,  to  whom  I  have  made  an
exhortation  every  time  I  have  been  there.  Father
Brebeuf  did  the  same  on  his  part ;  and,  by  the  grace
of  God,  we  have  made  such  progress  that  we  have
won  the  hearts  of  all  the  people  of  the  settlement,  and
have  induced  most  of  them  to  make  general  confes-
sions, and  have  lived  on  good  terms  with  the  Chief.
About  the  middle  of  Lent,  I  ventured  to  ask  the  Cap-
tain to  give  us  the  Carpenters  of  the  settlement  to
help  us  erect  a  little  cabin  at  the  place  we  had  begun
to  clear  away,  and  he  very  courteously  granted  my
request.  The  carpenters  asked  for  [ 1 3]  nothing  better
than  to  work  for  us,  and  in  fact  they  had  previously
given  us  their  promise;  so  they  worked  with  such
good  will,  that,  notwithstanding  the  unfavorableness
of  the  weather  and  of  the  season  (for  there  was  still  a
foot  and  a  half  of  snow),  they  had  finished  our  cabin
by  Monday  of  Holy  week;  and  besides,  they  had
sawed  over  250  planks,  both  for  the  roof  and  for  the
sides  of  the  cabin,  twenty  rafters,  and  hewn  over
twenty-five  large  pieces  necessary  for  the  erection  of
the  cabin.  These  are  very  happy  beginnings,  thank
God;  but,  considering  my  imperfections  still  con-
tinue, I  do  not  know  how  much  progress  will  be  made.
Further,  there  is  no  security  for  our  lives  among  these
Savages.  If  a  Frenchman  has  in  some  way  offended
them,  they  take  revenge  by  killing  the  first  one  they
meet,  without  any  regard  for  favors  which  they  may
have  received  from  the  one  whom  they  attack.  If
during  the  night  they  dream  they  must  kill  a  French-
man, woe  to  the  first  one  whom  they  meet  alone.
They  attach great  faith  to  their  dreams. Some  of


218  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

mant.  Ceux-la  font  en  reputation  parmy  eux  de  par-
ler  au  Diable.  Leur  conuerfion  ne  nous  donnera  pas
peu  d'affaire.  Leur  vie  libertine  &  faineante,  leur
efprit  groffier,  &  qui  ne  peut  guere  comprendre,  la
difette  des  mots  qu'ils  ont  pour  expliquer  nos  myf-
teres,  n'ayans  iamais  eu  aucun  culte  diuin,  nous  ex-
ercera  a  bon  efcient.  Mais  pourtant  nous  ne  perdons
pas  courage  graces  a  Dieu,  appuyez  fur  cette  verite,
que  Dieu  n'aura  pas  tant  efgard  au  fruict  que  nous
ferons,  qu'a  la  bonne  volonte  &  au  trauail  que  nous
prendrons;  &  puis  plus  il  y  aura  dimculte  en  leur
conuerfion,  &  plus  y  aura-t'il  de  defiance  de  nous-
mefmes;  tant  y  a  que  noftre  efperance  eft  en  Dieu.
Si  ie  puis  ie  me  tranfporteray  en  d'autres  nations;
fi  cela  eft,  il  ne  faut  plus  attendre  de  nouuelles,  car
ie  feray  fi  loin  d'eux,  qu'a  grand  peine  pourray-ie
leur  ecrire;  car  au  cas  que  cela  arriue  ie  vous  dy
adieu  &  a  tout  le  monde  iufques  a  ce  que  nous  nous
reuoyons  au  Ciel.  N'oubliez  pas  les  fuff rages  pour
noftre  ame,  &  faites  les  de  fois  a  autres.  A  tout  haz-
ard lors  que  vous  vous  fouuiendrez  de  nous  en  vos
faindts  facrifices,  dites  pour  vn  tel  vif  ou  mort.  Le
fecours  qui  nous  eft  venu  de  France  eft  vn  bon  com-
mencement pour  cette  Miffion ;  mais  les  affaires  [14]  ne
font  pas  encore  en  tel  eftat  que  Dieu  puiffe  y  eftre
feruy  fidellement.  L'heretique  y  a  autant  encore
d'empire  que  iamais,  c'eft  pourquoy  ie  renuoye  le
Pere  Noiroit  felon  la  permiffio  que  les  Superieurs
m'en  ont  faite,  afin  qu'il  paracheue  ce  qu'il  a  com-
mence; il  eft  le  mieux  entendu  en  cette  affaire.  Si
nos  Peres  defirent  l'affermiffement,  &  le  bon  fucces
de  cette  Miffion,  il  eft  du  tout  expedient  qu'ils  le
laiffent  faire.  C'eft  bien  a  fon  corps  defendant  qu'il
s'en  retourne,  veu  principalement  qu'il  eft  tant  in-


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  219

them  will  tell  you  two  days  before  the  coming  of  a
ship  the  hour  of  its  arrival,  and  will  give  no  other  ex-
planation except  that  they  have  seen  it  while  asleep.
These  are  reputed  among  them  to  have  intercourse
with  the  Devil.  Their  conversion  will  give  us  no
little  trouble.  Their  licentious  and  lazy  lives,  their
rude  and  untutored  minds,  able  to  comprehend  so
little,  the  scarcity  of  words  they  have  to  explain  our
mysteries,  never  having  had  any  form  of  divine  wor-
ship, will  tax  our  wits.  And  yet  we  do  not  lose  cour-
age, thank  God;  trusting  in  this  truth,  that  God  will
not  have  so  much  regard  to  the  fruits  that  we  pro-
duce, as  to  our  good  will  and  the  trouble  we  take;
and  besides,  the  greater  the  difficulty  in  their  conver-
sion, and  the  more  distrust  we  have  in  ourselves,  so
much  the  greater  will  be  our  trust  in  God.  If  I  can,
I  shall  go  among  some  of  the  other  tribes ;  and,  in
that  event,  no  further  news  need  be  expected  from
me,  because  I  shall  be  so  far  away  that  it  will  be
very  hard  to  communicate  with  you ;  and  if  that
should  happen,  I  say  farewell  to  you  and  to  every  one
until  we  meet  in  Heaven.  Do  not  forget  the  prayers
for  our  souls,  and  make  them  from  time  to  time.  In
any  case  when  you  remember  us  in  your  holy  sacri-
fices, offer  them  up  for  such  and  such  a  one,  living  or
dead.  The  help  which  has  reached  us  from  France
is  a  good  beginning  for  this  Mission,  but  things  [14]
are  not  yet  in  such  a  condition  that  God  can  be  faith-
fully served  here.  The  heretic  holds  as  complete
dominion  here  as  ever,  and  therefore  I  send  back
Father  Noiroit,  according  to  the  permission  that  I
have  received  from  the  Superiors,  in  order  that  he
may  finish  what  he  has  begun ;  he  is  the  most  capable
one  for  this  affair. If  our  Fathers  wish  the  strength-


220  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JE~SUITES  [Vol.4


commode  deffus  la  mer.  I'enuoye  fon  compagnon
auec  le  Pere  Brebeuf  a  300  lieux  d'icy  a  vne  de  ces
nations  qui  font  ftables  en  leur  demeure,  ils  y  fe-
ront  bien  toft  s'ils  trouuent  des  Sauuages  qui  les  y
vueillent  conduire,  autrement  ils  feront  contraints  de
retourner  vers  nous;  i'attends  tous  les  iours  de  leurs
nouuelles.  Ie  viens  d'apprendre  tout  maintenant
qu'ils  font  partis.  Le  Diable  qui  craint  la  touche  a
voulu  jouer  des  fiennes,  car  nos  Peres  eftans  defia
embarquez,  les  Sauuages  par  deux  ou  trois  fois  les
voulurent  faire  defembarquer,  alleguans  que  leurs  ca-
naux  eftoient  trop  chargez;  mais  en  fin  Dieu  l'em-
porta  par  deffus  luy,  on  gaigna  les  Sauuages  a  force
de  prefents.  S'il  plaift  a  Dieu  faire  reiiffir  cette
miffion,  voila  vne  entree  dans  des  nations  infinies
pour  ainfi  dire,  qui  font  toufiours  ftables  en  leur  de-
meure. I'euffe  bien  definS  eftre  de  la  partie,  mais
nos  Peres  ne  l'ont  pas  iuge  a  propos,  iugeans  qu'il
eftoit  neceffaire  que  ie  demeuraffe  icy,  tant  pour
l'eftabliffement  de  noftre  petit  domicille,  que  pour
l'entretien  des  Francois.  Voftre  R.  s'eftonnera  peut-
eftre  de  ce  que  i'ay  enuoye  le  P.  Brebeuf  qui  auoit
defia  quelque  commencement  a  la  langue  de  cette
nation,  mais  les  talents  que  Dieu  luy  a  departy  m'y
ont  fait  refoudre;  le  fruidt  que  Ton  attend  de  ces
natios  la  eftant  bien  autre  que  celuy  que  Ton  efpere
de  celle  cy.  S'il  plaift  a  Dieu  benir  leurs  trauaux
nous  aurons  grand  befoin  d'ouuriers;  les  difpofitions
du  cofte  des  Sauuages  font  telles,  qu'on  en  peut  ef-
perer  quelque  chofe  de  bon.  Le  truchement  ayant
demande  en  ma  prefence  a  l'vn  de  leurs  Capitaines
s'ils  feroiet  tous  contens  que  quelques-vns  des  noftres
allaffent  demeurer  en  leur  pays  pour  leur  apprendre
a  cognoiftre  Dieu, il  refpondit  qu'il ne falloit  de-


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  221

ening  and  the  success  of  this  Mission,  it  is  by  all
means  proper  that  they  should  allow  him  to  proceed.32
He  returns  very  much  against  his  inclination,  prin-
cipally on  account  of  his  sufferings  upon  the  sea.
I  send  his  companion31  with  Father  Brebeuf,  300
leagues  from  here,  to  one  of  those  tribes  which  has  a
permanent  location.  They  will  soon  be  there  if  they
find  Savages  to  conduct  them,  otherwise  they  will  be
obliged  to  return  here;  I  am  expecting  news  from
them  daily.  I  have  just  learned  that  they  have
gone.  The  Devil,  who  feared  their  approach,  tried
to  play  some  of  his  tricks  on  them,  for,  when  our
Fathers  had  embarked,  the  Savages  tried  two  or
three  times  to  make  them  go  ashore,  asserting  that
their  canoes  were  too  heavily  loaded ;  but  at  last  God
triumphed  over  him,  and  the  Savages  were  won  by
means  of  presents.  If  it  please  God  to  give  success
to  this  mission,  it  will  open  a  way,  so  to  speak,  to  an
infinite  number  of  tribes  which  have  permanent  set-
tlements. I  should  have  been  very  glad  to  be  one
of  the  party ;  but  our  Fathers  did  not  deem  it  expe-
dient, considering  it  well  that  I  should  remain  here,
both  for  the  establishment  of  our  little  home  and  for
the  welfare  of  the  French.  Your  Reverence  will  be
astonished,  perhaps,  at  my  having  sent  Father  Bre-
beuf,  who  already  had  some  knowledge  of  the  language
of  this  tribe ;  but  the  talents  that  God  has  given  him
influenced  me,  the  fruits  which  are  expected  from
those  tribes  being  very  different  from  those  hoped
for  here.  If  it  please  God  to  bless  their  labors,  we
shall  have  great  need  of  workers ;  the  disposition  on
the  part  of  the  Savages  is  such  that  something  good
may  be  looked  for.  When  the  interpreter  asked  one
of  their  Captains  in  my  presence,  if  they  would  all


222  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

mander  cela  &  qu'ils  ne  fouhaittoient  rien  tant,  puis
ayant confidere la maifon des Recollets ou nous
eftions,  il  adioulia  qu'a  la  verite ils  ne  pourroient
pas  nous  baftir  vne maifon de  pierre femblable a
celle-la,  [15]  mais  demandes  leur,  dit-il au truche-
ment,  s'ils  feroient  contans  de  trouuer  a  leur  arriuee
vne  cabane  faidle  femblable  aux  noftres. II  ne  pou-
uoit  nous  tefmoigner  plus  d'affedlion; De  plus  il  y  a
eu  de  la  fterilite  dans  leur  pays  cette  annee,  &  ils
l'attribuent  a  caufe  qu'ils  n'y  ont  point  eu  de  Reli-
gieux,  tout  cela  nous  fait  bien  efperer. Pour  ceux
de  cette  Nation  ie  les  ay  fait  fommer  de  refpondre,
s'ils ne vouloient pas fe faire inftruire;  &  nous
donner  leurs enfans  pour  le  mefme  fujet: ils  nous
ont  tous  refpondu  qu'ils  le  defiroient. Ils  attendent
que nous ayons bafty,  c'eft a nous cependant de
mefnager  leur  affedtion  &  apprendre  bien  leur  langue.
Au  demeurant  ie  fupplirois  volontiers  ceux  qui  ont  de
l'affedtion  pour  ce  pays,  qu'ils  ne  fe  degouftaffent
point s'ils  n'entendent  promptement  des  nouuelles
du  fruidt  que  Ton  efpere. La  conuerfion  des  Sau-
uages  demande  du  temps. Les  premieres  fix  ou  fept
annees  fembleront fteriles a quelques vns. Et fi
i'adiouftois  iufqu'a  dix  ou  douze,  poffible  ne  m'eloi-
gneroisie  pas  de  la  verite. Mais  eft  ce  a  dire  pourtat
qu '  il  faille  tout  quitter  la  ? Ne  f aut-il  pas  des  comence-
mens  par  tout? Ne  f aut-il  pas  des  difpofitions  pour
arriuer  oil  on  pretend  ? Quand  a  moy  ie  vous  conf  effe
que  Dieu  me  fait  cette  mifericorde,  qu'encor  que  ie
n'efperaffe  aucun  profit  tout  le  temps  qu'il  luy  plaira
me  conferuer  en  vie,  pourueu  qu'il  euft  nos  trauaux
agreables,  &  qu'il  vouluft  s'en  feruir  comme  de  pre-
paration pour  ceux  qui  viendront  apres  nous,  ie  me
tiendrois  trop  heureux  d' employer  &  ma  vie  &  mes


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  223

be  glad  if  some  one  of  us  should  go  among  them  to
teach  them  to  know  God,  he  answered  that  it  was  not
necessary  to  ask  that,  that  they  desired  nothing  bet-
ter; then,  having  examined  the  house  of  the  Recollets
where  we  were,  he  added  that  they  indeed  could  not
build  us  a  stone  house  like  that  one;  [15]  "  But  ask
them,"  said  he  to  the  interpreter,  "if  they  will  be  sat-
isfied upon  their  arrival  to  find  a  cabin  made  similar  to
ours."  He  could  not  manifest  more  affection  for  us
than  he  did.  Moreover,  there  was  a  drought  in
their  country  this  year,  and  they  attributed  it  to  the
fact  that  they  had  no  Religious  among  them ;  all  this
gives  us  strong  hopes.  As  to  the  people  of  this  Tribe,
I  had  them  called  together  to  say  whether  they  wanted
to  be  instructed,  and  to  give  us  their  children  for  the
same  purpose.  They  all  answered  that  they  did.
They  are  waiting  for  us  to  build ;  and  it  is  for  us,  in
the  meantime,  to  cultivate  their  affection  and  to  learn
their  language.  Meanwhile,  I  would  request  those
who  are  interested  in  this  country  not  to  be  disap-
pointed if  they  do  not  promptly  receive  news  of  the
hoped-for  converts.  The  conversion  of  the  Savages
takes  time.  The  first  six  or  seven  years  will  appear
sterile  to  some;  and,  if  I  should  say  ten  or  twelve,  I
would  possibly  not  be  far  from  the  truth.  But  is  that
any  reason  why  all  should  be  abandoned?  Are  not
beginnings  necessary  everywhere?  Are  not  prepara-
tions needed  for  the  attainment  of  every  object?
For  my  part,  I  confess  that,  if  God  shows  me  mercy,
although  I  expect  no  fruits  as  long  as  it  will  please  him
to  preserve  my  life,  provided  that  our  labors  are  ac-
ceptable to  him,  and  that  he  may  be  pleased  to  make
use  of  them  as  a  preparation  for  those  who  will  come
after  us,  I  shall  hold  myself  only  too  happy  to  employ


224  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

forces,  &  n'epargner  rien  de  ce  qui  feroit  en  mon  pou-
uoir,  non  pas  mefme  mon  fang  pour  femblable  fuiet.
Neantmoins  fl  nos  Superieurs  ne  font  point  d'aduis
qu'on  paffe  outre,  me  voicy  tout  pres  de  me  foufmet-
tre  a  leur  volonte,  &  fuiure  leur  iugement.  Voicy  vn
petit  Huron  qui  s'en  va  vous  voir,  il  eft  paffionne  de
voir  la  France.  II  nous  affedtionne  grandement  &  fait
paroiftre  vn  grand  defir  d  eftre  inftruic5t ;  neantmoins
le  pere  &  le  Capitaine  de  la  nation,  le  veulent  reuoir
Tan  prochain,  nous  affeurant  que  s'il  eft  contant  il  le
nous  donnera  pour  quelques  annees.  II  eft  fort  im-
portant de  le  bien  contenter ;  car  fi  vne  f ois  cet  enfant
eft  bien  inftruit,  voila  vne  partie  ouuerte  pour  entrer
en  beaucoup  de  nations  oil  il  feruira  grandement.  Et
tout  a  propos  le  truchement  de  cetre  [cette]  nation  la
eft  retourn[e]  en  France.  Truchement  qu'il  aime  tant,
qu'il  l'appelle  fon  pere.  Ie  prie  noftre  Seigneur
qu'il  luy  plaife  benir  le  voyage.  Au  refte  ie  remer-
cie  V.  R.  du  courage  [16]  qu'elle  m'a  donne.  I'ay  leu
fes  lettres  quatre  ou  cinq  fois;  mais  ie  n'ay  peu
gaigner  fur  moy  que  ce  n'ait  efte  la  larme  a  l'oeil
pour  plufieurs  raifons,  mais  fpecialement  fur  la  fou-
uenance  de  mes  imperfections  (coram  Deo  loquor)  qui
m'eloignent  grandement,  du  merite  de  cette  vocation,
&  me  fait  viuement  apprehender  que  ie  n'aille  tra-
uerfer  les  deffeins  de  la  grace  de  Dieu,  en  l'etablifle-
ment  du  Chriftianifme  en  ce  pays  Apres  cela  ie  ne
crains  rien.  Ie  vous  fupplie  en  vertu  de  ce  que  vous
aimez  mieux  dans  le  Ciel,  de  ne  vous  laffer  point  de
folliciter  la  diuine  bonte,  ou  qu'il  me  face  la  grace  de
m'en  defaire,  ou  fi  mon  idignite  eft  venue  iufques  la
qu'il  m'y  faille  encore  tremper,  que  ce  ne  foit  au
preiudice  de  nos  pauures  Sauuages;  que  ma  mifere
n'empefche  point  les  effedts  de  fa  mifericorde,  &  le


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  225

my  life  and  my  strength,  and  to  spare  nothing  in  my
power,  not  even  my  blood,  for  such  a  purpose.  How-
ever, if  our  Superiors  do  not  think  we  should  go  far-
ther, I  am  ready  to  submit  to  their  will  and  to  follow
their  judgment.  A  little  Huron  is  going  to  see  you ;
he  longs  to  see  France.  He  is  very  fond  of  us  and
manifests  a  strong  desire  to  be  instructed;  neverthe-
less, his  father  and  the  Captain  of  the  nation  wishes  to
see  him  next  year,  assuring  us  that,  if  he  is  satisfied,
he  will  give  him  to  us  for  some  years.  It  is  of  im-
portance that  he  should  be  thoroughly  satisfied ;  for,
if  this  child  is  once  instructed,  it  will  open  the  way
to  many  tribes  where  he  will  be  very  useful.  And
the  return  of  the  interpreter  of  that  tribe  to  France
is  very  opportune, —  the  Interpreter  whom  he  loves
so  much,  that  he  calls  him  his  father.  I  pray  our  Lord
to  be  pleased  to  bless  his  voyage.  I  also  thank  Your
Reverence  for  the  courage  [16]  you  have  given  me.
I  have  read  your  letters  four  or  five  times,  and  I  have
not  been  able  to  keep  the  tears  from  my  eyes  for
several  reasons;  but  especially  in  reflecting  upon
my  imperfections  (coram  Deo  loquor)  which  are  far
from  the  merit  necessary  for  this  vocation,  and  in-
spire me  with  grave  fears  that  I  am  opposing  the
purposes  of  God's  grace  in  the  establishment  of
Christianity  in  this  country.  After  that,  I  fear  noth-
ing. I  beseech  you,  in  the  name  of  all  you  hold  most
dear  in  Heaven,  not  to  become  weary  in  appealing  to
the  divine  goodness,  either  to  do  me  the  favor  of  re-
moving me  from  here,  or,  if  my  unworthiness  is  so
great  that  I  must  yet  be  chastened,  let  it  not  be  to
the  disadvantage  of  our  poor  Savages ;  lei  not  my
shortcomings  prevent  the  effects  of  his  mercy,  nor
my  weak  will  be  a  hindrance  to  the  order  that  his


226  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

defordre  de  ma  volonte  fragile,  l'ordre  que  fa  bonte
veut  etablir  en  ce  pays.  Nous  continuons  plus  que
iamais  les  bonnes  intelligences  auec  le  Pere  Ioseph,
qui  eft  icy  l'vnique  Preftre  de  fon  Ordre,  l'vn  eftant
alle  auec  nos  Peres  aux  Hurons;  &l'autre  s'en  retour-
nant  en  France ;  il  a  deux  bons  freres  auec  luy.  Mr.
Champlain  eft  toufiours  fort  affedtionne  en  noftre  en-
droit,  m'a  pris  pour  diredteur  de  fa  confcience,  auffi
bien  que  Gaumont,  duquel  i'auray  vn  foin  particulier
felon  les  recommandations  de  voftre  R.  L'aduis  que
voftre  R.  me  donne  touchant  la  dedicace  de  noftre
premiere  Eglife,  eft  fort  conforme  a  ma  deuotion  fi  les
Superieurs  m'en  laiffent  la  liberte,  elle  ne  fera  iamais
appellee  autrement  que  N.  Dame  des  Anges;  c'eft
pourquoy  ie  fupplie  V.  R  de  nous  faire  auoir  quelque
beau  Tableau  enuironne  d'Anges.  C'eft  vne  des
grades  Feftes  des  PP.  Recolets,  qui  ont  dedie  leur
Chappelle  a  S.  Charles ;  &  la  Riuiere  fur  laquelle,  eux
&nous;  fommes  logez,  f'appelle  la  riuiere  S.  Charles,
ainfi  nomee  quelque  temps  auparauant  que  nous  vin-
fios.  Pour  les  lettres  ie  ne  penfe  pas  auoir  obmis
perfonne,  tant  de  nos  bien-faiteurs  plus  fignalez,  que
de  ceux  qui  m'ont  efcrit.  Auffi  vous  confeffay  je  que
ie  fuis  vn  peu  las;  voicy  la  68  &  fi  ce  n'eft  pas  la
derniere.  Plaife  a  noftre  bon  Dieu  que  le  tout  foit  a
fa  gloire  Noftre  R.  P.  Affiftant  fe  monftre  fort  affec-
tiSne  a  cefte  Miffion ;  ie  luy  enuoye  vne  charte  de  ce
pays,  affeurant  que  ie  demeureray  toute  ma  vie,  de
Voftre  Reuerence,

Seruiteur  tres-affedtionne  en  N  Seigneur
Charles  l'Allemant.
A  Kebec  ce  i.
d'Aouft  1626.


1616-29]  C.  LALEMANT  TO  JEROME  227

goodness  wishes  to  establish  in  this  country.  Our  sym-
pathetic relations  with  Father  Joseph 26  are  stronger
than  ever.  He  is  the  only  Priest  of  his  Order  here,
one  having  gone  with  our  Fathers  to  the  Hurons,  and
the  other  now  returning  to  France ;  he  has  two  good
brothers  with  him.  Mr.  Champlain  is  always  very
kind  to  us,  and  has  chosen  me  as  his  confessor.  Gau-
mont  has  done  the  same,  and  I  shall  take  special  care
of  him,  according  to  the  recommendations  of  your
Reverence.  The  advice  which  your  Reverence  gives
me  in  regard  to  the  dedication  of  our  first  Church,  is
in  thorough  harmony  with  my  views.  If  the  Supe-
riors leave  it  to  me,  it  will  never  be  otherwise  named
than  "  N.  Dame  des  Anges."  Therefore  I  beg  Your
Reverence  to  send  us  a  beautiful  Picture  surrounded
by  Angels.  It  is  one  of  the  great  Fete  days  of  the
Recolet  Fathers,  who  have  dedicated  their  Chapel  to
St.  Charles ;  the  River  upon  which  they  and  we  live
is  called  the  river  St.  Charles,  so  called  some  time
before  our  arrival.  As  to  sending  letters,  I  think  I
have  not  passed  over  any  one,  either  of  our  well-
known  benefactors  or  any  of  those  who  have  written
to  me ;  and  I  confess  to  you  that  I  am  a  little  tired ;
this  is  the  68th,  and  it  is  not  the  last.  May  it  please
our  good  God  that  everything  may  be  done  here  for
his  glory.  Our  Reverend  Father  Assistant  manifests
a  great  deal  of  affection  for  this  Mission ;  I  send  him
a  map  of  this  country.  With  assurances  that  I  will
be,  during  my  life,  of  Your  Reverence,

The  very  affectionate  servant  in  Our  Lord,

Charles  l'Allemant.
Kebec,  this  ist  of
August,  1626.


XIX


Charles  Lalemants

Lettre  au  R.  P.  Superieur  du  College  des  Jesuites

a  Paris

BORDEAUX:  Nouembre  22, 1629


SOURCE  :  The  Title-page  and  Avant-Propos  follow  O'Cal-
laghan's  Reprint,  No.  3  ;  but  the  Text  has  been  compared  with
the  original  publication  in  Champlain's  Voyages  (Paris,
1632),  part  ii.,  pp.  275-279.  The  bracketed  pagination
in  the  Text  is  that  of  Champlain.


L  E  T  T  R  E

du  Reuerend

Pere  L'ALLEMAND,

Super ieur  de  la  Miffion  des  Peres  Iefuites,

en  la

NOUUELLE  FRANCE

Enuoyee  de  Bordeaux  au  R.  P.  Supe-

rieur  du  College  des  Iefuites

a  Paris,

et  datee  du  22  Nouembre,  1629.


Imprimee  d'apres  l'exemplaire  que  Ton  trouve
dans  les  Voyages  du  Sieur  Champlain.

A PARIS,
M. DC. XXXII.


LETTER

from  the  Reverend

Father  L'ALLEMAND,

Superior  of  the  Mission  of  Jesuit  Fat/iers,


in


NEW  FRANCE

Sent  from Bordeaux  to  the Reverend

Father  Superior  of  the  Jesuit  College

at  Pa  R  i  s ,

and  dated  22nd  November, 1629.


Reprinted  from  the  copy  to  be  found  in  the  Voyages  of
Sieur  Champlain.

PARIS,
M. DC. XXXII.


232  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4


Avant-Propos.

LE  R.  Pere  CHARLES  LALLEMANT,  qui  a  e'er  it  la
Lcttre  fuivantc,  cntra  a  V  age  de  vingt  am  dans  la
Compagnie  dc  jfcfus. En  1613,  il  avoit  accompagne
M.  de  la  Saujjfaye,  a  Pentagouet. Argal  f  e'tant  empare  de
cet  e'tabliffemement, le P. Lallcmant  /'en retourna en
France,  d' oh  il partit  pour  le  Canada  en  1625. C ejloit  la
premiere  fois  que  des  Peres  Je'fuites  entrerent  dans  ce  Pays.
Quelques  annees  apre's,  il  fill  envoyc  avec  le  P.  Philibert
Noyrot,  Procureur  de  la  MiJJion,  c here her  en  France  du
fecours  pour  la  Colonic,  et  ayant  trouve  de  quoi  frettcr  un
bailment  avec  des  vivres,  Us  fy  ctoicnt  cinbarque's  vers  la
fin  du  mois  de  J  utile  t,  1629. Le  vaijfeau  fit  naufrage
fur  la  cote  de  V Acadie,  et  c  eft  de  cet  naufrage  et  d' autre s
e've'nements qui  fuivirent  que  traitte  la  prefente  lettre.
[O'Callaghan.]


1616-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO  PARIS  SUPERIOR  233


Preface.

THE  Reverend  Father  CHARLES  LALLEMANT,  who
wrote  the  following  Letter,  entered  the  Society  of
Jesus  at  the  age  of  twenty  years.  In  1 6 1 3 ,  lie  ac-
companied M.  dc  la  Saussaye  to  Pentagouet.44  Argal  took
possession  of  this  settlement,  a?id  Father  Lallcmant  returned
to  France,  whence  he  departed  for  Canada  in  1625.  This
zvas  the  first  time  that  the  Jesuit  Fathers  had  entered  that
Country.  Several  years  later,  he  was  sent  with  Father
Philibcrt  Noyrot,  Agent  for  the  Mission,  to  France,  to  seek
aid  for  the  Colony  ;  and,  having  secured  the  means  to  load
a  ship  with  supplies,  they  embarked  upon  it  toward  the
end  of  July,  1629.  The  ship  was  wrecked  upon  the
Acadian  coast ;  and  it  is  this  shipivrcck  and  other  subse-
quent events  that  the  present  letter  describes.  [O'Cal-
laghan.]


234  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4


Lettre  du  Reuerend  P.  1'Allemand,  au  R.  P.  Su-
perieur, a  Paris.


[275]  A  A  YT  fefourne  deux  tours  a  Dieppe  ie  m  ache-
/~\^  minay  a  Rouen,  ok  ie  m  arreflay  deux  autres
iours,  &  appris  comme  le  vaijfeau  des  Reue-
rends  Peres  V  A  lie  viand  &  Noyrot  s '  ejioient  perdus  vers  les
IJlcs  de  Canfeau,  &  me  fit-on  voir  vne  lettre  dudit  Reue-
rend Per  e  I ' Allemand,  Superieur  de  la  Miffion  des  Peres
Iefuites,  en  la  nouuelle  France,  enuoye'e  de  Bordeaux  au
R.  P.  Superieur  du  College  des  Iefuites  a  Paris,  &  datte'e
du  22.  Nouembre  1629.  comme  il  sy  enfuit. [Champlain.]

[276] 71  /f  on  Reverend  Pere,

iVl  pax  Chrifli.

Cafligans  caftigauit  me  Dominus  &  morti
non  tradidit  me,  Chajiiment  qui  ma  ejle"  d '  autant  plus
fenjible  que  le  naufrage  a  es?e  accompagne'  de  la  mort  du  R.
P.  Noyrot  &  de  nojlre  frere  Louys,  deux  homes  qui  de-
uoient,  ce  me  femble  grandemet  feruir  a  nodre  Seminaire.
Or  neantmoins  puis  que  Dieu  a  difpofe  de  la  forte,  il  nous
faut  chercher  nos  contentcments  dans  fes  faincl.es  volontez,
hors  def que  lies  il  n  y  eut  iamais  efprit  folide  ny  content,  &
ie  m  affaire  que  V experience  aura  fait  voir  a  voflre  re-
uerence  que  V amertmne  de  nos  reffentiments  de'trempe'e  dans
la  douceur  du  bon  plaifir  de  Dieu,  auquelvne  ame  s 'attache
infeparablement,  perd  (ou  le  tout)  on  la  meilleure  partie  de
fon  fie  I ;  Si  que  s'il  re  fie  encore  que  Ique s  foufpirs  pour  les
foujfrances,  ou  paffe'es  ou  prefentes,  ce  n  efl  que  pour  afpi-
rer  dauantage  vers  le  Ciel,  &  perfcclionner  auec  merite


1616-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO  PARIS  SUPERIOR  235


Letter  from  the  Reverend  Father  l'Allemand  to
the  Reverend  Father  Superior,  at  Paris.

[275]  A  FTER  having  sojourned  two  days  at  Dieppe,  I
£\  journeyed  to  Rouen,  where  I  remained  two
more  days,  and  learned  how  the  ship  of  the
Reverend  Fathers  V  Allemand  and  Noyrot  had  been  wrecked
upon  the  Canseau  Islands  ;  and  I  was  shown  a  letter  from
the  Reverend  Father  V Allemand,  Superior  of  the  Mission
of  the  Jesuit  Fathers  in  new  France,  sent  from  Bordeaux
to  the  Reverend  Father  Superior  of  the  Jesuit  College  at
Paris,  and  dated  November  22nd,  1629,  as  follows.
[Champlain.]


[276]  A  /f  y  Reverend  Father,

1  V  1  The  peace  of  Christ  be  with  you.

Castigans  castigavit  me  Dominus  &  morti
non  tradidit  me,  a  Chastisement  all  the  more  keenly  felt
by  me,  as  the  shipwreck  was  accompanied  by  the  death  of
the  Reverend  Father  Noyrot  and  of  our  brother  Louys,'M
two  men  who  were  destined,  it  seems  to  me,  to  be  of  great
service  to  our  Seminary .  But  nevertheless,  since  God  has
so  ordained,  we  must  seek  our  consolation  in  his  holy  will,
outside  of  which  there  never  was  a  peaceful  or  contented
mind  ;  and  I  feel  sure  that  experience  will  have  shown  your
reverence  that  the  bitterness  of  our  grief,  tempered  with  the
sweetness  of  doing  the  will  of  God,  to  whom  a  soul  is  insep-
arably attached,  loses  (cither  all )  or  the  greater  part  of  its
sting.  And  yet,  if  there  still  remain  some  sighs  for  the
sufferings  either  of  the  past  or  of  the  present,  it  is  only  to


236  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fltSUITES  [Vol.4

ceste  conformity  dans  laquelle  V  ame  a  pris  refolution  de
paffer  le  res?e  de  fes  iours  ;  De  quatre  des  nos?res  que  nous
eftions  dans  la  barque,  Dicu  partageant  a  V efgal,  en  a
pris  deux,  &  a  laiffe  les  deux  autres.  Ces  deux  bons  Reli-
gieux  trcs-bien  difpofez  &  rcfignez  a  la  mort,  feruiront  de
viclime  pour  appaifer  la  colere  de  Die?i  ius'tement  ictte'e
contre  nous  pour  nos  deffauts,  &  pour  nous  rendre  deformais
fa  bonte  fauorable  au  fucceds  du  deffein  entrepris.

Ce  qui  nous  perdit  fut  vn  grand  coup  de  vent  de  Sues'!,
qui  s'ejleua  lors  que  nous  es2ions  a  la  riue  des  terres,  vent
ft  impctueux  que  quelque  foin  &  diligence  que  peus?  apporter
nos2re  Pilote  aucc  fes  Matclots,  Quelques  vceux  &  prieres
que  nous  pcu/Sions  faire  pour  des'tourner  cc  coiip,  iamais
nous  ne  peuf me  s  faire  en  forte  que  nous  n  allafsions  heurter
contre  les  rockers  :  ce  fut  le  26.  iour  d'apres  no/Ire  depart,
iour  de  faincl  Barthelemy,  emiiron  fur  les  neuf  heures  du
foir  ;  De  24.  que  nous  eflions  dans  la  barque,  dix  feulement
efchappcrent,  les  autres  furent  eflonjfcz  dans  les  eaux.  Les
deux  7iepueux  du  Pere  Noyrot  tindrent  compagnie  a  leur
oncle,  leurs  corps  ont  efle  enterrez,  [277]  entre  autres  celuy
du  P.  Noyrot  &  de  noftre  frere,  des  fept  autres  nous  ri en
auons  eu  aucune  nouuelles,  quelque  recherche  que  nous  en
ayons  pe?i  faire.  De  vous  dire  comment  le  Pere  de  Vieuxpont
&  moy  auons  efchappe'  du  naufrage,  il  me  feroit  bien  diffi-
cille,  &  croy  que  Dieu  feul  en  a  cognoiffance ,  qui  fuiuans
les  deffcins  de  fa  diuine  prouidece  nous  a  preferucz,  car  pour
mon  regard  ne  iugcant  pas  dans  les  apparences  humaines
qu'il  me  fufl  po/^ible  d'e'uiter  ce  danger,  i' auois pris  refo-
lution de  me  tenir  dans  la  chambre  du  nauire  aucc  noflre
frere  Louys,  nous  difpofans  tous  deux  a  receuoir  le  coup  de
la  mort,  qui  ne  pouuoit  tarder  plus  de  trois  Miferere,  lors
que  1  entendis  qii  on  in  appclloit  fur  le  haut  du  nauire,  ie
croyois  que  c ' cfloit  quelqiivn  qui  auoit  affaire  de  mon  fe-


1616-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO  PARIS  SUPERIOR  237

make  us  aspire  more  earnestly  to  Heaven,  and  to  perfect  with
merit  this  harmony  in  which  the  sold  is  determined  to  pass
the  rest  of  its  days.  Of  the  four  of  us  who  were  in  the
barque,  God  equally  divided  them,  taking  two  and  leaving
two.  These  two  good  Religious,  who  were  thoroughly  pre-
pared and  resigned  to  die,  will  serve  as  victims  to  appease
the  wrath  of  God,  justly  provoked  against  us  for  our  short-
comings, and  to  cause  him  to  grant  in  the  future  his  good-
ness, that  it  may  be  favorable  to  the  success  of  the  project
undertaken.

Our  zvreck  zvas  caused  by  a  heavy  gust  of  wind  from  the
Southeast,  which  arose  when  we  were  near  the  shore, —  a
wind  so  strong  that  in  spite  of  all  the  diligence  of  our  Pilot
and  his  Sailors,  and  the  vows  and  prayers  which  we  made
to  avert  the  disaster,  we  could  not  avoid  striking  upon  the
rocks.  This  zvas  on  the  26th  day  after  our  departure,
saint  BartJielemy 's  day,  about  nine  o'clock  in  the  even-
ing. Of  the  24.  who  were  in  the  barque,  ten  only  escaped,
the  others  being  suffocated  in  the  water.  The  two  neph-
ews of  Fatlier  Noyrot  kept  company  with  their  uncle,  and
there  the  bodies  were  buried,  [277]  among  others  that  of
Father  Noyrot  and  our  brother ;  of  the  seven  others  we
have  no  tidings,  notwithstanding  the  search  that  has  been
made.  It  would  be  difficult  for  me  to  tell  you  how  Father
de  Vieuxpont 45  and  I  escaped  sJiipzvrcck,  and  I  believe  it  is
known  only  to  God,  who,  in  harmony  zvith  the  purposes  of
his  divine  providence,  has  preserved  us  ;  for  in  regard  to
myself,  not  thinking  it  within  the  bounds  of  human  possi-
bility that  I  could  escape  this  danger,  I  had  resolved  to  re-
main in  the  ship's  cabin  with  our  brother  Louys.  We
were  preparing  ourselves  to  meet  death,  which  could  not  be
farther  away  than  three  Miserere's,  when  I  heard  some  one
call  me  on  the  deck  of  'the  ship. 7  thought  it  might  be  some


238  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4

cours,  ie  montay  en  haut,  &  tronuay  que  c '  eftoit  le  P.
Noyrot  qui  me  demandoit  derecJief  V abfolution  :  Apres  luy
auoir  donn^e,  &  chante'  tons  enfemble  le  Salue  Regina,  ie
fus  contraincl  de  demcurer  en  haut ;  car  de  defcendre  il
ny  auoit  plus  de  moyen,  la  mer  ejloit  fi  haute,  &  le  vent  Ji
furieux,  quen  mains  de  rien  le  cos?e'  qui  panchoit  fur  le
rochcr  fut  mis  en  pieces,  i 'eftois  prochc  du  P.  Noirot  lors
quvn  coup  de  mer  vint  Ji  impetueufement  donner  contrc  le
c oft e'  fur  lequel  nous  eftions  qui  rompit  tout,  &  me  fepara
du  P.  Noyrot,  de  la  bouche  diiquel  i'entendis  ces  dernier es
paroles,  In  maims  tuas  Domine,  &c.  Pour  moy  de  ce
coup  ie  me  trouuay  engage  entre  quatre  pieces  de  bois,  deux
defquclles  me  donnerent  fi  rudcment  contre  la  poiclrine,  &
les  deux  autres  me  briferent  Ji  fort  le  dos  qiie  ie  croyois
mourir  auparauant  que  d'etre  enueloppc  des  flots,  mais
voicy  vn  autre  coup  de  mer  qui  me  defengageant  de  ces  bois
m  enleua,  &  mon  bonnet  &  mes  pantouflcs,  &  mift  le  refte
du  nauire  tout  a  plat  dans  la  mer:  Ie  tombay  heureufement
fur  vne  planche  que  ie  n  abandonnay  point,  de  reticontrc
clle  cftoit  ne'e  aucc  le  refte  du  cos?c  de  ce  nauire.  Nous
voila  doncques  a  la  mercy  des  flots,  qui  ne  tious  efpargnoient
point ;  ains  s'eflcuaus  ie  ne  fcay  combien  de  coidde'es  au
dejjfus  de  nous,  tomboient  par  apres  fur  nos  teftes.  Apres
auoir  flotte"  long  temps  de  la  forte  dans  V  obfcurite'  de  la
nuicl,  qui  es?oit  defia  commcjiafc,  regardant  a  V entour  de
moy  ie  m  apperceus  que  nous  eftions  enfermez  d '  cj "pines  &
fir  tout  enuironnez  &  pre  ft  du  coftau  qui  fembloit  vne  ijle,
puis  regardant  vn  peu  plus  attentiucmcnt  ie  contay  fix  pcr-
fonncs  qui  nesJoient  pas  fort  cjloigne'cs  de  moy,  deux
def quels  m  apperccuans  m  exciter ent  a  fair e  tons  mes  efforts
pour  in  approchcr,  ce  ne  [278]  fut  pas  fans  peine,  car  les
coups  que  i'auois  receus  dans  le  debris  du  vaiffeau  m 'auoient
fort  ajfoiblis  :  Ie  fis  tant  neautmoins,  qu'auec  mes  planches


1616-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO  PARIS  SUPERIOR  239

one  who  was  planning  my  rescue. I  went  up  and  found  it
was  Father  Noyrot,  who  asked  me  to  again  give  him  abso-
lution. After  having  given  it  to  him,  and  having  all  sung
together  the  Salve  Regina,  I  was  obliged  to  remain  above,
for  there  was  no  means  of  descending ;  the  sea  being  so
high  and  the  wind  so  furious,  that,  in  less  than  no  time,
the  side  which  leaned  tozvard  the  rocks  was  broken  in  pieces.
I  was  near  Father  Noyrot,  when  a  wave  struck  the  ship  so
hard  on  the  side  where  we  were  that  it  broke  everything,
separating  me  from  Father  Noyrot,  from whose  lips  I
heard  these  last  words  :  In  maims  tuas  Domine,  &c. /
found  myself  after  this  blozv  entangled  in  four  pieces  of  wood,
tzvo  of  which  struck  me  so  hard  on  the  chest  and  the  other
two  hit  me  so  heavily  upon  the  back,  that  I  thought  I  should
die  before  being  engulfed  in  the  waves  ;  but  then  came  an-
other sea,  which,  freeing  me  from  these  pieces  of  wood,
carried  me  off,  and  my  cap  and  slippers,  and  scattered  the
rest  of  the  ship  over  the  sea. Fortunately,  I  fell  upon  a
plank  to  which  I  clung,  and  which  happened  to  be  attached
to  the  rest  of  the  side  of  the  ship. We  were  then  at  the
mercy  of  the  waves,  which  did  not  spare  us, but  which
rose,  I  know  not  how  many  cubits  above  us,  and  then  fell
forward  over  our  heads. After  having  floated  about  a
long  time  in  this  manner,  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,
which  had  already  set  in,  looking  around  me  I  saw  that
we  were  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  pine  trees,  and  every-
where environed  by,  and  near  the  shores  of  what  seemed  to
be  an  island ;  then  examining  a  little  more  closely  I  counted
six  persons  who  were  not  far  from  me,  two  of  whom  no-
ticed me,  and  motioned  for  me  to  try  and  come  near  them.
This  [278]  was  not  without  difficulty ,  for  the  blows  I  had
received  from  the  debris  of  the  ship  had  weakened  me. I
did  so  well,  however,  that  with  the  aid  of  my  planks,  I


240  LES  RELATIONS  DES  fESUITES  [Vol.4

i'arriuay  au  lieu  oil  Us  ejloient,  &  auec  leur  fecours  ie  vie
trouuay  a/Sis  fur  le  grand  mafil,  qui  tenoit  encore  ferine
auec  vne  partie  du  vaiffeau,  ie  riy  fus  pas  long-temps  car
comme  nous  approchions  plus  pre's  de  cctte  ijle,  nos  Matclots
fe  lancerent  bien-tos?  a  tcrre,  &  auec  leur  afiiflance  tons
ceux  qui  efloient  fur  le  cofile  du  nauire  y  furent  Men  toft
apres. Nous  voila  doncfept  de  compagnie,  ie  n  auois  bonnet
ny  fouliers,  ma  foutane  &  habits  eJ2oie?it  tons  defchirez,  &
fi  moulus  de  coups  que  ie  ne  pouuois  me  foufenir,  &  de
faicl  il  fallut  qu  on  me  fouslint  pour  aller  iufques  dans
le  bois,  aufii  auois-ie  reccu  deux rudes  coups  aux  deux
jambes,  mais  fur  tout  a  la  dextre,  dont  ie  me  reffens  en-
core, les  mains  f endues  auec  quelque  contufion,  la  hanche
efcorche'e,  la  poitrine  fur  tout  fort  offence'e,  nous  nous  re-
tirafmes  done  tons  fept  dans  le  bois,  moiiillez  comme  ceux  qui
venoicnt  d'etre  trempez  dans  la  mer : la  premiere  cliofc
que  nous  fi  fines  fut  de  remercier  Dieu  de  ce  qu'il  nous  auoit
preferuez, &  puis  le  prier  pour  ceux  qui  pourroiet  eflre
worts. Cela  faicl  pour  nous  ef chauffer  nous  nous  couchaf-
mes  les  vns  proches  des  autres,  la  terre  &  I ' hcrbe  qui  auoient
efle'  moiiillez  de  la  pluye  du  iour  n' efloient  encore  propre
pour  nous  feicher,  nous  paffafmes  ainfi  le  refile  de  la  nuicl,
pendant  laquelle  le  P. de Vieuxpont  (qui  graces  a  Dieu
nefioit  point  offence')  dormit  fort  Men. Le  V endemain  fi
tofl  quil  fut  iour  nous  allafmes  rccognoiftrc  le  lieu  oil  nous
eflions,  &  trouuafmes  que  c  efiloit  vne  ifle  de  laquelle  nous
pouuions  paffer  a  la  terre  ferme,  fur  le  riuage  nous  trou-
uafmes force  chofics  que  la  mer y  auoit  iettif,  ty  trouuay  deux
pantoufies,  vn  bonnet,  vnchappeau,  vnefoutanne,  & plufieurs
autres  chofes  neceffaircs. Sur  tout  Dieu nous  y  cnuoya
pour  viures  cinq  bariques  de  vin,  quclques  dix  pieces  de
lard,  de  Vhuile,  du  pain  des  from  ages,  &  vne  harquebufe,
&  de  la  pouldrc  tout  a  propos  pour  faire  du  feu. Apres


1616-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO  PARIS  SUPERIOR  241

reached  the  place  where  they  were,  and,  with  their  assist-
ance, I  found  myself  sitting  ?tpon  the  mainmast,  zvhich
was  still  firmly  fastc?ied  to  a  part  of  the  ship.  I  did  not
remain  there  long,  for  as  we  ncared  the  island  our  Sailors
soon  leaped  to  the  land ;  and,  with  their  assistance,  all
those  zuho  were  on  the  side  of  the  ship  zvere  soon  brought
to  the  shore.  There  zvere  then  sez'cu  of  us  together  ;  I  had
neither  cap  nor  shoes,  my  cassock  and  clot  lies  were  all  torn,
and  I  was  so  bruised  by  blozus  from  the  wreck,  that  I  could
not  stand  up ;  and,  in  fact,  some  one  had  to  support  me
while  I  was  trying  to  reach  the  woods  ;  for  I  had  received
two  hard  blows  upon  both  legs,  but  especially  upon  the
right  one,  zvhich  I  still  feel ;  my  hands  zvere  cut  and
bruised,  the  flesh  torn  from  my  hips ;  above  all  I  zvas
badly  zvounded  in  the  chest.  All  seven  of  us  withdrew  in-
to the  zvoods,  as  wet  as  those  who  have  just  been  soaked  in
the  sea.  The  first  thing  we  did  was  to  thank  God  for
having  preserved  us,  and  then  zve  prayed  to  him  for  those
who  might  be  dead.  This  done,  we  lay  down  very  near  to
each  other  to  keep  warm  ;  the  ground  and  the  grass,  which
had  been  wet  by  the  rain  of  the  previous  day,  zvere  not  yet
in  a  condition  to  dry  us;  thus  zve  spent  the  rest  of  the
night,  during  zvhich  Father  de  Vicuxpont  (who,  thank  God,
zvas  unharmed)  slept  well.  The  next  morning,  at  day-
break, we  reconnoitered  the  place  where  zve  zvere,  and  dis-
covered that  it  was  an  island,  from  zvhich  we  could  go  to
the  mainland.  We  found  many  things  upon  the  shore  that
had  been  throzvn  up  by  the  sea;  I  found  there  two  slippers,
a  cap,  a  hat,  a  cassock,  and  several  other  necessary  articles.
Best  of  all,  God  sent  us  as  food,  five  barrels  of  zvine,  about
ten  pieces  of  lard;  oil,  bread,  and  cheese  ;  also  an  arque-
buse,  powder,  and  everything  necessary  to  make  a  fire.
After  having  drazvn  all  these  upon the  shore, on  saint


242  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

qii  on  eut  ainfi  tout  retire,  le  ioitr  de  Jaincl  Louys  tons
s '  employ  erent  a  /aire  le  pofiible  pour  bajlir  vne  chalouppe
du  dcsbris  du  vaiffeau,  auec  laquelle  nous  irions  rangeant
la  cojle  chercher  quelque  nauire  de  pefcheurs  :  On  fe  nut
doneques  a  trauailler  auec  mefchans  ferremens  que  V on
trouua,  elle  ejloit  bien  aduancee  le  quatriefme  iour,  lors
que  nous  eufnies  cognoiffance  d'vne  chalouppe  qui  ejloit  fous
voile  venant  vers  le  lieu  ok  nous  ejtions,  Us  receurent  de-
dans vn  de  nos  matelots  qui  alia  tout  feid  phis  procJie  du
lieu  [279]  oil  elle  deuoit  paffer,  Us  le  menerent  dans  leur
vaiffeau  parler  au  Maijlre,  auquel  il  racota  nos?re  dij-
grace,  le  maijlre  tout  aufi>i-toJt  s 'embarqua  dans  vne  cha-
louppe &  nous  vint  trouuer,  nous  offrit  a  tous  le  paffage  :
Nous  voila  en  affcurance,  car  le  lendcmain  tous  les  homines
coucherent  dans  Jon  vaiffeau  :  C 'ejloit  vn  vaiffeati  Bafque
qui  faijoit  pejche  d  vne  lieue  &  demie  du  rocher,  oh  nous
fifmes  naufrage,  &  pour  autdt  qii  il  r ejloit  encores  bien  du
temps  pour  acheuer  leur  pejche,  nous  demeurajmes  auec
eux  ce  qui  rejloit  du  mois  d'  Aoujl,  &  tout  le  mois  de  Sep-
tembre.  Le  premier  d"  Oclobre  arriua  vn  Sauuage  qui  dijl
au  Maijlre  que  s  il  ne  s 'en  alloit  il  y  auroit  danger  que  les
Anglois  ne  le  Jurpriffcnt.  Cette  nouuelle  le  difpoja  au  de-
part :  Le  mejme  Sauuage  nous  dijl  que  le  Capitaine  Dan-
iel ejloit  a  vingt-cinq  lieu'es  de  la  qui  bajliffoit  vne  maijon,
&  y  laiffoit  des  Francois  auec  vn  de  nos  Peres :  Cela  me
donna  occafion  de  dire  au  P.  de  Vieuxpont  qui  me  preffoit
fort  que  ie  luy  accordaffe  de  demeurer  auec  ce  Sauuage
dans  cejle  cojle,  qui  ejloit  bien  I'vu  des  mcilleurs  Sauuage s
qui  Je  puiffe  rencontrer,  Mon  Perc  voicy  le  moyen  de  con-
tenter  vojlre  reuerence,  le  Pere  Vimond  Jera  bien  aije
d'auoir  vn  compagnon.  Ce  Sauuage  s ' offre  de  mener  vo-
jlre Reuerence  iujques  au  lieu  ok  ejl  Monfieur  Daniel,  Ji
elle  veut  demeurer  la  elle  y  demeurera,  fi elle  veut  allcr


1616-29] C.  LALEMANT  TO  PARIS  SUPERIOR  243

Louis 's  day,  everybody  went  to  work  in  earnest  to  build
a  boat  out  of  the  wreck  of  the  ship,  in  which  we  might  sail
along  the  coast  in  search  of  some  fishing  boat.  So  we
began  to  work  with  the  poor  tools  at  our  disposal,  and  con-
siderable progress  was  made  by  the  fourth  day,  wlien  we
learned  of  a  boat  under  sail,  coming  towards  the  place
where  we  were.  They  received  on  board  one  of  our  sailors,
zvho  went  alone  to  the  place  [279]  near  which  it  zuas  to
pass.  They  took  him  into  their  ship  to  speak  with  their
Captain,  to  whom,  he  related  our  misfortune.  The  cap-
tain in/mediately  entered  a  boat  and  came  in  search  of  us,
offering  a  passage  to  all  of  us.  Behold  us  then  in  safety,
for  the  next  night  we  all  slept  in  his  ship.  It  zvas  a
Basque,  zvhicJi  zuas  fishing  a  league  and  a  half  from  the
rock  where  we  zvere  wrecked ;  and,  as  they  zvould  not
finish  their  fishing  for  some  time,  we  stayed  zvith  them
during  the  remainder  of  the  month  of  August  and  the  en-
tire month  of  September.  On  the  first  of  October  a  Sav-
age arrived,  and  told  the  Master  that  if  lie  did  not  leave
he  would  be  in  danger  of  being  surprised  by  the  English.
This  news  decided  his  departure.  The  same  Savage  told
us  that  Captain  Daniel4®  was  tzventy-five  leagues  away,
and  was  building  a  house,  and  that  he  had  left  the  French
with  one  of  our  Fathers  there.  This  led  me  to  say  to
FatJicr  de  Vicuxpont ,  zvho  urged  me  earnestly  to  permit
him  to  remain  zvith  this  Savage  upon  this  coast,  for  he
was  one  of  the  best  Savages  that  could  be  found;  "My
Father,  here  is  the  zvay  zve  can  satisfy  your  reverence  ;
Father  Vimond4"  will  be  very  happy  to  have  a  companion.
This  Savage  offers  to  conduct  your  Reverence  to  the  place
where  Monsieur  Daniel  is;  if  you  wish  to  remain  there,
you  may  do  so  ;  if  you  wish  to  go  to  spend  a  few  months
with  the  Savages  to  learn  their  language,  you  may  do  so  ;


244  LES  RELATIONS  DES  JESUITES  [Vol.4

quelque  mois  auec  les  Sannagcs,  pour  apprendre  la  langne
elle  le  pourra  /aire,  &  ainji  le  R.  Pere  Vimond  &  vojlre
Reuerence  auront  leur  contcntement :  le  bon  Pere  fut  ex-
trcfmement  ioyeux  de  cejie  occajion  qui  fe  prefentoit ,  ainji
il  s'embarque  dans  la-chalouppe  du  Sauuage,  ie  luy  laiffay
tout  ce  que  nous  anions  fauuc,  horfmis  le  grand  Tableau
duquel  le  matelot  Bafquc  s'cjloit  faiji,  mais  i'auois  bien
pense  an  retour  de  luy  faire  rendre,  fi  vne  autre  dij grace
ne  nous  fut  arriue'e.  Nous  partifmcs  done  de  la  cojle  le
6.  Oelobre,  &  apres  auoir  endure"  de  Ji  furie2ifes  tempejlcs
que  nous  n  anions  encores  experimete'cs,  le  quarantiefme
iour  de  nojlrc  depart  entrdt  das  vn  port  proche  de  S.
Sebajlie,  nous  fifmes  de  rechef  vn  fecond  naufrage,  le  Na-
ture rompu  en  mille pieces,  toutc  la  molu'e perdue,  ce  que  ie
pens  faire  ce  fut  de  me  fauucr  dans  vne  chalouppe,  dans
laquelle  ie  me  iettay  auec  dcs  pantoufles  aux  pieds,  &  vn
bonnet  de  nuicl  en  tejle,  &  en  ceflc  efquippagc  m  en  aller
trouucr  nos  Peres  a  S.  Sebajlie n,  d'ou  ie  partis  il  y  a  huicl
iours,  &  fuis  arriue  a  Bourdeuac  proche  de  Bordeaux  le
20.  de  ce  mois.  Voila  le  fucceds  de  nojlre  voyage,  par
lequel  vojlre  Reuerence  pent  iuger  des  obligations  que  i  ay
a  DIE  V.


1616-29] C.  LA  LE  MA  NT  TO  PARIS  SUPERIOR  245

and  so  the  Reverend  Father  Vimond  and  your  Reverence
will  be  satisfied. ' '  The  good  Father  was  very  happy  at  this
opportunity  which  offered  itself,  so  he  embarked  in  the
Savage's  boat.  I  gave  him  all  that  we  had  saved,  except
the  large  Painting,  which  the  Basque  sailor  had  taken
possession  of ;  but  I  had  intended  to  make  him  surrender  it
upon  our  return,  if  another  misfortune  had  not  overtaken
us.  So  we  left  the  coast  on  the  6th  of  October  ;  and  after
having  suffered  the  most  furious  tempests  that  we  had  yet
experienced,  we  entered,  the  fortieth  day  after  our  depar-
ture, the  port  near  St.  Sebastien,  where  we  tvere  zvrecked  a
second  time,  the  Ship  being  broken  into  a  thousand  pieces
and  all  the  codfish  being  lost.  All  I  could  do  was  to  escape
in  a  shallop  into  which  I  threw  myself,  in  my  slippers  and
nightcap,  and  in  this  outfit  I  went  to  find  our  Fathers  at
St.  Sebastien,  whence  I  departed  eight  days  later,  and
arrived  at  Bourdevac,  near  Bordeaux,  the  20th  of  this
month.  This  is  the  result  of  our  voyage,  from  which  your
Reverence  can  judge  of  my  obligations  to  GOD.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA: VOL  IV

XIV

Chapters  xxvi.-xxxvii.,  completing  the  document,
are  given  in  the  present  volume.  The  preceding
chapters,  with  Bibliographical  Data,  are  found  in  our
Volume  III.

XV -XVII

Documents  XV.  and  XVI.  are  letters  from  Charles
Lalemant  to  Sieur  de  Champlain  and  the  provincial
of  the  Recollets,  respectively,  dated  at  Quebec,  July
28,  1625.  They  are  taken  from  Sagard's  Histoire  du
Canada  (Paris,  1636),  pp.  868,  869,  870;  in  the  Tross
reprint  of  Sagard  (Paris,  1865),  they  are  in  vol.  iii. ,
pp.  789,  790.48

Document  XVII.  is  a  letter  from  Lalemant  to  his
general,  at  Rome,  dated  New  France,  August  1,
(presumably  1626).  It  was  written  in  Latin,  the
original  being  preserved  in  the  Archives  of  the  Gesu
at  Rome.  This  is  one  of  the  letters  copied  for  Caray-
on,  by  Father  Martin,  in  1858,  and  translated  by  the
latter  into  French,  for  the  Premiere  Missiofi,  where  it
appears  on  pp.  117- 121, —  see  Bibliographical  Data
for  Document  XIII.,  in  our  Volume  III.  We  follow
the  Martin  apograph,  in  Latin  (preserved  at  St.
Mary's  College,  Montreal),  and  our  translation  into
English  is  made  therefrom. t!)

The  above  three  letters  by  Lalemant  were  selected
by  O'Callaghan  from  Sagard  and  Carayon,  —  the
third  being,  of  course,  Martin's  French  translation, —


248  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

and  published  at  Albany  in  1870,  with  a  brief  "Avis"
giving  the  sources  of  the  documents.  This  publica-
tion, known  in  the  Lenox  Catalogue  as  "O'Callaghan
Reprint  No.  2,"  bears  the  following  title-page:

Copie  de  Trois  |  Lettres  |  efcrittes  es  annees  1625.
et  1626.  I  Parle  P.  Charles  Lallemant  |  Superieur  des
Miffions  de  la  Compagnie  |  de  Iesvs  en  la  |  Novvelle
France.  |  A  Albanie  |  De  l'lmprimerie  de  J.  Mun-
sell  I  M.DCCC.LXX.

Collation  of  O ' Callaghari 's  Reprint.  Title,  1  p.;  re-
verse of  title,  with  inscription  :  "  Edition  tiree  a
vingt  cinq  exemplaires.  O'C,"  1  p.;  "Avis"  (by
O'Callaghan),  1  p.;  text,  pp.  5-14.

For  further  references,  see  Brown,  vol.  ii.,  no.  316
and  p.  166;  Harrisse,  nos.  426,  427,  429;  Sabin,  vol.
x.,  no.  38679;  O'Callaghan,  nos.  1209,  1250;  Win-
sor,  p.  301;  Lenox,  p.  18.

XVIII

We  follow  the  original  publication  (Paris,  1627),
now  in  the  Lenox  Library,  of  Lalemant's  letter  to  his
brother,  Jerome ;  it  is  described  in  the  Lenox  Cata-
logue, p.  4,  under  "  H.  41."

There  are  extant,  four  different  reprints  of  this
document,  as  follows:

1.  It  appears  to  have  first  been  reprinted  in  Mer-
cure  Francois,  tome  xiii.,  pp.  12-34;  the  portion  of
the  journal  wherein  this  is  found,  is  devoted  to  the
events  of  the  year  1626,  but  the  royal  Privilege  for
the  volume  was  "  Donne  au  camp  de  la  Rochelle  le
28.  de  Septembre,  l'an  de  grace  1628."  The  original
publication  appeared  without  statement  of  Privilege ;
it  is,  therefore,  impossible  to  say  when  in  1627  permis-
sion to  print  was  granted. In  the  Quebec  edition  of


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA: VOL.  IV  249

the  Relations  (1858),  it  is  inadvertently  stated  (vol.  i.)
that  this  letter  commences  on  p.  1  (instead  of  p.  12)
of  tome  xiii.  of  Mercure,  an  error  which  Sabin,  Harrisse,
and  others  have  repeated.  As  will  be  seen  by  a  com-
parison of  our  text  with  that  of  issues  which  follow
the  Mercure,  the  differences  between  the  original  and
this  first  reprint  are  slight.

2.  The  next  reprint  appears  in  Danjou's  Archives
Curieuses,  2nd.  series,  tome  iii.  (Paris,  1838),  pp.
405  -426).  This  follows  the  text  of  the  original,  and
not  that  of  the  Mercure.  The  following  clause  in  the
Lenox  Catalogue,  p.  19, —  the  final  sentence  of  note
under  "  7(b)"  in  list  of  O'Callaghan's  Reprints, —  is
misleading:  "  The  copy  in  the  Astor  Library  of  that
work  is  printed  from  the  original  letter  of  1627."
The  "  copy  in  the  Astor  "  is  simply  this  reprint  in
Archives  Curieuses,  of  which  rare  collection  the  Astor
has  a  set.

3.  The  third  reprint,  but  the  first  in  separate
form,  was  issued  by  O'Callaghan  at  Albany,  1870,
and  is  the  one  designated  in  the  Lenox  Catalogue
(p.  19)  as  "  7(b)."  The  text  of  the  Mercure  reprint  is
followed,  with  a  made-up  title-page,  as  follows:

Relation  |  de  ce  qvi  s'est  passe  |  en  la  |  Novvelle
France  en  l'annee  M. DC. XXVI.  Enuoyee  au
Pere  Hierosme  L'Allemant  |  par  le  P.  Charles  L'Al-
lemant  Superievr  de  |  la  Miffion  de  la  Compagnie  de
Iesvs  I  en  |  Canada.  |  D'apres  la  Copie  dans  le  Mer-
cure Francois  |  Tome  13.  |  A  Paris  |  Chez  Eftienne
Richer  rue  S.  lean  de  Latran  |  M. DC. XXIX.

Collation  of  same.  Title,  1  p.;  reverse  of  title,  with
inscription:  "Edition  tiree  a  vingt-cinq  excmplaires,
O'C,"  1  p.;  Tables  des  Matieres,  2  pp.;  text,  pp.
1 -51  ;  Table,  pp.  53-59.


250  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESU1TES

4.  A  second  separate  reprint  was  issued  by  O'Cal-
laghan in  1871,  and  is  that  referred  to  in  the  Lenox
Catalogue  (p.  19)  as  "  7(a)."  This  follows  the  orig-
inal text,  and  not  that  of  the  Mercure ;  it  is  set  in
small  type  in  imitation  of  the  original  (Paris,  1627),
and  comes  into  the  same  number  of  pages.  Upon
the  otherwise  blank  page  facing  the  last  page  of  the
text,  is  the  inscription  :  "  Caique  fur  l'exemplaire
dans  la  collection  de  Mr.  James  Lenox,  de  New
York."  The  title-page  is  apparently  photo-litho-
graphed from the  original.

For  further  references  to  this  document,  which  has
had  a  curious  bibliographical  history,  see  Harrisse,
no.  41;  Sabin,  vol.  x.,  no.  38680  (original),  and  no.
38682  (reprint);  Carayon,  nos.  1254,  1255,  and  p.
1 179;  Ternaux,  no.  496;  Winsor,  pp.  300,  301;  His-
torical Magazine,  vol.  iii.,  p.  19;  Brown,  vol.  ii.,  p.
166;  Lenox,  p.  4  (H.  41),  19;  and  the  Barlow  (no.
1272),  Murphy  (no.  1480),  and  O'Callaghan  (nos.
1250,  1982)  sale  catalogues.

Title-page.  We  give  a  photographic  facsimile  of
original.

Collation  of  Original. Title,  1  p.  ;  text,  pp.  1  -  16.

XIX

Charles  Lalemant's  letter  of  Nov.  22,  1629,  to  the
superior  of  the  Jesuit  College  at  Paris,  originally  ap-
peared without  title  or  headlines,  in  Les  voyages  du
Sieur  de  Champlain  (Paris,  1632),  2nd  part,  pp.  275-
279.  O'Callaghan  reprinted  it  in  what  is  known  in
the  Lenox  list  as  "No.  3,"  of  which, —  as  with  others
of  the  O'Callaghan  series, —  but  twenty-five  copies
were  published.  He  omitted  the  preliminary  edi-
torial note,  on  p.  275,  made  up  a  title-page  of  his  own,


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  DATA: VOL.  IV  251

and  furnished  the  Avant-Propos.  In  the  present
issue,  we  reproduce  the  O'Callaghan  title-page  and
Avant-Propos,  but  in  all  other  respects  strictly  follow
the  original  publication.  See  further  references  in
Winsor,  p.  301  ;  Sabin,  vol.  x.,  no.  38681 ;  Lenox,  p.  18.

Title-page. We  imitate  O'Callaghan's  Reprint.

Collation  of  O 'Callaghan 's  Reprint.  Title,  1  p. ;  re-
verse of  title,  with  inscription:  "Tiree  a  vingt  cinq
exemplaires,  lefquels  ne  font  |  pas  a  vendre.  O'C,"
1  p.;  Avant-Propos  (by  O'Callaghan),  1  p.;  blank,
1  p. ;  text,  pp.  5-15;  colophon,  1  p.:  "Acheve
d'Imprimer  a  Albany,  N.  Y.,  par  |  J.  Munfell,  ce  14
Juin,  1870."


•


NOTES  TO  VOL.  IV


(Figures  in  parentheses,  following  number  of  note,  refer  to  pages

of  English  text.)

i  (p.  15). —  The  pilot :  see  vol.  ii.,  note  88.

2  (p.  15). —  Pretended  Religion  :  see  vol.  iii.,  note  31.

3  (p.  21). — On  Turnell,  see  vol.  i,  note  66.

4  (P-  33)- —  The  Marshal :  Sir  Thomas  Dale  (spelled  Deel,  by
Biard). See  vol.  i.,  note  64.

5  (P-  33)- —  The  General :  this  was  Sir  Thomas  Gates,  one  of  the
prominent  men  of  his  time  in  both  military  and  civil  service.  He
was  of  Devonshire,  and  probably  at  this  time  a  little  over  50  years
of  age  ;  had  been  an  officer  in  the  Drake-Sidney  expedition  to
America  (1585-86),  and  published  an  account  of  it  in  1589;  later,
had  military  commands  in  Spain  and  Holland ;  was  commander  of
the  English  expedition  to  Virginia  in  1608,  and  appointed  the  first
sole  and  absolute  governor  to  the  colony  there ;  returned  to  England
in  April,  1614.  He  lived  about  six  years  longer,  and  took  much  in-
terest in  the  affairs  of  Virginia.  Both  he  and  Dale  were  men  of
energy  and  executive  ability ;  to  their  efforts  are  mainly  ascribed
the  establishment  and  continuance  of  the  Jamestown  colony.

6  (p.  69). — The  French  name  for  the  English  Channel;  given  on
account  of  its  shape,  resembling  a  sleeve  (Fr.  mane  he  J.  It  gives  its
name  to  the  maritime  department  of  France  in  which  are  situated
Cherbourg  and  St.  L6.

7  (p.  75). —  The  ambassador :  see  vol.  ii.,  note  94.

8  (p.  S5). —  On  Betsabes,  see  vol.  iii.,  note  16.

9  (p.  91). —  River  of  smelts  :  the  Liesse  River  of  Lescarbot  (see
vol.  ii.,  note 37).

10  (p.  95).  —  On  this  point,  cf.  Maurault  {Hist.  Abenahis,  p.  95,
note  4):  "  The  Abnakis  always  exhibited  profound  grief  at  the  death
of  a  child;  the  parents  were  inconsolable.  The  cause  of  this  great
sorrow  was  the  belief  of  the  savages  that  a  child  was  wretched  in
the  other  world,  because  it  was  too  young  and  weak  to  procure  for
itself  the  necessities  of  life  there."

11  (p.  101).  —  The  letters  patent  here  referred  to  were  those  issued
to  Sir  Thomas  Gates  and  others,  for  the  establishment  of  colonies  in
Virginia, and constituted the colonial charter. This  document,


254  PES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J E SUITES

dated  April  10,  1606,  granted  some  20,000  square  miles  to  the  two
companies,  but  claimed  for  the  crown  all  of  North  America  be-
tween 340  and  450  north  latitude,  presumably  amounting  to  some
2,000,000  square  miles,  as  the  width  of  the  continent  was  then  under-
stood. The  text  is  given,  with  collateral  and  illustrative  papers,  in
Brown's  Genesis,  pp.  52  et  seq.

12  (p.  105). —  For  a  graphic  account  of  the  colonial  enterprises  of
Jean  Ribaut  and  Rene  de  Laudonniere  in  Florida  (1562-65),  consult
Parkman's  Pioneers,  pp.  33-150.  Cf.  Laudonniere's  own  narra-
tive, and  Ribaut's  journal,  as  given  in  Goldsmid's  Hakluyt,  vol.
xiii.,  pp.  407-507;  also,  Guerin's  ATavigatenrs  Frangais  (Paris,
1846),  pp.  180-204.

13  (p.  105). — Concerning  these  early  discoveries  by  the  French,
see  vol.  ii.,  notes  49,  72;  and  vol.  iii.,  notes  5,  9.

14  (p.  107). —  Biard  here  refers  to  the  colony  established  in  1610  by
John  Guy  and  others  at  Cupids  Harbor  (opening  into  Conception
Bay),  N.  F.  Lord  Bacon  was  prominent  in  this  enterprise,  and  it
was  his  influence  that  secured  the  charter  and  subsidies  granted  to
the  Newfoundland  Colonization  Company,  as  it  was  called.  The
company  seems  to  have  existed  till  at  least  162S.  For  Guy's  charter,
and  letters  written  by  him,  with  an  account  of  his  enterprise  and  of
other  early  colonies  in  that  region,  see  Prowse's  Hist.  N.F.,  pp.
92-133.

15  (p.  107). — The  map  of  Ortelius  (1570)  shows  New  France  as  ex-
tending southward  to  400.  Van  der  Aa's  "Canada"  (1619,  ca.),  and
Blaeu's  "Extrema  America?"  (1620),  give  the  Kennebec  river  as  the
dividing  line  between  New  England  and  New  France;  the  latter
region  is  extended  by  Van  der  Aa  to  the  south  of  the  Great  Lakes,
and  as  far  as  the  Mississippi  river.  Wmsor  gives  {Car tier  to
Frontenac,  p.  9),  a  sketch  reduced  from  a  tracing  of  the  alleged  map
of  Denis  (1506),  mentioned  in  vol.  iii.,  of  the  present  series,  note  4.

16  (p.  109). —  Reference  is  here  made  to  the  "  Pandects,"  or  Cor-
pus Juris  Civilis,  a  collection  of  the  Roman  civil  law,  made  in  the
sixth  century  by  Emperor  Justinian.  The  "  law  of  Alluvions  "  has
two  branches, — the  law  of  abandonment,  and  that  of  accretion
(aequirendo).  Biard's  reference  is  to  the  Corpus  Juris  Civilis,  Di-
gest, book  41  (  "De  adquirendo  rerutn  dominio" ),  29  and  30.  The
sign  ff,  used  in  our  text,  was  employed  by  early  jurisconsults  to  sig-
nify the  Digest,  and  even  the  Pandects  as  a  whole ;  it  is  supposed  to
be  a  corruption  of  the  Greek  character  7?  (or  perhaps  of  6 J- — See
Hermann Hugo's  De  Prima  Scribendi  Originc  (Antwerp, 1617),

P-  153-

17  (p.  109).  —  Regarding  the  Count  de  Soissons,  see  vol.  ii. ,  ?iote  24.

18  (p.  109). — Cf. with these arguments of Biard, Champlain's


NOTES  TO  VOL.  IV  255

"Abrege  des  decovvertvres  de  la  Nouuelle  France"  in  his  Voy-
ages (ed.  1632),  part  2,  pp.  290-296;  and  Hinsdale's  "  Right  of  Dis-
covery," in  Ohio  Archceol.  and  Hist.  Quarterly,  Dec,  1888.

19  (p.  113).  —  Concerning  the  French  fisheries  in  Newfoundland,
which,  with  the  neighboring  Banks,  furnished  the  greater  part  of
the  Canadian  product,  see  Prowse's  Hist.  N.F.,  pp.  49-50;  and
Dionne's  Nouv.  France,  chaps,  viii.,  ix.  For  a  detailed  account  of
the  Canadian  fisheries  at  the  present  time,  see  Joncas's  "Fisheries
of  Canada,"  in  Canadian  Economics  (Montreal,  1884),  pp.  41-73.

Lalemant  says  (doc.  no.  xviii.,  post)  that  the  usual  exportation  of
beaver  skins  from  New  France  was  12,000  to  15,000  annually;  and
that  it  had,  in  one  year,  been  22,000.  These  skins  were  sold  in
France  at  a  pistole  each,  or  ten  livres.  The  Company  of  Merchants
is  said  to  have  realized  an  annual  dividend  of  40  per  cent  on  its  in-
vestment. Garneau  cites  De  Caen  as  saying,  when  Quebec  was
restored  to  him  by  Kirk,  in  1632:  "  But  as  for  our  settlement,  my
people  have  found  it  utterly  consumed,  along  with  9,000  beaver
skins,  valued  at  40,000  livres." — Histoire  du  Canada  f4th  ed.,  Mont-
real, 1882),  vol.  i.,  p.  127,  note*.  See,  also,  chapter  on  "New
France  and  the  Fur-trade,"  in  H.  H.  Bancroft's  N.  W.  Coast,  vol.  i.,
pp.  378-403;  and  Dionne's  Nouv.  France,  chap.  xiii.  Gagnon's
Essai  de  bibliographie  canadienne  (Quebec,  1895),  p.  128,  mentions
Bruslons's  Dictionnaire  universel de  commerce  (Savary's  ed.,  Paris,
1723)  as  "an  immense  compilation,  containing  highly  valuable  infor-
mation in  regard  to  Canadian  commerce  in  the  seventeenth  century. ' '

20  (p.  171).  —  Charles  Lalemant  (also  written  L'Alemand,  L'Al-
mand,  Lallemant,  and  Allemand)  was  born  at  Paris  Nov.  17,  1587,  and
became  a  novice  of  the  Jesuits  July  29,  1607,  at  Rouen.  He  studied
philosophy  at  La  Fleche,  1609-  12 ;  during  the  following  three  years,
he  was  an  instructor  in  the  college  of  Nevers ;  four  years  more  he
devoted  to  the  study  of  theology  at  La  Fleche,  and  one  year  at  Paris.
He  was  a  professor  in  the  college  at  Bourges,  1620-22 ;  and,  for  three
years  more,  principal  of  the  boarding  school  of  Clermont,  Paris.
In  March,  1625,  he  was  appointed  superior  of  the  mission  at  Quebec,
whither  he  went  with  his  brethren  Masse  and  Brebeuf,  and  the  Re-
collet  missionary  Joseph  La  Roche-Daillon,  arriving  in  June  of  that
year.  Here  Lalemant  remained  till  November,  1627,  when  he  went
to  France'  to  procure  supplies.  Returning  in  the  following  May,
the  ship  was  captured  by  Admiral  Kirk,  the  Jesuits  being  sent  to
England,  and  later  to  France.  In  June,  1629,  Lalemant,  with  sev-
eral other  Jesuits,  made  a  second  attempt  to  return  to  Canada;  but
they  were  shipwrecked  on  the  rocks  near  Canso.  Noyrot  and  Malot
perished  in  the  waves,  Vieuxpont  joined  Father  Vimont  at  Grand
Cibou,  and  Lalemant  was  taken  back  to  France  by  a  Basque  fishing


256  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

vessel,  arriving  at  St.  Sebastien  after  still  another  shipwreck.  Que-
bec having  been  meanwhile  captured  by  the  English,  the  Canadian
missions  were  interrupted  until  1632,  when  the  region  was  restored
to  France.  Lalemant,  upon  his  return  to  France,  in  1629,  was  ap-
pointed rector  of  the  college  at  Eu;  and,  later,  of  that  at  Rouen.  In
April,  1634,  his  superiors  granted  his  earnest  request  that  he  might
again  go  to  Canada.  He  was  placed  in  charge,  with  Masse  and  De
Noue,  of  the  chapel  "Notre-Dame  de  Recouvrance"  (built  by  Cham-
plain  on  his  return  to  New  France),  and  was  the  latter' s  friend  and
spiritual  director,  attending  him  at  his  death.  Lalemant  returned
to  France  in  1 639,  and  there,  during  several  years,  acted  as  agent  for
the  Canadian  missions ;  he  was  afterwards  successively  rector  of  the
colleges  at  Rouen,  La  Fleche,  and  Paris,  and  at  the  last  place  supe-
rior of  the  Maison  Prof  esse. There  he  died,  Nov.  18,  1674.

21  (p.  171). —  The  General.  This  was  Emery  de  Caen,  who,  with
his  uncle,  Guillaume  de  Caen,  was  placed  by  Montmorency  in
charge  of  commercial  affairs  in  New  France;  both  were  Hugue-
nots—  the  latter  a  merchant,  the  former  a  naval  captain.

It  is  necessary,  in  this  connection,  to  outline  the  commercial  mo-
nopolies that  successively  dominated  New  France  in  its  infancy.
For  an  account  of  the  first  of  these,  granted  to  De  Monts,  see  vol.  i. ,
note  2.  His  patent  was  finally  canceled  in  1609;  and  in  January,
161 1,  he  gave  up  his  claims  in  America  to  Madame  de  Guercheville.
Meanwhile,  Champlain  (see  vol.  ii.,  note  42)  was  continued  as  lieuten-
ant of  the  King  in  New  France,  with  personal  command  over  the
Quebec  colony,  which  was  sustained  mainly  through  his  efforts,  with
the  aid  of  the  Rouen  merchants  who  had  been  associated  with  De
Monts.

Company  of  Associates. — The  Rouen  associates  withdrew  from  the
enterprise,  toward  the  close  of  161 1;  and,  in  the  following  year,
Champlain  undertook  the  formation  of  a  new  company,  to  be  com-
posed of  merchants  from  Rouen,  Havre,  St.  Malo,  and  La  Rochelle.
It  was  open  to  all  who  were  willing  to  share  both  the  profits  and
the  losses,  thus  avoiding  the  jealousies  that  had  been  aroused  against
the  limited  membership  of  De  Monts 's  company.  The  Rochelle
men  finally  declined  to  enter  the  company,  which  afterwards  lost
heavily  by  the  illicit  trade  in  which  the  former  engaged  with  the
savages.  Champlain  also  accuses  these  merchants  of  selling  arms
and  ammunition  to  the  natives,  and  exciting  their  hostility  against
the  Quebec  colonists. —  See  his  Voyages  (1632),  part  2,  pp.  2,  3.  The
Count  de  Soissons  (vol.  ii.  of  this  series,  note  24)  was  appointed  gov-
ernor of  New  France,  with  Champlain  as  his  lieutenant.  After  con-
siderable delay,  the  Company  of  Associates  was  organized  (1613  - 14) ;
among its members were, besides De Monts and Champlain,


NOTES  TO  VOL.  IV  257

Thomas  Poree,  Lucas  Legendre,  Mathieu  Dusterlo,  and  Daniel
Boyer.  Quarrels  arose  among  the  associates,  caused  by  commercial
and  even  religious  differences  of  opinion ;  and  some  of  them  tried  to
eject  Champlain  from  his  command.  Although  this  attempt  failed,
his  work  was  greatly  hindered  and  embarrassed,  until  the  Duke  of
Montmorency,  Conde's  successor  as  viceroy,  came  to  his  aid  (1620).

Company  of  De  Caen. — Dissensions  and  complaints  still  arising,
the  Company  of  Associates  was  summarily  dissolved  by  Montmo-
rency, in  November,  1620,  and  a  new  company  formed.  At  its  head
were  the  De  Caens ;  there  were,  also,  Guillaume  Robin,  Jacques  de
Troyes,  and  Frangois  Herve,  merchants ;  Francois  de  Troyes,  chief
of  royal  finance  at  Orleans ;  Claude  Le  Ragois,  receiver-general  of
finance  at  Limoges ;  Pierre  de  Verton,  counselor  and  secretary  of
the  King ;  and  others.  The  old  company  had  resented  Montmoren-
cy's order  of  dissolution ;  but  within  a  year  its  membership  and  in-
terests were  consolidated  with  those  of  the  new  association.  The
latter  received  a  monopoly  for  eleven  years,  to  which  the  King
added  eleven  more ;  but  it  also  was  dissolved  by  Richelieu,  early  in
1627,  to  make  room  for  his  "Company  of  New  France,"  also  known
as  the  "Company  of  the  Hundred  Associates."

Company  of  New  France. — This  association  was  personally  con-
trolled and  managed  by  Richelieu;  and  had  members  in  official  posi-
tions about  the  court,  and  in  Paris,  Rouen,  and  other  cities  of
France.  Among  these  were  Marquis  Deffiat,  superintendent  of
finance;  Champlain;  Claude  de  Roquemont;  the  Commander  de
Razilly;  Sebastian  Cramoisy,  the  Parisian  publisher;  Jean  de  Lau-
son,  long  the  president  of  the  company,  and  intendant  of  Canada ;
Louis  Houel,  secretary  of  the  King,  and  controller  of  the  salt  works
at  Brouage ;  and  several  leading  merchants  of  Paris,  Rouen,  Dieppe,
and  Bordeaux.  The  reasons  for  the  formation  of  this  company,  the
royal  charter  granted  to  it,  and  its  articles  of  association,  are  given
in  Mercure  Francois,  vol.  xiv.  (1628),  pp.  232-267.  For  a  complete
list  of  the  (107)  members,  see  Creuxius'  Hist.  Canad.;  for  a  copy  of
the  list,  with  the  company's  charter,  and  other  interesting  particu-
lars, see  Suite's  Histoire  des  Canadiens-Francais  (Montreal,  1882-
84),  vol.  ii.,  pp.  27-33.  The  company  was  granted  jurisdiction  over
the  territory  extending  from  Florida  to  the  Arctic  Circle,  and  from
Newfoundland  to  the  "  great  fresh  lake  "  (Huron).  Only  Catholics
were  permitted  to  join  this  association,  or  to  settle  in  its  colonies;
and  no  Huguenot  or  foreigner  might  enter  Canada.  The  capture  of
Quebec  by  the  English  (1629)  temporarily  broke  up  this  monopoly;
but  it  resumed  operations  when  that  region  was  retroceded  to  France
(vol.  ii.,  note  42).  The  charter  of  the  company  obliged  it  to  send
4,000  colonists  thither  before 1643;  to  lodge  and  support  them  dur-


258  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES

ing  three  years ;  and  then  to  give  them  cleared  lands  for  their  main-
tenance. The  vast  expense  attending  this  undertaking  was  beyond
the  ability  of  the  Associates;  therefore,  in  1645,  they  transferred  to
the  inhabitants  of  Quebec  their  monopoly  of  the  fur  trade,  with
their  debts  and  other  obligations, — retaining,  however,  their  seignio-
rial rights.  Finally  (Feb.  24,  1663),  the  Hundred  Associates  aban-
doned their  charter,  and  New  France  again  became  the  property  of
the  crown.

All  these  monopolies  appear  to  have  sought  mainly  their  own
financial  interests.  They  sustained  the  Quebec  settlement,  but  in
penurious  fashion,  and  only  so  far  as  it  aided  their  trade  with  the
natives ;  but  they  did  nothing  to  make  it  an  agricultural  community,
or  to  forward  Cham  plain's  schemes  for  the  permanent  colonization
of  Canada, —  neither  of  which  objects  could  well  be  attained  under
the  feudal  tenure  by  which  the  colonists  held  land  under  the  com-
panies.

For  more  extended  accounts  of  these  enterprises,  see  Parkman's
Pioneers,  pp.  364-366,  419-432;  his/esuits,  pp.  155-157,  194.  195.
331;  Ferland's  Cours  d'Nisloire,  vol.  i.,  pp.  161,  162,  167,  185,  189,
197-201,  215,  217,  220,  226,  338-340;  Rochemonteix'sy<?'.S7«7<?.?,  vol.  i.,
pp.  128-135,  159,  163,  164,  and  vol.  ii.,  pp.  65-66;  Slafter's  "  Memoir
of  Champlain,"  in  Voyages  (Prince  Soc),  vol.  i.,  pp.  110-114,  I22>
144-158,  187;  Faillon's  Colon.  Fr.,  vol.  i.,  pp.  132-136,  150,  160-175,
189-232,  268-272,  333-352;  Winsor's  dirtier  to  Frontenac,  pp.
130,  131,  167,  168;  Garneau's  Canada,  vol.  i.,  pp.  63-75;  and  Mar-
gry's  Collection  de  manuscrits  relatifs  a  la  Nouvelle  France
(Quebec,  1883),  vol.  i.,  pp.  62-85.

The  losses  of  the  De  Caens  at  the  capture  of  Quebec  (referred  to
note  ante,  19)  were  heavy;  and,  as  some  compensation  therefor,
they  were  granted  a  monopoly  of  the  fur  trade  in  the  Gulf  of  St.
Lawrence  for  one  year.  Emery  De  Caen  was  therefore  appointed
provisional  governor  of  Canada  for  that  period,  upon  the  restitution
of  the  province  by  the  English;  and  on  July  13,  1632,  he  took  formal
possession  of  Quebec  in  the  name  of  his  King.  Laverdiere  gives
(Champlain,  close  of  vol.  ii.)  numerous  "  Pieces  justificatives;"  see
pp.  6-31  of  these,  for  documents  showing  De  Caen's  losses  through
Kirk's  attack,  and  his  attempts  to  secure  redress  from  the  latter
through  the  English  government.  L'Abbe  H.  A.  B.  Verreau,  in
Report  on  Canadian  Archives  (1874),  p.  197,  mentions  that  in  Paris
he  found  documents  granting  islands  in  the  West  Indies  to  De  Caen,
in  1633  and  1640.

22.  (p.  171). —  Champlain,  in  thorough  accord  with  the  policy  then
dominant  at  the  court  of  France,  was  fully  as  desirous  of  establish-
ing the  Christian  religion  among  the  savages  of  America  as  of  gain-


NOTES  TO  VOL.  IV  259

ing  new  possessions  for  France.  He  had  tried,  in  1612,  to  induce
Madame  de  Guercheville  to  send  the  Jesuits  to  Quebec,  and  to  aid
De  Monts  in  establishing  a  colony  there;  see  his  Voyages  (1632),
pt.  L,  pp.  112,  113.  This  proposal  was  rejected,  on  account  of  De
Monts' s  Calvinistic  faith.  But  when  the  Company  of  Merchants
was  formed,  two  years  later,  Champlain  at  once  made  plans  for  the
establishment  of  missions  in  New  France.  Consulting  Louis  Houel,
of  Brouage,  the  latter  advised  him  to  apply  to  the  Recollets  (vol.  ii.,
of  the  present  series,  note  41),  who  had  already  won  renown  from
their  successful  missions  in  Spanish  America.

That  Order  gladly  responded  to  the  appeal ;  and,  having  secured
the  consent  of  the  King  of  France  and  of  the  Pope,  and  assurances
of  aid  from  the  Company  of  Merchants,  the  first  Recollet  mission-
aries to  Canada  departed  from  France,  April  24,  161 5. —  See  Introduc-
tion, vol.  i.,  pp.  xx.,  xxi.  Other  Recollets  were  sent  over,  from
time  to  time;  and,  in  1620-21,  they  built  a  convent  and  chapel  (the
first  in  Canada)  on  St.  Charles  River,  about  half  a  French  league
from  the  fort  of  Quebec.  This  they  named  Notre-Dame  des  Anges ;
it  was  situated  (according  to  Laverdiere)  on  the  spot  where  now
stands  the  General  Hospital.

By  1624,  five  Recollet  missions  had  been  established  —  at  Tadous-
sac,  Quebec,  and  Three  Rivers ;  at  Carhagouha,  in  the  Huron  coun-
try ;  and  among  the  Nipissings.  There  was  another,  in  Acadia,  on
St.  John  River,  founded  in  1619,  conducted  by  three  Recollets  from
Aquitaine,  and  supported  by  certain  commercial  companies  at  Bor-
deaux. This  mission  was  closed  in  July,  1624;  and,  immediately
thereafter,  its  priests  joined  their  brethren  at  Quebec.

Just  before  their  arrival,  a  conference  of  the  Recollet  missionaries
was  held  at  Quebec,  at  which  they  resolved  to  ask  the  cooperation
of  the  Jesuits  (also  noted  for  the  success  of  their  foreign  missions)
in  the  Canadian  field,  which  was  far  too  large  and  arduous  for  their
limited  resources,  hoping  that  the  latter  order  would  send  some  mis-
sionaries at  its  own  expense.  The  Recollets,  even  more  austere
than  the  other  Franciscan  orders,  were  forbidden  by  their  rules  to
own  property;  hence  their  missionaries  could  not  look  to  their  own
order  for  aid.  The  Company  of  Merchants  had  agreed  with  Cham-
plain  to  support  six  of  the  Recollets ;  but,  as  many  of  its  members
were  Protestants,  this  outlay  was  probably  an  unwelcome  burden
to  them.  Moreover,  the  religious  dissensions  constantly  arising  be-
tween the  Huguenots  and  the  Catholics  were  felt  to  be  a  hindrance
to  the  labors  of  the  missionaries,  who  would  have  preferred  that
Protestants  should  be  entirely  excluded  from  the  management  of
affairs.  Sagard  says  (Canada,  pp.  860,  861)  that  he  complained  to
Montmorency  of  the  disorders  in  Canada,  for  which  he  blamed  the


260  LES  RELA.  TIONS  DES  J&SUITES

Huguenots ;  and  that  the  Recollet  provincial  at  Paris,  with  Father
Irenseus  Piat  (envoy  from  the  Canadian  missionaries,  to  negotiate
with  the  Jesuits),  made  formal  charges  against  them  in  the  council,
to  the  same  effect.  The  viceroy  (in  Rochemonteix's  phrase,  "a  man
of  the  world,  who  loved  pleasures  quite  as  well  as  honors")  had
meanwhile  gladly  disposed  of  his  troublesome  Canadian  dignities
(January,  1625)  to  his  nephew  Henri  de  Levis,  duke  of  Ventadour,
a  pious  man  who  cared  not  for  trade  or  conquest,  but  only  for  the
conversion  of  the  savages.  De  Levis's  spiritual  director  was  a
Jesuit;  the  application  of  the  Recollets  for  aid  from  the  Society  of
Jesus  came  at  an  opportune  time  for  both  orders.  It  is  also  prob-
able that  the  influences  of  the  court,  at  that  time  strongly  inclined
toward  the  Jesuits,  helped  to  bring  about  the  arrangement.  There
was,  however,  considerable  opposition  to  its  consummation,  especial-
ly from  the  Company  of  Merchants;  but,  according  to  Faillon,  the
new  viceroy  asserted  his  authority  over  them,  and  obliged  them  to
yield.  In  accordance  with  the  agreement,  the  Jesuit  fathers  Lale-
mant,  Masse,  and  Brebeuf,  with  the  coadjutors  Francois  Charreton,
Jean  Goffestre,  and  Gilbert  Burel,  were  sent  to  New  France  in  April,

1625.  There  they  pursued  their  missionary  labors  until  the  capture
of  Quebec  by  the  English,  four  years  later.  After  that  event,  Kirk
sent  all  the  missionaries  back  to  France,  by  way  of  England.  When
the  French  returned  (1632),  they  were  accompanied  solely  by  Jesuit
priests ;  for  Richelieu  would  not  allow  the  Recollets  to  resume  their
Canadian  missions.

For  accounts  of  this  transaction,  from  a  Recollet  standpoint,  see
Shea's  Le  Clercg,  pp.  224-233;  and  Sagard's  Canada,  pp.  860-865.
The  Jesuit  view  is  given  in  Rochemonteix's  fe'suites,  vol.  i.,  pp.
'i-31-1S3- Cf.  Faillon's  Colon.  Fr.,  vol.  i.,  pp.  206-212.

23  (p.  171). — This  was  Joseph  de  la  Roche-Daillon  (written  also
d'Allion),  a  Recollet  priest  of  the  province  of  St  Denis,  allied  to  the
house  of  the  counts  du  Lud  (or  Lude).  He  accompanied  the  Jesuit
missionaries  to  Canada,  and,  after  remaining  at  Quebec  for  a  year,
went  to  the  Huron  country  with  Brebeuf  and  De  Noue. In  October,

1626,  he  visited  the  Neutral  Nation,  and  spent  the  winter  there.  In
the  summer  of  1628,  he  returned  from  the  Huron  mission  to  Quebec,
remaining  there  until  its  capture ;  Champlain  mentions  his  visit  to
"  Father  la  Roche,"  just  before  that  event,  to  ask  if  the  Recollets
could  supply  any  grain  to  the  colony.  Sagard  gives  (Canada,  pp.
880-892)  a  letter  written  to  a  friend  by  Daillon,  describing  his  visit
to  the  Neutrals;  it  is  reproduced  by  Le  Clercq  (Shea's  ed.,  vol.  i.,
pp.  263-272).  Harris  (citing  Noiseux's  Liste  chronologiquc)  gives
the  date  of  Daillon's  death  as  July  16,  1656. —  Early  Missions  in

Western  Canada  (Toronto,  1893),  p.  56,  note.


NOTES  TO  VOL.  IV  261

24  (p.  171). —  The  trading  station :  Three  Rivers  (see  vol.  ii.,
note  52).  This  point  was  long  a  favorite  fur-trade  rendezvous  for
the  Indians.  The  Recollet  missionaries  established  a  residence  here
in  June,  1615,  which  was  maintained  until  1628.  The  fortified
French  settlement  at  Three  Rivers  was  established  by  Champlain  in
July,  1634,  to  protect  the  Huron  and  Algonkin  fur  trade  from  the  in-
cursions of  the  Iroquois,  and  to  serve  as  an  outpost  of  defence  for
Quebec.  The  first  colonist  was  Jacques  Hertel,  who  in  1633  had  ob-
tained a  grant  of  land  there.  The  Jesuit  missionaries  were  also
among  the  proprietors  of  the  new  town,  having  obtained  from  the
Company  of  New  France  (see  note  21,  ante),  by  a  grant  dated  Feb.
15,  1634,  six  arpents  of  land  at  Three  Rivers;  but  they  did  not  se-
cure possession  of  this  till  Montmagny  delivered  it  to  them  (1637).
However,  within  two  months  after  La  Violette,  Champlain's  lieuten-
ant, had  erected  his  stockade  at  Three  Rivers,  two  of  the  Jesuit
fathers,— Le  Jeune  and  Buteux, — had  established  a  residence  there,
which  was  for  many  years  an  important  center  of  missionary  work. —
See  Suite's  Can.-Francais,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  4S-54:  he  gives  a  list,  con-
taining also  much  genealogical  information,  of  the  early  inhabitants
of  Three  Rivers;  and  the  document  granting  land  there  to  the  So-
ciety of  Jesus,  copied  from  Titres  seigneuriaux  (Quebec,  1852),  p.
70.  Cf.  Ferland's  Coitrs  d' Histoire,  vol.  i.,  p.  270;  he  states  that
the  church  registers  of  Three  Rivers  are  continuous  since  February,
1635 ;  and  that  these  records  are  the  oldest  existing  in  Canada.  The
first  entry  gives  the  exact  date  on  which  the  settlement  was  begun  —
July  4,  1634.

Suite  has  published,  at  Montreal,  several  works  concerning  this
town:  Histoire  de  la  ville  des  Trois-Rivieres  (1870),  Chronique
trifiuvienne  (1879),  an(l  Album  de  V Histoire  des  Trois-Rivieres
(1881).

25  (p.  171). —  Father  Nicholas  Viel,  then  stationed  at  Montargis,
France,  was  sent  to  the  Canadian  mission  of  the  Recollets,  with
Brother  Gabriel  Sagard  (see  note  48,  post),  in  1623.  Arriving  at
Quebec,  June  28  of  that  year,  they  at  once  accompanied  Father
Joseph  Le  Caron  to  the  Huron  country,  which  they  reached  in  Au-
gust, and  settled  at  the  residence  already  established  at  Quieunonas-
caran.  At  the  end  of  ten  months,  Le  Caron  and  Sagard  returned  to
Quebec,  leaving  Viel  in  charge  of  the  mission.  In  the  summer  of
1625,  he  went  with  the  Hurons  on  their  annual  trading  voyage  to
Quebec,  taking  with  him  an  Indian  lad  named  Ahautsic,  whom  he
hud  baptized  and  confirmed.  A  storm  scattering  the  fleet,  the  three
Hurons  in  his  canoe  viciously  threw  him  and  his  disciple  into  the
water,  at  the  last  rapid  above  Montreal,  which  from  that  time  has
borne  the  name  of  Sault  au  Recollet. Sagard  and  Le  Clercq  give


262  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

full  accounts  of  Father  Viel's  missionary  work,  and  of  his  tragic
death.  The  latter  states  that  Viel  left  a  dictionary  of  the  Huron
language,  with  other  memoirs,  in  the  hands  of  certain  Frenchmen
then  living  in  the  Huron  country,  who,  later,  conveyed  the  MSS.  to
Father  Le  Caron,  at  Quebec.

26  (p.  171). — Joseph  Le  Caron  was  one  of  the  four  Recollets  who
began  the  mission  of  that  order  in  Canada  (see  note  22,  ante).  Ver-
bal permission  to  engage  in  this  work  was  given  them  by  the  papal
nuncio  at  Paris,  that  their  departure  might  not  be  delayed  by  wait-
ing for  the  usual  brief;  for  some  unknown  reason  the  issue  of  this
paper  was  delayed  until  March  20,  1618.  The  original  document  is
now  in  the  departmental  archives  of  France,  according  to  Faillon
(Col.  Fr.,  vol.  i.,  p.  146).  It  is  addressed  to  Father  Le  Caron  and
other  Recollet  brothers  and  priests:  Sagard  copies  it  in  his  Canada,
pp.  12-17.

Upon  arriving  at  Tadoussac,  May  25,  1615,  Jamay  (the  superior)
went  with  Le  Caron  to  Three  Rivers,  where  they  at  once  pro-
ceeded to  establish  a  sedentary  mission  for  the  Indians.  Leaving
this  in  the  care  of  Jamay  (whose  headquarters  were  at  Quebec),
Le  Caron  departed  for  the  Huron  country,  living  with  the  savages
at  their  town  of  Carhagouha  (near  Thunder  Bay ;  later  known  as
Toanche).  Here  he  remained  until  the  following  May,  meanwhile
visiting  with  Champlain  the  Tobacco  Nation  and  adjoining  tribes.
By  these  Indians  he  was  cruelly  treated,  at  the  instigation  of  the
medicine  men  (whom  the  French  missionaries  styled  "sorcerers").

In  July,  1616,  the  Recollet  missionaries  held  at  Quebec  a  confer-
ence with  Champlain  and  other  friends  of  their  work,  at  which  it
was  decided  that  they  needed  more  missionaries,  more  French  colo-
nists, and  a  seminary  for  the  education  of  Indian  children.  To  ob-
tain aid  in  these  directions,  Jamay  and  Le  Caron  soon  afterwards
went  with  Champlain  to  France,  where  at  first  they  received  but
little  help  or  encouragement.  Jamay  remained  to  forward  the  inter-
ests of  the  mission ;  while  Le  Caron,  now  appointed  its  superior,  re-
turned to  Canada  in  the  spring  of  161 7,  accompanied  by  Father  Paul
Huet.  A  year  later,  desiring  to  work  personally  among  the  sav-
ages, Le  Caron  delegated  to  Father  d'Olbeau  his  authority  as  supe-
rior, and  spent  a  year  at  Tadoussac,  with  the  Montagnais.  During
1619-22,  he  labored  at  Quebec,  then  again  wintered  with  the  Monta-
gnais; and  in  July,  1623,  returned  to  the  Huron  mission,  accom-
panied by  Viel  and  Sagard  (see  notes  25,  48).  During  his  year's
stay  there,  he  did  much  to  aid  Champlain  in  securing  the  temporary
treaty  of  peace  which,  in  July,  1624,  was  concluded  between  the
Iroquois,  on  one  part,  and  the  French  and  their  savage  allies  on  the
other.


NOTES  TO  VOL.  IV  263

In  August,  1625,  Le  Caron  went  to  France  on  the  affairs  of  the
mission,  and  returned  the  following  year  with  Brother  Gervase  Mo-
hier  and  a  reinforcement  of  Jesuit  missionaries.  He  remained  at
Quebec,  as  superior  of  his  mission,  until  1629,  when  all  the  priests
were  sent  back  to  France  by  Kirk.  As  the  Recollets  expected  to  re-
sume work  on  the  Canadian  mission,  Le  Caron  was  appointed  its
procurator  in  France;  but  he  died  on  March  29,  1632, — according  to
Le  Clercq  —  through  grief  at  the  exclusion  of  his  order  from  Canada.

Upon  the  invasion  of  Canada  by  the  English,  the  Recollet  mission-
aries had  been  urged  by  their  savage  disciples  to  take  refuge  with
them  in  their  towns,  where  they  would  be  safe  from  attack,  and  could
minister  to  the  religious  wants  of  the  natives  until  the  French
should  return.  The  fathers  wished  to  accept  this  proposal ;  but  as
it  was  opposed  by  the  council  of  Quebec,  Le  Caron  felt  obliged  to
decline  it,  for  which  he  was  afterwards  blamed  by  some  of  his
brethren  in  France.

Full  details  of  his  work  are  given  by  Le  Clercq  and  Sagard :  the
former  copies  a  letter  written  by  La  Caron  to  his  provincial  at  Paris,
Aug.  7,  1 61 8;  also  fragments  of  memoirs  sent  by  him  to  that  officer
in  1624. —  See  Shea's  Le  Clercq,  vol.  i.,  pp.  134-137,  and  213-224.
He  is  said  to  have  prepared  a  dictionary  of  the  Huron  language
(Ibid.,  p.  249).  Other  MSS.  of  his  were  burned  in  March,  1631,  as  a
result  of  sanitary  measures  then  taken  against  a  contagious  disease
in  the  convent  of  St.  Margaret,  near  Gisors,  Normandy,  of  which  he
was  superior. —  See  "  Memorial  of  the  Recollets,  1637,"  in  Margry's
Decouvertes  et  dtablissements  des  Francais  dans  V '  Amerique  sep-
tentrionale  (Paris,  1876-86),  vol.  i.,  p.  11.

27  (p.  173). —  The  purpose  of  his  voyage.  Sagard  tells  us  (Cana-
da, p.  871)  that  this  was  to  improve  the  condition  of  Canada,  and  to
ask  the  King  for  funds  to  support  the  children  and  new  converts  in
the  seminary  planned  by  the  Recollets.  Le  Clercq  asserts  that  it
was  through  Le  Caron's  influence  that  Emery  de  Caen  was  recalled
from  Canada,  and  replaced  by  a  Catholic,  Raymond  de  la  Ralde
(who  had  been  De  Caen's  lieutenant);  also  that  the  same  influence
had  much  to  do  with  the  formation  of  Richelieu's  Company  of  New
France. —  See  Shea's  Le  Clercq,  vol.  i.,  pp.  253-259.  Rochemon-
teix,  however,  claims  (ft'suites,  vol.  i.,  p.  165)  that  Richelieu's  deter-
mination to  replace  Montmorency's  company  by  that  of  the  Hun-
dred Associates  was  due  mainly  to  Father  Noyrot's  influence,  and  to
his  representations  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  Canada.

28  (p.  177). —  Mutio  Vitelleschi  was  born  at  Rome,  in  1565;  on
Nov.  15,  1615,  he  became  Aquaviva's  successor  as  general  of  the
Society  of  Jesus;  his  death  occurred  Feb.  9,  1645.  Ranke,  in  His-
tory of  the  Popes  (Foster's  tr.,  London,  1871),  vol.  ii.,  p.  388,  says:


264  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

"Vitelleschi  was  by  nature  mild,  indulgent,  and  conciliatory;  his  in-
timates called  him  the  angel  of  peace ;  and  he  found  consolation  on
his  deathbed  from  the  conviction  that  he  had  never  injured  any  one.
These  were  admirable  qualities  of  a  most  amiable  man,  but  did  not
suffice  to  fit  him  for  the  government  of  an  order  so  widely  extended,
active,  and  powerful.  He  was  unable  to  enforce  strictness  of  disci-
pline, even  with  regard  to  dress ;  still  less  could  he  oppose  an  effec-
tual resistance  to  the  demands  of  determined  ambition."  Dauri-
gnac,  in  History  of  the  Society  of  Jesus  (Clements's  tr.,  Baltimore,
1878),  vol.  i.,  p.  398,  says  that  he  was  designated  "the  Angel"  by
Pope  Urban  VIII.,  on  account  of  his  docility  and  humility.  It  was
under  his  generalship  (Feb.  12,  1622)  that  Loyola,  the  founder  of  the
Jesuit  order,  and  Francis  Xavier,  were  canonized  by  Gregory  XV. ;
that  the  first  centenary  of  the  society  was  held  (Sept.  25,  1639),  when
its  reports  showed  that  it  occupied  36  provinces,  and  had  800  houses
and  15,000  members;  and  that  the  great  controversy  between  the
Jansenists  and  Jesuits  began.  Even  more  important,  according  to
Ranke,  was  the  change  which  occurred,  during  this  administration,
in  the  government  and  discipline  of  the  society,  by  which  the  "pro-
fessed" members  attained  supremacy,  and  occupied  positions  in
business,  administration,  and  other  affairs  of  the  world,  which  be-
fore had  belonged  mainly  to  the  coadjutors, — those  of  provincials,
rectors,  and  superiors  of  colleges.  The  former  ascetic  strictness  of
discipline  was  relaxed;  and  the  society  became  less  ardent  in  its
devotion  to  the  interests  of  the  Holy  See.  Vitelleschi  and  his  im-
mediate successors  strove,  but  with  little  success,  to  correct  these
tendencies. — See  Ranke,  ut  supra,  pp.  387-393;  he  obtains  most  of
his  information  from  a  MS.  in  the  Corsini  library  at  Rome,  entitled
Discorso  sopra  la  religione  de'  padri  Gesuiti,  e  loro  modo  di  go-
vernare  (1681-86,  circa).  Cf.  Daurignac's  account  f«/  supra,  pp.
324-398)  of  the  order  under  Vitelleschi' s  administration.

29  (p.  177). —  During  the  seventeenth  century,  all  navigated  seas
were  infested  with  pirates.  Lescarbot  mentions  (vol.  ii.  of  the  pres-
ent series,  p.  131)  that  Poutrincourt  met,  in  the  English  Channel,  a
ship  of  "Forbans"  or  pirates;  the  word  "forban"  means,  literally,
one  banished,  an  outlaw,  and  characterizes  most  of  the  European
pirates  of  the  time.  Sagard  (Canada,  115,  120,  121),  relates  that,  on
his  journey  to  New  France,  his  ship  was  threatened  by  a  Dutch  pi-
rate, in  the  very  harbor  of  Rochelle.  Suite  (Can.-Francais,  vol.  ii.,
p.  20,  note)  cites  the  case  of  one  of  De  Caen's  vessels,  which  was
captured  (September,  1624)  while  en  route  from  Gaspe  to  Bordeaux,
by  Turks,  near  the  coast  of  Brittany ;  the  Frenchmen  were  carried
away  as  slaves.

Brown  (Cape  Breton,  p.  no),  who  says  he  obtained  his  informa-


NOTES  TO VOL.  IV  265


tion  from  original  documents  in  the  Public  Record  office  at  London,
writes:  "  The  fishermen  of  Newfoundland  were  cruelly  harassed  by-
pirates.  In  eight  years  (1612-20),  the  damage  done  by  the  pirates
was  estimated  at  40,800/.  /  besides  the  loss  of  180  pieces  of  ord-
nance, and  1,080  fishermen  and  mechanics  carried  off  by  force.  On
August  8,  1625,  the  Mayor  of  Poole  wrote  to  the  Privy  Council,  say-
ing that,  unless  protection  were  afforded  to  the  Newfoundland  fleet
of  250  sail,  '  of  the  Western  Ports,'  they  would  be  surprised  by  the
Turkish  pirates;  and,  on  the  12th  of  the  same  month,  the  Mayor  of
Plymouth  informed  the  Council  that  twenty-seven  ships  and  200  men
had  been  taken  by  pirates  in  ten  days. "  Brown  also  cites  Discourse
and  Discovery  of  Newfoundland  (London,  1623),  written  by  one
Captain  Whitbourne,  who  was  sent  out  in  1615,  to  hold  a  court  of
admiralty  for  inquiry  into  certain  abuses ;  and  who  says  that  Peter
Easton,  a  pirate,  had  ten  sail  of  well-appointed  ships,  that  he  was
master  of  the  seas,  and  levied  a  regular  tax  on  fishing  vessels.

As  early  as  1620,  John  Mason,  then  governor  of  Newfoundland,
received  a  commission  from  the  English  admiralty  to  suppress
pirates;  and  he  captured,  among  others,  a  Sallee  (or  Moorish)  pirate
in  the  Irish  harbor  of  Crookhaven  (1625).  Prowse  (Hist.  N.F.,  pp.
108,  174,  182),  gives  the  text  of  this  commission;  he  also  states  that
Placentia  was  raided  five  times  previous  to  1685,  by  English  buc-
caneers, who  plundered  the  town  of  all  movable  property.

30  (p.  177). —  Jean  de  Brebeuf  was  born  March  25,  1593,  at  Conde-
sur-Vire,  Normandy.  He  belonged  to  a  noble  family,  from  which,
according  to  the  Biographie  Universelle  (Paris,  1843-66),  the  Eng-
lish family  of  Arundel  had  its  descent.  Entering  the  Society  of
Jesus  Nov.  8,  161 7,  at  Rouen,  he  was  ordained  five  years  later;  and
in  1625  was  sent  to  Canada  as  one  of  the  first  Jesuit  missionaries
(note  22,  ante).  The  fir^st  year  he  spent  among  the  Montagnais;  but
in  1626  went,  with  Ue  Noue,  to  the  Huron  country,  where  they
settled  at  Toanche  (known  to  the  Recollets  as  Carhagouha;  see  note
26,  ante),  in  the  bark  cabin  which  Le  Caron  had  erected  eleven
years  before.  Here  Brebeuf  remained  (alone,  after  the  first  year)
until  the  capture  of  Quebec.  Returning  to  Canada  with  Champlain
(1633),  he  at  once  resumed  work  in  the  Huron  country,  where  he  la-
bored until  his  death  (excepting  1641  -44,  when  at  Quebec).  During
the  winter  of  1640-41,  he  endeavored  (but  without  success)  to  estab-
lish a  mission  in  the  Neutral  Nation.  He  lived  successively  at  Iho-
natiria,  a  new  village  built  not  far  from  the  deserted  Toanche;
Teanaustaye,  called  by  the  missionaries  St.  Joseph,  in  the  present
township  of  Medonte,  Simcoe  county,  Ontario;  and  St.  Ignace  and
St.  Louis,  about  half- way  between  the  former  towns.  In  March,
1649,  a  thousand  Iroquois  attacked  and  destroyed  the  two  last-named


266  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

villages,  capturing  there  Brebeuf  and  Gabriel  Lalemant,  both  of
whom  were  put  to  death  with  cruel  tortures, — the  former  dying
March  16,  the  latter  on  the  day  following.  Their  bodies  were  res-
cued by  their  brethren,  and  their  bones  afterwards  taken  to  Que-
bec,—  where,  in  the  Hotel  Dieu,  Brebeuf 's  head  is  still  preserved,
inclosed  in  a  silver  bust  sent  from  France  by  his  family.  A  minute
account  of  this  martyrdom  is  given  by  one  of  the  lay  brothers  of  the
Huron  mission,  Christophe  Regnaut  (Regnault),  in  a  MS.  written  at
Caen  in  1678.  A  copy  of  this  document,  with  an  English  transla-
tion, is  given  by  Brymner,  in  Canadian  Archives,  1884,  pp.  lxiii.-
lxvii.,  and  will  in  due  course  be  reproduced  in  the  present  series.

Harris  (Miss.  West.  Canada.,  p.  212,  note)  states  that  he  has
seen  in  St.  Martin's  church  (Ritualist),  Brighton,  England,  a  figured
window  in  memory  of  Father  Brebeuf.  A  memorial  church,  in
honor  of  all  the  Jesuit  martyrs  in  the  Huron  country,  is  now  ( Jan-
uary, 1897)  approaching  completion  at  Penetanguishene,  Ontario;
an  illustration  thereof  will  appear  in  vol.  v.  of  this  series.

Brebeuf's  Relations  of  the  Huron  mission  will  appear  in  succeed-
ing volumes  of  our  series;  that  for  1636  contains  an  elaborate  ac-
count of  the  social  condition,  manners,  and  customs  of  that  nation,
and  a  treatise  on  their  language  —  this  last  being  reproduced,  in  an
English  translation,  by  Albert  Gallatin  in  Transactions  of  A mer.
Antiquarian  Society,  vol.  ii.,  (Cambridge,  1836),  pp.  236-238.  At
the  close  of  Champlain's  Voyages  (ed.  1632)  may  be  found  transla-
tions into  Montagnais  of  Ledesma's  "  Christian  Doctrine,"  by  Bre-
beuf; and  of  the  Lord's  Prayer,  Apostles'  Creed,  etc.,  by  Masse.

31  (p.  1S1). —  Anne  de  Noue  was  born  Aug.  7,  15S7;  his  father  was
the  seigneur  of  Prieres  and  of  Villers,  near  Rheims,  France.  Anne's
early  years  were  spent  at  court,  first  as  a  page,  then  as  an  officer  of
the  King's  bedchamber;  but  at  the  age  of  twenty-five  he  devoted
himself  to  a  religious  life,  and  entered  the  Jesuit  novitiate  (Sept.  20,
1612).  He  spent  ten  years  in  the  study  of  philosophy  and  theology,
at  the  Jesuit  colleges  of  Paris,  La  Fleche,  and  Nevers ;  then  became
acting  rector  at  Bourges,  where  he  remained  until  sent  to  Canada
(1626).  Accompanying  Brebeuf  to  the  Huron  country,  he  came
back  to  Quebec  in  the  following  spring,  apparently  remaining  there
until  the  English  invasion.  During  this  time  he  essayed  to  spend  a
winter  with  the  Montagnais,  but  suffered  so  greatly  from  cold  and
hunger  that  he  was  obliged  to  leave  them.  Returning  to  Canada
with  De  Caen  (1632),  his  first  care  was  to  repair  the  convent  and
other  buildings  destroyed  by  the  English.  Unable,  after  repeated
efforts,  either  to  learn  the  native  languages,  or  to  endure  the  hard-
ships of  life  among  the  savages,  he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in
the  French  settlements  on  the  St. Lawrence, — ministering  to  the


XOTES  TO  VOL.  IV  267

sick  and  dying,  instructing  the  colonists,  supplying  the  temporal
needs  of  his  brethren,  directing  workmen  who  repaired  buildings  or
cultivated  the  ground, —  as  Rochemonteix  says,  "  he  became,  in  the
mission,  the  servant  of  all."  His  disposition  was  enthusiastic  and
impetuous,  yet  gentle,  lovable,  and  self-sacrificing.  On  a  journey
to  Fort  Richelieu,  to  administer  the  sacraments  to  the  garrison  there,
he  was  frozen  to  death  on  the  St.  Lawrence  river,  Feb.  i,  1646.

32  (p.  1S1). —  Philibert  Noyrot  was  born  October,  1592,  in  the  dio-
cese of  Avitun;  he  entered  the  Jesuit  order  Oct.  16,  1617,  and  spent
four  years  in  study  at  Paris  and  Bourges.  Four  years  later,  having
been  ordained  as  a  priest,  he  was  appointed  procuror  of  the  latter
college,  retaining  this  office  until  his  death.  It  was  by  his  advice,
according  to  Rochemonteix,  that  Ventadour  (whose  confessor  he
was)  bought  the  viceroyalty  of  Canada  from  Montmorency.  In  1626,
Noyrot  went  to  Quebec,  taking  with  him  twenty  workmen  to  build
a  residence  for  the  Jesuit  missionaries  there.  Lalemant  immediate-
ly sent  him  back  to  France,  to  report  to  Richelieu  on  the  affairs  of
Canada,  and  to  secure  the  removal  of  the  Huguenots  from  the  direc-
tion of  the  mercantile  company.  This  resulted  in  the  formation  of
the  Company  of  New  France  (see  note  27,  ante).  In  order  to  relieve
the  scarcity  at  Quebec,  Noyrot  loaded  a  ship  with  a  year's  supply  of
provisions  for  the  missionaries  and  their  workmen ;  but,  according
to  Le  Clercq,  these  supplies  were  stopped  at  Honfleur  by  De  Caen
and  La  Ralde,  from  resentment  at  Noyrot' s  complaints  about  their
conduct.  In  consequence  of  this  disappointment,  the  workmen  of
the  mission  were  taken  back  to  France  by  Lalemant.  Twice  again
did  Noyrot  seek  to  convey  supplies  to  his  brethren  at  Quebec :  the
first  time  (July,  1628),  he  was  driven  back  by  Admiral  Kirk;  the  sec-
ond (June,  1629),  he  perished  by  shipwreck  near  Canso  (see  note  20,
ante).

33  (p.  1S1). —  Regarding  Cotton,  (Coton)  see  vol.  ii.,  note  63.

34  (p.  183). —  For  sketch  of  Masse,  see  vol.  i.,  note  39.

35  (p.  191). —  Le  Clercq,  apparently  without  good  reason,  men-
tions this  letter  as  "  falsely  attributed  to  Lalemant." — See  Roche-
monteix's /esta'tes,  vol.  i.,  p.  155,  note.

36  (p.  191). — A  younger  brother  of  Charles  Lalemant;  a  sketch  of
his  life  will  be  given  in  a  later  volume.

37  (p.  193). —  Meslm  (or  maslin  ;  derived  from  Latin  miscere):
mixed  grain,  especially  a  mixture  of  rye  and  wheat.

38  (p.  195). —  Champlain  wished  to  make  Quebec  an  agricultural
colony,  but  his  efforts  were  thwarted  by  the  narrow  and  selfish  poli-
cy of  the  mercantile  companies,  who  cared  only  to  develop  the  fur
trade.  They  gave  the  colonists  no  means  for  cultivating  the  soil,
and,  according  to  Champlain,  "had  not  themselves  cleared  an  arpent


268  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

and  a  half  of  land  in  the  22  years  during  which  they  were,  according
to  his  Majesty's  intention,  to  have  peopled  and  cultivated  the  colony
of  Quebec."  Sagard  says  (Canada,  p.  16S)  that  the  space  cleared
was  not  even  one  arpent.  The  merchants  even  oppressed  Hebert
(vol.  ii.,  note  80), —  "the  only  colonist  who  supported  his  family  from
the  produce  of  his  land,  making  many  illegal  claims  upon  him  for
his  yearly  harvests,  and  compelling  him  to  sell  only  to  the  com-
pany, and  that  at  a  specified  rate. " — Champlain's  Voyages  (1632),
part  2,  pp.  144,  1S3,  1S4.  Cf.  Mercure  Francois,  vol.  xiv.  (1623),  p.
234.  The  Recollet  missionaries  were  cultivators,  and,  desirous  of
leading  the  savages  from  a  nomadic  to  a  semdentary  life,  even  in-
duced a  few  of  the  latter  to  imitate  their  example.  The  Jesuits  also
paid  much  attention  to  agriculture. —  See  Faillon's  Col.  Fr.,  vol.  i.,
pp.  161-164  ;  Rochemonteix's  Jesuites,  vol.  i.,  pp.  154-157  ;  and
Suite's  Can.-Francais,  vol.  ii.,  p.  18.

Champlain  says  (Laverdiere's  ed.,  pp.  1144,  1155)  that  the  plow
was  first  used  in  Canada,  April  27,  1628 ;  this  was  doubtless  by  Couil-
lard,  Hebert's  son-in-law.

Arpent :  a  word  of  Celtic  derivation,  according  to  Columelle  and
Littre;  it  occurs  as  early  as  the  eleventh  century  (e.g.,  Chatison  de
Roland).  An  old  French  land  measure,  containing  100  square
perches,  but  varying  in  different  provinces.  The  linear  arpent  of
Paris  was  180  French  feet  (variously  computed  at  from  191.83  to
192.3  English  feet),  the  common  arpent  200,  and  the  standard  arpent
220.  The  first  of  these  was  the  one  used  in  New  France,  under  the
Coutume  de  Paris,  and  it  still  remains  the  legal  measure  in  all  the
seigniories  of  Quebec.  The  Quebec  Department  of  Crown  Lands,
which  we  adopt  as  preferable  authority,  translates  the  arpent  into
191.  S5  English  feet.

Bourdon's  map  of  the  settlements  on  the  St.  Lawrence,  from  Que-
bec to  Cape  Tourmente  (1641;  reproduced  at  end  of  Tanguay's
Diet.  Genial.,  vol.  i.),  indicates  that  each  lot  had  seven  arpents
of  river  frontage,  and  a  depth  of  a  French  league  or  more  (84  ar-
pents to  the  league).  Giffard's  concession  at  Beauport  (the  first  of
the  seigniories)  was  1%  leagues  along  the  river,  and  the  same  in
depth. — Suite's  Can.-Francais,  vol.  ii.,  pp.  47-48.  Duralde's  sur-
vey of  the  Illinois  country  (1770)  assigned  to  each  inhabitant  a  lot,
measuring  from  one  to  four  arpents  wide,  and  forty  arpents  deep. —
See  H.  W.  Williams's  chapter  on  "  St.  Louis  Land  Titles,"  in  Scharf's
History  of  St.  Louis  (Phila.,  1883),  vol.  i.,  pp.  316-329.  Williams,
whom  Scharf  indorses  as  an  authority,  computes  the  arpent  at  192
feet  6  inches,  English  measure.

The  assignment  of  lands  throughout  New  France  in  long,  narrow
strips,  was  obviously  made  to  secure  for  each  settler  a  frontage  on


NOTES  TO VOL.  IV  269


the  river,  then  the  main  highway ;  and  to  bring  the  inhabitants  of
each  settlement  into  close  neighborhood,  for  social  and  defensive
purposes.  The  same  reasons,  of  course,  governed  the  allotment  of
lands  in  Roger  Williams's  colony  at  Providence  (1640), — an  inter-
esting similarity  to  French  Canadian  custom.  The  "  home-lots  "  at
Providence  had  an  (estimated)  river  frontage  of  105  to  120  English
feet,  all  running  up  to  a  common  highway  along  the  crest  of  the
back -lying  ridge;  each  lot  contained  from  41^  to  s%  acres.  For
description  and  plats,  see  Charles  W.  Hopkins's  Home  Lots  of  the
Early  Settlers  of  Providence  Plantations  (Providence,  1886).

39  (p.  201). — Cf.  vol.  iii.,  note  22.

40  (p.  201). —  See  vol.  ii.,  note  21.

41  (p.  205). —  Cf.  vol.  iii.,  tiote  19.

42  (p.  209). —  For  value  of  ecu,  see  vol.  i.,  note  34.  The  livre  was
a  money  of  account,  in  value  somewhat  less  than  the  modern  franc ;
but  in  ordinary  speech,  both  terms  signified  the  same  value;  six
livres  —  one  crown.  The  livre  of  Tours  was  worth  20  sous ;  that  of
Paris,  25  sous.  The  pistole  was  a  money  of  account,  equal  to  ten
livres  tournois,  and  worth  ten  francs  of  the  present  currency.

43  (p.  211)  Anti-Coton :  a  sarcastic  pamphlet,  published  in  Sep-
tember, 1610;  it  attacked  the  Jesuits,  and  especially  Father  Coton,
the  confessor  of  Henry  IV.,  of  whose  murder  the  Jesuits  had  been
accused  by  their  enemies.  Daurignac  says  (Hist.  Soc.  Jesus,  vol.
i.,  p.  295)  that  this  pamphlet  was  attributed  to  Pierre  Dumoulin,  a
Protestant  minister  of  Charenton.  This  and  other  like  attacks  on
the  Jesuits  had  been  circulated  in  Canada,  and  had  prejudiced
against  them  even  many  Catholics.

44  (p.  233).  —  This  mention  of  Lalemant  being  at  Pentegoet  in  1613,
has  been  copied  by  some  later  writers ;  but  it  is  apparently  an  over-
sight. Biard  would  certainly  have  included  Lalemant  in  his  account
of  the  Acadian  missions,  if  the  latter  had  been  there.

45  (P-  237). — Alexander  Vieuxpont  was  born  Dec.  25,  1599,  at
Auxeville,  Normandy.  He  became  a  Jesuit  novice  Sept.  13,  1620,  at
Rouen,  and  for  seven  years  pursued  his  studies  there,  at  Rennes,
and  at  La  Fleche.  Thence  he  was  sent  to  Alencon,  and  two  years
later  (June,  1629),  he  went  with  Noyrot  to  Canada.  Cast  ashore
near  Canso,  in  the  shipwreck  wherein  the  latter  perished,  Vieuxpont
went  to  Grand  Cibou,  to  join  Father  Vimont,  then  laboring  among
the  savages  of  Cape  Breton.  In  1630,  recalled  to  France  by  his  su-
periors, he  became  a  traveling  preacher  in  the  rural  districts  near
Rouen ;  he  did  not  return  to  Canada.

46  (p.  243). —  After  the  destruction  of  Port  Royal  (1613),  the  Eng-
lish took  no  immediate  steps  to  secure  possession  of  Acadia.  Bight
years  later,  Sir  William  Alexander  (afterwards  secretary  <>!"  state  for


270  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES


Scotland)  obtained  from  James  I.  a  grant  of  all  the  lands  from  the
St.  Croix  River  to  the  St.  Lawrence,  under  the  title  of  "  Nova  Sco-
tia;" thus  were  ignored  all  French  rights  in  that  region.  In  1625,
this  grant  was  renewed  by  Charles  I.,  with  considerable  additions.
Alexander,  not  having  the  necessary  funds,  was  unable  to  establish
any  colonies  there  until  1627;  when  (having  associated  with  himself
Gervase  Kirk  and  his  sons,  William  Berkley,  John  Love,  and  others,
under  the  title  of  "  Merchant  Adventurers  of  Canada  "),  he  sent  his
son,  as  governor  of  Nova  Scotia,  with  a  few  Scotch  emigrants,  to
form  a  settlement  at  Port  Royal.  David  Kirk,  whose  vessel  had
conveyed  them,  returned  to  England  for  reinforcements;  and,  in
the  following  year,  he  seized  Miscou,  and  all  the  French  fishing  ves-
sels in  the  Gulf;  threatened  Quebec;  and  captured  De  Roquemont's
squadron,  sent  by  the  Hundred  Associates  with  supplies  and  artillery
for  Champlain's  succor.  In  1629,  he  captured  Quebec.  Early  in
that  year,  Sir  James  Stewart,  who  had  purchased  a  tract  of  land
from  Alexander,  brought  a  colony  to  Port  Baleines,  Cape  Breton
(near  the  present  Louisburg) ;  he  also  began  to  seize  the  French  ves-
sels fishing  on  that  coast.  This  excited  the  anger  of  Captain
Charles  Daniel  (one  of  the  Hundred  Associates,  and  a  brother  of  the
Jesuit  Antoine  Daniel),  who  had  recently  come  from  France;  he
seized  and  demolished  Stewart's  fort,  and  proceeded  to  erect  an-
other at  Grand  Cibou.  (This  name,  meaning  "  the  great  river,"
was  doubtless  applied  by  the  natives  to  the  estuary  now  known  as
Great  Bras  d'Or;  but  Daniel's  colony  was  planted  at  St.  Anne's
Bay,— thus  named  by  him,— just  north  of  the  Bras  d'Or).  Charles
Leigh,  who  made  a  voyage  to  Cape  Breton  in  1597,  mentions  "the
harborow  of  Cibo;"  see  Goldsmid's  Hakluyt,  vol.  xiii.,  p.  69.  Here
he  left  a  garrison  of  forty  men,  with  the  two  Jesuits  Vimond  and
Vieuxpont,  and  took  the  English  colonists  back  to  their  own  country
(except  a  few,  whom  he  carried  to  France  as  prisoners).  Cham-
plain,  arriving  in  Dieppe  Dec.  31,  1629,  met  Daniel  there,  and  ob-
tained from  him  his  "  Relation  "  of  the  above  enterprise,  which  is
given  in  Champlain's  Voyages  (1632),  part  2,  pp.  271-275.

In  the  following  year,  Daniel  returned  to  this  fort,  and  settled  cer-
tain disorders  that  had  arisen  during  his  absence.  It  is  not  definite-
ly known  how  long  the  garrison  was  kept  here ;  but,  when  De  Caen
took  possession  of  Canada  (1632),  the  Jesuits  Davost  and  Antoine
Daniel  also  came  to  Cape  Breton  (probably  with  Charles,  the  latter's
brother),  and  carried  on  the  mission  begun  by  Vimont.  Denys,  a
few  years  later,  had  an  important  settlement  at  St.  Anne's.

47  (p.  243).— Vimont  remained  at  Cape  Breton  but  a  year,  and
did  not  return  to  Canada  until  1639.  A  sketch  of  his  life  will  appear
hereafter.


NOTES  TO VOL.  IV  271

48  (p.  247). —  Gabriel  Sagard  Theodat,  a  lay  brother,  was  one  of
the  Recollet  missionaries  to  Canada,  where  he  arrived  June  24,  1623,
in  company  with  Father  Nicholas  Viel.  He  states,  in  his  Canada,
p.  n,  that  he  desired  to  go  on  this  mission  in  1615,  at  which  time
he  was  m  a  Recollet  convent  in  Paris ;  but  his  superiors  would  not
then  consent.  Sagard' s  missionary  labors  were  among  the  Hurons,
with  whom  he  remained  nearly  one  year ;  returning  then  to  France,
he  wrote  and  published  two  books, — Grand  voyage  du  pays  des
Hurons  (Paris,  1632),  and  Histoire  du  Canada  (Paris,  1636).  In
these  works  he  minutely  describes  the  customs,  social  condition,  re-
ligion, etc.,  of  the  Indian  tribes;  and  gives  a  history  of  the  mission-
ary labors  of  the  Recollets,  up  to  their  expulsion  in  1629.  To  the
Grand  Voyage  he  appends  a  dictionary  of  the  Huron  language.
He  died  in  1650.

There  is  some  confusion  among  historians  in  regard  to  the  dates
of  Sagard's  sojourn  in  New  France,  which  apparently  arises  from
his  own  inaccuracy  of  statement,  or  possibly  from  a  typographical
error.  In  his  Histoire  (Tross  ed.,  1866),  p.  115,  he  says  that  he  left
France  in  1623;  but,  in  the  Grand  Voyage  (Tross  ed.,  1865),  p.  5,
he  gives  the  year  as  "  vingt-quatre ;  "  while,  in  the  former  work,  p.
759,  he  gives  in  full  the  letter  of  his  provincial  recalling  him  to
France,  dated  March  9,  1625.  Champlain,  however,  says  that  Sa-
gard arrived  at  Quebec  in  June,  1623,  and  returned  from  the  Huron
country  in  July,  1624.

Sagard's  works  are  rare,  and  command  high  prices.  Brunet  says
(in  Michaud's  Biog.  Univ.)  that  five  and  even  eight  guineas  were
paid  for  a  copy  at  public  sales  in  London ;  and  that,  in  France,  one
was  valued  in  1851  at  210  francs.  Chevalier  says,  in  his  edition  of
the  Histoire  (Paris,  1S66),  p.  iii.,  note,  that  1,200  francs  had  in  vain
been  offered  for  a  copy  of  that  work.  Gagnon  (Bib Hog.  Canad.J
states  that  a  copy  brought  $38  at  the  Fraser  sale  in  Quebec,  1S60;
and  that  one  had  been  offered  by  a  Paris  bookseller,  in  1890,  for
1,200  francs.

49  (p.  247).  —  Father  Felix  Martin  was  born  Oct.  4,  1804,  at  Auray,
in  Bretagne,  France;  in  September,  1823,  he  became  a  novice  in  the
Jesuit  order,  entering  the  convent  of  Montrouge,  at  Paris.  During
nearly  twenty  years,  he  was  employed  in  various  colleges  and  mis-
sions throughout  Western  Europe;  and,  early  in  1S42,  was  sent  to
Canada.  There  he  labored,  especially  in  Montreal,  until  August,
1851,  when  he  became  the  first  rector  of  St.  Mary's  College  in  that
city;  he  was  its  founder,  and  the  designer  of  its  building.  In  this
position  he  remained  until  1S57,  when  he  became  superior  of  the  resi-
dence at  Quebec.  Four  years  later,  he  returned  to  France,  where
he was, successively, rector of St.  Francis Xavier's college  at


272  LES  RELA  TIONS  DES  JESUITES

Vannes,  and  superior  at  Poitiers  and  Rouen. He  died  at  Paris,
Nov.  25,  1892.

Father  Martin  published  (Montreal,  1852)  a  French  translation  of
Bressani's  Breve  Relatione  (1653),  accompanied  by  explanatory
notes  and  a  biographical  sketch  of  Bressani.  Later,  he  wrote  the
lives  of  Jogues,  Brebeuf,  and  other  early  missionaries;  and,  in  18S6,
a  biography  of  his  sister,  Mother  St.  Stanislas,  a  French  nun.  He
was  also  noted  as  an  antiquarian  and  collector,  especially  in  regard
to  the  Jesuit  Relations  and  the  history  of  Canada.  Carayon's  Pre-
miere Mission  des  Jdsuites  an  Canada  (Paris,  1864),  described  in
Bibliographical  Data  for  Doc.  xiii.,  in  vol.  iii..  p.  285,  a  valuable  col-
lection of  documents,  all  of  which  are  embodied  in  our  series,  con-
sists of  manuscripts  collected  by  Father  Martin,  chiefly  in  1S58,
while  on  a  visit  to  Europe.


!i!!


■  ■ ■;• ■

I M HI
»■ • W


»m m ■

m m m  » *
- • •  ■
