* WTi! ^ TN'n^.lJ fATTnNATi SCIENTIFIC SEEIES.

T^e /ollowmy is a List of the Volumes already published.


I. THE FORMS OF WATER IN CLOUDS AND RIVERS,

ICE AND GIACIERS. Ry J. TVNDAlL, LL.D., K.U.S. With 26 lIluBtratioaa. Fwirth
Ktlition. Prii'o 6».

II. PHYSICS AND POLITICS ; <>R. Tiidcghts on the Avvmoation

OK TUB I'UINi-IKLBS ok “ NATI-'RAI. .SKMimON" ANO ” iNHKIlJTAXns" T«» FOMTICAJ,
S«H;iiiTY. Uy Wai/KER IJAGKHor. Second EilUion. Priced*.

III. POODS. Hy Edwaro .S.«iTir, M.D., LL.ii , K.lt.S. Profusely Illustrated.
Third tiiition. Price Tm.

IV. MIND AND BODY : TiIK ThKOKTES of THKIU ltV.!.ATH»N. lly
Alkxas’)>kr Rain, I.I,. I)., Professor of Irfigic »t. the University of Aherdeen. With Four
illustr.'itioiiH. Tliinl Editioti. Price 4*.

V. THE STUDY OF SOpiPLOGY. Hy MERnRur Svenckk. Fourth

Edition. Price .V. ‘ ‘ • ■

vr. THE CONSERVATION OP ENERGY, By rKOFKssoR Hal-

KOI’ It Stew Au r. With 14 Eui;r<ivin(i^. .Third liiiliUoit. Price Aa

VII. ANIMAL LOCOMOTION ; oit. Walking, Swimming, and Flyino.

Ry J. l-JRi.l. PiirmiRKW, M.D., F.U.S. With ilO llhititmlions. Second Edition. Prux! 15*.

Vfll. RESPONSIBILITY IN MENTAL DISEASE. % Du.

IlKNItV MaI!Osi.kv. Sec»)iMl Edilloii. Price !:««.

IX. THE NEW CHEMISTRY, By rROFics-SDU J«>.siau P. Codke., of

the Harvard University. With 3\ lllnstrations. Second Edition. Prit;* Ji*.

X. THE SCIENCE OF LAW. By Profhssoii Shkldon Amos, M.A.

.Second Edition. Price 6*.

XI. ANIMAL MECHANISM. A Treatise on Terreslrial and Aiirial
lA.iconiotion, Ry Pbokbssor E. J. Marry. With 117 Illustrations. Second Edition.
Price rtt.

Xll. THE DOCTRINE OP DESCENT AND DARWINISM.

p.y rRiiFKssoK OwrAR Schmidt iStrashurtj. University). With 1J6 lllusirutioiis. Socond
FdUion. Price Ps.

Xllf. HISTORY OP THE CONFLICT BETWEEN RELIGION

AND SCIENCE. By .ToHN Wii4,lAM DbafsB; LL.D.. I’rofdiiiaor.jn the University of

New Yorh; Author of " A Tre»^t1se:«n Human Pliyaiolojty.” Fourth .E<tltiuii.- Price »>*.

XIV. FUNGI: THEIR NATURE, INFLUENCES, AND USES.

Ry M. C. (’ooKK, M.A., LL.Tjf. Eilited by Uie Kev. M, .1. .Ruurbuiy, M.A., F.L.S, Profusely
Iliustratcd. Si:tond Edilum.; Prices*.

XV. THE CHEMICAL ■ EFFECTS OF LIG^T AND PHOTO -

GIlAPHy. Rv Dk. II kkm ANN Yqori. {PulytMdiriic Acadoiny of Berlin). With 100 Illiistra-
lions, including some bc-autiiul siicciiucns of Phoh)Kruphy. Price S».

XVI. TtiEULIPE AND GROWTH OP LANGUAGE, By William

DWioiiT WftiT.NBT, Professor of Sanskrit and Comparative Philoloey in Yalo Collette, New
Haven. Crown 6vo., Ss.


**♦ For List of Forthcoming Volumes see the Catalogue at the end of the Book.


MONEY 'AND


As;soc: £

BY

W. STANLEY JEVONS, M.A., E.R.S.,

PIIOKESSOK OK LOGIC AND POLITICAL ECONOMY IN THE
OWENS COLLKGK, MANCIIESTER*


Henby S. Kino & Co., London.


187 . 5 .


1


K S'


<7Jktf rights !>/ /.ranstofiTcm and, re-prodw^tian am ^esemed^y


PREFACE.


In preparing this volume, T have attempted to write
a doficriptive cHsay on the past and present monetary
systoms of the world, the materials employed to make
money, the regulations under wdiich the coins are struck
and issued, the natural laws which govern their circula-
tion, the several modes in which they may ho replaced
by tlio use of paper documents, and finally, the method
in which the use of money is immensely economized by
the cheque and clearing system now being extended and
perfected.

This is not a book upon the currency question, as
that question is so often discussed in England. I have
only a little to say about the Bank Charter Act, and
upon that, and other mysteries of the money market, I
refer my readers to the admirable essay of Mr. Bagehot


VI


PllEFACli.


on Lombard Street/* to which this book may perhaps
serve as an introduction.

There is much to be learnt al)out money before
entering upon those abstruse questions, which barely
admit of decided answers. In studying a language, we
begin with the grammar before w'e try to read or write.
In mathematics, we practice ourselves in simple arith-
metic before^ we proceed to the subtleties of algebra and
the differential calculus. But it is the grave misfortune
of the moral and political sciences, as well shown by
Mr. Herbert Spencer, in his ‘‘ Study of Sociology,*’ that
they are continually discussed by those who have never
laboured at the elementary grammar or the simple
arithmetic of the subject. Hence the extraordinary
schemes and fallacies eveiy now and then put forth.

Currency is to the science of economy what the
squaring of the circle is to geometry, or perpetual
motion to mechanics. If there were a WTiter on CuiTency
possessing some of the humour and learning of the late
Proiessor De Morgan, he could easily produce a Budget
of Currency Paradoxes more than rivalling Be Morgan’s
Circle-Sqnaring Paradoxes. There are men who spend
their time and fortunes in endeavouring to convince a
dull wurld that poverty can be abolished by the issue of


pheface.


Vll


printed bits of paper. I know one gentleman who holds
that exchequer bills are the panacea for the evils of
humanity. Other philanthropists wish to make us all
rich by coining tlie national debt, or coining the lands of
the country, or coining everything. Another class of
persons have long been indignant that, in this age of
free trade, the Mint price of gold should still remain
arbitrarily fixed by statute. A member of Parliament
lately discovered a new grievance, and made his reputa-
tion by agitating against the oppressive restrictions on
llio coinage of silver at the Mint. No wonder so many
people are paupers when there is a deficiency of shillings
and sixpences, and when the amount merely of the rates
and taxes paid in a year exceeds the whole sum of money
circulating in the kingdom.

The subject of money as a whole is a very extensive
one, and the literature of it would fill a very great
library. Many changes are now taking place in the
currencies of the world, and important inquiries have
been lately instituted concerning the best mode of con-
stituting the circulating medium. The information on
the subject stored up in evidence given before Government
Commissions, in reports of International Conferences,
or in researches and writings of private individuals, is
quite appalling in extent. It has been my purpose to


PREFACE.


viii

extract from this mass of literature just sucli facts as
seem to be generally interesting and useful in enabling
the public to come to some conclusion upon many
currency cpiostions which press for solution. Shall we
count ill pounds, or dollars, or francs, or marks? Shall
we have gold or silver, or gold and silver, as the measure
of valuo? Shall we employ a paper currency or a
metallic one? How long shall we in England allow
our gold coinage to degenerate in weight? Shall wo
recoin it at the expense of the State or of the unlucky
individuals who happen to hold light sovereigns ?


In America the questions are still more important
and pressing, involving the return to specie payments,
the future regulation of the paper currency, its partial
replacement by coin, and the exact size and character
of the American dollar, regarded in relation to inter-
national currency. Germany is in the midst of a groat,
and probably a sound and successful, reorganization of
the currency, both metallic and paper. In France the
great debate upon the double versus the single standard
is hardly yet ttjrminated, and active measures arc being
taken to place the paper issues on a convertible basis.
Among the other countries of Europe — Italy, Austria,
Holland, Belgium, Switzerland, the Scandinavian king-
doms and liussia — there is hardly one which is not at


PRKFACE.


IX


present reforming its currency, or has lately done so,
or is discussing the proper method of attempting the
task. As regards all such changes, we should remember
that in the present we are ever moulding the future, and
that a world-wide system of international money, though
it may seem impracticable at the moment, is an object
at whicli all those should aim who wish to leave the
world better than they found it.

1 w'isli to acknowledge the assistances which 1 have de-
rived from the works of Mr. Soyd, especially his treatise
on “ Bullion and the Foreign Exchanges/’ from Pro-
fessor Sumner’s “ History of the American Currency,”
M. Chevalier’s work “La Monnaic,” M. Wolowski’s
various important puldications upon money, and many
valuable articles in the Journal des Economistes. 1 must
express my thanks to many l)ankers and gentlemen
for information and assistance kindly rendered to me,
especially to Mr. John Mills, Mr. T. R. Wilkinsoib
Mr. Roberts, the chemist of the Royal Mint, and Mr. E.
Helm.

1 should also like to take this opportunity of thank-
ing those gentlemen who have from time to time sent
me documents and publications bearing upon the subject
of money, which have proved very valuable. I may


X


PREFACE.


mention especially a series of reports and documents
concerning the American mint and currency received
through the kindness of the Director of the Mint, and of
Mr. Walker and Mr. E. Dubois.

I am much indebted to Mr. W. H. Brewer, M.A., for
carefully reading the whole of the proofs, and to Pro-
lessor T. E. Cliffe Leslie, Mr. li. II. Inglis Palgrave,
and Mr. Frederick Hendriks for examining particular
portions.

May 81s«, 1875.


CONTENTS


CHAPTER L

BAIITEIU

PAcji:

Want of Coincidence in Barter ... ... ... 3

Want of a Measure of Value ... ... ... 5

^ Want of Means of Subdivision ... . . ... ... (j

CHAPTER II.

EXCHANGE.

Utility and Value are not Intrinsic ... ... ... ... 3

Value expresses llatio of E.xchange ... ... ... 10

CHAPTER III.

THE FUNCTIONS OP MONEY.

A Standard of Value ... ... ... ...

A Store of Value ... ... ... .. ... Ifj

Separation of Functions ... ... ... ... . . i

CHAPTER IV,

EARLY HISTORY OP MONEY.

Currency in the Hunting State ... ... ... ... I9

Currency in the Pastoral State ... ... ... ... 2 1

Articles of Ornament as Currency ... ... 24

Currency in the Agricultural State ... ... 25

Manufactured and Miscellaneous Articles as Currency ... 27


CONTENTS.


xii

CHAPTEIl V.

QUALITIES OF THE MATERIAL OF MONEY.

PAOK

1. Utility and Value ... -- ... ••

2. Portability • • •••

3. Iiuli'.struetibility ... ... ... 3G

4. Tloiiio^enoity ... .. .• . ■ 37

5 . Divisibility ... - ■ . • 38

0. Stability of Value ... ... ... .. ... 38

7. Cognizability ... ... ... ... ... .

CHAPTER VI.

’ITIE METALS AS MONEY.

Iron ... ... ... .. ... ... ... 43

Loud 44

Tin .. ... ... ... ... .. .. 44

Copper ... ... ... ... ... ... 45

Silver .. ... ... .. ... ... 4C

Gold ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 47

riatiTima .. ... ... ... . ... 48

Nicltel ... ... ... ... ... .. ... 43

Other Metals ... ... ... ... ... ... 51

Alloys of Metals ... ... ... ... ... ... 51

CHAPTER VII.

COINS.

The luvcution of Coining ... ... ... ... 55

What is a Coin? ... ... ... ... ... ... 57

Various Forms of Coins ... ... ... ... ... 57

The Host Form for Coins ... ... ... ... ... 59

Coins as Works of Art ... ... . . (52

liistorieal Coins ... ... ... ... ... (52

The Royal Attrihute of Coming ... ... ... ... 63


CONTENTS.


XI II

CHAPTER VIM.

THE PRINCIPLES OF C1RCULA.T10N.

The Standard Unit of Value ... ... ... t>7

Coin, Money of Accoinit, and Unit of Value ... ... 70

Standard and 'fokeii Money ... ... ... 71

MtlalluMmd N<)mino.l Valiics of Coins ... ... 75

Legal IVnd or ... .. ... ... ... ... 7d

The Force of Habit in the Circulation of Money ... ... 78

Cresham’s Law .. ... ... ... ... 80

Extension of Gresham’s Law ... ... ... ... 84

OIIAPTER TX.

SYSTEMS OF METALLIC MONEY.

Currency by Weight ... ... ... ... ... 88

Unrestricted Currency by Talo ... ... ... ... 5)2

Sin g 1 0 I iCgal ' I’eiid or Sy stem ... ... ... ... yij

Multiple Legal Tender System ... . . .. 98

Composite Legal I’endor ... ... ... ... . . lot

CHAPTER X.

I'llE ENCLISll SYSTEM OF METALLIC CUIIIIENCY.

English Gold Coin ... ... ... ... ... 105

English Silver Coin ... ... ... ... , . 108

English Bronze Coin ... ... ... ... ... HO

Deficiency of Weight of the English Gold Coin ... ... H i

Withdrawal of Light Gold Coin ... ... Ijy

Supply of Gold Coin ... ... ... 115

Supply of Silver Coin ... ... .... .. 118

The Koyal Mint ... ... ... ... ... 120


XIV


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER XL

FRACTIONAL CURRENCY.

I'ACrK

Equivalent Weights of tho Principal Metals ... ... ... 123

Billon Coin 125

Composite Coin ... .. ... ... ... ... 127

Bronze Coin ... ... ... ... ... ... 128

English Bronze Coin ... ... ... ... ... 129

W eight of the Currenciy ... ... ... ... ... 130

Nickel, Manganese, Aluminium, and other Metals and Alloys .. 132

CHAPTER XIl.

THE BATTLE OF THE STANDARD*S.

The Double Standard ... ... ... ... ... 1 3G

Compensatory Action ... ... ... ... . . 139

The Demonetization of Silver ... ... ... ... 110

Disadvantages of the Double Standard ... ... ... 143

The Monetary Systems of the World ... ... ... ... 147

CHAPTER XIII.

TECHNICAL MATTERS RELATING TO COINAGE.

The Alloy in Coins . ... ... ... 151

The Size of Coins ... ... ... ... ... ... 155

The Wear of Coins ... ... ... ... ... 15(>

Methods of Counting Coins ... ... ... ... ... IGl

Cost of tlie Metallic Currency ... ... ... ... 1G3

CHAPTER XIV.

INTERNATIONAL MONEY.

Advantages of International Money ... ... ... 1(57

Disadvantages of International Money ... ... ... ie;9

Conflict of Monetary Systems 17j


CONTENTS.


XV


i*a<;r

International Monetary Negotiations ... ... 172

Decimalization of English Money ... .. .. ... 175

The Future American Dollar ... ... ... ... 178

German Monetary Reform ... ... ... ... ... 180

Systems of Fractional Money ... ... ... 181

Final Selection of the Unit of International Money ... ... 184

CrHAPTER XV.

THE MECHANISM OF EXCHANGE.

Progressive Development of the Methods of Exchange . . ... 100

•Representative Money ... ... . . ... ... 1,01

Cheque and Clearing System ... ... ... ... 192

CJIAPTKR XVI.

REPRESENTATIVE MONEY.

Early History of Representative Money ... ... .. lOO

Reasons for the Use of Representative Money ... ... 100

Incon visii i eiice of .Metal lie M<mcy . . ... ... ... 200

The Weight of Currency ... ... ... ... .. 202

Saving of Interest ... ... ... ... ... 203

CHAPTER XVII.

THE NATU.RK AND VARIETIES OF PROMISSORY NOTES.

Specific Deposit Warrant ... ... ... ... 207

G eneral Dcj) 08 it Warrant ... ... ... ... ... 208

Difference Between a Special and a General Promise ... 200

Pecun iary Promissory Notes ... ... ... ... ... 21 2

Principles of the Circulation of Representative Money ... 214


XVI


CONTEXTS.


ClIAPTEll XVIII.


METHODS OF REdlJLATING A PAPER CUUIIENOY.

PACK


1 . Simple Deposit

221

2. I’artial Deposit

222

3. Minimum Ilescrvo

223

4. Proportional lioscrve

. 223

5. Maximnin Issue

225

0. Elastic Limit

... 220

7. Doci i incii ta ry Itesorve

227

8. Real Property Reserve

... 228

1). Regulation by tin; P'orcign Exchanges

229

10, Ereo Issiu; System

230

11. Tbe Cold Pi Jr Method

231

12. Convertibility l»y Revenue Payments

232

13. Deferred Convertibility

233

l l. .!iieonv(^rti1.ile .Paper Money

234

Over issue of Paper Moiu.-y

235

Want of Elasticity of Paper Money . .

236


CHAPTER XIX.

CRICDIT DOCUMENTS.

MeuFiiiroraoTit of Credit ... ... ... ,,, 239

.Bank-notes ... ... ... ... ... 239

Oheqiu's ... ... ... ... ... ... 210

Bills of Exelianf^e ... ... ... ... ... ... 244

In terest-bourin" Documents ... ... ... .. 245

Definition of Money ... ... ... 248


CHAPTER XX.

BOOK CREDIT AND THE BANKING SYSTEM.


Single Bank System
Syistem of Two Bunks


2.52

254


CONTENTS.


XVll


PAftF,

Complex Bank System ... ... ... 255

Branch Bank System , . . ... ... ... ... 2.57

Bank Agency System ... ... ... ... ... 2.59

Condon Agency System ... ... ... ... 200

Country Clearing System ... ... .. 200

CnAPTER XXI.

rElE CLEARING-nOUSE SYSTEM.

TransjMJtion of Business at the London Clearing House ... ... 205

Manchestt^r Clearing House ... ... ... 209

New York Clearing House ... ... ... 278

Extension of tlu; Clearing System ... ... 279

Advantages of the CluMjue and Clearing System ... ... .. 289

l:V)poi'tion of Cash rayments ... ... , ... 285

Cases to which the Clearing System is inapplicable ... ... 287

CHAPTER XXIL

THJ'l ClIEQliE BANK.

Relation of the Cheque Bank to other Banks . . 291

The On.'que Bank as a JMonetary Agent ... ... 21*9

rayineiit of Wag(.‘s )»y Clu‘<jU(S ... 295

The Cheque Bunk as a Savings Bank ... ... 290

Results of the Cheque Bunk System ... ... ... 298

CHAPTER XXni.

FOREIGN BILLS OF EXCHANGE.

Origin and Nature of Bills of Exchange ... ... ... 900

Trade in Foreign Bills ... ... ... . . ... 902

The World’s Clearing Houso ... ... ... . . ... 903

Centralization of Financial Transactions in London ... .. 905

Representation of Foreign Bankers in London ... 907


CONTENTS.


xviii

CHAPTER XXTV.

THK BANK OF ENGLAND AND THE MONEY MARKET.


TACB

Expansion of Trade ... .. ••• • •

Competition of Banlvers ... ... .. ^

'rhc Bank Charter Act of 1814 ... ... ... 31*^

The Free-banking School ... ... ... .. ... 311

Possibility of Over issue . . ... ... ... 311

The Right of Coining Bank-notes ... ... ... ... 3J7

Scotch and English Banking .. ... .’k'. 311)

Cash Roserve.s of Bankers ... ... ... ... ... 320

Remedy for the Sensitiveness of the Money Market... ... 322


CHAPTER XXV.

A TABULAR STANDARD OP VALUE.

Coni Rents ... ... ... ... ... ... 326

A Multiple Legal Tender ... ... ... .. ... 327

Lowe’s Proposed 'rahle of Reference ... ... ... 328

Poulett Scroxie’s Tabular Standard of Value ... ... ... 321)

Dillicultios of the Scheme ... ... .. ... 331

CHAPTER XXVI.

'IIIE QUAN'ITTY of money needed by a nation.

Quantity of Work to be done by Money ... ... ... 33o

Efficiency of the Currency ... ... ... 336

Effects of the Cheque and Clearing System ... ... ... 337

Conclusion ... ... ... ... ... 3^0

343


Index


MONEY

AND THE MECHANISM OF EXCHANGE.


CHAPTEE 1.

BARTER.

Some years since, Mademoiselle Zelic, a singer of the
Theatre Lyriqne at Paris, made a professional tour round
the world, and gave a concert in the Society Islands.
In exchange for an air from Norma and a few otlier
songs, siie was to receive a third part of the receipts.
When counted, her share w-as found to consist of three
l^igs, twenty-three turkeys, forty-four chickens, live
thousand cocoa-nuts, besides considerable cpiantities of
bananas, lemons, and oranges. At tlie Halle in Paris,
as the prima donna remarks in Ijer lively lettiu’, printed
by M. Wolowski, this amount of live stock and vegetables
might have brought four thousand francs, which would
have been good remuneration for five songs. In tlie
Society Islands, however, jiieces of money \vere very
scarce; and as Mademoiselle could not consume any


II


MONEY.


considerable portion of the receipts herself, it ])Ocamo
necessary in the mean time to feed the pigs and poultry
witli the fruit.

When Mr. Wallace was travelling in the Malay
Archipelago, ho seems to have suffered rather from the
scarcity than the superabundance of provisions. In his
most interesting account of his travels, he tells us that
in some of the islands, where there was no proper
currency, he could not procure supplies for dinner with-
out a special bargain and much chaffering upon each
occasion. If the vendor of fish or other coveted eatables
did not meet with the sort of (ixchange desired, he would
pass on, and Mr. Wallace and his party had to go without
their dinner. It therefore became very desirable to keep
oil hand a supply of articles, such as knives, pieces of
clotli, arrack, or sago cakes, to multiply the cliance tliat
one or other article would suit the itinerant merchant.

In modern civilized society tlie inconveniences of the
primitive method of exchange are wholly unknown, and
might almost seem to bo imaginary. Accustomed from
our earliest years to the use of money, wo are unconscious
of the inestimable benefits which it confers upon us ;
and only when we recur to altogether different states
of society can wo realize the difficulties whicli arise in
its absence. It is oven surprising to be reminded that
barter is actually th(> sole method of commerce among
many uncivilized races. There is something absurdly
incongruous in the fact that a joint-stock company,
called “ Tlic African Barter Company, Limited,” exists
in London, which carries on its transactions upon the


BARTER.


3


West Coast of Africa entirely by bartering European
manufactures for palm oil, gold dust, ivory, cotton,
coffee, gum, and other raw produce.

Tlie earliest form of exchange must have consisted
in giving what was not wanted directly for that wliich
was wanted. This simple traffic we call harter or trucks
the French troc, and distinguish it from sale and pur-
chase in which one of the articles exchanged is intended
to bo held only for a short time, until it is parted with
in a second act of exchange. The object which thus
temporarily intervenes in sale and purchase is money.
At first sight it might seem that the use of money only
doubles the trouble, by making two exchangers necessary
wliero one was sufficient ; but a slight analysis of the
difficulties inherent in simple barter shows that the
balance of trouble lies quite in the opposite direction.
Only by such an finalysis can we become aware tliat
money performs not merely one service to us, but several
different services, each indispensable. Modern society
could not exist in its present complex form without the
means which money constitutes of valuing, distributing,
and contracting for commodities of various kinds.


Want of Coincidence in Barter,

The first difficulty in barter is to find two persons
whose disposable possessions mutually suit each other’s
wants. There may be many people wanting, and many
possessing those things wanted ; but to allow of an act
of barter, there must be a double coincidence, which


4


MONEY.


will rarely happen. A hunter having returned from
a successful chase has plenty of game, and may want
arms and ammunition to renew the chase. But those
who have arms may happen to be well supplied with
game, so that no direct exchange is possible. In civilized
society the owner of a house may find it unsuitable, and
may have his eye upon another house exactly fitted to
his needs. But even if the owner of this second liouse
wishes to part with it at all, it is exceedingly unlikely
that he will exactly reciprocate the feelings of the first
ovmer, and wish to barter houses. Sellers and pur-
chasers can only bo made to fit by the use of some
commodity, some inarchandise banale, as the French
call it, which all are willing to receive for a time, so
that what is obtaincul by sale in one case, may be used
in purchase in another. This common commodity is
called a mid] urn. of exchange, because it forms a third or
intermediate term in all acts of commcu’co.

Within the last few years a curious attempt has been
made to revive the practice of barter by the circula-
tion of advertisements. The Exchange and Mari is a
newspaper which devotes itself to making known all
the odd property which its advertisers are willing to
give firr some coveted article. One person has some old
coins and a bicycle, and wants to barter them for a good
concertina. A young lady desires to possess ‘‘ Middle-
march,” and offers a variety of old songs, of which she
has l)ecomc tired. Judghig from the size and circula-
tion of the paper, and the way in which its scheme has
been imitated by some other weekly papers, we must


BARTER.


5


assTime that the offers are' sometimes accepted, and that
the printing press can bring about, in some degree, the
double coincidence necessary to an act of barter.


IFant of a MeaBxire of Value.

A second difficulty arises in barter. At what rate is
any exchange to be made? If a certain quantity of
beef be given for a certain quantity of corn, and in like
manner corn be exchanged for cheese, and cheese for
eggs, and eggs for flax, and so on, still the question will
arise — How much beef for how much flax, or how much
of any one commodity for a given quantity of another ?
In a state of barter the price-current list would be a
most complicated document, for each commodity would
have to be quoted in terms of every other commodity,
or else complicated rule-of-three sums would become
necessary. Between one hundred articles there must
exist no less than 4950 possible ratios of exchange, and
all these ratios must be carefully adjusted so as to be
consistent with each other, else the acute trader will be
able to profit by buying from some and selling to others.

All such trouble is avoided if any one commodity be
chosen, and its ratio of exchange with each other com-
modity be quoted. Knowing how much corn is to be
bought for a pound of silver, and also how much flax
for the same quantity of silver, we learn without further
trouble how much com exchanges for so much flax. The
chosen commodity becomes a common denominator or com-
mon measure of valuer in terms of which we estimate the


6


MONEY.


values of all other goods, so that their values become
capable of the most easy comparison.


Want of Meam of Subdivision.

A third but it maybe a minor inconvenience of barter
arises from the impossibility of dividing many kinds of
goods. A store of corn, a bag of gold dust, a carcase of
moat, may be portioned out, and more or less may be given
in exchange for what is w^anted. But the tailor, as we
are reminded in several treatises on political economy,
may have a coat ready to exchange, but it much exceeds
in value the bread which he wishes to get from the
baker, or the meat from the butcher. He cannot cut
the coat up without destroying the value of his handi-
work. It is obvious that he needs some medium of ex-
change, into which he can temporaiily convert the coat,
so that he may give a part of its value for bread, and
other parts for meat, fuel, and daily necessaries, retain-
ing perhaps a portion for future use. Further illus-
tration is needless ; for it is obvious that we need a means
of dividing and distributing value according to our
varying requirements.

In the present day barter still goes on in some
cases, even in the most advanced commercial countries,
but only when its inconveniences are not experienced.
Domestic servants receive part of their wages in board
and lodging : the farm labomer may partially receive pay-
ment in cider, or barley, or the use of a piece of land.
It has always been usual for the miller to be paid by a


BARTER.


7


portion of the corn which he grinds. The truck or barter
system, by which W’^orkmen took their wages in kind,
has hardly yet been extinguished in some parts of Eng-
land. Pieces of land ai‘e occasionally exchanged by
adjoining landowmers ; but all these are comparatively
trifling cases. In almost all acts of exchange money
now intervenes in one W'ay or otlier, and even \vhen it
does not pass from hand to hand, it serves as the
measure by which the amounts given and re(^eivt>d are
estimated. Commerce begins with l)arter, and in a
certain sense it returns to barter ; l)ut the last form of
.barter, as wo shall see, is very dillereiit from the first
form. ]3y far the greater part of commercial j)aymonts
are made at the present day in England appareiitly
wutlioui; the aid of metallic money ; but they are readily
adjusted, because money acts as the common denomin-
ator, and what is bought in one direction is balanced
off against what is sold in another direction.


MONEY.


CHAPTEE IL

EXCHANGE.

Money is the measure and standard of value and the
medium of exchange, yet it is not necessary tliat I
should outer upon more than a very brief discussion
concerning the nature of value, and the advantage of
exchange. Every one must allow that the exchange of
commodities depends upon the obvious princixdo that
each of our wants taken separately requires a limited
quantity of some article to produce satisfaction. Hence
as each want becomes fully satiated, our desire, as Senior
so well remarked, is for variety, that is, for the satisfac-
tion of some other want. The man who is supplied
daily with three pounds of bread, will not desire more
bread ; l)ut he will have a strong inclination for beef,
and tea, and alcohol. If he happen to meet with a
person who has plenty of beef but no bread, each will
give that which is less desired for that which is more
desired. Exchange has been called tha barter of the
superfluous for the necessary, and this definition will
be correct if we state it as the barter of the comparatively
superfluous for the comparatively necessary.


EXCHANGE.


9


It is impossible, indeed, to decide exactly how much
bread, or beef, or tea, or how many coats and hats a
person needs. There is no precise limit to our desires,
and we can only say, that as we have a larger supply of a
substance, the urgency of our need for more is in some
proportion weakened. A cup of water in the desert, or
upon the field of battle, may save life, and become
infinitely useful. Two or three pints per day for each
person are needful for drinking and cooking purposes.
A gallon or two per day are highly requisite for cleanli-
ness ; but we soon reach a point at which further supplies
of w^ater are of very minor importance. A modern town
population is found to bo satisfied witli about tw-enty-five
gallons per liead per day for all purposes, and a further
supply would possess little utility. Water, indeed, may
be the reverse of useful, as in the case of a flood, or a
damp house, or a w^et mine.


UliUty and Value are not Intrinsic,

It is only, then, when supplied in moderate quantities,
and at the right time, that a thing can be said to be
useful. Utility is not a quality intrinsic in a substance,
for, if it 'were, additional quantities of the same substance
would always be desired, however much we previously
possessed. We must not confuse the usefulness of a
thing with the physical qualities upon which the useful-
ness depends. Utility and value are only accidents of a
thing arising from the fact that some one wants it, and
the degree of the utility and the amount of resulting


10


MONEY,


value will depend upon the extent to whicli the desire for
it has been previously gratified.

Regarding utility, then, as constantly varying in
degree, and as variable even for each different portion of
commodity, it is not difficult to see that we exchange
tliose parts of our stock which have a low degree of
utility to us, for articles which, being of low utility
to others, are much desired by us. This exchange
is continued up to the point at which the next portion
given would be equally useful to us with that received, so
that there is no gain of utility : there would be a loss
ill carrying the exchange further. Upon these considei;-
ations it is easy to construct a theory of the nature of
exchange and value, wffiicli has been explained in my
book’^ called “ The Theory of Tolitical Economy.” It is
tliere shown that the well-known law^s of supply and
demand follow from this view of utility, and tlius yield a
verification of the theory. Since the publication of the
work named, M. Leon Walras, the ingenious professor
of political economy at Lausanne, has independently
arrived at the same theory of exchange, f a remarkable
confirmation of its truth.


Value expresses Ratio of Exchange.

We must now fix our attention upon the fact that,
in every act of exchange, a definite quantity of one sub-

* “ Tho Theory of Political Economy.” 8vo. 1871 (Macmilhin).
t Walras, Elements d’Economie politique pure. Lausanne, Paris
(Guillaumin), 1874.


EXCHANGE.


11


stance is exchanged for a definite quantity of another.
The things bartered may bo most various in character,
and may be variously measured. We may give a weight
of silver for a length of rope, or a superficial extent of
carpet, or a number of gallons of wine, or a certain horse-
power of force, or conveyance over a certain distance.
The quantities to be measured may be expressed in terms
of space, time, mass, force, energy, heat, or anj^ otlier
physical units. Yet each exchange will consist in giving
so many units of one thing for so many units of another,
each measured in its appropriate way.

. Every act of excliange tlius presents itself to us in the
form of a ratio between two numbers. The word value is
commonly used, and if, at current rates, one ton of
coiiper exchanges for ten tons of bar iron, it is usual to
say that the value of copper is ten times that of the iron,
weight for weight. For our puiq)ose, at least, this use of
the word value is only an indirect mode of expressing
a ratio. When we say that gold is more valuable than
silver, we mean that, as commonly exchanged, the weight
of silver exceeds that of the gold given for it. If the
value of gold rises compared with that of silver, then still
more silver is given for the same quantity of gold. But
value like utility is no intrinsic quality of a thing ; it is an
extrinsic accident or relation. We should never speak of
the value of a thing at all without having in our minds
the other thing in regard to which it is valued. The
very same substance may rise and fall in value at the
same time. If, in exchange for a given weight of gold,
I can get more silver, but less copper, than I used to do,


12


MONEY.


the value of gold has risen with respect to silver, but
fallen with respect to copper. It is evident that an in-
trinsic property of a thing cannot- both increase and
decrease at the same time ; therefore value must be a
mere relation or accident of a thing as regards other
things and the persons needing them.


( 13 )


CHAPTEIl III.

THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY.

We liave seen that three inconveniences attach to the
practice of simple barter, namely, the improbahilit}'^ of
coincidence between persons wanting and p(‘rsons possess-
ing; the complexity of exchanges, which are not made in
terms of one single substance; and the need of some .means
of dividing and distributing valuable articles. Money
remedies tliese inconveniences, and thereby performs two
distinct functions of high imi)ortance, acting as —

(1) A medium of exchange.

(2) A common measure of value.

In its lirst form money is simply any commodity
esteemed by all persons, any article of food, clothing,
or ornament which any person will readily recei^'e,
and which, therefore, every person desires to have by
him in greater or less quantity, in order tliat he may
have the means of procuring necessaries of life at any
timcj. Although many commodities may be capable of
performing this function of a medium more or less
perfectly, some one article will usually bo selected, as
money 2 )ar excdlcnce, by custom or the force of circum-
stances. This article will then begin to be used as a


14


MONEY.


measure of value. Being accustomed to exchange things
frequently for sums of money, people learn the value of
other articles in terms of money, so that all exchanges
will most readily he calculated and adjusted hy com*
parison of the money values of tlie things exchanged.

A Standard of Value.

A third function of money soon develops itself.
Commerce cannot advance far before people begin to
borrow and lend, and debts of various origin are con-
tracted. It is in some cases usual, indeed, to restore the
very same ai’ticle wliich was borrowed, and in almost
every case it would be possible to pay back in the same
kind of (jommodity. If corn be borrowed, corn might bo
paid back, witli interest in com ; but the lender will often
not wish to have things returned to him at an uncertain
time, when he does not much need them, or Avhon their
value is unusually low. A borrower, too, may need several
different kinds of articles, whicli he is not likely to obtain
from one person ; lienee arises the convenience of borrow-
ing and lending in one generally recognized commodity, of
which the value varies little. Every person making a
contract by Avhich he wiU receive something at a future
day, will prefer to seciue the receipt of a commodity likely
to be as valuable then as now. This commodity will
usually be the current money, and it will thus come to
perform the function of a standard of value. We must
not suppose that the substance serving as a standard
of value is really invariable in value, but merely that


THE FUNCTIOXS OF MONEY.


15


it is chosen as that measure by which the value of future
payments is to be regulated. Bearing in mind that value
is only the ratio of quantities exchanged, it is certain that
no substance permanently bears exactly the same value
relatively to another commodity ; but it will, of course, be
desirable to select as the standard of value that which
ai)pears likely to continue to exchange for many other
commodities in nearly unchanged ratios.


A Store of Value,

, It is worthy of impiiry whether money does not also
servo a fourth distinct purpose — that of embodying value
in a convenient form for couve3^ance to distant places.
Money, when acting as a medium of exchange, circulates
backwards and forwards near the same spot, and may
sometimes return to the same hands again and again.
It subdivides and distributes property, and lubricates the
action of exchange. But at times a person needs to
condense his propert} into the smallest compass, so that
he may hoard it away for a time, or carry it with him on
a long journey, or transmit it to a friend in a distant
country. Something which is very valuable, although of
little bulk and w^eight, and which will be recognised as
very valuable in every part of the wnrld, is necessary
for this purpose. The current money of a country is
perhaps more likely to fulfil these conditions than any-
thing else, although diamonds and other precious stones,
and articles of exceptional beauty and rarity, might
occasionally be employed.


16


MONEY.


The use of esteemed articles as a store or medium for
conveying value may in some cases precede their employ-
ment as currency. Mr. Gladstone states that in the
Homeric poems gold is mentioned as being hoarded and
treasured up, and as being occasionally used in the
payment of services, before it became the common
measure of value, oxen being then used for the latter
purpose. Historically speaking, such a generally
esteemed substance as gold seems to have served, firstly,
as a commodity valuable for ornamental purposes ;
secondly, as stored wealth; thirdly, as a medium of
exchange ; and, lastly, as a measure of value.


Separation of Functions,

It is in the highest degree important that the reader
should discriminate carefully and constantly between
tlic four functions Avhich money fulfils, at least in modern
societies. We fire so accustomed to use the one same
sul)stanco in all the four dilfereiit ways, that they tend
to become confused together in thought. We come to
regard as almost necessary that union of functions
which is, at the most, a matter of coiiveniencc>, and may
not always be desirable. We might certainly employ
one substance as a medium of exchange, a second as a
measure of value, a third as a standard of value, and
a fourth as a store of value. In buying and selling wc
miglit transfer portions of gold ; in expressing and cal-
culating prices we might speak in terms of sihor ; when
we wanted to make long leases we might define the rent


THE FUNCTIONS OF MONEY.


17


ill terms of wheat, and when we wished to carry our
riches away we might condense it into the form of
precious stones. This use of different commodities for
each of the functions of money has in fact been partially
carried out. In Queen Elizabeth’s reign silver was tlie
common measure of value ; gold was employed in large
payments in quantities depending upon its current value
in silver, while corn was required by the Act 18th
Elizabeth, c. \T. (1576), to be the standard of value in
drawing the leases of certain college lands.

There is evident convenience in selecting, if possible,
one single substance which can serve all the functions of
money. It will save trouble if wo can pay in the same
money in which the prices of things are calculated. As
few people have the time or patience to investigate closely
the history of prices, they wall probably assume that the
money in which they make all minor and temporary
bargains, is also the best standard in which to register
debts and contracts extending over many years. A great
mass of payments too are invariably fixed by bnv, such
as tolls, fees, and tariffs of cliarges: many other pay-
monts are fixed by custom. Accordingly, even if tlie
medium of exchange varied considerably in value, people
would go on making their payments in terms of it, as if
there had been no variation, some gaining at the expense
of others.

One of our chief tasks in this book will be to consider
the various materials w^hich have been employed as
money, or have been, or may be, suggested for the pur-
pose. It must be our endeavour, if possible, to discover


0


18


MONEY.


some substance which will in the highest degree combine
the characters requisite for all the different functions of
money, but we must bear in mind that a partition of
these functions amongst different substances is practic-
able. We will first proceed to a brief review of the very
various ways in which the need of currency has been
supplied from the earliest ages, and we will afterwards
analyse the physical qualities and circumstances whicli
render the substances employed more or less suited to
the purpose to wdiich they were applied. We may thus
arrive at some decision as to the exact nature of the
commodity which is best adapted to meet our needs in t^ie
present day.


( 19 )


CHAPTEE IV.

KAIMjY histohy of money.

Livino in civilized communities, and accustomed to tlie use
of coined metallic money, we learn to identify money with
gold and silver; lienee spring hurtful and insidious
fallacies. It is always useful, therefore, to be reminded of
the truth, so well stated by Turgot, that every kind of mer-
chandise has the two properties of measuring value and
transferring value. It is entirely a question of degree
what commodities will in any given state of society form
the most convtmient currency, and this truth will he best
impressed upon us by a brief consideration of the very
numerous things which have at one time or other been
employed as money. Though there a.re many numis-
matists and many political economists, the natural
history of money is almost a virgin subject, upon which
I should like to dilate; but the narrow limits of my space
forbid me from attempting more than a brief sketch of
the many interesting facts which may be collected.

Currency in the HimUny State,

Perhaps the most rudimentary state of industry is
that in which subsistence is gained by hunting wild


20


MONEY.


animals. The proceeds of the chase would, in such a
state, be the property of most generally recognised value.
The meat of the animals captured would, indeed, be too
perishable in nature to be hoarded or often exchanged ;
but it is otherwise with the skins, which, being preserved
and valued for clothing, became one of the earliest
materials of currency. Accordingly, there is abundant
evidence that furs or skins were employed as money in
many ancient nations. They serve this pm’poso to the
present day in some parts of the world.

In the book of Job (ii. 4) we read, “ Skin for skin,
yea, all that a man hath will he give for his life ; a
statement clearly implying that skins were taken as the
representative of value among the ancient Oriental
nations. Etymological research shows that the same
may be said of the northern nations from the earliest
times. In the Esthonian language the word rdha
generally signifies money, but its equivalent in the kin-
dred Lappish tongue has not yet altogether lost the
original meaning of skin or fur. Leather money is said
to have circulated in Kussia as late as the reign of
Peter the Great, and it is worthy of notice, that classical
writers have recorded traditions to the effect that the
earliest currency used at Rome, Lacedaemon, and Car-
thage, was formed of leather.

We need not go back, however, to such early times to
study the use of rude currencies. In the traffic of the
Hudson’s Bay Company with the North American
Indians, furs, in spite of their differences of quality and
size, long formed the medium of exchange. It is very


EAULY HISTOllY OF MONEY.


21


instructive, and corroborative of the previous evidence to
find that, even after the use of coin had become, common
among the Indians the skin was still commonly used as
the money of account. Thus AVhymper says,"^ ‘‘ a gun,
nominally worth about forty shillings, brought twenty
‘ skins.’ This term is the old one employed by the
comjiany. One skin (beaver) is supposed to be worth
two shillings, and it represents two marten, and so on.
You heard a great deal about * skins’ at Fort Y'ukon, as
the workmen wxu'e also charged for clothing, etc., in this
way.”


Ciirrmcy in the Pastoral State.

In tlic next higher stage of civilization, the pastoral
state, sheep and cattle naturally form the most valuable
and negotiable kind of property. They are easily trans-
ferable, convey themselves about, and can be Icept for
many years, so that they readily perform some of the
functions of money.

We have abundance of evidence, traditional, written,
and etymological, to show this. In the Homeric poems
oxen are distinctly and repeatedly mentioned as the
commodity in terms of which other objects are valued.
The arms of Diomed arc stated to be worth nine oxen,
and are compared with those of Glaucos, worth one
hundred. The tripod, the first prize for wrestlers in the
23rd Iliad, was valued at twelve oxen, and a woman
captive, skilled in industry, at four.f It is peculiarly

* “ Travels in Alaska, etc.,” by F. Whymper, p. 225.
t Gladstone, Juveiitus Mandi,” p, 534.


22


MONEY.


interesting to find oxen thus used as the ^ common
measure of value, because from other passages it is
probable, as already mentioned, that the precious metals,
though as yet uncoined, were used as a store of value,
and occasionally as a medium of exchange. Tlie several
functions of money were thus clearly performed by difier-
ent commodities at this early period.

In several languages the name for money is identical
with tliat of some kind of cattle or domesticated animal.
It is generally allowed that imiuiia, the Latin word for
money, is derived from pccus, cattle. From the Agamoin-
non of /Eschylus we learn that the figure of an ox was
the sign first impressed upon coins, and the same is said
to have been the case with the earliest issues of the
Eoman As. Numismatic researches fail to bear out
these traditions, which were probably invented to explain
the connection between the name of the coin and the
animal. A corresponding connection between these
notions may be detected in much more modern languages.
Our common expression for tlie payment of a sum of
money which is nothing but the Anglo-Saxon feohj
meaning alike money and cattle, a word cognate witli the
German rich, which still bears only the original meaning
of cattle. As I am informed by my friend, Professor
Theodores, the same connection of ideas is manifested
in the Greek word for property, KTij/na, which means alike
possession, flock, or cattle, and is referred by Grimm to
an original verb ictVw or Keraw^ to feed cattle. It is
even supposed by Grimm that the same root reappears
in the Teutonic and Scandinavian languages, in the


EARLY HISTORY OF MONEY.


23


Gothic, skatts, the modern High German, iichatz, the
Anglo-Saxon, or sceat^ the ancient Norsk sfo/Y, all
meaning wealth, property, treasure, tax, or tribute,
especially in the shape of cattle. This theory is con-
firmed by the fact that the Frisian equivalent, sket,
lias retained the original meaning of cattle to the
present day. In the Norsk, Anglo-Saxon, and English,
scat or scot has been specialized to denote tax or tribute.

In the ancient German codes of law, lines and penalties
are actually defined in terms of live-stock. In the Zend
Avesta, as Professor Theodores further informs me, the
scale of rewards to be paid to pliysicians is carefully
stated, and in every case the fee consists in some sort of
cattle. The fiftli and sixth lectures in Sir H. S. Maine’s
most interesting work on ‘‘ The Early History of Institu-
tions,” which has just been published, are full of curious
information showing the iraj)ortance of live-stock in a
primitive state of society. Being counted hy the head, the
kine was called capitale, whence the economical term
capital, the law terra chattel, and our common name
cattle.

In countries where slaves form one of the most
common and valuable possessions, it is quite natural
that they should serve as the medium of exchange like
cattle. Pausanias mentions their use in this way, and
in Central Africa and some other places Avhere slavery
still flourishes, they are the medium of exchange along
with cattle and ivory tusks. According to Earl’s account
of New Guinea , there is in that island a large traffic
in slaves, and a slave forms the unit of value. Even


MONEY.


in England slaves are believed to have been exchanged
at one time in the manner of money.


A rticles of Ornament as Currencij.

A passion for personal adornment is one of the most
primitive and powerful instincts of the liuman race, and
as articles used for such purposes would be durable, uni-
versally esteemed, and easily transferable, it is natural
that they should be circulated as money. The wam-
pumpcag of the North American Indians is a case in
point, as it certainly served as jewellery. It consisted
of beads made of the ends of black and wlrtte shells,
rubbed down and polished, and then strung into belts
or necklaces, which were valued according to their length,
and also according to their colour and lustre, a foot of
black peag being worth two feet of white poag. It was so
well established as currency among the natives that the
Court of Massachusetts ordered, in 1649, that it should be
received in the payment of debts among settlers to the
amount of forty shillings. It is curious to learn, too,
that just as European misers hoard up gold and silver
coins, the richer Indian chiefs secrete piles of wampum
beads, having no better means of investing their super-
fluous wealth.

Exactly analogous to this North American currency,
is that of the cowry shells, which, under one name or
another — charngos, zimbis, bouges, porcelanes, etc. — have
long been used in the East Indies as small money. In
British India, Siam, the West Coast of Africa, and else-


EAKLY HISTORY OF MONF.Y.


25


wliere on the tropical coasts, they are still used as small
change, being collected on the shores of the Maidive and
Laccadive Islands, and exported for the purpose. Their
value varies somewhat, according to the abundance of the
yield, but in India the current rate used to be about 5000
shells for one rupee, at which rate each shell is worth
about the two-hundredth part of a penny. Among our
interesting fellow-subjects, the Fijians, whale’s teeth
served in the place of cowudes, and white teetli were
exchanged for red teeth somewhat in the ratio of shillings
to sovereigns.

. Among other articles of ornament or of special value
used as ourrency, may be mentioned yellow amber,
engraved stones, such as the Egyptian scarabaoi, and
tusks of ivory.

Currancy in the Agrmdtnral State.

Many vegetable productions are at least as well suited
for circulation as some of the articles which have been
mentioned. It is not surprivsing to find, then, that
among a people supporting themselves by agriculture,
the more durable products were thus used. Corn has
been the medium of exchange in remote parts of Europe
from the time of the ancient Greeks to the present day.
In Norway corn is even deposited in banks, and lent and
borrowed. What wheat, barley, and oats are to Europe,
such is maize in parts of Central America, especially
Mexico, where it formerly circulated. In many of the
countries smTounding the Mediterranean, olive oil is one


26


MONEY.


of the commonest articles of produce and consumption ;
being, moreover, pretty uniform in quality, durable, and
easily divisible, it has long served as currency in the
Ionian Islands, Mytilene, some towns of Asia Minor, and
elsewhere in the Levant.

Just as cowries circulate in the East Indies, so cacao
nuts, in Central America and Yucatan, form a perfectly
recognised and probaldy an ancient fractional money.
Travellers have published many distinct statements as to
their value, but it is impossible to reconcile these state-
ments without supposing great changes of value either
in the nuts or in tlie coins with wdiich they are com-
pared. In 1521, at Caracas, about thirty cacao nuts
were worth one penny English, whereas recently ten
beans would go to a penny, according to Squier’s state-
ments. In the European countries, where almonds are
commonly grown, they have circulated to some extent
like the cacao nuts, but are variable in value, according
to the success of the harvest.

It is not only, however, as a minor currency that vege-
table products have been used in modern times. In the
American settlements and the West India Islands, in
former days, specie used to become inconveniently
scarce, and the legislators fell back upon the device of
obliging creditors to receive payment in produce at
stated rates. In 1618, the Governor of the Plantations
of Virginia ordered that tobacco should be received at
the rate of three shillings for the pound weight, under
the penalty of three years’ hard labour. We are told
that, when the Virginia Company imported young


EARLY HISTORY OF MONEY.


27


women as wives for tlie settlers, the price per head was
one hundred pounds of tobacco, subsequently raised to
one liundred and fifty. As late as 1732, the legislature
of Maryland made tobacco and Indian corn legal tenders ;
and in 1641 there were similar laws concerning corn in
Massachusetts. The governments of some of the West
India Islands seem to have made attempts to imitate
thescj peculiar currency laws, and it was provided that
the successful plaintiff in a lawsuit should be obliged to
accept various hinds of raw produce, such as sugar,
rum, molasses, ginger, indigo, or tobacco.* Such en-
deavours to establish a kind of multiple currency will be
found to possess considerable interest for us in a later
chapter.

The perishable nature of most kinds of animal food
|)revents them from being much used as money ; but
eggs are said to have circulated in the Alpine villages of
Switzerland, and dried codfish have certainly acted as
currency in the colony of Newfoundland.


Manufactured and Miscellaneous Articles as
Currency,

The enumeration of articles whicli have served as
money may already seem long enough for the purposes
in view. I will, therefore, only add briefly that a great
number of manufactured commodities have been used as
a medium of exchange in various times and places.

* See a scarce tract, entitled “ Two Letters to Mr. Wood on the Coin
and Currency in the Leeward Islands,” p. 34. London, 1740.


28


MONEY.


Such are the pieces of cotton cloth, called Guinea piecen,
used for traflic upon the banks of the Senegal, or the
somewhat similar pieces circulated in Abyssinia, the
Soulou Archipelago, Sumatra, Mexico, Peru, Siberia,
and among the Veddahs. It is less easy to understand
the origin of the curious straw money which circulated
until 1694 in the Portuguese possessions in Angola,
and which consisted of small mats, called libongos,
woven out of rice straw, and worth about IhL each.
These mats must have had, at least originally, some
purpose apart from their use as currency, and were per-
haps analogous to the fine woven mats so much valued
by the Samoans, and also treated by them as a medium
of exchange.

Salt has been circulated not only in Abyssinia, but in
Sumatra, Mexico, and elsewhere. Cubes of benzoin
gum or beeswax in Sumatra, red feathers in the Islands
of the Pacific Ocean, cubes of tea in Tartaxy, iron shovels
or hoes among the Malagasy, are other peculiar forms of
currency. The remarks of Adam Smith concerning the
use of hand-made nails as money in some Scotch
villages will be remembered by many readers, and need
not be repeated. M. Chevalier has adduccid an exactly
corresponding case from one of the French coalfields.

Were space available it would be interesting to discuss
the not improbable suggestion of Boucher de Perthes,
that, perhaps, after all, the finely worked stone imple-
ments now so frequently discovered were among the
earliest mediums of exchange. Some of them are cer-
tainly made of jade, nephrite, or other hard stones, only


EARLY HISTORY OF MONEY.


29


found in distant countries, so that an active traflic in
such implements must have existed in times of which we
have no records whatever.

There are some obscure allusions in classical authors
to a wooden money circulating among the Byzantines,
and to a wooden talent used at Antioch and Alcjxandria,
])iit in the absence of fuller information as to their
nature, it is impossible to do more than mention them.


30


MONEY.


CHAPTER V.

QUALITIES OF THE MATETITAL OF MONTJV.

Many recent writers, such as Huskisson, MacCullocli,
James Mill, Gamier, Cliovalier, and Walras, have satis-
factorily described the qualities which should be possessed
by the material of money. Earlier writers seem, liow-
ever, to have understood the subject almost as well.
Harris explained these qualities with remarkable clear-
ness in his Essay upon Money and Coins,” published
in 1757, a work which appeared before the ‘‘ Wealth of
Nations, ”yet gave an exposition of the principles of money
which can hardly be improved at the present day.
Eighty years before, however, Rice Vaughan, in his ex-
cellent little “ Treatise of Money,” had written a brief
but satisfactory statement of the qualities requisite in
money. We even find that William Stafford, the author
of that remarkable dialogue of the Elizabethan age
(1581), called “ A Brief Conceipte of English Policy,”
showed perfect insight into the subject. Of all writers,
M. Chevalier, however, probably gives the most accurate
and full account of tlie properties which money should
possess, and I shall in many points follow his views.


QUALITIES OF THE MATERIAL OF MONEY. 31

The prevailing defect in the treatment of the subject
is the failure to observe that money requires different
properties as regards different functions. To decide upon
the best material for money is thus a problem of great
complexity, because wo must take into account at once
the relative importance of the several functions of money,
the degree in which money is employed for each function,
and the importance of each of the physical qualities of
the substance with respect to each function. In a simple
state of industry money is chiefly required to pass about
between buyers and sellers. It should, then, be con-
veniently portable, divisible into pieces of various size,
so that any sum may readily be made up, and easily
distinguishable by its appearance, or by the design im-
pressed upon it. When money, however, comes to serve,
as it will at some future time, almost exclusively as a
measure and standard of value, the system of exchange,
being one of perfected barter, such properties become a
matter of comparative indifference, and stability of valiui,
joined perliaps to portability, is the most important
quality. Before venturing, however, to discuss such
complex questions, we must proceed to a preliminary
discussion of the properties in question, whicli may
thus perhaps be enumerated in the order of tluvir
importance ; —

1. Utility and value. 5. Divisibility.

2. Portability. 6. Stability of value.

3. Indestructibility. 7. Cognizability.

4. Homogeneity.


32


MONEY.


1. UtUity and Value.

Since money has to he exchanged for valuable goods,
it should itself possess value, and it must therefore have
utility as the basis of value. Money, when once in full
currency, is only received in order to he passed on, so
that if all people could be induced to take worthless bits
of material at a fixed rate of valuation, it might seem
that money does not really require to have substantial
value. Sometliing like this does frequently happen in
the history of cm’rencies, and apparently valueless shells,
bits of leather, or scraps of paper, are actually received
in exchange for costly commodities. This strange
phenomenon is, however, in most cases capable of easy
explanation, and if we were acquainted with the history
of every kind of money the like explanation would no
doubt be possible in other cases. The essential point' is
that people should be induced to receive money, and pass
it on freely at stc;ady ratios of exchange for other objects;
but there must always be some sufficient reason first
inducing people to accept the money. The force of
habit, convention, or legal enactment may do much to
maintain money in circulation when once it is afloat,
but it is doubtful whether the most powerful government
could oblige its subjects to accept and circulate as money
a woi-thless substance which they had no other motive
for receiving.

Certainly, in the early stages of society, the use of
money was not based on legal regulations, so that the
utility of the substance for other purposes must have


* QUALITIES OF THE MATERIAL OF MONEY. 33

been the i)rior condition of its employment as money.
Thus the singular currency, or wmnjnimpcaij, ^v]hch
w(is found in circulation among tlie North AmeiTcan
Indians by the early explorers, was esteemed foj- the
purj)ose of adornment, as already mentioned, (p. 24 ).
The cowry shells, so widely used as a small currency in
the East, areA^alued for ornamental purposes on the West
Coast of Africa, and were in all probability employed as
ornaments before tliey were tim2:)loyed as money. All
the other articles mentioned in Chaj)ter IV., such as
oxen, corn, skins, tobacco, salt, cacao nuts, etc., which
have pcu'formed the functions of money in one place or
other, 2)ossessed independent utility and value. If there
are any ap2>arent exceptions at all to this rule, they would
doubtless admit of exjdanation by fuller knowledge. We
may. therefore, agree with Storch when he says : — It
is ii.n2>ossible tliat a substance which has no direct value
should be introduced as money, however suitable it may
be in other respects for this use.”

When once a substance is widely employed as money,
it is conceivable that its utility will come to de2)end
mainly upon the services which it thus confers U2)on the
community. Gold, for instance, is far more important
as tlie material of money than in the production of 2ilate,
jewellery, watches, gold-leaf, etc. A substance originally
used for many 2Hir2Joses may eventually serve only as
money, and yet, by the demand for currency and the
force of habit, may maintain its value. The cowry cir-
culation of the Indian coasts is probably a case in 2)oint.
The importance of habit, j)erBonal or hereditary, is at


34


MONEY.


least as great in monetary science as it is, according
to Mr. Herbert Spencer, in morals and sociological
phenomena generally.

There is, however, no reason to suppose that the
value of gold and silver is at present due solely to their
conventional use as money. These metals are endowed
with such singularly useful properties that, if w^o could
only get tliem in sufficient abundance, tliey would sup-
plant all the other metals in the manufacdure of house-
hold utensils, ornaments, fittings of all kinds, and an
infinite multitude of small articles, which are now' made
of brass, copper, bronze, pewtt?r, German silver, or other
inferior metals and alloys.

In order that money may perform some of its
functions efficiently, especially those of a medium of ex-
change and a stove of value, to l>o carried about, it is
important that it should be made of a substaiKic valued
highly in all parts of the world, and, if possible, almost
ecpially esteemed by all peoples. There is reason to
think that gold and silver have been admired and valued
by all tribes which have been lucky (.mough to procure
them. The heaiitiful lustre of these metals must have
draw'n attention and excited admiration as much in the
earliest as in the present times.


2. Portahility,

The material of money must not only be valualde, but
the value must he so related to the w^eight and hulk of
the material, that the money shall not be inconveniently


QUALITIES OF THE MATERIAL OF MONEY.


35


lieavy on the one hand, nor inconveniently minute on the
other. There was a tradition in Greece tliat Lycurgus
obliged the Lacodajmonians to use iron money, in order
that its weight might deter them from overmuch trading.
However this may be, it is certain that iron money could
not be used in cash payments at the present day, since
a penny would weigh about a pomid, and instead of a
five-pound note, wo should have to (leliv(T a ton of
iron. During the last century copper was actually used
as the chief medium of exchange in Sweden; and
merchants had to take a whocJbaiTOw with them when
they went to receive payments in copper dalers. Many
of the sul)stanees used as cmTcncy in former times must
liave l)een sadly wanting in portal)ility. Oxcui and
slieep, indeed, would transport themselves on their own
legs; but corn, skins, oil, nuts, almonds, etc., tliough
in several respects forming fair currejuiy, would be
intolerably bulky, and troublesome to transfer.

The portability of momy is an important quality,
not merely })eeause it enabh^s the owner to carry small
sums in the pocket without trouble, but because large
sums (Tin be trjinsferred from place to ])lace, or from
continent to continent, at little cost. The result is to
secure an approximate uniformity in the value of monc'y
ill all parts of the world. A substance which is viay
heavy and bulky in proportion to valuta, like corn or
coal, may be very scarce in one place and over aljumhint
in another; yet the supply and demand cannot be
(Hiualized without great expense in carriage. Tiie cost
of conveying gold or silver from London to Paris,


86


MONEY.


including insurance, is only about four-tenths of one
per cent. ; ^ and between the most distant parts of the
world it does not exceed from two to three per cent.

Substances may be too valuable as well as too cheap,
so that for ordinary transactions it would be necessary
to call in the aid of the microscope and tlie chemical
balance. Diamonds, apart from other objections, would
be far too valuable for small transactions. The value
of such stones is said to vary as the square of the
■weight, so tliat we cannot institute any exact comparison
witli metaJs of which the value is simply proportional
to th(' weight. But taldng a one>carat diamond (four
grains) as worth .£15, we find it is, weight for weight,
460 times as valuahle as gold. There are several rare
metals, such as iridium and osmium, whicli would like-
wise he far too valuahle to circulate. Even gold and
silver are too costly for small currency. A silver penny
now wxighs 7.j: grains, and a gold penny would weigh
only half a grain. Q"he pretty octagonal quarter- dollar
tokens circulated in California are the smallest gohl
coins 1 have seen, weighing less than four grains each,
and are so thin that they can almost l)e blown away.

3. IndestnictUnlity,

If it is to he passed about in trade, and kept in
reserve, money must not be sulqcct to easy deteriora-
tion or loss. It must not evaporate like alcohol, nor
putrefy like animal substances, nor decay like wood,
nor rust like iron. Destructible ai-ticles, such as eggs,


QUALITIES OF THE MATERIAL OF MONEY.


37


dried codfish, cattle, or oil, have certainly hecn used
as currency; but what is treated as money one day
must soon afterwards be eaten up. Thus a largo stock
of such perishable commodities cannot be kept on hand,
and their value must be very variable. The several
kinds of corn are less subject to this objection, since,
when Avell dried at first, they suffer no appreciable
deterioration for several years.

4. nomogeneity,

‘ All portions or specimens of the substance used as
money sliould be homogeMCom, that is, of the same
quality, so that equal weights will have exactly the
same value. In order that wo may correctly count in
terms of any unit, the units must be equal and similar,
so that twice two will always make four. If we were
to count in precious stones, it would seldom happen
that four stones would be just twice as valuable as
two stones. Even the precious metals, as found in
the native state, are not perfectly homogeneous, being
mixed together in almost all proportions ; but this
produces little inconvenience, because the assayer readily
determines the quantity of each pure metal present in
any ingot. In the processes of refining and coining,
the metals are afterwards reduced to almost exactly
uniform degrees of fineness, so that equal weights are
then of exactly equal value.


38


MONEY.


5. DicislbiUty.

Closely connected with the last property is that of
divisibility. Every material is, indeed, mechanically
divisible, almost without limit. The hardest frems can
be broken, and steel can be cut l)y harder steel. But
the material of money should be not merely capable
of division, but the aggregate value of the mass
aft(n' division should be almost exactly the same as before
division. If we cut up a skin or fur the pieces will,
as a general rule, he far less valual)le tlian the whole
sliin or fur, except for a special intended purpose ; and
the same is the case with timber, stone, and most other
materials in which reixnion is imi)ossiblo. But portions
of metal can be melted together again wlienever it is
desirable, and the cost of doing this, including the metal
lost, is in tlie case of precious metals very inconsiderable,
varying from \f.L to Id. per ounce. Thus, approximately
speaking, the valno of any piece of gold or silver is
simply proportional to the wanght of lino metal which
it contains.


6. Stability of Value.

It is evidently desirable that the cnrrency should not
be subject to fluctuations of value. The ratios in which
money exchanges for other commodities should be main-
tained as nearly as possible invariable on the average.
This would be a matter of comparatively minor import-
ance were money used only as a measure of values at
any one moment, and as a mediflm of exchange. If all


QUALITIES OF THE MATERIAL OF MONEY. 39

prices were altered in like proportion as soon as money
varied in value, no one would lose or gain, except as
regards tlie coin wliicli lie happened to have in his pocket,
safe, or bank balance. But, practically speaking, as we
have seen, people do employ money as a standard of
value for long contracts, and they often maintain pay-
ments at the same invariable rate, by custom or law,
even when the real value of the payment is much
altered. Hence every change in the value of money does
some injury to soci(%.

It might b(' plausibly said, indeed, that the delator
gains as much as tlu> creditor loses, or rice versa, so that
on the whole the community is as rich as before ; l)ut
this is not really true. A mathematical analysis of tlu>
subject shows that to take any sum of money from one
and give it to another will, on the average of cases,
injure the loser more than it 1)onelits the receiver. A
person with an income of one hundred pounds a year
WTnild suffer more by losing ton pounds tlian ho would
gain by an addition of ton pounds, because the degree
of utility of money to him is considerably higher
at ninety pounds than it is at one hundred and ten.
On the same principle, all gaming, betting, pure
speculation, or other accidental modes of transferring
property involve, on the average, a dead loss of utility.
The whole incitement to industry and commerce and tlie
accumulation of capital depends upon the expectation of
enjoyment thence arising, and every variation of the
currency tends in some degi’ce to frustrate such expect-
ation and to lessen thg motives for exertion.


40


MONJiY.


7 . Cognizability.

By this name we may denote the capability of a sub-
stance for being easily recognized and distinguished
from all other substances. As a medium of exchange,
money has to be continually handed about, and it will
occasion great trouble if every person rectaving currency
has to scrutinize, weigh, and test it. If it re<piires any
skill to discriminate good money from bad, poor ignorant
people are sure to be inii)osed u])on. Hence the medium
of exchange should have certain distinct marks which
nobody can mistake. Precious stones, even if in other
respects good as money, could not be so used, because
only a sldlled lapidary can surely distinguish between
true and imitation gems.

Under cogniz ability we may properly include what
has been aptly called l^qm^ssihiUtij, namely, the capa-
Ihlity of a substance to receive such an impression, sc^al,
or design, as shall establish its character as current
money of certain value. We might more simply say,
that the material of money should be coinahh, so that
a portion, being once issued according to p;?!pper. regu-
lations witli the impress of the state, may Be known to
all as good and legal currency, equal in weight, size,
and value to all similarly marked currency. ' ''We shall
afterwards consider more minutely what is involved in
the manufacture of a good coin.


( 41 )


CHAPTEE VI.

THE METALS AS MONEY.

It need not be pointed out in detail that, though the
numerous commodities mentioned in Cliapter IV, pos-
sess, in a greater or less degree, the qualities essential
to the material of money, they cannot for a moment
compare in this respect with many of the metals. Some
of tlie metals seem to be marked out by nature as most
fit of all substances for employment as money, at least
when acting as a medium of exchange and a store of
value. Accordingly, we find that gold, silver, copper,
tin, lead, and iron have been more or less extensively in
circulation in all historical ages. So closely have silver
and copper become associated in people’s minds with
their use as money, that we find their names adopted as
the names of money. In Greek, apyvpo^' moans equally
silver, silver coin, and money generally ; in Latin, aes is
copper, bronze, or lirass, and also money and wages ; in
French, argent is both silver and money. The same
association of meanings could be pointed out in many
other languages^ including our own. Though our pence
are now made of bronze, w^e still speak of them as
coppers.


42


MONEY,


With the exception of iron, tlie principal metals are
peculiarly indestructihle, and undergo little or no dete-
rioration when hoarded up or handed about. Each
kind of metal is approximately homogeneous, piece
differing from piece in nothing but weight, the differences
of fineness being ascertained and allowed for in the case
of gold and silver. The metals are also perfectly divi-
sible, either by the chisel or the crucible, and yet a
second melting will always reunite tbo pieces again with
little cost or loss of material. Most of them possess the
ju’operties of cognlzahility and im2)rcssil)ility in the
highest degree. Each metal lias its characteristic
colour, density, and hardness, so that it is easy for a
person with very slight experience to distiiiguish one
metal from anotlier. Their malleability enables us to
roll, cut, and hammer them into any required form, and
to impress a permanent design by means of dies. Witli
the exception of porcelain coins, which have been used
in Siam, T am not aware that coins have ever been made
of any substance except metal.

In respect to steadiness of value the metals are prob-
ably less satisfactory, regarded as a standard of value,
than many other commodities, such as corn. From the
earliest ages metals must have been most liighly valued,
as we may learn from the way in which they are
esteemed by savages in the present day. But their
value has suffered and is suffering an almost continuous
decline, owing to the progress of industry, and the dis-
covery of new mechanical and chemical means for their
extraction. Even the order of their values becomes


THE METALS AS MONEY.


43


changed. According to Mr. Gladstone, iron was, in the
Homeric age, much more valued than chalkos, or copper,
which latter was then the most common and useful
metal. Lead w^as little known or valued, but gold,
silver, and tin held the same places at tlie head of the
list which they hold at the present day.

Iron.

Proceeding to consider briefly each of the more im-
portant ineta-ls, the statements of Avistotk*, Pollux, and
other writers prove tliat iron was extensively employed
as money in early times. Not a singles specimen of such
money is now known to exist, but tliis is easily accountc'd
for by the rapidity with which the metal rusts. In the
absence oi specimens, we do not know the form and
sii^e of tli(^ money, hut it is prohablo that it consisted of
small bars, ingots, or spikes, somewhat similar to the
small l)a]‘S of iron which are still used in tradiiig with
the natives of Central Africa. Iron money is still, or
was not long since, used in Japan for small values; hut
its issue from the mint has been discontinued.

The use of pure iron coins in civilized countries at the
present day is out of the question, both because of the
cheapness of the metal, and hecause the coins would
soon lose tlie sharpness of their impressions by rusting,
and become dirty and easily counterfeited. But it is
quite possible that iron or steel might still be alloyed
with other metals for the coining of pence.


44


MONEY.


Lead,

Lead has often been used as currency, and is occasion-
ally so mentioned by the ancient Greek and Latin poets.
In 1685 leaden bullets were used for change at the rate
of a farthing a piece in Massachusetts. At the present
day it is still current in Burmah, being passed by weight
for small payments. Tiio extreino softness of the metal
obviously renders it cpiite unfit for coining in the pure
state. It is one of the components of pew4cr, which
has frequently been coined.


Tin,

Tin has also been employed as money at various times.
Dionysius of Syracuse issued the c^diiiest tin coinage of
which anything is certainly known ; l)ut as tin was in
early times procured from Cornwall, it can hardly be
doubted that the first British currency was composed of
tin. In innumerable cabinets may bo found series of tin
coins issued by the Eoman emperors; the kings of
England also often coined tin. In 1680 tin farthings
were struck by Charles 11. , a stud of copper being in-
serted in the middle of the coin to render counterfeiting
more difficult. Tin halfpence and farthings were also
issued in considerable quantities in the reign of William
and Mary (1690 to 1691). Tin coins were formerly em-
ployed among the Javanese, Mexicans, and many other
peoples, and the metal is said to be still cmTent by
w^eight in the Straits of Malacca.


THE MRT.VLS AS MONEY.


45


Till would lie in many respects admirably suited for
making pence, possessing a fine white colour, perfect
fr('(jdom from corrosion, and a much higher value than
copper. Unfortunately, its softness and tendency to
bend and break when pure are insuperable olistacles
to its employment as money.

Copper.

This metal is in many respects well suited for coining.
It does not suffer from exposure to dry air, possesses a
line distinct red colour, and tak(\s a good impression from
tlie dies, which impression it retains better than the
majority of other metals. Accordingly, we find that it
has been continually employed as currency, either alone
or in subordination to gold and silver. The earliest
Hebrew coins were composed chiefly of copper, and the
metallic currency of Home consisted of the impure
copper, called acs, until b.c. 269, when silver was first
coined. In later times copper has not only been gem'vally
used for coins of minor value, but, in Russia and in
Sweden, a hundred years ago, it formed the principal
mass of the currency. Its low value now sta,nds in the
way of its use. A penny, if made so as to'contain metal
equivalent to its nominal value, would weigh 870 grains,
or more than an ounce and three-quarters troy. Its
value is also subject to considerable fluctuations.
Moreover, it is unlikely that copper in a pure state
will be coined for the future, since bronze is now known
to be so much more suitable for coinage.


46


MONEY.


Silver.

I need hardly say that silver is distinguished by its
exciuisito Avliitc lustre, wliicli is not rivalled by that of any
other pure metal. Certain alloys, indeed, such as
speculum metal, or Britannia metal, liave been made
of almost equal lustre, but they are either brittle, or
so soft as not to give the metallic ring of silver. When
much exposed to the air silver tarnishes bytlie formation
of black film of silver sulphide ; but this forms no
obstacle to its use as ciuTonc}', since the film is always
very thin, and its peculiar blac^k coloiir even assists in
distinguishing the pure metal from counterfeit. When
suitably alloyed, silver is sufficiently hard to stand much
w'car, and next after gold it is the most malleable and
impressible of all the metals.

A ('.oin or othvx obji'ct made of silver may be known
by tlie folloAving marks : — (1) a fine pure white lustre,
where newly rublx'd or scraped ; (2) a Ifiackish tint where
the surface has long been exposed to tlio air; (6) a
moderate' specific gravity ; (4) a good metallic ring when
tlirowii down; (5) considerable hardness; (G) strong
nitric acid dissolves silver, and the solution turns black
if (exposed to light.

Silver has been coined, it need hardly bo said, in all
ages since the first invention of the art, and its value
relatively to gold and copper suits it for taking the middle
place in a momdary system. Its value too remains very
stable for periods of fifty or a hundred years, because avast
stock of the metal is kept in the form of plate, watches,


THE METALS AS MONEY.


47


jewellery, and ornaments of various kinds, in addition to
money, so that a variation in the supply for a few years
cannot make any appreciable change in tlie total stock.
Productive silver mines exist in almost all parts of the
world, and wherever lead is produced, a small but
steady yidd of silver is obtained from it by the Pattin-
son method of extraction.


GohL

Silver is beautiful, yet gold is even morci l)eautiful,
and presents indei'd a combination of useful and striking
properties quite without parallel among known substances.
To a ricli and bjilliant y(3llow colour, wliicli enn only be
adequ;i,i(.‘ly described as golden, it joins astonisljing mal-
leability and a Y(?ry high specific gravity, exceeded only
l)y that of platinum Jind a few of tlie rarest or almost
unknown jnetals. We can usually ascertain whetlu'r a
coin (joiisists of gold or not, by looking for tliree (djarac-
teristic marks : (1) tlie brilliant yellow colour ; (2) tlie
high specific gravity; (3) the metallic ring of tlie coin
when thrown down, which will prove the absence of lead
or platinum in the interior of the coin.

If there remain any doubt about a metal being gold,
we have only to appeal to its solubility. Gold is remark-
able for its freedom from corrosion or solution, bijiiig
quite unaffected and untarnished after exposure of any
length of time to dry, or moist, or impure) air, and being
also insoluble in all the simple acids. Strong nitric
acid will rapidly attack any coloured counterfeit metal,


48


MONEY.


but will not touch standard gold, or will, at the most,
feebly dissolve the copper and silver alloyed with it.

In almost all respects gold is perfectly suited for
coining. When quite pure, indeed, it is almost as soft
as tin, but when alloyed witli one-tenth or one-twelfth
part of copper, becomes sufficiently hard to resist wear
and tear, and to give a good metallic ring ; yet it remains
perfectly malleable and takes a fine impression. Its
melting point is moderately high, and yt^t there is no
perceptible oxidization or volatilization of the metal at
the highest temperature which can be produced in a
furnace. Tims old coin and fragments of the metal
can be melted into bullion a.t a very slight loss, and at a
cost of not more than one halfpenny per ounce troy, or
little more than one-twentieth of one per cent.

Platvmun.

This is one of those comparatively rare metals which
have been known only in recent tiiiKiS. Its extremely
high melting-point, and low affinity for oxygen, render it
one of the most indestructible of all substances, whilst its
white colour, joined to its excessively high specific gravity,
are marks which cannot be mistaken. As it seemed in
these respects well suited for currency, the Russian
government, which owns the principal platinum mines in
the Ural mountains, commenced to coin it, in 1828, into
pieces intended to have the values of twelve, six, and three
roubles. Several objections to this use of the metal soon
presented themselves. The appearance of platinum


THE METALS AS MONEY.


49


being inferior to that of silver or gold, it is seldom
or never employed for purposes of ornament, and its only
extensive use is in the construction of chemical apparatus.
Hence there is no large stock of the metal kept on hand,
and the localities where it is found being few, the supply
is incapable of being much increased, so that any varia-
tion of doraand is sure to cause a great change in its
value. Moreover, the cost of making the coins was very
great, owing to the extreme diJBSculty of melting pla-
tinum, and the worn coins could not be withdrawn and
recoined, without much additional cost. Platinum boin^
thus found to be quite unfitted for currency, tluj scheme
was abandoned in 1845, and the existing coins withdrawn
from circulation. •

Great improvements having been lately made in the
modes of w-orking platinum, it was proposed by M. do
Jacobi, the representative of Russia at the International
Monetary Conference held at Paris, in 1867, that
platinum should l)e employed for the coinage of five-
franc pieces. It is not likely that such a suggestion
will be adopted.

Nickel.

This metal was formerly regarded as the bane of the,
metallurgist, but has recently assumed an important
place in manufacturing industry, and even in monetary
science. It is used only in alloy wdth other metals, and
for the purposes of coinage it is usual to melt up one
part of nickel with three of copper. The smaller coins
of Belgium, and the one-cent pieces of the United States

E


50


MONEY.


have been made of this material and seem to be very
convenient. In 1869 and 1870-1, pence and halfpence,
to the value of £3000, were esecutcd in the same
alloy, at the English mint, for the colony of Jamaica.
These are some of the most beautiful coins which have
ever been issued from Tower Hill, and are in most
respects admirably suited for circulation. But they were
unfortunately made much too large and heavy ; not
only were they thus rendered loss convenient, but when
in 1873, the Deputy Master of tlie Mint was requested to
supply a further quantity of the same coins, he found
that the price of nickel had risen very much, so that the
materials for the coinage alone would cost more than
the nominal valuo of the coins to be produced. This
rise in price was due partly to the small number of
nickel mines yet worked, and partly to the great demand
for the metal occasioned by the German government,
which has chosen the same aUoy for the ton and five-
pfennig pieces of its new monetary system. These coins,
which are now being issued, are of a convenient size,
rather less than a shilling and sixpence respectively, and
appear to be in every way admii-ably suited to their
purpose. The German empire will soon possess the
best instead of the worst fractional currency in the
world. The variableness in the price of nickel, which is
at present a cause of embarrassment, may after a time
become less serious, when the stock in use and the
annual produce become larger.


THE METALS AS MONEY.


51


Other Metals.

The metals yet mentioned are but a small number of
those now known by chemists to exist, and it would bo
unwise to assume as certain that money must always be
made in the future of the same materials as in the past.
I t is just conceivable, on the one liand, that in the course
of time, some metal still more valuable tliaii gold maybe
introduced. Itoughly speaking, the order in which the
metals have hitherto acted, as the principal medium of
(exchange, is (1) copper, (2) silver, (3) gold ; as a general
decline in the values of tlie metals took place, the
more valuable replaced the less valuable, and the more
portable gold is now rajndly taking the place of silver.
Some still more valuable metal, such as the scarce and
intractable iridium or osmium, or the remarkable metal
palladium, might possibly take the place of gold. This,
liowever, is barely more than a matter of scientific fancy.

On the other hand, many metals exist whicli might
be produced more cheaply than silver, such as aluminium
or manganese. It may be well worthy of inquiry
whether in such metals may not be found the best solu-
tion of the fractional currency difficulty, to be afterwards
more fully discussed (p. 132).

Alloys of Metals.

At one time or another an immense number of
different alloys or mixtures of metals have been coined.
It would be strictly correct to say, indeed, that metals


62


MONEY.


have seldom been issued except in the state of alloy.
Even gold and silver, as usually coined, are either
alloyed with each other or with copper. The latter
metal, too, has generally been employed in union with
other metals. The Eoman as consisted, not of pure
cop2)er, but of the mixed metal acs, an alloy of coi)i)er
and tin, partially resembling the bronze which has quite
recently been introduced for small money in France,
England, and other countries. Brass was largely coined
by some of the Roman emperors. In many cases, no
doubt, the early metallurgists in smelting an ore obtained
a natural aUoy of all the metals contained therein, and
being unable to separate them were obliged to use
the mixture. Thus we may explain the curious metal
containing from sixty to seventy parts of copper, twenty
to twenty-five of zinc, five to eleven of silver, with small
quantities of gold, lead, and tin, wdiich was employed to
make the stycas, or small money, of the early Idngs of
Northumbria.

Monarch s or states in difficulty have often coined the
metal which they could most easily obtain. The Irish
money issued by James II. was said to have been coined
from a mixture of old guns, broken bells, waste copper,
brass, and pewter, old kitchen furniture, and in fact any
refuse metal which his officers could lay their hands
upon. He attemj)ted to make pewter crowns circulate
for the value of silver ones.


( 58 )


CHAPTEE VIL

COIxVS.

It is clear that the inctals far surpass all other sub-
stances in suitability for the purpose of circulation, and
it is almost equally clear that certain metals surpass all
the other metals in this respect. Of gold and silver
especially we may say, with Turgot, that, by the nature
of things, they are constituted tlie universal money inde-
pendently of all convention and law^ Even if tlie art of
coining had never been invented, gold and silver would
probably have formed the currency of the world ; but we
hiive no^v to consider how, by sliaping weighed pieces
of these metals into coins, we can make use of their
valuable properties to the greatest advantage.

The primitive mode of circulating the metals, indeed,
was simply that of buying and selling them against
other commodities, the weights or portions being rudely
estimated. Some of the earliest specimens of money
consist of the aes rude, or rough, shapeless lumps of
native copper employed as money by the ancient
Etruscans. In the Museum of the Archiginnasio at
Bologna may be seen the skeleton of an Etruscan, half


54


MONEY.


embedded in earth, with the piece of rough copper
yet within the grasp of the bony hand, placed there
to meet the demands of Charon. Pliny, moreover, tells
us that, before the time of Servius Tullius, copper was
circulated in the rude state. Afterwards copper, brass,
or iron were, it is probable, employed in the form
of small bars or spikes, and the name of the Greek unit
of value, drachma, is supposed to have been derived
from tlie fact that six of these metal spikes could bo
grasped in the hand, each piece being called an obolus.
Such is supposed to iiave been the first system of money
which was passed purely by tale, or number of pieces.

Gold is most readily o])tained from alluvial deposits,
and then has the form of grains or dust. Hence this
is tlie primitive form of gold money. The ancient
Peruvians enclosed the gold dust for the sake of security
in quills, and thus passed it about more conveniently.
At the gold diggings of California, Australia, or New
Zealand, gold dust is to the present day sold directly
against other goods by the aid of scales. The art of
melting gold and silver, and fashioning them by the
hammer into various shapes was early invented. Even
in the present day the poor Hindoo, who has saved up
a few rupees, employs a silversmith to melt them up
and beat them into a simple bracelet, which he wears
in the double character of an ornament and a hoard of
wealth.

Similarly, the ancient Goths and Celts were accus-
tomed to fashion gold into thick wires, which they rolled
up into spiral rings and probably wore upon their fingers


COINS.


55


until the metal was wanted for trading purposes. There
can be little doubt that this ring money, of which
abundant specimens have been found in various parts
of Europe and Asia, formed the first approximation to
a coinage. In some cases the rings may have been
intentionally made of equal weight; for Ciesar speaks
of the Britons as having ii:on rings, adjusted to a certain
weiglit, to servo as money. In other cases the rings, or
amulets, were boiiglit and sold by aid of the balance;
and in certain Egyptian paintings men are represented
as in the act of weighing rings. It is probable that
the necessity for frequent weighings was avoided by
making up sealed bags containing a ceidain weiglit of
rings, and such perhaps are the bags of silver given by
Naaman to Gehazi in the Second Book of Kings (v. 213).
King money is said to be still current in Nubia.

Gold and silver have been fashioned into various other
forms to serve as money. Thus the Siamese money
consists of very small ingots or bars bent double in a
peculiar manner. In Pondicherry and elsewhere gold is
circulated in the form of small grains or buttons.


Invention of Coining,

The date of the invention of coming can be as-
signed with some degree of probability. Coined money
was clearly unknown in the Homeric times, and it was
known in the time of Lycurgus. We might therefore
assume, with various authorities, that it was invented in
the mean time, or about 900 b.c. There is a tradition,


56


MONEY.


moreover, that Pheidon, King of Argos, first struck silver
money in the island of ^gina about 895 b.c., and the
tradition is supported by the existence of small stamped
ingots of silver, which have been found in ^gina. Later
inquiries, however, lead to the conclusion that Pheidon
lived in the middle of the eighth century u.c., and Grotc
has shown good reasons for believing that what ho did
accomplish was done in Argos, and not in .®gina.

The mode in which the invention happened is suffi-
ciently evident. Seals were familiarly employed m very
early times, as we learn from the Egyptian paintings or
the stamped bricks of Nineveh. Being employed to
signify possession, or to ratify contracts, they came to
indicate authority. When a ruler first undertook to
certify the weights of pieces of metal, he naturally em-
ployed his seal to make the fact knowoj, just as, at
Goldsmiths’ Hall, a small punch is used to certify the
fineness of plate. In the earliest forms of coinage there
were no attempts at so fashioning the metal that its
weight could not be altered without destroying the
stamp or design. The earliest coins struck, both in
Lydia and in the Peloponnesus, were stamped on one
side only. The Persian money, called the lann, consists
of a round silver wire, about six centimetres long, bent
in two, and stamped on one part which is flattened for
the purpose. It is probably a relic of ring money.
The present circixlation of China is comimsed to a con-
siderable extent of the so-called Sycee silver, which con-
sists of small shoe-shaped ingots, assayed aqd stamped,
according to some accounts, by the government.


COINS.


57


What is a Coin ?

Although, in rings, grains, or stamped ingots, we have
an approximation to what we call coin, it is plain that
we must do something more to make convenient money.
The stamp must be so impressed as to certify, not only
the fineness and the original weight, but also the
absence of any subsequent alteration. To coin metal,
as we now understand the art, is to form it into flat pieces
of a circular, oval, square, hexagonal, octagonal, or other
regular outline, and then to impress designs from en-
graved dies upon both sides, and sometimes upon the
edges. Not only is it very costly and difficult to counter-
feit coins well executed in this manner, but the integrity
of the design assures us that no owner of the coin
has tampered with it. Even the amount of ordinary
wear and tear, which tlie coin has suffered, may be rudely
inferred from tlie sharpness or partial efi’acement of the
designs, and the roundness of the edges. “ Pieces of
money,” says M. Chevalier, “are ingots of whicli the
weight and the fineness are certified.” There is nothing
in this definition to distinguish coins from Sycce silver,
or from the ordinary stamped bars and ingots of bullion.
I should prefer, therefore, to say, coins are ingots of
whicli the weight and Jineness are certified Inf the integrity
of designs impressed upon the surfaces of the metaL

Various Forms of Coins,

From time to time coins have been manufactured in
very many forms, although circular coins vastly predomi-


68


MONEY.


nate in niiniber. Among the innumerable issues of the
German states may be found octagonal and hexagonal
coins. A singular square coin, with a circular impress
in the centre, was issued from Salzburg by Eudbert in
1513. Siege-pieces have been issued in England and
elsewhere in the form of squares, lozenges, etc. Some of
the most extraordinary specimens of money ever used
arc the largo plates of pure copper which circulated in
Sweden in the eighteenth century. These were about
three-eighths of an inch in thicloiess, and varied in size,
the half-daler being 3| inches square, and the two-daler
piece as much as 7|- inches square, and 3J pounds in
weight. As the whole surface could not bo covered witli
a design, a circular impress was struck near to cacli
corner, and one in the centre, so as to render alteration
as difficult as possible.

Among Oriental nations the shapes of coins are still
more curious. In Japan, the principal part of the cir-
culation consists of silver itzibas, which are oblong, flat
pieces of silver, covered on both sides with designs and
legends, the characters being partly in relief and partly
incised. The smaller silver coins have a similar form.
Among the minor Japanese coins are found large, oval,
moulded pieces of copper or mixed metal, each with a
square hole in the centre. The Chinese cash are well
known to be round discs of a kind of brass, with a square
hole in the centre to allow of their being strung together.
The coins of Formosa are similar, except that they are
much larger and thicker. All the copper and base metal
coins of China, Japan, and Formosa are distinguished by


COINS.


59


a broad flat rim, and they have characters in relief upon
a sunk ground, somewhat in the manner of Boulton and
Watt’s copper pence. They are manufactured by mould-
ing the metal, and then filing the protuberant parts
smooth. Such coins stand wear, and preserve their
design better than European coins, but they are easily
counterfeited.

Tlie most singular of all coins are the scimitar- shaped
pieces formerly circulated in Persia.

The best Form for Coins,

It is a matter of considerable importance to devise
the best possible form for coins, and the best mode of
striking them. Tlui use of money creates, as it were,
an artificial crime of false coining, and so great is the
temptation to engage in this illicit art that no penalty is
sufficient to repress it, as the experience of two thousand
years sufficiently proves. Thousands of persons have
suffered death, and all the penalties of treason have
been enforced without effect. Ending is then unqucistion-
ably right in saying, that our efforts should be directed
Jiot so much to the punishment of the crime, as to its
prevention by improvements in the art of coining. We
must strike our coins so perfectly that successful imita-
tion or alteration shall be out of the question.

There are four principal objects at which we should
aim in deciding upon the exact design for a coin.

1. To prevent counterfeiting.

2. To prevent the fraudulent removal of metal from
the coin.


GO


MONEY.


3, To reduce the loss of metal by legitimate wear
and tear.

4. To make the coin an artistic and historical monu-
ment of the state issuing it, and the people using it.

For the prevention of counterfeiting, our principal re-
source is to render the mechanical execution of the piece
as perfect as possible, and to strike it in a way which can
only be accomplished with the aid of elaborate maeliinery.
When all coins wore made by easting, the false coiner
could work almost as skilfully as the moneyer. Hence,
in the Eoman empire, it was difficult to distinguish
between true and false coin. Ilainnurcd money was a
groat improvement on moulded money, and milled money
on hammered money. The introduction of the steam
coining press by Boulton and Watt was the n(‘xt great
improvement; and the knee-joint press of Ulhorn and
Thonnelier, now used in nearly all mints, except that on
Tower Hill, forms the last advance in the mechanism
for striking coin.

The utmost attention ought to be paid to the perfect
execution of the milling, legend, or other design, impressed
upon the edge of modern coins. This serves at once to
I)r event clipping or tampering with the coin, and to
baffle the skill of the counterfeiter. The coins of ancient
nations were issued with rough, unstamped edges, and
the first coin marked with a legend on the edge was a
silver coin of Charles IX. of France, issued in the year
1573. The English coinage was first grained or marked
on the edge in 1658 or 1662, when the use of the mill
and screw was finally established in the mint. All the


COINS.


61


larger coins now issued from the English, and, indeed,
from most other mints, bear a milled or serrated edge,
produced by ridges on the internal surface of the collar
which holds the coin when being strack between the two
dies. These collars are difficult to make, and useless when
made except in the coining-press, and the counterfeiter
cannot imitate the milling by hand work, it being almost
impossible to use a file with suflieient regularity.

The French five-franc pieces bear a legend on the
edge in raised letters, the words being “ Dieu protege la
France.” Such raised letters sire (piitc beyond the art
of the counterfeiter. The English crown has a legend,
“Decus et Tutamcn,” and the year of tlie reign in
incised letters, which could obviously be imitated by the
use of punches. The new German gold coins are issued
with smooth edges, the ten-mark piece having only
a few slight incised marks, and the twenty-mark
piece bearing the legend, “Gott mit uns,” in faint
letters ; this is surely a far less satisfactory pro-
tection than the milled edge adopted in most other
mints. It may be worthy of inquiry, whether the milled
edge might not bo combined with a legend or other design
in relief, so as to render imitation still more difficult.
One or two centuries ago, silver coins used to have a
kind of ornamental beading on the edge. Elaborate
patterns, produced by machinery with perfect regularity,
and altogether incapable of imitation by hand, might now
bo substituted.


62


MONEY.


Coins as Works of Art.

I have in the previous section considered the best form
of a coin as regards the prevention of counterfeiting.
The falsification of coins, the loss which they undergo
by abrasion, and tlie best means of avoiding these evils
will be treated in Chapter XTIT. Of the use of coins as
artistic medals it would not be appropriate to speak at
any length. I must however remark that many of the
coins still issued from the English mint are monuments
of had taste. It is difficult to imagine poorer designs
than those upon the shilling and sixpence, descending
from a time when art in many branches was at its
apogee in England. As our architecture and art manu-
factures of many kinds are regenerated by the efforts of
private persons, is it too much to hope that a govern-
ment department will follow ? The florin is indeed an
immense advance upon the shilling, being in some
respects a reversion to the style of old English money.
A very beautiful pattern crown piece was produced in
1847 , in a somewliat similar style, but never issued,
Mr. Lowe, when Master of the Mint, gave us back the
old George and Dragon sovereign, which is much
superior to the shield and wreaths. I think, however,
that the time has come for a general improvement in
our coins.


Historical Coins.

Some states have utilized their coins as monuments
of important events, such as conquests, jubilees, the acces-


COINS.


63


sion of monarchs, etc. The German states, especially
Prussia, have struck a long series of beautiful coins
down to the Kronung’s Thaler of 1861, and the Sieges
Thaler of 1871. Some of these coins are at once
treasured up, in cabinets in the manner of medals. If it
is possible to conceive literature destroyed, and modern
cities and their monuments in ruins and decay, such
medallic coins would become the most durable memorials,
and the history of tlie kings of Prussia would be traced
out by future numismatists as that of the great
dynasties of llactria has lately been recovered.

In 1842 M. Antenor Joly brought bedore the French
legislative cham])ers a scheme for a system of historical
money, and he renewed liis proposal in 1852. M. Ernest
Dumas has also suggested the issue of twenty-centime
bronze pieces, which should servo cither as money or as
historical medals. Such schemes have not been carried
out in France, and in England no coins of the sort
have been struck. Except the more expense of a new set
of dies, I sec no objection to th(‘ issue of historical money.


The Royal Attribute of Coininy,

Every civilized community requires a supply of well-
executed coins, and there arises the question, How shall
this money be provided ? The coins of each denomina-
tion must contain exactly equal weights of fine metal,
and must bear an impress proving that they do so. Can
we trust to the ordinary competition of manufacturers
and traders to keep up a sufficient supply of such coins,


64


MONEY.


just as they supply buttons or pins and needles? Or
must we establish a government department, under
strict legislative control, to secure good coinage?

As almost every opinion finds some advocate, there
arc not wanting a few who believe that cc^nage should
be left to the free action of competition. Mr. Herbert
Spencer especially, in his Social Statics,” advanced
the doctrine that, as wo trust the grocer to furnish us
with pounds of tea, and the baker to send us loaves of
bread, so we might trust Heaton and Sons, or some of
the other enterprising firms of Birmingham, to supply
us witli sovereigns and shillings at their own risk and
profit. He lield that just as people go l)y preference to
the grocer who sells good tea, and to tlio baker whosc^
loaves Jirc sound and of full weiglit, so the lionest and
successful coiner would gain possession of the market,
and his money would drive out inferior productions.

Though I must always deeply respect the opinions of
so profound a thinker as Mr. Spencer, I hold tliat in tins
instance he has pushed a general princi2)lo into an ex-
ceptional case, where it quite fails. He has overlooked
the important law of Gresham (to be exjdained in the
next chapter), that bettor money cannot drive out Avorse.
In matters of currency self-interest acts in the opposite
direction to what it does in other affairs, as will be ex-
Ijlained, and if coining .were left free, those Avho sold
light coins at reduced prices Avould drive the best trade.

Thi^ conclusion is amply confirmed by experience ; for
at many times and places coins have been issued by
private manufacturers, and always with the result of


COINS.


65


debasing the currency. For a long time tlie copper
currency of England consisted mainly of tradesmen’s
tokens, which were issued very light in weight and ex-
cessive in number. In Mr. Smiles’ Lives of Boulton and
Watt” (p. 391), there is j)rinted an interesting letter, in
which Boulton complains that in his journeys he received
on an average at the toll-gates two counterfeit pennies for
one true one. The lower class of manufacturers, ho says,
purchased copper coin to the nominal value of thirty-six
shillings for twenty shillings in silver, and distributed it to
their work-people in wages, so as to make a considerable
p»rolit. The multitude of these depreciated pieces in
circulation was so great, that the magistrates and in-
habitants of Stock 2 )ort held a public meeting, and resolved
to take no lialf 2 )eneo in future but those of the Anglesey
Company, which were of full weight. This shows, if
proof were needed, that the se 2 )aratc action of self-interest
was inoperative in keeping bad coin out of circulation,
and it is not to bo supposed that the public meeting could
have had any sufficient effect. In China the current
small money called cash or le, is commonly manu-
factnred hy imvatc coiners, and the consequence is that
the size, quality, and value of the coins have fallen very
much.

Ill my opinion there is nothing less fit to be left to
the action of comjictition than money. In constijtiitibnal
law the right of coining has always been held to,^e one
of the pecTiliar prerogatives of the Crown, and it is ^
maxim of the civil law, that monetandi jm imndpum.
ossibus inhoeret To the executive government artd its


66


MONEY.


scientific advisers, who have minutely inquired into the
intricacies of the subject of currency and coinage, the
matter had better be left. It should as far as possible
be removed from the sphere of party straggles or public
opinion, and confided to the decision of experts. No
doubt, in times past, kings have been the most notorious
false coiners and depreciators of the currency, but there
is no danger of the like being done in modern times.
The danger lies quite in the opposite direction, that
popular governments will not venture upon the most
obvious and necessary improvement of the monetary
system without obtaining a concurrence of popular opinion
in its favour, wliile the people, influenced by habit, and
with little Imowlodge of the subject, will never be able to
agree upon the best scheme.


( 67 )


CHAPTER VIII.

THE PlllNCirLES OF CIKCULATION.

Before proceeding to consider the actual monetary
systems adopted by tnodern or ancient nations, it is
desirable to dwell for a short time upon the different
meanings which may bo attributed to tlio word vionejijy
and upon the natural principles which govern the use
and circulation of coins. We must, in the first place,
distinguish three things which, in the practical working
of a currency system, are often separate, namely, the
actual coins employed, the numbers by whicli they are
expressed, and the relation of those numbers to the
assumed unit of value. We must further distinguish
coins according as their values depend upon the metal
they contain, the metal for which they can he exchanged,
or the other coins for which they are the legal equivalent.

The Standard Unit of Value,

It is essential, in the first place, to decide clearly
what we mean by a standard unit of value. This must
consist of a fixed quantity of some concrete substance,


68


MONEY.


defined by reference to the units of weight or space.
Value may seem to some people to be a purely mental
phenomenon, and a pound would then have to be defined,
as Lord Castlereagh asserted, by a se?ise of value. But
we might as well define a yard by a sense of length, or a
grain by a sense of weight. cTust as every quantity in
physical science is defined by reference to some concrete
standard specimen, so, if we are to measure and express
value at all, we must fix upon definite quantities of one
or more definite and unchangeable commodities for the
purpose.

The expression, standard tinit of value, will indeed be
almost inevitably misunderstood as implying the exist-
ence of something of fixed value. As' we have seen,
however (p. 11), value merely expresses the essentially
variable ratio in which two commodities exchange, so
that there is no reason to suppose that any substance
does for two days together retain the same valu^ All
that a standard of value means is, that some uniform
unchangeable substance is chosen, in terms of which all
ratios of exchange may be expressed and calculated,
without any regard whatever to the feelings or mental
phenomena which the commodities produce in men. For
reasons already stated, one or other of the metals, gold,
silver, or copper, has usually been considered most
suitable for constituting the standard substance.

The absolute weight or magnitude of the unit of
money is a matter of little or no importance, provided
that all people agree upon the same imit, and that it
be permanently and exactly defined, and afterwards


THE PRINCIPLES OF CIRCULATION.


69


adhered to. Before the English yard was fixed, it would
not have mattered whether it was a few inches longer
or shorter ; it does not matter, indeed, whether the inch,
the foot, the furlong, or the mile is the unit, provided
that one of them is definitely fixed, and the others
referred to it by known ratios. So, it is really indifferent
whether we regard the pound troy of standard gold, or
the ounce, or the fixed number of grains in the sovereign,
as our standard. It is only requisite that every contract
expressed in money shall enable us to ascertain exactly
how much standard gold is due Irom one person to
another.

M. Chevalier and some other continental economists
have argued elaborately in favour of a universal standard
unit of value, coinciding with the metric system of
weights. They wish the unit of value to be ten grams
of gold exactly, and seem to think that there is some
iiiagidal efficacy in the correspondence of money and
weights. This correspondence might perhaps be a slight
convenience to those bullion dealers who have to calcu-
late the metallic value of coins before melting or export-
ing them, or to those mint officials who have to adjust
and tost the weights of coins; to all other i)orsons it would
be a matter of complete indiffereiice. Those who use
coins in ordinary business need never inquire how much
metal they contain. Probably not one person in ten
thousand in this kingdom knows, or need know% that a
sovereign should contain 123’27447 grains of standard
gold. Besides, if we agree to accept a precise metrical
quantity of one metal as our standard, the weights of


70


MONEY.


the coins composed of other metals will be complicated
fractional amounts, to be determined with reference to
the accidental market values of the metals.

All we can say, then, is that the standard unit of value
is some entirely arbitrary weight of the standard metal,
the exact amount of which, being a matter of indiffer-
ence on general grounds, should be fixed as seems most
convenient in reference to the habits of nations or other
accidental circumstances.


Coin^ Moneif of Account^ and Unit of Value.

It is desirable to distinguish clearly between three
things which, although definitely related to each other,
need not bo identical. The unit of value, or standard
weight of the selected metal, is not necessarily made into
a coin. It may bo a quantity too great or too small for
coining. All that is requisite is that the current coins
shall be multiples or submultiides of the unit, or
easily expressible in terms of the unit. Nor is it even
requisite that the numbers in which we oxpi’css value
should be numbers of coins, or numbers of units of value.
The money of account, as it is called, may differ both
from the current money and the standard money.
This is well illustrated in the Anglo-Saxon system of
currency. The unit of value was the Saxon pound of
standard silver, which was far too large to be coined.
The only coins issued in any considerable quantity by
the Anglo-Saxon kings, were silver pennies and a few
lialfpennies ; yet the usual money of account was the


THE PRINCIPLES OF CIRCULATION.


71


shilling, which, after varying from four to five pence,
was fixed by William I. at twelve pence, as it has ever
since continued. No coin called a shilling was issued
before the reign of Henry VIL Though the shilling
has survived, other moneys of account have been for-
gotten, as, for instance, the rnancm, which was equal to
thirty pennies, or six shillings of five pence each. The
wark, the ora, and the thrirnsa were other moneys of
account used by the Anglo-Saxons.

In our present English system the three moneys
happen to coincide, which is doubtless a matter of some
convenience. The sovereign is at once^ the principal
coin, the unit of value, and the money of account in
all the larger transactions, although in the expression
of smaller sums the shilling is yet preferred. In France
at the present time the money of account and the unit of
value is the franc in gold; but as this weighs only
0‘3226 gram, or about five gi-ains, it is coined only in
five, ten, and twenty-franc gold pieces, wuth subsidiary
silver coins. In Russia, before the time of Peter the
Great, the rouble was an imaginary money of account,
consisting of one hundred copper copecks.

When Montesquieu affirmed that the negroes on the
West Coast of Africa had a purely ideal sign of value
called a maaite, he misunderstood the nature of money
of account. The macute served with the negroes as
the name for a definite, though probably a variable,
number of cowry shells, the number being at one time
2000. The macute has also been coined in silver pieces
of eight, six, and four macutes, struck by the Portuguese


72


MONEY.


for use in their colonies, the macute being worth about

2J^^.

When the currency of a country undergoes a change,
the units of coinage, account and value are likely to
become separated. Sometimes a new system of accounts
is applied to an old coinage, as in Norway at the present
time. The Stockholm government is endcavoiu’ing to
introduce the Swedish decimal system of currency, and
some merchants are said already to keep their accounts
in kroner and ore, although the money in circulation
consists almost wholly of the old skillings and the paper
specie-dalcrs. On the other hand, the coinage is some-
times changed, and yet the old method of accounts
retained, especially as regards foreign transactions.
Thus the rates of foreign excliange between the United
States and England were, until last year, quoted in
terms oii a dollar valued at 4.s\ 6d., in accordance with
a law^ of 1789. This rate seems to have been the tra-
ditional par of excliange of the Mexican dollar, and it
was still retained even when the American dollar had
been coined so as to be Avorth only 49*316 English
pence.

There are t^vo causes which have often led to a
difference betw^een coinage and money of account. The
coins may, by legitimate abrasion, or by fraudulent clip-
ping and sweating, become much reduced below their
proper w^eiglits, yet an agio, or allowance, being made for
the average depreciation, the old standard of value and
money of account may be retained, as was the case in
Amsterdam, Hamburg, and other towns. When a depre-


THE PRINCIPLES OF CIRCtJLA.TION.


73


dated currency is issued in a country, the money of
account may either change with it or remain as before ;
and it is an exceedingly difficult, if not insoluble problem,
to decide whether, in particular periods of English his-
tory, prices were expres»sed in the new depreciated or the
old good money. Professor J. E. T. liogers has pointed
out, in his admirable “ History of Agriculture and Prices
in England,” printed by the Clarendon Press (vol. i. p.
175), that, in the fourteenth century, the coinage, though
apparently passed by tale, was often weighed. In the
ancient college accounts which he has investigated, he
finds charges entered both for the cost of scales to
make the weighings, and for the deficiency of weight
of the coins.

In many countries, even at the present day, the
circulating medium consists not of any one simple and
well-connected series of coins, but of a miscellaneous
collection of coins of various sizes and values, imported
from foreign states. In such cases tlic money of
account must necessarily differ from the mass of the
coins, of which the value is usually estimated by a tariff*
expressed in terms of the money of account. In the
Gennan states, a few years ago, French and English gold
was freely accepted in this manner. In Canada there
is an intricate confusion of monetary systems. There
being no national mint, the circulation consists of many
species of foreign coins, chiefly varieties of the dollar.
'Che monetary unit is a dollar, taken as equal to fifty
English pence ; but this is represented by bank notes,,
and not by any coin. At the same time there are


74


MONEY.


two different moneys of account ; the Halifax Currency
Pound, divided into twenty shillings of twenty pence
each, and defined by the fact that sixty such pence are
equal to a dollar; and, secondly, the Halifax Sterling
Currency, which perpetuates, for the purpose of express-
ing the rates of foreign exchange, the old valuation
which makes a dollar equal to 4s. 6d.


Standard ami Token Money,

We must distinguish between coins according as
they serve for standard money or for token money, A
standard coin is one of which the value in exchange
depends solely upon the value of the material contaiiK^d
in it. The stamp serves as a mere indication and
guarantee of the quantity of fine metal. We may treat
such coins as bullicai, and molt them up or export them
to countries where they arc not legally current ; yet the
value of the metal being independent of legislation will
everywhere be recognised.

Token coins, on the contrary, are defined in value by
the fact that they can, by force of law or custom, be
exchanged in a certain fixed ratio for standard coins.
The metal contained in a token coin has of course a
certain value ; but it may be less than the legal value
in almost any degree. In our English silver coinage the
difference is from 9 to 12 per cent., according to the
market price of silver ; in our bronze coinage the differ-
ence is 75 per cent. The metal contained in the French
bronze coins is in like manner equal in value to little


THE PRINCIPLES OF CIRCULATION.


75


more than one quarter of the current value. In many
cases the difference has been far greater, as for instance
in some of the old kreutzer pieces lately current in the
German states. Woods’s halfpence, which at one time
created so much discontent in Ireland, or the small
money previously issued by Charles II. in Ireland, are
extreme instances of depreciated token money.


Metallic and Nominal Values of Coins.

It has been usual to call the value of the metal
contained in a coin the intrinsic value of the coin; but
this use of tlio word intrinsic is likely to give rise to
fallacious notions concerning the nature of value, which
is never an intrinsic property, or ex.istence, but merely
a circumstance, or external i elation (see p. 9). To
avoid any chance of ambiguity, I shall substitute the
expression, metallic value, and I shall distinguish this
from the nominal, customary, or legal value, at which
a coin actually does, or is by law required, to exchange
for other coins.

There arc two ways in which the metallic value
of a coin may b(^ reduced below its nominal value,
namely, by reducing either the weight or the fineness
of the metal. English silver coin is still maintained
at the ^‘ancient right standard” of 11 oz. 2dwts. in
the troy pound, which has existed from time imme-
morial. By the Act of 181G the silver coins which had
previously been, in theory at least, standard money,
were reduced in weight by 6 per cent., and thus rendered


76


MONEY.


token money, which they still contimxe to be. In France
and other countries belonging to the Monetary Conven-
tion, the smaller silver coins of two francs, one franc,
and fifty centimes, have been converted into tokens by
reducing the fineness of the silver from 900 to 835 parts
in 1000. It does not seem to be a matter of any import-
ance which mode is adopted; but the English mode, so
long as it does not render the coins inconveniently small,
is perhaps slightly the better, because some persons can
satisfy themselves as to the Aveight of a coin, but none
are able to test its fineness, unless they arc i>rofessional
assay crs.

It need hardly be stated that coins which circulate
by law in one country as tokens nniy be accepted in
other countries at their metallic Auiliie.

Legal Tender.

Money must further be distinguished, according as it
is or is not legal tender^ or has or lias not wliat the
French call eowrs forex. By legal tender is denoted
such money as a creditor is obliged to receive in requital
of a debt expressed in terms of money of the realm. One
great object of legislation is to prevent uncertainty in
the interpretation of contracts, and accordingly the
Coinage Act defines precisely what will constitute a legal
offer of payment on tlie part of a debtor, as regards
a money debt. If a debtor tender to his creditor the
amount of a debt due in legal tender money, and it be
refused, the creditor may indeed apply for it, or sue for


THE PRINCIPLES OF CIRCULATION.


77


it afterwards, but the costs of the action will be thrown
upon him.

But there seems to be no legal necessity that
exchanges or contracts shall be made in money of the
realm. At common law, contracts for the direct barter
of two commodities, or for purchase and sale in terms of
any kind of money, will be valid, provided it is clear
what the terms of the contract moan. Accordingly,
the sixth section of the Coinage Act (33 Viet. c. 10 ),
while enacting that every contract, sale, payment, bill,
.note, transaction, or matter relating to money, shall be
made or done according to the coins which are current
and legal tender in pursuance of this Act, yet adds,
“ unless the same l)e made, executed, entered into, done or
had, according to the currency of some Britisli posses-
sion or som(3 foreign state.”

If I understand tlio matter aright, then, every person
is at liberty to buy, sell, or exchange in terms of any
money or commodity whatsoever which he prefers ; and
the fact that certain coins, u]) to certain limits, are
legal tender, only means that the state x>rovides a de-
finite medium of exchange and defines precisely what
that is. The Act requires that English money shall be
the money issued by the mint, in accordance with the
terms of the Act. Of comxse it remains quite open to a
creditor to receive payment in coins which are not legal
tender, if he like to do so, and I presume there would
be nothing to prevent him entering into a contract to
that effect. If a man contracted to sell goods to the
extent of JBIOO, and to receive payment in bronze pence


78


MONEY.


and lialfpence, it would no doubt be a valid contract,
although no single quantity of pence exceeding twelve
pence is a legal tender.

The exact meaning of the term, legal tender, may of
course vary from country to country, and the above
remarks apply only to countries under the English law.


The Force of Habit in the Circulation of Money.

No one can possibly understjind many social phe-
nomena unless he constantly bears in mind the force of
habit and social convention. This is strikingly true in
our subject of money. Over and over again in the
course of history, powerful rulers have endeavoured to put
now coins into circulation or to withdraw old ones ; but
the instincts of self-interest or habit in the people have
been too strong for laws and penalties. Though in
particular instances it may bo difficult to explain occur-
rences which happen in the circulation of coins, yet a
close analysis of the character of those who handle
money, and their motives for holding or paying it away,
will throw much light upon the subject.

We must notice, in the first place, that the great
mass of the population who hold coins have no theories,
or general information whatever, upon the subject of
money. They are guided entirely by popular report
and tradition. The sole question with them on receiv-
ing a coin is whether similar coins have been readily
accepted by other people. Thus in the remote parts of
Norway at the present time, the old paper daler notes


THE PRINOIPIiES OF CIRCULATION.


79


are preferred to the beautiful now twonty-ironer gold
pieces. By far the greater number of the people pos-
sess no means of learning the metallic, or even the legal,
value of an unfamiliar coin. Few people have scales
and weights suitable for weighing a coin, and no one
but an assayer or analytical chemist can decide upon
its fineness. Many a traveller who has carried good
new coin into a country where it luippened to be strange,
has had to suffer a loss in paying it away. When our
bronze pence were quite a novelty, I happened to take
some with mo into a remote part of North Wales, and
they were rejected.

People in general accept coin simply on the ground
of its familiar appearance. So entirely is this tlie case
among very ignorant populations, that it has often been
found desirable to maintain unchanged the impress on
successive issues of coins. In many cases coins have
been struck for this purpose with the date of a long past
year, or even the effigy of a dead sovereign. Tlie Maria
Theresa dollar is still coined by the Austrian mint,
with exactly the same design and date as when first
issued in 1780 , because it is the favourite coin in some
of the states of North Africa, and various parts of the
Levant. The British Government, when undertaking the
Abyssinian expedition, procured a large stock of these
coins for paying the natives. In the same way Mexican
dollars are usually worth rather more than silver bullion,
because of their easy currency in the East.

To the supremacy of habit, and the absence of means
of estimating the real value of coin, is obviously due the


80


MONEY.


depreciation 'which currencies have undergone. False
coiners and kings alike find that, if they can only make
new coins look and feel exactly like old coins, the people
will accept depreciated money '\^dthotit question.

The annals of coinage, in this and all other coun-
tries, are little more than a monotonous repetition of
depreciated issues both public and private, varied by
occasional meritorious, but often unsuccessful, efforts
to restore the standard of the currency. A curious
instance of successive attempts to beguile a people ar(‘
found in certain Eomaii denarii of the Consular times.
False coiners having issued plated denarii among the
subject Germans, tlie people appeared to have notched
them witli files to test their genuineness. The Germans
having thus become accustomed to see gemiino notched
coins, tlie Homan government found it desirable to issiu^
new coins notched in a similar manner. But the forgers
were not to be beaten. They issued plated denarii with
the notches all complete, apparently displaying good
metal w-itliin ; and notched false coins of this kind exist
to the present day in numismatic cabinets.

Greshams Law,

Though the public generally do not discriminate
between coins and coins, provided there is an apparent
similarity, a small class of money-changers, bullion-
dealers, bankers, or goldsmiths make it their business to
be acquainted with such differences, and know how to
derive a profit from them. These are the people who


THE PRINCIPLES OF CIRCULATION.


81


frequently uncoln money, either by melting it, or by
exporting it to countries where it is sooner or later
melted. Some coins arc sunk in the sea or lost, and
some arc carried abroad by emigrants and travellers who
do not look closely to the metallic value of the money.
But by far the greatest part of the standard coinage is
removed from circulation by people who know that they
shall gain by choosing for this purpos(^ the new heavy
coins most recently issued from the mint. ITonce arises
the practice, extensively carried on in tlie present day in
England, of 'picking and culling, or, as another tcclinicn.l
expression is, garbling the coinage, devoting the good new
coins to the melting-pot, and passing tlie old worn coins
into circulation again on every suitable opportunity.

From these considerations we readily learn the truth
and importance of a general law or principle concerning
the circulation of money, which Mr. Macleod has very
appropriately named the Law or Theorem of (Iresham,
after Sir Thomas Gresham, who clearly perceived its
truth three centuries ago. This law, briefly expressed, is
that had money driven out good 'money, but that good
money cannot drive out had money. At first siglit there
may seem to be something paradoxical in the faijt, tliat
when beautiful now coins of full weight arc issued from
the mint, the people still continue to circulate, in pref{3r-
once, the old depreciated ones. Many well-infentioncid
efforts to reform a currency have thus been frustrated,
to the great cost of states, and the perplexity of states-
men who had not studied the principles of monetary
science.


82


MONEY.


In all other matters everybody is led by self-interest
to choose the better and reject the worse ; but in the
case of money, it would seem as if they paradoxically
retain the worse and get rid of the better. The ex-
planation is very simple. The people, as a general rule,
do not reject the better, but pass from hand to hand
indifferently the heavy and the light coins, because their
only use for the coin is as a medium of exchange. It is
those who are going to melt, export, hoard, or dissolve
the coins of the realm, or convert them into jewellery
and gold leaf, who carefully select for their purposes the
new heavy coins.

Gresham’s law alone furnishes a sufficient refutation
of Mr. Herbert Spencer’s doctrine, already noticed (p. (>4)
that money ought to be provided by private manufac-
turers. People who want furnitm*e, or books, or clothes,
may be trusted to select the best which they can afford,
because they are going to keep and use these articles ;
but with money it is just the opposite. Money is made
to go. They want coin, not to keep it in their own
pockets, but to pass it off into their neighbours’ pockets ;
and the Avorse the money which they can get their
neighbours to accept, the greater the profit to them-
selves. Thus there is a natural tendency to the depre-
ciation of the metallic currency, wdiich can only be
prevented by the constant supervision of the state.

From Gresham’s laAV we may infer the necessity of
two precautions in the regulation of the currency. In
the first place, the standard coins, as issued from the
mint, should be as nearly as possible of the standard


THE PRINCIPLES OF CIRCULATION.


83


weight, otherwise the difference will form a profit for
the bullion-broker and exporter. In the second place,
adequate measures must be taken for witlidrtawing from
circulation all coins which are worn below the least
legal weight, otherwise they will continue to circulate
as token coins for an indefinite length of time. All
commerce consists in the exchange of commodities of
equal value, and the principal money should consist of
pieces of metal so nearly equal in metallic contents, that
all persons, including bullion dealers, bankers, and other
professed dealers in money, will indifferently substitute
one coin for another. But it is obvious that these
remarks do not apply to coins intended to serve as
tokens, since the current value of tokens exceeds their
metallic value, and every one who uses them otherwise
than in ordinary circulation will lose the difference.
Hence the weight of a token coin is comparatively a
matter of indifference, so long as people will receive
them, and the deficiency of weiglit is not too groat a
temptation to the false coiner.

In England at the present day the force of habit, and
the absence of means of discrimination, lead to the
depreciation of our gold standard coinage by abrasion.
Only wdiile a sovereign exceeds 122*5 grains in wnfight
is it legally a sovereign ; but people go on paying and
receiving indifferently, in ordinary trade, sovon^igns of
wdiich the metallic values differ 2</. or 4rf., and sometimcvs
even 6rf. or Sd. Every standard coin thus tejids to
degenerate into a token coin, and such a coin can only
be withdrawn from circulation b.y the state.


84


MONEY.


Extension of Gresham's Law.

Gresham’s remarks concerning the imibility of good
money to drive out bad money, only referred to moneys
of one kind of metal, but the same principle applies to
the relations of all kinds of money, in the same circula-
tion. Gold compared with silver, or silver with copper,
or paper compared with gold, arc subject to the sanu'
law that the relatively cheaper medium of exchange will
be retained in circulation and the relatively dearer will
disappear. The most extreme instance which has ever
occurred was in the case of the Japanese currency. At
the time of the treaty of 1858, between Great Britain, the
United States, and Japan, which partially opened up the
last country to European traders, a very curious system of
currency existed in Japan. The most valuable Japanese
coin was the kobang, consisting of a thin oval disc of
gold about 2 inches long, and inch wide, weighing 200
grains, and ornamented in a very primitive manner. It
was passing current in the towns of Japan for four silver
itzebus, but was worth in English money about 18^. 5d.,
whereas the silver itzebu was ecjual only to about Is. id.
Thus the Japanese were estimating their gold money
at only about one-third of its value, as estimated ac-
cording to the relative values of the metals in other
parts of the world. The earliest European traders
enjoyed a rare opportunity for making profit. By
buying up the kobangs at the native rating they trebled
their money, until the natives, perceiving what was being
done, withdrew from circulation the remainder of the


THE PRINOIPIiES OF CIRCULATION. 8»5

gold. A complete reform of the Japanese currency is
now being carried out, the English mint at Hong Kong
having been purchased by the Japanese govornmont.

What happened in an extreme degree in J apan has
often happened in England and other European countries,
in a less degree. If the ratio of gold and silver in the
coinage, as legally current, differs only one or two per
cent, from the commercial ratio, it may become profit-
able to export the one metal rather than the other, and
in this way, as we shall see, the main part of the cur-
rency of France was changed from silver into gold
between 1849 and 1869. In fact the character of the
coinage of most nations has been determined in a
similar manner, and England and the United States
w(U’o thus led to adopt a principal gold currency. Therti
is every reason to believe that in ancient Home, both
in the time of the Republic and of the Empire, great
difficulties were encountered in regulating the currency
of silver alongside of copper, and the perplexity became
worse when gold coin was introduced.


86


MONEY.


CHAPTEE IX.

SV«TEM« OF METALLIC MONEY.

We are now in a position to analyse the construction
of the various systems of metallic money which have
existed, or do exist, or which might be conceived to
exist. The systems actually brought into operation are
more numerous than is commonly supposed, and I have
nowhere met with an adequate classilicatioii of them.
M. Oourcelle-Seneuil, indeed, has satisfactorily described
some of the principal systems, and MM. Chevalier, Gamier,
and other writers, both continental and English, have
given other brief classifications. But we must now take
a comprehensive view of the possible ways in which two,
three, or more metals may be employed in the construc-
tion of a more or less useful monetary system.

There seem to be five distinct modes in which a
government may deal with metallic money.

1. It may confine itself to providing a system of
weights and measures, and may then allow the precious
metals to be passed about from hand to hand, like other
commodities, in terms of the national weights and mea-
sures, and in the form which individuals find to be most


SYSTEMS OP METALLIC MONEY. 87

convenient. This we may call the system of currency
hj weight,

2. To save the trouble of frequent weighing, and
the uncertahity of fineness of the metal, it may coin
one or more metals into pieces of certain specified weights
and fineness, and may afterwards allow the public to
make their contracts and sales in one or other kind of
coin, as they deem expedient. This may be described as
the system of mmstrkted currency hy talc.

3. To prevent misunderstandings, the government,
while emitting various coins in various metals, may
ordain tliat all contracts expressesd in money of the realm
shall, in the absence of express provision to the contrary,
be taken to mean money of one kind of metal, specially
named, while other coin shall be left to circulate at vary-
ing market rates compared with this principal kind of
coinage. This is the single legal tender system.

4. The government may emit coins of two or more
kinds of metal, and enact that money contracts may be
discharged in one or other kind, at certain rates fixed
by law. This is the mtdtiple legal tender system.

5. While maintaining one kind of coin as the jnincipal
legal tender, in which aU large money contracts must be
fulfilled, coins of other kinds of metal may be ordered
to be received in limited quantities, as equivalent to the
principal coin. For this the name composite legal tender
system may be proposed.


MONEY.


Currmcy hy Weight. •

The order in which 1 have enumerated the principal
systems of metallic money, is not only the logical order,
but it is the historical order in which the systems have,
for the most part, been introduced. There is over^
wholmiiig evidoucc to prove that simple currency by
weight is the priiiiitive system. Before the invention of
the balance, lumps and grains were no doubt exchanged
according to a rude estimation of their bulk or weight ;
but afterwards the l)alancc became a necessary instrument
in all important transactions. In the Old Testament we
find several statements clearly implying that the ancient
Hebrews used to pass money by weight. In Genesis
(xxiii. IG) Abrahani is represented as weighing out to
Ephron “four hundred shekels of silver, current money
with the nurchant,” but the silver in question is believed
to have consisted of rough lumps or rings not to be con-
sidered coin. In the Book of Job (xxviii. 15 ) wo are
told that “wisdom cannot be gotten for gold, neither
shall silver be weighed for the price thereof.”

Aristotle, in his Politics (Book I., chap, ix), gives an
interesting account of his view of the origin of money,
and distinctly tells us that the metals were first passed
simply by weight or size, and Pliny makes a similar
assertion. That it was so, we may infer from the re-
markable fact that, even when no use was made of it, the
custom of bringing a pair of scales survived as a legal
formality in the sale of slaves at Borne.

There can bo little doubt that every system of coin-


SYSTEMS OF METALLIC MONET.


89


age was originally identical with a system of weights,
the unit of value being the unit of weight of some
selected metal. The English pound sterling was cer-
tainly the Saxon pound of standard silver, which was
too large to be made into a single coin, but was
divided into two hundred and forty silver pennies, each
eijual to a iKnnywehjkt, In the English and Scotch
jmmds, and the French Uvre, we have the vestiges of a
uniform iiiternational system of money and weights, the
establishment of which is attributed to Charlemagne,
but which unfortunately became differentiated and de-
stroyed by the various depreciations of the coinage in
one country or another. Most of the other principal
units of valric wore originally units of weight, such as
tlio shekel, the talent, the as, the stater, the libra, the
mark, the franc, the lira.

In the Old Testament the notion of money is expressed
throe times by tlie Hebrew Avord kesitah, Avhich is trans-
lated in certain old versions into words meaning lamb. This
might BO(un to lie an additional proof of the former use of
cattle as a medium of exchange ; but I am infonned by my
learned friend, Professor Theodores, that this translation
probably arises from an accidental blunder, and that the
original meaning of the word kesitah, was that of a
certain weight,” or “an exact quantity.” The corres-
ponding word in the Arabic, last, is said to denote a
pair of scales.

Currency by weight still exists among considerable
portions of the human race. In the Burrnan empire,
for instance, three kinds of metal are current, namely,


90


MONEY.


lead, silver, and gold, and all payments are made by the
balance, the unit of weight for silver being the tical.
In the Chinese empire and Cochin China, there is in-
deed a legal tender currency of cash or sapeka but gold
and silver are usually dealt in by weight, the unit being
the tael. A very interesting account of Chinese money,
by M. le Comte llochcchouart, will be found in the Jour-
nal des Economisk's for 1869 (vol. xv. p. 103). According
to this writer, both gold and silver are treated simply as
merchandise, and there is not even a recognized stamp,
or government guarantee of the fineness of the metal.
Tlie traveller must carry these metals with him, as a
sufficient quantity of strings of cash would require
a waggon for their conveyance. Yet in exchanging silver
or gold he is sure to suffer great losses, both from the
falsity of balances and weights, and the uncertain
fineness of the metal. Li buying a tael of gold the
traveller may have to give eighteen taels of silver ; but
in selling it he will often not obtain more than fourteen
taels.

Whatever bo the inconveniences of the method,
currency by weight is yet the natural and necessary
system to which people revert whenever the abrasion
of coins, the intermixture of currencies, the fall of a
state, or other causes destroy the public confidence in
a more highly organized system. Though the silver
penny among the Anglo-Saxons was supposed to corres-
pond with a pennyweight, there was a practice of giving
cornpensatio ad pcnstim, which really amounted to taking
the coins by weight, to allow for abrasion and inaccurate


SYSTEMS OF METALLIC MONEY.


91


or false coinage. The as was at first equal in weight
to a Roman pound, but it was rapidly lessened, so that
at the epoch of the First Punic War, it did not exceed
two omices, and by tlio time of the Second Punic War it
had sunk to one ounce. The Roman people had natur-
ally reverted to weighing the metal, and the aes grave.
was money reckoned by weight instead of by tale.

In the present day currency by weight is far more
extensively practised then might be supposed, because,
in many parts of the world, the currency consists of a
miscellaneous assortment of old gold, silver, and even
copper coins, which have been brought thither from
other countries, and have been variously worn, clipped,
or depreciated. In such countries the only means of
avoiding loss and fraud is to weigh each coin, and the
impress passes for little more than an indication of the
fineness of the metals. In aU large international trans-
actions, agaui, currency by weight is the sole method.
The regulations of a state conceniing its legal tender
have no validity beyond its own frontiers ; and as all
coins are subject to more or less wear and uncertainty
of weight, they are received only for the actual weight of
metal they are estimated to contain. The coin of well-
conducted foreign mints is bought and sold by weight
without melting; but the coin of minor states, which
have occasionally depreciated their money, is melted up
and treated simply as bullion.


92


MOKEY.


Unrestricted Currency by Tale,

The simplest way for a state to manage its money
might seem to he to revert to the primitive notion of a
coin, and issue pieces of gold, silver, and copper, certified
to be equal to units of weight, leaving all persons free to
make contracts or sales in terms of any of these metals.
These pieces of certified metal would then be so many
commodities thrown into the markets and allowed to
take their natural relative values.

Such appears to have been the system intended to be
established by tlie French Revolutionary Government in
terms of the abortive law of Thermidor, an III. Discs
of ten grams each were to be struck in gold, silver, and
copper, and them put in circulation, witliout any attempt
to regulate their currency. If I understand his meaning
correctly, M. Gamier has recently brought forward a
somewliat similar scheme, proposing to make the gram
of gold at nine-tenths the unit of value, and to coin pieces
of one, two, five, eight, or ten grams concurrently with
standard silver pieces, which are in France already
multiples of the gram. M. Chevalier’s proposed system
of international money, partially at least, involves the
same notion; for he considers that the principal cur-
rency should consist of decagrams of gold. But, as
Mr. Bagehot has well remarked, there is no object
whatever, as regards the greater mass of the population,
in having coins simply related to the system of weights,
because most people never need take any account of the
weight at all. They need only know bow many copper


SYSTEMS OF METALLIC MONEY.


93


coins are equal to one silver coin, and how many silver
to one gold coin. Now, if we carry out M. Chevalier’s
scheme consistently and fully, and make all the coins
multiples of the gram, we shall oblige all people to be
constantly worldng complex arithmetical sums. No one
could give exactly correct change without calculating
how many silver ten-gram pieces are, at the market
price of silver, equal to one gold ten -gram piece. The
necessity for calculation occasions needless loss of time
and trouble, and a factitious gain is sure to accrue to the
expert and unscrupulous at the expense of the poor and
ignorant.

Owing to these obvious objections no government has
ever, I believe, carried into practice a system of money
of the kind described. Nevertheless, currencies approxi-
mating to it in nature have come to exist in many parts
of the world by the intermixture of coinages of different
states. There are many half-civilized nations which
have no national coinage, but employ the coins which
happen to reach them in the course of trade. On the
West Coast of Africa the Spanish dollar is the best
known coin, but Danish, French or Dutch coins also
circulate. In several of the South American states
the currency is in a state of complete confusion, (;on-
sisting of a mixture of American eagles, gold doubloons,
silver dollars, English sovereigns, piastres, etc., together
sometimes with several different issues of coinage of the
South American states variously depreciated. Even in
British possessions we find the same state of things. In
the British West Indian Islands, American, Mexican,


94


MONEY.


Spanish, and other dollars, cii-culate concurrently with
English money ; but it should be added that in most
cases the Spanish dollar is treated as the standard of
value, and other coins are quoted in terms of it.

In Eastern countries tliere is a similar intermixture
of coinage. In Singapore the Indian rupee mingles with
Spanish and Mexican dollars. Persia has a rude coinage
of its own, so uncertain in weight that it has to be dealt
in by the balance, but Russian, Turkish, and Austrian
gold coins circulate by tale. Some of the best-regulated
nations have allowed, or even promoted, the currency
of various foreign coins. In Germany, French and
English gold coins used to be accepted, according to
a well-recognised tariff. The circulation of English,
French, Spanish, Mexican, and other gold coins in
the United States was legalized by an Act of June 28th,
1884, repealed by an Act of February 21st, 1857, which
how^ever allows certain foreign coins to be received at
government offices.

In England we have for many generations enjoyed a
very pure currency, so that we are unconscious of the
inconveniences arising from a confusion of coins of
dijfferent values. But in the early part of this century
Spanish dollars were put into circulation for a time in
England.

In former centuries the mixture of coinages was far
more common than at present. No country had a
currency free from strange coins. It is impossible to
open an old book on commerce without finding long
tables of coins which the merchant might expect to meet


SYSTEMS OF METALLIC MONEY.


95


with ; and the business of money-changing was a
lucrative and common one.

It will be understood, that only so long as coins are
Imown by the fresh sharp appearance of the impression
to be of full weight, and arc accepted according to tariff,
does tlie system of currency by tale or number exist.
The silver dollar, being a large coin, is subject to com-
paratively little abrasion, so that people learn to receive
dollars of various species at certain well-established rates.
Thus the dollar has practically been for several centuries
the international money of the tropical countries. But
so soon as coins bear evidence of wear or ill-treatment,
they must he circulated by weight, and we revert to a
more primitive system.

M. Feer-Herzog has described, as the system of
j)(irallel standards, that in which a state issuiis coins
in two or more metals, and then allows them to circulate
by talc at ratios varying according to the market values
of the metals. He cites, as recent examjjles, the rixdaler
in silver, employed as the internal money of Sweden in
combination with the ducat in gold, serving as inter-
national money. The government of India, again, has
on several occasions tried to introduce a parallel standard
of gold alongside of the single silver legal tender now
existing there. Gold mohurs have long been more or
less in circulation in India, and are supposed to form at
present about one-tenth part of the coinage. They are
of exactly the same weight and fineness as the silver
rupee, and are usually valued at from 15 to 15i| rupees.
It seems probable, however, that wliat M* Feer-Herzog


96


MONEY.


calls the system of parallel standards will coincide
according to circumstances, either with that which I
have described as the system of unrestricted currency
by tale, or that of a single legal tender, with an additional
commercial money of varying value. The Indian currency
must certainly be classed under the latter head. There
cannot in fact be two different parallel standards used
both at the same time ; and though it is not uncommon
for a state to coin moneys in two metals, and leave its
subjects to pay in one or other at will, yet one of the two
is generally recognized as the standard of vfiluo.


Single Legal Tender System,

The system of currency naturally adopted by the first
coiners of money was that of a single legal tender.
Coins of one kind of metal, or even a single series of
coins of uniform weight, were at first thought sufficient.
Iron in small bars was the single legal tender in
Lacodflomon, and possibly in some other early states.
Aes was undoubtedly the legal tondor among the
Eomans for a length of time. In China the sole mea-
sure of value and legal tender to the present day
consists of brass cash or sapeks, strung togetlicr in lots
of a tliousand each. In England silver was the only
metal coined from the time of Egbert to that of
Edward IIL, with the doubtful exception of a very few
smaU pieces of gold. Silver was the sole legal tender
and measure of value, and few coins except silver pennies
were issued. In Eussia and Sweden, during part of last
century, copper was the sole legal tender.


SYSTEMS OF METALLIC MONEY.


97


A single metal currency has the great advantages of
simplicity and certainty. Every one knows exactly what
he is to pay or receive, and when the coins are of one
size or of a few sizes, simply related to each other, like
the early English coins, no one is subject to loss by
errors of calculation. But there is the obvious disad-
vantage that, according as the metal chosen is cheap or
dear, large or small transactions will be troublesome to
effect. To pay a few hundred pounds in Swedish copper
plates, or Chinese strings of easily a cart Avould be required
for conveyance, and the counting of cash is almost
impracticable. A silver coinage again does not admit
of coins sufficiently small for minor transactions. It is
difficult to understand how retail trade was carried
on when the silver penny weighed 22J grains, and
the precious metals were far more precious than at
present. The penny was, indeed, cut up into halfpence
and farthings, i.e. fonr-things ; T)ut even the farthing
must have been equal in pmrehasing power to our three-
penny or fourpenny piece. The mass of the currency
appears to have consisted of silver pennies.

Accordingly it is found that, if a government issue
coins only of a single metal, the people will introduce
and circulate coins of other metals for their own con-
venience. Tn Anglo-Saxon times gold byzants from
Byzantium were used in England, and the gold coins of
Florence, thence called florins, were much esteemed
both here and in other parts of Europe. In later cen-
turies, too, in the absence of a legitimate copper coinage,
tradesmen’s tokens came into general circulation.

H


98


MONEY.


Multiple Legal Tender Sgstem,

Out of a single legal tender naturally grew up systems
of a double or even a multiple legal tender. Tlie
Plantagcnet kings of England, for instance, finding that
though they coined only silver the people made use of
gold, eventually began to issue gold coins, and fixed the
rates at which they should be exchanged for silver coins.
In the absence of any special regulations to the contrary
this constituted a double tender system. As, after a time,
the ratio of values of the metals would fail to coincide
with that involved in the relative weights of the coins,

• it became requisite to fix by royal proclamation a new
value for one metal in terms of the other. From 1257
to 1664 the gold and silver currency of England w'^as
thus regulated, no coins of copper or any inferior metal
being then issued. From 1664 to 1717 no proclama-
tions were made upon the subject, and the value of the
guinea was allowed to vary in terms of the shilling.
At one time it rose nearly to 30«., owing partly to the
decreased value of silver, but chiefly to the clipped and
worn state of the silver money. During this interval,
then, the country had a single silver standard.

In the early part of the last century a great deal of
discussion took place upon the unsatisfactory state of
the silver currency, and Sii* Isaac Newton, the Master
of the Mint, was requested to report upon the best
measures to be adopted. In 1717 he made a celebrated
report, recommending that the government should revert
to the practice of fixing the price of the guinea, and he


SYSTEMS OF METALLIC MONEY.


99


suggested 21.9. as tlie best rate. Ilis advice being
accepted, the guinea has ever since been valued at 21.s*.
Then there was again a double standard in England,
anyone being at liberty to pay in either kind of coin.
In practice, however, it is almost impossible that the
commercial value of the metals should coincide with the
legal ratio. At the rate adopted by Sir Isaac Newion,
gold was overvalued by ratlier more than per cent. ;
to that extent it was more valuable as eniTcney than as
metal. Therefore, in accordance with the Law of
Gresham, and the principles laid down in Chapter VUI.,
the full w^eight silver coin wns withdrawn or exi)ortod,
and gold became the practical measure of value, wiiich it
has ever since continued to be.

In every otlier part of the wniid, wiiere attempts
have been made to c()ml)ine two metals as concurrent
standards of value, similar results have followed. In
Massachusetts, in 1762, gold w^as made a legal tender, as
well as silver, at the rate of 2JtZ. per grain; but, being over-
valued as much as 5 per cent, the silver coinage rapidly
disappeared from circulation. Various laws were passed
to remedy this mconveniont state of things, but without
success so long as this valuation of gold wns maintained.

In these and many other cases which might be
quoted, a government had attempted to combine a
circulation of gold with that of silver, without being
aware of all the principles involved in the experiment.
It was hardly, perhaps, till the time of tlie French
Kevolution that the double standard system w^as con-
sciously selected as the best method. Since the cele-


100


MONEY.


brated law, known as “ La loi du 7 Germinal, an XI.,” was
adopted by tlie Eevolutionary GoYernment, the system
has become identified with the policy of the French
economists. The history of the origin of this law was
almost unknown, until M. Wolowski described it in a
series of valuable articles published in the Journal des
Economistes for 1869.

As early as 1790 Mirabeau presented to tlie National
xissembly a celebrated memoir on monetary doctrines,
in which, amid a curious mixture of true and false views,
he decided in favour of silver as the principal money,
on the ground of the greater abundance of silver com-
pared with gold. He proposed to make silver the con-
stituticmal money ^ that is, the legal tender, and to employ
gold and copper as additioiml signs of value. These
ideas were only so far carried out that the franc was
defined first as ten grams of silver by the decree of the
1st August, 1793, and was afterwards definitively fixed
at five grams by the law of the 28th Tliermidor, an III,
The old gold pieces of twenty-four and forty-eight livres
continued to circulate, while the ten-gram gold pieces
ordered by the decree to be struck were not really issued.

In the year IX. Gaudin proposed that the ratio of
15^ to 1 should be adopted in fixing the weight of the
gold coins relatively to the silver ones. Thus, while the
franc was defined as consisting of five grams of silver nine-
tentlis fine, the twenty-franc gold piece was to contain
6‘451 grams of gold of ecpial fineness. He seems to have
thought that this ratio was suflSciently near to that of
the markets to allow the coins to circulate side by side


SYSTEMS OF METALLIC MONEY.


101


for a long time, and in case of a change, he thought
that the gold pieces could be melted and reissued at a
different weight. After a great amount of discussion,
in which Berenger, Lebreton, Daru, and Bose took the
most prominent parts, the proposals of Gaudin were
carried out, but not precisely on the ground indicated
by him. It appears to have been thought unwise either
to demonetize gold altogether, which would have
seriously diminished the circulating medium, or to leave
the value of the gold coins uncertain, which w-ould give
rise to disputes.

The ratio adopted the legislators of the Eevolu-
tion liappened to overvalue silver in some degree, and
hence the currency of France came to consist principally
of the heavy five-francs pieces, or ecus. Not until the
Californian and Australian discoveries caused gold to be
the cheaper money in which to make payments, did this
heavy silver money gradually disappear. The action
of the double standard system will be further considered
in Chapter XII.


Composite Legal Tender,

We have seen that with a single metal currency there
is inconvenience in making small or large payments,
according as the metal chosen is dear or choa|). If
two or more series of full-w^eight coins be issued in
different metals, and allowed to vary in relation to
each other, the difficulty of calculation, intervenes. If
they both be made legal tenders at a fixed ratio, the
currency will tend to become composed alternately of


102


MONEY.


one or the other metal, and money-changers will make
a profit out of the conversion.

There yet remains another possible system, in which
coins of one metal arc adopted as the standard of value
and principal legal tender, and subordinate token coins
of other metals are furnished for the purpose of sub-
division, being recognized as legal tender only for small
amounts. The values of those token coins now depend
upon that of the standard coins for which tliey are
legally exchangeable, and care is taken to make their
Aveights such that the metallic value will always be less
than the legal value. No profit can cv(?r bc5 made by
melting such coins, or removing them from tlic country,
and their ratio of exchange with the principal coins is
always a simple ratio fixed by law.

The composite legal tender rises naturally out of the
douldo standard system; for, as wo hav(:^ seen, if, under
the hitter system, gold be overvalued at tlie legal rate,
all full-weight silver coins will be withdrawn and ex-
ported by degrees, so that there wall remain practically
a token currency of light silver. Lord Liverpool, having
in his thorough investigation of tlie subject of metallic
money observed the superior convenience of the composite
legal tender to the double legal tender, advocated its
adoption in England in the most coijclusive maimer.
His arguments will be found in his admirable ‘‘Treatise
on the Coins of the Ecalm in a Letter to the King’*
(Oxford, 18()e5), and his recommendations, as carried into
effect in 1816, are the foundation of our present mone-
tary system.


SYSTE1\IS OF METALLIC MONEY.


103


A composito system of currency has frecpiently
existed in one country or another without being specially
designed or recognized. It comes into existence when-
ever coins of gold and silver are current at rates fixed
by law or custom, but the silver coins are reduced l)y
abrasion or clipping below the corresponding weight.
From the year 1717, when the guinea was fixed at
21s., until the present system wns instituted in 1816,
the English cuiTency was based theoretically upon the
double standard system. Practically, however, tlie silver
coins were so scarce and worn that they served but as
tokens. The tradesmen’s copper tokens, too, being
always of light weight, and exchangeable by custom for
a certain proportion of silver coins, formed the third
term in the series. But Lord Liverpool appears to have
l)een the first to apprehend and explain the principles
on which such a composito system worked, and there
can be no doubt that the system, as ho expounded it,
is the best adapted for supplying a convenient and
economical currency.

Most of the leading nations have now adopted the
composite legal tender in a more or less complete form.
France, Belgium, Switzerland, and Italy still adhere to
the double standard in theory, but have reduced all coins
of less value than five francs to the footing of token
money, by reducing the fineness of the silver from 900
parts to 835 parts in 1000, or by 7^' per cent., and by
limiting the amount for which they are legal tender.
The copper money of France had previously been re-
stricted as a legal tender to sums below five francs in


104


MONEY.


any one payment. In the United States, when metallic
currency was generally employed, the double standard
system existed in theory, but was reduced to a compo-
site standard by the excessive overvaluing of the gold
money. Moreover, by a law of 21st February, 1853, the
smaller silver coins were reduced in weight and made
legal tender only for sums not exceeding five dollars. The
silver three-cent pieces, and the several copper, bronze,
or nickel coins, issued from the United States* mints,
were also token money with various limits as .regards
legal tender.

The new German monetary system is perfectly or-
ganized as a composite legal tender.


( 105 )


CHAPTEE X.

THE ^flNGLISH SYSTEM OF METALLIC CURRENCY.

I NOW como to describe in more detail the system of
metallic currency which has existed in England for more
than half a century, and which seems to be the best of
all as regards the principles on which coins of three dif-
ferent metals arc combined into a composite legal tender.
The legal regulations under which the English coinage
is issued and circulated, can be ascertained with ease and
certainty, thanks to the Act of Parliament (33 Victoria,
ch. 10), which Mr. Lowe caused to be passed to simplify
and consolidate the statutes on the subject.

English Gold Coin,

The English sovereign is the principal legal tender
and the standard of value. It is defined as consisting
of 123*27447 grains (7*98805 grams) of English standard
gold, composed of eleven parts of fine gold, and one part
of alloy, chiefly copper. The sovereign ought, there-
fore, in theory, to contain 113*00160 grains, or 7*32238
grams, of pure gold. But as it is evidently impossible to


106


MONEY.


make coins of any precise weight, or to maintain them
of tliat weight when in circulation, the weight stated is
only that standard weight to which the mint workmen
should aim to attain as closely as possible, both in each
individual piece, and in the average.

From the weight of the sovereign we deduce the mint
price of gold. For if we divide the number of grains in
the sovereign into the number of grains — namely, 480 — in
the troy ounce, we ascertain exactly how many sovereigns
and portions of a sovereign the mint ought to return for
each ounce delivered in. This we find to be 8*89375,
which is equivalent to £d 17s, 10|y/. It comes to exactly
the same thing to say in terras of tlie old mint inden-
tures, that twenty-pounds’ weight troy of gold are to lie
coined into 934 sovereigns, and one half-sovereign. I
have heard of people who protested against the govern-
ment fixing the price at which gold should be bouglit and
sold by the mint, and who yet allowed that tlu' sovcjreign
must have some fixed weight. Kut the fixed price is
convertible with the fixed weight, and vice versa. Either
follows from the other.

In practice the weight of a coin is always a matter of
limits, and tliere must be limits both for the weight as
sent out and that at which it can legally remain in circu-
lation. The remcfh/ is the technical name for the allowance
made to the mint-master for imperfection of workman-
ship, and is defined by the Act as two-tenths of a grain
(0*01296 gram). Thus the mint cannot legally issue a
sovereign weighing less than 123*074 grains, or more than
123'474 grains. Since the fineness of the gold, again.


THE ENGLISH SYSTEM OF METALLIC CUIIIIENCY. 107


can never bo adjusted exactly to the standard of eleven
parts in twelve, or 916*66 in a 1000, a remedy of two
parts in 1000 is allowed in this respect. It is understood
that the English mint succeeds in working well Avithin
the remedy both of weight and fineness.

Every sovereign issued from the mint in accordance
with these regulations, and bearing the impress authorized
by the Queen, is legal tender, and must be accepted by a
creditor in discharge of a debt to that amount, provided
that it has not been reduced by wear or ill-treatment
below the weight of 122*50 grains (7*03787 grams). If
a sovereign of less tlian this lensf curmtt wvhjht bo ten-
dered to any person, he is presumed by tlie law to detect
the deficiency, and is bound to cut or defac'-e the coin, and
return it to the tenderer, Avho must bear the loss. If tho
coin so defaced should i)rove not to be l)e]ow the limit,
then the d(;facer has to receive it and bear tlie loss
arising from his mistake. Any justice of tlie peace may
decide disputes arising concerning light sovcireigns in a
summar}' manner.

Tlie only other gold coin actually issued is the half-
sovereign, of which the standard weight and remi.‘dy are
exactly half those of the sovereign, the remedy in fine-
ness the same as in the soA^ereign, and the least current
weight 61*1250 grains (3*96083 grams). The Coinage Act
also legalizes tho issue of two- and five-pound gold pieces,
the weights and remedies in weight being corresponding
multiples of those of tho soATreign. Coins of the value
of Ih^e and two guineas Avere struck liy most of the
English monarchs from the time of Charles II. to that of


108


MONEY.


George III. Patterns of five- and two-pound pieces have
been prepared under Queen Victoria ; but gold coins of
this size have not been issued in the present reign, nor
is it desirable, for reasons stated in Chapter XIIL, that
they should be issued.

English Silver Coin.

The further subdivision of the pound is effected by
token coins of silver and bronze, wliicli are made of
such weights that tlierc is no danger of their metallic
values rising above the metallic value of the gold coins
for which they are legally equivalent. Previous to the
year 181G, the troy pound of standard silver, containing
925 parts of fine silver and 75 parts of alloy in 1000,
was coined into 62 shillings, so that each shilling would
contain 92'90 grains of standard metal. Under these
regulations gold was rated as 15*21 times as valuable as
silver. As silver, however, may sometimes become more
valuable relatively to gold. Lord Liverpool very wisely
recommended in his letter to the king, that the weight
of the shilling should be reduced. By the Act 56
Geo. III. ch. 68, it was ordered that the troy pound
of silver should be coined into 66 sliillings, a reduction
of weight of about 6 per cent. The new Coinage Act
maintains the chief provisions of that of 1816, so that
the English shilling now has the weight of 87*27272
grains of standard silver (5*65518 grams), and the
weights of all the other silver coins are exactly corre-
sponding multiples or submultiples of this. The mint


THE ENGLISH SYSTEM OF METALLIC CXJRIIENCY. 109


remedy in weight for the shilling is a little more than
the third part of a grain, and in simple proportion for
the other coins. The remedy in fineness is in all cases
fonr parts in one thousand. The denominations of coins
authorized are nine in number, namely, the crown, half-
crown, florin, shilling, sixpence, groat, or fourpenny piece,
threepence, twopence, and penny. All, except the crown,
are coined in greater or less quantity, but the fourpence,
tw^opence, and penny, arc now only struck in very small
quantities as Maundy money, wdiich, after being dis-
tributed by the Queen annually in alms, appears to find
its way into numismatic cabinets or to be melted down.

All such coins are legally current, irrespective of
their wTUghts, so long as they are not called in by pro-
clamation, or so worn and defaced that the impress of
the mint cannot be recognized. The coin in circula-
tion is actually reduced in weight by abrasion to a con-
siderable amount, often one-fourtli or one-third of its
original weight. Moreover, the fall in the value of
silver relatively to gold reduces the metallic worth of
the coins, so that no one can export them to foreign
countries, or melt them for sale as bullion, without
losing from 10 to 30 per cent, of their nominal value.

It would obviously be a cause of grievance if a person
could be obliged to receive unlimited amounts of this
token money in discharge of a debt. Merchants might
often have thousands of pounds w'orth of such coins
thrown upon their hands, the full value of wdiich could
only be realized by gradually putting it into circulation
again. It was therefore provided by the Acts of 1816


110


MONEY.


and 1870, that silver coin shall be a legal tender only to
the amount of forty shillings in any one payment.
This limit was chosen apparently because the two-
pound piece was in 1816 regarded as the largest coin
then in circulation, or likely to be issued.


English Bronze Coinage.

Tlie final subdivision of the pound is effected by
bronze pence, halfpence, and farthings, of which the
weights when issued should be respectively 145*833,
87*500 and 43*750 grains. They are composed of an alloy
of 95 parts by weight of copper, four parts of tin, and
one part of zinc, being exactly the same kind of bronze
as was previously employed by the French mints. The
remedy in weight is one-fifth of one per cent., and as the
coins are token money there is no least current weight.
As the reasons against allowing them to be a legal
tender for large sums are stronger than in the case of
silver coin, it is enacted that bronze coins shall be a
legal tender only to an aggregate amount of one shilling.

If a copper penny were now made to contain metal
equivalent in value to the 240th part of a sovereign, its
^veight would be 871 grains, at the present market price
of copper (£75 per ton). Thus the fractional coinage
has been reduced in weight nearly to one-sixth part of
what it would bo as standard copper coin. The bronze
of which the pence are made is worth, according to
Mr. Seyd, 10(/, i)er troy pound, so that the metallic values
of the coins are almost exactly one-fourth part of their


THE ENGLISH SYSTEM OP METALLIC CURRENCY, 111


nominal values. A considerable profit therefore accrues
upon the coinage of bronze, amounting up to the end of
1871 to about £270,000 ; but the reduction of weight is
altogether an advantage, and is probably not carried as
far as it might properly be done.


Deficiency of Weifiit of the English Gold Coin.

It is the theory of the present English monetary huv,
as we have seen (p. 107) that every i)orson weighs a
sovereign tendered to liim, and assures himself, before
accepting it, that it does not weigh less than 122*5 grains.
In former days it was not uncommon for people to carry
pocket-scales for weighing guineas, and such scales may
still bo occasionally seen in old curiosity shops. But we
know that the practice is entirely given up, and that
even the largest receivers of coin, such as the banks and
railway companies, and even tax-offices, post-offices, etc.,
do not pay the least regard to the law. Only the Bank
of England, its branches, and a few government offices,
weigh gold coin in England. The result is that a large
part of the gold coinage is w^orn below the least current
weight, and all persons of experience avoid paying old
sovereigns to the Bank of England. Only ignorant and
unlucky persons, or else large banks and companies
which cannot otherwise get rid of light coin, suffer loss.
The quantity of light gold coin withdrawn by the bank
did not for many years exceed half a million a year ;
during the last few years it has varied from £700,000
to £950,000. As the average amount of gold coined


112


MONEY.


annually is four or five millions, and the coins melted
or exported 8»re for the most part new and of full weight,
it follows necessarily, that the currency is becoming more
and more deficient in weight.

In 1869 I ascertained, by a careful and extensive
incpiiry, that 31| per cent, of the sovereigns and nearly
one-half of the ten-shilling pieces were then below the
legal limit. The reader who has attended to the remarks
on Gresham's Law (p. 80), will see that no amount of
coinage of new gold will drive out of circulation these
depreciated old coins, because those who export, or melt,
or otherwise treat the coins as bullion, will take care to
operate upon good new ones.

Great injustice arises in some eases from this defective
state of the gold currency. I have heard of one case in
which an inexperienced person, after receiving several
hundred pounds in gold from a bullion dealer in the city
of London, took them straight to the Bank of England
for deposit. Most of the sovereigns were there found to
be light, and a prodigious charge was made upon the un-
fortunate depositor. The dealer in bullion had evidently
paid him the residuum of a mass of coins, from which he
had picked the heavy ones. In a still worse case, lately
reported to me, a man presented a post-office order at
St. Martin’s-le-Grand, and carried the sovereigns received
to the stamp-office at Somerset House, wdiere the coins
were weighed, and some of them found to be deficient.
Here a man was, so to say, defrauded between two
government offices.

It should be stated that the government made, in


THE ENGLISH SYSTEM OP METALLIC CURRENCY. 113

July, 1870, a slight effort to promote the withdrawal of
light gold, by engaging to receive it through the Bank of
England at the full price of *£3 175. 9d. per ounce by
weight, the price previously paid by the bank having been
only £3 175. C)jd., owing to the old sovereigns being
a little beloAV the standard in fineness. A certain in-
crease in the amounts withdrawn has no doubt followed
this measure ; but the loss by deficiency in weight is still
thrown upon the public, and as long as ithis is the case
the withdrawal of light gold will continue inadequate to
maintain the coinage at its standard weight.

Withdrawal of Light Gold Coin.

Some steps must soon be taken to remedy the increas-
ing deficiency of weight of the gold coinage described
above. The withdrawal may no doubt be effected in
several 'ways. One method would be for the Queen to
issue a proclamation calling in and prohibiting the circu-
lation of all gold coins more than twenty or twenty-five
years old, as it is mostly the older coins which are deficient
in weight. Another method Avoiild be to oblige all revenue
officers, post-masters, and others, under the control of
government, to weigh all sovereigns presented to them.
If necessary, the bankers of the kingdom generally
might be obliged to weigh coin. But it is obvious that
great trouble and inconvenience would arise from such
measures. The progress of the post-office savings banks
would be imperiUed if every depositor of a pound were
liable to be charged 2 per cent, for lightness. Con-


114


MONEY.


siderable excitement and trouble followed the issue of the
last proclamation of June, 1842, calling in light gold.
To make the last holder of a coin pay for the whole cost
of its circulation during thirty or forty years past, leads
in many cases to gross injustice. The present law tends
to throw the loss upon the poor, who have usually only
one or two sovereigns at a time to pay, whereas rich
people, having many, can avoid paying light gold at
offices where it will be weighed.

I hold that the only thorough remedy is for the
government to bear the loss occasioned by the wear of
the gold, as it already bears that of the silver currency.
The Bank of England should be authorized to receive all
sovereigns showing no marks of intentional damage or
unfair treatment at their full nominal value, on behalf of
the mint, which should recoin the light ones at the public
expense. No one would then have any reason for keep-
ing the light gold away from the bank ; the currency
would soon be purged of the illegally light coins, and would
thenceforth be kept up strictly to the standard weight ;
all loss of time and trouble would be saved to individuals,
a consideration which we should not lose sight of ; and,
lastly, no injustice would be done, as at present, to the
last holder of a light sovereign.

In opposition to such a proposal it is usually urged,
that encouragement would bo given to the criminal
practice of sweating or otherwise diminishing the weight
of the currency. I answer that, on the contrary, it is
the present state of things which gives the best oppor-
tunity for illegal practices, because it renders the popu-


THE ENGLISH SYSTEM OF METALLIC CURRENCY. 116

lation perfectly accustomed to handling old and worn
coins. No one now actually refuses any gold money in
retail business, so that the sweater, if he exists at all,
has all the opportunities he can desire. I have met with
sovereigns deficient to the extent of four to five grains,
or 8cl. to lOd., but they nevertheless circulate. If under
a better system the gold currency consisted entirely of
full- weight, fresh coins, with sharp, new, perfect impres-
sions, attention would quickly be drawn to any coin
which appeared to bo worn or ill-treated in any degree.
As the currency, too, would be constantly passing through
the automaton weighing-machines of the Bank of Eng-
land, without previously undergoing the operation of
garbling by bullion brokers, sweated coins, if they
existed at all, would soon be detected; whereas, accord-
ing to the present system, the bank authorities have
no opportunity of examining the whole coinage. It is
the present state of things, then, which gives the best
opportunity for tampering with the currency, though
there is no evidence to show that fraudulent practices
are carried on to any appreciable extent. Under the
proposed new system such practices would be rendered
almost impossible.

Supply of Gold Coin.

It is the theory of the English monetary law that
every individual is entitled to take gold to the mint and
have it coined gratuitously, all the expenses being borne
by the public revenues. It is intended that the coin


116


MONEY.


shall be rendered identical in value with an equal quantity
of gold bullion, so that it shall, in short, be so much
certified bullion^ and shall be reconvertible into ingots
without loss. Though this theory is simple and sound
in some respects, it is not perfectly carried into practice.
The mint never engages to deliver coin in immediate
exchange for gold sent for coining, so that there is a
loss of interest during the uncertain interval of coinage.
If, instead of sending gold directly to the mint, the
owner pursues the customary mode of selling it to the
Bank of England, he receives, according to the Bank
Charter Act of 1844, only £3 iTs. 9d, per ounce, instead
of the full mint price of £3 17s. lOJcZ. Moreover, it has
been pointed out by Mr. E. Seyd, that, as the bank
used to conduct their bullion business, there was a
series of small charges or profits made for weighing,
melting, assaying, the turn of the scale, tlie difference of
the assay reports, etc., which amounted on the whole,
including the above charge of l\d. per ounce for demur-
rage, to 0’2828 per cent, on the value of the gold. The
bank has since made some small improvements in the
mode of conducting the business, but it may still be
considered that the cost of converting gold bullion into
sovereigns is about \ per cent.

Though every person whatever has the right, under
the Coinage Act, of talcing gold to the mint and having
it coined free of charge and in order of priority without
undue preference, no one ever does use the privilege,
except the Bank of England. During an inquiry into
the Bank Act in 1857, Mr. Twells stated that he had


THE ENGLISH SYSTEM OP METALLIC CURRENCY. 117


once sent £10,000 to the mint, and was afterwards sur-
prised to find liis firm of Spooner and Co., mentioned
in a parliamentary paper as the only private firm that
had ever done such a thing. The directors of the Bank
of England have natiu^ally acquired the monopoly of
transactions with the mint, because they have to keep
large stocks both of coin and bullion to meet the de-
mands of the Issue Department and of their customers,
including, directly or indirectly, the whole of the bankers
of the United Kingdom. They can convert portions
of their bullion into coin without any loss of interest
or cost, whenever they find the stock of coin running
down. They feel the monetary pulse of the whole com-
munity, and they have all the requisite appliances for
the custody, assay, or exact weighing of bullion. Even
those persons who need to possess largo sums of gold
often employ the bank to weigh, pack, and warehouse
it, and the bank is always willing to do the work for
fixed low charges. Hence it is most natural and con-
venient that the bank should act as the agent of the
mint. Though the bank makes a certain profit out of
the business, it is hardly earned at the cost of the
public, but rather comes out of the economy with
which the work is managed. It could i)i no way improve
the currency of the country if every one who owned a
few ounces of gold were to run with it to the mint,
throwing upon the country the cost of melting and
assaying insignificant ingots, and complicating the
accounts and transactions of the mint.


118


MONEY.


Supply of Silver Coin.

On account of the absurd misapprehensions recently
existing as to the scarcity of silver money, and the
supposed ‘ right of private individuals to demand the
coinage of silver, it may be well to describe exactly how
the supply of silver coin is legally regulated and prac-
tically carried out. There is no law, statute, or common,
which gives any private person, company, or institution,
the right to take silver to the mint, and demand coin
in exchange, l^lius it is left in the hands of the Treasury
and the mint to issue so much and such denominations
of silver coins as they may think needful for the public
service. This state of the law is perfectly right ;
because, as the silver coins are tokens, tlicy cannot be
got rid of by melting or exportation at their nominal
values. If individuals were free to demand as much
silver coin as they liked, a surplus might be thrown
into circulation in years of brisk trade, which in a sub-
sequent year of depressed trade would lie upon people’s
hands.

Practically speaking, the mint is guided in the supply
of silver coin by the Bank of England, not because this
bank has by law any special powers, privileges, or duties
in the matter, but because, in acting as the bank of
banks, and the bank of government departments, it has
the best opportunities of judging when more coin is
wanted. Not only do all the London bankers draw
silver coin from the Bank of England when they need it,
but the same is done directly or indirectly by all the


THE ENGLISH SYSTEM OP METALLIC CUERENCY. 119

other bankers in the kingdom. A deficiency of silver
coin in any county is shown by the stock of the local
bankers running down. They replenish their stocks
either from the nearest branch of the Bank of England
or from their London agents, who again draw from the
Bank of England. At other times or places the bankers
tend to accumulate a surplus of silver coin. Some banks
in a large town may happen to have accounts with many
shopkeepers, butchers, brewers, cattle-dealers, or dealers
of one kind or another, who deposit silver coin in large
quantities. Other banks may be largely drawn upon by
manufacturers for the payment of wages, and may suffer
from a deficiency of silver coin. It is a common practice,
therefore, for bankers in any locality to assist each
other by buying or selling superfluous silver coin as the
case may require. If a superfluity of coin, however,
cannot be got rid of in this way, it may be returned to
the Bank of England or one of its branches. This bank
indeed is in no vray bound to provide or receive large
sums in silver, and it therefore usually makes a small
charge of about five shillings per hundred pounds to
cover the trouble and risk. In consideration of this
charge the bank bears the cost of transmission by rail-
way, examines the coin for the detection of base pieces
and the withdrawal of worn coin — which latter it sends
to the mint for recoinage, and acts in general as the
agent of the mint.

Having the business so much in its hands, it is
obvious that the department of the bank which man-
ages the receipt and issue of silver coin can judge accur-


120


MONEY.


ately when a fresh supply of coin is wanted. Before
the stock runs too low notice is given to the mint, and
money is usually advanced to the Master that he may
purchase silver bullion for coinage. Under this system
it is almost impossible for a deficiency of currency to
arise without becoming known to the mint, and if, two
or three years ago, the supi^ly could not be made ecpial
to the sudden demand, it was because the mint was not
supplied by governinent with machinery adcrpiate to the
growing wants of the country. The existing system, in
short, seems to be as nearly perfect as can bo desired,
provided that tlie mint bo rebuilt and organized in such
a manner as to enable it to meet any demand which the
fluctuations of trade may occasion.

The Royal MinL

While treating of the English system of metallic
money, it is impossible to avoid expressing the wish that
the House of Commons and the government will no
longer delay a complete reconstruction of the Eoyal
Mint. The mint factories, as they now stand, were very
creditable to the generation which erected them ; but
it is needless to say that in the last fifty or seventy years
we have immensely advanced, both in the art of con-
structing machinery and in our ideas of the arrange-
ment and economy of manufactories. What should we
think of a Cotton Spinnmg Company, which should
propose to use a mill and machinery originally con-
structed by Arkwright, or to drive a mill by engines


THE ENGLISH SYSTEM OF METALIJC CURRENCY, 121


turned out of the Soho works in the time of Boulton and
Watt ? Yet the nation still depends for its coinage upon
the presses actually erected by Boulton and Watt,
although much more convenient coining presses have
since been invented and employed in foreign and colonial
mints.

The present mint workshops are quite inadequate for
meeting the demands which may be thrown upon them
by the increasing industry and wealth of the United
Kingdom, not to speak of the Britisli Empire. A few
years ago it was impossible to turn out silver coin as
([uicldy as it was required wlicn trade was brisk, and,
while one metal is being coined, there are no means of
meeting the demand for other kinds of coin. As to the
bronze coinage, it has generally to be obtained from
Birmingham presses, and some that is issued is of very
inferior exeeution. Even silver blanks have been ob-
tained from Birmingham. The British mint ought to
represent the skill and wealth of the British nation,
and no petty considerations should be allow'od to post-
pone so necessary a reform.

Nothing short of a complete reconstruction of the
muit workshops will meet the requirements of the case.
If this is to be done, much convenience and economy
will arise from abandoning the large and valuable site
upon Tower Hill, and erecting an entirely new mint in a
more accessible position. The opinions of Mr. E. Seyd
upon this subject are worthy of much attention.


122


MONET.


CHAPTER XI.

FRACTIONAL CURRENCY.

One monetary question which can hardly be said to be
satisfactorily solved as yet, is that of selecting the best
possible material for coins of small value, called in
English in French monnaie cVappoinL The

fractional coins should be equal in value to about a
tenth part of the silver ones, coin for coin, but it
unfortunately happens that there is no suitable metal
of which the value is now one-tenth part of that of
silver. In the time of the Romans, gold Avas about ten
times as valuable as silver, and silver about ten times as
valuable as copper, so that there Avould then have been
no difficulty in constructing a perfect decimal system of
money.

To throAv light upon this subject, I have drawn out
the following table, in which are shown the weights
of the principal commercial metals which are of equal
values at present. The numbers in such a table must
of course be subject to perpetual fluctuations, according
to the changes in the market prices of the metals. In
some cases, too, it is difficult to find any accurate quota-


FRACTIONAIi CURRENCY.


123


tions at all, and the price often depends greatly upon
the manufactured state of the metal. Gold and silver
are taken as of standard fineness, and gold forms the
unit.


Equivalent Weights of the Principal Metals.


Gold .

. 1

Tin . .

942

Platinum .

. H

Copper .

. 1,696

Aluminium

. 7.

Lead . .

. 6,360

Silver . .

. 16

Bar Iron .

. 15,900

Nickel , .

. 71

Pig ton .

. 60,880


It may be worthy of notice that when we thus draw
out what may be called the commercial equivalents of the
metals, they are found to form a scries very rudely
approximating to a geometrical scries with the common
ratio 3. Silver, however, is an exception. There is,
too, one term missing between nickel and tin, and as
tin is not a coin able metal, there is a wide interval
between nickel and copper, and a still wider one between
silver and copper. At present silver is almost exactly
one hundred times as valuable as copper ; hence copper
pence must either contain in metallic value but a frac-
tion of the nominal value, or else they must be very
heavy and bulky. When a new copper coinage was issued
in England from the mint of Boulton and Watt in 1797,
the coins were made nearly of standard weight, at the
rate of an ounce avoii’diipois for each penny. The)re
was a double inconvenience in this. Sixteen pence
actually weighed a pound avoirdupois, at which rate the


124


MONEY.


people would now be carrying three times as great a
weight in their pockets as with our bronze currency.
Moreover, the price of copper having risen, Boulton’s
pence became more valuable as metal than as coins,
and were used as material in spite of their beautiful
execution.

The first and most obvious course was to reduce the
weight of the penny, making it purely a token coin.
The old pennies of Victoria weighed about 290 grains
each, instead of about 433 grains, as in the coinage of
Boulton and Watt, a reduction of about one-third part.
The bronze penny has been still further reduced, and
ought to weigh 145*8 grains.

There arc two inconveniences which may arise from
too great and sudden a reduction in the weight of token
currency. There is a risk of the population rejecting
the new coins as fraudulently light. This was the case
with the new copper .live- and ton-centime pieces, struck
in France in 1794 by the Bevolutionary Government,
at the rate of one gram for each centime, which was
half the previous rate. The government was obliged
to call in the light coin and issue it again at the old
weight, and only in the time of Napoleon III. could
coins of one gram per centime be put into circulation.
The people, then, must be educated to receive very light
tokens, and the reduction must be made by moderate
steps-

In the second place, if the metal is easily coined or
manipulated like copper, if it fails to retain a very good
impression, and if there is a considerable margin for


FRACTIONAL CURRENCY.


126


profit, the temptation to false coiners might become
strong. I am not aware that this has ever happened
in regard to the English copper coinage, but counterfeit
sous used to be manufactured on a large scale in the
Faubourg Saint Antoine, in Paris, almost under the eyes
of the government.

At the best, too, pure copper makes indifferent coin,
being deficient in hardness, so that it soon becomes dis-
figured ; it has a disagreeable odour which it communi-
cates to the fingers ; and when exposed to damp air it
becomes covered with verdigris, which is both unsightly
and poisonous. I proceed to consider the various ways in
which it has been attempted to substitute for copper
coin some more convenient currency.


Billon Coin,

Pennies and twopenny pieces, if now made of stan-
dard silver, like the Maundy money, would be too small
and light for use, weighing respectively, 7il and 14|
grains. Even the threepenny pieces, now so abundant
in England, and weighing 21’8 grains each, arc incon-
veniently small. In England, for a very long time, no
silver has been coined of less fineness than the old
standard of 925 parts in 1000. In many continental
countries the smaller currency has been made of a very
low alloy of silver and copper, called lillon. Such
coins were at one time current, to a certain extent, in
France, the metal containing only one part of silver in
five of alloy, but they have long been recalled. In Nor-


126


MONEY.


way the small currency now consists partly of half-
skilling and one-skilling pieces in copper, the skilling
being nearly equal in value to an English halfpenny,
but principally of two, three, and four-skilling pieces,
composed of billon, containing, according to an analysis
performed for me at the Owens’ College chemical labora-
tory, one part of silver and three of copper. These
billon pieces are very convenient in size, and, being for
the most part newly issued, arc clean and neat. Billon
is still being coined in Austria.

It is in the states now forming the German empire
that billon coins have been most extensively used,
especially in pieces of three, four, and six kreutzers, the
so-called scheiderniinze now being recalled. This con-
sists of silver alloyed with throe, four, or more times its
weight of copper. Before such base silver is passed
through the coining press, it is usual to dissolve the
copper from the surface of the blank pieces of metal, so
as to produce a film of pure white silver upon the sur-
face. This ojjeration, called colourinrj, gives a fine
bright appearance to the coins when new, and they are
easily put into circulation. But after a little time the
silver film is worn off, and the coins assume a very
patchy aspect. Billon coinage seems to have, too, an
extraordinary power of accumulating a layer of dirt of
a very disagreeable character, with which all travellers
in Germany in past years must be well acquainted.
Moreover, it offers great facilities to the counterfeiter,
and for several sufficient reasons cannot be recommended
for adoption.


FRACTIONAL CURRENCY.


127


Composite Coin,

It is said that Saint Louis, the great King of France,
finding much want of small money to pay his soldiers,
caused little pieces of silver wire, weighing nine and
eighteen grains, to he fixed on pieces of stamped leather,
and circulated for one- and two-dime pieces. The silver
gave the value, and the leather served as a case or handle
to preserve the small bit of metal from being lost. In
recent times, composite coins, having a centre piece of
silver and a rim of copper, were constructed on similar
principles. A model penny of this kind has an agree-
able appearance and a convenient size, but seems to be
subject to several objections. The cost of coinage would
be considerable ; the coins could hardly be made so
perfect that the centre would not come out sometimes ;
the contact of dissimilar metals would set up electro-
chemical action , and the copper would be corroded ; and,
lastly, it would be difficult to detect counterfeit silver
pieces inserted by the forger. Composite coins of a
similar character were struck in France under Napoleon
L, about the year 1810, but were never circulated.
Pennies formed of a copper centre with a brass rim have
been employed in England, and tin pence, halfpence,
or farthings, with a copper plug inserted near the
centre, were long used, and are plentiful in numismatic
cabinets.


128


MONEY.


Bronze Coin,

It was known, even in prehistoric times, that a small
quantity of tin communicated hardness to copper, and
the ancient nations were familiar with the use of bronze
thus manufactured. Tho French Revolutionary Govern-
ment melted up the bells of the churches seized by them,
and the sous de clocltc, as they were called, made from
the bell metal, were superior to coins of pure copper.
Yet curiously enough no modern government thought of
employing a well-chosen bronze for small money, until
the government of the late Emperor of the French
undertook tho recoinage of the old sous in 1852. This
recoinago was carried out with great success.

Between the years 1853 and 1867 coins to the
nominal value of about two millions sterling, consisting
of 800 millions of pieces, and weighing eleven millkins
of kilograms (10,826 tons) were struck, in addition to
a subsequent issue of about 200 millions of pieces. The
experiment was in almost every way successful. The
ten and five-centime pieces now circulating in France
are models of good minting, with a low but sharp and
clear impression. They were readily accepted by the
people, although only weighing as much as the sous ,
rejected in the time of the Revolution, namely, one gram
per centime, and they are wearing well.

The bronze used consists of 95 parts o^ copper, four
of tin, and one of zinc. It is much harder than coppey,
yet so tough and impressible that it takes a*fine impres-


FRACTIjONAL CURRENCY.


129


sion from the dies, and retains it for a long time. It
cannot be struck except by a press of some power, and
thus counterfeiting is rendered almost impossible. It
can hardly be said to corrode by exposure to air or
damp, and merely acquires a natural patina, or thin
dark film of copper oxide, which throws the worn parts
of the design into relief, and increases the beauty of
the coin.

Bronze has since been coined by the governments
of England, the United States, Italy, and Sweden, and
it seems probable that it will entirely take tlie place of
copper. The German government is now using bronze
for the one-pfennig pieces.

. English Brotize Coin.

The old copper coinage of the United Kingdom was
replaced, from ten to fifteen years ago, hy a much more
convenient and. elegant series of pence, halfpence, and
farthings, struck in exactly the same kind of bronze as
the French centime pieces. The English coins, though
far from being so well executed as the French ones, are
clean, and likely to w^ear w^ell. The only great objection
which can be raised to them, is that they are still of
considerable size and w^eight, although less than the
old copper coins. As all the latter are now withdrawn,
and few of the new ones can yet be lost or destroyed,
we know verj^ accurately the amount of the English
fractional currency. The whole amount issued in the
years 1861 to.l873 is as follows : —


E


130


MONEY.


Weight
in tons.

Pennies . . . 1,685
Halfpennies . . 918

Farthings . . 149


Number of Nominal value in

pieces. pounds sterling.

170.419.000 £710,082

164.505.000 342,719

53,594,000 55,826


2652 388,518,000 £1,108,627

Including a smixll amount issued before 1861, the
whole value of the bronze coin put into circulation up
to the end of 1873 was £1,143,633. It is remarkable
that the quantity of small coins used in England is
much less than in France, whore at least 1000 millions
of pieces, chiefly of ten and five centimes, are in use.
Thus while the English, Scotch, and Irish seem to be
suflEicicntly supplied with Sid. per head, the French
employ on the average 1 franc 60 centimes, (15 ponce),
the Belgians, 2 francs 26 centimes (21i- pence), and the
Italians as much as 3 francs 10 centimes (29 J pence). •


Weight of the Currency.

It is curious that the weights of the several kinds of
currency vary inversely as their nominal values ; thus,
taking the i)aper circulation of the United Kingdom
at 40 millions, the gold roughly at 100 millions, tlie
silver at 15 millions, and the bronze as above, I find
the weights to be approximately as follows : —

Paper currency 16 tons

Gold \, 786 „

Silver ,, 1670 „

Bronze „ 2652 ,,


5124 tons


FRACTIONAL CURRENCY.


131


It is impossible to give a satisfactory reason why
the least valuable part of the currency should be so
much the most weighty. A tendency thus arises for the
pence to accumulate upon the hands of retail tradcirs,
especially publicans, omnibus proprietors, and news-
paper publishers. At one time the London brewers had
such large quantities of bronze coins thrown upon their
hands from the public-houses which they own, that the
mint had eventually to arrange to buy it from them,
instead of coining more. In large towns, arrangements
have to be made for getting rid of the accumulating
pence with tlie least trouble and loss ; the coin is trans-
ferred weekly to mills and factories, where it is used in
paying wages. Bankers refuse to have anything to do
with bronze coin beyond the amount of a shilling, for
which it is legal tender, and it is usual for persons to
object to receive more than 2d. or 3d, of cliange in ponce.

It is worthy of inquiry whether this tendency of the
fractional currency to stagnation would not be remedied
by the substitution of a much lighter and more elegant
currency of nickel, or of some alloy yet to be invented.
In France, it is found that the bronze coinage circulates
much more freely than the old copper and boll-metal
sons, which tended to accumulate in certain localities.
Our bronze pence are much better than tlu^ old copper
pence, hut it does not follow that we have in any degree
approximated to perfection. Coins of about half the
weight of those in circulation would be much more
convenient.


132


MONEY.


Nickel, Manganese, Aluminium, and other Metals and
Alloys.

The employment of nickel in the manufacture of
small money has already been referred to (p. 49), and
if the conditions of supply and demand of this metal
were more steady wo should perhaps want nothing
better. The alloy of nickel and copper generally used
is hard and difficult to coin, but it takes a line impres-
sion W'hich it will probably require long wear to efface.
Nickel coinage is thus very unlikely to be counterfeited,
and its peculiar nondescript colour renders it easily
distinguishable from silver or gold money. The pro-
gress of metallurgy, however, is making us acquainted
with several new metals and many now alloys, and it is
quite likely that some new material for fractional money
will eventually lie found. Dr. Percy, having regard to
the rising price of nickel, suggests tliat manganese
should be employed instead, as it gives alloys of similar
character, and can bo procured in greater quantities.

Dr. Clemens Winkler strongly recommends alumi-
nium as suited for monetary purposes. Trial pieces,
marked ‘^ Jreal, 1872,” have been struck, and one of
them may be seen in the Monetary Museum at the Paris
mint. This metal has a characteristic bluish white
colour, l)ut its great advantage is its low specific gravity.
The trial piece in question, of which a specimen was
furnished to me by Mr. Eoberts, the chemist of the Eng-
lish mint, is two centimetres, or 0*79 inch, in diameter,
a little wider than a sixpence and much thicker, and yet


FRACTIONAL CURRENCY.


138


weighs only one gram, or 15J grains. Were our pence
and halfpennies as light and convenient as this coin, we
could carry many of them in the pocket without disconi;
fort. The chief difficulty in adopting such a new metal
would arise from the uncertain price at which it can be
produced. It is unknown, too, how it would wear. Even
if pure aluminium were found to be unsuitable for coining,
some of its remarkable alloys might be employed instead.
Mr. Graham, the late Master of the Mint, had a series of
trial pieces of one to ten cents struck in the so-called
aluminium bronze.”

I may suggest that one of tlie best possible materials
for small money would be steel, provided it could be
prevented from rusting. Steel coins would be difficult to
strike, but when once struck could be hardened, so as to
be almost indestructible. The cheapness of the material
would allow of their production on a large scale at small
cost, while they could not possibly be imitated by the
false coiners with any profit. Hence it would be needless
to pay any attention to the metallic value of the coins,
which might be struck of the most convenient sizes,
probably those of the sixpence and shilling. Now it
has been pointed out by Sir John Herschel (Physical
Geography, reprinted from the ‘‘Encyclopaedia Britan-
nica,” § 320, p. 289), that steel appears to be protected
from rusting by being alloyed with a small quantity of
nickel ; this at least is the effect in the case of meteoric
iron. It is much to be desired that such an alloy should
be fairly tried. I am informed by Mr. Eoberts, that
silver also alloys well with iron or steel, and that such


134


MONEY.


mixtures have been proposed for coining purposes. An
alloy of silver, copper, and zinc has already, indeed, been
fully tested in Switzerland, where it is used for tvrenty,
ten, and five-centime pieces. These coins are convenient
in size, but have a poor yellowish white appearance.
They have not been adopted, so far as I know, by any
other country ; and there seems to be no use in putting
silver into them, as it would probably be easy to produce
a similarly coloured alloy without silver.

It is a misfortune of what may be called the science of
monetary technology, that its study is almost of necessity
confined to tlie few officers employed in government mints.
Hence we can hardly expect the same advances to be
made in the production of money as in other branches of
manufaciture, where there is wide and free competition.
Moreover, it is very difficult to get an opportunity of
testing any new kind of coin ; in a large currency, like
that of the United Kingdom, it is almost impossible to
execute experiments. But it may be suggested that the
English mint, in supplying coins for some of the smaller
British colonies and possessions, enjoys an admirable
opportunity for testing new i)roposals. This need not
involve any cost to such colonies, as the English govern-
ment, in striking a few hundreds or thousands of pounds’
worth of small coin for a colony, might readily engage to
withdraw them at its own cost if found unsuitable after
a certain number of years.


( 135 )


CHAPTEE XIL

THE BATTLE OF THE STANDARDS.

Ever since the great discoveries of gold in California
and Australia began to disturb the value of that metal
relatively to silver and to other commodities, it has been
a continual subject of discussion what standard of value
should be ultimately adopted. There have been par-
tizans of the now antiquated silver standard, of the
double standard, and of the gold standard. Having in
England long possessed a gold standard, we liave been
only in a secondary degree concerned in such discussions,
upon which quite a library of works has been written by
distinguished French, Belgian, German, Swiss, Italian,
and Dutch economists. The changes actually effected in
the currencies of Europe since 1849 are of the most
extensive character. Some nations have more than once
changed their policy. Holland, anticipating a great fall
in the value of gold, adopted silver as the single standard
of value in 1850. This change had to be effected at
considerable pecuniary loss, and it is understood that
Holland is again exposed to the trouble and expense
of having to admit a gold standard, either as a sole
legal tender, like Germany, or else concurrently with


136


MONEY.


a restricted silver coinage, like Belgium and the other
monetary allies of France.

From the time of Locke to that of Lord Liverpool, the
comparative advantages of gold and silver, as the prin-
cipal measure of value, were a frequent subject of discus-
sion among English political writers. Locke and most
of the earlier English economists upheld silver. Lord
Liverpool definitely decided English policy in favour of
gold, and the tendency of oi)mion is now strongly in the
same direction. Several countries have recently changed
from silver to gold, and since the single example of
Holland no nation has passed from gold to silver. Even
Austria, which is still supposed to represent the silver
standard, has taken a step towards a change by coining
ten- and twenty-franc pieces in gold, the inscriptions
10 Francs and 20 Francs now appearing, as well as 4
Gulden and 8 Gulden, on the new gold coins of the
Austro-Hungarian empire.

The Double Standard.

The single silver standard having been practically
abandoned as regards the currencies of Europe, the
battle has more recently waged between the partizans of
the double standard, represented in the currencies of
France and the Monetary Convention of Western Europe,
and those who uphold a gold standard combined with
subsidiary coinages of silver and small money, somewhat
in the manner of the English system. The advantages
of the double standard have been most ably advocated
by MM, Wolowski, Courcelle-Seneuil, Seyd, Leon, Prince-


THE BATTLE OP THE STANDARDS.


137


Smith, and others, while MM. Chevalier, De Parieu,
Hendriks, Frere Orban, Levasseur, Fcer-Herzog, and
Juglar, have been some of the leading upholders of the
gold standard. The literature of the subject is very
extensive and, to most readers, dreary in the extreme,
but I will try to give a tolerably concise statement of the
principal arguments.

In the first place, I have no doubt whatever that
M. Wolowski is theoretically quite correct in what he says
about the compensatory action of the double standard
system. English writers seem completely to have mis-
understood the question, asserting that the system
exposes us to the extreme fluctuations of both metals.
No doubt, when gold and silver are both legal tenders to
unlimited amounts, there will be a tendency to pay in
that metal which is overrated in the legal ratio of 15^
to 1. Only when the price of standard silver is exactly
5s. per ounce is it a matter of indifference in

France whether a debt be paid in gold or silver, and this
exact price has only been quoted a few times in the
London market in the last thirty years. Accordingly, it
has been urged that the double standard is not really a
double one, but only an alternative gold and silver stan-
dard. When silver is lower in price than 5s. OJ-fd. per
ounce, silver becomes the standard; when silver rises
above this price, gold takes its place as the real measure
of value.

So far the English economists are no doubt correct ;
but, in the first place, it does not follow that the prices
of commodities follow the extreme fluctuations of value


138


MONEY.


of both metals, as many writers have inconsiderately
declared. Prices only depend upon the course of the
metal which happens to have sunk in value below the
legal ratio of 15J to 1. Now, if in the accompanying
figure we represent by the line A the variation of the
value of gold as estimated in terms of some third com-
modity, say copper, and by the line B the corresponding
varications of the value of silver ; then, superposing these
curves, the line C would be the curve expressing the
extreme fluctuations of both metals. Now the standard
of value always follows the metal which falls in value ;
hence the curve I) really shows the course of variation
of the standard of value. This line undergoes more
frequent undulations than either of the curves of gold
or silver, but the fluctuations do not proceed to so great
an extent, a point of much greater importance.

A

B


THE BATTLE OF THE STANDARDS.


139


Compensatory Action, «

Nor is this the whole error of the English writers.
A little reflection must show that MM. Wolowski and
Courcelle-Seneuil are quite correct in nrging that a
compensatory or, as I should prefer to call it, equiUhratory
action, goes on under the French currency law, and tends
to maintain both gold and silver more steady in value
tlian they would otherwise be. If silver becomes more
valuable than in the ratio of 1 to 15^ compared with
gold, there arises at once a tendency to import gold into
any country possessing the double standard, so that it
may be coined there, and exchanged for a legally
equivalent weight of silver coin, to be exported again.
This is no matter of theory only, the process having
gone on in Prance until the principal currency, which
was mainly composed of silver in 1849, was in 1860
almost wholly of gold. France absorbed the cheapened
metal in vast quantities and emitted the dearer metal,
which must have had the effect of preventing gold from
falling and silver from rising so much in value as
they would otherwise have done. It is obvious that,
if gold rose in value compared with silver, the action
would be reversed ; gold would be absorbed and silver
liberated. At any moment the standard of value is doubt-
less one metal or the other, and not both ; yet the fact
that there is an alternation tends to make each vary
much less than it would otherwise do. It cannot
prevent both metals from falling or rising in value
compared with other commodities, but it can throw


140


MONEY.


variations of supply and demand over a larger area,
ilistead of leaving each metal to be affected merely by
its own accidents.

Imagine two reservoirs of water, each subject to
independent variations of supply and demand. In the
absence of any connecting pipe the level of the water in
each reservoir will be subject to its own fluctuations only.
But if we open a connection, the water in both will
assume a certain mean level, and the effects of any
excessive supply or demand will be distributed over the
whole area of both reservoirs. The mass of the metals,
gold and silver, circulating in Western Europe in late
years, is exactly represented by the water in these
reservoirs, and the connecting pipe is the law of the 7th
Germinal, an XI, which enables one metal to take the
place of the other as an unlimited legal tender.

The Demonetization of Silver.

M. Wolowski has earnestly warned Europe against
the danger of abrogating the law of the double standard,
and demonetizing silver. Germany, in adopting a gold
standard, is causing a considerable demand for gold, and
at the same time throwing many millions of silver coins
upon the market. Austria, Denmark, Sweden, and Nor-
way are likely to follow her example. If other countries
were to insist upon suddenly having a gold money,
it is evident that gold would tend to rise in value com-
pared with silver, which might be largely depreciated.
If France, Italy, Belgium, and other countries now


THE BATTLE OF THE STANDARDS.


141


possessing theoretically the double standard, were to
allow the free action of their monetary laws, the depre-
ciated silver would flow in and replace the appreciated
gold, so that the change of values would be moderated.
M. Wolowski asserts that if this compensatory action be
suspended, and the demonetization of silver bo extended,
there must ensue a disastrous rise in the value of gold,
thus rendered the sole standard of value. All debts
private and public will be legally due in this metal,
and all burdens will be greatly increased.

Within the last year or two the predictions of M.
Wolowski may seem to have been verified in some degree.
The price of standard silver, which was at one time (>2irf.
per ounce, has already fallen as low as 57 ^( 1 . while the
demonetization of silver in Germany is only partially
accomplished. The whole effect of the great discoveries
of gold was only to raise the price from about 59|d. to
a maximum of 62|d., wliilo the double standard system
freely worked ; but since its action has been, as wo shall
see, suspended, the minting operations of a single govern-
ment can affect the price in a greater degree.

Agreeing that M. Wolowski is entirely correct in an
abstract i)oint of view, and is justified to some extent
by the course of events, I must adhere to the oj)inion
which I expressed at his request in 1868, and which w^as
partially published in his volume, “L’Or et FArgent”

(p. 62).

The question seems to be entirely one of degree, and
in the absence of precise information is quite indeter-
minate. If all the nations of the globe were suddenly


142


MONEY.


and simultaneously to demonetize silver, and require
gold money, a revolution in the value of gold would be
inevitable. But M. Wolowski seems to forget that the
nations of Europe constitute only a small part of the
population of the world. The hundreds of millions who
inhabit India and China, and other parts of the eastern
and tropical regions, emj)loy a silver currency, and there
is not the least fear that tlu^y will make any sudden
change in their habits. The English government has
repeatedly tried to introduce a gold currency into our
Indian possessions, but has always failed, and the gold
coins now circulating there are supposed not to exceed
one tenth part of the metallic currency. Although the
pouring out of forty or fifty millions sterling of silver
from Germany may for some years depress the price of
the metal, it can be gradually absorbed without difficulty
by the eastern nations, which have for two or three
thousand years received a continual stream of the
precious metals from Europe. If other nations should
one after another demonetize silver, yet the East may
bo found quite able to absorb all that is thrust upon it,
provided that this be not done too rapidly.

As regards the gold required to replace silver, it does
not seem to be evident that there will be any scarcity.
The adoption of the gold standard does not necessarily
involve the coining of much gold, for some countries
may, like Norw^ay, or Italy, or Scotland, have a principal
currency almost entirely composed of paper. In other
countries, such as France and Germany, the cheque and
clearing system, which we shall shortly consider, may


THE BATTLE OF THE STANDARDS.


143


be gradually introduced, and may economize to a great
extent the use of the metallic currency. The current
supply of gold from the mines is still very large, and
we cannot be sure that it will not be increased by fresh
discoveries in New Guinea, South Africa, North and
South America, and elsewhere.

In short, then, the amount of supply and amount of
demand of both the precious metals depend upon a
a number of accidents, ciianges, or legislative decisions,
which cannot be in any way predicted. The price of
silver has fallen in conseciuence of the German currency
reforms, but it is by no means certain that it will fall
further than it has already done. That any great rise
will really happen in the purchasing power of gold is
wholly a matter of speculation. We cannot do more
than make random guesses on the subject, and, as a
mere guess, I should say that it is not likely to rise.
Gold has since 1851 been falling in value, and an in-
creased demand for gold is not likely to do more than
slacken, or at the most arrest, the progress of depre-
ciation.


Disadvantages of the DoMe Standard.

While the need for maintaining the system of the
double standard is a matter of speculation, the in-
conveniences of the system are beyond doubt. So
long, indeed, as its operation resulted in substituting
a beautiful coinage of napoleons, half-napoleons, and
five-franc pieces in gold fof the old heavy silver ecus,


144


MONEY,


there was no complaint, and the French people admired
the action of their ’compensatory system. But when, a
year or two ago, it became evident that the heavy silver
currency was coming back again, and that the gold coin
was likely to form the circulating medium of other
nations, the matter assumed a different aspect. The
French, in short, have been educated to the use of gold,
and they are not likely to wish for the return of a cur-
rency 15J times as lieavy and cumbrous. Moreover, the
change involves a loss to the community in general,
who receive their debts in a metal of lessened value ;
and a part of the benefit is reaped by bullion-brokers,
money-changers, and bankers, for whom a factitious
trade in gold and silver money is created by the law of
the 7th Germinal, an XL The statesmen of the countries
still maintaining the double standard must have reflected
that other nations showed no tendency whatever to
adopt the same system. Thus, if France were to con-
tinue to act as a great compensatory currency pendulum,
she would bear the cost and inconvenienco, while other
nations would reaj) ecpially with herself the advantage
of the increased steadiness of value of the pi*ecious
metals. The founders of the Monetary Convention
and the advocates of International Currency never in-
tended to sacrifice themselves to this extent for the
benefit of the world. Accordingly they have in effect
abandoned the double standard.

When the /enewed tendency to coin silver five-franc
pieces in large quantities first became apparent, the
French goVi^nment at onee suspended the coinage.


THE BATTLE OF THE STANDARDS.


145


Subsequently an agreement has been made from year to
year between France, Switzerland, Belgium, and Italy,
that each country shall coin only a fixed quantity of silver
ecus proportional to its population. An agreement to the
same effect had before existed as regards tbe silver
token currency of two-franc and smaller piecCvS ; but the
coinage of ecus, which were in theory standard coins and
legal tender for unlimited amounts, had been left unre-
stricted. The result of the limitation of coinage now
imposed is to destroy the action of the double standard
system. Silver being coined only in limited quantities
cannot replace and drive out the gold, and the five-franc
pieces, although worth more than five single franc pieces,
are worth less than the fourth part of a napoleon or
twenty-franc piece in gold. Although, so far as I under-
stand, tliey remain a legal tender for unlimited amounts,
they cannot be had in unlimited quantities, and are thus
practically reduced to the rank of token coins. By the
least possible legislative change, the French and other
governments of the Monetary Convention have thus
practically abandoned the double standard, and have
adopted one which is hardly distinguishable from the
composite legal tender of England and Germany. Ever
since 1810 copper or bronze money had only been legal
tender in France to the amount of 4 francs 99 centimes,
and since the fineness of the smaller silver currency was
lowered, this money also was restricted as a legal tender
to the amount of 50 francs for any one payment between
individuals, or to the amount of 100 francs for any pay-
ment to the public treasuries; The. silver ecu forms the


146


MONEY.


single link by which France holds to the double standard,
and this link is half severed.

It is remarkable that the changes thus effected in the
money of Western Europe are almost the same as those
by which the United States had previously abandoned
the double standard. Until the year 1853 the silver
dollar of the United States mint was a standard coin of
unrestricted legal tender, concurrently with the gold
coinage of eagles and their fractions. The legal ratio of
silver to gold in weight indeed, was 16 to 1, instead of
15J to 1 as in France. More silver being thus required
to make a legal payment in America than elsewhere,
gold was naturally preferred for this purpose, and the
silver was sent abroad. To remedy this state of things
the government of Washington, in 1853, reduced the lialf-
dollar and smaller silver pieces to the condition of token
coins, and though the single silver dollar pieces remained
of standard weight, they were coined in very small
quantities and were practically suppressed. The pre-
dominance of an inconvertible paper currency suspended
the question of metallic money for a time. The Coinage
Act of the United States Congress came into operation
on 1st April, 1873, and constituted the gold one-dollar
piece the sole unit of value, whilst it restricted the legal
tender of the new silver trade doUar, and of the half-
dollar and its subdivisions, to an amount not exceeding
live dollars in any one payment.* Thus the double
standard previously existing in theory was finally
abolished, and the United States was added to the list of
nations adopting the single gold standard.


THE BATTLE OF THE STANDARDS.


147


The Monetary Systems of the World,

On reviewing the changes which have recently taken
place in the currencies of the principal nations, we notice
an unmistakable tendency to the adoption of gold as the
measure of value, and the sole principal medium of
exchange. This system is now adopted throughout Great
Britain and Ireland, the Australian colonies, and New
Zealand, the African colonies, and many of the minor
possessions of the British empire. It has existed for
some time in Portugal, Turkey, Egypt, and in several
of the South American States, such as Chili and Brazil.
It has been established by recent legislation in the
German empire, and also in the Scandinavian king-
doms of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, where a gold
currency, and principal legal tender, of twenty-kroner
pieces, is now being issued. Even Japan has imitated
European nations, and introduced a gold coinage of
twenty, ten, five, two, and one-yen pieces, the yem being
only three per mille less in value than the American
gold dollar. The new fractional money of Japan is to
consist of fifty, twenty, ten, and five-sen pieces in silver,
the sen corresponding to a cent, and forming a token
money at the fineness of eight parts in ten.

The double standard is still theoretically maintained
in France, Italy, Belgium, Switzerland. Spain, Greece,
and Roumania have also in recent years reformed their
currencies in imitation of the French system, and must,
I suppose, be considered as having a double standard.


148


MONEY.


In the New World, Peru, Ecuador, and New Grenada,
profess to have the same system,

A few years ago a very considerable part of Europe
might have been classed as retaining the ancient system
of a single silver standard, with gold coins circulating,
if at all, at varying rates, as commercial money. The
whole of Germany, north and south, together with
Austria, the Scandinavian kingdoms, and Kussia,
belonged to this group. Owing to the changes already
mentioned, only Austria and Russia now clearly repre-
sent the silver standard in Europe, and even Austria has
begun, since 1870, to coin gold pieces of eight and four
florins, the same in weight and fineness as the French gold
twenty- and ten-franc pieces. By an imperial decree, dated
Vienna, 12tli July, 1873, it is ordered that the French,
Belgian, Italian, and Swiss gold pieces of Wenty, ten,
and five francs shall be internationally accepted in the
Austro-Hungarian empire in the ratio of eight gold
florins to twenty francs of gold coin of the other nations.
Nevertheless the silver standard practically prevails
over a large part of the world. The vast populations
of India and China, Cochin China, the East Indian
Islands, portions of Africa and the West Indies, Central
America and Mexico, have a currency mainly consisting
of silver coins, either rupees as in India, sycee bars as in
China, or silver doUars as in many other places.

The gold standard has thus made great progress, and
it will probably continue to progress. When the United
States return to specie payments, they wiU certainly
adopt gold, and Canada, whose currency can hardly be


THE BATTIiE OF THE STANDARDS.


149


classed at all at present, must do the same. The Latin
nations, having once abandoned the double standard in
practice, are not likely to return to it, and Austria must
follow. An extensive monetary change is hardly to be
expected in Eussia, although it is very remarkable that
in the province of Finland, a part of the empire highly
distinguished for intelligence and good education, Eussia
has positively admitted the franc system and its decimal
subdivisions, the Finnish marc or quarter-rouble having
the precise silver weight and value of the franc, lira,
and peseta. A great step towards a future international
coinage is thus effected. Like changes are impossible
among the poor, ignorant, cons(!rvative nations of India,
China, and the tropics generally. Hence we arrive, as
it seems to me, at a broad, deep distinction. The highly
civilized and advancing nations of Western liluropo and
North America, including also the rising states of
Australasia, and some of the better second-rate states,
such as Egypt, Brazil, and Japan, will all have the
gold standard. The silver standard, on the other hand,
will probably long be maintained throughout the Eus-
sian empire, and most parts of the vast continent of
Asia; also in some parts of Africa, and possibly in
Mexico. Excluding, however, these minor and doubtful
cases, Asia and Eussia seem likely to uphold silver
against the rest of the world adopting gold. In such a
result there seems to be nothing to regret.


( 150 )


CHAPTER XIII.

TECHNICAL MATTERS RELATING TO COINAGE.

In this chapter I propose) to consider several minor points
relating to the construction and regulation of metallic
currency. Although the first principles of money are
simple, it is surprising how many little details have to
be considered before we can attain the maximum of
convenience. We liave already discussed the selection
of metals to be employed, tlie modes in which they may
be combined into a system, the regulations as to issue,
etc. In this and the following chapters we still have
to consider the character of the alloy which is best
adapted for coining ; the most convenient sizes for coins ;
the method of counting large numbers of coins ; the cost
at which the currency is maintained; the advantages
and disadvantages of international currency of money;
the difficulty of selecting a single standard unit ; the best
series of multiples and submultiples of the unit. At the
most I cannot in this work attempt to give more than a
slight sketch of the complicated questions of detail which
have to be considered before making any change in the
currency.


TECHNICAL MATTERS RELATING TO COINAGE. 151


The Alloy in Coins.

Although we commonly speak of money as consisting
of gold or silver, the coins actually used contain alloys
either of silver and copper, or of gold and copper, or of
gold, silver, and copper. Money struck in nearly pure
gold has indeed been issued both in early and recent
times, and among such gold coins may be mentioned
the ancient bezant, the recent Austrian ducat, contain-
ing 986 parts of gold in 1000, the six-ducat piece of
Naples, containing 996 parts, or the Tuscan sequin,
which is said to be almost pure gold, namely 999 parts
in 1000. Pure gold and silver are, however, soft metals,
so that oven if they were found naturally in the pure
state, it would be desirable to add copper, which com-
municates hardness and reduces very much the abrasion
of the coins. The proportion of copper to be adopted
has been a matter of frequent discussion, and is deter-
mined partly on historical, jiartly 0 ]i scientific grounds.

The exact alloy employed in England ajipears to
have been decided by the system of weights used. Silver
was weighed by the troy pound of 12 ounces, of which
11 oz. 2 dwts. were to be pure silver, and 18 dwts. copper.
This proportion, which, even in 1357, wiis called the
‘‘ old right standard of England,” has, in spite of tem-
porary depreciations, been maintained to tlic present
day, and corresponds to the proportion of 925 parts in
1000. Gold having been weighed by the ancient and
curious system of carat weights, said to be derived from
the seeds of an Abyssinian plant, the unit w^eight of gold


152


MONET.


was 24 carats, of which 22 were to be of pure gold and
two of alloy. This ratio, which has existed for many
centuries, is decimally expressed by 916*66 parts in
1000.

The degrees of fineness employed in one country or
another at different times are infinitely various. Silver
has been coined of only 200 or even 150 parts in 1000,
and gold of 750 or 700 parts; and coins exist of almost
every fineness from these limits up to nearly pure metal.
The only standards of fineness which it is needful to
discuss in the present day are those of 900 and 835
which are proposed for general adoption in international
money. A few years ago, indeed, the llerlin government
contemplated the adoption of a standard German crown,
consisting of ten grams of pure gold and one gram of
alloy, which would give a fineness of or 909*09. This
scheme had no ai)parent advantages, and was fortunately
abandoned in favour of the present German coinage,
which is, both as regards gold and silver, of the fineness
of 900 parts in 1000. This simple decimal proportion
was adopted by the French in tlie time of the Revolution;
it has been extended over the countries belonging to the
Monetary Convention of 1865, and over Spain, Greece,
and other countries which liave more or less imitated the
French system. It was long ago adopted by the United
States, and has been recently introduced into the gold
currency of the Scandinavian kingdoms. The German
government, having now decided to accept it, the simple
decimal fineness is established in all the more advanced
countries, excepting England and some of her colonies,


TECHNICAL MATTERS RELATING TO COINAGE. 158


and a few nations, such as Russia, Portugal, and Turkey,
which have imitated tho English currency and coined
gold at 916*66.

In a chemical and mechanical point of view the
exact degree of fineness is not a matter of importance.
The difference between and is only and

though the often-quoted experiments of Hatchett were
said to show that our standard was slightly bettor than
that of the French, tlie difference is so slight and ques-
tionable as to afford no ground for preference. The
late Master of the Mint, Professor Graham, was quite
willing to accept the standard of 900, both for gold and
silver, and there are really no reasons, except prejudice
and traditional usage, why we sliould not do so as soon
as we make any change at all. Uniformity in the
practice of nations is desirable in this and many otlier
points, and the French economists lay great stress upon
this question of fineness. It appears to me, however, that
the exact degree of fineness is altogether a matter of
secondary importance. If we were now to make our
sovereign niiie-tentlis fine, we sliould have to raise its
weight from 128*274 grains to 125*557 grains, and the
mixture of old and new coins would entirely frustrate
the method of counting gold money by the scales adopted
in all banks. We must certainly, therefore, postpone
a change of fineness in gold until we make a more con-
siderable monetary reform. I see no reason, on the
other hand, why the mint should not at once be author-
ized to coin silver of the decimal fineness of nine-tenths.
This would merely involve an imperceptible increase in


154


MONEY.


the thickness of the coins, which would, in the case of
the smaller ones, be advantageous.

The fineness of 835 parts in 1000 was adopted by
France, as already stated (p. 76), in order to reduce the
two-franc and smaller pieces to the rank of tokens, with-
out making any change in their weight and appearance.
There is no special objection to tliis alloy, which is
perfectly coinable and of good colour; but it is not
likely that it will be adopted by the English government,
instead of the present fineness of 925 parts in 1000
of our silver coinage, and does not need further discus-
sion. It may be added that, in former years, the alloy
contained in gold coins consisted in part of silver, which
is always present in a greater or less quantity in native
gold wherever it is found. The yellow appearance of
guineas, and also of many Australian sovereigns, was
duo to this silver alloy ; but all such silvery gold coins
are rapidly withdrawn now by gold refiners, who can
profitably separate the silver. The very remarkable
invention of Mr. F. E. Miller, of the new Melbourne
mint, enables this separation to be effected with great
ease, and at small cost, almost on the gold fields. It
is only requisite to melt the silvery gold, and pass a
current of chlorine gas into it, to obtain the silver in the
state of chloride, wdiich is readily separated from the
gold and reduced to the metallic state. It is a further
advantage of this simple process that all gold so treated
is freed from accidental impurities, and rendered per-
fectly malleable and fit for coining. One of the great
difficulties of mint masters, the brittleness of gold, has


TECHNICAL MATTERS RELATING TO COINAGE. 156


thus been entirely overcome. A full description of
the process, as employed at the English, Australian,
American, Norwegian, and other mints, will bo found in
the First Annual Eeport of the Deputy Master of the
English Mint (p. 93), and in the Second Eeport (p. 33),
or in the specification as printed by the Patent Ofi&ce.


The Size of Coins,

There appear to be pretty well defined limits of size
within which we should confine ourselves in the striking
of money. Coins must not be so small that they can be
easily lost, or can with difficulty be picked up. The rule
seems to be that the coin should cover the whole area of
contact between the points of the thumb and first finger ;
and though, of course, this area will differ wnth men,
women, and children, we should err rather in excess
than defect. On this ground I should condemn the
English threepenny silver piece as too small, and,
on the same ground, the Swedish ton-ore piece, the
American ono-dollar gold piece, the former Papal one-
scudo piece, must be pronounced inconveniently small.
The French five-franc gold piece of the later type, the
English fourpenny piece, the Canadian five-cent piece,
or the new silver piece of twenty pfennigs, now being
introduced into the German empire, must be considered
the smallest coins to be tolerated. The thickness of the
coins, hoAvever, must be taken into account as well as
the diameter. The moneys issued from the United
States mint are thicker than usual, and though this


156


MONEY.


tends to give some of tlie coins a clumsy appearance,
yet they seem to me all the more convenient to use.
The French have gone to the opposite extreme, the five^
franc gold piece being very thin, and having a diameter
of nearly seventeen millimetres, while the American
dollar, which is more valuable, has a diameter of little
more than thirteen millimetres. The maximum size of
coins has probably been determined chiefly with regard
to the practical difficulty of coining. The largest coin
which has been very widely circulated is perhaps the
Maria Theresa dollar, measuring 1*6 inches, or 41 milli-
metres, in diameter ; the other most common species of
dollar are somewhat smaller, such as the Spanish dollar
of 1858, measuring 87 millimetres; the American dollar,
1846, the Spanish dollar, 1870, the Mexican dollar, 1872,
measuring from 37 to 38 millimetres. The average
diameter of the dollars which I have examined is 38^
millimetres, or almost exactly an inch aiid a half. In
their larger gold coins, the Americans maintain unusual
thickness. Thus the double eagle, thougli in value equal
to more than four pounds, has a diameter of only 34
millimetres, or 1 inch. The beautiful four-ducat piece
of Austria has a larger diameter than the double eagle,
though it contains less than half the quantity of fine
gold.

The Wear of Coin.

Some attention must be given to the abrasion which
coins suffer in use. In the case of gold coins the loss of
metal thus occasioned is of importance, and leads, as


TECHNICAL MATTERS RELATING TO COINAGE. 157

we have seen (p. Ill), to a gradual depreciation of the
currency. As coins pass frequently from hand to hand,
the amount of metal abraded will be nearly the same as
regards each coin of the same type, and each year of
circulation. The loss will be iiroportional to length of
wear. Now the English law allows a sovereign to be
legal tender so long as it weighs 122-5 grains, or more ;
and the difference between this and the full standard
weight, or 0-774 grain, represents the margin allowed for
abrasion. Now, from experiments described in a paper
read to the London Statistical Society in November,
1868 Jonmalof the Statistical Society,’' Dec,, 18G8, vol.
xxxi. p. 426), I estimated the average wear of a sovereign
for each year of circulation at 0*043 grain (0*00276
gram). It would follow that a sovereign cannot in
general circulate more than about eighteen years without
becoming illegitimately light. This length of time, then,
would constitute what may be called the legal life of a
sovereign. It has since been shown by Dr. Farr, that
certain considerations overlooked in my calculations
would reduce this estimate of the legal life to fifteen years.
Mr. Seyd, on the other hand, thinks that twenty years
might be adopted as the legal age of the sovereign.

When we compare the ciu-rencies of different countries,
it becomes evident that the rate of abrasion will depend
partly upon the rapidity and constancy of circulation,
partly upon the size and character of the coins. Accord-
ing to the inquiries of M. Feer-Herzog in Switzerland,
the average loss of the twenty-franc piece amounts to
200 millionths of the full weight in each year, while


158


MONEY.


with the ten and five-franc gold pieces, the corresponding
amounts are 430 and 620 millionths. My own weighings
of English gold show that the sovereign loses about 350
millionths in each year of wear, and the half-sovereign
no less than 1120 millionths, or more than one-tenth per
cent, per annum. As the English coins are heavier than
the napoleon and half-napoleon, they should suffer less
loss in proportion. M. Feer-IIerzog attributes the ex-
cessive loss manifested by English money to the softer
character of the English alloy of eleven-twelfths. This
cause may contribute something to the effect observed,
but it is probable that the greater rapidity of the
circulation in England is the main ground on which
so great a difference can be explained.

The rate of wear of a coin depends greatly, it will
be seen, upon its size. A large coin, like an English
crown, a French silver ecu, or an American double
eagle, suffers comparatively littki wear, because the sur-
face increases much less rapidly in proportion than the
contents of the coin. The slight degree of abrasion of
the various silver dollars maybe one cause of their popu-
larity in the East. Smaller silver money loses much
more. Thus, according to experiments made at the mint
in 1833, the loss per cent, per annum on half-crowns is
about 2s. Gd,, on shillings 4s,, and on sixpences 7s. Gd,,
or decimally *125, ’200, and ’375 per cent, respectively.
This loss becomes considerable in the course of years, as
may readily be seen in the case of worn sixpences. The
average loss of weight of the old silver coins melted at the
mint, seems to be about 16| per cent., but this loss is


TECHNICAL MATTERS RELATING TO COINAGE. 159


more than covered by the profit upon the issue of new
silver coin. Experiments were made at the mint in 1798
upon the weight of English silver coins then in circula-
tion. It was found that the deficiency amounted in
crowns to 3*31 per cent., and in half-crowns, shillings,
and sixpences respectively, to 9*90, 24*60, and 38*28 per
cent. In the recent withdrawal of tlie old silver money
of South Germany, it was found to have lost on the
average about one-fifth part of its weight.

To reduce the loss arising from the wear of gold coin,
it might seem to be desirable to issue largo gold pieces.
The Americans used to have a great circulation of
eagles and double eagles, the latter especially being very
handsome medal-like pieces. In former days many
large gold coins, such as the carlino, dobraon, doubloon,
quadruple pistole, and the double ryder were current. A
serious objection, however, to such coins as a double
eagle, one-hundred franc-piece, or five-pound piece, is
that they can readily be falsified. Small holes can be
drilled through tliom, and then concealed by hammering.
The application of the file, the sweating bag, or cylinder,
or of chemical reagents, would probably be safer with
large than with small coins. In some cases a double
eagle has been completely sawn into two flat discs, which
were afterwards neatly soldered together again with a
plate of platinum between to give the requisite weight.
It might have been thought that the labour and skill
required to effect such falsification would have been better
remunerated in some honest employment ; but, accord-
ing to the reports of the Director of the United States


160


MONEY.


Mint, there is evidence to show that the practice is profit-
able. It is proposed to prevent this falsification by
reducing the thickness of the double eagle, and also
making it somewdiat dish shaped ; but it would be better
to abandon the issue of such large gold money, as has long
been done in England and France. Experience shows
that sovereigns, napoleons, half-eagles, and gold coins of
the same size are not fraudulently treated, nor are silver
coins ever debased m the way described.

In order to diminish the abrasion of coins as far as
possible, the design and legend should be executed with
the least possible relief consistent with perfect definition,
and the head of the monarch, or other personage, should
not protrude. In this and most other respects the
sharply defined flat design upon the English florin is
much superior to the high rounded ornaments of the
old crown, half-crown, and shilling. The French mints
seem to be very successful in the execution of dies, all
the coins, gold, silver, and bronze struck by them having
flat yet adinhably executed devices. Perhaps the most
beautiful recent coin which I have seen is the new
twenty-franc gold piece struck during 1874 for Hungary,
the engraving of the die being excellent. The new
Scandinavian gold pieces of five-specie dollars, or twenty
kroner, are also well executed.


TECHNICAL MATTERS RELATING TO COINAGE. 161


Methods of CounUng Coins.

To count large quantities of coin by tale, piece after
piece, is not only a tedious operation, but ver}' uncertain
as regards accuracy. Several methods have been d(‘-
vised to facilitate the operation. In mints, the Bank
of England, and other establishments, v-here vast
quantiti(?B of coin are treated, counting hoards are used.
Similar boards have, indeed, Ixsen used from tinier im-
memorial in some parts of India by nioney-chang(u*s and
tradesmen. Tliese consist of simple flat trays, with
several liundred depressions regularly arraaigod, and of
such a size that one coin will exactly fit into eacli
depression. Handfuls of uniform coins are thrown on
to the board, and shaken ovot it, until movst of the holes
are filled ; the remaining lioles are then filled up one
after anotlnu’ by Inind. The number contained upon
tlie board is then known with infallibhi accuracy, and
at the same time it is very easy to examine tlie coins,
and detect any counterfeit, defective, or foreign pieci^s.
By tlie use of such boards, bags of equal numbers of
any coinage are readily made up with great certainty.

In English banks it is requisite to count out con-
siderable sums in gold coin with rapidity for the
payment of cheques over the counter, or to verify the
number of sovereigns paid in on dejiGsit. For tliis
purpose balances are employed, with weights prepared
so as to be equivalent to 5, 10, 20, 60, 50, 100, 200, and
300 sovereigns. Any sum which is a multiple of five
sovereigns can thus be rapidly, and almost infallibly,

M


162


MONEY.


weighed out in a few seconds, provided that tlie coins
are not too old and worn. An error of a sovereign
is sometimes possible in a large sum, on account of
deficiency of weight. In the case of half-sovereigns, this
process is seldom to be depended upon, owing to the very
considerable lightness of the coins. This uncertainty
in weighing is one of several serious inconveniences
which arise from the defective state of our gold coinage.

Half sovereigns, however, and in fact all coins which
are approximately equal to eaclx other on the average,
can be rapidly counted on the balance by the ingenious
method of duplication. Any convenient number, for
instance, fifty coins, being comited into one scale,
an equal number may be made to balance them,
without counting, in the other scale. Tlje two equal
lots being united, one hundred more coins may be
made to counterbalance them, and by a second union
we get two hundred coins. We may repeat this duplica-
tion, if the balance will bear the Aveight, and afterwards,
using one lot of coins as the fixed weight, may go on
counting out lot after lot equal to it in weight and
number.

When neither balance nor counting board is available,
coins may be counted out into little piles of ten, fifteen,
or twenty. Placing these piles alongside each other on
a flat board, it is easy to detect any inequality of height
by the unassisted eye, or by a straight edge laid along
the top, A mistake in counting will thus be generally
made manifest.


TECHNICAL MATTERS RELATING TO COINAGE. 163


Cost of the Metallic Currency,

Calculations of some interest may be made as to the
cost which falls upon the public in one way or another,
owing to the use of metallic money. Si)eaking first of
the subordinate coins of silver and bronze, the govern-
ment mate a profit by their manufacture, owing to the
reduced weight at which they are issued as tokens.
Standard silver can usually be bought by the mint for
55. per standard ounce. It is issued to the public at
the rate of 55. M, per ounce, so that the government
receives a seignorage of at least nine per cent, on the
nominal value of the coin issued. The average coinage
of silver at the English mint during the last ten years
has been £546,580, upon which the seignorage would be
about £49,200 per annum. On the other hand, the mint
has to buy back worn silver coinage at its nominal value,
and in recoining such money there is a loss, which, on
the average of the last ten years (1864-73) has been
£16,700, leaving a net annual profit of £32,500, no
account being taken of the cost of the mint establish-
ment. At present the price of silver is not above
4s. lOci. per ounce, so that the seignorage is about 12;
per cent., and the profit on coining silver proportionately
greater.

We may look at this matter in another way, by
regarding the seignorage as so much money funded to
bear interest, to meet the cost of withdrawing the coin,
when worn out, say thirty years subsequently. Now a


164


MONEY.


pound bearing 3;} per cent, compound interest, becomes
in thirty years 2’61 pounds, so that the 9 per cent, of
seignorage will have multiplied to 23*5 per cent. But
the actual deficiency of weight of the silver coin with-
drawn is, on the average, only 16J per cent., so that,
without taking into account the considerable number of
coins which must be lost, exported, melted, hoarded,
sunk in the sea, or otherwise finally withdrawn! from cir-
culation, tliere is a profit on the issue of the silver coin
under the present regulations.

In the issue of bronze money there has been, as
before stated, a profit of ii270,()0(), against wliich must
be set off the possible, but uncertain, cost of recoining
a light token currency at some future time.

The cost of the currency is made up of four principal
items : the loss of interest upon the capital invested in
the moiKjy, the loss by the abrasion of gold coins, the
expenses of the mint, and lastly the casual loss of coins.
The last item is of Avholly unknown amount ; the other
items may be estimated as follows. We may, roughly
speaking, assume the gold currency of the kingdom to
consist of 84,000,000 of sovereigns and 32,000,000 of
half-sovereigns, tlie total value being 100,000,000 ster-
ling. The sovereigns lose annually on the average 0*043
grain each, giving an annual loss of about i:30,000;
the half-sovereigns lose 0*069 grain each, producing a
loss of £18,000. The loss of interest, how^ever, is a far
more serious matter. The whole value of the metals
employed in the currency is, roughly speaking, as
follows : —


TECHNICAL MATTERS RELATING TO COINAGE.


165


Gold coin in circulation 100 millions

Bullion in the Bank of England . . 15 ,,

Silver coin 15 ,,

Bronze coin !« »>


Total .... 131^ millions.

The interest on this sum at per cent is no less than
.1*4,262,000.

The cost of the mint establishment is about X*42,000
annually. The following statement, then, shows the

aggregate cost of the metallic currency so far as it can

be estimated.

Loss of interest .£4,262,000

Wear of coin 48,000

Mint establishment 42,000


£4,352,000

From this amount ought to be subtracted the profit
. which the mint makes out of the seignorage upon silver
and bronze coins ; but Ave may set off this profit against
the wholly unknown amount which the public loses by
the accidental dropping of coins.


166


MONEY.


CHAPTEE XIV.

INTERNATIONAL MONEY.

In a book upon money written in the present day,
reference must certainly be made to the scheme put
forward, and even the steps accomplished* towards a
world-wide system of International Money. Mxich time
will no doubt pass before such a notion is realized, and
the recent retrograde action of the German government
tends to retard so great an achievement of advancing
civilization. Yet in all our changes and discussions of
monetary matters we ought to bear in mind the eventual
introduction of a uniform monetary system. We may
surely look for a gradual amelioration in the relations
of nations, though wars cannot yet be avoided. We
have international copyright, extradition of criminals,
maritime codes of signals, j)Ostal conventions, treaties
for lessening the horrors of ^var. Nations have long
since ceased to be isolated bodies wishing evil to all their
neighbours ; and as free trade becomes everywhere pre-
dominant, and communication by means of railway,
steamboat, telegraph, post, and newspaper continually
increases, we may look for the time when all people will


INTERNATIONAL MONEY.


167


seek to break down, as far as possible, the barriers
between one family and another of the human race.

I will first of all state the advantages which may be
expected to accrue from an international system of
metallic money, and will then describe in succession the
corresponding possible disadvantages, the progress which
has already been made towards the simplification of
monetary systems, the principal schemes set forth, and
tlieir comparative merits and demerits.


Advantages of International Money.

Short-sighted people have objected to all schemes of
international money, that the object in view, if ever
realized, would only save trouble to the comparatively few
people who travel from nation to nation. This is the
least of all the benefits which the uniformity of money
would confer. I am disposed to put in the first place the
immense good which would arise from facility in under,
standing all statements of accounts, prices, and statistics,
when expressed hi terms of a uniform measure of value.
To the statistician it is almost intolerable to meet with
tables of information, variously expressed in francs,
pounds, dollars, thalers, metres, yards, ells, hundred-
weights, kilograms. The labour of statistical inquiry is
sufficiently great without the preliminary labour of re-
ducing great masses of figures to a common unit. To
the merchant, or man of business, the variety of moneys
and Pleasures is equally perplexing. In many places the
value of the currency is not certainly known, and only


168


MONEY.


those who happen to have special knowledge of a locality,
and the money and measures there employed, can venture
to trade with it. The difference of monetary systems,
again, renders- calculations relating to the foreign ex-
changes very complex, so that jirofit falls to those who
have acquired skill in calculations of the kind.

In the second jdace, the actual arljustmcnt of the
foreign exchanges would be rendered more prompt and
perfect wlien the coin of one country could l)e transferred
directly into the circulation of another country. One
result of international currency would be tliat the pre-
cious metals would be held more in the form of coin.
x\t the present time, what is coined by one country has
often to be melted up and recoined by another, although
to some extent the principal kinds of coin, English
sovereigns, American eagles, French napoleons, Mexican
dollars, arc held by banks and bought and sold. With
a single system of coins, all stocks of gold and silver
would, as a general rule, be kept in the coined state,
ready to go into circulation at any moment. Some small
savings would accrue from the less amount of mintage
required, though this is a very secondary matter. One
of more importance is the lessened opportunities of profit
which there would be for bullion brokers and others, \vho
trade upon the difficulties of conducting the bullion traffic
in the present state of things. Nor is the saving of
trouble and loss to travellers a matter of indifference.
As international communication increases, the number
of travellers will increase, and we ought to break down,
as far as possible, all factitious difficulties.


INTERNATIONAL MONEY.


169


One benefit of international money which has been
insuflficiently noticed, is the imj)rovement which its adop-
tion w^oiild probaldy effect in the currencies of minor and
half-civilized states. In many parts of the w^orld there
is still a mixture of coins of various and uncertain value ;
and as long as the principal nations coin money on
totally different systems,, the coins will circulate else-
where and make coiifhsioii. Already for a long time
the practically international currency of the Mexican
dollar has been a matter of great convenience; and
where it is tlie unit of value, merchants know on wdiat
basis they are making contracts. Now, if all the leading
nations combined to issue coins of one uniform series of
weight and sizes, these ^vould by degrees form the cur-
rencies of non-coining states, and w^ould effect a reform
in the most remote parts of the world.

Disadvantages of International Money,

There are, no doubt, certain evils which might possibly
arise from the circulation of money between nation and
nation. One government, for instance, might coin money
slightly inferior to the proper standard, and such money,
once introduced, would, in virtue of Gresham’s law, be
difficult to dislodge. The French mint has been in fault
in this respect. French gold coin, when carefully assayed,
is found to have a fineness of 898 or 899 parts in 1000,
instead of 900 parts. There is, indeed, a mint remedy
of two parts, so that the coin was legally issued ; yet the
mint authorities have taken advantage of this remedy in


170


MONEY.


an improper way. On the average, the coins issued by any
mint ought to have almost the exact standard fineness,
and the divergence allowed under the name of remedy is
only intended to cover accidental faults of workmanship
in particular coins, and not an intentional average diver-
gence from the standard.

It is hardly to be supposed that a state issuing money
under international obligations would wish to make a
profit of one or two parts in a thousand in this way. To
secure uniformity, it would be desirable for the assayers
and officers of different mints to meet and agree upon a
common standard process, and uniform trial plates.
Experience does not show that one nation need distrust
the faithfulness of another in matters of coining. We
do not look upon Spain and Mexico as models of financial
integrity, yet so faithfully used the mints of those comi-
tries to maintain the standard of W'eight and fineness
in the issue of silver dollars, that these coins have for a
hundred years past been received by talc almost without
question in most parts of the world, and were at one time
made current in England. The possibility of inter-
national currency is proved by the fact that, without any
international treaties, the coins of several nations are
recognized as a legal tender elsewhere. This is the case
with English sovereigns^^not only in the British colonies
and possessions, but also in Portugal, Egypt, Brazil, and
probably elsewhere. The napoleon has circulated freely
in most parts of Europe. The ducat of Holland has also
been a. highly esteemed coin; and of the wide circulation
of several species of dollars I have frequently spoken.


INTERNATIONAL MONEY.


171


Conflict of Monetary Systems.

The chief difficulty in establishing an international
money, arises from the fact that there Jire several great
nations, the French, English, Americans, and Germans,
each with its own system of money, which, from motives
worthy and unworthy, it is unwilling to give up. There
is no overpowering advantage which marks out any one
of these systems on its own merits as distinctly the best.
There is accordingly a balance of power which produces a
dead lock. Each of the three first-named nations has
much to say in favour of its own system. Tlie French
system, founded on the franc, is an eminently perfect
decimal coinage, and has the prestige of being recognized
as international money in ]3elgium, Switzerland, and
Italy, besides being adopted with international currency
as regards gold in Austria, and without it as regards
silver in Spain, Greece, and some minor states.

The English may very properly urge that, though the
subdivision of the pound is not to be recommended, the
pound sterling is itself an excellent unit of value. It
is the largest existing monetary unit, and on a gold
basis, so that it seems to be peculiarly suitable for the
growing wealth of nations. Though recogni^d only in
a small corner of Europe, namely, Portugal, we must
remeniber that lilurope is rapidly ceasing to be the ex-
clusive centre of trade and civilization. In the Austra-
lian, Polynesian, and African colonies are growing states
which will make their might felt ere long, and they
adhere to the pound. The world-wide extension of British


172


MONEY.


commerce and British shipping makes the sovereign
known in all the ports of the woild.

On their part, however, the Americans might have
much to say in favour of the dollar. It is decimally
divided, and, as we shall see, in the most convenient
manner. It corresponds to the coins which have for
two or three centuries been most widely circulated and
treated as units of account, so tliat there is much weight
of experience in its favour. But, above all, it is firmly
adopted as the money of a nation, which, as far as human
wdsdom can penetrate the future, is destined to be the
most numerous, rich, and powerful in the world. That
nation, which has arisen from the best stock of England,
has absorbed much of the best blood of other European
nations, and has inherited the richest continent in the
world, must have an importance in coining times of
wdiich even Americans are barely conscious.

International Monetary Negotiations.

It is quite imjiossible that I should in this brief w'ork
give any sufficient sketch of the long series of discussions,
meetings, congresses, associations, negotiations, and
cpnveiitio|^ which resulted in the actual establishment
of an international money among the nations of western
continental Europe, I must refer the reader, desirous
of more information, to the excellent pamphlet of the
eminent actuary, Mr. Frederick Hendriks, which first
made the subject well known in England. It is called
Decimal Coinage ; a Plan for its immediate Extension


INTERNATIONAL MONEY. 173

in England in connection with the International Coinage
of France and other Countries,” and was privately printed
in 1806. Mr. Scyd’s ‘‘Treatise on Bullion and the
Foreign Exchanges” may also be consulted, and the
Journal das Economistes is full of information on the
subject.

The International Association for obtaining a Uniform
Decimal System of Measures, Weights, and Coins, was
founded in Paris in 1855, and the English branch
carried on active operations. In 1858 the United States
made proposals towards the assimilation of currencies.
In 1800 and 1803 important international congresses
were held at London and Berlin, and, at the latter one
especially, important resolutions were adopted wliich wo
shall have to consider. It was, however, the close con-
tiguity of the countries, Belgium, France, Switzerland,
and Italy, and the fact that French gold, and even silver
coin, could not be prevented from passing the frontiers,
which forced the question forwards, and led in December,
18(>5, to an actual Convention for International Currency.

The report of the Congress of 1863 concerning
currency is a highly important docaiment. It points out
the superior convenience of a gold standard, with a
subsidiary coinage of silver and bronze; advocates
uniform fineness of nine parts^ in ten for all standard
coins ; suggests a definition of weights of coins, on the
metric system; and, finally, propounds a scheme by which
the existing monetary units could be brought into simple
relations with each other.

In 1870, a short time previous to the declaration of


174


MONEY.


war with Germany, France summoned a fresh Imperial
Commission, presided over hy the Minister of Commerce
and the Minister President of tlie Council of State
(M. de Parieii), to take evidence from all sides on the
various questions connected with the standard and its
hearing upon international coinage. No loss than thirty-
seven witnesses were examined, and the results of the
inquiry, printed hy the French government in two very
large volumes in 1872, show that the lunjority of the
witnesses and of the Commissioners were decidedly in
favour of a single gold standard.

Owing to a purely accidental c(>incidenco, the prin-
cipal monetary units already closely approximate to
simple miiltiphis of the franc. The following table shows
the present relative values of these units and the multiples
to which it is proposed to make them exactly conform.


Franc

1

F’roposed
value in francs.

1

Florin (Austrian, silver)

2-47

H

Dollar (American, gold)

5-18

5

Pound sterling . . .

25-22

25


It is only requisite to raise the florin 1*21 per cent.,
and to lower the dollar and pound sterling respectively
3*5 and 0*88 per cent., .to establish very simple ratios
between them. Thus, without any appreciable change
of monetary systems, it would be possible to reduce
statements from one mode of expression into another;
moreover, the coins might themselves have international
currency, the pound sterling serving as a twenty-five


INTERNATIONAL MONEY.


176


franc piece in France, and as a five-dollar piece in
America, the American gold dollar reciprocally circu-
lating as an ecu in Prance, and a four-shilling piece
in England.

The congress abstained from recommending any one
unit for universal ado 2 )tion, but urged that every nation,
not possessing one of the four units named, should select
that which jileased them best. Had this scheme been
accei)ted by all nations in an intelligent and liberal
spirit, we should ere now have probably seen our way
clearly to the selection of the best unit. Since 1865,
unfortunately, l)oth the German empire and the Scan-
dinavian kingdoms have made alterations not in accord-
ance with these principles. A groat assimilation of
moneys has taken place, but it is in the direction of
groups of national, rather than of international cur-
rencies, although, as has been demonstrated l)y Mr.
Hendriks in several articles in the Economist, the new
coins have many fresh and important points of contact
and of agreement witli the metrical and decimal systems,
so that some real i)rogress has actually been accom-
plished.


Decimalization of English Money.

Since Lord Wrottesley in 1824 proposed in parliament
to adopt a decimal subdivision of the pound sterling, an
immense amount of discussion has taken place upon
various schemes for a new*^ arrangement of our money.
The advantages of several plans are so nearly balanced.


176


MONEY.


and the difficulty of carrying any one into effect is so
great, that no jn'actical result has yet been achieved
by half a century of debate. The two j)riiicipal schemes,
which perhaps need alone be noticed now, arc the
Pound and Mil scheme, and the Penny and Tcn~franc
scheme.

The former of these schemes reposes upon the fact
that tlio farthing is nearly the thousandth part of the
pound. Since 960 fart) lings make a ,][)ound, it would only
be necessary to alter the farthing 4 per cent, to obtain
the lowest decimal submulti2)le, to bo called the mil.
The i)enny would be five mils, like the French half-
penny or five centimes ; as some have supposed, a new
coin, in value would luive to bo introduced, as

the hundredth part of the pound ; but this is unnecessary,
and the florin would be one hundred mils, and the half-
sovereign live hundred mils. Tlie great advantage of
this method is, that it retains the pound as the inincipal
unit, together Avith scAxral other familiar coins. Against
it has been urged, (1) the su2)poscd fact that it excludes
the most familiar of all coins, the sliilling and six23ence,
and (2) that the rail is somewhat too small a submultiple
to begin with. This is, hoAvever, not necessarily the
case. The shilling might remain, as coin of circulation,
of the same weight, fineness, and value as at present,
but would be translated, as coin of account, into fifty
mils instead of foi*ty-eight farthings, and the sixpence
into twenty-five mils instead of hventy-four farthings.
This subdivision is not more complex than the one
successfully, and in the almost parallel forms of fifty and


INTERNATIONAL MONEY.


177


twenty pfennige, centimes^ lire^ ore^ etc., pieces, carried out
in the new coinages of Germany, Scandinavia, or of the
monetary allies of France. As to the mil being too small
a submultiple, it seems to be overlooked that it is
times as large as the initial submultiple of the French
system, and times as large as that of the new German
system.

The second scheme was suggested by the late Pro-
fessor Graham, and by Mr. Rivers Wilson, in their Report
upon the Proceedings of the International Monetary
Conference of 18G7. It is founded upon the fact that the
ten-franc piece is within %(L of eight shillings, and only
differs 4 per cent, from one hundred pence. Thus it
would only be requisite to introduce a gold piece of ten
francs, temporarily serving as a token for eight shillings,
to obtain a link Avith the French system. The sub-
sequent reduction of the penny by 4 per cent., and the
replacement of the shilling by a franc or tenpenny -piece,
would give us a truly decimal system. A great advan-
tage of this proposal is, that it retains, almost unaltered,
so familiar a coin as the peimy, and makes it, as it is
for the most part at present, the lowest money of
account. It is, moreover, in close accordance with the
French monetary system. The main difficulty is that
it involves the abandonment of tlie pound, Avhicli becomes
two and a half of the new unit ; and that, of all our
Iiresent coins, only the florin, penny, and lialfpenny,
would fall in conveniently. To convert sums of money
from pounds sterling into the new currency, it would
be requisite to multiply by the factor 2J, which Avould


178


MONEY.


be regarded by most people as a very troublesome
process.

When the decimalization of English money was first
proposed, the notion of international money had never
been seriously entertained, and hardly indeed conceived.
So much progress has now been made, that it is impos-
sible to consider the one reform without reference to the
other. The difSculty of making any change whatever is
so great, that it would not be worth while to achieve a
partial reform.

The Future Amerumi Dollar.

The most easy and important step which can now be
taken towards an international money, consists in the
assimilation of the American dollar to the five-franc piece.
A great opportunity arises from the fact that the currency
of the United States is now a variable paper currency.
Considering the enormous fluctuations of value which
liave been experienced in the last ten years, it would be
altogether needless scrupulosity to bring it back to the
old standard, to the last degree of exactness. Every
change of value of the currency, whether it be a fall or
a rise, is so far injmious. Now the American dollar
consists of 25*8 grains of gold, valued in English money
at 49*316 pence. When gold is at 111 the paper
dollar will be at a discount of 10 per cent., and will
therefore be worth 44*384 pence, whereas the French
dollar, or five-franc gold piece, weighs 24*89 grains,
and is worth 47*58 pence. It would be obviously


INTERNATIONAL xMONEY.


179


desirable, therefore, to make the new metallic dollar
exactly of the same weight as the French one, and to
commence specie payments when the greenback currency
shall have risen to par with this coin. As regards all
contracts made in paper, all current prices and charges,
this change would involve no breach of faith whatever ;
it would in fact imply less change and breach of
contracts than if the paper currency were reduced
sufficiently to come to par with the old dollar.

The reduction of weight of the dollar would indeed
lead to a repudiation of all gold contracts, including all
bonds of the United States, railway companies, and
other bodies payable in coin, unless provision were made
to alter the terms of such contracts. This difficulty,
however, could be overcome by simply enacting that
each 1()3| of the new dollars shall be received and paid
as ecpiivalont to 100 of the old ones.

There is little doubt that the adhesion of the
American government to the proposals of the Congress
of 1863 would give the holding turn to the metric system
of weights, measures, and moneys. It is quite likely
that it might render the dollar the future universal
unit. The fact that the dollar is already the mone-
tary unit of many parts of the world, gives it large
odds. In becoming assimilated to the French ecu,
American gold would be capable of circulation in
Europe, or wherever the French napoleon has hitherto
been accepted. It may seem unpatriotic in an English-
man to advocate a change which may lead to the defeat
of the pound sterling, but I look upon any one scheme


180


MONEY.


of unification as better than none. Whatever may be
the ultimate results, I desire to see assimilation between
the French and American systems adopted as soon as
possible. For reasons subsequently stated, I consider
the dollar so good a unit that it would be mere national
prejudice to oppose it, were there a fair chance of its
general adoption. Even if it were not generally adopted,
it would be a great step in advance if Great Britain,
America, and France were to agree to coin gold money
identical in weight and fineness, which might circulate
indifferently as sovereigns, five-dollar pieces, and twenty-
five-franc pieces.

German Monetary Reform.

The new monetary system of the German empire
is introducing a good money where all was before con-
fusion. In a few years it will hardly be comprehensible
to Germans that they had so long endured a state
of the currency in which two, or even three or four,
inconsistent series of coins were mingled without any
method. In many respects the new system is all that
could be desired. In place of the antiquated silver
standard, gold is selected as the measure of value, the
sole principal money, and unlimited legal tender. The
unit of account is the mark, consisting of 6‘14G5 grains
of gold of the fineness of 9 parts in 10. Its value is,
therefore, about The principal coin will be the

twenty-mark piece, weighing 122-92 grains, or 7*964954
grams, and containing 7-168459 grams of pure gold.
There is also a ten-mark piece of exactly half the weight.


INTERNATIONAL MONEY.


181


The subordinate coins of silver and nickel-copper
are issued on the footing of the composite tender, or
English system, being tokens. The seignorage to be
levied on the German silver coins, will be 11*111 per
cent., exceeding the amounts subtracted from the English
and French silver money, which are about 9 and 7*784
per cent, respectively.

It cannot be too much regretted by all friends of
progress that, in deciding upon the weight of the new
mark piece, the German government should have
studiously avoided assimilation to the French system.
The sovereign contains 7*3224 grams of pure gold, the
twenty-five-franc piece when coined will contain 7*2581,
and the twenty-mark piece has been made to contain
7*1685. The only ground on which this precise weight
could have been justified, is that three marks are
approximately equal to one thaler. But so various was
the coinage of the German states, that the field was
open to the adoption of any system ; and it is impossible
to suppose that in so great a reform a difference of
1^ per cent, would have been an insuperable obstacle
to the adoption of international coinage.

Systems of Fractional Money,

A unit of value having been chosen, there are three
competing methods according to which it might be
subdivided, the Unary, duodecimal, and decimal. The
first system is carried out most perfectly in our avoir-
dupois weights, in which sixteen ounces make a pound ;


182


MONEY.


but it is also freely employed in our monetary system,
the sovereign being divided into half-sovereigns, crowns,
and half-crowns, the shilling into sixpences and three-
penny pieces ; and the penny into halfpence and fai*-
things. At the same time, the duodecimal method is
represented in our money by the division of the shilling
into twelve pence, of which the third part is still in
circulation as the groat, or fourpenny piece, now being
withdrawn.

Each system of subdivision has its own advantages,
and there must always exist a kind of natural competi-
tion between them. They have thus competed from the
earliest times. In ancient Italy the duodecimal system
predominated to the south of the Apennines, while the
decimal divison was in use to the northward. In Sicily
the two methods were confused together. China has
had a purely decimal system from an unknown epoch in
antiquity. In England duodecimal and binary divi-
sions have existed from very early times. It will be
readily allow^ed that the binary system is most simple
and natural, involving as it does the least possible
factor above unity. The duodecimal system also has
marked advantages, because it allows of division into
several aliquot parts, involving the factor 2 twdee over,
and the next higher factor 3 once. Thus the shilling
is divisible exactly into two sixpences, three fourpences,
four threepences, and six twoi)ences.

The decimal system is far less simple, and in some
ways less convenient. Ten admits of only Wo factors
superior to unity, namely, 2 and 5, and 5 is a more


INTERNATIONAL MONEY.


183


complex prime factor than appears in cither of the
previous methods. But the system has the supreme
advantage of exactly falling in with our decimal system
of numeration and calculation. Although probably not
the best method which might have been selected, liad
selection been open to us, decimal numeration is firmly
fixed among tlie institutions of the human race, as an
hereditary habit, derived from the early practice of
counting on the fingers. We have no choice but to
accept the inevitable, and as all our arithmetical pro-
cesses are conducted on the decimal method, there is an
overwhelming advantage, as education and the use of
writing advance, in making all our w^eights, measures,
and coins conformable to the same system.

A perfectly and purely decimal system, indeed, would
admit only the decimal multiples and submultiples,
thus:— 1000, 100, 10, 1, 0*1, 0*01, 0*001. But it is so
troublesome to have to count out as many as ten coins,
before coming to the next higher unit, that the rigour
of the decimal divisions has always been relaxed. In
the French system, the half and the double of each
multiple are allowed to be represented by intermediate
coins, the series being 1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 60, 100, 200,
600, etc. The American coinage is less simple and
symmetrical, since it admits the half and quarter eagle,
half and quarter dollar, the twenty-five-cent piece, and
also a three-cent piece. I am inclined to prefer the
French method, and to think that the American mint
has issued too many denominations of coins.


18 -t


MONKY.


Fmal Selection of the Unit of International Money,

I will conclude this chapter by some remarks on the
reasons which should guide us in selecting the monetary
unit to be finally established as the basis of a future
universal money.

I attribute very little w'-cight to arguments concerning
the absolute amount of the rival units. It is said that
as the wealth of nations increases, and the value of
gold at the same time sinks, we need a larger unit.
The pound is recommended on this ground as clearly
superior to the franc. If we count in francs our figures
will be twenty-five times as large as in pounds sterling.
It seems to be forgotten that the same unit can never
suit the extremely different sums which we have to
express, so that we must use multiples or submultiples
of the actual unit. Just as we use inches, feet, yards,
furlongs, miles, or diameters of the earth's orbit, accord-
ing to the magnitudes to be measured, so we vary the
unit with money. If we are discussing a workman’s
weekly w'ages, we count in shillings ; if we speak of a
clerk’s yearly salary, we speak of pounds ; if the fortune
of a merchant or banker is in question, we take notice
only of thousands of pounds ; in matters relating to the
revenue of the kingdom or the national debt, we give
our exclusive attention to millions of pounds. The
Portuguese unit of account, called the m, is worth only
about the nineteenth part of an English penny, and is
probably the smallest unit in the world. Practically,
however, the milreis, or thousand reis, worth 53 Jd.,


INTERNATIONAL MONEY.


185


becomes the unit. In the same way Indian merchants
speak of lacs and crores of rupees. The French estimate
their national debt in milliards of francs. No doubt it
is puzzling to Englishmen to interpret exactly the
meaning of a milliard of francs, but, to those accustomed
to count in francs it is no more difficult than a million
of pounds. Exactly the same considerations apply to
units of weight ; thus, though the French use so small
an ultimate unit as one gram, or 15'43 grains, yet
according to the magnitudes of the objects to be weighed,
they use smaller or larger units, centigrams or milli-
grams on the one side, or decagrams and kilograms on
the other. The absolute amount then of the ultimate
unit seems to me to be entirely a matter of indifference
in this point of view.

As regards the subdivision of the unit there are con-
siderations of more importance. The subdivision ought
of course to be decimal, and it ought to bo so contrived
that the lowest submultiple shall correspond to the
smallest sum wdiich is thought worthy of being recorded
in mercantile transactions. Now the franc is divided
into 100 centimes, so that the centime has a value of less
than the tenth of a penny. Though bronze pieces of
one and two centimes were coined to the amount of
about 5 per cent, of the wffiole bronze currency, it is
found that they hardly circulate. Even if they were
used in the smallest retail transactions at baker’s shops,
they would not bo entered in account books. Thus the
lowest entry which a French accountant makes is five
centimes, and the next lowest ten centimes, corresponding


186


MONEY.


to our penny. A needless complexity is thus introduced
into small accounts. It is indeed so inconvenient to
have to call the smallest coin in general use cmq
centimes that it is still common to speak of it as a sou,
in spite of the ninety years during which the decimal
system has existed in France. The Portuguese rei is
.so small a unit that it is not represented hy any coin at
aU. It nevertheless has a place in Portuguese mercantile
accounts, and thus needlessly adds a figure to all
pecuniary statements.

In England the smallest coin in actual use is the
farthing, hut in accounts little notice is taken of farthings
or halfpennies, so that the penny is the lowest money
of account. The post-office, in the regulations of the
savings bank business, refuses to recognize any coin les^
than the penny. But the penny is inconveniently
related to the pound, the hundredth part of which is
2*4d., and the thousandth part about a farthing^; Thus ■
the decimal system applied to our pound w'ould^ oblige
us to record as the lowest money of account an incon-
veniently small coin, namely, the mil. In this respect,
indeed, the pound and mil scheme is superior to the
franc and centime system. Thus 12s. Gd, may b^ ex-
pressed as 625 mils; but in French money (at twenty-
five francs to the pound) it would become 15’625.'
Taking the ten-franc piece as the principal unit, it
would become 1’56 units, or 156 metrical pennies.. ^ In
many cases it Tvould require less figures to ex2)r4ss a
sum in pennies than in mils or centimes.

The American system is unexceptionable in this


INTERNATIONAL MONEY.


187


respect. The dollar is divided into one hundred cents,
each of which has the* value of about one halfpenny.
Although half-cents have been coined, and may be used
in some trifling purchases, they need never be entered
in ordinary accounts. The cent thus seems to me to
correspond to the smallest sum which need be treated
in accounts, so that money statements are reduced
to the greatest possible simplicity. The question may
well be asked whether the lowest coin actually recorded
is not truly the unit, of which all other coins are
multiples. Perhaps the best answer would be to say
that the unit is indifferently the cent, or the dollar, or
the eagle. In English money it matters not whether
we regard the pound, or its twentieth part, or its two
hundi'ed and fortieth part, as the unit. The absolute
amount of the unit, I repeat, is totally a matter of
indifference, and the only point we have to consider
is whether it, or any decimal part of it, corresponds
to the Smallest sum of which we need take account. In
this resi^ect the dollar is the best existing unit; but
it might admit of discussion whether the double dollar,
of ten-franc piece of gold, equal to eight shillings, or one
hundred pence, would not be better. If the wealth of
nations continues to grow, and the value of gold to fall,
^^eyfn the cent will be too small a coin to appear con-
veniently in accounts, and the penny will be a better
Ipwest unit. In this case the hundred pennies, or the
te^i^ifanc piece, would become the best unit. The choice
.thus seems to me to lie between the five-franc and the
t^i-frane piece in gold as the ultimate unit of interna-


188


MONEY.


tional money. In favour of the ten-franc piece it may
be added, that it would make a convenient gold coin of
the smallest size which it would be well to issue. The
gold dollar and five-franc piece are too small, and suffer
great abrasion.


( 189 )


CHAPTEK XV.

THE MECHANISM OF EXCHANGE.

Having now sufficiently diseussed the subject of metallic
money, v^e pass on to consider the devices which natur-
ally develop themselves in a highly organized commer-
cial nation, for the purpose of economizing the precious
metals, or even avoiding the use of coins altogether.
No sooner have a people fully experienced the usefulness
of a good system of money, than they begin to discover
that they can dispense with it as a medium of exchange,
and return to a method of traflic closely resembling barter.
With barter they begin and with barter they end ; but
the second form of barter, as we shall see, is very different
from the first. Purchases and sales continue to be
made in terms of gold and silver coin, but equivalent
quantities of goods thus estimated are made to pay for
each other. If ownership in gold or silver intervenes
at all, it is in the shajie of warrants or repri^Hentatlve
documents with which gold can be procured, if desired,
but whicli are seldom used to procure it.

At the outset wc found that money performed at least
two, and probably four distinct functions (Chapter III.) ;


190


MONEY.


and, in a aimple state of industry, it is convenient that the
same metallic substance should fulfil all these functions ^
concurrently. But it does not follow that this union of
functions is the best possible an’angemcnt under all con-
ditions. We shall find that gold or silver always continues
to be the common denominator of value, hut that these
metals cease to a great extent to be the actual medium
of exchange which is passed about between buyer and
seller. In a later part of the book (Chapter XXV.) I shall
finther show that money may with great adviuitage be
replaced in its function as a standard of value for long
periods of time by a Tahdar Standard.


Progressive Development of the Methods of Exchange.

Beginning with the primitive method of barter, a
series of steps have been made towards a perfect and
world-wide system of interchange of commodities, with
the least possible use of the precious metals. We may
classify the devices employed for avoiding the use of
metallic money under five different heads, as follows : —

1. Eeplaeement of standard money by representative
money.

2. Intervention of book credit.

3. The cheque and clearing system.

4. Use of foreign bills of exchange.

5. International clearing system.


THE MECHANISM OF EXCHANGE.


191


Representative Mcmey.

Metallic money, as wo have seen, immensely facili-
tates and, so to speak, lubricates the operation of ex-
chaiage. But nations employing gold and silver money
have usually discovered, in the course of time, that tokens
of small metallic value, or even pieces of leather and
pax)cr of nominal value, might be passed from hand to
hand as signs of the ownershij) of coins. That which
replaces gold, or silver, or copper money, is at first of
a purely representative character. But, when a commu-
nity has become thoroughly habituated to the cii-culatioii
of a currency of this character, it is often found possible
to remove the basis of valuable metal, which it is sup-
I)osc^d to rex)resent, and yet to maintain the valueless
bits of leather or paper in circulation as before. Thus
arises the abnormal phenomenon known as an mcow-
vertihU paper money. Such a currency is, however, never
accepted beyond the frontiers of the state recognizing it.

■ Merchants conducting large international transactions
soon found out that great loss of interest and risk of loss
of the- whole money would arise, if they wore to trade
with actual specie. Hence they introduced the use, many
centur^ies since, of bills of exchange, which are signs or
certificates of debt, passed from hand to hand almost like
representative money, and often accomplishing many
acts of exchange by a single transfer of specie.


192


MONEY.


Cheque and Clearing System.

There is yet a more potent way of avoiding the
actual use of a medium of exchange, without encounter-
ing any of the inconveniences of barter. Those who
frequently traded with each other, both buying and selling,
found that it was absurd to pay a sum of money for
what w^as bought, and then receive it back for what w^as
sold. It w^as sufficient to estimate in terms of money
the values of the articles exchanged, and then pay the
difference, if any, in actual casli. The practice having
grown up of depositing the metallic money not im-
mediately wanted with goldsmiths or bankers, for safe
custody, it was gradually discovered tliat an order to
pay money would serve instead of tlie money ; and that,
if two persons trade with the same banker, they need not
in their mutual transactions handle the money at all.
A transfer in the books of their common bankers will
effect the payment of any balance of debt. Bankers
can in like manner arrange their mutual accounts, and
in this way tliere has been gradually developed in this
country and m America a vast system, which I propose
to denominate the Cheque and Clearing Systemj whereby
all the larger internal transactions of the people are
arranged by a mere settlement of accounts.

In this system London naturally becomes the mone-
tary centre of the United Kingdom ; but there is a further
tendency to make London the banking centre of the
world as regards all large and international transactions.
It is found to be advantageous to deposit money in


THE MECHANISM OF EXCHANGE.


193


London, or to obtain credit and make bills payable there,
j^rather than elsewhere. By such a concentration of
banking operations, London tends to become the seat of
a world-wide Clearing House. Such are the principal
steps in the development of the mechanism of ex-
change, and we proceed to consider them in detail.


0


194


MONEY.


CHAPTEE XVL

REPRESENTATIVE M0NJ!Y.

Although we now distinguish money according as it is
metallic or paper money, because paper has in recent
times been universally adopted as the material for
representative money, yet it is well to remember that
various other substances have been used for the purpose.
We may pass, in fact, by gradual steps from the perfect
standard coins, whose nominal value is coincident with
their metallic value, to worthless bits of paper, which
are yet allowed to stand for thousands, or even millions
of pounds sterling.

Token money, which we considered in Chapter VIIL
(p. 67), is in some degree representative money, because
it derives its value, not so much from the metal it con-
tains as from the standard coins for which it can be
exchanged. There is no need that a promise should be
always expressed by ink and paper. It may be still more
durably recorded by a die upon a piece of metal. Ac-
cordingly, while the monarchs of England down to the
end of Elizabeth’s reign refused to debase their currency,
as the notion seems to have been, by issuing such a


REPRESENTATIVE MONEY.


195


poor metal as copper, the tradesmen supplied the want
pence by issuing tokens. These pieces were in the
|arlier centuries composed of lead, or latten, a kind
of brass, or sometimes, it is believed, of leather. During
the last century, again, they were issued in large quan-
tities, chiefly in copper, and often bore an express
statement that they served as promissory notes. Thus
a well-executed piece, issued at Southampton in 1791,
bears the inscription, ‘‘Halfpenny Promissory, payable
at the Office of W. Taylor, E. V. Moody & Co.” A
token struck by the Flint lead vrorks in 1813, states the
promise in different terms, thus — “One Penny Token,
One Pound Note for 240 Tokens.” The variety of such
promissory coins issued at one time or other is very
great, and their study forms an important branch of
numismatic science, as will be learnt by looking into such
a work as Akerman’s “London Tradesmen’s Tokens.”
In quite recent years small money was found to be
scarce in New South Wales, and some tradesmen issued
copper or bronze tokens which circulated until the year
1870, when their further use was prohibited.

The ancients were well acquainted with the difference
between a standard and a token currency. The iron
money of the Laceda3monians was probably standard
legal tender, for it is described as being heavy and
bulky, and yet of small value. The iron money of the
Byzantines, on the contrary, was token representative
money. We shall find in the following section that
pieces of money of the same nature as bank-notes were
also employed by several ancient nations.


196


MONEY.


Early History of Representatiiw Money,

Ancient nations were unacquainted with the use
paper money, simply because they had no paper. But
it would be a mistake to suppose that they did not
employ representative money exactly on the same prin-
ciples as we use bank-notes. Some few particulars on
the subject have, long been known, but a recent article
by M. Bornardakis in the Journal des Economistes (vol.
xxxiii. pp. 353-370) has added much to our knowledge,
and made it quite clear that the ancients were more
acute in matters of currency than wo have given them
credit for.

One of the very earliest mediums of exchange, as we
have seen (p. 20), consisted of the skins of animals.
The earliest form of representative money consisted of
small pieces of leather, usually marked with an official
seal. It is a very reasonable suggestion made by Storch,
Bernardakis, and other writers, that when skins and furs
began to be found an inconveniently bulky kind of
money, small pieces were clipped off, and handed over
as tokens of possession. By fitting into the place from
which they were cut they would prove ownership, some-
thing in the same way that notched sticks, or tallies,
were for many centuries used to record loans of money
to the English Exchequer. We know by experience in
the case of paper money, that if a people had become
thoroughly accustomed to the circulation of these small
leather tallies, they would in time forget their repre-
sentative character, and continue to circulate them,


BEPRESENTATIVE MONEY.


197


when the government, or other holders of the skins
themselves, had made aAvay with the actual property.
^Sucli is no doubt the history of the leather money
which long had currency in Eussia.

It is impossible to ascertain what was the character
of the leather money which, according to an obscure
tradition, was in use at Eome before the time of Numa.
There is no doubt that the Carthaginians had a repre-
sentative leather currency, for yEschiiies the Socratic
tells us that they used small pieces of leather wrapped
round cores of unknown material, and then sealed up.
Neighbouring nations refused to receive these curious
pieces of currency, whence w^c may safely infer that
their value was nominal.

It is however in China that the use of paper money
was most fully developed in early times. More than a
century before the Christian era, an emperor of China
raised funds to prosecute his wars in a way which show- s
that the use of leather tokens was familiar to the people.
The tokens having been made of the skins of white deer,
he collected together into a park all deer of this colour
w^hich he could find, and prohibited his subjects from
possessing any animals of the same kind. Having thus
obtained a monopoly of the material, reminding one
of the monopoly of the Bank of England in water-
marked paper, he issued pieces of the white leather as
money at a high rate.

In the middle of the thirteenth century, Marco Polo
found a paper money in circulation in China, composed
of the inner bark of a tree beaten up and made into


198


MONEY.


paper, square pieces of which were signed and sealed with
great formality. These notes were of various values,^
and were legal tender, death being the penalty imposed
upon those who rejfused to receive them. Counter-
feiters likewise incurred the same penalty. Another
traveller, who visited China in the fourteenth century,
gives a very similar account of the paper money then
circulating, and adds that, when worn or torn, it could
be exchanged for new notes without charge. It is need-
less to follow out the long and doubtful history of the
subject in later times, many particulars of which will
be found in the article of M. Bcrnardakis, or tliat of
M. Courcelle-Seneuil on Papier Monnaie in the “Dic-
tionnaire do rEconomio Politique.'’ It may suffice to
say that the history resembles that of most inconvertible
currencies. The quantity of paper afloat increased so
much under the Mongol dynasty as to cause great evils,
and the Ming dynasty, continuing the issues, w^ent so far
as to prohibit the use of gold or silver money. The
value of the paper fell so low, it is said, that one
metallic cash was worth a thousand paper cash, remind-
ing us of the present state of the paper currency in
San. Domingo. The result was a collapse and reaction
in the fifteenth century.

Among other Asiatic nations, the Tartars and the
Persians also understood the use of paper money, and
Sir John Maundeville, who travelled in Tartary in the
fourteenth century, gives the following account of the
advantages which the Great Chan enjoyed in con-
sequence. ‘‘ This Emperour may dispenden als moche


EEPRESENTATIVE MONEY.


199


as he wile, withouten ostymacioun. For he despendethe
not, ne makethe no money, but of Lethcr emprented, or
^ of Papyre. And of that money, is som of grettcr prys,
and som of lasso prys, aftre the dyversitec of his
Statutes. And whan that Money hatlie ronne so longe
that it begynnethe to waste, than men beren it to the
Emperourc’s Tresorye ; and than thei taken newe
money for the olde. And that Money gothe thorghe
out alle the contree, and thorghe out alle his Provynces.

. For there and beyonde hem, thei make no Money
nouther of Gold nor of Sylver. And therefore he may
despende ynow, and outrageously/’ Not a few great
emperors and kings and even republics have imitated
the Great Chan, and have spent their paper money,
‘‘ ynow and outrageously.”

Reasons for the Use of Representative Money »

It is well to analyse and state exactly the reasons
which may be given for the introduction of j>ieces of
representative money. Several motives maybe detected,
and they have been of different weight in different cases.
The origin of the European system of bank-notes is to
be found in the deposit banks estfiblished in Italy from
four to seven centuries ago. In those days the circu-
lating medium consisted of a mixture of coins of many
denominations, variously clipped or depreciated. In
receiving money, the merchant had to weigh and
estimate the fineness of each coin, and much trouble,
loss of time, and risk of fraud thus arose. It became,


200


MONEY.


therefore, the custom in the mercantile republics of Italy
to deposit such money in a bank, where its value was
accurately estimated, once for all, and placed to the^
credit of the depositor.

The banks of Amsterdam and Hamburg were sub'
sequently established on a similar system, and a full
account of them will be found in Adam Smith’s Wealth
of Nations,” Book IV., Chapter III., and in Hewitt’s
“ Treatise upon Money” (p. 121). The money placed to
the credit of individuals in these banks was called bank-
money, and commanded an agio or premium correspond-
ing to the average depreciation of the coins. Payments
were made by the merchants attending at the bank
at a particular hour, and ordering transfers to be made
in the bank books. The money paid was thus always
of full value, and all trouble in counting and valuing
it was avoided. The regulations of these banks were,
however, in many respects complicated, and it is difficult
to understand their purpose.

Inconvenience of Metallic Money,

Closely involved with the previous motive for the use
of representative money is that of avoiding the trouble
and risk of handling large amounts of the precious
metals. In order to keep large sums of metallic money
in safety a person must have strongholds and watch-
men. The origin of banking in England has never been
sufficiently investigated, but, so far as we know, it arose
for the purpose of safe custody. While public and well-


REPRESENTATIVE MONEY.


201


regulated deposit banks Lad existed for centuries in
Italy, the only trace of such an institution in England
was found in the mint in the Tower of Ijondon,' whither
merchants were accustomed to send their specie for safe
keeping. Unfortimately, in 1640 King Charles I. ap-
propriated as a loan £200,000 thus deposited, and the
merchants, no longer trusting the government, and find-
ing it dangerous to keep large sums of money in their
own houses during the troubled times which followed,
resorted to the practice of depositing their money with
goldsmiths, who probably had vaults and guards suitable
for the purpose.

As acknowledgments of the possession of such sums
of money, the goldsmith gave receipts, and at first these
documents were special promises, like dock warrants.
.The practice arose of transferring possession by delivery
of these receipts, or goldsmith’s notes,” as they were
called. Such notes are frequently referred to in Acts
of Parliament, and even as late as 1746 most of the
London bankers continued to be members of the Gold-
smith’s Company. It is plain from the manner in which
these notes were mentioned in some statutes that they
had become general and not special promises — mere
engagements to deliver a sum of money on demand,
without conditions as to keeping a reserve for the
purpose.


202


MONET.


The Weight of Currency.

Even the weight of metallic money would be a suffi-
cient reason for the use of representative documents in
large transactions. In proportion as the legal tender is
more bulky and inconvenient to carry about, is this
motive more powerful. Thus, when the state of Virginia
employed tobacco as the medium of exchange in the
eighteenth century, the tobacco was placed in stores,
and receipts on paper were handed about. Paper money
was issued in Russia under Catherine II. in 17G8, on
the ground that the copper money, then forming the legal
tender, was inconvenient. So much were these assignats,
or notes, preferred, that they at first circulated at a
premium of \ per cent.

In the present state of commerce, even gold money
would be far too heavy to form a convenient medium for
making largo payments, M. Chevalier states that it
would require forty men to carry the gold equal in value
to the Regent Diamond. The average daily transactions
in the London Bankers’ Clearing House amount to
about twenty millions of pounds sterling, which if paid
in gold coin would weigh about 157 tons, and would
require nearly eighty horses for conveyance. If paid
in silver the weight would be increased to more than 2500
tons. For the conveyance and custody of very moderate
sums in coin or bullion, individuals, or even large banks,
resort to the aid of the Bank of England, whose officials
are experienced in the matter, and have all facilities.

I find that a Bank of England note weighs about 20^


KEPEESENTATIVE MONEY.


203


grains (IJ grams), whereas a single sovereign weighs
about 123 grains, and the note may represent five, ten,
fifty, a thousand, or ten thousand such sovereigns with
slight differences in the printing. If we were obliged
to handle a medium of exchange actually embodying
value, it would, ere now, have been necessary to employ
precious stones, or some metal much more rare and
precious than gold. But the use of representative docu-
ments is becoming so general in the most advanced
commercial countries, that the portability of metallic
money is a question of very minor importance. Gold
already acts in England only as change for notes, and
the question will arise whether it will long be needed
even for that purpose.

Saving of Interest,

A further and very potent motive for employing re-
presentative tokens or notes, consists in the saving of
interest and capital, which is effected by substituting a
comparatively valueless material in place of costly gold
and silver. Whenever a nation is in great straits for
want of revenue, there is a great temptation to treat the
metallic currency as a treasure to be temporarily
borrowed for the necessities of the state. The ancient
Greeks understood this as well as the modern English,
Italians, or Americans. Dionysius, on this ground,
obliged the Syracusans to accept tin tokens in place of
silver coins, worth four times as much in metallic value.
In the book on Economics, attributed to Aristotle, w^e


204


MONEY.


are told that Timotheus the Athenian persuaded the
soldiers and naerchants to receive copper money in place
of silver, promising to exchange it for silver coins at
the close of the war. The Clazomenians made a similar
issue of token money avowedly for the sake of the
interest thereby saved. Being unable to pay twenty
talents due to some mercenary troops, they were under
the necessity of paying four talents a year as interest-
They fell upon the device of coining iron tokens to the
nominal amount of twenty talents, which they obliged
the citizens to take in place of silver coin. The silver
thus obtained was used for the immediate discharge
of the debt, and there w^as a spare annual revenue
of four talents, formerly absorbed in the payment of
interest, which now enabled them in a few years to
redeem the token money. Closely parallel to this is
the case of the Guernsey Market, which was built
without apparent cost. Daniel le Broc, the governor
of the island, determined to build a market in St. Peters,
but not having the necessary funds, issued under the
seal of the island four thousand market notes for one
pound each, with which he paid the artificers. When
the market was finished and the rents came in, the notes
were thereby cancelled, and not an ounce of gold w’^as
employed in the matter. There is, however, no mystery
in this advantage of paper money.

Daniel le Broc, by issuing his market-notes, drove
an equivalent amount of gold out of circulation, and
thus effected a kind of forced loan out of the metallic
currency of the island, without paying any interest for


REPRESENTATIVE MONEY.


205


it. A similar gain of interest accrues upon all paper
notes so far as their amount exceeds the gold held in
readiness to pay them. The private and joint stock
banks of issue in England in this way enjoy the interest
upon a sum of about six millions and a half sterling, the
Scotch banks upon two millions and three <iuartcrs, and
the Irish hanks upon more than six millions. The issue
of paper representative money is beneficial to all parties,
provided that it be conducted upon a sound method of
regulation, a subject upon which the greatest differences
of opinion exist.


206


MONEY.


CHAPTEE XVII.

THE NATUEE AND VARIETrES OP PROMISSORY NOTES.

Before attempting to come to any conclusion as to the
best mode of regulating the issue of promissory notes,
we must carefully analyse the differences which may
exist between one promise and another. What seems at
first siglit a very slight and subtle distinction, may be
found to lead to important results. He who issues a
representative or promissory document, engaging to give
a certain quantity of a defined commodity in return
for the document when presented, may really make any
one of three distinct engagements.

1. He may promise to keep a certain identical
article in his possession until it is called for.

2. He may engage to have in his possession a
certain amount of commodity ready to meet the pro-
missory notes, without distinguishing between portion
and portion of a similar substance.

3. The undertaking may be merely to the effect
that the required commodity shall be forthcoming when
the note is presented, no covenant being made as to the
quantity to be held in stock for the purpose.


THE NATUEE AND VARIETIES OF rROMISSORV NOTES. 207


Specific Deposit Warrant.

The most satisfactory kind of promissory document
is the first, which is represented by bills of lading, pawn-
tickets, dock-warrants, or certificates which establish
ownership to a definite object. A bill of lading entitles
the legal holder of it to certain cases or packages of
goods, described by marks, numbers, dimensions, or
otherwise. The ship-master signing such a bill is
obliged to retain the identical cases committed to his
care, until he delivers them up in return for the bill of
lading at the close of his voyage. Dock- warrants are
of the same character, being receipts for packages of
goods deposited in the London or other dock ware-
houses. The holder of a dock-warrant has a prima facie
claim to the pipes of wine, bales of wool, hogsheads of
sugar, or other packages named thereon. Transfer of
the warrant by endorsement or otherwise, as required by
law and custom, is accounted a transfer of the owner-
ship of the goods. The important point concerning
such promissory notes is, that they cannot possibly be
issued in excess of the goods actually deposited, unless
by distinct fraud. The issuer ought to act purely as a
warehouse-keeper, and as possession may be claimed
at any time, he can never legally allow any object
deposited to go out of his safe keeping until it is
delivered back in exchange for the promissory note.


208


MONEY.


General Deposit Warrant

We pass to the case in which the issuer of a pro-
missory document engages to keep on hand goods
exactly equivalent in quantity and quality to what are
specified thereon, Avithout taking note of individual
parcels. In many cases commodities are so homo-
geneous that there seems to be no need to distinguish
parcel from parcel, or to restore the identical portion
deposited. Thus the keeper of a pig-iron store in
Glasgow receives large quantities of pig iron, of several
brands, and issues corresponding warrants representing
ownership therein. As no difference, however, is Imown
to exist between different portions of iron of the same
brand, it was the practice in former years not to allot
one heap of pigs to each warrant, but simply to retain a
stock of each brand equal in weight to the aggregate
amount due on outstanding warrants. More recently a
better system has been introduced, and each specific lot
of iron has been marked and set aside to meet some
particular warrant. The difference seems to be slight,
but it is really very important, as opening the way to a
lax fulfilment of the contract. Misunderstandings occa-
sionally arise upon this point in other trades. Eor in-
stance, a cotton merchant in Liverpool, a few years since,
obtained a loan of money upon the security of cotton
in his possession, and a court of law was subsequently
called upon to decide whether he had mortgaged certain
individual bales of cotton, and undertaken to retain
them until the loan was repaid, or whether he had


THE NATURE AND VARIETIES OF PROMISSORY NOTES. 200


merely engaged to have in his hands an equal quantity
of cotton of the same quality. I have heard that carry-
ing and warehousing companies are sometimes careless
about distinction of parcel and parcel. If they are
continually conveying or holding portions of exactly the
same goods, flour from the same miller, coal from the
same seam, they will sometimes deliver out the required
quantity of the same sort of goods, irrespective of its
being the identical portion delivered to them for con-
veyance or safe custody.


Difference between a Special and a General Promise,

The great importance of the distinctions pointed out
in the last section will be easily apparent. He who
has made a special promise to give definite parcels of
goods in return for particular individual papers, cannot
issue any such promissory papers without holding corre-
sponding goods. If he does so, he will be continually
liable to be convicted of fraud or default by the pre-
sentation of a particular document. If the promises
made by him, however, are only general ones, any
l)romissory document can be met by any portion of
commodity of the proper quality, and it will be neces-
sary to present most or all of the documents in order
to disclose default. The way is thus oi^ened for the
speculative issue of promissory notes. The receiver of
deposits, finding that a large portion of the deposited
commodity always remains on hand, may proceed to
use it in trade, only keeping so much as may meet

p


210


MONEY.


current demands. So long as he does fulfil promises
no harm seems to be done ; but experience i^roves that
there will always be a certain proportion of persons
who, in such circumstances, will not act so discreetly
as to be in a position to redeem all their engagements.

Moreover, it now becomes possible to create a ficti-
tious supply of a commodity, that is, to make peoifie
believe that a supply exists which does not exist. The
possessor of a promissory note or warrant regards the
document as equivalent to the commodity named thereon.
It is only necessary then to i)rint off, fill up, and sign
an additional number of such notes in order to have a
corresponding supply of commodity to sell. It is true
that the issue of promises involves their fulfilment at
a future day; but the future is unknown, and the
issuer may believe that before the fulfilment is likely
to be demanded the price of the commodity will have
fallen. Thus, if j^ig-iron warrants could be issued in
unlimited quantities (irrespective of the stocks actually
in the stores at Glasgow), an unscrupulous band of
speculators might perhaps make large profits by selling
great quantities of iron for future delivery. After sud-
denly and excessively depressing the price of pig-iron
they might succeed in gradually buying up enough at
lower prices to meet the warrants when presented. This
kind of “bear” operations has certainly been successful
in other markets.

Albout ten years ago it became the practice to rig
the market as regards the shares of particular joint-stock
banking companies, A party would be formed, perhaps


THK NATURE AND VARIETIES OF PROMISSORY NOTES. 211


owning none of the shares of the selected company, and
they would proceed to sell considerable quantities of
the shares, hoping so to damage the reputation of the
comi)any and lower the value of the stock as to be
able to buy up enough before delivery would be required.
This noxious kind of speculation was checked by an
Act of Parliament (30 Victoria, c. 29, 18G7), which now
requires the seller of bank shares to specify the numbers
or the registered proprietors of the shares which he is
selling for future delivery.

It might be urged, indeed, that there is a natural
right belonging to all persons to make promises, if they
can thereby benelit themselves. Any one can accept a
bill, thereby promising to deliver money at a future day.
It is quite common to make contracts involving the
delivery of government stock, or of cotton or corn
expected to arrive by sea, before delivery becomes due.
But we must remember that all la\vs and all social
relations are deAused to secure the greatest good of the
the greatest number. If a right to make all promises
be recognized by law, it must be because the right is
beneficial to society, and it is the recognition by law
which makes it a right. If, on the contrary, it be
found by experience that freedom of making and selling
promises in a particular way gives scope to illegitimate
speculation, or otherwise injures society more than it
produces benefit, the law ought certainly to restrict this
freedom and regulate the matter for the good of the
community. The whole matter, in short, is one of
expediency. It used to be held as a general rule of law,


212


MONEY.


that any present grant or assignment of goods not in
existence is without operation. Though the rule seems
to be generally disregarded, there are many cases in
which it might be advantageously enforced.

Pemnianj Projnissorij Notes.

Applying these considerations to the special matter of
money, we find that pecuniary promises are nearly
always of a general kind. He who undertakes to pay
a sum of money on a future day, rarely specifies the
individual coins which will be paid. In fact the Coinage
Act, in defining legal tender, makes any sovereigns,
shillings, and pence, duly coined and of proper weiglit,
a discharge for a corresponding sum named in a con-
tract. It is true that just as pipes of wine are ware-
housed in the London docks, cases of gold and silver
bullion or, it may be, of foreign or English coin, are
warehoused in the vaults of the Bank of England.
In fact, imports of gold and silver, at whatever port in
the kingdom they may arrive, are almost always sent up
for delivery at the bullion oflice of the bank, which acts
precisely as if it were a dock warehouse, and delivers
the packages on production of the bills of lading. These
bills of lading are specific inomises, and may yet be
passed by endorsement from one person to another.
Such consignments of bullion, however, do not enter
into the banking accounts.

A Bank of England note is neither more nor
less binding upon the bank authorities than a bill


THE NATURE AND VARIETIES OF PROMISSORY NOTES. 213

of lading, but it does not specify the bag or box of
money to be employed in paying it. Almost all other
pecuniary engagements are in the same way general
engagements. No banker could make any profit if he
were obliged to put away the sovereigns deposited by a
customer until that customer presented a cheque for
them, nor would there usually be sufficient motive for
desiring such a spcciah pledge. The idea never enters
into our heads in mercantile matters. Disputes,
however, have occasionally arisen upon this point.
Some people have a peculiar fancy for collecting
particular coins, and an old lady, having formed a
hoard of fourpenny pieces, died after bequeathing them
to a relative. Although wishing to keep them out of
respect to the old lady, this relative was in want of
ready cash, and desired to realize their value ; he
thought to achieve both objects by pledging them with
a pawnbroker. The broker readily received them, but
after a time thoughtlessly used the groats as change.
When the pawn-ticket w’as presented he considered that
the tender of the equivalent sum in sovereigns and
shillings was a sufficient discharge. Here, however, the
pledge should have been held as a special one.

Now, if pecuniary promises were always of a special
character there could be no possible harm in allowing
perfect freedom in the issue of promissory notes. The
issuer would merely constitute himself a warehouse-
keeper, and would be bound to hold each special lot of
coin ready to pay each corresponding note. But this is
not the case, and much harm may arise from the exces-


214


MONF.Y.


sive issue of promises to pay gold on demand. The gold
market may be rigged as well as the iron or any other
special market. One difference is that the gold market is
the most extensive of all markets, so that a great many
individuals or companies, each acting under the separate
impulse of self-interest, must over-issue notes in order
to produce any appreciable effect. A further difference
is that gold, being itself the measure of value, the rise or
fall in its price cannot be apparent except in the average
fall or rise in the price of many commodities. This
subject must be pursued in Chapter XXIV.

Principles of the Circtilation of Representative Money.

In the last two sections of Chapter VIII. (pp. 80 -85),
we found that by analyzing the motives of individuals in
receiving, holding, or paying away metallic money, we
could arrive at certain laws of circulation, which were
amply confirmed by experience. It was also pointed out
that the same laws might be extended mutatis mutandis,
to the mixed circulation of metallic and paper money.
Habit is almost as powerful in supporting the use of
representative money as of real metallic coins. Persons
who have long been accustomed to pay away certain
pieces of paper without loss, will continue to regard them
as good cuiTency until some rude shock is given to their
confidence. This may go so far that a dirty bit of paper,
containing a promise to pay a sovereign, will be actually
preferred to the beautiful gold coin which it promises.
The currency of Scotland is a standing proof of this


THE NATURE AND VARIETIES OF PROMISSORY NOTES. 215

assertion ; and the same may be said of Norway, where,
until 1874, no gold at all was in circulation, and notes
for one, five, or ten dollars formed the principal part
of the currency.

There is one all-important point in which represen-
tative differs from metallic money ; it mil not circulate
beyond the boundaries of the district or country where
it is legally current or habitually employed. No doubt
Bank of England notes are frequently carried abroad
by travellers, and are in most places readily exchanged
for the money of the locality; but they never circulate,
and are treated as bills upon London, forming a con-
venient mode of remittance. They do not satisfy a debt
from this to another country, but rather create it, an
English bank-note, in the hands of a Paris banker,
representing a claim which he has upon the Bank of
England. The only money which can really be exported
in payment of debts due to foreign merchants is standard
metallic money. Hence paper money has exactly the
same capacity for driving out standard money that light
or depreciated coins possess.

In the case of inconvertible notes this has always
been most obvious. As the quantity of such notes
issued progressively increases, as almost always hap-
pens, coin must be exported, otherwise the currency
would become excessive. But when most of the coin
is gone, need of it begins to be felt for making foreign
payments, and then the value of the paper falls below
that of the coin which it is supposed to correspond to.
Many persons begin to hoard the coins for the sake


216


MONEY.


of anticipated profit, and nothing but paper is soon to
be found in circulation. This effect of paper in driving
coin out of use has been manifested over and over
again, as in the time of the assignats of the French
Eevolution, the suspension of specie payments at the
Bank of England between 1797 and 1819, and the late
American war. One of the most recent and striking
instances is to be found in Italy, where large (juantities
of beautiful gold and silver coins had been struck in the
years 1862 to 1865, but all disappeared very rapidly
from circulation as soon as the cours force of paper
money was proclaimed.


( 217 )


CHAPTEE XVIIL

METHODS OP KEGDLATING A PAPER CURRENCY.

We may now proceed with advantage to consider the
various methods on which the issue of paper money
may he conducted. This question is perhaps the most
vexed and debatable one in the whole sphere of political
economy ; but, by carefully adhering to the analysis of
facts, we may perhaps get a view of the subject free
from the great perplexities in which it is commonly
involved. The elementary principles of the subject are
not of a complex character ; and if we hold tenaciously
to those principles, we may perhaps be saved from that
dangerous kind of intellectual vertigo which often
attacks writers on the currency.

The state may either take the issue of representative
money into its own hands, as it takes the coining of
money, or it may allow private individuals, or semi-
public companies and corporations, to undertake the
work under more or less strict legislative control. We
will afterwards briefly consider the relative advantages
of government and private issues, but in either case we
may lay down the following series of methods according


218


MONEY.


to which the amount of issue may he regulated, and the
performance of the promises guaranteed.

1. The Simj)le De/posit Method, The issuer of pro-
missory notes may be obliged to keep a stock of coin
and bullion constantly on hand, equal in amount to the
aggregate of the uncancelled notes, each of which, being
instantly paid on ju'esentation, will produce a corres-
ponding decrease of the reserve.

2. The Paiiial Depout Method, Instead of being
obliged to keep the whole of the precious metals
deposited in his vaults, the issuer may be allowed to
invest a fixed amount in government funds, or other
safe profitable securities.

3. The Minimum iteserve Method, The issuer may
be bound to have on hand under all circumstances a
fixed minimum amount of coin and bullion.

4. The Proportional Reserve Method, The reserve
may be made to vary with the amount of outstanding
notes, being, say, at least one-third or one-fourth of the
total.

5. The Maximum Issue Method, Permission may be
given to issue notes not exceeding in the aggregate a
fixed amount, prohibitory penalties being imposed upon
any breach of this restriction,

6. The Elastic Limit Method. A limit may be
assigned to the aggregate amount of notes, as in the
last method, but the penalties on the excessive issue
may be intentionally made so light, that the issuer
will under some circumstances prefer to pay the penalty
rather than restrict his issues.


METHODS OF REGULATING A PAPER CURRENCY. 219

7. The Docimientary Reserve Method. The reserve
of property which the issuer is required to keep may
consist not of gold or silver coin or bullion, but of
government funds, bonds, shares, or other documentary
securities.

8. The Real Property Reserve Method. Instead of
merely documentary property, the issuer may be allowed
to treat various property, such as land, houses, ships,
railway shares, etc., as his reserve of wealth to meet
engagements.

9. The Foreiyn Rxchanyes Method. Some important
bank may be allowed to issue convertible notes on
the understanding that it will not increase the amount in
circulation so long as the foreign exchanges arc against
the country, and render the export of specie profitable.

10. The Free Issue Method. The business of issuing
promissory notes may be left open to the free competi-
tion of all individuals, free from any restrictions or con-
ditions, except such laws as apply to all commercial
contracts and promises.

11. The Gold Par Method. Paper money may be
issued, bearing the appearance of promissory notes, but
inconvertible into coin. The issue being restricted as
long as any premium on gold is apparent, the paper
money may be thus maintained equal in value to the
coin which it nominally represents.

12. The Revenue Payments Method. Inconvertible
paper money may be freely issued, but an attempt may
bo made to keep up its value by receiving it in place
of coin in the payment of taxes.


220


MONEY.


13. The Deferred Convertibility Method. Notes may
be issued promising to pay metallic money at some
future day, either definitely fixed or dependent upon
political or other contingent events.

14. The Paper Money Method. Lastly, those who
coin apparent promissory notes may be entirely absolved
from the performance of their promises, so that the
notes circulate by force of habit, by the command of
the sovereign, or in consequence of the absence of any
other medium of exchange.

Although I have, in the above statement, enumerated
no less than fourteen distinct methods of managing
the issue of paper currency, it is by no means certain
that other methods have not been employed from
time to time. There may be, in fact, an almost un-
limited number of devices for securing the perform-
ance of promises, or for rendering the performance
unnecessary. Moreover, these methods may be com-
bined together in almost unlimited variety. The reserve
may be required to be partially in the form of specie,
and partially in documentary securities, or real pro-
perty. A banker may be allowed to issue a certain fixed
amount of notes without any condition as to reserves,
and to issue tether notes on the Deposit Method.

It would obviously require a very large volume to
enter at all in an adequate manner upon a description of
these methods, their relative advantages or defects, and
the ways in which they have been combined and carried
into effect at different times and places. I must there-


METHODS OP EEGULATING A PAPEU CURRENCY. 221


fore confine myself in this small book to a very concise
discussion of this most extensive subject.

1, Simple Deposit.

This method is perfectly represented by the ancient
deposit banks in the Italian commercial republics, by
the banks of Amsterdam and Hamburg, or by the London
goldsmiths, so long as they only acted as safe keepers
of the specie committed to their cai*e. Notes issued on
this sj^stem have a purely representative character, like
dock warrants or pawn tickets, as I have already fully
explained. The performance of promises is rendered
certain so far as legislation can provide for it. The
amount of such a currency will vary exactly like that of
a metallic currency, and there can be no fear of paper
replacing specie, and driving it out of .the country,
because the specie must be in the vaults of the issuing
bank before the notes are issued.

At the same time the advantages of the method are
comparatively slight, because the use of paper re-
presentatives merely saves the abrasion of coin, and
the trouble and risk of carrying it about and counting
it. The community loses the interest of the whole sum
held in pledge, and this forms by far the largest part
of the cost of the currency, as we have seen (p. 164). The
coin, too, may be safer in the hands of the people.
When lying apparently useless within the reach of an
arbitrary government, it often proves an irresistible
temptation. Charles I. seized the money in the Tower.


222


MONEY.


When the French invaded Holland in 1795 , a large part
of the specie supposed to be deposited in the vaults of
the bank of Amsterdam was not forthcoming, having
been secretly lent to the Dutch East India Company,
and the city authorities. The Eussian government
diligently collected a bank reserve in the citadel of St.
Petersburg, which was under the cognizance of members
of the Exchange, until the troubles of 1848 forced the
emi)cror to assume the control himself. In innu-
merable instances governments, including the English
government in 1797 , have made use of bank deposits,
under the form of suspending specie payments.

2 . Partial Dejfosit,

The Bank of England, under the Bank Charter Act
of 1844 , perfectly represents this method. For each
additional iive-pound note which is put forth out
of the issue department, gold to the weight of 616’37
grains must be deposited in that department. The
whole amount of gold, however, retained in th(3 vaults
is less by £ 15 , 000,000 than the outstanding notes, this
constant difference being covered by documentary secu-
rities, and by a sum of about eleven millions which the
bank lends to the government without interest. Under
this arrangement we secure all tlie advantages of the
simple deposit system, while the community gains the
interest amounting to about £ 445 , 000 , of which the
government receives £ 188,000 per annum. The cha-
racter of the contract between the government and
the bank is of too intricate a nature to be readily


METHODS OF IlEGULATING A P.U^ER CURRENCY. 223

fathomed or described, but it substantially amounts to
the government borrowing the larger part of the fifteen
millions of deposits, and allowing the bank to use the
rest to cover the cost of printing and managing the note
circulation. I shall treat of this system again in Chapter
XXIV. The Partial Deposit method is the basis of the
new law concerning the issue of notes in the German
empire, in combination with the Elastic Limit method,
which possibly constitutes an imi)rovement.

3. Minimum lieserve.

One mode of guaranteeing the payment of notes,
which might be suggested, would consist in obliging
the issuers to keep on hand a stock of specie, which
is never to be allowed to fall below a certain fixed
amount. This would be like recommending a man
to avoid impecuniosity by always keeping a shilling
in his pocket. The fact that the minimum amount
must be kept in the vaults renders it unavailable for
meeting demands when they come. There can be no
use in such a reserve unless there be a pow'er exercised
by the legisltiture or executive government, of arbi-
trarily suspending the operation of the law wdien there
is a run upon the banks.

4. Proportional Reserve,

The issuer of promises to pay money on demand
may be required to keep a reserve of coin never less
than, say, one-fourth of the whole outstanding notes.


224


MONEY.


This is analogous to the method on which the National
Bank currency of the United States was lately regulated,
and it is, perhaps, better to enforce the keeping of a
certain amount of reserve than to leave the matter
entirely to the discretion and good faith of the indi-
vidual issuers. As the banker sees his reserve ninning
down nearly to the legal limit, he will be compelled to
use additional caution, in order to avoid a breach of
the law. But if the untoward state of trade and credit
causes any large portion of the outstanding notes to
be presented, the legal tender reserve will be diminished
in a greater proportion than the amount of notes, which
is larger in absolute quantity. If there be 100,000
dollars of outstanding notes, and 40,000 dollars reserve,
then it is obvious that the presentation of 20,000 dollars
of notes will reduce these numbers respectively to
80,000 dollars of outstanding notes, and 20,000 dollars
of reserve ; and if the law required the reserve to be one-
fourth part of the liabilities, no more notes could be paid.
Thus, from the moment that the banker allows his reserve
to touch the legal minimum, it becomes unavailable to
him, except by a breach of law% and it may be said that
the law is of little use except when broken. This
system, in fact, reduces itself, when it comes into opera-
tion at all, to the Minimum Reserve method last described.
The banker cannot touch his reserve Just when he most
wants it, and the deadlock thus occasioned was acutely
felt in the United States during the panic of 1873.

This method of regulation has, moreover, little or no
effect in removing the motives for an extension of the


METHODS OF REGULATING A PAPER CURRENCY. 225


circulation. The greater part of the value of every
additional note kept in circulation is a gratuitous
addition to the loanable capital of the bank, and bears
interest as long as it can be kept afloat.

5. Maximum Issue,

To allow a bank or banks to issue in the aggre-
gate a certain fixed amount of promissory notes, and
no more, appears to me quite consistent with the
principles of political economy. It saves interest upon
a certain portion of the circulating medium, and sup-
plies a convenient and economical currency. At the
same time, the notes issued cannot drive gold out of
the country beyond a fixed amount. It is strongly urged
by Mr. E. Inglis Palgrave and others, that the limitation
is arbitrary, and that the people want more money ; but
it is always open to them to use metallic money instead.
The limitation imposed is not upon money itself, but
upon the representative part, and though we thereby
forego the increased saving of interest upon enlarged
issues, this loss may be balanced by the freedom from
any risk of producing a fictitious abundance of gold.
This system is sufficiently illustrated in the 170 banks
of England which are still allowed to issue notes. Sir
Eobert Peel provided, in the Act of 1844, that they might
continue to issue, without any condition as to reserve,
the same quantity of notes as they had issued on the
average of twelve weeks preceding a day named. If any
bank exceeded the amount thus determined it was to
be fined a sum of money equal to the average excess of

Q


226


MONEY.


the month ; and sworn returns of their circulations were
required from all issuing banks.

6. Elastic Limit,

The above is the best name which I can find for a
new method of regulation which has just been adopted
in the Bank Act of the German empire. So far as
regards the issue of bank-notes the banking organiza-
tion of Germany will substantially resemble that of
England. The new Imperial Bank, and sucli of the
state or other banks which conform to the require-
ments of the law, will have the right of issuing notes
not backed by gold to the aggregate sum of 385 millions
of marks. They may apparently issue any further
quantity of notes in exchange for a deposit of gold to an
equal value. So far the method is precisely that of the
partial deposit already d(?scribed ( p. 222). Observing,
however, that tlic English Bank Charter Act has on
several occasions been violated to prevent a panic,
the German legislature has provided that more bank-
notes may be issued, provided that a tax of 5 per cent,
be paid thereon. It is intended in this way to make it
unprofitable for any bank to exceed the normal limits.
It seems likely that this provision will work well, and
form an improvement on our method. The English
government, indeed, has always deprived the Bank of
England of the interest on any excess of notes which
it issued during a suspension of the Bank Act, but the
German law makes the limit of issue elastic in all cases,
so as to avoid the danger of panic.


METHODS OF REGULATING A PAPER CURRENCY. 227


7. Documentary Reserve.

It might seem enough in order to ensure the con-
vertibility of notes, that the hankers issuing them
should prove their possession of abundant funds, in
the form of government stocks, bonds, exchequer bills,
rentes, or even good mercantile bills, sufficient to estab-
lish the perfect solvency of the firm. If a considerable
margin be left, it may seem impossible that the notes
should not ultimately be paid. To argue in this way,
however, is to forget that bank-notes are promises to pay
gold or legal tender metallic money on demand, and that to
pay the notes ultimately is not to pay them on demand.
With such a reserve, payment can only bo made in any
large quantity by soiling the stocks and bonds for metallic
money; but it is just when there is a scarcity of gold
and silver, that notes are ijresented for payment. No
doubt good government fmids and good bills can always
be sold at some price, so that a banking firm wdth a
strong reserve of this kind might always maintain their
solvency. 1.5ut the remedy might be worse for the
community than the disease, and the forced sale of the
reserve might create such a disturbance in the money
market as would do more harm than the suspension of
payment of the notes. Payment of notes on demand
implies the possession of adequate gold and silver, and
if there be not sufficient bullion and coin in the country,
no paper documents, or promises to pay at a future day,
can take their place.


228


MONEY.


8. Real Property Reserve,

Many currency theorists have held, that in securing
the repayment of notes we need not restrict our-
selves to a single commodity gold, but may mortgage
for the purpose, land, houses, or any kind of fixed
real property. The celebrated scheme of John Law was
of this nature. In his remarkable tract on ‘‘Money
and Trade Considered, with a Proposal for Supplying
the Nation with Money,” published in 1705, he sug-
gests that commissioners should be appointed to “ coin ”
notes “ to be received in payments where offered,” that
is, I presume, as legal tender. He sets forth three
alternative modes of issuing these notes on land security,
the first and simplest being to lend them to landowners
at the ordinary interest, to the extent of one-half or two-
thirds of the value. He endeavours to provide against
depreciation of the notes by taking care that the prices
are always estimated in silver money.

Tlie assignats of the Ifrench Revolutionary Govern-
ment represented land assigned, namely, portions of the
confiscated e^states of the Church. They were to be
received back and cancelled as the lands were bought by
the public ; but, as the price of the land was not fixed, no
proportion was established between land and paper, and
no amount of land could prevent the assignats from
falling as they did to one two-hundredth part of their
original value. In the subsequent issue of Mandats, an
attempt was made to fix the price of land in mandats,
but this scheme also failed. The inconvertible land


METHODS OF REGELATING A PAPER CURRENCY. 229


mortgage notes, issued by Frederick the Great to recruit
his treasury exhausted by wars, were of somewhat the
same nature, but bore interest.

Land is doubtless one of the best kinds of security
for the ultimate repayment of a debt, and is therefore
very suitable when money is lent for a long time. But
representative bank-notes purport to be equivalent to
gold payable on demand, and nothing is less readily
convertible into gold on an emergency than land. In
this respect a reserve of real property is worse than a
reserve of exchequer bills or consols.

This method of providing paper money has generally
been advocated on the ground that the quantity of
money in circulation might thus be greatly increased,
and the wealth of the nation augmented. It could
readily be shown, however, that an increase of the
money in circulation will lead to a reduction in its value.
In any given state of industry only a certain quantity
of circulating medium is needed, and were the notes
really convertible into definite quantities of land or
any other substantial commodity, the excess of notes
would ultimately be presented for payment. To sup-
pose that the currency could be made equal in aggregate
value to any large part of the lands of the country is
evidently absurd.

9. Regulation hy the Foreign Exchanges.

A theory was very much in favour among bank
directors at the beginning of this century that a paper


230


MONEY.


currency could be regulated merely by watching the
rates of the foreign exchanges, and restricting the issue
when the lowness of the rates and the export of specie
showed a depreciation of the paper. This was one of
the methods proposed in opposition to the celebrated
Bullion Report, and a summary of the interminable
discussions on the subject will be found in Mr. Macleod's
Treatise on Banking, VoL II. Chapter IX.

Regulation by the foreign exchanges is much better
than no regulation at all, but if perfectly carried out
it would give exactly the same results as the deposit
method, and is only a loose and indirect way of reach-
ing the same end.

10. Free Issue System.

There is a school of economists, both in this country
and America, 'svho uphold the expediency of allowing all
persons to issue as many promissory notes payable on
demand as they can get other persons to acce];)t. They
call this system the Free Banking system, but incorrectly,
because it is no necessary function of a banker to issue
promissory notes, and a great many banks exist in
England without any power of issue. This subject will
be further discussed in a subsequent chapter, and I will
only add here that under the system of unrestricted
issue, a banker is bound by law to pay a note issued by
him, but is left entirely at his own discretion to keep
such balance of specie for the purpose as he may think
proper. As a general rule, no doubt, notes thus issued


METHODS OF EBGULATING A PAPER CURRENCY, 231

will be paid ; but, having regard to the great fluctua-
tions of commerce, which are becoming more, rather
than less marked, there will occur periods when a iwes-
sure for payment of notes will be made. Experience
abundantly shows that a certain number of individuals
will calculate too confidently on their good fortune, and
fail to carry out their promises and intentions when
the critical time arives.

11. The Gold Par Method.

Assuming an inconvertible paper currency to be
issued, and to be entirely in the hands of government,
many of the evils of such a system might be avoided if the
issue were limited or reduced the moment that the price
of gold in paper rose above par. As long as the notes
and the gold coins which they i)retend to represent circu-
late on a footing of equality, they are as good as if con-
vertible. Since the beginning of the Franco-Prussiaii
war, the Bank of France appears to have acted success-
fully on tliis principle, and the inconvertible notes were
never depreciated more than about or 1 per cent, in
spite of the vast political and financial troubles of France.
But this is one of the very few cases in which inconvert-
ible paper currency has not been seriously depreciated.
During the restriction of specie payments in Enghind,
gold was bought and sold at a premium varying up to 25
per cent., yet Fox, Vansittart, and other leading men of
the time, declared it to be absurd to suppose that paper
was depreciated. So unaccountable are the prejudices of


232


MONEY.


men on the subject of currency that it is not well to
leave anything to discretionary management.

12. Convertibility by Revenue Payments,

In many instances governments have tried to maintain
the value of a paper circulation by engaging to receive it
as taxes, or even rendering its use for this pm’pose obliga-
tory. The Eussian government when issuing assignats
received them at a fixed rate in place of copper coin, and
required that at least one-twentieth part of every pay-
ment was to be thus paid. The French assignats of the
Eevolution were also received at the public treasuries.
This would be a fair method of securing stability of
value on two conditions : — (1) that the taxes or charges
were themselves levied according to a fixed tariff ; and
(2) that the quantity of notes issued was kept within
such moderate limits that any one wishing to realize the
metallic value of the notes could find some one wanting
to pay taxes, and therefore willing to give coin for notes.
It is very unlikely, however, that these conditions could
ever be fully and conveniently realized in practice.

The United States greenback currency was made
receivable for all United States stamps, and was also
to be received in payment of all taxes and dues in sums
of certain assigned amounts, excepting Customs dues.
But the fact that some notes are thus withdrawn will
not prevent depreciation, if they be soon paid out again
with additions required to meet the pressing expenditure
of a government.


3IETH0DS OF REGULATING A PAPER CURRENCY. 233

In a small way postage stamps arc becoming used as
currency in several countries. They Avere extensively
used in the earlier years of the American war as the
well-knoAvn fractional currency. They are now a re-
cognized medium of payment in England, being repur-
chased by most postmasters at a discount of 21 per cent,
if presented in a piece of two or more undivided stamps.
Independently, however, of repurchase, stamps are so
continually being cancelled by use in postage, that their
value can hardly be lowered by excess of quantity. They
form a convenient and costless form of remittance for very
small sums, say from a halfpenny to five shillings, and
little or no objection can be made to their occasional use
as change; in place of pence. They would, however, form
a very bad currency if circulated to any great extent.

13. Deferred Convertibility.

It is a common resource for insurrectionary or belli-
gerent governments in want of funds to issue documents
promising to pay cash after their successful establishment.
When interest proportional to the time is also promised,
these notes must be regarded rather as bonds. Of such
nature were those issued by Kossuth in New York to form
a Hungarian fund, to be paid after the erection of
an independent Hungarian government. Similar bonds
were signed by the notorious Walker, as President of the
provisional government of the republic of Nicaragua.
By far the best instance of this kind of currency is fur-
nished by the Confederate States treasury notes, the


234


MONEY.


early issues of which were made payable six months
after the ratification of a treaty of peace with the United
States, and further issues were to be payable two years
after such treaty.

All such documents may be considered as bills of
very long date and of very uncertain value. The public
spirit of a people in time of war often enables them to be
put afloat, and the need of currency keeps them in circu-
lation for a time, but their value undergoes violent
variations, and there are few instances in which such
bills have been eventually paid.

14. Inconvertible Paper Money,

Finally we come to the undisguised paper money issued
by government and ordered to be received as legal tender.
Such inconvertible paper notes have in all instances been
put in circulation as convertible ones, or in the place of
such, and they are always expressed in terms of money.
The French mandats of 100 francs, for instance, bear
the ambiguous phrase ‘*Bon pour cent francs.” The
wretched scraps of paper which circulate in Buenos Ayres,
arc marked “ Un Peso, Moncda Corriente,” reminding one
of the time when the peso was a heavy standard coin.
After the promise of payment in coin is found to be
illusory the notes still circulate, partly from habit, partly
because the people must have some currency, and have
no coin to use for the purpose, or if they have, carefully
hoard it for profit or future use. There is plenty of
evidence to prove that an inconvertible paper money, if


METHODS OF EEGULATING A PAPER CURRENCY. 235


carefully limited in quantity, can retain its full value.
Such was the case with the Bank of England notes for
several years after the suspension of specie payments
in 1797, and such is the case with the present notes of
the Bank of France.

The principal objections to an inconvertible paper
currency are two in number.

1. The great temptations which it offers to over
issue and consequent depreciation.

2. Th (3 impossibility of varying its amount in
accordance with the requirements of trade.


Over Issue of Paper Money,

It is hardly requisite to tell again the well-worn tale
of the over issue of paper money which has almost
always followed the removal of the legal necessity of
convertibility. Hardly any civilized nation exists, except-
ing some of the newer British colonies, which has not
suffered from the scourge of paper money at one time or
other. Eussia has had a depreciated paper currency for
more than a hundred years, and the histoly of it may
be read in M. Wolowski’s work on the finances of Russia.
Repeated limits were placed to its issue by imperial
edict, but the next war always led to fm-ther issues.
Italy, Austria, and the United States, countries where
the highest economical intelligence might be expected
to guide the governments, endure the evils of an incon-
vertible paper currency. Time after time in the earlier
history of the New England and some of the other states


236


MONEY.


now forming parts of the American Union, paper money
had been issued and had wrought ruin. Full particulars
will be found in Professor Sumner’s new and interesting
‘‘ History of American Currency.” Some of the greatest
statesmen pointed to these results ; and Webster’s
opinion should never be forgotten. Of paper money
he says, We have suffered more from this cause than
from every other cause or calamity. It lias killed more
men, pervaded and corrupted the choicest interests of
oui- country more, and done more injustice than even
the arms and artifices of our enemy.”

The issue of an inconvertible money, as Professor
Sumner remarks, has often been recommended as a
convenient means of making a forced loan from the
people, when the finances of the government are in a
desperate condition. It is true that money may be thus
easily abstracted from the people, and the government
debts are effectually lessened. At the same time, how-
ever, every private debtor is enabled to take a forced
contribution from his creditor. A government should,
indeed, be in a desperate position, which ventures thus to
break all social contracts and relations which it was
created to preserve.

Want of Elasticity of Paper Money.

A further objection to a paper money inconvertible into
coin, is that it cannot be varied in quantity by the
natural action of trade. No one can export it or import
it like coin, and no one but the government or banks


METHODS OF REGULATING A PAPER CURRENCY. 237

authorized by government can issue or cancel it. Hence,
if trade becomes brisk, nothing but a decree of the
government can sui^jily the requisite increase of circu-
lating medium, and if this be put afloat and trade relapse
into dullness, the currency becomes redundant, and falls
in value. Now, even the best-informed government
department cannot be trusted to judge wisely and impar-
tially when more money is wanted. Currency must be
supplied, like all other commodities, according to the free
action of the laws of supply and demand.

Some persons have argued that it is well to have a
paper money to form a home currency, which cannot be
drained away, and will be free from the disturbing in-
fluences of foreign trade. But we cannot disconnect
home and foreign trade, except by doing away with the
latter altogether. If two nations are to trade, the
precious metals must form the international medium
of exchange by which a balance of indebtedness is paid.
Hence each merchant in ordering, consigning, or selling
goods must pay regard not to the paper price of such
goods, but to the gold or silver price with which he really
pays for them. Gold and silver, in short, continue to be
the real measure of value, and the variable paper cur-
rency is only an additional term of comparison which
a^ds confusion.


238


MONEY*


CHAPTER XTX.

CREDIT DOCUMENTS.

Much mystery has been created on the subject of money
by those who assort vaguely that credit can replace coins,
and that we have only to print sufficient bills and other
promissory documents in order to have an abundant
circulating medium. Credit has been said to multiply
property and to perform all kinds of prodigies. When
we analyze its natine, however, credit is found to be
nothing but the deferring of a payment, I taka (redit
when I induce my creditor to consent to rny paying a
month hence what might be demanded to-day ; and I give
credit when I allow my debtor in the same manner to put
off the liquidation of his debt. Thus credit involves, as
Locke very accurately said, “ the expectation of money
within some limited time.” The debts, indeed, may
consist of a definite quantity of any commodity. I may
have to pay corn, pig iron, palm oil, cotton, or any other
staple article, but, generally speaking, debts are debts of
legal tender money.


CBEDIT DOCUMENTS.


239


Measurement of Credit.

In order to measure and define exactly the amount
of credit which is given or received, and to estimate the
present value of a debt, we must take into account at
least five distinct circumstances, which are as follows : —

1. The amount of money to be received.

2. The probable interval of time elapsing before its
receipt.

3. The probability that it will then be paid.

4. The rate of interest likely to prevail in the mean
time.

5. The legal liabilities which it creates or involves.

Writers upon currency have been too much accus-
tomed to mass together all kinds of credit documents,
taking no account of the important results which may
follow from very slight legal or customary differences.
No doubt every kind of promise to pay money has a
certain value, but the degree in which it may be made
available to facilitate exchange varies exceedingly accord-
ing to circumstances.


Bank-notes.

What we call a bank-note is a promissory note, issued
by a banker, and binding him to pay the sum named
therein to the bearer immediately upon demand. The
note is transferable by delivery, so that the holder is like
the holder of a coin, the owner primd facie, and as such
can claim the fulfilment of the promise at any moment,


240


MONEY.


within reasonable hours, without inquiry. The failure of
the banker to pay the note when presented does not
create any liability between the persons through whose
hands the note had previously passed, so that the note
is continually employed, like metallic money, in settling
debts and removing liabilities. It is most important to
observe that a bank-note being payable on demand bears
no interest, and is never bought at a discount, cxcej)t
when the ultimate pajnnent is doubtful. Hence the
holder of a note has, like the holder of ordinary coins,
no motive in keeping it, except to make future pur-
chases. If a man has more notes than he expects to pay
away in the next week or two, he will do best to deposit
them in a bank, where they will be safer and at the same
time bear interest. There is thus an inherent tendency
in notes to circulate like coins, and to be kei)t down in
amount to the lowest quantity consistent with the accom-
plishment of retail purchases.


Cheques,

A cheque payable to bearer is an order addressed to
a banker, requiring him to pay the sum named to the
bearer of the cheque on demand. Like a bank-note, it
bears no interest, and is transferable from hand to hand
without any formality, so that the holder is primd facie
the owner. If there be no doubt at all as to the credit
both of the drawer and of the bank on which the cheque
is drawn, it is dijdicult to see why a cheque should be
inferior to a bank-note as representative money, except


CREDIT DOCUMENTS.


241


that it is usually drawn for an odd sum. In some places
cheques have been so used, and in Queensland at the
present time, in the absence of coins and notes, the
settlers pay their men in small bank cheques, wliich are
received at the stores, and thus become the circulating
medium of the colony. Obvious objections to this use
of cheques may be pointed out.

It is impossible to be acquainted with the cheejue
forms of all banks, the signatures of those who draw
them, and the credit of the drawers. If the public were
in the habit of daily receiving and paying cheques
without minutely inquiring into their validity, immense
facilities would be given to the perpetration of fraud.
Forgery would bo easy but hardl}^ requisite, since it
would be better to obtain possession of a cheque book, and
then fill up cheques for amounts exceeding the deposits
in the ])anker*s hands. Every one accepting a cheque
thus receives it at the risk of fraud or bankruptcy on
the part of the drawer. There is, moreover, the pos-
sibility of failure of the bank on wliich it is drawn ; for
it is a well-understood point of law, that if the holder
of a cheque does not present it in ‘"reasonable time,*’
that is before the close of business liours on the day
following the receipt of the cheque, he loses his claim
against the drawer, if the bank on which it is drawn
should happen to fail. The reason obviously is that the
drawer loses the deposit which he left in the banker’s
hands to meet the cheque, and should not suffer from
the holder’s want of diligence.

The salutary effect of this law and of other con-


242


MONEY.


ditiona is, that cheques do not circulate in this kingdom
in place of money, but are usually presented withiii one
or two days of receipt. Hence they come to serve as
mere instruments of transfer of money, and involve no
considerable length of credit. Nothing can be gained by
holding an ordinary cheque, for there is no interest, and
something may be lost. Beyond the mere trouble of
presentation, then, there is no motive to prevent a
holder from at once getting coin or bank-notes for his
cheque which, though paying no interest, are safer. Or
still bettor, he may deposit the sum at his bankers, get
a low interest in the mean time, and draw a new cheque
of his own when he wishes to pay the money away
again. Experience shows that the latter is the most
satisfactory course, the money being usually safer and
more available in the hands of a good banker than
elsewhere, and usually paying interest all tlio time. On
this foundation is erected the extensive system of pay-
ment which will be described in the next chapter, and
which may be called the Cheque and Clearing Syntem,
There are, indeed, many varieties of cheques.
Bankers’ cheques are those drawn by one banker upon
another, and are used as a means of remittance. If
both the bankers concerned are of perfect credit, and
the form and signatui'e can be verified, such cheques
seem to mo to be in no way inferior to bank-notes as
representative money. If two perfectly well-known
banks were to arrange to draw cheques upon each other
for convenient even amounts, and to issue these to their
customers, it would effect a successful evasion of the


CREDIT DOCUMENTS.


243


law against the unlimited issue of notes. So great
however is the force of habit, or the respect for law,
that no such attempt is made, and bankers’ cliecpies are
presented almost as promptly as any others.

Certiiied cheques, as employed in the New York
trade, are a still nearer approach to a bank-note, for
they arc cheques which have been marked by the
bankers on whi(ih they are drawn, as sure to be paid
on presentation. Either the banker in certifying the
cheque has funds belonging to the drawer whicli be can
retain to meet it, or else he pledges bis own cr(^dit that
he will meet the cheque in any c^ase. Buch cluH^ues
are really promissory notes of the hnnker, with further
recourse to tlui drawer; hut tliey do not circulate as
money, because, as 1 presume, the certification only
holds good within the tinui reasonably required for
presentation. Tho clieques of tlie Che(|uo Hank, which
will be subsequently considered (Chapter XXTI.), are
equivalent to certified cheques, as they ennnot bt? issued
except against deposits which are rotainod until the
cheque is presented.

Of late years the practice has become very general
of making clieques payable to order instead of to bearer,
and of crossing them so as to necessitate their presenta-
tion through a banker. The order may, indeed, be
discharged by an open endorsement, which renders the
cheque again payable to bearer, but there remains the
possibility of a forged endorsement, concerning which
difficult points of law have arisen. A general crossing
need not interfere appreciably with tlio circulation of a


244


MONEY.


cheque, but when crossed specifically for presentation
through a particular bank, the cheque becomes prac-
tically an order to credit a particular individual, who
keeps his account in that bank, with the sum of money
named.


Bills of Exchange,

A bill of exchange is an order to a person to pay
money to the legal holder of the document on a day
indicated therein. If payable at sight, a bill does not
apparently differ from a cheque or draft to order, except
that it will be usually drawn upon persons of less credit
than well-known bankers. If not payal)lc at sight, the
length of time intervening between the day named for
payment and the day of issue may vary from a day or
two upwards, and the money cannot be demanded in the
mean time. Hence a bill generally bears interest, or
rather is only bought at such a discount as will enable
it to be held to maturity without loss. To estimate the
liability of loss, some estimate must be formed of the rate
of interest likely to prevail in the mean time, and the
value of the bill will thus vary according to a multitude
of circumstances. Bills of exchange may be made pay-
able to the bearer, but as a general rule they are payable
to a specified person, and transferred by endorsement to
other specified persons. Thus every party concerned
with a bill incurs a certain liability, which is not removed
until it is duly paid. In several respects, then, a bill
may differ from coined money, which bears no interest,


CREDIT DOCUMENTS. 245

and discharges instead of creating liability when tendered
in payment of debts.

Intercst-heanng Docummts.

It is extraordinary that few writers on currency have
remarked the deep difference between commercial docu-
ments which hoar interest and those which do not. On
this point turns the possibility of their forming repre-
sentative money, b'or it is an essential characteristic
of coin that it yields no profit by keeping it in the
pocket or the sale. I may bo obliged to keep money
ready to pay debts, but in the mean time I lose the
interest which i might receive by investing the sum in
the funds, in bills, bonds, or oven as a bank deposit.
Hence money must be considered as a commodity which,
as Chevalier says, is in a comtant state of siipjdy and
demand. Every one is always trying to part with it in
a profitable purchase, and keeps as little in hand as
possible. The same is even more true of bank-notes,
cheques, circular notes, bills at sight, and a few other
kinds of documents, all of which are payable on demand
at any moment, so that no amount of interest can be
assigned to them. Except so far as the payment may be
doubtful, or the possession of the documents may involve
the holder in legal difficulties, these documents have the
characteristics of coin, and the amount held is kept
down to the low^est convenient figure. Interest-bearing
documents, on the contrary, are held in as large quan-
tities as possible, because the longer they are held the


246


MONEY.


more interest accnies. It is the principal business of
every banker to hold a portfolio full of good bills, which
really represent the investment of capital in industry.
Government bonds, or bonds issued by public companies
and corporations, do not differ from commercial bills
except hi tlie fact that they have very long, or even
interminable, usance, and that the interest is paid at
definite intervals. Such bonds represent the sinking
of capital in fixed undertakings, and are therefore held
as property by individual investors. They may be
bought and sold for money, but are not money them-
selves. They rather necessitate than replace the use
of money, since currency must have been paid at the first
investment, and is repaid by degrees at the periodical
terms fixed.

A number of schemiats have urged from time to
time, that, in addition to our ordinary currency, there
ought to be an currency. The first

small issue of the French assignats bore interest, and
about twelve years ago the United States government
tried a similar experiment, which was soon discontinued.
Persons have proposed to coin the whole National Debt
into money, so that instead of some 160 millions of
metallic and jiaper currency we might have more nearly
a thousand millions. Mr. E. Hill has published a form
of bank-note entitling the holder to one hundred pounds
on demand, and to interest at the rate of per cent,
up to the time when it is presented, the amount of
interest being tabularly stated on the form. It is
obviously impossible, however, that any government


OBEDIT DOCUMENTS.


247


should issue such notes, because whenever the current
rate of interest rose above and the value of the note
accordingly fell below par, a profit would be made by
presenting the notes for payment. Thus the government
issuing such notes would have to keep a large quantity
of coin in reserve to meet them, and would at the same
time be paying interest on the whole of the notes. Thus
there would be a loss of interest upon the wliole reserve
of coin.

The English government has rendered the National
Debt as transferal)le as possible by authorizing, in terms
of the Act of 83 and 34 Victoria, chapter 71, the issue
of stock (iortificates. These certificates resemble the
bonds of the United States and other governments.
They have coupons for the payment of interest, and
when not filled up with a name are transferable by
delivery like bank notes. They jire issued in exchange
for Three per Cent Annuities for even sums of not
less than £50 and not more tlian £1000 ; and if the
right to an annuity could be passed from one person to
another as currency, those certificates would allow of its
being done. But it is understood that a comparatively
small amount of such certificates has ever been api)li<^d
for. They are, I believe, used to some extent by bankers
and others, who have to hold sums of money invested in
the funds for short periods, and can save the cost of
transfers by the use of certificates. The public at large
are found to prefer the old method of registering their
stock in the books of the Bank of England.


248


MONEY.


Definition of Money,

Much ingenuity has been spent upon attempts to
define the term money, and puzzling questions have
arisen as to the precise kinds of credit documents which
are to be included under the term. Standard legal tender
coin of full weight is undoubtedly money, and as con-
vertible legal tender bank-notes are exactly equivalent to
the coined money for which they may at any moment
be exchanged, it has often been considered that these
also may be included. T3ut inconvertible notes are often
made legal tender by law, and can discharge in inland
trade all the functions of money. Are they not then
to be included? The question will next arise whether
cheques may not l)e as good as money.

All such attempts at definition seem to me to involve
the logical blunder of supposing that we may, by settling
the meaning of a single word, avoid all the complex
differences and various <jonditions of many things, each
requiring its own definition. Bullion, standard coin, token
coin, convertible and inconvertible notes, legal tender and
not legal tender, cheques of several kinds, mercantile bills,
exchequer bills, stock certificates, etc., are all things
capable of being received in payment of a debt, if the
debtor is willing to pay and the creditor to receive them ;
but they are, nevertheless, diflerent kinds of things. By
calling some money and some not, we do not save our-
selves from the consideration of their complex legal and
economical differences. Bullion is evidently not coin, but
can be turned into it at little or no cost, and will


CREDIT DOCUMENTS.


249


make foreign payments almost as well as coin. Token
coins are not standard coins, and will not make foreign
payments, but are legal tender for small sums, and may
be readily exchanged for standard coin at little or no loss.
Bank of England notes are not exactly coin, but can be
readily turned into coin by those who dwell near the
Bank of England, and are received as ecpiivalent to coin
by other persons. Cheques are not coin, but orders to
receive it on demand, and are valuable in proportion to
the probability that the sum will be received. Accepted
bills are an engagement to pay coin at a day named; if
we overlook the possible failure of the acceptor to pay
them, they are, as it were, deferred money. A certificate
of consolidated stock entitles the holder to an annuity,
that is, to quarterly sums of money.

We get back, in short, to that with which we started.
Standard legal tender coin is that in which all com-
mercial transactions and documents arci expressed, but
according to infinitely various circumstamjes, the receipt
of the money is more or less probable, more or less
deferred, more or loss involved in legal complexities, and
also variable in amount, as interest is or is not to be
received in addition. All other commercial projierty,
mortgage deeds, preference shares and bonds, and ordi-
nary shares, resolve themselves into more or less proba-
bility of receiving coin at future dates ; and thus we pass
insensibly from the golden sovereign in hand to the most
flimsy chance of receiving gold which is still like the bird
ill the bush.

The word casft is used with exactly the same ambiguity


250


MONEY.


as money. Originally cash meant that which was encause,
i.e. put into the chest or till. Strictly speaking, it
should consist of actual specie, and the word is used in
some English banks to include only coin of the realm.
But I find by actual inquiry that bank cashiers use it
with every shade of meaning. Some take Bank of
England notes to be cash. Good cheques upon a bank
paid into that bank are evidently as good as cash.
Others go so far as to include cheques upon other banks
of the same town, and even country bank-notes are some-
times included in cash. The question is evidently one of
degree, and cannot be settled except by the general
adoption among cashiers of some one arbitrary line of
definition.

In ordinary life we use a great many words with
a total disregard of logical precision. Who shall decide,
for instance, what objects are to be included under the
names hidldiny and hmnne ? Let the reader attempt to
decide which of the following objects is to be considered
a house, and why ? — namely, stables, cow-houses, con-
servatories, sheds, lighthouses, tents, caravans, hulks,
sentry-boxes, ice-houses, summer-houses, and parish
pounds. The difficulty is exactly analogous to that
of deciding what is money or cash.


( 261 )


CHAPTER XX.

BOOK cnvimr and the banking system.

Considerable economy of the precious metals arises,
as we have seen, from passing about pieces of paper
representing gold coin, instead of tlui coin itself. But
a far more potent source of economy is what we may call
the Cheque and Clearing System, whereby debts are, not
so much paid, aa balanced off against eacli other. The
germ of the method is to be found in the ordinary
practice of hook credit. If twro firms have frequent
transactions with each other, alternately buying and
selling, it would be an absurd waste of money to settle
each debt immediately it arose, when, in a fcAV days, a
corresponding debt might arise in the opposite direction.
x\ccoj’dingly, it is the common practice for firms having
reciprocal transactions, to debit and credit each other in
their l)ooks with the debt arising out of each transaction,
and only to make a cash payment when the balance
happens to become inconveniently great. An insurance
broker is one wdio acts as a middleman between the
owners of ships and the underwriters who insure them
in shares. lie has therefore to make many small pay-
ments to underwriters, for the premiums on policies,
and at intervals has to receive back the indemnity for any


252


MONEY.


insured vessel which has been lost. It is the common
practice to avoid cash payments ; the broker credits the
underwriters with the premiums and debits him with
losses, and only pays or receives the balance when large.

To represent the highly complex system of book
credit which is organized by the bankers of a large
kingdom, we shall have to employ a method of diagram-
atic notation. I will therefore remark that the simplest
case or type of book-credit is reju'esented by the formula

P Q.

Each of the letters, P and Q, indicates a person or a
firm, and the line indicates the existence of transactions
between them. Only in special cases, however, will this
direct balancing of accounts render the use of cash or of a
more complex system unnecessary. Generally speaking,
there will be a tendency for a surplus of goods to pass
in one direction, so that money must pass in the opposite
direction. The manufacturer sells to the wholesale
dealer, the latter sells to the retailor, and the retailer
to the consumer. By the intervention of the banker,
however, the transactions of many different individuals,
or even of many branches of trade, are brought to a focus,
and a large proportion of payments can be balanced off
against each other.

Single Bank System,

To obtain a clear notion of the way in which bankers
help us to avoid the use of money as the medium of
exchange, we must follow up the rise of the system from


BOOK CREDIT AND THE BANKING SYSTEM. 253

tlic simplest case to the comi)lf3tc development of the
complex organization now existing in the United King-
dom. Let us imagine, in the first place, that there is
an isolated town having no appreciable dealings with
other parts of the world, and possessing only a single
bank, in which each inhabitant has deposited all his
money. If any person a, then, wishes to make a pay-
ment to h, he need not go to his banker, draw out coin,
and carry it to /), but may hand to b a clieque requiring
the banker to pay the coins to 5, if needed. But if b
makes payments in the same way, he will not need to
draw out any coin. It would be a mere formality for
b to receive the coin due from a, and then pay it back
over the counter to the credit of his account with the
same banker. The payment is made by merely writing
the sum of money to the debit of a’s account, and to the
credit of account. If h wishes to make another pay-
ment to c, a similar record in the banker’s ledger will
accomplish the business. However many other traders,
d, Cy etc., there may be, their mutual transactions may
be settled in the same way, without their seeing a
single coin. We may represent this elementary banking
organization by the following diagram,

a b c d e

X\|//

P


in which it is obvious that P represents the single
banker, and a, b, c, d, e, his customers. The deposit


254


aroNEY.


banks of Amsterdam and Hamburg form perfect illustra-
tions of this arrangement.

So long as wo regard only the internal transactions
of a town, then, a stationary amount of coin, lying
untouched in the bank, will allow the whole to be
accomplished. If the traders never require to make
payments to a distance the metallic ihoney might bo
dispensed with altogether. But since ai|y of the cus-
tomers a, />, c, etc., may want his mone^f^^ the banker
ought to keep at least as much as will moot possible
demands.


System of Two Banks.

As a second case, let us suppose that there is a town
which is able to support two banks. Some of the
inhabitants keep their money in one bank and some
in the other, but all whom it is requisite to consider
have an account with one or the other. In the diagram,


a h c d q r s t


P Q


let P and Q be the two bankers, a, b, c, d, being cus-
tomers of P, and q, r, s, t, customers of Q. Now, the
mutual transactions of a, b, c, d, will, as before, be
balanced off in the books of P, and similarly with the
customers of Q. But if a has to make a payment to q,


BOOK CREDIT AND THE BANKING SYSTEM.


255


the operation becomes somewhat more complex. He
draws a cheque upon P, and hands it to q, who may,
of cours<3, demand the coin from P. Not wanting coin,
he carries the cheque to his own banker, Q, and pays
it in to his account in place of coin. It is the banker,
Q, who will now have to present the cheque upon P, and
it might seem if the use of coin would be ultimately
required. Th^e will be other p(u\sons, however, making
payments im'^he town in the same manner, and the
probability is very great that some of tlieso will result
in giving P cheques upon Q, and sonui in giving Q
cheques upon P. The two bankers, then, will be in tlie
position of the two traders before described (p. 251),
who have a running account. At the worst tlie payment
to be made in com will be only the balance of what is
due in opposite directions ; but as tins balance will
prol)ably tend in one direction one day, and in the
opposite direction the next day, the balance need only
be paid when it assumes inconvenient proportions.

Complex Bank System,

A large commercial town usually possesses several or
many banks, each with its distinct body of customers.
The mutual transactions of each body will, as before, be
balanced off in the books of tbeir common bank, but the
larger part of the transactions Avill now be cross ones,
resulting in a claim by one banker upon anotlu^r. The
probability is very great, indeed, that eacJi banker will
have to receive, as well as to pay, each day; but it


256


MONEY.


does not follow that he will pay to the same as those
who are going to pay to him. The complexity of rela-
tions becomes considerable ; thus among fourteen banks
there are or 91 different pairs Avhich may have
mutual claims, and among fifty banks there would be
no less than 1225 pairs. The result is, that P might
happen to have a considerable balance to pay to Q, and
yet miglit be going to receive about the same sum from
R or S. The actual carrying about of coin under such
circumstances wpuld be absurd, because a manifest
extension of the book-credit system at once meets the
difficulty. The several banks need only agree to
appoint, as it were, a haScers' hank, to hold a portion of
the cash of each bank, and then the mutual indebted-
ness may be balanced off just as when a bank acts for
individuals. In the figure we see four banks, P, Q, R, S,
each with its own body of customers, but brought into
connection with each other by the bankers’ bank, X.


a h c e f y I m n

\i/ \i/ \i/


I* Q R


\l/

S


P need not now send a clerk to present bundles of
cheques upon Q, E, and 8, but can pay them into the
central bank, X, where after being placed to the credit of
P and sorted out, they will be joined to similar parcels


BOOK CREDIT AND THE BANKING SYSTEM. 257

of cheques received from Q, R, S, and finally presented
at the banks upon which they are dra^vn. Thus all the
payments made by cheques will be effected without the
use of coin, just as if there were only a single bank in
the town. What each bank has to pay each day will
usually be balanced pretty closely by wliat it has to
receive. Such balance as remains will be paid by a
transfer in the books of X, the bankers' bank.

It is not precisely true that there is in any Englisli
toAvn a bankers’ bank, which thus arranges the payments
between banks. The accountants’ parf of the work is
carried out by an institution called the Clearing House,
managed by a committee of ^i^nkers, and the Bank of
England is (unploycd to hold the deposits of the bankers,
and make transfers which close the transactions of each
day. The organization of the Clearing House wdll be
described in the next chapter.

Branch Bank System,

It is impossible to avoid perceiving that the organiza-
tion of the English bank system is undergoing a com-
plete transformation, and is approximating to tliat which
has existed for a century or more in Scotland. Instead
of a great number of small, weak, disconnected banks,
there is arising, by amalgamation and extinction of the
weaker ones, a moderate number of important banks,
each possessing numerous branches. The Scotch banks
have long had many branches, and at present each of
the eleven great banks has on the average 78 branches,

s


258


MONEY.


the lowest number being 19, and the liighest 125.
Already a few of the English banks have equally exten-
sive ramifications. Thus the London and County Bank,
and the National Provincial Bank, which have especially
developed the branch system, have respectively 148 and
187 branches; the Manchester and Liverpool District
Bank has 50 branches and sub-branches. The Irish
banks also adopt the same system, and the National
Bank of Ireland has about 114 l)ranches and sub-
branches. It is interesting to observe that in Australia,
too, the bankirfg system has talten a similar form, and
a comparatively small number of strong banks, such as
the Bank of New South Wales, or the Bank of New
Zealand, leave no rising village withotit its branch.

Now, the close connection which exists between the
head office and each of the branches of an extensive
bank lead's to a great clearing off of claims. The
diagram on p. 25G again servos to represent this rela-
tion, X being the head office, P, Q, E, S, branch
banks, and a, 5, c, etc., customers. If a pay m with a
cheque on P, the cheque will be paid into E, credited to
in, forwarded by post direct to P, and debited to a. The
head office, being informed of this transaction in the
iisual daily statement, will close the business by trans-
ferring the sum from the account of P to that of E.
Much accountants’ work seems to arise, but it is work of
mere routine which costs little. Cash remittances are
seldom necessary, because each branch settles accounts
only with the head office, so that many sums will be
credited and debited during each week, and the balance


BOOK CREDIT iND THE BANKING SYSTEM. 259

will usually be small. The head office, in fact, acts in
every way like a clearing house, or hankers’ banl%

The question naturally arises, indeed, how will the
branches of one bank transact business with those of
another bank ? The solution, however, is simple ; for
unless the branches hapi)en to be in the same town,-, or for
other reason, in close relation with each other, they will
communicate through their head offices. A cheque upon
any branch of the London and County Bank received
by a branch of the National Provincial Bank, will be
presented through the head office of the latter at the
Clearing House upon the head office of the former.

Bank Agency System.

Another important feature of the banking system is
the extensive organization of agencies. A Sirge bank
has various business to be transacted in each of the
principal commercial towns of the kingdom, and if it
has no branches in these towns employs a banker in
each town, to act as its agent. This agent-bank collects
cheques, bills, notes, etc., payable in the district, cashes
drafts drawn against them, retires bills according to
instructions, and docs almost all that a branch banj|
would do, the main difference being that the remunera-
tion for this work consists of a commission. Each
agent-bank has a running account with its principal,
so that to a certain extent each important bank and its
agencies form a clearing system analogous to that of
a head bank and its branches.


MONEY.


2^0


London Agency System,

By insensible degrees there has grown up in England
an all-comprehensive and most perfect system of rela-
tions between the provincial and London city banks.
Ever^ banker in the United Kingdom, witliout, I believe,
any exception, employs one or other of the great London
city banks to act as agent. There are twcnty-sil city
clearing banks which thus undertake agencies, and on
an average, each of these banks represents at^ least
tw'elve country banks ; but the niimbdr varies very
much, and some country banks liave two London cf^ent-
banks.

This agency system leads at once to a clcarJlig of
transactions, because, if any two country banks have
the same London agent, all their mutual adjustments of
accounts <gpin be made by transfers in the books of the
agent. The diagram on p. 256 applies for a third time,
and X represents the city agent, having running accents
with P, Q, E, S, the country banks. The whole of the
customers of all the banks, having the same London
agent, are thus b^jought into close relation, though they
1 ihay live in the most distant parts of the country. Each
the city banks may bo regarded as a bankers* bank
and a clearing house on a small scale.

Country Clearing System,

Only one further step is required to complete
system of connections between each bank in the%ingd6m


BOOK CREDIT AND THE BANKING SYSTEM.


261


and all other banks. Every country bank, as wq have
seen, .^as a running account vrith some city hank, and
all the city banks daily settle transactions with eacli
other tlirough the Clearing House. It follows that a
payment from any part of the country to any other part
can be accomplished through London. In the f^low-
ing diagram, let P, Q, E be country banks having the

m .

a h c a f (I I m n r s t u v w x y z

\r/ \i/ \i/ \i/ \i/ \i/

f Q H u y w


- c.n

London agent, X, and U, V, W, otlicr coi|ntry banks
having the London agent, Y. If a, a customer of P,
wishes to j)ay r, a customer of U, he transmits hy post
a cheque upon liis l)ankcr, P. The receiver, r, pays it
into his account with U, who having no direct com-
munication with P, forw-ards it to Y, who presents it
through the Clearing House on X, who debits it to P,
and forwards it by tlie next post. Nothing can exc^d
the simplicity and perfection of this arrangement.

It will be readily seen, too, that sums of money
passing between London banks, or rather cleared off in
the Lombard Street Clearing House, will frequently be
the balances of extensive running accounts between
country banks and their aggnts and correspondents.


262


MONEY.


So long as the balance of accounts between any two
banks floes not assume large proportions, it need not
be paid in cash at all, except for special reasons. When
a balance has to be paid, and the banks happen to have
tlie same London agent, it is only requisite for the
debtoif bank to direct tlicir London agent to transfer
so much mone}' to the credit of the other country bank.
If they have diiferent London agents, and P, in the last
diagram, desires to,,vpay a balance to U, it is done by
directing X to credit Y, the agent of U. The credit note
effecting this payment passes through the Clearing Hous(i
amid a mass of other documents representing payments
in one direction or the other, and will, in general, become
an insignificant item in the general clearing. If it can
1)0 said to be paid in cash at all, it is in the form of a
final transfer in the books of the Bank of England, as we
shall see. * Great as are the transactions daily settled
in the London Clearing House, they are after all only
those \vhich have not been previously cleared off l)y any
more direct communication, and they often represent
the balances of multitudinous transactions which never
l)ass through London at all.


( 263 )


CHAPTEE XXL


THE CLEARING-HOUSE SYSTEM.


By means of the London agency system, the banking
transactions of the country are, as we hi^\o seen,
brouglit to a focus in the city of London. The settle-
ment of the reciprocal claims of the twenty-six principal
city banlis is therefore a business of the utmost magni-
tude and importance, representing as it does the com-
pletion of the business of no snuill part of the world.
In a room of moderate dimensions, entered from a
narrow passage running from the post-office in King
William Street across to Lombard Street, debts to the
average amount of nearJy twenty millions sterling per
day are licpiidated without the use of a single coin or
bank-note. In the classic financial neighbourhood of
Lombard Street, and even in this very chamber, the
system of paper commerce has been brought nearJy to
perfection. The early liistory of the London Clearing
House is buried in obscurity, and it is much to he
desired that those who are acquainted witli the principal
incidents in its progress should put them on record
before it is too late. ,


264


MONEY.


¥

The Clearing House appears to have been first
created just a century ago. About tlie year 1775 a
few of the city bankers hired a room where tlieir clerks
could meet to exchange notes and bills, and settle tlieir
mutual debts. The society was of the nature of a
strictly private club, the public knowing nothing about
it, and the transactions being conducted in perfect
secrecy. Mr. Gilbari tells us that, even in this form, it
was regarded as a questionable innovation, and some
of the principal bankers refused to have anything to do
with it. By degrees, however, the conveniomce of the
arrangement made itself apparent, more bankers were
admitted to the society, and a distinct committee and
set of rules were formed for its management. Although
it remains to the present day a private and voluntary
association, unchartered, and in fact unknown to tlio
law, the Clearing House has steadily grown in import-
ance and in tlie publicity of its proceedings.

Several important extensions of tlie clearing work
have been made in the last twenty-five years. After the
rise of the London Joint Stock Banks, subsequent to
1833, they were for along time refused admittance to the
Clearing House ; but in June, 1854, they were at last
allowed to join the association. The Bank of England
long remained entirely outside of the confederation, but
more recently it has become a member, so far as regards
the presentation of claims upon other banks. The West
End banks of London are still beyond its sphere, partly,
perhaps, because their distance stands in the way of the
working of the system. Tfhey are thus in the position


THE CLEARING-HOITSE iiitSTEM.


265


of provincial banks, and can clear through city agents
like provincial banks.

Before tlie year 1858 the business of the Clearing
House was restricted to the exchange of cheques and
bills actually drawn on the clearing bankers. Country
bankers receiving cheques drawn upon otlicr distant
country banlvs were in the habit of remitting them
direct by post, the paying bank effecting the payment
by directing their London banker to pay the amount to
the London agent of the receiving bank. In the year
1858, at the suggestion of Mr. William Gillett, but
chiefly by the exertions of Sir John Imbbock, the
country clearing system was organized. The country
banker, instead of posting many checpies every day to
all parts of the kingdom, sends them in a single parcel
to his London agent, to be presented througli the Clear-
ing House on the London agents of the paying banks.
This exchange is made, as we shall see, at different
hours of the day, but the results arc summed up in the
general balance of the day's transactions.

Transaction of Business at the London Clearimj House,

There are three clearings daily at the Lombard
Street House. The morning clearing opens on ordi-
nary days at 10.30 ; drafts are received not later than
11, and the work must bo closed at noon. The country
clearing then begins, drafts being received until 12.30,
and the clearing closed at 2.15. The heaviest clearing,
however, is that of the afternoon, which begins at 2.30.


266 ^ MONEY.

The bustle and turmoil of the work grow to a climax at
four o’clock, the runners rushing in with the last parcels
of drafts, up to the moment when the door is finally
.* closed. On the fourth day of each month, when the
heaviest wmk occurs, the hours are extended, the House
opening at nine o’clock.

The Clearing House is a plain oblong room, with rows
of desks in compartments round three sides, and down
the middle. A small olfice for the two Buperintendents
stands at one end. Each bank sends as many clerks to
the House as may l)e reij[uisitc for the rapid completion
of the work, and some banks have as many as six clerks.
The checpics and bills to be presented by any one
clearing banker, say the Alliance Jlank, upon any other
clearing banker, are entered at homo in the “ Out-clearing
book,” and are then sorted into twenty-five parcels, one
of which is to l)c presented on eacli of the other clearing
banks. On reaching the Clearing House, these parcels
are distributed round the room to the desks of the clerks
representing the several paying banks, who immediately
t)egin to enter them in the In-clearing books ” in
columns bearing at the head the name of the 2)rGsentiiig
bank. After being entered, the drafts are, as soon as
possible, forwarded to the banking house for examina-
tion and entry in the bank books. Any cheques or
bills refused payment are called “returns,” and can
generally be sent back to the Clearing House the same
day, and entered again as a reverse claim by the bank
dishonouring them on the banks which jnesented them.
At the close of the day the clerks of the Alliance Bank


267


THE CLEARING-HOUSE iJlTSTEM.

arc able to add up the whole of the claims which have
been made upon them by the other twenty -five banks, and
they learn from the out-clearing book the amount of the
claims which the Alliance Bank is making on other
banks. The difference is the balance wiiich the Alliance
Bank has either to pay or receive as the case may be.
These balances being communicated to tlie superinten-
dents of the House are by them inserted in a kind of
balance sheet. When finally added up, the debtor and
creditor sides of the sheet should exactly balance,
because every penny to bo received by one bank must be
paid by anotlior.

In former years the balance due by or to each bank
was paid in bank-notes, and in the year 1839, average
daily transactions to the amount of about three millions
were cleared the use of o £200,()00 in bank-notes, and
ii20 in coin, or about one-fiftecntli part of tlie debts liquid-
ated. More recently a suggestion of the late Charles
Babbage 'was carried into effect, and the balances were
paid by drafts upon the Bank of England, in which bank
each city banker deposits a large part of his spare casli.

One ingenious minor arrangement in the London
Clearing House is the division of the whole list of twenty-
six bankers into throe groups, in such a way that one
of the clearing clerks of the Alliance Bank corresponds
with one group of the other banks, a second clerk with
the second group, and so on. Thus when a comparison
or correction of accounts is made betw^cen any two
banks, it is known precisely which clerk must answer
to the questions called across the room.


268 fr MONET.

Although the rapid and effective way in which the
settlement is carried out in the London Clearing House
must always excite surprise, it is (piitc open to question
whether improvements are not needed. The room did
not seem to me large enough for the convenient and
wholesome transaction of such vast and increasing
work. Although some banks employ as many as six
clerks, the pressure is veiy great at times. The facility
which these clerks acquire by practice in making and
adding up entries is very gi'eat, but the intense head
work performed against time, in an atmosphere far from
pure, and in the midst of bustle and noise arising from
the corrections shouted from one clerk to another across
the room, must be exceedingly trying. Brain disease is
occasionally the consequence.

The question must arise, too, whether the privilege
of clearing is to be for ever restricted to twenty-six
principal city banks, when there are certainly many
other banks existing or being founded which need
the convenience of access to the House. In New York
the clearing circle, as we shall sec, is much wider. At
present the minor London banks are forced to employ
the clearing bankers as agents, or to forego the advan-
tages of the Clearing House altogether. It is hardly
just or possible that a narrow monopoly of the sort
should be maintained for ever.


THE CLEARINa-HOUSE, SYSTEM.


269


Manchester Clearing House.

Tlioiigh the London Clearing House is entirely the
birthplace of the system, and the spot where the work
lias been organized on the largest scale, it does not
follow that it is in every respect the most suitable
for imitation in commercial towns of less magnitude.
At least two English provincial towns, Manchester
and Newcastle, have established local clearing houses.
The bankers of Liverpool, also, I am told, have recently
arranged a private system of clearing among themselves;
and it is possible that the bankers of other towns may
have taken a similar step without the fact becoming
generally known. Through the kindness of some mem-
bers of the committee, I have received full information
as to the w’orking of the Manchester Clearing House.
The business seems to have been arranged, chiefly, I
believe, by Mr. E. W. Nix, with groat success, and it
may be useful to describe the arrangements in detail,
as they would be very suitable for adoption in many
English, foreign, or colonial towns, which will doubt-
less before long establish clearing houses.

In the Manchester Clearing House the work is per-
formed entirely upon loose forms, and not in account-
books, as in London. Though these forms may seem
rather numerous and elaborate, they greatly assist in the
accurate and orderly settlement of the balance. The
clearing clerk, before leaving his bank, sorts out the
drafts, which he has to deliver, into thirteen parcels, one


270


MONEY.


for cacli of the thirteen other banks, and tlien fills up
thirteen lists, one for each parcel, in the Form No. 1
shown below, each cheque being represented only by the
amount of money expressed in it. A copy of the list is
entered in one of the books of the bank provided for the
purpose.


Fimti No, 1 .

MANCHESTER BANK CLEARING.


Mom. of Cheques delivered by


to


Clearing, 187


!!


Adding up each such list, he inserts the totals in one
of the left-hand colmnns of the Form No. 2. He thus
obtains a complete abstract of all the claims he holds
upon other banks, and adding up the columns ascertains
the aggregate “ Out-clearing.’*


THE CLEARING-HOUSE SYSTEM.


Form No. 2.

MANCHESTER BANK CLEARING.


187


OUT.


I

!


IN.


i

1

First,

Clearing.

Second

1 Clearing.

1


1

First

Clearing

!


Scconil

Clearing.


i

1

1

Ailelplil

Itank

('onsolidated

County

Cunliffe’s

District

Hoy wood

Joint Stock

King Street

I^ancashire


■■ 1


i

National Tro-
vincial


i

Salford


Sewell


Union


Total


i


Balance


...i

i ..


271


On reaching the Clearing House, the clerk walks
round the room and lays on the desk belonging to each


272


MONEY.


other bank the parcel of cheques and the corresponding
list already described. In the course of a little time
thirteen similar parcels and lists will be laid on his own
desk by the clerks of other banks, and as they come in
he compares the list with the cheques, verifies the
addition, and if all be correct, enters the amount in one
of the right-hand columns of the second form, against
the name of the bank iirescnting the drafts. These
parcels are called the “ In-dmring,'' and represent all
tlie claims of other banks upon the one in question, so
tliat when all the thirteen amounts are entered, and the
columns added up, the clerk learns the aggregate which
his bank will have to pay.

At Manchester two clearings are held each day.
The first at 11.15 a.m. is a preliminary one only, and
no payment of balances is made. As soon as the
columns for the first clearing are filled up, the clerk
returns to his bank with the in-clearing parcel of
cheques and drafts presented upon the bank. These
documents are immediately examined by the proper
officials in order to detect any which may be irregular,
fraudulent, or, for want of funds, or other reasons, must
be dishonoured. At tlie Clearing House the clerk has
already made a first rough inspection, and returned any
documents which were obviously irregular, but no draft
is considered to be finally accepted until one hour after
the clearing is over. The returned drafts are com-
paratively few, and, as soon as detected, are forwarded
direct to the bank presenting them.

The second clearing takes place at 2.15 p.m. and is


THE CLEARING-HOUSE SYSTEM.


273


conducted just as in the morning. The second columns
of the out- and in-clearing, in Form 2, having been filled
and summed up, the totals of the first columns are
added in, and the clerk learns the sum that has to be
paid, and at the same time to be received, by his bank.
The difference is the balance which he has either to
receive or pay. These totals and the balance he copies
into the following brief form. No. 3, which he hands to
the inspector of the Clearing House.


i\mn No.


CLKARINT^ RETURNS.


OutXlcaring £
In.Olearhuj

Balance . . . £


Date _yS7


The inspector now proceeds to verify tlio halancos hy
inserting the amounts in Form No. 7, given on the next
page, in an abbreviated form, only four of the names of
the banks being inserted, to save space. In tht‘so forms
the names of the banks are given in the briefest manner,
and the Branch Bank of England is called simply
Bank.’’


274


MONEY.


Form No. 7.


Dr.


CLEARING HOUSE.


i| Adclphi

ij

j| Bank

li

li CouBolidatcd
i County


Or.


It is evident that tlie total which some of the banks
have to receive on balance must equal what the others
have to pay, because every cheque has been added in
twice, once in favour of, and once against, some bank.
If the debtor and creditor columns of the seventh form,
being added up, fail to balance, some error of account
must have been committed, and all the work is sub-
mitted to careful re-examination until the error is
detected. When all is correct, it remains only to effect
the payments, which is done by means of credit and debit
notes, directing transfers in the books of the Branch
Bank of England, to or from the accounts of the clearing
bankers. The payments are made, indeed, to and from
the Clearing House, as a kind of fictitious entity ; but
as its payments and receipts each day exactly balance,
the Clearing House requires no separate ledger account,
except for small current expenses, or inconsiderable
errors.


THE CLEAKING-HOESE SYSTEM. 275

To effect the transfer the clerk of each paying bank
fills up the double form, No. 4, as follows


Farm No, 4.


SETTLEMENT AT THE CLEARING HOUSE.

Manchesittr^ 187

To the Cjiphiers of the Bank, of England,

lie plensi^ lo TRANSFER from our Account
!k $um of

jnd })km it to the Credit qf the Account of the
clmm/ Ranhers, and allow it to l>e drawn for hj
■lull of them {with the hmolcdije of the Inajmlor,
'iani/ied by his counters iyiiiny the Drafts),


,K


SETTLEMENT AT THE CLEARING HOUSE.
Bank op England,

Manchester, 187

A TRANSPER./or the sum of


has this emiing been made at the Rank, from the

Jrco«ni of Messrs,

to the Account of the Clearing Rankers,

Eor the Bank ofEnglandl,


The coupon on the left-hand side is a draft to be
signed by the clerk, if he has authority for the purpose,
or else to be carried by him to his principals to be
signed, and then paid into the Bank of England. It
directs the cashier to credit the Clearing House with the
balance, and debit the sum to the paying bank in ques-
tion. The authorized oflScial of the Bank of England
signs the corresponding form on the right hand, when
the payment is made, as a receipt for the sum on behalf
of the Clearing House.


276


MONEY.


When, on the other hand, the balance is in favour of
a bank, Form No. 5, printed on green paper for the sake
of easy discrimination, comes into use. It sufficiently
explains itself.


For m So. 5.


SKTTLKMKNT AT THE CLEARING HOUSE.

Manchester, 187

To the Cashiers of the Bank op England,

Be iilmsed to CJtEb.fr our Acm.int the sum

C-..-.-

out qf the money at the Credit of the Account of the
Clearing Bankers,


£


§


SETTLEMENT AT THE CfilvAlUNa HOCSi;.
Bank op KNr;LANi.>,

Manchester^ ISI

The Aceonnt of Messrs.

has this evening heen Ckeoitkd with the Siiu

of

out of the money at the Credit of the Account of ih
Clearing Bankers.


For the Bank of Englaiiti.


There remains then only the question of the returned
cheques. Even these do not require cash payment.
The balance at the close of the day is paid only pro-
visionally, and those cheques which have to be dis-
honoured are returned within an hour to the bank
presenting them. Unless the irregularities be explained
away, or removed, the presenting cashier then signs the
following form, No. 6, which is an acknowledgment that
so much money too much was received by him at the
last clearing. This form is included by the bank dis-


THE CLEARING-HOUSE SYSTEM.


277


honouring the cheques, in its out-clearing parcel, and
the matter is rectified in the balance of the next
clearing.


Form No, 6 .

MANCHESTER BANK CLEARING.


Manchester y 1 S


We shall Credit :

in next clearing j on presentation of this slip, £ .
as heloWj for unpaid cheques.

For

£


The settlement in the Manchester Clearing House is
often effected in less time than it would take to read
this account of the method, and the work goes on with
noiseless ease, strongly contrasting with the tmrmoil of
the London House. No doubt, the amounts cleared are
comparatively insignificant in Manchester, the average
daily sums being, in the years 1872, 1873, and 1874,
respectively £226,160, £237,160, and £247,930, or little
more than one-hundredth part of the daily transactions
in the Lombard Street House.

The Manchester Clearing House is managed by a
committee of bankers, of which the chief agent of tha
Bank of England in Manchester is the chairman, ancl


278


MONEY,


the superintendence of the clearing work is conducted
by an official of the Bank of England. Thus the
Bank, while naturally taking precedence, harmoniously
co-operates with the local bankers.

Netv York Clearing House.

The New York Clearing House was established in
October, 1853, and has become a most important institu-
tion, embracing 59 banks, as compared with 26 in
London, and settling transactions hardly, if at all,
inferior in amount to those of the London house. The
general method of settling the business is necessarily
much the same as that already described, but it seems
to be in some respects better arranged than in London.
The work is carried on in a fine large Exchange Eooniy
and there is j)roper accommodation for the manager and
his clerks, instead of the small glass box in which the
inspectors sit in the Lombard Street room.

Each New York bank has one settling clerk in the
Exchange Boom, besides a messenger, who brings and
delivers the parcels of cheques and bills. The settling
clerks sit in a series of desks arranged in an oval form
in the middle of the spacious room, and the exchanges
are effected by an equal number of messengers simul-
taneously walking round the desks, delivering the
parcels of out-clearing,” and receiving those of ‘^in-
clearing,” or as they are called in New York the Credit
and Debit Exchanges. An account of the institution will
be found in Gibbon’s work on “The Banks of New


THE CLEARING-HOUSE SYSTEM.


279


York;” but the general method of procedure is so far
like that in England, that I need not again enter
into the details, which I have had no opportunity of
examining in person.

Extension of the Clearing System.

Until within the last few years there existed only
two bankers’ clearing houses, those of Lombard Street
and New York, but much progress has recently been
made in extending a similar system to otlier places, and
even to other branches of business. Tlie Manchester
Clearing House was established in July, 1872, and New-
castle has a similar establishment. On the continent
only a single city has yet adopted the method. In Paris
about eighteen bankers have formed an association,
called a ‘‘ Chambre des Compensations,” which is located
in the Place de la Bourse, and balances the reciprocal
claims of these firms much in the manner of tlie English
clearing houses. In France, Germany, and otlier con-
tinental countries the use of the banker’s cheque is
much less developed than in England and America.
In Germany a person wishing to remit a hundred
pounds will often collect the actual coins, seal them up
in a bag with five seals, and register them at the jiost-
ofiice. Thanks to the excellent system of government
Pastes existing in Germany, this method of remittance
is sufficiently safe. But it is evident that where the
monetary arrangements of a country are of such a
kind there is no need of a clearing house.


280


MONEY.


The method of btalaricing claims needs by no means
to be restricted to the business of banking. As, indeed,
the monetary transactions of any locality come to a
focus in the banks, the principal clearing will always
be in the hands of bankers. But wherever a set of
traders have numerous reciprocal claims, they may find
it desirable to set up their own clearing house. As long
ago as 1842, it occurred to Eobert Stephenson and
Mr. K. Morison, that the principle of the City Clearing
House might be advantageously applied to settling the
very complicated accounts arising between the railway
companies, which have through booking arrangements.
The work constantly eaiTied on in the great house full of
accountants at Euston Square is vastly more complicated
and various than that of a bankers* clearing house;
but the final result is to ascertain how much each
railway company is indebted to each other one. The
balance duo to or from each company is then paid by
a transfer at the bankers.

Within the last twelve months an attempt has been
made, unsuccessfully as yet, to introduce the general
use of cheques into Liverpool, where great sums of
money are constantly passing, especially, in the cotton
market. For reasons which it would be difficult to trace
out satisfactorily, the Liverpool merchants and bankers
have never adopted the use of cheques to the same
extent and in the same way as in other commercial
towns. Many firms in Liverpool still refuse to receive
payment by cheques, and only a year or two ago it was
a common practice for a Manchester firm to send a clerk


THE CLEABING-HOUSE SYSTEM.


281


to Liverpool by railway with a bundle of bank-notes to
make payments. At present, as I am informed, bank
bills payable at sight, and forwarded by post, are
substituted for Bank of England notes.

A Liverpool stock or cotton broker, wanting to
make a payment, draws money out of his bank in
notes and gold, and his clerks carry it about the town.
Every evening a great number of small cash-boxes,
containing large sums of money, are deposited at a
well-knowm silversmith’s shop, opposite tlie Town Hall,
for safe custody during the night. A great amount of
capital is thus kept lying idle, and it is surprising that
the bankers do not secure this sum, as an addition to
their deposits, by removing every obstacle. At present
the practice is to charge I or 7 ^^ per cent, commission,
whereas the actual cost of the accountants’ work by
which the bank transfers are accomplished is almost
nominal in regard to large transactions.

An important extension of the clearing principle
was effected by the establishment, in 1874, of the Lon-
don Stock Exchange Clearing House, which undertakes
to clear, not sums of money, but quantities of stock.
As stock brokers settle their transactions only once a
fortnight, or in consols once a month, it naturally
arises that, in the intervals, the same broker will
usually have bought the same kind of stock for one
client and sold it for another. The very same stock
may have passed through several different hands, and
the same brokers may have had reciprocal dealings
with each other. Instead, then, of actually making


282


MONEY.


transfers of stock for each transaction, and paying by
cheques which greatly swell the business of the Lombard
Street Clearing House on settling days, a plan has been
arranged, according to which each member of the Clear-
ing House prepares a statement of the net amount of
each stock which he has to receive from or deliver to each
other member. The manager of the house, after verifying
these accounts, which should balance in the aggregate,
directs the debtor members to transfer quantities of
stock to the creditor members in such a way as to close
all the transactions. It will be noticed tliat, for ju’etty
obvious reasons, the transfers are made in the stock
exchange, directly from broker to broker, and not to the
manager of the Clearing House, as in banking trans-
actions. A separate clearing has, of course, to be
made in each kind of stock. It is found that the
quantities actually transferred do not exceed 10 per
cent, of the whole transactions cleared, and the cheques
drawm are diminished on settling days as much as ten
millions sterling.

Still more recently the Cotton Brokers’ Association
of Liverpool, although unable to apply the system of
clearing as yet to their money transactions, have arranged
a clearing system for the settlement of business con-
nected with sales of cotton “to arrive.” Under the new
arrangement the first seller and the last buyer come into
contact, and all intermediate business, which sometimes
occasioned much dispute and delay from contracts in-
volving many middle-men, will be, as it were, cancelled
by the Clearing House. The business, indeed, is being


THE CliEARING-IIOUSE SYSTEM.


283


extended, so that all contracts, declarations, and pay-
ments will be effected through the agency of the asso-
ciation.

It may very well admit of question whether we have
at all reached the limit of the advantageous applica-
tion of the clearing principle. Prom bankers’ trans-
actions it has been extended to railways, stock exchange,
and cotton brokers’ business. It is conceivable that any
other body of merchants, brokers, publishers, or others
who have frequent pecuniary claims upon each other,
might have a clearing meeting once or twice a week.
Suggestions to tliis effect have already been made, and I
am told that in the Glasgow iron market, a settlement
day for the clearing of mutual transactions has been
established.

Advantages of the Cheque and Clearing System.

Eeturning to the subject of the bankers’ Clearing
Houses, it is to be remarked concerning the vast system
of relations which now exists between English banks,
that it has grown spontaneously, uninvented, unauthor-
ized by the legislature, and only recognized by the
judges when firmly established as a matter of business
custom. No Act of Parliament has been passed to
facilitate the operations of clearing, and it is only by
an understanding between the banks, that the presenta-
tion of cheques and bills through the Clearing House, or
their settlement by the payment of a balance, is regarded
as legally valid.


284


MONEY.


The advantages of the system are evidently of
enormous magnitude. All the larger payments are made
with a minimum of risk, loss of time, trouble, or use of
the precious metals. While the cheque representing a
payment is travelling about the country, the money
which it is transferring is reposing in the vaults of some
bank, or rather, not being needed in the operation at all,
is lent or sent out of the country, so that its interest is
saved. We found in p. 165 that the loss of interest upon
the metallic money now circulating or stored up in the
United Kingdom, amounts to between four and five
millions annually. If payments were now made by
coin only, many times as much metallic money would
be needed.

The security with which the i)ayments are effected
is also an element of importance. Specie when trans-
mitted in large sums, is always a temptation to thieves,
and has usually to be accompanied by one or more
guards. Through the agency of banks, whether by
crossed cheques or credit notes, the largest payments
may be made with almost absolute immunity from risk.
The cheques, bills, and other documents transferred in
the clearing houses are, as a general rule, so crossed or
endorsed as to be of no value to any one but the legal
owners, and in any case are regarded by thieves as
"" duffer,” with which they dare not meddle.


THE CLEARING-HOUSE SYSTEM,


285


Proportion of Cash Payments.

It is surprising to find to what an extent paper
documents have replaced coin as a medium of exchange
in some of the principal centres of business. In the
Statistical Journal for September, 1865, Sir J. Lul)bock
published some particulars concerning the business of
his bank during the last few days of 1864. Trans-
actions to the amount of £23,000,000 were effected
by the use of coin and documents, as shown in the
following statement : —

PEtt CENT.

ChoqucB and Hills passed tlirougli the Clcsaring House 70-8


ChequCvS and Hills not cleared 23'3

Bank of Jjiigland Notes 5 0

Coin *0

Country Bank-notes *3


100 0

The sums of money paid in by town customers
amounted to ,£10,000,000, and when analysed gave
the following results : —

PER CENT.


Cheques and Bills qg-g

Bank of England Notes 2 2

Country Bank-notes *4

Coin .0


1000

It is not for a moment to he supposed that these figm-es
represent the average use of coin in banking transac-
tions. The proportional amounts of different kinds of


286


MONEY.


money and commercial documents used in different
parts of the country, in different trades, or in banks of
different size and character vary widely. It is much to
be desired that bankers and others who have the facts
before them should publish more copious information
on the subject. In Manchester the use of Bank of
England notes appears to be much more extensive than
in London. Mr. E. H. Inglis Palgrave gave in the
Statistical Journal for March, 1873 (p. 86), an estimate
prepared for him by Mr. Langton, the Managing Director
of the Manchester and Salford Bank, of the proportion
of cash payments made in that bank. It appears that
coin and notes formed 53 per cent, of the total turn-over
in 1869, 42 per cent, in 1864, and only 32 per cent, in
1872, so that a rapid decrease has been going on. But
we find that in 1872 the amount of notes was still
large, tlie turn-over of customers’ accounts being thus
composed : —

PER CENT.


Cheques, Bills, etc 68

Bauk-notes 27

Coin 5


100

I have endeavoured to form some notion of the com-
parative amounts of cheques and bills which are cleared
off at successive points in the organization of the bank-
ing system. It is very desirable that we should learn
what proportion the transactions of the Clearing House
bear to the whole transactions of the banks of the
kingdom. There would not be much difficulty in form-
ing a fair estimate if we had from one or more banks


THE CLEARING-HOUSE SYSTEM.


287


in each of the principal towns a statement of the com-
parative amounts of cheques dealt with in various
manners. According to information kindly furnished
to me by the authorities of one of the principal banks
of Manchester, I find that, during the months July to
October, 1874, the cheques and bills on demand presented
on or through the bank were disposed of as follows : —

PER CENT.

Cheques paid in Coin and Bank-notes, over the

CoTuiter 34*2

Cheques on Solves paid to Credit of Account . . . 25*4
Cheques presented through Manchester Clearing

House 22*5

Cheques and Bills on demand on London presented

through Loudon Clearing House 10*8

Checiues on Country Bankers prosontod through
the London Clearing House ......... 3*5

Cheques on Country Bankers presented direct . . 3*6


1000

Although considerable trouble has been spent in the
preparation of this account, it seems doubtful whether
the items are complete and correct, and I give it more as
a specimen of the kind of information which is mucli
wanted than as a reliable statement.


Cases to which the Clearing System is inapplicable.

It will now be sufficiently apparent that, so long as
trade is reciprocal, the cheque and clearing system can
arrange all exchanges without the use of coin. The
values of goods are estimated and expressed in terms of


288


MONEY.


gold, which acts as the common denominator of value,
but metallic money ceases to be the medium of exchange.
The banking organization effects what I have heard
Mr. W. Langton describe, as a restoration of barter.
But it happens in some cases that transactions are not
reciprocal, and cannot be made to balance. In certain
trades there is a permanent set of the goods in one
direction. In the Manchester cotton trade, for instance,
the manufacturers in purchasing cotton from the Liver-
pool n\erchants, pay with cash or short credits. The
goods when completed are often shipped again at Liver-
pool for foreign consignees at long credits, but are not
generally purchased by the Liverpool merchants. Con-
sequently, while the Manchester manufacturer owes the
Liverpool merchant for the whole cost of the raw
material, and for the shipping charges and freight upon
the goods sent abroad, there are no equivalent claims of
Manchester merchants against Liverpool. The foreign
consignees of the goods pay for them by bills upon
London. Now if the Manchester manufacturers held
their funds in Manchester, and the Liverpool merchants
their funds in Liverpool, there would have to be a con-
stant current of money from London to Manchester, and
from Manchester to Liverpool, whence it would go abroad
to pay for the raw material. This inconvenient state
of things is remedied to a certain extent, as we shall see
in Chapter XXIIL, by making London the head-quarters
and clearing house both of home and foreign transactions.

But there is always a liability that claims expressed
in metallic money, and actually capable of being de-


THE CLEARING-HOUSE SYSTEM,


289


manded in that shape at the option of the owner, will
sometimes be pressed. In certain states of trade, or
under certain contingent circumstances, the holders of
cheques require gold, and bankers who have become
accustomed to consider metallic reserves as almost
superfluous, find themselves suddenly in a difficult
position. Such, as we shall see in Chapter XXIV., is
the real cause of the present instability of the English
money market.


u


290


MONEY.


CHAPTER XXIL

THE CHEQUE BANK.

The Cheque and Clearing System, so far as we have
hitherto considered it, is mainly restricted to the
arrangement of considerable payments. No one can
enjoy its advantages unless he keeps a banking account,
and for this purpose he must be able to command a
certain sum of money, and must have a sufficiently good
position and credit to be entrusted by a banker with a
cheque book. The result is that the larger part of the
population is entirely outside the banking system, and
must either use coin, postage stamps, or post-office
orders in making payments.

A very ingenious attempt is now being made to
extend the area of banking to the masses by the institu-
tion of the Cheque Bank. When preparing materials
for this book, I was so much struck by the way in which
this new bank seems to be adapted to complete the
cheque and clearing system in a downward direction,
that I applied to Mr. James Hertz, the able inventor of
the scheme, for information upon the subject, and have
been enabled to inquire minutely into it.


THE CHEQUE BANK.


291


The weak point of the present ordinary clieqiie book
is, that a person once getting a book full of blank
cheques, can fill them up for any amounts, irrespective
of the balance against which they are supposed to be
drawn. Here is an opening for easy fraud, if cheques
were generally received from strangers without inquiry.
The Cheque Bank proceeds on the new principle of
issuing cheques which can be filled up only to limited
amounts, as shown by printed and indelible perforated
notices upon the forms. These cheques, too, are only
to be had in exchange for the utmost sum for wliich
they can be drawn, which sum is retained as a deposit
until each corresponding cheque has been presented. It
follows that each cheque, when duly filled up and signed
by the owner, is as good as a bank-note issued against a
documentary reserve. It is true that cheque books or
forms may be lost or purloined, and then fraudulently
signed and issued ; but, being drawn to order and
crossed, these documents are very dangerous to meddle
with in a criminal manner, and, in the only instance
in which fraud has yet been attempted, swift punishment
followed.

Relation of the Cheque Bank to other Banks.

We have seen how much has been accomplished
by establishing relations between banks, as branches,
agents, or correspondents of each other. The Cheque
Bank carries out a similar system to the utmost extent
by establishing relations with almost all the banks of


292


MONEY.


the United Kingdom, as well as with most foreign
banks of importance. Abeady 984 English, Irish, or
Scotch banks, have entered into relations with the
Cheque Bank, and 596 colonial or foreign banks cash
the cheques. One advantage of this arrangement is,
that the sphere of the cheque system can be greatly
extended without any equal increase of trouble and
risk. Whenever a bank opens a new account with an
individual, that account has to be kept apart in the
ledger, and constantly watched. But a bank can sell
Cheque Bank cheques to any amount, without opening
separate accounts with the purchasers, and may also
pay such cheques when presented without risk. The
Cheque Bank thus aims at becoming a great institu-
tion of accountants, operating for the most part through
other banks, but relieving them of much of the risk and
trouble of small transactions. The Bank of England is
a bankers’ bank in the sense that it holds the reserves
of other banks, and makes those final payments of cash
which close the general balance of transactions. The
Cheque Bank seems to be a bankers’ bank in the
opposite sense of making deposits in all other banks
and employing them as agents.

A peculiar feature of the Cheque Bank is that it
entirely abstains from using, or even holding, the money
deposited. All money received for cheque books is left
in the hands of the bankers, through whom they are
issued, or transferred to other bankers, as may be needed
for meeting the cheques presented. The interest paid
by these bankers will be the source of profit, and as the


THE CHEQUE BANK.


293


money thus lies in the care of the most wealthy and
reputable firms in the kingdom, it could not be lost in
any appreciable quantity, except by the break-down of
the whole backing system of the country. It would
hardly be true to say that these cheques correspond
to notes issued on the deposit of government funds,
because each agent-bank can use at its own discretion
the portion of the funds of the Cheque Bank in its
possession. Nevertheless, as the portion in the hands of
any one bank will usually be a small fraction of the
whole, and there is, moreover, a guarantee fund of consols
in the background, the system of issue is more closely
analogous to that of a documentary reserve than any
other.


The Cheque Bank as a Monetary Agent

The Cheque Bank appears to aim at becoming the
medium for the accomplishment of an immense mass of
small payments. Small pensions and annuities, small
dividends, small disbursements by officers of depart-
ments, by agents, clerks, or even domestic servants are
made through it. A book of the Cheque Bank cheques
can be safely trusted to almost any servant or agent who
can write, and the cheque when presented forms a record
of the way in which he has apphed the money. No one
can venture in like manner to give signed blank cheques
to a servant, as they may be filled up for unlimited
amounts, and the Cheque Bank cheques are evidently
better than a sum of metallic money, which may be more
readily misapplied, purloined, or lost.


294


MONEY,


The recipient of such cheques finds them one of the
most convenient possible forms of remittance, because they
will be cashed by almost any banker, and will therefore
be received as cash by any person who has acquired suffi-
cient knowledge of their nature. Thus the Cheque Bank
seems to be capable of replacing with great advantage
the money-order system of the English Post-Office.

To procure a post-office order it is requisite to apjdy at
an office and wait while certain forms are being filled up.
A definite office of payment must be selected, and the
receiver of the order can obtain payment, as a general
rule, only by applying personally at the office, and giving
tlie name of the sender. Even if a person cannot afford
to purchase a book of Cheque Bank cheques, he can, in
towns where agencies are established for the purpose,
buy single cheques 'filled up for any odd sum with less
formality than at the post-office, and these cheques arc
payable not at one office, but at almost any bank in the
United Kingdom and in most foreign towns. They can
afterwards be restricted in payment, if desired, to any
particular bank. The cost of remittance by cheques will
on the average be lower than by money orders, since the
Post-Office makes charges for inland orders, increasing
from Id, for sums under IO 5 . to Is. for a £10 order,
witli much higher charges for orders to be paid in
certain colonies or foreign countries. The Cheque Bank
cheque costs only one penny and one-fifth of a penny in
excess of the sum remitted, and of this charge the penny
is for the government stamp duty and represents so
much public revenue. '


THE CHEQUE BANK.


295


The government can have no reason for oi)posmg the
Cheque Bank, because if successful it must earn for the
Chancellor of the Exchequer a large annual revenue.
The money-order system, on the other hand, in spite of
the higher charges, is understood to yield no profit, and is
rather a burden upon the department. It is said that
the issue of every money order involves the filling up of
eight or nine forms, and the amount of labour rendered
requisite swallows up the revenue. It is a very striking
instance of the comparative ineflicienoy of government
industry, except in special cusCkS, that a single banking
company can bring into use a form of remittance avail-
able in all parts of the world, and far cheaper than post-
office orders, and yet pay duty upon their transactions.

Tlie Cheque Bank also aims at becoming a collecting
as well as a paying agency. Any pul)lic institution
needing to collect a subscription, for instance, has only to
procure a ‘‘paying-in ’’ form, or credit note, and the §um
inserted therein will be receivv d by any of the numerous
banks in relation. Thus small debts and subscriptions
may be readily collected without trouble or expense in
any part of the country.

Payment of Wayes by Cheques,

The managers of the Cheque Bank liope to substitute
their cheques for the coin now used by manufacturers
in payment of wages. If this could be accomplished it
would be convenient rather than otherwise to bankers,
who are weekly called upon to furnish large sums in gold


296


MONEY.


and silver coin, and have the trouble and cost of hold-
ing and counting a suflScient stock. Now, if a master in
paying his men presented them with small cheques, or,
perhaps better still, with cheques for even sums, and the
balance in silver, the cheques would be cashed by shop-
keepers, and would be deposited by them in the banks,
or might even be bought back in large sums by the
masters for further use. It was at one time the practice
of great railway contractors to issue tally checks in the
form of one, two, or five-shilling cards, which were paid
to their workmen, and circulated among the publicans
and tradesmen of the neighbourhood, until taken back
by the contractor in wholesale. Such cheques con-
stituted true representative money, but would be of
doubtful legality. The Cheque Bank cheques might
serve the same piu*pose, and have been declared legal,
l)ut it is yet very doubtful how far the wholesome
practice of immediately presenting ordinary cheques
will stand in the way of the continued circulation of
other cheques, for which there is no need of immediate
presentation. Time after time we have found that habit
and custom exercise an immense and very unmanageable
influence in monetary affairs, and it will probably take
a long time to teach the public to look upon a cheque as
a safe document to keep.

The Cheque Bank as a Savings Bank.

Already the Cheque Bank serves as a savings bank,
into which persons may put surplus money for security.


THE CHEQUE BANK.


297


receiving as an acknowledgment the cheque forms by
which it can be drawn out or paid away with ease. No
interest, however, is paid on such deposits. It seems to
me, however, that the bank^ if successful in its present
aims, might readily become the most admirable of
savings banks. Instead of issuing cheques payable at
any moment, it might issue through its agent-banks,
deposit receipts, bills, or, what conies to much the same
thing, post-dated cheques, the interest to be paid at the
time of deposit as a discount at the rate of 2 or 2^ per
cent. This receipt could be retained, transferred by en-
dorsement, or again discounted by the Cheque Bank. If
retained until maturity it would become payable like a
cheque at any bank in relation with the Cheque Bank.
The money deposited in this way might be invested in
consols at 3 ^ per cent., and the cost of the documents
and accountants’ work, being slight, might leave a fair
margin of profit.

The Post-Office Savings Bank system as established
by Mr. Gladstone is an admirable institution; it has
been very successful, and has done great service in
increasing providence. But it is troublesome and costly
in working, and leaves no profit to the state. Already
the Scotch banks serve almost in the capacity of savings
banks by receiving small fixed deposits ; and it is well
worthy of consideration whether, by the assistapco of the
Cheque Bank, almost all the English banks might not
be converted into savings banks, to the advantage of
every one.


298


MONEY.


Results of the Cheque Bank System,

I have thought it quit|> suitable to this book to
enter somewhat minutely into the actual and possible
work done by the Cheque Bank, because, if successful,
the institution opens an mdefiiiite sphere for financial
improvement. The institution is, indeed, at present a
mere experiment, undertaken at the risk of shareholders,
and it can only succeed by offering conveniences to the
public and the body of bankers. It may succeed in
some of its schemes, and not in others, hut in any case
it will tend to replace coin payments by cheque pay-
ments, to be balanced off in the general London clearing.
The profits of the bank depend upon the very small
charge of J of a penny for each cheque, and the interest
on deposits. The amount of deposits remairfiiig undi’awn
depends upon three circumstances : (1) the time before
the cheque is utilized ; (2) the time it is in circulation,
or travelling about, and (3) the difference between the
sum drawn and that deposited. The average duration
of circulation, I am informed, Avas lately ten days, but
many cheques have already been out a year.

I should add that, in describing with some detail the
operations of the Cheque Bank, I have no interest in
the success of the institution other than a strictly
scientific interest. In any case it is a most ingenious
innovation, and if successful cannot fail to benefit the
community in a high degree, adding a new feature to a
banking system already wonderfully organized.


( 299


CHAPTEK XXIII.

FOEEIGN BILLS OF EXCIfANGK.

In early timoB foreign trade consisted in the direct
exchange of commodities. A caravan set out with a
variety of manufactured articles, across the deserts of
Arabia or Sahara, and came hack with the ivory, spices,
and other valuable raw produce obtained by barter.
In later. times the merchant loaded his own ship and
sent her forth on an adventure, trusting that his ship-
master would sell the cargo to advantage, and, with
the proceeds, bring back another cargo to be sold to
great profit at home. Trade xvas thus evidently recipro-
cal, and what was sent out paid for what was brought
back, so that little or no money was kept idle in the
mean time.

Wherever this direct reciprocal exchange did not exist
it was necessary either to transmit metallic money, or to
devise some mode of transferring debts. Now the trans-
mission of money not only causes the loss of interest
during the interval of transit, but leads to the expense
of guarding it, and the liability of total loss. Many
centuries ago, accordingly, it was discovered that the


300


MONEY.


use of paper documents would economize, if not alto-
gether render needless, the use of metallic money in
foreign trade.

Origin and Nature of Bills of Exchange,

Even the Eoinans appear to have been acquainted in
a slight degree Avith the system of foreign bills of ex-
change ; but it is to the early Italian, and especially the
Jewish merchants, that we owe the development of the
practice. The history of the subject is buried in much
obscurity, but there is evidence that, as early as the
fourteenth century, the use of bills of exchange was
fully established. The forms of the bills, and the laws
and customs relating to them, wore then much the same
as in the present day.

A bill is nothing but an order to pay money addressed
by the drawer to the drawee, or person on whom it
is di*aAvn, specifying the amount to be paid, the time
of payment, and the person to whom it is to be paid.
Whenever a bill is drawn, it is to be presumed that a debt
is due from the drawee to the drawer. When presented
to the drawee and accepted by him, this acceptance is
an acknowledgment of the existence of the debt. The
bill, although drawn in favour of a particular person, is
transferable by endorsement, and thus represents a nego-
tiable claim to receive money at a future date in a distant
country. Hence it is capable of being transmitted in
discharge of another debt of equal amount.

England buys every year from America a great


FOREIGN BILLS OF EXCHANGE.


801


quantity of cotton, corn, pork, and many other articles.
America at the same time buys from England iron,
linen, silk, and other manufactured goods. It would be
obviously absurd that a double current of specie should
be passing across the Atlantic Ocean in payment for
these goods, when the intervention of a few paper
acknowledgments of debt will enable the goods passing
in one direction to pay for those going in the opposite
direction. The American merchant who has shipped
cotton to England can draw a bill upon the consignee to
an amount not exceeding the value of the cotton. Selling
this bill in New York to a party who has imported iron
from England to an equivalent amount, it will be trans-
mitted by post to the English creditor, presented for
acceptance to the English debtor, and one payment of
cash on maturity will close the whole circle of trans-
actions. Money intervenes twice over, indeed, once when
the bill is sold in New York, once when it is finally
cancelled in England; but it is evident that payment
between two parties in one town is substituted for pay-
ment across the whole breadth of the Atlantic. Moreover,
the payments may be effected by the use of cheques, or
the bills when due may themselves be presented through
the Clearing House, and balanced off against other bills
and cheques. Thus the use of metallic money seems to
be rendered almost superfluous, and, so long as there is
no great distui'bance in the balance of exports and
imports, foreign trade is restored to a system of perfected
barter.


302


MONEY.


Trade in Fon'eign Bills.

It is an unnatural supposition that every importer of
goods will meet with an exporter of goods to the same
amount, so that two transactions will exactly balance
each other. But there are many merchants in Liverpool
indebted to American merchants, and many American
merchants indebted to others in Liverpool. Hence there
will be a continual supi)ly of bills of various amounts,
and a continual demand, and it becomes a profitable
business for certain houses to deal in the bills, pur-
chasing bills from those who can draw and selling to
those who wish to remit.

Large firms of merchants often have houses both in
America and in England, or a firm in one country has
agents or correspondents in the other with whom they
beep a running account. Not uncoimnonly, the very
same firm may be both importing and exporting, so that
a direct balancing of their accounts will be so far effected.
The remaining balance need only be paid from time to
time as opportunity offers. Thus, in foreign as in home
trade, book credit serves in a great degree to economize
the use of money. Only when there is a derangement of
the balance of trade, and one country owes to another a
preponderating debt of large amount, need specie be
transmitted.

It is out of the question that I should, in this small
treatise, attempt to enter into the intricacies of the
Foreign Exchanges, which have been so admirably
treated by Mr. Goschen, in his ‘‘ Theory of the Foreign


FOREIGN BILLS OF EXCHANGE.


303


Exchanges.” The general principle of the subject is,
that bills of exchange drawn on any particular place
constitute a new kind of article, subject to the laws
of supply and demand. Any circunistance diminishing
the supply, or increasing the demand, raises the price
of such bills, and vicfi vnrsd. The price being raised,
there is additional profit on any transaction which allows
a new supply of bills to be drawn. The export of any
kind of goods in greater quantities tends to restore the
balance, but, if requisite, coin or bullion can be sent at
a certain cost, and bills di’aTO against it. Thus the cost
of transmitting specie is the limit to the premium on
bills. Gold and silver being everywhere considered
a desirable possession, and being also very portable,
form, as remarked at the outset, the natural currency
between nation and nation. If a country were to be
absolutely denuded of specie, and had foreign debts to
pay, forced exportation and sale of the next most gene-
rally desirable and portable commodity would be the
only resource, and the premium on bills might vary
to almost any extent from par. Thus it is seen that,
in an economical point of view, gold and silver differ
from other merchandise not in kind but in degree.

The World's Clearing Utouse,

It might seem that in the use of cheques internally,
and of bills of exchange in foreign trade, we have
reached the climax in the economy of metallic money ;
but there is yet one further step to make. We found


804


MONEY.


that so long as all the merchants of a town keep their
cash with the same banker, they have no need to handle
the money at all, but can make payments by transfers
in the books of their banker. Let us imagine, then,
that merchants all over the world agreed to keep their
principal accounts with the bankers of any one great
commercial town. All their mutual transactions could
then be settled among those bankers. An approximation
to such a state of things exists in the tendency to make
London the monetary head-quarters of the commercial
world, and the general clearing house of international
transactions.

All that is needed to secure economy of money is
centralization of transactions, so that there may be the
wider scope for the balancing of claims. Before the
elaborate system of English provincial banking grew up,
considerable economy w^as effected by the practice of

drawing upon London.’' In every country town many
persons Avanted to transmit money to London, and others
wanted to draw money from the same place. To vast
private trading transactions with the capital and prin-
cipal commercial towns was added the whole of the pay-
ments connected with the collection and expenditure of
the public revenue. In each country town some promi-
nent trader discovered that profit was to be made by
selling bills on London to those who wished to remit,
and buying with the proceeds the bills of those who
had claims upon banks or firms in London. The capital
thus becoming the monetary centre, it w^as often con-
venient to make payments to other towns by bills upon


FOREIGN BILLS OP EXCHANGE.


305


London. Each person wanting to remit was more
likely to get a bill upon London with ease than upon
any other place, and it Was likely that the creditor
would prefer such a bill to one upon a town with which
he had no relations. It is obvious that if every impor-
tant trader in England kept his principal cash with a
city banker, the use of bills on London would have
enabled all the commercial transactions of England to
be centred in, and cleared through the books of these
bankers and the Clearing House.

Centralization of Financial Transactions in London.

There is a similar advantage in centralizing foreign
transactions in London. In the absence of any general
centre each two commercial towns must settle their
mutual transactions directly and separately. A merchant
will be receiving bills upon the bankers and merchants
of many other towns. There is a double inconvenience
in this. The supply and demand for bills upon com-
paratively small places must be comparatively small
and variable, and the bills wiU be drawn upon minor
firms, of the soundness of which it will not be easy to
get satisfactory information. Many firms, too, in the
present day have houses in several parts of the world,
and it would be more convenient that then- mutual
transactions should be brought to a centre somewhere,
just as the transactions of branch banks are brought to
a centre in the head office. Thus there arises a tendency
to prefer bills drawn upon well-known London banks,

X


306


MONEY.


or other great London firms, whose credit is known
all over the world, and ceteris paribuSy such bills
will command a readier acceptance in the exchange
market. Persons having to draw bills will get a better
price if they can draw upon London, which they can do
by opening an account with a London firm, and arrang-
ing that remittances due to them shall be deposited to
their credit in London. It comes to pass that a merchant
in America, Australia, or India, will i)refer to receive
money in London rather than anywhere else. Every-
one wishing to remit money can then do so in the form
of a bill upon the holders of these funds in London, and
the fund will be recruited from time to time by similar
bills received and transmitted to London for collection.

This tendency to the centralization of financial
business in London is much promoted by the fact that
the largest mass of cheap loanable capital exists there.
The general rate of interest in New York is at least ‘2
per cent, higher than in London, so that a trader who
has credit enough to obtain loans in London, will make
a profit by borrowing there rather than in New York.
Thus, instead of first depositing money in London, and
afterwards drawing against it, the more usual and
profitable form of the transaction is to get a credit
there, that is, leave to draw against a banker, making
subse(iuent remittances to recoup the banker accepting
and paying the bills. As regards continental trade,
Paris, Berlin, Vienna, Hamburg, and Amsterdam are of
course highly important centres, but recent wars have
occasioned a considerable transfer of financial business


FOREIGN BILLS OP EXCHANGE.


307


to London. Moreover, the great foreign trade of Eng-
land, reaching iftto every quarter of the globe, and the
many distant colonies and dependencies which naturally
have financial relations with the capital of the empire,
tend to give London a unique position.

Representation of Foreign Bankers in London.

The result of this centralization of banking trans-
actions in London, is that colonial and foreign bankers
find it very desirable to have agents, or even head
offices in London. At the present time there are no
less than 60 important colonial and foreign banks which
have their own London offices or houses. These include
the principal Australian, New Zealand, and Indian
banks, and a number of minor banks, established by
English capitalists to cultivate the trade of the minor
states of Europe, South America, China, and the East.
In addition to the above 60 banks, there are fully 1000
foreign and colonial banking houses in correspondence
with London bankers, so that almost every town in the
world which can maintain a bank at all, has the means
of correspondence with some member of the London
banking system. The foreign bankers vary greatly in the
importance of their transactions, and some of them
would, according to English ideas, be considered
merchants rather than bankers ; but, in the aggregate,
their transactions must be exceedingly large. It must
almost inevitably follow that transfers of money will be
more and more made through London. Just as this


308


MONEY.


city is the link of connection between each English
country banker and each other one, so it may, and
probably will by degrees, become the link between the
most distant parts of the world. But the greater becomes
the profitable burden of financial business thrown upon
Lombard Street and Threadneedle Street, the more it
behoves us to take care that our currency system is
maintained upon the soundest possible basis. It is
requisite, too, that our bankers, financiers, and mer-
chants should regulate their operations with a thorough
comprehension of the immense system in which they
play a part, and the risks of derangement and failure
which they encounter by over-severe competition. No
one doubts that alarming symptoms have during recent
years presented themselves in the London money market.
There is a tendency to frequent severe scarcities of loan-
able capital, causing sudden variations of the rate of
interest almost unknown thirty years ago., I will there-
fore in the next chapter offer a few remarks intended
to show that this is an evil naturally resulting from the
excessive economy of the precious metals, which the
increasing perfection of our banking system allows to
be practised, but which may be carried too far and lead
to extreme disaster.


( 309 )


CHAPTEE XXIV.

THE BANK OF ENGLAND AND THE MONEY MARKE1\

AVe commenced the study of money with the barter of
ordinary commodities, and money appeared in the first
place as some common commodity handed about as a
medium of exchange. By degrees, however, the subject
assumed a greater and greater degree of complexity.
The metals took the place of other commodities as
cm'rency, and delicate considerations began to enter
concerning token and standard coins. From metallic
representative money, we passed to paper representative
money, and finally discovered that, by the cheque and
clearing sj^stem, metallic money was almost eliminated
from the internal exchanges of the country. Pecuniary
transactions now present themselves in the form of a
room full of accountants, hastily adding up sums of
money. But we must never forget that all the figures
in the books of a bank represent gold, and every creditor
can demand the payment of the metal. In the ordinary
state of trade no one cares to embarrass himself with a
quantity of precious metal, which is both safer and more
available in the vaults of a bank. But in international
trade, gold and silver are still the media by which


810


MONEY.


balances of indebtedness must be paid, and serious
consequences may arise from any disproportion between
the amount of transactions carried on, and the basis of
gold upon which they are settled.

Eoopansum of Trade.

No one doubts that in the last thirty years there has
been an immense expansion in the trade of this and
most other countries. If, as is very commonly done, we
take the foreign trade as a test of the general advance of
industry, we find that the total declared real value of
British and Irish produce exported from the United
Kingdom was, in 1846, about 58 millions sterling. In
1866 it amounted to 189 millions, or more than three
times as much. In the mean time the bank-note cir-
culation had remained almost unchanged, and such
alteration as there was, consisted in a decrease. The
total circulation of bank-notes, English, Scotch, and
Irish, was, in 1846, 39 millions, and in 1866, 38^ millions*
I believe, however, that the best test of the progress of
trade, both internal and external, is furnished by the
out-put of coal, the mainspring of our wealth. Now, in
1854 the total quantity of coal raised was about 65
millions of tons, and the note currency 38 millions ; in
1866 the coal raised had increased to lOlJ millions of
tons, or by 56 per cent., while the note currency still
remained almost as before, namely, 38J millions. Be-
tween 1866 and 1874, indeed, there was a remarkable
increase in the circulation, the amount of which rose to


THE BANK OF ENGLAND AND THE MONEY MARKET. 311


£43, 912, 000, or by 14 per cent., but the production
of coal had in the mean time risen to 127 millions, an
increase, compared with 1854, of 95 per cent.

Competitwn of Bankers,

It is quite apparent, therefore, that the tendency is
to carry on a greater and greater trade upon an amount
of metallic currency which does not grow in anything
like the same proportion. The system of banking, too,
grows more perfect in the sense of increasing the
economy with which money is used. The competition
of many great banks, leads them to transact the largest
possible business with tlie smallest reserves which they
can venture to retain. Some of these banks pay divi-
dends of from 20 to 25 per cent, which can only be
possible by using large deposits in a very fearless manner.
Even the reserves consist not so much of actual coins or
bank-notes in the vaults, as of money employed at call
in the Stock Exchange, or deposited in the Bank of
England, which again lends the deposits out to a certain
extent.

Now the larger the trade which is carried on, the
larger will be the occasional demand for gold to make
foreign payments; and if the stock of gold kept in
London be growing comparatively smaller and smaller,
the greater will be the difficulty in meeting the demand
from time to time. Such is, I believe, the whole secret of
the growing instability and delicacy of the money market
in this country. There is a larger and larger quantity of


312


MONEY.


claims for gold, and comparatively less gold to meet
them, so that every now and then there is a natural
difficulty in paying claims, and the rate of interest has
to be suddenly raised to induce those who have gold to
lend it, or to induce those who were demanding it to
forego their claims for a time. Most people, it is true,
attribute all these troubles, either to the much-abused
gentlemen who meet weekly in the parlour of the Bank
of England, or to Sir Eobert Peel, who established the
note issue of the Bank upon the partial deposit system
already described (p. 222).

The Bank Charter Act of 1844.

At all times, during the last two hundred years, there
has been some currency topic upon the anvil. In early
days it was the scarcity of silver coin, the South Sea
Bubble, or the price of the guinea. Later on came the
restriction of specie payments, the bullion report, the
one -pound note question, and the joint stock banks.
Since 1844, however, all currency theorists have concen-
trated their attentions ujjon the Bank Charter Act of
that year, and, while endlessly differing about the nature
of the remedy, have been unanimous in attributing all
kinds of evils to a settlement of our currency, which I
believe to be a monument of sound and skilful financial
legislation.

The Acts of 1844 and 1845 placed a fixed limit upon
the amount of notes which can in this country be issued
without an equal deposit of gold. At present (April,


THE BANK OF ENGLAND AND THE MONEY MARKET. 313


1875) the Bank of England can issue, without gold, fifteen
millions ; the private and joint stock hanks of England
are individually restricted to fixed amounts, which, added
together, make about £6,460,000, wdiile the Scotch hanks
can, in a similar manner, issue notes to the amount
of £2,750,000, and tlie Irish banks to the amount of
£6,350,000, making in all about 30J millions. In
addition to this the Bank of England, and the Scotch
and Irish banks, can issue as many more notes as they
have deposits of bullion or coin ; and in the year 1874,
the extra amount thus issued was about 14J millions.
Let it be never forgotten, that no restriction is thus
placed upon the sum total of the currency of the
country; for the original legal tender of the country
is the coined sovereign of 123*274 grains of gold, and
every one who has the gold can readily turn it into
sovereigns. The objectors to the Bank Charter Act
urge that we want more currency, but they cannot really
mean more metallic currency. Wc must not look to
changes in the law to increase the amount of specie in
the country, and, as I have remarked, any one can get
sovereigns if he has the needful gold. This metal, again,
is only to be had, in the absence of gold mines, by that
state of foreign trade which brings it, and does not drain
it away again. The principal currency, in short, must
be regarded as a commodity, the supply of which is to
be left to the natm’al action of the laws of supply and
demand. The unrestricted issue of paper representa-
tive notes produces an artificial interference with these
natural conditions.


814


MONEY.


The Free-banking Sdwol,

What the currency theorists want, then, is not more
gold, but more promises to pay gold. The Free-banking
School especially argue that it is among the elementary
rights of an individual to make promises, and that each
banker should be allowed to issue as many notes as he
can get his customers to take, keeping such a reserve of
metallic money, as he thinks, in his own private discre-
tion, sufficient to enable him to redeem his promises.
But this free issue of paper representative money does
not at all meet the difiiculty of the money market, which
is a want of gold, not of paper; on the contrary, an
unlimited issue of paper would tend to reduce the already
narrow margin of gold upon which we erect an enormous
system of trade. Here we reach the critical point of the
whole theory of currency. There is also a school of
currency writers, formerly represented in England by ,
Ricardo and Tookc, who hold that it is impossible to
over-issue convertible paper money. Arguments to this
effect have been recently urged with great ability by Mr.
R. H. Inglis Palgrave, in his work entitled “Notes on
Banking, “ and his wide acquaintance with the subject
should lend much force to his opinions. But there is, to
my mind, an evident flaw in their position.

Possibility of Over-issue,

When prices are at a certain level, and trade in a
quiescent state, a single banker is, no doubt, unable to put


THE BANK OP ENGLAND AND THE MONEY MARKET. 315


into circulation more than a certain quantity of bank-
notes. He cannot produce a greater effect upon the
whole currency than a single pmxhaser can by his sales
or purchases produce upon the market for corn or cotton.
But a number of bankers, all trying to issue additional
notes, resemble a number of merchants offering to sell
corn for future delivery, and the value of gold will be
affected as the price of corn certainly is. We are too
much accustomed to look upon the value of gold as a
fixed datum line in commerce; but, in reality, it is a
very variable thing. The tables of prices analysed by
me in the Statistical Journal for June, 1865, show that
between 1822 and 1825 there was an average rise of
prices to tlie amount of 17 per cent. ; and between 1844
and 1847, and 1852 and 1857, the average rises were
respectively 13 and 31 per cent. Such variations of
prices mean that the value of gold is itself altered in
the inverse ratio; and these variations are produced
mainly by extensions of credit. Every one who pro-
mises to pay gold on a future day, thereby increases the
anticipated supply of gold, and there is no limit to the
amount of gold which can thus be thrown upon the
market. Every one who draws a bill or issues a note,
unconsciously acts as a bear ” upon the gold market.
Everything goes well, and apparent prosperity falls
upon the whole community, so long as these promises
to pay gold can be redeemed or replaced by new pro-
mises. But the rise of prices thus produced turns the
foreign exchanges against the country, and creates a
balance of indebtedness which must be paid in gold.


316


MONEY.


The basis of the whole fabric of credit slips away, and
produces that sudden collapse known as a commercial
crisis.

Now, what is true of credit generally, is still more true
of the special form of credit involved in bank promissory
notes. These purport to be payable in gold coin on
demand, so that they are taken by every one as equi-
valent to the coin. Even bills of exchange can be paid in
notes, and as regards internal trade, no difficulty would
be felt in maintaining credit so long as promises to pay
gold circulate instead of gold. But foreigners will not
hold such promises on the same footing ; and, if the ex-
changes are against us, the metallic, not the paper, part
of the currency will go abroad. It is at this moment
that bankers will find no difficulty in expanding their
issues, because many persons have claims to meet in
gold, and the notes are regarded as gold. The notes
will thus conveniently fill up the void occasioned by the
exportation of specie ; prices will be kept up, prosperity
will continue, the balance of foreign trade will be still
against us, and the game of replacing gold by promises
will go on to an unlimited extent, until it becomes
actually impossible to find more gold to make necessary
payments abroad.

Professor Cliffe Leslie, writing in Macmillan's Maga-
zine for August, 1864, correctly pointed out, as I think,
that speculative credit often raises prices for a time
above their natural range. Representative credit, on
the other hand, by which I suppose he means notes
issued against the actual deposit of metal, ob^dously
forms no augmentation of the currency, and can have


THE BANK OF ENGLAND AND THE MONEY MARKET. 317


no effect in raising prices above the level which would
exist under a purely metallic system.

The actual exhaustion of the bullion of a country is no
mere ideal event, for it is what occurred in this country
in 1889, under the free system of note issue. The
Bank of England had parted with almost the whole of
its bullion and was only saved from bankmptcy by the
ignominious expedient of a large loan from the Bank
of France. The narrow limits of this book evidently
restrict me from entering into historical and statistical
illustrations, but it may be said, that the collapse which
followed the crisis of 1839 induced severer distress and
depression of trade than has ever since been known in
this country. We now carry on industry and commerce
many times greater than in 1839, and tliere is nothing to
indicate that either the bank directors or the commercial
classes are more cautious or farseeing than they then
were. On the contrary, competition, speculation, and
the bold erection of the widest affairs upon the narrowest
basis of real capital is more common than ever. Know-
ing as wo do the very narrow margin of real metal
upon which our many great banks conduct their busi-
ness, it is impossible to entertain for a moment the
notion of allowing the paper currency of the country to
rest upon the discretionary reserves of such competing
bankers.


The Right of Coining Bank Notes,

According to the view which I adopt, the issue of
notes is more analogous to the royal function of coinage


318


MONEY.


than to the ordinary commercial operation of drawing
bills. We ought to talk of coining notes, as John Law did ;
for though the design is impressed on paper instead of
metal, the function of the note is exactly the same as
that of a representative token. As to the right to issue
promises, it no more exists than the right to establish
private mints. For our present purposes that alone is
right which the legislature declares to be expedient to
the community at large. As almost every one has long
agreed to place the coinage of money in the hands of the
executive government, so I believe that the issue of
paper representative money should continue to be practi-
cally in the hands of the government, or its agents acting
'under the strictest legislative control. M. Wolowski, in
his admirable works on banking, lias maintained that the
issue of notes is a function distinct from the ordinary
operations of a banker ; and Mr. Gladstone has allowed
that the distinction is a wholesome and vital one.
Bankers enjoy the utmost degree of freedom in this
country at present, in every other point, so that it is
wholly a confusion of ideas to speak of the unrestricted
emission of paper representative money as a question of
free banking.

Professor Sumner and others have objected to the
Bank Charter Act, that it cannot be regarded as a
scientific settlement of the currency question, inasmuch
as no other nation had adopted the same principles.
Quite lately, however, the German Imperial government
has adopted the main principle of a partial deposit,
adding to it the liberty of increasing the issues under a


THE BANK OF ENGLAND AND THE MONEY MARKET. 319

tax of 5 per cent., an arrangement which I have de-
scribed under the name of the Elastic Limit System
(p. 226). This provision appears to be designed to
avoid the suspension of the law during times of crisis,
and it is quite possible that we might with advantage
introduce a similar modification into our own currency
law. But the fine or tax upon the excessive issue ought
surely to be much more than 5 per cent., and in this
country should certainly not be less than 10 per cent.

Scotch and English Banking*

It is common, indeed, to point to the Scotch banks
as a proof that a perfectly sound currency may be fur-
nished by banks acting on their own unfettered discretion.
Up to 1845, the twelve or thirteen Scotch banks certainly
did possess the right of freely issuing notes down to one-
pound notes, a»nd only in one or two cases did bankruptcy
occur. All this I grant, holding that Englishmen and
Americans, and natives of all countries, may well admire
the wonderful skill, sagacity, and caution with which
Scotch bankers have developed and conducted their
system. There is no doubt, too, that Scotch bankers
are guiding the course of development of the banking
system in England, India, the Australian colonies, and
everywhere, with conspicuous success. If we were all
Scotchmen, I believe the unlimited issue of one-pound
notes would be an excellent measure. But when we
compare the Scotch and English banking systems, we
discover a profound difference. In Scotland there exist


320


MONEY.


only eleven great banks, which take good care that there
shall not be a twelfth great bank. The undoubted
monopoly which they possess is, however, used with
great moderation and wisdom, and by an immense
ramification of branches (p. 258), every village has its
banks, and every poor man may have his bank deposit,
if he will save a few pounds. In England and Wales we
have 267 private and 121 joint stock banks, or, in all,
388 banking firms, including in these numbers the
London banks, but not including any of the numerous
branch banka. There is, no doubt, a tendency to
approximate to the Scotch system by the amalgamation
of smaller banks. Still many new banks are from time
to time started, and the competition between them is of
the keenest character. The high dividends expected by
the shareholders can only be earned by bold trading on
small reserves, and every commercial man is aware that
the money market is becoming more and more sensitive.

Cash Reserves of Bankers,

It is important, but very difficult to decide, what is
the amount of real cash held by the bankers of the
United Kingdom in readiness to meet their liabilities.
Many banks pubhsh balance-sheets professing to show
the reserve of ready money. I have already remarked
(pp. 248-250) upon the ambiguity which attaches to the
words money and cash as commonly used ; and, when we
inquire into the nature of the banker’s ready money, it
is found to consist in a great degree of money invested


THE BANK OF ENGLAND AND THE MONEY MAEKET. 321

in government securities, deposited with other bankers,
especially the Bank of England, or held ‘‘ at call,” that
is, lent to speculators who invest it in negotiable secur-
ities. From the published balance-sheets we thus get
no indication of the real metallic reserve of the country,
available for the payment of foreign debts.

Mr. E. H. Inglis Palgrave, in his important ‘'Notes
on Banking,” published both in the Statistical Journal,
for March, 1873 (Vol. xxxvi. p. lOG), and as a separate
book, has given the results of an inquiry into this subject,
and states the amount of coin and Bank of England
notes, held by the bankers of the United Kingdom, as
not exceeding four or five per cent, of their liabilities, or
from one twenty-fifth to one twentieth part. Mr. T. B.
Moxon, of Stockport and Manchester, has subsequently
made an elaborate inquiry into the same point, and finds
that the cash reserve does not exceed about seven per
cent, of the deposits and notes payable on demand.
He remarks that even of this reserve a large propor-
tion is absolutely indispensable for the daily transactions
of the bankers’ business, and could not be parted wuth.
Thus the whole fabric of our vast commerce is found to
depend upon the improbability that the merchants and
other customers of the banks will ever want, simul-
taneously and suddenly, so much as one-twentieth part
of the gold money which they have a right to receive
on demand at any moment during banking hours.


322


MONEY.


Itemedy for the Sensitiveness of the Money Market

The present state of things in England is not to be
cured by any legislation. No government can save
those from trouble who will make unlimited trans-
actions in gold, without a sure prospect of finding the
gold when wanted. It is absurd to suppose that any
single establishment like the Bank of England, itself
becoming hardly more important than some of the great
city banks, can prop up the whole fabric of English
commerce.

The only measure which can restore stability to the
London market, or prevent it from becoming more and
more sensitive, is to secure by some means the existence
of more satisfactory cash reserves, either in actual coin,
or in Bank of England notes, representing deposits of
coin in the Bank vaults. It would be of comparatively
little use, however, for some banks to become more
prudent and self-denying, while others are allowed to
stretch their resources to the utmost possible point, and
outbid the more prudent banks in the rates of dividend
they can pay. Combined action, therefore, seems requisite,
somewhat in the manner suggested by Mr. Bagehot, as
regards the city bankers.

As the Bank of England pays no interest upon the
eight millions which it on the average of the last four
years holds as the deposits of the London bankers, there
seems to be no sufficient reason why the Bank should be
allowed to make a profit out of so large a sum. If held
by a committee of the depositing banks it would be equally


THE BANK OF ENGLAND AND THE MONEY MARKET. 323

safe, almost equally available, and might, moreover, by
the investment of a portion in government stock, yield a
profit to the depositors. It may be asked, Why not leave
each bank to hold its own reserve in its own vaults?
But there would then be no security against some banks
running their reserves dangerously low, and trusting to
extrinsic aid in times of difficulty. One objection which
I should make to the scheme as put forth is, that
government stock should not be allowed to form any
part of the ultimate reserve. When loanable capital is
very scarce, such stock can only be converted into actual
bullion by forced sales which depreciate the funds, sliock
public confidence, and drain away money from those who
would in some other cliannel have employed it in the
money market. Unless government stocks be sent
abroad, their sale cannot possibly increase the stock
of gold in the country. A cash reserve ought to be
composed of cash, and although it may be very con-
venient to bankers to use this word in a loose aiid
ambiguous manner, it ought not to mean, in speaking of
the ultimate reserves of the counti’y, anything but gold
coin or bullion, or warrants, actually issued against coin
or bullion, on the deposit system previously considered.

It has been pointed out, moreover, in an able article
in the Bankers' Magazine for February, 1875, that the
proi^osed scheme would be very insufficient if carried out
merely by a narrow circle of city bankers. The associa-
tion should include, in one way or another, aU the more
important banks in the three kingdoms. The vast trade
of the country cannot be placed upon a sound basis until


324


MONEY.


the force of public opinion among bankers imposes upon
each member the necessity of holding a cash reserve
bearing a fair proportion to the liabilities incurred. It
matters little who holds the reserve, provided it actually
does exist in the form of metal, and is not evaporated
away by being placed at call, or deposited with other
banks which make free use of it. In the absence of some
common action among bankers, it is certain that the
sensitiveness of the money market will increase, and it
is probable that commercial crises will from time to time
recur, even exceeding in their violence and disastrous
consequences those whose history we know too well.


( 325 )


CHAPTER XXV.

A TABULAR STANDARD OF VALUE*

At the outset it was observed that money, besides serving
as a common denominator of value, and as a medium to
facilitate exchange, was usually employed likewise as the
standard of value, in terms of which contracts extending
over long series of years are expressed. In letting land
on long or perpetual leases, in lending money to govern-
ments, corporations, and railway companies, it is the
general practice to make the interest and capital repay-
able in legal tender gold money. But there is abundance
of evidence to prove that the value of gold has undergone
extensive changes. Between 1789 and 1809, it fell in
the ratio of 100 to 54, or by 46 per cent., as I have
shown in a paper on the Variation of Prices since 1782,
read to the London Statistical Society in June, 1865.
From 1809 to 1849 it rose again in the extraordinary
ratio of 100 to 245, or by 145 per cent-, rendering
government annuities and all fixed payments, extending
over this period, almost two and a half times as valuable
as they were in 1809. Since 1849 the value of gold has
again fallen to the extent of at least 20 per cent.; and a


826


MONEY.


careful study of the fluctuations of prices, as shown
either in the Annual Eeviews of Trade of the Economist
newspaper, or in the paper referred to above, shows that
fluctuations of from 10 to 25 per cent, occur in every
credit cycle.


Corn Rents,

The question arises whether, having regard to these
extreme changes in the values of the precious metals,
it is desirable to employ them as the standard of value
in long lasting contracts. We are forced to admit
that the statesmen of Queen Elizabeth were far-seeing
when they passed the Act which obliged the colleges of
Oxford, Cambridge, and Eton, to lease their lands for
corn rents. The result has been* to make those colleges
far richer than they would otherwise have been, the
rents and endowments expressed in money having sunk
to a fraction of their ancient value.

I believe that there is no legal impediment in the
way of a landlord leasing his lands at present for a corn
rent, or an iron, or coal, or any other rent. All that the
law reejuires is that the contract shall be perfectly definite,
and of exactly determinate meaning, so that the kind of
commodity intended, and tlie quantity of that commodity,
shall be exactly ascertainable. But the law, in defining
legal tender money, provides against misapprehensions
concerning money payments, whereas there is no security
that mistakes and difficulties will not arise in taking
other commodities as the matter of rents. Moreover


A TABULAR STANDARD OF VALUE. 327

any single commodity, such as corn or coal, undergoes
considerable fluctuations from year to year, and as
regards periods of ten or twenty years, might prove
not to be so good a standard as silver or gold. Com-
modities which are comparatively steady in value on the
average of long periods may be subject to great tem-
porary variations of supply or demand.

yl Mfdtijile Legal Tender,

The question thus arises whether the progress of
economical and statistical science might not enable us
to devise some better standard of value. We have seen
(pp. 136-143) that the so-called double standard system
of money spreads the fluctuations of supply and demand
of gold and silver over a larger area, and maintains both
metals more unchanged in value than they would other-
wise be. Can Ave not conceive a multiple legal tender,
which would be still less liable to variation ? We estimate
the value of one hundred pounds by the quantities of
corn, beef, potatoes, coal, timber, iron, tea, coftee, beer,
and other principal commodities, which it will purchase
from time to time. Might we not invent a legal tender
note which should be convertible, not into any one single
commodity, but into an aggregate of small quantities of
various commodities, the quantity and quality of each
being rigorously defined ? Thus a hundred pound note
would give the owners a right to demand one quarter of
good wheat, one ton of ordinary merchant bar iron, one
hundred pounds weight of middling cotton, twenty pounds


828


MONEY.


of sugar, five pounds of tea, and other articles sufficient
to make up the value. All these commodities will, of
course, fluctuate in their relative values, but if the
holder of the note loses upon some, he will in all
probability gain upon others, so that on the average
his note will remain steady in purchasing power. Indeed,
as the articles into which it is convertible are those
needed for continual consumption, the purchasing power
of the note must remain steady compared with that of
gold or silver, which metals are employed only for a few
special purposes.

In practice, such a legal tender currency would
obviously be most inconvenient, since no one would
wish to have a miscellaneous assortment of goods forced
into his possession. Ho who wanted corn, would have
to sell to other parties the iron, beef, and other things
received along with it ; gold, or other metallic money,
would doubtless be used as the medium in these ex-
changes. This scheme would, therefore, resolve itself
practically into that which has been long since brouglit
forward under the title of the Tabular Standard of
Value.


Lowe's proposed Table of Reference.

Among valuable books, which have been forgotten, is
to be mentioned that by Joseph Lowe on “The Present
State of England in regard to Agriculture, Trade, and
Finance,*’ published in 1822. This book contains one
of the ablest treatises on the variation of prices, the


A TABULAR STANDARD OF VALUE.


329


state of the currency, the poor-law, population, finance,
and other public questions, of the time in which it was
published, that I have ever met with. In Chapter IX.
Lowe treats, in a very enlightened manner, of the
fluctuations in the value of money, and proceeds to
propound a scheme, probably invented by him, for
giving a steady value to money contracts. He proposes
that persons should be appointed to collect authentic
information concerning the prices at whicli the staple
articles of household consumption were sold. In regard
to corn and sugar authoritative returns were then, and
have ever since been, published in the London Gazette,
and there seemed to be no difficulty in extending a like
system to other articles. Having regard to the com-
parative quantities of commodities consumed in a house-
hold, he would then frame a table of reference, showing
in what degree a money contract must be varied so as to
make the purchasing power uniform. In principle the
scheme ^eems to be perfectly sound ; but Lowe did not
attempt to work out the practical details, and his plan
involves needless difficulties.

Poulett Scrope^s Tabular Standard of Value,

A very similar scheme was independently proposed,
about eleven years later, by Mr. G. Poulett Scrope, the
well-known writer on geology and political economy. In
a very able but now forgotten pamphlet, called “An
Examination of the Bank Charter Question, with an
Inquiry into the Nature of a Just Standard of Value’*


330


MONEY.


(London, 1833), Mr. Scrope suggests (p. 26) that a
standard might be formed by taking an average of the
mass of commodities which, even if not employed as
the legal standard, might serve to determine and correct
the variations of the legal standard. The scheme was
also described in Mr. Scrope’s interesting book on the
Principles of Political Economy, published in the same
year (p. 406), and in the second edition of the same
book, called “Political Economy for Plain People,’’
issued two years ago, (p. 308). The late Mr. G. E.
Porter, without referring to previous writers, gave the
same scheme in 1838, in the first edition of his well-
known treatise on “ The Progress of the Nation,”
(Sections III. and IV. p. 235). He added a table show-
ing the average fluctuations of fifty commodities monthly
during the years 1833 to 1837.

Such schemes for a tabular or average standard of
value appear to be perfectly sound and highly valuable
in a theoretical point of view, and the practical diffi-
culties are not of a serious character. To carry Lowe’s
and Scrope’s plans into effect, a permanent government
commission would have to be created, and endowed
with a kind of judicial power. The officers of the de-
partment would collect the current prices of commodities
in all the principal markets of the kingdom, and, by a
well-defined system of calculations, would compute from
these data the average variations in the purchasing
power of gold. The decisions of this commission would
be published monthly, and payments would be adjusted
in accordance with them. Thus, suppose that a debt of


A TABULAR STANDARD OF VALUE.


331


one hundred pounds was incurred upon tlie 1st of July,
1875, and was to be paid back on 1st July, 1878; if the
commission had decided in June, 1878, that the value of
gold had fallen in the ratio of 106 to 100 in the inter-
vening years, then the creditor would claim an increase
of 6 per cent in the nominal amount of the debt.

At first the use of this national tabular standard
might be permissive, so that it could be enforced only
where the i)artios to the contract had inserted a clause to
that effect in their contract. After the practicability and
utility of the plan had become sufficiently demonstrated,
it might be made compulsory, in the sense that every
money debt of, say, more than throe months' standing,
would be varied according to the tabular standard, in the
absence of an express provision to the contrary.

DiJlficidties of the Scheme,

The difficulties in the way of such a scheme are not
considerable. It would, no doubt, introduce a certain
complexity into the relations of debtors and creditors,
and disputes miglit sometimes arise as to the date of the
debt whence the calculation must be made. Such diffi-
culties would not exceed those arising from the payment
of interest, which likewise depends on the duration of
the debt. The work of the commission, when once estab-
lished and directed by Act of Parliament, would be little
more than that of accountants acting according to fixed
rules. Their decisions would be of a perfectly hona fide
and reliable character, because, in addition to their


832


MONEY.


average results, they would be required to publish
periodically the detailed tables of prices upon which
their calculations were founded, and thus many persons
could sufficiently verify the data and the calculations.
Fraud would be out of the question.

The only real difficulty vrhich I foresee, is that of de-
ciding upon the proper method of deducing the average.
According to the method which I should advocate, a
considerable number of commodities, say 100, should
be chosen with special regard to the independence of
their fluctuations one from another, and then the
geometrical average of the ratios in which their gold
prices have changed would be calculated logarithmically.
This is the method which I employed in my pamphlet
on the ‘‘ Serious Fall in the Value of Gold, etc. ” and
in the paper on the Variations of Prices since 1782,
pre\iously referred to (p. 323). A somewhat similar
method had been previously employed by Mr. New-
march. In the annual Commercial History and Review
of the Economist newspaper, there has, for many years,
appeared a table containing the Total Index Number
of prices, or the arithmetical sum of the numbers ex-
pressing the ratios of the prices of many commodities
to the average prices of the same commodities in the
years 1845-50. Whatever method were adopted, how-
ever, the results would be better than if we continued
to accept a single metal for the standard, as we do at
present.

The space at my disposal will not allow me to
describe adequately the advantages which would arise


A TABULAR STANDARD OF VALUE.


833


from the establishment of a national tabular standard
of value. ' Such a standard would add a wholly new
degree of stability to social relations, securing the fixed
incomes of individuals and public institutions from the
depreciation which they have often suffered. Specula-
tion, too, based upon the frequent oscillations of prices,
which take place in the present state of commerce,
would be to a certain extent discouraged. The calcula-
tions of merchants would be less frequently frustrated
by causes beyond their own control, and many bankrupt-
cies would be prevented. Periodical collapses of credit
would no doubt recur from time to time, but the in-
tensity of the crises would be mitigated, because as
prices fell the liabilities of debtors would decrease
approximately in the same ratio.


834


MONEY.


CHAPTER XXVL

THE QUANTITY OF MONEY NEEDED BY A NATION. ,

It might seem natural that one most important point
for discussion in an Essay on Money would be the
quantity of money required by a nation. Nothing would
seem more desirable than to decide how much each person
needs of paper, gold, silver, or bronze currency, so that
the government might take care to provide sufficient for
every one. In almost every country great complaints
have from time to time been made as to the scarcity of the
circulating medium, and the urgent need of more. All
the evils of the day, the slackness of trade, falling prices,
declining revenue, poverty of the people, want of employ-
ment, political discontent, bankruptcy, and panic, have
been attributed to the want of money, the remedy
suggested being in former days the setting of the mint
to work, and in later times the issue of paper money.

The true answer to all such complaints is that no
one can tdl how much currency a nation requires, and
that to attempt to regulate its quantity is the last thing
which a statesman should do. In almost every case
the apparent scarcity of currency arises from unskilful
management of the metallic currency, bad regulation of


THE QUANTITY OP MONEY NEEDED BY A NATION. 335

paper representative money, illegitimate speculation, or
some unsoundness in commerce which would be aggra-
vated by a further increase of the paper currency. We
shall find that to ascertain how much money is needed
by a nation is a problem involving many unlmown
quantities, so that a sure solution can never be obtained.

Quantity of Work to be done by Money.

To decide how much money is needed by a nation,
we must, firstly, determine the quantity of work which
money has to do. This will be proportional, eetens
jMribuSj to the number of the population; twice the
number of people, if equally active in trade and per-
forming it in the same way, will clearly want twic(i as
much money. It will be proportional, again, to the
activity of industry, and to the complexity of its organ-
ization. The more goods are bought and sold, and the
more often they pass from hand to hand, the more
currency will be needed to move them. It will be pro-
portional, again, to the prices of goods ; and if gold falls
in value, and prices are raised, more money will be
needed to pay the debts increased in nominal amount.

Few of the quantities concerned in such consider-
ations are known. We know the number of the popu-
lation approximately, and the amount of foreign trade,
but the quantities of goods bought and sold in inland
trade are almost entirely unknown. It is needless to
dwell on this side of the question, as our knowledge is
still more defective in other respects.


336


MONEY.


Efficiency of the Currency,

By the efficiency of the currency we mean the
average number of exchanges eifected by each piece of
money in a unit of time, such as a year. The aggregate
work done by money will be measured by its quantity
multiplied into the average number of times which
each coin or note passes from hand to hand during the
year. Now we know very imperfectly what is the
quantity of currency in most countries, and we know
nothing at all as to the average rapidity of circulation.
Some coins, especially small silver or bronze coins,
may pass several times in the course of a day. Other
coins or notes may be kept in the pocket for weeks, or
may be laid by for months and years. I have never
met with any attempt to determine in any country
the average rapidity of circulation, nor have I been
able to think of any means whatever of apj)roacliing
the investigation of the question, except in the inverse
way. If we knew the amount of exchanges effected, and
the quantity of currency used, we might get by division
the average number of times the currency is turned
over ; but the data, as already stated, are quite wanting.

There is no doubt that the rapidity of circulation
varies very much between one country and another, A
thrifty people with slight banking facilities, like the
French, Swiss, Belgians, and Dutch, hoard coin much
more than an improvident people like the English, or
even a careful people with a perfect banking system like
the Scotch. Many circumstances, too, affect the rapidity


THE QUANTITY OP MONEY NEEDED BY A NATION. 337

of circulation. Eailways and rapid steamboats enable
coin and bullion to be more swiftly remitted than of
old ; telegraphs prevent its needless removal, and
the acceleration of the mails has a like effect. A
decrease in the circulation of country bank-notes in
England, in 1842, was attributed to the effect of the
penny postal reform in facilitating presentation of notes
by post.

Effects of the Cheque and Clearing System.

Par more important than these considerations is tlie
fact that, where an extensive banking system exists, only
a portion of tlio exchanges are actually effected by
money. I do not lay much stress upon the use of bills
of exchange as replacing money, because the degree in
which they are so used must be comparatively limited,
and they arc rather articles bought and sold with
money than money itself. But we have traced out step
by step tlie Avay in which the cheque and clearing
system enables debts to be balanced off against eacih
other, so that the money is never touched at all, and
only intervenes as the unit of value in which sums are
expressed. Almost all large exchanges are now effected
by a complicated and perfected system of barter, in the
London Clearing House, transactions to tlie amount of, at
least, £6,000,000,000 in the year are thus effected, without
the use of any cash at all, and, as I have before explained,
this amount gives no adequate idea of tlie exchanges
arranged by cheques, because so many transactions are


338


MONEY.


really cleared in provincial banks, between branches,
agents, or correspondents of the same bank, or between
banks having the same London agents.

If our knowledge of the amount of transactions in
England is highly imperfect, we know still less of the
way in which payments are effected in other countries.
The New York Clearing House transactions are very
extensive, as wo have seen, and there is an elaborate
banking system extending over all the States of the
Union ; but it would require much investigation on the
spot to enable any one to form a notion whetlier the
correspondence between these banks enables them to
economize currency as much as the English system of
London agencies. In France and most continental
countries the cheque arid clearing system can hardly
be said to exist except in some of the large towns. Paris
has an incipient clearing house, and the Bank of France,
moreover, makes transfers between clients to the extent
of two or three millions daily. All banks wdll to a
certain extent economi74e currency, and those of Amster-
dam and Hamburg have for some centuries carried on a
system of transfers, the true prototype of our system.

Considerable changes, it is true, are taking place in
the mode of conducting business in some parts of the
Continent. Professor Cliffe Leslie, who is well known
to be intimately acquainted with the economical
systems of the continental countries, attributes the
rise of prices in Germany in a great degree to the
quicker circulation of the money, and the freer use of
instruments of credit. In the Fortnightly Review for


THE QUANTITY OF MONEY NEEDED BY A NATION. 339


November, 1870 (pp. 568-9), he says: — “The improve-
ments in locomotion and in commercial activity which
have so largely augmented the money-making power
of the Germans, have also quickened prodigiously the
circulation of money; and the development of credit,
likewise following industrial progress, has added to
the volume of the circulating medium a mass of sub-
stitutes for money which move with greater velocity.
A much smaller amount of money than formerly now
suffices to do a given amount of business, or to raise
prices to a given range; and to the increased amount
of actual money now current in Germany we must add
a brisk circulation of instniments of credit. Were the
circulating medium composed of coin alone, whatever
the amount of the precious metals issuing from the
mines, or circulating in other countties, and whatever
the price of German commodities in markets abroad,
no rise in the prices of Gennan commodities at home
could take place without additional coin to sustain it.”

So different, then, are the commercial habits of
different peoples, that there evidently exists no propor-
tion whatever between the amount of currency in a
country and the aggregate of the exchanges which can
be effected by it. Even if we had reliable statistics of
the amounts of currencies, such data should be regarded
as indicating, not the comparative abundance or scarcity
of money, but the degree of civilization, of providence, or
of complexity of banking organization, in the country.


340


MONEY.


Conclusion.

From all the above considerations it follows that the
only method of regulating the amount of the currency is
to leave it at perfect freedom to regulate itself. Money
must find its own level like water, and flow in and out
of a country, according to fluctuations of commerce
which no government can foresee or prevent. The
manner in which paper notes may be used to represent
and replace part of the metallic currency should bo
strictly regulated, because otherwise belief in the exist-
ence of metallic money is created when there is no such
money to warrant the belief. But the amount of money
itself can bo no more regulated than the amounts of
corn, iron, cotton, or other common commodities produced
and consumed by a people. It must be allowed, indeed,
to be no easy matter to discriminate precisely and
soundly between those points at which the legislator
must interfere in the management of the currency and
lay down a fixed rule, and those points at which perfect
freedom must be maintained.

A comparison of our present laws regarding currency
and trade, with those which existed in this country
from the tenth to the fourteenth centuiy, will show a
curious double progress. Many things which our
ancestors attempted to regulate by law are now left
free by general consent, and other things which they
left free, or nearly so, are now strictly regulated. The
rates of wages, the price of the quartern loaf, the exercise


THE QUANTITY OF MONEY NEEDED BY A NATION. 341


of various trades, were then the subject of legislation,
though we now know that they cannot be luoperly
brought within the scope of legislative control. On the
other hand, an endless diversity of weights and measures
were formerly used in different parts of the country,
and little or no attempt was made to reduce them to any
system or precise definition. Almost every important
town, too, had its mint in the earlier centuries, and
barons and great ecclesiastics often exercised the right
of issuing their own money. There are still a very few
persons who advocate free coinage; but, by almost
general consent, the work of coining metallic money is
now, in every civilized country, committed to the care of
the state. We provide for a uniform system of coins
with the same care that we establish a national system
of weights and measures. But while we thus take the
greatest care of the metallic currency in one respect, we
have utterly abandoned all the futile attempts which
were in former centuries made to bring bullion into the
kingdom in order to set the mint to work.

We must deal with the paper currency in an
analogous manner, and regulate it both more and
less than hitherto. Private issues should disappear like
private mints, and each kingdom should have one
uniform paper circulation, issued from a single central
stjite department, more resembling a mint than a bank.
The manner of issuing this paper currency should be
strictly regulated in one sense; the paper circulation
should be made to increase and diminish with the
amount of gold deposited in exchange for it. At the


342


MONEY,


same time, no thought need be taken about the amount
so issued. The purpose of the strict regulation is not to
govern the amount, but to leave that amount to vary
according to the natural laws of supply and demand.
In my opinion, it is the issue of paper representative
notes, accepted in place of coin, which constitutes an
arbitrary interference with the natural laws governing
the variations of a purely metallic currency, so that
strict legislative control in one way leads to more real
freedom in another. I am quite willing to allow, how-
ever, that questions of great nicety and subtlety arise in
this subject, and that only in the gradual progress of
economic science can they be finally sot at rest.


INDEX


A.

Abrasion of coins, 83, 157, 164
Ach, 41, 45, 52j rvxde, 53j grave, 91
Alricaii D{irtc?r Coinpuny, 2
Afri(;iin money, 93
Ajifenti banks, 259
Aj^io, 72, 200
Altoriiativc Hlandartl, 137
Alaruinium, 132

American money (see United
States)

Amsterdam, banka of, 200, 221,
254

Aristotle on money, 88
As, 22, 91

Assiernats, 202, 228, 232, 246
Australian aovoreigna, 154
Austrian money, 126, 136, 140
Austro-Hungarian money, 148, 160


B

Babbage, Craklks, 267
Bagehot, Walter, 92, 322
Bankers' bank, 256, 292

cheques, 242

competition of, 311

Bankers' Magazine, 322
Bank money, 200
Bank-notes, 239 ; weight of, 203
Bank of England, 111, 114, 222;


monopoly of coinage, 117;
supplies silver coin, 118; bul-
lion office, 212 ; baTik-notofi,
215,313; in 1839,317; bank-
ers’ deposil s, 322
Bank of Fnxnco, 231, 338
Bank Charter Act, 116, 222, 225,
312

Bunk sharoH, speculation in, 210
Bank-systom, single, 252; com-
plex, 255 ; branch, 257 ;
agency, 259

Barter, I, 6, 8, 77, 189 ; restor-
al ion of, 288

Bolgium, money of, 49, 103, 130
Bernanlakis, M., 196, 198
Billon, 125

Bills of exchange, 191 , 244, 299 ;

history of, 300 ; trade in, 302
Bills of laiUiig, 207
Binary system, 181
Book credit, 251
Boulton and Watt, 121, 123

— letter of, (>5

Branch banks, number of, 258
Brazil, money of, 147
Bronze coin, 128; SVoneb, 74;
English, 110, 129, 164; stag-
nation of, 131 ; penny, 124
Buenos Ayres, paper money of, 234
Bullion report, 230

trade of Bank of England

in, 111


344


INDEX.


Biirmah, money of, 14, 89
Dyzantinc money, 29, 195

C

Cacao nuts as money, 26, 33
Canadian inonoy, 73
Capital, derivation of nanu), 23
Cartha;?iiiian money, 197
Cash, Chinese money, 58, 65, 90 ;
amhig'uifcy of wonJ, 249, 323 ;
])i-oportiion of in payments, 285
Cattle as currotusy, 22
Cent, 187

Centime pieces, 124, 128, 185
Cor tilled cheques, 243
Cliamhre des CnnipcnsationSf 279
Chattel, derivation of uaruo, 23
Cheque and clearing system, 192,
242, 283, 337
Cheque Dank, 243, 290
Cheques, 240; circulated in Queens-
latul, 2 I I ; ciossiid, 243
Chevalier, M . Michel, 30, 57, 69, 86,
92, 137, 202, 245
Chili, 147

Chinese! money, 58, 97, 142, 148, 197
Clazomoriian money, 204
Clearing House, 257 ; London, 202,
337 ; of the world, 303
Clipped coins, 199
Coal raisod in Great Britain, 310
Cognizability, 10
Coin, 17, 25, 27, 57
Coinage, amount at English Mint,
163

Act, 76, 105, 107, 116 ; of

United States, 14*6
Coining, invention of, 55 ; a royal
prerogative, 65 ; of bank-notes,
318

Colonial currencies, 134, 147
Colouring of coins, 126
Compmsatio ad pensumy 90
Componsatory action of double
standard, 139


Composite coin, 127

legal tender, 101

Confederate States notes, 233
Conveyance, cost of, 35
Copper, 35, 45 ; price of, 110, 12J1 ;

objections to, 125
Corn as money, 25, 35
rents, 326

Counterfeit, coin, 59 ; sous, 126
Counting boards, 161
Country bankers, supply of silver
coin to, 119
— — clearing, 261
Courcelle-Seneuil, 86, 137, 139, 198
Gouts Jorc6y 76
Cowry shells, 24, 33, 71
Credit, 238 ; and debit exchanges,
278

Currency by weight, 88
weight of, 130

D

Decimal system, 172, 175, 182
Demurrage, 116
Denarii notched, 80
Denmark, money of, 140, 11-7
Do Daricu, M., 174
Deposit banks, 199
Diamonds, value of, 36
Divisibility, 38
Dock warrants, 207
Dollar, 93, 95; valuation of, 72;
sizes of, 156; Amoiican, 172,
174, 178, 187
Double standard, 136

eagle, 156, 159

Drachma, 64
Ducat pieces, 151, 156
Dumas, Ernest, 63
Duodecimal system, 181
Duplication, mothod of, 162

E

Eagle, 156, 159
Economisty 326, 332


INDEX.


345


Efficiency of currency, 336
Ejjypfc, money of, 147
English money, 98
Etruscan money, 53
Exchange, 8; medium of, 4; ratios
of, 5; theory of, 10
Exchange and Mart^ The^ 4

F

Park, Dr., 157
Farthing, 97, 110
Fee, derivation of, 22
Peer. Herzog, M., 95, 137, 158
Fineness, of silver money, 103 j
remedy in, 109 ; of gold and
silver, 151 ; of gold, 158 ; of
French silver money, 154
Piiilaiid, money of, 1 19
Five-franc ]iieeo in gold, 178
Five-pound piece, 159
Florin, 97 ; Fiiiglish, 100, 170 ;

Austrian, 17i<

FornK).sa, money of, 58
Fourponny pieces pawned, 213
Fijinc, 171, 174, 185
Fj’oc-banking school, 314
Frec-issne system, 230
French money, 71, 70, 99, 124,
127, 128 ; copper money, 103 ;
amount of small money, 130 ;
cniTcncy, 144; mint, 109;
commission of inquiry, 174
Functions of money, 13, 10

G

Gaming, 39
Garbling, 81

Gamier, M!. Joseph, 30, 80, 92
Gorman empire, monetary system,
104, 120, 129 ; nickel coinage,
50 ; demand for gold by, 140 ;
fineness of proposed crown-
piece, 152 ; wear of coin,
159 ; reform of monetary
system, 180, 279; bank law,
226, 318


Gladstone, W. E., 10, 21, 43, 318
Glasgow, pig-iron stores, 210 ; sot.

tlement in iron market, 283
Gold, beauty of, 34 ; character-
istics of, 47; bullion, 1 10;
jirobablo discoverie.s, 143 ;
standard, 174; weight, 202;
value, 315

coin, deficiency of weight, 111

Goldsmiths’ notes, 201
Government bonds, 240
1 Graham, Professor Thomas, 133,
153, 177

Greece, moiujy of, 147
Greenback currency, 179, 232
Gresham’s Law, 01, SO, 99, 112
Guernsey rnarktd notes, 204
Guinea, value of, 98, 103
Guinea-pieces, 28

H

Hamit, force of, 32, 78, 214
j Halfpenny, 110
j Half-sovereign, 107
i Halifax currency, 74
Hamburg, Hank of, 200, 221, 254
Harris, essay on money, 30
TTatchetfc, experiments of, 153
Hebrew money, 45
Hendriks, Frederick, 137, 172
Herschel, Sir John, 133
Hertz, Jamos, 290
Holland, money of, 135
Homogeneity, 37

Hndson Bay Company’s trade, 20
Hungary (see Aastro-Hungarian)

I

Impuksstrility, 40
In-clearing, 260, 272, 278
Indestructibility, 36
India, money of, 95, 142, 148
Insurance broker's business, 251
Interest on bills, 245


346


INDEX.


Int(n’(3st, loss of, 284
Inteniiitional money, 167
Iridium, 36
Irish money, 52

hanks, note issues of, 313

Iron money, 35, 43, 1)6
[ssnes of provincial banks, 313
Italy, money of, 103, 129, 130, 142,
216

Itzibn, Japanese coin, 84
J

Jamaica, nickel coinajjfe of, 50
Japan, money of, 58, 84; iron
money, 43 ; new metallic
currency, 147

K

KfisiTAH, Ilebrcw coin, 89
Kobang, 84
Kossuih^s bonds, 233
Kroutzer pieces, 126

L

LACEa«MONiAN wioney, 35, 195
Land reserve, 229
Langton, William, 286
Law, John, 228, 318
Lend, 43, 44

Least cuiTcnt weight of coins, 107,
111, 157

Leather money, 20, 127, 195, 197
Legal tender, 76, 107 ; single, 96 ;
multiple, 98, 327 ; composite,
102 ; limited in silver coinage,
110, 145

Leslie, Professor ClifEe, 316
Life of sovereign, 157
Light gold coin, 111, 113
Liveipool, Lord, 102, 108, 136
Liverpool Clearing House, 269

cotton market, 281, 282

use of cheques in, 280


Livre, 89

Locke on credit, 238
Loi dn 7 Germinal, an XI., 100, 140,
144

Lombard Street Clearing HonBO,263
London, banking system of, 192 j
goldsmiths, 221 ; bank agen-
cies, 260 ; Clearing House,
262, 265 ; drawing upon, 304 ;
centralization of financial
business in, 305 ; foreign
bankers in, 307
Lowe, Jos(3pb, 328
Lowe, Robert, 105
Lubbock, Sir John, 265, 285

M

Macleod, H. D., 230
Macnte, 71

Maize, as money, 25, 27
Manchester (^Hearing House, 269,
277, 279

use of notes in, 286

cotton ti*adc, 288

Mancua, 71
Mandats^ 228, 234
Manganese, 132
Marchundise hanaU, 4
Marco I*olo, 197
Maria Theresa dollar, 79, 1 56
Mark, 71 i new German coin, 180
Massaclmaetts, money of, 44, 99
Maundy money, 109, 125
Measure of value, 5, 13
Medium of exchange, 4
Melting gold, cost of, 38, 48
Metals, declining values of, 42;
alloys of, 51 j equivalent weights
of, 123

Metallic value, 75
Mexican dollar, 79, 169, 170
Mil, 176, 186
Miller, F. B., 154
Milling of coin, 60
Milreis, 184


INDEX.


347


Mint, the Euglish, 1 20 ; regulations
for coining gold, 116; oostoF,
165

Miraboau’s proposiils, 100
Monetary, Conference of 1867,
177; Convention, 141-5, 173;
technology, 134

Money, of account, 70 ; Aiiglo-
Sa.xon, 70 ; definition of Eng-
lish, 77 ; representative, 191 ;
definition of money, 248

market, 322

Monnaie d’a 2 '>point, 122
Moiit(?aquieu, 71
Moriaon, K., 280
Moxon, T. 11., 321

N

NtVtioNiMj Bank currency, 224

debt, 240

New South Wales, token money in,
195

New York Clearing House, 278
Newcastle Clearing House, 269
Newton, Sir Isaac, 98
Nickel, 49, 132
Nix, E. W., 269
Nominal value, 75
Norway, money of, 72, 78, 126, ll-O,
117

0

0 BOLUS, 54
Oil as currency, 25
Ora, 71
Osmium, 36

Out-clearing, 266, 270, 278
Oxen as currency, 21, 33, 35

P

Palokavk, R. H. Inglis, 325, 286,
314

Paper money, 236


Parallel standards, 95
Paris Clearing House, 279
Patina of bronze, 129
Peag currency, 33
Pecunia, 22

Penny, 110, 123, 124; weight of,
45 ; composite, 127 ; penny
and ton-franc scheme, 176
Percy, Dr., 132
Persian money, 56, 59, 198,
Phoidou, inventor of money, 56
Picking and culling, 81, 112
Pig-iron warrants, 208, 210
Platinum, 4S
Porcelain coins, 42
Portability, 34
Porter, G. R., 330
Portugal, money of, 147, 171, 181
Postage stamps, 233
Post-office money orders, 294 ;

8:ivings bank, 297
Pound and mil sdioinc, 176

sterling, 89, 171, 174, 184

Precious stones, 37, 4()

Prico of silver, 141 , 143, 163
l*ricos, variation of, 315, 325, 332
Profit on coinage, 111
Promises, specilic and genci-al,
209; freedom of, 211
Promissory notes, 206
IVuaaian historical money, 63

Ji

Railway Clearing House, 280
Ratio of exchange, 5, 10
Reciprocity of trade, 299
Recoinage of French bronze money,
128

Rei, 184, 186

Remedy, for sovereign, 106; for
shilling, 109

Reserve, minimum, 223 ; propor-
tional, 223 ; documentary, 227 ;
real property, 228; bankers*,
322


348


INDEX.


Uefcurncd cheques, 266, 276
Ricardo, David, 314
Ring money, 64
Roberta, W^. C., 132, 133, 137
Rogers, Rev. J. E. T., 73
Roman money, 45, 85, 122
Rouble, 71

Roumania, money of, 147
Rupee, 148

Russia, early currency of, 20 ;
platinum money, 48 ; metal-
lic money, 71, 1 ti) ; paper
money, 202, 232, 235 ; gov-
ernment bank, 222


S

Salt as money, 28
Savings banks, 296
Scales, use in making payments,
88 ; in counting coin, 161
S(5otland, currency of, 142 ; bank-
ing system, 257, 319 j bank-
note issues, 313
Scrope, Poulett, 329
Seignorage, 74, 163, 181
Sequin, 151

Seyd, Ernest, 110, 116, 121, 137,
157, 173

Shilling, 71, 108, 176
Siamese money, 55
Silver, 46; penny of, 36, 70, 97;
English coin, 75, 96; supply
of coin, 118; ratio of value to
gold, 108 ; price of, 137 ; wear
of, 158; weight of, 202.
Singapore, money of, 94
Skat, derivation of, 23
Skilling, 126

Skins as currency, 20, 33, 196
Slaves as currency, 23
Smith, Adam, 200
Sou, 186

Sous de cloche, 128
South American money, 93


Sovereign, 105; light, 113;
weighed at Rank of England,
116 ; W(!ight of, 153 ; Austra-
lian, 154; least current
weight, 157 ; international
currency, 170

Spanish dollar, 94 ; money, 147
Spencer, Herbert, 34, 64, 82
Stability of value, 38
Stafford, William, 30
Standard of value, 14 ; fineness of
sUvei', 75 ; fineness of gold,
105

Steel coins, 133
Stephenson, Robert, 280
Stock certificates, 247
Stock Exchange Clearing House,
281

Storch, Henri, 33, 196
Stycas, 52

Sumner, Professor W. G., 236, 318
Sweating of coin, 114
Sweden, money of, 129, 140, 147 ;
copper money, 45, 58, 97 ;
rixdaler, 95

Switzerland, money of, 103, 145 ;
small iruinoy, 134 ; wear of
gold coin, 157
Sycco si Ivor, 1 18
Syracusan money, 203

4 ’

Tabular standard, 328
Tael, 90

Tallies of exchequer, 196; tally-
checks, 296
Tartar money, 198
Ten-franc piece, 176, 187
Theory of politiccal economy, 10
Threepenny pieces, 125, 155
Thrimsa, 71

Tin money, 4'!, 127, 203
Tobacco as currency, 27, 33, 202
Token money, 74, 83, 194, 203
Tooke, Thomas, 314


INDEX.


349


Tower of London, 201
Trade, expansion of, 310
'rradcsmen’a tokens, 65, 103, 195
Truck, troCf 3, 7
Turgot, 53

Turkey, money of, 147
U

Unitkd Statks, money of, 49, 72,
94, 104, 129, 178, 183, 187;
ratio of gold to silver, 146 ;
thickness of coins, 155; in-
terest-bearing currency, 21'6 ;
National Bank curnjmjy, 234
Ut ility, 9, 32

V

Value, 9, 11 ; measure, 5; stand-
ard, 14; store, 15; stability,
38; unit, 67; scjnae of, 68;
intrinsic, 75 ; mejtallic, 76


Vaughan, Rice, 30
Virginian monoy, 202

W

Wages paid by cheque, 295
Wallace, A. R., 2
Walrjis, Loon, 10, 30
Warnpuinj)eag currency, 24, 33
Warrants, gold, 189 ; pig-iron, 208
Webster on paper currency, 236
West Indies, monoy of, 93
Wilson, Rivers, 177
Winkler, Dr. Clemons, 132
Wolowski, Louis, 1, 100, 137, 139,
140, 235, 318
Wooden money, 29
Wood's halfpence, 75
Wrotteslcy, Lord, 175

Z

Zend Avksta, fees mentioned in, 23


Oaxton Printing Workft^ Beceks.


23238

®fie ^otietp S^ibrarp


Author J e von si StRnl e y ;

Title Konoy Pttd the "‘echp-ni au; o

13xc}ian iji

Call No. 55 . .2, 15 ...J. 58I!1


; Date


Date of Issue


Issued to
