The Theory of Political Economy (W. Stanley Jevons, 1879)
==========================================================
The marginalist revolution: utility as the mathematical basis of economics. Second edition, 1879. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.84904).

THEORY OF POLITICAL ECONOMY. 

THE 

THEORY OF POLITICAL ECONOMY. 

BY 

W. STANLEY JEVONS, LL.D. (EwNB.), M.A. (Lond.), F.E.S. 

Professor of Political Economy in University College, London, 

Examiner in Mental and Mouil Scieme in the University of London. 

SECOND EDITION, 
KEVISED AND ENLAEOED, 

WITH NEW PREFACE AND APPENDICES. 

f 0ul^jan: 

MACMILLAN AND CO. 

1879 . 

IThe right of tramlation and reproduction is reserved.'] 

OXFORD: 

BY E. PICKAED HALL, M.A., AND J. H. STACY, 
PEINTEES TO THE UNIYEESITY 

PREFACE 

TO 

THE FIRST EDITION. 

( 1871 .) 

The contents of the following pages can hardly 
meet with ready acceptance among those who 
regard the Science of Political Economy as having 
already acquired a nearly perfect fonn. I believe 
it is generally supposed that Adam Smith laid the 
foundations of this science; that Malthus, Ander- 
son, and Senior added important doctrines ; that 
Ricardo systematised the whole ; and, finally, that 
Mr. J. S. Mill filled in the details and completely 
expounded this branch of knowledge. Mr. Mill 
appears to have had a similar notion ; for he dis- 
tinctly asserts that there was nothing in the Laws 
of Value which remained for himself or any future 
writer to clear up. Doubtless it is difficult to help 
feeling that opinions adopted and confirmed by 
such eminent men have much weight of probability 
in their favour. Yet, in the other sciences this 

VI 

Preface. 

weight of authority has not been allowed to restrict 
the free examination of new opinions and theories ; 
and it has often been ultimately proved that 
authority was on the wrong side. 

There are many portions of Economical doctrine 
which appear to me as scientific in form as they are 
consonant with facts. I would especially mention 
the Theories of Population and Rent, the latter a 
theory of a distinctly mathematical character, which 
seems to give a clue to the correct mode of treating 
the whole science. Had Mr. Mill contented himself 
with asserting the unquestionable truth of the Laws 
of Supply and Demand, I should have agreed witli 
him. As founded upon facts, those laws cannot be 
shaken by any theory; but it does not therefore 
folloAv, that our conception of Value is perfect and 
final. Other generally accepted doctrines have 
always appeared to me purely delusive, especially 
the so-called Wage Fund Theory. This theory 
pretends to give a solution of the main problem 
of the science — to determine the wages of labour ; 
yet, on close examination, its conclusion Is found to 
be a mere truism, namely, that the average rate of 
wages is found by dividing the whole amount 
appropriated to the payment of wages by the 
number of those between whom it is divided. 
Some other supposed conclusions of the science are 

Frafa^e. vii 

of a less harmless character, as, for instance, those 
regarding the advantage of exchange (see the sec- 
tion on ‘ The Gain by Exchange,’ p. 153). 

In this work I have attempted to treat Economy 
as a Calculus of Pleasure and Pain, and have 
sketched out, almost irrespective of previous opin- 
ions, the form which the science, as it seems to 
me, must ultimately take. I have long thought 
that as it deals throughout with quantities, it must 
be a mathematical science in matter if not in 
language. I have endeavoured to arrive at accu- 
rate quantitatiA^e notions concerning Utility, Value, 
Labour, Capital, &c., and I have often been sur- 
prised to find how clearly some of the most difficult 
notions, especially that most puzzling of notions 
Value, admit of mathematical analysis and expres- 
sion. The Theory of Economy thus treated 
presents a close analogy to the science of Sta- 
tical Mechanics, and the Laws of Exchange are 
found to resemble the Laws of Equilibrium of a 
lever as determined by the principle of virtual 
velocities. . The nature of Wealth and Value is 
explained by the consideration of indefinitely small 
amounts of pleasure and pain, just as the Theory of 
Statics is made to rest upon the equality of inde- 
finitely small amounts of energy. But I believe 
that dynamical branches of the Science of Economy 

viii Preface. 

may remain to be developed, on the consideration 
of which I have not at all entered. 

Mathematical readers may perhaps think that I 
have explained some elementary notions, that of 
the Degree of Utility, for instance, with unnecessary 
prolixity. But it is to the neglect of Economists to 
obtain clear and accurate notions of quantity and 
degree of utility that I venture to attribute the 
present difficulties and imperfections of the science ; 
and I have purposely dwelt upon the point at full 
length. Other readers will perhaps think that the 
occasional introduction of mathematical symbols 
obscures instead of illustrating the subject. But I 
must request all readers to remember that, as 
Mathematicians and Political Economists have 
hitherto been two nearly distinct classes of persons, 
there is no slight difficulty in preparing a mathe- 
matical work on Economy with which both classes 
of readers may not have some grounds of com- 
plaint. 

It is very likely that I have fallen into errors of 
more or less importance, which I shall be glad to 
have pointed out ; and I may say that the cardinal 
difficulty of the whole theory is alluded to in the 
section of Chapter IV upon the ‘ Ratio of Exchange,’ 
beginning at p. 91 (p. 98 of this edition). So able a 
mathematician as my friend Professor Barker, of 

IX 

Preface. 

Owens College, has had the kindneiss to examine 
some of the proof sheets carefully ; but he is not; 
therefore, to be held responsible for the correctness 
of any part of the work. 

My enumeration of the previous attempts to 
apply mathematical language to Political Economy 
does not pretend to completeness even as regards 
English writers ; and I find that I forgot to mention 
a remarkable pamphlet ‘On Currency’ published 
anonymously in 1840 (London, Cliaiies Knight and 
Co.) in which a mathematical analysis of the opera- 
tions of the Money Market is attempted. The 
method of treatment is not unlike that adopted by 
Dr. Whewell, to whose Memoirs a reference is made ; 
but finite or occasionally infinitesimal differences 
are introduced. On the success of this anonymous 
theory I have not formed an opinion ; but the 
subject is one which must some day be solved by 
mathematical analysis. Gamier, in his treatise on 
Political Economy, mentions several continental 
mathematicians who have written on the subject of 
Political Economy; but I have not been able to 
discover even the titles of their Memoirs. 

PEEFACE 

TO 

THE SECOND EDITION. 

In preparing this second edition certain new 
sections have been added, the most important of 
which are those treating of the dimensions of 
economic quantities {p'p. 66-74, 90-1, 193-4,253-5). 
The subject, of course, is one which lies at the 
basis of all clear thought about economic science. 
It cannot be surprising that many debates end in 
logomachy, when it is still uncertain how many 
meanings the word value has, or wliat kind of a 
quantity utility itself is. Imagine the mental state 
of astronomers if they could not agree among them- 
selves whether Right Ascension was the name of a 
heavenly body, or a force or an angular magnitude. 
Yet this would not be worse than failing to ascer- 
tain clearly whether by value we mean a numerical 
ratio, or a mental state, or a mass of commodity, 
John Stuart Mill tells us explicitly that ‘The value 

^ ‘ Principles of Political Economy/ Book III, Cliapter YI, Sec- 
tion i. 1. This definition occurs at the beginning of a carefully 
prepared summary of the principles of the theory of value. 

Preface. 

XI 

of a thing means the quantity of some other thing, 
or of things in general, which it exchanges for.’ 
It might of course he explained that Mill did not 
intend what he said ; hut as the statement stands 
it makes value into a thing, and is just as phil- 
osophic as if one were to say, ‘ Right Ascension 
means the planet Mars, or planets in general.’ 

These sections upon the dimensions of economic 
quantities have caused me great perplexity, espec- 
ially as regards the relation between utility and 
time (pp. 69-74). The theory of capital and interest 
also involves some subtleties. I hope that my solu- 
tions of the questions raised will be found generally 
correct ; but where they do not settle a question, 
they may sometimes suggest one which other 
writers may answer. A correspondent, Captain 
Charles Christie, R.E., to whom I have shewn 
these sections after they were printed, objects 
reasonably enough that commodity should not 
have been represented by M, or Mass, but by some 
symbol, for instance Q, which would include 
quantity of space or time or force, in fact almost 
any kind of quantity. Services often involve time, 
or force exerted, or space passed over, as well 
as mass. In this objection I quite concur, and 
I must therefore request the reader either to in- 
terpret M with a wider meaning than is given to it 

xii Preface. 

in p. 69, or else mentally to substitute another 
symbol. 

In treating the dimensions of interest, I point out 
the curious fact that so profound a mathematician 
as the late Dean Peacock went quite astray upon 
the subject (pp. 271-4). Other new sections are 
those in which I introduce the idea of negative and 
approximately zero value, showing that negative 
value may be brought under the forms of the equa- 
tions of exchange without any important modifica- 
tion. Readers of Mr. Macleod’s works are of course 
familiar with the idea of negative value ; but it was 
desirable for me to show how important it really is, 
and hoW naturally it falls in with the principles of 
the theory. I may also draw attention to the 
section (pp. 110-115) in which I illustrate the 
mathematical character of the equations of ex- 
change by drawing an exact analogy between them 
and the equations applying to the equilibrium of 
the lever. 

Two or three correspondents, especially Herr 
Harald Westergaard of Copenhagen, have pointed 
out that a little manipulation of the symbols, in 
accordance with the simple rules of the differential 
calculus, would often give results which I have 
laboriously argued out. The whole question is one 
of maxima and minima, the mathematical condi- 

Preface. 

Xll^ 

tions of which are familiar to mathematicians. 
But, even if I were capable of presenting the subject 
in the concise symbolic style satisfactory to the 
taste of a practised mathematician, I should prefer 
in an essay of this kind to attain my results by a 
course of argument which is not only fundamen- 
tally true, but is clear and convincing to many 
readers who, like myself, are not skilful and pro- 
fessional mathematicians. In short, I do not write 
for mathematicians, nor as a mathematician, but as 
an economist wishing to convince other economists 
that their science can only be satisfactorily treated 
on an explicitly mathematical basis. When mathe- 
maticians recognise the subject as one with which 
they may usefully deal, I shall gladly resign it into 
their hands. I have expressed a feeling in more 
than one place that the whole theory might prob- 
ably have been put in a more general form by 
treating labour as negative utility, and thus bring- 
ing it under the ordinary equations of exchange. 
But the fact is there is endless occupation for an 
economist in developing and improving his science, 
and I have found it requisite to reissue this 
essay, as the bibliopoles say, ‘ with all faults.’ 
I have, however, carefully revised every page of 
the book, and have reason to hope that little 
or no real error remains in the doctrines stated. 

XIV Preface. 

The faults are in the form rather than the 
matter. 

Among minor alterations, I may mention the 
substitution for the name Political Economy of the 
single convenient term Economics. I cannot help 
thinking that it would be well to discard, as quickly 
as possible, the old troublesome double-worded 
name of our Science. Several authors have tried 
to introduce totally new names, such as Plutology, 
Chrematistics, Catallactics, &c. But why do we need 
anything better than Economics ? This term, besides 
being more familiar and closely related to the old 
term, is perfectly analogous in form to Mathematics, 
Ethics, .Esthetics, and the names of various other 
branches of knowledge, and it has moreover the 
authority of usage from the time of Aristotle. Mr. 
Macleod is, so far as I know, the re-introducer of 
the name in recent years, but it appears to have 
been adopted also by Mr. Alfred Marshall at Cam- 
bridge. It is thus to be hoped that Economics will 
become the recognised name of a science, which 
nearly a century ago was known to the French 
Economists as la science honomique. Though em- 
ploying the new name in the text, it was obviously 
undesirable to alter the title-page of the book. 

When publishing a new edition of this work, 
eight years after its first appearance, it seems 

XV 

Preface. 

natural that I should make some remarks upon 
the changes of opinion about economic science 
which have taken place in the interval. A re- 
markable discussion has been lately going on in 
the reviews and journals concerning the logical 
method of the science, touching even the question 
whether there exists any such science at all. Atten- 
tion was drawn to the matter by Mr. T. E, Cliffe 
Leslie’s remarkable article ‘On the Philosophical 
Method of Political Economy,’ in which he en- 
deavours to dissipate altogether the deductive 
science of Ricardo. Mr. W. T. Thornton’s writings 
have a somewhat similar tendency. The question 
has been further stirred up by the admirable 
criticism to which it was subjected in the masterly 
address of Professor J. K. Ingram, at the last 
meeting of the British Association. This Address 
has been reprinted in several publications® in 
England, and has been translated into the chief 
languages of Western Europe. It is evident, 
then, that a spirit of very active criticism is 

Hermathena, No. iv, 1876, pp. 1-32. Bepublished in Mr. 
Leslie’s collected ‘Essays in Political and Moral Philosophy,’ 
DubUn, 1879, pp. 216-242. 

® Journal of the London Statistical Society, December, 1878, 
vol. xli, pp. 602-629. Journal of the Statistical and Social In- 
quiry Society of Ireland, August, 1878, vol. vii. Appendix. Also 
as a separate publication, Longmans, London 1878. 

Preface. 

spreading, which can hardly fail to overcome in 
the end the prestige of the false old doctrines. 
But what is to be put in place of them? At the 
best it must be allowed that the fall of the old 
orthodox creed will leave a chaos of diverse 
opinions. Many would be glad if the supposed 
science collapsed altogether, and became a matter 
of history, like astrology, alchemy, and the occult 
sciences generally. Mr. Cliffe Leslie would not go 
quite so far as this, but would reconstruct the 
science in a purely inductive or empirical manner. 
Either it would then be a congeries of miscel- 
laneous disconnected facts, or else it must fall in 
as one branch of Mr, Spencer’s Sociology. In any 
case, I hold that there must arise a science of the 
development of economic forms and relations. 

But as regards the fate of the deductive method, 
I disagree altogether with my friend Mr. Leslie; 
he is in favour of simple deletion; I am for thorough 
reform and reconstruction. As I have previously 
explained the present chaotic state of Economics 
arises from the confusing together of several 
branches of knowledge. Subdivision is the remedy. 
We must distinguish the empirical element from 

^ ‘The Future of Political Economy/ Fortnightly Review, 
November 1876, vol. viii, N. S. pp. 617-31. Translated in the 
Journal des Ecoiiomistes, March 1877, 3“^® S4rie, vol. xlv, p. 325. 

Preface. xvii 

the abstract theory, from the applied theory, and 
from the more detailed art of finance and ad- 
ministration. Thus will arise various sciences 
such as commercial statistics, the mathematical 
theory of economics, systematic and descriptive 
economics, economic sociology, and fiscal science. 
There may even be a kind of cross subdivision ol 
the sciences; that is to say, there will be division 
into branches as regards the subject, and division 
according to the manner of treating the branch of 
the subject. The manner may be theoretical, em- 
pirical, historical, or practical ; the subject may be 
capital and labour, currency, banking, taxation, 
land tenure, &c. — not to speak of the more fun- 
damental division of the science as it treats of 
consumption, production, exchange, and distri- 
bution of wealth. In fact, the whole subject is so 
extensive, intricate, and diverse, that it is absurd 
to suppose it can be treated in any single book or 
in any single manner. It is no more one science 
than statics, dynamics, the theory of heat, optics, 
magneto-electricity, telegraphy, navigation, and 
photographic chemistry are one science. But as 
all the physical sciences have their basis more or 
less obviously in the general principles of me- 
chanics, so all branches and divisions of economic 
science must be pervaded by . certain general 

b 

xviii Preface. 

principles. It is to the investigation of such 
principles — to the tracing out of the mechanics of 
self-interest and utility, that this essay has been 
devoted. The establishment of such a theory is a 
necessary preliminary to any definitive drafting of 
the superstructure of the aggregate science. 

Turning now to the theory itself, the question is 
not so much whether the theory given in this 
volume is true, but whether there is really any 
novelty. in it. The exclusive importance attributed 
in England to the Ricardian School of Economists, 
has prevented almost all English readers from 
learning the existence of a series of French, as 
well as a few English, German, or Italian econo- 
mists, who had from time to time treated the 
science in a more or less strictly mathematical 
manner. In the first edition (pp. 14-18), I gave 
a brief account of such writings of the kind as 
I was then acquainted with ; it is from the works 
there mentioned, if from any, that I derived the 
idea of investigating Economics mathematically. 
To Lardner’s ‘ Railway Economy ’ I was probably 
most indebted, having been well acquainted with 
that work since the year 1857; Lardner’s book 
has always struck me as containing a very able 
investigation, the scientific value of which has not 
been sufficiently estimated; and in chapter xiii 

preface. 

XIX 

(pp. 286-296, &c.) we find the Laws of Supply 
and Demand treated mathematically and illus- 
trated graphically. 

In the preface to the first edition (p. xi) e, I re- 
marked that in his treatise on Political Economy, 
M. Joseph Gamier mentioned several continental 
mathematicians who had written on the subject 
of Economics, and I added that I had not been able 
to discover even the titles of their memoirs. This, 
however, must have been the result of careless 
reading or faulty memory, for it will be found 
that Gamier himself t mentions the titles of several 
books and memoirs. The fact is that, writing as 
I did then at a distance from any large library, 
I made no attempt to acquaint myself with the 
literature of the subject, little thinking that it was 
so copious and in some cases so excellent as is 
now found to be the case. With the progress of 
years, however, my knowledge of the literature of 
political economy has been much widened, and the 
hints of friends and correspondents have made me 
aware of the existence of many remarkable works 
which more or less anticipate the views stated in 
this book. While preparing this new edition, it 

® See p. ix of this edition. 

t ‘Trait6 d’Economie Politique . . . / 5®^® Edition, Paris, 1863, 
pp. 700-2. 

b 2 

XX 

Preface. 

occurred to me to attempt the discovery of all 
existing writings of the kind. With this view I drew 
up a chronological list of all the mathematico-econo- 
mic works known to me, already about seventy in 
number, which list, by the kindness of the editor, 
Mr. Giffen, was printed in the Journal of the London 
Statistical Society for June 1878 (vol. xli, pp. 398- 
401), separate copies being forwarded to the leading 
economists, with a request for additions and cor- 
rections. My friend M. L^on Walras, Rector of the 
Academy of Lausanne, after himself making con- 
siderable additions to the list, communicated it to 
the Journal des Economistes (December 1878), 
to the editor of which we are much indebted 
for its publication. Copies of the list were also 
sent to German and Italian economical journals. 
For the completion of the bibliographical list I 
am under obligations to Professor W. B. Hodgson, 
Professor Adamson, Mr. W. H. Brewer, M.A., H. M. 
Inspector of Schools, the Baron d’Aulnis de Bou- 
rouill. Professor of Political Economy at Utrecht, 
M. N. G. Pierson of Amsterdam, M. Vissering of 
Leiden, Professor Luigi Cossa of Pavia, and others. 

All reasonable exertions have thus been made 
to render complete and exhaustive the list of mathe- 
matico-economic works and papers, which is now 
in the first annendix to this book (pp. 

XXI 

Preface. 

301-310). It is hardly likely that many additions 
can be made to the earlier parts of the list, but 
I shall be much obliged to any readers who can 
suggest corrections or additions. I shall also be 
glad to be informed of any new publications 
suitable for insertion in the list. On the other 
hand it is possible that some of the books men- 
tioned in the list ought not to be there. I have 
not been able in all cases to examine the publi- 
cations myself, so that some works inserted at the 
suggestion* of correspondents may have been named 
under misconception of the precise purpose of the 
list. Economic works, for instance, containing 
numerical illustrations and statistical facts nu- 
merically expressed, however abundantly, have 
not been intentionally included, unless there was 
also mathematical method in the reasoning. With- 
out this condition the whole literature of numerical 
commercial statistics would have been imported 
into my list. In other cases only a small portion 
of a book named can be called mathematico- 
economic ; but this fact is generally noted by the 
quotation of the chapters or pages in question. 
The tendency, however, has been to include rather 
than to exclude, so that the reader might have 
before him the whole field of literature requiring 
investigation. 

xxii Preface. 

To avoid misapprehension it may be well to 
explain that the ground for inserting any publica- 
tion, or part of a publication in this list, is its 
containing an explicit recognition of the mathe- 
matical, character of economics, or the advantage 
to he attained hy its symbolical treatment. I con- 
tend that all economic writers must be mathe- 
matical so far as they are scientific at all, because 
they treat of economic quantities, and the relations 
of such quantities, and all quantities and relations 
of quantities come within the scope of the mathe- 
matics. Even those who have most strongly and 
clearly protested against the recognition of their 
own method, continually betray in their language 
the quantitative character of their reasonings. 
What, for instance, can be more clearly mathe- 
matical in matter than the following quotation from 
Caimes’ chief works: — ‘We can have no difficulty 
in seeing how cost in its principal elements is to be 
computed. In the case of labour, the cost of 
producing a given commodity will be represented 
by the number of average labourers employed in 
its production — regard at the same time being 
had to the severity of the work and the degree 
of risk it involves — ^multiplied by the duration of 

^ ‘ Some Leading Principles of Political Economy Newly Ex- 
pounded/ pt. 1, cbap» iii, p. 97. 

Preface. xxiii 

their labours. In that of abstinence, the principle 
is analogous : the sacrifice will be measured by the 
quantity of wealth abstained from, taken in con- 
nection with the risk incurred, and multiplied by 
the duration of the abstinence.’ Here we deal 
with computation, multiplication, degree of severity, 
degree of risk, quantity of wealth, duration, &c., 
all essentially mathematical things, ideas, or ope- 
rations. Although my esteemed friend and pre- 
decessor has in his preliminary chapter expressly 
abjured my doctrines, he has unconsciously adopted 
the mathematical method in all but appearance. 

We might easily go further back, and discover 
that even the father of the science, as he is often 
considered, is thoroughly mathematical. In the 
fifth chapter of the First Book of the ‘ Wealth of 
Nations,’ for instance, we find Adam Smith con- 
tinually arguing about ‘ quantities of labour,’ 
‘ measures of value,’ ‘ measures of hardship,’ ‘ pro- 
portion,’ ‘ equality,’ &c. ; the whole of the ideas in 
fact are mathematical. The same might be said of 
almost any other passages from the scientific parts 
of the treatise, as distinguished from the historical 
parts. In the first chapter of the Second Book 
(29th paragraph), we read — ‘ The produce of land, 
mines, and fisheries, when their natural fertility is 
equal, is in proportion to the extent and proper 

XXIV 

Preface. 

application of the capitals employed abont them. 
When the capitals are equal, and equally well 
applied, it is in proportion to their natural fer- 
tility.’ Now every use of the word equal or equality 
implies the existence of a mathematical equation; 
an equation is simply an equality; and every use 
of the word proportion implies a ratio expressible 
in the form of an equation. 

I hold, then, that to argue mathematically, 
whether correctly or incorrectly, constitutes no 
real ditferentia as regards writers on the theory 
of economics. But it is one thing to argue and 
another thing to understand and to recognise 
explicitly the method of the argument. As there 
are so many who talk prose without knowing it, 
or, again, who syllogise without having the least 
idea what a syllogism is, so economists have long 
been mathematicians without being aware of the 
fact. The unfortunate result is that they have 
generally been bad mathematicians, and their 
works must fall. Hence the explicit recognition 
of the mathematical character of the science was 
an almost necessary condition of any real improve- 
ment of the theory. It does not follow, of course, 
that to be explicitly mathematical is to ensure 
the attainment of truth, and in such writings as 
those of Canard and Whewell, we find plenty of 

Preface. 

XXV 

symbols and equations with no result of value, 
owing to the fact that they simply translated into 
symbols the doctrines obtained, and erroneously 
obtained, without their use. Such writers mis- 
understood and inverted altogether the function 
of mathematical symbols, which is to guide our 
thoughts in the slippery and complicated processes 
of reasoning. Ordinary language can usually ex- 
press the first axioms of a science, and often also 
the matured results ; but only in the most lame, 
obscure, and tedious way can it lead us through 
the mazes of inference. 

The bibliographical list, of which I am speaking, 
is no doubt a very heterogeneous one, and may 
readily be decomposed into several distinct classes 
of economical works. In a first class may be placed 
the writings of those economists who have not at 
all attempted mathematical treatment in an express 
or systematic manner, but who have only incidentally 
acknowledged its value by introducing symbolic or 
graphical statements. Among such writers may be 
mentioned especially Rau (1868), Hagen (1844), 
J. S. Mill (1848), and Courcelle-Seneuil (1867), 
Many readers may be surprised to hear that John 
Stuart Mill has used mathematical symbols; but, 
on turning to Book III, chapters xvii and xviii, of 
the ‘ Principles of Political Economy,’ those difficult 

xxvi Preface. 

and tedious chapters, in which Mill leads the 
reader through the Theory of International Trade 
and International Values, by means of yards of 
linen and cloth, the reader will find that Mill at last 
yields, and expresses himself concisely and clearly 
by means of equations between m, n, p, and q. 
His mathematics are very crude; still there is 
some approach to a correct mathematical treat- 
ment, and the result is that these chapters, 
however tedious and difficult, will probably be 
found the truest and most enduring parts of the 
whole treatise. 

A second class of economists contains those who 
have abundantly employed mathematical appa- 
ratus, but, misunderstanding its true use, or being 
otherwise diverted from a true theory, have built 
upon the sand. Misfortunes of this kind are not 
confined to the science of economics, and in the 
most exact branches of physical science, such as 
mechanics, molecular physics, astronomy, &c., it 
would be possible to adduce almost innumerable 
mathematical treatises, which must be pronounced 
nonsense. In the same category must be placed 
the mathematical writings of such economists as 
Canard (1801), Whewell (1829, 1831, and 1850), 

^ Book III, chapter xviii, section 7 , 

XXVll 

Preface. 

Esmenard du Mazet (1849 and 1851), and perhaps 
Du Mesnil-Marigny (1860), 

The third class forms an antithesis with the 
second, for it contains those authors who without 
any parade of mathematical language or method, 
have nevertheless carefully attempted to reach 
precision in their treatment of quantitative ideas, 
and have thus been led to a more or less complete 
comprehension of the true theory of utility and 
wealth. Among such writers Francis Hutcheson, 
the Irish founder of the great Scotch School, and 
the predecessor of Adam Smith at Glasgow, pro- 
bably stands first. His employment of mathematical 
symbols! seems rather crude and premature, but 
the precision of his ideas about the estimation of 
quantities of good and evil is beyond praise. He 
thoroughly anticipates the foundations of Ben- 
tham’s moral system, showing that the Moment 
of Good or Evil, is in a compound proportion of 
the Duration and Intenseness, affected also by the 
Hazard or uncertainty of our existence As to 
Bentham’s ideas, they are adopted as the starting 
point of the theory given in this work, and are 
quoted at the beginning of chapter ii, (pp. 30-31.) 
Bentham has repeated his statement as to the mode 

i 1720. Hutcheson. ‘An Inquiry,’ 1729, &c., pp. 186-198. 

k 1728. Ib. ‘An Essay,’ &c., pp. 34-43, and elsewhere. 

xxviii Praface. 

of measuring happiness in several different works 
and pamphlets, as for instance in that remarkable 
one called ‘ A Table of the Springs of Action,' 
(London, 1817, p. 3;) and also in the ‘Codification 
Proposal, addressed by Jeremy Bentham to all 
nations professing Liberal opinions’ (London, 1822^ 
pp. 7-11.) He here speaks explicitly of the appli- 
cation of arithmetic to questions of iitilit 3 ^ meaning 
no doubt the application of matlieniatical methods. 
He even describes (p. 11) the four circumstances 
governing the value of a pleasure or pain as the 
dimensions of its value, though he is incorrect in 
treating propinquity and certainty as dimensions. 

It is worthy of notice that Destutt de Tracy, one 
of the most philosophic of all economists, has in a 
few words recognised the true method of treatment, 
though he has not followed up his own idea. 
Referring to the circumstances which, in his 
opinion, render all economic and moral calculations 
very delicate, he says " ‘ On ne pent gufere employer 
dans ces mati^res que des considerations tirdes de 
la theorie des limites.’ So well known an English 

1 ‘Elemens dldeologie/ iv, et v® Parties. ‘Traits de la Vo- 
lenti et de Ses Effets,’ Paris, 1815, 8vo, p. 499. Edition of 1826, 
p. 335. American Edition, ‘A treatise on Political Economy, 
translated from the unpublished French original,’ Georgetown, 
D.c. 1817, p. xiii. 

Preface. xxix 

economist as Malthus has also shown in a few 
lines his complete appreciation of the mathematical 
nature of economic questions. In one of his ex- 
cellent pamphlets he remarks ‘Many of the 
questions, both in morals and politics, seem to he 
of the nature of the problems de maximis and 
minimis in Fluxions; in which there is always a 
point where a certain effect is the greatest, while 
on cither side of this poink it gradually diminishes.’ 
But I have not thought it desirable to swell the 
bibliographical list by including all the works in 
Avhich there are to be found brief or casual remarks 
of the kind. 

I may here remark that all the writings of 
Mr. Henry Dunning Macleod exhibit a strong 
tendency to mathematical treatment. Some of his 
works or papers in wdiich this mathematical spirit 
is most strongly manifested have been placed in 
the list. It is not my business to criticise his 
ingenious views, or to determine how far he really 
has created a mathematical system. While I cer- 
tainly differ from him on many important points, 
I am bound to acknowledge the assistance which 
I derive from the use of several of his works. 

“a < Observations on the Effects of the Corn Laws, and of a rise 
or fall in the price of corn on the Agriculture and General Wealth 
of the Country,’ London, 1814, p. 30; 3rd Edition, 1815, p. 32. 

XXX 

Preface. 

In the fourth and most important class of 
mathematico-economic writers must he placed 
those who have consciously and avowedly at- 
tempted to frame a mathematical theory of the 
subject, and have, if my judgment is correct, 
succeeded in reaching a true view of the Science. 
In this class certain distinguished French philo- 
sophers take precedence and priority. One might 
perhaps go back with - propriety to Condillac’s 
work, ‘ Le Commerce et le Gouvernement,’ first pub- 
lished in the year 1776, the same year in which 
the ‘Wealth of Nations’ appeared. In the first 
few chapters of this charming philosophic work 
we meet perhaps the earliest distinct statement 
of the true connection between value and utility. 
The book, however, is not included in the list 
because there is no explicit attempt at mathe- 
matical treatment. It is the French engineer 
Dupuit who must probably be credited with the 
earliest perfect comprehension of the theory of 
utility. In attempting to frame a precise measure 
of the utility of public works, he observed that the 
utility of a commodity not only varies immensely 
rom one individual to another, but that it is also 
videly different for the same person according to 
;ircumstances. He says ‘ nous verrions que futility 
lu morceau de pain pent croltre pour le m6me 

Preface. 

XXXI 

individu depuis zdro jusqu’au chiffre de sa fortune 
entifere’ (1849 Dupuit, ‘De I’influence des Plages/ 
etc., p. 185). He establishes, in fact, a theory of 
the gradation of utility, beautifully and perfectly 
expounded by means of geometrical diagrams, and 
this theory is undoubtedly coincident in essence 
with that contained in this book. He does not, 
however, follow his ideas out in an algebraic form, 
Dupuit’s theory was the subject of some contro- 
versy in the pages of the ‘ Annales des Fonts et 
Chaussdes,’ but did not receive much attention 
elsewhere, and I am not aware that any English 
economist ever knew anything about these re- 
markable memoirs. 

The earlier treatise of Cournot, his admirable 
‘Recherches sur les Principos Mathdmatiques de 
la Thdorie des Richesses’ (Paris, 1838), resembles 
Dupuit’s memoirs in being, until within the last 
few years, quite unknown to English economists. 
In other respects Cournot’s method is contrasted 
to Dupuit’s. Cournot did not frame any ultimate 
theory of the ground and nature of utility and value, 
but, taking the palpable facts known concerning 
the relations of price, production and consumption 
of commodities, he investigated these relations 
analytically and diagraphically with a power and 
felicity which leaves little to be desired. This 

work must occupy a remarkable position in the 
history of the subject. It is strange that it should 
have remained for me among Englishmen to dis- 
cover its value. Some years since (1875) Mr. Tod- 
hunter wrote to me as follows : — ‘ I have sometimes 
wondered whether there is anything of importance 
in a book published many years since by M. A. A. 
Cournot, entitled “ Recherches sur les Principes 
Mathematiques de la Theorie des Richesses.” 
I never saw it, and when I have mentioned the 
title, I never found any person who had read the 
book. Yet Cournot was eminent for mathematics 
and metaphysics, and so there may be some merit 
in this book.’ I procured a copy of the work as far 
hack as 1872, but have only recently studied it 
with sufficient care to form any definite opinion 
upon its value. Even now I have by no means 
mastered all parts of it, my mathematical power 
being insufficient to enable me to follow Cournot 
in all parts of his analysis. My impression is that 
the first chapter of the work is not remarkable; 
that the second chapter contains an important 
anticipation of discussions concerning the proper 
method of treating prices, including an anticipation 
(p.21)of mylogarithmic method ofascertaining varia- 
tions in the value of gold ; that the third chapter, 
treating of the conditions of the foreign exchanges. 

XXXlll 

Preface. 

is highly ingenious if not particularly useful ; but 
that by far the most important part of the book 
commences with the fourth chapter upon the ‘ Loi 
du ddbit/ The remainder of the book, in fact, con- 
tains a wonderful analysis of the laws of supply and 
demand, and of the relations of prices, production, 
consumption, expenses and profits. Cournot starts 
from the assumption that the ddbit or demand for a 
commodity is a function of the price, or D = F (p) ; 
and then, after laying down empirically a few 
conditions of this function, he proceeds to work 
out with surprising power the consequences which 
follow from those conditions. Even apart from its 
economic importance this investigation, so far as 
I can venture to judge it, presents a beautiful 
example of mathematical reasoning, in which 
knowledge is apparently evolved out of ignorance. 
In reality the method consists in assuming certain 
simple conditions of the functions as conformable 
to experience, and then disclosing by symbolic 
inference the implicit results of these conditions. 
But I am quite convinced that the investigation is 
of high economic importance, and that, when the 
parts of political economy to which the theory 
relates come to be adequately treated, as they 
never have yet been, the treatment must be based 
upon the analysis of Cournot, or at least must 

xxxiv Preface. 

follow his general method. It should be added 
that his investigation has little relation to the 
contents of this work, because Cournot does not 
recede to any theory of utility, hut commences 
with the phenomenal laws of supply and demand. 

Discouraged apparently by the small amount of 
attention paid to his mathematical treatise, Cournot 
in a later year (1863) produced a more popular 
non-symbolic work on Economics; but this later 
work does not compare favourably in interest and 
importance with his first treatise. 

English economists can hardly be blamed for 
their ignorance of Cournot’s economic works when 
we find French writers equally bad. Thus the 
authors of Guillaumin’s excellent Dictionnaire de 
I’Economie Politique, which is on the whole the 
best work of reference in the literature of the 
science, ignore Cournot and his works altogether, 
and so likewise does Sandelin in his copious Reper- 
toire General d’Economie Politique. M. Joseph 
Gamier in his otherwise admirable text-book » 
mixes up Cournot with far inferior mathema- 
ticians, saying — ‘ Dans ces derniers temps M. 
Esmenard du Mazet, et M. du Mesnil-Marigny ont 
aussi fait abus, ce nous semble, des formules algd- 
briques ; les Recherches sur les Principes Mathema- 

« ‘Traits d’Economie Politique/ Cinqui^me Edition, p. 701 . 

Preface. 

XXXV 

tiques des Richesses de M. Cournot, ne nous out 
fourni aucun moyen d’dlucidation.’ MacCulloch of 
course knows nothing of Cournot, Mr. H. D. Macleod 
has the merit at least of mentioning Cournot’s 
work, but he misspells the name of the author, and 
gives only the title of the book, which he had pro- 
bably never seen. 

We now come to a truly remarkable discovery in 
the history of tliis branch of literature. Some years 
since my friend Professor Adamson had noticed 
in one of Kautz’ woidcs on Political Economy® 
a brief reference to a book said to contain a 
theory of pleasure and pain, written by a German 
author named Hermann Heinrich Gossen. Although 
he had advertised for it, Professor Adamson was un- 
able to obtain a sight of this book until August 
1878, when he fortunately discovered it in a German 
bookseller’s catalogue, and succeeded in purchasing 
it. The book was published at Brunswick in 1864 ; 
it consists of 278 well-filled pages, and is entitled, 

‘ Entwickelung der Gesetze des menschlichen Ver- 
kehrs, und der daraus fliessenden Regeln fiir mens- 
chliches Handeln,’ which may be translated — ‘ De- 
velopment of the laws of human Commerce and of 
the consequent Rules of Human Action.’ I will 

» ‘ Theorie und Geschichte der National-Oekonomik,’ 1858, vol. i. 

p. 9. 

C 3 

xxxvi Preface. 

describe the contents of this remarkable volume as 
they are reported to me by Professor Adamson. 

Gossen evidently held the highest possible opinion 
of the importance of his own theory, for he com- 
mences by claiming honours in economic science 
equal to those of Copernicus in astronomy. He 
then at once insists that mathematical treatment, 
being the only sound one, must be applied through- 
out ; but, out of consideration for the reader, the 
higher analysis will be explicitly introduced only 
when it is requisite to determine maxima and 
minima. The treatise then opens with the consi- 
deration of Economics as the theory of pleasure 
and pain, that is as the theory of the procedure 
by which the individual and the aggregate of in- 
dividuals constituting society, may realise the 
maximum of pleasure with the minimum of painful 
effort. The natural law of pleasure is then clearly 
stated, somewhat as follows : — Increase of the same 
hind of consumption yields pleasure continuously dimi- 
nishing up to the point of satiety. This law he 
illustrates geometrically, and then proceeds to 
investigate the conditions under which the total 
pleasure from one or more objects may be raised 
to a maximum. 

The term Werth is next introduced, which may. 
Professor Adamson thinks, be rendered with strict 

Preface. xxxvii 

accuracy, as utility, and Gossen points out that the 
quantity of utility, material or immaterial, is mea- 
sured by the quantity of pleasure which it affords. 
He classifies useful objects as, (1) those which 
possess pleasure-giving powers in themselves ; 
(2) those which only possess such powers when 
in combination with other objects ; (3) those which 
only serve as means towards the production of 
pleasure-giving objects. He is careful to point out 
that there is no such thing as absolute utility, 
utility being purely a relation between a thing' and 
a person. He next proceeds to give the derivative 
lavrs of utility somewhat in the following manner : 
— That separate portions of the same pleasure- 
giving object have very different degrees of utility, 
and that in general for each person only a limited 
number of such portions has utility ; any addition 
beyond this limit is useless, but the point of use- 
lessness is only reached after the utility has gone 
through all the stages or degrees of intensity. 
Hence he draws the practical conclusion that each 
person should so distribute his resources as to 
render the final increments of each pleasure-giving j 
commodity of equal utility for him. 

In the next place Gossen deals with labour, 
starting from the proposition that the utility of 
any product must be estimated after deduction 

XXXVUl 

Preface. 

of the pains of labour required to produce it. He 
describes the variation of the pain of labour much 
as I have done, exhibiting it graphically, and in- 
ferring that we must carry on labour to the point 
at which the utility of the product equals the pain 
of production. In treating the theory of exchange 
he shows how barter gives rise to an immense 
increase of utility, and he infers that exchange will 
proceed up to the point at which the utilities of the 
portions next to be given and received are equal. 
A‘ complicated geometrical representation of the 
theory of exchange is given. The theory of rent 
is investigated in a most general manner, and the 
work concludes with somewhat vague social specu- 
lations, which, in Professor Adamson’s opinion, are 
of inferior merit compared with the earlier portions 
of the treatise. 

From this statement it is quite apparent that 
Gossen has completely anticipated me as regards 
the general principles and method of the theory 
of Economics. So far as I can gather, his treat- 
ment of the fundamental theory is even more 
general and thorough than what I was able to 
scheme out. In discussing the book, I lie under 
the serious difficulty of not being able to read it ; 
but, judging from what Professor Adamson has 
written or read to me, and from an examination 

XXXIX 

Preface. 

of the diagrams and symbolic parts of the work, 
I should infer that Gossen has been unfortunate 
in the development of his theory. Instead of 
dealing, as Cournot and myself have done, with 
undetermined functions, and introducing the least 
possible amount of assumption, Gossen assumed, 
for the sake of simplicity, that economic functions 
follow a linear law, so that his curves of utility are 
generally taken as straight lines. This assumption 
enables him to Avork out a great quantity of precise 
formula's and tabular results, which fill many pages 
of the book. But, inasmuch as the functions of 
economic science are seldom or never really linear, 
and usually diverge very far from the straight line, 
I think that the symbolic and geometric illustra- 
tions and developments introduced by Gossen must 
for the most part be put down among the many 
products of misplaced ingenuity. I may add, in my 
own behalf, that he does not seem really to reach the 
equations of exchange as established in this book ; 
that the theory of capital and interest is wanting ; 
and that there is a total absence of any resemblance 
between the working out of the matter, except such 
as arises from a common basis of truth. 

The coincidence, however, between the essential 
ideas of Gossen’s system and my own is so striking, 
that I desire to state distinctly, in the first place, 

xl Preface. 

that I never saw nor so much as heard any hint 
of the existence of Gossen’s book before August 
1878, and to explain, in the second place, how 
it was that I did not do so. My unfortunate want 
of linguistic power has prevented me, in spite of 
many attempts, from ever becoming familiar enough 
with German to read a German book, I once 
managed to spell out with assistance part of the 
logical lecture notes of Kant ; but that is my sole 
achievement in German literature. Now this work 
of Gossen has remained unknown even to most 
of the great readers of Germany. Professor Adam- 
son remarks that the work seems to have attracted 
no attention in Germany. The eminent and learned 
economist of Amsterdam, Professor N. G. Pierson, 
writes to me, ‘Gossen’s book is totally unknown 
to me. Roscher does not mention it in his very 
laborious History of Political Economy in Germany. 
I never saw it quoted ; but I will try to get it. It 
is very curious that such a remarkable work has 
remained totally unknown even to a man like 
Professor Roscher, who has read everything.’ Mr. 
Cliflfe Leslie, also, who has made the German 
Economists his special study, informs me that he 
was quite unaware of the existence of the bookP. 

p A copy of Gossen^s book will be found in the Library of the 
British Museum (Press mark 8408, cc). It was not acquired by 

Preface. xli 

Under such circumstances it would have been far 
more probable that I should discover the theory 
of pleasure and pain, than that I should discover 
Gossen’s book, and I have carefully pointed out, both 
in the first edition and in this, certain passages of 
Bentham, Senior, Jennings, and other authors from 
which my system was, more or less, consciously de- 
veloped. I cannot claim to be totally indifferent to 
the rights of priority ; and from the year 1862, when 
my theory was first published in brief outline, I have 
often pleased myself with the thought that it was 
at once a novel and an important theory. Fi-om 
what I have now stated in this preface it is evident 
that novelty can no longer be attributed to the 
leading features of the theory. Much is clearly 
due to Dupuit, and of the rest a great share must 
be assigned to Gossen. Regret may easily be 
swallowed up in satisfaction if I succeed eventually 
in making that understood and valued which has 
been so sadly neglected. 

Almost nothing is known to me concerning 
Gossen ; it is uncertain whether he is living or not. 
On the title-page he describes himself as Kdniglich 
preussischem Regierungs- Assessor ausser Dienst, 
which may be translated ‘ Royal Prussian Govern- 

that institution until May 24, 1865, as shown by the date stamped 
upon the copy. 

xlii Preface. 

ment Assessor, retired ; ’ but the tone of his re- 
marks here and there seems to indicate that he 
was a disappointed if not an injured man. The 
reception of his one work can have lent no relief 
to these feelings ; rather it must much have deep- 
ened them. The book seems to have contained 
his one cherished theory; for I can find under 
the name of Gossen no trace of any other pub- 
lication or scientific memoir whatever. The history 
of these forgotten works is, indeed, a strange and 
discouraging one; but the day must come when 
the eyes of those who cannot see will be opened. 
Then will due honour be given to all who like 
Cournot and Gossen have laboured in a thankless 
field of human knowledge, and have met with 
the neglect or ridicule they might well have 
expected. Not indeed that such men do really 
work for the sake of honour; they bring forth 
a theory as the tree brings forth its fruit. 

It remains for me to refer to the mathematico- 
economic writings of M. Ldon Walras, the Rector 
of the Academy of Lausanne. It is curious that 
Lausanne, already distinguished by the early work of 
Isnard (1781), should recently have furnished such 
important additions to the science as the Memoirs 
of Walras. For important they are, not only 
because they complete and prove that which was 

before published elsewhere in the works descrihed 
above, but because they contain a third or fourth 
independent discovery of the principles of the 
theory. If we are to trace out ‘the filiation of 
ideas ’ by which M. Walras was led to his theory, 
we should naturally look back to the work of his 
father, Auguste Walras, published at Paris in 1831, 
and entitled ‘ De la Nature de la Richesse, et de 
Torigiue de la Valeur.’ In this work we find, it is 
true, no distinct recognition of the mathematical 
method, but the analysis of value is often acute and 
philosophic. The principal point of the work more- 
over is true, that value depends upon rarety — ‘ La 
valeur,’ says Auguste Walras, ‘ derive de la rarete.' 
Now it is precisely upon this idea of the degree of 
rarety of commodities that Leon Walras bases his 
system. The fact that some four or more indepen- 
dent writers such as Dupuit, Gossen, Walras, and 
myself, should in such different ways have reached 
substantially the same views of the fundamental 
ideas of economic science, cannot but lend great 
probability, not to say approximate certainty, to 
those views. I am glad to hear that M. Walras 
intends to bring out a new edition of his Mathe- 
matico-Economic Memoirs, to which the attention 
of my readers is invited. The titles of his publi- 
cations will be found in the Appendix 1. 

xliv Preface. 

The works of Von Thiinen and of several other 
German economists contain mathematical investi- 
gations of much interest and importance. A con- 
siderable number of such works will be found noted 
in the list, which, however, is especially defective 
as regards German literature. I regret that I am 
not able to treat this branch of the subject in an 
adequate manner. 

My bibliographical list shows that in recent 
years, that is to say since the year 1873, there has 
been a great increase in the number of mathe- 
matico-economic writings. The names of Fontan- 
eau, Walras, Avigdor, Lefevre, Petersen, Boccardo, 
recur time after time. In such periodicals as the 
Journal des Actuaires Franqais, or the National- 
Oekonomisk Tidsskrift — a journal so creditable to 
the energy and talent of the Danish Economic 
School — the mathematical theory of Economics is 
treated as one of established interest and truth, with 
which readers would naturally be acqiiainted. In 
England we have absolutely no periodical in which 
such discussions could be conducted. The reader 
will not fail to remark that it is into the hands 
of French, Italian, Danish, or Dutch writers that 
this most important subject is' rapidly passing. 
They will develop that science which only excites 
ridicule and incredulity among the followers of 

xlv 

Preface. 

Mill and Ricardo. There are just a few English 
mathematicians, such as Fleeming Jenkin, George 
Darwin, Alfred Marshall, or H. D. Macleod, and one 
or -two Americans like Professor Simon Newcomb, 
who venture to write upon the obnoxious subject 
of mathematico-economic science. I ought to add, 
however, that at Cambridge (England) the mathe- 
matical treatment of Economics is becoming gra- 
dually recognised owing to the former influence of 
Mr. Alfred Marshall, now the principal of University 
College, Bristol, whose ingenious mathematico- 
economic problems, expounded more geometrico, 
have just been privately printed at Cambridge. 

If we overlook Hutcheson, who did not expressly 
write on Economics, the earliest mathematico- 
economic author seems to be the Italian Ceva, 
whose works have just been brought to notice in 
the Giornale degli Economisti (see 1878, Nicolini). 
Ceva wrote in the early part of the 18th century, 
but I have as yet no further information about 
him. The next author in the list is the celebrated 
Beccaria, who printed a very small, but distinctly 
mathematical, tract on Taxation as early as 1765. 
Italians were thus first in the field. The earliest 
English work of the kind yet discovered is an 
anonymous ‘Essay on the Theory of Money,’ pub- 
lished in London in 1771, five years before the era 

xlvi Preface. 

of the ‘ Wealth of Nations.’ Though crude and 
absurd in some parts, it is not devoid of interest 
and ability, and contains a distinct and partially 
valid attempt to establish a mathematical theory 
of currency. This remarkable Essay is, so far as I 
know, wholly forgotten and almost lost in England. 
Neither MacCulloch nor any other English econo- 
mist known to me, mentions the work. I discovered 
its existence a few months ago by accidentally 
finding a copy on a bookseller’s stall. But it 
shames an Englishman to learn that English works 
thus unknown in their own country are known 
abroad, and I owe to Professor Luigi Cossa, of the 
University of Pavia, the information that the Essay 
was written by Major-General Henry Lloyd, an 
author of some merit in other branches of litera- 
ture. Signor Cossa’s excellent ‘ Guido alia Studio 
di Economia Politica,’ a concise but judiciously 
written text-book, is well qualified to open our 
eyes as to the insular narrowness of our economic 
learning. It is a book of a kind much needed 
by our students of Economics, and I wish that it 
could be published in an English dress. 

From this bibliographical survey emerges the 
wholly unexpected result, that the mathematical 
treatment of Economics is coeval with the science 
itself. The notion that there is any novelty or 

Preface.. 

xlvii 

originality in the application of mathematical 
methods or symbols must be dismissed altogether. 
While there have been political economists there 
has always been a certain number who with vari- 
ous success have struck into the unpopular but 
right path. The unfortunate and discouraging 
aspect of the matter is the complete oblivion into 
which this part of the literature of Economics has 
always fallen, oblivion so complete that each 
mathematico -economic writer has been obliged to 
begin almost de novo. It is with the purpose of 
preventing for the future as far as I can such 
ignorance of previous exertions, that I have spent 
so much pains upon this list of books. 

I should add that in arranging the list I have 
followed, very imperfectly, the excellent example 
set by Professor Mansfield Merriman, of the Sheffield 
Scientific School of Yale College, in his ‘List of 
Writings relating to the Method of Least Squares <i.’ 
Such bibliographies are of immense utility, and 
I hope that the time is nearly come when each 
student of a special branch of science or literature 
will feel bound to work out its bibliography, unless, 
of course, the task shall have been already accom- 
plished. The reader will see that, in Appendix 11, 

q ‘ Trausactions of the Connecticut Academy/ 1877, vol. iv. 
pp. 151-232. 

xlviii Preface. 

I have taken the liberty of working out also a 
part of the bibliography of my own writings. 

Looking now to the eventual results of the 
theory, I must beg the reader to bear in mind that 
this book was never put forward as containing 
a systematic view of Economics. It treats only 
of the theory, and is but ‘ an elementary sketch of 
elementary principles. The working out of a com- 
plete system based on these lines must be a matter 
of time and labour, and I know not when, if ever, 
I shall be able to attempt it. In the last chapter, 
I have, however, indicated the manner in which 
the theory of wages will be affected. This chapter 
is reprinted almost as it was wi’itten in 1871 ; since 
then the wage-fund theory has been abandoned 
by most English Economists, owing to the attacks 
of Mr. Cliffe Leslie, Mr. Shadwell, Professor Cairnes, 
Professor Francis Walker, and some others. Quite 
recently more extensive reading and more careful 
cogitation have led to a certain change in my ideas 
concerning the superstructure of Economics — in 
this wise — 

Firstly, I am convinced that the doctrine of 
wages, which I adopted in 1871, under the impres- 
sion that it was somewhat novel, is not really novel 
at all, except to those whose view is bounded by the 
maze of the Ricardian Economics. The true doc- 

Preface. 

xlix 

trine may be more or less clearly traced through the 
writings of a succession of great French Economists, 
from Condillac, Baudeau, and Le Trosne, through 
J.-B. Say, Destutt de Tracy, Storch, and others, down 
to Bastiat and Courcelle-Seneuil. The conclusion 
to which I am ever more clearly coming is that the 
only hope of attaining a true system of Economics 
is to fling aside, once and for ever, the mazy and 
preposterous assumptions of the Ricardian School. 
Our English Economists have been living in a fool’s 
paradise. The truth is with the French School, 
and the sooner we recognise the fact, the better 
it will be for all the world, except perhaps the few 
writers who are too far committed to the old 
erroneous doctrines to allow of renunciation. 

Although, as I have said, the true theory of wages 
is not new as regards the French School, it is new, 
or at any rate re-newed, as regards our English 
Schools of Economics. One of the first to treat 
the subject from the right point of view was Mr. 
Cliffe Leslie, in an article first published in Fraser’s 
Magazine for July 1868, and subsequently reprinted 
in a collection of Essays *•. Some years afterwards 
Mr. J. L. Shadwell independently worked out the 

>■ ‘ Land Systems and Industrial Economy of Ireland, England, 
ind Continental Countries.’ London, 1870. Appendix, pp. 
157-379. 

1 

Preface. 

same theory of wages which he has fully expounded 
in his admirable ‘ System of Political Economy 
In Hearn’s Plutology, however, as pointed out in 
the text of this book (pp. 296-7), we find the same 
general idea that wages are the share of the pro- 
duce which the laws of supply and demand enable 
the labourer to secure. It is probable that like 
ideas might be traced in other works were this 
the place to attempt a history of the subject. 

Secondly, I feel sure that when, casting ourselves 
free from the Wage-Fund Theory, The Cost of Pro- 
duction doctrine of Value, the Natural Rate of 
Wages, and other misleading or false Ricardian 
doctrines, we begin to trace out clearly and simply 
the results of a correct theory, it will not be diffi- 
cult to arrive at a true doctrine of wages. This 
will probably be reached somewhat in the following 
way — We must regard labour, land, knowledge, and 
capital as conjoint conditions of the whole produce, 
not as causes each of a certain portion of the pro- 
duce. Thus in an elementary state of society, 
when each labourer owns all the three or four 
requisites of production, there would really be no 
such thing as wages, rent, or interest at all. Distri- 
bution does not arise even in idea, and the produce 
is simply the aggregate effect of the aggregate con- 
8 London, 1877, Triibner. 

Preface. 

H 

ditions. It is only when separate owners of the 
elements of production join their properties, and 
traffic with each other, that distribution begins, and 
then it is entirely subject to the principles of value 
and the laws of supply and demand. Each labourer 
must be regarded, like each landowner and each 
capitalist, as bringing into the common stock one 
part of the component elements, bargaining for the 
best share of the produce which the conditions 
of the market allow him to claim successfully. In 
theory the labourer has a monopoly of labour 
of each particular kind, as much as the landowner 
of land, and the capitalist of other requisite articles. 
Property is only another name for monopoly. But 
when dilferent persons own property of exactly the 
same kind, they become subject to the important 
Law of Indifference, as I have called it (pp. 98-101), 
namely, that in the same open market, at any one 
moment, there cannot be two prices for the same 
kind of article. Thus monopoly is limited hy com- 
petition, and no owner, whether of labour, land, or 
capital, can, theoretically speaking, obtain a larger 
share of produce for it than what other owners of ex- 
actly the same kind of property are willing to accept. 

So far there may seem to be nothing novel in this 
view ; it is hardly more than will be found stated 
in a good many economic works. But as soon as 

d 2 

Hi Preface. 

We begin to follow out this simple view, the conse- 
quences are rather startling. We are forced, for 
instance, to admit that rates of wages are governed 
by the same formal laws as rents. This view is not 
new to the readers of Storch, who in the third book 
of his excellent ‘Cours d’Economie Politique' has 
a chapter * ‘ De la Rente des talens et des qualites 
morales.’ But it is a very new doctrine to one 
whose economic horizon is formed by Mill and 
Fawcett, Ricardo and Adam Smith. Even Storch 
has not followed out the doctrine thoroughly ; for 
he applies the idea of rent only to cases of eminent 
talent. It must be evident, however, that talent 
and capacity of all kinds are only a question of 
degree, so that, according to the Law of Continuity, 
the same principle must apply to all labourers. 

A still more startling result is that, so far as cost 
of production regulates the values of commodities, 
wages must enter into the calculation on exactly 
the same footing as rent. Now it is a prime point 
of the Ricardian doctrines that rent does not enter 
into cost of production. As J. 8. Mill says «, ‘ Rent, 
therefore, forms no part of the cost of production 
which determines the value of agricultural produce.’ 

^ Chapter V, vol. I, p. 304. 

« ‘ Principles of Political Economy/ Book III, Chapter V, Section 
2, Paragraph 3. 

Preface, 

liii 

And again v « Rent is not an element in the cost of 
production of the commodity which yields it ; except 
in the cases,’ &c. Rent in fact is represented as the 
effect not the cause of high value ; wages on the 
contrary are treated as the cause, not the effect. 
But if rent and wages be really phenomena sub- 
ject to the same formal laws this opposite rela- 
tion to value must involve error. The way out of 
the difficulty is furnished by the second sentence 
of the paragraph from which the last quotation was 
taken. Mill goes on to say : ‘ But when land 
capable of yielding rent in agriculture is applied 
to some other purpose, the rent which it would 
have yielded is an element in the cost of production 
of the commodity which it is employed to produce.’ 
Here Mill edges in as an exceptional case that 
which proves to be the rule, reminding one of other 
exceptional cases described as ‘ Some peculiar 
cases of value’ (see p. 214 below), which I have 
shown to include almost all commodities. 

Now Mill allows that when land capable of 
yielding rent in agriculture is applied to some 
other purpose, the rent which would have been 
produced in agriculture is an element in the cost 
of production of other commodities. But wherefore 

‘Principles of Political Economy/ Book III, Chapter VI, 
Section 1, Article 9. 

liv Preface. 

this distinction between agriculture and other 
branches of industry? Why does not the same 
principle ' apply between two dilferent modes of 
agricultural employment ? If land which has been 
yielding £2 per acre rent as pasture be ploughed 
up and used for raising wheat, must not the £2 per 
acre be debited against the expenses of the produc- 
tion of wheat ? Suppose that somebody introduced 
the beetroot culture into England with a view to 
making sugar; this new branch of industry could 
not be said to pay unless it yielded, besides all 
other expenses, the full rents of the lands turned 
from other kinds of culture But if this be con- 
ceded, the same principle must apply generally; 
a potatoe-field should pay as well as a clover-field, 
and a clover-field as a turnip-field; and so on. 
The market prices of the produce must adjust 
themselves so that this shall in the long run be 
possible. The rotation of crops, no doubt, intro- 
duces complication into the matter, but does not 
modify the general reasoning. The principle which 
emerges is that each portion of land should he 
applied to that culture or use which yields the largest 
total of utility, as measured by the value of the pro- 
duce ; if otherwise applied there will be loss. Thus 
the rent of land is determined by the excess of 
produce in the most profitable employment. 

Iv 

Preface. 

But when the matter is fully thought out, it will 
be seen that exactly the same principle applies 
to wages. A man who can earn six shillings a day 
in one employment will not turn to another kind 
of work unless he expects to get six shillings a day 
or more from it. There is no such thing as absolute 
cost of labour ; it is all matter of comparison. 

Every one gets the most which he can for his 

exertions; some can get little or nothing, because 
they have not sufficient strength, knowledge, nor 
ingenuity; others get much, because they have, 
comparatively speaking, a monopoly of certain 
powers. Each seeks the work in which his peculiar 
faculties are most productive of utility, as measured 
by what other people are willing to pay for the 

produce. Thus wages are clearly the effect not 

the cause of the value of the produce. But when 
labour is turned from one employment to another, 
the wages it would otherwise have yielded must be 
debited to the expenses of the new product. Thus 
the parallelism betw'een the theories of rent and 
wages is seen to be perfect in theory, however 
different it may appear to be in the details of appli- 
cation. Precisely the same view may be applied, 
mutatis mutandis, to the rent yielded by fixed 
capital, and to the interest of free capital. In the 
last case, the Law of Indifference peculiarly applies. 

Ivi Freface. 

because free capital, loanable for a certain interval, 
is equally available for all branches of industry; 
hence, at any moment and place, the interest of 
such capital must be the same in all branches of 
trade. 

I ought to say that Mill, as pointed out to me 
by Professor Adamson, has a remarkable section 
at the end of Chapter V, of Book III, of the 
‘Principles,’ in which he explains that all in- 
equalities, artificial or natural, give rise to extra 
gains of the nature of Rent. This section is a 
very satisfactory one inasmuch as it tends to sup- 
port the view on which 1 am now insisting, a 
view, however, which when properly followed out 
will overthrow many of the principal doctrines 
of the Ricardo-Mill Economics. Those who have 
studied Mill’s philosophic character as long and 
minutely as I have done, will not for a moment 
suppose that the occurrence of this section in Mill’s 
book tends to establish its consistency with other 
portions of the same treatise. 

But of course I cannot follow out the discussion 
of this matter in a mere preface. The results to 
be expected are partly indicated in my Primer 
of Political Economy, but in that little treatise 
my remarks upon the Origin of Rent (p. 94), 
as originally printed in the first edition, were 

Preface. 

Ivii 

erroneous, and the section altogether needs to be 
rewritten. When at length a true system of 
Economics comes to be established, it will be 
seen that that able but wrong-headed man, David 
Ricardo, shunted the car of Economic science on 
to a wrong line, a line, however, on which it 
was further urged towards confusion by his equally 
able and wrong-headed admirer John Stuart Mill. 
There were Economists, such as Malthus and Senior, 
who had a far better comprehension of the true 
doctrines (though not free from the Ricardian 
errors), but they were driven out of the field by 
the unity and influence of the Ricardo-Mill school. 
It will be a work of labour to pick up the frag- 
ments of a shattered 'science and to start anew, 
but it is a work from which they must not shrink 
who wish to see any advance of Economic Science. 

The Chestnuts, 
Hampstead Heath, N.W. 
May , 1879. 

CONTENTS. 

CHAPTEE I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

PAGE 

Introduction 1 

Mathematical Character of the Science .... 3 

Confusion between Mathematical and Exact Sciences . . 6 

Capability of Exact Measurement ..... 8 

Measurement of Feeling and Motives . . . . .13 

Logical Method of Economics . . . . . .18 

Relation of Economics to Ethics 25 

CHAPTER II. 

THEORY OE PLEASURE AND PAIN. 

Pleasure and Pain as Quantities ...... 30 

Pain the NTegative of Pleasure 34 

Anticipated Feeling , • . . . . . .36 

TTnrftrtaintv of Future Events ....*• 38 

lx 

Contents. 

CHAPTER III. 

THEOEY OF UTILITY. 

PAGE 

Definition of Terms . . . . . . , .40 

The Laws of Human Want . . . . . .42 

Utility is not an Intrinsic Quality . . . . .47 

Law of the Variation of Utility ...... 49 

Total Utility and Degree of Utility . . . . .53 

Variation of the Final Degree of Utility .... 56 

Disutility and Discommodity . . . , , .62 

Distribution of Commodity in different Uses . . .63 

Theory of Dimensions of Economic Quantities . . .66 

Actual, Prospective, and Potential Utility . . . .74 

Distribution of a Commodity in time . . . . .77 

CHAPTER IV. 

THEORY OF EXCHANGE. 

Importance of Exchange in Economics . . . .81 

Ambiguity of the term Value . . . . . .82 

Value expresses Ratio of Exchange 84 

Popular use of the term Value . . . . . .85 

Dimension of Value . . 90 

Definition of Market . . . . . . . .91 

Definition of Trading Body 95 

The Law of Indifference 98 

The Theory of Exchange 103 

Contents. 

Ixi 

PAGE 

Symbolic Statement of the Theory 

. 106 

Analogy to the Theory of the Lever . 

. 110 

Impediments to Exchange ..... 

. 115 

Illustrations of the Theory of Exchange 

. 117 

Problems in the Theory of Exchange . 

. 121 

Complex Cases of the Theory .... 

. 124 

Competition in Exchange ..... 

. 127 

Failure of the Equations of Exchange 

. 128 

Negative and Zero Value ..... 

. 137 

Equivalence of Commodities .... 

. 145 

Acquired Utility of Commodities 

. 149 

The Gain by Exchange ..... 

. 153 

Numerical Determination of the Laws of Utility . 

. 158 

Opinions as to the Variation of Price . 

. 160 

Variation of the Price of Corn .... 

. 165 

The Origin of Value . . . . 

. 174 

CHAPTER V. 

THEORY OF LABOUR. 

Definition of Labour . . . , . . . .181 

Quantitative Notions of Labour 184 

Symbolic Statement of the Theory . . , . ,189 

Dimensions of Labour . . . . . . .193 

Balance between Need and Labour , , , . .194 

Distribution of Labour . . . . . . .198 

Relation of the Theories of Labour and Exchange . .201 

Ixii 

Contents. 

PAGE 

Kelations of Economic Quantities , . . . .205 

Various Cases of the Theory . . . . . .209 

Joint Production ........ 214 

Over-production . . . . . . . .219 

Limits to the Intensity of Labour . . . . .221 

CHAPTER VI. 

THEOEY OF BENT. 

Accepted Opinions concerning Rent . . . . .228 

Symbolic Statement of the Theory . . . . .233 

Illustrations of the Theory . . . . . .238 

CHAPTER Vn. 

THEOEY OF CAPITAL. 

The Function of Capital . . . . . , .241 

Capital is concerned with Time 243 

Quantitative Notions concerning Capital . . . .249 

Expression for Amount of Investment . . . .252 

Dimensions of Capital, Credit, and Debit . . . .253 

Effect of the Duration of Work 255 

Illustrations of the Investment of Capital . . . .258 

Fixed and Circulating Capital . . . . . .262 

Free and Invested Capital 253 

Uniformity of the Rate of Interest ..... 264 
GeneraJ Expression for the Rate of Interest . . . 265 

Dimension of Interest 268 

Contents. 

Ixiii 

PAGE 

Peacock on the Dimensions of Interest 

, 271 

Tendency of Profits to a Minimum , , . * . 

. 274 

Advantage of Capital to Industry . . . . 

. 277 

Are Articles in the Consumers' hands Capital % . 

. 280 

CHAPTEK VIII. 

CONCLUDING EEMAKKS. 

The Doctrine of Population 

. 288 

Relation of Wages and Profit 

. 289 

Professor Hearn’s Views 

. 296 

The Noxious Influence of Authority . . . . 

. 298 

APPENDIX I. 

List of Mathematico-Economic Writings . 

. 301 

APPENDIX II. 

List of the Author’s Economic Writings . 

. 311 

THE 

THEORY or POLITICAL ECONOMY. 

CHAPTER I. 

INTEODUCTION. 

The science of Politieal Economy rests upon a 
few notions of an apparently simple character. 
Utility, wealth, value, commodity, labour, land, 
capital, are the elements of the subject ; and who- 
ever has a thorough comprehension of their nature 
must possess or be soon able to acquire a know- 
ledge of the whole science. As almost every eco- 
nomical writer has remarked, it is in treating the 
simple elements that we require the most care and 
precision, since the least error of conception must 
vitiate all our deductions. Accordingly, I have 
devoted the following pages to an investigation 
of the conditions and relations of the above-named 
notions. 

Repeated reflection and inquiry have led me to 
the somewhat novel opinion, that value depends 

B 

2 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

entirely upon utility. Prevailing opinions make 
labour rather than utility the origin of value ; 
and there are even those who distinctly assert 
that labour is the cause of value. I show, on the 
contrary, that we have only to trace out carefully 
the natural laws of the variation of utility, as 
depending tipon the quanlTty of commodity in our 
possession, in order to arrive at a satisfactory 
theory oF^xchange, of which the ordinary laws of 
supply and demand are a necessary consequence. 
This theory is in harmony with facts ; and, when- 
ever there is any apparent reason for the belief 
that labour is the cause of value, we obtain an 
explanation of the reason. Labour is found often 
to determine value, but only in an indirect manner, 
by varying the degree of utility of the commodity 
through an increase or limitation of the supply. 

These views are not put forward in a hasty or 
ill-considered manner. All the chief points of the 
theory were sketched out seventeen years ago; 
but they were then published only in the form of 
a brief paper communicated to the Statistical or 
Economic Section of the British Association at the 
Cambridge Meeting, which took place in the year 
1862. A still briefer abstract of that paper was 
inserted in the Report of the Meeting ^ and the 
paper itself was not printed until June 1866 

a ‘Keports of Sections/ p. 158. 

1> ‘Journal of the Statistical Society/ vol. xxix. p. 282. 

Introduction. 

3 

Since writing that paper, I have, over and over 
again, questioned the truth of my own notions, but 
without ever finding any reason to doubt their sub- 
stantial correctness. 

Mathematical Character of the Science. 

It is clear that Economics, if it is to be a science 
at all, must be a mathematical science. There 
exists much prejudice against attempts to intro- 
duce the methods and language of mathematics 
into any branch of the moral sciences. Many 
persons seem to think that the physical sciences 
form the proper sphere of mathematical method, 
and that the moral sciences demand some other 
method,— I know not what. My theory of Econo- 
mics, however, is purely mathematical in character. 
Nay, believing that the quantities with which we 
deal must be subject to continuous variation, I do 
not hesitate to use the appropriate branch of 
mathematical science, involving though it does the 
fearless consideration of infinitely small quantities. 
The theory consists in applying the differential 
calculus to the familiar notions of wealth, utility, 
value, demand, supply, capital, interest, labour, 
and all the other quantitative notions belonging 
to the daily operations of industry. As the com- 
plete theory of almost every other science involves 

4 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

the use of that calculus, so we cannot have a true 
theory of Economics without its aid. 

“ To me it seems that our science must he mathe- 
matical simply because it deals with quantities. 
Wherever the things treated are capable of being 
greater or less, there the laws and relations must 
be mathematical in nature. The ordinary laws of 
supply and demand treat entirely of quantities of 
commodity demanded or supplied, and express the 
manner in which the quantities vary in connection 
with the price. In consequence of this fact the 
laws are mathematical. Economists cannot alter 
their nature by denying them the name ; they 
might as well try to alter red light by calling it 
blue. Whether the mathematical laws of Econo- 
mics are stated in words, or in the usual symbols, 
X, y, z, p, q, etc., is an accident, or a matter of mere 
convenience. If we had no regard to trouble and 
prolixity, the most complicated mathematical pro- 
blems might be stated in ordinary language, and 
their solution might be traced out by words. In 
fact, some distinguished mathematicians have 
shown a liking for getting rid of their symbols, 
and expressing their arguments and results in 
language as nearly as possible approximating to 
that in common use. In his ‘ Systbme du Monde,’ 
Laplace attempted to describe the truths of physi- 
cal astronomy in common language ; and Thomson 
and Tait interweave their great ‘Treatise on 

Introduction. 

5 

Natural Philosophy’ with an interpretation in 
ordinary words, supposed to be within the com- 
prehension of general readers®. 

These attempts, however distinguished and inge- 
nious their authors, soon disclose the inherent 
defects of the grammar and dictionary for ex- 
pressing complicated relations. The symbols of 
mathematical books are not different in nature from 
language ; they form a perfected system of lan- 
guage, adapted to the notions and relations which 
we need to express. They do not constitute the 
mode of reasoning they embody; they merely 
facilitate its exhibition and comprehension. If, 
then, in Economics, we have to deal with quantities 
and complicated relations of quantities, we must 
reason mathematically; we do not render the 
science less mathematieal by avoiding the sym- 
bols of algebra, — we merely refuse to employ, in 
a very imperfect science, much needing every 
kind of assistance, that apparatus of appro- 
priate signs which is found indispensable in other 
sciences. 

c The large type or non -symbolic portion of the Treatise has 
been reprinted in a separate volume, under the title ‘Elements 
of Natural Philosophy, by Professors Sir W. Thomson and P. G. 
Tait. Part I. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1873/ But the authors 
appear to me inaccurate in describing this work, in the preface, as 
non-mathematical. It is comparatively non-symholicj but equally 
mathematical with the complete Treatise. 

6 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

Confmion hetween Mathematical and Exact 
Sciences. 

Many persons entertain a prejudice against mathe- 
matical language, arising out of a confusion between 
the ideas of a mathematical science and an exact 
science. They think that we must not pretend to 
calculate unless we have the precise data which 
will enable us to obtain a precise answer to our 
calculations ; but, in reality, there is no such thing 
as an exact science, except in a comparative sense. 
Astronomy is more exact than other sciences, be- 
cause the position of a planet or star admits of 
close measurement ; but, if we examine the methods 
of physical astronomy, we find that they are all 
approximate. Every solution involves hypotheses 
which are not really true: as, for instance, that 
the earth is a smooth, homogeneous spheroid. 
Even the apparently simpler problems in statics 
or dynamics are only hypothetical approximations 
to the truth 

We can calculate the effect of a crow-bar, provided 
it be perfectly inflexible and have a perfectly hard 
fulcrum,— which is never the case e. The data are 

^ This subject of the approximate character of quantitative 
science is pursued, at some length, in my ‘ Principles of Science,^ 
chapter xxi, on ‘ The Theory of Approximation,' and elsewhere in 
the same work. 

e Thomson and Tait’s ‘Treatise on Natural Philosophy,' vol. i. 
p. 337. 

Introduction. 

7 

almost wholly deflcieut for the complete solution 
of any one problem in natural science. Had 
physicists waited until their data were perfectly 
precise before they brought in the aid of mathe- 
matics, we should have still been in the age of 
science which terminated at the time of Galileo. 

When we examine the less precise physical 
sciences, we find that physicists are, of all men, 
most bold in developing their mathematical theories 
in advance of their data. Let any one who doubts 
this examine Airy’s ‘ Theory of the Tides,’ as given 
in the Encyclopedia Metropolitana ; he will there 
find a wonderfully complex mathematical theory 
which is confessed by its author to be incapable of 
exact or even approximate application, because the 
results of the various and often unknown contours 
of the seas do not admit of numerical verification. 
In this and many other cases we have mathe- 
matical theory without the data requisite for 
precise calculation. 

The greater or less accuracy attainable in a 
mathematical science is a matter of accident, and 
does not affect the fundamental character of the 
science. There can be but two classes of sciences 
— those which are simply logical, and those which, 
besides being logical, are also mathematical. If there 
be any science which determines merely whether a 
thing be or be not — whether an event will happen, 
or will not happen — it must be a purely logical 

8 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

science ; but if the thing may be greater or less, 
or the event may happen sooner or later, nearer 
or farther, then quantitative notions enter, and the 
science must be mathematical in nature, by what- 
ever name we call it. 

Capahility of Exact Measurement. 

Many will object, no doubt, that the notions 
which we treat in this science are incapable of any 
measurement. We cannot weigh, nor gauge, nor 
test the feelings of the mind ; there is no unit of 
labour, or suffering, or enjoyment. It might thus 
seem as if a mathematical theory of Economics 
would be necessarily deprived for ever of numerical 
data. 

I answer, in the first place, that nothing is less 
warranted in science than an uninquiring and un- 
hoping spirit. In matters of this kind, those who 
despair are almost invariably those who have never 
tried to succeed. A man might be despondent had 
he spent a lifetime on a difficult task without a 
gleam of encouragement ; but the popular opinions 
on the extension of mathematical theory tend to 
deter any man from attempting tasks which, how- 
ever difficult, ought, some day, to be achieved. 

If we trace the history of other sciences, we 
gather no lessons of discouragement. In the 
case of almost everything which is now exactly 

Introduction. 

measured, we can go back to the age when the 
vaguest notions prevailed. Previous to the time 
of Pascal, who would have thought of measuring 
doubt and helieff Who could have conceived that 
the investigation of petty games of chance would 
have led to the creation of perhaps the most sub- 
lime branch of mathematical science — the theory 
of probabilities ? There are sciences which, even 
within the memory of men now living, have be- 
come exactly quantitative. While Quesnay and 
Baudeau and Le Trosne and Condillac were found- 
ing Political Economy in Fi'ance, and Adam Smith 
in England, electricity was a vague phenomenon, 
which was known, indeed, to be capable of be- 
coming greater or less, but was not measured nor 
calculated : it is within the last forty or fifty years 
that a mathematical theory of electricity, founded 
on exact data, has been established. We now enjoy 
precise quantitative notions concerning heat, and 
can measure the temperature of a body to less 
than part of a degree Centigrade. Compare 
this precision with that of the earliest makers of 
thermometers, the Academicians del Cimento, who 
used to graduate their instruments by placing them 
in the sun’s rays to obtain a point of fixed tem- 
perature f. 

f See ‘ Principles of Science,’ chapter xiii, on ‘ The Exact Measure- 
merit of Phenomena/ 3rd Ed., p. 270. 

10 The Theory of Political Economy. 

De Morgan excellently said?, ‘As to some mag- 
nitudes, tlie clear idea of measurement eomes soon : 
in the case of length, for example. But let us 
take a more difficult one, and trace the steps by 
which we acquire and fix the idea : say weight. 

What weight is, we need not know We 

know it as a magnitude before we give it a name : 
any child can discover the more that there is in 
a bullet, and the less that there is in a cork of 
twice its size. Had it not been for the simple 
contrivance of the balance, which we are well 
assured (how', it matters not here) enables ns to 
poise equal weights against one another, that is, to 
detect equality and inequality, and thence to as- 
certain how many times the greater contains the 
less, we might not to this day have had much 
clearer ideas on the subject of weight, as a mag- 
nitude, than we have on those of talent, prudence, 
or self-denial, looked at in the same light. All who 
are ever so little of geometers will remember the 
time when their notions of an angle, as a magni- 
tude, were as vague as, perhaps more so than, 
those of a moral quality; and they will also re- 
member the steps by which this vagueness became 
clearness and precision/ 

Now there can be no doubt that pleasure, pain, 
labour, utility, value, wealth, money, capital, &c. 

g ^ Formal Logic/ p. 175 * 

Introduction. 

11 

are all notions admitting of quantity: nay, the 
whole of our actions in industry and trade certainly 
depend upon comparing quantities of advantage or 
disadvantage. Even the theories of moralists have 
recognised the quantitative character of the subject. 
Bentham’s ‘ Introduction to the Principles of Morals 
and Legislation ’ is thoroughly mathematical in the 
character of the method. He tells us ^ to estimate 
the tendency of an action thus : ‘ Sum up all the 
values of all the pleasures on the one side, and 
those of all the pains on the other. The balance, 
if it be on the side of pleasure, will give the good 
tendency of the act upon the whole, with respect 
to the interests of that individual person ; if on the 
side of pain, the bad tendency of it upon the whole.’ 
The mathematical character of Bentham’s treat- 
ment of moral science is also well exemplified in 
his remarkable tract entitled ‘A Table of the 
Springs of Action,’ printed in 1817, as in p. 3, 
and elsewhere. 

‘ But where,’ the reader will perhaps ask, ‘ are 
your numerical data for estimating pleasures and 
pains in Political Economy?’ I answei-, that my 
numerical- data are more abundant and precise 
than those possessed by any other science, but that 
we have not yet known how to employ them. The 
very abundance of our data is perplexing. There is 

1* Chapter iv, on the ‘ Value of a lot of Pleasure or Pain, Plow 
to be measured/ section v. 5, 

12 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

not a clerk nor book-keeper in the country who is 
not engaged in recording numerical facts for the 
economist. The private-account books, the great 
ledgers of merchants and bankers and public offices, 
the share lists, price lists, ^ bank returns, monetary 
intelligence. Custom-house and other Government 
returns, are all full of the kind of numerical data 
required to render Economics an exact mathe- 
matical science. Thousands of folio volumes of 
statistical, parliamentary, or other publications 
await the labour of the investigator. It is partly 
the very extent and complexity of the informa- 
tion which deters us from its proper use. But it 
is chiefly a want of method and completeness in 
this vast mass of information which prevents our 
employing it in the scientific investigation of the 
natural laws of Economics. 

I hesitate to say that men will ever have the 
means of measuring directly the feelings of the 
human heart. A unit of pleasure or of pain is 
difficult even to conceive ; but it is the amount of 
these feelings which is continually prompting us to 
buying and selling, borrowing and lending, labour- 
ing and resting, producing and consuming ; and it 
is from the quantitative effects of the feelings that we 
must estimate their comparative amounts. TVe can 
no more know nor measure gravity in its own 
nature than we can measure a feeling; but, just as 
we measure gravity by its effects in the motion 

Introdxiction. 

13 

of a pendulum, so we may estimate the equality 
or inequality of feelings by the decisions of the 
human mind. The will is our pendulum, and its 
oscillations are minutely registered in the price 
lists of the markets. I know not when we shall 
have a perfect system of statistics, but the want 
of it is the only insuperable obstacle in the way 
of making Economics an exact science. In the 
absence of complete statistics, the science will not 
be less mathematical, though it will be immensely 
less useful than if it were, comparatively speaking, 
exact. A correct theorj'^ is the first step towards 
improvement, by showing what we need and what 
we might accomplish. 

Measurement of Feeling and Motives. 

Many readers may, even after reading the pre- 
ceding remarks, consider it quite impossible to 
create such a calculus as is here contemplated, 
because we have no means of defining and mea- 
suring quantities of feeling, like we can measure 
a mile, or a right angle, or any other physical 
quantity. I have granted that we can hardly form 
the conception of a unit of pleasure or pain, so 
that the numerical expression of quantities of 
feeling seems to be out of the question. But we 
only employ units of measurement in other things 
to facilitate the comparison of quantities; and if 
we can compare the quantities directly, we do not 

14 The Theory of Political Economy. 

need the units. Now the mind of an individual 
is the balance which makes its own comparisons, 
and is the final judge of quantities of feeling. 
As Mr. Bain says', ‘ It is only an identical proposi- 
tion to affirm that the greatest of two pleasures, 
or what appears such, sways the resulting action ; 
for it is this resulting action that alone deter- 
mines which is the greater.’ 

Pleasures, in short, are, for the time being, as 
the mind estimates them ; so that we cannot make 
a choice, or manifest the will in any way, without 
indicating thereby an excess of pleasure in some 
direction. It is true that the mind often hesitates 
and is perplexed in making a choice of great 
importance : this indicates either varying estimates 
of the motives, or a feeling of incapacity to grasp 
the quantities concerned. I should not think of 
claiming for the mind any accurate power of 
measuring and adding and subtracting feelings, 
so as to get an exact balance. We can seldom 
or never affirm that one pleasure is an exact 
multiple of another ; but the reader who carefully 
criticises the following theory will find that it 
seldom involves the comparison of quantities of 
feeling differing much in amount. The theory turns 
upon those critical points where pleasures are 
nearly, if not quite, equal. I never attempt to 
estimate the whole pleasure gained by purchasing 
* ‘ The Emotions and the Will,’ 1st Ed., p. 447. 

Introduction. 

15 

a commodity; the theory merely expresses that, 
when a man has purchased enough, he would de- 
rive equal pleasure from the possession of a small 
quantity more as he would from the money price 
of it. Similarly, the whole amount of pleasure that 
a man gains by a day’s labour hardly enters into 
the question ; it is when a man is doubtful whether 
to increase his hours of labour or not, that we 
discover an equality between the pain of that ex- 
tension and the pleasure of the increase of pos- 
sessions derived from it. 

The reader will And, again, that there is never, 
in any single instance, an attempt made to com- 
pare the amount of feeling in one mind with that 
in another. I see no means by which such com- 
parison can be accomplished. The susceptibility 
of one mind may, for what we know, be a thousand 
times greater than that of another. But, provided 
that the susceptibility was different in a like ratio 
in ail directions, we should never be able to dis- 
cover the difference. Every mind is thus in- 
scrutable to every other mind, and no common 
denominator of feeling seems to be possible. But 
even if we could compare the feelings of different 
minds, we should not need to do so; for one mind 
only affects another indirectly. Every event in the 
outward world is represented in the mind by a 
corresponding motive, and it is by the balance of 
these that the will is swayed. But the motive in 

16 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

one mind is weighed only against other motives 
in the same mind, never against the motives in 
other minds. Each person is to other persons 
a portion of the outward world — the non-ego as 
the metaphysicians call it. Thus motives in the 
mind of A may give rise to phenomena which 
may he represented by motives in the mind of 
B ; but between A and B there is a gulf. Hence 
the weighing of motives must always be confined 
to the bosom of the individual. 

I must here point out that, though the theory 
presumes to investigate the condition of a mind, 
and bases upon this investigation the whole of 
Economics, practically it is an aggregate of indi- 
viduals which will be treated. The general forms 
of the laws of Economics are the same in the case 
of individuals and nations ; and, in reality, it is a 
law operating in the case of multitudes of indi- 
viduals which gives rise to the aggregate repre- 
sented in the transactions of a nation. Practically, 
however, it is quite impossible to detect the opera- 
tion of general laws of this kind in the actions of 
one or a few individuals. The motives and condi- 
tions are so numerous and complicated, that the 
resulting actions have the appearance of caprice, 
and are beyond the analytic powers of science. 
With eveiy increase in the price of such a com- 
modity as sugar, we ought, theoretically speaking, 
to find every person reducing his consumption by 

Introduction, 

17 

a small amount, and according to some regular 
law. In reality, many persons would make no 
change at all; a few, probably, would go to the 
extent of dispensing with the use of sugar alto- 
gether so long as its cost continued to be excessive. 
It would be by examining the average consump- 
tion of sugar in a large population that we might 
detect a continuous variation, connected with the 
variation of price by a constant law. It would not, 
of necessity, happen that the law would be exactly 
the same in the case of aggregates and individuals, 
unless all those individuals were of the same 
character and position as regards wealth and 
habits ; but there would be a more or less regular 
law to which the same kind of formidse would 
The use of an average, or, what is the 
same, an aggregate result, depends upon the high 
probability that accidental and disturbing causes 
will operate, in the long run, as often in one direc- 
tion as the other, so as to neutralise each other. 
Provided that we have a sufficient number of 
independent cases, we may then detect the effect 
of any tendency, however slight. Accordingly, ques- 
tions which appear, and perhaps are, quite indeter- 
minate as regards individuals, may be capable of 
exact investigation and solution in regard to great 
masses and wide averages’^ 

Concerning the meaning and employment of Averages, see 
‘ Principles of Science,’ chapter xvi, on ‘ The Method of Means.’ 

18 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

Logical Method of Economics. 

The logical method of Economics as a branch 
of the social sciences is a subject on which much 
might be written, and on which very diverse 
opinions are held at the present day (1879). ' In 
this place I can only make a few brief remarks. 
I think that John Stuart Mill is substantially 
correct in considering our science to be a case of 
what he calls i the Physical or Concrete Deductive 
Method ; he considers that we may start from 
some obvious psychological law, as for instance, 
that a greater gain is preferred to a smaller one, 
and we may then reason downwards, and predict 
the phenomena which will be produced in society 
by such a law. The causes in action in any com- 
munity are, indeed, so complicated that we shall 
seldom be able to discover the undisturbed effects 
of any one law, but, so far as we can analyse the 
statistical phenomena observed, we obtain a verifi- 
cation of our reasoning. This view of the matter 
is almost identical with that adopted by the late 
Professor Cairnes in his Lectures on ‘ The Character 
and Logical Method of Political Economy 
The principal objection to be urged against this 
treatment of the subject, is that Mill has described 
the Concrete Deductive Method as if it were one 

1 * System of Logic/ book yi. chap, ix, section 3. 

^ Second Edition (Macmillan), 1875. 

introduction. 

19 

of many inductive methods. In my Elementary 
Lessons in Logic (p. 258), I proposed to call the 
method the Complete Method, as implying that it 
combines observation, deduction, and induction in 
the most complete and perfect way. But I sub- 
sequently arrived at the conclusion that this so- 
called DeductiA’’e Method is no special method at 
all, hut simply induction itself in its essential 
form. As I have fully explained Induction is 
an inverse operation, the inverse of Deduction, and 
can only be performed by the use of deduction. 
Possessing certain facts of observation, we frame 
an hypothesis as to the laws governing those 
facts ; we reason from the hypothesis deductively 
to the results to be expected ; and we then ex- 
amine these results in connection with the facts in 
question; coincidence confirms the whole reason- 
ing ; conflict obliges us either to seek for disturbing 
causes, or else to abandon our hypothesis. In this 
procedure there is nothing peculiar ; when properly 
understood it is found to be the method of all the 
inductive sciences. 

The science of Economics, however, is in some 
degree peculiar, owing to the fact, pointed out by 
J. S. Mill and Cairnes, that its ultimate laws are 
known to us immediately by intuition, or, at any 
rate they are furaished to us ready made by other 
mental or physical sciences. That every person 

" ‘ Principles of Science,’ chapters vii, ix, xii, etc. 

20 

The Theory of Folitical Economy. 

will choose the greater apparent good ; that human 
wants are more or less quickly satiated ; that 
prolonged labour becomes more and more painful, 
are a few of the simple inductions on which we 
can proceed to reason deductively with great con- 
fidence. From these axioms we can deduce the 
laws of supply and demand, the laws of that 
difficult conception, value, and all the intricate 
results of commerce, so far as data are available. 
The final agreement of our inferences with d 
posteriori observations ratifies our method. But 
unfortunately this verification is often the least 
satisfactory part of the process, because, as J. S. 
Mill has fully explained, the circumstances of a 
nation are infinitely complicated, and we seldom 
get two or more instances which are comparable. 
To fulfil the conditions of inductive inquiry, we 
ought to be able to observe the effects of a cause 
coming singly into action, while all other causes 
remain unaltered. Entirely to prove the good 
effects of Free Trade in England, for example, we 
ought to have the nation unaltered in every cir- 
cumstance except the abolition of burdens and 
restrictions on trade ». But it is obvious that while 
Free Trade was being introduced into England, 
many other causes of prosperity were also coming 
into action — the progress of invention, the con- 
struction of railways, the profuse consumption of 

0 ‘ Principles of Science/ chapter xix, on ‘ Experiment. 

Introduction. 

21 

coal, the extension of the colonies, etc., etc. 
Although, then, the beneficent results of Free 
Trade arc great and unquestionable, they could 
hardly be proved to exist d posteriori ; they are to 
be believed because deductive reasoning from pre- 
mises of almost certain trutli, leads us confidently 
to expect such results, and there is nothing in 
experience which in the least conflicts with our 
expectations. In spite of occasional revulsions, due 
to periodical fluctuations depending on physical 
causes, the immense prosperity of the country since 
the adoption of Free Trade, confirms our antici- 
pations as far as, under complex circumstances, 
facts are capable of doing so. It will thus be seen 
that Political Economy tends to be more deductive 
than many of the physical sciences, in which closely 
approximate verification is often possible ; but, even 
so far as the science is inductive, it involves the 
use of deductive reasoning, as already explained. 

Within the last year or two, much discussion has 
been raised concerning the Philosophical Method 
of Political Economy, by Mr. T. E. Cliffe Leslie’s 
interesting Essay on that subject?, as also by the 
recent address of Dr." Ingram at the Dublin Meeting 
of the British Association <i. I quite concur with 
these able and eminent economists so far as to 

P ‘ Hermatliena,’ No. iv, Dublin, 1876, p. 1. 

<1 ‘ Statistical Journal,' January, 1879, vol. xli. p. 602. Also reprint 
by LonjjmanB, 1878. 

22 

The Tlheory of Political Economy. 

allow that historical investigation is of great import- 
ance in Social Science. But, instead of converting 
our present science of economics into an historical 
science, utterly destroying it in the process, I would 
perfect and develope what we already possess, and 
at the same time erect a new branch of social 
science on an historical foundation. This new 
branch of science, on wliich many learned men, 
such as Richard Jones, de Lavcleye, Lavergne, 
Cliife Leslie, Sir Henry Maine, Thorold Rogers, have 
already laboured, is doubtless a portion of what 
Herbert Spencer calls Sociology, the Science of the 
Evolution of Social Relations. Political Economy 
is in a chaotic state at present, because there is 
need of subdividing a too extensive sphere of 
knowledge. Quesnay, Sir James Steuart, Baudeau, 
Le Trosne, and Condillac first differentiated Econo- 
mics sufficiently to lead it to be regarded as a 
distinct science; it has since been loaded with 
great accretions due to the progress of investigation. 
It is only by subdivision, by recognising a branch 
of Economic Sociology, together possibly with two 
or three other branches of statistical, jural, or social 
science, that we can rescue our science from its 
confused state. I have already endeavoured to 
shew the need of this step in a lecture delivered 
at the University College, in October, I 876 r, and 

*■ ‘ Fortnightly Eeview/ December 1876 ; ^ The Future of Political 
Economy/ 

Introduction. 

23 

I shall perhaps have a future opportunity of en- 
larging more upon the subject. 

To return, however, to the topic of the present 
work, the theory here given may be described as 
the mechanics of utility and self-interest. Oversights 
may have been committed in tracing out its de- 
tails, but in its main features this theory must be 
the true one. Its method is as sure and demon- 
strative as that of kinematics or statics, nay, 
almost as self-evident as are the elements of Euclid, 
when the real meaning of the formulae is fully 
seized. 

I do not hesitate to say, too, that Economics 
might be gradually erected into an exact science, 
if only commercial statistics were far more com- 
plete and accurate than they are at present, so 
that the formulae could be endowed with exact 
meaning by the aid of numerical data. These data 
would consist chiefly in accurate accounts of the 
quantities of goods possessed and consumed by the 
community, and the prices at which they are ex- 
changed. There is no reason whatever why we 
should not have those statistics, except the cost 
and trouble of collecting them, and the unwilling- 
ness of persons to afford information. The quanti- 
ties themselves to be measured and registered are 
most concrete and precise. In a few cases we 
already have information approximating to com- 
pleteness, as when a commodity like tea, sugar, 

24 The Theory of FoUtical Economy, 

coffee, or tobacco is wholly imported. But when 
articles are untaxed, and partly produced within 
the country, we have yet the vaguest notions of 
the quantities consumed. Some slight success is 
now, at last, attending the efforts to gather agri- 
cultural statistics ; and the great need felt by 
men engaged in the cotton and other trades to 
obtain accurate accounts of stocks, imports, and 
consumption, will probably lead to the publication 
of far more complete information than we have 
hitherto enjoyed. 

The deductive science of Economics must be 
verified and rendered useful by the purely empi- 
rical science of Statistics. Theory must be invested 
with the reality and life of fact. But the difficul- 
ties of this union are immensely great, and I 
appreciate them quite as much as does Cairnes 
in his admirable lectures ‘On the Character and 
Logical Method of Political Economy.’ I make 
hardly any attempt to employ statistics in this 
work, and thus I do not pretend to any numerical 
precision. But, before we attempt any investiga- 
tion of facts, we must have correct theoretical 
notions ; and of what ai-e here presented, I would 
say, in the words of Hume, in his ‘ Essay on Com- 
merce,’ ‘ If false, let them be rejected : but no one 
has a right to entertain a prejudice against them 
merely because they are out of the common road.’ 

Introduction. 

25 

Relation of Economics to Ethics. 

I wish to say a few words, in this place, upon 
the relation of Economics to Moral Science. The 
theory which follows is entirely based on a calculus 
of pleasure and pain ; and the object of Economics 
is to maximise happiness by purchasing pleasure, 
as it were, at the lowest cost of pain. The language 
employed may be open to misapprehension, and it 
may seem as if pleasures and pains of a gross kind 
were treated as the all-sufficient motives to guide 
the mind of man. I have no hesitation in accepting 
the Utilitarian theory of morals which does uphold 
the effect upon the happiness of mankind as the 
criterion of what is right and wrong. But I have 
never felt that there is anything in that theory to 
prevent our putting the widest and highest inter- 
pretation upon the terms used. 

Jeremy Bentham put forward the Utilitarian 
theory in the most uncompromising manner. Ac- 
cording to him, whatever is of interest or import- 
ance to us must be the cause of pleas\ire or of 
pain ; and when the terms are used with a suffi- 
ciently wide meaning, pleasure and pain include 
all the forces which drive us to action. They are 
explicitly or implicitly the matter of all our cal- 
culations, and form the ultimate quantities to be 
treated in all the moral sciences. The words of 
Bentham on this subject may require some ex- 
planation and qualification, but they are too grand 

26 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

and too full of truth to be omitted. ‘ Nature/ he 
says ‘ has placed mankind under the governance 
of two sovereign masters — pain and pleasure. It 
is for them alone to point out what we ought to 
do, as well as to determine what we shall do. On 
the one hand the standard of right and wrong, 
on the other the chain of causes and effects, are 
fastened to their throne. They govern us in all 
we do, in all we say, in all we think : every effort 
we can make to throw off our subjection will serve 
but to demonstrate and confirm it. In words a 
man may pretend to abjure their empire ; but, in 
reality, he will remain subject to it all the while. 
The principle of utility I'ecognises tliis subjection, 
and assumes it for the foundation of that system, 
the object of which is to rear the fabric of felicity 
by the hands of reason and of law. Systems 
which attempt to question it, deal in sounds 
instead of sense, in caprice instead of reason, in 
darkness instead of light.’ 

In connection with this passage we may take 
that of Palcy, who says, with his usual clear 
brevity*, ‘I hold that pleasures differ in nothing 
but in continuance and intensity.’ 

The acceptance or non-acceptance of the basis 
of the Utilitarian doctrine depends, in my mind, 

s * An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation/ 
by Jeremy Bentham. Edition of 1823, vol. i, p. 1. 

t ‘ Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy,’ book i. chap. 6. 

Introduction. 

27 

on the exact interpretation of the language used. 
As it seems to me, the feelings of which a man 
is capable are of various grades. He is always 
subject to mere physical pleasure or pain, neces- 
sarily arising from his bodily wants and suscepti- 
bilities. He is capable also of mental and moral 
feelings of several degrees of elevation. A higher 
motive may rightly overbalance all considerations 
belonging even to the next lower range of feelings ; 
but so long as the higher motive does not inter- 
vene, it is surely both desirable and right that 
the lower motives should be balanced against each 
other. Starting with the lowest stage — it is a 
man’s duty, as it is his natural inclination, to 
earn sufficient food and whatever else may best 
satisfy his proper and moderate desires. If the 
claims of a family or of friends fall upon him, it 
may become desirable that he should deny liis 
own desires and even his physical needs their 
full customary gratification. But the claims of a 
family are only a step to a higher grade of duties 
The safety of a nation, the welfare of great 
populations, may happen to depend upon his exer- 
tions, if he be a soldier or a statesman; claims 
of a very strong kind may now be overbalanced 
by claims of a still stronger kind. Nor should I 
venture to say that, at any point, we have reached 
the highest rank — the supreme motives which 
should guide the mind. The statesman may 

28 The Theory of Political Economy. 

discover a conflict between motives; a measure 
may promise, as it would seem, the greatest good 
to great numbers, and yet there may be motives of 
uprightness and honour that may hinder his pro- 
moting the measure. How such difficult questions 
may be rightly determined it is not my purpose 
to inquire here. 

The utilitarian theory holds, that all forces 
influencing the mind of man are pleasures and 
pains; and Paley went so far as to say, that 
all pleasures and pains are of one kind only. 
Mr. Bain has carried out this view to its complete 
extent, saying ‘ No amount of complication is 
ever able to disguise the general fact, that our 
voluntary activity is moved by only two great 
classes of stimulants ; either a pleasure or a pain, 
present or remote, must lurk in every situation 
that drives us into action.’ The question certainly 
appears to turn upon the language used. Call any 
motive "which attracts us to a certain course of 
conduct, pleasure ; and call any motive which 
deters us from that conduct, pain ; and it becomes 
impossible to deny that all actions are governed 
by pleasure and pain. But it then becomes indis- 
pensable to admit that a single higher pleasure 
will sometimes neutralise a vast extent and con- 
tinuance of lower pains. It seems hardly possible 
to admit Paley ’s statement, except with an intei*- 

« ‘ The Emotions and the Will,’ Ist Ed. p. 460. 

Introduction. 

29 

pretatioii that would probably reverse his intended 
meaning. Motives and feelings are certainly of the 
same kind to the extent that we are able to weigh 
them against each other; but they are, neverthe- 
less, almost incomparable in power and authority. 

My present purpose is accomplished in pointing 
out this hierarchy of feeling, and assigning a proper 
place to the pleasures and pains with which the 
Economist deals. It is tlie lowest rank of feelings 
which we here treat. The calculus of utility aims 
at supplying the ordinary wants of man at the 
least cost of labour. Each labourer, in the absence 
of other motives, is supposed to devote his enei’gy 
to the accumulation of wealth. A higher calculus 
of moral right and wrong would be needed to show 
how he may best employ that wealth for the good 
of othei’s as well as himself. But when that higher 
calculus gives no prohibition, we need the lower 
calculus to gain us the utmost good in matters of 
moral indifference. There is no rule of morals to 
forbid our making two blades of grass grow instead 
of one, if, by the wise expenditure of labour, we 
can do so. And we may certainly say, with Francis 
Bacon, ‘ while philosophers are disputing whether 
virtue or pleasure be the proper aim of life, do 
you provide yourself with the instruments of 
either.’ 

CHAPTER II. 

THEOEY OP PLEASUEE AND PAIN. 

Pleasure and Pain as Quantities. 

Peoceeding to consider how pleasure and pain 
can be estimated as magnitudes, we must un- 
doubtedly accept what Bentham has laid down 
upon this subject. ‘To a person,’ he says^, ‘con- 
sidered hy himself, the value of a pleasure or pain, 
considered hy itself, will be greater or less according 
to the four following circumstances : — 

(1) Its intensity. 

(2) Its duration. 

(3) Its certainty or uncertainty. 

(4) Its propinquity or remoteness. 

^ * An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, 
2nd Ed., 1823, vol. i. p. 49. The earliest writer, who, so far as I 
know, has treated Pleasure and Pain in a definitely quantitative 
manner, is Francis Hutcheson, in his ‘Essay on the Nature and 
Conduct of the Passions and Affections,^ 1728, pp. 34-43, 126, etc- 

31 

Theory of Pleasure and Pain. 

These are the circumstances which are to be 
considered in estimating a pleasure or a pain 
considered each of them by itself.’ 

Benthamb goes on to consider three other cir- 
cumstances which relate to the ultimate and 
complete result of any act or feeling ; these 
are — 

(5) Fecundity, or the chance a feeling has of 

being followed by feelings of the same 
kind ; that is, pleasures, if it be a pleasure ; 
pains, if it be a pain. 

(6) Purity, or the chance it has of not being 

followed by feelings of an opposite kind. 
And 

(7) Extent, or the number of persons to whom 

it extends, and who are atfccted by it. 
These three last circumstances are of high im- 
portance as regards the theory of morals ; but 
they will not enter into the more simple and 
restricted problem which we attempt to solve in 
Economics, 

A feeling, whether of pleasure or of pain, must 
be regarded as having two dimensions, or modes 
of varying in regard to quantity. Every feeling 
must last some time, and it may last a longer 
or shorter time; while it lasts, it may be more 
or less acute and intense. If in two cases the 
duration of feeling is the same, that case will 

^ Introduction, p. 50. 

32 Tlte Theory of Political EcoiKroiy. 

produce the greater quantity which is the more 
intense ; or we may say that, with the same dura- 
tion, the quantity will he proportional to the 
intensity. On the other hand, if the intensity of 
a feeling were to remain constant, the quantity of 
feeling would increase with its duration. Two 
days of the same degree of happiness are to be 
twice as much desired as one day ; two days of 
suffering are to he twice as much feared. If the 
intensity ever continued fixed, the whole quantity 
would be found by multiplying the number of 
units of intensity into the number of units of 
duration. Pleasure and pain, then, are quantities 
possessing two dimensions, just as superficies 
possesses the two dimensions of length and 
breadth. 

In almost every case, however, the intensity of 
feeling will change from moment to moment. 
Incessant variation characterises our states of 
mind, and this is the source of the main difficul- 
ties of the subject. Nevertheless, if these varia- 
tions can be traced out at all, or any approach to 
method and law can be detected, it will be possible 
to form a conception of the resulting quantity of 
feeling. We may imagine that the intensity changes 
at the end of every minute, but remains constant in 
the intervals. The quantity during each minute may 
be represented, as in Fig. I, by a rectangle whose 
base is supposed to correspond to the duration of 

33 

Theory of Pleasure and Pain. 

a minute, and whose height is proportional to the 
intensity of the feeling during the minute in 

question. Along the line ox we measure time, and 
along parallels to the perpendicular line oy we 
measure intensity. Each of the rectangles between 
jym and qn represents the feeling of one minute. 
The aggregate quantity of feeling generated during 
the time mn will then be represented by the 
aggregate area of the rectangles between pm and 
qn. In this case the intensity of the feeling is 
supposed to be gradually declining. 

But it is an artificial assumption that the in- 
tensity would vary by sudden steps and at regular 
intervals. The error thus introduced Avill not be 
great if the intervals of time are very short, and 
will be less the shorter the intervals are made. 
To avoid all error, we must imagine the intervals 
of time to be infinitely short; that is, we must 
treat the intensity as varying continuously. Thus 
the proper representation of the variation of feeling 

D 

34 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

is found in a curve of more or less complex 
character. In Fig. II the height of each point of 

the curve pq, above the horizontal line ox, indicates 
the intensity of feeling in a moment of time ; and 
the whole quantity of feeling generated in the time 
mn is measured by the area bounded by the lines 
pm, qn, mn, and pq. The feeling belonging to any 
other time, ma, will be measured by the space 
mabp cut off by the perpendicular line ah. 

Pain the Negative of Pleasure. 

It will be readily conceded that pain is the 
opposite of pleasure ; so that to decrease pain is 
to increase pleasure ; to add pain is to decrease 
pleasure. Thus we may treat pleasure and pain 
as positive and negative quantities are treated in 
algebra. The algebraic sum of a series of pleasures 
and pains will be obtained by adding the pleasures 
together and the pains together, and then striking 

36 

Theory of Pleasure and Pain, 

the balance by subtracting the smaller amount 
from the greater. Our object will always be to 
maximise the resulting sum in the direction of 
pleasure, which we may fairly call the positive 
direction. This object we shall accomplish by ac- 
cepting everything, and undertaking every action 
of which the resulting pleasure exceeds the pain 
which is undergone ; we must avoid every object 
or action which leaves a balance in the other 
direction. 

The most important parts of the theory will turn 
upon the exact equality, without regard to sign, of 
the pleasure derived from the possession of an 
object, and the pain encountered in its acquisition. 
I am glad, therefore, to quote the following pas- 
sage from Mr, Bain’s treatise on ‘The Emotions 
and the Will in which he exactly expresses the 
opposition of pleasure and pain : — ‘ When pain is 
followed by pleasure, there is a tendency in the one, 
more or less, to neutralise the other. When the 
pleasure exactly assuages the pain, we say that 
the two are equivalent, or equal in amount, although 
of opposite nature, like hot and cold, positive and 
negative ; and when two different kinds of pleasure 
have the power of satiating the same amount of 
pain, there is fair ground for pronouncing them 
of equal emotional power. Just as acids are pro- 
nounced equivalent when in amount sufficient to 

c First Edition, p. 30. 

D 2 

36 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

neutralise the same portion of alkali, and as heat 
is estimated by the quantity of snow melted by it, 
so pleasures are fairly compared as to their total 
efficacy on the mind, by the amount of pain that 
they are capable of submerging. In this sense there 
may be an effective estimate of degree.’ 

Anticipated Feeling. 

Bentham has stated that one of the main ele- 
ments in estimating the force of a pleasure or pain 
is its propinquity or remoteness. It is certain that 
a very large part of what we experience in life 
depends not on the actual circumstances of the 
moment so much as on the anticipation of future 
events. As Mr. Bain says ‘ The foretaste of 
pleasure is pleasure begun ; every actual delight 
casts before it a corresponding ideal.’ Every one 
must have felt that the enjoyment actually expe- 
rienced at any moment is but limited in amount, 
and usually fails to answer to the anticipations 
which have been formed. ‘Man never is but 
always to be blest’ is a correct description of our 
ordinary state of mind ; and there is little doubt 
that, in minds of much intelligence and foresight, 
the greatest force of feeling and motive arises from 
the anticipation of a long-continued future. 

^ See above, p. 30. 

e ‘ The Emotions and the Will/ Firbt Edition, p. 74. 

Theory of Pleasure and Pain. 

37 

Now, between the actual amount of feeling antici- 
pated and that which is felt there must he some 
natural relation, very variable no doubt according 
to circumstances, the intellectual standing of the 
race, or the character of the individual ; and yet 
subject to some general laws of variation. The 
intensity of present anticipated feeling must, to 
use a mathematical expression, be some function 
of the future actual feeling and of the intervening 
time, and it must increase as we approach the 
moment of realisation. Tlie change, again, must 
be less rapid the further we are from the moment, 
and more rapid as we come nearer to it. An event 
which is to happen a year hence aifects us on the 
average about as much one day as another; but 
an event of importance, which is to take place three 
days hence, will probably affect us on each of the 
intervening days more acutely than the last. 

This power of anticipation must have a large 
influence in Economics; for upon it is based all 
accumulation of stocks of commodity to be con- 
sumed at a future time. That class or race of men 
who have the most foresight will work most for 
the future. The untutored savage, like the child, 
is wholly occupied with the pleasures and the 
troubles of the moment ; the morrow is dimly felt ; 
the limit of his horizon is but a few days off. The 
w'ants of a future year, or of a lifetime, are wholly 
unforeseen. But, in a state of civilisation, a vague 

38 

The Theoi'y of Political Economy. 

though powerful feeling of the future is the main 
incentive to industry and saving. The cares of the 
moment are but ripples on the tide of achievement 
and hope. We may safely call that man happy 
who, however lowly his position and limited his 
possessions, can always hope for more than he has, 
and can feel that every moment of exertion tends 
to realise his aspirations. lie, on the contrary, who 
seizes the enjoyment of the passing moment with- 
out regard to coming times, must discover sooner 
or later, that his stock of pleasure is on the wane, 
and that even hope begins to fail. 

Uncertainty of Future Events. 

In admitting the force of anticipated feeling, we 
are compelled to take account of the uncertainty 
of all future events. We ought never to estimate 
the value of that which may or may not happen 
as if it would certainly happen. When it is as 
likely as not that I shall receive £l00, the chance 
is worth but £50, because if, for a great many times 
in succession, I purchase the chance at this rate, 
I shall almost certainly neither lose nor gain. The 
test of correct estimation of probabilities is that 
the calculations agi-ee with fact on the' average. 
If we apply this rule -to all future interests, we 
must reduce our estimate of any feeling in the ratio 
of the numbers expressing the probability of its 
occurrence. If the probability is only one in ten 

39 

Theory of Pleasure and Pain. 

that I shall have a certain day of pleasure, I ought 
to anticipate the pleasure with one-tenth of the 
force which would belong to it if certain. In select- 
ing a course of action which depends on uncertain 
events, as, in fact, does everything in life, I should 
multiply the quantity of feeling attaching to every 
future event by the fraction denoting its proba- 
bility. A great casualty, which is very unlikely 
to happen, may not be so important as a slight 
casualty which is nearly sure to happen. Almost 
unconsciously we make calculations of this kind 
more or less accurately in all the ordinary affairs 
of life ; and in systems of life, fire, marine or other 
insurance, we carry out the calculations to great 
perfection. In all industry directed to future pur- 
poses, we must take similar account of our want 
of knowledge of what is to be. 

CHAPTER III. 

THEORY OP UTILITY. 

Definition of Terms. 

Pleasure and pain are undoubtedly the ultimate 
objects of the Calculus of Economics. To satisfy 
our wants to the utmost with the least effort — to 
procure the greatest amount of what is desirable 
at the expense of the least that is undesirable 
— in other words, to maximise pleasure, is the 
problem of Economic^ But it is convenient to 
transfer our attention as soon as possible to the 
physical objects or actions which are the source 
to us of pleasures and pains. A very large part 
of the labour of any community is spent upon the 
production of the ordinary necessaries and conve- 
niences of life, such as food, clothing, buildings, 
utensils, furniture, ornaments, &c. ; and the aggre- 
gate of these things, therefore, is the immediate 
object of our attention. 

41 

Tfieory bf Utility. 

It is desirable to. introduce at once, and to define, 
some terms which facilitate the expression of the 
Principles of Economics. Bj a commodity we shall 
understand any object, substance, action or service, 
which can afford pleasure or ward off pain. The 
name was originally abstract, and denoted the 
quality of anything by which it was capable of 
serving man. Having acquired, by a common 
process of confusion, a concrete signification, it 
will be well to retain the word entirely for that 
signification, and employ the term utility to denote 
the abstract quality whereby an object serves our 
purposes, and becomes entitled to rank as a com- 
modity. Whatever can produce pleasure or pre- 
vent pain may possess utility. J.-B. Say has 
correctly and briefly defined utility as ‘la facultd 
qu’ont les choses de pouvoir servir h I’liomme, de 
quelque maniere que ce soit.’ The food which 
prevents the pangs of hunger, the clothes which 
fend off the cold of winter, possess incontestable 
utility; but we must beware of restricting the 
meaning of the word by any moral considerations. 
Anything which an individual is found to desire 
and to labour for must be assumed to possess for 
him utility. In the science of Economics we treat 
men not as they ought to be, but as they 
are. Bentham, in establishing the foundations of 
Moral Science in his great ‘Introduction to the 
Principles of Morals and Legislation ’ (p. 3), thus 

42 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

comprehensively defines the term in question; — 
‘ By utility is meant that property in any object, 
whereby it tends to produce benefit, advantage, 
pleasure, good, or happiness (all this, in the present 
case, comes to the same thing), or (what comes 
again to the same thing) to prevent the happening 
of mischief, pain, evil, or unhappiness to the party 
whose interest is considered/ 

This perfectly expresses the meaning of the word 
in Economics, provided that the will or inclination 
of the person immediately concerned is taken as 
the sole criterion, for the time, of what is or is not 
useful. 

The Laws of Human Want. 

Economics must be founded upon a full and 
accurate investigation of the conditions of utility; 
and, to understand this element, we must neces- 
sarily examine the wants and desires of man. We, 
first of all, need a theory of the consumption of 
wealth. J. S. Mill, indeed, has given an opinion 
inconsistent with this. ‘ Political Economy,’ he 
saysf, ‘has nothing to do with the consumption 
of wealth, further than as the consideration of it 
is inseparable from that of production, or from 
that of distribution. We know not of any laws 
of the consumption of wealth, as the subject of a 

^ ‘ Essays on some unsettled Questions of Political Economy,’ 
p. 132. 

43 

Theory of Utility. 

distinct science; they can be no other than the 
laws of human enjoyment.’ 

But it is surely obvious that Economics does 
rest upon the laws of human enjoyment; and that, 
if those laws are developed by no other science, 
they must be developed by economists. We labour 
to produce with the sole object of consuming, and 
the kinds and amounts of goods produced must be 
determined with regard to what we want to con- 
sume. Every manufacturer knows and feels how 
closely he must anticipate the tastes and needs 
of his customers : his whole success depends upon 
it; and, in like manner, the theory of Economics 
must begin with a correct theory of consumption. 
Many economists have had a clear perception of 
this truth. Lord Lauderdale distinctly states s, 
that ‘ the great and important step towards ascer- 
taining the causes of the direction which industry 
takes in nations .... seems to be the discovery of 
what dictates the proportion of demand for the 
various articles w'hich are produced.’ Senior, in his 
admirable treatise, has also recognised this truth, 
and pointed out what he calls the Law of Variety 
in human requirements. The necessaries of life 
are so few and simple, that a man is soon satisfied 
in regard to these, and desires to extend his range 
of enjoyment. His first object is to vary his food ; 

8 ‘Inquiry into the Nature and Origin of Public Wealth,’ Second 
Edition. 1819. n. 306. 

44 The Theory of Political Economy. 

but there soon arises the desire of variety and 
elegance in dress; and to this succeeds the desire 
to build, to ornament, and to furnish — tastes 
which, where they exist, are absolutely insatiable, 
and seem to increase with every improvement in 
civilisation h. 

Many French economists also have observed that 
human wants are the ultimate subject-matter of 
Economics ; Bastiat, for instance, in his ‘ Harmonies 
of Political Economy,’ says i, ‘ Wants, Efforts, Satis- 
faction — this is the circle of Political Economy.’ 

In still later years, Courcelle-Seneuil actually 
commenced his treatise ■with a definition of want 
— ‘ Le besoin ^conomiquc est un d4sir qui a pour 
but la possession et la jouissance d’un objet 
materiel And I conceive that he has given the 
best possible statement of the problem of Econo- 
mics when he expresses its object as ‘ ^ satisfaire 
nos besoins avec la moindre somme de travail 
possible b’ 

Professor Hearn also begins his excellent treatise, 
entitled ‘Philology, or the Theory of Etforts to 
supply Human Wants,’ with a chapter in -which he 

h ^Encyclopaedia Hetropolitaiia/ art. Political Economy^ p. 133. 
Fifth Edition of Eeprint, p. 11. 

i ‘ Harmonies of Political Economy,’ translated by P. J. Stirling, 
1860, p. 65. 

k ‘Traits Th6orique et Pratique d’Economie Politique,' par J. 
G. Courcelle-Seneuil, 2me ed., Paris, 1867, tom. i. p. 25. 

1 A. p. 33. 

Theory of Utility. 45 

considers the nature of the wants impelling man to 
exertion. 

The writer, however, who seems to me to have 
reached the deepest comprehension of the founda- 
tions of Economics, is T. E. Banfteld. His course 
of Lectures delivered in the University of Cam- 
bridge in 1844, and published under the title of 
‘The Organization of Labour,’ is highly interest- 
ing, though not always correct. In the following 
passage™ he profoundly points out that the 
scientific basis of Economics is in a theory of con- 
sumption : I need make no excuse for quoting this 
passage at full length. 

‘The lower wants man experiences in common 
with brutes. The cravings of hunger and thirst, 
the effects of heat and cold, of drought and damp, 
he feels with more acuteness than the rest of the 
animal world. His sufferings are doubtless sharp- 
ened by the consciousness that he has no right to 
be subject to such inflictions. Experience, however, 
shows that privations of various kinds affect men 
differently in degree according to the circumstances 
in which they are placed. For some men the priva- 
tion of certain enjoyments is intolerable, whose 
loss is not even felt by others. Some, again, 
sacrifice all that others hold dear for the grati- 
fication of longings and aspirations that are 
incomprehensible to their neighbours. Upon this 

la Second Edition, p. 1 1 . 

46 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

complex foundation of low wants and high aspira- 
tions the Political Economist has to build the 
theory of production and consumption. 

‘An examination of the nature and intensity 
of man’s wants shows that this connection between 
them gives to Political Economy its scientific basis. 
The first proposition of the theory of consumption 
is, that the satisfaction of every lower want in the 
scale creates a desire of a higher character. If the 
higher desire existed previous to the satisfaction 
of the primary want, it becomes more intense 
when the latter is removed. The removal of a 
primary want commonly awakens the sense of more 
than one secondai-y privation : thus a full supply 
of ordinary food not only excites to delicacy in 
eating, but awakens attention to clothing. The 
highest grade in the scale of wants, that of pleasure 
derived from the beauties of nature and art, is 
usually confined to men who are exempted from 
hll the lower privations. Thus the demand for, and 
the consumption of, objects of refined enjoyment 
has its lever in the facility with which the primary 
wants are satisfied. This, therefore, is the key to 
the true theory of value. Without relative values 
in the objects to the acquirement of which we 
direct our power, there would be no foundation 
for Political Economy as a science.’ 

Theory of Utility. 

47 

Utility is not an Intrinsic Quality. 

My principal work now lies in tracing out the 
exact nature and conditions of utility. It seems 
strange indeed that economists have not bestowed 
more minute attention on a subject which doubtless 
furnishes the true key to the problem of Economics. 

In the first place, utility, though a quality of 
things, is no inherent quality. It is better described 
as a circumstance of thinys arising out of their 
relation to man’s requirements. As Senior most 
accurately says, ‘Utility denotes no intrinsic quality 
in the things which we call useful ; it merely ex- 
presses their relations to the pains and pleasures 
of mankind.’ We can never, therefore, say abso- 
lutely that some objects have utility and others 
have not. The ore lying in the mine, the diamond 
escaping the eye of the searcher, the wheat lying 
unreaped, the fruit ungathered for want of con- 
sumers, have no utility at all. The most whole- 
some and necessary kinds of food are useless unless 
there are hands to collect and mouths to eat them 
sooner or later. Nor, when we consider the matter 
closely, can we say that all portions of the same 
commodity possess equal utility. Water, for in- 
stance, may be roughly described as the most 
useful of all substances. A quart of water per 
day has the high utility of saving a person from 
dying in a most distressing manner. Several gallons 

48 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

a day may possess much utility for such purposes 
as cooking and washing; but after an adequate 
supply is secured for these uses, any additional 
quantity is a matter of comparative indifference. 
All that we can say, then, is, that water, up to 
a certain quantity, is indispensable ; that further 
quantities will have various degrees of utility ; but 
that beyond a certain quantity the utility sinks 
gradually to zero; it may even become negative, 
that is to say, further supplies of the same sub- 
stance may become inconvenient and hurtful. 

Exactly the same considerations apply more or 
less clearly to every other article. A pound of 
bread per day supplied to a person saves him from 
starvation, and has the highest conceivable utility. 
A second pound per day has also no slight utility : 
it keeps him in a state of comparative plenty, 
though it be not altogether indispensable. A third 
pound would begin to be superfluous. It is clear, 
then, that utility is not proportional to commodity : 
the very same articles vary in utility according as 
we already possess more or less of the same article. 
The like may be said of other things. One suit of 
clothes per annum is necessary, a second conveni- 
ent, a third desirable, a fourth not unacceptable; 
but we, sooner or later, reach a point at which 
further supplies are not desired with any per- 
ceptible./force, unless it be for subsequent use. 

Theory of Utility. 

49 

Law of the Variation of Utility. 

Let us now investigate this subject a little more 
closely. Utilit}’^ must be considered as measured 
by, or even as actually identical with, the addition 
made to a person’s happiness. It is a convenient 
name for the aggregate of the favourable balance 
of feeling produced — the sum of the pleasure 
created and the pain prevented. We must now 
carefully discriminate between the total utility 
arising from any commodity and the utility at- 
taching to any particular portion of it. Thus the 
total utility of the food we eat consists in main- 
taining life, and may be considered as infinitely 
great ; but if we were to subtract a tenth part 
from what we eat daily, our loss would be but 
slight. We should certainly not lose a tenth pai-t 
of the whole utility of food to us. It might be 
doubtful whether we should suffer any harm at all. 

Let us imagine the whole quantity of food which 
a person consumes on an average during twenty- 
four hours to be divided into ten eqiial parts. If 
his food be reduced by the last part, he will suffer 
but little ; if a second tenth part be deficient, he 
will feel the want distinctly ; the subtraction of 
the third tenth part will be decidedly injurious; 
with every subsequent subtraction of a tenth part 
his sufferings will be more and more serious, until 
at length he will be upon the verge of starvation. 

B 

50 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

Now, if we call each of the tenth parts an incre- 
ment, the meaning of these facts is, that each in- 
crement of food is less necessary, or possesses less 
utility, than the previous one. To explain this 
variation of utility, we may make use of space- 
representations, which I have found convenient 
in illustrating the laws of Economics in my College 
lectures during fifteen years past. 

Let the line ox he used as a measure of the 
quantity of food, and let it be divided into ten 
equal parts to correspond to the ten portions of 
food mentioned above. Upon these equal lines are 
constructed rectangles, and the area of each rect- 
angle may be assumed to represent the utility of 

the increment of food corresponding to its base. 
Thus the utility of the last increment is small, 
being proportional to the small rectangle on x. 
As we approach towards o, each increment bears 
a larger rectangle, that standing upon iii being 
the largest complete rectangle. The utility of the 

51 

Theory of Utility. 

next increment, ii, is undefined, as also that of i, 
since these portions of food would be indispen- 
sable to life, and their utility, therefore, infinitely 
great. 

We can now form a clear notion of the utility 
of the whole food, or of any part of it ; for we have 
only to add together the proper rectangles. The 
utility of the first half of the food will be the sum 
of the rectangles standing on the line oa ; that of 
the second half will be represented by the sura 
of the smaller rectangles between a and h. The 
total utility of the food will be the whole sum of 
the rectaiigles, and will be infinitely great. 

The comparative utility of the several portions 
is, however, the most important point. Utility 
may be treated as a quantity of two dimensions, 
one dimension consisting in the quantity of the 
commodity, and another in the intensity of the 
effect produced upon the consumer. Now, the 
quantity of the commodity is measured on the 
horizontal line ox, and the intensity of utility will 
be measured by the length of the upright lines, 
or ordinates. The intensity of utility of the third 
increment is measured either by pq, or p<l, and its 
utility is the product of the units in pf multiplied 
by those in pq. 

But the division of the food into ten equal parts 

“ The theory of dimensions of utility is fully stated in a subse- 
quewt section. 

E 2 

62 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

is an arbitrary supposition. If we had taken 
twenty or a hundred or more equal parts, the same 
general principle would hold true, namely, that 
each small portion would be less useful and neces- 
sary than the last. The law may be considered to 
hold true theoretically, liowever small the incre- 
ments are made ; and in this way we shall at last 
reach a figure which is undistinguishable from a 
continuous curve. The notion of infinitely small 
quantities of food may seem absurd as regards the 
consumption of one individual ; but, when we con- 
sider the consumption of a nation as a whole, the 
consumption may well be conceived to increase 
or diminish by quantities which are, practically 
speaking, infinitely small compared with the whole 
consumption. The laws which we are about to 
trace out are to be conceived as theoretically true 
of the individual; they can only be practically 
verified as regards the aggregate transactions, pro- 
ductions and consumptions of a large body of 
people. But the laws of the aggregate depend of 
course upon the laws applying to individual cases. 

The law of the variation of the degree of utility 
of food may thus be represented by a continuous 
curve 'phq (Fig. lY), and the perpendicular height 
of each point of the curve above the line ox, re- 
presents the degree of utility of the commodity 
when a certain amount has been consumed. 

Thus, when the quantity oa has been consumed. 

53 

Theory of Utility. 

the degree of utility corresponds to the length of 
the line ah ; for if we take a very little more food, 
ad, its utility will be the product of ad and ah 

very nearly, and more nearly the less is the magni- 
tude of ad. The degree of utility is thus properly 
measured by the height of a very narrow rectangle 
corresponding to a very small quantity of food, 
which theoretically ought to be infinitely small. 

Total Utility and Degree of Utility. 

We are now in a position to appreciate perfectly 
the difference between the total utility of any com^ 
niodity and the degree of utility of the commodity 
at any point. These are, in fact, quantities of alto 
gether ditferent kinds, the first being representec 
by an area, and the second by a line. We mus 
consider how we may express these notions ii 
appropriate mathematical language. 

Let X signify, as is usual in mathematical books 
the quantity which varies independently, — in this 

54 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

case the quantity of commodity. Let u denote the 
whole utility pi’ocecding from the consumption of x. 
Then u will be, as mathematicians say, a fimdioi- 
of X ; that is, it will vary in some continuous and 
regular, but probably unknown, manner, when x is 
made to vary. Our great object at present, how- 
ever, is to express the degree of utility. 

Mathematicians employ the sign a prefixed to 
a sign of quantity, such as x, to signify that a 
quantity of the same nature as x, but small in pro- 
portion to X, is taken into consideration. Thus ax 
means a small portion of x, and X+ ax is there- 
fore a quantity a little greater than x. Now, when 
£c is a quantity of commodity, the utility of a; + ax 
will be more than that of a; as a general rule. Let 
the whole utility of x+ ax he denoted by w-i- au ; 
then it is obvious that the increment of utility a u 
belongs to the increment of commodity ax; and 
if, for the sake of argument, we suppose the degree 
of utility uniform over the whole of a x, which is 
nearly true owing to its smallness, we shall find 
the corresponding degree of utility by dividing a u 
by AX. 

Wo find these considerations fully illustrated by 
Fig. IV, in which oa represents x, and ah is the degree 
of utility at the point a. Now, if we increase x by 
the small quantity aa', or ax, the utility is in- 
creased by the small rectangle abh'a', or au; and, 
since a rectangle is the product of its sides, w'e 

Theory of Utility. 66 

find that the length of the line ab, the degree of 
utility, is represented by the fraction 

As already explained, howerer, the utility of a 
commodity may be considered to vary with perfect 
continuity, so that we commit a small error in 
assuming it to be uniform over the whole incre- 
ment ACC. To avoid this we must imagine a a? to 
be reduced to an infinitely small size, £\u de- 
creasing with it. The smaller the quantities are 
the more nearly we shall have a correct expres- 
sion for ah, the degree of utility at the point a. Thus 

the limit of this fraction — , or, as it is commonly 

ACC 

expressed, is the degree of utility corresponding 

to the quantity of commodity cc. The degree of 
utility is, in mathematical language, the differential 
coeffcient of u considered as a ftinction of x, and 
will itself be another function of x. 

We shall seldom need to consider the degree of 
utility except as regards the last increment which 
has been consumed or, which comes to the same 
thing, the next increment which is about to be con- 
sumed. I shall therefore commonly use the expres- 
sion final degree of utility, as meaning the degree of 
utility of the last addition, or the next possible 
addition of a very small, or infinitely small, quantity 
to the existing stock. In ordinary circumstances. 

56 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

too, the final degree of utility will not be great 
compared with what it might be. Only in famine 
or other extreme circumstances do we approach 
the higher degrees of utility. Accordingly, we can 
often treat the lower portions of the curves of 
variation {plq. Fig. IV) which concern ordinary 
commercial transactions, while we leave out of 
sight the portions beyond p or q. It is also evident 
that we may know the degree of utility at any 
point while ignorant of the total utility, that is, 
the area of the whole curve. To be able to esti- 
mate the total enjoyment of a person would be 
an interesting thing, but it would not be really so 
important as to be able to estimate the additions 
and subtractions to his enjoyment, which circum- 
stances occasion. In the same Avay a very w'ealthy 
person may be quite unable to form any accurate 
statement of his aggregate wealth ; but he may 
nevertheless have exact accounts of income and 
expenditure, that is, of additions and subtractions. 

Variation of the Final Degree of Utility. 

The final degree of utility is that function upon 
which the Theory of Economics will be found to 
turn. Economists, generally speaking, have failed 
to discriminate between this function and the total 
utility, and from this confusion has arisen much 
perplexity. Many commodities which are most 

57 

Theory of Utility. 

useful to us are esteemed and desired but little. 
We cannot live without water, and yet in ordinary 
circumstances we set no value on it. Why is this ? 
Simply because we usually have so much of it that 
its final degree of utility is reduced nearly to zero. 
We enjoy, every day, the almost infinite utility of 
water, but then we do not need to consume more 
than we have. Let the supply run short by 
drought, and we begin to feel the higher degrees 
of utility, of which we think but little at other 
times. 

The variation of the function expressing the 
final degree of utility is the all-important point 
in economic problems. We may state as a general 
law, that the degree of utility varies with the quantity 
of commodity, and idtimately decreases as that quan- 
tity increases. No commodity can be named which 
Ave continue to desire with the same force, Avhatever 
be the quantity already in use or possession. All 
our appetites are capable of satisfaction or satiety 
sooner or later, in fact, both these words mean, 
etymologically, that we have had enough, so that 
more is of no use to us. It does not follow, 
indeed, that the degree of utility will always sink 
to zero. This may be the case with some things, 
especially the simple animal requirements, such 
as food, water, air, &c. But the more refined and 
intellectual our needs become, the less are they 
capable of satiety. To the desire for articles of 

58 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

taste, science, or curiosity, when once excited, there 
is hardly a limit. 

This great principle of the ultimate decrease of 
the final degree of utility of any commodity is im- 
plied in the writings of many economists, though 
seldom distinctly stated. It is the real law which 
lies at the basis of Senior’s so-called ‘Law of 
Variety.’ Indeed, Senior incidentally states the 
law itself. lie says : ‘ It is obvious that our desires 
do not aim so much at quantity as at diversity. 
Not only are there limits to the pleasure which 
commodities of any given class can afford, but the 
pleasure diminishes in a rapidly increasing ratio 
long before those limits are reached. Two articles 
of the same kind will seldom afford twice the 
pleasure of one, and still less will ten give five 
times the pleasure of two. In proportion, there- 
fore, as any article is abundant, the number of 
those who are provided with it, and do not wish, 
or wish but little, to increase their provision, is 
likely to be great; and, so far as they are con- 
cerned, the additional supply loses all, or nearly 
all, its utility. And, in proportion to its scarcitjf, 
the number of those who are in want of it, and the 
degree in which they want it, are likely to be in- 
creased ; and its utility, or, in other words, the 
pleasure which the possession of a given quantity 
of it will afford, increases proportionally 

o ‘Encyclopsedia MetropoUtana,’p. 133. Reprint, p. 12. 

Theory of Utility. oO 

Banfield’s ‘Law of the Subordination of Wants 
also rests upon the same basis. It cannot be said, 
with accuracy, that the satisfaction of a lower 
want creates a higher want ; it merely permits the 
higher Avant to manifest itself. We distribute our 
labour and possessions in such a way as to satisfy 
the more pressing wants first. If food runs short, 
the all-absorbing question is, how to obtain more, 
because, at the moment, more pleasure or pain 
depends upon food than upon any other commodity. 
But, when food is moderately abundant, its final 
degree of utility falls very low, and wants of a 
more complex and less satiable nature become com- 
paratively prominent. 

The writer, however, who appears to me to 
have most clearly apj)reciated the nature and 
importance of the laAv of utility, is Richard Jen- 
nings, who, in 1855, published a small book called 
the ‘Natural Elements of Political Economy?.’ 
This work treats of the physical groundwork of 
Economics, showing its dependence on physiological 
laws. It displays great insight into the real basis 
of Economics ; yet I am not aware that economists 
have bestowed the slightest attention on Jennings’ 
views 1. I give, therefore, a full extract from his 

P London : Longmans. 

Cairnes is^ however, an^, exertion. See liis work on ‘Tlie 
Character and Logical Method of Political Economy.’ London, 
1857, p. 81. Second Edition (Macmillan), 1875, pp. 56, 110, 
224 App. E. 

00 

The Theory of Political Ecoiiomy. 

remarks on the nature of utility. It will be seen 
that the law, as I state it, is no novelty, and 
that careful deduction from principles in our 
possession is alone needed to give us a correct 
Theory of Economics, 

‘ To turn from the relative effect of commodities, 
in reducing sensations, to those which are abso- 
lute, or dependent only on the quantity of each 
commodity, it is but too well known to every con- 
dition of men, that the degree of each sensation 
which is produced, is by no means commensurate 
with the quantity of the commodity applied to the 

senses These effects require to be closely 

observed, because they are the foundation of the 
changes of money price, which valuable objects 
command in times of varied scarcity and abun- 
dance ; we shall therefore hero direct our attention 
to them for the purpose of ascertaining the nature 
of the law according to which the sensations that 
attend on consumption vary in degree with changes 
in the quantity of the commodity consumed. 

‘We may gaze upon an object until we can no 
longer discern it, listen until we can no longer 
hear, smell until the sense of odour is exhausted, 
taste until the object becomes nauseous, and touch 
until it becomes painful; we may consume food 
until we are fully satisfied, and use stimulants 
until more would cause pain. On the other hand, 
the same object offered to the special senses for 

61 

Theory of Utility. 

a moderate duration of time, and the same food 
or stimulants consumed when we are exhausted 
or weary, may convey much gratification. If the 
whole quantity of the commodity consumed during 
the interval of these two states of sensation, the 
state of satiety and the state of inanition, be con- 
ceived to be divided into a number of equal parts, 
each marked with its proper degrees of sensation, 
the question to be determined will be, what rela- 
tion does the difference in the degrees of the 
sensation bear to the difference in the quantities 
of the commodity ? 

‘ First, with respect to all commodities, our feel- 
ings show that the degrees of satisfaction do not 
proceed pari passu with the quantities consumed ; 
they do not advance equally with each instalment 
of the commodity offered to the senses, and then 
suddenly stop ; but diminish gradually, until they 
ultimately disappear, and further instalments can 
produce no further satisfaction. In this progres- 
sive scale the increments of sensation resulting 
from equal increments of the commodity are 
obviously less and less at each step, — each degree 
of sensation is less than the preceding degree. 
Placing ourselves at that middle point of sensa- 
tion, the juste milieu, the aurea mediocritas, the 
apia-rov fxerpov of sages, which is the most usual 
status of the mass of mankind, and which, thei'e- 
fore, is the best position that can be chosen for 

62 

T/te Theory of Political Economy. 

measuring deviations from the usual amount, we 
may say that the law which expresses the rela- 
tion of degrees of sensation to quantities of com- 
modities is of this character : if the average or 
temperate quantity of commodities he increased, 
the satisfaction derived is increased in a less 
degree, and ultimately ceases to be increased at 
all; if the average or temperate quantity be 
diminished, the loss of more and more satisfaction 
will continually ensue, and the detriment thence 
arising will ultimately become exceedingly great 

Disutility and Discommodity. 

A few words will suffice to suggest tliat as 
utility corresponds to the production of pleasure, 
or, at least, a favourable alteration in the balance 
of pleasure and pain, so negative utility will 
consist in the production of pain, or the unfavour- 
able alteration of the balance. In reality we must 
be almost as often concerned with the one as with 
the other; nevertheless, economists have not em- 
ployed any distinct technical terms to express that 
production of pain, which accompanies so many 
actions of life. They have fixed their attention on 
the more agreeable aspect of the matter. It will 
be allowable, however, to appropriate the good 

pp. 96-99; 

63 

Theory of Utility, 

English word discommodity, to signify any sub- 
stance or action which is the opposite of com- 
modity, that is to say, anything which we desire to 
get rid of, like ashes or sewage. Discommodity 
is, indeed, properly an abstract form signifying 
inconvenience, or disadvantage ; but, as the noun 
commodities has been used in the English language 
for four hundred years at least as a concrete term 
so we may now convert discommodity into a con- 
crete term, and speak of discommodities as sub- 
stances or things, which possess the quality of 
causing inconvenience or harm. For the abstract 
notion, the opposite or negative of utility, we may 
invent the term disutility, which will mean some- 
thing different from inutility, or the absence of 
utility. It is obvious that utility passes through 
inutility before changing into disutility, these 
notions being related as + , o and — . 

Distribution of Commodity in different Uses. 

The principles of utility may be illustrated by 
considering the mode in which Ave distribute a com- 
modity when it is capable of several uses. There 
are articles which may be employed for many dis- 
tinct purposes : thus, barley may be used either to 

® It is used precisely in its present economical sense in the re- 
markable Processe of the Libelle of English Policie, probably written 
in the 15th century, and printed in Hakluyt’s voyages. 

64 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

make beer, spirits, bread, or to feed cattle ; sugar 
may be used to eat, or for producing alcohol; 
timber may be used in construction, or as fuel; 
iron and other metals may be applied to many 
diiferent purposes. Imagine, then, a community in 
the possession of a certain stock of barley; what 
principles will regulate their mode of consuming 
it. Or, as Ave have not yet reached the subject of 
exchange, imagine an isolated family, or even an 
individual, possessing an adequate stock, and using 
some in one way and some in anothei*. The theory 
of utility gives, theoretically speaking, a complete 
solution of the question. 

Let s be the whole stock of some- commodity, 
and let it be capable of two distinct uses. Then 
we may represent the two quantities appropriated 
to these uses by and it being a condition 
that a7i + yi = s. The person may be conceived as 
successively expending small quantities of the 
commodity; now it is the inevitable tendency of 
human nature to choose that course which appears 
to offer the greatest advantage at the moment. 
Hence, when the person remains satisfied with the 
distribution he has made, it follows that no alter- 
ation would yield him more pleasure ; which 
amounts to saying that an increment of commo- 
dity would yield exactly as much utility in one 
use as in another. Let ami, am 2 , be the incre- 
ments of utility, which might arise respectively 

65 

Theory of Utility. 

from consuming an increment of commodity in 
the two different ways. When the distribution 
is completed, we ought to have a = a W2 ; or at 
the limit we have the equation 

_ du.2, 
dx dy 

which is true when x, y are respectively equal to 
Vi- We must, in other words, have the final 
degrees of utility in the two uses equal. 

The same reasoning which applies to uses of the 
same commodity will evidently apply to any two 
uses, and hence to all uses simultaneously, so that 
we obtain a series of equations less numerous by a 
unit than the number of ways of using the com- 
modity. The general result is that commodity, if 
consumed by a perfectly wise being, must be con- 
sumed with a maximum production of utility. 

We should often find these equations to fail. 
Even when x is equal to of the stock, its degree 
of utility might still exceed the utility attaching to 
the remaining ~ part in either of the other uses. 
This would mean that it was preferable to give the 
whole commodity to the first use. Such a case 
might perhaps he said to be not the exception hut 
the rule ; for, whenever a commodity is capable of 
only one use, the circumstance is theoretically re- 
presented by saying, that the final degree of utility 
in this employment always exceeds that in any 
other employment. 

66 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

Under peculiar circumstances great changes may 
take place in the consumption of a commodity. In 
a time of scarcity the utility of barley as food might 
rise so high as to exceed altogether its utility, even 
as regards the smallest quantity, in producing 
alcoholic liquors ; its consumption in the latter 
way would then cease. In a besieged town the 
employment of articles becomes revolutionised. 
Things of great utility in other respects are ruth- 
lessly applied to strange purposes. In Paris a vast 
stock of horses were eaten, not so much because 
they were useless in other ways, as because they 
were needed more strongly as food. A certain 
stock of horses had, indeed, to be retained as a 
necessary aid to locomotion, so that the equation of 
the degrees of utility never wholly failed. 

Theory of Dimenswns of Economic Quantities. 

In the recent progress of physical science, it has 
been found requisite to use notation for the purpose 
of displaying clearly the natures and relations of 
the various kinds of quantities concerned. Each 
different sort of quantity is, of course, expressed in 
terms of its own appropriate unit — length in terms 
of yards, or metres ; surface, or area, in terms of 
square yards or square metres; time in terms of 
seconds, days, or years; and so forth. But the 
more complicated quantities are evidently related 

Theory of Utility. 

67 

to the simpler ones. Surface is measured by the 
square yard, that is to say, the unit of length is 
involved twice over, and if by L we denote one 
dimension of length, then the dimensions of surface 
are LL, or L\ The dimensions of cubic capacity 
are in like manner LLL, or i®. 

In these cases the dimensions all enter 'positively, 
because the number of units in the cubical body, 
for instance, is found by 'multiplying the numbers 
of units in its length, breadth and depth. In other 
cases a dimension enters negatively. Thus denoting 
time by T, it is easy to see that the dimensions of 
velocity will be L divided hy T, or LT~^, because 
the number of units in the velocity of a body is 
found by dividing the units of length passed over 
by the units of time occupied in passing. In ex- 
pressing the dimensions of thermal and electric 
quantities, fractional exponents often become ne- 
cessary, and the subject assumes the form of a 
theory of considerable complexity. The reader to 
whom this branch of science is new will find a 
section briefly describing it in my Principles of 
Science, 3rd ed. p. 326, or he may refer to the works 
there mentioned *. 

Now, if such a theory of dimensions is requisite 

t J. D. Everett's ‘ IlluBtrations of the Centimetre-gramme- 
second System of Units/ 1875; Fleeming Jenkin's ‘Text-book of 
Electricity and Magnetism/ 1873; Clerk MaxwelFs ‘Theory of 
Heat/ or the commencement of his great Treatise on Electricity, 
Vol. I. p- 2. 

68 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

in dealing with the precise ideas of physical mag- 
nitudes, it seems to be still more desirable as 
regards the quantities with which we are con- 
cerned in Economics. One of the first and most 
difficult steps in a science is to conceive clearly 
the nature of the magnitudes about which we 
are arguing. Heat was long the subject of dis- 
cussion and experiment before physicists formed 
any definite idea how its quantity could be mea- 
sured and connected with other physical quan- 
tities. Yet, until that was done, it could not be 
considered the subject of an exact science. For 
one or two centuries economists have been wrang- 
ling about wealth, demand and supply, value, pro- 
duction, capital, interest, and the like ; but hardly 
any one could say exactly what were the natures of 
the quantities in question. Believing that it is in 
forming these primary ideas that we require to 
exercise the greatest care, I have thought it well 
worth the trouble and space to enter fully into a 
discussion of the dimensions of economic quantities. 

Beginning with the easiest and simplest ideas, 
the dimensions of commodity regarded merely as a 
physical quantity will be the dimensions of mass. 
It is true that commodities are measured in various 
ways, — thread by length, carpet by length, corn 
and liquids by cubic measure, eggs by number, 
metals and most other goods by weight. But it 
is obvious that, though the carpet be sold by 

69 

Theory of Utility. 

length, the breadth and the weight of the cloth 
are equally taken into account in fixing the terms 
of sale. There will generally be a tacit reference 
to weight, and through weight to mass of materials 
in all measurement of commodity. Even if this be 
not always the case, we may, for the sake of sim- 
plifying our symbols in the first treatment of the 
subject, assume that it is so. We need hardly 
recede to any ultimate analysis of the physical 
conditions of the commodity, but may take it to be 
measured by mass, symbolised by M, the sign 
usually employed in physical science to denote this 
dimension. 

A little consideration will show, however, that 
we have really little to do with absolute quantities 
of commodity. One hundred sacks of corn regarded 
merely by themselves can have no important mean- 
ing for the economist. Whether the quantity is 
large or small, enough or too much, depends in the 
first place upon the number of consumers for whom 
it is intended, and, in the second place, upon the 
time for which it is to last them. We may per- 
haps throw out of view number of consumers in 
this theory, by supposing that we are always deal- 
ing with the single average individual, the unit of 
which population is made up. Still, we cannot 
similarly get rid of the element of time. Quantity 
of supply must necessarily be estimated by the 
number of units of commodity divided by the 

70 

The Theory of Political Economy, 

number of units in the time over which it is to 
be expended. Thus it will involve M positively 
and T negatively, and its dimensions will be re- 
presented by If jT'K Thus in reality supply should 
he taken to mean not supply absolutely, hut rate of 
supply. 

Consumption of commodity must have the same 
dimensions. For goods must be consumed in time ; 
any action or effect endures a greater or less time, 
and commodity which will be abundant for a less 
time, may be scanty for a greater time. To say 
that a town consumes fifty million gallons of water 
is unmeaning per se. Before we can form any 
judgment about the statement, we must know 
whether it is consumed in a day, or a week, or a 
month. 

Following out this course of thought we shall 
arrive at the conclusion that time enters into all 
economic questions. We live in time, and think 
and act in time; we are in fact altogether th^^e 
creatures of time. Accordingly it is rate of supply, 
rate of production, rate of consumption, per unit 
of time that we shall be really treating; but it 
does not follow that T~^ enters into all the dimen- 
sions with which we deal. 

As was fully explained in Chapter II, the ulti- 
mate quantities which we treat in Economics are 
Pleasures and Pains, and our most ' difficult task 
will be to express their dimensions correctly. In 

Theory of Utility. 

71 

the first place, pleasure and pain must be regarded 
as measured upon the same scale, and as having, 
therefore, the same dimensions, being quantities of 
the same kind, which can be added and subtracted ; 
they differ only in sign or direction. Now, the only 
dimension belonging properly to feeling, seems to 
be intensity, and this intensity must be independent 
both of time, and of the quantity of commodity 
enjoyed. The intensity of feeling must mean, then, 
the instantaneous state 'produced hy an elementary or 
infinitesimal quantity of commodity consumed. 

Intensity of feeling, however, is only another 
name for degree of utility, which represents the 
favourable effect produced upon the human frame 
by the consumption of commodity, that is by an 
elementary or infinitesimal quantity of commodity. 
Putting U to indicate this dimension, we must 
remember that U will not represent even the full 
dimensions of the instantaneous state of pleasure 
or pain, much less the continued state which 
extends over a certain duration of time. The 
instantaneous state depends upon the sufficiency 
or insufficiency of supply of commodity. To enjoy 
a highly pleasurable condition, a person must want 
a good deal of commodity, and must be well sup- 
plied with it. Now, this supply is, as already ex- 
plained, rate of supply, so that we must multiply 
U by MT~^ in order to arrive at the real instan- 
taneous state of feeling. The kind of quantity 

72 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

thus symbolised by MUT~^ must be interpreted 
as meaning so much commodity jproducmg a cer- 
tain amount of pleasurable effect per unit of time. 
But this quantity will not be quantity of .utility 
itself. It will only be that quantity which, when 
multiplied by time, will produce quantity of utility. 
Pleasure, as was stated at the outset, has the 
dimensions intensity and duration. It is then this 
intensity which is symbolised by MUT~^, and we 
must multiply this last symbol by T in order to 
obtain the dimensions of utility or quantity of 
pleasure produced. But in making this multi-^ 
plication, MUT’^T, reduces to MU, which must , 
therefore be taken to denote the dimensions of! 
quantity of utility. 

We here meet with an explanation of the fact, 
so long perplexing to me, that the element of time 
does not appear throughout the diagrams and pro- 
blems of this theory relating to utility and ex- 
change. All goes on in time, and time is a neces- 
sary element of the question ; yet it does not 
explicitly appear. Recurring to our diagrams, that 
for instance on p. 50, it is obvious that the dimen- 
sion U, or degree of utility, is measured upon the 
perpendicular axis op. The horizontal axis must, 
therefore, be that upon which rate of supply of 
commodity or MT'^ is measured, strictly spealcing. 
If now we introduce the duration of the utility, we 
should apparently need a third axis, perpendicular 

Theory of Utility. 

73 

to the plane of the page, upon which to denote it. 
But were we to introduce this third dimension, we 
should obtain a solid figure, representing a quantity 
truly of three dimensions. This would be erroneous, 
because the third dimension T enters negatively 
into the quantity represented by the horizontal 
axis. Thus time eliminates itself, and we arrive 
at a quantity of two dimensions correctly repre- 
sented by a curvilinear area, one dimension of 
which corresponds to each of the factors in MU. 

This result is at first sight paradoxical ; but the 
difficulty is exactly analogous to that which occurs 
in the question of interest, and which led so pro- 
found a mathematician as Dean Peacock into a 
blunder, as will be shown in the Chapter upon 
Capital. Interest of money is proportional to the 
length of time for which the principal is lent, and^^ 
also to the amount of money lent and the rate of 
interest. But this rate of interest involves time 
negatively, so that time is ultimately eliminated, 
and interest emerges with the same dimensions as 
the principal sum. In the case of utility we begin 
with a certain absolute stock of commodity, M. 
In expending it we must spread it over more 
or less time, so that it is really rate of supply 
which is to be considered; but it is this rate 
MT~^, not simply M, which influences the final 
degree of utility, U, at which it is consumed. If 
the same commodity be made to last a longer time, 

74 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

the degree of utility will be higher, because the 
necessity of the consumer will be less satisfied. 
Thus the absolute amount of utility produced will 
as a general rule be greater as the time of expen- 
diture is greater; but this will also be the case 
with the quantity symbolised by MU, because the 
quantity U will under those circumstances be 
greater, while M remains constant. 

To clear up the matter still further if possible, I 
will recapitulate the results we have arrived at. 

M means absolute amount of commodity. 

MT~^ means amount of commodity applied, so 
much per unit of time. 

U means the resulting pleasurable effect of any 
increment of that supply, an infinitesimal quantity 
supplied per unit of time. 

MUT~^ means therefore so much pleasurable 
effect produced per unit of commodity per unit 
of time, 

MUT~^T, or MU, means therefore so much 
absolute pleasurable effect produced by commodity 
in an unspecified duration of time. 

Actual, Prospective, and Potential Utility. 

The difficulties of Economics are mainly the 
difficulties of conceiving clearly and fully the con- 
ditions of utility. Even at the risk of being tire- 
some, I will therefore point out more minutely 

Theory of Utility. 

75 

how various are the senses in which a thing may 
be said to have utility. 

It is quite usual, and perhaps correct, to call iron 
or water or timber a useful substance ; but we 
may mean by these words at least three distinct 
facts. We may mean that a particular piece of 
iron is at the present moment actually useful to 
some person ; or that, although not actually useful, 
it is expected to be useful at a future time ; or we 
may only mean that it would be useful if it were 
in the possession of some person needing it. The 
iron rails of a railway, the iron which composes 
the Britannia Bridge, or an ocean steamer, is 
actually useful; the iron lying in a merchant’s 
store is not useful at present, though it is expected 
soon to be so ; but there is a vast quantity of iron 
existing in the bowels of the earth, which has all 
the physical properties of iron, and might be useful 
if extracted, though it never will be. These are 
instances of actual, ^prospective, and potential utility. 

It will be apparent that potential utility does not 
really enter into the science of Economics, and 
when I speak of utility simply, I do not mean to 
include potential utility. It is a question of phys- 
ical science~whether a substance possesses qualities 
which might make it suitable to our needs if it 
were within our reach. Only when there arises 
some degree of probability, however slight, that 
a particular object will be needed, does it acquire 

76 

The Theory of Political Pcomony. 

prospective utility, capable of rendering it a de- 
sirable possession. As Condillac correctly re- 
marks ‘ On diroit que les choses ne commencent 
k exister pour eux, qu’au moment oti ils ont un 
intdret k savoir qu’elles existent.’ But a very large 
part in industry, and the science of industry, be- 
longs to prospective utility. We can at any one 
moment use only a very small fraction of what we 
possess. By far the greater part of what we hold 
might be allowed to perish at any moment, without 
harm, if we could have it re-created with equal 
ease at a future moment, when need of it arises. 

We might also distinguish, as is customary with 
French economists, between direct and indirect 
utility. Direct utility attaches to a thing like food, 
which we can actually apply to satisfy our wants. 
But things which have no direct utility may be the 
means of procuring us such by exchange, and they 
may therefore be said to have indirect utility \ To 
the latter form of utility I have elsewhere applied 
the name acquired utility y. This distinction is not 
the same as that which is made in the Theory of 
Capital between mediate and immediate utility, the 
former being that of any implement, machine, or 
other means of procuring commodities possessing 

« Condillac, ‘ Le Commerce et le Gouvernement,’ Second e Partie, 
Introduction. OEuvres Completes. Paris, 1803. Tom vii. p. 2. 

X Gamier, ‘ Traite d’Economie Politique,' 5rne ed. p. 11-,^. 

y See Chapter IV. 

77 

Theory of Utility. 

immediate and direct utility — that is, the power of 
satisfying want''. 

Distribution of a Commodity in time. 

We have seen that, when a commodity is capable 
of being used for different purposes, definite prin- 
ciples regulate its application to those purposes. 
A similar question arises when a stock of com- 
modity is in hand, and must be expended over 
a certain interval of time more or less definite. 
The science of Economics must point out the mode 
of consuming it to the greatest advantage^ — that 
is, with a maximum result of utility. If we reckon 
all future pleasures and pains as if they were pre- 
sent, the solution will be the same as in the case of 
different uses. If a commodity has to be distri- 
buted over n days’ use, and v^, v^, &c. be the final 
degrees of utility on each day’s consumption, then 
we ought clearly to have 

Vi = V.i = V3= . . . =v„. 

It may, however, be uncertain during how many 
days we may require the stock to last. The com- 
modity might be of a perishable nature, so that 
if we were to keep some of it for ten days, it might 
become unserviceable, and its utility be sacrificed. 
Assuming that we can estimate more or less 
exactly the probability of its remaining good, let 
• • • Pio he these probabilities. Then, on 
2 See Chapter VII. 

78 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

the principle (p. 38) that a future pleasure or pain 
must be reduced in proportion to its want of cer- 
tainty, we have the equations 

= . . . =Vio Pio- 

The general result is, that as the probability is less, 
the commodity assigned to each day is less, so that 
V, its final degree of utility, will be greater. 

So far we have taken no account of the varying 
influence of an event according to its propinquity 
or remoteness. The distribution of commodity 
described is that which should be made and would 
be made by a being of perfect good sense and fore- 
sight. To secure a maximum of benefit in life, 
all future events, all future pleasures or pains, 
should act upon us with the same force as if they 
were present, allowance being made for their un- 
certainty. The factor expressing the effect of 
remoteness should, in short, always be unity, so 
that time should have no influence. But no 
human mind . is constituted in this perfect way : 
a future feeling is always less influential than 
a present one. To take this fact into account, let 
9.v> S'zi S's. be the undetermined fractions which 
express the ratios of the present pleasures or pains 
to those future ones from whose anticipation they 
arise. Having a stock of commodity in hand, our 
tendency will be to distribute it so that the follow- 
ing equations will hold true — 

= = . . . -v„p„q„. 

79 

Theory of Utility. 

It will be an obvious consequence of these equa- 
tions that less commodity will be assigned to 
future days in some proportion to the intervening 
time. 

An illustrative problem, involving questions of 
prospective utility and probability, is found in the 
case of a vessel at sea, which is insufficiently vic- 
tualled for the probable length of the voyage to the 
nearest port. The actual length of the voyage 
depends on the winds, and must be uncertain; 
but we may suppose that it will almost certainly 
last ten days or more, but not more than thirty 
days. It is apparent that if the food were divided 
into thirty equal parts, partial famine and suffering 
would be certainly endured for the first ten days, 
to ward off later evils which may not be encoun- 
tered. To consume one-tenth part of the food on 
each of the first ten days would be still worse, as 
almost certainly entailing starvation on the follow- 
ing days. To determine the most beneficial distri- 
bution of the food, we should require to know the 
probability of each day between the tenth and 
thirtieth days forming part of the voyage, and also 
the law of variation of the degree of utility of food. 
The whole stock ought then to be divided into 
thirty portions, allotted to each of the thirty days, 
and of such magnitudes that the final degrees of 
utility multiplied by the probabilities may be 
equal. Thus, let v-^, v^, v^, &c. be the final degrees 

80 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

of utility of the first, second, third, and other days 
supplied, and p^, p^, Sec. the probabilities that 
the days in question will form part of the voyage ; 
then we ought to have 

Pi Vl=P2 '^2 — Ps ■ • • “^^29 '^29— jPsO '*^30' 

If these equations did not hold true, it would be 
beneficial to transfer a small portion from one lot 
to some other lot. As the voyage is supposed cer- 
tainly to last the first ten days, we have 

Pi=P2= . . . =i)io = i ; 

hence we must have 

Vi=zV2= . . . =Vio; 

that is to say, the allotments to the first ten days 
should be equal. They should afterwards decrease 
according to some regular law; for, as the proba- 
bility decreases, the final degree of utility should 
increase in inverse proportion. 

CHAPTER IV. 

THEORY OP EXCHANGE. 

Importance of Exchange in Economics. 

Exchange is so important a process in the 
maximising of utility and the saving of labour, 
that some economists have regarded their science 
as treating of this operation alone. Utility arises 
from commodities being brought in suitable quan- 
tities and at the proper times into the possession 
of persons needing them ; and it is by exchange, 
more than any other means, that this is effected. 
Trade is not indeed the only method of econo- 
mising,; a single individual may gain in utility by 
a proper consumption of the stock in his possession. 
The best employment of labour and capital by 
a single person is also a question disconnected from 
that of excnange, and which must yet be treated 
in ^*16 science. But, with these exceptions, I am 

G 

82 The Theory oj Political Economy. 

perfectly willing to agree with the high importance 
attributed to exchange. 

It is impossible to have a correct idea of the 
science of Economics without a perfect comprehen- 
sion of the Theory of Exchange ; and I find it both 
possible and desirable to consider this subject be- 
fore introducing any notions concerning labour or 
the production of commodities. In these words 
of J. S. Mill I thoroughly concur : ‘ Almost every 
speculation respecting the economical interests of 
a society thus constituted, implies some theory of 
Value; the smallest error on that subject infects 
with corresponding error all our other conclusions ; 
and anything vague or misty in our conception of 
it, creates confusion and uncertainty in everything 
else.’ But when he proceeds to say, ‘Happily, 
there is nothing in the laws of Value which 
mains for the present or any future writer to clear 
up; the theory of the subject is complete — he 
utters that which it would be rash to say of any 
of the sciences. 

Ambiguity of the term Value. 

I must, in the first place, point out the thoroughly 
ambiguous and unscientific character of the term 
valus. Adam Smith noticed the extreme difference 
of meaning between value in use and value in 

“ ‘ Principles of Political Economy,’ book iii, chap. 1. § 1» 

Theory of Exchange. 

83 

exchange ; and it is usual for writers on Economics 
to caution their readers against the confusion of 
thought to which they are liable. But I do not 
believe that either writers or readers can avoid 
the confusion so long as they use the word. In 
spite of the most acute feeling of the danger, 
I often detect myself using the word improperly ; 
nor do I think that the best authors escape the 
danger. 

Let us turn to Mill’s definition of Exchange 
Valued, and we see at once the misleading power of 
the term. He tells us — ‘ Value is a relative term. 
The value of a thing means the quantity of some 
other thing, or of things in general, which it 
exchanges for.’ Now, if there is any fact certain 
bout exchange value, it is, that it means not an 

)ject at all, but a circumstance of an object. 
, alue implies, in fact, a relation ; but if so, it 
cannot possibly be some other thing. A student of 
Economics has no hope of ever being clear and 
correct in his ideas of the science if he thinks of 
value as at all a thing or an object, or even as 
anything which lies in a thing or object. Persons 
are thus led to speak of such a nonentity as 
intrinsic value. There are, doubtless, qualities 
inherent in such a substance as gold or iron which 
influence its value ; but the word Value, so far as 
it can be correctly used, merely expresses the 
'' ‘ Principles of Political Economy,’ book iii. chap. 6. 

84 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

circumstance of its exchanging in a certain rat io for 
some other substance. 

Value ex^presses Ratio of Exchange. 

If a ton of pig-iron exchanges in a market for an 
ounce of standard gold, neither the iron is value, 
nor the gold ; nor is there value in the iron nor in 
the gold. The notion of value is concerned only in 
the fact or circumstance of one exchanging for the 
other. Thus it is scientifically incorrect to say 
that the value of the ton of iron is the ounce of 
gold : we thus convert value into a concrete thing ; 
and it is, of course, equally incorrect to say that 
the value of the ounce of gold is the ton of iron. 
The more correct and safe expression is, that the 
value of the ton of iron is equal to the value of the 
ounce of gold, or that their values are as one to 
one. 

Value in exchange expresses nothing but a 
ratio, and the term should not be used in any other 
sense. To speak simply of the value of an ourice 
of gold is as absurd as to speak of the ratio of the 
number seventeen. What is the ratio of the number 
seventeen ? The question admits no answer, for 
there must be another number named in order to 
make a ratio ; and the ratio will diifer according to 
the number suggested. What is the value of iron 
compared with that of gold? — is an intelligible 

85 

Theory of Exchange. 

question. The answer consists in stating the ratio 
of the quantities exchanged. 

Popnlar use of the term Value. 

In the popular use of the word value no less 
than three distinct though connected meanings 
seem to be confused together. These may be 
described as 

(1) Value in use ; 

(2) Esteem, or urgency of desire ; 

(3) Ratio of exchange. 

Adam Smith, in the familiar passage already 
referred to, distinguished between the first and the 
third meanings. He said ‘ The word value, it is 
to be observed, has two different meanings, and 
sometimes expresses the power of purchasing other 
goods which the possession of that object conveys. 
The one may be called “ value in use ; ” the other 
“ value in exchange.” The things which have the 
greatest value in use have frequently little or no 
value in exchange; and, on the contrary, those 
which have the greatest value in exchange have 
frequently little or no value in use. Nothing is 
more useful than water : but it will purchase 
scarce anything; scarce anything can be had in 
exchange for it. A diamond, on the contrary, has 
scarce any value in use ; but a very great quantity 

c ‘ Wealth of Nations/ book i. chap. 4, near the end. 

86 The Thecyry of Political Economy. 

of other goods may frequently be had in exchange 
for it.’ 

It is sufficiently plain that, when Smith speaks 
of water as being highly useful and yet devoid 
of purchasing power, he means water in abundance, 
that is to say, water so abundantly supplied that it 
has exerted its full useful effect, or its total utility. 
Water, when it becomes very scarce, as in a dry 
desert, acquires exceedingly great purchasing 
power. Thus Smith evidently means by value in 
use, the total utility of a substance of which the degree' 
of utility has sunk very low, because the tvant of such: 
substance has been vjell nigh sati.fed. By purchas- 
ing power he clearly means the ratio of exchange for 
other commodities. But here he fails to point out 
that the quantity of goods received in exchange 
depends just as much upon the nature of the goods 
received, as on the nature of those given for them. 
In exchange for a diamond we can get a great 
quantity of iron, or corn, or paving stones, or other 
commodity of which there is abundance; but we 
can get very few rubies, sapphires, or other 
precious stones. Silver is of high purchasing 
power compared with zinc, or lead, or iron, but of 
small purchasing power compared with gold, 
platinum, or iridium. Yet we might well say in 
any case that diamond and silver are things of high 
value. Thus I am led to think that the word 
value is often used in reality to mean intensity o) 

87 

Theory of Exchange. 

desire or esteem for a thing. A silver ornament is 
a beautiful object apart from all ideas of traffic; 
it may thus be valued or esteemed simply because 
it suits the taste and fancy of its owner, and is the 
only one possessed. Even Robinson Crusoe must 
have looked upon each of his possessions with vary- 
ing esteem and desire for more, although he was 
incapable of exchanging with any other person. 
Now, in this sense value seems to be identical with 
the final degi-ee of utility of a commodity, as 
defined in a previous page (p. 53) ; it is measured 
by the intensity of the pleasure or benefit which 
would be obtained from a new increment of the 
same commodity. No doubt there is a close 
connection between value in this meaning, and 
value as ratio of exchange. Nothing can have 
a high purchasing power unless it be highly 
esteemed in itself ; but it may be highly esteemed 
apart from all comparison with other things ; and, 
though highly esteemed, it may have a low 
purchasing power, because those things against 
which it is measured, are still more esteemed. 

Thus I come to the conclusion that, in the use 
of the word value, three distinct meanings are 
habitually confused together, and require to be 
thus distinguished — 

(1) Value in use = total utility; 

(2) Esteem = final degree of utility ; 

(3) Purchasing power = ratio of exchange. 

88 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

It is not to be expected that we could profitably 
discuss such matters as economical doctrines, while 
the fundamental ideas of the subject are thus 
jumbled up together in one ambiguous word. The 
only thorough remedy consists in substituting for 
the dangerous name value that one of three stated 
meanings which is intended in each case. In this 
work, therefore, I shall discontinue the use of the 
word value altogether, and when, as will be most 
often the case, in the remainder of the book, I need 
to refer to the third meaning, often called by 
economists exchange or exchangeable value, I shall 
substitute the wholly unequivocal expression Ratio 
of Exchange, specifying at the same time what are 
the two articles exchanged. When we speak of the 
ratio of exchange of pig-iron and gold, there can be 
no possible doubt that we intend to refer to the 
ratio of the number of units of the one commodity 
to the number of units of the other commodity for 
which it exchanges, the units being arbitrary 
concrete magnitudes, but the ratio an abstract 
number. 

When I proposed, in the first edition of this 
book, to use Ratio of Exchange instead of the word 
value, the expression had been so little, if at all, 
employed by English economists, that it amounted 
to an innovation. J. S. Mill, indeed, in his chapters 
on Value, speaks once and again of things exchang- 
ing for each other ‘in the ratio of their cost of 

89 

Theory of Exchange. 

production ; ’ but he always omits to say distinctly 
that exchange value is itself a matter of ratio. As 
to Ricardo, Malthus, Adam Smith, and other great 
English economists, although they usually dis- 
course at some length upon the meanings of the 
word value, I am not aware that they ever 
explicitly apply the name ratio to exchange or 
exchangeable value. Yet ratio is unquestionably 
the correct scientific term, and the only term 
which is strictly and entirely correct. 

It is interesting, therefore, to find that, although 
overlooked by English economists, the expression 
had been used by two or more of the truly 
scientific French economists, namely Le Trosne 
and Condillac. Le Trosne carefully defines value 
in the following terms ^ ‘ La valeur consiste dans 
le rapport d’^change qui se trouve entre telle chose 
et telle autre, entre telle mesure d’une production 
et telle mesure des autrcs.’ Condillac apparently 
adopts the words of Le Trosne, saying e of value, 
‘Qu’elle consiste dans le rapport d’^change entre 
telle chose et telle autre.’ Such economical works 
as those of Baudeau, Le Trosne, and Condillac were 
almost wholly unknown to English readers until 
attention was drawn to them by Mr. H. D. Macleod 

d ‘De I’lnt6r6t Social,’ 1777 , chap. 1. §4. 

® ‘Le Commerce et le Gouvernement,’ 1776 ; ‘ QSuvres Completes 
de Condillac,’ 1803, Tom. 6>“e, p. 20. 

90 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

and Professor Adamson ; but I shall endeavour for 
the future to make proper use of them. 

Dimension of Value, 

There is no difficulty in seeing that, when we 
use the wmrd Value in the sense of ratio of 
exchange, its dimension will be simply zero. 
Value will be expressed, like angular magnitude 
and other ratios in general, by abstract number. 
Angular magnitude is measured by the ratio of 
a line to a line, the ratio of the arc subtended 
by the angle to the radius of the circle. So value 
in this sense is a ratio of the quantity of one 
commodity to the quantity of some other com- 
modity exchanged for it. If we -compare the 
commodities simply as physical quantities, we have 
the dimensions M divided by M, or MM ^ or M°, 
Exactly the same result would be obtained if, 
instead of taking the mere physical quantities, we 
were to compare their utilities, for we should then 
have MU divided by MU or M°U°, which, as it really 
means unity, is identical in meaning with M°. 

When we use the word value in the sense of 
esteem, or urgency of desire, the feeling with which 
Oliver Twist must have regarded a few more 
mouthfuls when he ‘ asked for more,’ the meaning 
of the word, as already explained, is identical with 
degree of utility, of which the dimension is U. 

Theory of Exchange. 

91 

Lastly, the valve in me of Adam Smith or the total 
utility, is the integral of U d M, and has the dimen- 
sions MU. We may thus tabulate our results 
concerning the ambiguous uses of the word value — 

Popular Expression of Meaning. 

(1) Value ill use 

(2) Esteem, or Urgency 

of Desire for more 

(3) Purchasing Power 

Scientific Expression. Dimensions. 

Total Utility . . MU. 

Final Degree of Utility . . U. 

Eatio of Exchange . . . M°. 

Definition of Market. 

Before proceeding to the Theory of Exchange, it 
will be desirable to place beyond doubt the mean- 
ings of two other terms which I shall frequently 
employ. 

By a Market I shall mean much what commercial 
men use it to express. Originally a market was 
a public place in a town where provisions and 
other objects were exposed for sale; but the word 
has been generalised, so as to mean any body 
of persons who are in intimate business relations 
and carry on extensive transactions in any commo- 
dity. A great city may contain as many markets 
as there are important branches of trade, and these 
markets may or may not be localised. The central 
point of a market is the public exchange, — mart 
or auction rooms, where the traders agree to 
meet and transact business. In London, the Stock 
Market, the Corn Market, the Coal Market, the 

92 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

Sugar Market, and many others, are distinctly 
localised ; in Manchester, the Cotton Market, the 
Cotton Waste Market, and others. But this dis- 
tinction of locality is not necessary. The traders 
may be spread over a whole town, or region of 
country, and yet make a market, if they are, by 
means of fairs, meetings, published price lists, the 
post office, or otherwise, in close communication 
with each other. Thus, the common expression 
Money Market denotes no locality: it is applied to 
the aggregate of those bankers, capitalists, and 
other traders who lend or borrow money, and who 
constantly exchange information concerning the 
course of business t. 

In Economics we may usefully adopt this term 
with a clear and well-defined meaning. By a 
market I shall mean two or more persons dealing 
in two or more commodities, whose stocks of those 
commodities and intentions of exchanging are 
known to all. It is also essential that the ratio 
of exchange between any two persons should be 

^ I find that Cournot has long since -defined the economical use , 
of the word market^ with admirable brevity and precision, but 
exactly to the same effect as the text above. He incidentally says in a 
footnote K^cherches sur les Principes Mathdmatiques de la Th^orie 
des Richesses,' Paris, 1838, p. 55), ‘On sait que les 4conomistes en- 
tendent par ma/rche^ non pas un lieu d6termin6 ou se consomment 
les achats et les ventes, mais tout un territoire dont les parties sont 
imies par des rapports de fibre commerce, en sorte que les prix s'y 
nivellent avec facility et promptitude.' 

Theory of Exchange. 

93 

known to all the others. It is only so far as this 
community of knowledge extends that the market 
extends. Any persons who are not acquainted at 
the moment with the prevailing ratio of exchange, 
or whose stocks are not available for want of com- 
munication, must not be considered part of the 
market. Secret or unknown stocks of a commo- 
dity must also be considered beyond reach of 
a market so long as they remain secret and un- 
known. Every individual must be considered as 
exchanging from a pure regard to his own require- 
ments or private interests, and there must be 
perfectly free competition, so that any one will 
exchange with any one else for the slightest appa- 
rent advantage. There must be no conspiracies for 
absorbing and holding supplies to produce un- 
natural ratios of exchange. Were a conspiracy 
of farmers to withhold all corn from market, the 
consumers might be driven, by starvation, to pay 
prices bearing no proper relation to the existing 
supplies, and the ordinary conditions of the market 
would be thus overthrown. 

The theoretical conception of a perfect market 
is more or less completely carried out in practice. 
It is the work of brokers in any extensive market 
to organise exchange, so that every purchase shall 
be made with the most thorough acquaintance 
with the conditions of the trade. Each broker 
strives to gain the best knowledge of the conditions 

94 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

ot supply and demand, and the earliest intimation 
of any change. He is in communication with as 
many other traders as possible, in order to have 
the widest range of information, and the greatest 
chance of making suitable exchanges. It is only 
thus that a definite market price can be ascertained 
at every moment, and varied according to the fre- 
quent news capable of affecting buyers and sellers. 
By the mediation of a body of brokers a complete 
consensus is established, and the stock of every 
seller or the demand of every buyer brought into 
the market. It is of the very essence of trade to 
have wide and constant information. A market, 
then, is theoretically perfect only when all traders 
have perfect knowledge of the conditions of supply 
and demand, and the consequent ratio of exchange; 
and in such a market, as we shall now see, there 
can only be one ratio of exchange of one uniform 
commodity at any moment. 

So essential is a knowledge of the real state 
of supply and demand to the smooth procedure 
of trade and the real good of the community, that 
I conceive it would be quite legitimate to compel 
the publication of any requisite statistics. Secrecy 
can only conduce to the profit of speculators who 
gain from great fluctuations of prices. Speculation 
is advantageous to the public only so far as it tends 
to equalise prices ; and it is, therefore, against the 
public good to allow speculators to foster artifl- 

Theory of Exchange. 

95 

cially the inequalities of prices by which they 
profit. The welfare of millions both of consumers 
and producers depends upon an accurate know- 
ledge of the stocks of cotton and corn; and it 
would, therefore, he no unwarrantable interference 
with the liberty of the subject to require any infor- 
mation as to the stocks in hand. In Billingsgate 
fish market there was long ago a regulation to the 
effect that salesmen shall fix up in a conspicuous 
place every morning a statement of the kind and 
amount of their stocks. The same principle has 
long been recognised in the Acts of Parliament 
concerning the collection of statistics of the quan- 
tities and prices of corn sold in English market 
towns. More recently similar legislation has taken 
place as regards the cotton trade, in the Cotton 
Statistics Act of 1868. Publicity, whenever it can 
thus be enforced on markets by public authority, 
tends almost always to the advantage of everybody 
except perhaps a few speculators and financiers. 

Definition of Trading Body. 

1 find it necessary to adopt some expression for 
any number of people whose aggregate influence 
in a market, either in the way of supply or demand, 
we have to consider. By a trading hody I mean, in 
the most general manner, any body either of buyers 

s Waterston’s ‘ Cyclopoedia of Commerce/ ed. 1846, p. 466. 

96 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

or sellers. The trading body may be a single indi- 
vidual in one case; it may be the whole inhabitants 
of a continent in another; it may be the indivi- 
duals of a trade diffused through a country in a 
third. England and North America will be trading 
bodies if we are considering the corn we receive 
from America in exchange for iron and other 
goods. Tlie continent of Europe is a trading body 
as purchasing coal from England. The farmers 
of England are a trading body when they sell 
corn to the millers, and the millers both when they 
buy corn from the farmers and sell flour to the 
bakers. 

We must use the expression with this wide 
meaning, because the principles of exchange are 
the same in nature, however wide or narrow may 
be the market considered. Every trading body 
is either an individual or an aggregate of indivi- 
duals, and the law, in the case of the aggregate, 
must depend upon the fulfilment of law in the 
individuals. We cannot usually observe any pre- 
cise and continuous variation in the wants and 
deeds of an individiial, because the action of extra- 
neous motives, or what would seem to be caprice, 
overwhelms minute tendencies. As I have already 
remarked (p. 17), a single individual does not vary 
his consumption of sugar, butter, or eggs from 
week to week by infinitesimal amounts, according 
to each small change in the price. He probably 

97 

Theory of Exchange. 

continues his ordinary consumption until accident 
directs his attention to a rise in price, and he then, 
perhaps, discontinues the use of the articles alto- 
gether for a time. But the aggregate, or what is 
the same, the average consumption, of a large com- 
munity will be found to vary continuously or 
nearly so. The most minute tendencies make 
themselves apparent in a Avide average. Thus, our 
laws of Economics will be theoretically true in the 
case of individuals, and practically true in the 
case of large aggregates; but the general princi- 
ples will be the same, whatever the extent of the 
trading body considered. We shall be justified, 
then, in using the expression with the utmost 
generality. 

It should be remarked, however, that the econo- 
mical laws representing the conduct of large aggre- 
gates of individuals will never represent exactly 
the conduct of any one individual. If we could 
imagine that thei’e were a thousand individuals 
all exactly alike in regard to their demand for 
commodities, and their capabilities of supplying 
them, then the average laws of supply and demand 
deduced from the conduct of such individuals 
would agree with the conduct of any one indivi- 
dual. But a community is composed of persons 
differing widely in their powers, wants, habits, and 
possessions. In such circumstances the average 
laws applying to them will come under what I have 

H 

98 The Tlkeory of Political Economy. 

elsewhere called the ‘Fictitious Mean/ that is to 
say, they are numerical results which do not 
pretend to represent the character of any existing 
thing. But average laws would not on this account 
be less useful, if we could obtain them ; for the 
movements of trade and industry depend upon 
averages and aggregates, not upon the whims of 
individuals. 

The Law of Indifference, 

When a commodity is perfectly uniform or homo- 
geneous in quality, any portion may be indif- 
ferently used in place of an equal portion : hence, 
in the same market, and at the same moment, all 
portions must bo exchanged at the same ratio. 
There can be no reason why a person should treat 
exactly similar things differently, and the slightest 
excess in what is demanded for one over the other 
will cause him to take the latter instead of the 
former. In nicely-balanced exchanges it is a very 
minute scruple which turns the scale and governs 
the choice. A minute difference of quality in 
a commodity may thus give rise to preference, and 
cause the ratio of exchange to differ. But where 
no difference exists at all, or where no difference 
is known to exist, there can be no ground for 
preference whatever. If, in selling a quantity of 

h ‘Principles of Science,’ 1st ed. rol. i. p. 422, 3rd ed. p. 363. 

Theory of Exchange. 

99 

perfectly equal and uniform barrels of flour, a mer- 
chant arbitrarily fixed different prices on them, 
a purchaser would of course select the cheaper 
ones ; and where there was absolutely no difference 
in the thing purchased, even an excess of a penny 
in the price of a thing worth a thousand pounds 
would be a valid ground of choice. Hence follows 
what is undoubtedly true, Muth proper explanations, 
that in the same open market, at any one moment, 
there cabinet he two prices for the same kind of 
article. Such differences as may practically occur 
arise from extraneous circumstances, such as the 
defective credit of the purchasers, their imperfect 
knowledge of the market, and so on. 

The principle above expressed is a general law 
of the utmost importance in Economics, and I pro- 
pose to call it The Law of Indifference, meaning 
that, when two objects or commodities are subject 
to no important difference as regards the purpose 
in view, they will either of them be taken instead 
of the other with perfect indifference by a pur- 
chaser. Every such act of indifferent choice gives 
rise to an equation of degrees of utility, so that 
in this principle of indifference we have one of 
the central pivots of the theory. 

Though the price of the same commodity must 
be uniform at any one moment, it may vary from 
moment to moment, and must be conceived as in 
a state of continual change. Theoretically speaking. 

H 2 

100 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

it would not usually be possible to buy two por- 
tions of the same commodity successively at the 
same ratio of exchange, because, no sooner would 
the first portion have been bought, than the condi- 
tions of utility would be altered. When exchanges 
are made on a large scale, this result will be veri- 
fied in practiced If a wealthy person invested 
£100,000 in the funds in the morning, it is hardly 
likely that the operation could be repeated in the 
afternoon at the same price. In any market, if 
a person goes on buying largely, he will ultimately 
raise the price against himself. Thus it is apparent 
that extensive purchases would best be made gra- 
dually, so as to secure the advantage of a lower 
price upon the earlier portions. In theory this 
effect of exchange upon the ratio of exchange must 
be conceived to exist in some degree, however 
small may be the purchases made. Strictly speak- 
ing, the ratio of exchange at any moment is that 
of dy to dx, of an infinitely small quantity of one 
commodity to the infinitely small quantity of 

i It is, I believe, verified in the New York Stock Markets, where 
it is the practice to sell Stocks by auction in successive lots, with- 
out disclosing the total amount to be put up. "When the amount 
offered begins to exceed what was expected, then each successive 
lot brings a less price, and those who bought the earlier lots 
suffer. But if the amount offered is small, the early buyers have 
the advantage. Such an auction sale only exhibits in miniature 
what is constantly going on in the markets generally on a large 
scale.' 

101 

Theory of Exchange. 

another which is given for it. The ratio of ex- 
change is really a differential coefficient, The 
quantity of any article purchased is a function of 
the price at which it is purchased, and the ratio 
of exchange expresses the rate at which the quan- 
tity of the article increases compared with what 
is given for it. 

We must carefully distinguish, at the same time, 
between the Statics and Dynamics of this subject. 
The real condition of industry is one of perpetual 
motion and change. Commodities are being con- 
tinually manufactured and exchanged and con- 
sumed. If we wished to have a complete solution 
of the problem in all its natural complexity, we 
should have to treat it as a problem of motion — a 
problem of dynamics. But it w'ould surely be 
absurd to attempt the more difficult question when 
the more easy one is yet so imperfectly within our 
power. It is only as a purely statical problem that 
I can venture to treat the action of exchange. 
Holders of commodities will be regarded not as 
continuously passing on these commodities in 
streams of trade, but as possessing certain fixed 
amounts which they exchange until they come to 
equilibrium. 

It is much more easy to determine the point at 
which a pendulum will come to rest than to cal- 
culate the velocity at which it will move when 
displaced from that point of rest. Just so, it is a 

102 The Theory of Political Economy. 

far more easy task to lay down the conditions 
under which trade is completed and interchange 
ceases, than to attempt to ascertain at what rate 
trade will go on when equilibrium is not attained. 

The difference will present itself in this form : 
dynamically we could not treat the ratio of ex- 
change otherwise than as the ratio of dy and dx, 
infinitesimal quantities of commodity. Our equa- 
tions would then be regarded as differential equa- 
tions, which would have to be integrated. But 
in the statical view of the question we can sub- 
stitute the ratio of the finite quantities y and x. 
Thus, from the self-evident principle, stated on 
pp. 98-99, that there cannot, in the same market, 
at the same moment, be two different prices for 
the same uniform commodity, it follows that the 
last increments in an act of exchange must he ex- 
changed in the same ratio as the whole quantities 
exchanged. Suppose that two commodities are 
bartered in the ratio of x for y; then every 
part of X is given for the part of y, and it does 
not matter for which of the parts. No part of 
the commodity can be treated differently to any 
other part. We may carry this division to an in- 
definite extent by imagining m to be constantly 
increased, so that, at the limit, even an infinitely 
small part of x must be exchanged for an infinitely 
small part of y, in the same ratio as the whole 
quantities. This result we may express by stating 

Theory of Exchange. 

103 

that the increments concerned in the process of 
exchange must obey the equation 

dx X 

The use which we shall make of this equation 
will be seen in the next section. 

The Theory of Exchange. 

The keystone of the whole Theory of Exchange, 
and of the principal problems of Economics, lies 
in this proposition — The ratio of exchange of any 
two commodities will be ^e reciprocal of^ihe raiio of 
the final degrees of utility of the quantities of com- 
modity available for consumption after the exdmnge 
is completed. When the reader has reflected a little 
upon the meaning of this proposition, he will see, I 
think, that it is necessarily true, if the principles of 
human nature have been correctly represented in 
previous pages. 

Imagine that there is one trading body possessing 
only corn, and another possessing only beef. It is 
certain that, under these circumstances, a portion 
of the corn may be given in exchange for a por- 
tion of the beef with a considerable increase of 
utility. How are we to determine at what point 
the exchange will cease to be beneficial? This 
question must involve both the ratio of exchange 
and the degrees of utility. Suppose, for a moment, 

104 The Theory of Political Economy. 

that the ratio of exchange is approximately that 
of ten pounds of corn for one pound of beef : then 
if, to the trading body which possesses corn, ten 
pounds of corn are less useful than one of beef, 
that body will desire to carry the exchange further. 
Should the other body possessing beef find one 
pound less useful than ten pounds of corn, this 
body will also be desirous to continue the ex- 
change. Exchange will thus go on until each 
party has obtained all the benefit that is possible, 
and loss of utility would result if more were ex- 
changed. Both parties, then, rest in satisfaction 
and equilibrium, and the degrees of utility have 
come to their level, as it were. 

This point of equilibrium will be known by the 
criterion, that an infinitely small amount of com- 
modity exchanged in addition, at the same rate, 
will bring neither gain nor loss of utility. In 
other words, if increments of commodities be ex- 
changed at the established ratio, their utilities will 
be equal for both parties. Thus, if ten pounds of 
com were of exactly the same utility as one pound 
of beef, there would be neither harm nor good in 
further exchange at this ratio. 

It is hardly possible to represent this theory 
completely by means of a diagram, but the accom- 
panying figure may, perhaps, render it clearer. 
Suppose the line pqr to he a small portion of the 
curve of utility of one commodity, while the broken 

Theory of Exchange. 105 

line pgr' is the like curve of another commodity 
which has been reversed and superposed on the 
other. Owing to this reversal, the quantities of 
the first commodity are measured along the base 

JJ>ir 

line from a towards h, whereas those of the second 
must he measured in the opposite direction. Let 
units of both commodities be represented by equal 
lengths: then the little line da indicates an in- 
crease of the first commodity, and a decrease of 
the second. Assume the ratio of exchange to be 
that of unit for unit, or 1 to 1 : then, by receiving 
the commodity d a the person will gain the utility 
ad, and lose the utility a c; or he will make a net 
gain of the utility corresponding to the mixtilinear 
figure cd. He will, therefore, wish to extend the 
exchange. If he were to go up to the point 6', 
and were still proceeding, he would, by the next 
small exchange, receive the utility he, and part 
with h'f ; or he would have a net loss of ef. He 
would, therefore, have gone too far; and it is 
pretty obvious that the point of intersection, q. 

106 • The Theory of Political Economy. 

defines the place where he would stop with the 
greatest advantage. It is there that a net gain 
is converted into a net loss, or rather where, for 
an infinitely small quantity, there is neither gain 
nor loss. To represent an infinitely small quantity, 
or even an exceedingly small quantity, on a dia- 
gram is, of course, impossible; hut on either side 
of the line mq 1 have represented the utilities of a 
small quantity of commodity more or less, and it 
is apparent that the net gain or loss upon the 
exchange of these quantities would be trifling. 

Symbolic Statement of the Theory. 

. To represent this process of reasoning in sym- 
bols, let AX denote a small increment of corn, 
and Ay a small increment of beef exchanged for 
it. Now our Law of Indifference comes into play. 
As both the corn and the beef are homogeneous 
commodities, no parts can be exchanged at a dif- 
ferent ratio from other parts in the same market : 
hence, if x be the whole quantity of corn given 
for y, the whole quantity of beef recewed. Ay 
must have the same ratio to ao: as y to we 
have then, 

A y y ■ y 

— = ~* or A y = ^ A 

AX X X 

In a state of equilibrium, the utilities of these 
increments must be equal in the case of each 

Tlmory of Exchange. 

107 

party, in order that neither more nor less exchange 
would be desirable. Now the increment of beef, 

Ay, is ^ times as great as the increment of corn, 

X 

AX, SO that, in order that their utilities shall be 

cc 

equal, the degree of utility of beef must be - 

times as great as the degree of utility of corn, 
Thus we arrive at the principle that the degrees 
of utility of commodities exchanged will he in the 
inverse propoi'tion of the magnitudes of the incre- 
ments exchanged. 

Let us now suppose that the first body. A, ori- 
ginally possessed the quantity a of corn, and thal 
the second body, B, possessed the quantity h oi 
beef. As the exchange consists in giving x of com 
for y of beef, the state of things after exchange will 
be as follows : — 

A holds a — X of corn, and y of beef. 

B holds X of corn, and h — y of beef 
Let (pi {a — x) denote the final degree of utility ol 
corn to A, and <p.^x the corresponding function 
for B. Also let ^^^y denote A’s final degree ol 
utility for beef, and {b —y) B’s similar func- 
tion. Then, as explained on p. 104, A will no! 
be satisfied unless the following equation holds 
true — 

cf)j^{a — x) . dx=^iy . dy; 

(pi {a — x) dy 

or 

108 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

}U 

Hence, substituting for the second member by the 
equation given on p. 103, we have 

4>i 

What holds true of A will also hold true of B, 
mutatis mutandis. He must also derive exactly 
equal utility from the final increments, otherwise 
it will be for his interest to exchange either more 
or less, and he will disturb the conditions of ex- 
change. Accordingly the following equation must 
hold true — 

^2 (b —y) . dy = (pi cV. d(r ; 
or, substituting as before, 

(p2^ _y 

^2{h-y)~ y 

We arrive, then, at the conclusion, that whenever 
two commodities are exchanged for each other, and 
more or less can he given or received in infinitely 
small quantities, the quantities exchanged satisfy 
two equations, which may be thus stated in a 
concise form — 

<pi {a-P) ^ (p.i^ ^ 

'\'iy ^^2 (h -y) ' 

The two equations are sufficient to determine the 
results of exchange; for there are only two un- 
known quantities concerned, namely, x and y, the 
quantities given and received. 

A vague notion has existed in the minds of 

Theory of Exchange. 

109 

economical writers, that the conditions of ex- 
change may he expressed in the form of an 
equation. Thus, J. S. Mill has saidt; ‘The idea 
of a ratio, as between demand and supply, is out 
of place, and has no concern in the matter: the 
proper mathematical analogy is that of an equation. 
Demand and supply, the quantity demanded and 
the quantity supplied, will be made equal.’ Mill 
here speaks of an equation as only a proper mathe- 
matical analogy. But if Economics is to be a real 
science at all, it must not deal merely with analo- 
gies ; it must reason by real equations like all the 
other sciences which have reached at all a sys- 
tematic character. Mill’s equation, indeed, is not 
explicitly the same as any at which we have arrived 
above. His equation states that the quantity of 
a commodity given by A is equal to the quantity 
received by B. This seems at first sight to be 
a mere truism, for this equality must necessarily 
exist if any exchange takes place at all. The 
theory of value, as expounded by Mill, fails to 
reach the root of the matter, and show how the 
amount of demand or supply is caused to vary. 
And Mill does not perceive that, as there must be 
two parties and two quantities to every exchange, 
there must be two equations. 

Nevertheless, our theory is 'perfectly consistent 
with the laws of supply and demand; and if we 
‘ Principles of Political Economy,’ book iii. chap. 2, § 4. 

110 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

had the functions of utility determined, it would 
be possible to throw them into a form clearly ex- 
pressing the equivalence of supply and demand. 
We may regard x as the quantity demanded on one 
side and supplied on the other ; similarly, y is the 
quantity supplied on the one side and demanded 
on the other. Now, when we hold the two equa- 
tions to be simultaneously true, we assume that 
the X and y of one equation equal those of the 
other. The laws of supply and demand are thus 
a result of what seems to me the true theory of 
value or exchange. 

Analogy to the Theory of the Lever. 

I have heard objections made to the general 
character of the equations employed in this book. 
It is remarked that the equations in question con- 
tinually involve infinitesimal quantities, and yet 
they are not treated as differential equations 
usually are, that is integrated. There is, indeed, 
no reason why the process of integration should 
not be applied when it is required, and I will 
here show that the equations employed do not 
differ in general character from those which are 
really treated in many branches of physical science. 
Whenever, in fact, we deal with continuously vary- 
ing quantities, the ultimate equations must lie 
between infinitesimals. The process of integration, 

Theory of Exchange. 

Ill 

if I understand the matter aright, only ascertains 
other equations, the truth of which follows from 
the fundamental differential equation. 

The mode in which mechanics is usually treated 
in elementary works tends to disguise the real 
foundation of the science which is to he found in 
the so-called theory of virtual velocities. Let us take 
the description of the lever of the first order as 
it is given in some of the best modern elementary 
works, as, for instance, in Mr. Magnus’ ‘ Lessons in 
Elementary Mechanics,’ p. 128 . We here read as 
follows : — 

‘Let AB hQ Q, lever turning freely about C, the 
fulcrum, and let P be the force applied at A, and 
W the force exerted, or resistance overcome, or 
weight raised at B. Suppose the lever turned 
through the angle AG A', then the work done by 
P equals P x arc AA', and work done by W equals 
W X arc BE, if P and W act perpendicularly to 
the arm. Therefore, by the law of energy. 

P xAA' —W y. BB', and since 

A A' AC 
BB'~BC 

we have 

PxAC=WxBC, 

or, P X its arm = TF x its ai*m.’ 

Now, in such a statement as this, we seem to be 
dealing with plain finite quantities, and there is no 
apparent difficulty in the matter. In reality the 
difficulty is only disguised by assuming that P and 
W act nernendicularlv to the ami thi^gh finite 

112 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

arcs. This condition is, indeed, carried out with 
approximate exactness in the problem of the wheel 
and axle^, which may be regarded as combining 
together an infinite series of straight levers, coming 
successively into operation. In this machine, there- 
fore, the weights, roughly speaking, always act 
perpendicularly to arms of invariable length. But, 
in the generality of cases of the lever, the theory 
is only true for infinitely small displacements, and 
no sooner has the lever begun to move through any 
finite arc AA', than it ceases to be exactly true 
that the work done by P equals P x arc AA'. Never- 
theless, the theory is quite correct as applied to the 
lever considered statically, that is, as in a state 
of rest and equilibrium, because the finite arcs 
of displacement, when it really is displaced, are 
exactly proportional to the infinitely small arcs, 
known as virtual velocities, through which it would 
be displaced, if instead of being at rest, it suffered 
an infinitely small displacement. 

It is curious, moreover, that, when we take the 
theory of the lever treated according to the prin- 
ciple of virtual velocities, we get equations exactly 
similar in form to those of the theory of value as 
established above. The general principle of virtual 
velocities is to the effect that, if any number of 
forces be in equilibrium at one or more points of 
a rigid body, and if this body receive an infinitely 

1 See Magnus^ ^Lessons/ § 91, 

Theory of Exchange. 

113 

small displacement, the algebraic sum of the pro- 
ducts of each force into its displacement is equal 
to zero. In the case of a lever of the first order, 
this amounts to saying that one force multiplied 
into its displacement will be neutralised by the 
other force multiplied into its negative displace- 
ment. But inasmuch as the displacements are 
exactly proportional to the lengths of the arms 
of the lever, we obtain as a derivative equation, 
that the forces multiplied each by its own arm are 
equal to each other. No doubt in the quotation 
given above, P y. AC =W x BC is an equation be- 
tween finite quantities ; but the real equation 
derived immediately from the principle of virtual 
velocities, is P x A A' = IP x BB', in which P and W 
are finite, but A A' and BB' are in strictness infi- 
nitely small displacements. Let us write this 

JV AA' 

equation in the form -p-— ^^7; then as we also 

have 

BB'~BG 

we can substitute ; hence 

W A^ 
P^BG- 

I dwell upon this matter at some length because 
we here have exactly the forms of the equations of 
exchange. As we have seen, the original equation 

is of the general form where <^x and -^y 

represent finite expressions for the degrees of 
utility of the commodities F and X, as regards 
some individual, and dy and dx are infinitesimal 

1 

114 The Theory of Political Economy. 

quantities of those commodities exchanged. But 
these infinitesimals may in this case at least be 
eliminated, because, in virtue of the Law of In- 
difference, they are exactly proportional to the 
whole finite quantities exchanged. Hence for 

we substitute We may write the equations 

one below the other, so as to make the analogy 
visible — thus 

W^AJf_AC 
P BP BC 

'^y dx X 

To put this analogy of the theories of exchange 
and of the lever in the clearest possible light, I give 
below a diagram, in which the several economic 
qualities are represented by the parts of the dia- 
gram to which they correspond or are propprtional. 

Now in statical problems no such process as in- 

Theory of Exchange. 115 

tegration is applicable. The equation lies actually 
between imaginary infinitesimal quantities, and 
there is no effect to be summed up. Yet there is 
no statical problem which is not subject to the 
principle of virtual velocities, and Poisson, in his 
‘Traitd de Mecanique,’ which commences with 
statical theorems, asserts explicitly ‘Dans cet 
ouvrage, j’emploierai exclusivement la mdthode 
des infiniment fetits' 

Impediments to Exchange. 

We have hitherto treated the theory of exchange 
as if the action of exchange could be carried on 
without trouble or cost. In I’eality, the cost of 
conveyance is almost always of importance, and 
it is sometimes the principal element in the ques- 
tion. To the cost of mere transport must be 
added a variety of charges of brokers, agents, 
packers, dock, harbour, light dues, &c., together 
with any customs duties imposed either on the 
importation or exportation of commodities. All 
these charges, whether necessary or arbitrary, are 
so many impediments to commerce, and tend to 
reduce its advantages. The effect of any one such 
charge, or of the aggregate of the costs of ex- 
change, can be represented in our formulae in a 
very simple manner. 

jn Seconds Edition, Pai-is, 1833, § 12, vol. i. p. 14. 

116 The Theory of Political Economy. 

In whatever mode the charges are payable, they 
may be conceived as paid by the surrender on 
importation of a certain fraction of the commodity 
received ; for the amount of the charges will usually 
be proportional to the quantity of goods, and, if 
expressed in money, can be considered as turned 
into commodity. 

Thus, if A gives x in exchange, this is not the 
quantity received by B ; a part of x is previously 
subtracted, so that B receives say mx, which is 
less than x, and the terms of exchange must be 
adjusted on his part so as to agi'ee with this con- 
dition. Hence the second equation will be 

y _ (psi'ni^) 
mx~ '^^{b —y) 

Again, A, though giving x, will not receive the 
whole of y\ but say ny, so that his equation 
similarly will be 

(pfa—ai) ny 

^i(ny} ~ x 

The result is, that there is not one ratio of ex- 
change, but two ratios ; and the more these differ, 
the less advantage will there be in exchange. It 
is obvious that A has either to remain satisfied 
with less of the second commodity than before, or 
has to give more of his own in purchasing it. By 
an obvious transfer of the factors m and n we may 

Theory of Eocchange. 117 

"state the equations of impeded exchange in the 
concise form — 

(a — < 2 ?) _ ^ m . ^2 (wcc) 
n .x|/i {ny) ^^{b-yj ‘ 

Illustrations of the Theory of Exchange. 

As stated above, the Theory of Exchange may 
seem to be of a somewhat abstract and perplexing 
character; hut it is not difficult to find practical 
illustrations wdiich will show how it is verified in 
the actual working of a great market. The ordinary 
laws of supply and demand, when properly stated, 
are the practical manifestation of the theory. Con- 
siderable discussion has talcen place concerning 
these laws, in consequence of Mr. W. T. Thornton’s 
writings upon the subject in the ‘ Fortnightly 
Review,’ and in his work on the ‘ Claims of 
Labour.’ Mill, although he had previously declared 
the Theory of Value to be complete and perfect 
(see p. 82), was led by Mr. Thornton’s alignments to 
allow' that modification was required. 

For my own part, I think that most of Mr. 
Thornton’s arguments are beside the question. He 
suggests that there are no regular laws of supply 
and demand, because he adduces certain cases in 
which no regular variation can take place. Those 
cases might be indefinitely multiplied, and yet the 
laws in question would not be touched. Of course, 

118 The Theory of Political Economy. 

laws which assume a continuity of variation are 
inapplicable where continuous variation is impos- 
sible. Economists can never be free from diffi- 
culties unless they will distinguish between a 
theory and the application of a theory. Because, 
in retail trade, in English or Dutch auction, or 
other particular modes of traffic, we cannot at 
once observe the operation of the laws of supply 
and demand, it is not in the least to be supposed 
that those laws are false. In fact, Mr. Thornton 
seems to allow that, if prospective demand and 
supply are taken into account, they become sub- 
stantially true. But, in the actual working of 
any market, the influence of future events should 
never be neglected, neither by a merchant nor an 
economist. 

Though Mr. Thornton’s objections are mostly 
beside the question, his remarks have served to 
show that the action of the laws of supply and 
demand was inadequately explained by previous 
economists. What constitutes the demand and 
the supply was not carefully enough investigated. 
As Mr. Thornton points out, there may be a number 
of persons willing to buy ; but if their highest offer 
is ever so little short of the lowest price which the 
seller is willing to take, their influence is nil. If 
in an auction there are ten people willing to buy a 
horse at £20, but not higher, their demand in- 
stantly ceases when any one person offers £21. I 

Theory of Exchange. 

119 

am inclined not only to accept such a view, but to 
carry it further. Any change in the price of an 
article will be determined not with regard to the 
large numbers who might or might not buy it at 
other prices, but by the few who will or will not 
buy it according as a change is made close to the 
existing price. 

The theory consists in can*ying out this view to 
the point of asserting, that it is only comparatively 
insignificant quantities of supply and demand which 
are at any moment operative on the ratio of ex- 
change. This is practically verified by what takes 
place in any very large market — say that of the 
Consolidated Three Per Cent Annuities. As the 
whole amount of the English funds is nearly eight 
hundred millions sterling, the quantity bought or 
sold by any ordinary purchaser is inconsiderably 
small in comparison. Even £1,000 worth of stock 
may be taken as an infinitesimally small incre- 
ment, because it does not appreciably affect the 
total existing supply. Now the theory consists in 
asserting that the market price of the funds is 
affected from hour to hour not by the enormous 
amounts which might be bought or sold at ex- 
treme prices, but by the comparatively insigni- 
ficant amounts which are being sold or bought at 
the existing prices. A change of price is always 
occasioned by the overbalancing of the inclinations 
of those who will or will not sell just about the 

120 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

point at which prices stand. When Consols are 
at 93i and business is in a tranquil state, it mat- 
ters not how many buyers there are at 93, or 
sellers at 94. They are really off the market. 
Those only are operative who may be made to 
buy or sell by a rise or fall of an eighth. The 
question is, whether the price shall remain at 93}, 
or rise to 93|, or fall to 93|. This is determined 
by the sale or purchase of comparatively very 
small amounts. It is the purchasers who find a 
little stock more profitable to them than the cor- 
responding sum of money, who make the price 
rise by |. When the price of the funds is very 
steady and the market quiescent, it means that 
the stocks are distributed among holders in such 
a way that the exchange of more or less at the 
prevailing price is a matter of indifference. 

In practice, no market ever long fulfils the 
theoretical conditions of equilibrium, because, from 
the various accidents of life and business, there are 
sure to be people every day compelled to sell, or 
having sudden inducements to buy. There is 
nearly always, again, the influence of prospective 
supply or demand, depending upon the political 
intelligence of the moment. Speculation compli- 
cates the action of the laws of supply apd demand 
in a high degree, but does not in the least degree 
arrest their action or alter their nature. We shall 
never have a Science of Economics unless we learn 

121 

Theory of Exchange. 

to discern the operation of law even among the 
most perplexing complications and apparent in- 
terruptions. 

Problems in the Theory of Exchange. 

We have hitherto considered only one simple 
case of the Theory of Exchange. In all other 
cases where the commodities are capable of inde- 
finite subdivision, the principles will be exactly the 
same, but the particular conditions may be subject 
to variation. 

We may, firstly, express the conditions of a great 
market where vast quantities of some stock are 
available, so that any one small trader will not 
appreciably affect the ratio of exchange. This 
ratio is, then, approximately a fixed number, and 
each trader exchanges at that ratio just so much 
as suits him. These circumstances may be repre- 
sented by supposing A to be a trading body pos- 
sessing two very large stocks of commodities, a 
and b. Let C be a person who possesses a com- 
paratively small quantity c of the second com- 
modity, and gives a portion of it, y, which is very 
small compared with b, in exchange for a portion x 
of a, which is very small compared with a. Then, 
after exchange, we shall find A in possession of 
the quantities a — x and b +y, and C in possession 
of X and c — y. The equations will become 

122 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

(pi (a—P) _y_ <p2^ _ 

Since a-x and b + y,hj supposition, do not appre- 
ciably differ from a and h, we may substitute the 
latter quantities, and we have, for the first equa- 
tion, approximately, 

^ = l = 

h cV 

The ratio of exchange being an approximately fixed 
ratio determined by the conditions of the trading 
body A, there is, in reality, only one undetermined 
quantity, x, the quantity of commodity which C 
finds it advantageous to purchase by expending 
part of c. This will now be determined by the 
equation 

(pi a (p.2X 
'I'l h~ >p^{c — mx) 

This equation will represent the condition in 
regard to any one distinct commodity of a very 
small country trading with a much larger one. It 
might represent, to some extent, the circumstances 
of trade between the Channel Islands and the great 
markets of England, though, of course, it is never 
absolutely verified, because the smallest purchasers 
do affect the market in some degree. The equation 
still more accurately represents the position of an 
individual consumer with regard to the aggregate 
trade of a large community, since he must buy at 

Theory of Exchange. 

123 

the current prices, which he cannot in an appre- 
ciable degree affect. 

A still simpler formula, however, is needed to 
represent the conditions of a large part of our 
purchases. In many cases we want so little of a 
commodity, that an individual need not give more 
than a very small fraction of his possessions to 
obtain it. We may suppose, then, that y in the 
last problem is a very small part of c, so that 
'^fc—y) does not differ appreciably from > 1^2 
Taking m as before to be the existing ratio of 
exchange, we have only one equation, 

or (p 2 X = m.>p^ 2 ^. 

This means that C will buy of the commodity until 
its degree of utility falls below that of the com- 
modity he gives. A person’s expenditure on salt 
is in this country an inconsiderable item of ex- 
pense; what he thus spends does not make him 
appreciably poorer ; yet, if the established price or 
ratio is one penny for each pound of salt, he buys 
in any time, say one year, so many pounds of salt 
that an additional pound would not have so much 
utility to him as a penny. In the above equation 
represents the utility to him of a penny, 
which being an inconsiderable fraction of his pof5- 
sessions, is approximately invariable in utility, 

124 The Theory of Political Economy. 

and he buys salt until <p^x, which is approxi- 
mately the utility of the next pound, is equal to, 
or it may be somewhat less than, that of the 
penny. But this case must not be confused with 
that of purchases which appreciably affect the pos- 
sessions of the purchaser. Thus, if a poor family 
purchase much butchers’-mcat, they will probably 
have to go without something else. The more 
they buy, the lower the final degree of utility of 
the meat, and the higher the final degree of utility 
of something else ; and thus these purchases will be 
the moi’e narrowly limited. 

Complex Cases of the Theory. 

We have hitherto considered the Theory of Ex- 
change as applying only to two trading bodies pos- 
sessing and dealing in two commodities. Exactly 
the same principles hold true, however numerous 
and complicated may be the conditions. The main 
point to be remembered in tracing out the results 
of the theory is, that the same pair of commodities 
in the same market can have only one ratio of ex- 
change, which must therefore prevail between each 
body and each other, the costs of conveyance being 
considered as nil. The equations become rapidly 
more numerous as additional bodies or commo- 
dities are considered; but we may exhibit them 
as they apply to the case of three trading bodies 
and three commodities. 

Theory of Exchange. 

125 

Thus, suppose that 

A possesses the stock a of cotton, and gives 
£Ci of it to B, to C. 

B possesses the stock h of silk, and gives 
3/1 to A, 3/a to C. 

C possesses the stock c of wool, and gives 
to A, Z.2, to B. 

We have here altogether six unknown quantities 
— fl?i, x-i, 3/1, 3/2, Zi, 2a; hut we have also suflRcient 
means of determining them. They are exchanged 
as follows — 

A gives Xi for 3/1, and x^ for Zi. 

B „ 3/1 for c^i, and 3/a for z.2. 

C „ 2i for X2, and 22 for 3/2. 

These may be treated as independent exchanges; 
each body must be satisfied in regard to each of 
its exchanges, and we must therefore take into 
account the functions of utility or the final de- 
grees of utility of each commodity in respect of 
each body. Let us express these functions as 
dlows — 

<Piy Xi ^’■'6 the respective functions of 

utility for A. 

"^29 Xu 

4 >s> i's, Xa C. 

Now A, after the exchange, will hold a — *2 of 
cotton and of silk ; and B will hold x^ of cotton 
and h — yi — y^ of silk; their ratio of exchange. 

126 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

y^ for «!, will therefore be governed by the fol- 
lowing pair of equations — 

— .Ti — <^2‘^i . 

'I'l ~ .*’1 “ -yx-y^ 

The exchange of A with C will be similarly de- 
termined by the ratio of the degrees of utility of 
wool and cotton on each side subsequent to the 
exchange; hence we have 

^l(a — .Ti — .^a) _ _ <^8^ 2 

Xi ‘*’2 x* ~ ^2) 

There will also be interchange between B and C 
which will be independently regulated on similar 
principles, so that we have another pair of equa- 
tions to complete the conditions, namely, 

<p 2 -yi ~yi) ^ ^ ^ 2.^2 . 

X2 ^2 yt Xs ~ ^2) 

We might proceed in the same way to lay down 
the conditions of exchange between more numerous 
bodies, but the principles would be exactly the 
same. For every quantity of commodity which is 
given in exchange something must be received; 
and if portions of the same kind of commodity be 
received from several distinct parties, then we may 
conceive the quantity which is given for that com- 
modity to be broken up into as many distinct por- 
tions. The exchanges in the most complicated case 
may thus always be decomposed into simple ex- 
changes, and every exchange will give rise to two 

127 

Theory of Exchange. 

equations sufficient to determine the quantities 
involved. The same can also be done when there 
are two or more commodities in the possession of 
each trading body. 

Competition in Exchange. 

One case of the Theory of Exchange is of con- 
siderable importance, and arises when two parties 
compete together in supplying a third party with 
a certain commodity. Thus, suppose that A, with 
the quantity of one commodity denoted by a, pur- 
chases ai*other kind of commodity both from B 
and from C, who respectively possess h and c of it. 
All the quantities concerned are as follows — 

A gives Xy of a to B and to C, 

B „ yi of h to A, 

C „ ^2 of c to A. 

As each commodity may be supposed to be per- 
fectly homogeneous, the ratio of exchange must be 
the same in one case as in the other, so that we 
have one equation thus furnished — 

^ — ( 1 ) 

Now, provided that A gets the right commodity 
in the proper quantity, he does not care whence 
it comes, so that we need not, in his equa- 
tion, distinguish the source or destination of the 

128 The Theory of Political Economy. 

quantities ; he simply gives and receives in 

exchange yi + y^,. Observing, then, that by (1) 

we have the usual equation of exchange — 

^ ( 2 ) 

But B and C must both be separately satisfied 
with their shares in the transaction. Thus 

(3) 

<r% _ y^ 

(4) 

There are altogether four unknown quantities — 
.*?i, A\, yi, y ^ ; and we have four equations by which 
to determine them. Various suppositions might 
be made as to the comparative magnitudes of the 
quantities 6 and c, or the character of the func- 
tions concerned; and conclusions could then be 
drawn as to the eflect upon the trade. The general 
result would be, that the smaller holder must more 
or less conform to the prices of the larger holder. 

Failure of the Equations of Eoochange. 

Cases constantly occur in which equations of 
the kind set forth in the preceding pages fail to 
hold true, or lead to impossible results. Such 

129 

Thebry of Exchange. 

failure may indicate that no exchange at all takes 
place, but it may also have a different meaning. 

In the first case, it may happen that the com- 
modity possessed by A has a high degree of utility 
to A, and a low degree to B, and that ^hce versd 
B’s commodity has a high degree of utility to B 
and less to A. This difference of utility might 
exist to such an extent, that though B were to 
receive very little of A’s commodity, yet the final 
degree of utility to liim would he less than that 
of his own commodity, of which he enjoys much 
more. In such a case no benefit can arise from 
exchange, and no exchange will consequently take 
place. This failure of exchange will be imlicatcd 
by a failure of the equations. 

It may also happen that the whole quantities 
of commodity possessed are exchanged, and yet 
the equations fail. A may have so low a desire 
for consuming his own commodity, that the very 
last increment of it has less degree of utility to 
him than a small addition to the commodity re- 
ceived in exchange. The same state of things 
might happen to exist with B as regards his com- 
modity : under these circumstances the whole pos- 
sessions of one might be exchanged for the whole 
of the other, and the ratio of exchange would of 
course be defined by the ratio of these quantities. 
Yet each party might desire the last^ncrpment of 
the commodity received more than he desires the 

K 

130 

The Theoi'y' of Political Economy. 

last increment of that given, so that the equations 
would fail to be true. This case will hardly occur 
practically in international trade, since two nations 
usually trade in many commodities, a fact which 
would alter the conditions. 

Again, the equations of exchange will fail to be 
possible when the commodity or useful article pos- 
sessed on one or both sides is indivisible. We have 
always assumed hitherto that more or less of a 
commodity may be had, down to infinitely small 
quantities. This is approximately true of all ordi- 
nary trade, especially international trade between 
great industrial nations. Any one sack of corn 
or any one bar of iron is practically infinitesimal 
compared with the quantities exchanged by America 
and England; and even one cargo or parcel of 
corn or iron is a small fraction of the whole. But, 
in exceptional cases, even international trade might 
involve indivisible articles. We might conceive 
the British Government giving the Koh-i-noor 
diamond to the Khedive of Egypt in exchange for 
Pompey’s Pillar, in which case it would certainly 
not answer the purpose to break up one article or 
the other “. When an island or portion of territory 

“ Since the above was written the value of Cleopatra's Needle 
has actually formed the subject of decision in the Admiralty Court, 
in connection with the award of salvage. Tlie fact however is that 
in the absence of any act of exchange concerning such an object, 
the notion of value is not applicable at all. At the best the value 

131 

Theory of Exchange. 

is transferred from one possessor to another, it is 
often necessary to take the whole, or none. America, 
in purchasing Alaska from Russia, would hardly 
have consented to purchase less than the whole. 
In every sale of a house, factory, or other building, 
it is usually impracticable to make any division 
without greatly lessening the utility of the whole. 
In all such cases our equations must fail to exist, 
because we cannot contemplate the existence of 
an increment or a decrement to an indivisible 
article. 

Suppose, for example, that A and B each possess 
a book : they cannot break up the books, and must 
therefore exchange them entire, if at all. Under 
what conditions will they do so ? Plainly on the 
condition that each makes a gain of utility by so 
doing. Here we deal not with the final degree of 
utility depending on an infinitesimal quantity, but 
on the whole utility of the complete article. Now let 
us assign the symbols as follows : — 

= the utility of A’s book to A, 

9} 

99 

A’s „ 

to B, 

'Vl 

99 

99 

B’s „ 

to A, 

Vi 

99 

99 

B’s „ 

to B. 

assigned, namely ;625,000, is a mere fiction arbitrarily invented to 
represent what might conceivably be given for such an object if 
there were a purchaser. It is, moreover, curious that since the 
first edition was printed Kussia has actually made an exchange 
of islands with Japan. 

K 2 

132 Tlie Theory of Political Economy. 

Then the conditions of exchange are simply 

> Ml, 

> ^ 2 . 

We might indeed theoretically contemplate the case 
where the utilities were exactly ecpial on one side ; 

thus Ml > Ml, 

m.2 = M2; 

B would then be wholly indifferent to the ex- 
change, and I do not see any means of deciding 
whether he would or would not consent to it. But 
we need hardly consider the case, as it could 
seldom practically occur. Were the utilities exactly 
equal on both sides in respect to both objects, there 
would obviously be no motive to exchange. Again, 
the slightest loss of utility on either side would 
be a complete bar to the transaction, because we 
are not supposing, at present, that any other com- 
modities are in possession so as to allow of separate 
inducements, or that any other motives than such 
as arise out of simple desire of one’s own conveni- 
ence enter into the question. 

A much more difficult problem arises when we 
suppose an indivisible article exchanged for a divi- 
sible commodity. When Russia sold Alaska this 
was a practically indivisible thing; but it was 
bought with money of which more or less might be 
given to indefinitely small quantities. A bargain 
of this kind is exceedingly common ; indeed it 
occurs in the case of every house, mansion, estate, 

133 

Theory of Exchange. 

factory, ship, or other complete whole, which is 
sold for money. Our former equations of exchange 
certainly fail, for they involve increments of com- 
modity on both sides. The theory seems to give 
a very unsatisfactory answer, for the problem 
proves to be, within certain limits, indeterminata 
Let X be the indivisible article; its utility 
to its possessor A, and its utility to B. Let 
y be the quantity of commodity given for it, 
a commodity which is supposed to be divisible 
ad infinitum ; let v■^ be the total utility of y to A, 
and ^2 its total utility to B. Then it is quite 
evident that, in order to give rise to exchange, 
must be greater than and u.2, must be greater 
than ^2 ; that is, there must, as before, be a gain 
of utility on each side. The quantity y must not 
be so great then as to deprive B of gain, nor so 
small as to deprive A of gain. The following is 
an extract from ]Mr. Thornton’s work which exactly 
expresses the problem : — 

‘There are two opposite extremes — one above 
which the price of a commodity cannot rise, the 
other below which it cannot, fall. The upper of 
these limits is marked by the utility, real or sup- 
posed, of the commodity to the customer ; the lower, 
of its utility to the dealer. No one will give for 
a commodity a quantity of money or money’s 
worth, which, in his opinion, would be of more use 
to him than the commodity itself No one will 

134 The Theory of Political Economy, 

take for a commodity a quantity of money or of 
anything else which he thinks would be of less use 
to himself than the commodity. The price eventu- 
ally given and taken may be either at one of the 
opposite extremes, or may be anywhere interme- 
diate between them 

Three distinct cases might occur, which can best 
be illustrated by a concrete example. Suppose we 
can read the thoughts of the parties in the sale 
of a house. If A says £1200 is the least price 
which will satisfy him, and B holds that £800 is 
the highest price which it will be profitable for him 
to give, no exchange can possibly take place. If 
A should find £1000 to be his lowest limit, while 
B happens to name the same sum for his highest 
limit, the transaction can he closed, and the price 
will be exactly defined. But supposing, finally, 
that A is really willing to sell at £900, and B is 
prepared to buy at £1100, in what manner can we 
theoretically determine the price ? I see no mode 
of solving the question. Any price between £900 
and £1100 will leave a profit on each side, and 
both parties will lose if they do not come to terms. 
I conceive that such a transaction must be settled 
upon other than strictly economical grounds. The 
result of the bargain will greatly depend upon the 
comparative amount of knowledge of each other’s 

o Thornton ‘ On Labour ; its AVrongful Claims and Rightful 
Dues’ (18t)9), p. 58. 

135 

Theory of Exchange. 

positions and needs which either bargainer may 
possess or manage to obtain in the course of the 
transaction. Thus the power of reading another 
man’s thoughts is of high importance in business, 
and the art of bargaining mainly consists in the 
buyer ascertaining the lowest price at which the 
seller is willing to part with his object, without 
disclosing if possible the highest price Avhich he, 
the seller, is Avilling to give. The disposition and 
force of character of the parties, their comparative 
persistency, their adroitness and experience in busi- 
ness, or it may be feelings of justice or of kindliness 
will also influence the decision. These are motives 
more or loss extraneous to a theory of Economics, 
and yet they appear necessary considerations in 
this problem. It may be, that indeterminate bar- 
gains of this kind are l)est arranged by an arbitrator 
or third party. 

The equations of exchange may fail again when 
commodities are divisible, but not to inflnitely 
small quantities. There is always, in retail trade, 
a convenient unit below which we do not descend 
in purchases. Paper nmj' be bought in quires, or 
even in packets, which it may not be desirable to 
break up. Wine cannot be bought from the wine 
merchant in less than a bottle at a time. In all 
such cases exchange cannot, theoretically speaking, 
be perfectly adjusted, because it will be infinitely 
improbable that an integral number of units will 

136 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

precisely verify the equations of exchange. In 
a large proportion of cases, indeed, the unit may 
he so small compared with the whole quantities 
exchanged, as practically to be infinitely small. 
But suppose that a person be buying ink which 
is only to be had, under the circumstances, in one 
shilling bottles. If one bottle be not quite enough, 
how will he decide whether to take a second or 
not. Clearly by estimating the aggregate utility 
of the bottle of ink compared with the shilling. 
If there be an excess, he will certainly purchase 
it, and proceed to consider whether a third be 
desirable or not. 

This case might be illustrated by Figure VI. in 
which the spaces o q^, q.^ p.^ q^, &c. represent the 

total utilities of successive bottles of ink ; wliile 
the equal spaces o jh r.^, &c. represent the total 

utilities of successive shillings, which we may 
assume to be practically invariable. There is no 

Theory of Exchange. 

137 

doubt that three bottles Mull be purchased, but the 
fourth will not be purchased unless the mixtilinear 
figure exceed in area the rectangle 

Ti Pi. 

Cases of this kind are similar to those treated 
in pp. 130-4, where the things exchanged are indivi- 
sible, except that the qtiestion of exchange or no 
exchange occurs over and over again with respect 
to each successive unit, jind is decided in respect 
to each by the excess of the total utility of the unit 
to be received over the total utility of that to be 
given. There is indeed perfect harmony betM^een 
the cases where equations can and where thej^ can- 
not be established ; for we have only to imagine 
the indivisible units of commodity to be indefi- 
nitely lessened in size to enable us to pass gradually 
down to the case where equality of the increments 
of utility is ultimately established. 

Negative and Zero Value. 

Only a feAv economists, notably Mr. H. D. Macleod 
in several of his publications, have noticed the fact 
that there may be such a thing as negative value. 
Yet there cannot be the least doubt that people 
often labour, or pay money to other labourers, in 
order to get rid of things, and they Avould not do 
this unless such things were hurtful, that is, had 
the opposite quality to utility — disutility. Water, 

138 The Theory of Political Economy. 

when it gets into a mine, is a costly thing to get 
out again, and many people have been ruined by 
wet mines. Quarries and mines usually pi-oduce 
great quantities of valueless rock or earth, variously 
called duff, spoil, waste, rubbish, and no inconsi- 
derable part of the cost of working arises from the 
need of raising and carrying this profitless mass 
of matter and then finding land on which to deposit 
it. Every furnace yields cinders, dross, or slag, 
which can seldom be sold for any money, and every 
household is at the expense of getting rid, in one 
way or another, of sewage, ashes, swill, and other 
rejecianea. Reflection soon shows, in short, that 
no inconsiderable part of the values with which we 
deal in practical economics must be negative values. 

It will hardly be needful to show at full length 
that this negative value may be regarded as vary- 
ing continuously in the same way as positive value. 
If after a long drought rain begins to fall heavily, 
it is at first hailed as a great benefit; the rain- 
water may be so valuable as to produce a crop, 
when otherwise successful agidculture would have 
been impossible. Rain may thus avert famine; 
but after the rain has fallen for a certain length of 
time, the farmer begins to think he has had enough 
of it ; more rain will retard his operations, or injure 
the growing plants. As the rain continues to fall 
he fears further injury; water begins to flood his 
land, and there is even danger of the soil and crops 

139 

Theory of Exchange. 

being all washed away together. But the rain 
unfortunately pours down more and more heavily, 
until at length perhaps the crops, soil, house, stock, 
— nay, the farmer himself, are all swept bodily 
away. That same water, then, which in moderate 
quantity would have been of the greatest possible 
benefit, has only to be supplied in greater and 
greater quantities, to become injurious until it ends 
with occasioning the ruin, and even the death of 
the individual. Those acquainted with the floods 
and droughts of Australia know that this is no fancy 
sketch p. 

It many other cases it might be shown similarly 
that matter, we can hardly call it commodity, ac- 
quires a higher and higher degree of disutility, the 
greater the quantity which has to be disposed of. 
Such is the case with the sewage of gi'eat towns, 
the foul or poisoned water from mines, dye-Avorks, 
etc. Any obstacle, however, may be regarded as 
so much discommodity, whether it be a mountain 
which has to be bored through to make a railway, 
or a holloAv which has to be filled up with an ex- 
pensive embankment. If a building site requires 
a certain expenditure in levelling and draining 
before it can be made use of, the cost of this Avork 
is, of course, subtracted from the value Avhich the 

P See the author’s ‘ History of the Floods and Droughts of New 
South Wales,’ iu the Australian Almanack, Sydney, 1859, p. 61. 
Also Mr. II. C. Hussell’s ‘ Climate of New South Wales.’ 

140 The Theory of Political Economy. 

land would otherwise possess. As every advantage 
in property gives rise to value, so every disad- 
vantage must be set against that value. 

We now come to the question hoAv negative value 
is to be represented in our equations. Let us sup- 
pose a person possessing a of some commodity to 
find it insufficient : then it has positive degree of 
utility for liim, that is to say <p{a) is positive. 
Su[)pose X to be added to a and gradually increased ; 
(l>{a + a,‘) will gradually decrease. Let us assume 
that for a certain value of it becomes zero ; then, 
if the further increase of ,r turns utility into dis- 
utility, cj)[a + ai) will become a negative quantity. 
How will this negative sign affect the validity of 
the equations which we have been employing in 
preceding pages, and in which each member has 
appeared to be both formally and intrinsically 
positive ? It is plain that we cannot equate a posi- 
tive to a negative quantity; but it will be found 
that if, at the same time that we introduce 
negative utility, we also assign to each increment 
of commodity the positive or negative sign, ac- 
cording as it is added to or subtracted from the 
exchanger’s possessions, that is to say, received 
or given in exchange, no such difficulty arises. 

Suppose A and B respectively to hold a and b, 
and to exchange dx and dy of the commodities 
X and Y. Then it will be apparent from the 
general character of the argument on pp. 106-108, 

141 

Theory of Exchange. 

that the fundamental equation there adopted will 
be included in the more general form — 

(f> {cf'± x) . (h ±y) .^y = o. 

In this equation either factor of either term may 
be intrinsically negative, while the alternative signs 
before x and y allow for every possible case of 
giving and receiving in excliange. 

Four possible cases will arise. In the first case, 
both commodities have utility for each person, 
that is to say, (p and yp are both positive functions ; 
but A gives some of X in return for some of Y. 
This means that dx is negative, and dy positive, 
while the quantities in possession after exchange 
are a — x, and h-{-y. Thus the equation becomes 

— (p (a — x) . dx + yp {b +y) . dy = o. 

We should have merely to transpose the negative 
term to the other side of the equation, and to 
assume h = o, to obtain the equation on p. 107. 

As the second case, suppose that Y possesses 
disutility for A, so that the function becomes for 
him negative ; in order to get rid of y, lie must also 
pay ,v with it, and both these quantities as well 
as dy and dx receive the negative sign. Then the 
equation takes the shape 

(p{a — x) X (— dx) — ^{b —y) x ( —dy) —o, 
or V 

~cp (a — x) . dx + >1^ (6 —y) .dy=.o. 

The third case is the counterpart of the last, and 

142 The Tlheory of Political Economy. 

represents B’s position, who receives both a- and y, 
on the ground that one of these quantities is dis- 
commodity to him. But putting the matter as the 
case of A, we may assume ^ to be positive, yjy nega- 
tive, and giving the positive sign to all of y, dx 
and dy, we obtain the equation — 

(p{a + ai) . d.i’—\}^ (& + ?/). d,p = o. 

It is possible to conceive yet a fourth case in 
which people should be exchanging two discom- 
modities, that is to say, getting rid of one hurt- 
ful substance by accepting in place of it, what 
is felt to he less hurtful, though still possessing 
disutility. In this case we have both (p and yp 
negative, as well as one of the quantities exchanged; 
taking ,r and d,r as positive, and y and dy as nega- 
tive, the equation assumes the form 

— <p {a + a) . da' — ■^ (& —y) . ( — dy) = o, 
or 

— <^ (a + if —y) . dy=:o. 

It might be difficult to discover any distinct 
cases of this last kind of exchange. Generally 
speaking, when a person receives assistance in 
getting rid of some inconvenient possession, he 
pays in money or other commodity for the service 
of him who helps to remove the burden. It must 
naturally be a very rare case that the remover has 
some burden which it would suit the other party 
to receive in exchange. Yet the contingency may 

143 

Theory of Exchange. 

and, no doubt, does sometimes occur. Two adjacent 
landowners, for instance, might reasonably agree 
that, if A allows B to throw the spoil of his mine 
on A’s land, then A shall be alloAved to drain liis 
mine into B’s mine. It miglit happen that B was 
comparatively more embarrassed by the great quan- 
tity of his spoil, than by water, and that A had 
room for the spoil, but could not get rid of the 
water in other ways without great difficulty. An 
exchange of inconveniences would then be plainly 
beneficial. 

Looking at the equations obtained in the four 
cases as stated above, it is appai’ent that the 
general equation of exchange consists in equating 
to zero the sum of one positive and one negative 
term, so that the signs both of the utility functions 
and of the increments may be disregarded. Thus 
the fundamental equation may be written in the 
general form 

<p{a± ,v) dt/ 

f (b ±y) ~ dw 

We may express the result of this theory in general 
terms by saying that the algebraic sum of the 
utility or disutility received or parted with, as 
regards the last increments concerned in an act 
of traffic, will always be zero. It also follows that, 
without regard to sign, the increments are in 
magnitude inversely as their degrees of utility or 
disutility. The reader will not fail to notice the 

144 

TJie Theory of Political Economy. 

remarkable analogy between this theory and that 
of the equilibrium of two forces regarded accord- 
ing to the principle of virtual velocities. A rigid 
lever will remain in equilibrium under the action 
of two forces, provided that the algebraic sum of 
the forces, each multiplied by its infinitely small 
dis])lacement, be zero. Substitute for force, degree 
of utility, positive or negative, and for infinitely 
small displacements, infinitely small quantities 
of commodity exchanged, and the principles are 
identical. 

It still remains to consider the imaginary case 
in which substances possess or are supposed to 
possess neither utility nor disutility, and are yet 
exchanged in finite quantities. Substituting the 
ratio of y and iv for that of dy and da\ the general 
equation 

<p (a ± ,*') _ y 

will give the value •^=?, both the functions of 

<*’ o 

utility being zero. This means that the quantities 
exchanged will be indeterminate so far as the 
theory of utility goes. If one substance possesses 
utility, and the other does not, the ratio of ex- 
change becomes either >?!! or ?, infinity or zero, 

o y 

indicating that there can be no comparison in our 
theory between things which do and those which 

146 

Theory oj Exchange. 

do not possess utility. Practically speaking, such 
cases do not occur except in an approximate man- 
ner. Such things as cinders, shavings, night-soil, 
&c., have either low degrees of utility or disutility. 
If the dustman takes them away for nothing, they 
must have utility for him sufficient to pay the cost 
of removal. When the dust is riddled, one part 
is usually found to have utility just sufficient to 
balance the disutility of the remainder, giving us 
an instance of the second or third form of the 
equation of exchange according as we regard the 
matter from the householder’s or the dustman’s 
point of view. 

Equivalence of Commodities. 

Much confusion is thrown into the statistical 
investigation of questions of supply and demand 
by the circumstance that one commodity can often 
replace another, and serve the same purposes more 
or less perfectly. The same, or nearly the same 
substance, is often obtained from two or three 
sources. The constituents of wheat, barley, oats, 
and rye are closely similar, if not identical. Ve- 
getable structures are composed mainly of the 
same chemical compound in nearly all cases. 
Animal meat, again, is of nearly the same com- 
position from whatever animal derived. There 
are endless differences of flavour and quality, but 

146 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

these are often insufficient to prevent one kind 
from serving in place of another. 

Whenever different commodities are thus ap- 
plicable to the same purposes, their conditions of 
demand and exchange are not independent. Their 
mutual ratio of exchange cannot vary much, for 
it will be closely defined by the ratio of their 
utilities. Beef and mutton, for instance, differ so 
slightly, that people eat them almost indifferently. 
But the wholesale price of mutton, on an average, 
exceeds that of beef in the ratio of 9 to 8, and 
we must therefore conclude that people generally 
esteem mutton more than beef in this proportion, 
otherwise they would not buy the dearer meat. 
It follows, that the final degrees of utility of these 
meats are in this ratio, or that if <j>a? be the degree 
of utility of mutton, and that of beef, we have 
8 . = 9 . -^y. 

This equation would doubtless not hold true in 
extreme circumstances; if mutton became com- 
paratively scarce, there would probably be some 
persons willing to pay a higher price, merely be- 
cause it would then be considered a delicacy. 
But this is certain, that, so long as the equation 
of utilities holds true, the ratio of exchange be- 
tween mutton and beef will not diverge from that 
of 8 to 9. If the supply of beef falls off to a small 
extent, people will not pay a higher price for it, 
Unf will eat more mutton; and if the supply of 

147 

Theory of Exchange. 

mutton falls off, they will eat more beef. The 
conditions of supply will have no effect upon the 
ratio of exchange; we must, in fact, treat beef 
and mutton as one commodity of two differenf 
strengths, just as gold at eighteen and gold at 
tAventy carats are hai'dly considered as two but 
rather as one commodity, of which twenty parts 
of one are equivalent to eighteen of the other. 

It is upon this principle that we must explain, in 
harmony with Cairnes’ views, the extraordinary per - 
manence of the ratio of exchange of gold and silver, 
which from the commencement of the eighteenth 
century up to recent years never diverged much 
from 15 to 1. That this fixedness of ratio did 
not depend entirely upon the amount or cost of 
production is proved by the very slight effect of 
the Australian and Californian gold discoveries, 
Avhich never raised the gold price of silver more 
than about 4| per cent., and failed to have a per- 
manent effect of more than 1^ per cent. This 
permanence of relative values may have been 
partially due to the fact, that gold and silver can 
be employed for exactly the same purposes, but 
that the superior brilliancy of gold occasions it 
to be preferred, unless it be about 15 or 15| times 
as costly as silver. Much more probably, how- 
ever, the explanation of the fact is to be found 
in the fixed ratio of 15^ to 1, according to which 
these metals are exchanged in the currency of 

L 2 

148 The Theory of Political Economy. 

France and some other continental countries. The 
French Currency Law of the Year XI established 
an artificial equation — 

Utility of gold = 15 1 X Utility of silver; 
and it is probably not without some reason that 
Wolowski and other recent French economists 
attributed to this law of I'eplacemcnt an important 
effect in preventing disturbance in the relations of 
gold and silver. 

Since the first edition of this work was pub- 
lished, the views of Wolowski have received strik- 
ing verification in the unprecedented fall in the 
value of silver, which has occurred in the last 
three or four years. The ratio of equivalent weights 
of silver and gold, wliich had never before risen 
much above 16 to 1, commenced to rise in 1874, 
and was at one time (July 1876) as high as 22‘5 
to 1 in the London market. Though it has since 
fallen, the ratio continues to be subject to frequent 
considerable oscillations. The great production of 
silver in Nevada may contribute somewhat to this 
extraordinary result, but the principal cause must 
be the suspension of the French Law of the Double 
Standard, and the demonetization of silver in Ger- 
many, Scandinavia, and elsewhere. As I have treated 
the subject of the value of silver and the Double 
Standard elsewhere % I need not pursue it here. 

<1 ^Serious fall in the value of gold/ 1863^ p. 33. 'Money and 
the Mechanism of Exchange ^ (International Scientific Series), 

Theory of Exchange. 

149 

Acquired Utility of Commodities. 

The Theory of Exchange, as explained above, 
rests entirely on the consideration of quantities 
of utility, and no reference to labour or cost ol 
production has been made. The value of a divi- 
sible commodity, if I may for a moment use the 
dangerous term, is measured, not, indeed, by its 
total utility, but by its final degree of utility, 
that is by the intensity of the need we have for 
more of it. But the power of exchanging one 
commodity for another greatly extends the range 
of utility. We are no longer limited to con- 
sidering the degree of utility of a commodity as 
regards the wants of its immediate possessor; for 
it may have a higher usefulness to some other 
person, and can be transferred to that person in 
exchange for some commodity of a higher degree 
of utility to the purchaser. The general result of 
exchange is, that all commodities sink, as it were, 
to the same level of utility in respect of the last 
portions consumed. 

In the Theory of Exchange we find that the 
possessor of any divisible commodity will ex- 

chapter xli. This chapter has been translated by M. H. Gravez and 
reprinted in the Bibliothfeque Utile, vol. xliv. (Germer Baillifere), 
Paris, 1878. See also Papers on the Silver Question read before 
the American Social Science Association at Saratoga, Sept. 5, 1877, 
Boston, 1877, and Bankers’ Magazine, December, 1877. 

L50 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

change such a portion of it, that the next incre- 
ment would have exactly equal utility with the 
increment of other produce which he would re- 
ceive for it. This will hold good however various 
may be the kinds of commodity he requires. Sup- 
pose that a person possesses one single kind of 
commodity, which we may consider to be money, 
or income, and that p, q, r, s, t, kc. are quantities 
of other commodities which he purchases with 
portions of his income. Let <^’ be the uncertain 
quantity of money which he will desire not to 
exchange; what relation will exist between these 
quantities p, q, r, &c. ? This relation will partly 
depend upon the ratio of exchange, partly on the 
final degree of utility of these commodities. Let 
us assume, for a moment, that all the ratios of 
exchange are equalities, or that a unit of one is 
always to be purchased with a unit of another. 
Then, plainly, we must have the degrees of utility 
equal, otherwise there would be advantage in ac- 
quiring more of that possessing the higher degree 
of utility. Let the sign denote the function of 
utility, which will be different in each case ; then 
we have simply the equations — 

= ^.^p = (p^q = (pyr=cp^s = kc. 

But, as a matter of fact, the ratio of exchange is 
seldom or never that of unit for unit; and when 
the quantities exchanged are unequal, the degrees 
of utility will not be equal. If for one pound of 

151 

Theory of Exchange, 

silk I can have three of cotton, then the degree 
of utility of cotton must be a third that of silk, 
otherwise I should gain by exchange. Thus the 
general result of the facility of exchange pre- 
vailing in a civilized country is, that a person 
procures such quantities of commodities that the 
final degrees of utility of any pair of commodities 
are inversely as the ratios of exchange of the com- 
modities. 

Let .j?!, <**2, &c. be the portions of his in- 

come given for p, q, r, s, &c. respectively, then 
we must have 

<pi i,v p ^1 •*’ 2 ’ 

and so on. The theory thus represents the fact, 
that a person distributes his income in such a way 
as to equalise the utility of the final increments of 
all commodities consumed. As water runs into 
hollows until it fills them up to the same level, so 
wealth runs into all the branches of expenditure. 
This distribution will vary greatly with different 
individuals, but it is self-evident that the want 
which an individual feels most acutely at the 
moment will be that upon which he will expend 
the next increment of his income. It obviously 
follows that in expending a person s income to the 
greatest advantage, the algebraic sum of the quanti- 
ties of commodity received or parted vnth, each 
multiplied by its final degree of utility, will be zero. 

152 The Theo'i'y of Political Economy, 

We can now conceive, in an accurate manner, 
the utility of money, or of that supply of com- 
modity which forms a person’s income. Its final 
degree of utility is measured by that of any of 
the other commodities which he consumes. What, 
for instance, is the utility of one penny to a poor 
family earning fifty pounds a year? As a penny 
is an inconsiderable portion of their income, it 
may represent one of the infinitely small incre- 
ments, and its utility is equal to the utility of 
the quantity of bread, tea, sugar, or other articles 
which they could purchase with it, this utility 
depending upon the extent to wliich they were 
already provided with those articles. To a family 
possessing one thousand pounds a year, the utility 
of a penny may be measured in an exactly similar 
manner; but it will be much less, because their 
want of any given commodity will be satiated or 
satisfied to a much greater extent, so that the 
urgency of need for a pennyworth more of any 
article is much reduced. 

The general result of exchange is thus to- pro- 
duce a certain equality of utility between different 
commodities, as regards the same individual; but 
between different individuals no such equality will 
tend to be produced. In Economics we regard 
only commercial transactions, and no equalisation 
of wealth from charitable motives is considered. 
The degree of utility of wealth to a very rich man 

Tlteory of Exchange. 

153 

will be governed by its degree of utility in that 
branch of expenditure in which he continues to 
feel the most need of further possessions. Ilis 
primary wants will long since have been fully 
satisfied; he could find food, if requisite, for a 
thousand persons, and so, of course, he will have 
supplied himself with as much as he in the least 
desires. But so far as is consistent with the in- 
equality of wealtli in every community, all com- 
modities are distributed by exchange so as to 
produce the maximum of benefit. Every person 
whose wish for a certain thing exceeds his wish 
for other things, acquires what he wants, provided 
he can make a sufficient sacrifice in other respects. 
No one is ever required to give what he more 
desires for what he less desires, so that perfect 
freedom of exchange must be to the advantage 
of all. 

The Gain hy Exchange. 

It is a most important result of this theory that 
the ratio of exchange gives no indication of the 
real benefit derived from the action of exchange. 
So many trades are occupied in buying and sell- 
ing, and make their profits by buying low and 
selling high, that there arises a fallacious ten- 
dency to believe that the whole benefit of trade 
depends upon the differences of prices. It is im- 
plied that to pay a high price is worse than doing 

154 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

without the article, and the whole financial sys- 
tem of a great nation may be distorted in the 
effort to carry out a false theory. 

This is the result to which some of J. S. Mill’s 
remarks, in his ‘Theory of International Trade,’ 
would lead. That theory is always ingenious, and 
as it seems to me, nearly always true; but he 
draws from it the following conclusion ^ : — ‘ The 
countries which carry on their foreign trade on 
the most advantageous terms, are those whose 
commodities are most in demand by foreign coun- 
tries, and which have themselves the least demand 
for foreign commodities. From which, among other 
consequences, it follows, that the richest countries, 
cceteris 'paribus, gain the least by a given amount 
of foreign commerce: since, having a greater de- 
mand for commodities generfilly, they are likely 
to have a greater demand for foreign commo- 
dities, and thus modify the terms of interchange 
to their own disadvantage. Their aggregate gains 
by foreign trade, doubtless, are generally greater 
than those of poorer countries, since they carry 
on a greater amount of such trade, and gain the 
benefit of cheapness on a larger consumption ; 
but their gain is less on each individual article 
consumed.’ 

r ‘ Principles of Political Economy,’ book iii. chap. 18, end of the 
8th section. 

Theory of Exchange. 

155 

In the absence of any explanation to the con- 
ti'ary, this passage must be taken to mean, that 
the advantage of foreign trade depends upon the 
terms of exchange, and that international trade 
is less advantageous to a rich than to a poor 
country. But such a conclusion involves con- 
fusion between two distinct things — the price of 
a commodity and its total utility. A country is 
not merely like a great mercantile firm buying 
and selling goods, and making a profit out of the 
difference of price ; it buys goods in order to con- 
sume them. But, in estimating the benefit which 
a consumer derives from a commodity, it is the 
total utility which must be taken as the measure, 
not the final degree of utility on which the terms 
of exchange depend. 

To illustrate this truth we may employ the 
curves in Figure VII to represent the functions 
of utility of two commodities. Let the wool of 
Australia be represented by the line oh, and its 
total utility to Australia by the area of the curvi- 
linear figure ohr'p. Let the utility of a second 
commodity, say cotton goods, to Australia be simi- 
larly represented in the lower curve, so that the 
quantity of commodity measured by o'U gives a 
total utility represented by the figure o'f'/V. 
Then, if Australia gives half its wool, ah, for the 
quantity of cotton goods represented by o' a', it 
loses the utility aqrh, but gains that represented 

156 The Theory of Political Econo'/ny. 

by the larger area o'jffa'. There is accordingly 
a considerable net gain of utility, which is the 
real object of exchange. Even had Australia sold 
its wool at a lower price, obtaining cotton goods 
only to the amount of o'c, the utility of this 

amount, op' sc, would have exceeded that of the 
wool given for it. 

So far is Mill's statement from being funda- 
mentally correct, that I believe the truth lies in 
the opposite direction. As a general rule, the 
greatness of the price which a country is willing 
and able to pay for the productions of other coun- 
tries, measures, or at least manifests, the greatness 

157 

Theory of Exchange. 

of the benefit which it derives from such imports. 
He who pays a high price must either have a very 
great need of that which he buys, or very little 
need of that which he pays for it ; on either sup- 
position there is gain by exchange. In questions 
of this sort there is but one rule which can he 
safely laid down, namely that no one will buy a 
thing unless he expects advantage from the pur- 
chase; and perfect freedom of exchange, therefore, 
tends to the maximising of utility. 

One advantage of the Theory of Economics, 
carefully studied, will be to make us very careful 
in our conclusions when the matter is not of the 
simplest possible nature. The fact that we can 
most imperfectly estimate the total utility of any 
one commodity should prevent us, for instance, 
from attempting to measure the benefit of any 
trade. Accordingly, when Mill proceeds from his 
theory of international trade to that of taxation, 
and arrives at the conclusion that one nation may, 
by means of taxes on commodities imported, ‘ ap- 
propriate to itself, at the expense of foreigners, a 
larger share than would otherwise belong to it of 
the increase in the general productiveness of the 
labour and capital of the world®,’ I venture to 
question the truth of his results. I conceive that 
his arguments involve a confusion between the 
ratio of exchange and the total utility of a com- 

s * Principles of Political Economy,’ book v. chap. 4, § 6. 

158 The Theory of Political Economy. 

modity, and a far more accurate knowledge of 
economical laws than any one yet possesses would 
be required to estimate the true effect of a tax. 
Customs duties may be requisite as a means of 
raising revenue, but the time is past when any 
economist should give the slightest countenance 
to their employment for manipulating trade, or 
for interfering with the natural tendency of ex- 
change to increase utility. 

Numerical Determination of the Laivs of 
Utility. 

The future progress of Economics as a strict 
science must greatly depend upon our acquiring 
more accurate notions of the variable quantities 
concerned in the theory. We cannot really tell 
the effect of any change in trade or manufacture 
until we can with some approach to truth express 
the laws of the variation of utility numerically. 
To do this we need accurate statistics of the 
quantities of commodities purchased by the whole 
population at various prices. The price of a com- 
modity is the only test we have of the utility of 
the commodity to the purchaser ; and if we could 
tell exactly how much people reduce their con- 
sumption of each important article when the price 
rises, we could determine, at least approximately, 
the variation of the final degree of utility — the' 
all-important element in Economics. 

Theoi'y of Exchange. 

159 

In such calculations we may at first make use 
of the simpler equation given on p. 123. For the 
first approximation we may assume that the 
general utility of a person’s income is not affected 
by the changes of price of the commodity; so 
that if, in the equation 

= m . 4" c 

we have many different corresponding values for x 
and m, we may treat \lrc, the utility of money, as 
a constant, and determine the general character 
of the function (px, the final degree of utility. 
This function would doubtless be a purely em- 
pirical one — a mere aggregate of terms devised 
so that their sum shall vary in accordance with 
statistical facts. The subject is too complex to 
allow of our expecting any simple precise law 
like that of gravity. Nor, when we have got the 
laws, shall we be able to give any exact explan- 
ation of them. They will be of the same cha- 
racter as the empirical formulae used in many of 
the physical sciences — mere aggregates of ma- 
thematical symbols intended to replace a tabular 
statement *. Nevertheless, their determination will 
render Economics a science as exact as many of the 
physical sciences ; as exact, for instance, as Meteor- 
ology is likely to be for a very long time to come. 

The method of determining the function of 

t See Jevons’ ‘Principles of Science,’ chapter xxii, New Ed., 
pp. 487—9, and the references there given. 

160 The Theory of Political Economy. 

utility explained above will hardly apply, how- 
ever, to the main elements of expenditure. The 
price of bread, for instance, cannot be properly 
brought under the equation in question, because, 
when the price of bread rises much, the resources 
of poor persons are strained, money becomes scarcer 
with them, and -fc, the utility of money, rises. 
The natural result is, the lessening of exjjendi- 
ture in other directions; that is to say, all the 
wants of a poor person are supplied to a less 
degree of satisfaction when food is dear than when 
it is cheap. When in the long course of scientific 
progress, a sufficient supply of suitable statistics 
has been at length obtained, it will become a mathe- 
matical problem of no great difficulty how to dis- 
entangle the functions expressing the degrees of 
utility of various commodities. One of the first 
steps, no doubt, will be to ascertain what pro- 
portion of the expenditure of poor people goes to 
provide food, at various prices of that food. But 
great difficulty is thrown in the way of all such 
inquiries by the vast differences in the condition 
of persons, and still greater difficulties are created 
by the complicated ways in which one commodity 
replaces, or serves instead of another. 

Opinions as to the Variation of Price. 

There is no difficulty in finding, in works of 
Economists, remarks upon the relation between 

161 

Theory of Exchange. 

a change in the supply of a commodity and the 
consequent rise of price. The general principles 
of the variation of utility have been familiar to 
many writers. 

As a general rule the variation of pidce is much 
more marked in the case of necessaries of life than 
in the case of luxuries. This result would follow 
from the fact observed by Adam Smith, that ‘ The 
desire for food is limited in every man by the 
narrow capacity of tlie human stomach; but the 
desire of the conveniences and ornaments of build- 
ing, dress, equipage, and household furniture, seems 
to have no limit or certain boundary.’ As I assert 
that value depends upon desire for more, it follows 
that any excessive supply of food will lower its 
price very much more than in the case of articles 
of luxury. Reciprocally, a dcflciency of food will 
raise its price much more than would happen in 
the case of less necessary articles. This conclusion 
is in harmony with facts ; for Chalmers says : 
‘The necessaries of life are far more powerfully 
affected in the price of them by a variation in 
their quantity, than are the luxuries of life. Let 
the crop of grain be deficient by one-third in its 
usual amount, or rather, let the supply of grain 
in the market, whether from the home produce, 
or by importation, be curtailed to the same extent, 

^ Chalmers’ ‘ Christian and Economic Polity of a Nation/ vol. ii. 
p. 240. 

M 

162 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

and this will create a much greater addition than 
of one-third to the price of it. It is not an un- 
likely prediction, that its cost Avould be more than 
doubled by the shortcoming of one-third or one- 
fourth in the supply.’ 

He goes on to explain, at considerable length, 
that the same would not happen with such an 
article as rum. A deficiency in the supply of rum 
from the West Indies would occasion a rise of 
price, but not to any great extent, because there 
would be a substitution of other kinds of spirits, 
or else a reduction in the amount consumed. Men 
can live without luxuries, but not Avithout neces- 
saries. ‘A failure in the general supply of escu- 
lents to the extent of one-half, would more than 
quadruple the price of the first necessaries of life, 
and would fall with very aggravated pressure on 
the lower orders. A failure to the same extent 
in all the vineyards of the world, would most 
assuredly not raise the price of wine to anything 
near this proportion. Rather than pay four times 
the wonted price for Burgundy, there would be 
a general descent to claret, or from that to port, 
or from that to the home-made wines of our own 
country, or from that to its spirituous, or from 
that to its fermented liquors He points to sugar 
especially as an article which would be extensively 

X Chalmers' ^ Christian and Economic Polity of a Nation/ vol. ii. 
p. 242. 

163 

Theory of Exchange. 

thrown out of consumption by any great rise in 
pricey, because it is a luxury, and at the same 
time forms a considerable element in expenditure. 
But he thinks that, if an article occasions a total 
expenditure of very small amount, variations ol 
price will not much affect its consumption. 

Speaking of nutmeg, he says: — ‘There is not 
sixpence a year consumed of it for each family in 
Great Britain ; and perhaps not one family that 
spends more than a guinea on this article alone. 
Let the price then be doubled or trebled ; this will 
have no perceptible effect on the demand; and 
the price will far rather be paid, than that the 
wonted indulgence should in any degree be fore- 
gone The same holds true of cloves, and 

cinnamon, and Cayenne pepper, and all the pre- 
cious spiceries of the East; and it is thus, that 
while, in the general, the price of necessaries differs 
so widely from that of luxuries, in regard to the 
extent of oscillation, there is a remarkable ap- 
in'oximation in this matter between the very com- 
monest of these necessaries and the very rarest of 
these luxuries 2.’ 

In these interesting observations Chalmers cor- 
rectly distinguishes between the effect of desire 
for the commodity in question and that for othei 
commodities. The cost of nutmeg does not ap- 

y Chalmers’ ‘ Christian and Economic Polity of a Nation,’ vol. ii 
p. 251. ^ Ibid. p. 252. 

M 2 

164 

The Thecjry of Political Economy. 

preciably affect the general expenditure on otlier 
things, and the equation on p. 123 therefore applies. 
But if sugar become scarce, to consume as before 
would necessitate a reduction of consumption in 
other directions; and as the degree of utility of 
more necessary articles rises much more rapidly 
than that of sugar, it is the latter article which is 
thrown out of use by preference. This is a far 
more complex case, which includes also the case 
of corn and all large articles of consumption. 

Chalmers’ remarks on the price of sugar are 
strongly supported by facts concerning the course 
of the sugar markets in 1855-6. In the year 
1855, as is stated in Tooke’s ‘History of Prices V 
attention was suddenly drawn to a considerable 
reduction which had taken place in the stocks of 
sugar. Tlie price rapidly advanced, but before it 
had reached the highest point the demand became 
almost wholly suspended. Not only did retail 
dealers avoid replenishing their stocks, but there 
was an immediate and sometimes entire cessation 
of consumption among extensive classes. There 
were instances among the retail grocers of their 
not selling a single pound of sugar until prices 
receded to what the public was satisfied was a 
reasonable rate. 

^ Vol. V. p. 324, &c, 

Theory of Exchange. 

165 

Variation of the Price of Corn. 

As to Chalmers’ ingenious remarlcs upon the 
consumption of nutmeg, he seems to be at least 
partially correct. To a certain extent he brings 
into view the principle explained above, that when 
only a small quantity of income is required to 
purchase a certain kind of commodity in sufficient 
abundance, the degree of utility of income will not 
be appreciably affected by the price paid, that is 
to say (p. 123) \|ac remains approximately constant. 

It follows that — is constant, or in other words 

m 

the final degree of utility of the small commodity 
purchased must be directly proportional to the 
price. If then the price rise much, either the 
consumer must relinquish the use of that com- 
modity almost entirely, or else he must feel such 
need of it, that a small deci’ease of consumption 
is irksome to him ; that is to say, looking to our 
curves of utility, either we must recede to a part 
of the curve very close to the axis of y, or else 
the curve must be one which rises rapidly as we 
move towards the origin. Now Chalmers assumes 
that with nutmeg the latter is the case. People 
accustomed to use it in his time, were so fond 
of it that they would pay a much higher price 
rather than decrease their consumption consi- 
derably. This means that it possessed a high 

16fi The Theory of Political Economy. 

degree of utility to them, which could only be 
overbalanced by some serious increase in the 
value of fc, which would ultimately mean the 
need of the necessaries of life. 

It is very curious that in this subject, which 
reaches to the very foundations of Political Eco- 
nomy, we owe more to early than later writers. 
Before our science could be said to exist at all, 
writers on Political Arithmetic had got about as 
far as we have got at present. In a pamphlet of 
1737^, it is remarked that ‘People who under- 
stand trade will readily agree with me, that the 
tenth part of a commodity in a market, more 
than there is a brisk demand for, is apt to lower 
the market, perhaps, twenty or thirty per cent., 
and that a deficiency of a tenth part will cause as 
exorbitant an advance.’ Sir J. Dalrymplec, again, 
says : — ‘ Merchants observe, that if the commodity 
in market is diminished one-third beneath its mean 
quantity, it will be nearly doubled in value; and 
that if it is augmented one-third above its mean 
quantity, it will sink near one-half in its value; 
or that, by further diminishing or augmenting the 
quantity, these disproportions between the quantity 
and prices vastly increase.’ These remarks bear 
little signs of accuracy, indeed, for the writers 
have spoken of commodities in general as if they 

Quoted in Lauderdale’s ‘ Inquiry into the Nature and Origin 
of Public Wealth,’ 2nd Ed., 1819, pp. 51-52. 

Theory of Exchange. 

167 

all varied in price in a similar degree. It is pro- 
bable that they were thinking of corn or other 
kinds of the more necessary food. In the ‘Spec- 
tator’ we find a conjecture ‘i, that the production 
of one-tenth part more of grain than is usually 
consumed would diminish the value of the grain 
one-half. I know nothing more strange and dis- 
creditable to statists and economists, than that in 
so important a point as the relations of price and 
supply of the main article of food, we owe our 
most accurate estimates to writers who lived from 
one to two centuries ago. 

There is a celebrated estimate of the variation 
of the price of corn which I have found quoted* in 
innumerable works on Economics. It is commonly 
attributed to Gregory King, whose name should be 
held in honour as one of the fathers of statistical 
science in England. Born at Lichfield in 1648, 
King devoted himself much to mathematical studies, 
and was often occupied in surveying. His prin- 
cipal public appointments were those of Lancaster 
Herald and Secretary to the Commissioners ol 
Public Accounts ; but he is known to fame by thr 
remarkable statistical tables concerning the popu- 
lation and trade of England, which he completed 
in the year 1696. His treatise was entitled ‘ Natura' 
and Political Observations and Conclusions upoi 
the State and Condition of England, 1696.’ L 

^ No. 200, quoted by Lauderdale, p. 60. 

168 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

was never printed in the author’s lifetime, but 
the contents were communicated in a most liberal 
manner to Dr. Davenant, who, making suitable 
acknowledgments as to the source of his infor- 
mation, founded thereupon his ‘Essay upon the 
Probable Methods of making a People gainers in 
the Balance of Trade Our knowledge of Gregory 
King’s conclusions was derived from this and other 
essays of Davenant, until George Chalmers printed 
the whole treatise at the end of the third edition 
of his well-known ‘Estimate of the Comparative 
Strength of Great Britain.’ 

The estimate of which I am about to speak is 
given by Davenant in the following words ^ : — 
‘We take it, that a defect in the harvest may 
raise the price of corn in the following propor- 
tions : 

Defect. 

Above the Common Rate. 

1 Tenth ^ 

^ 3 Tenths 

2 Tenths 

raises 

8 Tenths 

3 Tenths 

^ the 

1*6 Tenths 

4 Tenths 

price 

2*8 Tenths 

5 Tenths 

. 4*5 Tenths. 

So that when corn 

rises to treble the common 

rate, it may be presumed that we want above f of 

® ‘ The Political and Commercial Works of Charles Davenant,’ 
vol. ii. p. 163. 
t Ihid. p. 224. 

Theory of Exchange. 1 GO 

the common produce; and if wo should want 
or half the common produce, the price would rise 
to near five times the common rate.’ 

Though this estimate has always been attii- 
buted to Gregory King, 1 cannot find it in his 
published treatise; nor does Davenant, who else- 
where makes full acknowledgments of what he 
owes to King, here attribute it to his friend. It 
is therefore, perhaps, due to Davenant. 

We may re-state this estimate in the follow- 
ing manner, taking the average harvest and the 
average price of corn as unity — 

Quantity of Corn 1-0 '9 -8 '7 ‘6 ‘5 

Price .... 1-0 PS PS 2-G 3-8 55 

Many writers have commented on this estimate. 
Thorntons observes, that it is probably exceed- 
ingly inaccurate, and that it is not clear whether 
the total stock, or only the harvest of a single 
year, is to be taken as deficient. Tooke^*, how- 
ever, than whom on such a point there is no 
higher authority, believes that King’s estimate ‘is 
not very wide of the truth, judging from the 
repeated occurrence of the fact that the price of 
corn in this country has risen from one hundred 
to two hundred per cent, and upwards when the 

K ‘An Inquiry into the Nature and Effects of tlie Paper Credit 
of Great Britain/ pp. 270, 271. 

‘ History of Prices/ voL i. pj). 13—15. 

170 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

utmost computed deficiency of the crops has not 
been more than between one-sixth and one-third 
of an average.’ 

I have endeavoured to ascertain the law to 
which Davenant’s figures conform, and the mathe- 
matical function obtained does not greatly differ 
from what we might have expected. It is pro- 
bable that the price of corn should never sink to 
zero, as, if abundant, it could be used for feeding 
horses, poultry, and cattle, or for other purposes 
for which it is too costly at present. It is said 
that in America corn, no doubt Indian corn, has 
been occasionally used as fuel. On the other 
hand, when the quantity is much diminished, the 
price should rise rapidly, and should become in- 
finite before the quantity is zero, because fixmine 
would then be impending. The substitution of 
potatoes and other kinds of food renders the 
famine point very uncertain ; but I think that a 
total deficiency of corn could not be made up by 

other food. Now a function of the form , — 

fulfils these conditions ; for it becomes infinite 
when X is reduced to 6, but for greater values of 
X always decreases as x increases. An inspection 
of the numerical data shows that n is about equal to 
2, and, assuming it to be exactly 2, 1 find that the 
most probable values of a and h are a = '824 and 
6 = -12. The formula thus becomes 

Theory of Exchange. 

171 

price of corn = 
or approximately, = 

•824 
- 12 )^ ’ 

6 

6 (<*■-!)'** 

The following numbers show the degree of ap- 
proximation between the first of these formula? 
and the data of Davenant— 

Harvest 

Price (Davenant) 
Price calculated . 

PO 

•9 

•8 

PO 

P3 

P8 

P06 

P36 

P78 

•7 

•6 

•5 

2-6 

3-8 

5-5 

2*45 

3-58 

5-71 

1 cannot undertake to say how nearly Dave- 
nant’s estimate agrees with experience ; but, con- 
sidering the close approximation in the above 
numbers, we may safely substitute the empirical 
formula for his numbers ; and there are other rea- 
sons already stated for supposing that this for- 
mula is not far from the truth. Roughly speak- 
ing, the price of corn may be said to vary inversely 
as the square of the supply, provided that this 
supply be not unusually small. I find that this 
is nearly the same conclusion as Whewell drew 
from the same numbers. He says > ; ‘If the above 
numbers were to be made the basis of a mathe- 
matical rule, it would be found that the price 
varies inversely as the square of the supply; or 
rather in a higher ratio.’ 

There is further reason for believing that the 

i Six Lectures on Political Economy. Cambridge, 1862. 

172 

The, 2'heory of Political Economy. 

price of corn varies more rapidly than in the 
inverse ratio of the quantity. Toolce estimates 
that in 1795 and 1796 the farmers of England 
gained seven millions sterling in each year by a 
deficiency of one-eighth part in the wheat crop, 
not including the considerable profit on the rise 
of price of other agricultural produce. In each 
of the years 1799 and 1800, again, farmers pro- 
bably gained eleven millions sterling by deficiency. 
If the price of wheat varied in the simple inverse 
proportion of the quantity, they would neither 
gain nor lose, and the fact that they gained con- 
siderably agrees with our formula as given above. 

The variation of utility has not been overlooked 
by mathematicians, who had observed, as long ago 
as the early part of last century — before, in fact, 
there was any science of Political Economy at all — 
that the theory of probabilities could not be applied 
to commerce or gaming withoxit taking notice of 
the very different utility of the same sum of money 
to different persons. Suppose that an even and 
fair bet is made betw'een two persons, one of whom 
has £10,000 a year, the other £100 a year; let it 
be an equal chance whether they gain or lose £50. 
The rich person will, in neither case, feel much 
difference; but the poor person Avill receive far 
more harm by losing £50 than he can be benefited 
by gaining it. The utility of money to a poor 

^ ‘ History of Prices/ 

Theory of Exchange. 

173 

person varies rapidly with the amount; to a rich 
person less so. Daniel Bernoulli, accordingly, dis- 
tinguished in any question of probabilities between 
the moral expectation and the mathematical expec- 
tation, the latter being the simple chance of ob- 
taining some possession, the former the chance as 
measured by its utility to the person. Having no 
means of ascertaining numerically the variation 
of utility, Bernoulli had to make assumptions of 
an arbitrary kind, and Avas then able to obtain 
reasonable answers to many important questions. 
It is almost self-evident that the utility of money 
decreases as a person’s total wealth increases ; if 
this be granted, it follows at once that gaming is, 
in the long run, a sure way to lose utility; that 
every person should, when possible, divide risks, 
that is, prefer two equal chances of £50 to one 
similar chance of £100 ; and the advantage of 
insurance of all kinds is proved from the same 
theory. Laplace drcAv a similar distinction be- 
tween the fortune physique, or the actual amount 
of a person’s income, and the fortune morale, or 
its benefit to himi.’ 

In answer to the objections of an ingenious 
correspondent, it may be remarked that when we 
say gaming is a sure way to lose utility, we 
take no account of the utility — that is, the plea- 
sure attaching to the pursuit of gaming itself; 

^ Todhimter^s ‘ History of the Theory of Probability/ chap, xi. &c. 

174 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

we regard only the commercial loss or gain. If 
a person with a certain income prefers to run the 
risk of losing a portion of it at play, rather than 
spending it in any other way, it must no doubt 
be conceded that the political economist, as such, 
can make no conclusive objection. If the gamester 
is so devoid of other tastes that to spend money 
over the gaming-table is the best use he can dis- 
cover for it, economically speaking, there is nothing 
further to be said. The question then becomes 
a moral, legislative or political one. A source 
of amusement which, like gaming, betting, dram- 
drinking, or opium-eating, is not in itself always 
pernicious, may come to be regaixled as immoral, 
if in a considerable proportion of cases it leads to 
excessive and disastrous results. But this ques- 
tion evidently leads us into a class of subjects 
which could not be appropriately discussed in this 
work treating of pure economic theory. 

The Origin of Value. 

The preceding pages contain, if I am not mis- 
taken, an explanation of the nature of value which 
will, for the most part, harmonise with previous 
views upon the subject. Ricardo has stated, like 
most other economists, that utility is absolutely 
essential to value ; but that ‘ possessing utility, 
commodities derive their exchangeable value from 

Theory of. Exchange. 

175 

two sources : from their scarcity, and from the 
quantity of labour required to obtain them®.’ 
Senior, again, has admirably defined wealth, or 
objects possessing value, as ‘those things, and 
those things only, which are transferable, are 
limited in supply, and are directly or indirectly 
productive of pleasure or preventive of pain.’ 
Speaking only of things which are transferable, 
or capable of being passed from hand to hand, 
we find that two of the clearest definitions of 
value recognise utility and scarcity as the essen- 
tial qualities. But the moment that we dis- 
tinguish between the total utility of a mass of 
commodity and the degree of utility of different 
portions, we may say that it is scarcity which 
prevents the fall in the final degree of utility. 
Bread has the almost infinite utility of main- 
taining life, and when it becomes a question of 
life or death, a small quantity of food exceeds in 
value all other things.. But when we enjoy our 
ordinary supplies of food, a loaf of bread has 
little value, because the utility of an additional 
loaf is small, our appetites being satiated by our 
customary meals. 

I have pointed out the excessive ambiguity of 
the word Value, and the apparent impossibility 
of using it safely. When intended to express the 

^ ‘ Principles of Political Economy and Taxation/ third edition, 

176 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

mere fact of certain articles exchanging in a par- 
ticular ratio, I have proposed to substitute the 
unequivocal expression — ratio of exchange. But 
I am inclined to believe that a ratio is not the 
meaning which most persons attach to the word 
Value. There is a certain sense of esteem or 
desirableness, which we may have with regard to 
a thing apart from any distinct consciousness of 
the ratio in which it would exchange for other 
things. I may suggest that this distinct feeling 
of value is probably identical with the final degree 
of utility. While Adam Smith’s often-quoted value 
in use is the total utility of a commodity to us, 
the value in exchange is defined by the terminal 
utility, the remaining desire which we or others 
have for possessing more. 

There remains the question of labour as an 
element of value. Economists have not been want- 
ing who put forward labour as tlie cause of value, 
asserting that all objects derive their value from 
the fact that labour has been expended on them ; 
and it is thus implied, if not stated, that value 
will be proportional to labour. This is a doctrine 
which cannot stand for a moment, being directly 
opposed to facts. Ricardo disposes of such an 
opinion when he says^: ‘There are some com- 
modities, the value of which is determined by 

n ‘ On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation/ third 
edition, 1821, p. 2. 

177 

Theory of Exchange. 

their scarcity alone. No labour can increase the 
quantity of such goods, and therefore their value 
cannot be lowered by an increased supply. Some 
rare statues and pictures, scarce books and coins, 
wines of a peculiar quality, which can be made 
only from grapes grown on a particular soil, of 
which there is a very limited quantity, are all 
of this description. Their value is wholly inde- 
pendent of the quantity of labour originally neces- 
sary to produce them, and varies with the varying 
wealth and inclinations of those who are desirous 
to possess them.’ 

The mere fact that there are many things, such 
as rare ancient books, coins, antiquities, etc., which 
have high values, and which are absolutely inca- 
pable of production now, disperses the notion that 
value depends on labour. Even those things which 
are producible in any quantity by laboiir seldom 
exchange exactly at the corresponding values <>. 
The market price of corn, cotton, iron, and most 
other things is, in the prevalent theories of value, 
allowed to fluctuate above or below its natural 

o Mr. W. L. Sargant in his ‘Recent Political Economy,’ 8vo 
London, 1867, p. 99, states that contracts have been made tc 
manufacture the Enfield Rifle, of identically the same pattern, a( 
prices ranging from 70s. each down to 20s., or even lower. The 
wages of the workmen varied from 40s. or 50s. down to 15s. a 
week. Such an instance renders it obvious that it is scarcity which 
governs value, and that it is the value of the produce which deter- 
mines the wages of the producers. 

N 

178 

The Theory of 'Political Economy. 

or cost value. There may, again, he any dis- 
crepancy between the quantity of labour spent 
upon an object and the value ultimately attach- 
ing to it. A great undertaking like the Great 
Western Railway, or the Thames Tunnel, may 
embody a vast amount of labour, but its value 
depends entirely upon the number of persons who 
find it useful. If no use could be found for the 
Great Eastern steam ship, its value would be nil, 
except for the utility of some of its materials. 
On the other hand, a successful undertaking^ which 
happens to possess great utility, may have a value, 
for a time at least, far exceeding what has been 
spent upon it, as in the case of the Atlantic cable. 
The fact is, that labour once sfent has no injluence 
on the future value of any article : it is gone and 
lost for ever. In commerce, by-gones are for ever 
by-gones; and we are always starting clear at 
each moment, judging the values of things with 
a view to future utility. Industry is essentially 
prospective, not retrospective ; and seldom does 
the result of any undertaking exactly coincide 
with the first intentions of its promoters. 

But though labour is never the cause of value, 
it is in a large proportion of cases the determining 
circumstance, and in the following way: — Value 
depends solely on the final degree of utility. How 
can we vary this degree of utility? — By having 
more or less of the commodity to consume. And 

Theory of Exchange. 

179 

how shall we get more or less, of it ? — By spending 
more or less labour in obtaining a supply. Ac- 
cording to this view, then, there are two steps 
between labour and value. Labour alfects supply, 
and supply affects the degree of utility, which 
governs value, or the ratio of exchange. In order 
that there may be no possible mistake about this 
all-important series of relations, I will restate it 
in a tabular form, as follows : — 

Cost of production determines supply. 

Supply determines final degree of utility. 

E^nal degree of utility determines value. 

But it is easy to go too far in considering 
labour as the regulator of value; it is equally to 
be remembered that labour is itself of unequal 
value. Ricardo, by a violent assumption, founded 
his theory of value on quantities of labour con- 
sidered as one uniform thing. He was aware that 
labour differs infinitely in quality and efficiency, 
so that each kind is more or less scarce, and is 
consequently paid at a higher or lower rate of 
wages. He regarded these differences as disturb- 
ing circumstances which would have to be allowed 
for ; but his theory rests on the assumed equality 
of labour. This theory rests on a wholly different 
ground. I hold labour to be essentially variable, 
so that its value must be determined by the value 
of the produce, not the value of the produce by 
that of the labour. I hold it to be impossible to 

N a 

180 The Theory of Political Economy. 

compare d priori the productive powers of a 
navvy, a carpenter, an iron-puddler, a schoolmaster, 
and a barrister. Accordingly, it will be found that 
not one of my equations represents a comparison 
between one man’s labour and another’s. The 
equation, if there is one at all, is between the 
same person in two or more different occupations. 
The subject is one in which complicated action 
and re-action takes place, and which we must 
defer until after we have described, in the next 
chapter, the Theory of Labour. 

CHAPTER V. 

THEORY OP LABOUR. 

Dejinition of Labour. 

Adam Smith said, ‘ The real price of everything, 
what everything really costs to the man who wants 
to acquire it, is the toil and trouble of acquiring 
it. , . . Labour was the first price, the original 
purchase-money, that was paid for all things a.’ 
If subjected to a very searching analysis, this 
celebrated passage might not prove to be so en- 
tirely true as it would at first sight seem to most 
readers to be. Yet it is substantially true, and 
luminously expresses the fact that labour is the 
beginning of the processes treated by economists, 
as consumption is the end and purpose. Labour 
is the painful exertion which we undergo to 
ward off pains of greater amount, or to procure 

a ‘ Wealth of Nations,’ book i. chap. 5 

182 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

pleasures which leave a balance in our favour. 
Courcelle-Seneuil b and Hearn have stated the 
problem of Economics with the utmost truth and 
brevity in saying, that it is to satisfy our wants 
with the least possible sum of labour. 

In defining labour for the purposes of the eco- 
nomist we have a choice between two courses. 
In the first place, we may, if we like, include in 
it all exertion of body or mind. A game of 
cricket would, in this case, be labour; but if it 
be undertaken solely for the sake of the enjoy- 
ment attaching to it, the question arises whether 
we need' take it under our notice. All exertion 
not directed to a distant and distinct end must 
be repaid simultaneously. There is no account 
of good or evil to be balanced at a future time. 
We are not prevented in any way from including 
such cases in our Theory of Economics; in fact, 
our Theory of Labour will, of necessity, apply to 
them. But we need not occupy our attention by 
cases which demand no calculus. When we exert 
ourselves for the sole amusement of the moment, 
there is but one rule needed, namely, to stop when 
we feel inclined — when the pleasure no longer 
equals the pain. 

It will probably be better, therefore, to take 
the second course and concentrate our attention 

^ ‘Traits Theorique et Pratique d’Economie Politique/ 2nd 
edition, vol. i, p. 33. 

Theory of Labour. 

188 

on such exertion as is not completely repaid by 
the immediate result. This would give us a de- 
finition nearly the same as that of Say, who 
defined labour as ^Action suivee, dirigee vers un 
but.’ Labour, I should say, is any painful exer- 
tion of mind or body undergone partly or wholly 
with a view to future good It is true that labour 
may be both agreeable at the time and conducive 
to future good; but it is only agreeable in a 
limited amount, and most men ai’e compelled by 
their wants to exert themselves longer and more 
severely than they would otherwise do. When 
a labourer is inclined to stop, he clearly feels 
something that is irksome, and our theory will 
only involve the point where the exertion has 

c I have altered this definition as it stood in the first edition by 
inserting the words 'partly or 'wholly, and I only give it now as pro- 
visionally the best I can suggest. The subject presents itself to me 
as one of great difficulty, and it is possible that the true solution 
will consist in treating labour as a case of negative utility, or 
negative mingled with positive utility. We should thus arrive at a 
higher generalisation which appears to be foreshadowed in the 
remarkable work of Hermann Heinrich Gossen described in the 
preface to this edition. Every act, whether of production or of 
consumption, may be regarded as producing what Bentham calls a 
lot both of pleasures and pains, and the distinction between the two 
processes will consist in the fact that the algebraic value of the lot 
in the case of consumption yields a balance of positive utility, while 
that of production yields a negative or painful balance, at least in 
that part of the labour involving most effort. In a happy life the 
negative balance involved in production is more than cleared off 
by the positive balance of pleasure arising from consumption. 

184 The Theory of Political Economy. 

become so painful as to nearly balance all other 
considerations. Whatever there is that is whole- 
some or agreeable about labour before it reaches 
this point may be taken as a net profit of good 
to the labourer; but it does not enter into the 
problem. It is only when labour becomes effort 
that we take account of it, and, as Hearn truly 
saysd, ‘such effort, as the very term seems to 
imply, is more or less troublesome.’ In fact, we 
must, as will shortly appear, measure labour by 
the amount of pain which attaches to it. 

Quantitative Notions of Labour. 

Let us endeavour to form a clear notion of what 
we mean by amount of labour. It is plain that 
diction will be one element of it ; for a person 
labouring uniformly during two months must be 
allowed to labour twice as much as during one 
month. But labour may vary also in intensi^. 
In the same time a man may walk a greater or 
less distance ; may saw a greater or less amount 
of timber; may pump a greater or less quantity 
of water; in short, may exert more or less mus- 
cular and nervous force. Hence amount of labour 
will be a quantity of two dimensions, the product 
of intensity and time when the intensity is uni- 
form, or the sum represented by the area of a 
curve when the intensity is variable, 

^ ‘ Plutology/ p. 24. 

185 

Theory of Labour. 

But intensity of labour may have more than 
one meaning; it may mean the quantity of work 
done, or the painfulneas of the effort of doing it. 
These two things must be carefully distinguished, 
and both are of great importance for the theory. 
The one is the reward, the other the penalty, of 
labour. Or rather, as the produce is only of in- 
terest to us so far as it possesses utility, we may 
say that there are three quantities involved in 
the theory of labour— the amount of painful ex- 
ertion, the amount of produce, and the amount of 
utility gained. The variation of utility, as depend- 
ing on the quantity of commodity possessed, has 
already been considered; the variation of the 
amount of produce will be treated in the next 
chapter; we will here give attention to the varia- 
tion of the painfulness of labour. 

Experience shows that as labour is prolonged 
the effort becomes as a general rule more and 
more painful. A few hours’ work per day may 
be considered agreeable rather than otherwise; 
but so soon as the overflowing energy of the body 
is drained off, it becomes irksome to remain at 
work. As exhaustion approaches, continued effort 
becomes more and more intolerable. Jennings has 
so clearly stated this law of the variation of labour, 
that I must quote his words «. ‘ Between these two 
points, the point of incipent effort and the point 

® ‘Natural Elements of Political Economy,’ p. 119. 

186 The Theory of Political Economy. 

of painful suffering, it is quite evident that the de- 
gree of toilsome sensations endured does not vary 
directly as the quantity of work performed, but 
increases much more rapidly, like the resistance 
offered by an opposing medium to the velocity of 
a moving body. 

‘When this observation comes to be applied to 
the toilsome sensations endured by the working 
classes, it will be found convenient to fix on a 
middle point, the average amount of toilsome 
sensation attending the average amount of labour, 
and to measure from this point the degrees of 
variation. If, for the sake of illustration, this . 
average amount be assumed to be of ten hours’ 
duration, it would follow that, if at any period 
the amount were to be supposed to be reduced 
to five hours, the sensations of labour would be 
found, at least by the majority of mankind, to 
be almost merged in the pleasures of occupation 
and exercise, whilst the amount of work performed 
would only be diminished by one half; if, on the 
contrary, the amount were to be supposed to be 
increased to twenty hours, the quantity of work 
produced would only be doubled, whilst the amount 
of toilsome suffering would become insupportable. 
Thus, if the quantity produced, greater or less than 
the average quantity, were to be divided into any 
number of parts of equal magnitude, the amount 
of toilsome sensation attending each succeeding 

Theory of Labour. 

187 

increment would be found greater than that which 
would attend the increment preceding; and the 
amount of toilsome sensation attending each suc- 
ceeding decrement would he found less than that 
which would attend the decrement preceding.’ 

There can he no question of the general truth 
of the above statement, although we may not 
have the data for assigning the exact law of the 
variation. We may imagine the painfulness of 

labour in proportion to produce to be represented 
by some such curve as abed in Fig. VIII. In this 
diagram the height of points above the line ox 
denotes pleasure, and depth below it pain. At 
the moment of commencing labour it is usually 
more irksome than when the mind and body are 
well bent to the work. Thus, at first, the pain is 
measured by oa. At h there is neither pain nor 

188 The Theory of Political Economy. 

pleasure. Between 6 and c an excess of pleasure 
is represented as due to the exertion itself. But 
after c the energy begins to be rapidly exhausted, 
and the resulting pain is shown by the downward 
tendency of the line ed. 

We may at the same time represent the degree 
of utility of the produce by some such curve as pq, 
the amount of produce being measured along the 
line or. Agreeably to the theory of utility, already 
given, the curve shows that, the larger the wages 
earned, the less is the pleasure derived from a 
further increment. There will, of necessity, be 
some point m such that qm = dm, that is to say, 
such that the pleasure gained is exactly equal to 
the labour endured. Now, if we pass the least 
beyond this point, a balance of pain will result ; 
there will be an ever-decreasing motive in favour 
of labour, and an ever-increasing motive against 
it. The labourer Avill evidently cease, then, at the 
point m. It would be inconsistent with human 
nature for a man to work Avhen the pain of work 
exceeds the desire of possession, including all the 
motives for exertion. ' 

We must consider the duration of labour as 
measured by the number of hours’ work per day. 
The alternation of day and night on the earth has 
rendered man essentially periodic in his habits and 
actions. In a natural and wholesome condition 
a man should return each twenty-four hours to 

189 

Theory of Labour. 

exactly the same state ; at any rate, the cycle 
should be closed within the seven days of the week. 
Thus the labourer must not be supposed to be 
either increasing or diminishing his normal strength. 
But the theory might also be made to apply to 
cases where special exertion is undergone for many 
days or weeks in succession, in order to complete 
work, as in collecting the harvest. Adequate 
motives may lead to and warrant over-work, but, 
if long continued, excessive labour reduces the 
strength and becomes insupportable ; and the 
longer it continues the worse it is, the law being 
somewhat similar to that of periodic labour. 

Symbolic Statement of the Theory. 

In attempting to represent these conditions of 
labour with accuracy, we shall find that there are 
no less than four quantities concerned; let us 
denote them as follows — 

t — time, or duration of labour. 

I = amount of labour, as meaning the aggregate 
balance of pain accompanying it, irre- 
spective of the produce. 

,v — amount of commodity produced. 
u — total utility of that commodity. 

The amount of commodity produced will be very 
different in different cases. In any one case the 
rate of pi’oduction will be determined by dividing 

190 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

the whole quantity produced hy the time of pro- 
duction, provided that the rate of production has 

iXj 

been uniform ; it will then he - , But if the rate 

of production be variable, it can only he deter- 
mined at any moment hy comparing a small quan- 
tity of produce witli the small portion of time 
occupied in its production. More strictly speaking 
we must ascertain the ratio of an infinitely small 
quantity of produce to the corresponding infinitely 
small portion of time. Thus the rate of production 

is properly denoted hy — - , or at the limit by j-. 

Again, the degree of painfulness of labour would 

be - if it remained invariable ; hut as it is highly 

C 

variable, we must again compare small increments, 
and ~ , or, at the limit, ~ correctly represents the 

c etc 

degree of painfulness of labour. But we must also 
take into account the fact, that the utility of com- 
modity is not constant. If a man works regularly 
twelve hours a day, he will produce more com- 
modity than in ten hours; therefore the final 
degree of utility of his commodity, whether he 
consume it himself or whether he exchange it, will 
not be quite so high as when he produced less, 

dvb 

This degree of utility is denoted, as before, by 

Theory of Labour. 

191 

the ratio of the increment of utility to the incre- 
ment of commodity. ^ ] 

The amount of reward of labour “can now be 

expressed ; for it is ^ ^ ; that is to say, it is 

the product of the ratio of the commodity produced 
to the time, multiplied by the ratio of the utility 
to the amount of produce. Thus, the last two 
h ours of work in the day generally gives less 
reward, both because less produce is then created 
in proportion to the time spent, and because that 
produce is less necessary and useful to one who 
makes enough to support himself in the other ten 
hours 

We can now ascertain the length of time which 
should be selected as the most advantageous term 
of labour. A free labourer endures the irksome- 
ness of woi'k because the pleasure he expects to 
receive, or the pain he expects to ward off, by 
means of the produce, exceeds the pain of exertion. 
When labour itself is a worse evil than that which 
it saves him from, there can be no motive for fur- 
ther exertion, and he ceases. Therefore he will 
cease to labour just at the point when the pain 
becomes equal to the corresponding pleasure gained ; 
and we thus have t defined by the equation 
dl d/v du 
dt dt dx ’ 

In this, as in the other questions of Economics, 

192 The Theory of Political Economy. 

all depends upon the final increments, and we have 
expressed in the above formula the final equivalence 
of labour and utility. A man must be regarded as 
earning all through liis hours of labour an excess 
of utility ; what he produces must be considered 
not merely the exact equivalent of the labour he 
gives for it, for it would be, in that case, a matter 
of indifference whether he laboured or not. As 
long as he gains, he labours, and when he ceases to 
gain, he ceases to labour. 

In some cases, as in some kinds of machine 
labour, the rate of production is uniform or nearly 
so, and by choice of suitable units may be made 
equal to unity ; the result may then be put more 
simply in this way. Labour may be considered as 
expended in successive small quantities, a/, each 
lasting, for instance, for a quarter of an hour ; the 
corresponding benefit derived from the labour will 
then be denoted by am. Now, so long as am ex- 
ceeds in amount of pleasure the negative quantity 
or pain of aZ, the difference of sign being disre- 
garded, there will be gain inducing to continued 
labour. Were am to fall below aZ, there would 
be more harm than good in labouring; therefore, 
the boundary between labour and inactivity will 
be defined by the equality of am and a I , and at 
the limit we have the equation 

du dl 

Theory of Labour. 

193 

Dimensions of Labour. 

If I have correctly laid down, in preceding chap- 
ters, the Theory of Dimensions of Utility and Value, 
there ought not to be much difficulty in stating the 
similar theory as regards Labour. We might in 
fact treat labour as simply one case of disutility 
or negative utility, that is as pain, or at any rate 
as a generally painful balance of pleasure and pain, 
endured in the action of acquiring commodity. 
Thus its dimensions might be described as identical 
with those of utility ; U would then denote in- 
tensity of labour, or degree of labour, just as it 
was used to denote degree of utility. If we 
measure labour with respect to the quantity of 
commodity produced, that is, if we make commo- 
dity the variable, then total amount of labour 
will be the integral of U c? M, and the dimensions 
of amount of labour will be MU, identical with 
those of total utility. 

If for any reasons of convenience we prefer to 
substitute a new symbol, specially appropriated 
to express the dimensions of labour, and say that 
intensity of labour is represented by E (Endurance), 
and total quantity of labour incurred in the produc- 
tion of certain commodity by ME, it must be 
remembered that the change is one of convenience 
only ; U and E are essentially quantities of the same 
nature, and the difference, so far as there is any. 

0 

194 The Theory of Political Economy. 

arises from the fact that quantities symbolised 
by E, will usually be negative as compared with 
those symbolised by U. Labour, however, is often 
measured and bought and sold by time, instead 
of by piecework or commodity produced ; in this 
case, while E continues to express intensity of 
labour, E T will express the dimensions of amount 
of labour. 

Rate of production will obviously possess the 
same dimensions as rate of consumption (p, 70 ), 
namely, M T ~ ^ and this quantity forms a link be- 
tween labour as measured by time and by produce ; 
for E T X M T ~ ^ = M E. It would be possible to 
invent various other economic quantities, such as 
acceleration of ^production, with the dimensions 
M T“ 2 ; but, until it is apparent how such quantities 
enter into economic theorems, it seems needless to 
consider them further. 

Balance between Need and Labour. 

In considering this Theory of Labour, an inter- 
esting question presents itself. Supposing that 
circumstances alter the relation of produce to 
labour, what effect will this have upon the amount 
of labour which will be exerted? There are two 
effects to be considered. When labour produces 
more commodity, there is more reward, and there- 
fore more inducement to labour. If a workman 

Theory of Labour. 

195 

can earn ninepence an hour instead of sixpence, 
may he not be induced to extend his hours of 
labour by this increased result ? This would doubt- 
less be the case were it not that the very fact 
of getting half as much more than he did before, 
lowers the utility to him of any further addition. 
By the produce of the same number of hours he 
can satisfy his desires more completely ; and if the 
irksomeness of labour has reached at all a high 
point, he may gain more pleasure by relaxing that 
labour than by consuming more products. The 
question thus depends upon the direction in which 
the balance between the utility of further com- 
modity and the painfulness of prolonged labour 
turns. 

In our ignorance of the exact form of the func- 
tions either of utility or of labour, it will be 
impossible to decide this question in an d priori 
manner ; but there are a few facts which indicate 
in which direction the balance does usually turn. 
Statements are given by Porter, in his ‘ Progress 
of the Nation f’ which show that when a sudden 
rise took place in the prices of provisions in the 
early part of this century, workmen increased their 
hours of labour, or, as it is said, worked double 
time, if they could obtain adequate employment. 
Now, a rise in the price of food is really the same 
as a decrease of the produce of labour, since less 

f Edition of 1847, pp. 454, 455. 

0 2 

196 The Theory of Political Economy. 

of the necessaries of life can be acquired in ex- 
change for the same money wages. We may 
conclude, then, that English labourers enjoying 
little more than the necessaries of life, will work 
harder the less the produce; or, which comes to 
the same thing, will work less hard as the produce 
increases. 

Evidence to the like effect is found in the general 
tendency to reduce the hours of labour at the pre- 
sent day, owing to the improved real wages now 
enjoyed by those employed in mills and factories. 
Artisans, mill-hands, and others seem generally 
to prefer greater ease to greater wealth, thus 
proving that the painfulness of labour varies so 
rapidly as easily to overbalance the gain of utility. 
The same rule seems to hold throughout the mer- 
cantile employments. The richer a man becomes, 
the less does he devote himself to business. A 
successful merchant is generally willing to give 
a considerable share of his profits to a partner, or 
to a staff of managers and clerks, rather than bear 
the constant labour of superintendence himself 
There is also a general tendency to reduce the 
hours of labour in mercantile offices, due to in- 
creased comfort and opulence. 

It is obvious, however, that there are many intri- 
cacies in a matter of this sort. It is not always 
possible to graduate work to the worker’s liking; 
in some businesses a man who insisted on working 

Theory of Labour. 

197 

only a few hovirs a day would soon have no w'ork 
to do. In the professions of law, medicine, and the 
like, it is the reputation of enjoying a large practice 
which attracts new clients. Thus a successful 
barrister or physician generally labours more 
severely as his success increases. This result partly 
depends upon the fact that the work is not easily 
capable of being performed by deputy. A suc- 
cessful barrister, too, soon begins to look forward 
to the extrinsic rewards of a high judicial or par- 
liamentary position. But the case of an eminent 
solicitor, architect, or engineer is one where the 
work is to a great extent done by employees, and 
done without reference to social or political rewards, 
and where yet the most successful man endures 
the most labour, or rather is most constantly at 
work. This indicates that the irksomeness of the 
labour does not increase so as to overbalance the 
utility of the increment of reward. In some cha- 
racters and in some occupations, in short, success 
of labour only excites to new exertions, the work 
itself being of an interesting and stimulating 
nature. But the general rule is to the contrary 
effect, namely that a certain success disinclines 
a man to increased labour. It may be added that 
in the highest kinds of labour, such as those of the 
philosopher, scientific discoverer, artist, &c., it is 
questionable how far great success is compatible 
with ease; the mental powers must be kept in 

198 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

perfect training by constant exertion, just as a 
racehorse or an oarsman needs to be constantly 
exercised. 

It is evident that questions of this kind depend 
greatly upon the character of the race. Persons 
of an energetic disposition feel labour less pain- 
fully than their fellow men, and, if they happen 
to be endowed with various and acute sensibilities, 
their • desire of further acquisition never ceases. 
A man of lower race, a negro for instance, enjoys 
possession less, and loathes labour more; his ex- 
ertions, therefore, soon stop. A poor savage would 
be content to gather the almost gratuitous fruits 
of nature, if they were sufficient to give sustenance ; 
it is only physical want which drives him to ex- 
ertion. The rich man in modern society is supplied 
apparently with all he can desire, and yet he often 
labours unceasingly for more. Bishop Berkeley, 
in his ‘Querists,’ has very well asked, ‘Whether 
the creating of wants be not the likeliest way 
to produce industry in a people? And whether, 
if our (Irish) peasants were accustomed to eat 
beef and wear shoes, they would not be more 
industrious?’ 

Distribution of Labour. 

We noAv come to consider the conditions which 
regulate the comparative amounts of different 

g Query No. 20. 

199 

Theory of Labour, 

commodities produced in a country. Theoretically 
speaking, we might regard each person as capable 
of producing various commodities, and dividing his 
labour according to certain rules between the dif- 
ferent employments; it would not be impossible, 
too, to mention cases where such division does 
take place. But the result of commerce and the 
division of labour is usually to make a man find 
his advantage in performing one trade only; and 
I give the formulse as they would apply to an 
individual, only because they are identical in 
general character with those which apply to a 
whole nation. 

Suppose that an individual is capable of pro- 
ducing two kinds of commodity. His sole object, 
of course, is to produce the greatest amount of 
utility ; but this will depend partly upon the com- 
parative degrees of utility of the commodities, and 
partly on his comparative facilities for producing 
them. Let w and y be the respective quantities 
of the commodities already produced, and suppose 
that he is about to apply more labour ; on which 
commodity shall he spend the next increment of 
labour? — Plainly, on that which will yield most 
utility. Now, if an increment of labour, aI, will 
yield either of the increments of commodity a^ 
and A y, the ratios of produce to labour, namely, 

AV 

200 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

will form one element in the problem. But to 
obtain the comparative utilities of these commo- 
dities, we must multiply respectively by 

and 

Ay 

For instance, 

A A 
A«i’ A^i 

expresses the amount of utility which can be 
obtained by producing a little more of the first 
commodity; if this be greater than the same ex- 
pression for the other commodity, it would evi- 
dently be best to make more of the first com- 
modity until it ceased to yield any excess of 
utility. When the labour is finally distributed, 
we must have the increments of utility from the 
several employments equal, and at the limit we 
have the equation — 

dui da.’ du-i dy 
da; dll dy dl^ 

When this equation holds, there can be no motive 
for altering or regretting the distribution of labour, 
and the utility produced is at its maximum. 

There are in this problem two unknown quan- 
tities, namely the two portions of labour appro- 
priated to the two commodities. To determine 
them, we require one other equation in addition 
to the above. If we put 

I — I I ^ 

201 

Theory of Labour. 

we have still an unknown quantity to determine, 
namely, 1 ; but the principles of labour (pp. 187-192) 
now give us an equation. Labour will be carried 
on until the increment of utility from any of the 
employments just balances the increment of pain. 
This amounts to saying that du, the increment 
of utility derived from the first employment of 
labour, is equal in amount of feeling to dl^, the 
increment of labour by which it is obtained. This 
gives us then the further equation — 

dui d.v _ 
dd-y 

If we pay regard to sign, indeed, we must re- 
member that dl is, when measured in the same 
scale as du, intrinsically negative, but inasmuch 
as it is given in exchange for du, which is received, 
it will in this respect be taken negatively, and 
thus the above equation holds true^, 

Melation of the Theories of Labour and 
Exchange. 

It may tend to give the reader confidence in 
the preceding theories when he finds that they 
lead directly to the well-known law, as stated 

While revising this edition it seems to me probable that this, 
as well as some other parts of the theory, might be more simply 
and generally stated, but what is given is substantially true and 

correof. and it must fitand for the nrPRont. 

202 The Theory of Political Economy. 

ill the ordinary language of economists, that value 
is proportional to the cost of production. As I 
prefer to state the same law, it is to the effect 
that the ratio of exchange of commodities will 
conform in the long run to the ratio of produc- 
tiveness, which is the reciprocal of the ratio of 
the costs of production. The somewhat perplexing 
relations of these quantities will be fully explained 
in the next section, but we may now proceed to 
prove the above result symbolically. 

To simplify our expressions, let us substitute 

for the rate of production 

symbol ®-. 

Then ®-i, ^2* express the relative quantities of two 
different commodities produced by an increment 
of labour, and we have the following equation, 
identical with that on page 200. 

(J},r — .^2‘ 

Let us suppose that the person to whom it applies 
is in a position to exchange with other persons. 
The conditions of production will now, in all pro- 
bability, be modified. For a; the quantity of our 
commodity may perhaps be increased to + 
and y diminished to y—yv, by an exchange of the 
quantities and y^. If this be so, we shall, 
as shown in the Theory of Exchange, have the 
equation 

^ {■*’ + -*’ 1 ) _ ?/i 

Theory of Labour. 203 

Our equation of production will now be modified, 
and become 

or <P{^‘ + ^i) ^^2 

But this equation has its first member identical 
with the first member of the equation of exchange 
given above, so that we may at once deduce the 
all-important equation 

• r 

The reader will remember that w expresses the 
ratio of produce to labour; thus we have proved 
that commodities will exchange in any market 
in the ratio of the quantities produced by the 
same quantity of labour. But as the increment 
of labour considered is always the final one, oiir 
equation also expresses the truth, that articles 
will exchange in quantities inversely as the costs 
of production of the most costly portions, i.e. the 
last portions added. This result will prove of great 
importance in the theory of Rent. 

Let it be observed that, in uniting the theories 
of exchange and production, a complicated double 
adjustment takes place in the quantities of com- 
modity involved. Each party adjusts not only its 
consumption of articles in accordance with their 
tatio of exchange, but it also adjusts its pro- 

204 The Theory of Political Economy. 

duction of them. The jatio x)f exchange governs 
the production as much as the productrdh'^gO'vefhs 
t|m ratio^^^^^^df exchange. For instance, since the 
Corn Xaws have been abolished in England, the 
effect has been, not to destroy the culture of 
wheat, but to lessen it. The land less suitable 
to the growth of wheat has been turned to grazing 
or other purposes more profitable comparatively 
speaking. Similarly the importation of hops or 
eggs or any other article of food does not even 
reduce the quantity raised here, but prevents the 
necessity for resorting to more expensive modes 
of increasing the supply. It is not easy to express 
in words how the ratios of exchange are finally 
determined. They depend upon a general balance 
of producing power and of demand as measured 
by the final degree of utility. Every additional 
supply tends to lower the degree of utility; but 
whether that supply will he forthcoming from 
any country depends upon its comparative powers 
of producing different commodities. 

Any very small tract of country cannot appre- 
ciably affect the comparative supply of commo- 
dities : it must therefore adjust its productions in 
accordance with the general state of the market. 
The county of Bedford, for instance, would not 
appreciably affect the markets for corn, cheese, 
or cattle, whether it devoted every acre to corn 
or to grazing. Therefore the agriculture of Bed- 

205 

Theory of Labour. 

fordshire will have to be adapted to circumstances, 
and each field will be employed for arable or 
grazing land according as prevailing prices render 
one employment or the other more profitable. But 
any large country will affect the markets as well 
as be affected. If the whole habitable sui'face of 
Australia, instead of producing wool, could be 
turned to the cultivation of wine, the wool market 
would rise, and the wine market fall. If the 
Southern States of America abandoned cotton in 
favour of sugar, there would be a revolution in 
these markets. It would be inevitable for Aus- 
tralia to return to avooI and the American States 
to cotton. These are illustrations of the reciprocal 
relation of exchange and production. 

Relations of Economic Quantities. 

I hope that I may sometime be able, in a future 
and much larger work, to explain in detail the 
results which can be derived from the mathe- 
matical theory expounded in the previous pages. 
This essay gives them only in an implicit manner. 
But, before leaving the subject of exchange, it 
may be well without delay to point out how the 
results so far set forth connect themselves with 
the recognised doctrines of political economy. For 
the sake of accuracy I have avoided the use of the 
word value; the expression cost of production, so 

206 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

continually recurring in most economical treatises, 
is also here conspicuous by its absence. The reader 
then, unless he be very careful, may be thrown 
into some perplexity, when he proceeds to com- 
pare my results with those familiar to him else- 
where. I will therefore proceed to trace out the 
connections between the several quantitative ex- 
pressions, which most commonly occur in discus- 
sions concerning value, exchange, and production. 

In the first place, the ratio of exchange is the 
actual numerical ratio of the quantities given and 
received. Let X and Y be the names of the com- 
modities: a; and y the quantities of them respec- 
tively exchanged. Then the ratio of exchange is 
that of y to But the value of a commodity in 
exchange is greater as the quantity received is 
less, so that the ratio of the quantities dealt with 
must be the reciprocal of the ratio of the values 
of the substances, meaning by value the value per 
unit of the commodity. Thus we may say 
^ _ Value of X per unit 
X Value of Y per unit. 

Value is of course very frequently estimated by 
lyrice, that is by the quantity of legal money for 
which the commodity may be exchanged. Price is 
indeed ambiguous in the same way as value; it 
means either the price of the whole quantity, or 
the price per unit of the quantity. Let p^ be the 
price per unit of X, and p^ the similar price of Y. 

207 

Theory of Labour. 

Then, it is apparent that y will be the whole 
price of y, and cv x will be the whole price of w. 
These two must be equal to each other, so that 
we get 

y- =21. 

Thus we find that, when price means price per 
unit, the quantities exchanged are reciprocally as 
the prices. When price means price of the whole 
quantity, the quantities given and received are 
always of equal price. 

Turning now to the production of commodity, it 
is sufficiently obvious that the cost of production, 
so far as this expression can be accurately inter- 
preted, varies as the reciprocal of the degree of pro- 
ductiveness. The rate of wages remaining con- 
stant, the cost per unit of commodity must of 
course be lower as the quantity produced in 
return for a certain amount of wages is greater. 
Thus we may lay down the equation 
Degree of productiveness of Y 
Degree of productiveness of X 

_ Cost of production of X 
“Cost of production of Y. 

Now, it was shewn in pp. 202-3 that the quantities 
exchanged are directly proportional to the degrees 
of productiveness, 

or y — productiveness of Y 

X ~ Degree of productiveness of X. 

208 The Theory of Political Economy. 

But the ratio of the values is the reciprocal of 

X 

and the ratio of the costs of production is the 
reciprocal of the other member of the above equa- 
tion. Thus it follows that 

V alue per unit of X Cost of production per unit of X 
Value per unit of Y ~ Cost of production per unit of Y, 

or, in other words, value is proportional to cost of 
production. As, moreover, the final degrees of utility 
of commodities are inversely as the quantities ex- 
changed, it follows, that the values per unit are 
directly proportional to the final degrees of utility. 

As it is quite indispensable that the student 
of political economy should keep the relations of 
these quantities before his mind with perfect clear- 
ness, I repeat the results in several forms of state- 
ment. Thus we. may group the ratios together — 

Ratio of exchange = ^ 

tV 

_ Quantity of Y given or received 
~ Quantity of X received or given 
_ Value per unit of X _ Price per unit of X 
~ Value per unit of Y ~ Price per unit of Y 
_ Final degree of utility of X 
~ Final degree of utility of Y 

Cost of production per unit of 
~ Cost of production per unit of Y 
_ Degree of productiveness of Y 
~ Degree of productiveness of X. 

Theory of Labour. 

209 

We may state the matter more briefly in the fol- 
lowing words : — The quantities of commodity given 
or received in exchange, are directly proportional 
to the degrees of productiveness of labour applied 
to their production, and inversely proportional to 
the values and prices of those commodities and to 
their costs of production per unit, as well as to their 
final degrees of utility. I will even repeat the 
same statements once more in the form of a 
diagram : — 

Quantities of Commodity exchanged vary 

directly as the quantities 
produced by the same 
labour. 

inversely as their 

(1) Values. 

(2) Prices. 

(3) Costs of production. 

(4) Final degrees of utility. 

Various Cases of the Theo^'y. 

As we have now reached the principal question 
in Economics, it will be well to consider the mean- 
ing and results of our equations in some detail. 

It will, in the first place, be apparent, that the 
absolute facility of producing commodities will not 
determine the character and amount of trade. The 

ratio of exchange ^ is not determined by Wj, nor 

by separately, but by their comparative mag- 
nitudes, If the producing power of a country were 

p 

210 

The Theory oj Political Economy. 

doubled, no direct effect would be produced upon 
the terms of its commerce provided that the in- 
crease were equal in all branches of production. 
This is a point of great importance, which was 
correctly conceived by Ricardo, and has been fully 
explained by J. S. Mill. 

But though there is no such direct effect, it 
may happen that there will be an indirect effect 
through the variation in the degree of utility of 
different articles. When an increased amount of 
every commodity can be produced, it is not likely 
that the increase will be equally desired in each 
branch of consumption. Hence the degree of utility 
will fall in some cases more than in others. An 
alteration of the ratios of exchange must result, 
and the production of the less needed commodities 
will not be extended so much as in the case of the 
more needed ones. We might find in such in- 
stances new proofs that value depends not upon 
labour but upon the degree of utility. 

It will also be apparent, that nations possessing 
exactly similar powers of production cannot gain 
by mutual commerce, and consequently will not 
have any such commerce, however free from arti- 
ficial restrictions. We get this result as follows — 
Taking as before, to be the final ratios of 

productiveness in one country, and M2 in a 
second, then, if the conditions of production are 
exactly similar, we have 

Theory of Labour. 

211 

Ml 

But when a country does not trade at all, its 
labour and consumption is distributed according 
to the condition 

(pO' ®’2 

Now, from these equations, it follows necessarily, 
that 

'I'j/ Ml ’ 

that is to say, the production and consumption 
already conform to the conditions of production 
of the second country, and will not undergo any 
alteration when trade with this country becomes 
possible. 

This is the doctrine usually stated in works on 
Political Economy, and for which there are good 
grounds. But I do not think the statement will 
hold true if the conditions of consumption be very 
different in two countries. There might be two 
countries exactly similar in regard to their powers 
of producing beef and corn, and if their habits of 
consumption were also exactly similar, there would 
be no trade in these articles. But suppose that 
the first country consumed proportionally more 
beef, and the second more corn ; then, if there 
were no trade, the powers of the soil would be 

212 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

differently taxed, and different ratios of exchange 
would prevail. Freedom of trade would cause an 
interchange of corn for beef. Thus I conclude, 
that it is only where the habits of consumption, 
as well as the powers of production, are alike, 
that trade brings no advantage. 

The general effect of foreign commerce is to 
disturb, to the advantage of a country, the mode 
in which it distributes its labour. Excluding from 
view the cost of carriage, and the other expenses 
of commerce, we must always have true 
^2 Vj . ^^2 ^ 

Ml 

If, then, OT2 was originally less in proportion to 
than is in accordance with these equations, some 
labour will be transferred from the production 
of y to that of s until, by the increased magni- 
tude of OTg, and the lessened magnitude of ^i, 
equality is brought about. 

As in the theory of exchange, so in the theory 
of production, any of the equations may fail, and 
the meaning is capable of interpretation. Thus, if 
the equation 

<*’1 

cannot be established, it is impossible that the 
production of both commodities, y and w, can go 
on. One of them will be produced at an expen- 
diture of labour constantly out of proportion to 

Theory of Labour. 

213 

that at which it may be had by exchange. If 
we could not, for instance, import oranges from 
abroad, part of the labour of the country would 
probably be diverted from its present employ- 
ment to raise them; but tlie cost of production 
would be always above that of getting them indi- 
rectly by exchange, so that free trade necessarily 
destroys such a wasteful branch of industry. It 
is on this principle that Ave import the whole of 
our wines, teas, sugar, coffee, spices, and many 
other articles from abroad. 

The ratio of exchange of any two commodities 
will be determined by a kind of struggle betAveen 
the conditions of consumption and production ; but 
here again failure of the equations may take place. 
In the all-important equations 

^1 -*’1’ 

^2 expresses the ease Avith Avhich Ave may make 
additions to y. If Ave find any means, by ma- 
chinery or otherwise, of increasing y without 
limit, and with the same ease as before, we must, 

in all probability, alter the ratio of exchange ^ 

,*■1 

in a corresponding degree. But if we could ima- 
gine the existence of a large population, within 
reach of the supposed country, whose desire to 
consume the quantity y^ never decreased, however 
large Avas the quantity available, then we should 

214 The Theory of Political Economy. 

never have — equal to 
would make large gains 

and the producers of y 
of the nature of rent. 

Joint Production. 

In one of the most interesting chapters of hii 
‘ Principles of Political Economy,’ Book III, Chap 
ter 16, John Stuart Mill has treated of what he 
calls ‘Some peculiar Cases of Value.’ Under this 
title he refers to those commodities which are 
not produced by separate processes, but are the 
concurrent or joint results of the same operations. 
‘ It sometimes happens,’ he says, ‘ that two different 
commodities have what may be termed a joint 
cost of production. They are both products of 
the same operation, or set of operations, and the 
outlay is incurred for the sake of both together, 
not part for one and part for the other. The 
same outlay would have to be incurred for either 
of the two, if the other were not wanted or used 
at all. There are not a few instances of com- 
modities thus associated in their production. For 
example, coke and coal-gas arc both produced 
from the same material, and by the same opera- 
tion. In a more partial sense, mutton and wool 
are an example: beef, hides, and tallow: calves 
and dairy produce: chickens and eggs. Cost of 
production can have nothing to do with deciding 

215 

Theory of Labour. 

the values of the associated commodities relatively 
to each other. It only decides their joint value. 
.... A principle is wanting to apportion the 
expenses of production between the two.’ He 
goes on to explain that, since the cost of pro- 
duction principle fails us, we must revert to a 
law of value anterior to cost of production, and 
more fundamental, namely the law of supply and 
demand. 

On some other occasion I may perhaps more 
fully point out the fallacy involved in Mill’s idea 
that he is reverting to an anterior law of value, 
the law of supply and demand, the fact being 
that in introducing the cost of production prin- 
ciple, he had never quitted the laws of supply 
and demand at all. The cost of production is 
only one circumstance which governs supply, and 
thus indirectly influences values. 

Again, I shall point out that these cases of 
joint production, far from being ‘some peculiar 
cases,’ form the general rule, to which it is diffi- 
cult to point out any clear or important excep- 
tions. All the great staple commodities at any 
rate are produced jointly with minor commodities. 
In the case of corn, for instance, there are the 
straw, the chaff, the bran, and the different qua- 
lities of flour or meal, which are products of the 
same operations. In the case of cotton, there are 
the seed, the oil, the cotton waste, the refuse, in 

216 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

addition to the cotton itself. When beer is brewed 
the grains regularly return a certain price. Trees 
felled for timber, yield not only the timber, but 
the loppings, the bark, the outside cuts, the 
chips, &c. No doubt the secondary products are 
often nearly valueless, as in the case of cinders, 
slag from blast furnaces, &c. But even these 
cases go to show all the more impressively that 
it is not cost of production which rules values, 
but the demand and supply of the products. 

The great importance of these cases of joint 
production renders it necessary for us to con- 
sider how they can be brought under our theory. 
Let us suppose that there are two commodities 
X and Y, yielded by one same operation, which 
always produces them in the same ratio, say of m of 
X to n of Y. It might seem at first sight as if 
this ratio would correspond to the ratio of the 
degrees of productiveness, as shown a few pages 
above that we might say 

~=— ^ = ^ 1 , 

n Wj 

and thus arrive at the conclusion that things 
jointly produced would always exchange in the 
ratio of productiveness. But this would be en- 
tirely false, because that equation can only he 
established when there is freedom of producing one 
or the other, at each application of a new incre- 
ment of labour. It is the freedom of varying the 

Theory of Labour. 

217 

quantities of each that allows of the produce being 
accommodated to the need of it, so that the ratio 
of the degrees of utility, of the degrees of pro- 
ductiveness, and of the quantities exchanged are 
brought to equality. But in cases of joint pro- 
duction there is no such freedom; the one sub- 
stance cannot be made without making a certain 
fixed proportion of the other, which may have 
little or no utility. 

It will easily be seen, however, that such cases 
are brought under our theory by simply aggre- 
gating together the utilities of the increments of 
the joint products. If da‘ cannot be produced 
without (ly, these being the products of the same 
increment of labour, dl, then the ratio of produce 
to labour cannot be written otherwise than as 

dx + dy 
dl ■ 

It is impossible to divide up the labour and say 
that so much is expended on producing X, and 
so much on Y. But we must estimate separately 
the utilities of d.v and dy, by multiplying by their 

degrees of utility ^ and and we then have 
“ ^ dx dy 

the aggregate ratio of utility to labour as 

dv} dx j^du^ dy 

dx dl dy dl 

It is plain that wo have no equation arising out 
of these conditions of production, so that the ratio 

218 The Theory of Political Economy. 

of exchange of X and Y will be governed only by 
the degrees of utility. But if we compare X and 
Y with a third commodity Z, as regards its pro- 
duction, we shall arrive at the equation 
dv,i da,' du^ dy _ dv? dz 

dx dl dy dl dz dl 

In other words, the increment of utility obtained 
by applying an increment of labour to the pro- 
duction of Z, must equal the sum of the incre- 
ments of Titility which would be obtained if the 
same increment of labour were applied to the 
joint production of X and Y. It is evident that 
the above equation taken alone gives us no infor- 
mation as to the ratios existing between the quan- 
tities dx, dy, and dz. Before we can obtain any 
ratios of exchange we must have the further 
equation between the degrees of utility of X and 
Y, namely 

dui _ dy 
du^ dx 

As a general rule, however, any two processes 
of production will both yield joint products, so 
that the equation of productiveness will take the 
form of a sum of increments of utility on both 
sides, which we may thus write briefly — 

dui + du^ + .... = dUn + dUn+i + . . . . 

Such an equation becomes then a kind of equa- 
tion of condition of which the influence may be 
very slight regarding the ratio of exchange of 

Theory of Labour. 

219 

any two of the commodities conceimed. And if 
in some cases the terms on one side of such an 
equation are reduced to one or two, it is probably 
because the other increments of produce are nearly 
or quite devoid of utility. As in the cases of 
cinders, chips, sawdust, spent dyes, potatoe stalks, 
chaff, &c., &c., almost every process of industry 
yields refuse results, of which the utility is zero 
or nearly so. To solve the subject fully, however, 
we should have to admit negative utilities, as 
elsewhere explained, so that the increment of 
utility from any increment dl of labour would 
really take the form 

cZwi + du2, ± du^ + . . . . 

The waste products of a chemical works, for in- 
stance, will sometimes have a low value ; at other 
times it will be difficult to get rid of them without 
fouling the rivers and injuring the neighbouring 
estates; in this ciise they are discommodities and 
take the negative sign in the equations. 

Over-production. 

The theory of the distribution of labour enables 
us to perceive clearly the meaning of over-produc- 
tion in trade. Early writers on Economics were 
always in fear of a supposed glut, arising from 
the powers of production surpassing the needs of 
consumers, so that industry would be stopped. 

220 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

employment fail, and all bnt the rich would be 
starved by the superfluity of commodities. The 
doctrine is evidently absurd and self-contradictory. 
As the acquirement of suitable commodities is 
the whole purpose of industry and trade, the 
greater the supplies obtained the more perfectly 
industry fulfils its purpose. To bring about a 
universal glut would be to accomplish completely 
the aim of the economist, which is to maximise 
the products of labour. But the supplies must 
be suitable — that is, they must be in proportion 
to the needs of the population. Over-production 
is not possible in all branches of industry at once, 
but it is possible in some as compared with others. 
If, by miscalculation, too much labour is spent 
in producing one commodity, say silk goods, our 
equations Avill not hold true. People will be more 
satiated with silk goods than cotton, woollen, or 
other goods. They will refuse, therefore, to pm*- 
chase them at ratios of exchange corresponding 
to the labour expended. The producers will thus 
receive in exchange goods of less utility than they 
might have acquired by a better distribution of 
their labour. 

In extending industry, therefore, we must be 
careful to extend it proportionally to all the re- 
quirements of the population. The more we can 
lower the degree of utility of all goods by satiating 
the desires of the purchasers the better; but we 

Theory of Labour. 

221 

must lower the degrees of utility of different goods 
in a corresponding manner, otherwise there is an 
apparent glut and a real loss of labour. 

Limits to the Intensity of Labour. 

I have mentioned (p. 184) that labour may vary 
either in duration or intensity, but have yet paid 
little attention to the latter circumstance. We 
may approximately measure the intensity of labour 
by the amount of physical force undergone in a 
certain time, although it is the pain attending 
that exertion of force which is the all-important 
element in Economics. Interesting laws have been 
or may be detected connecting the amount of work 
done with the intensity of labour. Even where 
these laws have not been ascertained, long expe- 
rience has led men, by a sort of unconscious pro- 
cess of experimentation and inductive reasoning, 
to select that rate of work which is most advan- 
tageous. 

Let us take such a simple kind of work as 
digging. A spade may be made of any size, and 
if the same number of strokes be made in the 
hour, the requisite exertion will vary nearly as 
the cube of the length of the blade. If the spade 
be small, the fatigue will be slight, but the work 
done will also be slight. A very large spade, on 
the other hand, will do a great quantity of work 

222 The Theory of Political Economy. 

at each stroke, but the fatigue will be so great 
that the labourer cannot long continue at his 
work. Accordingly, a certain medium-sized spade 
is adopted, which does not overtax a labourer 
and prevent him doing a full day’s work, but 
enables him to accomplish as much as possible. 
The size of a spade should depend partly upon 
the tenacity and weight of the material, and 
partly upon the strength of the labourer. It 
may be observed that, in excavating stiff clay, 
navvies use a small strong spade ; for ordinary 
garden purposes a larger spade is employed; for 
shovelling loose sand or coals a broad capacious 
shovel is used; and a still larger instrument is 
employed for removing corn, malt, or any loose 
light powder. 

In most cases of muscular exertion the weight 
of the body or of some limb is of great import- 
ance. If a man be employed to carry a single 
letter, he really moves a weight of say a hun- 
dred and sixty pounds for the purpose of con- 
veying a letter weighing perhaps half an ounce. 
There will be no appreciable increase of labour 
if he carries twenty letters, so that his efficiency 
will be multiplied twenty times. A hundred let- 
ters would probably prove a slight burden, but 
there would still be a vast gain in the work done. 
It is obvious, however, that we might go on 
loading a postman with letters until the fatigue 

223 

Them']) of Labour. 

became excessive ; the maximum useful result would 
be obtained with the largest load which does not 
severely fatigue the man, and trial soon decides 
the weight with considerable accuracy. 

The most favourable load for a porter was in- 
vestigated by Coulomb, and he found that most 
work could be done by a man walking upstairs 
without any load, and raising his burden by 
means of his own weight in descending. A man 
could thus raise four times as much in a day as 
by carrying bags on his back with the most 
favourable load. This great difference doubtless 
arises from the muscles being perfectly adapted 
to raising the human body, whereas any addi- 
tional weight throws irregular or undue stress 
upon them. Charles Babbage, also, in his admi- 
rable ‘Economy of Manufactures,' has remarked 
on this subject, and has pointed out that the 
weight of some limb of the body is an element 
in all calculations of human labour. 

‘The fatigue produced on the muscles of the 
human frame,’ says Babbage, ‘ does not altogether 
depend on the actual force employed in each 
effort, but partly on the frequency with which 
it is exerted. The exertion necessary to accom- 
plish every operation consists of two parts: one 
of these is the expenditure of force which is 
necessary to drive the tool or instrument; and 
the other is the effort required for the motion of 

224 

The Theory of Political Econcnny. 

some limb of the animal producing the action. 
In driving a nail into a piece of wood, one of 
these is lifting the hammer, and ^propelling its 
head against the nail ; the other is raising the 
arm itself, and moving it in order to use the 
hammer. If the weight of the hammer is con- 
siderable, the former part will cause the greatest 
portion of the exertion. If the hammer is light, 
the exertion of raising the arm will produce the 
greatest part of the fatigue. It does therefore 
happen, that operations requiring very trifling 
force, if frequently repeated, will tire more effec- 
tually than more laborious work. There is also 
a degree of rapidity beyond which the action of 
the muscles cannot be pressed V 

It occurred to me, some time since, that this 
was a subject admitting of interesting inquiry, 
and I tried to determine, by several series of 
experiments, the relation between the amount of 
work done by certain muscles and the rate of 
fatigue. One series consisted in holding weights 
varying from one pound to eighteen pounds in 
the hand while the arm was stretched out at its 
full length. The trials were two hundred and 
thirty-eight in number, and were made at inter- 
vals of at least one hour, so that the fatigue 
of one trial should not derange the next. The 

i Babbage, ‘ On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures,’ 
§ 32, p. 30. 

Theory of Labour. 

226 

average number of seconds during which each 
weight could be sustained was found to be as 
follows — 

Weight in pounds . . 18 14 10 7 4 2 1 

Time in seconds . . 15 32 60 87 148 219 321. 

If the arm had been thus employed in any kind 
of useful work, we should have estimated the use- 
ful effect by the product of the weight sustained 
and the time. The results would be as follows, 
in pound-seconds — 

Weight 18 14 10 7 4 2 1 

Useful effect . . .266 455 .603 612 592 438 321. 

The maximum of useful effect would here appear 
to be about seven pounds, which is about the 
weight usually chosen for dumb-bells and other 
gymnastic instruments. Details of the other series 
of experiments are described in an article in Nature 
(30th June, 1870, vol. ii. p. 158). 

I undertook these experiments as a mere illus- 
tration of the mode in which some of the laws 
forming the physical basis of Economics might 
be ascertained. I was unaware that Professor S. 
Haughton had already, by experiment, arrived at 
a theory of muscular action, communicated to the 
Royal Society in 1862. I was gratified to find 
that my entirely independent results proved to 
be in striking agreement with his principles, as 

226 The Theory of Political Economy. 

was pointed out by Professor Haughton in two 
articles in Nature'^. 

I am not aware that any exact experiments 
upon walking or marching have been made, but, 
as Professor Haughton has remarked to me, they 
might easily be carried out in the movements of 
an army. It would only be necessary, on each 
march which is carried up to the limits of en- 
durance, to register the time and distance passed 
over. Had we a determination of the exact rela- 
tions of time, space, and fatigue, it would be 
possible to solve many interesting problems. For 
instance, if one person has to overtake another, 
what should be their comparative rates of walk- 
ing? Assuming the fatigue to increase as the 
square of the velocity multiplied by the time, we 
easily obtain an exact solution, showing that the 
total fatigue will be least when one person 
walks twice as quickly as he whona he wishes 
to overtake. 

In different cases of muscular exertion we shall 
And different problems to solve. The most advan- 
tageous rate of marching will greatly depend upon 

Vol. ii. p. 324; vol. iii. p. 289. See also Haughton’s ‘Prin- 
ciples of Animal Mechanics,’ 1873, pp. 444-450. The subject has 
since been followed up with much care and ability by Professor 
Francis E. Nipher, of the Washington University, St. Louis, Mis- 
souri, U.S. Details of his experiments will be found in the American 
Journal of Science, vol. ix. pp. 130-7, vol. x. etc. ; Nature, vol. xi. 
pp. 256, 276, etc. 

227 

Theory of Labour. 

whether the loss of time or the fatigue is the most 
important. To march at the rate of four miles 
an hour would soon occasion enormous fatigue, 
and could only be resorted to under circumstances 
of great urgency. The distance passed over would 
bear a much higher ratio to the fatigue at the 
rate of three, or even two and a half miles an 
houi’. But, if the speed were still further re- 
duced, a loss of strength wonld again arise, owing 
to that expended in merely sustaining the body, 
as distinguished from that of moving it forward. 

The Economics of Labour will constantly in- 
volve questions of this kind. When a work has 
to be completed in a brief space of time, work- 
men may be incited by unusual reward to do far 
more than their usual amount of work ; but so 
high a rate would not be profitable in other cir- 
cumstances. The fatigue alwa3'^s rapidly increases 
when the speed of work passes a certain point, so 
that the extra result is far more costly in reality. 
In a regular and constant employment the greatest 
result will always be gained by such a rate as 
allows a workman each day, or each week at the 
most, to recover all fatigue and recommence with 
an undiminished store of energy. 

CHAPTER VI. 

THEORY OF RENT. 

Accented Opinions concerning Rent. 

The general correctness of the views put forth 
in preceding chapters derives great probability 
from their close resemblance to the Theory of 
Rent, as it has been accepted by English writers 
for nearly a century. It has not been usual to 
state this theory in mathematical symbols, and 
clumsy arithmetical illustrations have been em- 
ployed instead; but it is easy to show that the 
fluxional calculus is the branch of mathematics 
which most correctly applies to the subject. 

The Theory of Rent was first discovered and 
clearly stated by James Anderson in a tract pub- 
lished in 1777, and called ‘An Inquiry into the 
Nature of the Corn Laws, with a view to the Corn 
Bill proposed for Scotland.’ An extract from this 
work may be found in MacCulloch’s edition of 
the ‘Wealth of Nations,’ p, 453, giving a most 

Theory of Rent. 

229 

clear explanation of the effect of the various fer- 
tility of land, and showing that it is not the rent 
of land which determines the price of its produce, 
but the price of the produce which determines the 
rent of the land. The following passage must be 
given in Anderson’s own words “ : — 

‘ In every country there is a variety of 
soils, differing considerably from one another in 
point of fertility. These we shall at present sup- 
pose arranged into different classes, which we 
shall denote by the letters A, B, C, D, E, F, &c., 
the class A comprehending the soils of the greatest 
fertility, and the other letters expressing different 
classes of soils, gradually decreasing in fertility 
as you recede from the first. Now, as the expense 
of cultivating the least fertile soil is as great, or 
greater than that of the most fertile field, it neces- 
sarily follows, that if an equal quantity of corn, 
the produce of each field, can he sold at the same 
price, the profit on cultivating the most fertile soil 
must be much greater than that of cultivating the 
others; and as this continues to decrease as the 
sterility increases, it must at length happen, that 
the expense of cultivating some of the inferior soils 
will equal the value of the whole produce.’ 

The theory really rests upon the principle, which 
I have called the Law of Indifference, that for 
the same commodity in the same market there can 

a ‘ Inquiry,’ &c. p. 45 ; note. 

230 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

only be one price or ratio of exchange. Hence, 
if different qualities of land yield different amounts 
of produce to the same labour, there must be an 
excess of profit in some over others. There will 
be some land which will not yield the ordinary 
wages of laboirn, and which will, therefore, not 
be taken into cultivation, or if, by mistake, it is 
cultivated, will be abandoned. Some land will 
just pay the ordinary wages ; better land will 
yield an excess, so that the possession of such 
land will become a matter of competition, and 
the owner will be able to exact as rent from the 
cultivators the whole excess above what is suffi- 
cient to pay the ordinary wages of labour. 

There is a secondary origin for rent in the fact, 
that if more or less labour and capital be applied 
to the same portion of land, the produce will not 
increase proportionally to the amount of labour. 
It is quite impossible that we could go on con- 
stantly increasing the yield of one farm without 
limit, otherwise we might feed the whole country 
upon a single farm. Yet there is no definite limit ; 
for, by better and better culture we may always 
seem able to raise a little more. But the last 
increment of produce will come to bear a smaller 
and smaller ratio to the labour required to pro- 
duce it, so that it soon becomes, in the case of all 
land, undesirable to apply more labour. 

MacCulloch has given, in his edition of the 

231 

Theory of Rent. 

‘Wealth of Nations'’/ a supplementary note, in 
which he explains, with the utmost clearness and 
scientific accuracy, the nature of the theory. This 
note contains by far the best statement of the 
theory, as it seems to me, and I will therefore 
quote his recapitulation of the principles which he 
establishes. 

‘ 1. That if the produce of land could always be 
increased in proportion to the outlay on 
it, there would bo no such thing as rent. 

‘ 2. That the produce of land cannot, at an 
average, be increased in proportion to 
the outlay, but may be indefinitely in- 
creased in a less proportion. 

‘ 3. That the least productive portion of the 
outlay, which, speaking generally, is the 
last, must yield the ordinary profits of 
stock. And 

‘ 4. That all which the other portions yield more 
than this, being above ordinary profits, is 
rent.’ 

A most satisfactory account of the theory is 
also given in James Mill’s ‘Elements of Political 
Economy,’ a work which I never read withoul 
admiring its brief, clear, and powerful style. James 
Mill constantly uses the expression dose of capita 
‘The time comes,’ he says, ‘at which it is iieces 
sary either to have recourse to land of the seconr 
^ New edition, 1839, p. 444. 

232 The Theory of Political Economy. 

quality, or to apply a second dose of capital less 
productively upon land of the first quality/ He 
evidently means by a dose of capital a little more 
capital, and though the name is peculiar, the 
meaning is simply that of an increment of capital. 
The number of doses or increments mentioned is 
only three, but this is clearly to avoid prolixity 
of explanation. There is no reason why we should 
not consider the whole capital divided into many 
more doses. The same general law which makes 
the second dose less productive than the first, 
will make a hundredth dose, speaking generally, 
less productive than the preceding ninety-ninth 
dose. Theoretically speaking, there is no need or 
possibility of stopping at any limit. A mathe- 
matical law is in theory always continuous, so 
that the doses considered are indefinitely small 
and indefinitely numerous. I consider, then, that 
James Mill’s mode of expression is exactly equi- 
valent to that which I have adopted in earlier 
parts of this book. As mathematicians have in- 
vented a precise and fully recognised mode of 
expressing doses or increments, I know not why 
we should exclude language from Economics which 
is found convenient in all other sciences. It is 
mere pedantry to insist upon calling that a dose 
in Economics, which in all the other sciences is 
called by the perfectly established and expressive 
tprm increment. 

233 

Theory of Rent. 

The following are James Mill’s general conclu- 
sions as to the nature of Rent®. ‘In applying 
capital, either to lands of various degrees of fer- 
tility, or in successive doses to the same land, 
some portions of the capital so employed are 
attended with a greater produce, some with a less. 
That which yields the least, yields all that is 
necessary for re-imhursing and rewarding the capi- 
talist. The capitalist will receive no more than 
this remuneration for any portion of the capital 
which he employs, because the competition of others 
will prevent him. All that is yielded above this 
remuneration the landlord will be able to appro- 
priate. Rent, therefore, is the ditference between 
the return yielded to that portion of the capital 
which is employed upon the land with the least 
effect, a.nd that which is yielded to all the other 
portions employed upon it with a greater effect.’ 

Symbolic Statement of the Theory. 

The accepted Theory of Rent, as given above, 
needs little or no alteration to adapt it to ex- 
pression in mathematical symbols. For doses or 
increments of capital I shall substitute increments 
of labour, partly because the functions of capital 
remain to be considered in the next chapter, 
and partly because James Mill, J. S. Mill, and 

c ‘Elements/ p. 17. 

234 The Theory of Political Economy. 

MacCulloch hold the application of capital to be 
synonymous with the application of labour. This 
assumption is implied in James Mill’s statement 
(p. 13); it is expressly stated in J. S. Mill’s ‘First 
Fundamental Proposition concerning the Nature 
of CapitaH;’ and MacCulloch adds a foot-note « 
to make it clear, that as all capital was originally 
produced by labour, the application of additional 
capital is the application of additional labour. 
‘ Either the one phrase or the other may be used 
indiscriminately.’ This doctrine is in itself alto- 
gether erroneous, but it will not be erroneous to 
assume as a mode of simplifying the problem that 
the increments of labour applied are equally as- 
sisted by capital. It is a separate and subsequent 
problem to determine how rent or interest arises 
when the same labour is assisted by different 
quantities of capital. 

I shall suppose that a certain labourer, or, 
what comes to exactly the same thing, a body 
of labourers, expend labour on several different 
pieces of ground. On what principle will they 
distribute their labour between the several pieces ? 
Let us imagine that a certain amount has been 
spent upon each, and that another small portion, 
aZ, is going to be applied. Let there be two 
pieces of land, and let accj, be the incre- 
ments of produce to be expected from the pieces 

Book i. chapter 5, § 1. ® ‘Wealth of Nations,’ p. 445. 

Theory of Rent. 

235 

respectively. They will naturally apply the labour 
to the land which yields the greatest result. So 
long as there is any advantage in one use of 
labour over another, the most advantageous will 
certainly be adopted. Therefore, when they are 
perfectly satisfied with the distribution made, the 
increment of produce to the same labour will be 
equal in each case; or we have 

To attain scientific accuracy, we must decrease 
the increments infinitely, and then we obtain the 
equation — 

dxi dx.i 

(Tt dl 

Now 

dx 

d! 

represents 

the ratio of produce, or the 

productiveness of labour, as regards the last in- 
crement of labour applied. We may say, then, 
that whenever a labourer or body of labourers 
distribute their labour over pieces of land with 
perfect economy, the final ratios of produce to 
labour will he equal. 

We may now take into account the general 
law, that when more and more labour is ap- 
plied to the same piece of land, the produce 
ultimately does not increase proportionately to 

d'Cc 

the labour. This means that the function -jj 

diminishes without limit towards zero after x has 

236 The Theory of Folitical Economy. 

passed a certain quantity. The whole produce of a 
piece of land is w, the whole labour spent upon it 
is I ; and a? varies in some way as I varies, never 
decreasing when I increases. We may say, then, 
that iT is a function of I ; let us call it PI. When 
a little more labour is expended, the increment 

dPl 

of produce dx is dPl, and — ^ is the final rate 

dl 

of production, the same as was previously de- 
noted by 

dl 

In the Theory of Labour it was shown that no 
increment of labour would be expended unless 
there was sufficient recompense in the produce, but 
that labour would be expended up to the point 
at which the increment of utility exactly equals 
the increment of pain incurred in acquiring it. 
Here we find an exact definition of the amount of 
labour which will be profitably applied. 

It was also shown that the last increment of 
labour is the most painful, so that if a person is 
recompensed for tlie last increment of labour which 

he applies to land by the rate of production 

(to 

it follows that all the labour he applies might be 
recompensed sufficiently at the same rate. The 
whole labour is I, so that if the recompense were 

d/OC 

equal over the whole, the result Avoiild be l.-^‘ 

Theory of Rent. 

237 

Consequently, he obtains more than the neeessary 
return to labour by the amount 

dl 

or, as we may write it, 

Pl-l.Fl, 

in which P'l is the differential coefficient of PI, or 
the final rate of production. This expression repre- 
sents the advantage he derives from the possession 
of land in affording him more profit than other 
methods of employing his labour. It is therefore 
the rent whieh he would ask before yielding it up 
to another person, or equally the rent which he 
would be able and willing to pay if hiring it from 
another. 

The same considerations apply to every piece 
of land cultivated. When the same person or body 
of labourers cultivates several pieces, PI will be of 
the same magnitude in each case, but the quantities 
of labour, and possibly the functions of labour, will 
be different. Thus with two pieces of land the 
rent may be represented as 

JPx ?! -1- -P 2 ^2 — P I lx 

or, speaking generally of any number of pieces, 
it is the sum of the quantities of the form PI, minus 
the sum of the quantities of the form I . PI. 

238 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

Illustrations of the Theory. 

It is very easy to illustrate the Theory of Rent by 
diagrams. For, let distances along the line ox denote 
quantities of labour, and let the curve ape repre- 
sent the variation of the rate of production, so that 
the area of the curve will be the measure of the 
produce. Thus when labour has been applied to 
the amount om, the produce will correspond to the 
area apmo. Let a small new increment of labour. 

mm\ be applied, and suppose the rate of production 
equal over the whole of the increment. Then the 
small parallelogram, pp'm'm, will be the produce. 
This will be proportional in quantity to pm, so that 
the height of any point of the curve perpendicularly 
above a point of the line ox represents the rate 
of production at that point in the application of 
labour. 

If we further suppose that the labourer considers 

239 

Theory of Rent. 

his labour, mmf, repaid by the produce fm', there is 
no reason why any other part of his labour should 
not be repaid at the same rate. Drawing, then, 
a horizontal line, rpq, through the point p, his 
whole labour, om, will be repaid by the produce 
represented by the area orpm. Consequently, the 
overlying area, rap, is the excess of produce which 
can be exacted from him as rent, if he be not him- 
self the owner of the land. 

Imagining the same person to cultivate another 
piece of land, we might take the curve, hqc, to 
represent its productiveness. The same rate of 
production will repay the labourer in this case as 
in the last, so that the intersection of the same 
horizontal line, rpq with the curve, will determine 
the final point of labour, n. The area, rn, will be 
the measure of the sufficient recompense to the 
whole labour, on, spent upon the land ; and the 
excess of produce or rent will be the area, rlq. 
In a similar manner, any number of pieces of land 
might be considered. The figure might have been 
drawn so that the curves would rise on leaving the 
initial line oy, indicating that a very little labour 
will have a poor rate of production; and that 
a certain amount of labour is requisite to develop 
the fertility of the soil. This may often or 
always be the case, as a considerable quantity of 
labour is generally requisite in first bringing land 
into cultivation, or merely keeping it in a fit 

240 The Theory of Political Economy. 

state for use. The laws of rent depend on the 
undoubted principle, that the curves always ulti- 
mately decline towards the base line ox, that is, 
the final rate of production always ultimately sinks 
towards zero. 

CHAPTER VII. 

THEORY OF CAPITAL. 

The Function of Capital. 

In considering the nature and principles of 
Capital, we enter a distinct branch of our subject. 
There is no close or necessary connection between 
the employment of capital and the processes of 
exchange. Both by the use of capital and by ex- 
change we are enabled vastly to increase the sum 
of utility which we eigoy; but it is conceivable 
that we might have the advantages of capital 
without those of exchange. An isolated man like 
Alexander Selkirk might feel the benefit of a stock 
of provisions, tools, and other means of facilitating 
industry, although cut off from traffic with other 
men. Economics, then, is not solely the science 
of Exchange or Value: it is also the science of 
Capitalisation. 

The views which I shall endeavour to establish 
on this subject are in fundamental agreement with 

R 

242 The Theory of Political Economy. 

those adopted by Ricardo ; but I shall try to put 
the Theory of Capital in a more simple and con- 
sistent manner than has been the case with some 
later economists. We are told, with perfect truth, 
that capital consists of wealth employed to facili- 
tate production; but when economists proceed to 
enumerate the articles of wealtli constituting 
capital, they obscure the subject. ‘The capital 
of a country,’ says MacCulloch ^ ‘ consists of those 
portions of the produce of industry existing in it, 
which may be directly employed either to support 
human beings, or to facilitate production.’ Pro- 
fessor Fawcett again says ^ : ‘ Capital is not confined 
to the food which feeds the labourers, but includes 
machinery, buildings, and in fact, every product 
due to man’s labour which can be applied to assist 
his industry ; but capital which is in the form of 
food does not perform its functions in the same 
way as capital that is in the form of machinery ; 
the one is termed circulating capital, the other fixed 
capital.’ 

The notion of capital assumes a new degree of 
simplicity as soon as we recognise that what has 
been called a part is really the whole. Capital, as 
I regard it, consists merely in the aggregate of those 
commodities which are reguired for sustaining la- 
bourers of any kind or class engaged in work. A 

a- ‘ Principles of Political Economy/ p. 100. 

‘Manual of Political Economy/ second edition, p. 47. 

243 

Theory of Capital. 

stock of food is the main element of capital; but 
supplies of clothes, furniture, and all the other 
articles in common daily use are also necessary 
parts of capital. The current means of sustenance 
constitute capital in its free or uninvested form. The 
single and all-important function of capital is to 
enable the labourer to await the result of any 
long-lasting work, — to put an interval between the 
beginning and the end of an enterprise. 

Not only can we, by the aid of capital, erect 
large works which would otherwise have been im- 
possible, but the production of articles which would 
have been very costly in labour may be rendered 
far more easy. Capital enables us to make a great 
outlay in providing tools, machines, or other pre- 
liminary works, which have for their sole object 
the production of some important commodity, and 
which will greatly facilitate production when we 
enter upon it. 

Capital is concerned with Time. 

Several economists have clearly perceived that 
the time elapsing between the beginning and end 
of a work is the difficulty which capital assists us 
to surmount. Thus James Mill has said — ‘ If the 
man who subsists on animals cannot make sure of 
his prey in less than a day, he cannot have less 
than a whole day’s subsistence in advance. If 

K 2 

244 The Theory of PoUi'^f^h^ Economy. 

hunting excursions are undertak-eh which occupy a 
week or a month, subsistence for several days may 
be required. It is evident, when men come to live 
upon those productions which their labour raises 
from the soil, and which can be brought to maturity 
only once in the year, that subsistence for a whole 
year must be laid up in advance 
Much more recently. Professor Hearn has said, 
in his admirable work entitled ‘ Plutology d/ — ‘ The 
first and most obvious mode in which capital directly 
operates as an auxiliary of industry is to render 
possible the performance of work which requires 
for its completion some considerable time. In the 
simplest agricultural operations there is the seed 
time and the harvest. A vineyard is unproductive 
for at least three years before it is thoroughly fit 
for use. In gold mining there is often a long delay, 
sometimes even of five or six years, before the gold 
is reached. Such mines could not be worked by 
poor men unless the storekeepers gave the miners 
credit, or, in other words, supplied capital for the 
adventure. But, in addition to this great result, 
capital also implies other consequences w'hich are 
hardly less momentous. One of these is the stead- 
iness and continuity that labour thus acquires. 
A man, when aided by capital, can afford to remain 

c ‘Elements of Political Economy,’ third edition, 1826, p. 9. 

d ‘ Plutology ; or the Theory of the Efforts to Satisfy Human 
Wants,’ 1864 (Macmillan), p. 139. 

245 

Theory of Ca'jyital. 

at his work until it is finished, and is not compelled 
to leave it incomplete while he searches for the 
necessary means of subsistence. If there were no 
accumulated fund upon which the labourer could 
rely, no man could remain for a single day exclu- 
sively engaged in any other occupation than those 
which relate to the supply of his primary wants. 
Besides these wants, he should also from time to 
time search for the materials on which he was to 
work.’ 

These passages imply, as it seems to me, a 
clear insight into the nature and purposes of 
capital, except that the writers have not with 
sufficient boldness followed out the consequences 
of their notion. If we take a comprehensive view 
of the subject, it will be seen that not only the 
chief, hut tlie sole purpose of capital is as above 
described. Capital simply allows us to expend 
labour in advance. Thus, to raise corn we need 
to turn over the surface of the soil. If we pro- 
ceed straight to the work, and use the implements 
with which nature has furnished us — our fingers 
— we should spend an enormous amount of pain- 
ful labour with very little result. It is far better, 
therefore, to spend the first part of our labour in 
making a spade or other implement to assist the 
rest of our labour. This spade represents so much 
labour which has been invested, and so far spent ; 
hut if it lasts three years, its cost may be con- 

246 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

sidered as repaid gradually during those three 
years. This labour, like that of digging, has for 
its object the raising of corn, and the only essen- 
tial difference is, that it has to precede the pro- 
duction of corn by a longer interval. The average 
interval of time for which labour will remain 
invested in the spade is half of the three years. 
Similarly, if we possess a larger capital, and expend 
it in making a plough, which will last for twenty 
years, we invest at the beginning a great deal 
of labour which is only gradually repaid during 
those twenty years, and which is therefore, on 
the average, invested for about ten years. 

It is true that in modern industry we should 
seldom or never find the same man making the 
spade or plough, and afterwards using the im- 
plement. The division of labour enables me, with 
much advantage, to expend a portion of my capital 
in purchasing the implement from some one who 
devotes his attention to the manufacture, and 
probably expends capital previously in facilitating 
the work. But this does not alter the principles 
of the matter. What capital I give for the spade 
merely replaces what the manufacturer had already 
invested in the expectation that the spade would 
be needed. Exactly the same considerations may 
be applied to much more complicated applications 
of capital. The ultimate object of all industry 
engaged with cotton is the production of cotton 

247 

Theory of Capital. 

goods. But the complete process of producing 
those goods is divided into many parts; and it is 
necessary to begin the spending of labour a long 
time before any goods can be finished. 

In the first place, labour will be required to till 
the land which is to bear the cotton plants, and 
probably two years at least will elapse between 
the time when the ground is first broken and the 
time when the cotton reaches the mills. A cotton 
mill, again, must be a very strong and durable 
structure, and must contain machinery of a very 
costly character, which can only repay its owner 
by a long course of use. We might spin and 
weave cotton goods as in former times, or as it 
is done in Cashmere, with a very small use of 
capital ; but then the labour required would be 
enormously greater in proportion to the produce. 
It is far more economical in the end, to spend a 
vast amount of labour and capital in building 
a substantial mill and filling it with the best 
machinery, which will then go on working with 
unimpaired efficiency for thirty years or more. 
This means that, in addition to the labour spent 
in superintending the machines at the moment 
when goods are produced, a great quantity of 
labour has been spent from one to thirty years 
in advance, or, on the average, fifteen years in 
advance. This expenditulre is repaid by an an- 
nuity of profit extending over those thirty years. 

248 The Theory of Political Economy. 

The interval elapsing between the first exer- 
tion of labour and the enjoyment of the result 
is further increased by any time during which 
the raw material may lie in warehouses before 
reaching the machines ; and by the time employed 
in distributing the goods to retail dealers, and 
through them to the consumers. It may even 
happen that the consumer finds it desirable to 
keep a certain stock on hand, so that the time 
when the real object of the goods is fulfilled be- 
comes still further deferred. During this time, 
also, capital seems to me to be invested, and only 
as actual utilisation takes place is expenditure 
repaid by corresponding utility enjoyed. 

I would say, then, in the most general manner, 
that whatever improvements in the supply of com- 
modities lengthen the average interval between the 
moment when labour is exerted and its ultimate 
result or purpose accomplished, such improvements 
depend upon the use of capital. And I would add, 
that this is the sole use of capital. Whenever we 
overlook the irrelevant complications introduced 
by the division of labour and the frequency of 
exchange, all employments of capital resolve them- 
selves into the fact of time elapsing between the 
[beginning and the end of industry. 

Theory of Capital. 

249 

Quantitative Notions concerning Capital. 

One main point which has to he clearly brought 
before the mind in this subject is the difference 
between the amount of capital invested and the 
amount of investment of capital. The first is a 
quantity of one dimension only — the quantity of 
capital; the second is a quantity of two dimen- 
sions, namely, the quantity of capital, and the 
length of time during which it remains invested. 
If one day’s labour remains invested for two years, 
the capital is only that equivalent to one day ; 
but it is locked up twice as long as if it were 
invested for only one year. Now all questions 
in which we consider the most advantageous em- 
ployment of capital turn upon the length of in- 
vestment quite as much as upon the amount. 
The same capital will serve for twice as much 
industry if it be absorbed or invested for only half 
the time. 

The amount of investment of capital will evi- 
dently be determined by multiplying each por- 
tion of capital invested at any moment by the 
length of time for which it remains invested. 
One pound invested for five years gives the same 
result as five pounds invested for one year, the 
product being five pound-years. Most commonly, 
however, investment proceeds continuously or at 

250 The Theory of Political Economy. 

intervals, and we must form clear notions on the 
subject. Thus, if a workman be employed during 
one year on any work, the result of which is com- 
plete, and enjoyed at the end of that time, the 
absorption of capital will be found by multiplying 
each day’s wages by the days remaining till the 
end of the year, and adding all the results toge- 
ther. If the daily wages be four shillings, then 
we have 

4 x364 + 4 x363 + 4 x362 +4 x1; 

. 365 x364 rroA 1‘IT J 

or, 4x ^ , or 265,720 slnllmg-days. 

We may also represent the investment by a 
diagram such as Fig. X. The length along the 
line ox indicates the duration of investment, and 

the height attained at any point, a, is the amount 
of capital invested. But it is the whole area of 
the rectangles up to any point, a, which measures 
the amount of investment during the time oa. 

The whole result of continued labour is not 
often consumed and enjoyed in a moment; the 
result generally lasts for a certain length of time. 
We must then conceive the capital as being pro- 

251 

Theory of Capital. 

grcssively uninvested. Let us, for sake of simple 
illustration, imagine the labour of producing the 
harvest to be continuously and equally expended 
between the first of September in one year and 
the same day in the next. Let the harvest be 
then completely gathered and its consumption 
begin immediately and continue equally during 
the succeeding twelve months. Then the amount 
of investment of capital will be represented by the 
area of an isosceles triangle, as in Fig. XI, the 

y' i 

^ : 

base of which corresponds to two years of dura- 
tion. Now the area of a triangle is equal to the 
height multiplied by half the base; and as the 
height represents the greatest amount invested, 
that upon the first of September, when the har- 
vest is gathered ; half the base, or one year, is the 
average time of investment of the whole amount. 

In the 37th proposition of the first book of 
Euclid it is proved that all triangles upon the 
same base and between the same parallels are 
equal in area. Hence we may draw the conclu- 
sion that, provided capital be invested and unin- 
vested continuously and in simple proportion to 

252 The Theory of Politiccd Economy. . 

the time, we need only regard the greatest amount 
invested and the greatest time of investment. 
Whether it be all invested suddenly, and then 
gradually withdrawn; or gradually invested and 
suddenly withdrawn; or gradually invested and 
gradually withdrawn; the amount of investment 
will be in every case the greatest amount of 
capital multiplied by half the time elapsing from 
the beginning to the end of the investment. 

Expression for Amount of Investment. 

To render our notions of the subject still more 
exact and general, let us resort once more to ma- 
thematical symbols. 

Let Ap = amount of capital supposed to be 
invested in the time At; let t = time elapsing 
before its result is enjoyed, the enjoyment taking 
place in an interval of time At, which may be 
disregarded in comparison with t. Then t.Ap is 
the amount of investment; and if the investment 
is repeated, the sum of the quantities of the 
nature of t.Ap, or, in the customary mode of 
expression, 'Z t . Ap is the total amount of invest- 
ment. But it will seldom be possible to assign 
each portion of result to an exactly corresponding 
portion of labour. Cotton goods are due to the 
aggregate industry of those who tilled the ground, 
grew the cotton, plucked, transported, cleaned. 

253 

Theory of Capital. 

spun, wove, and dyed it; we cannot distinguish 
the moment when each labourer’s work is sepa- 
rately repaid. To avoid this difficulty, we must 
fix on some moment of time when the whole 
transaction is closed, all labour upon the ground 
repaid, the mill and machinery worn out and sold, 
and the cotton goods consumed. Let t now denote 
the time elapsing from any moment up to this 
final moment of closing the accounts. Let aj) 
be as before an increment of capital invested, and 
let /\q be an increment of capital uninvested by 
the sale of the products and their enjoyment by 
the consumer. Thus it will be pretty obvious 
that the sum of the quantities ^ . Ap, less by the 
sum of the quantities t.Aq will be the total 
investment of capital, or expressed in symbols 
2 1 . Ap — '^t.Aq. 

Dimensions of Capital, Credit and Dehit. 

As the subject presents itself to me at present, 
I apprehend that capital is to be regarded simply 
as commodity. If so, the dimension of capital 
will be represented by M, and the amount of in- 
vestment of capital, possessing the additional dimen- 
sion of time, will have the symbol MT. How then 
are we to determine the quantitative nature of 
what Senior called Abstinence, that temporary 
sacrifice of enjoyment which is essential to the 

254 The Theory of Political Econwtny. 

existence of capital. Senior thus explicitly de- 
fined what he meant by the word ® : — ‘ By the 
word Abstinence, we wish to express that agent, 
distinct from labour and the agency of nature, 
the concurrence of which is necessary to the exist- 
ence of capital, and which stands in the same 
relation to profit as labour does to wages.’ He 
goes on to explain that abstinence, though usually 
accompanying labour, is distinct from it. A care- 
ful consideration of Senior’s remarks shows that 
in reality abstinence is the endurance of want, 
the abstaining from the enjoyment of utility which 
might be enjoyed. Now the degree or intensity 
of want is measured by the degree of utility of 
commodity if it were consumed. Great degree 
of utility simply means great want, so that one 
dimension of abstinence must be U, and time 
being also obviously an element of abstinence, 
the required symbolic statement of its dimensions 
will be UT. This result satisfactorily corresponds 
with Senior’s definition, for he says that abstinence 
is to profit as labour is to wages. Now profit or 
interest is clearly symbolised by M, and wages 
also by M, both consisting simply of quantities 
of commodity. Thus UT bears just the same 
relation to M that ET does to M, for E signifies 

^ ‘Political Ecoaomj/ by Nassau W. Senior. 6tli ed., 1863, 

255 

Theory of Capital. 

the degree of painfulness of labour, and can barely 
be distinguished from U, except in sign. 

The relation of abstinence, UT, to total utility, 
MU, also confirms our result. For if we convert 
ahstinence into satisfaction, by giving a supply of 
commodity for consumption, this action is symbo- 
lically represented by multiplying UT into MT“S 
which yields MU, or utility. 

It will need no argument to show that the 
dimension of dehit and credit, having regard only 
to what is borrowed and owed, will be the dimen- 
sion of commodity simply, or M. According to 
the practice of commerce, a contract of debt is a 
contract to return a certain physically defined 
quantity of a specified substance, such as an 
ounce of gold, a ton of pig iron, a hogshead of 
palm oil. No attempt is made to define quan- 
tities of utility, so that the debt when repaid 
shall yield utility equal to what it possessed 
when lent. The borrower and lender either take 
their chance about this, or provide for it in the 
rate of interest to be paid. It is equally obvious 
that in another sense the amount of credit or debit 
will be proportional to the duration of the opera- 
tion, and will have the dimensions MT. 

Effect of the Duration of Worh. 

Perhaps the most interesting point in the Theory 
of Capital is the advantage arising from the rapid 

256 The Theory of Political Economy. 

performance of work, if it is capable of being 
done with convenience and with the same ultimate 
result. To investigate this point, suppose that 
w = the whole amount of wages which it is re- 
quisite to pay in building a house, and that this 
does not alter when we vary, within certain limits, 
the time employed in the work, denoted by t. If 
the work goes on continuously, we shall, during 
each unit of time, have an amount invested equal 
to the fth part of w. The whole amount of invest- 
ment of capital will therefore be represented by 
the area of a triangle whose base is t and height 
w; that is, the investment is \tw. Thus when 
the whole expenditure is ultimately the same, the 
amount of investment is simply proportional to 
the time. The result would be more serious if the 
accumulation of compound interest during the time 
were taken into account; but the consideration 
of compound interest would render the formulae 
very complex, and is not requisite for the purpose 
in view. 

We must clearly distinguish the case treated 
above, in which the amount of labour is the same, 
but spread over a longer time, from other cases 
where the labour increases in proportion to the 
time. The investment of capital, then, grows in 
an exceedingly rapid manner. Neglecting the first 
cost of tools, materials, and other preparations, let 
the first day’s labour cost a; during the second 

Theory of Capital. 

257 

day this remains invested, and the amount of 
capital a is added ; on each following day a like 
addition is made. The amount of capital invested 
is evidently 

At beginning of second day a, 

„ ,, third ,, Oj c?, 

„ „ fourth „ a + a + a ; 

and so on. If the work lasts during n + 1 days, 
the total amount of investment of capital will be 

a + 2« + 3a + 4a+ na. 

The sum of the series is 

which increases by a term involving the square 
of the time. The employment of capital thus 
grows in proportion to the triangular numbers 
1, 3, 6 , 10, 15, 21, &c. 

If we regard the investment as taking place 
continuously, the whole absorption of capital is 

aCK 

represented by the area of a right-angled tri- 
angle (Fig. XII), in which ohi, h.^ 63 , &c. are the 

258 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

successive units of time. Tlie heights of the lines 
Oi&i, represent the amounts invested at the 
ends of the times. The daily investment being 

a, the total amount of investment will be a—, 

increasing as the square of the time. 

Cases of this kind continually occur, as in sink- 
ing a deep mine, of which the requisite depth 
cannot be previously known with accuracy. Any 
large work, such as a breakwater, an embank- 
ment, the foundations of a great bridge, a dock, 
a long tunnel, the dredging of a channel, involves 
a problem of a similar nature; for it is seldom 
known what amount of labour and capital will 
be required; and if the work lasts much longer 
than was expected, the result is usually a financial 
disaster. 

Illustrations of the Investment of Cajyital. 

The time during which capital remains invested, 
and the circumstances of its investment and repro- 
duction, are exceedingly various in different em- 
ployments. If a person plants cabbages, they will 
be ready in the course of a few months, and the 
labour of planting and tending them, together with 
a part of the labour of preparing and manuring the 
soil, yields its results with very little delay. In 
planting a forest tree, however, a eertain amount 
of labour is expended, and no result obtained until 

Theory of Capital. 

259 

after the lapse of 30, 40, or 50 years. The first 
cost of enclosing, preparing, and planting a planta- 
tion is considerable ; and though, after a time, the 
loppings and thinnings of the trees repay the cost 
of superintendence and repairs, yet the absorption 
of capital is great, and we may thus account for 
the small amount of planting which goes on. The 
ageing of wine is a somewhat similar case. A certain 
amount of labour is expended without result for 
10 or 15 years, and the cost of storage is incurred 
during the whole time. To estimate the real cost 
of the articles at the end of the time, we must, 
in all such cases, add compound interest, and this 
grows in a rapid manner. Every pound invested 
at the commencement of a business becomes 1'63 
pounds at the end of ten years, 11-47 pounds at the 
end of fifty years, and no less than 131-50 pounds at 
the end of a century, the rate of interest being taken 
at five per cent. Thus it cannot be profitable to store 
wine for fifty years, unless it become about twelve 
times as valuable as it was when new. It cannot pay 
to plant an oak and let it live a century, unless the 
timber then repays the cost of planting 132 times. 

If an annual charge however small, has to be 
incurred (for instance, the cost of storage ‘ and 
superintendence), the expense mounts up in a still 
more alarming manner. Thus, if the cost of any 
investment is one pound per annum, the amount 
invested, with compound interest at five per cent., 

260 The Theory of Political Economy. 

becomes 12-58 pounds at the end of ten years, 
209-35 pounds at the end of fifty years, and the 
enormous amount of 2610 03 at the end of a 
century. We shall almost always have to take into 
account both the original and continuous cost 
of an investment. Thus if a stock of wine worth 
£100 be laid by for fifty years, and the cost of 
storage be £l per annum, the total cost at the end 
of the time will be £1147-0 on account of original 
cost, and £209-35 for storage, or in all £1356-35. 

It is to be feared that the rapid accumulation 
of compound interest is often overlooked in esti- 
mating the cost of public works and other under- 
takings of considerable duration, A great fort, 
breakwater, or canal (the Caledonian Canal for 
instance) is often not completed for twenty years 
after its commencement, and in the meantime 
it may be of little or no use. Suppose that its cost 
has been £10,000 each year; then the aggregate 
cost would seem to be £200,000, but allowing for 
interest at five per cent, it is really £330,000. The 
French engineer and economist, Minard f, fully 
understood this point of finance, and showed that 
in the case of some public works, such as the great 
digue of Cherbourg harbour, and canals, the execu- 
tion of which is allowed sometimes to drag on for 
half a century, before any adequate result is 

f Minard, ^ Annales des Fonts et Chaussees,’ 1850, Semestre, 
p. 57. 

Theory of Capital. 

261 

returned, the real cost is incomparably greater than 
it is represented to be by merely stating the sums 
of money expended. In some cases, such as the 
first canal of Saint Quentin, a work after being 
long prosecuted, is abandoned, and the loss by first 
cost and interest becomes enormous. The Guernsey 
Harbour is a case in point, and the English dock- 
yards would supply abundance of similar facts. 

An interesting example of the investment of 
capital occurs in the case of gold and silver, 
a large stock of which is maintained either in the 
form of money, or plate and jewellery. Labour 
is spent in the digging or mining of the metals, 
which is gradually repaid by the use or satisfaction 
arising from the possession of the metals during 
the whole time for which they continue in use. 
Hence the investment of capital extends over the 
average duration of the metals. Now, if the stock 
of gold requires one per cent, of its amount to 
maintain it undiminished, it will be apparent that 
each particle of gold remains in use 100 years on 
the average ; if \ per cent, is sufficient, the average 
duration will be 200 years. We may state the 
result thus : 

Loss of Average duration 

gold or silver of each particle 

annually. in use. 

100 years 
200 „ 
400 „ 

1000 „ 

262 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

The wear and loss of the precious metals in 
a civilised country is probably not more than ^ 
part annually, including plate, jewellery, and 
money in the estimate, so that the average invest- 
ment will be for 200 years. It is curious that, if 
we regard a quantity of gold as wearing away 
annually by a fixed percentage of what remains, 
the duration of some part is infinite, and yet the 
average duration is finite. Some of the gold pos- 
sessed by the Romans is doubtless mixed with 
what we now possess ; and some small part of it will 
be handed down as long as the human race exists. 

Fixed and Circulating Capital. 

Economists have long been accustomed to distin- 
guish capital into the two kinds, fixed and circu- 
lating. Adam Smith called that circulating which 
passes from hand to hand, and yields a revenue by 
being parted with. The fact of being frequently 
exchanged is, however, an accidental circumstance 
which leads to no results of importance. Ricardo 
altered the use of the terms, applying the name 
circidating to that which is frequently destroyed, 
and has to be reproduced. He says unequivocally x 
— ‘In proportion as fixed capital is less durable, 
it approaches to the nature of circulating capital, 

8 ‘ On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation,’ chap. 1, 
§ 5, third edition, p. 36. 

263 

Theory of Capital. 

It will be consumed, and its value reproduced in 
a shorter time, in order to preserve the capital of 
the manufacturer.’ Accepting this doctrine, and 
carrying it out to the full extent, we must say that 
no precise line can be drawn between the two 
kinds. The difference is one of amount and degree. 
The duration of capital may vary from a day to 
several hundred years ; the most circulating is the 
least durable ; the most fixed the most durable. 

Free and Invested Capital. 

I believe that the clear explanation of the doc- 
trine of capital requires the use of a term free 
capital, which has not been hitherto recognised by 
economists. By free capital I mean the wages of 
labour, either in its transitory form of money, or its 
real form of food and other necessaries of life. The 
ordinary sustenance requisite to support labourers 
of all ranks when engaged upon their work is really 
the true form of capital. It is quite in agreement 
with the ordinary language of commercial men 
to say, not that a factory, or dock, or railway, or 
ship, is capital, but that it represents so much capital 
sunh in the enterprise. To invest capital is to spend 
money, or the food and maintenance which money 
purchases, upon the completion of some work. The 
capital remains invested or sunk until the work 

264 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

lias returned profit, equivalent to the first cost, 
with interest. 

Much clearness would result from making the 
language of Economics more nearly coincident with 
that of commerce. Accordingly, I would not say 
Ahat a railway infixed capital, but that capital is 
fixed in the railway. The capital is not the rail- 
Hvay, but the food of those who made the railway. 
Abundance of free capital in a country means that 
there are copious stocks of food, clothing, and every 
article which people insist upon having — that, in 
short, everything is so arranged that abundant 
subsistence and conveniences of every kind are 
forthcoming without the labour of the country 
being much taxed to provide them. In such cir- 
cumstances it is possible that a part of the labourers 
of the country can be employed on works of which 
the utility is distant, and yet no one will feel 
scarcity in the present. 

Uniformity of the Rate of Interest. 

A most important principle of this subject is, 
t\xsitfree capital can he indifferently employed in any 
branch or hind of industry. Free capital, as we 
have just seen, consists of a suitable assortment 
of all kinds of food, clothing, utensils, furniture, 
and other articles which a community requires for 
its ordinary sustenance. Men and families consume 

265 

Theory of Capital. 

much the same kind of commodities, whatever may 
be the branch of manufacture or trade by which 
they earn a living. Hence there is nothing in the 
nature of free capital to determine its employment 
to one kind of industry rather than another. The 
very same wages, whether we regard the money 
wages, or the real wages purchased with the money, 
will support a man whether he be a mechanic, 
a weaver, a coal miner, a carpenter, a mason, or 
any other kind of labourer. 

The necessary result is, that the rate of interest 
for free capital will tend to and closely attain 
uniformity in all employments. The market for 
capital is like all other markets: there can he hut 
one price for one article at one time. It is a case 
of the Law of Indifference (p. 98). Now the article 
in question is the same, so that its price must 
be the same. Accordingly, as is well known, the 
rate of interest, Avhen freed from considerations of 
risk, trouble, and other interfering causes, is the 
same in all trades; and every trade will employ 
capital up to the point at which it just yields the 
current interest. If any manufacturer or trader 
employs so much capital in supporting a certain 
amount of labour th^t the return is less than in 
other trades, he will lose; for he might have 
obtained the current rate by lending it to other 
traders. 

266 The Theory of Political Economy. 

General Expression for the Rate of Interest. 

We may obtain a general expression for the rate 
of interest yielded by capital in any employment 
provided that we may suppose the produce for the 
same amount of labour to vary as some continuous 
function of the time elapsing between the expen- 
diture of the labour and the enjoyment of the 
result. Let the time in question be t, and the 
produce for the same amount of labour the func- 
tion of t denoted by Ft, which may be supposed 
always to increase with t. If we now extend the 
time to ^ + A#, the produce will be F{t-\- At), and 
the increment of produce F{t+ At)— Ft. The 
ratio which this increment bears to the increment 
of investment of capital will determine the rate 
of interest. Now, at the end of the time t, we 
might receive the product Ft, and this is the 
amount of capital which remains invested when 
we extend the time by At. Hence the amount of 
increased investment of capital is At . Ft-, and, 
dividing the increment of produce by this last 
expression, we have 

F{t-\- At) — Ft 1 

^ — X -jt; • 

At Ft 

When we reduce the magnitude of infinitely, 
the limit of the first factor of the above expression 
is the differential coefficient of Ft, so that we find 
the rate of interest to be represented by 

Theory of Capital. 

2G7 

dFf 1_ Fft 

lU' Yt Yt' 

The interest of capital is, in other words, the rate 
of mcrease of the produce divided hy the tvhole 
pi'oduce ; but this is a quantity which must rapidly 
approach to zero, unless means can be found of 
continually maintaining the rate of increase. Unless 
a body moves with a rapidly increasing speed, the 
space it moves over in any unit of time must ulti- 
mately become inconsiderable compared with the 
whole space passed over from the commencement. 
There is no reason to suppose that industry, gene- 
rally speaking, is capable of returning any such 
vastly increasing produce from the greater appli- 
cation of capital. Every new machine or other 
great invention will usually require a fixation of 
capital for a certain average time, and may be 
capable of paying interest upon it ; but when this 
average time is reached, it fails to afford a return 
to more prolonged investments. 

To take an instance, let us suppose that the pro- 
duce of labour in some case is proportional to the 
interval of abstinence t ; then we have say Ft=a.t, 
in which a is an unknown constant. The differen- 
tial coefficient F't is now a ; and the rate of interest 

™ or or - ! or the rate of interest vaides in- 
P t at t 

versely as the time of investment. 

268 The Theory of Political Economy. 

Dimension of Interest. 

The formull Avhich Ave obtained in the preceding 
section, has been subjected to close criticism by 
an eminent mathematician, avIio proposed several 
alternative formula), but finally accepted my solu- 
tion of the question as correct. As Professor 
Adamson, hoAvever, has also raised some objections 
to the formula, it seems desirable to explain its 
meaning and mode of derivation more fully than 
Avas done in the first edition. 

In the first place, as regards the theory of dimen- 
sions the formula is clearly correct. The rate of 
interest expresses the ratio Avhich the annual sum 
paid per annum for the loan of capital bears to 
the capital. The interest and the capital are 
quantities of the same nature, their ratio being an 
abstract number. Dividing by length of time rate 
of interest Avill have the dimension T~^. 

Or Ave may put it in this Avay — Interest is paid 
per annum, or per month, or per other unit of time, 
and the less the magnitude of this unit, the less 
must be the numerical expression of the rate of 
interest. Simple interest at fiA-^e per cent, per 
annum is 0-416 .... per cent, per month, and so 
on. Hence time enters negatively, and the dimen- 
sion of the rate of interest will be T~^. Or, again, 
we may state it thus symbolically — The capital 
advanced may be taken as having the dimension 

269 

Theory oj Capital, 

M; the annual return has the dimensions MT. 
Dividing the former by the latter we obtain 

^ — T '— 1 

MT~ ■ 

F't 

Now the formula clearly agrees with this 

result ; for the denominator is a certain unknown 

function of the time of advance of the capital t. 
We may assume that it can be expressed in a finite 
series of the powers of t, and the numerator, being 
the differential coefficient of the same function, will 
be of one degree of power less than Ft. Hence 
the dimensions of the formula will be 

yn-X 1 

or 01 ’ T-\ 

It must be carefully remembered that it is the rate 
of interest which has the dimension T~'^, not interest 
itself, which being simply commodity of some kind, 
has the dimension of commodity, namely M, of the 
same nature, and having the same dimensions. 

The function of capital is simply this, that labour 
which would produce certain commodity Wj, if that 
commodity were needed immediately for the satis- 
faction of wants, is applied so as to produce m2 
after the lapse of the time t. The reason for this 
deferment is that m 2 usually exceeds Wj, and the 
difference or interest m2 — is commodity having 
the same dimensions as m^. Hence the rate of 
interest, anart from the Question of time, would be 

270 The Theory of Political Economy. 

m-i — mi, divided by and the quantities being 
of the same nature, the ratio will be an abstract 
number devoid of dimensions. But the time for 
which the results of labour are foregone is as 
important a matter as the quantity of commodity. 
The amount of deferment is mit, so that the rate 
of interest is divided by Mif, which will 

have the dimension T~^. 

Exactly the same result would be obtained, 
however, if we regarded the use of capital from 
a different point of view. Capital and deferment 
of consumption are not needed only in order to 
increase production, that is to say, the manufacture 
of goods; they are needed also to equalise con- 
sumption, and to allow commodity to be consumed 
when its utility is at the highest point. Now, when 
certain commodity is consumed within an interval 
of time, the utility produced will, as we have seen, 
possess the dimensions MUT~^T, or MU. Sup- 
pose that instead of being consumed within that 
interval, the commodity is held in hand for a time, 
before being consumed at all. Then the amount 
of deferment of utility will be proportional both 
to the interval of time over which it is deferred, 
and to the utility which is deferred. Thus the 
amount of deferment will have the dimensions 
MUT. The increase of utility due to deferment 
will clearly have the same dimensions as were pre- 
viously determined, namely M U. Hence the ratio 

Theory of Capital, 

271 

of this increase to the amount of deferment, will 

have the dimensions or T~^, and this result 

corresponds with the dimension of the rate of 
interest as otherwise reached. 

Peacock on the Dimensions of Interest. 

The need of some care in forming our conceptions 
of these quantities is strikingly illustrated by the 
fact that not quite fifty years ago so profound and 
philosophic a mathematician as the late Dean 
Peacock completely misapprehended the matter. 
In the first edition of his celebrated and invaluable 
‘Treatise on Algebra,’ published in 1830, he gives 

111, p. 91) the interest of money as an example 
of a quantity of three dimensions, and one which 
may be represented by a solid. He says — ‘ If p 
represent the principal or sum of money lent or 
forborne, r the rate of interest (of £l for one year), 
and t the number of years, then the interest ac- 
cumulated or due will be represented \>j prt\ for 
if r be the interest of £1 for one year, p r will be 
the interest of a sum of money denoted by p for 
one year, and therefore prt will be the amount of 
this interest in t years, no interest being reckoned 
upon interest due : such would be the result accord- 
ing to the principles of Arithmetical Algebra. 

‘ If we now suppose prt represented respectively 

272 

The Theory of Political Pconomy. 

by lilies, which form the adjacent edges of a paral- 
lelopipedon, the solid thus formed will represent 
the interest accumulated or due: in other words, 
it will represent whatever is represented by the 
general formula pi't when specific values and sig- 
nifications are given to its symbols : for in what- 
ever manner we may suppose any one of the 
symbols of jtrt to vary, the solid will vary in the 
same proportion. 

‘The lines which w’e assume to represent units 
of p, r, and t, are perfectly arbitrary, whether they 
are made equal to each other or not : this is clearly 
the case with p and t which are quantities of a dif- 
ferent nature; and the third quantity is likewise 
different from the other two, being an abstract 
numerical quantity : for it expresses the relation 
between the interest of £l and £1, or between the 
interest of £100 and £100, which is the quotient 
of the division of one quantity by another of the 
same nature ; thus, if the interest be 5 per cent., 
then r = yIo 01* ^ : if 4 per cent., then r = or ^ : 
and similarly in other cases: the line, therefore, 
which is assumed to represent the abstract unit to 
which r is referred, is independent of the lines 
which represent units of p and of t, and may 
therefore be assumed at ifieasure, equally with 
those lines. 

‘ The lines which represent p and t form a rect- 
angular area, which is the geometrical repre- 

Theory of Capital. 

273 

sentatioii of their product: the third quantity r, 
being merely numerical, may either be represented 
by a line, as in the case just considered, when 
a solid parallelopipedon is made the representative 
of prt: or we may consider the area pt sls repre- 
senting the product prt when r=l, and that this 
product in any other case is represented by a rect- 
angle which bears to the rectangle pt the ratio 
of r to 1 : this may be effected by increasing or 
diminishing one of the sides of the rectangle in the 
required ratio: the product prt may therefore be 
correctly represented either by a solid or an area, 
when one of the factors is an abstract number.’ 

The conclusion at which he arrives is a lame 
one, for he thinks that the same kind of quantity 
may be represented indifferently by a solid or an 
area. The fact is that Peacock confused a product 
of three factors with a quantity of three dimensions. 
He took these dimensions as if they were, say 
ilf= money, Z2 = rate of interest, and 2’= time. If 
we simply multiply these together, as Peacock 
first does, we get a quantity apparently of tjiree 
dimensions, MRT. If according to Peacock’s sub- 
sequent idea we take R to be an abstract nu- 
merical quantity, then we have two dimensions left, 
namely, M T. He overlooks the fact that the rate 
of interest involves time negatively, although he 
describes r as ‘ the rate of interest (of £1 for one 
year).’ Correctly stated, the dimensions of prt, 

T 

274 

The, Theory of Political Economy. 

the quantity of interest are M x T~^ y^T ox M, that 
is simply the dimension of the money advanced. 

If you say, for instance, that the simple interest 
of £300 at 5 per cent, per annum for five years 
is £75, there remains no reference in this result 
to time : £75 is simply £75, and is of exactly the 
same nature as the £300 which bore the interest. 

That Peacock subsequently discovered error, or 
at least difficulty, in this section, is rendered pro- 
bable by the fact that he omitted the illustration 
altogether in his second edition ; but he does not, 
so far as I have observed, give any explanation. 

Tendency of Profits to a Minimum. 

It is one of the favourite doctrines of Economists 
since the time of Adam Smith, that as society 
progresses and capital accumulates, the rate of 
profit, or more strictly speaking, the rate of interest, 
tends to fall. The rate will always ultimately sink 
so low, they think, that the inducements to further 
accumulation will cease. This doctrine is in strik- 
ing agreement with the result of the somewhat 
abstract analytical investigation given above. Our 
formula for the rate of interest shows that unless 
there be constant progress in the arts, the rate 
must tend to sink towards zero, supposing accumu- 
lation of capital to go on. There are sufficient 
statistical facts, too, to confirm this conclusion 

Theory of Capital. 

275 

historically. The only question that can arise 
is as to the actual cause of this tendency. 

Adam Smith vaguely attributed it to the’ com- 
petition of capitalists, saying, ‘The increase of 
stock which raises wages, tends to loAver profit. 
When the stocks of many rich merchants are 
turned into the same trade, their mutual com- 
petition naturally tends to lower its profit; and 
wlien there is a like increase of stock in all the 
different trades carried on in the same society, the 
same competition must produce the same effect in 
them all^.’ 

Later economists have entertained different views. 
They attributed the fall of interest to the rise in 
the cost of labour. The produce of labour, they 
said, is divided between capitalists and labourers, 
and if it is necessary to give more to labour, there 
must be less left to capital, and the rate of profit 
will fall. I shall discuss the validity of this theory 
in the final chapter, and will only remark here, 
that it is not in agreement with the view which 
I have ventured to take concerning the origin of 
interest. I consider that interest is determined 
by the increment of produce which it enables a 
labourer to obtain, and is altogether independent 
of the total return which he receives for this 
labour. Our formula (p. 267) shows that the rate 
of interest will be greater as the whole produce 

h ^ Wealth of Nations/ book i. chapter 9, second paragraph. 

T O 

276 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

Ft is less, if the advantage of more capital, mea- 
sured by F't, remains unchanged. In many ill- 
governed countries, where the land is wTetchedly 
tilled, the average produce is small, and yet the 
rate of interest is high, simply because the want 
of security prevents the due supply of capital : 
hence more capital is urgently needed, and its 
price is high. In America and the British Colonies 
the produce is often high, and yet interest is high, 
because there is not sufficient capital accumulated 
to meet all the demands. In England and other 
old countries the rate of interest is generally lower 
because there is an abundance of capital, and the 
urgent need of more is not actually felt. 

I conceive that the returns to capital and labour 
are independent of each other. If the soil yields 
little, and capital will not make it yield more, 
then both wages and interest will be low, provided 
that the capital be not attracted away to more 
profitable employment. If the soil yields much, 
and capital will make it yield more, then both 
wages and interest will be high ; if the soil yields 
much, and capital will not make it yield more, 
then wages will be high and interest low, unless 
the capital finds other investments. But the sub- 
ject is much complicated by the interference of 
rent. When we speak of the soil yielding much, 
we must distinguish between the whole yield and 
the final rate of yield. In the Western States of 

Theory of Cajyital. 

277 

America the land yields a large total, and all at 
a high final rate, so that the labourer enjoys the 
result. In England there is a large total yield, 
but a small final yield, so that the landowner re- 
ceives a large rent and the labourer small wages. 
The more fertile land having here been long in 
cultivation, the wages of the labourer are mea- 
sured by what he can earn by cultivating sterile 
land which it only just pays to take into cul- 
tivation. 

Advantage of Capital to Industry. 

We must take great care not to confuse the 
rate of interest on capital with the whole ad- 
vantage which it confers on industry. The rate 
of interest depends on the advantage of the last 
increment of capital, and the advantages of pre- 
vious increments may be greater in almost any 
ratio. In considering the laws of utility, we found 
that an article possessing an immensely great 
total utility, for instance corn or water, might 
have a very low final degree of utility, because 
our need of it was almost entirely satisfied; 
yet the ratio of exchange always depends upon 
the final, not the previous degree of utility. The 
case is the same with capital. Some capital may 
be indispensable to a manufacture; hence the 
benefit conferred by the capital is indefinitely 
great, and were there no more capital to be had, 

278 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

the rate of interest which could be demanded, 
assuming the article manufactured to he neces- 
sary, would he almost unlimited. But as soon 
as ever a larger supply of capital becomes avail- 
able, the prior benefit of capital is overlooked. 
As free capital is always the same in quality, the 
second portion may be made to replace the first 
if needful : hence capitalists can never exact from 
labourers the whole advantages which their capital 
confers — they can exact only a rate determined by 
the advantage of the last increment. A lender of 
capital cannot say to a borrower who wants £3,000 
— ‘ I know that £1,000 is indispensable to your 
business, and therefore will charge you 100 per 
cent, interest upon it ; for the second j6l,000, which 
is less necessary, I will charge 20 per cent. ; and 
as upon the third £1,000 you can only earn the 
common profit, I will only ask 6 per cent.’ The 
answer would be, that there are many people 
only earning 5 per cent, on their capital who 
would be glad to lend enough at a small advance 
of interest ; and it is a matter of indifference who 
is the lender. 

The general result of the tendency to uniformity 
of interest is, that employers of capital always 
get it at the lowest prevailing rate; they always 
borrow the capital which is least necessary to 
others, and either the labourers themselves, or 
the public generally as consumers, gather all the 

279 

Theory of Cai^ital. 

excess of advantage. To illustrate this result, let 
distances along the line ox, in Fig. XIII, mark 
quantities of capital employing in any branch of 
industry a fixed number of labourers. Let the 
area of the curve denote the whole produce of 
labour and capital. Thus to the capital, on, re- 
sults a produce measured by the area of the curvi- 
linear figure between the upright lines oy and qn. 
But the amount of increased produce which would 

he due to an increment of capital would be mea- 
sured by the line qn, so that this will represent 
F't (p. 267). The interest of the capital will be 
its amount, on, multiplied by the rate qn, or the 
area of the rectangle oq. The remainder of the 
produce, ;pqry, will belong to the labourer. But 
had less capital been available, say not more than 
om, its rate of interest would have been measured 
by pm, the amount of interest by the rectangle op. 

280 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

while the labourer must have remained contented 
with the smaller share, psy. I will not say that 
the above diagram represents with strict accuracy 
the relations of capital, produce, wages, rate of 
interest, and amount of interest ; but it may serve 
roughly to illustrate their relations. I see no way 
of representing exactly the theory of capital in 
the form of a diagram. 

Are Articles in the Consumers hands Capital f 

The views of the nature of capital expressed 
in this chapter generally agree with those enter- 
tained by Ricardo and varioiis other economists; 
but there is one point in which the theory leads 
me to a result at variance with the opinions of 
almost all writers. I feel quite unable to adopt 
the opinion that the moment goods pass into the 
possession of the consumer they cease altogether 
to have the attributes of capital. This doctrine 
descends to us from the time of Adam Smith, 
and has generally received the undoubting assent 
of his followers. The latter, indeed, have gene- 
rally omitted all notice of such goods, treating 
them as if no longer under the view of the eco- 
nomist. Adam Smith, although he denied the 
possessions of a consumer the name of capital, 
took care to enumerate them as part of the stock 
of the community. He divides into three portions 

281 

Theory of Cajyital. 

the general stock of a country, and while the 
second and third portions are fixed and circulating 
capital, the first is described as follows' — 

‘The first is that portion which is reserved for 
immediate consumption, and of -which the cha- 
racteristic is, that it atfords no revenue or profit. 
It consists in the stock of food, clothes, household 
furniture, &c., which have been purchased by their 
proper consumers, but which are not yet entirely 
consumed. The whole stock of mere dwelling- 
houses too subsisting at any one time in the 
country, make a part of this first portion. The 
stock that is laid out in a house, if it is to be the 
dwelling-house of the proprietor, ceases from that 
moment to serve in the function of a capital, or to 
afford any revenue to its owner. A dwelling-house, 
as such, contributes nothing to the revenue of its 
inhabitant ; and though it is, no doubt, extremely 
useful to him, it is as his clothes and household 
furniture are useful to him, which, however, make 
a part of his expense, and not of his revenue.’ 

MacCulloch, indeed, in his edition of the ‘ Wealth 
of Nations’ (p. 121), has remarked upon this pas- 
sage, that ‘ The capital laid out in building houses 
for such persons is employed as much for the 
public advantage as if it were vested in the tools 
or instruments they make use of in their respec- 
tive businesses,’ He appears, in fact, to reject the 

i ‘Wealth of Nations/ book ii. chap. 1, twelfth paragraph. 

282 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

doctrine, and it is surprising that economists have 
generally acquiesced in Adam Smith's view, though 
it leads to manifest contradictions. It leads to the 
absurd conclusion, that the very same thing ful- 
filling the very same purposes will be capital or 
not according to its accidental ownership. To 
procure good port wine, it is necessary to keep it 
for a number of years, and Adam Smith would 
not deny that a stock of wine kept in the wine 
merchant’s possession for this purpose is capital, 
because it yields him revenue. If a consumer 
buys it Avhen new, and keeps it to improve, it 
will not be capital, although it is evident that 
he gains the same profit as the merchant by buy- 
ing it at a lower price. If a coal merchant lays 
in a stock of coal when cheap, to sell when dear, 
it is capital ; but if a consumer lays in a stock, it 
is not. 

Adam Smith’s views seem to be founded upon 
a notion, that capital ought to give an annual 
revenue or increase of wealth like a field yields 
a crop of corn or grass. Speaking of a dwelling- 
house, he says ; ‘ If it is to be let to a tenant for 
rent, as the house itself can produce nothing, the 
tenant must always pay the rent out of some 
other revenue, which he derives either from labour, 
or stock, or land. Though a house, therefore, may 
yield a revenue to its proprietor, and thereby serve 
in the function of a capital to him, it cannot yield 

283 

Theory of Cajpitah 

any to the public, nor serve in the function of a 
capital to it, and the revenue of the whole body 
of the people can never be in the smallest degree 
increased by it. Clothes and household furniture, 
ill the same manner, sometimes yield a revenue, 
and thereby serve in the function of a capital 
to particular persons. In countries where mas- 
querades are common, it is a trade to let out 
masquerade dresses for a night. Upholsterers fre- 
quently let furniture by the month, or by the year. 
Undertakers let the furniture of funerals by the 
day and by the week. Many people let furnished 
houses, and get a rent, not only for the use of the 
house, but for that of the furniture. The revenue, 
however, which is derived from such things, must 
always be ultimately di-awn from some other 
source of revenue k.’ 

This notion that people live upon a kind of net 
revenue flowing in to them appears to be derived 
from the old French economists, and plays no part 
in modern Economics. Nothing is more requisite 
than a dwelling-house, and if a person cannot hire 
a house at the required spot, he must And capital 
to build it. I think that no economist would 
refuse to count among the fixed capital of the 
country that which is sunk in dwelling-houses. 
Capital is sunk in farming that we may have 

^ ‘Wealth of Nations,’ book ii. chap. 1, twelfth paragraph 
continued. 

284 

The Theory of Political JEconomy. 

bread, in cotton-mills that we may be clothed, 
and why not in houses that we may be lodged? 
If land yields an annual revenue of corn and 
wool, milk, beef, and other necessaries, houses 
yield a revenue of shelter and comfort. The sole 
end of all industry is to satisfy our wants; and 
if capital is requisite to supply shelter, and fur- 
niture and useful utensils, as it undoubtedly is, 
why refuse it the name which it bears in all other 
employments ? 

Can we deny that the property of a hotel- 
keeper is capital and yields a I'evenue to its 
owner? Yet it is invested in pots and pans, and 
beds, and all kinds of common furniture. In 
America it is not uncommon for people to live 
all their lives in hotels or boarding-houses; and 
we might readily conceive the system to advance 
until no one would undertake housekeeping except 
as a profession. Now if we allow to what is in- 
vested in hotels, hired furnished houses, lodgings, 
and the like, the nature of capital, I do not see 
how we can refuse it to common houses. We should 
thus be led into all kinds of absurdities. 

For instance, if two people live in their own 
houses, these are not, according to present opinion, 
capital; if they find it convenient to exchange 
houses and pay rent each to the other, the houses 
are capital. At great watering-places like Brighton 
it is a regular business to lease houses, fill them 

Theory of Capital. 

285 

with furniture, and then let them for short periods 
as furnished houses ; surely it is capital which is 
embarked in the trade. If a private individual 
happens to own a furnished house which he does 
not at the time want, and lets it, can we refuse 
to regard his house and furniture as capital? 
Whenever one person provides the articles and 
another uses them and pays rent, there is capital. 
Surely, then, if the same person uses and owns 
them, the nature of the things is not funda- 
mentally different. There is no need for a money 
payment to pass; hut every person who keeps 
accurate accounts should debit those accounts with 
an annual charge for interest and depreciation on 
what he has invested in house and furniture. 
Housekeeping is an occupation involving wages, 
capital and interest, like any other business, ex- 
cept that the owner consumes the whole result. 

By accepting this view of the subject, we shall 
avoid endless difficulties. What, for instance, 
shall Ave say to a theatre? Is it not the product 
of capital? Can it be erected without capital? 
Does it not return interest, if successful, like any 
cotton mill, or steam vessel? If the economist 
agrees to this, he must allow, on similar grounds, 
that a very large part of the aggregate capital 
of the country is invested in theatres, hotels, 
schools, lecture rooms, and institutions of various 
kinds which do not belong to the industry of the 

286 

21ie Theory of Political Economy. 

country, taken in a narrow sense, but which none 
the less contribute to the wants of its inha- 
bitants, Avhich is the sole object of all industry. 

I may add, that even the food, clothes, and 
many other possessions of extensive classes are 
often indubitable capital; they are bought upon 
credit, and interest is undoubtedly paid for the 
capital sunk in them by the dealers. There is 
hardly, I suppose, a man of fashion in London who 
walks in his own clothes, and the tailors find in 
the practice a very profitable investment for capital. 
Except among the poorer classes, and often among 
them, food is seldom paid for until after it is con- 
sumed. Interest must be paid one way or another 
upon the capital thus absorbed. Whether or not 
these articles in the consumers’ hands are capital, 
at any rate they have capital invested in them — 
that is, labour has been spent upon them of which 
the whole benefit is not enjoyed at once. 

I might also point oijt at almost any length, 
that the stock of food, clothing, and other requi- 
site articles of subsistence in the country are a 
main part of capital according to the statements 
of J. S. Mill, Professor Fawcett, and most other 
economists. Now what does it really matter if 
these articles happen to lie in the warehouses of 
traders, or in private houses, so long as there is 
a stock ? At present it is the practice for farmers 
and corn merchants to hold the produce of the 

287 

Theory of Capital. 

harvest until the public buys and consumes it. 
Surely the stock of corn is capital. But if it 
were the practice of every housekeeper to buy 
up corn in the autumn and keep it in a private 
granary, would it not serve in exactly the same 
way to subsist the population ? Would not every- 
thing go on exactly the same, except that every 
one would be his own capitalist in regard to corn 
in place of paying farmers and corn merchants for 
doing the business ? 

CHAPTER VIIT. 

CONCLUDING REMARKS. 

The Doctrine of Population. 

It is no part of my purpose in this work to 
attempt to trace out, with any approach to com- 
pleteness, the results of the theory given in the 
preceding chapters. When the views of the nature 
of Value, and the general method of treating the 
subject by the application of the fluxional cal- 
culus, have received some recognition and accept- 
ance, it will he time to think of results. I shall 
therefore only occupy a few more pages in point- 
ing out the branches of economic doctrine which 
have been passed over, and in indicating their 
connection with the theory. 

The doctrine of population has been conspicu- 
ously absent, not because I doubt in the least its 
truth and vast importance, but because it forms 
no part of the direct problem of Economics. I 
do not remember to have seen it remarked that 

Concluding Remarks. 

289 

it is an inversion of the problem to treat labour 
as a varying quantity, when we originally start 
with labour as the first element of production, 
and aim at the most economical employment of 
that labour. The problem of Economics may, as 
it seems to me, be stated thus; — Given, a cer- 
tain population, with various needs and powers of 
production, in possession of certain lands and other 
sources of material: required, the mode of employ- 
ing their labour which will maximise the utility of 
the produce. It is what mathematicians would 
call a change of the variable, afterwards to treat 
that labour as variable which was originally a 
fixed quantity. It really amounts to altering the 
conditions of the problem so as to create at each 
change a new problem. The same results, how- 
ever, would generally be obtained by supposing 
the other conditions to vai’y. Given, a certain 
population, we may imagine the land and capital 
at their disposal to be greater or less, and may 
then trace out the results which will, in many 
respects, be applicable respectively to a less or 
greater population with tlie original land and 
capital. 

Relation of Wages and Profit. 

There is another inversion of the problem of 
Economics which is generally made in works 
upon the subject. Although labour is the start- 

u 

290 The Theory of Political Economy. 

ing-point in production, and the interests of the 
labourer the very subject of the science, yet eco- 
nomists do not progress far before they suddenly 
turn round and treat labour as a commodity 
which is bought up by capitalists. Labour be- 
comes itself the object of the laws of supply and 
demand, instead of those laws acting in the dis- 
tribution of the products of labour. Economists 
have invented, too, a very simple theory to deter- 
mine the rate at which capital can buy up labour. 
The average rate of wages, they say, is found by 
dividing the whole amount of capital appropriated 
to the payment of wages by the number of the 
labourers paid ; and they wish us to believe that 
this settles the question. But a little consider- 
ation shows that this proposition is simply a truism. 
The average rate of wages must he equal to what is 
appropriated to the purpose divided hy the num- 
ber who share it. The whole question will con- 
sist in determining how much is appropriated for 
the purpose; for it certainly need not be the 
whole existing amount of circulating capital. Mill 
distinctly says, that because industry is limited 
by capital, we are not to infer that it always 
reaches that limit ^ ; and, as a matter of fact, we 
often observe that there is abundance of capital 
to be had at low rates of interest, while there are 
also large numbers of artisans starving for want 
» ‘ Principles of Political Economy/ book i. chap. 6, § 2, 

Concluding Remarks. 

291 

of employment. The wage-fund theory is there- 
fore illusory as a real solution of the problem, 
though I do not deny that it may have a certain 
limited and truthful application, to be shortly 
considered. 

Another part of the current doctrines of Eco- 
nomics determines the rate of profit of capitalists 
in a very simple manner. The whole produce 
of industry must be divided into the portions 
paid as rent, taxes, profits, and wages. We may 
exclude taxes as exceptional, and not very im- 
portant. Rent also may be eliminated, for it is 
essentially variable, and is reduced to zero in the 
case of the poorest land cultivated. We thus 
arrive at the simple equation — 

Produce = profit -l- wages. 

A plain result also is drawn from the formula; 
for we are told that if wages rise, profits must 
fall, and vice versd. But such a doctrine is radi- 
cally fallacious; it involves the attempt to deter- 
mine two unknown quantities from one equation. 
I grant that if the produce be a fixed amount, 
then if wages rise profits must fall, and vice versd. 
Something might perhaps be made of this doc- 
trine if Ricardo’s theory of a natural rate of 
wages, that which is just sufficient to support 
the labourer, held true. But I altogether ques- 
tion the existence of any such rate. 

The wages of working men in this kingdom 

u 2 

292 The Theory of Political Economy. 

vary from perhaps ten shillings a week up to 
forty shillings or more; the minimum in one part 
of the country is not the minimum in another. 
It is utterly impossible, too, to define exactly what 
are the necessaries of life. I am inclined, there- 
fore, to reject altogether the current doctrines as 
to the rate of wages ; and even if the theory held 
true of any one class of labourers separately, there 
is the additional difficulty that we have to account 
for the very different rates which prevail in dif- 
ferent trades. It is impossible that we should 
accept for ever Ricardo’s sweeping simplification 
of the subject, involved in his assumption, that 
there is a natural ordinary rate of wages for com- 
mon labour, and that all higher rates are merely 
exceptional instances, to be explained away on 
other grounds. 

The view which I accept concerning the rate of 
wages is not more difficult to comprehend than the 
current one. It is that the wages of a working man 
are ultimately coincident with what he produces, 
after the deduction of rent, taxes, and the interest 
of capital. I think that in the equation 
Produce = profit + wages, 

the quantity of produce is essentially variable, and 
that profit is the part to be' first determined. If 
we resolve profit into wages of superintendence, 
insurance against risk, and interest, the first part 
is really wages itself; the second equalises the 

Concluding Remarlis. 

293 

result in dilferent employments; and the interest 
is, I believe, determined as stated in the last chapter. 
The reader will observe the important qualification, 
that wages^ are only ultimately thus determined — 
that is, in the long run, and on the average of any 
one branch of employment. 

The fact that workmen are not their own capi- 
talists introduces complexity into the problem. 
The capitalists, or entrepreneurs, enter as a distinct 
interest. It is they who project and manage 
a branch of production, and form estimates as to 
the expected produce. It is the amount of this 
produce which incites them to invest capital and 
buy up labour. They pay the lowest current rates 
for the kind of labour required ; and if the pro- 
duce exceeds the average, those who are first in 
the field make large profits. This soon induces 
competition on the part of other capitalists, who, 
in trying to obtain good workmen, will raise the 
rate of wages. Competition will proceed until the 
point is reached at which only the market rate 
of interest is obtained for the capital invested. At 
the same time wages will have been so raised, that 
the workmen reap the whole excess of produce, 
unless indeed the price of the produce has fallen, 
and the public, as consumers, have the benefit. 
Whether this latter result will follow or not, 
depends upon the number of labourers who are 
fitted for the work. Where much skill and educa- 

294 The Theory of Political Economy. 

tion is required, extensive competition will be 
impossible, and a permanently high rate of wages 
will exist. But if only common labour is requisite, 
the price of the goods cannot be maintained, wages 
will fall to their former point, and the public will 
gain the advantage of cheaper supplies. 

It will be observed, that this account of the 
matter involves the temporary application of the 
w'age-fund theory. It is the proper function of 
capitalists to sustain labour before the result is 
accomplished, and as many branches of industry 
require a large outlay long previous to any definite 
result being arrived at, it follows that capitalists 
must undertake the risk of any branch of industry 
where the ultimate profits are not accurately 
known. But we now have some clue as to the 
amount of capital which will be appropriated 
to the payment of wages in any trade. The 
amount of capital will depend upon the amount 
of anticipated profits, and the competition to obtain 
proper workmen will strongly tend to secure to the 
latter all their legitimate share in the ultimate 
produce. 

For instance, let a number of schemes be set on 
foot for laying telegraphic cables. The ultimate 
profits are very uncertain, depending upon the 
utility of the cables as compared with their cost. 
If capitalists make a large estimate of those pro- 
fits, they will apply much capital to the imme- 

Concluding Remarks. 295 

diate manufacture of the cables. All workmen 
competent at the moment to be employed will be 
hired, and high wages paid if necessary. Every 
man who has peculiar skill, knowledge, or experi- 
ence, rendering his assistance valuable, will be 
hired at any requisite cost. At this point it is the 
wage-fund theory that is in operation. But, after 
a certain number of years, the condition of affairs 
will be totally different. Capitalists will learn, by 
experience, exactly what the profits of cables may 
be ; that amount of capital will be thrown into 
the work which finds the average amount of profits, 
and neither more nor less. The cost of transmit- 
ting , messages will be reduced by competition, so 
that no excessive profits will be made by any 
of the parties concerned ; the rate of wages, there- 
fore, of every species of labour will be reduced to 
the average proper to labour of that degree of skill. 
But if there be required in any branch of the work 
a very special kind of skilled and experienced 
labour, it will not be affected by competition in the 
same way, and the wages or salary will remain 
high. 

I think that it is in this way quite possible to 
reconcile theories which are at first sight so dif- 
ferent. The wage-fund theory acts in a wholly 
temporary manner. Every labourer ultimately 
receives the due value of his produce after paying 
a proper fraction to the capitalist for the remunera- 

296 The Theory of Political Economy. 

tion of abstinence and risk. At the same time 
workers of different degrees of skill, receive very 
different shares according as they contribute a com- 
mon or a scarce kind of labour to the result. 

Professor Hearn's Views. 

I have the more, pleasure and confidence in 
putting forward these somewhat heretical views 
concerning the general problem of Economics, in- 
asmuch as they are nearly identical with those 
arrived at by Professor Hearn, of Melbourne Univer- 
sity. It would be a somewhat long task to trace 
out exactly the coincidence of opinions between us, 
but he certainly adopts the notion that the capitalist 
merely buys up temporarily the prospects of the 
concern he manages and the labourers he employs. 
Thus he says — ‘ In place of having a share in the 
undertaking, the co-operator sells for a stipulated 
price his labour or the use of his capital. The case 
therefore comes within the ordinary conditions of 
exchange ; and the price of labour and the price 
of capital are determined in the same manner as 
all other questions of price are determined. Yet 
the general character of the partnership is not 
destroyed. Although each particular transaction 
amounts to a sale, yet for the continuance of the 
business a nearer connection arises. Although the 
whole loss of the undertaking, if the undertaking 

Concluding Remarks. 

297 

be unfortunate, falls upon the last proprietor, and 
the interests of the other parties have been previ- 
ously secured, yet each such loss prevents a repeti- 
tion of the transaction from which it arose. The 
capital which ought to have been replaced, and 
which if replaced would have alforded the means 
of employing labour and of defraying the interest 
upon other capital, has disappeared ; and thus the 
market for labour and for capital is by so much 
diminished. Both the labourer and the interme- 
diate capitalist are therefore directly concerned 
in the success of every enterprise towards which 
they have contributed. If it be successful, they 
feel the advantage; if it be not successful, they 
feel in like manner the loss. But this community 
of interest is no longer direct, but is indirect 
merely; and it arises not from the gains or the 
losses of partners, but from the increased ability, 
or the diminished demands, of customers 

This passage really contains a statement of the 
views which I am inclined wholly to accept; but 
no passages which I can select will convey an 
adequate notion of the enlightened view which 
Professor Hearn takes of the industrial structure 
of society in his admirable work on Plutology. 

b ‘ Plutology : or the Theory of the Efforts to satisfy human 
wants/ By William Edward Hearn, LL.D., Professor of History 
and Political Economy in the University of Melbourne, London 
(Macmillan and Co.), 1864, p. 329. 

298 The Theory of Political Economy. 

The Noxious Influence of Authority. 

I have but a few lines more to add. I have ven- 
tured in the preceding pages to call in question not 
a few of the favouiite doctrines of economists. To 
me it is far more pleasant to agree than to differ ; 
but it is impossible that one who has any regard 
for truth can long avoid protesting against doctrines 
which seem to him to be erroneous. There is ever 
a tendency of the most hurtful kind to allow 
opinions to crystallise into ci*eeds. Especially does 
this tendency manifest itself when some eminent 
author, enjoying power of clear and comprehensive 
exposition, becomes recognised as an authority. 
His works may perhaps be the best which are 
extant upon the subject in question ; they may 
combine more truth with less error than we can 
elsewhere meet. But ‘to err is human,’ and the 
best works should ever be open to criticism. If, 
instead of welcoming inquiry and criticism, the 
admirers of a great author accept his writings as 
authoritative, both in their excellences and in 
their defects, the most serious injury is done to 
truth. In matters of philosophy and science author- 
ity has ever been the great opponent of truth. 
A despotic calm is usually the triumph of error. 
In the republic of the sciences sedition and even 
anarchy are beneficial in the long run to the 
greatest happiness of the greatest number. 

Concluding Remarks. 

299 

In the physical sciences authority has greatly 
lost its noxious influence. Chemistry, in its brief 
existence of a centiiry, has undergone three or four 
complete revolutions of theory. In the science of 
light, Newton’s own authority was decisively set 
aside, though not until after it had retarded for 
nearly a century the progress of inquiry. Astro- 
nomers have not hesitated, within the last few 
years, to alter their estimates of all the dimensions 
of the planetary system, and of the universe, be- 
cause good reasons have been shown for calling 
in question the real coincidence of previous mea- 
surements. In science and philosophy nothing 
must be held sacred. Truth indeed is sacred ; but, 
as Pilate said, ‘What is truth?’ Show us the un- 
doubted infallible criterion of absolute truth, and 
we will hold it as a sacred inviolable thing. But 
in the absence of that infallible criterion, we 
have all an equal right to grope about in our 
search of it, and no body and no school nor 
clique must be allowed to set up a standard of 
orthodoxy which shall bar the freedom of scientific 
inquiry. 

I have added these words because I think there 
is some fear of the too great influence of author- 
itative writers in Political Economy. I protest 
against deference for any man, whether John Stuart 
Mill, or Adam Smith, or Aristotle, being allowed 
to check inquiry. Our science has become far too 

300 

The Theory of Political Economy. 

much a stagnant one, in which opinions rather 
than experience and reason are appealed to. 

There are valuable suggestions towards the im- 
provement of the science contained in the works 
of such writers as Senior, Cairnes, Macleod, Cliffe- 
Leslie, Hearn, Shadwell, not to mention a long 
series of French economists from Baudeau and 
Le Trosne down to Bastiat and Courcelle-Seneuil ; 
but they are neglected in England, because the 
excellence of their works was not comprehended 
by David Ricardo, the two Mills, Professor Fawcett, 
and others who have made the orthodox Ricardian 
school what it is. Under these circumstances it is 
a positive serviee to break the monotonous repeti- 
tion of current questionable doctrines, even at the 
risk of new error. I trust that the theory now 
given may prove accurate ; but, however this may 
be, it will not be useless if it cause inquiry to be 
directed into the true basis and form of a science 
which touches so directly the material welfare of 
the human race. 

FINIS. 

APPENDIX I. 

List of Mathematico-Economic Books, Memoirs, and other 

published writings. 

Bemarks upon the purpose and some of the contents of this list 

will be found in the preface to the second edition of this book. 

1720. Hutcheson (Francis). An Inquiry into the Original of 
our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue. London, 8vo. (3rd Edition, 
1729, xxii, 304 pp.) 

1728. Hutcheson (Francis). An Essay on the Nature and 
Conduct of the Passions and Affections, with Illustrations on 
the Moral Sense. London, 8vo. xxiv, 333 pp. 

1765. Begcaria (Cesare). Tentative analitico sui contrab- 
bandi. Estratto dal foglio periodico intitolato : II Caffe (vol. i. 
Brescia). Custodies Scrittori classic! Italian! di Economia politica. 
Parte Moderna, vol. xii, pp. 235-241. Milano, 1804. 

1771. Anonymous. An Essay on the Theory of Money. London, 
8 VO. 161 pp. (attributed to Major-General Henry Lloyd). 

1776. Condillac (Etienne Bonnot de). Le Commerce et le 
Gouvernement. Paris, 

1781. Anonymous (A. N. Isnard). Trait6 des Bichesses. Londres 
et Lausanne, 2 vols. 8vo. xxiv, 344, 327 pp. 

1792. SiLio (Guglielmo). Saggio sulU Influenza dell’ Analisi 
nelle scienze politiche ed economiche. (In vol. v. of the collec- 
tion Nuova Baccolta d’ opuscoli di Autori Sicilian!. Palermo), 

1793. Lang. Historische Entwickelung der Deutschen Steuerver- 
fassung. Riga, 

1801. Canard (Nicolas Francois). Principes d’Economie Poli- 
tique : Ouvrage couronn^ par rinstitut. Paris, 8vo. 384 pp. 

1801. Canard (Nicolas Fran 9 ois). M^moire sur la question 

302 Appendix 1. 

s'il est vrai que, dans un pays agricole, toute esp^ce d’impot 
retombe sur les propri^taires fonciers* Paris, 

1802. Brisson (B.) Essai sur la Navigation. Paris, 

1802. Kroncke (C.). Versuch einer Theorie des Euhrwerks mit 
Anvendung auf dem Strassenbau. Giessen, 8vo. 

1804. Kroncke (C.). Das Steuerwesen nach seiner Natur und 
seinen Wirkungen untersucbt. Giessen. 8vo. 

1807. Lakg. Ueber den obersten Grundsatz der Politisclien 
Oeconomie. Riga, 8vo. 

1815. Buquoy (G. Graf von). Theorie der Nationalwirthscliaft 
nacb einem neuen Plane, und nach mebreren eigenen Ansichten 
dargestellt. Leijpzig ] hierzu 3 Nachtrage, 1816—18, 4 to. 

524 pp. 

1824. Thompson (T. Perronet). Westminster Eeview, No. I, vol. i, 
pp. 171-205. Article on the Instrument of Exchange. (Re- 
printed in 1830, 27 pp.) 

1825. Ftjoco (Francesco). Saggi Economici. Priina Serie. 2 tom, 
8vo. Pisa, 1825-27. 

1829. Whewell (William). Mathematical Exposition of some 
Doctrines of Political Economy. Cambridge Philosophical 
Transactions, vol. iii, pp. 191-230. Cambridge. 4 to. 

J831. Walras (Auguste). De la Nature de la Richesse et de 
Torigine de la Valeur, Paris. 8vo. xxiv, 334 pp. 

1831. Whewell (William). Mathematical Exposition of the 
Leading Doctrines in Mr. Ricardo's ‘ Principles of Political 
Economy and Taxation.’ Cambridge Philosophical Transactions, 
vol. iv, pp. 155-198. Cambridge. 4to. 

1832. Lube (D. G.) Argument against the Gold Standard. 
London, 8vo. iv 192 pp. 

1838. Cournot (Augustin). Recherches sur les Principes Math4- 
matiques de la Theorie des Richesses. Pa/ris, 8vo. xi, 
198 pp. 

1838. Tozer (John). Mathematical Investigation of the Effect of 
Machinery on the Wealth of a Community in which it is 
employed, and on the Fund for the Payment of Wages. Cam- 
bridge Philosophical Transactions, vol. vi, pp. 507-522, 
Cambridge. 4to. 

Mathematico-Economic Books. 

303 

1839, Hageist (Karl Heinrich). Von der Staat&lehre und von der 
Vorbereitung zum Dienste in der Staatsverwaltung. Aufsatze 
gerichtet an angehende Cameralisten, zunachst an seine Herren 
Zuhorer, von K. H. H. Koenigsherg, 8vo. 477 pp. 

1840. Anonymous. On Currency, London (Charles Knight and 
Co.). 8vo. viii, 43, xxi pp. 

1840. Tozer (John). On the Effect of the Non-Residence of 
Landlords, &c., on the Wealth of a Community. Cambridge 
Philosophical Transactions, vol. vii, pp. 189-196. Cambridge. 
4to. 

1842. Thompson (T. Perronet). Exercises, Political and others, 
Yol. iii, pp. 295-343. On the Instrument of Exchange. See 
1824, Thompson. 

1844. Dupuit (Etienne Juvenal). De la Mesure de rUtilit6 
des Travaux Publics. Annales des Ponts et Chauss^es. 2® s^rie. 
Tome viii, pp. 332-375. Pa/ris. 8vo. 

1844. Hagen (K. H.). Die Nothwendigkeit der Handelsfreiheit 
fiir das Nationaleinkommen, mathematisch nachgewiesen. Koe- 
nig sherg. 8 VO. 32 pp. 

1844. Hagen (K. H.). System of Political Economy. Translated 
from the German by John Prince Smith. London. 8vo. 
viii, 88 pp. 

1844. De Quincy (Thomas). Logic of Political Economy. 
Edinburgh^ London. 8vo, 260 pp. 

1847. Boedas. De la Mesure de TUtilit^ des Travaux Publics. 
Annales des Ponts et Chauss^es, 1847, l®r semestre, 2»i® s6rie, 
tome xiii, p. 249. Paris. 8vo. 

1848. Mill (John Stuart). Principles of Political Economy, with 
some of their applications to Social Philosophy. London. 2 
vols. 8vo. (Book iii, chapters xvii, xviii. See 3rd Edition, 
1852, vol ii. pp. 143-4. 

1849. Esmenard DU Mazet (Camille). Nouveaux Principea 
d’Economie Politique. Paris. 8vo. ix, 456 pp. 

1849. Dupuit (E. J.). De ITnfluence des Plages sur TUtilit^ des 
Voies de Communication. Annales des Ponts et Chauss4es. 
No. 207. 2® serle, 1849, 1®^^ semestre, Paris. 8vo. (Pp. 

170-248). 

304 Appendix 1. 

1850. Minakd. De TTIsage Gratuit des Constructions 4tablies 
aux Frais de TEtat. Annales des Fonts et Chauss^es, 2® s^rie, 
semestre. Paris, 8vo. (p. 27.) 

1850. Laedner (Dionysius). Railway Economy. London. 8vo. 
(Chapter xiii.) 

1850. Whewell (William). Mathematical Exposition of Certain 
Doctrines of Political Economy. Second and Third memoirs, 
Cambridge Philosophical Transactions. Vol. ix. pp. 128-149, 
and Part II, pp. [1-7]. Cambridge. 4 to. 

1851. Esmenaed DU Mazet. De la Valeur : Lettre h M. J. 
Gamier. Paris, 8vo. 

1851. De Thunen. Recherehes sur ITnfluence que le Prix des 
Grains, la Richesse du Sol, et les Impots exerccnt sur les 
Syst^mes de Culture. Traduit par Laverri^re. Paris. 8vo. 

1854. WoLKOEF (Mathieu). Opuscules sur la Rente FoncRre. 
Paris. 8 VO. 231 pp. 

1854. Gossen (Hermann Heinrich). Entwickelung der Gesetze 
des menschlichen Verkehrs, und der daraus fliessenden Regeln 
fur menschliches Handeln. Braunschweig. 8vo. 278 pp. 

1855. Jennings (Richard, M.A.). Natural Elements of Political 
Economy. London, 8vo. 275 pp. 

1856. Benner. Th^orie Math^matique de TEconomie Politique, 

1856. WoLKOFE (M.). Journal des Economistes, Aout, 1856. 
Paris, 8vo. 

1857. De Thunen. Le Salaire Naturel, et son rapport au taux de 
rinter^t. Traduit de TAllemand par Mathieu Wolkoff. Paris. 

1857. Macleod (Henry Dunning). The Elements of Political 
Economy. London. 8vo. 

1857. Boccardo (Gerolamo). Dizionario della Economia Politica 
e Commercio, &c. Torino. 4to. (Vol. ii. pp. 653-9, etc.) 

1860. Du Mesnil-Marigny. Les Libre Echangistes et'les Pro- 
tectionnistes Concili^s. 8vo. Paris. 

1861. Wolkoff (M.). Lectures d’Economie Politique Rationelle. 
Paris. 1 2 mo. 

1862. Jevons (William Stanley). Notice of a General Mathe- 
matical Theory of Political Economy. Report of the 32nd 
meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of 

Mathematico-Economic Books. 

305 

Science, held at Cambridge in October, 1862. Reports of Sec- 
tions, p. 158. London^ 1863. 8vo. 

1862. Macleod (H. D.). On the Definition and Nature of the 
Science of Political Economy. Report of the 32nd meeting 
of the British Association, &c. Reports of Sections, pp. 
159-161. 

1863. Cournot (Augustin). Principes de la Th6orie des Richesscs. 
Paris. 8 VO. iv, 527 pp. 

1863. Macleod (H. D.). A Dictionary of Political Economy: 
Biographical, Bibliographical Historical, and Practical. Vol. i. 
London. 8vo. (Article Credit, p. 567.) 

1863. Du Mesnil-Maeigny. Catechisme de rEconomm politique 
bas6e sur des principes rationncls. Paris. 18ino. 355 pp. 

1863. Mangoldt (H. von). Grundriss der Volkswirthschafts- . 
lehre. Stuttgart, xvi, 224. 

1864. Eauveau (G.). Considerations Mathematiques sur la 
Theorie de Tlmpot. Paris. 8vo. 64 pp. 

1865. Knapp (George Friedrich). Zur Prufung der Untcrsuchungen 
Thiinen’s fiber Lohn uud Zinsfuss im isolirten Staate. Braun^ 
schweig. 8vo. 35 pp. 

1866. Jevons (W. S.). Brief Account of a General Mathematical 
Theory of Political Economy. Journal of the Statistical Society 
of London, June, 1866. Vol. xxix, pp. 282-287. London. 
8vo. 

1867. Courcelle-Seneuil (J. G.). Traite Theorique et Pratique 
d’Economie Politique. 2'“® Ed. Paris. 8vo. Tome I, livre i, 
chap. 2. 

1867. Fauveau (G.). Considerations mathematiques sur la theorie 
de la valeur. Journal des Economistes. 3® serie, 2® annee, 
t. V, pp. 31-40. 

1867. Brentano (L. J.). Ueber J. H. von Thunen's Naturge- 
massen Lohn und Zinsfuss. Gottingen. 61 pp. 

1868. Rau (Karl Heinrich). Grundsatze der Volkswirthshafts- 
lehre. Achte Ausgabe. Erste Abtheilung, p. 368. Leijgzig 
und Heidelberg. 8vo. 

1868. Jenkin (Fleeming). Trades Unions. How far Legitimate. 
North British Review, March 1858. 8vo. (Foot note.) 

X 

306 Afpeindiw I. 

1868. WoLKOFF (Mathieu). Pr6cis d’^conomie politique ration- 
nelle. Paris. In-18, 329 pp. 

1869. Fauveau (G.). Etude sur la tlieorie de Timpot. Journal 
des Economistes, 3« s6rie, 4® ann6e, t. xiii, pp. 391-403. 

1869. Fauveau (G.). L’impot sur le revenu du capital et sur le 
revenu du travail. Journal des Economistes, 3® serie, 4® ann6e, 
t. xvi, pp. 466-468, 

1869. Schumacher (H.). Ueber J. H. von Thunen^s Gesetz vom 
naturgemassen Arbeitslohiie. Rostock. 84 pp. 

1870. Jenkin (Fleeming). The Graphic Kepresentation of the 
Laws of Supply and Demand, and their application to Labour. 
Eecess Studies, edited by Sir Alexander Grant. Edinburgh. 
8vo. (pp. 151-185). 

1871. Jevons (W. S.). The Theory of Political Economy. 8vo. 
London, xvi, 267 pp. 

1871. Jenkhst (Fleeming). On the Principles which regulate the 
incidence of Taxes, Proceedings of the Poyal Society of Edin- 
burgh. Session 1871-72. (pp. 618-631). 

1871. Fauveau (G.). Pendement maximum de Timpot indirect . 
Journal des Economistes. 3® s4ric, 6® ann6e, t. xxiv, pp. 445-8. 

1872. Marchand (J.). Eecherche sur la m^thode k adopter pour 
la discussion des 414ments de la statistique. Journal des Ac- 
tuates frangais. T. i, pp. 267—273 and 393—409. 

1873. Bing og Petersen. Bestemmelse af den rationelle Arbeids- 
lon samt nogle Bemaerkninger om Oekonomiens Methode. Na- 
tionaloekonomisk Tidsskrift. Fdrste Bind, p. 296. Copenhagen. 

1873. Marchand (J.). Pecherche sur la methode adopter pour 
la discussion des <^14ments de la statistique. Journal des 
Actuates frangais. T. ii, pp. 58-78 et 251-263. 

1873. Petersen, Frederiksen, etc. Nationaloekonomisk Foren- 
ing. Diskussion om Oekonomiens Methode. Nationaloekonomisk 
Tidsskrift, Maanedsskrift for Oekonomi, etc. Andet Bind, p. 248. 
Copenhagen. 

1873. Pocket (L6on). G4om4trie des jeux de Bourse. Journal 
des Actuates frangais. T. ii, pp. 153-160. 

1873. Lefevre (H.). Physiologic et m^canique sociales. Journal 
des Actuates frangais. T. ii, pp. 211-250 et 351-388. 

Mathemaiico-Economic Boohs. 

307 

1874. Walras (L4on). Principe d'une tli4orie matli6matique de 
r^change. M^moire lu k TAcad^mie des sciences morales et poli- 
tiques (Stances des 16 et 23 aout 1873). Orleans. 8vo. 24 pp. 

1874. Jevons. et Waleas. Correspondance. Extrait du Journal 
des Economistes (numdro du 15 juin 1874). Paris. 8vo. 8 pp. 

1874. Boccaedo (Gerolamo). Dizionario Universale della Econ- 
oinia Politica e del Commercio. Milano. 8vo. 

1874. Lefevee (H.). Principe de la Science de la Bourse. 
M6tliode approuv4e par la Cliambre syndicale des Agents de 
Change de Paris. Paris. 8vo. 113 pp. 

1874. Walras (L^on). Elements d^4conomie politique pure, ou 
th^orie de la richessc sociale. Premier fascicule. Lausanne, 
Paris et Bdle. 8vo. viii, 208 pp. 

1874. Zanon (Giovanni Antonio). Sulla teoria matematica dello 
scambio del professore M. U. Walras, lettera al professore 
Alberto Errera. Estratto dalla Rassegna di Agricoltura, Indus- 
tria e Commercio. Padova. 8vo. 7 pp. 

1874. Letort (Charles). De Tapplication des math^raatiqucs k 
r^tude de Ti^conomic politique. L’Economiste frangais, 31 
octobre 1874, p. 540. 

1 874. D'Aulnis de Boueouill (Johan). Het Inkomen der Maats- 
chappij. Eene Proeve van theoretische Staathuishoudkunde. 
Leiden. 8vo. xiii, 215 pp. 

1874. Lefevre(H.). Physiologic et m4canique sociales. Journal 
des Actuaires fran^ais. T. iii, pp. 93-118. 

1874. Doemoy (Emile), Les mati^res premi6res. Etablissement 
des coefficients d’ Elaboration. Journal des Actuaires fran^ais. 
T. iii, pp. 142-162. 

1874. Avigdoe (Septime N.). Question d’6conomie sociale. 
Journal des Actuaires fran^ais. T. iii, pp. 300-306. 

1874. Maechand (J.). Bechcrchc sur la mcthode k adopter pour 
la discussion des 614ments de la statistique. Journal des 
Actuaires fran9ais. T. iii, pp. 307—325. 

1875. Jevons (W. Stanley). The progress of the mathematical 
theory of Political Economy, with an explanation of the prin- 
ciples of the theory. Transactions of the Manchester Statistical 
Society, pp. 1-19. 8vo. (Read Nov. 11, 1874.) 

X 2 

308 

Appendix /. 

1875. Darwin (Goorge H.). The Theory of Exchange Value; 
Fortnightly Deview. New series. Yol. xvii, pp. 243-253. 
London, 8vo. 

1875. Boccaedo (Gerolamo). Del metoclo in economia politica. 
Estratto dal Giornale degli Economisti. Padova. 8vo. 23 pp. 

1875. Boccardo (Gerolamo). Deconomia politica odierna come 
scienza le come ordinamento socialc. Introduzione generale alia 
Biblioteca deir Economigta. 3^ serie, pp. 1-43. 

1875. Ereeea (Alberto). Appunto bibliografico. 6l6ment3 
d’(^conomie politique pure par L4on Walras. Estratto dal 
giornale La Perseveranza. Milano. 18mo. 16 pp. 

1875. Boccardo (Gerolamo). Dell’ applicazione dei metodi 
quantitativi alle scienze cconomiche, statistiehe o sociali. Saggio 
di logica cconomica. Prefazione al 2^ volume della Biblioteca 
deir Economista. Pp. i.— Ixxii. 

1875. Whewell (W.). Esposizione matematica di alcune dot- 
trine di economia politica. Due Memorie. Biblioteca delV 
Economista. 3^ serie. Vol. ii, pp. 1-G5. 

1875. Cournot (Agostino). Biccrche intorno ai principii mate- 
matici della teorica delle ricchezze. Biblioteca delP Economista. 
3^ serie. Yol. ii, pp. 67-170. 

1875. Jevons (W. Stanley). La teorica dell’ economia politica. 
Biblioteca dell’ Economista. 3'^ serie. Vol. ii, pp. 173-311. 

1875. Newcomb (Simon). North American Review, No.CCXLIX. 
Review of Cairnes’ Logical Method of Political Economy. 

1875. Pierson (N. G.). Grondbcginselen der Staathuishoud- 
kunde. Haarlem. 1875-6. 2 vols. 

1875. Achard (M. a.). Influence des taxes qui frappent les 
obligations sur leur prix d’apr^s un taux d4termin6. Journal 
des Actuaires fran^ais. T. iv, pp. 70-74. 

1875. Fontaneau (E.). Principes de chr^matistique. Journal 
des Actuaires fran^ais. T. iv, pp. 75-83 et 151-172. 

1875. Laurent (II.). Demonstration simple du principe de 
M. Menier. Journal des Actuaires fran 9 ais, T. iv, pp. 
84-87 (also printed in MeniePs Theorie ct Application de I’lm- 
pot sur le Capital. 2^^. Ed. Paris. 1875. 12mo. Appendice, 

pp, 607-12). 

Mathematico-Economic Books . 

309 

1875. Fontaneau (E.) Do la valeur. Journal des Actuaircs 
fran^ais. T. iv, pp. 175-199 et 267-277. 

1875. Falck (G. von). Die Thunensche Lehre vom Blldungsgesetz 
dcs Zinsfusses und vom naturgemjissen Arbeitslohn. Ldi)zig. 
55 pp. 

1876. Walras (Leone). Un nuovo ramo della matematica. 

Deir applicazione delle matematiche all’economia politica. 
Estratto dal Giornale degli Economisti. Padova. 8vo. Vol. iii. 
Fascicolo N. I. Aprile, 1876. 40 pp. 

1876. Walras (L(5on). Equations de l’6cliange. Equations de 
la production. M^moircs lus a la Society vaudoise des sciences 
naturelles. (Stances des 1^^^ ct 15 d^cembrc 1875, 19 janvier ct 
16 fevrier 1876.) Lausanne. 8vo. 66 pp. 

1876. Zambelli (Andrea). La tcoria matematica dcllo scambio 
del signor Leone Walras. Lettera diretta al prof. Errera dott. 
Alberto. Padova. Gr. in- 8. 28 pp. 

1876. Jevons (W. Stanley). The Future of Political Economy. 
Fortnightly Review, Kovember 1, 1876. vol. xx. pp. 617-631. 

1876. Walras (L4oii). Equations de la capitalisation. 

nioire lu k la Soci^te vaudoise des sciences naturelles (Seance du 
5 juillet 1876). 8vo. 40 pp. 

1876. Fontaneau (E.). Chr(^matistiquc. Journal dcs Actuaires 
fran^ais. T. v, pp. 70-96 et 341-365. 

1876. Madsen (C. L.). Den Sandsynlige Lov for den inter- 
nationale Tclegraftrafik. Copenhagen. 8vo. 

1877. Madsen (C. L.). Recberclies sur la loi du Mouvemciit 
tel6grapbique international. Copenhague^ Paris. 8vo. ix, 68 
pp., avec 10 tableaux. 

1877. Jevons (W. Stanley). Lc pass6 et I’avenir de reconomie 
politique. Les m(^tbodes. Les ^conoinistes contemporains. Le 
political economy club. Journal des Economistes. Mars 1877. 
3® serie. T. xlv, pp. 325-342. 

1877. Walras (L6on). Elements d'economie politique pure, ou 
tb6orie de la richesse sociale. Deuxi^mc fascicule. Lansa^me, 
Paris et Bdle. pp. 209-407. 8vo. 

1877. Moll (L. A.). Der Werth. Eine neue Theorie dcssclbcn. 
Leipzig. 48 pp. 

MO Appendia? I. 

L878. Westeegaard (Harald). Den Sandsynlige Lov for den 
internationale Telegraftrafik Anmeldt af H. W. National- 
oekonomisk Tidsskrift. Bind xi. Co^penhagen. 8vo. 

[878. Du Mesnil-Maeigny. D^conomie politique deveniie 
science exacte ou les libre-6changistes et les protec tionnistes 
concili^s. 3® edition. Paris, Gr. in-8. 413 pp. 

L878. Waleas (Leone). Teoria matematica della richezza sociale. 
Quattro memorie lette all* Accademia delle science morali e 
politiche, a Parigi, ed alia Societa Valdese delle scienze natural!, 
a Losaima. Biblioteca dell’ Economista. 3® s6rie. Vol. ii, 
pp. 1289-1388. 

1878. Weisz (Dr. Bela, of Budapestb, Hungary). Die Matbc- 
matisc^ie Methode in der Nationalbkonomie. Hildebrandt’s 
Jahrbucher fiir Nationalokonomie und Statistik. Article YI, vol. 
xxxi, pp. 295-316. Jena. 

1878. Nicolini. Un antico Economista Matematica (Ceva). 
Giornale degli Economisti, vol. viii. fasc. 1. Oct. Padova. 8vo. 

1879. Marshall (Alfred). The Pure Theory of Foreign Trade. 
The Pure Theory of (Domestic) Values. Carnbridge. 8vo. 
Privately printed. 

1826. Thunen (Johann Heinrich von), Der isolirte Staat in 
Beziehung auf Landvvirthschaft und Nationalokonomie, oder 
Untersuchungen tlber den Einfluss, den die Getreidepreise, der 
Beichthum des Bodens und die Abgaben auf den Ackerbau 
ausiiben. Hamburg. 8vo. viii, 290 pp. 

1842. Thunen (J. H. von). Der isolirte Staat, etc. Erster 
Theil. Rostock. 8vo. xv, 391 pp. 

1850. Thunen (J. H. von). Der isolirte Staat, etc. Zweiter 
Theil. Erste Abtheilung. Der naturgemasse Arbeitslohn imd 
dessen Verhaltniss zum Zinsfuss und zur Landrente. Rostock. 
8vo. vi, 285 pp. 

1863. Thunen (J. H. von). Der isolirte Staat. Zweiter Theil. 
Zweite Abtheilung. Der naturgemasse Arbeitslohn, etc. 
Rostock. 8 VO. ix, 444 pp. 

APPENDIX n, 

List of works and papers upon Economical Subjects, by the 

author of the present book : — 

1857. Comparison of the Land and Railway Policy of New South 
Wales. The Public Lands of New South Wales. Articles in 
the Em'pire newspaper, 7th April and 23rd June. Sydney^ 
New South Wales. 

1862. Diagram, shewing all the Weekly Accounts of the Bank of 
England, since the passing of the Bank Act of 1844, with the 
Amount of Bank of England, Private, and Joint Stock Bank 
Promissory Notes in Circulation during each week, and the 
Bank Minimum Rate of Discount. London, Sheet, 20 x 30 
inches, coloured. 

This Diagram represents to the eye all the useful results of 
tables, containing about 113,000 figures. 

1862. Diagram, shewing the Price of the English Funds, the 
Price of Wheat, the Number of Bankruptcies, and the Rate of 
Discount, monthly, since 1731 ; so far as the same have been 
ascertained. London, Sheet, 20 X 30 inches, coloured. 

This Diagram is drawn from tables carefully compiled for the 
purpose, and containing more than 12,000 figures. 

Explanatory Notes and References are appended to each 
Diagram. 

1862. (1) On the Study of Periodic Commercial Fluctuations. 
With five diagrams. (2) Notice of a general Mathematical 
Theory of Political Economy. Papers read in the F section of 
the British Association at the Cambridge Meeting. Report. 
Proceedings of Sections, pp. 157-8. 

312 Appendix II. 

18G3. A serious Fall in the Value of Gold Ascertained, and its 
social effects set forth. With two diagrams. London : Edward 
Stanford, Charing Cross. 8vo. 73 pp. 

1865. The Coal Question; an Inquiry concerning the Progress of 
the Nation, and the Probable Exhaustion of our Coal Mines. 
London and Cambridge : Macmillan & Co. 8vo. xix, 349 pp. 

1865. On the Variation of Prices, and the Value of the Currency 
since 1782. Paper read before the London Statistical Society, 
May, 1865. Journal of the Statistical Society, vol. xxviii, 
pp. 294-320. With four diagrams. 

1866. On the frequent Autumnal Pressure in the Money Market, 
and the Action of the Bank of England. Paper read before the 
Statistical Society, April, 1866. Journal of the Statistical 
Society of London, vol. xxix, pp. 235-253. 

1866. Brief Account of a General Mathematical Theory of Political 
Economy. (Bead at the British Association, 1862.) Journal 
of the Statistical Society of London, vol. xxix, pp. 282-287. 

1866. The Coal Question, &c. Second edition. London. 8vo, 
xxvi, 383 pp. 

1866. An Introductory Lecture on the Importance of diffusing 

a Knowledge of Political Economy. Delivered in Owens 
College, Manchester, at the opening of the Session of Evening 
Classes, on October 12. Manchester, 12mo. 35 pp. 

1867. Science Lectures for the PeoiJe. Lecture IX. On Coal: 
its importance in manufactures and trade. Delivered in the 
Carpenters’ Hall, Manchester, January 16, 1867. (Science 
Lectures, vol. i, pp. 128-140.) 

1867. On the Analogy between the Post-office, Telegraphs, and 
other systems of Conveyance of the United Kingdom, as regards 
Government Control. Paper read before the Manchester Statis- 
tical Society, April, 1867. Transactions, 1866-7, pp. 89-104. 

1868. A Lecture on Trades’ Societies: their Objects and Policy. 
Delivered by request of the Trades Unionists’ Political Asso- 
ciation, March 31. Manchester, 8vo. 16 pp. 

1868. Lecture on the Probable Exhaustion of our Coal Mines. 
Royal Institution of Great Britain. Friday Evening, March 13, 
8vo. 7 pp. 

A^fendix II. 

313 

1868. On the International Monetary Convention, and the Intro- 
duction of an International Currency into this Kingdom. Paper 
read before the Manchester Statistical Society, May 13. Trans- 
actions, 1867-8, pp. 79-92. 

1868. On the Condition of the Metallic Currency of the United 
Kingdom, with reference to the Question of International 
Coinage. Paper read before the Statistical Society of London, 
November. Journal, See., vol. xxxi, pp. 426-464. 

1869. Letter on the Value of Gold. Economist newspaper, May 8. 
Keprinted in the Journal of the Statistical Society of London. 
December. Vol. xxxii, p. 445. 

1869. On the "Work of the Society in Connection with the 
Questions of the Day. Inaugural Address read before the 
Manchester Statistical Society, November 10, 1869. Transac- 
tions, 1869-70, pp. 1-14. 

1870. Opening Address of the President of Section F (Economic 
Science and Statistics), of the British Association for the Ad- 
vancement of Science, at the Fortieth Meeting, at Liverpool, 
September, 1870. Beport. Transactions of the Sections, 
pp. 1781-87. Journal of the Statistical Society of London, 
vol. xxxiii, pp. 309-326. 

1870. On Industrial Partnerships. A Lecture delivered under 
the auspices of the National Association for the Promotion of 
Social Science, April 5, 1870. London : 1, Adam Street, Adelphi. 
12mo. 39 pp. 

1871. The Match Tax; a Problem in Finance. London. 8vo. 

66 pp. 

1871. The Theory of Political Economy. London and New York: 
Macmillan & Co. 8vo. xvi, 267 pp. 

1874. The Progress of the Mathematical Theory of Political 
Economy, with an Explanation of the Principles of the Theory. 
Paper read before the Manchester Statistical Society, November 
11. Transactions, 1874-5, pp. 1-19, with a diagram. 

1875. The Post-office Telegraphs and their Financial Besults. 
Fortnightly Review, December 1, vol. xviii. N.S. pp. 826-35. 

1875. La Teorica deir Economia Politica, esposta da W. Stanley 
Jevons. Biblioteca del! Economista. S® serie. Tomo ii, pp. 

Y 

314 Appendid' II. 

175-311. (Translated under the superintendence of Professor 
Gerolamo Boccardo.) 

1875. Money and the Mechanism of Exchange. (International 
Scientific Series, vol. xvii.) London : H. S. King & Co. New 
York : T>, Appleton & Co. Post 8vo. xviii, 349 pp. 

1876. La Monnaie et le M^canisme de I’Echange. Farts: Librairie 
Germer Bailli^re et Ci®. (Bibliotheque Scientifique Inter- 
nationale, vol. XX.) 8 VO. viii, 288 pp. 

1876. Geld und Geldverkehr. Le^yzig: F. A. Brockhaus. (In- 
ternationale Wissenschaftliclie Bibliothek. xxi Band. 8vo. 
xvi, 359 pp.) 

1876. La Moneta ed il Meiscanismo dello Scambio. Milano: 
Fratelli Dumolard. (Biblioteca Scientifica Internazionale. Vol. 
vi. 8vo. xxix, 319 pp.) 

1876. On the United Kingdom Alliance and its Prospects of 
Success. Paper read before the Manchester Statistical Society, 
March 8, Transactions, pp. 127-142. 

1876. On the Frequent Autumnal Pressure in the Money Market, 
and the Action of the Bank of England. Paper reprinted from 
the Journal of the Statistical Society of London, 1866, in the 
Transactions of the Manchester Statistical Society. Appendix, 
pp. 17-41. 

1876. The Future of Political Economy. Introductory Lecture 
at the Opening of the Session, 1876—7, at University College, 
London, Faculty of Arts and Laws. Fortnightly Review, 
December, vol. xx, pp. 617-631. (See also App. I. 1877. 
Jevons.) 

1877. The Silver Question. A paper read by Hamilton A. Hill, 
of Boston, before the American Social Science Association at 
Saratoga, September 5. Boston: published for the Association 
by A. Williams & Co. pp. 26-32. Eeprinted in the London 
Bankers* Magazine, December. 7 pp. 

1878. Science Primers — Primer of Political Economy. London: 

Macmillan & Co. 18mo. 134 pp. 

1878. L’Economie Politique par W. Stanley Jevons, traduite 
par Henry Gravez, Ing^nieur. Paris : Librairie Germer Bail- 
Ii6re et C^®. (Biblioth^ue Utile, vol. xliv.) 18mo. 184 pp. 

316 

Appendix II. 

• 

1878. Money and the Mechanism of Exchange. London: C. 

Kegan Paul & Co. Fourth edition. 

1878. The Periodicity of Commercial Crises, and its Physical 
Explanation. Paper read before the F Section of the British 
Association at the Dublin Meeting, August 19. Report. 
Transactions of Section F. p. 666. Published in the Journal 
of the Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland, August, 
1878. Vol. vii, pp. 334-342. 

1878. Commercial Crises and Sunspots. Article printed in Nature 
of November 14, vol. xix, pp. 33-37. 

1878. Remarks on the Statistical Use of the Arithmometer. 
Journal of the Statistical Society of London, December, vol. 
xli, pp. 597-601. 

1879. Methods of Social Reform, No. II. A State Parcel Post. 
Article in the Gontem 2 )orary Review of January, vol. xxxiv, 
pp. 209-229. 

1879. Sunspots and Commercial Crises. Nature, April 24, vol.. 
xix pp. 588-590. 

BY THE SAME AHTHOB. 

Worhs on Logic. 

PRIMEE OF LOGIC. With Illustrations and Ques- 

tions. New Edition. 18mo. la. 

ELEMENTARY LESSONS IN LOGIC : DEBUG- 

TIVE AND INDUCTIVE. With Copious Questions and 
Examples, and a Vocabulary of Logical Terms. Seventh 
Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 3a. dc?. 

THE PRINCIPLES OP SCIENCE : a Treatise on 

Logic and Scientific Method. Third Edition. Crown 8vo. 
12a. 

(The abote three works form a consecutive course of logical 
text-books.) 

THE SUBSTITUTION OF SIMILARS THE 

TEUE PEINCIPLE OF EEASONING. Fcap. 8vo. 2a. U, 

Works on Political Economy, 

THE COAL QUESTION : an Inquiry Concerning 

the Progress of the Nation, and the probable exhaustion of 
our Coal Mines. (New Edition in preparation.) 8vo. 

PRIMER OF POLITICAL ECONOMY. 18mo. 1^. 

Second Edition. 

MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON. 

Elementaby Manual of the Pbinciplbs of Currency. 

MONEY AND , THE MECHANISM OF EX- 
CHANGE. Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. 5a. (International 
Scientific Series.) 

C. KEGAN PAUL AND CO.
