^tate m delation to


THE ENGLISH CITIZEN :
HIS RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.


THE STATE


IN EBLATION TO LABOUR


BY


W. STANLEY JEVONS,

LL D , F R S


MACMILLAN AND CO.
1882


Pnnied ly R & R CLARK, Edinburgh


PEEFACE.

So much, has been written about Labour and Capital
and the legislation relating to them that it is scarcely
possible to say anything new upon this subject.
Not only is there an immense literature of contro-
versial pamphlets bearing upon the matter, but
there is also a superabundance of facts and in-
formation. "What seems now to be needed is
a careful attempt to understand the principles of
legislation which emerge when we analyse the
actions of the Legislature, and the state of public
opinion with reference to the conflict of labour and
capital and the regulation of industry. The all-
important point is to explain if possible why, in
general, we uphold the rule of laisser faire, and yet
in large classes of cases invoke the interference of
local or central authorities. This question involves
the most delicate and complicated considerations,
and the outcome of the inquiry is that we can lay
down no hard-and-fast rules, but must treat every
case in detail upon its merits. Specific experi-


vi PREFACE.

ence is our best guide, or even express experiment
where possible ; but the real difficulty often consists
in the interpretation of experience. We are reduced
to balance conflicting probabilities of good and evil.
In order, however, to prevent the possible misappre-
hensions into which a hasty reader of some of the
following pages might fall, I may here state that I
am a thorough-going advocate of free trade. As the
subject of the book does not include foreign com-
merce I have no opportunity of showing the consist-
ency of this doctrine with such regulation of home
industry as I advocate.

Concerning the functions and actions of trade
societies I have not hesitated to express approval or
blame in the freest way ; but I think the time is
come when all bitter terms, all class rancour, and all
needless reference to former unfortunate occurrences,
should be laid aside. The economic errors of trades
unions after all are not worse than those which per-
vaded the commercial, if not the governing, classes
a generation or two ago. One result which clearly
emerges from a calm review is that all classes of
society are trades-unionists at heart, and differ chiefly
in the boldness, ability, and secrecy with which they
push their respective interests.


PREFACE. vn

The necessity of writing briefly has generally
prevented me from giving references to authors or
quotations of facts and opinions. I must content
myself with acknowledging my special indebted-
ness to certain works such as Professor F. A.
Walker's Wages Question; Mr. George Howell's
Conflicts of Capital and Labour; Mr. G. J. Holyoake's
instructive and amusing History of Co-operation; Mr.
J. E. Davis' excellent treatise on the Labour Laws ;
Mr. Jos. D. Weeks' Eeports on the Practical Opera-
tion of Arbitration and Conciliation (Harnsburg,
II S.A.) ; the valuable collection of documents con-
tained in the Beport on Trades Societies, published by
the Social Science Association in 1860 ; the eleven
voluminous reports of the Trades Union Commis-
sioners of 1 8 6 7, especially the masterly memorandum
of Sir William Erie upon the Law relating to Trades
Unions ; the Beports of the Labour Laws Commission
of 1874, of the Factory Acts Commission, the Factory
Inspectors, etc.


HAMPSTEAD, KW.

April 1882.


CONTENTS,

CHAPTER I.


PAGE

PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION . . l


CHAPTER II.

DIRECT INTERFERENCE OF THE STATE WITH INDUSTRY 33

CHAPTEB III.

THE FACTORY ACTS AND SIMILAR LEGISLATION

DIRECTLY AFFECTING LABOURERS . . 52

CHAPTER IY.

INDIRECT INTERFERENCE WITH INDUSTRY TRADES

UNION LEGISLATION . . . ,88

CHAPTER Y.
THE LAW OF INDUSTRIAL CONSPIRACY . . 128

CHAPTER YL
CO-OPERATION AND INDUSTRIAL PARTNERSHIP . 139

CHAPTER YII.
ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION . . .148

CHAPTER VIII.
CONCLUDING REMARKS . . . .164


THE STATE IN KELATION TO
LABOUR.

CHAPTER I

PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION.

WE are about to deal in this little Treatise with the
proper methods and limits of legislation in matters
relating to labour that is to say, the operative or
handicraft classes. We have to distinguish, as far as
possible, between cases in which individuals should be
left at liberty, as -being the best judges of their own
interests, and those cases in which some kind of authoiity
should interfere, in order to ensure or increase their
welfare. Imagine, for the sake of illustration, that there
is in some factory a piece of revolving machinery which
is likely to crush to death any person carelessly approach-
ing it. Here & a palpable evil which it would be
unquestionably well to avert by some means or other.
But by what means ^ It is obvious that there are many
possible courses to choose between, and much to be said
for and against each particular course.

In the first place, it may fairly be said that the
B


2 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUK [CHAP.

individual workman is bound to take care of himself,
and to be especially wary when approaching machinery
Mere common sense, we might think, would lead people
to avoid negligent conduct likely to be instantly and
inexorably punished with sudden death, or the most
fearful and painful mutilation. As a general rule, at
least, adult persons must take care of themselves, and
observe where they are going. If everybody is to go m
leading-strings, it is obvious that there will be no persons
left to act as leaders, It may well be urged, too, that
the more we guard people from palpable dangers, the
more heedless they will become, and the more likely
to fall victims to some unforeseen danger. But a little
observation and reflection show that to such general
rules and arguments there must be exceptions. It is all
very well for theorists and "cabinet philosophers" to
argue about what people ought to do ; but if we learn
from unquestionable statistical returns that thousands
of hapless persons do, as a matter of fact, get crushed
to death, or variously maimed, by unfenced machinery,
these are calamities which no theory can mitigate.

Evidently there must be cases where it is incumbent
on one citizen to guard against danger to other citizens.
If one man digs a pit in search of coal, and, not finding
coal, leaves the hole uncovered, to be half hidden by grass
and brambles, he is laying a mere trap for his neighbours ;
he might as well at once lay man-traps and spring-guns in
the old-fashioned way. Are all neighbours to grope their
way about in constant fear of a horrible, lingering death,
because he dislikes the trouble of filling up or covering
the pit he has made 1 So obviously unreasonable was
such neglect, that we find a customary law existing in


I.] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 3

the Forest of Dean two hundred years ago, requiring
every owner of an abandoned pit to cover it over.
Now, revolving machinery is in many cases quite on a
par with uncovered coal-pits. When the putting up, at
inconsiderable expense, of a few bars of wood or iron
will remove all danger and difficulty, surely it is much
better simply to put them up, and avoid all metaphysical
argument.

Unfortunately the metaphysician cannot be kept at
bay in so simple a way. Having once decided that the
fly-wheel ought to be fenced, we have but raised a series
of questions relating to the person who ought to put
up the fences, and the other persons who have either
a right or a duty to take care that he puts them up.
We might, in the first place, assume that the owner of
dangerous machinery would fence it from motives of
mere humanity, if not from those of self-interest. But
here again experience proves the existence of unaccount-
able thoughtlessness, if not heartlessness. Before the
Legislature began to interfere, hardly any owner of
machinery thought of incurring the small additional
percentage of cost requisite to render the machinery safe
to the operatives. Plenty of documentary evidence
exists, moreover, to show that legislation on the subject
was distinctly opposed by factory owners. In other
cases mere thoughtlessness and indifference can alone be
charged against the owners. In one of the reports of
factory inspectors we are told that when the inspector
lemonstrated against the dangerous unfenced condition
of a fly-wheel, the owner calmly remarked that it had
no doubt killed a man not long before; he made no
objection to erecting the necessary fence, the idea of


4 THE STATE IN" RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP

which did not seem to have previously occurred to his
mind.

It is obvious, then, that somebody ought to suggest
idteas of the sort to the erectors of dangerous machine
traps. But there is still a wide choice of means and
persons. The men employed about the factory might
be expected to meet together and, through their trades
union or otherwise, insist upon proper fences being
put up. But, as a matter of fact, the men have not
generally taken this reasonable course. "Whether from
false pride, want of thought, or otherwise, the last people
to complain about danger seem to be the people exposed
to it The public in general, through the agency of some
society such as the Eoyal Humane Society, might be ex-
pected to step in from humanitarian motives, and either
fence the machinery at their own cost, or oblige the
owners to do it. But there is nothing more fickle and
unaccountable than the humanity of the public in general.
The Legislature might frighten the owner of machinery
into carefulness by making negligence into manslaughter,
should a fatal accident occur. Judges and juries might
do much to the same end by awarding heavy damages
against the owner. But there remains one other mode
of solving the question which is as simple as it is
effective. The law may command that dangerous
machinery shall be fenced, and the executive government
may appoint inspectors to go round and prosecute such
owners as disobey the law.

The Principle of Liberty. Of course the case treated
above is but a simple example of the questions which
arise in every matter relating to the health, safety, con-


i ] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 5

venience, or general welfare of the workman. If an em-
ployer offers a man work in a very unhealthy workshop,
and the man accepts the work and its conditions, are the
employer and the workman at perfect liberty to carry
out such a contract 1 * Has the community nothing to
say to the matter 'Z Is the Legislature to save the man
from sudden death by the rotating fly-wheel, and yet to
leave him, unwarned and unaided, to a slower but surer
death by steel particles, phosphorus vapour, clay dust,
lead poisoning, or some other easily avoidable source of
injury? The answer may depend no doubt upon the
question whether the operative is an adult man, an adult
woman, a young person (i.e a boy or girl of the age of
fourteen years and under eighteen years), or a helpless
child. But, even in the extreme case of the adult man,
experience unquestionably shows that men from mere
thoughtlessness or ignorance incur grave injuries to
health or hmb which very little pressure from the Legis-
lature would avert with benefit to all parties. The diffi-
cult question thus arises whether, out of respect to some
supposed principle of individual liberty, the "State ought
to allow men to go on working and living in the midst
of needless risks.

It may well be urged, on the one hand, that the
liberty of the subject is an indefeasible right of English-
men, and a fundamental principle of English law. Not
only is liberty in itself a prime element in happiness,
but it is also the necessary condition of that free develop-
ment from which all our social blessings arise. Liberty
is a theme upon which it would be possible to enlarge
very considerably, and it is always a popular theme.

But if my study of this subject has led to any true


6 THE STATE IN KELATIOET TO LABOUK. [CHAP

results, the first step must be to rid our minds of the
idea that there are any such things in social matters as
abstract rights, absolute principles, indefeasible laws, in-
alterable rules, or anything whatever of an eternal and
inflexible nature. We deal here, it should be observed,
only with a lower class of relations, and have nothing
directly to do with those higher questions of ethical
science, of moral obligation, of conscience, of religious
conviction, in which we may rightly seek for a firmer
basis. Legislation undoubtedly must take account of
moral feelings, and must usually conform to the prevail-
ing opinions of the people. Yet a positive law is a very
different thing from a moral rule , the former deals only
with outward acts ; the latter both with acts and motives.
Not uncommonly conflict arises. A nonconformist re-
fuses to pay church-rates or Easter offerings ; a clergy-
man declines to recognise the authority of a temporal
court; an anti-vaccinationist prefers fine and imprison-
ment to allowing a slight but life-saving operation on his
children ; one of the " peculiar people " goes still further,
and maintains that it is the law of God not to call in a
physician to a dying child. All these cases raise very
difficult questions ; but the attitude of the law is simple.
Either the man does as the law orders, or he goes to
prison. A person may entertain whatever moral feelings
he thinks proper to indulge in, and in our present state
of society he enjoys the further liberty of expressing
those feelings nearly but not quite without limits. Hence
he enjoys the privilege, in England at least, of endea-
vouring to persuade other people that the law is mis-
taken. If he succeeds, it is well ; if not, he must practi-
cally conform.


i.] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION

But the law in itself has nothing to do with conscience,
nor religion, nor even with moral right and wrong, as esti-
mated by individuals. Moreover, it knows nothing of
absolute principles from which we must not diverge. It
is but a series of arbitrary rules, accumulated or varied
from century to century, and defining the terms on which
people may best live in each other's society It is a
system of adjustments and compromises, founded upon
experience and trial. The complication of social relations
is such that no simple unqualified laws can hold good in
all cases ; necessary exceptions spring up as soon as ever
we try to establish a general proposition. It might surely
be thought, for instance, that a man would be free to buy
and sell as he thought best. Barter, moreover, being
the original simple form of commerce, would & fortwn
seem to be open to every free subject. Yet, since the
fourth year of Edward IV. (cap. 1) laws have existed
prohibiting the payment of wages in the manner of
barter. Even at the present day the Truck Act is in
full operation (1st and 2d William IV. cap 37), and in a
number of specified trades inflicts penalties on any settle-
ment of wages by way of barter, the third offence being
treated as a misdemeanour punishable by fine only at the
discretion of the court. Curiously enough, however, this
law does not apply to agricultural labourers, domestic
servants, and various other important classes of the em-
ployed. What is a misdemeanour in an iron-work or
cotton-mill, is the most familiar arrangement possible in
the adjoining farmhouse. All that can be said in favour
of the law, and it is probably sufficient, is that repeated
inquiry and long experience ever since the time of King
Edward IV. have shown that masters abuse the liberty


8 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

of making barter contracts with their workmen. But
what becomes of that celebrated entity, "the liberty of
the subject "2

It may be imagined, again, that a person has an
absolute right to his own property. Apart from the
difficulty of defining what is his own property, a cursory
examination of the statute book would show that this
absolute right has been invaded in every conceivable
way. Taxation is in complete conflict with the supposed
absoluteness of the right. Even property in a man's
own labour has never been absolute : sailors were pressed
into the navy ; military service was in former centuries
compulsory, as it now is in most continental countries,
and in theory yet is in England ; statute labour was re-
quired to mend the roads. The compulsory purchase of
land for railways, water-works, and other enterprises of
public utility, is a further invasion of absolute rights,
although accompanied in most cases by abundant, if not
superfluous, compensation. The new Irish Land Act is
destructive to the absolutist theory, as regards Ireland
at least ; that Act has been denounced as contrary to
all the principles of political economy. But when a
country has arrived at a state of social disorganisation,
the probabilities of good implied in those principles are
met by certainty of evil, and the question simply is by
what least sacrifice to approximate to a sounder state of
things.

There is, indeed, no subject more generally miscon-
ceived than the relation which exists between economics
and legislation. It is generally supposed that the econo-
mist is a presumptuous theorist, who is continually laying
down hard-and-fast rules for the conduct of other people.


i ] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 9

Everybody is to buy in the cheapest market, and sell in
the dearest; marriage is to be restrained as much as
possible ; paupers are to be reduced to the verge of star-
vation ; strikes are not to be endured, and so forth. It
is possible that such ideas may have been put forward
by some over -dogmatic economist such as MacCulloch,
For the most part, however, they arise from the mis-
interpretation by the public of the relation between
science and practice. It is one thing to demonstrate
scientifically the tendency of population to progress in
a geometric ratio ; it is quite another thing to infer that
marriage should therefore be discouraged, still more that it
should be discouraged by some particular measure, which
might involve consequences of the most varied character.
As, then, in philosophy the first step is to begin by
doubting everything, so in social philosophy, or rather
in practical legislation, the first step is to throw aside all
supposed absolute rights or inflexible principles. The
fact is that legislation is not a science at all ; it is no
more a science than the making of a ship or a steam-
engine, or an electrical machine, is a science. It is
a matter of practical work, creating human institutions.
There are sciences which instruct us in the making of a
ship or an engine, and which, by giving us comprehen-
sion of its nature, enable us to use it well or to improve
it. In these sciences there may be general principles of
nature So there may be general sciences of ethics, of
economics, of jurisprudence, which may much assist us
in the work of legislation. But before we can bring the
principles down to practice they run into infinite com-
plications, and break up into all kinds of exceptions and
apparent anomalies.


10 THE STATE IF RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP

Abstractions and Realities. la endeavouring to gain
clear ideas as to the proper method of legislation, nothing
is more necessary than to descend from vague terms and
abstractions to the definite facts which they imply or are
founded upon. We cannot help speaking of principles
and rights, but we must endeavour to avoid the persistent
fallacy of taking words for things. Such principles are
not existing things ; they are only complex propositions
founded on extensive experience, and indicating the
probable results of actions. They are registers, as it
were, of the convictions of society that a certain course
will involve certain consequences. The principle of the
common law, for instance, that parents have a right to
the governance of their children, is a register of the
general belief that the strong instinctive love of parent
for child will be the best guarantee in general for the
beneficial treatment of the child, while conducing also
to the happiness of the parents. Mathematically speak-
ing, there is a large balance of probability of good in
favour of the law. Eut it can never have been intended
that a right designed for the production of good should
be perverted to the production of evil. Probability
cannot stand against ceitainty. If it clearly appear
that a parent is injuring his child, there is an end of
presumption to the contrary, and it is a mere question
of degree when the power of the law will step in to pre-
vent this injury. To preserve an appearance of consist-
ency the lawyers use various circumlocutions.

A parent has the legal right of chastising his child ; but
this does not mean that he may beat his child whenever
he feels inclined ; as the lawyers say, the chastisement
must be reasonable; which, being interpreted, means


i ] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION.

that the parent must never chastise his child but in
manner, degree, and on such occasion (if any there be),
as is conducive to the good of the child primarily, with
some regard, perhaps, to the interests of the family and
neighbours secondarily. In fact, it comes to this, that
he has no right to do anything but just what he ought
to do, all the circumstances being taken into account.
So from time to time, as it was made plain that children
were being worked to death in factories reduced to
crippled, stunted, deformed little creatures a further
inroad was made upon the parent's right. The pre-
sumption of good was altogether rebutted by the cer-
tainty of evil, and the State undertook, through the
Factory Acts, to secure a better state of things. Quite
recently the same conflict between presumed good and
certain evil arose in the controversy regarding elementary
education. The parent in theory was the best educational
guardian of the child ; but, if the result was no education
at all, there was no ground for the theory. In this case,
again, the State dispersed metaphysics by stepping in and
ordering the child to be educated.


Gromds and Limits of Legislation. It may be fear-
lessly said that no social transformation would be too
great to be commended and attempted if only it could
be clearly shown to lead to the greater happiness of the
community. No scheme of Bellers, or Babeuf, or Robert
Owen could be resisted, if only their advocates could
adduce scientific evidence of their practicability and good
tendency. No laws, no customs, no rights of property
are so sacred that they may not be made away with, if
it can be clearly shown that they stand in the way of


12 THE STATE IN DELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

the greatest happiness. Solus populi, supremo, lex. But
it ought to be evident that before we venture upon a
great leap in the dark, we may well ask for cogent
evidence as to the character of the landing-place. The
question resolves itself into one of logic. What are the
means of proving inductively or deductively that a
certain change will conduce to the greater sum of happi-
ness \ In the case of any novel and considerable change
direct experience must be wanting. The present social
arrangements have the considerable presumption in their
favour that they can at least exist, and they can be
tolerated. A heavy burden of proof, therefore, lies
upon him who would advocate any social change which
has not or cannot be tested previously on the small scale.
Wherever direct experience can assure us that good is
to be obtained by a certain course, we may with some
confidence venture to adopt it. In hardly any case,
however, are the consequences of an action or a law
limited to the direct obvious results. As Bastiat said, we
must take into account " what is not seen " as well as
"what is seen."

To descend, however, from philosophy to the practical
subject before us, I conceive that the State is justified in
passing any law, or even in doing any single act which,
without ulterior consequences, adds to the sum total of
happiness. Good done is sufficient justification of any
act, in the absence of evidence that equal or greater^evil
will subsequently follow. It is no doubt a gross inter-
ference with that metaphysical entity, the liberty of the
subject, to prevent a man from working with phosphorus
as he pleases. But if it can be shown by unquestionable
statistics and the unimpeachable evidence of scientific


i ] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 13

nxen that such working with phosphorus leads to a
dreadful disease, easily preventable by a small change of
procedure, then I hold that the Legislature is primdfaae
justified in obliging the man to make this small change.
The liberty of the subject is only the means towards an
end; it is not itself the end; hence, when it fails to
produce the desired end, it may be set aside, and other
means employed. Wherever, in like manner, palpable
evil arises, the Legislature is justified if not bound to
inquire whether by some special change of law that evil
might not be avoided. It is obvious, however, that in
this inquiry all effects of the proposed act, whatever be
their remoteness or uncertainty, must be taken into
account. Direct observation, therefore, will not usually
be all-sufficient. There may be collateral or secondary
effects of an action which will not be apparent for years
to come

The Evolutionist Doctrine of Freedom. If. we are to
acknowledge the existence in social affairs of any inde-
feasible right or absolute principle, none would seem
more sacred than the principle of freedom the right of
the individual to pursue his own course towards his own
ideal end. In favour of such a view, it may be said, in
the first place, that happiness mainly consists in unim-
peded and successful energising. Every needless check
or limitation of action amounts to so much destruction
of pleasurable energy, or chance of such. Not only,
however, must man, in common with the brutes, suffer
from endless material checks and obstacles, but he
cannot enjoy the society of other men without con-
stantly corning into conflict with them. The freedom of


U THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP

one continually resolves itself into the restriction of
another In any case, then, the mere fact of society
existing obliges us to admit the necessity of laws, not
designed, indeed, to limit the freedom of any one person,
except so far as this limitation tends on the whole to the
greater average freedom of all. Thus the evolutionists
aim, not so much at directly maximising happiness, as at
maximising liberty of action, which they conceive to be
equivalent to the means of greatest happiness. The
principle of equal freedom is therefore put forth as an
all-extensive and sure guide in social matters. It would
lead me too far to attempt in this place to inquire
whether the present course of industrial legislation, and
the remarks to be made upon it in the present volume,
are really reconcilable with this principle. I am inclined
to think that the reconciliation is not impossible ; but
that, when applied to the vast communities of modern
society, the principle fails to give a sure guiding light.
So intricate are the ways, industrial, sanitary, or political,
in which one class or section of the people affect other
classes or sections, that there is hardly any limit to the
interference of the legislator.

I do not think that such interference, applying, as
it would do, only to the simpler physical conditions
of the body, can be said, in a reasonable point of
view, to dimmish freedom. As physical conditions
become more regulated, the intellectual and emotional
nature of man expands ever more freely The modern
English citizen who lives under the burden of the
revised edition of the Statutes, not to speak of innumer-
able municipal, railroad, sanitary, and other bye-laws,
is after all an infinitely freer as well as nobler creature


L] PEIKCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 15

than the savage who is always under the despotism
of physical want. He is far freer, too, than the poor
Indian who, though perhaps unacquainted with written
law, is bound down by the most inflexible system of
traditional usage and superstition. It is impossible,
in short, that we can have the constant multiplica-
tion of institutions and instruments of civilisation
which evolution is producing, without a growing com-
plication of relations, and a consequent growth of social
regulations.

The doctrines of evolution, moreover, are yet so
young and novel, being, indeed, no older than illustrious
philosophers yet living and working among us, that it is
hardly to be supposed that the full bearing of such doc-
trines should yet be appreciated, even by their origin-
ators. It is easy to perceive that in many a primitive
community little legislative interference is needed, be-
cause the people, by long-continued trial, have settled
down to a mode of life approximately perfect according
to its circumstances. There long tradition is legislation,
and often legislation of the most strict and minute kind.
Evolution has had time to work its full effects , we see it
accomplished, not in progress. But all is different with
a great modern manufacturing community, the whole
mode of industry and life of which has been invented or
profoundly modified within the memory of men yet
living or but lately dead. Tradition is in such a case
broken and dispersed. New conditions of life have to
be discovered and tried Evolution is doubtless at woik,
but the question arises whether the very legislation
which we are about to consider is not the manifestation
of evolution. Based, at any rate, upon trial and experi-


16 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

ence, it is but the multiplying of the good tendencies,
and the quick elimination of the bad. It is an attempt
to save needless suffering by making the few teach the
many, so as to bring individuals into conformity with
their environment without the blind striving of indi-
vidual action.

The Metaphysical Incubus. It is futile to attempt to
uphold, in regard to social legislation, any theory of
eternal fixed principles or abstract rights. The whole
matter becomes a complex calculus of good and evil.
All is a question of probability and degree. A rule of
law is grounded on a recognised probability of good
arising in the opinion of the lawgiver from a certain line
of conduct. But as there almost always occur cases in
which this tendency to good is overmastered by some
opposite tendency, the lawgiver proceeds to enact new
rules limiting, as it is said, but in reality reversing, the
former one in special cases. Lawgivers, as well as philo-
sophers, delight in discovering euphemisms adapted to
maintain the fiction of universal principles. When the
principles fail to hold good, it is said that the cases are
exceptional. It is a general principle that a man may
do as ho likes with his own property. It is an exception
when a railway company forcibly takes possession of his
land.

I venture to maintain, however, that we shall do much
better in the end if we throw off the incubus of meta-
physical ideas and expressions. We must resolve all
these supposed principles and rights into the facts
and probabilities which they are found to involve
when we inquire into their real meaning. The right of


ij PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 17

a man to dispose freely of his labour means the recogni-
tion by the Legislature that in the majority of cases a
man is the best judge of his own interests in disposing of
his labour. In a number of cases specified in the statute
books, the Legislature recognises an opposite state of
things The principle of the freedom of trade stands on
the same footing ; it is a probability of advantage which,
however, must be set aside in case of greater probability
of evil. The indefeasible right of a squire to his
ancestral acres rests, of course, upon the like considera-
tions. All depend ultimately upon the salus popiih,
which is the only lex suprewia.

The question may well arise, indeed, whether, accord-
ing to the doctrine here upheld, there is really any place
at all for rules and general propositions. If a general
law may be limited by a particular law, and that again
by a further and more limited exception, we should get
down eventually to individual cases. When followed
out, this is the outcome of the Benthamist doctrine.
Every single act ought to be judged separately as
regards the balance of good or evil which it produces.
Practically, too, the doctrine is often recognised as true
and necessary Many Acts of Parliament give discre-
tionary power to the Secretary of State, so that he can
deal with each individual case according to its merits
Under the Factory and Workshop Act of 1878, exten-
sive powers of relaxing the directions of the Act are
given to the Secretary of State Many of the sections
contain a clause beginning, " Where it is proved to the
satisfaction of a Secretary of State," etc. Thus section
43 gives power to allow the period of employment to be
between 9 A.M. and 9 P.M. in certain cases,
c


18 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

It will be easily seen, however, that legislation be-
comes impracticable when it runs into too much detail.
Not only is discretionary action likely to be abused, but
the time and trouble spent in obtaining it form a con-
siderable obstacle. There arises a distinct advantage in
being able to know how other people will act, and
whether they are or are not acting rightly. Even under
a system of general rules, such as are most of those
contained in the statute-book, legislation is so complex
that only those who give themselves wholly to the study
can be acquainted with any considerable part of it. The
statute-book, again, can never really contain the whole
of the law, as the definitions of terms, the conflicts of
clauses and acts, the complex evolution of unforeseen
cases, necessitate numberless decisions which practically
add themselves to the text

Inferential Results of Legislation Among the most
important effects of a legislative act must be placed the
expectations which it creates of future similar or appa-
rently similar acts* People are always reasoning, well
or ill usually ill. Accordingly, every conspicuous act
which is done becomes a precedent^ on which many
future claims are based> In courts of law where that
metaphysical entity justice is administered, judges are
obliged to act upon precedents The expectations raised
and the actions guided by one decision must be justified
by a like decision in similar circumstances. This is
done even when the particular decision is regretted
by the judges and allowed to work evil in itself. It
is impossible, however, that law can be administered
otherwise than by reference to precedents, and the only


i ] PRINCIPLES Or INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 19

question remaining open is the minuteness of analysis of
the circumstances and conditions. As no two exactly
similar cases ever do come before courts of law, analysis,
if carried to the utmost, would practically render every
decision independent of every other decision ; there
never can, in short, be a precise precedent. Practically,
therefore, the analysis of precedents is restricted to those
more obvious elements which can be generally appre-
hended, and, in jury cases, rendered satisfactory to the
average British householder.

The Legislature is less bound by regard to precedent.
It is all powerful, and apparently irresponsible. It can
do single executive acts as well as pass general rules of
law. Every private Act of Parliament is a distinct inter-
ference with some persons for the good of others. In
special cases it acts for the good of a single individual
reversing a legal decision, validifying a questionable
marriage, rectifying accidental mistakes, authorising the
enclosure of land, or altering the legal status of a single
estate. These well-understood cases bear out my con-
tention that any act is justified by the good done in the
absence of countervailing inferential or other evils. But
even in regard to private acts, Parliament is to a great
extent bound by tradition and precedent. Such acts
generally fall into well-defined classes with regard to
which experience has already been gained. Any proposal
for a novel kind of private act meets with the utmost
scrutiny. Railway companies, for instance, seem able to
obtain almost any land they want for their purposes.
They have merely to ask, and it is given at a price. But
when a company proposed to build a large hotel near
Lincoln's Inn, and applied for a private act to enable


20 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

them to make the purchase of land, the Bill was summarily
rejected by the Lords. In this particular case the
public would probably have gained distinct benefit from
the passing of the Act The result of course would have
been that multitudes of other companies would discover
modes of benefiting the public by building hotels and
other large structures by private Acts of Parliament.
In this way it is that we become hampered in every act
of legislation, if not of private life. We must do to one
as we would to another, or else we must be prepared to
give some clear reason why we do not. This reason, too,
must be clear and sufficient, not so much to those who
act, as to those who are in a position to judge the actors.
The distinctions, then, must not be very fine drawn.
Public opinion is in the highest degree undiscriminating,
and yet it is the ultimate court of appeal. Thus the
legislator or the administrator may be practically com-
pelled to abstain from many measures and acts good in
themselves, because if they happened to come under
public notice they would not be discriminated from
measures and acts of a recognised evil tendency. It
necessarily follows that the public man, without the least
real sacrifice of his own conscience and instincts of right,
is obliged to defer more or less to the state of public
opinion and of popular education. There arises an in-
evitable contest between the private and so to say the
public conscience.

Questions of Degree. One of the most serious diffi-
culties standing in the way of legislation is the fact
that many legislative questions are questions of degree.
One act differs from another not by any clearly assign-


i ] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 21

able mark present in one and absent in the other,
but by more or less of the same mark In a case of
assault, for instance, the provocation given may vary
from nothing at all up to something extremely great,
and there may be all intermediate degrees. Sir W.
Erie, in his profound memorandum upon the Law of
Trades Unions, pointed out that in the case of nuisances,
whether by obstruction or otherwise, unlawfulness begins
at a certain degree of annoyance, and that this degree is
to be measured not by any exact standard, but on a sup-
posed estimate of what is reasonable by men assumed to
be prudent.

Two obvious difficulties arise out of this variation of
degree : the first consists in the fact that it is often
impossible to define with certainty what acts are to be
restrained by law and what left free. Obstruction of
the Queen's highway may range from the case of one or
two men carelessly lounging about, up to that of thou-
sands of men purposely blocking the road in order to
create public terror and disaster. Negligence, again, is
a legal fault of which no precise measure can be given.
To shoot a person by misadventure is not criminal in
the eye of the law; to shoot him owing to a certain
undefined degree of negligence is manslaughter.

A second resulting difficulty consists in the fact that
in questions of degree an illegal act must differ by an
infinitesimal quantity from a legal act. Mere care-
lessness merges on one side into pure accident, but on
the other side into gross or illegal negligence. Now.
when an act ceases to be legally innocent, it becomes
legally culpable, and in theory there must be some point
at which this change logically takes place. At this point


22 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

the minutest difference distinguishes crime from inno-
cence. It is a case of the ancient logical sophism called
the Sorites or the Acervalis. It can be shown that one
single hair makes the difference between a bald man and
those well-haired people who have no special class-name,
but are not bald. If a man who has only a hundred hairs
is called bald, the question will arise whether men with.
101, 102, 103, 104 hairs, and so on, are also bald. If so,
we can proceed with like questions until we get up to
thousands of hairs. Sooner or later the man must be
pronounced not-laid ; but as there is no third term or
middle between bald and not-bald, the change must take
place upon a single hair. Certainly this is often the case
with legal questions. A railway signalman charged with
manslaughter on account of some mistake is either com-
mitted for trial or not committed : there is no legal middle
term. But the mistake occasioning the accident may
vary in culpability from zero up to something amount-
ing to murder. At some point, therefore, an infinitesimal
difference lies between crime and innocence.

In practice, these nice questions of degree are slurred
over, and roughly decided by referring the whole matter
to the discretion of a jury. Twelve jurymen decide
whether the signalman has used ordinary and reasonable
caution, " such as might be fairly expected from a person
in his position " The lawyers and the judges are always
talking about "what is reasonable," "what is fair,"
although they know perfectly well that they cannot
explain clearly what they mean. Nor can the jury say
any better on what clear grounds they decide the question
of " reasonable care." Probably the only real use in the
jury system is that it furnishes the judges with a practi-


r.] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 23

cal measure of ordinary ways of thinking Unconsciously
the twelve men in the jury-box are so many standard
measures of ordinary capacity, and though they may
differ more or less in opinion the final average opinion
is the best standard of "reasonableness" which we can
command. It is curious to observe how frequently men
are engaged in solving mathematical problems without
being aware of the fact,

Baconian Legislation. Hardly any person will be found
to contest the statement that legislation must proceed
upon the ground of experience. Legislation must be
Baconian, But, when we try to ascertain exactly what
is meant by these statements, difference of opinion will
arise. As I have attempted in another book to show, all
reasoning must be general, Even when we appear to
pass in inference from one single experiment to a like
one, we rise in the course of the logical journey to a
general truth concerning all such experiments, so far as
they are like to each other, and then we descend the
logical mountain again to the particular one in prospect.
But there may be all degrees of proximateness or remote-
ness between our real premisses of fact and our ultimate
conclusion. What I venture to maintain is that Baconian
legislation will always proceed by reasoning from the
most nearly proximate and analogous experience which
is available. We cannot possibly dispense with general
reasoning, but we should use it as sparingly as possible.
We should choose, as it were, the lowest logical elevation
within sight.

I have recently endeavoured to show, in an article in
the Contemporary Jteview of January 1880 (vol. xxxvii. pp.


2* THE STATE IN KELATIOK TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

177-192), that in many cases it is possible for the legis-
lator to resort to direct experiment, Before passing any
great Act of Parliament which will involve the whole
of an extensive trade or class in some irrevocable and
costly change, we ought to try experiments, and thus
obtain the most direct and pertinent evidence con-
cerning the probable result. It is not for a moment to
be supposed that legislation has not long, or, even always,
been based upon experiment or upon experience in some
sense; but the experiments have generally been the
unintentional changes which time and circumstance have
wrought, or the institutions which individuals or private
societies have created with no distinct legislative purpose.
The vast collection of parliamentary papers which Parlia-
ment has printed in the last hundred years, amounting
to several thousand folio volumes, show the empirical
basis upon which the Legislature has proceeded. Not
a few great laws, notably the Poor Law Reform of 1834,
were based upon inquiries of an empirical character
which in care and completeness left little to be desired.
But as a general rule Parliament has confined itself to
accumulating information about the working of existing
institutions ; when an institution of a certain kind did
not exist in this country, it has not created one for the
purpose of trial, but has inquired into the working of
such an institution in any foreign country where it hap-
pened to exist This method is easy and inexpensive ;
nevertheless it involves a breach of Baconian rules ; for
analogy is much more remote and inference accordingly
precarious between one country and another, as compared
with one part and another of the same country.

Nor can it for a moment be contended that experi-


i ] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 25

ments have not been made and consciously described
and treated as experiments. Robert Owen, for instance,
established his mills and schools at New Lanark for
the purpose of showing what might be done to elevate
mill-hands by wise and considerate treatment. He ex-
pressly described his establishment as an experiment. If
not exactly the founder of the Factory Acts, he origin-
ated ideas and supplied practical evidence which was of
the greatest value, so far as it could be appreciated at
the time.

From time to time, too, statesmen have distinctly
approved the experimental method. Thus, on 4th March
1835, Mr. Secretary Goulburn, 1 speaking of the new
Factory Act of 1833, said that "he thought it the most
expedient course to make an experiment of the law ; so
that from actual experience, rather than from contradic-
tory opinions, they might be enabled to ascertain what
alterations really were necessary." In the debate upon
the second reading of the Factory and Workshop Bill
(llth February 1878), Mr Fielden, whose father was
one of the leaders of the party which carried forward
the improvement of the Factory Law, remarked that
" in all its legislation upon the subject Parliament had
been guided by experience, and had gradually extended
the operations of the Acts from one trade to another."
In the same debate the Home Secretary expressed his con-
currence in the statement that such legislation proceeded
on "a tentative system." It must be quite apparent
too that the common practice of passing an Act and then
remedying its mistakes, oversights, omitted cases, incon-

1 Hansard's Parliamentary Debates^ 3d Series, vol. xxvi. p.
527.


26 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

veniences, or unforeseen wrongs, in successive Amendment
Acts is really an application of the tentative or experi-
mental method.

It ought also to be pointed out that the late Mr New-
march explained the empirical or experimental character
of legislative method. Speaking at the British Associa-
tion in 1861 he said : "From the plan suggested by the
Statistical Congress of last year, they would gradually
be able to ascertain what was the real condition, and
what was the effect, of the social relations pervading
different parts of the world, The application of the ex-
perimental method pursued during the last thirty years
had led to a large modification of the early economic
science in reference to free colonisation, legal interfer-
ence with labour," etc. The idea that legislation is and
must be essentially experiential, if not experimental,
pervades this remarkable address, which is printed in full
in the Journal of the Statistical Society for December
1861, voL xxiv. p. 453, etc,

Legislative Experimentation. But in order that we may
pursue a truly Baconian course in legislation, we must
not merely make experiments, but we must make them
in the particular way calculated to prove or disprove the
conclusion in view. There is manifest advantage, for
instance, in making a legislative change in certain cities
or districts only, so that we may observe what happens
both where the change is in operation, and also in closely
proximate places, where it is not in operation. This is
often the only way in which we can clearly learn what
is really the effect of the change in question ; because if
applied universally the effects of the new course will be


I.] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 27

merged into the general aggregate of many existing and
varying effects. Nor is there usually any practical
obstacle in the way of such partial trial. Since the
article referred to was published the Postmaster-General
actually applied the experimental method in the intro-
duction of the penny stamp savings bank forms. These
forms were first tried by distribution in certain selected
counties, and the results were inquired into before the
measure was adopted generally. Although the case was
not one suited to test the method effectively, the com-
plete success of the trial tends distinctly in favour of
experimental legislation.

It is not po&sible to repeat here all that was said in
the Article referred to in favour of direct appeal to ex-
perience. The fact, however, is, that the real difficulty
will consist not in making such appeals, but in knowing
when to make them, how to interpret the results, and
how far to depend upon our inferences. Experience
must be our guide when we can enjoy such an advan-
tage, but it is often the most difficult thing in the world
to know what experience teaches. The palpable and
direct result will often be the least part of the matter.
A fence erected around machinery palpably saves people
from falling among such machinery ; but how are we to
prove that it does not generate recklessness which will
lead the people to fall into other dangers 1 We have to
fall back upon vague presumptions and general inferences.
An operative advocating a strike may easily point to
other strikes in like circumstances which have benefited
the strikers to all appearance. Here are experiments
to the point. It would require a great deal of inquiry
and much argument of a vague kind to convince an


28 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

economist that the striker really was benefited in the
long-run.

It will now be apparent that the true method of
approaching a legislative measure assumes the form of
a complicated logical and scientific problem. It is
granted, or at least assumed, that anything is right and
expedient in legislation which adds to the sum of
happiness of the community* But how to show this 1
It is not sufficient to show by direct experiment or other
incontestable evidence that' an addition of happiness is
made. We must also assure ourselves that there is no
equivalent or greater subtraction of happiness, a sub-
traction which may take effect either as regards other
people or subsequent times. This, it need hardly be
said, is a more difficult matter. There is the difficulty of
discovering and measuring, as Bastiat so clearly put it,
"that which is not seen, as well as that which is seen."
Let it, moreover, be clearly understood that in thus
endeavouring to see the invisible we must make use of
any science, or of all sciences which have any bearing
upon the matter. It seems to be commonly supposed
that certain matters are to be treated by economic
science ; others by moral science or jurisprudence ; others,
again, are questions of mere physical science only. It
would generally be implied, for instance, that questions
relating to corn or wages are purely economic; that
marriage is a simply moral question ; that the building
of a bridge is one of engineering science or physics.

Eelation of Science to Legislation. The relation of
science to social legislation will now become apparent.
Each science is an aggregate of natural laws, more or


L] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION. 29

less general ; and these laws, when divested of meta-
physical wrappings, resolve themselves into probabilities
that certain consequences will follow from certain con-
junctions of antecedents. Obviously, at whatever end
the legislator aims, he must consult all those sciences
whose probabilities bear upon this end. If, for instance,
the matter under consideration be colliery explosions, sup 1
posed to arise from the firing of shots or blasts, there is
(1) the probability that the blasting is really the cause
of the explosion , (2) the probability that more efficient
ventilation would render the blasting harmless ; (3) that
if gunpowder were prohibited, compressed air or some
other agent would be brought into successful operation ,
(4) that if blasting were confined to the night time, the
mines could still be worked ; and so forth, until we
come finally to the probability that if the mines in
question were actually thrown out of use, more harm
than good would result. The legislator must look at
such questions in an all-round manner. He is neither
chemist, nor physicist, nor physician, nor economist, nor
moralist, but all of these in some degree, and something
more as well, in the sense that he must gather to a
focus the complex calculus of probabilities, the data of
which are supplied by the separate investigators. The
Minister of State, as it is said, acts "upon advice." It
is impossible that he should read up all the text-books
of the sciences concerned, but he takes from the most
reliable professors of each branch of science their
inferences as bearing directly upon the matter. Here
evidently we meet the reason why so few men of science
are legislators, and so few legislators are men of science.
The occupations are almost incompatible. The profound


30 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

man of science must restrict his purview, whereas the
legislator must be equally open to truth that is to say,
probability, from whatever quarter it comes. And
although the legislator in matters of trade has perhaps
more to do with economics than with any other science,
yet on this very account he may need the more caution,
lest he attribute exclusive value to the economic proba-
bilities, and overlook moral, sanitary, political, and other
probabilities.

Complications of the Subject* After the preceding
general remarks on the principles of legislation in matters
of industry, we may proceed to consider how far certain
of the more important or imminent questions may be
treated on those principles. Industrial legislation is,
indeed, of such extent and complication of detail that we
cannot do more in the available space than select typical
cases. The subject would be comparatively simple
were we concerned only with the direct relations of the
State to individuals. Even in this respect there is com-
plication enough, when we remember the vast variety of
trades which have to be considered, and the fourfold
classes of persons to be legislated for in various degrees
and manners namely, men, women, young persons, and
children.

In reality > however, the most difficult questions arise
not from the relations of the State to individuals, but
from its relations to aggregates and organisations of
individuals. After all, the State may perhaps be
described, with a little pardonable hyperbole, as the
least of the powers which govern us. Law is but the
consecration of custom and public opinion. Whether in


I.] PRINCIPLES OF INDUSTRIAL LEGISLATION 31

the home, the school, the workshop, or the public
meeting, we are really governed by an indefinite amount
of common law. More especially is this the case in the
factory and the exchange. Men of the same trade
cannot meet together without entering into some kind
of combination, tending to govern its constituents and
to affect the interests of outsiders. Industrial society is,
and always has been, more or less honeycombed with
cliques and corners and cabals, each with its own ideas
of private interest, and its own code of right and wrong.
As we shall presently see, trade societies or gilds are
among the oldest institutions of which we have any
historical information, and they doubtless existed long
before their existence came to be recorded

The relation of the State to labour is a question not
so much of the direct restraint of the labourer by the
State as of the manner in which the State can regard
the voluntary and unauthorised legislation of the
labourers themselves. It may be that the work of the
State will consist in * increasing rather than lessening
the liberty of the individual workman. In any case, it
is impossible to treat of industrial legislation without
fully taking into account the rules and restraints under
which labour exists. We shall, however, best approach
the difficulties of the subject by considering in the first
place the modes and degrees in which it is expedient for
the State to control labour directly. We shall then
have some clue to the question, how far individuals are
justified in attempting to control their fellow-workmen.
Next there arises the higher question, how far the State
ought to control individuals in their attempts at con-
trolling each other. Even when we can clearly perceive


32 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

that the action of a "corner "or a trades union is pernicious,
it does not necessarily follow that the State would do
well to intervene. In some cases evils are best left to
work their own remedy ; in other cases attempted inter-
vention would only aggravate the evil. There are often,
moreover, several ways of approaching the same end : in
some cases an institution may need to be summarily
suppressed; in other cases it may be allowed to show
its own worthlessness and futility; in yet other cases
rival institutions may be set up to undermine and
counteract that which is deemed pernicious ; occasionally,
instead of trying to suppress the obnoxious institution, it
may be favoured and promoted, in the hope that the
good which is in it may grow and the evil die away ; nor
is this at all an exhaustive statement of the many indirect
ways in which legislation may be brought to bear upon
an industrial problem. Not uncommonly we may hesi-
tate between the several ways, and perhaps wait for
further experience to indicate the best method of setting
to work If we only have carefully-recorded information
about it, every institution may be regarded as an experi-
ment tending to show its own success or non-success.


ii ] DIRECT INTERFERENCE OF THE STATE.


CHAPTEE II.

DIRECT INTERFERENCE OF THE STATE WITH LABOUR

THE manner, occasion, and degree in which the State
may interfere with the industrial freedom of its citizens
is one of the most debatable and difficult questions of
social science. Existing legislation, which all allow to
be necessary, obliges us on the one hand to look upon
such interference as justifiable in certain circumstances ;
more general considerations lead us to look upon free-
dom as the normal state. There is a wide intervening
tract, where the line of demarcation is very differently
drawn by different thinkers. The question arises,
moreover, whether the matter is not one which must
be decided according to circumstance of time, place,
history, and national character.

It might perhaps be expected that we could learn a
good deal about labour legislation from the English
Statute Book, which now covers in almost unbroken
continuity an interval of 650 years. There is no want
of such legislation in that great book ; in fact, there is
over-abundance, and we may learn something from the
failure and futility of much that has been enacted by
English Parliaments. But the great lesson which we
learn, and it is an impressive one, is that legislation with

D


34 THE STATE IN" RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP

regard to labour has almost always been class-legislation.
It is the effort of some dominant body to keep down a
lower class, which had begun to show inconvenient
aspirations. Such is clearly the nature of the celebrated
Statute of Labourers, which was simply a futile attempt
to prevent labour from getting its proper price. Bren-
tano is doubtless right in saying that all statutes of
labourers in the Middle Ages were framed with regard
to the powers and wants of the landed proprietors, the
feudal lords. The great Statute of Apprentices (5 Elk
cap. 4), of which I shall have much to say, had a
different origin, According to the opinion of historians,
it represented the triumph of the craft-gilds that is,
the mediaeval trade-unions. If it was this, it was also
more than this. Regarded as a piece of legislative
handiwork, it certainly left nothing to be desired in
thoroughness and comprehensiveness ; but it was never-
theless a monstrous law. From beginning to end it
aimed at industrial slavery. The Justices of the Peace
could not only fix all rates of wages, but if they chose
to exert their powers, could become the industrial
despots of their district.

It has often been weakly remarked that probably
this statute, however indefensible it may seem at the
present day, was well suited to the then existing
state of society. Such remarks imply ignorance of
the contents of the statute. The general theory of
the Act is that every servant or artificer shall be
compelled to work in the trade to which he was
brought up. Any workman departing from his city,
town, or parish, without a testimonial from his previous
employer or some officer, was to be imprisoned until he


ii.] DIRECT INTEKFEKENCE OF THE STATE. 35

procured a testimonial ; or if he could not do so within
the space of one and twenty days, was to be whipped
and used as a vagabond. The hours of labour were
prescribed, not, as in our Factory Acts, by way of limita-
tion, but by imposition. Thus, from the middle of the
month of March to the middle of September all artificers
and labourers hired by time were to be and continue at
their work at or before five o'clock in the morning, and
continue at work and not depart until betwixt seven
and eight of the clock at night two and a half hours in
the course of the day being allowed for meals and
drinking. Thus the legal day's work was to be about
twelve hours at the least.

As to young women, they were simply at the orders
of the magistrates; for the 24th section enacts that
any two Justices of the Peace or other competent
magistrates shall "appoint any such woman as is
of the age of twelve years and under the age of forty
years and unmarried, and forth of service, as they
shall think meet to serve, to be retained or serve by
the year, or by the week or day, for such wages and
in such reasonable sort and manner as they shall think
meet ; and if any such woman shall refuse so to serve,
then it shall be lawful for the said Justices of Peace,
Mayor, or Head Officers, to commit such woman to
ward, until she shall be bounden to serve as is aforesaid."
Lest the Justices should be lax in regulating the service
of labourers, they were to be paid for their trouble
Such was liberty such was industry under {C good Queen
Bess/' at least such it was in the Statute Book, and in
the intention of the governing classes. In operation the
statute was, there is reason to believe, little more than a


36 THE STATE IN KELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

dead letter, except as regards the important sections
relating to apprenticeship, of which the evil influence
has hardly yet died out. It has often been boasted that
the laws of England were always just and equal to all
classes; this may be true of much judge -made law,
but it is decisively contradicted by such a monstrous
statute, from the operation of which the higher classes
and even their servants were expressly exempted. Yet
this Statute of Apprentices was not finally and com-
pletely repealed until six years ago by the Conspiracy
and Protection of Property Act (38 and 39 Viet. cap. 86,
sec. 17, III a).

AM Old Experiment in Industrial Legislation. In many
cases we learn from the preamble or other contents of a
statute regulating a trade that it was really passed at the
instance of the trade for their supposed advantage. This
is most plain in the case of the Act touching drapers,
cottoners, and frizers of Shrewsbury (8 Eliz. cap. 7),
which commences by reciting that there has been in
Shrewsbury time out of mind of man a gild of the art
and mystery of drapers lawfully incorporated. This
gild, it appeared, was used most commonly to set on
work above six hundred persons of the art or science of
shearmen or frizers. Divers artificers and other persons
of Shrewsbury, however, not being of the said company
or mystery, "nor brought up in the use of the said trade,
have of late with great disorder, upon a mere covetous
desire and mind, intromitted with and occupied the said
trade of buying Welsh cloth or lining, having no know-
ledge, experience, or skill in the same." After further
describing the dire evils thus produced by successful


n ] DIRECT INTERFERENCE OF THE STATE. 37

competition, the Act proceeds to prohibit every person
inhabiting in Shrewsbury from occupying the trade of
buying Welsh cottons, etc., unless he be free thereof,
However quaintly and candidly expressed, there is
nothing in this statute but the simple spirit of trade
monopoly. We may wonder indeed that the cottoners
of Shrewsbury could so easily move the great statesmen
of Queen Elizabeth in their favour ; but the policy of the
cottoners was of a piece with the policy of Lord Burleigh,
as so strikingly formulated in the Statute of Apprentices
above referred to. What, however, is very strange about
the Shrewsbury cottoners is that before six years were over
they had not only found out their error, but candidly
confessed it to the powers. In the Act 14 Ehz. cap. 12,
we find the previous Act almost entirely repealed,
"at the humble suit of the inhabitants of the said town,
and also of the said artificers, for whose benefit the said
Act was supposed to be provided." Nor is this all for
in the second section the moral of the matter is brought
out in the clearest terms. "Experience hath plainly
taught in the said town that the said Act hath not only
not brought the good effect that then was hoped and
surmised, but also hath been and now is likely to be the
very greatest cause of the impoverishing and undoing
of the poor artificers and others, at whose suit the said
Act was procured, for that there be now, sithence
the making of the said statute, much fewer persons to
set them a-work than before," etc. etc. Were it not
that the Lord Chancellor Bacon was then a boy of only
eleven years of age, we might have thought that he had
had a hand in drawing this Act, where the value of ex-
perience is brought out in so truly a Baconian manner.


38 THE STATE IK RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAF.

Parliament, since the 14th year of Elizabeth, has made
many great mistakes and failures, and has had often
to eat its own words. But it has seldom taken the
lessons of experience in the same spirit of candour and
philosophy.

The Common Law. We ought not, however, to forget
that, in England at least, the statute-book contains but
half the law. The unwritten and judge-made common
law has always held a very different tone in matters of
industry. The same judges who delighted themselves
with the intricacies of the law of real estate held one
simple rule about industry that it should be free. It
would be very difficult to say when this doctrine of the
common law took its rise. As Blackstone said of the
common law in general, its rise is like that of the Nile
unknown. Some persons have found the principle of
non-restraint of trade in the Great Charter ; but Article
41 of that charter (re-enacted by 2 Edw. III. cap. 9)
only refers to foreign merchants trading in England.
There is no reference to the general industry of the
people, who, it need hardly be said, were by no means
free at that time. It seems likely that the extremely
wise course of the judges was due in no small degree to
natural reaction against the tyranny of the statute law,
the greed of class legislators, and the illegal encroach-
ments of the Crown. The judges were the only disin-
terested parties in power, and however they might
delight on other occasions to display their acumen in
logical quibbles, they took in trade questions the interest
of the whole community as their sole guide. In this
course they were much assisted by the fact that the


ii ] DIRECT INTERFERENCE OF THE. STATE. 39

Statute of Apprentices, when enacting in the 31st section
that none may use any manual occupation except he hath
been apprentice to the same, fortunately confined this
restriction to "any craft, mystery, or occupation now
used or occupied within the realm." The words "now
used or occupied" were inserted, I presume, from regard
to the logical impossibility of any new trade springing up,
if its " occupiers " were required to have passed through a
seven years' apprenticeship before occupying it Lord
Burleigh, or the other ingenious authors of the statute,
not foreseeing the development of modern industry,
made no attempt to circumvent this difficulty, and the
fortunate result was that all the new industries of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries were left to free
development. The Act contained the elements of its
own abrogation,

Goicrnmeiit Inspection of Commodities. To illustrate
these views of the proper limits of legislative action we
cannot do better than consider the reasons which may
be urged for and against the system of submitting
commodities to the scrutiny of Government officers.
Herrings are branded by Government inspectors in
Scotland; kegs of butter are tested and weighed in
some Irish markets. Gun-barrels are proved in Birming-
ham ; gold and silver plate must be marked at the Assay
Offices ; meat and fish are inspected by sanitary officers ;
public analysts are appointed to detect the adulteration
of groceries, drugs, and some kinds of food. Are not all
these cases violations of the general principle that the
individual is the best judge of his own needs and
interests 1 On what principle, if any, are these particular


40 THE STATE IN EELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP

classes of things submitted to an arbitrary system of
State supervision, while the far greater number and bulk
of commodities are left to the great principle of Mssez
faire ?

It may well be said, on the one hand, that laws
defining what we shall wear and eat, sumptuary laws,
as they have been called,- were long since repealed by
general consent. Statutes of Edward III , Edward IV.,
and Henry VIII. prescribed minute regulations about
peaked shoes, short doublets, and long coats. They were
all repealed as long ago as the first year of James I.
(cap. 25). Are we gradually to get back to a somewhat
similar system in which the articles which we use must
be passed by a Government officer before we are allowed
to buy and use them 1 By degrees inspectors will make
their way into our houses to see that our drams are in
good order, our rooms well ventilated, our kitchen boilers
safe, our cisterns clean, our children at school.

If this sort of thing is to progress, we shall be guided
and tutored and inspected at every hour of the day.

But in discussing these matters we need above all
things discrimination. One hundred modes of Govern-
ment interference might be mentioned, of which fifty
night be very desirrble and fifty condemnable. In each
case, as I contend, we must look to the peculiar aim,
purpose, means, and circumstances of the case. Sump-
tuary laws, for instance, bear no analogy to recent
sanitary laws. They were mere class laws, intended to
support the pride of an aristocracy by restraining the
tastes of the lower classes. If any pretext was put for-
ward about saving the purses of the poor, and prevent-
ing them from running into extravagance, it was a too


IL] DIRECT INTERFERENCE OF THE STATE. 41

obvious pretence. The roots of the legislation of this
kind were in pride and oppression.

The purpose of recent Government interference in
trade is widely different. "Whether that interference is
wise or not we will presently consider but those who
examine such things as herrings, butter, gun-barrels,
coffee, tea, pepper, butchers'-meat, and the like, cannot be
charged with indifference or opposition to the good of
the common people. But why examine and certify these
and a few other things, and leave the great mass of
commodities chairs and tables, hats, shoes, calicoes,
woollen cloths, and so on ad mfaittumio the unfettered
choice of the purchaser 1 Discrimination is here again
needed.

It ought to be easily seen that commodities fall into
two distinct categories, according as the purchaser is or is
not the best judge of what he wants. The pattern of a
dress, the style of a bonnet, the shape of a pair of boots,
the tone of a picture, the melody of a piece of music, are
matters in which the intending purchaser is necessarily
the final judge, at least for the time being. If the
pattern of a dress is pleasing to the intending wearer,
that settles the matter; no Government inspector can
make it unpleasing. The question is one of taste and
individual preference. Now the greater number of
commodities fall into this category : whether we are
buying books or pictures, or horses or carriages, a mansion
or an estate, or anything ministering to our personal feel-
ings, we are clearly the best judges. Similarly, the palat-
ableness of drinking water, the flavour of wine, the
pungency of pepper, are matters of which every consumer
may be supposed able to judge.


42 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

But it is a totally different question whether a
purchaser in certain cases knows what he is buying. A
man, for instance, about to buy a mansion tries the water
out of the well, and is satisfied by its sparkling lim-
pidity and its brisk taste. A chemist would have
pointed out that these are suspicious symptoms, and
analysis might have detected deadly sewage poison. The
drains of a mansion, again, are a different matter from
its style of architecture, or the view from its windows.
It is a pure matter of technical skill to say whether
the existing drains ensure freedom from infectious
sewer gases. A sanitary inspector can decide this with
indefinitely greater approach to certainty than the average
householder. In a similar way it may be easily allowed
that he who can judge the pungency of cayenne pepper
cannot by taste detect the red lead which colours it.
He who selects the greenest pickles may be unaware of
the copper which gives the attractive tinge.

It must surely be allowed, then, that there are many
cases where the expert is a far better judge than the
individual purchaser. Common sense would in these
cases, of course, lead us to desire the opinion of the
expert before purchasing. We might, it is true, still
leave the matter to individual action A whole profes-
sion of food analysts would spring into existence if the
ordinary paterfamilias made a rule of sending samples of
his grocer's supplies to be examined. Laisser faire
policy might still be maintained if everybody understood
his interests. But the very point of the matter is that
ignorant people cannot take precautions against dangers
of which they are ignorant. While it is a fact that
people live in badly-drained houses, drink sewage water,


".] DIRECT INTERFERENCE OF THE STATE. 43

purchase bad meat or adulterated groceries, it is of no
use urging that their interests would lead them not to
do so. The fact demolishes any amount of presumption
and argument The same considerations apply to various
other cases, such as the testing of gun-barrels, the assay
of plate, and the like. Nobody can possibly wish to be
blown up when shooting off a rifle or fowling-piece ; but
no purchaser, by mere visual examination, can tell that
an apparently sound and beautifully-constructed barrel
is really safe.

It must surely be apparent that in such cases the
Government officer who steps in and prevents the faulty
article from being exposed to sale does not really restrict
the liberty of the purchaser. We may assume that no
consumer wants to buy putrid sausages, poisonous
pickles, dangerous guns, or fraudulent plate. Thus the
Government official who excludes these things from
public sale actually assists the purchaser in carrying out
his own desires. We come, therefore, to the view long
since maintained by the great economist Jean-Baptiste
Say, that Government may properly interfere to prevent
abuses in those special cases where it is impossible, or at
least difficult, for the buyer of goods to verify their
character for himself. (See the Caticfasme d' Economic
Politique, chap. XXL Cours, 4? m Partie, chap. x. vol. iii.
p. 278 seq.)

Multiplication of Efficiency of the Expert li can hardly
fail to be noticed, too, that an immense increase of
efficiency and multiplication of utility is secured by
appointing officers to assist and protect the public in
certain special points. The whole division and sub-


44 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

division of labour is but a case of Mr. Herbert Spencer's
doctrine of evolution, and the evolution of special
Government inspectors is a case of division of labour.
It is obviously impossible that an ordinary person busily
engaged in his ordinary daily occupation can acquire the
technical knowledge and skill requisite to enable him to
test the purity of the groceries, water, milk, meat, ale,
gas, and other commodities daily consumed in his house.
If he does attempt to acquire the knowledge, and pro-
vide himself with the requisite apparatus for testing,
how needlessly great is the trouble and expense, con-
sidering that a single officer, provided with one set of
apparatus, may do the work tor a whole town. However
zealous and clever the individual may be, he cannot
compete in skill with an officer devoted to the occupa-
tion, who, besides giving his whole time and thought
to the work, has opportunities of varied experience and
comparison. An individual householder, for instance,
can inspect his own drains and those of a few friends.
But an authorised sanitary inspector may go from house
to house all over the parish or district. He sees drains
of all kinds good, bad, and indifferent. He learns by
repeated observation where evil is likely to arise, and by
what change it can be avoided He enjoys, in fact, all
the resources of experience and experiment The same
advantages are enjoyed by every inspector whose busi-
ness it is to pass from factory to factory, from school to
school, from shop to shop, and who sees what is good
and bad in each place.

It is no slight further advantage in favour of Govern-
ment action that an inspector becomes acquainted with
the law and legal procedure applying to his business,


". ] DIRECT INTERFERENCE OF THE STATE. 45

and can put the law in operation with immensely greater
ease and efficiency than can a private person. "We might
think, for instance, that everybody would take care to
get full weight when they buy a sack of coals, a pound
of sugar, or an ounce of tobacco. The law provides the
fullest remedies and penalties for giving short weight;
and in the special cases of coals and bread it obliges the
deliverer to carry scales and weights to the purchaser's
house, in order that he may weigh them on the spot if
so minded. But experience proves that private persons
seldom test the weights of commodities they buy, and
probably never prosecute those who use false scales and
weights. The reasons are sufficiently obvious. The loss
of time involved in a prosecution is almost sufficient
reason, without taking into account the cost, the obloquy,
and the chance of making some mistake which will turn
the tables against the prosecutor. But a single official
inspector of weights and measures can do for a whole
town what they cannot do for themselves. Without
personal offence, and as a mere matter of routine, he
tests all scales and weights , he knows precisely when
and how to prosecute, and can conduct a number of
prosecutions at the same time. Everything is in his
favour.

It seems to be certain, again, that a skilled inspector
can detect dangerous high-pressur$ boilers incomparably
better than persons not specially expert in the matter.
The advantage of some system of Government inspection
cannot be seriously denied, and the only question which
remains is, whether the inspection should be directly
governed from Whitehall, or should be indirectly carried
on through local bodies of experts.


46 THE STATE IN KELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

The Herring-Brand Sys tern. Although it seems im-
possible to hold that Government inspection of retail food
supplies is inexpedient, a very different question is raised
in the case of the herring-brand system in Scotland, or
the tasting and sizing of butter kegs in Ireland. Such
regulation affects the wholesale trade, and is, in fact,
chiefly brought into action as regards goods intended for
exportation. The inspection and branding is not com-
pulsory, as it formerly was, but is largely used by
producers, owing to the facility with which barrels of
herrings or butter thus branded are accepted in foreign
markets. Branded barrels of herrings are, in fact,
endowed with the property of currency that is to say,
they pass from owner to owner without sampling or
examination of any kind. They can be ordered, bought,
sold, or assigned as security for advances, by the mere
specifying of the crown brand.

There can be no question that this system is nearly,
if not quite, anomalous. Its only analogues are found in
the Hall marking of gold and silver plate and jewellery,
in the proving of gun-barrels, or in the coining of- the
Queen's money at the mint. Of the two former cases it
may be said that they are compulsory regulations
required to prevent fraud or accident. Of money it
may be said that, although a commodity, it is a very
peculiar one. The herring-brand cannot possibly be
said to be necessary, for sundry large herring -curers
dispense with the stamp of the State, and argue that
they can sell their produce at a somewhat better price
without it. Still the great bulk of the curers are
not of this opinion, when we find that in a recent
season 660,000 barrels of herrings, cured by perhaps


ii ] DIRECT INTERFERENCE OF THE STATE. 47

400 different curers, were examined and branded, this
work being accomplished by only twenty-six official
inspectors. The great opponent of the system was that
doctrinaire-economist, MacCulloch, who, in Ms well-known
Commercial Dictionary, advocated the complete abolition
of the Fishery Board of Scotland. The inspection, he
held, was in point of fact utterly useless. It was an attempt
on the part of Government to do that for their subjects
which they could do far better for themselves If the
official inspection were put an end to, merchants and
others who buy herrings would themselves inspect the
barrels ; and while any attempt at fraud would thus be
effectually obviated, curers could prepare their herrings
in any way they pleased without being compelled to
prepare fish in the same way for the tables of the poor
as for those of the rich. Then, having denounced the
system as useless, MacCulloch proceeds in his charac-
teristic way to discover that it is far worse than useless,
being "rather a security against the detection of fraud,
than against its existence." The immense expansion of
the herring trade since the date of MacCulloch's remarks
(1840), and the general use of the brand to the present
day, is the answer which experience gives. It is impos-
sible that the brand should still carry the Scotch cured
herring through all parts of the world were it the mere
cloak for deception which was asserted.

MacCulloch's theoretical objections and the discontent
of some members of the trade led, however, in 1848, to
the despatch of a Treasury Commissioner, who was to
inquire into the expenditure and operations of the Scotch
Fishery Board. This duty was entrusted to the late
John George Shaw Lefevre, and the result was a most


48 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

able, and to my naind conclusive, report on the subject,
reprinted in John M. Mitchell's excellent work on The
Herring (Edinburgh, 1864). The commissioner went
with no leaning towards the system, but came back
impressed with its usefulness. The only serious objec-
tion to the system which he admits is, that it somewhat
tends to discourage the improvements of private enter-
prise by promoting a uniform limit of price which it is
difficult to pass. The Government brand indeed is purely
optional ; yet so long as the great majority of the trade
adopt it, other curers find great difficulty in dispensing
with it. On the other hand, the trade generally uphold
the system as facilitating trade in herrings, and prevent-
ing disputes or repudiation of orders. Lefevre summed
up the results of his inquiry in these words . " I feel
compelled, notwithstanding the objection in principle to
which it is liable, to recommend that it should still be
maintained." He suggested, indeed, that a small fee
should be imposed to meet the expenses of the Fishery
Board, and this suggestion was. carried into effect in
1859, fourpence being charged for each barrel branded.
So much, however, has the use of the brand extended,
that the fees for 1880 were estimated at 11,000, or
about 7000 beyond the whole expenses of the branding
staff.

Here we are brought to a very interesting dilemma
in industrial legislation. Experience decisively confirms
the advantages of a system which is in conflict with prin-
ciple, at least in the estimation of MacCulloch, Lefevre,
and many other economists.

There are, indeed, many cases of commodities of
which the purchaser can be no good judge, but which the


n] DIRECT INTERFERENCE OF THE STATE. 43

Legislature has never thought of certifying. No ordinary
person, for instance, can possibly judge the quality of a
watch which, from all that appears to the unpractised
eye, might be worth 10 or ,50. Nevertheless, it is out
of the question that Government officers should be em-
ployed to inspect and stamp watches before they aie
allowed to be exposed for sale. The sufficient reason is,
no doubt, that watches differ infinitely in details of
construction and finish, so that it would be impossible to
say exactly what the certification meant, or how long it
would hold good. The fineness of the gold or silver
composing the case is a simple definite fact which can be
tested in a few moments and exactly recorded.

From a review of what precedes we may perhaps infer
that Government branding is only to be approved under
the following joint conditions (1) When some special
danger is to be avoided, or some special considerable
advantage to be attained by Government intervention ;
(2) When the individual is not able to exercise proper
judgment and supervision on his own behalf ; (3) When
the intervention required is of a simple and certain char-
acter, and the result can be certified in a manner com-
prehensible to all.

Ancient Samtanj and Track Regulations. It is well
worthy of notice that the tendency towards sanitary
inspection which some people now dread as an approach
to despotism, is in reality a very old institution. A
study of Eiley's translation of the Liber Alhis, or " White
Book of the City of London," and a glance through Mr.
G. L. Gomme's Index of Municipal Ojfices (Index Society),
will show that the ancient municipalities of this land
E


50 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

were minutely organised in this respect. Ale-conners,
ale -founders, ale -tasters, auditors, aulnegers, beadles,
bread-weighers, coal-meters, flesh-searchers, and inspec-
tors and searchers under various other names, were
employed by our ancestors to save themselves from un-
apparent frauds and evils. I think, too, that Mr. Gomme
has clearly shown, in other writings, that the munici-
palities were no creations of Norman monarchs, but were
really developments of original village communities. So
far, therefore, as antiquarian learning can go, we have
the fullest warrant for the functions of Government
objected to by some persons, The tendency to centralis-
ation, again, which is involved in much recent legislation,
is due partly to the decay of local activity, and partly
to the immense improvements in communication, which
render every part of a kingdom now almost as accessible
to the seat of government as were the outlying parts of
an extensive parish or hundred to its local lords in early
days. It is the vastly greater scale on which our legisla-
tive operations now proceed which makes them bear the
appearance of offensive innovations and despotic encroach-
ments.

In former days, too, much trouble was taken 'by the
Government to ensure the excellence of several kinds of
goods, especially woollen cloth. The Act 2d and 3d
Philip and Mary, cap. 12, for instance, provides for the
viewing and sealing of clothes called Bridgwaters. At
Leeds the ancient regulations of the Cloth Hall con-
tinued to be exercised in full vigour until about the
middle of last century. The fact, however, is, that the
old system of Government certification has been replaced
within the last hundred years by the modern system of


IL] DIRECT INTERFERENCE OF THE STATE. 51

trade-marks, the legalisation of which, however, is only
now being carried into effect under the Trade-Mark Acts
of 1875 and 1876. The trade-mark or trade-name is a
private brand, and it is essential to the continued success
of a firm that they shall uphold the reputation of their
marks by carefully supervising the qualities of the goods
to which they are affixed. Registered trade -marks
being now legal property, manufacturers become their
own branders, and are urged to brand honestly by the
powerful and constantly-acting .motive of self-interest.
Both statute and judge-made law have of late tended
strongly to create and maintain property in trade reputa-
tion, and the effect is probably very good. But I see
nothing in this to prohibit the employment of State
inspection and certification in cases where it can be
clearly shown to possess superior advantages.

As frequent complaints are now made in the manu-
facturing districts as to frauds committed in the packing
of cotton, earth, stones, brick-bats, and rubbish of all
descriptions being sometimes found inside the bales, it
may be pointed out that such* matters were well looked
after by our ancestors. The packing of wool was superin-
tended by a special officer qualified and admitted before
the mayor and constables of the staple of Westminster.
An elaborate treaty of commerce between Henry VII.
and the Duke of Burgundy, contracted in the year 1499,
provided that all wool exported should be packed by duly
qualified packers, who were to certify by labels the quality
of the wool.* Penalties were enacted against any fraud,
cheat, collusion, or deceit, especially against those who
should " pack or fold up earth, stones, dung, sand, gravel,
or hair in the fleeces."


52 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP


CHAPTEE III

THE FACTORY ACTS AND SIMILAR LEGISLATION DIRECTLY
AFFECTING LABOURERS.

THE most important mass of legislative enactments re-
lating to- labour is contained in the Factory Acts, now
consolidated into the very important^ long, and compli-
cated statute known as the Factory and Workshop Act,
1878 (41 Viet, cap 16). This Act, mainly due, as regards
the passing, to Mr. (now Sir) Assheton Cross, forms a
complete code of factory regulations-, and replaces about
sixteen previous statutes, which are enumerated and
repealed in a schedule. There can be no doubt that,
whether we look to the several more tentative acts by
which this was preceded, to the inquiries connected with
them, to the diligent and zealous labours of the factory
inspectors, to the thorough inquiries of the Factory Act
Commissioners of 1 8 75^- conducted to no small extent by
personal examination of the workshops, or finally, to the
prolonged and exhaustive debates in committee of the
House of Commons, by which the details of the Act
were finally settled, this Consolidation Act is one of
the brightest achievements of legislation in this or any
other country. The great fact is that it embodies disin-
terested legislation : the health and welfare of the people


in.] THE FACTORY ACTS. 53

at large form the sole object ; no one class or trade is to
be promoted, as in almost all the older industrial laws.
If anything, it involves a sacrifice on the part of those
capitalists and employers who were greatly concerned in
passing it. Before, however, entering further into the
matter of existing factory legislation, it will be well to
consider as briefly as possible the course of events which
have led up to the present state of the law.

History of English Factory Legislation Not only is it
impossible to attempt anything approaching to a history
of factory legislation, but it is also unnecessary. The re-
port or essay upon this subject prepared by Ernst, Edler
von Plener, the first Secretary of the, Austro-Hungarian
embassy in London, leaves nothing to be desired as a
most clear, accurate, and compendious historical sketch of
the subject. It has been excellently translated into
English by F. L Weinmann, and published with an In-
troduction by Mr. Mundella (London, Chapman and
Hall, 1873). This convenient little book contains also,
as an appendix, abstracts of Continental laws and regula-
tions respecting the labour and education of children
employed in factories. The history of factory legislation
is not only highly technical, involving details of hours
and arrangements of little general interest, but it is also
complicated by the intrusion of political intrigues and
struggles.

The first of the Factory Acts was the so-called Health
and Morals Act, passed in 1802 (42 Geo. III. cap. 73),
and generally known as the Elder Sir Eobert Peel's Act.
It appears to have originated out of the practice of
apprenticeship many children having been sent by the


54 THE STATE IN RELATION" TO LABOUR [CHAP.

poor-law overseers of the southern counties, under bonds
of apprenticeship, to the rising manufacturing towns of
the north. These children were treated hardly better
than slaves, which indeed they really were. They were
worked day and night, and it is even said that one gang,
when exhausted, went to rest in the beds still warm of
those who were coming on to work Attention having
been drawn to this state of things by the epidemics
which arose from overcrowding, a Board of Health was
appointed in 1796, and in 1802 the Act already named
was passed, which declares in the preamble that certain
regulations were become necessary to preserve the health
and morals of the great number of male and female
apprentices whom it was then the practice to employ in
cotton and woollen mills. The Act began by requiring
factories to be well whitewashed twice a year, and a suf-
ficient number of windows to be provided to supply fresh
air. The next clause obliges every master to supply each
of his apprentices with one new suit of clothes yeaiiy }
showing that it was legally bound apprentices with whom
the Act really dealt. The time of working was not to
exceed twelve hours daily, and night work was prohibited,
with certain exceptions. Apprentices were to be in-
structed in reading, writing, and arithmetic. Male and
female apprentices were not to sleep in the same room,
nor were more than two "to sleep in the same bed. A
long clause governs the instruction and conduct of
apprentices on Sundays, all these matters being looked
after by two visitors appointed by the justices. The
point of greatest interest aljout this Act, now wholly re-
pealed by the Factory and Workshop Act, is the fact that
it applied directly only to legal apprentices, who, being


in ] THE FACTORY ACTS, 55

industrial slaves, indubitably needed the protection of the
law. Thus was the thin end of the wedge introduced.

In course of time, however, it was brought to the
notice of Parliament that great numbers of children
residing near factories were being worked in an excessive
and injurious manner, because they did not enjoy the
protection of the Act described. As the evils produced
were practically as great as if the children had been
legal apprentices, the parents being almost as grasping
and careless of the children's health as the masters, Parlia-
ment could not deny the need of inquiry. The evidence
given before a Select Committee of the House of Commons
in 1816 led to the passing m 1819 of the Second Factory
Act (59 Geo. Ill cap, 66), which applied, however,
only to cotton mills. The age at which children could
be admitted to such mills was now for the first time
limited to nine years of age or upwards. Between the
ages of nine and sixteen the hours of labour were not to
exceed twelve per day, exclusive of meal times, and night
work was again prohibited. Some trifling exceptions
were allowed in the case of water mills, which suffer from
irregularity of water-power, such exceptions existing
even in the present day.

Progress was again made in 1825 by an Act passed by
Sir John Cam Hobhouse (6 Geo. IV. cap. 63), which,
besides a more thorough restriction of labour as regards
children under sixteen years, introduced a half or rather
quarter holiday on Saturdays. The work on that day
was not to exceed nine hours in length, to be completed
between five in the morning and half -past four in the
afternoon. Meal hours were carefully provided, and
labour of any kind during such hours absolutely pro-


56 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

hibited. A register of children employed was now first
required, and the signature of the parents or guardians
of a child to the statement of age was to exempt em-
ployers from penalty in case of falsity, Powers were
given or confirmed to justices, but the important provi-
sion was introduced that no justice being the proprietor
or master of a cotton mill, or the father or son of such,
should act as justice in respect of this law.

There soon followed that troublous time when trades
unions were rampant and the Reform Bill imminent.
The Factory king; Eichard Oastler, now came forth into
notoriety, advocating a Ten Hours Bill. The only im-
mediate fruit of the agitation, however, was the Act
1 and 2 Will. IV. cap. 39, which, while repealing five
previous enactments, consolidated and slightly improved
their provisions. But this Act had the great advantage
of being carried into effect to a considerable extent, the
law having been previously much disregarded. There
soon followed, however, Lord Althorp's Act of 1833
(3 and 4 Will. IY. cap. 103), which introduced several
important novelties. The distinction was now intro-
duced, which has been ever since maintained, between
" children" admitted to work of the ages nine to thirteen
years, and "young persons" of ages from thirteen to
eighteen years. The attendance of children at school
was now also rendered compulsory, and effectively pro-
vided for. Children were not to work more than nine
hours per day, and were to spend two more hours daily
in school. It is said that this "half-time" principle was
quite accidentally discovered. Some means being sought
whereby evidence should be available that a child was
not working at a certain hour, it was suggested by Mr.


in ] THE FACTORY ACTS. 57

Edwin Chadwick that presence in school would afford
the best possible evidence. Thus it came about that all
factory children have for half a century past received
something to call education.

Passing over many technical difficulties which were
encountered in ascertaining the ages of children, whether
by reference to stature, general appearance, dentition,
etc , we come to the Consolidating Act, which Sir Robert
Peel carried in 1844, namely, the Factory Act (7 and 8
Viet cap. 15) The hours of labour of children of eight
(instead of nine) years of age and upwards were now
reduced to six and a half, three hours' daily attendance
at school for five days per week being further required.
In some cases, however, alternate days of ten hours'
labour and five hours' schooling were allowed. Various
careful regulations were made about meal times, during
which times no children nor young persons were to be
allowed to remain in the workrooms. Many such regula-
tions, which appear at first sight needless or oppressive,
were found by experience to be requisite to prevent evasion
of the law, and to facilitate discovery of infractions by the
inspectors and sub-inspectors, who were now endowed
with considerable powers. Under the original Health
and Morals Act visitors were to be appointed by the
local justices, but the law was generally disregarded
The Act of 1833 introduced the principle of centralisa-
tion, enabling the Crown to appoint four inspectors, with
all kinds of functions, including, at that time, magis-
terial powers. The latter powers were retrenched by
the Act of 1844, and inspectors must now prosecute
before a court of summary jurisdiction ; but in every
other respect the inspectors have retained or advanced


58 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

their functions, and they have been the key to the suc-
cess of the whole system.

The subsequent Factory Acts are of less general
interest, being chiefly occupied either with more nar-
rowly defining hours, or with extending the provisions
of the Acts to additional branches of industry. Thus
the 13 and 14 Viet cap 54, defined the legal working
clay as limited between six in the morning and six in
the evening, with an hour and a half for meals, leaving
a maximum of ten and a half hours for work. Any
person simply found upon the premises of a factory was
to be deemed at work. A Saturday half-holiday after
two o'clock was securely provided for.

The legislation so far described related only to textile
factories cotton, woollen, silk, or linen. Bleaching
and dyeing works were only brought under restriction
in 1860, by the 23 and 24 Viet. cap. 78. Mining in-
dustry had been regulated so far back as 1842, when
the Mining Act (5 and 6 Viet. cap. 99) absolutely pro-
hibited the employment of females, and boys under ton
years of age, underground. In 1850 the supervision of
mines was vastlyimproved by the Coal and Iron Mines Act
(23 and 24 Viet cap. 151) which introduced a variety
of precautions as regards the health and safety of miners,
and empowered the appointment of a staff of inspectors.
In 1862 double shafts were required to be provided to
coal mines. Several minor industries, such as manufac-
tories of earthenware, lucifer matches, cartridges, etc.,
were brought under regulation in 1864.

A great advance was carried out by the Factory Acts
Extension Act and the Workshop Eegulation Act, both
passed in 1867 (30 and 31 Viet. caps. 103 and 146),


ni.] THE FACTORY ACTS. 59

which brought almost all establishments to be called
manufactories under supervision, the number of sub-
inspectors being increased for the purpose. The regu-
lations of the Workshop Act, however, were to be
enforced by the local authorities. A kind of expen-
fnentwn cntcis was thus afforded to show the com-
parative merits of localised and centralised management,
which resulted entirely m favour of the latter. Many
town councils explicitly resolved not to interfere with
trade, and many more silently ignored the Act, so that
the inspectors were obliged to declare, in 1868 and 1869,
that the Workshop Act was a dead letter. Compara-
tively little interest attaches to some of the subsequent
Acts, such as that of 18 TO, extending the Factory Acts
Extension Act to print, bleaching, and dyeing-works,
and to preserving and fish -curing establishments, or the
Amendment Act of 1871, allowing Jews to work on
Sundays. Another Act of 1871 (34 and 35 Viet, cap
104) transferred the supervision of workshops from the
local authorities to the inspectors and sub-inspectors of
factories, who were to enforce the law and make reports
as in the case of factories. The Factories (Health of
Women) Act of 1874 much enlarged the powers of
inspectors, and made many small improvements in the
law which it is needless to refer to, inasmuch as the
whole of the laws relating to factories and workshops
generally are consolidated and codified, as already
stated, in the Act of 1878. The changes effected
by this Act, indeed, were not great, the chief pur-
pose of the consolidation being to make the law
clear, consistent, and embodied in a single convenient
code.


60 THE STATE IN EELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

The Factory and Workshop Ad, 1878. This Act
(41 Viet cap. 16), which has no preamble at all, con-
sists, in addition to two preliminary sections giving
the short title and commencement of Act, of four
principal parts, and six schedules. The first part con-
tains the general law relating to factories and work-
shops, treating in succession of sanitary provisions, the
safety of employees, their employment and meal hours,
holidays, the education of children, certificates of tit-
ness, and notice and investigation of accidents. Part IT.
is of a more detailed character, and provides specially
for particular classes of factories and workshops as
regards health and safety, special restrictions of employ-
ment, special exceptions regarding Jews, meal hours,
overtime, night -work, domestic employment, etc. In
Part III. the machinery of administration is provided
the appointment of inspectors, certifying surgeons, regu-
lation of clocks, provision of registers, enforcement of
penalties, and legal procedure, being provided for There
yet remains Part IV!, which settles the difficult question
of definitions of terms, the mocle of application of the Act
to Scotland and Ireland, and adds a few trifling excep-
tions, finally repealing all the previous sixteen Factory
Acts, and a few sections of other Acts, as enumerated in
the sixth schedule. There are, moreover, five important
schedules, giving detailed lists of occupations subject to
certain special restrictions or exceptions. Such, however,
are the complications of this remarkable code of law, the
mere table of contents filling eight pages and the text
sixty -five, that anything approaching to a commentary
upon its effects would fill a large volume. In addition to
several publications of Mr. Alexander Redgrave, a text-


in ] THE FACTORY ACTS. 61

book of the Act has been published by Mr G- J. Notcutt,
entitled " The Law relating to Factories and Workshops,
with Introduction and Explanatory Notes ; comprising
the Factory and Workshop Act, 1878, and the Orders
of the Secretary of State made thereunder." Second
Edition London, 1879 (Stevens).

It is a peculiarly difficult task to give in a few words
the general effect of this Act, because there are in almost
every clause various alternatives or options in addition
to exceptions and other complications. Thus every
abbreviated statement is of necessity more or less in-
accurate. The general assumption of the Act is, that
labour in textile factories involves a more severe strain
than that in non-textile factories and workshops. While
the longest period for which a young person or woman
may be employed in textile labour without an interval
for meals is four and a half hours, the corresponding
limit for other labour is five hours. Textile factories are
defined in section 93 as premises in which steam, water,
or other mechanical power, is used in manufacturing
cotton, wool, hair, silk, flax, etc., not including bleach,
print, and various other kinds of works. Non- textile
factories are described in a long schedule ; and workshops
are practically any places not being factories where
manufacture is carried on.

The hours of work seem to be in no case absolutely
fixed, but on five days a week are either to begin not
before 6 A.M. and end not later than 6 P M. (in work-
shops 9 P M.), or else begin not before 7 A.M. and end
not later than 7 P.M On Saturdays work must end at or
before 2 P M. in textile and 4 P.M. in other factories and
workshops. The meal -times shall amount to not less


62 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

than two hours in the day in textile factories, and one
hour and a half in other places of work, except on
Saturday, when half an hour only may be allowed The
general result seems to "be a working week of 56 J hours
in textile factories, and 60 hours in non-textile factories
and workshops, subject to exceptions, holidays, etc.

The regulations for the employment of children are
of a far -more complex character. The 20th section, in-
deed, is simple enough, absolutely prohibiting the employ-
ment in any factory or workshop of children under the
age of ten years a rule extended to industry generally
by the 5th section of the Elementary Education Act of
1876, 39 and 40 Viet. cap. 79. Under sixteen years of age
a certificate of fitness for factory labour must be obtained.
Children are only to be worked upon the half-time system,
which admits, however, two methods, either of working
part of the day in the factory and another part in school,
or else attending the factory and school on alternate days.
On the latter system the child is treated much on the
terms of a young person, but must never be employed at
work for two days in succession, nor without alteration
of the days in each alternate week.

In the daily half-time system, morning sets of children
begin with the young persons, but end at one o'clock, and
afternoon sets begin at one o'clock and end with the
young persons. The morning set of one week becomes
an afternoon set the next week, and wee versd. The
Saturday half -holiday is provided for in an elaborate
way. When employed in a morning or afternoon set, a
child is required to attend a recognised efficient school
for one attendance every day excepting Saturday. On
the alternate day system two attendances shall be made


m] THE FACTORY ACTS. 63

on each work day preceding each day of employment.
Sunday labour is prohibited on the part of all children,
young persons, and women, excepting Jews, for whom
special regulations are provided. There are, moreover,
all kinds of special exceptions and relaxations in parti-
cular trades. Manual labour carried on by a family in
their own dwelling is exempted from restriction under
section 98, provided that the labour is exercised at
irregular intervals, and does not furnish the whole or
principal means of living. The work of straw-plaiting,
pillow -lace -making, and glove -making, is expressly ex-
empted under section 97 when carried on in a private
house, and such exemption may be extended by the
Secretary of State to other light, healthy handicrafts.
As the terms employed do not include male persons
above the age of eighteen years, except in the sections
relating to safety and sanitary precautions, it follows
that men are allowed to work as they like, day or night.

There are various further exceptions ; thus overtime
is freely allowed up to nine or ten o'clock at night, when
fruit has to be suddenly preserved, or railway guides
bound' at the end of the month, or Christmas presents
rapidly pushed forward, or some similar press of work
undertaken. When water-mills are liable to be stopped
by drought or flood, a certain amount of overtime may
be granted by the Secretary of State to make up the loss.

A number of additional relaxations or changes have
been made by order of the Secretary of State, under
powers given in several sections ; thus another day has
been allowed to be substituted for the Saturday half-
holiday in the case of printing-offices engaged in printing
newspapers, railway time-tables, and other urgent publi-


64 THE STATE 1$ RELATION TO LABOUR. [ru vr.

cations, as also in certain workshops where clothes are
being made Other orders grant a ft\ e lioui'h 1 spell in
the hosiery and woollen factories of ceitain counties , vary
the holidays ; alter the meal hours , allow emplo) mimt
during meal hours ] allow thirty minutes' overtime in
case of non-completion of work, and so forth.

AduU Male Labour. It is quite possible that, at some
future time, attempts will be made to pi ess upon the
attention of the Legislature measures for the restriction
of adult male labour. At present, under the Factory
and Workshop Act, regulation of the time ot labour is
carefully limited, as already explained, to the labour of
children, young persons, and women The Legislature
has, in fact, always abstained from interfering "with the
liberty of adult men to work as long or as short a time
as they like. Indirectly, however, a largo number of
workmen fall practically under restriction, because,
where many childien or women are employed, the
whole labour of the factory is brought to a htand when
the clock strikes the hour assigned for stopping in the
Act It is well known, however, that many men
advocate the interference of the Legislature in all fac-
tories whatsoever. The ultimatum of the working
classes is expressed in the following couplet:

" Eight liouis to \voik, eight hours to play ;
Eight horns to sleep, and eight shillings a day."

In the United States an Eight Hours Act has already
been passed in some of the States, but being purely per-
missive in character, has proved to be a dead letter.
An Act which defines a day's labour as being that of
eight hours, in the absence of any stipulation to the


HI-] THE FACTORY ACTS. 65

contrary, is, of course, easily set aside, and has been
generally disregarded.

I venture to maintain that the question of limiting
adult male labour in associated and organised bodies of
men is not to be decided once for all on some supposed
principle of liberty. The same principle, if it existed,
would apply to adult women. We must treat the ques-
tion on the varied and detailed grounds of expediency,
Nc one, indeed, would propose to interfere with the
workman labouring in his own private shop or dwelling.
There each man can work as he likes. But where a
large number of men are employed together in a factory
there is not the same individual liberty all must con-
form to the wishes of the majority, or the will of the
employers, or the customs of the trade. I see nothing,
therefore, to forbid the State interfering in the matter,
if it could be clearly shown that the existing customs
are injurious to health, and that there is no other
probable remedy. Neither principle, experience, nor
precedent, in other cases of legislation, prevents us from
contemplating the idea of State interference in such
circumstances.

Eut we are bound in a question of this sort to place
ourselves at every point of view, and to accept all kinds
of information, irrespective of any strict laws of
evidence. Thus, when we hear workmen debating on
the moral and sanitary advantages of an Eight Hours
Bill, we must remember the prevalent fallacy that the
limitation of labour raises its price, and transfers some
of the master's profits to the workman's pockets. To
lessen the day's labour by one hour, is to lessen the
supply of labour by one-ninth or one-tenth part, and to

F


66 THE STATE IN DELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

the same extent to waste the efficiency of all machinery,
and of the fixed capital connected therewith. It is an
economic fallacy to suppose that any adequate counter-
balancing advantage can, as a general rule, arise out of
this loss, except of course the recreative, sanitary, or
intellectual advantages (if any) to the workman from,
his enjoyment of more leisure time. When we observe,
too, that trades unions are already constantly wrangling
with employers for a reduction of hours, while individual
workmen are generally ready to work overtime for a
moderate inducement, we shall be led to think that
there is no ground whatever for legal limitation of adult
male labour in the present day. Where the interference
of trade societies is already, if anything too great, there
would be harm rather than good in adding Government
restrictions.

Grandmotherly Legislation. In spite of the conclusion
just arrived at, I think it well to show by example that
the Legislature has fully conceded, even for adult men,
the principle of "grandmotherly legislation," if principles
must be spoken of. I may mention again the Truck
Acts as a standing proof that men have been held to need
the protection of the State in some of the simplest
transactions of life. The freedom of contract is actually
destroyed by such laws. It is only necessary again to men-
tion the Coal Mines Act and the Metalliferous Mines Act
(35 and 36 Viet. caps. 76, 77), or the complicated series
of Acts relating to merchant shipping, to show what a
mass of legislation has already been sanctioned for the
protection mainly of acUdt men. The provisions of the
law to repress crimping and imposition by the keepers


in.] THE FACTORY ACTS. 67

of seamen's lodgings (17 and 18 Viet. cap. 104, sections
233-238) are especially a case in point. Any person can
be fined five pounds who, on board a ship within twenty-
four hours of her arrival, solicits a seaman to become a
lodger. The seaman is treated by the law as if he
were a mere child ; but there is no like law to protect
the bewildered traveller, who, in stepping out of the
railway-station at some strange town, finds himself
beset by a score of hotel porters and touts of various
descriptions.

The point of the matter, however, is most curiously
illustrated by the history of the law relating to the
fencing of machinery. By the 7 and 8 Yict, cap. 15,
sec. 21, it was enacted that " every fly-wheel . . . and
every hoist or teagle, near to which children or young
persons are liable to pass or be employed, and -all parts
of the mill-gearing in a factory, shall be securely fenced."
When these words came to be critically read by those
machinery owners, to whom they were a matter of
pecuniary importance, it was argued that the limitation
"near to which children or young persons are liable to
pass " must have been intended to apply to all parts of
the mill-gearing in a factory as well as to the fly-wheel,
hoist, teagle, etc. The contrary supposition not only
produced some absurd distinctions between parts which
were always to be fenced and those which were only
sometimes to be fenced, but it led to the very sweeping
result that a vast amount of machinery to which men
alone had access was to be fenced just as if women and
children were in question. The principle of adult male
protective legislation was in fact involved unintention-
ally in the awkward wording of the clause. The disputes


68 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR.

which arose in consequence induced the Government to
pass a special Act (the Factory Act of 1856, 19 and 20
Viet. cap. 38), for the purpose of explaining and limiting
the words above quoted. It was enacted that " the said
section 21, so far as the same refers to mill-gearing,
shall apply only to those parts thereof with which
children and young persons and women are liable to
come in contact, either in passing or in their ordinary
occupation in the factory. " Adult males, then, were to be
left to be crushed to death by their own carelessness,
when so small an expenditure would render these acci-
dents nearly impossible. Twenty years later the absurdity
as well as the inhumanity of this limitation seems to have
become apparent, and in the Factory and Workshop Act
of 1878 the sections (5 and 6) relating to the fencing
of machinery apply to "any person," which of course
includes the adult male. Nor, while these sections were
debated in committee, was any objection made nor any
reference to the old disputes. The regulations in the
same Act relating to bakehouses involve men as well as
boys, but it was explained by Mr. Cross that they were
intended for the good of the bread, not the good of the men.
But the principle of legislation for men was sufficiently
conceded in the matter of fencing.

Adult Women's Labour. After the remarks just made
upon the expediency of restrictions on adult men's labour,
it may be superfluous to consider whether like restric-
tions are justifiable in the case of adult women. It
seems to be conceded that women are less able to take
care of themselves than men, and accordingly since 1833
they have been an object of care to the Legislature. No


ni -l THE FACTORY ACTS, 69

doubt, with trifling exceptions, they have formed no
trades unions, and apparently have taken no measures to
protect themselves. In the case of domestic service,
nevertheless, they have known perfectly well how to
advance their interests. It is, indeed, a remarkable fact
worthy of careful notice that while factory labour has
engrossed so large a share of the attention of Parliament,
and added a multitude of Acts to the Statute Book, there
is really no statute law worth speaking of which relates
to domestic service. The common law, which in this case
means little more than custom, has been found sufficient
to secure the rights and interests of adult women as well
as men. This, however, seems to indicate by contrast the
need for legislation where the conditions of labour are
very different The most absolute of labour prohibi-
tions, for instance, is that of the Act of 1842 (5 and
6 Yict. cap. 99), which declared it to be "unfit that
women and girls should be employed in any mine or
colliery." Everybody has acquiesced in this law, and
though the circumstances of mines may be described as
exceptional, so in fact in some degree are all the circum-
stances in which restrictive legislation has been applied.
A factory where people work together in large numbers,
and under necessity to remain the whole interval of time
determined by the employers or by custom, is an excep-
tion to the conditions of agricultural or domestic labour
which had prevailed from primeval times down to a
century or two ago.

Professor Fawcett has upon every suitable occasion
especially in his powerful speech in the House of
Commons on 30th July 1873 protested against inter-
ference with adult women's labour on the ground that


70 THE STATE IS BELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

there was no more justification for interfering with their
labour than there was for interfering with the labour of
men. 1 This opinion he repeated in the debates upon the
Factory Act of 1878. His argument does not readily
admit of answer except upon the grounds adopted gener-
ally in this essay. If the liberty of the subject, or any
abstract indefeasible right is to be recognised, Professor
Fawcett cannot be answered. But if we say that legis-
lation is a matter of circumstance, and must be guided
by experience, then there are ample grounds, not only
for the Mines Act of 1842, but generally for the course
of legislation in regard to women. In the next section,
indeed, I venture to advocate a decided advance in
restrictive legislation as regards women.

Employment of Mothers. Another question relating
to the factory laws is that of the expediency of allow-
ing the employment, as is usually said, of married,
or more strictly speaking, of child-bearing women in
factories and workshops. The great evil which arises
from such employment is the separation of the mother
from her young children. In the case of infants who
ought to be suckled, the result is usually disastrous.
Committed during the whole day to the care of inexperi-
enced and uninterested nurses, they are fed on "pap "
that is, bread and water or some mixed food hardly more
suitable to an infant's stomach. A large proportion
succumb, and those who, by any fortunate accident of
more vigorous constitution or slightly better treatment,
survive, are too often ruined physically and mentally,
and grow up into a stunted and sickly generation. Im-

1 Fawcett's "Speeches on some Current Political Questions," p. 133.


m.] THE FACTOKY ACTS. 71

provident marriages, too, are much promoted by the fact
that the mother can earn her own living. The evils
arising out of the admission of mothers to the mills are
in fact so palpable, and so generally admitted in the
manufacturing districts, that the only question is, Are
such evils remediable ?

It has long, indeed, been one of the most frequent
and urgent proposals of trade unionists that married
women should be "taken out of the mills." The so-
called labour advocates are often a great deal nearer to
the truth than the general public believe. But then,
unfortunately, they give reasons for their opinions, and
these reasons will not always bear examination. Thus,
in favour of the summary exclusion of married women, it
is argued that the market is overstocked, and that if
married women were taken out the operatives would
realise a great social and domestic benefit, whilst "much
of the overplus labour would be reduced." This, however,
is obviously bad political economy. We cannot possibly
increase the welfare of the people by lessening labour,
the source of wealth. But there is another possible
aspect of the matter. It must not be necessarily assumed
that the amount of earnings is the measure of advantages
enjoyed. Those who know not how to spend well are
often injured rather than bettered by higher earnings ;
and when these earnings are acquired at the cost of
neglecting a young family and destroying the home, the
evils may become such as to demand the attention of the
Legislature. The doctrine of the liberty of the subject
will of course crop up again. On what ground, it will be
asked, can we presume to think of preventing an adult
woman, not uncommonly an unmarried woman, with full


72 THE STATE IN KELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

legal rights, from working where she pleases 1 In this case
the answer is particularly easy and conclusive. On the
ground that the first duty of a mother is to give that
sustenance to her infant which she alone can give in
perfection. Now the Factory Act practically obliges a
woman who works under it to remain at work four and
a half hours at a spell, which is about twice the interval
which should elapse between the meals of a very young
infant. The result is that suckling is abandoned, or,
what is perhaps still worse, an alternation of artificial
and of deteriorated natural food is given to the child.
In any case the interests of a future generation are sacri-
ficed to the apparent good of the present, and the
foundation is laid for multitudinous evils in the future.
Hence arises a considerable part of the shocking infantile
mortality prevailing in many parts of the manufacturing
districts, accompanied by much immorality and intem-
perance not unnaturally produced by the destruction of
home influences.

As some incredulity seems to exist in England as to
the expediency and practicability of legislation concern-
ing this subject, it may be well to mention that the
Social Science Association of Germany, according to Mr.
Mundella, warmly advocates the entire exclusion of
married women from factory labour. The subject has
also been carefully investigated by Mr. Carroll D.
Wright, the chief, and Mr. George H. Long, the deputy-
chief, of the Massachusetts Statistical Bureau. Their
conclusions as stated in the Sixth Annual Eeport of the
Bureau, published in March 1875 (Public Document,
No. 31), are in such striking accord with the views here
advocated that I must make some brief quotations. On


m -l THE FACTORY ACTS. 73

pp. 183-4 the American statisticians denounce the
employment of married women (Le. mothers), as "at
once the most harmful wrong, and the most difficult to
reach." With some deprecation of popular opinion they
pronounce "that married women ought not to be tolerated
in mills at all. Yital science will one day demand their
exclusion ; "but we certainly can recommend the regula-
tion of their work." As to the effect of such employ-
ment upon the health and welfare of the offspring, they
conclude " it is an evil that is sapping the life of our
operative population, and must sooner or later be regu-
lated, or, more probably, stopped."

In the paragraph which I quote below, the American
statisticians explain what has not received proper atten-
tion here, namely, that the employment of a married
woman under the Acts practically defeats the intention
of those Acts, inasmuch as she has domestic work to
perform in addition to a full day's work at the mills.
They say

"We find it a difficult subject to treat, so many
obstacles come up, so many seemingly insurmountable
barriers, so much that smacks of sentimentahsm, but
still speaks to one's highest appreciation of real justice
and mercy, and to one's sympathy for the helpless who
now must be raised in such a way as to entail constant
expense, when, by proper treatment and deprivation
from immediate earnings, comfort and strength for old
age would be secured. It is a knotty point, and one
which must demand the attention of philanthropists and
law-makers, as it already has of mill-owners, and which
will soon call for serious consideration; but it is so
delicate and so knotty, we can at the present time do little


74 THE STATE IN EELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

more than enter an earnest appeal for this class of workers,
which has, as a class by itself, been overlooked in the
desire to establish some more noisy reforms. To be sure,
married women have received, or will receive, what
benefits accrue from the ten-hour law - } but when it is
considered that no ten-hour law can ever be put into
practical operation by the mother of a family, even when
she has nothing but her family to attend to, it will be
readily seen how utterly impossible it is for such law to
reach the woman who does ten hours' work in the mill,
cooks for her husband and children, and cares for the
household. It is a slavery which must be abolished or
alleviated ; and, if we succeed in drawing the attention
of earnest practical men to the subject, we shall have no
fear but the intelligence of the citizens of Massachusetts
will, at an early day, remove the evil."

So great are the social evils thus arising that no doubt
can exist as to the propriety of legislative interference
could a practicable method be devised which would not
entail counterbalancing evils. There are as usual many
possible courses. Summary and immediate exclusion of
mothers from factory work is out of the question, so con-
siderable are the numbers concerned, and so difficult the
position into which many women have brought them-
selves by thoughtless marriages. Some intermediate
and palliative measure is therefore requisite, such as
the permission of employment for mothers at those
factories only where well- supervised creches are pro-
vided by the employers, the mother being permitted
to break the morning and afternoon spells in order to
suckle her child. This system has been carried into
effect in some French factories with much success ; and


Hi ] THE FACTORY ACTS. 75

it is regularly adopted in many laundries. Even without
legislative interference much good would be done if
employers would make it a rule to inquire into the cir-
cumstances of married or child-bearing women, and only
to give employment where there are no young children
to be injured, or where, on consideration of all the cir-
cumstances, more harm than good would be done by re-
fusal. This system has long been maintained by a large
firm of cotton thread manufacturers in Glasgow. It
would be even more advantageous in the case of any large
isolated factory which furnishes the sole employment of
the neighbourhood. I will not, however, further dwell
upon this subject here, because I have recently treated
it at some length in the Contemporary Review for January
1882 (vol. xli. pp. 37-53), where will be found a good
deal of evidence concerning the evils in question, and
some suggestions as to the best form of remedy.

Apprenticeship or Industrial Slavery of Youths. A sub-
ject well worthy of attention, but which receives little,
is that of apprenticeship, and the terms under which
young persons are educated to a trade. An admirable
article, to be found both in the Penny and the English
Cyclopaedias, and in Knight's Political Dictionary, gives a
detailed history of the law and practice of apprentice-
ship. The binding of young persons to serve masters
was unknown to the Eomans and the Roman law. Its
origin is to be sought in the mediaeval gilds from the
twelfth century onwards, the purpose being obviously to
combine instruction with that limitation of numbers
entering a trade which was always a prime point of gild
policy. Subsequently to the twelfth century appren-


76 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

ticeship prevailed in all the more advanced nations of
Europe in France, Germany, Italy, and Spain, as well as
England. According to Adam Smith, seven years was
the usual term of the engagement in all trades and
countries. But it is probable that there was no settled
rule. The number seven probably prevailed from the
superstitions or traditional reasons which made it pre-
dominate in many human institutions. Apprenticeship
is first incidentally noticed in the English Statute -Book
in the year 1388 (12 Kick II cap. 3). From the 7
Henry IV. cap. 17 (1405-6) we learn that apprenticeship
had become a common practice so common that this
law was intended to prevent children from going into
trades and to retain them as agricultural labourers.
In another Act (8 Henry VI. cap. 11) the taking of ap-
prentices is stated to have been at that time a custom
of London time out of mind. The whole law of the
subject was consolidated and perfected by the celebrated
Statute of Apprentices (5 Eliz. cap. 4) of which the
second half, sections 25 to 48, is almost exclusively
occupied in defining the term of apprenticeship in various
trades. The general rule was (sec. 36) that no one could
be apprenticed other than such as be under the age of
twenty-one years, which section, together with the pro-
hibitions in section 31, was intended to prevent any
person from entering a handicraft unless he were brought
up to it when young. The term of apprenticeship was
to be seven years at least (sec. 26), "so as the term
and years of such apprentice do not expire or determine
afore such apprentice shall be of the age of twenty-four
years at the least." Apparently, then, every apprentice to
a manual occupation was bound to remain in such posi-


in ] THE FACTORY ACTS. 77

tion up to the age of twenty-four years at least, though
it is provided (sec. 25) that in agriculture twenty- one
years may be the end of the term.

We must suppose that the clauses of this great but
noxious Act relating to apprentices were found more
practicable and less tyrannical than those relating to
adult workmen, for they long remained in operation in
the trades which existed at the epoch of the Act. As
elsewhere remarked, newly -in vented occupations were
exempt under section 31 from the restrictions of the
statute, so that apprenticeship was in them optional. A
seven years' apprenticeship was, however, for a long time
the customary mode of entering all trades, and the cus-
tom survives even to the present day. It is a curious
fact, too, that even in those trades, such as the woollen
manufacture, which were legally under the Statute of
Apprentices, the law of Elizabeth was entirely forgotten,
being known neither to masters nor men. The custom
of the seven years' apprenticeship was, however, tradi-
tionally established, and a long struggle arose when
manufacturers began in the newly -built mills to intro-
duce women and children who had served no apprentice-
ship. Combinations of woollen weavers were at length
formed to endeavour to maintain the custom, and they
seem in time to have discovered the existence of the
Elizabethan law. While Parliament, on the one hand,
was occupied in endeavouring to suppress combinations
of workmen, these workmen succeeded in prosecuting
several employers and convicting them for breaches of
the Statute of Apprentices. As, however, the enforce-
ment of the law would have thrown great numbers of
working people out of employment, Parliament resorted


78 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

in 1803 to the device of suspending the laws of appren-
ticeship, a suspension renewed in successive years until
they were repealed in 1809 (49 Geo. Ill cap. 109).

Thus at length died apprenticeship as the statutory
mode of entering trades. The recent entire repeal of
the 5 Eliz. cap. 4, and of various other statutes relat-
ing to the subject, has left little written law on the
subject except what relates to parish or marine appren-
tices. But there undoubtedly still remains the common-
law power on the part of parents of binding their children
apprentices, and so recent a law as the Employers and
"Workmen Act (1875) recognises the custom by provid-
ing for the settlement of disputes between master and
apprentices (sections 5 to 7). Such disputes are to be
determined by courts of summary jurisdiction as if they
were between employers and workmen. The justices
may indeed rescind the instrument of apprenticeship,
ordering the whole or any part of the premium to be
repaid. But they may also order the apprentice to per-
form his duties, and if he fails they may, after the expira-
tion of one month, imprison him for a period not exceed-
ing fourteen days. This, moreover, may be done " from
time to time," which is understood to mean that after
one order of performance the justices may impose any
succession of fourteen-day terms of^ imprisonment upon a
refractory apprentice. Except, then, by the consent of
the parties, or the merciful discretion of the justices in
rescinding the indentures, the apprentice is in the posi-
tion of a slave to his master, bound to fulfil his reason-
able orders under the constant penalty of imprisonment

There is reason to hope and believe, indeed, that the
practice of binding youths to long terms of apprentice-


IIL] THE FACTORY ACTS. 79

ship is falling into desuetude. The demand for boys'
labour in factories, shops, workshops, the telegraph ser-
vice, etc., is so great that the youths are masters of the
situation; they can choose their employment, and ask
fair wages as well. Thus in many trades journeymen
are glad to get intelligent youths as assistants, without
insisting on a long term of service. As the intelligence
of children is raised under the Education and Factory
Acts this tendency will still further develop itself. In
fact, the seven years' indentures can only be required in
some few trades which by combination succeed in limit-
ing their numbers. The question may well admit of
discussion, therefore, whether on every ground the com-
mon law, allowing a parent to bind his child to a long
term of industrial servitude, ought not to be abolished
almost entirely. The law and practice is such as to give
the master a vastly greater power than the parent him-
self. The child is bound at an age when he can have
no sure judgment nor choice of a trade, and once bound
there is no further choice. There is no field for the dis-
play of inclination or talent. Surely the power of the
parent thus to divest himself of his responsibilities is
altogether anomalous, and in operation often little short
of barbarous. It is now simply a survival, an obsolete
relic of a former state of things. There is, however,
little need to argue about the matter, because the great-
est authorities have denounced the custom. Adam
Smith (Wealth of Nations, Book I, chap, x., part ii.)
especially has condemned long apprenticeships in well-
known passages.

"The institution of long apprenticeships has no tend-
ency to form young people to industry. A journeyman


80 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUK. [CHAP.

who works by the piece is likely to be industrious,
because he derives a benefit from every exertion of his
industry. An apprentice is likely to be idle, and almost
always is so, because he has no immediate interest to be
otherwise. ... A young man naturally conceives an
aversion to labour, when for a long time he receives no
benefit from it. ... A young man would practise
with much more diligence and attention, if from the
beginning he wrought as a journeyman, being paid in
proportion to the little work which he could execute, and
paying in his turn for the materials which he might
sometimes spoil through awkwardness and inexperience.
His education would generally in this way be more
effectual, and always less tedious and expensive."

These opinions of Smith have been to a great extent
borne out by the disuse of apprenticeship in many trades.
What remains of the practice is a survival which ought
to be put an end to. Inquiry would, no doubt, be
needed as to the exact mode of doing this. Probably a
father ought not to be allowed to hire out his child for a
longer term than one year at a time; in any case,
apprenticeships should be limited to three years. Such
a tyrannical power as that possessed by the justices of
forcing a young person to work at an unwelcome trade
under the fear of constantly -rei^ewed imprisonment
should be repealed, as befitting the Middle Ages rather
than the reign of Victoria.

Since the above remarks were first drafted, the public
has been startled by the case of the unfortunate youths
brought home from Constantinople by Mr. Littler, Q C.
It was actually suggested in the Police Court that the law
against slavery would apply in the case of these youths ;


in.] THE FACTORY ACTS. 81

but the magistrate held that apprenticeship bonds duly
executed held good against that law. The Englishman
is engaged in putting down slavery in all parts of the
world, but is unaware that parents can and do sell their
own children into slavery and wretchedness here in
London itself, under the forms of a law which ought to
be regarded as a mere survival from semi-barbarous
times. And although a child is legally an infant, and
incapable of most legal acts below the age of twenty-one
years, yet his nominal consent, even at a very tender
age, is held sufficient to consign him to industrial slavery
up to the age of legal majority !

Shop Assistants' Labour. An important but hitherto
little regarded kind of industry is that of men, women,
and young persons employed in retail shops and ware-
houses. Where the work done is simply that of trade,
as distinguished from manufacture, the State has hitherto
held entirely aloof. The distinction is clearly an arti-
ficial one in many cases ; the making up of pounds of
sugar and the packing of goods is clearly a manual
operation, or sometimes a machine operation, identical
with much that is done in factories. Grocers' assistants,
too, are frequently employed in grinding coffee, chopping
loaf sugar, mixing teas, and the like. As a shopman or
woman seldom sits down during the hours of work, the
labour is exhausting in the long-run, In the character
of the work itself there is no reason why it should not
be regulated as much as various handicrafts, The
anomaly of the distinction drawn by the law is strongly
marked in the case of some establishments where per-
sons employed upstairs under the Factory and Workshop


82 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

Act are brought downstairs to assist in the shop as soon
as the legal hour has struck upon the clock.

We must assume, then, that the hours of shop assist-
ants' labour remain unregulated from regard to the con-
venience of the public, or else from regard to the profits
of the employers. But the interests of the employers
have not been allowed to stand in the way of the crea-
tion of the Factory Acts. It seems, then, that it is the
public necessity or convenience which keeps shops open
to ten or twelve o'clock at night, and obliges shop
assistants to labour, in many cases, from fourteen to
eighteen, or even nineteen hours in the twenty-four.

It is well known that neither the shop people nor the
philanthropic public acquiesce entirely in this state of
things. The existence of many early closing associations
shows the prevailing discontent. Considerable success
has been achieved in some towns or parts of towns by
these associations, and most high-class shops now close
at six or seven o'clock, or nearly as early as we should
think desirable. But in the east end of London and
other poor localities the hours of closing are still very
late, especially on Saturday night. The difficulty of the
matter is clearly that of competition. Jones has a well-
grounded fear that if he closes his shop at 7 P.M., his rival
Brown will enjoy all the better trade until 9 or 10. Such
gain of customers may eventually enable Brown to drive
Jones out of the trade altogether. Failure in the com-
petition of retail trade may mean ruin. No ordinary
tradesman, then, can singly break through the custom of
the locality. It is obvious, too, that as a chain may
break from the defect of a single link, so the defection
of a single grocer from an early closing association may


in ] THE FACTORY ACTS. 83

oblige all the other grocers to withdraw. Only a strong
spirit of trades unionism, or else the abstention of the
public, or, in the last resort, legislative interference, can
effect early closing.

I venture to think that the early closing of shops in
so-called respectable neighbourhoods is mainly due to
the fact that richer customers usually go home to dinner
between 6 and 7 P M., and, owing to our lamest faire
system of moral legislation, ladies especially are obliged
to retire from the streets about that time, The
working classes, on the contrary, having come from
their employment at some time between half-past five
and seven o'clock, are then prepared, if not obliged, to
begin their shopping. If this be the state of the case, it
seems to be very doubtful whether any considerable
change will be effected without the intervention of the
Legislature. As there can be no doubt about the advan-
tage of shorter hours to the shop people, the only re-
maining questions regard the convenience of the public,
and the practicability of enforcing a restrictive law. As
to the latter point, Mr. Henderson, one of the inspectors
of factories in the Metropolis, expressed considerable
doubt, in his evidence before the Factory Acts Commis-
sion. Considering, however, that shops depend for their
trade upon publicity, and that competitors in trade
would have the strongest possible motives for expos-
ing each other's infractions of the law, I cannot see
the practical difficulties. An inspector, by merely
walking down a street of shops after the legal hour
of closing, would discover the infractions without much
difficulty.

The real point to consider, therefore, is whether the


84 THE STATE IK KELATIOST TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

public, especially the working-class public, would suffer.
Judging from their present habits of stopping up to ten
o'clock at night, and twelve o'clock on Saturday nights,
they would suffer. It can hardly, indeed, be supposed
that anybody is driven by necessity to buy clothes,
furniture, and other permanent articles, after eight o'clock.
The case may be somewhat different with food, tobacco,
drinks, and other matters of immediate need. . Some
doubt may arise as to whether the brightly-lighted streets
of a poor neighbourhood do not really form the promenade
ground of those who have few pleasures to relieve the
dull monotonous round of a laborious life. To those
who live in crowded dirty lodgings unsavoury streets
may be a breathing -place, and the well -filled shop
windows the only available museum of science and art.
Much care and discrimination would obviously be needed,
and a legislator might find the question almost as thorny
as that of public-house closing and the bond fide traveller.
In any case, it is necessary to approach the question
tentatively and gradually. The experiment might, more-
over, be tried at first in such separate towns as should
present strong petitions in favour of it ; but to prevent
unfair competition the law should apply to the whole of
a town, if to any part. The regulation might even be
carried out by special clauses in local Acts of Parliament,
in the same way that the municipal authorities of Man-
chester and Liverpool are endeavouring to remedy the
great abuse of young children trading in the streets at
night. Such special legislation no doubt needs to be
watched, but when properly watched presents the best
method of gaining experience. It amounts, in fact, to
experimental legislation.


in ] THE FACTORY ACTS. 85

Agricultural Labour. Very little can be said in this
book on the subject of agricultural labourers. The
"hind," as he now exists in the rural parts of England,
is mainly the result of the Land Laws and the Poor
Laws, subjects of great extent and importance which
have little affinity with the special topic of this essay,
and are treated in other volumes of the same series. In
former centuries the agricultural labourer, in common
with all other labourers, came within the scope of the
Statute of Labourers, the Statute of Apprentices, and
other similar laws; but since such kind of legislation
became obsolete, the real peasant, so far as he has been
allowed to exist at all, has not been vexed with much
legislation. Even the Truck Act, as we have seen, does
not apply to him. A family living on their ancestral
farm, and cultivating it with their united labour, repre-
sent so natural and healthy a condition of life that little
or no interference of the State is needed. But bad laws,
especially bad Poor Laws, not to speak of bad Game
Laws, have in England caused the peasant to diverge
sadly from this state of things. The laws of pauper
settlement led to the general destruction of labourers'
cottages wherever they could possibly be destroyed.
The labourers were obliged to crowd together in the
nearest village or town. Hence, whenever much labour
was needed for the cultivation of root and other special
crops, gangs of men, boys, women, and children, had to
be employed, in a manner giving rise to scandalous
results. As it was impossible all at once to reverse the
course of events which led to these abuses, the only
resource was to regulate agricultural gangs, a work
attempted in the 30 and 31 Viet. cap. 130. This Act


86 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

provided that every person acting as gang-master should
previously obtain a license from the justices, on proof
that he was a person of good character, and fit to be
trusted with the control of a gang. No child under
eight years of age was to be employed ; no females were
to work in the same gang as men; and, when females
were employed, a licensed female gang-mistress was to
be present. From the first the Act was to a great extent
evaded or disregarded. Although penalties were imposed
upon every breach of the Act, no machinery of inspection
or prosecution was provided , it was nobody's business
to see that the Act was observed, and it was therefore
not observed.

Shortly after the passing of this Act were published
the elaborate inquiries of the Commission appointed in
1867 to investigate the employment of children, young
persons, and women, in agriculture. l The facts brought
to light showed abundant scope for State interference,
but no useful results have followed except as regards the
compulsory education of agricultural children. This was
specially provided for by the Agricultural Children
Act, 1873 (36 and 37 Yict. cap. 67), which, however,
was repealed for no very clear reason by the Elementary
Education Act of 1876, the provisions of which were
substituted. But section 16 of the Agricultural Children
Act had already repealed so much of the fourth section
of the Agricultural Gangs Act as related to children, and
this repeal holds good. It seems to follow that the
remainder of this fourth section, relating to mixed gangs
and female gang-mistresses, probably entirely inoperative,
together with the provisions of the Elementary Educa-
1 Parliamentary Papers, 1867-8 [4068 and ij, 1868-9 [4202 and i.]


IIL] THE FACTORY ACTS 87

tion Acts, forms practically the sum total of direct re-
strictive legislation now applying to agriculture. Here
is a wonderful contrast to the elaborate regulations of
the factory, workshop, shipping, coal mines, metalliferous
mines, and other Acts relating to the various branches
of manufacturing and commercial industry. It would
lead us too far to inquire whether this absence of
legislative restriction is due to its needlessness, or to
the unwillingness of landowning legislators to touch
the interests of their own order.


THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.


CHAPTER IV.

INDIRECT INTERFERENCE WITH INDUSTRY TRADES
UNION LEGISLATION.

HAVING now considered the application of the principles
of industrial legislation as manifested in the direct inter/-
ference of the State, we have yet the larger and more
-difficult part of the subject before us. Individuals are
in the habit of interfering with their neighbours' affairs,
and in the case of trade and industry such interference
has from early times assumed a decided form. Common
trade interest is one of the strongest and most frequent
bonds of society, and, judged by the light of history, is
likely always to be a considerable factor in social affairs.
It leads to the creation of secret or open confederacies
attempting to control not only their own members, but
all whose actions touch the trade interest. Imyeria
in wvpwio are continually growing up, and, under the
guise or name of gilds, fraternities, colleges, corpora-
tions, friendly societies, trades unions, institutes or asso-
ciations of various titles assume a right of government.
It thus becomes a highly important and difficult question
for the State to decide how such bodies can be treated.
The State in controlling the individual must, of course,
control his control over other individuals, where that


iv,] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION. 89

becomes noxious to the community. This task, how-
ever, is one of great difficulty, owing to the secret and
insidious forms which trade confederacy assumes when
prohibited, and the insensible way in which it varies in
degree from perfectly legitimate discussion to distinct
conspiracy, enforced occasionally by criminal outrage.

History of Trades Societies. It is always needful to
view the present by the light of the past, but more
especially so in the case of trade societies. We learn
from history that such societies are among the earliest and
most persistent institutions of the human race. In the
Old Testament, for instance, are to be found allusions to
a gild of apothecaries (ISTehemiah iii. 8, and other
passages, as specified in Mr. Spencer's Descriptive Soci-
ology, No. 7, p. 103). In the Eoman State trade so-
cieties arose at least as early as the time of Publius
Servilius, under whose reign existed a collegium mer-
catorum. The Eoman law, however, was very jealous
of the existence of any such bodies, and in the Digest we
find that the formation of collegia was prohibited unless
under the authority of the Emperor or a Senatus-Consul-
tum (Digest 47, tit. 22, ss. 1, 2, 3). No doubt in Eoman
Britain such collegia opificum existed \ nevertheless the
first origin of modern trade societies must be traced to
the gilds of the rude Teutonic tribes. Space totally
fails me here to allow description of the three kinds of
gilds Frith or Peace gilds, religious gilds, and trade
gilds which undoubtedly existed in Saxon times, the
charters of some of them being extant in Thorpe's Diplo-
matarium Anglicum. The laws of Ina, Alfred, and
Athelstan mention and recognise such bodies, and even


90 THE STATE IN KELATION TO LABOUB. [CHAP.

if some societies such, as the Freemasons have not a
continuous history from the line of Athelstan to the
present day, certain it is that trade gilds have never
been wanting ; the City Companies still meeting in their
guild halls are the lineal descendants in a degenerated
form of the Saxon gilds. For the whole history of the
mediaeval gilds I must refer the reader to the essay of
Brentano " On the History and Development of Gilds,
and the Origin of Trades Unions," prefixed to the invalu-
able collection of documents given in Toulmin Smith's
English Gilds (Early English Text Society), also issued
separately. Brentano's own views on industrial legislation
should be read cum grwo, but his history is excellent.
A great amount of information is also given in Mr.
C. Walford's Insurance Cyd&pc&dia, vol. v., article
"Gilds."

As the relations of labour and capital turn mainly
upon economic considerations, and as the theory of the
subject has been much misunderstood and perverted even
by economists, I commence with the briefest possible
exposition of what I conceive to be the true theory of
the mechanics of production,

Economics of the Labour Question, The economics of
the labour question may be stated in a manner brief and
simple enough. Production of wealth consists in the
putting together of certain materials, and the working
them up into some novel form by the aid of labour that
is, by muscular force, and mental skill and knowledge.
As with the Witches 7 Cauldron, there is needed

"Double, double toil and trouble ;
Fire burn and cauldron bubble. ".,


iv.] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION. 91

The point of the matter is that, like the contents of the
cauldron, the results of production form a joint result
or medley. All the constituents are thrown into hotch-
potch, and as it is impossible to say what part of the
product is due to any of the contributions thrown into
the cauldron, no natural, necessary, or legal principle of
dividing the proceeds can be assigned. If, indeed, all
the elements of production, the materials as well as the
labour and skill of management, are all due to one
person, he of course owns the whole of the products, and
no question of distribution arises. The product is
neither wages, profit, interest nor rent, nor any combina-
tion of these. It is wealth or commodity simply.

Under the complex arrangements of modern industry,
however, the several requisites which go to the produc-
tion of commodity, such as cotton cloth, are contributed
by different persons and classes of persons. One person
owns the land on which the mill stands ; another builds
the mill and stocks it with machinery ; the work-people
furnish what might seem the most essential of all the
labour which actually produces the cloth. But where
all are essential there can be no question of degree and
precedence. The finished product is the joint product
of all that was requisite to produce it. Quite clearly,
too, the wealth to be earned by all those concerned is to
be found in the aggregate product of the work after
being sold. Eent, profit, interest, and wages, must all
be paid out of the proceeds of the business, which is in
modern trade the money value of the produce.

But the difficult question now arises, on what principle
or system, if any, the value of the joint product is to
be shared among the landowners, capitalists, managers,


92 THE STATE IN BELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

and workmen, who have contributed to its production.
Property in result cannot possibly be traced, as we
have seen, through the complex process of manufacture.
Hence it may be safely said that there is no natural
principle, certainly no single and simple principle, on
which the division can be effected. No person's share
being defined, each must ask for the most which he has
any chance of getting, and must content himself with
the best which he succeeds in securing. Every contri-
butor enters voluntarily into the hotch-potch, and he
cannot demand more than was agreed upon when he
entered the partnership. Practically, the whole question
resolves itself into a complex case of the laws of supply
and demand. If any intended partner in the work of
production is dissatisfied with his assigned share of the
expected produce, he is at liberty to refuse to enter into
the business. The other partners then must either con-
cede his demands, or must find somebody else to take
his place, or must abandon the work The whole
adjustment of distribution of wealth thus hinges upon
the question whether one person or thing will do as well
as another. A landlord cannot successfully ask a certain
rent for his land if another landlord is willing to let an
equally good and available site at a lower rent. A
workman cannot expect to get forty shillings a week,
while an equally good workman is ready to work at
thirty-five shillings. As to simple money capital, it
matters little whence it comes, provided it can be had
for a sufficient term, and the smallest fractional difference
in the rate of interest would therefore be a sufficient
cause of preference. The same principle holds true,
likewise, of the business capacity of the manager, though


iv.] TKADES UNION LEGISLATION. 93

in a less obvious manner. It all comes to this, that the
price which the owner of any kind of property, whether
land, labour, or capital, can demand is limited by the
price at which further supplies of the same kind can be
found. In other words, all like articles must be sold at
the same price when they come into competition with
each other in the same market.

Obviously, then, the rate of wages which workmen
can demand will depend upon the relation of supply to
demand of such particular kind of labour. The demand
depends upon the expected value of the produce. If a
certain kind of commodity is much wanted by consumers,
it means that considerable quantities can be sold at a
fair or high price. There will therefore be money
value in plenty to be divided between landowners, capi-
talists, and labourers. But if the production of such
commodity requires a peculiar skill in certain of the
workmen such as happens to be enjoyed by few men,
there is no limitation by competition, and any price can
be obtained by that skill and labour, provided, indeed,
that the shares of the other producers are not reduced
below what they could acquire in other occupations.
The whole affair, therefore, is one of comparative advan-
tages, each contributor to the hotch-potch trying to get
the largest, share of the proceeds, short of the point at
which he will drive the other contributors to find other
hotch-potches where their shares will be better. There
is this further complication in the matter, that, as the
proceeds of production depend both upon the quantity
of commodity produced, and the price at which it can be
sold to consumers, there is no limit to the earnings of a
producer except the inclinations and means of the con-


94 THE STATE IF RELATION TO LABOUR , [CHAP.

sumer that is to say, the portion of other persons' pro-
ductions which he is able and willing to give in exchange.
The earnings of a labourer may therefore be large,
either because he can produce much commodity, or
because what he produces being much valued exchanges
for a large share of other labourers' products. There
thus arise two possible modes of increasing earnings:
the one being to increase products, so as to have more
to sell, and the second to decrease products in order to
sell them at a higher price. But there is this obvious
and all-important difference between these courses, that
the latter tends to impoverish all persons except the
producer, whereas the former tends to enrich both the
producer and those whom he supplies. It follows in-
evitably that if many or all people pursued the latter
policy it would fail altogether ; it can only succeed by
the few enriching themselves at the expense of the
many whereas the former policy of increasing products
enriches alike the giver and the receiver. It is twice
blessed, and is capable of unlimited adoption by all
parties.

A False Theory of Wages. The view above stated of
the economics, or, as it might be called, the mechanics of
production, is so obviously true and so entirely in accord-
ance with facts that it might seem hardly to need the
emphasis here given to it. 1 Nevertheless this view differs
fundamentally from the two theories (for mere theories

1 TMs view of the economics- of industry appears to "be nearly
coincident with that'put forth by the eminent American economist,
Professor Francis A. Walker, in his standard work on " The "Wages
Question : a Treatise on Wages and the Wages Class ; " London,


iv.] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION. 95

they are) of the relations of capital and labour now or
recently prevailing. The first of these theories is known
as the wage-fund theory of the books on political
economy. It represents the rate of wages as depending
upon the amount of capital which employers think
proper to disburse as wages. The wages rate was re-
garded as the dividend, found by dividing the wages
fund by the number of labourers. But, though this
division doubtless takes place, there is nothing in the
theory to determine either the whole amount which is to
be divided, or the proportional share which any particu-
lar labourer may obtain. Nobody can possibly suppose
that workmen in different branches of production, or in
different ranks of the same branch, receive the same
wages.

Nor can anybody imagine that the capitalist distri-
butes his capital simply because it is his capital, irre-
spective of the produce which he expects from the
labour bought. The relations between the producer and
consumer are complicated and obscured by the fact that
the real producer seldom comes into relation with the
real consumer, whom he serves. The process of produc-
tion takes a long time to complete, and middlemen
intervene, who buy up the produce of one in order to
sell again to another. In his capacity of capitalist, the
owner and manager of a mill buys up the share of the
eventual proceeds which the factory hand may expect to
receive. The labourer cannot or will not wait many
weeks; he wants to spend the value of his labour.

1878 (Macmillan) ; but the same view may be traced in the
writings of Mr. Longe, the late Professor (Me Leslie, and others.
This is not the place to inquire into the niceties of the history of
economic doctrine.


96 THE STATE Itf RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

Hence his wages are paid, and spent and consumed,
weeks, or months, or even years, before the useful effect
of his labour is enjoyed by consumers. The capitalist
bridges over this period and discounts the labourer's
share.

But it is not the less true that, in the long-run, the
wages are a share, not of the capitalist's property, but
of the products which that capital assists the labourer to
produce, Obviously, the amount which the capitalist
will advance to any particular workman is not the
amount which he possibly has to advance, but the value
of the product which he expects to receive, taken in
connection with what would be sufficient to pay for
equally good labour by other men. Cases, of course,
constantly occur where the labourer is quite ignorant
and indifferent as to what is to be the result of his
labour ; he simply does what he is asked, and gets his
customary pay. But even this ignorance will not neces-
sarily deprive him or his class from receiving in the long-
run their due share. For if some highly profitable means
of employing such labour arises, many capitalists will
engage in the work, and, in the absence of abundant
supplies of such labour, will be obliged to attract fresh
supplies by raising the rate of wages. But it is evidently
the produce in prospect and not the mere possession of
capital which induces this demand for labour.

Another False Theory. The view here adopted of the
economics of industry differs also from that of many
members of trades unions, who appear to think that their
wages actually come out of their employers' pockets.


iv.] TRADES OTION LEGISLATION. 97

it would seem that the more they receive the less he can
retain. There is no more fallacy in this idea than in
the theory of a good many economists who have held
that as wages rise profits must fall. But any such theory
is not only obviously defective in itself, but is opposed
to facts. It overlooks the fact that the amount received
by the employer is unfixed, depending, as we have seen,
both on the amount of goods produced, and on the price
at which the goods can be sold. Even assuming that
the former factor cannot be raised, it may be open to the
producer to raise the price of his goods, and thus recoup
himself for increased payments of wages. Whether he
can or cannot do so depends upon the state of the market,
and especially upon the question whether other producers
are under like circumstances. There are, of course, excep-
tional cases in which a heedless or unfortunate employer
may really have to pay out of his own pocket the in-
creased wages of his work-people, as when he has made
long-continuing contracts, or has commenced production
in the wrong part of the commercial cycle. But such
mishaps are more or less foreseen and discounted by
capitalists, who look to exceptional profits in brisk times
to balance these exceptional losses. Employers must
earn on the average the customary profits due to their
capital and skill, otherwise the greater attractions of
other branches of trade will draw capital away. Certainly
the employer will no more pay wages out of his own
private fortune than a wine merchant would pay the
wine duties. All such duties are paid by one hand, but
charged to another, namely, the consumer, and so it is, as
a geneial rule, with all other costs of production. The
capitalist, like the merchant, is but an intermediary who

H


98 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

gets goods ready for the consumer, and presents him in
the price a complete bill of costs,

So far is it from being true that high wages imply
loss on the employer's part, that the opposite result will
often follow. Such high wages usually arise from
circumstances occasioning scarcity and high price of
products. Now, on higher -priced goods the employer
will usually get a larger gross profit, even though the
rate be no higher than in ordinary times But it may,
moreover, be possible for the employer to run up the
prices of his goods more than m proportion to the rise
of wages, and he may thus net a considerable profit.
Certainly the efforts made by miners to limit the output
of coal and to raise wages during the coal famine of
1873-74, led to enormous gains on the part of many coal-
owners.

The result which emerges is that the supposed con-
flict of labour with capital is a delusion. The real con-
flict is between producers and consumers. The capitalist
employer is a part of the producing system, and his
conflict is naturally with the consumer who buys from
him. But his function of acting as discounter of the
labourers' share gives rise to a further conflict with the
labouring class. Thus it comes to pass that the capi-
talist is buffeted about and bears the whole brunt of the
economic battle, while the consumer always smarts in
the end.

Imaginary Eight to a Trade. A question which really
lies at the basis of many pasfc and present disputes about
labour is whether a workman can claim any right of
property in his skill. It may be at least plausibly said


iv] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION. 99

that in his education and training a skilled operative
expends no small amount of capital, which remains in-
vested in him, to be repaid by an annuity of higher
wages during his available working life. Any change in
trade which tends to supplant the skill thus acquired
may seem to be an invasion of property almost as dis-
tinctly as if a landowner were turned out of his estate.
Such arguments, however, can hardly be urged either
from an economic or, in the present state of the law,
from a legal point of view. We have nothing here to do
with rights of property in land, which are peculiar in
their nature, owing to the fact that land is necessarily
limited and exclusive, each portion of each other portion,
so that it must become sooner or later the monopolised
property of some person or body of persons But labour
is the primary possession of every person , it represents
the economic value of the person, and in respect of the
greatest number is the sole source of sustenance.

Anything, then, which tends to interfere with the
exercise by any person of the utmost amount of skill
of which he is capable, is pinm facie opposed to the
interests of the community. There may, as we have
seen and shall further see, be counterbalancing advan-
tages which, as in the case of registered medical practi-
tioners and others, justify a certain restriction of industry
in a few cases. But these partial monopolies must be
fully justified and carefully regulated by the State.
Their raison d'etre must be the good of the people out-
side, not that of the privileged few inside the monopoly;
and when they fail to secure this advantage they must
be either reformed or destroyed. But it is, of course, a
totally different matter for any body of labourers to


100 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

endeavour to monopolise a trade without public sanction.
The presumption, usually confirmed by experience, is
that they intend such monopoly for their own benefit,
not for that of the public. The only possible answer is
that a trade society by maintaining regulations, by insist-
ing upon adequate training or apprenticeship as the
means of entry, and by raising a high esprit de corps, may
really serve the public better than an entirely disaggre-
gated body. Such, for instance, is the plea put forward
in defence of those arrant trades unions the Inns of
Court. But the obvious retort is that if they are thus
anxious to serve the public, they must allow the public
to judge of the manner m which the service is to be
performed.

The Original Plan of Modern Trades Unions. Nor, as
we have elsewhere seen, is the common law mote favour-
able to monopoly, the uniform doctrine of which has
been that restraint of trade is illegal, and may even be
punished as a misdemeanour. The case was, no doubt,
different so long as the Statute of Apprentices remained
a part of the letter of the law. It might fairly be
argued that, when the condition of entry into a trade
was by law apprenticeship of at least seven years, per-
sons who, to use the old expression, "intromitted" them-
selves into the trade without due apprenticeship, invaded
legal property. This, accordingly, was the ground upon
which many petitions of working-men were grounded
when a parliamentary committee considered the proposed
repeal of the Statute of Apprentices in 1813. Some
time previously, in the very year which became an epoch
by the publication of the Wealth of Nations, there was


iv ] TRADES UNIOK LEGISLATION. 101

printed a very remarkable pamphlet, which more than
any other publication known to me discloses the origin
and principle of modem trades unions. I should sup-
pose that this pamphlet is now an exceedingly rare docu-
ment, as I know no copy except that in the British
Museum, of which the press mark is 1029, i. 6 (6).
(See Catalogue ad verbum "Plan") It bears a long title,
as follows

" A practicable and eligible plan to secure the rights
and privileges of mechanics with proper directions for
the journeymen, whereby they may get an advancement
in their wages, without loss of time or hindrance of busi-
ness. Humbly submitted to the perusal of the com-
munity at large by the Author. London, 1776 "

This ably written tract urges the general establish-
ment of trades unions. The journeymen of every shop in
a parish were to send one deputy to a parish meeting of
the trade, at which an agent for the parish was to be
selected out of their number. The parish agents,
again, were to meet at times to elect a special or grand
committee with proper salaries. Masters were eligible
equally with the journeymen, and half the special com-
mittee might consist of them. There might also be
two gentlemen mot of the calling. All members were to
pay one shilling a month. All strangers before getting
employment in the metropolis were to apply to onfe of
the clerks of the society and get a certificate of having
entered themselves as a member. Before leaving London
they were to get certificates to carry into the country.
The grand committee were to make use of every lawful
means in their power to preserve their rights inviolate,
and to prevent those from exercising the calling who


102 THE STATE IK RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

were not authorised by law, whether as journeymen or
masters. Those, however, were to be accepted who had
followed the trade prior to the establishment of the pro-
posed society. These arrangements, it was hoped, would
"deter those from communicating the secrets of our
trade, whose duty it is most to conceal them." The com-
mittee were further to avail themselves of every infor-
mation, and to pursue every legal mode to prevent any
person from working at "our" calling who refuses to
comply with the articles and resolutions of this society.

This plan, it will be at once seen, anticipates the
whole principles and mode of working of modern trades
unions. Societies appear actually to have been formed
on the basis sketched out, for, in Brentano's work (p. 110),
we find mention of an advertisement in 1802 calling a
meeting of one weaver out of the parish he represents,
in order to determine on prosecuting those who unlaw-
fully exercise or follow the trade of a weaver. But the
parish area was afterwards abandoned by societies, and the
limits of districts selected as might be most convenient.
Masters, again, have not in recent times taken the pro-
minent place assigned to them in the "Plan," although
in many trades it has been the practice to lequire both
foremen and employers to belong to the society at least
formally. In all other respects the ra^son d'etre and
the principles of action of trade societies are faithfully
sketched out in this remarkable pamphlet. One of the
ablest passages, however, is that in which the writer in
a few words puts the whole question of the right to a
trade before us. He says (p 14) :

"It has been frequently objected that to deprive an
ingenious man of the liberty to exercise his abilities


iv.] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION, 103

merely because his parents had it not in their power to
put him apprentice, and permit another of meaner parts
to prosecute business, only because he has enjoyed such
an advantage, is notoriously unjust and glaringly partial :
to which I answer, such is the imperfection of all human
laws, that in their operation some individuals are always
prejudiced , and the nearest approaches we can make to
justice is by preferring the good of the whole to that
of a part. Whenever, therefore, the exercise of an
individual's abilities invades the rights of a whole
profession, civil and natural law proclaim such exercise
unjust."

It is impossible to deny the ingenuity of the argument
here given, identical with that ever since employed by
the advocates of exclusive trade societies : that the interest
of the many i & the many of the same trade is to be
preferred to the interest of one. A single workman, by
accepting wages below the tariff, or by working too
vigorously, may lead to a change prejudicial to the whole
trade. Of course the answer is that the still greater
number, the public at large, are left out of view altogether.
If the interests of a thousand are to overbalance those of
one, still more must the interests of hundreds of thou-
sands or of millions overbalance those of thousands.

Social Effects of Private Monopolies. Let it be under-
stood, then, in the clearest way, that whosoever tries to
raise his own wages by preventing other persons from work-
ing at his trade, and thus makes his own kind of labour
scarce, attempts to levy contributions from other people.
It is simply a case of private taxation. In the early
Norman times it was not uncommon for the small sea-


104 THE STATE IK RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

port towns to impose customs duties of their own upon
goods imported, the proceeds being applied to the advan-
tage of the town. One of the first results of improved
government was the abolition of such exclusive imposts.
Whatever duties were levied were to go to the king,
who was supposed to expend them for the benefit of
the whole community.

Those who pay the private duties levied by exclusive
trades are the consumers of the goods made by the trade.
High wages for hat-makers simply mean high prices of
hats, and so much out of the pockets of hat-wearers. Or,
as in consequence of expense the hat-wearers will prob-
ably wear fewer hats, it means less convenience to them.
We ought not to look at such subjects from a class point
of view, and in economics at any rate should regard all
men as brothers. But it cannot escape attention that,
as by far the larger number of hat-wearers are workmen,
a very large part of the tax in any case falls upon brother
workmen. In this particular case the harm done may
not be considerable, but in the case of other trades it
certainly is Nothing, for instance, can be more injurious
to the poorer classes than any artificial restrictions in the
building trades tending to raise the cost of building, or
to impede the introduction of improvements in brick-
laying and the other building arts. The effect is pecu-
liarly injurious, because it places great obstacles in the
way of any attempt to produce really good new dwellings
for the working classes. There are always quantities of
old houses and buildings of various sorts which can be
let as lodgings at a rate below that at which it is possible
to build good new ones. The result is either that very
inferior cheap houses must be built, or the more expen-


iv ] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION.

sive model dwellings fall practically to a better-pai
class. The general effect is to make really wholesome
houses a luxury for the wealthier classes, while the
residuum have to herd together between whatever walls
they can find.

Of course it may be said that to some extent unionists
raise their wages at the cost of the wealthy classes.
Beautifully-printed books, for instance, are seldom pur-
chased except by book-fanciers, and other well-to-do
people. Hence } if high wages could be maintained in
the high- class printing houses, the extra cost would
come, not out of the employer's funds, but out of the
spare cash of the book -buyers. Little harm would be
done in this particular case, because such bibliomaniacs
actually aim at finding scarce and costly books, and buy
in preference those books which are printed in small
numbers. But anything which tends to raise the price
of printing in general has the very pernicious effect
of hindering the diffusion of knowledge among the
people.

Nor is the injury to their fellow-workmen by exclu-
sive trades unionists solely produced by this raising of
cost directly. As is ingeniously pointed out by Professor
Alfred Marshall in his "Economics of Industry" (pp.
206-7), several trades usually act together in the produc-
tion of any important commodity. Thus bricklayers,
stone-masons, carpenters, plasterers, slaters, painters,
common labourers, and various minor trades, are all
concerned in the production of a house. If, then, any
one of these trades, say plasterers, could by combination
seriously raise their wages, and thus add to the cost of
the house, the effect would be to diminish the demand


106 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

for such houses, and to lessen the wages of the other
trades concerned. Each trade which maintains a strict
union is, in fact, striving to secure an unfair share of
the public expenditure. Though workmen, in respect of
belonging to the same social class, may try to persuade
themselves that their interests are identical, this is not
really the case. They are and must be competitors, and
every rise of wages which one body secures by mere
exclusive combination represents a certain amount, some-
times a large amount, of injury to the other bodies of
workmen. We must further take into account the
consideration that by raising barriers around trades,
and preventing the surplus labour of one from finding
employment in another, there is a general decrease of
producing power. On the whole, then, we conclude that
it is quite impossible for trades unions in general to
effect any permanent increase of wages, and that success
in maintaining exclusive monopolies leads to great loss
and injury to the community in general

There would be a certain fairness in the establish-
ment of monopolies if all trades were equally able to
combine and tax each other. The result would of
course be very absurd and very pernicious, but it would
be equal. As a matter of fact, however, those who most
need combination to better their fortunes are just those
who are the least able to carry it out As in so many
other walks of life, to him that hath shall be given. A
small body of skilled men are able in some cases to form
a nearly complete and exclusive society, and by the
restriction of apprentices to hold the "mystery" as
their private property. This power would doubtless be
much more used were it not controlled by the compe-


iv.] TKADES UlSriON LEGISLATION. 107

tition of foreign producers. Where goods are very
portable in proportion to value, it is obviously impossible
for any mere trade society to prevent the substitution
of foreign productions. There are certain trades, how-
ever, which are concerned either with very heavy, bulky
goods, or else with work which must be performed
upon the spot. Bricks, for instance, of which 1000 may
be had for little more than twenty shillings, are usually
made in close proximity to the buildings of which they
are to form part. In any case, they cannot be concealed,
and thus brickmakers are (or were) able to exercise a
close supervision over the sources of supply. Accordingly,
the brickmakers of Manchester actually succeeded for
a length of time in maintaining the rule that no bricks
made beyond four miles of Manchester should be
brought into that city. House - carpenters formerly
enjoyed the advantage of making all the wood-work of
a house upon the spot. A close union could then by a
strike entirely stop the progress of the building. The
advance in the use of wood-working machinery, and
the possibility of importing foreign machine-made
window-frames and doors, has somewhat diminished this
advantage. But the plasterers still have the master
builders at their mercy ; for, though a few mouldings
and casts may be made elsewhere, the bulk of the
plasterer's work must be done actually upon the walls
and ceilings of the house in situ. In countries where
wooden houses are chiefly used, these may be bought
and carried piecemeal for erection on any spot, but
those who prefer to dwell in brick, stone, and plaster
dwellings must continue for the present to be more or
less at the mercy of the building trades.


103 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAI>.

Such being the facts with regard to exclusive trade
monopolies, what is the attitude which the State should
maintain towards them 1 ? Economists have almost
unanimously condemned such trade societies. Adam
Smith refers in a condemnatory tone to the exclusive
privileges of corporations, and all laws which restrain
in particular employments the competition to a smaller
number than might otherwise go into them.* They
are, he thought, a sort of enlarged monopoly, and
might keep the market price of particular commodities
above the natural price, maintaining both the wages of
labour, and, as he correctly adds, the profits of stock
employed about them, somewhat above their natural
rate. 1

J. S. Mill, after expressing some opinions in which
I cannot coincide, has added 2 the following striking
passage, which cannot be too much read :

"If the present state of the general habits of the
people were to remain for ever unimproved, these
partial combinations, in so far as they do succeed in
keeping up the wages of any trade by limiting its
numbers, might be looked upon as simply intrenching
round a particular spot against the inroads of over-
population, and making their wages depend upon their
own rate of increase, instead of depending on that of
a more reckless and improvident class than themselves.
The time, however, is past when the friends of human
improvement can look with complacency on the attempts
of small sections of the community, whether belonging to
the labouring or any other class, to organise a separate

1 Wealth of Nations, Book I. chap. vii.
2 Principles of Political Economy, Book II. chap nv. sec. 6.


iv.] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION. 109

class interest in antagonism to the general body of
labourers."

Professor Fawcett also is not less emphatic in pro-
testing against such monopolies. He says r 1 " If trades
unions are permitted to prevent this free passage of
labour from one employment to another, wages may per-
manently maintain an artificial advance , but trades
unions can only exert such an influence by resorting to
a social tyranny, which is in every sense illegal and un-
justifiable." But it is, of course, one thing to protest
in theory ; it is another to interfere by force of law, A
brief consideration of the history of the Combination
Laws will show how hopeless is the attempt to prevent
trade confederacies by direct prohibition.

The Combination Laws. In view of the economic prin-
ciples considered above, "What is the duty of the
legislator 1 Monopoly in any trade is against the public
interest. Ought not the lawgiver, then, simply to pro-
hibit societies which tend towards such monopoly 1 and
ought they not to carry out the law with all "the re-
sources of civilisation"? There are, however, two
reasons against such forcible suppression: in the first
place, it is impracticable and impossible ; in the second
place, if possible, it would suppress with much evil many
germs of good. As to the first point, which might
seem decisive of the question, we have the evidence of
long experience. Our grandfathers and great grand-
fathers, not to speak of earlier ancestors, did their best
to crush all societies of working men, and ignominious
was their failure. Are we likely to succeed better when
1 Manual of Political JSconomy, 2d ed , p. 2.


110 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

the working-class order lias become immensely increased
in numbers, and increased almost equally in intelligence,
organisation, wealth, and general resources 2

Eegard to space will not allow of my citing fully the
evidence which conclusively proved the failure of the
restrictive legislation. The Combination Laws begin
with that quaint Act of the 33 Edward I. (stat. 2,
1304), "Who be conspirators and who be champer-
tors." This curious law is a definition only, not an
enactment. "Conspirators," it says, "be they that do
confeder or bind themselves by oath, covenant, or other
alliance, that every of them shall aid and bear the other
falsely and maliciously to indite," etc. It seems to have
been thought quite sufficient to define who were con-
spirators ; the rest went without saying.

The subsequent long series of Combination Laws,
about thirty-five in number, are fully recapitulated in
the first section of the 5 Geo. IY. cap. 95, which swept
them away so far as they rendered it illegal for workmen
to meet together to deliberate and agree upon the terms
and wages for which they should labour. Most of these
Acts related only to particular trades; thus the "jour-
neymen tailors within the weekly bills of mortality"
came under the care of the Legislature in the 7 Geo. I
and the 8 Geo. III. ; the better regulation of the linen
and hempen manufactures was provided for in the
3 Geo. Ill, and so forth. Finding, however, in 1800,
that in spite of the many complicated enactments then
in force strikes and combinations were still rampant,
the Legislature directed a final blow against workmen's
associations in the 39 and 40 Geo. Ill cap. 106. By this
thoroughgoing law all agreements between journeymen


IV.] TMDES UNION LEGISLATION. Ill

and workmen for obtaining advances of wages, reductions
of hours of labour, or any other changes in the condi-
tions of work, were declared illegal; persons entering
into such agreements could be convicted summarily by
two justices of the peace, and committed to prison for
two months. A like penalty was imposed upon all who
should, by giving money, by persuasion, intimidation, or
otherwise, prevent any unhired workman from hiring
himself, or any hired workman from continuing in his
employ, and so forth. But, as Mr. Longe remarks, in his
interesting sketch of this legislation l " This elaborate
attempt on the part of the Legislature to prevent
'strikes' was its last Experience soon showed that
such laws were not only useless, but pernicious." This
experience is sufficiently detailed in various parts of the
excellent volume referred to. The effect of such laws
was not to suppress societies, but to render them secret
conspiracies. Very often clubs, simulating the character
of friendly societies in public, acted as trade societies in
private. Some societies boldly defied the law, especially
the formidable union of the Liverpool shipwrights.
According to Mr. Philip Kathbone's report on the Liver-
pool trade societies, these bold shipwrights used to range
about the town carrying a loaded cannon with them.

There wore prosecutions from time to time. In 1805
three linen weavers of Knaresborough were sent to gaol
for three months, one of them for simply carrying a
letter to York requesting assistance. Mr. George
Howell specifies a good many other cases (pp. 121-124),
especially a notable one in Lancashire in 1818, in which

1 $ej>mi m Trades Soadies : Social Science Association, 1860,
p. 345.


112 THE STATE IK RELATION TO LABOUB. [CHAP.

a trade union deputy was sent to prison for twelve
months, although his own employer gave evidence in his
favour, and said that he had himself suggested the reso-
lutions carried at the illegal meeting of workmen. A
most telling fact is that in some cases the masters
declared to their men their intention not to appeal to
the Combination Laws, and more peaceful relations be-
tween the parties then ensued The writer of the admir-
able anonymous tract "On Combinations of Trades,"
published in 1831, asserts that the general conviction of
the injustice and impolicy of these laws had produced a
disinclination on the part both of masters and justices to
put them in force unless in seasons of disturbance, when
they were administered for other purposes. But we need
hardly resort to secondary evidence when we find that
a Committee of the House of Commons declared " that
the Act of the 39 and 40 of his present Majesty, for
settling disputes between masters and workmen engaged
in the cotton manufacture in England, has not produced
the good effects that were expected from it." l

It was upon such grounds of distinct experience,
rather than upon any theory of freedom of trade, that
Parliament in 1824, led mainly by the lamented
Huskisson swept those mistaken laws away. The act
was inevitable, and yet it was momentous ; for it has
led to the growth of the many great societies which now
exist and, as many people think, oppress industry. It
is requisite from time to time to remind one generation
of the experience which led a former generation to
important legislative actions.

1 Journals of the House of Commons, 28th March 1804, vol. lix.
p. 187.


iv.] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION. 113

The Legislation of Trades Unions, It is very desirable
that the public, especially the working-class public,
should always bear in mind exactly what was the
intention and effect of the Trades Union Acts of 1871
and 1876, which enabled trades societies to be regis-
tered and to obtain legal facilities equivalent to those
enjoyed by registered friendly societies. The matter
is a technical one, of no real importance in principle,
but the change made in the law is liable to be mis-
construed into an approval by the State of trade combi-
nations. Previous to the passing of the above-named
Acts, trades societies, being deemed illegal in respect of
acting in restraint of trade, were excluded from regis-
tration under the Friendly Societies Act (18 and 19
Yict. cap. 63 sec 44). This Act granted special benefits
as regards security of property and settlement of dis-
putes to any societies established for certain specified
purposes, and in certain cases " for any purpose which
is not illegal," But then it must be remembered that
exclusion from this Act was only exclusion from special
facilities. The members did not lose their ordinary
legal rights, and, if the funds of the society were made
away with, could proceed under the ordinary law, pro-
vided, indeed, that no unlawful acts or purposes in
restraint of trade could be proved against the union.

But as in modern times governments could not
venture to prevent the existence of associations of all
kinds, there arose gradually the anomaly of societies
allowed to exist, and yet deprived of any means of put-
ting the law into effective operation. Lawyers would
probably be the first to allow that the law of paitnership,
whether theoretically good or not, was practically m-
I


114 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

applicable to societies whose rates of subscription were
counted in shillings or pence. The expense of proceed-
ings and the difficulty of proving ownership in common
funds was such as to amount to practical refusal of justice,
and several scandalous cases occurred in which the em-
bezzlement of the funds of unions was thus allowed to
go unpunished. The state of the law was such as to
promote and encourage fraud and injustice. There was
no sense in trying to discourage unions by indirect
means, which did not prevent their formation, but which
obliged the members either to suffer from fraud or else
to resort to violent means of redress, such as is practised
upon " welchers " at a race meeting.

Under the present state of the law, however (Trades
Union Acts, 1871 and 1876), great facilities are enjoyed
by unions, They can hold land and other property in
the names of trustees, and can carry on all legal proceed-
ings in the trustees' names. They have remedy on sum-
mary conviction for any fraud or illegality on the part
of their officers. Members' property in the union funds
can be transmitted at death without a will, and various
other facilities are enjoyed, as described in the Report of
the Chief Registrar of Friendly Societies, 1877, p. 32.
It is remarkable, however, that very few trades societies
have availed themselves of these advantages, the number
in 1878 being only 177, compared with 17,776 registered
societies of other kinds Possibly the necessity of regis-
tering the rules has had a deterrent influence in some
cases.

It is a matter worthy of consideration, however,
whether the Legislature ought not finally to give up
its jealousy of associative action, by recognising in law


iv ] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION 115

courts every society of whose existence formal evidence
can be given. The law has come, in fact, very nearly to
this point The Friendly Societies Act of 1855 (18
and 19 Viet. cap. 63, sec. 9) gave power to a Secretary
of State to name "additional purposes" to which the
powers and facilities of the Act might be extended.
Under this, and the like provisions in subsequent Acts
(see the Consolidation Act of 1875, 38 and 39 Viet. cap.
60, sec 8 [5]), additions have been made In January
1878 societies guaranteeing the performance of their
duties by officers of friendly societies were allowed to be
registered. In April of the same year societies for playing
the game of quoits were approved by the Treasury ; and
finally, in July 1878, there was made the sweeping addition
of societies for the promotion of literature, science, and the
fine arts. All societies "for any charitable or benevolent
purpose" had been previously eligible for registration.
Now these terms are so wide and vague as to comprehend
almost every purpose for which associations, not for trad-
ing purposes, could be formed. The public appear to be
generally ignorant of these facilities, and the number of
registrations under the additional powers is very limited.
The point of most interest to us here is that the existence
of such comprehensive definitions disposes of the idea
that the Legislature, in allowing the registration of trade
societies, gave any kind of special approval or facility to
them

The Good and Eml of Strikes I have adopted, in the first
chapter, the doctrine that in social as in physical matters
we must be guided by experience direct specific experi-
ence if possible. But nothing is more necessary than to


116 THE STATE IN KELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

bear in mind how impossible it is in some cases to inter-
pret experience with certainty, Especially is this the
case as regards the effects of strikes. Of these we have
indeed had ample experience. Hardly can we take up
any newspaper without meeting accounts of strikes,
small or large, in some parts of the country. In the
Trades Societies' Eeport of the Social Science Association
we have minute details of some of the most celebrated
and prolonged strikes such as that of Preston in 1853,
the Yorkshire coal strike of 1858, or the building trades
strike in London in 1859-60. The origin and results
of many strikes are also investigated in the evidence
taken by the Trades Union Commission of 1867. Any
one who wishes to appreciate fully the difference of
opinions which may be held on this subject should
compare the optimist view of Mr. George Howell in his
important article on "Strikes: their Cost and Results,"
in Fraser's Magazine for December 1879, with the some-
what pessimist conclusions derived by Mr. G- P. Bevan
from his very careful and elaborate statistical inquiries, as
given in the Statistical Journal for March 1880, vol. xliii.
pp. 35-54.

Primd fade, indeed, we might take the recurrence of
strikes as evidence of their success ; for it is hardly to
be supposed that the workmen so seriously concerned
would venture on new strikes unless they were satisfied
that advantage was derived by themselves or other
workmen from previous strikes. It would seem, in
short, as if we had the direct specific experience needed
to settle the matter. A little consideration, however,
will show that this is one of the cases where the whole
difficulty lies in interpreting experience. In a certain


iv ] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION. 117

proportion of strikes no doubt the strikers do really
succeed in gaining what they demand ; and more than
this, other workmen of the same trade often profit from
a corresponding rise of wages conceded in consequence
by their employers. It may also be argued that, since
workmen acquired the liberty of striking at discretion,
their wages have been greatly advanced, a fact which will
not be disputed. But it is altogether a different matter
to infer that because increased wages have been attained
the strikes are the cause of attainment. This argument
is essentially one of the kind post hoc ergo propter liQ6&
kind of argument more often fallacious than sound.
We must remember that many other causes have been
in operation tending towards the increase of earnings.
Free trade has made the world our customers ; invention
has proceeded by leaps and bounds ; the power of coal
has been brought to the assistance of human labour ; the
capital of employers has grown vastly; the productive
powers of machinery have been multiplied time after
time. Moreover, great changes have taken place in the
purchasing power of money. We should have to allow
for these and not a few other causes before we could
really infer that any definite rise of wages is due to a
strike. In view of this multiplicity of causes, in fact,
the method of direct experience fails.

The last chance of a verdict conclusively in favour of
strikes is removed when we remember that the general
rise of wages allowed by statists to have occurred is by
no means confined to trades which are united and
addicted to striking, but extends more or less distinctly
to all classes of employees Many extensive groups of
workers, such as mercantile and bank clerks. Government


118 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

clerks and officials, post-office employees, policemen,
soldiers, and so forth, have all attained distinct and,
what is more, permanent advances of salary, without
anything to be called striking. Still more remarkably
is this the case with domestic servants, an exceedingly
numerous class of persons, quite devoid of organisation,
and often of an age and character little suited, it might
be thought, to enforce concession. Yet, by the natural
operation of the laws of supply and demand, and by their
own good sense, these employees have been greatly
advanced in earnings and other advantages. Ho far as
regards employments free from fluctuations of trade, the
evidence tends to show conclusively the uselessness and
harm of strikes.

The case, no doubt, is somewhat different where there
are violent oscillations of activity and depression, as in
the coal and iron trades especially. It is of such trades,
in all probability, that Professor Fawcett was thinking
when he said " I cannot, after great deliberation, resist
the conclusion, that such a power of combination may
secure to the labourers higher wages in certain special
states of trade." It is difficult indeed to deny that in a
sudden improvement of trade a strike or the threat of a
strike will occasionally induce masters to raise wages
with a promptitude otherwise not to be expected. But
the reverse process is witnessed when the wave begins
to recede : the masters having promptly advanced wages
determine to reduce them with like promptitude, whereas
the men, convinced of the efficacy of strikes, resist when
the circumstances are all against them. Nothing is
clearer than that in a time of falling demand strikes
must fail. They often form, indeed, the opportunity- as


iv.] TRADES TOIOK LEGISLATION. 119

in the disastrous strike at Cyfartha for employers to
close works which, they might otherwise have felt bound
to carry on at some risk of loss

So difficult, or rather impossible, is it to distinguish
the cases in which strikes must inflict great loss and
disappointment and those in which they may yield at
least apparent success, that the economist incurs grave
responsibility in expressing approval of any strikes. As
well commend gambling because there are occasions
when the gambler gains, as commend striking because
" in certain special states of trade " it may be successful.
The only true system of striking is for every man to
strike individually when he has an undoubted opportunity
of bettering his position.

Professional Trades Unions. During the long and
bitter controversies which have been waged on the
Trades Union question, no argument has been found
more telling on the side of the unions than the tu quogue
retort. Trades unions, it is said, are not confined to
handicraftsmen. The legal and medical professions
understand equally well the virtue of combination.
The Inns of Court, the Colleges of Surgeons and Phy-
sicians, and suchlike bodies, are but exclusive trade
societies of the upper classes. The very name college
implies as much, collegium (con t together ; and legere, to
gather) being, in fact, the Latin equivalent of association,
or guild. It is only in late years that the name, college,
has become specialised to associations of teachers, and
thence applied to mere schools for boys and girls.

This tvi, quogue argument is so far true that the only
possible way of meeting it is to admit its substantial


120 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

truth. There can be no doubt whatever that both the
legal and medical professions are pervaded by strong
" professional " feelings, and that under the euphemism
of "professional etiquette," they are governed by elaborate
systems of social terrorism. Nobody could possibly have
followed the several steps of the struggle concerning the
admission of women to the practice of medicine, especi-
ally the debates and votes on the subject in the Convo-
cation of the London University, without feeling that it
was simply a trade question. As to the Inns of Court,
venerable as they are in respect of age having been
founded at various dates between 1310 and 1520 they
were but lately trades unions in an advanced stage of
degeneration, and they are not very much better now.
Entry was obtained by the mere form of eating dinners
in the public hall, and the paying of certain substantial
fees. The true genius of the trades union is shown in
the jealous care with which the barristers exclude
solicitors, the exclusion being in former years absolutely,
and in the present day sufficiently, complete. The same
spirit is also evinced in the vexatious restrictions regard-
ing circuits. Every circuit mess is a separate union,
election to which is practically compulsory. Having
joined one mess, the barrister is confined to it, and must
refuse work from other circuits except at " special rates."
But while it is impossible not to admit that the bodies
referred to are trades unions of a well-marked type in
some respects, they are strongly distinguished from the
handicraft unions in other important respects. In the
first place, no attempt is made at limiting the numbers
of members. Every respectable man who brings the
requisite fees, and goes through the proper forms, is


iv ] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION. 121

admitted almost without exception. So much is this
the case in the Inns of Court, that the nominal barrister s-
at-law are perhaps two or three times as numerous as
those barristers who really practise with success. Even
in the medical profession, where entry is now barred by
stiff examination, as well as by costly education and not
inconsiderable fees, the number who qualify for practice
is distinctly in excess of those who adhere to the pro-
fession and eventually succeed. The danger, if any-
thing, lies in the direction of too free admission, and
the temptation is always on the side of relaxing every
condition except the payment of fees

Again, within these professional bodies there is no
trace of socialistic tendency. On the contrary, the
keenest possible competition is the rule. Successful
barristers and physicians make their 10,000 or
15,000 a year; but, instead of meeting with obloquy
and opposition from their less successful brothers, they
are the objects of admiration and esteem. Thus the
life of an eminent professional man becomes one un-
ceasing round of severe labour } his talent and experience
are multiplied in utility to the highest possible degree,
not without reward to himself, but with still greater
benefit to a public who need skilful assistance. In the
case of the bar, this unlimited competition tends perhaps
to run into excess and abuse ; but, as regards the medical
profession, I am unable to see any evil in the present
system, the avenue to distinction and success usually
lying through long -continued gratuitous services at
hospitals, or a distinguished career as a public teacher
of the healing art.

There is, too, a third condition which strongly dis-


122 THE STATE IS DELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

languishes professional from handicraft unions, namely,
the exaction in the present day of a more or less severe
entrance examination. Corporations, according to J.-B.
Say, have never really guaranteed the quality of the
goods which they produce. It would not be practicable
for the College of Surgeons to guarantee continuously
the excellence of the services rendered by their members.
But, so far as entrance examinations are concerned, there
is little ground of complaint at present. As to the
expediency of some State regulation of the medical and
legal professions, no serious difference of opinion can
exist. Medical advice is obviously a thing of which an
ordinary patient is incapable of judging ; it clearly falls,
therefore, under the category of commodities which may
be inspected by State officers. Clearly, too, the inten-
tion of the Legislature has always been to secure the
efficiency of practitioners. Thus, shortly before the
establishment of the College of Physicians, we find that
an Act was passed (3 Henry VIII. cap. 11), providing
that no one should take upon him "to exercise and oc-
cupy" as a physician or surgeon in London, unless he had
been admitted by the Bishop of London, or the Dean of St.
Paul's These eminent ecclesiastics were not themselves
to be the judges of efficiency, but were to call unto them
four doctors of physic, and " for surgery, other expert
persons in that faculty, and for the first examination
such as they shall think convenient, and afterward
alway four of them that have been so approved." In
other parts of the country the bishop of the diocese, or
the vicar-general, was to be the licensing authority. The
method of examination, then, was established by law
more than 350 years ago. From time to time, no doubt,


iv 1 TRADES UKION LEGISLATION. 123

in spite of renewed legislation, the examinations fell into
abeyance, or were little more than nominal.

In recent years, it need hardly be said, the practice
and the art of examination have made rapid progress.
Examinations have become the sole mode of entry, not
only into the medical profession, the lower branch of
the law, the civil service, the army and navy, and
even the church, but many other bodies of professional
men have taken steps in the like direction. A Sur-
veyors' Institute has just been created, entry to which
will be eventually confined to successful examinees.
The Institute of Actuaries, the Bankers' Institute, and
the Society of Chartered Accountants, have also estab-
lished systems of examination. It is even proposed, by
means of an Act for the registration of teachers, to make
some kind of examination test a legal qualification for
all teachers in secondary schools.

So long as entrance examinations are of a bond fide
character, there is no analogy between such chartered
bodies and mere trades unions. No trade society has in
recent times made even the pretence of exacting a test
of proficiency. In former days the apprentice, before
he could be admitted to act as journeyman, was required
to exhibit his chef d'auvre as a specimen of his skill.
I am not aware that any such test is ever applied now.
The applicant for admission to a modern trades union
must indeed satisfy the society that he is capable of
earning the usual wages, but this is only in order that
his employment may not tend to make a precedent for
admitting lower rates of wages. So good a witness as
Mr. Gr J. Holyoake says (History of Co-operation,
vol. ii. p. 262) "Now, a man being a unionist, is no


124 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUK. [CHAP.

guarantee to any one that he will not scamp his work,
or do the least for the most he can get. ... A trades-
union council are not leaders of art in industry ; they
are, with a few exceptions, mere connoisseurs in strikes.
All a union does is to strike against low wages, they
never strike against doing bad work." It is indeed
remarkable that with their extensive funds, widespread
organisation, and trade-knowledge, hardly any union has
attempted to carry on industry itself. They confine
themselves to criticism and opposition. Even their
funds are deposited in banks or other ordinary modes of
investment, and find their way round into the hands of
capitalists, perhaps their own obnoxious employers. In
spite of the evils and horrors of "capitalism," the work-
men can find no way of using their own capital but such
as puts it into the hands of their supposed enemies.

There can be no doubt that the system of examina-
tions will go on and prosper, and that we have not yet
seen the end of the movement towards the incorporation
of professions. There can, however, be equally little
doubt that the public and the Legislature must keep a
vigilant eye on all such bodies, and must without scruple
reform them as soon as ever they fall away from their
original good purpose,

Principle of Degeneration of Associations. In attempting
to forecast the future of trades societies, it is indispen-
sable to take account of what I may call the principle of
degeneration, which applies to all associations of men.
Every society which has perpetual succession is subject
to a tendency to fall away from its original purposes.
Although formed in the first instance by persons having


iv.] TRADES UNION LEGISLATION 125

a definite object in view, the society subsequently becomes
a distinct entity. It acquires reputation and power ; it
often collects endowments and acquires vested interests
of various kinds. By degrees those who act as officers
are drawn aside by their private interests, and there is
no setting a limit to the possible divergence of the
institution from the intentions of its founders.

It is hardly requisite to illustrate this statement ;
instances of degeneration pour upon us. St. Katharine's
Hospital in Begent's Park, the city companies, sundry
ancient colleges before their reformation, the Inns of
Court, as they were not long ago, are sufficient instances.
The change, however, is not always correctly described
as degeneration; though diverging from its original
purpose, a society often develops into something of unex-
pected utility. A small benefaction for the erection of
a hospital leads to the creation of a great medical and
scientific school. A convivial club of a score of members
grows into the greatest of learned societies. By far the
most singular of such transformations, however, is that
of the Freemasons' societies.

The Freemasons' lodges were originally simple trade
societies of the skilful builders who in the Middle Ages
raised our grand cathedrals and our beautiful parish
churches A lodge was established at York as early as
A.D. 926, and the order is said to have been introduced
into England some centuries before, perhaps in 674.
However that may be, the societies retained their dis-
tinctive trade character throughout the Middle Ages, as
we learn incidentally from the Act 3 Henry VI cap. 1,
against masons who " confederate themselves in chapiters
and assemblies/' That great builder, William of Wyke-


126 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP

ham, was at one time Grand-Master, and as late as 1666
Sir Christopher Wren was elected deputy grand-master,
in recognition of his skill as an architect and builder.
Subsequently the order has become entirely disconnected
from the building trade, and while ever prospering has
adopted philanthropic or social purposes. The square
and compasses, once the actual implements of its mem-
bers, are now mere mystic symbols.

The bearing of this principle of degeneration on our
subject is very evident. The existing great trade societies
only need to be let alone and they will probably degen-
erate from their original trade purposes. But inasmuch
as those trade purposes were against the public good,
the process of degeneration will probably bring them
more nearly into consonance with public interests What
were, under the Combination Laws, mere midnight con-
spiracies, are developing and will develop into widespread
philanthropic bodies, headed by members of Parliament,
meeting in large halls before a table full of reporters,
gradually giving up their selfish and mistaken ideas.
No one could have read the proceedings of the recent
Trades Union Congress in London without feeling that
recent wise legislation was bearing good fruit. Instead
of machine - breakers and midnight conspirators, the
working-men met as the members of a parliament to
discuss the means and ends of legislation with dignity
and propriety at least equal to that recently exhibited at
St. Stephen's. No longer entirely devoted to the pet
fallacies and interests of their order, their deliberations
touch many of the most important social questions of the
day The more extensive the federations of trades
which thus meet in peaceful conference, the more wide


iv ] TKADES UNION LEGISLATION. 127

and generous must of necessity become their views
Enjoying all the rights and performing all the duties of
the English citizen, the trades unionist will before long
cease his exclusive strife against his true ally, his wealthy
employer. It is impossible not to accept the general
views of Mr. Henry Crompton, that as woiking-men
gradually acquire their full rights, their leaders will turn
to the noble task of impressing upon them the duties of
citizenship.


128 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.


CHAPTEE V,

THE LAW OF INDUSTRIAL CONSPIRACY,

THERE is no part of the law relating to labour which has
been debated with more bitterness than that touching
the doctrine of conspiracy. Until quite recent years
the common law gave power to the judges, or they at
any rate assumed the power, to treat any combination
of labourers aiming at the increase of wages as a con-
spiracy against the public weal, an attempt at public
mischief, which could be punished as a misdemeanour
by fine and imprisonment, The celebrated case of the
Dorsetshire labourers in the year 1834 was an instance
of the exercise of this somewhat arbitrary power. The
common law has now been defined and restricted, if not
almost abrogated, by the Conspiracy and Protection of
Property Act, 1875, which in the 3d section enacts that
an agreement or combination by two or more persons to
do or procure to be done any act in contemplation or
furtherance of a trade' dispute between employers and
workmen shall not be indictable as a conspiracy if such
act committed by one person would not be punishable as
a crime. But as other parts of the same section and the
same Act continue or impose special penalties in the case of
proceedings involving conspiracy, some unionists are still


v ] THE LAW OF INDUSTBIAL CONSPIRACY. 129

dissatisfied at the state of the law. They regard these
penalties as being still specially aimed at combinations of
working-men, as relics, in fact, of past mistaken class
legislation, and it is seriously urged that the offence of
conspiracy should be entirely abolished as regards labour
questions. It is not superfluous, therefore, to inquire
into the grounds of the law of conspiracy.

What is Conspiracy ? That confident but often mis-
taken economist MacCulloch has touched the point of
the matter when he says, in his little treatise on Wages
(2d ed. p 90) : " A criminal act cannot be generated by
the mere multiplication of acts that are perfectly inno-
cent." This statement may be true as it stands, but it
has no reference to conspiracy. To ask for more wages
is a perfectly legal act, and if a thousand men were to be
struck independently with a wish for higher wages, and
were to go and ask separately, there would be no con-
spiracy in the matter. But, if a number of men meet
together and agree jointly to ask for more, and then
persuade others to do likewise, it is not a mere multipli-
cation of requests ; it is that plus an agreement and an
organised arrangement. The difference is even greater
than this : the act becomes different in nature by
reason of the concert and the purpose implied in that
concert.

Ifc is, for example, a perfectly legal action to walk
along a highway, and no multiplication of such acts
in the ordinary course of life or business can render
them illegal If so many men happened some day to
want to walk through Throgmorton Street that the
street became entirely blocked up, there would still be
K


130 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAR

no legal offence. The concourse would be fortuitous, and
each man would be simply exercising his legal right
under difficulties. But if a number of men were to
agree together that they would walk up and down
Throgmorton Street on a particular day, the complexion
of the act would be entirely changed. The act is no
doubt physically the same ; but, being accompanied with
the knowledge that other people would do the same, and
that a block would be occasioned, there would be reason
to presume some special purpose, as, for instance, the
obstructing the business of the Stock Exchange, or
occasioning alarm, perhaps panic, in the city. The act
would be illegal in respect of the intention to block up
the Queen's highway, and it would be further illegal in
respect of a special purpose, which, though not illegal
in itself, might be illegal if sought by means of com-
bination.

Surely it cannot escape attention that many of the
industrial and other ordinary arrangements of society
entirely hang upon the tacit assumption that individuals
will act as individuals, pursuing independent and usual
courses of action. A footpath, an omnibus, a railway
train, is calculated only for the ordinary average traffic.
A banker's business entirely depends upon the presump-
tion that, while some customers are drawing out, others
will be paying money in. There is no bank in the
country which could stand a run on the part of a con-
siderable number of its depositors. But, according to the
theory of probabilities, it is practically impossible that
such a sudden concurrence of demands should take place
really by accident ; the mere occurrence of such a run
would be sufficient evidence of a common cause, which


v] THE LAW OF INDUSTRIAL CONSPIRACY. 131

might be merely a false rumour, or it might "be a con-
spiracy of depositors to ruin the bank. Now, it must
be quite apparent that any agreement between bank
depositors to draw out money in order to overthrow a
bank is a totally different thing from drawing out in
the ordinary course of business, and is, in fact, a serious
matter

It must be easy to see that there is hardly one of the
ordinary arrangements of trade which may not be entirely
upset by concerted action. The bakers and butchers
might starve us out ; the cab proprietors might refuse
to carry us away , innkeepers might decline to harbour
us; our neighbours might tacitly avoid assisting us.
No man's life would be safe if unlimited " Boycotting"
were regarded as legal.

Industrial Treason. It must be apparent, too, that
this subject assumes by degrees higher importance as
the organisation of society becomes more complex and
delicate, and the condensation of population greater
London might be reduced to starvation and anarchy by
a well-devised combination among a few thousands of
men. When we depend for water upon one organisation,
for light upon another, for food upon railways and a
long series of middlemen, the state of things is very
different from that of the old-fashioned house with a
well in the back-yard, and plenty of candles, salt-meat,
and groceries in the store-room.

It seems to me to be quite impossible, then, to sup-
pose that the law of conspiracy can be entirely repealed.
Such entire abrogation would enable a handful, or at
most a few thousands, of men, by legal means, to coerce


132 THE STATE IN" RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

the community to any extent, and, in the absence of
concession, to inflict immeasurable injury. It is still a
serious crime to purchase arms and to organise and drill
a body of men in order to oppose the State, or any of its
authorities. Treason is still an offence in the Statute-
Book But so all-powerful has the English Government
become in recent times by the inventions of science and
the improvements of organisation, that little harm is to
be feared from this antiquated kind of treason. But I
venture to think that a great strike, if carried sufficiently
far, might assume the character of social treason. As in
the case of the great railway strike in the United States,
in 1877, it might bring society to a dead lock. If ten
thousand Yorkshiremen were to march upon London,
with the very best arms they could muster, the Govern-
ment would probably surround and capture them in
twenty-four hours by the aid of railways and telegraphs.
But if ten thousand railway men were to form a con-
spiracy to obstruct and destroy the railways and telegraphs
of the kingdom, they would create infinitely greater alarm
and injury, and would be checked with far greater diffi-
culty. It is thus highly needful to bear in mind how
the more delicate and elaborate arrangements of modern
society have caused a change in the bearing of social
dangers.

In accordance, however, with what has been said
before, it is one thing to hold that there must exist the
offence of conspiracy, and another thing to say that any
particular kind of conspiracy should be punished. Con-
spiracy is especially a question of degree, varying in
several ways, as regards the number of persons involved,
the consciousness of common intention on their part,


is


v.] THE LAW OF INDUSTRIAL CONSPIRACY. 133

and the innocence or noxiousness of the purpose aimed
at. One end of the scale is formed by some case in
which thousands of men intentionally injure society in a
manner which might lead to death, distress, and harm
incalculable. At the other end of the scale we may
place the case of a few workmen talking over together
the state of trade and their own condition, and agreeing
unanimously that they must ask for more wages. Nothing
can be easily conceived more innocent, if not praiseworthy,
than the latter action ; few things more blamable than
the former. It is, therefore, the extreme vagueness and
graduation of the act of conspiracy which constitutes the
difficulty. This was surmounted in the old common law,
if, indeed, surmounted at all, by leaving it to the dis-
cretion of the judges only to apply the law where the
interests of society required it. But even judges are not
always perfectly discreet, and the sentence of seven years'
transportation passed upon the Dorsetshire labourers for
a mere strike, involving nothing which we should now
esteem criminal, not unnaturally created intense indigna-
tion throughout the country.

The Present Law. I venture to hold, therefore, that
the Conspiracy and Protection of Property Act of 1875
was drawn upon the proper lines. It endeavoured
to discriminate between such acts of conspiracy as are
and are not highly noxious to society. Thus any breach
of contract involving failure of the water and gas supplies
of towns or other places is rendered punishable with
imprisonment for three months, under the fourth section.
The next section is a much more elastic one, inflicting like
punishment " where any person wilfully and maliciously


134 THE STATE IS RELATION TO LABOUK. [CHAP.

breaks a contract of service or of hiring, knowing or
having reasonable cause to believe that the probable con-
sequences of his so doing, either alone or in combination
with others, will be to endanger human life, or cause serious
bodily injury, or to expose valuable property whether
real or personal to destruction or serious injury." The
seventh section, again, enacts special penalties for any
person convicted of intimidating, annoying, or watching
another person, with a view to compel him to do or
abstain from doing any act which such person has a
legal right to do or abstain from doing. It has been
frequently urged, indeed, that these special penalties are
invidious. If the acts of intimidation and annoyance
are illegal, why should they not be left to be dealt with
by the general law ? But here again is false analogy; to
shake your fist at a man is no doubt the same physical
act whether done in momentary anger or as part of an
extensive concerted system of actions. But it may have
vastly greater significance and importance in the latter
than the former case. The law must always look to the
real character of the action, not to the mere outward
manifestation. The whole of the criminal law may be
said to consist of special penalties for special acts accord-
ing to their social noxiousness. Forgery is only one
mode of fraud, but being peculiarly dangerous to society
is punished with special severity. To break into a
house is the same act physically whether done by day
or by night ; but being more alarming and injurious in
the latter case is treated as the special crime of burglary,
and punished with greater severity. Having regard
now to the peculiar and in fact extraordinary powers
which combinations of men acting well together may


v.] THE LAW OF INDUSTRIAL CONSPIRACY. 135

acquire, it is not at all unnatural that any illegal acts
which they commit should need repression under a
special law adapted to the circumstances.

Industrial Emergency. One point of much importance
concerning the Conspiracy and Protection of Property
Act is that it only punishes conduct leading to injury of
property, loss of life, etc., when it involves breach of
contract. Thus, if a body of workmen employed in
water or gas works leave in a body at the expiration of
their agreement, they commit no offence, be the conse-
quences to the community what they may. This seems to
be reasonable enough, because they act within the terms
of their engagement, and the community through then-
servants, the water and gas companies, ought to take care
of themselves. But we can easily conceive conjunctures
to arise in which perfectly legal action may inflict the
highest injury on society. If any very large proportion
of the colliers of the kingdom, for instance, were to leave
work, even after due legal notice, they might bring the
industry of the country to a standstill. Not only in-
dustry, indeed, but the sustenance and health of millions
of their fellow-citizens would be imperilled.

Necessity knows no law, and the essence of illegality
is injury to other people. I conceive, therefore, that in
repealing the old common law of conspiracy as regards
industrial disputes the Act in question has opened up at
least the possibility of injurious actions for which no legal
remedy is provided. Of course if such extreme cases
could not occur there would be no good in providing
against them, which is perhaps the motive of the repeal
referred to. But then the federated societies of colliers


136 THE STATE IN KELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP

have repeatedly proposed to resort to a universal strike ;
and ten years ago, though they never went to such an
extreme length, they inflicted much harm upon the
industry of the country, and eventually upon themselves,
by restricting the output of coal. So entirely has coal
now become the motive-force of all industry, the source
of maintenance, that a really complete strike of colliers
would place the country in a state of siege as completely
as Paris was so placed by the German armies. We
cannot seriously contemplate the idea of a coalless and
foodless nation, perishing because some quarter of a
million of colliers refuse to work. Yet a strike of only
a few weeks would reduce the country to a state of
which we have no present idea.

I venture to point out that there is another mode of
approaching this subject, otherwise than through the law
of conspiracy. It is quite in accordance with all prece-
dents that every citizen should be bound to perform
duties essential to the good of the State and the com-
munity. On this ground householders are compelled to
serve on juries, and rich men are obliged to assume the
onerous office of sheriff. Several parish offices such
as those of constable, overseer, collector of taxes, etc.
were lately obligatory, if they are not so still, obsolete or
unusual though they may in many places have become.
Every able-bodied man, too, is potentially a police con-
stable, and can be fined for refusing to assist a police-
man when called upon to do so. Eight to the military
service of all men of military age is in abeyance in this
kingdom, but would, of course, be reasserted under the
pressure of necessity. I presume that the posse comitatus
still exists in theory. But as some things become


v.] THE LAW OF INDUSTRIAL CONSPIRACY. 137

archaic, new things arise ; and if our present elaborate
system of trade and industry presents the chance of
serious emergencies, the posse comitatus should be called
out in the appropriate way. In other words, there should
be some legal authority capable in the last resort of
obliging citizens to perform certain essential duties,
whether it be the stoking of gas retorts, the mending of
water conduits, or the mining of coal, essential for the
life of the nation. Instead of sentencing men to penal
servitude, as in former days, because they had refused
to continue in their legal employment, they would be
simply ordered, by competent authority, to continue to
work so long as the imperative needs of society con-
tinued, ordinary compensation being given, and punish-
ment inflicted only for breach of orders.

For this course there are, in fact, some precise legal
precedents. Thus the Sewers Act (28 Henry VIII cap.
5) gave powers to the Commissioners of Sewers to pro-
vide for the draining of the Fens, and allowed them "to
arrest and take as many carts, horses, oxeri, beasts, and
other instruments necessary^ and as many workmen and
labourers as for the said works and reparation shall
suffice, paying for the same competent wages, salary, and
stipend. " Again, the liability of parishioners and tenants
personally to repair the highways by Statute Labour has
only recently been commuted into money payments.

It is worthy of notice that the great railway strike in
the United States, which was, in fact, an industrial
insurrection, was brought to an end not by any legal
process, but by the arbitrary exhibition of force The
situation having become intolerable, " a division, headed
by two 12-pounder Napoleon guns and a detachment of


133 THE STATE IH RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

mounted police, was marched out, supported by volun-
teers, to Schuler's Hall, the new headquarters of the
strikers, when about ninety men were arrested without
form or warrant of law, and taken off to prison. These
men were subsequently examined, and discharged with
cautionary counsels from the authorities" (Reports
respecting the late Industrial Conflicts in the United
States, 1877 [0. 1853], p. 47). In the same very in-
structive report we are told that about 300 discontented
railway hands, and a score or two of agitators, were
powerful enough to paralyse a vast system of railway
traffic, and the industries of a city (St Louis) of nearly
half a million people, when "had 200 police beoa
detailed in the first instance to compel 'hands off' the
property of the railroads, and to enforce peace at all
hazards, the strike would not have lasted a day."

It ought to be added that Messrs. Thomas Hughes
and Frederick Harrison, the most enlightened perhaps of
all the so-called "labour advocates," while condemning
the policy of exceptional penalties, allow that some ex-
traordinary danger to the public safety may justify even
such an anomalous system. In their separate report
under the Royal Commission of 1867, they say (Third
Dissent, p. liii)

" It seems to us that the policy of imposing exceptional
penalties upon the labouring population m me, aad as
such recognising in that class exceptional offences, is* a
principle vicious in itself, and long discredited Nothing
but some extraordinary danger to the public safety, or some
peculiar proneness to crime, can justify such. ML anoma-
lous system. We can see nothing in the combinations of
workmen which the ordinary police cannot deal with."


vi] INDUSTRIAL PARTNERSHIP. 139


CHAPTEE YI.

CO-OPERATION AND INDUSTRIAL PARTNERSHIP

AMONG the means by which the relations of workmen
and capitalists may be put on a sounder footing, much
has been hoped from co-operation. The name co-opera-
tion has indeed been used in so many and such vague
senses, that it has come to mean little or nothing beyond
some novel form of association. Eefore we can say any-
thing about it, we must distinguish at least three different
classes of co-operative associations, which again in their
details admit of much variety. Thus we may enumerate -

(1.) The co-operation of retail purchasers to buy their
household supplies on the wholesale scale, and thus avoid
the profits of the middleman.

(2.) The co-operation of workmen who form joint-
stock companies for the carrying on of manufacturing or
agricultural industry independently of large capitalists.

(3 ) The co-operation of employers and employed in
any scheme of partnership which admits the employed
to a share of the ultimate profits, in addition to the
wages advanced.

Of these forms of co-operation the first has little or
no direct connection with the subject of this volume.
There is of course not the least reason why any body


140 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

of persons, whether working-men, or civil servants, or
merchants, or others, may not associate themselves
together to procure supplies at the lowest rates. Such
associations are, or at least were, experiments, the failure
of which can hardly injure any but the members.
Their success, on the contrary, may lead to extensive
social advantages of a kind not strictly coming within
the scope of this work The State, too, has little to <lo
with the matter beyond allowing the utmost possible
legal freedom and facilities to such associations. There
is nothing whatever in the legal position or the actions
of such societies, with the trifling exception of their
disputed exemption from the necessity of giving receipts
with penny stamps, to threaten any other industrial
bodies or institutions unfairly.

Indirectly, however, co-operative associations have con-
siderable bearing on trade questions, because they offer
the most ready and engaging mode of investment for
small sums of capital. Half the bitterness of trades
union disputes arises from the anti-capitalist feelings of the
workman, who believes that he is by the nature of things
cut off from the possession of capital, and even looks
upon it as contrary to the esprti de corps of his order to
own capital Nothing can tend more to break down
this most mistaken and lamentable feeling than the
insidious way in which capital accumulates in a well-
managed co-operative society. Almost without know-
ing it, the workman finds himself a small capitalist, and
when the balance has once begun visibly to grow, it is
strange if the love of accumulation is not at length
excited. The balance not only grows, but its growth
excites the more interest because the owner, as a customer,


vi.] INDUSTRIAL PARTNERSHIP. 141

a member, or even a committee man, assists in its growth,
and may take part in the management of the affair. A
savings bank deposit pays very low interest, and that
interest is perfectly fixed. The depositor is entirely
passive, and is in respect of it a powerless dependant of
the State. But savings deposited in almost any form of
co-operative company tend to excite the instincts of the
capitalist, and to acquaint the owner with a new view of
the labour question.

It may almost go without saying that the second
form of co-operative undertaking, the joint -stock
association of workers, is highly desirable as far as it
can be carried out. The law for so many centuries prac-
tically prohibited joint-stock enterprise that we can hardly
wonder at the small progress which has yet been made
in this direction among the working classes. The break-
down of the Ouseburn Co-operative Society and other
hasty experiments shows that time is needful for learning
the conditions of success in this direction. The Oldham
Joint -Stock Mills, however, are now earning profits,
and by the periodical publication of their accounts are
probably preparing the way for new phases of the labour
question. The law, at any rate, does not now stand in
the way. The old mistaken law of unlimited liability is
sufficiently set aside by the Companies Acts of 1862 and
1867, and also by the Partnership Law Amendment Act
of 1865 (28 and 29 Viet. cap. 86), which allows any
trader to give an employee a share of profits without
thereby rendering him liable as a partner, or giving him
right to demand an account. We proceed to consider
the new form of industrial association which will prob-
ably emerge in time from these changes of the law.


142 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

Industrial Partnership. -It has been seen that the
value of a workman's services depends not only upon
his technical skill and the quantity of goods which he
has helped to produce, but also upon the price at which
those goods can be disposed of. Owing to unavoidable
commercial fluctuations the price obtained varies from
time to time in a manner defying precise anticipation.
It follows that there is a large margin for loss or gain,
which must fall upon the employer if the interests of
the workman are to be closed by the weekly or fort-
nightly payment of wages. The operative, in short, is
a partner who is being continually paid out of the firm,
as it were, because he will not or cannot await the reali-
sation of his labours.

There can be no doubt that the soundest possible
solution of the labour question will eventually be found
in such a modification of the terms of partnership as
shall bind the interests of the employer and workman
more closely together. Under such a system the weekly
wages would be regarded merely as subsistence money,
or advances which the employer would make to enable
the labourer and his family to await the completion of
the interval between manufacture and sale. The balance
of the value produced would be paid at the end of the
year or half-year in the form of a dividend or bonus,
consisting in a share of all surplus profits realised beyond
the necessary charges of interest, wages of superintend-
ence, cost of depreciation of capital, reserve to meet
bad debts, and all other expenses of production for
which the employer can fairly claim compensation.
Under the name of Industrial Partnership such an ar-
rangement has been experimentally tried in England,


vi ] INDUSTRIAL PARTNERSHIP. 143

and has been subject to a good deal of adverse discussion.
The outlines of the scheme are familiar to all who have
read with proper care John Stuart Mill's Principles of
Political Economy. 1 I need not repeat here the details
of the success attained by Leclaire, the house-decorator
of Paris, m organising a partnership on this basis,
including 200 employees. Nor need I do more than
refer to the Paris and Orleans Railway Company, which
long made a practice of distributing a bonus to its
employees.

It would probably be impossible to get back to the
first origin of this system. The primitive form of
industrial organisation within the family, the family
tribe, or the village community, was not very different.
It is said that at the present day there is a system of
social partnership in Hindu villages in which the divi-
sion of the aggregate profits is made according to the
work, ability, or capital which each individual contributes.
Brentano quotes an ancient record showing that at Bruges
and Ypres the masters and servants in the woollen trade
divided the profits according to a fixed scale. In the
herring fishery, whaling adventures, Cornish mining, and
some other branches of industry, it has always been
usual to make the workman's share depend partly at
least upon the results. The extension of a similar
system to manufacturing industry in general was until
recent years practically impossible owing to the law of
partnership. But it is a very remarkable fact that nearly
a hundred years ago (1788), an Act was passed by the
Irish Parliament to promote trade and manufacture
by regulating and encouraging partnerships. It allowed

1 Book IV. cliap. vii. sect. 5. People's Edition, pp. 461465.


144 THE STATE IN KELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

persons to subscribe sums of money to men well quali-
fied to trade, on the condition that the subscribers were
not to be deemed traders on that account, or subject to
any further demands. 1 Had such a law existed for a
hundred years in England, it would have allowed of the
growth of industrial partnership, and would in all
probability have profoundly ameliorated the relations of
labour and capital.

I entered into careful consideration of this subject in a
lecture prepared for the Social Science Association in 1870,
and published by the Society, 2 and I see no reason to
alter the opinions in favour of the plan then expressed.
It is true that the experimental trials of the system
which were then being made by Messrs. Henry Briggs
and Co. in coal mining, Messrs Fox, Head, and Co. in
iron manufacture, Mr. E. 0. Greening, and others, in
several branches of trade, have proved more or less
unsuccessful The industry has continued, but the
partnership with the men has been given up. On the
principles enunciated at the outset, to the effect that we
must reason from the most direct and proximate experience
available, it might seem that these failures negative the
whole thing. But then, as before explained, experience
requires careful interpretation ; when we remember that
these few experimental partnerships were started in
single-handed opposition to powerful trades unions, we
can see that there may have been inteifermg causes suffi-
cient to ensure failure. A system like that of trades-

1 Holyoake, History of Co-operation, vol n. p 227

2 On Industrial Partnerships A Lecture delivered under the
auspices of the National Association for the Promotion of Social
Science. April 5, 1870, London, 1 Adam Stieet, Adelphi.


vi.] INDUSTRIAL PARTNERSHIP. 145

unionism, with all its associated ideas, has vast latent
influence. When we remember that the men employed
in the works in question were brought up and imbued
with these ideas, we see that it must take a long time
to introduce a very different system.

The present doctrine is that the workman's interests
are linked to those of other workmen, and the employer's
interests to those of other employers. Eventually it-
will be seen that industrial divisions should be per-
pendicular, not horizontal The workman's interests
should be bound up with those of his employer, and
should be pitted in fair competition against those of
other workmen and employers. There would then be
no arbitrary rates of wages, no organised strikes, no long
disputes rendering business uncertain and hazardous.
The best workman would seek out the best master, and
the best master the best workmen. Zeal to produce the
best and the cheapest and most abundant goods would
take the place of zeal in obstructive organisation. The
faithful workman would not only receive a share of any
additional profits which such zeal creates, but he would
become a shareholder on a small scale in the firm, and a
participator in the insurance and superannuation benefits
which the firm could hold out to him with approximate
certainty of solvency.

I should hesitate thus to enlarge upon the advantages
of industrial partnership were they at present purely
imaginary and in opposition to experience. The fact,
however, is, that in France, where trades unions have never
acquired much influence, the system of industrial partner-
ship has advanced surely, and of late rapidly. Under
the name of Participation auxBMfices, or participation in


146 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUK. [CHAP.

profit, it has been adopted by at least forty firms, many
of them, such as the well-known "Bon March6," being
establishments of great extent and imp ortance. A society,
now in the third year of its existence, has been formed to
study the different schemes of participation adopted, and
to make them known in the Bulletin of the Society. This
publication is issued by Messrs. A. Chaix et Cie., Eue
Bergere, 20, Pres du Boulevard Montmartre, 5 francs
per volume. Payments can be made to a collector in
London, who will be named on application to the
secretary of the society at the address just given. Full
membership of the society is obtained by payment of an
annual subscription of 20 francs. The fullest details of
the constitution, general management, and results of the
French industrial partnerships are given in this peri-
odical. One of the latest numbers of the Bulletin con-
tains a complete history of the partnership accorded
to its employees by the Compagnie du Chemin de Fer
d'0rl6ans, since amalgamated with other lines. In the
last year or two Mr. Sedley Taylor has drawn attention
to the remarkable progress of "participation in profits"
in France, and has wisely and ably advocated similar
progress in this country. So great is the practical
importance of the subject that I subjoin a list of the
papers or books in which the reader can obtain full
information :


Charles Babbage, Economy of Manufactures, chap, xxvi,
II. C Bnggs, Social Science Association, 1869
E. C. and A Briggs, Evidence before the Trades -Union Com-
mission, 4th March 1868. Questions 12,485 to 12,753.
The Industrial Partnerships Record.
Pare, Co-operative Agriculture (Longmans), 1370.


vi.] INDUSTRIAL PARTNERSHIP. 147

Jean Billon, Participation des Oumiers awe, Bn<$ces des
Patfom, Geneve, 1877.

Fougerousse, Patrons et Ouvriers de Paris (Chaix), 1880.

Sedley Taylor, Society of Arts Journal, 18th February 1881,
vol. xrix. pp 280-70. Also m Nineteenth Century, May 1881, pp.
802-11, "On Profit Sharing."

To HCO what is being done abroad, the reader should consult La
Question Owntonx Essai de Solution Pratique. Par J, C. Van
Marten : Pans (Ohaix), 1881,


148 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.


CHAPTEE VII.

ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION.

HAVING regard to the failure of working-men in most
cases to become their own employers by co-operation,
and the apparent remoteness of the time when the
system of industrial partnership is likely to be adopted
in this country, we must turn with increased interest
to the measures which have been taken with respect
to conciliation and arbitration. A conciliator is one who
intervenes between disputants in order to promote calm
discussion, to draw forth frank explanations, or to
suggest possible terms of compromise. The mere fact
that the conciliator is, as he always ought to be, unim-
passioned and disinterested, the impartial spectator of
Adam Smith's theory of morals, is often sufficient to
enable him to allay the irritation and to prove that the
disputants are more nearly of a mind than they imagined
themselves to be. An arbitrator, on the other hand, is
one appointed either by the consent of the parties, or by
superior authority, to inquire into the facts, to receive
explanations from both sides, and then, with or without
the concurrence of the disputants, to assign the terms of
arrangement The logical difference between conciliation


VIL] ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION. 149

and arbitration is that the agreement is in the former
case entirely voluntary ; in the latter case it is, if need
be, compulsory. It follows that conciliation may be
practised any day by any person, irrespective of the law
or the State, To constitute arbitration in the proper
sense of the term there must be some statutory or
judicial power under which the arbitrators proceed.
Even if the parties enter into arbitration in a perfectly
voluntary way, they must surrender their freedom to a
certain extent, by agreeing to accept the arbitrators'
award, and thus enabling it to be judicially imposed.
If this be not the case, the arbitration so called is in
reality only conciliation.

It must be quite apparent, however, that the greatest
possible difference exists between trade disputes according
as they relate to the past, or (the present being a mere
moment) to the future. When difficulties occur about
the interpretation of past contracts, or questions of detail
arise which were unforeseen at the time, arbitration is
of course the proper and natural resource. It is the
mode of settling disputes provided for in the articles of
association of countless mercantile companies, in agree-
ments of many kinds, and in the instruments of partner-
ship of private firms. A court of law in a civil action
is to a great extent a court of arbitration, but when
the points of disagreement turn on questions of usage,
technical practice, or complicated accounts, rather than
points of law, it is usual for the judges to hand over the
decision to arbitrators who are unfettered by the forms
and ceremonies of the law. All such disputes relating
to the past must be settled one way or the other, and
when the arbitrators have been chosen and have given a


150 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

decision honestly and carefully, it is proper that the
result should be carried into effect compulsonly.

It is a totally different question how far agreements
relating to the future conduct of trade and industry can
or ought to be decided by the judgment of a third party.
Here the freedom of industry is at stake, for the arbi-
trator will now have to decide, not what agreement was
made, but what is to be made. The voluntary nature of
the arrangement cannot be affected by inquiries directed
merely to ascertain what the arrangement was ; but in
regard to the future an arbitrator in assigning the terms
on which disputants are to agree necessarily restricts
their liberty. The course of future events being unknown,
there can be no certainty that the arbitrator knows
better than the other parties. Such arbitration, then,
resolves itself into the arbitrary fixing of rates of wages
and prices, and other terms of working, which it is
supposed, according to the principles of economics, should
be left to the play of supply and demand. It is of a
piece with the assize of bread and ale, and the provisions
of the Statute^of Apprentices which required the justices
of the peace to fix rates of wages at their own discretion.

The Law of Arbitration in Labour Disputes. Before
attempting, however, to form an opinion how far some
kind of conciliation or arbitration is applicable to the
future, it is well to review briefly the course of legislation
on the subject. Under the Elizabethan statutes there
was no place for arbitration, because the conditions of
labour were placed entirely in the hands of magistrates.
But the decadence of that legislation was marked by
the statute of the 20 Geo. II. cap. 19, which introduced


VIL] ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION. 151

a new principle by giving summary jurisdiction to justices
of the peace in disputes between masters and servants
when the term of hiring is one year or longer. A justice
of the peace may decide all such disputes "although no
rate or assessment of wages has been made that year by
the justices of the peace of the shire," etc. Extensive
powers were given to the magistrates for coercing refrac-
tory servants and apprentices, although there was the
alternative of discharging them from their engagements.
By the 31 Geo. II. cap. 11, the powers of the Act
were extended to the case of agricultural servants hired
for less than a year ; but the magistrate's interference
was clearly limited to disputes arising during the
currency of a hiring, and no power was given to bind
servants beyond that term.

During the eighteenth century a series of Acts was
passed, partly the same as those known as the Combination
Acts, which provided means for the settlement of disputes
in particular trades, especially those engaged with cotton.
The Act of the 43 Geo. III. (1803), cap. 151, was of a
more elaborate character, and enabled disputes between
masters and weavers, or such as arise with persons
engaged in ornamenting cotton goods by the needle, to
be settled by referees appointed by a justice of the peace,
Such Acts were, however, consolidated and replaced
by that of the 5 Geo. IY. cap. 96, which established
one general law relating to arbitration of disputes in
every branch of trade and manufacture. This Act was
doubtless passed in consequence of the recommendations
of the Committee of the House of Commons of 1824,
which inquired into the operation of the Labour Laws.
In the second section we find an enumeration of the


152 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

causes of dispute which, may be referred to arbitrators
under the Act ; but we find it carefully provided that
"nothing in this Act contained shall authorise any justice
or justices acting as hereinafter mentioned to establish a
rate of wages or price of labour or workmanship, at
which the workman shall in future be paid, unless with
the mutual consent of both master and workman." There
is a great contrast between the powers here given to
justices and those which they enjoyed under the older
laws ; but it will be seen that with the consent of both
parties they could settle rates prospectively. The arbi-
tration under this Act is to be carried out by persons
nominated by the justice of the peace, one half being
master manufacturers, and the other half workmen, out
of which the master and workmen who are in dispute
respectively choose one man each as referees having full
power to hear and determine the dispute. In case of
failure of decision other referees could be appointed, and
in the last resort the justices could settle the matter
finally, provided that no master manufacturer could act
as justice in this capacity. This elaborate Act is in full
force, only the first section having been superseded by
the Statute Law Revision Act, 1873. It is, I presume,
but seldom appealed to.

The Function of the Conciliator. It is quite obvious,
then, that there is ample precedent for referring trade
disputes to arbitration, provided that the powers of the
arbitrators shall not extend to the fixing of a future rate
of wages or prices of any commodity. But, as this fixing
of future rates is often the main matter in dispute, it
still remains to be considered how far conciliation may
apply to the future. Clearly, the consent of both the


vii.] ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION. 153

parties will be the measure of the power of the arbi-
trator, and, as the term of the compulsory award, if any,
will be brief, prospective arbitration becomes reduced to
conciliation. But the question still remains, Is there
any legitimate function for a third party intervening
in such disputes? Wages and prices are governed by
that is to say, manifest the laws of supply and demand.
Buyers and sellers must higgle until they hit that mean
term at which business can proceed. In the corn, cotton,
stock, and other large markets, no conciliators are needed
to arrange quotations. The question is, Will you, or will
you not buy 2 If one person does not buy, another does ;
or the price asked is shifted a little, until a buyer is
attracted. Why does not the same spontaneous adjust-
ment take place in the labour market ^ Probably it
would take place were individual workmen and em-
ployers left alone to make separate bargains in each case.
Domestic servants, for instance, arrange their terms of
hiring in perfect independence 3 there are no strikes and
no lock-outs. If an employer offers too low terms,
servants are not to be had. There is the freest com-
petition among good servants for good places, and among
good employers for good servants. The general result is
quite satisfactory.

The existence, however, of combinations in the labour
market alters the nature of the bargains altogether.
There is no longer competition among men and among
employers, but we have a uniform body of men demand-
ing a certain rate of wages, and a body of employers
offering another. The laws of supply and demand do
not apply to such a case. In all bargains about a single
object there may arise, as I have explained in my Theoiy


154 THE STATE IK KELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

of Political Economy (2d ed. pp. 128-137) a dead-lock
In the sale of an estate, for instance, A may be willing
to sell for .10,000, and B may in his own mind be pre-
pared to give .11,000, if necessary. Could their minds
be perfectly known to each other, any price between
10,000 and 11,000 would be possible; but there
would even then be a dead-lock arising from the want of
any means of determining at what point between 10,000
and 11,000 the eventual price should be fixed. As
each party in a negotiation, however, conceals his own
feelings and intentions as much as possible, B may believe
that A will sell for 9000, and by way of dissembling
his own great wish for the estate offers only 8000.
The combat of desires and fears is only resolved by the
lapse of time which tries the patience of both parties,
unless, indeed, a third party is called in as mediator.
An important negotiation of the kind is, indeed, seldom
conducted by the personal meeting of the parties in-
terested. It is handed over to their solicitors or land
agents; and, when they come to a dead -lock, the inde-
pendent opinion of a valuer will be appealed to, if it is
obviously for the advantage of all that some bargain
should be concluded.

Now, as pointed out by Mr. F. Y. Edgeworth, in his
remarkable work on Mathematical Psychics, the exist-
ence of combinations in trade disputes' usually reduces
them to a single contract bargain of the same indeter-
minate kind. The men, for instance, ask for 15 per
cent advance of wages all round. Eather than have a
strike, it might be for the interest of the employers to
give the advance, or for the men to withdraw their
demand; a fortiori, any intermediate arrangement would


vii] ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION. 155

still more meet their views. But there may be absolutely
no economic principle on which to decide the question.
Mathematically speaking, the problem is an indeterminate
one, and must be decided by importing new conditions.

It would appear, then, that, even on the grounds of
pure economic theory, there are reasons why a conciliator
might be properly called in to resolve an industrial dead-
lock. Far more expedient still must this course appear
when we remember that in trade disputes the economic
question is often the smallest part of the matter. Masters
and men belong to such different classes of society that
the least difference of opinion is soon complicated with
sentiments of social dislike. Ideas of so-called fairness,
justice, generosity, good faith, etc, are implicated. If
no mode of allaying the dispute be quickly discovered,
it becomes a question of surrender or no surrender.
A strike, says Mr. Newmarch, is the end of discussion
and the beginning of war. As Mr. Bevan remarks, a
casus lelk no sooner arises than all prudence is thrown
to the winds. Pecuniary losses are of little account to
those who are prepared to endure starvation rather than
submit to what they esteem "injustice." It is obvious,
then, that a trade dispute, especially when it has reached
the acute phase of a strike, has little or nothing to do with
economics. It is not a question of science, and there is no
theoretic reason why conciliators should not be called in,
if experience shows that they are usually able to compose
matters.

In many cases the work of such conciliators will con-
sist in little more than inquiring into the real facts of the
case, and impartially and authoritatively making them
known to both parties. If either party then confesses to


156 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

misapprehension, it is clear that the conciliator imports
rather than ousts political economy. He acts the part
of an economic and statistical inquirer. Even if a differ-
ence still exists, the conciliator may be able to suggest
some medium course which it will be for the interests of
both parties to accept rather than to continue a struggle
ruinous to all. As in legal litigation, it is often better
to have any decision rather than no decision at all. The
conciliator may play the part of scapegrace, and bear the
reproaches, provided only that the combatants will accept
the terms and try to forget their mutual reproaches.

Results of Experience in Conciliation. The success of the
conciliation system has varied much in different trades.
From a review of the facts adduced by Mr. Weeks in his
valuable report upon the subject, to be presently men-
tioned, I should infer that success is greatest when there
is a multiplicity of rates of wages and prices of work and
all lands of technical details to be settled. In the hosiery
trades, for instance, this is conspicuously the case, the lists
of prices and rates extending to thousands of items. In
such a trade some method of arrangement must be invalu-
able if not indispensable, as the remarkable success attained
at Nottingham by the Board originated by Mr. Mundella
sufficiently shows, In many other trades the details are
more numerous and perplexing than easily appears to an
outsider. Thus, in the building trades generally there
are not only the principal rates of wages to be paid, but
the rates for overtime, the time of payment, the length
of notice, the hours of beginning and ending work, and
the intervals allowed for meals. The allowance of
" walking time," or the time required for getting to and


vii ] ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION. 157

from the place of work, is also a fruitful cause of dispute.
When all such matters are arranged to the satisfaction
of both parties, there arises a complete code of working
rules, like that prepared by Mr. Davis for the bricklayers
and builders of the Staffordshire potteries. Such trouble-
some details must be settled by custom or by some kind
of rule, written or unwritten. The laws of supply and
demand cannot settle such details. And if disputes and
strikes are shown by experience to be fewest under a
system of arbitration, it is difficult to deny the utility of
the system.

Much less success has so far attended the practice of
arbitration in the great branches of mining industry and
metallurgy. When a single decision affects in a serious
degree the interests of a very large body of men, or a
very large mass of capital, it is difficult to induce the
parties to submit so important a matter to the judgment
of a single mind. The employers affirm that they cannot
yield demands for higher wages without suffering a large
pecuniary loss. Nothing but necessity, then, can make
them yield. The men, on the other hand, will not be
satisfied by the assurances of the most respectable arbi-
trator. Thus either the dead-lock is maintained without
arbitration, or the awards of arbitrators are unfortunately
repudiated in some cases by the men, or in rare cases by
the masters. It is to be hoped, however, that arbitration
may make progress even among colliers ; there must be
many matters relating to modes of weighing, safety of
mines, convenience of labour, etc., which might be settled
by a board, and an approach to a better understanding
about wages should be made through a sliding scale.
In several cases, indeed, sliding scale agreements have


158 THE STATE IN RELATION" TO LABOUR. [CHAP.

recently broken down, and the experience of arbitration
in the great trades alluded to is rather discouraging.
But in the absence of any better method of composing
strife, the only course seems to be to try again and again,
until the parties learn the superior advantages of indus-
trial peace. It must be obvious, however, that both the
sliding scale and the system of arbitration generally
should be regarded as no permanent settlement of the
relations of workmen and employers, but rather as a
stepping-stone to some still sounder method of partner-
ship and participation in profits which a future generation
will certainly enjoy.

A very careful and impartial inquiry into the methods
and success of arbitration and conciliation in this country
was made a few years ago by Mr. Jos. D. Weeks, special
commissioner of the State of Pennsylvania. It is en-
titled, "Beport on the Practical Operation of Arbitra-
tion and Conciliation in the Settlement of Differences
between Employers and Employees in England. . . .
Harrisburg (U.S.A), 1879." It is probably the most
valuable document published on the subject, describing
both the successes and failures of the system. 1 Reference
should also be made to Mr. Rupert Kettle's valuable
evidence before the Trades-Union Commissioners of 1867
(Questions 6985 to 7231), and to Mr. Henry Crompton's
well known "Essay on Industrial Conciliation."

Conseils de Prud'hommes. The comparatively brief
experience furnished by boards of arbitration in this

1 See also Mr. "Weeks' later report on Industrial Conciliation and
Arbitration in New York, OMo, and Pennsylvania, m the Twelfth
Annual Eeport of the Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor.
Boston, 1881.


vii ] ABBITRATION AND CONCILIATION. 159

country is fortified by the long and successful action of
somewhat similar bodies in France and Belgium. Though
invested with judicial power, and placed upon a legal
footing, the Conseils de Prud'hommes are in part of
their functions closely analogous to the volunteer concili-
ators of the English manufacturing districts. The name
pmd'hommes (wise-men) carries us back to the mediaeval
communmUs or gilds of arts and trades in France.
They were the experts chosen to judge the soundness
of commodities or to settle trifling disputes between
merchants and manufacturers at fairs. The Eevolution
made an end of all such antiquated institutions, so far
as they had not already fallen into disuse; but it is
curious to find that the eleventh year of the Republic
had not elapsed before the City of Lyons discovered the
necessity of some kind of trade tribunal, and the law of
the 21 Germinal of that year, although applying at first
only to Lyons, soon became the basis on which similar
conseils were established in many other French towns.
The members of the conseil are elected by all the
employers, managers, foremen, and workmen of the
industries coming under its purview, the maire of the
commune preparing the voting lists, and the prefet acting
as returning officer. The masters and men are convoked
separately, and return to the council equal numbers of
their own body. The president and vice-president are
nominated by the chief of the executive power (i.e. the
Central Government), and the council thus constituted
retains its power for three years. It is divided into two
'bureaux or committees the bureau gMral, composed of
at least five members, meeting once a week, and the
bureau paitwuherj consisting of one master and one


160 THE STATE Iff RELATION TO LABOUR [CHAP.

workman, who attend every day for two hours. All
disputants are " invited," in the first place, to come before
the bureau parhculier, in order to "explain" their differ-
ences. If this result be not achieved, they are summoned
more formally before the bureau gMral, which disposes
authoritatively of the matter, if falling within their com-
petence. It is plain that the bureau particuher represents
conciliation as contrasted with the arbitration of the
bureau gMral.

From Mr. Bevan's paper on Strikes (Journal of the
Statistical Society^ March 1880, vol. xliii. pp. 35-64) we
learn that the numbers of cases brought before these
bodies annually in France have varied from 30,000 up to
45,000. In about 70 per cent of the cases conciliation
was sufficient, while a considerable number of cases were
eventually settled outside the court. Of the causes of
dispute, 61 per cent related to wages, 14 per cent to
dismissals, and 5 per cent to apprenticeship cases. The
conseils also have cognisance of property in designs, trade-
marks, and some other matters not coming within our
present subject.

A considerable body of law has grown up in France
around these tribunals, the functions of which are care-
fully defined and regulated. Those who are interested
in the subject can learn the whole constitution, law, and
practice from any of several admirable little manuals
which have been drawn up by French advocates. It
will be sufficient to mention the Code Pratigue des Prud'~
hommes, par Th. Sarrazin, 3e ed. 2e Tirage, Paris, 1880
(Marchal, Billard, et Cie. Prix 1 franc 50 cent.)

The Best Constitution of Boards of Conciliation. -The


vii ] ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION. 163

Evidently these Equitable Councils of Conciliation
are imitations of the French Conseils de Prud'hommes,
with some infusion of the older English law of arbitra-
tion. They are courts of law in disguise, and although
care is taken to make them as impartial as possible, it is
to be doubted, and experience confirms the doubt, whether
they will meet with any favour. As such legally con-
stituted councils are very properly prohibited from fixing
rates of wages for the future, they fail to give aid just
where aid is needed. All available evidence tends to
show that successful boards of conciliation must Toe
purely volunteer bodies, with no taint of the justice of
the peace about them, and no powers of distress and
commitment.

In all probability success will best be obtained in the
settlement of .trade disputes by keeping lawyers and laws
as much at a distance as possible. There must be spon-
taneous or at least voluntary approximation of the
parties concerned. It is a question not of litigation, but
of shaking hands in a friendly manner, and sitting
down to a table to talk the matter over. The great
evil of the present day is the entire disunion of the
labourer and the capitalist j if we once get the hostile
bodies to meet by delegates round the same table on a
purely voluntary and equal footing, the first great evil
of disunion is in a fair way of being overcome. There
might arise danger of joint conspiracy against the outside
public, but on the whole the evils thus likely to arise are
less considerable than those connected with strikes.


164 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUR. [CHAP.


CHAPTER VIII

CONCLUDING REMARKS.

ON reviewing the arguments given in the little treatise
now brought to a close, it may perhaps seem to the
reader that the results obtained are hesitating and con-
flicting, if not positively contradictory. We started with
the task of determining in what cases the State should
or should not interfere with industrial freedom.

Ancient restrictive legislation such as that of the
Statute of Apprentices was denounced; and even the
slight modern remnant, the practice of apprenticing
youths for seven years, was described as slavery; the
common law doctrine of non-restraint of trade was held
up as wise in the highest degree ; yet at the same time
the modern Factory Acts were treated as admirable, and
additional restrictions were advocated in the cases of
mothers -of -young -children employed in factories, shop-
assistants, and some other cases.

Anything approaching to a government superintend-
ence of industry or official inspection of commodities
was treated as out of the question , yet certain branches
of trade, it was concluded, could be advantageously
regulated by government.


viii.] CONCLUDING REMARKS. 165

Passing to another branch of the subject, the inter-
ference of trade societies in productive industry was, as a
general-rule, deprecated ; yet the existence and proceed-
ings of certain professional unions and newly -created
institutes of various sorts were defended. Though it
was held that trades unions ought not to settle the
course of trade, yet it was argued that courts of concilia-
tion, if not of arbitration, might decide many matters
which, according to the pure principles of political eco-
nomy, ought to be left to the action of the laws of supply
and demand.

All this savours of paradox and contradiction, but
only on a superficial view of the matter. The subject is
one in which we need above all things discrimination.
Eestrictions on industry are not good nor bad per se : but
according as they are imposed wisely and with good
intentions, or foolishly, and with sinister intentions.
Pnma facie, indeed, restriction is bad, because Providence
is wiser than the legislator that is to say, the action of
the natural forces of evolution will ensure welfare better
than the ill-considered laws of the prejudiced and unskil-
ful legislator. But reason is a Divine gift, and where
upon the grounds of clear experience interpreted by
logical reasoning we can see our way to a definite im-
provement in some class of people without injuring others,
we are under the obligation of endeavouring to promote
that improvement. The greater part of the interference
of trade societies is objectionable, because, though directed
toward the welfare of a part, it is directed against the
welfare of the rest of the community. All other indus-
trial problems must be solved by similar careful estima-
tion of the total utilitarian results.


166 THE STATE IN RELATION TO LABOUE. [CHAP. VIIL

If such be a true view of the case it is clear that there
can be BO royal road to legislation in such matters.
We cannot expect to agree in our utilitarian estimates,
at least without much debate. We must agree to differ,
and though we are bound to argue fearlessly, it should
be with the consciousness that there is room for wide
and bond fide difference of opinion. We must consent to
advance cautiously, step by step, feeling our way, adopt-
ing no foregone conclusions, trusting no single science,
expecting no infallible guide. We must neither maximise
the functions of government at the beck of quasi-military
officials, nor minimise them according to the theories of
the very best philosophers. We must learn to judge
each case upon its merits, interpreting with painful care
all experience which can be brought to bear upon the
matter.

Moreover, we must remember that, do what we will,
we are not to expect approach to perfection in social
affairs. We must recognise the fact clearly that we have
to deal with complex aggregates of people and institu-
tions, which we cannot usually dissect and treat piece-
meal. We must often take "all in all or not at all"
Tolerance therefore is indispensable. We may be obliged
to bear with evil for a time that we may avoid a worse
evil, or that we may not extinguish the beginnings of
good. In the end we shall not be disappointed if our
efforts are really directed towards that good of the people
which was long ago pronounced to be the highest law.

THE END.
