INVESTIGATIONS

IN

CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


INVESTIGATIONS

IN

CURRENCY AND FINANCE


BY

W. STANLEY JEVONS

LL.D. (Eras.), M.A. (Lond.), F.R.S.

ILLUSTRATED BY TWENTY DIAGRAMS--


Edited, with an Introduction, by

H. S. FOXWELL, M. A.

Fellow and Lecturer of St John's College, Cambridge; and Propessor
op Political Economy at University College, London.


LOXDOX

MACMILLAN AND CO.

1884


CHABLES DICKERS AND EVANS,
CRYSTAL PALACE PRESS.


ERRATA--

Pp, 1 — 320 having been printed off before the volume came
into the Editor’s hands, it has been necessary to append the
following corrections, which affect the se* 1 ^ :

P. 53, line 2 —for “ p. 48/’ read “ p. 5 6.'’

P. 107, line 8 — for “page 32,” read “ g>age 48.”

P. 179, line 2 from bottom — for “a restricted,” read “an
unrestricted.”

Diagram XI. (p. 192), second line of heading — -for “ Averages,”
read “ Variation.”

P. 226, line 4 — dele “ or to 1817, the d#to of the previous one.”

P. 249, line 8 —for “ adopting,” read “ adapting.”

„ line 19 — insert comma after the* word “ value.”


CONTENTS.


PAGB

Preface by Mrs. Jevons xvii

Introduction by Professor H. S. Foxwell .... xix

I. — On the Study of Periodic Commercial Fluctuations ( 1862 ) 1-12

II. — A. Serious Fall in the Value of Gold ascertained, and its

Social Effects set forth ( 1863 ) 13-118

Preface 15

Chap. I. — Of the Nature and Difficulty of the Inquiry p. 18

Chap. II. — Inquiry into Prices before and after the

Gold Discoveries p. 34

Chap. III. — Deductions on other grounds concerning

the Future Value of Gold ..... p. 64
Chap. IV. — The Social Effects of the Depreciation of

Gold set forth * p 77

Chap. V. — Is a Remedy needful or possible ? . . p. 93
Appendix. Notes A — G p. 105

III. — The Variation of Prices, and the Value of the Currency

since 1782 ( 1865 ) 119-150

IV. — The Depreciation of Gold ( 1869 ) 151-159

V. — On the Frequent Autumnal Pressure in the Money

Market, and the Action, of the Bank of England ( 1866 ) 160-193


Preliminary Remarks. p. 160

(1) On the Average Fluctuations of the Currency and

the Bank Accounts within the Year . . . p. 165

(2) On the Causes of the Autumnal Pressure . . p. 169

(3) Special Examinations of the Pressure of 1865 . p. 173

(4) On the Action of 3ie Bank of England , . p. 177

Appendix I. • P 182

Postscript P* 187


VI


CONTENTS.


PAGE

VI.— The Solar Period and the Price of Corn (1875) 194-205

YIL — The Periodicity of Commercial Crises and its Physical

Explanation (1878), with Postscript (April, 1882*) . 206-220

VIII. — Commercial Crises and Sun-Spots (1878-9) . . . 221-243

Part I. (1 878) p. 221

Part II. (1879) p. 235

IX. — On the Condition of the Gold Coinage of the United

Kingdom, with reference to the question of Inter-
national Currency (1868) 241-296

I. — On the Necessity for a Ko-coinage, and the In-
troduction of an International Money. . . p. 241*

II. — An Inquiry into the Amount and Age of the Gold


Currency p. 262

III. — The Age of the Gold Circulation p. 274

IV. — Proportions of Coinage surviving . . p. 280


V.~ Ou the Deficiency of Weight of the Gold Coi age p. 282

X. — An ideally perfect System of Currency (1875) (nob

previously published) . 297-302

XI. — Gold and Silver: A Letter to M. Wolowski (180S)

(Only part translated and published in Wolowski’s
“L’Or et L’ Argent,” Paris, 1870, pp. 62-64) . . 303-306


XII. — The Silver Question (1877) 307-316

XIII. — Bimetallism (1881) 317-329

XIY. — Sir Isaac Newton and Bimetallism. (Left unfinished
in 1882.) With an Appendix of Fragments on
Bimetallism from the Author's MSS. . . . 330-360

Appendix on the Theory of Cycles . . . . , . . 361-362

Bibliography of Writings on Money and Prices . . . 303-414

Index • . 414

n


LIST or DIAGRAMS.


Periodic Commercial Fluctuations: _ .

To face page

I. — Monthly and Quarterly Averages 11

Serious Fall in the Value of Gold:

II. — 1. Yearly Averages of Prices, etc. 1845-62 ... 48

III. — 2. Logarithmic Chart, showing Average Rise of Prices . 56

Proportional Variation of Prices, 1782-1865 .*


IY. — 1. Metals, Iron, Timber, Oils 150

Y. — 2. Fibres, Cottons, Dyes 150

VI.— 3. Corn, Wheat, Fodder, Meat, Tropical Food . .150

VII. — 4. General Variation of the whole 40 Commodities . . 150

Commercial Fluctuations :

VIII — 1. Weekly Averages of Bank Accounts . . . .192

IX. — 2. Quarterly Variation of Bank Accounts . . . 192

X. — 3. Monthly Variation of Bank Accounts .... 192

XI. — 4. Bank Accounts after Elimination of the Quarterly

Variation 192

XII. — 5. Variation of Country, Irish, and Scotch Xote Circu-
lation 192

Exports from England to India, 1708-1810 :

XIII. — 1. Total Annual Values 218

XIV. — 2. Three-Year Averages. Logarithmic Chart . . . 218

Periodicity of Crises:

XV. — Bankruptcies in England and Wales, 1867-81 , . . 220

Commercial Crises :


XVI. — Exports from Maryland, etc., to England, 1697-1775 . 242

The Gol» Coinage:

XVII.— 1. Propoi^ion of Surviving Coinage 281

XVIII.— 2. Weight of Sovereigns, etc 28®


In addition to the above 18 diagrams, which will be found in the places
mentioned in the body of the work two larger ones are appended.


viii


LIST OF DIAGRAMS,


I.— A Diagram showing all the Weekly Accosts of the Bank
op England since the passing op the Bank Act op 1844^ with the
Amount of Bank op England, Private, and Joint Stock Bank
Promissory Notes in Circulation during each weJ?k, and the Bans
Minimum Bate op Discount.

This diagram was originally published in 1862, and has since been
continued to the year 1864, so that it now gives two complete cycles of
the Accounts. There were many difficulties in the way of bringing it
up to the present date, and it was considered that the subsequent
researches of Mr. Seyd, Mr. Inglis Palgrave, Mr. Dun, and others, had
made this less necessary.

The following explanatory notes and references were appended to
the diagram by Mr. Jevons on its publication in 1862 :

CONSTRUCTION OP THE DIAGRAM. — The height of every
dot above the nearest base line, or above the corresponding dot of a
lower curve, exactly represents the required number op pounds sterling,
on the Scale of one inch to every £10,000,000.

Each of the curves consists of 52 such dots within the year, repre-
senting the 52 weekly returns. The first dot of each year is placed
upon the perpendicular line at which the year begins, and the other
dots follow at equal horizontal distances of T \ inch.

According as the weeks fall, there are four or five weekly returns
in each month. By placing a straight ruler parallel to the upright
lines, and over any given dot, the month to which the dot belongs will
be shown on the scale of months above or below. When placed hori-
zontally, the straight edge will show the height of the dot. A pair of
compasses will also serve the purpose.

The rate of discount is shown by the height of a horizontal dark line
above tbe base line, on the scale of one inch to 5 per cent.

REFERENCES TO THE CURYES,— ' The base lines being
denoted by A, F, and M, and tbe curves by B, C, D, etc., the series of
accounts shown are as follows ;

A to E — Total Amount of Notes created by Issue Department.

A to D — Amount of Notes in hands of the Public.

D to E — Same as F to G : Notes in the Banking Department, forming*
1 the Banking Reserve.

A to C — Gold Coin and Bullion in Issue Department.

C to E— Government Debt (£11,015,100) and other^Securities, on the
* credit of which £14,000,000 notes (in 1844, ( ©r £14,650,000 in
1862) are credited in excess of 1>he*bullion.

J to L— Proprietors 5 Capital, with Rest (or Reserved Profits), and Seven-
day and other Bills. (These items, being of no general
importance, are not separately exhibited.)


LIST OF DIAGRAMS .


IX


H to J — Public or Government Deposits.

P to H — Other or private Deposits. (Thus P to J shows the Total
Deposits).

P to J — T&tal Deposits.

K to L — Government Securities, with the small amount of Gold and
Silver £!oin iu Banking Department.

G to K — Qfther or private Securities, Bills, etc.

P to G— Same as D to E : Notes in Banking Department, Banking
[Reserve, or Capital available for Loans.

M to N — Amount of Notes of Private or Country Banks in circulation.
N to O — Amount of Notes of Joint Stock Banks in circulation.

MtoO — Total amount of Notes (other than those of the Bank of
England) in circulation in England and Wales. (The circu-
lation of Scotland and Ireland is not shown in the diagram.)
A to B — Minimum Rate of Discount (on advances upon first-class Secu-
rities) at the Bank of England.

ACCOUNTS OP THE BANK OP ENGLAND are published
weekly in the London Gazette, and reprinted in most of the Public
Journals, as in the following example :

An Account pursuant to the Act 7 and 8 Yictoria, cap. 32, for the
Week ending Wednesday, March 5, 1862.

ISSUE DEPARTMENT.

Notes issued . . £29,472,645 Government Debt . £11,015,100

Other Securities . 3,634,900

Gold Coin and Bullion 14,822,645

Silver Bullion . .

£29,472,645 £29,472,645

BANKING DEPARTMENT.

Proprietors’ Capital . £14,553,000 Government Securi-

Rest .... 3,656,299 ties (including Dead

Public Deposits (in- Weight Annuity) . £11,210,541

eluding Exchequer, Other Securities . 18,384,900

Savings Banks, Notes .... 8,941,695

Commissioners of Gold and Silver Coin . 851,253

National Debt, and
Dividend Accounts) 6,755J287
Other Deposits . . 13,737,507

Seven-day and other
Bills . . - . 686,296

£39,388,389 £39,388,389

(Signed) M. MARSHALL,

Chief Cashier.


March 6.


X


LIST OF DIAGRAMS.


Previous to 3lst October, 1857, the accounts were made up for the
weeks ending Saturday. The collected accounts are in the Report of the
Select Committee on the Bank Act, 1857, Appendix, *in the Journal of
the Statistical Society, the Banker’s Magazine, etc. The accounts for
the period of 17 years, 1845-61, when printed at length, contain about
113,000 figures, all the useful results of which are spen at a glance i^
the above diagram. The numbers actually represented abqgre contain
more than 20,000 figures.

CONSTITUTION OF THE BANK.— The celebrated Act of
Parliament, 7 and 8 Victoria, cap. 32, under which the Bank of’England
is now managed, was devised by Sir Robert Peel, on the views of Lord
Overstone and others ; it came into operation on September 1, 1844.

Assuming that the Bank of England Note Circulation cannot possibly
fall below £14,000,000 (to which amount, however, must be added two-
thirds of any amount of Private or Joint Stock Bank Issues which may
lapse after the passing of the Act, this addition being in March, 18b*2,
£650,000), such amount of notes is issued upon the credit of securities,
of which the debt due by the Government to the Bank forms the chief
part.* Any further amount of notes is issued only when demanded in
exchange for gold bullion of equal value at the constant price of
£3 17s. 9d. per standard ounce, this gold being retained until demanded
back in exchange for notes. The amount of the currency thus varies as
if gold coin only were in use. The Issue Department, which manages
these transactions, is in effect a Government Bank of Issue. The Bank
Directors in conducting it exercise no discretion; they arc merely
administrators or trustees under the Act of Parliament.

The Banking Department acts with the same freedom and on the
same principles as any other bank, due regard being had to the vast
magnitude and influence of its transactions. As the Bank of the
Government it receives the revenue, and manages the transfer and
payment of dividends on the National Debt. To the public in general,
it performs the usual functions of a bank, but does not pay any interest
on deposits. Among its principal customers are the other Banks of the
country, as well as the Clearing House, or Association of London
Bankers. The whole monetary system of the kingdom is thus centralised
in the Bank of England, the accounts of which furnish the best possible
index to the condition of commercial affairs.

[* In September, 1883, the Bank of England Fiduciary Issue had*
increased to £15,750,000 ; but the Total Authorised Fiduciary Issues of
the United Kingdom had declined from £32,073,350 in 1844, to
£30,671,010 in 1883, or about £1,400,000. Meanwhile the total actual
'hote circulation has increased from about £37,000,000 in 1844, to about
£41,000,000 in 1883 ; and the gold circulation from about £36,000,000 in
1844, to about £110,000,000 m 1883. Of. Palgrave, Notes on Banking,
p. 49; and Journal of Bankers’ Institute, December, 1883.]


LIST OF DIAGRAMS .


xi


QUARTERLY VARIATION. — The payment of the Dividends of
the National Debt, on January 5, April 5, July 5, and October 5, causes
the following variations soon after the above dates

1. A rapfe decrease in the Government Deposits — H to J.

2. A decrease mj;he reserve of notes — F to G.

3. - A decrease in jthe private securities — G to K.

4. A slight decrease in the bullion — A to C.

5. An increase in the private deposits — F to H.

6. An increase in the note circulation — A to D, M to N, N to 0.

The reserve of notes, or capital available for loan, is usually least at

the end of autumn, and is often much reduced during the spring.

RATE OF DISCOUNT.— In determining the Bank minimum rate
of discount, the Directors slowly follow the general course of the open
Market. (Evidence before Committee of 1857.)'* In the above diagram
it is seen that the rate (A to B) varies inversely as the reserve of notes
available for discount, but the private securities (G to K), or amount
actually advanced on discount, is usually greater as the rate is higher.

SUSPENSIONS OF THE ACT.-On October 25, 1847, and
November 12, 1857, the reserve of notes (F to G or D to E), or loanable
capital, was so much reduced and so rapidly diminishing that its
complete exhaustion was obviously impending. This was the natural
result of the state of trade in previous years, and was totally unconnected
with the Act of 1844, which placed the note circulation on a secure
foundation.

But on the days named, the Government undertook the responsibility
of suspending the Act of Parliament so long as the rate of discount
should remain above 8 and 10 per cent., in order that the exceptional
issue (or the possibility of issue) of an unrestricted amount of paper
money might enable the Bank to remedy the temporary dearth of
capital. The provisions of the Act were broken only on the latter
occasion. So secure, indeed, was the position of the Bank, that the
convertibility of the notes was not in the slightest degree endangered
during either of these severe crises.

II. — A Diagram showing the Price op the English Funds, the
Pbice op Wheat, the Number op Bankruptcies, and the Rate op
Discount, monthly, since 1731, so par as the same have been

ASCERTAINED.

This diagram also was originally published in 1862. It has since
been brought up to date, with the exception of the curve showing the

[*This statement scarcely gives an adequate account of the present
•policy of the Bank. The Directors have to consider, first, the state of
the Reserve, and the probable future demands upon it ; and secondly,
the interests of the Bank Shareholders. It is understood that the first
consideration is paramount with them. The Market usually follows the
Bank.] *


xii


LIST OF DIAGRAMS .


number of bankruptcies. The attempt to complete this curve was
abandoned, for reasons which are given below.

The following explanatory notes and reference? were appended to
the diagram by Mr, Jevons on its publication in 1862 :

CONSTEUCTION OF THE DIAGRAM.— Th% required price f or
number for each month is represented on a certain scale, by the height
of a dot above the base line. The dot for January is placed upon (or
close after) the perpendicular line at which the year begins, and the dots
for the succeeding months follow at horizontal intervals of inch, being
joined together so as to form a curve. The month to which any dot
applies may be ascertained by counting the number from the beginning
or end of the year. The height of any dot may be learnt by referring
with a pair of compasses, or a ruler placed horizontally, to the scale at
the side.

The diagram exhibits at a glance all the results of tabular statements
containing more than 12,000 figures.

PEIOE OF 3 PEE CENT. FUNDS OE CONSOLS (coloured red)
is shown on the scale of \ inch to £10 per £100 of Stock. The price is for
money*, an average price or a medium quotation for each month is taken.

In 1751 several separate Stocks bearing an interest of 3 per cent,
were united into a single Stock, then amounting to £9,137,8*21, called
the 3 per cent. Consolidated Annuities or Oonsols . On March 31, 1860,
the Consolidated Annuities amounted to £400,637,849, forming more
than half the National Debt.

From 1731 to 1802 the quotations are from tables in Sinclair's History
of the British Eevenue, compiled from the books of the Stock Exchange.
1803-44, Averages deduced from tables in Gentleman’s Magazine.
1844-55, Toolte’s Hist. Prices. 1856, etc., Stat. Tables of the Board
of Trade, Stat. Journal, etc.

PRICE OF WHEAT (coloured blue) is shown on the scale of i inch
to 10 shillings per imperial quarter.

From 1731 to 1758, the price is the monthly quotation for the London
Market in the Gentleman’s Magazine.

1771 to 1792. The monthly average price in London, published in
the London Gazette, under the Act Geo. Ill, cap. 3 4 \ and other Acts.

1793 to 1837, the monthly average price in England and Wales, as
published in the Gazette, and compiled in Toohe’s History.

The whole of the above prices have been reduced to the uniform rate
per imperial quarter, for the purposes of this diagram.

After 1837, the monthly Gazette price as given in the Parliamentary
Papers, the Statistical Abstracts of tbe Board of Trade, the Statistical
Journal, etc.

The prices are not corrected for the depreciation of the currency
from 1800 to 1820, during the stoppage of specie payments. In 1814
the depreciation was as much as 25 per cent.


LIST OF DIAGRAMS.


xiii


NUMBER, OF COMMISSIONS OF BANKRUPTCY, published
in the London Gazette during each month, is shown on the scale of one
inch to’ 100 bankruptcies in the month.

Tables iff Chalmers 9 Estimate (p. 291) contain the data for the periods
1736-41, 1744-49, 1752-57, 1762-64, 1772-74, 1778-84, and 1791-93. For
mpst of the intervening years the numbers have been obtained from the
monthly li^s of bankrupts m the Gentleman’s Magazine, but the
results are not quite complete or accurate. From 1808 the numbers
have been compiled from the Annual Register. Up to the end of 1836
they refer to England and Wales only; afterwards to the United
Kingdom. •

The new Bankruptcy Act came into operation on October 11th, 1861 ;
during the few next months the bankruptcies were temporarily four
times more numerous than during any ^previous like period.*

MINIMUM RATE OF INTEREST OR DISCOUNT IN
LONDON (coloured red) is shown by the height of a thick horizontal
line above the base line, on the scale of one inch to 5 per cent, per
annum. The Rate 1824-56 is the Minimum Rate in the open
Market as actually charged at the beginning of each month at the
house of Overend, Gurney, & Go. These accounts were first com-
piled and published in part by Mr. Joplin ; they were afterwards ex-
tended and printed in the Report of the Committee on the Bank Act,
1857, in Tooke’s History, &c.

After May, 1857, the Minimum Rate of the Bank of England is
given.

The true rate of interest during the earlier years cannot be ascer-
tained, owing to the operation of the Usury Laws. The slight variation
from 1826 to 1830 is from the same cause. During nearly the whole
period from the beginning of last century until 1824, the rate of dis-
count on private bills at the Bank of England was 5 per cent.

REMARKS. — The price of the Funds as above exhibited forms a
sort of natural register, in which is marked the effect of every political
event and every commercial fluctuation upon the value of property
and the general prospects of the country.

In the first half of last century the 3 per cent. Funds bore a higher
price than at any subsequent period. In June, 1737, they were quoted
at 107. The highest price which 3 per cent. Consols have obtained was
106-J in December, 1752, shortly after their formation. These high
prices appear to be due to the very low rate of interest, and the sluggish
and unprogressive condition of trade in those times.

Until within the last 40 years the chief fluctuations in the Funds
were caused by the gveat wars in which the kingdom was engaged, and
the fear that the country could not bear the pressure of the debt in-
curred. The lowest price of Consols was 47£ in August. 1798 {Yam
Sommer 9 s Tables.)

[* See Note on the Bankruptcy Curve appended below.]


XIV


LIST OF DIAGRAMS .


In later years commercial causes have chiefly governed the value of
the Funds, and periods of great speculation followed by periods of
depression and bankruptcy have left strong marks, especially 'during
the years 1823-26 and 1842-48.

On examining the above diagram from the year 1824, it will be
obvious that a rise in the rate of discount usually follows a rise in tjae
price of wheat. This is explained by considering that whe^, being the
principal article of food, constitutes the most important part of the
capital of the country. Its scarcity should naturally be followed by
the indications of a scarcity of capital. But of course many other
causes concur with the productiveness of the harvest to determine the
supply of capital at any period. From an examination of the diagram
at the periods 1822-26, 1833-37, 1838-40, 1843-48, 1852-55, and
1858-61, the following would seem to be the usual course of a
commercial fluctuation. A low price of corn, low rate of interest, with
few bankruptcies, and a high price of the funds, lead to the employ-
ment of capital in vast undertakings at home and abroad. Capital
gradually becomes less abundant compared with the demand, and in
the revolution of the seasons, the scarcity is suddenly increased by a
failure of the harvest, and a rise in the price of corn. The rapid ascent
of the rate of interest is necessarily followed by a sudden flood of
bankruptcy, and a general revulsion of credit, which brings incal-
culable loss and disappointment upon all classes.

The revulsion of 1857, being the secondary effect of failures in the
United States, is excepted from these remarks. The same is partly the
case with the commercial difficulties of 1839-40.

[Note on the Bankruptcy Curve .— Serious difficulties presented them-
selves in the attempt to continue this curve, as the available data from

1861 onwards were examined. Mr. William Storr, who had kindly
undertaken to prepare the data, therefore applied for advice, as to the
best method of dealing with them, to the late Comptroller in Bankruptcy,
Mr. Mansfield Parkyns. Mr. Parkyns very generously offered to render
any assistance in his power towards the completion of the curve; but
at the same time showed that the difficulties in the way were such that
the work could not be satisfactorily executed. His letters not only
explain the nature of these difficulties, but throw so much light on the
snares which await those who would rashly handle English Bankruptcy
Statistics, that, with his kind permission, extracts from them are here
appended :

“Tables purporting to give the annual number of insolvencies since

1862 have led to considerable misapprehension, from want of regard
to the effect of changes of the law, which, without necessarily at all
affecting the amount of insolvency in the country, have largely affected
the number of insolvents under the Bankruptcy Act.

“ For any purpose of comparison between the number of cases now
and prior to 1870, not only the changes of the law above referred to,


LIST OF DIAGRAMS.


xv


but an apparently small change in the mode of gazetting, must be
carefully considered. 10,000 cases now shown by the Gazette mean,
probably, no more insolvencies than 8,000 in the Gazette before 1870.
Then arrf^igemenos and compositions were not gazetted till the re-
quired assents of creditors had been obtained. Now the debtors’
petitions are gazetted ; and of late years about 2,000 per annum have
dome to nothing, the debtors having failed to obtain the required assent
of the crec&cors.

“ I fear your difficulties are even more insurmountable than 1
imagined. The author’s note is easily explained. He had only ob-
tained for the chart the gazetted cases in the then Bankruptcy Court ;
that is, probably not one-tenth of the then cases, such as would now be
gazetted and dealt with by Mr. Seyd, etc. In those days there was a
separate Court for what was then termed insolvency, and there were, as
now, several thousands of assignments and compositions with creditors
annually. The Act of 1861 abolished the Insolvent Court; ‘insol-
vencies ’ became 4 bankruptcies/ and the assignments and compositions,
also brought into the Bankruptcy Court, have been gazetted. For
example, the chart seems to give about 800 to 900 cases for the year
1853. If all arrangements, etc., and attempted arrangements, had been
gazetted then as now, there would probably have been, with insol-
vencies, about 11,000 to 12,000 cases gazetted in that year. About
7,000 assignments and compositions with creditors in that year were
actually carried.

“Your suggestion of 1,000 instead of 100 cases per inch would
probably meet the question of space; but you would deal with cases
of altogether different character, which would need to be explained.
I think you will see clearly that I cannot assist you, as I would
gladly have done if it could have been possible to perceive how.”

The reader will find in the diagram facing p. 220 a representation of
the bankruptcies in England aud Wales for the years 1867-81 ; and
curves showing the annual variation of bankruptcy will be found in
another diagram facing p. 11.]


PREFACE.


Towards the end of 1881 my husband collected the following
papers, with the intention of publishing the volume in the
spring of 1882 ; but the state of his health, combined with
the pressure of other work, obliged him to proceed more
slowly than he had hoped to do, and he therefore postponed
the publication until the autumn. When he laid the book
aside, hoping to resume work upon it in the autumn, he had
seen all but the last two papers through the press ; but the
manuscript of the concluding one was still unfinished, and
the Introduction, which was to have been a long and
full one, bringing up the results of the papers to the
present time, was hardly commenced. With regard to the
Bibliography, though the greater number of the entries had
been written out, there was still a good deal of arranging
and of verifying references to be done ; and only about
one-third of the Index was made.

Several of the diagrams had been originally published
with the papers, and most of the others had merely to be
reduced from the large diagrams prepared at the time the
papers were read. The diagrams relating to the Bank
Accounts, however, having been prepared in 1862, at the
time the first paper was read at the British Association,
did not contain the results of . the Tables relating to the
later years ; they have therefore been entirely re-cast by
.Mb. Mabson, of “The Statist.” I may add that Mr. Jevors
had begun to prepare a diagram on the price of wheat at

Delhi from 1763 to 1836, but only outlines, insufficient to

l


xviii PREFACE BY MRS. JEVONS

indicate the plan of it, -were left, and therefore it could not
be carried out and inserted.

It would have been quite impossible for me to have com-
pleted the book myself; but when I accepted* Mb. Foxwell’s
most kind offer of help, feeling sure that to no one
would my husband have so gladly entrusted the Completion
of his book, I had no idea of the labour which I was
imposing upon him. I did not then realise the difficulties
which must be met with in taking up another’s unfinished
work, nor how much time and patience would be needed
to overcome them. Though it is impossible that the book
should be quite all that it would have been if my husband
had lived to finish it himself, I cannot sufficiently express
my thanks to Mb. Foxwell for having spared no pains to
bring the work to completion in the way which the Author
would himself have wished.

HARRIET A. JEVONS.


2, The Chestnuts.
Hampstead.


INTRODUCTION.


The circumstances in which the present volume of papers by
the late Mr. Stanley Jevons is offered to the public have been
partly explained by Mrs. Jevons in her Preface to it. In this
short Introduction, which, at her request, I have gladly under-
taken to write, I shall have little to add to what she has there
said, in regard to the history of the volume ; but I shall
attempt to give some account of the general nature of the
papers it contains, and to point out some considerations which
go to show their unique value to the economic and statistical
world, and the opportuneness of their present collection and
publication.

Those who had interested themselves in the recent de-
velopment of economic science, whether on its theoretic,
statistic, or administrative sides, must have been well aware
that it received a severe check by the lamented death
of Mr. Jevons in August 1882. But probably only a few of
his more intimate friends were conscious of the full extent of
their loss. For some years, Mr. Jevons had been concen-
trating himself with ever-increasing interest and intensity
upon his economic studies. His book on the State in
Relation to Labour was one indication of the new lines of
inquiry on which he was entering, and was full of promise
of the important service his eminently wise and healthy judg-
ment might have rendered in the treatment of the difficult
social problems which now press for solution. Another direc-
tion taken by his many-sided activity was historical research

b 2


XX


INTRODUCTION.


and bibliography. In his brilliant article on Cantillon,* and.
in the last paper of this volume, he has left us sufficient
evidence of what he could have done as an historian. To
Bibliography he attached great value, regarding it as the
instrument of historical study, the economiser of scientific"
labour, and an important help to the formation of a solid
and instructed judgment. In the List of Works on Money
appended to this volume we have the first-fruits of his labours
in this department. He had hoped, at no distant date, to
give a similar list of works on other branches of economic
science.

These various studies, however, were but subordinate to
one principal enterprise, towards which his later work and
thoughts had been steadily converging, and for which both
the time and the man certainly seemed ripe. He had planned
and partly written a great Treatise on Economics, which
was, as he hoped, to be the achievement of his life, and in
which he would have worked up the immense store of
classified materials which he had been accumulating for more
than twenty years. He had unrivalled qualifications for the
task he had set himself; his death, when he had just fairly
set out upon it, falls on many of us with all the weight of a
personal and irreparable loss.

It would seem as though before making this fresh start
Mr. Jevons had been desirous to collect and review his already
accomplished work. For he had begun to arrange for the
reprinting of two collections of his papers; those on social
subjects, which were published by Mrs. Jevons last year,f and
those on Currency and Finance, which are contained in the
present volume.

The delay which has intervened in the publication of this
second volume is due to several causes. Besides the diffi-

Richard, Qaniillon and the Rationality of Political Economy . Cent.
Eev. Jan., 1881.

f Methods of Social Reform. Macmillan and Co. 1883.


INTRODUCTION.


xxi


culties inseparable from an attempt to gather up the scattered
threads of another's work, suddenly suspended, unexpected
obstacles were met with in the preparation of the diagrams,
some of which are very elaborate, and all of such a character
# as to require great precision of execution. Constant and
unforeseen engagements have also prevented my devoting to
the work as much time as I could have wished, and this
has further retarded its appearance.

But if the time of publication had been deliberately
arranged, instead of being the result of adverse circumstances,
it could hardly have been more opportune. Never, as we shall
see when we come to consider the several papers in detail, has.
more general attention been directed to the subjects of which
they treat. And while few of the papers have lost any of
their significance by the lapse of time, they have all gained
immensely by unity of presentation. It may thus safely be
said that though some of them are now twenty years old, they
will be read with wider and keener interest to-day than they
were when they first appeared.

It is obvious, however, that in a republication of this kind,
an Introduction is required, and Mr. Jevons had begun to
write one. As he observes at the outset, “ in reprinting in a col-
“ lected form a series of papers, tracts, and letters previously
“ published during the last twenty years, it was desirable to
“ prefix some sort of Introduction tending to show the bearing
" of these papers upon each other, and to bring up their contents
“ to the present day." Only a few fragments were written of
these projected “ introductory discussions." It would appear
from them that Mr. Jevons had intended to give an account,
first of the general contents of the volume, and then of each of
the separate papers, with comments and completions to date.
In attempting to furnish such substitute as I can for the_
Introduction thus planned, I shall devote myself chiefly to
explaining the nature of the inquiries undertaken, and their
relation to one another. As to comments, any that I shall


XXII


INTRODUCTION,


offer will be very brief, and will be directed principally to
pointing out the value and significance of tbe papers to which
they relate ; and I shall, as far as possible, incorporate with them
what has been left by Mr. Jevons. The papers themselves, as
printed in the text, are fortunately for the most part brought*
up to date, so that little remains to be done under tEis head.
How far this is the case will more fully appear after the
description of the contents of the volume, to which I now
proceed.

To a great extent, as Mr. Jevons says, the volume consists
of reprints of already published papers. Most of these
originally appeared in the journals of societies, and were not
very accessible to the general student, and those which had
been separately published were out of print. Their re-
publication therefore in a collected series is a great con-
venience to the economist. It cannot fail, too, by the view it
affords of the singular consistency and steady development of
his opinions, greatly to enhance the already first-rate re-
putation of Mr. Jevons. The general reader, who is not given
to hunting up Transactions, will be impressed by the con-
tinuous series of inquiries, pursued through so many years of
distracting occupations ; and even the special inquirer will
scarcely be prepared to find that the papers he has studied as
isolated writings arrange themselves in such a perfect and
fascinating organic whole. There is, so far as I have observed,
only one important case in the whole series of papers, in which
Mr. Jevons allowed himself to make a prediction which has
not been verified by tbe subsequent course of events ,* while
cases of confirmation and unexpected consilience are numerous.

But the volume is by no means simply a collection of
reprints. The unfinished Paper XIV., which, with its Ap-

&$e p. 64. It is worthy of notice that in this case he was misled by the
mechanical teaching of English economists on the subject of money, teaching
which led him to ignore the stimulating effect on trade of an increase in its
quantity.


INTRODUCTION.


xxiii

pendix, contains the Author’s latest views on Bimetallism,
together with Paper X., on an Ideal Currency, are now
printed tfor t2e first time; and of the letter which forms
Paper XI. only a part has been previously published, and
'ithat in a french translation. A new Note on Gold Pro-
duction Is appended to Paper II. ; to Paper Y. elaborate
Tables have been added, bringing the analysis of the Bank
Accounts up to date ; and a Postscript has been added to
Paper YII. Of the eighteen smaller diagrams, all except
those which illustrate Papers II. and III. are now published
for the first time, though some of them, drawn upon a large
scale, had been used by the Author to illustrate the papers
when originally read. Of the two large diagrams, one has
been brought up to date, and the other has been so far
completed that it now gives two complete decennial cycles
of the figures. The valuable Bibliography, extending over
50 pp. of double columns, was also compiled expressly for
this volume. And a very full Index has been added, which,
under certain headings, has been made analytical,* in the
hope that the absence of the Author’s analysis of the various
papers in his proposed Introduction might thus be partly
compensated.

The general contents of the volume are thus described by
Mr. Jevons: “The papers fall into two groups, the first
“ comprising Papers I. to VIII., treating of prices, commercial
“ fluctuations, crises, &c. ; while the second, comprising Papers
“IX. to XIY., treat more strictly of Currency, including the
“ lapsed subject of International Currency, the burning question
“ of Bimetallism, and technical questions relating to the age,
weight, and cost of the gold metallic currency.” (The course
of events, bringing with it the prospect, at an early date, of a
great re-coinage, has raised the “technical questions” here
referred to, to a degree of immediate interest and contro-
ls e.g. under Bimetallism, Crisis, Gold Currency.


XXIV


INTRODUCTION


versial heat, which makes the question of "bimetallism for the
time seem cool and speculative by comparison.)

The two groups of papers thus characterised, though the
distinction between them is real and well-marked, have some
equally real points of contact. Beginning with r commercial
fluctuations, which are indicated by prices, we pass Naturally
to the condition of the currency, the instrument of price, and
so to the consideration of the ideal currency, and the ques-
tion of bimetallism. And the various subjects thus related
through the notion of Price, are further connected by the
fact that they all (bimetallism not wholly excepted) admit of
treatment by exact and statistical methods. The introduction
of exact treatment into economic investigations was a matter
to which Mr. Jevons attached great importance, and in regard
to which the publication of this volume may be expected to
have considerable influence. It may, therefore, be of interest
to quote what he has written in reference to this point, un-
finished though the sentences are.

“ These papers/" he says, in language which recalls the
memorable words of Sir William Petty, two centuries before,*
“are, throughout, an attempt to substitute exact inquiries,
“exact numerical calculations, for guess-work and ground-
“ less argument . . to investigate inductively the intricate
“phenomena of trade and industry. . . , Perhaps, one
“ might say that theory is all-important ; and yet fact is all-
important also. . . Pacts alone without theory are mere
“disconnected records. . . Again, anything, it has been

“said, may be proved by figures. What we want are facts

* “ The Method I take to do this is not yet very usual, for instead of using*
only Comparative and Superlative words, and Intellectual Arguments, I have
taken the course (as a Specimen of the Political Arifchmetick I have long aimed
at) to express myself in Number, Weight, and Measure.”

Bee Preface to A Discourse of Trade appended to England's Guide to Industry ,
1683. The Discowrse was published by Lord Shelborne in 1690, after his father’s
death, under the title of Political Arithmetick by which it is usually known 5
and the Preface was then enlarged.


INTRODUCTION.


XXV


cc carefully marshalled. ... It is natural, moreover, in
“ approaching the difficulties of the moral sciences to look for
“ aid and examjfle to the most nearly proximate sciences. The
“natural method is to proceed from the known to the un-
known/* Ijp. short, Mr. Jevons, while by no means disposed,
as his Treatise of 1871 shows, to underrate the advantage of the
deductive method when scientifically used, or to attach much
value to the mere empirical adduction of facts, desires to see
more fully introduced into economic inquiry those powerful
and precise methods of inductive investigation which have
done so much for physical inquiry, and which he has so well
described in his Principles of Science.* It is to be re-
gretted that he has left us no more distinct indication of the
particular inductive methods he regarded as most appropriate
for the purposes of the economist, nor of his general views on
the relation of the historical to the theoretical treatment of
economics. The question of the relative importance to be
attached to these two modes of treatment is so warmly dis-
puted, and has had so important a bearing on the progress of
economic thought, that I will not take upon myself to define
Mr. Jevons* position in regard to it. The best evidence now
available of his views on this matter is that afforded by his*
Introductory Lecture at University College on The Future of
Political Bconomy ,+ and by his own practice, to the study of
which the publication of the present volume will prove a
valuable aid.

Leaving these questions of method, and turning to the
papers themselves, we find that the first eight, taken in
connection with the two large statistical diagrams, form a
continuous study of periodic commercial fluctuations. It
would seem from the remarks on pp. 16 and 224, that a

* The Principles of Science , etc. 2 vols. 8vo. Macmillan and Oo. 1874.
See especially Books III. and IV.

i Published in the Fort Rev., $Tov., 1876.


INTRODUCTION.


Xxvi

certain historic importance attaches to the two large diagrams.
Not only were they the first pieces of purely economip work
undertaken by Mr. Jevons, but it seems to have* been the
study of them which suggested the whole series of his
subsequent investigations into commercial periodicity. Having
before him in these diagrams, conveniently presented for
comparison, an account of the actual series of commercial
fluctuations extending over long terms of years, certain
periodicities soon forced themselves on his notice. Taking
averages over these long terms for every week, month, and
quarter in the year, Mr. Jevons detected an unmistakable
monthly, quarterly, and annual variation, which he first
described in 1862, in Paper I. of this volume. In Paper V.,
published in 1865, he afterwards went more fully into the
proof and explanation of these regular variations, calling
particular attention to the annual variation, better known as
the Autumnal Pressure in the Money Market, of which a
remarkable instance had occurred in that year.

In the course of these investigations, Mr. Jevons had from
the first observed the decennial variation, so well known from
the crisis in which it usually culminates, and had described it
in Papers I. and II., giving some account of its immediate
causes. Meanwhile, however, the effects of the gold dis-
coveries, which were exciting very general interest, and giving
rise to the wildest speculation, forced upon his notice a
variation of a very different order, the progressive change in
the value of money : a variation, which though no doubt it
could not well be estimated unless the decennial periodicity
was assumed, and allowance made for it, nevertheless required
to be taken into account before the amount of the decennial
variation could be precisely measured.

Accordingly, in Papers II., III., and IV., Mr, Jevons
proceeds to deal with this, the greatest variation of which
economic science takes cognisance, unless we except the
variation from age to age in the return to labour. In Paper II.,


INTRODUCTION,


xxvii

lie estimates the fall in the value of gold from the base line
formed, by the average of 1844-50, down to the date of the
paper (186?>). In Paper IIL, written in 1865, this period of
investigation having been found too limited to give a quite
trustworthy result, the inquiry is extended back to the year
1782 ; and in Paper IV., the same inquiry is carried onwards
to the year 1869 : the results in both cases substantially
confirming the original conclusion arrived at in Paper II.

In the remaining Papers VI., VII., VIII. (1875-79), the
famous papers on Commercial Crises, Mr. Jevons returns to
the investigation of the decennial variation. He seeks to
furnish further evidence of its existence, to ascertain its
precise average length, and to assign its ultimate or remote
cause. This ultimate cause, as every reader will remember, he
attempted, by a brilliant stretch of scientific imagination, to
trace in the* variation of the sun-spots, or rather (as he more
carefully states the theory on pp. 235-6), in meteorological
variations depending upon cosmical variations of which the
sun-spot variation is only one index.

These investigations then present us with a complete
example of the three great classes of economic fluctuations, so
well characterised by Cournot, in his comparison of them to
astronomical motions * The large diagrams give us the actual
changes of trade, complicated by every passing industrial
disturbance, and accidental miscalculation of the markets. In
Papers I. and V., these minor irregularities having been
averaged away, certain regular variations with monthly,
quarterly, and annual periods are detected and explained ;


* “Dans le system© des valeurs, ' cotnme dans les mouvements des corps
“celestes, il faut bien distinguer les perturbations passageres, aecidentelles
“ (comme celles des com&tes), ou les inegalit^s lb conrtes p&nodes, dont les
“ effets se compensent par le seul laps du. temps, d’avec les variations stculaires
“ qui procedent avec une grande lentenr, tonjjours dans le meme sens, on qui ne
“ changent de sens que dans des penodes de temps trop longs pour que nous
“ ayons la pretention de les embrasser dans nos calculs ” — Princijoes de la Th6orie
des JR ichesses. Paris, 1863, p. 149.


xxviii


INTRODUCTION.


and tie larger decennial variation is analysed in Papers VL,
YII., YIH. Finally, in Papers II., III., IY., we can examine
the great secular variation, the change in the value of money.
It is a beautiful series of studies ; invaluable to the student,
whom it furnishes with a type of all e:£aet economic
investigation; and of high interest to the historian of economic
theory, in which, from its systematic completeness, it practically
constitutes a new departure.

Some of the papers* constituting this first group call for
special notice here ; and especially the remarkable Paper II.,
entitled, A Serious Fall in the Value of Gold Ascertained > and
its Social Effects set forth. In common with everything else
Mr. Jevons wrote, it has the magic power of arresting and
compelling the attention ; and by its singular success, a
success better deserved than such successes always are, it
placed its author at once in the first rank of living economists.
Like Ricardo’s famous tract on the High Price of Bullion , the
only achievement of the sort which deserves to be compared
with it, it boldly grappled with the great question that was
exercising contemporary economic thought, it attacked it by
methods which, so far as they went, were sound and conclusive,
and the solution it arrived at met with general acceptance.
Like Ricardo’s tract, too, it has made a permanently valuable
contribution to economic theory. It is true that the present
movement of the value of gold is not in the direction of a fall,
but towards a rise. But this does not diminish the impoi’tance
of the investigation, which attaches not to its results, but to
its methods ; methods that are equally applicable whatever
direction the movement of prices takes. Mr. Jevons was well
aware (see pp. 18-24, 57-59, 120-124), that the method he
used was open to objections, and that his result could only be
regarded as an approximation. But he could scarcely have
foreseen the interest which has recently been taken in the
whole inquiry, or he would probably have returned to the
subject and pursued it further. A most lively controversy has


INTRODUCTION, \


XXIX


sprung up, not only on tie question of fact as to the actual
movement of prices, but on the question of the method by
which such^a, movement can be ascertained, and especially on
the meaning and application of an average. Among the
writers who have particularly considered the first of these
points I may refer to Mr. Giffen , 1 Mr. Ellis , 2 Mr. Patterson , 3
Mr. Goschen , 4 Mr. Gibbs , 5 Mr. J. B. Martin , 6 7 and Mr. Cork/
The question of method has been raised, and Mr. Jevons*
procedure in this paper discussed by most of these writers,
particularly by the two latter; and also by Professor Sidgwick , 8
M. Henri Chevassus , 9 and Mr. Edgeworth . 10

On another portion of this first group of investigations,
contained in Papers I. and V., Mr. Jevons had himself left
some notes, indicating its object and practical bearing. The
notes are very fragmentary, but I will try to connect them so
as to convey Mr. Jevons*s meaning. They are written under
the heading, The Eey to the Variation of the Bank of
England Accounts.” “ Once a week,” Mr. Jevons observes,
“ it becomes requisite to analyse, and if possible explain, the

1 The Depreciation of Gold since 1848 . 1872. On the Fall of the Prices of

Commodities m Recent Years. 1879. See “Essays in Finance,” 1880. II. and
XIV.

2 Article in The Statist , June 9, 1878.

3 Is the Value of Money Rising , etc. ? Jour. Stat. Soc., March, 1880. Vol.
XLIII., pp. 1-26.

4 Speech in Commons Debate, Tues , Feb. 20, 1883. See Extract in Jour.
Inst. Bankers, IV., pp. 162, 163. On the Probable Results of an Increase in the
Purchasing Power of Gold. Read April 18, 1883. With Discussion, and a
Letter to The Times , May 7. See Jour. Inst. Bankers, IV., pp. 276-308.

5 The Gold Question and the Fall of Prices . Originally published in the
Nat. Rev., July, 1883.

6 Qold v. Goods . Read before the Brit. Assoc., Sept. 1883.

7 What is the True Measure of the alleged Appreciation of Gold ? Read
before the Soc. Sci Assoc., Oct., 1883.

3 Principles of Political Economy. 1883. pp. 66-69.

9 Uitalon Monitaire. Lond. 1883. pp. 45-62.

10 On the Method of Ascertaining the Change in the Value of Gold. Jour.
Stat. Soc., Dec , 1883. XLVI., pp. 714-718. Also three papers in the Phil.
Mag. On the Law of Error. Oct., 1883. On the Method of Least Sgucwes,
Nov., 1883. Oft the Reduction of Observations . Feb., 1884.


XXX


INTRODUCTION.


“ changes of the chief items in the Bank of England accounts.
“ As bringing to a focus the financial transactions of the whole
“ kingdom, and of no small part of the world, these accounts
“ are beyond doubt the most important of $11. ... It seems
“ somewhat extraordinary, however, that while thus furnishing
u all kinds of explanations of these changes, financial writers
“ have not taken the simple step of estimating their amount by
“reference” [to the average changes for the particular week in
previous years] “ . . . In such matters the great point is
u reference to fact and experience when it is possible to refer

. * . Now the Bank Accounts have been published regularly
“since” [the passing of the Bank Charter Act of 1844] . . .
[Materials therefore have existed since that time for the
formation of the required reference-averages] “ . . . This was
“ done by me in the year 1861, when I formed average tables of
“the Bank of England accounts for the years 1845-61, and
“ communicated them to the British Association in 1862. The
“tables, however, were not printed until the year 1866 in the
“ Jour. Stat. Soc.” [XXIX., p. 251.] “ Although they have been
“ referred to by Mr. Inglis Palgrave in his Notes on Banking ”
[1873, p. 66], “they have remained buried in the volumes of a
“ periodical not very easy of reference, and have by the lapse of
“time become inapplicable” [i.e. for purposes of comparison
with current returns].

Mr. Jevons accordingly, with the assistance of Mr. William
Thornely, repeated the calculations for the two decades
1862-71, and 1872-81, taking each separately (see the Post-
script to Paper V., p. 187). The principal figures in both old
and new tables have been graphically represented by Mr.
Mabson, of The Statist , in five diagrams, arranged so as to
facilitate the comparison of the three periods treated. (In
fairness to Mr. Mabson, I must remark that these diagrams,
which were carefully drawn by him, have suffered considerably,
so far as their appearance and clearness is concerned, at the
hands of the lithographer. The same remark applies to the


INTRODUCTION.


XXXI


reprinting and continuation of the larger diagrams, which was
also dope under Mr. Mabson's experienced direction. In both
cases, eve:?y pains has been taken to ensure that the accuracy
of the diagrams h^s not been impaired.)

Mr. Jevons goes on to explain the use which should be
made of these tables and diagrams. He takes as an illustration
the weekly account of the Bank of England for 1st March,
1882, which was as follows ; — *

BANK OF ENGLAND.

An Account pursuant to the Act 7th and 8th Victoria, cap. 32, for the
week ending on Wednesday, the 1st March, 1882,

ISSUE DEPARTMENT.

£ £
Notes issued , . 36,524,135 Government debt . 11,015,100

Other securities . . 4,734,900

Gold coin and bullion. 20,774,135

Silver bullion . . —

36,524,135 36,524,135

BANKING DEPARTMENT.

£

Proprietors’ capital . 14,553,000
Best .... 3,782,779

Public deposits, in-
cluding Exchequer,

Savings’ Banks,

Commissioners of
National Debt, and
dividend accounts . 9,136,618

Other deposits . . 23,853,766

Seven-day and other
bills . . • 205,242

51,531,405


Government securities 13,133,684
Other securities . . 25,883,187

Notes. . . . 11,507,680

Gold and silver coin . 1,006,854


51,581,405


Dated March 2, 1882.


Frans May, Chief Cashier.


xxxii


INTRODUCTION.


The preceding accounts compared with those of last week
exhibit : —


Increase. Decrease.

Circulation (excluding bank post bills) 483,795 . —


Public deposits .... 471,783

Other deposits 538,328

Government securities . . . 3,341

Other securities .... 1,231,629

Bullion 580,769

Best 332,262

Beserve 96,974


On this he remarks, “Now the average accounts of 1st
“March, 1872-81, compared with those of the preceding
“ week, show the following changes : —

Increase.

A

Circulation (excluding bank post bills) . . . 140,000

Public deposits 570,000

Other deposits 390,000


[and so on, the results being obtained by subtraction from the
data in Table IX., p. 109.] ... “It seems probable that the
“ best way of making the comparison would be to give the
“increase or decrease for the actual week, and then the excess
“ of that above or below the average* : thus —


Circulation, &c.
Public deposits
Other deposits


[1st March, 1882. Average of 1872-81. Difference.
Increase. Increase.

& & A


. 483,795 140,000 +343,795

. 471,783 570,000 - 98,217

. 538,328 390,000 +148,328


That is to say, that the increase in the circulation for
1st March, 1882, was £343,795 in excess of the average
increase for that week taken over the period 1872-81; the


This method has been independently advocated in an article on Natural
Bank Betmns in the last number of The Economist , April 26th, 1884.


INTRODUCTION .


xxxiii


increase in the public deposits £98,217 less than the average
increase, and so on.] “ Especially is this comparison important
“ in the Jhonths of October and November, when the drain
“ upon the resources of the Bank is apt to continue longer
“than is usually expected, thus creating alarm ” [alarm
which a reference to Mr. Jevons’ average results would show
at once to be unfounded.] L This particular matter of the
Autumn Drain, thanks especially to Mr. Jevons* important
paper on the subject here reprinted on pp. 160-194, is
probably pretty well understood at the present time. But
less attention has been paid to the other regular variations
brought out by his tables; and it is possible that a close
scrutiny of his averages by financial experts might reveal
some hitherto unnoticed periodic disturbances, less important,
no doubt, but still sufficient to produce, in certain conditions,
an appreciable effect on the market.

The three brilliant papers on Commercial Crises require no
comment for readers who, setting aside any preconceptions,
will observe what it is precisely that the Author maintains
in them. There is no doubt this has been much mis-
understood. The theory propounded by Mr. Jevons does
not presuppose any accurate correspondence between the
particular crisis intervals and the solar or sun-spot period.
He only claims that the periodic variation of tropical harvests
is connected with the solar period, and that this harvest
variation operates so as to stimulate and determine the
naturally rhythmic fluctuation of European trade. If this is
not so, what other reason, he asks, can be ^assigned why
this latter fluctuation, depending immediately on such very
various causes, should nevertheless show such a curious
regularity of recurrence, and recur in a period whose average
length, within the limits of error, is identical with that of
the solar spots ? Is it more rational to suppose that the
commercial mind is constructed so as to vary, in its moods of
enterprise and depression, in just this period of 1044 years ?

c


xxxiv


INTRODUCTION \


The question has been asked again quite recently by
Professor Poynting*f in an able and suggestive paper* to
which I am very glad to have this opportunity of calling
attention. Professor Poynting*, while conclusively proving
that the remarkable coincidences established by his tables
cannot be merely accidental* refrains from indicating any
particular explanation of them* contenting himself with the
remark that they a point probably to a common _ meteoro-
“ logical cause.” His paper concludes with a very interesting
note on the process of averaging, as applied to the detection
of periodic fluctuations. In the discussion which followed the
reading of the paper, constant reference was made to the
papers of Mr. Jevons, especially in the valuable remarks of
Mr. Hyde Clarke ; but it will not fail to be observed that
much misunderstanding prevailed as to the nature and object
of both inquiries. Practical men are very apt to think that
those who attempt to discover periodic fluctuations overlook
the number and importance of the fluctuations due to what
are sometimes called accidental* i,e. 3 less regular and less pre-
dictable causes. It is scarcely necessary for me to say, for
every page of his works shows it, that this was at any rate not
the case with Mr. Jevons. Probably no single individual
ever accumulated such a mass of material relating to irregular
fluctuations* or was so capable of dealing with it. But he was
far too clear a reasoner to suppose that such evidence of
periodicity as is afforded by these papers* such* for instance*
as may be seen by a glance at Diagram I.* can possibly be
set aside by the process of instancing exceptions, or setting
forth proximate causes. The truth is that these u practical ”
objections* pushed to their logical conclusion* amount to a
denial of the value of averaging altogether* and would confine
us strictly to the observation of isolated and* therefore* unin-

A Comparison of ike Fluctuations m the Price of Wheat and in the Cotton
and Bilk Imports into Great Britain. Bead before the Stat. goo., Jan, 15, 1884 ;
and published in the Journal for March, 1884. Vol. XLVII., pp. 34-64.


INTRODUCTION, \


XXXV


telligible facts. Nay, we should soon want even facts. Com-
mercial facts defend on market price, and are expressed in
general tlrms. Both market price and general terms are
averages.

In the same discussion, reference was made by Mr. Hyde
Clarke to the probability that some longer periodicity (e.gr. a
period of 26 \ years) might overlie and interfere with the
recurrence of the decennial period principally considered by
Mr. Jevons. It will be seen that Mr. Jevons admits on p. 224
that the period of 54 years “ is perhaps deserving of further
“ investigation.” The difficulty is that materials of a trust-
worthy kind scarcely exist for an adequate inquiry into these
longer periods. I may perhaps mention here that I have
recently met with a scrap of evidence, which, by carrying
Mr. Jevons* series of crises twenty years back, helps to extend
the basis of inquiry. It is from the first series of the Col-
lection of Letters for the Improvement of Husbandry and Trade,
published in 1681-83 by that very industrious and ingenious
writer, John Houghton, F.B.S. Under date of Feb. 13,
168-|, he refers* to a “late storm ** in the financial world,
preceded by a rise of interest from 3 to 6 per cent. ; and it
is especially deserving of notice that the causes of this dis-
turbance were entirely connected with the East Indian trade.
It seems to have arisen out of a contest between the Company
and the Interlopers, the result no doubt of an old rivalry, but
probably brought to a head at this particular time by the
exceptional profitableness of the trade. The incident, there-
fore, goes to justify Mr. Jevons* opinion (p. 241) of the im-
portant influence of the East Indian trade on the European
Market, an opinion which my own acquaintance with 17th
and ] 8th century literature would lead me entirely to confirm.

Just observing that the comments on the large diagrams
are given exactly as they were written in 1862 — though twenty

See pp. 141-145 of the original qnarto edition.

c 2


XXXVI


INTRODUCTION


years* study of tie facts they represent would no doubt have
led Mr. Jevons to amplify and otherwise improve them* had he
been permitted to republish them himself — we may ftow leave
the group of papers relating to Fluctuation^, and pass on to
the second gToup, relating to the Currency. r

On the first paper of this group, which deals r with The
Condition of the Gold Coinage , we have fortunately a few
notes by Mr. Jevons. “ The ninth paper,” he says, “ treats of
“a practical^ if not technical, subject, just now coming into
“ special notice — the gold coinage. The purpose of that paper
“was partly to advocate a system of international money,
“ originally suggested by Mr. Hendriks and the late Col. J. T.
“ Smith. An attempt was made to throw light upon the subject
“of the collection of new information. A partial census of the
“coinage was carried out by ” [Mr. Jevons in 1868, with the
cordial co-operation of many bankers and other gentlemen (see
p. 263), and the results were worked out and communicated to
the Statistical Societies of Manchester (May 13) and London
(Nov. 1?).] “ The project of international money bavingfallen
“ through, and no attention having been paid to the subject, the
“ condition of the gold coinage has, as predicted, gone on from
“bad to worse, until it has become almost impossible to ignore
“ it any longer. The attention of Mr. J. B. Martin, one of the
“ Hon. Secretaries of the Statistical Society, having been drawn
“ to the matter, he very recently undertook to repeat upon a more
“ extensive scale the census which I carried out ” [14 years
before].* “His basis of facts indeed is not very much more
1 6 extensive than mine, the sovereigns examined being [105,364]
“against [90,474], and half-sovereigns [145,743] against
“ [75,086] . But as the half-sovereigns form a minor part of the

* The result •was communicated by Mr. Martin to the Institute of Bankers
* on April 19, 1883, in a valuable paper entitled Our Gold Coinage : An Inquiry
into its present Defective Condition, with a view to its Deform, The paper and
a report of the discussion which followed will be found in the Journal for
June, 1883. Yol. III., pp. 297-358.


INTRODUCTION.


xxxvii


“ circulation, and are now for the most part reduced to the
“rank^of token money, they are of far less interest.

“ Altlfbugh I could never have any doubts as to the sub-
ce stantial accuracy of my figures, it is evidently desirable that
inquiry of the kind should [receive independent verifica-
tion], ... It may indeed seem somewhht strange that in-
quiries of this sort, touching matters of direct practical
“interest to the population, should be left to be carried out
“by private inquirers like Mr. Martin and myself. ... It
“must, of course, be highly satisfactory to find that Mr.
“ Martin confirms, with almost absolute coincidence, the
“accuracy of my determination of the average wear of the
“ sovereign, obtaining the result [by a different method, of
“*04325 gr. as the mean annual rate of wear of the sovereign,
“against Mr. Jevons’ I’esult of *043 gr.*] But this is subject
“ [in both cases] to the remarks of Dr. Farr.'” f

Here Mr. Jevons’ notes end. The reader will find further
information on the present state of the gold coinage question
in a paper by Mr. Inglis Palgrave,{ and in the Annual Reports
of the Deputy Master of the Mint for 1882 and 1883. It would
appear from the Deputy Master’s Reports that the Mint, after
the recent alterations and renewals, is in a position “to under-
take a long and continuous gold coinage,” and “to meet all
“ demands likely to be made upon it.” As to the urgency of the
matter, there is now general agreement. The Report of 1883
speaks of “ the unsatisfactory condition of the gold coinage,
“and the necessity of taking steps for the withdrawal and re-
“ coinage of the large amount of light gold in circulation/’ Mean-
while, the Institute of Bankers had taken up the question;

Bee p. 284 of this volume j and Jour. Inst. Bankers, III., 310.
t In his Report to the Inter. Stat. Congress of 1869. Bee note p. 284 of
this volume.

t Ihe Deficiency of Weight %n our Gold Coinage , with a Proposal for its
Deform. Read before the Inst, of Bankers, Peb. 21, 1883. Published with a
report of the discussion in the Journal for March (No. 2), 1883. Vol. IV.,
pp. 177-210.


INTRODUCTION.


xxxviii

and at a meeting on February 21, 1883, it was resolved that
the Council should appoint a Committee to report upon it. In
pursuance of the recommendation of this Committee, the
President of the Institute, on June 19, 1883rmade a formal
representation to the Lords of the Treasury, calling their
attention “ to the condition of the gold coinage of the Realm,
the deterioration of which has of late years increased in a
marked degree, to the great inconvenience of the public in
general, and to the serious anxiety of the Bankers as a body /**
As these sheets are passing through the press the announce-
ment is made that the Government propose to take the matter
up without further delay. In his recent Financial Statement,
the Chancellor of the Exchequer explained the plan on which
it is intended to proceed ; and is reported t to have said in
the remarks by which he introduced it that “ the question is
“ one of great importance. Since the late Mr. Jevons* paper
“on the subject in 1868, the condition of the gold coinage has
“ more and more occupied the attention of bankers, the Press,
“and indeed of the general public. . . More than half of our
“ existing gold coins are not even a legal tender. ... To leave
“matters alone ... is evidently impossible, as the evil would
“ only get worse, and the result would be to bring serious dis-
credit on our gold coinage as our instrument of exchange/*
Accordingly the Government propose to gradually withdraw
from circulation the light gold, substituting in the case of
sovereigns coins of full weight, and defraying the expense
by a seignorage of ten per cent, upon tbe half-sovereign,
which would thus be made actually, what Mr. Jevons has de-
clared it to be virtually, a token coin. The withdrawal would
be conducted through the banks ; careful provision is made
against fraud ; and, as the arrangement would be permanent,
the future deterioration of the sovereign currency would be
effectively prevented. Space does not permit us to give the

* Jour. lust. Bankers, IV., 361.

f The Times , Friday, April 25fck, 1884


INTRODUCTION.


XXXIX


details of this well-conceived scheme. In considering it and
comparing it with the alternative proposals rejected by the
ChancelWr of the^Exchequer, the reader will find it instructive
to refer to the discussion on the amount and proper incidence
Of. the charges of a re-coinage in the already-mentioned papers
by Mr. Martin and Mr. Inglis Palgrave; as well as to an
ingenious argument on the effects of a seignorage on standard
coin, contained in a later paper by Mr. Martin.*

The tenth paper, on An Ideally Perfect By stem of Currency ,
calls for no special remark. It is characterised by Mr. J evons*
usual independence and breadth of view. It will be observed
that it agrees with the essay on the same subject by Ricardo
in regarding paper as the natural medium for the main body
of the currency, and consequently in contemplating the issue
of small notes. On this latter point, besides the publications
referred to in the Bibliography, the reader will find it worth
while to consult the Summary of the Commons Debate on
Mr. W. Fowler's resolution of May 28, 1882, f and a
paper by Mr. Fowler, J read on December 20 of the same
year.

The four concluding papers deal with Bimetallism. There
are none in this volume raising more points which one might
be tempted to discuss. But the “ burning question” is
scarcely one which could be fitly or conveniently treated within
the limits of an Introduction; and bearing in mind Mr. Jevons'
humorous description on p. 329 of the usual results of bi-
metallic controversy, I think it best to be silent on the matter
here. But I may refer the reader to two Reports on the
International Monetary Conference of 1881, the first by the
delegate of the English Government, the Hon. C. W, Fre-


* Seigmuriage and Mint Charges. Read before the Inst, of Bankers, March
19, 1884. Published with a report of the discussion in the Journal for
April, 1884. Vol. V. f pp. 171-205.

f Jour. lust. Bankers, June, 1882. Yol. III., pp. 358-362
J Jour, Inst. Bankers, Feh , 1883. Vol. IV., pp. 75-103.


x!


INTRODUCTION.


mantle, the second by Lord Eeay and Sir Louis Mallet, the
delegates of the Indian Government,* in which he will find
some interesting historical matter, and a clear statement of
the principal arguments on both sides : and ,also to the very
valuable report and collection of documents by Mr. Dana
Horton, referred to in Paper XIII., p. 328, and in the Biblio-
graphy, p. 409. And I will ask him not to forget, in judging
of the position taken up by Mr. Jevons, to take into account
his views as to the constitution of the ideal currency of the
future. Whatever opinion may be held as to Mr. Jevons’
conclusions, no one can fail to admire his sagacity and practical
caution. And it will be generally felt that in the author of
Paper XIY. we have lost an economist of unrivalled historical
gifts, under whose touch the driest episodes of monetary
policy or the knottiest points of theory arc equally invested
with the interest of romance.

The Bibliography which concludes the volume illustrates
another side of Mr. Jevons’ character — his patient industry,
and his consideration for other workers in the same field. Of
course he did not attempt to make the list absolutely complete ;
but with the entries added by Mrs. Jevons, on whom the
principal labour of editing it fell, it is very far the best yet
published ; and he thought it might be of service until the
completion of the British Museum Printed Catalogue should
afford facilities for improving it.

A few words in conclusion as to the general bearing of
the volume whose contents we have now glanced at. I have
pointed out that its appearance is most opportune, so far as
concerns that portion of the public which has a special interest
in the subjects of which it treats. It might be supposed,
however, that so far as general readers are concerned, the
book would be more suitable to the times of the Bullion
Controversy or the Bank Charter Debates, than to an age

See Jour. Inst. Bankers, July, 1882. Yol. III., pp. 424-436. The first
report is printed in full, and important extracts are made from the second.


INTRODUCTION.


xli


which is principally occupied with social questions. But "I
venture to think that, on closer consideration, it will be per-
ceived* th&t the study of fluctuations, abstract and theoretical as
it may appear, i§ most intimately related to the great practical
questions, to which, fortunately, public attention is now at
length seriously directed. One of the gravest social evils of
our economical system is the uncertainty and precariousness
in so many respects connected with it, and largely due to the
fluctuations of trade. Let me quote on this point the views of
Mr. George Howell, one of the ablest representatives of work-
ing-class opinion. “ If the science of political economy/' he
says, “is to be of any practical value, its expounders ought to
“ try and find some means whereby these frequent fluctuations
“ can be avoided, instead of which they only teach men to in-
“ crease them, by declaring that wages must be dependent on
“ the variations of 'the market/ which may change fifty times
“a day, in so far as the price of the commodities offered for
“sale is concerned. Stocks and securities go up and down like
“the notes on a gamut, and in the hands of skilful operators
“they play strange music, which should make good men f$el
“ sad indeed." * A knowledge of these fluctuations and their
causes is the necessary preliminary to the mitigation of their
disastrous effects; and Mr. Jevons’ unerring instinct for the
practical bearing of theory was never more conspicuously
shown than in the labour and importance he assigned to this
study. His most characteristic theoretical work, in fact,
diyides almost equally into two parts : the mathematical
analysis of economic conceptions, such as those of Utility,
Yalue, and Exchange; and this statistical investigation of
periodic fluctuations, such as the Autumn Pressure and the
Commercial Crisis; and the part occupied with fluctuations
is neither the less valuable nor the less original of the
two.

Space will not allow me to attempt an adequate estimate
The Conflicts of Capital and Labour, p. 228* Cbatto and Windus. 1878.

d


xlii


INTRODUCTION.


o£ the general value of Mr. Jevons' work, nor of the position
which it will occupy in the history of Political Economy.
But I do not think it too much to say 'that the future
historian of the science, in reviewing the development of its
theory up to the present time., will trace the main sources
of its advance in the writings of four men, each of marked
genius — Petty, Cantillon, Ricardo,* and Jevons ; and of these
four, the name of Jevons, though last in order of time, will
not, I think, rank last in order of fame.

If it is with the advance of theory we associate Mr. Jevons,
rather than with its social applications, this is not so much
because he has not given abundant proof of his power in
this latter department, as because until lately his attention
had been less directed to it. In his union of high speculative
ability with the greatest reserve and sagacity in the treatment
of practical problems, Mr. Jevons is a conspicuous example
of the truth of Cournot's defence of theoretical study in his
great work of 1838.f Cournot urges that those who are
most concerned for the precision of their principles will be
most sensible of the limits of their application, and therefore
the least unpractical in their treatment of real questions.
The reader who compares the exact researches in the earlier
papers of this volume, or in the Theory of Political Economy ,
with the cautious and balanced papers on Bimetallism at
its close, and with the admirably wise essays in the Methods
of Social Reform , will have the best possible illustration of
the justice of Cournot's contention. Nor will he be likely
to think that the high opinion I have above expressed of
the singular and varied ability of Mr. Jevons is merely due to
the partiality of acquaintance, or to the special opportunities

* Notwithstanding his instinctive antagonism to Kieardo’s unsystematic
and inexact manner of exposition, there can be no doubt that Mr. Jevons is in
the direct line of descent from Petty through Cantillon and Kicardo.

+ Recherche s sur lee Principes Mathdmatiques de la, Theone des Richesses ,
par Augustin Cournot, Paris : Hachette, 1838. Pref. xi., and p. 13.


INTRODUCTION,


xliii


I have had of observing the thoroughness of his work, and
the masses of material he had collected for it. I am glad,
nevertheless, to be able to support what I have said by the
opinion of Mr. Alfred Marshall, beyond doubt the most com-
petent of living writers to judge of the value of Mr. Jevons'
work on a!i its sides. He holds that the great body of it
“will probably be found to have more constructive force
“than any, save that of Eicardo, that has been done during
“the last hundred years”; and of the contributions to statistics
now collected he says that “the pure honesty of Mr. Jevons*
“mind, combined with his special intellectual fitness for the
“ work, have made them models for all time.”

With these conclusions of Mr. Marshall I entirely agree,
but I do not attempt to justify them here. The Editors of
this volume have rather felt it their business to furnish others
with materials for criticism than to form a critical estimate
themselves. No one can be more conscious than they are of
what the book has lost by the absence of the finishing touches
which the Author himself, had he been spared, would certainly
have given it. But though they have felt this keenly, it has
been a labour of love with them to make the loss as small
as circumstances would permit. They have adhered with
scrupulous fidelity to the intentions of the Author, and in
their desire to throw the utmost light upon his opinions and
results, they have not hesitated to publish fragments, however
detached, which seemed to possess any value. Much, no
doubt, has been lost in the Introduction and in Paper XIV.,
which they were not able thus to supply ; but, otherwise, they
are satisfied that the volume appears substantially as the
Author would have desired; and they believe it will remain
a lasting monument to his genius, and a landmark in the
history of economic science.

Mrs. Jevons having too kindly referred, in her Preface, to
the share which I have had in the preparation of this book
for the press, I wish to say that I have been m ost ably


xliv


INTRODUCTION .


assisted by her; and that her part in the work has been much
more considerable and important than her language iij. regard
to it might lead the reader to infer.

H. S. FOXWELL.

St. John’s College, Cambridge,

April 28, 1884.


I.

ON THE STUDY OF PERIODIC COMMERCIAL
FLUCTUATIONS.


INVESTIGATIONS IN


CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


i.

ON THE STUDY OF PERIODIC COMMERCIAL
FLUCTUATIONS. *

1. In the daily market reports, and other statistical publica-
tions, we continually find comparisons between numbers
referring to the week, month, or other parts of the year, and
those for the corresponding parts of a previous year. The
comparison is given in this way in order to avoid any variation
due to the time of year. And it is obvious to everyone
that this precaution is necessary. Every branch of industry
and commerce must be affected more or less by the revolution
of the seasons, and we must allow for what is due to this cause
before we can learn what is due to other causes.

2. Merchants and manufacturers are of necessity intimately
acquainted, by experience or by tradition, with such periodic
fluctuations as occur in their own branches of industry. By
the skill and rule-of-thumb knowledge which each one acquires

This paper was forwarded, together with one upon the “ Mathematical
Theory of Political Economy,” to the Meeting of the British Association at
Cambridge, in 1862. It was read in Section F,by Mr. Edmund Macrory, M.A.,
the Honorary Secretary, and a brief abstract of its contents was printed in the
Report. See Transactions of Sections, p. 157. (See also Times , Wednesday,
8th October, 1862, p. 5, b.) The paper itself is now printed completely for the
first time, with some trifling verbal corrections.

B 2


4


COMMERCIAL FLUCTUATIONS.


[i.


in Lis own pursuits, they make allowance for such variations,
and tLns very rude comparisons of prices, stocks, and sales
enable tLem to detect irregular changes in their own market,
which is all that they require.

3. But this unwritten knowledge of commercial fluctuations
is not available for scientific purposes, and it is always of
very limited extent ; so that, if we come to inquire into the
causes of more obscure fluctuations, such as those of credit,
bankruptcy, bullion, currency, rate of interest, etc., theorists
and practical men alike disagree.

4. It seems necessary, then, that all commercial fluc-
tuations should be investigated according to the same scientific
methods with which we are familiar in other complicated
sciences, such especially as meteorology and terrestrial mag-
netism. Every kind of periodic fluctuation, whether daily,
weekly, - monthly, quarterly, or yearly, must be detected
and exhibited, not only as a subject of study in itself,
but because we must ascertain and eliminate such periodic
variations before wo can correctly exhibit those which are
irregular or non-periodic, and probably of more interest and
importance.

5. It is surprising what little work has already been
done in this way. Two papers on the variations of the
bank-note circulation, by Grilbart (“ Statistical Journal,”
vol. xvii. pp. 289-321 ; and vol. xix. pp. 144-108, partly re-
printed in others of his works),* and Babbage's “Analysis
of the Statistics of the Clearing House during the Year
1839" (“ Statistical Journal," March, 1856, vol. xix. p. 28), f
contain almost the only express inquiries into such fluctuations
-^hich I have met with. In other cases any reference to them
is usually incidental. Babbage, indeed, strongly recommends
the kind of inquiry to which I am referring, but he has not

* See “A Practical Treatise on Banking,” 1865, vol. ii. pp. 466-68, 519-24,
. 582-92. Tooke and Newmarch’s “ History of Prices/’ vol. vi, pp. 560-583.

+ Reprinted as a Pamphlet. London *. Hurray. 1856.


BANK OF ENGLAND ACCOUNTS .


5


i.]

carried it into effect, so far as I am aware, in more than the
single instance of the Clearing House.

6. In attempting to show that something may be done
ig this subject, I have begun upon the Bank of England
accounts, *)f which we have a perfect series from the 1st
September, 1844, in accordance with the provisions of the
Bank Charter Act of that year. Taking the weekly accounts
of the seventeen complete years, 1845 to 1861 inclusive, I
have simply ranged them under each other in their numerical
order within the year, and drawn the averages with all suitable
precautions against error. All non-periodic variations seem
to be nearly eliminated, and the seasonal variations remain
as shown in the following tables,* and more plainly in the
largest of the diagrams, which sufficiently explain themselves.
Only the most important and interesting items, however, are
shown in these diagrams.

7. It is quite obvious that in the large diagram we have
several sets of fluctuations imposed upon each other. It is
scarcely necessary to say that the very conspicuous quarterly
variation is chiefly due to the payments of the dividends
on the National Debt, the immediate effect of which is seen
in the Government deposits. But some further quarterly
variation may be due to the general custom of settling rents
and other accounts at the quarter-days.

Ranging the corresponding weeks of the quarters under
each other, and drawing the averages, we determine the
quarterly variation, nearly free from any difference which
distinguishes one quarter from another. This is shown in
the following table (II.), or in the diagram.

8. An examination of these quarterly curves will show
certain minor fluctuations, which are obviously not fortuitous.
They are doubtless due to the custom of settling accounts

* These tables were subsequently printed as an appendix to the paper
on “The Frequent Autumnal Pressure in the Money Market,” etc., No. V.
in this volume, and will be found below. The diagrams also are represented
in the plates to be found in another part of the volume.


6


COMMERCIAL FLUCTUATIONS.


t*.


and making kills payable at the end of the month, so that
(in consequence of the days of grace) the fourth day of the
following month becomes the principal settling-day. Taking
the original series of fifty-two weekly averages, I ha^e
arranged them according as the week, on cm average , fell,
1st, 2nd, 3rd, or 4th in the month, and the averages being
drawn indicate a distinct monthly variation, of much less
amount however than the quarterly variation. The diagram
showing the monthly average is therefore made, as regards
upright distances, on ten times the scale of the others. An
average for a fifth week is added, because this occurs four
times during the year, and this is only one of many incon-
veniences which arise from the week not being an aliquot
part of the year.

9. It is interesting to observe that the monthly and
quarterly variations are of precisely the same character. The
payments which occur at the beginning of each period, whether
on government or private account, cause a sudden increase of
the note circulation, and of private deposits, a considerablo
decrease of private securities, or bills, a slight decrease of
the bullion, accompanied by a larger, but otherwise similar,
variation of the loanable capital.

10. The chief use of the table of quarterly variations, how-
ever, is that we may by its use eliminate these variations from
the whole variations of the year, by simple subtraction. We thus
ascertain the nature of the yearly variation which is due to
natural causes, as distinguished from the artificial distinctions
of months and quarters. The elimination, indeed, is by no
means perfect, because the dividend and other payments in
January and July are considerably greater than those in April
and October. But the results are sufficiently accurate for a
first approximation, and afford, I think, an interesting subject
of study. They are shown in the following table (IV.), or in
the diagram, in which only the divergence from the average of
the whole year is shown.


BANK OF ENGLAND ACCOUNTS .


1


ij


11. We here see that the bank-notes in circulation fall to a
minimal^ in January and February ; that they gradually rise
to a maximum in the third quarter^ and then very rapidly
decrease during*November and December. As was observed,
however, py Mr. Newmarch,* in his address to this section
last year, the amount of the circulation of notes is not of the
importance that the currency theory attributed to it. It is
merely a.very inaccurate indication of the amount of payments
taking place, which are thus shown to be greatest, as we should
expect, in the fall of the year. The utter want of any con-
nection between the annual variation in the notes and in the
bullion, is a fresh argument against the currency theory in its
extreme form.

12. The private securities and deposits exhibit great and
opposite changes during the third and fourth quarters of the
year, principally due to the gathering and buying up of the
harvest, and the general proceeds of the year's industry, which
have then to be held in stock for consumption during the
succeeding twelve months, causing an absorption of capital.
From the same general cause, no doubt, arises the marked
decrease of bullion and loanable capital during the second half
of the year.

18. But the bullion and capital exhibit a double variation
during the year, unlike the other curves, unless we may say,
indeed, that the private deposits show some traces of the same.
Thus there is a secondary maximum in these curves in
February, and a subsequent decrease until May. As a mere
conjecture, I should suggest that this variation in the first half
of the year is due to the balance of foreign trade, which would
certainly affect the stock of gold, the medium of international
payments. The greater variations in the second half of the
year may be due both to inland and foreign causes, but
especially the former.

* British Association, 1861. “ Journal of the Statistical Society,” December,
1861 ; vol. xxiv, p. 464.


8


COMMERCIAL FLUCTUATIONS.


[i.


14. A full explanation of these variations can only be
expected from an intimate practical acquaintance with trade ;
or by an extension of the inquiry into all other parts of com-
mercial statistics. I have not the advantage gf possessing the
former, and the long and laborious nature of the calculations
necessary has hitherto prevented me from getting much be-
yond the Bank of England accounts. But I shall hope to be
able to treat similarly the values of the various funds and stocks,
amounts of traffic, shipping, export and import trade, the prices
of commodities, and especially the stocks of commodities, as
far as they are ascertainable.

15. In a supplementary diagram are shown the general
nature of the variations from month to month, of the average
rate of discount, the number of bankruptcies, the price of
consols, and the price of wheat. As the calculations are not
quite completed, I do not give the scale of the curves, nor the
corresponding table of numbers.* As in the bank accounts,
we here see that the most striking fluctuations are due to the
gathering of the harvest, and the general termination of the
year’s operations. The consequences are a rapid xuse in the rate
of discount, a sudden flood of bankruptcy, and a fall of consols,
followed by a rise. The double minimum in the price of
wheat and consols is curious. The curve of wheat, perhaps,
requires more consideration, and a larger average, but the
possible effect of alterations in the corn laws must be borne in
mind.

16. Some, perhaps, would attribute the sudden changes in
the rate of discount, bankruptcies, and consdls, to the occur-
rence of panics during the months of October and November.
It would be more correct to say that there is a periodic
tendency to commercial distress and difficulty during these
months, of which all concerned should be aware. It is when
great irregular fluctuations aggravate this distress, as in the

* These tables are now printed in the Appendix to this paper, pp. XO and 11,
together with curves exhibiting tbe variations.


!•]


VARIATION OF BANKRUPTCIES ’.


9


years 1836, 1839, 1847, and 1857, that disastrous breaches in
commercial credit occur.*

17. I will only further mention the curious fact, which is
apparent in the "fcurve of bankruptcies, that considerably more
bankruptcies occur in the middle month of the quarter than in
the third month, which immediately precedes the quarterly
payment of dividends and the settlement of accounts. Fewest
of all ocpur in the first month. Thus, out of 79,794 bank-
ruptcies which were gazetted from the beginning of 1806 to
the end of 1860, 28,391 occurred in the second month of the
quarter, 26,427 in the third month, and only 24,976 in the
first month.

* This relation of periodic panics to the autumnal months was farther
investigated in the Paper No. Y. (t On the Frequent Autumnal Pressure,” etc.
printed in this volume.


to


COMMERCIAL FLUCTUATIONS,


[i.


M

M

ft

fc

ft

ft

ft


1816-61. Shillings per quarter


AVERAGE RATE OF DISCOUNT, 1845- GI & 1825-61.


TOTAL NUMBER OF BANKRUPTCIES, 1806-60. | *


I.]


APPENDIX .


ii


TABLE’thowing the Quarterly Averages of the Bate of Discount, etc.


b

January

to

March.

April

to

June.

July

to

September.

October

to

December

Bate of -Ujscount, 1845-61

3*97

3-87

3*60

4-17

Ditto, 1824-61

3*80

3-67

3 57

3-97

Bankruptcies — Aggregate )
number, 1806-60 )

21,771

21,025

16,711

20,287

Brice of Consols — )

Average, 1845-60 ... )

94-27

93-73

94-03

93-27

Price of Wheat — Gazette )
Average, 1846-66 ... \

53-1

54-4

54*1

53*1


It will be seen that the greatest number of bankruptcies
occurs in the first quarter of the year, succeeding the period of
highest rates of discount. The number is much reduced in the
third quarter, in which, as well as in the second quarter, the
rate of discount is distinctly below the average.

The seasonal variation of the price of wheat is best seen in
the following averages :


February

May

August

November

to

to

to

to

April.

July.

October.

January.

52-8

55-6

52-9

53*5


There is a palpable double maximum, the greatest occurring
in the months immediately preceding the harvest, and easy to
understand. The maximum of November to January is less
easy to comprehend, unless it be due merely to reaction from
the previous low prices, assisted by the greater difficulties of
conveyance during the winter.


n.

A SERIOUS FALL IN THE YALUE OF GOLD

ASCERTAINED,

AND ITS SOCIAL EFFECTS SET FOETH.


®ith ‘Stew Ipiitgtmrts.


“ Kowe that the pryces of thinges are so rysen of al handes, yon
may better lyve after your degree than wee, for you may and do
rayse the pryce of your wares as the prices of vittayles and other
your necessaries doe ryse; and so cannot we so much*”

“ A compendious or briefe examination of certayne ordinary
complaints, of divers of our countrymen in these our dayes.”
By W. S., Gentleman. London : 1581. Fol. 5.

(See Appendix, note A.)


PREFACE.*


That an article tends to fall in value as it is supplied more
abundantly and easily tlian before, is a most familiar fact.
When the discoveries of gold in California were followed in a
few years by equally extraordinary discoveries in Australia,
and minor discoveries elsewhere, there was no lack of predic-
tions as to the inevitable effect upon the value of gold. But
with few exceptions there have been only surmises and con-
jectures on this highly important subject. Even after the
lapse of ten or twelve years, men who give their whole
attention to public and monetary matters, or to questions of
statistics and economy, remain in a state of doubt as to whether
any depreciation of gold is really taking place.

Chevalier, in his well-known work “ On the Probable Pall
in the Value of Gold,” presented to English readers in 1859 by
Cobden, confidently predicted a great fall. He suggested,
however, that it would be deferred some years by the change
of the French currency, which is proceeding. On the other
hand, Mr. Newmarch, in the last volume of Tooke's “ History of
Prices,” published in 1857, and MacCulloch, writing in December,
1858,+ both doubted the existence of any depreciation. They
seemed to hold also that the rapid extension of trade and the
increase of wealth, might cause the absorption of the new

* This tract was originally published in April, 1863 (London : Edward
Stanford, Charing Cross), 8vo, iv. 73 pp.

t (( Encyclopedia Britannica,” Eighth Edit., art. “ Precious Metals ”


i6


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[n.


supplies of gold; without the occurrence of any considerable
depreciation. In brief re-discussions of the subject, in the
u Journal of the Statistical Society” (for March 1859, 1860, and
1861); Mr. hfewmarch, using a method of comparison in which
I have had no choice but to follow him, has seemed to suspefid
any definite judgment. The question thus continues an open
one.

I was only led to form an opinion upon this subject when
engaged in compiling tables of the monthly prices of many
articles since 1844. I was so much struck with the enormous
and almost general rise of prices about the year 1853, that I
was led to suspect an alteration of the standard of value. At
the same time, the late comparative depression of tirade in
reducing prices as low as they are likely to go (as it were to
low tide), has seemed to me to render the subject more and
more mature for decision. It shows that the great rise of
prices in 1853 has not been, and thus probably will not
be, compensated by any equal fall ; that there is conse-
quently a permanent rise of prices certainly constituting a
fall in the value of gold, and probably arising from the gold
discoveries.

In the following tract I commence by endeavouring to
unfold the fundamental difficulties of the inquiry, afterwards
discriminating the various causes of temporary fluctuations
in prices, in order that we may the more surely recognise
the effect of the permanent cause in question. I then intro-
duce tables formed and reduced in accordance with the
principles of the subject, so as to exhibit a depreciation of
gold if any exists. The large depreciation rendered apparent
is confirmed by an extended inquiry as regains the prices
of 1860-62. The future probable depreciation of gold is
considered on somewhat a priori grounds ; and lastly, the social
effects are deduced and commented on.

While I must assert the fact of a depreciation of gold
with the utmost confidence, I assign the numerical amount


IL]


PREFACE.


*7


of it with equal diffidence. The lowest estimate of the fall
that I arrive at is 9 per cent., and I shall he satisfied if

• m ,

my readers accept this. At the same time, m my own opinion
the fall is nearer 15 per cent. It may even be more than
tins. Many years, however, must pass before numerical
estimates can be properly stated to possess more than a
slight degree of probability.*

On this point, however, see No. IY. “ The Depreciation of Gold”


CHAPTER I

Ok the Nature and Difficulties of the Inquiry.

I . — Of the Meaning of a Fall in the Value of Gold .

All that is meant by a fall in the value of gold, is the fact
that more gold is now usually required to purchase an article
than in former years. The comparative values of two articles
are said to be altered when the proportion of the quantities
usually exchanged in the open market is altered. This
alteration may arise from circumstances affecting the supply
or demand of either article, just as a balance may be dis-
turbed by an upward or a downward force, applied to either
arm. There is nothing in the simple motion to indicate from
which side the change comes. Thus during the years 1845-50
a ton weight of copper was, on an average, exchanged for
about 88 gold sovereigns. During the years 1860-62, the
rate was that of a ton of copper to about 101 sovereigns.
There is nothing in this fact to show whether gold is become
more abundant and easily obtained, or copper more scarce
and troublesome to procure. It may be, and probably is
the case, that the circumstances of demand and supply are
altered on both sides. The observed effect is then the sum
or difference of several effects, concerning which we learn
nothing from the simple alteration of values in question.

When a number of articles are exchanged each for the


II.]


THE MEANING OF A FALL IN VALUE .


*9

other we are still unable to say with certainty on which
side arises any change in the proportion of the exchanges.
Thus, if the value of an article, A (gold, for instance), falls
yi comparison with several other articles, B, 0, D, E (copper,
lead, tin,*silver, for instance), so that the same quantity of
A purchases less of each of B, 0, D, E than it used to do,
this may arise either from causes affecting A only, or from
causes affecting each of B, 0, D, E. The value of A may
fall from a lessened demand or an increased supply. The
value of each of B, 0, D, E may likewise rise from increased
demand or lessened supply. The mere alteration of values
is the same fact, whether arising on one side or the other.

There is something, however, which we may say in the
case of five articles, but cannot say in the former case of two
articles. It is more likely that the alteration should have arisen
on the side of A than on the side of 0 , D 3 E > because one
cause affecting A will suffice to explain the change, whereas
four separate but concurring causes respectively affecting B, 0,
D, E will be needed on the other side. The odds, then, are
four to one in favour of the cause of alteration being in A,
and not in B, 0, D, E.

If, again, we compare A with a still larger number of
other articles, B, 0, D, E, F, G, H, etc. and find that all of
these have risen or fallen with regard to A, the odds are still
more in favour of some circumstance connected with A having
caused the alteration. It is obvious, in short, that an alteration
in any one article is shown in its rate of exchange * with all
other articles, so that the fact of an alteration may be ascer-
tained with a continual approach to certainty, by examining
its value in terms of more and more articles. But there
always remains the alternative of a concurrence of causes
affecting the other articles.

* It is obvious that rate of exchange is used in this tract in a sense equivalent
to that of ratio of exchange , an expression which I subsequently proposed to
substitute for the name value * — See " Theory of Political Economy,” p, 91 j
Second Edit. p. 84.

c 2


20


THE VALUE OF GOLD , .


[n.


The chief difficulty of such an investigation arises from
the independent variations of value, which each of B,jO, JD, E,
etc. will doubtless undergo. Besides rising from an alteration
in A, B may rise still further, from an alteration peculiar to
itself. On the other hand, 0 may not rise at all or may fall in
value, because its rise, due to A, may be neutralised, or more
than neutralised, by a fall due to itself. Similarly, in the cases
of D, E, F, etc. all will suffer the effect due to A ; but this
will be disguised by the various distinct accidents which affect
B, C, D, etc.

We must again fall back upon mere probabilities. If the
majority of B, C, D, etc. have risen in value, and only a
minority fallen, it is more likely that a single cause acting on
A should have led to a general rise than that the majority of
B, C, D, etc. should have been affected by separate but con-
curring causes. And in determining the average variation of
value with respect to A, of a sufficient number of articles
B, 0, D, E, etc. we may always ascertain the common altera-
tion probably due to A. For the distinct and contrary
variations peculiar to B, 0, D, etc. will destroy each other
more or less completely in drawing the average, and only that
common variation which all equally suffer in being measured
against A will remain undiminished.

To apply this analysis to our present inquiry, we have only
to consider the substance A as being gold, and the rates of
exchange of B, 0, D, etc. the prices of commodities in pounds
sterling and their fractions as usually quoted. If prices on
the average have risen ever so little, this constitutes a fall in
the mine of gold . If only one thing had risen in price while
the others remained as before, gold must be said to have fallen
in some degree. Yalue is a vague expression for potency in
purchasing other commodities, and if gold has become less
potent with respect to some and not more potent with respect
to others, it has fallen in value. The same may be said, how-
ever various and contrary the alterations of prices, provided


THE MEANING OF A FALL IN VALUE .


21


IL]

the rising preponderate in a certain way over the falling ones.
It must be confessed , however , that the exact mode in which pre-
ponderance of rising or falling prices ought to be determined is
involved in doiCbt. Ought we to take all commodities on an
equal footing in the determination ? Ought we to give most
weight to those which are least intrinsically variable in value ?
Ought we to give additional weight to articles according to
their importance, and the total quantities bought and sold ?
The question, when fully opened, seems to be one that no
writer has attempted to decide — nor can I attempt to decide
it.* Fortunately, the conclusions I shall have to adopt may,
I believe, be sustained under any and all modes of estimation
which are likely to be proposed. I regard the fall of value
as conclusively proved, although the exact nature of the
problem is left amid the obscurities of economic science in
general.

All that I can pretend to prove in this inquiry is that,
subject to the vagueness just referred to, the prices of com-
modities have risen, or that the rise of prices of those which
have risen preponderates over the fall of those which have
fallen. This is and constitutes the alteration of value of gold
asserted to exist.

It is quite another question how this fall of value is caused.
It may be due to an increased supply of gold, or to a diminished
demand for it. It may also arise from an increased demand
for one or more commodities not accompanied by a corre-
sponding demand for gold, or a diminished supply not accom-
panied by a corresponding change of supply of gold. Anything
affecting the value of gold, in short, must affect either gold
apart from other articles, or other articles apart from gold ; or
at least it must affect one side more than the other. It is with
a less degree of confidence and certainty that it can be inferred
on which side of the balance the disturbance arises. If, as is

* Some farther brief discussion of this subject will be found in the
succeeding paper, No. III . e< On the Variation of Prices,” etc.


22


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[n.


no doubt the case, disturbances on both sides contribute
towards the aggregate effect, it will be still more difficult to
discriminate between the portions of the total effect due to
one cause or another. By what has gone before, however, it
is seen to be more likely that any considerable and general
change of prices should arise from a single circumstance
affecting the demand or supply of gold only, than from a
variety of circumstances separately affecting all or most other
commodities. Joined to the fact that circumstances have
occurred in the production of gold which would probably
cause a considerable rise of prices, it is hardly to be doubted
that any general elevation of prices which we may discover is
for the most part due to *such circumstances. But I am far
from denying that there may have been such alterations in the
comparative demand for gold, and for certain other chief
materials of manufacture, or other articles of commerce, as
might contribute in an appreciable degree to the change of
prices in question.

In the minds of some few there may be confusion between
the exchange value of gold , the value of money in the money
market, and the Mint price of gold . These things have
not the slightest connection with each other. The value of
money in the money market, means the interest or profit
yielded hy money or capital which is lent and borrowed. But
as the loan consists of gold, or at least of something estimated
in gold, and the interest is also paid by a certain percentage
of gold, this percentage or ratio is quite independent of
the value of the gold which forms both capital and interest.

The Mint price of gold again merely defines the weight
of a sovereign, or the number of sovereigns and parts of
a sovereign into which the Mint converts an ounce Troy of
gold. The delusion of those who want free trade in gold
as well as everything else, merely amounts to doing away
with coins of any fixed weight. They might as well, at
the same time, do away with all standard weights and mea-


n.] MEANING OF AN AVERAGE RISE OF PRICES. 23


sures. In that case fixed promises would become impossible*
so that lie should get who can* and giye who cannot help.

II . — Of the Meaning of an Average Rise of Prices .

There* is no such thing as an average of prices at any
one time. If a ton of bar-iron costs £6, and a quarter
of corn £3, there is no such relation or similarity between
a ton of iron and a quarter of corn as can warrant us in
drawing an average between £6 and £3 ; and similarly of
other commodities. If at a subsequent time a ton of iron
costs £9, and a quarter of corn £3 12s. there is again no
average between these quantities* We may* however* say
that iron has risen in price 50 per cent, or by J; what was
previously 100 has become 150 ; corn has risen 20 per cent,
or by i : what was 100 has become 120. Now the ratios
100 : 150 and 100 : 120 are things of the same kind, but
of different amounts* between which we can take an average.

This average percentage or ratio must not be the arith-
metic but the geometric average; not 100 : ^ (120 + 150) or
100 : 135* but 100 : a/120 X 150* or the ratio of 100 to rather
more than 134*16. The mean ratio 100 : 134*16 indeed
differs so little from 100 : 135 that in common business
matters it would be sufficient to take the simpler arithmetic
mean in place of the other* and neglect the error. But
this cannot be done in the present inquiry* where our altera-
tions of prices have a large range* varying from more than
50 per cent, of decrease to more than 100 per cent, of
increase. Thus the price of cocoa has nearly doubled since
1845-50. It has increased by 100 per cent, so that its
variation is now expressed by the number 200. Gloves* on
the contrary, have fallen 50 per cent.* and are now at 50.
The arithmetic mean of these ratios would be (200 + 50)
or 125. The average rise of cocoa and cloves would then
appear to be 25 per cent. But this is totally erroneous. The


H


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[n.


geometric mean of the ratios expressed by the numbers 200
and 50 is 100. On the average of cocoa and cloves there
has been no alteration of price whatever. In otSer words,
the price of one is doubled, of the othes halved — one is
multiplied by two, one divided by two — on the average, theft,
the prices of these articles remain as they wei’e/instead of
rising 25 per cent.

A corresponding error of more or less amount would be
committed in every case did we take the simple arithmetic
mean of percentages. The general result would be to ex-
aggerate the prices which have risen at the expense of those
which have fallen. The average rise of prices would come
out considerably greater than it really is, and our results would
be to that extent erroneous.

To take the geometric mean of two ratios we must
multiply them together and extract the square root of the
prodxict. This is easily accomplished by turning the numbers
into their common logarithms, the arithmetic mean of which
is the logarithm of the geometric mean required. All the
percentages required have accordingly been calculated in
logarithms, and the averages drawn in that form, but after-
wards turned back into ordinary numbers. Without guaran-
teeing the absolute accuracy of every figure, deduced from
tedious calculations, it may be said that more than reasonable
trouble has been taken to insure accuracy, and that the final
conclusions cannot be erroneous in any degree worthy of
consideration.


III. — That we must discriminate Permanent from
Temporary Fluctuations of Prices .

So far we have considered only the general method by
which we may ascertain alterations of prices in general,
between any two periods, without reference to the character
of the alterations. There may, however, he variations of


II.] OF FLUCTUATIONS OF SUPPLY. 25

prices which, are temporary, and it is a more difficult matter
to prove that any variation observed is a permanent one.
For this purpose we must briefly analyse the whole series
of possible causes of fluctuation in price. Such causes may
b& divided into two principal classes : (1) those which affect
the supply, and (2) those which affect the demand for com-
modities.

IV . — Of Fluctuations of Supply.

All articles of commerce might be arranged in a list
according to the degree in which their supply is subject to
natural fluctuations unconnected with the demand. The more
variable commodities, of course, are those agricultural pro-
ducts which depend entirely on the seasons. Hops perhaps
stand at the head of the list, soon followed by potatoes, and
then by the several kinds of grain. All vegetable commo-
dities are more or less variable. Animal products, such as
butchers' meat, dairy produce, hides, or sperm oil, undergo
much slower temporary fluctuations. Finally, we reach mineral
substances, especially the chief metals, iron, copper, lead,
silver, and gold, of which the natural conditions of supply
experience no temporary fluctuations of importance. The
gradual exhaustion of mines is compensated by occasional
new discoveries, but except in very rare instances the changes
are slow and small. Social causes, such as wars, civil dis-
turbances, disputes among workmen, are also incapable of
causing fluctuations of supply of any importance. Hence
many of the metals may be regarded as comparatively sta-
tionary in value, except so far as their prices may depend
on variations of demand.

Our duty as regards fluctuations due to changes of supply is
to have nothing to do with them, but to eliminate the effects
from our inquiry as soon and as completely as possible. That
& commodity is naturally very variable in price is no reason,
indeed, for excluding it wholly from our tables. It is only


2 6


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[ii.


necessary to select such a number and variety of articles in-
dependent in their fluctuations, tliat tbe variations of some will
probably compensate the others. Were we to begin%y exclud-
ing commodities because they are variable in price, we should not
have more than two or three articles left. Wheat, for instance,
because it varies in a few years from 40 to 60 and # 80 shillings
per quarter, does not the less suffer an additional alteration
from any change in gold. Alone, it would afford no sure
indication of such alteration in the value of gold, but we take
it in company with hay, clover, and straw, with meat and
butter, with cotton from several parts of the world, with sugar
from the East and West Indies, with spices, dye woods, and
various other important products, each subject to its own
independent natural fluctuations, but all subject to vary in
price with the variations of value in gold of which we are in
search. In drawing our averages the independent fluctuations
will more or less destroy each other; the one required
variation of gold will remain undiminished. Again, were we
to exclude some commodities from our tables because variable
in price from natural causes, we should have to exclude nearly
all the rest from variations depending on demand. The only
mode of eliminating these fluctuations , is to render our inquiry,
not more exclusive , but more inclusive .


V. — Of Political Causes of Fluctuations .

During the Russian war, the prices of hemp, flax, and
tallow rose much above their ordinary or natural level.
During the present blockade of the ports of the Southern
United States, cotton has risen to three or more times its
ordinary value. It will be more generally satisfactory, no
doubt, to exclude such extreme fluctuations from our inquiry
altogether. This accordingly has been done. In tbe case of
hemp and flax, the prices of 1858, 1854, and 1855 were
struck out and numbers interpolated, in a geometric series.


II.]


OF VARIATIONS OF DEMAND .


27


between the prices of 1852 and 1856. In the case of cotton,
the prices of 1861 and 1862 were struck out, and that of 1860
adopted for those years, as being unaffected by the present
cotton famine. In the case of tallow, a correction which
ought to have been made was accidentally omitted.

It is, however, an open question, whether such extraordinary
elevations of price are not compensated by corresponding
depressions in the prices of other commodities, due to the
stagnation of trade which a war or the stoppage of a great
branch of industry occasions. For the sake of clearing the
inquiry of difficulties, I do not insist on this view.

, VI. — Of Variations of Demand.

Important variations of demand arise only from changes of
fashion, taste, or habit ; from a few exceptional causes, such
as wars, national works, or f6tes ; and from certain great
fluctuations in industry, which alone need be further analysed
here. The demand for bread, meat, spirits, spices, and articles
of food and personal use generally, may be regarded as constant,
or only affected slightly and indirectly by the floods of pro-
sperity and depression depending on the commercial fluctua-
tions to be further considered. Thus, articles of immediate
and 'personal use> speaking generally , are constant in demand ,
variable in supply . Metals, timber, and other articles of more
permanent and remote use , are comparatively constant in
supply ; but I have to show that they undergo great variations
in demand .

VII. — Of Variations of Permanent Investment.

That great commercial fluctuations, completing their course
in some ten years, diversify the progress of trade, is familiar
to all who attend to mercantile matters. The remote cause of
these commercial tides has not been so well ascertained.* It

The inquiry into this remote cause was resumed in subsequent papers
reprinted m this volume. See Nos. YI. to Till.


28


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[n.


seems to lie in tlie varying 'proportion which the capital devoted
to permanent and remote investment bears to that yThich is but
temporarily invested soon to reproduce itself.

A large part of tlie industry of tlie country must be applied
in agriculture and manufactures to produce tlie supplies of
food, clothing, and other articles required for immediate use,
the demand for which, as I have said, cannot much vary. It
is by the sale of these finished articles that capital, invested in
materials, and the payment of wages, is returned as ready
money, available for fresh investment. While uninvested, it
contributes to form the reserve of loanable capital in the Bank
of England, and in other banks, or private hands.

It is quite otherwise with those permanent investments in
houses, ships, improvements of land, manufactories, mines,
railways, foreign loans or undertakings, of which the result is
durable, and not expected to make a ready-money return for
what was invested, except after the course of many years,
or in the form of annual interest. These undertakings are
the great means by which the wealth of the country is
increased. Temporarily, however, they absorb the means of
subsistence of the community — they are wealth in posse, rather
than in esse . Were a certain definite proportion of the capital
of the country set apart every year for such long-dated invest-
ments, the returns of capital which they would make would be
as regular as the absorption of capital. But this is not the
case. It is the peculiarity of these great and permanent works
to be multiplied at particular periods. When capital is abun-
dant its owners look out anxiously for some mode of profitable
employment. Any new discovery or fresh employment for
money is eagexdy taken up. Hope of gain is a most contagious
emotion among business men, and presently hundreds set
themselves to carry out this new discovery upon a most
extended scale.

While one scheme is prospering so well, the circumstances
of the market and the feelings of men are not less propitious


ii] VARIATIONS OF PERMANENT INVESTMENT. 29


for any other schemes which have at all a good appearance.
Farther description is needless ; it is well known that nothing
is so difficult to restrain within prudent bounds as these manias
for speculative investment. It is needless also to add, that the
most extraordinary of these manias was that for railway con-
struction in 1843-46, when hundreds of millions were rashly
subscribed among the vaiious classes of the community.

During §uch a mania, industry is thrown into extraordinary
activity, and also into unusual channels. The customary con-
sumption of food, clothes, etc. goes on of course as usual, or
even increases somewhat.* On the other hand the demand for
timber, iron, bricks, and countless other commodities of more
permanent nature is greatly increased. Their production
being incapable of any but slow e^ension, their prices rise.
Part of the available labouring power of the country is trans-
ferred to their production. Prices are thus started upwards,
and unwonted prosperity and hopes of gain fall upon nearly
every one in the country.

The wealth created during such a period of unwonted
activity probably far overbalances any loss which follows.
Hitherto, however, great losses have usually followed. To
explain exactly how the revulsion comes is perhaps a feat of
statistical analysis not yet accomplished. The salient fact is
a great dearth of capital, or loanable money (gold), due no
doubt to the previous great permanent investment. The arrival
of this dearth is generally accelerated by the failure of the
harvest, or some event which cuts off a large part of the
anticipated gains of the country. The result is that the stocks
of commodities cannot be sold against the stock of available
ready money at the point to which prices have advanced.
Merchants would gain if they could hold on, but they cannot
hold on, because there is no one to continue the advances of


* Insufficient account is taken here of the increased demand for articles of
luxury during a time of prosperity ; but this error does not affect the truth of
what follows.


30


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[ii.


capital with which they have bought their goods. To sell at
lower prices is loss or even ruin. Then conies the panic and
the collapse of credit.

That these great commercial fluctuations arise in the
periods of great permanent investment is perhaps sufficiently
shown for our present purposes in the following table :


Years.

Bricks made
in TL K.

Loads of un-
sawu Timber
imported.

Price of Welsh
Bar Iron in.
Liverpool. $

Years.

Q

§ g
& "

Loads of tm-
sawn Timber
imported.

£g§

IS*

Of


Millions.

Thsncls.

£ s .

d.


Millions. 1

1

Thsnds.

£ s.

d.

1821

979

417

8 17

6

1841

1426 1

756

7 5

0

+1822

993

583

8 7

6

1842

1274 j

527

6 0

0

1823

1265

545

8 7

6

+1843

1161 I

70S

5 0

0

1824 i

1493

611

10 0

0

1844

1420 j

758

5 15

0

"1S25 !

1991

755

14 0

0

1845

1821 |

1077

8 7

6

1826 |

1381

612

10 7

6

1846

2010 .

1249

9 0

0

1827

1121

533

9 10

0

‘1847

2042 !

1031

9 2

6

1828

1104

530

8 7

6

1848

2194 |

929

7 0

0

1829

1135

557

7 7

6 !

1819

1461

818

5 12

6

1830 j

1112

505

6 10

0

1850

1463

868

5 0

0

1831 !

—

569

6 2

6

+1851


1102

4 17

6

+1832

998

557

5 17

6

1852

'i .

924

5 17

6

1833

1036

527

6 15

0

1853

<D

0.0

1180

8 10

0

1834

1152

558

7 0

0

1854

©

H GO

1216

9 7

6

1836

1349

694

6 15

0

1855


909

7 17

6

1836

1606

688

10 15

0

1856

P

1081

8 0

0

*1837

1491

660

9 5

0

*1857

P

1179

7 10

0

1838

—

725

9 10

0

—

— .

—

— .


*1839

1576

726

9 15

0

—

—

—

—


1840

1748

817

8 7

6


—*

*— ■

— ■


The high prices of iron, and the increased production of
bricks, show periods of great investment, and these correspond
exactly with the well-known epochs of commercial difficulty,
in 1825, 1836-89, and in 1847 ; indeed, if the above numbers
were drawn out in a curve, its form would be found to
correspond closely with the curve representing the numbers
of bankruptcies during the same years.

* Years marked * are those of commercial difficulty and revulsion.

+ Years marked + seem to be those with which the great commercial
fluctuations begin and end.

% From a circular of an old Liverpool iron-exporting firm (Jevons and Sons).


II.] OP PRICES AS DEPENDENT ON CREDIT 31

Effect of Ceedit.

VIII . — Of Prices as dependent on Credit .

What greatly assists a rise of prices, started in a period of
free investment, is the system of credit on which trade is
necessarily conducted. By this system a trader is not obliged
to be the real owner of the goods in which he trades, but may
buy freely by giving the promise of payment in, perhaps,
three months 3 time. Thus the goods really belong to the
holder of his promissory note, or bill; only the margin of
profit or loss falls to the share of the trader. The result of
this system of purchase on credit must be that prices are not
restrained at every moment by the quantity of gold in the
country to make payments. Prospective payments take the
place of present payments, and in the meantime the bills
created may circulate from one hand to another as if they
were an embodiment of so much gold.

So long as prices rise every trader is enabled to discharge
his liabilities at any required moment ; they may be bought by
others with a still more free recourse to credit. Thus, prices
and credit mutually inflate each other. But there is a check
to this process. Though the merchant does not own the
goods there must be some one to own them, to advance
capital, or, as it is said, to discount the bills arising out of
the transaction. Now this capital is limited, and the available
amount is reduced during the period of permanent investment,
from which a rise of prices proceeds. It is the exhaustion of
this capital which limits credit ; it is the limitation of credit
which must sooner or later bring prices to a stand, or even
cause them to recede to a rate much lower than they had
reached. In this revulsion and recession of prices some class
must bear the loss; those who are too much dependent on
credit will suffer bankruptcy, and inflict part of the loss on
others.


32 THE VALUE OF GOLD . [n.

While the elasticity of credit; then, may certainly give
prices a more free flight, the inflation of credit^ must be
checked by the well-defined boundary of available capital,
which consists in the last resort of the reserve of notes,
equivalent to gold, in the banking department of the Bank
of England. Prices temporarily may rise or fall independently
of the quantity of gold in the country ; ultimately they must be
governed by this quantity . Credit gives a certain latitude
without rendering prices ultimately independent of gold.


Causes oe Fluctuation.

IX. — Of Prices after a Revulsion .

A revulsion occasioned by a failure of the national capital
must cause, not only a collapse of credit, and of any inflation
of prices due to credit; it must put an end to the formation of
new* schemes of permanent investment. Schemes already on
foot will, as far as possible, be continued, and must for a time
keep up the price of permanent materials. As by degrees
these undertakings are completed, the demand for materials
will decrease as rapidly as it formerly increased. The prices
of such materials, therefore, will fall and remain low until the
fresh accumulation of free capital causes speculation again to
germinate.

X. — Of other supposed Causes of Fluctuation.

Even if there be nothing erroneous in the preceding
analysis of a great commercial fluctuation, I am far from
supposing that the exact relations in regard to prices, com-
modities, gold, and capital have been hit upon. I do not
believe that any of our economists have yet untied this Gordian
knot of economic science, although some cut it in a very
unhesitating manner. One of these summary kinds of pro-
cedure is the currency theory, which attributes every fluctuation


ii.j OTHER SUPPOSED CAUSES OF FLUCTUATION. 33


of prices to an extension of tlie bank-note circulation. Now
by the Bank Charter Act of 1844, it is provided in the most
satisfactory manner that every note in the country that is
likely to be presented at the Bank for payment, shall be met
thfere by its equivalent amount. Thus, any influence which
the note can have is that of its equivalent gold. Under the
old state of things it was almost the same, because the prudence
of the Bank management might be said to maintain the notes
really convertible.*

Another favourite theory of some writers is the dependence
of our commercial position on the foreign exchanges. This is
another twist in the Gordian knot which it is not easy to untie in
detail, and is not right to cut. But taking a general view of the
matter, it will appear that the foreign exchanges merely link
trade in one country to trade in another. The natures of gold,
of capital, and of commodities are not changed by con-
veyance over the sea, and with certain minor exceptions, trade
between England and Germany, or England and America, is
subject to the same great laws as trade between England north
and south of the Trent, or between the manufacturers and the
agriculturists within the nation. The fluctuations of invest-
ment of capital, prices, stocks of commodities, and of the
standard of value, whether gold or not, would not be altered
in nature if we had no foreign exchanges at all.


On the relation of the note circulation to prices, see Appendix, Note B.


CHAPTER II.

InquipvT into Prices before and after the Gold
Discoveries.

XI . — Of the Elimination of temporary Fluctuations.

What little lias been correctly stated in the previous chapter
as to the procedure of commerce, may serve to explain the real
fluctuations of prices which my tables disclose. At the same
time, we shall be put on our guard against mistaking any
temporary fluctuation due to excessive investment or credit,
for the effect of gold depreciation. The twelve years which
have elapsed since the epoch of the Australian discoveries have
covered scarcely more than a single great fluctuation of com-
merce, in the effects of which those of gold depreciation must
necessarily be disguised. To eliminate such disturbances in
our comparison of prices before and after the gold discoveries,
we might compare the prices at corresponding points of the
commercial tide. This method, proposed by Cobden,* in the

* That Cobden had observed the periodic character of commercial
fluctuations is evident from the passage cited above, •which is as follows
(p. xii.) : {t The only useful comparison that conld be drawn is by comparing
the range of prices, a few months after the panic of 1857, with the prices of a
corresponding period after the panics of 1825, 1836, and 1847. From the
cursory reference which X have been able to make to the valuable tables in
Hr. Tooke’s work on prices, I am inclined to the opinion that the comparison
would be found to confirm the views of M. Chevalier.” The latter inference is
conclusively confirmed in my reduction of Tooke’s tables (see Paper III.). That
Cobden, however, did not entirely appreciate the nature of the decennial cycle,


II.]


OF THE METHOD ADOPTED .


35


preface to his translation of Chevalier’s Essay, is theoretically
correct, but practically useless. Commercial fluctuations are
never so similar and well marked that we can discover exactly
corresponding points in each. Since 1851, too, they have
b%en much interrupted by wars, so that we find no definite
undulation of prices sufficiently comparable with that of the
years 1844-50.

In these circumstances I adopted the method — partly the
same as that previously used by Mr. Newmarch — of comparing
the prices of every part of the commercial fluctuations since
1851, not with the similar movements of a previous fluctuation,
but with a certain average price fairly drawn from all parts
of the previous fluctuatioji of 1844-50. We must then form
the best judgment we can as to the part of the commercial
tide in which any year since 1851 is situated, and allowing for
the height of the tide, judge how far the level of prices has
been permanently altered by the gold discoveries. We thus
eliminate, I conceive, so far as it can now be done, the
fluctuations of prices due to varying demand, and dependent
on the manias for permanent investment, and the inflations of
credit. The natural variations of supply, which chiefly affect
the articles of more immediate use, are at the same time
destroyed, as far as may be, in the drawing of our averages.

XII. — Of the Method adopted .

To carry out the inquiry on these principles, I propose to
define the commercial tide which culminated in 1847, as com-
mencing with 1844 and ending with 1850. Eor these tides
begin and end with abundant capital, and with low water, as

will be apparent from the following passage of his interesting preface (p x.) :
“ The tendency to a general rise of prices would lead to an expansion of credit
and an inerease~of speculation, which would "be followed by panics and con-
vulsions of greater violence and more frequent recurrence than have been
hitherto experienced. Instead of a crisis visiting the commercial world once
in each decade, its return might be expected every five years.”


36


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[n.


it were, in the rate of interest. Thus the turn of the tide will
be at the moment of minimum rate of interest, or perhaps more
truly about the middle of the period when interest is at or near
its lowest point . Now the rate of discount or interest was at
its minimum in the years 1843 and 1844, when it sank as low
as If per cent., and scarcely rose at all above 2J percent. It
gradually rose during 1845, reached 5 per cent, early in 1846,
and, after a temporary relapse, advanced to 10 per cent., its
culminating point, in November, 1847. Before the commence-
ment of 1848 it had already dropped to some 4 per cent., and
then continuously fell, reaching the level of 2 per cent, in
1850. A temporary rise in 1851 was succeeded by the
extraordinary depression to If during the last eight months of
1852. It was now that the speculative period of 1853 com-
menced, only to terminate completely in the stagnation of last
year (1862). I think accordingly that there are two pretty
well defined periods of low interest, 1843-44 and 1849-52,
neglecting in the latter the very minor rise of interest in 1851.
It is accordingly in the middle points of these periods, the
beginning of 1844, and the end of 1850, that I place the limits
of the fluctuation of 1847. The average prices of this interval
I regard as free from the influences of speculation or inflated
credit. At the same time this interval affords a good average
price of grain and other agricultural produce, because these
articles suffered a well-marked fluctuation of prices, culminating
in the famine of 1847, just about the middle of the period.

By a further happy coincidence, these years, 1844-50,
selected with reference only to the rate of interest, are also
nearly the best we could have chosen with reference to the
date of the gold discoveries. The year 1851 is that of the
Australian discoveries, and that also about which the supplies
of Californian gold began to be of importance.

In place, however, of the seven years* average, 1844-50, 1
was obliged to adopt the six years* average, 1845-50, because
the pricelists of The Economist newspaper, which I used, do not ,


II.] COMPILATION OF THE TABLES OF PRICES . 37


commence at all until July., 1844, and did not assume the full
form which they have ever since retained until the beginning
of 1845. To have used data for 1844 drawn from other
pjice lists would have introduced doubt and error in place
of additional certainty, because articles are not necessarily
quoted in an exactly similar manner in different lists. There
is also no reason to suppose that the inclusion of the year 1844
would have sensibly altered the average. To include 1851 in
my average in place of 1844 would only increase my estimation
of the subsequent rise of prices.*

It may perhaps be objected that six years are not sufficient
for furnishing a correct average of prices. But if the period
were extended at all, it would have to be extended to the
commencement of the previous commercial tide, some ten years
earlier, about 1833 or 1834. This would have added greatly
to the labour of the inquiry ; it would also have rendered it
less worthy of reliance. Recourse must have been had to
various different lists of prices, and numerous discrepancies
in the qualities of the articles quoted or the conditions of
their production must have crept in. The shorter the space of
time over which our comparison extends, the less will it be
affected by long-continued and radical alterations of demand
or supply, which there is perhaps no mode of eliminating. In
the balance of advantages and disadvantages, I think that
the period 1844-50, or 1845-50, will give the most reliable
datum line , as surveyors would say.

XIII . — Compilation of the Tables of Prices,

Tables of the monthly prices of thirty-nine articles of com-
merce were compiled from the price lists of The Economist , and
from other sources, as described in the following statement.
The quotations were usually taken, as near as may be, to the
middle of each month, from the number of The Economist ,


See Appendix, Note 0 .


33


THE VALUE OF GOLD .


[n.

dated between the 14tli and 20th of the month. Though
it is a matter of indifference as regards the present rsurbject, it
seems obvious that single monthly quotations should be taken
at the middle of the month rather than at the beginning, as /s
commonly done. They thus belong more properly to the
month, correspond more truly with the monthly tables of the
Board of Trade, and are less liable to disturbance from the
monthly settlements.

It is usual in all commercial quotations to state, not an
average price, but the highest and lowest prices, comprehending
any varieties of quality, as well as any variations of price in
the period considered.* In this form, however, it is impossible
to deduce any exact conclusions from the numbers. To
ascertain whether prices are rising or falling, we must take the
average of* the highest and lowest, and consider it as the
average price of a medium quality. To treat the higher and
lower qualities as separate commodities, might be a more
rigorously correct method, but it would double the labour of an
inquiry already sufficiently laborious, without any adequate
advantage. It is only in the case of a few commodities, such
as indigo, that the range of qualities is so great as to cause
uncertainty. In regard to the metals, oils, and many other
important articles, there is little or no range of price.

LIST OF THIRTY-NINE CHIEF COMMODITIES.

METALS.

1. Silver — Standard bars per ounce Troy. From The
Economist, with some quotations completed from “The London
Mercantile Price Current/' and “ The Banker's Magazine/*

2. Tin — English blocks, per ton,

3. Copper — tough cake, per ton.

4. Lead — English pig, per ton.

5. Bar iron — British, per ton.

* There is also the difference in some oases between the prices for sellers
and for buyers.


II.]


LIST OF CHIEF COMMODITIES.


39


6. Fig iron — No. 1 Wales,, per ton.

7. "Tinplates — (iron) — Charcoal, 1 0. per box.

Nos. 2-7 from The Economist .

VEGETABLE AND ANIMAL MATERIALS.

8. Palm oil — per ton.

9. Linseed oil — per ton.

10. Tallow — St. Petersburg, 1st yellow candle, per ton.

11. Hides — Buenos Ayres and Monte Video, dry, per lb.

12. Leather — Crop hides, 80 to 45 lb., per lb.

18. Timber — Dantzig and Memel fir, per load.

14. Logwood — Campeachy, per ton.

1 5. Indigo — Bengal, per lb.

Nos. 8-15 from The Economist .

EIBROUS MATERIALS.

16. Upland cotton — per lb.

17. Pernam . cotton — per lb.

18. Surat cotton — per lb.

Nos. 16-18. The yearly average prices of the three chief
varieties of cotton were taken from an excellent table and
paper in “The Exchange Magazine ” for October, 1862, reprinted
in the “Journal of the Statistical Society ;; for December
(vol. xxv. p. 527). The average price of fair quality for
1862 has been added on p. 42, from the data in The Economist ;
but to avoid the exceptional disturbances of prices in 1861-62,
the low prices of 1860 have been repeated in those years in
making up the averages in the table on page 46.

19. Wool — English fleeces, Southdown hogs, per pack of
240 lb.

20. Silk — Cossimbuzar, per lb.

" 21. Flax — Riga, W. E. P. K., per ton.

22. Hemp — St. Petersburg, clean, per ton.

Nos. 19-22 from The Economist .


40


THE VALUE OF GOLD .


[ii.


COEN-.

23. Wheat . 2 L Barley . 25. Oats . 26. Bye . *0*7 r Beans.

28. Peas.

Nos. 23-28. The monthly average Gazette prices, pgr
Imperial quarter, taken from “The Statistical Abstract ” of the
Board of Trade, or from the “Journal of the Statistical
Society.” These averages are deduced from official returns
from all the chief market-towns in England and W ales, and,
o! course, afford most reliable data. The numbers for 1862
apply only to the first nine months of the year.

A.CHUCULTURA.L PRODUCE, MEAT, ETC.

29. Hay .

30. Clover.

31. Straw.

Nos. 29-31. Avex*age of the highest and lowest prices, per
load, as given in Dodsley’s “Annual Register for the London
Markets.” Prices for 1862 in Smithfield Market are added
from The Times .

32. Beef.

33. Mutton ,

34. Pork

Nos. 32-34. Average of the highest and lowest prices, per
stone of 81b., in Smithfield, or the Metropolitan Cattle Market,
as given in “The Annual Register.” The numbers for 1862
were filled up from The Times , and seem rather below what they
would have been given in “ The Register,” the exact inode of
quotation in which is not stated.

35. Butter — per cwt. Limerick, 1845-50 ; afterwards
Waterford, first quality new. In the earlier years Limerick
and Waterford butter were often confused together in The
Economist , the price of Limerick seeming, however, to be one
or two shillings more than that of Waterford, though after-
wards Waterford became superior to Limerick. To prevent


LIST OF CHIEF COMMODITIES.


4i


n]

any doubt, tbe rather higher prices o£ Limerick butter were
taken in Jihe earlier period from “ The London Mercantile
Price Current,” and joined with the higher prices of Waterford
butter from The Economist in the later period.

FOREIGN ARTICLES OF FOOD.

36. Sugar , per cwt. — Gazette average price of the week
nearest the middle of each month, of Muscovado sugar, being
the average of West India, Bast India, and Mauritius sugar.
Prom “The London Mercantile Price Current,” 1844-47, and
The Economist afterwards.

37. Spirits — Jamaica rum in bond, 15 to 25 0. P., per
gallon. In some of the earlier years the strength of spirit
quoted in The Economist is 10 to 20 0. P. As spirits afford
an exception to the general rise of prices, this discrepancy
need not be further noticed.

38. Tea — Congou in bond, per lb. The lowest price quoted
in The Economist ; but there is some little change in the
description.

39. Pepper — Black Malabar in bond, per lb.

From the tables of monthly prices obtained as described in
the above list, the simple arithmetic mean prices for each year
were drawn. Double calculations were made to prevent error.
The following table was thus prepared. It forms the basis of
my deductions.


TABLE stowing tlie Average Price of each of thirty-nine chief Commodities, during each of the Years 1845-62,


^iaqvONOOOQ ©00©C3©'HCO© «|^j>!»h 1»0 O CO O ^NONMO N lO 00 Ci N N OlM HC5
rH <b CD © H © Jt>» 03do©©HHiH© 22 ^ © © ^ © w w CO J> O O JC- C3 © © 05 03 J> H 03 © H

CO rH 05 03 03 CO 03 H © "H H CO O CCCh rH © © «i CQ N « ^ 00 CD 05 © H © © O 03 rH

rH rH rH t * t * I * ;H

Sh'-JI voo MO ©©OOtHCIHOOH © © 05 M rH J> J> H 03 © © © Jt- Jt> H 1> H K © CO

6^050000 05 © rH © © H 05 l> © J> OS © JC>. J> rH ©<£>©1003 rH ©©H©C5COC5 H 03 05H

CO 03 C5 03 03 CO 03 H © © rH rH CO w'w'w rH ,— ) © © © © 03 © H HP Jt> 05 © © © © © 03

rH rH Hi ...

CO H O

<B « OO O O ^ rHG5M00©O5©iH h|(ShW H teJ> H 00 rH 05 © H © *> © J> W O O N Cl 03 ZD CO ip Q

rH © © 03 rH © rH ©00©tHJC'.©CD© © CO -H< Cl CO H< O © © H-< © Tp 6 Cl © rH rP 6 HP rH 1> CO HP H*

© © O 03 © I> © rff N VO H H CD HHCOCO © © 03 © H< ’H 3>%1 © © © © rH 03 rH

rl rl r- < *H

00 © ©

05 H* © © 03 03 05 03©©03©HHrH© c000c ^ *'• © 03 © © 1> rH 10 O ^ 03 OQ © XO ^ 0)10

H H 01 N O CO N xb 00 xb rH XO CO J>» H^ CD GO ^ O) XO O Cl © © © 03 03 05 CM © 00 rH I> CO © © © ©3 tp

CD CO O 03 t> CO ^ NU5HHCO rH rH i> 03 HP 00 03 00 H< CO JO 05 03 © © ^ 03 rH

0X0 CO

CO OC 03 CO 1> 03 CO CDNOHH(MJ>9 hWmHUc-N 0 ® "H< 'H 1 © 03 .O © © <35 05 © © © 03 05 rH © Jfc» © © ©

Hi rf i nr» *v« i A /r>\ i /*o i — s i m r/"i >rs rri in f T\ Co ivi _j jm /•Tv /-r\ m r->i /vs 1 — rv*i r~>


H 00 00 N CO 6 CO Cl rH 03 rH © Hp
CO rH © 03 -H 01 CO CO CO XO rH iH CO

—1 rH r— (


•H CO lb © OD '^p © CD © Cl Hp Hp rp 03 rH ©3 6l Cl 00 O C5 H< i> Jt> CO O 10
co rHH©03Hp©©3©HpHTlCOOOC3©©HlOC3 rH


i>HWCO^XOH 00 O CD CD CO Op I> 00 ^^^03 h? C5 rH WHOMOOp XD ip t? yi CO © Cl CO 03 03 C3

rH © 05 HI tf) © Cl HPOOOO©ClrHOOH< J> CO b 6 N H H © 03 lb 00 CO rH 00 6l J> O GO © J> HP CO lb

© CO 03 03 © O CO H © © rH rH X> 03 ©3 © © © H 53 © H H © PO 53 XD © X5 O © rH

rH rH rH rH rH

H ci oo

00 H © rH rH 03 © ©©■'^©©iHqOH’ WC3JC> 03 H 03 O © © Hp © Cl H rH H © M © 05 <N

rH 03 00 © rH H 1> ©3JC-HOH03 00H © .t> H J> J> 00 © © rH lb lb CO rH O J> © © H 03 © 05 © 00 lb

©©rHC3 00rH©Tp©©tHrHX> H H IQ CO © H 53 H H H ©OC3101QIGO 03


© © 9 H © CO H ©ip©X0ipi£5t>?H ^ ^00 © 00 O Jt- Jt» H 1> © © J^* © © J> 05 H H C0J>©O

rH © © CO rH O CO H=IC5Jt>00©©.!>H © -t> © © 03 i> H H Jt> © © 05 1^ Jt> © Cl O 1> O © CO © lb

© rH 03 03 I> O CO H © © rH© rH rH X"- © 03 H H H CO O 53 "P XO H O 03

rH H rH rH ^ rH rl 1

H CO Hn ©

lil © © © CO O rH ip©C3lpip©03© ^ ^ h © © ^ © -HO©©©© 03 XO y< 03 CO J> © Dooi>®

rH rH © CO © © CO I> lb H J> cb N © © © 3> CO CO CO © 03 © lb JH 1*0 O rH Cl © © © 03 Tp rH

© 03 03 03 © rH © Tp © © rH© HH J> 00 03 ^ ^ © O © 'H © ^P © 03 rH


© © /— s ©

^ O © © © I> © lO©Hi''>P©C303H' H |., COIOM’P © 03 O O H XO © © t? Cl rH © NHiOW

rH lb © © © © lb J^» © © © 03 © t> © ID X> cb I>- CO 2g X> CO 00 H lO O 00 © © rH yi © lO O ^©H^i

© iH rH 03 © © © ©C3U5 Ht- HH^CO ©©©©^P© ©©©Tpuo-H© © r*'


© ©

© 03 JO © O © rH © © rH yi © © xP ©


O O © J> -H 03 © © JO ©
© © © rH © JO 03 03 ©©


UN JL>*

yl © © rp © ^ y^O©©^ iO © rH © © © O X5 rH ■r? © 10 07 © rH © Cl

lb © © © Tp lb X> © lb 03 © rH O © © © 03 O 6 iH Jo © 03 © r? 03 03 00©
rHrHTp©TP03rH03©©JO©C3©Tp©i>(?3


© CO © © T P X£5 O rHJO031OO©S©
JO rH © 03 ©tH©lbOO©^P
© © rH rH © © 03©© rH ©


el © O ID 03 lO O © XO © 03 9 © © © © © rH yi§©0
^^©©rP© ©-^ooib©^ ©©^ibo3©xb xb 03 O C
rH rH HH 03 CO 03 rH 03 03 03 © -t> 03 CO Tp CO I> 03 rH


© W5 rH X> © © Hrl ©©ip©K5XO©© GO X(5 © © rp rf( © © 03 rH XO © CO © © © © rp © ©

c5l O lb o © 6 03 O 03 O* © »H © © 3oi01D©rHrHO 6©©W©JO rH©l(5JO0303© © 03 © ©

XD © © rH >H © © © © © rHiH^© ^03rH0303C3 ©J>C3©^^© 03 rH

rj © ©

©JO©©Op^»© p^©©©©03^ 'iD ID © H ©1>X£503©XD O lO © © O © 03 JO 1(5 © H

CD © © lb HI H=l 03 C3©OOxPClJO©© ID ID CO rH © © © r?X^JOcb©iH 03©JO©©X£5© lb 03 © CO
X£5 t> © rH 03 Jt> © ©03© © rH rH © © -rp 03 rH 03 © © © J> 03 © ^ ^ © 03

r§XD03 05©«5Xp ©rH©Q0©C0©^ ^ ^XO 03 rH © © XO © -N- 03 © lO © © 03 © i> 03 I> O0

CD t- © © bp 03 Cl 03©©^©©©© ^ © © © © Cl 03 O rH © O © © HP 10 © CO 03 03 rH ©©J>0J

XO i> © rH © 03 © 03 ^ rHX> rH rH © © © © 03 CO © © © CO 03 Tp © © 00 03


*5 © XO GO 3> © 00 03 ^©©pTp©^ p rHi>03 J> 03 I> © xp Hp ©©00©©©© © © © 0

S © © © 00 HP © © ©©©©6©i>4p © 1> ^ CO © © 00 © hi OO © 6 H rH rH 6 t;. C3 © 3> 00 © © cq

©©©H©©© © 03 H H 00 rHrHH©©HC3H©XDCDOO©H©©COC3

rH

S ©0)©©©H©^-91>9©©©© i.jao^iyje-^© ©©Xp J>i>i>©©9 H©l>po09© 03 © 03 o

h 92 ^ :r! o* d 2 *"■< ©h©©ih©ooh h x> © © h © 03 h©©©oo© © h 03 © © h 03 h 03 © 05

© © © rH © © © © 03 H rH QO H rH H © ©©03©©H © © © H © © © ©


© © CD

Q 9 CO © 9 03 © qOO)HPHt^©J>iH «[^oesf30 © 00 03 00 0)Jt>©M©J> © © H i> H CO Jt> ©©©^

00 H © © rH © 00 xft H © ©© 03 © 00 6 rH 03 03 © © 03 © 00 © © © 03 © 05 »

lO OO CO H OO O CO O303 H rH 00 iHHHC3©©C3W©©©©OTHHH00©

rH rH «— I


P ftnC Y
h d & «8

I 3 B o 3 (


i o, ii

Hast l-g


© tr 00 © © rH 03 © H © CD t> CO C5©rH03©HXO
rH rH rH rH 03 03 03 03 C3 03 03 03 G3 03 ©©©©©©


cs *rj ft*
tifl.g eS Cu
a p* ® o
GQ0QE-iP4

© 3> 00 b

© © © CO


IL]


REDUCTION OF THE TABLES.


-43


Reduction of the Tables.

To obtain any accurate conclusions from tbe above table,
it was necessary to reduce it in accordance with principles
before considered. The simple arithmetic average price of
each commodity for the six years 1845-50 was first drawn, and
will be found stated in the tables in Section XVII. This
average being assumed as the true or natural average, according
to the undisturbed value of gold (see above, p. 35), was divided
(arithmetically) into the average price of each separate year,
1845-62. The ratios or percentages thus obtained represent
from 1845 to 1850 the proportional variation due to speculative
or other ordinary fluctuations. Since 1850 the percentages
express the rise of prices above their former ordinary level,
affected of course by any temporary 'fluctuations. In the
following table these percentages are given in detail.


TA'RT.T! showing the ratio of the Average Price of each separate Year, 1845-62, to the Average of the Years 1845-50.


£5

g

®5-t^C5J^-Cp^HOO ii 00 ON 05 'S? » <4 © CO lO VO 00 © <M N* © Jt> © © rH OONOeOONN ^ © © 00

OCOOHNNOO ©'HrH©©©xJ(iO © H O rH O O ffi O « H H O M 0Q N- tH CO

H HHH HHHHn rH rH MNMHHHH HriHHHH HHHHHH rHrH

* * *

s

CO

N^cqxOOOJtNOq rH©CO<M©rHt>rH « O M H H CO O Jt> © © © ^ ^ NONN^WO © 2 S3 «

© ^ rH rH J> I> © •'HrH<MQ0'H©©Trl H 1 W5 CO U0 O OHHOHO OaH H CO (M H H CO 05 O VO

HrlpHH rHrHrHrHr-i rH rH rH rl H H rH rl H H H H rl rH H rH rH H H rl rl rl rlH

* si X

§

00

f-t

^Or-jHI WiOCi W3ONHICD00HVO NHNC0r?0DHI M lO CO H O CO N- © CM © rH <M N- 05 00 CO

O CD eg eg 00 00 03 hH rH © O © GO © CO o CM O ^ CO ^ 03 OHHHNO HHOCOM HHi © © VO U5

rl rH rl H H rl rl N H H H H rH rl rl rl rlHHHrlH H rl rl rl rl H rl rHrHrH

ca

g

VO CO CO -T? CM©©<M©©00© H M CO O O N H VO VO CO © "*JI rH CD GO CM © O VO CO CO 05

© VO <M <M GO GO © "5H©©©rf(©©<N CM <M <M ^ ^ © © C00005H© O © 05 CM rH O CO 05 rH CO ^1

rl rH H H rl rl H H (35 H rH HHHHHH rH rH rl rl H H H rl rl rl rH rH rt

tH

00 O (M CD o (M lO -5p©<M©vnHp©<M CO rH CO VO CO N- <M VO 05 •<?<©© © CM © -# rH <M © J> JC> © <M ©

O H 1 (N (M 05 O O CMrHCqO^XOqCO H N cq H H (M 05 00 © rH © rH © © O 03 N H 05 CO © rH rH ©

H rl H H rHrHrHrHrHtMrH Hrl HHrlHHH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rHrHrH

1

^OONOCHI OvflNN«3TpfflN VO © © <M © VO © © CM © 1> © © O © rH 03 <M <M © rH © ^ CO

O Cp M O N W Hr*'vHC0 , 5?CO©rH(M CO CM ^ VO © CM O O CO H H rl O O © © CM CM rH CO © Tp rfl <0

H rl rl H rl rH rl rl rl rl N H rHrH rl H H rl H H rl rl rl rl rl rl rl rH rH rl rl rH H H H H H

o

8

iH

CO © rp <M CO © CO ^HCOOC5HINVO 03 10 <M "$< rH rH Tp © Jfc- 00 00 VO S5 ^ 05N NlV^I M © N

© VO CO rH CM rH C0^fi<M©CO©(MH rH © rH CO V0 (M H CO (M rH CO rH O CO IN 00 N H O CO © rH 05 CD

rl H rl rlrlrl rl rl rl H H rH rHrH H rl rl rl rl rH rl H H rl rl rl H rHrH H rl rl rl rHrH H

I

CO © CO (M N- ^ V0 00rHrf(Tfl©VOVO© N. © rH Hi rH 00 CO ^ © Jt> © VO © CO © GO O CO i> 00 03 03 00 O

© CO CO © rH © CO VO CO VQ CO O© © © © © O rH rH © H © N H N H CM CM 00 04 © © CM © CM © CD

rH p^ rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH rH tH tH rH rH rH tH tH rH rH rH rH rH pH rH rH rH pH pH rH rH

HI

8

iH

C0 (M CO ^ ^ rH rp © J> © © © N- CO 00 O CO rH VO rH ^ VO © © © © i> © 00 -t> HP © VO © © O CO N- CO
© -vjH co (M © O rrlCOVOCOOOOrHVO ©©©©(Mr-1© H H CO vji (N H HHHH005W 00 rp <M VO

H rl H H rl H H rHHHHMi— IHH H H H H H H H H H rl H H iHrHrHrHrH rH H H rl

s

00

rH

CO VO rH VO © © CO 00©00VOiXM©N- © CO H H O H (N CO x? N- N- CO GO *> © ^ N- © 03 ID Jt> 03 VS 00

© CO CO CO rH © rH H H H H H O 05 CO © © © CO CM rH © O O © O © © CM rH © © © © rH 00 O CM CO

HHHrHHrHH HHHHHH rH rH rH rHrHiHrHrHrH rH rH tHrHrHrHrH rH H H H

1852

CM CO © O 00 CM (M rH©O3O0O3QO0Oa0 O © N- © © i>- © C5C5 35HNN (M 05 CO 00 05 ^ ONHUO
© O © © JO GO © © O © © © O 00 CM 0005HH 005 O 00 GO © GO O © © 00 GO 00 •!> © 00 I> © 03
rH rH rH rH rH H rl H H H H rH H

1

03 © © Jt> © VO rH ©rH©^©©(M© N- © ^ VO 03 vO HP 00 © 00 Jt> © © GO © 3> 00 © ID © ©3 V® vO

© © © © N- N* © ©<M©©©J>©CM © rH O © rH © © Jt> N- © J> i> © © GO 00 00 00 -t> © CO DO H O

rHrH rHrHrH rHrHr-irHrHrHrH rH rHrH


rH V0 © © HP © <M IQNQOOOHOHM VO © © © VO VO © ©©©rH©© ©VO©0©©© rHrH©©

© © © © t> © © © IM ©©©©©© © rH CO © O © © J>X>N-i>X> © ©©©©©©© ©©rHrH
rH H rH ^ rH H HHHHH rHrH

i

r-l

O HI VO 05 00 HI H ©rHrHHPCMOO©© VO rH rH J> r? HP CONHONO rH CM <M HP rH HP O ©©CO©

© © © 00 Jt> GO © ©©©OOOjOOQO© ©©©©©©© ©©©©©© ©©©©©©© © © © ©
rH rH rH rH rH

1

© H CD VO O CO CO CM 00 © © © © ©3 © © © -^ © rH © O ©©VO©©© HP 00 00 »0 GO N» CO CO © CO ©

©©©©©©© ©©rH©©©©© © © i> © © O ©©©©©© ©©000©0© © © © ©

rH rHrH rH rH rH rH rH rH

1

O © O VO (M © VO VOOHCOONNCO ©NNNOHD 10©©©©© © HP <M H*! © © 03 © © © ©

OOHONOQ5 HOHOOHOO HHHOC3HH ©©©VO©© C0 050HQHH O © © ©

rHrHrHrHrH'^ H H H rl H H H H HHHH HH HHHHHH HHHHH H H

H

© (M HP N» © HP © ©HKNOVDHHH rH © © VO © (M rH © CO © N- H* (M © © © © © VO © *> © ID

OHOONHO 05OCWOHHO fflO©HOHO © O H O O N © © © © © O © (M © O 05

HH HHHHH HHHHHH rH HHHH HHHHHH HHH H H H H - H

1

rH

© <M © HP © © © © lD *D 1® 03 CO GO 00 rH ^ 00 t> -H< CO © © © HP © VO © VO M JO © © © © HP rH N* 05
© O © © rH CM © 05 05®HHHHO © © N* rH tH © © ©©©©©© © (M CM © © © rH HOOO
rH HHHH HHHHH rHrHrH rH rH rHrHrH rH rH rH rH rH

1

1

©

d o

0 -H —

-is S3

rH -43 O ©

. - - - w c • - - -OQ+9

.8 3« l

oqEhOhIPCIPhEh ^WOPhWPh WocqpqJ^PhW JGOQE-IPH

rH (M CO ^ VQ © J> 00©OrH(MC0'HvO © Jt> 00 © © rH <M CO ^ VO CD X> 00*" 05 © rH (M CO ^ VO CO i> 00 05
HHHHHH HHHHNCUN CM<M<MC<IIM<M CMCQCOGOCQCOOO © © © ©


II.]


REDUCTION OF THE TABLES .


45


To display more clearly the great variations in the above
table, free from minor fluctuations, I have grouped together
those commodities which seemed to have anything in common,
and calculated the average ratios or percentages as described at
pp. 23, 24. I have lastly deduced the general average variation
from year to year of the whole thirty-nine commodities. The
descriptions of the groups and the average numbers are given
in the following table, the contents of which are more easily
seen in the accompanying diagram. The general course of the
Bank minimum rate of discount is added in the diagram,
because its comparison with the general average course of
prices is interesting, and will probably justify my assumptions
in Section XII., pp. 35-37.


TATiTYF. showing the Average ratio of Prices each year, 1845-62, to the Average Prices of 1846-50.


—


T 1 '

00

00

o

98

3

83

©

CO

©

rH

3

©

©

©

©

iH

99

1

1

CO

rH


rH


rH


rH

rH

rH

rH


rH


rH


eq

vo

©

vp

*>

©

CO


©


©


tH

s

eq

o

8

8

00

00

9

©

rH

3

8

8

©

3

3

a

1

VO

H


rH

rH


H

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH


rH


0981

cp

00

VO

00

00

©

©

co

cp

CO

©

©


05

00

S

J>

00

3

©

CO

©

©


CD

6

1

J>

o

00

eq

rH

VO

rH


3

CM

rH


rH


rH

rH


rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

tH

rH

rH

r>

rH


rH

HI

cp

VO

©

vp

9

CO


9

cp

op


O

§

§

tH

©

3

1>

eq


rH

rH

©

©

op

1

CD

rH

00

VO

(M

H

©

©

H

eq

©


rH


rH

rH


rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH


rH ^

03

O

o

©

00

VO

cp

©

<M


©

H

cp


eq

£

00

CO

3


CM

©

©

8

©

do

©

vb

1

H»


o


3

VO

CM


©

rH

rH

eq

1

H


rH

rH


rH

rH

rH

rH


rH

rH

rH


rH


00

rH

©

00

VO

co

©

H

©

Jt>

co

©


9

s

O

s

©


$

CO

H

CO

vb

©

IQ

rH

S

a

3

<M

3

1

do

eq


rH

rH

tH

rH

rH

H

rH


tH

tH


rH


o

<sq

CO

HR

©

9

<M

©

Hi

vp

H<

eq


vp


00


H


8

rH

©

vb

CO

CO

©

co

3

rH

1

eq

iH

s

CO

rH

©

CO

rH

S

CO

rH

3

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

l

3


rH

vp

CO

cq

9

VO

CO

frq

J>.

©

vp

CO


9

§

00

O

eq

CM

vb

o

3

00

©

8

©

vb

CM

rH

rH

3

vb

rH

S

1

3


rH

rH

H _

rH

H

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

tH

rH


HI

eq

CO

o0


CO

rH

CO

rH

CD

VO

HI


S>

CO

05


8

00


00


ZD

©

dq

do

1

O


o

CM

©

CO

©


3

rH

rH

CM

CO


CM


rH

rH

rH

rH

rH


rH

rH

rH

rH

rH


rH


eq


H

rH


©

rH

OO

rH

©

rH

©


CO


00

<M

CM

vb

©


©

eq

H


rH

©

I

rH

t— (

o

<M

©

rH


©

CM

©

rH

©

rH

cq


rH


*H

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH


rH


00

©


00

tH

©

CO

tH

<M

eq

rH


9

1

tH

00

do

00

00

©

©

V©

vb


©

CD

j

do

O

05

Jt>

©

©

©

tH

00

©

©

©

q


©


rH


rH

rH


rH


■*

05

vp

Hi

HI

©

©

05

op

Hi

©

<M


1

§

8

00

i>

CO

©

3

§

CO

O

CO

I>

do

©

So

je>

©

vb

o

1

cq

©


rH


rH


rH

tH


rH


VO

Hi

©

©

1>

~9~

co

ip

CD

©

eq


tH

g

8

6

05

8

|

©

00

&

8

fi

vb

©

oo

©

8

©

1

cq

©


rH


rH


rH

rH


rH


eq

05

rH

cp

©

©

Hi


9

vp

eq

o


9

1

6

05

00

o

00

<M

oo

eq

rH

©

rH

8

1

©


o

00

00

o

©

©

CO

00

©

CO

©

1

©


rH


rH


GO

eq

©

©

©

9

Hi

rH

CO

cp


eq


rH

h

05

00

CO

3

s

CO

CD


do

vb

©

©

1

HI

rH

GO

05

©

CO

CO

©

©

s

©

©

J

©

tv

00

VO


©

tH

05

ea

O

©

'HI

rH

00


00 ,

g}

8


rH

S


b

rH


H»

rH

vb

do

1

©

rH

o

rH

©

rH

O

CO

©

rH

©

©

I

rH


rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH


rH

rH

H


rH

eo

1>-

©

CO

iH '

©

CO

©

CO

rH

cp

cp

VO


H

00

05

05

rH

vo

©

b>

rH

8

CD

do

eq

5

1

VO

05

©

rH

©

O

©

rH

o

©

o

1 _

©


rH

rH


rH


rH

tH

rH

rH

rH

H


rH

MS

cm

rH

CO

©

oo

rH

©

co

<M

co

©

o


H

3

iH

05

05

8

CM

rH

CM

©

©

©

H

CO

CM

rH

8

©

CM

8

&

a

1

H

©


rH

rH


rH


rH

rH

rH

rH

rH

rH


rH


:

:


:

©

:

O


©

;

<rt

O £

§

1

$

jj


(D

Be

a

*©


b

"©


"©

u

c o

o

&•§

1 §

M 0

CJ

rS a

E

a

1

1

%

a

J

EH

Oils

0

1

o

-M

O

O

Wool

Corn

£

W

Meat

c3

bn

&

m

p

2 "S

rH

CM

CO

rH

©

■9

00

CM*

3

00

3

3

5

rH

5

©

vb

°F

CM

05

CO

CO

vb

rH

H

g$


rH

rH

tH

CM

CM

CO

CO

rH


n.] REMARKS ON THE VARIATION OF PRICES


47


XIV *. — Bemarhs on the Valuation of Prices since 1845.

The general average variation of the whole thirty-nine
commodities may be taken as an approximate representation
of the great fluctuations in speculation and investment which
we have before considered. All the commodities, excepting
perhaps silver, show in their separate fluctuations some
influence of speculation. In such natural products as
cotton, sugar, tea, logwood, and indigo, the variations due
to speculative demand are much obscured by irregular fluctu-
ations due to accidents of supply. We see that fibrous
materials such as w T ool, silk, flax, and especially cotton, do not
partake in any marked manner in the sudden rise during' the
period of speculation and permanent investment about 1853.
It is in the metals, iron, copper, lead and tin, that we find the
variation of demand most perfectly marked. Especially is it
to be remarked that the curve of these metals is almost exactly
that of the general average somewhat exaggerated. Metals,
as has been before said (p. 27), are subject only to variations
of demand, or to very slow and occasional variations of supply.
Timber manifests in the next degree the preponderance of
demand- variations over supply-variations. Thus its variations
closely resemble those of the metals, with a little more
undulation and a general tendency downwards. Oils are
chiefly remarkable for the great rise in 1853, more than
compensated by the recent fall. The animal materials, tallow,
hides, and leather, show a strong resemblance to the specula-
tive variations of metals joined with a great and exceptional
rise since 1852, which must indicate that the increase of
demand tends to outrun a supply incapable of great increase.
Butchers* meat displays a great rise in the last ten years,
partly no doubt from the same cause. Its highest points
usually follow those of hay, clover, and straw. The prices of
the latter do not show the same tendency to a progressive
rise, but then we should remember that the prices apply to


43


THE VALUE' OF GOLD .


[n.

London only. The prices of corn, meat, and fodder show so
mnch relation to the speculative changes of metals, to the
general average variations, and to the rate of discount, that it
cannot he doubted there is a close relation of cause and
effect. The bountiful or scarce supplies of food with which
Providence favours us in the several seasons, strongly con-
tribute to hasten or retard the several periods of abundant
capital and investment, and again those of scarcity and re-
vulsion. The current of human business is ever ready to
break into a ripple. A good or bad season marks it with
a crest or a trough, and the fluctuation multiplies and con-
tinues itself. Yet, according to a known principle, it in-
sensibly tends to fall into pace with the fluctuations of nature,
which it may obey but cannot rule *

But we must hasten to conclusions which more immediately
concern us.

XV . — Proof of Depreciation of Gold pointed out .

It is hardly necessary to draw attention to the permanent
elevation of prices since 1853, which is shown in the curve of
the general average. Now we cannot possibly accounf for
this permanent change by any excessive speculation, inflation
of currency, or credit. For to every extraordinary increase
caused by such means at one period there must be a corre-
sponding revulsion soon following. Such a revulsion took
place in 1857 ; but, although five years have since elapsed,
prices are far from having fallen to their old level. In the
last two years especially the dearth of cotton has caused a
depression of trade of a formidable character. The lowest
average range of prices since 1851 has indeed happened in the
last year, 1.862 ; but prices even then stood 13 per cent, above

* This is the idea which I subsequently endeavoured to work out in the
paper JTo. 71., read to the British Association in 1878. The succeeding
papers on the relation of the Commercial to the Solar Cycle furnish, as I
now conceive, the true explanation.


To /he# p 48.


IL]


PRICES NEAR A MINIMUM.


49


the average level o£ 1845-50; and it is most highly im-
probable that prices will long continue to fall ; yet prices have
continually stood above the high point they reached in 1847 !
Examine the yearly average prices at any point of their fluctua-
tions since 1852, and they stand above any point of their
fluctuations before then within the scope of my tables! There
is but one way of accounting for such a fact, and that is by
supposing a very considerable permanent depreciation of gold.

XVI. — That Prices are now near a Minimum .

I think no one will doubt that during the last year, 1862,
and at present, we are at or near the lowest point, and at very
low water of the commercial tide. The low rate of discount
in 1862, and the very low prices to which metals especially
have fallen, testify this, apart from more general facts.
Numerous large foreign loans, and innumerable schemes for
foreign or home banks, discount companies, hotel, railway, and
other undertakings, involving permanent investments, show
that we are in one of those periods which must be followed by
a rise of prices and of interest, unless extraordinary events
should interfere. The depression of the cotton trade, and the
sad political confusion in the United States, at present mode-
rate the tendency to speculation. But when the end of the
civil war, disastrous to the Northern States, comes, as it
certainly must, and when the cotton trade begins to resume its
wonted course, we may look forward, I confidently believe, to
su.ch a period of prosperity as even England has hardly yet
experienced. The great danger is that the excess of specula-
tion' may bring its usual punishment. But the consequence
that concerns us now is that prices cannot fall much further ;
that they must be regarded as ready to rise rapidly upon the
first signs of a revival of trade ; that the present minimum
will be soon succeeded by a maximum, doubtless surpassing
that of 1857. The permanent- elevation of prices, due to gold
depreciation, will then be more apparent to all.


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


So


£n.


XVII . — An extended Proof that Prices are now raised above
their old Level .

Having ascertained, as I think, beyond reasonable doubt,
that prices in the last few years, though comparatively low,
and near the turn of the tide, are yet greatly raised above their
old natural level, I have not restricted myself to the thirty-nine
commodities concerning which this was proved. We may
safely say that the prices of all minor commodities are at the
same point of their course, and in the same comparative con-
dition. A far more expeditious comparison of the recent prices
of such minor commodities with their former prices, will thus
serve to confirm or refute the statement that there is a general
rise of prices, not due to any temporary fluctuations, but perhaps
to a permanent alteration in the value of gold. Taking again
the lists of The Economist , I selected seventy-nine additional
commodities, mostly distinct from any of the thirty-nine, and
likely to vary independently of them and of each other.
Quotations of these were taken, as before described, in the
middle of the months of February and August, in each of the
years 1 845-50, and again in 1 860-62. The arithmetical average
of the twelve quotations 1845-50 was then divided by logarithms
into the arithmetical average of the six quotations 1860-62.
The ratio or percentage thus obtained represents the rise of
price (during a speculative minimum) due to any fall of the
value of gold, affected by any change of value peculiar to the
commodity. Adding the corresponding data for the thirty-nine
chief commodities from previous tables, we get the following
list of 118 commodities, and the ratios of variation of their
prices in the interval between 1845-50 and 1860-62.


Description op Commodity.

(Numbers refer to list on pp. 38-41.)

Average

Price,

1845-50.

Average

Price,

1860-62.

Logarithm

of

Ratio.

Ratio,
or per-
centage

1. Silver

std. oz . — d

59 53

61*31

•0128

103

■ 2 .I'm.

ton — £

85*00

124 80

*1668

147

3. Copper

ton — £

88*30

100 9

•0578

114

4, Lead

ton — £

17-8

21-0

•0737

118

Bed lead:

ton — £

19*44

23-10

•0749

119 )

White lead

ton — £

24-00

28 04

•0676

117 |

Foreign spelter

ton — £

18*56

18-73

•0039

101

Swedish steel

ton — £

14*86

16*71

•0510

112

*5. Bar Iron, ,

ton — s

159*6

127-1

9-9011

80

6. Pig Iron

ton — $

88*4

69 4

9-8952'

79

7. Tin Plates (iron)

bos — s

31*66

29 45

9-9685

93

8. Palm Oil

ton — £

81 ’87

44-57

•1457

140

9. Linseed Oil

ton — £

26 19

33*00

•1000

126

Sperm oil ...

tun — £

80*94

96*33

■0756

119

Olive oil, Gallipoli

tun — £

44 6

591

•1220

132

Cocoa-nut oil

ton — £

38 68

48*60

■0997

126

Bapeseed oil, pale

ton — £

37-20

45*12

•0839

121

Linseed cake, foreign

ton — £

7-84

10 20

•1086

128

10 Tallow

cwt. — s

42-67

52 37

•0889

123

11. Hides

lb .— d

5*53

10 20

•2656

184

Hides, Australian

lb .— d

2 00

4*19

•3212

210

12. Leather

lb . — d

10 42

15*58

•1749

150

Calf skins, 28-35 lb.

lb . — d

14*83

20 34

•1373

137

Tar, Stockholm

barrel — s

16-7

27*1

•2103

162

Turpentine, American (1860-1) cwt . — d

100 75

129 7

•1097

129)

„ English spirits

cwt. — s

38 10

35*56

9-9701

93 >

„ Foreign spirits

cwt — s

34 4

36*5

•0257

106)

Nitrate of Soda

cwt . — s

14*27

16-10

•0524

113

13. Timber

load — s

76 40

66 89

9*9423

88

Quebec oak

load — s

93-1

115*0

•0918

124

Baltic oak ...

load — s

103 8

88 0

9 9283

85

African oak

load — s

180 0

228 3

•1032

127

Indian teak

load — s

230 0

288 3

•0981

125

Deals, Canada, 1st Pme ...

stand — £

16*44

17*50

*0271

106

22. Hemp, Bussia

ton — £

32 04

32*69

•0087

102

Manilla hemp

ton — £

32 58

30*10

9*9656

92

East Indian Sunn

ton — £

16 0

17*5

•0389

109

Jute ...

• ton — £

16*0

16*5

•0134

103

16. Upland Cotton ;

lb. — d

5*38

5*5

-0100

102

17. Pernam . Cotton

lb . — d

6-8

8*25

•0845

121

18. Surat Cotton

lb . — d

3 85

4*13

•0294

107

19. Wool , Southdown

pack — £

13-31

18 35

•1395

138

Wool, German, 1st and 2nd

lb . — d

41-54

46 67

•0505

112)

Wool, German, tertia

lb . — d

19 0

17 3

9-9592

91 (

Wool, Sydney lambs

lb. — d

18-0

21*7

•0812

121 r

Wool, Y. D. L , Locks and Pieces lb. — d

10*5

14*3

•1350

136)

20* Silh, Cossimbuzar

lb.— s

11-22

17*32

•1883

154

Silk, China, Tsatlee

lb.— 5

16-0

21-5

•1283

134)

Silk, Eaw, white Novi

lb.— s

23-65

39*00

•2173

164 >

Silk, Organzme, Piedm. 22-24 lb. — s

26-8

38 5

•1574

144)

21. Flan j, Biga

ton — £

43*8

65*8

•1769

150

14. Logwood ...

ton— £

7*32

8*31

•0551

114

15. Indigo ...

lb.— s

3-796

5-465

•1583

144

Cochineal, Teneriffe

lb.— s

5-27

3*18

9-7808

60

Turmeric, Bengal

cwt.— s

14*35

15-79

•0415

110

Terra Japonica, Dutch

cwt. — $

24-02

25*46

•0253

106

Brazilwood...

ton — £

34-0

80*0

•3716

235

Fustic, Cuba

ton — £

8-083

8*926

•0431

110

Sapan wood

ton — £

11-63

7*86

9*8298

4*

68


E 2


Description 1 op Commodity,

(Numbers refer to list on pp. 38-41 )

Average

Price,

1845-50.

Average

Price,

1860-62.

Logarittm

of

Ratio.

i Ratio,
or per-
centage

23. Wheat

. . . imp. qr. — s

51-7

54-7

*0244

106

24. Barley

... imp. qr . — s

3187

35-90

•0518

113

25. Oats

... imp. qr . — s

21 55

23-72

•0418

110

26. Bye ...

... imp. qr . — s

32*68

36*39

•0467

111

27. Beans

... imp. qr . — s

37-11

42 44

c-0584

114

28. Peas

... imp. qr — s

39*50

40*53

*0113

103

Rice, Bengal

... cwt . — s

14-12

12*00

' 9 9294

85

Sago, pearl

... cwt. — 5

23-75

20 00

9 9253

84

r

29. Hay

. . . load — s

68-3

73 4

*0313

107

30. Clover

... load — s

86 8

94*0

•0346

108

31. Straw

. . . load — s

30 2

34 0

•0515

112

32. Beef

... stone — d

41-35

52 73

*1056

128

Beef, salt, American

... tierce — s

86-04

118-67

•1396

138

33. Mutton

... stone — d

48-13

57-85

•0799

120

34. Pork

. . . stone — d

48-87

54 27

•0456

in

Pork, salt, American

. . tierce— s

67-71

91 00

•1283

134

35. Butter

. . . cwt. — s

78 63

109*66

*1434

139

Cheese, American ...

... cwt. — s

44 14

55-00

•0956

125

Lard, American

... cwt. — s

45-68

59 00

•1112

129

36. Sugar , Gazette average

... cwt. — s

28-45

25-33

9-9493

89

Sugar, Mauritius, yellow

... cwt. — s

42 3

270

9 8051

64)

Sugar, Havana, white

. cwt. — s

44-33

32-46

9*8646

73 (

Sugar, Java, gzey and white cwt. — 5

41-44

29 33

9 8499

71

Sugar, refined, 8~10 lb.

cwt. — 5

67-63

55 70

9 9158

82 )

Sugar, Bastards

... cwt. — s

36 3

19 5

9 7301

54

38. Tea, Congou

lb. — d

9-19

11-30

*0898

123

‘Tea, Souchong

lb. — d

22-05

23 83

•0337

108)

Tea, Orange Pekoe

lb — d

17-08

17 00

9-9979

100 f

Tea, Hyson

lb. — d

19 08

20-75

•0364

109 {

Tea, Gunpowder ...

lb — d

32 75

32 50

9*9967

99)

Coffee, Ceylon, ordinary

... cwt. — s

41 03

60-58

•1692

148

Cocoa, Guayaquil ...

cwt — s

33*42

64-25

•2839

192

37. Spirits) Jamaica Rum

... gallon — s

3 03

2*77

9*9610

91

East Indian Rum . . .

. . . gallon — d

22-06

18-5G

9-9236

84

Spirits, Geneva, common

... gallon — d

26*17

25*50

9-9887

97

39. Pepper, black

lb. — d

3*14

4 67

•1722

149

Pepper, white

lb. — d

5 56

9 33

*2248

168

Cinnamon, Ceylon ...

lb.— s

2-84

1-58

‘ 9*7454

56

Cassia Lignea

. . . cwt. — s

70*55

89*10

•1014

126

Cloves, Amboyna ...

lb. — d

19*8

10 6

9 7286

54 l

Cloves, Bourbon ...

lb. — d

8 21

4 00

9 6878

49 S

Ginger, East Indian, common cwt. — s

44*8

36 0

9 9050

80

Mace

lb. — d

35*6

19 3

9 7347

54

Hutmegs

lb. — d

29*7

29 5

9 9970

99

Tobacco, Maryland

lb. — d

6-2

65

•0198

105

Seeds, Caraway

cwt. — s

37*21

31 50

9 9276

85

Seeds, Canary

qr. — s

72-63

51*42

9 8500

71

Seeds, Clover, red ...

cwt. — -s

45-60

51 33

•0514

113

Seeds, Coriander ...

cwt. — s

17 08

15*50

9-9578

91

Seeds, Mustard " ...

bush. — s

12 92

15*00

•0648

116

Almonds, sweet Barbary

cwt. — s

44 73

45*92

•0114

103

Currants, Patras, new

cwt. — s

44 00

30 93

9*8469

70

Pigs, Turkey*

cwt. — s

55 8

42 2

9 8784

76

Prunes

cwt. — s

27*6

29-4

•0274

107

Raisins, Yalentia, new

cwt. — $

39*85

32*83

9-9159

82

Port wine ... ,,,

pipe — £

34*5

52-6

•1832

152

Claret wine

hhead, — £

26 5

36 5

•1391

138

Sherry wine ... ^

butt — £

44-0

48*3

•0404

110

Madeira wine

pipe — £

36 5 '

62*5

'2336

171


n.]


REMARKS ON PRICES .


53


The results of the above tables are displayed in the diagram
following j>. 48, in which large dots for the thirty-nine chief
commodities, and small dots for the minor commodities, indicate
the rise or fall in price of each upon a logarithmic scale. The
fhin horizontal lines, inserted at intervals, decreasing upwards,
show the percentage of rise or fall. The average rise or fall of
each group, and the average rise of the whole, are indicated by
dotted lines. At the left-hand side the chief and minor com-
modities are represented in two groups, so as to point out more
clearly the preponderating rise of prices.


XVIII. — Remarks upon the average and individual Changes

of Price.

From the preceding lists we may deduce the average rise
of the whole 118 commodities, or varieties of commodity, by
taking the arithmetical mean of the logarithms, and turning it
back into ordinary numbers. Doing this separately for the
thirty-nine chief, and the seventy-nine minor articles, I find
that the prices of the former have on an average risen between
1845-50 and 1860-62 in the ratio of 100 to 116*2, which is
equivalent to a depreciation of gold in the ratio of 100 to
86 0, or by 14*0 per cent.

The minor commodities, however, give a somewhat different
result. In taking the mean I have treated those which are
bracketed together in the last column as having the importance
only of a single commodity, so that only the mean of the ratios
bracketed entered into the general average. We thus find
that there are sixty-four independent minor articles of which
the prices have on the average risen between 1845-50 and
1860-62 in the ratio of 100 to 106*76, which would indicate a
depreciation of gold in the ratio of 100 to 93*66, or by 6*34
per cent., not half the change shown by the chief commodities.

If we take the average of the whole, the rise of prices is
found to be in the ratio of 100 to 110*25, or by 10 % per cent ,


54


THE VALUE OF GOLD .


[n.


corresponding to a depreciation of gold in the ratio of 100 to
90*70, or by about 9J- per cent .

This result is one which must, I think, excite some surprise.
During a period of depression, at low water of the commercial
tide, the prices of 118 commodities or varieties of commodity,
comprising nearly all the great staple articles, stand 10 per
cent, higher than they did before the gold discoveries, according
to the mean level of prices during the preceding commercial
tide. One naturally asks, if this is the rise at low tide, what
will be the rise at high tide ? Even in 1857, only five or six
years after the supplies of gold began to arrive, prices at high
tide were 29 per cent, above the average, and within the next
half-dozen years it may be reasonably expected that they will
rise considerably higher still, probably from 40 to 50 per cent,
above the old average of 1845-50.*

The rise of the thirty-nine chief commodities in 1860-62
has been stated at about 16 per cent. If we deduce from the
table on p. 46 the average ratio of rise for the whole twelve
years, 1851-62, we find that it is 13 per cent. This is a correct
average of a complete commercial tide, but it of course shows
only partially the influence of the gold supplies which were
constantly arriving during the period.

Nor is our surprise much decreased by considering merely
the numbers of commodities which have risen and fallen in
price. Of the thirty-nine chief commodities, thirty-three have
risen more or less between 1845-50 and 1860-62, and only six
have fallen ; that is, less than one in six. Although it is against
the principle I have adopted in this inquiry to refer to the
individual circumstances of commodities, it hardly needs to. be
pointed out that of these six exceptions, three — bar iron, pig
iron, and tinned- iron plates — are only forms of one commodity,
for which there was an extraordinary demand during the interval
1845-50, and a very slack demand during 1860-62. Both iron
and timber, another exception, being articles subject to great
This prediction was not verified.


IL]


REMARKS ON PRICES.


55


demand-variations, might thus, from their peculiar circum-
stances,. have been excluded from the tables, had not the
principle of the inquiry forbidden exclusion. Sugar and spirits
stand out as the only two obstinate and real exceptions to a
general rise of prices ; but again, as Jamaica rum, quoted for
spirits, is made from sugar, they might be said to form only
a single exception.

It is somewhat otherwise with the minor articles. Of the
seventy-nine varieties of commodity, twenty -nine, or more
than one in three, have fallen in price. If we do not count
separately those varieties of commodity which are bracketed
together, we find that out of sixty -four articles, nineteen, or
rather less than one in three, have fallen in price.

It is quite obvious that the exceptions consist almost
entirely of spices, fruit, and foreign articles of food, which
are not employed in manufacture by the English people,
but only applied to their personal use. The distinction is so
well marked and interesting that I give the following averages.
Twelve groups of articles have risen in price, and by the
following amounts :


Tallow, hides, etc. 58 per cent.
Wines . . 41 „

Meat and butter . 28 „

Oils . . .27 „

Fibrous materials 27 ,,

Tar, turpentine, etc. 18 ,,


Dyes . , . 9 per cent.

G-rain . . , 9 ,,

Hay, clover, & straw 9 ,,

Timber.^ * . 8 „

Metals. , . 6 „

Hemp, jute, etc. . 2 „


Six groups of articles have fallen in price, and by the
following amounts :


Sugar, tea, & coffee 5 per cent.
Seeds » * • 7 ,,

Spirits . . . 9 „


Fruit (foreign) , 14 per cent.
Rice and sago .15 ,,

Spices, tobacco, etc. 15 „


There can be no doubt that the groups which have risen


THE VALUE OF GOLD .


[n.


56

in tlie highest degree, such &s hides, tallow, leather, wines,
butchers* meat and oils, have so risen from preponderance
of demand oyer supply. They comprise articles of* which the
demand increases rapidly with the wealth and population of
the country, while the supply is naturally limited ; they cou£
prise the principal animal materials. On the other hand, all
the groups which have fallen in price are of vegetable origin,
and chiefly of foreign growth.* As a general rule, then
animal and mineral substances have risen in price, and vege-
table substances fallen. But this does not prevent our asserting
that, on the whole, there is a great general rise. The groups of
articles which have risen are twice as numerous as those which
have fallen , comprise immensely more important articles of
wealth , and have risen more than the others have fallen. There
can be no room to doubt, then, the great preponderance of the
rising prices over the falling prices, as will be more fully shown
in the next section.

The marked distinction between the classes of materials
which have risen in price, and those of foreign articles of food
which have fallen suggests its* own explanation. It is English
manufacturing skill which invests the materials with such
useful and attractive forms that they are desired all the world
over. The great demand thus arising for our manufactures
causes the demand for their materials to increase generally,
and the prices of most of the materials must increase with their
demand. On the other hand, foreigners can only purchase our
manufactures by offering somethiug in return. When they
can offer materials of manufacture, they share the advantage


* Compare these results with Cairnes’ theoretical anticipations that the
rise of price will be greater in animal than in vegetable productions : “ While
the commodities the last to feel the effects of the new money, and which will
advance most slowly under its influence, are the productions of India and China.**
— "Essays in Political Economy, Theoretical and Applied,** 1873 (Macmillan),
p. 73 ; “ British Association, 1858, Transactions of Sections,’* p. 174. This
important paper is printed also in “The Journal of the Dublin Statistical

Sooiety,** January, 1859, vol. ii. pp. 236-69.


SERIOUS FALL IN THE VALUE OF GOLD.


PRICES FALLEN PER CENTUM. | PRICES RISEN PER CENTUM


II.]


OTHER MODES OF REDUCTION,


57


of the rising prices; but often they can only offer foreign
articles of food and luxury, for which there is a stationary, or
but slightly growing demand. To increase their purchases it
is necessary to increase their sales, which can only be done by
forcing their produce upon our markets at reduced prices.
It is thus that manufacturing skill, making our produce more
desired and dearer, turns the balance of purchases in our
favour, and makes foreign produce cheaper in our markets.*


XIX . — Of other Modes of ’Reduction .

It may seem to many persons absurd to take a mass of 118
commodities, and treat them as equally good measures of the
value of gold, some being so greatly more important and more
free from fluctuations than others. I have considered and
tried many ways of deducing an average which should obviate
this objection more or less perfectly. I proposed to give to each
commodity a greater weight, as the range between the highest
and lowest prices of the interval 1845-62 was less; but on
applying this notion to the thirty-nine chief articles, I found
that, always excepting silver, the highest price of nearly every
one was just about double the lowest price, so that the method
could give no result appreciably different from the simple
average.

If we were to assume that there is a certain interdepen-
dence between the prices of different commodities, it would
follow that the true mode of deducing an average would be to
give each commodity a weight proportional to the quantity of
it sold in the country during a fixed period of time. The only
result of such a method would be to make our final estimate
approximate to that of the thirty-nine chief commodities. For
the value of the total quantity of these sold in a year must be

* There may be some truth in this explanation, but Cannes’ theory of the
course of depreciation, given in the essay just cited, no doubt contains the true
key to the explanation of the phenomena m question.


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[n.


58

several times as great as that of the minor commodities. The
superior importance too of some commodities is allowed for by
quoting several varieties.

Another method which I tried was to exclude all com-
modities which have undergone exceptionally great changes.
Thus assuming the logarithm *04202 to be the first approxi-
mation to a correct average, I took a fresh average of all those
commodities whose ratios lay between — *1000 and *18404., or
*14202 on each side of the first average *04202. The new
result, however, was not noticeably different from the old one.

I conclude that 10 per cent, may be taken as the best
approximation which we can get to the rise of prices between
1845-50 and 1860-62. It corresponds to a depreciation of gold
of about 9 per cent., that is 100 ; 110 : : 91 : 100 nearly.

It may seem to some persons that the best and perhaps only
way to ascertain whether and why prices have altered, is to
examine the circumstances of demand and supply of each article.
I do not hesitate to say that the whole inquiry would be thrown
into confusion by any such attempt, and that for the particular
purposes of our inquiry it is better not to know the details
concerning the articles. If you are able to explain the rise or
fall of one commodity by circumstances unconnected with gold,
and throw it out of the inquiry, you must do the same with
others, or else the impartial balance of the inquiry is overthrown.
Now there is not a single article but is affected by many
circumstances besides the alteration in gold. A searching
inquiry into the conditions of supply and demand of every
article would result in every one being thrown out as unworthy
of reliance as a measure of the value of gold. It is only by
ignoring all these individual circumstances, and trusting that
in a wide average, such as that of 118 articles, all individual
discrepancies will be neutralised, that we can arrive at any
conclusion in this difficult question.

It should be clearly understood that all the preceding parts
of this inquiry are independent of any assumptions as to the


II.]


THE PRICE OF SILVER.


59


cause of the fall in. the value of gold. I consider that I have
simply established the fact of an alteration in the usual ratios
at which gold is exchanged against the great mass of other
commodities. Any variation of demand or of supply affecting
most commodities, to the exclusion of gold or in a greater
degree than gold, or on the other hand affecting gold to the
exclusion of other commodities, or in a greater degree than
these commodities, may be the complete or partial cause of the
alteration. Numerous circumstances might be called in as
contributing causes ; but all facts I am aware of are so incon-
siderable compared with the great discoveries of gold, that it
is impossible not to treat these discoveries as the substantial
cause of the depreciation. These explanations must be borne
in mind in reading the following pages.


XX . — Of the Price of Silver.

It will probably be asked — if prices in general have risen
10 per cent., or thereabouts, how is it with the price of silver ?
This metal is as good a standard of value as gold ; by some it
is thought to be better. Ought we not to find every change
in the value of gold exactly indicated in the price of silver ?
This question has at once presented itself to everyone who
turned his attention to the subject. It is, I conceive, because
the question has not been in general rightly answered, that
the depreciation of gold has been so much doubted.

In the first place, it is far from true that no change has taken
place in the price of silver. In tables or diagrams already
given, we see that a permanent rise of at least 8 per cent, has,
taken place. Before the year 1850, the price might be said to
stand permanently below sixty pence, or five shillings, the
standard ounce Troy. During the year 1850 a sudden rise
took place, and the change has proved so permanent that only
one monthly quotation (May, 1852) has since been below sixty
pence. It is true that the rise has not been progressive,


<So


THE VALUE OF GOLD,


[ii,


having attained in 1854 an elevation of about 8J per cent, over
the old level, the price has remained nearly stationary,, and has
even slightly fallen back since 1859. That the gold price of
silver should remain stationary has, however, been accounted
for by Chevalier, though I must point out a great oversight in
that writer's view of the matter.

By the French law of the 7 Germinal, year 11 of the
Revolution, an attempt was made to combine gold and silver
in the French currency. It was enacted that silver or gold
might be used in any payment, in the proportion of 15^ parts
of silver for 1 part of gold. The law adopted the proportion
of values which silver and gold had long possessed, and
continued to possess for some fifty years longer. But this
proportion, as we have shown, was altered to the extent of
3 per cent, about the year 1850, so that 15| ounces of silver
became more valuable than the ounce of gold for which they
were legally payable as money in France. Thus it became
cheaper to discharge debts in gold in France, and to pay the
silver of France away in foreign payments. And so long as
there is much silver coin current in France, and the law of the
year 11 holds, it will be possible for merchants, by importing
gold and exporting silver, to gain the difference of the natural
and the legal rates of value in France, inns charges of
carriage, insurance, etc. Yery correctly Chevalier argues that
so long as this state of things lasts, it will be impossible at
London, Brussels, Hamburg, or even at New York, or any
other great centre of commerce, for gold to fall in value much
below that of 15J times its weight of silver. On these grounds
he calls the French silver currency a parachute which retards
the fall of the value of gold. Here is the great oversight. The
French currency may and does prevent gold from falling much
below its old relative value to silver , but it cannot prevent both
gold and silver from falling in value. The inevitable conclusion
drawn from my tables of prices is that gold has fallen, say
9 per cent,; silver has risen in value compared with gold


II.] THE PRICE OF SILVER . 61

3 per cent. ; the difference, 6 per cent., must necessarily repre-
sent the depreciation of silver. Nor is it hard to see that, from
the change of the French currency, silver must participate
temporarily in the fall of gold.

The moment the abundance of the Australian and Californian
gold has altered the relative values of gold and silver by a
certain amount, it becomes profitable for French merchants to
buy up with silver all gold they can get at or below this new
rate, on the single condition that other countries will take
French silver in return. One hundred millions of gold flowing
into France cause an overflow of one hundred millions of silver
out of France. This vast supply of silver is just as unusual,
sudden, and superfluous as the supplies of gold from Australia
and California, France, in absorbing the new gold, pours out
silver just as if it had come from newly-discovered silver mines
of extraordinary richness. There can be but one result. The
value of silver must fall before the new and unusual supplies
can be disposed of. Suppose it to fall so that silver and gold
nearly resume their old relative values. The substitution of
gold for silver in France is now no longer profitable. Gold
accumulates on the London and other markets, and therefore
again begins to fall in value. This cannot proceed far without
it once more becoming profitable to substitute gold for silver
in France. Gold is again readily absorbed ; silver again be-
comes superfluous and depreciated. Gold and silver thus
alternately accumulate upon the markets of the world, and
their values alternately fall to the points at which it becomes
possible to dispose of the one or other metal in foreign markets,
especially in India. What is here described as taking place
by steps, may also take place continuously and simultaneously.
The superabundance of gold flowing into France causes a
superabundance of silver to flow out, just as a stream flowing
into one end of a reservoir that is already full, causes an equal
stream to flow out at another part.* Both metals are depre-

* This action of the law of the double standard was more maturely treated


62


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[ii.


dated in company, and nearly as much, as gold alone would
have fallen had the French currency law not existed. Not
quite so low indeed, because by that law it is now possible to
dispose of the new gold either by direc't use, or indirectly by
disposing of French silver at its reduced value, and putting
gold in its place.

There is nothing new nor strange in this sympathy be-
tween the values of two articles. Any two articles which can
be used more or less one in the place of the other, vary in
price together. A comparative abundance of either article
causes it to overflow into channels of consumption usually
filled by the other. When wheat is cheap, it is lavishly used
as fodder, for distilling, and for a variety of other uses to
which inferior kinds of grain or other produce are usually
applied. Thus the cheapness of wheat causes most other
kinds of agricultural produce to be cheap, and similarly of
other groups of commodities.*

These effects of the French currency law are far from
being indicated by 'theory only. The tables already given
show by the force of facts that the price of silver has not risen
so much by some 6 per cent, as the prices of 117 other articles
on the average. This fact constitutes depreciation of silver .
On the other hand, statistics of undoubted accuracy show that
up to 1859 about £100,000,000 of gold had been absorbed by
France, a large amount of silver being given out. Previously
to the year 1852, the annual imports of silver into France
had exceeded the exports. In that year, which succeeded the
change in the price of silver, the stream turned, and the exports
have since constantly exceeded the imports by a large amount.

in my book on (( Money and the Mechanism o £ Exchange ” (International
Scientific Series), chapter xii. ; on “The Battle of the Standards.” The same
simile of the reservoir , or of two reservoirs, was again employed. The matter
has, of course, been debated ad nauseam during the recent controversies on
ff Bimetallism.” See post, Papers XI. to XIIL

* On the theory of equivalence of commodities, see the “ Theory of Political
Economy,” pp. 127-30 ; Second Edit. pp. 145-48.


n.J


THE PRICE OF SILVER.


63


These facts are shown hy the following table, calculated from
data given jn Cobden's translation of Chevalier's Essay, p. 48 :


1846

Excess of Imports of silver into Prance £1,870,868

1847


33

33

2,145,168

1848


33

33

8,557,338

1849

>)

33

1 3

9,782,708

1850


33

33

2,615,378

1851

33

33

33

8,117,959

1852

Excess of Exports of silver from Prance 108,690

1853

3)

33

33

4,675,418

1854

33

33

33

6,547,751

1855

33

33

33

7,886,885

1856

33

33

33

11,342,932

1857

33

33

33

14,500,835

The

large amount

of silver

thrown

by France upon


European markets has been disposed of in Eastern markets,
thus causing, as I think, that remarkable drain of silver to the
East which for eight or ten years back has excited so much
surprise in the commercial world. Some excellent writers
have attributed this drain to the balance of trade between
Europe and India, as disturbed by the transmission of English
capital to railway works in India. The drain of precious
metals thus accounted for serves to explain the supposed fact
that the precious metals have not fallen in value here. It
would be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to prove or
disprove anything a priori, by the balance of trade between
Europe and the East. But having shown upon a wide basis of
facts that both gold and silver are depreciated here, I am
much more inclined to regard this depreciation as the cause of
the Eastern drain. The fall in the value of silver, compared
with most other goods, makes it more profitable to pay for
Eastern produce with silver bullion than with our manu-
factures, silver being always acceptable among Asiatic nations.*

* 5This explanation, viewed by the light of subsequent information, seems
to be quite correct.


CHAPTER III.


Deductions, on other Grounds, concerning the Future
Value, oe Gold.

XXI . — Of the Bate of Fall of the Value of Gold.

Writers have usually treated the fall of the value of gold as if
it -were a remote event that would happen suddenly after the
accumulations have become great. Chevalier’s theory about
the parachute has contributed greatly to nourish and support
this notion. Nothing, however, can -be more mistaken. The
most sudden fall must occur at first, and the value of gold will
fall more and more slowly as time gets on, and the total
accumulations of gold grow. This is a simple consequence of
the fact that gold is chiefly used as currency, so that its value
varies nearly inversely as the total quantity in use. Let us
take the estimate of Tooke and Newmarch, and suppose that
the quantity of gold in use at the end of the year 1848 was
560 million pounds sterling ; let us further suppose 20 millions
to be the subsequent annual excess of supply over consump-
tion. Then, at the end of the first year 580 millions, were in
use, and the value of gold would be reduced in the ratio of
580 : 560 ; at the end of two years 600 millions were in use,


II.] PROGRESS OF FALL OF VALUE. 65

and the value of gold would be reduced in the ratio of 600 : 560,
and so op. ( Thus we get the following :


End of Tear.

Quantity of Gold
m Use.

Million £.

Total Fall in
Value of Gold
per cent.

Total Fall per cent,
during
each Tear. 4

1848

560

•0

•0

1849

580

3*4

3*4

1850

600

6*7

33

1851

620

9-7

32

1852

640

12-5

3*1

1853

660

15-1

3-0

1854

680

17-6

29

1855

700

20-0

2*9

1856

720

22 *2

2*8

1857

740

24*3

27

1858

760

26*3

2-6

1859

780

28*2

2-6

1860

800

30-0

2*5


Of course the above numbers are not supposed to represent
the real progress of the fall, but they show sufficiently that the
rate of falling must be most rapid at first, and must decrease
by nearly a third part within the first twelve years.

In a more general form : If a be the quantity of gold in the
world at anytime, and b the quantity added in each succeeding
year, then at the end of n years, the value of gold is reduced

aS 1 10 ~a + nb ’ ^ioh is always growing less as n increases,

but at a constantly less rate. Thus the fall during the wth
, , a + (n— 1) b . . ,

year is as 1 to ^ which approaches unity as n

increases constantly.


* Not found from the preoeding column by subtraction, but by dividing
the quantity of gold eaoh year into the quantity of the preceding year. °


66


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[n.


XXII. — Of the ultimate Equilibrium of the Supply and
Consumption of Cold.

It is obvious that the fall in the value of gold will become
less and less rapid, even on the supposition that the annual
supply of new gold remains constant. But this is a very
wrong supposition. Even supposing the mines not to become
exhausted, there are large numbers of diggers whose earnings
are so small that any fall in the value of gold will render their
labour incapable of supporting them. They will desert gold-
digging for other more profitable occupations which the colonies
offer. The more the value of gold falls, the greater the number
who will thus desert the gold-fields, and the greater the
decrease in the produce of gold. Again, as the total quantity
of gold in use increases so must the consumption by wear and
loss increase. In proportion as the value falls the consump-
tion increases and the supply decreases. The consumption
then must at length become equal to the supply, and thence-
forth the value will be stationary, or nearly so.

Two assumptions, which are not far frqm the truth } will
enable us to put this result in a simple form. Let us suppose
that the consumption of gold increases in the same proportion
as the whole mass in use ; and since the value falls inversely
as that whole quantity, let us further suppose that the supply
decreases in the same proportion as the whole mass in use
increases.

Let A be the quantity of gold in use at any time, c the
annual consumption then, and p 3 which is greater than c, the
annual supply at the time. Let d be the total addition up to
the time when equilibrium of supply and demand is attained,
and the value of gold becomes stationary. At that time the

value of gold is reduced in the ratio of 1 to . The

annual supply at that time, according to our suppositions, is

^ tTtt (J ~ /7

P‘ The consumption at that time is c. — ~g— and


II,] PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION OF GOLD. 67


the supply is equal to the consumption, or jp. = c — ■


The solution of this equation gives us d~ A.y/ - —A.
The greatest amount to which the accumulation of gold
will reach is d + A. or A.y/^ and the greatest possible
depreciation of gold is in the ratio of 1 to*/ A

P'

It is an interesting but obvious result of this theorem that
the ultimate value of gold is independent o£ the amount of
gold in use at any previous moment, and depends solely upon
the conditions of supply and consumption.

Chevaliers estimate of the probable annual consumption of
gold (according to the old value ?) is as follows :


For the extension of currency —

1. Of certain countries.

2. From increase of population, and

well-being generally

3. From commercial extension
For wear and tear of currency .

For hoarding and accidental losses .
For use in the arts ....

Total annual consumption .


£4,200,000

3,080,000

3.080.000
490,000

2 . 100.000
4,900,000

£17,850,000


Joining to this his estimate of the annual production, which
is stated as £35,000,000, we have an ultimate fall of the value

of gold in the ratio of 1 io\/ , or nearly as 1 to or
- oo, UU

as 1 to *714. Thus gold would fall in value by less than 30

per cent.

But though Chevalier takes the annual production at
£35,000,000, he thinks it may rise shortly to £42,000,000.
In that case the ultimate fall of value will be as 1 to *65, or by
35 per cent. The estimated consumption adopted by Chevalier


68


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[ii.


is in his opinion a great exaggeration, and only adopted to
render ids argument an d fortiori one. Macculloclj,* however,
would by no means be satisfied with even a consumption of
£17,850,000 per annum, for be adopts the following large
estimate of the annual consumption of the precious metals,
merging the amounts of value of gold and silver together :

Wear and tear and loss of coin" . £7,500,000

Increase in currency . . . 10,000,000

Used in the arts .... 12,000,000

£29,500,000

As be estimates tbe annual production of tbe mines at
£89,050,000, be finds there is only a surplus of £9,550,000,
both of gold and silver, to be boarded, exported to tbe Bast,
or pressed upon tbe market. Under these circumstances, tbe
maximum fall of value would be only 13 per cent. !

For my part, I cannot but agree with Chevalier, that even
bis estimate of tbe consumption of gold is greatly exaggerated,
especially as regards tbe extension of currency. A more
moderate estimate would indicate a greater surplus produce of
gold and a greater probable depreciation, say 50 per cent.;
but all such estimates are so uncertain that I care not to dwell
upon them.

It remains to be remarked, that any conclusion drawn from
tbe preceding calculations is based upon arbitrary assumptions,
each of which is more favourable to tbe fall of gold than by
right it ought to be; and that, for simplicity, I have also
made an omission in tbe calculation which similarly tends to
exaggerate the conclusion.

In tbe first place, I make no doubt that tbe consumption
of gold will increase rather more rapidly than its value falls.
That large part, indeed, which swells the currency of various
countries will follow this simple law pretty exactly ; but were

* “ Encyc. Brit.” (Eighth Edition) art. “ Precious Metals,” p. 466.


II.] PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION OF GOLD. 69


gold to fall to anything like half its old value, there could not
fail to be.a jLew demand for the purposes of ornament, luxury,
and use. This is the first thing that would tend to diminish
tl^e fall of value.

Secondly, the mines are far from maintaining their original
richness. The alluvial deposits, even in the first ten years,
show signs of exhaustion, and the deficiency cannot be fully
supplied by quartz-mining. This decreasing fertility of the
mines will so strongly tend to arrest the fall of value that we
must consider it more fully in another section.

Thirdly, we have treated the £10,000,000 or more of gold
annually added to the currency, owing to the increasing re-
quirements of trade, as if it were consumed and destroyed,
which is not the case. Being retained in use as currency, it
is not only subject to wear and tear, but also requires an
increase every year, as its value is depreciated. The result is,
that although the mass of gold eventually in use will exceed
our estimate (A+d), the annual consumption will also be
greater — so that it will sooner balance the annual __supply.

The value of gold will be arrested before it falls to*/ — of its

< v p

original amount. To correct this omission would require cal-
culations of a complexity unsuited to this inquiry, and to
obtain any mathematical conclusion, proceeding on other than
simple and arbitrary, but approximately correct laws, would,
of course, be impossible.

The extension of the currency of the world, caused by the
spread of commerce, tends to retard the fall of the value of
gold. This extension must not be confused with that increase
or swelling of the currency which is an effect of its deprecia-
tion. It seems to me that most writers have over-estimated
the consumption of gold by the first cause, perhaps in con-
sequence of not keeping it perfectly distinct from the latter
effect.


7o


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[n.


XXIII . — Of the future Supplies of Gold from the Mines .

The amount of gold which may be procured from almost
any quarter of the globe is, so to say, unlimited; but the
critical question is, Will it pay to extract it ? If the gold-
fields of Victoria offered to every labourer who chose to resort
thither the reward of fifteen shillings per day, the country would
soon be densely populated, its prosperity ever increasing, its
produce of gold constantly growing, and gold would soon be
reduced in value to a half or a third of its present value.
Thus Chevalier, quoting some statements of the year 1854,
when the gold fever was at its height, takes the ordinary earn-
ings of a miner, whether in Australia or California, to be at
least nineteen francs per day. “If, then/'* he adds, “the
auriferous regions preserved indefinitely the same richness, the
value of gold might fall until the sum of nineteen of our
present francs in gold (fifteen shillings and tenpence) was
only equal to the ordinary price of a day's labour in California
and Australia, aft|£ the cost of subsistence and the rate of
wages should hav^ there found their permanent level."

Such would, no doubt, be the conclusion from the data;
but anything more erroneous than those data cannot be easily
found. I speak with the advantage of having resided in a
gold-producing colony, and travelled over nearly all the chief
diggings of Australia, f when I say that the greater number of

4 “De la Baisse Probable de l’Or/’etc. 1859, p. 51. Cobden’s translation, p. 43.

f I resided in Sydney, as one of the assayers of the Eoyal Mint, from October,
1854, until December, 1858. In 1856 I visited Sofala, the Turon river, and
the diggings of the neighbourhood, then in an active state. In January, 1859,
I had an interesting trip to Braidwood, Jembaicumbene, and the Araluen*river.
When leaving Australia, I travelled by mail-car from Sydney overland to
Melbourne, seeing the Yackandandah and Beechworth diggings on the way,
and subsequently examined the Ballaarat mines, Bendigo,Tarrengower, Adelong,
Porest Creek, Creswick’s Creek, etc. The results of my observations were given
in a paper, entitled “ Eemarks on the Australian Gold Pields,” read to the
Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society, 15th November, 1859, and
printed in the first volume of the third series of the memoirs of that society,
session 1859-60 (1862), pp, 115-130. The supposed geological formation of the


IL]


THE GOLD DIGGINGS.


7i


gold-diggers earn small and precarious wages. It has been
said ; that all mining industry, like speculation in lotteries, is
carried on at a loss. This is especially true of gold-digging.
From the first, the great attraction of the diggings was in the
freedom and novelty of the life, and the exciting chance, how-
ever small, of a sudden fortune, rather than in the reasonable
prospect of good steady earnings.

The greater number of the diggers pass a most laborious
life, to gain average returns of only a few shillings a day.
They continue the occupation more from love of independence
than from love of the gold produced. They strive to keep up the
pleasure of the chase by frequent removals from one digging
to another, on the slightest report of new discoveries. There
has, in fact, arisen a large class of experienced but nomadic
diggers who are constantly making what are called <e rushes/*
and who often, on the most unreasonable grounds, make
journeys from one colony to another, a thousand miles or
more away. I have seen ten thousand diggers and others
assembled in a “ rush 93 during two or three weeks, on a plot
of ground where a rich discovery was ^reported” to have
been made, and where a town of wood and canvas was already
risen, or quickly rising, with its shops for butchers, bakers,
clothiers, jewellers, and even hotels, banks, and newspaper
offices. The excitement of the occupation draws crowds
to dig for gold who would make far better profits at their
proper trades. The production of gold during past yeafe'has
thus been altogether beyond the governance of economic laws ;
it has not been requisite that the produce should pay the cost
of production, and remunerate labour equally well with other
occupations which are open to the labourer.

gold-fields of Victoria is shown by a large diagram. The geological remarks
are doubtless of small value. I reprint as an appendix to this essay (below
p. 114 ) the remarks on the future supply of gold which formed the third
part of the paper, and which seem in some degree to have been verified by
the subsequent course of events — events, however, not by any means yet
brought to a close.


72


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[n.


I cannot think that this present state of gold getting will
endure. The nomadic class of skilful c{ prospector^/*, or gold
seekers, will die out in some ten or fifteen years more, and
gold-digging will become a more steady and ordinary occupa-^
tion. Haying less of the attraction of a lottery, the total
produce cannot fail to be reduced. Those who have hitherto
formed the poorer classes of diggers will be attracted from the
occupation by wages offered in other occupations, and any fall
of the value of gold must accelerate this change. I believe it
has already done so.

In opposition to Chevaliers quotation of a gold-miners
earnings in 1854, I will state that in a Parliamentary Paper*
the wages of a farm labourer in 1858, in New South Wales,
are quoted at four shillings per day, and the wages of a shep-
herd at fire shillings and sixpence. It is well known, too, that
for some years back there have often been in Melbourne and
Sydney crowds of strong labourers, chiefly unsuccessful diggers,
clamouring for employment from the Government at about four
shillings per day. Owing to the high cost of subsistence in the
colonies, such wages were regarded, and were in fact scarcely
more than a pauper's allowance. These facts prove that there
is a wide margin of gold production which must be given up
as the falling value of gold still further reduces the profits.

What has been said does not apply so fully to those men,
or companies of men, who are furnished with capital and en-
abled to undertake large sluicing works, deep sinking, or
quartz-mining and crushing. That there is an extensive area
open for such works is beyond doubt. It is equally beyond
doubt that certain quartz mines, and certain beds of alluvium,
will yield gold for ages to come. But gold-mining will more
and more become submitted to the principles of ordinary
industry, by which both capital and labour seek the occupation

* Statistical Papers relating to the Colonial Possessions of the United
Kingdom, Part V., 1858, p. 277. A statement more to the point is in Appendix,
Note D, of this tract, p, 111.


II.]


FAILING YIELD OF THE MINES .


73


which gives the largest returns. The falling value of gold
cannot fail* therefore, seriously to retard such steady gold-
mining. And these operations, however well conducted, will
not yield the lottery-like returns that were got at the first
scramble from the newly-discovered alluvium of Ballaarat and
Bendigo. The gold produce of Yictoria has long since reached
its maximum, and is declining, partly perhaps owing to the
u rushes ” of diggers to New South Wales and New Zealand,
but partly, as I think, to the failing richness of the deposits,
and the falling value of gold.*

The only way in which the gold produce could be kept at
the high amount of past years, would be by a succession of
discoveries of rich gold-bearing alluvium. But it seems to be
the nature of these alluvial deposits to be easily discovered
when once attention is drawn to their existence, and to be
quickly rifled of their thickest riches. It is a most singular
fact that, in Australia at least, all the richest deposits were
found in the first year or two. Ballaarat and Bendigo seem as
if they would always maintain the leading position they took
at the very first. Though nearly the first spots worked in
Yictoria, they are likely also to be the last. And so of other
gold-fields ; the first coup has generally been followed by a great
many lesser ones, but anything like a progressive discovery
of gold alluvium seems to be against the nature of things.

The supposition, then, that the gold produce will decrease
in the same proportion as the value of gold, is probably less
than the truth. The failing richness of the gold deposits will
occasion, in my opinion, a still greater decrease ; so that the
fall of the value of gold will be arrested earlier, and at a higher
point, than according to my assumptions in the last section.

XXIY . — Of the probable ultimate Fall of Value .

Chevalier suggests that the value of gold may fall to half
its former amount, or by 50 per cent. From a general view of


See Appendix, Note E, p. 1X3.


74 THE VALUE OF GOLD. [n.

the facts and arguments already presented, I am inclined to
think the fall will be arrested at, perhaps, 30 per cent. As I
think it not improbable that a depreciation of some 15 percent,
has already occurred (though I do not positively assert it), it
will follow that the more serious and sudden part of the fall
is already felt. As shown in Section XXI., the fall is most
sudden at the first.

Having arrived near to the limiting value at a rate ever
decreasing, the value of gold will probably long remain very
steady, because its area of production has been so much ex-
tended.* Before the recent discoveries, no gold mines of value
have been in the possession of any Anglo-Saxon nation. They
have been chiefly in the hold of the Spanish and Russian
Governments, subject to arbitrary restrictions and taxes. In
English or American hands the production of gold becomes a
matter of free industry and skill. It must follow that the
produce will conform more closely to commercial principles ;
a rise or fall in the value of gold will be followed more exactly
by an extension or cessation of the production. At the same
time, the greater area of production, offering scope for more
various competition and equalisation of local fluctuations, and
the greater and more various modes of consumption, will all
tend to render the demand and supply of gold more equable
and its value more constant.

XXV. — That the Values of Gold and Silver will probably return
to their ancient Proportion .

It is curious that the utmost depreciation of gold which can
be considered likely, will be just about sufficient to restore

In making this remark no account was taken o£ the recent extreme
variations in the demand for gold due to arbitrary changes in the currency
systems of nations, consisting both in the substitution of the gold for the silver
'standard, as in Germany and Scandinavia, and the operations of paper currency
emitted at one time and withdrawn at another, as in Italy and the United
States. If governments will in this way derange the conditions of supply and
demand, it is impossible that values can remain steady.


II.] HISTORY OF THE VALUES OF GOLD AND SILVER . 75


gold and silver to tlie proportional values which they usually
held in th$ middle and older historical ages of the world.

According to the earliest authentic statement which occurs
jn Herodotus, gold was, in the reign of Darius, thirteen times
more valuable, weight for weight, than silver.

About fifty years later, the proportion in Greece, according
to a statement in the Hipparchus of Plato, seems to have been
twelve to one.

The pillage of the temple of Delphi, in b.c. 357, throwing
more than 10,000 talents of gold into circulation, reduced its
value to about ten times that of silver. This rate, there is
reason to suppose, continued until about 170 years after the
death of Alexander.

In the Eoman world, the value of gold is said to have risen
at one time as high as 17 times that of silver. When Ca 3 sar
returned from Gaul, with much spoil of gold, its value fell to
9 times that of silver ; but these fluctuations were probably
temporary. Prom the time of the Emperor Galba to that of
Alexander Severus, the ratio of values was that of 12 4 to 1.
Under Constantine, it was 10^ to 1 ; after his reign, however,
gold became 14f times as valuable as silver. During the
middle ages the ratio varied between about 10 and 12 to 1,*
but soon after 1600 it began to rise gradually, in consequence
of the supplies of silver from the new American mines pre-
dominating over the supplies of gold. In 1717 the values
of the English silver and gold coins were fixed at the ratio
of 15'209 to 1, and only changed in 1816, when silver coins
were reduced to the subordinate rank of tokens.f

See a table of the English Coinage in Tooke’s <f History of Prices,” vol. vi.
pp. 4.17-19.

f Puller details concerning the history of the Comparative Value of Gold
and Silver will be found in Lord Liverpool’s Treatise on the Coins of the
Realm, 1805, Appendix, pp. 239-266 ; Reprint by the Bank of England, 8vo,
1880, pp. 267-95 1 The American Report on the International Conference of
1878, with Appendix by Mr* Dana Horton.


76


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[n.

Thus, from the time of the earliest historical notice down
to the discovery of America, gold was not on an average worth
more than 10 or 12 times as much as silver. The superior
abundance of silver in America appeared permanently to alter*
the proportional values, so that for some two centuries past,
gold has been as much as 15 times as valuable as silver. And
the proportion has been very steadily maintained.

The Australian and Californian discoveries have now come
as the great counterpoise to the Peruvian and Mexican dis-
coveries of the 16th century. Gold, in falling in value 30
per cent., will perhaps return to its old relation to silver — that
of 10 or 12 to 1.

It is not at all unlikely, however, that silver is now suffer-
ing, or will soon suffer, a certain depreciation, independently
of gold. The discovery of the Pattinson process for sepa-
rating silver from lead, has been equivalent to the discovery of
new mines. And were the Spanish American States to be
redeemed from anarchy by again falling into the possession of
any European government, it is certain, as Chevalier has
remarked, that they would throw largely increased supplies
of silver upon the market. This possible permanent deprecia-
tion is, of course, quite distinct from the temporary depreciation
of, say 6 per cent., caused by the pouring out of the French
silver currency. When the silver currency is nearly exchanged
for a gold one, as will soon have happened, this supply of
silver will of course suddenly cease, and the price of silver
will quickly rise to between 65 and 70 pence per ounce Troy.
When the price rises above 66 pence per ounce, it will be
necessary to diminish the weight of the English silver coins,
in order to prevent their being exported like the French
coins.*

* These anticipations have, of course, teen falsified by the substitution of
gold for silver currency, and also by the discovery of the great Nevada silver
mines. The subject is further discussed in the later papers on Bimetallism and
the Silver Question,


CHAPTER IV.

Social Effects of the Depreciation of Gold set forth.

XSVI . — How the Effects will he apparent.

It is worth while to consider what social effects the present
depreciation of gold must have, through the virtual alteration
of all fixed money payments. The ordinary dealings of
manufacturers, merchants, and traders, being terminated in
the course of a few months, or, at the most, of several years,
will be comparatively unaffected by an alteration of the
standard which merely increases the figures in their cash-
books and ledgers without altering the balance. It is otherwise
with the accounts of any person who, by virtue of a contract,
has a fixed sum of gold money to receive or pay on one side of
his account, while the sums on the other side, depending on
the prices of the chief articles of subsistence or commerce,
increase as gold falls in value. The balance of his accounts is
deranged in a very serious manner, as disadvantageous to the
receiver of the fixed sum as it is advantageous to the payer.
A fall in the value of gold virtually violates every contract
expressed in gold money, and benefits the debtor at the
expense of the creditor. Exactly the same effects will follow
wherever a payment remains fixed at its former amount by the
force of custom and habit. It may, perhaps, be said that
there is hardly a person among the 30,000,000 in the kingdom
but is affected more or less, for better or for worse, by the


78


THE VALUE OF GOLD .


[ii.


change which is taking place. The same may he said of every
other country where contracts are performed, and* payments
made in gold.

There has been no want of alarming predictions of the sociaj,
effects which must thus follow the alteration of the standard of
value. Chevalier says* of the period of change

“ This transition will be an interval painful to pass over,
and will be marked by innumerable shocks and sufferings. . . .

“ The value of all properties will be subjected to a painful
uncertainty, and to injurious fluctuations. It will be still worse
for those persons to whom I have already alluded, whose
incomes consist of a sum of money (napoleons or sovereigns)
fixed in advance. They will live in a perpetual state of trouble,
anxiety, and uneasiness. They will sink by whole sections from
their present state to another, in which they will enjoy only
the half of their previous comforts ; reasoning, as I always do,
upon the assumption that gold falls to the half of its present
value. They will be flung headlong, without rule or measure,
down to a lower station, and without ever having the chance
of preparation, for it is the very essence of changes of this
kind, subjected as they are to many opposing influences, to
pursue an irregular and disorderly course.”

Cobden,in the preface (p.ix) to his translation of Chevalier's
Essay, expresses a similar opinion :

<e Wages and salaries of all kinds would eventually rise in
proportion to the enhanced price of commodities, but the
transition would, I fear, be accompanied with much incon-
venience and suffering. The rise would not be steady and
continuous, but would be effected by leaps, and after struggles
which would tend to derange and convulse the relations of
capital and labour.”

On the contrary, I think that the alteration of the value of
gold must, especially for the future, be most gradual and gentle

* Cobden’s translation, p. 114. “Dela Baisse Probable de l’Or,” sec. vi.
chap. ii. p. 191.


n.]


ALARMING RESULTS PREDICTED .


79


in its effects. Far from taking place with sudden and painful
starts, flinging the rich headlong down to a lower station, and
shaking the groundwork of society, nothing is more insidious,
s^ow, and imperceptible. It is insidious because we are
accustomed to use the standard as invariable, and to measure
the changes o£%ather things by it, and a rise in the price of any
article, when observed, is naturally attributed to a hundred
other causes than the true one. It is slow, because the total
accumulations of gold in use are but little increased by the
additions of any one or of several years.* It is imperceptible
because the slow rise of prices due to gold depreciation is dis-
turbed by much more sudden and considerable, but temporary
fluctuations which are due to commercial causes, and are by no
means a novelty.

It is almost impossible, too, for any person to detect the
effects of the change of standard in his own personal affairs.
Besides the interference of changes in prices and profits and
activity of trade, which affect most persons, each individual
has his own fluctuations of prosperity and adversity. If his
income is not variable, at least his expenditure is more or less
so. There are a hundred items of expenditure, some increased,
some diminished, and among the variety of unmeasured cir-
cumstances, it is impossible for him to feel the very slow and
measured change of 20 or 30 per cent., spread over twenty or
thirty years. If his receipts are variable and increasing, he
enjoys the consciousness of prosperity, and probably attributes
it complacently to his own abilities and deserts. If his income
consists of fixed dividends or rents, he receives the same
pieces of money as before, and has no thought that they are
not what they were. It is when he comes to pay his household
bills that he can alone feel the difference. And then the
difference seems to arise from the deficient harvest, from the
growth of population, from the extortion of tradesmen, from
anything rather than the change of a British sovereign fresh
* As shown above, chap. iii. sec. xxi. p. 64,


So


THE VALUE OF GOLD .


[ir.


from the Mint. Value is the most invisible and impalpable of
ghosts,* and comes and goes unthought of Vhil^ the visible
and dense matter remains as it was.

So it certainly has been, I think, in the last fifteen years.
Prices rose about 1853 so much that no trader or housekeeper
could be ignorant of the change in the case of several articles
at least. But then the rise of prices is diversified by occasional
falls until the original state of things fades from the memory.
The fluctuations noticed are rightly attributed to the prosperity
or stagnation of trade, to an increase of demand, or to a war
which happens to be waging in some part of the world. It is,
in fact, impossible by the ordinary observation of two or three
articles, to separate and detect the change of prices due to
gold. Only a laborious inquiry extending over the commercial
records of many years, and over most of the articles of com-
merce, can enable us surely to separate the gradual but
permanent effects of gold depreciation from more noticeable
but temporary changes. It is needless to add that the working
out of long tables and' logarithmic calculations is not a popular
occupation. Thus it is that a considerable fall in the value of
gold, and I believe the most sudden and serious part of the fall
that can be expected to occur , has occurred while almost all the
world were either without thought of such an event, or
altogether in doubt about it.


XXVII. — Classification of Incomes according as they suffer from

Depreciation .

It will be well to examine rather more closely the effects of
the depreciation of gold upon individuals in different circum-
stances. We can always arrive at the effect by separating

* That is to say, value is an impalpable relation ; there is no such thing as
intrinsic value, as I have endeavoured to show in (l The Theory of Political
Economy,” pp. 81-83 ; Second Edition, pp. 82-91 j “ Money and the Mechanism


II.] CLASSIFICATION OF INCOMES . 81

those items in their accounts -which are fixed money payments,
from those ^hich depend on the variable prices of commodities,
or on rates of wages. So far as fixed receipts are balanced by
figed payments, or variable receipts by variable payments, there
is neither loss nor gain. But so far as fixed receipts are.
balanced by variable payments, and variable receipts by fixed
payments, there is respectively loss and gain to the whole
extent of the depreciation of gold occurring since the pecuniary
conditions were fixed by contract or otherwise. A farther
distinction, however, will have to be drawn between receipts
altogether fixed, and those depending on fixed charges. The
fees of a lawyer are fixed by law, but his income chiefly depends
on the number of his clients. The tolls of a bridge are usually
defined by Act of Parliament, but the recess bf its owners
depend on the amount of traffic. In every such case we shall
have to consider separately in what degree the virtual lowering
of the charges effected by the depreciation of the standard, will
occasion so much more custom or traffic as to prevent loss of
income.

Taking first the receipt side of the account, I will attempt
to classify the various kinds and sources of income, according
as they are more or less affected by gold depreciation :

The incomes and 'property of the following classes of persons
are perfectly fixed in money amount and suffer to the whole
extent of the depreciation of gold } it being understood that the
payments contracted for are expressed in British or gold
money.

British fundholders, stockholders, or annuitants, and holders
of exchequer bonds or bills.

Holders of bonds, annuities, or any kind of debt (in gold
money), due from Foreign Governments.

Holders of bonds, debentures, etc., with fixed interest on
money advanced for roads, docks, or other public works.

Holders of preference shares or debentures of fixed interest,
and, to some extent, all shares with guaranteed interest.


82 THE VALUE OF GOLD. [n.

All creditors, the payment of whose fixed claims is deferred
any considerable interval of time.

Mortgagees.

Owners of leasehold property, as regards the period of the
lease.

Holders of policies of insurance, whether upon life or other
risks.

Depositors in banks, savings banks, or in private institutions
and firms, or in the hands of private individuals.

Owners of any contingent claims, definable in money, upon
friendly societies, or other institutions, or upon individuals.

Bank-stock proprietors, shareholders of joint-stock banks,
discount companies, bankers, capitalists, bill discounters and
dealers, money-lenders, and all who hold or own capital in
the form of money. (It is very difficult in these cases to
separate the effect of a variation in the value of gold, in
which their capital really consists, from the variation of the
value or interest of money, and the varying success of the
business.)

Goldsmiths, bullion dealers, misers, or others who hold any
considerable quantities of gold.

The Royal Family, officers of state, judges, government
employes, and others upon the civil list, with fixed salaries or
pensions.

Officers and men in the army and navy.*

Half-pay officers, and pensioners not receiving subsistence
in kind.

Holders of endowed offices of any kind, fellowships, etc.,
where the receipts are defined in money.

All persons receiving pensions, alms, or allowances of fixed
money amount.

Each of the above classes suffers the loss accruing from the
depreciation of gold between the moment when the payment

* There has since, however, been a general advance in the rates of pay of
almost all officers, soldiers, and other government employes*


CUSTOMARY PAYMENTS .


83


nJ

became defined in money, and that at which the payment or
series of parents is made (or rather expended). The loss, of
course, is inappreciable unless the interval of time concerned be
several years at least. But a person may suffer the whole
effect of the depreciation, although frequently changing the
form of his property, so long as it is held continuously in any
of the forms above described. Thus, if a person holds his
fortune in gold or banknotes for a time, then as a bank deposit,
next investing it in consols, or in bank stock, finally perhaps
lending it on mortgage, he will still suffer the depreciation of
the whole interval of time elapsed.

Secondly. The next class of incomes contains those depend-
ing on fixed charges , established by law , custom , or convenience .
It is impossible to form more than a rude conjecture as to
how far the lowering of the rate of charge will increase the
traffic, custom, or activity of business ; but I will begin with
those that seem likely to have least compensation from this
source.

Solicitors, attorneys, and other lawyers whose charges are
fixed. Their business can only in a very indirect and partial
manner receive increase.

Physicians, with their customary fee of a guinea, will
scarcely receive full compensation.*

A great variety of payments at exhibitions, theatres, and
entertainments, fixed by custom at one shilling, of subscrip-
tions to societies, clubs, charities, etc., school or college fees,
pew rents, mostly fixed at customary amounts, are not likely to
be wholly compensated.

Pees to registrars, clergymen, public officers, etc,, will yield
little or no compensation.

Tolls of roads, bridges, and ferries are usually fixed by law,
but increased traffic will probably give ample compensation.

Tolls on railways, canals, telegraphs, steam-boats, etc., may

* But not a few of them have since raised the fee to two guineas.

Q 2


84


THE VALUE OF GOLD , .


[II.


be raised, or a lowering deferred by tbe fall of the value ‘of
gold; it will depend upon the skill with whi^h the tolls
were originally adjusted whether the revenue is increased or
diminished by the slight alteration due to gold. In any case,
it may be said that there are few kinds of property that will
suffer less from depreciation of gold. The same may be said
of water and gas companies.

Charges of cab-drivers, postmasters, carriers, licensed
porters are usually fixed by law or custom, but will be fully
compensated.

Post-office charges, especially the penny stamp, will cer-
tainly not be raised in consequence of gold depreciation, but
the continuous increase of the revenue more than covers any
depreciation.

Thirdly. Although each of the preceding classes of income
includes a great aggregate amount, the third class is still
greatly more comprehensive and important. Among those
variable incomes which are entirely independent of the value of
gold , and therefore suffer no loss by its depreciation , are those
of manufacturers, farmers, contractors, mine-owners, ship-
owners, who depend chiefly on their skill and good fortune ;
of merchants, brokers, agents, tradesmen, commercial travellers,
hawkers, and dealers generally, whose profits usually consist
of a percentage on the value of the articles turned over; of
artisans, skilled workers, labourers, porters, domestic servants,
and others receiving variable wages.

I may add innkeepers, -lodging-house keepers, medical men,
apothecaries, and others who make uncertain charges, per-
formers of various kinds, and a host of others whose charges
and earnings are equally uncertain.

Soldiers, sailors, pensioners, paupers, and others receiving
support in kind will not suffer so far. All persons owning
land, houses, or other property not in money, will suffer no
loss so far as they either occupy or use the property or let it


ii.] EXPENDITURE AFFECTED BY DEPRECIATION 85

for short periods ; in leasing it for long periods, and for money
rents, they^will lose. Clergymen, in receiving tithes and
variable rents, will not be losers.

There is, however, a very large class of incomes, including
wages or salaries, which must be considered of quite uncertain
position. In a large proportion of cases the salaries of clerks,
officials, and other employes, or the wages of servants and
labourers, will remain unchanged for long periods of time by
want of attention to the changed value of gold, or the general
dislike to altering or discussing an agreement once made. In
those cases, where the salary or rate of wages remains un-
changed, the office or employment must usually be reduced to
a lower rank, and command less efficient services. This will,
often be the case where the income from which the salaries
are paid is also fixed, and liable to loss from depreciation. In
other and the majority of cases the salary or wages will be
raised after the lapse of a certain time.* Artisans, mill-hands,
and other skilled labourers will obtain the increased wages
by strike, if not by the free acquiescence of their employers.
It is not unlikely that the great strikes which occurred
a few years ago were partly caused by the depreciation of
gold.


XXVIII . — Of Expenditure as affected by Depreciation .

For every person who suffers loss in a fixed income or claim
from depreciation of the money in which it is paid there must
be some person or persons who gain. But, with few exceptions,
the corresponding benefit is very much diffused. There are
but few individuals subject to fixed payments of long en-
durance. The fixed payments enumerated in the first class of


* This is what has taken place as a general rale.


86


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[n.


incomes are chiefly due from the Government, or from public
or private companies, or institutions. It will be $hown that,
as regards the Government annuities and other fixed pay-
ments, the whole community gains in the unintentional
remission of taxation which gold depreciation has effected.
Foreign governments and peoples equally gain as regards
debts in gold due from them. All public companies, corpora-
tions, or their members and shareholders, gain in the partial
remission of their debts, the effect being a slight improvement
of the dividends. In the case of banks, insurance companies,
capitalists, goldsmiths, or others holding any part of their
capital as money or gold, their loss, or that of their depositors
or claimants, is not productive of any corresponding gain
to other persons. They suffer from the actual depreciation
of money in their hands. The lessees and mortgagors of
property gain to the full extent of what lessors and mortgagees
lose.

The lowering of fixed charges considered in the second
class of incomes, was found to inflict a vei y .partial loss on
their receivers, but it occasions a great benefit to the public
at large. The payments for conveyance, for amusements, and
for a great variety of services, being virtually lowered, persons
either spend less upon them than before, or else by availing
themselves more freely of such services, they gain in comfort
and recreation. The effect is a general increase of business,
inducing increased industry and energy, with very slight
exceptions, of a most beneficial character to all classes.

As incomes in the third class suffer no loss, there is, of
course, no corresponding gain. .

The greater part of the expenditure of all individuals
consists of payments for food, clothing, variable rent, and
innumerable charges which increase pari passu with the
depreciation of gold. If these charges are defrayed out of
a fixed income, the increase of expenditure must .either be


n.] PUBLIC REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE . $7

met by cutting off former savings, by relinquishing former
enjoyments,* or by exertion in providing new sources of
income.

XXIX. — Effects of Depreciation upon the Revenue and
Expenditure of the Country .

It is a principle, and a very good one, of the English tariff,
to define all charges as much as possible by reference to fixed
weights or measures of commodity. Ad valorem duties are
imposed only upon such rich articles as lace, silks, and precious
stones, of which the weight or measure bears no constant
relation to the value.* Thus the tendency to fraudulent
misrepresentations concerning the value of goods is, as far
as possible, removed. Similarly all the excise charges and
assessed taxes are defined by quantities — bushels of malt
gallons of spirit, number of horses, and so forth. The stamp
charges are partly fixed, such as those on most kinds of legal
documents. But when a legal document expresses a money
claim, the stamp charge is regulated in some proportion to the
amount of the money, as there can be but little misrepresenta-
tion for the purpose of evading the tax. Among theso ad
valorem stamp duties fall the whole of the duties on legacies,
letters of administration, and probates. The larger part of
the income-tax and the miscellaneous sources of revenue are
also ad valorem , increasing with the prices of articles.

It would not be possible to determine with exactness how
much the revenue suffers by the depreciation of gold, without
going through the whole of the National accounts in detail.
But separating en masse , and when necessary by conjecture,

* There are no ad valorem duties at all in the present English tar if ; nor
were there, I think, when the above sentence was written. In 1821, jewels,
excepting diamonds, were charged with a duty of 20 and 50 per cent, of their
value, according as they were not set, or were in any way manufactured.
Lace and many other things were taxed ad valorem.


88


THE VALUE OF GOLD .


[n.

the part depending on fixed charges from that which is ad
valorem, and therefore increases with the increase of prices,
we have the following rude estimate for the year 1860 :


Customs
Excise
Stamps (say)
Income and pro-
perty tax
Assessed taxes
Land tax .

Post Office
Woods, Forests,
etc.

Miscellaneous .


Independent of
the value of gold.

£24,391,084
, 20,240,467
2,040,091

1 Inconsiderable

2,100,539

1,137,034

3,310,655

| Inconsiderable


Variable with the
value of gold.

. Inconsiderable
. None
say £6,000,000

. 9,666,142

. None
• »

. 416,531

. 1,801,584


Adding up the respective columns we obtain the following
totals :

Independent of value of gold £53,219,870 or 75 per cent.

Variable with the value of gold 17,884,257 ,, 25 „

Total revenue (1860) £71,104,127 100 „

It would appear then that almost exactly three-fourths
of the revenue of the year 1860 afforded no equivalent to
counterbalance the fall in its value.

Turning to the public expenditure of the country, we "find
it still more difficult to separate the fixed and variable pay-
ments with accuracy. The following estimate is therefore
founded on little more than conjecture. It is made also on
the assumption that no salaries or pensions had received any
increase in 1860, on account of' the diminished value of
gold :


II.] PUBLIC REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE. 89
Public Expenditure of 1860 for the United Kingdom.


Public l5ebt.

Eixed payments.

Variable payments.

£28,638,726 .

. . None

Civil List

515,588 .

• »

Civil Government (say)

1,435,116 .

£497,111

Justice (say)

1,833,078 .

. 1,620,681

Diplomatic (say) .

374,336 .

50,000

War in China

None

858,057

Army and Ordnance

7,300,000 .

. 6,757,186

Navy ....

5,000,000 .

. 6,823,859

Public Works

None

945,860

Education (say) .

844,334 .

446,297

Colonial charges (say) .

142,625 .

100,000

Miscellaneous (say)

477,685 .

400,000

Collection of Revenue (say) 3,821,132 .

. 1,280,568

Adding up the columns as before we get :


Total fixed payment

. £49,882,620

or 72 per cent.

Total variable payment . 19,779,619

„ 28 „

Total real expenditure . £69,662,239
Redemption of Exchequer

100 „

bonds .

! . 2,000,000


Total expenditure.

. £71,662,239


Prom these estimates it would appear probable that the

national balance-sheet is

scarcely affected in

a direct manner


by the depreciation of gold. The increase of the variable
changes dependent on prices, and forming one-fourth part of
the expenditure, seems to be just balanced by a corresponding
increase on one-fourth part of the revenue which happens
to be levied ad valore7n. This is on the assumption that
Government salaries in general, and the pay of the army and
navy, have not been increased. How far these Government
employes can be said to suffer, in common with other classes


90


THE VALUE OF GOLD .


[n.

of tlie community, by the retention of old rates of salary and
pay will be shortly considered.

We must not forget, however, that even the three-fourths
of the revenue which proceed from fixed duties is of the same
nature for the most part as incomes included in the second
class. Though the charge on each gallon of spirits or each
pound of tea be virtually lowered, the usual effect follows,
namely, an increase of trade and consumption. The breach in
the real value or efficiency of the revenue, even when derived
from fixed charges, is soon repaired by the secondary effects of
the lowering of the charges. And the community derive nearly
as much benefit from this unintentional remission of taxation
as from any of the great remissions effected by Peel or
Gladstone. I am thus unable to agree with the opinion of
Chevalier, who, with the instincts of a French writer, thinks
the results of the depreciation of gold will be a revolution at
least.

* “ There are grounds,” he says,* “for apprehending many

other difficulties, political or administrative. It would be
necessary to enlarge the budget, for wherever the State
appeared as a customer, it would have to pay dearer than
formerly. . . . The augmentation of the budget, assuming
it to be considerable, means an aggravation of the public
burdens, which excites, even when justifiable, the popular
discontent, just in proportion to the degree to which taxation
is increased. I believe I run no risk of contradiction, by any
politician, in saying that a Government which should have to
double the taxes in the course of a few years would thereby
incur very great perils.”

The revenue naturally increases more than pari passu with
the expenditui-e during a time of depreciation, so that unless
warlike preparations, or the demands of the people for lower
taxes, absorb the surplus, there will be enough to give a fair
increase to the lower classes of Government employes. But of

* Cobclen’s translation, p. 120, De la Baisse Probable de TOr,” p. 197.


THE NATIONAL DEBT .


9i


«.]

late years the English people have seemed to think that the
first duty df their Government is to take off taxes. The rise of
the nominal amount of the revenue and expenditure no doubt
contributes to the impression that the amount is excessive.

XXX . — Influence of Depreciation on the National Debt

The most remarkable effect of the depreciation of gold is a
considerable reduction of the National Debt. This, it is need-
less to say, is an event which few of us could have hoped to
live and see.

The National Debt of this country was in 1860 represented
by a capital of £819,079,305. The annual charge was then
£26,176,275. A gold depreciation of 9 per cent., which is
quite the least I can believe to have occurred, must therefore
have effected a reduction in the capital of about £75,000,000,
and in the annual charge of nearly £2,500,000. The gain
from this reduction is shared in by all taxpayers in the
kingdom, almost proportionally to the amount of taxes they
pay. Let us consider how the loss is distributed.

The Dividends of the National Debt were on the first
dividend day of 1860 distributed among 268,242 persons, as
follows :


Dividends not exceeding

£5

Number of persons en-
titled to such, dividends.

94,560


99

£10

43,845


99

£50

86,809


99

£100

22,516

>9

99

£200

12,787

>>

99

£300

3,646

a

99

£500

2,417

99

99

£1000

1,091

99

99

£2000

361


Exceeding

£2000

210


268,242


92


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[II.


Nearly a quarter of a million of persons (247,730) receive
dividends not exceeding £100. As several children or other
dependents on an average must share in the benefit of each
annuity, it is probable that about one million persons, or about
one in every thirty of the total population of the kingdom,
depend more or less for support upon the public annuities.
Of the larger sums too a considerable portion consists of the
incomes of hospitals, schools, and other endowed institutions of
public benefit. Some portion of the debt forms the reserve of
securities of banks, insurance companies, and other monetary
institutions. Nearly the whole sum of money in the Govern-
ment and Post-Office savings banks is invested in the public
funds. We should never forget, then, that the National Debt
represents the savings of the poorer classes, rather than the
money-bags and coffers of the rich and luxurious.

Should gold, in the course of years, fall in value some
30 per cent., as I think possible, the pressure of the National
Debt will be no greater than if it were about 550 millions
sterling, instead of 800 millions, according to the old value of
gold. Annuitants will suffer and taxpayers in genei'al gain in
simple proportion to the fall.


CHAPTER V.

Is a Remedy needful or possible?

XXXI, — Sow far is positive Sardship inflicted on Annuitants
and Creditors by Depreciation ?

No one can feel mucli commiseration for the richer classes
of the community even when their expenditure presses incon-
veniently close upon their income. A footman, a horse, a ball,
or a shooting excursion retrenched during the year, will restore
the balance without inflicting any very great hardship. How
is it with the large mass of persons whose incomes of £50 to
£150 a year afford them little more than the necessaries and
decencies of modern life ? A reduction of real income by 10,
15, or ultimately by 30 per cent., would sorely press upon their
comforts, and even reduce them in the social scale, unless there
were some compensating tendencies. But no one, I think, can
look at the real progress of affairs in this country, during the
period under consideration, without concluding that an alteration
of 10, 15, or even 30 per cent,, is almost swallowed up and
rendered inconsiderable among the many improvements and
ameliorations, and the general increase of industry, profit, and
general prosperity which is taking place.

It must be distinctly understood that the general rise of
prices which I have proved to exist refers to raw materials, and
especially to those raised by the same processes now as twenty
years ago. Manufactured articles in general have certainly


94


THE VALUE OF GOLD ,


[ii.


not risen so mucli as the materials from which they are made ;
possibly they have fallen. They fall in price, or do not rise,
because new and cheaper modes are constantly invented for
making them. Thus, to a great extent, we can scarcely be
said to use the same articles now as we did twenty years ago,
or as our fathers before us. Railways are radically different
things from stage-coaches — telegraphs from postmen or private
messengers ; and, similarly, half the woven fabrics, hardwares,
and other articles we use, though serving the same purposes,
are different from what we used twenty or thirty years ago.
It would be impossible to trace the effects of mechanical skill,
of improved and more rapid conveyance, and of the removal
of legislative restrictions in cheapening and advancing all
processes of manufacture.

That manufactured articles grow cheaper rather than
dearer is no contradiction to our conclusion concerning a rise
of prices. New manufactures must be regarded as new pro-
ductions altogether — new gifts of science and patient industry.
It is the old materials which have risen in price, and contribute,
indeed, to maintain even manufactures at a higher rate.

Again, the removal of customs duties from some hundreds
of minor articles, and the reduction of duties on most of the
chief articles, tends to counteract the rise of prices. For the
prices quoted in commercial lists, and used in my tables, are
mostly for articles in bond , duty unpaid. Then, we must
remember, that charges enumerated in the second class of
sources of income, as well as three-fourths of the whole
taxation of the country, have not increased with the increased
prices of materials. Moreover, the discovery of the American
and Australian diggings, by creating two or three new colonies,
drawing off part of our population, and opening new branches
of trade of the most profitable kind, has contributed to the
general prosperity. The Repeal of the Corn Laws alone, lead-
ing to an enormously increasing yearly importation of food, to
a positive decrease -of the agricultural population, and to a


PROGRESS OF INDUSTRY.


95


il]

great increase of our town population, is a concession to the
tendencies^ of our country, beneficially affecting (for the
present at least) the position of certainly all save landowners,
and them too as many persons think.

The effects of such and of many more changes effected
during the last twenty years or so, is seen in a general increase
of wealth and of mercantile industry and profits. Thus only
can be explained the extraordinarily high rate at which the
interest of money has in the last ten years often stood.
During 1854-57 the rate of interest was only for a few months
below 5 per cent., but for many months above it. For more
than half a year it. stood at 6 and 7 per cent., and in the
end of 1857 it remained for nearly two months at 10 per cent.
Again, in 1861, interest rose to 6 and 8 per cent., and all this,
to the surprise of the elder generation, without the general
stoppage of trade, the breach of credit, and the flood of
bankruptcy, which has hitherto attended such rates of interest.
It is certainly not to increasing scarcity of capital we should
attribute such rates, but rather to a greatly extended field for
its profitable employment.

All these great changes beneficially affecting every indi-
vidual in a hundred ways forbid us to assert that any person
has suffered positive loss of the necessaries and comforts of
life by the depreciation of his income in the last twenty years.
The expenditure on the principal kinds of food must certainly
be greater than it was; but there may easily be at least a
corresponding decrease of expenditure on clothes and many
other articles. To conclude, then, it cannot be proved that
positive hardship, that is to say, loss of comfortable sub-
sistence, is inflicted upon any person by the present deprecia-
tion of gold, nor would even a greater degree of depreciation
necessarily produce that effect.


9$ THE VALUE OF GOLD . [n.

X X XII. — Of Comparative Hardship inflicted on Owners of
fixed Incomes,

There may be comparative if there is not positive hardship
inflicted upon persons of fixed income. Half the expenditure
of all classes, down to the artisan at least, is required to keep
up a certain style of living, dressing, and appearing before the
public eye, which is considered decent and necessary for each
person's position, or, at least, which he considers necessary
and desirable for himself and his family. The great general
increase of incomes in the third, and even in the second class,
enables a large part of the community to improve their appear-
ance and style of living. This is more especially apparent
among the wealthier classes, as the altogether extraordinary
extension of the West-End of London over Pimlico, Brompton,
and Kensington, testifies in some degree. Now, every wealthy
merchant, banker, builder, manufacturer, or landowner, who,
by virtue of his increasing wealth, sets up a more handsome
establishment than of old, commits a kind of wrong upon his
poor relations and friends, who, with their fixed incomes and
growing tradesmen's bills, can hardly make the two ends meet
on the old footing.

Whatever we may conclude as to the positive hardship, it is
impossible that any social improvement, or anything except
restoration of the value of gold, can prevent comparative hard-
ship. Those merchants, manufacturers, and artisans, whose
profits and wages are growing by the new activity and
efficiency of industry, have all the benefits of improved
manufactures, and rapid communication as consumers. They
gain at both ends.

XXXIII. — Of the Influence of Depreciation on the Community

as a Whole .

I cannot but agree with Macculloch,* that, putting out of
sight individual cases of hardship, if such exist, a fall in the
“ Bncyc. Brit.” (Eighth. Edit.) art. <( Precious Metals.”


IL]


CLAIM TO COMPENSATION.


97


value of gold must have, and, as I should say, has already, a
most powerfully beneficial effect. It loosens the country, as
nothing else could, from its old bonds of debt and habit. It
throws increased rewards before all who are making and
acquiring wealth, somewhat at the expense of those who are
enjoying acquired wealth. It excites the active and skilful
classes of the community to new exertions, and is, to some
extent, like a discharge from his debts is to the bankrupt long
struggling against his burdens. All this is effected without a
breach of national good faith, which nothing could compensate.


XXX I Y. — That Creditors have no Equitable Claim to
Compensation.

That there is no legal breach of money contracts by the
accidental and unforeseen depreciation of the money in which
they are expressed, is obvious. But it will be worth while to
consider how far creditors, especially public creditors, can
have an equitable claim to -consideration on the ground that
the community or its government provides the money in
which contracts are expressed, and seems perhaps to guarantee
it as a standard of value.

All such claim seems to be done away with by the fact that,
generally speaking, the Legislature never obliged contracts to be
made in gold money . Though very rightly selecting gold as
the best obtainable standard and providing a gold currency
as a public convenience, it never professed to make gold an
invariable measure of value, and accordingly never prevented
any persons from selecting other standards if they desired.
On the contrary, from the earliest feudal times, contracts,
especially those concerning rents, have been made in corn and
other commodities, as well as in personal services.

In the reign of Elizabeth, when the values of gold and
silver were threatened, and actually affected by the discovery
of America, as is gold now by the recent discoveries, it was

H


98


THE VALUE OE GOLD,


[n.


expressly provided by Act of Parliament (18 Elk. cap. 6,
1576), on the advice of the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, and of
Thomas Smith, Secretary of State,* that in all future leases
for life, or for a term of years, made by the several colleges
in Oxford or Cambridge, and by those of Winchester and
Eton, one-third at least of the old rent should be reserved in
corn, according to the value of good -wheat and good malt, to
be taken after the rate at which they should be sold at their
respective markets, on the next market-day before such
rents should be due. And in quite late years, when the new
imperial standard weights and measures were brought into
use, Acts were passed (5 Geo. IY. cap. 74, sec. 17, and 5 & 6
Will. IY. cap. 68, sec. 14) recognising these corn rents and
ascertaining their quantity according to the new measures.
And we find, in fact, that the only legal condition of the
validity of any rents, according to the Common Law of
England, is “that the quantum must be either certainly

* This Act is so interesting as regards the theory of value and currency,
that I quote the important parts ofjfche Act in the original words : “An Act
for maintenance of the colleges in the Universities, and of Winchester and
Eaton. Eor the better maintenance of learning and the better relief of scholars
in the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, and the colleges of Winchester
and Eaton. (2) Be it enacted .... that no Master or chief ruler of any college
.... by what title, style, or name soever they now be, shall, or may be called,
after the end of this present session of Parliament, shall make any lease
for life, lives, or years, of any farm, or any their lands, tenements, or
other hereditaments to the which any tithes, arable land, meadow, or
pasture doth, or shall, appertain, except that the one-third part at the
least of the old rent be reserved and paid m corn for the said colleges,
cathedral church, halls, and houses $ that is to say, in good wheat after six
shillings and eightpence the quarter or under, and good malt at five shillings
the quarter or under, to be delivered yearly, upon days prefixed, at the said
colleges .... j (3) and for default thereof, to pay to the said colleges ....
in ready money, at the election of the said lessees, their executors .... after
the rate of the best wheat and malt in the market of Cambridge, for the rents
that are to be paid to the use of the house, or houses, there .... (similarly
for the other colleges) is or shall be sold the next market-day before the said
rent shall be due, without fraud or deceit 5 (4) and that all leases otherwise
hereafter to be made, and all collateral bonds or assurance to the contrary, by
any of the said Corporations, shall be void in law to all intents and purposes ;
(5) the%aweiftFh0&|, malt, or the money coming of the same, to be expended to
the use.df'the a^elief pi the commons and diet of the said colleges .... only (6)


CORN RENTS .


99


nj

mentioned, or be sucli as by a reference to something else
may be reduced to a certainty,”*

The rule was further shown by the exception made by
Acts of Parliament in the case of the Truck System — that of
paying labourers wages in kind. This system haying given
rise to many abuses, it was provided that in certain defined
trades, wages must be paid in money, clearly showing the
perfect freedom to contract in money, or in other commodities
which existed and still exists in commercial transactions
generally. It is true, sovereigns and Bank of England
notes are a legal tender ; but this only means that any claim
expressed in pounds sterling is satisfied and discharged by
the tender of good sovereigns or banknotes. Just as the
Government provides certain measures and weights convenient
for public use, and takes care that contracts made according
to these shall be inviolate, so it provides money, which is
nothing but a system of gold weights. But no one is obliged
to use weights of gold rather than weights of any other
commodities. All that is necessary to make a good contract
is that the quantities of commodity mentioned therein may be
certainly and accurately known.

Thus it seems obvious, that the law of England has always
carefully avoided guaranteeing gold or any other commodity
as a real standard of value. It has never guaranteed amounts
of value at all, but only amounts of commodity. Consequently
no claim for compensation can be founded on the fact that the
value of gold is now varying. There is no violation of justice
neither in letter nor in spirit.

and by no frand or colour let or sold away from the profit of the said colleges
.... and the fellows and scholars in the same, and the use aforesaid, upon
pain of deprivation of the governor and chief rulers of the said colleges ....
and all other thereunto consenting.”

Two sections containing trifling exceptions complete the Act. The results
following from the Statute may be studied in u Prices of Corn in Oxford,” col-
lected from manuscripts at Oxford, by the Rev. W. P. Lloyd. Oxford University
Press, 1830.

* Bacon’s Abridgement, Seventh Edit. vol. vii. p. 4.

H 2


100


THE VALUE OF GOLD .


[n.


XXXV . — Save Creditors any Claim to Charitable Belief?

It is altogether another question, as to whether public
annuitants, pensioners, or other creditors have any claim
upon the charitable consideration of the community. Public
annuitants and creditors, I think, have no more claim to con-
sideration than private annuitants and creditors, the guarantee
offered by the law being the same in both cases. Though the
public, as debtors, might consent to compensate its creditors
in some degree, it could not oblige the private debtor who
gains by the depreciation of gold, to give up this gain, or any
part of it, to compensate his creditor. Thus it would follow,
that if the public undertook to compensate any annuitants or
creditors, it would in mere justice have to undertake the whole
cost of compensating all private annuitants and creditors as
well. This may be regarded as a simple impossibility. The
consequence of any such attempt would be to increase greatly
the public burdens, which otherwise are being decreased by
the depreciation of gold. And if it be true that the reduction
of income, even of the poorer annuitants, is compensated by
the ameliorations of the age, so that no positive loss of
comforts is inflicted, there cannot be any sufficient grounds
for interfering with the natural course of events.

Secondly, we should remember that if there were positive
hardship from the lowering of the value of gold, it is only one
case of hardship out of hundreds which natural fluctuations
inflict. No society could subsist under the condition that all
calamities were to be relieved. The hardship in question is,
at the worst, much slighter than what a commercial revulsion,
like those of 1825 and 1847, or a failure of harvest such as
usually occurs in every decade, or a great war and blockade,
inflicts. The loss and suffering inflicted by the present
scarcity of cotton is many times more serious than any
which the probable fall in the value of gold will cause. Yet
the executive Government and Parliament also have very


II.]


GOLD AS THE WORLD'S MONEY.


ioi


rightly refused to admit any claim for unusual compensation
or relief. By the poor law, indeed, the community saves all
from positive starvation; hut no Government could ever pretend
to save any portion of the people from losses and minor hard-
ships entailed by natural, unforeseen, and inevitable fluctua-
tions. A Government which attempted to turn itself into
an universal assurance company, superseding all individual
forethought and liability to disaster, would soon come to grief,
like other socialistic enterprises.


XXXV I . — Ought Gold as a Standard of Value to be abandoned?

It may seem that there is one very simple way of avoiding
all the evils and apparent injustice of gold depreciation, namely,
to change the standard of value to silver. This accordingly
is what Chevalier would advise us to do. There is, no doubt,
much to be said in favour of the proposal. It has always been
a mere matter of opinion whether silver or gold were the better
standard. Now that gold has actually lost its stability, all
pretence for retaining it as the standard might seem to be
gone. The country may be said to be calmly looking on
while every contract, including that of the National Debt,
is being violated against the intention of the contracting
parties.

Had gold indeed utterly lost its ancient stability of value
there would be no other course than to abandon it in favour
of silver. But I think that the ultimate effect of the late gold
discoveries will be to render gold more than ever the pre-
eminent and natural standard of value. The greatly increased
mass of gold in use, the extended area of production, and the
greater variety of nations which share in its production, will
finally render it far more steady in value even than it has
been. In becoming more abundant gold will become more
than ever the natural international currency, by the flow of
which the balances of the exchanges of nations are adjusted.


102


THE VALUE OF GOLD .


[n.


It will become more generally the money of the world.* So
far from our changing from gold to silver as a standard, many
years will probably not pass before several countries, which
still cling to silver, will be constrained to change to gold.
Gold will form the mass of the currency as regards value,
even if it do not furnish the standard, and the inconveniences
are very great of using coins varying in denomination, as was
the case in England in the early part of the last century.

Gold has not lost its character of a standard by the late
gold discoveries. These must be regarded as one of those runs
of Tuck, one of those events of extreme improbability, which
will in all likelihood not recur in the course of ages. According
to the doctrine of chances, a person may play whist until he
gets a complete hand of trumps, or any other particular hand
he likes to name ; or he may throw dice until at length ,§ixes
are thrown without fail for a whole day. He might have to
play for years, or for centuries, or for geological ages before
such events happened and equal periods before they should
happen again. So it is with gold discovery. The great ex-
tension of the English race of late years had prepared the way
for such discoveries, and when once the gold was accidentally
found in California, the attention drawn to the subject led to
the even greater discoveries in Australia, and to a tail of minor
discoveries in New Zealand, Nova Scotia, and British Columbia.
But the present gold fever at an end, centuries will probably
pass without such another run of luck. The character of gold
as a standard is not much damaged by a variation such as has
not occurred more than two or three times in the history of the
world; of which the last occurrence was in the sixteenth
century, and of which the next occurrence may be as far in the

* These anticipations have been entirely realised within the last few
years. The ideas here briefly expressed were developed more fully in some
of the later papers published in this volume, as well as in the book on " Money
and the Mechanism of ifschange,” chap. xii. Bnt I may fairly claim to
have maintained the same opinion consistently from the first, namely, that
gold must become the standard money of advanced nations.


II.]


GOLD DISCO VERIES.


103


future as that is in the past. The character of gold is no more
changed by these discoveries than is the game of whist by the
occurrence of an extraordinary hand of cards, or the climate of
the British Islands by one of those extraordinary cyclones
which at long intervals reach our shores.

It is worthy of remark, that gold and many other things
will assume an altogether new condition of stability when there
are no longer new lands to explore. The centre of Africa,
Borneo, New Guinea, some parts, perhaps, of Asia, together
with tracts at the north and south poles, alone offer new ground
at present. After these parts have been examined as well as
they may be, the chances will grow still less of any recurrence
of great gold discoveries.

But whether gold be a good or a bad standard, it is to be
questioned whether silver is a better one. A change of
standard to silver at present would bring no relief, because
silver, as I have shown,* is depreciated as much as gold, save
3 per cent., which is an inconsiderable change. And when
the French silver currency has ceased to overflow, as it soon
must, and the value and price of silver rise, this restoration to
the old value would not, for the most part, benefit creditors,
who have suffered or are suffering, but a new set of creditors,
including many who may have succeeded to or bought up the
claims of former annuitants and creditors at their reduced
value, and who have no claim whatever to the benefit.

It is also by no means clear that silver will be more free
than gold from future variations of importance.

XXX'VII . — Save the Gold Discoveries added to the Wealth of

the World?

If we take wealth to be that which is agreeable and useful
to mankind, it may be safely said that the mere gold produced
by Australia and California represents a great and almost dead
loss of labour. •


See above, pp, 60, 61.


104 THE VALUE OF GOLD. [n.

A century or more ago it was the fashion to consider gold
and silver as the only wealth , because they happened to be the
measures and vehicles of wealth. Now it is more correctly
seen that gold is one of the last things which can be considered
wealth in itself, and that in its most useful employment as
money, the very scarcity of gold is its recommendation,
rendering the value greater, and the weight or quantity to be
carried as money less. It is only so far as the cheapening of
gold renders it more available for gilding and for plate , for
purposes of ornament , and for use in other ways than as money ,
that we can be said to gain directly from the gold discoveries .
To over-estimate the indirect effects of these discoveries in
creating new colonies, in spreading the English people and
language, and in newly animating commerce, is not easy. But
in itself gold-digging has ever seemed to me almost a dead
loss of labour as regards the world in general — a wrong against 1
the human race, just such as is that of a Government against
its people, in over-issuing and depreciating its own currency.


APPENDIX.


Note A. — The sentence on the back of the title-page* is
from certain brief dialogues u Imprinted at London in Meet-
streate, neere unto Saincte Dnnstones Church, by Thomas
Marshe/ 5 in 1581. They have been attributed to Shakespeare,
and were reprinted with his name in I751.f

The real writer, however, was William Stafford. The
dialogues attack certain common prejudices against learning,
trade, enclosure of land, etc. in a very able and enlightened
manner. They are creditable even to the age of Shakespeare,
and are interesting and worthy of perusal for many reasons.
They are to be noticed here, and have before been noticed in
Jacob's “ History of the Precious Metals/' with regard to the
great rise of prices occurring at the time, chiefly in consequence
of the American discoveries of gold and silver mines. The rise
of prices was indeed attributed by W. S. to the debasement of
the coin, against which he argued as clearly and successfully as
has ever since been done. His mistake was not without excuse,
considering that the coin had been debased under Henry VIII.

*. See above, p. 14.

t Hallam remarks of the book : “This bears the initials W. S., which, some
have idiotically taken for William Shakspeare.” (Introduction to “The Litera-
ture of Europe,” 1839, vol. iii. p. 361.) To complete the apparent absurdity,
the book has since been beautifully reprinted, at the expense of the Eail
of Derby, by the new Shakespeare Society (Trubner, 1876), not, it is to be
hoped, because it was once attributed to Shakespeare, but because it throws
much light upon the state of trade and agriculture m Shakespearean times.
It is indeed a most remarkable work, and we may well be glad to have so good
a reprint. The first passage quoted is found at page 63 of this new edition.


io6 THE VALUE OF GOLD . [n.

and Edward VI. not long before. But the effects of any
alteration of the standard are most clearly stated, and the
distribution of loss and gain is thus explained :

“ Knight. — I pray you what be those sorts that yee mean© ?
And first of those that yee thinke should haue no losse
thereby ?

“ Doctor. — I meane al these that liue by buying and selling;

for, as they buy deare, they sell thereafter.

“ Knight. — -What is the next sort that yee say would win by it ?
“ Doctor. — Mary, all such as haue takinges, or Fearmes in
theyr owne manurance* at the olde rent ; for where they
pay after the olde rate, they sell after the new ; that is, they
pay for theyr lande good cheape, and sell all things growing
thereof deare.

“Knight. — -What sorte is that which yee sayde should haue*
greater losse hereby, then these men had profit ?

“Doctor. — It is all noblemen, gentlemen, and all other that
liue either by a stented rent or stypend, or do not Manure
the ground, or doe occupy no buying or selling.”

And elsewhere the Knight says :

“ You my neighbour the husbandman, you Maister Mercer
and you Goodman Capper, with other artificers may save
yourselves metely well. Forasmuch as all thinges are deerer
than they were, so much doe you arise in the pryce of your
wares and occupations that yee sell agayne. But we have
nothing to sell whereby we might advaunce ye price thereof,
to countervail© those things that we must buy again©.”


Manoeuvre, cultivation.


II.]


EXTENDED REVIEW OF PRICES.


107


Note B. (See p. 33.)

It was the mistaken notion of some few persons that con-
vertible Bank notes might have a peculiar efficacy in regulating
prices and sowing the seeds of fluctuations. In the reaction
from this error others have gone so far as to assert that there
is no obvious relation between the fluctuations of the note
currency and the course of prices. The comparison of the
general curve of prices in the diagram facing page 32, with
the corresponding curve of the note circulation, as shown for
instance in full detail in my Diagram of the Bank Accounts,
will prove a striking relation, viz. that an expansion of the
currency occurs one or two years previous to a rise of prices .
The rise of prices once started, however, proceeds independently
of the currency for a time. This is shown in the following
table, from which it also appears that the chief additions to
the metallic currency are made at periods of rising prices.


Years.

Bank of England N

Average of March,
June, Sept , Dec.

ote Circulation.

Ratio to average
of 1845-50.

Variation of
Prices
(See p. 46 )

Gold and Silver
Com issued from
the Mint.

1843

£19,168,000

95-7


£6,895,000

1844

21,094,000

105*3


4,198,000

1845

21,576,000

107-7

104*4

4,899,000

1846

20,787,000

103 7

105-4

4,901,000

1847

19,561,000

97*6

110 8

5,293,000

1848

18,790,000

93 8

94-1

2,490,000

1849

19,265,000

961

89 6

2,299,000

1850

20,261,000

ion

92 1

1,621,000

1851

20,215,000

101*0

92-4

4,492,000

1852

23,028,000

115 0

93 -8

8,936,000

1853

23,471,000

117-1

1113

12,664,000

1854

21,329,000

106-1

120 7

4,354,000

1855

20,330,000

101-4

117-6

9,245,000

1856

20,083,000

100 2

122-5

6,476,000

1857

'20,081,003

100 2

128 8

5,240,000

1858

20,860,000

104*0

114-2

1,690,000

1859

21,855,000

109-1

116-0

3,305,000

1860

21,572,000

107*6

117-9

3,378,000

1861

19,554,000

97-6

115-1

8,673,000

1862

20,303,000

101-3

113-4

8,338,000


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[a


108


It must be allowed that these facts are the very ones with
which the currency theorists would support their nations. But
they are not less mistaken in supposing that the notes have
any peculiar effect; it is a superabundance of gold bullion that
first turns prices upwards by a real but temporary lowering of
the value of gold in the country. All the gold coin and bullion
in the country must be considered as constantly on sale. The
issue department of the Bank is the national gold warehouse,
and notes are but the warrants, exactly resembling dock-
warrants, entitling the holder to certain portions of the gold
stored up. Thus I apprehend that a superabundance of gold
in the Bank reduces its value and raises prices, just as would
a superabundant supply of sugar or tea in the London Docks
reduce the value of sugar or tea. It is' credit, or the creation of
prospective gold > which allows prices to continue rising for a
time while gold is decreasing. But the knotty point remains
unexplained — that is to say, the exact relation of gold as a
commodity on sale to gold as the most perfect form of free capital
on hire .

Note 0. (See p. 37.)

Although the comparison of periods just before and after
the gold discoveries will exhibit the effects of the new gold
most free from other influences, there is an obvious advantage
in extending the inquiry further back. By comparing the
period 1851-62 with that of 1844-50, and then the latter with
the previous period of 1833-43, we shall ascertain not only
whether prices have altered since the gold discoveries, but also
whether the alteration is of an unusual character. The* gold
discoveries being a new event intervening between 1844-50
and 1851-62, it is not the simple change of price then which
is dhe to the gold, but the difference of the change between the
two second periods from the change between the two first
periods.

From Tooke's “History of Prices/* the Annual Register, and


ii.] EXTENDED REVIEW OF PRICES. log

other sources, I have formed hasty averages of twenty-four of
the thirty-nine chief commodities for the years 1838-43. This
interval of years seems to have formed the preceding rather
broken period of fluctuation of investment.

It thus seems that silver was slightly dearer in 1833-43
than in 1845-5(3, but was still distinctly cheaper than since
1851. The metals in general did not vary much in price
between 1833-48 and 1845-50, but the majority of other
commodities fell in price by some 12 per cent.

This considerable change suggested the notion that the
average of 1845-50 might be too restricted and erroneously
low. The best period, as shown on page 36, would be 1844-50,
and the year 1848 might also be included without impropriety.
Though complete and accurate data for 1843 and 1844 were
not available, I carefully examined such as I could readily get,
and thus satisfied myself that the inclusion of these two years
would have slightly lowered the average (1845-50) adopted,
instead of raising it, so that it is, if anything, a little too high .
The extension of the period in the other direction into 1851
and 1852 would also have considerably lowered the average.

It is therefore certain that prices did truly fall between
1833-43, and 1844-50, but rose between the last period and
1851-62. It must, indeed, be generally known to all who
concern themselves with these matters that the prices of
materials of manufacture, and of most other articles had been
continually falling since the great wars. I am the more sure of
the fact, because I have by me diagrams constructed from data
in Tooke’s ff History of Prices, ” and from other sources, repre-
senting the course of prices from various periods in the last
century. Overlooking fluctuations due to variations of supply,
and the greater fluctuations due to variations of demand, it may
be confidently stated that prices pursued a downward course
from 1820, about the time when the currency was re-established
on a gold basis, to 1850. The fall, it is true, was most rapid
at first. Silver, too, does not share in the fall. We can only


IIO


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


[ii.


explain these facts, so far as I am aware, by supposing that
the supply of the precious metals did not keep p^tce with the
demand, or that while modes of procuring, raising and making
other articles more easily and cheaply were constantly being
discovered, no such great improvements took place in the
procuring of the precious metals. It should be remembered,
too, that the supplies of Russian gold were failing, and the
Spanish-Ameriean colonies were falling into anarchy.

Thus while industry, trade, and property were rapidly
advancing in Great Britain, America, and most other parts of
the world, there was no corresponding advance in the pro-
duction of the precious metals. Prices, both in gold and
silver, continually receded. Now if, while the introduction
of free trade, railways, telegraphs, and innumerable other
improvements accelerated the extension of trade, and the
consequent demand for the precious metals, no new discoveries
of gold and silver had been made, what must have ensued ?
Prices must have continued in the downward course they had
pursued for thirty or forty years before . But they did not con-
tinue in this course — on the contrary they turned upwards in a
sudden and decided manner , as shown in the body of this tract.
And this change was simultaneous with the discovery of the
new gold-fields. Half the Prerogative Instances of Bacon are
exemplified in this question, and if the philosophy of obser-
vation and common sense may be applied to statistical matters,
we can draw but one conclusion — that prices have risen in
consequence of the gold discoveries.

But we may now draw another speculative conclusion. The
gold discoveries have had the double effect of arresting the fall
of prices and then raising them. The total effect is not merely
the rise that has occurred, but that rise plus the fall that
would have occurred. This goes a considerable way to explain
why prices have not risen so high as the vast supplies of gold
might have led us to expect. It is true we touch upon the
ax-gum ent of several distinguished writers, that the rapid


II.]


EXTENDED REVIEW OF PRICES .


in


extension of trade would absorb tbe new supplies of gold and
prevent th^in from pressing upon tbe markets and raising
prices. But an argument that a rise of prices is not to be
expected does not weigh much against the fact that arise of prices
has occurred . And when to explain away this rise of prices
without reference to gold, we are told that the extension of
trade and manufacture has caused a great demand, for many
materials, and this has raised prices, I can only answer that to
a similar extension of trade and manufactures generally must
be attributed the fall of prices between 1820 and 1850. Similar
causes have similar effects. He who allows prices to have risen
since 1850, but denies it to be the effect of the gold discoveries,
must point out something else in the progress of industry since
1850 entirely different and contrary to the progress before ;
otherwise, it is natural to point to these gold discoveries as
that which has entirely altered the course of prices.*


Note D. ( See p. 72.)

The following extracts from The Melbourne Argus , quoted in
the “ Journal of the Statistical Society 99 for September, 1862,
vol. xxv. p. 897, show how rapid has been the decline in the
profits of gold-digging.

<c We cannot estimate the aggregate earnings of our mining
population at more than £8,000,000 sterling, which, divided
among 100,000 diggers (the exact number returned is 100,468),
only gives £80 per head per annum. But even this sum must
be considerably in excess of the net earnings of each individual,
since ’from the gross product must be deducted the interest on
the mining plant employed, the cost of the fuel consumed by
the steam-engines, and of the timber required for stabling,
the maintenance of the horses used in connection with the

* The next ensuing Paper (III.) in this volume treats in a more general way
of the variation of prices during the periods in question.


112 THE VALUE OF GOLD. [n.

whims, pumps, and puddling-machines, and a large sum to
represent the deterioration of plant, and casualties,

ee Probably £70 a-year would approximate more closely to
the average earnings of each miner, and the bearing of this
fact upon the value of labour generally in this colony is too
important to be overlooked. The income of the digger has con-
stituted a standard by which the wages of day labourers have
been adjusted ever since the discovery of the gold-fields. The
fluctuations in the wages of the latter have been determined by
those of the former ; and the close relation which has existed,
and continues to exist, between the decline in the rate of
wages and the average earnings of the miners, as a class, will
become apparent by a comparison of them at the under-
mentioned rates and periods.”

The data given, when uniformly reduced to the rate per day,
are as follows :


Bate of Wages per Day.

1854.

1857.

1861.


s.

&

s.

d.

5.

d.

Farm labourers (with rations ?)

5

10

4

2

2

6

Stock keepers (with, rations ?)

4

4

3

4

2

8

Masons ... ...

32

0

16

0

14

0

Caipenters

28

0

14

0

11

0

General labourers ...

12

6

9

0

1

0

Miners (gold-diggers)

8

8

6

6

4

8


As the above are the average earnings of diggers, and
many earned much more, of course the majority must have
earned something less. Though in the past years of the gold
excitement wages were much raised by the attraction of the
diggings, it is obvious that the real profits cannot fall much
lower without the occupation being deserted. A successful
gold-digger must be a strong, active, intelligent, and even
ingenious man, capable of earning good wages in a score of
occupations.


II.]


PRODUCE OF GOLD.


113


Note E. ( See p. 73.)


The following estimate of the gold produce of Victoria
up to the end of 1859 is given by the Kegistrar-General of
Victoria.


1851 .

1852 .

1853 .

1854 .


£580,587
. 10,899,733

12,600,083
9,568,262
1859 .


1855 . . £11,172,261

1856 . . 11,942,783

1867 • . 11,046,113

1858 . . 10,112,752

. £9,122,702


The greatest productiveness of the Victoria diggings was
attained within two years from their discovery. The fluctua-
tions are chiefly caused by the migrations of diggers, and the
following account of the produce of New South Wales, from
The Sydney Morning Herald of January 21, 1863, shows a con-
tinuous decrease down to the year 1855, and then a continuous
increase up to the present time, which about compensates the
falling off of the Victoria produce.


1851 .

Ounces.

161,880

1857 .

Oances.

148,126

1852 .

199,500

1858 .

255,535

1853 .

178,960

1859 .

293,574

1854 .

148,900

1860 .

355,328

1855 .

107,250

1861 .

403,139

1856 .

134,950

1862 .

584,219

The produce of

1851 is that of half a

year only. Some


writers have fallen into a serious mistake by treating the
export of gold dust from New South Wales as the whole
produce. They should have added many millions of pounds
coined at the Sydney Royal Mint.

The total supply of new gold during the twelve years
1849-60 has been stated by Mr. Newmarch at 300 millions


1


THE VALUE OF GOLD .


1 4


[u.


sterling, which is equal to about 50 per cent., or the half of the
total stock of gold supposed to be in use at the beginning
of the period. Is it likely ? — Is it conceivable that the stock
of gold in the world, which before 1848 must have been nearly
stationary, should suddenly have grown half as large again
without a considerable effect upon prices ?


Note F. ( See p. 71.)

I reprint below the third part of a paper, entitled “Re-
marks on the Australian Gold Fields,” prepared by me for
the Literary and Philosophical Society of Manchester, and
published in vol. i. series iii. of the Memoirs of the Society,
session 1859-60 (1862), pp. 115-30.

On the future Supply of Gold.

The question, Will the supply of gold from Australia in-
crease, remain constant, or diminish ? is of evident and high
importance. I will therefore conclude with a few remarks by
way of answer.

The rich diggings of Ballaarat, Bendigo, and Forest Creek
were all discovered in the course of one or two years after
attention was first drawn by Hargreaves to the presence of
gold in the Australian rocks. Since then the most favourable
localities have been well prospected, or tested, for alluvial
gold by the many thousands of experienced diggers with
whom Victoria now abounds. I regard it as certain, there-
fore, that no alluvial deposits, equally rich and equally
accessible, will ever be laid open in future. But it Is by
no means certain that great and rich “ leads 33 of gold may not
exist in many places still concealed by the great thickness of
the overlying alluvium, or by a portion of the basaltic forma-
tion or sheet of lava. Such leads would be comparable to the
new and deep leads beneath the new town of Ballaarat, and
would be discovered only by a very lucky chance, or by a


ix.] THE FUTURE SUPPLY OF GOLD . 115

skilful and expensive ‘search. From the mode in which
schistose hifls, hearing fine auriferous reefs, only just appear
here and there through the basaltic formation, as at Olunes
and Melbourne, we may consider it very possible that complete
gold districts may lie hidden, perhaps for ever, at considerable
depths beneath other parts of the basaltic plain. Not much,
perhaps, is to be hoped from the future discovery of alluvial
gold.

The chief diggings of Victoria have, during the past eight
years, been so vigorously undermined and turned up by small
parties of miners that scarcely a square yard of untouched
auriferous ground is left — at least such ground as would have
formerly been considered profitable to men without experience
and means of undertaking large works. But these diggings
are by no means exhausted. The miners, learning the advan-
tages of co-operation and the use of machinery, find that
masses of alluvium, only slightly auriferous, now afford a
handsome and also a steady profit. Ground exhausted in the
old style is being reworked in a much more complete manner,
and even the failings, or refuse from the cradles of previous
diggers, is valuable to those provided with more improved
washing apparatus. As science, capital, and co-operation are
more and more introduced, auriferous land of less and less
richness will successively become profitable, and of such land
the quantity, it may be stated, is certainly very great.

It follows, then, that the supply of gold, even from the
present alluvial diggings, would diminish but slowly, unless,
indeed, other social circumstances, as may well happen, should
interfere. The many thousands of Chinese diggers, with their
quiet, plodding, and, so to say, mean industry, assist to main-
tain and steady the supply. Yet it must certainly be allowed
that the deposits of alluvial gold will begin to fail gradually
in a very moderate interval of time.

The answer is otherwise, I believe, when we take into
account the quartz reefs which are real gold mines . The

1 2


THE VALUE OF GOLD.


116


Dl.


number of reefs now known to be auriferous is great; of the
rest some may be devoid of gold, but tbe majority probably
contain a proportion of the valuable metal which, either now
or in some years to come, as machinery is improved, will repay
extraction. As reefs are now worked by small parties of
miners, each owning a small claim and sinking an independent
shaft, even the richest reefs would cease to be profitable at a
certain depth, from the great comparative expense of draining
and working so small a mine. But if a whole reef were in
possession of one large moneyed company, two or three shafts
and a single establishment would suffice; powerful engines
and pumps would be employed to drain the mine, and the
quartz reef might be followed as deeply as copper veins or
coal beds. There is no known reason, beyond a mere fancy in
the minds of some geologists,* that reefs should become im-
poverished in sinking ; the fancy is now proved to be contrary
to fact. Even a few large reefs then would, I believe, yield
a considerable and constant supply of gold for many years to
come. Eor how much more may we not hope when greater
experience is attained in quartz mining, now so new an em-
ployment ; when improved machinery is brought into use for
the rapid, complete, and cheap extraction of the gold from the
quartz matrix; when capital is attracted in great sums to
the pursuit : and when the search for new auriferous reefs,
becoming more keen, is rewarded, as I believe, it will be, by
abundant discoveries ?

My conclusions, expressed as shortly as possible, are :

1 . That no great and recurring discoveries of alluvial gold
are to be expected; so that the yield of alluvial gold* must
notably, yet gradually, fall off.

2. That the supply of gold from its quartz matrix is subject
to entirely different laws ; that we at present know of no limit
to *the amount procurable with the aid of capital; and that
that amount, whatever it be, will probably remain constant

* Murchison’s <f Siluria,” 1854, oh. xvii. p. 455.


II.]


YIELD OF GOLD IN AUSTRALIA .


Hi

for a long interval of time ; that, in short, the supply of gold
from Australia will prove as inexhaustible as the supply of tin
and copper from the Cornish mines, or as the supply of almost
any other metal from its most common source.

Note G.

The following extract from The Economist newspaper, of
4th March, 1882 (yol. xl. p. 252), gives the latest information
about the yield of gold in Victoria. It would appear that the
deep leads of alluvial gold are now being discovered.

" After dwindling for many years prior to 1879, the gold
production of Victoria has begun again to increase. The total
amount raised in 1880, it is estimated, exceeded the product of
1879 by fully 70,000 ounces, and now for 1881 a further
increase in the yield is reported. According to the estimates
of The Melbourne Argus , which are generally reliable, the


output last year was as follows :

Ounces.

Victorian gold exported

398,641

Do. minted

519,884

Do. held by banks 31st December last

60,438

Total

978,963

Deduct held by banks, 31st December, 1880

92,547

Total output for 1881 .

886,416

„ „ ,, 1880 .

812,092

Increase for 1881 .

74,324


Estimating the value of the gold raised at £4 per ounce, last
year’s yield represents a value of £3,546,000. As to the causes
of the increased gold production, the Mining Department
reports that it is considered to be due to the opening up of new
gold-producing areas, in which the rich deposits have been
hitherto hidden beneath deep flows of volcanic rock. The dis-
coveries in these tracks have been greatly facilitated by the


THE VALUE OF GOLD,


[n.


n8


operations of tlie diamond drills imported and worked by the
Government. The rapid borings through dense basalt by those
machines, and the information disclosed by the cores of rock
obtained, have given a great impetus to alluvial mining, and
have enabled mining companies to determine the downward
courses of auriferous lodes at distant points, and to sink shafts
with precision either upon or in close proximity thereto/*

The following table gives the average number of gold-
miners employed in the colony of Victoria during each of the
fifteen years ending 1880 , and the quantity obtained during
each of the past sixteen years :


Year.

Number of
Miners.

Yield of Gold.
Ounces

Year.

Number of
Miners.

Yield of Gold.
Ounces.

1866 . .

73,749

3,636,581

1874 ...


1,102,614

186? . .

65,857

1,493,831

1875 ..


1,058,823

1868 ...

63,181

1,474,187

1876 . .

41,564

937,260

1869 ...

68,037

1,367,903

1877 . .

38,882

792,839

1870

60,367

1,281,841

1878 ...


753,793

1871 ...

58,101

1,303,379

1879 ...

37,553

718,208

18?2 ...

54,651

1,317,102

1880 ...

38,568

812,092

1873 ...

52,544

1,249,407

1881 ...


883,625


A similar increase of production is reported from the gold-
fields of New South Wales and Tasmania.


III.]


TOOKE'S “HISTORY OF PRICES I


119


III.

THE VARIATION OF PRICES AND THE VALUE
OF THE CURRENCY SINCE 1782*

The results which I wish to explain in this paper were
obtained by applying more extensively the method of investi-
gation employed in a pamphlet on the “ Value of Gold/*
published by me about two years ago. Although my purpose
then was only to ascertain the much- questioned effect of the
gold discoveries, a review of the prices of a period of twenty
years seemed hardly sufficient even for that inquiry. We
cannot safely assert a given change of prices to be occasioned
by an alteration in the supply of gold, unless we observe the
general course of prices for a considerable interval, and show
that there was an unusual change in the course of prices
subsequent to an unusual change in the supply of gold.

Nor do I think it useless, when assisted by a distinct
method of inquiry, to go still further back, and bring into
question the course of prices at the beginning of this century.
No one, indeed, who knows the division of opinion which
existed on this subject, the hundreds of publications which it
called forth, and the incessant discussion which it created,
would wish uselessly to raise the subject into debate again.
But I think that a true understanding of the course of prices
can alone explain many important facts in the statistical and
commercial history of the country.

It is true that we have Tooke’s “ History of Prices/* a
unique work, of which we can hardly overestimate the value.

* Printed in the (t Journal of the Statistical Society of London ” for Jane,
1865, vol. xxviii. pp. 294-320, Laying been read before the Society in Hay, 1865.


120


THE VARIATION OF PRICES ’.


[m.


But it has struck me that Tooke, and other writers on the
subject of prices, were in want of some method pf reducing
their tables of prices, and eliciting the general facts contained
in them. Large tables of figures are but a mass of confused
information for those casually looking into them. They will
probably be the source of error to those who pick out a few
figures only; a systematic but probably tedious course of
calculation and reduction is necessary to their safe and complete
use.

My inquiry has accordingly consisted in applying such a
method of reduction to the tables of prices contained in the
t€ History of Prices ” by Took© and Newmarch, extending with
little interruption from 1782 to recent years, the purpose being
to ascei'tain the course of prices of commodities generally, or
of any distinct class of commodities separately.

The method of reduction used consists in calculating the
ratios of change of prices year after year, and then taking,
by the aid of logarithms, the geometric mean ratio of change of
prices for each year. The reasons for adopting the geometric
mean were explained in my pamphlet,* and I still think those
reasons sufficient. I must mention, however, that the method
has been called in question by Dr. E. Laspeyres, Professor in
the University of Basle, who has published*]- a complete and
very valuable investigation concerning prices in Hamburg,
including a review of some English writings, and of the
previous labours of Soetbeer in the same subject. Dr. Laspeyres
urges, if I read him aright, that as the value of gold meant its
purchasing poiver , we ought to take the simple arithmetic
average of the quantities of gold necessary for purchasing
uniform quantities of given commodities. There is certainly
some ground for the argument. But it may be urged with
equal reason that we should suppose a certain uniform quantity

* €t Serkras Ml in the Value of Gold,” pp. 6, 7. (See above, p. 23.)

■f “ Hamburger Waarenpreise,” in the “ Jabrbncb von Nationaloekonomie,”
Bd, iii. s. 81, etc.


III.]


CHOICE OF THE MEAN \


121


of gold to be expended in equal portions in the purchase of
eertain commodities, and that we ought to take the average
quantity purchased each year. This might be ascertained by
taking the harmonic mean . Thus there are no less than three
different kinds of averages which might be drawn.

Suppose, for example, that the price a of one commodity
were to change to 5, and the price p of another commodity were
to change to q } then the arithmetic mean ratio of change which
Dr. Laspeyres would adopt is


1 (l + s\

2 \a + p)


or


bp + aq
2 ap


The geometric mean is


1


The harmonic mean would be


1 (a , p\ 2 bq

2 \b ~q) 0r aq + bp


Suppose one commodity to remain unchanged in price
(a- 1, 6 = 1), the other to be doubled (p = l, 2 = 2); then the
mean rise of price might be thus variously stated :

Per cent.

Arithmetic mean 50

Geometric „ 41

Harmonic 33


It is probable that each of these is right for its own purposes
when these are more clearly understood in theory. But for the
present approximate results I adopt the geometric mean,
because (1) it lies between the other two; (2) it presents
facilities for the calculation and correction of results by the
continual use of logarithms, without which the inquiry could
hardly be undertaken; (3) it seems likely to give in the most
accurate manner such general change in prices as is due to a
change on the part of gold. For any change in gold will affect
all prices in an equal ratio ; and if other disturbing causes may


122


THE VARIATION OF PRICES \


[m.


be considered proportional to the ratio of change of price they
produce in one or more commodities, then all tjje individual
variations of prices -will be correctly balanced off against each
other in the geometric mean, and the true variation of the
value of gold will be detected.

In any case my tables will present a sufficient first approxi-
mation, and the striking phenomena detected will be under-
estimated rather than over-estimated by my calculations.
Thus the general rise of prices between 1845-50 and 1860-62,
which I had estimated at 10*25 per cent.,* would have been
13*1 per cent., according to Dr. Laspeyres* method of calculation
by the arithmetic mean.f

Calculations of this kind are far from being advocated now
for the first time. Not to speak of Sir George Shuckburgh
Evelyn^s well-known paper in the “Philosophical Transactions”
for 1798 (Part I. p. 176), it was proposed, more than thirty
years ago, “ to correct the legal standard of value (or at least,
to afford to individuals the means of ascertaining its errors),
by the periodical publication of an authentic price current,
containing a list of a large number of articles in general use,
arranged in quantities corresponding to their relative con-
sumption, so as to give the rise or fall, from time to time, of
the mean of prices ; which will indicate, with all the exactness
desirable for commercial purposes, the variations in the value
of money; and enable individuals, if they shall think fit, to
regulate their pecuniary engagements by reference to this
tabular standard

* u A Serious Fall/’ etc. p. 29. (See above, p. 53.)

t “ Hamburger Waarenpreise,” etc., Hildebrand’s “ Jabirbuch/’ etc. Bel. iii.
s. 97.

X " Principles of Political Economy,” p. 406, by G, Poulett Scrope, ftl.P.,
London, 1833. See also the second edition of the same work under the title
“ Political Economy for Plain People,” p. 308, London, 1873. Scropo’s first
reference to this subject is contained in his very able pamphlet , u An Examina-
tion of the Bank Charter Question, with an Inquiry into the Nature of a just
Standard of Value,” published in 1833. The idea was perhaps derived from
the ingenious work of Joseph Lowe, “ The Present State of England in regard
to Agriculture, Trade, and Finance,” etc. qh. ix. London, 1822. A second


TABULAR STANDARD OF VALUE.


123


in,]


Suck a proposal, though scarcely practicable, is interesting,
and perhaps sound in a theoretical point o£ view.

I may add, that I had almost completed my calculations
before I found that no less an authority than Mr. Gh R. Porter
had distinctly advocated and adopted a similar method. In
the first edition of his “Progress of the Nation/'* he proposes
the formation of extensive tables of prices, but adds : “ It is
not meant by this to recommend a mere record of the prices
of goods, such as would be afforded by a collection of prices
current, but a calculation conducted upon the plan already
described, or some other that should be equivalent to it, and
which would afford, on inspection, a correct comparative view
of the average fluctuations that should occur." Mr. Porter
actually publishes f such a table, giving for each month,
1833-37, the average ratio of variation (probably the arith-
metic average) of the prices of fifty commodities. The tables
greatly exaggerate the fluctuations compared with my tables,
as may be seen in the following comparison :


Comparative Prices in the Month of March,


Tear.

POETEE.

Fifty Articles.

Jeyoxs.

Forty Articles

1833

100

100

1834

110

103

1835

117

104

1836

128

114

1837

125

111


This subject of mean prices was again considered (p. 36)
in a most curious mathematical pamphlet “ On Currency,"

edition of this book appeared in 1823, and it was also reprinted (in German)
in Leipsio in the same year, and in New York in 1824. See Horton on “ Silver
and Gold,” pp. 37, 157, Cincinnati, 1877. My book in the International Scientific
Series, on tl Money and the Mechanism of Exchange,” 1875, contains a chapter
(xxv.) on “ A Tabular Standard of Value,” and Lowe’s proposal.

* Yol. ii. p. 235 ; section III. chap. xii.
t Ibid. vol. ii. pp. 236, 237 $ edition of 1847, pp. 444, 445.


124


THE VARIATION OF PRICES.


[i«.


anonymously published in the year 1840.* Several able
articles, too, by M. Levasseur, in the “ Journal des Eeonomistes,”
bear upon the subject.

I come now to the actual construction of my tables. I
selected from Tooke*s tables about forty of the chief com-
modities, including the official prices of corn, and the prices
of butchers* meat and fodder. The particulars are stated in
the Appendix. A single quotation having been obtained for
each year (in the case of some commodities, a yearly average,
but in general the medium of the highest and lowest prices in
the March quotations of Tooke ; s tables), the ratio of each
yearly price to that of the preceding year was calculated
by logarithms, as in the following example :

Price of Wheat,


Tear.

Tearly Price.

Logarithm

of

Number of Pence.

Difference.

1782 ...

£ s. d.

2 9 3

0-772


1783

2 14 3

0-814

0 042

1784

2 10 4

0-781

1*967

1785

2 3 1

0-714

1-933

1786

2 0 0

0-681

1-967

1787

2 2 5

0 707

0 026


The logarithm in the third column is obtained by subtract-
ing each logarithm in the second column from the logarithm
for the succeeding year. In practice it was more convenient

* I have lately ascertained that this remarkable pamphlet was the work of
the late Sir J. W. Lubbock, the father of the present Sir John Lubbock. It is,
in fact, acknowledged to be his in a list of publications given on the cover of
one of his other works, and on this ground was entered under his name in the
catalogue of the Graves Library at University College. (See the catalogue of
hooks in the General Library, etc. at University College, vol. ii. p. 399.) Sir
John Lubbock has also informed me that such a pamphlet was written by his
father. It was published by Knight, London.


in.] METHOD OF INQUIRY. 125

to subtract each logarithm from the preceding one, the re-
ciprocals of»the ratios being used all through the calculations
until the averages were completed, when they were easily
turned back.

Tables of the above form having been made nearly com-
plete for the series of years 1782-1864, in respect of about
forty kinds of commodity, the logarithmic ratios for each year
were copied out in perpendicular columns, and in an order
carefully determined on. The several proximate groups were
then added up and averaged. By adding together the sums
of the first groups, larger groups can readily be formed, and
the addition of these gives the final aggregates of the ratios
of the whole forty commodities. The following is a specimen
of the second series of tables :


Prices of Agricultural Produce.


Line.

Commodities.

Logarithmic Ratios of Prices.

1832 to 1831.

1833 to 1832.

1

Wheat

•014

1947

2

Barley

•067

1*940

3

Oats

*016

1-906

4

Bye

•047

1-937

5

Beans

•042

1-948

6

Peas

•030

1945

7

Hay... ...

1-945

•033

8

Clover

•020

•038

a

Straw

1-903

*000

10

Sam of corn (1 — 6) ...

* 2 l 6

1*623

11

Average of corn

*036

1*937

12

Sum of fodder (7 — 9)

1-868

•071

13

Average of fodder

1*956

•024

14

Sum of com and fodder (10, 12 )

•084

1-694


126


THE VARIATION OF PRICES.


in. ,


The averages thus determined, however, give only the
ratio of prices each year to those of the preceding year. To
ge£ the complete and continuous course of prices of any set of
commodities, we must join the separate yearly ratios to each
other year after year, by the simple addition of the logarithms,
as in the following example :


Prices of Metals, Copper, Lead, Tin, Iron.


Year,

Ratio of Prices
each Year to those of
the

Preceding Year.

—

Ratio of Prices each Year
to

Prices of 1782.


Logarithm.

Logarithm.

Common Number.

1782

0 000

oooo

IOO

1783

1-999

1-999

IOO

1784

1-957

1*956

90

1785

1-995

r-95i

89

1786

0-026

1*977

95

1787

1-992

19*69

93

1788

0-011

1*980

96


In the third column each number is found by adding the
preceding number to the number of the succeeding year in
the second column, as for instance :

1*977 = 1-951 + * 026 .

A difficulty arises concerning the classification of com-
modities, that there is no single system of groups into which
they naturally fall. It may always be objected that any one
arrangement is arbitrary. The fact is, that a mass of forty
commodities may be classified in a great number of ways.
The principle I adopted, therefore, was to try all systems of
classification which seemed to be founded on any material
distinctions ; in short, to try as many different systems as I
could, and then to adopt any which seemed to elicit important
information.


in.]


CLASSIFICATION OF COMMODITIES.


12 7


The first proximate grouping was nearly that adopted in
my gold pganphlet, and in most other arrangements it was
sufficient to join these groups together.

A complete classification according to locality of production
was rendered impossible, because most commodities are pro-
duced in several different parts of the world. The natural
and impassable division of tropical and temperate regions,
however, enables us to separate their respective products,
and it will appear that important results may be obtained by
considering the products of eastern countries apart from other
^commodities.

For the interval of years 1800 to 1820 a correction is
obviously necessary to reduce prices and their variations to a
gold standard. A table is to be found in most works on the
currency, giving the depreciation of the Bank of England
paper during each of those years, and the authorities for some
of these numbers are given in a pamphlet by the Earl of
Lauderdale * These numbers, indeed, bear some internal signs
of want of accuracy and reliability, arising, no doubt, from
the fact that the depreciation of the currency was not
recognised by the law. The prices of silver probably furnish
a better criterion of the value of the paper currency, and their
variation is shown in Table I. (Appendix), calculated from the
average variations of the price of standard silver and Spanish
dollars, as given in Tooke’s “ History” (vol. ii. p. 384), and
the “ Report of the Bullion Committee, 1810, ^ p. [22]. There
is, however, a general accordance between the variation of price
of silver and gold, and as it is convenient to keep to a single
standard, I have reduced all the tables to the gold standai’d
by the subtraction of the logarithms in column (3) of Table I.
from the logarithmic ratios of prices in the corresponding
years to prices in 1782.

A further step seemed necessary to present the information

* “ Depreciation of the Paper Currency of Great Britain proved.” London :


1812 .


128


THE VARIATION OF PRICES.


[in.


contained in these tables in the simplest form. The price of
each commodity and group of commodities varies both from
causes peculiar to each commodity, and from causes affecting
gold, the measure of value. The latter are common to all, and
their effects are more or less truly shown in the general varia-
tion of price of all commodities. If, then, we divide the ratios
of variations of individual commodities and partial groups
by the ratios of all commodities, which is done by the simple
subtraction of the corresponding logarithms, we get the
variations peculiar to each commodity or partial group. (See
Appendix, Table VIII., comparative variations.)

The logarithmic ratios thus prepared may be turned back
into natural numbers, giving the ratios of prices each year to
prices in 1872. But, for most purposes, I should prefer to
retain the ratios in their logarithmic form, and represent them
to the eye upon a diagram. The diagrams* appended to this
paper are thus drawn, and have several advantages over those
drawn on the scale of common numbers. Equal perpendicular
distances represent equal ratios of change, and straight lines
represent numbers in geometric, not in arithmetic, progression.
A tendency may be observed in mbst statistical curves to
become divergent, or to run up into excessive elevations.
This is easily understood when we consider that in almost
every branch of statistics numbers should be considered
relatively to each other, which may most easily be done
by representing them on a logarithmic scale. f

* These diagrams represent the variations of prices in currency, not
corrected during the interval 1800-20 for depreciation of the paper currency.
In the tables the correction has been made.

+ During the years which have elapsed since this paper and the previous
essay on the value of gold were printed, I have not happened to learn that
logarithmic diagrams had been used before their employment in these inquiries.
It must be evident, however, that they furnish the true mode of representing
alj statistical and other numbers of which the ratios, not the absolute amounts,
are in question. Now this is, strictly speaking, the case with almost all
nnmbers used for statistical research, as apart from mere practical accounts.
Professor Osborne Reynolds has recently used logarithmic curves for the
purpose of comparing the ratios of pressures of gases in his researches on


III.]


CURVE OF GENERAL VARIATION


129


The datum point to which the numbers in the tables and
curves are referred is given by the prices of the year 1782,
the first year of Tooke's tables. This is a purely arbitrary
commencement, and it might seem desirable to substitute for
it some carefully-selected average of a period of years. But I
conceive that when we have the variations of a long series of
years presented in a curve, no such datum line is necessary, as
the eye easily compares any year or period with any other year
or period.

It is impossible here to notice more than a very small part
of the information contained in the tables. We notice the
tendency of animal and mineral substances to rise in price,
and of vegetable substances, at least in this country, to
decline.

The curve of the general variation of prices is perhaps the
most interesting. In this we detect a series of smaller undula-
tions, riding, as it were, on one very great one. We see
elevations of prices probably due to speculation, and reaching
their highest points in the years 1796, 1801, 1809, 1814, 1818,
1825, 1836, 1839, 1847, and 1857. The speculation of 1793
is hardly perceptible, and the extraordinary rise of prices in
1825 is chiefly marked by a pause in the very rapid downward
course of prices about that time. From 1833 to 1843, there
is an elevation of prices of a more extensive character than
can well be assigned to speculation alone. Since 1852, lastly,
prices have risen in a permanent manner, which points to the
effect of the Californian and Australian discoveries.

It is, however, the general form of the undulation of prices
which is most remarkable. After the year 1790 an enormous
and long-continued elevation presents itself. And when prices
had reached their highest, about the year 1809, a still more
surprising fall commences, reaching its lowest point in 1849.

diffusion.'* (See “ Philosophical Transactions,” 1879, vol. clxx. pp. 753, etc.)
He calls these curves the logarithms homologues of the plain curves. In his
figures both the ordinates and abscissae are logarithmic.


THE VARIATION OF PRICES.


130


[111.


Between 1809 and 1849, prices fell in the ratio of 100 to
41.*

My purpose has been to ascertain and measure these great
changes with some approach to certainty and accuracy, and to
establish them as facts of observation. To explain or account
for them is a matter which I do not undertake. I cannot help
noticing, however, the insufficiency of all explanations yet
given of the state of prices in the early part of the century.
Fiercely though the subject was debated, it was impossible at
the time, perhaps, to form any adequate notions of the great
movement which was taking place. Some writers laboured to
prove that prices were unchanged, and those who were less
wrong about the fact were hardly less wrong in attributing
that fact to the deranged state of currency and banking at the
time. Subsequently Tooke's “ History of Prices ” came to
be regarded as the authority on the subject. Tooke's main
purpose was to disprove all the prevailing notions about the
extraordinary influence of currency. He allowed, of course,
that the note currency was depreciated in the comparatively
small degree marked by the increased price of gold bullion.
But, beyond this, he would not allow any influence to the
derangement of currencies, and what elevation of prices he
supposed to exist, was attributed by him to the frequency of
bad harvests at the time, or to the disturbance by war of the
ordinary relations of supply and demand. In these opinions
I conceive that Tooke was partly, and only partly right.
On the one hand, I cannot too fully concur in his protest
against the common practice of attributing every evil to the


* I have not been able to discover the cause of this remarkable check and
reversal of the prevailing downward course of prices. But it is worthy of
notice that, in the years 1831-83, there was an altogether exceptional reversal
of the drain of specie to the East, the imports thence exceeding the exports by
the amount of £730,000. (See below, p. 134, and Appendix VI.) There was also
a great expansion of bank circulation in the United States, followed by a
general breakdown of the banks there. (See Sumner’s “ History of American
Currency pp. 123, etc.)


III.]


CAUSES OF HIGH PRICES .


I3i


monetary circulation, which is a very passive thing, and does
not deserve # to be made the scapegoat it has long been. But,
on the other hand, it cannot be denied that the extraordinary
issue of Bank of England notes and private bank notes in
England during the suspension of specie payments, drove
out a large mass of metallic currency. Other amounts were
similarly displaced by the paper currencies of France, Austria,
Russia, and some other countries. In the aggregate a con-
siderable mass of precious metals must have been thrown on
European markets, and to this cause we must assign some
part of the elevation of prices. William Jacob,* indeed,
argues that this effect of the paper currencies would be in-
considerable, and without attempting to discuss the subject
farther here, I am quite ready to allow it would only produce a
small part ’of the elevation of prices.

But then I think the cause assigned by Tooke was equally
insufficient, namely, the unusual frequency of bad seasons. I
cannot think that Tooke, when assigning such a cause, was
fully aware how great and general was the rise of prices. Bad
seasons might well raise the prices of all kinds of corn, fodder,
meat, and agricultural produce, but could not have any perma-
nent effect upon the prices of other articles. Now, though
corn did rise extravagantly in price on several occasions
during the period under review, on the whole it did not rise
so much as metals, fibres, oils, and some other articles. At
the most, I think the unusual frequency of bad harvests could
only be a partial contributing cause to the general rise.

The elevation of prices in the early part of the century is
still more striking when contrasted with the subsequent great
fall, proceeding from 1818 to 1830, and reaching its lowest point
as yet in 1849. This fall is less difficult to understand. The
production of almost all articles has been improved, extended,

* “ Historical Inquiry into the Production and Consumption of the Precious
Metals,” yoI. ii. pp. 866-71. Jacob’s opinion is disputed in the w Quarterly
Review,” Ho. 94, July, 1882, vol. xlvii. p. 427.


132


THE VARIATION OF PRICES .


[m.


and cheapened during this period* and all imported articles
must, too, have been affected by improvements in navigation*
while there was no corresponding improvement in the pro-
duction of the precious metals* from the derangement of the
American mines in 1810 to the Californian discoveries in 1849.

But this argument tells two ways* for manufactories and
modes of production were undergoing improvement in the
earlier period while prices were rising* as well as in the
latter period while they were falling. Even our foreign trade
suffered no great check during the wars* and the very founda-
tions of our home industries were being energetically laid
throughout the period from 1782 to 1815* when prices were
high or rising. The progress of our industry* in short* has
been continuous, and its only change that of acceleration in
recent years. There is nothing in such constant progress that
can account for a great rise of price followed by a great fall.

If the progress of invention causes a fall of price* then we
need even more potent causes to raise prices in opposition to
it in the early part of this century* when invention was most
active.

The production of gold, on the other hand, has* been far
from uniformly progressive. It progressed up to the begin-
ning of the century* but suffered a serious relapse in 1810*
when the American mines were deranged by the Spanish war
of independence. Jacob estimates the average produce* from
1810 to 1830* at one-half the previous amount, and this failure
must be regarded as one of the contributing causes to the fall
of prices.

Further light may* however* be thrown upon the question*
whether gold could be said to be depreciated in the early part
of this century, by considering the relative prices of the
products of different countries and the state of the exchanges.
Professor Cairnes has most clearly pointed out the effects of a

See the diagram prefixed to Stirling’s t( Gold Discoveries,” Edinburgh,

185 $.


III.]


PRICES OF ORIENTAL PRODUCE .


133


flood of gold in successively raising prices in tlie countries into
which, it flo^s.* He established theoretically that while the
precious metals are copiously flowing, for instance, from this
country to India, prices here must be higher than in India;
hence all articles will be dear in price here except those tropical
products which we buy from India.

It was, if I recollect aright, noticed by Mr. Newmarch, in
the sixth volume of Tooke*s “History/* that the prices of
tropical and some colonial produce had scarcely risen of late
years. I encountered the same fact, which I stated, being
then quite unacquainted with Professor Cairnes* writings on
the subject, in the following words: “All the groups which
have fallen in price are of vegetable origin, and chiefly of
foreign growth/* and I gave what I thought an obvious,
though perhaps mistaken, explanation of “the marked dis-
tinction between the classes of materials which have risen
in price and those of foreign articles of food which have
fallen .**+

When Professor Cairnes read my pamphlet he detected,
in this comparative fall of the price of oriental produce, a con-
firmation of his own theoretical views of the effects of an
excess of gold in one country and its motion towards another
country. These three facts, (1) a distinct, though moderate
general rise of prices here ; (2) a drain of bullion to the Bast;
(3) a comparative fall in the price of oriental produce, formed,
in his opinion, when taken in union, a complete demonstration
of some depreciation of gold since the Australian discoveries.

When I had nearly completed the reduction of Tooke's
tables, I could not help being struck by the fact that when
prices were highest here, between 1800 and 1815, the prices
of Eastern produce were not higher than they had been, and

* “ Report of the British Association,” 1858 j “Dublin. Statistical Journal/*
January, 1859; “Frazer’s Magazine,” September, 1859, and January, 1860;
Econoynist, 30th May, 1863.

+ “ A Serious Fall,” etc. p. 31. (See above, p. 56.)


134


THE VARIATION OF PRICES .


[hi.


consequently, in comparison with the prices of other articles,
had fallen. This fact, according to Professor Ca'iraes* views,
would inevitably point to a comparative redundancy of gold
in Europe. I was therefore led to inquire into the past
fluctuations of the current of specie towards the East.

It does not seem possible to form any one complete series
of accounts of the export of bullion extending over the whole
period of our inquiry, but we may perhaps pretty safely infer
the character of the fluctuations from tables given in the
Appendix.

The current of gold having been very steady during the
earlier half of last century, fluctuated a good deal during the
second half of the century. It was considerable in the period
1785 to 1791 or 1792 ; then it fell off very much, and only
began to rise again into importance in 1797. In the years
1798, 1799, 1802, 1808, 1804, and 1805 the exports both of
the East India Company and of private persons were very
great, the exports of the Company at least reaching greater
amounts than had ever been known before.

Independent evidence of the increased current of precious
metals setting towards the East in the early years of this
century is seen in the table of imports into Bengal, given in
Macpherson*s “ Commerce with India.” And the later course
of the trade is given in the semi-official tables published
in Martin’s <e British Colonies/* p. 360, B, etc.*

The current greatly fell off in the period 1806-13, but
stood at a very high amount in the years 1814-19. After
1820 the drain decreased very rapidly, and the exports of
other merchandise increased, so that about the year 1832 the
current of treasure actually turned in the opposite direction
for a year or two. With slight exceptions, there was then no
considerable movement until the Californian and Australian
discoveries of gold, which were followed almost immediately
by the great drain, unremitted to the present time.

* See also Tooke on t( High and Low Prices,” p. 211.


iil] DRAIN OF BULLION TO THE EAST. 135

Viewed by itself, the current of specie would not afford any
safe criterion of variations in value of gold here. It might
easily be asserted that the growth of our trade about the
beginning of the century required increased remittances,
especially after the opening of the trade to -India in 1814;
that afterwards the increased export of cotton and other manu-
factures took the place of treasure. Under this view, however,
the recent drain of bullion stands out as unaccountable.

Then again it will probably be said that the great wars
were sufficient to account for vast remittances of treasure
and for interruptions of trade. I am quite willing to allow to
such causes all that can be fairly attributed to them, but I
cannot regard occasional and temporary events as the causes
of long- continued changes of trade.

When we compare the large average exportation of treasure
during the period 1798-1820 with the high general range of
prices at the time, and the comparatively low price of oriental
produce ; when we remember that the increased abundance of
gold in late years has been accompanied by somewhat increased
prices, by an enormous drain of bullion to the East, and again
by a low price of oriental produce ; and when we observe
especially that between these two periods, when prices in
general were very rapidly falling, or were low, and oriental
produce comparatively high, the drain of bullion was either
small or actually reversed, we can hardly help connecting
these events as causes and effects.

I am far from asserting, indeed, that there is any exact
coincidence between the state of prices and the drain of bullion
in the period 1798-1820 that would put the question beyond
doubt. The drain, for instance, was greatest after 1814, when
general prices here had already fallen, and the prices of
oriental produce had risen. But this discordance is of a kind
which might be accounted for by the opening of markets and
by political events. Such events may dislocate and reverse a
trade for a few years, but on an average of a long period trade


1 36 THE VARIATION OF PRICES . [111.

will assert; its own character, and deeper causes will produce
tlxeir effects.

I do not attempt to account for tlie comparative redun-
dancy and depreciation of gold, which I believe to have
existed in Europe in the early part of this century. No
single cause that I know of can be sufficient to account for
so singular an event. The discovery of the Kussiam mines
and the increased yield of the Spanish American mines would
contribute something to the observed effects, but would be
totally inadequate to their complete explanation. It seems
impossible to tell the net effect of the long-continued wars.
The displacement of metallic by paper currency, and the
diminished sphere for its use by the restriction of trade, would
tend to throw quantities of metal on the market. But, on the
other hand, the hoarding or sluggish use of currency occasioned
by war, and the demand and dispersion of metallic money by
armies in the field, would tend to absorb those supplies. It
seems impossible to say what the balance would be. I assert,
the redundancy of gold in the early part of the century, then,
as a simple fact of observation.

These views of the relation of the Eastern drain of treasure
to the state of prices here, if accepted, throw considerable
light upon the course of prices since the gold discoveries.
Those who predicted a revolution in monetary affairs from the
great flood of gold have been thoroughly disappointed. Fifteen
years have elapsed, and the diggings have perhaps passed the
meridian point of their prosperity without any appearance of
a commercial revolution. But those, I conceive, are also wrong
who proved there was and could be no depreciation of gold ;
who even went so far as to assert that gold naturally opens a
way for its own employment.

European markets, where expedients for economising
currency are in common and growing use, could not possibly
absorb the continuous supplies' from the diggings without a
complete revolution in prices. But no sooner had a certain
moderate rise occurred than the surplus of the precious metals


Hi.] ABSORPTION OF BULLION BY THE EAST. 13 7


flowed off to tlie East, where an immense metallic currency, an
absence of ^my modes of economising it, and a general taste
for the luxurious use of the precious metals, opens a great
sphere for their absorption and consumption. That this
current was occasioned by the redundancy of gold is proved,
as Professor Oairnes anticipated, by a low price of oriental
produce.* Had it been occasioned by an immense demand
here for oriental produce, and a consequent balance of trade
outwards, oriental produce would have been comparatively
high, not low in price.

Asia, then, is the great reservoir and sink of the precious
metals. It has saved us from a commercial revolution, and
taken off our hands many millions of bullion which would be
worse than useless here. And from the earliest historical
ages it has stood in a similar relation to Europe. In the
middle ages it relieved Europe of the excess of Spanish
American treasure, just as it now relieves us of the excess
of Australian treasure. "The Indian trade/* says Macpher-
son,f “ arose to considerable magnitude at the same time that
the American mines began to pour their treasures into "Europe,
which has happily been preserved by the exportation of silver
to India from being overwhelmed by the inundation of the
precious metals, as it must have been had no such exportation
taken place.” And " Raynal affirms that the Spaniards must
have abandoned their most productive mines of silver in
America, as they had already abandoned many of the less
productive ones, if the progress of the depreciation of silver
had not been somewhat retarded by the exportation of it to
India

* I had also said (“ Serious Fall,” etc. p. 37), “ having shown upon a wide
basis of facts that both gold and silver are depreciated here, I am much 1 more
inclined to regard this depreciation as the cause of the Eastern drain. The fall
in the value of silver, compared with most other goods, makes it more profit-
able to pay for Eastern produce with silver bullion than with our manufactures,
silver being always acceptable among Asiatic nations.” (See above, p. 63 )

f “ Commerce with India,” p. 337.

$ “ Commerce with India,” quoting “ Histoire Philosophique et Politique
des deux Indes,” vol. iii. p. 169, edit. 1782 .


138 THE VARIATION OF PRICES. [ hi .

If the state of prices here, then, depends upon prices in
India, we should be backward in making predictions of their
future course. But we may perhaps speak with the more
confidence of the accomplished results of the gold discoveries.
Prices had been falling with little interruption from 1810 to
1849. The years 1886-39 form a temporary but remarkable
exception. In 1849-52 prices were unprecedentedly low, and
cceteris paribus, we might have expected that after another
period of speculation and its corresponding relapse of trade
prices should descend still lower. But prices in 1858 were
still 18 per cent, above those of 1852.

Since 1858 enormous fluctuations have taken place in the
prices of many commodities. The price of cotton has been
quadrupled and again halved. Corn has fallen to what seems
a natural minimum price, and meat and fodder have greatly
advanced. There has been a recent great fall, too, in the
price of many kinds of imported produce. Yet when the
average of all kinds of commodity is struck we find that
prices, since 1858, have been uniform. in an unprecedented
manner. The average fall since last year has been trifling.
If we compare prices now (March, 1865) with what they were
at their lowest in 1849, we find there has been a rise of 21 per
cent. If we take the average of 1845-50 as our standard of
comparison, the rise is 11 per cent. The real permanent rise
due to the gold discoveries is doubtless, something between
these, or probably nearer the higher limit, 21 per cent. The
gold discoveries have caused this rise of price. They have
also neutralised the fall of prices which might have been
expected from the continuous progress of invention and pro-
duction, but of which the amount is necessarily unknown. It
may be confidently asserted, then, that the Californian and
Australian: discoveries have had a considerable effect in revers-
ing the previous course of prices, but it is impossible to state
the amount of that effect with any approach to certainty.


in.] PRICES OF GOLD AND SILVER BULLION


*39


I . — Table showing the Variation of the Prices of Gold and Silver Bullion
during the Suspension of Specie Payments at the Bank of England.


1

Tear.

2

Price of Gold.

3 4

Ratio of Price of Gold
to

Standard Price.

5 6

Ratio of

Price of Silver to
the

Price of Silver in 179S.


Logarithm.

Number.

Number.

Logarithm.

1798 ...

£ s . d .

3 17 lOi

O'OOO

100

100

*000

1799 ...

—


O'OOO

100

103

*014

1800 ...


O’OOO

100

111

•047

1801 ...

4 5

0

0*038

109

115

*060

1802 ...

4 4

0

0-033

108

109

•037

1803 _...

4 0

0

0*012

103

108

*°33

1804 ...

—


0’0I2

103

105

*023

1805 ...


0*012

103

109

■035

1806 ...

. —


0*012

103

108

•032

1807 ...

—


0*012

103

106

■025

1808 ...


0*012

103

105

•023

1809 ...

—


0*012

103

106

*025

1810 ...

4 10

0

0*063

116

111

*045

1811 ...

4 4

6

0*036

109

118

*071

1812 ...

4 15

6

0*089

123

122

*088

1813 ...

5 1

0

0*113

130

133

*125

1814 ...

5 4

0

0*126

134

123

•089

1815 ...

4 13

6

0*080

120

105

*022

1816 ...

4 13

6

0*080

120

94

1*971

1817 ...

4 0

0

0*012

103

91

1*960

1818 ...

4 0

0

0*012

103

97

1*988

1819 ...

4 1

6

0*020

105

99

1*994

1820 ...

3 19 11

0*011

103

93

1*968

1821 ...

3 17 10J-

0*000

100

91

1*957


Note , — Column 3 of the above tablo contains the logarithms by the
subtraction of which prices are reduced to a gold standard.


III.]


DRAIN OF BULLION TO THE EAST


141


VI . — Table showing the Value of the Treasure absorbed in each Year ,
1802-56,"* by the Three Presidencies of India, being the Excess of
Imports from all parts over Exports .

[0,000’s omitted ]


Value in Millions


Value in Millions

“Year.


of

Year.


of


Pounds Sterling.


Pounds Sterling.

1802-03 ..


i)73

1830-31...


93

1803-04...


1,58

1831-32 ..

...

-41

1804r-05...


2,27

1832-33 ..


-32


1833-34 .

...

1,10

1805-06...


2,21

1834-35...


i , 7 °

1806-07...


2,65


1807-08 ..


2,01

1835-36...


2,04

1808-09...


1,01

1836-37 ..

...

i,77

1809-10...


2,37

1837-38 ..


2,30

1810-11...


1838-39 .


2,66


2,15

1839-40 ..


1,47

1811-12...


1,07


1812-13 ..
1818-14 ..
1814-15...


S7

62

1,21

1840- 41...

1841- 42...

1842- 43...


1,42

1,33

3,23

1815- 16...

1816- 17...


2, 10

4,oi

1843- 44 ..

1844- 45...

...

4,05

2,65

1817- 18...

1818- 19...


4,30

6,77

1845-46...


1,68

1819-20...


4,25

1846- 47 ..

1847- 48 ..


2,23

55

1820-21 ..
1821-22...


3,05

1,61

1848- 49 ..

1849- 50...


1,66

2,43

1822-23...


2,02


1823-24...


39

1850-51...


3,27

1824-25...


96

1851-52 ..


4,13


1852-53...


5,78

1825-26 ..


1 , 54

1853-54...


3,39

1826-27...


1,80

1854-55...


76

1827-28...


1,89


1828-29...


1,20

1855-56...

...

10,70

1829-30...


99

1856-57...

...

13,16


Note . — The numbers 1802-33 are reduced from the table in Martini
“British Colonies,” p. 360, B. The continuation of the account is from
McCulloch's article, “Precious Metals,” in the “Encyclopaedia Britanmca,”
Eighth Edit. p. 469.

During the years 1831-32 and 1832-83, there was an excess of exports
over imports of ^ 410,000 and ,£ 320,000 respectively.

About 1818 there was an unusually large Government remittance to India.


142


THE VARIATION OF PRICES .


[in.


VIL — List of Commodities treated in the Tables.

From 1782 to 1844 the prices were mostly taken from Tooke’s tables.
After 1844 the average prices, as calculated from the price lists of The
Economist , and printed in my “ Serious Fall,” etc. p. 21 (see above, p. 42),
were mostly used, the commodities being nearly identical with those quoted in
Tooke’s tables, and subsequently in the valuable annual review of trade in
The Economist newspaper. Concerning inconvenient but unavoidable changes
of quotation, see Mr. Danson’s note in Tooke’s “ History,” vol. vi. p. 491. The
following list notices the more important changes only.

The brackets indicate the groups of commodities, or else point out where
several qualities of one commodity have been joined and averaged before being
thrown as one unit into larger groups.


Metals


r Copper, tough cakes.

Lead, British pigs.

Tin, English bars.

fPig, Tooke, 1782-94, 1816-89, 1801-32, Matthews 5
I “ Report of Commission on Manufactures.”

I Iron ■{ Wrought, Russia, 1782-1839; Swedish, 1839-56; Swedish
[ steel, 1857-65.

L Welsh bars, 1806-57, “ Serious Fall,” etc. p. 12.


J Gallipoli, in bond ; linseed after 1844.
\ Fish ; palm after 1844.


Tallow, St. Petersburg.
Tar, Stockholm.


f Ashes, barilla; Carthagena in bond to 1836.
1 „ pearl ; Dantzio or Russia to 1839.

I „ Canadian pearl, first sort, 1840-45.


Timber


Fibres


rMemel fir, in bond.

... 4 Quebec, yellow pine, 1784-1806, 1820-39, 1813-21, McCulloch’s
l “Dictionary,” Canadian yellow pine, 1856-65.

Hemp, St. Petersburg, clean.

f Cotton, upland, 1798 ) after 1801, from table in « Exchange

„ Pcrnam, 1788 \ Magazine,” October, 1862, or “Journal
„ Surat, 1790 ) Statistical Society,” December, 1862

„ Surinam, 1782-1844 ; Demerara after 1820.

Wool, Southdown, average 1784-1845, McCulloch’s “Dictionary ”
"* „ Spanish, South Australian lambs, 1861-65.

Silk, China, raw.

,, Reggio, raw, 1844; Italian raw, all descriptions*

^Flax, St. Petersburg.


Dye

Materials.


Logwood, Jamaica.

Indigo, superior and inferior, East India.
.Cochineal, Spanish; Teneriffe after 1861*


in.]


LIST OF COMMODITIES.


143


VH . — List of Commodities treated in the Tables — continued.


( Hides, B.A. and M.V. dry, after 1844.

( Leather, crop hides, after 1844.

( Wheat, Gazette average.

)i
i>

jj

„ from 1792.


r Hay, “Gentleman’s Magazine,” 1798.

Poddeb ,..-4 Clover, „ 1803.

v Straw, „ 1798.


Cobn


Barley,
Oats,
Bye,
Beans,
l Peas,


Meat


''Mutton, St. Thomas’s Hospital average.

Beef „ „

Irish Mess Beef, after 1848 American and Canadian .
^Pork, after 1845.

Butter, Waterford, etc.


[ Sugar, Muscovados, Gazette average after 1800.
( „ Savannah for exportation, 1801-46.

( Tea, congou.

\ „ hyson.

f Coffee, superior British plantation.

„ inferior ,,

l „ St. Domingo for exportation, after 1807.


Spirits, Jamaica rum.

Eice, Carolina, 1782-1839.
Pepper, East India black.
Cinnamon, first quality in bond.
Tobacco, Yirgima, in bond.


The following groups are thus composed :

Oriental Produce.

Indigo.

Pepper.

Cinnamon.

Tea.

Sugar.

China silk.

Surat cotton.


Tropical Pood,
Sugar.

Tea.

Coffee.

Spirits.

Pepper.

Cinnamon,

Eice.

Tobacco.


144


THE VARIATION OF PRICES .


[in.


YIII .' — Proportional Variation of Prices from 1782.


Year.

General Yariation
of

all the Forty Commodities.

Oriental Products.

. Tropical Pood.

Gold

Standard

Paper

Standard

Gold

Standard.

Logarithm

Actual.

Compa-

rative.

Actual.

Compa-

rative.

1782 ..

100


’OOO

100

IOO

100

IOO

1783 ...

100


•ooi

101

IOI

87

87

1784 ...

93


1*966

94

102

82

89

1785 ...

90

o

CM

1 956

93

103

70

77

1786 ...

85

g

1-927

82

97

64

76

1787 ...

87

S3

1-941

91

105

70

79

1788 ...

87

a


91

105

74

84

1789 ...

85

£

1-930

85

IOO

70

82

1790 ...

87


r ‘937

80

92

69

80

1791 ...

89

g

&

1*947

89

IOI

72

81

1792 ...

93

r d

i 969

107

US

81

87

1793 ...

99

M

1*994

96

97

79

80

1794 ...

98


1 989

84

86

72

74

1795 ...

117

<0

1

•067

96

82

93

80

1796 ...

125

8

•097 ■

105

84

102

82

1797 ...

110

A

*043

85

77

87

79

1798 ...

118

p

•070

107

9i

98

83

1799 ...

130


•113

100

77

86

66

1S00 ...

141


•148

80

57

84

60

1801 ...

140

153

•147

80

57 *

73

52

1802 ...

110

119

•042

74

67

68

62

1803 ...

125

128

•096

74

60

67

54

1804 ...

119

122

•074

71

60

64

54

1805 ...

132

136

*120

79

60

75

57

1806 ...

130

133

’H3

79

61

70

54

1807 ...

129

132

•no

73

57

. 63

49

1808 ...

145

149

•160

84

58

71

49

1809 ...

157

161

*195

1 86

55

82

53

1810 ...

142

164

•152

83

59

75

53

1811 ...

136

147

•132

74

55

60

44

1812 ...

121

148

*08 r

66

55

58

48

1813 ...

115

149

*060

68

59

67

59

1814 ...

114

153

•058

90

78

84

73

1815 ...

109

132

‘039

82

75

77

71

1816 ...

91

109

1 *959

68

75

63

69

1817 ...

117

120

•067

81

69

77

66

1818 ...

132

135

- *119

90

69

92

70

1819 ...

112

117

*048

74

66

73

65

1820 ...

103

106

•013

65

6 $

67

L

4


III.]


TABLES OF PRICES .


145


VUE . — Proportional Variation of Prices — continued.


Year.

All Commodities.

Oriental Products.

Tropical Food.

Gold

Standard.

Logarithm.

Actual.

Compara-

tive.

Actual.

Compara-

tive.

1821 ...

94

i'975

68

72

63

66

1822 ...

88

i'946

67

76

61

70

1823 ...

89

1-948

65

73

62

70

1824 ...

88

1-946

61

69

52

58

1825 ...

103

•014

80

78

65

63

1826 ...

90

i*953

56

62

55

61

1827 ...

90

i'956

58

64

54

60

1828 ...

81

1 909

53

65

48

60

1829 ...

79

1-899

51

64

49

62

1830 ...

81

1*906

52

64

47

59

1831 ...

82

i'915

49

59

48

58

1832 ...

78

1-893

49

62

50

63

1833 ...

75

1-877

50

67

49

65

1834 ...

78

r89I

53

68

50

64

1835 ...

80

1-905

58

72

51

64

1836 ...

86

i'935

60

69

54.

63

1837 ...

84

1*922

50

60

48

63

1838 ...

84

1*924

53

63

52

62

1839 ...

92

1-965

56

61

61

66

1840 ...

87

1*940

56

64

60

68

1841 ...

85

1*928

51

60

53

63

1842 ...

75

1-875

45

60

46

62

1843 ...

71

1*851

45

64

44

62

1844 ...

69

1*840

42

61

42

60

1845 ...

74

1*867

38

5i

40

54

1846 ...

74

1*871

37

49

38

52

1847 ...

78

1*894

36

46

40

51

1848 ...

68

1*831

31

46

35

52

1849 ...

64

i*8o6

33

52

36

5<5

1850 ...

64

1*808

38

59

39

! 61

,

1851 ...

66

1*817

36

56

41

62

1852 ...

65

1*810

34

53

34

52

1853 ...

74

1*871

36

49

38

52

1854 ...

83

i*9i9

34

41

40

48

1855 ...

80

1*903

31

39

39

48

1856 ...

82

1*916

36

44

40

48

1857 ...

85

1*928

39

46

43

51

1858 ...

76

1*878

35

46

37

49

1859 ...

77

I 884

35

46

37

49

1860 ...

79

1*898

30

46

39

So

1861 ...

78

1*894

36

46

38

49

1862 ...

79

1*900

42

52

39

49

1863 ...

78

1*894

43

S I

39

50

1864 ...

78

1*894

44

56

42

53

1865 ...

78

1*890

44

5<?

42

54 ,


THE VARIATION OF PRICES .


[ill.


146


VIII . — Proportional Variation of Prices from 1782.


Year.

Metals.
Copper, Lead,
Tin, Iron.

| Iron.

1 Several

Varieties

Timber.

"V."'

j Oils.

Dye

Materials.

Actual.

Compa-

rative.

Actual.

Compa-

rative.

Actual.

Compa-

rative

Actual.

Compa-

rative

Actual

Compa-

rative.

1782

100

IOO

100

IOO

100

IOO

100

IOO

100

IOO

1783

100

IOO

97

97

108

107

94

94

92

91

1784

90

98

72

73

54

58

96

104

98

106

1785

89

99

67

74

73

Si

104

11 5

90

99

1786

95

1 12

84

IOO

58

69

91

107

69

81

1787

93

107

72

82

61

70

87

IOO

75

86

1788

96

109

73

83

5S

67

81

93

78

s?

1789

93

109

78

9i

58

69

84

98

73

85

1790

92

106

76

37

56

65

88

IOI

64

74

1791

100

113

92

104

So

96

82

92

77

87

1792

108

116

92

99

73

79

86

92

79

85

1793

113

115

91

92

70

7i

103

104

79

80

1794

111

1 14

94

96

78

So

103

106

81

83

1795

108

93

86

74

108

93

124

106

109

93

1796

117

94

101

81

105

84

134

107

116

93

1797

123

III

124

113

77

70

120

10S

96

87

1798

122

104

127

108

98

84

123

105 ;

137

116

1799

127

98

126

97

120

93

134

1 0-1 1

125

97

1800

135

96

115

82

168

119

122

s? 1

101

72

1801

139

99

139

99

167

'119

134

95

108

77

1802

137

125

119

108

125

1 14

102

92

83

76

1803

144

US

118

94

182

146

124

IOO

128

103

1804

147

124

116

98

152

128

115

97

105

89

1805

161

122

118

89

146

in

131

IOO

135

102

1806

169

130

123

95

136

105

132

IOI

131

IOI

1807

152

118

116

90

168

131

125

96

113

88

1808

155

107

113

78

253

175 |

166

115 J

116

80

1809

159

IOI

114

73

533

340

162

103 II

110

70

1810

142

IOO

99

70

300

21 1 j

141

99

157

in

1811

148

109

106

78

381

281 |

136

IOO I

107

79

1812

118

98

88

73

306

254

120

99 1

91

75

1813

111

97

81

7i

185

161

115

IOO 1

82

7i

1814

113

99

77

68

197

172

113

99 t

132

116

1815

115

105

81

74

1G1

14S

114

104 !

106

97

1816

96

105

71

78

116

127

82

90 I

68

75

1817

107

92

78

67

115

99

124

106 !

86

73

1818

119

9i

98

75

134

102

129

98 j!

95

72

1819

113

IOI

104

93

138

124

100

90 i

80

72

1820

106

103

95

92

113

no

105

IOI

!

i

69

67


Note * — The actual variation is shown by the average proportion of gold prices
in each year to the gold prices of 1782. The comparative variation is the ratio
i£ which the prices of each commodity or group of commodities have risen or
fallen more than the whole forty commodities.


TABLES OF PRICES.


14 7


ill.]


YIII . — Proportional Variation of Prices — continued.


Tear.

Metals.
Copper, Lead,
Tin, Iron.

Iron.

Several

Varieties.

Timber.

Oils.

Bye

Materials.

Actual.

Compa-

rative.

Actual.

Compa-

rative.

Actual.

Compa-

rative.

Actual.

Compa-

rative,

Actual

Compa-

rative.

1821

101

107

82

87

116

123

89

94

74

78

1822

100

113

74

83

101

115

93

I0 5

89

IOI

1823

107

121

78

88

187

155

85

96

96

108

1824

108

123

94

106

126

143

78

88

83

94

1825

123

119

114

no

133

129

86

84

98

95

1826

111

124 .

100

in

107

119

81

90

70

79

1827

103

1 14

86

96

95

105

82

90

73

81

1828

95

117

80

98

93

1 15

75

9 o

61

75

1829

89

113

72

9i

101

128

78

9 f

59

75

1830

81

IOO

66

82

98

121

86

106

56

69

1831

80

98

63

77

104

126

90

no

49

59

1832

77

99

61

78

108

139

79

IOI

47

60

1833

82

109

65

87

106

141

79

105

43

57

1834

87

112

65

83

106

137

75

96

47

61

1835

90

hi

64

79

116

' 145

78

97

48

60

1836

114

132

86

100

126

I46

93

108

46

53

1837

97

116

74

89

119

142

89

107

49

59

1838

96

1 14

77

92

111

132

92

109

52

62

1839

94

102

77

83

111

120

92

IOO

59

64

1840

87

IOO

63

72

*

—

91

I0 5

47

54

1841

90

106

61

7i

113

133

97

115

40

47

1842

80

107

51

68

113

151

96

127

33

44

1843

71

IOO

43

61

85

120

89

125

36

5i

1844

74

107

43

63

84

122

79

114

34

50

1845

86

117

59

80

96

130

84

114

35

48

1846

90

121

60

81

90

122

86

116

36

48

1847

90

115

60

76

91

Il6

99

127

35

45

1848

77

113

47

69

84

124

95

141

30

45

1849

73

1 14

40

63

72

1 12

96 j

150

28

44

1850

74

US

37

58

66

103

91

142

30

46

1851

73

112

36

54

68

103

90

137

31

47

1852

80

124

40

63

62

96

84

13°

31

48

1853

103

138

53

1 %

81

109

95

128

37

5°

1854

109

131

60

72

87

105

121

146

38

46

1855

104

130

51

64

88

no

117

146

31

38

1856

109

132

55

66

78

95

110

134

35

42

1857

108

127

51

60

84

99

113

133

36

43

1858

96

127

46

62

69

92

96

127

36

48

1859

97

127

42

55

70

92

101

132

32

42

1860

95

121

40

5i

70

88

105

132

32

40

1861

88

112

37

47

69

89

111

142

32

41

1862

85

107

35

44

72

90

113

142

35

44

1863

85

108

37

47

74

95

. 107

137

34

43

1864

92

117

44

57

73

94

98

125

35

45

1866

81

105

39

5i

74

. 96

90

*15

j 31

44


%


* Uncertain from interference of customs duties $ the uncertainty extends to
the succeeding in relation to the preceding numbers.

L 2


THE VARIATION OF PRICES.


148


[m.


VIII — Proportioned Variation of Prices from 1782.


Tear.

Fibres. J

Cotton, Wool, I
Silk, Plax.

Actual

Compa-
* rative.

1782

100

loo

1783

112

III

1784

93

IOI

1785

107

1 18

1786

108

128

1787

107

123

1788

107

123

1789

93

no

1790

90

US

1791

96

109

1792

109

117

1793

103

105 1

1794

88

90 ;

1795

103

89

1796

126

IOI

1797

118

107

1798

130

III

1799

172

133

' 1800

143

102

1801

142

IOI

1802

132

120

1803

149

120

1804

149

12 5

1805

155

118 3

1806

144

III

1807

150

II 7

1808

168

Il 6 1

1809

214

137 1

1810

165

Il 6

1811

149

no

1812

147

122

1813

134

117

1814

131

1 14 1

1815

138

126 ! !

1

1816

106

1

116 j <

1817

140

120 j 1

1818

161

122 1<

1819

118

105 1 <

1820

*

121

117 | <


Cotton.

Several

Varieties.


100

102

61

84

86

91
96
5 7
66

64

81

76

68

79

115

92


94

86

86


85


86

66

70

83


II

Corn.

Wheat, Bariev, i
Oats, Bye, 1
Beans, Peas.


100

102

66

93

IOI

i °5

no

67
77

72

87

77

7o

68

92

83
11 8
157
82

81

86

69

73

76

7i

66

73

*5

60

49
58
7 2
97
86

96

94

80

60

60


I Compa-l

’ I rah vp !


100
127
116

104

105
102

99
105
117

112

110

129
140
168

153

112

116

159

252

232

130
123
134
177

158

168

195

205

175

167

221

197

123

114

123

192

203

177

148


Wheat.

<f Gazette ”
Average.


} Actual, I

native.


Fodder.

Hay, Clover,
Straw.


Actual


Compa-

rative.


IOO

100

IOO


126

110

no


126

102

no


ns

88

97

—

—

124

81

96

__


117

86

99


114

94

108


,

123

1 107

126


136

11!

129

—

—

126

99

in


118

1 87

94


131

100

IOI


_

144

I 106

109


144

152

131


—

123

160

128


IOI

109

99

-»t

$

99

105

90

118

IOO

122

140

108

171

132

179

231

164

235

1 67

165

222

159

244

174

Il8

131

119

164

149

98

116

! 93

230

185

”3

123

104

191

161

134

177

134

1 162

123

122

156

120

181

1 39

131

149

US

233

181

135

160

in

230

159

131

192

123

214

137

124

187

132

242

171

123

178

131

308

228

183

209

173

203

169

1 72

172

150

182

IS9

108

113

99

167

146

104

111

IOI

166

152

135

132

146

222

244

165

191

164

224

192

155

170

129

252

192

159

144

129

254

228

144

134

x 30

171

!

166


TABLES OF PRICES.


149


HI.]


VEX — Proportional Variation of Prices — continued.


Fibres.

Cotton.

Corn.

Wheat.

Fodder.


Cotton

, Wool,

Several

Wheat

SV>+e<

Barley,

“ Gazette”

Hav,

Clover.

Year.

Silk,

Flax.

Varieties.

Beans, Peas.

Average.

“Straw.


Actual.

Compa-

rative.

Actual.

Compa-

rative

Actual.

Compa-

rative.

Actual.

Compa-

rative.

Actual.

Compa-

rative.

1821

112

119

53

56

116

123

114

121

182

193

1822

110

125

47

53

92

105

90

102

170

193

1823

115

129

48

52

125

140

108

122

215

243

1824

103

116

48

54

147

1 67

130

147

250

283

1825

121

117

63

61

157

152

139

135

—

—

1826

86

96

40

45

152

169

119

132


—

1827

86

95

38

42

155

l ll

119

131

245

271

1S28

83

102

34

42

136

x 68

123

151

197

243

1829

76

95

41

39

135

171

134

169

ISO

228

1830

78

96

36

45

138

171

130

162

220

274

1831

87

1 06

33

40

150

182

135

164

199

242

1832

82

105

35

45

130

166

119

152

210

269

1833

89

118

48

5S

119

158

107

143

169

224

1834

106

136

48

62

123

158

94

121

177

228

1835

116

145

55

69

119

148

80

99

218

271

1836

111

129

53

62

131

152

98

1 14

185

215

1837

97

116

40

48

132

158

113

136

228

272

1838

91

108

38

46

184

160

131

156

211

252

1839

96

104

41

44

155

168

143

155

234

254

1840

92

106

36

41

150

173

135

155

200

230

1841

88

104

37

44

140

166

131

154

227

267

1842

77

103

31

41

120

160

116

155

210

280

1843

72

102

27

37

113

159

102

H3

221

311

1844

79

1 14

27

39

125

180

104

150

173

251

1845

81

no

24

33

130

176

103

140

233

315

1846

83

112

28

37

140

188

111

*49

200

269

1847

77

98

29

37

176

224

142

181

180

230

1848

61

90

21

! 31

125

184

103

151

173

256

1849

62

96

23

36

106

166

90

140

177

2 77

1850

76

119

32

50

94

146

82

127

156

243

1851

77

117

27

41

98

150

78

119

163

248

1852

76

1 18

25

39

109

169

83

128

176

273

1853 '

77

104

24

33

127

170

I 108

146

189

254

1854

75

90

24

30

157

189

1 147

177

226

272

1855

75

94

26

32

154

193

151

189

217

2 72

1856

89

108

30

36

151

184

140

170

221

268

1857

98

116

36

43

142

168

114

135

191

225

1858

87

115

32

43

128

169

90

119

194

257

1859

97

127

33

43

125

163

89

116

198

258

1860

95

121

30

37

136

1 72

108

137

214

271

1861

96

122

39

5°

135

172

113

144

213

272

1862

111

140

82

104

131

165

113

142

210

264

1863

127

161

| 117

150

119

152

91

1x6

199

254

1864

129

164

128

164

109

139

81

104

199

254

1865

120

155

77

100

107

^ .

78

IOI

229

295


THE VARIATION OF PRICES .


Cm.


150

IX . — Description of the Diagrams .

Each point on a curve has been laid down at a distance from Ike thick zero
line, so as to represent the ratio of prices of each year tD the prices of 1782,
on the scale of one quarter of an inch to the logarithm *100. The horizontal
reference lines represent, from below upwards, the logarithms 1*500, I* 600,
1*700, 1*800, 1*900, 0*000, o*ioo, 0*200, 0*300, etc. Since the logarithm of 2 is
nearly *300 (*30103) and that of 1*700, the third line above the zero line
represents a doubled price, the third line below it a halved price.

In the case of the important curve showing the general variation of value
of all the commodities, horizontal lines representing the ratios in common
numbers have been substituted for the logarithmic lines, the logarithmic scale
however being preserved.

The diagrams are intended only to show the general character of the
variations, the numerical results being given in the tables. It has not been
thought needful to draw out the comparative variations except in a few cases.


1780


PROPORTIONAL VARIATION OF PRICES,

C m Paper Currency J 797- 18Z0.)


IV.]


LETTER ON DEPRECIATION


151


IV.


THE DEPKECIATION OF GOLD.*

It is interesting to examine at intervals the evidence brought
by the efflux of time concerning the effects of the great
gold discoveries of 1849 and 1851 upon the value of gold.
Almost twenty years have now elapsed since the new sup-
plies began to be received, and taking into account the rapid
means of communication with all parts of the world which
this age enjoys, it can hardly be doubted that a certain equi-
librium has been attained in the distribution of the precious
metals, and that the character of the results will now be
manifest.

The present year is especially suitable for a retrospective
inquiry, because we have just passed through nearly three
years of commercial prostration, during which the use of
credit has been undoubtedly reduced to its minimum, and
prices have suffered a corresponding depression. Taken in
connection with the similar depression which followed the
collapse of 1857, this gives us ample means of judging whether
a real rise of prices has been established, because it assures
us that any rise of prices which may be detected is not


' * Letter to The Economist newspaper, May 8th, 1869, vol. xxvii. pp. 530-
532. Eeprinted in the “ Journal of the Statistical Society,” December, 1869,
yoI. xxxii. pp. 445-49.


153 THE DEPRECIATION OF GOLD, . [iv.

due to a temporary cause, jsuch as the inflation of prices by
credit.

I hare therefore made some calculations founded upon
your price lists, in order to bring down to the present time
the estimates of the general rariation of prices which I first
attempted in my pamphlet on the “ Value of Gold,'” and after-
wards extended over the whole period embraced in lookers
“ History of Prices,” the complete results being published in the
“Journal of the London Statistical Society” for June, 1865,
The inquiry is substantially of the same nature as that which
was originated by Mr. Newmarch in the “ Statistical Journal ”
for 1859, and which has since been continued in your valuable
“Annual Review.” Your readers will probably have noticed on
p. 44 of the “Commercial History and Review” of 1868, a
table containing the proportionate prices of a number of com-
modities compared with their average range in 1845-50, and a
column is added containing what you have called the total
index number, formed by the simple addition of the percentage
numbers of the separate commodities. My method is very
similar, but consists in calculating, in a manner fully described
in the “Statistical Journal,” the average ratio of prices in
March of each year to prices in the same part of the previous
year, so that by the junction of these ratios the prices of each
year can be compared with those of any year before or after,
just as in taking the levels of a line of country the difference of
level of each two successive points is measured, and then the
difference of any two points on the route can be ascertained
by the simple junction of the intervening differences. Any
year may readily be made the datum line or point of com-
parison, but the year 1849 is peculiarly fitted to be the start-
ing-point, because it was not only the first year of the gold
discoveries, but it also happens that prices then reached the
lowest point which they have attained during the present
century.

The* following numbers thus deduced show the average


IV.]


FLUCTUATIONS OF PRICES.


153


ratios of the prices of about fifty of the chief articles of com-
merce duriijg the last twenty-two years to the prices of the
same articles in 1849 :


Year,

Average

Ratio

of Prices to

Year.


Average

Ratio

of Prices to

1847 .

those of
1849.

. 122

1859 .


those of
1849.

. 120

’48 .

. I 06

'60 .

•

. 124

>49 .

- . IOO

'61 .

•

. 123

’50 .

. IOI

„ '62 .

•

. 124

’51 .

. 103

'63 .


. 123

'52 .

5 53 .

. IOI

. 116

'64 .


. 122

*54 .

. 130

'65 .


. ‘ 121

'55 .

. 125

'66 .


. 128

'56 .

. 129

'67 .


. 118

'57 .

. 132

'68 .

•

. 120

'58 .

. 118

'69 .

.

. 1 19


It appears from the above that the range of prices has
since 1853 been always considerably above the point they
attained in 1849. The three great collapses of credit and
enterprise occurred in the years 1847, 1857, and 1866, and
the depression of prices thereby occasioned were respectively
22, 14, and 10 per cent. ; it is perfectly fair therefore to com-
pare together the three lowest points thus attained in the
years 1849, 1858, and 1867, and we thus learn that there has
been a net or permanent rise of 18 per cent, accomplished
in the prices of about fifty of the chief materials and com-
modities. The still greater elevations of 32 per cent, in 1857
and 28 per cent, in 1866 are partly due to the inflated credit
and excessive speculation of those periods. It may seem that
my numbers ' underestimate rather than overestimate the
fluctuations of prices ; but it must be remembered that, though
many commodities in which speculation chiefly takes place


154 THE DEPRECIATION OF GOLD. [iv.

vary much more than is shown in the average, there are many
articles — such as butchers* meat and provision%r~which are
little subject to speculative changes, and in drawing a wide
average many considerable changes in individual commodities
are entirely obliterated.

The results given above will be found to correspond
pretty closely with the like results which are easily drawn from
the index numbers in your “ Annual Review/* except that from
1863 to 1867 you represent prices as having risen much more
than I state them. This I find is due to your index number
being the sum of twenty-two different numbers, of which four
numbers represent the increased prices of raw or manufactured
cotton ; as these prices have risen in one case as much as by
360 per cent., a great effect is produced on the aggregate.
My quotations include only three out of fifty depending on
cotton; besides which my mode of drawing a geometrical
average always gives a less result than the simple addition
employed in the “ Annual Review.** It may be a matter of
opinion which result is the truer one, but at any rate I am
satisfied to feel that I underestimate the fluctuations of prices
as compared with the results in your “Annual Review.**

I cannot help then reasserting with the utmost confidence
that a real rise of prices, to the extent of iS per cent., as
measured by fifty chief commodities, has been established
since the year 1849. This is an undoubted depreciation of
gold, because it represents a real diminution in the general
purchasing power of gold. Nor can we well avoid attributing
it to the effect of the gold discoveries. Indeed, as Professor
Cairnes has so distinctly pointed out, the effect of those
discoveries is probably much greater than any we can prove,
because the course of prices was in previous years decidedly
downwards, so that the new gold has both prevented a
further fall and occasioned a rise in its stead. To illustrate
this, I have formed from the tables given in my paper in the
“ Statistical Journal** (founded upon Tooke*s tables of prices)


IV.]


GREAT DECLINE OF PRICES.


*55

the following comparison of prices at intervals of ten years,
taking the yaar 1849 as the datum point :


Year.

1789


ft

Average Ratio
of Prices to
Prices of the
Year 1849.

• 133

'99


ft

. 202

180.9


•

. 24S

'19


. I7S

'29


. , 124

'39


. 144

'49


. IOO

'59


. . 120

'69


. . II 9


Between 1809 and 1849 we notice a vast decline of prices,
to the extent of 145 per cent., the previous rise having been
nearly as great. With this great revolution in the value of
gold, we are only concerned so far as regards the fact that
previous to 1849 a great decline in prices was in progress.
This decline was interrupted during the years 1835-39 by
a temporary rise, due perhaps to excessive speculation, but
the decline was renewed as rapidly as before until we reach
the critical year 1849. Since then the course of prices seems
to have been entirely altered, and a permanent rise has been
established.

Not a few able writers, including Professor T. C. Leslie,
who lately addressed you on the subject, are accustomed to
throw doubt upon all such conclusions, by remarking that until
we have allowed for all the particular causes which may have
elevated or depressed the price of each commodity we cannot
be sure that gold is affected. Were a complete explanation of
each fluctuation thus necessary, not only would all inquiry
into this subject be hopeless, but the whole of the statistical
and social sciences, so far as they depend upon numerical
facts, would have to be abandoned. It has been abundantly


156


THE DEPRECIATION OF GOLD , .


[iv.


shown by Quetelet and others, that many subjects of this
nature are so hopelessly intricate, that we cam only attack
them by the use of averages, and by trusting to probabilities.
The price of any one commodity, even silver, utterly fails as a
measure of the value of gold, because it is sure to be affected
by numerous conflicting causes of rise and fall, no one of
which we can accurately estimate. Even the intimate know-
ledge which a merchant gains of the commodity in which he
deals is insufficient to enable him to explain, still less to
predict, the changes in its price with confidence. But when
we take a large list of fifty commodities the probability is
almost infinite that particular influences will not all act the
same way, so that a rise in one case will balance a fall in
another. The average then must in all reasonable probability
represent some single influence acting on all the commodities.
This influence may indeed be something affecting the com-
modities rather than gold — for instance, a general increase of
demand not met by a corresponding supply. This is possible
but not likely, because the supply of many articles is exceed-
ingly increased and cheapened by the progress of civilisation.
Even if it were the commodities which were altered in their
conditions of supply and demand, the result would not the less
be an alteration in the purchasing power or value of gold. But
considering that there is no reason to suppose the supply and
demand for gold would always maintain an equilibrium, and
that a most extraordinary change has taken place in the con-
ditions of supply, the probability is excessively great that we
find the true cause in the gold discoveries.

To complete the argument, I have only to ask those who
think that the growth of population, the increase of demand,
or the progress of trade is the cause of the rise of prices,
whether population, demand, trade, etc. were not expanding
before 1849, not so rapidly perhaps as since, but still expand-
ing ; and how it is that causes of the same kind have produced
falling prices before 1849 and rising prices since ?

To gain some notion of the degree of probability of con-


IV.]


PROBABLE ERROR OF RESULT \


1 57


elusions on tliis subject it bas occurred to me to apply tbe
ordinary methods of tbe theory of probabilities to tbe results
stated in my pamphlet on tbe value of gold. Tbe list of com-
modities there given (including cotton) contained thirty-six
different articles, of which twenty-nine were found to have
risen in price in 1862 , as compared with the average of the
years 1845 - 50 , while only seven had fallen in price. All the
alterations of price (excluding the extreme rise in the case of
cotton) lay between a fall of 26 per cent, and a rise of 67 per
cent., but most of the alterations were of about 10 or 20 per
cent. Regarding each of these thirty-six commodities as a
separate and independent measure of the alteration in* the
value of gold, I first took the average rise of prices, namely,
16 per cent., as the most probable estimate which these
thirty-six measures give, and then proceeded to calculate by
the ordinary method of least squares the probable error of
this result. This probable error proved to be just 2 )4 per
cent. — that is to say, it is as likely as not that the tme altera-
tion of gold lies within 2)4 per CGro ^ t °f 1 ® JP er cent., or between
13)4 and 1 8)4 per cent. From this result we can readily
calculate the probability that gold is depreciated in some
degree , or that the true result if it be not 16 per cent, rise
is above 0 per cent, rise. This probability proves to be so
near to certainty that the tables required in the calculation
do not go sufficiently far to enable me to give it exactly. It
may be safely said that the odds are 10,000 to I in favour
of a real depreciation of gold. The meaning of this is,
that the chances are 10,000 to 1 against a series of dis-
connected and casual circumstances having caused the rise
of price — one in the case of one commodity, another in
the case of another — instead of some general cause acting
over them all. It is true that as the commodities do not all
vary independently, different kinds of corn, for instance,
generally varying together, the improbability is not so great
as stated; but if we reduce it ten times, to 1000 to I, it is
great enough for my purposes.


THE DEPRECIATION OF GOLD.


[iv.


158

Taking into account the separate probability that such a
result would follow from the gold discoveries, t believe it is
wholly beyond doubt that the expected result has been mani-
fested, but not in the mode predicted. Many eminent men,
especially Chevalier, looked upon the depreciation of gold as a
sudden and revolutionary event which would happen in the
course of time, and yet I believe that when Chevalier was
writing the most sudden and serious part of the effect had
already been produced. Prices have never since stood so
high as they did in 1854 and 1857, and though returning
enterprise and expansion of credit will doubtless occasion
another rise in the next few years, there seems to be no reason
to suppose that we shall get beyond the point attained in 1857.
I should therefore not venture to call in question the remark
of your annual reviewer, that the tendency is now in an
opposite direction — in that of appreciation rather than depre-
ciation. It is quite possible that the causes which occasioned
a great fall of prices before 1849 are now again beginning to
make themselves felt. All I contend for is the existence of
some disturbance which in the last twenty years has prevented
the previous fall of prices from continuing. The tables of
your “Annual Review ^ unmistakably prove the existence of a
rise : to what must we attribute it ? To the growth of' popu-
lation and trade ? I think that the growth of population and
trade tend to lower prices by increasing the use of gold, and
to this cause we may reasonably attribute the fall of prices
before 1849. But to attribute to the same cause, as some do,
the diametrically opposite change which has occurred since
1849, is illogical in the extreme. The normal course of prices
in the present progressive state of things is, I think, down-
wards ; but for twenty years at least this normal course has
been checked or even reversed, and why should we hesitate
to attribute this abnormal effect to the contemporary and
extraordinary discoveries of gold ?

It would not be difficult to show that not only have


IV.]


THE PRACTICAL RESULT


159

prices risen during the period in question, but that the rela-
tions of society have readjusted themselves in accordance.
While statisticians have been disputing, society has practi-
cally accepted the fact of a rise. The pay of the army is
increased, the whole of the Civil Service and the staff of the
Bank of England receive larger salaries, and could the infor-
mation be obtained, I believe the same change might be
shown to have occurred in most private establishments.
Trades unionists point to the services rendered by their
societies in gaining a rise of wages. Financial reformers, on
the other hand, point to the great increase in the public
expenditure of the kingdom as a proof of extravagance. To
all these effects the alteration in the value of gold has, I
believe, contributed something ; it would not be too much to
say, that the increased cost of materials and wages has added
three or even five millions to the public expenditure, and
wages not unnaturally rose when gold was perceptibly
depreciated.


i6o


PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET.


[v.


V.

ON THE FEEQUENT AUTUMNAL PEESSUEE
IN THE MONEY MAEKET, AND THE AC-
TION OP THE BANK OF ENGLAND.*

Preliminary Remarks.

At the beginning of last October (1865), the commercial
world of England was disturbed by a remarkable with-
drawal of coin from the Bank of England, causing a great
decrease of the loanable capital, and necessitating a corre-
sponding rise in the terms of discount. The commercial
editor of The Times , writing on Saturday evening, 7th October,
said :

“The Bank of England this morning made a further
advance of 1 per cent, in their rate of discount, the charge
being now 7 per cent. The rise during the week has, there-
fore, been per cent., a movement unprecedented in so
short a space. ... At no former period, except during
panics or runs from political or commercial disasters, has
it ever been found requisite to advance the rate of discount
in the face of a prolonged favourable condition of the
foreign exchanges. For four months there has almost
uninterruptedly been a ’favourable balance, week by week,
in the operations of the bullion market, as regards exports
and imports, and during that time the home community
have absorbed, not only the surplus thus left, but about
£3,000,000 from the Bank, in addition to an extra one or

* Bead before the Statistical Society of Loudon, on April 17th, 1866, and
printed in the Journal of the Society for June, 1866, vol. xxix. pp. 235-53.
Reprinted by the Manchester Statistical Society, 1876. Transactions, Session
1875-76, Appendix, pp. 1H1.


V.]


AUTUMNAL DRAIN IN 1865.


161


two millions in note3. As the amount of currency used for
internal purposes rarely experiences any great or permanent
fluctuation, the Bank directors were entitled to assume, week
by week, as the absorption became more remarkable, that
a turn must be rapidly witnessed, and that the market
would then be oversupplied with the amounts that had
been so' strangely removed from it. But there was a point
below which, whatever might be their confidence as to the
supply of money actually available in the country, they
could not allow their reserve of notes to fall, and that
point having been reached ten days ago, the present measures
commenced. And here, again, nothing but abnormal results
were witnessed. With a rise of half per cent., the demand
still increased, and an additional movement of 1 per cent,
seemed to have no restrictive effect”

The commercial press were in considerable perplexity as
to the cause of this demand for money. The Times of the
morning of 7th October had allowed that “ the question
is still unsolved as to the causes that can have led to that
excessive absorption of gold and notes by the public to
which, in the absence of any unfavourable condition of the
foreign exchanges, the existing pressure is solely due. In
addition to the influences of active employment and high
wages, it is suggested that there has been a partial drain
for Ireland, but the last published returns showed that the
coin held by the banks in that country was only £168,000
in excess of the total at this time last year.”

In “ Travers’ Circular ” it was remarked that “ a further
half-million sterling has been taken from the Bank by the
public during the past week, yet no additional suggestions
have been offered to account for this singular drain. Not
only must the amounts withdrawn in August and Sep-
tember, in connection with election and harvest payments,
have been returned long ago to their natural channels, but
the si^ms withdrawn for autumn pleasure traffic must now


162 PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET. [v.

also be finding their way back to the banks. The absorption,
therefore, becomes every day more inexplicable.” r

By other papers or their correspondents the absorption
of money was attributed variously to the large American
purchases on credit, to extensive speculations in cotton at
Liverpool, to the sinking of capital in joint-stock enterprise,
or to the Fenian conspiracy.

The remarks of The Economist , although written during
the progress of the pressure, appear to be substantially
correct. In the issue of October 14 th, the editor said:
“The present rise in the value of money is owing to the
simultaneous occurrence of three causes. There is a sort
of tide in the cash transactions of the country which perio-
dically empties and periodically fills the Bank till. At the
close of every quarter there is a strong outgoing current.
The non-banking classes then get their money. Salaries
are paid, wages are paid, small dividends are paid; each
of these transactions is very minute, but their aggregate
mass is very large. . , . Little people are paid in actual
cash ; they take so much from the Bank till. . . . Speak-
ing generally, the middle of each quarter is marked by an
incoming current towards the Bank, and the close of every
quarter by an outgoing current from the Bank.”

The periodical quarterly outflow of money from the Bank
was, then, according to The Economist, the chief cause of
the pressure, aggravated in this particular case, as it goes
on to explain, by two minor causes, the Irish demand for
coin, and the creation of bills by large cotton speculators.
A few weeks later The Economist pointed out an unusual
increase of the export and import trade of the country,
revealed by th'e Board of Trade returns, as the chief
aggravating cause.

It was, however, a correspondent whose letter, signed
“Gk F.,” was inserted in The Economist of October 21st, who


V.] THE OCTOBER DRAIN, \ 163

most correctly, as I think, attributed the pressure to an
annual tiUe in the movement of money.

“Why,” he says, “was the pressure in October, 1847,
in October, 1857, in October last year, in October this year,
and more or less in October every year ? It is because
there is an annual tide in the cash transactions of this
country, and I believe of all countries. The currency gene-
rally, including bank-notes of all our banks, gold coin and
silver coin, expands from July to the end of October or
beginning of November; it contracts from the middle of
November to the end of March, and is, on the whole,
stationary in April, May, and June, ♦ . , Such is the
annual tide, masked to some extent by the action of the
quarterly tides. ... I believe that observations in the
direction I have indicated would be found to confirm the
law of annual tides arising from agricultural as distin-
guished from manufacturing causes ; and to prove that
they are a periodical source of disturbance in the money
markets of the world, of greater force and importance than
has hitherto been acknowledged”

In these able remarks I thoroughly concur, and I think
it therefore a work of interest to direct the attention of the
Society to such analysis of the periodical fluctuations as
“G. F.” suggests. It is the more needful because “G. F”
is not aware of the great peculiarity of the October drain;
and even The Economist is so far from being quite accurately
informed concerning these fluctuations that it considers the
most serious demand for coin to occur in December.*

What I have to point out is, that in the beginning of
October there are several causes concurring towards a drain
of currency which renders this by far the most critical period
of the whole year. In September, 1862, I pointed out this
tendency to an autumnal disturbance in the money market*

The Economist, December 2nd, 1865, vol. xxiii. p. 1453.

M 2


PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET.


164


[V.


In a paper read before the 'British Association, in 1862, I
said : *

“ Some, perhaps, would attribute the sudden changes in the
rate of discount, bankruptcies, and consols, to the occurrence
of panics during the months of October and November. It
would be more correct to say that there is a periodic
tendency to commercial distress and difficulty during these
months, of which all concerned should be aware. It is when
great irregular fluctuations aggravate this distress, as in the
years 1836, 1839, 1847, 1857, that disastrous breaches in
commercial credit occur/”

In two of the three succeeding years, namely, 1863 and
1865, this autumnal pressure has been strikingly manifested,
and these occurrences, considered in connection with the fact
that since 1825 all the severest pressures have either com-
menced or culminated in the last quarter of the year, are
sufficient prima facie evidence of a dangerous tendency in these
months worthy of the deliberate attention of commercial men.

I have lately found, however, that so long ago as December,
1857, this autumnal pressure was distinctly described by Mr.
William Langton to the Manchester Statistical Society. After
noticing the fluctuation caused by the payment of the dividends
he makes the following very able and true remarks :f “This
short and superficial wave is accompanied by another, not so
easily detected (because sometimes absorbed in a larger move-
ment), and more difficult to account for. It has an annual
increment and collapse, and is doubtless connected with the

* See above, p. 8.

t <e Observations on a table stowing the balance of account between the
mercantile public and tho Bank of England.” Bead December 30th, 1857.
Transactions, Session 1857-58, p. 9. This admirable paper was lately reprinted
by the Manchester Statistical Society. Transactions, Session 1875-76, Appendix,
pp. 1-16. In the Transactions of the Society will also be found several other
papers by the same most acute and sound of bankers and financiers. All who
had the advantage of being acquainted with Mr. Langton will understand how
difficult it is to pass over his name without paying a slight tribute of esteem
and admiration.


V.]


WILLIAM LANG TON’S THEORY.


1 65

action of the seasons upon trade. In the midst of other dis-
turbances, r»this wave may be traced in the magnitude of the
operations of the third and fourth quarters, and the almost
invariable lull in the second quarter of each year, the third
quarter being generally marked by rapid increase in the
demand for accommodation at the Bank. The culminating
point in the movement, originating in the third quarter of the
year, appears to be a moment favourable to the bursting of
those periodical storms in which the commercial difficulties in
the country find their crisis.”

Now, I have no hesitation in saying that the autumnal
pressure of 1865 was little more than an unusually distinct
exhibition of this curious tendency to a drain of currency and
capital in the autumn, and especially in the month of October.
I wish, therefore, to divide the remainder of my remarks
among four points :

(1) To analyse somewhat closely the nature of this tendency,
as shown in average tables of the circulation of bank-notes
and of the Bank of England accounts.

(2) To offer some suggestions as to its cause.

(3) To examine how far, and from what unusual causes,
the pressure of 1865 exceeded the average autumnal pressure.

(4) To consider whether the action of the Bank during
disturbances of this kind is faulty, and whether any legislative
change could alleviate the evil

(1 ). — On the Average Fluctuations of the Currency and of the
Bank of England Accounts within the Year .

The nature and extent of the autumnal pressure is clearly
seen in tables of the average fluctuations of the Bank accounts
from week to week, which I prepared for reading at the
meeting of the British Association in 1862, and which are
printed and explained in the Appendix. (See Table I.)*

* See also above, pp. 5-8.


i66


PRESSURE IN THE ; MONEY MARKET.


[v.


Tlie fact which, first strikes us in examining these tables is
the great quarterly variation in all the principal elements of
the Bank accounts, caused chiefly by the payment of the
dividends.* Coincident with this payment, we observe a sudden
increase in the note circulation and in the private deposits, a
considerable decrease of private securities or commercial bills,
a slight decrease of the bullion, accompanied by a larger
but otherwise similar variation of the loanable capital.

The amounts of these variations are approximately as
follows :


Government deposits, decrease

Mils.

• ;£4>2<5

Private securities, „

1 , 9 1

Bullion and coin, 5,

. ,62

Loanable capital, „

i, 9 1

Notes in circulation, increase

1,40

Private deposits, „

1 , 55


It is easy to detect in the tables evidence of a monthly
variation due partly to the occurrence of the settling-day at
the commencement of the month.

The annual tide in the accounts, however, is far more inter-
esting than these artificial quarterly and monthly variations.
It is ascertained in a manner very imperfect, no doubt, but
sufficient for our purposes, by first determining the average
variations within the quarter, and then subtracting these
variations from the general variations in Table I.

Thus Table IV. gives the variation within the year of the
five principal elements of the Bank accounts, after elimination

* The disturbances created in the money market by the dividend pay-
ments, and the arrangements on the part of the Bank of England rendered
requisite by them, were described by David Bicardo in his pamphlet, entitled,
<e Proposals for an Economical and Secure Currency,” 1816, pp. 37-41. He
suggested a method of payment by the issue of post-dated dividend warrants,
which, he thought, would mitigate the locking up of money before the
dividend-day.


V.] DOUBLE ANNUAL OSCILLATION 167

of the quarterly disturbance. We observe that the note circu-
lation is at a minimum in January and February ; that it rises
gradually to a maximum 'in the third quarter, and then rapidly
decreases during November and December. The private
securities and private deposits exhibit great and opposite
changes during the third and fourth quarters ; the securities
rise to a remarkable maximum, and the deposits fall to a very
low minimum in the first week of October.

The bullion and loanable capital undergo a curious double
oscillation during the year, both rising to a maximum in the
first quarter, and again at the beginning of the third quarter.
I am at a loss to explain this double oscillation, but it does not
directly bear upon our present subject. The important fact
for us is, that both the bullion and capital undergo a con-
tinuous decrease from the beginning of the third quarter, until
about the middle of the fourth.

We may sum up these variations so far as they touch our
present purpose, by saying that the Bank experiences during
the latter part of the year, especially in the beginning of
October, an unusual demand for money. Both by the with-
drawal of deposits, and the presentation of bills for discount,
the public try to get what they can from the Bank.

These accounts do not, however, reveal the most singular
fact concerning the autumnal pressure. The movements of
metallic money undergo curious fluctuations throughout the
year, and reach a most remarkable crisis in the month of
October.

The volumes of the “Miscellaneous Statistics of the Board
of Trade ” contain certain tables of the receipts and payments
of coin by the Bank of England, which I have not seen
noticed. From these tables I deduce the following interesting
statements :


1 68


PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET


[v.


Average Amount ( 1855 - 62 ) of Gold Coin sent to the Branches
of the Banh of England during each month of the Year .


January

February

March.

April

May

June


.£293,000

50.000

82.000

. 119,000
. 166,000
. 140,000


July

August .
September

October .

November

December


.£174,000
. 219,000
. 209,000

. 463,000
. 263,000
. 214,000


It is seen that far more gold is sent out during October
than during any other month, and more than twice as much
as during either of the preceding harvest months.


Average Excess ( 1855 - 62 ) of Payments or Receipts of British


Goin at the Banh of England.

Excess of
Payments.

January (dividend) . . . 163,000

Excess of
Receipts.

February (excess of receipts)

.

807,000

March ....

. 1 1 1,000

...

April (dividend) .

. 808,000

• • •

May .....

363,000

• . ft

June (excess of receipts)

.

74,000

July (dividend) .

. 763,000


August ....

. 529,000

ft . *

September ....

704,000

...

October (dividend)

. 1,509,000


November ....

. 258,000

. . •

December ....

TIT "¥ H •»

. 123,000

•••


We find, as we should expect, that the payments of coin
are far larger in the first month of each quarter than in either
of the succeeding months— on an average about four times as


V.]


CAUSES OF THE PRESSURE.


169

large. But we cannot fail to Tbe struck with, the fact, that the
excess of payments of coin over receipts is nearly twice as
great in October as in any other month.

The result is very remarkable, too, when we take the
aggregate excess of payments over receipts in each quarter,
or vice versa , as follows :

First quarter, January — March , £33,000 Beceipts

Second „ April— June . . 1,097,000 Payments

Third „ July — September . 1,996,000 „

Fourth „ October — December . 1,890,000 „

I may add, that these fluctuations do not appear to be due
to any very great or all-extensive influence of the seasons upon
trade. For, on carefully examining Mr. ISTewmarch's well-
known statistics of bills created in the years 1830-53,* I find
no great difference between the four quarters of the year.
The average aggregate amounts of bills of all sizes drawn are
as follows :

First quarter .... ^£64, 050, 000

Second „ .... 61,550,000

Third „ .... 65,690,000

Fourth „ .... 61,960,000

The variation is greatest in the large bills, but the extreme
variation of the aggregate is only to the extent of about
6 per cent. It is curious that we meet here again the double
oscillation shown in the bullion and in the reserve of loanable
capital.

(2 ). — On the Causes of the Autumnal Pressure .

It being now sufficiently obvious how extensive is the
autumnal disturbance of the money market, and especially
how singular is the periodical crisis in October, I come to the

* (< History of Prices,” yoI, vi. Appendix. XI. pp. 584-92.


PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET \


170


[v.


question : What are the causes of the disturbance ? These causes
must be sought in the influence of the seasons upgn trade and
industry, but the difficult point is : Why does the drain fall so
peculiarly in the first few weeks of October ?

It is not hard to see that there must be an excess of coin
in circulation in the latter half of the year. In the prosecu-
tion of agriculture, in the building and outdoor trades gene-
rally, and in pleasure-seeking and travelling, there is an excess
of wages and payments dispersed in the summer, and especially
in the three months July, August, and September. Large
numbers of labourers and others must then receive wages in
coin upon which they will have to maintain themselves partly
or wholly until the next spring. As such persons belong to
a social class which does not make any considerable use of
banks (even of savings* banks), they must actually hold a
certain amount of coin by them in a temporary hoard.

This view of the subject is supported by the fact that the
variation is more important in the metallic circulation than in
that of notes, of which few would in England be held by the
working classes.

But then, why do we not find the drain most excessive
during the months June, July, August, and September, when
the industry is most active ? Why does the drain fall with
most intensity into the month of October ? I cannot give ah
explanation with any confidence," and* would rather expect it
from members of the Society who are better acquainted with
the details of banking business. But it seems to me likely
that the drain falls in the first place upon private firms and
country banks, whose reserves in consequence run down.
Advantage is then taken of the payments of the dividends
in October to replenish the banking reserves of notes and
coin. It is evident, in fact, from Table I., that in October
the dividends are withdrawn rather than placed in deposit, as
is usual at the other dividend payments.

Thus it would seom evident that there is a tendency during


V.]


DISPERSION OF COIN


m

every autumn to use the Bank of England as a bank of
support, and <jf last resort. While the newspapers are arguing
in October that the harvest is done, and pleasure traffic over,
and that therefore the coin should be flowing back, the coin
is really dispersed among the non-banking classes of the
country, and the drain having previously fallen on the smaller
banks is only just reaching the Bank of England. “ What is
seen and what is not seen ” should always be discriminated in
these matters. We do not see the movements of coin until
the drain falls upon the Bank in the first weeks of October
with unexpected and alarming severity.

It is interesting to compare the variation of the Bank of
England circulation with that of the country and joint-stock
banks, or with that of the Scotch and Irish note currencies.
I have calculated the average variation from week to week of
the English country note circulation for the series of years
1845-62, and have shown it in Table VI.

It will be seen that there is an increase of circulation at
the commencement of each quarter, but that in April and
October the increase is much greater and more lasting than in
the other quarters. The currency falls to its lowest in August
and the beginning of September, then rises rapidly to the
highest point of the year in the end of October, whence it
falls continuously until the end of the year. These variations do
not agree well with Gilbart’s “Laws of the Currency,” deduced
from an observation of monthly returns for ten years.*

His description, however, of the changes in the Scotch
currency is very accurate.*}* cc In Scotland the lowest point of
the circulation is in March, and the highest in November. The
advance, however, between these two points is not uniform;
for the highest of the intervening months is May, after which
there is a slight reaction ; but it increases again until
November and falls off in December. The reason of the

* « Statistical Journal,” vol. xvii. p. 295 (December, 1854) . See above p. 4.
f Ibid , pp. 297, 298 (December, 1854).


172


PRESSURE IN TEE MONEY MARKET.


[v.


great increase in May and November is that these are the
seasons of making payments. The interest duOfOn mortgages
is then settled, annuities are then paid, the country people
usually take the interest on their deposit receipts, and the
servants receive their wages. There are frequently large sums
transferred by way of mortgage/'

The variation of the Irish note circulation does not agree
exactly with Grilbart's remarks. The notes of £5 and upwards
vary like the English country issues. The smaller note circu-
lation falls to a low point in July and August, and then rises
rapidly until November, owing to the purchase of harvest
produce. It remains high until March, when it begins to fall
gradually up to the month of July-

A complete explanation of all these variations, pointing
out how much is due to each particular cause, could only be
founded on a wide basis of statistics, which do not exist.
Much might, indeed, -be done by minute inquiry into the
customary payments at different times of the year, and in
different parts of the country ; but such an inquiry I am not
at present able to undertake. I must content myself with
pointing out the precise character and amount of the fluctua-
tions, in order that we may rightly appreciate the amount of
disturbance they will usually occasion in the money mairket.

To sum up, then, the October drain is due, like many other
economic disturbances, to a concurrence of causes. The dis-
persion of money in wages during the summer, and the
absorption of money and capital in buying up the produce
of the harvest, occasion a general autumnal drain upon the
resources of the banks, causing the private deposits, the
bnllion, and the reserve of notes to fall. Then the general
quarterly payments of rents, bills, and especially the dividends
at the beginning of October, cause a sudden extra run upon
the resources of the Bank, quite sufficient in certain states of
the money market to engender a panic, unless, indeed, its
normal and temporary nature be well understood.


v.] THE OCTOBER DRAIN OF 1865 . 173

(3 ). — Special Examination of the Pressure of 1865.

I now proceed to compare tlie drain of bullion in the
autumn of 1865 with, that normal drain shown in the average
tables of the Bank accounts. The following statement gives
the comparison in detail :


[0,000’s omitted ]


Date.

Notes in Circulation.

Bullion m

Issue Department.

Reserve of Loanable
Capital (Notes).

Aveiage

of

1845-61.

1865.

Average

of

1845-61.

1865.

Average

of

1815-61.

1865.

June

7

19,88

21,16

14,35

14,89

8,65

8,38


14

19,63

20, 73

14,58

15,09

9,12

9,01


21

19,52

20,71

14,80

15,35

9,45

9,29

jj

28

19,81

21,12

I4>99

15,42

9,35

8,95

July

5

20,20

22,22

14.85

15,12

8,8 2

7,55


12 ......

20,82

22,39

14,67

14,56

8,02

6,82


19 ... .

21,00

22,24

14,55

14,15

7j 7 2

6,56

jj

26

20,80

22,07

14,49

13,60

7,85

6,18

l ug.

2

20,81

22,64

14,37

13,60

7,73

5,61

jj

9

20,57

22,03

i 4j33

13,35

7,93

5,97


16

20,46

21,97

14,3s

13,24

8,09

5,92


23

20,24

21,78

j 4j35

13,27

8,29

6,14

jj

30

20,19

21,60

14,35

13,57

8,34

6,62

Sept.

6

20,10

21,70

t 4j29

13,42

8,36

6,37


13

I9j 77

21,39

x 4,33

13,30

8,73

6,56


20

19,70

21,32

14,36

13,34

8,83

6,67

jj

27

19,86

21,50

x 4,33

13,13

8,64

6,28

Oct.

4

20,41

22,73

14,14

12,44

7,90

4,36

jj

11

20,47

22,32

x 3,9i

11,96

7,61

4,29

jj

18

21,06

22,31

x 3j69

12,00

6,81

4,34

jj

25

20,90

21,82

x 3,6o

12,41

6,88

5,24

Nov.

1

20,97

21,85

13,57

12,51

6,78

5,31

jj

8

20,64

21,47

13, 55

12,57

7,08

5,75

jj

15

20,31

21,15

13,55

12,86

7,4i

6,36

jj

22

20,04

20,58

13,68

13,67

7,8 i

7,74

jj

29

19,89

20,72

13,82

13,84

i

8,11

7,77


The fairest mode of bringing the matter into a narrow
compass will be to take the extreme highest and lowest
points.


174


PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET.


[v.


Average of Tears.
1845-61.

Millions.

The Year 1865^

Millions.

Rotes in Circulation —

September 20

October 18

£

19,70

21,06

September 20

October 4

£

21,32

22,73

Difference

1,36

Difference

1,41

Bullion —

June 28

November 8

14,99

13,55

June 28

October 11

15,42

11,96

Difference

1,44

Difference

3,46

Reserve of Rotes —

June 21

November 1 ...

9,45

6,78

June 21

October 11

9.29

4.29

Difference . .

2,67

Difference

6,00


If we restrict our view more particularly to the October
drain, by comparing the extreme points of September and
October, the change of the circulation remains as already
shown, and the drain of gold and capital is as under :


Average of Years.
1845-61.

Millions.

The Year 1865.

Millions.

Bullion —

September 20,. ,

October 25

£

14,36

13,60

September 6

October 11

£

13,42

11,96

Difference

,76

Difference

1,46

Reserve of Rotes —

September 20

October 11

8,83

7,61

September 20 ...

October 11

6,67

4,29

Difference

1,22

Difference ...

2,38


However we view it, the drain of 1865 is seen to be con-
siderably beyond, and in fact about double of what is shown as
the normal change in my average tables.

This excess may arise either from (1) exceptional circum-
stances affecting the trade of 1865, or from (2) the general and
gradual development of our industry.


V.]


GROWTH OF TRADE.


1 75

I shall not dwell much upon the special disturbing circum-
stances of #1865. Many of them were mentioned in the
beginning of the paper. The considerable degree of pressure
in the money market, which has existed during the winter^
shows, however, that excessive investments in joint-stock
and other enterprises have diminished the ready capital of
the country, in spite of the late unusual abundance and
cheapness of corn. It is well known, too, that during the
last year, and one or two previous years, buildings of all
sorts have been erected in great numbers in most of our towns.
Large sums of money must have been dispersed in wages
during the progress of these works, and especially during the
summer.

Secondly, the ordinary export trade of the country ex-
panded very rapidly during the year, as noticed by The
Economist Not only do these exports represent so much
money dispersed in wages over the country, but being sold
to a great extent on credit, they cause a temporary abstrac-
tion of the floating capital of the country.

What I have chiefly to remark, however, is that, with
the rapid growth of our system of trade and industry, our
money market is necessarily becoming more and more delicate.
We must look this fact boldly in the face. We must not
needlessly complain of what is to a great extent an inevitable
result of our progress, nor on the other hand must we omit
any efforts to apply a remedy so far as this is possible.

The following figures will aid in showing what I mean :


Year.

Bullion in the
Bank,
September.

Notes

in

Circulation.

Total

Exports of
Year.

Computed Real
Value of Total
Imports of Year.


Millions.

Millions.

Millions.

Millions.


£

£

£

£

1844

14,35

20,17

59,00

—

1861

12,63

19,62

116,00

152,00

1864

12,22

21,36

213,00

275,00


176 PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET [v.

Whether we consider these numbers, or whether we look
to the increasing perfection of our system of credit, clearing,
and banking generally, which, as shown by Sir John
Lubbock,* enables coin to be almost dispensed with in large
transactions, we see that we are carrying on a vaster and
vaster system of trade upon a nearly stationary reserve of
currency. Our trade goes upon a method resembling that
of barter, f except that the values exchanged or written off
against each other are all determined and expressed in gold.
Now, it is the aggregate of coin and gold in circulation or
reserve — in short, the supply of gold as compared with the
work it has to do — which determines the range of prices, and
which must in the last resort be used to make payments either
in an internal or foreign drain.

Admirably has M. de Laveleye said, in a passage of the
“ Eevue des Deux Mondes,” quoted by The Economist in its
“ Commercial History and Review of 1864” :

“All countries which cany on gigantic transactions with
small reserves of gold and silver, and which have a vast
movement of importations and exportations, must be exposed
to these economical perturbations. . . . The more a country
■expels the precious metals from the channels of circulation,
and replaces them by instruments of credit, bank-notes,
cheques, warrants, deposits, clearing-houses, etc., and the
more at the same time it develops its relations with foreign
countries, the more it will be exposed to the periodical return
of financial perturbations, because more easily an unfavourable
balance of trade and payments will disturb all the mechanism
of exchanges, and will require from the managers of credit
institutions redoubled circumspection, prudence, and ability.”

Now this is just as true of internal as of foreign drains of
gold. The larger our system of trade is, the larger the excess
of wages dispersed at some periods of the year. When our

* “ Statistical Journal,” September, 1865, vol. xxviii. pp. 361-71.
t 6ee « Money and the Mechanism of Exchange,” p. 288.


V.]


BARTER SYSTEM.


1 77


reserve of coin is stationary, tlie greater will be the inconveni-
ence and alarm excited. Even without taking into account
exceptional circumstances, the unbounded prosperity of the last
few years seems sufficient to explain why the autumnal drain has
of late manifested itself with far more than the normal severity
of the years 1845-61. We must bear in mind that we are
moving onwards, and rapid progress such as ours, however
desirable in itself, must beget some difficulties.


(4 ). — On the Action of the BanJc of England.

We come now to the last question, namely, whether the
action of the Bank of England as at present governed is bene-
ficial to trade during these frequently recurring pressures.

It is well known that many merchants and gentlemen of
influence in Glasgow, Liverpool, and elsewhere, have a strong
desire to unsettle our monetary system again. They spare no
pains in urging upon us that the Bank of England is the cause
of all our troubles. While some go so far as to propose an
inconvertible currency, others advise a return to a system of
free issue of notes, the convertibility of which shall be
dependent on the credit and discretion of the issuing banks,
according to the method which used to prevail in Scotland.
It is the latter scheme alone that I need consider here.

I will not deny that there is some apparent harshness in the
action of the Bank during the temporary fluctuations which
I have attempted to describe. But after considerable reflec-
tion I have satisfied myself that this harshness is not neces-
sarily inflicted under the conditions of the Bank Act; or,
more precisely, I should say that what harshness is a necessary
consequence of that Act is legitimate and ultimately beneficial
to trade.

In the first place, as regards a foreign drain of bullion.
Lord Overstone and the supporters of the Bank Act seem to


178 PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET. [v.

me to be in an impregnable position. Nothing can be more
desirable, nothing more in accordance with the natural laws of
economics and trade, than that a foreign drain should at once
cause a redaction in the currency, and thus tend to restore the
exchanges to equilibrium as quickly as ^possible. In a system
of unrestricted issues the drain will for a time probably act
upon the bankers’ metallic reserves without leading them at
once to reduce their advances of notes. The revulsion is
thus deferred only to become ultimately more severe and
hazardous.

It is, however, an internal drain which we have now to
consider, and it is in this respect that the primci facie incon-
venience of a restricted paper currency is manifested. Mr.
Guthrie, the able advocate of the Scotch system, in his
“ Practical Contrast of English Banking, and British Free
Banking,” puts this point clearly enough. In our present
system, he says :

“ The natural demand at rent-terms and other seasons for
increased circulation, has the same deranging and distressing
effect upon the money market as an export of bullion, and the
people of England are excluded from a privilege w hic h the
people of Scotland have found to be both safe and most
profitable and convenient.”

In contrast to this, he adds :

“ The circulation has increased in Scotland at certain
seasons, to the amount of 10 or 15 per cent., but this natural
periodical demand was met by the elasticity of the Scotch £1
note circulation without the slightest difficulty or disturbance
of the money market, and a similar circulation, with its cor-
responding advantages, should of course be allowed to
England.”

These remarks are perfectly applicable to the autumnal
pressures we have been considering. Had we an unrestricted
note circulation, the three millions and a half of additional
currency required might have been furnished by a proper


v.] ACTION OF THE BANK OF ENGLAND. 179

number of bits of paper.* Bankers and the Bank of
England would readily have issued these notes in discount
or payment of deposits and dividends. No one, perhaps,
would have known until the proper blue-book appeared
long afterwards, how great an excess was issued, and the
money market might have proceeded without apparent
disturbance.

The question here becomes twofold :

1. How far is such an absence of apparent disturbance
desirable ?

2. How far may it be attained under the present system ?

The answers, I take it, are as follows :

1. So far as a demand is a purely temporary demand for
internal circulation, it is desirable that it should be furnished
by an extended issue of notes or gold from the Bank reserves.
This excess of currency will return spontaneously as the
seasons go round.

2. So far as a demand for gold or notes is known to be of
this temporary character, it may even now be properly sup-
plied by the Bank of England and the other banks without
exciting pressure on the money market.

On the other hand, so far as a drain is not certainly known
to be of a periodic or temporary nature, bankers are bound to
raise the terms of advance and to restrict their amount.
Under the same circumstances bankers would be bound in
prudence to reduce their issues, even did the Bank Act not
exist. I hold, in short, that the Bank of England and hankers
generally have just the same legitimate latitude in increasing or
diminishing their advances now as they would have under a
restricted system . It is only the illegitimate expansion of the

* This point has since been very strongly put by Mr. R. H. Inglis Palgrave
in his “Analysis of the Minutes of Evidence taken before the Select Committee
of the House of Commons on Banks of Issue, 1875 55 (London, 1876, printed for
private circulation). See Preface, pp. 42-48, on the periodic fluctuations of
the provincial circulation, and the evidence of witnesses there referred to,
especially that of Mr. Palgrave himself (Questions 5507-6168).

N 2


i go PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET [v.

note currency which is put out of their power by the Bank
Acts of 1844 and 1845.

If it he clearly known that in the early par! of October
there is a normal demand for currency far greater than at any
other time of the year, then I take it to he an expedient and
necessary policy of the Bank to prepare themselves for it some-
what beforehand, and when it does occur, to let their reserve
run down to a lower point than they would do at any other
time of the year, knowing that the excess of currency issued
will in the natural course of events return.

This is the policy to a considerable extent adopted even at
present. The Times represents the Bank directors as feeling
confidence that the amounts of currency gradually withdrawn
during July, August, and September would shortly return.
But their confidence failed when the sudden October pressure
fell upon the Bank. Here, I apprehend, was to some extent
a double error. The newspaper press and the mercantile world
were not sufficiently aware that the chief pressure falls into
October. Had this been thoroughly known it would have
been only prudent for the Bank directors to strengthen their
position somewhat earlier than they did. When the expected
run in the beginning of October came upon them it would
have been quite unnecessary to put on so violent a pressure as
a rise of 2| per cent, in the rate of discount in ten days.

It cannot be denied, indeed, that to some extent the periodic
drain was aggravated by a more chronic scarcity of capital,
which has been felt ever since. Still I have no hesitation in
asserting that if the public and the commercial press had been
thoroughly aware how peculiar those first few weeks of October
naturally are, far less alarm, pressure, revulsion of prices and
injury would have been excited during last autumn.*

# Some remarks on these periodic variations were made by Mr. R. H.
Xnglis Palgrave in his important paper entitled “Notes on Banking in the
ITnited Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark, and Hamburg”—" Statistical Journal,”
March, 1873, vol. xxxvi. pp. 90, 96-99, and separate reprint.


V.]


PERIODIC PRESSURES.


i&i

I take it, therefore, that careful observation and com-
parison of the fluctuations of the money market are sufficient to
enable us to avoid tho inconveniences of these periodic pres-
sures. We should learn to discriminate what is usual and
normal in the changes of the Bank accounts, from what is
irregular or abnormal. It is a matter of skill and discretion
to allow for the normal changes . It is the abnormal changes
which are alone threatening or worthy of very much attention.
These changes arise from deficient or excessive harvests, from
sudden changes of supply or demand in any of our great staple
commodities, from manias of excessive investment or specu-
lation, from wars and political disturbances, or other fortuitous
occurrences which we cannot calculate upon and allow for. In
such matters of high uncex’tainty it is desirable to trust as
little to discretion and to commit as much to the operation of
natural laws as is possible. The Bank Act of 1844 carries this
principle into effect, and relieves the directors from vast
responsibility, by making the circulation identical in amount
and variations with that of a purely metallic currency. I must
maintain, then, that under the present system the English
currency is governed by the natural laws of supply and demand
of a metallic currency, and not by merely artificial regulations.
If the terms are interpreted aright, we have already a natural
and free-trade system of currency. And I venture to take
this auspicious expression — Free Trade — from those who use
it wrongly, and who confuse the free manufacture of currency
with/rcc trade in capital , the true business of the banker.


PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET.


[V.


182


APPENDIX L

Description of the Tables I. to VII.

Table I. was formed by arranging the Bank of England
accounts of tie years 1845-61 under each other, so that tie
average state of tie accounts, for tie first week, for tie second
week, and so on, could be drawn.

Table II. was formed from Table I., by arranging tie
accounts of tie corresponding weeks of eaci quarter under
eaci other, and drawing tie average of tie first week of tie
quarter, tie second week, and so on.

Table IV. represents tie divergence of eaci of tie prin-
cipal elements of tie Bank account from its average point, after
elimination of the quarterly variation. It was formed by
subtracting tie numbers in Table II. from tie corresponding
numbers of eaci quarter in Table I. Thus —

20.200.000 s=s average note circulation of 27th week.

20.110.000 ,, ,, 1st week of quarter.

Difference 90,000 = divergence of note circulation.

Tie numbers in Table IV. are only approximate, and in
tie forty-first week are thrown wrong by tie fact that tie
dividend-day falls five days later than usual.

Tie other tables sufficiently explain themselves.

All tie tables were calculated to a further place of figures,
and thus an apparent discrepancy of a unit will sometimes be
discovered in tie last place of figures given.

In cutting off useless columns of figures a unit has always
been added to tie last place retained when the highest figure
cut off was 5 or more. Thus, instead of 10,665 I should write
10,67 according to a a?ule approved by Professor De Morgan.


V,] TABLES OF BANK ACCOUNTS. 183

Table I.— Average State of the Accounts of the Banh of England in each Week

{Average of 1845 - 61 ).


[0,000*8 omitted.]


Reserve

of

Notes.

Total

Reserve,

Notes

and

Com.

Bullion and Coin,
Gold and Silver.

Number

of

Week.

Average
Distribu-
tion of
Weeks.

Circulation.

Private

Secu-

rities.

Private

De-

posits.

Public

De-

posits

Issue

Depart-

ment.

Bank-

ing

Depart-

ment.

Total.

Notes.

Bills.

Total.

8,59

9,22

14,16

64

14,80

1

Jan. 4

*9)74

98

20,72

16,75

IO,8l

8,53

7,83

8,45

13,98

63

14,60

2

)) 11

20,32

1,02

21,34

15,31

12,71

4,63

7, 60

8,25

13)94

65

14,59

3

„ 18

20,51

1,03

21,54

14,83

12,43

4, 18

7,79

8,46

13,98

67

14,64

4

„ 25

20,36

1,01

21,36

14,85

*2,39

4,23

7,75

8,43

*3)99

68

14,68

5

Feb. 1

20,42

99

21,41

15,14

*2)33

4,48

8,18

8,88

14,03

70

14,78

6

>, 8

20,01

99

21,00

15,13

12,09

5)Oi

8,51

9,22

14,18

‘71

14,88

7

,, 15

19,84

96

20,80

15,16

*i)9i

5,59

8,84

9.57

14,27

73

15,00

8

,, 22

19,60

93

20,53

15,16

11,89

6,03

8,74

9,45

14,3*

72

15,03

9

Mar. 1

19.75

93

20,67

15,74

11,91

6,24

8,97

9,68

14,36

71

15,07

10

,, 8

19.55

93

20,49

15,67

11,67

6,58

9,20

9)93

14,41

72

15,13

11

,, 15

*9,37

9*

20,28

15,83

11,68

7,03

9,42

10,14

H, S 1

73

15,24

12

„ 22

19,27

9*

20,18

15,96

11,57

7,44

8,93

9,6s

14,48

72

15,20

13

» 29

19,72

92

20,64

16,55

11,46

7,83

8,29

8,97

14,22

69

14,91

14

April 5

20,10

95

21,06

16,61

11,64

7,48

7,50

8,17

14,03

66

14,69

15

), 12

20,70

99

21,68

15,20

13,26

4,27

7,35

7)99

*3,92

64

14,56

16

„ 19

20,74

99

21,73

14,74

12,91

3,74

7,40

8,08

13,87

68

14,55

17

,) 26

20,64

99

21,63

14,46

12,45

3,80

7,20

7,88

13,73

68

14,41

18

May 3

20,70

1,00

21,70

14,55

12,07

4,05

7,49

8,18

13,78

69

14,48

19

„ 10

20,47

1,00

21,47

14,59

11,89

4,06

7,82

8,53

13,81

7i

14,52

20

» 17

20,16

97

21,13

14,77

11,69

4,83

8,28

9,01

14,03

73

14,75

21

„ 24

19,92

95

20,86

14,59

11,47

5,45

8,47

9)19

14,24

72

14,96

22

), 31

19)94

94

20, S8

14,65

i*)55

5,7!

8,65

9,36

14,35

72

15,07

23

June 7

19,88

95

20,82

14,75

11,42

6,09

9,12

9,83

14,58

70

15,29

24

,) 14

19,63

94

20,57

14,78

H)43

6,53

9,45

10,18

14,80

73

15,53

25

„ 21

19,52

9*

20,43

14,77

*i)i5

7,21

9,35

10,05

14,99

70

15,69

26

» 28

19,81

93

20,74

15,24

11,06

7,72

8,82

9,49

14*85

67

15,52

27

July 5

20,20

97

21,17

15,64

11,27

7,48

8,02

8,67

14,67

65

15,32

28

)) 12

20,82

1,01

21,83

14,31

13)04

3,71

7,72

8,37

*4,55

65

15,19

29

„ 19

21,00

1,01

22,01

13,89

12,56

3,3°

7,85

8,5°

*4,49

64

15,13

30

„ 26

20,80

1,04

21,84

13,71

12,04

3,63

7,73

8,37

*4,37

64

15,00

31

Aug. 2

20,81

1,02

21,83

14,00

*i)73

3,94

7,93

8,57

14,33

64

14,97

32

„ 9

20,57

1,02

21,59

14,19

11,28

4,63

8,09

8,73

*4,38

65

15,02

33

,) 16

20,46

*)03

21,49

14,36

10,96

5,32

8,29

8,94

*4,35

65

15,01

34

„ 23

20,24

*)03

21,26

14,22

10,58

5,77

8,34

8,98

*4,35

64

15,00

35

„ 30

20,19

r, 01

21,19

14,55

10,51

6,17

8,36

8,98

14,29

62

14,91

36

Sept. 6

20,10

1,01

21,11

14,83

10,17

6,65

8,73

9,37

*4,33

64

14,98

37

„ 13

19)77

98

20,76

15,03

10,16

7,24

8,83

9,49

14)36

i 66

15,01

38

20

19,70

99

20,68

15,53

10,15

8,02

8,64

9,3°

14,33

65

14,99

39

„ 27

19,86

99

20,85

16,18

10,07

8,35

7,90

8,50

14, 14

60

14,74

40

Oct. 4

20,41

*)03

21,44

16,89

10,15

8,09

7,61

8,23

*3,9*

62

14,53

41

)) 11

20,47

1,03

21,50

16,63

10,58

7, 46

6,81

7,39

*3,69

59

14,28

42

„ 18

21,06

1,07

22,12

15,40

i*)53

4,54

6,88

7,48

13,60

61

14,21

43

„ 25

20,90

1,06

21,96

15,22

ii,47

4,37

6,78

7,39

*3,57

61

14,18

44

Nov. 1

20,97

i)OS

22,01

15,46

H)32

4,60

7,08

7,69

*3,55

61

14,16

45

)) 8

20,64

1,04

21,68

15,35

11,04

5,04

7,41

8,05

13,55

64

14,19

46

„ 15

20,31

1,02

21,33

15,63

10,90

5,79

7,81

8,44

13,68

63

14,31

47

,, 22

20,04

1,01

21,05

15,94

10,86

6,52

8,11

8,76

13,82

65

14,47

48

„ 29

19,89

99

20,87

16,10

10,97

6,98

8,32

8,98

13,90

67

14,57

49

Deo. 5

19,75

98

20,74

16,10

10,88

7,30

8,79

9,47

14,06

68

14,75

50

„ 12

19,44,

95

20,39

16,08

10,83

7)90

9,13

9,82

14,20

68

14,89

51

„ 19

19,24

94

20,19

16,28

; *P) 8o

8,40

9,05

9,7i

14,23

66

14,88 !

52

„ 26

>9,35

9*

20,26

16,71

io,79

8,88


1 84


PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET.


[V.


Table II . — Average Variation of the Bank Accounts from Week to Week of
the Quarter (1845-61).

[0,000’s omitted.]


Reserve

ot

Notes

and

Coin.

Bullion and Com,
Gold and Silver.


Circulation.

Private

Secu-

rities.

Deposits.

Issue

Depart-

ment.

Bank-

ing

Depart-
ment. .

Total.

Num-
ber of
Week.

Notes

Bills.

Total.

Private.

Public

£

£

£

£


£

£

£

£

£

£

9 >°$

14,34

65

14,99

1

20,11

98

21,10

16,47

10,96

7,89

8,38

14,15

64

14,79

2

20,58

1, or

21,59

15,36

12,40

5,02

8,oo

' 14,02

63

14,66

3

20,83

1,02

21,85

14,71

12,36

3,94

8,13

13,98

65

14,63

4

20,68

1,02

21,70

14,56

12,09

4,01

8,02

*3,9*

65

14,57

5

20,72

1,02

21,74

14,79

11,86

4,27

8,33

13,92

66

14,58

6

20,42

1,01

21,44

14,82

11,58

4,68

8,63

13,98

68

14,65

7

20,19

1,00

21,19

14,98

11,36

5,38

8,99

14,08

69

14,77

8

19,95

98

20,92

14,98

11,20

5,94

9,09

14,18

68

14,86

9

19,94

96

20,90

15,26

11,24

6,28

9,25

14,23

68

14,90

10

19,82

97

20,79

15,34

11,03

6,65

9,65

14,35

69

15,03

11

19,55

95

20,50

15,43

11,03

7,18

9,9 1

14,47

70

15,17

12

19,43

94

20,37

15,64

10,92

7,78

9,68

14,5 1

68

15,19

13

19,69

94

20,62

16,17

. 10,85

8,20


Table III.— Average Variation of the Ghief Accounts from Week to Week of
the Month (1845-61).

[0,000’s omitted.]


Reserve

of

Notes

and

Coin.

Bullion and Com,
Gold and Silver.

Num-
ber of
Week.

Circulation.


Deposits.

Issue

Depart-

ment.

Bank-

ing

Depart-

ment.

Total.

Notes.

Bills.

Total.

Secu-

rities.

Private.

Public.

£

£

£

£


£

£

£

£

£

£

8,72

14,14

66

14,80

1

20,26

99

21,25

15,51

ii»3S

6,15

8,65

14,10

66

14,76

2

20,27

99

21,26

15,17

11,67

5,45

8,76

14, ™

67

14,78

3

20,19 !

99

21,18

15,04

11,58

5,50

9,°i

14,18

68

14,86

4

20,02

98

21,00

15,06

11,40

5,91

1 9,68

[ I4,5i

1

68

15,19

5

19,69

94

20,62

16,17

10, 85

8,20


V.]


TABLES OF BANK ACCOUNTS.


*85


Table IY. — Divergence of the Bank Accounts from their Average Condition,
after Elimination of the Quarterly Variation (1845-61).

[0,000’s omitted ]


Num-
ber of
Week.

Reserve

of

Notes

and

Coinin

Bank-

ing

Depart-

ment.

Total
Bullion
m Issue
and
Bank-
ing

Depart-

ments.

Notes

in

Circu-

lation.

Private

Secu-

rities.

Private

De-

posits.

Num-
ber of
Week.

Reserve

of

Notes
and
Com in
Bank-
ing

Depart-

ment.

Total
Bullion
in Issue
and
Bank-
ing

Depart-

ments.

Notes

m

Circu-

lation.

Private

Secu-

rities.

Private

De-

posits.


£

£

£

£

£


£

£


S


£

£

1

4* 18

-

19

-

37

+

28

-

16

27

+

44

+

53

+

9

-

83

+

31

2

7

-

19

—

26

-

5

4*

3i

28

+

29

+

53

+

24

— 3

,06

+

64

3

+ 25

-

6

-

3i

4-

11

+

7

29

+

37

+

54

+

17

—

82

4-

20

4

+ 33

4-

1

-

32

4-

29

+

3o

30

+

37

4-

50

+

13

—

85

-

5

5

+ 4i

4*

11

-

3i

4-

36

+

47

31

+

35

+

44

+

9

—

79

-

13

6

+ 55

+

14

-

41

4-

31

+

52

32

+

24

+

39

+

15

-

62

-

29

7

+ 5*

4-

23

-

35

4-

18

+

54

33

+

10

+

37

+

27

—

62

-

41

8

+ 58

4-

23


35

+

19

+

69

34

-

5

+

24

4-

29

—

76

-

62

9

+ 36

+

16

-

20

4*

48

+

67

35

-

11

+

13

+

25

-

71

-

72

10

+ 43

+

16

-

27

4-

33

+

63

36

-

28

4-

1

+

28

—

51


87

11

-1- 28

+

9

—

18

+

40

+

66

37

-

28

-

6

+

22

—

40

-

86

12

+ 24

4-

7

-

16

4-

33

+

66

38

-

42

-

16

4-

27

—

11

-

77

13

- 2

4-

1

+

4

+

38

+

62

39

-

38

-

20

+

18

4-

1

-

78

14

- 7

—

8

__

1

4-

14

+

67

40

_

55

_

26

+

30

4-

41

—

82

15

- 22

—

9

4-

12

-

16

+

86

41


*


*


*


*


*

16

- 1

-

9

-

9

4-

2

+

55

42

-

61

—

38

4-

23

4-

68

-

82

17

- 5

-

9

-

3

-

10

+

37

43

-

65

-

42

+

22

+

67

-

62

18

- 14

-

16

_

3

-

24

+

21

44

-

63

-

38

+

25

+

67

-

54

19

“ i5

-

11

4-

4

-

23

4-

3i

45

-

65

-

43

+

22

4-

54

-

54

20

10

-

14

-

3

-

21

4-

33

46

-

53

-

47

4-

12

4-

65

-

47

21

+ 2

-

2

-

3

-

39

4*

27

47

-

55

-

46

4-

9

+

96

-

34

22

+ 9

+

10


0

-

6L

+

32

48

-

34

—

39

-

6

+

84

-

26

23

+ 11

4*

17

4-

5

-

59

+

39

49

-

27


34

-

7

4-

77

-

15

24

4- 18

+

25

4-

8

-

65

+

40

50

-

18

—

29

—

11

4-

65

-

20

25

+■ 28

4*

37

+

9

-

87

+

23

51

-

9

-

28

—

19

j +

65

-

12

26

+ 37

4-

50

+

12


93

+

22

52

+

3

—

31


34

4-

54

_2

5


* The October dividends being due five days later than the other dividendSi
the results for the forty-first week are thrown out, and cannot be given.


Table V. — Average Amount of the Chief Elements of the Bank Accounts
during the Whole Period (1845-61).


£

Notes in the hands of the public... 20 , 146,000

Seven-day and other bills ... 984,000


Total circulation


!•«


21 , 130,000


1 86


PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET


[v.


Gold and Silver Bullion and Coin —
Issue department ...

Banking


£

14,163,000

687,000


Total


14,830,000


£


Reserve of notes and coin
Private securities ...

„ deposits ...
Public „


in B anking department 8, 854, 000

15,269,000

... 11,45 1,000

5>94o,ooo


Table YI . — Average Variation from Week to Week of the Note Circulation
of the English Private and Joint- Stock Banks (1846-62),

[0,000’s omitted.]


Week.

Average

Circulation.

Week .

Average

Circulation.

Week,

Average

Circulation.

Week.

Average

Circulation.


£


£

27

£


£

1

6,53

14

6,86

6,51

40

6,85

2

6,75

16

6,97

28

6,58

41

6,98

3

6,8l

16

6,97

29

6,53

42

7,06

4

6,74

17

6,94

30

6,45

43

6,99

5

6,64

18

6,92

31

6,37

44

6,91

6

6,59

19

6,90

32

6,35

45

6,85

7

6,55

20

6,87

33

6,33

46

6,79

8

6 , 5 °

21

6,75

34

6,30

47

6,69

9

6,47

22

6,62

35

6,31

48

6,61

10

6,51

23

6,56

36

6,35

49

6,52

11

6,54

24

6,52

37

6,42

50

6,49

12

6,58

25

6,48

38

6 , 5 °

51

6,41

13

6,71

26

6,48

39

6,63

52

6,41


Table YII . — Average Variation during the Year of the Bank Note Circu-
lation of Scotland and Ireland, at Four-weekly Intervals (1853-62).

[0,000’s omitted.]


Pour-

Scotland.

Ireland.

Pour-

Scotland,

Ireland.

weekly

Returns.

£5 and

up-

wards.

Under

£5

£5 and

wards.

Under

£5

weekly

Returns.

£5 and
up-
wards

Under

£ 5 .

£5 and
up-
wards.

Under

£ 5 .


£

£

£

£


£

£

£

£

1

1,47

2,63

3,05

3,57

8

1,42

2,55

3,01

2,82

2

1,44

2,50

3,08

3,60

9

1,39

2,54

2,92

2,82

3

1,38

2,41

3,06

3,5°

10

1,41

2,61

2,99

3,oi

4

1,35

2,41

3,09

3,39

11

1,52

2,67

3,24

3,4i

5

1,44

2,46

3,22

3,26

12

1,62

2,83

3,26

3,54

6

7

1,66

1,51

2,75

2,59

3,17

3,03

3,09

2,93

13

1,60

2,83

3,15

3,55


v.]


TABLES OF BANK ACCOUNTS .


187


POSTSCRIPT.

Twenty years having elapsed since the preceding tables
were drawn up, it has become desirable to repeat the calcula-
tions then made. We might reasonably expect that the great
increase in commerce and financial transactions in the interval
would produce some changes in the variations of the Bank
accounts, involving probably an aggravation of the seasonal
fluctuations. Some interesting results might be obtained in
this direction. In any case, it is obvious that for practical
purposes the most recent data are the most valuable.

The accounts fall naturally into two intervals of ten years
each, and as there was little, if any, more labour in making
two sets of averages rather than a single set of averages of
the whole twenty years, double tables were drawn up. Their
comparison with each other and with the preceding tables
of the interval 1845-61, serves either to confirm the existence
of well-marked fluctuations, or else to detect changes of
management on the part of the Bank authorities.

The preparation of these tables has cost a great deal of
labour, each number in the principal tables of weekly averages
being derived from the addition of ten numbers for the corre-
sponding weeks of ten years. I am much indebted to my
friend Mr. William Thornely for undertaking a part of the
requisite work.

Any remarks which I may have to make upon the
inferences to be deduced from these tables will be best
given in the Introductory Discussions.


188 PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET. [v.

Table YEL — Average State of the Accounts of the Bank of England in each Week

( 1862 - 71 ).


[0,000’s omitted.]


Reserve

of

Notes.

Total

Reserve,

Notes

and

Com.

Bullion and Com,
Gold and Silver.

Number

Average
Distribu-
tion of
Weeks.

Circulation.

Private

Secu-

rities.

Private

De-

posits.

Public

De-

posits.

Issue

Depart-

ment.

Bank-

ing

Depart-

ment

Total.

of

Week.

Notes.

Bills.

Total.

9,02

9,86

16,49

84

17,83

1

Jan.

4

23,35

56

22,91

21,13

17,14

7*97

8,94

9,80

16,37

86

17,23

2

a

11

22,32

60

22,92

19,21

19,16

4,67

8,86

9.74

16,28

89

17,17

3

»>

18

22,31

60

22,91

18,26

17,78

4* 60

9,15

10,03

16,25

88

17,13

4

a

25

21,99

57

22,56

18,16

17,17

5*o8

9,16

10,04

16,32

88

17,20

5

Feb.

1

22,05

57

22,62

18,59

16,84

5,4i

9,27

10,16

16,28

89

17,17

6

»

8

21,89

55

22,44

18,12

16,07

5*95

9,64

IO *55

16,39

9i

17,30

7


15

21,63

55

22,18

18,18

16,07

6,36

9,96

10,89

16,40

93

17,33

8

,*

22

21,35

A4

21,89

18,18

16,07

6,63

9,73

10,64

16,44

9i

17,35

9

Mar.

1

21,63

54

22,17

19,28

16,38

7,00

9,72

10,64

16,39

92

17,31

10

,*

8

21,60

52

22,12

19,72

16,03

7*74

10,10

11,04

16,48

94

17,42

11

33

15

21,29

50

21,79

19,80

15,88

8,20

10,36

11,31

16,73

95

17,68

12


22

21,28

49

21,77

19,96

15*39

9*04

9,89

10,83

16,83

94

17,77

13

s>

29

21,75

49

22,24

20,80

15,63

9*47

9,06

9.94

16,69

88

17,57

14

April 5

22,54

51

23,05

20,67

16,36

8,n

8,74

9.64

16,48

90

17,38

15

„

12

22,66

5i

23,17

19,32

17*30

5*65

8,70

9,60

16,41

90

17,31

16

a

19

22,61

5°

23,11

18,88

16,78

5,78

8,88

9,74

16,41

86

17,27

17

3 ,

26

22,44

56

23,00

18,39

l6,06

6,20

8,41

9,31

16,37

90

17,27

18

May

3

22,77

52

23,29

19,05

15,68

6,69

8,57

9,5i

16,24

94

17,18

19

*>

10

22,58

S 2

23,10

19,44

15,82

7,02

8,41

9,32

16,33

9i

17,24

20

3 3

17

22,83

51

23,34

20,45

16,47

7,08

8,92

9; 86

16,51

94

17,45

21

33

24

22,50

49

22,99

20,20

16,32

7,53

9,05

9,94

16,83

89

17,72

22

33

31

22,81

5o

23,31

20,63

i6,55

7,93

9,46

io,37

17,15

91

18,06

23

June

7

22,60

50

23,10

20,35

16,22

8,37

10,05

11,00

17,48

95

18,43

24

j)

14

22,43

5°

22,93

20,33

16,35

8,89

10,55

11,49

17,84

94

18,78

25

33

21

22,19

48

22,67

20,38

16,41

9,3.8

10,31

11,28

18,04

97

19,01

26

33

28

22,73

49

23,22

22,29

17,45

10,02

9,41

10,31

17,99

90

18,89

27

July

5

23,49

53

24,02

22,29

i8,77

7*8 1

9,29

10,25

17,87

96

18,83

28

33

12

23,50

56

24,06

20,14

19,74

4,60

9,16

10,08

17,75

92

18,67

29

33

19

23,52

60

24,12

19,51

18,97

4*49

9,16

10,09

17,66

93

18,59

30

33

26

23,41

58

23,99

19,72

19,01

4*59

8,75"

9.65

17,58

90

18,48

31

Aug.

2

23,75

60

24,35

19,63

18,18

4* 80

8,79

9,69

17,39

90

18,29

32

33

9

23>5 2

60

24,12

19,24

17,83

1 4*74

9,15

10,10

17,48

95

18,43

33

33

16

23*24

63

23,87

18,91

17,70

4*87

9,56

10,49

17,61

93

18,54

34

33

23

22,99

62

23,61

18,71

17,53

5>i6

9,86

10,79

17,81

93

18,74

35

33

30

22,91

62

23,53

18,65

17,33

5*53

9,79

10,71

17,88

92

18,80

36

Sept.

6

23,00

62

23,62

18,76

16,89

5*8$

10,10

11,02

17,81

92

18,73

37

33

13

22,63

64

23,27

18,64

16,70

6,29

10,19

11,09

17,81

90

18,71

38


20

22,53

63

23,16

18,61

16,40

6,63

9,81

10,73

17,58

92

18,50

39

33

27

22,68

64

23,32

19,66

16,76

7 *io

8,70

9*5*

17,33

81

18,14

40

Oot.

4

23,60

68

24,28

20,11

16,69

6,64

8,38

9,25

17,00

fz

17,87

41

33

11

23*53

66

24,19

19,41

17,03

5*83

8,27

9,i3

16,87

86

17,73

42

33

18

23,52

66

24,18

18,44

17,82

4*i3

8,66

9? 53

16,96

87

17,83

43

33

25

23,21

66

23,87

18,11

17,65

4,13

8,58

HI

16,97

o 4

17,81

44

No v.

1

23,30

66

23,96

18,34

17,36

4,42

8,83

9,68

16,93


17,78

45

33

8

23,01

66

23,67

18,15

17,03

4,90

9,35

10,22

17,07

87

17,94

46

33

15

22,64

64

23,28

18,03

16,92

5*38

9,84

10,74

17,15

90

18,05

47

33

22

22,23

63

22,86

17,88

16,80

5*84

9,85

10,74

17,13

l 9

18,02

. 48

33

29

22,19

61

22,80

17,90

16,57

6,1 7

, 9,89

10,78

17,13

89

18,02

49

Dec.

5

22,15

60

22,75

18,05

16,15

6,59

10,43

11,31

17,25

88

18,13

* 50

»

12

2i,73

57

22,30

18,25

16,46

7,48

10,70

11,61


9i

1 18,34

51

33

19

21,67

54

22,21

18,63

16,45

7*95

, 10,46

11,30

17,48

84

18,32

52

33

26

21,84

5i

22,35

19,82

16,80

8,56


v.] TABLES OF BANK ACCOUNTS '.

Table IX. — Average State of the Accounts of the Bank of England

( 1872 — 81 ).


189

in each Week


[0,000*8 omitted.]


Reserv

Total

Reserve

Bullioif and Coin
Gold and Silver.

Numbe

Average
r Distribu-
tion of
Weeks.

I Circulation,

Private

Secu-

rities.

Privat

De-

posits.


of

Notes,

.Notes

and

Com.

Issue

Depart

ment.

Bank-

ing 1

‘ Depart
ment

Total.

of

Week.

Notes.

Bills.

Total.

Public

De-

posits.

11.49
11,67
11,90
12,42

12.14

12.49

13.02

13.49
13,38

13.38
13,63
13,72

12.96

12.02
11,62

11.89
12,01

11.38
11,47

11.52
11,95

12.74

12.29
13,26
14,04
13,80
13,09

13.30

13.53
13,63

13.15
13,14
13,59

13.71
13,63

13.50

13.89

13.97
13,62

11.93

11.53
11,18

11.30
11,02

10.89

10.93
11,17

11.75
11,65
11,86

11.72
11,23

12,27

12,46

12.76
I3>34
13,08

13.42

13.97
14,49

14.39
r 4>44
14,70

14.76

13.94

12 .95
12,61
12,88

12.98

12,31

12.43

12.48
12,92
13,74
13,26
14,30
iS,o3

14.77
14,05

14.28
14,47

14.56

14.02

14.03

14.49
14,63
14,49

14.40

r 4»73

14,84

14,46

12,69

12.28

11.98
12,13
11,87

11.72

1 1,81

I2,IO

12,65

12,53

12.73

12.57

12,01

24,04

24.08
24,16
24,30

24.12
24,22
24,34
24,55
24,59
24,55
24,67

24.79

25.29
24,36
24,03
24,03
23,99

23.88

23.75

23,66

23.76

24.01

24.29

24.78

25,53

25,98

25.88
25,97

26.08

26.12
25,96
25,96

26.01

25,90

25,75

25.75

25.78
25,84

25.89

24,87

24,39

23,92

23.76

23,58

23,22

22.89

23.08

23,24

23,21

23,26

23,38

23,34

78

79
86

92

94

93

95

1.00

1.01

1.06

1.07
1,04

98

93

99
99
97

93

96

96

97
1,00

97

1,04

99

97

9 o

98

94
93
87

89

90

92
86

9°

84

87

84

76

75

80

i 3

%

88

93
90
88
87

85

78

24.82
24,87
25,02
25,22
25,06
25,15
25,29
25,55

25.60

25.61
25,74

25.83
26,27
25,29
25,02
25,02
24,96

24.81

24.71

24.62

24.73

25.01
25,26

25.82
26,52
26,95

26.84
26,95

27.02

27.05

26.83

26.85
26,91
26,82
26,61
26,65

26.62

26.71

26.73
25,63

25.14

24.71
24,59
24,43

24.05
23,77
24,01

24.14
24,09
24,13
24,23
24,12

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

Jan. 4
„ 11
„ 18
,, 25

Feb. 1
„ 8
„ 15

„ 22
Mar. 1
„ 8
„ 15

„ 22
„ 29

April 5
„ 12
a 19
„ 26
May 3
„ 10
„ 17

„ 24

,, 31

June 7
„ 14

„ 21
„ 28
July 5
„ 12
„ 19

„ 26
Aug. 2
„ 9

„ 16
„ 23

„ 30

Sept. 6
„ 13

„ 20
„ 27

Oet. 4
„ 11
„ 18
,, 25

Nov. 1
>, 8
,, 15

„ 22
„ 29

Deo. 5
„ 12
,, 19

„ 26

2 7,55

27,41

27,26

26,88

26.87
26,73
26,32

26.07

26.21
26,24
26,01

26.08

27,13

27/34

27.39

27.22
27,06
27,67
27,46
27,22

26.88

27.03

26,91

26,70

26,57

27.26

27,86

27,76

27.62
27,37

27.89
27,89

27.40

27.27
27,40
27,33
26,95
26,80
26,56

28,00

27,74

27,82

27,54

27,64

27,40

27.04

26,79

26,56

26.63

26,47*

26.64
27,H

32

35

34

32

32

33

32
30

30

33

31

31

30

34

35

32

31

32

33

32

30

30

31

31

30

29

32

34

35

34

34

35

35

35

34

37

35

36

35

37

38

36

35

35

37

35

34

32

34

32

30

30

27,87

27,76

27,60

27,20

27,19

27,06

26,64

26.37
26,51
26,57

26.32
26,39
27,43
27,68

27.74
27,54

27.37
27,99
27,79

27.54

27.18

27.33
27,22
27,01

26.87

27.55

28.18
28,10

27.97
27,71

28.23

28.24

27.75
27,62
27,74
27,70
27,31
27,16
26,92

28.37
28,12
28,18
27,90
27,99
27,77
27,39
27,13

26.88

26.97
26,79
26,94
27,44

21,52

18,64

18,43

18,45

18,81

19,11

19,33

19,50

20,86

20,99

21.94

21.91
22,84
22,47
21,14
20,67
21,16
21,09
20,60
20,25

19.95
20,08
20,03
19,30
19,28
20,75
20,49
18,54
18,43
18,21
18,86
18,43
18,06

17.91
18,24

18.93

18.97
19,11
19,40

20,45

19,77

19,72

19,65

19,33

19,23

19,59

18.94
19,00

18.92
19,21

19.97
21,54

25,39

24,85

24,85

24,16

22,94

21,97

21,96

21,51

21.90

21.53

21.66

21.54
22,12

22.42
23,20

22.83

22.62
22,41

21.84

21.63

21,69

21.71

21,38

21.43

21,27

22.80

23.72

24,26

25,07

24.73

24.81

23.91

23,76

23.55
23,46
23,57

23.67

23.59
23,99

24,17

25,31

24,89

24.59

23.64

23,06

23,33

22,96

22,94

22,10

21,84

21,71

23,79

6,94

4.80

4.77
4,89

5.49
6,87
8,12

8.81
9,38

10,09

11,03

«, 3 i

11,69

9.49

7.24

7.35

8,21

7.50
7,72
7,67

I;?I

8,61

8.78
9,04

9.42

7,50

4,92

4.65

4.66
4,76
4,96
5,06

5.25

5.42
5,33
5,75

6,01

5.95

6,12

4,92

4.35

4,21

432

4,28

4.26
4,65

4.95
5,49

6,19

6.95
7,44


190


PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET


[v.


Table X . — Average Variation from Week to Week of the Quarter (1862-71).

[0,000’s omitted.]


Reserve

of

Notes

and

Coin,


Num-
ber of
Week.

Circulation.


Deposits.

Issue

Depart-

ment.

Bank-

ing

Depart-

ment.

Total.

Notes.

Bills.

Total.

lu

Private.

Public.

9,90

17.12

86

17,98

1

23,00

57

23,57

21,05

17,24

7,63

9,73

16.93

90

17,83

2

23,00

58

23,58

19,52

18,31

5»i9

9,64.

16,83

89

17,72

3

22,99

59

23,58

18,77

17,84

4,75

9,85

16,82

88

17,70

4

22,76

59

23,35

18,59

17,47

5,00

9,60

16,81

88

17,69

5

22,97

59

23,56

18,90

17,01

5,33

9,76

16,71

89

17,60

6

22,75

58

23,33

18,74

16,69

5,65

10,05

16,82

9i

17,73

7

22,59

58

23,17

18,89

16,79

5,92

10,50

16,92

92

17,84

8

22,27

57

22,84

18,74

16,68

6,29

10,53

17,06

90

17,96

9

22,38

57

22,95

19,11

16,71

6,66

10,62

17. >3

9i

18,04

10

22,34

56

22,90

19,22

16,32

7J4

11,12

17,26

92

18,18

11

22,02

55

22,57

19,25

16,35

7,7 1

11,37

17,46

92

18,38

12

21,92

53

22,45

19,40

16,16

8,25

11,03

17,48

92

18,40

13

22,25

53

22,78

| 20,64

16,66

8,79


Table XI . — Average Variation from Week to Week of the Month (1862-71).

[0,000’s omitted.]


Reserve

of

Notes

and

Com.

Bullion and Com,
Gold and Silver.

Num-
ber of
Week.

Circulation.

Private

Secu-

rities.

Deposits.

Issue

Depart-

ment.

Bank*

mg

Depart-

ment-

Total.

Notes.

Bills.

Total.

Private.

Public.

10,01

17,00

,88

17,88

1

22,78

,58

23,36

19,69

16,99

6,54

10,04

16,92

,9°

17,82

2

22,70

,57

23,27

19,16

17,11

5,99

10,27

16,97

,91

17,88

3

22,53

,57

23,10

18,97

16,99

6,13

10,57

17,07

,9i

17,97

4

22,32

,56

22,88

18,91

16,77

6,51

11,03

17,48

,92

18,40

5

22,25

,53

22,78

20,64

16,66

8,79


V.]


TABLES OF BANK ACCOUNTS.


19I


Table XII. — Average Variation from Week to Week of the Quarter (1872-81).

[0,000*8 omitted.J


Reserve

of

Notes

and

Com.

Bullion and Coin,
Gold and Silver.

Num-
ber of
Week.

Circulation,

Private

Secu-

rities.

Deposits.

Issue

Depart-

ment

Bank-

ing

Depart-

ment.

Total.

Notes.

Bins.

Total.

Private.

Public.

12,99

24,78

,86

25,64

H

£7,69

*34

28,03

21,23

23,92

751

12,91

24,61

,88

25,49

2

27,57

*35

27,92

19,52

24,40

547

13,02

24,56

*90

25,46

3

27,48

*34

27,82

19,31

24,41

528

13,25

24,54

*91

25,45

4

27,21

*33

27,54

19,37

24,02

549

12,82

24,38

,90

25,28

5

27,52

*33

27,85

19,52

23,45

552

12,90

24,29

,90

25,19

6

27,37

,34

27,71

19,34

22,70

596

13,19

24^3

*92

25,15

7

26,97

*33

27,30

19,31

22,67

628

13,53

24*33

*95

25,28

8

26,75

*32

27,07

19,07

22,43

661

13,82

24,40

*94

25,34

9

26,80

! ,3i

27,11

19,54

22,50

698

13,66

24*45

,95

: 25,40

10

26,78

,34

27,12

19,72

22,14

738

14,11

24*64

*94

25,58

11.

26,53

*32

26,85

19,85

22,15

794

14,30

24,88

,94

25,82

12

26,52

*32

26,84

20,06

22,03

833

13,79

25*13

*89

26,02

13

27,02

*3i

27,33

21,13

22,92

862


Table XIII . — Average Variation from Weehio Week of the Month (1872-81).

[0,000* s omitted.]


Reserve

of

Notes

and

Com.

Bullion and Coin,
Gold and Silver.

Num-
ber of
Week.

Circulation.


Deposits.

- Issue
Depart-
ment.

Bank-

ing

Depart-

ment

Total.

Notes.

Bills.

Total.

Private

Secu-

rities.

Private

Public.

13,21

24,52

,90

25,43

1

27*34

>33

27,67

20,10

23,29

6,6 7

13,16

24,45

*91

25,36

2

27,22

*34

27,56

19,53

23,08

6,30

13,44

24,48

,92

25,40

3

26,99

*33

27,32

19,49

23,08

6,50

13,69

24,59

>93

25,52

4

26,83

*32

27,15

19,50

22,83

6,81

13,79

25,13

,89

26,02

5

27,02

*3i

27,33

21,13

22,92

8,62


192


PRESSURE IN THE MONEY MARKET.


[v.


Table XIT . — Divergence of the Bank Accounts from their Average Condition , after Elhninatfa
of the Quarterly Variation , in the two intervals 1862-71 and 1872-81. ‘


[0,000’s omitted.]


Totai Reserve.

Total Bullion.

Notes in
Circulation.


Average
Distribu-
tion of
Weeks.

Private

Securities.

n

Private

Deposits.

Public 3
Deposits, ij

1862-71

1872-81

1862-71

1872-81

1862-71

1872-81


1862-71 | 1872-81

1862-71

1372-81

1862-71

1872-81

1 “ 4

- 72

- 65

- 82

-6 5

-14

1

Jan 4

- 8

-

- 29

- IO

+ 147

+ 34

- 57

+ 7

- 45

-60

- 62

-68

- 16

2

» ll

- 31


- 88

- 85

+ 45

“ 52

- 67

! io

- 26

- DO

- 44

-68

- 22

3

„ 18

- 51


- 88

- 6

+ 44

- is

- 51I

i -18

-l 9

-57

- 23

“77

“33

4

» 25
Feb. 1

- 43


- 92

“ 30

+ 14

+ 8

- 6qJ

! + 44

26

-49

- 22

-92

-65

5

- 31


- 71

- 1 7

" 51

+ 8

“ 3

! -40

+ O 2

-43

- 4

: -86

-64

6

8

- 62

-

- 23

- 62

- 73

+ 30

+ gii

; H-50

7S

-43

- 14

- 96

-65

7

15

- 71

T 2

“ 72

" 71

+ 44

+ i8i
+220

i + 39

- 96

- 51

- 27

-92

-68

8

» 22

- 56

-

- 43

- 61

- 92

+ 34

+ n

+ 57

-61

+ 26

“75

“59

9

Mar. 1

T 17

-

-132

- 28

- 60

+ 34

+ 24O

2

- 78

-73

- 21

“74

“54

10

„ 8

+ 50

-

-127

- 29

- 61

+ 60

+271'

! - 8

+ { 9

-76

- 16

“73

-52

11

„ 15

— 55

-

-209

“ 47

- 49

+ 49

+309

- 6

v 46

-70

T 1

-64

“44

12

22

— 56

-

-185

” 77

- 49

+ 79

+ 298

-20

15

-63

-t- 25

“50

-11

13

,, 29

+ 16

■

-171

-103

- 80

+ 68

+307

+ 4

“ 4

-41

- 35

-46

“ 35

14

April 5

- 38

-

-124

- 88

-150

+ 48

+ I98

- 9

- 30

-45

- 47

-34

-iS

1

„ 12

- 20

-

-162

-101

- 120

+ 46

+ 177

- 4

- 14

-41

- 4 1

“3«

- 26

16

» 19

+ 11

-

-136

- 106

-158

+ 103

+ 207

j -II

- 27

-43

- 49

“3 2

- 15

17

„ 26

- 20

-

-179

-141

- 140

+ 120

+ 272

1 — 29

- 5 1

- 42

- 47

-20

-- 15

18

May 3

+ 15

-

-157

“133

- 104

+ 136

+ I98

-2;

- 47

-42

- 38

-17

- 9

19

„ 10

+ 70

-

-126

- 87

- 86

+ 137

+ 176

-73

- 7i

-49

- 53

-24

'-25

20

» 17

+ 56


- 94

“ 32

-104

+ 116

+ i6 9j

-64

- 61

-39

- 55

-'-23

-■13

21

.. 2-1

-146

-

- 88

- 36

“ 74

+ 124

+ 114

-59

- 8

-24

- 33

"43

-23

22

„ 31

.-152

-

- 54

- i5

“ 79

+ 127

+ I2jj

-25

- 40

+ 2

- 14

+ 26

" 13

23

June 7

- u 113

— 31

- IO

- 76

+ 123

+ 1211

- 12

- 19

+ 25

-i- 24

"41

"17

24

„ u

-'-108

-

00

+ 19

- 72

+ 118,

+ 841

+ 71]

+ 12

+ 73

+ 40

+ 70

+ 27

+ 5

25

„ 21

+ 98

_

78

+ 25

- 76

+ 113

+ 25

+ 98

+ 61

+ 93

+ 48

+ 24

26

„ 28

+165

-

38

+ 79

- 12

+ 123

+ 80’

+41

+ 106

+ 91

+ 120

+49

+ 17

27

July 5

+ 124

-

74

+ 153

- 20

+ 18

- I

+ 52

+ 137

+ 100

+ 146

+ 50

+ 19

28

„ 12

+ 62

-

98

+ 143

“ 14

- 59

“ 55

+44

+ 145

+95

+156

+ 53

+ 14

29

a 19

+ 74

-

88

+ 113

+ 66

- 26

“ 83

+ 24

+ 131

+ 89

+ 160

+ 65

+ 16

30

„ 26

+113

-

-116

+ 154

+ 7i

- 4i

+ 5

+ 120

+ 79

+155

+ 78

+ 37

31

Aug. 2

+ 73

-

66

+ 117

+ 136

" 53

- 76*

- 7

+ 113

+ 69

+ 166

+ 77

+ 52

32

„ 9

+ 50

-

91

+ 114

+ 121

- 91

- 100

+ 5

+ 130

+ 70

+ 176

+ 65

+ 43

33

„ 16

+ 2

-

-125

+ 91

+ 109

-105

-122 j

- 1

+ 110

+ 70

+ 154

+ 72

+ 52

34

„ 23

- 3

-

-116

+ 85

+ 1 12

-113

-136!

+26

+ 67

+78

+ 127

+ 53

+ 60

35

„ 30

- 46

-

-130

+ 58

+ 96

“ii3

- 156 1

+ 9

+ 74

+76

+ 125

+ 66

+ 55

36

Sept. 6

- 46

-

79

+ 57

+ 143

- 129

“205*

- 10

4 62*

+ 55

+ 104

+ 61

+42

37

» 13

- 61

-

88

+ 35

+ 152

- 142

“2I<$

-28

+ 54

+ 33

+ 89

+ 61

+ 28

38

„ 20

- 79

-

95

+ 24

+ 156

- 162

“232|

-30

+ 67

+ 10

+ n

+43

-46

39

„ 27

- 98

-

■173

+ 10

+ 107

-169

“26^

-39

- 30

+16

- 1

+ 60

+ 31

40

Oct. 4

- 94

-

78

" 55

+ 25

" 99

“1391

-48

- 63

+ 4

-‘35

+53

+ 17

41

„ 11

- 11


- 25

-128

+ 91

+ 64


-5i

-104

+ 1

- 75

+ 53

+ 34

42

„ 18

- 33

-f

41

- 2

+ 48

- 62

: lf\

-32

-112

+13

- 86

+45

+ 33

43

„ 25

“ 48

+ 28

+ 1 8

+ 57

- 87

- 128 ]

-18

- 95

+12

- 85

+33

+ 12

44

Nov. 1

- 56

-

19

+ 35

+ 19

- 91

-120

- 8

-118

+18

-114

+26

+ 3

45

» 8

- 59

-

11

+ 34

+ 36

- 75

-168

+ 17

-138

+21

-138

+ 5

+ 7

46

„ 15

- 86

H

28

+ 13

+ 66

- 54

-202

+24

-143

+21

-127

- 4

+ 4

47

„ 22

- 86

-

13

+ 12

+ 53

“ 45

-196

+21 1

-117

+ 6

-120

-13

; “24

48

>, 29

-121

-

54

- 14

+ 44

- 49

-203,

+ 16

-113

- 2

-131

-19


49

Deo. 5

-117

-

80

- 16

“ 4

“ 55

-l8&

+ 19

-138

- 5

-145

-29

- 6

50

„ 12

-100

-

64

+ 11

“ 31

- 23

“i 79

+24

-173

- 4

“159

-25

" + 12

51

„ 19

- ir

-

9

+ 29

“ 32

“ 30

-138

+27
-+ —

-178

- 8

-190

“4 Ir

l +12

1

52

„ .26

- 82

-f

41

+ 14

“ 13

- 23

-118


COMMERCIAL FLUCTUATIONS.


DIAGRAM of the Average Accounts of the Barth of England/ For eachy
week of the Year. Average of the Years JS4S to fSGJ iruboewe, bo Hluetrute
Utile 1 pages J82


COMMERCIAL FLUCTUATIONS.


DIAGRAM oF the Average Accounts of the Sank of England/ for each/
week of the. Year. Average/ of the Ykcrs J86Z to J87i incZaeive/ t to tUustmta
TatUVIH page/ 188


Commercial, Fluctuations.

Average Variation of the, Bouvh of lErufloLtvd, Accounts Prow wwk> tfr week* of' the/ QucurUr.
tomustmto Table, 11. page m a*ub Tables X cuvd, XJJ. pages 100-1.


Average, of 1845 to 1861 inclusive/. | Average of 1862 to 1871 inclusive/.


HHHBBBBHBBBB1 HBHBHIHIHHHHHH HBflflBBBHHHHHiS


mm

man

lua iaia

!■ ■■■■■

1


COMMERCIAL FLUCTUATIONS.

DIAGRAM of {ke Average, Accounts of the Earth of England/ /hr each.,
week of the. Year. Average/ of the, Tears 187% to 18 81 vadaswe/, to iJTuebute.
TaMe, IX page/ 189


A VERAGE VAR I A T/OR ofthe/Bouvfo of England’ Jccounts from/
■week to week- of the- Mmflv To illustrate/ Talk- THpage>l84. fyTaffles
XI omol X1JI pager 190


Back horizontal, spate, represented 1,000,000. |

PUBLIC DEPOSITS. RESERVE. I BULLION & COIN, j PRIVATE DEPOSITS j


Commercial Fluctuations.

TJwergmee of the Bank, of England, Accounts from, their Average condition after EhnwwUion of the Quarterly Averages.

To Illustrate TaMe JV page, 78S. and Jhble XIV. page I9Z.


RriMMERciAL Fluctuations

AVERAGE VARIATIONS; DURING II YEARS OF THE BANK-HOTEGlRGUl.ATmN

TaRUistrctte, Tables VI & Vll, Page/ 166

i t


A ftifcoM EN GLAND (Pri vate&Joint Stock Banks)

°jL 1845 - 62 .


R E LAND.iAT FOUR-WEEKLY INTERVALS,)
1853-62 __


Notes w ft ricrJLS I


SCOTLAND.(at four-weekly intervals 5
1853 - 62 .


yr&T'oh'


( Eoj&v hjori^onbul Space/ represents on e MiUUuorv)


V.]


AVERAGE STATE OF BANE ACCOUNTS .


193


Table XV . — Average Amount of the Chief Elements of the Bank Accounts
during each of the Decennial intervals 1862-71 ancl 1872-81.


Notes in the hands of the public ...

Seven-day and other bills . .

Average of
1802 - 71 .

£

22,560,000

570,000

Average of
1871 - 81 .

£

27,090,000

330,000

Total circulation ...

23,130,000

27,420,000

Gold and Silver Bullion and Coin —

Issue department

Banking department . .

17,030,000

900,000

24,560,000

910,000

Total ..

17,930,000

25,470,000

Reserve of notes and coin in Banking depart-
ment ... ..

Private securities

„ deposits . . ..

Public

10.290.000

19.290.000

16.940.000
6,490,000

13.410.000

19.770.000

23.060.000
6,720,00000


194


SOLAR PERIOD AND PRICE OF CORN


[vi*


YL

THE SOLAR PERIOD AND THE PRICE OF
CORN.*

It is a well-known principle of mechanics that the effeots of
a periodically varying cause are themselves periodic, and
usually go through their phases in periods of time equal to
those of the cause. There is no doubt that the energy poured
upon the earth's surface in the form of sunbeams is the
principal agent in maintaining life here. It has lately been
proved, too, beyond all reasonable doubt, that there is a
periodic variation of the sun's condition, which was first dis-
covered in the alternate increase and decrease of area of the
sun-spots, but which is also marked by the occurrence of
auroras, magnetic storms, cyclones, and other meteorological
disturbances. Little doubt is now entertained, moreover, that
the rainfall and other atmospheric phenomena of any locality
are more or less influenced by the same changes in the sun's
condition, though we do not yet know either the exact nature
of these solar variations nor the way in which they would act
upon the weather of any particular country.

The success of the harvest in any year certainly depends
upon the weather, especially that of the summer and autumn
months. Now, if this weather depends in any degree upon the
solar period, it follows that the harvest and the price of grain
will depend more or less upon the solar period, and will go
through periodic fluctuations in periods of time equal to those

* This paper was read by me at the meeting of the British Association, at
Bristol, in 1875, Section F. See Report, “Transactions of Sections,” p. 217.
It has not been previously printed, as explained in the Introductory Discussions.


vi.3


PREVIOUS INQUIRIES.


195


of the sun-spots. This almost necessary result seems to have
occurred to Mr. R. 0. Carrington, E.RS., and in his standard
work upon the sun, he gave a diagram* comparing the price
of corn with the sun-spot curve during portions of the last and
present centuries. Between the phenomena as thus treated
there is no apparent correspondence sufficient to found any
conclusions on. Mr. A. Schuster, of the Owens College, has
since then ingeniously pointed out that the years of good
vintage in Western Europe have occurred at intervals some-
what approximating to eleven years, the average length of the
principal sun-spot cycle. The correspondence appeared to him
sufficiently close to afford some evidence of connection.

It might seem easy to decide whether any such dependence
exists or not by taking tables of prices, such as those given in
Tooke's “ History of Prices,” and observing whether there is
any tendency to fluctuate in a similar manner at intervals of
eleven years. During the last hundred years, however, the
prices of grain and all other commodities have been greatly
affected by all kinds of political and social events. There have
been great wars, great industrial discoveries, and great inven-
tions. The currencies of the principal nations have been, at
two or more distinct times, revolutionised by the introduction
of paper currency, which, by driving out specie, has produced
enormous fluctuations in the values of the precious metals, f


* u Observations of the Spots on the Sun from November 9th, 1853, to March
24th, 1861.” 1863, 4 to. Williams & Norgate. See plate 166, at the end of the
volume, and pp. 247, 248, where Carrington made the following remark : “ I
attach no importance to the wheat diagram, but data of this kind were em-
ployed m an interesting and original investigation of the elder Herschel, which
has been frequently referred to in subsequent years. The present diagram
appears to me rather to indicate that, concurrently with abundant and deficient
crops, social and political causes affect prices to an extent sufficient to destroy
their value for the purpose for which he selected them. It will probably be
noticed that no previously uninformed person could from the curve infer the
year of the abolition of the corn laws.” Carrington, it will be seen, does not
assert the influence on prices to be null; but only to be overborne and
disguised by those due to social and political causes.

+ See above, pp. 74, 130, 131, 136.

0 2


196 SOLAR PERIOD AND PRICE OF CORN [vi.

even greater than the variations due to the vast discoveries of
gold. For these and other reasons., there is no interval of time
less suitable than the last hundred years for the detection of
variations due solely to meteorological conditions.

It occurred to me, however, that we have in the wonderful
“ History of Agriculture and Prices in England/* deduced
entirely from original and contemporaneous records by Professor
James E. Thorold Rogers, and published by the Clarendon
Press,* exactly what we want for the purpose in view. I
will take the present opportunity to say of this work,
that the more I study it the more I am inclined to regard
it as the most valuable and remarkable contribution to the
history and statistics of a past century ever made by a single
individual in a single work. It makes us almost better
acquainted with the state of prices and the details of many
kinds of industry in the thirteenth and fourteenth cen-
turies than we are with such matters as regards the last
fifty years. No one who has not studied these two volumes
can have any notion of the infinite fund of information
of a wholly new kind which they contain, nor the immense
labour which their preparation must have entailed. In the
second volume of this work we find one hundred and seventy
pages of close print occupied with the details of the prices
of all kinds of grain in all parts of England, from the year
1259 to the year 1400. These are the actual prices as quoted
in innumerable transactions recorded in the ancient accounts
of the Oxford Colleges, relating to their landed possessions, and
are of unquestionable accuracy and genuineness. It is hardly
needful to point out that in those days, when the means of
inland or oversea conveyance were so simple and imperfect
compared with what we now have, the prices of grain in any

* <( A History of Agriculture and Prices in England, from tlie year after
the Oxford Parliament (12S9) to the Commencement of the Continental War
(1793). Compiled entirely from Original and Contemporaneous Records.”
Oxford, 1866. 2 vols. During the course of the present year Professor Rogers
has issued vols. iii. and iv. of this grand work.


vl] METHOD OF CALCULATION. r 9 7

locality were mainly governed by the harvest of that locality, and
thus depended immediately upon the weather. From the average
tables drawn up by Professor Rogers for decennial periods, it
appears that there was not during the long interval of one hun-
dred and forty years any great revolution in the value of the
precious metals. Credit cycles, crises, floods of paper money, and
other causes, which now so often cause fluctuations, were un-
known, and though wars were frequent enough, they were not of
a kind to make revolutionary changes in the primitive commerce
of the time. The Black Death and the changes in the rates of
wages thence arising are the only interfering events of any
importance tending to obscure the action of simple meteoro-
logical conditions upon the prices of grain.

Professor Rogers* volumes, then, contain precisely the kind
of data suitable for testing the effects of the sun-spot variation
on human affairs. The labour of treating such a mass of
numerical information would have been almost impossibly
great for me, had not Professor Rogers himself drawn up
elaborate tables, giving the average prices of each kind of
commodity in each year. In the case of grain he has also
reduced the prices to their expression in grains of pure silver,
so as to remove the disturbances due to depreciation of the
coinage.

Taking these tables of the prices of wheat, barley, oats,
beans, peas, vetches, and rye (vol. i. pp. 236-44), I pro-
ceeded to make a further reduction by dividing up the table
into successive intervals of eleven years, writing the prices of
each year under the corresponding year of the previous
eleven years* interval, and then drawing averages, so as to get
the average of the first, of the second, of the third, etc. years of
the cycle of eleven years. As, indeed, the sun-spot period is
believed to be more nearly of a length of 1IT1 years than
exactly eleven years, it was requisite in arranging the prices to
omit one year*s quotations in the course of the one hundred and
forty years. As the years of maximum or minimum sun-spots are


198


SOLAR PERIOD AND PRICE OF CORN.


[VI.


quite unknown as regards such, earlier centuries, and even their
occurrence is only a matter of inference, the exact relation of
prices to the sun-spots cannot be disclosed at pi^esent by this
inquiry. My purpose has been solely to ascertain whether in
one part of the eleven years 5 period, as accidentally chosen,
prices tended on the average to be higher or lower than at
aiiother pari. In reading the following tables it must be
remembered that the first year of the solar cycle corresponds
with any and all of the years 1259, 1270, 1281, 1292, 1803,
1315 (1314 being omitted), 1326, 1337, 1348, 1359, 1370, 1381,
1392. The average price of wheat for the first year means,
therefore, the average price for all those years taken together.
The second year of the cycle corresponds in like manner to
1260, 1271, 1282, 1293, 1304, 1316, 1327, 1338, 1349, 1360,
1371, 1382, 1393, and similarly of the third and other years of
the cycle. The following table, showing the average price of
each kind of corn in terms of grains of silver in each year of
the cycle, will now be intelligible :


Years .

1st

1259

etc.

2nd

1260

etc.

3rd

1261

etc.

4th

1262

etc.

5th

1263

etc.

6fch

1264

etc.

7th

1265

etc.

8th

1266

etc.

9th

1267

etc.

10th

1268

etc.

11th

1269

etc.

Wheat .

1490

1490

1570

(mx)

1570

(mx)

1460

1490

1410

1370

1290

(mn)

1320

1540

Barley .

1058

1021

1026

1111

(mx)

979

1017

1010

1027

985

902

(mn)

1036

Oats

598

596

619

699

(mx)

593

625

592

575

581

555

(mn)

626

Beans .

993

1064

1248

1424

(mx)

1111

1116

980

1095

983

843

(mn)

1049

Peas. .

928

818

1019

1231

(mx)

1016

891

870

880

757

(mn)

767

929

Vetches

900

848

1139

1228

(mx)

1016

953

916

824

850

920

808

(mn)

Bye . .

1047

1025

1245

(mx)

1161

1011

1142

1065

1139

1027

968

(mn)

1094

Sums

7014

6862

7861

8424

7186

7234

6843

6910

6453

6275

7082


(m») denotes that the preceding number is the greatest in the line, and (mn) similarly

the least


VI.]


AVERAGE FLUCTUATIONS ,


199


We may observe that the price of every kind of commodity,
without exception, rises in the second, third, or fourth years,
and afterwards falls. The fluctuations of each kind of grain
are marked by some peculiarity. The changes are greatest
in vetches, peas, and beans, which exhibit many points of
resemblance; they are least in barley and oats. We find
that in every case the maximum price occurs either in the
third or the fourth year, and in five or six cases out of seven
in the fourth year. Looking to the lowest average prices, we
find them occur twice in the ninth year, four times in the
tenth, and once in the eleventh.

We may draw a further kind of average if we add together
the prices of wheat, barley, oats, etc. in each of the eleven
years. Thus, in the lowest line of the table, 7014 means the
number of grains of pure silver which would, on the average,
in the first year of the assumed sun*spot period, buy one
bushel of wheat, plus one bushel of barley, plus one of oats,
of beans, of peas, of vetches, and of rye, all taken together*
These figures require such careful examination that I repeat
them :

1st year 2nd 3rd 4th. 5th.

7014 6862 7861 8424 7186

6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th

7284 6843 6910 6453 6275 7082

In these figures we observe a minimum in the second year, a
very sudden rise of 22 1 per cent, to an absolute maximum in
the fourth year, a fall, only slightly interrupted in the sixth
year, down to an absolute minimum in the tenth year, the
average of the fourth being 34 per cent, above that of the
tenth year; lastly, a recovery in the eleventh and first years.

The fluctuation in the aggregate price of grain and fodder
thus disclosed is of so very considerable * an amount, and so
well marked in form, that it might be deemed quite conclusive.
It seems in the highest degree unlikely that wars, plagues,


200 SOLAR PERIOD AND PRICE OF CORN [Vi.

legislative enactments; or other accidental events should have
happened to recur at such intervals,, approximating to eleven
years; as to produce upon the average of from ten to thirteen
such periods a total variation of 84 per cent. Two considera-
tions; indeed; somewhat weaken the value of these averages.
In the first place an intense and universal famine occurred in
the years 1315 and 1816; the prices rising to three or more
times above the average rates; and all kinds of grain naturally
participated in such extreme prices. These two years con-
tribute considerably towards the rapid rise in the second year.
It might have been well to strike out the excessive prices of
these years altogether, but I find; on removing these divergent
numbers and recalculating the averages, that there is still a
variation of much the same form as before. The general
averages of all the prices of corn now become as follows :

list year 2nd 3rd 4tli 5th 6th

7014 6351 7317 7470 7186 7234

7th 8th 9th 10th 11th

6843 6910 6453 6275 7082

It will be observed that the maximum is still to be found
in the fourth year of the cycle, but its amopnt is reduced and
the extreme range of variation does not exceed about 19 per
cent. I am inclined to believe, however, that the great famine
of the years 1315 and 1316 is really to be regarded as only
an excessive manifestation of the tendency to bad harvests,
which these numbers show to recur in almost every eleven
years, and if so, the exclusion of the numbers is hardly to be
justified.

To show in another manner that the high prices occur in
the early years of the assumed period, I marked in every eleven-
years* series of prices of each kind of grain the price which was
the highest and that which was the lowest of the set of eleven.
I then counted up the number of times that a maximum or a
minimum price occurred in the first, second, third, etc. year


VI.]


MAXIMA AND MINIMA PRICES.


201


of the period. The results are given in the accompanying
tables ; and, looking to the totals at the foot, it will be seen


Occurrence of Maxima Prices,


Years.

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

10th

Uth

Wheat .

1


2

2

0

1

1

0

1

1

2,

Barley .

1


1

1

0

2

2

0

1

2

2

Oats

1


1


1

1

2

0

0

8

1

Beans .

2

0

3

1

2

1

1

0

0

0

1

Peas

0

L

5

0

2

1

1

0

0

1

1

Vetches

1

2

3

1


1

0

0

0

1

1

Eye . .


2

1

1

2

1

0

1

o !

1

2

Sams .

6

10

16

6

1

1 8

1

! 1

2

9

10


Occurrence of Minima Prices.


Years.

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

10th

nth

Wheat .

4

1

1

1

1

0

3

0

2

0

0

Barley .

3

2

0

0

1

0

1

1

3

0

2

Oats

3

1

0

0

0

0

3

0

2

2

1

Beans .

0

2

0

1

0

2

2

0

2

2

0

Peas

0

2

0

0

2

1

2

2

2

1

0

Vetches

2

2 ;

0

1

0

1

1

1

0

1

1

Eye . .

4

i

0

1

0

2

0

3

0

0

1

Sums .

16

li

1

4

4

6

12

1

11

6

5


that there is a decided excess of maxima in the second and
third years. Still more remarkable, however, is the almost
complete absence of high prices in the eighth and ninth years,
in which only 3 out of 82 maxima occur. It is hardly con-
ceivable that this unequal distribution of high prices can be
accidental. The aggregate number of maxima occurring in
the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth years is
only 31, as against 51 in the tenth and eleventh, and first,
second, and third years. Comparing this" with the distribution


SOLAR PERIOD AND PRICE OF CORN.


202


[VI.


which would be most probable in the absence of any regular
fluctuation, we find the following results :


Six years of fewest maxima
Fire years of most frequent maxima


Number of
observed
maxima.


Calculated

proportion.


31 * 45 = A* 82

51 . 87 -AX 82


Thus the maxima are found to be nearly 40 per cent, more
numerous than they would be if accidentally distributed in the
tenth, eleventh, and first, second, and third 'years.

Looking to the other table we find that the minimum prices
are more evenly distributed, except that they are numerous
in the first year and very deficient in the third year. Adding,
we get altogether 44 for the six years from the fourth to
the ninth, against 38 for the remaining five years. Now 44 is
to 38, nearly as 7 to 6. We thus have reason to believe that
it is remarkably high rather than remarkably low prices which
manifest a tendency to periodical recurrence.

A second objection which may be taken to this inquiry is
that the prices of each kind of grain are more or less influenced
by those of other kinds, so that a few considerable fluctuations
being shared by all the commodities quoted would produce
much effect on the averages. The results which I have given
would be altogether conclusive as to the influence of the sun«
spots if each of the seven commodities varied independently of
the rest. As they are, however, not independent I must
regard these results as of a merely provisional value, showing
the need of further investigations of the same nature, which
will, however, be surrounded by difficulties. I have already
partially examined the series of prices of wheat in the Windsor
market and elsewhere between the years 1595 and 1761 as
given by Adam Smith in his “Wealth of Nations.”* When
treated in the same manner as Professor Rogers* figures, they


* Book I, cbap. xi. ad finem. In Professor Rogers’ edition of tbe “ Wealth
of .Nations ” (Oxford, Clarendon Press), vol. i. pp. 260-71, these tables are
completed and extended.


VI.]


CREDIT CYCLES.


203


give a curve in some degree resembling that of wheat in the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, but showing a total varia-
tion of only 16 per cent, instead of 22, which is the range of
variation in Professor Rogers' quotations of wheat.

I do not venture to assert positively that the average
fluctuations as given in the preceding tables are solely due to
variations of solar power. They seem to show that the subject
deserves further investigation, which I hope to give to it
when I have leisure.

Before concluding I will throw out a surmise, which, though
ib is a mere surmise, seems worth making. It is now pretty
generally allowed that the fluctuations of the money market,
though often apparently due to exceptional and accidental
events, such as wars, great commercial failures, unfounded
panics, and so forth, yet do exhibit a remarkable tendency to
recur at intervals approximating to ten or eleven years. Thus
the principal commercial crises have happened in the years 1825,
1886-39, 1847, 1857, 1866, and I was almost adding 1879, so
convinced do I feel that there will, within the next few years,
be another great crisis. Now, if there should be, in or about
the year 1879, a great collapse* comparable with those of the
years mentioned, there will have been five such occurrences in
fifty-four years, giving almost exactly eleven years (10*8 years)
as the average interval, which sufficiently approximates to
11*11, the supposed exact length of the sun-spot period, to
warrant speculation as to their possible connection.

It is true that Mr. John Mills, in his very excellent papers
upon Credit Cycles in the Transactions of the Manchester
Statistical Society (1867-68, pp. 5-40), has shown that these
periodic collapses are really mental in their nature, depending
upon variations of despondency, hopefulness, excitement,
disappointment and panic* But it seems to me very probable

* The collapse here anticipated actually did occur $ but it must be assigned
to the autumn of the year 1878 , as shown by statistics of bankruptcy appended
to the next paper (VII.) *


204 SOLAR PERIOD AND PRICE OF CORN. [vi.

that these moods of the commercial mind, while constituting
the principal part of the phenomena, may he controlled by
outward events, especially the condition of the harvests.

Assuming that variations of commercial credit and enter-
prise are essentially mental in their nature, must there not be
external events to excite hopefulness at one time or disap-
pointment and despondency at another ? It may be that the
commercial classes of the English nation, as at present con-
stituted, form a body, suited by mental and other conditions,
to go through a complete oscillation in a period nearly corre-
sponding to that of the sun-spots. In such conditions a com-
paratively slight variation of the prices of food, repeated in
a similar manner, at corresponding points of the oscillation,
would suffice to produce violent effects. A ship rolls badly
at sea, when its period of vibration corresponds nearly with
that of the waves which strike it, so that similar impulses
are received at similar positions. A glass is sometimes broken
by a musical sound of the same tone as that which the glass
produces when struck. A child's swing is set and kept in
motion by a very small push, given each time that it returns
to the same place. If, then, , the English money market is
naturally fitted to swing or roll in periods of ten or eleven
years, comparatively slight variations in the goodness of
harvests repeated at like intervals would suffice to produce
those alternations of depression, activity, excitement, and
collapse which undoubtedly recur in well-marked succession.
I have shown reason to suppose that there is an average
variation in the price of corn to the extent of some 16 or 20
per cent, recurring at these intervals, and these variations
form the impulses, as I apprehend, which produce the rolling
of the commercial ship. I am aware that speculations of this
kind may seem somewhat far-fetched and finely- wi'ought ;
but financial collapses have recurred with such approach to
regularity in the last fifty years, that either this or some
other explanation is needed.


SCIENTIFIC PRESENTIMENTS.


205


yi.]


It is curious to reflect that if these speculations should
prove to have any validity, we get back to something which
might be mistaken for the astrology of the middle ages.
Professor Balfour Stewart has shown much reason for believing
that the sun-spot period is connected with the configuration
of the planets.*

Now, if the planets govern the sun, and the sun govefns
the vintages and harvests, and thus the prices of food and
raw materials and the state of the money market, it follows
that the configurations of the planets may prove to be the
remote causes of the greatest commercial disasters.

It is a curious fact, not sufficiently known, that the electric
telegraph was a favourite dream of the physicists and roman-
cists of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, f It would be
equally curious if the pseudo-science of astrology should, in
like manner, foreshadow the triumphs which precise and
methodical investigations may yet disclose, as to the obscure
pei'iodic causes affecting our welfare when we are least aware
of it.

* I have since re-read some of Professor Stewart’s “ Memoirs ” on the
s abject, and am inclined to think that the relation of the planets and solar
variations is of a more remote nature than he believes.

t See “ Proceedings of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society,”
6thMarch, 1877, vol. xvi. No. 10, p. 164, referring to an article in The Spectator
newspaper of 27th April, 1867, pp. 475, 476, on “ Early Presentiments of the
Electric Telegraph,” in which I traced out the history of this very curious
subject. See also an article on the same topic by Henry B. Wheatley, F.S.A.,
in the “Antiquary,” August, 1881, vol. iv. pp. 62-64, • also “Journal of the
Society of Arts,” August, 1881, vol. xxix. p, 756 j also “List of a Selection of
Works relating to Electricity and Magnetism, exhibited by Latimer Clark,
M.I.C.E., at the Exposition Internationale d’Hlectricite, Paris, 1881 j” and the
admirable “ Catalogue of the Ronald’s Library of the Society of Telegraph
Engineers,” edited by Mr. Alfred J, Frost.


206


PERIODICITY OF CRISES.


[VII.


TO

THE PERIODICITY OF COMMERCIAL CRISES
AND ITS PHYSICAL EXPLANATION.


The depression of trade, which, has now lasted for some four
or five years, with gradually increasing intensity, has naturally
attracted considerable attention. All kinds of reasons have
been offered to explain its origin — wars, foreign competition,
luxurious living, the greed of capitalists, the errors of trades’
unions, and the like. No accidental cause, however, is suf-
ficient to explain so widespread and recurrent a state of
trade. The present depression is no new and exceptional
phenomenon ; it is, as I shall show, only one instance added
to a long series of events of the same kind, occurring with
remarkable regularity at intervals of about ten years. The
cause can only be found in some great and widespread
meteorological influence recurring at like periods.

This suggestion is by no means a new one ; for Sir
William Herschelf endeavoured, in the first year of this
century, to discover a connection between the price of corn
and the power of the sun’s rays as marked by the decennial

* This paper was read at the Dublin meeting of the British Association,
Section P, August 19th, 1878. An abstract is printed in the “ Transactions of
Sections, 1 ” p. 666. The complete paper was published in the “ Journal of the
Statistical and Social Inquiry Society of Ireland,” August, 1878, yoI. vii.
pp. 334-42,

t “ Philosophical Transactions,” 1801, vol. xci. pp. 265-318.


VII,] PREVIOUS INQUIRIES. 20 7

variation of the sun’s spots. He failed, and so did Carrington
subsequently.* Three years ago, at the Bristol meeting of
the British Association, I read a paper giving the supposed
results of a new attempt to prove the relation suspected by
Herschel. Subsequent inquiry convinced me that my figures
would not support the conclusion I derived from them, and
I withdrew the paper from publication. I have since made
several attempts to discover a regular periodicity in the price
of corn in Europe, but without success.

Nevertheless, I have long felt convinced that a well-
marked decennial periodicity can be traced in the activity of
trade and the recurrence of commercial crises. If we start
backwards from the very distinct collapse of 1866, we observe
that there was an almost equally distinct crisis in 1857 — nine
years before — a crisis, too, which was very severe in the
United States. Just ten years before that we reach the
memorable panic of 1847. Proceeding backwards we find
there was in England some kind of crisis in 1839, and a
previous one in 1836, so that the series appears to be broken;
but in the United States there was an intense crisis, and a
general stoppage of the banks in 1837, punctually at the ten
years* interval. In England some exceptional causes appear
to have broken up the crises into two minor crises, the mean
position of which however satisfactorily accords with the
theory. From 1837 we regress eleven or twelve years to the
great bubble year, 1825, and the collapse of 1825-26, the most
extraordinary event of its kind since the time of the South Sea
Bubble. Receding yet nine or ten years more, we find in the
year 1816 the commercial distress and increase of bankruptcy
which mark a crisis. Here the series is somewhat interrupted,
for there was in 1810-11-12 a commercial panic which can iu
no way be brought into accordance with the theory. Never-


* See above, p. 195.


208


PERIODICITY OF .CRISES.


[vii.


tkeless, in 1805, there was a minor fluctuation,* which falls
well into the series, and that of 1810-12 must be set down as
exceptional. If we consider, the political state of Europe at
this time, and the manner in which trade was then disturbed
by wars, tariffs, Orders in Council, etc., it can be no matter of
wonder that the regular march of the decennial variation was
somewhat broken.

The periodicity of the events which I have briefly enume-
rated has long been recognised by Dr. Hyde Clarke, Mr. John
Mills, and others who have written on the subject. It does
not seem to have occurred to any writer, however, to inquire
whether the decennial period, so well marked in the nineteenth
century, could be traced also in the eighteenth century. Yet, for
some steps at least, the periodicity is unquestionable. In
1793, just before the great wars of the Revolution, occurred a
commercial panic so severe and genuine that it has been
described as “the first modern panic” It is true that 1793
precedes 1805 by an interval of twelve years, which is rather
too much ;f but now comes the remarkable fact that crises of
more or less intensity also occurred in the years 1783, 1772-73,
and most distinctly in the year 1768. The mean interval here
is almost exactly ten years.

It is impossible that I should in this paper adduce proper
evidence of the accuracy of the statements I make. This

* Though I have seen the year 1805 mentioned as a year of crisis, it is
doubtful whether it can be so described. That it was a year of great activity
of investment is shown by the fact that the metals were higher in price in
1805 and 1806 than ever before or after in modern times* B ankr uptcies were
considerably more numerous in 1805 than in 1804 or 1806, but much less than
in 1807 to 1810, when the great and, as I hold, exceptional collapse took place.

t It is worthy of notice that in the interval between 1790 and 1820, which
presents the greatest difficulty m tracing the periodical recurrence of crises,
there is a corresponding irregularity in the sun-spot curve, as delineated in
the diagram at the end of Carrington’s work on the sun. (See above, p. 195.)
This curve shows no maximum between 1789 and 1804, an interval of fifteen
years $ and then again there is a gap of twelve years more up to about 1816.
On the whole the commercial crises recur with greater regularity than the
flexures of the sun-spot ctuye.


[vu.


THE SOUTH SEA BUBBLE.


209


I hope to do in some more detailed publication. But as
regards these crises, I may refer to Mr. Macleod*s unfinished
“ Dictionary of Political Economy/* where, in the article on
Crisis (Commercial), is to be found a concise account of these
events. Thus, on p. 627, we find a brief description of the
crisis of 1763. Mr. Macleod then proceeds : “ Ten years after
the preceding crisis of 1763, another of a very severe nature
took place in 1772 and the beginning of 1773. It extended
over all the trading nations of Europe.** The article which
commences with these words is headed, “The Crisis of 1783,**
and Mr. Macleod goes on to explain how the termination of
the war with America led to a great extension of foreign
commerce, and soon after to a foreign drain of bullion, which
greatly embarrassed the Bank of England and occasioned
a panic in October, 1783. Then Mr. Macleod proceeds to an
article headed “ The Crisis of 1793,** in which he commences
as follows: “The great crisis of 1793 may be considered
as the first of those great catastrophes in modern times of
which we have a sufficiently distinct account for scientific
purposes.** Now, Mr. Macleod, when he wrote his Dictionary,
does not seem to have entertained any theory of periodicity,
so that I can appeal with confidence to his unbiassed state-
ment that there were crises in 1763, 1772-73, 1783, and
1793.

Reflecting upon the wonderful periodicity of these events,
it at length occurred to me to ask why such a series should
commence abruptly in 1763. If the sun-spot theory have any
real foundation, we should expect to find some vestige of
decennial variation in previous years. Everyone knows, of
course, that the great South Sea Bubble occurred in 1720,
and was accompanied with a commercial mania and sub-
sequent collapse never since equalled. But this seemed to
be a unique and isolated event. Inquiry, however, soon led
me to doubt this isolation. The extreme intensity of the
mania in 1720 has blinded both contemporary and subsequent

p


210


PERIODICITY OF CRISES.


VII.


writers to the existence of periods of “ stock- jobbing/' as
it was then generally called, both before and after that event.
Now the South Sea Bubble is generally attributed to the year
1720, and it is true that the South Sea Company got into
serious trouble in that year. But the general European crisis
— for European it was— is more correctly assigned to the
year 1721 at the earliest. Turning to Mr. Fox Bourne's
interesting work on “ The Komance of Trade, ;; we find that it
contains an excellent popular account* of these early manias
and panics, and it is curious to find that both the years 1701
and 1711 are mentioned in connection with ^stock-jobbing”
I suspect that there was a slight mania about 1700, but I
will not at present attempt to adduce evidence about this
early period, or about the previous bubbles of the seven-
teenth century. There were manias about the years 1682,
1692, 1695; but so exceedingly tedious and difficult has
been the labour of finding the right sort of contemporary
information about such events, that I have confined myself as
yet to the eighteenth century. There can be no doubt, how-
ever, about the existence of a stock-jobbing mania in the
year 1710 or thereabouts. It was in 1710 and 1711 that the
South Sea Company was incorporated by Acts of Parliament
(9 Anne, c. 21, and 10 Anne, c. 37), so that this greatest of
bubbles completed the first stage of its strange career in just
about ten years. In 1710 and 1711 also we find Parliament
complaining of the prevalence of gambling and bubbling, and
in both these years Acts were passed to restrain these evils — •
(9 Anne, c. 6, ss. 56, 57, and 10 Anne, c. 26, s. 109). But
it is hardly requisite to quote further evidence than that
which I have been fortunate enough to acquire through the
kindness of Mr. Cornelius Walford.

In the course of his minute inquiries into the history of
insurance, he compiled a nearly complete list of the numerous
small insurance companies formed at the commencement of the

Chapter xi. See p. 312.


VII.]


STOCK-JOBBING MANIAS .


21 1


eighteenth, century. From this list I learn that the numbers
of companies created in each of the following years were
as follows :


1704 .

. 2

1713 .


. 0

1705 .

. 0

1714 .


. 6

1706 .

. 2

1715 .


. 1

1707 .

• . 1

1716 .


. 2

1708 .

. 2

1717 .


. 4

1709 .

. 8

1718 .


. 0

1710 .

. 37

1719 .


. 6

1711 .

. . 35

1720 .


. 52

1712 .

. 20


Nothing can be more plain, looking at these figures, than
that there was a mania in the years 1710-12, preceding by ten
years the mania of 1720.

It now becomes a matter of great interest to discover
whether there are connecting links between 1721 and 1763.
One step can be made with confidence : there was un-
questionably a period of stock-jobbing about 1731-33. Thus
in the second edition of Defoe’s ff Tour through the whole
Island of Great Britain,” published in 1738, we read* : <f This
sort of trade is too well known to be insisted on here. It was,
in short, by this, that the madness of the year 1720 was
carried on . . . And it was again getting head as fast as
it could, and possibly might in time have utterly ruined the
kingdom . . . But a happy stop was put to this spreading
mischief, by a wise Act of Parliament against stock- jobbing,
which passed in the year 1733.” “ The Gentleman’s Magazine ”f
also remarks that the state of things “ as much requires speedy
and effectual remedies now as in 1720.”

The state of things was thought to be so serious that
Parliament passed an Act (7 Geo. II. c. 8 — 1733-34) to pre-
vent “the infamous practice of stock- jobbing.” Yet the evil

Yo]. ii. p. 106. f January, 1Y39, vol. ii. p. 561.

r 2


212


PERIODICITY OF CRISES , .


[vii.


was one arising rather from prosperity than adversity ; for
« The Gentleman’s Magazine expressly tells ns that the
woollen trade never was in a better condition, and there was a
decided rise in the price of wool in 1731-32. Some prices of
lead and tin, which I have found in "The London Magazine”
for the years 1732-36, show a pretty steady decline,
fndicating that the years 1731-32 were probably years of
active trade. I have other evidence which there is not time
to quote.

Assuming the existence of a mania ten or eleven years
subsequent to the great South Sea collapse to be shown, it
becomes still more important to discover corresponding events
about the years 1742 and 1752; but here the real difficulty
begins. It is quite clear that there was nothing to call a
mania or a crisis at either of these periods. As Holland was'
at that time the commercial centre of the world, I thought it
desirable to make inquiries in that country, and I was
fortunate enough to receive assistance from the eminent and
learned Dutch economists. Dr. S. Vissering and Dr. W.
Yissering. The former wrote, in 1856, a small treatise upon
the South Sea mania, for a copy of which I am much indebted
to him.f In answer to my inquiries, Dr. W*. Yissering wrote :
"Of crises in 1731-32 and 1741-42,1 found no trace whatever;
perhaps a now forgotten depression of trade may have
happened in those years . . . but our economic history
did not preserve any memory of it.” I feel bound to quote
this adverse statement, and I have no doubt that it is correct
as far as it goes. But I have already shown that 1731-32 were
years of bubbles and stock-jobbing, and I believe that there
was a distinct tendency to brisk trade at the subsequent
decennial periods.

* Vol. ii. p. 1047.

t “ Het Groote Tafereel der Dwaasheid.” 1856. 8yo, 44 pp. I regret that
I cannot make much nse of this apparently very interesting pamphlet, being
unable to read Dutch.


vnj


FLUCTUATIONS OF PRICES.


213


The best proof I possess concerning 1743 consists in a
remarkable rise in the price of wool ; for wool which had been
sold at 13s. per tod in 1739 rose to 19s. and 21s. in 1743-44.
This rise was said to be general all over the kingdom ; it was
attributed not to any deficiency in the growth, but either to
the arts of stock-jobbing, or more probably to the great
demand for woollen goods for exportation.* * * §

In Parliament the prosperity of the trade was attributed
to the fact that the East India Company exported woollen
goods to the value of £200,000 in 1742, while in the previous
years the exports did not exceed £40,000. It is stated, too,
that in the memory of man there had never been a larger
demand for our woollen manufactures, and that the warehouses
in Holland and other markets were emptied of goods which
had been in hand several years. f I regret that I have been
unable to meet with any prices of metals which would throw
light upon this period.

Passing on to the next decennial period, we find a still
greater rise in the price of wool occasioned, as it was said,
by a brisk trade and a great consumption and exportation.
Notwithstanding the complaints and the arts of the manufac-
turers to depress the price of wool, it rose so that “in the
years 1750, 1751 the very best and finest Lincolnshire wool
was sold upon the spot at 25s. a tod.” J In another work we
are told that English wool sold at Amsterdam in 1751 at 37s.,
and fell in two years to 21s. and 25s.§ Light is thrown
upon this period by a table of prices of tin in Cornwall,
beginning in 1746, which is to be found in the “Statistical
Journal,” vol, ii, p, 262. I quote the earlier part of the
table.


* Smith’s “Memoirs of Wool,” vol. ii. pp. 468-72.

*1 * lc Gentleman’s Magazine,” vol. xiii. p. 658.

J “ A Short View of the Eise, etc. of the Woollen Manufacture in England.”
London, 1753. , P. 61.

§ « Sheffield on the Trade of Ireland,” p. 167.


214

PERIODICITY OF CRISES.

VII.


Price of tin per cwt. — s.

a.


Price of tin per cwt. — s.

a.

1746

60

0

1755

. ■ 66

3

1747

. 62

0

1756

. 62

3

1748

. 63

4

1757

. 59

0

1749

... .63

9

1758

. 56

6

1750

. 65

0

1759

. 56

0

1751

. 65

0

1760

. 56

0

1752

. 67

0

1761

60

0

1753

. 68

0

1762

. 64

6

1754

. 67

9

1763

. 69

0


1764


, ,

69s. 0 d.


It may easily be shown that the prices of the metals form
the best index to the general activity of trade and credit, and
in the above figures we see a steady rise up to a maximum of
685. in 1758, followed by a steady fall to 56s. in 1759, when
a rapid rise, connected with the collapse of 1768, commences.
In a book called “ A General View of England respecting its
Policy, Trade, etc. from the Years 1600 to 1762,” translated
from the Erench, London, 1766, I find the following state-
ment (p. 150) :

“ England being obliged to pay abroad what balances
were against her, species became so scarce in 1753 and in
1754, that at the bankers of London you could scarcely obtain
a payment of one hundred pounds in the lawful gold coin
of the country; and as for silver, there was scarcely any
left ”

Without entering into further details at present, I hold,
then, that there is more or less evidence that trade reached a
maximum of activity in or about the years 1701, 1711, 1721,
1732, 1742, 1753, 1763, 1772, 1783, 1798, 1805, 1815, 1825,
1837, 1847, 1857, 1866. These years, whether marked by
the bursting of a commercial panic or not, are, as nearly
as I can judge, corresponding years, and the intervals vary
only from nine to twelve years. There being in all an interval
of one hundred and ^sixty-five years, broken into sixteen periods,


VII.]


DURATION OF CREDIT CYCLE .


215


the average length of the period is about 10*8 years. But
the earlier dates, 1701 and 1711, are not well established; and
the panic of 1866 was probably precipitated by the fall of
Overends, Gurney and Oo. Judging by the events of 1887,
1847, and 1857, we should naturally place the proper date
of the collapse in 1867. If we compare the unquestionable
collapse of 1721 with 1 867, the average interval is 10*48 years ;
if we prefer to compare 1721 with 1857, in which year there
was an undoubted collapse, then the mean interval becomes
10*46. As the year 1763 was also a year of well-marked crisis
it is instructive to compare it with 1857, which gives the
average interval just 10*444 years, which falls nearly between
the previous results, and may be accepted as the most
probable* Now it is very curious to bring this result into
connection with the following statement of Mr. J, A* Broun,
in Nature , of the 24th May, 1877.* “The mean duration
of the period at which I arrive is therefore almost exactly
that which Dr. Lamont had previously obtained, or 10*45
years.”

Judging this close coincidence of results according
to the theory of probabilities, it becomes highly probable
that two periodic phenomena, varying so nearly in the same
mean period, are connected as cause and effect. Mr. John
Mills, who has so ably treated of credit cijcles } as he has
named them, in the Transactions of the Manchester Statistical
Society,! attributes the periodic variations to mental action*
A commercial panic, he holds, is the destruction of belief and
hope in the minds of merchants and bankers. But though
I quite agree with him so far, I can see no reason why the
human mind, in its own spontaneous action, should select
a period of just 10*44 years to vary in. Surely we must
go beyond the mind to its industrial environment. Merchants


* Yol. xvi. p. 63.

f Session 1867-68, pp. 5-40. <( On Credit Cycles, and the Origin of Commercial
Panics,”


21 6


PERIODICITY OF CRISES.


[VII.


and bankers are continually influenced in their dealings by
accounts o£ the success of harvests, the comparative
abundance or scarcity of goods; and when we know that
there is a cause, the variation of the solar activity, which
is just of the nature to affect the produce of agriculture,
and which does vary in the same period, it becomes almost
ceftain that the two series of phenomena, credit cycles and
solar variations, are connected as effect and cause.

It is, no doubt, a great difficulty in the way of this theory
that no one has yet been able to detect a periodic variation
in the price of corn in Europe, coincident with the sun-spot
variations. But the fact, no doubt, is that the success of the
European corn harvest depends upon a conjunction of fortunate
events: a frosty winter to prepare the ground, a good
ploughing and sowing season, moisture for the growing plant,
a favourable blooming-time, a warm sun to ripen the grain,
and a dry period to harvest it. Failure in any one of several
points involves a poor harvest. Under such circumstances it
is quite likely that no obvious connection could be traced.
The conditions of our climate are too complicated. But we
must not suppose that things are the same all over the world
as they are in England, or in Western Europe. As Mr. A.
Schuster has pointed out,* the good wine years in Germany
correspond closely with the years of minimum sun-spots, and it
is quite likely that, if we had the requisite information and
the patience to investigate the matter thoroughly, similar
relations might be discovered as regards other products.

But, however this may be as regards Europe, there cannot
be much doubt that in India periods of scarcity and plenty
show a decennial tendency. The theory of Dr. W. W. Hunter,
concerning the periodicity of famines in India, has been too
recently and fully discussed to need recapitulation here ;
and it is quite likely that what takes place in India may

* Mure, May 17th, 1877, vol. xvi. p. 45.


VII.] INFLUENCE OF PRICE OF FOOD . 217

also occur more or less distinctly in China, tropical Africa,
and other tropical parts of the earth, which contain by
far the largest part of the world's population. The
population of those parts, too, lives almost entirely upon
vegetable produce, so that any important variations in the
solar activity ^might be expected to affect them profoundly
and immediately.

It is well worthy of notice that nearly forty years ago (in
1840), Mr. James Wilson, the well-known founder of The
Economist newspaper, published a small book, or large
pamphlet, on “Fluctuations of Currency, Commerce, and
Manufactures; referable to the Com Laws." Mr. Wilson
speaks of " the frequent recurrence of periods of excitement
and depression in the monetarial and commercial interests of
the country," as if the idea of periods was familiar to him ;
and he attributes them (p. 10) “to the huge fluctuations in the
amount of its means, which, from time to time, have been
required to pay for the necessary subsistence of life ; or, in
other words, to the fluctuations of the price of food."
The idea may have been a novel one forty years ago ; but it is
now well known to manufacturers that an active demand for
their produce is to be expected only when food is cheap. By far
the largest part of the population have but a small margin of
income remaining when their necessary expenditure on food
has been provided for. Thus arises the singular connection
between the prosperity of Lancashire and the price of rice in
India, which has been well explained by Mr. J. C. Ollerenshaw
in the Transactions of the Manchester Statistical Society.*
It might seem that Tenterden Church steeple and the Groodwin
Sands are not more remotely connected than the cotton-mills
of Lancashire, the paddy-fields of India, and the spots on the
sun; yet the connection is obvious when we carefully trace
it out. The depressed trade of Lancashire at the present time

Session 1869-70, p. 109.


218 PERIODICITY OF CRISES. [vii.

is generally attributed to tie slackness of the export trade to
India, which is due to the scarcity of food in many parts of
that country, this scarcity absorbing the whole earnings of
the poorer classes.

In. corroboration of this view, I may point to the remarkable
curves exhibited in the accompanying diagram, which repre-
sent the variation of the value of merchandise exported to
India in each year from 1708-9 to 1809-10, as given in
Milburn's treatise,* In curve No. I are shown the simple
yearly values of merchandise (without bullion) exported. To
make the general form of the curve more apparent, I have
prepared curve No. II. by substituting for each yearly amount
the average of three years, of which the year in question is
the centre, representing these averages logarithmically, so
as to show the true comparative importance of the varia-
tions. On examining this curve attentively, it will be seen
that there is in most parts of its course a strongly-marked
decennial variation. Thus, after 1711, the curve begins to fall
rapidly, not to attain a maximum again until 1721 or 1722.
A second marked depression is followed by a new rise up to
1781. These three maxima correspond satisfactorily with the
crises which I have already described. Then the curve be-
comes somewhat irregular, and we have no decided maximum
until we come to 1748 or 1744. In 1753 we have a further
decided maximum, and the same may perhaps be said of
1761-68. After this point the correspondence of the curve
with the decennial crises is much less marked, if not doubtful ;
but we may notice a retrogression after 1783, and an important
continuous rise up to 1795. I ought to add that I have
examined many tables of exports and imports, and other
statistical facts, without finding evidence of decennial varia-
tion so strongly marked as in these curves ; but the? subject is
altogether too new and complicated to take the absence of
* " Oriental Commerce,” vol. i. pp. xlviii. liii. xci.


VII.] VARIATION OF BANKRUPTCY. 219

variation in certain figures as conclusive negative evidence.
The distinct and unquestionable tendency to a decennial
period shown in these curves seems to me an important corro-
borative fact, and outweighs a great deal of failure and dis-
couragement which attends any one investigating a subject of
this nature.

I have so far made no allusion to the last decade of yfcai’S
now just terminating. The latest panic mentioned was that
of 1866. The kind of collapse which took place in the United
States in l$72-73, and which was followed both there and here
by commercial depression, might seem to conflict with the
sun-spot theory; but from a circular of Messrs. John Kemp
and Co., reprinted in the last number of the (London)
ce Statistical Journal,”* it appears that the number of bank-
ruptcies was comparatively small about the years 1871-78, and
has been increasing since, reaching a maximum in the United
States in 1876, and in England either in 1877 or possibly in
the present yeai’, the number in the first quarter of the year
having been very great. Thus, in spite of all peculiar and
exceptional circumstances, the period of disaster is recurring
almost as inexorably and regularly as the march of the
seasons.

Taken altogether, the historical facts concerning the
periodic recurrence of crises appear to me too strong to admit
of doubt, and it is only the nature of the explanation of that
recurrence which is matter of speculation. So far as can be
seen at present, brisk trade is produced by the abundance of
certain kinds of produce yielded by the harvests in certain
parts of the earth, especially in India; but much fuller
information and more careful investigation will be needed to
trace out the details of this explanation and place them
beyond doubt.


' Vol. xli. p. 384*


PERIODICITY OF CRISES.


[VII.


320


POSTSCRIPT.


(Apkil, 1882.)

These remarks have been satisfactorily verified by the sub-
sequent course of events, as shown in the following valu-
able table of failures in England and Wales, given in the
supplement of 4th January, 1882, of Kemp’s Mercantile
Gazette :


Tears.

1st Quarter.

2nd Quaiter.

3rd Quarter.

4th Quarter.

Totals.

1867

3,981

4,081

3,555

4 233

15,850

1868

4,091

4,131

4,139

3,501

15,862

1869

3,819

3,997

3,495

5,207

16,518

1870

2,804

1,589

1,773

1,985

8,151

1871

2,142

2,191

1,837

1,994

8,164

1872

2,192

1,980

1,795

2,145

8,112

1873

2,354

2,299

2,054

2,357

9,064

1874

2,193

2,428

2,339

2,290

9,250

1876

2,331

2,277

2,133

2,453

9,194

1876

2,744

2,573

2,670

2,861

10,848

1877

2,829

2,856

2,610

2,952

11,247

1878

3,439

3,873

3,069

3,749

13,630

1879

4,478

3,852

3,629

3,773

15,732

1880

3,486

3,002

2,899

3,084

12,471

1881

3,276

2,871

2,574

2,911

11,632


The extraordinary fall between 1869 and 1870 was due to
a change in the law, and is of no interest to us here. The
subsequent rise from 1873 up to the maximum in 1879 is very
marked, as is also the succeeding depression to 1881. The
highest quarterly aggregate is 4478, that of the first quarter
of 1879* and as bankruptcies naturally follow a crisis, we
must assign the date of the last decennial crisis to the autumn
of 1878, a date which accords perfectly with the theory of
periodicity maintained in these papers.


1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881


1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 - 1875 1870 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881


VIII.]


COMMERCIAL CRISES .


221


YIII.

COMMERCIAL CRISES AND BUN-SPOTS,*

Part I.

" Thou Sun, of this great world both eye and soul.’ 1

It is curious to notice tlie variety of the explanations offered
by commercial writers concerning the cause of the present
state of trade. Foreign competition, beer-drinking, over-
production, trades-unionism, war, peace, want of gold, super-
abundance of silver, Lord Beaconsfield, Sir Stafford Northcofce,
their extravagant expenditure, the Government policy, the
Glasgow Bank directors, Mr. Edison and the electric light, are
a few of the happy and consistent suggestions continually
made to explain the present disastrous collapse of industry
and credit.

It occurs to but few people to remember that what is
happening now is but a mild repetition of what has previously
happened time after time. October, 1878, is comparable with
May, 1866, with November, 1857, with October, 1847, and,
going yet farther back, with a somewhat similar condition of
things, in 1837, in 1825-26, and even in 1815-16. The inci-
dental circumstances of these commercial collapses have indeed
been infinitely diversified. At one time the cause seemed to
be the misconduct of the great firm of Overends; in 1857
there was the mutiny in India, the peace with Russia, and
a commercial collapse in the United States; in 1847 occurred
the Irish famine and a failure of European harvests generally,

* This article, printed in Nature for November 14th, 1878, vol, xir.
pp. 33-37, contains, to a considerable extent, the same matter as that com-
municated to the British Association, reprinted above, p. 206. It embodies,
however, a good many additional facts and remarks, and, having been the
subject of Hr. R. A. Proctor’s criticism, it seems best to reprint it in spite
of the repetition.


222


COMMERCIAL CRISES.


[viit.


following upon the great railway mania ; the crisis of 1837
succeeded an immense expansion of home trade, the establish-
ment of joint-stock banks, and the building of multitudes of
factories and other permanent works ; 1825 was preceded by
extravagant foreign speculations and foreign loans; 1815 was
the year of the general peace. All kinds of distinct reasons
cau-thus be given why trade should be now inflated and again
depressed and collapsed. But, so long as these causes are
various and disconnected, nothing emerges to explain the
remarkable appearance of regularity and periodicity which
characterises these events.

The periodicity of the earlier portion of the series is so
remarkable that, even without the corroboration since received,
it convinced scientific inquirers that there was some deep cause
m action. Dr. Hyde Clarke, for instance, wrote, more than
thirty years ago, a paper entitled "Physical Economy— a
Preliminary Inquiry into the physical Laws governing the
Periods of Famines and Panics.” This paper was published
m the "Railway Register « for 1847, and is well worth reading.
In the commencement he remarks : "We have just gone
through a time of busy industry, and are come upon sorrow
and ill-fortune; but the same things have befallen us often
within the knowledge of those now living. Of 1837, of 1827
of 1817, of 1806, of 1796, there are men among us who can
remember the same things as we now see in 1847. A period
of bustle, or of gambling, cut short in a trice and turned into
a period of suffering and loss, is a phenomenon so often
recorded, that what is most to be noticed is that it should
excite any wonder.” Dr. Hyde Clarke then proceeds to argue
in a highly scientific spirit that events so regularly recurring
cannot be attributed to accidental causes; there must, he
thinks, be some physical groundwork, and he proposed to
search this out by means of a science to be called Physical
Economy. In the third page of his paper he tells us that
he had previously written a paper on the laws of periodical or


VIII.] HYDE CLARKE'S THEORY. 223

cyclical action, printed in Herapatli’s “Railway Magazine” for
1838. “At this time,” he says, “it was my impression that
the period of speculation was a period of ten years, but I was
led also to look for a period of thirteen or fourteen years. . . .
In the course of these inquiries I looked at the astronomical
periods and the meteorological theories without finding any-
thing at all available for my purposes.” A little below,
Dr. Hyde Clarke continues : “ Still thinking that the interval
was an interval of about ten years,. I was, during the present
famine, led to look for a larger period, which would contain
the smaller periods, and as the present famine and distress
seemed particularly severe, my attention was directed to the
famine so strongly felt during the French Revolution. This
gave a period of about fifty-four years, with five intervals
of about ten or eleven years each, which I took thus :

“1793 1804 1815 1826 1837 1847.”

Dr. Hyde Clarke was by no means the only statist who
adopted a theory of periodicity thirty or forty years ago.
In February, 1848, Mr. J. T. Danson read a paper to the
Statistical Society of London, attempting to trace a connection
between periodic changes in the condition of the people and
the variations occurring in the same period in the prices of the
most necessary articles of food.* Mr. James Wilson had
published, in 1840, a separate work or large pamphlet upon
“Fluctuations of Currency, Commerce, and Manufactures,”
in which he speaks of the frequent recurrence of periods of
excitement and depression. In later years Mr. William
Langton, the esteemed banker of Manchester, independently
remarked the existence of the decennial cycle, saying : “ These
disturbances are the accompaniment of another wave, which
appears to have a decennial period, and in the generation
of which moral causes have no doubt an important share.”

* “Journal of the Statistical Society,” vol. si. pp. 101-40.


224 COMMERCIAL CRISES . [viii.

The paper in which this remark occurs is contained in the
Transactions of the Manchester Statistical Society for 1857,
and is one of the most luminous inquiries concerning com-
mercial fluctuations anywhere to he found.* In still later
years Mr. John Mills, of the Manchester Statistical Society,
has almost made this subject his own, insmpng, however,
mainly upon the mental origin of what he has aptly called the
Credit Cycle.

The peculiar interest of Dr. Hyde Clarke’s speculations
consists in the fact that he not only remarked the cycle of
ten or eleven years, but sought to explain it as due to physical
causes, although he had not succeeded in discovering any
similar astronomical or meteorological variation with which
to connect it. Writing as he did in 1888 and 1847, this
failure is not to be wondered at. His supposed period of fifty-
four years is perhaps deserving of further investigation, but it
is with his period of ten or eleven years that we are now
concerned.

My own inquiries into this interesting subject naturally
fall much posterior to those of Dr. Clarke; but, about the
year 1862, 1 prepared two elaborate statistical diagrams, one
of which exhibited in a single sheet all the accounts of the
Bank of England since 1844, while the other embraced all
the monthly statements I could procure of the price of corn,
state of the funds, rate of discount, and number of bank-
ruptcies in England from the year 1731 onwards. Subsequent
study of these diagrams produced upon my mind a deep con-
viction that the events of 1815, 1825, 1836-39, 1847, and 1857,
exhibited a true but mysterious periodicity. There was no
appearance, indeed, of like periodicity in the earlier parts
of my second diagram. In the first fifteen years of this
century statistical numbers were thrown into confusion by
the great wars, the suspension of specie payments, and the
frequent extremely high prices of corn. It must be allowed,

See above, p. 164.


VIII.]


THE RECENT CRISIS.


225


moreover, tliat the statistical diagram, so far as concerns the
eighteenth century, presents no appreciable trace of decennial
periodicity. The recent continual discussions concerning the
solar or sun-spot period much increased the interest of this
matter, and infj-875 I made a laborious reduction of the data
contained in^rrofessor Thorold Rogers* admirable “ History
of Agriculture and Prices in England from the Year 1259/*

I then believed that I had discovered the solar period in the
prices of corn and various agricultural commodities, and I
accordingly read a paper to that effect at the British Associa-
tion at Bristol. Subsequent inquiry, however, seemed to show
that periods of three, five, seven, nine, or even thirteen years
would agree with Professor Rogers* data just as well as a
period of eleven years ; in disgust at this result I withdrew the
paper from further publication. I should like, however, to
be now allowed to quote the following passage from the
manuscript of the paper in question :

“ Before concluding I will throw out a surmise, which,
though it is a mere surmise, seems worth making. It is now
pretty generally allowed that the fluctuations of the money
market, though often apparently due to exceptional and
accidental events, such as wars, great commercial failures,
unfounded panics, and so forth, yet do exhibit a remarkable
tendency to recur at intervals approximating to ten or eleven
years. Thus the principal commercial crises have happened in
the years 1825, 1836-39, 1847, 1857, 1866, and I was almost
adding 1879, so convinced do I feel that there will, within the
next few years, be another great crisis* Now if there should
be in or about the year 1879 a great collapse comparable with
those of the years mentioned, there will have been five such
occurrences in fifty-four years, giving almost exactly eleven
years (10*8) as the average interval, which sufficiently
approximates to 11*1, the supposed exact length of the sun-
spot period, to warrant speculation as to their possible
connection/*


Q


226 COMMERCIAL CRISES . [vjii.

X was led to assign the then coming (that is, the now
present) crisis to the year 1879, because 11*1 years added
twice over to 1857, the date of the last perfectly normal crisis,
or to 1847, the date of the previous one, brings the calculator
to 1879. If I could have employed instead Mr. J. A. Broun's
since published estimate of the sun-spot period, to be presently
mentioned, namely, 10*45 years, I should have come exactly to
the present year 1878. My mistake of one year was due to
the meteorologist's mistake of eight months, which, as crises
usually happen in October and November, was sufficient to
throw the estimate of the event into the next twelve months.

While writing my 1875 paper for the British Association,
I was much embarrassed by the fact that the commercial
fluctuations could with difficulty be reconciled with a period of
11*1 years. If, indeed, we start from 1825, and add 11*1
years time after time, we get 1886*1, 1847*2, 1858*3, 1869*4,
1880*5, which show a gradually increasing discrepancy from
1837, 1847, 1857, 1866 (and now 1878), the true dates of the
crises. To explain this discrepancy I went so far as to form
the rather fanciful hypothesis that the commercial world might
be a body so mentally constituted, as Mr. John Mills must hold,
as to be capable of vibrating in a period of ten years, so that
it would every now and then be thrown into oscillation by
physical causes having a period of eleven years. The sub-
sequent publication, however, of Mr. J. A. Broun's inquiries,
tending to show that the solar period is 10*45 years, not 11*1,*
placed the matter in a very different light, and removed the
difficulties. Thus, if we take Mr. J okn Mills' “ Synopsis of
Six Commercial Panics in the present Century/' and, rejecting
1866 as an instance of a premature panic, count from 1815 to
1857, we find that four credit cycles, occupying forty-two
years, give an average duration of 10*5 years, which is a
remarkably close approximation to Mr. Broun' s solar period.
Thus encouraged, it at last occurred to me to look back into


Nature, vol. xvi. p. 63.


VIII]


MACLEOD'S HISTORY OF CRISES .


227


the previous century, where facts of a strongly confirmatory
character at once presented themselves. Not only was there
a great panic in 1793, as Dr. Hyde Clarke remarked, hut there
were very distinct events of a similar nature in the years 1788,
1772-73, and 1763. About these dates there can be no
question, for they may all be found clearly stated on pp. 627
and 628 of the first volume of Mr. Macleod's unfinished
“Dictionary of Political Economy.^ Mr. Macleod gives a
concise, but, I believe, correct account of these events, and as
he seems to entertain no theory of periodicity, his evidence is
perfectly unbiased. Yet; in the space of a few lines, he
unconsciously states this periodicity, saying : “ Ten years after
the preceding crisis of 1763, another of a very severe nature
took place in 1772, and the beginning of 1773. It extended
over all the trading nations of Europe.” A few lines below he
goes on to state that in May, 1783, a rapid drain of bullion to
the Continent set in, which greatly alarmed the Bank directors
and embarrassed the merchants. The paragraph in which
this occurs is headed, “The Crisis of 1783,” and on turning
the page we at once come on another paragraph headed, “ The
Crisis of 1793.” Here then we have, in a few lines of a good
authority concerning the history of finance, a statement of four
crises occurring at almost exactly decennial intervals. It is
wonderful that no writer has, so far as I know, previously
pointed out the strictly periodic nature of these events ; and I
may add that I have several times lectured to my college
classes about these crises without remarking their periodicity.
It is true that we cannot, by any management of the figures,
bring them into co-ordination with later crises so long as we
adhere to the former estimate of the solar period. If, starting
from 1857, we count back nine intervals of 1T1 years each, w r e
get to 1757 instead of 1763 ; we are landed in the middle of a
cycle instead of in the beginning or end; and there can be no
possible doubt about the crises of 1763 and 1857. But, if we
are once allowed to substitute the new estimate of Broun,

Q 2


228 COMMERCIAL CRISES, [vm.

which is the same as the old one of Lamont, the difficulty
disappears ; for the average interval is 10‘44 years.

This beautiful coincidence led me to look still further
backwards, and to form the apparently wild notion that the
great crisis, generally known as that of the South Sea Bubble,
might not be an isolated and casual event, but only an early
ahd remarkable manifestation of the commercial cycle. The
South Sea Bubble is generally set down to the year 1720,
and the speculations in the shares of that company did
attain their climax and commence their collapse in that
year. But it is perfectly well known to the historians of
commerce that the general collapse of trade, which profoundly
affected all the more advanced European nations, especially
the Dutch, French, and English, occurred in 1721. Now,
if we assume that there have been since 1721, up to 1857,
thirteen commercial cycles, the average interval comes out
10*46 years; or if we consider that we are in this very month
(November, 1878) passing through a normal crisis, then the
interval of 157 years from 1721 to 1878 gives an average
cycle of 10*466 years.

It would be impossible, however, to enlist the South Sea
Bubble in our series unless there were some links to connect
it with subsequent events. I have, therefore, spent much
labour during the past summer in a most tedious and dis-
couraging search among the pamphlets, magazines, and
newspapers of the period, with a view to discover other
decennial crises. I am free to confess that in this search I
have been thoroughly biased in favour of a theory, and that
the evidence which I have so far found would have no weight,
if standing by itself. It is impossible in this place to state
properly the facts which I possess ; I can only briefly mention
what I hope to establish by future more thorough inquiry.

It is remarkable to notice that the South Sea Company,
which came to grief in 1720-21, was founded in 1711, just ten
years before, and .that on the very page (312) of Mr. Fox


VIII.]


THE EARLY CRISES.


229

Bourne's “ Romance of Trade " * which mentions this fact
the year 1701 also occurs in connection with speculation and
stocic-jobbing, as the promotion of companies was then
called. The occurrence of a crisis in the years 1710-11-12,
is indeed almost established by the lists of bubble insurance
companies formed in those years, as collected by Mr.
Cornelius Walford, and obligingly shown to me by him.j*

Again, it is quite plain that about ten years after stock-
jobbing had been crushed by the crisis of 1721, it reax’edits
head again. A significant passage in “The Gentleman's
Magazine " of 1782 (vol. ii.p. 561) remarks that “ Stock-jobbing
is grown almost epidemical. Fraud, corruption, and iniquity
in great companies as much require speedy and effectual
remedies, now, as in 1720. The scarcity of money and
stagnation of trade in all the distant parts of England is a
proof that too much of our current coin is got into the hands
o£ a few persons." This “ getting the current coin into the
hands of a few people" was the favourite theory at that time
to explain any slackness of trade, just as now over-production
is a theme of every short-sighted politician. But the Legis-
lature of that day thought they could remedy these things in a
drastic manner, so they passed, in 1734, “ An Act to prevent the
infamous practice of Stock-jobbing." Mr. Walford, who has
inquired into the commercial history of this time far more
minutely than any other writer, remarks J that “ gambling in
stocks and funds had broken out with considerable fervour
again during the few years preceding 1784. It was the first
symptom of recovery from the events of 1720."

I may add that there was in 1782 a great collapse of a
society called the “ Charitable Corporation for Relief of the
Industrious Poor." A great many people wei’e ruined by the

* This book contains an interesting account of some of these early manias
and panics.

f These lists are partially published in Mr. Walford’s Insurance Cyclo*
paedia,” art. " Gambling.**

$ “Insurance Cyclopaedia,” art. “ Gambling.”


COMMERCIAL CRISES,


230


[Viit


unexpected deficit discovered in tie funds of this kind of
bank, and Parliament and the public were asked to assist the
sufferers, just as they might now be asked to aid the share-
holders of the City of Glasgow Bank. Thus does history
repeat itself !

Whether it was that the Act of 1734 really did diminish
the infamous practice of stock- jobbing, or whether the sun-
spots manifested less variation than usual, it is clear that
between 1732 and 1763 it is very difficult to discover anything
approaching a mania or crisis. My learned and obliging
correspondents at Amsterdam and Leiden, Drs. S. and W.
Yissering, disclaim any knowledge of such events in the
trade of Holland at that time, and my own diagram, showing
the monthly bankruptcies throughout the interval, displays a
flatness of a thoroughly discouraging character. Nevertheless,
inquiry leads me to believe that although there really was
nothing to call a crisis, mania, or panic, yet there were remark-
able variations in the activity of trade and the prices of some
staple commodities, such as wool and tin, sufficient to connect
the earlier with the later periods. It is a matter of much
regret that I have hitherto been quite unable to discover a
connected series of price-lists of commodities of the early part
of last century. The accounts of prices of goods at Green-
wich Hospital, to be found in several statistical works, are not
only incomplete, but probably misleading. Any reader of this
article who can point out to me series of prices of metals or
other commodities, not merely agricultural, before 1782, will
confer a very great obligation upon me by doing so.

Deferring, however, for the present, any minuter inquiry,
I permit myself to assume that there were about the years
1742 and 1752 fluctuations of trade which connect the un-
doubted decennial series of 1711, 1721, and 1732, with that
commencing again in the most unquestionable manner in 1763.
Thus the whole series of decennial crises may be stated as
follows: (1701?), 1711, 1721, 1731-32, (1742? 1752 ?), 1763,


VIII.]


PERIODICITY OP FAMINES .


2j i

1772-73, 1783, 1793, (1804-5?), 1815, 1825, 1836-39 (1837
in the United States), 1847, 1857, 1866, 1878. A series of
this sort is not, like a chain, as weak as its weakest part ; on
the contrary, the strong parts add strength to the weak parts.
In spite, therefore, of the doubtful existence of some of the
crises, as marked in the list, I can entertain no doubt whatever
that the principal commercial crises do fall into a series having
the average period of about 10*466 years. Moreover, the
almost perfect coincidence of this period with B rounds estimate
of the sun-spot period (10*45) is by itself strong evidence that
the phenomena are causally connected. The exact nature of
the connection cannot at present be established. As we have
seen, Hyde Clarke, Wilson, and Danson all argued, some thirty
or forty years ago, that commercial fluctuations must be
governed by physical causes. But here we are embarrassed
by the fact that no inquirer has been able to discover a clear
periodic variation in the price of corn. This is what Sir
William Herschel attempted to do, at the beginning of this
century, in his truly prophetic inquiry about the economic
effects of the sun-spots ; but his facts are evidently too few to
justify any sure inference. Carrington also compared the sun*
spot curve with that of the price of coim, without detecting
any coincidence ; and my own repeated inquiries have been
equally without result as to this point. The fact is, I believe,
that cereal crops, as grown and gathered in Europe, depend
for their success upon very complicated conditions, so that the
solar influence is disguised. But it does not follow that other
crops in other latitudes may not manifest the decennial period.
Dr. Schuster* has pointed out a coincidence between good
vintages and minima _ of sun-spots which can hardly be due to
accident, and the whole controversy about the connection of
Indian famines with the sun-spot period is of course familiar
to all readers of Nature . Now if we may assume Dr.

Hunter's famine theory to be true, there is little difficulty in
* Nature) vol. xvx. p. 4.5?


232 COMMERCIAL CRISES. [viii.

explaining tlie remarkable series o£ periodic crises which I have
pointed out.

The trade of Western Europe has always been strongly
affected by communication with the Indies. Several of the
crises are distinctly traceable to this cause, especially those at
the beginning of the eighteenth century. That was a time of
wild enterprise in the tropical regions, as the very names of
the South Sea Company, the Mississippi scheme, the Darien
project, etc. show. The Dutch, English, and French East
India Companies were then potent bodies, the constant subject
of legislation and controversy. Thus it is my present belief
that to trade with India, China, and probably other parts of
the tropical and semi-tropical regions, we must attribute the
principal fluctuations in European commerce. Surely there is
nothing absurd in such a theory when we remember that the
present crisis is at least partly due to the involvement of the
City of Glasgow Bank in the India trade, through the medium
of some of their chief debtors. Thus the crisis of 1878
is clearly connected with the recent famines in India and
China, and these famines are confidently attributed to solar
disturbance*

To establish this view of the matter in a satisfactory manner, it
would be desirable to show that there has been a decennial varia-
tion of trade with India during the one hundred and seventy years
under review* The complications and disturbances produced
in the statistics of such a trade by various events are so con-
siderable that I have not yet attempted to disentangle them
properly. Yet the accounts of the merchandise (not including
bullion) exported by the English East India Company between
the years 1708-9 and 1733-34 display a wonderful tendency
to decennial variation, as is apparent on examining with care
the diagram representing these statistics.*

In the above table there are three well-marked maxima in
1710-11, 1721-22, and 1731-32, at intervals closely approxi-

* See above, p. 218.


VIII.]


SOLAR OBSERVATORIES.


233


mating to tliat of tlie sun-spot curve. I believe that there are
some traces of the same decennial variation in subsequent
portions of the same tables. The fact that this variation is
difficult to trace may possibly explain the absence of any
serious crises in 1742 and 1752.

Probably, however, we ought not to attribute the decennial
fluctuation wholly to Indian trade. It is quite possible that
tropical Africa, America, the West Indies, and even the
Levant are affected by the same meteorological influences
which occasion the famines in India. Thus it is the nations
which trade most largely to those parts of the world, and
which give long credits to their customers , which suffer most
from these crises. Holland was most easily affected a century
ago; England is most deeply affected now; France usually
participates, together with some of the German trading towns.
But I am not aware that these decennial crises extend in equal
severity to such countries as Austria, Hungary, Switzerland,
Italy, and Bussia, which have comparatively little foreign
trade. Even when they are affected, it may be indirectly
through sympathy with the great commercial nations.

There is nothing in this theory inconsistent with the fact
that crises and panics arise from other than meteorological
causes. There was a great political crisis in 1798, a great
commercial collapse in 1810-11 (which will not fall into the
decennial series) ; there was a Stock Exchange panic in 1859 ;
and the great American collapse of 1873-75. There have also
been several minor disturbances in the money market, such as
those of February, 1861, May and September, 1864, August,
1870, November, 1873; but they are probably due to ex-
ceptional and disconnected reasons. Moreover, they have
seldom, if ever, the intensity, profundity, and wide extension
of the true decennial crises.

If it were permitted to draw any immediate conclusion
from these speculations, I should point to the necessity of at
once undertaking direct observations upon the varying power


234


COMMERCIAL CRISES .


[vnr.


and character of the sun's rays. There are hundreds of
meteorological observatories registering, at every hour of the
day and night, the most minute facts about the atmosphere ;
but that very influence, upon which all atmospheric changes
ultimately depend, the solar radiation , is not, I believe,
measured in any one of them, at least in the proper manner.*
Pouillet showed long ago (1838) how the absolute heating
power of the sun's rays might be accurately determined by his
Pyrheliometer. This instrument, and the results which he
drew from its use, are fully described fc in his “laments
de Physique Experimental© et de M6teorologie," livre
8 tae , chap. i. section 285. But I have never heard that
his experiments have been repeated, except so far as this
may have been done by Sir John Herschel, with his so-
called Actinometer, as described by him in the Admiralty
Manual of Scientific Inquiry. I fancy that physicists still
depend upon Pouillet's observations in 1837 and 1838 for one
of the most important constants of the solar system, if constant
it can be called. While astronomers agitate themselves and
spend infinite labour about the two-hundredth planetoid, or some
imperceptible satellite, the very fountain of heat and light and
life is left unmeasured. Pouillet indeed assumed that the
heating power of the sun's rays is a constant quantity, which
accounts for his not continuing the solar observations. But,
if there is any truth in all the sun-spot speculations, there
must be a periodic variation in the sun’s rays, of which the
sun-spots are a mere sign, and perhaps an unsatisfactory one*
It is possible that the real variations are more regular than the
sun-spot indications, and thus perhaps may be explained the
curious fact that the decennial crises recur more regularly on
the whole than the maxima and minima of sun-spots.

But why do we beat about the bush when all that is needed

Of course there have been abundance of black-bulb thermometer observa-
tions made in various parts of the world, but I doubt whether they are of much
value.


vm.j


THE SOURCE OF ENERGY,


23 $

is half-a-dozen of Pouillet’s pyrheliometers with skilled
observers, who will seize every clear day to determine directly
the heating power of the sun ? Why do we not go direct to
the Great Luminary himself, and ask him plainly whether he
varies or not ? If he answers No ! then some of us must
reconsider our theories, and perhaps endure a little ridicule.
But if, as is much more probable, he should answer Yes ! then
the time will come when the most important news in The Times
will be the usual cablegram of the solar power. 'Solar
observatories ought to be established on the table-lands of
Quito or Cuzco, in Cashmere, in Piazzi Smith’s observatory on
the Peak of Teneriffe, in Central Australia, or wherever else
the sun can be observed most free from atmospheric opacity.
An empire on which the sun never sets, and whose commerce
pervades every port and creek of the sunny south, cannot
wisely neglect to keep a watch on the great fountain of
energy. From that sun, which is truly “ of this great world
both eye and soul/’ we derive our strength and our weakness,
our success and our failure, our elation in commercial mania,
and our despondency and ruin in commercial collapse.

Commercial Crises and Sun-Spots.*

Part II.

I have been repeatedly told by men who have good opportu*
nity of hearing current opinions, that they who theorise about the
relations of sun-spots, rainfall, famines, and commercial crises
are supposed to be jesting, or at the best romancing. I am, of
course, responsible only for a small part of what has been put
forth on this subject, but so far as I am concerned in the
matter, I beg leave to affirm that I never was more in earnest,
and that after some further careful inquiry, I am perfectly
convinced that these decennial crises do depend upon meteoro-

* Article printed in 'Nature, April 24tb, 1879, vol. sis. pp. 588-90, Much of
the matter of this article was given also in two letters printed in The Times of
January 17th, 1879, p* 6, /, and of April 19th, 1879> p. 6, /*


236


COMMERCIAL CRISES .


[vm.


logical variations of like period, which again depend, in all
probability, upon cosmical variations of which we have evidence
in the frequency of sun-spots, auroras, and magnetic perturba-
tions. I believe that I have, in fact, found the missing link
required to complete the first outline of the evidence.

About ten years ago it was carefully explained by Mr. J.
0. ©llerenshaw, in a communication to the Manchester Statis-
tical Society (Transactions, 1869-70, p. 109), that the secret
of good trade in Lancashire is the low price of rice and other
grain in India.* Here again some may jest at the folly of
those who theorise about such incongruous things as the
cotton-mills of Manchester and the paddy-fields of Hindostan.
But to those who look a little below the surface the connection
is obvious. Cheapness of food leaves the poor Hindoo ryot a
small margin of earnings, which he can spend on new clothes ;
and a small margin multiplied by the vast population of British
India, not to mention China, produces a marked change in the
demand for Lancashire goods. Now, it has been lately argued
by Dr. Hunter, the Government statist of India, that the
famines of India do recur at intervals of about ten or eleven
years. The idea of the periodicity of Indian famines is far
from being a new one ; it is discussed in various previous pub-
lications, as, for instance, “The Companion to the British
Almanack” for 1857, p. 76. The principal scarcities in the
North-Western and Upper Provinces of Bengal are there
assigned to the years 1782-88, 1792-93, 1802-3, 1812-13,
1819-20, 1826, 1832-38. Here we notice precise periodicity
up to 1812-18, which, after being broken for a time, seems
to recur in 1832-33.

Partly through the kind assistance of Mr. Garnett, the
Superintendent of the British Museum Reading Room, I have
now succeeded in finding the data so much wanted to confirm
these views — namely, a long series of prices of grain in

* This view is confirmed by the opinion of Mr. E. Helm, as given in the
Transactions of the same Society, 1868-69, p. 76.


VIII.]


FAMINES IN INDIA .


2 37


Bengal (Delhi). These data are found in a publication so
accessible as the “ J ournal of the London Statistical Society ”
for 1843, vol. vi. pp. 246-48, where is printed a very brief
hut important paper by the Rev. Robert Everest, chaplain to
the East India Company, “ On the Famines that have
devastated India, and on the Probability of their being
Periodical.”

Efforts have, I believe, been made by Dr. Hunter, Mr.
J. H. Twigg, and probably others, to obtain facts of this kind,
which would confirm or controvert prevailing theories; but
this little paper, which seems to contain almost the only avail-
able table of prices, has hitherto escaped the notice of all
inquirers, except, indeed, Mr. Cornelius Walford. The last
number of the “ Journal of the London Statistical Society”
contains the second portion of Mr. Waif ora's marvellously
complete account of “The Famines of the World, Past and
Present,” a kind of digest of the facts and literature of the
subject. At pp. 260, 261 (vol. xlii.) we find Everest's paper
noticed. In this latter paper we have a list of prices of wheat
at Delhi for seventy-three years, ending with 1835, stated in
terms of the numbers of seers of wheat — a seer is equal to
about 2 lb. avoirdupois — to be purchased with one rupee. As
this mode of quotation is confusing, I have calculated the
prices in rupees per 1000 seers of wheat, and have thus
obtained the following remarkable table :


Price of Wheat at Delhi .


1763 .

. 50 m.c.

1770 .

. 28

1764 .

. 35

1771 .

. 33

1765 .

. 27

1772 .

. 38 c.

1766 .

. 24

1773 .

. 100 M.

1767 .

. 23

1774 .

. 53

1768 .

. 21

1775 .

. 40

1769 .

. 24

1776 „ .

. 25


238


COMMERCIAL CRISES.


[VIII.


Price

of Wheat at

Delhi — ( 1 continued ).

1777


. 17

1807 .

. 28

1778


. 25

1808 .

. 36

1779


. 33

1809 .

. 40

1780


. 45

1810 .

. 25 0 .

1781


. 55

1811 .

. 28

'1782


. 91

1812 .

. 44

1783


. 167 m.c.

1813 .

. 43

1784


. 40

1814 .

. 30

1785


. 25

1815 .

. 23 c.

1786


. 23

1816 .

. 28

1787


. 22

1817 .

. 41

1788


. 23

1818 .

. 39

1789


. 24

1819 .

. 42

1790


. 26

1820 .

. 46

1791


. 83

1821 .

. 38

1792


. 81 IT.

1822 .

. 35

1793


. 54 c.

1823 .

. 33

1794


. 32

1824 .

. 39

1795


• 14

1825 .

. 39 0.

1796


. 14

1826 .

, 48 m,

1797


. 15

1827 .

. 30

1798


. 8

1828 .

. 22

1799


. 17

1829 .

. 21

1800


. 22

1830 .

. 21

1801


. 23

1831 .

. 26

1802


. 25

1832 .

. 22

1803


. 65 m.

1833 .

. 33

1804


. ■ 48 0.

1834 .

. 40 m.

1805


. 38

1835 .

. 25

1806


. 31

1836 .

. — 0.


The letter M indicates the maxima attained by the price;
and we see that up to 1808, at least, the maxima occur with
great regularity at intervals of ten years. Referring to Mr.


VIII.]


PERIODICITY OF FAMINES '.


239


Macleod's “Dictionary of Political Economy,” pp. 627, 628, we
learn that commercial crises occurred in the years 1763, 1772-73,
1783, and 1793, in almost perfect coincidence with scarcity at
Delhi. M. Clement Juglar, in his work, “Des Crises com-
merciales, et de leur Betour periodique,” also assigns one to
the year 1804. After this date the variation of prices becomes
for a time much less marked and regular, and there also occurs
a serious crisis about the year 1810, which appears to be
exceptional; but in 1825 and 1836 the decennial periodicity
again manifests itself, both in the prices of wheat at Delhi
and in the state of English trade. The years of crisis are
marked with the letter C.

When the above numbers are plotted out in the form of a
curve, the earlier part of the series presents the appearance of
a saw, with four or five high sharp-pointed teeth at almost
exactly equal distances of ten years. The first maximum, that
of 1763, is perhaps imperfectly represented, and were the table
extended backwards, the true maximum might fall in 1762.
It is remarkable that after about the year 1807 the character
of the curve suddenly and entirely changes, the oscillations
becoming comparatively small, irregular, and rounded,
although the periodicity, as already remarked, seems to recur
in a less intense degree after 1823. This change in the curve
may be due to some local causes, such as the opening of new
roads and markets, and it is obviously important that we should
learn whether this is the case, or whether some important
meteorological variation is here manifested. This is not the only
instance in which a well-marked decennial oscillation appears
to be for a time suddenly arrested or thrown into confusion.

One difficulty which presents itself in connection with the
above table is that the commercial crises in England occur
simultaneously with the high prices in Delhi, or even in
anticipation of the latter ; now the effect cannot precede its
cause, and in commercial matters we should expect an interval
of a year or two to elapse before bad seasons in India make


240


COMMERCIAL CRISES .


[viu.


their effects felt here. The fact* however* is* that the famines
in Bengal appear to follow similar events in Madras. Thus it
is well known that the great famine occurred in the year 1770,
or even began in 1 769* though it seems not to have made its
mark at Delhi until 1773. This quite explains the fact that
the English crisis was in 1772-73. Mr. F. C. Danvers* of the
India Office (“ Journal of Science*” N.S.* vol. viii. p. 436),
assigns famines in the Madras Presidency to the years 1781-83
and 1790-92. In fact Mr. Danvers explicitly points out this
tendency of famines to travel northward* saying (p, 441) :
“It is a point worthy of remark that severe droughts in
Northern India have* on several occasions* followed closely
upon distress similarly caused in the Peninsula of India : thus,
the Madras famine of 1781 to 1783 was followed by one which
affected Bengal* the North-Western Provinces, and the Punjab
in 1783-84; the failure of rains which resulted in scarcity in
many of the provinces of the Madras Presidency in 1824-25
was followed by a similar calamity in the North-Western
Provinces in the succeeding years. The ‘Guntoor* famine
of 1833 preceded* only by a few years* one which affected the
Norfch-Wesfc and Lower Provinces of Bengal in 1837-38* and
the Madras famine of 1866 was very closely followed by one in
the North-West Provinces and the Punjab in 1868 to 1870.”
We see, then* that in looking for periodicity* we must confine
each comparison to events of the same locality. It must also
be allowed that the commencement of famine in India precedes
by about two years the occurrence of commercial collapse in
England.

It ought to be added that Everest refers to a journal
published at Calcutta* called “ Gleanings in Science*” which
contains (vol. i. p. 368) a table of the prices of various kinds
of grain at Chinsurah* in Bengal* from 1700 to 1813. The
yolume is to be found in the British Museum ; but on referring
to it and plotting out the curve for the price of rice* it was


VIII.]


INDIAN TRADE.


241


very disappointing to find tlie series broken by gaps of several
years every here and there, which renders it impossible to draw
any safe inference, affirmative or negative. The table is said
to have been drawn up by G. Herklots, the fiscal of Ohinsurah,
from authentic documents. Now, if such documents existed
half a century ago, it is indispensable that minute inquiry
should be made for any local records of the kind which may
still exist.

Returning to the prices at Delhi, and taking the above
table in connection with a mass of considerations of which
I have given a mere outline at the last meeting of the
British Association,* I hold it to be established with a
high degree of probability that the recurrence of manias
and crises among the principal trading nations depends upon
commerce with the Bast. This conclusion is confirmed by
the fact that these fluctuations are but slightly felt by the
non-trading nations, and that what these nations do feel is
easily accounted for as an indirect effect.

It has been objected by The Economist that this explanation
cannot be applied to the earlier crises in the years 1711, 1721,
and 1732, because trade with India was then of insignificant
dimensions. But the reading of many old books and tracts of
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries has convinced me
that trade with India was always looked upon as of the highest
importance. A large part of the political literature of the time
was devoted to the subject, and under the Mercantile Theory
the financial system of the country was framed mainly with an
eye to Indian trade. The published returns of exports and
imports probably give us little idea of the real amount of
trade, as smuggling was very common in those days, and much
of the Indian trade went on secretly in private ships or
indirectly through Holland,

Dr. George Birdwoocl has lately been studying the records

* See above, No. VII. , pp» 200-19.


R


242


COMMERCIAL CRISES.


[viii.


of the India Office, and lie gives as the result of his extensive
reading “that the history of modern Europe, and emphatically
of England, has been the quest of the aromatic gum-resins,
and balsams and condiments, and spices of India and the
Indian Archipelago ” (“Journal of the Society of Arts,”
February 7th, 1879, vol. xxvii. p. 192). This closely corre-
sponds with the view which I have been gradually led to adopt
of the cause of decennial crises.

While India is, no doubt, together with China, the
principal source of disturbance, there is no reason to suppose
that it is the only source. A nearly exhaustive analysis which
I have made of the trade of England with various parts of the
world during the last century, as given in Whitworth’s valuable
tables, fails to disclose any clear periodicity as regards
European trade. The investigation of various long series of
prices of agricultural produce in Europe also leads me to
believe that the decennial periodicity, if felt in Europe at all,
is overborne by disturbing causes, or involved in too great
complication to admit of discovery. On the other hand, I
have fallen upon the very interesting and significant fact that
the export trade from Maryland and Virginia exhibits what
seems to me unquestionable periodicity, with maxima in the
years 1701, 1711-13, 1720, 1742, 1753, 1764, and 1774. The
same tendency is not apparent in the trade of New England.
Thus it is likely that crises may have an independent
meteorological origin in the semi-tropical States of the Union ;
and, if so, it is probable that there are other tropical parts of
the world where the meteorological conditions allow the cycle
to manifest itself. This subject, so far as it has yet been
studied, is full of important and mysterious facts, which
stimulate the interest of the inquirer in a high degree. At
the same time it is plain that sound conclusions can he reached
only by most extensive analyses and comparisons of large
series of facts. The search for the facts, too, among the
records of the last two centuries, the suitable part of which


Commercial Crises


TiwAnmtal Values, as gwen/m/ Whitworths Tables, are represented/ by Che dgts-
Three Tears Averages by the/ Curve/. Scale/ SOX) boil, 000,000.


VIU .] ORIGIN OF CRISES. 243

has in too many cases probably perished, is so tedious and
disappointing that it taxes the patience of the inquirer very
severely. It is no jest at all.

But whatever be the area of the tropical and semi-tropical
regions from which the decennial impulse comes, mainly India
and China, no doubt, it does not follow that the extent of the
commercial mania or crisis here is bounded by the variation of
the foreign trade. The impulse from abroad is like the match
which fires the inflammable spirits of the speculative classes.
The history of many bubbles shows that there is no proportion
between the stimulating cause and the height of folly to which
the inflation of credit and prices may be carried. A mania is,
in short, a kind of explosion of commercial folly followed by
the natural collapse. The difficulty is to explain why this
collapse so often comes at intervals of ten or eleven years, and
I feel sure the explanation will be found in the cessation of
demand from India and China occasioned by the failure of
harvests there, ultimately due to changes of solar activity.
Certainly the events of the last few years, as too well known
to many sufferers, entirely coincide with this view.


244


THE GOLD COINAGE .


[IX.


IX.


ON THE CONDITION OF THE GOLD COINAGE
OF THE UNITED KINGDOM, WITH REFER-
ENCE TO THE QUESTION OF INTER-
NATIONAL CURRENCY.*


I . — On the Necessity for a Recoinage , and the Introduction of
an International Money .

All thinges good chepe I trust to se er I dye,

Coy ns, measures and weyghtes in good imiforinifcie
Thorow all the world, I trust to se schortely.f

Foe nearly half a century the subject of the metallic currency
has been left to slumber. The deficiency and imperfections of
the coinage were, in previous years, an ever-recurring matter
of complaint, and our libraries bear evidence to the inquiry
and thought bestowed upon the removal of these defects by
Yaughan, Locke, Lowndes, Newton, Harris, and many less
celebrated writers. But now it is the paper currency and
the banking system which give rise to endless publications,

This paper was read before the Statistical Society of London on the 17th
of November, 1868, and was printed in the Journal of the Society for
December, 1868, vol. xxxi. pp. 426-61 Part of the substance of this paper,
especially of the first section, had been previously communicated to the
Manchester Statistical Society, in a paper “ On the International Monetary
Convention, and the Introduction of an International Currency into this
Kingdom.” Eead May 13th, 1868. Transactions, Session 1867-68, pp. 79-92.
To prevent repetition, the Manchester paper is not reprinted in this volume.

t From a ballad of the sixteenth century (printed by Cornelis Woltrop,
dwellyng at Saynt Anthonies) ; pointed out to me by [the late! William
Langton. The next line runs- J

Onles that diversitie doth more good, it be true.


IX.]


MONETARY LA VVS.


Hi


while the gold and silver currencies are regarded as placed
upon an indisputable foundation.

There can be no doubt that we are much indebted to the
Act of Parliament 56 Geo. III. c. 68 (22nd June, 1816),
which still contains the principal regulations for the issue of
our coins,* and which was to a great extent based upon the
recommendations of Lord Liverpool, in his admirable “ Treatise
on the Coins of the Realm ,* in a Letter to the King ” (Oxford,
4to, 1805).f Since that Act came into operation both gold
and silver coins have been issued, year after year, with hardly
any intervention or change, excepting a very partial recoinage
in 1841-43, so that we now have a circulation of coins ex-
tending in almost unbroken succession over more than fifty
years.

I shall have, however, to point out that the present law
concerning the gold currency does not really work so perfectly
as is supposed. It may possess a certain theoretical perfection,
but in practice it has bi'oken down, and it now fails to prevent
our gold coinage from becoming seriously worn and depre-
ciated. Although the Mint has coined, since the beginning
of 1850, the enormous sum of ninety-eight millions sterling',
more than half of these coins have become a prey to bullion
dealers and exporters ; and these vast issues have not had the
effect of driving out of use the worn coins of earlier years.
Some changes of the law, or some very decided intervention of
the State, can alone succeed in restoring to our standard of
value its boasted perfection, or can prevent it from becoming
gradually depreciated still further.

It happens, moreover, that while intrinsic motives are

* The whole statute law relating to the Mint and the metallic currency has
since been consolidated in the S3 & 34 Viet. c. 10, “An Act to consolidate and
amend the Law relating to Coinage and Her Majesty’s Mint ” (Robert Lowe’s
Act), from which may he learnt in the clearest way the conditions under which
our coins are made, issued, and withdrawn. All previous statutes on the
subject are at the same time repealed.

f Since reprinted at the press of the Bank of England. 8vo. 1880.
Effingham Wilson.


54.6


THE GOLD COINAGE.


D-V

arising for some alteration of our Mint regulations, the
project of an international money, now for the first time put
forward in a feasible shape, affords the strongest reason why
we should reconsider our position in an enlightened spirit.
The Eoyal Commissioners lately appointed for the purpose
have allowed, in their somewhat ambiguous report,* the
extreme utility of an international money, but have pointed
out certain technical difficulties which must, in their opinion,
prevent this country from taking any steps to promote this
truly grand scheme, unless after much further deliberation.
I do not hesitate to say that these difficulties are wholly
imaginary, and arise either from a misapprehension of the
theory of value, or from the difficulty of overcoming the
prejudices of a state of things now likely to pass away. I
feel sure that there is no obstacle that need prevent us from
joining the international monetary convention. This step
would at once place the realisation of a world-wide money
beyond doubt j and it might be made without in the least
disturbing the standard of value in this kingdom, or occa-
sioning any breach of contracts or alteration of accounts. A
concurrence of circumstances truly remarkable renders it
almost indispensable that we should make the change re-
quired ; and X undertake to show that, instead of occasioning
cost and difficulty, the trifling alteration of the sovereign is
the only mode by which we can impart practical as well as
theoretical perfection to our system of metallic currency.

The change which is pressed upon us by so many con-
siderations is of the simplest possible character, and consists
merely in the Mint undertaking to coin gold sovereigns for
the future nearly 1 per cent, less heavy than at present, this
quantity of gold to be appropriated as a mint charge in
order to cover the cost of "coinage and maintenance of the

* Eeporb from the Eoyal Commission on International Coinage ; together
’with the Minutes of Evidence and Appendix. Presented to both Houses of
Parliament, etc, London, 4-868. Session 1867-68, No, [4073.] Keport, p. vii.


IX.]


INTERNATIONAL CURRENCY, \


Hi


currency.* We should thus secure the following remarkable
series of advantages :

1. Our sovereign being assimilated in value aud weight to
a 25-franc piece, would at once become the current coin of the
world, and being issued chiefly from British, American, and
French mints, a world-wide gold currency of unimpeachable
fidelity and excellence would be obtained.

2. As the sovereign would soon become current in all
civilised countries, it would no longer be necessary, in making
remittances, to melt the coin and have it recoined at con-
siderable charge in a foreign mint. The foreign exchanges
would then be more quickly and accurately adjusted than at
present, and our standard of value, instead of being impaired,
would really become more perfect.

3. The questionable practice of picking the heavy sove-
reigns for remittance or for melting, which is now universally
practised, would be almost entirely prevented, and we should
no longer stand in the absurd position of coining many
millions of sovereigns which pass almost immediately to the
melting-pot.

4. The Government being relieved, without cost to anyone*
of the expense of coinage, might very properly take upon
themselves the cost of withdrawing improperly light coins, the
circulation of which is liable to occasion most unjust loss and
inconveniences under the present law.

As the Royal Commissioners do not deny the advantages
of an international currency, I shall confine myself mostly to
meeting the supposed difficulties and the real prejudices which
stand in the way of the realisation of this scheme.

The most formidable of these prejudices, I conceive, arises

* For the details of this scheme I must refer to the privately-printed
pamphlet of Mr. Hendriks, in which it was, I believe, first advocated in this
country, or to the very able evidence and memoranda of Mr. S. Brown,
Mr. Hendriks, and Colonel J. T. Smith, printed in the recent report of the Inter*
national Coinage Commission, See Questions 266-361, 840-1117, 2173-2290*
and pp. 142-53.


248


THE GOLD COINAGE.


[IX.


from our national pride in the fact that the sovereign is known
and respected in almost all parts of the world, and is the actual
currency of some foreign countries, such as Portugal, Brazil,
and Bgypt. Our present system of free coinage tends, it is
supposed, to promote this diffusion of British coin, and tho
cost of coinage is regarded as a trifle compared with the
dignity of this position. We overlook the fact, indeed, that
we probably bear the expense of the wear of sovereigns in all
parts of the world ; for about a million and a-half sterling of
British coin is reimported every year on an average, according
to the Custom House returns. This coin will include at least
an average proportion of light coins, while it is certain that
the coins exported consist almost entirely of heavy coins.
The home circulation thus becomes the sink into which all
light coins readily find their way, to our cost.

Supposing, however, that the diffusion of the greatest
quantity of British coin over the world is a worthy object,
shall we not best attain it by entering the convention ?
Surely it is we who will become by this step the great
producers and distributors of the coinage of the world. As
we strive, by opening our ports and accommodating 1 our
productions to foreign use, to render this island the great
depot and manufactory of the world, so we shall, by render-
ing our coinage fit for foreign circulation, acquire a nearly
complete ascendency in the specie and currency trade. In
Australia, in New Zealand, and probably in South Africa,
we hold the most productive gold-mines of the world, and
of what is produced elsewhere a large part passes directly to
London, the monetary centre of the world. We shall there-
fore become, without doubt, the greatest coiners. The
possessors of California, it is true, will he our partners in
this monopoly, but they are friends whom we can trust to
coin as faithfully as ourselves. British mints, therefore,
in company with Anglo-American mints, will become to the
gold currency of future years even more than the mints of


IX.] INTERNATIONAL CURRENCY. 249

Spain, and Peru, and Mexico have been in past years to the
silver cuiTency. The Spanish dollar has long been the most
esteemed of all coins, and has even circulated in this country
within the present century.* But gold is now definitively
taking the place of silver, and some kind of gold coin must
take the place of the dollar. If we are not misled by foolish
pride, we shall take, while we* can yet do it with a gobd
grace, the step of adopting our sovereign to become the new
gold currency of the world.

I may add, that if we place any opposition or obstruction
in the way of the International Monetary Convention, they
have a most justifiable and powerful weapon ready to ensure
our defeat.f It is only necessary for the Continental nations
and the United States to issue, as is already proposed, a
piece of 25 francs in order to supplant the sovereign. As the
new coin would have the value of a well-worn sovereign,
it would soon be accepted in place of the sovereign in all
foreign countries and in our colonies, if not at home. At
the same time, the difference of value being about 2 d. in
the pound, would ensure the melting of all new sovereigns
in preference. Thus, however many sovereigns are coined,
we should never succeed in dislodging the 25-franc piece
from circulation. More even than at present, our British
mints would perform the labours of the Danai'des — ever
pouring forth new and beautiful coin, to disappear at once
into the bullion dealer's crucible. The sovereign would be

* Spanish dollars were issued from the Bank of England, March 10th, 179V,
the value being 4s. 9d. each. They were recalled in October of the same year.

f The German Imperial Government has since cut the ground from under
the scheme of international money by the method here indicated. The new
gold mark was so defined that the 20 -mark piece contains 7*17 grammes of pure
gold, of the value of 19s. 7 d. in our money. The following comparison shows
the quantity of pure gold contained by the principal gold coins :


Grammes.

American 5-dollar piece, or half-eagle .... 7*58

English sovereign 7*32

Proposed 25-franc piece 7*26

German 20-mark piece . . . . . .7*17


250


THE GOLD COINAGE .


[ix.


an evanescent coin, constantly liable to be recoined with
the permanent impress of a foreign mint. Common sense,
as well as invariable experience, tell us that we must be
worsted in this contest of the heavier and the lighter
coins.

But the great bugbear which appears to have deterred
the Royal Commission from recommending the slightest
change in our currency laws, is the supposed injury to the
theoretical perfection of our standard of value. If, on the
one hand, we lower the sovereign without imposing an
equivalent mint charge, we violate all contracts, and degrade
the old standard to the extent of 2 d. I need hardly stay
to point out how easily all home contracts, of any consider-
able amount, could be readjusted by law, the alteration of
accounts being no more difficult than that performed
frequently in the case of the income-tax. As regards smaller
payments, which cannot be so readjusted, it might surely
have been noticed, that an exact adjustment of price is hardly
ever attempted in such cases, the nearest round number of
shillings or pence being arbitrarily chosen. Tolls, cab fares,
many railway fares, entrance fees, etc. — in short, almost all
small customary charges of a fixed character, are never
calculated so as to meet the exact average cost, which, indeed,
could seldom be done. An approximate round number is
chosen with a view to convenience, and profit and loss are
left to adjust themselves. To the same natural adjustment
might be equitably left the very small arbitrary change of
2cZ. in the pound.

But all inconvenience or injustice arising from the change
of the sovereign might be entirely avoided by the imposition
of a seignorage, or mint charge, equal in amount to the value
of the gold subtracted. This seignorage is really desirable
on several other distinct grounds, but it is condemned by
the Commission, as tending to destroy the theoretical perfec-
tion of our standard of value. With all respect to the


IX.]


STANDARD OF VALUE.


251


eminent members of tbis Commission, I must bold that some
of them have lost tbeir way in tbe intricacies of tbe theory
of value. Questions were even asked wbicb implied that
value was something inherent in a coin, like its colour or
its weight, so that the value must be reduced* with the
weight.* This is a radical misapprehension, which must
prevent any clear or sound conclusions on the subject.

To understand the point in dispute, we must remember
that there is no such thing as value intrinsic in any com-
modity, but that, in an economic sense, the values of two
things merely express the ratio in which they do as a fact
exchange for each other.f Thus if, de facto, 100 ounces of
gold are taken to the Mint every day, and 99 ounces of coin
received back in exchange, this would actually establish the
fact that 99 ounces of coin have the same value, at the time
and place in question, as 100 ounces of gold. Since the
facilities of transit render the values of bullion and coin
sensibly the same all over the country, it follows that as long
as there is any demand for coin at the Mint, the relative
values of gold and coin are defined by the Mint ratio of
exchange. The value of the coin, compared with bullion,
cannot be raised above this rate without the Mint being set
to work to restore equilibrium. On the other hand, the value
of coin cannot fall unless there be already a superabundance
of it, so that the Mint is stopped working. In this case the
value of the coin may undoubtedly decline more or less,
pi’ovided that there are persons who wish to have gold in
the form of bullion rather than in that of coin. If the com-
parative values were altered more than 1 per cent., it would
become profitable to make the reverse exchange by melting
the coin* into bullion. But why should bullion be wanted
and not coin? At present bullion is wanted because our
coins cannot be used to make payments in foreign countries

** Questions 2091-95, and elsewhere.

t See “ The Theory of Political Economy/ 5 before cited, p, 82.


252


THE GOLD COINAGE .


[ix.

where they are not current, and they therefore lose, on
passing our shores, whatever value may attach, to them as
coins. But the proposition of an international money
altogether alters the conditions of the argument. Should
our coins be current abroad, and should foreign mints charge
a seignorage exactly equal to ours, as is proposed, then it
musT) happen that when we have to make a payment abroad,
or, in other words, to add to the currency of that country,
our coins will bear there the same premium over bullion for
that purpose which they have here. The reduction of coin
into bullion would then necessarily produce a loss, and would
only be resorted to for exceptional purposes.

So imbued are we with the prejudices and imperfections
of our present system, that we cannot easily conceive the
natural result of introducing an universal money, namely, that
gold and silver would be almost wholly held in the form
of coin. Certain small supplies of bullion would, no doubt,
be convenient for goldsmiths and silversmiths, gilders, and
other artisans who consume the precious metals ; but in
respect to its main employment, it would be found almost
always advantageous to convert gold into coin at the first
opportunity, since its value is thereby exactly ascertained,
and all future expenses for melting and assay would be
avoided.

It is now apparent that our standard of value will be
improved instead of being injured by the proposed arrange-
ments. For at present, when the exchanges are against
us, our currency must always be liable to fall in value to
the extent of the mint charge in foreign countries, in addition
to the costs of transit. But in the proposed international
system, the coins having already paid the mint charge, will
effect payments abroad without any depreciation.

One paragraph in the report of the Commissioners betrays
confusion of thought, for they say : “ If the new sovereign,
containing only 112 grains of fine gold, retains* in consequence


IX.]


LORD LIVERPOODS VIEWS.


253


of the imposition of a seignorage, the value of the old
sovereign, it would retain its superiority in value over 25 francs.
If it is equal iu value to 25 francs of the present French
currency, it would not be equal in value to the existing
sovereign.”*

But it is apparent that at present, in the absence of
international currency, we measure only the gold in our Sove-
reign against the gold in 25 francs, and, in calculating the par,
no account is taken of the mint charge in France, which is an
uncertain quantity. The fact has even coine out during the
controversy, that the true pars of exchange are not accurately
ascertainable in the absence of precise information concerning
the mint charges in different countries.f No exact comparison
can at present be made between the value of the franc plus
a mint charge, with the sovereign without a mint charge.
But it is indisputable that if both coins and mint charges are
exactly assimilated, there will be no difference in value
possible between the currencies of France and England, except
such as may arise from the natural variation of the exchanges ;
and this will be restricted within the very small cost incurred
by the transmission of specie.

The grounds on which a mint charge has been hitherto
opposed in England, are stated in the clearest manner in Lord
Liverpool's treatise, and are four in number :

1. Because the principal measure of value would notin such
case be perfect.

2. Because merchants in exporting the coins would lose the
mint charge, and would raise the price of foreign goods in order
to transfer the loss to consumers.

* Report etc. p. xiii.

+ See a statement by Mr. Hendriks, who throws great light upon this
subject in the “ Report of the International Coinage Commission,” p. 142.
Mr. E. Seyd, in a pamphlet published since this paper was written, attempts to
show that the cost of converting gold bullion into coin is usually higher iu
London than in Paris. Much new technical information concerning the bullion
trade is contained in Mr. Seyd’s work on c< Bullion and Foreign Exchanges.”


254


THE GOLD COINAGE.


[IX.


3. Because a reduction in the weight of the sovereign would
be necessary; and, consequently,

4. A recoinage would be requisite.

But when Lord Liverpool set forth the above objections he
had no thought of an international money, which is a condition
changing the whole grounds of the question. It is apparent
that merchants will not lose the mint charge if they send abroad
coins which are equally current there as here ; that, therefore,
the whole necessity for the reduction of coin to bullion will
disappear, and the coin, minted under uniform conditions, will
form as perfect a measure of value for the future as bullion or
freely-coined gold has been in the past confusion of currencies.
I may say, with confidence, of Lord Liverpool, what he
has said of Locke:* ce The state of the coins of the king-
dom is wholly changed from what it was when he con-
sidered this subject : it is probable that, if this great man had
lived to the present times, he would have been sensible of the
change : he would have applied his principles to the facts as
they now exist, and would have drawn his conclusions in
conformity to them.-”

It will be noticed that, in addition to theoretical reasons,
which operated against the expediency of imposing a mint
charge in Lord Liverpool's days, but which will vanish when
coins are of international currency, there were in those days
two strong practical difficulties — namely, that a reduction of the
weight of the sovereign and a recoinage would be requisite.
But it so happens that this reduction of the sovereign is the
very thing we now want to effect, and the mint charge is
recommended as a mode of effecting it without trouble. The
first three of Lord Liverpool's objections having been com-
pletely reversed, it is truly strange to find that the fourth has
suffered the same fortune by the lapse of time. The expense
of recoinage is not incurred, but is positively saved by our

* “Treatise on the Coins of the Realm/' p. 172 $ Bank of England reprint,
chap, xx. p, 191,


IX.]


INCONVENIENCE OF LIGHT COINS.


255


accepting the proposal to assimilate our sovereign to a 25-franc
piece.

The free mintage system and the other provisions of our
present currency law are gradually landing us in a position of
much difficulty. The law at present holds that the sovereign
is not legal tender unless it weighs at least 122-| grains ; and,
as a kind of legal fiction, every person is supposed to have *by
him, whenever he receives gold coin, a pair of scales capable
of detecting light gold. Every person must bear the loss if he
l’eceives a coin which is afterwards rejected as too light, and
the Government declines all responsibility concerning the
weight of gold coin when once in the hands of the public.
But the weighing of coin is so generally troublesome, if not
impracticable, and even the refusal, much more the cutting of
a light coin, would so often be considered a discourteous act,
that the practice is almost entirely abandoned by the public.
Such banks and railway companies as cannot altogether avoid
loss on this account, prefer to bear- it rather than cause
inconvenience to their customers ; but almost everybody
manages to put off the loss by passing on the light coins. The
Bank of England and its branches and a few Irish banks alone
observe the law with rigour. The natural consequence is, that
all experienced persons, in making payments to the Bank of
England, keep back worn sovereigns with great care, and the
Bank is rendered powerless to withdraw an adequate quantity
of light money. Thus it arises that there is a mass of about
20,000,000 light sovereigns and £5,000,000 or £6,000,000 in
value of half-sovereigns circulating in defiance of the law.
This light coin forms almost a third part of the sovereign
circulation, and nearly a moiety of the half-sovereign circula-
tion ; but, being unequally distributed, we find that in some of
the agricultural districts the proportion of light sovereigns
rises to 44 per cent. The average deficiency of weight
of the sovereigns, as I shall show, is fully *53 per cent.,
or more than 10$. in £100, while tha half-sovereigns are


256 THE GOLD COINAGE. [ix.

depreciated more than twice as much, or by about 22 $. in

£ 100 .

Much evil and injustice arise from this discreditable state
of our metallic currency. The public having universally
abandoned the weighing of coins, the burden of the light gold
is most unequally borne, and falls chiefly upon the districts
where coin tends to accumulate. I shall give evidence tending
to show that new coin is mostly distributed in the manufacturing
districts, where there is always a want of coin for the payment
of wages. In such parts little or no loss from light gold is
encountered. But there is a strong tendency for the coinage
to migrate into the agricultural districts, and a plethora of gold
presses upon the banks which serve such districts. The loss
incurred in remitting this surplus of gold to London would be
of a serious amount, were not the practice universally adopted,
in such circumstances, of picking out the new Victorias for
remittance, the old worn coin being put into circulation again
as soon as possible. This process of sieving and picking,
through which the gold coin is perpetually passing, is not only
a source of labour and trouble, but is of questionable legality
and expedience. And though most bankers may thus succeed
in escaping loss, the weight falls all the more unfairly upon
those who happen to have too great a plethora of coin. Thus,
I have unquestionable information that one large banking
establishment lost in this way, during the year ending 30th
September, 1868, the large sum of £6716, and this, I am
assured, is in addition to “ a large loss in interest on the stock
we keep, so as to avail ourselves of any opportunity of placing
the coin in circulation.” As the average loss upon the light
gold sold as bullion by this bank was 1*363 per cent., it would
evidently be better to keep the coin on hand for many months
at the present rate of interest, provided it could be ultimately
pushed off into circulation. I apprehend, too, that the
lightness of the coin must restrict the use of Bank of
England notes in some districts ; for the loss of interest on a


IX.]


NECESSITY OF RECOINAGE .


2 57


bank reserve will be the same whether it be held in notes or
coin. Thus many banks which have a surplus of gold will
hold it for the chance of being able to pay it away to the
public rather than bear the loss on the light coin in replacing
it by notes, as might otherwise have been done to the
convenience of every one.

This is a weak statement of the evils which follow from ihe
worn condition of our gold currency. I feel sure that as soon
as public attention is called to the subject, it will be found
impossible to deny the necessity for a recoinage, similar to that
of 1841-43, but on a more extensive scale, which shall restore
to our circulating medium its due weight and perfection.
Twenty-five years have elapsed since the Government last
undertook the charge of withdrawing light coin ; and, though
the Bank of England has continued to withdraw annually about
half a million, or in the last few years rather more, this is
wholly inadequate to repair the accumulated wear of a great
currency. Assuming, then, that the Government must, before
long, undertake the charge of a recoinage, let us consider the
comparative cost under the old law and under the proposed new
system.

The sovereigns in circulation amount, as I shall show, to
64,500,000 at the most, of which 31J per cent, are below
the legally current weight. In short, about 20,000,000 of
sovereigns require to be withdrawn if we desire to maintain
the credit of our currency on its present footing, together
with 11,500,000 of half-sovereigns, or in all 31,500,000 coins.
The cost of this recoinage, as afterwards shown, may be
estimated at £348,000. Regard it how we will, this is a sum
which, if we maintain our present law, must be paid either by
individuals in an arbitrary and unjust method of taxation, or
by the Government in a more equitable manner.

But now let us see how legitimately and easily we may
make use of the present circumstances of our circulation to
assist in the beneficent scheme of an universal money.

$


258


THE GOLD COINAGE.


[IX.


Judging from the age of the present circulation of
sovereigns, which is a pretty sure guide to the weight, as
subsequently shown, I estimate their relation to the weight of
the 25-franc piece as follows :*


Too heavy to pass as 25-franc pieces .

Per cent.

. 70

Of proper weight .

. 2 o

Too light

. 5


100


In introducing the new sovereign, the 25 per cent, of the
old ones which are of proper weight would, of course, be left
untouched for the present. The 5 per cent, of lighter ones
might also be left; they would, by degrees, fall into the Bank
of England in the ordinary course of business, because the
practice of picking the coins would doubtless be abandoned.
The remainder of the sovereigns in the hands of the public,
with all the new coin in the Bank, might be recoined at a
convenient rate, and the quantity being 48,500,000 at the
most, could be reissued, if necessary, in three years, at a cost
of about £65,000. The excess of weight of the old sovereign
over the new coin would yield a sum of £280,000, which, if
secured in the form of a mint charge, would constitute a net
profit to the Government of £215,000. This recoinage might
be carried out by the Mint buying up each sovereign with a
new 25-franc piece, appropriating the difference of weight as
a part of the intended mint charge of 1 per cent. The full
charge would, of course, be imposed on any bullion brought
for coinage, so that the new coin would at once have, for
home circulation, exactly the same value as the old sovereign.

The standard weight of the 25-franc piece of gold, eleven-twelfths fine, is
taken at 7*9179 grms. (122*19 grains), with a mint allowance of + or — 2 per
mille, and an allowance for wear in addition of - £ per cent. The higher and
lower limits of currency arc thus 7'9337 and 7*8625 grms. In the “Transactions
of the Manchester Statistical Society,” 1868, p. 88, 1 have given a somewhat
different statement, on the supposition that ^ per cent, deviation from the
standard, in excess or defect, might he allowed.


IX]


MODE OF EE COINAGE.


259


There would be no necessity, indeed, for the Mint to make any
unusual recoinage at all, except for the purpose of securing
the profit, and only just such coins as would return an
adequate profit need be withdrawn at first. For years to
come the exporters and melters of the coinage will doubt-
less operate as they have been accustomed to do, and the
real establishment of an universal money must take mahy
years to effect. To them it might be left to clear off such
sovereigns as the Mint could not recoin with advantage. In
fact, as the whole change of weight lies well within the limits
of weight of the money now in familiar use, the public need
never feel that any change is being made at all, except by
noting the improved appearance of the new coins.

The half-sovereigns might for a time b'e left untouched, as
they would, to a great extent, be of a proper weight to pass as
12J-franc pieces, and would be required only for home use.

The total difference, then, of the two modes of effecting a
recoinage is a possible profit of £215,000, instead of a certain
loss of £348,000; in all a difference of more than half a million.
In imposing a mint charge, however, the Government might
most properly prevent the coinage falling again into its present
discreditable state by undertaking to withdraw constantly, at
its own cost, a certain amount of light gold. The loss would
be more than covered by the mint charge on an average of
years; and, as British mints would coin for other countries
more than they would coin for us — as we, in fact, should levy
considerably more revenue at our mint than they at theirs, we
need not fear being improperly burdened with loss on worn
coin. Some international agreement might become necessary
as to the equitable distribution of this loss ; but it is certain
that we need no longer pay out of our own pockets, as we at
present do, both the cost of coinage and the cost of the wear
of coin circulating in several foreign countries and many of
our own colonies.

Whatever it may have formerly been, our free coinage


26 o


THE GOLD COINAGE.


[ix.


system will for the future be reduced to a complete absurdity,
and can be supported only by unreasonable prejudices. It
was long ago described by Sir Dudley North as “ a perpetual
motion found out, whereby to melt and coin without ceasing,
and so to feed goldsmiths and coyners at the publick charge
and such it continues to the present day. It is condemned by
thfc experience of all foreign governments which have tried it,
nor is it at all defended by our greatest economists. Adam
Smith, Ricardo, Tooke, J. S. Mill, and many others agree in
regarding a small mintage as a sound and desirable imposition.
Not only is the present Master of the Mint* clearly in favour
of a mint charge, but I learn from correspondence of the year
1852, published in the Report of the International Coinage
Commission, j- that Sir John Herschel, while Master of the
Mint, had formed a strong opinion against the present system,
and had most clearly and forcibly pointed out the evils and
absurdities into which it leads us.

The time is come, then, for us to make that slight altera-
tion in the law of 1816 which shall both remedy the technical
imperfections in our currency and secure to ourselves and to
the world a boon which we could hardly have conceived to be
possible a few years ago. Our main object should be to aid in
the establishment of an universal money, which shall furnish
every nation with a sure standard of value and an uniform
medium of exchange. Had we, in pursuit of so great an
end, endured some inconvenience at home, we should find
ourselves amply repaid by gain abroad. Our interests are in
every part of the world; our traffic is with every country both
civilised and uncivilised. With far-sighted policy we have
promoted free exchange of commodities with all the world;
but our financiers are unable to perceive that a similar policy
in regard to money is a natural and necessary corollary. It is

* The late Professor Thomas Graham. See Report of the Commission on
International Coinage,

t Appendix No. XXIII. Report, pp. 324-38.


ixj INTERNATIONAL CURRENCY. 2&1

well to have good currency at home, but to our foreign trade
it is equally important that there should be good currency
abroad. The calculations of profit must be based upon one as
much as upon the other. At present the calculations of the
foreign exchanges require great skill and experience, and
foreign merchants are generally superior to our own ^in
the mysteries of commercial arithmetic. It was given in
evidence* that shippers of goods, even to some parts of the
Continent, have to charge a small advance of price to cover
their uncertain knowledge of the foreign money, and in other
parts of the world the confusion and imperfections of the
currency are far worse.

All this will be gradually changed if we join the Monetary
Convention, and adapt our sovereign for foreign circulation ;
for we shall bring with us our great system of trade, our
many colonies, and in time the currency of our Indian
dependency. The United States will decide the question
as regards North America ; and the new “ sovereign/' as we
might continue to call it, becoming current in all civilised
countries, would soon find its way to every part of the globe.
It will form an accurate term of comparison, and might
eventually compose the mass of the currency; at the same
time our home circulation will be improved without the least
trouble or cost, and no prejudice will be done to the future
introduction of a decimal system. It would be an act of the
greatest folly in us to make any radical alteration in our
fractional money before the future unit of the Monetary Con-
vention should have been chosen. This unit will certainly be
in a simple ratio with the franc, so that the assimilation of the
sovereign to the 25-franc piece will be the first and most
judicious step towards obtaining decimal money.

In the following parts of this paper I shall give the details
of an investigation into the quantity and condition of our gold

* Report, Questions 89-107, 275-84, 433-35 5 Bagehot, 1977-80 j and
elsewhere.


THE GOLD COINAGE,


262


[ix.


currency, upon which many of the preceding estimates and
arguments are founded.


II . — An Inquiry into the Amount and Age of the Gold
Currency*

In order to ascertain as precisely as possible the amount
and condition of the gold currency, I haye lately carried out
an inquiry into the composition of that currency as regards
age. It occurred to me that if the comparative numbers of
sovereigns of different years* coinage now in circulation were
determined by a kind of partial census, not only might some
new facts come to light, but data would be obtained for
solving several important problems. The amount of the
currency might thus, as it seemed to me, be estimated with
more certainty than has hitherto been possible ,* for it neces-
sarily happens that the coinages of recent years are less
diminished by exportation, melting, or loss than those of
earlier years ; and as there are no reliable data for estimating
the great quantities of coin thus subtracted from our circula-
tion, the only resource is to eliminate these quantities, as far
as possible, from our calculations. Now this can be done by
taking the coinages of recent years as a measure to apply to
the whole currency ; for just as we estimate the length of a
room by trying how many paces are required to compass it,
although we do not know with perfect accuracy the length of
a pace, so I thought that the number of coins of a few recent
years now in circulation, although not known with much pre-
cision, would yet be the best standard of measurement. This
is no new method of estimation in statistics, but it has not
hitherto been applied to this subject with care.

To carry out this notion, I distributed copies of a circular
letter and a blank form to many bankers and other gentle-
men, requesting them to take one or two hundred pounds in
sovereigns* tod half the amount in half-sovereigns, from gold
received in the ordinary course of business, and to cause the


CENSUS OF GOLD COINAGE.


263


ixj

numbers of coins of each date to be counted and stated in tbe
form. The aid thus requested was furnished with a readiness
which I had no right to expect, and which I cannot suffi-
ciently acknowledge. Not a few gentlemen, on becoming ac-
quainted with my purpose, procured very extensive returns,*
and the final result was that this kind of census of the gold
coinage was extended over one-sixth of a million of coins thus
composed :

Number of sovereigns enumerated . . 90,474

„ of half-sovereigns enumerated . 75,036

Total number . . 165,510

At least one gold coin in every six hundred now existing
in this country was, on the average, enumerated ; and as there
were 321 separate returns received from 213 distinct towns
or localities, including almost every place of commercial im-
portance, it may be allowed, I think, that sufficient data
were acquired for determining the average character of the
circulation.

A complete reduction of these returns yields the following
table of the comparative numbers of sovereigns and half-
sovereigns of each year’s coinage found in 100,000 coins; for
sake of comparison, the actual number of coins issued in each
year is added. Some real and some apparent inaccuracies in
the table are explained farther on in this paper (pp. 280, 296) :

* X am especially indebted to tbe Governor of tbe Bank of Scotland for an
enumeration of 48,647 coins at tbe various branches of that bank. Tbe general
manager of tbe London and Westminster Bank most kindly forwarded me a
similarly complete return for his district. Messrs. Bxddulph and Wood, of
Swansea, procured me many valuable returns from tbe banks and large works
in that neighbourhood. To tbe following gentlemen I am indebted for special
aid in procuring tbe larger enumerations: Mr. Walliker, postmaster of Hull;
Professor J. E. T. Rogers; Mr. John Mills and Mr. Thomas Browning, of
Manchester ; Sir John Lubbock ; Mr. J. L. Sargant, Messrs. Chance Brothers,
and Mr. Joseph Chamberlain, of Birmingham; Mr. J. Pilling, of Stafford;
Mr. Eugene Bean, of York ; Mr. J. H. Barber, of Sheffield ; and Mr. Henry
Haley, of Halifax.


2 64


THE GOLD COINAGE.


Census of the Gold Coinage.


Sovereigns. |

Half-Sovereigns.

Year

of Coinage.

Number Issued
from
the Mint.
[000’s omitted.]

Number now
existing m 100,000
Sovereigns
circulating.

Number Issued
from
the Mint.
[000’s omitted ]

Number now
existing m 100,00
Half-Sovereigns
circulating.


IX.]


RESULTS OF CENSUS.


2 65


I will describe, firstly, the results to which this census
leads as regards the magnitude of the circulation. We
observe in the above table that out of every 100,000 sove-
reigns now in circulation, 18,671 sovereigns are found on an
average to bear the dates 1863 or 1864. Though the pro-
portion of such coins undoubtedly values in different localities,
I feel certain, after drawing up many averages, that this
proportion must be very near the truth. We may say, there-
fore, with confidence, that the whole circulation of sovereigns
is or 5*356 times (5£) as great as the number of

sovereigns of 1863-64 now in the hands of the people. But
the whole number of sovereigns coined in those years, as
stated in the table, amounts to £14,578,000.

The whole of this sum had not indeed passed into circu-
lation in March last, when the enumerations were for the most
part made ; for according to information furnished to me by
the Governor of the Bank of England, through the kind aid
of Mr. Alfred Latham, one of the Directors, it appears that
the Bank held the following quantities of sovereigns :


Sovereigns coined in 1864


39 >3

39 9 )

Australian gold


'65

'66


Total unmixed coin ,
Mixed sovereigns received from circulation


£

. 600,000
. 500,000

. 2,300,000
. 100,000

. 3,500,000
. 2,600,000

£6,100,000


Inasmuch as 600,000 sovereigns of the coinage of 1864
were thus lying in bags as received from the Mint, they
cannot have contributed anything to the proportions shown
in my census. The quantity of sovereigns of 1863-64 in the
hands of the public cannot, therefore, exceed £14,578,000
minus £600,000, or just about 14,000,000^ and as the whole of


266


THE GOLD COINAGE.


[IX.


the mixed circulation of sovereigns is 5^- times this quantity,
it is thus ascertained not to exceed 75,000,000. In this
quantity are included all masses of sovereigns which do not
greatly differ in age and composition from the general average
as shown in my census. I have no reason to suppose that
hags of unmixed coin as issued by the Mint, or other peculiar
parcels of coin, exist anywhere in considerable quantities,
except in the Bank of England, where they amounted in
March last, as already stated, to 3,500,000. Adding in this
sum, we find that the total stock of sovereigns in this country
cannot exceed :

£

Mixed coin of various age \ . 75,000,000

Undistributed coin . . . 3,500,000

Total . . . £78,500,000

By a similar calculation, I have determined that the number
of half-sovereigns cannot be supposed to exceed 24,000,000,
or £12,000,000 in value; for it will be learned, from the
enumeration of 75,036 half-sovereigns, that 12,819 out of
every 100,000 in circulation are found to be of the coinage
of 1863 and 1864. In other words, the whole circulation of
half-sovereigns cannot exceed or about eight times

the whole coinage of half-sovereigns in 1863-64. Now, as the
coinage of these years amounted to £1,565,000 (3,130,000
pieces, see table, p. 264), we have only to multiply this by 7*8,
and we then ascertain that the total number of half-sovereigns
cannot exceed about £12,000,000.

The whole circulation of gold in the United Kingdom
cannot, therefore, exceed :

£

Sovereigns 78,500,000

Half-sovereigns .... 12,000,000

£90,500,000

This sum, however, is not the prolalle amount of the cir-


IX.]


ESTIMATE OF CIRCULATION.


2 67


culation, but tlie mammum limit within winch it must lie ; for
it is certain that some portions of the coinage of 1863-64
have already been exported or melted, and for every million
sovereigns thus withdrawn, 5| millions must be subtracted
from our estimate. In attempting to make some allowance
of this kind, we shall commit no appreciable error, and shall
be, in fact, on the safe side in supposing that the whole*ex-
portation has fallen on the sovereigns. This we are obliged to
do, as the Custom House returns do not discriminate sove-
reigns and half-sovereigns. The quantities of British gold
coin registered for export since 1864 are as follow :

£

Kegistered exports in 1865 . * 3,390,910

„ „ >66 . . 4,007,089

„ >67 . . 1,266,654

£ 8,664,653

There are no means of determining from the above, with
accuracy, how much of the coinage of 1863-64 has been ex-
ported ; but as exporters prefer the newest and heaviest
coin, we are probably within the truth in assuming that the
sovereigns of 1863-64, which form about one-fifth of the
sovereign currency, also form one-fifth of the above exports.
We may then subtract £1,750,000 from the coinage of 1863-64,
which formed the basis of our calculation. Our estimate will
then stand as follows :

£

Sovereigns coined in 1863-64 . 14,600,000

Subtract : in Bank . 600,000
„ exported (say) 1,750,000

2,350,000

12,250,000
5*356


£65,600,000


Multiply by


368


THE GOLD COINAGE.


[IX.

Reducing this result a little for the sake of getting round
numbers, we may state our estimate finally as follows :

£

Sovereigns in circulation . . 64,500,000

Unmixed sovereigns . . . 3,500,000

Half-sovereigns .... 12,000,000

Total gold circulation . . £80,000,000

Since I commenced this inquiry, however, facts have come
to my knowledge which prevent me from supposing that the
gold coinage is as much as the above. Any pretensions to
rigid accuracy, which the preceding calculations might other-
wise possess, are removed by the selection and melting of
newly-issued coins, which is believed to be extensively carried
on by the largest and most respectable firms of capitalists and
bullion dealers. Ho precise information can be procured as to
the amount of the newest and heaviest coins thus destroyed,
but they may be asserted to amount to millions in the course
of the few last years. Reference is made to this practice in
the report of the British representatives at the recent Paris
conference, in the following terms :*

“ There is reason to believe that large masses of new
British sovereigns are occasionally treated so as to separate
out the heavy pieces, and these are disposed of as bullion ;
while the lighter pieces, which may still be all of legal weight,
are preserved and put into circulation. This fact will not
surprise those persons who are aware of the small margin
of profit upon which bullion transactions are often con-
ducted.^

* Report of the International Coinage Commission, Appendix IV. p. 192.
The British representatives at the Paris International Monetary Conference
of 1867 were the late Professor Graham, then Master of the Mint, and Mr.
(now Sir) C. Rivers Wilson.


IX.]


OTHER ESTIMATES.


269


Now if, in the prosecution of this peculiar trade, a million
sovereigns of 1863-64 have been melted up, we must reduce
the estimate by £5,000,000, and in a similar ratio for larger
quantities. All, therefore, that I can assert to be shown by
my calculations is, not that the gold circulation amounts to
£80,000,000, but that it is under eighty millions , and probably
lies somewhere between seventy and eighty •millions. Bat I
shall regard £80,000,000 as the safest estimate to employ in
all the other calculations of this paper.

Let us compare this estimate with others lately put forward.
Messrs. Graham and Wilson, in their official report on the Paris
Conference, speak of the whole gold currency as “variously
estimated at from £80,000,000 to £120,000,000.” The Inter-
national Coinage Commission adopt the same limits, remarking
that “it is impossible to ascertain the actual amount of
sovereigns and half-sovereigns in circulation, the estimates
varying from £80,000,000 to £120,000,000” Yet, as will be
seen, my method of calculation demonstrates that the amount
cannot exceed about £90,000,000, and shows that it probably
falls below £80,000,000, the lower limit named by the
Commissioners.*

The late Mr. Miller, of the Bank of England, gave much
attention to this subject, and is statedf to have considered that
there could not have been less than £80,000,000 sterling of
gold in the country ; but there is still the difference between
our estimates that he regarded £80,000,000 as the lower limit,
while I am confident that it is above the truth. Mr. Weguelin,
when Governor of the Bank, stated it to be his opinion that
the gold coin was between £40,000,000 and £50,000,000,
which is clearly too low ; and Mr. Hankey, in his work on
Banking, adopts a medium amount, “ somewhat less than the
calculation of Mr. Miller, still considerably nearer to his


See Report, pp. xiii. 192.


f “ Hankey on Banking, 1 ” p. 67.


270


THE GOLD COINAGE .


[IX.


statement than to that of Mr. Weguelin.” This medium
amount would thus, in my opinion, be close to the
truth.

By far the [most important estimate, however, which we
have to consider, is that of Mr. Newmarch, who has, in one of
his appendices to Tooke’s “ History of Prices,” * published an
excellent inquiry into this subject. Mr. Newmarch has em-
ployed, indeed, the old method of estimation, which consists
in assuming, on necessarily feeble evidence, a certain amount
of coin as in use in a given year, adding the issues of new
coin from the Mint or the Bank, subtracting the known
amounts of light gold withdrawn, and also the amounts
exported, according to the most probable estimate. Thus,
Mr. Newmarch takes £46,000,000 as the probable circulation
at the close of 1844, adds £64,000,000 coined and issued
since, making £110,000,000, and then subtracts £25,000,000
for exports to Australia, etc., £6,000,000 of coin cancelled for
deficiency of weight during the years 1844-56. This would
give £79,000,000 ; but he makes a further arbitrary reduction
on account of unknown exports to various parts of the world,
and sums up as follows :

“ I am disposed to think, that if the amount of the gold
coin circulation was £46,000,000 in 1844, we may suppose it
to be, say, seventy millions in 1856 (that is to say, 50 or 60
per cent, more) without any extreme departure from the
probabilities of the case when they are carefully examined.
And considering the general tenor of former estimates of the
quantity of gold coin in circulation in the United Kingdom, it
does not appear that a supposition of even seventy-five millions
sterling , as the quantity at the close of 1856, would be unduly
exaggerated.”

To bring this estimate into comparison with my own, it is
necessary to make allowances for the large quantities of coin


Appendix XXII. vol. yi. pp. 696-711.


IX.]


NEWM. ARCH'S ESTIMATE .


271


since issued, as well as for the export and withdrawal of
sovereigns. This is done in the following statement :

£

Assumed circulation at close of 1856 . . • 75,000,000

Add reimports of British coin, 1858-66 . * 14,000,000

,, issues from Mint ..... 52,000,000

141,000,000

Subtract light gold cancelled at | rnn nnn
the Bank, £500,000 per annum ) o ' oUU ' UU0
Gold coin exported, 1857-66 . . 41,500,000

_ 47,000,000
Total £94,000,000

The above exceeds my estimate by at least £14,000,000,
but a considerable part of this discrepancy may be fairly
attributed to the incomplete registration of exports of gold
coin at the Custom House. It is thus apparent that if we took
Mr. Newmarch's lower estimate of £70,000,000, there would
remain but little discrepancy between that result and my
estimate of £80,000,000. But if even my own estimate of
£80,000,000 is above the truth, owing to the extensive
practice of melting new coin, in the same degree we must
consider that Mr. Newmarch's estimate of £70,000,000 is in
excess of the truth. If any one could determine the circulation
correctly in the old manner, it would be Mr. Newmarch ; but
there are such inherent inaccuracies in all accounts of the export
of coin, that we can rely upon no calculation in which they
play an important part. I have satisfied myself, by working
from my own maximum estimate of £80,000,000 backwards to
the year 1852, that there is from £20,000,000 to £25,000,000
of the coinage which is not to be accounted for by the Custom
House returns, and which must have disappeared by melting,
secret exportation, or accidental loss during that interval.

It will be interesting now to form a notion of the complete


272


THE GOLD COINAGE.


[ix.


aggregate of the circulating medium of the United Kingdom,
by which I mean the whole standing stock of gold, or of the
immediate representatives of gold, consisting of banknotes
convertible at will. By a very limited and rough investigation
of the dates of shillings in circulation, I have estimated that
out of a total silver coinage of £19,500,000 issued since 1816,
th§re remains infuse about £14,000,000. The Master of the
Mint, indeed, in his evidence before the Decimal Coinage
Commission in 1857, stated the quantity of silver coinage
presumed to be in circulation at £14,167,000, since which time
nearly £4,000,000 of new coin has been issued, and rather
more than £1,000,000 has been withdx’awn, which would leave
£17,000,000 of silver coin in use; but no allowance is made in
this for the loss, destruction, and exportation of the silver
coinage which in the course of fifty years must have amounted
to a lai'ge sum. Therefore, I think £14,000,000 not an
improbable amount to assign. Owing to the recent issue of
the bronze com, we know its amount to be almost exactly
£1,000,000 sterling in nominal value. Thus the metallic
currency will consist of — £

Sovereigns 68,000,000

Half-sovereigns .... 12,000,000

Silver coin 14,000,000

Bronze coin 1,000,000

£95,000,000

The bullion in the Bank of England must be regarded as a
portion of the circulating medium, since it is represented by
notes. The whole metallic basis of our currency will then be
at the present time* : £

Coin ...... 95,000,000

Bullion (say) .... 15,000,000

£110,000,000

W e ought to’ add such variable quantities of bullion as may

* is, about the year 1868.


ESTIMATE OF CIRCULATION,


2 73


ix ]

be in the bands of bullion brokers, refiners, and others, which
may occasionally amount to some millions.*

As regards paper equivalents of gold, we must take the
whole issues of the United Kingdom and subtract such part
as merely represents an equal quantity of coin employed in
guaranteeing the notes. The amount of the coin reserves
of the English banks is quite unknown, but*we may suppose
that the issues of English notes, amounting to £ 5 , 000 , 000 ,
are backed by £ 1 , 500,000 of coin. The Scotch and Irish
issues may be taken at £10,000,000, with a set-off of
£ 4 , 500,000 of coin and bullion, ascertained from the monthly
official returns. Accordingly, the circulating medium may
be stated as follows :


£


Coin

. .

95,000,000

Bullion

.

15,000,000

Notes issued by Bank of England

on security

15,000,000

English bank issues .

. 5 , 000,000


Specie to he subtracted

. 1 , 500,000

3,500,000

Scotch and Irish issues

. 10,000,000


Specie to be subtracted

. 4 , 500,000

5,500,000


Total . . . £134,000,000


It appears, then, that after all the interminable discussions
on the paper currency, and the vast power attributed to the
Bank of England in creating or preventing oscillations of
prices and credit, our currency is metallic to the extent of
£110,000,000, or four-fifths (80 per cent-.), and that only
£ 24 , 000 , 000 , or one-fifth part, can be considered to rest on
credit.

A later estimate of the gold circulation, partly based on the calculations
given above, will be found in Mr. R. H. iDglis Palgrave’s “Rotes on Banking
in the United Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark, and Hamburg j” “Statistical
Journal,” March, 1873, vol. xxxvi. p. 79. Reprint, p. ^9.

T


the gold coinage.


[IX.


m


III . — The Age of the Gold Circulation.

An examination of the comparative age of the sovereigns
current in diff erent parts of the country has revealed some
facts of interest. These will be detected in the following
table, which exhibits the average composition of the sovereign
currency in a number of towns and districts, the counties of
England being grouped as in the Reports of the Registrar-
General. A similar table is added, showing the comparative
age of the half-sovereigns in different districts ; but though
considerable variations are proved to exist, they do not seem
to admit of any simple explanation, and my remarks will be
chiefly confined to the more important case of the sovereign
circulation.


Name of Town or District.


London

„ further returns ..

Manchester

„ (Mr. Ross) . .

Birmingham

Swansea

Hull and Bridlington . . .
Ormskirk

Glasgow

Edinburgh

Eastern counties
South-Eastern counties .
South-Western „
South Midland „

West „ „

North „ „

Lancashire and Cheshire

Yorkshire

Northern counties . .

North Wales

South „

North Ireland

South „

Scotch Highlands
Scotch Lowlands, Bank
of Scotland ...

General average* ^


Propoition of Current Sovereigns coined m tlie Period.


817-19 :

L 820-29 !

1830 - 39 j 1840-49

1 S 50-59

1860-67

Australi;

•I

6’5

56

17*1

28*7

40*0

2-0

•I

6*2

6-4

16*9

28*3

40*1

2*0

*1

4*4

4*9

13*1

29*4

46 8

1*3

*2

4*3

46

ii*8

277

497

1*7

*2

6*9

6-4

I 7 *i

28*6

39 '6

1*2

’2

8-4

7*4

15*7

28*4

37-0

29

‘4

9*3

8*1

20*3

30-8

30*4

*7

•i

6-8

5*7

17*2

31*1

382

*9

*3

io*6

8*o

12*1

28-3

38*0

27

i*i

8*6

5*5

18*9

25 ‘8

39 *o

1*1

*2

io‘S

n*5

22*0

28-5

25 7

1*6

*2

7 *o

7-8

17-7

29*9

35*7

1*7

*4

7-8

8*2

17*2

32*1

32*9

1*4

'i

7*8

8*i

19*6

27*6

35 '6

12

’4

9*2

8*2

15*9

27*1

38-3

*9

'4

9*2

7*9

1 6*6

26*6

38 - 2

1*1

•2

7 *i

6*3

16*1

26*6

42 - 5

1*2

*3

7*3

6*9

14*9

27*0

42 ‘6

10

*2

6*4

6*6

x6*S

26*6

427

1*0

*2

8*5

7*5

17*4

27*5

38-1

*8

*3

7*7

9*5

18*9

26*9

35 - 6

1*1

*2

5*9

66

W*5

31-8

36-8

1*2

*2

9*3

7*3

19*9

29 - 8

32*2

1*3

*2

6*6

6*9

17*2

27 ‘5

40*7

*9

*1

7*3

6*2

14*8

287

40*6

2*3

*2

7*4

7*o

16*9

28*6

38-3

1*6


Calculated from the general aggregate, see table, p, 2 64


IX.]


AGE OF COINS .


27$


Name of Town or District.

Proportion of Current Half-Sovereigns coined in the Period

1817-19

1820-29 1830-39

L

1840-49

1850-59

1860-67

Australian

London

7

1*1

,0

I4’l

33*7

48 '4

10

Manchester

*5

17

ri

17*3

417

37‘ 2

•5

Birmingham

'5

i '5

i-4

21*7

39' 2

35 ‘4

•3

Swansea...

•6

i*9

1*9

17*8

40-5

36-4

•9

Hull and Bridlington . . .

*7

i*4

r 3

20*3

4i‘9

33*9

5

Glasgow

‘5

1*4

r8

13*1

3^7

47 7

18.

Edinburgh

6

1*1

*9

16*1

39*i

41 2

10

Eastern counties

*9

2*0

VI

18*9

387

37 *3

11

South-Eastern counties .

7

1*4

‘7

17-9

38*2

39*5

1*6

South-Western „

‘4

i*5

17

17*9

41*8

35*4

1*3

South Midland „

*4

2*2

2*8

21*2

36*6

36 5

*3

West „ „

'4

1*9

1*2

19*8

43-8

32*4

*5

North „ „

1-8

2*9

*8

18*4

44 - 3

31 0

*8

Laneashiro and Cheshire

’3

i*3

1*2

20*0

44’5

'32*3

*-

Yorkshire

*5

1*5

i*3

18 5

42-5

35 ’I

*6

N or them counties

•2


1*0

1 7*7

377

40*8

18

North Wales

ri

*5

i*8

20*0

47-2

28 7

•7

South „

*2

ri 1

1

r6

18*6

37 '0

41*0

•5

North Ireland

I *2


*9

20*7

44 '6

32*2

•4

South „


*8 !

1*4

21*1

47 ‘2

28*3

•5

Scotch Lowlands

•5

i*3

i*S

178

387

39*i

11

„ Highlands

•4

VI |

*8

13 5

43 'S

39*6

1*1

General average

*5

r 3 1

1 I#I

16*3

40*1

39-6

1*1


As a general result, it may be stated that the coin is
newer in the manufacturing and mining districts, and that
the proportion of old coin increases as we pass into purely
agricultural counties.* Thus, the greatest proportion of old
coin occurs in the eastern counties (Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex),

Note , — Eastern Counties : Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk.

South-Eastern: Surrey, Kent, Sussex, Hants, Berks.

South-Western : Wilts, Dorset, Devon, Cornwall, Somerset.

South Midland : Middlesex, Herts, Bucks, Oxford, Northampton,
Huntingdon, Bedford, Cambridge.

West Midland : Gloucester, Hereford, Salop, Stafford, Worcester,
Warwick.

North Midland ; Leicester, Rutland, Lincoln, Nottingham, Derby.

Northern : Durham, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmoreland.

North Ireland : Ulster, Connaught.

South „ Leinster, Munster.

* When the West of England Bank failed the whole of the gold coin
remaining in the bank coffers was removed to the Bank of England, with the
startling result that nearly 50 per cent, of the coin was found to be below the
least current weight. See The Times of 20fch December, 1879, p. 11, d.

t 2


276 THE GOLD COINAGE. [ix.

and in the south-eastern counties (Surrey* Kent* Sussex*
Hampshire* and Berkshire), although all these counties are
in the vicinity of the metropolis. Of all towns for which
I have sufficient data* Manchester seems to have the newest
currency ; this fact being confirmed by an excellent enumera-
tion of 3358 sovereigns, procured for rue by Mr. Ross* of
the Manchester and Liverpool District Banking Company.
It will be seen that nearly half the sovereigns current in
Manchester have been coined since the beginning of 1860.
Birmingham* Swansea* Hull, Ormsldrk* for which I have
also adequate information* do not show such extreme newness*
and the coinage in Hull is considerably older than the average*
although the town possesses a branch of the Bank of England.
London* it will be seen* approaches very closely to the
general average of the kingdom* except that there is an
unusual infusion of Australian coins. Nearly 3 per cent,
of the sovereigns current in Swansea and the neighbourhood
are from the Sydney Mint* and there is also a pei'centage of
2*3 per cent, in the Scotch Lowlands* as shown in the returns
of the Bank of Scotland. It is remarkable that the whole
of Scotland* as well as the northern counties of England*
stand high as regards the proportion 'of new coin ; but the
same peculiarity does not attach either to Wales or to
Ireland.

A little inquiry has enabled me* with the aid of the above
numbers* to detect the general course of circulation through
which the gold currency seems to pass. To a great extent*
indeed* the motion of the currency is altogether indiscriminate*
and coins may be conveyed by travellers, by railway remit-
tances, or in other ways, from any one place to any other.
Thus is produced the general similarity shown* with few
exceptions* in the returns from all places. But there will
yet be almost sure to arise prevailing currents of coin passing
in determinate directions* arising from the outward and
inward trade of a district being conducted in different modes.


IX.]


MOVEMENT OF COIN


277


Thus, a considerable quantity of gold must be carried by
tourists every summer into North Wales and Scotland. In
Wales it adds to the superfluity of gold, which is very
marked there; in Scotland it often furnishes the branch
banks with the only gold they possess, so general is the use
of notes in most parts of Scotland. But the chief movement
of gold coin seems to go on in the pockets of dealers in
cattle, horses, farm produce, etc., who avoid bank commission
by carrying actual cash, and a portion of it, at least, in gold.
It is certain that agricultural produce must move in general
from the purely agricultural counties towards the manu-
facturing districts and great towns. Coin will often be
carried back in payment for it, whereas the goods purchased
by the agricultural counties from the manufacturing towns
will usually be paid for in drafts and cheques.

In North Wales, as has been kindly explained to me by
Mr. Hugh Roberts, manager of the Holyhead branch of the
North and South Wales Bank, there is a constant plethora
of gold coin, partly brought by tourists and temporary
residents at watering-places, but mainly perhaps by farmers
and dealers, who sell their cattle, horses, sheep, wool, butter,
and other agricultural produce, and prefer payment in cash.
The greater exports of Wales, such as slates, paving-stones,
ores, etc., will always be paid for in paper remittances, but
then almost the whole of the imports of draperies, flour,
groceries, liquors, ironmongery, coals, etc. will be paid for
without the use of specie. Even commercial travellers, when
they receive cash payments from the smaller shopkeepers
and dealers, will often deposit the cash in a local bank and
make a remittance by draft.

It thus falls upon the local country banks to restore the
equilibrium of the currency by making frequent remittances of
specie to London, or to the head offices in a neighbouring
large town, in order to meet drafts. But in the manufacturing
towns and districts the current is in the*opposite direction, as


THE GOLD COINAGE.


[ix.


i 7 S

also in the seats of the Government dockyards : vast sums are
here drawn in actual coin for the payment of wages, most of
which, indeed, circulates in the neighbourhood, and sooner or
later returns to the local banks, but the remainder passes out
of the district. As the manufactured exports will almost
always bo paid for by bills, drafts, and cheques, there is no
compensating current of coin, and the town banks have to
draw coin either from their branches, from the nearer country
banks, or from the Bank of England and its branches. It is
through the bank that new coins are distributed to the public ;
for the branches never, in ordinary circumstances, send good
coin to Threadneedle Street,* whereas the bank, in addition to
what it pays out in London, remits £2,375,000 annually on the
average of the years 1855-64 to the branch banks, chiefly in
the dividend months.

I have entered into these particulars concerning the one-
sided movements of coin, because the effect upon the character
of the circulation is important. It is obvious that somebody
must return to the Bank of England, or must export a certain
quantity of coin annually, and it falls to the lot of the country
banks in certain districts, especially those banks which have
many country branches, to return this surplus coin to London.
These banks, then, would have to bear the whole loss on light
gold, did they not take the precaution of remitting only new
heavy Victorias. In the course of these inquiries I have
received overwhelming evidence that this picking and culling
of the coinage, as it used to be called, is practised as an
ordinary business transaction by all banks which need to make
remittances or to pay gold into the Bank of England. Thus a
gentleman in the eastern counties mutes to me ; “ It is custo-
mary for our branches to pick their surplus gold for re-
mittance to head office, which yields on an average about
twenty per cent, of bright or heavy gold ; otherwise there

* The aggregate amount thus remitted was only £298,751 in the course of
the ten years 1855-64, andthis arose, as I am told, from peculiar circumstances.


IX ] COURSE OF TUB CIRCULATION. 2?g

would be a charge made for short weighty arising from wear
and tear, when taken to the Bank of England.”*

It will thus be apparent that there exists a regular system,
whereby the older coins are continually returned into the hands
of the public, and the new heavy coins alone are remitted to
the Bank of England, and to those who would melt or export
them. The lightness of a coin is so far from being a reason
why it should be withdrawn from circulation, that it is the
very reason why it is retained in it.f The public in general
manage to avoid any loss from the wear of the currency, and
it is only particular banks and companies or ignorant in-
dividuals who incur unjust loss. Thus, I have heard of an
unfortunate person who received several hundred pounds —
probably his whole property — from a London bullion broker,
and, without apprehending the result, took them to the Bank
of -England, where the larger part were cut, as being light*
and a heavy commission charged.

* In Franco in former years the practice of “ culling ” out the weightiest
pieces and selling them at a premium was a capital offence. I am not aware
that the practice is illegal in England at present, except so far as it is against
the 7th section of “The Coinage Act” (33 Viet. c. 10), which directs that
“ where any gold coin of the realm is below the current weight as provided by
this Act, or where any coin is called in by any proclamation, every person
shall, by himself or others, cut, break, or deface any such coin tendered to him
in payment, and the person tendering the same shall bear the loss.” Ap-
parently it is a perfectly legal act to tender a light gold sovereign, but it
is illegal to accept it without defacing it; this misdemeanour having been
committed, it is legal to pay the coin away again.

f The following are questions, addressed by a “practical” Member of
Parliament to the Deputy Master of the Mint, with his answers : “With regard
to the melting up of sovereigns, is it not the fact that the lighter sovereigns are
melted up to a much greater extent than the heavier sovereigns ? ” — “Hoj the
heavier sovereigns are, for obvious reasons, those that are exported and used
for commerce, because light sovereigns would not be received.” “ So that, m
any case, the chances are that if sovereigns disappear absolutely, they are
more likely to be light sovereigns than heavy sovereigns ? ” — “ No ; they are
more likely to be heavy sovereigns than light sovereigns.” — “Report on London
City Lands Bill,” Questions 389 and 394.


2 So


THE GOLD COINAGE .


[IX.


IV. — Proportions of Coinage surviving.

Ifc is of some interest to examine closely the contents of
the table,, p. 264, showing the composition of the present gold
circulation, in order to detect the effects which have been
produced upon the coinage in the course of half a century by
expprbation, destruction, loss, or reimportation of coins.
What we want to learn is the degree in which the coinage of
earlier years has been withdrawn from use, compared with
that of later years, and this may be inferred from the fraction
which the coins actually enumerated for me under the date of
each year form of the total issue of coins in that year. This
comparison, however, cannot be made year by year, because,
until very lately, it was the occasional practice at the Mint to
use up the surplus stock of dated dies of one year in the
following year,* and it has even happened, during years of
small coinage, that the whole of the coins issued during the
year bore the date of the preceding year. These facts, for
which I am indebted to the Master of the Mint, take away all
accuracy from a comparison year by year ; but if we aggregate
several years together, taking care to commence and end with
years of small coinage, we shall avoid any appreciable error.
Since Mr. John Graham became Superintendent of the
Coining Department of the Mint, a better system has been
introduced, and a new series of dies with the proper date has
been brought into use at the beginning of each new year.
This practice began with the year 1864 ; thus it is possible that
some coins struck in 1863 bear the date of 1862 ; but it is not
possible that any coined in 1865 bear the date of 1864. The
only effect of these irregularities upon my estimate of the
circulation is to strengthen the probability of my assertion,
that the true amount of the gold currency lies under rather than
over eighty millions .

Aggregating the numbers of sovereigns and half-sovereigns
shown in the table, p, 264, in the most convenient groups of


17-3 1 1830—0 I 1830 9 I 1640 — 9 I 1850 -y 9 I860


IX.]


SURVIVAL OF COINS .


2S1

years, and calculating from the same table the proportions
which appear to have survived, on the assumption that the
present mixed circulation of sovereigns amounts to £64,500,000,
and of half-sovereigns to £12,000,000, we have the following
results :


Intervals of Tears.

Proportions of
Sovereigns
coined now m use.

1817-19

*02

’20-23

*06

’24-28

*17

’2931

‘2 6

’32-33

*29

’33-39

*20

-’40-45

‘36

’46-50

’33

’51-54

*34

’55-58

•36

’59-62

1 ’52

’63-64

I 77


Intervals of Tead?

Proportions o£
Half-Sovereigns
coined now in use.

1817-19

•04

’ 20-22 , , ,

*05

’23-29

*08

’30-39

*19

’401- 5

*41

’46-50

’45

’51-57

•65

’58-62

*95

’63-64

( 1 * 00) 4


It appears that of the sovereigns coined in 1817-19, not
more than one-fiftieth part remain in circulation, and the pro-
portion rises until between the years 1840 and 1858 it is about
one-third. When exhibited graphically the numbers produce
two curious curves, which are at once similar and different.
In both cases there is an elevation in the period (1840—45),
arising probably from the recoinage of the years 1841-43,
when 12,000,000 or 14,000,000 sterling of gold coins were
recoined and distributed again in an unusual manner, so that
more than a common proportion became fixed in the circu-
lation. The most important peculiarity of these numbers,
however, is the very small increase which takes place in the
proportion of sovereigns preserved between the years 1832
and 1854. This indicates that there is a residuum of coin
which is no longer subject to be exported or withdrawn like
the rest of the circulation. For if the coins exported were
taken indifferently from the mixed mass in circulation, we

Assumed.


THE GOLD COINAGE .


[!X.


can readily see that the curve would have the form arising
from a geometrical series, and would tend constantly upwards,
without any contrary flexures.* The curve of half-sovereigns,
were it not for the interruptions of 1840-45, would represent
pretty nearly this normal form, and the deviation of the
sovereign curve indicates the care with which exporters and
metbers of sovereigns have avoided taking any old or light
coins.f


V . — On the Deficiency of Weight of the Oolcl Coinage .

It appeared likely that the accurate information which
I had acquired concerning the age of the gold currency would
become more valuable if joined with a determination of the
average rate of wear of the coins. For there was reason to
suppose that the wear of a sovereign would be approximately
uniform and proportional to its age, so that the average age of
a number of coins would become a sure indication of their
amount of depreciation. Coins of different age, being in-
differently used in the ordinary course of circulation, would
suffer equal friction, so that any difference in the amount
rubbed away could only arise from the different character
of the metal or from the varying prominence of the impres-
sion. It might, perhaps, have been expected that sharp, new
coins would wear more rapidly than those old coins which
have already been rendered smooth by wear; but my own
weighings, as afterwards described, do not give much evidence
of this, and the elaborate experiments of Cavendish and
Hatchett seem to establish the contrary. It is true that
when Hatchett rubbed stamped and unstamped pieces of gold
against each other, with sand or other hard powder between


* Suppose a be the quantity of coin issued in any given year, and that
— thjparfc of the circulation be indifferently -withdrawn every year; then at the

end of n years, the quantity a will evidently be reduced to a. (l —
t See accompanying digram.


IX.]


WEIGHTS OF COINS.


283


them, the stamped pieces were much the more worn, but when
he caused a number of such pieces to be shaken against each
other in a revolving box, without any powder, during 71,720
revolutions, no essential difference was observed in the loss of
weight of smooth and stamped pieces.^ It is the latter
experiment which seems to me to represent most truly the
kind of friction to which coins are exposed^in the purse, «the
pocket, the till, or the bullion scales.

To determine the wear of the currency, I thought that
a very accurate weighing of a moderate number of coins of
different ages would be better than the ordinary rough
weighings of larger quantities of coin as conducted in bank
scales. I have, therefore, at several times during the present
year drawn gold from the ordinary circulation at Manchester,
amounting in all to 434 sovereigns and 178 half-sovereigns,
and after a careful cleansing have weighed them upon a
delicate chemical balance placed at my disposal for the pur-
pose by Dr. Roscoe in his laboratory at Owens College.
Ail the half-sovereigns and 280 of the sovereigns were
weighed individually.

The sovereigns of 1860-67 are, with a single exception, of
legal currency, but lie almost entirely between the standard
weight 123*274 grains (7*9879 grins.) and the lowest weight of
legal currency 122*5 grains (7 9379 grms,), the average being
123*04 grains (7*9728 grms.) ; of the sovereigns of 1850-59,
only one was up to the correct standard, and many were not
legal tender. Even the average weight of those coined in
1840-49 fell below the legal limit, and coins of greater age
descend, on the average, in proportion to age, but with greater
individual divergencies. Thus, while the sovereigns of 1817-29
are, on an average, more than one grain below the legal limit,
one of them descends as low as 119£ grains.

The following table shows the average rate of wear of
sovereigns of different ages in decennial groups. The de-
* “Philosophical Transactions (1803), fol. xciii. p, 172.


THE GOLD COINAGE.


:S4


[ix.


ficiency is calculated from the average weight of sovei’eigns
issued from the Mint, as determined Tby a weighing of 1000
new sovereigns executed at the Bank of England, in March,
1868, at the desire of the International Coinage Commission
(Report, p. 94). Thus, while the standard weight is 123*274
grains, the weight of those issued is slightly less, namely,
123*264 grains.


Years of Issue.

Number of
Sovereigns
weighed.

AverageWeight
of the
Sovereigns.

Deficiency

from

Mint Weight.

Average Date
of

Oomage.

Average
Annual Loss
of Weight.

1817-29 ...

31

Grains.

121*40

Grains.

I’86

1824 7
, 34 3

Grains.

*043

’30-39 ...

’40-49 ...

’50-59 ...

22

121 92

1*34

•040

44

122 16

I - 10

’45-8

•051

129

122-72

*54

’54 6

•042

’60-67 ...

208

123-04

•22

* 68*1

*050

Mint weight .

—

123-26

—

( ’67-5)

—


In order to ascertain the complete average rate of wear of
the whole, I have calculated the average weight of the sove-
reigns to be 7*9515 grms. (122*71 grains), and the average
date of issue to be 1854*6. The weight as issued from the
Mint being 7*9871 grms. (123*26 grains), we have a deficiency
of *0356 grm. (*55 grain), caused by 12*9 years* wear,, conn ting
up to the middle of the year 1867, and *0356 -f 12*9 = *00276
grm. (*043 grain), the required result.*

As the coins when issued weigh 7*9871 grms., and they

* In his elaborate report to the International Statistical Congress of 1869,
Dr. Farr said, p. SO : f< Professor Jevons makes the annual rate of waste only
*00035, by estimating it from tbe weight of circulating sovereigns; thus not
allowing for tbe waste in light sovereigns withdrawn by the Bank. By using
this factor he makes the mean time in which average sovereigns remain of
legal age 18 years = *00628 -*-*00035 — 18. They really wear below the legal
standard in *00628 *t-*C 0Q4 =*15*7 years, as Professor Jevons would have found
had, no light sovereigns been withdrawn. It is the only oversight I have dis-
covered. . . . The waste by his table is *0004 in the first four years.”

The error is an obvious one as* soon as it is pointed out. As a consequence
of this error some of the results of the inquiry are below the truth, instead of
abore the truth.


IX.]


LEGAL LIFE OF COINS , .


385


cease to be legal tender when they fall befow 7*9379 grms.
(122*5 grains), it is easily calculated that just about eighteen
years* wear will reduce a sovereign below its point of legal
currency. Of course it is nob meant that every sovereign will
be light after eighteen years* wear, for some are coined heavier
than others, or undergo less wear owing to accidental
circumstances ; but these will be balanced ^by others coined
lighter, or subject to more severe wear. But it would be
hard to name a subject in which reasoning by averages may
be more safely trusted than the present, because the coinage
consists of an immense number of pieces which are constantly
circulating through every part of the country and in every
kind of business. A little reflection will show, I think, that
though the age of any individual coin is but a poor criterion
of its weight, the age of 1,000,000, or 1000, or even 100
coins drawn from the ordinary mixture in circulation, must
be a very sure criterion, as it is in the highest degree unlikely
that even in 100 coins the accidental peculiarities of the
history of any of those coins should influence appreciably the
general average.

My results are strongly corroborated by experiments made
at the Mint in the year 1833, by weighing parcels of 300
sovereigns, coined in each of the years 1817, 1821, 1825, and
1829.* The average annual wear calculated from these data
is as follows :


Sovereigns of 1817 .


>)

33


’21 .
>25 .
’29 .


•034 grain per annum.

•047

•051

•054


The average of the whole is *047 grain per annum.


The specimen of sovereigns for 1817 was evidently not

* See G. R. Porter's “Tables of Revenue, etc. of the United Kingdom,
part iii. (1834), p. 16. Similar experiments made in 1826 gave a like resalt.
See “Jacob on the Precious Metals,” vol. ii. p. 380.#


2 86


THE GOLD COINAGE .


[IX.


properly chosen,, as the wear was actually less for sixteen
years than in the coins of 1821 for twelve years.

I may assume, therefore, with great confidence, that the
proportion of sovereigns in circulation of a greater age than
eighteen years is equivalent to the proportion of illegally
light sovereigns ; and as the coinages of the years 1848-50
wene not large, it would influence the result but little if we
took twenty years instead of eighteen. Assuming, then, that
sovereigns coined since the beginning of 1850 are of legal
weight and the others light, w r e readily determine, from the
table on p. 264, that 81*5 per cent, of the whole of the sovereigns
in the kingdom are no longer of legal currency .*

From the table on p. 274, we can also readily ascertain the
varying proportion of light sovereigns in different parts of


* la the report from the Select Committee on the London City Lands Bill
(June, 1881, No. 301), it is stated by Mr. Grenfell (Questions 1127 and 1131),
that the Bank of England, in 1868, weighed 1000 sovereigns obtained from
various railway companies, and found the average proportion of light sovereigns
to be 2S'8 per cent. Considering all circumstances, this result does not differ
very much from my average of 31 *5 per cent. The percentage of light
sovereigns paid into the Bank by the Post Office rose from 17*67 per cent, m
1876 to 30*04 in 1880, no less than 44*63 per cent, of the half-sovereigns being
light in the last year (Questions 1108-1133). Statements, sometimes obviously
erroneous, will be found in the answers to the following questions : 254^58, 373-
410, 547-51, 822-30, 903-4, 915, 918, 1045-48, 1147-77. In spite of its title this
Beport consists of an inquiry into the recent condition of the Eoyal Mint and
the state of currency. It resulted in the reconstruction of the present Mint
workshops, now nearly completed.

In The Times of March 8th, 1882, Mr. John B. Martin states that the
result of his census of the gold coinage just completed, comprising 105,364
sovereigns and 145,713 half-sovereigns, is as follows :


—

Full
Weight
per 1000.

Light
Weight
per 1000.

Standai d
Weight,

Average
Actual
Weight of
F.W. Com.

Average
Actual
Weight of

L. W. Coin.

Sovereigns

Half-sovereigns

495*6

412*5

504*4

587*5

Grains.

123-274

61-637

123*203

61*412

121-759

59 651


IXJ


PROPORTIONS OF LIGHT COINS .


287


the country, as in the following statement — arranged in order
of magnitude ;


Per cent.


Per cent.

Eastern counties .

44

North Scotland .

. 31

Hull ....

38

Birmingham

. 31

South Wales

36

Glasgow

. 31

,, Midland counties

36

I North Ireland

. 30

Edinburgh .

34

Lancashire and Cheshire 80

South-western counties

34

Ormskirk ,

. 30

North Wales

34

Northern counties

. 30

West Midland

34

London

. 29

North „

34

Yorkshire .

. 29

South-eastern counties

33

South Scotland .

. 28

Swansea . ...

32

Manchester.

. 22

General average

31-5

„ second enumeration 21


It would seem that the proportion o£ light gold is now
as great or greater than at previous times when a recoinage
was being contemplated or carried out. Thus in the years
1840 and 1841, when light gold was freely received by the
bank, for recoinage at the public expense, the proportion did
not rise above 25 or 28 per cent.* Of the old guineas current
in 1807, 31*4 per cent, were under the least current weight,
according to one experiment, and 46 per cent, according to
another hut the proportion of light half-guineas was greater,
namely, 77 per cent.

The preceding statements concerning the lightness of the
coin are of a somewhat startling character, and I might
hesitate to put them forward had I not strong collateral
evidence of their trustworthiness. One very convincing fact
consists in the extraordinary difference of age between the
sovereigns in the Bank of England and those outside it. Of

* Newmarcb, “Tooke’s History of Prices,” vol. vi. p. 701.
f “Jacob on the Precious Metals,” vol. ii. p. 382.


288


7 HE GOLD COINAGE.


[IX.


this I am enabled to judge by a return of 1000 sovereigns,
carefully prepared for me by Mr. Robinson, the Principal of
the Issue Department, at the desire of the Governor. The
composition of this return is shown below, the results of a
like return from the branches of the London and Westminster
Bank being given for the sake of comparison :


HP —

Bank of England.

London and
Westminster Bank.


Per cent.

Per cent.

Coined in 1817-19

0*0

*2

„ ’20-29

*4

6*9

’30-39

*2

77

„ ’40-49 ...

2*3

187

„ ’50-59

23*5

30’S

„ ’60-67

69*1

33‘6

„ Australia

4*5

2*6


100*0

IOO'O


The sovereigns enumerated for me at the Bank were
intentionally selected by Mr. Robinson as a fair specimen,
and were taken, as I presume, from coin paid in by the public
and purged of light coin by the weighing-machines. Only
2*9 per cent, of coins older than 1850 remain in such a sample,
this small proportion consisting, no doubt, of those coins which
were originally rather heavy, or have by some accident escaped
the usual wear. The fact that some of the older coins are
still of legal weight does not prevent the age from serving as
a criterion of average weight, because such old and heavy
coins are balanced by an equivalent of new coins which by
some accident are light. My own weighings show that 10 per
cent, of the sovereigns of 1850-67 are below the limit of
legal currency.

The return from the London and Westminster Bank shows
the result of an enumeration of 1600 sovereigns at all the
branches of that bank, which was kindly procured for me by


IXJ


AGE OF SOVEREIGNS,


289


the general manager. The reader cannot fail to notice the ex*
traordinary discrepancies existing between the gold currencies
of the two great banks in question.

I have calculated that the average age of the sovereigns in
the Bank of England (Threadneedle Street) is 7*14 years,
whereas the average age of the whole circulation of sovereigns
in the United Kingdom is 15*35 years, or more than twice, as
much.*

Almost as great a contrast exists between the coinage in
the branch Banks of England, so far as I can judge from
returns with which I have been favoured by the agents at
Newcastle and Plymouth.


Proportional Numbers of Goins per Gent, of different Pates.


Intel val of Years.

Plymouth Branch*

Bank of England

Average of
South-Western
Counties.

Newcastle Branch
of

Bank of England.

Average of
Northern
Counties.

1817-19 ...

00

‘4

0*0

*2

’20-29 ...

00

7'S

0*0

6-4

’30-39 ...

20

8*2

00

6*6

’40-49 ...

13 0

VJ'2

50

i6*s

’50-59 ...

35 0

32*1

38 5

26*6

’60-67 ...

49*0

32*9

55*5

427

Australian ...

1*0

i*4

10

1*0


100*0

100*0

100 0

100*0


I have additional confirmatory evidence concerning the
quantity of light coin in circulation, derived from notes
appended to the returns of sovereigns by the bankers or other
gentlemen sending them. The following is a brief tabular

* By an entirely different and independent method of inquiry, Dr. Farr
calculated the mean age of sovereigns in circulation to be 15*46 years. —
“ Report to the International Statistical Congress, held at the Hague in 1869,”
p, 31.

U


29°


THE GOLD COINAGE .


[ix.

statement of the percentage of light coin named as circulating
in the respective places :


—

Sovereigns.

Half-Sovereigns. .

^Ballyshanuon . .

Per cent.

25

Per cent.

50

Birkenhead

63

66

Buckingham

57

48

Dartford

65

48

Dublin

47

48

^Dundalk..*

25


j, ... ... ... ...

20


Farnham

56

74

; Halifax

25


Lampeter

15

87

Leominster

29

58

Liskeard

38

30

London ...

62

70

jj . . ... ...

66

88

Liverpool

50

5o

Nenagh ...

‘'Norwich

23

49

7o

70

'Ramsgate


66

Wells ...

75

94


In the cases marked with an asterisk only a rough estimate
has been given, but in all other cases the percentage of light
coin was determined by weighing with the usual bank scales.
These statements show a serious depreciation of the currency
in many places where old gold happens to have accumulated.
The average percentage of light coins would be, according to
the above, about 45 per cent, of sovereigns and 62 per cent,
of half-sovereigns ; but, though these statements seem to show
that my estimate is not overdrawn, they evidently cannot be
considered as furnishing a general average.

Strong remarks on the lightness of the coinage were added
by many gentlemen. Thus, the manager of a bank at Birken-
head says : ce I have taken the two hundred of each sort above
enumerated out of a considerable quantity which was paid in
by various customers, and think they will give a very fair
average of our coinage here. I subjoin the numbers of light
^^^^^^JS^espectively, hoping that something may be


ttxrtftvgfi m


IX.]


REMARKS ON THE COINAGE .


291


done to call attention and rectify the very unsatisfactory
nature of our circulating medium.” The result is stated in
the table above.

From Cambridge I have the remark that, “the half-
sovereign coinage is much worse than the sovereign ; two or
three years back it being found on trial that not more than
10 per cent, of this circulation was weight.”

Halifax. a Half-sovereigns are extremely light, and many
should be called in.”

Rochdale. “ The greater portion of the gold in circulation
here is light.”

Ramsgate. “Few sovereigns, after two or three years'
circulation, are now safe to send into the Bank of England
without careful weighing.”

Saint Helens. “ Gold generally light.”

It is right to add that, among a number of other remarks
too numerous to give at length, were five or six expressing more
or less satisfaction with the coinage.

The enumerations of coins which I have received from
Ireland present far wider differences than those from Great
Britain. This doubtless arises from the practice of weighing
and charging a commission on light gold being strictly
maintained in some Irish banks, although most of the banks
have abandoned this precaution. Two of my returns exhibit
the following extraordinary contrast :


—

Carlow,

Bandon.

Sovereigns of 1817-19


. .


99

’20-29


—

37

9)

99

’30-39


25

99

99

’40-49


14

10

99

99

’50-59


42

13

99

99

’ 60-67


44


99

Australian


—

—


ICO

100


292


THE GOLD COINAGE .


[ix.


The correspondent who kindly furnished me with, the second
return has not been able to give any decisive explanation of its
exceptional character, but suggests that it may arise from some
old deposits of gold coin in the banks having been brought
forth during the run on the banks in the neighbourhood of Cork,
occasioned by the Fenian alarm.

There will no difficulty now in calculating the actual
deficiency of weight and value of the currency. One mode is
to multiply 15*35 years, the average age of the sovereigns, by
*00276 grm. (*043 grain), the ascertained average annual wear.
The average deficiency of each sovereign therefore is *0424 grm.
(two-thirds of a grain, or *66 grain), amounting to *53 percent
or quite 10s. in £100. On the total assumed quantity of
64,500,000 sovereigns, this deficiency would be £340,000.
The whole of this, however, would be covered by the allowance
for wear of *63 per cent. (*050 grm. or *774 grain), if it were
spread evenly over the currency. To detect the illegal
deficiency, we must consider the old and new coins apart. In a
sum of 100,000 of the sovereigns as in ordinary circulation,
the deficiency will be as follows :


Years of Coinage.

Number
of Sovereigns in
100,000,

Average
Deficiency of
each Piece.

Value

of Deficiency m
£100,000.

1817-19

207

Grains.

) .c„

£

’20-29

7,402

I 1-874

Il6

’30-39

6,979

I *354

77

’40-49

16,935

*829

1 14

’50-59

28,612

*554

128

’60-67

38,246

*234 -

71

Australian...

1,619

•214

2


| 100,000

—

508


The whole of the deficiency upon sovereigns coined since
the beginning of 1850 may be considered as covered by the
allowance of *774 grain for wear; so that only the deficiency


IX.]


RATE OF WEAR OF COINS .


293


on earlier coins, amounting to £307 in £100,000, or nearly
one-third per cent., would require to be made good in a
recoinage. On a total quantity of 64,500,000 this deficiency
would be almost exactly £200,000.

The weighings of 178 half-sovereigns, drawn from the
ordinary circulation at Manchester, give the following average
wear:


Years of Issue.

Number of
Half-Sovereigns
weighed.

Average Weight
of

Half-Sovereigns.

Deficiency

of

Weight.

Average

Date

of Coinage.

Average
Annual Loss
of Weight

1817-49 ...

32

Grains.

60*199

Grams.

1*468

1844‘5

Grains.

'064

’50-59 ...

86

60-857

•780

} 55*7

■066

’60-67 ...

60

61 -298

‘339

’63*2

•079


The wear thus indicated is considerably greater than that
ascertained in the Mint experiments of 1833, which was as
follows :

Half-sovereigns of 1817 wear *032 grain per annum.

„ ’21 „ *036

„ ’25 „ -052

„ ’29 „ *048 „

I cannot account for the difference, unless it is owing to the
fact noticed by Jacob,* that the gold money was not properly
in circulation between 1817 and 1821. Not only does the worn
appearance of old half-sovereigns now in use lead us to suppose
that they have suffered much loss, but the fact that they offer
more than three-quarters of the surface of sovereigns, and are
much more actively used in circulation, would lead us to expect
rapid wear.

Taking the average annual wear of the half-sovereigns at
“ Precious Metals,” vol. ii. p. 172.


294 THE GOLD COINAGE. [ix.

*069 grain, we find the length, of time daring which it will
remain of legally current weight as follows :


1

Grams.

Giammes.

Standard weight of Half-sovereigns

61-637

3*9938

Lsasfc current ^ „ ,,

61*125

3 9609


*512

*0329

Eenoe ^i='

71 years.


As we cannot he sure that the half-sovereigns get into
circulation for the first year or two of their existence, it will
he well to take ten years so as to he on the safe side, and say
that the number of light half-sovereigns is represented hy the
number coined before 1858. Prom the table on p. 264 we then
learn that the proportion of light half-sovereigns is about 47 per
cent, on the average of the whole country. On a total quantity
of £12,000,000 of half-sovereigns, this will amount to just 5|
millions sterling, and the annual cost of the wear will he at
least £13,000, being about three times as great in proportion to
the value of the coin as in the case of sovereigns.

The aggregate deficiency of value of the half-sovereign
circulation may be calculated as follows :


Years of Issue.

dumber of
Half-Sovereigns in
100 , 000 .

Average
Deficiency of
each Piece.

Value

of Deficiency in
£ 100 , 000 .


Grains.

£

1817-49

19,270

1*468

458

’60-57

28,080

•780

356

’58-67

61,570

*339

284

Australian

1,080


100,000

—

1,098


Thus there is a deficiency in the half-sovereign circulation
of just 1*1 per cent, in value \ but as *83 per cent, is covered


XX.]


COST OF RECOINAGE.


-9S

by the allowance for wear, there remains an average illegal
deficiency of *27, or quite 5s. in £100. But if we pay regard
only to the coin which is no longer legally current, the
deficiency required to be made good in a recoinage amounts to
£814 for each £100,000 of the present half-sovereign circula-
tion, or in an assumed total quantity of £12,000,000, to about
£ 100 , 000 .

The deficiency of value of the whole of the light gold in
circulation at present may now be calculated as follows :


—

Value.

Number of Pieces.

Deficiency in Value.

Sovereigns

Half-sovereigns ...

£

20 , 300,000

5 , 700,000

20.300.000

11.400.000

£

200,000

100,000

26 , 000,000

31,700,000

300,000


The recoinage thus shown to be required is fully twice as
great as that carried out in 1841-43, when £12,000,000 of coin
were withdrawn at the cost of the State. The Mint authorities
estimate the cost of striking a large number of sovereigns at
about a third of a penny (*311 penny) each,* so that we can
calculate the complete cost of the recoinage now contemplated
as in the following statement :


Cost of Recoining 314 Millions of Gold Coins .

£


To make up deficiency of weight
„ „ fineness

Cost of coinage (Mint expenses)

Total cost .


. 300,000
7,000
. 41,000

. £348,000


The second item arises from the assaying of the gold
having been inaccurately performed previously to the year

« Report of the International Coinage Commission, 5 ’ p. 94.


296 THE GOLD COINAGE . [ix.


1850, so that the older coins are not reported as of standard
fineness.

The total cost to the nation of the metallic instrument of
circulation cau be estimated with sufficient accuracy as in the
following statement :

£

Annual wear of 64500,000 sovereigns ; . . 22,000

,, 24,000,000 half-sovereigns . . 13,000

Expenses of the Mint, including wear of silver coin 42,000

77,000

Interest on 95,000,000 of gold, silver, and copper 1 ~ oka aaa

coin at 3 per cent J J * u


£2,927,000


The only source of cost not included in this estimate arises
from the accidental loss of coins, the amount of which is quite
unknown. The cost of coining and replacing the currency is
seen to be quite inconsiderable, compared with the loss of
interest upon it.

Should a recoinage be carried out, it is much to be desired
that some improvement should be made in the design of the
sovereign. Although only two or three gold coins have been
recorded as undecipherable in date, I have myself found it to
be almost impossible to distinguish 3 from 5 and 0 from 6 upon
tnany sovereigns of no great age. It is to the mistaken reading
of numbers that I attribute the small number of coins enu-
merated in the table, p. 264, in years when no such coins were
issued from the Mint. These mistakes were quite insufficient
to affect the accuracy of my inferences, but they could hardly
have happened had the gold coins borne old-faced figures
somewhat similar to those upon the new bronze coins.


X.]


A PERFECT MONETARY SYSTEM.


2 97


X.

AN IDEALLY PEEFECT SYSTEM OF CUEEENCY *

I propose to conclude this brief treatise by sketching out a
scheme for an ideally perfect monetary system, to which the
investigations and discussions contained in the preceding pages
lead me. I do not for a moment suppose that such a scheme
is ever likely to be realised as a whole. It is only a convenient
mode of summing up conclusions, and selecting from the
principal existing monetary systems those features which
a PP ear be the best in each.

The separation of the functions of money is indispensable.
Grold must be employed as the common denominator and
temporary standard of value, in terms of which all prices will
be expressed. It should cease to be the permanent standard
of value, because, as I have explained in Chapter XXV., long-
enduring debts and transactions will be regulated by the
Tabular Standard of Value, the amounts of debts, although
expressed in gold, being varied inversely, as gold varies in
terms of other commodities.'!' To a great extent, moreover,
gold will cease to be the medium of exchange. A portion of
the currency may consist of ten and twenty franc, or two and
five dollar pieces in gold ; but the main body of the currency

* A fragment written to form tlie conclusion of the book on (C Money, etc.”
(published in the International Scientific Series), but omitted therefrom.

t See above, p. 122. I find, however, that David Eicardo, in his pamphlet,

“ Proposals for an Economical and Secure Currency, 1816,” pp. 14, 15, makes
some allusions to a proposal for judging of the value of currency by reference
to a mass of commodities. Owing to the absence of any precise references,
it is impossible to ascertain exactly what he is discussing.


2 9 S AN IDEALLY PERFECT SYSTEM OF CURRENCY, [x.


will consist, as in Scotland, of representative notes of various
denominations, from sums of ten, twenty, or twenty-five francs
upwards. Even representative money will be employed in a
comparatively small part of the aggregate transactions of the
country, since the Cheque and Clearing System must gradually
extend and perfect itself, by the increased adoption on the part
of all classes of th<* facilities of a hanking account. The Cheque
Bank, or institution of a somewhat similar class, will extend
the use of cheques to the poorer classes; and it is not beyond
hope that private enterprise might so improve and simplify the
methods of Banking as ultimately to enable all thrifty men and
women to have their banking accounts and their cheque-books.

Thex-e must, howevei*, be some material basis for so
widespread a system of papei-, and this basis must be gold,
which will long continue to be the true international cuiTency,
by which the indebtedness of nations can be discharged.
Though paper documents will in highly-civilised countries
perform the mechanism of exchange, coin will long circulate
in Eastern and other less advanced communities. Regarding
an international currency as a perfectly feasible scheme, at
which we are bound in the interests of civilisation to aim, we
must select the unit of account. In an abstract point of
view, as I have explained,* the exact amount of this unit
seems to be a matter of indifference, except as regards the
smallest subdivisions. The choice evidently lies between the
pound, dollar, fi-anc, and ten-franc piece. The franc is much
too small, giving a needlessly minute centime. The pound is
convenient as being the largest unit ; but its hundredth part is
too large, and its thousandth part is too small to make the
lowest submultiple. The dollar is unexceptionable in this
respect, and having regard to its wide adoption in extra-
European countries, might be very properly accepted as the
ultimate unit, provided that it he made exactly equivalent to
the five-franc piece in gold. But the ten-franc piece, or double


* “.Money, etc.” chap. viii. p. 68.


X.]


METALLIC CURRENCY.


299


dollar, is equally good in most respects, and superior in some.
All that can be said is that either the five or the ten franc piece
ought to be selected as the world's unit of account.

In any case, the gold coins to be issued should be equivalent
in size to ten and twenty-five francs — that is, two and five
dollars, weighing *82258 grm. for each franc, the alloy con-
taining nine parts of fine gold and one part of copper. ’ All
mints issuing such coin should make a uniform charge of
(say) 1 per cent., and, in consideration of such charge, should
covenant to receive back the coin, when worn by legitimate
usage, at the nominal value, delivering back the exact quantity
of fine gold which was given for the coin when first issued.
To the extent of 1 per cent., then, the gold coinage would be
a token coinage, convertible into bullion, and the charge made
would cover the cost of coinage and produce a fund which,
multiplying at compound interest, would indemnify the State
for the liability of withdrawing and recoining the worn coin
after twenty years or more of use, as shown by Colonel J. T.
Smith and the late Professor Graham *

The subdivision of the unit, whether dollar or ten-franc
piece, should of course be decimal, and a seignorage of 10 or 12
per cent, ought to be levied upon all silver coins which should
be legal tender to the amount of only five dollars or twenty-
five francs. It is a point of minor importance whether such
silver coin should have international currency ; but, in any case,
the mint issuing the coin should be bound to take it back at
the nominal value when worn. In choosing the series of
multiples, the French system should be preferred, so that the
minor coins would be one, two, five, ten, twenty, fifty cent
pieces; but if the principal unit should be the ten-franc piece,
a half-cent piece, equal to a halfpenny, would have to be coined.
The smaller coins should be made of nickel-silver, nickel-steel,
or some alloy, perhaps to be yet invented, which would be

* See “ Report from the Royal Commission on International Coinage, 1868. ,>
Memorandum by Col. Smith, pp. 148-53.


3oo AN IDEALLY PERFECT SYSTEM OF CURRENCY, [x.

superior to the present bronze, and in size they should resemble
the new ten and five pfennig pieces of the German Empire.

Such being the constitution of the metallic money to be em-
ployed in the smallest retail transactions, the main body of the
currency will consist, as already stated, of paper representative
notes, the smallest note representing twenty francs (or perhaps
evemten francs). All the notes should be issued on the system
of the present Issue Department of the Bank of England,
which I have called the Partial Deposit System. The amount
to be issued on securities instead of coin or bullion would be
greater or less according to the whole amount of the issue, and
the profit would of course be secured for the public revenue,
after payment of the costs of issue.

In mechanical execution these notes should resemble the
American issues more nearly than those of the Bank of England.
By combining the water-marked paper with the mechanically-
engraved designs of the American notes, it might be possible
to render counterfeiting hopeless .* In an artistic point of
view, the notes of the Bank of Prance are the best yet issued,
but it ought not to be difficult, in a time of improving taste, to
obtain far better designs. The notes should be re-issued until
they are too much worn.

I have adopted the opinion that one-pound notes might be
used with great advantage in England, as they are in Scotland,
Ireland, and some of the colonies, if only they be issued on the
firm basis of the Bank Charter Act and the Deposit System.
But the question arises, at what point shall we stop ? If one-
pound notes, why not ten-shilling or even five-shilling notes ?
I do not share the prejudice which commonly exists against
small paper-money, and regard the question as one to be
decided only on the ground of experience. We must have
regard to the relative cost and convenience of notes of each

* Mr. Fowler lias lately proved, by statistics of the counterfeit notes in the
United States, that it is notes of large value which are there counterfeited for
the most part*


X.]


PAPER CURRENCY.


301


denomination, and stop at that point where economy or con-
venience is overbalanced by more important considerations.

The French, during the Great Revolution, set the example
of issuing very small notes, as low as ten sous. Such was
the depreciation ultimately reached that the value of some of
the smaller notes could hardly have exceeded that of the paper
011 which they were printed. The United States, in the early
periods of the Great War, went almost as far, printing fractional
currency of ten, five, or even three cents. Italy at the present
time* is inundated with small notes, the one lira notes, value
about eight pence, being very abundant, and local notes of
fifty or even twenty-five centesimi serving as smaller change.

There is little to be said in favour of such very small
fractional issues except that they are light to carry. Such
small notes can hardly be economical, as they must be fre-
quently renewed, whereas well-coined pence need not cost one
quarter of their nominal value, and will circulate for thirty or
forty years. Small paper money, too, is far more difficult
to count than coins, care being requisite to separate the bits
of paper; This is not a matter of importance in large notes
which may represent ten, or twenty, or one hundred coins,
but is a serious objection to small notes. These bits of paper,
too, soon become torn, .dirty, and obliterated. Disputes arise
as to their genuineness or validity, and time is lost in
exchanging them. Small notes, too, circulate so freely among
the poorer classes that they may become the means of
propagating infectious diseases.

The lowest limit of a paper currency should in any case
be five francs, which is the lowest point to which the French
recently descended.f But I am unable to see any very

* That is, in 1875.

f This is true, I believe, as regards the Bank of France j but in November,
1871, <c Bons de Monnaie,” or small notes of the value of one franc, were
issued by the Sociefce Generate. They were payable in notes of the Bank of
Franco.


302 AN 'IDEALLY PERFECT SYSTEM OF CURRENCY, [x.

serious objections to the pretty five-franc notes of the Bank
of France, now being withdrawn. The main part of the
currency of Norway consists of one speciedaler notes, in
value about 4 s. 5 d. each.* The Government are desirous
of replacing them by gold coin, apparently inferring that
because richer countries have gold currencies, therefore,
Norway will become more rich by possessing a similar money.
Provided, however, that such notes are rendered strictly
convertible and supported by an adequate deposit of specie,
I see little or no use in a country of limited capital like
Norway sinking a large sum in a gold currency.


Owing to the reform of the currency in the Scandinavian kingdoms these
notes have been replaced by a very similar currency of five and ten kroner
notes, together with notes of larger value, excellently engraved in the American
manner, and in all respects convenient. Each note is about 5 inches lon<- bv 8
broad and weighs about 0*76 grm. or 11-7 grains. In regard to weight
therefore, this currency is about 3-42 times as convenient as our gold coinage’
The five-kroner note is worth about 5s. 6id. The attempt to introduce a eold
currency into Norway has proved a failure, the notes being generally preferred


XI.]


THE STANDARDS OF VALUE .


303


XL


GOLD AND SILVER.;*


I am very far from being desirous of taking any decided
position about tte double or single standard . It seems to me a
question of excessive difficulty, in which there are many facts
and quantities of unknown amount to be taken into account.
It is a question partly of theory, but partly also of practice.

As regards the theory, I feel strongly in what an admirable
manner you have set forth the principles of the so-called double
standard , and the danger we might run of a rise in the value
of gold were silver entirely demonetised.

It has been usual for economic writers on this side of the
Channel to assert that the joint system of gold and silver ex-
poses the country to the extreme fluctuations of both the metals.
[Thus, if gold falls in value, the standard falls with it; if silver
falls, then the standard again falls with it, always following
the metal which sinks below the legal ratio.] The compensatory
action of which you speak has been overlooked. The cele-
brated law of the year XI. renders gold and silver mutually
replaceable by each other at a fixed ratio, and, as I now see the
matter, I think this must have the effect of preventing extreme

* A letter addressed on 12th December, 1868, to the late M. Wolowski, in
answer to a request for an opinion upon the position of tho monetary question
as then set forth in Wolowski’s tract, tf L’Or et l 5 Argent : Question
Monetaire j” Paris, 1868, 8 vo, 32 pp. A part of the letter is translated
and published in Wolowski’s “L’Or et 1* Argent;” Paris, 1870, pp. 62-61*.
The author remarks of the letter: “Le doute methodique de M. Stanley
Jevons se trouve dej& partage par beaucoup d’autres professeurs d’economie
politique, qui, d’abord surpris de Pattaque dirigee contre oe qu’ils regardaienfc
comme un axiome passe en force de chose 3 ogee, etudient la question h
nouveau.’ *


3°4


GOLD AND SILVER.


[XI.


fluctuations in either metal. It is like opening a connecting
channel between two reservoirs, which now assist to keep each
other level at a medium point, instead of rising and falling
independently.* The Trench Currency law has thus no doubt
assisted to keep gold and silver at a nearly invariable price as
compared one with the other. Thus I find that the ounce of
English standard silver, which was worth 59c?. in London in
1845, did not, on r the average, rise higher than to 62c7. (1859)
after the gold discoveries, and it has since fallen again, being
in 1867, 60f<2. Although both gold and silver have, I believe,
suffered considerable depreciation, yet relatively they have not
varied more than 5 per cent. Some persons anticipated that
the fall in the value of gold would be indicated by a rise in the
price of silver ; but they overlooked the fact that gold would
spread itself into the channels previously occupied by silver.
Gold and silver thus influence each other's valuef [somewhat
as wheat, barley, and oats tend to rise or fall in price together,
because they are to some extent capable of mutual substitu-
tion. Mr. J. E. Oairnes is the first author from whom I got
any clear idea on this subject. He could hardly resist the
argument that the double standard acts somewhat like a com-
pensating pendulum by compensating the variations of one
metal by those of the other.

But it is another matter when we come to look at the
subject in a particular point of view. Is there any means of
showing that gold would rise in value 25 per cent, in conse-
quence of the demonetisation of silver ? Might not the
currencies of the world still absorb a large quantity of silver
so as nearly to produce the same equability of value as is
artificially produced by the law of the year XL? Would not

* Wolowski adds the following footnote: <£ M. le doctenr Wolfgang Iras
s’itait servi d’une image analogue an Handelstag de Berlin.” I had, however,
introduced the simile of a reservoir in a somewhat different way in 1863. See
above, pp. 61, 62.

t The portion of the letter from this bracket to that on p. 306 is not
published in Wolowski’s work.


xi.] REASONS FOR PREFERRING GOLD . 305

the Eastern nations continue to act for a very long time, as
they have already acted for many centuries, as a great reservoir
of the precious metals, tending to prevent and to compensate
extreme variations ?

Again, is not gold becoming, by the progress of industry,
the most suitable medium of exchange ? Could we in this
country ever replace our gold currency by a silver currency
fifteen times as heavy ? Yet it is only by a more or less complete
replacement of this kind that a rise in the value of gold would
be prevented. It seems to me that as 'nations become more
and more wealthy, they naturally pass from a silver to a gold
currency. Such is now the progress of wealth in many parts
of the world that this change is becoming natural and
inevitable to them. Bather than use silver coins to any large
extent, I feel sure that we should prefer a currency of small
notes, like the Scotch or Irish one-pound notes, and the ex-
clusive use of a paper currency opens the way to evils exceed-
ing any which are to be anticipated from the demonetisation of
silver.

Then again, I cannot see any prospect of a serious rise in
the value of the precious metals. Australia, California, New
Zealand, and other countries will continue for a long time to
send considerable supplies from the quartz veins. Prom
British Columbia we may expect increased supplies. In South
Africa there are prospects of a great gold-field, and should the
United States or other nation succeed in restoring good govern-
ment to Mexico or to some of the South American republics, we
might expect extraordinary supplies, both of gold and silver.
The danger, therefore, that the value of gold would rise, and
the burdens of nations become increased, is of an uncertain
nature, depending upon many events, the probability of which
we cannot estimate.

On the other hand, the conveniences of a single gold
standard are of a tangible and certain nature. The weight of
the money is decreased to the least possible amount, without

x


3 o 6 GOLD AND SILVER . [xi.

the use of paper representative money. There is a simplicity
and convenience about the system which has recommended it
to the English during the half century which has passed since
our new sovereigns were issued. The operation of our law of
1816 has, in fact, been so successful in most respects that I
should despair altogether of the English people or Government
ever being brought to adopt the double standard in place of it.
I was glad, therefore, to see that the monetary convention had
decided in favour of a single gold standard. This decision
seemed to render possible our entry into the continental
monetary scheme. Even the 2 d. by which our pound exceeds
the 25 francs is at present an obstacle in the way of inter-
national money. You may easily judge how far the somewhat
theoretical advantages of the double standard would be duly
estimated on this side of the Channel.]*

Though far from feeling confident in anything which I say
on this subject, I must acknowledge that in theory you and the
other defenders of what may be called the alternative standard
are right. But in the practical aspect the subject looks very
different, and I am inclined to hope for the extension of the
single gold standard .

* Not published in Wolowski’s work. The author, however, thus alludes to
the imprinted paragraphs: “ M. W. Stanley Jevons croit a une augmentation
rapide des approyisionnements d’or 5 cette pensee domine la solution pratique
cju’il entrevoit.”


XII.]


CONCLUSIONS.


307


XII.

THE SILVER QUESTION.*

It is evidently impossible to discuss the innumerable facts of
the silver question in a brief paper like the present. My
purpose must be restricted to expressing the conclusions
which force themselves upon an English reader of the recent
controversies.

In several official publications — in the excellent minority
report of Professor Bowen, or the works of Mr. Blakef,
M. Cernuschi, Mr. S. Dana Horton, in Mr.W. L. FawcetPs useful
“American Handbook of Finance,” and in numerous minor
books or articles — we have abundance of facts. We are not
likely at present to get more information of importance, and
our task, therefore, is to digest what we have and to interpret
its outcome wisely.

The general result, as it appears to an Englishman, is, that
the United States should not, or rather cannot, adopt the
double standard. If the attempt be made, it must be made
either with or without the similar action of other nations. But
the first supposition is easily disposed of. The notion of
M. Cernuschi, that there might be a congress of nations, and
that the leading commercial States might be induced to unite

* This paper was read at the meeting of the American Social Science
Association at Saratoga, 5th September, 1877, by Mr. Hamilton A. Hill of
Boston. It was published for the Association in conjunction with a paper on
the same subject by Mr. B. F. Uourse of Boston, by Messrs. A. Williams & Co.,
Boston, 1877. It was reprinted in the (London) “ Bankers’ Magazine ” for
December, 1877, vol. xxxvii. pp. 989-96.

+ tc Report upon the Precious Metals : Paris Universal Exposition, 1867”
“ Keports of the United States Commissioners. Washington, 1869.”


300


THE SILVER QUESTION.


[xn.


in adopting bi-metallic money, is chimerical. Several of the
more important European nations have for the present no hope
of using coin, whether gold or silver. Germany is only now
establishing an excellent currency on a gold basis, and is most
unlikely to abandon it without further trial. The Scandinavian
kingdoms have no reason for retracting their late adoption of
gold, which has <Jone no harm. Even France, which has still
the law of the double standard in nominal existence, shows no
desire to put it into operation again, having experienced the
trouble of an alternating standard and a heavy silver currency.

As to England, there is not the most remote chance that
the proposal would be accepted or even entertained here. The
present English system of metallic money has now existed
almost unchanged since 1816 , and it has worked so satisfactorily
in most respects that it would require very strong reasons for
making a fundamental change. Even were there a considerable
weight of evidence in favour of the double standard, it would
probably be found impossible to persuade the House of
Commons to accept it. In nothing is the English nation so
conservative as in matters of currency.

To prove this statement by some instances, I may
mention, firstly, the question of decimal money. Nothing
is more apparent than the superiority of a decimal system,
like that of the United States, or that of France, over our
£ $. d. The subject has been discussed ad nauseam for
forty or fifty years, and some of the ablest men, such as the
late Professor De Morgan, wasted great labour in advocating
the obvious reform ; but nothing has been done, and we are,
perhaps, farther from success than ever. Again, there is
absolutely no sensible reason against the use of one-pound
notes, which have been in constant circulation in Scotland from
the origin of the Scotch banks. But an English Chancellor
of the Exchequer would not venture to propose their use in
England. When it was shown, a few years ago, that the
alteration of the pound sterling to the extent of twopence


XII.] ENGLISH MONETARY CONSERVATISM ;


309


would probably lead to tbe establishment o£ international
money, our financial wiseacres decided that it could not be
done. What, then, would be the reception in England o£ a
proposal to subvert our standard altogether ? So long, too, as
the mother-country retains the gold standard, there would be
no chance of the Australian and South African colonies
abandoning it. Consequently, if the United States were* to
adopt the double standard, they would throw into confusion
the monetary relations of the foremost commercial nations,
while the universal bimetallism essential to the success of
M. Cernuschi’s schemes would be as far distant as ever*

If, indeed, the adopted legal ratio of gold and silver, were
such as to enable gold to circulate in the United States, then
no effect on the value of silver would be produced, and all
discussions would end in nothing. If the legal ratio were
15 \ to 1, as proposed, then full- weight gold coins could
not circulate, and the currency and the standard of value
would consist of silver only. American trade would be
hampered by a money fifteen and a-half times as heavy as it
need be. Americans would be loading themselves with silver
fetters, and for what purpose ? In order that the rest of the
world might enjoy the superior convenience of gold money.
While other advanced nations are passing, one after another,
from the silver age of currency to the golden age, America,
and probably America alone, would be stepping back from the
gold age into the silver age. This seems to me about as wise
as if the men of the bronze age had solemnly decided to reject
bronze, and to go back into the stone age. In a matter of
this sort, we must take account of general and long-continued
tendencies, and the tendency now appears to be inevitably
toward the general adoption of gold as the standard money.*
During the last six centuries the precious metals, gold and
silver, have both become greatly depreciated. An agricultural
labourer can now earn in England by a day’s labour about ten
* See above, pp. 70-76, 101-3, 114-18.


3io


THE SILVER QUESTION .


[XII.


times as much silver as lie could six centuries ago (about three
hundred and fifty grains of standard silver as compared with
thirty-four grains). Silver, too, is depreciated more than gold ;
in. the middle ages the ratio was 10 or 12 to 1 ; now it is 16,
or even 20 to 1.

To attempt to arrest progressive changes of this kind is
blihd and vain striving against Providence. Why should we
try to keep silver dear ? If the mines of America yield so
beautiful a metal in sufficient abundance, why should we not
enjoy the use of it for ornamental and useful purposes, for
which it is at present too expensive ? Why should we wilfully
employ it in the very way in which it is not useful, but simply
inconvenient ? When we see pictures of Indian women loaded
with silver bangles and anklets, it is difficult to help wondering
how such a weight of ornaments can add to the enjoyment of
life, Vanity can explain a good deal ; but what can explain
the wish of the Americans to load themselves with silver coins,
from which they will derive no gratification whatever ? The
benefit, if any, will fall to other nations, which can use gold in
greater abundance, and no Americans will be better off, unless,
indeed, it be the few proprietors of silver mines, who, being
rich already, will become richer still.

I might go on to show that, even if America could establish
the double standard, and succeed in inducing other nations to
do so likewise, the advantages of so great and so difficult a
measure are of a very speculative and doubtful kind. I quite
concede to MM. Wolowski and Oernuschi that the bimetallic
system does spread fluctuations of supply and demand over a
wider area. I have tried to explain in my book on ce Money
and the Mechanism of Exchange,”* that gold and silver, free
from the action of a legal ratio, are like two unconnected

* Chapter xii. on " The Battle of the Standards,” International Scientific
Series. This chapter, extracted from the French edition, is reprinted as an
appendix to M* H. Gravez* French version of the " Primer of Political
SSonomy” — “ I/fSconomie Politique.” Biblioth&que Utile, tome xliv. Germer
fiailifere, Paris.


XII.]


THE TWO RESERVOIRS.


3i 1

reservoirs of water, each liable to be raised and lowered in
level by various accidents. Establish a communication between
these reservoirs, and then each new supply spreads itself over
a double area, and each new demand is supplied with less effect
upon the general level. The legal currency ratio of 15 \ to 1
actually does establish a communication of this sort between
the reservoirs of gold and silver in the world; but it does
not, therefore, follow that it is desirable to establish the
communication.

To say the least, it is quite open to argument that silver is
now a metal less steady in value than gold. If one mine like
the Comstock lode produces so serious an alteration in the
supply, what may we not apprehend when the mineral treasures
of Peru and Mexico are opened up by Anglo-Saxon miners ?
Both Humboldt and Murchison were of opinion that enormous
supplies of silver would some day be obtained from South
America, and what has occurred in Nevada lends probability
to their predictions. Moreover, silver is drawn almost
exclusively from regular mines, and it is extracted from ores,
so that the advance of mechanical and metallurgical science
tends to cheapen it in the same way (though not in so great a
degree) as it has cheapened iron and steel. This is much less
true of gold, which is found to a considerable extent in the
native state in surface deposits. Gold is a widely diffused metal,
and there are large tracts of auriferous deposits which might be
worked if an increased demand for gold should make it
profitable to do so.

Under these circumstances, it is probable that the double
standard, or, as it ought to be called, the alternative standard ,
will be really less steady in value than the gold standard alone.
Indeed, it is difficult to help looking upon the adoption of a
silver standard now (and the double standard would not differ
much in practice from a single silver standard) as approxi-
mating indirectly to an act of partial repudiation. I take it
for granted that, if the United States were to adopt silver


3 13 THE SILVER QUESTION [xir.

money, the Federal and State governments would make pro-
vision for the payment of past obligations, including the
whole national debt, State and city debts, railway bonds, etc*,
in the gold money in terms of which they were contracted.
I am sorry to see, indeed, that M. Oernuschi, if I read him
rightly, proposes that “ all existing debts, stipulated in dollars
of whatever denomination, shall, without exception, be payable
in the new bimetallic currency ” Such a measure would
verge closely upon a breach of faith, for the change would be
made on the ground that silver is depreciated. And if, as is
probable, the bimetallic system would not restore silver to
its original value, then creditors would plainly lose, to the
advantage of debtors.

One of the most powerful arguments in favour of the double
standard is founded on the idea that there will not be gold
enough to meet alone the advancing needs of commerce.
Prices, it is said, will fall, and the burden of debts will thus be
increased by the demonetisation of silver. But there is no
proof, nor even probability, that such results will follow. In
the past thirty years the supply of gold has certainly been
excessive, as shown by the progressive rise in the cost of living
in almost all parts of the world. The same tendency, the pro-
gressive depreciation of the precious metals, has been going
on, as I have already remarked, for centuries. Should the
adoption of a gold metallic currency in America and elsewhere
tend to slacken this continual fall of value for a time, there
would be nothing to regret in the result ; but I doubt if it
would even do this.

On the one hand, there is no good evidence of any con-
siderable falling off in the excessive supplies of gold yielded
by California and Australia. Elaborate calculations have been
made to show the inadequacy of the gold supply. I am much
inclined to agree with the late Walter Bagehot, who, in the
course of his excellent evidence concerning the depreciation of
silver, said that the estimates of the stock of gold and silver


xri,] SUPPLY OF THE PRECIOUS METALS . 3* * * § 3

were not worth the paper they were written on.* Even the
apparently precise returns of produce and amounts trans-
mitted are probably most inaccurate. But, even taking these
returns, Mr. S. Dana Horton, in his ingenious work on Silver
and Gold,f comes to the conclusion that the net annual supply
of gold for the use of money is twice that of silver ; namely,
sixty millions of dollars, as compared witji thirty millions.
Now, if we remember that of the whole population of the world
probably two-thirds use silver coin exclusively, and are in the
habit of melting it up and burying it in the earth, whereas those
who use gold use silver also for subsidiary currency, I cannot
see that there is any evidence of gold becoming comparatively
deficient. Mr. Horton concludes, too, that the present annual
addition of new gold i3 If per cent, of the total stock of gold
money, while that of new silver is only about 1 per cent, of
the silver money. So far as such calculations have any weight,
they are strongly in favour of a gold standard. I may add
that Mr. Hollingberry, after an elaborate inquiry canned out
for the information of the Indian Government, J comes to the
conclusion that the production of gold is much underestimated ;
that there has been little falling off in the aggregate yield, and
that there is little prospect of any further falling off. U
should be remembered, too, that the product of the Comstock
lode consists of gold to the extent of 45 per cent, in value.

On the other hand, I see no probability that any great
nation except the United States will soon want a considerable
supply of gold. Russia, Italy, § Austria, Turkey, and other

* “ Report from the Select Committee on the Depreciation of Silver, 1876,”
Question 1391 3 “ Some Articles on the Depreciation of Silver,” p. 126. By the
late Walter Bagehot.

f “ Silver and Cold, and their relation to the Problem of Resumption,”
p, 28. New Edition. 1877.

$ “ The Production of Cold and Silver,” etc. Selections from the Records
of the Government of India. Calcutta, 1876, passim.

§ As regards Italy, this has turned out to be incorrect 3 Austria also has
accumulated a certain stock of gold. The Bank of France has had great
difficulty in preventing its gold reserve from running low.


314


THE SILVER QUESTION.


[xir.


States with depreciated currencies, are not likely to coin much
gold at present. France already has the largest stock of gold
ever accumulated in one place, and can hardly want more.
The Scandinavian kingdoms have already exchanged their
small bank reserves of silver for gold, and their gold currency
makes no progress. England already has a currency mainly
composed of gold coins, and cannot want more than the usual
annual addition, which is probably not the half in reality of
what it seems to be by the statement of coinage at the -Mint.
Germany, no doubt, is still absorbing gold, but the quantity
retained is really much less than what is coined.* In looking
round in this way, it is difficult to see where any very great
demand is likely to arise simultaneously with the American
demand. No doubt, as I have said, the use of gold money will
gradually progress, but a costly change of this kind will take
decades or even centuries of years to carry into complete
effect*

Nor will the United States require any very great quantity
of gold when they resume specie payments upon a gold basis.
It is quite a mistake to suppose that, because a currency is
convertible into gold at will, it is therefore actually converted
into gold. In England we have a great quantity of gold
coin, because there is an absurd prejudice against the use of
one-pound notes, so that sovereigns must be used as change
for five-pound notes. In Scotland it is just the reverse, and
it is not an uncommon incident for a beautiful gold sovereign
to be actually refused, and a one-pound note demanded instead.
In Sweden and Norway there has long been in use a well-
regulated paper currency, and, so far as my own observation
goes, there is little prospect of the new gold coin beating out
the notes.

So, in the United States, the resumption of specie

* This is due to the large amounts of coin which are melted, carried abroad
by travellers, or exported without proper declaration at the custom-houses, so
that they are not entered in any returns.


XII.] RESUMPTION OF SPECIE PAYMENTS. 315

payments does not mean necessarily that all the notes shall
be replaced by gold coins. Gold is not really requisite except
for making international payments, and the stock kept need
not be very much larger than will meet any conceivable
demand for exportation. Provided that the amount of notes
afloat is made to rise or fall by the exact amount of gold
added to or drawn from tbe reserve, in the ipanner of the Issue
Department of the Bank of England, and the present German
Bank system, it is possible to have a currency conforming
exactly to the variations of a gold currency, and yet consisting
mainly of paper.

The resumption of specie payments seems to me to need
no heroic measure whatever. Already the premium on gold
is so low that, if the dollar were made coincident with the
five-franc piece, the paper dollar would be almost at par.
The difference of about 2 per cent, would disappear of its
own accord as trade became brisk again. The par having
been once established, it would be possible to begin making
specie payments in gold in a partial manner, as is actually
done at present by the Bank of France. Payments might at
first be limited to small sums, or fenced round with such
conditions and precautions as would prevent any sudden run
for gold. After the novelty of specie payments was worn off,
these precautions might be gradually abandoned, and con-
vertibility would be achieved without any violent change
whatever. Nor does there seem to me to be any need to
make national bank notes convertible to any amount at the
bank issuing them. They might continue to be convertible
into Treasury legal-tender notes, which would become
convertible into gold at Washington or such other few spots
as might be selected for the deposit of the reserve. As gold
is only needed really for international transactions, the
reserve should be concentrated, and not dispersed over a
great many local and minor banks.

Finally, as regards the future American dollar, I agree


3 x 6


THE SILVER QUESTION.


[XII.


nearly but not entirely with. Professor Francis Bowen.*
Excepting in a few minor points, I believe his report to be
true and wise from beginning to end, and I trust that his
recommendations will for the most pai't be adopted. He
proposes that the dollar shall contain 22 '6 grains of gold,
so that the five-dollar piece may be the exact equivalent
of the pound stealing. The choice ought, doubtless, to He
between this and the 25-franc piece, and those who do not
yet quite despair of international cuiTency would prefer the
latter. In this case the dollar would contain 22*40 grains
of pure gold, and the American five-dollar piece, containing
about a grain less gold than the sovereign, would be preserved
in this way from being melted wherever it came into competi-
tion with the sovereign. It is a law of currency that the
lighter coin lives and the heavier one goes to the melting-pot.
In this way the American five-dollar piece would probably
become the predominant gold coin, until such times as the
English people would see the wisdom of reducing their
sovereign by twopence, and thus establishing a simple ratio
between the Latin, American, and English currencies,

But this is a matter only of detail. My principal purpose
is accomplished if I have adequately expressed the strength
of my conviction that, in trying to establish a bimetallic
money, the American nation would be setting themselves
against irresistible natural tendencies so as to ensure defeat.
For the sake of making those richer who are rich already,
they would be loading themselves with heavy metal, which,
if it is to be abundant, had better be left to other uses, or
to those Eastern nations who are too poor and ignorant to
employ gold. It is the general rule in commerce to take
care of number one,” but in the bimetallic scheme the
rule is reversed, and “ number one ” is asked to carry
silver coin in order to benefit “ number two” and “ number
three.”

* “Report of the Monetary Commission constituted in pursuance of Act
of Congress, August X4th, 1876.’*


XIII.]


THE QUESTION OF BIMETALLISM.


317


XIII.

BIMETALLISM.*

It may be safely said that the question of bimetallism
is one which, does not admit of any precise and simple answer.
It is essentially an indeterminate problem. It involves several
variable quantities and many constant quantities, the latter
being either inaccurately known or, in many cases, altogether
unknown. The present annual supplies of gold and silver are
ascertained with fair approach to certainty, but the future
supplies are matter of doubt. The demand for the metals
again involves wholly unknown quantities, depending partly
upon the course of trade, but partly also upon the action of
foreign peoples and governments, about which we 03m only
form surmises.

The question is much complicated, again, by presenting
a double problem — that regarding the next decade of years,
and that involving the more remote future. Possibly, a step
which might be convenient during the course of the next five,
ten, or fifteen years would prove subsequently to be the mere
postponement of a real and inevitable difficulty. When we
pursue an inquiry of this complex and indeterminate kind, it
resolves itself into endless hypotheses as to what will or will
not happen if something else happens or does not happen.
Nevertheless, it does not follow that, because statistical science
fails us, we can come to no practical conclusion ; on the con-
trary, from the very vagueness and uncertainty of the subject
may emerge a conviction that it is best to do nothing at all.
A party of travellers lost in a fog will probably indulge in a

* “ Contemporary Review,” May, 1881, vol, xxxix. pp. 750-57.


BIMETALLISM \


318


[xiiu


great many speculations and arguments as to the possible
paths and turnings they might take; but the wisest course
may, nevertheless, be to stay where they are until the air
becomes clear.

Looking at the question, in the first place, as a chronic
one, that is, as regarding the constitution o£ monetary systems
during centuries, it is indispensable to remember the faot, too
much overlooked £>y disputants, that the values of gold and
silver are ultimately governed, like those of all other com-
modities, by the cost of production. Unless clear reasons,
then, can be shown why silver should be more constant in its
circumstances of production than gold, there is no ground for
thinking that a bimetallic gold and silver money will afford a
more steady standard of value than gold alone. The common
argument that there will not be enough gold to carry on the
trade of the world with, does not stand a moment's examina-
tion in this aspect. In the first place, if the value of gold
rises, more gold will be produced, and the great number of
gold-mining enterprises now being put forth may have some
connection with this principle. In the second place, so long
as sudden changes of supply and demand can be avoided, it is
almost a matter of indifference, within certain limits, whether
there is mnch gold or little. Prices having once settled them-
selves, it is only a question of carrying a little more metal or
a little less in your pocket. As Cantillon,* and subsequently,
but independently, Hume,f remarked, if the money in the
world were suddenly doubled or halved trade would go on as


* <f Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en General.” Part. ii. pp. 235-39.
Cantillon’s remarks are, however, exceedingly cautious and profound. He
says : " Je conclus de tout cela que par ^introduction d*une double quantile
d^axgent dans un 6tat, on ne double pas tou jours les prix des denrdes et des
marchandises. TJne riviere qui coule et serpente dans son lit, ne ooulera pas
avec le double de rapidite, en doublant la quantity de ses eaux.”

f What Hume says, is: tc Suppose four-fifths of all the money in Britain
to be annihilated in one night. . . , Must not the price of all labour and
commodities sink in proportion, . . . ? ” — “Political Discourses V.) on the
Balance of Trade,” p, 82, Second Edit, 1752 ; u Essays,” 1777, vol. i, p, 329.


XIII.] THE CHRONIC QUESTION 31 9

before* all prices being approximately doubled or Halved. But,
of course, tHe interests of creditors and debtors would be
affected while the change was in progress.

Now, as regards the chronic question, it is probable, though
not certain, that the establishment of the bimetallic ratio of
15| to 1 would give a worse rather than a better standard of
value, because the momentary standard is always the over*
estimated metal. The double standard systefn gives an option
to the debtor, so that if either gold or silver were in future
years discovered in large quantities, the debtor would have
the benefit. In the monometallic system there is no option,
and all parties stake them interests on the single metal. To
these considerations must be added the historical fact that
silver has during the last thousand years fallen in value more
than gold. The ratio of values in the middle ages was about
10 to 1, fluctuating at times to 12 to 1. Later on silver became
comparatively cheaper, and in the latter part of the last century,
15|- to 1 correctly represented the natural ratio. For some fifty
years it was held pretty steadily at this point by the action of
the French Currency law. The unprecedented discoveries of
gold in California, Australia, New Zealand, and elsewhere
reversed the course of prices for a time, but more lately the
tendency to a preponderating fall of silver has reasserted itself.
No doubt the events here so briefly recapitulated admit of
endless discussion, and it would be impossible even to mention
the volumes which have been written since the time of Locke
upon the comparative steadiness of value of gold and silver.
There emerges a certain degree of probability that silver is
more subject to depreciation than gold, although both have, in
the course of a thousand years, been very greatly depre-
ciated in comparison with corn and the chief kinds of raw
materials.

If this may be assumed to be the case, it follows that an
attempt to re-establish the ratio I5| to 1 would tend to dis-
courage the production of the dearer metal, gold, and to


330


BIMETALLISM.


[XIII.

encourage the production of the more depreciated silver. We

should be filling our pockets and our strong boxes with a

metal 15| times as heavy and 28-J times as bulky as gold,

proportionally to value, in order to get a worse medium of

exchange, and a probably worse standard of value. Nor

should we be approximating towards a better state of things.

If gold is destined ultimately to be the general standard of

value of all civilised nations, we must let it take its own
*

natural value, and must allow the appreciation, if any, to tell
upon the profits of mining. But the arbitrary reduction in
the value of gold, involved in the present bimetallic project,
would tend constantly to replace gold by silver ; and unless it
were desired actually to take silver as the medium of exchange,
the last state of things would be worse than the first. % It thus
becomes plain that a bimetallic regime is not the means of
approximating to a gold regime . On the contrary, it must
either be a permanent regime , or it will, sooner or later, leave
us with a vast stock of silver, liable to sudden depreciation,
and a diminished stock of gold. In short, the project of
M. Cernuschi is not a real panacea for our present troubles ; it
is only a mode of postponement leading to eventual aggravation.

When we turn to the temporary view of the subject, by
which I mean the circumstances and interests of the next ten
or fifteen years, the difficulties increase, chiefly because the
data becomes wholly uncertain and contingent. The great
principle of the cost of production fails us, because in the case
of such durable commodities as gold and silver, the accumu-
lated stock in hand is immensely greater than the annual pro-
duction or consumption. It stands to reason, of course, that if
several great nations suddenly decide that they will at all cost
have gold currencies to be coined in the next few years, the
annual production cannot meet the demand, which must be
mainly supplied, if at all, out of stock. The result would,
doubtless, be a tendency to a fall of prices. M. de Lavelye, in
one of the able articles which he is contributing to the Inde-


CREDIT VARIATIONS.


XmJ

pendance Beige* as an advocate of Cernuschi-ism, points to a
fall of 30 per cent., which, he thinks has already been occa-
sioned by the demand for gold currency. He excites our
imagination as to what may be expected to happen should
Italy and other countries need gold for coining. But he omits
to observe that the fall of 30 per cent, is probably due for the
most part to the collapse of credit and speculation., a peripdic
event of which we have had many prior instances. The period
of 1833 to 1844 especially was one when no great wars and
monetary operations were in progress; it was a period of
active industrial and commercial progress. Yet the tables of
prices given by Tooke, in his “ History of Prices/' and reduced
in my paper on the Variation of Prices, f show that on the
average prices rose by 22J per cent, between 1833 and 1839,
and fell 25 per cent, between this last year and 1844. So far
as I have been able to discover, this great oscillation was
entirely due to the general expansion of trade and credit, and
to its subsequent collapse. Like causes have certainly been in
operation in the last ten or twelve years ; and if, as seems
probable, we are now getting round by the lapse of time to
the period when trade naturally revives, experience would
prevent us from imagining that the late fall of values will be
continued or repeated without an intervening rise. I am far
from denying that if the Italian Government decide to carry
into effect M. Luzzatti's threat of buying gold at all hazards,
and if the like course be taken by the United States and
France, not to speak of Germany, then there might be a con-
siderable disturbance of values for a time. But is it likely
that such proceedings will be taken by rational statesmen and
rational parliaments ? It is really too absurd to suppose that
any country will insist upon immediately having a gold cur-
rency at any cost, regardless of the fact that it will thereby

* Sinecj reprinted : <f La Question Monetaire en 1881,” p. 9. Par flmile
de Laveleye. III. Bruxelles, Paris.

f See above, pp. 144 et seq.

y


322


BIMETALLISM .


[xm.

injur© its own trad© and commerce in the getting. The
position is simply this. We hay© had for fifty years or more
an abundant currency of gold. Italy and some other countries
hay© a paper currency. Suddenly becoming disgusted with
paper, they say that unless w© consent immediately to abandon
our gold to a great extent, and take silver instead, they will
insist upon buying our gold from us at whatever price we like
to ask for it. We have so good a currency that, unless we
consent to give it up willingly, they will insist on borrowing it
from us. But surely, in this case, possession is nine points of
the law. The largest stock of gold in the world is to be found
in England, and many of the great gold-producing districts are
to be found in the English colonies or dependencies. If these
foreign nations insist upon having gold currencies, they must
pay our price for gold, and they must, in raising the price,
benefit us and our colonies, comparatively speaking.

When we consider what are the difficulties put forward as
the ground of this bimetallic crotchet, we find that they arise
either out of the sudden issue and withdrawal of paper money,
or else out of the efforts of certain governments to get rid of
silver. If the Italians suddenly want fifteen or twenty millions
of specie, it is because they allowed their specie to be replaced
by paper in former years, and they now discover the evils of a
variable paper currency. Germany wants gold, because Prince
Bismarck and his economists recognised the soundness of the
principles on which Lord Liverpool fashioned our metallic
currency. But because Germany has met with a temporary
check in striving after a gold standard, is there any reason
that we, who have had a gold standard with little interruption
since the time of Sir Isaac Newton, should throw it up at the
demand of M. Cernuschi ? The difficulties of France simply
consist in the fact that, having had the law of the double
standard previously in operation, she suspended the action of
the law as soon as it began to occasion a return of silver. If
all civilised countries were to adopt the double standard, they


CURRENCY CHANGES .


323


XIII.]

would just be inviting the growth of a silver currency, which
France, with full experience of the use of silver, has practically
decided to avoid.

Much which has recently been published on this subject,
including the official text of the draft resolution to be sub-
mitted to the Conference in Paris, implies that the French
law establishing the double standard was intgnded to act as a
regulator of the values of the metals according to the ratio of
15^ to 1. The fact, however, is that no such idea seems to
have prompted the law. G-audin, who in the ninth year of the
Revolution proposed the ratio of 15£ to 1, did so upon the
ground that this ratio was sufficiently near to that of the
market values to allow coins of gold and silver to circulate
side by side indifferently. In case the market ratio should alter
after a time, he thought that the gold pieces could be melted
and re-issued. Sir Isaac Newton, again, when in 1717 he fixed
the guinea at 21s., did so upon the ground that this was the
closest convenient approximation to market rates. Only five
months ago I quoted* {“ Contemporary Review ") the remarks
of Cantillon upon the decision of Newton. Cantillon says: “It
is the market price which decides the proportion of the value
of gold to that of silver. On this is based the proportion which
we give to pieces of gold and silver money. If the market
price varies considerably, it is necessary to alter the propor-
tion of the coins. If we neglect to do this, the circulation is
thrown into confusion and disorder, etc.” There is, in fact, no
precedent for the views now pressed upon us. It is not even
proposed to accept the prevailing ratio of the markets, but by
an arbitrary convention to raise up silver to the place it held
in the markets before, which involves bringing down gold so
as to meet it about half way. I do not undertake to deny
that if a convention were agreed upon, and carried into formal
effect, it might possibly raise silver to its former price of 59 d.
per ounce. The measure is one of so novel a character that it
* See below, 3STo, XI Y., pp. 338, 339.


BIMETALLISM .


[xnt.


is almost impossible to say what would or would not happen.
The attempt to force silver dollars into use in the United
States has entirely failed, and it might fail even under a con-
vention. It is quite conceivable that in the United Kingdom
and the colonies the scheme would be defeated by the tacit
refusal of the people to accept silver legal tender. A bank or
a tradesman migjit try to stand upon his legal rights, but the
result would be a kind of commercial “ boycotting.” Some
formula would probably be discovered for contracting affairs
out of the Double Legal Tender Law. At present there is no
law to prevent people from making contracts in terms of gold
or silver bullion, or tin or copper or corn, or whatever else
they like, which is capable of precise definition. Even if the
law were not thus circumvented, it might still be possible to
make payments in gold a point of honour.

Then, again, the perpetual maintenance of this supposed
convention is the only safeguard against the most serious in-
convenience to some of the parties to it. The convention
would resemble a chain, the breaking of each link of which
would throw an increased strain upon the other links. There
exist, indeed, a good many international conventions relating
to postal intercourse, extradition of criminals, copyright, and
so forth ; but in none of these cases would the breaking or
suspension of the convention result in any ruinous conse-
quences. There would be suspension of benefits rather than
occasion of evil. But should war break out among some of
the countries involved in the monetary convention, the
probable effect would be to throw the mass of silver coin
upon neutral nations. This might be done without any
express breach of the convention, simply by the issue of paper
money, a measure which we cannot pretend to consider un-
likely, seeing that the chief difficulties of the present monetary
situation arise out of efforts for the withdrawal of recent paper-
money issues. It is true that the 8th Article of the proposed
convention enacts that u the fact of issuing or allowing to be


XIII.] DIFFICULTIES OF A CONVENTION. 32 S

issued paper money, convertible or otherwise, shall not relieve
the state issuing it, or allowing it to be issued, from the above
stipulated obligation of keeping its mints always open for the
free mintage of the two metals at the ratio of 1 to 15J.” But,
as far as I can understand this “ keeping of the mints open/*
it seems probable that this article would be quite nugatory in
time of war. If silver were depreciated 5 or 10 per cent.,
paper legal tender might easily be depreciated 20 or 30 per
cent., and no one would think of coining silver to pay their
debts when they could pay them so much more cheaply with
paper. The issue of paper legal tender forms then, to the
best of my belief, an indirect mode of abrogating the con-
vention without a distinct breach of faith. No Government
has ever yet resisted the temptation of resorting to paper under
serious stress of war ; and therefore, until a wiser and better
state of things is brought about in the long course of time, it
would seem impossible to fulfil the first condition of the
bimetallic project — the making of an indefeasible convention.

When a measure is so clearly undesirable, it is hardly
needful to point out the many difficulties which would arise in
its operation. But there is one which presents itself to my
mind as almost insuperable — namely, the confusion which
would be produced in the masses of national and other debts
contracted in terms of gold money. Silver is now about 13
per cent, below its old customary value, compared with gold. If,
then, debts contracted formerly in gold could be paid in silver
by the option of the bimetallic system, the claims of all
creditors would be endangered to this extent, and in all
probability would be depreciated to half that extent. Nor
would the matter be much improved by enacting that old
debts should be paid in gold as contracted, because gold being
forced into a fixed par with silver, would be depreciated, say
6 per cent. The adoption of the bimetallic regime would be
a coup d'etat affecting the value of all past monetary contracts
in a degree incapable of estimation ; and although such a coup,


326 BIMETALLISM. [xm.

or almost any other coup, might be advisable under certain
circumstances, according to the maxim, Salus populi suprema
lex , yet it would be clearly impossible to unsettle the whole
monetary contracts of the British nation and the British race,
to the extent of some 6 per cent, or more, for the sake of
the exceedingly problematic, if not visionary, advantages to be
derived from this proposed convention.

Though it thus appears to be altogether out of the question
that the English Government should contemplate the abandon-
ment of the gold standard, there are two or three minor
measures of a temporary nature which might perhaps be
adopted to relieve the disturbed relations of the precious
metals. There would probably be little or no inconvenience
in raising the limit of legal currency of silver coin in the
United Kingdom to five pounds instead of two pounds, as at
present. This change would probably prove to be a merely
nominal one, unless bankers and others could be induced to
pay out silver coin more largely than at present. The Mint
gains so handsome a profit upon the coinage of silver money at
present that the opportunity might well be taken to throw as
much silver into circulation as possible; but unless the habits
of the people be changed it would not stop in circulation.
There is, in fact, at present a very clear disinclination on the
part of the public to take any larger amount of silver money
than is necessary. It is almost an unknown thing in England
for any tradesman to give as much as two pounds in silver
change. No customer is expected to take more than ten, or at
the most twenty shillings in silver, and any surplus of silver
receipts is paid into the banking, account, and the general
balance of the district is eventually returned to the Bank of
England. It is very doubtful whether Mr. Seyd’s scheme of a
four-shilling piece or any other scheme would overcome this
fixed habit, which is moreover a reasonable habit.” *

(< Let there be coined in England and in India a new silver piece of suit*,
fkbli fineness, containing 350| (350 ’625) grains troy of fine silver. This coin is


SILVER RESERVE.


XIII.]


327


A good deal has been said about the expediency of bringing
into operation tbe third clause of the Bank Charter Act,
which is supposed to authorise the issue of notes upon a reserve
of silver bullion to a certain extent. That clause reads as
follows :

“ And whereas it is necessary to limit the amount of silver
bullion on which it shall be lawful for the same department of
the Bank of England to issue Bank of England notes ; be it
therefore enacted, that it shall not be lawful for the Bank of
England to retain in the Issue Department of the said Bank at
any one time an amount of silver bullion exceeding one-fourth
part of the gold coin and bullion at such time held by the Bank
of England in the Issue Department/'

It is obvious that this clause is solely a restrictive one ; that
which authorises the holding of silver bullion is the preceding
clause, far too long for quotation. It states, however, that it
shall not be lawful to issue notes in excess of the securities
allowed to be transferred to the Issue Department, “ save in
exchange for other Bank of England notes, or for gold coin, or
for gold or silver bullion received or purchased for the said
Issue Department under the provisions of this Act," etc. It is
curious that, although the second clause thus seems to speak of
silver bullion being received or purchased under the provisions
of this Act," there are no provisions in the rest of the Act
relating to the purchase of silver. The fourth clause defines
the price at which all persons may demand notes for gold
bullion, but there is no like definition as regards silver. The
result seems to be that the Bank of England buys and sells
silver bullion as an ordinary dealer or speculator. If, then, the
Bank Directors think that it will conduce to the interests of
their shareholders that they should lay in a stock of three, four,

to be added to the present English silver coinage, as a four-shilling piece. It
is to be coined only at the option of the Government, and remain under the
limited tender.” — “ The Monetary Conferences in Paris, etc. 1881,” p. 6. By
Ernest Seyd. His last pamphlet. Let me add a word of regret at his untimely
death.


328 BIMETALLISM. [xm.

or five millions of pounds' -worth of silver, as the case may be,
let them do so. They will gain or lose according as the value
of that stock rises or falls ; but who can say how that will be?
In any case, the effect of such an operation upon the silver
markets of the world must be inappreciable.

There is one further measure which might well be adopted
at Jhe present conjuncture, namely, the alteration of the
Bank Act so as to allow of the issue from the Bank of one-
pound notes. Now that Parliament has authorised the
circulation in England, under very questionable conditions,
of a fractional paper currency, the last shadow of reason has
disappeared why one-pound notes, so long current in Scotland
and Ireland, should be unknown in England. If we could
suppose that thirty millions of such notes were put into
circulation eventually, about twenty millions might be issued
on Securities, giving a profit to the Government of nearly
half a million a year. The margin of ten millions more or
less of gold added to the specie reserve of the Issue Depart-
ment would be ample to meet any conceivable demand for
payment of such notes, the circulation of which would pro-
bably be more constant than that of the larger notes. Thus
a supply of twenty millions of sovereigns would be opportunely
thrown upon the markets of the world, which might be
scrambled for by the various nations now wanting gold
currencies.

It will easily be seen that in this article I do not pretend
to enter into the complexities of the subject, nor to answer
the numerous arguments adduced in favour of the bimetallic
project. The literature and statistics of the subject are of
an almost interminable extent. If any reader wishes to learn
what he has to read before he can be considered to have
mastered this subject, let him refer to “A Partial List of
Modern Publications on the Subject of Money," prepared by
Mr. Horton, and printed among the Appendices to the Official
American Report on the International Monetary Conference,


XIII.] ONE-POUND NOTES . 329

held in Paris, in August, 1878. This volume is replete with
information on the subject.* But my contention is, that to
wade through the interminable discussions on bimetallism is
about as useful as to wander through a forest in a mist, the
happiest result of which is usually to find yourself back again
at the point you started from.


[Since the above lines were written, Mr. Jevons determined to publish a
more complete bibliography of the subject, which will be found at the end of
this volume.]


33° SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM. [xiv.


XIV.

SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM.

Note. — In all cases where, either in the text or notes of this paper, it has
been necessary to make any additions to the unfinished MS. of the Author,
the additions are enclosed between square brackets [ ].

The name of Sir Isaac Newton is naturally a good one to
conjure by. It would, in fact, be impossible to find a better.
The bimetallists have discovered this fact, and when in want
of a good, strong argument, fall back upon their favourite idea
that Sir Isaac Newton was the inventor of bimetallism. We
all know how scientific myths attach themselves to great names,
such as those of Greber, Roger Bacon, Something of the
same sort of myth creation seems now to be taking place as
regards the honoured name of Newton. As to the accuracy of
the assertions made, we shall inquire in the course of this
article. About the making of the assertions there can be no
doubt. Thus quite recently M. Emile de Laveleye, in a most
interesting note upon the historical origin of some arguments,
mono-' and bi-metallic,* has said (translation of French) :
“ Newton had perfectly perceived the cause of the phenomenon
of the alternation of two metals, and he had indicated the
method of putting an end to it. For that purpose it sufficed,
according to him, to establish between gold and silver the
same relation of value (rapport de valeur) in all countries.
Newton is then really the inventor of bimetallism. Here is
the important passage in which he expresses this great
economic discovery.”

* “ Jahrbucbern fur Nafcionalokonomie und Statisfcik.” Ton Professor Job,
ConrsA Miseellen. pp. 114r-119.


XIV.]


M. DE LAVELEYE.


331


He then quotes a few lines from the celebrated Report of
Newton, in 171 7, to be presently cited.

As M. de Laveleye, indeed, points out, he is not the first to
treat Newton as a great economic discoverer. M. Cernuschi
has this great merit. Michel Chevalier was perhaps the first
Continental writer to notice the interest attaching to this
Report, and in his well-known treatise* quotes it, and adds
some slight but sensible remarks. But then, Chevalier was
one of the obnoxious sect now described in a new-fangled
nomenclature as mono-metallists, or, in other words, a
supporter of the single gold standard.

It is to M. Cernuschi that is due the discovery of Newton's
great discovery. Michel Chevalier, according to Cernuschi,
speaks of Newton “in a way so obliquely eulogic, that in
listening we might believe that Newton was a monometallist,
whereas he has given to England a bimetallic law in unison
with that of Erance/' Before, however, I proceed to combat
the ideas now known as Cernuschi-ism, I should like to offer a
slight tribute of respect, not only to the great ability of the
author of this doctrine, but also to the high and disinterested
public spirit which has led him to rush into the strife. On
previous occasions he has not hesitated to risk a fortune on
economic experimentst which he conceived to be for the


* " Cours d’Hlconomie Politique, etc.’’ 3me vol. La Monnaie. 1866, pp. 145-7.

f [See “ Illusions des Societes Co-operatives.” Par Henri Cernuschi.
12mo. Paris, 1866. Esp., pp. 12-22.

M. Cernuschi was the victim of his conscientious devotion to a venerable
but not too logical maxim. In a note to p. 65, he observes : “ II n’y a rien
de tel que de pratiquer soi-m&me ce qu’on pr^che aux autres. Avant de parler
de co-op6ration, fen ai fait. (Je m* y ruinais. Des amis m'ont soutenu aux
moments critiques, mais jamais aucune organisation de credit ne m’efit tirS
d’affaire.)”

The experiment which led to this unfortunate result was an attempt to sell
meat by retail on the plan of division of profits with the customer. M. Cer-
nuschi persisted very pluckily in his enterprise, but lost 100,000 francs in
three years (p. 17). Co-operators and butchers will probably agree in
holding that nothing more was proved by its failure than that the batcher’s
trade is a skilled one, not rashly to be undertaken by amateurs.]


332 SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM, [xiv.

public good. Even those who deride bis crotchets, or overturn
his arguments, can well afford to honour the high and pure
spirit in which he has acted throughout. Returning to our
theme, however, we find M. Cernuschi* citing Newton's Report
more fully than Chevalier, and this is what he thinks of it :

“ These words of Newton contain the whole bimetallic
science/'

€< The bimetallism proposed by Newton was sanctioned by
a law. But after some time the public officers, in spite of the
law, began again to take and give in payment pieces of gold
at a price superior to the legal rate ; naturally the public did
likewise in their transactions, and it is thus that, little by little*
gold monometallism was implanted in England, in spite of
Newton. The entirely gold monometallic law, proposed by
Lord Liverpool in 1816, upon the eve of the resumption of
cash payments, merely sanctioned an old abuse."

“ Locke and Lord Liverpool have given two theories, very
simple, but too simple — the silver monometallic theory, and
the gold monometallic theory : Newton has given the theory
of reason and of experience , the bimetallic theory. Rule ,
Britannia ! 99

These characteristic statements, in their original French at
least as clear as crystal, and almost sparkling as the French
language alone can sparkle, are true enough as regards Locke
and Lord Liverpool, and the origin of our gold standard
system.

It is not, however, French economists alone who believe
in Newton as the inventor of bimetallism. * Newton's own
countrymen seem to care very little about the matter. But
when in a previous number of the “ Contemporary "f I inci-
dentally brought forward some passages from the remarkable

* “ M. Michel Chevalier et le Bimetallisme.” Par Henri Cemuschi. Articles
putties dans “ Le Si&cle,” en Avril et Mai, 1876. Paris, 1876, pp. 65-69,

f “ Contemporary Review,” January, 1881. Art. Richard Cantillon and
the Nationality of Political Economy, pp. 73-75,


M CERkUSCHI ok NEWTON.


333


XXV j

Essai of Richard Cantillon, as explaining Newton's views, or
even reporting his words, Mr. Dana Horton, the learned
American economist, did me the honour to publish an
elaborate reply,* to be further discussed in the sequel. He
even brought forward Newton and Richard Oantillon, making
them supporters of bimetallic ideas in the way that Cernuschi
describes as “ obliquely eulogic," at the International Mpne-
tary Conference of 1881. +

Even apart from the great controversy still raging, which
is beyond doubt the most active and widely extended con-
troversy which has ever taken place on monetary affairs,
Newton's Report is, in any case, a matter of high interest.
It is probably the most important document in monetary
history, because, whether or not it is a bimetallic testament,
it certainly led to the creation and triumph of the opposite
doctrine. Hence it marks the turning point when the ancient
silver standard began to give place to the present and the
future gold standard. Sir Thomas Gresham's quaint “In-
formation touching the Pall of the Exchange," or Sir Robert
Cotton's remarkable Speech at the Council Table, are doubtless
documents of extreme ability and interest, but they have not
the critical importance of Sir Isaac Newton's brief and
enigmatic Report.

The text of this Report has been frequently printed and
reprinted. J [McCulloch mentions a quarto edition in 1717,
probably the original one.]

It was reprinted in the second volume of the tracts edited

* « Sir Isaac Newton and England’s Prohibitive Tariff upon Silver Money.”
An Open Letter to Prof. W. Stanley Jevons, LL.D. (Edinb.), M.A. (Lond.),
P.R.S., Professor of Political Economy in University College, London, etc.,
etc. By S. Dana Horton, M.A., etc. Robert Clarke & Co., Cincinnati, 1881.

+ <f Proofs Verbaux.” Paris. Imprimerie Nationals, 1881, p. 280.

J See also “ Political State of Great Britain,” vol. xiv., Dec., 1717 ; and the
continuation of “ Rapin’s History of England,” for that year. [The Report
does not appear in the £< Commons’ Journals,” nor in the quarto (Horsley ; s)
edition of Newton’s works. It is prefixed to “ Short Essay on Com,” Dublin,
1737, (by Bryan Robmson), and is to be found at p, 62 in the enlarged edition


J34 SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM, [xiv.


by MacCulloeh for the Political Economy Club, which have
now, however, become so scarce as to be practically non-
existent. It was a most happy thought of Mr. Dana Horton
to reprint this Report, together with a considerable body of
other currency documents, admirably selected and edited by
him, * in the “Appendix to the American Official Report on
the International Monetary Conference of 1878,”* pp. 317
-322.

The Report is an answer to an “ Order of the Lords of the
Treasury,” dated August 12th, 1717, to the effect that Newton,
as Master .of the Mint, should lay before them “ A State
of the Gold and Silver Coins of this Kingdom, in Weight
and Fineness, and the Value of Gold in Proportion to Silver,”
together with Newton's own observations and opinions, and
his idea as to the best means of preventing the melting down
of the silver coin. The greater part of the document is a
somewhat dry and official statement of the weights and values
of coins, both British and foreign, the particulars being of
little or no present interest. It emerges that a pound of gold
bullion is, at the Mint ratio, worth 15* [571 7] pounds of silver,
but at the market price is worth only 14* [9682] pounds. Gold
was thus overvalued by the Mint indentures, to the extent
of 4* [0316] per cent. After some statements concerning foreign
currencies, Newton makes the following highly interesting
remarks :

“ So then, by the course of Trade and Exchange between
Nation and Nation, in all Europe, fine Gold is to fine Silver

of this essay, published in 1758. It was also reprinted in tc Lawson's History
of Banking," 2nd edition, 1855. App. xiii., p. 481, etc.

There is a passage in Bryan Bobinson's essay which is of interest;, as
confirming the view of Newton's action taken in this paper. On p. 20, the
writer remarks, and claims the sanction of Newton's advice in regard to
Ireland for the assertion: “The true interest of a Nation with regard to its
Coin, consists in having the same proportion observed in its Coin as obtains in
the Nation with which it has the greatest Commerce.*']

* “Senate Executive Document," No. 58; Forty-fifth Congress, Third
Session. Washington : Government Brinting Office. 1879. 8vo.


NEWTON 9 S REPORT


MS


xivj

as 14f, or 15 to one ; and a Guinea at the same rate is worth
between 20s. 5c?. and 20s. 8 d. Halfpenny, except in extra-
ordinary Gases, as when a * Plate^Fleet is just arrived in
Spain or ships are lading here for the East Indies , which
Oases I do not here consider. And it appears by Experience,
as well as by Reason, that Silver flows from those Places
where its Value is lowest in Proportion to Gold — as from
Spain to all Europe , and from all Europe t$ the East Indies f
China , and Japan; and that Gold is most plentiful in those
Places in which its Value is highest in Proportion to Silver , as
in Spain and England .

“ It is the Demand for Exportation which hath raised the
Price of exportable Silver about 2c?. or 3c?. in the Ounce above
that of Silver in Coin, and hath thereby created a Temptation
to export or melt down the Silver Coin rather than give 2c l. or
3c?. more for Foreign Silver ; and the Demand for Exportation
arises from the higher Price of Silver in other Places than
in England , in Proportion to Gold — that is, from the higher
Price of Gold in England than in other Places, in Proportion
to Silver, and therefore may be diminished by lowering the
Value of Gold in Proportion to Silver.

<c If Gold in England , or Silver in East India, could be
brought down so low as to bear the same Proportion to one
another in both Places, there would be here no greater Demand
for Silver than for Gold to be exported to India; and if Gold
were lowered only so as to have the same Proportion to the
Silver Money in England which it hath to Silver in the rest
of Europe, there would be no Temptation to export Silver
rather than Gold to any other part of Europe . And to com-
pass this last there seems nothing more requisite than to take
off about 10c?. or 12c?. from the Guinea, so that Gold may bear
the same Proportion to the Silver Money in England which
it ought to do by the Course of Trade and Exchange in Europe *
But, if only 6c?. were taken off at present, it would diminish
the Temptation to export or melt down the Silver Coin, and, by


336 SIX ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM. [xiV.

the Effects , would show hereafter better than can appear at
present, what further Reduction would be most convenient for
the Publick .

“ In the last year of King William the Dollars of Scotland,
worth about 4 s. 6 d. Halfpenny, were put away in the North of
England for 5s., and at this price began to flow in upon us.
I j^ave Notice thereof to the Lords Commissioners of the
Treasury , and th&y ordered the Collectors of Taxes to forbear
taking them, and thereby put a Stop to the Mischief.

"At the same time the Lewidors of France, which were worth
but 17s. and 3 Farthings a Piece, passed in Eng land for 17s. 6 d.
I gave Notice thereof to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury,
and his late Majesty put out a Proclamation, that they should
go but at 17s., and thereupon they came to the Mint, and
l,400,000£s were coined out of them ; and if the Advantage of
5 d. 1 Farthing a Lewidor sufficed at that Time to bring into
England so great a quantity of French Money, and the
Advantage of 3 Farthings in a Lewidor to bring it to the
Mint, the Advantage of 9 d. Halfpenny in a Guinea, or above,
may have been sufficient to bring the great Quantity of Gold
which hath been coined in these last 15 years without any
Foreign Silver.

“ Some years ago the Portugal Moydores were received in
the West of England at 28s. a Piece; upon Notice from the
Mint that they were worth only about 27s. Id., the Lords Com-
missioners of the Treasury ordered their Receivers of Taxes to
take them at no more than 27 s. 6 d . Afterwards many Gentle-
men in the West sent up to the Treasury a Petition that the
Receivers might take them again at 28s., and promised to get
Returns for this Money at that rate, alledging that when they
went at 28 s. their Country was full of Gold, which they wanted
very much. But the Commissioners of the Treasury, consider-
ing that at 28s. the Nation would lose 5 d. a Piece, rejected the
Petition. And if an Advantage to the Merchant of hd. in 28s.
did pour that money in upon us, much more hath an Advantage


2ivJ NEWTON'S REPORT. 337

to the Merchant of 9 d. Halfpenny in a Guinea, or above,
been able to bring into the Mint great Quantities of Gold
without any Foreign Silver, and may be able to do still, till
the Cause be removed.

ic If Things be let alone till Silver Money be a little scarcer,
the Gold will fall of itself, for People are already backward to
give Silver for Gold, and will in a little Time refuse to make
Payment in Silver without a Premium, as they do in Spain ;
and this Premium will be an Abatement in the Value of Gold.
And so the Question is. Whether Gold shall be lowered by the
Government, or let alone till it falls of itself by the Want of
Silver Money ? It may be said, that there are great Quantities
of Silver in Plate, and if the Plate were coined there would be
no want of Silver Money. But I reckon that Silver is safer
from Exportation in the Form of Plate than in the Form of
Money, because of the greater Value of the Silver and Fashion
together ; and therefore I am not for coining the Plate till the
Temptation to export the Silver Money, (which is a Profit of
2d. or 3 d. an Ounce) be diminished : For as often as Men are
necessitated to send away Money for answering Debts Abroad,
there will be a Temptation to send away Silver rather than
Gold, because of the Profit, which is almost 4 per Oent. And
for the same Reason Foreigners will choose to send hither
their Gold rather than their Silver.”

The task now before us is to decide what relation this
proposal of Newton bears to modern bimetallism. Newton's
remarks commit him to the least possible amount of theory.
u By experience as well as by reason,” he thinks it is known that
silver flows from those places where it is undervalued to those
places where it is overvalued, and to stop this flow we must
do away with the differences of value. Is this the whole
science of bimetallism, and is it Newton's science ? Such are
the questions which we must try to decide. I cannot pretend,
indeed, to be in any doubt about the answers. After very
careful consideration of Newton’s own words, the inferential


33 $ SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM. [xiv.


results of his scheme, and the light thrown upon it by other
documents, I come to a negative conclusion regarding both
questions. Newton's scheme is not bimetallism ; it would be
more nearly correct to say that it is anti-bimetallism ; more-
over, it is not* Newton's scheme, is not Newton's in any special
way. It was probably the common property of debaters on
the currency at the time, and, in any case, is traceable to the
celebrated speech*of Sir Robert Cotton at the Council Table,
of which several editions had been published. (See below,
p. 347).

I have already quoted in another place* the opinion of
Richard Cantillon, written within a few years after the date
of Newton's Report, that it is the market price which must
decide the proportion to be given to the coins. If the market
price varies considerably, we must, in Cantillon's opinion,
alter the coins, in order to follow the course of the market.
Of this need a recent example had occurred at the Tower of
London ; and then Cantillon goes on to describe the circum-
stances of the English currency at the time of Newton's
Report, and to discuss his policy. Incidentally he quotes the
words which Newton appears to have addressed to him in a
personal discussion of this subject :

ee Monsieur Newton m'a dit pour reponse a cette objec-
tion, que suivant les loix fondamentales du Royaume, l'argent
blanc etait la vraie et seule monnoie, et que comme telle, il ne
la falloit pas alterer."f

Now here, if Cantillon is to be trusted, Newton expressly
declares himself to be a silver monometallist. There is,
indeed, as before, a singular absence of theory in Newton's
treatment of this subject ; as if afraid of being betrayed into
the intricacies of currency, he takes his stand dogmatically
upon the fundamental laws of the kingdom, that is to say, the

* “ Coat. Rev. Jan., 1881. Art. Richard Cantillon and the Nationality
of Political Economy.

t £ “ Essai snr la Nature dn Commerce en General, 1755,” p. 377 J


RICHARD CANTILLON.


xivj


m


traditional legal currency of silver coin, and declares that it
must not be altered. It is impossible to imagine anything
further from the over-ingenious arguments of a Cernusehi, or
a Dana Horton, than this Nolumus leges Anglice mutari of
the great philosopher, who had laid down the laws of the
Universe. Before Cantillon leaves the subject, however, he
gives a still more explicit statement that it is by the mafket
price th&t the relative weights of gold and silver coins must
be regulated.

ec II n’y a que le prix du Marche qui puisse trouver la pro-*
portion dela valeur de l’or a Pargent de m§me que toutes les pro-
portions des valeurs. La reduction de M. Newton de la guinee
a vingt-un schellings n'a ete calculee que pour empecher qu'on
n'enlevat les especes d’argent foibles et usees qui restent dans
la circulation: elle n'etoit pas calculee pour fixer dans les
monnoies d'or et d’argent la veritable proportion de leur prix,
je veux dire par leur veritable proportion, celle qui est fixee
par les prix du Marche. Ce prix est to uj ours la pierre de
touche dans ces matieres ,* les variations en sont assez lentes,
pour donner le terns de regler les monnoies et empecher les
desordres dans la circulation.” — pp. 380-1.

Here, then, we are told in the most explicit manner, by
one who had debated the question with Newton, that his
scheme was not calculated to fix in gold and silver the veritable
proportions of their price. The market-price, we are told, is
always the touchstone in these matters. How far is this
doctrine of the acute banker-economist from the theory now
upheld by the new society [for the Establishment of an Inter-
national Monetary Standard] !

Mr. Dana Horton, indeed, denies that the bimetallic pro-
gramme involves the finality and perpetuity of a fixed ratio
which I have ascribed to it. But of this more anon.

As, however, Mr. Horton was not satisfied with Oantillon’s
anti-bimetallic statements and arguments, I have sought
among the economic literature of the period for further

a 2


340 SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM, \ £xiV.


evidence of Newton’s ideas. I have had the good fortune to
discover a tract, the existence of which was well known,
though the value of its contents had never been appraised.
This tract has the following title-page, which explains a good
deal. cc Observations upon the Present State of our Gold and
Silver Coins, 1730. By the late John Conduitt, Esq., Member
for ^Southampton, and Master of His Majesty’s Mint. From
an Original Manuscript, formerly in the possession of the late
Dr. Jonathan Swift. London : Printed for T. Beckett, corner
of the Adelphi in the Strand. 1774.” Were a writer’s space
unlimited, here are many pegs to hang tales upon. How came
Dr. Jonathan Swift to possess such a dry document as “ A
Present State of our Gold and Silver Coins ” ? * How came
the document to be published so long after the date of writing ?
Who was Conduitt, and how came he to be the successor of so
great a man as Newton ? To some extent these questions
admit of plausible answers. John Conduitt married the niece
of Newton, the celebrated Miss Barton. If we may accept the
result of the late Professor De Morgan’s learned inquiries.
Miss Barton was a “ professional beauty ” of those days, and
though for a long time she was Newton’s affectionate and
dutiful housekeeper, we read at other times that Dr. Swift
called upon her ec at her lodgings.” Passing over, however,
all the delicate questions which may be here involved, there is
no doubt whatever that Conduitt was the great friend and
support of Newton in his old age. He was a very superior
kind of Boswell, recording Newton’s conversations, helping
him in business complications, attending him in his rare ill-
nesses with the affection of a son. We are especially told that
et after Newton in his eightieth year was seized with painful
maladies, he was obliged to rely upon Conduitt for the discharge

* Swifts was much concerned in the opposition to Wood’s notorious half-
pence. “ Euding’s Annals of the Coinage,” ii. 71.

[This reference to the natural explanation of the difficulty raised in the
text was found among the author’s MSS., and would, presumably, have been
inserted here.]


XIV.]


JOHN CONDUITT \


341


of his office in the Mint”* After Newton's death Oonduitt
drew up a memorial of his life, which served as the basis of
Fontenelle’s celebrated eloge of Newton, the original notes
being printed by Edmund Tarnor.f Oonduitt also endeavoured
to write the life of Newton, and for this purpose collected in-
formation from Newton's correspondents ; but he broke down
in the execution of this scheme, and the life of Newtoi^has
never been written except by Sir David Brewster, whose un-
skilful and inadequate book does not so much as mention
Newton's Currency Report, let alone his bimetallic science. As
to Oonduitt, his personality has been almost lost in the shadow
of his illustrious relative. It is true there is a handsome
monument to him in Westminster Abbey, erected in
1738 by his widow, and so placed as to face Newton's tomb.
The biographers, indeed, have entirely overlooked Oonduitt,
who does not appear in any of the dictionaries. But a few
particulars have been gleaned by Brewster, as that he was born
in 1688 and died in 1737.J

It is of more interest to us, however, that he married
Newton's beautiful niece and housekeeper on August 24th,
1717, about a month before Newton's Monetary Report was
sent into the Treasury. If not at that time a zealous assistant,
Oonduitt must, under the circumstances, have been a very apt
disciple. To come to the point, it is impossible to imagine
any better interpreter of Newton's monetary theory than his
nephew — his almost adopted son, his successor in the Mint
office, his biographer and literary executor.

Now Oonduitt's tract is well worthy of all this preface.
It is a masterly paper, and possesses the high interest of being
an exposition of Newton's views. The tract is probably a
rare one ; it is not to be found in most libraries, but there are

* Hutton's “ Mathematical Dictionary ” vol. ii. p. 152,

4 “ Collections for the History of the Town and Soke of Grantham.” [1806.
4to. p. 168.]

$ <( Memoirs of Life, Writings, and Discoveries of Sir Is aJlteaw ton.” 2 vols,
8vo, 1866. Vol. ii. p. 397 and note.


342


SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM. pav.


two copies in the British Museum, and one in the Bodleian
Library. MacCulloch appears to have had a copy, the title
of which he enters in his “Literature of Political Economy”
(p. 164), without comment. I fortunately possess a copy,
which I purchased for a mere trifle, with a quantity of other
pamphlets of more or less interest, at Salisbury a few years
ago. The text of the tract fills fifty-nine small octavo pages,
but the passages which are of interest for us go into a small
compass. Oonduitt commences with the following very clear
and sound passage :

“ When we cannot pay in goods what we owe abroad, on
account of the balance of trade, or for the sale or interest
of stocks belonging to foreigners, or for foreign national
services, our debts must be paid in gold or silver, coined or
uncoined ; and when bullion is more scarce or more dear than
English coin, English coin will be exported, either melted or
in specie, in spite of any laws, to the contrary. All that can
be done in such cases is to take care, from time to time, that
a pound weight of fine silver be worth as much fine gold in
our monies as it is in the gold coins of the neighbouring
nations with whom we have the greatest dealings, that it may
turn equally to the merchant's account to pay any balance he
owes abroad, or to have any balance that is due to him sent
hither, either in gold or silver ; for if gold be valued here higher
than in other parts, and silver lower, any debts due to us from
abroad will be paid only in gold, and any debts we owe abroad
will be paid only in silver; and over and above the balance to
be paid or received it will be a profitable trade to import gold
which is overvalued, and export silver which is under-
valued. The value of gold and silver in respect of each other
has constantly varied in all nations, and must vary according
to the plenty and scarcity of either. In Europe, for many
years, twelve pounds weight of fine silver were equal to one
pound weight of fine gold. By the discovery of the silver
'mines in America, silver fell gradually, from the proportion of


CONVTITTTS TRACT.


343


XIV.]

12 to 1, to 16 to 1. In England, by the high price of guineas,
it has been at all rates, from 12 to above 21 to 1. By the
discovery of the new gold mines in Brazil, and an increase
of the demand for silver, gold has for some years been falling,
and silver rising all over 'Europe. If the importation of gold
should still increase, and that of silver decrease, or a greater
demand arise for it, a pound of gold may again be wor% no
more than twelve pounds of silver, as itf was formerly in
Europe, or than 9, as it is now in China; and whatever
nation will not alter the proportion, between gold and silver,
according to the general want or abundance of either, only
exposes itself to be the dupe of those who do, and to be
bought and sold with its own money ” (p. 3)*

To be bought and sold with its own money is the fate of
those nations, according to Conduct's strong expression, who
will not alter the proportion between gold and silver according
to the general want or abundance of either. Far, then, was
the writer from looking upon Newton's settlement of the
guinea as intended to be fixed. Like Cantillon, Conduitt
evidently looked upon the market price, “the general want
or abundance of either,” as the guide. The value of Con-
duct's opinions will be more apparent, however, when we
learn how perfectly he comprehended the action of the double
standard. The following passages are perfectly to the point
(p.19):

“Necessity and Convenience will make that coin the
measure which is in greatest plenty : it was for this reason
that silver, and not gold, was the first measure. Wherever
the silver coin of any country is bought at a premium, with
the gold coin of the same country, there gold is the measure,
and silver the merchandise ; and wherever gold is a legal
tender, at a certain rate, it is as much a measure as silver. . . .
In Portugal, gold is now the only measure, and in Spain too ;
for no payments are made there in any silver, but what is
base, without a premium, even for bills that run payable in


344


SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM. [XIV,


dollars. Gold in Prance is as much a measure as silver ; and,
whatever it was formerly, is at present as much a measure
as silver here, and as legal a tender ; being so established by
his late Majesty's proclamation, bearing date the 22nd of
December, 1717, which was grounded on an address from the
House of Commons ; the title of which is ‘ a proclamation
declaring the ratgs at which gold shall be current in pay-
ment ; 9 and in the body of it, after specifying that a guinea
shall be current for no more than 21$., and broad pieces for
no more than 25s. and 23s., there are these words : c At which
rates and values we do hereby declare the said respective
pieces of coined gold to be current.' "

It will be seen, then, that Conduitt explicitly allows the
equal legal currency of gold and silver as established by the
proclamation which followed the Parliamentary debates on
Newton's Report. Probably the passage quoted above is one
of the earliest in which the existence and action of the
double standard is clearly stated and explained. At the same
time, he points out that in practice, necessity and convenience
make that coin the measure which is in greatest plenty ; by
inference he recognises gold as the practical measure of value
prevailing at the date of his writing. And he had previously
stated that those who do not alter the proportion of their
coins according to the general abundance of gold or silver,
become the dupe of those who do. Now, these views are in
complete conflict with the bimetallic doctrines now advocated.
The whole purpose of the new society for the establishment of
an International Monetary Standard is “ the promotion of the
Stability of Values." This important object is to be accom-
plished by establishing the free coinage of silver, and its use
as money, under the same conditions as gold, under the
conditions of an International Agreement “whereby a fixed
relative value between gold and silver may be established,"

This is a brief but, I believe, a correct statement of the
yiews of the people who call themselves bimetallists. But,


XIV.]


CONDUITT ON NEWTON


345


whether we look to Newton's own Report, or to the com-
mentaries on it afforded by Cantillon or Conduit t, there is
not the faintest ground for identifying Newton's views as
bimetallism. Cantillon expressly tells us that Newton's
action was not calculated to fix the proportion of values,
and Conduitt explains that any nation which does not alter
its values, will become the dupe of those who do. The ifdea
of an international agreement on the subject had not then
been mooted. Before entering, however, on a more thorough
discussion of these points, I will complete the review of Con-
duct's tract, many pages of which, filled with details of his
weighings of coins and other practical inquiries into its state,
prove the care which he took to acquire exact knowledge, but
do not further interest us. On p. 23 is a sentence worthy of
note, as follows : “ If it were a fundamental and unalterable
maxim that silver should be the bushel, and the only and
invariable measure always, and a pound weight never cut
into more or less pieces, it would not have been raised in other
countries, nor here. . .

Comparing these words with those which Cantillon reports
Newton to have used, it will be found that there is coincidence
of expression, leading to the supposition that Newton had
used the same words in debates with his nephew. The
argument may seem a little far-fetched, but it tends to support
the veracity of Cantillon's statements, to the effect that
Newton was a silver monometallist, in spite of a report which
.legally established the double standard. The fact is we
cannot readily in the present day conceive the fixity of the
idea entertained in former times that silver was the only true
money. The idea was, however, constantly maintained, the
respect due to Locke's writings contributing to uphold the
tradition. As late, for instance, as the year 1790 I find in a
book of much authority* the following remark : “ Silver ever


Anderson’s et Origin of Commerce,” iii., p. 299. 6 vols, 8vo. Dublin 1790.


346 SIB ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM, [xiv.


lias and probably ever will hold, the prerogative of being the
fixed standard ; gold being always valued by silver, but not
silver by gold.” Even yet the tradition survives in language,
all moderate sums of money being described in shillings rather
than in pounds and fractions ; a defendant, for instance, is
fined “ forty shillings,” not two pounds. This interminable
bimetallic discussion forms the final throes of the revolution
from silver to g<?ld, which by the wisdom of Lord Liverpool
was mainly accomplished in this country more than half a
century ago, but was delayed in France by the excessive
ingenuity of the French revolutionary philosophers. Probably
Oonduitt was one of the first to accept the idea that gold might
be the measure of value, and under the Proclamation of 1717
was practically the standard. Returning, however, to his tract,
he winds up by deducing from his' computations, the prevailing
proportion of silver to gold; in Portugal it was 14 [’2222]
to 1 of gold; in Spain 15[*1578] ; in France, 14 [*4578] ; in
Holland, 14[*7981.] At a medium, 14[*6588] of fine silver is
equal in his opinion to one pound of fine gold (pp. 53-4).

Then he comes to the very sensible conclusion that the
silver coins should be cut at such a rate to the pound that
silver will be lower here than it is at a medium of the pro-
portions in the countries above mentioned. That which
Newton aimed at by the reduction of the nominal value
of the guinea he would carry farther by a reduction of the
weight of silver coins, adding that no recoinage of the existing
silver circulation would be needed, because it was light
enough already. Finally, he sums up in the following
passage :

[“ When Gold and Silver bear the same proportion to each
other here as in the neighbouring countries, the Mint is the
pulse of the trade of the nation in general, as the constant
course of exchange is of that with any particular country. If
our imports exceed our exports, we spend more than our
ipeoM©* and must consequently grow poorer; and whatever


XIV.]


SIR ROBERT COTTON


347


Expedients may be thought of, neither gold nor silver can
naturally come to the Mint; but what is already in the
nation, near the just weight, must, by degrees, be exported,
in spite of any laws to the contrary. The only effectual
methods to increase the coinage, and keep what is coined in
the nation, is to follow the examples of other nations, in
encouraging our own manufactures, and retrenching £ur
luxury, especially such part of it as is bought of foreigners,
who take nothing of us in exchange but Gold and Silver.

“All which is most humbly submitted.

"Jam Condixitt”

(Pp. 58-59.)].

It is a pity that Conduitt, in thus winding up so luminous
and sound a discussion of the intricacies of currency, betrays
some taint of the mercantile heresy. The expression about
the Mint being the pulse of the trade of the nation is very
interesting, because it is repeated in various currency pam-
phlets of the time, and is easily traced to the celebrated
"Speech made by Sir Robert Cotton/”*

The greater part of this speech is an able and learned
argument against an alteration, that is to say, a depreciation,
or, as the expression was, " enfeebling of coyn.” Only the
last paragraph requires notice, which it does not seem hitherto
to have received. It is as follows :

“1 cannot but then conclude (My honourable Lords), that
if the proportion of gold and silver to each other be wrought
to that parity, by the advice of Artists, that neither may be
too rich for the other, that the mintage may be reduced to
some proportion of neighbour parts, and that the issue of
our native commodities may be brought to overburthen the
entrance of the forreign, we need not seek any way of shift,

* t{ A Speech made by Sir [Robert Cotton, Hut. and Baronet, before the
Lords of His Majesty’s Most Honourable Privy Council, at the Council Table;
be ing thither called to deliver his Opinion touching the Alteration of Coin.
September 2. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli, 2. (1626.) London : Printed

in the year 1651,”


348 SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM. [Xiv.


but shall again see our trade to flourish, the Mint (as the
pulse of the Commonwealth) again to beat, and our materials,
by industry, to be a mine of Gold and Silver to us, and the
honour, justice, and profit of his Majestie (which we all wish
and work for), approved/*

In a later edition of this speech printed in 1679, the word
pcfrity is by mischance or misapprehension printed as “ purity/*
[p. 294] a change which entirely obscures the meaning.
Obviously we here have the theory of parity of proportions
of gold and silver in neighbour parts, which in Newton’s
Report was discovered to be full-blown bimetallism. Conduitt’s
final paragraph is but a paraphrase of Cotton’s exordium.
Having regard to the intimate friendship which so long pre-
vailed between Conduitt and his great relative, we cannot
believe that Cotton’s well-known speech was unknown to
Newton in 1717. Certainly if the doctrine of parity of values
be bimetallism, we must antedate this great economic dis-
covery by nearly a hundred years, namely, to the 2nd
September, 1626, when Cotton’s speech was delivered. It is,
however, so obvious a fact that profit will accrue from the ex-
portation and importation of the precious metals unless they
be coined and current at parity of values, that I should decline
to regard the theory of parity as any discovery at all. We
have, indeed, only to turn to Vaughan’s admirable “ Discourse
of Coins and Coinage** to find the whole theory of the thing
deliberately explained. Though published in 1675, twenty-
one years before Newton became connected with the Mint,*
this little treatise was, according to MacCulloch,f written

* [Newton was appointed Warden of the Mint 1696, and rendered signal
seryioe in the great reooinage In 1699 he was made Master of the Mint.
Conduitt succeeded him in the latter office on his death in 1727.

See Brewster, ii. p. 193, etc., and Turnor’s t( Collections,” pp. 162, 167.
Conduitt* s Indenture, a copy of which is in the present editor’s possession, was
signed in 1732.]

+ tf A Select Collection of Scarce and Valuable Tracts on Money, etc.”
Political Economy Club. 1856. Preface, p. vi.


Vaughan's treatise.


349


3tivj

between 1630 and 1635, or soon after Cotton’s speech.
Chapter iv. treats “ Of the Proportions held between Gold ,
and Silver, Antient and Modern/’ and a very instructive
chapter it is, to those, at least, who imagine that our ancestors
were ignorant of these matters. The chapter most to the
point, however, is the eighth, treating “ Of the Low Price of
our Silver,” which contains a luminous discussion of the proper
method of regulating the proportion of gold^and silver coins.
Yaughan reviews the various opinions and theories current at
the time. The following passage will show what full hints
were furnished to Newton towards his invention of bimetallism.
Speaking of those who wished the ratio to remain as it was,
is. above 13 to 1, Yaughan says : *

“ But they that give this reason do not consider that in
this manner, although our Silver will remain still in use amongst
us as long as it lasteth by reason of the lightness of it, yet
of all that is new coined, according to this ordinance, the
weightiest and loyallest will be continually culled out, and
transported, or melted ; and, therefore, since the Experience
of the scarcity which we have of Silver doth sufficiently prove
unto us the inconvenience of the proportion, it ought to be
altered. Others would have the proportion to be eleven, or
thereabouts, because that was the ancient proportion, both
amongst us here in England and amongst our neighbours.
But since that proportion is under that of all our neighbours
at this present, it would in time fall out thereupon that we
should suffer as much scarcity of Gold as we do now of Silver.
But the most, and the most judicious, propositions that I have
seen, both at home and in other parts, do agree upon twelve
for one, as the most equal proportion ; and it agrees with the
proportion of Spain, upon which, in this subject, we ought
principally to have our eye fixed.”

Yaughan goes on to explain that he the more inclines to

* [“ A Treatise of Money ; or, A Discourse of Coin and Coinage, etc.” By
Bice Vaughan, late of Gray’s Inn, Esq. London. 1675. Pp. 73-75.]


SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM, [xiv.

this ratio of 12 to 1, because 12 is a number so readily divisible
•and most proper for accounts. But it seems that there were
other people who wished to maintain this ratio for ever, because
it squared with the conceipt of the alchemists who call Gold Sol
and Silver Luna, “ whose motions do come near upon the point
of 12 to 1 It is pretty plain, indeed, that these people were
th$" bimetallists of those days, for Vaughan says of them:
(C The conceipt of many men hath run so strongly upon the
proposition of 12 to 1, that they'd have it hold as well in
money wrought as in Gold or Silver fine.'' This is the nearest
thing to bimetallism which I have been able to discover in
these old writings, and it must be allowed in favour of our
ancestors that they selected a ratio 12 to 1, which has some
advantages over the awkward fraction 15| to 1, on which the
conceipt of our modern bimetallists runs so strongly.

In any case, then, there is an end of the idea that Newton
discovered bimetallism ; whether it be bimetallism or not,
there is nothing in his recommendation of lowering gold “ so
as to have the same proportion to the silver money in England
which it hath to silver in the rest of Europe," which is not
contained in the quaint language of Cotton. It still remains,
however, to be more carefully decided whether this doctrine
is bimetallism or not. Plainly, there was wanting the idea of
international agreement. But, if this be now possible, it only
carries out more perfectly the doctrine of parity of values. In
this point, therefore, circumstances rather than the theory
have been changed. In trying to follow out the consequences
of the doctrine, we soon fall into intricacies. Cotton, Newton,
and Conduitt, all refer only to neighbouring parts or neigh-
bouring countries ; they could not contemplate embracing
the Eastern nations, for Newton himself cites the fact that in
China and Japan one pound weight of fine gold was worth
but nine or ten pounds of fine silver. Even the most advanced
bimetallists only contemplate interfering with “ the currency
of civilised nations." Whether among civilised nations we


PARITY OF VALUES.


351


%iv.]

may include China and Japan, Africa, South America, the
Pacific Archipelago, not to speak of Russia, Siberia, etc.
does not clearly appear. Probably not ; in fact, many bi-
metallists have expressed themselves quite satisfied if certain
“ preponderating nations" could be got to accept the bi-
metallic gospel. But I venture to think that important issues
would depend upon the extent of the proposed convention.
Obviously, if a few nations only agree to maintain a fixed
artificial ratio, they will bear the brunt of all inconvenient
results. Hence the awkward position in which Prance has
lately been, and is now placed. The greater the extent over
which the bimetallic convention was arranged, the less, for a
time at least, would be the apparent inconveniences. If the
monetary ratio were fixed at 15^ to 1, and the cost of pro-
duction ratio were 18 to 1, the longer would the owners of
silver mines enjoy the advantage of this considerable margin.
There would be a premium of [16*18] per cent, on the pro-
duction of silver in preference to gold. Consequently there
would be a long-enduring tendency for the replacement of
gold by silver money, greatly to the inconvenience of those
who dislike a heavily-weighted pocket, and to the more
serious injury of those who, having contracted for payment
in gold, would find themselves put off with depreciated silver.

Those who take Newton's doctrine of parity of value to be
bimetallism, overlook the fact that nations must for our
purpose be divided into two classes, according as they are or
are not producers of the precious metals. A nation which,
like Australia or the United States, produces a permanent
stream of precious metals, cannot have the same ratios * * *


[Here unfortunately the MS. abruptly ends, just as the
Author was leaving the historical question at issue to consider
the most recent arguments in favour of bimetallism, and to
confront them with his own views. Those views, no doubt, are


352 SIR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM . [XiV.


already pretty fully stated iu Papers X. to XIII. inclusive, of tLis
volume. But tlie subject is so important, and Mr. Jevons'
opinions upon it are entitled to so much, attention, that it was
thought desirable to examine all the MS. notes left among
his papers, with a view to discover his latest conclusions.
It will be seen from the extracts which follow that these
conclusions are substantially the same as those contained in
the articles previously published. But greater stress is laid
on the difficulties incident to an international convention, and
on the dominating importance of paper issues in regard to
the whole question of the stability of values. It is also
contended that the existing glut of silver is largely due to
temporary causes, and must probably be relieved by the
natural demand for currency and the arts, more especially in
connection with the Eastern trade.

It will be observed that Mr. Jevons draws a distinction
between Cernuschi-ism, or the bimetallism of the fixed ratio,
and the bimetallism of the variable ratio advocated by
Mr. Dana Horton and others ; and that his arguments are
principally (though not exclusively) directed against the
former proposal. He had a high opinion of Mr. Horton's
ability, and frequently remarked in conversation that he
ranked him “ quite apart from ordinary bimetallists."

Many of the notes consisted of references to statistics of
the production of the precious metals. These are not here
inserted, because they contained no attempt at a new estimate,
and Mr. Jevons has (on p. 312) endorsed Mr. Bagehot's
opinion that such estimates are in general not worth the
paper they are written on. Those who wish to form a rough
idea of the figures in question may be referred for one of the
best of these estimates to Mr. Dana Horton's “Silver and
Gold," Cincinnati, 1877.

Of the fragments which are inserted, the first group seem
to have been intended to form part of the reply to Mr. Dana
Horton's “ Open Letter," which is promised on p. 333. The


FRAGMENTS.


353


3av.]

second group, following after the heading “ Common Sense
Ideas about Money,” evidently bear a similar relation to the
articles of M. de Laveleye on “ Commonplace Fallacies con-
cerning Money,” published in the “ Contemporary Review” for
Nov. and Dec., 1881.]


“Mr. Dana Horton (p. 7) protests (and reasonably) against
[the application to his proposals of the] name bimetallism.
But it is not 1 that have done it. It is M. Cernuschi and
M. Emile de Laveleye.

“ It is not to be assumed that I am answering simply the
arguments and propositions of Dana Horton. They may be
more sensible and practicable, but if so they are not the
bimetallism which I am answering. ... I was not neces-
sarily arguing against Horton's phase of bimetallism. The
Society [for the Establishment of an International Monetary
Standard] advocates a fixed relative value. . . . Cernuschi
says (‘Compte/ 279), *Le jeton jaune compte pour 15J jetons
blancs. Le bimetallisms n'est autre chose.' . . . Firmez
says that the fixed ratio is the sole point dominating the
whole debate. ( c Proctk Verbaux,' 286.) . . . Cernuschi says
everything in money is arbitrary. ( * Proces Verbaux,' 90.)

* . . . The early French bimetallists contemplated a variation
of ratio and recomage .... so apparently did Cantillon
.... but practically it would be impossible — extremely in-
convenient. ... A ratio, if adopted widely, would practically
become fixed, but with the inconvenience that the cheaper
metal would be always growing upon the other. . . . Fixed-
ness is essential to a bimetallic system. The coins are
actually adjusted to a certain ratio. If, then, several great
nations were to decide to change, the whole coinage must be
recoined, or, what is almost worse, the legal equivalence must
be fractionally altered. . . . Silver is not an outlaw, as Dana
Horton says (p. 8). The English have as much silver as they

2 A


$54 SIjR ISAAC NEWTON AND BIMETALLISM . [xiv.


will use. Everybody who wants silver coin can get it in
unlimited quantity. ... No doubt a certain temporary con-
venience might possibly be experienced by the introduction
[into circulation] of the stores of silver in the Bank of Prance.
But the agitation practically received its death-blow on the
day of the celebrated Mansion House Meeting. Had the
Governor of the Bank of England been [in a position to
report] that the crate of discount was up to seven per cent.^
the gold still draining away, and higher rates in prospect, the
bimetallists might (perhaps) have had their opportunity (of
trying to throw our currency into confusion). But on that
very day the rate dropped to three per cent., a measure
necessitated by the flood of gold from America, and all the
alarmist predictions completely collapsed.

"We only need a little patience and a little common sense
to surmount the practical difficulties. It was impatience and
want of foresight, joined to a remarkable conjunction of
events, which led to the great disturbance of values. On a
memorable occasion President Lincoln protested against
swopping horses while crossing a stream. Two or three
great Governments insisted simultaneously on swopping silver
for gold just when the suspension of the Indian drain and
one or two other events rendered it most perilous to attempt
the change. Within the next few years good harvests in
India will, in all probability, enable that country to buy up
all our surplus silver, as it has been in the habit of doing,
with rare exceptions, since the time of Pliny. If the German
Government can carry out the proposal to utilise the stock
of silver by the withdrawal of the minor gold coins and notes,
it will facilitate [matters]. In future years any amount of
silver can be got rid of without loss, if only it be sold gradually
and cautiously.

“As to the equilibrating action of the double standard,
on one who has inquired into the matter can doubt it, any
more than he can doubt that one scale of a balance will go up


FRAGMENTS.


33 $


XIV.]

when the other goes down. But the refinements of bimetallic
theory have little practical importance, in view of the fact
that the greatest variations of monetary standards are due,
not to gold and silver, but to paper. When several great
countries simultaneously replace their metallic money by a
forced currency of paper, a rise of prices naturally follows.
When the same countries subsequently abolish the paper,4he
vacuum thus produced as naturally occasions a scramble for
bullion and a fall of prices. It is to this cause that I con-
fidently attribute the fall of prices pointed out by Mr. Giffen,
and triumphantly quoted by the bimetallists in the ‘Procds
Yerbaux/ Now if the Governments which are so anxious
that we should buy their cheap silver would begin by
promising for the future to play no tricks with paper money,
it might be worth while to listen to their further proposals.
But so far is this from being the case, that the terms of a
proposed convention actually recognise the possibility that
the contracting Governments will resort to paper issues. As
I pointed out in my article in the c Contemporary Review 9
the substitution of paper money presents a means by which
any Government may practically absolve itself from the in-
convenient consequences of the convention ; and there can be
no reasonable doubt that in the event of a great war the
power of paper money would be brought largely into play.

“In view of these considerations, the questions of bi-
metallists and anti-bimetallists, however interesting and
perplexing they may be from a scientific point of view, lose
all practical importance.

“It is with grave regret that I noticed the remarks of
Sir J. Lubbock and other speakers in the debate on the
£1 note question. It was treated as a matter of course that
a forced paper currency would be resorted to in time of war.
„ . . . Above all must I insist upon the importance of
establishing a rule against the sudden replacement of masses
of metal by paper currencies. As several great nations may

2 a 2


356 COMMON SENSE IDEAS ABOUT MONEY. [xiV.

join in a war, this means an immense sudden supply of bullion

and a decreased demand I can only repeat that these

excessive rises or falls of value are not due to silver or gold,
hut to paper. . . . The real evil comes from paper. If
nations could be got to contract not to issue [forced] paper
money, the effect would be excellent.”

* 9 * * *

Common Sense Ideas about Money .

do not propose to follow M. de Laveleye through the
various commonplace fallacies into which he thinks several
professors have fallen, especially Mr. Bonamy Price. The
Oxford Professor is very well able to answer for himself, and
doubtless will do so.

“I do not find anything to retract. The equilibrating
action, no doubt, does go on; but it does not therefore
conclusively follow that we are to adopt that action in [regard
to] our pocket money. With equal reason we might be called
upon to eat oat-cake or rye-bread when the price of wheat is
high, in order that the equilibrating action of our private
consumption might equalise the price of grain. Nobody who
has carefully studied the subject would venture to deny that
there is a certain advantage in the double standard, as indeed
there is in almost all things. As a subject of study it is
most interesting, and this action of replacement described as
the Law of Gresham undoubtedly lies at the basis of the
science of money. But it is entirely a different matter to
decide in practice whether .... Practical action in legis-
lative and in ordinary matters almost always depends upon
a balance of a great many advantages and disadvantages ; and
this subject of bimetallic money is especially a case of this
kind. There may be much to be gained, but I venture to
think there is far more to be lost. The Americans have tried
the experiment for us, and have failed. . . . As regards the


XIV.]


FRAGMENTS.


357


us© of silver coin, tlie experiment lias been tried for us in the
United States. The monetary system of the Americans is
more similar to our own than is that of any Continental
country. It furnishes therefore the best guide ; and we find
that the banking classes have unanimously refused to handle
silver. ... As to the state of things in the United States,
it is impossible to feel the smallest amount of surprise.
Anyone who comprehends the intense Common sense of
Americans in the real conduct of their own affairs, apart
from the lobbies of Washington, must know that they would
not consent to carry silver about for the mere profit of
Nevada miners. ... Of course it would be possible to
depress silver to 30 pence per ounce, if the United States
Government, having accumulated [a large] stock of silver
should out of mere spite determine to sell it at any cost.
The profit to those who buy wisely would then be very large.
This is practically what the German Government did not long
ago, until experience taught them what a mistake they were
making. Any quantity of silver which even Nevada can
produce can be readily disposed of, I will not say at 60d.,
but at 52d. or 50d., if only reasonable time be allowed for
the operation. . . . What I maintain is that when the
demand of India for silver regains its normal amount, it will
be able to absorb all supplies which are thrown upon the
market with common sense regard to commercial profit. But
I further maintain that if the ancient demand [for silver] for
India cannot absorb the supplies from Nevada, it must be
an outrageous act of folly to endeavour to create a factitious
demand for silver in order to keep up the profits of American
miners, already the richest individuals in the world. . . .
As M. de Laveleye has explained (p. 802), there is no fear
of the silver of the East finding its .way back. What has
been going on with slight temporary checks since the time
of Pliny is not likely to be .suddenly reversed now. ... Just
as it is impracticable to introduce a silver medium in the


35S COMMON SENSE IDEAS ABOUT MONEY. [xiv.


United States, so it is impossible to carry out a gold one in
India. . . . All that we need in this subject is to avoid panic.
Let all keep their seats. Of course it stands to reason that
if the United States Government, having occupied themselves
in collecting a great mass of silver, insist on selling it off
suddenly, they will run down the price, and incur a grave
loss* In that case it would only be reasonable of other people
to take advantage r of the opportunity to buy up a commodity
which is sure to recover from any panic depression. . . .
The general conclusion which we should draw from a review
of the values of gold and silver is that they have both pro-
gressively decreased in purchasing power. . . . but that silver
has decreased in value more than gold in the ratio of about
16 to 10, and on the whole there is reason to believe that the
course of silver will be much the same in the future as in the
past. If so, gold will be the most equitable metal to retain
as the standard ; but those nations which retain silver as the
standard will receive in the course of time the greatest relief
from their obligations. ... It is not impossible that before
the inevitable change to the gold standard is achieved, some
troubles may be in store for us. They are not due to our own
mistakes, for we have so far made no mistakes. They are
due partly to physical circumstances over which we have no
control, partly to the tricks which foreign Governments have
been playing, tricks which a [bimetallic convention] would
not really preserve us from in the event of war. . , .
Curiously enough,* money is the only thing about which
traders unanimously agree in deprecating a high price (i.e.

* [The reason is clear enough, and certainly could not have escaped the
Author. In the first place, all traders, except the few who deal in money, are
in the position of buyers of loans, and naturally desire their loans cheap.
Secondly, the trade m money is for the most part of the nature of a commission
trade, and its profits depend rather on the quantity of business than on the
price at which it is done. And lastly, when the price of money rises beyond a
certain point, the whole system of trade is disorganised, and all classes of the
community suffer.]


XIV.]


FRAGMENTS.


359


interest). But it ought, surely, to be obvious that . . . .
there are two sides to the question. A steady rate o£ interest
of 4 to 5 per cent, is a healthy state of things. The recent
low rates of 2 or 2J per cent., or any less, are not healthy ;
they were the signs of revulsion and distrust of investment;
.... I do not believe that a convention to establish the
ratio 15| [to 1] would remedy the most serious part of -the
matter. Governments would still preserve the power to
contract or expand their paper currencies. When the next
great war occurred, we should again have metallic stores
poured forth, with the additional inconvenience that it might
be silver which would be poured into our circulation as well
as gold. What we really want is a convention between
nations to the effect that they will not suddenly pour out their
stores of precious metal in one year, and then as suddenly
wish to draw them back another year. . . . Even if silver
is to be accepted, there would be a disturbance of values by
these abnormal actions. It is not a question of silver or gold ;
it is a question of paper and metal.”

* * * *

[Mr. Jevons seems at one time to have intended to reprint
in this volume an extract from his article on Cantillon in
the <e Contemporary Review/* Jan., 1881, consisting of three
pages (73—75), in which Cantillon's views on bimetallism are
discussed. On p. 75 of this article the following passage
occurs : “ Not only bimetallism, but a thousand other

beneficent measures would become possible if all the nations
of the world could agree about them.” In transcribing this
passage for the press, Mr. Jevons had appended the following
note, which seems to contain his final judgment on the matter,
and may therefore be fitly inserted here :]

“ Although bimetallism might, under the conditions
alluded to, become possible, it is another question whether


360 COMMON SENSE IDEAS ABOUT MONEY. [xiv.

it would even then be beneficial. In the papers which follow,
especially No. [XIII., p. 320 of the present volume], it is
shown that, however convenient bimetallism might be at a
particular time, it would lead to an exceedingly inconvenient
surplus of silver coin, and to [other] evils there described.”


[APPENDIX ON THE THEORY OP CYCLES.


The following notice of recent investigations on the sun-
spot period, for -which. I am indebted to Professor Arthur
Schuster, of the Victoria University and Owens College,
Manchester, is of obvious interest in relation to the speculations
contained in the sixth, seventh, and eighth papers of this
volume.

I have also thought that the extract from Sir William
Petty, which, so far as I know, is the first distinct recognition
of the harvest cycle from a theoretic point of view, deserves
notice here. I find, on referring to Mr. Jevons* copy of
Petty, that he had doubly scored this passage. The chapter
in which it occurs is one of the most remarkable in a most
remarkable work, containing amongst other things a clear
statement of the theory of Cost of Production. The Treatise
itself is the first great work on economic theory, which it may
fairly be said to have founded. H. S. F.


WOLF ON THE SUN-SPOT PERIOD.

“ Manchester, Jan. 9, 1883.

Mv Dear Foxwell,

The paper on the sun-spot period, to which I referred when
I saw you last, is contained in No. 57 of the " Astronomische
Bachrichten.” I have not seen the original, but what appears to
be a full abstract is given by Faye in the “ Comptes Bendus,” vol. 95,
p. 1245. Wolf has come to the conclusion thfb the behaviour of
sun-spots since 1751 is best explained by the assumption of two
periods, one of 9 years 11 months, and the other of 11 years 3 months.
I must confess that the method by which he arrives at this result


362 APPENDIX ON THE THEORY OF CYCLES .


does not appear to me to be quite conclusive, though, there seems to
he a presumption in favour of the double period.

Arthur Schuster.”


SIR WILLIAM PETTY ON THE CYCLE.

( From Ms Treatise on Taxes and Contributions , 1662.)

“ Suppose a man could with his own hands plant a certain scope
of Land with Corn, that is, could Digg, or Plough, Harrow, Weed,
Eeap, carry home, Thresh, and Winnow so much as the Husbandry
of this Land requires ; and had withal Seed wherewith to sowe the
same, I say, that when this man had subducted his seed out of the
proceed of his Harvest, and also what himself hath both eaten and
given to others in exchange for Clothes and other Natural necessaries ;
that the Remainder of Corn is the natural and true Rent of the Land
for that year; and the medium of seven years, or rather of so many
years as makes up the Cycle, within which Dearths and Plenties
make their revolution, doth give the ordinary Rent of the Land
221 Corn.” Ch. XV., § 13, pp. 24, 26.]


BIBLIOGKAPHY.


As I have accumulated in the course of time a considerable number
of books and pamphlets, or references to such publications, bearing
on the subjects of this volume, I have thought that it might save
some readers labour to throw these into the form of a bibliography.
Mr. Dana Horton has already given a list of books of the same
kind in his work on Gold and Silver, developed in the Appendix to
the Monetary Conference of 1878.

In drawing up this list some bibliographical omissions have been
made for the sake of brevity. As almost all the books and pamphlets
are in octavo size, this is left to be understood except where it is
otherwise stated. Where no place of publication is stated, it is
understood to be London, excepting in the case of periodicals where
it would be known to be otherwise. When the same author's name
is frequently repeated, the Christian name or initials are given only
on the first occurrence of the name, as in the case of Wolowski,
Leslie, etc.


1568.

Bodin (Jean). Reponse aux paradoxes
de M. de Malestroit touchant
Tench^rissement de toutes les
choses et des Monnaies. Paris.
4to.

1576.

Ganault (Frangois). Les Recherches
des Monnoyes, Poix, etc. Paris.

Grimaudet (Francis). Les Mon-
noyes, Augmentation, etc. Paris.

1578.

Bodin (Jean). Lisconrs snr le re-
haussement et diminution des
Monnaies, pour reponse aux para-
doxes du sieur de Malestroit.
Paris. 8vo.


1582.

Scaruffi (Gaspardo). Discorso sopra
le Monete, et della vera Pro-
porzione tra l’Oro et 1’Argento.
Reggiano.

1591.

Budelius (Renerus). De Mouetis
et Re Numeraria. Colonise Agrip.
4to,

1603.

Malynes (Gerard de). England’s
View in the Unmasking of Two
Paradoxes, with a Replication
unto the Answer of Master John
Bodine. 12mo.

1608.

Bomitius (Jacohus). De Nfummis
in Repub. Peroutiendis. Hanovise.
4to.


364


CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


1613.

Sena (Antonio). Breve Trattato
delle Cause che possono far
abondare li Regni d’Oro e
d’Argento dove non sono Mmiere.

1622.

Malynes (Gerard de). Consuetudo
vel Lex: Mercatoria, etc. Fol.

1623.

MlSSelden (Edward). The Circle of
Commerce, or She Balance of
Trade, etc. 4to.

1627.

Savot (Louis). Discours sur les
Medalles Antiques, etc. Paris.
4to.

1641.

Kobinson (Henry) . England’s Safety
in Trade’s Encrease. pp. 62.

1643.

Violet (T.). The Transportation of
Gold and Silver, and other Abases.

1651.

Reynolds. The Touchstone of Gold
and Silver Wares.

1659.

33. (S.) Touchstone of Money and
Commerce. 4to.

1666.

Bouteroud (Claude). Recherches
Ouneuses des Monoyes de Prance.
Paris. Fol.

1671.

Use and Abuse of Money, and the
Improving of it. 4to.

1675.

Vaughan (Rice). A Treatise of
Money j or, A Discourse of Coin
and Coinage : the first invention,
use, matter, forms, proportions,
and differences. 12mo, 248 pp.

1679.

A Speech made by Sir Robert Cotton
before the Lords of His Majesty’s
Most Honourable Privy Council
touching the Alteration of Coyn.
(Prom Cottoni Posthuma.)


1682.

Petty (Sir William). Quantulum-
cunque ; or, A Tract concerning
Money, addressed to the Marquis
of Halifax. 4to.

1689.

Le Blanc (Franqois). Dissertation
Historique sur quelques Mon-
noyes. Paris. 4to.

1690.

Le Blanc (Franqois). Traits His-
torique des Monnoyes de France,
etc. Paris. 4to.

Some Ways for Raising of Money.
By a Person of Quality. 4to.

True Causes of the Present Scarcity
of Money. Fol.

1691.

England Undeceived, in Answer to
“ Some Ways for Raising of
Money.” 4to.

Locke (John). Some Considerations
of the Consequences of the
Lowering of Interest and Raising
the Value of Money, in a Letter
to a Member of Parliament.
London. 1 vol. 12mo.

Locke (John). Short Observations
on a Printed Paper, entitled
“For Encouraging the Coining
Silver Money in England, and
after for keeping it here.”
London. 12mo.

Nortfc (Dudley). Discourses upon
Trade, principally directed to the
Cases of Interest, Coinage, Clip-
ping, and Increase of Money.

1692.

Boizard (Jean). Traite des Monnaies
de leur circonstances et depend-
ances. Pans. 1 vol. 12mo.

1695.

About Mending the Coyn. 4to.

A further Essay for the Amend-
ment of the Coins, with the
opinion of Mr. G. de M. 4to.
Anon. (Wm. Lowndes). A Report
containing an Essay for the
Amendment of the Silver Coins.
159 pp.


Bibliography.


0. E. (Cook, E.) Treatise concern-
ing the Regulation of the Coyn of
England, 4to.

Discourse of the General Notions of
Money, Trade, and Exchanges.
By a Merchant.

Essay on the Goyn and Commerce
of the Kingdom. 4to.

Locke (John). Further Considera-
tions Concerning Raising the
Value of Money, etc. London.
12mo.

Proposal for supplying His Majesty
with £1,200,000 by mending the
Goyn. 4to.

V. A. (Vickaris, A.) Essay for
Regulating of the Coyn. 4to.

Woods (T.) Letter concerning the
Coyn. 4to.


1696.

Aickin (J.) Mysteries of the
Counterfeiting of the Coyn of the
Nation fully detected. 4to.

Asglll (John). Several Assertions
proved in order to create another
money than Gold and Silver.

Barbou (Nicholas). A Discourse
concerning Coining the New
Money Lighter, in Answer to Mr.
Locke’s <f Considerations about
Raising the Value of Money.”
12mo.

Dialogue between a Country Gen-
tleman and a Merchant con-
cerning the falling of Guineas.

Essay for lowering the Gold and
raising the Silver. 4to.

Letter of Advice to a Friend on the
currency of Clipt Money.

Review of the Universal Remedy
for all Diseases incident to Coin.
12mo.

The Regulating Silver Coin made
practicable and easie. By a Lover
of Ins Country, pp. 125.

Treatise of the Coyn and East India
Trade.

Briscoe (j.) Discourse of Money, m
l Letter to a Nobleman.

Cary (j*) Essay on the Coyn and
Credit of England, as they stand
with respect to its Trade.


36s

Chamberlain (H). On dipt and
Counterfeit Coin.

Decus et Tutamen; or, our New
Money as now coined in full
Weight and Fineness proved to
be for the Honour, Safety, and
Advantage of England. 12mo.

Ford (R.) The Reformation of the
Com.

Houghton (T.) Alteration of the
Coyn, 1695, and Europe’s GUjry.
Scheam for^Establishing a Peace,
and to reimburse the charges of
the Wars, 1695, and Book of
Funds.

Houghton (T.) Method for Supply-
ing the scarcity of money, and
the promoting of Trade.

Temple (Sir R.) . Remarks on Lock’s
Book, in answer to Lonnd’s and
other Books concerning Coin. 4fco.

1697.

H. J. (Hodges J.). Present State
of England as to Coyn and
Publick Charges.

Observations concerning Money
and Coins, and especially those
of England. 4to.

PoHexfen (j.). A Discourse of
Trade, Coyn, and Paper Credit;
And of Ways and Means to Gain,
and Retain Riches. To which is
added the Argument of a Learned
Counsel, upon an Action of the
Case brought by the East-India,
Company against Mr Sands an
Interloper 12mo, pp. 167, 77.

Treatise of the Reason and Cause
why our Money and Bullion have
been Exported for many years
last past. 2nd ed. 4to.

1705.

Law (John). Money and Trade con-
sidered ; with a Proposal for sup-
plying the Nation with Money.
Edinburgh. Sm, 4to, pp. 120.

1707.

Fleetwood. Chronicon Preciosum;
or, An Account of English Money,
the Price of Corn and other Com-
modities for the last 600 years.

pp 181.

Poulaiu (Henri). Traite des Mon-
naies. Paris. 12mo.


366


CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


1711.

Boizard. Traite des Monnaies, de
leurs Circonstances et Depen-
danoes. 2e Edition, augmentee
d’un traits d’alliage dfi a Hindret
de Beaulieu, etc. Paris. 2 yds.,
12mo.

Ceva. D© re Nummaria, quoad fieri
potuit geometric© tractata. Auc-
tore Joanne Ceya. Mantuee. 4to.
60 pp.

1716. ©

Further Reasons for Increasing our
Money. Pol.

1717.

Clayton (D.). Search into what
may be the Cause of the Present
Scarcity of our Gold Coin.

Newton (Sir Isaac). Report on the
State of the Coinage. 4to.

1718.

An Essay cm Money and Bullion.

38.

Letter to a Priend on what was Pub-
lished in “ The Daily Courant,”
Dec 30th, 1717, by Sir I. Newton,
relating to Coin.

Letter to a Member of Parliament
relating to the Coin.

Remarks Upon Gold Coin, wherein
some Mistakes are endeavoured
to be removed.

1722.

Wood (Wm.). A Survey of Trade
. . . with Considerations on our
Money and Bullion. . . Scarcity
of Silver Coins accounted for.
2nd ed., xiv., 373.

1730.

Swift (J.). Drapier’s Letters to the
People of Ireland concerning
Wood’s Brass Halfpence.

1737.

Lee (William). An Essay to ascer-
tain the value of Leases and
Annuities for Lives, with Obser-
vations on the State of Coins,
Interest of Money, and the Prices
of Things m Different Ages. (2nd
ed., 1764.)

Robinson (Bryan), Short Essay on
Coin. Dublin,


1738.

Anon. (Dutot). Reflexions Politiques
sur les Finances et le Commerce,
oh Ton Examine quelles ont ete
sur les Revenus : les Denrees, le
Change. ... les Influences des
Augmentations et des Diminu-
tions des Yaleurs Numeraires des
Monnoyes. A la Haye. 12mo.
2 vols. xxi, 444 j xii., 456.

1740.

Hewitt (John). A Treatise upon
Money, Coins, and Exchange, in
regard both to Theory and Prac-
tice. . . . 215 pp.

Two Letters to Mr. Wood on the
Coin and Currency in the Lee-
ward Islands.

1742.

Child (Sir J.) . Considerations sur le
Commerce et l’Interet de 1* Ar-
gent ; Traduit en Fran$ais par
Gournay. 12mo. Dans le m&me
volume se trouve joint le Petit
Traite confcre l’Usure, de Th.
Culpeper, traduit par le m&me.

Vallavine (Peter). Observations on
the Current Com of the Kingdom.

1746.

Dupre de St. Maur. Essai sur les
Monnaies; ou, Reflexions sur le
Rapport entre l’Argent et les
Denrees. Paris. 4to, 188 pp.

Fleetwood (Wm.). Account of the
True Market Price of Wheat.
Sheet folio.

1749.

Liruti (Gr.). Moneta Propria
Porestiera. 4to.

Turgot. Lettre sur les Papier Mon-
naie adress^e & M. Abbe de Cice.
(CEuvres completes. Paris, 1808-

u).

mo.

Galiani (Fernando). Della Moneta.

1751.

Dell Origiue della Moneta e del
Commercio. 4to.

Neri (Pompeo). Osservazioni sopra
il Prezzo Legale delle Monete.
Fiorentin.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


3 &7


1164 ,.

Carli-Rubbi (Don Gian Rinaldo).
Dissertazione delle Monete e dell*
Instituzione delle Zecche d’ltalia
dell* Antico e Presente Sistema
d’esse. Mantova.

1756.

Magens (Nicholas). Further Ex-
planations of some Particular
Subjects in “ The Universal Mer-
chant.” 4to.

1757.

Mortis (0.). Letter balancing the
Causes of the Present Scarcity of
our Silver Coin.

Naveau. Le Financier Citoyen.
Paris. 2 vols. 12mo.

1758.

D© Forbonnais. Reohercbes et
Considerations sur les Finances
de France, depuis 1595 jusqu’&
1721. Bale. 2 vols. 4to.

Robinson (Bryan). An Essay on
Coin, printed from a copy made
by the Author in 1747, and by
his two sons, Christopher and
Robert Robinson, of Dublin.

1757-58.

Harris (1 oseph). An Essay on Money
and Coins. Two Parts. 1 vol,

1759.

Considerations on the Present
Scarcity of Silver Coin, etc.
London. 4to.

1760.

Be Rettange. Traite des Monnaies.
Avignon. 2 vols. 12mo.

1762.

Duprd de Saint-Maur. Reeherches
sur la Valeur des Monnaies et
sur „le Prix des Grains, avant et
apr5s le Concile de Francfort.
Paris. 12mo.

Whatley (T.) Reflections on Coin
in General, on the Coins of Gold
and Silver of Great Britain in
particular, on those Metals as
Merchandise, and also on Paper
passing as Money. 4to.


1764.

Abot de Basinghen. Traite des
Monnaies et de la Jurisdiction de
la Cour des Monnaies, en forme
de Dictionnaire. Paris. 2 vols.
4to.

1765.

Authentic Accounts of the Price
of Wheat, Bread, Malt . . .
from William the Conqueror to
1745 : also Relation of Deafths
and Famines. Sm. 4to.

Relloni (Girolamo). Lettre sur la
Monnaie Fictive.

1766.

A Farmer. Three Letters to a
Member of the . . . House
of Commons, from a Country
Farmer, concerning the Price of
Provisions, and pointing ont a
Sure Method of preventing future
Scarcity.

Snelling (Thomas). The Doctrine
of Gold and Silver Computations ;
. . . the Par of Money; the
Proportion in Yalue between Gold
and Silver . . . 144 pp,, 10
plates of coins.

1767.

Abot de Basinghen. Table des
Monnaies Courantes. Paris.
12mo.

Mignot (l’Abbe). Traite des Prets
du Commerce; ou, de Hntdret
Legitime etlllegitime de T Argent.

1768.

An Inquiry into the Prices of Wheat,
Malt, and occasionally of other
Provisions ; of Land and Cattle,
... as sold in England from
the year 1000 to the year 1765.
Folio. (Attributed to Michael
Combrune, Esq., Brewer, but
said to be due to Sir Chas.
Whitworth.)

Auzano (Thomas). Refleciones
economico - politicas sobre las
causas de las alteraciones de
precios que ha padecido Aragon,
y discursos sobre los medios que
pueden facilitar la restauration
de Aragon. Zaragoza.


368


CURRENCY AND FINANCE .


1770.

Symons (William). An Essay on
Weighing of Gold, etc. . . .
An effectual method for discover-
ing . . . counterfeit pieces of
money . . . 2nd ed., vi., 60 pp.

1771.

Butel-Dumont. Traite de la cir-
culation et du credit. Amster-
dam et Paris.

Alton. (Major-General Henry
Lloyd). An Esa&y on the Theory
of Money, viii., x., 161.

Pinto. Traite de la Circulation, et
du Credit, xvi., pp. 368.

W im p Ay (Jos.). Present High Price
of Provisions

1772.

Beldam. Considerations on Money,
Bullion, and Foreign Exchanges ;
being an Inquiry into the Present
State of the British Coinage with
regard to the Scarcity of Silver
Money, vii. 157 pp.

1773.

Reflexions sur les derniers Ban-
queroutes en Angleterre et Hol-
lande et Conduite du Mimstere
Anglais & ce su]et. pp. 94.

1774.

A Critical Inquiry into the Legality
of the Proceedings consequent to
the late Gold Act.

Conduitt (John, Master of the Mint).
Observations upon the Present
State (1730) of our Gold and
Silver Coins. From an Original
Manuscript formerly in the pos-
session of the late Dr. Swift.

Hatton (T.). Essay on Gold Coin.
2nd ed.

1775.

Mahon (Lord Yisoount) . Considera-
tions on the Means of Preventing
Fraudulent Practices on the Gold
Coin. 4to.

1776.

Mace de Richeberg. Essai sur les
Qualites des Monnaies Etrang&res
et sur leurs diflerents Rapports
avec les Monnaies de France, etc.
Paris, Imprimerie Royale. Folio
de 58 pp.


1780.

PanctOIL. Metrologies ou, Traite des
Mesures, Poids, et Monnoies des
Anciens Peuples et des Modernes.
Paris. 4to.

1785.

Mirabeau (Le Comte de). De la
Banque d’Espagne dite de Saint
Charles, xiv., pp. 162.

1788.

Lettre sur la Proportion entre POr
et T Argent ; sur les Monnaies de
France, etc. Paris.

1789.

Meney (Walter). Remark? on the
Coinage of England, from the
Earliest to the Present Times,
with a view to point out the
Causes of the Present Scarcity
of Silver Coin, etc. Nottingham.

1790.

Forbonnais (Yeron de). Observa-
tions Succinctes sur remission
de Deux Milliards d’Assignats.
Paris 12mo.

Mirabeau. Observations Prelimi-
naires sur le Rapport du Comit6
des Monnoies et Memoire sur la
Constitution Monetaire. Paris,
Imp. de la Repub.

Premier Rapport da Comity des
Monnoies &T Assemble Nationale.
Paris, Imp. de la R5pub.

Second Rapport du Comite des
Monnoies E 1’ Assembles. -Paris.

1791.

Webster (Peletiah). Nature and
Operation of Money; with Essays
on Finance, etc. Philadelphia.

1792.

Hamilton (Alexander). Report (as
Secretary of the Treasury) on
the Mint. Washington.

Rochon (l’Abbe). Essai sur les
Monnaies Anciennes et Modernes.
1 vol., avec planches.

1793 (?).

Bergasse. Protestation de M. Ber-
gasse, D4put^ de la Senechaussee
de Lyon, contre les Assignats-
Monnoie. 2me ed. 48 pp. (?).


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


36 9


1794.

Crawfurd. The Doctrine of Equi-
valents ; or, an Explanation of the
Nature, the Value, and the Power
of Money. Rotterdam.

1*96.

Mongez (A.) Considerations sur les
Monnaies . . . Suivi d’une notice
sur les Monnaies Franeaises, par
Dibarrat.

Ortig CT. A.), Ensayo Econdmico
sobu, el Sistema de la Moneda-
Papel, y sobre el Credito publico.
4to.

1*97.

Baring (Sir Francis, Bart.) Ob-
servations on the Establishment
of the Bank of England, and on
the Paper Circulation of the
Country.

Frienr. Rapport sur la Loi des
Monnoies fait au Nom de la Com-
mission des Finances au Conseil
des Oinq-Cents. Paris. An VI.

Saint Alibin. Opuscules sur les
Finances, le Papier-Monnaie, le
Crddit, etc., avec tables, 20 pieces.

1*98.

Evelyn (Sir G. Shuckburgh). Of
Some Endeavours to ascertain a
Standard of Weight and Measure.
“Philosophical News,” vol. 88,
p. 133. Hutton’s Abridgment,
vol. xviii., pp, 300-12.

Magens (Magens Dorien) . Thoughts
upon a new Coinage of Silver,
more especially as it relates to
an Alteration in the Division of
the Pound Troy. By a Banker,
vi., 104.

Tableau Graphique de lavaleur en
numeraire des assignats, rescrip-
tions et mandats, depuis leur
creation jusqu’& leur ch&te, et de
celle des inscriptions sur le grand
livre depuis le 27 Janvier, 1*9*,
jusqu’au ler Janvier, 1*98. One
large sheet. Date of publication
unknown.

1800.

An Inquiry iuto the Causes and
Remedies of theXate and Present
Scarcity and High Price of Pro-
visions. ... *1 pp.


Cause of the Threatened Famine
occasioned by the Paper Cur-
rency.

Forbonnais. Analyse des Principes
sur la Circulation des Denrdes, et
l’Influence du Numeraire sur la
Circulation. Paris. 12mo.

Le Breton. Rapport fait au Nom
- de la Section des Finances, sur le
Projet de Correlatif aux Mon-
naies. Paris. 4to.

1801.

Baring (Sir Francis). Observations
on the Publication of Walter
Boyd, Esq.

Berenger. Premier Rapport sur les
Monnoies — Section des Finances.
Citoyen Berenger, Rapporteur.
Paris, Imp. de la Repub. Au X.

Bdrenger. Second Rapport sur les
Monnoies — Section des Finances.
Citoyen Berenger, Rapporteur.
Paris. Au X.

Boyd (Walter). A Letter to the
Right Hou. William Pitt, on the
Influence of the Stoppage of
Issues in Specie at the Bank of
England ; on the Prices of Pro-
visions and other Commodities.
2nd ed,, with Notes and
Preface.

Freud (W.). Effect of Paper Money
on the Price of Provisions.

1802.

G-audin. Premier Rapport du Min-
istre des Finances auxConseils sur
les Monnaies. Paris, Imp. de la
Repub. An XI.

Gaudin. Second Rapport du Min-
istre des Finances aux Conseils de
la Republique sur les Monnaies.
Paris, Imp. de la Rdpub. An XI.

The Utility of Country Banks Con-
sidered.

Thornton (Henry). An Inquiry into
the Nature and Effects of the
Paper Credit of Great Britain.

1 vol.

1803.

Crawfurd (George). Doctrine of
Equivalents ; or, An Explanation
of the Nature, Value, and Power
of Money.

2 B


370


CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


Ghier (de). Considerations sur les
Finances.

King (Lord). Thoughts on the Effects
of the Bank Restrictions. (The
2nd edition enlarged, with some
Remarks on the Coinage. 1804).

Lasalle (Henri). Des Finances
d’Angleterre. Pans.

Wheatley (John). Remarks on
Currency and Commerce, vi., 262.

1804.~

Foster (John Leslie). An Essay on
the Principle of Commercial
Exchanges, and more particularly
of the Exchange between Great
Britain and Ireland ■ with an
Inquiry into the Practical Effects
of the Bank Restrictions.

Magens (M. D.). An Inquiry into
the Real Difference between
Actual Money, consisting of Gold
and Silver, and Paper Money of
various descriptions, vi., 68.

Parnell (Henry). Observations upon
the State of Currency in Ireland,
and upon the Course of Exchange
between Dublin and London.
Dublin.

1805.

Lauderdale (Earl of). Thoughts on
the Alarming State of the Cir-
culation, and on the Means of
Redressing the Pecuniary Grie-
vances of Ireland.

Liverpool (Charles, Earl of). A
Treatise on the Coins of the
Realm ; m a Letter to the King.
Oxford. 4to, 268 pp.

1806.

Bonneville. Traite des Monnaies.

1808.

Ede (James). A View of the Gold
and Silver Corns of all Rations
... in above 400 copperplate
engravings . . . also Sir Isaac
Newton's Tables of Foreign Coins.

76 pp. 34 plates.

1809.

Murhard (Oh.) ITeber Geld Munze
Cassel und Marburg,


1810.

Atkinson (J.) Letter to a Member
of Parliament on the Report of
the Committee on the High Price
of Bullion.

A Short Statement of the Trade in
Gold Bullion, with an attempt to
show that Bank Notes are not
depreciated. Liverpool. 81 pp.

Blake (William). Observations on
the Principles which regulate the
Course of Exchange, and on the
Present Depreciated State of the
Currency.

| Bosanqiiet (Charles). Practical
Observations on the Report of the
Bullion Committee. 110 pp.

Carey (P.) Real Cause of the
Depreciation of the National
Currency.

Cock (S ) Examination of the Report
of the Bullion Committee.

FonblanQLUe (j.) Doubts as to the
Expediency of adopting the
Recommendation of the Bullion
Committee.

Francis (Sir P.) Reflections on the
Abundance of Paper Money in
Circulation, and the Scarcity of
Specie. 2nd ed.

Grenfell (John). A Defence of Bank
Notes against the opinions which
have been published in the Morn-
ing Chronicle , . . and in a recent
pamphlet entitled the High Price
of Bullion, &c. pp. iv., 32.

Hill (J .) An Inquiry into the High
Price of Gold Bullion in England.

Huskisson (W.) The Question con-
cerning the Depreciation of our
Currency stated and examined.
3rd ed., xix., 154 pp.

J ackson (R.) Speech at the General
Court of the Bank of England on
the Report of the Bullion Com-
mittee.

Musket (Robert). An Enquiry into
the ^ Effects produced on the
National Currency and Rates of
Exchange by the Bank Restriction
Bill, explaining the Cause of the
High Price of Bullion, <&c.

Report, with Minutes of Evidence and
Accounts, from the Select Com-
mittee appointed to inquire into
the Cause of the High Price of
Gold Bullion ... x., 78, 237
(115) pp.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


Ricardo (David). The High Price
of Bullion a proof of the De-
preciation of Bank Notes, iv.,
48 pp.

Sinclair (Sir John). Observations
upon the Report of the Bullion
Committee.

Sismondi (J. C. L. Simonde).. Du
Papier-Monnaie dans les Etats
Autrichiens et des Moyens de la
supprimer. Weimar.

Trotter (0.) Principles of Currency
and Exchanges applied to the
Report of the Bullion Committee.

1811.

Boase. Remarks on the New Doc-
trine concerning the Supposed
Depreciation of our Currency.

Canning (George). Substance of
two Speeches ... in the Com-
mittee of the whole House, to
which was referred the Report of
the Committee ... to inquire
into the Cause of the High Price
of Bullion. . . . 155 pp.

Castlereagh (Lord "Viscount). Sub-
stance of a Speech . . . May 8th
... on the Report of the Bullion
Committee. 50.

Cattley (S.). Speech at the Bank
of England, 21st March, 1811,
showing the Present High Price
of Bullion.

Chalmers (George). Considerations
on Commerce, Bullion, and Coin,
Circulation, and Exchanges. . ,
237 pp-

Cooke (N.). Money, What it is, its
Value, etc., in reference to Bank
of England Notes.

Eliot (F. P.). Observations on the
Fallacy of the Supposed Deprecia-
tion of the Paper Currency.

Enquiry into the Nature, Value,
and Operation of Coin and Paper
Money. By Peter Pennyless.

Few Facts stated in answer to the
Report of the Bullion Committee.

Giddy (D.). Plain Statement of the
Bullion Question.

Herries, Review of the Controversy
respecting the High Price of
Bullion and the State of the
Currency.


in

Hoare (p. R : ). Examination of Sir
J. Sinclair’s Observations on the
Report of the Bullion Committee.

Humboldt (Alexander von). Essai
Politique sur la NouvelleBspagne.
Paris. English translation, New
York, 1811.

Johnstone. Speeoh on the Third
Reading of Lord Stanhope’s Bill
relating to Gold Coin.

King (Lord).* Speech in the House
of Lords, July 2nd, 1811, on the
Second Reading of Lord Stan-
hope’s Bill, respecting Guineas
and Bank Notes.

Koslin (John T.). Short Statement
of the Trade in Gold, Bullion,
etc. etc. Liverpool.

Observations upon the Argument
drawn by Huskisson and the
Bullion Committee from the High
Price of Bullion. By Civis,

Raithby (John) . The Law and Prin-
ciple of Money Considered, in a
Letter to W. Huskisson, Esq.,M.P.
xvi., 116.

Ricardo (David). Reply to Mr.
Bosanquet’s “ Practical Observa-
tions on the Report of the Bullion
Committee.”

Rosse (Earl of). Observations on
the Present State of the Currency
of England.

Siordet (J. M.). Letter to Sir John
Sinclair, supporting his Argu-
ments in refutation of those
advanced by Huskisson on the
Supposed Depreciation of our
Currency.

Smart (B.). Letter to the House of
Commons on the Necessity of an
Immediate Attention to the State
of the Coinage.

Smith (Thomas). Essay on the
Theory of Money and Exchange.
2nd ed.

Theory of Moneys or, Inquiry into
the State of the Circulating
Medium, with Considerations on
the Bank of England.

Thornton (E.). Observations on the
Report of the Committee on the
High Price of Gold Bullion.

Vansittart (Right Hon. N.). Two
Speeches on the Bullion Question.

2 B %


372 CURRENCY AND FINANCE .


Wilson (G-.) Defence of Abstract
Currencies in Reply to the Bullion
Report of Huskisson.

Wilson (&•)• Observations on the
Depreciation of Money, and the
State of our Currency.

Wilson (R.). Further Observations
on the Supposed Depreciation of
our Currency.

1812.

Lauderdale (Earl of) A Depreciation
of the Paper Currency of Great
Britain Proved.

Thoughts on the Present State of
the Currency of this Country.
By a Merchant.

Torrens (B,.) . An Essay on Money
and Paper Currency, xvi., 348.

Wilson (Glocester). A Further De-
fence of Abstract Currencies.

pp. 111.

Young (Arthur). Inquiry into the
Progressive Value of Money in
England.

1813.

Smith (J. P.). Elements of the
Science of Money, founded on
the Principles of the Laws of
Nature.

1815.

Wilson (Robert). An Inquiry into
the High Prices of Corn and
Labour, with Relative Tables and
Remarks. Edinburgh.

Witherspoon (L). Essay on Money
as a Medium of Commerce. Edin-
burgh. 12mo.

Young (Arthur). An Enquiry into
the Rise of Prices in Europe
during the last Twenty-five Tears,
compared with that which has
taken place in England; with
Observations on the Effects of
High and Low Prices. “ Pam-
phleteer, 1 ” vol. vi.

1816.

Hennet o© Chevalier). Essai du
Plan de Finances. Paris. 4to.

Martineau, Du Numeraire et des
Moyens de Remplacer celui qui
sortira de la France. Paris.

Ricardo. Proposals for an Economical
and Secure Currency; with Ob-
servations on the Profits of the
Bank of England. . . , 126 pp.


Silver Coinage. Debate of the
House of Commons in Committee,
and (excellent) Speech of Mr.
Wellesley Pole. “ Parliamentary
Debates,” May 30th, vol. xxxiv.,
pp. 940-966.

Smith (Thomas). A Reply to Mr.
Ricardo’s Proposals for an Econo-
mical and Secure Currency. 44 pp.

Tatham (Edw). Observations on the
Scarcity of Money, and its Effects
upon the Public. “ Pamphleteer,”
vol. vii., pp. 445-474. (Also
separate print, 5 editions, Oxford.)

Zach-Gallard. De la Conservation
du Numeraire en France. Paris.

1817.

A Method of increasing the quantity
of Circulating Money: upon a
new and solid principle. “ Pam-
phleteer,” vol. xi., pp. 1-31.

Cleynmann. Aphorismen aus dem
Faohe der Munzgesetzarebung'.
Frankfort.

Letconne (J . A.) Considerations
generates sur revaluation des
Monnaies Grecques et Romaines,
et sur la Valeur de l’Or et de
1 Argent avant la Decouverte de
l’Anterique. Paris, 4to.

Ruding (Rogers). Annals of the
Coinage of Britain and its De-
pendencies. 4 vols., 4to.

Sabatier. Des Banques, de leur
Influence pour faciliter la Cir-
culation des Capitaux, faire
baisser le trop haut prix de
1 intdr^t, et des mesures k adopter
pour que I’agriculture, 1’industrie,
le commerce de la France et des
divers Etats jouissent de l’avan-
> tage de tels etablissements. Paris.

Smith (Thomas). Letter to the Rt.
Hon. the Earl of Liverpool on the
New Coinage. “Pamphleteer,”
vol. x., pp. 71-92.

1818.

A Letter to the Rt. Hon. W. W. Pole,
respecting the Disappearance of
the Gold Coin, and the Resumption
of Cash Payments. “Pamphleteer,”
vol. xii., pp. 19-48.

Considerations sur la Sortie du
Numeraire A l’occasion de la
Situation Commerciale et Finan-
ciaire de la France. Paris.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


373


Sinclair (Sir J.) The approaching
Crisis or Impracticability of Re-
suming Cash Payments at the
Bank.

1819.

Anon* (Copleston). A Letter on the
Pernicious Effects of a variable
Standard of Value . . . 3rd ed.
Oxford. Ill pp.

Bollman (E.) Letter to T. Brand
on Resumption of Specie Pay-
ments.

Cooke. Real Cause of the High
Price of Gold.

Gamier (Germain). Histoire de la
Monnaie, depuis les temps les
plus recules jusqu’au regne de
Charlemagne. Paris. 2 vols.

Gilbert (Davies). A Plain State-
ment of the Bullion Question . . .
2nd ed. “ Pamphleteer," vol. xiv.,
pp. 19-45.

Lyne (C.) Letter to the Earl of
Liverpool on the Impossibility
of a Speedy Return to a Gold
Currency.

Report from the Secret Committee
on the Expediency of the Bank
resuming Cash Payments; with
the Minutes of Evidence . . .
382 pp.

Booke (J.) Remarks on the Nature
and Operation of Money. By Cum-
briensis . . . also Supplement to
Remarks, &c., 1819.

Three Letters on the Causes of the
Present State of the Exchanges
and Price of Gold Bullion. By
an Old Merchant; with an In-
troductory Address by the Earl
of Lauderdale.

TWO Tables, with explanations,
illustrative of the Speeches of
. . . the Earl of Liverpool and
. . . the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer, showing the Rates of
Exchange on Hamburg, compared
with the amount of Bank Notes
and the price of Gold . , . “ Pam-
phleteer," vol. xv., pp. 281-6, with
two copper-plate folding dia-
grams.

1820.

Crawford (W. H.) Report (as
Secretary of the Treasury) on
the Circulation, Washington
(reprinted in Report of Monetary
Conference of 1878, p. 602).


Elementary Thoughts on the
Bullion Question, the National
Debt,, the Resources of Great
Britain, &c. Barnstaple,

1821.

Cobbett (William). Paper against
Gold : on the History and Mystery
of the Bank of England. 4th ed.
470.

Beport of the Committee of the Jlouse
of Representatives on Currency,
Feb. 21, 1821, on the Expediency
of increasing the Relative Value
of the Gold hereafter to be coined 1
at the Mint of the United States.
Reprinted in Report of Monetary
Conference, 1878, p. 554.

1822.

Cleynmann. Materialien fur Miinz-
gesetzgebung. Frankfort.

Klaproth (J.) Sur TOrigine du
Papier-Monnaie. “ Journal Asi-
atique," vol. i., p. 375.

Low© (Joseph). Present Condition
of England, etc.

Playfair (Wm.). Letter on our
Agricultural Distresses . . . with
Tables and Copperplate Charts,
showing and comparing the Prices
of Wheat, Bread, and Labour,
from 1565 to 1821. . . . 2nd ed.,
79 pp., three charts ; 3rd ed.,
84 pp., four charts.

State of the Currency. <{ Quart. Rev.”
vol. xxvii., 239-267.

1823.

Andrd (C. C.). Neueste Zahlensta-
tistik, etc. Stuttgart.

Blake (Wm.). Observations on the
Effects produced by the Expendi-
ture of Government during the
Restriction of Cash Payments.

121 pp.

Klaproth (J.)* Origin of Paper
Money.

Letter to Lord A. Hamilton on Alter-
ations of the Value of Money.

Rainier (Rear-Admiral). Synopsis
of the Prices of Wheat, from the
Commencement of the 13th
Century to the end of 1822, and
of Circumstances affecting them,
Fol.


374


CURRENCY AND FINANCE .


Tooke on High and Low Prices.
“ Quarterly Review,” April, vol.
xxix., pp. 214-239.

Tooke. Thoughts and Details on the
High and Low Prices of the last
Thirty Years. Part I., On the
Alterations in the Currency, viii.,
220; Table.

1824.

Thompson (T. Perronet). The In-
urnment of Exchange. “ West-
minster Reviewer No# 1, Jan.,
vol. i., pp. 171-205. (Reprinted
in 1830, 27 pp., with preface,
notes, etc,)

1825.

Crutwell (R.). Treatise on the State
of Currency, 1824-25.

Ganilh (Charles). De la Science des
Pinances.

1826.

Digest of Pacts and Principles on
Banking and Commerce j with a
Plan for Preventing Future Re-
actions. xii., 118 pp.

Drummond (H.). Elementary Pro-
positions on the Currency.

Extract of a Letter to “The Farmers’
Journal ” on the Currency.

Graham (James). Com and Currency.
2nd ed.

Hardcastle (Daniel). Letters to
the Editor of “The Times” on
the Affairs. ... of the Bank of
England, the Introduction of
British Silver Honey into the
Colonies. ...

Joplin (T.). News of the Currency.

Mushet (Robert). An Attempt to
Explain from Pacts the Effects of
the Issues of the Bank of England
upon its own Interests, Public
Credit, and Country Banks.

Parnell (Sir Henry, Bart.) . Observa-
tions on Paper Money, Banking,
Over-trading, etc.

Pebrer (p.). Five Questions on the
Actual Mercantile Distress. 34 pp.

Beport from the Select Committee
on Promissory Notes m Scotland
and Ireland. Polio.

BeportS from the Committee on the
Bank of England, and on the
Necessity of the Continuance of
Suspension of Cash Payments.
Folk*


Scott (Sir Walter). Letters of
Malachi Malagrowther on the
Proposed Change of Currency,
etc. etc. Edinburgh,

Tooke (Thomas, P.R.S.). Considera-
tions on the State of the Currency,
iv., 152 pp.

West (Sir Edward). Price of Com
and Wages of Labour . . . and
an Attempt at an Exposition of
the Fluctuation of the Price of
Com during the last Thirty Years.

Yates (J. A ). Essays on Currency
and Circulation.

1828.

Anon. (Paul Moon Jambs, first
Managing Director of the Man-
chester and Salford Bank). A
Summary Statement of the One-
Pound Note Question, v., 23 pp.

Senior (Nassau W.). Three Lectures
on the Transmission of the
Precious Metals from Country
to Country, and the Mercantile
Theory of Wealth. 96 pp.

Ward. Mexico in 1827. 2 vols.

1829.

Currency. “ Quarterly Review,”
vol. xxxix., pp. 451-475.

Essay on Currency. By an Old
Practitioner.

On the Currency in Connexion with
the Corn Trade j and on the Corn
Laws. . . . Postscript on the
Present Commercial Stagnation.
119 pp.

Sinclair (Sir John). Thoughts on
Currency, and the Means of Pro-
moting National Prosperity.

Tooke. Letter to Lord Grenville on
the Effects ascribed to the Re-
sumption of Cash Payments on
the Yalue of the Currency. 132 pp.

1830.

Banking. “ Quarterly Review,”
March, vol. xlii., pp. 476-504.

Crutwell (R.)* Salv& Fide : a Letter
on the Currency, and the necessity
of a New Standard.

Distress of the Country. “ Quarterly
Review,” vol. xliii., pp. 278-304.

Higham (S. D.) Report on the
Relative Yalue of Gold and Silver.
Washington. Reprinted in Report
on Monetary Conference of 1878,
p, 558.


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 37$


Lloyd (Rev. F, W.) The Price of
Corn in Oxford in the beginning
of the Fourteenth Century : also
from the year 1583 to the present
time . . . Oxford, viii., 100 pp.

Postscript to the Article on the
Instrument of Exchange in No. 1,
“ Westminster Review/* April,
xii., pp. 525-33.

Rapport an Roi sur 1* Administration
des Finances. Par le Oomte de
Chabrol, Mai 15. Partie intitulee
“ Commission des Monnaies.”

Report) Dec. 15, 1830, from the
Select Committee of the Senate
on the State of the Current Coins
by Mr. Sanford. 21st Cong.,
2nd Sess., S. R. 3.

Scrope (G. P.). On Credit Currency,
and its superiority to Coin, in
support of a petition for the
establishment of a Cheap, Safe
. . . Circulating Medium.

Senior. Three Lectures on the Cost
of obtaining Money, and on some
effects of Private and Government
Paper Money. 103 pp.

Solly (E.). Our Present Distress in
Relation to the Theory of Money.

The Currency Question freed from
Mystery. (By Poulett Scrope).

1831.

Gallatin (Albert). Considerations
on the Currency and Banking
System of the United States.
Philadelphia.

Jacob (W.), F.R.S, An Historical
Inquiry into the Production and
Consumption of the Precious
Metals. 2 vols., xvi., 380 $ xi.,
415 pp.

Lambert (H.). Letter on the Cur-
rency, to Lord Althorp.

1832.

Alt 4 « (F.). Traite Comparatif des
Monnaies, Poids et Mesures . . .
Suivi d’Explications et de Rap-
ports sur le Syst&me Monetaire
. . . Marseilles, 360.

Badcock (B.). Tables exhibiting
the Prices of Wheat from the
year 1100 to 1830 ; also the Prices
of Beans, Barley, and Oats from
1790 to 1830 . , . Fob, 12 pp.


Lubl (D. G.). Argument against the
Gold Standard, iv., 192 pp.

Report from the Secret Committee
on the Expediency of Renewing
the Charter of the Bank of
England, and the System on
which Banks of Issue in England
are conducted. 1831. Fol.

Return: Production of Gold and
Silver Mines. " Pari. Paper/*
No. 338.

Scrope (G. Poulett). An Examination
of the Bank Charter Question ;
with an Inquiry into the Nature
of a Just Standard of Value, and
Suggestions for the Improvement
of our Monetary System. 77 pp.

Supply and Consumption of the
Precious Metals. “ Edinburgh
Review/* April, vol. !v., pp. 43-61.

The Rights of Industry and the
Banking System. “ Quarterly
Review/* xlvii., 408-57.

1833.

Busch (Prof.). Evils of Gold as a
Sign of Value ; with Suggestions
for the Establishment of a
National Bank. Hamburg.

Gouge (Wm. M.). A Short History
of Paper Money and Banking in
the United States, Philadelphia.

Mill (J- S.). The Currency Juggle.

" Tait’s Magazine,” January. Dis-
sertations and Discussions, 2nd
ed., i. 42-55.

Moore (Samuel). Report on the
Relative Value of Gold and Silver
Bullion, etc., in a Letter to the
Director of the Mint, Jan. 11th.
(Extracts reprinted in Report of
Monetary Conference, p. 678).

Prolongation of the Bank Charter.
“Edinburgh Review/’ January,
vol. lvi., pp. 376-411.

1834.

Anon (G. R*JPorter). Wages and
Prices. “ Companion to The
British Almanack,” pp. 33-61.

Report of the Select Committee of
the House of Representatives on
Coins, etc., C. P. White, Chair-
man, Feb. 19th, 23rd Congress,
1st Sess. H. R., No. 278, 116 pp. ;
containing also a Reprint of the
Report of March 17th, 1832, on


CURRENCY AND FINANCE .


37 °


the State of the Coins, by Mr.
White, Chairman, for the similar
Committee, and of a Report of
Feb 22nd, 1831, upon the pro-
posed Legal Tender of Dollars of
the New American Governments,
and of Five-Franc Pieces, by
Mr. White, Chairman of a Select
Committee, etc. (Extracts re-
printed in Eeport of Monetary
Conference, p. 673).

General JackSOE and the Bank of
the United Statesr “Westminster
Review,” October, xxi., 273-297.

1835.

Hermann (F. B. W.). Ueber den
gegenwartigen Znstand des

Munzwesens in Deutschland und
die neuen Vorschlaege zur

Abstellung seiner Gebrechen. 1
Bd. Heidelberg.

Return : East India Gold Currency.
February 25.

1836.

De Saulcy (F.). Essai de Classifica-
tion des Suites Mon&aires By-
zantines.

New System of Currency. By a
Citizen of the World.

Prices Of Fourteen Articles for Forty
Years. “American Almanack,”
p. 101.

Taylor (John). Catechisms of the
Currency and Exchanges . . .
Few ed., enlarged, 12mo, 122 iv.,

160 pp.

1837.

Bailey (Samuel). Money and its
Vicissitudes in Value, as they
affect National Industry and
Pecuniary Contracts.

Biot (Ed ). Memoire sur le System©
Mon6taire des Chinois. “ Journal
Asiatique.”

Gilbart (j. W.). The History of
Banking in America, with an
Inquiry how far the Banking
Institutions of America are
adapted to this Country, and a
Review of the Causes of the
Eecent Pressure on the Money
Market.

J. M. 0. Monetary System : the
Inconvenience of a Gold Standard
&nd Circulating Medium stated,
with a proposed substitute.


J oplin (Thos.). Tracts on Currency.

Loyd (Samuel Jones). Reflections
suggested by a Perusal of Mr. J.
Horsley Palmer’s Pamphlet on
the Causes and Consequences of
the Pressure ou the Money
Market.

Loyd (S, Jones). Further Beflections
ou the State of the Currency, and
the Action of the Bank of England.

MacCulloeh (J. C.). Causes and
Consequences of the Crisis in the
American Trade. u Edinburgh
Review,” July,vol. Ixv., pp. 221-38,

Money the Representative of Value.
79 PP-

Morrison (W. H.). Observations on
the System of Metallic Currency
adopted in this Country.

Palmer (j. Horsley). The Causes
and Consequences of the Pressure
upon the Money Market, with a
Statement of the Action of the
Bank of England from the 1st
October, 1833, to the 27th Decem-
ber, 1336.

Palmer (j. Horsley). Reply to the
Reflections of Mr. S. Jones Loyd
on the Pamphlet entitled “ Causes
and Consequences of the Pressure
upon the Money Market.”

Report of the Select Committee on
the Royal Mint.

Torrens (R.)* a Letter to the Right
Hon. Lord Viscount Melbourne,
on the Causes of the Recent
Derangement in the Money
Market and on Bank Reform.

1888.

Carey (H. C.). The Credit System
of France, Great Britain, and the
United States, pp. 130. Phila-
delphia.

Hoffmann (j. G.). Die Lehre vom
Gelde als einleitimg zu grimd-
lichen Urtheilen uber das Geld-
wesen mit besonderer Rucksicht
auf den prenssischen Staatvorge-
tragen. Berlin.

Humboldt (A. Van). Ueber
die Schwanknngen der Gold
production, mit Rucksicht auf
staats wirthschaftliche Probleme.
“ Deutsche Vierteljahrs-Schr.,”
iv., ss. 1-40. Stuttgard.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


3 77


Jacob (W.). Ueber Production und
Consumtion der edlen Metalle.
Eine gescbictliche untersuchung
A. de Engl mit Benutzung
hauptsachlich mit getbeilter
Yerbesserungen des Yerfassers
und mit eigenen Zusaetzen
versehen yon 0. T. Kleinschrod.
Leipzig.

Joplin (T.). Articles on Banking
and Currency, from “ Tbe Econo-
mist ” newspaper, vi., 108. (An
earlier “ Economist/’)

Mees (C.). Dissertatio de vi Mutatsa
Monetae in Solutionem Pecuniae
Debitae. Rotterdam.

Norman (G. Warde). Remarks on
some Prevalent Errors with re-
spect to Currency and Banking.

Tooke (Thomas). A History of
Prices, and of the State of the
Circulation, from 1793 to 1837;
preceded by a brief sketch of the
state of the Com Trade in. the
last two Centuries. 2 vols., viii.,
376 ; iv., 298. (Yols. i. and ii. of
“ History of Prices.”)

1839.

Felt. Historical Account of the
Massachusetts Currency.

Say (Horace). Histoire des Relations
Commerciales entre la France et
le Bresil, et Considerations sur les
Monnaies, les Changes, les
Banques et le Commerce Ex-
terieur. Paris.

1840.

Anon. (Sir J. W. Lubbock.) On

Currency. London (Charles
Knight & Co.), viii., 43, 21 pp.

Bailey (Samuel). A Defence of Joint
Stock Banks and Country Issues.

Bell (R.)* better to J. W. Gilbart
on the Regulation of the Currency
by the Foreign Exhanges.

Carey (H. C.). Answers to the Ques-
tions — What Constitutes, what
are the Causes of Unsteadiness
of the Currency, and what is the
Remedy ?

Condy-Raguet. Traits des Banques
et de la Circulation. Traduit de
T Anglais par I emaitre. Paris.


1838-40.

Dumas et Golmont. Rapports h
M. le Ministre des Finanoes.

1840.

Hildreth (R.). Banks, Banking, and
Paper Currencies ; in three parts.
I. The History of Banking and
Paper Money. II. Argument for
Open Competition in Banking.
III. Apology for One -Dollar
Notes. Boston, U.S.A. 20& pp.

Loyd (S. JoriSs). Remarks on the
Management of the Circulation,
and on the Conditions and Con-
duct of the Bank of England, and
of the Country Issuers during the
year 1839.

Loyd (S. J.). A Letter to J. B.
Smith, Esq., President of the
Manchester Chamber of Com-
merce. London.

Loyd (S- J.)* Effects of the Adminis-
tration of the Bank of England.
A Second Letter to J. B. Smith,
Esq., President of the Manchester
Chamber of Commerce.

Ruding (Rogers). Annals of the
Coinage of Great Britain and its
Dependencies. 3rd ed., 3 vols.
4to, xix., 422 ; 620 ; 3rd vol.
plates and maps.

Tooke. A History of Prices and of
the State of the Circulation in
1838 and 1839. . . . iv., 298.
(Yol. iii. of History of Prices).

Wilson (James). Fluctuations of
Currency, Commerce, and Manu-
factures ; referable to the Com
Laws, iv., 148 pp.

1841.

Corbet (Thomas). An Inquiry into
the Causes and Modes of the
Wealth of Individuals; or, The
Principles of Trade and Specula-
tion Explained. In two parts,
xi., 256.

De Morgan (Augustus). . . . and on
the Practicability of a Decimal
Coinage. “ Companion to the
British Almanack,” pp. 17-21.

Gallatin (Albert). Suggestions on
the Banks and Currency of the
several United States, in reference
principally to the Suspension of
Specie Payments. New York.


378


CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


Hildreth (R.)* High and Low Prices.
“Hunt’s Merchants’ Magazine,”
vol. iii., p. 305.

Hoffman (J. G). Die Zeichen der
Zeit im Deutschen Munzwesen
als zugabe zu der Lehre vom
Gelde. Berlin.

Leatham (Wm.). Letters on the
Currency. 2nd senes.

Nebenius (F.). Ueber die Schwan-
%nngen des circulienden Mediums
in Europa und d£ren Inflnss auf
die Geld preise der Dinge in den
letzten funf Decennien. (D. Y.
Schr., xii., 1-72). Stuttgard.

1842.

Bosanquet (J. W.). Metallic, Paper,
and Credit Currency.

Coquelin (Oh.) Du Credit et des
JBanques dans l’Industrie. “ Eevue
des Deux Mondes,” 1 Sept.

Dubois (W. E.) and Eckfeldt (Jacob
it-)* A Manual of Gold and
Silver Coins of all Nations. (See
“Hunt’s Merchants’ Magazine,” j
vol. vii., pp . 267-273; vol, x.,

# PP- 240-250).

Price of Bank Notes at Philadelphia.
1814-41. « Hunt’s Merchants’

Magazine,” vol. vii., pp. 91-94.

Th°mps?n (T. Perronet). Exercises,
Political and others. Yol. iii. pp.
295-343. On the Instrument of
Exchange. See 1824. Thompson.

Vom_ "Weseu des Geldes. Tom
emem rnssisohen Schriffcsteller.
Leipzic.

1843.

Cowell (J.W.). Letters on Currency.
Addressed to the Bight Hon.

F . T. Baring.

Daubre'e (Ang.). Mdmoire snr les
Depots Metallif&res de la Su&de
6t de la Norvege.

■^ aU vn er Becherches sur

lOret sur l’Argent comme etalon
ae la Yaleur. Paris.

Helfjpdch (1). Yon den periodischen
Schwankungen im Werthe der
edlenMetalle, von der Entdeckung
Amerika’s bis zum Jahre, 1830,
eine historisch - cekonomische
Monographic. Niirmberg.

Hubbard (j. G.). The Currency and
the Country.


Production of Gold and Silver Mines.
“ Pari. Paper,” No. 476.

Saint-Clair-D aport. De la Pro-
duction des Metaux Pr^cieux au
Mexique, consideree dans ses
Rapports aveo la Geologie, la
Metailurgie et l’Economie Poli-
tique. Paris.

Twiss (Travers). On Money and
Currency. Oxford.

1844.

Coquelin. Les Monnaies en Prance,
B4forme dn Systems Monetaire!

“ Bev. des D. M.,” 15 Oct.

Or ocher on (John J.). The Currency.
“Hunt’s Merchants’ Magazine,”
vol. x., pp 50-65.

F ort escue (Earl) . A Selection from
the Speeches and Writings of the
late Lord King.

Fullarton (John). Begnlation of the
Currencies, and the Working of
the New Bank Charter Act, etc.

Gold, Silver, Gold Coin. “Pari.
Paper,” No. 46.

Loyd (S. J.). Thoughts on the
Separation of the Departments of
the Bank of England.

Middleton (Henry). The Govern-
ment and the Currency. Phila-
delphia. (See “ North American
Beview,” October).

Product of Precious Metals since the
Discovery of America. “ Hunt’s
Merchants’ Magazine,” vol. x.,
pp. 146-152.

Peel (Sir Robert). Speeches in the
House of Commons, May 6th and
20th, 1844, on the Eenewal of
the Bank Charter, and the State
of the Law respecting Currency
and Banking.

Theory of Money.

Tooke (Thomas). An Inquiry into
the Currency Principle, the Con-
nection of the Currency with
Prices, and the Expediency of a
Separation of Issue from Banking.

2nd ed., viii., 165 pp.

Torrens (Eobert). An Inquiry into
the Practical Working of the
Proposed Arrangements for the
Renewal of the Charter of the
Bank of England, and the Regu-
lation?, of the Currency, efcc.


BIBLIOGRAPHY. '


379


Wliat is a Pound ? A Letter to
the Premier on his new Currency
Measures, 2nd ed.

Wilson (James). Capital, Currency*
and Banking.

1845.

Alison (A.). England in 1815 and
1845 j or, a Sufficient and a Con-
tracted Currency.

Middleton (H.). The Government
and the Currency. “ Hunt’s
Merchants’ Magazine,” vol. xiii.,
pp, 115, 211, 311, 412.

Record of the Proceedings of the
Committee of Deputies from the
Joint Stock Banks . . . with the
Acts . . . passed during the
Session of 1844. 8vo, pp. 106.

The Precious Metals in Russia.
u Hunt’s Merchants’ Magazine,”
vol. xii., pp. 347-51, 554-6.

1846.

Chevalier (Michel). Des Mines d’Or
et d’ Argent du Nouveau Monde.
“ Revue des Deux Mondes,” 15
Deo.

Soetheer (A.), Denkschrift liber
Hamburgs Munzverhaltnisse.
Hamburg.

Speeches and Writings of the late
Lord King. “ Edinburgh Re-
view,” October, vol. Ixxxiv.,
pp. 315-343.

18 47.

Chevalier. Des Mines d’Or et
d* Argent du Nouveau Monde.
“Revue des Deux Mondes,” 1
Avril.

Cieskowski. Du Credit et de la
Circulation. Paris, 2nd ed.

Danson (J. T.). Accounts of the
Bank of England under the
operation of the Acts 7 and 8
Viet., c. 32. “Jour. Stat. Soc.,”
vol. x., pp. 132-153. With four
diagrams.

Doubleday (Thomas). A Financial,
Monetary, and Statistical History
of England. 2 vols.

Hancock (W. Neilson). The Varia-
tions in the Supply of Silver
Coin in Ireland during ... the
Distress in 1846 and 1847, {< Brit.
Assoc.,” pp. 97-8,


| Jones (Rev. Richard). Primitive
Political Economy of England.
“ Edinburgh Review,” No. clxxii.,
April, vol. , p. . Reprinted in
“Jones’ Remains,” by Whewell,
pp. 293-335.

Leber (M. C.). Essai sur l’appr£cia-
tion de la fortune privee au
moyen &ge relativement aux
variations des valeurs mon^taires
et au pouvoir commercial ^3e
l’Argent, su£vi d’un examen cri-
tique des Tables de Prix du Marc
d’ Argent, depuis Fepoque* de
Saint Louis. 2me edition, revue
et augmentee.

Ward (W.). Remarks on the
Monetary Legislation of Great
Britain.

Wilson (James). Capital, Currency
and Banking : being a collection
of . . . Articles published in the
“ Economist ”... xxvi., 294.

» 1848.

Bergius (C. J.) Vorschlaege zur
Verbesserung des preussischen
Munzwesens Archiv der poli-
tischen Oekonomie, etc. N. F.
vii. Bd. Heidelberg.

Coquelin (Ch.). Les Crises Com-
merciales et la Liberty des
Banques. “ Revue des Deux
Mondes,” 1 Nov.

Danson. (j. T.). . . . Investigation
of the Changes in . . . the Con-
dition of the People . . . from
the Harvest of 1839 to the
Harvest of 1847, and . . . the
Connection (if any) between the
Changes observed and the Varia-
tions ... in the Prices of the
most Necessary Articles of Food.

” Jour. Stat. Soc.,” vol. xi., pp.
101-140.

De Morgan. On Decimal Coinage.

“ Companion to the British
Almanack,” pp. 5-21,

Gray (John). Lectures on the Nature
and Use of Money. Edinburgh.

Humboldt (Alex). Memoire sur la
Production de 1’Or et de l’Argent,
consid^ree dans ses Fluctuations.
Traduit de M. Rempp, aveo un
avant-propos de Michel Chevalier.

Noerdlinger. Vorschlaege zu einem
allgemeinen Beutschen Munz,
Mass, und Gewicht system,


380 CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


Smith (J. T.). Observations on the
Duties and Responsibilities in-
volved in the Management of
Mints. . . . Madras, viii., 186 pp.

The Currency of the British Colonies.
Printed for H.M.’s Stationery
Office, iv., 247 pp.

Tooke, A History of Prices and of
the State of the Circulation from
1839 to 1847. . . . xvi., 500.

W&rd (J.). The True Action of a
purely Metallic Currency. 101.

1849.

Berry (G.). Gold of California,
Short Inquiry into.

Bonneville (Alphonse). Encyclo-
pedie Monetaire ; ou, Nouveau
Traite des Monnaies d’Or et
d Argent en circulation chez les
Divers Peuples du Monde. Pol.

Comstock (J. L.). A History of the
Precious Metals. Hartford, U.S. A.

Delessert (B.). Les Mines d’Or de
la California. “ Rev. des D. M 99
1 Fevr.

Hancock. On the Discovery of
Gold in California. “ Brit. Assoc.”
pp. 94-96.


1850.

Ansichten uber Gold und Silber-
waehrung in Bremen. Bremen.

Chevalier (Michel). Cours d’lScono-
mie Politique fait au College de
France. 3me vol., La Monnaie.
Paris.

Danson (J. T.). On the Fluctua-
tions of the Annual Supply and
Average Price of Corn in France
during the last Seventy Years
. . . with particular reference
to the Political Periods of 1792,
1814, 1830, and 1848. « Jour.

Stat. Soc.,” vol. saii., pp. 152-167.
Die Entdeckung der Goldschatze
in Calif ornien und deren Folgen
D. V. Schr., xvi., 175-204.

Porter (G. R.). On a Comparative
Statement of Prices and Wages
during the Years from 1842 to
1849. “Jour. Stat. Soc.,” vol.
xiii., pp. 210-218,

Report of Commission on the Value
of the Rupee. Mauritius, Folio.


Coaueiill (0.). De la Depreciation
de 1 Or, et du Sysfc&me Monetaire
Frangais. “Journal des £cono-
mistes,” T. xxix.

Danson (J. T.). Of the quantity of
Gold and Silver supposed to have
passed from America to Europe
• . . “ Jour. Stat. Soc.,** March!
vol. xiv., pp. 11-44.

Landrin (H.). De l’Or- de son 5tat
dans la nature, de son exploita-
tion, de sa metallurgie, de son
usage, et de son influence en
economic politique.

Mces (W. C.). Het Muntwezen van
N ederlandisch-Indie. Amsterdam.
Newmarch. An attempt to ascertain
the Magnitude and Fluctuations
of the Amount of Bills of Ex-
change ... in Circulation . . .
1828-47. “Jour. Stat. Soc.”

# voL xiv., pp. 143-183.

Poisat (Michel). Discours et
Rapports sur les Monnaies et sur
les Metaux Precieux. Paris.

Smee ( W . R.) . The Relative Values
of Gold and Silver from early
times. “ Society of Antiquaries.’*
April 3rd.


1852.

Browne (E. H.). A Few Words on
the Gold Question.

Cochut (A.). La Refoute des
Monnaies de Cuivre. 1 Mai.

Collot (Edme.). De la Demonetisa-
tion de l*Or. Paris.

Courtois (Alph.). Etude sur
"Agiotage. Paris.

Du Puynode (M. G.). De la
Monnaie, du Credit et de l’Impdt
2 vols. Pans.

Fairfax (John). Australia! with
Latest Intelligence from the
Diggings.

Faucher (Ldon). De la Production
et de la Demonetisation de l’Or
• . . “Rev. des D. M.,*’ 15 Aoflt.

Faucher (Leon). Remarks on the
Production of the Precious Metals,
and on the Demonetization of
Gold m Several Countries in
Europe. Translated by Thomson
Hankey, Jun., y., 103 pp.


BlJBLtO CRA PHY.


Gilbart. On the Laws of Currency
m Ireland . . . the Changes in the
Annual Circulation of Bank Notes
. . . “Brit, Assoc.,” pp. 115-6.
“ Jour. Stat. Soc.” vol. xv.,
pp. 307-26.

Gold Discoveries. “ Quarterly
Review,” September, vol. xci.,
pp. 504-40.

Grauman. Lettre ooncernant les
Monnaies d’Allemagne. Berlin.
12mo.

Halpben (Louis). De la Demonetisa-
tion de l*0r.

Hancock. Should our Gold Standard
of Value be maintained if Gold
becomes depreciated . . . “ Brit.
Assoc.,” p. 116.

Johnson (Andrew). Remarks on
Mr, Scheer’s Letter.

Observations on the Effect of the
Californian and Australian Gold,
and on the Impossibility of Con-
tinuing the Present Standard in
the event of Gold becoming
seriously Depreciated.

Observations on the Effect of the
Australian and Californian Gold.
32 pp.

Report of the Commissioners and
Changes in the Management of
the Royal Mint. 1848-52.

Scheer (F.). Letter to Thomas
Baring, Esq., M.P., on the Gold
Discoveries.

Soetbeer (A.). Andenkungen in
Bezug auf die vermehrte Gold-
produktion und ihren Einfluss.
Hamburg.

Steijn Parve (D. C.). Geschiedenis
van het munten bankwezen in
Nederlandsch - Indie. Zalt-
Bommel.

Ward (J.). A History of Gold as a
Commodity and as a Measure of
Value; its Fluctuations both in
Ancient and Modern Times ; with
an Estimate of the Probable
Supplies from California and
Australia.

1853.

Austin (W.). On the Imminent
Depreciation of Gold, and how to
Avoid Loss.


3^1

Chevalier. Remarks on the Pro-
duction of the Precious Metals,
and on the Depreciation of Gold.
Translated by D. Forbes Camp-
bell. pp. 117.

Cooper (0.). Decimals and Decimal
Coinage.

Franklin (j* A..). A Decimal System
Facilitated. 4to.

Mills (R. H.). Principles of Currency.

Newmarch (William). The New
Supplies Gold : Facts and
Statements relative to their Actual
Amount, and their Present and
Probable Effects. From “ The
Morning Chroniole” of 28th July,
vii. 122 pp.

Newmarch. On New Supplies of
Gold. “Brit. Assoc.” pp. 110-111.

Rathhone (T. W.). Examination of
the Report and Evidence of the
Committee of the House of
Commons on Decimal Coinage.

Rozzell (B ). Practical Suggestions
for Facilitating the Adoption of
a Decimal Currency.

Spackman (W. F.). The Commercial
Barometer, from 1845 to 1853,
showing the Operation of the
Present System of Currency. 35

pp.

Stirling (Patrick James). The Aus-
tralian and Californian Gold
Discoveries, and their Probable
Consequences ; or, an Inquiry into
the Laws which Determine the
Value and Distribution of the
Precious Metals. Edinburgh, xiii.,
279 pp.

Tegoborski (L. de). Essai sur les
Consequences &ventuelles de la
Decouverte des Gites Aurif&res
en Californie et en Australie.
Paris, viii,, 199 pp.

Vrolik (A.). Le Syst&me Mondtaire
du Royaume des Pays Bas, la
Refonte des Vieilles Monnaies
d’ Argent, et la Demonetisation
de POr. Utrecht.

Vrolik. Verslag van al het
verrigte tot herstel van hetNeder-
landsche Muntwesen. Utrecht.

Walsh (R. H.). Elementary Treatise
on Metallic Currency.

Die Wichtigkeit der Silberwahrung
fur Deutschland. Frankfurt-a-M.


3 82 CURRENCY AND FINANCE


Wilson (Titos. ) . J ottings on Money 5
or, a few Remarks on Currency,
Comage, and a New Decimal
System, with the Theory of
Annular Coinage. ”

1854.

Alexander (J.). Suggestions for a
Simple System of Decimal No-
tation and Currency after the
Portuguese Model

BoVring (Sir John). The Decimal
System in Numbers, Coins, and
Accounts . . . with reference
to the Decimalisation of the
Currency. 245 pp. Portraits,
Figures of Coins, etc.

Brown (W.). Decimal Coinage: i
Letter to P. Shand.

Cochut (A.). De lTnfluence de*
Mines d’Or de l’Australie et de la
Calif orniesurle Marche Europeen
“Rev. des D. M.,” 15 Fevr.
Decimal Coinage : What it Ought
and What it Ought Not to be
By One of the Million.

Decimal System in Money, Weights
Measures. *

De Morgan. On a Decimal Coinage
“Companion to the British
Almanack,” pp. 5-15.

Further Papers relative to the
Discovery of Gold in Australia, m
continuation of Papers presented
16th August, 1853. February.

Gilhart . On the Laws of the Currency
as exemplified in the Circulation
of Country Bank Notes in England
. . . “ Brit. Assoc ,” pp. 136-8
“ Jour. Stat, Soc.,” vol. xvih,'
pp. 289-321.

Laurie (j.)* Decimal Coinage, etc.

Minasi (F. J.). Decimal Coinage for
the United Kingdom. “Jour.
Stat. Soc.,” vol. xvii. pp. 243-258!

Molinier (Jos. Y.). De la Deprecia-
tion de l 5 Or et de la Yaleur Legale
des Conventions par lesquelles on
determine les Espies Mon5taires
pour le Payement des Creances.

The Bank Panic : or War and the
wltipiacoveTies ip connexion
with the Money Market , . # By
Malagrowther the Less, pp, 4of

Thomson (W. T.). Decimal Numera-
non and Decimal Coinage.


Whitney (J. D.). The Metallic
Wealth of the United States
described, and compared with
that of other Countries.

Yates (James). On a Method of
Substituting Francs and Centimes
for the present English Metallic
Currency. “Brit. Assoc.,” pp.
146-7. “Assurance Magazine and
Journal Institute of Actuaries,”
No. xviii., pp. 146-151.

1855.

Alexander (J. H). International
Coinage for Great Britain and the
United States.

Currency self -regulating and elastic.
Danson. On the Current Price, and
the Cost Price of Corn in England,
... as illustrating the value of
Agricultural Statistics. “Jour.
Stat. Soc.,” vol. xviii., pp. 3-20.
Davidson (A.). A Circular to
Bankers and Merchants on
Decimal Coinage.

Debate on the Decimal Coinage
Question in the House of Com-
mons, June 12, 1855.

Decimal Association. Debate on
the Decimal Coinage Question;
with Remarks (by A. de Morgan)
on the Speech of the Hon.

! Member for Kidderminster.
Decimal Association. Proceedings;
with an Introduction by Professor
De Morgan, and Notes, xii., 66 pp.
Decimalism, Part I. Remarks on
the Proposed Decimalisation of the
Weights, Measures, and Moneys
of Great Britain.

De Morgan. Decimal Association.
Reply to the Facetiae of the
Member for Kidderminster. Fol.
Frichot (A. P.). Etudes Monotaires,
au point de vne de Tadoption par
tous les peuples de 1 ? Uniformity
de Poids, de Mesures, et de
Monnaies.

Jessop (W. H. R.). Decimal System
of Money and Measures.

K. 0. Ueber Gold und Silber Wah-
rung. Frankfurt.

Lanjuinais (Y.). Reoherches sur
la Question de FOr. «K. des
D. M,,” 1 Juillet.

Oppenheim (S.). Die Natur des
Geldes. Mainz.


BIBLIOGRAPHY. 383


ftochet-Atys. Tarif des Mat&res
d’ Argent. 7me ed. Tarif des
Matidres d’Or. 7me ed.

Slater (R.). Inquiry into the Prin-
ciples involved in the Decimalisa-
tion of the Weights, Measures,
and Moneys.

Smith. (W. H.). How to Detect
Forged Bank Notes. 16, with
specimens. .

Soetbeer (A.). Beitrage und Ma-
tenalen zur Beurtheilung von
Geld und Bankfragen. Hambourg.

S taint Oil (J. J.). Familiar Conversa-
tion on Decimal Coinage.

Tarrassenko-Otreschkoff (Narcos).
De 1’Or et de 1* Argent, leur
Origine, Quantity extraite dans
toutes les contrdes du monde
connu, depuis les temps les plus
recules jusqu’en 1855. Tome ler.

Tate (W.). Bullion and Exchange.

The Currency Question, etc.

Vining (C.). System of Decimal
Coinage and Currency without
Fractions.

Walsh (R. H.). The Price of Silver
of Late Years does not Afford an
Accurate Measure of the Value of
Gold. “ Brit. Assoc., ”pp. 198-199.

Walsh. On the Price of Silver as
affording no Correct Measure
of the General Value of Gold.
“Journal of the Dublin Sta-
tistical Society.”

1856.

A Select Collection of Scarce and
Valuable Tracts on Money, printed
for the Political Economy Club,
pp. xvi., 637.

Babbage (Charles), An Analysis of
the Statistics of the Clearing
House during the Year 1839 j
with an Appendix on the London
and New York Clearing Houses,
and on the London Railway
Clearing House. 33 pp. (Partly
reprinted from the “ Jour, of
the Stat. Soc.,” March, vol. xix,,
pp. 28-48).

Cairnes (J. E.), The Effect of War
on Prices, “Journal of the Dublin
Statistical Society,” April, vol, i.,
pp. 223—238*


Clayton (J*)* Observations on the
Proposed Decimal Coinage.

Coombe (G.). The Currency Question
considered in Relation to the
Bank Restriction Act.

Currency and the Bank Restriction
Act. Reply to G. Coombe’s Pam-
phlet. By Civis.

De Morgan. Notes on the History
of the English Coinage. “ Com-
panion to the British Almanack,”
pp. 5-21.

Dumas (Ernest). Essai sur la Fa-
brication des Monnaies. Ronen.
Academie Imperials des Sciences,
etc. 48 pp.

Elements of the Currency. By F. C.

Further Papers relative to the
Gold Discoveries. Presented to
Parliament, February.

Gibbon (Alex.). On the Circulating
Medium, on Seignorage, on Gold
Com, etc.

Haslam (j.). The Paper Currency
of England Considered.

Hill (E.). Principles of Currency.
Means of ensuring Uniformity of
Value and Adequacy of Supply.
12mo,

Johnson (A). Currency Principles
versus Banking Principles.

Kolb (G. F.). Gold oder Silber-
wahrung? Zeitschnft fur die
gesammten Staatswissenschaften.
Bd. xii., pp. 487-535. Tubingen.

Levasseur (E.). Une Methode
pour mesurer la Valeur de 1* Ar-
gent. “ Journal des icon.,” Mai.

MacDonald (J. H ), G. Coombe's
“Doctrines on the Currency ”
examined and refuted.

Muret de Bort (L.). Crise Mone-
taire. De la Situation Respective
des Grands Btats Commerqants,de
la Crise et de ses Causes, du Role
important de la Monnaie . . ,

Soetbeer (A.). Denkschrift betref-
fend die Einfuhrung der Gold-
wahrung in Deutschland, mit
besonderer Riicksicht auf die
Hamburger Bankvaluta, Aus-
gearbeitet im Auftrage der Com.
merz-Deputation in Hamburg.
Fol. Hamburg.


384 CURRENCY And finance .


Strzelecki (P. E. de). Gold and
Silver : a Supplement to S.’s
Physical Description of New
South Wales and Van Dieman’s
Land. 33 pp.

Walsh (R. H.). On the Present
Export of Silver to the East.
“ Brit. Assoc.,” p. 161.

Walsh. Observations on the Gold
Crisis, the Price of Silver, and
the Demand for it. . . . “Jour.
Dublin Statistical Society,” Jan.,
vol. i., pp.175-193. “ Brit.Assoc.,”
Glasgow.

1857.

AllOll. (Urbain de Bonneval). Der-
rri&res Paroles, avant Tombe, d’un
Gros Sou Demonetise. Publiees
par lui-m^me.

A Select Collection of scarce
Tracts on Paper Currency and
Banking, with a Preface, Notes,
and Index, by J. R. McCulloch.
Reprinted by Lord Overstone.

Baumgartner (V.). Die edien
Metalle und ihre naturliche Rang,
ordnung als Geld-stoffe. Wien.

CairneS- On some of the Principal
Effects of the New Gold, as an
Instrument of Purchase, on the
Production and Distribution of
Real Wealth. “ Brit. Assoc.,”
pp. 156-158.

Chevalier. De la Production actuelle
de I’Or . . . Du R61e fait & 1’Or en
France par la Legislation Mone-
taire, Dangers d’une Depreciation
de l’Or. . . . “ Rev. des Deux
Mondes,” 1 and 5 Oct. j 1 Nov.

Coq (Paul). La Monnaie de Banque,
en l’espkce et le portefeuille.

De Morgan. Notes on the State of
the Decimal Coinage Question.

“ Companion to the British Al-
manack,” pp. 5-19.

Langton (W.) On the Balance of
Account between the Mercantile
Public and the Bank of England.
“Manch. Stat. Soc.” (pub. in 1876.)

L 4 on (Alphonse). Lettre sur la
Question des Monnaies.

Mannequin (Th.). Question de la
Monnaie d’Or. 12mo.

Minasi (P. J.). Appendix to Evidence
before the Royal Commission on
Decimal Coinage.


Monnaie et M&aux PrScieux: de
la fixity de leur valeur. Par X.

Questions communicated by Lord
Overstone to the Decimal Coinage
Commissioners, with Answers.

Report from the Select Committee
of Bank Acts, together with the
Proceedings of the Committee,
Minutes of Evidence, Appendix,
and Index. Part I., Report and
Evidence.

Robinson (0. B.) Rural Economy
in Yorkshire in 1641, being the
Farming and Account Book of
Henry Best. “ Surtees Society,”

188 pp.

S. (J.). The Decimal System adapted
to our present Coinage.

Slater (R.). Observations on the
Currency in connection with a
Renewal of the Bank Charter.

Tooke and Newmarch. A History
of Prices . . . during the nine
years 1848-1856. 2 vols., xxiii .,
666 ; xv., 981. (Yds. v. and vi.
of History of Prices.)

Traite Monetaire Austro-AUemand
du 24 Janvier, 1857.

Walker (Amasa). Nature and Uses
of Money and Mixed Currency.
Boston.

Wylie (A). Coins of the Ta-Tsing.
Shanghai.

1858.

CairneS. On the Laws according to
which a depreciation of the
Precious Metals consequent upon
an increase of supply takes
place. . . . “ Brit. Assoc.,” Trans.
Sect., pp. 174-5.

Chevalier. De la Baisse Probable
de TOr. Pads.

Cldment (Ambroise). Des Crises
Commerciales. “Jour, des Boon.,”
Jan., xvii. p. 161. Crise h, Ham-
burg, %b, 9 p. 245.

Currency under the Act of 1844,
from the City Article of “The
Times.”

De Lhuillier. Transformation de
la Banque et du Syst&me Mon6-
taire en Europe par I’Inaugura-
tiou d’une Monnaie, Mesure de
Puissance Circulatoire.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


385


Doc um ents relatifs & la Question
Mondtaire. Paris. Itnprimene
Imperiale, 4to.

Kenner. Die Anfaenge des Geldes.
Wien.

Levassenr (E.). La Question de
l’Or : Les Mines de Californie.
Paris, vii., 357 pp.

Levasseur. L’Qr efc la Condition des
Personnes. “Jour, des Ijcon.,”
vol. xviii., pp. 231, etc.

Maclaren (James). A Sketch of
the History of the Currency :
comprising a brief review of the
opinions of the most eminent
writers on the subject, viii.,
400 pp.

Ministfcre des Finances. Rapport
de la Commission chargee d’dtu-
dier la Question Monetalre.

Overstone (Lord). Tracts and other
Publxcationson Metallicand Paper
Currency. Originally published
1837 to 1857, pp. ix., 649.

Robinson (C. B.). Chronicon Pre-
tiosum Snarthense; or Lists of
Prices ... in the Ecclesiastical
Peculiar of Snarth . . . compiled
from the Probate Records 1 . .
“Jour Stat. Soc.,” vol. xxi., pp.
369-420.

Sealy (Henry Nicholas). A Treatise
on Coins, Currency, and Banking
. . . xviii., 633 pp.

v Seyd (Ernest). California and its
Resources. 168 pp.

St. Andrd (j. L.). Question Mond-
taire : Description et IT sage du
Mode de Payement par Cheques,
adopt e en Angleterre.

Tooke and Nowmarch* Die Ge-
schichte und Bestimnmng der
Preise wahrend der Jahre, 1793-
1857. Deutsch und mit Zusfltzen
versehen von C, W. Asher.
2 Bde. Dresden.

1859.

Alison (Sir A.). The Currency Laws
and their Effect on the Profits
of Trade and Wages of Labour.
Glasgow. 16mo.

Barnes (w.). Views of Labour and
Gold.


Benneau. Quelques Vues sur remis-
sion d’une Nouvelle Monnaie d’Or
en Belgique. Bruxelles.

Bericbt der Mehrheit der National
rathlichen Munz-Commission . . .
in Betreff auf die Muuzfrage.

Chevalier. De la Baisse Probable
de l’Or : Des Consequences Com-
merciales et Sociales qu’elle peut
avoir et des Mesures qu’elle
provoque. Avec Pieces JuStifi-
catives. Paris. 283; 244 pp.

Chevalier. On the Probable Pall in
the Value of Gold . . . trans-
lated . . . with Preface by

Richard Cobden. 3rd ed. Man-
chester and London, xvi,, 196.

Colwell (Stephen). The Ways and
Means of Payment: a Pull Analysis
of the Credit System, with its
Various Modes of Adjustment.
Philadelphia.

Crane (J.). Remarks on Coinage
with an Explanation of a Decimal
Coinage.

De Parieu (Esquirau). La Question
Monetaire. “ Revue Contempo-
raine.”

Fawcett (Henry). On the Social
and Economical Influence of the
new Gold. “ Brit. Assoc./* Trans.
Section, pp. 205-9.

Final Report of the Decimal Coin-
age Commissioners. London.

Godard-Desmarest. Des Effets de
l’Abondance de l*Or sur les
Monnaies Fransaises.

La Suisse. Message du Conseil
Federal h l’Assemblee Federate
touchant les Monnaies. 30
Decembre. (C. Feer-Herzog.)

La Touz£ (C.), Traits Theorique et
Pratique du Change, des Ar-
bitrages, et des Matures d’Or et
d’Argent.

Louis (S.) Decimal Coinage TTn-
necessary. 12mo.

Malou (Jules). La Question Mond-
taire. Bruxelles. 37 pp.

Matigny (Hubert de). De la Dis-
parition de la Monnaie d* Argent
et de son Remplacement par la
Monnaie d* Or; ou, Situation Mond-
taire de la France en 1859.

2 0


3 86 CURRENCY AND FINANCE .


Morel (A.). Etudes de la Question
Monetaire h propos de la Brochure
de M. Malou. Bruxelles.

Neate (C,). Two Lectures on the
Currency in 1858.

Newmarch (W.). Mercantile Reports
of the . . . Results of the Trade
of the United Kingdom during
the year 1858 ; with a reference
to the Progress of Prices, 1851-9.
“ Jour. Stat. Soc.,” vol. xxii., pp.
76-100.

Notes et Documents soumis & la
Commission institute par M. le
Minisbre des Finances, pour
examiner diverges questions rela-
tives aux Monnaies. Bruxelles.
168 pp.

Questions Monefcaires : Rapport a la
Chambre des Representants.
<( Documents Parlementaires.”
Belgique.

The Laws relating to the Mint of
the United States. Philadelphia,

T. (M. 0 ). La Situation Monetaire
de la Suisse en Septembre, 1859.
Traduit de l’Allemand par J.
Malou. Bruxelles. 29 pp.

Venisse (R.). De I’Eoonomie Sociale
dans l’Bohange et le Credit.

1859-60,

Doc um ents Officiels sur les Monnaies
Suisses.

1860.

Association pour obtenir en Belgique
le Cours L6gal des Monnaies d’Or
et d’Argent. Comite Central
Question MoDetaire. Bruxelles,
ii., 16 pp.

Campan (Oh. L. A.). La Question de
TOr en Belgique.

Chevalier. On the Probable Fall in
the Value of Gold. “Edin. Rev
July, vol. cxii., pp. 1-33.

Cogelo (Le Baron). Cours Legal
de la Monnaie d’Or Frangaise.
Bruxelles.

De Cocquiel (Oh.). La Chambre du
Commerce d’ Anvers et la Question
de l’Or. Bruxelles.

De Haerne. La Question Monetaire
consider^ en general et dans ses
rapports avec l’Angleterre, la
France, la Suisse, et la Belgique.
Bruxelles.


De Parieu (E.). La Question Mond-
taire en France. “Revue Oon-
temporaine.”

East India Currency, Correspon-
dence relative to. “ Pari. Paper,”
No. 183.

Hauk (F.) • La Question Monetaire du
point de vue pratiqne. Bruxelles.

Hayez. Loi decretant la Fabrica-
tion d’une Monnaie d’Appoint
composes de Nickel et de Cuivre.
Bruxelles.

Keller (F.). Die Gold-und Silber-
frage. Ein Versuch. St. Gallon.

Laveleye (E. de). La Question de
l’Or en Belgique. Bruxelles.
12mo, 81 pp.

Leon. Lettres sur la Question des
Monnaies. Paris. 188 pp.

Malou (J.). De r Adoption Legale de
l’Or Franqais. Bruxelles.

Newmarch (Wm.). Results of the
Trade of the United Kingdom
during the year 1859 ; with State-
ments and Observations relative
to the Course of Prices sinoe the
year 1844. “Jour. Stat. Soc,”
vol. xxiii. pp. 76-110.

Newmarch. On Methods of Inves-
tigation as regards Statistics of
Prices and of Wages , . .

“ Jour. Stat. Soc.,” vol. xxiii., pp.
479-497.

Noerdlinger (W.). Die Zukunft des
Metrischen Systems und die
Deutsche Mtmz Mass und Gewieht-
Einigung. Stuttgart.

Prove (F?). De la Question Mone-
taire en Belgique. Bruxelles.
12mo. 55 pp.

Stirling (p* j). Apprehended De-
preciation of Money from New
Supplies of Gold. “Proc. Roy.’
Soc, Edinb’.,” 19th March, vol.
iv., p. 301-309.

The Australian Colonies and the
Gold Supply. “Quarterly Review,”
vol 107, pp. 1-45.

The Precious Metals, and their
Influence on Prices. By an old
Norfolk Farmer, “ Jour, of
Agriculture,” and “ Trans, of the
Highland Agric. Soc. of Scot-
land.” October, pp, 431-454.

X. (M.). Simples Questions h propos
de la Question Monetaire.
Bruxelles.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


387


1861.

Allard (Alphonse). L’ Or, L’ Argent,
efc le Commerce Beige. Bruxelles:
Paris, pp. vii., xxn., 51.

Blaise (A.). La Question Monefcaire.
“Journ des Hcon.,” Aoftfc.

Cocquiel (Charles de). IStude sur le
Systems Monefcaire Beige.

Cogelo (Le Baron). Encore un Mot
a propos du Cours Legal de l’Or
Fran^ais. Bruxelles. 47 pp.

De Parieu. l3tat de la Question
Monetaire en 1861. tf Revue
Contemporarne,” 31 Mai.

De Parieu. La Question Mone-
taire Fran<jaise dans ses Rapports
avec la Legislation Monefcaire des
Pays Grangers. “Jour.des fecon.,”

15 Avnl.

Frere-Orban. Discours prononce k la
Chambre des Representants, dans
les Stances de 23 efc 26 Fevrier —
Question de la Monnaie d’Or.

Goudvrient (Philidor). Extraifc des
Memoires m&lifcs d’une Vieille
Piece de Yingt Francs. Bruxelles

16 pp.

Hanschild (Johann Friedrich). Zur
Geschichte des deutschen Mass
und Munz wesens in den lefczen
seohzig jahren. 117 pp. Frank-
fur fc-a-M.

Horn (j. 32.). Le Double ^ talon Mone-
taire. “Journal des Econ.,”
Juillefc. Oh en est la, Crise
Monefcaire F “Journal des Econ.,”
Juillefc.

Infonna sobra Moneta. Madrid.

Jourdan (Francis). The Effect of
the Gold Supplies on the Foreign
Exchanges . . . and on the Price
of Silver, “Jour. Sfcafc. Soc.,”
vol. xxiv., pp. 38-54.

Ldon. Question Monefcaire. Lettre
& M. le Directeur du “Journal des
fjeonomisfces/ 5 “ Journal des
Econ., 55 Janvier.

Morato Boma(C.). De la Monnaie.
Lisbonne. xi., 103 pp.

Newmarch. Results of the Trade
. . . during the year 1860.
“Jour. Stafc. Soc.,” vol. xxiv.,
pp. 74-124.

Rogers (J. E. T.). Facts and Ob-
servations on Wages and Prices


in England during the 16th and
17th Centuries. & . . “Jour, Sfcat.
Soc./’ Deo., vol. xxiv., pp, 535-585.

Seyd. On the Establishment of an
Anglo-Californian Bank and a
Refinery ... in San Francisco.
93 pp. (Private issue.)

Soetbeer. Yerhandlung des ersfcen
deutschen Handelstages zu Hei-
delberg, Mai, 1861. Naoh den
stenographischen Aufzeiohfiun-
gen. Berlin.

Soetbeer. Die Frage der deutschen
Munzeinheit mifc besonderer
Rucbsicht auf Hamburg und
Bremen. Fur den deutschen
Handelsfcag als Manuscript
gedruoht. Heidelberg.

Weibezahn (H,). Die deutsche
Munzfrage. Yersuch einer Loe-
sung derselben in emheithcher
Riehfcung, nnter Anbahnung des
Ueberganges zur Goldwahrung.
Rinteln.

1862.

De Fontenay (R.). Documents nou-
veaux pour servir k l’etudo de la
question monetaire. “Jour, des
Scon.,” Novembre.

Gold Coin and Treasure. “Pari.
Paper,” No. 436.

Jacob. Des Monnaies divisionnaires
d’argenfc. “Jour, des ficon.”
Mars.

Jevons (W. S). Diagram, showing
all the Weekly Accounts of the
Bank of England since the passing
of the Bank Act of 1844, with
the Amount of Bank of England,
Private, and Joint Stock Bank
Promissory Notes in Circulation
during each week, and the Bank
Minimum Rate of Discount.
London. Sheet, 20x30 inches,
coloured. This Diagram repre-
sents to the eye all the useful
results of tables, containing about
113,000 figures.

JevOES. Diagram, showing the
Price of the English Funds, the
Price of Wheat, the Number of
Bankruptcies, and the Rate of
Discount, monthly, since 1731s
so far as the same have been
ascertained. London. Sheet,
20x30 inches, coloured* This

2 c a


388


CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


Diagram is drawn from tables
carefully compiled for the pur-
pose, and contains more than
12,000 figures.

JeVOUS. On the Study of Periodic
Commercial Fluctuations. Brit.
Assoc.

Juglar (Clement). Des Crises Com-
merciales et de leur Retour Perio-
^dique, en France, en Angleterre,
*et aux fitats-Ums. Paris, xvi.,
258.

Latir (P.). D e la Production . des
Metaux Precieux en Californie.

Mautellier. Memoir e sur la Valeur
des Principales Denrees . . . dans
la ville d’Orleans . . . (14e . . .
au 18e si&cle). Memoire de la
Societe Archdologique de TOr-
leannais. Tome v. Paris.

Mystery (The) of Money explained,
and illustrated by the Monetary
History of England, from the
Norman Conquest to the present
time. xii. 272 pp. (Anonymous,
but by James Taylor of Bake-
well.)

Papers relating to the present Con-
dition and Prospects of the Gold-
fields in Victoria. Presented to
both Houses of Parliament. April.

Papers relating to the Discovery of
Gold in British Columbia. Pre-
sented to both Houses of Par-
liament. April.

Rapport & M.le Ministre des Finances
au nom de la Commission chargee
d 5 examiner la question des Mon-
naies divisionnaires d’ Argent.

Resume!! de los informes sobre la
cuestion monetaria. Madrid. Im-
primerie Nationale.

Wagner (Adolph). Die Geld und
Kredit-Theorie der Peel ’schen
Bankakte. Wien.

Westgarth (W.). The Australian
Gold Discovery, and its Effects
upon Australia. “ Soc. Sci.
Assoc.,” pp. 752-63.


1863.

Berg (N. P. Tan den). De kwestie
over den geld om loop in, Neder-
landsch-Indie, Batavia.


Cairnes (j. E.). The Effects of the
Gold Discoveries. “ National Re-
view,” October. 18 pp.

Cooke (Northcote). The Rise, Pro-
gress, and Present Condition of
Banking in India. Calcutta.

Goldfields and Gold Mining. “ Edin-
burgh Review,” January, vol.
cxvii., pp. 82-116.

Jevons- A Serious Fall in the
Value of Gold ascertained, and
its Social Effects set forth. With
two diagrams.

Landrin (H.). Traits de TOr, Mono-
graphic, Histoire Naturelle, Ex-
ploitation, Statistique, son r61e en
llconomie Politique et ses Divers
Emplois. 12mo.

Lenormant (F.) Essaisurl’Organisa-
tion Politique et ISconomique de
la Monnaie dans l’Antiquite.

M'Combie (Thomas). Recent Gold
Discoveries. “ Soc. Sci. Assoc.,”
pp. 839-844.

Puynode (De) De la Monnaie, du
Credit, et de l’lmpdt. Paris.

Soetbeer. Goldwahrungund deutsche
Munz verhaltnisse Vierteljahr-
schnft fur Volks wirthschaft, etc.
I. Jahrg., 3 u. 4 Bd. Berlin.

Stansfeld (Hamer). Our Monetary
Laws : their Evils and the
Remedies. ff Soc. Sci. Assoo.,”
pp. 833-840; Discussion, p, 883.

1864.

Blerzy (H.). Les Mines d’Or de
TAustralie. “R. des DeuxMondes ”
15 D5c.

Bordet. L’Or et V Argent en 1864.
Paris.

D’Eichthal (Ad ). De la Monnaie de
Papier et des Banques demission.

Gibbons (J. S ). The Banks of New
York, their Dealers, the Clearing
House, and the Panic of 1857.
With a Financial Chart. New
York, x,, 399 pp.

Goschen (George J.), MP. The
Theory of the Foreign Exchanges.
Fourth Edition, xvii., 150 pp.

Guthrie (George). Bank Monopoly
the Cause of Commercial Crises.

86 pp.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


389


Laspeyres(E!,). Hamburger W aar en -
preise 1851 — 1863 und die Cali-
fornia*^, Australischen, Goldent-
deckungen seit 1848. Hilde-
brand^ “Jahrbuches-Band 11.” s.
81-118, 209-36.

Lees (W- Nassau). The Drain of
Silver to the East, and the Cur-
rency of India, xii., 196 pp.

Leslie (T. E. C.). The Distribution
and Value of the Precious Metals
in the 16th and 19th Centuries.
“Macmillan’s Magazine,” August.
(Reprinted in Essays, <fcc., 1879,
pp. 264-295.)

Mansfield (W. R.). On the Intro-
duction of a Gold Currency into
India.

Rogers (J. E. T.). On a Continuous
Price of Wheat for 105 years,
from 1380 — 1484. “Jour. Stat.
Soc.,” vol. xxvii., pp. 70-81.

Schaake (W.), Ueber die Einfuh-
rung einer neuen Goldmunze
statt der zu beseitigenden Gold-
krone. Vertrag gehalten am 30
Juli, 1864. Hildesheim.

Trevelyan (Sir C.). Minute on a
Gold Currency for India.

Wolowski. Traitee de la premiere
Invention des Monnoies de Nicole
Oresme . . . et Traite de la
Monnoie de Copernic. Publies et
annotes par M L. W. Pans,
lxxii, c. xxxix., 83.

Wolowski. La Monnaie. Entretien
sur le Traite de la Monnaie de
Copernic.

1865.

Bonnet. La Crise Monetaire de
1863-64 et ses Origines. “ Rev.
des D. M.” 15 Nov.

Bouillet (J. B.). Notice sur le
Papier-Monnaie 6mis en Au-
vergne de 1790 a 1793.

Bontaiel (Aim6). Enquete sur la
circulation mon5taire etfiduciaire.
Memoire presente & MM. les
Membres duConseil Superieurdu
Commerce. . . .

Cemnschi (H.). Mecanique de PfS-
change. Paris. 244 pp.

De Parien. La Question Monetaire
de France et h, TEtranger. “ Revue
Contemporaine,” 31 Dec.


Dncrocq (Theophile). De la Mon.
naie au point de vue de Peconomie
politique et du droit, et du service
monetaire de la France . . .

GHIbart (J. W.) . A Practical Treatise
on Banking. 2 vols, xxx., 364 j
xii., 365—682.

Grote (H.). Die Geldlehre, insbeson-
dere der Wiener Munzvertrag
von 1057; die Goldkronen und
die deutschen Handelsveneine.
Leipzig.

Jevons. The Variation of Prices and
the Value of the Currency since
1782. “Jour. Stat. Soc.,” June,
vol. xxviii., pp. 294-230.

Juglar (0. and P. J. Coullet). Ex-
traits des Enqu&bes Parle-
mentaires Anglaises sur les
Questions de JBanques . . .
Traduits.

Laveleye. Le Marche Monetaire et
ses Crises depuis Cinquante Ans.
Paris. 314 pp.

Laveleye. Le Money-Market en
Angleterre depuis Cinquante Ans.
“ Rev. des Deux Mondes,” 1 Janv.
La Fuite de V Argent et la Hausse
de PEscompte. “ Tb 15 Janv.

Laveleye. Les Crises Commerciales
et Monetaires. “Rev. des Deux
Mondes,” Jan. 1.

Le Cesne (Jules). Etude prepara-
toire & PEnquete sur les Faits
Generaux quiregissent laCircula-
tion Monetaire et Fiduciaire.

Leslie. The New Gold Mines and
Prices in Europe in 1865. “ North
British Review,” June. (Reprinted
in Essays, etc., 1879, pp. 296-
325.)

Leslie. Changes in Prices. “ Econo-
mist,” October 14th, pp. 1239-40.

Lubbock. On the Country Clearing.
“Jour. Stat. Soc.,” vol. xxviii.,
pp. 361-71.

Marqfoy (Gustave). Theorie de la
Monnaie.

Nahuys (Le Comte), fitat de la
Question de PUniformit5 des
Monnaies, des Poids, et des
Mesures. “ Traits Economique et
Statistique.” Utrecht.

Nahuys. De PStablissement d’une
Monnaie Universelle.


CURRENCY AND FINANCE .


390

RoSWag (0.)* Les Metaux Precieux
consideres au point d© vue $cono-
mique. Paris.

Soetbeer. Yerhandlungen der vom
Hamburghischen Kaufmanns-
Oonvent znr Prufung der Yaluta-
Frage niedergesetzten Commis-
sion. Yeroeffentlicht seitens der
Commerz-Deputation. 4to. Ham-
burg.

Soetbeer. Production der edlen

Metalle. Berlin.

Soetbeer. Zusammenstellung der

Erklaerungen yon 35 deutschen
Handelskammern in Betreff der
Goldausmiinzung in Deutschland
Herausgegeben vom bleibenden
Ausschusse des deutschen Han-
delstages im Maerz. Berlin.

Soetbeer. (Berichterstatter.) Yer-
handlungen in Betreff deutscher
Munzeinheit und eiuer neuen
Yereinsgoldmiinze in der Sitzung
des dritten deutschen Handels-
tages am 27 September. Berlin.

Soetbeer. Die fiinfte Sitzungperiode
des internationalen statistischen
Congresses in Berlin. September,
1863. II. Bd., Secbste Section.
Die Einheit der Miinzen, Masse
und Gewichte als wichtigstes
Hilfsmittel der vergleichenden
Statistik. 2 Bde. Berlin.

Wefebaupt (0 .) . Bericht, betreff end
die Beschaffrmg einer neuen
Goldmunze fur die durch den
Munz vertrag vom 24 Januar,
1857. Yerbundenen Staaten.
Cassel.

1866.

Baxter (Robert). The Panic of
1866, with its Lessons on the
Currency Act. xiii., 100 pp.

Berg (N. P. Yan den). Bankwezen
en Banken in Britisch-Indie.
Eene geschiedkundige schets
Batavia Java.

Cemuschi. Contre le Billet de
Banque, 18mo.

Obevalier. Cours d’Economie
Politique . , . 3me vol. 2me ed.
... La, Monnaie. Paris, viii.,
779 pp.

Oom and Money. Edinb. Rev.,
Feb., vol. xxvi, pp. 135-156.


Crump (Arthur). A Practical
Treatise on Banking, Currency,
and the Exchanges, xiv. , 254 pp.

DO Parieu. L* U nion Monetaire de la
France, de Vltalie, de la Belgique,
et de la Suisse : le Mimzverein
latin. fC Revue Contemporarne,”
Octobre.

Documents relatifs h la Question
Monetaire, la Convention de
1865, expose des motifs de la loi
actuelle, rapports sur cette loi,
text© des lois anterieures, etc.
1 vol. 4to. Bruxelles.

Economist (An) of the Fourteenth
Century. (Review of Wolowski’s
edition of Oresme’s Traitee de la
Premiere Invention des Monnaies,
etc.) “Edmb. Rev.,” Jan., vol.
cxxiii., pp. 83-94.

Fitzgerald (F.). An Expanding
Currency. 2nd ed.

Hendriks (Frederick). Decimal
Coinage: a Plan for its Imme-
diate Extension in England. In
connection with the International
Coinage of France and other
countries. 48 pp.

International Coinage (Review of
Roswag, Hendriks, De Parieu,
and others). “Edinb. Rev.,”
vol. cxxiv , pp. 388-399.

Jevons. On the Frequent Autumnal
Pressure in the Money Market,
and the Action of the Bank of
England. “ Jour. Stat. Soc,” June.
Yol. xxix , pp. 235-53.

Mills (John). The Bank Charter
Act and the late Panic . . .

“Social Science Assoc.,” Man-
chester, October. 23 pp.

Newmarch. Notice of . . . Rogers’
History of Agriculture and Prices
. • . “Jour. Stat. Soc.,” vol.
xxix., pp. 542-8.

Newmareh. The Sudden Rise in
the Rate of Discount in Octo-
ber last, and the Causes which
led to it. “Bankers* Magazine,”
January, 1866, vol. xxvi., pp. 9-
16.

Pereire (iWle et Isaac). Enqu^te
sur la Banque de France. De-
positions ... Du Systems des
Bauques et du System© de I>aw,
Paris, xxxii., 273,


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


39 *


Rapport adress6 h S. M. PEmpereur
par M. le Mmistre des Finances
snr un^rojet de loi relatif h la
Convention Monetaire passee
entre la France, la Belgique,
Tltalie, et la Suisse. 14 Avril.

Rogers (J. E. Thorold). A History
of Agriculture and Prices m
England. a.d. 1259-1400, 2 vols.

Souli& (Emile). Les Gisements de
Metaux Precieux des Etats et
des Territoires da Pacifique
(Etats-Unis).

The Bank of England, the Bank
Acts, and the Currency. By
Cosmopolite. 74 pp. Six fold-
ing diagrams.

Walker (Amasa). The Science of
Wealth (chiefly devoted to the
Money Question). Boston.

Wolowski. Enquete sur les Priucipes
et lesFaits Generaux qui regisseut
la Circulation Monetaire et Fidu-
oiaire. Deposition de M. W.
Stances des 21, 28, et 30 Nov.,
1865. Paris, Imprimerie Im-
periale. 4to, iv., 392 pp.

1867.

Baudrillart (Henri). L’ Argent et
ses Cutiques. 32mo.

Bericht uber die Yerhandlungen des
neunten Congresses deutscher
Yolkswirthe zu Hamburg, August
1867, 3 Sitz. : Munzeinheit und
Goldwahrung. Berlin.

Brock (0. J.). Beport to the Nor-
wegian Government on the Con-
ference of 1867. Christiania.

Brtlckner (A.). Finanzgeschicht-
liche Studien. Kupfergeldkusen.
St. Petersburg.

Cherbuliez (A. E.). Nature de la
Monnaie compl^mentaire de la
Convention de 1865. “ Journ. des
Econ.,” Janvier.

Conference Monetaire Internationale
de 1867. Proems Terbaux. Paris.

De Parieu. Be PUniformite Vlone-
taire. “ Journ. des Eqqu.” Juin.

Enquete de 1865-66. Deposition des
Delegues de la Banque de France.

Fellows (F. P.). On the Yarious
Methods in which our Coinage
may be Decimalised. . . . ct Brit.
Assoc .,* 1 r pp. 188-90.


Gassiot (John P.), F.R.S. Monetary
Panics and their Bemedy. . . .
2nd ed., 48 pp.

Geyer. Theorie und Praxis des Zettel-
bankwesens. Munchen.

Heron (James). On Monetary Panics.
“ Soc. Sci. Assoc.,” pp. 647-55.

Hock (0. Yon). Der Munz vertrag
von 24 Jan., 1857, und seiner
Gebrechea. Oester. Bevue, 1867,
2 Heft. Wien.

Instructions Relative to the Trans-
action of Business at the Mint
of the United States, and its
Branches. Printed by order of
the Director for the use of the
Mint and B ranches. Philadelphia.
32 pp.

Lammers (A.). Deutsche Munzre-
form. “ Preuss. Jahrbucher,” Bd.
xx., Heft 5. Berlin.

Laveleye (De). La Monnaie Inter-
nationale. “Bevue des Deux
Mondes,” 1 Avril.

Laws (The) relating to the Mint of
the United States and its
Branches. Printed by order of
the Director for the use of the
Mint and Branches. Philadelphia.
103 pp.

Levi (Leone). Is it desirable that
there should be an International
Currency . . .? “Boo. Sci.
Assoc.,” pp. 159-164.

Mantellier (Philippe). De 1’Expo-
sition des Monnaies Etrangbres
en France. De la Contrefa 90 n
des especes framjaises et du faux,
monnayage du xi. e au
Si&cle.

Mannequin (Theod.). Uniformity
Monetaire. Bapport & MM. les
Commissaires d© PApaerique
Central© et Meridional© (Exposi-
tion Universelle de 1867.)

Mini st ere des Finances. Bapport de
la Commission chargee d’4tudier
la question de 1’E talon Monetaire.
Paris.

Mouuder (Frederick). The Causes
and Cure of Monetary Panics.

Nygociatious Monetaires entre la
France et PAutriche. Juillet,
1867. Manuscrit.

Patterson (B. H.). La Guerre des
Banques et son Kem&de : Un
Systlme Monetaire International*


392


CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


QueipO (Yasquez). La cuadruple
Convencion monetaria con-
siderada en su origen, objeto,
©to. Madrid.

Verhandlungen der Special- Com-
mission fur der Berathung der
Munzfrage vom 10 bis 14 April,
1867. Unter dem Versitze des
Freiherren von Hoch. Wien.

Wallenburg. Report to the Swedish
Government on the Conference
?>f 1867. Stockholm.

Wolowski. De la Monnaie.
Wykeham-Martin (C.). An At-
tempt at a Popular Explanation of
the Theory of Price ... 26 pp.

1867-69.

EnquSte sur les Principes qui R6-
gissent la Circulation Monetaire.
Paris. 6 vols.

1868.

Augspurg (G. D.). Zur deutschen
Munzfrage. Zur deutschen Munz-
frage, IX. Nachtraege. Bremen.

Bachiene (P. J.). De internationale
Munt — Conferentie in 1867.

(Overgedruckt uit de Economist.)
Gravenhage.

Ballard (Colonel). Remarks on a
Gold Currency for India. Bombay.

Benard (T. N.). Enquete Anglaise
sur la Monnaie Internationale.
(" Journ. des XScon.,” Decembre.)

Bonnet (Y.). La Question de l’Or.
II. Le Double 4talon Monetaire.

“ Rev. des Deux Mondes.” Nov.
Yol. lxxviii. pp. 385-359.

Brown (Samuel). Is it desirable to
have an International Coinage
• . . ? “ Soo. Sci. Assoc., ”pp. 510
■—517 •

Chevalier. De I’Etablissement d’une
Monnaie TJniverselle. “Jour. des
Economistes,” Novembre, pp.
185-7 •

Chevalier. Lettre k M. Ed. Bertin,
directeur gerant du Journal des
Debats. (“Journ. des Debats,”
19 Octobre.)

Courcelle-Senenil. Projet d’une
Monnaie Internationale. (“Journ.
des Econ. ” Avril.)

Coutzen (H.), Ueber die Geschichte
des Geldes und uber Goldwah-
rtmg. Leipzig.


Debombourg (Georges). Gallia
aunfera: Etudes sur les Alluvions
Aurif&res de la France.

De Parieu. Lettre & Hr. Ruggles.
“ Journ. des Econ.,” Septembre.

De Parieu. Situation de la Ques-
tion Monetaire Internationale.
“ Journ. des Econ.,” Avril.

De Parieu. La Question Monetaire
et l’Opportunite de sa Solution.

Der Uebergang zur Goldwah-
rung. Eine Sammlung von
Preisschriften herausgeg von
den bleibenden Ausschuss des
deutschen Handelstages. Darin
enthalten. — Grote (H.), Der
Uebergang von der Silverwah-
rung. — Millauer (G.), Die Emfuh-
rung der Goldwahrung in
Deutschland. — Weibezahn (H ),

Zur Deutschen Munzreform.

Bach (R.), Die Nothwendigen
Y orbereitungen fur den Ueber-
gang zur Goldwahrung.— Eiller-
mann (F. G.), Beantwortung der
Preisfrage. Berlin.

Deutschlands Aufgabe in der Munz-
frage.

Documents relatifs a la Question
Monetaire. Paris.

Dubois-Caplain. La Demonetisation
de 1’ Argent et la Question Mone-
taire. Lettre k M. de Champvaux,
Directeur du “Journal de Macon.”

Du Camp (Maxime). L’Hotel des
Monnaies de Paris et la Fabrica-
tion des Esp&ces Mon^taires.

“ Rev. des D. M.,” 15 Dec.

Dumas (E). Notes sur remission
en France des Monnaies Deci-
males de Bronze (1852-65). Paris.
4to. pp. 107.

Elliott (E.B.). The Metrical Unifica-
tion of International Coinage,
Washington.

Engelenburg. Proven van het ont-
werpen ter invoerung van het
franken stelsel, etc. Nimwegen.

Field (Alfred). International Coinage.

“ Soc. Sci. Assoc.,” pp. 517-523.
Discussions, pp. 570-575.

Goldschmidt (L.). Handbuch des
Handelssechts. 1 Bd 2 Abtheil
(Drittes Buch Abschnitt II. Das
Geld). Erlangen.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


393


Jevons. On the Condition of the
Gold Coinage of the United
Kingdoy with Reference to the
Question of International Coin-
age. “Jour. Stat. Soc.,” Decem-
ber, vol. xxxi., pp. 426-64.

Jevons. On the International
Monetary Convention, and the
Introduction of an International
Currency into this Kingdom.
Paper read before the Manchester
Statistical Society, May 13.
Transactions, 1867-8, pp. 79-92

Juglar (C.). Du Change et de la
Liberte d’fUmission. Pans.

Leon (Alphonse). De l 5 uniformity
des Monnaies. Notes presentees
& l’Academie des Sciences.

L£on. La Convention Monetaire da
23 Decembre, 1865, et P Uni-
formity des Monnaies.

Le Touze (Ch.). De r Uniformity
Monetaire et de TUnite d’E talon.
“ Journ. des Econ.,” Mars.

Le Touze. Necessity de resoudre la
Question Monetaire. “Journ. des
Econ.,” Juillet.

Le Touze. La Convention Mone-
taire da 25 Decembre, 1865, et la
Commission Anglaise. “Coiir.de
la Gironde,” 27 Novembre.

Le Touze. La Question Monetaire
et le Rapport de la Commission.
“Courrier de la Gironde,” 24 Avnl.

Majority Report on International
Coinage. Senate Finance Com-
mittee. Mr. Sherman. Wash-
ington.

Minority Report on International
Coinage. Senate Finance Com-
mittee. Mr. Morgan. Wash-
ington.

Mint of the United States. Annual
Assay. Rules and Laws regu-
lating the same, with a Statement
of the processes employed there-
in. Philadelphia. 27 pp.

Potter (George A.). The Instrument
of Association .* a Manual of
Currency. New York, xiv., 131pp.
12mo.

Proceedings of the International
Monetary Conference of 1867, etc.
(“ Ex.Doc.” No. 14,40th Congress,
2nd Session.) Washington.


ProC&S Verbaux et Rapport de la
Commission Monetaire de 1867,
relatifs & la question de FlStalon.
2 vols., 4to. Paris. Impr. Imp.

Report from the Royal Commissioners
on International Coinage ; to-
gether with the Minutes of Evi-
dence and Appendix. Presented
to . . . Parliament . . . Folio
xxii., 372 pp. (Collected Series
1867-8, vol. xxvii., p. 9.)

Report of the TJommission appointed
by the Government of India on
Currency. 16th March.

Roux (P.). Enquete Monetaire.
“ Journ. des Econ.,” Juin.

Seyd. Bullion and Foreign Exchanges
Theoretically and Practically
Considered ; followed by
Defence of the Double Yaluation.
vi,, 700 pp.

Seyd. The Question of Seignorage
and Charge for Coining, and the
Report of the Royal Commission
on International Coinage. 59 pp.

Seyd. The Practical Proposals for
an International Coinage, etc.
“ Economist,” December.

S mit h (Colonel J. T. ) . Remarks on
a Gold Currency for India, and
Proposal of Measures for the
Introduction of the British
Sovereign . . . Large 8vo, viii.
119 pp*.

Stoney (G. Johnstone). On the
Natural System of Coinage.
“ Brit. Assoc ” Trans, of Sections
pp. 177-9.

Weibezahn (H.). Der Gold Gulden
als die dem Nachstigste deutsche
Rechnungsmimze. 2 verws. Ausg.
Koeln und Leipsig.

Wolowski. L’Or et T Argent. Ques-
tion Monetaire. Memoirs lu le
7 Octobre, 1868, & la Seance des
Cinq Academies de I’Institut Im-
perial de France. Pans, 32 pp.

Wolowski. Les Metaux Pryeieux et
la Circulation Fiduciaire. “ Jour
des Econ.,” Octobre.

Wolowski. De ^Influence du Change
sur le Marche Monetaire. “ Rev.
des Deux Mondes,” Sept., vol
lxxvn., pp. 391-417,


394 CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


Wolowski. Quelques Notes stir la
Question Monetaire. Epreuve.
Paris. 40 pp.

Y Borras (Jose-Palo de Barnabe).

Report to the Spanish Govern,
ment on the Conference of 1867.
Madrid.

Y Bull (Surra). Yarious Essays on

the Monetary Question. Madrid.

1869.

Augspurg (G. D.). r Zur deutschen
Munzfrage. III. Gold-und Silber-
wahruug. ITebergang zur Gold-
wahrung. Papiergeld. Bremen.

Augspnrg. Zur deutschen Munz-
frage. XY. Wahl des Munz-
systems. Hambiirg.

Bagehot (Walter). A Practical Plan
for Assimilating the English and
American Money as a Step to-
wards a Universal Money. 70 pp.

Bank of England. The Bullion
Business of the Bank of England.
Printed at the Bank for private
circulation, vi. 21 pp.

Blaise (A.) La Monnaie Interna-
tionale. u La Liberfce,” 30 Mars.

Blaise. Des Conclusions adoptees
par la Commission Frangaise
Monetaire. “ Journ. des Econ.”
Avril.

Blake (William P.) Report upon the
Precious Metals: being Statistical
Notices .... Paris Universal
Exposition, 1867. Washington,
vii 369 pp.

Bonnet. Les Variations et la
Hansse des Pnx. ‘‘Revue des
Deux Mondes,” 15 Aoftt.

Bonnet (V.) Les Differens Syst&mes
de Monnaie Internationale, “ Re-
vue des Deux Mondes,” 15 Mars.

Brichaut (A. C.) Histoire Mone-
taire Contemporaine. “ Revue
Beige de Numismatique ” (and
subsequent years).

Commissioa Monetaire. Proofs
Yerbaux et Rapport. Paris. 2
vols. 4to.

Currency and Banking : English
and American. “ Banker’s Maga-
zine” (New York), vol, iv. 3rd
Ser., Nov., pp. 321-346,


De Parieu. La Question Mone-
taire et la Demonetisation de
TArgent “ Courner de la Gi-
ronde,” Janvier et Fevrier.

De Parieu. La Monnaie Inter-
nationale. “ Revue Contempo-
raine,” 31 Juillet. 8 pp.

De Parieu. Les Conferences Mon6-
taires Internationales de 1865 et
1867 l et leurs Resultats. “Journ.
des Econ.,” Fevrier.

De Parieu. Progrhs recent et
avenir de l’Umfication Monetaire.
e< Joum. des Econ.,” Decembre.

De Bisder (R.). De la Monnaie du
Credit, etc. Gand.

De Wolf (L. E.). Money; its Uses
and Abuses. Chicago.

Dubois (W. E.) Propositions for a
Revised System of Weights and
a Restoration of Silver Currency.
“Banker’s Magazine” (N. Y.),
September; vol. xxiv. pp. 161-
176. *

Farr (W.) On International Coinage.

" Brit. Assoc.,” pp. 183-190.

Feer-Herzog. Bonification Mone-
taire Internationale ; ses Con-
ditions et ses Perspectives. Pans
et Geneve. 78 pp.

Geschwendner (A.) Zur aiige-
meinen Muuzemheit. Die Inter- *
nationale Munzkonferenz zu
Paris im J., 1867. Uebersetzung
und Bemerkungen. Erlangen.

Henderson (W. D.) The Statistics
of the London Bankers’ Clearing
House. A paper read at ... .
the “ Social Science Association.”
October, 1868; 17 pp.

Henderson. On the Currency.

“ ” PP- 598-99. Discussion, pp.

599-602.

Hill (Edwin). On the Proposal to
Charge for Mintage of the Sove-
reign. “Social Science Assoc.,”
pp. 597-8.

Jevons (W. S.) The Depreciation
of Gold. Letter to the “ Econo-
mist,” May 8 ; vol. xxvii, pp. 530-
32. Reprinted in “Jour. Stat.
Soc.” December, 1869 j vol,
xxxii. pp, 445-49.

Xidon. La Monnaie Internationale et
le Syst&me M4fcrique.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


$95


Leslie. On Value of Gold. “ Econo-
mist,” January 23.

Lowe (Robert). The Gold Coinage.
Speech delivered in the House of
Commons by the Chancellor of
the Exchequer, on Friday, Aug. 6,
1869. Extracted from Hansard’s
“Parliamentary Debates,” vol.
cxcviii. pp. 1411-1422.

Maclaren (James). A Brief Review
of some of the Principal Argu-
ments for and against the
Chancellor of the Exchequer’s
Proposal to reduce the quantity
of Fine Gold in the Sovereign.
2 7 pp.

Mees. De Muntstandaard. Amster-
dam.

Memorandum — Metrical System of
International Coinage. “Treasury
Department,” April. Washington.

Miller (F. B.) On Gold Refining by
Chlorine Gas. “Trans. Royal Soc.
of New South Wales,” Art. xi.
15 pp.

Nahuys (Le Comte). La Question
de TUniformite Internationale
des Monnaies, consideree au point
de vue historique.

Nicholson (N. A.) Observations on
Coinage and our present Mone-
tary System. 3rd ed. 48 pp.

Nobhomb (G ) Die Weltmiinze.
Preuss. Jahrbuch, ii. Bd. Berlin.

Price (B.). The Proposals of the
Chancellor of the Exchequer on
Coinage. “ Contemporary Re-
view,” November, vol. xn. pp.
370-398.

Reduction in Weight of Gold Coin.
“Jour. Stat. Soc.,” vol. xxxu., pp.
329-331. Reprinted from “ The
Times.”

Report by the Master of the Mint
and Colonel Smith, on the Mint-
age necessary to cover the ex-
penses of establishing and main-
taining the Gold Currency. “ Pari.
Paper,” No. 285, folio 3.

Schultz (C.). Die deutsche Munz-
reform und der Anschluss an
das Frankensystem. Berlin.

Seyd. The Depreciation of Labour
and Property which would follow
the Demonetisation of Silver.
109 pp.


Sloet Van de Beele. Diagramme
representant les Prix Moyens des
Cereales au Marche d’Arnheim,
1544 h 1869. A la Haye.

Soetbeer. Denkschrift betreffend
deutsche Munzeinigung. Berlin.
4to, 84 pp.

Soetbeer, Bedenken gegen die
sogenannte Doppelwahrung,
“Der Uebergang zur Goldwah-
rung in Deutschland.” Bremer
Handelsblatfc. Nm. 899, 924-27.

Soetbeer. Zur Deutscben Munz-
frage, i.-m, Hamburgiscbe Boer-
senballe. Maerz.

Stopel. Ueber einige neuere Theorien
vom Geld. Jena.

Tabellarische Uebersiehten des
Hamburgischen Handels, 1852-
1869.

Uebersiehten uber die in den
Staaten des Nord - Deutschen
Bundes Stattgehabten Ausprae-
gungen und Einziehnngen von
Gold, Silber, and Kupfer Mun-
zen. No. 8 du Actenstucke des
Bundesratbs. Berlin. Fol.

Wolowski (L.). Le Change et la
Circulation. Paris, viii., 480 pp.

"Wolowski. La Question Monetaire.
2me edit.

Worms (Emile) Theorie et Pra-
tique de la Circulation Monetaire
et Fiduciaire.

Xeller (J.). Die Frage der Inter-
nationalen Munzeinigung und der
Reform des deutschen Munz-
wesensmit besonderer Ruchsicht
auf Sud-Deutschland. Stuttgart.

1870.

Augspurg (G. D.). Zur Deutscheu
Munzfrage. v. Die Frageu der
Munzuntersuchung und ihre
Beantwortung vor dem Kriege
nnd Wahrend des Krieges.
Hamburg.

Bach (N.). Ein neuer Vorscblag zur
Loesung der Deutscheu Munz-
frage. Buchholz.

Bemardakis (A. N.). De POrigine
des Monnaies et de leurs Noms.

Bo nn et (Victor). Etudes sur la
Monnaie. Paris.

Eichelberg (J.). Vorschlag fur eine
Einheit in Munz nnd Wahrung
fiir alle Grossen handeltreiben-
den, Staaten. Frankftirt-an-M


396 CURRENCY AND FINANCE .


Farr (William), F.R S. Report to
tie International Statistical Con-
gress, held at The Hague, m 1869.
Printed for H.M.’s Stationery
Office. 52 pp.

Feer-Herzog. La France et ses
Allies Monetaires en presence de
TUnification Universelle des
Monnaiee. Deposition faite. . . .
devant le Conseil Superieur du
Commerce . . . de France. Paris.
U6 pp.

Franklin (J. A-.). On International
Money of Account, independently
of International Coinage. “Jour.
Soc. of Arts,” yol. xviii. pp. 590-
603.

Fremantle (C. W.). Report of the
Deputy Master of the Mint on
European Mints. “ Pari. Paper,”
466, 50 pp.

Geschwendner (A). Zur Deutschen
Munzeinheit. Yeremigung des
Thaler und des Guldenfusses
unter sich und mit dem Franken-
system. Als Antrag in die
Rayerische Abgeordneten-Kam-
mar gebracht. Munchen.

Gold Coinage Controversy of 1869.
Speeches, Letters, Articles, etc.
Printed at the Bank of England,
for private circulation only, ix.,
310 pp.

Grote (H.). Die Goldwahrungs-
frage Allerlei Miinzfragen. “Neu-
en Hannoverischen Zeitung,”
Maerz nnd April.

Kelley (Hon. William D.). Inter-
national Coinage. Speech of
W. D K., of Pennsylvania, de-
livered in the House of Repre-
sentatives, April 13 th, 1870.
Washington. 8 pp.

Kilim (F. W. E.) . Grundlinien emer
decimalen Munz-Ordnung des
Nord-Deutschea Bundes. Berlin.
4to.

Lehr (Ernest.) Les Ileus de Cinq
Francs au Point de Yue de la
Numismatique et de 1’Histoire.

Levi (Leoni). The International
Coinage Question. “ Soc. Sci.
Assoc.’* p. 640-1.

Mosle (A. G.). Das Teutonische
■ Munzsystem. Ein Beitrag zur


Loesung der Deutschen Munz-
frage. Bremen.

Nahuys (M.). Die eMunzreform
Deutschlands vom Nationalen
und Internationalen Standpunkt
betrachtet. Utrecht.

Patterson (R. H.). On our Home
Monetary Drains, and the Crisis
of 1866. “Jour. Stat. Soc.,” pp.
216-42.

Reports of the United States Com-
missioners to the Paris Universal
Exposition, 1867. Washington.

Rtmkell (William M ). The United
States Mint. A brief History of
the Institution, with a full de-
scription of the manner in which
Gold, Silver, Nickel, and Copper
are converted into Money. Phila-
delphia. 16 pp.

Seyd (Ernest). On International
Coinage, and the Yariation of
the Foreign Exchanges during
Recent Years. “Jour. Stat. Soc.,”
vol. xxxiii , pp. 42-73.

Seyd. * Enquete sur la Question
Monetaire. Seance du 31 Mars.

Snowden (j. Ross). International
Coinage. “ Lippincott’s Maga-
zine,” January, pp 85-93.

Society of Arts. Report of Con-
ferences held by the India Com-
mittee on a Gold Currency for
India. Reprinted from the
“ Journal of the Society of Arts,”
vol. xviii., pp. 101, 211, 231, 274,
311.

Stoney (G J.). On the Effect which
a Mint Charge has upon the
Yalue of Coins. . . . “ Brit. Assoc.”
Trans, of Sections, pp. 201-3.

Weibezahn (H.). Kritishe Umschau
anf dem Gebiete der Yorschlage
zur Deutschen Munzreform. Koln
und Leipzig.

Weibezahn. Deutschlands Ueber-
gaug zur Goldwahrung vermoege
der Franzoesischen Knegsent-
schaedigung.

Wolowski (L). L’Or et V Argent.
Paris, xl., 440 pp.

Wolowski. Enqu&te sur la Ques-
tion Monetaire. Deposition de
M. W. Folio. 125 pp.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


39 7


1871.

Allgspurg (G.D) Die wirthschaft-
lichen ft-esetze des Uebergangs
zur Goldwahrung. Hirth’s 44 An-
nalen des Deutschen Reiches.”
Leipsig.

AugSpurg. Die Rechnungseinheit
nnd die Uebergangsraassregeln
bei der deutschen Munzreform.
Berlin.

Ausschuss — Berichfe der Handels-
kammer zu Leipsig Tiber die
Frage der Ordnung des deutschen
Munzwesens. Leipsig.

Bericht uber die Verhandlungen des
12 Congresses Deutsche Volks-
wirthein Lubeck, 28-31 August —
Munzreform.

Boehmert (B.) Die Gerechtigkeit
und das nationals Interesse bei
der deutschen Munzreform. Em
wort an die Mitglieder des
deutschen Bundesraths und
Reichstags. Zurich.

Boehmert (B ) Die Gold aus munz-
ungsfrage in der deutschen
Munzreform. Bremen.

Braiine (A.) Silberwahrung oder
Goldwahrung? Fur Jedermann
verstandliche Erlauterung der
Reform des deutschen Munz-
wesens. Plauen.

Bundesrath des Deutschen Reichs
(An den hohen). Eingabe des
bleibenden Ausschusses des
deutschen Handelstages, betr.
die Munzreform, yom 17 Fol.
October.

Dietrich (A.) Was werden wir im
neuen Deutschland fur ein Geld-
bekommen. Stuttgart.

Drobisch. Ueber die Berechnung der
Yer&nderungen der Waarenpreise
und des Geld worths. Hildebrand’s
44 Jahrbucher,” Bd. i., s. 143,

Drobisch. Ueber Mittelgrossen und
die Anwendbarkeit derselben auf
die Berechnung des Steigens und
Sinkens des Geldwerthes. Be-
richte der Komglich Sachsischen
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften.

Bggers (A.) Zur Munzfrage. I.
Emleitung Parallel wahrung,
etc. II. und III. Einklang mit
demmetrischen System — Andert-


halb Gramm, etc. IV. und V.
HerrEugen Nothomb undzwang-
kurskonyersion. Den Deutschen
in Mord Amerika gewidmet.
Bremen. Maerz, April, und Mai.

Eggers. Volks wirthschaftliche Ab-
handlungen. I. Hft. zur Deuts-
chen Munzfrage. Der Wilhelms-
thaler, I.-VI. Mai. 2 Hft. zur
Deutschen Munzfrage, VII.-IX,
September. Bremen.

Eggers. Loeitmg der Deutschen
Munzfrage zum Zweeke einer
Weltmunze, die Munzverhaelt-
nisseNord-und Sud-Deutschlands
und Elsass-Lothringens Ver-
mittelnd. Berlin.

Eggers. 4 Hft. zum Munzund Bank-
notenfrage die Goldmark mit
Zwangskurs nach dem Munz-
gesetz vom 4 December, 1871.
Bremen.

Eisenlohr (A.). Prufung der Munz-
reformyorschlaege der preussis-
chen Regierung. Heidelberg.

Frand (0. H. H.). Die Munzfrage
und der Diesjahrige Volks-
wirthschaftliche Congress. Lu-
beck.

Gamier (J.) Perfectionnements
introduire dans les Monnaies.

Geschwendner (A.) Zur deutschen
.zugleich mternationalen Muuzein-
heit. Die deutsch-franzoesische
Munzidentitaet als Munz-system
des deutschen Reiche. Augsburg.

Goldwahrung (Die). Von einem
Laieu geschneben. 4to. Sorau.

Hendriks (F.) Mew German Gold
Currency and International Coin-
age. 44 Jour. Stat. Soc.” vol.
xxx iv. pp. 504-508, 44 Economist.”

La Crise Mondtaire en France;
Etude surne d’un Tableau G6n6rai
des Monnaies d’Or et d’ Argent
fabriquees en France de 1795 &
1870.

Mills (John). On the Post-Panic
Period — 1866-70. 4 4 Manchester

Statistical Soc. Trans.” Session
1870-1, pp. 81-104.

Mohl (Moritz). Ueber die Gefabren
einer verfehlten Munzreform.
Tubingen.

Mohl. Zur Munzfrage. Tubingen,


398 CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


Nothomb (El.) Rapport sur la Loi
Mon^taire Allemande du 4 De-
cembre, 1871. Bruxelles.

Partee (W. B.) (Pseud. Nomistake).
The Science of Honey. Phila-
delphia.

Quenstedt (M.) Zur deutschen
Wahrungs - und Munzfrage.
Berlin.

Reichstag (An den hohen). Petition
der Handelskawner in Ham-
burg in Betreff des Gesetzens-
wurfs wegen Anspragung yon
Reichsgold munzen, vom 8 No-
vember j Pol.

Schneider (J. B.) Das neue Munz-
gesetz. Bremen.

Schneider. Die deutsche Munzfrage.
Em Beitrag zur Loesung ders el-
ben. Giessen.

Schneider. Die Verhandlungen
des Yolkswirthschaftlichen Con-
gresses in Lubeck uber die
Geldfragen. Giessen.

Seyd. On Currency Laws, and their
Effects on Pauperism. “Jour.
Stat. Soc.” March, vol. xxxiv ,

pp. 1-20.

Seyd. Suggestions in Reference to
the Metallic Currency of the
United States of America, pp.
253.

Seyd. Die Munz-Wahrungs und
Bankfragen in Deutschland.
Elberfeld. 204 pp.

Seyd. Bemerkungen uber das
vom Bundesrathe vor geschlag-
ene neue deutsche Munzgesetz,
Elberfeld.

Soetheer. Yerschl&ge zur deutschen
Munzreform. 3 Aufsaetze, April
und Mai. Die deutsche Munz-
reform in besonderer Beziehung
auf preussische Thaler und Ham-
burger Bankgeld ; September.
w Die Munzreform ; ” September
and October. “ Deutsche Munz-
reform 5” November.

Stockholm. Rapport de la Com-
mission chargee d’etudier la
Question Mon4taire.

Stoney (G. J ) The Natural System
of Coinage. Berlin.


Weibezahn (H.) Deutschlands
Munz-Einheit mit Goldwahrung.
Entwurf eines deutschen Reichs-
munzgesetzes. Mit 10 Munz-
Abbildungen und einer Munz-
Tabelle. Leipsig.

Weihezahn. Mark Oder Goldguldeu,
sowie die internationale Seite
der deutschen Munzreform. Leip-
sig.

Weihezahn. Thaler, Kronzehntel
oder Goldgulden. Leipsig.

Xeller (P.) Die Prage der deutschen
Munzreform, Stuttgart.

1872.

Bamberger (L). Zur deutschen
Munzgesetzgebung (Heft 161 der
Sammlung gemeinverstandlioher
vissenchaftlicher Yortrage) Ber-
lin.

Broch. Om Myntforandring. Chris-
tiania.

Broch- Om den nye tydske Myntlov.
Christiania.

Burgess (Herbert). On Interna,
tional Decimal Coinage. “ Brit
Assoc ” Trans, of Section, pp
222-4.

Chubb (Hammond). The Bank Act
and the Crisis of 1866 “ Jour

Stat. Soc.,” xxxv., pp. 171-195.

Coinage (The) of Gold for Twenty-
four Years. “ Jour. Stat. Soc.,”
pp. 376-83. Reprinted from
“ Economist ” of 29th June.

Conseil Superieur du Commerce, de
1* Agriculture, et de 1’ Industrie.
Enquete sur la Question Mone-
taire. 2 vols , 4to. Procks-
verbaux des deliberations du
Conseil Superieur ; Rapports ;
Depositions. Pans. Impr. Na-
tionale.

Crump (Arthur) The Key to the
London Money Market. 4to.
71 pp., and blank forms for in-
serting -weekly accounts of the
Bank of England.

Dawson (S. E.). Old Colonial Cur-
rencies. “ Canadian Monthly,”
April 5 “ Canadian Antiquarian,”
July; also “New York Banker’s
Magazine,” Pebruary, 1874,


BIBLIOGRAPHY .


3$9


De Parieu (E.). La Politique Mon6-
taire en France et en Allemagne.
2 me edi£.

Do Parieu. La Nouvelle Loi Mone-
taire de Japon dans ses Rapports
avec 1’ Unification Monetaire
Umverselle. Extrait du <e Oompte
Rendu de TAcademie des Sciences
Morales et Politiques,” 1872.

Do Parieu. De la Situation des
feats Confederes Monetaire-
ment, en vertu de la Convention
du 23 D4cembre, 1865. “ Revue
Catholique de Louvain,” Aout.

DO Parieu. La Question Mone-
taire Internationale. “ Journal
des feonomistes,” 15 Deeembre.

De Parieu. La Question Mone-
taire en 1872, k propos de la
Nouvelle Loi Monetaire de l’Alle-
magne. “ Revue de France,” 31
Juillet.

Euquete sur la Question Monetaire.
Conseil Sup^rieur du Commerce.
Paris. Imprimerie Nafcionale.
2 vols , 4to, xvi., 768 ; iv., 584.

Jaeger (E. L ). Der TJebergang zur
Goldwaehrung. Eine national
oekonomische Skizze. Stuttgart.

Knies (Carl). Geld und Credit.
Erste Abtheilung. Das Geld.
Berlin.

Laspeyres (E.). Welche waaren
werden im verlaufe der Zeiten
immer tlieurer ? Statistiscbe
Studien zur gescbicbte der Preise.
Zeitschrift fur Staatswissen.
schaft. 1 Heft., pp. 1-89.

Legrand (Arthur). Depositions
Orales faites devant le Conseil
Superieur de ! Agriculture. . . .
dans l’EnquSte sur la circulation
monetaire et fiduciaire resumees.
Paris. Imp. Nat. xvi., 422.

Leslie. The Gold Question and the
Movement of Prices in Germany
in 1872. “ Fortnightly Review,”
November, vol. xii., pp. 554-71
Reprinted in Essays, etc., 1879,
pp. 326—355.

Meyer (Josef). Das Geld, Eine
Nationaloekonomische Studie.
Wien.

Quenstedt (M.). Die Neuen Deuts-
chen Munzen. Entstehung,


Text und Erlauterung des
Geldes, betreffend die Ausprae-
gung von Reichsgoldmunzen, etc.
Berlin.

Question Monetaire en Hollande.
Bruxelles.

Rapport der Staats Commissie over
de Muntquestie. A. Vrolik.
Rise in Prices (The). “Jour.
Stat Soc.,” vol. xxxv., pp. 231-
236. Reprinted from the “^Bir-
mingham ®aily Post,” of 18th
June.

Roscher (W.). Betrachtungen uber
die Wabrungsfrage der Deuts-
chen Munzreform. Berlin.

Seyd. Improvements in the Process
of Coining. “Jour. Society of
Arts,” 26th January, vol. xx.,
pp. 171-181.

Seyd. The London Banking and
Bankers’ Clearing House System.
3rd ed , 68 pp.

Seyd. Statistical Critique on the
Operation of the Bank Charter
Act. . . “Jour Stat. Soc.,”
pp. 458-540.

Soetbeer (A.). Die Hamburger Bank
Valuta in ihren Beziehungen zur
Allgemeinen Deutschen Munz-
reform Zusammenstellung von
Aktenstiicken und Nachweisen.
Hamburg.

Soetbeer (A.). Munzpohtische Auf-
satze ; (1) Ausmimzung fur

Privatrechnung ; (2) Kosten der
Goldausmunzung ; (3) Genauig-
keit der Ausmunzung ; (4) Auf-
rechthaltung des Munz-fusses
der Reichsgoldmunzen. " Bremer
Handelsblatt,” vom Januar bis
April.

Weibezabn (H.) Der Hamburger
Wahrungswechsel. Bremen.

1873.

Augspurg (G. D.) Zur Deutschen
Munzfrage. VIII. Der TJebergang
zur Goldwahrung in Deutsch-
land. Bremen.

Bagehot (Walter). Lombard Street :
A Description of the Money
Market. VIII., 359 pp.

Bonnet, feat de la Question Mone-
taire, le Double fealon. “Rev.
des Deux Mondes,” 1 Nov,


40o


CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


Cairnes (j- E.). Essays in Political
Economy, Theoretical and Ap-
plied.

De Parieu. La Question Mon4-

taire depuis la Discussion au
Parlement Beige. “ Revue de
France,” 31 Decembre.

De Parieu. Da Question Mon6-

taire en France et a l^tranger.
“ Revue de France.”

EgBerS. Die Geldreform. Berlin.

Feer-Herzog (0.). Gold oder Silber ?
Erorterung einer Tagesfrage.
Aaran.

Feer-Herzog Or ou Argent? IStude
sur nne Question hi 1’Ordre du
Jour. Traduit de l’Allemand.
Paris.

Henderson (W. D.). Commercial
Panics 4 'Brit Assoc” Trans.
Sections, pp. 193-4.

Knies (Carl). Geld und Credit.
Berlin. 2 yols.

Korosi (Josef). Donnees pour Servir
h, l’Histoire des Prix, 1791-1870.
Tirees de “VAnnuaire Statis-
tique.” Pest. 92 pp.

Korosi. Beitrage zur Geschichte
der Preise . . . Pest. 92 pp.

Menier (E. J.). L’Unite de l’iitalon
Monetaire.

Motiven des Gesetzes, yom 9 Jnli.
1873. Mit Zustzaen. Berlin.

Nicholson (N. A) The Science of
Exchanges. 4th ed., 215 pp.

Palgrave. Notes on Banking in
Great Britain and Ireland, Swe-
den, Denmark, and Hamburg. . , .
“Jour. Stat. Soc.,” vol. xxxvi.,
pp. 27-152. Discussion, pp. 153-
-8. On the Relation of the
Banking Reserve of the Bank
of England to the Current Rate
of Interest .... “16.,” pp.

529-564.

Question Monetaire. La Discussion
& la Societe d’Economie Politique
Beige, le 16 Novembre.

Roberts (W. Chandler). Report on
certain Chemical Operations in-
cidental to Coining. Reprinted
from the 4th Annual Report of
the Deputy Master of the Mint,
15 pp.


Soetbeer. Uebersicht der Litera.
tnr Tiber die Deutsche Miinzfrage
in den Jahren, 1869-1871. Jahr-
buch fiirGetetzgebung des Deuts-
chen Reichs, herausgegeben von
F. V. HoltzendorfE. II. Jahrg.
Leipzig.

Soetbeer. Zur Miinzfrage. I. — III.
Das Reichsmunz gesetz und die
Goldauspragung fur Privatrech-
nung Das Munzgesetz. Boer-
senhalle vom 3, 5, und 22 Maerz,
10 und 11 April Hamburg.’

Uebersichten . uber die in den
Staaten des Deutsehen Reichs
bis ende 1871, stattgehabten
Auspragungen und Einziehungen
von Munzen. (Actenstucke zu
den Terhandlungen des Deut-
schen Reichstags, Sess. 1873.)

Van Giesenburg (Baron D’Ablaing).
Aanmerkmgen op het Vorslag der
Munt-commissie. Utrecht.

Weibezabn (H ). Der Absehluss der
Deutsehen Munzreform. Leipzig.

1874.

Bernadakis. Le Papier Monnaie
dans l’Antiqnite. “ Jour, des
Economistes.” Mars, vol. xxxih.,
pp 353-370.

Cernusclli. Or et Argent.

Compte-Rendu des Discussions de la
Commission reunie. Par M. J.
Malon, Mimstre des Finances, h
Bruxelles, Oct., Nov., 1873, pour
examiner aveo lui les diverses
Questions Monetaires. Bruxelles.

Conference Monetaire de 1’ Union
Latine. P roebs Y erbaux, J anvier,
1874. Paris.

De Beaulieu (Ad. le Hardy). La
Question Monetaire.

De Parieu. Nouvel iStat de la Ques-
tion Monetaire. “Journal des
JSconomistes,” Janvier.

Documents relatifs hi la Question
Mon4taire recueillis et publies
par M. G. Malon. “Documents
Parlementaires.” Belgique.

Documents Monetaires Execution
de la Convention Monetaire Addi-
tionnelle con cine le 31 Janvier,
1874, entre la Belgique, la France,
Tltalie, et la Suisse. “Documents
Parlementaires.” Belgique.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


401


Fr&re-Orban. La Question Mone-
taire. Examen du Syst5me et
des EfEets du Double E talon, sui-
yant leu idees de M. Emile de
Laveleye. Bruxelles xiv. 318 pp.

Knies (C.)* Weltgeld und Welt-
mimzen. Berlin.

Leslie. The Movements o£ Agri-
cultural Wages in Europe. 4 4 Fort-
nightly Beview,” June, NS.,
vol. xv., pp. 705-19. Beprinted
in Essays, &e., 1879, pp. 356-374.

Lettre & M. de Laveleye sur la
Question Monetaire.

Meyer (Josef). Das Geldwesen auf
einheitlicher Grundlage. Wien.

Palgrave. An Analysis of the
Transactions of the Bank of
England, for the years 1844-72.
44 Jour. Stat Soo. Dec., 1873, vol.
xxxvi , pp. 529-564 and Beprint.

P ani c, Our Late. “ International
Beview,” vol. i., pp. 1-16.

Rapport au Conseil Federal Suisse
sur la Conference Monetaire de
Jan., 1874, par Feer Herzog et
Lardy. Berne.

Roswag (C). Etudes Economico-
industrielles. La Question Mone-
taire. 12mo

Sampleri (Leonida). Notizie per la
Storia dei Prezzi. . . . Annali
del Ministero di Agricultura. . . .
Yol. 72. Roma. 56 pp.

Sarazin (F.). Traiie des Monnaies
d’Or en Japon. Traduit pour la
premiere f 01 s du J aponais.

Seyd. The Bank of England Note
Issue, and its Error. (Six large
sheets of Diagrams illustrating
the above.) 298 pp.

Soetbeer. Deutsche Bankverfas-
sung. Erlangen.

Sumner (William G.). A History of
American Currency, with Chap-
ters on English Bank Bestric-
tion, and Austrian Paper Money,
New York. 391 pp.

Wagner. Staats Papiergeld. Beicho-
Eassenscheine und Banknoten.
Berlin.

Walker (Amasa). Our National
Currency. 44 International Be-
view,” March, vol. i.

Walras (L6on). Elements d’Econo-
mie Politique Pure. Lausanne.


1875.

Allard (Alph). L’Or, 1’ Argent, et le
Commerce Beige.

Bernardakis (A. N.). De la Quantite
des Metaux Precieux et du Chiffre
des Monnaies depuis P Antiquity
jusqu’& nos jours.

Bolletino Settimauale dei Prezzi di
Alouni dei Pnncipali Prodofcti
Agrari. “Ministero di Agricul-
tural Boma. (In progress^.

Bonnet (Yictot). La Depreciation
de 1’ Argent et la Question Mone-
taire. Paris.

Bradford (Gamaliel). Three Sys*
terns of Currency. “Soo. Sci.
Assoo.,” pp. 673-687.

Conference Monetaire de riTnion
Latme. “ Proems Yerbaux,”
Janvier, Fevrier, 1875. Pans.

Cornwallis (Kinahan). The New
York Gold Room. “International
Beview,” March, vol ii.

Courcelle-Seneuil. Les Operations
de Banque.

De Parieu. La Bevolufcion Mone-
taire par la Depreciation de
T Argent. “Journal des Econo-
mistes,” Juillet ou Ao&b,

De Parieu. La Politique Franqaise
dans la Question Monetaire
Cosmopolite. “ Bevue de France.”

De Parieu. Lettre k M. Dumas.
“Journal des Economistes,” et
“ Bevue de France.”

Hansen (Y. Falbe). Om Prisbevoe-
gelsen i de Sidste 3 Aar 0 g den
derved foraarsagede Fordyrelse
af Livsforndenhederne. “ Det
Statistiske Bureau.” Copenha-
gen. 19 pp.

Jevons. The Solar Period and the
Price of Corn. Bead at the
Meeting of the “Bnt. Assoc.,”
1875.

Jevons. Money and the Mechanism
of Exchange. “ International
Scientific Series,” London and
New York, xvni., 349 pp. 5th
edition, 1881.

Mannequin (The). La Monnaie et
le double Etalon. Theories et
Pratiques Fausses. Priucipes
tires de PExperience. Monnaie,
Yaleur, Bichesse. . , .

2 x>


402


CURRENCY AND FINANCE , .


Meyer. Das Munzwesen auf ein-
heitlicher Grundlage. Berlin.

Minghetti e Finali. Relazione della
oiroolazione cartacea. Espozi-
zione storioa delle vicende e degli
effetti del corso forzoso in Italia
con documenti a corredo, etc.
Roma. 4°-

Niendorf (M. A.). Die Goldwah-
rung im Scheitem nnd der Ein-
jfag der Reichspapier wahrung.
Munchen,

Patterson (R. H.). The Economy
of Capital ; or, Gold and Trade.

Question Mondtaire (La). Lettre &
M. Frkre-Orban, Membre de la
Chambre des Representants de
Belgique. Par un Economiste.

Rapport sur la Conference de Jan.,
Fev., 1875, Par Kern et Feer-
Herzog.

Report. Banks of Issue. 22nd July,
1875. London.

Spaulding- History of Legal Tender
Paper Money issued during the
Great Rebellion. Extra sheets
2nd ed. Buffalo. 104 pp.

Stevenson (James). The Card Cur-
rency of Canada during the French
Domination. Quebec. 32 pp. Two
photographs.

Stevenson, Canada, the Currency
of, after the Capitulation. 32
pp. Undated.

1876.

Baker (Henry). On the Relations of
Trade with the Bank of England.
With Table, showing the Balance
of Account between the Mercan-
tile Public and the Bank of
England. 1858 to 1875. Man-
chester Statistical Society. Sess.

1875 - 6 . pp. 203 - 221 .

Bamberger (L.). Die Entthronung
eines Weltherrschers. Berlin.

Bamberger, Reiohsgold. Leipzig.

Baxter (Robert). On the Principles
which regulate the Rate of
Interest, and on the Currency
Laws. “Jour. Stat. Soc.,” pp.
277-290. “ Discussion.” pp,

291-8.

Benner (Samuel). Benner’s Pro-
phecies of Future Ups and Downs
in Prices, What Years to Make


Money on Pig-Iron, Hogs, Corn,
and Provisions. By S. B., an
Ohio Farmer. “I know of no
way of judging of the r f uture but
by the past.” — Patrick Eenry.
Price One Dollar. Cincinnati.
Published by the Author.

Berg (Van den). De Muntquestie.
Batavia.

Berkey (W. A.). The Money Ques-
tion. Grand Rapids, Mich.

Cernuschju La Monnaie Bime-
tallique. Articles publiees dans le
“ Si&cle,” en Novembre et D6-
cembre, 1875. Paris, vii., 62 pp.

Cemuschi. Michel Chevalier et
ie Bimetalliszne. Articles publiees
dans le “ Si&cle,” en Avril et Mai.
Paris. 135 pp.

Cernuschi. Silver Vindicated. Pa-
per read before the “ Social
Science Association,” Liverpool
Meeting. 26 pp. (See Report,
pp. 631-9. Discussion, pp. 639-
50.)

Cernuschi. Nomisma; or, Legal
Tender. Mew York. 12mo.

Coe (George S.). Address to the
American Bankers’ Association.
New York.

Cohnstaedt (Ludwig). Zur Silber-
frage. Frankfurt-an-M.

Conference Monetaire de 1’ Union
Latme. “ Proems Verbaux,”
Janvier et Fevner, 1876. Paris.

Cornw allis (Kinahan). The New
York Clearing House. “Inter-
national Review,” Sept., vol, iii.,
pp. 595-614.

Discussions (Joint) between General
Thomas Ewing, of Ohio, and
Governor S. T. Woodford, of
New York, on the Finance Ques-
tion. Cincinnati.

Documents Relatifs h la Question
Monetaire. Recueillis et publics
par M. J, Malou, Ministre des
Finances. Deuxifcme S5rie. Brux-
elles.

Dun (John). The Banking Institu-
tions, Bullion Reserves, and Non-
Legal Tender Note Circulation
of the United Kingdom. “Jour,
Stat. Soc.,” vol. sxrix.,pp. 1-189.
Discussion, pp. 190-197.

Fawcett (Henry). Manual of Politi-
cal Economy. 5th ed. . . . xxxii.,


BIBLIOGRAPHY,


4°3


631 pp. (Chapters xv. and xvi.
on Recent Discoveries of Gold
and Silver, and the Depreciation
in the Value of Silver),

Gibbs (Henry ^Hucks). Letter to
the Most Hon. the Marquis of
Salisbury, on the Depreciation
of Silver. Printed at the Bank
of England for private circula-
tion only. 29 pp,

Gibson. The Silver Question.

Giifen (Robert). Causes and Effects
of the Depreciation of Silver . . .
“ Soc. Sci. Assoc.,*’ pp. 624-31.

Hancock (W, Neilson). On the Im-
portance of Extending the British
Gold Standard with Subsidiary
Silver Coins to India. . . . “ Jour.
Dublin Statistical Society/* Dec.,
vol. vii., pp. 67-71.

Hertyka (Theodor). Wahrung und
Handel. Wien.

Hollingbery (R. H.) Selections from
the Records of the Government
of India — Financial Department.
The Production of Gold and
Silver, the Demand for Gold,
and the Price of Silver, vi,
117 pp.

Hotton. The Silver Bill in Con-
gress. An Address to Congress
against the Bland Bill. “Bankers’
Magazine,” Jan., 1877.

Hynes (Lewis G.), of H.M.’s Mint.
Gold for India; or, Remarks upon
the Depreciation of the Rupee,
its Causes, Effects, and Remedy.
Bombay. 65 pp.

Jevons. La Monnaie et le Meca-
nisme del’ ^change. “Bibliothkque
Seientifique Internationale,” vol,
xx. Librairie Germer Bailli&re et
Cie., Paris, viii*., 288 pp.

Jevons. Geld und Geldverkehr. “In-
ternationale Wissenschaftliche
Bibliothek,” xxi Band E. A.
Brockhaus, Leipzig, xvi. 359 pp.

Jevons. La Moneta ed il Meccanismo
dello Scambio. “Biblioteca Scien-
tifica Internazionale,” vol. vi.
Eratelli Dumolard, Milano, xxix.
319 pp.

Jones (John P.) Speeches in the
Senate of the United States on
the Question of Gold and Silver.


Laveleye. La Monnaie Bimetallique.
Extraifc de la “Revue de Bel-
gique.” Bruxelles. 32 pp.

Memorandum on an International
Bi-Metallic Standard Measure of
Value.

Menier. L’ Unite de l’Btalon Mone-
taire. 12mo.

Moran (Charles). Money, Curren-
cies, and Banking. New Tofk.

Hasse (Erwin). 1 * Dlo Demonetisation
des Silbers und das Werthver-
haltniss der Edlen Metalie. Berlin.

Notizie intorno all* ordinamento ban-*
cano ed al corso forzato negli
Stati Uniti d* America, in Russia,
nell hmperio Austro -Ungarico e
in Francia. Memorie di iegis-
lazione agraria e commerciale.
Roma.

Hourse (B. F.) The Relation of the
Volume of Currency to Prices.
“ Social Science Association.”
Saratoga. 8 pp.

Price (Bonamy). Currency and Bank-
ing. 176 pp.

Puynode, de (Gustave). Les Grandes
Crises Fmancieres de la France.
Paris.

Rapport . . . sur la Conference de
Jan. — Fev., 1876. Par Kern et
Feer-Herzog.

Rationale (The) of Market Flnotua.
tions. By a City Editor, viii-

186 pp.

Report from the Select Committee
on Depreciation of Silver; to-
gether with the Proceedings of
the Committee, Minutes of Evi-
dence, and Appendix. Ordered
by the House of Commons to be
printed, 5th July (No. 338). Ivi.
205 pp.

Romanelli (A.) Legislazioni e
Coniazioni Monetarie. “ Archivio
di Statistica.” Anno i., vol. iv.
Roma. 51 pp. Seconda Edizione,
pp. 164-214.

Seyd. The Fall in the Price of
Silver.

Sherman (Hon. John). Report on
Concurrent Resolution proposing
a Common Mint of Money and
Accounts for the United States
and the United Kingdom. . . .
44th Congress, 1st Sess. Senate
Report, No. 39, 8 pp.

2 D 2


CURRENCY AND FINANCE .


404

Sherman. Speech, in the Senate of
the United States, March 6, on
National Finances and Specie
Payments. Washington. 25 pp.

Smith (J.T.), FR.S. . . . Silver, and
the Indian Exchanges 5 a Remedy
for its Depreciation, in Three
Essays. 82 pp. Essay No. 4,
26 pp. Essay No. 5, 39 pp.,with
^Three Diagrams.^

Smith (Samuel). Three Letters on
the Silver Question. Liverpool.

^Soei6t4 Neerlandaise pour le Progres
de ^Industrie. Adresse h Sa

Majeste le hoi. Haarlem. 14 pp.

Steele (G. M.), President of Law-
rence University, Appleton Wis.
The Currency Question. 15 pp.

Sumner (W. G-). A History of Ameri-
can Currency, etc. New York.

Thornton (W. T.). The Indian Side
of the Silver Question. Four
Letters addressed to Sir Louis
Mallet. 24 pp. (Unpublished).

Walker (Amasa). Our National

Currencyand the Money Problem.

Walras. Note sur le 15£ Legal.
“Jour, des Hcon.,” Decembre.

Weston (G-eo. M.). On the Silver
Question.

White (Horace). The Financial Crisis
in America. “ Fort, Rev,,” N. S.,
vol. xix., pp. 810-29.

White. The Silver Question. An
Essay on the Proposed Remone-
tization of Silver in the United
States. Chicago. 28 pp. with
Diagram.

Williamson (Stephen). Deprecia-
tion in the "Value of Silver. Rea-
sons for the Adoption of a Bi-
metallic Money System. Second
Letter. . . . 56 pp.

Williamson. India in its Relation
to the Silver Question. A Letter
• , . Liverpool. 20 pp.

1877.

Bagehot (Walter), Some Articles
on the Depreciation of Silver,
met on Topics connected with
A Reprinted from “ The Econo-
rds^^tiii., 136 pp.


Bamberger. Das Gold der Zukunft*
“Deutsche Rundschau.” Berlin*
October. 9

Bamberger. L T Avenir de l’Or ;
“ Bulletin de Statistique.” Pans.
Tome ii , pp 2401253.

Barrows (Henry D.). Gold and
Silver A Composite Single
Standard deducible from a
Double Standard. Los Angeles,
California 3 pp.

Birneisel (F.). Deutsch Munz-
reform und die Edelmetallbewe-
gung wahrend der Jahre 1871-75.

Cernuschi. Nomisma j or, Legal
Tender. New York. 157 pp.
12mo.

Contribuzioni per una Storia e Sta-
tistioa dei Prezzi e dei Salari.
Annali del Mmistero di Agn-
coltura. No. 100. “ Statistical
pp. 117-157.

Currency Maze, The : an entertain-
ing Sketch of “The Question
without au End.” 99 pp.

Currencies (The Future) of the
United States. By an American
Citizen Chicago.

East India (Sliver). Return to a u
Address of the House of Com-
mons (22nd March) for Papem
having reference to the Silver
Question. 126 pp.

De Parieu. Lettre & M. Wash-
bourne, 23 Fevrier.

East India (Silver) f< Pari. Papers,”
Nos. 120 and 416.

Eggers (August). Die Geldreform.

Fawcett (W. L.). Gold and Debt?
an American Hand-book of Fi-
nance, with over Eighty Tables
and Diagrams. Also, a Digest of
the Monetary Laws of the United
States. Chicago. 270 pp., 12mo.

Gibbs (H. H.). Correspondence
between H. H. G. and Sir Louis
Mallet, on the Silver Question m
its relation to India.

Giffen The Liquidations of 1873-76.
“ Fort. Rev.,” N.S., vol. xxii., pp.
510-525.

Groesbeck (W. S.), Address before
the American Bankers’ Asso-
ciation.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


405


Halstead (Murat). The Silver
Question, Cincinnati.

Haupt (Oi^omar). Gold, Silber, und
Wahrung. Wien, 240 pp.

Horton (S. Dana). Silver and Gold,
and their Relation to the Problem
of Resumption. New edition,
revised and enlarged. Cincin-
nati, xii., 196 pp.

Jevons. The Silver Question. A
paper read by Hamilton A.
Hill, of Boston, before the
American Social Science Asso-
ciation at Saratoga, September 5.
Boston ; published for the Asso-
ciation by A. Williams & Co.
pp. 26-32. Reprinted in the
London “ Bankers’ Magazine,”
December, 1877.

Kautz-Gyala. A Fempenz-ez y
Valutaugy a Tdrvinyhozas es a
Tudomany jelen allasa Szerint.
Budapest.

Lindsay (A M.). A Gold Standard
for India without a Gold Coinage.
See “ Bankers’ Magazine,” yoI.
xxxvii., p. 959.

Lockyer (J. N.) and Hunter (W. W.).
Sunspots and Famines. “ Nine-
teenth Century,” Nov., vol. ii.,
pp. 583-602.

Loi Monetaire de Germinal An XI.
Monnaies fabriqnees en France
depuis 1795. “ Bulletin de Sta-
tistique,”tom.i., pp. 42-53. (See
also tom. iv., pp. 24-5).

Martiis (Cognetti de). La Rinno-
vazione dei Trattati diCommercio.
La Question Monetaria. Mantova
69 pp.

Meyer (Joseph). Ein Beitrag zur
Valuta Regulirungin Oesterreich-
Ungaro. Wien.

Moore (J- S.). Letters on the Silver
Question. By the Parsee Mer-
chant. New York.

Parsons (Geo M.) The Silver Ques-
tion, Columbus.

Poor (Henry V.). Money and its
Laws; embracing a History of
Monetary Theories, and a History
of the Currencies of the United
States xl., 623 pp.

Projet d’une Banque Internationale
a Bruxelles basee sur l’applica-


tion du Systeme de la Monnaie
banco ayant pour unite le Kilo-
gramme d’Or on d’Argent Fin.
Bruxelles.

Rapport de la Commission Anglaise
chargee de rechercher les Causes
et les E diets de la Depreciation
de T Argent. “Bulletin de Sta-
tistique,” Paris, tom. i., pp. 69,
110, 184, 239 et 297.

Redish (J- o.). The Silver Question.
<£ Lit. and* Phil. Soc. of Liver-
pool,” 30th April.

Report and accompanying Docu-
ments of the United States Mon^
tary Commission.

Say (Leon). Discours au S&iat sur la
Question Monetaire. Paris.

Schneider (Joh. Philip). Zur Wah-
rungsfrage, Eine Entgegnung
auf das Buch des Hrn. Dr.
Theodor Hertzka, a Wahrung,
und Handel.” Berlin.

Shadwell (John Lancelot). A System
of Political Economy, x., 625,
xii. pp.

Soetbeer. De la Frappe d’une Piastre
de Commerce Allemande en Ar-
gent Fin. “Bulletin de Statis-
tique” . . . tome i., pp. 235-8.

Statistique Internationale des Mines
et Usines. Publi^e par le Ccimite
Central de la Statistique de
Russie, et r^digee par J. Bock.
St. Petersburg.

Streeter (Edwin W.). Gold: or,
Legal Regulations for the Stan-
dard of Gold and Silver Wares iri
Different Countries .... xiv.,
139 pp., 12mo.

Toppan (Robert Noxon). The His-
torical Succession of Monetary
Metallic Standards. Reviewed
. . . in a letter to the Committee
of the Chamber of Commerce of
the State of New York on Inter-
national Coinage. New York,

18 pp.

Vissering (Willem) On Chinese
Currency, Coin and Paper Money.
“Academisch Proefschriffc,” . . .
Leiden (E. J. Brill), xv., 228 pp.
(In Chinese and English). See
“Archivio di Statistica,” Roma,
Anno*II., pp. 156-166.


4 o 6 CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


Walcker (Karl). Die Silber-enfcwer-
thungs-Frage. Strassburg. vi.,

102 pp.

Wharton (Joseph.). Memorandum
concerning Small Money and
Nickel Alloy Coinage : with illus-
trations ... of existing Nickel
Alloy Coins. Philadelphia. 50 pp.

White (Horace). Present Phases
of the Currency Q uestion. “ Inter-
actional Review,**^yol. iv.

' 1878.

*&rchlbald (E. D.). The Rainfall of
the World, in connection with
the Eleven-year Period of Sun-
spots. . . . Calcutta, xi. 58.

Arendt (Otto). Die Internationale
Zahlungsbilanz Deutschlands.
Berlin.

Bamberger (L.), Die Entthronung
eines Weltherrsohers. “Deutsche
Rundsohau.”

Bamberger (L.). Das Gold der Zn-
kunft. “ Deutsche Rundschau.’*

Barrows (H. D.). Silver and Green-
backs. Los Angeles.

Bartolini (D.) and Scarabelli (G.).

Notizie Storico Statistiche sui
Pressi e Salari. “ Annali di Sta-
tistica,” Mimstero di Agricoltura,
Roma. . , . Serie 2a, i. 194-
207.

Belgique. Munnaies fabriquees de
1832 & 1875. “ Bulletin de Sta-
tistique.” . . . Tome iii., pp. 324-
327.

Bonnet. La Reprise de 1’lStalon
' d’ Argent aux Stats-Unis. “Revue
des Deux Mondes.*’

Brown (William). The Money
Question in the United States.
Montreal.

Cernuschi. The Bland Bill : its
Grounds, its Alleged Dishonesty,
its Imperfections, its Future.
Paris. Published by the Author,
7, Avenue Yelasquez, Parc Mon-
ceau. 24 pp.

Cernuschi. Le Bland Bill. Articles
publics dans “Le Steele.” Paris.
65 pp,

Cernuschi. Monetary Diplomacy
hi 1878. , 63 pp.


Composition (La) de la Circulation
Monetaire de la France. “ Bui-
letin de Statistique.” ^ . . Tome
iv., pp. 202-220. Tableaux et
cartes.

Conference Monetairelnternationale.
“Proems Yerbaux, Aofib, Paris.

Conference Monetaire de 1’ Union
Latine. “ Procfcs Yerbaux,” Aofit
— Novembre. Paris.

De Parieu. Discours an S&iat
et Interpellation Adressee au
Ministre des Finances. Mars,
Paris.

De Parieu. L’ Unification Mone-
taire devant l*Exposition Uni-
verselle de 1878. “Journal des
iScon.,** Fevrier.

De Parieu. La Question de TUm-
f or mite Monetaire en 1878. “ Cor-
respondant,**

lEtatS-Unis. La Question du Double
Etalon. “Bulletin de Statistique.**
Tome iii., pp. 46-58; 132-3;
202-4.

Feer-Herzog et Lardy. La Con-
ference Monetaire Americaine
tenue h Paris, dn 10 an 29 Aofit.
Rapport au Conseil Federal Suisse.
Berne. 71 pp.

Feer-Herzog. Rapport snr I’Efcat de
la Question Monetaire. Zurich.

Peer -Herzog. Berichfc au der
Sehweizerischen Handels und
Indnstrie-Yerein fiber den gegen-
wartigen Stand der Mfinzfrag.
Zurich.

Goldmann. Monetary Reform in
Russia. Cracow.

Hamilton (Rowland). Money and
Yalne An Inquiry into the
Means and Ends of Economic
Production. With an Appendix
on the Depreciation of Silver and
Indian Currency, xi. 392 pp.

Handbook on Gold and Silver. By
an Indian Official, xii 387 pp.

Helm (Elijah). The Silver Question.
“Manchester Statistical Society
Trans.,** pp. 75-88.

Horton. The Monetary Situation.
An Address to the American
Social Science Association, Cin-
cinnati, May 21st. With an
Appendix. Cincinnati, xii. 58 pp.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


Jevons. Commercial Crises and
Sun Spots. “ Nature,” November
14. .

Jevons. Money and the Mechanism
of Exchange. 4th ed.

Jevons. L’Eqpnomie Politique. Tra-
duite par Henry Gravez, In-
genieur. Librairie Germer Bail-
ee et Cie., Pans. “ Bibliothkque
Utile,” vol. xliv. 18rao, 184 pp.

Jevons. The Periodicity of Com-
mercial Crises, and its Physical
Explanation. “ Brit. Assoc
Transactions of Sections, p. 666.
Published in “Journal of Sta-
tistical and Social Inquiry Society
of Ireland,” vol. vii. pp. 334-342.

Laveleye. India’s Losses from the
Single Standard. American
“ Bankers’ Magazine,” November.

Lexis (W.). Die Edelmetalle in
Auswartigen Handel Russlands,
Hildebrand’s “ Jahrbuoher,” B.
xxix. Jena.

Linderman. Money and Legal
Tender in the United States.
New York.

Magaldi (V.) eFabrio (R.). Notizie
Stonche e Statisbische sui Prezzi
e Salari in Alcnue citta d’ltalia
. . . hei Secoli xm. al xvni.
“ Annali di Statistica,” serie 2a,
vol. iii., 106 pp.

Martiis (Cognetti de). Forme e
Leggi della Perturbazione Econo-
miche. Estratto dal “Giornale
degli Economist!,” Marzo. Padova.
24 pp.

Mouvement (Le) des Prix depuis
1826, d’apr&s les tableaux annuels
du Commerce Ext6rieur. “Bul-
letin de Statistique,” . . . Tome
iv., pp. 71-86.

Nasse (Erwin). Der Bimetallismus
und die Wahrungs-frage in den
Yereinigten Staaten. Brentano’s
“Jahrbuch der Deutschen Gesetz-
gebung ” . . . Munchen.

Newlomb (Simon, LL.D.). The ABC
of Finance ; or, The Money and
Labour Questions familiarly ex-
plained ... New York. 115 pp.
l6mo,

Nichol (Thomas M.). Honest Money,
an Argument in favour of a Re-
deemable Currency.


407

Nicolini. Un Antioo Economista
Matematica (Ceva). “ Giornale
degli Economists ” vol. viii., fasc.
i. October. Padova. (See 17J.1,
Ceva.)

Panaiejff. Financial and Economic
Questions. Cracow.

Poor (H. Y.). Resumption and the
Silver Question. New York.

Price (B ). Chapters on Practical
Political Economy . . . • viii,,
559. (Ajlfjendix II. Correspon-
dence with Henry H. Gibbs, Esq.,
... On the Reserve of the Bank
of England.)

Rapport des Commissions Parlemen-
taires sur la Convention Mon£-
taire du 5 Novembre, 1878.

Remarks Of the Comptroller of the
Currency before the Committee
on Banking and Currency . . .
on the Substitute for a Bill to
retire the Circulating Notes . . .
February 19. Washington. 21

pp.

Resumption of Specie Payments.
Notes of a Conference between
the Committee on Banking and
Currency of the House of Repre-
sentatives and . . . the Secretary
of the Treasury, April 1st and 4th.
Washington. 73 pp.

Romanelli. La Produzione e il Yalore
dell’ Oro e dell’ Argento. “ Archi-
vio di Statistica,” Roma. Anno I.,
vol. ii. Nuova edizione. pp. 41-
62.

Rusconi (Le Comte). Question
Monetaire. Paris,

Rusconi. La Conferenza Mone-
taria Americana Reunitasi a
Parigi nel Mese di Agosto.
Roma.

Scott (E. J.). Suggestions concern-
ing National Money. Toledo.

S^nat. Session 1877-1878. Proces
Yerbaux des Seances de la Com-
mission d’Enqu^te sur les Souf-
f ranees du Commerce et de
l’Industrie et sur les Moyens d’y
porter Remade. 1 vol. 4to. Impr.
du S6nat. Versailles.

Seyd. The Wealth and Commerce
of Nations, and the Question of
Silver.


4o8 CURRENCY AND FINANCE .


Seyd. Diagrams exhibiting the
Position of the Bank of England,
the Bank of France. . . . “ Jour.
Stat. Soc.,” vol. xli., pp. 40-82.

Silver Question Memorial to Con-
gress (The). January. New
York.

Smith (J. T.)., r.K.s. On the De-
preciation of the Value of Silver $
with reference to the Exchange
between India and England, and
Suggestions for* a#Remedy. Paper
to be read before the Society of
Arts, 29th March, 47 pp. See
“Journal of the Society,” vol.
xxvi, pp. 423-444.

Smith. (J. T.). Silver, and the Indian
Exchanges ... A Seventh Essay.
24 pp.

Snowden (A. London). The Silver
Dollar, etc. Philadelphia.

Suess (Edouard). Die Zukunft des
Goldes. Vienna.

Sumner- Money and Its Laws.
“International Review,” vol. v.,
pp. 75-81.

Three Vulnerable Points in our
Monetary System. Glasgow.
Printed for private circulation.
46 pp.

Walker (Francis A.), Professor of
Political Economy in Yale Col-
lege, etc. Money. New York,
xv., 550 pp.

Ward (Durbin). American Coinage
and American Currency. An
Address. Cincinnati.

Warner (A. J.). The Problem of
Resumption Re-examined.

Wells (David A.). The Silver Ques-
tion. New York.

Weston (G. M.). The Silver Ques-
tion. New York.

White (Horace), After Specie Re-
sumption— What P “International
Review,” vol. v., pp. 833-846.

1879.

Berg (N. P. Van den), ll.d.h.c.
The Silver Question ; with Intro-
ductory Chapter on the Present
State of the Currency in Holland
ahd Java. Liverpool. 46 pp.,
and Diagram.


Bartolini (Dario”). Contribution!
alia Stona e Statistioa dei Prezzi
et Salari, 1670-1685 “Annali

di Statistioa,” Serie vol. vii.,

pp. 25-32.

Boccardo (Gerolamo). La Legge di
Periodicita delle^Crisi. Pertur-
bazioni Economiche e Malcchie
Solari. “ Archivio di Statistioa,”
anno III. Roma. pp. 385-412.

Bourne (Stephen), On Some Phases
of the Silver Question. “Jour.
Stat. Soc.,” June, vol. xlii., pp.
406-43. Discussion, pp. 444-455.

Broch. Indberetning. Christiania.

Cazalet (Edward). Bi-metallism and
Commerce. *

Cernuschi. Bi-metallism in Eng.
land and Abroad. An Answer to
a Letter from Henry Hucks
Gibbs, Esq. 52 pp.

Chambre de Commerce (La) de Liver-
pool, et le Bi-metallisme. “ Bul-
letin de Statistique,” tome v., pp.
273. (See also p 364)

Chamber of Commerce of Liverpool.
Report of the Special Committee
on the State of Trade in connec-
tion with the Discrediting of
Silver as Money. . . . Liverpool.

20 pp.

Chesney (Col. George). The Depre-
ciation of Silver and the Indian
Finances “Nineteenth Century,”
January, vol. v., pp. 97-111.

Conference Monetaire de TUnion
Latine. “Proces Verbaux,” Jum,
1879. Paris.

Daniell (Clarmont). Gold in the
East. “ Westminster Review,”
January.

Discussion on the Causes and Reme-
dies of the Present Depression in
Trade. Cleveland Institute of
Engineers — “Proceedings,” Feb S
and 10. “Middlesbrough” 100
pp., and Diagram of Prices of
Pig Iron, 1852-78.

Ferraris (Carlo F.). La Produzione
dei Metalli Preziosi e il Rapporto
di Valore fra POro e PArgento.

. . . “Archivio di Statistic i.”
Anno, IV., fasc. ii, 28 pp.

Ferraris. Moneta e Corso Forzoso.
Milano.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


409


FoviUe (A. de). The Influence of
the Prioe of Goods on the Move-
ment <$ the Foreign Trade of
France. “ Jour. Stat. Soc.,” Dec.,
vol. xlii., pp. 848-857. * Trans-
lated from the “ iconomiste
Frangais.” *

Gibbs (Henry H.). Silver and Gold.
41 pp.

GifFen (Robert). The Case against
Bi-metallism. “ Fortnightly Re-
view,” vol. xxvi., N S., pp. 278-
293. Reprinted in “Essays in
Finance,” 1880, pp. 286-311.

GifFen. On the Fall of Prices of
Commodities in Recent Years.
“ Jour. Stat. Soc.” March. Yol.
xlii., pp. 36-68. Discussion, pp.
69-78. Partly reprinted in Giffen’s
“Essays in Finance,” pp. 311-
47.

GifFen- Prices of Exports from 1861
to 1877. “Jour Stat. Soc ,” vol.
xlii., pp. 305-321.

Goldmann (W.). Zur Reform des
russischen Geldsystem. St.
Petersbourg.

Goschen (G. J.) and Cross (J. K ).
Speeches on the Silver Question
and Eastern Finance. Reprinted
* by W. Rathbone, M.P.

Gregory (Isaac). Rough Notes on
the Silver Crisis and on the
Debased Money of India. . . .

3 1 pp.

Grenfell. Banking and Commercial
Legislation. “ Nineteenth Cen-
tury,” March, vol. v., pp. 534-46.

Hankey (Thomson) M.P. On Bi-
metallism. A Reply to Mr.
Cazalet and Mr. Gibbs. 7 pp.

Horton (Dana). International Mone-
tary Conference, held ... .in
Paris, in August, 1878. . . . Report
of Proceedings with Appendix
. . . and Historical Material for
the Study of Monetary Policy,
contributed by Mr. Horton Wash-
ington. xiv., 918 pp., and dia-
grams.

Joass (Edward C ). Brief Review of
the Silver Question. 1871-79.
Edinburgh. 30 pp.

Knox. The National Banking
System. New York,


Kremp (I. H,). liber den Einfluss
des Ernteausfallsanf dieGetreide-
preise wahrend der Jabre 1846-
1876, in den hauptsachlichsten
Landern Europas. Jena. “Annali
di Statistica.” . . . Serje 2a,
vol. xi., pp. 154-56.

Langley (Edward). The Silver Ques-
tion. “ Manchester Statistical
Society Trans.,” Session, 1878-
79, pp. 129-147.

Lenormant (^linjois). Money in
Ancient Greece and Rome. A
Chapter in the History of Political
Economy. “ Contemporary Re-
view,” February, vol. xxxiv., pi#
504-523.

Leslie. Essays in Political and Moral
Philosophy. M Dublin University
Press,” xii, 483 pp. (See Leslie,
1864-5-72-74).

Lowe (Robert). A Simple Way out
of the Indian Difficulty. £t Fort-
nightly Review,” July, vol. xxvi.,
N S., pp. 24-37.

Lubbock (Sir John). Inaugural Ad-
dress of the President. “Jour.
Bankers’ Institute,” June, vol. i.,
pp. 1-21. Two Plates of Coins.

Mannequin (Th.). Le Problem©
Monetaire et la Distribution de l a
Richesse. Paris, xii., 174 pp.

Martiis (Cognetti de). 11 N uovo Patto
della Unione Monetaria Latina.
12mo. Roma, Torino, Ferenze,
104 pp.

Mills (Carlton H ). Honest Money,
Scientifically and Constitutionally
Defined. A New System Formu-
lated. Detroit, 31 pp
Palgrave (R. H. I.). The Three
Great Banks of Europe. “ Jour.
Bankei's’ Institute,” August, vol.
i., pp. 39-59.

Patterson (R. H) Bad Trade and
Its Cause. “ Contemporary Re-
view,” April, vol. xxxv., pp. 121-
152.

Reports from the United States
Consuls in the several Countries
of Europe on the Rates pf Wages,
Cost of Living. . . . Amount of
Paper Money in Circulation, and
its Relative Value to Gold and
Silver. . . . Washington. Gov.
Printing Office.


4io


CURRENCY AND FINANCE .


Rogers (J* E. T.). Causes of Com-
mercial Depression. “ Princeton
Rev,/' pp. 2X1-238.

SeycL The Decline of Prosperity;
Its Insidious Cause and Obvious
Remedy. Polio 100, iv.

Sherman (John), Secretary of the
Treasury. Speeches and Reports
on Financial Questions. Washing-
ton,

Sid^wick (Henryk What is Money ?
“ Fort. Rev.,” April. N.S. vol.,
xxv., pp. 563-575.

Smith (Samuel). Letters on the

^ Silver Question. Second Series.
Liverpool. 38 pp.

Soetbeer- Edelmetall Production
und Werthverhaltniss zwischen
Gold und Silber seit der Ent-
deckung Amerika’s bis zur Gegen-
wart. Mifc drei Tafeln Graf-
hischer (Erganzungsheft, No. 57,
zu Peternanns, Mittheilungen).
Darstellungen. Gotha. 4to, iv.,
141 pp. (See “ Bulletin de Sta-
tistique,” tome v., pp. 349-363.

Sumner (W. G.). Bi-metalhsm.
“Princeton Rev.,” November,
pp. 546-578.

Walker (F. A.). The Monetary Con-
ferences of 1867 and 1878.
“ Princeton Review,” January,
pp. 28-54.

Walker. Money in its Relation to
Trade and Industry. New York,
iv., 339 pp.

1880.

Arendt. Die Yertragsmassige Dop-
pelswahrung. Berlin.

Barnett (R. W.) The Progress and
Development of Banking in the
United Kingdom from the year
1800. “Journ. Bankers’ Insti-
tute,” August, vol. i. pp. 591-
674.

Brown. Silver in its relation to
Industry and Trade. Montreal.
Chambers (Charles), f.r.s. The De-
preciation of the Rupee. Lahore.
23 pp.

DelJMar (Alexander). A History of
the Precious Metals from the
Earliest Times to the Present,
xx. pp. 373.


Dodd (George). The Mint : its Sys-
tem, Operations, and Locality.
“Companion to theeAlmanack,”
pp. 5-23. Translated in “ Bul-
letin de Statistique,” tome viii.
pp. 269-287.

L’Encaisse Metallique de la Banque
de France (1850-79). “Bulletin
de Statistique ” . . . . tome vii.
pp. 23-9. (With Diagram).

Giffen. Essays in Finance, xii. 347.
“ The Depreciation of Gold since
1848,” p. 82; “Notes on the
Depreciation of Silver,” p. 198 j
“The Case against Bi-metallism,”
p. 286 ; “ The Fall of Prices of
Commodities,” p. 311.

Head (Barclay V.) Guide to the
Select Greek and Roman Coins
exhibited in Electrotype. British
Museum, vii. p. 128 ; 7 plates.

Jevons. Postal Notes, Money Or-
ders, and Bank Cheques. “Con-
temporary Review,” July, vol.
xxx viii. pp. 150-161.

Knox. Address before the Mer-
chants’ Association of Boston.
“Bankers’ Magazine.” New York.

Laveleye. La Question Monetaire.
Congr&s International du Com-
merce efc de l’lndnstrie. Section
d’Hjconomie Politiqne. Bruxelles.
15 PP '

Legislation Monetaire des Pays-Bas
et de leurs Colonies. “Bulletin
de Statistique ” . . . . tome vii.
pp. 276-89.

Liverpool (Charles, first Earl of).
A Treatise of the Coins of the
Realm in a Letter to the King.
Reprinted at the Bank of Eng-
land. xii. 295 pp.

Malou (j.). Allemagne. La Re-
form© Monetaire. “Bulletin de
Statistique.” . . . Tome vi., pp.
351-7 ; 418-30.

Martin (j. B.) . An Inquiry into the
History, Functions, and Fluctua-
tions of the Bank Note Circu-
lation. . . . “ Jour. Bankers’ In-
stitute,” March, vol. i., pp. 273-
336. Discussion, pp. 337-41.

Messedaglia (Angelo). II Calcolo
dei Yalori Medii, e le sue Appli-
cazioni Statistiche. “ Arqhivio


BIBLIOGRAPHY \


4«


di Statistica.” Roma. Anno V,
fascioolo ii., pp. 177-224 ; fasci-
colo iv.,^pp. 489-528.

Melbourne Branch of Her Majesty’s
Mint. Catalogue of Exhibits
shown at tl*p Melbourne Inter-
national Exhibition, 1880, with
Explanation. Melbourne. 42 pp.

Montgomery (Robert). The Silver
Controversy. “ Manchester Sta-
tistical Society Trans.,” Session
1879-80, pp. 43-64.

Patterson. Is the value of Money
rising in England and throughout
the world? . . . “Jour. Stat. Soc
March, vol. xliii., pp. 1-26.

Platt (James). Money, ix., 208 pp.

Robertson (j. Barr). East Indian
Currency and Exchange. “West.
Rev.,” October, vol. lviii., N.S.,
pp. 459-488.

Salandra (Antonio). L’ Abolizione
del Corso Porzoso in Italia. “ Ar-
chivio di Statistica,” anno V.,
pp. 529-552.

Seyd. Foreign Exchanges and the
English Banking System. “ Jour.
Bankers’ Inst.,” vol. i., pp. 469-
# 491. Discussion, pp. 492-7.

Smith (W. E.). The Recent De-
pression of Trade.

Soetbeer. Die Hauptsachlichen Pro-
blems der Wahrungsfrage. Jahr-
bucher fur National-Okonomie.
. . . Jena. Translated into Italian.
“Annali di Statistica,” serie 2a,
vol. xxii., pp. 150-172.

Suisse. La Question des Banques
demission. “Bulletin de Sta-
tistique,” tome viii., pp. 357-86.

Thornton (W. T.). The Indian Ex-
change Difficulty. “ West. Rev,”
October.

1881.

Arendt. Die Deutsche Munzreform
und die Pariser Munzconferenz.
Berlin.

Arendt. Die Restitution des Silbers
eine N o tb wen digkeit fur die
gesammte Culturwelt. Berlin.

Barclay (Robert) . Essays and Letters
on Bi-metallism. Manchester.


Barnett (Robert W.). Effect of the
Development of Banking Faci-
lities upon the Circulation of the
Country. “ Jour. Bankers’ Inst.,”
vol. ii., pp. 73-102. Discussion,
pp. 102-104.

Berlin. Documents relatifs h la
Reforme Monetaire en Allemagne.
1871.

Berlin, Expose de la Situation Mon5-
taire en Allernj^he.

Bonnet. La Souvelle Conference
Monetaire. Paris.

Burchard (Horatio C.). Report of
Director of the Mint upon th^
Statistics of the Production of the
Precious Metals in the United
States. Washington. Govern-
ment Printing Office. 443 pp.

Cemnschi. Bi-metallism at 15|.

Cemnschi. The Monetary Con-
ference. Questions addressed to
the British and Belgian Delegates.
With Appendices. 32 pp.

Charnier (De). La Conference
Monetaire de Paris. Paris.

Conference Monetaire Internationale.

“ Proems Yeibaux,” Avril — Mai,
xii., 341 pp. Juin — Juillet, xi.,
226 pp. Folio. Paris. Impri-
merie National©.

Coniazioili Monetarie — Circolazione
Cartacea. . . . “Annuario Sta-
tistic© Italiano,” Ministero di
Agricoltura. Roma, pp. 54-74,
573-607.

Correspondence Relative to Inter-
national Monetary Conference.

“ Pari. Paper,” No. 449.

Cours (Le) force en Italie et la Situa-
tion Financier© et ^conomique
du Royaume. “ Bulletin de
Statistique,” Paris. Tomeix.,pp.
162, 251, 341, et 429.

Courtois (Alphonse). Histoire des
Banques eu France. Paris.

Cramer-Frey. Die Mtmzfrage.
Paris.

Du Bois (Patterson). In Memoriam
William E. Dubois, Assayer of the
United States Mint and Curator
of the Cabinet. Philadelphia.
4to., 8 pp. Reprinted from the
American “Journal of Numis-
matics.”


412


CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


Eggers. Solution de la Question de
1* Argent — Metal moyennant un
Dollar d 5 Argent TJmversel.
Br6me.

Ellis (Arthur). The Clearing System
applied to Trade and Distribu-
tion. “Jour. Bankers’ Inst.,”
yoI. ii., pp. 207-32. Discussion,
pp. 233-40.

Evans (John). L. SfD.; or, the Origin
<s of Pounds, fillings, and Pence.
“Jour. Banked Inst.,” vol. iii.,
pp. 63-79. Discussion, pp. 80-88.

Fancounier. L’ Argent et l’Or:
Essai sur la Question Monetaire.
Pans.

Gibbs (Henry H). The Double
Standard, with an Introduction
by Henry R. Grenfell.

Grenfell (Henry R.) What is a
Pound P “ Nineteenth Century,”
June, yoI. ix., pp. 937-948.

Hamilton (Howland). Money and
Barter. “Jour. Bankers’ Inst.,”
vol iii.,pp. 1-21, Discussion, pp.
21-26.

Haupt (Ottoma). La Rehabilitation
de 1’ Argent. Paris. 16 pp.

Hector (John) The Deadlock and
its Remedy, 2 Parts.

Horton. International Monetary

Conference. Session of May 19.
Address of Mr. H. Translated
from the French. 16 pp.

Horton. La Monnaie et la Loi.

Paris.

Horton. Sir Isaac Newton and

England’s Prohibitive Tariff
upon Silver Money. An Open
Letter to Prof. W. Stanley Jevons.
Cincinnati. 29 pp.

Jacobi. Geld und Silber im Landes
und im Weltverkehr. Leipzig,

Jevons. Bi-metallism. “Contem-
porary Be view,” yoI. xxxix., pp.

750-57.

Knox (J- Jay). Dry Bank Statistics.
Address at the Annual Conven-
tion of the American Bankers’
Association. 2nd ed. New York.
16 pp.

Laveleye. Bi-metallism and Free
Trade. “ Fortnightly Beview,”
Wy*


Laveleye. Commonplace Fallacies
concerning Money. “ Contem-
porary Review,” November j vol,
xl. pp. 788-806 f December,
vol. xl , pp. 899-921.

Laveleye. The Future of Gold.
“Nineteenth CSntury,” Septem-
ber ; vol. x. pp. 455-72.

Laveleye. International Bi-metallism
and the Battle of the Standards.

Laveleye. La Question Monetaire en
1881. Bruxelles, i., ii., in., and
iv. j 48, 41, 40, 48 pp.

L£on. Lettres sur la Question des
Monnaies. Paris.

L6xis. Erorterungen uber die Wah-
rungfrage. Leipzig.

L’Or et L ’Argent dans la Crise
Actuelle. “Revue Suisse,” No.'ll.

Messedaglia (Antonio), LaMoneta
e ii Sistema Monetaria in Gene-
rale. “Archivio di Statistica,”
anno VI., fasoicolo iii , pp. 5-123,

Messedaglia (A). La Storia e la
Statistica dei Metalli Preziosi.
“Archivio di Statistica.” Roma.
Anno VI., fascicolo i., pp 89-194.

Monetary Conference (The) “ Sum-
mary of Proceedings.” “Jour.
Bankers* Inst ” vol. ii. pp. 372-
382; 482-8. ' ’

Movimento dei Prezzi delle Derrate
Alimentari (1585-1873). Mono-
grafia della Citt& di Roma. . . .

Minister© di Agricoltura

Roma. Vol i., pp. 325-89.

Murphy (j- j*) Bi-metallism as a
Policy for the British Empire
“ Soc. Sci Assoo.,” p. 756.

Nemo. Monetary Relief through the
Conference.

Neuwirth. Der Kampf um die
Wahruug. Jena.

Nforme Delle per una Riforma della
Statistica de Movimento Inter-
nazionale dei Metalli Preziosi.
“ Annali di Statistica,” Serie 2a,
vol. xxi. pp. 203-10.

Papers respecting the Resumption of
Specie Payments in Italy. “ Pari.
Papers,” [c. 2848]. Folio, 66 pp,

Paris Monetary Conference, 1881.
Copy of translation of the Proems
Verbaux. “Pari. Paper,” No. 409,
folio, iv. 282 pp.


BIBLIOGRAPHY.


413


Pownall (George H.) The Propor-
tionate Use of Credit Documents
and Metallic Money in English
Banks. “Jour. Bankers* Inst,”
vol. ii. pp. 629-664;. Discussion,
etc., pp. 66^-675.

Proceedings of the International
Monetary Conference, held in
Paris, 1881. Printed by the
Honourable Secretary of State.
Cincinnati, xn., 556 pp.

Rambaud (JO* L’CEuvre Econounque
de L. Wolowski. xv,, 508.

Relevd du Monnayage en Hongtie de
1867 h, 1880.

Robertson (J. Barr) Bi-metallism
and the Finances of India.
“ The Westminster Review,”
January, New Series, vol. lviii.,
pp. 200-238. (Independent Sec-
tion )

Rocca (F. de). La Circolazione
Monetana ed il Corso forzoso in
Russia. Studio— Storioo — Critico.
“Annali di Statistica.” Roma.
Serie, 2a. vol. xxiv., x. 485 pp.

ScbaflBLe. Fur Internationale Dop-
pelwahrung Tubingen.

Schneider. Die Goldwahrungs-
autoritaten. Br&me.

Seyd. The Monetary Conference in
Paris and England, indicating
the Proper Method of Solving
the Problem. 24 pp.

Silver Question (The) in the United
States. Extracts from the Re-
port of the Secretary of the
Treasury of the United States.
“Jour. Bankers* Inst.,** vol. iii.,
pp. 30-34.

Smith (Col. J. E. T.). East Indian
Currency and Exchange. “ West-
minster Review,** vol. lix., N.S.,
pp, 506-527.

Smith (Samuel). Bi-metallic Money.
2nd ed. Liverpool.

Soderholm (j- N.). Bi-metallism
and the Price of Silver. 27 pp.

Temple (Sir Richard). The General
Monetary Practice among the
Natives of India, with some esti-
mate of the use and probable
future absorption of Silver as


Coin. “Jour. Bankers* Inst,**
vol. ii., pp. 405-15. Discussion,
415-21.

Tupp (A. Ootterell). The Proceedings
of the International Monetary
Conference, held in Paris in 1881.
Condensed and Translated from
Official Proofs Verbaux. With
Notes and Appendices. Three
Parts, xvi., 430 pp.

Wagner. Die junspte Munzdebatte
lmDeutsch^Keichstage. Berlin.

Wagner. Fur BimetallistischeMunz-
politik Deutschlauds. Berlin.

Wahrungsfrage (Die) im Deutschen
Handelstage. Berlin.

Walras. Theorie Mathematique du
Bi-mktallisme. Extrait du “ Jour,
des Econ.,** Dec., 1876, et Mai,
1881. 16 pp. Diagram.

Walras. Theorie Mathematique du
Billet de Banque. “Bull. Soo.
Vaud. So. Nat.,’* xvi, 83, Bull,
pp. 553-592. (Year doubtful.)

Westgarth (W.). The Silver Ques-
tion, and the Double versus the
Single Standard. “ Brit. Assoc.,”
pp. 759-60.

Westgarth. A Reconsideration of the
Silver Question and the Double
Standard, xiv., 18 pp.


1882.

Bi-metallism. Supplement to the
“ Bulliomst ** of 18th March.
Fol. xii. Issued for the Inter-
national Monetary Standard As-
sociation.

Bithell (R.)* A. Counting House
Dictionary, containing an Ex-
planation of the Technical Terms
used by Merchants, . . . with a
Minute Description of the Coins.
, . . viii,, 319 pp.

Crump (Arthur). A Review of the
Position and Prospeots of the
Bi-metallists. 108 pp,

Grenfell (H. R.). What is a Stan-
dard ? “ Nineteenth Century,”

May, vol. xi., pp. 740-752.

Haupt (Ottomar). Bimetallic Eng-
land. Paris, London. V., 32 pp.

Laveleye. Commonplace Fallacies
concerning Money. “ Cont, Rev.”
Also Reprint, 40 pp.


4 U


CURRENCY AND FINANCE.


Martin (John B. ) . Our Gold Coinage.
An Inquiry into its Present De-
fective Condition, with a View to
its Beform. “Jour. Bankers’
Inst.,” April, vol. iii.

H Orman (John Henry), Bi-metallism,
or a Double Standard: a system
which would legally debase the
coinage of a country possessing
but one standard. Polio. 4 pp.

Price (B.). li^wMoney does its
Work. A Bepl^to M. de Lave-
leye. Contemporary Beview.
February, vol. xli., pp. 248-266.

Puestione Monetaria (La). Society
di Economia Politica Italiana.
Biunione del lmo Marzo. Estratto
dalla “ Nuova Autologia,” Fasci-
colo v. Boma. 19 pp.


Rogers (J. E. T.). A History of Agri-
culture and Prices in England.
. . . vols iii. and i#. Oxford,
xvii., 775 ; xx., 779.

Sherbrooke (Viscount). What is
Money ? “ Nineteenth Century,”
vol. xi., pp. 501-509.

Silver Question (The Present Aspect
of the). American “Bankers’
Magazine,” January, vol. xxxvi.,
pp. 492-5.

Tidman (Paul F.). Gold and Silver
Money. Part I. A Plain State-
ment. Part II. Objections An-
swered. 2nd ed., 12mo, 99pp.

Walker (J. H.). A few Facts and
Suggestions on Money, Trade,
and Banking. Boston, iv., 105
pp., 12mo.


INDEX.


A.

Absorption, of gold and notes by
public, 161 ; of precious metals by
the East, 63, 137, 305, 354, 357.

Acts of Parliament, 18 Eliz., cap. 6, 98 ;
relating to standard weights and
measures, 98 ; against truck, 99 ;
against stock- jobbing, 211, 229, 230 ,•
Lord Liverpool’s, of 1816, where it
has broken down, 245, successful in
most respects, 306, 308, 322, 346.
(See also Bank Charter Act.)

Actinometer, of Sir John Herschel,
234.

Adam Smith, his corn prices com-
pared with Mr. Bogers’s, 203.

Ad valorem duties, 87? one-fourth
revenue levied ad valorem , 89.

Africa, 103 ; South African goldfield,
305 j South African colonies, 309.

Agricultural produce, price of, 125.

Aillpvial gold deposits, 114 5 future
discoveries, 116.

Almonds, price of, 52.

America, discovery of silver, 76, of
gold and silver, 105 ; derangement
of gold mines in 1810, 132, 136.

American Social Science Association,
paper read at, 307.

Anderson, • History of Commerce
quoted, 345.

Animal products, price of, 25 j varia-
tion in price of, 56; tendency to
rise in price of, 129.

Annual Register, prices quoted from,
40.

Annual tides in money market, 163,
166 ; Mr. Wm. Langton on, 164.

Annual variations of Bank of England
accounts, 167.


Annuitants, 81, 92, 93 ; claim to relief,

100 .

Arithmetic average, 23 ; mean, 121.

Army, pay of, 82, 84, 89,* increase of
pay of, 159.

Artisans obtain increased money
wages, 85.

Ashes, price of, 142.

Asia, the reservoir of the precious
metals, 137, 305, 354, 357.

Astrology, possible element of truth
in, 205.

Australia, visits to gold diggings, 70 ;
Remarks on Australian Gold Fields
referred to, 70 (note), extract from
reprinted, 114.

Australian — see Gold discoveries.

Autumnal drain, 8, described by Mr.
Langton, 164, causes pressure in
market, 164, reason of, 169, due to a
concurrence of causes, 172, pressure
of 1865, 165, 173 ; why severe of
late years, 177 ; might be met under
an unrestricted note circulation, 178,
but also under existing system, 179,
180 ; policy of Bank m regard to, 180.

Average, use of, 20, 35; arithmetic,
23, geometric, 23. (See also under
Mean).

Average prices, of 39 commodities
1845-62, 42, mode of reducing, 43,
ratio of annual average to average
of years 1845-50, 44, grouped 46,
diagram 48, average rise of prices
between 1845-50 and 1860-62, 53.

B.

Babbage, Statistics of Clearing House
referred to, 4.

Bagehot, Walter, quoted, 312,


4i6


INDEX.


Balfour Stewart, Prof., on relation of
sun-spot period to configuration of
planets, 205.

Ballaarat, alluvial deposits of, 73, 1X4.

Bank, City of Glasgow, 230, 232.

Bank of England, suspension of specie
payments, 139; salanes of staff, 159;
withdrawal of com from m 1865,
160 ; gold coin sent to branches,
168, 278 ; note circulation, 1843-62,
107, variations of, 166-7, 170-1;
$ge of soveiSigns at, 289, at New-
castle and Plymouth branches of,
289, compared with age of outside
currency, 289.

Bank of England Accounts, fluctua-
tions of described, 5, 165 : tabular
averages of, weekly (1845-61), 183,
(1862-71), 188, (1872-81), 189;
monthly variation (1845-61), 184,
(1862-71), 190, (1872-81), 191;

quarterly variation (1845-61), 184,
(1862-71), 190, (1872-81), 191;
divergence after elimination of
quarterly variation (1845-61), 185,
(1862-71), 192, (1872-81), 192;
average of chief elements (1845-61),
185, (1862-71), 193, (1872-81), 193 ;
and five diagrams, 192.

Bank Charter Act of 1844, action of
notes on prices, 33 ; effect of dur-
ing periodic pressures, 177, 181;
Lord Overstone’s position in regard
to, impregnable, 177-8; every le-
gitimate expansion of note currency
possible under, 179 ; Silver Reserve
clauses, quoted, 327, permissive
only, 327.

Bank Notes, effect on prices, 33, 107 ;
expanded issue of, in 1800-20, 131 ;
circulation of English Private and
Joint- Stock banks (1845-62), 186, of
Scotch and Irish (1853-62), 186;
execution and design of, 300. (See
also Small Notes.)

Bank Reserve, may be allowed to run
lower m October, 180 ; may consist
partly of silver, 327.

Bankers* Magasnne, 307 note.

Bankruptcies, monthly variation, 9,
10; quarterly variation, 11; de-
cennial variation, 219, 220.

Barley, price of, 40, 42, 44, 51, 143,
148-9.

Barter, employment of system of, 176.

. Barton, Miss, the celebrated, her re-

_ lationswith Swift and Conduitt, 340.

Beans, price of, 40, 42, 44, 51, 143,
148-9.


Beef, price of, 40, 42, 44, 51, 143;
salt, 52.

Bendigo, alluvial deposits at, 73, 114.

Bi-Metallism, of the fi^pd ratio and
the variable ratio distinguished,
352-4, fixity of ratio essential, 353 ;
the international agreement, 351;
paper issues musf disturb, 322, 352,
355, 359 ; action of credit on prices,
321; action of French Currency
Law, 60-62, equilibrating effect ad-
mitted, 61, 304, 310-11, 319, 354,
356; future supply of gold, 305,
and silver, 311-313 ; future demand
for gold, 313-314 ; Eastern absorp-
tion of silver, 63, 137, 305, 354,
357 ; action of the United States,
357-8; silver more subject to de-
preciation than gold, 319 ; gold the
best medium, 305, and standard,
101-3, 298, 306, 309 ; the chronic
question, 318, and the temporary
question, 320, bi-metallic regime
must either be permanent or lead
to silver regime, 320 ; bi-metallism
opposed to irresistible natural ten-
dencies, 316, and by English con-
servatism on currency matters, 306,
308, 309 ; the problem very indeter-
minate, 317, hence wise to suspend
action, 317-18, but minor measures
might be adopted, 326, as Silver
Reserve, 327, and issue of £1 notes,
328.

Birdwood, Dr. George, on Oriental
Trade, 241-2.

Birkenhead, state of gold coin at, 290.

Blake, Mr., his Reports on Silver
Question referred to, 307.

Board of Trade, Miscellaneous Statis-
tics of, quoted, 167; Monthly Tables
of, 38 ; Statistical Abstract, 40.

Borneo, has yet to be explored for
gold, 103.

Bowen, Professor, his minority report,
307; approved, 316.

Brazil wood, price of, 51.

Brief e Conceipte of English Pohcie , 14,
105-6.

British Association, Papers read at,
1, 7, 56, 133, 164, 194, 206.

Broun, Mr. J. A., in Nature quoted,
215 ; his estimate of sun-spot period,
226.

Bullion, exports of, to the East, 134-5,
tables of, 140-1 ; prices of gold and
silver (1798-1821), 139 ; amount in
Issue Department 1845-61 com-
pared with 1865, 173.


INDEX.


4*7


Butchers’ meat, variations of price of,
47.

Burleigh, Lord,, his Act concerning
Com Reifts, 98.

Butter, price of, 40, 42, 44, 51, 143.


C.

0 -esa.r, return of, with spoils of gold,
75.

Cairnes, J. E., on effect of gold dis-
coveries on price of tropical pro-
ducts, 56, 57, 133, 137, on their
total effect, 154 ; on compensatory
action of double standard, 304.
Calf-skins, price of, 51.

Californian discoveries. (See Gold
discoveries.)

Cambridge, state of gold coin at, 291.
Cantillon, Richard, quoted, 318 note ;

on Newton, 323, 338, 339.

Capital, variations in investment of,
285 temporary exhaustion of, 31,
32; extended field of employment
for, 95; annual variation of loan-
able, 167; loanable in Bank of
England 1845-61 compared with
1865, 173.

Carrington, Mr. R. C., F.R.S., on sun-
spots, 195, 207, 208 note, 231.

Cassia Lignea, price of, 52.

Cavendish and Hatchett, their experi-
ments on wear of coins, 282.
Cernusehi, M., quoted, 307, 312 ; on
Newton, 331 ; his economic experi-
ment, 331 note.

Cheese, price of, 52.

Cheque Bank, will extend use of
cheques, 298.

Chevalier, M, Michel, On the Probable
Fall in the Value of Gold, 15 ; esti-
mate of ultimate fall, 73 ; expected
sudden depreciation, 78, 158; on
social effects of depreciation, 78;
effects on public revenue, 90 ; on
gold price of silver, 60; theory of
parachute, 64; estimates of pro-
duction and consumption of gold,
67 ; miners’ wages, 70 ; silver from
Spanish America, 76 ; standard of
value, 101 ; on Newton, 331 ;
Cobden, on views of, 34 note, 78.
China, gold and silver exported to,
1788-1808, 140.

Chinese gold diggers, 115.

Chinsurah prices, referred to by
Everest, 240, imperfect, 241.
Cinnamon, price of, 52, 143.


Circulation, total, metallic and note*
estimate of, 272, 273 ; general
course of, described, 276-7 9.

Civil Service, increase of salaries, 159.
Clark, Mr. Latimer, List of Works on
Electricity, 205 note.

Classification of incomes, 80; of 6om>
modities, 126.

Clearing House, statistics of, 4.
Clergymen as tithe-receivers, 85.
Clerks, salaries of, 8% 159.

Clover, price of„40, 42, 44* 52,’ *143,
148-9.

Cloves, price of, 23, 52.

Cobden, Richard, on commercial
fluctuations, 34 ; on social effects of
the depreciation of gold, 78. "*

Cochineal, price of, 51, 142.

Cocoa, price of, 23, 52.

Coffee, price of, 52, 55, 143.

Coin, debasement of by Henry Till.,
105 ; table of amounts issued from
Mint 1843-62, 107. (See also Gold
Currency.) .

Coinage, English, reference to table
of, 75 note.

Colleges of Oxfordand Cambridge, &e.,
Act relating to leases made by, 98;
corn prices preserved by, 196.
Commercial cycle, 48. (See also Crises
and Cycle.)

Commercial fluctuations, 27. (See also
Fluctuations.)

Compensatory action of double stan-
dard, 61, 304, 310-11, 319, 354, 356.
Comstock lode, 313.

Conduitt, John, his Observations
quoted, 340-47; biographical details
of, 340-41 ; allows that double
legal currency was established in
1717, 344; his views not bi-
metallism, 344-45.

Conference, International Monetary
of 1867, 268 note.

Consols, monthly variation of price,
10, quarterly, 11.

Constantine, value of gold and silver
under, 75.

Contemporary Review, The, referred to,
317, 323, 338, 353, 355, 359.

Contracts in gold money, 77, 97.

Cork, run on banks of, 292.

Corn, average prices of, 46, 48, 55;
Prices of, m Oxford, quoted, 99;
Mr. Thorold Rogers’ prices of,
exactly the kind of data required
for testing effects of sun-spot vari-
ation, 197.

Corn Laws, effect of repeal of, 94.

2 E


4iS


INDEX ;


Corn rents, 97, 98.

Copper, price of, 38,42,44,51,142,146-7.

Cotton, effects of scarcity of, 100 ;
price of, 26-7, 39, 42, 44, 46, 51,
142; prices of, 1782-1865, 148-9;
excessive variations of price of, 154.

Cotton, Sir Robert, Speech at the
Council Table quoted, 347.

Credit, effect of on prices, 31, 108,
321 ; elasticity of, 32 ; inflations of,
153; collapse of, 208, &c. (See
under Crises.)

Credit-Cycles, described, 27-30, 48,
physical relations of, 48 ; Mr. John
Mills’ view that they are essenti-
ally mental, 203, does not exclude
physical explanation, 204 ; duration
of, 215, 230, &c. (See under Crises.)

Credit system, extension of, 176.

Creditors, their loss by depreciation
of gold, 82, 93 ; claim to compensa-
tion, 97, to charitable relief, 100.

Crises, tendency to occur in October
and November, 8; Cobdenon, 34-5 ;
of 1839, 1847, 1857, 1866, and their
effect on prices, 151, 153, 164;
periodic recurrence of, 48, 203,
traceable in 18th century, 208 ;
length of period, 214-15, 230-31 ;
one predicted in 1879, 203, actual
date of it, 219-20 ; Mr. Mills’ view
that their cause is essentially
mental, 203, does not exclude
physical explanation, 204 ; inci-
dental causes of, 221, do not ex-
plain periodicity of, 222 ; irregular
ones, do not weaken evidence for a
period, 233 ; simultaneity of English
crises and Delhi maximum prices
explained, 240 ; English crises
stimulated, but not bounded, by
variation in tropical trade, 243.

Currants, price of, 52.

Currency, arbitrary changes in, 74;
extension and expansion of, 69;
effects of expansion of, 107 ;
Gilbart’s Laws of the Currency ,
171-2 ; mathematical pamphlet on,
123. (See also Gold Currency,
Paper Currency, Note Circulation.)

Currency,' Ideal, Tabular Standard,
297, largely paper medium of
exchange, 298, gold basis, 298, unit
of account five or ten franc piece,
299, seignorage 1 per cent, on gold,
10 or 12 per cent, on silver coins,
299, decimally subdivided, 299, notes
On partial deposit system, 300, how
small, 300-1.


Currency Law, French, of year XI.,
its operation, 60-2, 304, 319, equili-
brating effect admitted. 60-2, 304,
310-11, -354, 356 ; how the ratio
was fixed, 323.

Currency Theory, 32, 107-8; New-
march on, 7. ~

Curves, Statistical, 128.

Customs’ duties, 88 ; removal of, 94 ;
ad valorem \ 87, fixed, 90.

Cycle, the commerc al described, 27-
30, decennial, 34; the commercial
and solar, 48; the eleven years’,
average silver price of corn in each
year of, 198 ; Sir W. Petty on, 362
(See also Credit-cycle, and Crises ;
and Sun-spot period.)

Cyclic fluctuation, in aggregate price
of grain and fodder, 199, corrected
for exceptional disturbances, 200 ; in
European commerce, chiefly due to
Indian trade, 282, not wholly, 233,
242, connected with cosmical varia-
tions, 236.

D.

Danson, Mr. J. T., on quotations in
Tooke’s History, 142 ; on periodic
variations, 223.

Danvers, Mr. F. C., on Madras famines,
24°.

Datum line or point for prices, 152.

Deals, price of, 51.

Debt — see National.

Decennial cycle, 34.

Decimal Coinage Commission of 1857,
evidence of Master of Mint on
quantity of silver coinage, 272.

Decimal money, English conservatism
in regard to, 308; De Morgan’s
efforts to introduce, 308

Defoe, Daniel, his Tour quoted on
stock- jobbing, 211.

Delhi, prices of wheat at, 237 ; simul-
taneity of European crises with
high prices at, a difficulty, 239,
explained, 240.

Delphi, pillage of the temple of, 75.

Demand, variations of, 27; circum-
stances of, 58.

De Morgan, his efforts to introduce
decimal money, 308.

Depreciation of gold, amount assigned,
17, 53 ; proof of, 48, extended proof
of, 50; subject resumed, 151; of
18 per cent, proved, 154; effects of,
80, on national debt, 91, on credi-
tors, 93, has not produced loss of


INDEX.


419


subsistence, 95, influence on com-
munity, 96.

Depreciation of paper currency, 1800-
20, 127. w

Depressionof trade, as effecting esti-
mate of rise of prices, 16, 35-6,
48-9, 151. ^

Diagrams, advantages of logarithmic,
128 ; of prices, description of, 150.

Diggings, gold, 70, 112.

Discount, rate of, 'monthly variation,
10, quarterly variation, 11.

Dividends, National Debt, effect of
quarterly payments, 5, 166, of Oc-
tober payment, 170 ; numbers en-
titled to, 91; payment by post-dated
warrants proposed by Ricardo, 166 :
of companies, affected by depreci-
ation of gold, 86.

Dock warrants, notes resemble, 108.

Dodsley's Annual Register, quoted, 40.

Dollar, prices of Spanish, 127; the
future American, Prof. F. Bowen's
proposals for approved, 316.

Double standard. (See Bi-Metallism,
Standard, &c )

Drain of specie to East, 63, 134-7,
305, 354, 357; reversed in 1831-3,
130.

Dublin Statistical Journal, quoted, 56,
133.

Dyes, average price of, 46, 55 ; dye
•materials, prices of, 1782-1865,
146-7.

E.

East India Company, exports of
bullion by, 134, 140; exports in
1742, 213.

Eastern drain. (See Absorption and
Drain )

Economist, The, price lists quoted, 36,
37, 39-41, 50; on yield of gold,
117 ; letter to, 151 ; Annual Review
quoted, 152, 154, 176 ; on monetary
pressure of 1865, 162; on export
trade of 1865, 175; the founder
of, Mr. James Wilson, quoted, 217 ;
objects to reference of crises to
variations in Indian trade, 241.

Elimination, of quarterly variations,
6 ; of fluctuations, 26, 34.

England, A Qeneral Yiew of, respect-
ing its Policy , Trade , Sfc., 1600 -
■*762,. quoted, 214.

Equivalence of commodities, 62.

Error. (See Probable Error.)

Eton College, Act relating to, 98.


Evelyn, Sir G. S., on prices, 122.

Everest, Rev. Robt., his table of grain
prices in Bengal, 237 ; refers to
Chinsurah prices, 240.

Exchange, rate of, 19.

Exchange Magazine , quoted, 39.

Expenditure, as affected by deprecia-
tion of gold, 85; of Government,
87; of U. K. in 1860, 89.

Export trade, absorbs floating capital,
175.

Exports to India, of* treasure, JL40;
variations in vssiue of, 218, 232.


F.

F., G., letter in The Economist ,
October drain, 162-3.

Fall in value of gold, meaning of, 18,
20 ; theorems in regard to, 65, 67 ;
rate of, 65 ; ultimate amount of, 73,
157 ; largely unperceived, 80.

Famines, of 1315 and 1316, effect on
corn-price averages, 200 ; in Madras
precede those in -Bengal, 240, travel
northward, 240.

Farr, Dr., on the rate of wear of
coins, 284 note ; on average age of
sovereigns, 289 note.

Fawcett, Mr. W. L., his Eandbook of
Finance referred to, 307.

Fees, effect of depreciation of gold on,
83.

Fibrous materials, prices of, 39, 55,
142.

Figs, prices of, 52.

Fixed incomes, 96.

Flax, prices of, 39, 42, 44, 51, 142,
148-9.

Fluctuations, periodic, 3; of prices,
24 ; of supply, 25 ; of bankruptcy,
219 ; political causes of, 26 ; sup-
posed causes of, 32; in European
commerce, chiefly due to Oriental
trade, 232, not wholly due to Indian
trade, 233, 242 ; depend on meteoro-
logical variations and thus connec-
ted with cosmical variations, 236 ;
objection of Economist , 241. (See
also Cycle and Crises.)

Fodder, prices of, 1798-1865, 148-9.

Food, demand and supply of, 27,
variation of price of, 56, tropical
prices of, 143-5 ; influence of price
of on trade, 217.

Foreign Exchanges, merely links, 33 ;
uncertainty caused in by want of
international money, 261.


420


INDEX.


Four-shilling piece, Ernest Seyd’s
proposed, 326.

Fowler, Mr., Ms statistics of note
forgery in United States, 300 note.

Fox Bourne, his Romance of Trade
quoted, 210, 229.

Fraser’s Magazine, Cairnes in, quoted,
133.

Free trade, in gold, 22; in capital,
the true business of the banker,
181.

French Currency, a parachute, 60, 64;
equilibrating act&n must cease, 103.

Frost, Mr. A. J., on history of tele-
graph, 205 note.

Fruit, price of, 55.

Fustic, price of, 51.

Fundholders, 81, 86.


G.

Gaudin, proposed the ratio 15 } to 1,
323.

Gentleman’s Magazine, on price of
wool, 212, great demand for wool,
213 ; on stock- jobbing in 1732, 211,
229.

Geometric average, 23, mode of ob-
taining, 24.

Geometric mean, use of, 120.

Gilbart, on bank-note circulation, 4,
his Laws of the Currency, 171.

Ginger, price of, 52.

Gladstone, Mr. W. E., his remissions
of taxation, 90.

Gold, as free capital, 108, superabun-
dance of, 108'; natural standard of
value, 101, 298, 306, 309; Mint-
price of, 1798-1821, 139; cost of
production of, 70, Chevalier on, 70 ;
produce of in New South Wales,
1851-62, 113, in Victoria, 1851-59,
113, 1880-1, 117, 1866-81, 118;
total supply of, 1849-60, 113 ; pro-
gress of production of, 132 ,* future
supply, 70-72, tendency to equi-
librium of supply and consumption,
66; depreciation of, 151, 154, pro-
bability of established, 157, probable
error of result, 157.

Gold and Silver, history of relative
values of, 75, 310, 319 ; supply and
demand of, 110.

Gold coin sent monthly to branches
of Bank of England, 168, 278.

Gold currency, inquiry into amount
and age of, 262-296; method de-
scribed, 262, 283, 292; census of


one-sixth million coins taken, 263i
results, 264-5; whole circulation
estimated from census, 266, cor-
rected by allowance foi«export, 267,
by allowance for “ picking and
culling,” 268-9 ; Messrs. Graham
and Wilson’s estimate, 269 ; Mr.
Miller’s estimate, 269 ; Mr. Wegue-
lin’s estimate, 269; Mr. Hankey’s
estimate, 269; Tooke and New-
march’s estimate, 270; Mr. Inglis
Palgrave’s estimate, 273 : Geo-
graphical distribution of light coin,

274- 5, 287, newest in Manchester,
276, light in agricultural districts,

275- 6; general course of circula-
tion, 276-9, (< picking and culling, 1 ’
278, new coins distributed through
Bank of England, 278 • proportions
of sovereigns and half-sovereigns
of different dates remaining in cir-
culation, 280-1 ; Cavendish and
Hatchett on wear of by friction,
282; author’s weighings of, 283;
Bank of England weighings of, 284,
286 note ; Dr. Farr on rate of wear
of, 284 note; Mint weighings of,
285 ; Mr. J ohn B. Martin’s census
of, 286 note ; Mr. Robinson’s census
of coins in Issue Department of
Bank, 288, average age of coins in
Bank compared with outside circu-
lation, 289; country reports on
state of, 290-2; actual deficiency
of weight and value estimated,
292-5; total cost of metallic cur-
rency to nation, 296; figures on
coins should be old-faced, 296.

Gold discoveries, 15, 36, 59, 61, 76,
102, 103, 151 ; effects of, 94, 119,
129, 132, 134, 138, 158; indirect
effects of, 104 * effect of measured
by difference of change of prices,
108; have arrested fall of prices,
110 - 11 .

Gold-fields, Remarks on ihe Australian,
quoted, 114.

Gold mining, 66, 69, 70-72, 74, 116 ;
number of miners employed in
Victoria, 118 ; earnings of gold
miners, 111-12.

Gold money, not compulsory to con-
tract in, 97.

Gold standard, prices in, 1782-1865,
144-5; the natural one, 101, 298,
306, 309. (See Bi-Metallism, Cur-
rency, Standard.)

Goldsmiths, lose by depreciation of
gold, 82, 86.


INDEX.


42 1


Graham, Mr., his approval of seignor-
age, 260; his estimate of amount
of gold currency, 269 ; on cost of
renewal, 299.

Graves Library, the, at University
College, 124

Greenwich Hospital prices incomplete
and misleading, 230.

Grenfell, Mr., his evidence on state of
gold currency, 286 note.

Gresham, Sir Thos., his Information
touching the Fall of the Exchange
referred to, 333.

“ Guntoor” famine, of 1833, 240.

Guthrie, Mr." on elasticity of Scotch
£1 note circulation, 178.


H.

Halifax, state of gold coin at, 290,
291.

Hallam, his remarks on Brief Con -
ceipt, 105.

Hamburg, prices in, 120.

Hankey, Mr., his estimate of amount
of gold currency, 269.

Hargreaves, his discovery of gold, 114.

Harvests, effect of on prices, 8, 131 ;
connect crises with variations of
solar activity, 194, 216, 236 ;
. periodicity of bad, in India, 216.

Harvest payments, effect of, on circu-
lation, 161.

Hatchett and Cavendish, their experi-
ments on wear of coins, 282.

Hay, price of, 40, 42, 44, 51, 55, 143,
148—9.

Helm, Mr. E., on price of rice and
trade in Lancashire, 236.

Hendriks, Mr. F., his pamphlet on
International Currency, 247 note;
his evidence to Commission on, 247
note, 253 note.

Herepath’s Railway Magazine , 223.

Herklots, G., his table of Chinsurah
prices, 241.

Herodotus, on value of gold and
silver, 75.

Herschel, Sir John, his Actinometer,
234 ; against free mintage, 260.

Herschel, Sir William, on sun-spots
and price of corn, 195, 206.

Hides, price of, 39, 42, 44, 61, 143.

Hipparchus of Plato, on value of gold
and silver, 75.

History of Brices— see Tooke and
Newmarch.

Hollingberry, Mr., quoted, 313.


Hops, price of, 25.

Horton, Hon. S. Dana, his Appendix to
Report of i8?8 quoted, 75; his
Silver and Gold quoted, 123, 313 ;
his Bibliography mentioned, 328,
his Open Letter, 333, fragments of
reply to, 353-4; on Hewtou and
Cantillon as bi-metallists, 333 ; on
the variable ratio, 352 ; works re-
commended, 307.

Hume, on money, 318^

Hunter, Dr. W. W. 4 on periodicity of
famines in India, 216, 281, 236.

Hyde Clarke, Dr., his paper on Physi-
cal Economy quoted, 222-3, peculiar
interest of, 224.


I.

Incomes, classification of, 80; variable,
84, fixed, 96.

Income tax, how affected by deprecia-
tion of gold, 87.

India, drain of precious metals to, 63,
137, 305, 354, 357; reversed in
1831-3, 130; bullion absorbed by,
1802-56, 140-1.

Indian trade, not the sole cause of
the decennial fluctuation, 233.

Indigo, price of, 39, 42, 44, 51, 142,

Index number of The Economist
(Annual He view), 152, 154.

Insurance Cyclopaedia , Mr. Cornelius
Walford’s, quoted, 229.

Interest, variations of rate of, 36, 95.

International Coinage, Royal Com-
mission on, of 1868, Report quoted,
246, 260-1, 268,295, 299; Messrs.
Brown and Hendriks on Scheme
for, and its advantages, 247; Mr.
Hendriks’ pamphlet referred to,
247 note; Col. Smith’s Memo-
randum, 247, 299; unit of will
certainly be m a simple ratio with
franc, 261.

International Monetary Conference
of 1867, British representatives at,
268 note.

International Monetary Standard,
Society for Establishing an, 344.

Investment, variations of permanent,
27 ; long-dated, 28.

Ireland, state of gold coin in, 291*

Irish note circulation, variation of,
172.

Iron, bar, price of, 38, 42, 44, 51 54,
142.


422


INDEX.


Iron, pig, price of, 39, 42, 44, 51, 54,
142.

Iron, several varieties, price of, 1782-
1865, 146-7.

Irregular crises, 233, do not weaken
the evidence for a period, 233.

Italian currency changes, 321, 322.

J.

Jacob, W m., ^History of Precious
Metals quoted, 105, 131, 132, 285,
293 ; on paper currency, 131 ; on
production of gold, 132.

Jewels, duty on, 87.

Journal des fficonomistes, quoted, 124.

&)uri%al of Society of Arts , quoted, 242.

Juglar, M. Clement, on crises, 239.

Jute, price of, 51.

K.

Kemp, Messrs. John, & Co., their cir-
cular on bankruptcies quoted, 219 ;
their Mercantile Gazette quoted,
220 .

L.

Lamont, his estimate of sun-spot
period, 228.

Landowners, suffer no loss by de-
preciation of gold, 84.

Langton, Mr. Wm., on commercial
crises, 164 ; observations on Bank of
England accounts quoted, 164; on
the decennial cycle, 223.

Lard, price of, 52.

Laspeyres, Dr. E., his Hamburger
Waa/renpreise, 120; on the use of
the geometric mean m the re-
duction of prices, 120, 122.

Lauderdale, Lord, his Depreciation of
the Paper Currency referred to, 127.

Laveleye, M. Emile de, on econo-
mising of gold, 176; on fall of
prices due to scarcity of gold, 321 ;
on Newton as the inventor of bi-
metallism, 330 ; fragments of reply
to his Commonplace Fallacies, 356-9.

Lead, price of, 38, 42, 44, 51, 142,
146-7.

“ Leads ” of gold, 114, 117.

Least Squares, Method of, used, 157.

Leather, price of, 39, 42, 44, 51, 143.

Legal Tender, 99.

Leslie, T. E. Gliffe, on causes of
variation of prices, 155.


Levasseur, M., on prices, 124.

Light coin, losses by, 256, 275 note,
279 ; most in agricultural districts.
275.

Liverpool, Lord, his Treatise on the
Coins of the Realm, 1805, quoted,
75 note, 245, 2§4 ; his Act of
1816 successful in most respects,
306, 308, 322, 346; but system of
free mintage has broken down in
practice, 245; his reasons against
a mint charge, 253 ; the situation
changed, 254; alteration required,
260-1.

Lloyd, Rev. W. F., his Prices of Corn
m Oxford quoted, 99.

Locality of production, commodities
cannot be classed by, 127.

Logarithms, use of, 24, 121, 124 ; of
ratio of price of gold to standard
price, 139 ; logarithmic curves, use
of, 53; diagrams, advantage of,
128, described, 150; homologues,
129 note.

Logwood, price of, 39, 42, 44, 51, 142.

London Magazine , The, quoted for
prices of lead and tin, 212.

London Mercantile Price Current , The,
quoted for prices, 38, 41.

London and Westminster Bank, enu-
meration of sovereigns by, 288.

Lowe, Joseph, on tabular standard of
value, 122.

Lubbock, Sir J. W., his mathematical
pamphlet On Currency, 124.

Lubbock, Sir John, on Clearing
System, 176.


M.

MacCullooh, J. R., doubts depre-
ciation of gold in 1858, 15 ; his esti-
mate of consumption of precious
metals, 68 ; on beneficial effects of
depreciation, 96; his article on
Precious Metals quoted, 141.

Mace, price of, 52.

Macleod, Mr. H. D., his Dictionary of
Political Bcommy quoted for evi-
dence of periodicity of crises, 209, 227 .

Macpherson, his Commerce with India
quoted, 137 ; on exports of treasure
and merchandise to East, 140.

Maerory, Mr. Edmund, reader of
Paper I., in Section F., British As-
sociation, 1862, 3.

Madras famines precede Bengal
famines, 240.


INDEX . ;


Manchester, gold currency in heavy,
276; weighings of half-sovereigns
at, 293*

Manchester Literary and Philoso-
phical Society, Proceedings quoted,
114, 205 note.

Manchester Statistical Society, Trans-
actions quoted, 160, 164, 203, 215,
2L7, 224, 236, 258.

Manufactured articles, prices of, 94

Mark, the new 20- mark piece com-
pared with other coins, 249 note.

Martin, Mr. John B., his census of
gold coinage, 286 note.

Martin’s British Colonies quoted, 134,
141.

Maryland and Virginia, export trade
from, periodicity of, 242.

Materials, variation of price of
foreign, 56 ; price of raw, 93.

Mean, arithmetic, geometric, har-
monic, 120-2 ; Dr. E. Laspeyres on
selection of in reduction of prices,
120 .

Mean prices, 123, Sir J. W. Lubbock
on, 123, Mr. G. R. Porter on, 123.

Meat, average prices of, 46, 55.

Melbourne, schistose hills at, 115.

Melbourne Argus quoted, 117-

Mercantile theory, principally con-
cerned with Indian and Eastern

"*#rade, 241.

Metals, demand and supply of, 27,
quotations of prices, 38, variation
of prices, 46-7, 55, prices of, 1782-
1865, 146-7.

Meteorological conditions, variations
due to not easily traceable in last
100 years, 195-6.

Method, of inquiry into prices, 35,
57, 120, 125, 128, 152, 154; of
inquiry into effect of sun-spot
variations on price of corn, 197,
another method, 200, objections to
method, 200, 202 ; of inquiry into
amount and age of gold currency,
262, 283, 292.

Milburn, Oriental Commerce quoted,
218.

Mills, Mr. John, on Credit Cycles, 203 ;
his tract On Credit Cycles , Sfc.
quoted, 215, his Synopsis of Six
Commercial Panics quoted, 226.

Miller, Mr., his estimate of amount of
gold currency, 269.

Mines, exhaustion of, 25.

Mineral substances, price of, 25, ten-
dency to rise in price, 129.

Miners. (See Gold mining.)


423

Mining industry, precarious and un-
remunerative, 71.

Mint price of gold, 22, from 1798-
1821, 139.

Mint, the Royal, gold and silver
coin issued from 1843-62, 107 ;
sovereigns and half-sovereigns is-
sued annually 1817-1867, 264 ;
Report on City Lands Bill quoted,
279 note, 286 note; weighings of
half-sovereigns at in#833, 293.
Mintage, free, difficulties of, 255 ; T3ir
Dudley North on, 260.

Money, value of, 22.

Money Market, autumnal pressure in,
160; increased delicacy of, 175.
Money and the Mechanism of JSxckangdf
author’s work on quoted, 62, 80,
102, 123, 176, 298, 310.

Monthly variation of Bank of England
accounts, 6, 166.

Mortgagees, lose by depreciation of
gold, 82.

Murchison, his Siluria quoted, on gold
reefs, 116.

Mutton, price of, 40, 42, 44, 51, 143.

N.

National Debt, effect of depreciation
of gold on, 91, 101.

Mature, quoted, 215, 216, 221, 231, 235.
Navy, pay of, 82, 84, 89.

Nevada, silver mines of, 76, 311, 357 ;

Comstock Lode, 313.

New Guinea, possible gold field, 103.
New South Wales, production of gold
in, 113, 118.

Newmarch, W., on Currency Theory,

7 ; estimate of new supply of gold,
1849-60, 113 ; inquiry into prices,
begun in 1859, 152, method of in-
vestigation, 35, estimate of depre-
ciation of gold, 15-16 :
contributions to History of Prices
quoted ; — on tropical produce, 133 ;
statistics of bills, 169 ; estimate of
quantity of gold in use ia 1848, 64,
in 1856, 270 ; on recoinage of light
gold in 1840-1, 287.

Newton, Sir Isaac, how he valued the
guinea in 1717, 323 ; his Report of
1717, 334-8; does not hold doctrine
of bi-metallism, 344-5, but of parity
of values, 350-1 ; probably a silver
mono-metallist, 345.

Nitrate of soda, price of, 51.

North, Sir Dudley, against free mint-
age, 260.


424


INDEX \


North “Wales, circulation of coin in,
277.

Norway, small notes in, 302.

Note circulation, the currency theory,
7, 32, 107-S; average of 1845-61
compared with 1865, 173 ; of Eng-
lish Private and Joint Stock Banks,
average variation, 1845-62, 186 ; of
Scotland and Ireland, average vari-
ation, 1853 - 62, 186 5 advantages of
unrestricted 178-9, equally attain-
able under A ci of 1844, 179-80;
small notes, 301, 302; one-pound
notes advocated, 308, 328.

Nutmegs, price of, 52.

O.

Oik, price of, 51.

Oats, price of, 40, 42, 44, 51, 143,
148-9.

Observatories of solar radiation
wanted, 235.

October drain (see Autumnal drain.)

Oil, linseed and palm, prices of, 39,
42, 44, 51; sperm, olive, cocoa-
nut, rape- seed, 51 ; average varia-
tion of prices of oils, 46, 55 ; prices
from 1782-1865, 146-7.

Ollerenshaw, Mr. J. C., quoted, 217,
236.

One-pound notes, no sensible reason
against use of, 308 ; issue of thirty
millions advocated, 328.

Orders in Council, trade disturbed by,
208.

Oriental produce, composition of
group, 143, prices 1782-1865,
144-5; comparative fall of prices
of, 133.

Oriental trade, chief cause of periodic
fluctuations in European trade,
232, 236; great commercial na-
tions chiefly affected, 233, 241;
smuggling makes official returns
an inadequate measure of in 18th
century, 241.

Overend, Gurney, and Co., 215, 221.

Oxford and Cambridge Colleges, value
of their records of corn prices, 196.

P.

Paxgrave, Mr. E. H. Inglis, on unre-
stricted note circulation, 179 note ;
his Notes on Banking quoted on
periodic. variations, 180 note; his
estimate of gold circulation, 273
note.


Panics (see Crises.)

Paper currency, effect of arbitrary
changes in on values, 74, 131, 136,
195 ; bearing of this 0# the question
of bi-metallism, 322, 352, 355, 359 ;
pnmd facie inconvenienoe of a re-
stricted, 178, notereal, 179 ; depre-
ciation of the, 1800-20, 127 ; prices
in, 1801-20, 144.

Paper standard, prices in, 1801-20, 144,

Parachute, Chevalier’s theory of,
60, 64.

Parity of values, doctrine of, held by
Conduitt, 343, Cotton, 348, Newton,
350, Yaughan, 348-50; this doc-
trine not bi-metallism, 350-1,

Partial Deposit System of note issue,
300.

Pattinson process for separating silver
from lead, 76.

Peas, price of, 40, 42, 44, 51, 143,
148-9.

Peel, Sir Eobert, his remission of
taxation, 90.

Pensioners, loss by depreciation of
gold, 82, 84 ; claim to relief, 100.

Pepper, price of, 41, 42, 44, 51, 143.

Period, of crises, length of, 214-15,
230-31 ; of famines, 231-33 ; of
sol&r variation, 197, 203, 215, 226,
228, 231, 235, 361.

Periodic commercial fluctuations,
portance of investigating, 3, 4;
periodic tendency to panic in
autumn, 8; periodic pressures in
money market, the bank should
make allowance for the normal,
181 ; aggravated by increase of
commerce, 187-

Periodicity of crises, idea suggested
by diagrams, 224, nature of, 48,
traced, 203 ; m the 18th century, 208 ,
shown in high rather than in low
prices, 202 ; more marked in crises
than in sun-spots, 208 note; Dr.
Hyde Clarke on, 222 ; Mr. Danson
and Mr. Langton on, 223 5 not ex-
plained by incidental causes, 222 ;
evidence of not weakened by ir-
regular crises, 233 ; connected with
cosmical variation, 236.

Philosophical Transactions , quoted,
122, 206, 283.

Physicians 1 fees, 83.

Piazzi Smith, his observatory, 235.

Picking and Gulling , regularly prac-
tised in England, 278-9 ; in former
years a capital offence in Prance,
279 note.


INDEX . ;


425


Pleasure traffic, in autumn, effect on
circulation, 161, 170-1.

Political causes of fluctuations, 26.

Population, growth of as affecting
prices, 156, 158.

Pork, price of, 40, 42, 44, 52, 143 j
salt, 52. m

Porter, G. R., his Progress of the
Nation quoted on variation of prices,
123.

Post Office charges, how affected by-
depreciation of gold, 84.

Pouillet, his Pyrheliometer, 234.

Piecious metals (See Gold and
Silver).

Pressure of 1865, special descrip-
tion of, 173. (See also Autumnal
drain) >

Price, of commodities, 1845-62, 42 ;
of consols, 10, 11 ; of corn, meteoro-
logical influences on obscured, 195 ;
_ of gold at Mint, 22, during sus-
pension of specie payments, 139 ;
of raw materials, 93, foreign, 56 ;
of wheat, 10, seasonal variation of
11, decennial variation of, 197,
Everest’s Delhi table of, 237.

Prices, dependent on credit, 31, ulti-
mately on gold, 32, collapse after a
revulsion of credit, 32 ; inflation of
1857, 153, 158 :

■•meaning of average rise of, 23 ; per-
manent and temporary fluctuations
of, 24; comparative variations of,
128:

sources and method of compilation
of tables of, 37-41, 43, 45, 50 :
great decline of 1809-49, 109, 155,
temporary rise, 1835-9, 155 ; state
of in 1833-43, 108-9, great rise of
in 1853, 16, 80, near a minimum
1862-3, 49 :

inquiry into general variation of
1782-1865, 119, results, 144-5;
ratios of prices 1847-69 to those
of 1849, 153.

Probable error of estimate of de-
preciation of gold, 157.

Probability, of an average result, 20,
22 ; of future gold discoveries, 70-3,
102, 305, 319 ; of depreciation of
gold established, 157 ; the guide in
moral and social science, 156; bi-
metallism a question of, 317, 319,
320.

Prunes, #rice of, 52.

Purchasing power of gold and arith-
metic mean, 120,

Pyrheliometer, Ponillet’s, 234.


Q.

Quarterly Review, quoted, 131.

Quarterly tides iu money market, 6,
162-3, 166; Mr. W. Langton on
the, 164; quarterly movement of
coin at Bank of England, 168.

Quartz gold reefs, 115.

Quetelet, on the use of averages, 156.

Quotations of prices, 38, 50.

If.

Raisins, price of, 52.

Ramsgate, state of coin at, 290-1.

Ratio of exchange, 19.

Ratio of value of gold and silveV,
history of variations in, 75-6, 310,
319.

Raynal, AbbS, on Eastern drain, 137.

Recomage, of 1841-43, 257, 295 ;
necessity for another, 257 ; cost of
under existing law (1868), £348,000,
257, 295; profit of under proposed
international system, £215,000, 258,
259.

Red-lead, price of, 51.

Report, American, on Conference of
1878, 334.

Reservoir, simile of, used to illus-
trate bi-metallism, 61-2, 310-11;
Wolowski and Wolfgang on, 304
note ; Eastern nations act as a, 137,
305.

Resumption of specie payments in
United States, * method suggested,
315.

Revenue of Government, how affected
by depreciation of gold, 87-90

Revulsion, commercial, effect on prices,
32, effect of in 1857, 48; such as
those of 1825, 1847, cause greater
hardship than fall an value of gold,
100 .

Reynolds, Professor Osborne, on
Logarithmic Curves, 128 note.

Ricardo, David, his Proposals for an
Economical and Secure Currency
quoted, 166, 297 note.

Rice, Bengal, price of, 52, 55, 143.

Rise of prices in 1853, 16, 80. (See
Prices.)

Robinson, Bryan, his Essay on Coin
quoted, 333-4 note.

Rochdale, state of coin at, 291.

Rogers, Professor J. E. Thoroid, his
History of Agriculture and Prices ,
196, 197, 203, 225, great value of,
196, 197.

2 F


426


INDEX.


Bum, price of, 52, 65.

Buns of luck, in gold discovery, 102.
“ Bushes,” at gold diggings, 71, 73.
Bussian gold mines, 110.

Bussian war, corrections for effect of
on prices, 26.

Bye, price of, 40, 42, 44, 51, 143,
148-9.


S.

Sago, price of, 52, 55.

St. Helens, state of gold coin at, 291.

Sapan wood, price of, 51.

Scandinavian currency changes, 302,
308, 314.

Schuster, Professor Arthur, on vint-
ages and sun-spot period, 195, 216,
231 ,* his account of Wolffs paper on
sun-spot period, 361.

Scotch currency, annual variation of,

171, 186.

Scotch currency system, elasticity of,
178.

Scrope Poulett, on standard of value,

122 .

Seasons, effect of, 3, 5, 195-6, 216,
236.

Seeds, price of, 52, 55.

Seignorage on gold coin, of 1 per
cent., suggested by Mr. Hendriks,
246, effect of, 251, should be interna-
tional, 252, would improve standard
of value, 252 ; Adam Smith, Bicardo,
Tooke, X S. Mill, Graham, Herschel,
approve, 260.

Serious Fall m the Value of Gold,
publication of, 15 ; prices in, 142.

Seyd, Ernest, his Bullion and Foreign
Exchanges, quoted, 253 note; his
proposed four-shilling piece, 326.

Shakespeare Society, reprint of Staf-
ford’s Dialogues, 105.

Sheffield, Lord, On the Trade of
Ireland, quoted, 213.

Silk, price of, 39, 42, 44, 51, 142,
148-9.

Silver, depreciation of since 1850,
61-2 ; Prench imports and exports
of, 63 ; price of, 38, 42, 44, 46, 51,
rises after 1850, 59, in 1833-43,
109, best criterion of value of paper,
127; ratio of price 1798-1821 to
that of 1798, 139; as standard of
value, 103, possibly less steady in
value than gold, 311.

Silver and gold, relative values of, 75,
310, 319.


Simultaneity of English crises with
high prices at Bengal a difficulty,
239, explained, 240. ^

Small note question, 301 ; three cent
notes, 301; Bons de Monnaie of
one franc, 301 ^ small notes in
Norway, 302; issue of small notes
desirable to relieve the strain on
gold, 328.

Smith, Col. J. T., on International
Coinage, 247 note, 299.

Smith’s Memoirs of Wool quoted, 213.

Social effects of depreciation of gold.

77.

Soetbeer, his inquiries into prices, 120.

Solar period and price of corn, paper
on, publication of, 194 note.

Solar radiation, desirability of measu-
ring variations of, 234; variations
of perhaps more regular than varia-
tions of sun-spots, 234; observa-
tories wanted, 235.

Soldiers, pay of, 82, 84, 89.

Solicitors’ charges, 83.

South Sea Bubble, not an isolated
event, 209, 228 ; other stock-
jobbing manias, 210, 229.

South Sea Company, 207, 209, 210,
212, 228, 232.

Sovereign, British, its international
diffusion, 248; 25-franc piece
would supplant it, 249. (See Gfflff
Currency, Seignorage.)

Spanish America, gold mines of, 110

Speculation, of 1853 described, 47,
return of predicted, 49 ; changes of
prices due to, 129.

Spelter, price of, 51.

Spices, price of, 55.

Spirits, price of, 41, 42, 44, 51, 143.

Stafford, W. (W. S.), his Brief Qon -
ceipte quoted, 14, 105-6.

Stamp duties, how affected by depre-
ciation of gold, 87.

Standard of value, “Battle of the
Standards,” 62 note ; effect of
change in insidious, 79, described
by Stafford, 106 ; the Tabular, 122,
is the ideal standard, 297 ; silver
no better than gold, 101-3; single
gold the best m practice, 298,
306; alternative standard right in
theory, 306, possibly less steady m
value than gold, 311 ; compensatory
action of, 61, 304, 310, 319^ 354, 356.

Statistical Journal, quoted, 4, 7, 16,
39-40, 111, 119, 151, 152, 154, 160,
171, 176, 180, 213, 214, 219, 223
237, 244.


INDEX.


427


Steel, Swedish, price of, 61.

Stirling, his Gold Discoveries , diagram
in referred to, 132 note.

Stock-jobbing, manias, 209, 210, 211 ;
Acts of Parliament against, 211,
229, 230.

Straw, price off 40, 42, 44, 51, 55, 143,
148-9.

Strikes, due to depreciation of gold,
85.

Sugar, price of, 41, 42, 44, 52, 55, 143.

Sunn, East Indian, price of, 61.

Sumner’s History of American Cur -
rency , 130 note.

Sun-spot period, Carrington’s observa-
tions on, 195 ; supposed length of,
197, 203 ; later estimates of Lamont,
228, of Broun, 215, 226, 231 ; Pro-
fessor Schuster on, 195, 216, 231,
361 j Wolfs last conclusion as to,
361.

Supply, fluctuations of, 25; special
circumstances of, 58, must be dis-
regarded in inquiry into prices, 25,
58 5 of gold, 70, ultimate equilibrium
of with consumption, 66.

Swift, his relations with Miss Barton
and Oonduitt, 240.


T.

Tables of figures, large, often a
source of error, 120.

Tabular standard of value, 122, the
standard of an ideal currency
system, 297.

Tafereel der Diuaasheid , Het Groote, by
Dr. S. Yissering, 210 note.

Tailings, of gold diggers, 115.

Tallow, price of, 39, 42, 44, 51, 142 ;
general variation of price of, 47;
correction for Russian war acci-
dentally omitted, 26-7*

Tar, price of, 51, 55, 142.

Tasmania, production of gold in, 118.

Tea, price of, 41, 42, 44, 51, 55, 143.

Teak, Indian, price of, 51.

Telegraphy Electric , Early Presenti-
ments of they author’s article on m
Spectator , 205 note.

Temporary fluctuations, elimination
of, 34.

Tender, legal, 99.

Terra Japonica, price of, 51.

Theqpy of Political Economyy Mathe-
matical, paper on, 3.

Theory of Political Economy , author’s
work on, quoted, 19, 62, SO, 251


Thornely, Mr. William, assistance in
preparing tables acknowledged, 187.

Tides, commercial, 27, 35, 36, 49, 54 ;
in movement of money, 163. (See
also commercial fluctuations.)

Timber, price of, 39, 42, 44, 46, 51,
54, 55, 142, 146-7; demand and
supply of, 27.

Times , The, price lists quoted, 40;
remarks of commercial editor on
advance in rate of discount, Oct.,
1865, 160-1; oth^ references to,
1, 180, 235, 273 note, 286.

Tin, price of, 38, 42, 44, 51, 142,
146-7, from 1746-64, 214.

Tin-plates, price of, 39, 42, 44, 51, 54.

Tobacco, price of, 52, 55, 143.

Tolls, effect of depreciation of #fld
on, 81, 83.

Tooke, Thomas, his opinion in
favour of seignorage on the
sovereign, 260; his History of
Prices, a unique work, 119, gene-
ral argument of it, 130, assigns
too much weight to unusual fre-
quency of bad harvests, 131 ; his
Tables of prices begin at 1782, 129,
reduction of them by author, 34
note, 120, 124, 142, 195, 321; dia-
grams constructed from data in
the History, 109 ; prices of silver
in it, 127 ; table of English coinage
in it, 75 note :

Newmarch’s contributions to the
History quoted ; on tropical produce,
133; statistics of bills, 169; esti-
mate of quantity of gold in use in
1848, 64, in 1856, 270; on recoin-
age of light gold in 1840-1, 287.

Trade, expansion of as affecting
prices, 156-8 ; rapid growth of
makes money market more delicate,
175, and aggravates periodic fluctu-
ations, 187; European strongly
affected by Eastern, 232.

Travers ’ Circular quoted, 161.

Tropical food, price of, 143-5.

Truck system, 99 ; Acts of Parliament
against, 99.

Turmeric, price of, 51.

Turpentine, price of, 51, 55,

Twigg, Mr. J. H., on prices of corn in
India, 237.

U.

Undulations of prices, 129.

United States, expansion of bank
circulation of 130 ; decimal system
