Peoples of Asiatic Russia (Waldemar Jochelson, 1928)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/dli.pahar.2363). Jochelson's survey of the peoples of Asiatic Russia - Yukaghir, Koryak and Tungus social life and shamanism, from the Jesup North Pacific Expedition.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

A Yakut Girl in Festive Attire 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

By 

WALDEMAR JOCHELSON 

THE AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NaAtTurRAL History 
1928 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

By WALDEMAR JOCHELSON 

PREFACE 

The writing of a handbook on the peoples of Asiatic Russia is a 
peculiarly difficult task. These peoples are of many racial strains, the 
relations of which, the one to the other, are not always clear. For 
example, the divisions of the so-called Ural Altaic peoples, the Palz- 
Asiatics, the Aryan, and the Semitic elements present complicated 
problems. Each of these divisions must be considered from the stand- 
point of its own perplexing anthropological and historical aspects, as 
well as taking into account kinship and connections with other peoples 
outside of Asiatic Russia, or even outside of Asia. Further, adequately 
to present these ethnic divisions, and the various groups of peoples, one 
must review their somatological, linguistic, and cultural characters. 
To this end these divisions have been treated geographically and in 
accordance with their present locations, as the tribes to be found in 
Siberia proper, in the Amur region, the Steppe provinces, in Turkestan, 
the Caucasus, and finally the native populations of bordering countries. 
Lastly, for the sake of perspective, we add a review of the prehistory and 
migrations in the region as a whole, together with a résumé of cultural 
characteristics. 

The author was able to consult many Russian publications in the 
libraries of the American Geographical Society, the Slavic Division of 
the Congressional Library, and in other American institutions, as well as 
some of the latest works and information on the population of Asiatic 
Russia, thus making it possible to include otherwise inaccessible data. 

Of personal obligations there are many. Photographs were 
generously furnished by the Museum of Anthropology and Ethnography 
of the Academy of Sciences in Leningrad; the Russian Museum of Lenin- 
grad (formerly the Museum of Emperor Alexander III); the Central 
Ethnographic Museum of Moscow (formerly Count Rumiantzev’s 
Museum); Professor A. A. Ivanovsky, University of Kharkov; and 
Professor M.S. Andreev, University of Tashkent. The greater number 
of photographs are to be credited to the two last named individuals. Dr. 
I. I. Sarubin, Curator of the Central Asiatic Division of the Museum of 
Anthropology and Ethnography of the Academy of Sciences in Leningrad 
and Professor Andreev have furnished their recent publications, as well 
as unpublished information on the population of Turkestan. The Central 

3 

4 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Statistical Bureau of the Uzbeg Soviet Republic kindly sent me statistical 
reports for 1925 on the Autonomous States of Central Asia which were 
formerly included in the Turkestan Republic. The maps were executed 
by Mr. 8. Ichikawa. 

- WaLDEMAR JOCHELSON 
American Museum of Natural History 

July, 1928 

CONTENTS 

PREFACE 
CuaptTer I 

THE MONGOLOIDS OF ASIA AND EUROPE 
FInNICc TRIBES 
THE UGRIANS . 
WESTERN FINNS 
BALTIC FINNS 
THE PERMIANS 
THE BULGARIAN FINNS . 
THE CHUVASH. 
SLAVONIZED FINNS 
THE LAPPS 
THE SAMOYED 
TURKICIZED SAMOYED 
Tue Turkic TRIBES 
THE YAKUT . 
THE TATARS OF TOBOLSK PROVINCE 
THE TATARS OF TOMSK PROVINCE 
THE ALTAIAN TATARS 
THE KARAGAS 
Tre Monco.uic TRIBES 
THE BURYAT 
Tue Tuncus TRIBES : : : ; . 
PRESENT DISTRIBUTION, NUMBER, AND TRIBES 
THE TUNGUS PROPER 
LANGUAGE 
RELIGION : ' 
DIVISIONS AND CLASSES 

CHAPTER II 
THE AMERICANOIDS OF SIBERIA 
~ THE CHUKCHEE 
THE Koryak. ; 
REINDEER KORYAK 
MARITIME KORYAK 
Tue KAMCHADAL . 

- Tue Cuuxcuee-Koryak- K.gicHaban Puy sICco- Cuore Coieunx 

Tur YuKAGHIR AND CHUVANTZY 
THE REINDEER CHUVANTZY ‘ ; 
SETTLEMENTS OF DOG-BREEDING YUKAGHIR 
DOG-BREEDING CHUVANTZY 
RELIGION AND LANGUAGE 

THE GILYAK . 

Tue Asiatic EsKIMO AND Coniannen Auer 
THE ASIATIC ESKIMO 
THE ALEUT OF THE COMMANDER ISLANDS 

5 

PaGE 

13 
16 
17 
19 
19 
20 
20 
21 
21 
21 
22 
23 
25 
25 
27 
28 
28 
32 
33 
34 
37 
38 
39 
41 
41 
42 

43 
45 
47 
47 
47 
49 
53 
54 
56 
56 
57 
57 
57 
60 
60 
62 

6 - PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Villages and Dwellings 
Food : ‘ 
Clothing 
Fur Seal Hunting 
Boats 
Dog Breeding 
Domestic Animals : 
Cuapter ITI 
SIBERIANS OF UNDETERMINED ANTHROPOLOGICAL POSITION 
THE YENISEIANS 
THE AINU 4 ‘ ‘ 
Cuarrer IV 
THE NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 
AREA : 
ADMINISTRATION . 
STATISTICS 
POPULATION . ; 
LANGUAGE AND RELIGION . 
ETHNICAL COMPOSITION OF THE PHEvIATION < OF ye 
THE KIRGHIZ . 
Religion . 
Costume. 
Social Orvaniaation 
THE UZBEG 
THE TURKOMAN 
THE KARA-KALPAK 
THE KIPCHAK 
THE TATARS 
THE TARANCHI 
THE SART 
Marriage 
Family Life 
Comedians 
Dancing Women . 
Circumcision . 
Funeral; 
Costume 
MONGOLIC TRIBES OF TURKESTAN 
THE DUNGAN . 
THE SART-KALMUCK 
THE ARYANS. 
THE TADJIK 
PERSIANS 
THE HINDOOS . ; : ; : 
GYPSIES . 
SEMITES OF TORKEATAN 

Pace 

63 
63 
64 
64 
64 
64 
64 

65 
65 
67 

71 
71 
71 
72 
74 
75 
77 
77 
83 
83 
84 
85 
88 
96 
97 
97 
97 
98 
99 
99 
102 
102 
102 
103 
104 
104 
104 
106 
106 
116 
113 
113 
114 
115 

CONTENTS 
JEWS 
ARABS 
AFGHANS ; 
ADMINISTRATIVE Caancuit UNDER THE Soviars 
UZBEKISTAN . 

THE TURKOMAN SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLIC 
THE KARA-KIRGHIZ AUTONOMOUS PROVINCE 
THE TADJIK AUTONOMOUS REPUBLIC . 
THE KARA-KALPAK AUTONOMOUS PROVINCE 
STATISTICAL DATA ON THE TURKESTAN REPUBLIC 
CHAPTER V 
THE ASIATIC STEPPE PROVINCES 
Tue Kircuiz. : 
HISTORICAL DATA . 
SOMATOLOGY . 
ETHNOGRAPHY 
SOCIAL LIFE 
RELIGION 
DWELLINGS 
THE RuSSIAN Pépuianion OF THE Geveere 
THE COSSACKS 
LITTLE RUSSIANS . 
GERMAN COLONISTS 
OTHER PEOPLES : ‘ ‘ 
Cuaptrer VI 
THE PEOPLES OF THE CAUCASUS 
THE GEORGIANS 
THe ABKHAS-CHERKESS Gnour: 
Tur CHecHEN GROUP 
Ture LescuHiIn Group . 
ANTHROPOLOGICAL Cuxnecnins: OF THE ‘Tipaeribes 
THE GEORGIANS 
THE ARMENIANS 
INDO-EUROPEANS 
The Kurd 
The Ossete 
The Tate 
The Talysh 
Persians . 
Gypsies . 
Europeans 
SEMITIC PEOPLES . 
JEWS 
THE AISSOR 
ARABS 
CAUCASIAN Mowaoroind 

Paar 

115 
116 

‘116 

118 
119 
120 
121 
121 
122 
122 

125 
125 
125 
128 
129 
130 
130 
131 
133 
134 
135 
135 
136 

137 
140 
142 
143 
143 
146 
146 
146 
149 
149 
149 
150 
150 
151 
151 
151 
151 
151 
152 
153 
153 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

THE AZERBAIJAN 
THE KUMYK 
THE BALKAR AND KARACHAI 
THE CAUCASIAN OSMANLI 
THE NOGAIS 
THE KARAPAPAK 
THE TURKOMAN 
Monco.ic TRIBES 
THE KALMUCK 
THE KAITAK 

Tuer ADMINISTRATIVE Divisions OF THE Gieibus UNDER THE Sovicrs : 

GEORGIA. 
ARMENIA 
AZERBAIJAN : 
AUTONOMOUS STATES IN Giecieeiain 

CuapTer VII 

THE IRANIAN PEOPLES 

Tue Kurp 

THE OSSETE . 

SoGDIANS AND RnonEE MANS 
MEDIANS AND BACTRIANS 
THe TATE AND AZERBAIJAN 
THe SaRTS... ; : 

Tue AFGHAN AND BALUCHI 

Tue TApDJiK AND GALCHA . 
ARMENIANS 
Tue HiInpoos AND Gissies 

Cuapter VIII 

SOMATOLOGY . 

Tae DISTRIBUTION OF STATURE. ; 
DISTRIBUTION OF THE CEPHALIC INDEX . 
Factau INDEX 

Tue CepHatic MopDULE ‘ 

Tue CepHatic MopuLe STATURE INDEX. 

CuapTer IX 

MODE OF LIFE 

DWELLINGS 
MATERIAL AND CONSTRUCTION 
Shades and Screens 
Conical Tents 
Cylindro-Conical Tents 
Felt-Covered Tents. 
Cylindro- Conical Felt Tents ; 
Cvlindro-Dome or Cupola-Shaped Felt. Tents. 
Pyramidal Dwellings 

PaGE 

153 
154 
156 
156 
156 
156 
157 
157 
157 
158 
158 
158 
159 
159 
159 

161 
164 
166 
167 
168 
169 
169 
169 
169 

-170 

170 

173 
173 
176 
180 
182 
184 

187 
188 
189 
189 
189 
195 
198 
198 
198 
201 

CONTENTS 9 

PaGE 

Truncated Pyramidal Dwellings i : : ‘ j . 201 

Flat-Roofed Block Houses . ‘ : ; . : : ; . 203 

Pent-Roofed Dwellings : ‘ . ; ; . ‘ ; , 203 

Sloping-Roofed Block Houses . ; ; ; : . : . 203 

Underground Dwellings or Earth Huts . ; ; ; ‘ . 204 

Snow DWELLINGS. . 208 

Flat-Roofed Dwellings of Mud, Clay, Unbaked Bricks, and Stones 208 

Pile Dwellings. : ; ; . . 210 

Dress AND ORNAMENT ; ; ’ ‘ . ae ; ; : . 210 

PERSONAL DECORATION : ; : . ; . ; : . 210 

Painting : : . : ‘ ; : : ; . 210 

Tattooing. : : : ‘ : : ‘ : . 210 

Piercing Parts of the Face re ow alee te ; . 211 

Hair Dressing . : . : ; : : : : : . 211 

Costume ; ; : : : ; ; : . 212 

GRAPHIC ART : . . ; ; : ‘ ‘ ; . 213 

DRAWING AND ENGRAVING . : ‘ Q ‘ ‘ . : . 213 

CARVING . . : ; z ; . ; : ; : . . 214 

RELIGION AND ART... . : : : : : ‘ ; . 215 

Music AND DANCING . ; : . : y : : : ; ‘ . 216 

MUSIC. 2 : ; : : ; : ; . . . . 216 

The Dein : ; : 2 ; : . ; : . : . 216 

The Jew’s Harp . é t . ; : ; . i : . 217 

Wind Instruments : : . : 5 . ; ; ; . 217 

Stringed Instruments . : : ; ; : . ; . 217 

DANCING . : . : . : ‘ : : ‘ : . 218 

Circle Dante: : j ; . : : : . 218 

Pantomime or Primitive Denn . . : : ; : . 219 

Caucasian Lesghinka Dance : : : : ; . 221 

~The Trading Dance of the Chukchee : . . . 221 

Religious Dances . : : : ; ; : : ‘ : . 222 

POETRY . ; ; . : é ; : d ‘ : : . 222 
CHAPTER X 

MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY . : . . : : : ‘ : . 229 

PREHISTORY AND PREHISTORIC MIGRATIONS . : d : 3 ‘ . 229 

Tue Historic Periop : ; : : , . : : : : . 234 

THE DINLIN.. : ; ; . “ ; ; ‘ ; ‘ . 235 

HISTORICAL WANDERINGS.. : : . . ; : . 2 . 237 

Jranians . . ’ . : , : . s d . 237 

The Caucasus Peoples | ; : : ‘ : ; ‘ . . 238 

The Turkestan Peoples we : : : . 239 

Siberia and the Amur Country . : ; : : . ; . 240 

The Western Siberians 5 : : : . . : . 242 

REtia1ous CLASSIFICATION. : ; : : : . . : : . 2438 

LANGUAGES . : : . . ; 5 : : : ; ; ; . 245 

BIBLIOGRAPHY : : ; : . : . ‘ . ; : 251 

INDEX 2 ge ee Oe Se ek Rk. ge od gs 881 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

PaGE 
A Yakut Girl in Festive Attire . Frontispiece 
1. Bashkir Men 18 
2. Soyot Man and Woran 23 
3. Two Yakut Types 24 
4. A Kachin Tatar, Minusinak District 30 
5. Kachin Tatar Women and Children, Minuanak District 3l 
6. Buryat Women and Men, Irkutsk Province . 35 
7. Buryat Shaman, Irkutsk Province . : 35 
8. Mongols of the Khalka Division, related to the Buryat 37 
9. Tungus Men. : ; : ; . ; 40 
10. Koryak Woman and Man . : 48 
11. Driving Sledges of the Reindeer Koryak 51 
12. A Kamchatkan Dog Team and Sledge 52 
13. Asiatic Eskimo Woman and Man . . . ; : : 61 
14. A Kirghiz-Kaisak and an Uzbeg Girl. : _ &. 78 
15. A Kirghiz riding a Yak : : 82 
16. Uzbeg Woman and Child . 87 
17. Turkoman Men, Khiva 89 
18. A Turkoman Musician, Khiva . 90 
19. A Turkoman Woman, Khiva 94 
20. Mountain Tadjik Woman resembling a European 107 
21. Ruins of Fortified Tadjik Dwellings on the Upper Course of the Oksus 
River. s . : “ . 109 
22. Types of Tadjik of the Upper Cours of the Oksus 109 
23. Tadjik Pottery and Wooden Vessels, and a Stick for churning Butter. : 110 
24. Agricultural Implements and Tools of the Tadjik. 110 
25. Gypsy Woman, Samarkand 114 
26. A Georgian Girl and a Gurian Prince 141 
27. Georgian Women churning Butter . 143 
28. Lesghins selling Cloth and Two Georgians 144 
29. An Armenian making Musical Instruments and an Azerbaijan Elder ; 147 
30. A Terek Cossack ‘ . ; ‘ . 151 
31. Karachai Girl and Woman. The icaracliat are a, a Parkie-spealing-tribe 
living on the upper course of the Kuban River 155 
32. Birchbark Tents of the Soyot 190 
33. Summer Dwelling of the Ancient Yakut 190 
34. Conical Tent of the Forest Altai Tatar . 192 
35. A Sod and Grass-Covered Conical Tent of the Yakut from the mouth of the 
Yana River . Z 192 
36, A Yukaghir Summer Village on ‘the Korkodon River ; 193 
37. Conical Summer Tent of the Upper Kolyma Yukaghir 194 
38. A Cylindro-Conical Tent of the Tundra Yukaghir 196 
39. A Cylindro-Conical Tent of the Okhotsk Tungus . ; . 196 
40. A Felt-Covered Cylindro-Conical Tent used ee by Mongoloid Tribes . 197 
41. Framework for a Felt Tent ; . 197 

11 

12 

42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 

52. 

_ 

SOMNASAR WN 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

A Felt-Covered Conical Tent of the Northern Mongols 

A Cylindro-Dome-Shaped Felt Tent used by Turkic Tribes 

A Yakut Dwelling : 

A Flat-Roofed Blockhouse of the Upper Kolynia Vilkaghip 

Inner Court of a Tadjik Dwelling, Eastern Bokhara 

A Karachai House.” : 

A Polygonal Altaian Slaping-Roofed Bigelshouse . 

An Earth-Covered Blockhouse of the Altai-Tatar Kumandintzy 

A Teleut (or Telengit) Dwelling 

Galcha Summer Dwelling in the Mountains of the’ Veanoby: a Tributary of 
the Zarafshan River me hg 

A Kamchadal Storehouse which ake Serves as a Simmer Dwelling’: 

Maps 
Ethnographic Map of Asiatic Russia. ‘ . opposite 
The Former Adjninistrative Divisions of ‘Asiatic Russias . opposite 

The Latest Administrative Divisions of Central Asia under the Soviets 
Administrative Divisions of the Caucasus under the Soviets 

The Former Administrative Divisions of the Caucasus : : 
The Distribution of Peoples in the Caucasus ; : . opposite 
The Distribution of Stature. ; ; : . . ‘i 
Distribution of the ee Index . ee ee 
Mode of Life -4 oe ee Opposite 
Distribution of Religion. ; , : : . . opposite 

PaGE 

199 
199 
200 
200 
202 
202 
204 
205 
205 

209 
209 

13 

42 
117 
138 
139 
159 
174 
177 
187 
243 

ETHNOGRAPHIC MAP 
OF 
ASIATIC RUSSIA 

LEGEND 

MB eussians TUNGUS 
GH mantans ES tums 
Gl eavaz-astaticsES sanovens 
MONGOLLANS EA 

* aul 
nl 

i 

wilt 

a 

+ ie 

«fled ee 

——, b wea 

Snr ey ate 

si 
s 

. 

q & 

L 
oe ee 

Map 1 

CHAPTER I 

THE MONGOLOIDS OF ASIA AND EUROPE 

In the sixteenth century the name, Siberia (Russian, Szbir) referred 
to Isker, the chief settlement of the Tatar Khan Kuchum on the Irtysh 
River, a tributary of the Ob.! Subsequently, the name was extended to 
include all the Russian dominions in northern Asia, from the Ural Moun- 
tains to the Pacific Ocean, and the Amur River region. For this reason, 
and particularly because the natives of the Amur River region are closely 
related to some of the tribes of Siberia proper, or belong to the same 
ethnic units, both territories will be considered in this chapter. 

For administrative purposes, Siberia proper was divided into two 
sections, Western and Eastern Siberia. Western Siberia is composed of 
the following provinces: 1, Tobolsk; 2, Tomsk. Eastern Siberia has four 
provinces: 1, Yeniseisk; 2, Irkutsk; 3, Yakutsk; and 4, Transbaikalia. 
The Russian name for province is Guberniya (Government) or Oblast 
(Territory). Tobolsk, Tomsk, Yeniseisk, and Irkutsk were called Govern- 
ments, while Yakutsk and Transbaikalia were called Territories. The 
districts into which the provinces were divided were called Ouyezd in the 
Governments and Okrug in the Territories. Each province had its own 
governor; those called Guberntya were of greater importance, both 
numerically and economically. A Governor General for all of Eastern 
Siberia was stationed at Irkutsk. 

The advent of Russians in Siberia considerably influenced the dis- 
tribution of aboriginal tribes. The natives were either forced out of 
many localities, were exterminated, or were Russianized by the invaders. 
It may be of interest. to cite the relative percentages of Russian and 
native population. The Russian conquerors and immigrants naturally 
occupied the territory nearer to European Russia and those districts best 
fitted for agriculture. Thus the percentage of Russian, or white, popula- 
tion diminishes from southwest to northeast. Enumerating the provinces 
from west to east, we find the percent of aboriginal population as follows:- 

Tobolsk 5.9 percent 
Tomsk 6.0 percent 
Yeniseisk 8.8 percent 
Irkutsk 22.6 percent 
Yakutsk 87.5 percent 

When we consider the districts of the provinces from south to north, 
we find the same differences in the relation between the Russian and 

a ee es a 
‘Isker was situated about twelve miles to the south of the city at present known as Tobolsk. 

13 

14 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

native population. For instance, in Tobolsk Province, the percentage 
of natives by districts, is as follows:— 

Kurgan 0.14 percent 
Yalutorovsk 2.6 percent 
Tyumen 12.8 percent 
Surgut 71.9 percent 
Berezof 72.8 percent 

And if we take the most northeasterly province, Kamchatka, we find 
the population is almost entirely native. Thus, 

Petropavlovsk District 72.3 percent 
Okhotsk District 93.9 percent 
Gishiga District 97.0 percent 
Anadyr District 98.9 percent 

The density of population increases with the percentage of Russian 
settlers. Tobolsk Province has 3.35 men to a quadratic mile; Yeniseisk 
Province, 1.75 men; Tomsk Province, 6.0 men; Irkutsk Province, 1.76 
men; and Yakutsk Province, 0.2 men. The Kolyma District of Yakutsk 
Province, the farthest to the northeast, has only 0.01 individual to a 
quadratic mile. 

In this chapter, however, we are concerned with the anthropology 
of aboriginal Siberia: somatology, linguistics, culture, and archeology. 
Our first task will be to enumerate the several tribes now living, define 
their habitats, and finally, give their anthropological classification; but, 
as a preliminary, a general review of the terminology now employed, 
seems advisable 

The term Ural-Altaic was introduced by the Finnish investigator, 
M. A. Castren,' and applied to the aborigines living in the region between 
the Ural and Altai Mountains. Lexically, Ural-Altaic is a geographical 
term, while in meaning it may be compared with Indo-Germanic (Indo- 
European, or Aryan) which owes its origin to the opinion that the Aryans 
of India and the Germanic peoples form the extreme outposts of the Aryan 
nations. Miller accepts the name, Ural-Altaic, applying it to the north- 
ern division of the Turanian family.?- Schrenck* also makes similar use of 
the term, while Peschel includes in it only the Finnic tribes ;* yet according 
to the first two authorities, the Ural-Altaic group embraces not only the 
Finns, but also the Samoyed, Turks, Mongols, and Tungus. Originally, 

1Castren, (b). 
IMiller, Max, 322. 

§Schrenck, (a). 
‘Peschel. 3 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES 15 

Ural-Altaic was employed in th2 linguistic sense to characterize the 
Finnic, Samoyedic, Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic languages. Mor- 
phologically, these languages belong to the agglutinative order of speech. 
However, they differ from other languages so classified in the exclusive 
use of suffixes attached to the unmodified root and partly blended with it, 
on the principle of progressive vowel harmony, by virtue of which the 
vowels of the suffixes are assimilated to those of the root. In the Ural- 
Altaic languages there are no changes of the root and no prefixes. 

Fortunately, the term is also applicable when the group is considered 
from the somatological point of view, for in physical characters it is 
closely allied to the Eastern and Southern Asiatics. The skin color of 
the Ural-Altaic peoples is yellow or yellowish brown; the hair is cylindri- 
cal, stiff, and black; the beard and body hair are sparse or totally wanting ; 
the eyes are usually obliquely set, and the lids have the epicanthic fold; 
the head is broad and low; the cheek bones are very prominent; the nose 
is short and flattened. However, the purity of the Mongoloid characters 
of the Ural-Altaics decreases toward the west. The vast territory they 
occupy has, in the past, been invaded by many peoples, and the Finnic 
tribes especially, during their westward migration, were intermixed to 
some degree with Aryan peoples. 

While the term Ural-Altaic may therefore be considered as covering 
both the linguistic and somatological classification, so that we may speak 
of Ural-Altaic languages and Ural-Altaic tribes, nevertheless such a 
general usage may meet with objections. The Finnic peoples number 
sixteen millions, only 24,797 of whom (Ostyak and Vogul) are now located 
in Siberia. Of course, the present European Finnic nations may be called 
Ural-Altaic, by virtue of their Ural or Altaic origin, but whether the 
Tungus-Manchu of Eastern Asia are of Altaic origin remains an open 
question. The Amur region is regarded as their place of origin.! For this 
reason, it is hardly fair to classify the Tungus-Manchu as Ural-Altaian. 
Miss Czaplicka proposed an alternative term, ‘‘Neo-Siberians’’? for the 
Ural-Altaic tribes as ‘comparatively recent comers” to Siberia, but the 
writer believes this should be rejected because it excludes the Mongols, 
Turks, and Finns living outside of Siberia. Besides, the ‘‘Neo-Siberians”’ 
are not newcomers to Siberia. They migrated northwest and eastward 
after the retreat of the last glacier, and afterwards, though in quite early 

__ Wee Patkanoff, (d), 26. It should be added, however, that Castren, (b), 76 ds the Altai 
Ridge aa the lace of origin of the Tatars and Mongols and of the Teka ee On ine 
cee bend. Storeeo on ee uy atieator of the Tungus-Manchu tribes, places their original 

1 * In northern China in the region of the lo f - -Ki 
riven GHP Mera totes can wer courses of the Hwang-Ho and Yangtze-Kiang 
2Czaplicka, (a), 15. 

16 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

times, were driven to the north by related or alien tribes. The cradle- 
land of the Turks appears to have been in the Altai region which is only 
partly located in Siberia. The Finno-Ugrian and Samoyed stocks orig- 
inated in close proximity to the Turks about the headwaters of the 
Yenisei. The foregoing considerations have led the writer to use the 
term ‘“‘Mongoloid peoples” instead of ‘‘ Ural-Altaic,”’ since it may be 
applied to the Mongol-Turkic peoples of other regions of Asiatic Russia, 
as well as to the Finno-Ugrians of Europe. 

The Siberian Mongoloids may be divided into five branches: Finnic, 
Samoyedic, Turkic, Mongolic, and Tungusic, whose physical and lin- 
guistic affinities have previously been briefly noted and will be discussed 
in greater detail in subsequent chapters. The linguistic affinities of the 
Mongoloid tribes may be termed linguo-psychological, as the grouping 
of their languages is based chiefly on their common phonology and gram- 
matical structure. There is, as yet, no evidence of their common origin 
from one parent language, as has been assumed for the Indo-Germanic or 
Semitic stocks. These languages do have a number of roots in common, 
but these may have been borrowed in the course of migrations. 

FInnic TRIBES 

As has been previously stated the Finnic peoples, though very 
numerous, have a comparatively small representation in Siberia, since 
the great majority live in Hungary, European Russia, Sweden, and 
Norway. Some Hungarians, however, live in Siebenbiirgen, Bukowina,! 
and Moldavia, Rumania. Outside of Western Siberia, there are at 
present no Finns in Asiatic Russia,’ or in other parts of Asia. Magyar- 
Finnic writers have attempted, on the basis of their somatology, to 
separate the Finns from the Mongoloids. They have also sought to 
associate the Ugro-Finnic with the Indo-Germanic languages.’ It is true 
that there is a certain percentage of light-haired persons among the 
Western Finns due to intermixture with representatives of the Aryan 
race, but, in the main, their physical characteristics are Mongoloid. 
This applies to a greater degree to the dark-haired Magyars.‘ 

1Siebenbiirgen (or Transylvania) and Bukowina were ceded to Rumania by Austria-Hungary in 

2With the exception of recent immigrants from European Ruasia. ( 

‘See, for instance, Szinnyei. This Aryo-Finnic theory was formulated for the first time by the 
Russian Academician, P. von Képpen, about the end of the eighteenth century, but waa then rejected by 
other Russian scholars. Doctor r Silinich, while reviewing Professor 8S. Rudenko’s work “ Anthro- 
pological Investigation of the Natives of Northwestern Siberia’’ came to the conclusion that these 
natives belong to the great Mongoloid family, despite the fact that the Vogul and some Ostyak deviate 
comiatolonivally from the Mongoloid type, as is evidenced by a certain percentage of dolichocephalic, 
light-haired, and gray-eyed individuals. 

4Von Luschan, (b), 162-165. 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES 17 

Szinnyei maintains that the hypothesis that the place of origin of 
the Finno-Ugrians was in the Altai Mountains should be abandoned! and 
that it should be sought in the middle of the Urals, chiefly on the 
European slope, or in southeastern Russia. Admitting that the F inno- 
Ugrian languages are closely related to Samoyedic, he divides the Ural- 
Altaic languages into two groups: the Ural, including the Finno-Ugrian 
and Samoyedic languages and the Altaic, comprising the Mongolic, 
Turkic, and Manchu-Tungusic stocks. In the exposition of this theory 
we may again draw an analogy from the Indo-Germanic languages. 
Since philologists have discarded the view that Sanskrit represents the 
most archaic form of the Indo-European languages, the defenders of the 
Asiatic origin of the Indo-Europeans have lost their strongest point. 
Various theories have been advanced, placing their original home in 
northern France, the valley of the middle Danube, Scandinavia, the 
Vistula region, or western Russia. So we see that the original home of the 
Aryans is still unknown and the places mentioned as points of origin may 
well have been secondary places of dispersion.2 Similarly, the Ural 
region and southeastern Russia may be considered secondary places of 
origin of the Finnic nations. As for the original home of the Finns, we 
must turn back to Castren and other authorities. Castren based his 
beliefs that the Finns formerly inhabited the Altai region on the fact 
that the names of streams in the Yenisei District, such as Oya, Yoga, 
Kolba mean in Finnic and Lapp, brook, water, and fishing water, and 
that in its upper course the Yenisei itself is called, Kem, which signifies 
stream in Finnic.* The original home of the Samoyed, who are related to 
the Finn, will be discussed below (p. 22). 

The multiform Finnic group of peoples may be divided, according to 
dialectic affinities into four branches: namely, the Ugrians, the Baltic 
Finns, Permians, and Bulgarians. 

THE UGRIANS 

Castren includes in the Ugrian group the Ostyak living on the right 
bank of the Ob River, the Vogul on the eastern slopes of the northern 
Urals, and the Magyar. According to the latest statistics the Magyar 
number about 9,500,000; the Ostyak, 17,221; and the Vogul, 7,476. 
Though now an aristocratic and highly civilized European nation, about . 
800 A.D. the Magyar appeared in their present abode as wild nomadic 

nyel: 20. 

here were also theories that the forefathers of the Indo-E i 

they originated in Turkestan or in Bactria (See Sehwara): Perrone sercended trom Pam or chat 
‘Castren, (d), 82, 84 and 107; also, (b). 

18 ' PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

horsemen. According to Szinnyei, there is not only lexical but gram- 
matical conformity between the Finnic and Indo-Germanic languages, 
thus leading to the assumption of an old relationship between the Indo- 
Germanic and Finno-Ugrian peoples. However, this supposition is 
repudiated by Winkler! from the point of view of linguistics, and von 
Luschan? from that of somatology. In spite of the borrowing of Aryan 
lexical and structural elements, Hungarian remains a Mongoloid 
language. Also, Mongoloid characters are retained in the Magyar 

Fig. 1. Bashkir Men. The Bashkir are a Turkic-speaking Mohammedan tribe, 
living between the Volga River and the Ural Mountains, and are regarded as Tatarized 
Finns, 

physical type despite a certain amount of mixture with Aryan peoples. 
The Magyar, a fishing, hunting, and to some degree, an agricultural 
tribe, before their intrusion into Hungary, lived in southeastern Europe 
where they were subjected to lasting influences from peoples of different 
races. Thus, from the Iranian Alan they acquired and have preserved 
much of their outer life, dress, and ornamentation. However this may 

‘Winkler. 
2yon Luschan, (b). 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES 19 

be, the Mongoloid influence is dominant. For a long time the Magyar 
were ruled by the Finno-Turkic Khazar.' 

The Hungarian language contains many Turkic roots applicable to 
military and political organizations and primitive agriculture. The 
Magyar invaded western Europe under pressure by the Pechenyeg,’ 
a Turkic tribe, which was, in turn, driven to the west, first by the Khazar 
and later by the Polovtzy.? In their new home the Magyar also absorbed 
some Turkic elements. The remnants of the Avar were amalgamated 
with the Magyar. 

WESTERN FINNS 

The Finns proper, the so-called Suomi, the Karelians, and Baltic 
Finns, are known as the Western Finns. Present independent Finland is 
inhabited by Suomi Finns, a subdivision of the Karelians, and a small 
number of Swedes, and is as highly civilized a country as Hungary. 
Although now autonomous, before the Russian revolution, Finland was a 
part of the Russian Empire. The present-day Suomi Finns are on a par 
with the European civilized nations in the development of trade, industry, 
manufactures, science, and art. As they are now and have been in the past 
a cattle-breeding and agricultural people, they prosper in these pursuits 
despite the unfavorable climatic conditions of their country. With inde- 
fatigable labor they have turned stony soil and desolate forests into 
meadows and farms, colonizing the country far to the north and penetrat- 
ing the territory of the Lapps. Of the total present population of Fin- 
land 2,352,990 are Finns and 439,733 are Swedes. 

The Karelians inhabit the provinces of Archangelsk, Olonetz, Tver, 
and Novgorod, and number something over 200,000. 

BALTIC FINNS 

The Esthonians, Vesp, Vod, Livonians (now reduced to 2000) and the 
extinct Krevin are known as Baltic Finns. 

Small groups of Esthonians are to be found in the Russian. provinces 
of Petrograd, Vitebsk, and Pskof, and about a million live in Esthonia 
and Livonia, The Vesp, also called the Northern Tchud, number about 
20,000 and live on the southwestern shores of Lake Ladoga: the Vod. or 

Ee 

1Russian investigators are not agreed upon the racial origin or the language of the 

ranking them with the Finns and others with the Turks. See Samoilovich, (a), 200-210 
_ It is known that the upper classes of the Khazar were converted! 

casian Jews with whom they intermarried. Some scholars regard the Karaites and the Krimchak 
(Crimea Jews), both speaking Turkic dialects, as remnants of these Khazar-Jewish mixed-bloods, thus 
proving that the Khazar spoke a Turkic language. Crimea was a part of the Khazar kingdom. Profes- 
sor Rostovtzeff designates the Khazar asa Mongolian” tribe (Rostovtzeff , 219). 

?Known also under name of Kangli. 

"A Turkic tribe known also under the names of Kuman and Kipchak. 

Khazar, some 

to Judaism, supposedly by Cau- 

20 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Southern Tchud, having a population of 14,000, live to the northeast 
of the town of Narva. 

THE PERMIANS 

The Permian branch of Finns includes two closely related tribes: the 
Votyak and Zyryan. 

The Votyak are a numerous Finnic tribe, more than 500,000 living 
on the banks of the Kama, an affluent of the Volga, and its tributaries. 
They belong to the Greek Catholic Church, but have also retained 
their ancient pagan beliefs, mode of thinking, superstitions, and customs. 
They are agriculturists and skilful artisans. 

The Zyryan live to the north of the Votyak, occupying a vast stretch 
of territory from the 58th degree of latitude to the shores of the polar ocean 
and from the Urals westward to the Pinega, a tributary of the Dvina 
River. To the east they come into contact with the Ostyak and a divi- 
sion of the Samoyed. Though closely resembling the Votyak in physical 
traits, the Zyryan may be distinguished from them by their considerably 
higher culture. They are devoted Christians and have no pagan super- 
stitions. They are sharp traders and many centuries ago were active in 
commercial intercourse with the peoples to the west, south, and east. 
They are industrious agriculturists, and with the stubborn persistence and 
care, peculiarly Finnish, cultivate the soil as far north as the 65th degree 
of latitude and somewhat higher. In the northern part of their territory, 
where they may properly be regarded as newcomers, they are nomadic 
reindeer breeders, own large herds, and carry on a profitable trade in 
reindeer skins and meat. It is said that the Zyryan are wont to exploit 
their less civilized and poorer kin. They number about 260,000. 

THE BULGARIAN FINNS 

The Mordvin, Cheremiss, and Chuvash, inhabiting some isolated 
districts of the Volga River are Bulgarians. The Mordvin are distri- 
buted in the provinces of Tambof, Nijni Novgorod, Simbirsk, Penza, 
Saratof,and Orenburg. In spite of its peculiarities, their language appears 
to be closely related to that of the Western Finns, so that the Mordvin 
and the Western Finns may be regarded, linguistically at least, as near 
relatives. They belong to one of the numerous Finnic groups and number 
more than 500,000. They are excellent agriculturists and, because of this 
quality, were sent to colonize certain districts in Astrakhan and other 
provinces. 

The Cheremiss may be distinguished from the Mordvin by their 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES . 21 

language. They occupy the same localities as the Mordvin, but live in 
more compact masses. Under the sovereignity of the Tatars they formed 
a separate khanate. Their population is about 400,000. The so-called 
Forest Cheremiss, dwelling in the low country on the west bank of the 
Volga River, westward of Kazan, differ, both in dialect and customs, 
from the Mountain Cheremiss who are more isolated from the Russian 
population and consequently have preserved many of their pre-Christian 
customs and superstitions. They also are perfect cultivators of the land; 
in addition, they rear bees, hunt, and fish. Their language is inter- 
mediate between eastern and western Finnic. Physically, they are 
representatives of the Finnic type, although many light-haired people 
may be found among them. 

THE CHUVASH 

The Chuvash live in isolated parts of the provinces of Kazan, Sim- 
birsk, Samara, Saratof, Orenburg, and Perm. They number some half a 
million. Although they are of Bulgarian origin they became Tatarized 
and now speak a Turkic dialect mingled with traces of Finnic. Physically 
they resemble most closely the Finnic type. 

SLAVONIZED FINNS 

The Danube Bulgarians no longer belong in this branch of the Finnic 
family, but are now Slavonic in language and some physical characters, 
and have also completely absorbed the remnants of the former Bulgarians 
of the Middle Ages. While the Volga Bulgarians maintained their in- 
dependent government until the thirteenth century and their nationality 
until their permanent subjugation by the czars of Moscow, the Bul- 
garians of the Danube forfeited their language in the tenth century and 
their independence at the beginning of the eleventh century. They be- 
came a free nation again in 1878. The Bulgarians first appeared on the 
banks of the Pruth in the latter part of the seventh century. In 677 they 
crossed the Danube, subjugated the more civilized Slavonic population, 
and adopted its customs, local institutions, and language. Some Finnic 
elements are present in modern Bulgarian and have given the Finnic 
name to the nation. Mongoloid characters may still be recognized in the 
Bulgarian physical type. 

THE LAPPS 

The Lapps are a distinct Finnic group inhabiting the northern parts 
of Sweden, Norway, and Finland, and the Kola Peninsula, and number 
about 30,000. In former times, their territory extended further to the 

22 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

south. In the middle of the sixteenth century they lived on the shores 
of Lake Saima and in the fourteenth century on the shores of Lake 
Onega. Fishing is their chief occupation, but wherever possible, they 
rear cattle and cultivate the land. About a fifth of the tribe are reindeer- 
breeding nomads. The language of the Lapps, according to Szinnyei, 
is closely akin to that of the Baltic Finns, but physically, the Lapps 
differ from them and stand quite isolated. Therefore, it must be admitted 
that in olden times, the Lapps spoke another language and their present 
tongue was borrowed from one of the Finnic-Ugrian tribes. Professor 
Rudenko'! found that the Lapps have some physical characters in common 
with the Samoyed and is inclined, therefore, to regard the Lappo- 
Samoyed and Finno-Ugrian as two distinct somatological groups. On 
the other hand, the linguist, Winkler,” is of the opinion that in their mode 
of life and physical traits the Lapps strongly resemble the Ostyak and are 
probably an eastern Finnie division which has been dispersed to the 
west. Their language, although much influenced by that of the Baltic 
Finns, contains traces of the languages of Eastern Finns and even of the 
Hungarians. — 

THE SAMOYED 

In comparison with the Finno-Ugrians the Samoyed branch of the 
Mongoloids is numerically quite insignificant. The Samoyed never 
formed political organizations or civilized states as did the kindred Finns, 
but remained chiefly an Asiatic people and only a small number have 
recently migrated westward into the tundras of European Russia. 
However, they are of great importance as aids in clearing up some ethno- 
logical problems. Those who believe that the Finns are related to the 
Aryans and not to the Mongoloids are obliged to acknowledge their close 
relationship to the Samoyed and must therefore include the latter in the 
circle of early kinship with the Indo-Europeans. For that reason Profes- 
sor Szinnyei® segregates the Finnic and Samoyedic languages into a 
distinct group of the Ural peoples, as opposed to the Altaic group which 
includes the languages of the Turks, Mongols, and Tungus-Manchu. 

The Samoyed are divided into three branches: 1, The Yurak (2519 
men and 2852 women); 2, the Yenisei Samoyed and the Tawgi (639 
men and 687 women); and 3, the Ostyak-Samoyed (2843 men and 2962 
women). If we add to the above the 4000 Samoyed (1924 men and 2076 
women) who immigrated into Archangelsk Province, the total number 
of Samoyed is 16,512 (7905 men and 8607 women). 

\Rudenko. 
2Winkler. 
3§zinnyei. 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES 23 

The Yurak Samoyed occupy the northern tundra between the Urals 
and the Yenisei River. The Tawgi Samoyed live on the tundra between 
the Yenisei and the Khatanga River while the Ostyak Samoyed! wander 
to the south of the two preceding branches in the northern forest zone 
of the provinces of Tobolsk, Yeniseisk, and Tomsk. A part of the Ostyak 
Samoyed have turned to a sedentary life and have horses and cattle, 
instead of reindeer. 

The Samoyed newcomers in Archangelsk Province, European Russia, 
wander over the northern tundra, and come into contact with Finnic 
tribes and Russians. On the west they have reached the Kola Peninsula 
and some Samoyed families have moved to Nova Zembla Island. 

AEA 

Mg. 2. Soyot Man and Woman. The Soyot or Uriankhai live in Yeniseisk 
Province and in Mongolia, and are regarded as Tatarized Samoyed. In Uriankhai 
they rear reindeer, in Mongolia, cattle. 

TURKICIZED SAMOYED 

Pallas,? Castren,? and Radloff‘ have pointed out that some of the 
present Turkic tribes of the southern parts of the provinces of Tomsk, 
Yeniseisk, and Irkutsk originated in an intermixture of the Turkic 
invaders with the Samoyedic aborigines. The Beltir and Koibal5 live 

io in the section on the Yeniseians, the writer proposes to call this Samoyed division, 
ales 433, 508, 510, 518. 
'Caatren, (a), 350, 351, 359, 371, 
‘Radloff, (a), 205. 

5According to Castren, i igi i i 
aopcee (al ae (b), 322 three of the Koibal clans were of Ostyak origin, while the remainder 

24 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

in the southern part of Yeniseisk Province; the Karagas wander in the 
Nijni Udinsk District of Irkutsk Province, the Kamassintzy live in the 
Kansk District of Yeniseisk Province; and the Soyot, according to Pat- 
kanoff,! live in the Biisk District of Tomsk Province and in the Minusinsk 
District of Yeniseisk Province. A part of the Soyot, also called 
Uriankhai, wander in Chinese territory in Mongolia. The Soyot, as 
well as the Karagas, and some other Tatarized Samoyedic tribes and 

1 E wr x ins Pe y 

Fig. 3. Two Yakut Types. At the left is a flat-faced Mongol with prominent 
cheek bones and narrow eyes; at the right, a Tatar, with a high-bridged nose and wide 
eye fissure. 

subtribes call themselves Tuba.? Patkanoff believes this name to be 
testimony in favor of their Samoyedic origin. The reindeer-breeding of 
the Soyot and Karagas gives further evidence of their Samoyedic origin. 
The original place of domestication of the reindeer, or rather one of 
the places of its early domestication, was undoubtedly the region of 
the Upper Yenisei. 

Quite recently the writer received from Professor Petri of the Uni- 
versity of Irkutsk, his very interesting narrative of his trip to the 
Karagas.? The chief interest of his account lies in the description of the 
Karagag reindeer, a strong, tall, and highly domesticated race. The 
Karagas place the saddle on the back and not on the shoulder blades, 

— 

1Patkanoff, (ce), 78. : . Dialed 
4In the Chinese annals the name Tuba is applied to the peoples who lived in the southern ¥ enisei 

region and it is probable the Samoyedic tribes were meant. The Turkic peoples were called Tu-kiu. 
4Petri, (c). 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES 25 

over the front legs of the reindeer, as is done by all other reindeer breeders 
who ride the animal. Professor Petri also mentions the reindeer of the 
Uriankhai people, which is of the same variety as that of the Karagas. 
In another place he writes of the Soyot, identifying them with the 
Uriankhai. He had written to me before going to the Sayan Mountains 
and I had asked him to clear up the question of the relation of the Soyot 
to the Uriankhai as some authors (for instance, Weule and Czaplicka) are 
in doubt as to their identity, which identity Petri positively confirmed. 

THe Turkic TRIBES 

We have seen that, with the exception of the Magyar, of the Swedish- 
Norwegian Lapps, and of the Suomi and Baltic Finns who became in- 
dependent after the Great War, the remaining Finnic peoples may be 
found within the boundaries of European and Asiatic Russia. It seems 
desirable to consider the Turkic tribes in the same way, including in our 
review the non-Russian Turks. The total number of Turks, about 
twenty-three million, is much greater than that of Finns. Subtracting 
from this total ten million of Osmanli, Persian, and Afghanistan Turks 
and about two million Turks subject to China (in Jungaria and northern 
Mongolia) we have about eleven million Turks in European and Asiatic 
Russia. It may be said that no other Old World race is so widely 
distributed. The Turkic language may be heard from the shores of the 
Adriatic to the Arctic Coast and the Okhotsk Sea. No other people have 
displayed so great an assimilative power as have the Turks who have 
Turkicized not only many Finns, Samoyed, Tungus, and Mongol tribes, 
but also some Arvans, for instance, the Sart and Tadjik of Turkestan, 
Russians of Yakut Province, Greeks of Crimea, the Krimchak (the 
aboriginal Crimean Jews) and the Karaites, the Jews and Arabs of Turk- 
estan. The ancient. Khazar were probably Turkicized Finns. Some 
Turkic divisions are known as Tatars or Tartars. It should be pointed 
out that the term Tatars is more correct than Tartars, as the latter was 
originally applied to both the Mongol and Turkic stocks which invaded 
Europe seven centuries ago. 

The Turkic tribes of Siberia are, however, our chief interest in this 
publication, and comprise the Yakut, Tatars, and the Karagas, each of 
which will now be discussed in the order given. 

THE YAKUT 

According to the Russian general census of 1897 there were at that 
time 226,739 Yakut (113,409 men and 113,330 women), but in 1911 they 

26 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

numbered 245,000. To this number may also be added the small tribe 
of Dolgan, evidently of Tungus origin, living in the Turukhansk District 
of Yeniseisk Province. They number 967 (472 men and 495 women) 
and have become quite Yakutized. They speak Tungus, but regard 
Yakut as their native tongue.! 

Two physical types can be distinguished among the Yakut: one, 
pure Mongol, with broad face and flat nose; the other, is more like the 
Tatar of southwestern Siberia, with long face and narrow and more 
prominent nose. The so-called ‘‘noble”’ and wealthy Yakut, the elders, 
are mostly of the second type. 

Yakut traditions of their tribal origin picture their descent from a 
Tatar hero and a Buryat girl. According to Radloff,? the Yakut language 
is of Turkic structure; its roots, however, are only one third Turkic, the 
second third is Mongolic, and the remainder of unknown origin. 

The Yakut now call themselves Sakh4 (plural, Sakhalar). In olden 
times sakhd meant man. In tales and songs the Yakut use, instead of 
the term kisi, man, sakhd-kist, i.e., the reduplication of man. Sakha 
is the name of one subtribe of the Kachin Tatars (Minusinsk District, 
Yeniseisk Province). The ancient name of the Yakut was Uriankhai, 
at present applied to a troublesome, cranky, or foolish person. As has 
been noted before, Uriankhai is the name of a Turkic-Tatar tribe in 
Mongolia. 

Katanoff,’ the student of Turkic languages, believes Uriankhai to bea 
Turkic dialect, influenced to some degree by Mongolic elements. On the 
other hand, Castren and his followers are inclined to see in the Uriankhai 
a Samoyed tribe that mixed with Turks and adopted a Turkic language. 
It is as difficult to ascertain whether the Yakut had some historical con- 
nections with the Uriankhai as it is to determine definitely their original 
home. Radloff believes the Uriankhai were the ancestors of the present 
Yakut, a supposition denied by other investigators. But if Radloff’s 
hypothesis be true, the unknown lexical elements of the Yakut language 
may be attributed in part to Samoyedic origin, and in part to the language 
of the Yeniseians, Tungus, and Yukaghir with whom the Yakut were in 
contact during their wanderings to the northeast. According to historical 
and archeological data, the Yakut lived on the shores of Lake Baikal, 
whence they were forced out by the Buryat at the time of the invasions of 
Jenghis Khan. Professor Petri, who has recently conducted excavations 

1A bout five percent of the Dolgan having intercourse with Samoyed, consider the Tawgi-Samoyed 
eo their native tongue. 

1Katanoff. 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES 27 

on the shores of Lake Baikal and some other localities in Irkutsk Prov- 
ince, came to the conclusion that the Yakut formerly lived in the dis- 
tricts now occupied by the Buryat or Tungus. This is borne out by the 
finding of archeological objects of the age of metals. In form and orna- 
mentation the clay vessels found are reminiscent of present day Yakut 
pottery. The Buryat and Tungus who now occupy this region do not 
make pottery. Dwellings, remains of which were discovered, are 
similar to the present earth huts of the Yakut. Iron knives, sickles for 
hay making, bifurcated arrowheads and metal parts of horse riding gear 
resemble objects of Yakut manufacture.! But the Baikal region may 
have been the secondary home of the Yakut and their place of origin, 
and like that of other Turkic peoples, should be sought in the Altai 
region of central Asia. Some traditions and customs of the Yakut show 
that they were a nomadic horse-breeding tribe of the central Asiatic 
steppes. Also, their kumiss festivals and religious attitude toward the 
horse certify that in their old home they were principally pastoral horse 
breeders.2, The Yakut introduced horses and cattle into the region now 
called Yakutsk. For a time after their arrival in their new abode, the 
horse remained their principal domestic animal and kumiss their essential 
article of food. Gradually, however, climatic conditions and the contact 
with Russians modified both their mental and material culture, so that at 
present cattle breeding is more predominant than horse breeding. A 
small part of the tribe living in the extreme north of Yakutsk Province 
experienced a breakdown of their former material culture and became 
reindeer breeders,’ dog breeders, or hunters, and fishermen. But the 
Yakut introduced more advanced methods even in these new modes of 
life. In the southern parts of the Yakut territory, the, cultivation of 
cereals, a trait borrowed from the Russians, has so progressed in the last 
thirty or forty years that agriculture is now the chief occupation and 
bread the staple food of many Yakut of the districts of Yakutsk, Viluisk, 
and Olekminsk. 

THE TATARS OF TOBOLSK PROVINCE 

The Turkic tribes of Siberia, except the Yakut, are better known 
under the name, Tatar. We shall review them, by provinces, in the 
order of their present location. 

1Petri, (a). 
spielen, (c). 

t is erroneous to speak of the Yakut as ‘the most typical representatives of a reindeer culture” 
as do Mias Craplicka, (b), 52, and Doctor Laufer, (c). Of “he 245,000 Yakut, only about ten or fifteen 
thousand rear reindeer and even among these, it isa secondary occupation. Rich reindeer owners amon 
them do not wander with their herds but keep special Tungus herders for that purpose. The Yakut herd 

owners lead a sedentary or half sedentary life. For particul to di i i 
eee ee ae. ae p ars as to different types of reindeer breeding 

28 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

The Tobolsk, otherwise called the West Siberian Tatars, inhabit 
the forested and the forest-stepped zones of the province of the same 
name, chiefly the middle course of the Irtysh River, the lower course of 
the Tobol River, and the middle course of the Tura. River, in close prox- 
imity to Russian settlers. There were, according to the Russian census 
of 1897, 37,637 (19,821 men and 17,816 women) aboriginal Tobolsk 
Tatars. Only 1.2 percent of them lived in towns, the remainder in sep- 
arate villages called yurts. 

The so-called ‘‘Siberian Bukhartzy’’-are included with the West 
Siberian Tatar aborigines. They are descendants of Sarts, Uzbeg, 
Tadjik, and other central Asiatic merchants who came to Siberia at the 
end of the sixteenth century, settled there, became assimilated with the 
Tatars, and adopted their language. In 1897 they numbered 11,659; 
most of them (11,307) now live in Tobolsk Province, mainly in the Tatar 
villages. They speak a Turkic dialect, though they know Russian also, 
and are Mohammedans. Only 268 have been Russianized, converted to 
Christianity, and regard Russian as their native tongue. 

THe Tatars or Tomsk PROVINCE. 

The Baraba Tatars (2,278 men and 2,158 women) are agriculturists 
and live in the Kainsk District of Tomsk Province, in villages adjacent 
to Russian settlements. With few exceptions, they have retained their 
Tatar language. The Baraba Tatars are believed to be Turks who have 
mixed with Tatarized Finno-Ugrians, but, judging from the names of 
certain localities in their territory, Yeniseians seem to have occupied it 
at one time. 

Chulyma Tatars numbering 11,123 (5,451 men; 5,672 women) live 
in the Tomsk and Mariinsk districts of the same province, and partly in 
the Achinsk District of Yeniseisk Province. The Achinsk division of the 
Chulyma Tatars are sometimes called Meletski Tatars. Only a third of 
the Chulyma Tatars have preserved their Turkic language; two thirds 
have become Russianized. To the north, they are in contact with the 
Samoyed. 

THE ALTAIAN TATARS 

There are two groups of Altaian Tatars: the Turks of the Altai 
Mountains proper, and of the northern Altai and Ala-Tau Mountains. 
The Turks of the Altai Mountains proper are the most typical Turkic 
division of Western Siberia. In consequence of their former subjection to 
the Oirat Kalmuck, they are also called Mountain or White Kalmuck. 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES 29 

They number 26,084 (13,198 men and 12,886 women) and live in the 
Biisk District of Tomsk Province. Only a small proportion of the group 
leads a sedentary life; the majority are nomadic cattle breeders. They 
have preserved their Turkic language and only 139 persons consider 
Russian their native tongue. With the Turks of the Altai Mountains 
proper may be reckoned the Teleut (or Telengit), also called Kara- 
Kalmuck (i.e., Black Kalmuck) who live in the Tomsk, Kusnetzk, and 
Biisk districts of Tomsk Province and number 9,200 (4,543 men; 4,657 
women). Only thirty-eight percent of them have preserved the Teleut 
Turkic dialect; the remainder are quite Russianized. 

The Tatars of the northern Altai and Ala-Tau Mountains represent 
a mixture of many small Turkic tribes, partly of pure Turkic origin, 
partly intermixed with Yeniseians and Samoyed. They include the 
Kumandintzy, Lebedintzy, Shortzy, and Cherneviye Tatars. 

The Kumandintzy live in the Biisk District of Tomsk Province, 
and have a population of 4,092 (2,102 men, 1,990 women). They speak 
an Altaian Turkic dialect, but a few regard Russian as their native 
language. They are called ‘‘nomadic natives,’ but most of them are 
sedentary. 

The Lebedintzy, numbering 907 (446 men; 461 women), live in the 
Biisk and Kusnetzk districts of Tomsk Province and speak a dialect 
closely related to that of the Kumandintzy. 

The Shortzy having a population of 138,902 (7,081 men; 6,821 
women) live in the Kusnetzk District of Tomsk Province. About 12,000 
of these consider the Shortzy Turkic dialect their native tongue. They 
are officially recorded as a nomadic people, but some groups maintain 
permanent settlements. 

The Tomsko-Kusnetzk Tatars are a sedentary Turkic people dia- 
lectically related to the Teleut and to the Shortzy. The Russians called 
them Kuznietzy (smiths) because of their skill as iron workers. At the 
time of the Russian conquest they paid tribute to China with iron imple- 
ments of their own manufacture. They number 8,164 (3,927 men; 
4,237 women). They live in the Kusnetzk, Tomsk, and Barnaul districts 
of Tomsk Province. 

The Cherneviye Tatars (3,146 men; 3,196 women) live in the dense 
forests, called in Russian, chern (black, dark), covering the northern slopes 
of the Altai Mountains in the Biisk’ District. They are a semi-nomadic 

people speaking a Turkic dialect. Only a few of them have been 
Russianized. 

30 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Under the name Abakan Tatars Radloff! has combined all the native 
Turkic tribes of Yeniseisk Province (with the exception of the Chulym 
or Melet Tatars). This group consists of both small and large tribes of 
diverse origin (pure Turkic peoples, Tatarized Yeniseians, and Samoyed) 
who now speak Turkic dialects. Judging by the similarity of some of 
their tribe names to those found in Tomsk Province, we must admit that 
some of these Turks came from that Province. The following peoples 
have been assigned to the Abakan Tatar group:— 

Fig. 4. A Kachin Tatar, Minusinsk District. The Kachin are a division of the 
Abakan Tatar of diverse origin, Turkic and Tatarized Samoyed and Yeniseian. 

The Kizyl Tatars (4,044 men; 3,715 women) live in the southwestern 
part of Achinsk District. About six thousand of them speak their native 
Turkic dialect, while the remainder live among Russians and have become 
Russianized. They are said originally to have lived in Tomsk Province. 

The Kachin Tatars live on the banks of the Abakan River and its 
tributaries in the northwestern part of Minusinsk District. They are 
called Kachin Tatars because in the beginning of the eighteenth century 
they migrated to their present abode from the banks of the Kacha River, 

'Radloff, (a), 206. 

Fig. 5. Kachin Tatar Women and Children, Minusinsk District. 

31 

32 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

a tributary of the Yenisei, in Krasnoyarsk District. The population is 
11,974 (6,048 men; 5,926 women). They have retained their Turkic 
dialect. Only about five percent of the group who live among Russians 
have adopted the Russian language. 

The Sagai Tatars consist of twelve small tribes, which have been 
erroneously called clans. They live on the banks of the Abakan River 
and its tributaries and continue to speak a Turkic dialect. They number 
19,570 (9,750 men; 9,820 women). The Beltir is the most numerous of 
these groups and has a population of 4,859 (2,389 men; 2,470 women). 
Another Sagai tribe is the Koibal who are Tatarized Samoyed numbering 
1,015 (497 men; 518 women): 

Two other tribes belonging to the Altaian Tatar group are the so- 
called Steppe Kamassintzy and Forest Kamassintzy. The Steppe 
Kamassintzy are a part of the Yeniseian Kott who are related to the 
Yenisei Ostyak and to the extinct Yeniseian tribes of the Assan and 
Arin.' They number about 400, are partly Tatarized, partly Russianized, 
and live in the Kansk District. The Forest Kamassintzy are a completely 
Tatarized Samoyed tribe? who live among the Tatars of the Kansk Dis- 
trict. Their actual number cannot at present be ascertained. 

THE KARAGAS 

The Karagas are Tatarized Samoyed related to the Forest Kamas- 
sintzy. Castren, who studied the Karagas in 1845, recognized Samoyedic 
traits in their physical characters and Samoyedic elements in their Tatar 
language.’ Some clans have Samoyedic names. At the time of Castren’s 
travels (1845-1849) the Forest Kamassintzy spoke a Samoyedic dialect, 
but when Radloff visited them (1865) only Turkic was spoken. Their 
reindeer breeding may also be regarded as proof of their Samoyedic 
origin. The Karagas, Forest Kamassintzy, as well as a part of the Soyot, 
domesticate reindeer even at the present time.‘ The pure Turkic tribes, 
on the other hand, were never reindeer breeders.® 

Thus, the Siberian Turks, omitting the Yakut and Dolgan, number 
176,124 (89,165 men; 86,959 women), of whom about 93 percent, though 
preserving their Turkic dialects, understand Russian also. All the Tatars 
of western Siberia are Mohammedans and it is noteworthy that they were 
converted to Islam during the Russian domination, thus checking their 
Russianization. The Altaian Turks and those living in the steppes of 

1Castren, (b), 383. 
1Castren, (b), 380. 
4Castren, (b), 380. 
*Radloff, (a), 206. 
‘For the Yakut reindeer breeders, see p. 27. 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES (33) 

Tomsk and Yeniseisk provinces live practically apart and isolated from 
the Russiah centers and consequently have not been much influenced by 
Russian culture and language. In addition, there live in Western Siberia 
about 33,000 Kirghiz who will be described with the rest of this numerous 
people whose habitat falls outside of Siberia proper in Turkestan and the 
Steppe provinces. 

Tur Monco.ic TRIBES 

The Eastern or true Mongols, the Western Mongols or Kalmuck, 
and the Buryat constitute the three great Mongol divisions. The Buryat 
are closely related to the Khalkas tribe of the Eastern Mongols, most of 
whom ure nomads, occupying the vast region known as Mongolia, and in- 
cluding the Gobi Desert. As the result of wars and migrations, the 
Western Mongols, or Kalmuck, are at present scattered over the immense 
tract lying between Siberia and Lhassa and from the banks of the Hoang- 
ho to those of the Manich, a tributary of the Don. The more compact 
groups are found in European Russia (the Astrakhan Kalmuck), in the 
Caucasus (the Terek Kalmuck), in Jungaria (the Torgout)', in north- 
western Mongolia, between the Altai Mountains and Tyan-Shan, and 
lastly, in Alasha and farther to the west, in the Chinese district of Kuku- 
Nor in northern Tibet. The Eastern Mongols number about 700,000; the 
Western about a million; and the Buryat, 288,599 (145,717 men; 142,882 
women). Thus, the Buryat are the most numerous aboriginal Siberian 
tribe, the Turkic Yakut occupying second place (p. 25). 

Some authors add a fourth to the three Mongol divisions, the so- 
called Hezare or Hazara tribes abandoned by Timur, or as he is gencrally 
called, Tamerlane, in Afghanistan. It appears that at present these tribes 
retain only a few physical characters, as evidence of their origin, speak a 
Turkic dialect, and have mixed with Turkic tribes and adopted their 
language and religion. The Hazara lead a nomadic life, range between 
Herat and Kabul, and are divided into a western and eastern group, of 
which the former are Sunnites and the latter, Shiites. 

As compared with the Turks, the Mongols are few in number, 

about two million in all, and something over this figure, if we include the 
Hazara 

'Ivanovaky, (b). 
2The Hazara tribes are estimated to number about 450,000. 

34) PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

THe Buryat 

The Buryat live in two provinces of Kastern Siberia: Transbaikalia 
and Irkutsk. In Transbaikalia, according to the census of 1897, there 
were 177,687 Buryat (90,024 women; 87,613 men) who constituted 26.4 
percent of the inhabitants of the province. The bulk of the Transbaikalia 
Buryat live in the southern and western parts of the province. They are 
zeulous Buddhists and belong to the Yellow Hat sect, or Lamuists, fol- 
lowers of Tsou-kapa, a Tibetan reformer, The greatest number of 
Lamaists live in the districts of Selenghinsk (60.7 percent of the inhabit- 
ants), Verkhne Udinsk (381.9 percent), Chita (28.3 percent), Troizkosavskil 
(32.8 percent), and Bargusin (45.2 pereent). The two eastern districts, 
Nertehinsk and Stryetensk, and the southern district Akshna (or Ak- 
shinsk) along the Mongolian border, are inhabited by Russian settlers 
and by Buryatized Tungus. Very few Buryat can be found in these 
districts. 

The Transbaikalinn Buryat. lead the nomadic or semi-nomadic life of 
cattle breeders, although a knowledge of agriculture is at present becom- 
ing more prevalent. Their language is an castern didleet. of Buryat, 
called Mongol-Buryat, and is related to the Mongolie dialeet of the Khal- 
kas. Only 5.2 percent. of these Transbaikalian Buryat were registered a8 
spenking Russian, 

The Buryat of Irkutsk Provinee number 110,745 (57,905 men, 
52,840 women). Their religion is shamanistic. They have become Rus- 
sinnized toa greater degree than their Transbaikalian kin. Most of them 
have become agriculturists and now live with the Russian settlers and 
constitute 21.5 percent. of the whole population of the province, On the 
banks of the Uda and Goloustnaya rivers, emptying into Lake Baikal, 
and the Oka River, they live in more compnet. settlements. They form 
the bulk of the population of the southern part of Verkholensk District. 
The Irkutsk Buryat. speak the Western or so-called Bargn-Buryat 
dialeet.. Twelve and one half pereent. (13,858) of the Irkutsk Buryat 
regard Russian as their native language. Among the remaining Irkutsk 
Buryat are many people speaking both Russian and Buryat. What the 
Buryat. language had lost. asa result of the Russianization of a part of the 
Irkutsk Buryat. was recovered by the Buryatizing of the Tungus who 
live among them, As we shall see later, 9,714 Tungus regard the Western 
Buryat dialect. as their native tongue, 

Nig. 6. Buryat Women (above) and Men (below), Irkutsk Province. The 
Irkutsk Buryat are sedentary agriculturists, speaking the western Buryat din- 
leet, A amall number, however, regard Russian as their native tongue, 

Fig. 7. Buryat Shaman, Irkutsk Province. The Buryat of 
Irkutsk Province are far more Russianized than those of Trans- 
baikalia, but have retained their old shamanistic beliefs and practices. 

36 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES | 37 

Fig. 8. Mongols of the Khalka Division, related to the Buryat. 

Tue Tuncus TRIBES 

The original home of the Tungus is, as yet, undetermined, though 
usually they are said to have spread over the whole of Eastern Siberia 
from the Valley of the Amur River. Beginning with the second century 
of our era, the Chinese annals mention Tungus tribes under various 
names. The actual date of the Tungus migration from the Manchu 
country to Siberia is not known. Patkanoff, however, believes! that, 
beginning with the seventh century, A.D., some of the Tungus tribes, un- 
der pressure of more powerful peoples who waged war to the south of the 
Amur River, migrated to the north from Manchuria. The Tungus are 

'Patkanoff, (d), 26. 

38 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

related to the Manchu who conquered the Chinese Empire in 1644 and 
founded a sovereign dynasty.! 

PRESENT DISTRIBUTION, NUMBER, AND TRIBES 

At present the Tungus are distributed over all of Eastern Siberia, 
from Manchuria to the Arctic Ocean and from the Okhotsk Sea to the 
eastern tributaries of the Yenisei River. Small Tungus groups were 
located to the west of the Yenisei in the region of the Taz River among 
the Samoyed and on the Kass River, an eastern tributary of the Yenisei, 
among the Yenisei Ostyak. 

In comparison with the other Mongoloid divisions the Tungus are 
numerically insignificant, for, according to the census of 1897 the popula- 
tion was 76,504 (39,303 men; 37,201 women). Patkanoff, however, be- 
lieves that this number should be increased to 78,000 or 79,000, since 
he considers the census to have been inaccurate. Their kin, the Manchu, 
number about 12,500,000. The Koreans are regarded as a mixture of 
Tungus and Chinese. 

Professor L. Schrenck,? who, in the first half of the nineteenth century, 
studied the Amur peoples, found ten tribes which he divided into four 
dialectic groups:— 

1. Daur and Solon 

2. Manchu (a small un-Chinesized branch of the Manchu), Goldi, 

and Orochi. 

3. Orochon, Manegri, Birar, and Kibi 

4. Olchi (the Mangun on the lower course of the Amur River and 

Oroki of Sakhalin), Negidaltzy, and Samaghir 

It is still an open question whether these Tungus divisions should be 
regarded as separate tribes, as branches, or perhaps as clans of one or 
another of the groups. Thus, L. Sternberg considers? the Samaghir a 
branch of the Goldi tribe, dividing the Amur Tungus into two groups:— 

The Ivenki, nomadic reindeer-breeding Tungus (Orochon of Trans- 
baikalia and the Upper Amur, Manegri, Birar) and the Nani, sedentary 
dog-breeding hunters and fishermen (Oroki,* Olchi, Goldi, Samaghir, and 
the Orochi living on the shores of the Tatar gulf) were formerly also rein- 
deer breeders. 

Contrary to Schrenck’s contention that the Orochi came from Korea, 
Sternberg asserts that their original home was the Amur Valley, where 

Mt should be stated that Castren, (b), 75 ascribed an Altaic origin, like that of athiek Mongoloids, 
to the Tungus-Manchu. Shirokogoroff placed their original abode in northern China. (See p. 15.) 

2Schrenck, (a). 

3In a communication to the author 

‘It should be noted that the Sakhalin Oroki still have reindeer. 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES 39 

some Tungus groups have clan names in common with the Orochi. He 
mentions another group of Tungus, called Amguntzy, who live on the 
banks of the Amga River and were formerly reindeer breeders, but, after 
losing their reindeer they became settled fishermen and dog breeders. 
According to Patkanoff, the Amguntzy belong partly to the Nagda 
or Negidaltzy tribe and partly to the Samaghir. They were mixed with 
the Gilyak to a great degree. 

Professor W. Kotwich of Petrograd, the foremost authority on 
Manchu-Tungus languages, classifies the Manchu-Tungus tribes accord- 
ing to their dialectic affinities as follows:— 

1. Manchu including Sib 

2. Tungus proper (including Lamut), Managhir, Solon, and Daur 

3. Goldi group, including Olchi, Oroki, and Orok 

4. Samaghir and Nagda 
Among the Amur Tungus we find sedentary agriculturists (the greater 
part of the Manchu, the Daur, the Goldi, and the Orochi of the south- 
ern Usuri District) who also rear cattle. 

* 

THE TUNGUS PROPER 

The Tungus proper number 62,068 and include the so-called Lamut 
and the Amur Orochon. The writer proposed the elimination of 
the term, Lamut, which is derived from the Tungus word, lam, sea 
(actually sea means nam in Tungus). Lamut is supposed to mean coast 
dweller. The Tungus of the Okhotsk region were known as Lamut, but, 
according to the author’s observations the name is unknown on the shores 
of the Okhotsk Sea. The Okhotsk Tungus, even the sedentary fisher- 
men, are known as Tungus, and the Okhotsk reindecr-breeding Tungus, 
who wander, in winter, as far as the Kolyma River, and a part of whom 
have migrated to the Kamchatka Peninsula, call themselves Tungus, and 
are so known to their neighbors. On the other hand, some Tungus clans 
who wander in the mountains of the Kolyma and Verkhoyansk districts 
are officially recorded as Lamut. 

The Orochon whose name means reindeer-breeders (Tungus, oron, 
meaning reindeer)! are identified, both culturally and dialectically, with 
the Tungus proper. 

The Tungus proper, consisting in the main of nomadic clans, are 
scattered over all of eastern Siberia, living among Russian settlers, 
Buryat, Yakut, Yukaghir, and partly among the Chukchee, Koryak, and 

'The term, Orek, may also be derived from Oron, reindcer. 

or 
-ajdoed Surpeeiq-Sop Arezuepes & yUeSeid 7B “UOISLATP IP[OX) 9G} OF sSu0peq JYSU oyy ye UeUIeyT “s0e} orenbs sty 
Aq peysmsurystp st pue UOISTATp SuIpsdiq-1saputes ay} OF SSUOTEG PLIYSIG, YSJOYYO 24} Woy ey] sy} Pe ouUo eG], ‘usyY SuSUNnY, “6 Sly 

ne a : ie x fa 
ee - . r 7 

on zh . a 
eee Sead died ine a es. 
Vi ¥ ? my a . o S 

MONGOLOID PEOPLES 41 

Kamchadal. In the thirties of the nineteenth century, they appeared 
on the Kamchatka Peninsula. The Tungus proper are distributed among 
the provinces, as follows:— 

Province Population 
Kamchatka 8,848 (4,544 men; 4,304 women) 
Amur 1,104 (623 men; 481 women) 
Sakhalin 143 (83 men; 60 women) 
Yakutsk 12,231 (6,251 men; 5,980 women) 
Irkutsk 2,191 (1,103 men; 1,088 women) 
Transbaikalia 34,379 (17,108 men; 17,271 women) 
Yeniseisk 3,169 (1,662 men; 1,507 women) 

These figures are, in all probability, lower than the actual figures, since 
many nomadic families were not recorded during the census of 1897. 

LANGUAGE 

Their native tongue has not been preserved by all the Tungus, as 
may be observed in the following tabulation :— 

Language spoken Number Percent 
Tungus 27,597 44.5 
Russian 19,742 31.8 
Buryat 9,714 15.4 
Yakut 4,760 7.6 
Yukaghir 237 4 

Thus we see that 55.5 percent of the Tungus have adopted foreign lan- 
guages, though a part of the latter also know Tungus. 

RELIGION 

The modern Tungus are Christians, Lamaists, and pagans (shaman- 
ists). Kighty-two percent, 50,874 (25,933 men; 24,941 women) belong 
to the Greek Catholic Church. Their conversion to Christianity began 
in the seventeenth century, and in Transbaikalia, as early as the latter 
part. of the sixteenth century. But, for the most part, these baptized 
Tungus may still be regarded as Christians in name only. Their nomadic 
life seldom brings them into contact with their priests, and though they 
like the church ceremonies and rituals, their religious concepts and psy- 
chology remain shamanistic. 

The Lamaistic branch of the Buddhistic faith spread in Tibet, 
Mongolia, and Jungaria. Of the Tungus 14.9 percent or 9,258 (4,535 
men; 4,723 women), living in Transbaikalia, are recorded as Lamaists. 

42 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Lamaism appeared in Transbaikalia only two centuries ago, replacing 
shamanism, and thus beginning a transformation in the spiritual life of 
the Transbaikalian Tungus and Buryat which is still in progress. 

Only 3.1 percent of the Tungus were recorded in the census of 1897 
as pagans (shamanists) or, in other words, 1,936 (907 men; 1,029 women) 
individuals. But actually, the greater number of nomadic Tungus said 
to be Christians really belong to this category. The shamanists were 
located in the provinces of Transbaikalia and Yeniseisk. 

DIVISIONS AND CLASSES 

The former Russian law classified the Siberian natives as nomadic. 
(brodyachi), half-nomadic (kochevoi), and sedentary (osyedly) peoples. 
The nomadic Tungus, numbering 28,472 (14,702 men; 13,770 women) 
wander all over Eastern Siberia with their reindeer. The half-nomadic 
Tungus, numbering 29,737 (14,763 men; 14,974 women) have seasonal 
places of abode. They are cattle breeders and fishermen and may be 
found in the provinces of Transbaikalia and (a small number) Yakutsk. 
The sedentary Tungus, numbering 3,859 (1,910 men; 1,949 women), are 
mostly agriculturists and live chiefly in Transbaikalia Province. About 
45 percent of this group live in Irkutsk and Primorskaya! provinces and 
are cattle breeders or fishermen. 

The greater number of sedentary Tungus are Cossacks who live 
along the Mongolian border in the Aksha District of Transbaikalia 
Province. In the beginning of the eighteenth century, the Russian Gov- 
ernment, in addition to its Russian Cossack divisions, organized Tungus 
and Buryat Cossack divisions to guard the frontier from the intrusion of 
Chinese-Mongol hordes. In 1750 these were re-organized as special 
Tungus Cossack and Buryat regiments. The native Cossacks were ex- 
empted from taxation, received some other special privileges, and a small 
salary for their service which had no age limit. The Tungus Cossack 
chief, Gantimur (Khan-Timur), and his family, were raised to the ranks 
of the imperial nobility under the name of Gantimuroff. In 1897 there 
were 371 (194 men) hereditary Tungus nobles. 

The Tungus Cossacks are agriculturists and many of them also have 
large herds of cattle. In certain seasons, under the lead of Mongol 
herders, the herds cross the Chinese frontier to the pasture lands of the 
Mongolian steppes. Most of the Tungus Cossacks adopted the Buryat 
language and habits and only official records disclose their Tungus origin. 
poo ei ae eg a eat SE 8 a ee 

1In 1910 Primorskaya was re-named Kamchatka Province. 

THE FORMER ADMINISTRATIVE 
DIVISIONS OF 
ASIATIC RUSSIA 

SCALE 

Map 2 

CHAPTER II 
THE AMERICANOIDS OF SIBERIA 

On the basis of their physical, cultural, and linguistic affinities with 
the American aborigines, the northeastern Siberian Chuckchee, Koryak, 
Kamchadal, Chuvantzy, Yukaghir, and Gilyak are grouped under the 
general term, Siberian Americanoids. While America is geographically 
and politically separated from Asia by Bering Strait, it does not con- 
stitute an ethnical barrier, and the anthropological boundaries may be 
extended far to the west of Bering Strait. For the reasons to be enumer- 
ated below the writer rejects the terminology applied to these tribes by 
former investigators. 

The tribes named above, including the Ainu and Yenisei Ostyak 
are classified by Max Miiller,! as Siberian peoples, belonging in the north- 
ern Turkic division of the Turkic-Altaic family. Of course, tribes now 
living in Siberia may be called peoples of Siberia, but historically speak- 
ing, this may be wrong. It is also incorrect to class them with the Turks. 

Friedrich Miller calls these tribes, including the Ainu, Aleut, and 
Eskimo, ‘‘ Arctic or Hyperborean races.’’? Neither the Ainu nor the Kam- 
chadal can be called an Arctic tribe. ‘‘ Arctic or Hyperborean”’ is, in the 
first place, a geographical term, and even if it had any ethnological sig- 
nificance, referring to peoples possessing a circumpolar culture, we can- 
not correctly ascribe any somatological significance to it. 

Oscar Peschel divides these tribes into two groups,’ one of which he 
calls “the Bering nations” in which he includes the Kamchadal, Koryak, 
Chukchee, Eskimo, Aleut, Tlingit, and the tribes of Vancouver Island. 
Although embracing tribes with some common affinities, the classifica- 
tion remains, nevertheless, purely geographical. He calls the second 
group “ Northern Asiatics of doubtful position” and includes in it tribes 
little related to each other, as the Yenisei-Ostyak, Yukaghir, Ainu, and 
some extinct Yeniseian peoples. If we except the Yukaghir, the name 
might be applicable even now. 

Schrenck refers to both groups by the same name, calling them 
“Palaeasiatics” (northern and northeastern) as opposed to the “ Ural- 
Altaians.”” The scant notes on the languages of these tribes available 
at that time have shown that structurally they have no affinities with the 
Ural-Altaic stock. Schrenck believed that they are remnants of a 
formerly more numerous stock driven to their present abode by more 

a 
*Peschel, 387400. 
43 

44 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

recent comers. This historico-geographical classification was proposed by 
him pending a determination of the linguistic affiliations of the Palae- 
asiatics.! Results of recent careful investigations of the tribes of north- 
eastern Siberia make it clear that the term, Palaeasiatics, should also be 
eliminated, even when we consider it from the point of view of Schrenck 
himself. In addition, ‘‘ Palaeasiatic’’ does not include any reference to 
the somatological problems of the region. Further, if we adopt the views 
of leading anthropologists as to the Asiatic origin of mankind, in general, 
we may apply the name “ Palaeasiatic”’ not only to all the old races of 
Asia, but also to all the races of the world. 

We do not consider the substitute term proposed by Miss Czaplicka, 
“ Paleo-Siberians’”? as any more suitable. This classification also is not 
based on somatological characters; in addition, there are no reasons why 
we should regard the Chukchee or Koryak as more ancient inhabitants 
of Siberia than are the Samoyed or Ostyak. 

Another exclusively geographical name we propose to reject is 
Ratzel’s term, ‘‘Rand Volker”’ (marginal peoples) which may include both 
the Siberian coastal tribes and the Eskimo. 

For his part, the writer believes the term, Americanoid, to be the 
most suitable, for if we disregard the Asiatic, or rather Eurasiatic cul- 
tural achievements, such as the domestication of the reindeer, we will find 
the peoples of northeastern Siberia related to the American aborigines in 
language structure, spiritual life, material culture, and somatology. 
Professor Boas has suggested that a mass immigration started from Asia 
into North America during one of the interglacial periods, or before the 
last glaciation. The people living in America were cut off from their 
congeners in the Old World and forced to migrate southward because of 
the spread of the last ice cap. At the end of this glaciation, as the ice 
retreated in both North America and Asia, communication between the 
two continents again became possible. Members of the American race 
moved back toward the north, crossed to Asiatic soil, and occupied the 
northeastern part of Siberia. Therefore, the Chukchee, Koryak, Kam- 
chadal, Yukaghir, Chuvantzy, and Gilyak are classified as Americanoids. 

The theory of the Asiatic origin of the American aborigines and of the 
re-emigration from America into Asia of the Siberian tribes we call 
Americanoids, may find a corroborative parallel in the history of the 
distribution of certain Asiatic zoological species. Professor Peter P. 
Sushkin of the Russian Academy of Sciences in a paper read before the 

———— 

ISchrenck, (a), 255-258. 
2Czaplicka, (a), 25. 
*Jochelaon, (c), 90-95. 

SIBERIAN AMERICANOIDS 45 

National Academy of Sciences in Washington April 25, 1925, said :-— 

M. Severtzoff and Professor Nussonov, after studying the distribution and 
structure of the wild sheep, have both come to the conclusion that. this genus migrated 
from High Asia to America before the last glaciation; that in Amcrica they were driven 
south by the glaciation; that. afterwards the American stock spread again to the north 
and gave origin to another group; and finally that this new group spread back into 
the Asian continent and occupied Eastern Siberia, so that the present Siberian sheep 
stand geographically and structurally, in no close relation with the sheep of Tligh 
Asia. 

The Chukehee, Koryak, and Kamchadal, in language, somatology, 
spiritual and material culture, form one ethnic group with a common 
origin. 

THE CHUKCHEE 

According to official census data the Chukchee population was 
11,771 (5,811 men; 5,960 women). Bogoras estimates their number at 
about, 12,000. Their territory extends from the shores of the Chukehee 
Peninsula to the tundra of the lower course of the Indigirka River. 
They are divided into nomadie reindeer breeders and sedentary coast 
dwellers. Of the total population only about 3,000 are a maritime 
people. Traditionally, it is said that a division of the Reindeer Chukchce 
formerly wandered over the Kolyma tundra between the Alazeya and 
Kolyina rivers, but, in the cighteenth century, with the advent of the 
Russian conquerors, they retreated to the east. of the Kolyma River. 
They refused to pay tribute to the Russian officials and after a hard and 
inconclusive struggle were left to themselves. Only in the sixties of the 
nineteenth century, after an understanding with some of the Chukchee 
chiefs did the Russian authorities permit) the Reindeer Chuckchee 
to return to the west. of the Kolyma River. Now some Reindeer Chuk- 
chee families wander over the tundra between the mouths of the Kolyma 
and Alazeya rivers; thirteen camps were located by the writer between 
the Alazeya and Indigirka rivers and ten families were found (in 1902) 
in the valley of the Yerchen River, a tributary of the Indigirka. This 
most, westerly group of Reindeer Chukehce cross the Indigirka River 
often during the winter-and appear, for trading purposes at Alayikha, 
a Yakut village, located on the banks of a western tributary of the Indi- 
girka River with the same name. 

The greater number of Reindeer Chukchee (1,186; 566 men and 620 
monien) of the Kolyma District, Yakutsk Province, live in Yakutsk 
Province in what. was formerly Yukaghir territory, bounded on the south 

'Sushkin, 522- 523. 

46 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

by the Dry Anyui River, on the north by the Arctic Ocean, on the west 
by the Kolyma River, and on the east by the Chaun River. 

A third group of Reindeer Chukchee of the Kolyma District, num- 
bering about 400, is located in the valley of the Omolon River and its 
tributaries. However, the bulk of the Reindeer Chukchee, 6,611 (3,280 
men; 3,331 women) wander in the Anadyr District of Kamchatka 
Province (formerly called Primorskaya). The Anadyr River is regarded 
as the southern boundary of the Chukchee country, but a number of 
camps, with a population of 628 (349 men; 279 women) wander in the 
Gishiga District of the same province among the Reindeer Koryak and 
partly Reindeer Tungus. 

There are no maritime or sedentary Chukchee in the districts of 
Kolymsk (Yakutsk Province) and Gishiginsk (Kamchatka Province). 
These groups live exclusively in the Anadyr District, and are located on 
the shore of the Arctic Ocean between Cape Deshnef and the mouth of the 
Chaun River, i.e., at the boundary of the Kolyma District. Thirty-two 
villages are scattered along the coast, one of which, Koluchi, is situated 
on an island of the same name. Farther to the west, in the Kolyma 
District, there are no permanent coast dwellers. The author learned, 
however, that some families of Reindeer Chukchee from this district 
came to the coast in order to hunt sea animals, after losing their herds in 
epidemics. 

Three villages of sedentary Chukchee are situated on the banks of 
the lower course of the Anadyr River. One of these, Wueng, is near 
the Russian administrative post, Novo-Mariinsky, at the entrance to 
the Anadyr estuary. Another village, Erulen, is located in the northern 
part of Holy Cross Bay (Svyatoi Krest). Nine villages are located on the 
shore of Anadyr Gulf. Finally, twenty-four Chukchee villages are situ- 
ated on the Pacific Coast between Cape Deshnef on the north and Cape 
Chaplin (Indian Point) on the south, or otherwise stated, between the 
settlements of the Peekit! Asiatic Eskimo on the north and those of the 
Aiwan Eskimo on the south. Four of these villages are located on 
Kiyinen Island (also Arakamchechen), on Yaurakinon, on an island of 
the same name, and four more on two peninsulas protruding into Mechig- 
me Bay. In this region also is located Chechin Village the population of 
which is mixed Chukchee and Aiwan and in which the Chukchee language 
is spoken. Thus, there are in all seventy villages of maritime or seden- 
tary Chukchee. 

1Peekit, means people from Peek, the Eskimo name for East Cape. 

SIBERIAN AMERICANOIDS 47 

THe Koryak 

Like the Chukchee, the Koryak are divided into reindeer breeders 
and maritime people, or, tundra nomads and coast dwellers. In 1900, 
their total population, according to the author’s census taken during 
the Jesup Expedition, was 7,530 (3,829 men; 3,701 women). Of these, 
3,748 (1,964 men; 1,784 women) were reindeer breeders and 3,782 
(1,865 men; 1,917 women) sedentary people. Thus, it will be observed 
that the two Koryak divisions are almost equal in number, while among 
the Chukchee the maritime people constitute only a third of the total. 
This may be due to the extent and indentation of the coast line of the 
Koryak territory, where settlers can procure maritime food, while the 
interior is less extensive than that of the Chukchee. The Koryak live 
in four districts of Kamchatka Province: in Okhotsk, Gishiginsk, Anadyr, 
and Petropavlovsk. 

REINDEER KORYAK 

At present there are no Reindeer Koryak in the Okhotsk District 
and most of the camps of the nomadic Koryak may be found in the 
Gishiga District. Their population is 2,387 (1,287 men; 1,100 women). 
In the Petropavlovsk District in the northern part of Kamchatka live 
1,284 Reindeer Koryak (642 men; 642 women), while in the Anadyr 
District there are only 78 individuals (83 men; 45 women). Some 
Reindeer Koryak wander with the Reindeer Chukchee. 

Ji 
4 
b. 

’* MARITIME KORYAK 

Before the advent of the Russians, Koryak territory reached as far 
south as Tauisk on the Okhotsk Sea, but now only two Koryak villages, 
Yamsk and Tumansk, with a population of 244 (126 men; 118 women) 
are located in the Okhotsk District. These Koryak are Russianized 
Christians and physically represent a mixture of Russian, Tungus, and 
Yakut. According to official records 66 percent of the inhabitants of 
these two villages are Koryak. 

In the Gishiga District, forty-three villages have been recorded: 
one village, Nayakhan on Gishiga Bay; eighteen villages on the shores 
of Penshina Bay; twenty-four villages on the coast of Bering Sea. The 
most northerly thirteen villages on Bering Sea are inhabited by the 
Kerek division of the Maritime Koryak. Their territory is bissected by 
the official boundary liné*between the Anadyr and Gishiga districts, thus 
their five northernmost villages are in the Anadyr District. 

se 

“SUBIPU] UVOLIGULY UlisJSeMyPION 3} s[qUIesei YeAIOY 3y3 ‘eINg]No PeLeyeU pur ‘ABojo3 
-eulos ‘ayy enjiiids ‘asensur] uy “YeAIOY ey} JO UOISIAIp SuIpeeiq-isaputei sy} WIOI] aie asay, “URPY pue UEUIOAA HeAIOW “QT “Sg i 

SIBERIAN AMERICANOIDS 49 

Five Koryak villages are located on the Okhotsk Sea in Petropav- 
lovsk District. The southernmost of these is Voyampolka. Of the six 
villages on Bering Sea the most southerly is called Osernoye. Thus the 
total number of Maritime Koryak villages is fifty-four. 

THE KAMCHADAL 

The Kamchadal occupy the southern part of the Petropavlovsk 
District of Kamchatka Province on the peninsula of the same name. The 
territory formerly occupied by them now has a population of 8,069, 
of which 3,370 are Russian, 3,555 Kamchadal, and 802 Reindeer Koryak 
and Tungus immigrants. The remaining 310 include Japanese, Chinese, 
Ixoreans, and whites (Americans and Europeans). 

Since the Kamchadal have become Russianized only the inhabitants 
of the seven villages between Amanino and Soposhnoye on the western 
coast have preserved their native language, the western IXamchadal 
dialect. The inhabitants of Sedanka village on the Tighil River speak the 
northern Kamechadal dialect. Formerly, four Kamchadal dialects were 
known. At present, even the above-mentioned Kamechadal speak a kind 
of Russian-Kamchadal jargon rather than pure KXamchadal. The young- 
er generation is learning Russian in the schools and before long the Kam- 
ehadal language will be altogether forgotten, as was the case with the 
Kamehatka River and the southern dialect spoken between the Great 
River (Bolshaya Reka) and Lopatka Cape. While the northern IXam- 
chadal dialect spoken on the Tighil River contains a considerable number 
of Koryak words, the southern dialect. had an intermixture of Kurilian 
words. Krasheninnikoff called the southern Kamehadal, urilian. 

The Kamehadal have been and still are a true fishing people. Al- 
though they hunted the wild Kamchatka variety, they did not adopt the 
domesticated reindeer from their Koryak neighbors. Fish, particularly 
different species of salmon, ascend the Kamehatka rivers in such abun- 
dance that they amply satisfy the needs for food. During the short fish- 
ing season the Kamehadal have no time to dry or smoke all the fish for 
Winter use and the greater part. are stored in holes dug in the ground and 
covered with stones and earth, to be consumed later in its decayed state 
by both men and dogs. 

Sea mammals are hunted to some extent by the Kamchadal of the 
western coast. Since they do not possess skin boats, they do not go out 
fo sea, but kill the seals, white whales (Delphinopterus Leucas), and sea 
lions which enter the river mouths to eateh the ascending fish. The seals 

50 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

are caught in thong nets. Another method is to spear or shoot them at 
their rookeries. Sea lions rarely enter the river mouths. 

Horned cattle and horses were imported into Kamchatka chiefly 
from the Yakut of the Okhotsk District. In spite of the fact that they 
were not well cared for, they were acclimatized and have produced a 
small-sized, but strong race of domestic animals. 

An important. food item of the Kamchadal and Russian inhabitants 
of the country is cow’s milk. They use sweet as well as sour milk and 
pot cheese. Although the milk is rich in fat, butter is rarely made. 
Principally because of the scant winter feed and the housing in unheated 
stalls, the cows give but a small quantity of milk, about two or three 
quarts a day. The Kamchadal make little hay, as the seasons for fishing 
and hay making coincide. If we reckon one cow for every three in- 
habitants, the number of cattle may be estimated, according to the 
author’s census, at about 2,000. 

The Kamchatka horses are small in size, short-necked, wide-breasted, 
and short-legged. During the winter, they are covered, particularly 
their legs, with long thick hair. Horses are used only in summer as riding 
and pack animals; in winter, they are rarely fed hay but are released to 
graze as best they can; consequently, they turn wild and in the summer 
must be captured and again broken for riding. 

Prior to the arrival of the Russians, the driving dog was the only 
domestic animal known to the Kamchadal whose dogs were regarded as 
the best and biggest driving dogs of Siberia. At present, as a result of an 
unfavorable environment, the dogs are small in size. They are worked 
hard during the long winter and are tied up far from the village and badly 
fed during the summer; otherwise, calves and colts, and even cows and 
horses, are in danger of being injured by dogs. Owing to economic, 
climatic, and topographic conditions, the Kamchadal cannot dispense 
with the driving dog and every family has from eight to fifteen. Accord- 
ing to the author’s census of 1911, there were over 5,000 dogs. The old 
Kamchadal sledge for riding astride is no longer in use, the Russians 
having introduced the type of sledge used all over eastern Siberia. The 
harnessed dogs are tied in pairs to a long thong which is fastened to the 
sledge. 

There are no other domesticated animals, no goats, nor sheep, nor 
birds, one reason for this condition being that they would be exterminated 
by the ever hungry dogs which very often find the means to free them- 
selves from their bonds. 

The Russian Government tried repeatedly to introduce agriculture 

Ts 
‘IBALIP SITY pulyed aspays @ Uo Surpti sanqord oy} Jo JayUe0 94} UI UMOYSSI JOYINe ay], “yeAIOy Joaputay ay} Jo sespalg Sug “TI “SIq 

Rew 

* a ae) oe 
hi ees 
ita ST (Se 
3 — 5; i 

~ 

ae 
er 
we 

es 

‘SSUT]JOMP IOWIUINS SE IAIOS OS[B IBALI 9Y} JO SyURG sy} UO sjsod UO pazyRAgya 
SOsNOYys10}S VY, “VYIVYOWLY U1s}SaM Ul JOATY VAOSNAIVYY 39y} UO SuTeavs] 10YNe syy, ‘“espeyg puve uresay Soq uvyyeyouey y “ZI sy 

SIBERIAN AMERICANOIDS 53 

and gardening into Kamchatka. For this purpose peasants from southern 
Siberia and European Russia were several times transferred to Kamchat- 
ka, but all these experiments failed, the imported husbandmen having 
themselves adopted fishing and hunting. At Kluchevskoye Village in the 
valley of the Kamchatka River barley is grown in small quantities, but 
the crop has no economic value. Experiments with gardening have been 
more successful. Potatoes grow everywhere in southern Kamchatka; 
consequently, digging for other edible roots has almost ceased. Turnips 
are also grown and the inhabitants of Kluchevskoye also grow cabbage 
which heads well. 

Tue CHUKCHEE-KORYAK-KAMCHADAL PuHysico-CULTURAL COMPLEX 

The Chukchee, Koryak, and Kamchadal are closely inter-related 
and at the same time show considerable affinity with the American 
aborigines; hence, a brief review of their physical characters and of their 
common cultural elements may be profitable. 

Of the descriptive physical characters, hair form will be given first 
consideration. Straightness of hair, as is well known, is a common 
Mongoloid, Americanoid, and Indian character. However, a few cases of 
wavy hair were recorded among the Chukchee, Koryak, and Kamchadal 
which may explain how an element of wavy hair once entered the 
aboriginal population in South America.' As to skin color, it may be 
pointed out that while the Mongoloids are characterized by pigmenta- 
tion tending toward shades of yellow, the Americanoids, like the Indians, 
are pigmented in various tones of brown. 

On both sides of the Pacific, the nose is not of the flattened form, and, 
in many cases, is high bridged. The oblique eye fissure of the Mongo- 
loids is also rarely encountered among the Americanoids and Indians. 
The epicanthic eyefold has been observed, but this eyefold has also been 
known to occur among whites. 

The face is wide as compared with the head width. As indicated by 
the cephalic index, the Americanoids, particularly the Kamchadal, have 
narrow heads as compared with their broad-headed Mongoloid neighbors. 

Perhaps the best known cultural resemblances and affinities between 
the Americanoids and northwestern Indians, are recognized in the 
identity of the Raven myths; the language structure, based on the same 
principles; and identical hunting and fishing methods. The latter is 
particularly true of the Kamchadal who have no skin boats and no 
domesticated reindeer. 

'Wissler, 325, 

54 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

The cultural affinities of the northeastern Siberian Americanoids 
with the American Eskimo, who form a wedge between the Americanoids 
and the Indians, may be classified as resemblances of a local Arctic and 
of a circumpolar character. The wearing of fur clothing, the manu- 
facture of the sinew-backed bow, and dog breeding are components of 
circumpolar culture; on the other hand, the skin boat and the methods 
of hunting sea mammalsare local achievements of the Eskimo-Chukchee- 
Koryak Arctic group. Bering Sea seems to present a barrier to the 
American diffusion of the reindeer breeding complex of the arctic and 
subarctic regions of Eurasia.! But the fact that in the immediate past 
the Asiatic Eskimo have acquired domesticated reindeer from the 
Chukchee, principally because of the extermination of sea mammals by 
white whalers, indicates that the diffusion of the domesticated reindeer 
might naturally be expected to have been across Bering Strait. On the 
other hand, the taking over of the Siberian domesticated reindeer, 
instead of attempting to tame the American wild reindeer (caribou) 
would tend to show that achievements in culture are made by the com- 
paratively easy process of adopting a culture complex as a whole than 
by imitating its development. 

The snowhouse appears to be the only genuine Eskimo invention. 
The Arctic peoples of Eurasia, including the Asiatic Eskimo, do not build 
snowhouses. This can be explained by environmental differences, as 
follows :— 

1. The forests of Eurasia extend farther to the north than does the 
tree line in America, so that it is easy to obtain poles for the framework 
of tents. 

2. The numerous herds of domesticated reindeer furnish the skin 
covers for the shelters, while the hunter of wild reindeer cannot obtain 4 
sufficient number of skins for his dwelling, clothing, and bedding. 

3. Only a small proportion of the polar inhabitants of Asia hunt at 
sea and they seldom go to distant islands. The Eskimo, on the other 
hand, are sea hunters and many live permanently on the most northerly 
capes and islands. 

THE YUKAGHIR AND CHUVANTZY 
The Yukaghir are so interbred with Tungus that their somatological 
affinities are closer to the Mongoloids than to the Americanoids. From 
the Tungus also they have adopted their mode of life and costume. On 

'\We consider the introduction of the Siberian domesticated reindeer into Alaska by the Linitel 
States Government as an artificial influence on what appears to have been the natural course of the 
diffusion of this culture trait. 

SIBERIAN AMERICANOIDS 59 

the other hand, the structure of their language, their traditions, and his- 
tory bear witness to their close relation to the Chukchee and Koryak. 
According to the census taken by the writer in 1900, there were 1,003 
Yukaghir (503 men; 500 women) and 453 Chuvantzy (236 men; 217 
women). In olden times these two tribes formed a single ethnic unit so 
that we may give the population of the Yukaghir as 1,456 individuals. 

Odul (plur. Odulpe, or Odupe) meaning, the strong one, is the 
Yukaghir name for themselves. Traditionally, they were reputed to be 
the best warriors in the extreme northeast of Siberia. The Chukchee and 
Koryak call the Yukaghir and Chuvantzy, Atal or Etel, which is the Chuk- 
chee-Koryak pronunciation of the Yukaghir, Odul. This may be con- 
sidered as additional evidence that their neighbors regarded the Yukaghir 
and Chuvantzy as divisions of one tribe, which is also corroborated by 
their folklore and the remnants of the Chuvantzy dialect still extant 
among the Russianized Chuvantzy on the Anadyr River.! 

Like the Chukchee and Koryak, the Yukaghir and Chuvantzy are 
divided into reindeer (764 Yukaghir; 177 Chuvantzy) and dog breeders 
(239 Yukaghir; 275 Chuvantzy), and before their contact with the 
Russians, were a numerous people, occupying, together with related 
groups now extinct, the whole region between the Arctic Coast and Verk- 
hoyansk Mountain Ridge and the lower course of the Lena River and 
the Stanovoi Mountains. We have no evidence as to whether or not the 
ancient Yukaghir were reindeer breeders. The present Yukaghir rein- 
decr are, however, of Tungus stock. The first Russian records of the 
Yukaghir mention them as living in earthen huts on the banks of rivers, 
though some Yukaghir tales refer to roaming with reindeer. 

At present the Yukaghir occupy only a small portion of their former 
territory or wander with alien tribes. There are two Reindeer Yukaghir 
clans in the Kolyma District, of Yakutsk Province. These wander on 
the tundra between the Kolyma River and the Alazeya Mountains in 
company with two Yukaghirized Tungus clans. Five Reindeer Yukaghir 
clans wander in the Verkhoyansk District in the region of the Indigirka 
River, the Khroma River, and between the Yana and the Omoloi 
rivers, also partly to the west of the Omoloi River. The Omoloi Yukaghir, 
together with Tungus clans, adopted the Yakut language. The rest of 
the Reindeer Yukaghir of the Verkhoyansk District became Tungusized. 

Dyachkoff, 

56 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

THE REINDEER CHUVANTZY 

The majority of the Reindeer Chuvantzy roam among the Chuk- 
chee camps along the upper course of the Anadyr River and its tributaries 
in the Anadyr District, sometimes visiting the valley of the Omolon 
River in the Kolyma District. A small number wander among the Chuk- 
chee in the Kolyma District and about twenty persons among the Koryak 
in the basin of the Penshina River. 

SETTLEMENTS OF DOG-BREEDING YUKAGHIR 

The following settlements are found in the Kolyma District: the 
Hare clan numbering 79 (37 men; 42 women), together with 80 (35 men; 
45 women) Yukaghirized Tungus, spends the winter in small settlements 
on the Yassachnaya, Nelemnaya, and Korkodon rivers, living in log huts 
or half underground dwellings. Early in the spring, these Yukaghir 
leave their permanent houses and with dog sledges and conical skin tents, 
move to the upper courses of the Kolyma River and its tributaries to 
hunt wild reindeer, birds, elk, and fur-bearing animals. Early in the 
summer, they descend the river in boats, stopping on their way to fish, 
and late in the fall return to their permanent settlements. 

The First Omolon clan is an amalgamation of four former Yukaghir 
clans: the First Omolon and the First, Second, and Third Omok clans. 
In former times, the First Omolon clan, moved up the Omolon River 
during the winter, and, when the ice broke, floated down to its mouth 
in canoes and on rafts. The Omoki wandered in the valleys of the two 
Anyui rivers, the Big Anyui and the Dry Anyui, and their tributaries. 
At present the remnants of these four clans, now constituting the First 
Omolon clan, have so declined in vigor that they have almost given up 
their wanderings and hunting, and live in a village at the mouth of the 
Omolon River, in Nishne Kolymsk and other Russian settlements along 
the lower Kolyma River. They have become entirely Russianized. 

The Second Omolon clan became Tungusized and has joined the 
Tungus in the Omolon Valley. A settlement, Karbashan, on the banks 
of the Omolon River, about five hundred miles from its mouth, had a 
population of twenty persons who lived like the Yukaghir of the Yas- 
sachnaya River. This group became extinct in 1897 after a famine 
which ended in cannibalism. 

A few dog-breeding Yukaghir (81 persons) may also be found in the 
Anadyr District of Kamchatka Province. They live in the village of 
Markovo and in other settlements on the Anadyr River among the Chu- 
vantzy and Russians. These Yukaghir have become entirely Rus- 

SIBERIAN AMERICANOIDS 57 

sianized, and form a “ Yukaghir community” and not a clan. They are 
the descendants of the Kolyma Yukaghir who emigrated to the Anadyr at 
various times and who formerly belonged to the Omolon and Omok clans. 

DOG-BREEDING CHUVANTZY 

To the River Yukaghir should be added the permanent Chuvantzy 
settlers of whom there were 262 (136 men: 126 women) in the Anadyr 
District. They have lost their clan name and constitute a “ Chuvantzy 
community.” The greater part of them, 147 persons (75 men; 72 
women) live in Markovo Village, forming 46 percent of its permanent 
population. The rest of the sedentary Chuvantzy live in other villages 
along the Anadyr River, forming the majority of their inhabitants. All 
the sedentary Chuvantzy have become entirely Russianized. 

On the Kolyma River were 13 Russianized Chuvantzy settlers (7 men; 
6 women) who live in Nishne Kolymsk or in settlements nearby. 

RELIGION AND LANGUAGE 

All the Yukaghir and Chuvantzy are Christians, but many of them 
have preserved their aboriginal mode of thinking and shamanistic ideas 
and practices. Russian is spoken by 181 Yukaghir (18 percent) and by 
294 Chuvantzy (64 percent); Tungus by 225 Yukaghir (22 percent); 
Yakut by 17 Yukaghir (1.7 percent); and Koryak or Chukchee by 150 
Chuvantzy (38 percent) who wander with Reindeer Koryak or Chuk- 
chee. The Yukaghir may be called true polyglots. Besides Yukaghir, 
the Upper Kolyma Yukaghir speak Tungus and Yakut. The Tundra 
Yukaghir speak Yukaghir, Tungus, Yakut, and Chukchee. The Rus- 
sianized Yukaghir of the Lower Kolyma know Russian, Yakut, and 
Chukchee. The Omoloi Yukaghir of the Verkhoyansk District, having 
at first become Tungusized, have now, together with the local Tungus 
groups, become Yakutized, and speak only Yakut. 

THE GILYAK 

The small Gilyak tribe, numbering, according to the census of 1897, 
4,649 (2,556 men; 2,093 women) is scattered over the northern half of 
Sakhalin Island and the continental coast adjacent to it, being almost 
equally divided between the two localities. On Sakhalin Island they 
occupy the western coast. line from Cape Sakh-kotan to the northern 
extremity of the island to Cape Mary; the eastern coast from Cape 
Levenstern to Cape Delisle de la Croyere; and the interior, the upper and 
middle course of the only large river of the northern part of the Sakhalin, 

58 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

the Tym. Several scores of Gilyak were found in the southern part of the 
island at the mouth of the Poronaya River and on Cape Patience, among 
the Ainu and Orok, where they immigrated about a half century ago. 

On the continent, the Gilyak are located on both banks of the lower 
Amur River up to the place where Geri Village is situated; the shores of 
the Amur estuary; and the coast to the north of the mouth of the Amur 
to the Kol River; and to the south as far as the Choma River. They 
sometimes range as far north as the mouth of the Tugur River, but have 
no permanent dwellings there. If we may judge from historical data, no 
change has taken place in the location of this group during the last three 
centuries. 

The Gilyak are closely encircled by alien peoples. On Sakhalin 
Island there is pressure from the south from the formerly numerous 
Ainu; in the east, the Orok group of Tungus have penetrated to the very 
heart of the Gilyak settlements. On the continent the Gilyak are sur- 
rounded by representatives of Tungus-Manchu tribes: Negidaltzy, 
Olchi, Goldi, Orochi, Samaghir, and Tungus proper. 

The physical appearance of the Gilyak may be indicative, to some 
degree, of affinities with their nearest neighbors. On the other hand, their 
language, in structure, phonetics, and vocabulary has no relation to those 
of surrounding tribes and is structurally and grammatically related to the 
stocks of the North Pacific Coast of America. 

Sternberg states that there is now no well-defined Gilyak physical 
type, the average Gilyak representing a complex of the modified Mongo- 
loid traits of the Tungus, to which have been added some Ainu characters. 
In form, their faces are more or less oval, with fairly prominent cheek 
bones; noses are medium in length; the eye fissure is wide; and facial 
hair is abundant on the males. The average cephalic index (86 and above) 
is not only higher than that of the Ainu (77), but the head form is also 
more brachycephalic than that of the Tungus (82). Mongoloid traits 
appear to be more prominent among the women than among the men. 
Thus, it will be seen that the somatology of the Gilyak gives no clue to the 
solution of the problem of their origin. 

Schrenck,! on his part, contended that Sakhalin Island should be re- 
garded as the original home of the Gilyak, whence they spread to the con- 
tinent, while Sternberg? believes that the Gilyak of Sakhalin Island are 
newcomers who forced the original Ainu population to move southward. 
It may be profitable to review some of the evidence bearings on this point. 

(os ph es 

1Sschrenck, (b), vol 3, 207. 
Sternberg. 

SIBERIAN AMERICANOIDS 59 

The Gilyak have Ainu names for the indigenous plants and animals of 
Sakhalin which are not found on the continent. Perhaps the argument 
bearing the most weight consists in the fact that over all Sakhalin, ex- 
tending to its most northern extremities, are the remains of ancient under- 
ground dwellings which the Gilyak call, Kugi-Tulkch, i.e., Ainu pits. 
In addition, tales of bloody wars with the Ainu are prominent and still 
extant in Gilyak folklore. 

On the other hand, Sternberg believes the present territory of the 
Gilyak on the mainland was not their original home. He attempts to 
uphold his contention by the citation of many items of Gilyak material 
culture which he considers merely a part of a single arctic culture com- 
plex. And if we grant his hypothesis, the Gilyak must be assumed to 
have come to their present abode from a region to the north. 

The Gilyak earthen house is of the Kamchadal-Koryak type. Al- 
though the dwelling has a side door leading to a small entrance passage- 
way, the smoke hole in the roof is used as a means of entrance when the 
skin and flesh of the bear killed during the bear festival is lowered into the 
dwelling, and evidently harks back to the time when the smoke hole 
served as the only means of exit and entrance to this semi-underground 
dwelling. Then too the Gilyak who adopted the Manchu plank dwelling, 
which has no smoke hole, remove the fishskin coverings from the windows, 
despite the winter frost, when sacred objects relating to the bear festival 
are taken out of the house and returned. The very expressions for “going 
in” and “going out” of the dwelling (kusind and yugind) mean “to 
plunge”’ and ‘dive out,” which notion corresponds to the use of the 
smoke hole as an entrance. 

Dog driving, which is a characteristic trait of arctic life, was adopted 
from the Gilyak by the Ainu, Goldi, and Orochi. The sledge, the mode 
of harnessing dogs, and sitting astride when driving, is reminiscent of the 
ancient: Kamchadal dog driving and of Chukchee and Koryak reindeer 
driving. 

But, we have not yet answered the question as to which specific 
tribe the Gilyak are related. Many origin traditions of Gilyak clans 
refer to the appearance of these clans on the coasts of Sakhalin on hovykh’s! 
from the north. Sternberg also suggests that the Gilyak were related to 
the Aleut, but all these hypothesis are not based on facts. It is true that 
the comparative hairiness of the Gilyak approaches that of the Ainu, 
pat een brachyeephalic head form is comparable only to that of the 

"The G ilyak s ap ig the term, hen: to the lumps of earth brok ff f 
or to ice blocks floatiny i in the northern waters. e a cae 

60 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Aleut. Generally speaking, the Gilyak, both in language and somatology, 
occupy an isolated position among the surrounding tribes. It may be 
added also that the absence of the use of the skin boat can be considered 
an argument against their supposed northern origin, for instead of this 
type of boat they employ a light poplar dugout canoe. 

The Gilyak are semi-sedentary and they change their dwelling places 
several times during the summer, moving up and down the rivers and to 
the seacoast, following the migrating fish and hunting seals in the river 
mouths. 

THe Asiatic ESKIMO AND COMMANDER ALEUT 

The Siberian Eskimo and the Aleut of the Komandorski, or, more 
correctly, Commander Islands, may be classed with the Americanoids. 
Since both these Eskimo divisions belong politically to Russia, they 
should be described with the other natives of Asiatic Russia. 

THE ASIATIC ESKIMO 

Both Wrangel and Nordenskiold' mention an Eskimo tribe that some 
two hundred years occupied the whole Arctic Coast, from Cape Shelag- 
sky to Bering Strait, but was driven away by the Chukchee. Their chief 
argument is based upon the difference between the actual Chukchee 
dwellings and the remnants of the old underground houses scattered 
along the coast. In reality, says Bogoras,? this difference means nothing 
more than that with the increase of reindeer breeding, the underground 
dwellings because of their unwholesomeness, and the necessarily great 
consumption of oil, were gradually abandoned by the Eskimo and Chuk- 
chee for a tent-like type of habitation. 

Liitke and Wrangel mention Onkilon and Namollo as tribal names 
of the Eskimo, but of these, the former resembles the Chukchec-Koryak 
Ankalin (maritime dweller) and the Koryak Namollo, from the word, 
nimilu, which means settlers, 7.e., coast settlers. It cannot be denied 
that the Arctic Coast was previously inhabited by a considerable number 
of Eskimo, who, little by little, were assimilated by the Chukchee. 
Thus, some of the Arctic Chukchee village names have an Eskimo-like 
sound which can be accounted for on the basis of the Eskimo language, 
especially the Aiwan dialect.’ At the present time, on the whole western 
coast of Bering Sea, only five underground houses are still inhabited, one 
at Uwelen and four at Nookan. 

\Nordenskiold, 406. 

2Rogoras, 21. 

In discussing the question of former Eskimo occupation of the Siberian Arctic Coast, a very remote 
period of time is not meant, ao that in this sense the assumed recent Eskimo migrations from Asia into 
America and vice versa do not interfere with the general theory of the Asiatic origin of the American 
population. 

TS 

‘£IO}LII9} UBYSeTY Ul ‘OWTYs| purysy 
gousIMme’y “yg 94} Aq ueyods yey} 04 srepTUNIs yooyerp v Zuryeeds pu yulog uviIpuy uo Zuiaq ‘dnois yeuemry ay} 0} Suopeq payeszysnq]I e104 
spenplarpul ey, *(ueUr ‘YN Wo] ‘femnjd) 4yMX seajeswIsy} [Jeo OWUDSY oyVIsy sayy, “Ue pue ULWOM OUITASY ONVISy “ET “BIY 

62 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

According to Bogoras, in 1900 the Asiatic Eskimo in the villages of 
the Chukchee Peninsula numbered 1200, while on the western island of 
the Diomedes group, belonging to Russia, 108 individuals were found, 
totaling 1,308 (632 men; 676 women). Ethnically, the Eskimo of east- 
ern Diomede Islands and of St. Lawrence Island, which belong to the 
United States, should be classified with the Asiatic Eskimo. They 
number 272. Thus, the total Asiatic Eskimo population is 1580. 

Dialectically, the Asiatic Eskimo may be divided into three groups :— 

1. The Aiwanat (plur. from Aiwan) live on.Indian Point and at four 
other coast villages. This name is also applied to the Maritime Chukchee 
who do not own reindeer. . 

2. The inhabitants of the Eskimo village, Nookan, on East Cape, 
are called Nookalit, or derisively, Peekit, from Peek, the Eskimo name 
for East. Cape. 

3. The Wootéelit, the inhabitants of Wuteen, the last Eskimo 
village on Cape Ulakhpen, to the northwest of Plover Bay.! 

The Nookalit dialect is intermediate between that of the Aiwanat 
and the natives of the Diomede Islands which, in turn, is connected with 
that. of the Alaskan Eskimo. Another dialect is spoken by the Wootéelit. 
The language of the St. Lawrence Eskimo is quite similar to that of the 
Asiatic Aiwanat who are traditionally believed to have come from the 
mainland, probably from Indian Point. 

The inhabitants of Diomede Islands are called Yikirgaulit (the 
large mouthed), the labrets which they formerly wore having made their 
mouths very conspicuous. The Asiatic Eskimo in general call themselves 
Yu'it (the plural of yuk, man), just as the American Eskimo call them- 
selves Inuit (the plural of inuwk, or inung, man). 

THE ALEUT OF THE COMMANDER ISLANDS 

The Commander Islands, when first discovered by Bering in 1741, 
were uninhabited. That the animals on the islands had no fear of men, 
and that the latter had to exercise care lest they be bitten by foxes, 
while asleep in their tents, may be considered good evidence that no man 
had previously visited the islands. Before 1826 there were no permanent 
settlements on the Commander Islands, although Russian hunting parties 
sometimes spent one or more winters on the islands from which large 
numbers of valuable skins were exported. 

In 1826 the so-called Russian-American Company who leased all 
its American possessions from the Russian Government. colonized the 
Commander Islands, with Aleut from Attu and Atka Islands. Subse: 

- tBogorasa, 29; ale map atthe Chukchee Peninsula. _ 

SIBERIAN AMERICANOIDS 63 

quently, Aleut from other Aleutian Islands, as well as Kodiak Eskimo 
and Indians from Sitka were brought to the Commander Islands. The 
last group from the east (30 Aleut from Attu) were brought in 1872. 
In 1888, 26 Aleut and Kurilians were transported from Kamchatka. In 
addition, various other Siberian natives and Russian laborers were 
brought to the Commander Islands, and clerks and attendants and 
officials of Russian, Polish, Lettish, and American origin have added to 
the confusion of races. However, the racial nucleus was Aleut, so that 
the Aleut physical type and language predominate. On Copper Island 
(Russian, Medny) ,where descendants of the Attu people are most numer- 
ous, the Attu dialect is spoken; on Bering Island, however, the inhabit- 
ants are mainly from Atka and that dialect is used. 

In 1909 there were, on both islands, 501 natives (251 men; 250 
women) and 51 whites (24 men; 27 women). The native population is 
constantly decreasing; in 1892 it was 826. Thus it will be noted that in 
seventeen years it decreased by twenty percent. 

Villages and Dwellings. On Bering Island, there are three perma- 
nent villages, Nikolskoye, Lodyghinskoye, and Sarannaya, and two 
temporary summer settlements, Severnoye and Staraya Gavan. There is 
one permanent village, Preobrashenskoye, and two summer settlements, 
Glinka and Korabelnoye, on Copper Island. 7 

The Commander Aleut live in wooden houses built of posts and 
planks brought from America for them by the Russian American Com- 
pany, but the old earth house which is warmer than the wooden house in 
the inclement Bering Sea climate is still the prevailing type of dwelling on 
Bering Island. Coal is imported for fuel; the coastal villages also have 
driftwood. The islands are treeless, except for low willows, mountain ash 
(Sorbus sambucifolia), and dwarf birches (Betula ermanni and Betula nana). 

Food. There were two varieties of food: local and imported. The 
local food consists of flesh of fur seals and sea otters, seals, and sea lions, 
but seals and sea lions are seldom killed now. At rare intervals, whale 
carcasses are cast ashore, the flesh and fat of which are much liked by the 
Aleut. Sea urchin roe and octopus meat, either raw or cooked, are con- 
sidered delicacies. They also eat different species of shellfish and holo- 
thuroidea. There is an abundance of sea fish, like cod and halibut, but 
during the winter storms, sea fishing is impossible, and consequently, 
there is no fresh food during this period. 

In summer, migrating salmon ascend the rivers and lakes to spawn 
and many gulls, cormorants, sea parrots, and auks are caught. Also, 
thousands of eggs are gathered at the nesting places and added to the 
Aleut menu. In winter, ptarmigan and ducks are taken. 

64 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Among imported foods, flour has first place (about 300 pounds a 
year per person), then biscuits (20 pounds a year for each person), lard, 
rice, butter, grits, salt meat, corned beef, etc. . For the most part, these 
products, together with wood, metal wares, guns, and clothing, were 
brought from America, as they are cheaper than those from Russia. 

Clothing. The Commander Aleut wear clothing of American make 
and European fashion. Some clothing of the primitive type, especially 
that worn on the hunt, is still in use, but of these garments only sealskin 
boots with soles of sea lion skin and trousers and raincoats of guts of sea 
mammals or of fur seals have been preserved. The ancient birdskin coats 
are no longer worn. 

Fur Seal Hunting. Of fur-bearing animals there are blue foxes, 
sea otters, and fur seals. Sea otter rookeries are now found only on 
Copper Island. Fur seal hunting is now the most important among the 
Aleut who are regarded as government employees who kill fur seals and 
other fur-bearing animals for the government or the lease holders. In 
return for each skin, the hunters are given a proportionate amount of 
food, clothing, and fuel. 

Boats. The Commander Aleut no longer make skin boats, but use 
American whale boats. Their prowess as seamen seems to have declined, 
for now they never venture far from shore, and crossing the straits 
between Copper and Bering islands is regarded as a heroic deed. 

Dog Breeding. Driving dogs are kept only on Bering Island and 
used in winter as well as in summer, when they drag the sledges over the 
tundra mosses. When not in harness the dogs are tied up near the 
villages. In 1909 there were 390 driving dogs on Bering Island. On 
Copper Island, where no driving dogs are kept, the Aleut use snowshoes 
in winter and river boats in summer, or travel afoot. 

Domestic Animals. There are no horses on the Commander Islands. 
Of horned cattle in 1909 there were forty head on Bering Island and 
seventeen on Copper Island where there were also several goats. The 
Aleut build no stalls nor make hay, so that in the winter the cattle move 
alone to the mountains or to the coast where the winds blow the snow off 
the ground and they are able to graze on the withered grass. They 
have no milk throughout the long winter. They keep pigs; there were 
not many of them on Bering Island, but on Copper Island, where no dogs 
are kept and the pigs ran about freely, there were about ninety of them. 
In the winter the cattle and pigs grow a heavier coat of hair than those oD 
the continent. Of domesticated birds there are few on Bering Island on 
account of the dogs, but on Copper Island, there were about one hundred 
hens and ducks in 1909. 

CHAPTER III 

SIBERIANS OF UNDETERMINED ANTHROPOLOGICAL 
POSITION 

Under this head will be considered two unrelated tribes having no 
affiliation with other ethnical divisions of Siberia: the Yenisei Ostyak, 
or more simply, the Yeniseians, and the Ainu. 

THE YENISEIANS 

Three quite distinct tribes are called Ostyak: 1, the Ugrian Ostyak 
(see p. 17); 2, Samoyed Ostyak (p. 22); and 3, Yenisei Ostyak. 
This situation is very confusing for the student of Siberian ethnography. 
We propose to apply the name Ostyak only to the Ugrian Ostyak, or 
Ostyak proper. The Samoyed Ostyak may be called Narym Samoyed, 
since the majority (4,821 out of 5,805 Ostyak Samoyed) live in the Narym 
District of Tomsk Province. The Yenisei Ostyak may be designated 
simply Yeniseians. Klaproth'! has proposed that the term Ostyak be 
discarded and that the Yeniseians include the Kott, the extinct Assam, 
and the Tartarized Arin. The Yeniseians call themselves Din.? It cannot 
be ascertained whether or not this name has something in common with 
the Dintin’ (Ting-Ting) people mentioned in the Chinese annals, who, 
together with the Uigur and Khakas (Kirghiz) are described as having 
fair complexions, light hair, and blue eyes. The present Yeniseians have 
hair lighter than the dark brown or black hair of their neighbors, the 
Samoyed, Ugrian Ostyak, and Tungus. Individuals with blue eves are 
also found among them, but whether this is an original character or 
should be ascribed to Russian admixture remains an open question. Be- 
fore the seventeenth century the Yeniseians were under the influence, 
first of Turkic and later of Mongol tribes, but since then the Russian in- 
fluence has over-ridden all others. 

The Yeniseian tribes (Assam, Arin, Kott, Sagai) were still numerous 
in the beginning of our era. Some, Radloff states, were annihilated by 
‘invading Ugrian Samoyed,® while others soon became Turkicized, like 
the Khakas, who may originally have been related to the Yeniseians, and 
who, after being Turkicized, formed the Kirghiz nation. It also remains 
an open question whether the Turkicized Yeniseians were the makers of 

'Klaproth, (a), 266. 
2Anuchin, 37. 
5For further mention of the Dinlin see the chapter on Pee and Migrations (p. 235). 

‘Radloff, (a), vol. 1, 123, 136; vol. 2, 143; Bichurin, vol. 
’Radlof, (a), vol 2, 101 

65 

66 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

the “‘pisanitzy,” the pictographic inscriptions on the Yenisei and the 
Orkhon, deciphered by V. Thomsen and W. Radloff.' 

As has been shown by Castren,? the Yeniseian languages are struc- 
turally quite different from those of the Mongoloid stock. For example, in 
the Yeniseian dialects, in pluralizing nouns the root vowels are changed; 
the genitive case has different endings for animate and inanimate objects; 
and pronomina and predicates may indicate the sex. All of these mor- 
phological modifications are unknown in Mongoloid languages. 

The present Yeniseian territory follows the banks of the Yenisei 
River and its tributaries between the Russian village, Antziferova (near 
Yeniseisk), on the south, and the mouth of the Kureika (an eastern 
tributary of the Yenisei) in the north. The Yeniseians number 988 
(535 men; 453 women). On the Yenisei River they live in villages 
segregated from, but in close proximity to, the Russian settlements, or 
even among the Russians. But the greater number of Yeniseians live 
on the banks of the eastern tributaries of the Yenisei, Podkamennaya 
Tunguska, Bakhta, Nishnaya Tunguska, and Kureika. On the west they 
live chiefly on the banks of the Yelogaya River. In addition, some 
Tungus groups also live on the banks of the eastern tributaries of the 
Yenisei River while along its western tributaries dwell the Samoyed. 
The Russians, however, constitute the major population unit on the 
Yenisei River. 

All the Yeniseians have been baptized, but their Christianity, like 
that of many Siberian natives, consists chiefly in the observance of 
certain rites of the Greek Catholic church, and is merely superimposed 
on their aboriginal shamanistic conceptions and practices. Of 988 Yeni- 
seians, 952 (525 men; 427 women) still regard Yeniseian as their native 
tongue, while only 36 (10 men; 26 women) recorded Russian as their 
native language. The Yeniseians are among those Siberian natives who 
are rapidly becoming extinct. The census of 1859 reported 1,652 Yen- 
iseians, but in 1897 only 988 were recorded. It is regrettable that there 
is not yet available a thorough investigation of this interesting tribe 
which seems to have an admixture of Aryan blood and which is probably 
a small remnant of a numerous stock which emigrated from Central Asia 
to Siberia through the gateway of the sources of the Yenisei River. 

Castren has given us a somewhat incomplete conception of the 
Yeniseian language, while other writers‘ have published superficial 

'1Thomsen, (a), 1-15; (b), 11; Radloff, (d), 425-503. 
2Castren, (c). 

3Patkanoff, (c), 108; (a), 116. 

4Stepanoff; Tretyakoff; Krivoshapkin. 

YENISEIANS AND AINU 67 

descriptions of the tribe, but no data as to its origin. The same criticism 
applies to the contributions of V. I. Anuchin who in 1906 was commis- 
sioned by the Museum for Anthropology and Ethnography of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences to study the Yeniseians.' The report of the 
expedition to the Yenisei (1914-1915) undertaken by the late Miss M. A. 
Czaplicka and Mr. H. U. Hall, Curator of Ethnology of the University 
Museum, Philadelphia, has not yet been published.” 

Tue AINU 

Even more complicated than the question of the origin of the Yen- 
iseians is that of the origin of the Ainu. Although at present, the Ainu, 
numbering about 20,000, are all under Japanese sovereignity, still, in 
view of their historical and ethnological connections, they should be 
included with the Siberian natives. First of all, let us sketch their 
historical background. 

After having conquered Kamchatka in the beginning of the 
eighteenth century, the Russians found their way to the Kurile Islands, 
inhabited by a division of the Ainu. The Russians made their first 
permanent settlement on Sakhalin Island in 1857, but the southern 
part was held by the Japanese until 1895, when they ceded it to Russia, 
in exchange for the Kurile Islands. By the treaty of Portsmouth 
in 1905, the southern part of Sakhalin, below 50°, north latitude, 
was re-ceded to Japan. Before the Japanese migration from the 
mainland all the islands now Japanese were occupied by the Ainu. At 
present, 15,000 or more Ainu may be found on Yezo Island. In fifty- 
four coast. villages in the southern part of Sakhalin Island there were, in 
1897, 1,443 (762 men, 681 women) Ainu.? Twenty-nine villages were 
located on the Pacific Coast. and twenty-five on the coast of Tatar 
Strait, and about 500 Ainu live on the five southernmost Kurile Islands. 
The inhabitants of the northern Kurile Islands were transferred to the 
southern ones after the Japanese Government took possession of them, 
the northern Kurile Islands are now visited only by Japanese hunters and 
revenue ships. 

The presence of a Caucasoid tribe amid Mongoloid and Americanoid 
peoples had puzzled the first European travelers to the Far East, and 

_ This investigator should, however, not be confused with the late Professor D. N. Anuchin, the 
Pane nt Russian geographer and anthropologist. Of his information on the Yeniseians, V. I. Anuchin 
pe pub lahedl butt a single article on the shamanism of the Yenisei Ostyak. His physical measurements 
; eee Yeniseinns were published by N. A. Sinelnikoff who gives the following averages: for stature, 
! con cephalic index, 83.1; cephalo-facial index, 79.1. No facial index is given. 
_ “Hall has published a brief account of his expedition to Siberia which contains many interesting 
poutts: but, by no means solves the question of the orign of the Yeniseians (27-45). 
*Accorrding to Japanese data there are at present about 2,000 Ainu Sakhalin on Island. 

68 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

many quite contradictory opinions as to their origin were. presented.! 
In view of their hirsuteness they were identified with the Aryans, Semites, 
Todas, Australians, and even Melanesians. Even an authority like the 
late Professor Baelz insisted on the relationship of the Ainu to the Cauca- 
sian race.2. And this seems the only solution of the somatological aspect 
of the question, although the problem of their migrations and the route 
and time when a small Caucasian tribe may have fought its way through 
or was driven to the east by the Asiatic Mongoloid tribes remains un- 
solved. Schrenck expresses the opinion that the Ainu must have stopped 
in Korea before landing on the Japanese Islands. As the Japanese in- 
vaded the islands more than three thousand years ago, it follows that the 
Ainu must have long preceded them to have made possible the accumu- 
lation of the extensive archeological remains found on the Japanese 
archipelago. 

Also, the question remains whether a pre-Ainu population ever 
existed, as some authors (Sternberg, Pilsudski) contend, basing their 
belief on Ainu traditions and on the examination of skeletons excavated 
by Professor Tsuboi. Of course, it is quite natural to assume that 
another race preceded the Ainu, or, at least, co-existed with them on the 
Japanese Islands before the arrival of the Japanese, but the weight of 
archeological evidence favors the view that the ancestors of the present 
Ainu were the earliest inhabitants. Sternberg and Pilsudski maintain 
that the builders of the prehistoric pit dwellings on Sakhalin Island were 
not Ainu, but a mythical tribe, the Tonchi.? The late Professor Tsuboi’ 
held that the so-called Koropok-guru, the ancient pit-dwellers of Yezo, 
were a pre-Ainu dwarf people related to the Eskimo. However, later 
investigators have clearly shown that both the Tonchi and Koropok- 
guru are the ancestors of the present Ainu. Tonchi (or rather Toi-che) 
means in Ainu, ‘earthen house’’ and Koropok-un-guru, contracted to 
Koropok-guru, means “persons dwelling below.”” The most important 
opponents of the views expressed by Professor Tsuboi are Professor 
Koganei, N. G. Munro, the Rev. John Batchelor, and Doctor Laufer.’ 
Koganei and Munro, after comparing pre-Japanese skeletons with those 
of the Ainu found them identical with the present Ainu; archaeological 
objects were also attributed to ancestors of the present Ainu. It is of in- 
terest to note that Batchelor who lived among the Ainu for many years 
as a missionary and studied their language, agreed, at first, with Tsuboi’ 

iSchrenck, (a), 252-275. 7 
iSternberg: Filoudski. 

‘Tsuboi. 
5Koganei, (a), (b): Munro, (a), (b); Batchelor; Laufer, (a). 

YENISEIANS AND AINU 69 

theory, but later revised his views regarding the Ainu as the original 
inhabitants of the pits at Yezo.! 

While in Yokohoma in 1911 the writer visited Doctor Munro who 
practised medicine there. In discussing the Ainu problem he expressed 
the opinion that the supporters of Tsuboi’s theory were influenced by 
political motives. The view that the Ainu are not the original inhabit- 
ants of Yezo was regarded as a moral excuse when the Japanese Govern- 
ment forced them out of many localities which were later colonized by 
Japanese. The original Ainu occupation of the southern part of Sak- 
halin Island and the Kurile Islands was also due to Japanese pressure. 
Not only on Yezo, but also on the main island, have many place names 
been proved to be of Ainu origin. In their northward movements the 
Ainu came into contact with the Kamchadal who thus acquired some 
items of Ainu culture. The clay vessels with handles attached inside, 
excavated by the author from ancient Kamchadal pit dwellings, were 
adopted from the Ainu.? 

Physically many Ainu have a Mongoloid appearance, particularly 
in their prominent cheek bones and the eyefold. The low cephalic index 
of the Ainu is almost identical with that of the Japanese, and differs 
greatly from that of the Gilvak and their Sakhalin and Amur River 
neighbors, which is higher, indicating a shorter and wider head form. 

ae (b), 85. 
“The results of the author's excavati K i ; i i 
hisses: Wahine phcaee ne on Kamchatka Peninsula were published by the Carnegie 

CHAPTER IV 
THE NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 

Turkestan, or perhaps more correetly, Turkistan, means the land of 
Turks. However, at the dawn of history, Central Asia was occupied 
mainly by Aryan peoples, though later, when the Aryan tribes were sub- 
jugated by Turkic invaders, the country was named Turkestan, As early 
as the ninth century, we find the term, Turkestan, mentioned by Arab 
geographers. As the present Turkic tribes of Turkestan are chiefly 
descendants of Aryan-Turkie and also of some Mongolian mixtures, they 
are called Iranian Turks, as opposed to Turanian, or pure Turks. 

Historically, as well as ethnically, Turkestan has passed through 
many vicissitudes. Few countries have experienced so many changes, 80 
many civil and foreign wars, such numerous invasions, and sanguinary 
disturbances, Lying as it does at the crossroads between northern and 
southern Asia, on the one hand, and China and western Asia and Murope, 
on the other, if. has served, from time immemorial, as the meeting place of 
various peoples and cultures and as the arena for the activities of the 
greatest Asiatic conquerors. Cyrus, Alexander the Great, Jenghis 
Khan, Timur, Nadir Khan, the Arabian chief, Kuteibabin Muslim, and 
many minor leaders invaded the country, and with the help of their 
violent and greedy hordes desolated it. These interminable wars ceased 
only after Turkestan was conquered by Russia in 1867, 

AKA 

Before the revolution of October, 1917, Turkestan occupied an area 
of 788,317 square miles and included five provinces (having an aren of 
673,997 xquare miles) governed by Russian officials, and) two vassal 

Khanates, that of Bokhara and Khiva, which occupied 114,320 square 

miles, 
¢ 

ADMINISTRATION 
For administrative purposes Turkestan was divided into five 
provinces: 
1. Semirechye, seat, of government at Verni. 
2. Syr Daria, the governor’s residence at Tashkent, 
4.) Verganna, the governor's residence at. Margelan, Jater re-named 
Skobeley, 

J 4 . 
4. Sumarkand, the governor's residence of the same name, 

f mh ’ 
9 ‘Transeaspia, seat. of government at Merv, 

71 

72 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Transcaspia and Semirechye provinces formerly belonged to the Steppe 
country, but in 1899 were transferred to the Turkestan administration. 
A governor general, with residence in Tashkent, controlled governors of 
the five provinces named above and of the Khans of Khiva and Bokhara 
who retained their semi-independence, and were nominally under the 
protection of Russia. 

STATISTICS 

Because of climatic, topographic, and soil conditions, Turkestan is 
sparsely and unequally populated. Frequently, the density of popula- 
tion of small well-watered and flourishing oases may be compared with 
the most thickly populated countries of western Europe, and these 
heavily populated districts alternate with unpeopled steppes or deserts, 
covering many thousands of square miles. The presence of human habi- 
tations is closely connected with the availability of water, for, wherever 
the water supply is sufficient we find a dense and prosperous population. 
Where water is lacking, life, both human and otherwise, deteriorates 
and disappears. The rainfall which is entirely absent in summer is 
very scant in winter. Perhaps the most remarkable feature in all 
Turkestan is its wonderful irrigation system which apparently has con- 
siderable antiquity, for without these irrigation canals nothing could 
ever have grown. Traces of ancient canals in what are now unreclaimed 
deserts have convinced archeologists that in many districts now unin- 
habited, rich and populous cities once flourished. Upon excavation, 
many mounds are found to have been town sites.! So, in Turkestan, 
water is precious, as is borne out pointedly by the following Sart saying: 
‘Drop upon drop makes a sea; if there are no drops there is a desert.” 

The following table shows the territorial extent of the population 
in the five provinces and two Khanates of Turkestan. 

Province Territory in Population Individuals 
Square Miles in 1909 per square mile 

Semirechye 152,280 1,158,900 7.6 
Syr Daria 194,853 1,837,200 9.4 
Fergana 86,000 1,900,200 22.1 
Samarkand 26,627 1,154,800 43.3 
Transcaspia 214,237 429 300 2.0 
Bokhara Khanate 92,000 2,500,000 27.1 

1.1 

Khiva Khanate 22,320 550,000 

1 oN 

'Pumpelly. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 73 

The greater number of the inhabitants of Turkestan are agri- 
culturists and cattle breeders, therefore the rural population far out- 
numbers that of the cities. In the Russian provinces only 13.8 percent 
of the population is found in the cities. Some of the cities located in the 
southeast and south of Turkestan are very old and flourished for hun- 
dreds or perhaps thousands of years before the Russian occupation; some 
towns, on the other hand, have developed since the Russian conquest , 
and particularly, since the building of railroads. In some places, directly 
adjacent to the native cities there have developed practically distinct 
cities populated entirely by Russians, like the Russian quarter of Tash- 
kent, Samarkand, Kokand, and others. Some small villages (auls) 
became towns and in many places new cities like Krasnovodsk, Verni, 
Skobelev, Kazalinsk, etc., were established. The relation between the 
urban and rural population is shown in the following table :— 

Province Urban Percent Rural Percent 
Semirechye 6.4 93.6 
Syr Daria 13.9 86.1 
Fergana 18.1 81.9 
Samarkand 15.7 84.3 
Transeaspia 10.9 89.1 
Bokhara 13.0 87.0 
Khiva 5.0 95.0 

Fergana Province has the greatest number of town dwellers and Khiva, 
the smallest. 

The following census figures for 1897 may be of interest with refer- 
ence to the distribution of the sexes in the five Russian provinces :— 

Province Absolute Number Relative Number 

of of 
Men Women Men Women 
Semirechye 529,215 458,648 53.6 46.4 
Syr Daria 803,411 674,987 54.3 45.7 
Fergana 852,919 719,295 54.2 45.8 
Samarkand 472,443 387,578 54.9 45.1 
Transcaspia 212,638 169,849 55.5 44.5 
2,870,626 2,410,357 54.3 45.7 

We note that in all the provinces the men exceed the women. This 
difference in numbers is more marked in the cities. On the average, 
there are 83.8 women to 100 men. This excess of men over women is 

74 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

common in Mohammedan countries. As the cities of Turkestan are still 
in the developmental stage, the exceedingly small number of women may 
be explained by the unsettled mode of life and by the influx of young men 
looking for work and enjoyment. 

PoPpuLATION 

The rural population may be divided, according to mode of life, 
into sedentary or agricultural inhabitants, and nomadic, or cattle, 
horse, or sheep-breeding people. The sedentary people are concentrated 
in the oases, river valleys, and at the foot of mountains, while the 
nomads wander over the steppes seeking fertile pasture land. The hos- 
tility of the nomads towards the settled people is well known and in the 
past they often subjugated more civilized settlers or devastated their 
culture. The history of Turkestan is replete with incidents of this kind. 

Archeologists contend that the cultivation of cereals in Central 
Asia preceded the nomadic culture stage. The Central Asiatic popula- 
tion, before 8,000 B.C., was sharply divided into two classes, sedentary 
agriculturists and migratory hunters. Domestication of animals was 
achieved by nomadic hunters after 8,000 B.C. The larger the herds of 
domesticated animals became, the more extensive were the pasture lands 
required, and the more often did the nomadic herders come into conflict 
with the agriculturists. After epizootics many nomads became cul- 
tivators of cereals. The commodities and comforts of settled civiliza- 
tions influenced the wandering nomads and the immigration of Russian 
settlers and the regulations of the Russian Government were also re- 
sponsible for the disintegration of the nomadic life. One may say that 
the roaming peoples of Turkestan are now in a transition stage between 
nomadism and a sedentary life. Some of the tribes, like the Sarts and 
Tadjik, are sedentary; others, like the Kirghiz and Turkoman, are part 
nomad and part agriculturists. There are no accurate statistics showing 
the number of nomadic peoples, but it is assumed that these constitute 
about thirty percent of the rural population. 

The following table shows the relative numbers of natives:— 

Province Natives Russians Foreigners 
Percent. Percent Percent. 
Semirechye 87.1 12.6 0.3 
Syr Daria 95.2 3.9 0.9 
Fergana 99.1 0.9 er 
Samarkand 97.4 2.4 0.2 
Transcaspia 83.0 12.8 4.2 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 75 

The Russians are officials, priests, traders, and peasants, though more 
than half of them are immigrant agriculturists. The so-called foreign 
group consists chiefly of Persians and subjects of Khiva and Bokhara. 

LANGUAGE AND RELIGION 

Turkestan, dominated as it was by onc invader after another, received 
its chief cultural influences from two nations, the Turkic conquerors who 
imposed their language on its population and the Arabs who forced their 
conversion to Mohammedanism. 

‘Yoming from the Altai country, the Turkic invaders appeared in 
Turkestan in the sixth century. They included also some hybrid groups, 
but all were known under the general name, Turks. Ina short time, they 
subducd all of northern Turkestan and spread far to the south, forming 
a vast Turkic state which, about the end of the sixth century, was divided 
into two parts, an eastern and a western one. The subjugated Iranian 
population not only had a new language superimposed upon its own, but 
underwent, an admixture of Turkic blood. The Chinese, taking advantage 
of the constant internal troubles in these states, in 657 vanquished the 
eastern and then the western Turks, destroying their independence. 
This circumstance aided the new conquerors, the Semitic Arabs, who 
came from the south to subdue Turkestan. 

The first Arab invasion of Persia took place in 633. They gradually 
conquered all Iran and then moved on into Turkestan and after their 
defeat of the Chinese, ruled Turkestan from the seventh to the thirteenth 
centuries. The Arab victory over the Chinese in 751 was the last chapter 
of Chinese domination in Central Asia and made the Arab preéminent so 
that Islamic culture and Mohammedanism were practically all-prevailing 
in Central Asia. 

A brief account of the former religious beliefs of Turkestan may here 
be of interest. The Irano-Turkie tribes of Central Asia were originally 
shamanists, but even before the beginning of our era, Zoroastrianism, 
the Persian state religion under the Sasanian dynasty, had spread in 
Turkestan. And at the same time, the Buddhistic doctrine under 
Chinese influence also found its way into Turkestan. There is evidence 
(the Buddhist, writings in Uigur characters) that at about the cighth 
century some Central Asiatic Turks were followers of Buddha, since the 
conquering Arabs found many Buddhistic convents, monks, and golden 
statues with eyes of pearls. Besides these religious faiths, Manichacism, 
a kind of gnosticism, was current. in Turkestan. The Manichacan religion, 
based on the Mazdeiat. or Maraakiat doctrine, arose in Babylonia and 

: : 
From Maadak, a Persian leader of a communiatia sect, who based hin eecchiae on Worcudviiailer: 

76 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

toward the end of the fifth century, spread into Persia and Turkestan. 
Finally, in the fourth century the Nestorian heresy of Christianity pene- 
trated Turkestan from the west. 

Nestorianism, named after Nestorius, Bishop of Constantinople 
(428-431 A.D.), became so popular in Turkestan that in 420 the Bishop 
of Merv was proclaimed metropolitan. The Arab invaders found Chris- 
tians in Bokhara and, some time later, Nestorianism spread farther to 
the northeast and found proselytes among the different Turkic tribes of 
northern Turkestan. It was not until the beginning of the fourteenth 
century that Christianity was finally supplanted by Mohammedanism. 

At present 95.6 percent of the population of the five provinces of 
Turkestan are Mohammedans; 3.7 percent belong to the Russian church 
(mostly Russians), and 0.7 percent profess other Christian religions, 
Judaism, and other faiths. The population of the Khanates, Khiva 
and Bokhara, with the exception of a small group of Russians, Jews, a 
few Mennonites, is, as a whole, Mohammedan. 

Islamic influence on the political, civil, and economic life of the 
country is so great, that a review of Mohammedanism in Turkestan may 
be quite appropriate at this point. The greater number belong to the so- 
called sunna (or traditions) sect. Besides the Koran, delivered to 
Mohammed by God himself, the Sunnites recognize the traditions or 
explanations (kias) of the Koran by the first four Khalifs, and the deci- 
sions and judgments (hadis) of Khalifs, other than the first four, and by 
the Imams and highest spiritual persons. The Sunnites are much more 
fanatical and zealous in their religious observances than their neighbors, 
the Persians, who are Shiites, and only recognize Mohammed, his 
nephew, Ali, and the Koran, without commentaries. The Sunnite con- 
ception of the world and of religious institutions may be well exemplified 
by the Sart among whom the clergy are the keepers of all traditions. 
There are no priests in the strict sense, since they are neither ordained 
nor consecrated. Every literate man is called mullah (teacher) and one 
well versed in the knowledge of the written law, (shariat), is called ulem 
(scholar, theologist). The mullahs and ulems, whose official positions 
are in accordance with their degree of learning and familiarity with 
Islamic theology and law, form the main group of the clergy, which may, 
be divided into four classes :-— 

1. The parish priest of a mosque (imam) and the sexton (azancht, 
muejin, suffi). 

2. The judge (kazi) and his assistants (aglam and mufti), who ex- 
amine court affairs and lawsuits, basing their rulirtgs on the sharzat. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 77 

3. The teachers (damullah) of the schools for beginners (makteb). 

4. Instructors and professors of law and theology in medresses 
(colleges). 

However, not these, but representatives of the Moslem clergy called 
ishans, pirs, or sheikhs exercise the greatest influence over the spiritual 
life of the Mohammedan population of Turkestan, and are their real 
confessors and preceptors. They occupy no offices, but by their 
ascetic and moral lives attract many followers and form mystic religious 
orders called suffism, in which the order of dervishes is conspicuous. 
Poorly clad, unshod, and long-haired dervishes tear along the streets, 
singing, shouting, dancing in a mad frenzy, and collecting alms. 

The Persians living in Transcaspia Province and a few Tadjik on the 
upper course of the Zarafshan River, belong to the Shiites, who are less 
zealous in their religious observances. 

ETHNICAL COMPOSITION OF THE POPULATION OF TURKESTAN 

As we have previously seen, as a result of numerous invasions the 
original Iranian population of Turkestan was either driven out or physi- 
cally modified by different races. It is therefore no easy task to differen- 
tiate the past population into tribal divisions. We deem it more 
profitable therefore to enumerate the present tribal groups. 

THE KirGHiz 

The name Kirghiz is applied to two tribes related in language, 
customs, and mode of life, but differing in origin, and partly in physical 
type—the Kirghiz-Kaisak and Kara-Kirghiz. 

The Kirghiz-Kaisak, numbering about 1,600,000, occupy the steppes 
of the provinces of Semirechye, Syr Daria, and northwestern Transcaspia; 
they also live in Samarkand Province and in Khiva. They call them- 
selves Kaisak or Kosack, meaning a free, independent people, or by the 
name of the divisions to which they belong. 

The Kara-Kirghiz, meaning Black-Kirghiz, are called Mountain 
Kirghiz by the Russians and are also known as Burut. They live on the 
slopes and in the valleys of Tyan-Shan Mountain. They are called Ki-li- 
ki-dzi by the Chinese in whose annals the Kara-Kirghiz of old are men- 
tioned as forming an independent state, but were afterwards subjugated 
by the Huns and interbred with Mongol and other ethnic elements, and 
later, with the Kirghiz-Kaisak. According to Aristoff, the well-known 
authority on the Turkic tribes, the Kara-Kirghiz are a branch of the 
common Kirghiz tree. The Kaisak say that they had their origin with 

‘Ariatoff, (a), 394, 

78 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

the Uzbeg, and that the Kara-Kirghiz are sprung from dogs; they, 
their part, call themselves brothers of the Kaisak. The exact number 
Kara-Kirghiz in Turkestan is not known, but according to official da 

Fig. 14. A Kirghiz-Kaisak and an Uzbeg (right) Girl. Both are Mohammeda 
of Turkic origin, but the Kirghiz-Kaisak girl (left) shows greater mixture with t 
Mongols. The Uzbeg were originally nomadic cattle breeders, but now many of the 
have taken to agriculture. ‘ 

there were about 540,000, chiefly in Semirechye, but there are u 
doubtly more Kara-Kirghiz than this official record would lead one 
believe. The total number of both branches of Kirghiz in Turkestan 
not less than 2,200,000.' 

‘According to the official statistics of 1911 there were in Turkestan 2,480,443 of both branchet 
Kirghiz, but the statistical report of the Turkestan Socialistic Soviet Republic for 1922 gives the num 
of both branches of Kirghiz as 1,614,217. This decrease may be explained by the political events wh 
have taken place during the last decade. : 

Before the World War the aborigines of Asiatic Russia were exempt from military service, bu 
decree of 1916 called them to the colors. The Kirghiz revolted and the uprising was crushed by ' 
czarist government with the utmost severity. After the revolution of Ortober, 1917, the economic 
of the country was ruined as the result of civil war. The production of cotton and silk, the railroads t 
other means of communication, and eet the irrigation system, the very heart of the peapleis exiater 
were destroyed. The import of grains from European Russia ceased and a famine followed, resulting ! 
loss of ten to twenty percent of the population. Then followed the revolt known as the Basma 
Uprising against the communist régime. Basmachi is a Turkic word denoting a man who_make 
sudden attack, a robber or brigand, from the verb basmék. to fall over unexpectedly. The Basma 
bands devastated unguarded places, killing communists, and robbing their partisans. It has been sta 
that in 1921-1922 from fifty to sixty thousand men participated in the revolt, among whom were § 
many Russian peasanta. Trotaky himself came to Tashkent to direct the military operations. Man) 
the bands were annihilated and others are reported to be still lurking in the mountains. On the ot 
ati many wealthy Kirghiz moved to Mongolia with their herds to escape nationalization by ° 

oviets. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 79 

Perhaps more than other Turkic tribes, the Kirghiz-Kaisak and 
Kara-Kirghiz have clung to their life as nomadic cattle breeders and to 
their clan organization. Since the beginning of the seventeenth century 
the Kirghiz-Kaisak have consisted of three divisions called Ordas (hordes), 
the Great, Middle, and Little Orda. Each orda is divided into tribes or 
unions of paternal clans. Similar divisions may be found among the 
Kara-Kirghiz. They are divided into two “wings,” on (right) and sol 
(left), each wing consisting of tribes and each tribe of clans. 

Somatologically both divisions of Kirghiz represent a mixed type 
with many variations, but the fundamental traits are Turkic with some 
Mongoloid admixture. The Kirghiz-Kaisak are of medium stature (164 
cms.), with a well-developed thorax; their hands and feet are small; 
they have robust constitutions and are inclined to gain considerably in 
weight with advancing age; the skin color is of yellowish tints; the head 
hair is straight, coarse, and black, and becomes gray late in life; the beard 
is scant, growing late, in the form of a wedge; the head is round with a 
brachycephalic index. Their faces are broad with prominent cheek bones; 
their noses broad, short, and low-bridged; their eye fissures are almost 
horizontal and the lids often have a Mongoloid fold; their legs are often 
bowed from constant horseback riding. The Kara-Kirghiz have almost 
the same somatological characters. They are somewhat taller (167 
ems.); their cheek bones are more prominent and they are generally more 
Mongoloid than the Kirghiz-Kaisak. Kirghiz women have more regular 
and pleasanter features than the men. 

The Kirghiz are endowed with fair mental abilities. They have 
good memories, are sociable, hospitable, good-humored, and inquisitive 
The majority are, as yet, illiterate. The Kara-Kirghiz look more re- 
served and unfriendly than the Kirghiz-Kaisak. 

The Turkic dialects of both Kirghiz branches may be distinguished 
from one another by slight phonetic differences and belong to the so- 
called Tatar division of the Turkic languages. Owing to the influence 
of Mohammedanism and the neighboring tribes, many Mongolic, Arabic, 
Tatar, and Russian words have been adopted into the Kirghiz language. 
In writing, the ancestors of the Kirghiz used the Uigur characters derived 
from the Syrian alphabet, which was introduced into Turkestan from 

‘The students of Turko-Tatar languages, Berezin and Mirza Kasem Beg, divide them into three 
ete plaeuion: 2, Tatar; 3, Turkic. Radloff divides the Turkic languages into four groups, accord- 
k f. o their phonetic characteristics: Eastern, Western, Central Asiatic, and Southern dialects. He 

e levee the Kirghiz dialects belong in the Western group. 
benes here were many other classifications of Turkic languages (IIminsky, Korsh, Vambery, Katanoff) 
N Suan ~ well as morphological characteristics. The latest student of Turkic languages 
dinlebta in tke Kincha wean six groups, also based on phonetic characteristics and places the Kirghiz 

80 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Persia by Nestorian preachers. But during the fifteenth century, Uigur 
writing was supplanted, under Mohammedan influence, by the Arabian 
alphabet, which is now in use. 

The Kirghiz are fond of poetry, eloquence, and rhetoric. Verbal 
folklore is well developed. Productions of a lyric character, romantic 
tales, and love songs are more in favor with the Kirghiz-Kaisak, while 
epic poetry, tales, and songs about strong men and war heroes are more 
developed among the Kara-Kirghiz. Tales of khans, monsters, animals, 
and other supernatural beings are numerous and of a great variety. 
Folk tales are not recited, but sung to the accompaniment of the dombra 
(a kind of three-stringed guitar, Russian balalaika), or the kobyz (guitar). 
Contests in the improvisation of songs form the most popular amusement. 

Dwellings are of two kinds: that for summer consists of a circular 
frame with a dome-like top, covered with felt and called oo7. The winter 
dwelling is a hut (kstauw) made of withes and reeds covered with earth. 
Some of the rich Kirghiz now build log houses for the winter. This 
change in type of abode is connected with the development of agriculture 
among the Kirghiz and the shift to a sedentary life. 

Food consists chiefly of the products of their cattle and horses: 
milk and airan (sour milk mixed with water), zrimchzk (sweet sheep pot 
cheese), kurt or krut (dry cheese made of sour sheep pot cheese), and 
among the rich, kumiss, a drink made of fermented mare’s milk. During 
the summer, people of means live almost exclusively on kumiss, consuming 
it in enormous quantities. Porridge made of millet flour is also a favorite 
food. The Kirghiz are fond of tea with sugar, using mainly brick tea. 
Like all herders, they spare their domestic animals and consume very 
little meat, particularly during the summer. Meat, usually mutton, is 
cooked, though horse meat is eaten rarely as a special dainty. They are 
very fond of boursak, pieces of unleavened dough fried in mutton fat, 
which takes the place of bread, to some degree; kaurdak, roasted meat; 
and palau, stewed rice. They seldom eat birds, fish, and vegetable foods. 
They do not use many cooking vessels, but every household has a cast- 
iron kettle in which meat is cooked, linen washed, and babies bathed. 

The nomadic life of the Kirghiz is entirely the result of his occupa- 
tion as a herder which necessitates traveling over vast stretches of terti- 
tory unfit for agriculture. Their domestic animals are horses, cattle, 
sheep, camels, asses, and goats. Two species of the domesticated horse 
are known in Turkestan, the Kirghiz and the Turkoman. The Kirghiz 
horse is small, but sturdy and strong. He has a large head and a short 
back. He, like his master, has great powers of endurance and cad 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 81 

sustain life without food for several days at a time. He is ridden and 
driven in harness and provides his master with food and drink and 
materials for clothing and footwear. Like other domestic animals, the 
Kirghiz horses graze under the watch of a herder. A herd of horses 
usually consists of one stallion and thirty to forty mares and colts. 
Several herds form a drove. Rich Kirghiz often own from five hundred 
to one thousand horses. 

Cattle are kept in Turkestan by the nomadic, as well as the settled 
inhabitants, chiefly as working animals and for milking. The flesh is 
seldom eaten as the Kirghiz prefer mutton or horse meat. In late years 
cattle breeding has increased at the cost of horse breeding, and has been 
found to be more profitable. There is a distinct Kirghiz species of 
horned cattle. In some mountainous places the Kirghiz rear the domes- 
ticated yak (Poephagus grunicus). 

Sheep breeding is the chief and most important branch of zooculture 
in Turkestan, but only the nomadic or semi-nomadic Kirghiz and Turko- 
man rear sheep. More than three-quarters of the nomadic Kirghiz 
domestic budget has its source in the income derived from sheep breed- 
ing. In the steppes a year-old ram still serves as a unit of value in barter- 
ing. The Kirghiz chiefly rear the broad-tailed species of sheep derived 
from Turkestan. It furnishes very good meat and fat and various milk 
products. From sheep milk either pure or mixed with cow milk, the 
Kirghiz prepare katyk (sour milk), krut (a kind of pot cheese), aizan 
(pot cheese mixed with water), a refreshing drink, and butter. From 
sheep wool the Kirghiz prepare tent covers, rugs, clothing, rope, bags, 
etc. In some places the Kirghiz rear other species of sheep. In Trans- 
caspia Province may be found the so-called yomud' species, a hybrid of 
the Kirghiz and Kurd sheep, and the Persian species called aimak, which 
furnishes valuable white wool. In Bokhara and also in Samarkand and 
some districts of Transcaspia is bred the karakul, skins of which are 
exported to Europe and America. The karakul sheep is traditionally 
believed to have been brought to Turkestan by the Arabs. In recent 
times the angora goat was introduced from the Caucasus into the Ash- 
kabad District of Transcaspia and has been well acclimatized. 

Camel breeding is also an important branch of Turkestan animal 
industry. In spite of the expansion of railroad lines, the camel remains 
the chief, and sometimes the only, means of transportation over the 
steppes and deserts of Turkestan. In strength, endurance, and docility, 
it ‘Surpasses all animals domesticated by man, with the Probable excep- 

'Yomud is the r name oF 6 one af the Turkornnii divisions. 

82 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

tion of the elephant. There are two species of camel, the one-humped 

(Camelus dromedarius) and the two-humped (Camelus bactrianus). 
The one-humped camel (nar) is more sensitive to cold and is used, 

therefore, in the southern parts of Turkestan; the two-humped camel 

Fig. 15. A Kirghiz riding a Yak. 

(air) has more endurance and is employed most frequently in the northern 
parts of Turkestan. Camels are used not only as beasts of burden, but 
also in agricultural work. Their flesh is tough and tasteless and they are 
killed only because of age or incurable sickness. Camel’s hair is more 
valuable than sheep wool; it is removed once a year in the spring or early 
summer when the camels moult. The milk is rich in fat and when used 
is mixed with the milk of other domestic animals. Kumiss is also prepared 
from camel’s milk. It is thicker and more nutritious than mare’s kumiss. 
In the nomadic life of the open steppes the camel is a necessary animal, 
while in the oases, in villages and towns, the donkey is equally indis- 
pensable. It has endurance, is docile, obedient, and inexpensive, so that 
even poor people can afford it. 

Swine breeding, which was unknown in Turkestan before the advent 
of Russian colonists, is now developing in the Russian villages. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 83 

Religion. All the Kirghiz are Sunnites, but are less fanatical in their 
religious observances than the sedentary Mohammedans. They have no 
permanent or parish priests and not many of them are literate. Circum- 
cision is performed by Tatar mullahs who wander through the steppes. 
Some of them live in the camps of the rich people, lead a pious life, and 
practise medicine. They also take part in funerals, reading verses from 
the Koran over the deceased. The body, after being washed, is usually 
put into a cylinder of cotton or silk, open at each end, then the ends are 
tied up to form a bag. As no coffins are used, the grave is shallow, only 
three feet below the surface, and is so dug that when the body is lowered, 
it can be slipped into a niche hollowed out in the side of the grave. Thus, 
no earth is thrown upon it in filling the grave. In another type of grave, 
the niche is of bricks plastered with clay. 

Some old shamanistic beliefs have also been preserved. The 
shaman (baksy) cures sick people and also performs on other occasions. 
According to the written law (shariat), the Kirghiz may have four wives, 
but only the wealthy can avail themselves of this privilege, since the pay- 
ment of a vride price (kalym) in ca{tle or money is necessary. Sometimes 
the bride price is as much as three hundred head of cattle. A local 
proverb says: “When a Sart becomes rich he will build a new house, and 
when a Kirghiz becomes rich he acquires wives.”’ 

Kirghiz women enjoy much more freedom than do the women of the 
sedentary Mohammedan tribes. They do not veil their faces, take part 
in conversations with men, and freely ride about on the steppes, and 
though they work hard, their position in the household is far more 
important than that of the Sart woman. The first wife is called bai-biche, 
1.e., the elder wife, and she directs the work of the household and appor- 
tions it among the younger wives. All the women join in the difficult task 
of setting up the felt tent. A Kirghiz man would never dream of assist- 
ing his wife in her household duties. The men devote themselves almost 
entirely to the care of their horses, leading, in general, a lazy and shift- 
less life. This is particularly true of the wealthy herd owners. The Kir- 
ghiz arc sociable and always eager for fresh news; as soon as a Visitor 
arrives with a piece of news one of the family immediately starts off on a 
fresh horse to pass it on to some distant acquaintance. 

Costume. Being Mussulmen, the men shave their heads and grow 
beards which are usually very insignificant, mere straggly tufts of hair, 
scarcely covering the chin. They wear immense baggy leather breeches 
and a coarse shirt with wide flapping collar. Under the leather breeches 
they sometimes wear cotton trousers. The outer garment is a robe of 

84 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

cotton or wool; usually two or three of these are worn, according to the 
weather. The rich and distinguished have magnificent silk or velvet 
robes, heavily embroidered in gold and silver. They wear embroidered 
skull caps and over these, oddly shaped sheepskin hoods, with the wool 
inside, or conical felt hats, cut with two slits, for convenience in turning 
up the brims. On important occasions the wealthy don tall steeple- 
crowned hats of felt or velvet, often embroidered with gold. Their 
greatest adornments are their belts, saddles, and bridles which are often 
almost solidly covered with silver, gold, and sometimes precious stones. 
During the winter they wear sheep or wolfskin robes and fur caps with 
ear protectors, and high boots with high heels. In winter their stockings 
and boots are of felt. 

The women’s dress is almost identical with that of the men. Their 
shirts, however, are longer, reaching to the heels. The cotton, wool, or 
silk robe is narrower at the waist and is made of gayly colored material. 
Their heads and necks are swathed in loose folds of white cotton cloth, 
forming a combination of bib and turban. Young girl’s wear round caps 
trimmed with fur, with their hair shorn behind, but hanging in front in 
a score of very long fine braids. Married women wear only two braids. 

Social Organization. In their social organization the Kirghiz 
Kaisak have retained a system of social classes. The descendants of 
former khans form a kind of nobility, called ak-suck-tyure, i.e., white 
bene. The hodji, the descendants of the first adherents cf Mohammed 
also belong to this class. The mass of the people are called kara-suck, 
ie., black bone. According to the common law (adat) of the Kirghiz- 
Kaisak the “white bone” group had some privileges and advantages in 
land owning. Marriages between ‘white’ and “black bones’ were 
regarded as a disgrace for the “white” party. Russian cultural influence 
has, however, diminished the significance of this transgression of the 
common law. 

Among the Kara-Kirghiz there is no privileged class of people, but 
to a certain degree the so-called chiefs (manap) from whom the judges 
(bii) are selected may be regarded as privileged. Formerly, the office ofa 
judge was inherited in the male line. 

Every aspect of Kirghiz life is regulated by the common law (adat) 
and accordingly the paternal clan is the basis of ownership and of all 
social and political relations. The principle of seniority in clan and 
family relations is still extant. The clan defends its members and 
theoretically cares for its poor. A bride is regarded as the property of 
the clan. A Kirghiz proverb says: ‘It is better to be a herder in one’s 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 85 

own clan than a czar in an alien clan,” or, ‘Those who do not know the 
names of their seven ancestors are traitors.” 

THE UZBEG 

The Uzbeg related, in origin, to the Kirghiz, with the latter comprise 
the bulk of the population of Turkestan. According to the census of 
1897, there were 726,072 Uzbeg in the Russian provinces, 336,000 in 
Khiva, and about a million in Bokhara. Thus, the total number is over 
two million. In Semirechye Province, there are no Uzbeg and only 470 
in Transcaspia. In the province of Samarkand, in some districts of Syr 
Daria and Fergana, and in Khiva and Bokhara not only is the mass of 
the population Uzbeg, but this is the dominating group. The rulers of 
Khiva and Bokhara were Uzbeg. 

Properly speaking, Uzbeg is a political rather than an ethnical 

term. It appeared for the first time in the first half of the fourteenth 
century when Uzbeg-Khan, a descendant of Dsuchi or Juji (the elder son 
of Jenghis-Khan), had zealously propagated Mohammedanism among 
the subject, Turkic tribes of northwestern Turkestan. To distinguish 
themselves from their relatives, who still adhered to shamanism, the 
Turks who were converted to Islam began to call themselves Uzbeg, 
after their khan. They became more powerful in the beginning of the 
sixteenth century when they crushed the might of the Timurides under 
the command of Sheibani-Khan, a descendant of Uzbeg-Khan. Besides 
the Turkic hordes, the followers of Sheibani-Khan included a consider- 
able admixture of Mongolic peoples who came with Jenghis Khan and 
were clescendants of the original Iranic population. Thus, the name 
Uzbeg includes a conglomerate of tribes of Turkic origin with a mixture 
of some Mongolic and Iranic elements, physically and ethnically differ- 
entiated in accordance with local conditions. The Uzbeg speak one of 
the Jagatai dialects of the Turkic language. The Uzbeg of Khiva are the 
representatives of the purest Turkic type though they too have some ad- 
mixture of Aryan blood. 
In stature they are a little taller (168 cm.) than the Kirghiz; the head 
1s oval in form, sub-brachycephalic; the face is oblong with slightly 
prominent cheek bones; the skin color is yellowish; the hair black; the 
beard scanty; and the eyes dark brown and horizontally placed. 

Most Uzbeg are agriculturists and lead a sedentary life, but a few 
still remain a nomadic or semi-nomadic people. The process of becoming 
settled has been accomplished in the Russian provinces as well as in 
Khiva during the last fifty years. Semi-nomadic Uzbeg may be found in 

86 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

some sections of Bokhara, roaming during the summer and living in 
villages during the winter. As reminders of their former social organiza- 
tion, they have preserved their tribal names and clan federations, but many 
of them, especially those of Khiva, have forgotten their clan names. 
According to Khanykoff! there were ninety-seven Uzbeg clans; Khorosh- 
khin gave ninety-two as the number.? Some of the Uzbeg clan names are 
similar to those of the Kirghiz, evidence bearing on their origin. 

The Uzbeg are still little civilized and most of them are illiterate. 
Their clerical heads and official representatives are Sarts or Tadjik. The 
Tadjik regard the Uzbeg as barbarians and seldom intermarry with them. 

The Uzbeg are fervent Mohammedans following the Sunnite doc- 
trine, but are not so fanatical as their Aryan neighbors. Their folklore 
consists of religious and epic tales and songs. The religious motives are 
based on Mohammedan traditions and legends and the epics on Kirghiz 
folklore. Like the Kirghiz, the Uzbeg are fond of music and poetry. The 
musical instruments (p. 30) found in every Uzbeg dwelling are the same 
as those of the Kirghiz. 

In the family the father is all powerful; even married sons dare not 
sit or speak first in the father’s presence. The position of women is 
somewhat less favorable than among the Kirghiz, but better than among 
the Sarts and Tadjik. They veil their faces and are responsible for all the 
domestic and sometimes, the field labor too, while the men lazily visit 
the bazaars or acquaintances and seldom stay at home. 

Polygamy is found chiefly among the rich Uzbeg. Marriage takes 
place only after the bride price (kalym) is paid. The ceremony consists in 
the conclusion of a civil contract before a judge (kazil) and by the read- 
ing of a prayer by a mullah. These are followed by a reception, games, 
and contests. 

The common law (adat) which still plays an important role 
among the Kirghiz, has become almost obsolete among the Uzbeg, who 
comply only with the written law (shariat). 

The mode of life of the nomadic Uzbeg is generally the same as 
among the nomadic Kirghiz and the life of the settled Uzbeg is similar 
to that of the sedentary population of Turkestan in general, though its 
chief parallels are with that of the Sarts, which will be described below. 
Of course, local differences are numerous. Thus, in the oasis of Khiva, 
the Uzbeg do not live in villages, but in separate farms (rabat or kur- 
gancha), which are surrounded by high walls of beaten clay surmounted 

iKhanykoff. 
2K horoshkhin. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 87 

by small towers at the corners, and having the general appearance of 
small forts. 

The Uzbeg wear robes of dark brown cotton decorated with red 
stripes, quite unlike the gayly-colored dresses of the Sarts and Tadjik. 

Fig. 16. Uzbeg Woman and Child. The illustration shows the interior of an Uzbeg 
winter house, built. of mud and clay. 

Usually, a tall sheepskin cap serves as a head covering; the turban is 
worn only by the judges (kas7z), mullahs, and other representatives of the 
clergy. 

As to food, it may be said that the Uzbeg use more meat than do the 
Sarts. Iumiss, consumed in such quantities by the Kirghiz, finds little 
favor with the Uzbeg who prefer azran (sour milk mixed with water) and 
green tea. 

Perhaps the most typical mental trait of the Uzbeg is their love of 
freedom and gencral restlessness, which often brought them into conflict 
with their rulers, and especially with the Amir of Bokhara and the khan 
of Kokand.' The very name, Uzbeg, meaning “master of himself’’ from 

Uz (self) and Beg (master, chief, khan), connotes a somewhat ambitious 
tendency. 

Fite ears 
The Khanate of Kokand was conquered by the Russians in 1875 and renamed Fergana Province. 

88 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

THE TURKOMAN 

The Turkoman may be regarded as the tribe most closely related to 
the Kirghiz and, particularly, to the Uzbeg. They form the bulk of the 
population of Transcaspia, but also dwell in Khiva and Bokhara and in 
Syr Daria Province. According to the census of 1897 there were about 
450,000 Turkoman in Turkestan. Of this number, 262,378 people of 
both sexes (4.78 percent of the whole population) were located in the 
Russian provinces of Turkestan; 139,640 in the Khanate of Khiva 
(26.8 percent of the population), and about 50,000 in Bokhara. 

According to the very contradictory data on their origin, derived 
from their traditions and other sources, the ancestors of the Turkoman 
were some clans of the Kangly people,'! who, after abandoning their 
native home on the banks of the Ili River and the shores of Lake Issyk- 
kul, settled on the lower courses of the Syr Daria River and took the 
name of Ogus (or Ohus?).2. Because of their wars with the Bedjiye 
who are regarded as a division of the Pechenyeg,? they were forced to 
cross the Amu Daria River and to settle in the region of Merv. On the 
other hand, some authorities regard the Ogus as Pechenyeg.* 

The Turkic scholar, Abul-Ghazi, Khan of Khiva, who in 1663 wrote 
his History of the Mongols’ refers the Turkoman settlement in the region 
of Merv as having taken place in the third century of the Mussulman 
chronology, in the time of the hero Salor-Kasan, the grandson of the 
mythical Ogus Khan, whom most of the Turkoman regard as their 
ancestor. Their settlement in Merv separated the Turkoman from their 
kin and thus they formed a distinct tribe. The conversion of the Turko- 
man to Islam is also traditionally ascribed to Salor-Kasan. 

Some writers derive the name Turkoman from the Persian ‘“Turk- 
manend,” i.e., one who resembles a Turk, while others derive it from the 
Turkic, ‘Turk-men,” ie., I am a Turk. It may be noted, in passing, 
that one of the Uzbeg clans also bears the name, Turkman. 

The Turkoman have preserved their former social organization. 
They are classified into tribes, clans, and other divisions. The most 
important tribes are:— 

1. The Tekke (the Mountain Goat), or Tekkintzi of the Russians, 
form the most numerous and prosperous tribe (about 38,000 tents) 
and occupy: ine Aknaltekinsky, BVERSEY Tedjensky; and Mervsky 

; 'The Bechoeyer were known as Kangly, a name alas cpoked. to some ‘Kirghi- Kaiank aa U sbex 
clans. 
20gus means bull in Turkic. Rashid al-Din Tabib regards the Ogus as of purely Turkic blood. 
IMassalsky, 38-4. 
4Golubowsky. 
$A bul-Ghaai-Bahadur Khan. 

™~ . 
WR 

Fig. 17, Turkoman Men, Khiva. Linguistically, a Turkic tribe, the Turko- 
man are somatologically mixed with Iranians. 

89 

~~ 

4 

Fig. 18. A Turkoman Musician, Khiva. He accompanies himself on 
a two-stringed guitar as he sings folk songs. 

90 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 91 

oases, and the adjacent steppes. The Tekke consist of two sections, each 
of which is divided into clans and smaller divisions. 

2. The Saryk (about 7300 tents) occupy the Yolatan and Pendin 
oases on the Murghab River and are divided into six clans and smaller 
divisions. 

3. The Salor or Salyr (about 3,000 tents), are the most ancient 
of the Turkoman tribes, and are mentioned by Arabian writers of the 
seventh century as having lived in the region of the Amu Daria, but now 
occupy the Serakh Oasis, and are divided into three divisions. 

4. The Yomud (about 4,800 tents) live on the banks of the Sumbar 
and Artak (or Artrek) rivers flowing into the Caspian Sea, and also in the 
Amu Daria District of Syr Daria Province. The Yomud are divided into 
several divisions and clans. 

Beside the four Turkoman tribes there live in Transcaspia Province 
several other Turkoman divisions, descendants of the ancient Ogus. 
Thus, the Goklan (about 900 tents) live on the banks of the Atrek and 
Chandir rivers on the Persian frontier and partly in the district of Amu 
Daria. The Igdyr (about 400 tents) and the Abdal (60 tents) wander 
along the shores of the Caspian Sea. The Ogurdjal (1,025 tents) live on 
the shores and islands of the Caspian Sea. The Ata (1,600 families) and 
Arabachi (250 families) live in the Amu Daria District. 

Among the Turkoman of Transcaspia Province there live several 
tribes, which have become Turkomanized, but whose origin is not exactly 
known. Some of them (Shik, Seid, Makhtum, Khodja, and Atay, in all 
about 1,200 tents) regard themselves as of Arabian origin. The Turko- 
man rank them as clerics, as the descendants of the prophet, and treat 
them with honor. They do not intermarry with other Turkoman divi- 
sions and from them are descended the greatest number of ishans (p. 
77). Neither in language, dress, nor mode of life, are they distinguish- 
able from other Turkoman, among whom they live. Some other small 
Turkoman divisions (Aliel, Nukhurli, Murchali, Anouli, Mekhinle, 
about 2,000 families) represent the remnants of former Turkic inhabit- 
ants of the country and the descendants of various ethnical elements of 
Turkic and Iraniec mixture. 

The Yomud and representatives of other Turkoman divisions are to 
be found in the Khanate of Khiva, a total of about 28,000 families. Of 
the Turkoman tribes of Bokhara, the Ersar (about 1,000 families) living 
on the banks of the Amu Daria River, are well known. 

Somatologically the Turkoman represent a great variety of types. 
In the northern parts of Turkestan the Turkic type has been retained to 
a great degree, but in the south, Iranian characters become more and 

92 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

more conspicuous. Their greatest prominence is noted among the Tekke, 
who, from time immemorial, have invaded Persia, and captured slaves 
whom they sold in Khiva and Bokhara, resulting in a mixture with Aryan 
blood. More than any other Turkic tribe of Turkestan, the Turkoman 
are entitled to be called Iranic Turks. 

The Turkoman may be distinguished by a high stature (169 cms.). 
They are thin, but strong, and generally well proportioned. The skin 
color is brownish, rarely of a light yellowish tint; the beard is luxuriant: 
the head is high and long (dolichocephaly is predominant); the cheek 
bones are not very prominent: the eye fissure is mostly horizontal; the 
eye color is usually. of brownish tints, but often gray. The nose is straight 
and high; the lips are moderate; and the ears are large. The Turkoman 
is physically strong and easily endures privations and fatigue. Very few 
of them have a sickly appearance. Among the women the Turkic type 
seems prevalent. Their cheek bones are more prominent and one can 
scarcely say that their appearance is generally striking or that they are 
especially handsome. 

In general character and moral qualities the Turkoman is more 
attractive than the Uzbeg. He is hospitable, trustful, frank, sincere, and 
brave. On the other hand, he is hot-headed, revengeful, superstitious, 
and disinclined toward systematic work. Centuries of plundering, 
brigandage, and robbery have made him lazy and caused him to regard 
labor as humiliating. Most of their fortifications and irrigation devices 
were built by Persian slaves and prisoners, and all domestic and industrial 
activities are carried on by women. The Turkoman cares for his horses 
and does agricultural work, but in the remainder of his time he hunts, visits 
neighbors, and gossips, while continually drinking green tea. The Turko- 
man has a sound mind, is far from stupid, but is still quite illiterate. 

The Turkoman speak different Turkic dialects. Those living on 
the Persian borderland speak a somewhat corrupt Azerbaijan dialect; 
those of Khiva, Bokhara, and on the borders of Afghanistan speak 
dialect allied to the Jagatai or Uzbeg language; and finally, those dwel- 
ling near the Kirghiz speak a dialect related to the Kirghiz language. 

All the Turkoman are Mohammedans of the Sunnite faith, but they 
are not distinguished by particular religiosity or fanaticism. In the 
settlements the mosques, like the dwellings, are rooms of mud or beaten 
clay, with tiny square windows, covered with parchment. The nomadic 
Turkoman have no mosques. They have scant knowledge of the Koran 
and the tenets of the Islamic faith, confining themselves to the observance 
of certain rites and ceremonies. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 93 

Like the Kirghiz and Uzbeg, the Turkoman, are fond of music, songs, 
and poetry. The strolling singer (bakhshi), with his two-stringed guitar, 
is a welcome guest in every dwelling. He may praise folk heroes or sing 
of historical events or love songs. Of the national poets the best known 
is Makhtum-kuli, a lyric poet, who lived about a hundred years ago on 
the Atrek River. , 

The women skilfully weave rugs and carpets. They show much 
taste in the combination of colors and arrangement of designs, and one 
frequently sees rugs of a high artistic value. 

The nomadic or semi-nomadic Turkoman live in felt tents (uz) while 
those in villages dwell in huts made of mud, clay, or unbaked bricks. 
The interior arrangement and furnishing of the dwellings is very primi- 
tive and simple. Felt carpets, rugs, wadded quilts, pillows, skin bags, 
and jars for water, milk, and butter, bags for bread, harness, cups, a tea 
pot, a trunk, and sometimes a samovar, are the only paraphernalia of a 
Turkoman dwelling. - 

The clothing of a man consists of a cotton shirt, wide trousers, and 
one, two, or more, cotton or silk (with rich people) robes. The inner 
robe is belied with a girdle. Some wear robes of cloth or woven camel 
wool. In winter they wear sheepskin robes. The shaved head is covered 
by a skull cap ornamented with silk embroidery and a tall sheepskin 
hat. The footwear consists of woolen stockings and heel-less slippers. 
In winter they wear yellow and unblackened boots. 

The woman’s costume consists of a red or gayly colored silk shirt, 
tight trousers, a cotton or silk robe, a headband, and woolen belt. They 
wear pendent breast ornaments consisting usually of silver rings or discs. 
The forehead is covered with a silver band, on the wrists are worn heavy 
bracelets, silver rings are worn on the fingers, and numerous silver orna- 
ments are hooked in the hair. On festive occasions a Turkoman woman 
wears a tall hat ornamented with silver discs and pendants. All this 
jewelry is so heavy that, it impedes the movements of the wearer, who, 
with every movement, tinkles like Swiss cow bells. Some of the pendants 
are regarded as amulets. Some Salyr women wear silver rings in the 
septum of the nose. The woman’s footwear is the same as that of the 
man. 

Of all Mohammedan women, the Turkoman seem to enjoy the great- 
est freedom; they go where they please, are unveiled, and mingle with 
the men from childhood. They seldom have much pretension to good 
looks. Those of pure Turkoman blood are the ugliest, and have distinctly 
Mongol features. The better-looking among them are invariably 

94 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

descended from Persian slaves and rank low in Turkoman society; 
consequently a Turkoman of high rank will never choose such a woman 
for his wife. However, like the Kirghiz women, the Turkoman is re. 
garded as inferior to any males, and she is seldom allowed to take part in 

lig. 19. A ‘Turkoman Woman, Khiva. 

social affairs. Asn result of the scarcity of women the bride price is 8 
high that only very rich men can afford the privileges of polygamy, while 
a certain number of men remain single, contrary to Mohammedan rules. 
In his food the Turkoman is distinguished from other central Asiatic 
nomadic people. While the latter live chiefly on meat and milk products, 
the former's food is mainly vegetarian. Unleavened cakes, gruel, beet 
soup, melons, and wild herbs are his staple food, He also consumes swect 
and sour milk. Pilau of rice, lamb and camel meat are regarded a8 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 95 

daintics and eaten by rich people or on such occasions as weddings or 
circumcisions. They seldom use kumiss, but drink chal, a slightly intoxi- 
cating swectish-sour beverage prepared from camel’s milk, Green tea 
finds great favor with them. Most. Turkoman smoke or chew tobacco 
and recently they have adopted the pernicious habit of smoking opium. 

Not long ago, shortly before the Russian conquest of Turkestan, the 
Turkoman were chiefly nomads and their main occupation, brigandage 
(alaman). They stole cattle and horses and kidnapped men and women 
mainly from neighboring Persia. They had no khans or hereditary 
chiefs. All the Turkoman were considered of equal rank, but when pre- 
paring themselves for an attack they seleeted a temporary leader (serdar), 
usually an individual known for his courage. After a successful invasion 
the booty was divided into equal parts among the robbers, called braves 
(batyrs), the lender reeciving a double portion. Turkoman slave dealers 
used to bring their Persian captives regularly to the market for sale. A 
man usually brought the equivalent of $150 and a woman $3800. In 1864 
when the Kassians ook hiva, they liberated nearly forty thousand 
slaves, mone whom were twenty-six Russians. In conquering Turkestan 
the Russitos encountered the most. stubborn resistance from the Turko- 
man inhabitants. At present they have become a peaceful people and 
are generally turning to agriculture. 

In them social relations the Turkoman are guided by the unwritten 
common tiw (adaé) and only oeeasionally, as in dividing an inheritance, 
in family disputes, or divorees, do they, as Mohammedans, apply the 
written law (shariat). The Turkoman common law does not. distinguish 
between criminal and eivie offences. very crime is regarded from the 
point of view of damage caused to some party. A murder may be 
avenged by death of the killer or by a definite payment (Khun), while 
a theft. of any kind is adjusted by returning the stolen goods and paying 
damages. 

In former times the Turkoman had no strictly organized courts. 
Cases under the jurisdiction of the adat were settled by an assembly of 
“old men” while those falling under the shariat were solved by the kazii 
and mullahs, After the subjugation of Turkestan by the Russians a local 
public court. was organized, based on the common law, and consisting of 
three judicial resorts for appeal. 

The principle of clan solidarity is strong among the Turkoman. 
Tribal divisions occupy territory with definite boundaries, which neigh- 
boring divisions must. not trespass. Within these boundaries nomadic 
or sedentary clans are segregated by kin groups. The Turkoman Tekke 

96 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

and some other divisions marry women of their own clan only in order 
that the bride price may remain within the clan. 

THE KARA-KALPAK 

The Kara-Kalpak or Kara-Klobuk, i.e., Black Caps, are kindred of 
the Kirghiz-Kaisak. However, their origin is not strictly known. Théir 
language is related to that of the Western Turks.! According to the 
census of 1897, there were, in the Russian provinces (chiefly in Syr 
Daria and Fergana), 104,271 Kara-Kalpak and about 20,000 in Khiva. 

Golubowsky’ says that the Kara-Kalpak were a mixture of Ghuz 
Turks, Pechenyeg, and others, and that they were the remnants of the 
Ghuz Turks who remained in Russia when the new wave of Turkic in- 
vaders from Asia, the Polovtzy, drove part of the tribe across the 
Danube. Some remnants of the Ghuz, possibly with other Turks, settled 
on the Russian borderlands, accepted Christianity, and were known as 
Kara-Klobuk, while some of them returned to Asia. According to Mosh- 
koff? about 70,000 of them now live in Bessarabia under the name of 
Gagauzy. Whether the Kara-Kalpak now living in ‘Asia are the same 
as the Kara-Kalpak who, in the eleventh century, were the borderland 
population of Southern Russia, is difficult to ascertain, but possibly they 
re-migrated to Asia from European Russia in the eighteenth century, 
where Howorth! thinks they formed the Nogai Pechenyeg tribe on the 
Yaik River (now called Ural). 

Physically, the Kara-Kalpak may be distinguished from the Kirghiz 
and Turkoman by a higher stature, by a flat and broad face and nose, 
prominent cheek bones, a large, but scanty beard, and large hands. 
Kara-Kalpak women are regarded as good looking. 

The neighbors of the Kara-Kalpak mock them, regarding them as 
clumsy and silly, but they are actually a sound-minded, strong, indus- 
trious, and peaceful people, who appear timid and reserved as a result of 
oppression and exploitation by the Uzbeg and other more powerful 
neighbors. 

At present the Kara-Kalpak live in permanent settlements occupying 
themselves with agriculture and cattle breeding, and partly with fishing. 
They still preserve the remnants of their former clan organization. 
Those of the Khiva oasis are divided into two sections which consist of 
clans and minor divisions. The names of some of these divisions are 

SS 

1Maksimoff, 24 
2Golubowsky. 
§3Moshkoff, XXII. 
4Howorth, IT, 5. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN _ 97 

similar to those of the Kirghiz and Uzbeg and may suggest some relation- 
ship with these tribes. 

. THE KIPCHAK 

The Kipchak are one of a group of tribes related to the Kirghiz, 
particularly the Uzbeg. They live chiefly in Fergana Province. Their 
number, according to the census of 1897, was 45,000; but the official 
records of 1911 give their population as 60,000. It is possible that there 
may be more Kipchak, as in many cases they are taken for Uzbeg or 
Kirghiz. The ancient Comonians, known in Russian chronicles as 
Polovtzy, were called Kipchak by Mussulman writers, but whether the 
present Kipchak may be identified with the former Polovtzy remains 
an open question. At present they are a peaceful people, engaged in 
agriculture, cattle breeding, and trade, while formerly they took a promi- 
nent part in the frequent disturbance and feuds in the Khanate of Kokand 
(present F'ergana Province) before the Russian conquest. A Kipchak was 
the leader of the Kokand when Tashkent was vanquished and other men 
prominent in the history of Central Asia belonged to the same tribe. 

THE TATARS 

The Tatars may be included in the Turkic population of Turk- 
estan. In the Russian provinces, there were, according to the census of 
1897, about 17,000 Tatars. In Khiva and Bokhara there are very few 
Tatars. The greater number migrated to Turkestan from the eastern 
part of European Russian, especially from the Volga provinces. Before 
the conquest of Turkestan, Russian merchants traded with Turkestan 
through Tatar intermediaries. The Tatars were also the instructors and 
teachers of Mohammedanism among the Kirghiz. 

THE TARANCHI 

Before describing the Sarts, the most numerous sedentary ethnical 
group of Turkestan, some attention should be devoted to the last. Turkic 
tribe of the region—the Taranchi. They are the descendants of a people 
of mixed Turkic, eastern Iranian, and other elements, and originally 
lived in Mastern Turkestan, under Chinese rule. In the second half of the 
eighteenth century, the Taranchi were transferred to the valley of the Ili 
River by the Chinese Government. In the beginning of the sixtieth 
year of the nineteenth century, the Dungan (Mohammedan Chinese), 
Kirghiz, and Taranchi of Kuldja revolted against their Chinese oppressors 
and drove them out of the district. The Russians, who had conquered 
Bokhara and Kokand, occupied Kuldja, but ten years later they returned 

98 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

it to China, who cruelly punished the rebels. The Taranchi left Kuldja 
and settled in Semirechye Province of Russian Turkestan. According to 
the census of 1897, there were 55,977 Taranchi in Semirechye Province 
and several hundred in Transcaspia. But the latest available data give 
70,000 Taranchi! in Semirechye Province, where they constitute a 
settled agricultural unit in the population. The name Taranchi is derived 
from Taran, which, according to one writer, means plough land, and to 
others, millet. The Taranchi speak a Turkic dialect similar to that of the 
Sart. 

THE SARTS 

The Sarts belong to the Iranian Turks and speak a dialect of the 
Jagatai division of Turkic, adopted from the Uzbeg. This dialect differs 
in some respects from that of the Uzbeg and is called Sart-tyly, i.e., Sart 
language. They are regarded as mixed-blood descendants of the Iranian 
Tadjik and Turkic Uzbeg in which the Tadjik element predominates. 
Although distinct from the Kirghiz, Uzbeg, and Tadjik, they do not form 
a separate ethnological division. Every settled native is called Sart by 
the Russian newcomers, as opposed to the nomadic or Kaisak (vagabond, 
wanderer) population. However, the name Sart is mentioned by 
Arabian writers of the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries and even by 
Plano Carpini (thirteenth century)? According to Radloff,? the word 
Sart is of Indian origin and means “merchant,” and, if this be so, it would 
corroborate the contention that the name is a term designating a certain 
mode of life (settled town people) and having no ethnological signifi- 
cance. According to Professor Andreev in some places the Tadjik of the 
plains called themselves Sart even before they adopted the Turkic 
language.‘ 

According to the census of 1897 there were 1,458,000 Sarts, but the 
official records of 1911 give the figure, 1,847,000. Most of the Sarts live in 
Fergana and Syr Daria provinces. There are none in Khiva and about 
700,000 in Bokhara. However, these figures cannot be regarded as 
absolutely accurate, especially in view of the vague meaning of the 
word Sart. 

Generally, two types of Sart. may be distinguished: one with more 
Mongoloid traits; the other with more prominent Aryan characteristics. 
Among the representatives of the second type, which is more re prevalent 

'The Report of the Turkestan Soviet Socialiatic Republic (Tashkent, 1922) | gives cae number er of 
Taranchi as only 45,526 tly, 
In 1245 John de Plano Carpini, a Franciscan Monk, was sent asa missionary by Pope Innocen 
to Mongolia (See Yule). 
3Samoilovich, (ec). 
4Andreev, 159. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 99 

in the southern parts of Turkestan, handsome faces are frequently en- 
countered. As far as is known from their measurements, the Sarts are 
tall (168 cms.), of a robust constitution, with an inclination to stoutness. 
The exposed skin color is dark brown and the unexposed yellowish. They 
are brachycephals (cephalic index, 85.6), but it should be noted that the 
occiput may be artificially (though perhaps not intentionally) flattened 
during childhood, due to the manner of cradling. The face is oval and, in 
most cases, without prominent cheek bones. The cye color is dark brown, 
gray appears in exceptional cases. [yes with a Mongoloid fold are fre- 
quently seen. The head hair, which is usually shaved, is black, or less 
often, dark brown. The beard is full and black, and less frequently, 
dark brown. Sometimes the growth of the beard is much retarded. The 
nose is long and broad. The hands are small and the fingers thin. 

Marriage. When a boy reaches the age of fifteen or sixteen his 
parents look about for a suitable wife. Girls are considered marriageable 
between cleven and fifteen. A matchmaker arranges the amount of the 
bride price (kalym). Properly speaking there is no marriage ceremony, 
although a maullah is invited to recite a prayer; he is, however, only one 
of the witnesses who place their scals on the contract. The bride and 
bridegroom are not present: at this ceremony. After the contract is 
sealed, the bridegroom obtains admission to the bride. If a feast is 
held, it usually lasts all night. Men receive refreshments in the outer 
court, while the women feast in the inner court. Before departing, the 
men and women guests receive presents, and then the bridegroom is 
allowed to take the bride home. Mussulman law allows every man four 
Wives at. one time. 

Family Life. Fvery Sart house has two courtyards round which the 
men’s and the women’s apartments are built. These are entirely separate 
from cach other and only one door, or passage, connects the two. A 
Sart. street looks like a dark corridor since no windows face it. 

The wife is obliged to obey her husband in all things and to avoid 
everything unpleasant to him, and, without his consent, may not make any 
contracts. She must also make every effort to preserve her beauty in 
order to please her husband, and for this purpose she is allowed, by law, 
to use various cosmetics. The most. necessary is usma, a species of wood 
(satis) which furnishes a black dye for painting the eyebrows. The juice 
of the fresh leaves is squeezed into a tea cup and applied with a small 
plece of reed, instead of a brush, or with the finger. The space between 
the eyebrows is also painted so as to make a continuous line. The cye- 
lashes are painted with surma, a black powder made from antimony, 

100 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

which is used also by men, as it is thought to relieve inflammation of the 
eyes caused by dust and wind. Upa, or white lead, brought from Russia, 
and rice powder, or powder made of egg shells, are used for whitening the 
face. Rouge (iglyk) is prepared by soaking cotton wool in an infusion of 
the root of some boraginous plant. The nails are colored with henna or 
common garden balsam. It was formerly the custom for the women, 
especially the old ones, to paint their teeth black (like Japanese married 
women) with a powder composed of the gall of the pistachio tree mixed 
with the scales from a blacksmith’s forge, but this is now out of fashion. 
There are no pomades for the hair which is cleaned solely by rubbing with 
sour milk and then washing in warm water. Baths and houses are per- 
fumed by burning gum or roots of an umbelliferous plant (Euryangiwm 
sumbul). Women perfume their persons by carrying a bunch of some 
sweet-smelling plant, usually basil, or roses. They are fond of flowers. 
Even men like to have a flower hung from under their turbans. 

The position of a woman in the family is not very pleasant. She 
eats apart from the men, being perforce content with the remains from 
her husband’s meals, so that quite frequently she is poorly nourished. 
She is regarded by her husband merely as an instrument of his pleasures 
or as a servant to manage his house. The husband can divorce his wife 
whenever he chooses, and need give no reason, but must return all her 
own property, as well as the amount of the bride price, if he has not yet 
paid it. In case of her adultery the husband not only divorces her but 
curses her, and after this, she may not re-marry. The wife may also 
request a divorce which the husband may refuse. But if she is able to 
give sufficient reason why she should have a divorce, as for instance, the 
husband’s illness, neglect, non-support, the judge (kaz7) will compel the 
husband to divorce her. 

The several wives of the same man seldom live together harmoni- 
ously, not so much because of jealousy, but because of envy of the 
privileges that another may enjoy or the presents she may receive. 
Every husband tries, as far as possible, to keep his wives apart. Wives 
have a peculiar expression for each other: kyun-dash, day companion. 

A respectable Sart woman will not go into the street without 4 veil. 
The woven black horsehair veil is manufactured in great quantities In 
Bokhara. When worn the heavy veil reaches the woman’s waist and over 
it is thrown a dark blue or green robe (khalat), the sleeves of which, tied 
together at the ends, dangle behind. 

The polygamous family life of the Sarts (this concerns, of course, only 
the prosperous people; poor men seldom have more than one wife) 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 101 

does not seem to satisfy them. In spite of their religious fanaticism the 
Sarts are fond of every kind of amusement, entertainment, and merry- 
making. They stroll about the bazaars, gossiping or bargaining with 
shopkeepers, examining the work of the artisans, taking tea in a tea house, 
or meat patties in a cook shop, or eating pistachio nuts. The men often 
do the shopping for the household. No upper class woman ever goes to 
the bazaar. 

Close to the tea shop is the barber shop. The barber shaves the 
head and the middle of the mustache, under the nose, but is forbidden by 
Mussulman law to touch the beard and the ends of the mustache. The 
barber is a surgeon as well, he will let. blood or operate as best he can, 
but he prescribes no drugs. Nearby is the apothecary’s shop where every 
kind of dried herb and cosmetics can be found. 

The Sarts are fond of visiting, particularly on holidays, and like 
especially to arrange receptions, for men and women separately. During 
the winter, it is customary to form clubs (jura), the members of which 
pay certain fees to buy provisions and to hire a cook. They amuse them- 
selves late into the night. The Koran prohibits the use of wine, but a 
very intoxicating liquor called buza, resembling beer, and made from 
grain, is used. 

The Sarts are especially fond of singing and will sit for hours listen- 
ing to a monotonous song or the half-chanted recitation of some poem, 
accompanied by the strumming of a guitar or the beating of a tambourine. 
Sometimes the batchas, or dancing boys, are invited. These boys are an 
institution peculiar to Central Asia and are most in vogue in Bokhara 
and neighboring Samarkand. In Tashkent, batchas flourished until 1872, 
when a severe epidemic of cholera induced the mullahs to declare that 
dancing was against the precepts of the Koran. At the request of the 
leaders of the native population, the Russian authorities forbade public 
dances during that summer because of the vast crowds which always 
congregated. It was impossible, however, for the pleasure-loving Sart to 
continuc this abstinence for more than one year, and the mere rumor of a 
bazem, or dance, was sufficient to draw great crowds to the tea house or 
garden where it was expected to take place. Dancing boys, chosen for 
their beauty and effeminate appearance travel round the country under the 
direction of a manager who is often crucl to them. The hair is worn long, 
trimmed a little at the forehead. They wear long tunics of various hues 
and loose trousers which are tucked into high leather boots, when boots 
are worn. The natives prefer these dances when the batcha is dressed as a 
girl, with long braids of false hair and tinkling anklets and bracelets. 

102 _ PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

While the batcha collects his fees, the spectators try to embrace and kiss 
him; if the spectator is not very generous, the boy slips from his arms. 

During the dances love songs are always sung to the accompani- 
ment of musical instruments. They arc not indecent, at least in public, 
but often very lascivious. The batchas practise their profession some- 
times until it is impossible to conceal their beards, and as soon as they 
begin to lose their girlish appearance, the manager finds them wives and 
starts them in trade, but, having lived immoral and effeminate lives, they 
are no longer fit for hard work. Frequently his admirers set up a batcha 
as a tea house keeper, where he will always have a good clientele. More 
often he is likely to take to smoking opium or drinking kukhnar, a narcotic 
made of poppy heads bruised in water, and sinks to the miserable state 
of a homeless vagabond (gulasha). 

Comedians. A very common accompaniment of the dance in a tea 
house (bazem) is the exhibition of a comedian (maskarabash), who, with 
whitened face and the addition of a rug or some rags, and the help of a 
bystander, will represent various scenes of native life, such as « doctor 
and patient, a judge (kazz) and plaintiff, teacher and pupil, or will mimic 
dogs, cats, and other domestic animals. Most of these representations 
are of a very obscene character, though they are often very vivid, as well 
as witty, and are approved with rounds of laughter. 

Dancing Women. Not only boys, but girls as well as women, dance 
in Central Asia. However, their exhibitions are generally confined to the 
women’s court. Women musicians, with their tambourines and pipes sit 
on rugs or carpets and the girls or women dance in the center of the circle. 
The dances are similar to those which are danced by boys, but less pas- 
sionate, vigorous, and graceful. In the Russian quarters women and 
girls also dance before men. The Mussulmen in general disapprove of 
women dancing, yet they do not refuse to witness a dance if the oppor- 
tunity arises. 

Circumcision. Perhaps the most important event, in the life of a 
Mohammedan is circumcision. On the ninth day after the birth of a 
child it is placed in a cradle; the mother rises from her bed and there is 4 
great feast, varying according to the circumstances of the family. This is 
the only feast given for a girl. 

Boys are circumcised between seven and ten years of age; the cere- 
mony may take place at an earlier period, and sometimes, because of 
poverty, it is deferred until later. As the circumcision feasts (tuz) are 
very expensive, and all the friends of the family must be invited, in order 
to avoid expense, two or three men usually have their sons circumcised 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 103 

at the same time. Naturally, if the father is rich he gives the feast. bim- 
self. The boys’ friends gather at some place and form a procession, dis- 
guised and decked out with paper caps, wooden swords, and paper shields, 
and masks made of melon rind. The boy to be cireumeised is carried on 
the back of one of the older boys, in case the feast is not in his own home; 
if, however, it takes place at home, he is taken from the house, earried 
through the strects in triumph, and then brought-back again. However, 
he is in a state of unconsciousness, having had administered to him carly 
in the morning, a powerful narcotic, gul-kan (literally flower sugar) which 
is made of sugar candy mixed with sifted pollen from hop flowers and 
reduced to a hard paste. When the guests are all assembled there is 
usually a grand banquet. This is followed by dances, or, what is more 
usual, native eomedians perform a series of farces and impersonations 
for the amusement, of the boys. 

During this feasting the boy to be circumcised is kept in the women’s 
court, where he is dressed in his best clothes and at the proper time, 
brought, back to the men’s court and Jaid upon a bed prepared: in the 
guest roone around which are seated the most distinguished guests. 
The operaiion is performed with a sharp razor and gunpowder or fine 
wood ashes are immediately placed on the wound, which heals in the 
course of (wo or three days—the boy then becomes a believer and a 
member of fslam. 

Funerals. As soon as a man dies, the jaws are bound with a cloth, 
to prevent the lower one from falling. The relatives, together with the 
people who have come to wash the corpse, wail loudly. The body is then 
wrapped in a white cloth and carried on a bier to the mosque, where 
verses, from the Koran are read over it by a mullah. From the mosque, 
the bier is carried to the graveyard and followed in solemn silence by all 
the male relatives. [Hach man carries a stick and a dark blue handker- 
chief to signify mourning. The interment is carried on in the same way as 
among the Kirghiz (p.83). The body is always laid with head towards 
the north. The jug used in washing the body is laid in the grave with it. 
Mr. and Mrs. Nalivkin! say that.at.a rich man’s funeral a coin wrapped in 
paper is given to cach guest. The men who wash the body wear gloves, 
80 as not to touch it. The corpse is usually put into a bag, open at each 
end, then the ends are tied up. In some districts the women visit the 
Krave carly on the day after the burial; in others, they do not go until 
the seventh day. 

A small lamp is frequently placed on the grave and sometimes ob- 

Nalivkin, V.P. and Nalivkin, U, - 

104 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

jects belonging to the deceased, especially the cradle, in case of a child. 
Feasts called ash (i.e., food) are given to friends on the day of the funeral, 
and on the seventh day, the fortieth day, the half yearly and the yearly 
anniversary of the death, men and women come to the tombs to weep 
and wail and put bread and money upon the grave. 

The feasting of the relatives is sometimes accompanied by a mourn- 
ing dance, which sometimes ends in tearing the hair and distorting the 
face. Fora year the women are obliged to wear dark blue or black cloth- 
ing, asa sign of mourning; the men, however, do not express their grief 
in this way. For three days after a death the family does no cooking for 
itself, but depends upon the food brought by relatives. 

Costume. The robes and veils worn by the women have been pre- 
viously described. The voluminous costume of the men is distinguished 
by its simplicity and cheapness. It consists of a long cotton shirt, of 
wide trousers tucked into soft leather boots, over which are worn heeled 
leather galoshes, which are removed before entering a mosque, dwelling, 
or shop. The shirt has a girdle of bright-colored calico, and over it are 
worn one or more robes of printed calico, silk, cloth, or velvet. In Persia 
only the mullahs wear turbans as a sign of holiness, but among the Sart 
all may wear these as well as girdles. In Afghanistan a man must wear a 
girdle that can be used as his shroud, but among the Sart, the turban 
serves that purpose. In Persia, the head may or may not be shaved, 
according to the individual taste; shaving is compulsory only for a 
mullah. But all Sart must shave their heads as soon as the beard begins 
to grow. The shaved head is covered with an embroidered skull cap and 
a turban. The mustache is shaved; the upper lip is shaved to insure 
cleanliness in eating, but the ends of the mustache and the beard are not 
touched. Barbers (sartorash), or, more correctly head shavers, are very 
numerous. Sartorash is a Tadjik word from sar, head, and torash, 
shaver. The local dervishes wear long hair, so they can be easily distin- 
guished from their fellows. 

Monco.tic TRIBES OF TURKESTAN 

THE DUNGAN 

The origin of the Dungan has, as yet, not been determined. Some 
writers regard them as Chinese professing Mohammedanism,' others, 8 
remnants of the old Turkic Uigur who became Chinesized.2 Potanin 

'Massalsky, 410. 

Schuyler, vol. 2,173; Radloff, (a), vol.2,353. Schuyler, vol. 2, 173, also mentions a Mohammedan 
people of Chinese Turkestan under the name of Salar, whom he is inclined to connect or identify with 
the Dungan, but there still remains a doubt whether one people can be meant under these two names. 
While the Salar, according to Potanin, speak a Turkic language, the Dungan speak Chinese, but both 
tribes, though remaining Mohammedans, have adopted Chinese dress and customs. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 105 

describes them under the name of Salar.' When Jenghis Khan advanced 
on Peking there were many Mussulmen from eastern Turkestan in his 
army. After the conquest he appointed his son, Mongoo, governor of 
China. These Mohammedans from Eastern Turkestan, the Dungan, re- 
mained in China, adopted Chinese customs, manners, and dress, but re- 
tained their Mussulman faith. They also adopted the Chinese language 
and married Chinese women. They knew but little of Mohammedanism, 
but rigorously observed the rules for abstinence from the use of swine’s 
flesh, spirits, and opium. The Dungan are a healthy, hardy people, due 
in part perhaps to their temperance, and are bolder and braver than the 
Chinese. Consequently, they have always been found to be excellent 
recruits, and at one time, the police force of Peking was drawn from their 
ranks. They came to the new western provinces as hired soldiers, but 
after their terms of service had expired, most of them remained there. 
One of their chief occupations is as carters, most of those in the north of 
China being Dungan. When a regular fast route was established to the 
Ili River, where many flourishing towns developed, the Dungan followed 
this route in the exercise of their trade, and many of them settled in these 
towns. In some of them they constituted the major portion of 
the population. In 1862 it was estimated that there were 60,000 Dungan 
in the province of Kuldja.2_ About 1870, the Dungan, together with the 
Taranchi, losing patience because of the heavy taxation, oppression, and 
tyranny of the Chinese officials, revolted. The rebellion was suppressed 
by the Chinese with the utmost cruelty. To pacify the country adjacent 
to Russian Turkestan, the Russian army occupied the Kuldja region, 
but ten years later, in accordance with an agreement with China, the 
Russians left the Kuldja region, taking some of the Dungan with them 
to Russian Turkestan. The census of 1897 recorded 16,279 Dungan in 
Turkestan. Most of them (14,130) lived in Semirechye Province; in 
Fergana Province were 1,640; and about 600 were in Syr Daria Province.’ 
There are no Dungan in the Khanates of Khiva and Bokhara. The 
Dungan live in towns and villages and are traders, agriculturists, and 
gardencrs. Thanks to their enterprising spirit and capacity for work, 
and in spite of their recent settlement in the country, the Dungan popu- 
lation is prosperous. Beside Chinese the Turkestan Dungan also speak 
Dungan, a corrupt Turkic dialect of Uigur origin. Somatologically, 
they should be regarded as Mongolized Turks. 

'1Potanin, 172-174. 
*Radloff, (b), 88, 250. 

, According to 8 i i : : 
lived in decinnchye ens), 20, in 1917 there were 18,318 Dungan in Turkestan; of these 17,646 

106 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

THE SART-KALMUCK 

With the Mongolian branch of the Mongoloids may be included the 
so-called Sart-Kalmuck. Some explorers regard them as Turks who were 
assimilated by the Jungarian Kalmuck. Neither in manners, customs, 
nor language, can they be distinguished from the genuine Kalmuck, 
except that the latter are Buddhists and the Sart-Kalmuck are Mohan- 
medans. They departed from Chinese territory in the troublous times 
of the Dungan uprising and, with the permission of the Russian Govern- 
ment, settled in the Prshevalsk District of Semirechye Province. In 
1897 the population was 1734. According to Sarubin, in 1920, there were 
553 families of Sart-Kalmuck numbering 2,469. Sarubin calls them 
Mongolian Mussulmen.! The Sart-Kalmuck are cattle-breeders and 
wander together with the Kirghiz and are indistinguishable from them 
in their mode of life. 

THE ARYANS 

THE TADJIK 

The Tadjik form 7 percent of the population of the Russian provinces 
of Turkestan, and appear to be the descendants of its old Aryan inhabit- 
ants who originated in Iran and in prehistoric times occupied the south- 
ern part of Central Asia. This population, which for centuries had 
suffered from invasions and sanguinary wars, particularly from the 
devastations wrought by Turco-Mongolic hordes, either intermarried 
with the conquerors or were forced out of the valleys to the rocky moun- 
tains, in which districts they have preserved their racial characteristics 
in greater purity. According to the census of 1897 the Tadjik popula- 
tion of the Russian provinces of Turkestan was 350,286 forming 6.63 
percent of the whole population. Their distribution among the provinces 
varies. Thus, in Fergana there were 114,081 (7.25 percent of the popula- 
tion); in Samarkand, 230,384 (26.78 percent of the population); in Syr 
Daria, 5,557 (about 0.4 percent of the population). In Transcaspia no 
Tadjik were recorded and in Semirechye only 264 were found. There are 
also no Tadjik in Khiva, but in Bokhara they form the bulk of the in- 
habitants of the mountains, about 30 percent of the whole population. 
Their exact number is not known, but it is estimated that in Bokhara, 
there were from 350,000 to 700,000. Accepting the last figure as accurate, 
it may be assumed that in 1897 there were, in Turkestan and Bokhara, 
about 1,050,286 Tadjik, i.e., about 10 percent of the total population. Ac- 
cording to the Report of the Turkestan Socialist Soviet Republic for 1922 

MSarubin, (b), 24. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 107 

there were 399,912 Tadjik in the five provinces of Turkestan and about 
800,000 in Bokhara, a total of about 1,200,000, which exceeds the total of 
1897 by about 200,000. A number of Tadjik dwell in Afghanistan, partly 
in the Pamir Mountains, but their exact number was not available. 
According to the estimate of the Imperial Gazetteer of India (Calcutta, 
1908) there were in Afghanistan about 900,000 Tadjik, occupying, after 

Mg. 20. Mountain Tadjik Woman resembling a European. Tadjik women, 
unlike other Turkestan Mussulman women, do not veil their faces. Long woollen 
braids are attached to their hair, and metallic pendants, rings, necklaces, beads, and 
other ornaments decorate their dresses. 

the Afghan, the first place among the peoples of Afghanistan. But 
Professor Andreev,' based on the calculations of Mr. Tate? estimates the 
number of the Afghanistan Tadjik at about 2,000,000. Thus, the total 
number of Tadjik may be regarded as exceeding 3,000,000. 

Under the name Tadjik (from the Persian word, Tadj, crown), is 
usually included the sedentary population of Turkestan and Bokhara 
which is not included among the Turkic peoples. But, as we have 

1Andreoy ay, 152. 
Tat 

108 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

previously seen, a large part of the population of Afghanistan also con- 
sists of Tadjik. They speak different Persian dialects and other Iranian 
idioms. Most of these Tadjik dialects are differentiated to such a degree 
that representatives of the various Tadjik tribes do not understand each 
other and must have recourse to Persian in communicating with each 
other, being thus bilingual. 

The Tadjik may be divided into plains and mountain dwellers. The 
Plains people were greatly influenced by their Turkic conquerors. 
Strong centers of Plains Tadjik are still preserved in the large towns of 
Samarkand and Bokhara and in some localities of Fergana. 

The Mountain Tadjik (including those of Pamir) are usually called 
Galchas meaning ‘‘mountain people” (from an old Bactrian word, gar, 
meaning mountain).! With the present Tadjik are also included the 
descendants of Persian immigrants, particularly the slaves who were 
brought into Turkestan in great numbers by its Turkish conquerors. 
But this Tadjik element, having interbred profusely with Turkic tribes, is 
losing its Aryan characteristics, a statement equally applicable to the 
Tadjik living with Turkic inhabitants in towns. Thus, in the Tashkent 
District, the Tadjik have become more and more Sarticized, and are 
forgetting their native tongue. 

The Tadjik are of medium or high stature (167 to 170 cms.). They 
are broad-shouldered, usually with black hair, bushy black beards, dark 
eyes, and clear-cut features, have dark complexions, high foreheads, 
strong chins, and prominent noses. Were it not for their dark complex- 
ions, many of them would pass for Europeans. Some are of lighter com- 
plexion with light hair and blue eyes, indicating perhaps a mixture with 
a blond people. Among the mountaineers, according to Pumpelly, the 
dark type is more common.? Andreev, however, expresses another 
opinion, saying :— 

‘Thanks to the better preservation of their Iranian blood. by the 
Tadjik Mountaineers they resemble European types more than do the 
Plains Tadjiks. Among the Mountaineers one meets types resembling 
the Caucasian Ossetines. Tall and well-shaped, they have frequently 
reddish or blond beards, brown eyes, and light skin.’’ 

According to Sarubin‘ they have an average cephalic index of 84. 

The Tadjik living in cities, on the plains, and on the mountain 

slopes are Mohammedans of the Sunnite faith. The Mountaineers adhere 

_ According to Andreev (157) the Tadjik mountaineers do not call themselves Galcha, but. apply 
this name only to the Yagnob people, descendants of the ancient Sogdians, living in the valley o the 
Yagnob, a tributary of the Zarafshan River. 

2Pumpelly, 312. 
3Andreev, 158. 
4Sarubin, (a), 97-148. 

Fig. 21. Ruins of Fortified Tadjik Dwellings on the Upper Course of the Oksus 
River (Amu Daria). 

- 

‘ oe re wats 7 *> ee we 

Fig. 22. Types of Tadjik of the Upper Course of the Oksus (Amu Daria). As 
mountain dwellers they were little influenced by their Turkic conquerors and have 
preserved their Iranian type. They speak a Persian dialect and wear turbans. 

109 

Mig. 23. Tadjik Pottery and Wooden Vessels, and a Stick for churning Butter. 
Che Tadjik are the most industrious agriculturists of Central Asia, also rearing several 

kinds of domestic animals, as sheep, camels, cattle, ete. 

Pig. 24. Agricultural Implements and Tools of the Tadjik. Though living in the 
mountains these people maintain gardens and orchards among barren rocks. 

110 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 111 

partly to the Shiite doctrine and partly to the Ismailite sect. The 
Tadjik are particularly fanatic in their religious observances, but despite 
this, their belief in pre- Mohammedan superstitions has not lessened. 
They recognize two kinds of spirits—evil (dev) and benevolent ones (pare). 
The devs cause all kinds of maladies, death, and other calamities; the 
pares protect and defend man against the evil deeds of the devs. If the 
pares prove inefficient, incantations, amulets, prayers, and a special diet 
may afford relief. 

Marriage among the Tadjik is, as a rule, with their own kin and 
that between cousins of different degrees is regarded as the most proper. 
A man may also marry his brother’s or sister’s daughter, but is not 
allowed to marry an aunt. There is practically no polygamy among 
them at present. The bride price is divided between her father and her 
mother’s brother. 

As a result of long submission to alien races the Tadjik seem to be 
reserved, distrustful, and timid, but they are noted for their industry and 
sobriety. Irom time immemorial, they have been the most typical and 
industrious sgriculturists, representing an old and highly developed 
agricultural civilization. Their skillfully constructed systems of irriga- 
tion transformed deserts into flourishing fields and gardens and evoked 
the admiration of European and American explorers. 

The Mountain Tadjik live in houses grouped into villages in oases 
of the high valley type, where the waters from streams may be diverted 
for irrigation. In contrast to the desolate slopes of barren rock that 
surround them, these oases, with their gardens, apricot orchards, and 
grain ficlds are a welcome sight to the traveler who has struggled over 
miles of the rough trails that. wind up the desert gorges. 

The houses are rectangular in groundplan, about eight feet high, 
with a courtyard containing the stalls for horses. Their roofs are flat, 
ordinarily of about six inches of clay, covering a foundation of brush laid 
on split saplings and hewn timbers. Higher in the mountains, houses 
are built of cobbles cemented with clay. Near the glaciers, the dwellings, 
usually only summer settlements (yailok) are mere squalid huts, with 
rounded corners, and brush roofs usually protected with felt, but without 
fireplaces, as there is no fuel. Situated as they are, the settlements are 
isolated from each other, and are necessarily self-supporting. One may 
ont Lamailiam is an Islamic eect originated among the Shiites. Its adepts may be found all over 
ate atte toward the even attin eee kre Me tie Sa, led Nae 
after the name of their leader who, a century Ago, iarated (oon Peres fo lisdia with a ars of hie 
disciples. Aga-Khan auides the acct by the right of succession and is regarded by the TiaBBea as an 

nearnation of the deity. The present Aga-K i i | i ili 
n y. ‘ Aga-Khan is the forty-eighth imam. The sect is called Ismailite 
after Ismail, the seventh imam of the Shiites. 

112 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

be separated from its nearest neighbor by miles of dangerous trail, with 
their long rock-hewn flights of steps up which pack animals must struggle. 
Sometimes these cuts in the cliffs are so narrow and steep that freight 
must be carried by men. To acquire buoyancy in swimming across deep 
streams, inflated goat skins are used, a method also known to the ancient 
Assyrians. 

The domestic animals of the Tadjik are cattle, horses, sheep, goats, 
asses, and camels (in the plains and valleys), but by far the most impor- 
tant occupation is sheep breeding, which is best adapted to the scanty 
pasturage afforded by the mountain environment. 

Tadjik food consists chiefly of bread, flour made from different 
grains, fruits, various kinds of melons, and milk products. Meat is 
rarely consumed. Because of religious prohibitions they do not eat horse 
meat nor drink mare’s milk.! 

Tadjik women enjoy more freedom than do Sart women. They 
seldom veil their faces, the women of the mountains never using the veil. 
The man’s costume consists of wide trousers and a robe. During the 
winter sheepskin coats are worn over their robes. Footwear consists of 
woolen stockings and soft leather boots. The head is covered with a skull 
cap of the Sart type or a woolen cap. Turbans are rarely worn. Women 
dress in the same manner as men. They cover their heads with cotton 
handkerchiefs and ornament their dresses with beads, necklaces, and 
bracelets. Their hair does not grow long and they attach long woolen 
braids with pendent metallic tassels to their tresses. Finger rings are 
worn by women and men, but not so often as earrings. Men and bdys 
often wear silver earrings, not as ornaments, but as amulets. 

Metallic ornaments are made by local smiths, who are honored by 
their fellow tribesmen and their trade is regarded as a supernatural 
gift. There is a tradition of a pious man who in his sleep heard a voice 
telling him to go to a certain place. He went, and there found a golden 
anvil, hammer, and tongs which had fallen from the sky. It was he who 
became the first smith who taught other people to work metal. 

The position of an embroiderer? and lathe turner is not so honored. 
There are also special knife grinders and circumcisors. The last evoke as 
much respect as the mullahs, those who know how to read and write 

 'Sarubin, (a). This observation is made with particular reference to the fact that many Islamic 
tribes, like the Tatar, are particularly fond of and consume horse meat and mare’s milk as well as kumiae. 

r. Sarubin, ethnographer of the Russian Academy of Sciences, accompanied the French Professor R. 
Gauthiot, on his Turkestan expedition of 1914 in order to study the Iranian population. | With the 
outbreak of the World War Gauthiot hastened to enlist and in 1916 died of wounds received ina battle, 
during the first offensive at Artois in the spring of 1915. Gauthiot was one of the greatest Iranian 
scholars. Doctor Laufer dedicated to his memory his volume, “ Sino-Iranica.”’ 

Embroidery is practised chiefly by men. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 113 

Persian. Besides cooking and other housework, basket and rug weaving, 
and cropping of sheep, are considered women’s occupations. 

In conclusion, it should be pointed out that the Tadjik have no 
tradition of their arrival in their present territory, but boast of having 
always been there, which may be evidence of the presence of a very ancient 
Aryan civilization in Turkestan. Ruins of fortresses (gala) in which the 
Tadjik repelled the attacks of Kirghiz and Afghan are numerous. The 
mazars or stone monuments placed on the graves of pious or saintly men 
should also receive mention. The Tadjik traveler usually pauses when 
passing a grave to recite a prayer and leave an offering. 

PERSIANS 

Some of the Persians of Turkestan, as has been stated before, are 
included among the Tadjik who are related to them, but the census of 
1897 lists Persians separately. In the Russian provinces there were 
12,964;' in IXhiva they formed 0.6 percent of the whole population. 
Their number in Bokhara is unknown. A small percentage of the Persians 
in Turkestan are former slaves who were kidnapped and sold by Turko- 
man brigands. When the Russians conquered Turkestan the Persian 
slaves were freed and returned to Persia, only a small number remaining. 
But many of these released Persians were attacked on their homeward 
journey and killed by the Turkoman. According to the treaties of 1873 
with the Ainirs of Bokhara and Khiva, slave trade in these countries 
was abolished. In Khiva alone 35,000 Persian slaves were found. 

Most of the Persians at present in Turkestan are newcomers from 
Persia who came to aid in the construction of the Central Asiatic railroad, 
all the embankments being constructed by Persian laborers. Because 
they arc followers of the Shiite doctrine the Persians are disliked by the 

Sunnites of Turkestan. In Khiva and Bokhara they may not even pray 
in public. 

THE HINDOOS 

In the Russian provinces of Fergana, Syr Daria, and Semirechye 
there were recorded only 250 Hindoo males, but they are more numerous 
in Bokhara. The Hindoos come temporarily from Shikarpur or Peshawu 
and live in towns, mainly in special Indian caravansaries, partly to be 
hear the business centers of the towns, and partly for safety. Their 
chief occupation is usury, although lending money at interest is forbidden 
by Mussulman law. Their tight trousers, peculiar coats, and red or 

‘According to the Report of the Turkestan Soviet Republic there were 25,000 Persians in 1922. 

114 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

black caste marks on their foreheads, in addition to their other race char- 
acteristics, make them easily distinguishable. They shave the tops of 
their heads, letting the hair at the back of the head grow long. Their 
mustaches and beards remain untouched. 

eae 

ma 

Fig. 25. Gypsy Woman, Samarkand. During the winter the Turkestan Gypsies 
live in Sart villages; in summer, they live in tents, moving from place to place. Their 
women engage in basket making, fortune-telling, and begging. 

GYPSIES 

Something over 600 Gypsies, called liul:, are scattered over 
Turkestan'. In the winter, they live in Sart villages; in summer, in 
tents, moving from place to place. They are constantly seen in the 
bazaars and streets. They make sieves, shovels, troughs, spoons, and 

1According to Sarubin, (n), in 1917 there were in Turkestan about 2700 Gypsies speaking Tadjik. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 115 

carry on petty trade. The women make baskets, tell fortunes, and take 
alms, when they can get them. They are more active than the men. 
The Turkestan gypsies speak Sart and Tadjik and are Mohammedans, 
but because of their dishonesty, are disliked by the local population. 
Their women go about with unveiled faces. 

To these Turkestan gypsies evidently belong the so-called Karaliuli 
(black gypsies), Industani-liuli (Indian gypsies), or Maimunyliuli 
(monkey gypsies), who roam about in small groups, carrying on petty 
trade, chiefly selling cosmetics, and training bears, monkeys, and goats. 

SEMITES OF TURKESTAN 

JEWS 

Of the Semitic inhabitants of Turkestan, the most important are the 
Jews, usually called Bokharan Jews, who live in all the towns. They 
believe themselves to be descendants of those Israelites who were taken 
prisoner by the kings of Assyria and Babylon, and brought to Central 
Asia between six and seven hundred years before the time of Christ. 
Under the successive Mohammedan conquerors their position was not an 
enviable onc. In ancient times, they were obliged to live in separate 
quarters, were forbidden to ride within the city walls, to ride on horses 
or mules (they were restricted to donkeys), and to wear a turban and 
any girdle other than a rope. 

The Mohammedans despised their Jewish neighbors and forbade 
them to enter their houses. If a Jew, mounted on his donkey, met a 
Mussulman in the street, he was expected to dismount and make way for 
him. The only people the Turkoman did not kidnap were the Jews, their 
reason for passing them over being that no Mohammedan would buy a 
Jewish slave. 

All these restrictions and humiliations were abolished by the Russian 
conquerors and the Bokharan Jew, being well aware of what Russia has 
done for him, has shown himself an honest. and friendly citizen of the new 
country. Besides, the Russian Government granted him the right of 
“domicile” over all Russia, a privilege accorded only to a small class of 
Russian Jews. Leaving the despicable practice of usury to the Hindoo 
settlers, the Jews of Turkestan devoted themselves principally to the 
dyeing of native silk, in consequence of which a Hebrew can be distin- 
guished from the Sart, who have a monopoly of the cotton trade, by the 
purple stains upon his hands, as well as by his distinctive features. So 
good a reputation have they won by their honorable and upright dealings 

116 ‘ PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

that the Russian merchants rely implicitly on their word. They also carry 
on considerable trade with other countries. The Bokhara Jewish women 
may be distinguished by their beauty. In their own homes they mingle 
with the men as freely as they would in Europe, but, out-of-doors, for 
their own safety, they wear the Sart woman’s coat (parandja) and horse- 
hair veil, so that they may not be distinguished from the Mohammedan 
women. 

The Turkestan Jew speaks Sart and, at present, wears the same 
costume as the other natives, but substitutes a high fur-trimmed cap for 
the turban. He shaves his head, leaving thick curls on the temples. In 
the Russian provinces there were about 6,000 Jews, very few in Khiva, 
and a considerable number in Bokhara, but the exact figure is not avail- 
able.! 

ARABS 

The Arabs who, in former times, conquered Turkestan, where they 
forcibly introduced Mohammedanism, have become almost entirely 
assimilated with the Uzbeg population. The census of 1897 recorded 634 
Arabs in Syr Daria Province, but it is assumed that this number is not 
high enough. The same reservation applies to the other provinces. In 
the district of Zarafshan there are estimated to be 2,000 Arab families. 

AFGHANS 

A few Afghan may be found in all the provinces of Russian 
Turkestan, as well as in Bokhara. Near Kokand there is a whole settle- 
ment of Afghans. The census of 1897 gives the number of Afghans (600) 
only for Samarkand and Transcaspia. The Afghans are Mussulmen, 
following the Sunnite doctrine, and are disliked by the native Mohamme- 
dans. In contrast to the latter they do not shave their heads, but wear 
long hair. Their clothing, however, is like that of the local population. 
They are merchants and speak an Afghan language with Semitic elements. 

The Afghans have been included among the Semitic tribes of Turk- 
estan, first, because the term, Afghan, applies only to one division of the 
conglomeration of peoples in Afghanistan, but this is the dominant section 
and is known as the Durani. The Durani Afghan claim to be Ben-- 
Israel, and insist on their descent from the tribes who were carried away , 
as captives from Palestine to Media by Nebuchadnezzar. The other 

less numerous division of Afghans, is called Ghilzai, and claims Turkic 
origin. 

‘According to Sarubin, the Central Asiatic Jews speak a Persian dialect. He estimates the number 
of Jews in Turkestan provinces at about 16,000 and several thousand in Bokhara. He mentions aleo 
amall group of Jews converted to Islam and known as Chala. 

LIT 
€ dew 

SLAIAOS AHL 
agaann 

VISV TVULNAD eee 
JO SNOISIAIG : 

AALLVALSININGV 
LSALVT FHL 

é 
AESSIH @! AEISSY Leg 
, 

e 
‘ 
x 

DITEAdTA MIL. 

ae" 
fp eee LOU PE ZI py , 
Lippy y Pevey 

vebiewe| | 
SD \eeanuser (@) 
HIM-VAEH / 

/ 3 
7 . Ln ; Peay 
< quayuiy r~/ i ‘ 
Sa Je Ss \S%en; 
s STON TA Deter Sn yny Selsiiny ¢- “NS 
’oWwONor ne TW s . 
y 

~. 
‘. 
x. 
Ss 
y 

ss. 

D 
an 

ee 
a, 
Key, 
a 
\ 

118 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES UNDER THE SOVIETS 

The administrative changes through which the provinces and vassal 
states of Turkestan have passed naturally cannot affect its ethnical com- 
position, but from a socio-historical point of view, they have a very far- 
reaching importance. 

After the revolution of October, 1917, the general government of 
Turkestan was overthrown and a Soviet government proclaimed. By a 
decree dated April 20, 1921, the Moscow Government recognized Turk- 
estan as an Autonomous Socialist Soviet Republic. The Turkestan 
Republic enjoyed a somewhat larger measure of independence than did 
the other federal states, since it had its own legislative body, resembling 
the Moscow Congress of Soviets. When this body was not in session, its 
legislative functions were exercised by a Central Executive Committee. 
However, a special ‘‘ Turkestan Commission” appointed by the Moscow 
Soviets, had its headquarters in Tashkent, and represented the central 
authority. Instead of five provinces the Turkestan Republic was 
divided into six, namely: Amu Daria, Djetisuinsk, Samarkandsk, Syr 
Daria, Turkmensk, and Fergansk. Amu Daria is actually a part of the 
former Semirechye, and Turkmensk is the former Transcaspia. 

The Amir of Bokhara and the Khan of Khiva were driven out after 
the revolution of 1919 and Soviet governments were set up. 

The Khanate Khiva was renamed the Republic of Khorezm! and in 
September, 1920, the Moscow Government concluded a treaty with it, 
which affirmed the complete independence of the Republic of Khorezm. 
It annulled all agreements made between former Russian governments 
and the Khanate, agreed upon the previously existing frontiers, prohibited 
both sides from allowing their territory to be used as a base for hostile 
movements directed against either party, and promised assistance to 
Khorezm in the matter of education, technical instructions, and a sub- 
sidy. It stipulated also that Khorezm shall give concessions to no states 
other than the Soviet republics for industrial, mining, agricultural, trans- 
portation, or similar enterprises within its boundaries. Khorezm, like 
all the other independent States, had a plenipotentiary representative in 
Moscow. 

In March, 1921, a treaty between Russia and the Soviet Republic 
of Bokhara was concluded in’ Moscow. It affirmed the complete in- 
dependence of Bokhara and renounced all rights acquired by the Imperial 
Russian government. The treaty was styled a “Military Political 
Agreement”’ and its chief clauses were :— 

od 

'Khorezm ia the ancient Turkic name for Khiva. 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 119 

1. That neither contracting party shall allow its territory to be 
used as a base for military movements against any other Soviet republic, 
or.permit the passage of armies intended for the furtherance of’ such 
movements, and that mutual assistance shall be rendered in order to 
protect the independence of either country against attacks from the 
world bourgeoisie or its agents. 

2. The previously existing frontiers were confirmed. 

3. Aneconomic agreement was to be concluded under which Russia 
is to assist Bokhara, by providing materials, machinery, specialists, and 
financial aid necessary to the country’s industrial needs. 

The representative of the Russian Government, who had his head- 
quarters in Tashkent, also dealt with the Republics of Bokhara and 
Khiva. 

‘In the beginning, both republics were called “soviet,” but not 
“socialist,” being named People’s Soviet Republic, and occupied a middle 
position’ between capitalistic and communistic countries. Bokhara 
particularly held to the institutions of modern democracies, such as 
universal suffrage, the individual’s right to own property, freedom of 
speech, press mectings and unions; liberty of trade and commerce; 
personal security and protection of private domiciles. Little by little, 
however, both republics were deprived of their privileges. Bokhara held 
out longer than Khiva (Khorezm). After four years of relative inde- 
pendence Bokhara too was reorganized into a Soviet Socialist Republic 
and became a member of the Union of Soviet Republics. 

According to a decree of November, 1924, Khorezm and Bokhara 
ceased to cxist as separate administrative units, and were incorporated 
under different government divisions according to the principle of ethnical 
majorities. So that we now have the following reorganized administra- 
tive divisions, the data for which have been taken by the author from the 
paper “Pravda Vostoka” (The Truth of the Orient) for November 25, 
1924, which is responsible for the correctness of the report. 

UZBEKISTAN 

The Uzbeg Socialist Soviet Republic, or Uzbekistan, occupies 
193,365 square miles and consists of seven provinces: Tashkent, Samar- 
kand, Vergana, Zarafshan, Suzakhan, Kashka Daria, and Khorezm. 

Tashkent. appears to be a part of the former province of Syr Daria, 
occupies 6,008 square miles, and has a population of 282,455. It is 
divided into two districts—Tashkent and Mirza-chul. 

1 = Z >> Ree oe oe t . . ] 
3 The appended map, ‘The latest administrative divisions of Central Asin under the Soviets’’ 
pied from the same source (p. 117). 

inc 

120 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

The province of Samarkand occupies 11,529 square miles, has a 
population of 580,408, and is divided into four districts: Dshidak, Katta- 
Kurgan, Khodjent, and Samarkand. The ancient city, Samarkand, the 
center of the province, is the capital of the Uzbekistan republic. 

Fergana is divided into four districts: Kokand, Andijan, Namangan, 
and Fergana. It occupies 7,620 square miles and has a population of 
1,293,385. The center and chief city of the province is Kokand. 

Zarafshan, Kashka Daria, and Surakhan provinces represent three 
districts of the former Republic of Bokhara which were incorporated 
into the Uzbeg Socialist Soviet Republic. Zeravshan Province includes 
three former vilayets' of Bokhara: Nurat, Kezmin, and Bokhara, having 
as their center the city of Staraya Bokhara. 

Kashka Daria includes the former vilayets of Bokhara: Karshin, 
Kitab-Shakhrizyab, and Guzar, with a central city, Begbudy (former 
Karshi). 

Surakhan Province includes the following former Bokhara vilayets: 
Baisun, Shirabad, and a part of Sary-Assiisk. The central city is Shira- 
bad. 

The total number of inhabitants of the three last-named provinces 
is 958,686. 

The total population of the Uzbeg Socialist Soviet Republic is 
estimated at 3,725,326. The national composition of Uzbekistan includes 
representatives of different races. The Uzbeg, however, form the 
majority of the population and total 2,578,786 individuals. Then in 
order of their number follow the Tadjik (594,986), the Russians (159,845), 
the Kirghiz-Kaisak (89,834), the Kara-Kirghiz (81,762), and the Kip- 
chak. It should be noted, however, that the Sart are classed with the 
Uzbeg by the Soviet Government and the name Sarts? is no longer 
mentioned in the official records. 

The population is largely rural: of the 3,725,326 inhabitants only 
613,772 are town dwellers. 

THE TURKOMAN SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLIC 

In extent of territory and number of inhabitants the Turkoman 
Soviet Socialist Republic, otherwise known as Turkmanistan, takes 
second place among the Soviet republics of Central Asia. It occupies 

( nae is a Turkish name for an administrative division of the first class governed by 4 ali 
governor). i 
*8arubin and Andreev, the latest investigators of Turkestan, regard the Sarts as Iranians (Tadjik) 
who adopted the Turkic dialect of their conquerors, the Uzbeg. In their Turkic speech they gave U i 
however, the Turkic harmony of vowels preserving to a certain degree the Iranian phonetics. The well- 
known Russian student of thie Turks, Professor A. N. Samoilovich, regards the word Sart, not as 48 
ethnological, but as a vocational term, deriving it, according to the linguistic research of the late 
Professor W. Radloff, from a Sanskrit word meaning, ‘“ merchant.” - 

NATIONS OF TURKESTAN 121 

170,650 square miles and has 850,000 inhabitants. Turkmanistan is 
divided into five districts :— 

1. Poltoratzk with a principal city of the same name. 

2. Merv with a chief city of the same name. 

3. Tashaun includes the former bek district! of Khiva Tashaun, 
and some other districts of the former Khiva Khanate. The chief city 
is Tashaun. 

4. Chardjui was formed from the Chardjui vilayet of the former 
Bokhara on the banks of the Amu Daria River. The chief town is 
Chardjui. 

5. Kerkinsk was formerly the Bokhara vilayet, Kerkin, and the 
Kelif District of the former Turkestan Republic. 

Until Chardjui is rebuilt as a capital, the administrative center 
is temporarily located in Poltoratzk, a large trading station, with 303,492 
inhabitants. . 

The naticnal composition of Turkmanistan includes different tribal 
elements, but the Turkoman are the dominating people, numbering 
660,007. Then follow the Uzbeg, 92,782: the Russians, 47,341; the 
Tadjik, 17,622: the Persians, 17,589; and others. 

THE KARA-KIRGHIZ AUTONOMOUS PROVINCE 
The Kara-Kirghiz autonomous province occupies the whole south- 
eastern corner of Central Asia bordering on the foreign territories of 
China and Afghanistan. It occupies 89,048 square miles, with a popula- 
tion of 792,783, and includes the Karakol and Naryn districts, and a part 
of the Aulie-Atin District of the former Province of Semirechye (later 
Djetisuinsk), fifty-two rural districts of the former Fergana Province and 
the eastern part. of the Pamir region. For administrative purposes the 
province is divided into two districts: 1, Pishpek, with a center in a 
town of the same name; 2, Djalal-abad, with a center in a town of the 
same name. The population consists of nomadic, semi-nomadic, and 
sedentary people. Only 73,000 live in. towns; ninety percent of the 
population is rural. The Kara-Kirghiz, numbering 504,858, form the 
majority of the population, then follow the Russians, 135,784; the Uzbeg, 
118,170; the Kirghiz, 14,324; and others. 

THE TADJIK AUTONOMOUS REPUBLIC 

. The Tadjik Autonomous Republic, which enters into the composi- 
tion of the Uzbeg Soviet Socialist. Republic, occupies 33,436 square miles 

‘Bek is the Turkish name for the governor ofa district. 

122 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

and has a population of about 600,000. It consists of five vilayets of the 
former Bokhara, of one district of the former Samarkand Province, and 
of a district of western Pamir. 

The whole of the Tadjik Autonomous Republic consists of high 
rocky mountains. It is watered by the upper Amu Daria River and its 
tributaries. The chicf town and administrative center is Dyushambe on 
the Varzob River. The bulk of the population which is found in the rural 
districts of the more fertile western part of the republic is composed of 
Tadjik (65.4 percent), Uzbeg (82.4 percent), and Kirghiz (2.2 percent.) 

THE KARA-KALPAK AUTONOMOUS PROVINCE 

The Wara-Kalpak Autonomous Province occupies a territory of 
30,572 square miles, with a population of 273,684. It is located between 
the Aral Sea, Kirghiz Republic, Uzbekistan, and Turkmanistan, and is 
composed of the Khodjel and Kugrad districts of the former Khiva 
(later Khorezm Republic) and of the Chimbai and Turtkul districts of 
the former Amu Daria Province. It is divided into four administrative 
Districts: Turtkul, Chimbai, Kugrad, and Khodjeibi, with principal 
towns of the same names. The chief occupations of the inhabitants are 
agriculture (the settled Kara-Kalpak) and cattle breeding (the nomadic 
Kirghiz). They form the major part of the Kara-Kalpak population 
(72.5 percent). The Kirghiz represent 21 percent. 

STATISTICAL DATA ON THE TURKESTAN REPUBLIC 
The following statistical data concerning the Turkestan Republic 
are based on the census of 1920 made before the reorganization of the 
Turkestan states. 

Provinces 

Amu Daria 
Djetisuinsk 

(former Semirechye) 
Samarkand 
Syr Daria 
Turkoman 
Fergana 

Total 

Cities and Touns 

Men 
3,805 
45,068 

86,007 
161,538 
28,713 
220,666 

545,797 

Province 
Syr Daria 
Djetisuinsk 
Turkoman 
Samarkand 
Amu Daria 

123 

Fural Population 

Women Total Men Women Total 
3,485 7,290 80,815 72,490 153,305 
44,714 89,782 444,063 425,775 869,838 
81,525 167,532 333,962 291,155 625,117 
153,354 314,888 510,856 480,087 990,943 
27,144 56,057 147,604 130,132 277,736 
144,635 405,301 666,904 597,270 1,264,174 
454,857 1,040,850 2,184,204 1,996,909 4,181,113 
Percentage of Literacy 
Men Women 
15.6 8.1 
13.0 5.5 
9.5 6.2 
6.3 2.4 
3.3 7 

Men 
84,620 
489,131 

419,969 
672,390 
176,517 
887,570 

2,730,197 

Total 

NRO H 
KB OnNowes 

Total 
Women 
75,975 
470,489 

372,680 
633,441 
157,276 
781,905 

2,491,766 

Total 
160,595 
959,620 

792,649 
1,305,831 
333,793 

1,669,475 

5,221,963 

124 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Domestic Animals Owned by the Natives of Turkestan in 1914, 1917, and 1920 

Provinces 1914 1917 1920 

Djetisuinsk 

Horses 1,112,000 726,000 283,000 

Horned cattle 860,000 682,000 440,000 

Sheep and goats 7,126,000 6,233,000 2,443,000 
Syr Daria 

Horses 678,000 471,000 201,000 

Horned cattle 798,000 607,000 413,000 

Sheep and goats 5,870,000 4,538,000 1,576,000 
Turkoman 

Horses 81,000 29,000 20,000 

Horned cattle 63,000 90,000 39,000 

Sheep and goats 2,001,000 1,275,000 603,000 
Samarkand 

Horses 115,000 75,000 56,000 

Horned cattle 230,000 239,000 166,000 

Sheep and goats 1,147,000 960,000 288,000 
Fergana 

Horses 338,000 257,000 118,000 

Horned cattle 415,000 526,000 271,000 

Sheep and goats 978,000 766,000 351,000 

We see from this table how much the war and the revolution affected the 
rural economy of the natives of Turkestan. The civil war particularly 
impoverished the Turkestan breeder of domestic animals. But in some 
cases (in the provinees of Turkoman, Samarkand, and Fergana) the 
number of horned cattle increased in 1917, as compared with the figures 
of 1914. 

CHAPTER V 

THE ASIATIC STEPPE PROVINCES 

The Steppe Provinces under old Russia included Uralsk, Turgai, 
Akmolinsk, and Semipalatinsk. This region is also known as the Kirghiz 
country, since the people of this name form the bulk of the population. 
Under the soviets, these steppe provinces are known as the Kirghiz 
Republic. 

THE KIRGHIZ 

The local Kirghiz were included in the description of the inhabitants 
of Turkestan (p. 77), but in this section will be presented a survey of 
the whole tribe. 

The total number of Kirghiz, according to statistical data published 
in 1911, was 4,692,384. Of these, 2,480,443, or a little more than one 
half of both branches of Kirghiz lived in Turkestan (p. 77) and 37,982 
in Siberia of whom there were about 33,000 in western Siberia (p. 33). 
A small part of the Kirghiz-Kaisak, called Bukeyef, numbering about 
150,000 (see p. 128) live in Europe between the Ural and the Volga. 
Thus, there remain for the Steppe Provinces, 2,173,959. Sedelnikoff,' 
however, gives 1,929,572 for the Steppe Kirghiz. In the Steppe 
Provinces ouly the Kirghiz-Kaisak are nomadic.’ 

HISTORICAL DATA 

The general region of the steppe provinces has been called “the 
historical p»ieway”’ of Asiatic peoples. From the remotest times, until 
the end of the nineteenth century, the country has served as the stage for 
numerous movements, struggles, and contests of different nations. Re- 
mains of the Stone, Bronze, and Iron Ages are numerous. Burial mounds 
called, kurgans, stone figures called baby (plural, from baba, woman) 
or kamenniya baby (stone woman), stone memorial tablets, and picto- 
graphic writings on cliffs and rocks have been encountered all over this 
region, as well as in southern Siberia. The memorial tablets are covered 
with inscriptions in the ancient Turkic language, called Uigur. Many of 
these inscriptions have been deciphered, but the pictographs are, as yet, 
umnterpreted. Russian investigators call the old Turkic characters 
“Tunic inscriptions” and the pictographs, “pisanitzy”’ from the word 
pisat (to write), 

All these antiquities, dating from the Metal Ages and found in the 
Steppe region and in southern Siberia are known by the Russians under 

edelnikoff, Chapt. V. 
For the Kara-Kirghiz, who are mainly mountain dwellers in Turkestan, sce p. 77. 

125 

126 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

the vague appellation, Chude, or remains of the mythical people. The 
honor of being the first to decipher the old Turkic inscriptions belongs 
to the Danish scholar, Professor Vilhelm Thomsen! of Copenhagen, who 
studied them in 1893, and to a member of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences in Leningrad, Professor Wilhelm Radloff,? who began his in- 
vestigations in 1894. The racial affiliations are still undetermined, but 
gome skulls excavated and ascribed to the Chudes appear to be dolicho- 
cephalic. 

According to the Chinese annals of two centuries B.C., a blond and 
blue-eyed people named Usun, moved to Lake Balkash through the 
“historical gateway’”’ formed by the Ili Valley, a route followed by all 
subsequent migrating peoples. The Usun continued to live there until 
the beginning of the new era, when, disrupted by internal dissension and 
forced out by pressure from new immigrants, they moved farther to the 
north and northwest into the steppes, where they were either extermin- 
ated or assimilated by Mongolo-Turkic tribes. 

The Huns, coming from China in 177 A.D., the Uigur descending 
from the Altai in the seventh century, the Pechenyeg in the same century, 
and the Polovtzy in the eleventh century passed through the steppes in 
their westward migrations. About the same time the Kirghiz-Kaisak 
appeared from the Tyan-Shan Mountains. The Chinese historians of the 
seventh century, to whom they were known as Khakas or Khagas, 
describe them as fair-skinned and light-haired, and possessed of a civiliza- 
tion higher than that of most Central Asiatic tribes. Some authors are 
inclined to assume that they had a common origin with the Finns, or 
even the white race, but now most of them are dark-skinned and black- 
haired, showing that their intermixture was with Turks and Mongols. 
The few words of their original language known to us show that it be- 
longed with the Turkic group. 

In the middle of the fifteenth century the Kirghiz-Kaisak wandered 
back, under pressure of kindred Turkic tribes (Uzbeg) from the Aral Sea 
to the region of the Balkash Sea. In the sixteenth century when the 
Uzbeg left for Amu Daria, a part of the Kirghiz migrated to the north 
and northeast of the Aral Sea and by the end of the century they had 
become powerful rulers in Turkestan and Tashkent. 

In the seventeenth century, they became divided into three parts oF 

— 

'Thomeen, (a), 285-299; (b), V, 54, I, 224. 
2Radloff, (c); (a), vol. II, Chapt. VII; see also, Radloff and Melioransky, (a), (b).- 

THE STEPPE PROVINCES 127 

hordes: the great horde (Ulu-juz), the middle horde (Urta-juz), and the 
small horde (Kitchi-juz).! 

Turkestan and Tashkent remained the chief seat of the Middle 
Horde, while the Great Horde went to the east and the Small Horde to 
the north and west. Inner dissensions weakened the power of the 
Hordes, so that the Kalmuck in the southwest, the Russians on the north, 
and the Jungarians on the east, embarrassed them. The Khan of the 
Small Horde, Abul Khair, was compelled to offer his allegiance to Peter 
the Great. However, this was not accepted, because of lack of accord 
among the Kirghiz. When the Jungarians (1723) conquered Turkestan 
and Tashkent, the Middle and Small Hordes moved to the west, expelled 
the Bashkir from their habitat and occupied all the territory between the 
Aral and Caspian Seas and the Ural River. Thus the small Horde be- 
came a neighbor of Russia. 

Soon the clever and crafty Abul Khair was named Khan of the Great 
Horde, again conquered Turkestan, and subjugated Khiva. But the 
Shah Nadir of Persia drove him out of Turkestan. In 1730 Abul Khair 
repeated his offer of allegiance to Russia and this time it was accepted, 
the Russian Government having a mistaken idea of his power. It turned 
out that he could not fulfill his obligations to guarantee the safety of the 
Russian merchants and other travelers passing through Kirghiz territory. 
They were plundered and assaulted, the Russians were compelled to 
build fortresses, and to advance into Central Asia until they reached 
Pamir. 

The Middle Horde came under Russian control in 1781, and the 
Great Horde in 1847. After conquering Turkestan the Russians estab- 
lished (1867) a government of the Steppe Provinces of the Kirghiz terri- 
tory. The nomads were divided into administrative units called auls 
or volosty which elected their own elders (aksakals) and judges (b7z) and 
taxes were imposed on them at the rate of three roubles from each tent 
for the state and half a rouble for internal expenses. 

The boundaries of the territories of the three hordes are not fixed. 
Some families of the Middle and Great Hordes roam in Chinese territory, 
not far from Zaisan Lake, near the Tarbagatai Mountains, in the 
Sergiopol District. , 

Gt horde, Russian orda, is derived from the Turkic ordu, a camp. Orda is now commonly 
lated iM ‘he Russians as a contemptuous term for the Asiatics. Ulu and Kitchi are not properly trans- 
Signiben arent and small, as the exact meaning of Ulu is elder or older, and the word has no quantitative 
ftchisng «l Actually, the Ulu-juz horde has fewer people than the two others. In the same way, 
tiga me should be translated as the younger and not the small horde. Juz is the German transcrip- 
and should be pronounced like the English, Yuz. 

128 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

A fourth horde, the Bukeyef or Inner Horde, living in European 
Russia, between the Ural and the Volga, numbers about 150,000. This 
horde was formed in the early years of the nineteenth century from a part 
of the Small Horde, which, led by Bukeyef, a grandson of Abul 
Khair Khan, crossed the Urals to occupy the land vacated by the 
Kalmuck. Bukeyef was confirmed Khan in 1811. After his death his 
eldest son was given the Russian title, Prince Jenghiz, in honor of his 
illustrious ancestor, the famous Jenghis Khan, and of the services of 
his father. 

SOMATOLOGY 

The heterogeneous physical type of the Kirghiz-Kaisak reveals the 
mixed origin of the tribe. The average stature of the tribe is 164 cms., 
but taken separately, the different divisions have the following averages:- 

Bukeyef Horde 162.9 cms. 
Middle Horde 165.1 ems. 
Syr Daria 166.9 cms. 
Semirechye 168.8 ems. 

The general average for the cephalic index is 87.1, but when divided into 
groups, the Kirghiz-Kaisak have the following averages: Kuldja 
Kirghiz, 83.2; Middle Horde, 87.4; Bukeyef Horde, 86.28; Syr Daria, 
87.91; Semirechye, 85.18. The average for the transverse cephalo-facial 
index is 70.34, with the following variations for the various groups: Syr 
Daria Kirghiz, 67.43; Kuldja Kirghiz, 68.71; Bukeyef Horde Kirghiz, 
71.32; Middle Horde Kirghiz, 71.35; Small Horde Kirghiz, 73.14. The 
total average for the nasal index is 68.50, with variations for the Kuldja 
Kirghiz, 52.39; Middle Horde Kirghiz, 71.78; Small Horde Kirghiz, 
74.13. 

The physical data on the different divisions of Kirghiz show their 
complex composition which may also be noted from the names of the 
tribes composing the various hordes. The most important tribes belong- 
ing to the largest, the Middle Horde, are the Kirei, Naiman, Argy?, 
and Kipchak. They are supposed to have originated from a mixture of 
Turkic peoples with the original inhabitants of the country, the Usun, 
and some Mongolic elements. 

The Kipchak, identified with the Polovtzy and Kuman, were form- 
erly the most numerous and powerful Kirghiz tribe, but, beginning with 
the twelfth century, some divisions separated from the parent stock and 
migrated to the west where they were mixed with the Bashkir, Nogal, 
and the Tatars of the Volga, Kazan, and Crimea. Some of them moved 

THE STEPPE PROVINCES 129 

to the southwest and formed the bulk of the Uzbeg of Fergana, Khiva, 
and Zarafshan. 

The chief divisions of the Great Horde are the Kangli and the Dulat. 
The Kangli may be identified with the Pechenyeg, Turkic invaders of 
Southern Russia between the ninth and thirteenth centuries, who were 
known to the Chinese as the Kan-giu. The Alchin tribe was the most 
important in the Small or Younger Horde. According to some ethnolo- 
gists the Alchin represent a mixture of Turks with the Dinlin of the 
Chinese Annals and Ugro-Finnic tribes. 

ETHNOGRAPHY 

The tribal and clan organization of the Kirghiz-Kaisak is very com- 
plicated. The Kirghiz ethnologist, Mustafa Chokayeff gave the follow- 
ing explanation of his own standing in the Kirghiz-Kaisak nation.' He 
belongs to the Turkic race, Kaisak nation, Middle Orda, Kipchak tribe, 
Toru-aibghyz clan, Shashli subclan, Boshai branch (or generation, 
Russian kolyeno) and Janay sub-branch (Russian, podkolyeno). 

Like that of most Turkic tribes, the social structure of the Kirghiz- 
Kaisak is based upon a patriarchal system. It is difficult to decide when 
the term clan should be used.2 There seems to be a conception of a 
political group, called among both the Kirghiz-Kaisak and the Kara- 
Kirghiz uruk or ru, with its head, bey, bz, or serdar. A group of families 
affliated by blood is called by the Kaisak taypas or tayfa and the Kara- 
Kirghiz, kyrk. The head of such a subclan, based on blood relationship, 
is called ak-sakal. An amalgamation of several subclans forms a sdk 
(clan), 

The subclan crest. or tamga may be regarded as its symbol. The 
crest is used as a property mark and is branded on the left side of the 
animal, i.c., the side from which the rider mounts, or cut on various 
belongings, as well as on the graves of deceased members of the clan. 
The tamga, represented by geometric designs, may correspond to a 
totem. Some of the Kirghiz of the Middle Horde have tamgas represent- 
Ing a “bird’s rib” (urdas bit), a comb (tarak), and a forked stick (salak). 
The antiquity of these symbols can be judged from the fact that they 
may be seen on the old Nestorian monuments and on the monument to 

Samoilovich, (b), 162, 
ial ay have used the term clan in the same way as most Ruasian investigators. It should be pointed 
stounl et er, that it would be more appropriate to apply the term gens to certain units of Kirghiz social 
Neve A nent they reckon kinship in the male line only. However, the Kirghiz terms of relationship 
dita . vet yeen nulequately investigated. A thorough study of the terms of relationship and marital 
' 8 of some other Turkic peoples, for instance the Yakut and Altaians, may lead to the proof of the 
ormer existence of matriarchy among them. 

130 ) PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 
Khan Kul-Jegi in the valley of the Orkhon, on which the inscriptions are 
in old Turkic characters, dating from 732 A.D.! 

SOCIAL LIFE 

The social organization of the local Kirghiz-Kaisak was sketched in 
the chapter on Turkestan. The nomadic peoples of the steppes are more 
democratic than their Turkestan kin. Although the descendants of the 
old sultan-clans and the hodjas (the alleged descendants of Mohammed) 
are still regarded as secular and clerical nobility, their influence on the 
masses is quite insignificant. The more powerful clans were those pos- 
sessing more land, usually commandeered from the common domain. 
The clan heads were the owners of large herds. Slavery flourished among 
the Kirghiz, until the middle of the nineteenth century, and at the end of 
the eighteenth century received official sanction from the Russian Gov- 
ernment. But in 1822 the Russian Government made its first attempt to 
limit the slave trade. The retention of old slaves (kul’s) was allowed, 
but the acquisition of new onés was proscribed. In 1859, according to 
the proposal of the governor general, the sultans, b7is, and elders of all 
the Kirghiz districts freed their slaves, but there remained a class of 
djetaks, poor people with no cattle, who were exploited by the rich cattle 
owners. 

Under the Soviets these social relations have considerably changed, 
but to the detriment of the continued breeding of domestic animals. 
On the other hand, the development of agriculture which began long ago, 
under the influence of Russian immigrants, who occupied Kirghiz 
pasture lands, is increasing, the recent years of famine having furthered 
this process. 

RELIGION 

Like the Turkestan peoples, the Kirghiz of the Steppes are Moham- 
medans of the Sunnite faith. It is a curious fact that the Kirghiz were 
converted to Mohammedanism through the mistaken efforts of the 
Russian Government, which had no faith in the capacity of ignorant 
Russian missionaries to propagate Christianity among the Kirghiz pagans 
and preferred Mohammedanism to shamanism. In the same way, 
during the eighteenth century, the Buryat who were also shamanists, 
were converted to Buddhism by Mongolian lamas with the cooperation 
of Russian officials. A part of the Kirghiz, however, were converted to 
Islam in the beginning of the fourteenth century by the Mohammedan 
mullahs of Khiva, Bokhara, and Tashkent. They are, however, not 
very ardent Mohammedans. 

‘Ar stoff, (b), 391-486. 

i 

THE STEPPE PROVINCES 131 

At the beginning their religious heads were hodjas, descendants of 
the first adherents to Mohammedanism. Later, the Kasan Tatars acted 
as mullahs. Now they have their own mullahs who receive their religious 
education in the theological colleges (medresses) of Petropavlovsk and 
Semipalatinsk. During the nineteenth century Kirghiz Mohammedanism 
was strengthened through intercourse with their co-religionists of 
Central Asia. 

Of the religious festivals, the following may be mentioned. In the 
offering festival (kurbanais), symbolizing the offering of Isaac by Abra- 
ham, the best male horses were sacrificed. The Kirghiz believe, that on 
the spirit of the sacrificial horse, sinners may safely drive through the 
infernal regions and not be forced to ride on a thin cord, sharp as a sword’s 
blade. The hides of the horses sacrificed are given to the mullahs and 
the poor invited to consume the meat. The festival is accompanied by 
plays and contests. Horse races are run, girls taking part, and the 
youths overtaking them are privileged to kiss them. 

A thirty day fast (uraza) was established to commemorate Moham- 
med’s fast. he month of fasting is called ramshan, during which food 
may be taken only during the night. From early dawn (when one is 
able to se a thread) until sunset, both food and drink are prohibited. 
This is a peculiar form of diet, but the Kirghiz accommodate themselves 
to it very well. They eat and drink throughout the night and sleep in 
the daytime. 

The Ramazanait (or Uzazait) festival which follows the Ramazan 
fast is spent in the abundant consumption of meat (horse meat and 
mutton) and kumiss and in various contests, races, etc. 

Besides the three festivals mentioned the Kirghiz also have feasts 
in the memory of honored dead. 

DWELLINGS 

There are two kinds of dwellings, the summer tent, wi, and the 
winter house -kstau, the wi is the more characteristic and important in the 
history and nomadic life of the Kirghiz. The kstau is a necessity because 
of local climatic conditions. There are two types of wi, the conical tent 
of the Kirghiz proper and the dome-shaped tent of the Torgout. The 
first form is more widely used. Both forms have wooden frames and a felt 
cover. In the interior the place opposite the entrance is occupied‘ by 
trunks covered with rugs and serves as the sitting and sleeping place for 
honored guests. At the right of the entrance is the living room of the 

132 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

master. It is partitioned from the rest of the tent by'a curtain or screen 
made of stalks of a shrub (Lasiagrostis splendens). Behind the curtain 
are stored food, kitchen utensils, and other household belongings. To 
the left of the entrance is the place for married sons and grown children. 
On the same side, but near the entrance, the dogs, lambs, and falcons 
trained for hunting are kept. There also are seated needy or poor 
visitors. The fireplace (ofbossy) is in the center of the tent. The Kirghiz 
are fond of sitting cross-legged around it, not only at meal times, but also 
to gossip. The tent (kibitka) is regarded as a sanctified shelter, under the 
protection of which all life proceeds. All clan deliberations and gather- 
ings take place in the tent by which the Kirghiz swear. ‘I swear upon 
my tent,” or ‘““A man’s tent is like a god’s temple,” the Kirghiz say. 

The permanent winter dwelling, kstau, is regarded as imperfect and 
uncomfortable and is not liked by the Kirghiz. The character and type of 
this house varies with local conditions. In the mountains, it is of stones; 
in the river valleys, of wood; in the southern treeless region, of sod and 
turf; in the northern forest region, of sod or logs. However, the most 
characteristic winter dwelling is the sod hut, the walls of which are 
about a yard thick. The roof is flat. Between the ceiling rafters are 
closely packed small willow branches. This roof foundation is then 
thatched with reeds over which is placed a layer of clay and sod. It is 
necessary to renew the clay and sod every year to render the roof water- 
proof to any degree. Leading to the court is a low door, opposite which 
are one or two windows, or, more exactly, holes covered with glass or the 
membrane of a bladder or guts. 

The interior is divided in two sections. At the front is a stove of 
beaten clay with a cooking kettle set in it. Newly born lambs and calves 
are kept there and harness and household utensils. At the rear near the 
walls are the sleeping quarters. Wooden pegs are set in the wall on which 
are hung clothing and the more valuable harness. The walls are usually 
covered with felt rugs fastened on with pegs. 

Close to the dwelling are stalls for sheep. These are similar in form 
to the dwelling, but without stove and windows. “Nearby are two addi- 
tional huts, one for laborers and the other used as a storeroom. Fach 
dwelling and its accompanying structures is surrounded by a wall of earth, 
dung, and reed; a reed shed resting on the wall and on posts covers the 
whole court, protecting it from heavy winds and storms. The covered 
yard is divided into several sections of which the warmer ones are OccU- 
pied by horned and small cattle and the others by horses. Well-to-do 

UMIKKY, WHY OY} PUP] “MePUIBYO HHO[}sd PUT YUVPUVdpUL vyosd 
O} popuo} WOPoody [ENPIAIPUL PUB SUONOL Hod Jo VOUUSYB VY ‘puTY Joyo 
oy} UY) “SUOIyBLIdSE OLysI[ENPIAIpUL OF BKNYCUT UB VAVA JUVULUOMIAUY 
MoU JY} JO sHOUSNOLOUdS PUv suyo fuNyoU oy, “AgjunoOo vAtyuu ayy 
UL UMOUYUN SUA oft] JO PUD, MoU OYL “K}UOAY [BOMOYHIY PUB os} Xt Peo 
“opodosyyUe HE YON SE Woy} pavUoNBUl PUVWIUOIIAUY [YAN EU ot 7, 
“USE, UBYGOING, UL ULY toy} UVYY KNOL Pod BSOT IBj 
We AVL, “UBNEY YIN ssuryy AQ posouqns vpinb ov svatou OE PSI[BapI 
puy ‘uot sOdsip oLsI[ELoyeu B OABY ‘OPP HL YPBP SAPMOTS YUIYY AVY “Boly 
“lunoud puowAY doy YIM pUOdsoLd0d BOLILIGB [BNYVo] POPUL Aq, 
‘SPUNON OIATIY OY} JO SHOUYJOS [BUFO Ol) YO] BBY 
YOrUIOUNUOId UTIKKNYL JOY} PUB SUTISEIYL BU ]Joa 8B ZIyAIIy yeods [Pe 
AVL “PUOUTVAOUL JO MOJS OAT PUY ‘KoAD UMOUY YuBpP IBY youl WyAreys 
“WO}Oo ULYs Yup “syvuy popunod YA “pring AyVoys Soanqyeys umupow 
jo vit soddoyg oy} Jo suBissnyp vy, “odAy OLATTY VY} JO UOryEZtosUO] 
yerjivd oyy Ul poynsod suotun osoyy, “AuruAAjOd yo woysno z1ysary 
oy} poydopy syoUsso;) oY, “UOULOM ZIGRILY PolBur Avy ‘usioMm £q 
petuvdurovatun odo syUUstOd PUT ‘KLOINYUVAPs ‘so LLosop osot[} SY 
‘sdOOd} JUVUIUTVAOL) AQ PoMO][O} SUA 10/0] YON 
puv soddoys 2iysty vy} poyovod UOIPUABTUUWIE STY JO OABM VU) “BUTBY 
“UNOJ [VAL] VY} JO Ysvo oY} OF posvodds ‘soalyuU oyy Jo UOTE po[dxe Aq 
HOA[VSULOY) YOUU OF odIsop VY} AY posnod VOM LO VISSNYT UL vst] JO SUOTFIP 
“W0d YHOUyIp vy} Wlody podtosy pey OYM ‘Soyo PUT ‘syUpIssip ‘SpeuTUTO 
‘SJLOs VATHINY ‘sdoplosop ALU} ‘SdoINPUVAPU SlolptBe UoA dO ‘Aamguea 
YQuoopXIs OY? YIM FULUULHoOgT “GUVUTUTAOL) UBISSNY oY, Aq _ ysonbuoo 
BYE alOjog AUOL UVF VISSNYL OLVUISY JO UOLVZIUO[OD UISSHY, OWT, 
"SOBESO:) 
puv squusuod OUT poplalp oq osu Avur uoTyEpndod uvissnyy oy yp, ‘wor 
-INOUULOD SIL OPUL polopuy “sofOg, VULOS ST [JOM ST ‘SURISSNY] JY JO puv Op}T 
YANOYYV ‘SUBISSNYZ, WoT) OY JO APOLITA B sv popsvdod og ysntu soddayg 
oy} jo uorRpndod uvissnyy vy. Jo poy ‘vpdood oryuisy [vapuo.) Joyyo 
pus ‘suniuyyog ‘sya fyonuypuyp ‘smo ‘supog ‘suTIUOY yO, ‘SUBIUOY ST 
ophypuL Yuoodod g' Aulurwiwod opp “puvoted g’gz yhoqu suvissny 
oy puv uoryundod vddoyg vy} Jo quodded ges UNOy Z1yFIDYy OUT, 

Md OLG TH LO NOLLWINdO YT NVISSOY AND 

(22d vos) YUsIEY-2zIysry UvQsoyIN TT, VY} JO osoy} WOdJ JayIp 

1OU Op ZUQAITY -vddoy, oy} Jo stuoysnd ApUvy puv ‘poog ULYOP OY, 
‘squustod UeIssny 
JO OKOY) VYL[ STO] JO SOSNOY LOJULM AVOYD P]ING UOLAoA yso10J OY} JO ZIYBITY 

tel SHONTAOUd Add OLS AL 

134 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

settlers been on a higher cultural plane, they might have initiated superior 
forms of economic and social life, as did the European settlers of North 
America. But the Russian immigrants were strongly dominated by 
predatory instincts and they oppressed and exploited the natives rather 
than make an attempt to profit by the riches of the country through their 
own labor. 

Under Soviet rule the Russian settlers have been cruelly repaid by 
the Kirghiz. Acquiring power, the Kirghiz took their farms from the 
Russians, nationalizing all the land, under the pretext of distributing it 
among the needy Kirghiz. Thus, many of the Russian settlers were 
obliged to return to European Russia. Dr. R. Asmis, the councilor of the 
German Department of State, on his way through Russia, met many 
caravans of Russian peasants returning to their former home with a small 
number of cattle left to them after the rest were confiscated.! 

THE COSSACKS 

There are in the steppes two divisions of Cossacks: the so-called 
Siberian and the Ural Cossacks. The Siberian Cossacks came into the 
country together with other Russian settlers from southeastern European 
Russia. They were organized into irregular light: cavalry (sotnyas, 
hundreds) whose duty it was to maintain order in the steppes and to 
guard the frontier. Service was compulsory and every male Cossack had 
to serve till the age of thirty-three. Their military duties occupied most 
of their time and they began to look down on the field work of the 
peasants and to despise the natives. The cultivation of the land assigned 
to them by the government was left to the women and hired Kirghiz 
laborers and therefore the harvests were not so good as those of the 
peasants. The Cossacks also traded with the Kirghiz, even monopoliz- 
ing the grain trade. It is very profitable to carry on commerce with a 
people so easily exploited as the Kirghiz. There were also among the 
Siberian Cossacks many rich cattle breeders, but among them the cattle 
were cared for by the women. 

About 96 percent of the Siberian Cossacks belong to the Greek 
Catholic Church, but they are not very religious. The small Steppes 
settlements rarely have their own churches and the inhabitants see the 
priest only on important occasions. It is interesting to note that 3 percent 
of the Siberian Cossacks in the Kokchetaf District are Mohammedans. 
A small number are “‘old believers” (dissenters). The Cossacks are less 
superstitious than the peasants. . 

18ee Doctor Asmis' very interesting book, p. 203. 

THE STEPPE PROVINCES 135 

In tribal composition the Siberian Cossacks include about 84 percent 
Great Russians, 6 percent Little Russians, 3 percent White Russians, 5 
percent Mordva, 1 percent Kirghiz, and 1 percent Tatars. There are also 
a small number of Cheremiss, Chuvash, Votyak, Zyryan, and others who 
were assimilated with the great Russian bulk of the Cossacks. 

The historical conditions of the life of the Ural Cossacks were similar 
to those of the Siberian Cossacks; therefore, they have many traits in 
common with the Siberian Cossacks. The nucleus of the Ural Cossack 
stock was formed by the Volnitza (freedom seekers), deserters, escaped serfs, 
dissidents, Don and Volga Cossacks, Poles, and a small number of Tatars 
and Kalmuck. They originally aspired to create a free and independent 
life for themselves, far from any oppressive government. They take their 
name from the Ural River where they first settled. Originally, they were 
called Yaik Cossacks after the river of the same name, but after the rebel- 
lion under Pugachoff in 1774, in which the Yaik Cossacks took part, the 
Empress Catherine ordered the name Yaik changed to Ural. 

Fishing is the chief occupation of the Ural Cossacks. Two physical 
types may he distinguished among them. One is of medium stature 
stockily built, round-faced, blond-haired, short and heavily bearded, and 
of somewhat rude appearance; the other is of high stature, good looking, 
dark-complexioned, long-bearded, and with dark brown eyes. 

LITTLE RUSSIANS 

In the latter part of the nineteenth century there appeared in the 
Steppes (chiefly in the Akmolinsk and Atbazarsk districts), Ukrainian 
peasant immigrants. They settled apart from the Great Russians. 
Their villages can be easily distinguished by their white painted clay 
houses with straw roofs. 

GERMAN COLONISTS 

German settlers (Mennonites, Baptists, and other sects) came to the 
province of Akmolinsk in the nineties of the nineteenth century. Their 
villages are on leased land near Omsk, or on portions granted by the 
government of Akmolinsk District. The general appearance of their 
Villages is very similar to that of the Little Russians, but these settlers 
differ in their European dress and their vehicles drawn by two horses and 
two-wheeled carts. Their relations with the Russians were rather un- 
friendly, so that in some cases the Administration had to interfere and 
the colonists were given other sections of land, which are even better 
cultivated than among the Russian peasants. They have their own 
schools and houses of prayer. | 

136 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

OTHER PEOPLES 
Poles, Jews, Bokharans, and Sarts live in towns only. The Sarts are 
chiefly merchants. A small number of Bashkir and Kalmuck live in 
rural districts in Ural and Turgai provinces, where they cultivate the 
land. 

CHAPTER VI 

THE PEOPLES OF THE CAUCASUS 

The Caucasus region comprises the isthmus separating the Black 
Sea and the Sea of Azof from the Caspian Sea and the southeastern part 
of European Russia from Persia and Turkey in Asia. Under the Russian 
Empire, it was divided into two districts, Trans-Caucasia and North or 
Cis-Caucasia, with an area of 181,173 square miles and a population of 
13,500,000 with a density of about seventy to the square mile. In its 
territorial extent the Caucasus exceeds Sweden, and in density of popula- 
tion, European Russia. For administrative purposes Transcaucasia 
was divided into eleven parts. Six of these were called governments: 
Baku, Chornomor, i.e., Black Sea, Erivan, Kutais, Tiflis, and Yelizavet- 
pol; three were provinces: Batum, Kars, and Daghestan; and two 
territories: Sukhum or Abkhasia and Zakataly. Cis-Caucasia was 
divided into one government, Stavropol, and two provinces, Terek and 
Kuban. 

Nowhere else in the world do we find such a heterogeneous confusion 
of peoples, languages, and religions gathered in one area. The peoples of 
the Caucasus may be divided into three groups: first, newcomers like 
the Russian conquerors and other recent immigrants; second, aborigines 
with tribal affiliations outside the Caucasus; and third, abcrigines 
indigenous to the Caucasus. 

The languages of the Caucasian aborigines are, according to Profes-, 
sor Marr, called Japhetic,! a designation in accord neither with the bibli- 
cal nor with the present scientific use of the term Japheth. Biblical 
anthropology, as interpreted by theologists, divides mankind into the 
descendants of Shem (the white race), Ham (black race), and Japheth 
(the yellow race). This identical terminology is used in quite a different 
sense by modern anthropologists. These three terms refer to Caucasians 
only. The Indo-European tribes are Japhetic, while the Semites and the 
Hamites (the African subdivisions of the semitic race) are regarded as 
having a common origin. Whether Professor Marr used the term Japheth 
correctly or not, the question lies chiefly in the meaning he attributed 
to it and in this respect. his classification can be of great assistance in 
classifying the Caucasian peoples.2 Marr’s theory of what he terms 
Japhetism, was much criticised by European philologists, but among his 
ardent adherents Professor Braun of Leipzig may be named. 

1Marr. : 
Gee may be added that the use of the name Japhetides to designate the earliest inhabitants of the 
C asus might clear up the ambiguous meaning of the word Caucasian as a geographical (native of 

ee and an anthropological (representative of the white race) term. 
; un, 

137 

138 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

A brief résumé of the Japhetic theory may be worth while. The two 
primary elements of Mediterranean civilization, according to Marr, are 
the languages and culture of the Indo-Europeans and the Semito- 
Hamites, the Japhetic languages and culture comprising the third ele- 

Map 4. Administrative Divisions of the Caucasus under the Soviets. 

ment. Properly speaking, the Japhetic languages and culture should be 
designated the first or fundamental element, which, being mixed with 
Indo-European, Semito-Hamitic or Turkic elements, produced hybrid- 
ism of different kinds, to which the present Indo-European, Semito- 
Hamitic, and some Turkic languages belong. The Basques of the 
Pyrennees and the Bureshki, Burishaski, or Vershiki! tribe of Pamir still 
retain remnants of Japhetic languages. The extinct languages of the 

'1Marr, 36, 52. He regards this tribe as emigrants from the Caucasus. Dixon (303) mente Ke, 
“isolated and peculiar little group of the Burusheski just under the Pamirs.”” Although brachycep- a es 
these people are very light, almost fair, and occasionally have hazel or even gray-blue eyes. Profess 
Dixon gives no bibliographical reference to this group. 

THE CAUCASUS 139 

prehistoric Etruscans, Pelasgians, and Iberians, also shows affinities with 
the Japhetic languages. The great variety of Japhetic languages in the 
Caucasus forces Marr to assume that their place of origin must be sought 
outside of the Caucasus Mountains. These languages are more closely 

Map 5. The Former Administrative Divisions of the Caucasus. 

related to the Semitic-Hamitic than to the Indo-European stocks. Re- 
garding the different types of language structure (monosyllabic, agglutin- 
ative, and inflective) not as parallel types, but as three chronological 
phases in the development of language, Professor Marr assumes that 
Semitic and Japhetide peoples parted after reaching the inflective phase 
in the development of their languages. Japhetic elements may be found 
in the vocabulary, structure, and phonetics of all the Mediterranean 
languages. As no physical type is absolutely pure, so no languages are 
pure. The Mediterranean languages consist of a compound of original 

140 _ PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

and borrowed elements, the sources of the latter being partly known. 
The elements of unknown origin are ascribed to Japhetic influence. 
This is true not only of the Mediterranean cycle of languages. The role 
played by the Caucasus in the formation of human speech and culture is 
shown by the Hebrew traditions of the flood and Noah’s ark, borrowed 
from Assyro-Babylonian sources,.and Greek myths of Prometheus, the 
fire-giver. In 1922 the Russian Academy founded a Japhetic Institute 
for the study of Japhetic languages and Japheuc survivals in other 
languages and publishes a ‘“‘Japhetic Magazine.” 

With this brief summary of Japhetism we may pass to the descrip- 
tion of the peoples of the Caucasus, beginning with those living exclu- 
sively in the Caucasus, whom Professor Marr regards as Japhetides. 

THE GEORGIANS 

The Georgians or Kartveliens belong to the southern Japhetides of 
the Caucasus. Traditionally, their origin may be traced to Thorgomos, a 
greatgrandson of Japheth. They were Christianized during the fourth 
century and at various times were under the domination of various con- 
querors. In 302 they were freed from Alexander the Great. The Sus- 
sanide dynasty controlled Georgia from 205 to 571; in 787 the Arabs 
over-ran the country; and in the eleventh century it was temporarily 
brought under the yoke of the Seljuk Turks, but regained independence 
under King David (1090-1125). In the thirteenth century Jenghis 
Khan conquered Georgia and toward the end of the following century 
Timur overthrew the country, but the beginning of the fifteenth century 
saw his expulsion by the Georgian king, George VII, under whose reign 
Georgia became a flourishing state. His son divided the kingdom among 
his three sons and three states (Guria, Mingrelia, and Imeretia) were 
formed, thus weakening the country in the event of foreign aggression. 
From 1798 to 1810 these states were surrendered to Russia. 

I. The Georgians include the following stocks:— 

1. The Georgians proper or Grusians. To these may be added the 
Inghilois, of a mixed Georgian-Lesghian origin. Mohammedans of the 
Sunnite faith may be included with the Georgians proper, who number 
about 480,000. 

2. The Khevsur, Pshav, and Tushin of the northern part of Tiflis 
Province, about 25,000. 

3. The Imeretins, living chiefly in the eastern part of Kutais 
Province, numbering 505,000. 

> 

TT 

‘Q0ULIg UBLINY & pure [II UBIZ10Ex) Y 

"9% “Iq 

142 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

4. The Gurians, living chiefly in the Osurghet District of Kutais 
Province. The population is about 93,000. 

5. The Adshar, are according to Marr, Gursinized Megrels. They 
were converted to the Sunnite faith of Islam. In their religious services 
they used Arabic, but in ordinary speech Turkic (Azerbaijan) and the 
Georgian languages. They number about 70,000. 

Some Georgian groups have preserved ancient local names which 
have, however, a geographical rather than an ethnographical meaning, 
like the Ratcha inhabitants of the Ratcha District or Kakhetins, the 
inhabitants of Kakhetia. 

II. The Megrel or Mingrel living in the western part of the prov- 
ince of Kutais, numbering about 253,000. 

III. The Lazes or Chan. The bulk of the stock lives in Turkey, 
adjacent to Russian territory and on the shores of the Black Sea. Only a 
small number (about 3,000) live in Batum Province. They are Moham- 
medans of the Sunnite faith. Their written languages are Holy Arabic 
(extinct) and literary Osmanic. Their own Chan language is spoken in 
two dialects and the popular Osman-Turkic. 

IV. The Swan or Swanet, numbering about 23,000, live on the 
banks of the upper course of the Ingur River. Most of them are Greek 
Catholics, but a small number are Roman Catholics. They use the now 
extinct Georgian language in their church services, the present literary 
Georgian in writing, and the Swan dialect in conversation. 

THe ABKHAS-CHERKESS GROUP 

The Abkhas, numbering 61,000, living chiefly in the Sukhum Dis- 
trict, are called the Coast Pontine group, and consist of three divisions: 
Samurrakan, Abjui, and Bzyby. Part of them belong to the Greek 
Catholic Church and part to the Mohammedan (Sunnite doctrine). A 
Caucasian tribe called Ubykh, which occupied an intermediary ethno- 
graphic position between the Abkhas and the Cherkess, immigrated into 
Turkey and now lives in Ismid, Asia Minor. 

The Cherkess, also called Adighe, numbers about 200,000, and is a 
Japhetic division consisting of many differently named tribes. After 
the Russians conquered the Caucasus many Cherkess migrated to 
Turkey. The Kabardin who live in the former province of Daghestan 
are the chief Cherkessian tribe. They are Mohammedans of the Sunnite 
faith. Old Arabic is used as a church and literary language and Adighe 
in ordinary communication. 

THE CAUCASUS — 143 

THE CHECHEN GROUP 

The Chechen belong to the North Caucasian Japhetides, number 
about 305,000, and include a group of tribes speaking different dialects 
of the Chechen language. The chief and most numerous people are the 
Chechen proper, or Nakhchi (in the district of Groznyi); the Mountain 
Chechen (in the former Argun District); the Ingush or Galga (in the 
districts of Vladikavkaz and Terek); the Kist (to the north of Tiflis); 
and the Thushi and Khevsur (to the north of the ist). Among the 
Thushis there lives a small Chechen tribe called Tsova-Thushi (in 

Vig. 27. Georgian Women churning Butter. 

Tiflis Provinee). All the Chechen tribes occupy the region to the north- 
west of Daghestan, in the corner formed by the upper and middle course 
of the Terck River and its right. tributaries, the Argun and Assa. Most 
of them are Greek Catholics, but there are also some Roman Catholics 
and Mohammedans of the Sunnite doctrine. 

Tue LrescHin Group 
The present population 6f Daghestan is known by the name, 
Lesghin, However, there is in Daghestan only one tribe which calls 
itself Lesghin and its name was transferred to other Daghestan tribes and 

FFL 

“SUBISIODY) OM} PUT YYOT[O SUES SUIYSSa'T “QZ “SL 

THE CAUCASUS 145 

even to some living in the Sakatal District of Baku Province and in some 
sections of Yelizavetpol Province. Marr ranks the Lesghin among the 
North Caucasian Japhetides of the Pontine-Caspian branch. The 
following are the Lesghin divisions :— 

1. The Avar. This is the strongest and most numerous Lesghin 
tribe, living in central Daghestan, from its northernmost part to the main 
ridge. Some of the Avar crossed the mountain ridge and penetrated into 
the Sakatal District. The Avar played an important part in the pre- 
Russian period of Daghestan, and consequently, their language, which 
has several dialects, became the common means of intercourse over a 
considerable part of the northeast and west of Daghestan. At present, 
their language is being supplanted in some localities by the Kumyk- 
Tatar dialect. The population is about 234,000. 

2. The Darghin live in the eastern part of Daghestan. Their 
language has three dialects. The population is about 148,000. 

3. The Lak or Kazi-Kumuk live in Central Daghestan, numbering 
more than 45,000. 

The flowing: Lesghin divisions belong to the eastern or Kurin 
group. 

4. he Kurin proper live along the Samur River, penetrating partly 
into Baku Province. They number about 158,000. 

5. ‘fhe Tabsaran, numbering about 20,000, live to the north of the 
Kurin. 

6. The Agul live.to the west of the Tabasaran and number about 
8,000. 

7. The Archin live in a single village of Central Daghestan and 
number about 800. 

8. The Rutul (or Mykhad), numbering about 14,000, live on the 
banks of the upper course of the Samur River. 

9. The Oudin, numbering about 10,000 live in two villages of 
Trans-Caucasia, not far from Nukka. In contrast to the Daghestan 
peoples who are Mohammedans of the Sunnite faith, the Oudin are 
Christians of the Armenian-Gregorian or Greek Catholic faith. 

10-13. The Khinalug, Djek, Budukha, and Khaput together, 
number 14,000. 

The following Lesghin divisions belong to the western group. 

14. The Andi live in sixty-two villages and form eight tribes, 
numbering about 28,000. 

15. The Didol live in fifty-three villages, form eight tribes, and 
number about 11,000. 

146 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

The Andi and Didoi are Mohammedans of the Sunnite faith. Their 
church language is old Arabic, but for ordinary intercourse they employ 
Avar. 

ANTHROPOLOGICAL CHARACTERS OF THE JAPHETIDES 

THE GEORGIANS 

We find two physical types among the Georgians: brunette and 
blond. The first has black hair and dark eyes, the second has blond hair 
and blue eyes, probably indicating a mixed physical origin. While 
skulls found in Caucasian excavations are mostly dolichocephalic, the 
present Georgians are brachycephalic, and in many cases, hyperbrachy- 
cephalic. They are of medium stature (165 cms.). 

THE ARMENIANS 

From the standpoint of language, the Armenians were regarded as be- 
longing to the Indo-European division of mankind. Professor Marr, how- 
ever, believes their language to be a hybrid and calls it Japhetic-Aryan. 
Somatically, Professor von Luschan regarded them as a comparatively 
homogenous people. There are, of course, various alien physical elements, 
but on the whole, the great mass of the Armenians form a somatic unit. 
More frequently than any other group in western Asia and the Caucasus 
they show the “ plano-occipital” form of the profile curve, great brachy- 
cephaly (with the maximum of frequency of the cephalic index falling at 
88 and an average of 87.5), extreme height of head, and a particularly 
narrow and high nose. They are generally dark, yet a small number of 
Armenians have reddish hair and gray or greenish eyes, which may indicate 
racial mixture. They call’ themselves Haikan and their country, Hai- 
astan, from Haik, the grandson of Japheth, from whom they traditionally 
trace their descent. 

Armenian territory embraces the northeast corner of Asiatic Turkey, 
the southern part of Transcaucasia, and the northwest corner of Persia. 
The principal portion belongs to Turkey. The Russian portion was 
acquired in part from Persia, in 1828, and in part from Turkey, in 1878. 
Persian Armenia forms a part of the Persian province of Azerbaijan. 

Professor von Luschan believed that the Armenians may be descen- 
dants of the Hittites. The: Hittite inscriptions have not yet been dect- 
phered, but orientalists are unanimous in assuming that there is not the 
slightest doubt that the Hittite language was not of the Semitic type. 

The tragic history of the Armenians shows that they were unable to 
uphold their independence. Greeks, Persians, Arabs, Egyptians, 

L¥T 

raprq uelreqiezy Ue pue s}UEUINIYSU] [eOISNY] SuLyVU ULIUEMTY UV “6% ‘BI 

148 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Mongols, and Turks alternately oppressed and governed them. Internal 
troubles and their inability to maintain their own government may 
account for their becoming the prey of alien rulers, so that they have 
succeeded in achieving independent existence only for short intervals. 
From 885 to the end of the tenth century they maintained an independent 
kingdom under the dynasty of the Bagratides, descendants of ancient 
Jews. In.1198 a local prince was made king under the name of Leo II, 
but his dynasty. was overthrown by the Egyptians in 1374. In the six- 
teenth century, Armenia was divided between Persia and Turkey and in 
the nineteenth century Russia also became a partner in possessing 
Armenia. 

It is well known that the Kurds, encouraged in their assaults by the 
Turkish Government, repeatedly massacred large numbers of Armenians. 
It is said that during the World War, one million out of 1,850,000 Turkish 
Armenians were slaughtered. The present total number of Armenians is 
not exactly known. It is, however, estimated at about 5,000,000, of 
whom only half live in their original diaspora, while the other half is 
distributed over the world. They have large colonies in all the great 
cities and a special quarter in New York. In the Caucasus and other 
parts of Russia there were 1,490,000 Armenians. 

About the end of the third century, Christianity began to displace 
the old religion of the Armenians, the Persian doctrine of Zoroaster. 
Now the mass of Armenians belongs to the Armeno-Gregorian church and 
a small number to the Russian Orthodox, Roman Catholic, or Protestant 
church. A few Armenians, called Hemshin, are Moslems of the Sunnite 
faith. 

In its historical development the Armenian language may be divided 
into the classical or church language, the present literary language of the 
educated classes, and the language of the common people. Beside those 
the Armenians speak one or two of the languages of their neighbors, but 4 
few living among the Georgiaris speak only Georgian. The Hemshin 
speak Osmanly and also popular Armenian, which is, however, on the 
verge of extinction. Extinct holy Arabic is their church language. 

Although there are families among the Armenians pretending to be 
of princely descent, they are as a whole, a democratic nation, without 
nobles, differing greatly from the Georgians with their numerous princes 
and nobles. 

The Armenians are a_ business-like people; most Caucasian 
merchants and capitalists are Armenians. Georgian agrarians were 
always dependent on Armenian capitalists. The Armenians are despised 

THE CAUCASUS 149 

by the Georgian upper classes. A Georgian may marry an Armenian 
woman, but a Georgian girl will never wed an Armenian. Of all the 
Caucasian peoples the Armenians show the greatest percent of urban 
population: about 22 percent of the Armenians live in towns; 9 percent 
of the Georgians; about 11 percent of the Turko-Tatars; and about 1 
percent of the Cherkess. 

INDO-EUROPEANS 

The Kurd. Certain parts of Turkey in Asia and Persia have been 
named Kurdistan. Kurdistan is a vast mountainous territory to the 
southeast of the Armenian mountains. The greater or northwestern part 
is under Ottoman, the southeastern, under Persian control. The Kurds 
number about 2,300,000. Of these, about 1,500,000 are supposed to live 
in Asiatic Turkey, 750,000 in Persia, and 60,000 (according to Marr, 
100,000) in the Caucasus. These figures cannot be regarded as exact, as 
the nomadic Kurds avoid being recorded in order to escape taxation. 
They speak several dialects of an Aryan language, related to new Persian. 
The Caucssian Kurd speaks two dialects, Kurmandshi and Zaza. 

The western Kurd are dolichocephalic, with an average cephalic 
index of 75, and more than 50 percent of the adults have fair hair and 
blue eyes. The eastern Kurd have shorter heads and darker hair and 
eyes, resctibling the Persians among whom they live. 

Professor Marr regards the Kurd as Japhetic-Aryan hybrids. They 
profess the Sunnite doctrine of Islam, which has brought them into an- 
tagonism with the surrounding Armenians and other Christians and made 
them the agents of Turkish oppression. They are of small stature, 
shrewd, and bad neighbors. Most of them are nomadic cattle breeders, 
but there are also some agriculturists. 

A group of Kurds called Yezidis form a religious sect of fire and devil 
worshippers. It is believed that Yezidism is an offshoot of Mazdeism 
and is regarded as an effort to bring unity in dualism. The Yezidis 
recognize the old testamental, Christian and Moslem reformers and 
practise baptismal and circumcision rites. They are scattered all over 
Kurdistan, Armenia, and Caucasus. Their total number is estimated at 
about 50,000, of whom 12,000 are believed to dwell in the Caucasus. 
The average stature of 40 Caucasian Yezide men was 163.3 cms., cephalic 
index, 77.86; length-height index, 74.21; and nasal index, 61.59. 

The Ossete. There appears to be no agreement as to the number of 
Ossete. Thus Erckert gives their population as 120,000 and Ischchanian, 
as 165,494, while Dirr and Marr give 224,000. The bulk of the people 

150 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

(about 127,000) live in central Caucasus to the south of Kazbek. About 
86,000 Ossete live in the government of Tiflis. On the Kuban River isa 
small colony of 1,600 Ossete and in the Ratcha District of Kutais Prov- 
ince about 5,000. 

Their traditions give their place of origin in the region of the Don. 
Some writers believe them to be a part of the Alan who were forced into 
the Caucasus by the Huns. Ripley is inclined to regard them as immi- 
grants from Iran. They call themselves Irons. Marr, regarding them asa 
a Japhetized Indo-European people, divided them, first, into eastern 
(Iron) Ossete, to whom the Tagaur belong; second, western Ossete, 
called Digor; and third, southern, called Tual. 

The Ossetic language belongs to the Indo-European stock. The 
greater number of Ossete are Christians (of the orthoclox faith), the re- 
mainder are Sunnites. Both Christians and Moslem have, however, 
preserved much of their former pagan beliefs. They have but a scanty 
literature, but have a rich folklore. They are becoming Russianized or 
Gruzinized. Somatically, they are related to the southern Aryan. The 
average stature of the men is 1,692, of the women, 1,573 mms.; the 
cephalic index is 81.95; height-length index, 71.58; facial index, 78. 

The Tate. As with the Ossete, there is a discrepancy in the popula- 
tion figures of the Tate. Erckert gives 90,000; Ischchanian, 94,302; 
Dirr, 74,000; Marr, 125,000; and Kurdoff, 135,000. The Tate villages 
are scattered all over Transcaucasia but the majority live in Baku Prov- 
ince. The name, Tate, has no ethnological significance since the Turkic 
conquerors applied it to all the sedentary tribes subdued by them, and 
means a subject, slave, or attendant of a lord. 

The language of the Tate is a somewhat corrupt dialect of New 
Persian. Therefore some scholars regard them as Iranians who were 
driven from Persia to colonize the conquered Caspian provinces, while 
others consider them Turks, who, being conquered by the Persians, 
adopted the language and religion of the latter. The Tate, like the 
Persians, are followers of the Shiite faith. According to Tate tradition, 
however, they are Persian emigrants who were exiled after a revolt 
against the Sassanides. Marr simply ranks them with the Persians and 
regards them as a Japhetized Iranian tribe. The average stature of Tate 
men is 1,701 mms., the cephalic index, 78.62. 

The Talysh. The Talysh, numbering about 91,000, live in the Len- 
koran District close to the Persian frontier. The Talysh language is 4 
New Persian dialect containing, however, many elements of Zend, the 
language of the Avesta, or ancient sacred writings of the Persians. 

THE CAUCASUS 151 

In physical type and mode of life, they form, according to Erckert, 
two sharply differentiated groups: the inhabitants of the mountains are 
of Iranian descent, while the Talysh of the plains are descendants of the 
Tatars. Marr ranks them with the Japhetized Aryans. 

Persians. Dirr gives the population for Caucasian Persians as 50,000; 
Marr, 16,000, and Erckert, 10,000. But the actual number of Persians 
in the Caucasus is not known, since all Persian subjects were recorded 
under this name at different times. The greater part of them speak 
Azerbaijan and may be of Tatar descent. 

Fig. 30. A Terek Cossack. <A distinct division of Cossacks in Cis-Caucasia 
named after the Terek River, believed to be descendants of the Russian conquerors 
of the Caueasus. 

Gypsies. There are about. 2,500 gypsies in the Caucasus. They are 
nomadic. Those who live among the Armenians are called Boshas and 
speak a kind of Armenian jargon. 

Europeans. ’ Russians (Great, Little, and White Russians) in the 
Caucasus number 3,900,000. They form the majority of the population 
in Cis-Caucasia, particularly in the region of Kuban (2,135,460). In 
Transcaucasia there are about 280,000 Russians and about. 35,000 
scattered Poles who do not. form colonies. There are 103,000 Greeks, 
48,000 Germans, 8,700 Italians, French, and Rumanians, and an insignifi- 
cant number of other Europeans. 

Semitic PEOPLES 
JEWS 

According to the census of 1897 there were 56,783 Jews in the Cau- 
casus, but Dirr and Marr give the figure, 119,000, of whom 53,000 live in 

152 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Transcaucasia and are known as Gruzian Jews and 64,000 live in Terek 
and Daghestan provinces, and are known as Gorsky (i.e., Mountain) 
Jews. With the exception of 3,500 European Jews who recently immi- 
grated into the Caucasus from European Russia, the Jewish aborigines 
there are believed to be ancient inhabitants of the country. They regard 
themselves as descendants of the ten lost tribes of Israel. 

While somatologically, both the Gruzian and Gorsky Jews form one 
unit, they are ethnographically quite different. Both groups are of 
medium stature (163.6 cm. and 164 cm.), brachycephalic, and, with rare 
exception, have dark hair, complexions, and eyes. Anthropological 
students of the Caucasian population find a certain similarity between the 
physical type of the Armenians, Aissor, and the Caucasian Jews. On 
the other band, the Jews of Yemen, being dolichocephalic, represent the 
original semitic type. The brachycephaly of the Caucasian Jews may be 
caused both by mixture with Armenians and others and the influence of 
environment. 

Ethnographically the Gruzian Jews are Georgians. They have 
adopted the Georgian language, dress, and manners, but preserved their 
religion. This is true also of the Gorsky Jews. They speak the language 
of the Tate, a dialect of New Persian, and neither in dress nor manners can 
they be distinguished from the local Islamic population. Wherever they 
come into contact with the Caucasian Tatars they speak Azerbaijan. 
Marr calls the Caucasian Jews, “Caucasian colonists of the ancient 
world’s peoples.’’ 

THE AISSOR 

The total number of Aissor or Assur is estimated at 150,000 but the 
prevalent opinion is that actually their number is considerably larger. 
They are descendants of the old Chaldeans and call themselves Syrians. 
They live in Persia and partly in Asiatic Turkey. After the end of the 
Russian-Persian war of 1827, a few Aissor emigrated into the Caucasus 
and settled in some villages in Erivan Province. Now their number in 
that province is about 1,250. 

The Persian and Turkic Aissor are Nestorians. Some of them were 
converted to Catholicism or Protestantism, but the Caucasian Aissor 
belong to the Greek Catholic church, though they are not strict observers 
of baptismal, marriage, and burial customs, and under the influence of 
their Mohammedan neighbors, often practise polygamy. In intercourse 
with their neighbors, they use the Armenian and Tatar languages. 

Their stature (173.7 ems. after Chantre and 168.3 cms. after Pant- 

THE CAUCASUS 153 

yukhoff) exceeds medium height. Their cephalic index (average of differ- 
ent investigators) is 87.2.. The Mongoloid eyefold is not present; the iris 
is light or dark brown: The skin color is dark brown, the hair is dark 
and slightly wavy. 

They are agriculturists and cattle breeders. In the cities they are day 
laborers, carters, water carriers, brick layers, etc. 

ARABS 

There are a small number of Arabs in the Caucasus, but the exact 
figure is not available. 

CAUCASIAN MONGOLOIDS 

THE AZERBAIJAN 

The Azerbaijan are a Turkish-speaking people so named after the 
Persian province, Azerbaijan, which is inhabited mostly by a tribe of the 
same name. In order to colonize Transcaucasia the Persian rulers of 
ancient times directed the Azerbaijan Turks to move into the Caucasus, 
so the Azerbaijan occupied the southeastern part of Transcaucasia. 
At present, their settlements or camps are met in all the provinces of 
Transcaucasia. . 

The greatest number (about 70,000) live in the former province of 
Baku. Their total number in the Caucasus is estimated by Dirr and 
Marr at. about 2,000,000. The number of the Persian Azerbaijan is not 
exactly known. Vambery gives the figure for Persian Turks as 2,000,000. 
According to Rasul-Zade,! the Azerbaijan author, there were 2,500,000 
Azerbaijan in Persia. Marr estimates them at about 3,000,000. 

Like the Persians, they are Mohammedans of the Shiite doctrine. 
Their language is a Turkic dialect which was adopted from them by 
other Turkic tribes of Transcaucasia and also by the Islamic population 
of southern Daghestan. 

In somatic characters they differ from other Turkic tribes, except 
the Turkoman, and show some affinities with the Persians. They are of 
medium stature, 168.5 cms. (men); have a cephalic index of 77.6; a 
length-hcight. index of 70.9; a facial index of 75.9; and a nasal index of 
63.2. The eye fissure is wide; the eye is dark brown in color; the hair 
18 of dark tints. We may say that physically, the Azerbaijan are of 

mixed Turkic-Iranian origin. Marr characterizes them as Japhetic- 
Turkic hybrids. 

ese ot 

1Muhammed-Emin Rasul Zade. 

154 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

The Azerbaijan are mostly semi-nomadic herders; they rear horned 
cattle, sheep, buffalo, some camels, and but few horses, and for this 
reason, oxen are often used as pack and riding animals. They use the 
arba, a two-wheeled cart. For the summer, they migrate by villages, to 
the mountains, and return for the winter to the plains and valleys. They 
carry on some agriculture in order to protect the land from Russian 
intruders. 

Their dwellings are of two kinds: a permanent house and a tent. 
The house used in winter is a hut built of clay or of stones cemented and 
covered with clay. The roof is flat and covered with clay. Frequently, 
the permanent dwelling is a two-storied house; the lower floor serves as 
a stall for animals. On the flat roof, hay is stored for the winter. Well- 
to-do people have three rooms. The largest one is the cleanest; the floor 
is covered with carpets and rugs, and has some furniture.’ In the walls 
are niches with bedding, which serve as sleeping places for guests. The 
host and his family live in the two smaller rooms, which are far from 
clean. They sit, eat, and sleep on the clayey floor. The summer dwelling 
is a tent consisting of a felt-covered frame. The tent is not quite circular 
in groundplan. 

The staple food of the Azerbaijan consists of milk products (cheese, 
fresh and sour milk), bread, and pancakes. Hot and meat dishes (soup 
with balls of dough, roasted mutton, or fowl) are not eaten every day. 

As compared with their neighbors, Azerbaijan culture has remained 
at a low stage. Among the Armenians there is about 10 percent of il- 
literacy, but among the Azerbaijan, 95 percent are illiterate. Ancient 
Arabic is the church language, Osmanli the literary language, and that 
for ordinary intercourse is the Azerbaijan dialect of Turkish. 

THE KUMYK 

The Kumyk, numbering 112,000 (after Marr and Dirr), live in the 
northeastern part of Daghestan, to the north of Derbent, and on the 
lower course of the Terek River. Erckert is inclined to regard the Kumyk 
as the remnants and descendants of the ancient Khazar. But it is ques- 
tionable how much support can be brought to bear out this hypothesis. 
Even the language of the Khazar is not known, though it is assumed to be 
a Finnic or a Turkic one. The Kumyk language is akin to that of the 
Nogais, who came to the Caucasus in the twelfth century together with 
other hordes of Jenghis Khan. The Kumyk are more civilized than the 
Azerbaijan and other Turkic neighbors. They are Mohammedans. 
They breed cattle, are fishermen, and are becoming agriculturists. They 

cst 

“IOAI B 
ry ueqny oy} jo esinod saddn oy4 uo Suray equy Suryeeds-oryany, v are TeyVIey ey, “ue 

WOM Pure FIND Ieyourey “TE “Biy 

156 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

lead a very simple life. They are divided into two social classes, the 
common people or “black bone,” and nobles, or “white bone.” Marr 
calls them Japhetic-Turkic hybrids. 

THE BALKAR AND KARACHAI 

According to Marr, the Balkar or Tauli and the Karachai people 
also belong with the Japhetic-Turkic hybrids. The Balkar, numbering 
25,000, live in the mountains of the Naltchik District of Terek Province 
and are called by the Russians, “Mountain Tatars.”” The Karachai, 
numbering 30,000, live on the upper course of the Kuban River and its 
tributaries. The dialects of both tribes are akin to the language of the 
Kumyk. 

THE CAUCASIAN OSMANLI 

The Osmanli, who remained in the provinces of Kars and Batun, 
acquired through conquest by the Russians from Turkey, belong to the 
Southern Turks. They number about 140,000. After the last war, 
Turkey regained from Russia the districts of Ardahan and Kars in which 
the Turkic population is estimated at about 80,000. (Compare Maps 4 
and 5). 

With the more or less recently immigrated Turkic tribes should be 
included the Nogais, Bashkir, Chuvash, Sarts, Kirghiz-aisak, Kara- 
papak, and Turkoman. 

THE NOGAIS 

The Nogais entered Cis-Caucasia in the twelfth century, together 
with the other Turco-Mongolic hordes of the invasion of Jenghis-Khan. 
At present, they live on the Steppes between the Kuma and Terek rivers 
and at the mouth of the Sulak River. ‘Some small Nogais villages are 
located near Piatigorsk, at the mouth of the Selentchuk River, a tribu- 
tary of the Kuban, and on the upper course of the Kuban. They number 
about 58,000. About 48,000 nomadic Nogais wander in the eastern part 
of Stavropol Province, 4,000 sedentary Nogais in Terek Province, and 
about 6,000 live on the banks of the upper Kuban. 

The Bashkir (about 1,000), the Chuvash (about 400), the Sarts (150), 
and Kirghiz-Kaisak (80) are recent immigrants to Cis-Caucasia. 

THE KARAPAPAK 
The Karapapak are a Turkic tribe, numbering about 39,000, and 
live in Kars Province, at present under Turkish dominion. This tribe is ! 
mentioned by Dirr and Marr who give no particulars, except its number ° 
and lccation. 

THE CAUCASUS 157 

THE TURKOMAN 

The Turkoman, numbering about 15,000, according to Marr, and 
about 23,000, according to Dirr, are nomads who wander in the lower 
courses of the Kalaus and Kuma rivers. They are immigrants from the 
Transcaspian steppes. 

Moncotic TRIBES 

THE KALMUCK 

The Kalmuck belong to the western branch of the Mongols. They 
live in eastern Tibet, eastern Turkestan, the western part of Astrakhan 
Province, and the province of the Don Cossacks. In 1703 a branch of the 
Kalmuck (otherwise called Oirat) and known as Torgout crossed the Ural 
Mountains, because of constant feuds among the heirs of Jenghiz Khan, 
and settled in the lower region of the Volga River. The Chinese Govern- 
ment, profiting by the internal dissensions of the Mongols, succeeded in 
destroying the power of the descendants of Jenghis Khan and sub- 
jugated all the Mongolic peoples of Jungaria, Mongolia, and Eastern 
Turkestan. Soon after the final emigration of the Oirat tribes to the 
Volga, the Chinese Emperor Kiang-hi sent a mission to the Kalmuck 
Khan on the lower Volga, inviting him to Jungaria. The Volga Kalmuck 
decided to return to Jungaria and set out from the Volga in the beginning 
of 1771. Only a small number preferred to remain. After an eight 
months’ march, attended by much suffering, being harassed by the 
Kirghiz and pursued by the Russians, they arrived in Jungaria to find 
the Chinese in full possession of the country. They were allowed, how- 
ever, to settle on the Kunges and Tekes rivers in Ili Province, where 
nearly half a million still live, under the name of Torgout. According 
to the census of 1897, the Kalmuck in Russia numbered 190,648. The 
Kirghiz forecd the Kalmuck to occupy the right bank of the Volga and a 
part of them, about 14,000, wander in the steppes on the left bank of the 
Terek, in the former Groznyi District of Cis-Caucasia. The mass of the 
Russian Kalmuck now form, according to a decree of November 4, 
1920, an autonomous Kalmuck Province, occupying portions of former 
Astrakhan, Tsaritsyn, and Stavropol governments, and of Don and Terek 
Provinees. The capital is Astrakhan. While Turkic tribes, as a rule, 
a adherents of one of the doctrines of Islam, the Mongol, including the 
Kalmuck, are Buddhists. The Russian Kalmuck have preserved their 

ee type and language and, to some degree, their nomadic mode of 
ife, 

158 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

THE KAITAK 

Marr mentions another Mongolic tribe, the Kaitak, which is being 
Turkicized, but gives no estimate of its population. 

THE ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS OF THE CAUCASUS UNDER THE SOVIETS 

Transcaucasia is divided into three republics: Georgia, Armenia, 
and Azerbaijan. In 1918 they set up an Independent Transcaucasian 
Republic and refused to recognize the Russian Soviet Government. The 
three component states soon split off into independent republics. 

GEORGIA 

Georgia, occupying an area about 35,000 square miles, and including 
the former provinces of Tiflis and Kutais and the districts of Batum and 
Artvin, and the portion of Sukhum Province known as Abkhasia, has a 
population of 3,053,345, according to the census of 1915. The Georgians 
form the greatest percentage of the population (82 percent) and are in 
Kutais Province; the Russians compose only 1.27 percent of the local 
population, the remainder being divided among other peoples. In 
Tiflis Province, the Georgians constitute 44.5 percent of the whole popula- 
tion, the Russians 8.2 percent, and other Caucasian peoples 47.3 percent. 
In both provinces the Georgians constitute 61.5 percent of the whole 
population, thus forming a majority. 

The constituent assembly of Georgia ratified its independence 
March 12, 1919; the Allies recognized the government de jure, January 
21, 1921, but in the course of that year the Soviet troops occupied the 
country. The state was termed Fraternal Soviet Republic of Georgia and 
a treaty between Russia and Georgia was signed in Moscow, August 7, 
1921. Arrangements were concluded regarding communications, 
finances, and commerce. Foreign affairs remained in the hands of the 
Georgia Government, while the Georgian military forces passed over to 
Russian control. The territory was administered by a temporary 
Revolutionary Committee. 

Commercially, Georgia, with Armenia and Azarbaijan, enjoyed an 
exceptional position, for the three states formed their own Department of 
Foreign Trade, independent of Moscow. Internal trade in Georgia re- 
mained free, as it was before the invasion of Moscow troops. 

The capital of Georgia is Tiflis. An uprising in Georgia in 1924 
which was suppressed with the utmost severity by the Moscow army and 
the changes that have taken place in Georgia after this rebellion are not 
known. As far as can be judged from the new administrative map of the 

. ° 
ry a? 
of ewwences* 

astces 

Map 6. The Distribution of the Peoples in the Caucasus 

[Re-arranged by the author after A. von Petermann’s “Ethnographische Karte von Russland” (Siidliches BI 

att), Mittheilungen aus Justus Perthes 
Geographisches Anstalt. Erganzungsband XIT (1878)]. 

1. Azerbaijan 6. Little Russians 11. Chechen 16. Georgian 

2. Jews 7. Cherkess (Adighe) 12. Kumyk 17-23. Lesghin Tribes 
3. Greeks 8. Kalmuck 13. Kabardine 24. Kurd 

4. Germans 9. Kirghiz 14. Ossete 25. Tate 

5. Great Russians 10. Nogauis 15. Abkhasian 26. Armenian 

THE CAUCASUS 159 

Caucasus recently received, Georgia is now called Georgian Socialist 
Soviet Republic, with adjoining states as follows: 1, the Autonomous 
Abkhasian Socialist Soviet Republic with the capital at Sukhum-Kale; 
2, the Autonomous Adjar Territory with the capital at Batum; 3, the 
Autonomous Ossetine Province, with the capital at Dinval. (Map 4, 
p. 138). 

ARMENIA 

The situation of Armenia is very similar to that of Georgia. It 
occupies the former provinces of Erivan and Kars, an area of 17,500 
square miles, with a population of 1,510,000, among whom are 795,000 
Armenians, 575,000 Moslems, and 140,000 of other races. A part of the 
Moslems are Armenian-Khemshins. The capital is Erivan (90,000 
population). The country is administered by a Central Executive 
Committee. 

AZERBAIJAN 

Azerbaijan occupies the former Russian provinces of Baku and 
Yelizavetpol, and a small portion of Erivan Province. The present 
Caucasian Azerbaijan occupies the same territory as the original Persian 
Azerbaijan Province ceded to Russia in 1813. When the provinces of 
Baku and Yelizavetpol declared themselves independent, the Persian 
hame was adopted for the infant state, for political motives. It was 
hoped thus to attract to the new republic the Persian remainder of the 
old province of Azerbaijan, peopled chiefly of the same stock. 

Caucasian Azerbaijan occupies an area of 33,970 square miles with a 
population of 4,615,000 of whom 3,482,000 are Moslems and 795,000 
Armenians. The capital is Baku (250,000 inhabitants). 

AUTONOMOUS STATES IN CIs-CAUCASIA 

According to the recently published administrative map of the 
Caucasus the following autonomous states were created in Cis-Caucasia. 

1. The Autonomous Daghestan Socialist Soviet Republic created 
by a decree of J anuary 20, 1921. It occupies the territory of the former 
Daghestan Province. ‘The capital is Makhach- Kala. 

2. The Chechen Autonomous Province, the former Chechniya. 
The capital is Groznyi. 

3. The Gorsky (Mountain) Autonomous Socialist Soviet Republic 
created by a decree of January 20, 1921, occupies the former Terek 
Provinee. The capital is Vladikavkaz. 

160 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

4. The Autonomous Kabarda Province, with the capital at Nalchik. 

5. The Autonomous Karachayevo-Cherkessian Province, with the 
capital at Batalpashinsk. 

The following Soviet states may be added to those mentioned above. 

1. The Russian Province, Rostov, with a capital of the same name. 

2. The Cossack Province, Kuban, with the caplet at Krasnodar 
(former Yekaterinodar).'! 

3. The Russian Province, Stavropol, capital of the same name. 

4. The Russian Province, Georgievsk, capital of the same name. 
A small number of Chechen and other Caucasian natives live in this 
province. 

5. The Kalmuck Autonomous Province (former Astrakhan Prov- 
ince). The capital, Astrakhan, as an administrative center, is located 
outside the borders of the Kalmuck state. 

6. Azerbaijan Territory, with the capital at Nakhichevan, is a 
small Tatar state, separated from the main Azerbaijan Republic by the 
Armenian Soviet Republic. 

7. Cherkasian Territory, located in the middle of Kuban Province, 
capital, Adamovskaya, is occupied by a remnant of a Cherkessian tribe, 
the bulk of which emigrated to Turkey after the Russians conquered 
their country. The territory is called Cherkasian after the Russian 
terminology. 

In order to afford a clear view of the present and former administra- 
tive divisions of the Caucasus, two maps are appended, each accom- 
panied by two lists of former provinces and present states. (See pp. 138 
and 139). 

'Yekaterinodar menns a gift from Catharine (Empress) and Krasnodar, ared gilt. 

CHAPTER VII 
THE IRANIAN PEOPLES 

The history and development of the Iranian peoples is still to be 
recovered. Doctor Laufer says:— 
If we know as much about the culture of ancient Iran as about ancient Egypt, 

or even as much as about India or China, our notions of cultural developments in 
Asia would probably be widely different from what they are at present.! 

It is related in the Avesta, the sacred book of the Zoroastrian religion, 
that Thraetono had three sons, Tura, to whom fell the Oriental lands; 
Sairima, who received the western lands; and Airya (Arya), who received 
Iran as his portion. Tuirya or Turya in the Avesta applies to the coun- 
tries now called Turanian, and the people of Tuirya are spoken of as 
enemies of the people of Airya.2 In the epic poem by the Persian poet, 
Firdousi, the Shah Naméh,’ dating from the tenth century, A.D., Iran 
is placed to the south of Turan. A prominent figure in this poem, the 
Turkic Khan Afrdsiydb, is said to have reigned over Turo in the sixth 
century B.C'., and to have been the great foe of Iran.‘ 

The inhabitants of Persia call their country, Iran, while the name 
Persia is applied only to the small province, Farsistan. But according to 
historians, ethnologists, and geographers, Iranian territory included the 
region from the Caucasus, the Caspian Sea, and Russian Turkestan on 
the north, to the Tigris, the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea on the west 
and south, and extended to the Indus on the east, including modern 
Afghanistan and the territory to the north of it, as far as the Jaxartes 
River (Syr Daria). 

The ancient and modern peoples included in the Iranian stock are: 
the Sogdians and Khorezmians, the old Medes and Bactrians, the Per- 
sians, Tadjik, Galcha, Kurd, Ossete, Baluchi, Afghan, and the inhabit- 
ants of the Pamir districts. Within the Iranian area there are now many 
mixed groups. Mongolian, Turkic, and Arabian conquerors influenced 
the physical type of the Iranians to some degree, while Jews, Armenians, 
and natives of the Caucasus and India, who were in contact with the 
Iranians, as merchants and colonists, also contributed their share to the 
mixture. 

On the other hand, Iranian blood and culture have been diffused 
eastward to China, to the west, as far as westernmost Turkey, to the 

Maufer, (ce), 
*Blochet, 305-309. 

*Firdoust (Abul Casim) 
‘Skrine, 115. Cier 

161 

162 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

north into Cis-Caucasia, and to the south into India. The chief tribes of 
Russian Turkestan are regarded as Turkicized Iranians. 

Ethnologically, the Iranian peoples are members of the Aryan or 
Indo-Germanic family. The question of their place of origin is therefore 
closely connected with the problem of the earliest abode and dispersion 
of the Aryan race as a whole. Since philologists have discarded the view 
that) Sanskrit represents the most archaic form of Indo-European 
languages, the theory of the Asiatic origin of the Aryan peoples has lost 
the support of many students. Various places in Europe were assumed to 
have been the original home of the Indo-Europeans and the Asiatic 
branches of the stock, located in Iran and India, are regarded as having 
emigrated from Europe. But this hypothesis can hardly serve as the 
final solution of the Aryan problem. A. brief résumé of the Iranian 
peoples, beginning with the Persians, the most prominent member of the 
family follows. 

The name Persia is derived from the classical “Persis” which re- 
ferred to the province of Parsa (now Fars). The word farsi is employed 
by the Persians to deseribe their own language, although when applied to 
an individual it is restricted to an inhabitant of Fars Province. Parsi is 
the Persian word, and Farsi its Arabic form, there being no p in the Arabic 
language.' Persians call their country, Iran, or ran and themselves, 
Irani, 2 word which is the Airyiya of the Avesta, and signifies “the land 
of the Aryans.” Thus, Iran, when used in a political sense, applies to 
modern Persia only. When used geographically Iran includes all the 
Iranian countries. 

Modern Persian, as well as the other Iranic languages, is written in 
Arabic script. Pahlavi, the Persian language of the middle Iranian 
period and the language of the Avesta, is recorded in a script based on 
Semitic writing, and is read from right to left. The middle Iranian period 
lasted from the fifth century B.C., until the tenth century of our era. 
The ancient. Iranian inscriptions were in wedge-shaped letters based on 
Babylonian characters. 

The Persians appear to be rather homogeneous. However, our 
knowledge of the physical anthropology of Persia is: still extremely 
limited. Of its ten million inhabitants hardly thirty individuals have 
been measured and no authentic Persian skulls are as yet. available in our 
scientific collections. We know, however, that omitting about 300,000 
people, Kurd, Arab, Armenian, and others (Lori, Gypsies, ete.) the bulk 
of the Persian population consists of two elements: the Tadjik, the 

Sykes, vol. 1, 5. : 

IRANIAN PEOPLES 163 

original settlers of the country, and the Thlat, the descendants of the 
Turkoman conquerors. The first have been agriculturists since ancient 
times; the second were originally nomadic herders and now most. of them 
have also become tillers of the soil. They are Mohammedans, following 
the Sunnite doctrine. 

The Tadjik embraced the Shiite faith about 1520 A.D. Phey do not 
recognize the three successors of Mohammed, Abubekr, Omar, and 
Othman, but honor the fourth, Mohamined’s son-in-law, Ali, like a god. 
The hatred between the followers of these two Tslamic doetrines is so 
great that a Shiite, after treating a Sunnite as a guest, ostentatiously 
breaks the plates on which the guest has eaten in the open street while 
the visitor is mounting his horse to leave. But in spite of this-mutual 
enmity, marriages between adherents of both religious faiths are frequent. 

In some remote districts, as, for instance, in Jesd, despite the perse- 
cution of the followers of Zoroaster (or Zarathustra) by the Persian gov- 
ernment, a sinall number of Parsis have preserved their old faith, which 
becaine the State religion about, 520 B.C. under the reign) of Darius 
I. Itis said tliat among these Parsis the ancient Persian physical type 
has been preserved in quite a pure form. But. this does not. refer to those 
Parsis whose ancestors in order not to be converted to Islam, when the 
Arabian conquerors destroyed the kingdom of the Sassanides, 640 A.D,, 
migrated to northwestern India. Up to the present time, they adhere 
closely to their old religion. They expose their dead on high towers 
that they may be devoured by rapacious birds and that the earth or fire 
may not. be polluted by their uncleanliness. On the other hand, the 
Indian Parsis have lost. their original physical traits and with their 
dark eyes and skin closely resemble their Indian neighbors. 

The above characterization of the Persians is based on the work of 
von Luschan.! We wish, however, to cite other investigators on the 
subject, particularly Russian explorers. In Constantinople and Asia 
Minor von Jaischan himself measured fifteen pure Persians who were 
temporarily sojourning there. Three of these had a dolichocephalic 
Index (73, 74, 74), one was a mesocephal (80), and eleven individuals were 
brachyeephalic and hyperbrachycephalic (from 81 to 90). 

Russian investigators (Daniloff, Maslovsky, Pantyukhoff, and Bog- 
danoft)? measured 123 Persians, with an average cephalic index of 78.72 
(minimum, 69.20: maximum, 88.40). Thus, 45 pereent were dolicho- 
cephals, 24 percent. mesocephals; and 31 percent brachyeephals. It will 

wot Lusehan, (b), 110 112. 
Danilof: Pantyukhoff; Bogdanof; Maslovaky's material was utilised by Ivanovaky,. 

164 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

be noted that these data differ considerably from von Luschan’s figures, 
According to these Russian authorities, the hair and eye color are almost 
exclusively dark. Thus, the present Persians differ physically from the 
primitive Iranians, who are said to have been blue-eyed and blond doli- 
chocephals. According to Ujfalvy, the present sedentary inhabitants 
of Persia, known as Tadjik, are a blend of Persians, Uzbeg, and Kirghiz! 
The northern Persians were also influenced by the Turkoman and the 
Persian language contains many Turkic elements. 

THe Kurp 

The problem of the Kurd has been discussed in the chapter on the 
population of the Caucasus (p. 149), but we may present some additional 
data here. Kurdistan, the present territory of the Kurd is a mountain- 
ous region, almost as large as Greece, lying to the southeast of the 
Armenian mountain range. Geographically, the home of the Kurd may 
be regarded as the upper part of Mesopotamia and the region of the upper 
courses of the Euphrates and Tigris. The banks of the Chabur River, 
an important tributary of the Euphrates, are inhabited mostly by the 
Kurd. However, the exact boundaries of their territory are quite uncer- 
tain. The bulk of them are still nomads and their camel caravans reach 
Mersin and Alexandrette on the Mediterranean Sea and Bassora on the 
Persian Gulf. How far the Kurd penetrate into southeastern Persia is 
not well known, nor the exact number living in Afghanistan and 
Beluchistan. 

Kurd history is still veiled in darkness. The Armenians claim that 
they are of Medean origin. Although both are Sunnites, the western 
Kurds have an unconquerable aversion toward their Turkish “op- 
pressors.” After sanguinary wars in 1837 and 1847 they were subdued 
by the Turks, under the command of the well-known Moltke. More 
recently, the Turks were confronted by a Kurd uprising. 

The eastern Kurds fanatically hate their Persian rulers as heretic 
Shiites, although both are Iranian. In Turkey, as well as in Persia, the 
Kurds are feared as plunderers and robbers. They kidnapped the women 
of the Christian Armenians, their rivals for the mastery of eastern Asia 
Minor, and have more than once, at the instigation of the Turks, their 
hated masters, perpetrated cruel massacres of Armenians. 

The Kurd language is related to New Persian, thus belonging to the 
Indo-European stock. It has not yet been sufficiently studied and con- 
tains words borrowed from Turkic, Chaldaic, Persian, Arabic, and 

\Ujfalvy. 

IRANIAN PEOPLES 165 

Russian, according to the peoples with whom they have been in contact. 
The eastern dialects are better known than the western ones from which 
they differ considerably. The Kurd have no writing of their own, but 
the few of them who know how to write their own language and Turkic 
use Arabic characters. Their literature, insignificant as it is, is also re- 
corded in Arabic script. 

Physically also their position still remains in doubt. The Eastern 
Kurd are dark-skinned and short-headed like the Persians, among whom 
they live, while the somatological traits of western ones are quite differ- 
ent. Professor von Luschan investigated three groups of western Kurds: 
115 adult men of the district of Karakush, 26 at Nemrud-Dagh, and 80 
in the environs of Sendschirli, the ancient capital of the Hittites. Of the 
115 Karakush men, 71 were pronounced xanthochroics, of the 26 men of 
Nemrud-Dagh there were 15 and of 115 Sendschirli men only 31 were 
fair. Thus, of blond-haired and light-eyed there were: in Karakush, 62 
percent; on Nemrud-Dagh, 58 percent; and in Sendschirli, 39 percent. 
The head index in Karakush ranged between 71.3 and 78.5; at Nemrud- 
Dagh between 72.3 and 78.3; and in Sendschirli between 74.4 and 80.9. 
The arithme tical averages were 74.9, 75.2, and 76.9. There were no 
essential differences in nasal and facial indices in these groups. All three 
groups have almost identical facial indices, ranging between 76 and 96, 
with the greatest distribution at 87 and 93. 

The Kurd at Karakush and of the Mountains of Nemrud-Dagh have 
no alien neighbors although an occasional Armenian retail merchant may 
be met. In Sendschirli, with its unhealthy swampy plains, the Kurd set 
up their tents only in winter, and live in Turkish and Armenian villages, 
and very often marry Turkic women and kidnap Armenian girls. We can 
thus explain why the hill Kurd’ are mainly a xanthochroic and long- 
headed people while the Kurd of Sendschirli are in the main dark and 
have broad heads. 

We have previously seen that the Eastern Kurd living among the 
Persians do not differ from them somatologically: they are brachycephals 
and brunettes. From these data we may conclude, as von Luschan 
contends, that originally all the Kurd were blond, long-headed, and blue- 
eyed, and only as a result of blending with Turks, Armenians, and 
Persians have they become more or less dark-complexioned and short- 
headed. Where then is the actual home of the blond, blue-eyed, and long- 
headed Kurd? Professor von Luschan’s reply to this query is that North- 
ern Nurope is the only region in the world where we now find blond, blue- 
eyed, and long-headed people. He rejects the opinion of some philol- 

166 _ PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

ogists that the Kurd were originally Persians; in order to accept their 
conclusions he believed that the questions as to where the pure Kurd 
acquired the Northern European somatological traits and whether it is 
compatible with the latest theories as to the European origins of Aryan 
peoples in general, to admit an Asiatic origin for the Kurds, must be 
answered. 

If we answer these queries in accordance with Professor von 
Luschan’s theories, another question arises. What language did they 
speak before they came into contact with the Persians? The Per- 
sians themselves, as Aryans, may also claim a European origin. Thus the 
study of the Kurd involves important historico-anthropological problems, 
particularly as to the actual history of the migrations between Europe 
and Asia. 

THE OSSETE 

Another Aryan tribe, the history of which is lost in the remote past, 
is the Ossete. They call themselves Iron, a name which has been identi- 
fied with Iran. Ripley is inclined to regard the Ossete as immigrants 
from the direction of Iran.'. According to their own traditions, however, 
they came from the region of the Don River in southern Russia. More- 
over, a8 Vsevolod Miller? has shown, the Ossetian language alone explains 
a great many South Russian place names. The Ossete occupation of 
territory in the Caucasus along the Pass of Dariel, according to Ripley, 
gives tenability to the hypothesis that they came from the south. But as 
the Ossete occupy both slopes of the pass there is some doubt as to the 
direction from which they may have come to the Caucasus, whether from 
south or north. On the other hand, linguistic investigations have shown 
that the Ossete must have had a direct connection with the Scythians and 
Sarmatians of Europe (southeastern Russia). Inthe third century B.C., 
the Scythians were overcome by the Sarmatians, who spoke a Scythian 
dialect.3 Remains of Sarmatians have been found in the burial mounds 
of their former habitat. The greater number of the barbarian names 
occurring in the inscriptions of Olbei, Tanais, and Panticopgeum are 
supposed to be Sarmatian, and as these have been well explained from 
the Iranian language, now spoken by the Ossete of the Caucasus, these 
are supposed to be the descendants of Sarmatians. The latter are also 
regarded as the ancestors of the Slavs. The Russian anthropologist, 
Pantyukhoff, regards the Ossete as the latest European immigrants among 

Ripley, 436. 
Miller. 
iZaborowski (36) identifies the Ossete with the Alan who were Scythians of Iranian apeech. 

IRANIAN PEOPLES 167 

the peoples of the Caucasus. Judging by the considerable percent of 
blue eyes and long heads he is inclined to regard the Ossete as a blend of 
North Europeans (Celts, Slavic tribes) with Caucasian and Middle 
Asiatic brachycephals. The somatology of the Ossetes was studied by 
several Russian investigators, all of whom came to the same conclusion. 
Fifty-five percent of the Ossete have dark hair and eyes; 30 percent are 
of a mixed type, while only 15 percent have light eyes and blond hair. 
The average height of 500 Ossete was 169.2 cms. (minimum, 154.2; 
maximum, 190.0). The head index is moderately sub-brachycephalic, in 
average, 81.95; 11 percent were dolichocephalic and 22 percent meso- 
cephalic. Their facial index is 54 percent chameprosopic; as to nasal 
index, 69 percent were leptorrhin. 

SoGDIANS AND KHOREZMIANS 

The well known authority on the history of the Orient, the Russian 
Professor and Academician V. V. Barthold,' gives some data concerning 
the original population of the country now called Turkestan. During 
more than 1500 years, since the sixth century B.C., the names of two 
civilized Iranian nations, the Sogdians and Khorezmians, have been 
mentioned. Figures of a Sogdian and a Khorezmian are preserved on the 
tomb monument of Darius (522-486 B.C.), near the ruins of Persepol, 
among rcpresentations of other peoples who composed the empire of this 
monarch. Authentic information on the languages of these two peoples 
is available only for the period of their disappearance and may be found 
in a work written in Arabic by a Khorezmian, Biruni, in the year 1000 
of ourera. Describing the Sogdian and Khorezmian calendars, he refers 
to names of days, months, and holidays, thus giving an idea of the 
dialectic peculiarities of both languages. 

Of these two agricultural and civilized Iranian nations, the Khorez- 
mians had an independent political existence for a long period and were 
politically dominant in Central Asia before the formation of the Persian 
empire of the Achemenid dynasty. They were subjugated for a short 
period by the Persians, but soon freed themselves. During the Central 
Asiatic campaigns of Alexander the Great (330-327 B.C.), Khorezm had 
its own king, while the country of the Sogdians, the center of which was the 
region of the Zarafshan River, remained a Persian province. As far as is 
how known, Khorezm was never conquered either by Alexander the 
Great or by the Greco-Bactrian kings, or the pre-Mussulman nomadic 
peoples of Central Asia. Only the Mussulman conquest in the seventh to 

'Barthold, 93-112. 

168 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

eighth centuries of our era put an end to the political, and later, the 
ethnographical independence of Khorezm; but even the Mohammedan 
rulers retained the title of the pre-Mussulman rulers of Khorezm, or 
Khorezmshah. 

The country of the Sogdians was a part of the empire of Alexander 
the Great and later of the Greco-Bactrian dominions, and was many 
times subjected to invasions of nomadic peoples, so there was no favor- 
able basis for the creation of a tradition of political independence, as in 
Khorezm. On the other hand, the Sogdians, far more than the Khorez- 
mians, influenced the course of cultural history and were the chief dif- 
fusers of Anterior Asiatic culture in the countries of Turkestan and east- 
ward, as far as China. The oldest Turkic alphabet known from the 
Yenisei-Orkhon inscriptions is said to have originated in the most ancient 
form of Sogdian. The derivation from the Sogdian of the much later 
Turkic alphabet, that of the Uigur, is more evident. 

The Arabian invasion'‘of the seventh to the eighth centuries changed 
the ethnographic composition of the Iranian population of Turkestan. 
At the end of the tenth century when the political power was definitely 
vested in the Turks, the remainder of the Iranian population, under the 
influence of their Turkic rulers, began to call themselves Tadjik. When 
the Turkic nomadic Uzbeg began to settle themselves as agriculturists, 
the Tadjik were gradually forced out of the valleys to the mountainous 
regions. The Russian conquest of Turkestan saved them from the 
predatory invasions of Turkic nomads and further displacements. 
However, in the course of intertribal relations, the Iranian dialects 
became more and more often displaced by the Turkic. 

The Sogdian language is still spoken by a small group of Iranians 
called Yagnobtzy (about 1500-2000) living in the mountains of Yagnob, 
a tributary of the upper Zarafshan River. They are surrounded by Tad- 
jik who speak Persian dialects. The Yagnobtzy are also called Galcha, 
but all the Tadjik mountaineers are known by this name. 

MEDIANS AND BACTRIANS 

Media and Bactria were ancient Iranian kingdoms. The Medians 
were fire worshipers. Among their priests, called Magi, rose Zoroaster, OF 
more correctly, Zarathustra, the founder of the religion known under his 
name. Bactria was still independent in 1000 B.C. The Persian king, 
Cyrus, subjugated both countries and made them Persian provinces. 
Alexander the Great conquered them in 327 B.C. The descendants of 
the old Bactrians, together with the partly civilized Kurd, are said to 
speak purer Persian than that in vogue in Persia itself. 

IRANIAN PEOPLES 169 

Tue TaTE AND AZERBAIJAN 

These two tribes are-regarded as Iranians who adopted the Turkish 
language and therefore linguists class them as Turks. For a more detailed 
description see pp. 150, 159. 

THE SartTs 
Some ethnologists are inclined to regard the Sarts as Turkicized 
Iranians, but as we have previously seen, they are somatologically a 
mixed population and have been recorded by the Soviets with the Turkic 
Uzbeg. 
THE AFGHAN AND BALUCHI 

A certain portion of the populations of Afghanistan and Baluchistan 
is physically Persian, speaking more or less Turkic dialects. The Afghan 
(36 individuals) were measured by the Russian anthropologists, Poyar- 
koff, Matzeyevsky, and Maslovsky.! Their average stature was 165.7 
em.; cephalic index, 80.24; facial index, 73.18; and nasal index, 50.93. 
We have no measurements for the Baluchi. 

Tue TapJIK AND GALCHA 

The Galcha are Mountain Tadjik. We have previously noted that 
these two Iranian divisions form one people. They speak Persian and 
other Iranian dialects. However, the Plains Tadjik and the Mountain 
Tadjik are unlike in some of their somatological characters. Taking the 
average figures for descriptive characters of the Tadjik recorded by Mas- 
lovsky,? Yavorsky,? and Ujfalvy, we have (of 393 persons examined) 41 
individuals, or 11 percent who are blond; 66 or 17 percent who are mixed; 
and 285 or 72 percent who are dark. The chief measurements recorded 
were stature, 169.3; head index, 84.85; facial index, 73.33. 

For the Galcha (58 individuals) we have only the measurements by 
Ujfalvy.!. Their stature is 166.7 cms.; head index, 85. The number of 
blond persons (8.6 percent) is less than among the Tadjik. 

Thus, we see that both branches of the Iranian Tadjik somatologi- 
cally tend to resemble the Alpine type of Europeans. The Galcha may be 
regarded as a primitive population which preserved its relative purity 
perhaps by reason of its isolation in the mountains. If we compare the 
somatology of the Tadjik and other Asiatic Iranians (Persians, Hindoos, 
Kurds, and others) we must conclude that in tracing the European racial 

See Ivanovaky. 
?Maslovaky. 
*Vavorsky. 
Vifalvy. 

170 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

types to Asia in the search for a common stock, we find at least two of 
the types present in Central Europe. 

ARMENIANS 

Earlier authorities classed the Armenians with the Iranians, but 
later investigators regard them as.an independent Aryan branch. 

Tue HInpoos AND GYPSIES 

To complete our survey of the Iranians or the Asiatic Aryans, 
some space should be devoted to the Hindoos and Gypsies. Some 
Hindoos may be found outside of India on the right banks of the Indus, 
among the Baluchi and Afghan. Crossing the Indus we enter into the 
actual country of the Hindoo division of the Aryan race. From the left 
bank of the Indus the Hindoos spread over all of northern India and over 
the western Dekhan (or Deccan). Their distribution boundary lies some- 
what to the south of the Narbada and Mahanadi rivers. The country 
farther to the south and east, to the shores of Bengal Bay and the Indian 
Ocean, is occupied by the Dravidians. They were regarded as the ancient 
inhabitants of India who were driven back by an Aryan invasion. The 
invasion was not quite complete and was effected gradually, so that 
numerous mixtures of both races had taken place. Then a Mongolian 
current, which carried Mohammedanism with it, engulfed this medley of 
peoples, and was, on one hand, the cause for the splitting of the Indian 
inhabitants into different religious denominations, and on the other, 
served further to entangle the various factors entering into the racial 
mixture, so that at present it has become exceedingly difficult to dis- 
entangle the various components. 

The Indian population comprises not only Dravidians, Hindoos, 
Mongols, and Arabs, but also the supposed more ancient inhabitants who 
lived there long before the arrival of the Dravidians. These descendants 
of the older inhabitants live in the mountains, leading a very primitive 
life. More recently came the Parsis, Jews, and Europeans. 

_ The Aryan Hindoos came to their present home about 2000 B.C. 
from their former habitat in the high steppes of Pamir. In India they 
first appeared as herders, and occupied the Punjab where they developed 
their high culture, which became more complicated the farther they pene- 
trated into the provinces of Deccan and Hindustan with their more fav- 
orable climatic conditions. 

The physical type of the Indian Aryans is not in any way homogene- 
ous. Intermixture with the native aborigines, in spite of the caste system, 

IRANIAN PEOPLES 171 

and later, with the Mongolian invaders has effaced the original Aryan 
physical characters. The Hindoos are of medium stature, have an olive 
brown skin, straight black hair, oval face, large almond-shaped eyes, 
and small chin. There are individuals of lighter complexion, of whom 
they are proud, as they offer evidence of their Aryan origin. Hindoo 
women are said to be very beautiful. The Hindoos speak a Neo-Sanskrit 
idiom. The phonetic changes which old Sanskrit passed through are re- 
garded by philologists to be similar to the development of New Persian 
from the Avesta. Like Persian, Sanskrit also had three periods of devel- 
opment: 1, Classic Sanskrit, the ancient Veddie dialect; 2, Middle 
Indian, the Prakrit; 3, New Indian dialects. 

About 210,000,000 people speak Aryan dialects, most closely related 
to Persian and Kurd, and like the European Aryan branches, may be 
regarded as members of the Indo-Germanic family. But no inference 
should be made as to physical affinity from this linguistic relationship. 
We refer here only to an Aryan language. The study of the physical 
anthropology of India is still in its infancy. We gave above some descrip- 
tive characters of the Indian Aryans and here add some figures for aver- 
age measurements. The’ average stature of 6,423 Hindoos measured by 
different investigators is 162.3; the cephalic index, 75.2; the average 
facial index of 161 individuals is 70.22; the average nasal index of 5,924 
individuals is 82.37. 

The most prominent social phenomenon in India is the caste system. 
These castes are: priests (Brahmans), warriors (Kshatriyas), traders 
(Vaisya), and peasants and craftsmen (Sudra). Later a fifth caste, that 
of savages or outcasts was added. The Aryans in India never conquered 
the land through mere force of numbers. Their social and religious influ- 
ence upon the pre-Hindoo population was far more important than their 
racial influence. Nevertheless, the racial element affected the position 
of the priest. caste to a certain degree. The Brahmans are distinguished 
from the other castes by a lighter complexion, considered a reminder of 
superior descent. 

The Buddhist doctrine, which, like Christianity, was preached not 
to a selected people, but to all mankind, enjoyed many centuries (from 
about. 500 B.C. to 599 A.D.) of undisputed sovereignity. Buddhism 
has, however, almost disappeared from India, in spite of the fact that 
Buddha himself was a Hindoo, according to tradition, the son of Cuddho- 
dana, the King of Kapilavastu, the house of Sakya. The militant Mo- 
hammedanism introduced into India by the Arabic conquerors was much 
more successful and the Islamic period lasted from 1000 until 1757 A.D., 
but it was not strong enough to supplant Brahmanism. Neither was 

172 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Christianity capable of taking the place of the original Hindoo beliefs, 
The Indian census of 1911 gives an exact idea of the relation of Buddhism, 
Mohammedanism, and Christianity to Brahmanism, which still 
dominates the minds of the Hindoos: Brahamanism, with its ideas of 
castes, was professed by 217,586,900 people; Mohammedanism, by 
66,000,000; Buddhism, by 10,721,500; Christianity by 3,000,000. 

The Gypsies should be ranked with the Hindoos. Their origin was 
unknown for a long time, but scientific investigations recently made by 
Pott, M. L. Goje, and Bataillard! lead to the belief that their original 
home must have been somewhere in northwestern India. There is no 
doubt that the language of the Gypsies is closely related to old Prakrit, 
and that for some time before they migrated to the northwest, they 
lived on the middle course of the Indus. There are a considerable 
number of Gypsy dialects as they adopted lexical elements from the 
languages of the countries they inhabited. The Slavic linguist, Miklo- 
sich,’ was the first to call attention to the fact that the migration routes 
of a Gypsy band can be determined by the borrowed foreign elements in 
its language. In Germany, Gypsies first appearee in 1417 and in Poland 
and Russia in 1500. 

We do not know the exact number of Gypsies in Asia or Europe, but 
according to superficial estimates there are 500,000 in Asiatic Turkey, 
about. the same number in the Balkan countries, and in other European 
countries, scarcely 200,000 altogether. This small European population 
may be explained by the fact that European legislation had prohibited 
the immigration of Gypsies. They call themselves Rom which term 
corresponds to the name of a dark caste in India. They are differently 
named by different peoples. The Persians call them Luri or Karachi; the 
Syrians, Nawars; the Hindoos, Jat or Sinti; the Germans, Zigeuner, 
the Russians, Tzygany. 

Very little is known of the physical characters of the Gypsies. In 
Anterior Asia they are long-headed (75.29); the average facial index is 
84.23; the average statue is 170.1. The Gypsies of southern Russia 
(Taurida) according to the measurements of Lyshin®? have an average 
cephalic index of 82.93. 

The Gypsies are rarely sedentary, but. roam from place to place with 
their wagons and tents. The men are mostly blacksmiths and shrewd 
horse dealers, curing sick horses and cattle, and have an inclination to 
theft and larceny. The women make baskets and sieves and are known 
as fortune tellers. 

ssi Sacre cea 

ivon Luschan, (b), 78. 
2Miklosich. 
JLyshin. 

CHAPTER. VIII 
SOMATOLOGY 

We now turn to a general anthropological survey of the affinities 
and peculiarities of the peoples noted in the preceding pages. In sucha 
study one must deal with anthropometric data and should be reminded 
that arithmetic averages for bodily measurements do not of themselves 
give an accurate idea of the extent of individual variation in the. group 
nor do such averages taken alone enable one to make satisfactory com- 
parisons as between groups, modern statistical methods demanding in 
addition to the average, the standard deviation, the coefficient of varia- 
tion, and the probable errors for these. Unfortunately, these require- 
ments cannot be fully met with respect to many of the ethnic groups 
considered herein, the published data giving only arithmetical averages. 
Nevertheless, these are of value and we shall make the best possible use of 
them. 

Taking into consideration the large number of peoples reviewed and 
their different racial affiliations, we had necessarily to limit ourselves to 
the examination of but a few physical characters, namely: stature, 
cephalic index, facial index, height-length-breadth head index, the 
cephalic module, stature index, and their distributions. 

By their statures we can differentiate arctic and southern tribes, 
mountainerys, and plains dwellers. The cephalic and facial indices are 
generally regarded as the most important racial indices, and while these 
indices give us the relation of two measurements, the height-length- 
breadth head index, or the cephalic module (lthth ) will give an idea of the 
absolute size of the head. 

THE DIsTRIBUTION OF STATURE 

We turn, first, to stature about which a great deal has been written, 
but concerning which there is no definite insight as to the factors that 
increase or decrease bodily length. It is customary to say that the en- 
vironment, natural or artificial selection, habits of life, race, etc., are all 
determining factors in size, but so far no one has been able to isolate 
any one of these and the assumed resulting stature increment. It is even 
asserted that, topographical factors are important determiners, as when ; 
we are told that northern peoples are shorter than southern; yet, the 
northwestern extremity of Europe (Scandinavia and the British Isles) 
18 occupied by very tall peoples, while in some parts of Italy stature is 
very low. The same contradictions are met with in mountain and plains 

173 

gn Sees 
ogas 
@& Soom 

& Sree 
5 as2e26 

igs 
NGGe ° 

pW % 
\ ssp ae wk 3 ~ " sett NSS : . 
<< SSA WAY | a, s 
PLY. Rene YW Ty 
SW Vi: i 
= a Ae AND ARN 
. <> LN v. N . \ 4 “ 
eS aN AY 
ASX RAY Les, 
/ NARA Zr 
4 
NY 

ae 

\\; \ ee i 

LS 

SOMATOLOGY | 175 

dwellers, for while it is true that the Swiss of the Bernese Oberland are 
short in contrast to their brothers dwelling in the valleys below, the high- 
lands of Scotland, Dalmatia, and Bosnia-Herzogovinia are the homes of 
very tall men. Hence, we can do no more than present the facts for 
Siberia as we find them. 

From the variations in stature shown in the table below and 
graphically represented in Map 7, the following conclusions may be 
drawn. As a rule, the. shortest people of Eurasia occupy the most 
northerly portions of the continent (Lapps, Samoyed, Ostyak, Yukaghir), 
but in the northeastern extremity of Asia are people falling below the 
average (Chukchee, Asiatic Eskimo), while to the south of them (Koryak, 
Kamchadal, and some of the Tungus tribes) are again peoples of low 
stature. The Yakut are also of sub-average stature, but they are new- 
comers in the Polar region. 

With regard to occupation we see that fishermen are low statured, 
while reindeer and cattle breeders and tillers of the soil are of average or 
high stature. Samoyed, Ostyak, Lapp, and some other reindeer breeders 
are exceptions to this rule, but most of them are largely dependent on 
fishing for their living. 

It is of interest to draw attention to geographical distribution of 
stature. In Murasia, the stature of the Polar tribes increases from west 
to east, beginning with the Lapps and Samoyed, while in Arctic America 
the reverse is true: the Eastern Eskimio have the lowest stature; the 
Eskimo of Alaska and the Chukchee Peninsula have the highest. If, 
then, we regard the whole Arctic and Sub-Arctic belt extending from 
Lapland to Greenland, a border of low statures tends to surround a 
central trans-Bering area of higher statures. 

Tue DIstTRIBUTION OF STATURE 

Low Stature (under 1600 mm.) 

Orochi 1545 Japanese 1578 
Samoyed 1550 Ostyak 1579 
Yukaghir 1559 Vogul 1580 
Lapps 1559 Chuvantzy 1581 
Ainu 1567 Aleut 1584 
Northern Tungus 1570 Karagas 1589 
Labrador Eskimo 1575 Koryak 1596 

Kamchadal 1597 

176 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Stature below the Average (1601-1649 mm.) 

Eastern Eskimo! 1606 Yezides 1633 
Point Barrow Eskimo 1615 Torgout 1636 
Yakut 1617 Telengit 1636 
Permiak 1618 Jews (Georgian) 1636 
Votyak 1619 Black Tatars (Altai) 1639 
Chukchee 1620 Kirghiz 1640 
Asiatic Eskimo 1623 Kalmuck 1640 
Hindoo 1623 Udine 1643 
Jews (Russian) 1626 Kumyk ; 1644 
Tungus 1627 Tatars (Kazan) 1645 
Cheremiss 1628 Georgians 1646 
Zyryan 1629 Gypsies (Europe) 1646 
Buryat 1631 Mingrelian 1647 
Stature above the Average (1650-1699 mm.) 

Mestcheryak 1650 Armenians 1673 
Chinese 1653 Kara-Kirghiz 1673 
Poles 1654 Karachaevtzy 1675 
Bashkir 1655 Persians 1677 
Great Russians 1657 Kabardine 1678 
Lithuanians 1659 Uzbeg 1679 
Afghan 1659 Lesghin 1681 
Dungan 1659 Kurd 1684 
Gorsky Jews 1659 Azerbaijan 1685 
Tatars of Crimea 1661 Ossete 1692 
Turks 1668 Tadjik 1693 
White Russians 1668 Sarts 1695 
Galcha 1669 Imeretine — 1696 
Little Russians 1670 Turkoman 1696 
Aissor 1671 

Finn 1671 

High Stature (1700 mm. and up) 

Svanets 1700 Lett 1705 
Gypsies (Anterior Asia) 1701 Ingush 1713 
Tate 1701 Karelian 1720 
Esthonians 1703 Livonian 1736 

DISTRIBUTION OF THE CEPHALIC INDEX 
The cephalic index, i.e., the breadth of the head expressed in per- 
centage of its length is regarded as one of the best. means to detect 
racial affinities. In most cases our list of cephalic indices corroborates 
this contention. The Iranian nations (Persians, Yezide, Kurd), and the 

1Hudson Bay, Greenland, and Coronation Gulf. 

2L1 
“xopuy ayeydoyD ayy jo uonnqiysig “g dey 

178 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

linguistically Turkicized Iranians (the Tate, Azerbaijan, and Afghan) are 
mesocephals. The Hindoos and Gypsies (of interior Asia) are also meso- 
cephals. If we take the Finnic group of peoples, independent of culture 
stage, we see that with a few exceptions, they are mesocephals. These are: 
the Vogul, Ostyak, Esthonians, Livonians, and Finns of Finland. 

Turks and Mongols are pronounced brachycephals or hyperbrachy- 
cephals. The Mongols are usually regarded as typically broad-headed, 
but our list of indices shows that some Turkic tribes have wider heads 
than the Mongols. While the chief Mongolic divisions, Kalmuck, Torg- 
out, and Buryat are brachycephals, the Turkic, Kara-Kirghiz, Kumyk, 
and Kirghiz are hyperbrachycephals. 

Some exceptions to this may be pointed out. Thus, the dolicho- 
cephalic Turkoman are a Turkic tribe (75.63), which may be explained 
by the fact that the Turkoman before their subjugation by the Russians, 
were robbers, slave dealers, and kidnappers of Persian men and women, 
and were consequently mixed with Persians. The Persians themselves 
are, however, mesocephals.! Also, it should be noted that Turkoman 
women have a distinctly Mongol type of face. 

The Dungan are also dolichocephalic (76.05). Some writers regard 
them as Chinecised Turks, while others believe them to be Chinese Mo- 
hammedans. The average cephalic index for all Chinese is 79.61, for 
those of Kuldja, 78.41, and for northern China, 77.0. There are still other 
puzzling questions regarding the cephalic index, as the Finnic Lapps 
with a brachycephalic index of 84, and the hyperbrachycephalic Zyryan 
(86.36). The Americanoid Gilyak also have a hyperbrachycephalic index, 
while their nearest neighbars, the Ainu and Tungus, have indices of 79 
and 83 or 80, respectively. The hyperbrachycephalic index of the 
Armenians bears witness against the contention of some writers that they 
belong to the Iranian group of Aryans. 

DISTRIBUTION OF THE CEPHALIC INDEX 

Dolichocephals (below 76.4) 

Hindoos 75.2 Turkoman 75.63 
Gypsies (Anterior Asia) 75.2 Dungan 76.05 
Labrador Eskimo 75.53 

'The ancient Persians [Aristoff, (a), 451] had light hair and long heads. Their present mesocephaly 
and dark hair were acquired through mixture with Semites and Turks. Thus, the olichocepha 4 2 
Turkomen might be explained by their mixture with old Persian and other Iranian dolichocephals. 

DisTRIBUTION OF THE CEepHALiIc INDEX (Continued) 

Ainu 

Eastern Eskimo 
Azerbaijan 
Yezide 

Vogul 

Japanese 

Kurd 

Chinese (Kuldja) 
Tate 

Persian 
Kamchadal 
Alaskan Eskimo 

Luli 

Karelian 
Asiatic Eskimo 
Mestcheryak 
Lithuanian 
White Russians 
Chukchee 
Votyak 
Ossetines 
Abkhastzy 
Tatar (Kazan) 
Arab 

Pole 

Ingush 

Little Russians 
Chechen 

Great Russians 
Permiak 

Sibo (Manchu) 
Mingrelian 
Tungus 
Bashkir 

SOM ATOLOGY 

Mesocephals (75.6— 80.9) 

77. 
77. 
77. 
77. 
77. 
78. 
78. 
78. 
78. 
78. 
78. 
79. 

31 
3 

57 
86 
90 
15 
29 
41 
62 
72 
90 
20 

Cheremiss 
Ostyak 
Esthonian 
Lett 
Northern Tungus 
Altai Tatar 
Livonian 
Chuvantzy 
Koryak 
Afghan 
Yukaghir 
Finn 

Brachycephals (81.0-85.9) 

81. 
81. 
81. 
81 
81 
81 
81 
81 
81 
82. 
82. 
82. 
82. 
82. 
82 
82. 
82. 
82. 
82. 
82. 
82. 
82. 

16 
19 
20 

64 
.88 
87 
.90 
94 
.95 

02 
08 
10 
13 
14 

Jol 

37 
39 
40 
42 
44 
46 
53 

Jews (Russian) 
Kalmuck 
Yakut 

Orochi 
Gypsies (Tauride) 
Soyot 
Imeretine 
Mordva 

Tatar (Caucasus) 
Kabardine 
Aleut 
Karachayevtzy 
Samoyed 

Lapp (Russia) 
Sarts 

Afghan 

Tatar (Crimea) 
Turk 

Torgout 
Karaites 
Tadjik 
Georgian 
Buryat 

Hyperbrachycephals (86.0- and upwards) 

Telengit 
Kara-Kirghiz 
Uzbeg 

Gilyak 
Zyryan 
Armenian 
Taranchi 

86. 
86. 

86.26 

86. 
86. 

86. 46? 

86. 

14 
17 

30 
36 

46 

Udine 

Kalmuck (Kuldja) 
Kumyk 

Kirghiz 

Laze 

Lesghin 

Aissor 

79.20 
79.23 
79.26 
79.52 
79.6 
79.64 
79.9 
79.9 
80.0 
80.24 
80.4 
80.67 

82.56 
82.57 
82.60 
82.81 
82.93 
83 .03 
83.09 
83.21 
83.49 
83.73 
83.80 
83.88 
83.95 
84.00 
84.22 
84.24 
84.49 
84.70 
84.73 
84.80 
84.85 
85.36 
85.87 

86 . 86 
86.98 
87.04 
87.10 
87.48 
87.74 
87.89 

179 

7Average for 99 males from Hudson Bay, Greenland, and Coronation Gulf measured by Birket-Smith. 
ecording to von Luschan, 87.5. 

“180 ) PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Faciau INDEX’ 

There-is usually some relation between the proportion of the head 
and the form of the face: a relatively broad head is accompanied by a 
round face. We know that there are exceptions to this rule. For in- 
stance, the Greenland Eskimo head and face is remarkably disharmonic. 
These Eskimo are very long-headed, yet they resemble the Lapps in 
extreme width of face. The accompanying table of the available physiog- 
nomic facial indices brings out the correlation of the head and facial 
indices of the tribes reviewed. Unfortunately, the facial indices for many 
of these tribes were not available. For instance, no where in the litera- 
ture could we find data on the facial indices of the narrow-headed Turko- 
man and Dungan. 

The Ainu (78.07 facial and 77.03 head index), the Mongolic Tourgout 
(85.2 and 84.73), the European Gypsies (79.26 and 78.36), the Anterior 
Asiatic Gypsies (84.23 and 75.20), and the Finnic Ostyak (79.6 and 79.23) 
have large facial indices. All the other peoples have narrower faces as 
compared with the width of their heads. The differences between the two 
indices mentioned ranges from 1 to 12 units. The Mongolic tribes show 
less difference than the Turkic tribes. Thus, the head indices of the 
Buryat and Kalmuck are larger than their face indices by 6 and 3 units 
respectively, while the head indices of the Turkic Kirghiz and Uzbeg are 
larger than their face indices by 7 and 9 units, respectively. The great- 
est differences are shown by some of the Asiatic Japhetides and Aryans. 
The face indices of the Caucasian Lazes and of the Turkestan Tadjik are 
smaller than their head indices by 11 and 12 units, respectively. 

FacraL INDEX 
Leptoprosopic (below 70) 
Mesoprosopic (70.01-80.00) 

Japanese 71.35 Taranchi 77.26 
Arab 72.46 Uzbeg 77.41 
Afghan 73.19 Ainu 78.07 
Tadjik 73.33 Little Russians 78.12 
Karelian 73.68 Armenian 78.31 
Persian 74.31 Ingush 78.37 
Mezleghantzy 74.70 Imeretine 78.33 
Lithuanian 75.16 Tatar (Kazan) 78.64 
Kurd 75.32 _ Votyak 78.70 
Jew 75.50 Aissor 78.73 
Vogul 75.77 Luli 79.09 

Azerbaijan 75.88 Yakut 79.25 

Laze 

White Russians . 
Pole 

Zyryan 

Khalkas 

Great Russians 
Tatar (Crimea) 
Bashkir 

Finn 

Mingrelian 
Telengit 

SOM ATOLOGY 

FactaL InpEx (Continued) 

76.14 
76.22 
76.32 
76.45 
76.56 
76.73 
76.97 
77.80 
77.15 

Chamaeprosopic (80.01 and upwards) 

80.08 
80.32 

Kirghiz (Middle Horde) 80.43 

Ossetine 

80.82 

Georgian 
Kumyk 
Ostyak 
Ossetine 
Udine 
Buryat 
Kabardine 
Kalmuck 

Permiak 
Tungus 
Lesghin 

Gypsies (Anterior Asia) 
Torgout (Tarlag) 

A Comparative Table 

Gypsies (Anterior Asia) 

Ainu 
Azerbaijan 
Vogul 
Japanese 
Gypsics (Europe) 
Kurd 

Persian 
Chinese 
Afghan 

Finn 

Asiatic Eskimo 
Luli 

Karelian 
Mestcheryak 
Lithuanians 
White Russians 
Chukchee 
Votyak 
Ossctine 
Abkhastzy 
Tatar (Kazan) 
Aral 

Pole 

Ingush 

Little Russians 
Chechen 

Cephalic Index 

72.20. 
77.3 
77.57 
77.90 
78.15 
78.36 
78.29 
78.72 
79.66 
80.24 
80.67 
81.00 
81.16 
81.19 
81.64 
81.88 
81.87 
81.9 
81.94 
81.95 
82.02 
82.08 
82.10 
82.13 
82.14 
82.31 
82.37 

79. 
79. 
79. 
.63 
79, 
79. 
79. 
79. 

79 

81. 
81. 
81. 
84. 
85. 

84.23 
78.07 
75.88 
75.77 
71.35 
79.21 
75.32 
74.31 
73.74 
73.19 
77.25 

43 
47 
60 

65 
72 

79: 

87 

00 
26 
77 
23 
20) 

Facial Index 

181 

182 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

A Comparative TABLE (Continued) 

Cephalic Index ‘Facial Index 

Great Russians 82.39 ; 78.73 
Permiak 82.40 81.00 
Mingrelian 82.44 és 80.08 
Tungus 82.46 81.26 
Bashkir 82.53 77.80 
Jews (Russian) 82.56 75.50 
Kalmuck 82.57 79.87 
Yakut 82.60 79.25 
Imeretine 83.09 78.38 
Kabardine 83.73 79.79 

Tatar (Crimea) 84.49 76.97 
Torgout 84.73 85.20 
Tadjik 84.85 73.33 
Georgians 85.36 79.43 
Buryat 85.87 79.72 
Telengit 86.14 80.32 
Uzheg 86.26 77.41 
Zyryan "$6.36 76.45 
Armenian 86.46 78.31 
Taranchi 86.46 77.26 
Udine 86.86 77.55 
Kumyk 87.04 79.47 
Kirghiz 87.10 80.43 
Laze 87.48 76. 14- 
Lesghin 87.74 81.77 
Aissor 87.89 78.73 

THe CEpPHALIC MopULE 

While the cephalic index (as well as the height-length and height- 
width head indices) give us a relative idea of the form of the head, the 
height-length-breadth head index or the cephalic module will give us an 
idea of absolute size of the head which may be compared with the head 
sizes of other ethnic groups. Although anthropologists attach little 
importance to the absolute size of head as a means of establishing intel- 
lectual superiority or inferiority, it may be of importance as @ racial 
character. : 

The following list shows that the cephalic module ranges between 
147.3 and 162. 

Tue CrepHatic MopuLEe 
L+B+H 
(age) 
Hindoo 147.3 

Chinese 149.7 

SOM ATOLOGY 

Tar CepHatic Mopu.e (Continued) 

Kamchadal 
Lithuanian 
Chuvantzy 
Aleut ss 
Lett 

Koryak 

Asiatic Eskimo 
Livonian 

Jews (Russian) 
Gypsies (Europe) 
Lapps (Russian) 
Bashkir 
Chukchee 
Georgian 

Little Russians 
White Russians 
Aissor 

Tatar (Kazan) 
Dungan 
Kabardine 

Great Russians 
Gruzine (Guria) 
Kumyk 
Yukaghir 
Turkoman 
Kalmuck 

Sart 

Tadjik 

Japanese 

Tatar (Altai) 
Ainu 

Jews (Mountainous) 
Zyryan ~ 

Kurd 

Armenian 
Persian 

Eskimo (Labrador) 
Little Russians 
Chinese (Kuldja) 
Buryat 

Udine 

Tungus 

Ingush 

Tate 

Afghan 

Jews (Georgians) 

150 

150. 
150. 

152 
152 

152. 
152. 
152. 
152. 

153 
153 

153. 

154 
154 
155 

155. 
155. 
155. 
155. 

_ 
ou 
or 

155. 
155. 
155. 

156 
156 
156 
156 
156 

156. 
156. 
156. 

157 
157 

157. 
157. 
157. 

158 
158 

158. 
158. 
158. 
158. 
158. 
158. 
158 .. 

159 

NOOwwwww 

6 
7 

INN 

Om ow ow 

OD Ww ow ow 

183 

184 ' PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Tue Cepuatic Mopu.e (Continued) 

Torgout 159 

Mingrelian 159.3 
Kara-Kirghiz 159.7 
Yezide 159.7 
Yakut 160.3 
Ossetine 160.7 
Kirghiz 161 

Ostyak 161 

Samoyed 161.3 
Azerbaijan 161.5 

We see from the table of cephalic modules that no definite somato- 
logical conclusions can be drawn from the array of these indices. Only 
such closely related ethnical groups as the Great, White, and Little Rus- 
sians have similar cephalic modules (155.6, 155.3, and 155). The Mon- 
golians (Kumyk, Kalmuck, Buryat, and Torgout) have approximately 
sirnilar cephalic modules (155.7, 156, 158.3, 159). This is not the case 
with the Finnic, Turkic, and Iranic nations. Of the Iranians, the Kurd 
and Persians have almost the same cephalic module. The Ostyak have 
the same cephalic module as the Samoyed. 

THe CrepHatic MopuLeE STaTuRE INDEX 

The cephalic module stature index (cephalic module by 100, divided 
by the stature) shows the relation of the size of the head to stature. 
Taking the available data concerning the peoples mentioned in the 
preceding table we can compile the following list. 

Mean Mean Cephalic 
Stature Cephalic Module 
Module Stature Index 

Chinese 1653 149.7 9.0 
Lett 1705 152 9.0 
Livonian 1736 152.7 9.0 
Hindoo 1623 147.3 9.1 
Lithuanian 1659 159.6 9.1 
Kabardine 1678 155.3 9.2 
Turkoman 1696 156 9.2 
Sarts 1695 156 9.2 
Tadjik 1693 156.3 9.2 
Ingush 1713 158.6 9.2 
Tate 1701 158.6 9.2 
Gypsies (Europe) . . 1646 153 9.3 
Lapp (Russian) 1559 153 9.3 
Bashkir 1655 153.3 9.3 

SOMATOLOGY 185 

Mean Cephalic 
Mean Cephalic Module 
; Stature Module Stature Index 
Little Russian 1670 155 9.3 
Aissor 1671 155.3 9.3 
Dungan : 1659 155.3 9.3 
Kamchadal 1597 150 9.4 
Asiatic Eskimo 1623 152.7 9.4 
Jews (Russian) 1626 152.7 9.4 
Georgian 1646 154 9.4 
Tatar (Kasan) 1645 155.3 9.4 
Great Russian 1657 155.6 9.4 
Gruzine (Guria) 1646 155.6 9.4 
Kumyk 1644 155.7 9.4 
Kurd 1684 157.3 9.4 
Armenian 1673 157.3 9.4 
Little Russian 1670 158 9.4 
Chuvantzyv 1581 150.7 9.5 
Chukchee 1620 154 9.5 
Kalmuck 1640 156 9.5 
Jews (Gorsky) 1659 157 9.5 
Kara Kirghiz 1673 159.7 9.5 
Ossetine 1692 160.7 9.5 
Azerbaijan 1684 161.5 9.5 
Aleut. 1584 152 9.6 
Koryak 1596 152.7 9.6 
Altai Tatar 1639 156.6 9.6 
Zyryan . 1629 157 9.6 
Udine 1643 158.3 9.6 
Afghan 1659 158.6 9.6 
Buryat. 1631 158.3 9.7 
Tungus 1627 158.3 9.7 
Georgian Jews 1636 159 9.7 
Torgout 1636 159 9.7 
Mingrelian 1647 159.3 9.7 
Yezide 1633 159.7 9.7 
Japanese 1578 156.3 9.8 
Kirghiz 1640 161 9.8 
Ainu 1567 156.6 9.9 
Yakut 1617 160.3 9.9 
Yukaghir 1559 156 10.0 
Labrador Eskimo 1575 158 10.0 
Ostyak 1579 161 10.2 
Samoyed 1550 161.3 10.4 

The cephalic module stature index ranges between 9.0 and 10.4 
units. It is difficult to draw conclusions from this index concerning the 

186 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

relation between the size of the brain and stature, but the above table 
may be of some value for future investigators of the subject. It is worth 
noting that the tallest peoples of the list (Lett, Livonian) show the 
smallest index (9.0) while the shortest peoples (Ostyak, Samoyed) show 
the greatest indices (10.2 and 10). 

In concluding this chapter on somatology we may point out that all 
the absolute measurements given refer to males only. There are very 
few measurements of women and in many cases these are altogether 
lacking. The relative measurements shown in our tables also refer 
mostly to men. Yet, in some cases average indices of men and women 
are available. The indices of both sexes are usually parallel, but we sub- 
mit what data we have. 

Head Index Facial Index 

Male Female Male Female 
Armenian 86.46 84.12 Sleuths ° “ixahak 
Ainu 77.3 78.4 78.7 79.98 
Buryat 85.87 80.7 ne 
Georgians 85.36 838.56 —— ..... ee adi 
Kalmuck 82.57 86.83 79.87 80.0 
Kurd 78.29 77.68 75.32 76.05 
Lithuanians 81.88 83.47 75.16 77.68 
Ossetine ; Ree iste ar 79.63 77.68 
Soyot 84.42 82.57 ee es 
Tadjik 84.84 82.89 cece ee 
Uzbeg 86.26 BL.15 ae es 
Yakut 82.60 80.82 79.25 78.87 

We see that in some cases men have larger indices, while in others 
the reverse may be: noticed. 

ig CATTLE BREEDING 

SEE ASME 

a 
DEER 
ekere 

ay Ach 
ES 

LEGEND 
Rog =] CATTLE BREEDING 
a3 

MODE OF LIFE 

ZN 
a \ 

LZ 

WS 
y BN 

a SAX aad 
wr 
y 

eS 
WRORGQ 
RRr~a 

\ N NN \ 

it Wy, 

TOF 

Map 9 

CHAPTER Ix 
MODE OF LIFE 

Russian ethnologists classify the natives of northern and central 
Asia according to their mode of life, into migratory, nomadic, semi- 
nomadic, and sedentary peoples. For taxation purposes, the pre-revolu- 
tionary Russian government distinguished three divisions: migratory, 
nomadic, and sedentary. In both classifications, it is difficult to draw 
definite boundary lines since each tribe may represent different groups, 
and each group may migrate or lead a nomadic life in one season of the 
year and be settled in the other. We will endeavor, however, to set up 
definitions for these terms. 

Migratory people are exclusively hunters, whether they travel on 
foot, by dog sledges, or mounted upon reindeer. A nomadic as well as a 
semi-nomadic people may also hunt, and may breed dogs or reindeer, to 
transport them when on the hunt, but are not wholly dependent upon the 
hunt for sustenance. 

As representative migratory people, we may mention the Yukaghir 
and some of the Tungus clans who roam over the vast polar tundra or 
through the immense forest immediately to the south. However, even 
these nomads remain near the river banks or lake shores during the fish- 
ing season. The hunting groups wander over a vast, but not boundless 
area. To avert conflicts, which formerly took place between various 
tribes, the Russian government assigned each group to a certain locality, 
but this arrangement is not faithfully observed. For instance the Upper 
Kolyma Yukaghir complain that the Tungus reindeer breeders of the 
Okhotsk region come to their territory and kill the squirrels before they 
themselves can do it, since they are “walking hunters.’””’ The Tundra 
Yukaghir accuse the Chukchee, who recently came from the east, of 
driving off the wild reindeer with their domesticated herds. Both the 
Tungus and the Chukchee contend that since all the land belongs to the 
State, they may use it as hunting ground or pasture. However, the 
Chukchee have tried to appease the Yukaghir, giving them meat gratis 
or presenting them with reindeer for killing. 

Nomadic tribes may be defined as those who move with their 
domesticated herds from one pasture to another. This may take place 
infrequently or many times a year. The Koryak or Chukchee move their 
herds of reindeer as soon as the lichens in any pasture are consumed 
The cattle and horse breeders of the steppes follow the same system. 
The nomadism of the Mongolic and Turkic peoples of Central .Asia 

187 

(188 ) PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

differs, however, from that of the north, in that the migrations are 
seasonal. | 

Tribes who change their abode twice a year are called semi-nomadic. 
The Yakut and Buryat are typical tribes falling under this category, 
maintaining permanent dwellings in both their habitats. Fishing people, 
like the Maritime Koryak, the Kamchadal, and River Ostyak, may also 
be called semi-nomadic, as they live in settlements in winter and have 
summer huts on the seacoast or river banks during the fishing season. 

Those people or divisions living in permanent villages or cities are 
called sedentary. These are mostly agriculturists, merchants, and 
artisans, as the Tadjik, Sarts, Persians, and others. 

DWELLINGS 

Natural shelters, like caverns, overhanging rocks, holes in the 
ground, hollow tree trunks, etc., are still occasionally used by primitive 
hunters and travelers: These shelters undoubtedly served as a model for 
the first man-made habitation. The ideal dwelling should protect its 
inhabitants from wet ground, rain, snow, cold, sun, and other inclemencies 
of the weather, but not every type of dwelling fills all these requirements. 
The full history of the development of house types has not yet been 
recovered. We will here review the numerous types of dwelling as they 
now exist in northwestern Asia, their use, and dependency upon climatic 
and topographic conditions, mode of life, and stage of culture. 

These dwellings may be distinguished according to their outer form, 
material, and method of construction. According to form, dwellings 
may be classified as follows:— 

Shades and screens. 

Conical. 

Cylindro-conical. 

Cylindro-dome or cupola- shaped. 
Pyramidal. 

Truncated pyramidal. 
Flat-roofed, square. 

Flat-roofed, rectangular. 

9. Flat-roofed, polygonal. 

10. Sloping-roofed, square. 

11. Sloping-roofed, rectangular. 

12. Sloping-roofed, polygonal. 

13. Underground or half underground. 
14. Pile dwelling. 

15. Tents on boats. 

PO te CO Be 

MODE OF LIFE 189 

MATERIAL AND CONSTRUCTION 

Dwellings are built of the following: snow, rods, poles, wattle, logs, 
hide, leather, birchbark, thatch, earth, sod, clay, stone, and brick. The 
type of construction depends on the form and building material. All the 
movable dwellings are set up by women, while the fixed habitations are 
built by men. 

Shades and Screens. This primitive type of temporary abode is used 
by Siberian hunters and fishermen when moving about unaccompanied 
by women. In winter, sticks or rods are set up in the ground or in the 
snow in a sloping position against the wind and two or three reindeer 
skins sewn together are tied to the sticks. The people place themselves 
under the slope of the screen and build a fire in front. In winter the outer 
side of the hide shelter is banked with snow. When a skin cover is not 
available a snow wall is built, with or without a thatch of twigs. Yakut 
drivers with whom the author traveled over sparsely populated places 
used to erect such shelters as sleeping places. When sleeping in such a 
shelter the Siderian natives lie with their feet toward the shade and head 
toward the fireplace, the fire being kept up during the night. 

Conical Tents. The conical tent of circular groundplan is the 
simplest kind of temporary dwelling. It is used, in the main, by hunting 
and fishing, nomadic, or semi-nomadic tribes. It consists of a framework 
of rods, the upper ends of which are bound together by a bast rope, thong, 
or a willow ring, while the lower ends are set up in a regular circle in the 
earth or snow. In northern Siberia, the frame is covered with soft tanned 
reindeer skins. The cover consists of three separate strips of skin fast- 
ened to the rods by leather straps. The apex of the tent frame is left 
uncovered and serves as a vent for the smoke. Through the same 
hole the sunlight may penetrate. The hide cover is also not wholly 
impermeable to the daylight. 
| The size of the tent depends on the number of its occupants. Inside, 
in the centcr of the floor, is a fireplace encircled with stones. Over the 
fireplace is set. up a wooden tripod with hooks for hanging kettles and 
teapots. Under the slope of the conical tent, all around the wall, are 
seats made of soft. willow twigs covered with reindeer skins. These serve 
also as sleeping places and for grown-up girls and married couples, sleep- 
ing tents in the form of rectangular boxes placed upside down are hung 
over the sleeping places. The sleeping tents are sewn of dressed reindeer 
skin or of some cotton material. Unmarried men, boys, small girls, and 
old people have no sleeping tents. Thé lower strip of the tent cover does 
not cover the entire frame and an entrance is left. between two poles. 

Fig. 32. Birchbark Tents of the Soyot. 

Fig. 33. Summer Dwelling of the Ancient Yakut. These were large conical 
tents, covered with birchbark, often elaborately decorated, but now seldom seen. 

190 

MODE OF LIFE 191 

This is covered by a flap of reindeer skin which serves as a door. Honored 
guests do not raise the entrance flap for themselves. This is done for 
them by boys or girls. The same mark of respect is given to old people. 

It is the woman’s duty to care for the tent. She sews the skins for 
the tent cover, sets up the frame, covers it, and arranges the fireplace and 
sleeping places. When the family moves, as to another hunting or fishing 
place, the women take down the tent, and load it on the sledge or in a 
boat. 

In southern Siberia and in the Amur River region, the conical tent is 
covered with birchbark. To prepare the tent cover, strips of birchbark 
are first softened by boiling and then sewn together. 

The conical tent with a skin cover is distributed among the following 
tribes: the Kolyma Yukaghir, the northern Tungus, the Ostyak, Sam- 
oyed, and Lapps. The conical tent with a birchbark cover is used by the 
Amur River Tungus, the reindeer-breeding Soyot and Karagas, and the 
southern Ostyak. 

The writer met poor Yakut at the mouths of the Yana and Lena 
rivers who lived in conical dwellings, the frames of which were covered 
with earth and sod. But this should be regarded as a seasonal dwelling, 
since it was used only during the summer fishing season. 

As a summer dwelling, the ancient Yakut used a conical tent covered 
with birchbark. It differs from other types of tents in its size and heavy 
and solid construction of the wooden frame so that it cannot be easily 
transported. These large tent-like dwellings were located far from the 
winter earthen huts of the Yakut and were occupied during the summer 
in order that their horses and cattle might not injure the meadows on 
which hay is made for the winter and near which the winter dwellings 
are situated. 

The fireplace in a Yakut birchbark tent is a large wooden bottomless 
hox filled with beaten clay. The tent was ornamented with engravings, 
wood and birchbark carvings, sinew thread and horsehair embroidery 
and with slivers of colored mica and pieces of bright cloth. This type 
of dwelling is no longer in use, though twenty-five years ago it was 
occasionally observed. A complete tent, such as is described above, was 
brought to the museum by the author. At present, the Yakut build log 
houses instead of tents for the summer. 

The following types of conical tents also deserve mention. The Altai 
Tatar, living in the forest, cover their conical tents with the bark of 
pines and larches, but in open country they use felt covers. Some of 
these dwellings have the entrance framed in wood and a door of boards. 

Fig. 34. Conical Tent of the Forest Altai Tatar. The cover is of bark from the 
larch tree; the entrance is framed in wood and the door is of boards. The outer 
poles keep the bark cover in place. 

Fig. 35. A Sod and Graas-Covered Conical Tent of the Yakut from the Mouth 
of the Yana River. Some of the Altai Tatar also cover their conical tents with reeds. 

192 

£61 

"8}U9} JOY}B9] [BOLUOD BY} JO UOT] UT ZuIpuLys ‘soULYSIP B Ye Way} SuLAsesqo Usp]. pu uaWIOM 
ayy ‘YoU Surjooys & Ul pasvsue oie UU oY], “IOAN UOpOyxIOYy oy} uO aFeyIA JoWUME ITyseyNA WY “Og “SIT 

Fig. 37. Conical Summer Tent of the Upper Kolyma Yukaghir. The 
cover consists of three separate strips of soft tanned reindeer skin fastened to 
the frame. 

104 

MODE OF LIFE 195 

In winter, the bark as well as the felt conical tent, is banked with earth 
and snow to half its height. The length of the tent pales is from 6 to 8 
meters. The Altai Tatars cover their tents with birchbark. In some dis- 
tricts the Altai Tatars as well as the Teleut use tent covers of mats made 
from the bark of the acacia (Robinia Carganata L.) or of reed grasses. 

According to Khangaloff,! the northern Buryat formerly used to 
cover their conical tents with skins in winter and with pine branches in 
summer. At present they do not use the conical tent. The Selenga 
Buryat, according to Erman,’ used conical tents covered with double 
sheets of felt. : 

The Bashkir of Ufa Province still use conical tents with a framework 
of rods plastered with dung and covered with straw. 

The Mongols of northern Mongolia, according to Potanin,? use felt- 
covered conical tents. Shitetzky also reports that the Mongolic Kal- 
muck of Astrakhan use such tents. The Kirghiz also continue the use of 
the conical felt-covered tent as a temporary dwelling. 

The construction of the pole framework of these tents falls into the 
following types: 

1. The upper ends of the poles are tied by a thong or cord. 

2. The poles are held by a ring of plaited willows. 

3. The upper ends of the poles are held in the holes of a wooden 
hoop. 

4. Several willow rings are tied to the poles at certain distances. 
In forested areas the framework is of heavier poles and it is usually aban- 
doned to avoid its transportation when moving. In the open steppes the 
frame consists of light poles and is always transported, together with the 
cover, when moving. 

The conical tent. may be regarded as a primitive type of dwelling 
associated with the hunting stage of culture. However, it is retained, 
chiefly as a summer dwelling, by many nomadic or semi-nomadic herders 
and even by some sedentary agricultural tribes. 

Cylindro-Conical Tents. This type of tent consists of a frame of 
poles and a skin cover, but it is constructed in two parts, a lower, 
cylindrical, and an upper, conical one. The cylindro-conical tent may be 
regarded as a natural development from the conical one, and accordingly 
It constitutes a higher type of dwelling. We do not know exactly how 
the process of transition from the conical to the cylindro-conical tent was 
effected, but. we may assume that a casually bent rod may have suggested 

'Khangalof. 
Erman 

*Potanin, (b). 

* 
or 

wong 
we 

uo 
& 
es, 
a 

Vie BS. A Oydhindro-Conieal Tent of the Tundra Yukaghir. [Ut is covered with 
reindeer shins; in the winter, with the hair on; in summer, without the hair. In 
winter the lower part of the tent is banked with snow for warmth. The photograph 
is from the rear, where covered freight sledges serve as storage places for clothing and 
household belongings. 

Fig. 39. A Cylindro-Conieal Tent of the Okhotsk Tungus. The upper. conical 
portion, ts covered with reindeer skins; the lower, evlindrical section, is of rectangular 
sheets of birchbark sewed together with thongs. 

198 

MODE OF LIFE . 197 

the idea of allowing the lower part of the poles to remain vertical and the 
upper part to slope toward the center of the tent. The cylindrical part 

Fig. 40. A Felt-Covered Cylindro-Conical Tent used chiefly by Mongoloid 
Tribes and usually known as the Kalmuck Tent. This type is used by the Kalmuck, 
Buryat, and other Mongoloid tribes. 

4 

Fig. 41. Framework for a Felt Tent. a, The upper part consists of straight or 
bent rods; b, A variation in the side frame. 

is about one meter high, the top of the tent in the center is from 3.5 to 8 
meters high. The framework of the lower part is composed of short light 
stakes, tied in pairs with cross bars to form a wide circle. The conical 
upper part consists of poles, the lower ends of which are tied to the cross 
bars of the cylindrical section. Thongs hold the upper ends of the slant- 
ing poles together and they are supported in turn by a high tripod of 
heavier poles, the lower ends of which are dug into the ground on three 
sides of the fireplace. 

This form of dwelling is in use all over Siberia and partly among the 
nomads of northern Europe. The framework is usually covered with 
reindeer skins dressed without the hair. Though the compound tents of 

os 

(19 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

the Chukchee and Koryak are similar in plan, their lower sections are 
heavier, clumsier, and less regular in shape than other similar tents. 
Furthermore, in winter, the Chukchee and Koryak cover their tents with 
heavy reindeer skins with the hair on. 

In the district of Okhotsk and in the Amur River region, the Tungus 
cover the lower, cylindrical parts with rectangular pieces of birchbark 
sewed together with thongs. 

The interior arrangement of the compound tent is the same as for 
the conical form. The compound tent differs, however, from the conical 
in being larger and higher, that is, high enough for a person to stand 
erect not only in the center of the dwelling, but in other places as well. 

Felt-Covered Tents. The felt-covered tents are of two shapes—a 
cylindro-conical, like the skin tents described above, and a cylindro- 
dome-shaped. The first is called the Kalmuck type, and the second, 
the Kirghiz type, because the former is used by the Kalmuck and the 
latter by the Kirghiz. But as most Mongolian tribes use the cylindro- 
conical tent and the Turkic tribes use the cylindro-dome-shaped, they 
may be designated as Mongolian and Turkic types. The difference is 
mainly in the shape of the upper framework. In the Mongolian type the 
rods are straight, while in the Turkic type they are curved. 

We have previously assumed that the cylindro-conical tent was 
derived from the conical form, but we cannot state that the cylindro- 
dome form was in turn evolved from the cylindro-conical. We believe, 
however, that the dome form is a further development from the cylindro- 
conical. 

Cylindro-Conical Felt Tents. This form of tent is in use among the 
Mongol tribes, the Kalmuck, Northern and Transbaikalia Buryat, and the 
Mongols proper. However, some of the Turkic tribes also use the 
cylindro-conical tent, namely, the Bukei-Kirghiz, Altai-Tatar, Kachin- 
Tatar, Kara-Nogai, and Sarts of northwestern Mongolia. 

Cylindro-Dome or Cupola-Shaped Felt Tents. This form of tent is 
used by the following Turkic tribes: the Kirghiz, (both branches), 
Kara-Kalpak, Kipchak, Uzbeg, Turkoman, Nogais, and the Bashkir. 

The cylindrical portions of both types of felt tent are of light wattle, 
fastened together, in a circle, with cords of horse, bull, or camel hair. 
The upper poles, either straight or curved, are tied at their lower ends to 
the upper wattle slats while the upper ends are fastened in the holes of a 

" large wooden ring. The whole frame is fastened all around with thongs 
or cords and covered with wide strips of felt attached to the frame and 
held down on the outside with cords. The wooden ring serves as a vent 

MODE OF LIFE 199 

and is covered by a piece of felt when there is no fire. The wooden door 
at the side of the cylindrical section is sometimes two-paneled and is 
covered with a reed mat or a felt rug. The floor is covered with felt rugs 

Fig. 42. A Felt-Covered Conical Tent of the Northern Mongols. The Kalmuck 
of Astrakhan and the Kirghiz use it as a temporary dwelling. 

Fig. 43. A Cylindro-Dome-Shaped Felt. Tent used by Turkic Tribes and called 
a Kirghiz or Turkic Tent. 

and, among rich people, with tapestry carpets. The interior arrange- 
ment of the tent has been previously described. It is set up by the 
women, but, the men assist, holding the heavy wooden ring while the 
women attach the upper poles. For the winter, the felt cover is usually 
doubled, nevertheless it is not a warm dwelling for the steppes, where it 
originated. 

Fig. 44. A Yakut Dwelling. A double structure is shown, a dwelling with 
chimney, and a cattle stable, adjoining. Inside the dwelling a door leads to the 
stable. New-born calves are kept in the dwelling behind the chimney. 

Fig. 45. A Flat-Roofed Blockhouse of the Upper Kolyma Yukaghir which serves 
as a Winter Dwelling. The windows are covered with thick panes of river ice. 

200 

MODE OF LIFE 201 

Pyramidal Dwellings. Dwellings of pyramidal form are found only 
among some of the northern Yakut, who set up a four-poled frame and 
cover it with sod, leaving the top of the pyramid open as a vent hole. 

Truncated Pyramidal Dwelling. This form of dwelling is in use 
among the Yakut and Yakutized Tungus. We may assume that it was 
invented by the Yakut after their arrival in their present territory from a 
more southerly habitat. Indeed the present Yakut house is far more 
fitted to the harsh sub-polar or polar climate than all the types of 
tents described above. 

The Yakut house is built as follows: Four posts, driven into the 
ground, are joined by four cross-beams, on which rest the upper ends of 
poles or roughly hewn boards, set up in slanting position. The cross 
beams are covered with branches, poles, or boards, over which bark is 
spread, thus forming the ceiling and roof. Then the roof and sloping 
walls are covered with mud, earth, and clay mixed with cow dung. In 
winter, a laver of snow is added. 

The floor, generally of beaten mud, is sunk two or three feet below 
the ground; rich people, however, have it level with the ground and 
covered with boards. A few small squared openings, admitting scant 
light, are covered by sheets of ice in winter, and, in summer, with fish 
membrane, mica, oiled paper, or dense horsehair nets, which ventilate 
the dwelling and shut out mosquitoes. Around the walls are parti- 
tioned off wide permanent benches which serve as seats in the daytime 
and as sleeping places at night. 

The bench opposite the door, usually on the southern wall, is re- 
served for honored guests. The right side is occupied by the master of 
the house, his children, and married sons; the left by grown girls. Less 
honored guests occupy the lower ends of the right and left sides, 
nearest the door. The sleeping places of married people and grown 
girls are set off with a curtain. The slanting board door is covered 
by cow or horseskins. In the corner, to the right of the entrance, 
but not close to the walls, is a kind of open hearth, made of beaten clay 
Ina wooden box, from which a chimney made of poles tied together 
with willow rings and coated inside with a layer of clay rises to the 
roof. A fire burns constantly on the hearth, but during the night the 
temperature drops very low despite the fact that the chimney hole 
18 covered with a piece of skin. There is usually a shed over the en- 
trance which faces the east. Some Yakut dwellings have an elongated 
form and they are divided by an inside wall of thin boards, to form a 
living room and a stall for cows, with a communicating door. The cows 

Fig. 46. Inner Court of a Tadjik Dwelling, Eastern Bokhara. The house is a 
flat-roofed structure made of mud and clay. 

Fig.47. A Karachai House. The Karachai, a Cis-Caucasian Turkic tribe live on 
the upper course of the Kuban River. The dwelling is made of clay-covered willows. 

202 

MODE OF LIFE 203 

enter and leave their stalls through the living room where newborn calves 
are kept behind the hearth. Rich people, however, build separate stalls, 
called khoton, with a separate hearth for their cattle. 

This truncated pyramidal dwelling of the Yakut is a typical winter 
dwelling for a semi-nomadic life. Their summer dwelling is the large 
conical birchbark tent, described above (p. 190). At present, most Yakut 
have two earth huts, one for the winter, the other for the summer, but 
when living near cities or Russian settlements they have abandoned their 
old type of dwelling and live in log houses. 

Flat-Roofed Block Houses. The further evolution of the material 
culture of the cattle-breeding tribes of Siberia and Central Asia led them 
to substitute log houses of the type used by Russians for their tent-like 
dwellings. These log houses may be square, rectangular, or polygonal. 
The flat roof has a foundation of rods overlaid by grass, bark, earth, clay, 
and sod. This type of dwelling is found among the Bashkir, Kirghiz, 
Buryat, Dolgan, Yakut, and many other Siberian Turkic tribes. The 
polygonal house of the Altai Tatars may be regarded as an imitation of 
the cylindrical skin tent. The block house usually served as a winter 
dwelling, while the tent remains a summer dwelling; but in some dis- 
tricts the cattle breeders have two wooden houses in different places. 

Pent-Roofed Dwellings. The author has never seen pent-roofed log 
houses in use among the Siberian natives. Neither are they mentioned 
by other investigators. However, the late Yadrintzev, in his book on the 
Altaian natives mentions a log house with a sloping roof. 

Sloping-Roofed Block Houses. The block house is the highest type 
of dwelling of the Asiatic natives who have partly or entirely abandoned 
their nomadic life. Tent-like dwellings are usually used in the summer, 
but for those who have become agriculturists the block house is a perma- 
nent dwelling. The sloping-roofed block house may be square, rectangu- 
lar, or polygonal in form. The latter is in some respects a reminder of 
the cylindro-conical tent from which it was probably derived. 

The richer and more civilized Siberian and Central Asiatic natives 
how live in wooden houses. The polygonal sloping-roofed block house 
of the Altaians was described by Radloff! and Yadrintzev.? Like tents 
they have no windows. We have observed such block houses on the 
Kolyma River, used by the local Yakut and Russian settlers as 
storehouses and summer dwellings during the fishing season. 

ee et 

1Radloff, (a), 267. 
*Yadrintzev, 634, 

204 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Underground Dwellings or Earth Huts. Although underground 
dwellings are usually characteristic of a lower stage of culture, we are. 
describing them after the block houses, since we wish to show the transi- 
tional culture processes from the lower to higher forms of habitations, 
beginning with the conical tent. It can be demonstrated, for example, 
that the underground dwellings found in different latitudes have evolved 
into superterrene habitations, and into log houses. 

Fig. 48. A Polygonal Altaian Sloping-Roofed Blockhouse. The author saw such 
blockhouses among the Yakut fishermen of the Upper Kolyma River. They resemble 
in form the cylindro-conical tents. 

The designation “subterranean” is not always correct, for few of this 
type are entirely underground;' others are situated under the ground to a 
greater or less degree (about a half or less), while their superterrene 
portion is covered with earth taken from the pit in which the dwelling 
is placed. Therefore, all these dwellings should perhaps be considered 
under the general name, earth huts. 

The earth hut is built to protect its inhabitants from climatic ex- 
tremes, against frosts or heat, and therefore it is found in the north as 

well as in the south, though it occurs more frequently in the polar 
region. 

1For instance, the remains of ancient subterranean dwellings that have been found in Scotland and 
Ireland. 

MODE OF LIFE 205 

The following are the general characteristics of the earth hut. 

1. The round, rectangular, or irregular pit is dug in the ground to a 
depth of from three to six feet. It is generally dug at some altitude, to 
allow adequate drainage. 

2. The timber walls are set in the pit vertically. They form a 
rectangle, or an irregular octagon, about half or a third of them above 
ground. 

Fig. 49. An Earth-Covered Blockhouse of the Altai-Tatar Kumandintzy, 
Biisk District. of Tomsk Province. 

+ 

7 

NT 

MM 

Ny 
i) 

, 
Ue 
} 

vn 

or 

i 

A 

f) 

M 

“a 
| 
, 
! 
7 
¢ 

Fig. 50. A Teleut (or Telengit) Dwelling. This has a flat roof of clay and reeds 
and sides of plaited willow branches covered with clay outside and inside. The Teleut 
live in the Tomsk, Kusnetzk, and Biisk districts of Tomsk Province. 

3. The flat roof is supported by four or more pillars, and slopes 
from these to the outer walls. 

4. A square aperture in the roof serves as an outlet for the smoke, 
a8 a window, and a door. For entering and leaving the house a notched 
log ladder is placed within the opening. 

There are many deviations from these general characteristics. It 
should be added, however, that some forms of the earth hut have not yet 
been sufficiently studied. 

206 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

In Europe, the earth hut was known to the Scythians, ancient 
Germans, and the Swiss. In southern Bavaria it was round, with a 
kettle-like widening at the bottom, from eleven to fifteen meters in 
diameter, and from two to four meters in depth. In the winter, the 
Slavs, Finns, and Laplanders lived in earth huts. They were also used 
in the last century by Hungarian gypsies, who dug holes in the ground 
ten or twelve feet deep for their winter huts. Their roofs were of rafters 
covered with straw and sod. 

In Asia, Armenia may be mentioned first of all. According to Xeno- 
phontes, the pit of the Armenian earth huts was wide at the bottom and 
the huts were entered by a stairway. The Phrygians overlaid their stone 
dwellings with earth. The Ostyak earth hut, which has now almost dis- 
appeared, was built in a quadrangular pit lined with wood. The roof was 
of poles covered with turf and earth. It had no windows. An opening 
in the roof served to let in the light and allowed the smoke from the 
hearth to escape. The hut was entered through a side door from which 
steps led down into it. The earth hut of the present Ainu is also entered 
by a lateral door. Whether the earth huts of the ancient Ainu, numerous 
remains of which have been found on the Islands of Yezo and Sakhalin, 
were entered through a lateral door or through the roof cannot be ascer- 
tained. The earth hut of the modern Gilyak, who have not yet acquired 
the superterrene Manchurian structure, is entered through a narrow 
sloping passageway to the lateral door. Sternberg surmises that in 
ancient. times the smoke hole of the Gilyak earth hut also served as an 
entrance, as with the Kamchadal. 

The Kamchadal are now Russianized and no longer live in earth huts 
in winter, but have replaced these with Russian block houses. In summer 
they lived in pile dwellings. The smoke hole of their ancient earth hut 
served also as a window and a door. 

Among the Maritime Koryak the earth hut is still in use. As among 
the Gilyak it has a sloping passage leading to the lateral door of the house, 
but this is only open in the summer. For the winter, the lateral passage 
is fenced with logs, grass, earth, and snow and only the smoke hole is 
used as an entrance. One peculiarity of the Koryak earth hut is pre- 
sented by its storm roof which resembles an inverted umbrella in shape 
and protects the smoke hole entrance from the wind, and the house itself 
against snowdrifts. 

The Chukchee, even the Maritime branch, now live in reindeer skin 
tents, but the ancient Maritime Chukchee lived in earth huts. According 
to Bogoras’s description, the Maritime Chukchee earth hut, called walkar 

MODE OF LIFE 207 
(jawbone house), also had two entrances, but, contrary to the Koryak 
house, the upper entrance at the top of the wall was reserved for the 
summer, while in winter they used a narrow underground passage which, 
-insummer, was filled with water. The floor of the inner room being on a 
higher level than that of the underground passage, the water could do no 
damage. The walkar had a whalebone frame, heavy pieces of bone were 
set upright in the ground, at intervals, and were held in place by earth 
and stones. Large pieces of jawbone or of whales’ ribs were superposed as 
rafters. 

The Yukaghir, as reported by the first Russian invaders of the 
country, lived in earth huts. The first Russian travelers refer to the 
remains of earth huts, which were formerly inhabited by the Yukaghir. 
This leaves no doubt that the houses of the Yukaghir, at any rate, of 
those who dwelt on the seacoast and on the river banks, were earth huts, 
though we lack a detailed description of them. 

The dwelling of the ancient Aleut was similar to the Kamchadal 
earth hut. Its frame was built up of driftwood and jawbones and ribs of 
whales. The roof opening served as a smoke hole, window, and entrance, 
and one d-scended into it by means of a notched log. Beyond the main 
living room, as has been ascertained by the author’s excavations, and as 
related in folk tales, there were other and smaller lateral rooms, but it is 
not known whether they had individual means of exit. The present earth 
huts of tle Aleut are of two types. The Attu hut has the entrance at the 
side and « window in the roof. The Umnak hut has a door and windows 
in the walls and the roof is covered with long grass. The dwellings of the 
Aleut of Unalaska and Pribilof Islands are modern board block houses. 

For comparative purposes a description of the Eskimo earth huts 
may be of interest. There are varieties in type. To judge by the descrip- 
tions of travelers, earth huts of the Aleut type were encountered in south- 
ern Alaska with this difference, however, that besides the small earth hut, 
one might find large subterranean public houses (kashim) designed for 
festivals, entertainments, or sweatbaths. In some places remnants of 
earth huts of the Gilyak type were found. At Bering Strait, the Eskimo 
were found to possess underground houses of the walkar type described 
above (p. 206). On the shore of the Arctic Ocean we find small earth 
huts of the Kamchatka type, with the entrance through the smoke hole, 
but with a frame made of jaw bones and ribs of whales. Farther east, we 
find the remains of stone walls of earth huts, similar to the old Scotch and 
Armenian subterranean dwellings. The easternmost huts had roofs of 
whales’ bones. The stone walls frequently penetrate but very slightly 

208 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

into the ground, or are erected on the surface of the soil, being banked 
with earth. 

Snow Dwellings. The well known vaulted snowhouse, built by the 
Arctic Eskimo of North America, because of the absence of driftwood and 
timber, has never been observed in Asia, but almost all the northern 
earth huts described above are covered with snow in the winter. The 
winter dwelling of the Kerek, a northeastern division of the Koryak tribe, 
may be called a snowhouse. The Kerek, who have an insufficient supply 
of wood or skins to construct adequate winter houses, utilize snow as 
building material. Their half underground house has a roughly con- 
structed framework of such poles and pieces of wood as they can find on 
the shore. Crooked branches of stunted willow and birch trees are used to 
fill in the spaces in the frame. The interior is lined with such skins as 
they can scrape together, and the exterior is covered with sod and loose 
earth. A long, low, narrow passage made of similar material forms the 
entrance. This structure is used in this form in spring and summer; but 
in the fall it is covered with a layer of snow several feet deep, and 
fashioned into a well-defined round or rectangular form which gives it, 
outwardly at least, the appearance of an Eskimo snowhouse. Like the 
latter, the Kerek house lacks the roof entrance with its characteristic 
notched log ladder. 

In winter the joint mortises of block houses in the polar region are 
covered with wet snow which freezes and protects the house against cold 
winds. 

Flat-Roofed Dwellings of Mud, Clay, Unbaked Bricks, and Stones. 
These types of dwellings are used by Central Asiatic natives, usually as 
winter houses. 

The Kirghiz dwelling, called kstau, has already been described (p. 
80) 

The Uzbeg, Turkoman, Kara-Kalpak, Sarts, and other Turkic tribes 
live in winter or sometimes permanently in houses of mud, clay, or 
unbaked bricks. Some of these, as in Tashkent, are covered with 
plaster and painted with some light color. They are seldom more than 
one story high. The flat roof has a foundation of rafters and pieces of 
small willow branches closely fitted together. The whole is then thatched 
with reeds and covered with a layer of clay and sod. 

The Dungan have similar clay dwellings, the roofs of which are 
covered with straw. 

In winter, the Azerbaijan live in huts made of clay or cemented 
stones covered with clay. 

Fig. 51. Galecha Summer Dwelling in the Mountains of the Yagnob, a Tributary 
of the Zarafshan River. The two-storied house is built of cobbles cemented with clay, 
the lower for cattle, the upper for the family. 

‘} ns ” : my ‘ 
. lig. 52. A Kamehadal Storehouse which also serves as a Summer Dwelling. 
Such houses have two or three floors and in the upper one food is stored out of reach 
of the dogs. The lower floors are used for storing clothes and household belongings. 

209 

210 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

The Tadjik of Turkestan have similar houses. In the plains and 
valleys they are of clay; in the mountains of cobblestones cemented with 
clay. 

Pile Dwellings. The Kamchadal and the Gilyak are the only 
Siberian tribes who formerly used and in part still use houses built on 
piles in the summer. The Kamchadal pile dwelling is built on a platform 
supported by posts two fathoms, or more, high. The Gilyak pile dwelling 
is considerably lower, about a fathom above the ground. The Kamchadal 
and Gilyak now living in block houses instead of earth huts use these 
houses in winter as well as in summer, but in many cases the pile dwelling 
has not been completely abandoned. Both the Kamchadal and Gilyak 
use their pile structures as storehouses in summer as well as in winter, 
but almost al] the Siberian natives use pile storehouses. 

DRESS AND ORNAMENT 

PERSONAL DECORATION 

Painting. Body painting is not practised by any of the tribes under 
consideration since the northern primitive tribes as well as the Central 
Asiatic peoples are completely clothed, at least, out-of-doors. Face 
painting was practised by the Kamchadal, Ainu, and Koryak. Men, 
women, and children in Turkestan paint their eyebrows and the inter- 
vening space with surma, a black powder made from antimony. The 
eyelashes are painted by the man in the belief that the painting will re- 
lieve inflammation of the eyes caused by dust and wind. The women use 
white lead rice powder for whitening their faces. They also color their 
nails, perfume themselves, and carry sweet-smelling plants. Men like to 
carry a rose or a bunch of roses tucked under the turban. Formerly, it was 
customary for elderly women to paint their teeth black, as Japanese 
married women still do, but now it is out of fashion. The Hindoo usually 
have a red or black caste mark in the form of a circle painted on their 
foreheads, but this can hardly be regarded as an ornament. 

Tattooing. While painting is a transitory decoration, which must 
be constantly renewed, tattooing is a permanent cosmetic modification of 
the body. The art of tattooing has spread only among the fairer peoples; 
the dark-skinned peoples practise scarification. All the northern in- 
habitants of Eurasia practised tattooing, chiefly of the face, but, under 
the influence of contact with civilized nations, this type of personal 
decoration is becoming less and less prevalent. It is still retained by the 
Chukchee and Koryak who have had contact with the Russians less 

MODE OF LIFE 211 
frequently than other Siberian natives. Their tattooing may be regarded 
as a privilege of the women. ; 

Piercing Parts of the Face. Lip, nose, and cheek plugs are not worn 
by the Siberian natives and probably were unknown in the past. The 
Chukchee, for instance, ridicule the labrets of their Eskimo neighbors, 
calling them ‘mouthed people.”’ Piercing the ear lobes and earrings 
were apparently known to them prior to the acquisition of metal orna- 
ments. Koryak and Chukchee women still wear earrings of polished 
stone and fasten stone pendants to their braided hair. 

Hair Dressing. The women of the Tundra Yukaghir, Koryak, 
Chukehee, and Asiatic Eskimo part their hair in the middle, from the 
forehead to the neck, and braid it behind in two braids, so that each braid 
begins quite close to the ear. The back of the head is thus left free for 
the attachment of an ornamented leather strip, which extends almost from 
one ear to the other. The ends of the braids are usually tied with a thong 
or sinew thivead on which beads are strung. The braids rest on the chest 
or back, th:igh oftener on the chest. The women of Turkestan tie their 
braids at ihe oceiput. 

Meu «ress their hair in various ways. The Mussulmen of Siberia, 
Turkestan, and Caucasus shave their heads, allowing their beards to 
grow. The beards of Turko-Mongolic tribes are usually very sparse, but 
the Iranian tribes are quite hirsute. According to Pallas,' the ancient 
Ostyak used to shave their heads. The Koryak, Chukchee, and Asiatic 
Eskimo men use a sharp knife to cut or shave the hair from the top of the 
head, leaving a thick fringe of short hair around it, producing a tonsure 
like that of a Roman Catholic priest. The forehead is free; the hair is 
removed from the nape of the neck and the region about and under the 
ears. This ring of hair is often supported by a small thong with which 
the Koryak tie their hair when fighting, running races, tending herds, or 
engaging in other activities. 

The Yukaghir, Tungus, and Ostyak-Vogul wear their hair long. In 
the love songs of the Yukaghir, the hair of a lover is pictured as squirrel 
tails falling over the neck. The Yakut and other non-Mussulman natives 
of Siberia cut their hair short. Some Vogul wear their hair in two braids 
hanging from the neck near the ears. 

The non-Mussulman tribes of Northeastern Siberia, the Chukchee, 
Koryak, Yukaghir, Chuvantzy, Tungus, Yakut, and in part, the Buryat, 
peoples of different racial origin, pull out their facial hair which is gen- 
erally a short, scanty growth, with iron tweezers. Pubic hair is pulled 

'Pallas, vol 4,91. 

ae Sy 
(212) PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

out with tweezers or shaved with the tailoring knife by Yukaghir, Tungus, 
and Yakut women. 

Costume. While the southern hunting and other primitive tribes 
are not troubled by the necessity for clothing, the northern, and particu- 
larly the polar natives must, before all, provide themselves with a costume 
that will afford protection from the cold. The winter dress of these tribes 
is of fur; for the short summer, of leather. Yet, despite the primary 
necessity for protection from the elements, the northern tribes do not 
forget ornament. They trim their fur garments with variously colored 
strips of fur and hide, embroidered with painted hair, sinew, cotton thread, 
or silk. At the front, sides, and especially at the seams, leather tassels 
and fringes, bone and metal pendants, and similar objects are attached. 

The women’s dresses are ornamented with circlets of silver and 
pendants like bronze bells, human figures in brass, and metallic rattles. 
Silver and bronze circlets are attached to the breast part ‘of the leather 
apron of Yukaghir and Tungus women. Some of these metallic orna- 
ments are regarded as amulets, thus obscuring the question as to whether 
their original significance, was religious or esthetic. 

The tail-like prolongation of the back of the fur coat of the Tundra 
Yukaghir, Tungus, and the ancient Koryak and Kamchadal, an adorn- 
ment used by the Eskimo, should be mentioned. 

The ornamental designs used in the decoration of fur clothing by the 
northern peoples are very variable. Here we find both the most primi- 
tive motives, consisting of dots, dashes, and rings, together with geometri- 
cal patterns in the shape of triangles, rhombi, and squares. In one style 
of ornamentation, for instance, nets and checker-work patterns are 
represented; in another, the realistic representation of animals and 
human beings, or of groups of both of a pictographic nature, is dominant. 
Finally, realistic or conventionalized plant motives are often used. 

The methods of ornamentation used for clothing are also employed 
in the making of fur rugs which are frequently of high artistic value. All 
these achievements in decoration are the results of the artistic efforts of 
the women. Of particular excellence are the fur clothing and skin mosaic 
rugs made by Koryak and Kamchadal women. The technique of orna- 
mental embroidery with colored sinew, yarn, or silk is quite varied. 

While the clothing and rugs of the reindeer-breeding peoples are 
made of reindeer skins, the northern horse and cattle-breeding tribes, 
like the Yakut and Buryat, use horse and cattle skins. Their workman- 
ship is, however, inferior. For trimming, skins of other fur-bearing ani- 
mals are used. Sea-hunting people use sealskins for clothing and rugs, 

MODE OF LIFE 213 

to some degree, particularly for summer clothing. The Ainu, Gilyak, and 
some of the Amur Tungus make clothing of fish skins which they orna- 
ment by various methods. The Aleut and Asiatic Eskimo make rain- 
proof clothing from the guts of sea and land mammals and ornament the 
seams with variously colored birds’ down, or, at present, with gayly 
colored yarns. 

The motives employed in the decoration of clothing represent, on the 
one hand, a rhythmic repetition of ornamental elements, and, on the 
other, asymmetrical composition of the whole decoration, both combining 
into a single esthetically pleasing unit. The bead embroidery on belts, 
caps, mittens, and the borders of coats deserves mention. Silk 
embroidery in Turkestan is mostly executed by men. 

The patterns of carpets and rugs woven in Persia and in Central 
Asia consist of geometric and conventionalized motives rather than of 
realistic and pictographic designs. This is also true of the rugs from 
Daghestan, Caucasus, and those made by the Turkoman of the Steppes. 
Although they are inferior in beauty, as compared with Persian rugs, 
they surpass the latter in their closeness of weave and in the dyes. The 
reason for this absence of realistic motives will be discussed later. 

GraPHiIc ART 

Few discoveries have attracted such general attention as the repre- 
sentative art of the Reindeer Age, brought to light in the caves of south- 
ern France and Spain. None the less interesting are the so-called pisanitzy, 
the prehistoric pictographs on rocks in Siberia. P. P. Khoroshikh, in a 
recently published description of the pisanitzy in the Irkutsk country,! 
illustrates two kinds of writing, represented by conventional and realistic 
figures. Some of the conventional signs are regarded as old Turkish, or 
the so-called Uigur letters. The realistic figures represent men and 
animals (horses, reindeer, elk, goats, bulls, and birds). Some archeolo- 
gists connect. these drawings and engravings on the rocks with magical 
practices, but it seems impossible that figures drawn or engraved with 
such great. feeling for form were produced by the artists for any other 
Teason than for the mere love of the task. 

DRAWING AND ENGRAVING 

The present Arctic peoples, from the Lapp to the Eskimo, draw and 
engrave, mostly in miniature, on wood, bone, and ivory. Many of these 
engravings are representations of a single man or animal; in others, 

'Khoroshikh, 

214 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

human and animal figures are grouped to tell a story, or, in other words, 
make a picture. Houses, implements, and even vegetation are frequently 
associated with animals and men. The bulk of these pictures are repre- 
sentations of hunting scenes and incidents in the life of the Arctic peoples 
and are useful as illustrations of native life and industry. The grouping 
of figures is mainly linear; no attempts are made to place them in 
perspective. The lines of the engravings are filled in with black and red 
paint. 

Picture writing is most developed among the Yukaghir who incise 
their realistic and symbolic figures on birchbark with a knife point. The 
former are used in letters and maps, the latter in love letters.! 

Carving. Sculpture, which like drawing, is found even among the 
remains of Quaternary man in Europe, attains little development 
among uncultured peoples in general. However, among the Arctic 
peoples of Eurasia, we find a great development of sculpture or carving 
in miniature, chiefly executed in bone. This sculptured art is most highly 
developed among the Koryak whose accomplishments are worthy of some 
detailed attention. 

The Koryak carvings are realistic, representing human beings, 
animals, and birds. Some carved figures ornament houschold articles, 
tools, instruments, and pipes, while others serve no practical purpose and 
aim to afford pleasure only. These carvings of animal and human figures, 
when applied to household articles, follow the rule of modern ornamental 
carving, embellishing the ornamented object without obscuring it. For 
this reason, Koryak ornamental carving retains the realistic character 
of pure art. 

Their non-utilitarian sculptural carvings not only surpass the art of 
the European cave dwellers but of the modern Eskimo. The vivacity 
and artistic execution of some specimens is remarkable. The fine 
technique and great artistic merit may be seen in a figure of a man hold- 
ing a drum. The plastic curves of the back and the sides are rendered 
with anatomical accuracy and realistic vividness. The characteristic 
postures and movements of animals are carved with such realism as to call 
forth a vivid image in the mind of the spectator and testify to the great 
skill and esthetic taste of the artist. 

That these Koryak carvings are objects of pure art, independent of 
religion, may be seen from the fact that the Koryak idols and amulets 
usually bear but a crude likeness to human or animal forms and serve, 

——— 

1Jochelson, (d), part 3. 
*Jochelson, (a), 654. 

MODE OF LIFE 215 

not as expressions of real sense-impressions, but of vague ideas of in- 
visible biomorphic beings. Frequently, part of a human figure or an 
animal is substituted for the whole and serves as a guardian. 

The carvings of the western neighbors of the Koryak, the Yakut, 
Tungus, Yukaghir, and others, lack all artistic merit, and can in no wise 
be compared with their own. The human and animal carvings are rigid 
figures bearing only scant resemblance to their originals. The artists are 
unable to put life and motion into them. 

RELIGION AND ART 

Religious ideas have always influenced the character of art and, 
generally, this influence has been detrimental. Taking our illustrations 
from the history of sculpture and painting of civilized nations, we sec 
that amon the ancient Greeks religious ideas corresponded to the re- 
quiremen!« of realistic art, while we find an opposite effect in Judaism. 
The propli:tic attack on idolatry carried with it an objection to images 
and the xspresentation of any form of animal life was forbidden in the 
Decalog:« The old dislike of animal representation is continued in 
the Talinud. There is still a reluctance to admit animal or human forms 
in the decoration of present day synagogues. 

Reaiism in art is forbidden by Islam owing to the Prophet’s injunc- 
tion against depicting human and animal forms. Ornamentation of 
Mohammedan sacred buildings embraces no representation of living 
objects. Buddhism introduced a great deal of conventionalization into 
sculpture and drawings and Christianity also adopted a certain kind of 
conventionalization in the representation of saints and icons. 

The art. of uncivilized peoples is likewise influenced by their religious 
beliefs. The Yakut ornamental designs include the representation of 
neither human nor animal figures. Only the dress of the shaman may 
be decorated with figures of men and animals which represent his guar- 
dians and benevolent and evil spirits, since it is feared that any 
biomorphic representation may become a harmful spirit. Even represen- 
tations of the horse, which is regarded as a benevolent being and almost 
worshiped, is avoided. Only the bases of the large wooden goblets for 
drinking kumiss represent horse’s legs and hoofs. All other carved orna- 
mentations of the goblets consist of geometric, skewomorphic, and con- 
ventionalized designs. This applies also to Yakut weaving and the manu- 
facture of fur rugs which have no biomorphic decorations. In the Yakut 
collection in the American Museum there are some crude and rigid figures 
of men and animals made from mammoth tusks. There are also combs 

216 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

and boxes of mammoth ivory, ornamented in filigree. But these articles 
are products of the Yakut living near Yakutsk and were made to meet the 
demands of the Russians and are not works of art. 

Among the Tungus, as among the Yakut, ceremonial objects are 
decorated with more or less realistic designs, while geometric motives are 
applied to ordinary garments. Professor Boas has called attention to the 
difference in the realistic decoration of ceremonial objects and the geo- 
metrical designs on objects in common use among the Indians and 
Eskimo.! Among the Koryak the reverse is true. Their funeral and 
ceremonial dancing garments are covered with geometrical designs, while 
realistic motives are found only on ordinary clothing and fur rugs. 

Music aNnpD DANCING 
MUSIC 

The Drum. Some writers. consider the drum the most ancient 
musical instrument, but archeological evidence has shown that the flute 
antedates the drum. It is also possible that the musical bow may precede 
the flute. The drum is the most complicated of primitive musical instru- 
ments. However, drumming is regarded as the first attempt at music, or 
rather, time-keeping. 

The drum is distributed all over Asia and is used both for amusement 
and ritual purposes. The Siberian drum is single headed and consists of 
a wooden rim, covered with a membrane held in place by cords, a cross- 
piece of metal, or a wooden bar, inside the drum. The Chukchee drum, 
like that of the Eskimo, has a wooden handle, like that on a hand mirror 
attached to the rim. The drumstick is covered with skin. 

Two-headed drums, covered with hide, are used in Siberia only by 
Buddhists (for instance, the Buryat) in their divine services and by 
Tibetan lamas in their temples. These are cylindrical and have leather 
handles attached to the outer edge of the rim. 

In Turkestan a large goatskin-covered tambourine which is tossed 
up in both hands and struck with the flat of the fingers is in use for dance 
music. The edge ds fitted with jingling bits of metal. The player con- 
stantly holds the instrument over a pan of hot coals to make it more 
resonant. It is called tchilmanda. In Persia the same instrument 1s 
called daira. 

Other drums called nagora are also used in Turkestan. These con- 
sist of two differently sized drums made of small earthenware vessels 
covered with skins fastened on by a network of little straps. The smaller 

1Bons, 484, 485. 

MODE OF LIFE 217 

drum has a thicker skin; its sound is called zic, or wooden; the larger, 
with a thinner skin, produces a more prolonged sound called bum. The 
drums are beaten in turn with two sticks. 

The Jew’s Harp.! This primitive musical instrument has spread 
almost all over the world. It is found among all the peoples of Asiatic 
Russia. It consists of a small frame (of wood. bone, or metal) with a 
metal tongue, moved by the finger. The narrow end of the instrument is 
held between the teeth, so that the mouth acts as a sounding board. It is 
a wind instrument combined with the principle of a string instrument (of 
the vibrating string). The Germans call it Maultrommel; the Koryak, 
cogged drum (vaniyayai); the Yakut, khomus; the Soyot, komus; the 
Buryat, khui; the Kirghiz, tchang. 

Wind Instruments. The flute is the most primitive wind instrument, 
but the author has never seen it among the Siberian natives. It is told 
of the Hindoo that they used a nose flute like that of some Malayan 
people. The use of this type of flute may be explained as the result of 
prejudice, since no Hindoo of higher caste would touch with his lips a 
flute which a. low caste man had made and put to his mouth. 

The Gypsies play the bagpipe and reed-pipe, which they brought 
presumably from India. The Turkestan musicians play the surnaz, a 
pipe-like clarinet made of apricot wood, about two feet long, in the small 
opening of which there is a brass pipe called nil. It has a reed mouth- 
piece close to which is a brass disk serving as a support for the lips of the 
player. When not in use, the farther end of the pipe is stopped up with a 
brass rod, to which two small wooden disks which cover the mouthpiece 
are attached by a chain. 

Turkestan musicians also use the kurnaz, a large brass trumpet: six 
to seven feet long, swelling greatly at the farther end, and when blown, 
producing only one unearthly deep bass note. Two trumpets of different 
keys are generally used at the same time. The Mongol and Tibetan 
Buddhists use trumpets and trombones in their temples. 

Stringed Instruments. Stringed instruments may be divided into 
those plucked with the fingers, struck with a stick, or played with a bow. 
The Sarts sing or recite half chanted poems to the accompaniment of a 
two-stringed guitar. They also have a kind of violincello named ridschak. 
In the cities of Turkestan the chief stringed instrument played is called 
dutara (a Persian word, from du, two, and tara, string), and is of the same 
general shape as a guitar. It is played with the hand, the strings are 
usually of fine wire. The sitara (Persian, sz, three, and tara, string) has, 
as its name indicates, three strings, and is usually played with a bow, like 

‘Pennant, vol. 3, 95. 

218 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

a violin. The tchetara, or four-stringed instrument is also used. Another 
stringed instrument, called kemangeh is known. The strings proceed 
from a long metal foot and are drawn over a sounding board made of a 
coconut with about one-third cut off. This is also played with a bow. 
The Vogul have a five-stringed instrument like the dombra of the Ostyak. 

The Ostyak have three stringed instruments of their own invention, 
one called dombra (the name seems to be akin to the tombora of the 
Magyar) with five strings, another with eight strings called chotuing 
which means swan, and a third, a two-stringed violin. 

The Kamchadal have a three-cornered guitar with two or three 
strings and rude violins which are undoubtedly adopted from Russian 
settlers. The triangular guitar is the Russian balalaika. 

The Kara-Kirghiz have a two-stringed instrument called kobys. 
The horsehair strings are drawn over a bowl-like sounding board and are 
played by plucking with the finger or with a horsehair bow. 

The Mongol have a two-stringed violincello. The Sarts of East 
Turkestan and the Taranchi have a guitar. The Ainu also use a guitar 
and the Gilyak have a kind of two-stringed violin. 

DANCING 

In the first place, dancing is intended to provoke pleasure and 
esthetic feeling, both in the dancer and the spectator. Its chief char- 
acteristic is the rhythmical order of the movements. In its most primi- 
tive form dancing is closely associated with music, that is, beating time 
by clapping the hands. On the other hand, primitive dances are mainly 
mass dances and have a social influence, the dancing group feeling and 
acting as a single organism. 

Circle Dance. The circle dance was observed by the author among 
the Tungus, Yukaghir, and Yakut. It appears that the Yukaghir and 
Yakut adopted it from the Tungus among whom the sexes frequently 
dance separately, as the author has observed in the Okhotsk country. 

Among the Yukaghir and Yakut the sexes dance together. The men 
and women dancers, arm in arm, but in no definite order, form a circle, 
and, tramping with their feet, move slowly from right to left in a sunwise 
direction. The entire dance consists of four kinds of steps. First, the 
left foot is moved along the ground to the left; then the right foot is 
brought up near the left, in the same fashion; and finally, the dancers 
stamp twice, with both heels held together, standing on their toes, and 
without moving from the spot. At the same time, the dancers bend and 
unbend their knees, sway their bodies to and fro, raise and lower their 

MODE OF LIFE 219 

shoulders, and bend their heads first to one side, and then to the other. 
All these movements are performed by all the dancers simultaneously and 
with the same rhythm. The grace thus displayed by some of the dancers 
is admirable. 

The motions of the Tungus seemed less pleasing. The circle dance 
of the Yakut is still more clumsy, the movements are slow, at first, but 
become faster and faster as the dancers become more excited, and the 
circle revolves with greater speed. Gradually, other persons present 
begin to be affected by the dance; old men and women join the circle, 
and children and infirm persons who usually stand aside, begin to stamp 
the ground, imitating the dancers. 

On holidays the Yukaghir whirl around in this fashion all day long; 
they dance to exhaustion, nay, to intoxication. Some leave the circle to 
rest, while cthers having regained their strength, break in and join the 
dancers, again closing the circle. The dance is accompanied by a song 
consisting of four notes, corresponding to the four steps. The words 
sung: ho-yi-he-yur, or, he-ke-ha-ka, are Tungus. The Yukaghir believe 
them to be pure interjections. No drum or other musical instrument is 
used in this dance. 

Pantomine or Primitive Drama. The singing during the performance 
of the circle dance is interrupted from time to time by a guttural rattle, 
and by other sounds imitating the cries of various animals. At times, the 
singing recalls the cries of sea animals and sea birds. 

One mimic dance of the Yukaghir, with its accompanying onomoto- 
poetic sounds is performed with great vivacity and grace and refers to the 
swan. It is called the “dance of the long-necked one,” as the Yukaghir 
call the swan. The dance is performed in combination with a circle 
dance. Girls and youths form a circle and revolve from right to left 
around a couple representing a male swan making love to a female. The 
male circles the female alternately lifting the left, then the right wing 
(that is, arm), while the female tries to evade his approaches. At the 
same time, the dancing couple skillfully imitates the sounds by which 
the male and female swans call each other in the mating season. This 
dance discloses how carefully the Yukaghir observe the ways of animals. 

Among the Koryak and the Chukchee, both children and adults 
perform similar dramatic dances, consisting in the imitation of the move- 
ments and sounds of animals. A row of Koryak men faces a row of 
women, and men and women in turn produce guttural rattling sounds in 
tmitation of seals, tramp on one spot, bend and unbend their knees, and 
move their shoulders. 

220 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Young Chukchee girls have dances of their own which are meant to 
imitate the motions of various animals or certain human actions. They 
are accompanied by peculiar songs, or rather, rhythmical guttural sounds 
produced by alternately drawing in and letting out the breath. To make 
these sounds is termed ‘‘to call with the throat.’’ Two or more girls take 
positions opposite each other or in a circle and produce the sounds in 
succession, carefully keeping time and quickly taking their turns one 
after the other. The singing is begun with low hoarse notes. Imitative 
sounds are introduced later in a much higher key. While singing, the 
girls sway the upper parts of their bodies back and forth and then go 
through various imitative motions in connection with the sounds uttered. 
Young boys taking part in the dance, hold up their hands and snap their 
fingers, at the same time, producing a peculiar clicking sound with their 
tongues. Each song, with its accompanying dance, is named after the 
animal represented. 

The Raven dance is the one most frequently performed. The imita- 
tive sounds represent the croaking of the raven. While dancing, the girls 
hop around, pretend to search for something, peck at the ground, etc. 

Among other songs may be mentioned “the song of the fox,” a kind 
of dialogue between the fox and the bear, reproducing a widely known 
tale in which the fox pretends to heal the bear’s wounds with red hot 
stones, and finally kills him. The fox speaks in a thin treble voice which 
gradually weakens. 

In the dance and song of the geese, the motions and cackling of the 
white-breasted goose (Anser obbigrans) are imitated. In ‘the song of the 
fighting sandpiper”’ (Totanus pugnaz) are imitated the quaint motions of 
those birds in their social gatherings during the early nesting season. 
Songs of the long-tailed duck (Fuligula glacialis), swan, walrus, seal, and 
of reindeer rutting, are either imitative, or accompanied by imitative 
dances. 

The dances of the Kamchadal are pantomimic, accompanied by 
songs, with always increasing passion. Langsdorf' mentions the sea dog 
dance and the bear dance of the Kamchadal, during which they begin 
with the gentlest, softest motions of the head and shoulders and close with 
very violent motions of the whole body. Lesseps? mentions the partridge 
dance. Krebs’ saw similar dances among the Ainu of the Kurile Islands. 
Choris,‘ writing of the Aleut, mentions a pantomime in which a hunter 

'Langsdorf, vol. 2, 302. 
2Lesseps, 105-106. 
Krebs, 355. 

‘Choria, 9. 

MODE OF LIFE . 221 

shoots a beautiful bird which is suddenly transformed into a beautiful 
woman with whom he at once falls in love. 

Caucasian Lesghinka Dance. Although this dance is named after the 
Lesghin of Daghestan it is regarded in the Caucasus as a common 
national dance. It is accompanied by the beating on a drum or tambour- 
rine, playing on a kind of clarinet, and beating time by hand clapping. 
Sometimes a harmonica is used. The spectators, mostly men, form a 
circle, either standing or sitting. Outside the circle stands a small group 
of women dancers, dressed in their picturesque national costume, with 
faces half hidden by their head covering. Suddenly, one of the women 
dancers leaps into the circle, holding in her left hand a handkerchief 
with which she conceals the lower part of her face. Forthwith, one of the 
men dancers follows her and with his right hand held flatly over his heart 
and the left resting on his hip, or, with graciously outstretched arms, he 
tries to approach the shy and coquettishly evading lady. He displays a 
manly self-consciousness and dignity; she, with rhythmic, short, fast, 
and sidewise steps, swiftly glides away, giving her body the appearance 
of a puppet, thc movements of which are controlled by a wire. On the 
whole, the lesyhinka, representing as it does a courting pantomime, 
makes a pleasing and esthetic impression. 

The Trading Dance of the Chukchee. While the purpose of most primi- 
tive dances is purely esthetic, they often go far beyond the bounds of 
what may be termed esthetic. Dances in which both men and women 
take part, ov even in which men dance alone and women are mere on- 
lookers and vice versa, are, for the most part, calculated to excite sexual 
passion. In many cases, the sexual element predominates. We have 
previously noted (p. 101) the lascivious character of the dances of the 
batchas or dancing boys in Turkestan. The sexual element in some 
Koryak and Chukchee dances is even more conspicuous. Georgi, writ- 
ing of the dances of the Ostyak, states that the gestures in them are 
frequently immodest.! 

The trading or bartering dance of the Chukchee is not in itself, but 
because of its consequences, placed in this class. On the second day of the 
festival consecrated to the sea god, keretkun (p. 223), an exchange of 
presents takes place. This brings us to another variety of ceremonial 
exchange, the exchange of wives. It takes place between members of a 
“compound marriage,’ beginning with a dance in which a male member 
of the'group has one of the women for his partner. Frequently, the man 
merely looks on, while the woman dances before him. He must, however, 

‘Georgi, 80. 

222 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

provide a reindeer skin to spread on the ground under her feet while she 
dances. While the dance is performed, the other dancers remain quiet, 
and join the other spectators. After the-dance, the man must give a 
present to the woman and the following night they sleep together, leaving 
their respective mates to arrange matters between themselves. The next 
day, the husband of the woman and the wife of the man perform a similar 
dance in which the man gives an equivalent of the present of the preced- 
ing day, and each newly mated couple sleeps together for another night. 
Such dances are arranged chiefly among cousins or other relatives, who, 
among the Chukchee, frequently assume the bond of compound marriage. 
Conversely, a new bond of compound marriage may be concluded through 
a trading dance. The third day of the keretkun ceremonial is the women’s 
day. This time it is they who act as drummers and dancers. 

Religious Dances. In most religions, ritual dances play a large part 
and are a means of excitement in the desire to approach or to unite with 
the deity. King David danced before the Ark; the Levites had their 
sacred dances. Even as late as the eighth century early Christianity 
retained the dance in its religious rites, a partial survival of which may 
be seen in the proceedings in the Cathedral at Seville during the Easter 
Festival and in what has recently taken place in one of the American 
Methodist churches. The masked ballets performed by the Buddhist, 
Lamaist priests are a part of religious worship. The Brahmins, Hindoo, 
and Japanese Buddhists require dancing girls in their temples for religious 
feasts. Human sacrifices of the Aztec to the god, Huitzilopochtli, were 
also accompanied by dances by men and women. 

In primitive religions, also, the dance is a part of worship. The well 
known bear festival of the Ainu and Gilyak is accompanied by dances 
before and after the killing of the bear that has been reared from a cub. 
According to Sternberg, the dead bear is regarded as a messenger to the 
sky who will secure prosperity for the men below. Ainu girls and women 
dance round the bear’s cage before it is killed. Among the Gilyak, men 
also participate in the dancing. Dances also accompany the ritual after 
the eating of the bear meat, which is regarded as a communion with the 
worshipped bear. 

A similar cult of the bear is found among the Goldi, a Tungus tribe, 
which believes the bear about to be killed is their kin. Eating the bear 
is a form of communion with the ancestor animal. The Ostyak, Vogul, 
and Samoyed have similar ceremonies. 

On many occasions the Koryak perform ritual dances. They greet 
dead whales, white whales, and other sea and land animals with songs 

MODE OF LIFE 223 

and dances. The men and women dancers wear special richly embroid- 
ered dancing coats and grass masks. The second act of the ceremony is 
performed several days later, when the Koryak feign to send the dead 
animals home as honorable guests who were well treated. This part of 
the festival is also accompanied by songs, dances, and drum beating. At 
the beginning of the winter the Koryak, wearing wooden masks, dance 
and enact different scenes of winter life. Launching the skin boat in the 
spring and storing it for the winter are celebrated by a feast and dances. 
The Reindeer Koryak have some festivals of their own in connection 
with the herd: the ceremony on the return of the herd from summer 
pastures; the fawn festival. The bear, wolf, and fox festivals are com- 
mon to both branches of the Koryak. 

The usual ceremonies of the Reindeer Chukchee are those connected 
with the herd. The most regular festivals are: the autumn slaughtering; 
the winter slaughtering; the ceremonial of antlers; the sacrifice to the 
new moon; the sacrifice to the fire; the sacrifice for luck in hunting; 
and a ceremonial connected with the killing of wild reindeer bucks. Be- 
sides these seasonal ceremonials there is also a thanksgiving ceremonial 
which each family must perform once or twice a year, on different success- 
ful occasions. 

The ceremonial cycle of the Maritime Chukchee opens in the begin- 
ning of the autumn with two short ceremonies which are often combined. 
One of these is a commemorative sacrifice to the dead, the other is a 
sacrifice to the sea, to ensure good fortune in subsequent sealing on the sea 
ice. Late in the autumn, or rather, early in the winter, the chief cere- 
monial of the year is performed. It is consecrated to the sea god, keret- 
kun, or is made a thanksgiving ceremonial to the spirits of sea mammals 
killed since fall. Early in the spring the ceremonial of boats is held. In 
the middle of summer, the ceremonial of heads is performed; this is a 
thanksgiving to the spirits of sea animals killed since early in the spring. 
These four ceremonials are performed with varying similarity by both 
the Maritime Chukchee and Asiatic Eskimo. Some minor festivals are 
observed during the year by the Maritime Chukchee and Asiatic Eskimo 
which are accompanied by songs and dances. 

The Yukaghir, as a genuine hunting tribe, invest the hunt with 
religious coloring. In olden times before starting on the spring hunt, 
clan groups celebrated their departure from winter quarters by shaman- 
istic performances, sacrifices, and mimetic dances to gain the favor of the 
animals’ guardian spirits. 

All the shamanistic performances of the Siberian peoples are accom- 
panied by the shaman’s dances. 

224 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

POETRY 

Poetry is a verbal representation of subjective and objective pheno- 
mena and thus it embraces the lyric, which affords expression to the 
inner world, and the epic, which expresses the outer world. In both cases, 
the expression serves an esthetic purpose; the poet invokes feeling 
rather than action. The expression of joy and suffering in love belongs to 
lyric poetry. The high development of poetry, lyric and epic, among the 
Mussulman people of Central Asia and Caucasus is well known, so we 
will give attention to the poetry of primitive Siberian tribes, not unmind- 
ful that most authorities deny primitive tribes the sense of poetry. It is 
also said that primitive tribes have no true love songs. 

We will take, first of all, the Yukaghir, a poor hunting tribe. All 
their poetry consists of improvisations or is handed down from narrator to 
narrator and from singer to singer through generations. In the last case 
the context is subjected to slight individual alterations. 

The Song of an Old Man 

Oh, old age came to me. 
It. threw me down like a rotten tree. 
A scorched stump I am looking, see. 

The Song of an Amorous Lad 
She is white as snow 
Her eyebrows are black as ink 
Her hair is soft as silk 
She shines like the sun 
I am hurrying to her 
Never to part with her 

The Song of a Girl 

When our camps separated 

I looked after him 

He is tall like a mountain ash 
His hair covered his shoulders 
Like black squirrels’ tails. 
When he disappeared 

I lay down in the tent. 

Oh, how long is a spring day? 
But the evening came 

And through a hole in the tent cover 
I saw my love coming 

When he came in 

And looked at me 

My heart melted 

Like snow in the sun 

MODE OF LIFE (223) 

The following is the love song of a Russianized Yukaghir of the 
Omolon River. 

There stood a handsome fir 
Vasya' fell it there, 

Meadow green was their bed, 
Moving clouds their coverlet 
Soft bush of a willow 

Served them as a pillow 
And the firmament 

Was their upper tent 

Of course, all this is a free translation, but the originals, although 
not in verse, have a peculiar beauty. 

The epic narratives of the Yukaghir, dealing with wars with alien 
tribes, struggles between their clans, and the first meeting with the 
Russians, are distinguished by a majestic simplicity combined with deep 
feeling. 

The poetic dramatizations of shamanistic performances also deserve 
mention. An example is given below, a part of a Yukaghir shaman’s 
address to his spirits :— 

You, owners of the green and trees, help me 

Sea mother, who has as cover seven snow mounds, 
As bed, eight ice layers, 

As collar, black foxes, 

As foam, arctic foxes, 

As waves, cub foxes. 

Help me, sea-mother-owner. 

. The following is the song of a Buryat shaman while making a liba- 
tion at the ceremony connected with the birth of a child:— 

The boys, like the rushes 

The maids, like the mushrooms 
From the grass of the steppe 
They have made a scourge; 
With the water of the spring 
They have made ablution 
With the nine silken threads 
They have made a scourge 

The following is an extract from a Buryat epic tale about Khan- 
Guzhir (Gesser) showing the verbosity, eloquence, and richness of epi- 
thets of this Mongolic tribe. 

'Vasya, caressive of Vasilii (Basil), is the n ame of the author. 

226 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

“Khan Guzhir drove to the blue sea, turned into a golden birch, 
which grows there, throwing a cool shade upon the sea by its early 
leaves.””! 

Patkanoff gave us material through which we may appreciate the 
epic lore of the Ostyak? and Potanin of the Mongol*. The author recalls 
how his Yakut guides and drivers sitting on horseback or sledge would 
hum or sing, praising the green wood, the blue sky, the flying birds, and 
the whole world around. 

In concluding this chapter we wish to cite a Yakut epic poem called 
“The White Youth” in which there appears a beautiful fairy who asks 
the White Youth, a knight of divine origin, for protection against the 
designs of a powerful monster. The heroine is thus described :— 

“Just when he (the White Youth) was asleep, between sleep and 
waking, he heard above him a voice, gentle and kind, the voice of a 
woman whispering like the sound of the light breeze which rustles in the 
leaves of the poplar trees by the river.”’ 

The exalted language and poetical similes are commendable. The 
opening section of the poem is erotic in character; but in spite of its 
utter frankness, it is clothed in poetical form. The monster of devilish 
origin appeals to the White Youth, requesting him to assist him in 
getting possession of the beautiful woman :— 

‘“We shall ride very fast, very speedily,” says the monster, ‘‘Go and 
make the bed softer for the mistress, for the lady. Tonight I have a 
mind to go to my mistress, to take her, the clean one, the transparent one, 
. . . Thou, I suppose, wilt support and help me. . . . Dost thou hear? 
Well, then, go on. 

“Upon this, the man grew terribly angry, awfully wrathful; the 
blood rushed to his cheeks, and the blood of his nose became smoking 
hot. His daring thought came leaping from his side; his boastful 
thought came flying from the nape of his neck; his proud thought arrived, 
smoking like a blue cloud. Then he commenced to speak in his wrath, 
like the sound of a rifle-shot. ‘ 

‘What insulting words. What a venom of mouth. What a caustic 
beak. Foulness of the lips of such a piece of nothingness; the lowest of 
man eaters, profligate among the devils. A devil from the very worst 
place. Thou’dst better tell thy will instead of that. Say, instead of that, 
thy last word of farewell to the earth and place. I shall break the crown 

'Khangaloff and Satoplaeff. 
2Patkanoff, (b). 
3Patanin, (a), (b), (ec). 

MODE OF LIFE (ay) 

of thy head into four pieces; the upper part of thy body into three; 
the remainder of thy body into five parts.’”! 

All this is a preliminary dialogue before a combat between the divine 
and devilish hero. The wealth of allegory, the solemn character, impres- 
sive style, poetic fancy, and the archaic expression of this poem are 
peculiar to all Yakut heroic epics. 

CHAPTER X 
MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY 

Anthropologists recognize that the whole of mankind consists of a 
single species: Homo Sapiens, and that distinct racial characters were 
produced by climatic, social, and other environmental factors. There 
have been many theories concerning the place of man’s origin, and though 
most of the remains of fossil man have been discovered in Europe, he is 
believed to have had his origin in Asia. Palwographical reasons, says 
Professor Martin,' lead us to believe that the Hominidex originated in 
interior Asia. Matthew? is inclined to regard the great Central Asiatic 
plateau as the center of dispersal for mankind. But concrete facts as to 
the prehistoric dispersion and differentiation of human groups are still 
scarce, particularly with reference to Asia, where both archeological 
and palxontological data are meager. We have some knowledge of stone 
artifacts in isolated localities, but know little of fossil man himself. 

PREHISTORY AND PREHISTORIC MIGRATIONS 

Cultural remains of prehistoric man in the Caucasus were discovered 
(1879) in a cave near Kutais. Also, traces of a palwolithic station were 
found (1814) in the central Caucasus between Kutais and Oni. When 
excavating near Tomsk, Siberia, Professor N. F. Kastchenko? discovered 
the bones of a young mammoth that had been killed and eaten by pala- 
olithic hunters. At this site were also found ashes, charcoal, fragments 
of stone knives, and the burnt leg bones of the mammoth that had been 
split to obtain the marrow. This station has been assigned to the upper 
paleolithic period. 

Forty years ago, another paleolithic site was discovered near Kras- 
noyarsk by the archeologist, I. T. Savenkov. Here he found stone 
Scrapers, cutting implements, flakes, and nuclei comparable to those of 
the upper paleolithic period of Europe. Few bone implements were 
found. This paleolithic deposit described by Savenkov was on a high 
terrace, fifteen to eighteen meters above the Yenisei River. The gravels 
of this terrace, used for ballast, are overlaid by a deposit of silt or loess 
containing a rich Pleistocene fauna, including the woolly rhinoceros, 
mammoth, and reindeer. Worked stones were found in abundance at 
the bottom of the silt deposits where they lay upon the gravels. These 
included implements fashioned of quartzite pebbles, dressed on one or 

'Martin, 19. 
?Matthew. 
*Kastchenko, (a); (b), 64-70; (c), 45. 

229 

230 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

both surfaces, in the Mousterian or Chellean manner. With these stone 
objects were others of bone, reindeer antler, and mammoth ivory. 

This layer, essentially paleolithic in character, and geologically 
similar to European alluvial beds, is quite distinct from the neolithic of 
that region, of which characteristic evidences may be found in the layers 
of vegetable soil covering the loess. Krasnoyarsk, situated at about 56° 
north latitude, seems to be the most northerly Pleistocene palzolithic 
site known. Here the great ice sheets did not spread as far south as in 
Europe. Noteworthy among the animals hunted by prehistoric man is 
the argali, or great mountain sheep, the present habitat of which is now 
four hundred miles to the south. 

Savenkov recorded the occurrence, on rocks in western Siberia, of 
curious engravings and paintings which are sometimes of fine workman- 
ship, recalling the products of European Paleolithic art.! Since 1919 
Savenkov’s work has been continued by G. P. Sosnovsky, G. von 
Merhart, and others who have considerably extended the investigations. 
Von Merhart, a German scientist, spent considerable time in Siberia as a 
prisoner of war.2. These archeologists have excavated in the Yenisei 
Valley to the south of Krasnoyarsk and discovered microlithic artifacts 
characteristic of the end of the palzolithic period. However, on the same 
level were found artifacts which may belong to epochs of the lower as well 
as of the upper palzolithic period, so von Merhart, for the present, defines 
the Old Stone Age culture of the Yenisei as a Siberian variation of the 
upper palzolithic period. 

Within a radius of 330 miles in the Yenisei Valley twenty palexo- 
lithic stations are at present known. 

In the Angara Valley, palzolithic finds were made by Chersky’ and 
Chekanovsky,’ but the artifacts were probably lost in the fire (1879) 
which destroyed the museum of the Geographical Society of Irkutsk, 
where the specimens were deposited. In the vicinity of Irkutsk M. P. 
Ovchinnikov’ found many paleolithic objects which are on exhibition in 
the museum of Irkutsk. 

Professor B. E. Petri® recently made excavations on Verkholensk 
Mountain near Irkutsk and discovered typical stations on the loess be- 
longing to the upper palzolithic epoch. He is convinced that these are 
similar to Magdalenian artifacts, but with many special characteristics. 

‘Savenkov, (a), (b). : 
Cheraky. 108-116. 
‘Chekanovsky. 

s5Ovchinnikov. 
®Petri, (a), (b). 

MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY 231 

The numerous artifacts of stone, bone, horn, and tusk found in Siberian 
paleolithic stations, are lacking in ornamentation, with one exception—a 
horn awl bearing engraved lines. This dearth of decorated objects may 
bear witness to a lesser development of artistic skill on the part of palao- 
lithic peoples of Siberia as compared with those of western Europe, who 
left so many examples of skilled sculpture and painting. Materials for 
painting, such as graphite, hematite, and lime, were found on Verk- 
holensk Mountain, but there were no traces of their use. Aurignacian 
and Mousterian scrapers, laurel Jeaf-like stone blades typical of the Solu- 
trean Period and nicely made harpoons like those of the Magdalenian 
Period of Western Europe were represented in the paleolithic cultural 
remains from Verkholensk Mountain. This diversity of forms, belonging 
to different culture stages and occurring together, appears to reveal the 
specific peculiarity of the Siberian palzolith since the mixture of ancient 
and new styles is clearly demonstrated in the excavations of different 
investigators.! 

Paleolithic man in Siberia knew the art of fire-making and produced 
stone, and later, bone implements. 

Neolithic man was distributed from the Urals to the Pacific, but his 
culture is as little known as the more ancient cultures. 

Traces of an ancient station in the far north of Siberia were dis- 
covered in Obdorsk Village, on the Ob River, where pottery was found. 
However, the present inhabitants of the district, the Samoyed, do not 
make pottery. We do not know whether they abandoned pottery making 
after acquiring metal wares, as did many other Siberian peoples, or 
whether this pottery should be ascribed to a pre-Samoyed tribe. It 
should be noted that Obdorsk pottery resembles, on the one hand, the 
prehistoric pottery of Ladoga Sea in the north of European Russia, and 
on the other, the ceramics found near Krasnoyarsk and Irkutsk. 

In southern Siberia neolithic stations are known as far south as the 
borders of Mongolia. In the Minusinsk region they were discovered by 
Savenkov; in the Irkutsk country on the shores of the Baikal Sea, by 
Petri; in the Orkhon country by P. P. Khoroshikh;? in western Trans- 
baikalia by Talko-Hrynceviz,? who found stone implements together 
with some human skeletal remains. Farther to the east, neolithic stations 
were discovered on the dunes of the banks of the Patkha River where it 
flows into the Amur. 

‘s See also Doctor Vishnievsky's chapter ‘ Fossil Man in Russia’’ appended to his Russian transla- 
ton of Oshorn’s ‘‘ Men of the Old Stone Age.”’ 

2Khoroshikh. 

*Talko-Hrynceviz. 

232 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

In western Siberia neolithic stations are known on the shores of the 
Transuralian lakes and on the eastern slopes of the Ural ridge. Siberian 
neolithic man knew the art of polishing and drilling stone, making pottery, 
and carving in wood. 

In Irkutsk Province, Vitkovsky! has excavated tombs containing 
neolithic relics of an archaic character, where human skeletons were 
covered with red ocher, like those of the reindeer age in western Europe. 
Farther north, near Olekminsk, deposits bordering the Lena River con- 
tain arrowheads and implements of mammoth ivory, simple’ objects 
representing a Stone Age culture which still exists or formerly existed 
among the circumpolar population.” 

In the far northeast of Siberia, neolithic artifacts were discovered 
by the author in excavations in the Koryak and Kamchadal region. At 
the Koryak sites (1900) remains of elaborate pottery and polished stone 
implements were uncovered. On the Kamchatka Peninsula polished 
stone axes, arrowheads, etc., were collected (1911) in abundance, together 
with a particular type of pottery influenced by the culture of the pre- 
Japanese population of the Japanese islands. This material has been 
analyzed by the author for the Carnegie Institution of Washington.’ 

Returning to the middle of the Asiatic continent, we must record the 
researches of Doctor and Mrs. Torii in eastern Mongolia, a region covered 
with incredible quantities of remains and ruins. Here the stone objects, 
axes, knives, scrapers, and arrows, are neolithic. According to these 
authors, this region, as well as Manchuria, Korea, Japan, and even 
China, seems to have no paleolithic remains.‘ In Asia, according to 
Boule,* the age of polished stone seems to be lessclearly separated from the 
older age of dressed stone, than it is in Europe. 

All these countries are rich in prehistoric relics, ranging from the 
Stone to the Iron Age. The coast of Manchuria (Port Arthur), the banks 
of the Amur, and the coast of Japan have many shellmounds and kitchen 
middens similar to those of Denmark. Sometimes, raised high above the 
present sea level, these mounds contain neolithic implements. These 
countries, as well as Korea, are dotted with many megalithic monuments. 
The Chinese prehistoric period is still unknown; but we are aware that it 
includes a neolithic phase.® 

lVitkovaky. 

2Boule, 355. 
jJochelson, (e). 

‘Torii, R. and Torii, K. 
‘Boule. 

® Boule, 355. 

MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY 233 

In Turkestan, Pumpelly has traced five successive civilizations, 
ranging from neolithic times to the present. The most ancient culture 
dated from 8000 years before our era.!. The mountains and high plateaus 
of Asia Minor and Persia which, during the Pleistocene period, were 
covered to a large extent with ice and snow, are very poor in paleolithic 
remains.” 

Migrations are determined by two main factors: by the attractive- 
ness of other localities and by an expulsion caused by invaders. Increase 
in population, climatic changes, the aspiration for freedom from social, 
political, or religious bondage, or the enthusiasm to spread a new re- 
ligious doctrine, may be regarded as secondary causes, but these also may 
be reduced to the first two factors. Two periods, a prehistoric and a 
historic, may be distinguished in the course of a people’s migrations. 
Inforination concerning the first period is ordinarily based on traditions 
and archxological evidence; concerning the second, on written records. 

We have seen how fragmentary and uncertain is our knowledge of the 
stone spe in the countries we have been discussing. The data on the 
metal age are equally unsatisfactory. Traditions, as a source of informa- 
tion, are significant only when supported by archeological evidence, and 
corroborated by known historical facts. Archsology, unaccompanied by 
historical records may be compared to a book from which a great many 
pages are lacking. We will try, however, to coordinate the disjointed 
fragments of archeological evidence as far as possible. 

Archeological evidences of prehistoric migrations in Asiatic Russia 
are very scanty. Osteological remains of the neolithic period have shown 
that there were probably several narrow-headed peoples in Asia. These 
were further differentiated in the beginning of the metal age. The pre- 
historic dolichocephalic Chud of southern Transbaikalia, the narrow- 
headed builders of the tumuli (kurgans) of southern Siberia, and the 
dolichocephalic kurgan builders of South Russia probably belonged to 
one stock, which may be identified with the blue-eyed and blond Usun 
or Wusun of the Chinese annals, who lived on the northern slopes of the 
Tyan-Shan in Chinese Turkestan, with the Sacae, the western Scythians, 
and the Nordies of northern Europe. These are believed to have been 
nomadic peoples, mostly pastoral. 

Craniometric measurements of the kurgan skulls, made by the Siberian 
anthropologist, Gorostchenko? produced evidence of a single long-headed 
type which does not. correspond to the modern population of the region, 

1p umpelly. . 
2Boule, 353 
4G Eye cake: 

234 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

either Mongol or Turk. The present Ainu and Yeniseians may be re- 
garded as present representatives of this prehistoric dolichocephalic race. 
Further archeological evidences are too fragmentary. We know from 
Petri’s excavations in the Baikal country that traces of the culture of the 
Yakut were found there. | 

Tue Historic PERIopD 

The early historical information on the movements of Siberian and 
Central Asiatic peoples found in the Chinese annals is far from reliable. 
The study of the runic inscriptions on stone memorial tablets, apparently 
written in the old Turkic language, is of some historical value. These 
memorial tablets belong to the Iron Age, and judging by the historical 
events, mentioned in the inscriptions, may be dated between the sixth 
and seventh centuries, A.D. The beginning of the Iron Age was un- 
doubtedly much earlier. According to the Chinese annals in the second 
century B.C., the Hiung-nu (i.e., the Turk), then living to the north of 
the Chinese, used iron implements.! Preceding the Iron Age there have 
been found remains of a Bronze Age, which also included copper and gold 
objects and traces of pictographic writings called by Russian archzo- 
logists, pisanitzy. The Bronze Age people are often set down as Finno- 
Samoyedic, or as Paleo-Yeniseian, but Tallgren justly rejects the idea 
that the primitive peoples who are still living in northern Siberia might 
have developed a comparatively high Bronze Age civilization. The 
people who developed the Bronze Age civilization of the Upper Yenisei 
may have been Turks or Indo-Europeans.’ 

The names of rivers in the forested regions of the Upper Yenisei are 
of Turkic origin. It has been established that the late Iron Age is to be 
ascribed to the Turks, but whether the people of the Bronze Age and of 
the early Iron Age belonged to the same stock as the people of the late 
Iron Age cannot be ascertained. If this be true, they must have been in 
contact with and influenced by Aryan culture since their methods of 
bronze working and the characters used in their inscriptions must have 
been borrowed from Semitic sources. 

“The ability of the old Turks to develop these borrowed arts,” says 
Miss Czaplicka, “is surprising, in view of the fact that no later Turks in 
Central Asia have reached so high a standard of civilization, but the 
explanation may possibly be that the Turks of that time were freer from 
Mongolian admixture than they have been since the thirteenth century 

\Adrianoff, 5. 
1Tallgren, 30. 

MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY 235 

and that the Aryan element in Central Asia was, at the time of this old 
culture very considerable.’’! 

The people of the Bronze Age are believed to have been peaceful, 
since there are hardly any weapons among the cultural remains of this 
period. From the abundant remains of agricultural and mining imple- 
ments, it has been assumed that they were agriculturists and miners. 
Finally, they have been described as democratic, because we find 
Bronze Age communal graves and graves of ordinary individuals, while 
in the Iron Age, it was mainly the chiefs who enjoyed the privilege of 
burial in a mound. On the other hand, the Iron Age people were supposed 
to have been warlike nomads who lived on their horses, and who left 
behind them many weapons of war. 

The late Siberian scholar, Yadrintzev,? who made observations on 
the physical type of the Altaian Turks and the Chern Tatars was struck 
by their resemblance to the people of the Caucasus. Yet, the western 
Aryan are not known ever to have spread as far as the Altai Mountains; 
on the other hand, we know of the close association of the Turkic peoples 
with this region. The only plausible suggestion, therefore, is that the 
prehistoric contact between the Turks and Aryan affected the physical 
type of the Asiatic Turks as well as their nomadic life, leading them to 
settle down to agriculture. 

THE DINUIN 

We have stated that some Aryan tribe must have influenced the 
culture and physical type of the Turkic tribes of southern Siberia. Most 
of the Turkie tribes, according to Aristoff,? originally occupied the 
Altai Mountains, Turkic traditions, tribal and place names bearing wit- 
hess to this. Many centuries before Christ, Turkic tribes inhabited the 
Altai country and the adjacent parts of Mongolia. The most ancient 
Turkic tribe, the Hun-nu, was known to the Chinese as living in Central 
Mongolia and there are available reliable data about them, dated the 
third century B.C., when they conquered the whole of Mongolia. Before 
the invasion of ihe Hun-nu, northern Mongolia and a part of the Gobi 
desert: was occupied, according to Chinese sources, by the Dinlin.4 Thus, 
in the Chinese inscription on a monument on the Orkhon River in north- 
ern Mongolia, erected in 732 to the memory of the Khan Kyul-Tegin, 
the ptOLy, which at that time belonged to the Tukiu Turks, and before 

" \Canplioka, (b), 79. 
2Yadrintzev. 
*Ariatoff, (a). 
‘Radloff, (d), 17, 22. 

236 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

them to the Hun-nu, is named as an ancient country and the native 
region of the Dinlin.! The earliest mention of the Dinlin in official 
Chinese history was in the years 209-201 B.C., when the conquests of the 
Hun-nu are included in enumerating the possessions of the Dinlin.? 
About the year 100 B.C. the Hun-nu transferred the territory of the Dinlin 
to the Chinese military chief, Vei-Lui, to whom they were subjected. 
The latest authentic mention of the Dinlin was in the middle of the 
second century of our era in connection with their failure to subdue the 
Sian-bi in the north.4| In the Chinese annals on the Han dynasty, the 
Dinlin are described as having been of tall stature, considerably pilose, 
and with red hair, ruddy faces, and blue eyes.> Another fair-complexioned 
division of the Dinlin who were engaged in agriculture, hunting, and fish- 
ing was also mentioned.6 They had utensils of clay and copper, very 
few of iron, and lived in block houses covered with birchbark. They were 
divided into communities headed by independent chiefs. They had 
thirty thousand warriors and were often at war with the Kirghiz. Of the 
two divisions of the Dinlin, one occupied the country between the 
Ural and Altai, the other the Yenisei to the north of the Kirghiz, approxi- 
mately between the Obi River and Lake Baikal. 

In the seventeenth century, the Russian conquerors of Siberia found 
the Dinlin in the localities previously mentioned, but largely Turkicized 
and subjugated by the Kirghiz, to whom they paid taxes in peltries, iron 
implements, and utensils, and who called their vassals, Kyshtym. At 
that time, of the descendants of the Dinlin only the Arines, Assan, Kotts, 
and the so-called Yeniseian Ostyak (p. 65) still retained their native 
language, but they were in a state of degradation. The first of the three 
tribes soon became extinct or were Turkicized and merged with the local 
Tatars, as the Turkic tribes of the region are called. The Yenisei Ostyak 
are still extant. They have preserved their language, but physically have 
become intermixed with Finno-Ugrian Ostyak and Samoyed. Klaproth, 
and following him, Ritter, believed the Dinlin belonged to the Aryan stock. 
If this theory be tenable, many puzzling problems in Asiatic archeology 
and ethnology may be satisfactorily solved. 

The vestiges of the ancient civilization of southern Siberia and 
Mongolia as evidenced by monuments and burial mounds (kurgans), 
objects of bronze, copper, gold, and silver, as well as the remains of the 

See p. 65 with erence to the Yeniseians who call themselves, Din. 

2Richurin, 258, 

‘Thid., part I, 7 het 

‘Ibid., part I, 169. The Sian-bi of Father Bichurin seem to be the same as the Sien-pi of Bloche 
(305- Stee who believes the Sien-pi to be of Tungus atock and identical with Jwen-Jwen. 

sThid., pa 

6Tbid., part I, 442; Deguignes, tome I, part 2, lxii; Klaproth, (b), tome I, 129-131. 

MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY 237 

oldest mining and ore smelting industries and agriculture should be 
ascribed to the Dinlin. The later Turkic metal workers of the Altai, 
called kuznietzy, i.e., smiths, by the Russians, may be regarded as succes- 
sors of the Dinlin, with whom they were partly mixed and from 
whom they must have learned the art of metal working. 

The dolichocephalic skulls found in the burial mounds of Transbaika- 
lia, southern Siberia, and southern Russia may be the remains of a single 
race represented by the Dinlin, to which the blue-eyed and blond Usun, 
or Wusun of the Chinese annals, might have belonged and which might 
have been connected with the high statured, fair complexioned, long- 
headed, naxrow-faced Europeans, who are at present represented by the 
so-called Nordics. In southern Russia and Central Europe this physical 
type was :nodified by the admixture of Scythian and Turco-Mongolic 
Asiatic invaders, and gave rise to two short-headed types: the Alpine 
(with narrow faces and narrow noses) and the Slavic (with wide faces 
and shori, wide noses) types. The Dinlin were greatly Mongolo-Turk- 
icized in Asia and only a few individuals of the Yenisei-Kirghiz have pre- 
served the reddish hair and gray eyes of a primeval stock, possibly of the 
Dinlin. The so-called Yenisei-Ostyak and the Ainu may also be regarded 
as related to the Dinlin, the former because of their considerable per- 
centage of light hair, eyes, and complexion, and the latter, because of 
their hairiness and cephalic index. The physical type of the original 
Yeniseians was influenced by the Samoyed and that of the Ainu by the 
Japanese. 

HISTORICAL WANDERINGS 

Data on historical migrations of the Asiatic peoples were given in 
the chapters dealing with separate tribes or groups of tribes. A brief 
summary will be added here. 

Iranians. The question as to the place of origin of the Iranians, as a 
division of the Aryan, will be answered only when the entire Aryan 
problem is solved. As most authorities on the history of the Aryan 
peoples are inclined to believe their origin to have been European and 
not Asiatic, the Iranians too must have originated in Europe. The Per- 
slans are the chief Iranians, who have undergone considerable Turkic 
a and have, in their present abode, lost some Aryan somatological 
Talts, 

6 

Professor von Luschan ranges the Kurd with the peoples of northern 
Europe. The Ossete, according to their own traditions, came to the 
Caucasus from the region of the Don River, which traditions are corro- 

238 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

borated by linguistic evidence. The Sogdians, Khorezmians, Medians, 
and Bactrians were old Iranian peoples. The Afghan and Baluchi are 
regarded as Turkicized Persians, but when their place of origin is taken 
into account, they must be considered with the Persians. The Tadjik 
and the Mountaineer Tadjik, the Galcha, are also Iranian, but have 
been less influenced by Turkic culture than the Persians related to them 
and may, without doubt, be ranged with the Aryan, as remnants of the 
Sogdians. Somatologically, they resemble the European Alpines. The 
Aryan Hindoo came to India from the high steppes of Pamir about 2000 
B.C., though some investigators do not consider this their original home, 
but believe them to have had a place of origin in common with other 
Aryan peoples. The Gypsies of India are ranked as Aryan with the 
Hindoo and wandered from their secondary home in northwestern India 
to the northwest in the beginning of our era, appearing in Germany in 
1417. 

The Caucasus Peoples. The Caucasus is not the original home of the 
peoples now dwelling there, even of those who live there exclusively. 

The Georgian tribes may have come to the Caucasus from Western 
Asia in the earliest period of Asiatic history. A smal] number of Moham- 
medan Georgians migrated to Turkey after the Russian conquest of the 
Caucasus. 

The history of the Abkhas-Cherkess group of tribes is identical with 
that of the Georgians and differs only in that a considerable number of 
them are Islamists, a part of whom, as noted above, migrated to Turkey 
in the nineteenth century. 

The Chechen and Lesghin groups of the northern Caucasus and 
Daghestan were mentioned by Greek historians 2500. years ago. There 
is strong evidence that their habitat was thickly populated in neolithic 
times. 

The origin of the Armenians is closely connected with that of the 
Hittites from whom they are believed to have descended. Von Luschan 
connects them with the Alpine race of Central Europe, but does not solve 
the problem as to whether the Hittites came from Central Europe, or 
the Alpine race from Western Asia, though he does incline to the latter 
view.! 

In language and type the Kurd may be classed with the northern 
Europeans, but the time and routes of their migrations are unknown. 
The Ossete are an Aryan tribe whose original home was on the Don River, 
whence they were forced into the Caucasus by the Huns. The Tate 

‘von Luschan, (a), 242-243. 

MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY 239 

migrated to the Caucasus from Persia, having been exiled after a revolt 
against the Sassanides. They are Persians both in language (speak a 
dialect of New Persian) and religion (Shiites). Somatologically, they are 
mixed with Turks. 

The Talysh speak Persian, but somatologically, form two groups, 
Iranians in the Mountains and Tatar in the Plains. 

The Jews are ancient dwellers of the country and regard themselves 
as descendants of the lost tribes of Israel. The Aissor are descendants of 
old Chaldeans. Some of them migrated into the Caucasus from Persia 
after the Russian-Persian war of 1827. 

The Azerbaijan are regarded as Iranians who adopted the Turkish 
language. The ancient Persian rulers directed the Azerbaijan to move 
into the Caucasus in order to take possession of Transcaucasia. 

The Kumyk is a Turkic tribe that came to the Caucasus in the 
twelfth century from the north. Akin to Kumyk are two small Turkic- 
speaktuiy tribes, the Balkar and the Karachai. 

The Caucasian Osmanli are Turks who remained in the Caucasus 
after the Russian conquest. 

The Nogais came into Cis-Caucasia from the east in the twelfth 
century, together with other Turco-Mongolic hordes of Jenghis IXhan’s 
invasion. 

The Turkoman are immigrants from the Transcaspian steppes. 

The Kalmuck of the Caucasus are a part of the Kalmuck who settled 
on the Volga River in 1703. 

The Turkestan Peoples. The Kirghiz came into Turkestan from the 
Altai country with other Turkic invaders in the sixth century. 

The Uzbeg, who are related to the Kirghiz, were also among the sixth 
century invaders of Turkestan. They were first called Uzbeg in the first 
half of the fourteenth century, after their khan, Uzbeg-Khan, a descend- 
ant of Jenghis-Khan. 

The Turkoman, who are related to the Kirghiz and Uzbeg, came to 
their present abode in Transcaspian Province from the Ili River and Lake 
Issyk-kul in the third century of Mussulman chronology. 

The Kara-Kalpak, a tribe related to the Kirghiz-Kaisak, came to 
western Turkestan with the followers of Jenghis-Khan. In the eleventh 
century, they formed the borderland population of southern Russia. It 
is assumed that they re-emigrated to Asia from European Russia in the 
eighteenth century. A part of them, accepting Christianity, settled in 
southern Russia and still another part, driven to the west by other Turkic 
invaders, now live in Bessarabia under the name of Gagauzy. 

240 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

The Tatar are Turks who migrated into Turkestan from the eastern 
provinces of European Russia before and after the Russian conquest 
of Turkestan. 

The Taranchi, a Turkic tribe mixed with Iranians originally lived in 
Eastern Turkestan. In the nineteenth century the Taranchi left Chinese 
territory and settled in Russian Turkestan, chiefly in Semirechye 
Province. - 

The sedentary Sarts being a mixture of Iranian and Turkic elements, 
though mainly Uzbeg, may be regarded as a local ethnical compound and 
to recapitulate their migrations, one must refer to the ethnical compo- 
nents of which they were formed. 

A part of the Dungan, a Chinese-Turkic blend, migrated into 
Russian Turkestan about 1890, after an uprising suppressed by the 
Chinese. 

The Jews of Turkestan regard themselves as descendants of the 
Israelites who were captured by the kings of Assyria and Babylon 
and brought by them to Central Asia between six and seven hundred 
years B.C. 

A small number of Arabs remained in Turkestan after they con- 
quered the country and in the eighth century forcibly introduced 
Mohammedanism. 

Siberia and the Amur Country. The supposed re-migration of the 
Americanoid tribes into Asia from America, after the last glaciation, 
took place in the prehistoric period. Their historical movements do not, 
represent large migrations. 

The Chukchee occupied the northern tundra to the east of the Kolyma 
River until the middle of the nineteenth century. In 1859 a division of 
Reindeer Chukchee, with the permission of the Russian Government, 
crossed the Kolyma River and moved to the western tundra, where they 
found large reindeer pastures. Gradually, they moved farther to the 
west and reached the Indigirka River about the end of the nineteenth 
century. In their western movements they came in contact with the 
tundra Yukaghir, Tungus, and Yakut divisions. During the same period 
of the nineteenth century, some camps of Reindeer Chukchee moved to 
the south, wandering amid the Reindeer Koryak. 

The Reindeer Koryak in their turn, under the pressure of the expan- 
sion of the Reindeer Chukchee, moved to the south, appearing as far 
south on the Kamchatka Peninsula as the upper vallev of the Kamchatka 
River and the mountain slopes between Tighil and Sopochnoye villages. 

MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY 241 

The Tungus are a striking example of a people whose language and 
ethnic unity are not closely connected with their material culture and 
they show particularly that culture is a question of environment and not 
of race. The Tungus are fishermen, hunters, dog, reindeer, cattle or 
horse breeders, agriculturists and town dwellers according to the natural 
resources and social conditions surrounding them. One of the Tungus 
tribes, the Manchu, after being Chinesized, became the rulers of China. 

The original home of the Tungus (p. 37) appears to have been the 
uplands of Chan-alin, where they dwelt with the kindred Niu-chi of the 
Chinese annals, i.e., the Manchu, till the thirteenth century, when the 
disturbances brought about by the wars and conquests of Jenghis- 
Khan drove them to the north, west, and east. The Tungus migrations 
were slow, but constant. In their movement to the north and northeast 
they met a stubborn resistance from the Chukchee, Koryak, and Yuka- 
ghir. The Tungus wars with the last-named tribes are mentioned in their 
folklore. Finally, however, the Tungus succeeded in advancing to the 
north, to the coast of the Arctic tundra, to the west, as far as the Yenisei 
River, and to the east, as far as the Anadyr River region, and the Kam- 
chatka Peninsula. 

Reindeer Tungus first appeared on the Kamchatka Peninsula in 
1850, having come from the Amur Valley, along the shores of the Okhotsk 
Sea and its bays (Gishiga and Penshina Bays), fighting the Koryak while 
traversing their country. Some of the nomadic Tungus, after losing their 
reindeer, settled on the shores of the Okhotsk Sea, in the Maritime 
Koryak villages and became mixed with them. Now they have extended 
their territory as far south as the camps of the Reindeer Koryak (p. 47). 

The Yakut, the most numerous Turkic tribe of Siberia, originally 
lived in the Altai Region, together with other Turkic tribes. The Mongol 
invasion of the thirteenth century found them in the region of the Baikal 
Sea. The Mongolic Buryat invasion from the banks of the Upper Amur 
forced the Yakut, with their horses and cattle, to move down the Lena 
River. On their way to their present places of habitation, they fought 
the war-like Tungus, who finally retreated to the mountainous portions of 
Yakut Province and the Yakut occupied the Lena River Valley to its 
mouth, and all its tributaries. After the occupation of the Lena River 
(1632) by the Russians and the foundation of the Fortress of Yakutsk, 
some Yakut divisions moved to the most distant parts of the country, 
and even crossed the Verkhoyansk Mountain Ridge to escape taxation. 
After curbing the resistance of the Tungus and Yukaghir, the Yakut 
settled the Yana, Indigirka, and Kolyma valleys, and in some localities 

242 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

between these rivers. About the same time, some Yakut crossed the 
Stanovoi Mountain Ridge and came to the shore of the Okhotsk Sea. 
Some trading and hunting Yakut went to the south of the Stanovoi Ridge 
and appeared in the valleys of the left tributaries of the Amur River. 

The Western Siberians. In the historical movements and migrationd 
of the western Siberian peoples, three geographically distinct regions 
must be distinguished: the southwestern steppes, the western forestes 
country, and the northern tundra. At the dawn of history we find south- 
western Siberia occupied mostly by Scythian peoples, originally of 
Iranian descent, belonging to the fair-complexioned, long-headed Euro- 
pean stock. Later, they were mixed with Finno-Ugrian and Mongol- 
Tatar elements. This is also true of the Alan who mixed with the 
Mongols to a greater degree. Although we have no exact knowledge of 
the original abode of the Magyar, numerous Turkic elements in their 
language show that they lived in southwestern Siberia a long time and 
occasionally were in contact with Turkic tribes. They were drawn along 
by the westward migration of Central Asiatic peoples, which continued 
many centuries after the Hun onslaught on Europe, until in 886 they 
established themselves on the Danube, in the country formerly occupied 
by the Avar. After the disappearance of the Hun and the Alan and the 
withdrawal of the Magyar from western Siberia, the nomadic Kirghiz ruled 
the country until they were subjugated by Russia in the beginning of the 
eighteenth century. 

In the fifteenth century the forested country of western Siberia was 
occupied by several Tatar states the most powerful of which was the 
Sibir kingdom. From 1557 they paid tribute to Russia and remained 
undisturbed until the Russian Cossack leader, Yermak, took the resi- 
dence of the Khan Kuchum Sibir, or Isker, and subjugated all other 
Tatar princes. Although Yermak fell in a battle ins584 and Kuchum’s 
kingdom was restored, in 1588, Isker (present Tobolsk) was again occu- 
pied by the Russians and in 1598 the Khan Kuchum suffered a decisive 
defeat. 

The northern parts of western Siberia are now occupied by the 
Samoyed and Finno-Ugrian groups of the Ostyak and Votyak. Their 
place of origin is regarded as the Altai in close proximity with the locali- 
ties whence Turks originated. The Samoyed drifted northward to the 
Arctic Ocean and a small group recently migrated westward into 
European Russia. The Finnic branches followed the course of the Istish 
to the Urals. Of the northwestern Siberian tribes, known in the Russian 
annals under the name of Yugria, the Samoyed, Ostyak, and Vogul, the 

MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY 243 

most southerly of them, the Ostyak had a military organization and forti- 
fied settlements. On the one hand, they had to resist the Tatar efforts 
to subdue them, and, on the other, they had to uphold their independence 
with Russian merchants who came to Yugria from the free state of Nov- 
gorod. In 1465 the Ostyak became tributary vassals of Russia and in 
1499 the region of the lower Obi was included in the Russian dominions. 

RELIGIOUS CLASSIFICATION 

With very few exceptions Russian political domination in Asia had 
little influence on native religions. As has been previously noted, some 
of the aborigines of Siberia and Central Asia were converts to Mohammed- 
anism or Buddhism after the Russian conquest. The official State 
religion of czarist Russia, Greek Catholicism, was adopted by many of 
the peoples of the Caucasus who had already been converted to Chris- 
tianity before the conquest of the Caucasus by the Russians. 

Greek Catholics. The following peoples belong to the Greek 
Catholic church :— 

1. ‘fhe Abkhasian belong in part to the Russian Church and, in 
part, are Sunnites. 

2. Some Caucasian Aissor, descendants of ancient Syrians or 
Chaldes1s, and not Assyrians, as many regard them, belong to the 
Nestoria) church and to the Jacobites. 

3. The Aleut of the Commander Islands (as well as of the Aleutian 
Islands) are Greek Catholics. Of the primitive tribes conquered by 
Russia, the Aleut are the most devoted Greek Catholics. The author 
observedl many cases where Aleut children who had. been brought up in 
the Methodist House of Unalaska, returned to the church of their 
parents after leaving the House. 

4. The Armenians belong in part to the Greek Catholic Church. 
The bulk of the people belong to their own church, the Armenia- 
Gregorian, akin to the Greek Catholic Church, but with a separate head 
and organization. A small number of Armenians are Roman Catholics. 
The Hemshin, a small Armenian division, are Mohammedans of the 
Sunnite faith. 

5. The Chechen belong to the Greek Catholic Church; a small 
number are Roman Catholics; some profess the Sunnite faith of Islam. 

6. The Chuvantzy, a branch of the Yukaghir, are Greek Catholics, 
and, in part, shamanists. 

7. A few Gilyak are Greek Catholics. The bulk of the tribe remain 
shamanists, or, as Sternberg characterizes them, pronounced animists. 

244 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

8. The Georgians of the Caucasus are Greek Catholics. A small 
number of Gruzians are Roman Catholics; the Adjar Gruzian and the 
Ingilois are Mohammedans of the Sunnite faith. 

9. The Kamchadal are devoted Greek Catholics and their former 
shamanistic practices are almost entirely abandoned. 

10. The Megrel or Migrelians of the Caucasus are Greek Catholics. 
A small number are Roman Catholics. 

11. The bulk of the Ossetes or Ossetines are Greek Catholics. A 
small part of them are Islamists of the Sunnite doctrine. 

12. The Swan of the Caucasus are Greek Catholics; a small 
number of them are Roman Catholics. 

13. The Yakut are Greek Catholics, but shamanistic beliefs and 
practices are still maintained. Fifty years ago, there were no baptized 
individuals in the northern districts. 

14. The Yeniseians on the Yenisei River are Greek Catholics, but 
continue their shamanistic practices. 

15. The Yukaghir, like the Yakut, are Greek Catholics, but prac- 
tise shamanism. 

Roman Catholic. Asmall number of the following Caucasian peoples 
belong to the Roman Catholic church: 1, Armenians; 2, Gruzians; 3, 
Megrel; 4, Swan, or southern Chechen. 

Protestants. Only a small number of Armenians are recorded as 
Protestants. 

Buddhists. With few exceptions all the Mongolic tribes are Budd- 
hists: the Mongol proper, the Kalmuck, and the Buryat of Transbaika- 
lia. Of the other peoples reviewed, a small part of the Tungus in Trans- 
baikalia, a part of the Ainu, and some of the Hindoo are Buddhists. 
From the account of Professor Petri, mentioned above (p. 24) one may 
draw the conclusion that the small tribe of Karagas, Turkicized Samoyed, 
are Buddhists. 

Brahmanists. Some Hindoo and Hindoo Gypsies are recorded as 
Brahmanists. 

Mohammedans. All the Turkic tribes (with few exceptions, as for 
instance, the Yakut), a part of the Caucasians and the greater part of 
Iranian peoples are Mohammedans. While the Turks are almost exclu- 
sively Sunnites, the Iranians are adherents of the Shiite faith. 

The following peoples are adherents of the Sunnite doctrine :— 

Turkic peoples: 1, Sarts; 2, Sart Kalmuck; 3, Siberian Tatars; 4, 
Kumyk: 5, Nogai; 6, Kirghiz; 7, Uzbeg; 8, Turkoman; 9, Kara-Kal- 
pak; 10, Kipchak; 11, Taranchi. 

MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY 245 

Turkicized Mongol: Western Hazara or Aimak. 

Caucasian peoples: 1, Laze or Chan; 2, Cherkess (Adighe); 3, 
Kabardine; 4, Adjar-Gruzian; 5, Ingiloi-Gruzian; 6, Abkhasian (a part); 
7, Chechen (a part). 

Iranians: 1, Persians (a part); 2, Tadjik of the Plains; 3, Afghan, 
4, Baluchi; 5, Kurd; 6, Hindoo of Turkestan; 7, Gypsies of Turkestan; 
8, Ossete (a small part); 9, Hindoo (a part). 

Other Aryan: Hemshin Armenians. 

Other peoples: 1, Dungan; 2, Arab of Turkestan. 

The followers of the Shute doctrine are the Iranians: 1, Persians; 
2, Mountaineer Tadjik or Galcha; 3, Azerbaijan (Turkicized); 4, 
Tate; 5, Talysh; 6, the Eastern Hazar (Turkicized Mongol). 

Some of the Persians, Tadjik, Afghan, and Hindoo are adherents of 
the Ismailite sect of Islam. 

Shamanists. The following have been recorded as shamanists: 1, 
Chukchee; 2, Koryak; 3, Asiatic Eskimo; 4, Buryat of Irkutsk Prov- 
ince; 5, Ainu (nature worship and cult of bear); 6, Gilyak (like Ainu); 
7, Tungus of Irkutsk Province. 

Ali the baptized Siberian natives practise shamanism. The Islamic 
Kirghiz and Tadjik have also retained some shamanistic beliefs. 

LANGUAGES 

I. Turkic Languages. The greater number of the inhabitants of 
Siberia and Central Asia speak Turkic or Tataric languages. 
In the following enumeration, those tribes that speak one or 
more languages in addition to Turkic are marked with an 
asterisk. Some of the Caucasians also speak Turkic 
languages. 
1. *Aissor speak Azerbaijan Turkic (also Semitic-Syrian 
and Armenian). 
2. Azerbaijan (Turkicized Iranians). 
3. *Gorski or Mountain Jews speak Azerbaijan (also New 
Persian and use old Hebrew as the church language). 
*Adjar-Gruzine (also Gruzinic). 
*Ingiloi-Gruzine (also Gruzinic). 
Hemshin (Turkicized Armenians, speak Osmanli). 
Kaitak (Turkicized Mongol in Caucasus). 
Caucasian Osmanli. 
Kumyk. 
Karachayevtzy. 

= Se Sy ove 

—" 

246 

Pa 
28-3 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Nogai. 

Hazara (Turkicized Mongol in Afghanistan).! 

Kirghiz-Kaisak. 

Kara-Kirghiz. 

Uzbeg. 

Turkoman. 

Kara-Kalpak. 

Kipchak. 

Taranchi. 

Tatar of Turkestan. 

Sarts. 

*Turkestan Gypsies (also speak New Persian). 

*Turkestan Jews (Old Hebrew as church language). 

*Turkestan Arabs (also Arabic). 

Bashkir. 

Chuvash (Turkicized Finns). 

Arin (Turkicized Yeniseians). 

2. Baltir, Koibal, Karagas, Soyot, Uriankhai (Turk- 
icized Samoyed). 

33-34. Tatar of Tobolsk and Tomsk provinces. 

35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 

Altaian or Cherneviye Tatar. 

* Afghan. 

*Baluchi. 

Yakut. 

Dolgan. 

*Tungus living among or near the Yakut. 

*Yukaghir. 

*Russian settlers in Yakutsk Province (Some of them 
speak very poor Russian or have altogether aban- 
doned their native speech). 

II. Mongolic Languages. Mongolic dialects are spoken by the follow- 
ing peoples :— 

L 
2. 

Eastern or Mongol proper. 
Western Mongol. 
a. Astrakhan Kalmuck. 
b. Caucasian Kalmuck. 
c. Torgout of Jungaria and northwestern 
Mongolia. 

\There are contradictory accounts of the language spoken by the Hazara. Some travelers contend 

that they adopted the Persian dialect of the Tadjik, the former inhabitants of the present Hazara country. 

MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY — 247 

3. Buryat. 
4. *Tungus living among the Buryat. 
5. Sart-Kalmuck. — 
III. Finnic Languages. 
A. Ugrian Dialects. 

1. Ostyak. 

2. Vogul. 

3. Magyar. 
B. Permian Dialects. 

1. Votyak. 

2. Zyryan. 

C. Bulgarian Dialect. 
1. *Mordvin. 
2. *Cheremiss. 
The Bulgarian branch of Finns is Russianized to a 
large degree. 
D. The language of the Lapp. 
IV. Samoyedic Dialects. 
1. Samoyed. 
2. Narym-Samoyed (usually called Ostyak-Samoyed). 
V. Yeniseian Dialects. 
1. Yeniseians (usually called Yenisei-Ostyak). 
2. Kott (extinct). 
3. Assan (extinct). 
4. *Arin (Tatarized). 
VI. Tungus-Manchu Languages. 
1. Tungus proper. 
2. Tungusic tribes of the Amur region. 
3. The so-called Lamut clans. 
4. The Manchu of the Amur River region. 
5. *Buryat (a small part). 
6. *Yukaghir. 
VII. Ainu language (a distinct tongue) 
VIII. Iranian Languages 
A. New Persian 
Persians 
Tadjik 
Galcha 
Kurd. 
5. Ossete. 

eo 

248 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

6. Yezide. 
7. *Gorski Jews (and Azerbaijan). 

8. *Turkestan Gypsies (and Turkic). 
B. Archaic Persian. 

1. Talysh. 
C. Southern Aryan. 

1. Hindoo. 

2. Gypsies. 

IX. Caucasian Languages. 
i 
A. Georgian proper or Gruzian Dialects. 
1. Gruzian (Gruzian language). 
a. *Adjara-Gruzian (Gruzian and 
Turkic). 
b. *Ingiloi-Gruzian (Gruzian and 
Turkic). 
Khevsur, Pshave, Tushin (Gruzian language). 
Imeretine (Gruzian language). 
Gurian (Gruzian language). 

5. Georgian Jews (Gruzian language). 
B. Megrel or Migrelian. 

C. *Laze or Chan (Chan and Osmanli). 
D. *Swan (Gruzian and Swan). 
ii 
Abkhas-Cherkess Group 
2. The Abkhasian and the Abazin speak Abkhasian. 
4. The Cherkess or Adighe and Kabardine speak Adighe. 
ili 
*Lesghin (fifteen divisions) speak Avar and Kumyk Tatar. 
iv 

Pee 

1- 
3- 

Armenian Language 

1. Armenians. 

2. Armenian Gypsies. 

3. *Aissor (also Syrian and Azerbaijan). 
X. Chinese Language. 

Dungan. 
XI. Americanoid Languages. 

1. Chukchee. 

MIGRATIONS AND HISTORY 249 

2. Koryak. 

3. *Kamchadal (The greater number have abandoned their 
native language, having become Russianized). 

4. *Yukaghir (Also speak Tungus, Yakut, and in some 

places, Russian). 
5. *Chuvantzy (Have abandoned their native language of 
the Yukaghir stock and speak Chukchee, Koryak, 
or Russian). 
6. Gilyak. 
XII. Eskimo Dialects. 

1. Asiatic Eskimo. 

2. *Aleut of the Commander Island (also speak Russian) 
XIII. Semitic Languages. 

1. *Arabs (In Persia also speak New Persian; in Turk- 

estan, Turkic). 

2. *Turkestan Jews (Old Hebrew and Turkic). 

3. *Caucasian Jews (The so-called Gorski or Mountaineers 

speak Azerbaijan and New Persian and use old 
Hebrew as the church language; the Gruzian Jews 
speak Gruzian and old Hebrew as a church language; 
some Caucasian Jews speak Aissor, Iranian Tate, 
or one of the north Caucasian languages). 

4. *Aissor (Speak a Syro-Chaldean language and one or two 

of the following: Armenian, Azerbaijan, Kurd, 
New Persian. Some Aissor know all these 
languages). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Abul-Ghazi-Bahadur Khan. Histoire des Mongols et des Tartares. Publiée, traduite 
et annotée par le baron Désmaison. St. Petersburg, 
1871-1874. English translation by Col. W. Miles. 
London, 1838. 

Adrianoff, A. V. Sketches of the Minusinsk Country. Tomsk, 1904. (In Russian). 

Andreev, M.S. On the Ethnography of the Tadjiks (The Tadjikistan Publication of 
the Society for the Study of Tadjikistan and the 
Iranian Peoples beyond its Borders, Tashkent, 
1925). (In Russian). 

Anuchin, V. I. A Sketch of the Shamanism of the Yenisei Ostyak (Publications of the 
Museum for Anthropology and Ethnography of 
the Imperial Academy of Sciences, vol. 2, pp. 1-89, 
Petrograd, 1914). 

Aristoff, N. A. (a) Notes on the Ethnic Composition of the Turkic Tribes and 
Peoples and Information about their Number 
(Shivaya Starina [The Old Living Times}, Journal 
of the Ethnographical Division of the Imperial 
Russian Geographical Society, vol. 6, parts 3 and 
4, pp. 277-446, St. Petersburg, 1896). (In Russian). 

(b) Attempt at an Explanation of the Ethnic Composition of the 
Kirghiz-Kaisak of the Great Horde and of the 
Kara-Kirghiz, based on Clan Traditions and on the 
Existing Clan Divisions, on the Clan Ensigns 
(Tamga) and also on Historical Documents and on 
Anthropological Investigations (Shivaya Starina 
[The Old Living Times], Journal of the Ethno- 
graphical Division of the Imperial Russian Geo- 
graphical Society, Parts 3-4, pp. 391-486, St. 
Petersburg, 1894). (In Russian). 

Asmis, Rudolf. Als Wirtschaftspioner in Russisch-Asien. Tagebuchblitter. Berlin, 
1924. 

Baelz, E. Zur Vor und Urgeschichte Japans (Zeitschrift fiir Ethnologie, vol. 39, pp. 
281-310, Berlin, . 1907). 

Barthold, V. V. The Tadjik, an Historical Sketch (Articles on Tadjiketan of the 
Society for the Study of Tadjikistan [Soviet State 
of Tadjik] and of Iranian Peoples outside its 
Boundaries). Tashkent, 1925. (In Russian). 

Batchelor, J. The Aino and their Folklore. London, 1901. 

Bichurin, Father Yakinth. Collection of Information concerning Peoples living in 
Central Asia in Ancient Days. St. Petersburg, 
188. (In Russian). 

Blochet, E. Le Nome de Ture dans |’Avesta (Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 
vol. 20, pp. 305-309, London, 1915). 

Boas, Franz. The Decorative Art of the North American Indians (Popular Science 
Monthly, vol. 63, pp. 481-498, October, 1903). 

251 

252 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Bogdanoff, A. P. Anthropometrical Notes on the Natives of Turkestan (Bulletin of 
the Society of the Friends of Natural Science, 
Anthropology, and Ethnography, at the Imperial 
University of Moscow, vol. 34, part 5, Moscow, 
1891). (In Russian). 

Bogoras, W. The Chukchee (Memoirs, American Museum of Natural History, vol. 
XI, parts 1-3, 1904-1909). 

Boule, M. Fossil Men. Elements of Human Palxontology. Translated from the 
French. Edinburgh, 1923. 

Braun, F. F. Die Urbevélkerung Europas und die Herkunft der Germanen (Japhe- 
tische Studien zur Sprache und Kultur Eurasiens, 
vol. 1, Berlin-Stuttgart-Leipzig, 1922). 

Castren, M. Alexander. (a) Reisserrinnerungen aus den Jahren 1838-1844 (In 
Nordische Reisen und Forschungen, Kaiserliche 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, St. Petersburg, 
1853). 

(b) Reiseberichte und Briefe aus den Jahren 1845-1849 (In 
Nordische Reisen und Forschungen, Kaiserliche 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, St. Petersburg, 
1856). 

(c) Versuch einer Jenissei-Ostjakischen und Kottischen 
Sprachlehre nebst Worterverzeichnissen aus den 
genannten Sprachen (In Nordische Reisen und 
Forschungen, Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissen- 
schaften, St. Petersburg, 1858). 

(d) Ethnologische Vorlesungen iiber die Altaischen V6lker 
nebst Samojedischen Marchen u. Tatarischen 
Heldensagen. St. Petersburg, 1857. 

Chekanovsky, A. Geological Investigation of Irkutsk Province. Irkutsk, 1874. 
(In Russian). 

Chersky, I. D. Fossil Fauna in the Environs of Irkutsk (Bulletin of the Siberian 
Division of the Russian Geographical Society, 
vol. 5, no. 3-4, pp. 108-116, Moscow, 1892). (In 
Russian). ; 

Choris, M. L. Voyage Pittoresque Autour du Mond, etc. Paris, 1822. 

Czaplicka, M. A. (a) Aboriginal Siberia. A Study in Social Anthropology. Oxford, 
1914. 

(b) The Turks of Central Asia in History and at the Present Day. 
An Ethnological Inquiry into the Pan-Turanian 
Problem and Bibliographical Material relating to 
the Early Turks and the Present Turks of Central 
Asia. Oxford, 1918. 

Daniloff, N. P. On the Characteristics of the Anthropological and Physiological. 
Traits of the Present Inhabitants of Persia (Me- 
moirs of the Anthropological Division of the 
Society of the Friends of Natural Science, Anthro- 
pology and Ethnography, at the Imperial Uni- 
versity of Moscow, vol. 17. 1894.) (In Russian). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 253 

Dixon, Roland B. The Racial History of Man. New York, 1923. 

Dyachkoff, G. The Country of the Anadyr. Vladivostok, 1893. (In Russian). 

Erman, G. A. Reise um die Erde durch Nord-Asien und die beiden Oceane in den 
Jahren, 1828-1830. Berlin, 1838. 

Firdousi, Abul Casim. The Shah Nameh. Translated from Persian by J. Atkinson, 
London, 1886; another edition, 1892. Other trans- 
lations by A. S. Werner, 1905; by A. Rogers, 1907. 

Geotei, J.G. Beschreibung aller Nationen des Russischen Reiches. St. Petersburg, 
1776. 

Golubowsky, P. The Pechenyegi, the Torki, and the Polovtzy before the Tatar 
Invasion. History of Southern Steppes of Russia 
in the Ninth to the Thirteenth Century. Kieff, 
1884. (In Russian). 

Gorostchenko, IK. t. Skulls of the Kurgans in the Minusinsk District (Description of 
the Collections of the Minusinsk Museum, part 2, 
Minusunsk, 1900). ({n Russian). 

Guignes, J. de. Histoire générale des Turcs, des Mongols et des autres Tartares 
occidentaux. Paris, 1756-8. 

Hall, H. U. The Siberian Expedition University of Pennsylvania (The Museum 
Journal, vol. 7, pp. 27-45, Philadelphia, 1916), 

Howorth, IT. H. History of the Mongols from the Ninth to the Nineteenth Centuries. 
Part 1. The Mongols Proper and the Kalmucks 
(1876); Part II. The So-Called Tartars of Russia 
and Central Asia (1880); Part III, The Mongols of 
Persia (1888). London. 

Ivanovsky, A. A. (a) Anthropological Composition of the Population of Russia. 
Moscow, 1904. (In Russian). 

(b) The Mongol Torgout. Moscow, 1891. (In Russian). 

Jochelson, Waldemar. (a) The Koryak (Memoirs, American Museum of Natural 
History, vol. 10, 1905-1908). 

(b) Kumiss Festivals of the Yakut, (Boas Anniversary Volume, 
New York, 1906). 

(c) Ethnological Problems of Bering Sea (Natural History, 
Journal of the American Museum of Natural 
History, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 90-95, 1926). 

(d) The Yukaghir (Memoirs, American Museum of Natural 
History, vol. 13, 1910-1926). 

(e) Archeological Investigations in Kamchatka (Publication 
No. 388, Carnegie Institution of Washington, 
1928). 

(f) Past and Present Subterranean Dwellings of the Tribes of 
Northeastern Asia and Northwestern - America 
(International Congress of Americanists, Quebec, 
1906). 

Kastchenko, N. F. (a) The Skeleton of a Mammoth and Evidences that parts of its 
Body were eaten by Man (Memoirs, Russian Aca- 
demy of Sciences, 8th series, vol. 11, no. 7, 1901). 
(In Russian). 

254 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Kastchenko, N. F. (b) On the Question of the Synchronous Existence of Mammoth 
and Man (Memoirs, Tenth Archeological Congress 
in Riga, 1896, vol. 1, pp. 64-70, Moscow, 1899). 
(In Russian). 

(c) Ein von Menschenverzehrtes Mammuth (Correspondenz 
Blatt der Deutschen Gesellschaft fiir Anthropologie, 
Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte, XX VII Jahrgang, 
no. 6, p. 43, Miinchen, Juni, 1896). 

Katanoff, N. F. Essay on an Investigation of the Uriankhai Language. Kazan, 
1903. (In Russian). 

Khangaloff, M. N. Some Data concerning the Mode of Life of the Northern Buryat 
(Ethnographical Review, Moscow, 1876). (In 
Russian). 

Khangaloff, M. N. and Satoplaeff, N. Tales and Beliefs of the Buryat. Irkutsk, 
1889. (In Russian). 

Khanykoff, N. Description of the Khanate of Bokhara. St. Petersburg, 1843. (In 
Russian). 

Kharuzin, N. History of the Development of the Dwellings of the Turkic and Mon- 
golic Nomads of Russia. Moscow, 1896. (In 
Russian). 

Khoroshikh, P. P. Investigations of the Stone and Iron Ages of the Irkutsk Coun- 

_ try (Bulletin of the Biologico-Geographical In- 
stitute of Irkutsk University, part 1, Irkutsk, 1924). 
(In Russian). 

Khoroshkhin, A. P. The Nations of Central Asia. Year-Book of the Turkestan. 
Country, pp. 303-330. Tashkent, 1874. (In 
Russian). 

Khudyakoff, I. A. Verkhoyansk Collection of Yakut Tales, Songs, Riddles, and 
Proverbs (Published by the Eastern Siberian Divi- 
sion of the Imperial Russian Geographical Society, 
Irkutsk, 1891). 

Klaproth, H. J. (a) Asia Polyglotta. 2 Parts. Paris, 1831. 

(b) Mémoires relatifs &1’Asie. Vols. 1-2. Paris, 1824-1828. 

Koganei, Yoshikiyo. (a) Ueber die Urbewohner Japans (Mittheilungen der Deut- 
schen Gesellschaft fiir Natur. und Volkerkunde 
Ostasiens, vol. 9, Theil 3, pp. 297-330, Tokio, 
1903). 

(b) Beitriige zur Physischen Anthropologie der Aino (Mittheil- 
ungen aus der Medizinischen Facultit der Kaiser- 
lich Japanischen Universitit, Band 2, pp. 1-251, 
Tokio, 1894). 

Krivoshapkin, P. The Yenisseisk District. St. Petersburg, 1863. (In Russian). 

Langsdorf, G. H. von. Voyages and Travels in Various Parts of the World during the 
Years 1803-1807. Translated from German. 2 
vols. London, 1813-1814. 

Laufer, B. (a) Die angeblichen Urvélker von Yezo und Sakhalin (Central-blatt fiir 
Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte. 
Band 5, Heft 6, Jena, 1900). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 255 

Laufer, B. (b) The Reindeer and its Domestication (Memoirs, American Anthro- 

pological Association, vol. 4, no. 2, 1917). 
(c) Sino-Iranian, Introduction (Anthropological Series, Field Museum 

of Natural History, vol. 15, no. 3, Chicago, 1919). 

Lesseps, F. M. Travelsin Kamchatka. Translated from the French. London, 1790. 

Luschan, F. von. (a) The Early Inhabitants of Western Asia (Journal, Royal 
Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and 
Treland, vol. 41, pp. 230-244, London, 1911). 

(b) Volker, Rassen, Sprachen. Berlin, 1922. 

Lyshin, N. I. An Anthropological Sketch of the Gypsies of Tauride Province (Sup- 
plement to vol. 2, Bulletin of the Society of the 
Friends of Natural Science, Anthropology and 
Ethnography, at the Imperial University of 
Moscow, 1893). (In Russian). 

Maksimoff, A. N. The Kara-Kalpak (Encyclopedic Dictionary edited by Jelesnoff, 
vol. 23, Moscow, 1912). (In Russian). 

Marr, N. The Japhetic Caucasus and the Third Ethnical Element in the Creation 
of Mediterranean Culture. Leipzig, 1920. (In 
Russian). 

Martin, R. Lehrbuch der Anthropologie. Jena, 1914. 

Massalsky, Prince V. I. The Turkestan Country (Vol. 19, of ‘Russia.’ Edited by 
P. P. Semenoff-Tyan-Shansky. St. Petersburg, 
1913). 

Matthew, W. D. Climate and Evolution (Annals, New York Academy of Sciences, 
vol. 24, pp. 171-318, 1915). 

Merhart, (;. von. The Paleolithic Period in Siberia: Contributions to the Prehistory 
of the Yenisei Region (American Anthropologist, 
N.S., vol. 25, pp. 21-55, 1923). 

Miklosich, I’. Zigeuner Europas, Wien, 1873. 

Miller, Vsevelod F. Sketches on the Ossetines. vols. 1-2, Moscow, 1882; vols. 3-4, 
Moscow, 1887. 

Moshkoff, V. The Gagauzy. Samples of the Folk-Literature of the Turkic Tribes, 
vol. 10. Edited by W. Radloff. St. Petersburg, 
1904. (In Russian). 

Muhammed-Emin, Rasul-Zade. The Iranian Turks (In the Stambul magazine , 
Turk-Yurdy, 1912). 

Miiller, Friedrich R. Allgemeine Ethnographie. Wien, 1873. 

Miller, Max. Lectures on the Science of Language delivered at the Royal Institution 
of Great Britain in April, May, and June, 1861, and 
February, March, April, and May, 1863. London, 
1866. Last edition, London, 1891. 

Munro, N.G. (a) Primitive Culture in Japan (Transactions, Asiatic Society of 
Japan, vol. 34, pp. 1-212, Yokohama, 1906). 

(b) Prehistoric Japan. Yokohama, 1911. 

Nalivkin, V. P. and U. A Sketch of the Life of the Women of the Sedentary Popula- 
tion of Fergana. Kazan, 1886. (In Russian). 

Nordenskisld, A. E. Die Umseglung Asiens und Europas auf der Vego. Leipzig, 
1882. 

256 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Ovchinnikov, M. P. Material for the Study of Archeological Remains in the En- 
virons of Irkutsk (Bulletin, East Siberian Division 
of the Russian Geographical Society, vol. 35, no. 3, 
Irkutsk, 1904), 

Pallas, M.P.S. Voyages en Différentes Provinces dl’Empire de Russie, et dans |’ Asie 
Septentrionale. Traduite de l’Allemand. Tome 
Quatriéme. Paris, 1798. 

Pantyukoff, I. I. Anthropological Observations in the Caucasus (Bulletin of the 
Caucasus Division of the Imperial Russian Geo- 
graphical Society, vol. 15, 1893). (In Russian). 

Patkanoff, 8S. (a) Increase of the Native Population in Siberia. St. Petersburg, 1911. 
(In Russian). 

(b) The Ancient Life of the Ostyak and their Heroes gathered from 
their Poems and Tales. St. Petersburg, 1891. (In 
Russian). 

(c) Statistical Data on the Racial Composition of Siberia, its Lan- 
guages and Tribes. St. Petersburg, 1912. (In 
Russian). © 

(d) Essay on the Geography and Statistics of the Tungusic Tribes of 
Siberia. Petrograd, 1906. (In Russian). 

“e) Essai d’un Statistique et d’une Géographie des Peuples Paléo- 
Asiatiques de la Sibérie. St. Petersburg, 1903. 

Pennant, Thomas. A Tour in Scotland, 1769. In John Pinkerton’s Voyages and 
' Travels, vol. 3, London, 1809. 

Peschel, Oscar. The Races of Man and their Geographical Distribution. Translated 
from the German, New York, 1876. 

Petri, B. E. (a) The Distant Past of the Buryat Country. Irkutsk, 1922. (In 
Russian). 

(b) The Siberian Palsolith. Irkutsk, 1923. (In Russian). 
(c) The Reindeer Breeding of the Karagas. Irkutsk, 1927. (In Russian). 

Pilsudski, B. Die Urbewohner von Sachalin (Globus, Band 96, no. 20, pp. 325-330, 
December, 1907). 

Potanin, G. N. (a) Eastern Motives in the Medieval European Epic. Moscow, 1899. 

(b) Sketches of Northwestern Mongolia (Publication of the Imperial 
Geographical Society, St. Petersburg, 1881-1885). 
(In Russian). 

(c) The Tangut-Tibet Borderland of China and Central Mongolia. 
Travels in 1884-1886 (Publications of the Imperial 
Russian Geographical Society, St. Petersburg, 
1893). (In Russian). 

Pumpelly, R. Explorations in Turkestan, Expedition of 1904, Prehistoric Civiliza- 
tion of Anau. Origins, Growths and Influence of 
Environment. 2 vols. (Carnegie Institution of 
Washington, Washington, 1908). 

Radloff, W. (a) Aus Siberien. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1883. 

(b) Das Ili-Thal in Hoch Asien und Seine Bewohner (Petermann’s Mit- 
teilungen, vol. 12, pp. 88-97, and 250-264, 1866). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 257 

Radloff, W. (c) Siberian Antiquities, Materials for the Archzology of Russia (Pub- 
lished by the Imperial Archzological Commission 
St. Petersburg, 1888, 1891, 1892, 1902). (In 
Russian). 

(d) Die Alttiirkischen Inschriften der Mongolei. St. Petersburg, 1894, 
Neue Folge, 1897. 

(e) Die Jakutische Sprache in ihrem Verhaltniss zu den Tiirksprachen 
(Memoirs, Imperial Russian Academy of Sciences, 
vol. 8, part 7, 1907). 

Radloff, W. and Meliransky, P. M. 

(a) The Old Turkic Monuments in Kosho-Tsaidam (Col- 
lection of Documents of the Orkhon Expedition, 
vol. 4, St. Petersburg, 1897). (In Russian). 

(b) Altuigurische Sprachproben aus Turfan. (Nachrichten 
uber die von der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wis- 
senschaften zu St. Petersburg im Jahre 1893 aus- 
gerichtete Expedition nach Turfan, St. Petersburg, 
1899). 

Rashid al-Din Tabib, Fazl Allah. Introductien al’Histoire des Mongols. Translated 
by E. Blochet, E. J. W. Gibb Memorial, vol. 12, 
Leyden and London, 1910. 

Ripley, W. Z. The Races of Europe. New York, 1899. 

Rostovtzeff, M. Iranians and Greeks in South Russia. Oxford, 1922. 

Rudenko. S. I. Anthropological Investigation of the Natives of Northwestern Siberia 
(Memoirs, Imperial Academy of Sciences, vol. 33, 
no. 3, Petrograd, 1914). (In Russian). 

Samoilovich, A. N. (a) On the Question of the Successors of the Khazar and their 
Culture (Yevreiskaya Starina [The Old 
Hebrew Times], vol. 11, pp. 200-210, Lenin- 
grad, 1924). (In Russian). 

(b) Prohibited Words in the Vocabulary of a Married Woman 
among the Kaisak (Shivava Starina [The Old 
Living Times}, parts 1-2, Petrograd, 1915). 
(In Russian). 

Sarubin, I. I. (a) Notes and Material on the Ethnography of the Mountain- 
Tadjiks (Memoirs, Museum of Anthropology 
and Ethnography, Russian Academy of 
Sciences, vol. 5, part 1, pp. 97-148, Petrograd, 
1918). (In Russian). 

o A List of the Tribes of the Turkestan Country (The Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Results of the Study of 
the Ethnical Composition of the Population of 
Russia, No. 9, Leningrad, 1925). (In Russian). 

Savenkov, I. T. (a) Sur les Restes de TV’ Epoque Paléolithique dans les Environs de 
Krasnoiarsk (Congris Internationale d’An- 
thropologie et d’Archéologie de Moscow, vol. 
1, 1892). 

(b) The Stone Age in the Minusinsk Country. Moscow, 1876. 
(In Russian). 

258 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Schrenck, P. L. von. (a) Die Vélker des Amur-Landes. Geographisch-Historischer 
und Anthropologisch-Ethnologischer Theil 
(Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaft, St. 
Petersburg, 1891). 

(b) Reisen und Forschungen im Amur Lande in den Jahren 
1854-1856 (Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissen 
schaften, 4 vols., St. Petersburg, 1858-1881) 

Schuyler, E. Turkestan. 2 vols. New York, 1871. ; 

Schwarz, F. Turkestan die Wiege der Indo-Germanischen Volker. Freiburg, 1900. 

Sedelnikoff, A. P. Distribution of Population. (In ‘‘Russia,” vol. 18, the Kirghiz 
Country, Chapter V). (In Russian). 

Shirokogoroff, S. M. Anthropology of Northern China (North China Branch, Royal 
Asiatic Society, Extra vol. 2, Shanghai, 19°23). 

Shitetzky, I. A. Sketches of the Astrakhan Kalmuck (Memoirs of the Society of the 
Friends of Natural Science, Anthropology and 
Ethnography, at the Imperial University of 
Moscow, vol. 57, pp. 110-123, Moscow, 1892). 
(In Russian). 

Silinich, I. On the Question of the Anthropological Type of the Population of North- 
western Siberia (Russian Anthropological 
Journal, parts 3-4, pp. 43-45, Moscow, 1916). 
(In Russian). 

Sinelnikoff, N. A. The Yenissei-Ostyak (Memoirs of the Society of the Friends of 
Natural Science, Anthropology, and Ethno- 
graphy of the Imperial University of Moscow, 
vol. 28, part 1, Moscow, 1914). (In Russian). 

Skrine, F. H. B. and Ross, E. D. The Heart of Asia, a History of Russian Turkestan 
and the Central Khanates from the Earliest 
Times. London, 1899. 

Stepanoff, P. The Yenisseisk Province. St. Petersburg, 1835. (In Russian). 

sternnere, L. J. The Gilyak (Ethnographical Review, vols. 60-63, pp. 1-131, Mos- 
cow, 1905). (In Russian). 

Sushkin, Peter P. Outlines of the History of the Fauna of Palearctic Asia (Science, 
vol. 61, pp. 522-523, May 15, 1925). 

Sykes, P. M. History of Persia. 2 vols. New York, 1915. 

Szinnyei, Joseph. Finnisch-Ugrische Sprachwissenschaft. Leipzig, 1910. 

Talko-Hrynceviz, J. D. The Ancient Inhabitants of Central Asia (Russian Anthro- 
pological Journal, Vol. 1, pp. 1-11, no. 2, 
Moscow, 1900). (In Russian). 

Tallgren, A. M. Collection Tovostine des Antiquités Préhistoriques de Minoussinsk 
conservées chez le Dr. Karl Hedman A Vasa. 
Chapitres d’Archéologie Sibérienne (Société 
Finlandaise d’Archéologie, Helsingfors, 1917). 

Tate, C. P. The Kingdom of Afghanistan. Bombay, 1911. 

Thomsen, V. (a) Déchiffrement des Inscriptions de l’Orkhon et de 1’Jéniss¢i. 
Notice Préliminaire (Bulletin de l’Académie 
Royale des Sciences et des Lettres de Dane- 
mark, 1893, pp. 285-299, Copenhagen, 1894). 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 209 

Thomsen, V. (b) Inscriptions d l’Orkhon déchiffrées, I, 1894 (Mémoirs, de la 
Société Finno-Ougrienne, vol. 1, p. 224, and 
vol. 5, p. 54, Helsingfors, 1894, 1896). 

Torii, R. and Torii, Kimico. Etude Archéologiques et Ethnologiques (Journal, 
College of Science, vol. 36, Tokyo, 1914). 

Tretyakoff, S. The Turukhansk Country. St. Petersburg, 1871. (In Russian). 

Tsuboi, S. Tokyu Jinruigaku Zasshi (Anthropological Magazine, no. 90, Tokyo, 1894). 

Ujfalvy, C. de. Les Aryans au Nord et au Sud 1’Hindou-Kouch. Paris, 1896. 

Vishnievsky, B. N. Fossil Man in Russia (Appended to the Russian translation of 
Henry Fairfield Osborn’s Men of the Old Stone 
Age, Leningrad, 1924). 

Vitkovsky, N. I. Results of Excavations of Stone Age Burials in Irkutsk Province; 
Account of the Excavation of Stone Age 
Burials on the Banks of the Angara River 
(Bulletin, East Siberian Section of the Imperial 
Russian Geographical Society, vol. 12, no. 1, 
1881, vol. 18, nos. 1-2, 1882). 

Winkler, H. Die Altaische Vélker und Sprachenwelt. Leipzig, 1921. 

Wissler, Clark. The American Indian. An Introduction to the Anthropology of the 
New World. New York, 1922 (Second Edi- 
tion). 

Yadrintzev, N. M. (a) The Altai and its Natives. Petrograd, 1885. 

(b) The Altaians and the Chern Tatars (Bulletin, Imperial 
Russian Geographical Society, vol. 17, pp. 
228-254, 1881). 

Yavorsky, J. L. (a) A Brief Review of a Scientific Mission in Central Asia. Odessa, 
1895. (In Russian). 

(b) An Anthropological Sketch of the Turkoman (Transactions, 
Anthropological Society of the Imperial 
Military Medical Academy, vol. 2, pp. 145- 
206, Petrograd, 1897). 

Yule, Col. Sir Henry. Travels of Marco Polo. Edited by Cordier. London, 1903. 

Zaborowski, M. Sur Dix Cranes de Rochefort, Les Blonds et les Proto-Caucasians 
(Bulletin, Société d’Anthropologie de Paris, 
tome 15 (4th series), pp. 28-65, 1894). 

INDEX 

Abakan Tatars, 30. 

Abdal, 91. 

Abjui, 142. 

Abkhas-Cherkess Group, 142. 

Acknowledgments, 3-4. 

Adighe. See Cherkess. 

Administration, Turkestan, 71-72. 

Administrative, changes under the 
Soviets, 118-124; divisions, Siberia, 
13; divisions of the Caucasus, 138, 139; 
divisions of the Caucasus under the 
Soviets, 158-159. 

Adshar, 142. 

Adultery, customs connected with, Sarts, 
100. 

Afghan, 113, 116, 169, 238. 

Agriculture, attempt at introduction in 
Kamchatka, 50, 53; Azerbaijan, 154; 
camels used in, 82; Kara-Kalpak, 122; 
Kirghiz, 80, 1380; recent introduction 
to Yakut, 27; Tadjik, 110, 111; Turko- 
man, 95. 

Agul, 145. 

Ainu, 58-59, 67-69, 118, 180, 206, 213, 
218, 222; dance, 220; languages, 247. 

Aissor, 152-153. 

Aiwanat Eskimo, 61, 62. 

Alan, 242; identified with Ossete, 166; 
influence on Magyar, 18. 

Alchin, 129. 

Aleut, 63, 64, 207, 213; colonization of 
Commander Islands, 62-63; Com- 
mander, classification with Ameri- 
canoids, 60. 

Aliel, 91. 

Alphabets, Kirghiz, 79-80. 

Altai Tatar, 28-32, 191, 195, 198. 

Altai-Tatar Kumandintzy, 205. 

Americanoid languages, peoples speak- 
ing, 248-249. 

Americanoids, of Siberia, 43-64; various 
classifications of, 43-44. 

Amulets, Koryak, 214; Yukaghir and 
Tungus, 212. 

Amur Orochon, 39. 

Amur Tungus, 213. 

Andi, 145. 

261 

Animal, breeding, Kirghiz, 80-82, 130; 
breeding, nomadic peoples, 187; 
dances, 219-220; dances, Koryak, 222- 
223. 

Animals, domesticated, Central Asia, 74; 
Commander Islands, 64; Kamchadal, 
50; Kirghiz, 80-81; Tadjik, 112; 
owned in Turkestan by provinces, 124. 

Anouli, 91. 

Arabachi, 91. 

Arabs, Caucasus, 153; Turkestan, 116. 

Archeological evidence, bearing on 
original home of the Yakut, 26-27; 
previous occupation by Ainu popula- 
tion, 68. 

Archeology, Asiatic Steppe provinces, 
125. 

Archin, 145. 

Arctic or Hyperborean races, tribes in- 
cluded under, 43. 

Area, Armenia, 159; Azerbaijan, 159; 
Caucasus, 137; Kara-Kalpak Autono- 
mous province, 122; Kara-Kirghiz 
Autonomous province, 121; Republic 
of Georgia, 158; Tadjik Autonomous 
Republic, 121; Turkestan, 71; Turk- 
manistan, 120-121; Uzbekistan, 119, 
120. ° 

Argyn, 128. 

Arin, 65. 

Armenia, administration of, 159. 

Armenian, peoples speaking, 248. 

Armenians, 146-149, 170. 

Art, conventionalization, introduced by 
Buddhism, 215; graphic, 213; influence 
of religion on, 215-216; palsolithic, 
examples of in Western Siberia, 230; 
realism, forbidden by Mohammedism, 
215. 

Artifacts, Magdalenian, Irkutsk District, 
231; microlithic, near Krasnoyarsk, 
230; neolithic, in Mongolia, 232; neo- 
lithic, near Olekminsk, 232; paleolithic, 
Angara Valley, 230; paleolithic, in the 
Caucasus, 229; palseolithic, near Kras- 
noyarsk, 229-231; paleolithic, vicinity 
of Irkutsk, 230, 

262 

Aryan, family, Iranian peoples members 
of, 162; peoples, in Central Asia, 71. 

Aryans, 106-115, 180. 

Asiatic Eskimo, 60-62, 211, 213. 

Asiatic Russia, former administrative 
divisions of, 24. 

Assam, 65. 

Assur. See Aissor. 

Ata, 91. 

Autonomous states in Cis-Caucasia, 159- 
160. 

Avar, 19, 145, 242. 

Azerbaijan, 150, 153-154, 159, 169. 

Bactrians, 168. 

Bagpipe, Gypsy, 217. 

Balkar, 156, 239. 

Baltic Finns, 19-20. 

Baluchi, 169, 238. 

Baraba Tatars, 28. 

Bark-covered tents, Altai Tatar, 
192, 195. 

Barley, grown in Kamchatka, 53. 

Bartering dance, Chukchee, 221-222. 

Bashkir, 18, 127, 128, 136, 195, 198, 208. 

Basmachi uprising, Kirghiz, 78. 

Basques, language spoken by, 138. 

Bear, ceremonies, 222; cult, Goldi, 223; 
dance, Kamchadal, 220; festival, Ainu 
and Gilyak, 222; festival, Gilyak, 59. 

Bedjiye, 88. 

Beltir, 23, 32. 

Birar, 38. 

Birchbark, tent covers, 191, 195. 

Black-Kirghiz. See Kara-Kirghiz. 

Block houses, Siberian natives, 203, 204. 

Boats, Commander Aleut, 64; skin, 
lacking among Kamchadal, 49, 53. 

Body painting, not practised by north 
and central Asiatic peoples, 210. 

Bokharan Jews, 115. 

Boshaa, 151. 

Brachycephalic peoples, 178, 179. 

Brahman peoples, 244. 

Brahmanism, in India, 171. 

Bride price, Kirghiz, 83; Sarts, 99; Tad- 
jik, 111; Turkoman, 94, 96; Uzbeg, 
86. 

191- 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Bronze age, remains of, 234. 

Buddhism, Buryat conversion to, 130; 
conversion to by aborigines of Siberia 
and Central Asia, 243; in India, 171; 
influence on art, 215; spread in Turke- 
stan, 75; Tungus, 41. 

Buddhist peoples, 244; Buryat, 34; Kal- 
muck, 106, 157. 

Buddhists, drums used by, 216. 

Budukha, 145. 

Bukei-Kirghiz, 198. 

Bukeyef, 125, 128. 

Bulgarian Finns, 20-21. 

Burial, customs, Kirghiz, 83, 103; cus- 
toms, Sarts, 104; methods, Iron and 
Bronze age peoples, 235; mounds, 
Asiatic Steppe Provinces, 125; mounds, 
Transbaikalia, southern Siberia, and 
southern Russia, 237. 

Burusheski, 138. 

Burut. See Kara-Kirghiz. 

Buryat, 33, 34, 130, 180, 188, 195, 198, 
203, 211, 212, 225-227. 

Buryatized Tungus, 34. 

Bzyby, 142. 

Camel breeding, Turkestan, 81-82. 

Canoe, dugout, Gilyak, 60. 

Carving, 214-215; realistic, Koryak, 214. 

Caste marks, Hindoo, 210, 

Castes, in India, 171. 

Cattle, Bering Island, 64; breeding, 
Kamchadal, 50; breeding, Kirghiz, 
81, 122; breeding, Siberian Cossacks, 
134; importation in Kamchatka, 50; 
skins, used for clothing, 212. 

Caucasian, languages, peoples speaking, 
248; Mongoloids, 153-157; Osmanii, 
156. 

Caucasus, peoples of the, 137-160; 
peoples, historical wanderings, 238~- 
239. 

Central Asia, administrative divisions of 
under the Soviets, 117. 

Cephalic index, Ainu, 69, 178; Aissor, 
153; Armenians, 146, 178; Chinese, 
178; distribution, 176-178; Dungan, 
178; Finnic Lapps, 178; Gilyak, 178; 

INDEX 263 

Kamchadal, 53; Gypsies, 172; Kir- 
ghiz tribes, 128; Kurd, 149; Persians, 
163; Tadjik, 108; Tungus, 178; 
Turkoman, 178; Zyryan, 178. 

Cephalic module, 182-184. 

Cephalic module stature index, 184-186. 

Cereals, origin of cultivation in Central 
Asia, 74. 

Ceremonial cycle, Asiatic Eskimo, 223; 
Maritime Chukchee, 223. 

Ceremonies, Chukchee, 221-222; Rein- 

deer Chuckchee, 223; Reindeer 
Koryak, 223. 

Chamaeprosopic peoples, 181. 

Chan. See Lazes. 

Chechen group, 148. 

Cheremiss, 20, 21. 

Cherneviye Tatars, 29. 

Chinese, 178; domination in Central 
Asia, 75; peoples speaking, 248. 

Chinesized peoples, 104-105; Manchu, 
241; Dungan, 178. 

Christian peoples, 50. 

Christianity, conversion to, Tungus, 41; 
in Turkestan, 76. 

Chud, 233. 

Chudes, remains of, 126. 

Chukchee, 45-46, 187, 198, 206-211, 216, 
221-222, 

Chukchee-Koryak-Kamchadal physico- 
cultural complex, 53-54. 

Chulyma Tatars, 28. 

Chuvantzy, 54-57. 

Chuvash, 20, 21. 

Circle dance, 218-219. 

Circumcision rites, Kirghiz, 83; Sarts, 
102-103. 

Circumpolar culture, components of, 54. 

Cis-Caucasia, autonomous states in, 
159--160. 

Clan, defined, 129; heads, Kirghiz, 130; 
organization, Kirghiz, 129; system, 
Kirghiz, 84. 

Clans, Dog-Breeding Yukaghir, 56; 
Gilvak, 59; Karagas, 32; Kara-Kal- 
pak, 96-97; Kirghiz, 79; Kirghiz- 
Kaisak, 88; Reindeer Yukaghir, 55; 
Saryk, 91; segregation by kin groups, 

Turkoman, 95-96; Uzbeg, 86, 88. 
Clarinet, played in Turkestan, 217. 
Class system, Kara-Kirghiz, 45; Kirghiz- 

Kaisak, 84. 

‘Clergy, Sart conception of, 76-77. 

Colonization, Commander Islands, 62-63; 
Russian, of Steppe Provinces, 133. 

Comedians, Sarts, 102. 

Common law, Kirghiz-Kaisak, 84; 
Turkoman, 95; Uzbeg, 97. 

Comonians, 97. 

Conical tents, 189-195; Kirghiz, 131. 

Conquest, Chinese, of Mongolic peoples, 
157; Kurd, by Turks, 164; Moham- 
medan, of Khorezm, 167-168; of 
Peking, by Jenghis Khan, 105; Rus- 
sian, of Khanate of Kokand, 87; 
Russian, of Steppe provinces, 127, 
133; Russian, of Turkestan, 71, 95, 97, 
168; Scythians, by Sarmatians, 166; 
of Turkestan, 75; Turkestan by Arabs, 
116; Turkestan, by Jungarians, 127. 

Cooking, Kirghiz, 80. 

Cossacks, Steppe provinces, 133, 134-135. 

Costume, 212-213; Afghans, 116; Aleut, 
64; Hindoos, 113-114; Kirghiz, 83- 
84; Sarts, 87, 104; Tadjik, 87, 112; 
Tungus, 42; Turkestan Jews, 116; 
Turkoman, 93; Uzbeg, 87. 

Courts, Turkoman, 95. 

- Covers, for conical tents, types of, 189, 

191-195; for cylindro-conical tents, 
types of, 196-198; for pyramidal dwell- 
ings, 201; for shades and screens, 189. 

Crests, antiquity of, Kirghiz subclans, 
129-130. 

Crime, definition of, Turkoman, 95. 

Culture, affinities, Yukaghir and Chuk- 
chee and Koryak, 55; general char- 
acterizations of, Aissor, 153; Azerbai- 
jan, 154; Bokharan Jews, 115-116; 
Bulgarian Finns, 20; Buryat, 34; 
Cheremiss, 21; Cherneviye Tatars, 29; 
Chukchee, 45; Dinlin, 236; Dungan, 
105; Gilyak, 60; Gruzian and Gorsky 
Jews, 152; Gypsies, 172; Gypsies of 
Turkestan, 114-115; Kamchadal, 49- 
50; Kara-Kalpak, 96; Kipchak, 97; 

264 

Kirghiz-Kaisak and Kara-Kirghiz, 79; 
Koryak, 47; Kumyk, 154, 156; Kurds, 
149; Lapps, 22; Magyar, 18; Ostyak 
Samoyed, 23; Sart-Kalmuck, 106; 
Soyot, 23; Soyot and Karagas, 24; 
Suomi Finns, 19; Tadjik, 108, 110; 
Tadjik and Ihlat, 163; Tungus, 42, 241; 
Tungus proper, 39, 40; Turkestan, 73, 
74; Turkoman, 95; Turks of the Altai 
Mountains, 29; Uzbeg, 78, 85-86; 
Votyak, 20; Yakut, 27; Zyryan, 20; 
influence of Aryan on Bronze and Iron 
age peoples, 234; influences, Turkic 
and Arabic in Turkestan, 75; palzo- 
lithic, in Siberia, 231; resemblances, 
Americanoids and Northwest Coast 
Indians, 53-54; sequences in Turke- 
stan, 233. 

Cylindro-conical tents, 195-198. 

Cylindro-dome or cupola-shaped felt 
tents, 198-199. 

Dance, mourning, Sarts, 104. 

Dances, dramatic, and mimetic, 219; 
religious, 222-223; Sarts, 101-102; 
Turkestan, 221. 

Dancing, 218-223; boys, Sarts, 101; 
steps, Yukaghir and Yakut, 218-219; 
women, Sarts, 102. 

Danube Bulgarians, 21. 

Darghin, 145. 

Daur, 38, 39. 

Dead, customs connected with, Kirghiz, 
83; Sarts, 103-104; Tadjik, 113; 
feasts in memory of, Kirghiz, 131; 
method of disposal, Parsis, 163. 

Decoration, personal, 210-213; Yakut 
birchbark tent, 191. 

Deformation of head, Sarts, 99. 

Designs, on ceremonial objects, 216; 
carpet, Persia, Central Asia, Daghes- 
tan, Caucasus, Turkoman, 213; for 
decoration of fur clothing, 212; motives 
for, in decorating clothing, 213; orna- 
mental, Yakut, 215. 

Dialectic, affinities, Tungus tribes, 39; 
groups, Amur peoples, 38. 

Dialects, Asiatic Eskimo, 62; Eskimo, 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

61; Finnic, 17; Kamchadal, 49; 
Turkic, 79, 92, 98; Yeniseian compared 
with Mongoloid, 66. 

Didol, 145. 

Digor, 150. 

Din, 65. 

Dinlin, 65, 129, 235-237. 

Disharmonic faces, 180. 

Distribution, cephalic index, 176-178; 
circle dance, 218; conical tents with 
skin and birchbark covers, 191; cylin- 
dro-conical tent, 197-198; cylindro- 
conical felt tent, 198; cylindro-dome or 
cupola-shaped felt tent, 198; drum, 
216-217; earth huts, 206-208; Finnic 
peoples, 16; Jew’s harp, 217; Kal- 
muck, 33; Lapps, 21-22; log houses, 
203; Mordvin, 20; neolithic man in 
Asia, 231; peoples in the Caucasus, 
159; religions, 243; Samoyed, 23; 
stature, 173-176; Tungus, 38; Tungus 
proper, 41; Turkic tribes, 25; Western 
Mongol or Kalmuck, 33. 

Divorce, Sarts, 100. 

Djek, 145. 

Dog, breeding, Commander Aleut, 64; 
driving, Bering Island, 64; driving, 
Gilyak, 59; use and care of, Kam- 
chadal, 50. 

Dolgan, 26, 203. 

Dolichocephalic peoples, 178. 

Dome-shaped tents, Torgout, 131. 

Domestication of animals, Central Asia, 
74; reindeer, 24. See Animals. 

Donkey, importance in nomadic life in 
Turkestan, 82. 

Dravidians, 170. 

Drawing, 213-214. 

Dress, 210-213; men’s and women’s, 
Kirghiz, 84; mourning, Sarts, 104; 
Tadjik women, 107; Turkoman, men’s 
and women’s, 93; Uzbeg, 87; winter, 
northern Siberian natives, 212. See 
Costumes. 

Drums, Siberian, 216; types in Turkestan, 
216-217. 

Dulat, 129. 

Dungan, 97, 104-106, 178, 180, 208. 

INDEX 

Durani Afghan, 116. 

Dwellings, 154, 188-210; Azerbaijan, 
208; Central Asiatic natives, 208; 
classified as to form, 188; Commander 
Aleut, 63; Dungan, 208; Galcha, 209; 
Kara-Kalpak, 208; Kirghiz, 80, 131- 
133, 208; Kolyma Yukaghir, 200; 
northeastern Siberian peoples, 206-— 
207; remains on Lake Baikal, 27; 
Sarts, 208; summer and winter, 203; 
Turkoman, 93, 208; Uzbeg, 87, 208; 
Yakut, 200. 

Earrings, Koryak and Chukchee, 211. 

Earth, houses, Bering Island, 63; huts, 
204-208; Yakut, 191, 195, 203. 

Embroidery, bead and silk, 213; prac- 
tised by men, Tadjik, 113. 

Engravings, Arctic peoples, 213-214. 

Epic tales, Buryat, 225-227; Yukaghir, 
225. 

Epicanthic eyefold, Americanoids, 53. 

Ersar, 91. 

Eskimo, 61, 207, 211, 216, 223; dialects, 

249; disharmonic faces, 180; tribal 
names, 60. 
Esthonians, 19. . 

Ethnographic map, Asiatic Russia, 13. 

Europeans, Caucasus, 151. 

Eye, color, Aissor, 153; Armenians, 146; 
Burusheski, 138; Kurd, 149, 165; 
Ossete, 167; Persians and primitive 
Iranians, 164; Sarts, 99; Uzbeg, 85; 
Yeniseians, 65; forms, Americanoids, 
53; Aissor, 153; Gilyak, 58; Kirghiz- 
Kaisak, 79; Sarts, 99; Turkoman, 92; 
Ural-Altaic peoples, 15. 

Eyebrows and eyelashes, painting, in 
Turkestan, 210. 

Face, form, Gilyak, 58; Kara-Kalpak, 
96; Kara-Kirghiz, 79; Kirghiz-Kaisak, 
79; Sarts, 99; Turkoman, 92; Uzbeg, 
85; painting, Kamchadal, Ainu, and 
Koryak, 210; piercing, 211; Sarts, 
99-100; width, Americanoids, 53. 

Facial index, 180-182; Kurd, 
Ossete, 167. 

165; 

265 

Family life, Sarts, 99-102. 

Farms, Uzbeg, 86-87. 

Fast, Kirghiz, 131. 

Feast, circumcision, Sarts, 103; funeral, 
Sarts, 104. 

Felt-covered tents, 191, 195, 198-199. 

Festivals, religious, Kirghiz, 131. 

Finnic languages, peoples speaking, 247. 

Finnic Lapps, 178. 

Finnic tribes, 16-25. 

Finno-Ugrian stocks, place of origin, 16— 
17. 

Finns, place of origin of, 17; relation to 
Samoyed, 22. 

Fireplaces, in conical tents, 189, 191; 
Yakut houses, 201. 

First Omolon clan, Yukaghir, 56. 

Fish skins, use for clothing, 213. 

Fishermen, stature of, 175. 

Fishing, methods, Kamchadal, 49; 
peoples, 188; Ural Cossacks, 135. 

Flat-roofed block houses, 203. 

Flat-roofed dwellings, of various ma- 
terials, 208-210. 

Flute, not used by Siberian peoples, 217. 

Folklore, Gilyak, 59; Kirghiz, 80; Uzbeg 
86. 

Food, Azerbaijan, 154; Commander 
Islands Aleut, 63-64; Kamchadal, 50; 
Kirghiz, 80, 81; Tadjik, 112; Tatar, 
112; Turkoman, 94-95; Uzbeg and 
Sart, 87. 

Footwear, Tadjik, 112; Turkoman, 93. 

Forest Cheremiss, 21. 

Forest Kamassintzy, 32. 

Fortresses, ruins of Tadjik, 108, 113. 

Fowl, domesticated, Commander Islands, 
64. 

Framework, conical tent, 189; cylindr®- 
conical tent, 195-197; cylindro-dome 
or cupola-shaped felt tent, 198-199; 
pyramidal dwellings, 201; shades and 
screens, 189. 

Fuel, Commander Islands, 63. 

Funerals, Sarts, 103-104. 

Fur-bearing animals, 
Islands, 64. 

Fur clothing, northern Siberia, 212. 

Commander 

266 PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Gagauzy, 96. 

Galchi 108, 168, 169-170, 209, 238. 

Galga. See Ingush. 

Gens, defined, 129. 

Geometric designs, 216. 

Georgia, administration, 158-159. 

Georgians, 140-142, 146. 

German colonists, Steppe provinces, 135. 

Ghilzai, 116. 

Gilyak, 57-60, 178, 206, 207, 213. 

Ghuz Turks, 96. 

Goblets, for kumiss, decoration of, 215. 

Goklan, 91. 

Goldi, 38, 39, 223. 

Gorsky Jews, 152. 

Government, Armenians, 148, 159; 
Azerbaijan, 159; Georgia, 159; Kurdi- 
stan, 149; Samoyed, 22; Siberia, 13; 
Slavonized Finns, 21; republics of 
Bokhara, Khorezm, and Turkestan, 
118-119. 

Great Horde, Kirghiz, 127, 129. 

Greek Catholicism, adoption by peoples 
of the Caucasus, 243. 

Greek Catholic peoples, Abkhas, 142; 
Chechen, 143; Daghestean, 145; 
Siberian Cossacks, 134; Swan, 142. 

Grusians, 140. 

Gruzian Jews, 152. 

Gruzinized peoples, 150. 

Guitar, 218. 

Gurians, 142. 

Gursinized Megrels, 142. 

Gypsies, 172, 180; Caucasus, 151; 
Iranians, 170-172; Turkestan, 114- 
115. 

Habitat, Abdal, 91; Abkhas, 142; 
Afghans, 116; Agul, 145; Aissor, 152; 
Aiwanat, 62; Arabachi, 91; Arabs in 
Turkestan, 116; Archin, 145; Armeni- 
ans, 146; Ata, 91; Avar, 145; Azer- 
baijan, 153; Balkar, 156; Baraba 
Tatars, 28; Bashkir, 18; Beltir, 23- 
24; Bokharan Jews, 115; Bukeyef, 
125; Buryat, 34; Caucasian Osmanli, 
156; Chechen, 143; Cheremiss, 20, 21; 
Cherkesa, 142;. Cherneviye Tatars, 29; 

Chukchee, 45; Chulyma Tatars, 28; 
Darghin, 145; Dinlin, 235-236; Dog- 
Breeding Chuvantzy, 57; Dog-Breed- 
ing Yukaghir, 57; Dolgan, 26; Dravi- 
dians, 170; Dungan, 105; Ersar, 91; 
Esthonians, 19; Finnie peoples, 25; 
Forest Cheremiss, 21; Forest Kamas- 
sintzy, 32; Gagauzy, 239; Georgian 
stocks, 140-142; Gilyak, 57-58; 
Goklan, 91; Gorsky Jews, 152; Gru- 
zian Jews, 152; Gurians, 142; Hindoos, 
113, 170; Igdyr, 91; Ingush, 143; 
Jews in the Caucasus, 152; Kabardin, 
142; Kachin Tatars, 30, 32; Kakhe- 
tins, 142; Kalmuck, 33, 157; Kam- 
chadal, 49; Kamassintzy, 24; Kara- 
chai, 156; Karagas, 24; Karelians, 19; 
Kara-Kalpak, 96; Kara-Kirghiz, 77, 
78; Khevsur, 1438; Kipchak, 97; 
Kirghiz, 78, 125; Kirghiz-Kaisak, 77; 
Kist, 143; Kizyl Tatars, 30; Koibal, 
23-24; Koryak, 47; Kumandintzy, 
29; Kumyk, 154; Kurds, 149, 164; 
Kurin, 145; Lapps, 21-22; Lak or 
Kazi-Kumuk, 145; Lazes, 142; Lebed- 
dintzy, 29; lLesghin, 144-145; 
Magyar, 242; Maritime Chukchee, 
46; Maritime Koryak, 47; Megrel, 
142; Mordvin, 20; Mountain Chechen, 
143; Narym Samoyed, 65; Nogais, 
156; nomadic peoples Turkestan, 74; 
Nookalit, 62; Ogurdjal, 91; Ossete, 
149-150, 166, 238; Ostyak, 17; Oudin, 
145; Peekit, 62; Persians, 113; 
Ratcha, 142; Reindeer Chukchee, 45— 
46; Reindeer Chuvantzy, 56; Rein- 
deer Koryak, 47; Rutul, 145; Sagai 

Tatars, 32; Salor, 91; Salyr, 91; 
Samoyed, 66; Sart-Kalmuck, 106; 
Sarts, 98; Saryk, 91; sedentary 

peoples of Turkestan, 74; Shortzy, 
29; Siberian Bukhartzy, 28; Sog- 
dians, 168; Soyot, 23, 24; Swan, 142; 
Tabsaran, 145; Tadjik, 106; Talysh, 
150; Taranchi, 97, 98, 240; Tatars, 
97; Tate, 150; Tawgi Samoyed, 23; 
Tekke, 88, 91; Teleut, 29, 205; Thu- 
shi, 143; Tobolsk Tatars, 28; Tomsko- 

INDEX 

Kusnetzk Tatars, 29; Tsova-Thushi, 
148; Tungus, 37, 42, 66, 241; Tungus 

. proper, 39-41; Turkic tribes, 235; 
Turkoman, 88, 157; Turks of the 
Altai Mountains, 29; Ubykk, 142; 
Ural-Altaic peoples, 14; Uriankhai, 25; 
Uzbeg, 85; Vesp, 19; Vod, 20; Vogul, 
17; Votyak, 20; Western Mongol or 
Kalmuck, 33; Wooteelit, 26; Yag- 
nobtzy, 168; Yakut, 241-242; Yeni- 
seians, 66; Yezidis, 149; Yikirgaulit, 
62; Yomud, 91; Yurak Samoyed, 23; 
Zyryan, 20. 

Hair, body, Gilyak, 58-59; color, Aissor, 
153; Kirghiz-Kaisak, 79; Kurd, 165; 
Ossete, 167; Persians, 178; Persians 
and primitive Iranians, 164; Samoyed, 
65; Sarts, 99; Tungus, 65; Ugrian 
Ostyak, 65; Uzbeg, 85; Western 
Finns, 16; Yeniseians, 65; dressing, 
211-212; Afghans, 116; Hindoos, 
114; Kirghiz, 83-84; Sarts, 101; 
Tadjik, 112; form, Chukchee, Koryak, 
and Kamchadal, 53; Ural-Altaic 
peoples, 15; ornaments, Northeastern 
Siberian peoples, 211. 

Hazara tribes, 33. 

Head form, Ainu, 234; Americanoids, 
53; Armenians, 146; Asiatic peoples, 
233; Burusheski, 138; Chud, 233-234; 
Georgians, 146; Gilyak, 58, 59-60; 
Gruzian and Gorsky Jews, 152; 
Gypsies, 172; Jews of Yemen, 152; 
Kirghiz-Kaisak, 79; Kurd, 149, 165; 
Ossete, 167; Persians, 163-164, 178; 
Sarts, 99; Tadjik, 108; Turkoman, 
92; Uzbeg, 85; Yeniseians, 234. 

Headgear, Kirghiz, 84; Persia and Sarts, 
104; Tadjik, 112; Turkoman, 93; 
Uzbeg, 87. 

Height-length-breadth head index, 182- 
183. 

Hezare. See Hazara. 

Hindoo, 113-114, 170-172. 

Historical, background, Ainu, 67; data, 
on the Kirghiz, 125-128; wanderings, 
237-243. 

History, Armenians, 146-148. 

267 

Hittite, connected with Armenians, 238; 
language, 146. ° 

Hordes, Kirghiz, 126-128. 

Houses, Arctic peoples of Eurasia, 54; 
Azerbaijan, 154; Central Asiatic 
natives, 208; Commander Aleut, 63; 
construction of Yakut, 201; Eskimo 
and Chukchee, 60; Gilyak, 59, 210; 
Kamchadal, 210; Karachai, 202; 
Karapapak, 156; log, distribution of 
use, 203; Sarts, 99; Tadjik, 111-112, 
202, 210; underground, remains of, 60. 
See Dwellings. 

Horses, breeding, Yakut, 27; care and 
use, Kamchadal, 50; representation in 
Yakut art, avoided, 215; sacrifice of, 
Kirghiz, 131; skins, use for clothing, 
212; types domesticated by Kirghiz, 
80-81. 

Hun-nu, 235. 

Huns, 126. 

Hunting, ceremonies, Yukaghir, 223; 
Commander Aleut, 64; grounds, 

assigned, Northeastern Siberia, 187; 
methods, Kamchadal, 49-50; peoples, 
187. 

Hyperbrachycephalic peoples, 178, 179. 

Igdyr, 91. 

Thlat, 163. 

Illiteracy, Armenian and Azerbaijan, 154; 
Kirghiz, 79. 

Imeretins, 140. 

Immigration, Russians 
Provinces, 133. 

Implements, agricultural and mining, 
Bronze Age, 235. 

Indo-Europeans, 149-150; 
162, 164; peoples, 137, 138. 

Indo-Germanic family, 162, 171. 

Industani-liuli, Indian gypsies, 115. 

Ighilois, 140. 

Inheritance, of office, Kara-Kirghiz, 84. 

Inner Horde, Kirghiz, 128. 

Inscriptions, pictographic, on the Yenisei 
and Orkhon, 65-66, 168. 

Interior arrangement, Azerbaijan houses 
154; conical tent, 189-191; cylindro- 

into Steppe 

languages, 

268 

conical tent, 198; Kirghiz tents, 131- 
132; Kirghiz winter house, 132; Yakut 
house, 201, 203. 

Intermarriage, Kurd with Turkic women, 
165; Shiites and Sunnites, 163. 

Intoxicants, used by Sarts, 101. 

Inuti, 62. 

Invasion, Arab, of Persia, 75; Magyar of 
Western Europe, 19. 

Iranian, languages, peoples speaking, 
247-248; peoples, 161-172, 238; 
peoples, historical wanderings, 237- 
238; peoples of Turkestan, influence of, 
on invaders, 77; peoples of Turkestan, 
subjugation of, 75. 

Iranic Turks, 92. 

Iron. See Ossete. 

Iron age, memorial tablets of, 234. 

Iron working, Tomsko-Kusnetzk Tatars, 
29. 

Irrigation system, Tadjik, 111; ancient 
Turkestan, 72. 

Ismailite sect, peoples belonging to, 245; 
Tadjik belong to, 111. 

Ivenki, 38. 

Jagatai dialect, peoples speaking, 85, 98. 

Japhetic-Aryan language, 146. 

Japhetic languages, peoples speaking, 
137-140. 

Japhetides, 145-151, 180. 

Japhetism, theory of, 137-140. 

Japhetized Aryans, 151. 

Jat, 172. 

Jewelry, Turkoman women, 93. 

Jews, Caucasus, 151; Bokharan, 115; 
Turkestan, 115-116. 

Jew’s harp, distribution, 217. 

Jungarians, 127. 

Kabardin, 142. 

Kachin, 30. 

Kachin Tatars, 26, 198. 

Kaitak, 158. 

Kakhetins, 142. 

Kalmuck, 33, 106, 127, 136, 157, 180, 
198, 199, 239. 

Kamassintzy, 24. 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Kamchadal, 49-53, 59, 188, 206, 212, 213, 
218, 220. 

Kangli, 19, 88, 129. 

Kan-giu, 129.- 

Karachai, 155, 156, 239. 

Karachi, 172. 

Karagas, 24, 32-33. 

Kara-Kalmuck, 29. 

Kara-Kalpak, 96-97, 122, 198, 208. 

Kara-Kalpak Autonomous Province, 122. 

Kara-Kirghiz, 77, 78, 120, 121, 125. 

Kara-Kirghiz Autonomous Province, 121. 

Kara-Nogai, 198. 

Karapapak, 156. 

Kara-Klobub. See Kara-Kalpak. 

Karaliuli, 115. 

Karelians, 19. 

Kartvelians, 140-142. 

Kazi-Kumuk, 145. 

Kerek Koryak, 47. 

Keretkin ceremony, 221, 223. 

Khagas. See Kirghiz-Kaisak. 

Khalkas, 33. 

Khanate of Kokand, Russian conquest 
of, 87. 

Khaput, 145. 

Khazar, 19, 25, 154. 

Khevsur, 140, 143. 

Khinalug, 145. 

Khodja, 91. 

Khorezmians, 167-168. 

Kibi, 38. 

Kinship, reckoning of, Kirghiz, 129. 

Kipchak, 97, 120, 128. 

Kirei, 128. 

Kirghiz, 33, 65, 77-75, 97, 106, 113, 122, 
125-133, 134, 180, 198, 199, 203, 208, 
236, 242. 

Kirghiz-Kaisak, 77, 84, 88, 120, 125, 126. 

Kist, 143. 

Kitchi-juz, 127. 

Kizyl Tatars, 30. 

Koibal, 23, 32. 

Koreans, 38. 

Kolyma Yukaghir, 191. 

Koropok-guru, 68. 

Koryak, 47-49, 198, 207, 211, 212, 213, 
214, 216, 222-223. 

INDEX 269 

Kott, 65. 

Kuman, 128. 

Kumandintzy, 29. 

Kumiss, festivals, Yakut, 27; important 
summer food of Kirghiz, 80; not used 
by Turkoman, 95; not used by Uzbeg, 
87; preparation and use in Turkestan, 
82. ° 

Kumyk, 154-156. 

Kumyk-Tatar dialect, 145. 

Kurdistan, 164. 

Kurds, 148, 149, 164-166. 

Kurilian. See Kamchadal. 

Kurin, 145. 

Labor, division of, care of tent, 191; con- 
structing dwellings, 189; constructing 
felt-covered tent, 199; Kirghiz, 83; 
Tadjik, 112-113; Turkoman, 92: 
Uzbeg, 86. 

Labrets, Diomede Islanders, 62; Eskimo, 
211. 

Lak, 145. 

Languages, 245-249. 

Language, Abakan Tatars, 30; affinities, 
Gilyak, 58; Adshar, 142; Aissor, 152; 
Andi, 146; Arines, Assan, Kotts and 
Yeniseian Ostyak, 65, 236; Armenians, 
146, 148; Asiatic Eskimo, 62; Avar, 
145; Azerbaijan, 154, 239; Balkar 
and Karachai, 156; Baraba Tatars, 
28; Basques, 138; Bulgarian Finns, 
20; Bureshki, 138; Buryat, 34; 
Caucasian aborigines, 137; Caucasian 
gypsies, 151; Caucasian Persians, 151; 
Central Asiatic Jews, 116; Chechen, 
143; Cheremiss and Mordvin, 20-21; 
Cherneviye Tatars, 29; Chulyma 
Tatars, 28; Chuvash, 21; Danube 
Bulgarians, 21; Darghin, 145; Dolgan, 
26; Dungan, 104, 105; extinct of the 
Etruscans, Pelasgians, and Iberians, 
138; Finnic, 22; Finno-Ugrian, 17; 
Forest Cheremiss, 21; Galcha, 169; 
Gruzian and Gorsky Jews, 152; 
Gypsies, 172; Hazara, 33; Hemshin, 
148; Hindoo, 171; Hittite, 146; 

Hungarian, 19; Indo-European, 17; 
Japhetic, 137, 138; Kabardin, 142; 
Kachin Tatars, 32; Kalmuck, 157; 
Kamchadal, 49; Karachai, 155; Kara- 
Kalpak, 96; Khazar, 154; Kirghiz 
divisions, 79; Kirghiz-Kaisak, 126; 
Kizyl Tatars, 30; Kumandintzy, 29; 
Kumyk, 154; Kurds, 149, 164-165, 
238; Lapps, 22; Lazes, 142; Lebe- 
dintzy, 29; Mediteranean, 139-140; 
Nogais, 154; Ossete, 150, 166; Per- 
sian, 162, 164; relationship between 
Finnic and Indo-Germanic, 18; Rus- 
sians of the Steppes, 133; Sagai 
Tatars, 32; Salar, 104; Samoyedic, 
22; Samoyedic elements in Karagas, 
32; Shortzy, 29; Siberian Bukhartzy, 
28; Siberian Mongoloids, 16; Siberian 
Turks, 32; Slavonized Finns, 21; 
Sogdian, 168; Sogdian and Khorez- 
mian, 167; Swan, 142; Tadjik, 107- 
108; Talysh, 150, 239; Taranchi, 
98; Tate, 150, 239; Tomsko-Kusnetzk 
Tatars, 29; Tungus, 39, 41; Turkestan, 
75-77; Turkestan gypsies, 115; Turke- 
stan Jews, 116; Turkic, distribution, 
25; Turkic, spoken by Azerbaijan, 
153; Turkoman, 90, 92; Turks of the 
Altai Mountains, 29; Ugro-Finnic, 16; 
Ural-Altaic, 15,17; Uzbeg, 85; Yakut, 
26; Yeniseians, 66-67; Yukaghir, 75. 

Lamaists, Buryat, 34, 42; Tungus, 41. 

Lamut, 39. 

Lapps, 21-22, 191. 

Law, Kirghiz, 84; Turkoman, 95; Uzbeg, 
86. 

Lazes, 142, 180. 

Lebedintzy, 29. 

Lesghin group, 143-146. 

Lesghinka dance, 221. 

Linguistic affinities, Siberian Mongo- 
loid tribes, 16. 

Little Russians, 135. 

Log houses, Yakut, 191. 

Luri, 172. 

Magyar, 17-19. 

270 

Maimunyliuli, 115. ie 

Makhtum, 91. 

Managhir, 39. 

Manchu, 38, 39. 

Manegri, 38. 

Manicheism, rise and diffusion in Turke- 
stan, 75. 

Maritime Chukchee, 46, 62, 206-207, 223. 

Maritime Koryak, 47-49, 188, 206. 

Marriage customs, Chukchee, 221-222; 
Georgian and Armenian, 149; Kirghiz, 
83; Kirghiz-Kaisak, 84; Sarts, 99; 
Tadjik, 86,111; Turkoman, 96; Uzbeg, 
86. 

Masked ballets, Buddhist, Lamaist priests 
222. 

Masks, Koryak, 223. 

Massacres, of Armenians, 148, 164. 

Mat-covered tents, 195. 

Material culture, Yakut, change in, 27. 

Mazdeism, Yezidism an: offshoot of, 149. 

Medians, 168. 

Megalithic monuments, 232. 

Megrel, 142. 

Mekhinle, 91. 

Meletski Tatars, 28. 

Memorial tablets, stone, 125. 

Mesocephalic peoples, 178, 179. 

Mesoproscopic peoples, 180-181. 

Metal, Tadjik work in, 112. 

Middle Horde, Kirghiz, 127, 128. 

Migrations, Abkhas-Cherkess group, 238; 
Ainu, 68; Aissor, 239; Asia to Ameri- 
ca, 44; Azerbaijan, 154; causes for, 
233; Cherkess, 142; Chukchee, 241; 
Dungan, 240; Finnic tribes, 15; 
Gypsies, 172; historical, Asiatic 
peoples, 237-243; and history, 229- 
249; Japanese, 67; Kara-Kalpak, 96, 
239; Kirghiz-Kaisak, 126-127; Mo- 
hammedan Georgians, 238; Neo- 
Siberians, 15-16; peoples of Asiatic 

Steppe provinces, 126; prehistoric, 
229-234; Reindeer Chukchee, 240; 
Samoyed, 222, 242; Sarts, 240; 

Tatars, 97, 240; Tate, 238-239; Tun- 
gus, 37, 39, 241; Yeniseians, 66. 
Military, duties, Cossacks, 134; service, 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

peoples of Asiatic Russia, 78. 

Milk, Kamchadal uses of, 50. 

Mingrel, 142. 

Mode of life, 187-227. 

Mohammedan, influence on art, 215; 
peoples, 150, 244-245; Abkhas, 142; 
Andi, 146; Azerbaijan, 153; Chechen, 
143; Daghestan, 145; Hemshin, 148; 
Ihlat, 163; Kumyk, 154; Kurds, 149; 
Sart-Kalmuck, 106; Tadjik, 163. 

Mohammedanism, Afghans, 116; con- 
version to, aborigines of Siberia and 
Central Asia, 243; conversion of Turko- 
man to, 88; Dungan, 105; in India, 
171; introduction into Turkestan, 116, 
240; Georgians proper, 140; Kabardin, 
142; Kirghiz, 83, 1380; Lazes, 142; 
Siberian Cossacks, 134; spread, in 
Central Asia, 75; Tadjik, 108, 111; 
Tatars, 97; in Turkestan, 76; Turke- 
stan Gypsies, 115; Turkoman, 92; 
Uzbeg, 86. 

Mongol divisions, 33. 

Mongolic, languages, peoples speaking, 
246-247; tribes, 33-34; tribes, Cauca- 
sus, 157-158; tribes, Turkestan, 104- 
106. 

Mongoloid, characters, Bulgarian physi- 
cal type, 21; influences on Magyar, 
18; physical characters, Magyar, 18; 
Slavonized Finns, 21; traits, Kirghiz, 
79; Ural-Altaic peoples, 15; Western 
Finns, 16; Yakut, 26. 

Mongoloids, Asia and Europe, 13-42; 
Caucasian, 153-157; Siberian, 16. 

Mongols, 15, 37, 198. 

Mordvin, 20. 

Morphological modifications, Yeniseian 
languages, 66. 

Mosques, Turkoman, 92. 

Mountain Chechen, 143. 

Mountain Cheremiss, 21. 

Mountain Kalmuck, 28. 

Mountain Kirghiz. See Kara-Kirghiz. 

Mountain Tadjik, 108, 111, 156, 169, 238. 

Mourning dance, Sarts, 104. 

Murchali, 91. 

Murder, punishment and avenging for, 

INDEX 

Turkoman, 96. 

Music, 216-218; Caucasian Lesghinka 
dance, 221; Kirghiz, 80; Turkoman, 
93; Uzbeg, 86. 

Musical instruments, Kirghiz, 80; Sarts, 
101, 102; Turkoman, 90; Uzbeg, 30, 
86. 

Mykhad. See Rutul. 

Nagda, 39. 

Naiman, 128. 

Names, Upper Yenisei rivers, Turkic 
origin of, 234. 

Nakhchi. See Chechen. 

Nani, 38. 

Narym-Samoyed, 23, 65. 

Nasal index, Kirghiz, 128; Ossete, 167. 

Nawars, 172. 

Negidaltzy, 38. 

Neolithic, man, distribution in Asia, 231; 
remains,, Krasnoyarsk district, 230; 
stations, in Siberia, 231-232. 

Neo-Siberians, migrations, 15-16. 

Nestorianism, spread in Turkestan, 76. 

Nestorians, Aissor, 152. 

New Persian language, 150. 

Nobility, Kirghiz, 130; Kirghiz-Kaisak, 
84, 

Nobles, Tungus, 42. 

Nogai, 128. 

Nogais, 156, 198. 

Nogai Pechenyeg, 96. 

Nookalit, 62. 

Nose, flute, Hindoo, 217; form, Ameri- 
canoids, 53; Armenians, 146; Gilyak, 
58; Kara-Kalpak, 96; Kirghiz-Kaisak, 
79; Sarts, 99; Turkoman, 92; Ural- 
Altaic peoples, 15; rings, Salyr, 93. 

Nukhurli, 91. 

Odul, 55. 

Offering festival, Kirghiz, 131. 
Ogurdjal, 91. 

Ogus, 88, 91. 

Oirat. See Kalmuck, 157. 
Okhotsk Tungus, 196. 

Olchi, 38, 39. 

Omok clans, Yukaghir, 56. 

271 

Ordas, Kirghiz, 79. 

Origin, Afghan and Baluchi, 238; Ainu, 
67-68; Aissor, 152, 239; Armenians, 
146, 238; Aryan Hindoo, 238; Asiatic, 
American aborigines, 44-45; Asiatic, of 
man, 229; Azerbaijan, 153; Caucasian 
Jews, 152; Chechen and Lesghin 
groups, 238; Chukchee, Koryak and 
Kamchadal, 45; Chuvash, 21; Dog- 
Breeding Yukaghir, 57; Dolgan, 26; 
Dungan, 104; Durani Afghan, 116; 
Finno-Ugrian stock, 16, 17; Finns, 17; 
Georgian tribes, 238; Georgians or 
Kartveliens, 140; Ghilzai, 116; Gilyak, 
58-59; Gypsies, 172, 238; Iranian 
peoples, 161-162, 237; Kara-Kalpak, 
96; Kara-Kirghiz, 77; Khakas, 126; 
Khazar, 19; Khorezmians, 238; Kir- 
ghiz, 239; Kirghiz-Kaisak, 77-78, 128; 
Kirghiz Middle Horde, 128; Kumyk, 
154, 239; Kurd, 164, 165-166, 237; 
Magyar, 17-18; Mongols, 15; Ossete, 
150, 166, 237-238; Samoyed, 16, 17, 
22; Samoyed and_ Finno-Ugrian 
peoples, 242; Sarts, 98; Siberian Buk- 
hartzy, 28; Siberian Cossacks, 134; 
Slavonized Finns, 21; Sogdians, 238; 
Soyot and Karagas, 24; Tadjik, 106, 
108, 164, 168; Talysh, 151; Taranchi, 
97; Tatars, 15; Tate, 150; Tungus 
groups, 38-39; Tungus-Manchu, 15; 
Turkic tribes, 23; Turkic tribes of 
Turkestan, 71; Turkoman, 88, 239; 
Turkomanized peoples, 91; Turks, 16; 
Ural Cossacks, 135; Uzbeg, 85, 239; 
Yakut, 27, 241; Yeniseians, 66-67. 

Ornamentation, Siberian clothing, 212. 

Orochi, 38. 

Orochon, 38, 39. 

Ornament, 210-213. 

Orok, 39. 

Oroki, 39. 

Osmanli, 156, 239. 

Osmanly language, 148. 

Ossete, 149-150, 166, 238. 

Ostyak, 16, 17, 22, 65, 180, 191, 206, 218, 
243. 

Ostyak-Samoyed., 22. 

272 

Ostyak-Vogul, 211. 
Oudin, 145. 

Pahlavi, Persian language of the middle 
Iranian period, 162. 

Painting, 210. 

Palaeasiatics, 43-44. 

Paleolithic remains, in Central Caucasus, 
229; not found in Mongolia, Man- 
churia, Korea, Japan, and China, 232; 
in the Yenisei region, 229-230; site, 
near Krasnoyarsk, 229; stations, near 
Irkutsk, 230; in the Yenisei valley, 
230. 

Paleo-Siberians, 44. 

Pantomime, 219-221. 

Pantomimic dances, 
Kamchadal, 220. 

Parsis, 163. 

Partridge dance, Kamchadal, 220. 

Pechenyeg, 19, 88, 96, 126, 128. 

Peekit, 46, 62. 

Pent-roofed dwellings, 203. 

Permians, 20. 

Persia, derivation of name, 162. 

Persians, 113, 151, 163. 

Physical type, Afghan, 169; Ainu, 69; 
Aissor, 152; Altaian Turks and Chern 
Tatars, 235; Armenians, 146; Azer- 
baijan, 153; Caucasus people, 235; 
Cheremiss, 21; Chuvash, 21; Danube 
Bulgarians, 21; Dinlin, 65, 236; Chuk- 
chee, Koryak, and Kamchadal, 53; 
Dungan, 105; Forest Cheremiss, 21; 
Galcha, 169; Georgians, 146; Gilyak, 
58; Gruzian and Gorsky Jews, 152; 
Gypsies, 172; Indian Aryans, 170- 
171; Iranian, 161-162; Kalmuck, 157; 
Kara-Kalpak, 96; Kirghiz, 79, 128; 
Kirghiz-Kaisak, 126; Kurds, 149, 
165-166; Lapps, 22; Magyar, 18; 
Ossete, 150, 167; Persians, 163-164; 
Russians of the Steppes, 133; Samoyed 
in Karagas, 32; Sarts, 98-99, 169; 
Slavonized Finns, 21; Tadjik, 108; 
109, 169; Talysh, 151, 239; Tate, 
150, 239; Tekke, 92; Transbaikalian 
peoples, 237; Turkoman, 90, 91-92; 

Caucasian, 221; 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Ural Cossacks, 135; Ural-Altaic 
peoples, 15; Usun, 126; Uzbeg, 85; 
Vogul and Ostyak, 16; Votyak and 
Zyryan, 20; Yakut, 24, 26; Yen- 
iseians, 65,67; Yenisei Ostyak, 236; 
Yezidis, 149; Yukaghir, 54. 

Pictographic inscriptions, Yenisei and 
Orkhon, 65-66. 

Pictographic writing, 
Provinces, 125; 
Yukaghir, 214. 

Pictographs, prehistoric Siberian, 213. 

Pile dwellings, 210. 

Place names, South Russian explained by 
Ossetian language, 166. 

Plains Tadjik, 108, 169. 

Poems, Sarts, 217. 

Poetry, 224-227; development among 
Mohammedan peoples, 224; Turko- 
man, 93; Yukaghir, 224, 225. 

Political, history, Khorezm, 
organization, Kirghiz, 129; 
Finland, 19. 

Polovtzy, 19, 96, 97, 128. 

Polygamy, Aissor, 152; Kirghiz, 133; 
Sarts, 99, 100-101; Tadjik, 111; 
Turkoman, 94. 

Population numbers, Abdal, 91; Abkhas, 
142; Adshar, 142; Afghans, 116; 
Agul, 145; Ainu, 67; Aissor, 152; 
Andi, 145; Arabachi, 91; Arabs in 
Turkestan, 116; Archin, 145; Ar- 
menia, 159; Armenians, 148; Ata, 91; 
Avar, 145; Azerbaijan, 153, 159; 
Balkar, 156; Baraba Tatars, 28; 
Bashkir, 156; Beltir, 32; Bukeyef, 
125, 128; Buryat, 33, 34; Caucasus, 
137; Caucasus gypsies, 151; Cauca- 
sian Osmanli, 156; Caucasian Persians, 
151; Chechen, 143; Cheremiss, 21; 
Cherkess, 142; Cherneviye Tatars, 
29; Chukchee, 45; Chulyma Tatars, 
28; Chuvantzy, 55, 57; Chuvash, 
21, 156; Commander Islands, 63; 
Darghin, 145; Didol, 145; Dog- 
Breeding Yukaghir, 56; Dungan, 105; 
Eastern and Western Mongol, 33; 
Ersar, 91; Eskimo, 92; European in 

Asiatic Steppe 
Bronze Age, 234; 

167-168; 
status, 

INDEX 

the Caucasus, 151; Finland, 19; Finnic 
peoples, 15; Forest Cheremiss, 21; 
Gagauzy, 96; Georgians proper, 140; 
Georgian stocks, 140; Gilyak, 57; 
Goklan, 91; Gorsky Jews, 152; Gru- 
zian Jews, 152; Gurians, 142; Gypsies, 
172; Hindoos, 113; Igdyr, 91; Imere- 
tins, 140; Jews in the Caucasus, 151- 
152; Kachin Tatars, 32; Kalmuck, 
157; Kamchadal, 49; Karachai, 156; 
Kara-Kalpak, 96; Kara-Kalpak Auto- 
nomous Province, 122; Kara-Kirghiz, 
78, 120; Kara-Kirghiz Autonomous 
Province, 121; Karapapak, 156; 
Karelians, 19; Khinalug, 145; Kip- 
chak, 97, 120; Kirghiz, 33, 78, 83, 121, 
125; Kirghiz Steppe Provinces, 133; 
Kirghiz-Kaisak, 77, 120, 156; Kizyl 
Tatars, 30; Koibal, 32; Koryak, 47; 
Kumandintzy, 29; Kumyk, 154; 
Kurds, 149; Kurin, 145; Lak or Kazi- 
Kumuk, 145; Lapps, 21; Lazes, 142; 
Lebedintzy, 29; Magyar, 17; Man- 
chu, 38; Megrel, 142; Mongols, 33; 
Mordvin and Western Finns, 20; 
Narym Samoyed, 65; Nogais, 156; 
Ogurdjal, 91; Ossete, 149-150; Ostyak, 
17; Oudin, 145; Persians, 113; Per- 
sians, Turkoman Soviet Socialist 
Republic, 121; Reindeer Chukchee, 
45-46; Reindeer Koryak, 47; Republic 
of Georgia, 158; Russians in the 
Caucasus, 151; Russians, in Turko- 
man Soviet Socialist Republic, 121; 
Russian, in Uzbekistan, 120; Rutul, 
145; Sagai Tatars, 32; Salor or 
Salyr, 91; Samoyed, 22; Sart-Kal- 
muck, 106; Sarts, 98, 156; Saryk, 91; 
Shortzy, 29; Siberia, 13-14; Siberian 
Bukhartzy, 28; Siberian Turks, 32; 
Steppe Kamassintzy, 32; Steppe 
Kirghiz, 125; Swan, 142; Tabsaran, 
145; Tadjik, 106, 107, 120, 121; 
Tadjik Autonomous Republic, 122; 
Talysh, 150; Taranchi, 98; Tatars, 97; 
Tate, 100; Tekke, 88; Teleut, 29; 
Tobolsk Tatars, 28; Tomsko-Kus- 
netzk Tatars, 29; Tungus, 38, 39, 41, 

273 

42; Tungusized Yukaghir, 56; Turke- 
stan, 72, 74-75; Turkestan Gypsies, 
114; Turkestan Jews, 116; Turkestan 
Republic, 123; Turkic tribes, 25; 
Turkmanistan, 121; Turkoman, 88, 
121, 157; Turks of the Altai Moun- 
tains, 29; Uzbeg, 85, 86, 120, 121; 
Uzbekistan, 119-120; Vesp, 19; Vod, 
19-20; Vogul, 17; Votyak, 20; West- 
ern Mongols, 33; Yagnobtzy, 168; 
Yakut, 25-26; Yeniseians, 66; Yezidis, 
149; Yomud, 91; Yukaghir, 55; 
Zyryan, 20; relation between urban 
and rural, Turkestan, 73; relative 
number of native and Russian, 74. 

Pottery, Kamchadal, 69; Kirghiz, 80; 
Koryak sites, 232; neolithic, in Siberia, 
231; Tadjik, 110; Yakut, 27. 

Prehistoric, contact, Turks and Aryan, 
235; migrations, 229-234. 

Property marks, Kirghiz, 129. 

Protestant peoples, 244. 

Proverbs, Kirghiz, 83, 84-85; Sart, 72. 

Provinces, Turkestan, 71-72. 

Pshav, 140. 

Pyramidal dwellings, 201. 

Racial composition, Siberian Cossacks, 
135. 

Rainfall, Turkestan, 72. 

Rainproof clothing, Aleut and Asiatic 
Eskimo, 213. 

Rank, Turkoman, 94, 95. 

Ratcha, 142. 

Raven dance, Chukchee, 220. 

Realistic designs, on ceremonial objects, 
215-216. 

Reed-pipes, 217. 

Reindeer, breeders, stature of, 175; 
breeding, Chukchee, 60; breeding, 
Karagas, 32; breeding, Yukaghir, 55; 
breeding complex, diffusion of, 54; 
culture, Yakut, 27; domestication of, 
24; driving, Chukchee and Koryak, 
59; hunting, Kamchadal, 49; skins, 
for clothing, 212; types and riding 
gear, Karagas, 24-25. 

Reindeer Chukchee, 45-46, 223, 240. 

274 

Reindeer Chuvantzy, 56. 

Reindeer Koryak, 47, 223, 241. 

Reindeer Tungus, 241. 

Religion, Abkhas, 142; Adshar, 142; 
Andi, 146; Armenian, 148; and art, 
215-216; Buryat, 34; Chuvantzy, 57; 
Dungan, 105; Georgians, 140; Hazara, 
33; Indian peoples, 170; Kabardin, 

142; Kalmuck, 106, 157; Khazar, 
19; Kirghiz, 78, 83, 130-131; Kurds, 
149; Medians, 168; Oudin, 145; 

Parsis, 163; Persian and Turkic Aissor, 
152; Persians, 113; Sart, 76; Sart 
Kalmuck, 106; Siberian Bukhartzy, 
28; Siberian Cossacks, 134; Tadjik, 
108, 111, 163; Tate, 239; Tungus, 
41-42; Turkestan, 75-77; Turkestan 
Gypsies, 115; Uzbeg, 86; Votyak, 
20; West Siberian Tatars, 32; Yen- 
iseians, 66; Yezidis, 149; Yukaghir, 
57; Zyryan, 20. 

Religious, classifidation, 243-245; dances, 
222-223. 

Republic of Bokhara, 118-119. 

Republic of Georgia, 158-159. 

Republic of Khiva, 119. 

Republic of Khorezm, 118. 

Revolt, against Chinese, Dungan, 105, 
106. 

Ritual dances, 222-223. 

River Ostyak, 188. 

Roman Catholic peoples, 244; Chechen, 
143; Swan, 142. 

Russianized peoples, Buryat, 34; Cher- 
neviye Tatars, 29; Chulyma Tatars, 
28; Kamchadal, 206; Kizyl Tatars, 
30; Ossete, 150; Siberian Bukhartzy, 
28; Steppe Kamassintzy, 32; Teleut, 
29. 

Russianized Chuvantzy, 57. 

Russianized Kamchadal, 49. 

Russianized Koryak, 47. 

Russianized Yukaghir, 56. 

Russians, in the Caucasus, 151; in the 
Steppes, 133-136; in Uzbekistan, 120; 
influence on peoples of Turkestan, 74; 
influence on Siberian natives, 13; in- 
fluence on Turkic peoples, 32-33; 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

influence on Yeniseians, 65. 
Rutul, 145. 

Sacrifice, ceremonies, Maritime Chuk- 
chee, 223; horses, Kirghiz, 131. 

Sagai, 65. 

Sagai Tatars, 32. 

Sakha, 26. 

Salar, 104. 

Salor, 91. 

Salyr, 91, 93. 

Samaghir, 38, 39. 

Samoyed, 16, 17, 22-23, 191, 231. 

Samoyedic dialects, “247.. 

Samoyed Ostyak, 22, 65. 

Samurrakan, 142. , 

Sarmatians, 166. 

Saryk, 91. 

Sarticized Tadjik, 108. 

Sart-Kalmuck, 106. 

Sarts, 74, 76-77, 86, 87, 97, 98-104, 115, 
136, 169, 198, 208, 218. 

Scarification, 210. 

Screens, 189. 

Sculpture, development of, peoples of 
Eurasia, 214. 

Sea dog dance, Kamchadal, 220. 

Sealing methods, Kamchadal, 49-50. 

Seal hunting, Commander Aleut, 64. 

Sealskins, use for clothing, 212-213. 

Sea mammals, hunting, Kamchadal, 
49-50. 

Seid, 91. 

Selenga Buryat, 195. 

Semites, Turkestan, 115-122. 

Semitic, languages, peoples speaking, 
249; peoples, 151-153. 

Semito-Hamite peoples, 138. 

Settlements, Commander Islands, 62; 
Russian on Kurile Islands, 67; sum- 
mer, on Bering Island, 63; summer, 
on Copper Island, 53. 

Shades, 189. 

Shaman, Yakut, dress of, 215. 

Shamanism, peoples practising, 245; 
Buryat, 34, 130; Irano-Turkic tribes, 
75; Tungus, 41-42. 

Shaman’s dances, 223. 

INDEX 

Shamanistic beliefs, Kirghiz, 83; per- 
formances, 223; performances, Yuka- 
ghir, 225. 

Sheep breeding, Kirghiz and Turkoman, 
81; breeding, Tadjik, 112; economic 
importance, among Kirghiz, 81. 

Shellmounds, 232. 

Shiite sect, peoples belonging to, 245; 
Azerbaijan, 153; Persians, 113, 164; 

Tadjik, 111, 163; Tate, 150; in 
Turkestan, 76, 77. 
Shik, 91. 

Shortzy, 29. 

Shrouds, Afghanistan and Sart, 104. 

Siberian Americanoids, 43. 

Siberian Bukhartzy, 28. 

Siberian Cossacks, 134. 

Singing, circle dance, 219; 
dances, 220; Sarts, 101. 

Sinti, 172. 

Skin, boat, not found among Gilyak, 60; 
not used by Commander Aleut, 64; 
clothing, 212-213; color, Aissor, 153; 
color, Americanoids, 58; color, Kir- 
ghiz-Kaisak, 79; color, Sarts, 99; 
color, Tadjik, 108; color, Turkoman, 
92; color, Ural-Altaic peoples, 15; 
color, Uzbeg, 85; cover, conical tent, 
190; cover, cylindro-conical tent, 196; 
covers for tents, 191, 193, 195. 

Skulls, dolichocephalic, Chudes, 126. 

Slavery, Kirghiz, 130; Persian, 
Turkoman, 94, 95, 115. 

Slavonized Finns, 21. 

Sledge, Gilyak, 59; Kamchadal, 50; 
Reindeer Koryak, 51-52. 

Sloping-roofed block houses, 203. 

Small Horde, Kirghiz, 127, 129. 

Smoke hole, use as entrance to house, 
Gilyak, 59. 

Snowhouse, an Eskimo invention, 54; 
Eskimo and Kerek, 208. 

Snowshoes, Aleut, 64. 

Social, life, Kirghiz, 130; organization, 
Kirghiz, 84-85; organization, Kir- 
ghiz-Kaisak, 84, 130; organization, 
Kumyk, 156; organization, Turkoman, 
90-91; organization, Uzbeg, 86. 

Chukchee 

113; 

275 

Sod huts, Kirghiz, 132. 

Sogdians, 167-168. 

Solon, 38, 39. 

Somatology, 1738-186; Kirghiz, 128-129. 

Songs, animal, Chukchee, 220; Buryat 
shaman, 225; contests in improvisa- 
tion of, 80; Sarts, 102. 

Soviets, administrative changes under the, 
117, 118-124; administrative divisions 
of the Caucasus under the, 158-159. 

Soyot, 23, 24, 25. 

Spirits, recognized by Tadjik, 111. 

St. Lawrence Eskimo, 62. 

Statistical data, on Turkestan Republic, 
122-124, 

Stature, Aissor, 152-153; determining 
factors in, 173-175; distribution of, 
173-176; Georgians, 146; Gruzian 
and Gorsky Jews, 152; Kara-Kalpak, 
96; Kara Kirghiz, 79; Kirghiz-Kaisak, 
79, 128; and occupation, 175; Ossete, 
167; Sarts, 99; Tadjik, 108; Turko- 
man, 92, 96; Uzbeg compared with 
Kirghiz, 85. 

Steppe Kamassintzy, 32. 

Steppe Kirghiz, 125. 

Steppe Provinces, Asiatic, 125-136. 

Steppes, Russian population of, 133-136. 

Storehouses, Kamchadal, 209, 210. 

Stringed instruments, 217-218. 

Subclans, Kirghiz, 129. 

Sunnite sect, peoples following, 244-245; 
Abkhas, 142; Adshar, 142; Afghans, 
116; Andi, 146; Chechen, 143; Daghe- 
stan, 145; Georgians, 140; Hemshin, 
148; Jhlat, 163; Kabardin, 142; 
Kirghiz, 83, 130; Kurds, 149, 164; 
Lazes, 142; Ossete, 150; Tadjik, 108, 
163; Turkestan, 76; Turkoman, 92; 
Uzbeg, 86. 

Summer dwellings, 
Yakut, 191. 

Suomi Finns, 19. 

Swan, 142. 

Swan dance, Yukaghir, 219. 

Swanet, 142. 

Swine breeding, in Turkestan, 82. 

Kirghiz, 80, 131; 

276 

Tabsaran, 145. 

Tadjik, 74, 86, 87, 98, 106-113, 120, 
162-163, 164, 168, 169-170, 180, 238. 

Tadjik Autonomous Republic, 121-122. 

Tagaur, 150. 

Talysh, 150-151. 

Tambourine, 216. 

Taranchi, 97-98, 218, 240. 

Tatarized Arin, 65. 

Tatarized peoples, Baraba Tatars, 28; 
Samoyed, 24; Steppe Kamassintzy, 32. 

Tatars, 15, 25, 26, 27-32, 83, 97, 128, 242. 

Tate, 150, 169. 

Tattooing, 210-211. 

Tauli. See Balkar. 

Tawgi Samoyed, 22, 23. 

Teeth, painting of, 210. 

Tekke, 88, 91, 92, 95. 

Tekkintzi, 88. 

Teleut, 29. 

Tents, conical, 189-195; 
154. 

Thanksgiving ceremonial, Chukchee, 223. 

Theft, adjustment for, Turkoman, 95. 

Thushi, 143. 

Tobacco, used by Turkoman, 95. 

Tobolsk Tatars, 28. 

Tomsko-Kusnetzk Tatars, 29. 

Tonchi, 68. 

Torgout, 131, 157, 180. 

Trade, Cossacks with Kirghiz, 134. 

Trading dance, Chukchee, 221-222. 

Transportation methods, Azerbaijan, 
154; Commander Aleut, 64; migra- 
tory peoples, 187; Tadjik, 112; Turke- 
stan, importance of camel in, 81-82. 

Transverse cephalo-facial index, Kirghiz, 
128, 

Trees, Commander Islands, 63. 

Tribal organization, Kirghiz-Kaisak, 129- 
130. 

Trombones, 217. 

Trumpets, 217. 

Truncated pyramidal dwelling, 201-203. 

Tsova-Thushi, 143. 

Tual, 150. 

Tuba, 24. 

Tundra Yukaghir, 196, 211, 212. 

felt-covered, 

PEOPLES OF ASIATIC RUSSIA 

Tungus, 34, 37-42, 66, 178, 187, 191, 198, 
211, 212, 218. 

Tungusized Yukaghir, 55, 56, 57. 

Tungus-Manchu, 15, 247. 

Turkestan, Mongolic tribes of, 104-106; 
nations of, 71-124; peoples, historical 
wanderings of, 239-240. 

Turkestan Republic, 118. 

Turkestan Semites, 115-122. 

Turkic, languages, distribution, 25; 
peoples speaking, 245-246; tribes, 
23, 25-33. 

Turkic-Altaic family, 43. 

Turkicized peoples, 25; Dinlin, 236; 
Iranians, 162; Kaitak, 158; Samoyed, 
23-25; Sarts, 169; Yeniseians, 65-66, 

Turkmanistan, 120-121. 

Turkoman, 74, 88-96, 113, 121, 153, 157, 
178, 180, 198, 208, 239. 

Turkomanized peoples, 91. 

Turkoman Soviet Socialist Republic, 
120-121. 

Turko-Tatar languages, 79. 

Turks, 16, 28. 

Tushin, 140. 

Tzygany, 172. 

Ubykh, 142. 

Ugrians, 17-19. 

Ugrian Ostyak, 17, 65. 

Ugro-Finnic languages, 16. 

Uigur, 65, 104, 126; alphabet, 168; char- 
acters, used by Kirghiz, 79-80; in- 
scriptions on stone, 125-126; writing, 
213. 

Ulu-juz, 127. 

Underground dwellings, 59, 204-208. 

Ural-Altaic, languages, 17; peoples, 14— 
16. 

Ural Cossacks, 134, 135. 

Uriankhai, 25, 26. 

Urta-juz, 127. 

Usun, 126, 128, 233, 237. 

Uzbeg, 78, 85, 88, 92, 96, 97, 116, 129, 
168, 180, 198, 208. 

Uzbeg Socialist Soviet Republic, 119. 

Uzbekistan, 119-120. 

INDEX 

Vesp, 19. 

Villages, Aleut, 67; Bering Island, 63; 
Chukchee, 45, 46; Commander Aleut, 
63; Copper Island, 63; German 
Colonists, Steppe Provinces, 135; 
Koryak, 49; Little Russians, Steppe 
Provinces, 135; Maritime Koryak, 47; 
Tadjik, 111, 112. 

Violin, two stringed, Ostyak, 218. 

Violincello, Mongol, 218; Sarts, 217. 

Vod, 19-20. 

Vogul, 16, 17, 211, 218. 

Volga Bulgarians, 21. 

Volga Kalmuck, 157. 

Votyak, 20. 

Water supply, Turkestan, 72. 

Weaving, Turkoman, 93; Yakut, 215. 

Western Finns, 19. 

Western Siberians, 242-243. 

West Siberian Tatars. See Tobolsk 
Tatars. 

White Kalmuck, 28. 

Wind instruments, 217. 

Winter dwelling, Kirghiz, 80, 131, 132; 
Uzbeg, 87. 

Wives, exchange of, Chukchee, 221-222. 

Women, position, among Kirghiz, 83; 
among Sarts, 83, 86, 99-100; among 
Tadjik, 86, 112; among Turkoman, 
93-94; among Uzbeg. 

Wooteelit, 62. 

277 

Writing, Kirghiz, 79-80; picture, in the 
Irkutsk country, 213. 

Yagnob, 108. 

Yagnobtzy, 168. 

Yaik Cossacks, 135. 

Yak, domestication of, 81. 

Yakut, 24-27, 188-189, 191, 195, 200, 
201, 203, 204, 211, 212, 215, 218-219. 

Yakutized tribes, Dolgan, 26. 

Yakutized Tungus, 201. 

Yakutized Yukaghir, 57. 

Yezidis, 149. 

Yikirgaulit, 62. 

Yomud, 91. 

Yuiit, 62. 

Yugria, 242, 243. 

Yukaghir, 54-57, 200, 207, 211, 212, 218- 
219, 225. 

Yurak, 22, 23. 

Yurak Samoyed, 23. 

Yeniseian dialects, peoples speaking, 247. 

Yeniseian Kott, 32. 

Yeniseians, 65-67. 

Yenisei Ostyak, 32, 65, 236. 

Yenisei Samoyed, 22. 

Zarathustra, religion of, 168. 

Zoroaster, Persian doctrine of, 148, 163. 
Zoroastrianism, spread in Turkestan, 75. 
Zyryan, 20, 178.
