Homilies on Philemon (John Chrysostom)
Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 1, 1887. Public domain.
Source: Christian Classics Ethereal Library.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

 homilies of St. John Chrysostom,

 archbishop of constantinople,

 on the

 epistle of St. paul the apostle

 to

 Philemon.

 ------------------------

 Argument.

 First, it is necessary to state the argument of the Epistle, then also
 the matters that are questioned respecting it. What then is the
 argument? Philemon was a man of admirable and noble character. That he
 was an admirable man is evident from the fact, that his whole household
 was of believers, [1529] and of such believers as even to be called a
 Church: therefore he says in this Epistle, "And to the Church that is
 in thy house." (v. 2.) He bears witness also to his great obedience,
 and that "the bowels of the Saints are refreshed in him." (v. 7.) And
 he himself in this Epistle commanded him to prepare him a lodging. (v.
 22.) It seems to me therefore that his house was altogether [1530] a
 lodging for the Saints. This excellent [1531] man, then, had a certain
 slave named Onesimus. This Onesimus, having stolen something from his
 master, had run away. For that he had stolen, hear what he says: "If he
 hath wronged thee, or oweth thee aught, I will repay thee." (v. 18,
 19.) Coming therefore to Paul at Rome, and having found him in prison,
 and having enjoyed the benefit of his teaching, he there also received
 Baptism. For that he obtained there the gift of Baptism is manifest
 from his saying, "Whom I have begotten in my bonds." (v. 10.) Paul
 therefore writes, recommending him to his master, that on every account
 he should forgive him, and receive him as one now regenerate. [1532]

 But because some say, that it was superfluous that this Epistle should
 be annexed, since he is making a request about a small matter in behalf
 of one man, let them learn who make these objections, that they are
 themselves deserving of very many censures. For it was not only proper
 that these small Epistles, in behalf of things so necessary, should
 have been inscribed, [1533] but I wish that it were possible to meet
 with one who could deliver to us the history of the Apostles, not only
 all they wrote and spoke of, but of the rest of their conversation,
 even what they ate, and when they ate, when they walked, and where they
 sat, [1534] what they did every day, in what parts they were, into what
 house they entered, and where they lodged [1535] --to relate everything
 with minute exactness, so replete with advantage is all that was done
 by them. But the greater part, not knowing the benefit that would
 result thence, proceed to censure it.

 For if only seeing those places where they sat or where they were
 imprisoned, mere lifeless spots, we often transport our minds thither,
 and imagine their virtue, and are excited by it, and become more
 zealous, much more would this be the case, if we heard their words and
 their other actions. But concerning a friend a man enquires, where he
 lives, what he is doing, whither he is going: and say, should we not
 make these enquiries [1536] about these the general instructors of the
 world? For when a man leads a spiritual life, the habit, the walk, the
 words and the actions of such an one, in short, all that relates to
 him, profits the hearers, and nothing is a hindrance or impediment.

 But it is useful for you to learn that this Epistle was sent upon
 necessary matters. Observe therefore how many things are rectified
 thereby. We have this one thing first, that in all things it becomes
 one to be earnest. For if Paul bestows so much concern upon a runaway,
 a thief, and a robber, and does not refuse nor is ashamed to send him
 back with such commendations; much more does it become us not to be
 negligent in such matters. Secondly, that we ought not to abandon the
 race of slaves, even if they have proceeded to extreme wickedness. For
 if a thief and a runaway become so virtuous that Paul was willing to
 make him a companion, and says in this Epistle, "that in thy stead he
 might have ministered unto me" (v. 13.), much more ought we not to
 abandon the free. Thirdly, that we ought not to withdraw slaves from
 the service of their masters. For if Paul, who had such confidence in
 Philemon, was unwilling to detain Onesimus, so useful and serviceable
 to minister to himself, without the consent of his master, much less
 ought we so to act. For if the servant is so excellent, he ought by all
 means to continue in that service, and to acknowledge the authority of
 his master, that he may be the occasion of benefit to all in that
 house. Why dost thou take the candle from the candlestick to place it
 in the bushel?

 I wish it were possible to bring into the cities those (servants) who
 are without. "What," say you, "if he also should become corrupt." And
 why should he, I beseech you? Because he has come into the city? But
 consider, that being without he will be much more corrupt. For he who
 is corrupt being within, will be much more so being without. For here
 he will be delivered from necessary care, his master taking that care
 upon himself; but there the concern about those things will draw him
 off perhaps even from things more necessary, and more spiritual. On
 this account the blessed Paul, when giving them the best counsel, said,
 "Art thou called, being a servant? care not for it: but if even thou
 mayest be made free, use it rather" (1 Cor. vii. 21.); that is, abide
 in slavery. [1537] But what is more important than all, that the word
 of God be not blasphemed, as he himself says in one of his Epistles.
 "Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters
 worthy of all honor, that the name of God and His doctrine be not
 blasphemed." (1 Tim. vi. 1.) For the Gentiles also will say, that even
 one who is a slave can be well pleasing to God. But now many are
 reduced to the necessity of blasphemy, and of saying Christianity has
 been introduced into life for the subversion of everything, masters
 having their servants taken from them, and it is a matter of violence.

 Let me also say one other thing. He teaches us not to be ashamed of our
 domestics, if they are virtuous. For if Paul, the most admirable of
 men, speaks thus much in favor of this one, much more should we speak
 favorably of ours. There being then so many good effects--and yet we
 have not mentioned all--does any one think it superfluous that this
 Epistle was inserted? And would not this be extreme folly? Let us then,
 I beseech you, apply to the Epistle written by the Apostle. For having
 gained already so many advantages from it, we shall gain more from the
 text. [1538]

 [Note.--The views of the Fathers on Slavery and Emancipation were very
 conservative, as slavery was interwoven with the whole structure of the
 Roman empire and could not be suddenly abolished without a radical
 social revolution. But the spirit of Christianity always suggested and
 encouraged individual emancipation and the ultimate abolition of the
 institution by teaching the universal love of God, the common
 redemption and brotherhood of men, and the sacredness of personality.
 Comp. Bishop Lightfoot's Commentary on Colossians and Philemon, and
 Schaff's Church History, I. 793-798; II. 347-354; III. 115-122. Möhler,
 in his Vermischte Schriften, II. 896 sqq., has collected the views of
 St. Chrysostom on slavery, and says that since the time of the Apostle
 Paul no one has done more valuable service to slaves than St.
 Chrysostom.--P.S.]

 [1529] B. and a Venice ms. read piston. Edd. pisten, which applies to
 the household as one.

 [1530] panton heneken. The phrase occurs again in a few lines, where it
 is translated, "on every account."

 [1531] thaumastos as before.

 [1532] B. and Ven. here add, "And on this score forgive him everything.
 And so much for the argument. Now let us proceed to the solution of the
 questions. Inasmuch as some venture to say," &c. and presently, "For I
 say not only this, that it was proper,...but add this also, that I
 wish."

 [1533] He means in the Canon, as before by the word "annexed."

 [1534] So B. and Ven. Edd. "where they sat and when they walked."

 [1535] Lat. "landed," but katechthesan bears the other sense, and he
 means evidently, "in what part of the house." B. and Ven. have, "I
 would not have been weary of relating."

 [1536] B. and Ven. erotontas.

 [1537] So also he says on the place, and Theodoret too, although he
 calls it a hyperbole. Ei kai is properly "if even," but the kai may be
 taken with the following word, as "also"; see Kühner, § 824, anm. 1,
 who quotes Eur. Andr. 1080, and Xen. Mem. i. c. 6, § 12.

 [1538] tes huphes.

 Homily I.

 Philemon i. 1-3

 "Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, unto
 Philemon our dearly beloved, and fellow-laborer, And to our beloved
 Apphia, and Archippus our fellow-soldier, and to the Church in thy
 house: Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father and the Lord Jesus
 Christ."

 These things are said to a master in behalf of a servant. Immediately
 at the outset, he has pulled down his spirit, and not suffered him to
 be ashamed, he has quenched his anger; calling himself a prisoner, he
 strikes him with compunction, and makes him collect himself, and makes
 it appear that present things are nothing. For if a chain for Christ's
 sake is not a shame but a boast, much more is slavery not to be
 considered a reproach. And this he says, not exalting himself, but for
 a good purpose doing this, showing thence that he was worthy of credit;
 and this he does not for his own sake, but that he may more readily
 obtain the favor. As if he had said, "It is on your account that I am
 invested with this chain." As he also has said elsewhere, there indeed
 showing his concern, but here his trustworthiness.

 Nothing is greater than this boast, to be called "the stigmatized
 [1539] of Christ." "For I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus."
 (Gal. vi. 17.)

 "The prisoner of the Lord." For he had been bound on His account. Who
 would not be struck with awe, who would not be humbled when he hears of
 the chains of Christ? Who would not be ready to give up even his own
 life, much less one domestic?

 "And Timothy our brother."

 He joins another also with himself, that he, being entreated by many,
 may the more readily yield and grant the favor.

 "Unto Philemon our dearly beloved, and fellow-laborer."

 If "beloved," then his confidence is not boldness nor forwardness, but
 a proof of much affection. If a "fellow-laborer," then not only may he
 be instructed in such a matter, but he ought to acknowledge it as a
 favor. For he is gratifying himself, he is building up the same work.
 So that apart from any request, he says, thou hast another necessity
 for granting the favor. For if he is profitable to the Gospel, and thou
 art anxious to promote the Gospel, then oughtest thou not to be
 entreated, but to entreat.

 Ver. 2. "And to our beloved Apphia."

 It seems to me that she was his partner in life. Observe the humility
 of Paul; he both joins Timothy with him in his request, and asks not
 only the husband, but the wife also, and some one else, perhaps a
 friend.

 "And Archippus," he says, "our fellow-soldier."

 Not wishing to effect such things by command, and not taking it ill, if
 he did not immediately comply with his request; but he begs them to do
 what a stranger might have done [1540] to aid his request. For not only
 the being requested by many, but the petition being urged to many,
 contributes to its being granted. And on this account he says, "And
 Archippus our fellow-soldier." If thou art a fellow-soldier, thou
 oughtest also to take a concern in these things. But this is the
 Archippus, about whom he says in his Epistle to the Colossians, "Say to
 Archippus, Take heed to the ministry which thou hast received in the
 Lord, that thou fulfill it." (Col. iv. 17.) It seems to me too, that
 he, whom he joins with him in this request, was also one of the Clergy.
 And he calls him his fellow-soldier, that he may by all means cooperate
 with him.

 "And to the Church in thy house."

 Here he has not omitted even the slaves. For he knew that often even
 the words of slaves have power to overthrow their master; and more
 especially when his request was in behalf of a slave. And perhaps it
 was they particularly who exasperated him. He does not suffer them
 therefore to fall into envy, [1541] having honored them by including
 them in a salutation with their masters. And neither does he allow the
 master to take offense. For if he had made mention of them by name,
 perhaps he would have been angry. And if he had not mentioned them at
 all, he [1542] might have been displeased. Observe therefore how
 prudently he has found a way by his manner of mentioning them, both to
 honor them by his mention of them, and not to wound him. For the name
 of the "Church" does not suffer masters to be angry, even though they
 are reckoned together with their servants. For the Church knows not the
 distinction of master and servant. By good actions and by sins she
 defines the one and the other. If then it is a Church, be not
 displeased that thy slave is saluted with thee. "For in Christ Jesus
 there is neither bond nor free." (Gal. iii. 28.)

 "Grace to you, and peace."

 By mentioning "grace," he brings his own sins to his remembrance.
 Consider, he says, how great things God has pardoned in thee, how by
 grace thou art saved. Imitate thy Lord. And he prays for "peace" to
 him; and naturally: for it comes then when we imitate Him, then grace
 abides. Since even that servant who was unmerciful to his
 fellow-servants, until he demanded the hundred pence, had the grace of
 his master abiding on him. But when he made that demand, it was taken
 from him, and he was delivered to the tormentors.

 Moral. Considering these things, then, let us also be merciful and
 forgiving towards those who have trespassed against us. The offenses
 against us here are a hundred pence, but those from us against God are
 ten thousand talents. But you know that offenses are also judged by the
 quality of the persons: for instance, he who has insulted a private
 person has done wrong, but not so much as he who has insulted a
 magistrate, and he who has offended a greater magistrate offends in a
 higher degree, and he who offends an inferior one in a lower degree;
 but he who insults the king offends much more. The injury indeed is the
 same, but it becomes greater by the excellence of the person. And if he
 who insults a king receives intolerable punishment, on account of the
 superiority [1543] of the person; for how many talents will he be
 answerable who insults God? so that even if we should commit the same
 offenses against God, that we do against men, even so it is not an
 equal thing: but as great as is the difference between God and men, so
 great is that between the offenses against Him and them.

 But now I find also that the offenses exceed, not only in that they
 become great by the eminence of the person, but by their very nature.
 And it is a horrible saying that I am about to utter, and truly awful,
 but it is necessary to be said, that it may even so shake our minds and
 strike them with terror, showing that we fear men much more than God,
 and we honor men much more than God. For consider, he that commits
 adultery knows that God sees him, yet he disregards Him; but if a man
 see him, he restrains his lust. Does not such a one not only honor men
 above God, not only insult God, but, which is even much more dreadful,
 whilst he fears them, despise Him? For if he sees them, he restrains
 the flame of lust, but rather what flame? it is not a flame, but a
 willfulness. For if indeed it was not lawful to have intercourse with a
 woman, the matter perhaps would be a flame, but now [1544] it is insult
 and wantonness. For if he should see men, he desists from his mad
 passion, but for the longsuffering of God he has less regard. Again,
 another who steals, is conscious that he is committing robbery, and
 endeavors to deceive men, and defends himself against those who accuse
 him, and clothes his apology with a fair show; but though he cannot
 thus prevail with God, he does not regard Him, nor stand in awe of Him,
 nor honor Him. And if the king indeed commands us to abstain from other
 men's goods, or even to give away our own, all readily contribute, but
 when God commands not to rob, not to gather other men's goods, we do
 not forbear.

 Do you see then that we honor men more than God? It is a sad and
 grievous saying, a heavy charge. But show that it is grievous; flee
 from the fact! But if you fear not the fact, how can I believe you when
 you say, We fear your words, you lay a burden on us! It is you that by
 the deed lay a burden on yourselves, and not our words. And if I but
 name the words of which you do the deeds, you are offended. And is not
 this absurd?

 May the thing spoken by me prove false! I would rather myself in That
 Day bear the imputation of ill language, as having vainly and
 causelessly reproached you, than see you accused of such things.

 But not only do you honor men more than God, but you compel others to
 do so likewise. Many have thus compelled their domestics and slaves.
 Some have drawn them into marriage against their will, and others have
 forced them to minister to disgraceful services, to infamous love, to
 acts of rapine, and fraud, and violence: so that the accusation is
 twofold, and neither can they obtain pardon upon the plea of necessity.
 For if you yourself do wrong things unwillingly, and on account of the
 command of the ruler, not even so is it by any means a sufficient
 excuse: but the offense becomes heavier, when you compel them also to
 fall into the same sins. For what pardon can there be any more for such
 an one?

 These things I have said, not from a wish to condemn you, but to show
 in how many things we are debtors to God. For if by honoring men even
 equally with God, we insult God, how much more, when we honor men above
 Him? But if those offenses that are committed against men are shown to
 be much greater against God; how much more when the actual offense is
 greater and more grievous in its own quality.

 Let any one examine himself, and he will see that he does everything on
 account of men. Exceedingly blessed we should be, if we did as many
 things for the sake of God, as we do for the sake of men, and of the
 opinion of men, and for the dread or the respect of men. If then we
 have so many things to answer for, we ought with all alacrity to
 forgive those who injure us, who defraud us, and not to bear malice.
 For there is a way to the forgiveness of our sins that needs no labors,
 nor expense of wealth, nor any other things, but merely our own choice.
 We have no need to set out upon our travels, nor go beyond the
 boundaries of our country, nor submit to dangers and toils, but only to
 will.

 What excuse, tell me, shall we have in things that appear difficult,
 [1545] when we do not do even a light thing, attended too with so much
 gain and so much benefit, and no trouble? Canst thou not despise
 wealth? Canst thou not spend thy substance on the needy? Canst thou not
 will anything that is good? Canst thou not forgive him that has injured
 thee? For if thou hadst not so many things to answer for, and God had
 only commanded thee to forgive, oughtest thou not to do it? But now
 having so many things to answer for, dost thou not forgive? and that
 too, knowing that thou art required to do it on account of things which
 thou hast from Him? If indeed we go to our debtor, he knowing it,
 receives us courteously, and shows us honor, and pays us every
 attention in a liberal way; and that though he is not paying off his
 debt, but because he wishes to render us merciful in our demand of
 payment: and thou, who owest so much to God, and art commanded to
 forgive that thou mayest receive in return, dost not thou forgive? And
 wherefore not, I beseech you? Woe is me! How much of goodness do we
 receive, and what wickedness do we show in return! What sleepiness!
 what indolence! How easy a thing is virtue, attended too with much
 advantage; and how laborious a thing is vice! But we, flying from that
 which is so light, pursue that which is heavier than lead.

 Here there is no need of bodily strength, nor of wealth, nor
 possessions, nor of power, nor of friendship, nor of any other thing;
 but it is sufficient only to will, and all is accomplished. Hath some
 one grieved thee, and insulted thee, and mocked thee? But consider, how
 often thou hast done such things to others, and even to the Lord
 Himself; and forbear, and forgive him it. Consider that thou sayest,
 "Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors." (Matt. vi. 13.)
 Consider, that if thou dost not forgive, thou wilt not be able to say
 this with confidence: but if thou forgivest, thou demandest the matter
 as a debt, not by reason of the nature of the thing, but on account of
 the lovingkindness of Him that hath granted it. And wherein is it
 equal, that one who forgives his fellow-servants should receive
 remission of the sins committed against the Lord? but nevertheless we
 do receive such great lovingkindness, because He is rich in mercy and
 pity.

 And that I may show that even without these things, and without the
 remission, thou art a gainer by forgiving, consider how many friends
 such a person has, how the praises of such an one are everywhere
 sounded by men who go about saying, "This is a good man, he is easily
 reconciled, he knows not to bear malice, he is no sooner stricken than
 he is healed." When such an one falls into any misfortune, who will not
 pity him? when he has offended, who will not pardon him? When he asks a
 favor of others, who will not grant it to him? Who will not be willing
 to be the friend and servant of so good a soul? Yea, I entreat you, let
 us do all things for Him, [1546] not to our friends, not to our
 relations only, but even to our domestics. For He says, "Forbearing
 threatening, knowing that your Master also is in heaven." (Eph. vi. 9.)

 If we forgive our neighbors their trespasses, ours will be forgiven to
 us, if we bestow alms, if we be humble. For this also taketh away sins.
 For if the publican, only for saying, "God be merciful to me a sinner"
 (Luke xviii. 13.), went down justified, much more we also, if we be
 humble and contrite, shall be able to obtain abundant lovingkindness.
 If we confess our own sins and condemn ourselves, we shall be cleansed
 from the most of our defilement. For there are many ways that purify.
 Let us therefore in every way war against the devil. I have said
 nothing difficult, nothing burdensome. Forgive him that has injured
 thee, have pity on the needy, humble thy soul, and though thou be a
 grievous sinner, thou wilt be able to obtain the kingdom, by these
 means purging off thy sins themselves, and wiping off their stain. And
 God grant that we all, having purified ourselves here by confession
 from all the filth of our sins, may there obtain the blessings promised
 in Christ Jesus our Lord, &c.

 [1539] stigmatias. Literally, "branded slave."

 [1540] He may mean a stranger to Onesimus.

 [1541] i.e. of Onesimus.

 [1542] Some suggest the plural, "they," but there is no ms. authority
 for it. The last editor defends the singular, as the expression used
 would please Philemon.

 [1543] Edd. axiopistian, literally, "worthiness of credit," but in
 later Greek "of consideration." Sav. mar. B. and Ven. have huperochen.

 [1544] Sav. mar. B. and Ven. "but now, with most men, what is lawful is
 despised," and, "but what is forbidden made much of, it is all," &c.

 [1545] Raphelius (ap. Par.) notes that he means "what presumption is
 there that we would do them if we could?"

 [1546] Or, "to this purpose," as the Latin. But it seems to be an
 unexpected turn upon the last clause. Compare the general argument of
 Bp. Butler's Sermons on the Love of God.

 Homily II.

 Philemon i. 4-6

 "I thank my God, making mention of thee always in my prayers, Hearing
 of thy love and faith, which thou hast towards the Lord Jesus, and
 toward all saints. That the communication of thy faith may become
 effectual by the acknowledging [in the knowledge] of every good thing
 which is in us, [1547] in Christ Jesus."

 He does not immediately at the commencement ask the favor, but having
 first admired the man, and having praised him for his good actions, and
 having shown no small proof of his love, that he always made mention of
 him in his prayers, and having said that many are refreshed by him, and
 that he is obedient and complying in all things; then he puts it last
 of all, by this particularly putting him to the blush. [1548] For if
 others obtain the things which they ask, much more Paul. If coming
 before others, he was worthy to obtain, much more when he comes after
 others, and asks a thing not pertaining to himself, but in behalf of
 another. Then, that he may not seem to have written on this account
 only, and that no one may say, "If it were not for Onesimus thou
 wouldest not have written," see how he assigns other causes also of his
 Epistle. In the first place manifesting his love, then also desiring
 that a lodging may be prepared for him.

 "Hearing," he says, "of thy love."

 This is wonderful, and much greater than if being present he had seen
 it when he [1549] was present. For it is plain that from its being
 excessive it had become manifest, and had reached even to Paul. And yet
 the distance between Rome and Phrygia was not small. For he seems to
 have been there from the mention of Archippus. For the Colossians were
 of Phrygia, writing to whom he said, "When this Epistle is read among
 you, cause that it be read also in the Church of the Laodiceans, and
 that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea." (Col. iv. 16.) And
 this is a city of Phrygia.

 I pray, he says, "that the communication of thy faith may become
 effectual in the knowledge of every good thing which is in Christ
 Jesus." Dost thou see him first giving, before he receives, and before
 he asks a favor himself bestowing a much greater one of his own? "That
 the communication of thy faith," he says, "may become effectual by the
 acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus";
 that is, that thou mayest attain all virtue, that nothing may be
 deficient. For so faith becomes effectual, when it is accompanied with
 works. For "without works faith is dead." (Jas. ii. 26.) And he has not
 said, "Thy faith," but "the communication of thy faith," connecting it
 with himself, and showing that it is one body, and by this particularly
 making him ashamed to refuse. If thou art a partaker, he says, with
 respect to the faith, thou oughtest to communicate also with respect to
 other things.

 Ver. 7. "For we have [I had] great joy and consolation in thy love,
 because the bowels [hearts] of the Saints are refreshed by thee,
 brother."

 Nothing so shames us into giving, as to bring forward the kindnesses
 bestowed on others, and particularly when a man is more entitled to
 respect than they. And he has not said, "If you do it to others, much
 more to me"; but he has insinuated the same thing, though he has
 contrived to do it in another and a more gracious manner.

 "I had joy," that is, thou hast given me confidence from the things
 which thou hast done to others. "And consolation," that is, we are not
 only gratified, but we are also comforted. For they are members of us.
 If then there ought to be such an agreement, that in the refreshing of
 any others who are in affliction, though we obtain nothing, we should
 be delighted on their account, as if it were one body that was
 benefited; much more if you shall refresh us also. And he has not said,
 "Because thou yieldest, and compliest," but even more vehemently and
 emphatically, "because the bowels of the Saints," as if it were for a
 darling child fondly loved by its parents, so that this love and
 affection shows that he also is exceedingly beloved by them.

 Ver. 8. "Wherefore, though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin
 thee that which is convenient [befitting]."

 Observe how cautious he is, lest any of the things which were spoken
 even from exceeding love should so strike the hearer, as that he should
 be hurt. For this reason before he says, "to enjoin thee," since it was
 offensive, although, as spoken out of love, it was more proper to
 soothe him, yet nevertheless from an excess of delicacy, he as it were
 corrects it by saying, "Having confidence," by which he implies that
 Philemon was a great man, [1550] that is "Thou hast given confidence to
 us." And not only that, but adding the expression "in Christ," by which
 he shows that it was not that he was more illustrious in the world, not
 that he was more powerful, but it was on account of his faith in
 Christ,--then he also adds, "to enjoin thee," and not that only, but
 "that which is convenient," that is, a reasonable action. And see out
 of how many things he brings proof for this. Thou doest good to others,
 he says, and to me, and for Christ's sake, and that the thing is
 reasonable, and that love giveth, wherefore also he adds,

 Ver. 9. "Yet for love's sake, I rather beseech thee."

 As if he had said, I know indeed that I can effect it by commanding
 with much authority, from things which have already taken place. But
 because I am very solicitous about this matter, "I beseech thee." He
 shows both these things at once; that he has confidence in him, for he
 commands him; [1551] and that he is exceedingly concerned about the
 matter, wherefore he beseeches him.

 "Being such an one," he says, "as Paul the aged." Strange! how many
 things are here to shame him into compliance! Paul, from the quality of
 his person, from his age, because he was old, and from what was more
 just than all, because he was also "a prisoner of Jesus Christ."

 For who would not receive with open arms a combatant who had been
 crowned? Who seeing him bound for Christ's sake, would not have granted
 him ten thousand favors? By so many considerations having previously
 soothed his mind, he has not immediately introduced the name, but
 defers making so great a request. For you know what are the minds of
 masters towards slaves that have run away; and particularly when they
 have done this with robbery, even if they have good masters, how their
 anger is increased. This anger then having taken all these pains to
 soothe, and having first persuaded him readily to serve him in anything
 whatever, and having prepared his soul to all obedience, then he
 introduces his request, and says, "I beseech thee," and with the
 addition of praises, "for my son whom I have begotten in my bonds."

 Again the chains are mentioned to shame him into compliance, and then
 the name. For he has not only extinguished his anger, but has caused
 him to be delighted. For I would not have called him my son, he says,
 if he were not especially profitable. What I called Timothy, that I
 call him also. And repeatedly showing his affection, he urges him by
 the very period of his new birth, "I have begotten him in my bonds," he
 says, so that on this account also he was worthy to obtain much honor,
 because he was begotten in his very conflicts, in his trials in the
 cause of Christ.

 "Onesimus,"

 Ver. 11. "Which in time past was to thee unprofitable."

 See how great is his prudence, how he confesses the man's faults, and
 thereby extinguishes his anger. I know, he says, that he was
 unprofitable.

 "But now" he will be "profitable to thee and to me."

 He has not said he will be useful to thee, lest he should contradict
 it, but he has introduced his own person, that his hopes may seem
 worthy of credit, "But now," he says, "profitable to thee and to me."
 For if he was profitable to Paul, who required so great strictness,
 much more would he be so to his master.

 Ver. 12. "Whom I have sent again to thee."

 By this also he has quenched his anger, by delivering him up. For
 masters are then most enraged, when they are entreated for the absent,
 so that by this very act he mollified him the more.

 Ver. 12. "Thou therefore receive him, that is mine own bowels."

 And again he has not given the bare name, but uses with it a word that
 might move him, which is more affectionate than son. He has said,
 "son," he has said, "I have begotten" him, [1552] so that it was
 probable [1553] he would love him much, because he begot him in his
 trials. For it is manifest that we are most inflamed with affection for
 those children, who have been born to us in dangers which we have
 escaped, as when the Scripture saith, "Woe, Barochabel!" [1554] and
 again when Rachel names Benjamin, "the son of my sorrow." (Gen. xxxv.
 18.)

 "Thou therefore," he says, "receive him, that is mine own bowels." He
 shows the greatness of his affection. He has not said, Take him back,
 [1555] he has not said, Be not angry, [1556] but "receive him"; that
 is, he is worthy not only of pardon, but of honor. Why? Because he is
 become the son of Paul.

 Ver. 13. "Whom I would have retained with me, that in thy stead he
 might have ministered unto me in the bonds of the Gospel."

 Dost thou see after how much previous preparation, he has at length
 brought him honorably before his master, and observe with how much
 wisdom he has done this. See for how much he makes him answerable, and
 how much he honors the other. Thou hast found, he says, a way by which
 thou mayest through him repay thy service to me. Here he shows that he
 has considered his advantage more than that of his slave, and that he
 respects him exceedingly.

 Ver. 14. "But without thy mind," he says, "would I do nothing; that thy
 benefit should not be, as it were, of necessity, but willingly."

 This particularly flatters the person asked, when the thing being
 profitable in itself, it is brought out with his concurrence. For two
 good effects are produced thence, the one person gains, and the other
 is rendered more secure. And he has not said, That it should not be of
 necessity, but "as it were of necessity." For I knew, he says, that not
 having learnt [1557] it, but coming to know it at once, thou wouldest
 not have been angry, but nevertheless out of an excess of
 consideration, that it should "not be as it were of necessity."

 Ver. 15, 16. "For perhaps he was therefore parted from thee for a
 season that thou shouldest have him for ever; no longer as a
 bond-servant."

 He has well said, "perhaps," that the master may yield. For since the
 flight arose from perverseness, and a corrupt mind, and not from such
 intention, he has said, "perhaps." And he has not said, therefore he
 fled, but, therefore he was "separated," [1558] by a more fair sounding
 expression softening him the more. And he has not said, He separated
 himself, but, "he was separated." For it was not his own arrangement
 that he should depart either for this purpose or for that. Which also
 Joseph says, in making excuse for his brethren, "For God did send me
 hither" (Gen. xlv. 5.), that is, He made use of their wickedness for a
 good end. "Therefore," he says, "he was parted for a season." [1559]
 Thus he contracts the time, acknowledges the offense, and turns it all
 to a providence. [1560] "That thou shouldest receive him," he says,
 "for ever," not for the present season only, but even for the future,
 that thou mightest always have him, no longer a slave, but more
 honorable than a slave. For thou wilt have a slave abiding with thee,
 more well-disposed than a brother, so that thou hast gained both in
 time, and in the quality of thy slave. For hereafter he will not run
 away. "That thou shouldest receive him," he says, "for ever," that is,
 have him again.

 "No longer as a bond-servant, but more than a bond-servant, a brother
 beloved, especially to me."

 Thou hast lost a slave for a short time, but thou wilt find a brother
 for ever, not only thy brother, but mine also. Here also there is much
 virtue. But if he is my brother, thou also wilt not be ashamed of him.
 By calling him his son, he hath shown his natural affection; and by
 calling him his brother, his great good will for him, and his equality
 in honor.

 Moral. These things are not written without an object, but that we
 masters may not despair of our servants, nor press too hard on them,
 but may learn to pardon the offenses of such servants, that we may not
 be always severe, that we may not from their servitude be ashamed to
 make them partakers with us in all things when they are good. For if
 Paul was not ashamed to call one "his son, his own bowels, his brother,
 his beloved," surely we ought not to be ashamed. And why do I say Paul?
 The Master of Paul is not ashamed to call our servants His own
 brethren; and are we ashamed? See how He honors us; He calls our
 servants His own brethren, friends, and fellow-heirs. See to what He
 has descended! What therefore having done, shall we have accomplished
 our whole duty? We shall never in any wise do it; but to whatever
 degree of humility we have come, the greater part of it is still left
 behind. For consider, whatever thou doest, thou doest to a
 fellow-servant, but thy Master hath done it to thy servants. Hear and
 shudder! Never be elated at thy humility!

 Perhaps you laugh at the expression, as if humility could puff up. But
 be not surprised at it, it puffs up, when it is not genuine. How, and
 in what manner? When it is practiced to gain the favor of men, and not
 of God, that we may be praised, and be high-minded. For this also is
 diabolical. For as many are vainglorious on account of their not being
 vainglorious, [1561] so are they elated on account of their humbling
 themselves, by reason of their being high-minded. For instance, a
 brother has come, or even a servant thou hast received him, thou hast
 washed his feet; immediately thou thinkest highly of thyself. I have
 done, thou sayest, what no other has done. I have achieved humility.
 How then may any one continue in humility? If he remembers the command
 of Christ, which says, "When ye shall have done all things, say, We are
 unprofitable servants." (Luke xvii. 10.) And again the Teacher of the
 world, saying, "I count not myself to have apprehended." (Philip. iii.
 13.) He who has persuaded himself that he has done no great thing,
 however many things he may have done, he alone can be humble-minded, he
 who thinks that he has not reached perfection.

 Many are elated on account of their humility; but let not us be so
 affected. Hast thou done any act of humility? be not proud of it,
 otherwise all the merit of it is lost. Such was the Pharisee, he was
 puffed up because he gave his tythes to the poor, and he lost all the
 merit of it. (Luke xviii. 12.) But not so the publican. Hear Paul again
 saying, "I know nothing by myself, yet am I not hereby justified." (1
 Cor. iv. 4.) Seest thou that he does not exalt himself, but by every
 means abases and humbles himself, and that too when he had arrived at
 the very summit. And the Three Children were in the fire, and in the
 midst of the furnace, and what said they? "We have sinned and committed
 iniquity with our fathers." (Song, v. 6, in Sept.; Dan. iii. 29, 30; v.
 16.) This it is to have a contrite heart; on this account they could
 say, "Nevertheless in a contrite heart and a humble spirit let us be
 accepted." Thus even after they had fallen into the furnace they were
 exceedingly humbled, even more so than they were before. For when they
 saw the miracle that was wrought, thinking themselves unworthy of that
 deliverance, they were brought lower in humility. For when we are
 persuaded that we have received great benefits beyond our desert, then
 we are particularly grieved. And yet what benefit had they received
 beyond their desert? They had given themselves up to the furnace; they
 had been taken captive for the sins of others; for they were still
 young; and they murmured not, nor were indignant, nor did they say,
 What good is it to us that we serve God, or what advantage have we in
 worshiping Him? This man is impious, and is become our lord. We are
 punished with the idolatrous by an idolatrous king. We have been led
 into captivity. We are deprived of our country, our freedom, all our
 paternal goods, we are become prisoners and slaves, we are enslaved to
 a barbarous king. None of these things did they say. But what? "We have
 sinned and committed iniquity." And not for themselves but for others
 they offer prayers. Because, say they, "Thou hast delivered us to a
 hateful and a wicked king." Again, Daniel, being a second time cast
 into the pit, said, "For God hath remembered me." Wherefore should He
 not remember [1562] thee, O Daniel, when thou didst glorify Him before
 the king, saying, "Not for any wisdom that I have"? (Dan. ii. 30.) But
 when thou wast cast into the den of lions, because thou didst not obey
 that most wicked decree, wherefore should He not remember thee? For
 this very reason surely should He. [1563] Wast thou not cast into it on
 His account? "Yea truly," he says, "but I am a debtor for many things."
 And if he said such things after having displayed so great virtue, what
 should we say after this? But hear what David says, "If He thus say, I
 have no delight in thee, behold here am I, let Him do to me as seemeth
 good unto Him." (2 Sam. xv. 26.) And yet he had an infinite number of
 good things to speak of. And Eli also says, "It is the Lord: let Him do
 what seemeth Him good." (1 Sam. iii. 18.)

 This is the part of well-disposed servants, not only in His mercies,
 but in His corrections, and in punishments wholly to submit to Him. For
 how is it not absurd, [1564] if we bear with masters beating their
 servants, knowing that they will spare them, because they are their
 own; [1565] and yet suppose that God in punishing will not spare? This
 also Paul has intimated, saying, "Whether we live or die, we are the
 Lord's." (Rom. xiv. 8.) A man, we say, wishes not his property to be
 diminished, he knows how he punishes, he is punishing his own servants.
 But surely no one of us spares more than He Who brought us into being
 out of nothing, Who maketh the sun to rise, Who causeth rain; Who
 breathed our life into us, Who gave His own Son for us.

 But as I said before, and on which account I have said all that I have
 said, let us be humble-minded as we ought, let us be moderate as we
 ought. Let it not be to us an occasion of being puffed up. Art thou
 humble, and humbler than all men? Be not high-minded on that account,
 neither reproach others, lest thou lose thy boast. For this very cause
 thou art humble, that thou mayest be delivered from the madness of
 pride; if therefore through thy humility thou fallest into that
 madness, it were better for thee not to be humble. For hear Paul
 saying, "Sin worketh death in me by that which is good, that sin by the
 commandment might become exceeding sinful." (Rom. vii. 13.) When it
 enters into thy thought to admire thyself because thou art humble,
 consider thy Master, to what He descended, and thou wilt no longer
 admire thyself, nor praise thyself, but wilt deride thyself as having
 done nothing. Consider thyself altogether to be a debtor. Whatever thou
 hast done, remember that parable, "Which of you having a servant...will
 say unto him, when he is come in, Sit down to meat?...I say unto you,
 Nay...but stay and serve me." (From Luke xvii. 7, 8.) Do we return
 thanks to our servants, for waiting upon us? By no means. Yet God is
 thankful to us, who serve not Him, but do that which is expedient for
 ourselves.

 But let not us be so affected, as if He owed us thanks, that He may owe
 us the more, but as if we were discharging a debt. For the matter truly
 is a debt, and all that we do is of debt. For if when we purchase
 slaves with our money, we wish them to live altogether for us, and
 whatever they have to have it for ourselves, how much more must it be
 so with Him, who brought us out of nothing into being, who after this
 bought us with His precious Blood, who paid down such a price for us as
 no one would endure to pay for his own son, who shed His own Blood for
 us? If therefore we had ten thousand souls, and should lay them all
 down for Him, should we make Him an equal return? By no means. And why?
 Because He did this, owing us nothing, but the whole was a matter of
 grace. But we henceforth are debtors: and being God Himself, He became
 a servant, and not being subject to death, subjected Himself to death
 in the flesh. We, if we do not lay down our lives for Him, by the law
 of nature must certainly lay them down, and a little later shall be
 separated from it, [1566] however unwillingly. So also in the case of
 riches, if we do not bestow them for His sake, we shall render them up
 from necessity at our end. So it is also with humility. Although we are
 not humble for His sake, we shall be made humble by tribulations, by
 calamities, by over-ruling powers. Seest thou therefore how great is
 the grace! He hath not said, "What great things do the Martyrs do?
 Although they die not for Me, they certainly will die." But He owns
 Himself much indebted to them, because they voluntarily resign that
 which in the course of nature they were about to resign shortly against
 their will. He hath not said, "What great thing do they, who give away
 their riches? Even against their will they will have to surrender
 them." But He owns Himself much indebted to them too, and is not
 ashamed to confess before all that He, the Master, is nourished by His
 slaves.

 For this also is the glory of a Master, to have grateful slaves. And
 this is the glory of a Master, that He should thus love His slaves. And
 this is the glory of a Master, to claim for His own what is theirs. And
 this is the glory of a Master, not to be ashamed to confess them before
 all. Let us therefore be stricken with awe at this so great love of
 Christ. Let us be inflamed with this love-potion. Though a man be low
 and mean, yet if we hear that he loves us, we are above all things
 warmed with love towards him, and honor him exceedingly. And do we then
 love? and when our Master loveth us so much, we are not excited? Let us
 not, I beseech you, let us not be so indifferent with regard to the
 salvation of our souls, but let us love Him according to our power, and
 let us spend all upon His love, our life, our riches, our glory,
 everything, with delight, with joy, with alacrity, not as rendering
 anything to Him, but to ourselves. For such is the law of those who
 love. They think that they are receiving favors, when they are
 suffering wrong for the sake of their beloved. Therefore let us be so
 affected towards our Lord, that we [1567] also may partake of the good
 things to come in Christ Jesus our Lord.

 [1547] E.V. "in you." [The R.V. reads "in you," en humin, and puts
 "us," hemin, in the margin.--P.S.]

 [1548] dusopon.

 [1549] Philemon, as it is parontos.

 [1550] i.e. a man of high Christian character, who would admit such
 claims as his.

 [1551] He means that his words would be felt as a command, and were
 really not less, but more.

 [1552] Old Lat. adds, "in my bonds," which the sense requires.

 [1553] B. and Ven. "so as to show that he loved him especially."

 [1554] The last Paris edition has a note from Raphelius and
 Hemsterhusius which curiously illustrates the variation of names. This
 ouaibarochabel is in Sept. 1 Sam. iv. 21, ouaibarchaboth, Vat.
 Ouaichaboth Alex., Or. Hex. ouai iochabed, E.V. "Ichabod."

 [1555] apodexai.

 [1556] proslabou.

 [1557] i.e. by previous explanation, mathon.

 [1558] Gr. echoristhe. [R.V. "he was parted from thee."--P.S.]

 [1559] horan, lit. "an hour."

 [1560] oikonomian.

 [1561] "Proud of his periods leveled against pride."--Anon.

 [1562] B. "didst thou not remember," and presently, "did I not
 remember." The construction in either case is so elliptical as to be
 difficult.

 [1563] Bel and Dragon, verse 38 [hode kurios ho theos emnesthe tou
 Daniel.--P.S.]

 [1564] B. and Ven. add, "for us to be well disposed while we are
 favored, but discontented when we are chastised; tell me now."

 [1565] Such seems the principle in Ex. xxi. 21.

 [1566] The sense naturally leads to this transition to the singular,
 which is not uncommon in St. Chrysostom.

 [1567] B. and Ven. add, "May both obtain His help here, and."

 Homily III.

 Philemon i. 17-19

 "If thou count me therefore a partner, receive him as myself. If he
 hath wronged thee at all, or oweth thee aught, put that to mine
 account; I Paul write it with mine own hand, I will repay it: that I
 say not to thee how thou owest unto me even thine own self besides."

 No procedure is so apt to gain a hearing, [1568] as not to ask for
 everything at once. For see after how many praises, after how much
 preparation he hath introduced this great matter. After having said
 that he is "my son," that he is a partaker of the Gospel, that he is
 "my bowels," that thou receivest him back "as a brother," and "hold him
 as a brother," then he has added "as myself." And Paul was not ashamed
 to do this. For he who was not ashamed to be called the servant of the
 faithful, but confesses that he was such, much more would he not refuse
 this. But what he says is to this effect. If thou art of the same mind
 with me, if thou runnest upon the same terms, [1569] if thou
 considerest me a friend, receive him as myself.

 "If he hath wronged thee at all." See where and when he has introduced
 the mention of the injury; last, after having said so many things in
 his behalf. For since the loss of money is particularly apt to annoy
 men, that he might not accuse him of this, (for it was most likely that
 it was spent,) then he brings in this, and says, "If he hath wronged
 thee." He does not say, If he has stolen anything; but what? "If he
 hath wronged thee." At the same time he both confessed the offense, and
 not as if it were the offense of a servant, but of a friend against a
 friend, making use of the expression of "wrong" rather than of theft.

 "Put that to mine account," he says, that is, reckon the debt to me, "I
 will repay it." Then also with that spiritual pleasantry,

 "I Paul write [1570] it with mine own hand." At once movingly and
 pleasantly; if when Paul did not refuse to execute a bond for him, he
 should refuse to receive him! This would both shame Philemon into
 compliance, and bring Onesimus out of trouble. "I write it," he says,
 "with mine own hand." Nothing is more affectionate than these "bowels,"
 nothing more earnest, nothing more zealous. See what [1571] great
 concern he bestows in behalf of one man. "Albeit I do not say to thee
 how thou owest unto me even thine own self besides." Then that it might
 not appear insulting to him, whom he requests, if he had not the
 confidence to ask and obtain in behalf of a theft, he in some measure
 relieves this, saying, "That I say not unto thee how thou owest to me
 even thine own self besides." Not only thine own things, but thyself
 also. And this proceeded from love, and was according to the rule of
 friendship, and was a proof of his great confidence. See how he
 everywhere provides for both, that he may ask with great security, and
 that this may not seem a sign of too little [1572] confidence in him.

 Ver. 20. "Yea, brother."

 What is, "Yea, brother"? Receive him, he says. For this we must
 understand though unexpressed. For dismissing all pleasantry, he again
 pursues his former considerations, that is, serious ones. And yet even
 these are serious. For the things that proceed from Saints are of
 themselves serious, even when they are pleasantry.

 "Yea, brother, let me have joy of thee in the Lord, refresh my heart in
 Christ." [1573]

 That is, thou grantest the favor to the Lord, not to me. "My heart,"
 that is, toward thyself.

 Ver. 21. "Having confidence in thy obedience, I write unto thee."

 What stone would not these things have softened? What wild beast would
 not these things have rendered mild, and prepared to receive him
 heartily? After having borne witness to him by so many great
 testimonies of his goodness, he is not ashamed again to excuse himself.
 He says, Not barely requesting it, nor as commanding it, nor
 arbitrarily, but "having confidence in thy obedience I wrote unto
 thee." What he had said at the beginning, "having confidence," that he
 also says here in the sealing up of his letter.

 "Knowing that thou wilt also do more than I say."

 At the same time in saying this he excited him. For he would have been
 ashamed, though for nothing else, if having such credit with him as
 this, that he would do more than he said,--he should not do so much.

 Ver. 22. "But withal prepare me also a lodging: for I trust that
 through your prayers I shall be given unto you."

 This also was the part of one who was exceedingly confident--or rather
 this too was in behalf of Onesimus, that not being indifferent, but
 knowing that he upon his return would know the things relating to him,
 they might lay aside all remembrance of the wrong, and might the rather
 grant the favor. For great was the influence and the honor of Paul
 residing among them, of Paul in his age, of Paul after imprisonment.
 Again, it is a proof of their love that he says that they pray; and to
 attribute to them so much as that they pray for "him." For although I
 be now in danger, yet nevertheless you will see me if ye pray for it.

 Ver. 23. "Epaphras, my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus, saluteth thee."

 He was sent by the Colossians, so that from this it appears that
 Philemon was also at Colossæ. And he calls him his "fellow-prisoner,"
 showing that he also was in much tribulation, so that if not on his own
 account, yet on account of the other, it was right that he should be
 heard. For he that is in tribulation, and overlooks himself, and is
 concerned for others, deserves to be heard.

 And he puts him to shame from another consideration, if his countryman
 is a fellow-prisoner with Paul and suffers affliction with him, and he
 himself does not grant him a favor in behalf of his own servant. And he
 has added, "my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus," instead of on account
 of Christ.

 Ver. 24. "Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke, my fellow-workers."

 Why then does he put Luke last? And yet he elsewhere says, "Only Luke
 is with me" (2 Tim. iv. 11.), and "Demas," he says, was one of those
 who "forsook him, having loved the present world." (2 Tim. iv. 10.) All
 these things, although they are mentioned elsewhere, yet nevertheless
 ought not to be passed over here without enquiry, nor ought we merely
 to hear them as things of course. But how comes he to say that he who
 forsook him salutes them? For "Erastus," he says, "abode at Corinth."
 (2 Tim. iv. 20.) He adds Epaphras, both as known to them, and being of
 their country. And Mark, as being himself also an admirable man. Why
 then does he number Demas with these? Perhaps it was after this that he
 became more remiss, when he saw the dangers multiplied. But Luke being
 last became first. And from these indeed he salutes him, urging him the
 more to obedience, and calls them his fellow-laborers, and in this way
 shames him into granting the request.

 Ver. 25. "The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
 Amen."

 Moral. He hath closed his Epistle with a prayer. And indeed prayer is a
 great good, salutary, and preservative of our souls. But it is great
 when we do things worthy of it, and do not render ourselves unworthy.
 And thou too, therefore, when thou goest to the priest, and he shall
 say to thee, "The Lord will have mercy on thee, my son," do not confide
 in the word only, but add also works. Do acts worthy of mercy, God will
 bless thee, my son, if indeed thou doest things worthy of blessing. He
 will bless thee, if thou showest mercy to thy neighbor. For the things
 which we wish to obtain from God, of those we ought first to impart to
 our neighbors. But if we deprive our neighbors of them, how can we wish
 to obtain them? "Blessed," He says, "are the merciful: for they shall
 obtain mercy." (Matt. v. 7.) For if men show mercy to such, much more
 will God, but to the unmerciful by no means. "For he shall have
 judgment without mercy to him that hath showed no mercy." (Jas. ii.
 13.)

 An excellent thing is mercy! Why then hast thou not done it to another?
 Dost thou wish to be pardoned, when thou offendest? why then dost thou
 not thyself pardon him who has offended thee? But thou comest to God,
 asking of Him the kingdom of heaven, and thou thyself dost not give
 money when it is begged of thee. For this cause we do not obtain mercy,
 because we do not show mercy. But why? you say. Is not this also a part
 of mercy, to show mercy to the unmerciful? Nay! [1574] For he that
 treated with the greatest kindness the hard-hearted cruel man, that had
 done numberless ills to his neighbor, how should he be merciful? What
 then, say you? Hath not the Laver saved us, who had committed infinite
 evils? It hath delivered us from them, not that we should commit them
 again, but that we may not commit them. For "how shall we," it is said,
 "that are dead to sin, live any longer therein"? (Rom. vi. 2.)

 "What then? shall we sin because we are not under the law? God forbid."
 (v. 15.) For this cause God hath delivered thee from those sins that
 thou mightest no more run back to that dishonor. Since even physicians
 relieve their feverish patients from their heat, not that they may
 abuse their health to their injury and disorder, (since it would be
 better to be sick, if one was about to use his health only that he
 might confine himself again to his bed,) but having learnt the evils
 that arise from sickness, they may no longer fall into the same, that
 they may the more securely preserve their health, that they may do
 everything that conduces to its preservation.

 How then? you say: what is the lovingkindness of God, if He is not
 about to save the bad? For oftentimes I hear many talking in this way,
 that He is the Friend of man, and will by all means save all. That we
 may not therefore vainly deceive ourselves, (for I remember that I made
 a promise of this kind to you,) come let us to-day move this argument.
 I lately discoursed with you about Hell, and I deferred my argument
 upon the lovingkindness of God. It is proper therefore to-day to resume
 it. That there will, then, be a hell, we have, as I think, sufficiently
 proved, bringing forward the deluge, and former evils, and arguing that
 it is not possible that He who performed these things should leave the
 men of the present age unpunished. For if thus He chastised those who
 sinned before the Law, He will not let those go unpunished who after
 grace have committed greater wickedness. It has been questioned
 therefore how is He good? how merciful to man, if at least He punishes?
 and we have deferred the argument, that we might not overwhelm your
 ears with a multitude of words.

 Come, to-day let us discharge the debt, and show how good is God, even
 in punishing. For this discourse would be suitable for us in opposition
 to the heretics. Let us therefore pay earnest heed to it. God, standing
 in no need of anything from us, yet created us. For that He stood in
 need of us, is manifest from His having made us after a long time. For
 He might have made us long ago, if He had needed us. For if He Himself
 was, even without us, and we were made in later times, He made us, not
 needing us.

 He made the Heaven, the earth, the sea, all things that exist, for our
 sake. Tell me, are not these marks of goodness? And many things one
 might mention. But to cut short the matter, "He maketh the sun to rise
 on the evil and the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the
 unjust." (Matt. v. 45.) Is not this a mark of goodness? No, you say.
 For I said once in conversing with a Marcionite, Are not these things a
 mark of goodness? and he answered, If He did not call men to account
 for their sins, it were a mark of goodness. But if He calls them to
 account, it is not goodness. That man, however, is not now present. But
 come, let us repeat what was then said, and more beside. For I, out of
 my superfluity, show that if He did not call men to account, He would
 not be good; but because He does call them to account, therefore He is
 good.

 For, say, if He did not call us to account, would human life then have
 endured? Should we not then have fallen into the state of beasts? For
 if when there is this fear impending over us, and the giving account,
 and judgments, we have gone beyond fishes in devouring one another, we
 have thrown wolves and lions into the shade in ravaging one another's
 possessions; if He did not call us to account, and we were persuaded of
 this, with how great tumult and confusion would life be filled? What
 would be the fabled labyrinth after this, compared with the
 perplexities of the world? Would you not see numberless indecencies and
 disorders? For who then would have respected his father any more? Or
 who would have spared his mother? Who would have left unattempted any
 pleasure, any wickedness? And that the matter is so, I will endeavor to
 show you from one house only. How? You who raise these questions and
 who have servants; if I could make it manifest to these, that if they
 should destroy the family of their masters, [1575] if they should
 insult their persons, if they should plunder everything, if they should
 turn things upside down, if they should treat them as enemies, they
 would not threaten them, nor correct them, nor punish them, nor even
 grieve them with a word, would this be any proof of goodness? I
 maintain that this is the extreme of cruelty, not only because the wife
 and children are betrayed by this unreasonable kindness, but because
 the slaves themselves are destroyed before them. For they will be
 drunkards, wanton, dissolute, and more irrational than any beasts. Is
 this, tell me, a proof of goodness, to trample upon the noble nature of
 the soul, and to destroy both themselves and others beside? Seest thou
 that to call men to account is a proof of great goodness? But why do I
 speak of slaves, who more readily fall into these sins? But let a man
 have sons, and let him permit them to do everything they will, and let
 him not punish them; will they not be worse than anything? tell me. In
 the case of men then, it is a mark of goodness to punish, and of
 cruelty not to punish, and is it not so in the case of God? So that
 because He is good, therefore He has prepared a hell.

 And do you wish that I should speak of another instance of God's
 goodness? It is not only this, but that He does not suffer the good to
 become bad. For if they were destined to meet with the same things,
 they would all be bad. But now this also does not a little console the
 good. For hear the Prophet, saying, "The righteous shall rejoice when
 he seeth the vengeance upon the ungodly, he shall wash his hands in the
 blood of the sinner." (Ps. lviii. 10.) Not rejoicing on account of it,
 God forbid! but fearing lest he should suffer the same things, he will
 render his own life more pure. This then is a mark of His great care.
 Yes, you say, but He ought only to threaten, and not to punish also.
 But if He does punish, and still you say it is a matter of threat, and
 on that account become more slothful, if it were really but a threat,
 would you not become more supine? If the Ninevites had known it was a
 matter of threat, they would not have repented. But because they
 repented, they cause the threat to stop at words only. Dost thou wish
 it to be a threat only? Thou hast the disposal of that matter. Become a
 better man, and it stops only at the threat. But if, which be far from
 thee! thou despiseth the threat, thou wilt come to the experience of
 it. The men before [1576] the flood, if they had feared the threat,
 would not have experienced the execution of it. And we, if we fear the
 threat, shall not expose ourselves to experience the reality. God
 forbid we should. And may the merciful God grant that we all
 henceforth, having been brought to sound mind, may obtain those
 unspeakable blessings. Of which may we all be thought worthy, through
 the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the
 Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, and honor, now
 and for ever and ever. Amen.

 [1568] parainein.

 [1569] epi tois autois, perhaps "for the same prize."

 [1570] [egrapsa, the epistolary aorist.--P.S.]

 [1571] Colb. "what entreaty he makes."

 [1572] The Editor has ventured to insert me from Raphelius' conjecture.
 Old Lat. omits the former negative. If the common text ("too much
 confidence") is right, "security" means confidence in Philemon, but
 that is indifferent Greek.

 [1573] So the best mss. and most Fathers for enkuri& 251;.
 Hemsterhusius quoted in New Par. defends the Vulgate Ego te fruar in
 Domino for the former clause, giving it a general sense; Beza has hunc
 fructum. [A.V. "my bowels in the Lord"; R.V. "my heart in
 Christ."--P.S.]

 [1574] The negative is understood in "for."

 [1575] despoteian.

 [1576] So Sav. al. "of."

INDEXES OF SUBJECTS.

  HOMILIES ON GALATIANS AND EPHESIANS.


 Abraham, justified by faith, [1]25; his household a pattern of harmony
 and good government, [2]148; his hospitality and contempt of riches,
 [3]156.

 Absalom, [4]122.

 Achan, his sin brought calamities upon all, [5]79.

 Adam, the parent stock of mankind, [6]143.

 Adultery, an instance of the willfulness of sin, [7]57.

 Agar, interpretation of, [8]34 (note) .

 Allegory, what, [9]34.

 Almsgiving, duty of, [10]45; the danger of omitting the duty, [11]69;
 enforced, [12]172.

 Altar, Christian, [13]64.

 Amattari, the family of, mentioned 1 Sam. x. 21; the text quoted in
 illustration of God's Paternal Government over the families of heaven
 and earth, [14]82 (and note) .

 Ambition of those who wished to introduce circumcision, [15]42.

 Angels, men become in the Gospel, [16]6; Priests called, [17]8-28; St.
 Paul received as, [18]32; their life a pattern for Christians, [19]55;
 cannot confer spiritual gifts, [20]60; are taught the mystery of the
 Gospel by the Church, [21]80; their knowledge limited, [22]80; orders
 of them alluded to, [23]81; as implied in the word "family," [24]82
 (and note) ; surround Elisha and encamp unseen as guardians of God's
 saints, [25]95; keep unity, [26]99; are a pattern of love and unity to
 us, [27]100; are present at the Christian mysteries, [28]120;
 represented as girded like soldiers, [29]165.

 Anger, to be directed against the devil and against ourselves, [30]58,
 [31]163; forbidden against our brethren, [32]118; its cure, [33]118; it
 is giving place to the devil, [34]ib.; of momentary anger, [35]128.

 Anomoeans, [36]28 (note) .

 Apostles, &c., Eph. iv. 11, 12; the subordination of the Christian
 ministry not defined in this text, [37]104.

 Apostolic vocation, prerogative of, [38]2.

 Argument, not the way to attain spiritual wisdom, [39]60.

 Arius, the heretic, [40]164.

 Armor, of the Christian, [41]167.

 Atonement, [42]4, [43]22, [44]23, [45]27; the marvelousness of it and
 its effects, [46]53.


 Babylas, St., buried in his fetters, [47]96.

 Baptism, not the Law, makes us sons, [48]4; a crucifixion with Christ,
 [49]22; regenerating with the Word, [50]35; a confession of faith
 before and after it, [51]53 (and note) ; no second Baptism, [52]57,
 [53]73; raises Christians to sit together with Christ, [54]67; washes
 away sin, [55]69; the beginning of righteousness, [56]114; the danger
 of sin after it, [57]171.

 Bitterness, taints the whole character, [58]122; is powerless, [59]122;
 must be entirely eradicated, [60]125.

 Boasting in self ultimately leads to humility, [61]44.

 Body, not sinful, but the instrument of sin, [62]39; not necessarily
 evil, [63]41; nor opposed to the spirit, [64]41; not evil in substance,
 [65]42.

 Body, not sinful in itself, but sins, when left to itself, [66]73;
 should be in subjection to the soul, [67]74; the compactness and
 sympathy of its members a type of those of the Church, [68]106,
 [69]117; its limits forbid covetousness, [70]58; and excess, [71]138;
 the Church is Christ's body, [72]62; receives life from Him as the body
 from the head, [73]106; as such must not be torn by schism, [74]ib.

 Body and blood of Christ, partaken in the Eucharist, [75]63.

 Bonds, their great power, [76]85 et seqq.; a type of bondage by sin,
 [77]88; see [78]Prison.


 Carnal, what acts are so called, [79]73.

 Cathari, a name indirectly assumed by the Novatians, [80]119 (and note)
 .

 Catholics, accused of being through ambition contentious against
 heretics, [81]7.

 Charity, can only be exercised in this life, [82]46; to be extended to
 all, [83]ib.

 Children, the Three Holy Children, [84]92, [85]93.

 Children, admonished, [86]153; their duty obedience, [87]153; need not
 be made monks, but must be brought up as Christians, [88]154; to be
 taught self-discipline and trained for immortality, [89]154; require
 this training more for courts than for monastic life, [90]155; they who
 train them are forming statues to Christ, [91]156.

 Chosen, how Christians are chosen, [92]55; are made manifest by
 sealing, [93]56.

 Christ, His sufferings voluntary, [94]4; the cause both of our hidden
 and of our visible life, [95]22; was sacrificed for all men, [96]23;
 yet loved each enough to die for him alone, [97]ib.; awful
 mysteriousness of His death, [98]23; took on Him the curse of the
 Cross, [99]27; in the baptized, [100]29, [101]30; Christians fulfill
 the Law one with and for another, [102]43; our Mediator and Judge,
 [103]51; above all principality and power, [104]61; our Head, [105]62,
 [106]105; made man's nature His garment, [107]62; His deep humiliation
 and high exaltation, [108]62; specially present in the Eucharist,
 [109]65; how He broke down the middle wall, [110]71; and abolished the
 enmity, [111]72; became a Jew by circumcision, [112]73; a Gentile by
 being a curse, [113]ib.; united both Jews and Gentiles and slew the
 enmity by His Cross, [114]73; the chief corner-stone, [115]75; brought
 us to Himself, [116]75; dwells in the faithful, [117]81; His glory in
 the Church, [118]82; the exemplar of love to enemies, [119]84; and of
 forgiveness of injuries, [120]129; led captivity captive, [121]104; is
 the Head of the Church, and the Saviour of the Body, [122]144; the
 Bridegroom of the Church, [123]144; His love to the Church a pattern
 for husbands, [124]142-145.

 Christians, in all conditions called saints and faithful, [125]49;
 their blessings spiritual, [126]50; how chosen in Christ, [127]51; in
 order to be unblamable, [128]51; ought to be like Angels, [129]55,
 [130]62, [131]100; how sealed by the Spirit, [132]56, [133]120; their
 privilege in having Christ for their head, [134]62; are members of His
 body, [135]62; partakers of His body in the Eucharist, [136]63; are
 made to sit in heavenly places, [137]67; are created unto good works,
 [138]68; may not live in the flesh, but in heaven, [139]74; are given
 what elder saints toiled after, [140]75; are collectively and severally
 the temple of God, [141]75; are bound as one body by mutual ties,
 [142]102; all equal in Christ, [143]102; alike in grace, differ in
 gifts, [144]103; how light in the Lord, [145]133; cannot serve God and
 mammon, [146]135; must walk circumspectly and not give offense,
 [147]137; must put on the whole armor of God, [148]160; their conflict
 with the devil, [149]161; must stand well and be braced up for the
 fight, [150]163; how they are to keep the Passover, [151]165; their
 warfare ceases in the land of promise, [152]166; are here in a
 pilgrimage or campaign, [153]166.

 Chrysostom, St., did not preach to please, [154]79; calls to public
 humiliation, [155]102; offers to resign his dignity for the sake of
 unity, [156]108; his times, manifold vices of, [157]78, [158]79 (and
 note) ; neglect of Communion, [159]64; degeneracy of teachers, [160]78;
 Church offices salable, [161]ib.; the Church in conflagration through
 pride, [162]100; treatment of slaves, [163]123.

 Church, name of, implies unity, [164]4; divided into a thousand
 parties, [165]8; represented by Sarah, [166]34; its exaltation as the
 body of Christ, [167]62; is Christ's fullness, [168]62; shall continue
 till He comes, [169]76, [170]82; is one body in Him, [171]99; binds all
 together by mutual good offices, [172]ib.; is like a house built of
 men's souls, [173]100, [174]101; set on fire by pride, [175]ib.; ought
 not to seek the support of bad men, [176]107; is the spouse of Christ,
 [177]144; her condition when He took her, [178]ib.

 Circumcision, brings us under the Law, [179]37; observed by St. Paul,
 not preached, [180]38.

 Clamor, forbidden, [181]123; is the vehicle of anger, a special fault
 of women, [182]ib.

 Commandments, the Ten, the order of them, [183]153.

 Communicants, unworthy, [184]79; careless and formal, [185]108; must
 refrain from reviling, and why, [186]120.

 Communion, Church, not to be expanded to take in bad men, [187]107.

 Concession, and command, difference between, [188]15; condescension of
 the Apostles to the Judaists, [189]1-15.

 Corner-stone. See [190]Christ.

 Corruption, various meanings of the word, [191]171.

 Courtezans, [192]151.

 Covenants, old and new proceeded both from the Father and the Son,
 [193]6.

 Covetousness is idolatry in Christians, [194]133-34; leads to the death
 of the soul, [195]134.

 Cross, destroys the need of the Law, [196]3; removes the curse,
 [197]27; the boast of Christians, [198]46; raises them above the old
 Dispensation as well as above the world, [199]46.

 Curiosity, generally misdirected and misplaced, [200]141.


 Damsels, devoted to monastic life, [201]115-16.

 David, a guileless character, [202]123.

 Deacon, his office in dismissing the congregation, [203]64 (and note) .

 Death, of the soul, what it is, [204]134; the second death, [205]172.

 Devil, why called the prince of this world, [206]66; why of the power
 of the air, [207]ib.; takes advantage of men's quarrels, [208]119; and
 of their covetousness, [209]162; his wiles, [210]159; his forces,
 [211]160; maybe overcome, [212]160; but is not to be wrestled with so
 much as trampled on, [213]162; his fiery darts are doubts, [214]169;
 and evil desires and sharp sorrows, [215]169; to be slain by keeping
 the commandments, [216]169.

 Dispensation of grace, [217]76.

 Drunkenness, excludes from Heaven, [218]69; its temporal ill effects,
 [219]138.


 Earnest, the meaning of the word explained, [220]56; see [221]Spirit.

 Economy, of the Apostles about the Law, [222]15; to be beneficial to
 the objects of it, must be concealed from them, [223]16; of St. Paul in
 circumcising Timothy, [224]16.

 Education in Scripture remedies that in the Classics, [225]154;
 consists in nurture, see [226]Children.

 Eli, [227]154.

 Elisha, [228]95.

 Ephesus, the metropolis of [Proconsular] Asia, [229]49; the abode of
 St. John and of Timothy, and a great resort of philosophers, [230]ib.;
 its inhabitants advanced in knowledge, [231]49.

 Epiphany, the great festival of the Greek Church in remembrance of our
 Lord's Baptism and Birth, [232]63 (note) ; a season for Communicating,
 [233]ib.

 Equality of ranks, inconsistent with peace, [234]147; Christian
 equality, [235]102; civil slavery not inconsistent with it, [236]142;
 mutual service, [237]158.

 Eucharist, called the flesh of Christ, [238]41; Christ's body and blood
 partaken in it, [239]63; the preparation for it, [240]63; profanation
 of it, [241]64; neglect of it, [242]ib.; formalism of Communicating
 only at the seasons, danger of unworthy Communicating, [243]63;
 inconsistency of coming to Service and not Communicating, [244]64;
 unfitness not the fault of nature but of indolence, [245]65; Christ
 specially present in the Eucharist, [246]65; allusions to the
 Eucharistic Service, [247]120-21; see [248]Sacrifice.

 Evidences, of the Gospel, [249]9.

 Evil, not necessarily connected with this life, [250]5; not in our
 bodily substance but our will, [251]42.


 Faith, vitiated by a slight adulteration, [252]7; to be defended in
 slight matters, [253]8; slight perversion of, invalidates the
 ministerial authority, [254]8; anterior to the Law, [255]26-27;
 justifies without the Law, [256]26; but not without love, [257]37; ever
 sees Christ, [258]24; gains miraculous and spiritual powers, [259]25;
 as no force if the Law be added, [260]25; makes us sons of God,
 [261]30; always joined with love by St. Paul, [262]60; will not save
 without works, [263]67; a shield to protect ready believers, [264]169.

 Faithful, the, bear about the form of Christ, [265]30; the body of
 Christ, [266]41.

 Falsehood, an instance of willful sin, [267]58.

 Fasting, a means of intercession, [268]101.

 Father and Son, one in will, [269]4; one in act, [270]6; reveal each
 other, [271]11, [272]146.

 Fathers, their duties in the nurture of their children, [273]154.

 Faults, to be mildly corrected, [274]43.

 Fetters and bonds, gloried in by St. Paul, [275]84, &c.

 Fireworshipers, [276]110.

 Flesh, means not the body, but the depraved will, [277]41.

 Forgiveness, motives for it, [278]128-29.

 Foundation, katabole, a beautiful allusion contained in the word,
 [279]51; Christ the foundation, [280]75.

 "Fullness of the times" was Christ's coming, [281]54.

 "Fullness of Christ" is the Church, [282]62.

 "Fullness of God" explained, [283]82.


 Galatians, nature of their error, [284]2; feared to forsake the Law,
 [285]6; justly called "foolish," [286]23; sons of Abraham as Isaac was,
 [287]34; misled by party spirit, [288]40.

 "Gather together into one," the meaning of the expression, [289]54.

 Gentile customs, [290]8.

 Gentiles, raised above the privileges of the Jews, [291]71; their
 calling a mystery, [292]80; the vanity of their worship as directed to
 the creatures, [293]110; it flattered men's evil passions, [294]111.

 God, loves us for His own Name's sake, [295]56; a just apprehension of
 Him forbids us to doubt or rationalize, [296]60; the knowledge of Him
 derived from His Spirit, [297]ib.; His goodness not to be presumed
 upon, [298]69; kind to the unthankful, [299]139; no respecter of
 persons, [300]159.

 Good-pleasure, the meaning of the word, [301]52.

 Government, in its origin paternal, [302]82; must be centered in one,
 [303]146; exemplified in a household, [304]159.

 Gospels, one in substance, though fourfold in form, [305]7; easily
 perverted, [306]7.

 Gospel, no afterthought, [307]51, [308]55; may be in itself an offense,
 in the manner of preaching it should not be, [309]137.

 Grace, sets us free, makes us new, heirs and sons, [310]30; the great
 change it produces in Christians, [311]52; arrays the soul in spiritual
 beauty, [312]53.

 Guilelessness, [313]123.


 Habit, one sinful one may ruin us, [314]68; evil ones must be cured by
 cultivating their opposites, [315]125-26.

 Hagar, [316]149.

 Hannah, an example to mothers, [317]154; of watchfulness and prayer,
 [318]170; her reverence and contrition, [319]170.

 Harlots, their treatment of their lovers, [320]83.

 Heretics, denied the Co-equality of the Father and the Son, [321]4;
 considered this life essentially evil, [322]5.

 Herod, judgment upon, [323]90.

 Holiness in teachers more influential than miracles, [324]77.

 Holy children, as examples of triumph over affliction, [325]93.

 Hospitality, to he shown to the poor, [326]151.

 Household, the mistress's duty in the conduct of, [327]124; when well
 ordered sheds a fragrance around, [328]143; is a little city and its
 head a prince, [329]159.

 Husbands, to love their wives as Christ loved the Church, [330]144-45;
 the husband the head of the family, [331]146; the importance of him to
 the household, [332]148; character of a good one, [333]149; must show
 all forbearance, [334]150; and wean his wife from the world, [335]ib.

 Hymn, the Angelic Hymn, "Holy, Holy, Holy," sung in the Eucharistic
 service, [336]64 (and note) , [337]121, [338]165.


 Idolatry of Christians is covetousness, [339]134; its origin, [340]135.

 Ignorance, to profess it more wise than to profess knowledge, [341]141.

 Incarnation, effects of, [342]30.

 Inheritance, by lot, according to a purpose, [343]55.

 Israelites, how they kept the Passover, [344]164; how they fell,
 [345]165; their history is a mystery or type, [346]ib.


 Jailer at Philippi, conversion of, [347]87.

 James the Less, not the Lord's brother, though so called, [348]13.

 Jeremiah in prison, [349]94.

 Jericho, [350]166.

 Jerusalem, earthly and heavenly, [351]166.

 Jesting, forbidden to Christians, [352]130; the character of one given
 to it, [353]131; enormous when extended to Scripture, [354]131-32.

 Jesus, the Son of Nave, the type of Jesus the Son of God, [355]166.

 Jews, the hindrance to their conversion, [356]4; their blessings
 earthly, [357]50; how of old chosen by God, [358]51; their privileges
 how stated by St. Paul, [359]71; how Jews and Gentiles are made one,
 [360]71.

 Job, an example of protracted suffering, [361]172.

 John Baptist in prison, [362]94.

 Joseph in prison, [363]94.

 Judaizers opposed St. Paul, [364]2; their ambition, [365]42; in St.
 Chrysostom's day, [366]8, [367]21; heresy of, [368]11.

 Judgments, temporal, a call to repentance, [369]79.

 Julian, St., a recluse, his character, [370]156.


 Laver, of Baptism. See [371]Baptism.

 Law the, not evil, but weak and dangerous, [372]20; death to, different
 meanings of, [373]22; causes faith not to avail, [374]25; curse of
 removed by the Cross, [375]27; partially restrains sin, [376]28;
 provided for self-knowledge and self-restraint, [377]29; once led to,
 now leads from Christ, [378]29; sometimes means Genesis, often the Old
 Testament, [379]33; obedience to part of, subjects to the whole,
 [380]36; abolished to make room for a higher rule of life, [381]39,
 [382]42; fulfilled by the various gifts of the faithful, [383]43; the
 ceremonies of, abolished in Christ, [384]72.

 Lent-season, [385]63.

 Light, detects darkness by its own shining, [386]133, [387]136.

 Lot, inheritance by lot implies that we are not chosen by merit,
 [388]55 (and note) .

 Love, God's love the cause of our being chosen, [389]52; how to
 understand its extent, [390]82; its effects and obligations upon man,
 [391]98; always combined with faith, [392]60, [393]171; towards enemies
 enforced, [394]82, [395]127-129; its fruit unity and mutual confidence,
 [396]97-98; is the condition of our receiving the Spirit, [397]105;
 love between husband and wife, [398]149.

 Lowliness, the ground of all graces, [399]96.


 Man, the wonderful exaltation of his nature in Christ, [400]61; his
 littleness and greatness, [401]62; a fourfold consideration of him,
 [402]114.

 Manichees, considered the world essentially evil, [403]5 (note) ; and
 the body, [404]39; paid divine honors to the heavenly bodies, [405]5.

 Manichees, [406]139 (and note) .

 Marcionites, allowed one Gospel only, [407]7, [408]139 (and note) .

 Marks of the Cross, [409]47.

 Marriage, &c., some heretics forbade it, [410]147; rules for, [411]151.

 Masters, their duties, [412]158.

 Mildness in correcting enjoined, [413]43.

 Minister, in what sense not applied to the Son, [414]54 (and note) .

 Ministers of the Gospel to be obeyed though wicked, [415]8; unless they
 vitiate the faith, [416]8; maintained by their disciples, [417]44;
 mutual benefits of this, [418]45; contrast in the case of Heathen
 teachers, [419]45 (note) .

 Monks, [420]165 (note) ; their self-denial, [421]248.

 Moses, an example of love to enemies, [422]83.

 Murder, an instance of voluntary sin, [423]57.

 Mystery, "of His will," [424]53; the calling of the Gentiles so called,
 [425]77; of the Gospel made known to angels by the Church, [426]80; the
 union of Christ and the Church so called, [427]146.


 Natural, what acts are so called, [428]73.

 Nature, does not force man to sin, [429]57.

 Necessity, not to be pleaded in excuse for sin, [430]57.

 Nineveh, its repentance an example to us, [431]101-2.

 Novatians, denied repentance to the lapsed, [432]25 (note) .


 Oaths, not necessary to beget confidence, [433]62.

 Obedience, slight breach of, punishable, [434]7.


 Passover, its historical and mystical meaning, [435]165; how kept by
 Israelites, how to be kept by Christians, [436]165.

 Paul, St., followed Christ's example in his mode of preaching, [437]1;
 his divine calling and commission, [438]2; suddenness of his conversion
 a proof of its being divine, [439]10; sincerity of his motives,
 [440]10; his opposition to Christianity on religious motives, [441]ib.;
 called on account of his capacity, [442]10; reason of his first journey
 from Antioch to Jerusalem, [443]11; reason of his second journey,
 [444]14; his fervency and humility, [445]12; equal in dignity to St.
 Peter, [446]12; his humility shown in his visit to St. Peter, [447]12;
 his doctrine approved by the Apostles, [448]17; his tenderness and
 skill, [449]31-2; observed, but did not preach, circumcision, [450]38;
 usual arrangement of his Epistles, [451]39; why he wrote that to the
 Galatians with his own hand, [452]46; a proof of God's love and power,
 [453]52; had a foretaste of heavenly blessings, [454]56; his sympathy
 and affectionateness, [455]59; his gentleness, [456]65; bound for the
 Gentiles' sake, [457]76; saved by grace, [458]76; had special
 revelation of the calling of the Gentiles, [459]77; his zeal,
 endurance, and wisdom, [460]77; attributed all to grace, [461]ib.; an
 example to teachers, [462]ib.; his great humility, [463]79; his earnest
 supplication, [464]81; example of love to enemies, [465]84; glories in
 bonds, [466]85; but not before Agrippa, and why, [467]95; his skill as
 a spiritual physician, [468]118; his simplicity and condescension in
 admonishing children, [469]153; overcame Satan, [470]161; the intensity
 of his love to Christ, [471]161; asks his brethren's prayers, [472]168.

 Paul of Samosata, heretic, [473]104 (note) , [474]164.

 Peter, St., boldness of his character, [475]18; did not really
 dissemble at Antioch, [476]ib.; reasons why he appeared to do so,
 [477]19; instructed not to spurn the Gentiles, [478]77; his deliverance
 from prison by the Angel, [479]86, [480]89-90.

 Poverty the lot of the Christian, [481]46.

 Prayer, the Lord's Prayer, how it should affect us, [482]120-21; prayer
 unceasing required in Christians, and watchfulness, [483]169;
 exemplified in the Canaanitish woman, the importunate widow, [484]ib.;
 and in Hannah, [485]170.

 Presence, real, of Christ in the Eucharist, [486]63-64.

 Priests, may be understood under the term "Angels," [487]8, [488]28.

 Prison, the blessedness of it for Christ's sake, [489]85 et seqq.;
 instanced in St. Paul, St. Peter, Three Holy Children, [490]93;
 Jeremiah, Joseph, St. John the Baptist, [491]94.

 Privileges, Jewish and Christian compared, [492]51; present privileges
 but an earnest, [493]56; how enhanced in being bestowed through Christ,
 [494]52; the consideration of them very awful, [495]62.

 Providence, instanced in mercies upon some, and judgments upon others,
 [496]90; implied in the circumstances of men, [497]139; in the order of
 nature, [498]140; proved by analogy, [499]140; yet wholly mysterious,
 [500]140-41.

 Psalms, the expression of Christian cheerfulness, [501]138.

 Punishment, degrees of it in hell, [502]69.


 Rationalizing, its absurdity and shallowness, [503]139-40.

 "Redeeming the time" explained, [504]137.

 Redemption, absolute redemption will be in the next world, [505]56.

 Regeneration, another needed by Galatians, [506]32; effected by the
 Divine Words in baptism, [507]35.

 Repentance, possible after lapsing, [508]25.

 Reproof, is charitable, and to be given at any hazard, [509]136.

 Resurrection of Christ, effected by His own power, [510]3.

 Resurrection, more miraculous to persuade souls than raise the dead,
 [511]61, [512]65.

 Reviling, shameful in Christians, [513]163.

 Riches. See [514]Covetousness.

 Righteousness, Jewish and Christian compared, [515]114; is in respect
 of God, or man, [516]114; is a garment, [517]115.

 Rites of the law, connected with each other, [518]37.


 Sabbath, strictness of under the Law, [519]7; Judaic observance of
 excludes from grace, [520]21.

 Sacrifice, the Christian, [521]63-64; preparation for it, [522]63; see
 [523]Eucharist.

 Saints, a common name for Christians in all conditions, [524]50; what a
 saint ought to be, [525]131.

 Salvation, is entirely of free grace, yet not exclusive of our virtue,
 [526]52.

 Samuel, the child of a good mother, [527]154.

 Sarah, [528]148.

 Satan, seduces gradually and secretly, [529]7.

 Schism, cuts off from the Spirit, [530]105; implies want of love and of
 holiness, [531]106; especially provokes God's anger--like the sin of
 those who mangled Christ's Body, [532]ib.; inexpiable by martyrdom,
 [533]106 (and note) , [534]108.

 Schismatics, to be avoided, [535]106.

 Scripture, supreme authority of, [536]8; sense of, not the words must
 be considered, [537]11; profane use of, [538]131; understatements of,
 [539]132.

 Seal, of the Spirit. See [540]Spirit.

 Self-indulgence, in Christian teachers impairs their power of
 converting and keeping in the fold, [541]77.

 Servants, to be taken care of, [542]148, [543]159; as brethren,
 [544]157; their duties to serve with good will, [545]157-58; taken to
 the theater, but not to church, [546]159.

 Sin, is evil, not the world, [547]5; not to be excused by nature or
 necessity, [548]57; its voluntariness instanced by various cases, with
 reference to the Commandments, murder, adultery, theft, perjury,
 assault, rapine, [549]57 et seqq.; would not be punished if of
 necessity, [550]ib.; the ground of discord, [551]97; blinds the
 understanding, [552]112-13; is self-destructive, [553]113; is in
 omission as well as commission, [554]126; is the only real evil,
 [555]140; the source of corruption both of body and soul, [556]171;
 should be put away by acts of mercy, [557]172.

 Slaves, how to be treated, [558]123-24.

 Slavery, how mitigated by the Gospel, [559]142; is but a name,
 [560]157; loses its meaning when it is made volluntary, [561]158; its
 origin, it is the punishment of the sin of rebellion against parents,
 [562]159.

 Solitaries, Christians induced to be so by evil times, [563]78.

 Son and Spirit, oneness of Their power, [564]2; sons of God we become
 through baptism, [565]4; by the Word, [566]35; in putting on Christ,
 [567]29-30; in receiving the Spirit, [568]30; out of the course of
 nature, as Isaac, [569]33.

 Soul, its relation to the Flesh and Spirit, [570]42; should govern the
 body, yet requires the guidance of the Spirit, [571]73; the death of,
 [572]134.

 Spirit, Holy, imparts righteousness, [573]37; gift of not by Law, but
 faith, not by circumcision, but grace, [574]47; Christians sealed by
 Him, [575]56, [576]120; the earnest of our inheritance, [577]56,
 [578]166; alone reveals mysteries, [579]60; and the true knowledge of
 God, [580]ib.; the calling of the Gentiles, [581]80; alone can
 strengthen against trial, [582]81; His indwelling necessary to teach
 the love of God, [583]82; binds the faithful in one body, [584]96; His
 gifts manifold, [585]104; yet have all one office to build up each and
 all in one faith, [586]105; communicates life from the Head to the
 whole Church, as natural life is conveyed through the body,
 [587]105-06; how grieved, especially by sins of the tongue, [588]120;
 by bitterness, [589]121; His grace typified by the pillar of fire,
 [590]165; the sword of the Spirit, [591]169.

 Submission, mutual, is mutual service, [592]142.

 Suicide worse, and punished worse by God than murder, [593]5.

 Sunworship, [594]110.

 Superstitions, [595]8, [596]79, [597]111.

 Synagogue, the, represented by Agar, [598]34.


 Teachers, degeneracy of, their powerlessness to convert and guide,
 [599]77-78.

 Teachers of error, to be cut off, their followers to be spared,
 [600]38.

 Thanksgiving, universally a duty in Christians, [601]138-39.

 Theft, an instance of voluntary sin, [602]58.

 Times, how called evil, [603]137.

 Tithes, the danger of omitting them, [604]69.

 Tongue, its proper use, [605]119, [606]131; and discipline, [607]121.

 Trisagion, the Hymn so called. See [608]Hymn.

 Types, in the Old Testament, explained, [609]166.


 Unity of the Spirit, binds all together, [610]97; its perfectness,
 [611]ib.; promotes virtue, [612]97; kept by love, [613]98; binds in one
 body the faithful of all ages, [614]99; meant by St. Paul's expression,
 "a perfect man," [615]105; unity is the condition of our receiving life
 from the Spirit, [616]106; is founded on the Divine Unity, [617]146.

 Unpopularity the lot of Christians, [618]46.

 Uzzah, [619]7.


 Valentinus, heretic, [620]164.

 Vanity, not in the works of God but those of man, [621]109.

 Vice, against nature, [622]58.

 Vigils, of the Church, [623]170 (and note) .

 Virtue, universal, required in Christians, [624]68, [625]125; promotes
 unity, [626]97; must be active, [627]126; and positive, [628]127.


 Wall, "middle wall of partition," explained, [629]72.

 Water with the Word regenerates, [630]35.

 Wealth, ill-gotten has no security, [631]58; desires of it bounded by
 man's physical frame, [632]ib.

 Will, in the Almighty precedent and consequent illustrated, [633]52.

 Will, evil, the cause of evil, [634]5.

 Will, unity of, between Father and Son, [635]4.

 Wisdom, not curious but submissive, [636]141.

 Wives, to submit themselves to their husbands in the Lord, [637]143; in
 what their excellence consists, [638]145; not to be chosen for beauty,
 [639]ib.; nor for riches, [640]145, [641]151; to reverence their
 husbands, [642]146; not to be treated as slaves, [643]147; marry for
 richer for poorer, [644]149; to be formed by the husband and weaned
 from the world, [645]149-50; and treated with love and honor, [646]152.
 See [647]Women.

 Women, their self-denial and endurance, [648]115-16; a pattern to men,
 [649]116; their faults common to men, their excellencies their own,
 [650]116; warned against clamor, [651]123; especially in the treatment
 of their slaves, [652]124; leniency of laws towards them, [653]124.

 Works, good, the fruit of the Spirit, [654]42.

 World, not essentially evil, [655]5.

 Wrath, "children of," explained, [656]66 (and note) .

  HOMILIES ON PHILIPPIANS, COLOSSIANS, AND THESSALONIANS.


 Aaron, why he was not smitten with leprosy as Miriam, [657]274.

 Abel, suffered through love, [658]342; shall meet Christ, [659]356.

 Abraham, example of good use of riches, [660]240; his offering Isaac a
 type of our Lord's death, [661]283; bid sacrifice Isaac, that he might
 be rewarded, [662]331; an example to bereaved parents, [663]336; prayed
 for Sodom, [664]342; preferred God to all things, [665]350; heard even
 his wife for God's sake, [666]350; blessed in his family for this,
 [667]350; not heard for Sodom, [668]358; his reward greater for his not
 knowing the future, [669]361; had children, but was not covetous,
 [670]369; his hospitality, [671]ib.; wronged by Lot, [672]ib.

 Accusation, false, met by explanation, true by acknowledgment and
 amendment, [673]392.

 Achaia, churches of, [674]381.

 Achan, sacrilege of, punished, [675]359.

 Actions, tradition by, [676]344, [677]394.

 Acts, of mercy to be done against the last day, [678]202; noble acts
 not performed without daring, [679]226; evil actions spring from
 thoughts, [680]247.

 Adam, first of mankind, [681]271; difference between him and a
 Christian, [682]287.

 Adjuration, by Christ, once feared, now despised, [683]372; a woman
 rewarded for regarding, [684]373.

 Admonition, indirect, most effective, [685]348; relieved by praise,
 [686]ib.; disliked, [687]366; should be gentle, [688]367; followed up
 with prayer, [689]371; of an offending brother, private, [690]395.

 Admonitions, should be coupled with commendations, [691]219.

 Adrian, sufferings of Jews from, [692]358.

 Adultery, has worse effects than fornication, [693]248; is uncleanness,
 [694]342; forbidden to men as well as to women, [695]345; a work of
 darkness, [696]362; most insulting if open, [697]370.

 Affliction, of self, now a virtue, at Day of Judgment an unprofitable
 reflection, [698]245; a benefit, [699]253; no one free from it even in
 this world's contests, [700]253; from it ease springs, [701]255; admits
 spiritual joy, [702]325 (see [703]Trial) ; the lot of Christians,
 [704]335; less felt when we have great blessings, [705]350; grace and
 comfort in, [706]380; unity a help in, [707]380-81; shakes the weak,
 confirms the strong, [708]380; comfort in, [709]382; a temptation
 against love of God, [710]393.

 Ahithophel, example of flattery, [711]205.

 Alexander the coppersmith, [712]391.

 Alexander, called the Macedonian, [713]328; his conquests prophesied
 of, [714]ib.

 Alms, adorn the soul, root out covetousness, raise soul toward heaven,
 bring blessings, assist the dead, [715]197; a help to catechumens,
 [716]ib.; measured by the purpose of the giver, [717]251-52; are a
 sweet savor to God, [718]ib.; should be given in proportion to the
 property a person has, [719]294; are a more beautiful clothing than
 golden ornaments, [720]307; surpassed by thanksgiving and losses,
 [721]337; giving, relieves one's losses, [722]338; stores for,
 [723]338; oil of our lamp, [724]371; are for those who cannot support
 themselves, [725]394.

 Almsgiving, to ministers a gain to the giver, [726]187; the right
 disposition of giving, [727]187; removes sins of the giver, [728]ib.;
 should be to the poorer before the richer, [729]ib.; not to a saint in
 abundance, [730]ib.; should be without nice curiosity, [731]188; its
 good effects on man's nature, [732]248; does more good to the giver
 than the receiver, [733]249; shown to be the best thing by time present
 and future, [734]263.

 Amalek, conquered by Moses' prayer, [735]391.

 Ambassadors, honor due to, [736]330.

 Amulets, used in sickness, [737]336; applied by old women, [738]298; a
 device of Satan's, [739]ib.; the use of them condemned by the better
 sort of heathens, [740]ib.

 Ananias, sin and punishment of, [741]359.

 Anarchy, Antichrist's opportunity, [742]389.

 Anchor, hope of Resurrection, [743]377.

 Angels, Colossians' notion about them refuted, [744]270; created by the
 Son, [745]271; all things done by them are of Christ, [746]ib.;
 aforetime enemies to man, were reconciled to him by Christ, [747]272;
 could not persuade men to reconciliation, for they could not bind
 Satan, [748]275; not needed since men are "knit" to Christ, [749]276;
 notion about them answered again by Christ's being in Christians,
 [750]280; Colossians' notion about them arose from some false teacher,
 out of his vainglory, [751]288; it caused them to let go their hold of
 Christ, and so be lost, [752]289; attend on children, [753]351; work of
 in the Resurrection, [754]355-56; host of, described as surrounding
 Christ, [755]382.

 Anointing, metaphorically, for encouraging, [756]378.

 Antichrist, might seem a sign of Christ's coming, [757]362; is not an
 exact one, [758]ib.; will come first, and so far a sign, [759]378;
 Christ left no room for his deceit, [760]378; he that shall come in his
 own name, [761]ib.; called the Apostasy, [762]386; will not setup
 idolatry, [763]ib.; will be worshiped in God's temple, i.e., in
 Churches, [764]ib.; miracles of, [765]ib.; is not Satan, [766]386; what
 withheld, the Roman Empire, [767]388-89; Nero a type of, [768]389;
 Christ's mere appearing shall destroy, [769]ib.; permitted for
 silencing of unbelievers, [770]ib.

 Antioch, monks near, [771]394 (note 2) .

 Apollinarius, of Laodicea, [772]206; his followers denied that our Lord
 took a soul, [773]214.

 Apostasy. See [774]Antichrist.

 Apostles, The, examples how we should meet pride arising from our
 wisdom, [775]205; a type, and their life-giving laws, [776]240; taught
 and then left those they had taught to teach in their place, [777]301;
 their ignorance no hindrance to the spread of the Preaching, [778]307;
 rejoiced in suffering, [779]325; chosen as unworldly, [780]329; at
 first curious about the time of Consummation, [781]360; not so
 afterwards, [782]ib.; not informed, [783]ib.; St. Peter chief of,
 [784]ib.

 Appearing, not said of the Father, but of the Son, [785]207.

 Archippus, probably held some office in the Church at Colossæ [786]257,
 [787]314; a person to whom St. Paul would have the Colossians entirely
 subject, [788]315.

 Archangel, [789]355-56.

 Arians, like Greeks in making a greater and a lesser God, [790]207.

 Aristarchus, was brought up from Jerusalem fellow-prisoner with St.
 Paul, [791]310.

 Arius of Alexandria, [792]206; how his heresy falls before St. Paul's
 text, [793]207.

 Ark, one hundred years building, [794]357; resting-place of, [795]ib.

 Armor, spiritual, [796]363.

 Army, the Church like an, [797]367.

 Article, the, often not placed, and yet the word God means The Father,
 [798]209.

 Artisans, oppress their poorer fellows, [799]370.

 Arts, knowledge of, should not make men proud, [800]217; to be used in
 God's service in serving one another, not to withdraw men from
 spiritual things, [801]233.

 Ascalon, country beyond, [802]357; men of, conquered by Samuel's
 prayer, [803]391.

 Assyrians, king of, conquered by Hezekiah's prayer, [804]391.

 Atoms, notion of, [805]353.

 Avarice, souls sacrificed to, [806]346; wickedness of, [807]368; vain
 excuses for, answered, [808]368-69; its bad effects, [809]210; consists
 in loving money at all, [810]211; hinders from seeing Christ's face,
 [811]ib.; is a root of evils, [812]ib.; hinders from being Christ's
 servant, [813]ib.

 Audacity, examples of, [814]205; is shown in causeless rage, [815]206.


 Baptism, called a seal, [816]197; men freed from sin by, and have the
 Holy Ghost given them, [817]237; men are delivered, as it were, from a
 fever and wholly diseased state by it, [818]ib.; it gives remission of
 sin, grace, and wealth, [819]238; prodigal son an example for those
 that have sinned after baptism, [820]ib.; is through the cross,
 [821]242; the way prepared for it by the things done of old in water,
 [822]283; is a circumcision of spirit, [823]285; not burial only, but
 resurrection, [824]ib.; a death unto sin, [825]286; prefigured in Red
 Sea, [826]290; its destroying and new-making effects no cause for
 marvel from what goes on in nature, [827]290; called sleep by heretics,
 [828]352; too often deferred, [829]361; St. Greg. Naz. on this
 practice, [830]361 (note 3) ; priest has one with people, [831]392.

 Beasts, wild, do not hurt unless straitened, [832]368; man inferior to
 in bodily qualities, [833]379.

 Beauty, no cause for being proud, [834]217.

 Bee, lesson from, in that it dies in stinging, [835]368; commended in
 Scripture, [836]ib.

 Beggars, adjure by Christ in vain, [837]373; succeed by praising
 ladies' beauty, [838]ib.; driven to low jesting and juggling, [839]ib.;
 and to loose music, [840]ib.; thankful under great privations,
 [841]ib.; at churches, [842]ib.; cruel treatment of, [843]395.

 Begging, a shameful thing, [844]348; misery of, [845]368.

 Beginning, used for first impulse, or for grounding, [846]378.

 Belief, of things in heaven increased from what takes place on earth,
 [847]283.

 Believers, sins of, punished, [848]359.

 Belly, the many ways men make it their god, [849]243; moderation a
 boundary to it, as the sand to the sea, [850]ib.

 Benjamin, tribe of, that in which the priest's portion was, [851]231.

 Beræa, persecution at, [852]328.

 Bishops, sometimes called presbyters and deacons, [853]184; have
 authority from Christ by succession, [854]274; come from God, [855]ib.;
 are ambassadors from God, [856]274-75.

 Bishop (see [857]Chrysostom, [858]Priest, [859]Ruler) , responsibility
 of, [860]372.

 Blasphemers, hated by God, taken up by the devil and the demons,
 [861]209.

 Blood, resisting unto, [862]385.

 Body, the, may be made spiritual, and at length shine in heaven like
 Christ's body, [863]243; shall be made immortal by the power of Christ,
 [864]244.

 Body (see [865]Resurrection) , formation of, a mystery, [866]353-54;
 unity of, requires care of all parts, [867]381; place of head in,
 [868]397.

 Bonds, a furtherance to the Gospel, [869]182, [870]189; a confirmation
 of the Gospel, [871]186; give confidence to others, [872]190; cause
 preaching both from envy and for good-will, [873]ib.; the great service
 they are to St. Paul and to his work, [874]306; a contrast between his
 and those the women bound their hair with, [875]307; St. Paul's, a
 support under all kinds of tribulations, [876]315; and in temptations
 to luxury, [877]315-16.

 Books, Christian and heathen, [878]379.

 Bowels, of Christ, force of the expression, [879]188.

 Breastplate, of faith and love, [880]363.

 Brethren, used as a mark of honor, [881]230; murdered by refusing
 sustenance, [882]359; disorderly, to be punished, not starved,
 [883]393-94; nor utterly cut off, [884]395.

 Bride, with what ornaments she should be adorned, [885]320.

 Brutes, superior to man, [886]217.

 Bulimy, ravenous disease called, [887]379.

 Busybodies, never satisfied, [888]379.


 Cain, envied for want of love, [889]342; his sin punished, [890]359;
 his sin equaled, [891]ib.; had no written law, [892]ib.

 Calling, Christian, requires good life, [893]345; many fall from,
 [894]385; God's will in our, [895]363, [896]385.

 Canticles, mystical interpretation of, [897]352.

 Care, undue, takes away the native force of the soul, [898]229.

 Catechumens, do not benefit by remembrance in the Mysteries, only by
 alms, [899]197.

 Catasta, [900]336 (note 2) .

 Ceiling, gilded, common in houses of the rich, [901]232.

 Cæsar's household, obedient to St. Paul's preaching, [902]253.

 Chapels of martyrs, [903]373; some built by Constantine, [904]ib. (note
 1) ; poor at doors of, [905]ib.; alms at [906](reference in note 1) .

 Chariot, [907]206.

 Charmer, unpitied if bitten, [908]365.

 Charms (see [909]Amulets) , offered in sickness, [910]336-37; to be
 rejected for fear of God, [911]ib.

 Chastity, specially called holiness, [912]342; blessing of keeping till
 marriage, [913]346; sometimes found in heathens, [914]347; first
 practice of, keeping the eyes, [915]378; foundation of, fasting,
 [916]ib.

 Cheerfulness, right in all events, [917]223.

 Children, of nobles, wear golden ornaments round the neck, as those of
 high birth, [918]182; put it off when men, [919]183; require to be
 indulged, [920]277; loss of, not a new suffering, and a gain to them,
 [921]299; may be wept for, but without blasphemous words, [922]ib.; at
 Constantinople had learnt songs and dances of Satan; should be
 instructed in psalms and hymns, [923]301; should never be left to
 intermix freely with servants or friends even, [924]ib.; the many
 virtuous lessons they may be instructed in from the Psalms, [925]302.

 Children, term used by St. Paul when he would correct or show fondness
 for, [926]229; loss of, too great grief for, [927]349; what children
 happy, [928]351; good, meet their fathers, [929]356; eaten by women,
 [930]358; curiosity of, [931]360; made an excuse for avarice, [932]368;
 God may take away if made an excuse, [933]369; patriarchs had, but were
 not covetous, [934]ib.; why given, [935]ib.; should be taught to fear
 judgment, [936]383; to be regulated, [937]384; cares for, sweet to a
 mother, [938]392.

 Children, the three, refreshed in the furnace, [939]325; ventured
 without knowing they should escape, [940]361.

 Christ, how glorified in St. Paul's life or death, [941]194; exhorts
 disciples by examples of himself, the Father, and prophets, [942]206;
 called the great God by St. Paul, [943]207; His not seizing to Himself
 equality proves Him not lesser than the Father, [944]208; His divinity
 not matter of robbery, but His right, natural to Him, [945]213; His
 emptying Himself His own act, [946]ib.; if a mere creature, did not
 humble Himself in washing disciples' feet, [947]214; in what ways like
 and unlike other men, [948]ib.; underwent no change or degeneracy in
 becoming a servant, [949]ib.; proved to have taken a soul against the
 Apollinarians, [950]214-15; was not servile in becoming willingly
 obedient to His Father, but greatly honored Him, [951]215; His
 humiliation corresponding to His height, [952]ib.; His death greater
 humiliation than His being a servant, [953]ib.; the most ignominious
 death of all, [954]ib.; humbled as man, [955]ib.; exalted as man,
 [956]ib.; His glory, honor, or dishonor is the Father's too, [957]216;
 His obedience, His exaltation, [958]ib.; can be known only by faith,
 [959]235; fellowship in His sufferings and death through faith,
 [960]236; comes Himself to take His friends to heaven, [961]244; the
 grief it will be to be rejected from His kingdom at the judgment,
 [962]245; men are saints because of their faith in Him, [963]258; His
 names symbols of His benefits to man, [964]ib.; He cometh to us through
 the poor, [965]260; present at the table of the poor, [966]261; the
 greatness of His work in redemption, [967]267; First of the Church, as
 the Adam of men, [968]271-72; still suffers in His members, [969]276;
 does many things for them now, [970]ib.; reasons why He came at this
 time, not in old time, [971]277-79; in Him is hid all wisdom, [972]281;
 "fullness of Godhead" in Him means that God dwelleth in Him, [973]285;
 blotted out the bond that was against man by His death, [974]286; and
 then tore it in two, [975]ib.; conquered Satan on the cross, [976]ib.;
 His death public, His Resurrection private, [977]ib.; so beautiful it
 is not possible to tell, [978]295; is put on by clothing the soul with
 virtues, [979]308; present at marriages, [980]319; with His angels,
 [981]320; glorified in suffering, [982]325; waiting for, [983]328; His
 resurrection a ground of hope, [984]328, [985]363; known by the Jews,
 though slain by them, [986]333; foretold affliction to lighten it,
 [987]335; suffered for us while enemies, [988]ib.; he that can give to,
 rich, [989]338; death of, proves incarnation real, [990]352; is in the
 faithful, [991]353; our Pilot, [992]355; words of, recorded only by St.
 Paul, [993]ib.; voice of, raises the dead, [994]ib.; honor of meeting,
 [995]356; checked curiosity about the end, [996]360-61; comes as a
 thief, and why, [997]361; comes suddenly, though preceded by Antichrist
 and Elias, [998]362; command of, to obey rulers, though bad men,
 [999]366; comes to table in the poor, [1000]374; proclaimed at hand to
 induce disappointment, [1001]377; spoke particularly of consummation to
 provide against deceivers, [1002]378; coming of, to be like lightning,
 [1003]ib.; taught humility by washing disciples' feet, [1004]379;
 suffering for, glorious, [1005]385; coming of, will be with gathering
 of saints, [1006]385-86; followers of Antichrist would in no case have
 believed, [1007]389; did not openly call Himself God, [1008]ib.;
 excuses for not believing, taken away through Antichrist, [1009]389;
 came in the Father's name, [1010]ib.; called the Love of the Truth,
 [1011]ib.; friend of man, [1012]390; glory of, to save men, [1013]ib.;
 is present where men pray together, [1014]392; to be waited for,
 [1015]393; forbade idleness, [1016]394.

 Christians, of old, sharers of St. Paul's sufferings, [1017]200; if
 they glorify Christ, and live not rightly, insult Him, and worse than
 heathen, [1018]216; enemies to the cross, who seek ease and luxury,
 [1019]242; called faithful because of mysteries intrusted to them never
 intrusted to others, [1020]258; a call to have a portion of the Saints
 in Light, [1021]266; translated into it by Christ, [1022]ib.; yet
 prefer ease and luxury in this world, [1023]267; contrasts between
 state of, at baptism and Adam's state in Paradise, [1024]287; can only
 be kept in state of purity by a virtuous life, [1025]287-88; are risen
 with Christ therefore their life is not this life, nor will it appear
 till He appears, [1026]289; compare to a corpse, [1027]290; have all
 one royal form, viz., that of Christ, [1028]297; should make the sign
 of the cross, and not use amulets, [1029]298; should not always be
 learning, but should be able after a time to teach others also,
 [1030]301; wisdom with which they should treat those that are not
 Christians, [1031]309; in having put on Christ, are clothed with
 ornament enough, [1032]307.

 Christian, so may you die, a form of adjuration, [1033]372; first all
 friends, [1034]331; appointed to trials, [1035]335; present, have borne
 nothing, [1036]ib.; are not ready for war, [1037]ib.; in peace should
 provide for war, [1038]336; are Christ's in death or life, [1039]363;
 first, as one family, hence withdrawal much feared, [1040]395-96.

 Christ-mongers, some call, [1041]348.

 Christs, false, provided against, [1042]378.

 Chrysostom, St., admires St. Paul more for his grief at sinners than
 for his many trials, [1043]254-55; is not afraid to warn people of
 their sins because he may be left with a small congregation, [1044]293;
 the mind with which he had spoken of the defects of his people,
 [1045]ib.; his hearty joy at the mention of St. Paul's bonds,
 [1046]306; straitened for an example of friendship, [1047]331; his
 argument about fornication, [1048]342; apostrophizes Joseph, [1049]343;
 urges to immediate forgiveness, [1050]ib.; talks like a matchmaker,
 [1051]346; must speak of unclean things for remedy, [1052]ib.; calls
 his charge his own body, [1053]ib.; in fear of punishment because of
 his office, [1054]359; promises to prove that hell is not against God's
 mercy, [1055]359-60; grieves for scorners, [1056]365; complained of for
 discipline, [1057]366; prayed for the people, though unworthy to do so,
 [1058]371; asks their prayers on account of his responsibility,
 [1059]372; and on account of Satan's assaults, [1060]391; feels for the
 people as a father, [1061]391; asks to hear any complaint, [1062]392;
 wishes his charge multiplied, though heavy, [1063]ib.; spiritual
 children of, [1064]ib.; pangs for, [1065]ib.; preached as bishop once
 or twice a month, [1066]396; asks help in teaching, [1067]397.

 Church, the, the bride of Christ and of His flesh, [1068]319; the real
 palace, [1069]373; poor around doors of, [1070]ib.; lessons from this,
 [1071]374; rich are vain and showy in, [1072]387; reverence in,
 [1073]388; called in God, for distinction from other assemblies,
 [1074]324; of Constantinople, unworthy to be so called, [1075]ib.;
 offenders removed from, [1076]336; order of, like that of an army,
 [1077]367; they that war on, say they know God, [1078]378; whole,
 claims our love, [1079]381; tradition of, [1080]390; each once like one
 family, [1081]396; glory of, lost for want of love, [1082]ib.

 Churches, Antichrist shall be seated in, [1083]386.

 Circumcision, might be performed to the breaking of the Sabbath,
 [1084]230; nothing but "concision" when the law was no more, [1085]230;
 what true circumcision is, [1086]ib.; only a type, [1087]231; how it
 differed from baptism, [1088]285.

 Coiner, coineth but in vain, [1089]388.

 Colony, Philippi so called, [1090]181.

 Colossæ, a city of Phrygia 256.

 Colossians, Epistle to the, written while St. Paul was in bonds, and
 after that to the Romans, [1091]257; later than that to the
 Philippians, [1092]ib.; their fruitfulness after they had received
 grace, [1093]259; are brought unto God by ministers of Christ, not by
 angels, [1094]ib.; praised for their way of life, [1095]265; blamed for
 their doctrines, [1096]ib.; must be brought unto God by His Son, no
 more by angels, [1097]264; their love for St. Paul, [1098]280; saw him
 constantly in the spirit, [1099]ib.; their steadfastness in faith,
 [1100]281; warned against their notion about angels by being bid walk
 in Christ, [1101]284; warned against some false philosophizer that
 would gradually undermine them, [1102]ib.

 Commands, different at the end of some Epistles, [1103]303.

 Commandments, perfection goes beyond, [1104]344.

 Commendation, needs qualifying, [1105]385; carefully guarded,
 [1106]393.

 Concision. See [1107]Circumcision, [1108]230.

 Conscience, a terror to those that live in crime, [1109]248; constantly
 tells men they sin, but they refuse to know it, [1110]269.

 Constantine, built chapels to martyrs, [1111]373 (note 1) .

 Constantinople, St. Gregory Nazianzen at, [1112]361 (note 3) ;
 Constantine built chapels to martyrs in, [1113]373 (note 1) .

 Consummation, curiosity about time of, [1114]360; curiosity checked,
 [1115]ib.; time of, best not known, [1116]361; death is to each one,
 [1117]360; now going on, [1118]360-61; Christ spoke particularly of, to
 exclude deceivers, [1119]378; Thessalonians perplexed about, [1120]ib.

 Contention, nature of man fond of, [1121]217; does away with peace,
 [1122]248.

 Contentious, the, require arguments from reason as well as Scripture,
 [1123]212.

 Contentment, in all states not easy, and requires discipline and trial,
 [1124]250.

 Contrite spirit, God loves, [1125]278.

 Conversation, about hell, useful, [1126]382-83; of other men's matters,
 dangerous, [1127]383.

 Corinth, fornicator of, quenched the spirit, [1128]370; cured by
 withdrawing from him, [1129]396.

 Corinthians, were not poor, [1130]332; Timothy sent to, [1131]335;
 reasoned with, because indocile, [1132]353.

 Cornelius, example for a soldier, [1133]241; prayer of, [1134]326.

 Correction, by means of hard sayings, [1135]211-12.

 Covenant, the nature of a, [1136]287.

 Covetousness, its bad effects, [1137]248; more cruel than robbery,
 [1138]369-70; to be checked, [1139]370.

 Courage, not haughtiness, [1140]205 (see [1141]Pride) ; examples of
 true courage, [1142]205; is shown in the absence of self-love,
 [1143]206; has scope through uncertainty, [1144]361.

 Craticula, [1145]336 (note) .

 Cross, the, must be borne by Christians, [1146]242; its power,
 [1147]ib.; Christians exhorted to sign themselves with it, [1148]298.

 Cupping-glass, draws out disease, [1149]387.

 Curiosity, must not be indulged, [1150]277, [1151]279; natural to man,
 [1152]360; indulgence promotes, [1153]ib.; especially about the
 consummation, [1154]ib.; belongs to an imperfect state, [1155]ib.;
 reasons against, [1156]ib.; excuse for, to answer heathens, [1157]ib.


 Daniel, his humility shows us how we should meet the pride that comes
 from wisdom, [1158]204 (see [1159]Apostles and [1160]Joseph) ; thought
 a god, [1161]327; could not have saved Jews, [1162]ib.

 Darkness, works of, [1163]362; vice a, [1164]363; is over the earth,
 [1165]370.

 Daughters, of men, [1166]357; Lot would have given up, for the sake of
 God's servants, [1167]358.

 David, example of humility, [1168]205 (see [1169]Humility) ; an example
 how to behave in a kingdom, [1170]241; Samuel sent to anoint,
 [1171]339; care of people for, [1172]391.

 Day, sons of, [1173]362; to be such our own part, [1174]ib.; of the
 Lord comes as a thief, [1175]326, [1176]360; of judgment, circumstances
 of, [1177]355; darkness to some, light to others, [1178]362; comes as
 travail on a woman, but partially foreknown, [1179]362; as a thief to
 men in darkness, [1180]ib.; last, will show who have believed,
 [1181]385; falsely proclaimed at hand, [1182]386.

 Deacon, bids silence for lessons, [1183]387.

 Dead, of all ages, raised, [1184]356; raised and gathered before caught
 up, [1185]ib.; all await the end, [1186]361; by nature and in sin
 compared, [1187]363-64; one who wrongs us is in sin, [1188]368;
 therefore we need no revenge, [1189]ib.; burial of, [1190]379.

 Death, no shame to a Christian, [1191]194; only a coming to life to the
 Christian, [1192]196; in itself indifferent, [1193]ib.; several causes
 of the fear of, [1194]198; that by the Cross most ignominious,
 [1195]215; of the just matter of joy, [1196]223; that of desperately
 bad, cause of more joy, [1197]ib.; if really death, sad, [1198]349;
 horror of being led to, [1199]356; eternal more terrible, [1200]ib.;
 consummation to each one, [1201]360; time of, best unknown, [1202]361;
 fear of, restrains many, [1203]ib.; vice a, [1204]363; going to, by a
 broad road unenviable, [1205]364; thought of, humbling, [1206]ib.

 Deceit, a good kind of, [1207]284.

 Deeds, teach, not words only, [1208]240; make the teacher to be
 reverenced and obeyed by disciple, [1209]ib.; "of the old man" means
 that of the bad moral choice, [1210]294-95.

 Deep, how to traverse safely, [1211]355.

 "Defense, of the Gospel," the expression explained, [1212]190.

 Delay, folly of, [1213]325; makes forgiving harder, [1214]343; of
 Judgment is for our repentance, [1215]384.

 Deluge, disbelieved till it came, [1216]356; of Hell, [1217]357.

 Demons, statues in houses so called, [1218]232; praised in song at
 heathen feasts, [1219]262; beset way from earth to heaven, [1220]371.

 Desire, the end for which it is implanted in the mind, [1221]233; to be
 limited except in heavenly things, [1222]370.

 Despair, none to, though late, [1223]325-26; makes any one bold,
 [1224]361; men should not be driven to, [1225]395.

 Despondency, relieved by example, [1226]349.

 Difficulties, met by difficulties, [1227]353-54; of others turned to
 our good, [1228]378.

 Disciples, Christ washed feet of, [1229]379; in schools are also
 teachers, [1230]397.

 Discipline, Church, thought odious, [1231]366.

 Discourses, of Hell, profitable, [1232]359; thought unpleasant,
 [1233]382; qualify the soul; [1234]383-84; are to it as wind to ships,
 [1235]383; to be applied to all, [1236]384; preferred by many to
 lessons, [1237]388; yet not heeded by them, [1238]388; less effective
 than life, [1239]396.

 Dishonor, for Christ's sake glorious, [1240]385.

 Disease, produced by carelessness, [1241]364; sin a, [1242]ib.; to be
 expected, [1243]367.

 Disorderly, who are, [1244]367, [1245]394; not to starve to death,
 [1246]394.

 Dispensation, may have two meanings, [1247]277.

 Disputing, what it means, [1248]220.

 Dives. See [1249]Rich man.

 Divinity, not spoken of as unequal in Scripture, [1250]207.

 Diviners, not consulting, makes loss a gain, [1251]337; may learn
 something of Satan, [1252]ib.; going to them pleases him, [1253]ib.

 Doctrines, not to be forsaken for human respects, [1254]381.

 Docetæ, [1255]352 (note 2) .

 Dogs, the poor are, of God's palace, [1256]374.

 Draught, of wind puts out lamp, [1257]370.

 Dress, should not make men proud, [1258]217.

 Drunkenness, any vice a, [1259]362; causes sleep, [1260]364.

 Duties, should be done not from nature only, but from higher motive of
 pleasing God, [1261]304.


 Ear, formation of, [1262]354; sin may enter by, [1263]370.

 Ears, how to use them in God's service, [1264]233.

 Earth, imperfectly known to men, [1265]354; shall give up the dead,
 [1266]356; things of, quench grace, [1267]370; way from, to heaven
 beset by demons, [1268]371.

 Ease, in this world is not the way to heaven, [1269]255; in this world
 is not the life of Christians, [1270]289.

 Edification, mutual, [1271]366.

 Education, soul the chief object in, [1272]346.

 Egypt, bad character of, [1273]358.

 Egyptians, drowned, [1274]358; irascible and unforgiving, [1275]380.

 Elation, more disease to the soul than dropsy to the body, [1276]217.

 Elect, the, worth suffering for, [1277]325; to be gathered by Angels,
 [1278]355; honored by meeting Christ, [1279]356; Antichrist might
 well-nigh deceive, [1280]386.

 Eli, and his sons, punished, [1281]359; sin of, not unimitated,
 [1282]ib.

 Elias, example of courage, [1283]205; type of the Resurrection,
 [1284]283; to come before Christ, [1285]362, [1286]378, [1287]390;
 example of poverty, [1288]240.

 Empire, Roman, [1289]388.

 Endurance, Christian, convinces adversaries, [1290]200.

 Enemies, spiritual, enumerated, [1291]336; to be talked to concerning
 Hell, [1292]384.

 Enemy, an, should be treated as a real friend, [1293]249; softened by
 kindness, [1294]343; good of not having, [1295]395.

 Enmities, ruler must incur, [1296]366; of great, not feared by first
 Christians, [1297]381.

 Enmity, had its origin from the earth, [1298]275.

 Enoch, type of the resurrection, [1299]283.

 Envy, the causes of it, [1300]191; to indulge it makes us friends of
 Satan's, to resist it makes us sharers in our brother's pleasure,
 [1301]312; he that resists it, makes his own soul brighter than his
 whose grace he envies, and gains three crowns, [1302]313; makes to
 fight against God and His Church, and puts a man in punishment,
 [1303]313; likened to a savage beast, [1304]ib.; of Cain from want of
 love, [1305]342; bred at marriage feasts, [1306]384.

 Epaphras, See [1307]Epaphroditus.

 Epaphroditus, sent by clergy of Philippi to St. Paul, [1308]184; sent
 to the Philippians by St. Paul, [1309]223; St. Paul's fellow-soldier,
 [1310]224; "Messenger" or "Teacher" to the Philippians, [1311]225; his
 sickness and recovery, [1312]ib.; risked his life in going to visit St.
 Paul, [1313]ib.; the service of all the Philippians fulfilled through
 him, [1314]226; the bearer of the Epistle to the Philippians,
 [1315]249; bearer of alms to St. Paul, [1316]252; brought St. Paul the
 account of the Colossians, [1317]258; commended by St. Paul, [1318]314;
 a Colossian, [1319]ib.; St. Paul's great praise of him, [1320]315.

 Ephesians, Epistle to, written while St. Paul was in bonds, [1321]257.

 Ephesus, Elders of, [1322]355.

 Epistle to Hebrews, called one of St. Paul's writings, [1323]184;
 second to Thessalonians, occasion of, [1324]377; one forged as from St.
 Paul, [1325]377, [1326]386; token of a true, [1327]377; prefaced with
 prayer for God's favor, [1328]380; not all things given in, [1329]390.

 Erythræan sea, [1330]358.

 Eternity, of future punishment, [1331]384.

 Eve, clothed herself with the garment of sin, and became unseemly,
 [1332]307.

 Evil, not to be rendered for evil, [1333]367; much less for good,
 [1334]ib.; all to be abstained from, [1335]371.

 Evil-speaking, true or false, against superiors brings harm to the
 speaker, [1336]228; love allows not, [1337]381.

 Eusebius, of Constantine's building chapels, [1338]373 (note 1) .

 Example, must be from a stronger case, [1339]208.

 Examples, of different kinds, in Holy Scripture that each Christian may
 follow as he is able, [1340]240.

 Excuses, vain and inconsistent, [1341]388.

 Execution, horror of going to, [1342]356-57.

 Executioner, abhorred, [1343]347.

 Eyes, the right way of employing them in God's service, [1344]233;
 formation of, [1345]354; an inlet of danger, [1346]370, [1347]378; must
 care for whole body, [1348]381.

 Ezekiel, his prayer rejected, [1349]327; not on his own account,
 [1350]ib.; his sufferings, [1351]ib.; his way of speaking, [1352]371.


 Faith, alone comprehends mysteries, [1353]236; is perfected by doing
 works like Christ's works, [1354]ib.; coupled with conduct everywhere
 by St. Paul, [1355]264; causes solidity when it shuts out reasonings,
 [1356]282; instances of the need of it in things above human
 conception, [1357]282-83; implies willingness to suffer,
 [1358]324proved by it, [1359]ib.; strong, of Thessalonians, [1360]328;
 what could be lacking in, [1361]341; in Mysteries, [1362]354; needed
 everywhere, [1363]ib.; sails of, [1364]355; a breastplate, [1365]363;
 how strengthened, [1366]363, [1367]380; weakness in, [1368]367; design
 of some to subvert, [1369]377; weak, shaken by affliction, strong
 confirmed, [1370]381; work of, is patience, [1371]385; not given to
 all, [1372]391.

 Faithful, are God's riches, [1373]385.

 Fans, used in Holy Eucharist, [1374]205 (note 1) .

 Fasting, foundation of chastity, [1375]378; and prayer, not work of
 hands, [1376]394.

 Fate, a cruel doctrine, [1377]269; believed only by those that defined
 Pleasure the "end" and did not love Virtue, [1378]ib.

 Father, name of The, enough to show His priority, [1379]213; we stand
 before, when judged by Christ, [1380]342; Christ came in the name of,
 [1381]389.

 Father, St. Chrysostom feels as a, [1382]391; is to many in the spirit,
 [1383]392; even to those baptized by others, [1384]ib.; all Christians
 at first as under one, [1385]396.

 Fathers, duty of, to their children, [1386]304; reward children for
 virtue as pleasing them, [1387]332; should keep sons in chastity,
 [1388]346; good children meet, [1389]356; neglect education of sons,
 [1390]359; have to annoy their sons, [1391]366; but can do so
 unresisted, [1392]ib.; relation of, to sons, why appointed, [1393]369;
 even as such have claims on children, [1394]372; would not lose their
 children, though burdened, [1395]392.

 Fathers, old, wait for us, [1396]356.

 Fault, to be spoken of to the persons concerned, [1397]392.

 Favorers, [1398]312.

 Favor, of God. See [1399]Grace, [1400]380.

 Fear of God is better than all things, [1401]197; not so powerful as
 shame to bring us to right tone, [1402]201; a means of softening the
 mind, [1403]212; needful for setting a high example, [1404]219; in
 achieving temporal, much more spiritual matters, [1405]ib.; produced by
 remembrance of God's presence everywhere, [1406]ib.; should not cast
 down because God works with man, [1407]220; of man often more
 persuasive than fear of hell, [1408]226.

 Fear, [1409]382; if early learned, not soon effaced, [1410]383-84; we
 should hear with, in church, [1411]388.

 Feast, differences between a Christian and a heathen, [1412]262; best
 to invite poor to, [1413]374.

 Feet, how to use them in God's service, [1414]233.

 "Fellowship in the Gospel," what St. Paul means by it, [1415]185.

 Fig tree, what it grows from, [1416]353.

 Fire, appointed for avaricious [1417]211; see [1418]river of,
 [1419]365; thought of, good, [1420]382; makes riddance of thorns,
 [1421]387; kills small insects far off, [1422]389.

 Fiery furnace, type of the Resurrection, [1423]283.

 Firstborn, of every creature, its meaning, [1424]270; another meaning,
 [1425]271; from the dead, [1426]352.

 Flattery, not humility, is shown by courting for the things of this
 life, [1427]206.

 Fleetness, should not make men proud, [1428]217.

 Flesh, the, hath been honored by God, was dishonored by the false
 teachers of the Colossians, [1429]289; of Christ, deniers of,
 [1430]352.

 Folly, not so bad as haughtiness, [1431]217; all sin so called;
 contrast between it and wisdom, [1432]300.

 Forbearance, of God, [1433]384.

 Forgive, not to, cause of greater harm to oneself, [1434]202; we
 should, like Joseph, [1435]343; while the heart is warm, [1436]ib.; to,
 a means of pardon, [1437]ib.

 Forgiveness, our own, increased by warning others of like sins,
 [1438]268-69; of what character it should be, [1439]295; and is nothing
 without love, [1440]ib.

 Form, in a simple being, implies one substance, [1441]209; does not
 mean "work" of a servant, but real humanity, [1442]214.

 Fornication, its bad effects on man's nature, [1443]248; opposed to
 love, [1444]342; to be shunned for sanctification, [1445]344; those who
 commit, are like filthy swine, [1446]ib.; worst in the married,
 [1447]345; all, forbidden, [1448]ib.; the young to be kept from,
 [1449]345; early, makes bad husbands, [1450]346; twenty-three thousand
 slain for it, [1451]358; law against, then new to them, [1452]ib.;
 quenches the Spirit, [1453]370; never satisfies, [1454]379; how
 corrected, [1455]396.

 Free will (see [1456]Will) , [1457]220, [1458]362.

 Friend, a faithful, how good, [1459]330; times and places loved for,
 [1460]331; loves to be indebted, [1461]ib.; and to have his friend so,
 [1462]ib.; Christ is the, of man, [1463]390.

 Friendship, of many, brings hurt, [1464]189; many kinds of friendship,
 [1465]259; it is a cold kind that comes of giving great feasts,
 [1466]263; become rare, [1467]330; examples of, in first Christians,
 [1468]ib.; rewarded by God, [1469]332.

 Fullness, means Godhead, [1470]272.

 Funeral, sight of, humbling, [1471]379.


 Gain, loss made a, [1472]337; not to be sought from loss of others,
 [1473]370; Heavenly, to be desired without limit, [1474]ib.

 Gains, dishonest, how to be rid of, [1475]369; example of Zaccheus,
 [1476]ib.; little, great covetousness shown in seeking, [1477]370.

 Galatians, return to observance of the law, [1478]198; quench the
 Spirit, [1479]370.

 Garment, God gives a glorious, [1480]350; Joseph's, rather showed him
 innocent, [1481]380; wedding, he that had not, cast out, [1482]385.

 Garments, stores of, no real gain to the possessors, [1483]232.

 Gaza, country beyond, [1484]357.

 General, specially attacked in war, [1485]391; all succor him,
 [1486]ib.

 Generation, of Christ, greater mystery than his Resurrection,
 [1487]236; can be comprehended only by faith, not reason, [1488]ib.
 (see [1489]Resurrection) ; spiritual, type of the Son's eternal
 generation, [1490]283.

 Gentiles, once were "dogs," but the Jews had now taken their place,
 [1491]230.

 Gifts, God's, to be used in His praise, [1492]233; not what withheld
 Antichrist, [1493]381; for they had long ceased, [1494]ib.

 Glory, not to be obtained, except by fleeing from it, [1495]217; of God
 to impart good, [1496]385; of suffering for Christ, [1497]ib.; great,
 of glorifying God, [1498]ib.

 Glorying, of St. Paul in his converts, [1499]381.

 God, everywhere called great in the Scriptures, [1500]207; all mankind
 acknowledge Him to be just, [1501]212; His glory does not consist in
 man's worship, [1502]215-16; when the Son is honored or dishonored He
 is, [1503]216; everywhere present, [1504]219; His longsuffering motive
 for repentance, [1505]ib.; works with man only when he has a good will
 to work, not to make him careless, [1506]220; gives the desire and
 fulfillment of the good works, [1507]ib.; His working with man does not
 take away his free-will, [1508]ib.; men flee from Him by sin,
 [1509]237; to know His will spiritual wisdom is needful, [1510]264; to
 know His essence, continual prayers, [1511]ib.; longsuffering is said
 of Him, patience never, [1512]265; His love known by seeing His Son
 delivered up, [1513]ib.; His gifts cannot be used unless He gives
 strength, [1514]ib.; does not do things on a sudden, but with
 consideration of man's weakness, [1515]277; the Church in Him,
 [1516]224; sinners not so, [1517]ib.; raised up Christ, [1518]328; His
 trusting implies approval, [1519]329; acts like a friend in dissembling
 claims, [1520]331; promises His Son as reward for Abraham, [1521]ib.;
 rewards us for what is good for us, [1522]332; well-doing his gift,
 [1523]341; true virtue that in His sight, [1524]342; is insulted by
 uncleanness, and avenges, [1525]345; teaches love of brethren,
 [1526]348; blasphemed through idlers, [1527]ib.; jealous of our
 trusting in man, [1528]350; takes away what we prefer to him,
 [1529]ib.; protects the widow, [1530]ib.; and the fatherless,
 [1531]351; His undeserved goodness, [1532]350; speaks more kindly than
 a husband, [1533]351; nature of, inscrutable, [1534]354; His power ends
 difficulty, [1535]ib.; seen in a manner by prophets, [1536]355; spoke
 to St. Paul, [1537]ib.; Resurrection His work, [1538]356; will do what
 He threatens, [1539]357; did so to old world, and to Sodom, [1540]ib.;
 must punish if impartial, [1541]359; infinite goodness of, [1542]363;
 mercy of, to the merciful, [1543]365; image of, not to be insulted,
 [1544]368; salvation of, His purpose, [1545]372; admits the poor to His
 courts, [1546]374; not knowing, the beginning of pride, [1547]378;
 knowing, cures pride, [1548]379; St. Paul invokes favor of, [1549]380;
 favor of, to Joseph, [1550]ib.; praise due to, for our good actions,
 [1551]ib.; justice of, to be seen at last, [1552]381; must punish on
 His own account, [1553]382; the King most to be feared, [1554]ib.;
 forbears, that we may prepare, [1555]384; does all His part to save us,
 [1556]ib.; punishment of those who know not, [1557]384; coming of, in
 itself implies vengeance, [1558]385; it is light to some, darkness to
 others, [1559]ib.; glorified in His saints, [1560]ib.; the faithful His
 riches, [1561]ib.; imparting good, His glory, [1562]ib.; gratification
 or persuasion of, [1563]ib.; speaks in Church lessons, [1564]387;
 letters from, [1565]ib.; all good ascribed to, [1566]390; care of, a
 pledge, [1567]ib.; we concur with, in our establishing, [1568]ib.;
 desires united prayers, [1569]391; all depends on, [1570]393; love of,
 how to show, [1571]ib.

 Gomorrah, [1572]358.

 Good, to be returned for evil, [1573]367; of Heaven, may be desired
 without limit, [1574]370.

 Goodness, of God, [1575]384-85.

 Goods, only good when men do good with them, [1576]232; spoiling of,
 [1577]349; cruelly seized, [1578]369.

 Good-will, in man, necessary to God's working, [1579]186.

 Good works, done with bad motives, not good, and get a punishment,
 [1580]190; performance of them makes like to God, [1581]206; the desire
 of, and fulfillment comes from God, [1582]220.

 Gospel, to share in its troubles is a blessedness, [1583]186-87; its
 progress throughout the world, [1584]259; mystery of, hidden in Christ,
 [1585]279; only made manifest now to the Saints, [1586]280; in what its
 great mystery consists, [1587]ib.; proved divine by persecution,
 [1588]324, [1589]329; preached for no ill purpose, [1590]ib.; a great
 gift, but easy to give, [1591]330; to be preached to all nations before
 Christ comes, [1592]378.

 Grace, those are made partakers of it who partake of the sufferings of
 their ministers, [1593]186; not given in Job's time, [1594]222; given
 in baptism, quenched by sin, [1595]238; works with God's ministers,
 though unworthy, [1596]274; some quench, some improve, [1597]370; works
 by unworthy ministers, [1598]371; prayer for, in Epistles, [1599]380;
 consolation from, [1600]ib.; to endure trials, [1601]385; a pledge for
 the future, [1602]390; has made many laymen better than rulers,
 [1603]391.

 Graciousness, towards those that oppose the truth, must not lapse into
 indifferentism, [1604]309.

 Grapestone, wonderful growth of, [1605]354.

 Grass, growth of barren, and mystery, [1606]354.

 Greeks. See [1607]Heathens.

 Greeks, how to argue with them, about Christianity, [1608]269; still in
 an imperfect state, from their own listlessness, [1609]277; how to
 answer their question, "why Christ came at this time," [1610]ib.

 Gregory, St. Nazianzen, sermon of, against deferring baptism, [1611]361
 (note 3) .

 Gridiron, an instrument of martyrdom, [1612]336.

 Grief, to be shown for sinners living, as well as when dying,
 [1613]196; but with secret, not open, sorrow, [1614]ib.; for sinners,
 tends to joy, and is evidence of a mind devoted to God, [1615]255;
 profitable to those that grieve, as leading them to repent for their
 own sins, [1616]ib.

 Guests, poor, are the best, [1617]374; great and rich, are like
 masters, [1618]ib.


 Hades, most said to be punished in, [1619]359.

 Hadrian. See [1620]Adrian.

 Ham, cursed through want of love, [1621]342.

 Hand, of God, is strong, and able to support men, [1622]209.

 Hands, the right way of using them in God's service, [1623]233.

 Hand-writing, St. Paul's cause of emotion to the Colossians, [1624]314.

 Hardships, present lot of Christians, [1625]329.

 Harlot, ways of, pleasant to loose minds, [1626]346; dishonor of being
 united to, [1627]347; hired for wedding-feasts, [1628]317; to do so
 like mixing vinegar with wine, [1629]318.

 Haughtiness. See [1630]Pride, [1631]204.

 Head of a family should be its teacher, [1632]397; husband is, of wife,
 [1633]ib.; office of, in the body, [1634]ib.

 Health, good, should not make men proud, [1635]217.

 Hearing, quick, should not make men proud, [1636]217.

 Heart, the source of good and evil, [1637]342.

 Heathens, sometimes chaste, [1638]347; grief at deaths suitable to,
 [1639]349; answers to, about Resurrection, [1640]353; no better answer
 by knowing time of Consummation, [1641]360; asked when should be
 Resurrection, [1642]361; shame they should see Christians despise
 adjuration, [1643]372; use of their histories, [1644]379.

 Heaven, compared to palaces, [1645]351; orphans shine in, [1646]ib.;
 not to be attained with self-indulgence, [1647]364; way to, beset by
 demons, [1648]371; opened in description, [1649]382.

 Hell, appointed for avaricious, [1650]212 (see [1651]Avarice) ; a
 warning to bad men, [1652]ib.; though intolerable, yet not equal to the
 pain of being dishonored at the judgment, [1653]245; deluge a proof of,
 [1654]357; Sodom a proof of, [1655]ib.; not known to ancients,
 [1656]358; thought of, implanted in us for good, [1657]359, [1658]382;
 St. Chrysostom in fear of, [1659]359; sons of, [1660]362, [1661]366;
 thought of, makes trouble seem nothing, [1662]382; should be talked of,
 [1663]382-83; thought of, keep from falling into it, [1664]383; he that
 will not hear of, not ready for persecution, [1665]ib.; St. Paul would
 have borne for God's will, [1666]ib.; fear of, guides the soul,
 [1667]384; rich man would have escaped had he feared, [1668]ib.; some
 think mild and temporary, [1669]384; those refuted, [1670]ib.

 Helmet, spiritual, preserves reason, [1671]363.

 Heretics, do great and good works, but without a reward, [1672]191;
 their way of interpreting, "He thought it not robbery," [1673]212; say
 Christ was humbled not as He is Man, [1674]215; that "Name" means
 glory, [1675]ib.; and that God's glory consisted in that all worship
 Him, [1676]ib.; their notions of God false, [1677]216; the wisdom of
 the Spirit leads them to undertake the fight that they may fail,
 [1678]234; blot out words of Scripture when against them, [1679]ib.;
 entrapped by St. Paul's words on the Law, [1680]ib.

 Hezekiah, heard, and why, [1681]326; triumphed over king of Assyria by
 prayer, [1682]391.

 History, proves vanity of earthly things, [1683]379.

 Holiness, chastity specially called, [1684]342; implies all virtues,
 [1685]ib.

 Homily, unnecessary, [1686]388.

 Hope, source of all good, [1687]194; helmet of, [1688]363; an anchor,
 [1689]377; false in the notion that Hell is temporary, [1690]384; good,
 supports the soul, [1691]390.

 Holy Spirit, His words are as a two-edged sword in a phalanx,
 [1692]206; given in Baptism, [1693]237.

 Holy Scriptures, apply human words to God, [1694]252.

 Honor, takes place between a greater and a lesser, [1695]209.

 Horse race, [1696]206.

 Horse, soul compared to, [1697]384.

 Hospitality, to the poor, has a reward at the Judgment, [1698]262; of
 Abraham, [1699]369; to the poor, [1700]374.

 House, a, a memorial of covetousness, [1701]369.

 Houses, how to use them in serving God, [1702]233; fallen, of the
 great, an admonition, [1703]379.

 Human nature, imperfect, [1704]192.

 Humility, the greatest safety for disciples against their enemies,
 [1705]182; Joseph's, [1706]204; Christ's cause of men's working greater
 deeds than Himself, [1707]205; not adulation or meanness, [1708]ib.;
 shown in David, [1709]ib.; examples of, [1710]ib.; is shown when one
 shows respect to another, for things pleasing to God, [1711]206; taught
 by examples of Christ, [1712]ib.; must be an emptying one's self from
 free choice, [1713]213; what true humblemindedness is, [1714]208;
 always a way to be exalted, [1715]216; the good things that spring from
 it, [1716]217; arises from considering our own failings, [1717]229.

 Hunger, should be relieved, [1718]368; to perish by no disgrace,
 [1719]ib.; to make others do so, a crime, [1720]ib.

 Husband, duty of, to his wife, [1721]304; bound to keep to his wife
 alone, as she to him, [1722]345; not to be idolized, [1723]350; what
 comes of a, [1724]ib.; should teach by example, [1725]396 (and see
 [1726]Wife) ; head of the wife, [1727]397; his obligations to her,
 [1728]ib.; should take spiritual food, like a swallow, to the nest,
 [1729]ib.

 Husband and wife, make but one man, [1730]318; what kind of one parents
 should seek for their daughters, [1731]320.

 Husbandman, desires to see his land when fruitful, [1732]341; must
 attend to the seed sown, [1733]386; natural, has to do with lifeless
 earth, [1734]ib.; not so spiritual, [1735]387; he must root out thorns,
 [1736]ib.

 Hymns, diviner things than psalms, [1737]301-02; that of the Angels
 which the faithful know, [1738]302; when a person is about his
 business, he may sing a hymn in his heart, [1739]ib.


 Idleness, mischief of, [1740]348; of Christians is an offense to
 heathens, [1741]ib.

 If, used for because, as assuming certainty, [1742]382.

 Ignorance, often cause of sorrow, [1743]352.

 Illumination. See [1744]Baptism.

 Images, set up in houses of rich, [1745]232.

 Image, the, why it is not said of an Angel, yet is of a man, [1746]270.

 Image, of God, in man, [1747]368; of a king, not safe to insult,
 [1748]ib.; impressed on wax while warm, [1749]383.

 In, said of the Son as of the Father, [1750]324; in Jesus, [1751]353;
 used for through, [1752]385, [1753]390.

 Incarnation, proved real by Christ's death, [1754]352; unforeseen,
 [1755]356. See [1756]Flesh.

 Indolence, cause of men's believing in fate, [1757]269.

 Industry, benefit of, [1758]348.

 Initiated, know the order of service, [1759]371.

 Injustice, injures the doer of it most, [1760]249.

 Insult, not bearing, a weakness, [1761]367; to a man is to Christ,
 [1762]368; not returning, a lesson, [1763]396.

 Intercession. See [1764]Prayer.

 Intercessions, good for all, [1765]197.

 Interpretation, mystical, [1766]352.

 Inworking, of God, requires good-will in man, [1767]186.

 Iron. See [1768]Soul, [1769]212.

 Israel, conquered thirty-two kings by prayer, [1770]391.


 Jacob, prayer of, [1771]326; an example to pastors, [1772]332; had
 children, yet not covetous, [1773]369; wronged by Laban, but never
 defrauded him, [1774]ib.

 Jacob's ladder, type of the Cross, [1775]283; he deceived his father,
 by an economy, [1776]285.

 Jailor, his business full of wickedness, [1777]182; his sudden
 conversion, and that of all his family, [1778]ib.

 Japheth and Shem, blessed for loving their father, [1779]342.

 Jeremiah, his prayer rejected, [1780]327; his way of speaking,
 [1781]371.

 Jerusalem, temple at, not the only seat of Antichrist, [1782]386;
 above, our Mother, [1783]398.

 Jason, made to give security, [1784]324.

 Jesus, called Justus, probably a Corinthian, [1785]310; to sleep in,
 what, [1786]352 (note 4) , [1787]353.

 Jews, corrupt Christianity under a show, [1788]182; an example with
 what mind men should give to Priests, [1789]226; still in an imperfect
 state from excess of listlessness, [1790]277; were as children under
 Moses, [1791]ib.; the wilderness was a school to them, [1792]278; Egypt
 as the tablet on which their letters were written, [1793]ib.; like
 children in wishing to return to Egypt, [1794]ib.; their doctrines
 those of children, [1795]ib.; were humored in their passions like
 children, [1796]ib.; in all respects imperfect like children,
 [1797]279; prayer not heard for, [1798]326; persecutors of Christ and
 His Church, [1799]333; and that not for truth's sake, [1800]ib.; slew
 prophets whose books they use, [1801]ib.; enemies of all men,
 [1802]ib.; wrath on them, [1803]334; their sufferings, [1804]358.

 Job, heard for his friends, [1805]326; he could not have saved the
 Jews, [1806]ib.; his patience better than almsgiving, [1807]337;
 wrestled with Satan, [1808]ib.; tried through his wife, [1809]340;
 mourned little for his children from love to God, [1810]350; thankful
 in all circumstances, [1811]367; prayers of, for his children,
 [1812]392; prayer of, for his sons, not for temporal blessings, but for
 pardon of sin, [1813]197; Satan attacked his soul to make him more
 approved, [1814]210; an example of suffering without murmuring,
 [1815]221; the grievousness of his sickness, [1816]ib.; and his state
 worse than ours, because it was before the gift of grace, and the
 tidings of the Resurrection, [1817]222; gave thanks in his pain,
 [1818]265.

 John, St., the Baptist, example of courage, [1819]205; came in spirit
 and power of Elias, [1820]389.

 Jonas, type of the Resurrection, [1821]282-83.

 Jordan, plain of, like Paradise, [1822]357; now burnt and desolate,
 [1823]ib.

 Joseph, his example shows us how we may overcome the pride that comes
 from our wisdom, [1824]204; contrast between him and the Egyptian
 woman, [1825]307; how tempted by his mistress, [1826]342-43; firm, yet
 moved by tears, [1827]343; forbore revenge, [1828]ib.; an instance of
 the power of grace, [1829]380; how hardly treated, [1830]ib.

 Josephus, records punishment of the Jews, [1831]358.

 Joy to be shown for just, dead as well as living, [1832]196; of the
 world soon over, and bringeth grief, [1833]254; spiritual in
 affliction, [1834]325; on suffering enables to render good for evil,
 [1835]367.

 Judæa, Churches of, persecuted, [1836]324, [1837]333, [1838]341;
 Christians of, lost their goods, [1839]349.

 Judaizing Teachers, why called dogs, no longer children, [1840]230.

 Judas, the traitor, fell, from his love of money, [1841]210; his
 hardness of heart, [1842]211; his fall told by all the Evangelists,
 that we may dread it, [1843]ib.

 Judgment, to be dishonored in the, worse than pain of hell, [1844]245;
 the nearness of it, a consolation to the good, [1845]244; Day of, is
 night and winter to sinners, day to the just, [1846]267; Christian who
 disbelieves it cannot be called a Christian, [1847]268; none disbelieve
 it, [1848]269; to disbelieve it not reasonable, [1849]269-70;
 commencement of, [1850]355; not disproved by prosperity of wicked,
 [1851]362; suddenness of, [1852]ib.; terrors of, to scorners,
 [1853]365; deceivers proclaimed at hand to induce disappointment,
 [1854]377; just, of God, [1855]382; children to be taught about,
 [1856]383; future, less talked of than earthly, [1857]384; and less
 prepared for, [1858]ib.; delayed that we may repent, [1859]ib.

 Justice, its good effects, [1860]161.


 Kindness, softens an enemy, [1861]343.

 King, Eternal, fear of, [1862]382; honor of meeting, [1863]355;
 reprieve from, [1864]356; poor admitted with, to Christ's Table,
 [1865]374; none Christian at first, [1866]381; fear of, keeps from much
 evil, [1867]382; letters of, read in churches, [1868]387.

 Kings, not free from affliction, [1869]253; instances to show this,
 [1870]254; their kingdom not like the kingdom of heaven, [1871]ib.; use
 the bees' work, [1872]368; Israel conquered, [1873]32; by prayer,
 [1874]391.

 Kingdom of God, worth bearing all for, [1875]333, [1876]382; of heaven,
 obtained through Priests, [1877]367.

 Kiss, of charity, given through others, [1878]372.

 Knowledge, brings condemnation without practice, [1879]206; without
 action, leads to punishment, [1880]265.


 Labor, in vain, [1881]340; of hands recommended, [1882]348; spiritual,
 made an excuse for idleness, [1883]ib.

 Laity, duty of, towards priests, [1884]366; have liberties that priests
 have not, [1885]ib.; equal in chief benefits, [1886]392.

 Lamb, priest and people partake of one, [1887]392.

 Lamp, of the Spirit, not to be quenched, [1888]370; robbers first put
 out, [1889]371; bright, admits to bridechamber, [1890]372; lighted, can
 light others, [1891]396.

 Land, how to use it in serving God, [1892]233.

 Laodicea, epistle from, probably written from thence to St. Paul,
 [1893]314.

 Laughter, arising from present things is condemned by Christ,
 [1894]246; at admonition, miserable, [1895]367.

 Law, the, not is loss, but is counted loss for Christ, [1896]235; like
 a bridge to the Gospel, [1897]ib.; or as a man counts silver when he
 found gold, [1898]ib.; it is loss by comparison, [1899]ib.; good as the
 chaff is to the corn, [1900]ib.; not absolutely loss, but for Christ,
 [1901]ib.; but a doctrine of men, now the time (of Christ) is come,
 [1902]289.

 Laws, father's authority upheld by, [1903]366; fear of, hinders many
 bad actions, [1904]382; hurt not those who fear them, [1905]383.

 Law-suits, men talk much of, [1906]384; and take pains about, [1907]ib.

 Laying on, of hands is through the cross, [1908]242.

 Lazarus, raising of, [1909]356; rich man despised, [1910]374; needed
 his help afterwards, [1911]ib.

 Leopard, Daniel's vision of, [1912]328.

 Letter, forged as from St. Paul, [1913]377.

 Letters, from heaven, [1914]387; of kings, read in church, [1915]ib.

 Life, is of several kinds, [1916]195; what it is not to live this
 present life, [1917]ib.; this present, worth living if we live in
 faith, [1918]196; not life if it has no fruit [1919]ib.; good or bad as
 we make it, [1920]ib.; the present a good state, [1921]225; future is
 better than a good state, [1922]ib.; to risk it for saints is
 martyrdom, [1923]226; cannot be without pain, [1924]254; the present,
 compared to a nest of mire and sticks, [1925]267; the virtuous, a good
 thing, [1926]280; the present, should be no cause of care to a
 Christian, [1927]290.

 Light, children of, [1928]362.

 Lightning, coming of Christ, evident as, [1929]378.

 Like-mindedness, not so great as to be of one mind, [1930]203.

 Likeness of man said of Christ, because he was not equal in everything
 to man, [1931]214.

 Listlessness, arises from looking at the faults of others, [1932]229;
 puts Christians out of the state of grace, [1933]276.

 Littlemindedness, as bad as sloth, [1934]367.

 Longsuffering, is towards one that we can requite, [1935]264.

 Loss of money, made a gain by patience, [1936]337; relieved by giving
 alms, [1937]338.

 Lot, his choice proves fertility of plain of Jordan, [1938]357; did not
 save Sodom, [1939]358; his love to God, [1940]ib.; Abraham bore wrong
 from, [1941]369.

 Love, spiritual, a support in great trials, [1942]186; it was as a dew
 to the holy children, [1943]ib.; impossible to convey St. Paul's in
 words, [1944]188; is unbounded, [1945]189; indiscriminate, leads to
 weak friendships, and to receiving spurious doctrines, and makes to
 stumble, [1946]ib.; it should have respect to what is profitable, with
 understanding, [1947]ib.; maintained by believers standing in one mind,
 [1948]199; to love one another the best return for spiritual benefits,
 [1949]203; it is more to St. Paul than to deliver him from dangers,
 [1950]ib.; greater than like-mindedness, [1951]ib.; how much is meant
 by oneness of mind, [1952]ib.; shown for others by wrestling in spirit
 for them, [1953]224; increased by troubles from without, [1954]253;
 spiritual love alone steadfast, [1955]259; and like a queen over other
 friendships, [1956]ib.; instanced in St. Paul and Moses, [1957]ib.; is
 as the bond or root, without which there can be no perfection
 [1958]295; is more requisite from the governing to the governed than
 from the governed to the governing, [1959]304; puts down envy,
 [1960]313; labor of, [1961]324; true, would give the soul, [1962]330;
 possible, since Christ bids, [1963]331; want of, causes heresies,
 [1964]ib.; love dissembles favors, [1965]ib.; perpetuates heathenism,
 [1966]ib.; is indescribable, as a foreign plant, [1967]ib.; needs help
 of presence, [1968]334; should extend to all, [1969]341, [1970]348,
 [1971]380; makes unblamable, [1972]342; saints pleased God by,
 [1973]ib.; fire of, consumes all sin, [1974]ib.; Cain wanted,
 [1975]ib.; overcame St. Paul, [1976]ib.; why mentioned in passing,
 [1977]348; God teaches, [1978]ib.; of God to man, [1979]351; a
 breastplate, [1980]363; how to strengthen, [1981]ib.; overcomes
 distance, [1982]372; weak, shaken by affliction, strong, confirmed,
 [1983]380-81; should be equally balanced, [1984]381; danger of division
 in, [1985]ib.; must be for God's sake, [1986]ib.; of God, hindered by
 many things, [1987]393; toward God before ourselves, implies before
 money too, [1988]ib.

 Love of money. See [1989]Wealth.

 Lowliness, corrects vainglory, [1990]203; its power when found in two
 persons, [1991]204; shown in a broken heart, [1992]ib.; of mind,
 [1993]217.

 Lust, to be cut off, [1994]344; and its occasions, [1995]345; a
 drunkenness, [1996]362; insatiable, [1997]379; cured by thought of
 hell-fire, [1998]ib.

 Luxury, gives birth to affliction and pain, [1999]255; not to be
 envied, [2000]364; talk of, hurtful, [2001]384.


 Macedonia country of the Philippians, [2002]181; St. Paul's cultured
 field, [2003]341.

 Macedonians, once as renowned as the Romans, [2004]328; joined with
 others in St. Paul's crown, [2005]334; empire of, overthrown by Romans,
 [2006]328, [2007]389.

 Madness, vice worse than, [2008]364.

 Magistrates, scourge St. Paul more from impulse than wickedness,
 [2009]182.

 Mammon, contradicts Christ's commands, [2010]211; hell and river of
 fire because of it, [2011]212; turns from love of God, [2012]393.

 Man, is superior to brutes only through religion and virtue, [2013]218;
 and in things that concern the soul, [2014]ib.; may become an angel by
 practice of virtue, [2015]ib.; not worthy of the grace of God,
 [2016]266; greatness of his deliverance set forth, [2017]ib.; and of
 his own will under the power of darkness, [2018]275; could be persuaded
 to return to God only by Christ, [2019]ib.; can continue in this state
 only by continuing to have faith and hope in Christ, [2020]276; how he
 is changed by the Gospel, [2021]276; "the old man" does not mean the
 substance of flesh, but the bad moral choice, [2022]294; the new man is
 ever advancing to greater youthfulness, [2023]295; man imperfect when
 alone, [2024]318.

 Manes, [2025]206.

 Manichees, [2026]294 (note 5) , [2027]352 (note 2) .

 Mansions, splendid, are a loss, [2028]232.

 Marcellus, of Galatia, [2029]206; in what way heretical, [2030]207; how
 his heresy falls before St. Paul's text, [2031]ib.

 Marcion, of Pontius, [2032]206; in what way heretical, [2033]207.

 Marcionites, their heresy of our Lord being a phantom overturned,
 [2034]213, [2035]352 (note 2) .

 Marriage, early recommended, [2036]346; of chaste persons blessed
 [2037]ib.; object of, [2038]ib.; second, of widows, [2039]349; feast
 at, occasions envy and discontent, [2040]384.

 Marriages, satanical performances at, [2041]378; how marriage is a
 mystery, [2042]ib.; marriage union really a pure thing, dishonored from
 man's wickedness, [2043]319; how it is a mystery of the Church,
 [2044]ib.; a satanic pomp in, without significancy, [2045]320; pleasure
 will follow from celebration of a marriage in an orderly way,
 [2046]ib.; melancholy from such as then were common, [2047]ib.; the
 right way to keep the wedding feast, [2048]ib.

 Martyrdom, is attained by lesser things more than by great, [2049]226;
 not now usual, [2050]336; may still be imitated, [2051]337.

 Masters, duty of, to servants, [2052]305.

 Medicine, bitter, useful, [2053]360; to be sweetened, [2054]337.

 Memorial, a great house a, of covetousness, [2055]369.

 Memory of good deeds makes men remiss and haughty, [2056]238.

 Mercy, works of, must never be given up, [2057]182; should be worn as
 tokens about the necks of Christians, [2058]ib.; a means to convince
 unbelievers, [2059]183; must be done with caution and true faith,
 [2060]ib.; can only be done in this world, [2061]ib.; can open the
 gates of heaven, [2062]183; ofttimes called "righteousness," [2063]189;
 men soon led to it, no good in our nature so great as it, [2064]201; in
 the nature even of the fiercest, [2065]ib.; peculiar to power,
 [2066]ib.; the world established by it, [2067]ib.; most pleasing to
 God, [2068]ib.; priests, kings, and prophets anointed by it, [2069]ib.;
 signified by oil, [2070]ib.; it is over all men alike, [2071]ib.;
 without it all created things would perish, [2072]ib.; cause of light
 to men, [2073]202; to be merciful God's true character, and so man's,
 [2074]ib.; it is of it that all things are, [2075]ib.; it delivers from
 fire of hell, [2076]ib.; comes of love, [2077]ib.; without man's
 showing it, he shall have no forgiveness, [2078]ib.; must be shown to
 obtain mercy, [2079]365; where none the Spirit dwells not, [2080]371.

 Metals, abuse of precious, through luxury, [2081]292.

 Ministers of Christ not clothed by miracle, [2082]229; allowed to be in
 want that others may be profited, [2083]ib.; though unworthy, have God
 with them, [2084]274.

 Miracle, standing, of fruits of Sodom, [2085]357.

 Miracles, danger of men being honored for, [2086]339; of Antichrist,
 [2087]386, [2088]389.

 Moderation, binding on all, not priests only, [2089]227; reasons why it
 should be shown to enemies and the bad, [2090]246.

 Money sent by Philippians to St. Paul at Rome, [2091]226; to be
 employed in God's service, [2092]233; must be despised for the sake of
 God, [2093]393.

 Monks, near Antioch, [2094]394 (note 2) .

 Mortification, as necessary as it is continually to rub the rust off a
 bright statue [2095]294; of sin in members of the body necessary,
 [2096]296-97.

 Moses, a schoolmaster to the Jews, [2097]277; his intercession,
 [2098]327; would not have saved Jews at last, [2099]ib.; seat of,
 [2100]366; conquered Amalek by prayer, [2101]391.

 Mother, delights in her cares, [2102]392; her pangs before birth,
 spiritual parents' lasting, [2103]ib.; heavenly Jerusalem our,
 [2104]398.

 Mothers should take care of their own characters, because their
 daughters take pattern from them, [2105]308-9.

 Motives, temporal weigh with most men, [2106]348.

 Mourning, house of, [2107]384.

 Mouth, how to use it in God's service, [2108]233; door of our lamp,
 [2109]370; keep shut when insulted, [2110]ib.

 Murmuring, an art of Satan's to take away reward of virtue, [2111]220;
 occasions stains, [2112]ib.; to be avoided at all times, [2113]223.

 Mysteries, Apostles ordered a remembrance to be made of the dead in
 them, [2114]197; the mystery of God is to be brought to Him by His Son,
 [2115]280; priest makes partakers of, [2116]367.

 Mystery, must be confessed somewhere, [2117]354.


 Name, does not mean glory, [2118]215.

 "Name of our Lord Jesus," everything done in it prospers, [2119]302.

 Name of God, the great power of the, [2120]303.

 Nature, human, may be looked on as one continued life from the first to
 the present time, [2121]277.

 Necessity, notion of, from Satan, [2122]269-70.

 Nero, emperor when Epistle to Philippians was written, [2123]186; a
 type of Antichrist, [2124]389.

 Night, compared to a caravan of many fountains, [2125]192; children of,
 [2126]362.

 Ninevites, escaped because they feared, [2127]383.

 Noah, type of the Resurrection, [2128]283; a just man, [2129]326; could
 not have saved the Jews, [2130]ib.; his sons' conduct, [2131]342; days
 of, like the last, [2132]357; men in time of, perished from not
 fearing, [2133]383.

 Number, change of, in speaking, [2134]372 (note 2) .


 Obedience to others does not make us inferior to them, [2135]215; cause
 of exaltation, [2136]216; the duty of the wife to her husband,
 [2137]304.

 Oil, a type of God's love to man, [2138]201; hence kings and priests
 anointed with it, [2139]ib.; type of mercy as being the cause of light,
 [2140]ib.; want of, quenches lamp, [2141]371.

 Ointment, the Saints are like, [2142]327.

 Oneness of mind, the force of it, [2143]203.

 Onesimus, sent by St. Paul to the Colossians, [2144]310.

 Oppressors, more cruel than robbers, [2145]369; poor as bad as rich,
 [2146]370.

 Ornaments, gold, are a loss to the users, [2147]232; earthly chains to
 bind sin on, and strip Christ off, [2148]308; love of, incites
 vainglory, and is the cause of many evils, [2149]ib.

 Orators, record vanity of human things, [2150]379.

 Oratories, [2151]373.

 Ornament, danger of, [2152]338; none like gravity, [2153]350;
 spiritual, [2154]351.


 Palaces, splendid, no cause for pride, [2155]217; none like heaven,
 [2156]351; way to, borne with, though narrow, [2157]364; one who admits
 to, loved for it, [2158]367; great men of the world found at,
 [2159]373; churches the real, [2160]ib.

 Palæstra, place in which runners in a race were trained, [2161]239.

 Palestine, travelers in, called to witness on overthrow of Sodom,
 [2162]357; sufferings of the Jews in, [2163]358.

 Paradise, plain of Jordan like, [2164]357, [2165]369.

 Passions, tempt us as pagans did martyrs, [2166]336; insatiable in
 their nature, [2167]379.

 Patience, a high praise, [2168]325; of Job, [2169]337; toward all men,
 [2170]367; puts the impudent to shame, [2171]ib.; proved in time,
 [2172]381; of Christ, [2173]393.

 Patriarchs, examples how people should suffer the loss of children,
 [2174]299.

 Patronage, change of religion for, [2175]381.

 Paul, St., scourged at Philippi, [2176]181, see [2177]Philippi; gives
 high testimony to Philippians, [2178]ib.; in bonds when wrote Epistle
 to Philippians, [2179]ib.; let go afterwards, [2180]ib.; wrote it in
 his first imprisonment, [2181]ib.; consoles Philippians about his
 bonds, and exhorts to unanimity and humility, [2182]182; writes to
 encourage, not to rebuke, Philippians throughout, [2183]ib.; praises
 them for their well-doing, [2184]ib.; his great love for them,
 [2185]ib.; why he calls himself "servant" in writing to the
 Philippians, [2186]184; reason for his writing to the clergy of
 Philippi, [2187]ib.; his joy at their virtues, and constant readiness
 to assist him, [2188]185; to be loved by him, sign of being great,
 [2189]186; imprisoned under Emperor Nero, [2190]ib.; in what sense he
 calls God to witness, [2191]188; his bonds useful, [2192]189; cause of
 confidence to himself, [2193]ib.; did not mind grievous things of this
 life, [2194]193; rejoices though he has many enemies, [2195]ib.; his
 humble-mindedness and trust in God, [2196]194; would glorify Christ by
 life or death, [2197]ib.; not to die at this imprisonment, [2198]ib.;
 how dead as this present life, [2199]195; because he did not care for
 it, [2200]ib.; it would be by God's dispensation, not of man's sin,
 [2201]196; though in the midst of suffering chooses to live, [2202]198;
 in what way like the sun, [2203]199; why willing to stay on earth,
 [2204]ib.; not a flatterer, [2205]205; how he was humble and
 courageous, [2206]ib.; exhorts to humility by example of Christ,
 [2207]206; by awe at presence of the Holy Spirit, [2208]ib., and note
 2; one text of his lays low many heresies at once, [2209]206; takes
 away fear of being debased because of humility by example of the
 Incarnation, [2210]212; his discretion in admonishing, [2211]219; his
 death like a drink-offering, and cause of rejoicing to the Philippians,
 [2212]222-23; frees the Philippians from suspicion of his giving
 comfort merely by sending Timothy, [2213]223; does all for Christ,
 [2214]ib.; tidings of the Philippians would give him courage,
 [2215]224; did not know all things absent by revelation, [2216]ib.; his
 dependence on God in everything, [2217]ib.; had not neglected them
 because he sent so late, [2218]225; his soul never free from sorrow,
 [2219]ib.; careful to teach Philippians humility, [2220]226; had more
 than one cloak, and lived the life of faith, [2221]228; provided his
 proper clothing, [2222]ib.; does not give exhortation without first
 commending, [2223]230; his high state as a Jew in birth and way of
 life, [2224]231; died to his body while alive, [2225]236; not confident
 of attaining to the resurrection that leads to Christ, [2226]ib.; his
 life one of contest to the end, [2227]237; taught by deeds as well as
 words, [2228]240; an example of the constancy of virtue under all
 circumstances, [2229]241; his care to recommend laborious persons, and
 the benefit of this, [2230]244; is refreshed at the advancement of his
 disciples, [2231]249; probable reason of his receiving at one time, and
 not at another, [2232]250; partly excuses the negligence of the
 Philippians, [2233]ib.; how he put down proud thoughts from well-doing
 and yet did not check it, [2234]ib.; his way of encouraging liberality
 and keeping independence, [2235]251-52; his grief for sinners
 remarkable, [2236]255; those of his epistles most holy which were
 written while he was in bonds, [2237]257; had not seen Colossians when
 he wrote to them, [2238]ib.; his presence everywhere a great thing,
 [2239]258; everywhere couples conduct with faith, [2240]264; first
 praises, then blames, [2241]265; his striving for his disciples,
 [2242]281; in all his epistles he tries to show that Christians are
 partakers with Christ, [2243]290; his lowliness of mind, [2244]306; his
 work prospered much more when he in bonds than out of them, [2245]ib.;
 reasons for his not putting everything into his epistles, [2246]309;
 his behavior to Agrippa, an instance of Christian wisdom, [2247]309;
 treated worse than the prophets were [2248]310; the considerate way in
 which he spoke of persons, [2249]ib.; his warnings how to deal with
 persons he calls "without," [2250]310-11; his wisdom instanced in his
 discourse to the Athenians, [2251]311; and in treatment of Elymas,
 [2252]ib.; his reminding the Colossians of his bonds a great support to
 them in trials, [2253]314-15; meaning of his wish to be accursed from
 Christ, [2254]317; his humility in placing others with himself,
 [2255]323; his thanksgivings and prayers for others, [2256]324; asked
 prayers of others, [2257]326; persecuted at Beroea, [2258]328; at
 Philippi, [2259]329; no flatterer, [2260]329, [2261]333; sought not
 honor, [2262]329-30; like a nurse, [2263]330; ready to endure hell,
 [2264]331; worked with his own hands, [2265]332, [2266]394; like a
 father, [2267]333; spoke to each singly, [2268]ib.; asked only that men
 would gain the kingdom, [2269]ib.; felt separation like an orphan,
 [2270]334; satisfied his love through others, [2271]ib.; his vehement
 love, [2272]334, [2273]341, [2274]372; hindered by Satan, [2275]334; by
 the Spirit, [2276]ib.; not all things revealed to, [2277]339; his thorn
 in the flesh, [2278]ib.; stayed in spite of danger, [2279]340; his
 labor, [2280]ib.; his joy at good report, [2281]ib.; his sufferings,
 [2282]ib.; firm, yet moved by love, [2283]342; exhorts by Christ,
 [2284]344; had no false delicacy, [2285]346; Christ spoke in,
 [2286]355; heard expressly from God about Judgment, [2287]ib.; checks
 curiosity, [2288]360; improved his gifts, [2289]370; had great
 confidence before God, [2290]371; sends kiss of charity, [2291]372;
 subscribed with his own hand, [2292]377-78; begins with prayer for
 grace, [2293]380; humility of, [2294]ib.; gloried in the Thessalonians,
 [2295]381; would have borne hell for God's will, [2296]383; wisely
 hinted the fall of the Roman Empire, [2297]388; prayer of, for
 Thessalonians, [2298]390; he asks theirs, [2299]390-92; indicates his
 dangers, [2300]390-91; had right to be maintained, [2301]394; humility
 of, in speaking of his own doings, [2302]396.

 Paul of Samosata, [2303]206; in what way heretical, and how his
 heresies fall before St. Paul's text, [2304]206-07; said our Lord was a
 mere creature, [2305]214; his doctrine refuted, [2306]271.

 Peace, we are at peace with God, through virtue, [2307]247; must be
 maintained with God and our neighbor, [2308]248; restored between men
 and angels, [2309]273; the frequent mention of it in the church,
 [2310]ib.; not the Bishop's, but Christ's, by means of him, [2311]274;
 is an umpire in the heart between anger and charity, [2312]296; human
 peace cometh of revenging, [2313]ib.; prayer for, [2314]395.

 Peacemakers, always imitate the Son of God, [2315]248; why called the
 sons of God, [2316]273.

 Pearson, Bp., an argument of, [2317]353 (note 2) .

 People, should obey priests with good will, [2318]366; many of, excel
 ruler, [2319]391; equal with priests in chief blessings, [2320]391;
 partake of one Baptism, one Lamb, with him, [2321]ib.

 Perfecting, implies deficiency, [2322]341.

 Perfection, not in the Law, nor in Angels, but in Christ only,
 [2323]280-81; goes beyond commandments, [2324]344.

 Persecuted, God's glory to reward, [2325]385.

 Persecution at an end, [2326]182; why permitted, [2327]324; at Beroea,
 [2328]328; at Philippi, [2329]329; endurance of, proves the Gospel,
 [2330]329; men that will not hear of hell are not ready for, [2331]383;
 patience under, [2332]385.

 Persecutors, will be punished, [2333]328, [2334]334; shall be
 confounded at glory of saints, [2335]385.

 Persians, king of the, wears his beard of gold, [2336]292; empire of,
 [2337]389.

 Persuasion, of God, [2338]385, and note 1.

 Peter, St., had common convenience of clothing, [2339]228; freed by
 prayers of others, [2340]326, [2341]391; refuses honor for miracles,
 [2342]339; chief of Apostles, [2343]360; not told time of consummation,
 [2344]360; improve grace given, [2345]370.

 Phalanx, pushing through, [2346]335.

 Phantom, our Lord so called by the Marcionites, [2347]214.

 Pharaoh, punishment of, [2348]358.

 Pharisee, spoiled good works by pride, [2349]378.

 Pharisees, made men sons of hell, [2350]362, [2351]366; in Moses' seat,
 and to be obeyed, [2352]366.

 Philemon, Epistle to, written while St. Paul was in bonds, [2353]257;
 written upon close of St. Paul's preaching, [2354]257; probably with
 the Colossians at one time, [2355]ib.

 Philippi, persecution at, [2356]329; named from its founder, a colony,
 [2357]181; the seller of purple converted there, [2358]ib.; keeper of
 the prison believed there, [2359]ib.; St. Paul and Silas scourged
 there, [2360]ib.; St. Paul's preaching had a remarkable commencement
 here, [2361]ib.; had shown great readiness for the Faith, [2362]182.

 Philippians, of a city in Macedonia, [2363]182; sent Epaphroditus to
 St. Paul in prison, [2364]ib.; patterns of charity, [2365]ib.; partook
 of St. Paul's sufferings, [2366]200; their virtue made St. Paul
 illustrious, [2367]222; had attained to a life of love, concord, and
 peace, [2368]240; had at some time been negligent in well-doing,
 [2369]249; the first to think of giving to St. Paul, [2370]251; their
 gifts would turn to their salvation, [2371]252; they were poor men,
 handicraftsmen, [2372]ib.; Epistle to, written while St. Paul was in
 bonds, [2373]257; Timothy sent to, [2374]334.

 Philosopher, true, not grieved by things of this life, [2375]193.

 Philosophers, speak of future punishment, [2376]359; of changes of
 fortune, [2377]379.

 Philosophy, heathen, not true wisdom, [2378]193-94; true, not to wish
 for revenge, [2379]338.

 Physicians, trusted when they have foretold symptoms, [2380]335; defile
 their hands to cure, [2381]346; must displease the sick, [2382]366;
 useless, going to, unless for remedy, [2383]387.

 Photinus, in what way heretical, [2384]206; how his heresy falls before
 St. Paul's text, [2385]ib.

 Piety, belongs to man alone of creatures, [2386]218.

 Pilot, Christ a, [2387]355.

 Pity, [2388]201.

 Places, loved on account of friends, [2389]321.

 Plants, wonderful growth of, [2390]352-354.

 Plane-tree, golden, made by an ancient king, [2391]291-92.

 Pleasure, less in splendid feasts, than in poor ones, [2392]261; is not
 the life of Christians, [2393]289.

 Plenty, inclines to evil, and requires great virtue in the use of it,
 [2394]250.

 Poets, speak of future punishment, [2395]359; of great men's falls,
 [2396]379.

 Pomegranates, of Sodom, full of ashes, [2397]357.

 Poor, to feast them is to make God our debtor, [2398]260; called to
 Christ, [2399]292, [2400]294; it is no good to feed them and live
 voluptuously one's self, [2401]ib.; sometimes oppress the poorer,
 [2402]370; exemplary in thankfulness, [2403]373; sit at Church doors,
 [2404]ib.; are dogs of God's palace, [2405]374; communicate with the
 great, [2406]ib.; descendants of, may he great, [2407]374; pride cured
 by sight of, [2408]ib.; best guests to entertain, [2409]ib.; Christ
 comes in, [2410]ib.; contempt of, comes of pride, [2411]378; dishonor
 to, provokes God, [2412]395.

 Potiphar, unreasonable, [2413]380.

 Poverty, a happiness, [2414]191; false reasons for fearing it,
 [2415]193; good or bad, according to the disposition, [2416]ib.; is
 good or bad, according to a man's will, [2417]233; the procurer of
 heaven, [2418]ib.; distresses most men, [2419]349; furnace of,
 [2420]373; comforted in house of mourning, [2421]384.

 Power of Christ, cause of men's working greater deeds than himself,
 [2422]205; persons in power ever changing like dust, [2423]290.

 Practice, of the commands of Christ brings us His gifts, [2424]206.

 Prætorium, palace of Nero so called, [2425]181; palace so called,
 [2426]189.

 Praise, when rightly given and withheld, [2427]208; men should not live
 dependent on it, or do praiseworthy actions for its sake, [2428]248.

 Prayer, assists the dead, [2429]197; a consolation at all times,
 [2430]246; should be joined with thanksgiving, [2431]ib.; not
 acknowledged without thanksgiving, [2432]247; frequent, makes persons
 listless, therefore they must join watching with it and thanksgiving,
 [2433]305; a Saint's prayer, [2434]ib.; remembering others in,
 [2435]324; of others useful, if we do our part, [2436]326; made for all
 men, [2437]ib.; expressed from love, [2438]341; due to pastors,
 [2439]372; houses of, [2440]373; of arrogant, not heard, [2441]ib.; of
 St. Paul for Thessalonians, [2442]390; he asks theirs, [2443]ib.; St.
 Chrysostom asks earnestly, and more on his own account, [2444]ib.;
 united, powerful, [2445]391; for people bold in St. Chrysostom,
 [2446]ib.; yet he makes it in private as well as in public, [2447]ib.;
 seals precepts, [2448]395; for peace, [2449]ib.; in salutation,
 [2450]ib.

 Prayer of the Faithful, Lord's Prayer so called, [2451]306.

 Preachers, of strife taught as St. Paul did, against their will, as
 instruments of the devil, [2452]190.

 Presbyters, sometimes called Bishops, [2453]184; could not lay hands on
 a Bishop, [2454]ib.

 Pride, to be corrected by thanking God for our wisdom, [2455]204; makes
 men even unlike the devil, [2456]205; haughtiness not courage,
 [2457]ib.; cause of Satan's fall, [2458]216; is worse than folly,
 [2459]217; the evils that come from it in a man's temper, [2460]ib.;
 natural good qualities and blessings should not make men proud,
 [2461]ib.; makes a man lower than irrational creatures, [2462]218;
 shown in thinking fine houses superfluities, etc., a gain, [2463]232;
 attendant on the feasts of the heathen, [2464]262; cure of, in seeing
 the poor, [2465]374; exclaimed against, [2466]ib.; comes of not knowing
 God, [2467]378; beginning of sin, [2468]ib.; of Pharisee, spoiled good
 works, [2469]ib.; a constant misery, [2470]379; a sign of wanting
 reason, [2471]ib.; of rich at Church, [2472]387.

 Priest, should be obeyed with good-will, [2473]366; hated for
 reproving, [2474]ib.; authority of, sanctioned by Christ, [2475]ib.;
 gives up the world for his office, [2476]ib.; imparts the Holy
 Mysteries, [2477]367; communicates first but equally with people,
 [2478]392.

 Priests, grudging to support them upbraided, [2479]226-27.

 Prize, the, the Christian runs for in heaven, [2480]239; it is far more
 precious than gold or jewels, [2481]ib.; those who could gain it must
 follow example of runners in a race, [2482]ib.; Christ gives it in
 heaven, [2483]ib.

 Proclamation, the, is made further known when St. Paul is bound,
 [2484]306-07.

 Prodigal Son, an example to those that sin after Baptism, [2485]238.

 Prophecies, about Christ and Antichrist, [2486]389.

 Prophesyings, true and false, [2487]371.

 Prophets, slain by Jews, [2488]333; speak as from God, [2489]355; speak
 irresponsibly at the time, [2490]371; less listened to than king's
 messengers, [2491]387.

 Proselytes, not circumcised on the eighth day, nor of the stock of
 Israel, [2492]231.

 Providence, signs of, [2493]283.

 Proving all things, what, [2494]371.

 Prudentius, on St. Lawrence, [2495]336 (note 2) .

 Psalms, singing a less irksome way of gaining instruction than reading,
 [2496]301; the warnings they contain for the practice of virtue,
 [2497]302.

 Pulpit, not opened to all, [2498]371.

 Punishment, example of, necessary to lead bad-principled to virtue,
 [2499]220; all sin incurs, [2500]344; comes of evil will, [2501]347;
 temporal, for those who knew not eternal, [2502]358; instances of,
 [2503]358-59; from God not to be questioned, [2504]358; present
 unequal, [2505]359; for not obeying the Gospel, [2506]382, [2507]384;
 of others not to be rejoiced in, [2508]382; the heavier for delay,
 [2509]384; future, proved eternal, [2510]ib.; of disorderly by
 withdrawing from them, [2511]394, [2512]396.

 Purity, blessedness of, [2513]342; enjoined on Timothy, [2514]344.


 Reader, at Church speaks God's words, [2515]387.

 Reason, cannot comprehend mysteries, [2516]236, [2517]282; pride shows
 want of, [2518]379; overwhelmed by ill discourses, [2519]383.

 Reasoning, not used to the docile, [2520]352; on some things unwise,
 [2521]354; like swimming without boat or pilot, [2522]ib.; good not to
 indulge in, [2523]380; conclusive, from God's justice, [2524]382.

 Rebecca, an example for a bride, [2525]317.

 Reconciliation, the way of, through Christ, [2526]272.

 Red Sea, burial to Egyptians, generation to Israelites, [2527]290.

 Rejoicing in Christ arises from mourning for sins, [2528]246.

 Relations, domestic, intent of, [2529]369.

 Remembrance, good, what, [2530]340.

 Remission, of sins, given in baptism, [2531]238.

 Repetition, needful, [2532]386; in Holy Scriptures complained of,
 [2533]388.

 Report, of actions, greatest near the spot, [2534]328; credible from
 those who might envy, [2535]ib.

 Reprieve, [2536]356.

 Reproof, preparation for, [2537]380, [2538]393.

 Restitution, should exceed wrongful gains, [2539]369.

 Resurrection, the, a motive to good living, [2540]212; no tidings of,
 in Job's time, [2541]222; that of Christ, known only by faith, not
 reason, [2542]236; one which leads to honor, one to punishment,
 [2543]236; the glorious one to be attained by going through the like
 sufferings with Christ, [2544]237; doctrine of, believed by only a few
 of those who live in sin, [2545]269; men rewarded in it according to
 desert, [2546]ib.; prefigured in Enoch, Elias, Jonah, Noah, fiery
 furnace, generation of plants, and of man, [2547]283; of Christ an
 encouragement, [2548]328, [2549]363; future, a comfort in troubles,
 [2550]349; belief in, stays sorrow for deaths, [2551]ib.; sorrow in
 spite of believing, [2552]352; first Resurrection [2553]ib.; objections
 to, [2554]353-54; of garments supposed by some, [2555]353; in a moment,
 [2556]356; comes unawares, [2557]ib.; some said already past, and why,
 [2558]377; lively picture of, [2559]382; time of, not known, [2560]386.

 Retribution, to come, [2561]357-360; future, just, [2562]381; exceeds
 actions, both good and evil, [2563]382.

 Revenge, best found in taking none, [2564]367.

 Reward, according to proportion of righteousness, [2565]381; more
 desired than revenge, [2566]382.

 Rich, not refused by Christ, [2567]374; but warned of their danger,
 [2568]ib.; man, despised Lazarus, [2569]ib.; asked his help in vain
 afterwards, [2570]ib.; men, advised to entertain the poor, [2571]ib.;
 fall anyhow in war, [2572]374; goods of, often confiscated, [2573]ib.;
 man would have escaped hell had he feared it, [2574]ib.; make a show in
 church, [2575]387; think they do a favor in coming to church, [2576]ib.

 Riches, cause of unnumbered evils, [2577]183; bring trouble, [2578]191;
 make unable to receive pleasure, [2579]192; their value shown in
 instance of Dives and Lazarus, [2580]ib.; how to be rich indeed,
 [2581]193; should be joined with great mercy, [2582]201; no cause for
 being proud, [2583]217; may deprive men of future consolation,
 [2584]228; the conditions of, are loss accompanied with inexpressible
 trouble, and without gain, [2585]231-32; men must soon leave them,
 [2586]232; their ill effects, [2587]ib.; are a good, if used as a means
 to gain heaven, [2588]ib.; love of, shows unreadiness for trial,
 [2589]335; love of, increased by gazing, [2590]338; of ancients, in
 things necessary, [2591]ib.; a disgraceful memorial, [2592]369;
 ill-gotten, to be restored with addition, [2593]ib.; desire of, comes
 of pride, [2594]378; vanity of, proved by death, [2595]384; of God are
 the faithful, [2596]385; must be despised if we are to despise self,
 [2597]393.

 Righteousness, not according to Christ is a simply moral life,
 [2598]189; the kind which comes from man's own diligence is not to be
 compared with that which is God's gift through faith, [2599]235; reward
 according to, [2600]381.

 River of fire, [2601]365.

 Robber, watchfulness defeats, [2602]362; armor needed against,
 [2603]363; covetous man a, [2604]369; first puts out lamp, [2605]371.

 Robbers, crucified with our Lord, both of them impious at one time,
 [2606]215.

 Robbery, a work of darkness, [2607]362; hard dealing more cruel than,
 [2608]369.

 Roman, laws. See [2609]Laws. Empire, what withheld Antichrist,
 [2610]388; fall of, predicted, [2611]ib.; but covertly, [2612]ib.

 Rudiments, same as elements, the sun and moon, [2613]284.

 Rule, a, is destroyed by addition or subtraction, [2614]240.

 Ruler, incurs enmities, [2615]366; obedience due to, [2616]ib.; should
 be gentle, [2617]367; interest of, is the people's, [2618]391; should
 excel in virtue rather than in honor, [2619]397.

 Rulers, fall of, frequent, [2620]379; men seek favor of, [2621]380;
 none Christian at first, [2622]381; why now to be prayed for,
 [2623]391; most assailed by Satan, [2624]ib.

 Runners, in a race an example for Christians in their course to heaven,
 [2625]239.


 Sabbath, was broken for the sake of circumcision, [2626]230; breaking
 of, punished, [2627]359.

 Sabellius, the Libyan, [2628]206; what his heresy was, [2629]ib.; how
 his heresy falls before St. Paul's text, [2630]207.

 Sacraments, keys of heaven, [2631]367.

 Sacrifice, the, [2632]273.

 Saints, they that wait on them sharers of their crown, [2633]185; to
 wait on them makes up for inability to fast, [2634]ib.; how they live
 not this present life, [2635]195; to be received with honor, [2636]225;
 service to them no favor, but a debt, [2637]226; it is a free service,
 and brings a reward on the giver, [2638]227; united by afflictions,
 [2639]253; pray with thanksgiving for every person and thing,
 [2640]305; those that attend on them share their troubles, [2641]312;
 and sharers of their sufferings share their crowns, [2642]ib.; the way
 to share with them, [2643]ib.; prayers of, useful, [2644]326,
 [2645]393; not to the careless, [2646]ib.; to be sought, [2647]327;
 spread a perfume of virtue, [2648]ib.; all things not revealed to,
 [2649]339; remembrance of, warms us, [2650]343; God glorified in,
 [2651]385; shall come with Christ, [2652]386.

 Salvation, hope of, a helmet, [2653]363; ground for such hope,
 [2654]363, [2655]372; by sanctification and belief, [2656]390; of man,
 Christ's glory, [2657]ib.

 Salutation, a proof of good-will, [2658]253; in St. Paul's own writing,
 [2659]377-78, [2660]395; prayer called a, [2661]395.

 Samson, lost in marriage, not from marriage, but his own free will,
 [2662]241.

 Samuel, prayed in vain for Saul, [2663]326; with effect for Israel,
 [2664]326, [2665]391; prophecy restored in, [2666]327; knew not whom to
 anoint of himself, [2667]339.

 Sanctification, fornication opposed to, [2668]344; through the Spirit,
 [2669]390; faith needed after, [2670]ib.

 Sapphira, sin and punishment of, [2671]359.

 Satan, allowed to ravage upon unfruitful souls, [2672]210; likened to
 different wild creatures according to his disposition, [2673]ib.; great
 or small in power as men choose, [2674]ib.; cannot enter man's soul
 except God permit him, [2675]ib.; fell by pride, [2676]216; received
 his death-stroke from a dead body, [2677]286; did what he could to make
 Christ's death private, [2678]ib.; the deviser of charms, [2679]298-99;
 hinders human purposes, [2680]334; an enemy ever urgent, [2681]336; his
 robbing Job, [2682]337; his means of divination, [2683]ib.; robbers his
 servants, [2684]ib.; his crafty assaults, [2685]ib.; attacks men
 through others' trials, [2686]339-40; suggester of questioning God's
 justice, [2687]358; ever lying in wait, [2688]364; foretold things
 future, [2689]371; but falsely, [2690]ib.; would cut off hope of
 Resurrection, [2691]377; suborned false teachers, [2692]ib.; fills
 children with false notions, [2693]378; Antichrist like him in pride,
 [2694]ib.; by which he fell, [2695]ib.; specially attacks rulers,
 [2696]391.

 Saul, not saved by Samuel's prayer, [2697]326; sinned in sparing
 against commandment, [2698]359.

 Schools, of learning, scholars teach in, [2699]397.

 Scorners, miserable and unreasonable, [2700]365.

 Scribes and Pharisees in Moses' seat, [2701]366; not to be imitated,
 [2702]ib.

 Scripture, without reason not enough to persuade the contentious,
 [2703]212; shows admiration for jewels out of regard for man's
 weakness, [2704]234; should be read not lightly, but with earnestness,
 [2705]301; makes suffering less burdensome, [2706]ib.; better than
 men-teachers, [2707]300; not to know it the cause of all defects in
 practice, [2708]301; hearkening to, keeps up good thoughts, [2709]382;
 chief things plain in, [2710]388; read in known language to the people,
 [2711]ib.; people challenged to give account of, [2712]ib.

 Seed, analogy of, [2713]352-53; sown on a rock, [2714]367; spiritual,
 needs culture, [2715]386; devil carries away, if neglected, [2716]ib.

 Self-command, makes man superior to irrational creatures, [2717]218.

 Self-denial, now a means of escaping future punishment, [2718]245.

 Self-indulgent, deny the cross, and are worthy of tears, [2719]242;
 their belly their god, [2720]ib.

 Seller of purple converted at Philippi, [2721]181.

 Senses, all originate in the head, [2722]397.

 Sentences, what indisputable, [2723]382.

 Servant, of Jesus Christ, a high rank, [2724]184.

 Servants, duty of, to their masters, [2725]304-05; should serve heathen
 masters with the same care they would Christian, [2726]305; to be
 spoken to concerning hell, [2727]384.

 Service, lessons in, [2728]387; silence called for in, [2729]ib.

 Severity, not needed where there is no guilt, [2730]220.

 Shame, is not in being bound for, but in betraying Christ, [2731]195;
 implanted in our nature by God, more powerful than fear to bring us to
 virtue, [2732]201; sense of, motive to improvement, [2733]224.

 Shem, loved his father, [2734]342.

 Shimei, examples of audacity, [2735]205.

 Ship, lightened in dangers, [2736]338; Scriptures, a, [2737]355; wind
 to, as discourse to soul, [2738]383.

 Sickness, recovery from, a mercy, and how, [2739]225.

 Silas, scourged at Philippi, [2740]181.

 Silvanus, St., named before Timothy, [2741]323; implied in plural,
 [2742]341.

 Sin, more object of dread, if we lament for it in others, [2743]196;
 many things lead to our avoiding it, [2744]201; why called "upon
 earth," [2745]294; those who walk in, are not in God, [2746]324;
 frustrates prayer for us, [2747]326; all, defiles, [2748]342; to shun,
 no praise, [2749]344; punished temporally to teach men, [2750]358;
 instances of, punished, [2751]358-59; different characters of,
 [2752]359; leads to certain death, [2753]367; pride the beginning of,
 [2754]378; to be cut off by talking of hell, [2755]384.

 Sinners, dying in sin without hope, [2756]196; must be pained here that
 they may escape the river of fire, [2757]212; know they sin by their
 conscience, [2758]269; think one that rebukes them austere only,
 [2759]320.

 Sinai, angels at Mount, [2760]355.

 Slave, female, about to be sold with her husband, [2761]372; may teach
 a master virtue, [2762]397.

 Slaves, scourged, [2763]372; adjure their masters, [2764]ib.

 Sleep, comes over the virtuous without fear, [2765]248; spiritual,
 danger of, [2766]326, [2767]363, [2768]393; in Jesus not death,
 [2769]352; our helplessness in, humbling, [2770]379.

 Sloth, to avoid it we must do the labors within our measure, [2771]191.

 Sodom, sin of, surpassed, [2772]357; fruits of, full of ashes,
 [2773]ib.

 Soil, spiritual, not inanimate, [2774]386.

 Soldier, rewarded for wounds, [2775]335; always keeps to exercise and
 arms, [2776]ib.; an example to Christians, [2777]336; in heaven a child
 may be made, [2778]351.

 Son, why it is said of man, but never of Angel, [2779]270; The, the
 image of God, [2780]270; not a creature because called Firstborn,
 [2781]ib.; "before all things," [2782]ib.; first in the Church,
 [2783]ib.; types of His eternal generation, [2784]283; same words
 applied to as to the Father, [2785]324; given for us, [2786]363;
 generation of, above reasoning, [2787]354; of God, he who knows, is not
 proud, [2788]378; named before the Father, [2789]390.

 Sophronius, [2790]206; in what way heretical, [2791]207; how his heresy
 falls before St. Paul's text, [2792]ib.

 Sorrow, not to be without hope, [2793]389; excuses for, [2794]ib.;
 comfort in, [2795]350; often caused by ignorance, [2796]352; for
 sinners, [2797]ib.

 Soul, Christian, noble in life or death, [2798]194; brought into tune
 by hard sayings, [2799]212; the truly wise is disturbed by nothing,
 [2800]241; the diseased is ever changing, [2801]242; is delighted with
 sweet savors, [2802]252; that of servants, free in its service,
 [2803]305; to give, hard, [2804]330; defiled by all sin, [2805]342;
 chief object in education, [2806]346; notion of its transmigration,
 [2807]353; thought to be consumed by fire, [2808]ib.; a vicious, dead
 and dry, [2809]363; fear of hell should be seated on, [2810]383-84;
 shaken, can make no effort, [2811]390.

 Speech, heavy, good to correct the soul, [2812]212; rules for, in
 dealing with people of different estates, [2813]311; rules for it in a
 teacher, [2814]ib.

 Spirit, the Holy, comes through mercy, [2815]201; man nothing but by
 Him, [2816]258; gives joy in suffering, [2817]325; lamp of, not to be
 quenched, [2818]370; flame of, what strengthens, [2819]371; gifts of,
 Satan would abuse, [2820]ib.; fire of, cures thorny land, [2821]387;
 clergy fathers in, [2822]392; unclean, false prophets spoke by,
 [2823]386.

 Spirits, wicked, [2824]371; discernment of, [2825]ib.

 Steadfastness, cannot be shaken by deceit or trial, [2826]281.

 Stores, of bread, wine, and oil, [2827]338.

 Strangers, all Abraham had at their service, [2828]369.

 Strength, should not make men proud, [2829]217; to be employed in God's
 service, [2830]233.

 Subscription, to letters in sender's own writing, [2831]378; of St.
 Paul, a token, [2832]395.

 Suffering, for Christ, joyous, [2833]325; rejoicing in, enables one to
 render good for evil, [2834]367; for Christ is glory, [2835]385.

 Sufferings, for Christ, are of grace, [2836]200; their dignity,
 [2837]236; make men comformable to Christ's death, [2838]ib.; are
 lightened by thinking of harder ones, [2839]299; and by thanksgiving,
 [2840]300; knowledge of Scripture lightens them, [2841]ib.

 Sun of Righteousness, melts away all hardness, [2842]343.

 Superior, a, draws his disciple towards him, by showing concern for
 him, [2843]225.

 Surfeit, worse than hunger, [2844]261.


 Tabitha, raised by prayer, [2845]326.

 Table, holy, poor admitted to, with the rich, [2846]374; equally with
 the emperor, [2847]ib.; an example for our entertainments, [2848]ib.

 Tables, description of two sorts, [2849]260.

 Teacher, spiritual, surpasses a natural father in kindness, [2850]203;
 leads on his disciple by deeds, not words only, [2851]240; must use
 discretion in teaching hard things, [2852]311; should be ready for
 hardship, [2853]332; claims of, to support, [2854]332, [2855]394;
 troubles of, try disciples, [2856]335; good, cares for his disciples,
 [2857]340; obliged to incur enmities, [2858]366; obedience to,
 enjoined, [2859]ib.; not every one made, [2860]ib.; patience good in,
 [2861]367; head of a family should be at home, [2862]397; so relieving
 the teacher of the Church, [2863]ib.

 Teaching, affects us with compunction, [2864]397-98.

 Tears, excessive, spring from passion, not true affection, [2865]197;
 St. Paul's better than the fountain in Paradise, [2866]316; such tears
 Christ pronounces blessed, [2867]ib.; those for others' sins are better
 than the sight of Christ, [2868]ib.; should be used when we entreat a
 sinning brother, [2869]317; overcame St. Paul, [2870]342.

 Temple, of God, in which Antichrist shall sit, [2871]378.

 Temptation, uses of term, [2872]335 (note 2) ; may be where no
 wavering, [2873]340; endangers grace, [2874]370; God glorified in,
 [2875]385; may turn from love of God, [2876]393.

 Thankfulness, right under all events, [2877]223; for good of others,
 [2878]380; present things cause for, [2879]390.

 Thanksgiving, a duty in grievous as well as pleasant things, [2880]247;
 may be given even in anguish, [2881]265; the good effects of it in
 evil, [2882]298; lightens suffering, [2883]300; for every person and
 thing should be joined with prayer, [2884]305; in all things, true
 philosophy, [2885]367; of many, when prayer of many is answered,
 [2886]391.

 Theaters, tempt to uncleanness, [2887]347; talking of, useless and
 dangerous, [2888]382.

 Thessalonians, new converts, [2889]323; praise of, implied in
 thanksgiving, [2890]324; their sufferings, [2891]ib.; and joy in them,
 [2892]328; called elect, [2893]325; an example, [2894]325,
 [2895]327praised everywhere, [2896]328; were poor, [2897]332; proved
 sincere by trials, [2898]396; joined with others in St. Paul's crown,
 [2899]334; honored by his sending Timothy, [2900]ib.; praised for love
 of brethren, [2901]348; had lost their goods, [2902]349; many of the,
 prophesied, [2903]371; occasion of the second Epistle to, [2904]377;
 perplexed about the last times, [2905]378; heard of in distant places,
 [2906]381; St. Paul gloried in, [2907]ib.; check to proud thoughts in,
 [2908]385; so commended as to learn trust in God, [2909]393; admonished
 about idleness, [2910]394.

 Thorns, riches are, [2911]386; feed sulky camels, [2912]387.

 Thought. See [2913]Reason.

 Threats of God will be performed, [2914]357.

 Time, spent with unbelievers, made useful to their salvation,
 [2915]310; examples given, [2916]311.

 Times, accused by St. Chrysostom, [2917]201; loved because of friends,
 [2918]321; question about deferred, [2919]377.

 Timothy, St., with St. Paul, when he wrote Epistle to Philippians,
 [2920]181; shown to be a Bishop, [2921]184; sent to the Philippians,
 [2922]223; the only one like-minded with St. Paul, [2923]224; Epistle
 to, written later than that to the Philippians, [2924]238; Epistle to,
 written while St. Paul was in bonds, [2925]257; probably later than
 that to Colossians, [2926]ib.; why named after Silvanus, [2927]323; why
 sent by St. Paul, [2928]334-35; hard to be spared, [2929]340; brought
 good news, [2930]ib.; bid keep himself pure, [2931]344.

 Toil, to seek remission from, is to leave off seeking the things of
 Christ, [2932]224; toil distinguished from labor, [2933]340 (note 4) .

 Tradesmen, hard on poorer tradesmen, [2934]370.

 Tradition, by actions, [2935]344, [2936]394; of the Church, to be
 received, [2937]390.

 Traffic, spiritual, carried on by giving to the good, [2938]251.

 Tragedies, ancient, please because they are formed from true incidents,
 [2939]254.

 Travail, time of, not exactly known, [2940]362.

 Travelling, should not make men proud, [2941]217.

 Trials, less grievous if foretold, [2942]335; he who cannot bear is
 feeble-minded, [2943]367; is "sown on a rock," [2944]ib.; thought of
 hell prepares for, [2945]383; God glorified in, [2946]385.

 Tribulation for Christ is glory, [2947]385.

 Tribulations according to Christ, bring joy, [2948]229.

 Trumpet, at the Resurrection, [2949]356.

 Truth, he that resists it wounds himself, [2950]191.

 Tychicus, bearer of the Epistle to the Colossians, [2951]258; sent by
 St. Paul to the Colossians, [2952]309.

 Tyrants, reduced to sit on ground, [2953]379.


 Unanimity, the greatest safety for disciples against their enemies,
 [2954]182; comes of humility, [2955]ib.

 Unbelief, prevalent at all times, [2956]267; it arises from a bad
 conscience, [2957]268; punishment increased by it, [2958]269.

 Unbelievers, are with the condemned at death, [2959]197.

 Uncleanness, expresses a class of sins, [2960]294; legal, opposite of
 holiness, [2961]342 (note 1) .

 Understanding, how to use it in God's service, [2962]233; the, gets
 dizzy at things faith does not stagger at, [2963]282.

 Unity, the work of the Holy Spirit, [2964]200; breakers of, rend
 Christ's members, [2965]273.

 Universe, not made by chance, [2966]283.

 Usurpers, fear to lay aside what they have usurped, [2967]213.


 Vainglory, the evils that come of it, [2968]203; cause of men's
 thinking, dress, ornaments, and fine houses, a gain, [2969]232; leads
 men to use God's gifts for enjoyment merely, [2970]234; turns from love
 of God, [2971]393.

 Valentinus, [2972]206.

 Vice, practice of, increases it, [2973]220; at enmity with man's
 nature, [2974]247; purged out by thought of hell, [2975]359-60; a
 drunkenness, [2976]362; life of, a dream, [2977]363; a death,
 [2978]ib.; a darkness, [2979]ib.; seizes us when we think not,
 [2980]364.

 Vienne, martyrdoms at, [2981]336 (note 2) .

 Vineyard, God's, type not of Jerusalem only, but of the soul,
 [2982]209.

 Virgins, may appear at a wedding to attend on the bride, [2983]318;
 should be modest at all times and states, [2984]ib.; parable of the
 ten, [2985]355, [2986]372, [2987]385.

 Virtue, advancement in it the only thing to be sought, [2988]199;
 entirely a gift from God, [2989]200; many natural affections lead to
 it, [2990]201; belongs to man alone of all creatures and makes him
 superior to them, [2991]218; practice of, will make a man an angel,
 [2992]ib.; practice of, increases it, [2993]220; in the midst of
 affliction, shines like stars in the night, [2994]222; path of, easier
 to poor than rich, [2995]233; perfection of, attained by constant
 striving, [2996]239; shines forth under all circumstances, [2997]241;
 makes men at peace with God, [2998]247; is friendly to man's nature,
 [2999]248; required in knowing how to abound, as well as to be in want,
 [3000]250; planted everywhere in the later times by God's grace,
 [3001]279; called wisdom, [3002]300; rewarded by God, as if His gain,
 [3003]332; true, that in God's sight, [3004]342; two-fold, in shunning
 evil and doing good, [3005]344; promoted by uncertainty of life,
 [3006]361; consistent with a married life, [3007]396.

 Vision of Christ seen by a woman, [3008]372-73.

 Voice, a fine, should not make men proud, [3009]217; of Christ raises
 dead, [3010]355; of Archangel, [3011]355-56.


 Want, inclines to evil things, [3012]250.

 War, spiritual, always our duty, [3013]336.

 Warning, should be gentle, [3014]367.

 Watchful, nothing will hurt him, [3015]241.

 Watchfulness, a security, [3016]326, [3017]362; in our power,
 [3018]362; in vain without arms, [3019]363; perpetual, needed,
 [3020]364.

 Water, wonderfully transformed, [3021]353; extinguishes a lamp,
 [3022]370.

 Way, narrow, requires care, [3023]364; and light equipment, [3024]ib.;
 broad, leads to death, [3025]ib.

 Weak, to be supported, [3026]367; in faith, [3027]ib.; wish to see
 enemies punished, [3028]381.

 Wealth, not a cause of honor, but of dishonor, [3029]290; its bad
 effects seen in a luxurious king, [3030]291-92; its evils arise from
 the greediness of the desires, [3031]292; makes men mad and turns them
 into demons, [3032]292; a mischievous thorn, [3033]386-87; often lost
 for want of a wife, [3034]397.

 Well-doing, brings good, [3035]249; well-doings of man are gifts of
 grace, [3036]219-20.

 Widows, unable to manage slaves, [3037]349; excessive grief of,
 [3038]356; comfort for, [3039]350-51; children of, may do well,
 [3040]351; widows indeed, [3041]ib.

 Wife, what her duty is to her husband, [3042]304; wife and husband make
 but one man, [3043]318-19; how she should please her husband,
 [3044]346; often ill-treated, [3045]350; to be taught to fear hell,
 [3046]384; will learn meekness of her husband, [3047]397; and contempt
 of money, [3048]ib.; directed to learn of her husband, [3049]ib.

 Will, good, increased. by doing good, [3050]220; free, not taken away
 by God's working with man, [3051]ib.; it makes riches or poverty a gain
 to man, [3052]233; of God must cast out every other will, [3053]314;
 the chief thing for amendment, [3054]347; can turn a wrong into a
 benefit, [3055]367; ours must concur to our salvation, [3056]393-395.

 Wind, as, to a ship, so discourse to a soul, [3057]383; help of God
 like a, [3058]393.

 Wisdom, is opposed to all luxury, [3059]292; consists in a virtuous
 life, [3060]300; not craftiness nor hypocrisy, [3061]309; shown in a
 proper way of behaving, to persons of all estates, [3062]311.

 Withdrawal, a severe punishment, [3063]394, [3064]396; success of,
 [3065]396.

 "Without," means Greeks, [3066]310.

 Witness, God an unseen, [3067]332.

 Women, who labored with St. Paul, recommended to care, [3068]244; some
 warned to amend, or not to come into the Church, [3069]293; adorn their
 hair with trinkets of gold, [3070]307; excessive mourning of,
 [3071]349; one taken, another left, [3072]356; eating their own
 children, [3073]358.

 Word, The, appeared as Man, not to change from being God, or to be a
 Phantom, but to be an example of humility, [3074]214-15.

 Words, idle, will be punished, [3075]228; terrible enough without
 further explanation, [3076]384; love must be more than, [3077]393.

 Work, of faith, what, [3078]324, [3079]385; of hands, how made
 spiritual, [3080]348.

 Works, of darkness, what, [3081]362; good do not make prayers for us
 needless, [3082]393; love of God to be shown in, [3083]ib.; tradition
 through, [3084]394.

 World, the, thought a God by some, [3085]360; end of, see
 [3086]Consummation, etc.

 Wrath, the, of God, against Jews, [3087]334; of God, testimonies of,
 [3088]358; to be forborne, [3089]343.

 Wrong, the doers of, pitiable, [3090]368; how to revenge, [3091]367;
 more cruel when with contempt, [3092]370.


 Yokefellow, brother or husband of some one at Philippi, [3093]244.

 Young men, to be kept from fornication, [3094]346; are able to resist
 the temptation, [3095]347; blamed for going to theaters, [3096]ib.


 Zeal, makes up for late beginning, [3097]325.

 Zeba, example of flattery, [3098]205.

  HOMILIES ON THE EPISTLES TO TIMOTHY, TITUS, AND PHILEMON.


 Aaron, those that rebelled against, perished, [3099]482.

 Abraham, riches of, in what they consisted, [3100]447; concealed his
 purpose about Isaac, [3101]458.

 Activity, needful in our spiritual course, [3102]517.

 Adam, in what sense not deceived, [3103]435.

 Admonition, not meant to grieve, but to correct, [3104]414.

 Age, failings of, [3105]531.

 Aged, the, not to be rebuked but advised, [3106]450.

 Alexander, persecuted St. Paul, [3107]514.

 Almsgiving, blessings of, [3108]455; objects of, [3109]ib.; communion
 in, [3110]479; failure in, enough to cast into hell, [3111]498; must
 become a habit, [3112]499; mercifully ordained, [3113]ib.; meant to
 detach from love of riches, [3114]542; effects of, extend to all,
 [3115]ib.; the chief of virtues, [3116]ib.; the mother of love,
 [3117]ib.; the ladder fixed to heaven, [3118]ib.

 Alms, to be dispensed by ourselves, [3119]455; make way for prayer,
 [3120]479; of no avail if from wrongful gains, [3121]498; to avail,
 must be of our own, [3122]500; a good inheritance, [3123]504; benefit
 the giver more than the receiver, [3124]541; bind together the body of
 Christ, [3125]542; blessed effects of, [3126]ib.

 Androgeus, story of, [3127]538.

 Angels, saw the Son, with men, through the Incarnation, [3128]442;
 Timothy charged before the, [3129]464; the elect, who, [3130]ib.

 Apostleship, dignity of the, [3131]408.

 Apostles, preaching of the, assailed, not their lives, [3132]439; power
 of the, [3133]516; power of our Lord exercised through, [3134]517
 (note) ; manner of life of, [3135]523.

 Appearing, the love of the, of Christ, [3136]512.

 Apphia, [3137]547.

 Aratus, quoted by St. Paul, [3138]528.

 Archippus, [3139]547.

 Asia, Church and people of, committed to Timothy, [3140]461; many in
 Rome from, [3141]484.

 Athenians, admitted new gods, [3142]528.

 Avarice, a lust, [3143]430; inexcusable, [3144]536.


 Balaam, a prophet, though a wicked man, [3145]482.

 Barochabel, [3146]551 (note) .

 Baptism, the anointing of, [3147]415.

 Baths, considered too luxurious for very devout persons, [3148]499
 (note) .

 Beauty, right use of, [3149]421; increases trials of modesty,
 [3150]422; want of, no reproach, [3151]ib.; has no advantages,
 [3152]ib.; imaginary, not in nature of things, [3153]479; moral, alone
 real, [3154]ib.

 Bishopric, of those who desire a, [3155]522.

 Bishop, character of a, [3156]437; office of, may be desired from love
 to the Church, [3157]ib.; vigilant, [3158]438; to be instant in his
 duties night and day, [3159]ib.; the husband of one wife, [3160]437,
 [3161]438 (note) ; must be blameless, [3162]438; apt to teach,
 [3163]ib.; no smiter, [3164]ib.; not to smite the consciences of
 others, [3165]ib.; why the highest attainments not required of,
 [3166]439; one to preside in every city, [3167]438; to exhibit good
 order in his own house, [3168]439; not to be a new convert, [3169]ib.;
 must be well reported of all, [3170]ib.

 Bishops, must know how to manage their household, [3171]408; superior
 to priests only in power of ordination, [3172]441; set over and to be
 feared by all, [3173]461; continually slandered wrongfully, [3174]522;
 dangers and difficulties of, [3175]ib.; must regard their health for
 the Church's sake, [3176]523.

 Blasphemy, produced by ill living, [3177]532.

 Books, of St. Paul, [3178]514.

 Brutality, of mankind before Christ's coming, [3179]538.

 Bulimy, disease called, [3180]502.


 Cain, offense of, [3181]498.

 Canker, false doctrine compared to a, [3182]493.

 Children, good bringing up of, brings its own reward, [3183]436; great
 responsibilities of those who have, [3184]437; to be well trained from
 the first, [3185]ib.; greatest care to be taken in choice of tutors
 for, [3186]ib.

 Children, The Three, example of, [3187]543.

 Christ, great strength required to bear the name of, [3188]416; true
 disciples of, the admiration of angels, [3189]417; apathy of men
 towards, [3190]418; friends preferred before, [3191]ib.; died for the
 heathen, [3192]431; His suffering a testimony, [3193]ib.; meaning of
 His directions about prayer (Matt. vi. 6) , [3194]432; love of, not
 returned by us, [3195]431; should put us to shame, [3196]ib.;
 condescension of, [3197]463; sacramental union with, [3198]464; the
 good confession, [3199]471; unoriginated, [3200]ib.; cannot be seen in
 His divine apart from His human nature, [3201]ib., note; the cross of,
 a remedy against shame, [3202]480; power of, shown when His servants
 are oppressed, [3203]491; dying with, a pledge of life with, [3204]492;
 how to suffer for, [3205]512; why ministered to by others, [3206]542.

 "Christ, through," meaning of the phrase, [3207]418.

 Christians, must learn, and obey, and doubt not, [3208]410; not freed
 only from punishment, but gifted with immense privileges, [3209]418;
 must not pray against each other, [3210]427; engaged in a contest,
 [3211]424; bid to pray everywhere, [3212]432; bad, hinder conversion of
 heathen, [3213]440; how dead with Christ, [3214]492; should be prepared
 for everything, [3215]496.

 Church, different stations in the, as in an army, [3216]424; the, a
 household, [3217]439; a pillar of truth in the world, [3218]442;
 maintains the preaching of the word, [3219]442; makes known the
 Incarnation, [3220]ib.; those directing the, assailed with difficulty,
 [3221]475; equality in the, [3222]547; knows no distinctions of rank,
 [3223]548.

 Claudia, [3224]516.

 Clergy, to be maintained, [3225]460; not to be stinted, [3226]ib.; not
 to spare themselves, [3227]ib.

 Cloak, of St. Paul left at Troas, [3228]513.

 Commandment, matters of, [3229]449; not left to choice, [3230]521.

 Committed, things to us, imply that they are not our own, but to be
 kept with care, [3231]424.

 Communicants, unworthy, delivered by God to Satan, [3232]425.

 Communion, Holy, careless preparation for, reproved, [3233]425; one
 unworthy partaking of, presumption, [3234]ib.

 Condescension, of God to man's weakness, [3235]529.

 Conduct, of others, not to be judged, but our own, [3236]482.

 Conscience, a good, brings rejoicing, [3237]446; a pure, a blameless
 life, [3238]476; torments of a bad, [3239]494; an impure, defiles all
 things, [3240]530.

 Contentious persons, to be avoided, [3241]468.

 Contest, those out of the, sometimes cause of the victory to those who
 gain it, [3242]485.

 Controversy, some unavoidable, [3243]541.

 Conversion, none without practical holiness, [3244]440.

 Corah, insurrection of, [3245]482.

 Corinthian, case of incestuous, [3246]424.

 Counsels, of perfection, [3247]521.

 Courtesans, finery of, [3248]433.

 Covetousness, admits no friendship, [3249]469; cure of, [3250]470; to
 be brought under by the will, [3251]ib.; self-love source of,
 [3252]501; evils arising from, [3253]ib.

 Creature, none unclean, [3254]445.

 Cretans, who said they were liars, [3255]528; to be sharply rebuked,
 [3256]529.

 Cross, the greatest sign of God's love, [3257]479; a rebuke to mistaken
 shame, [3258]480; sign of the, use of, [3259]499.

 Crown, of righteousness, [3260]512; in store for all saints, [3261]ib.

 Cynophontis, festival of, at Argos, [3262]470 (note) .


 Daniel, humility of, [3263]553.

 Daphne, burning of, [3264]508 (note) .

 Daughters, to be trained religiously for marriage, [3265]437.

 David, his love for Jonathan, [3266]503; humility of, [3267]553.

 Day of Judgment, not borne in mind, [3268]462.

 Deacons, qualities for, [3269]441; trial of, [3270]ib.; same virtues
 required of, as of bishops, [3271]ib.; temporal ministry of, [3272]442
 (note) .

 Deaconesses, [3273]441; necessary and useful to the Church, [3274]ib.

 Death, in a monastery, [3275]457.

 Demas, chose his own ease before danger, [3276]513, [3277]556.

 Desires, foolish, [3278]469; as thorns, [3279]ib.

 Despisers of their brethren, despise God, [3280]501.

 Devil, his rage greater against the shepherd than the flock, [3281]409.

 Devils, abhor the unguent of the Spirit, [3282]415; divinations of,
 condemned and defied, [3283]508.

 Disputes, contagious, [3284]467, [3285]493.

 Distinctions, spiritual to be sought for, [3286]444.

 Divinations, failure in, [3287]508; sin to have recourse to, [3288]ib.

 Divine things not to be measured by human reason, [3289]479.

 Doctrine, corrupt, engendered by an evil life, [3290]419; orthodox,
 useless without a corresponding life, [3291]429; false, a growing evil,
 [3292]493.

 Doxology, inference of heretics from (1 Tim. i. 17) , disproved,
 [3293]421.

 Dramas of the heathens filled with abominations, [3294]538.

 Dress, finery in, gives occasion of offense, [3295]434.

 Drunkenness, drowns the soul, [3296]451.

 Duties, plain neglect of, a denial of the Faith, [3297]453.


 Earnestness, taught by the Epistle to Philemon, [3298]546.

 Elders, bishops called, [3299]524.

 Eli, perished for neglecting his children, [3300]436.

 Eloquence, inferior to strength of mind, [3301]525.

 Encratites, not often mentioned by St. Chrys. [3302]444 (note) ;
 mentioned by Clem. Al. etc., [3303]ib.

 Envy of men passes on to Christ, [3304]419.

 Elect, sufferings endured for the, [3305]489.

 Epaphroditus, infirmity of, [3306]515.

 Epimenides, [3307]528 (note) .

 Epiphany, meaning of, [3308]512.

 Episcopate, dangers of the, [3309]522.

 Epistles, occasional, not superfluous, [3310]545.

 Ephesus, false Judaizing apostles at, [3311]410.

 Error, never stops, yet never advances, [3312]506.

 Essence, no dissimilarity in the Divine, [3313]409.

 Eucharist, Holy, always a Holy Passover, [3314]425; the same, whether
 offered by common men or by Paul, &c., [3315]483.

 Evangelist, the work of an, [3316]511.

 Eve, bad teaching of, [3317]436.

 Excommunication, a proof of the Apostles' power, [3318]425.

 Exercise, bodily, spoken of by St. Paul, not fasting, [3319]445;
 spiritual, [3320]ib. (note) , [3321]446; spiritual, rewarded,
 [3322]447.


 Fables, what St. Paul means by, [3323]410; Jewish traditions such,
 [3324]445.

 Faith, excludes questioning, [3325]410; sets reasoning at rest,
 [3326]ib.; excludes not prayer for knowledge, [3327]ib.; objects of
 being divine to be revered not questioned, [3328]ib.; adherence to the,
 safeguard against false opinions, [3329]411; earthly things depend on,
 [3330]ib.; exacted by heathens, [3331]ib.; produces love, [3332]412; a
 safe ship, [3333]424; without a good life unavailing, [3334]ib.;
 apostates from the, have no stay, [3335]ib.; an unshaken rock,
 [3336]472; dead, [3337]505; common to all, [3338]522.

 Faithful, should assist each other, [3339]485.

 Family, the, a model for all government, [3340]535.

 Fasting, cleanses in vain if we return to sin, [3341]426; useless
 without alms, [3342]498.

 Fate, doctrine of, excludes responsibility, [3343]411; arguments
 against doctrine of, [3344]ib.

 Father, a bad, unfit to be a bishop, [3345]524.

 Fear, prevents quarrels, [3346]427; utility of, [3347]462; love opposed
 to, [3348]477; of God, a firm foundation, [3349]513.

 Fight, the Christian, [3350]511.

 Flesh, those called, whose souls are dead, [3351]452.

 Food, spiritual, [3352]445.

 Forgiveness of injuries, [3353]427, [3354]428; peculiar to Christians,
 [3355]427; brings gain here, [3356]549.

 Form, used in a good and in a bad sense, [3357]505.

 Free will, not taken away by grace, [3358]418.

 Friendship, benefits of, [3359]412; of David and Jonathan, [3360]503;
 among the wicked, [3361]412.

 Freedom, Christian, causes greater faithfulness in serving, [3362]465.

 Funeral, in a monastery, [3363]457.


 Gamaliel, appears free from ambition, [3364]417.

 Garlands, worn by bridegrooms, why, [3365]437.

 Garments, vanity of worldly, [3366]414.

 Gentiles, tenets of, human, and so to be examined, [3367]410.

 Gentleness, comes from thinking what we once were, [3368]537.

 Gift, given to Timothy for working miracles, etc., [3369]477.

 Glory of the world useless, [3370]414; of the saints internal,
 [3371]ib.; real, described, [3372]490; a hard taskmaster, [3373]527.

 Gluttony, disgusting effects of, [3374]452; unnatural to the body,
 [3375]ib.; nausea succeeds, [3376]453; evils of, [3377]451.

 Gnostics, the name of assumed by pretenders to great knowledge,
 [3378]472.

 God, blessings of, not conceived by reasoning, [3379]410; knowledge of,
 presupposes faith, [3380]ib.; belief in, destroys notions of fate and
 nativity, [3381]411; takes earthly gifts away, to lead men to heaven,
 [3382]412; gifts of, so great as to be incredible, [3383]419; how to be
 glorified, [3384]421; to be honored by works, [3385]422; longsuffering
 of, an example to ourselves, [3386]428; goodness of, to His enemies,
 [3387]ib.; not to be approached in costly ornaments, [3388]433; willeth
 salvation of all, therefore men must pray for all, [3389]430; threatens
 in mercy, [3390]461; to be loved not from fear of hell, but from desire
 of His kingdom, [3391]462; union of man with, in Christ, [3392]463; the
 best Master, but ill served, [3393]465; acts through evil men,
 [3394]482; threatens in mercy, [3395]485; why He defers punishment,
 [3396]486; His work not impaired by the instrument, [3397]483; appeal
 to, full of awe, [3398]492; charging before, [3399]493; His doings too
 deep for the curious, [3400]507; His power shown in man's weakness,
 [3401]515; teaches men through that which they know, [3402]528; our
 Creditor, [3403]549; goodness of, in punishing, [3404]556, [3405]557.

 Godliness, mystery of, [3406]442; exercise of, [3407]445; a means of
 gain, but not worldly, [3408]468; beautiful in its own nature,
 [3409]470; requires daily nourishment of good works, [3410]486; the
 truth, according to, [3411]520.

 Gold, good for almsgiving, [3412]432; to be used in loosing captives,
 not in enslaving the soul, [3413]ib.; bonds of, tend to the chains of
 hell, [3414]ib.; not to be worn by penitents, [3415]433.

 Good, best done in person, [3416]455; real, may be seized by all,
 [3417]517.

 Goods, named from use, [3418]443; inherited, not preserved without
 trouble, [3419]447; worldly, destroyed in a moment, [3420]ib.;
 spiritual, not gained without labor and pain, [3421]446.

 Good works, perseverance in, [3422]485.

 Gospel, why called glorious, [3423]414; gifts of, not of mercy only,
 but of love and affection, [3424]418; justice and mercy meet only in
 the, [3425]420; that committed to us, [3426]481; victorious through
 sufferings, [3427]489.

 Government, an appointment of God, [3428]426.

 Grace, indwelling and aiding, [3429]516; how gained, [3430]ib.

 Grace and free will, [3431]520.

 Graces, Christian, true ornaments, [3432]444.

 Gratitude, God glorified in, [3433]554.


 Habit, force of, [3434]499.

 Hands, employed in almsgiving, holy, [3435]432.

 Health, to be prized above beauty, [3436]422.

 Heathen, the, to be prayed for, [3437]430; there would be no, if
 Christians were as they ought to be, [3438]440; errors of the wiser,
 [3439]539.

 Heathenism, testimony of heathens against, [3440]528.

 Heaven, to be won by pain and labor, [3441]517.

 Hell, misery of, not the less for numbers, [3442]440; prepared by God
 because of His goodness, [3443]557.

 Herald, duty of a, [3444]521.

 Heresies, want of brotherly love, the cause, [3445]412; arise from love
 of power, [3446]ib.; foretold, [3447]444; propagated by Jews,
 [3448]475.

 Heretics, to be prayed for, [3449]430; on the Church's disapproval of
 putting to death, [3450]ib. (note) ; measure heavenly things by human
 reasonings, [3451]479; no cause of offense, [3452]504; existed from the
 beginning, [3453]ib.; arguing with, useless, [3454]540.

 Hermogenes [3455]484.

 Holiness, the best converter from heathenism, [3456]440.

 Honesty of living, in what consists, [3457]429.

 Honor, dangerous, [3458]526; to be evaded when offered, [3459]527; to
 be rejected, [3460]526.

 Hope, no real, but in repentance, [3461]441.

 Hospitality, must be cheerful, [3462]454; kind of, intended by St.
 Paul, [3463]525.

 Hours, canonical, of prayer, [3464]456.

 Household, duty of regulating our, [3465]453.

 Humiliation, our utmost due to Christ, [3466]554.

 Humility, true, rarely to be met with, [3467]416; puffs up when not
 genuine, [3468]552; Scripture examples of, [3469]553.

 Husband, how to win a heathen, [3470]532.


 Idleness, teacher of every sin, [3471]459.

 Immortality, admits not of degrees, [3472]421.

 Incarnation, The, called The dispensation, [3473]442; immense mystery
 of, [3474]ib.; mystery of, made known by the Church, [3475]ib.;
 doctrine of, to be taught with discretion, [3476]ib.

 Industry, practiced in monasteries, [3477]456.

 Injustice, bitterness of, to those who practice it, [3478]494.

 Insincerity, pernicious to the Church, [3479]441.

 Intemperance, horrors of, [3480]452.

 Intercession, priestly, [3481]426; advantages of, [3482]ib.; for those
 without never to be relaxed, [3483]ib.

 Isaac, why kept in ignorance when about to be slain, [3484]458.


 Jacob, had wealth, but it was earned, [3485]447.

 Jannes and Jambres, magicians in the time of Moses, [3486]505.

 Jews, crimes of the, [3487]414; had no prayers for heathens, [3488]431;
 their great stumbling block, the love of power, [3489]417; allowed to
 pray only in one place, [3490]432; tenets of, how fables, [3491]529.

 Job, his afflictions, occasion of great good, [3492]504; his alms
 rewarded, [3493]ib.; his patience, [3494]512.

 Joseph, won the confidence of a heathen master, [3495]534; honored in
 prison, [3496]ib.; a ruler, [3497]ib.

 Judas, delivered to Satan, [3498]425; a golden vessel became earthen,
 [3499]496.

 Judgment, day of, awfulness of, [3500]485; to come, a cause of fear to
 all, [3501]494.

 Judging, faculty of, implanted in us, [3502]495.

 Jugglers, condemned, [3503]509.

 Justice, courts of, symbolical, [3504]486; universal on earth, though
 incomplete, [3505]ib.


 Labarum, the, [3506]416 (note) .

 Labor, worldly, vain, [3507]447.

 Law, the, lawful use of, [3508]413; if used aright sends men to Christ,
 [3509]ib.; least needed by those who keep it best, [3510]ib.; necessary
 for the confirmation of the Gospel, [3511]414.

 Life, a corrupt, produces similar doctrine, [3512]424; heathens admire
 a good, [3513]440; known from death by its acts, [3514]451; true, that
 of the soul, [3515]452; a dream, [3516]462; eternal, to be won only by
 great labor, [3517]469; eternal, secured by good works, 572; a time of
 trial, [3518]506.

 Linus, when Bishop of Rome, [3519]516 (note) .

 Longsuffering of God, to lead men to repentance, [3520]486.

 Lord's Prayer, for all, [3521]428; everything contained in, [3522]ib.

 Love, to enemies, possible, [3523]419; to man, brings love to God,
 [3524]502.

 Luke, St., always adhered to St. Paul, [3525]513.

 Lust, inordinate desire is, [3526]496.

 Lusts, worldly, [3527]536.

 Luxury, danger of, [3528]446; unworthy of man, [3529]451; weakens the
 soul, [3530]453.


 Magic, condemned, [3531]440.

 Man, union of, with God in Christ, [3532]464; Scriptural definition of
 a, [3533]452.

 Manes, [3534]479.

 Manichees, [3535]444 (note) .

 Mansions, heavenly and earthly compared, [3536]463.

 Marcion, [3537]479.

 Marcionites, [3538]444 (note) .

 Marriage, not forbidden, [3539]446; he that is chaste before, will be
 so after, and vice versa, [3540]437; those who contracted a second,
 ineligible for the episcopate, [3541]524; second objectionable,
 [3542]ib.; second, better to avoid, [3543]503.

 Martyrdom, original idea of, [3544]479 (note) .

 Martyrs, The sacrifice offered on the days of, [3545]425.

 Masks, worn on the stage, [3546]527.

 Masters, to forbear threatening, [3547]465.

 Matrona, cave of, [3548]529.

 Meat, abstinence from, the doctrine of devils, [3549]445.

 Meats, typical, [3550]446; prohibited, to restrain luxury, [3551]ib.

 Mediator, nature and office of a, [3552]430; our Lord as, must have two
 natures, [3553]ib.

 Medicine, spiritual, [3554]495.

 Men, of flesh, [3555]452.

 Mercy, all else vain without, [3556]498; of God, men chiefly attracted
 by, [3557]ib.; of God, requires mercy in us, [3558]556; implies ill
 desert, [3559]417; the work of God, [3560]498; by it men resemble God,
 [3561]ib.

 Miracles, not wrought on all occasions, and why, [3562]515.

 Monastery, death and sickness in a, [3563]457.

 Monasteries, house of mourning, in what sense, [3564]455; as lights to
 mariners, [3565]456; calm and peace of, [3566]ib.; manner of life
 passed in, [3567]ib.; morning, in, [3568]ib.

 Money, loved before God, [3569]502; difficulties undergone to gain,
 [3570]ib.; lovers of, really mad, [3571]469; love of, seizes all
 classes, [3572]470; love of, the worse as not a natural passion,
 [3573]536; love of, the root of all evils, [3574]469; given for relief
 of the poor, [3575]ib.; to make amends for past sins, [3576]ib.;
 miseries caused by, [3577]ib.

 Monks, sleep not naked, [3578]456; psalmody of, [3579]ib.; industry,
 meals, and sleep of, [3580]457; devotions of the, [3581]ib.

 Mortification, for the sake of future blessings, [3582]446.

 Mothers, advice to, [3583]437.

 Mystery, of the Incarnation, [3584]442; not to be treated irreverently,
 [3585]ib.

 Mysteries, dignity of those who are entrusted with, [3586]442.


 Nature, chief blessings of, common to all, [3587]448.

 Nero, compared with St. Paul in the Resurrection, [3588]491; called a
 lion, [3589]514; cupbearer of, converted by St. Paul, [3590]ib.;
 compared with St. Paul, [3591]490; worshiped as a God, [3592]ib.; tomb
 of, unknown, [3593]491.

 Nicopolis, Titus bid to come to, and why, [3594]541; which, here meant,
 [3595]ib. (note) .

 Nineveh, saved through fear, [3596]462.

 Novelties, to be avoided, [3597]493.

 Novices, not to be promoted to the episcopate, [3598]439.


 Obedience, follows our election, [3599]520.

 Oil, in the parable of virgins taken for almsgiving, [3600]498; for
 good works generally by St. Jerome, and St. Augustin, [3601]ib. (note)
 .

 Onesiphorus, St. Paul's prayer for, [3602]485; his kindness to St.
 Paul, [3603]ib.

 Onesimus, a true and not a true son, [3604]521; a son begotten in
 bonds, [3605]551; his fault overruled to good, [3606]552; came to St.
 Paul at Rome, [3607]545; was baptized there, [3608]ib.

 Oppositions, certain, not to be answered, [3609]472.

 Orders, Holy, none to be admitted to, without frequent and strict
 examination, [3610]464.

 Ordinations, responsibilities of, [3611]464.

 Ornaments, of the body to be avoided, [3612]422; of the soul alone to
 be sought for, [3613]423; inconsistent with penitence, [3614]433;
 suited to actors and dancers, not to Christians, [3615]ib.

 Ostentation, in prayer, to be avoided, [3616]432.


 Paint, condemned, [3617]422.

 Parade, in religion to be avoided, [3618]527.

 Paradoxes of the Gospel, [3619]443.

 Parasceve, Holy Communion celebrated on the, [3620]425.

 Parents, may be benefited by their children's virtue, [3621]436; to be
 requited, and how, [3622]450.

 Paschal Feast, [3623]425.

 Passions, the most cruel tyrants, [3624]473; evil, worse than wild
 beasts, [3625]512.

 Patience, in teaching, [3626]497; shown from the fisher, the
 husbandman, [3627]ib.; all may exercise for Christ's sake, [3628]512;
 befits the aged, [3629]532.

 Paul, St., why he wrote to Timothy and Titus only, [3630]407; mentions
 no particular age for the episcopate, [3631]ib.; instructions to
 Timothy, as to a Teacher, [3632]ib.; appointed by command of God,
 [3633]408; sent by Father and Son, [3634]ib.; anxiety for Timothy,
 extended to care for his bodily health, [3635]409; garments of, cast
 out devils, [3636]415; humility of, [3637]416; always conceals his own
 merit, [3638]ib.; his former life, dwelt upon as to the glory of God,
 [3639]417; his opposition not from ignorance, but from zeal, [3640]ib.;
 ignorance of, produced by unbelief, [3641]ib.; dwells on his sinfulness
 to extol God's mercy, [3642]420; righteousness of, under the law,
 [3643]ib.; how blameless, [3644]ib.; his life not impure, but compared
 with God's righteousness worthless, [3645]ib.; humility in describing
 his own case, [3646]420; ordained for the Gentiles, [3647]431; why he
 discourses so much of dress, [3648]433; his trials, encouragement to
 others, [3649]446; detained in prison, [3650]480; why say so often that
 he was a teacher of the Gentiles, [3651]ib.; gave offense to Nero,
 [3652]484; his prayer for Onesiphorus, [3653]485; a tent maker,
 [3654]490; his name celebrated all over the world, [3655]ib.;
 victorious over Nero, [3656]ib.; his tomb, in the royal city, its
 splendor, [3657]491; his glory at the Resurrection, [3658]ib.; no
 emperor ever so honored as, [3659]ib.; his travels, [3660]511;
 discourses of his own death, [3661]509; his death a drink offering,
 [3662]511; preached though imprisoned, [3663]513; whole life passed in
 afflictions, [3664]507; deserted by man, supported by God, [3665]514;
 cause of his death, [3666]ib.; more powerful than Plato, [3667]525; his
 thorn in the flesh, [3668]515; condescension of, [3669]532; "the
 stigmatized of Christ," [3670]547.

 Peace, worldly, useless, if there be war in the heart, [3671]429; with
 one's self to be desired, [3672]ib.

 Peacefulness, duty of, [3673]497.

 Perfection, counsels of, [3674]521.

 Perfumes, spiritual, suitable to Christians, [3675]415.

 Persecutions, afflictions, sorrows, called, [3676]506; the godly must
 suffer, [3677]ib.

 Persons, in the Godhead of the same substance, not distinct in nature,
 [3678]485.

 Peter, St., crucified with his head downwards, [3679]493.

 Philemon, argument of the Epistle to, [3680]545; his household a
 Church, [3681]ib.; his character admirable, [3682]ib.; the lessons to
 be learned from Epistle to, [3683]546; St. Paul's love to, how shown,
 [3684]550.

 Philosophy, a life of pleasure opposed to, [3685]495.

 Phygellus, [3686]484.

 Plato, Republic of, [3687]539 (note) .

 Pleasure, bodily, more difficult of restraint, [3688]498.

 Pleasures, certain, agitate, not productive of calm, [3689]415.

 Pomp, absurd and despicable, [3690]443.

 Poor, the, are our benefactors, [3691]455; men must become, if they
 would be rich, [3692]443; benefits of visiting the, [3693]456.

 Possessions, contention introduced by, [3694]448.

 Poverty, to stand in need of others is, [3695]443.

 Power, of Christ's servants insuperable, [3696]490.

 Praise, vanity of human, [3697]526.

 Prayer, cursing cannot exist with, [3698]427; not limited to one place,
 [3699]433; for heathens, heretics, [3700]430; without alms, unfruitful,
 [3701]498; always to be joined with giving of thanks, [3702]427;
 against another, sinfulness of, [3703]ib.; of Jews, how distinguished
 from Christians, [3704]432; monastic hours of, [3705]456; preservative
 of our souls, [3706]556; must be free from all passion, [3707]433; from
 all doubting, [3708]ib.; power of, [3709]430.

 Prayers, for heathen princes, agreeable to rules of justice, [3710]426;
 to be offered for all men, [3711]427; for heathen princes, and why,
 [3712]426.

 Preacher, duty of a, [3713]428.

 Preaching, difficulties of, [3714]461; good, advantageous to the
 Church, [3715]ib.; pompous language not necessary for, [3716]ib.

 Presbyters, why St. Paul gives no directions to, [3717]441; no great
 difference between, and Bishops, [3718]ib.

 Presumption comes of ignorance, [3719]467.

 Pride, aroused by ignorance, [3720]467.

 Priest, commanding belongs to a, [3721]449; the, as it were a common
 father of all the world, [3722]426; his office to be honored for God's
 sake, [3723]481; they that honor him, will honor God, [3724]ib.; if he
 teach heresy not to be obeyed, [3725]482; a, by his office, a spiritual
 father, [3726]483; intercession of, [3727]ib.; wicked, impairs not
 God's work, [3728]481; an angel of the Lord, [3729]ib.; his words, not
 his own, but God's, [3730]482; God worketh through evil, [3731]483.

 Priesthood, dignity of the, [3732]423; responsibility of the, [3733]483
 (note) .

 Priests, anointing of, typical of inward virtue, [3734]415; but
 instruments of God, [3735]483; Christ in His, their words His,
 [3736]ib.

 Principles for solving difficulties of God's doings, [3737]507.

 Priscilla, her zeal, [3738]515.

 Proclamation, the Gospel a, from God, [3739]521.

 Promise of God eternal, [3740]520.

 Prophets, false, [3741]511.

 Prophecy, not of future things only, but of present, [3742]423; used of
 teaching, [3743]449.

 Prosperity, real, shared fairly even now by good and bad, [3744]411.

 Psalmody, of the monks, [3745]456.

 Punishment, the saints rejoice not in, of the evil, but the Gospel
 requires it, [3746]514; all who will may escape, [3747]557.

 Pure, all things pure to the, [3748]529.

 Purification, many means of, [3749]549.

 Purity, in what it consists, [3750]433; true, cannot be defiled from
 without, [3751]530; what real, consists in, [3752]499; outward,
 attainable by the most wicked, [3753]ib.


 Questioning, uselessness of, [3754]467; inconsistent with faith,
 [3755]ib.


 Ransom, meaning of, [3756]431.

 Reasoning, evil effects of, [3757]424.

 Reading, diligent, necessary for teachers, [3758]450.

 Rebuke, offensive, especially of the old, [3759]450; careful enquiry
 necessary before, [3760]461.

 Regeneration, by grace, [3761]538.

 Relations, affection to, necessary, [3762]453; cannot be neglected
 without denial of the faith, [3763]ib.

 Religion, to be without show, or parade, [3764]527.

 Repetition, of the same subjects not annoying to those who practice
 them, [3765]428.

 Reproof, discretion required for, [3766]450; to be tempered with
 exhortation, [3767]510.

 Republic of Plato, [3768]539 (note) .

 Resurrection, of those who said it was past, [3769]493.

 Retribution, not here, but hereafter, [3770]411; future, accounts for
 prosperity of the wicked, [3771]ib.

 Reward, of teachers, [3772]488; proved by various illustrations,
 [3773]ib.

 Rich man, a, how he can be good, [3774]448.

 Rich, those who will be, blamed, [3775]468; the, in this world,
 [3776]472; duties of the, [3777]ib.

 Riches, do not please of themselves but by means of covetousness,
 [3778]431; to be despised, [3779]443; true, [3780]ib.; not our own,
 [3781]ib.; how to take hence with us, [3782]ib.; love of, cannot exist
 with desire of heavenly things, [3783]ib.; beneath the care of
 Christians, [3784]447; never justly gathered, [3785]ib.

 Righteous, allowed to be rich, rather than made so, by God, [3786]412;
 peculiarly called men of God, [3787]472.

 Righteousness the true purifier, [3788]499.

 Robbers, tremble at judgment, [3789]495.

 Robe, to be sought by Christians, [3790]414.

 Rome, Christians at, probably men of consequence, [3791]513.

 Rulers, spotlessness required in, [3792]438; Jewish, sinned not in
 ignorance, [3793]417.


 Sabbath Day, distinguished from Lord's Day, [3794]425.

 Sacrifice, The, mystery of, always the same, [3795]425; no limit of
 time for the celebration of, [3796]ib.

 Sacrifice of goods rewarded in this life, [3797]443.

 Saints, various as jewels, [3798]458; many ways of becoming, [3799]ib.;
 conflicts of the, shared by aiding them, [3800]484; their present honor
 a sign of future, [3801]491; ever mixed with the wicked, [3802]504;
 pleasantry of the, has serious meaning, [3803]555; infirmities of the,
 why permitted, [3804]515.

 Satan, offending Christians delivered to, and why, [3805]424; made
 subject to the Apostles, [3806]425.

 Saturn, plain of, in Cilicia, [3807]529.

 Scripture, accuracy of, [3808]430; folly of thinking any superfluous,
 [3809]546.

 Scriptures, Holy, called sacred writings, [3810]507; thorough knowledge
 of, prevents offense, [3811]ib.; storehouse of instruction, [3812]510.

 Seal of Christians, [3813]494.

 Secrecy, in sinning [3814]548.

 Self-command, real power, unfailing, [3815]472.

 Self-denial, grudging men exact extreme, [3816]523.

 Self-examination, [3817]482.

 Self-preference, sin of, [3818]482.

 Sensuality leads to hatred, [3819]539.

 Serians, [3820]470 (note) .

 Sermons, better not to hear, than not to derive benefit from,
 [3821]428; weariness in hearers caused by unwillingness to practice
 what they hear, [3822]ib.

 Servants, advice to, [3823]533 sq.; may gain the regard of the worst
 masters, [3824]534; should continue in service, [3825]546.

 Service, daily, [3826]426.

 Services of God and mammon contrasted, [3827]473.

 Sepulchre, the body a, when the soul is dead, [3828]499.

 Shame, sufferings no cause for, [3829]481; causes of false, [3830]493.

 Sickness, in a monastery, [3831]457; a time for reflection, [3832]495.

 Sin, foulness of, [3833]415; pleasures of, unsatisfying, [3834]416;
 great, in small matters, [3835]468; small, guiltier from slight
 temptations, [3836]ib.; danger of one, indulged in, [3837]498.

 Sins, some to be checked with authority, [3838]495.

 Sinners, made better by prayers offered for them, [3839]426; open and
 secret, [3840]465.

 Slave, a Christian life will be admired in a, [3841]533.

 Slaves, duties of, [3842]465; the bishop's concern in, [3843]465;
 obedience of, puts men to shame, [3844]466; to be imitated by
 Christians towards God, [3845]ib.; brethren of Christ, [3846]552; to be
 treated as such, [3847]ib.

 Slavery, to passions, miserable, [3848]473; moral disadvantages of,
 [3849]533; state of, lawful and capable of good use, [3850]546.

 Sobriety, what it consists in, [3851]536.

 Soldiers, spiritual, must endure hardness, [3852]488.

 Solomon, experience of, in knowledge of the world, [3853]462.

 Son, heretical comments on the term, applied to Timothy, [3854]409
 (note) .

 Sons, not all true, [3855]521.

 Sorrows, not to cause impatience or despair, [3856]477; no exemption
 from, in this life, [3857]ib.; each thinks his own most severe,
 [3858]478; productive of advantage, [3859]ib.

 Soul, called the spirit to distinguish it from the body, [3860]421; a
 healthy state of, called a sound mind, [3861]477; neglected when sick,
 [3862]540.

 Spirit, the, mark of the Church, [3863]425.

 Stephen, St., prayer of, [3864]427.

 Strangers, kindness to be shown to, [3865]455.

 Strife, inconsistent in a Christian, [3866]497.

 Submission, in suffering, [3867]553.

 Suffering, needful to the righteous, [3868]507; inequality of, no cause
 for offense, [3869]ib.

 Superstitions, condemned, [3870]440.

 Sympathy, with those in misery, [3871]478; lightens grief, [3872]ib.;
 want of, brings its own reward, [3873]504.

 Swine, flesh of, not unclean, [3874]445.


 Teachers, engaged more than the taught in the contest, [3875]424; what
 is required of, [3876]ib.; not to disdain instruction, [3877]ib.; as
 luminaries, as leaven, as angels among men, [3878]440; must use
 diligent study, [3879]450; need both gentleness and authority,
 [3880]467; responsibilities and claims of, [3881]481; must think their
 disciples everything, [3882]ib.; we must not judge our, but ourselves,
 [3883]483; succession of, [3884]488; must not be impatient, [3885]497;
 two things that disquiet, [3886]506.

 Teaching, when to be used, [3887]449; called prophecy, [3888]ib.; made
 useless by impatience, [3889]497.

 Thanksgiving, to be made for others' good, [3890]427; binds men to love
 one another, [3891]ib.

 Theater, the heavenly, [3892]526.

 Timothy, submitted to be circumcised, [3893]407; affection of St. Paul
 for, [3894]ib.; his youth no hindrance to his promotion, [3895]ib.;
 alleged miracles by the bones of, [3896]ib. (note) ; the time when
 placed at Ephesus, [3897]409; manner of his appointment, [3898]423; his
 strictness, abstinence, [3899]439; commanded to read, [3900]449; whole
 church and people of Asia committed to, [3901]461; fastings of,
 [3902]464; why not cured, [3903]465; miracles of, [3904]ib.; encouraged
 in his duties, [3905]475; intensity of St. Paul's love for, [3906]476;
 faith of, hereditary, [3907]ib.; gift given to, [3908]477; advice to,
 through him to all teachers, [3909]488; consoled, [3910]511; second
 Epistle to, a sort of Testament, full of consolation, [3911]ib.; why
 St. Paul begs him to come to him, [3912]513.

 Titans, [3913]470.

 Titanes, a warlike dance called, [3914]470 (note) .

 Titus, an approved companion of St. Paul, [3915]519; his character,
 [3916]ib.; his jurisdiction, [3917]ib.; mentioned in the Acts,
 [3918]ib. (note) ; perhaps a Corinthian, [3919]ib.; required not many
 words, [3920]ib.; Epistle to, written before that to Timothy,
 [3921]ib.; character of Epistle to, [3922]520; why left in Crete,
 [3923]524; St. Paul at liberty when he wrote to, [3924]519.

 Tongue, the, to be kept pure, [3925]427.

 Transgression, real cause of uncleanness in meats, &c., [3926]531.

 Trials, prolonged to the impatient, [3927]543.

 Tribulation, should not haste to be rid of, [3928]543.

 Trophimus, why not healed by St. Paul, [3929]515; when left at Miletus,
 [3930]ib.

 Truth, disregarded by those ambitious of power, [3931]413; supports the
 Church, [3932]442; contrasted with Type, [3933]520; acknowledgment of,
 from faith, not from reasoning, [3934]ib.


 Unclean, nothing by nature, [3935]446, [3936]530; sin alone, [3937]530;
 an evil will, [3938]ib.

 Uncleanness, of meats, done away with by sign of the cross, [3939]445;
 not in themselves, but in receivers, [3940]ib.; legal, typical of sin,
 [3941]531; what is, [3942]530.

 Uncleanliness, no honor in, [3943]523.

 Unguents, kind of, to be sought for by Christians, [3944]415.

 Unmarried, duties of the, [3945]454.

 Unrighteous, sufferings of the, [3946]495.

 Unthankfulness, [3947]501.


 Vainglory, difficulty of overcoming, [3948]526.

 Valentinus, [3949]479.

 Vanity, of earthly things, [3950]462.

 Value, of things imaginary, [3951]470.

 Vessels, earthen, twofold meaning of, [3952]496.

 Vices, unnatural, of the heathen, [3953]539.

 Violence, hinders influence, [3954]525.

 Virgins, to be simple in their dress, [3955]433; hoods and veils worn
 by, [3956]434; reproved for over-carefulness about dress, [3957]ib.;
 have Christ for their Bridegroom, [3958]ib.; have entered upon a great
 contest, [3959]ib.; should be an example to others, [3960]435; the
 foolish, failed in almsgiving, [3961]498 (note) .

 Virginity, not enjoined, [3962]446; a higher state, [3963]ib.

 Virtue, the best inheritance we can leave to our children, [3964]437;
 alone can depart with men hence, [3965]443; most men practice, from
 constraint, [3966]461; prevails over everything, [3967]535; bad men
 overawed by, [3968]ib.

 Virtues, real goods, [3969]448.


 War, three kinds of war, [3970]429; with one's self the worst,
 [3971]ib.

 Warfare, good and bad, [3972]424.

 Washing, bodily, clears not from guilt, [3973]499; of the body, no
 great matter, [3974]ib.

 Water, worldly things as, [3975]512.

 Way, the narrow, [3976]542.

 Wealth, no power of itself, [3977]431; folly of hoarding, [3978]432;
 not a possession, a loan for use, [3979]443; however gained, is God's,
 not ours, [3980]448; not a good, [3981]ib.; trusting in, produces
 pride, [3982]472.

 Wicked, if rich, because they are disesteemed of God, [3983]412;
 various reasons why suffered to remain, [3984]496.

 Wickedness, has its torments here as well as hereafter, [3985]445,
 [3986]446; to prevail in the last days, [3987]500; no one to be
 offended because of, [3988]506; shall increase as the end draws near,
 [3989]ib.

 Widowhood, better not professed than to be forsaken, [3990]459;
 Christian, [3991]503; how to bear, [3992]ib.

 Widows, what makes, [3993]450; to receive honor from the priest,
 [3994]ib.; domestic duty of, [3995]ib.; God the stay of, if desolate,
 [3996]ib.; must renounce pleasure, [3997]451; intemperate threatened,
 [3998]453; "list of widows" relieved by the Church, [3999]ib. (note) ;
 strictness required of, [4000]454; directions to younger, [4001]459;
 marriage of, recommended to prevent evil, [4002]460; with relations,
 [4003]ib.

 Widows, church, age of, [4004]454; duties of, [4005]ib.

 Wine, women given to, [4006]441; danger of, [4007]442; those who served
 in the temple never tasted, [4008]ib.

 Woman, taught once and ruined all, [4009]436.

 Women, to be modest in dress, [4010]433; to be silent and modest,
 [4011]435; not to speak in Church, [4012]ib.; in St. Chrysostom's time
 open to reproof, [4013]ib.; must not teach, but occupy station of
 learners, [4014]ib.; why made subject to men, [4015]ib.; salvation to,
 through child-bearing, [4016]436; yet saved without children,
 [4017]ib.; what they may do, [4018]516; many suffered martyrdom,
 [4019]ib.; not inferior in spiritual matters, [4020]ib.; forbidden to
 teach, [4021]532; those who led to war, condemned, [4022]539; duties
 of, [4023]454.

 Word, of God, not bound, [4024]489; how rightly divided, [4025]493.

 Works, good, are to shine and be manifest, [4026]440; to be concealed,
 [4027]458.

 World despised, heaven gained, [4028]516.

 Worth, moral, alone real, [4029]470.


 Youth, requires much restraint, [4030]436; exposed to lust, [4031]533.


 Zeal, in good works, [4032]537.

 Zenas, the lawyer, [4033]541.

 Indexes

Index of Scripture References

 Genesis

 [4034]1:11 [4035]1:11 [4036]1:26 [4037]1:26 [4038]1:26
 [4039]1:27 [4040]1:27 [4041]1:27 [4042]1:31 [4043]1:31
 [4044]2:2 [4045]2:7 [4046]2:17 [4047]2:17 [4048]2:18
 [4049]2:23 [4050]2:24 [4051]2:24 [4052]2:24 [4053]3:5
 [4054]3:16 [4055]3:24 [4056]4 [4057]4:9 [4058]4:14
 [4059]6:2 [4060]6:3 [4061]6:4 [4062]6:9 [4063]6:12
 [4064]7:7 [4065]8:21 [4066]12:1 [4067]12:4 [4068]12:16
 [4069]13:10 [4070]13:10-11 [4071]14:14 [4072]14:21-23
 [4073]15:16 [4074]16:5 [4075]16:6 [4076]17:8 [4077]18:11
 [4078]18:12 [4079]18:14 [4080]18:21 [4081]19:13 [4082]19:14
 [4083]19:24 [4084]21:10 [4085]21:12 [4086]21:12 [4087]22:7-8
 [4088]22:16 [4089]22:18 [4090]22:18 [4091]24:1-67 [4092]24:22
 [4093]24:65 [4094]25:21 [4095]25:21 [4096]26:4 [4097]27:46
 [4098]28:1 [4099]28:13 [4100]31:42 [4101]31:45 [4102]32:48
 [4103]35:18 [4104]37:9-10 [4105]37:20 [4106]39:1 [4107]39:6
 [4108]40:4 [4109]40:7 [4110]40:8 [4111]40:14-15 [4112]40:22
 [4113]41 [4114]41:16 [4115]42:36 [4116]43:14 [4117]43:30
 [4118]45:5 [4119]48:15-16 [4120]49:9 [4121]64:28

 Exodus

 [4122]2:11 [4123]2:14 [4124]3:8 [4125]3:14 [4126]12:11
 [4127]14:15 [4128]14:20 [4129]15:16 [4130]16:3 [4131]16:3
 [4132]16:18 [4133]17:4 [4134]18:18 [4135]19:6 [4136]19:13
 [4137]20:13 [4138]20:14 [4139]21:21 [4140]23:15 [4141]23:20
 [4142]23:22 [4143]24:3 [4144]24:7 [4145]29:9 [4146]32:1
 [4147]32:19 [4148]32:32 [4149]32:32

 Leviticus

 [4150]8:23-24 [4151]15:13 [4152]24:20 [4153]24:20
 [4154]27:30-32

 Numbers

 [4155]11:4-5 [4156]11:29 [4157]12 [4158]13:23 [4159]15:32
 [4160]15:36 [4161]16 [4162]16:1-35 [4163]16:5 [4164]22
 [4165]31:47 [4166]35:1-8

 Deuteronomy

 [4167]4:26 [4168]5:5 [4169]7:6 [4170]7:13 [4171]7:13
 [4172]8:15 [4173]14:2 [4174]14:22 [4175]14:28 [4176]18:15
 [4177]18:15 [4178]19:15 [4179]21:23 [4180]21:23 [4181]23:13
 [4182]25:4 [4183]25:4 [4184]26:12 [4185]27:26 [4186]27:26
 [4187]28:4 [4188]29:5 [4189]32:8 [4190]32:8-9 [4191]32:15
 [4192]32:15 [4193]32:15

 Joshua

 [4194]7:1 [4195]7:1-26

 Judges

 [4196]2:5

 1 Samuel

 [4197]1:5-6 [4198]1:8 [4199]1:9 [4200]1:10 [4201]1:11
 [4202]1:11 [4203]1:13 [4204]1:13 [4205]1:16 [4206]1:24
 [4207]2:21 [4208]2:25 [4209]2:27 [4210]2:30 [4211]2:30
 [4212]3:1 [4213]3:18 [4214]4:21 [4215]4:30 [4216]6:9
 [4217]6:12 [4218]8:7 [4219]9:20 [4220]10:21 [4221]10:21
 [4222]10:22 [4223]12:23 [4224]16:7 [4225]20:4 [4226]23:20
 [4227]25:10 [4228]26:5-12 [4229]28:8

 2 Samuel

 [4230]1:25 [4231]1:25-26 [4232]1:26 [4233]4:8 [4234]5
 [4235]6:6-7 [4236]12:23 [4237]12:24 [4238]13 [4239]15:3
 [4240]15:6 [4241]15:26 [4242]16:1-3 [4243]16:7 [4244]16:11
 [4245]17:1-4 [4246]19:26 [4247]19:31-35 [4248]21:17 [4249]24:16

 1 Kings

 [4250]10:10 [4251]10:18 [4252]17 [4253]17:12 [4254]17:14
 [4255]18:18 [4256]18:21 [4257]18:21 [4258]18:27

 2 Kings

 [4259]4:27 [4260]6:8-12 [4261]6:13-17 [4262]6:16-17
 [4263]6:28 [4264]9:31 [4265]9:34 [4266]20:6

 Job

 [4267]1 [4268]1:1 [4269]1:2 [4270]1:5 [4271]1:5 [4272]1:7
 [4273]1:10 [4274]1:10-11 [4275]1:10-11 [4276]1:11 [4277]1:21
 [4278]1:21 [4279]1:21 [4280]2:5 [4281]2:9 [4282]2:9
 [4283]2:9 [4284]2:9 [4285]4:18 [4286]6:7 [4287]7:1
 [4288]7:4 [4289]7:5 [4290]7:5 [4291]7:14 [4292]11:6
 [4293]11:12 [4294]16:2 [4295]29:15 [4296]30:1 [4297]31:33-34
 [4298]38:3 [4299]38:7 [4300]40:3 [4301]40:8 [4302]42:8
 [4303]42:8

 Psalms

 [4304]1:1 [4305]1:5 [4306]1:6 [4307]1:6-7 [4308]2:6
 [4309]2:9 [4310]2:11 [4311]2:11 [4312]2:11 [4313]3:6-7
 [4314]3:13 [4315]4 [4316]4:2 [4317]4:15 [4318]4:26
 [4319]4:26 [4320]5:18 [4321]6:2 [4322]6:2 [4323]6:2
 [4324]6:5 [4325]6:5 [4326]6:6 [4327]6:8 [4328]6:8
 [4329]6:24 [4330]6:32 [4331]6:37 [4332]7:11 [4333]7:11
 [4334]8:1 [4335]8:4 [4336]8:4 [4337]9:4 [4338]9:18
 [4339]9:19 [4340]9:21 [4341]10:1 [4342]10:5 [4343]10:17
 [4344]12:2 [4345]12:3 [4346]12:5 [4347]12:9 [4348]12:9
 [4349]14:1 [4350]14:1 [4351]14:4 [4352]15:3 [4353]15:4
 [4354]16:2 [4355]16:2 [4356]16:2 [4357]18:1 [4358]18:15
 [4359]18:22 [4360]18:24 [4361]19:4 [4362]19:5 [4363]19:10
 [4364]19:62 [4365]19:71 [4366]19:120 [4367]19:125
 [4368]19:164 [4369]19:165 [4370]20:6-7 [4371]20:7 [4372]22:13
 [4373]23:2 [4374]23:4 [4375]23:4 [4376]24:1 [4377]24:2
 [4378]25:14 [4379]26:4 [4380]27:1 [4381]28 [4382]28:3
 [4383]30:3 [4384]31:1 [4385]33 [4386]33:15 [4387]33:22
 [4388]34:7 [4389]34:8 [4390]36:1 [4391]36:6 [4392]36:7
 [4393]37:1 [4394]37:1 [4395]37:35 [4396]38:5 [4397]38:5
 [4398]38:5 [4399]38:7 [4400]39:5 [4401]39:6 [4402]39:7
 [4403]39:9 [4404]40:2 [4405]41 [4406]42:1 [4407]43:2
 [4408]43:7 [4409]44:4 [4410]44:4 [4411]44:15 [4412]44:22
 [4413]45:3 [4414]45:10-11 [4415]45:11 [4416]46:4 [4417]47:20
 [4418]48:1 [4419]48:1 [4420]48:10 [4421]48:10 [4422]49:15
 [4423]49:16 [4424]49:17 [4425]49:17 [4426]49:17 [4427]50:3
 [4428]50:13 [4429]51:1 [4430]51:4 [4431]51:10 [4432]51:10
 [4433]51:16-17 [4434]51:17 [4435]52:8 [4436]53:5 [4437]53:5-6
 [4438]58:10 [4439]62:3 [4440]62:3 [4441]62:10 [4442]62:12
 [4443]63:1 [4444]64:5 [4445]68:5 [4446]68:6 [4447]68:18
 [4448]68:18 [4449]69:1 [4450]69:17 [4451]69:20 [4452]69:20
 [4453]73:6 [4454]73:7 [4455]73:27 [4456]73:27 [4457]74:13-14
 [4458]74:17 [4459]78:30 [4460]80:12 [4461]80:12-13 [4462]81:7
 [4463]81:10 [4464]84:2 [4465]84:6 [4466]86:10 [4467]88
 [4468]90:2 [4469]91:2 [4470]91:5-6 [4471]94:12 [4472]98:3
 [4473]103 [4474]144:5 [4475]145:9

 Proverbs

 [4476]3:3 [4477]3:3 [4478]3:11 [4479]3:34 [4480]4:27
 [4481]5:3 [4482]5:3-4 [4483]6:34-35 [4484]10:9 [4485]12:28
 [4486]14:12 [4487]14:31 [4488]15:17 [4489]18:3 [4490]18:19
 [4491]20:6 [4492]20:6 [4493]24:11 [4494]25:28 [4495]26:11
 [4496]26:12 [4497]26:12 [4498]26:27 [4499]28:1 [4500]28:1
 [4501]30:8 [4502]31:6

 Ecclesiastes

 [4503]1:2 [4504]2:4-5 [4505]2:4-8 [4506]5:6 [4507]7:2
 [4508]12:8 [4509]12:8

 Song of Solomon

 [4510]1:3 [4511]1:3 [4512]2:10

 Isaiah

 [4513]1:1 [4514]1:2 [4515]1:15 [4516]1:16 [4517]1:16
 [4518]1:16 [4519]1:17 [4520]1:17 [4521]1:19 [4522]1:19
 [4523]1:20 [4524]2:6 [4525]3:16 [4526]3:24 [4527]5:1-7
 [4528]5:2 [4529]5:5 [4530]5:18-19 [4531]5:19 [4532]5:21
 [4533]8:18 [4534]8:20 [4535]9:6 [4536]9:6 [4537]11:5
 [4538]14:10 [4539]22:4 [4540]26:9 [4541]27:1 [4542]27:1
 [4543]40:6 [4544]40:15 [4545]40:15 [4546]43:26 [4547]44:22
 [4548]45:9 [4549]45:22 [4550]46:3-4 [4551]48:11 [4552]49:15
 [4553]49:15 [4554]49:15 [4555]51:9 [4556]51:11 [4557]52:5
 [4558]52:7 [4559]52:52 [4560]53:9 [4561]53:9 [4562]53:12
 [4563]54:1 [4564]54:13 [4565]54:13 [4566]54:13 [4567]58:7
 [4568]58:7 [4569]58:7 [4570]58:7 [4571]58:8 [4572]59:2
 [4573]59:2 [4574]59:7 [4575]59:17 [4576]60:1 [4577]60:1
 [4578]61:10 [4579]64:6 [4580]66:20

 Jeremiah

 [4581]1:1 [4582]2:6 [4583]2:11 [4584]4:4 [4585]4:14
 [4586]4:14 [4587]7:16 [4588]7:17 [4589]9:1 [4590]10:24
 [4591]10:24 [4592]13:1-9 [4593]15:1 [4594]18:1-6 [4595]20:7
 [4596]21:11 [4597]27:12 [4598]31:34 [4599]31:34 [4600]32:18
 [4601]38:4 [4602]38:4

 Lamentations

 [4603]3:27 [4604]4:10

 Ezekiel

 [4605]3:19 [4606]3:21 [4607]4:12 [4608]4:15 [4609]9:8
 [4610]9:11 [4611]13:19 [4612]14 [4613]14:14 [4614]14:16
 [4615]18:4 [4616]18:4 [4617]18:24 [4618]24:18 [4619]28:3
 [4620]29:3 [4621]32:2 [4622]33:11 [4623]34:2 [4624]44:22

 Daniel

 [4625]2 [4626]2:4 [4627]2:30 [4628]2:30 [4629]2:46
 [4630]2:47 [4631]3:1-30 [4632]3:17-18 [4633]3:17-18
 [4634]3:26 [4635]3:28 [4636]3:28 [4637]3:29-30 [4638]4
 [4639]4:2-3 [4640]4:27 [4641]5 [4642]5:16 [4643]10:13

 Hosea

 [4644]2:5 [4645]4:8 [4646]6:5 [4647]6:6 [4648]13:2

 Joel

 [4649]2:28

 Amos

 [4650]2:11 [4651]4:13 [4652]5:8 [4653]5:18 [4654]6:4-6

 Jonah

 [4655]3:4 [4656]3:4 [4657]3:10

 Micah

 [4658]6:2 [4659]6:3

 Habakkuk

 [4660]2:4

 Zechariah

 [4661]2:5 [4662]13:7

 Malachi

 [4663]1:2-3 [4664]2:7 [4665]2:15

 Matthew

 [4666]1:21 [4667]1:21 [4668]1:21 [4669]1:21 [4670]2
 [4671]3:3 [4672]3:7 [4673]3:14 [4674]4:18 [4675]4:23
 [4676]5:3 [4677]5:3 [4678]5:3 [4679]5:4 [4680]5:4 [4681]5:6
 [4682]5:7 [4683]5:8 [4684]5:8 [4685]5:8 [4686]5:9 [4687]5:9
 [4688]5:10-12 [4689]5:11 [4690]5:11 [4691]5:11-12 [4692]5:12
 [4693]5:16 [4694]5:16 [4695]5:19 [4696]5:20 [4697]5:22
 [4698]5:22 [4699]5:22 [4700]5:22 [4701]5:22 [4702]5:23-24
 [4703]5:29 [4704]5:29 [4705]5:32 [4706]5:39 [4707]5:39
 [4708]5:44 [4709]5:45 [4710]5:45 [4711]5:45 [4712]5:45
 [4713]5:45 [4714]5:45 [4715]5:46 [4716]6:3 [4717]6:3
 [4718]6:5 [4719]6:5 [4720]6:5-6 [4721]6:6 [4722]6:7
 [4723]6:10 [4724]6:11 [4725]6:13 [4726]6:14 [4727]6:15
 [4728]6:15 [4729]6:19 [4730]6:23 [4731]6:23 [4732]6:24
 [4733]6:24 [4734]6:24 [4735]6:24 [4736]6:25 [4737]6:25
 [4738]6:26 [4739]6:26 [4740]6:33 [4741]6:33 [4742]6:34
 [4743]6:34 [4744]7:1 [4745]7:1 [4746]7:2 [4747]7:2
 [4748]7:2 [4749]7:2 [4750]7:2 [4751]7:3 [4752]7:7 [4753]7:9
 [4754]7:9 [4755]7:9 [4756]7:11 [4757]7:11 [4758]7:14
 [4759]7:14 [4760]7:14 [4761]7:14 [4762]7:21-23 [4763]7:22-23
 [4764]7:23 [4765]7:24-25 [4766]8:2 [4767]8:4 [4768]9:3-6
 [4769]9:6 [4770]9:25 [4771]10:5 [4772]10:5 [4773]10:9-10
 [4774]10:9-10 [4775]10:11 [4776]10:12 [4777]10:13
 [4778]10:13-15 [4779]10:16 [4780]10:16 [4781]10:17
 [4782]10:19 [4783]10:19 [4784]10:27 [4785]10:32-33
 [4786]10:33 [4787]10:37 [4788]10:37 [4789]10:38 [4790]10:38
 [4791]10:40 [4792]10:40 [4793]10:41 [4794]10:41 [4795]11:2-3
 [4796]11:12 [4797]11:28 [4798]11:29 [4799]11:29 [4800]11:29
 [4801]11:29 [4802]12:36 [4803]12:36 [4804]13:3 [4805]13:52
 [4806]13:56 [4807]15:16 [4808]15:19 [4809]15:24 [4810]15:27
 [4811]15:27 [4812]16:16 [4813]16:17 [4814]16:17 [4815]16:17
 [4816]16:22 [4817]16:23 [4818]16:24 [4819]16:25 [4820]17:4
 [4821]17:11 [4822]17:20 [4823]18:6 [4824]18:7 [4825]18:10
 [4826]18:10 [4827]18:12 [4828]18:14 [4829]18:15 [4830]18:18
 [4831]18:19 [4832]18:20 [4833]18:32 [4834]19:4 [4835]19:12
 [4836]19:12 [4837]19:21 [4838]19:21 [4839]19:21 [4840]19:21
 [4841]19:23 [4842]19:23-24 [4843]19:24 [4844]19:28
 [4845]19:28 [4846]19:29 [4847]20:18 [4848]20:21 [4849]20:23
 [4850]21:22 [4851]22:13 [4852]22:13 [4853]22:13 [4854]22:30
 [4855]22:32 [4856]22:32 [4857]22:40 [4858]23:2-3 [4859]23:2-3
 [4860]23:3 [4861]23:8 [4862]23:15 [4863]23:15 [4864]23:37
 [4865]24:12 [4866]24:12 [4867]24:12 [4868]24:14 [4869]24:23
 [4870]24:24 [4871]24:27 [4872]24:29 [4873]24:31 [4874]24:36
 [4875]24:38 [4876]24:40-41 [4877]24:42 [4878]24:42
 [4879]24:42-43 [4880]25 [4881]25 [4882]25:1 [4883]25:3
 [4884]25:6 [4885]25:6 [4886]25:8 [4887]25:12 [4888]25:15
 [4889]25:26 [4890]25:26 [4891]25:34 [4892]25:34 [4893]25:34
 [4894]25:34-35 [4895]25:34-35 [4896]25:35 [4897]25:35
 [4898]25:40 [4899]25:40 [4900]25:40 [4901]25:41 [4902]25:41
 [4903]25:41 [4904]25:42 [4905]25:44 [4906]25:46 [4907]26:21
 [4908]26:63-64 [4909]27:2 [4910]27:40 [4911]27:46 [4912]27:56
 [4913]27:63 [4914]28:19 [4915]28:19 [4916]28:19
 [4917]28:19-20 [4918]28:20 [4919]28:20 [4920]28:20

 Mark

 [4921]1:15 [4922]3:24 [4923]6:18 [4924]7:11 [4925]7:25-30
 [4926]9:44 [4927]9:44 [4928]10:24 [4929]11:25 [4930]12:41
 [4931]15:41

 Luke

 [4932]1:17 [4933]1:68 [4934]2:10 [4935]2:13 [4936]4:18
 [4937]6:21 [4938]6:23 [4939]6:24 [4940]6:25 [4941]6:30
 [4942]6:36 [4943]6:36 [4944]8:8 [4945]10:5 [4946]10:7
 [4947]10:7 [4948]10:7 [4949]10:8 [4950]10:13 [4951]10:19
 [4952]10:19 [4953]10:19 [4954]10:19 [4955]10:20 [4956]10:22
 [4957]11:5-8 [4958]11:5-8 [4959]11:41 [4960]12:35 [4961]14:12
 [4962]14:12 [4963]14:12-14 [4964]14:16 [4965]14:26
 [4966]14:26 [4967]14:33 [4968]14:33 [4969]14:33 [4970]15:7
 [4971]15:7 [4972]15:18 [4973]15:33 [4974]16:9 [4975]16:9
 [4976]16:11 [4977]16:11 [4978]16:16 [4979]16:19 [4980]16:19
 [4981]16:23 [4982]16:23 [4983]16:25-26 [4984]16:31
 [4985]17:7-8 [4986]17:10 [4987]17:10 [4988]17:10
 [4989]17:34-35 [4990]18:1-7 [4991]18:1-7 [4992]18:12
 [4993]18:13 [4994]18:14 [4995]18:19 [4996]19:8 [4997]19:22
 [4998]21:28 [4999]22:31-32 [5000]22:35 [5001]22:70
 [5002]23:28 [5003]23:34 [5004]23:40 [5005]23:40 [5006]24:39

 John

 [5007]1:1 [5008]1:12-13 [5009]1:13 [5010]1:14 [5011]1:14
 [5012]1:14 [5013]1:14-18 [5014]1:16 [5015]1:18 [5016]1:27
 [5017]1:30 [5018]2 [5019]2:19 [5020]3:3 [5021]3:6 [5022]3:7
 [5023]3:13 [5024]3:16 [5025]3:16 [5026]3:20 [5027]3:20
 [5028]3:20 [5029]4:22 [5030]4:23 [5031]4:24 [5032]4:24
 [5033]4:24 [5034]4:27 [5035]5:2 [5036]5:19 [5037]5:27
 [5038]5:39 [5039]5:39 [5040]5:41 [5041]5:43 [5042]5:43
 [5043]5:43 [5044]5:44 [5045]5:46 [5046]5:46 [5047]6:45
 [5048]6:46 [5049]6:67 [5050]7:7 [5051]7:12 [5052]8:28
 [5053]8:34 [5054]8:35 [5055]8:44 [5056]8:56 [5057]9:22
 [5058]10:11 [5059]10:11 [5060]10:11 [5061]10:18 [5062]10:20
 [5063]10:28 [5064]10:36 [5065]11:11 [5066]11:43 [5067]11:43
 [5068]11:48 [5069]11:49 [5070]12:19 [5071]12:25 [5072]12:26
 [5073]12:42-43 [5074]13:12 [5075]13:14 [5076]13:14
 [5077]13:27 [5078]13:35 [5079]14:6 [5080]14:7 [5081]14:9
 [5082]14:10 [5083]14:12 [5084]14:12 [5085]14:14 [5086]14:23
 [5087]14:23 [5088]14:23 [5089]14:27 [5090]14:27 [5091]14:27
 [5092]14:29 [5093]14:30 [5094]15:1 [5095]15:13-14 [5096]15:15
 [5097]15:16 [5098]15:16 [5099]15:16 [5100]15:20 [5101]15:22
 [5102]16:20 [5103]16:20 [5104]16:27 [5105]16:28 [5106]16:33
 [5107]16:33 [5108]16:33 [5109]16:33 [5110]16:33 [5111]17:1
 [5112]17:1 [5113]17:1-5 [5114]17:3 [5115]17:4 [5116]17:10
 [5117]17:10 [5118]17:11 [5119]17:11 [5120]17:15 [5121]17:16
 [5122]17:24 [5123]17:24 [5124]17:24 [5125]18:23 [5126]18:24
 [5127]18:37 [5128]18:37 [5129]19:6 [5130]19:15 [5131]19:25
 [5132]20:17 [5133]20:29 [5134]21:7

 Acts

 [5135]1:6 [5136]1:7 [5137]1:8 [5138]1:9 [5139]1:11
 [5140]2:14 [5141]2:36 [5142]2:37 [5143]2:46 [5144]2:46-47
 [5145]3 [5146]3:12 [5147]3:12 [5148]3:12 [5149]4:12
 [5150]4:12-13 [5151]4:13 [5152]4:32 [5153]4:32 [5154]4:32
 [5155]4:32 [5156]4:33 [5157]4:35 [5158]4:35 [5159]5:4
 [5160]5:11 [5161]5:15 [5162]5:19 [5163]5:19 [5164]5:28
 [5165]5:29 [5166]5:41 [5167]5:41 [5168]5:41 [5169]6:5-7
 [5170]6:13 [5171]6:60 [5172]7:2 [5173]7:20 [5174]7:24
 [5175]7:24 [5176]7:27 [5177]7:27 [5178]8:10 [5179]8:16
 [5180]8:23 [5181]9:3-4 [5182]9:5 [5183]9:15 [5184]9:15
 [5185]9:15 [5186]9:15 [5187]9:23 [5188]9:26 [5189]9:30
 [5190]9:36 [5191]9:40 [5192]10:3 [5193]10:34 [5194]10:47
 [5195]11:30 [5196]12:5 [5197]12:5 [5198]12:5 [5199]12:6
 [5200]12:7 [5201]12:8 [5202]12:8-10 [5203]12:15
 [5204]12:18-19 [5205]12:25 [5206]13:2 [5207]13:2 [5208]13:2
 [5209]13:2 [5210]13:46 [5211]14:14 [5212]14:14-15 [5213]14:15
 [5214]14:15 [5215]14:19 [5216]14:22 [5217]15 [5218]15:2
 [5219]15:2 [5220]15:2 [5221]15:2 [5222]15:2 [5223]15:5
 [5224]15:5 [5225]15:7 [5226]15:22 [5227]15:39 [5228]16
 [5229]16:1 [5230]16:2 [5231]16:3 [5232]16:3 [5233]16:7
 [5234]16:13 [5235]16:16 [5236]16:16-17 [5237]16:17
 [5238]16:18 [5239]16:23 [5240]16:25 [5241]16:26 [5242]16:28
 [5243]16:29 [5244]16:29-31 [5245]16:30 [5246]16:32-33
 [5247]17 [5248]17:5 [5249]17:5 [5250]17:5-6 [5251]17:5-8
 [5252]17:9 [5253]17:14 [5254]17:15 [5255]17:22 [5256]17:23
 [5257]17:28 [5258]17:28 [5259]17:28 [5260]18:7 [5261]18:8
 [5262]18:9-10 [5263]18:22 [5264]18:24 [5265]19:10 [5266]20:3
 [5267]20:22 [5268]20:25 [5269]20:26 [5270]20:26 [5271]20:28
 [5272]20:29 [5273]20:31 [5274]20:31 [5275]20:31 [5276]20:31
 [5277]20:31 [5278]20:31 [5279]20:31 [5280]20:32 [5281]20:34
 [5282]20:34 [5283]20:34-35 [5284]20:35 [5285]20:35
 [5286]20:35 [5287]20:35 [5288]21:13 [5289]21:13 [5290]21:15
 [5291]21:17-18 [5292]21:20 [5293]21:20 [5294]21:20-26
 [5295]21:24-26 [5296]21:29 [5297]22:14-15 [5298]22:21
 [5299]22:21 [5300]23:5 [5301]23:11 [5302]24:25 [5303]26:2-3
 [5304]26:28 [5305]26:29 [5306]27:24 [5307]28:17 [5308]28:20
 [5309]28:25-26 [5310]28:30 [5311]28:30

 Romans

 [5312]1:1 [5313]1:1 [5314]1:1 [5315]1:9 [5316]1:9
 [5317]1:11-12 [5318]1:16 [5319]1:16 [5320]1:16 [5321]1:20
 [5322]1:25 [5323]1:28 [5324]1:28 [5325]1:32 [5326]2:4
 [5327]2:4 [5328]2:5 [5329]2:11 [5330]2:13 [5331]2:16
 [5332]2:19-20 [5333]2:20 [5334]2:24 [5335]2:25 [5336]2:28-29
 [5337]2:29 [5338]2:29 [5339]3:3-4 [5340]3:4 [5341]3:4
 [5342]3:4 [5343]3:8 [5344]3:20 [5345]3:22 [5346]3:23
 [5347]3:23 [5348]4:1-2 [5349]4:2 [5350]4:2 [5351]4:15
 [5352]4:21 [5353]5:1 [5354]5:5 [5355]5:5 [5356]5:5
 [5357]5:7 [5358]5:7 [5359]5:8 [5360]5:10 [5361]5:11
 [5362]5:12 [5363]5:14 [5364]5:20 [5365]6:2 [5366]6:2
 [5367]6:4 [5368]6:4 [5369]6:4 [5370]6:4-5 [5371]6:5-6
 [5372]6:6 [5373]6:7 [5374]6:13 [5375]6:13 [5376]6:15
 [5377]6:17 [5378]6:19 [5379]6:21 [5380]7 [5381]7:4
 [5382]7:6 [5383]7:9 [5384]7:11 [5385]7:13 [5386]7:23
 [5387]7:23 [5388]7:23 [5389]7:24 [5390]8:2 [5391]8:3
 [5392]8:3 [5393]8:6 [5394]8:7 [5395]8:7 [5396]8:8-9
 [5397]8:9 [5398]8:11 [5399]8:18 [5400]8:18 [5401]8:18-24
 [5402]8:19 [5403]8:24 [5404]8:28 [5405]8:28-30 [5406]8:29
 [5407]8:29 [5408]8:30 [5409]8:31 [5410]8:32 [5411]8:32
 [5412]8:32 [5413]8:32 [5414]8:34 [5415]8:35 [5416]8:35
 [5417]8:35 [5418]8:38 [5419]8:38 [5420]8:38-39 [5421]8:39
 [5422]9:1 [5423]9:3 [5424]9:3 [5425]9:3 [5426]9:3 [5427]9:3
 [5428]9:3 [5429]9:3 [5430]9:5 [5431]9:13 [5432]9:28
 [5433]10:1-2 [5434]10:2 [5435]10:2 [5436]10:3 [5437]10:4
 [5438]10:5 [5439]10:6-9 [5440]10:12 [5441]10:14 [5442]10:15
 [5443]10:17 [5444]10:17 [5445]11:4 [5446]11:6 [5447]11:14
 [5448]11:24 [5449]11:25 [5450]11:25 [5451]11:33 [5452]11:33
 [5453]12:2 [5454]12:5 [5455]12:13 [5456]12:15 [5457]12:15-16
 [5458]12:16 [5459]12:16 [5460]12:18 [5461]12:18 [5462]12:20
 [5463]12:20 [5464]12:20 [5465]13:2 [5466]13:3 [5467]13:3
 [5468]13:5 [5469]13:6 [5470]13:7 [5471]13:7 [5472]13:8
 [5473]13:10 [5474]13:10 [5475]13:14 [5476]13:14 [5477]13:14
 [5478]14:1 [5479]14:1 [5480]14:8 [5481]14:9 [5482]14:10
 [5483]14:10 [5484]14:13 [5485]14:13 [5486]15:1 [5487]15:4
 [5488]15:9 [5489]15:9 [5490]15:18 [5491]15:19 [5492]15:22
 [5493]15:23 [5494]15:25 [5495]15:25 [5496]15:25
 [5497]15:25-27 [5498]15:26 [5499]15:26-27 [5500]16:1
 [5501]16:16 [5502]16:20 [5503]16:20 [5504]16:20 [5505]16:22
 [5506]16:25 [5507]16:25

 1 Corinthians

 [5508]1:4 [5509]1:10 [5510]1:25 [5511]2:3 [5512]2:9
 [5513]2:9 [5514]2:14 [5515]2:14 [5516]2:14 [5517]2:14
 [5518]3:2 [5519]3:2 [5520]3:3 [5521]3:6 [5522]3:6
 [5523]3:6-8 [5524]3:9 [5525]3:10 [5526]3:10 [5527]3:10-11
 [5528]3:11 [5529]3:12 [5530]3:13 [5531]3:18 [5532]3:21
 [5533]4:3 [5534]4:3 [5535]4:3-4 [5536]4:4 [5537]4:4
 [5538]4:6 [5539]4:7 [5540]4:7 [5541]4:10 [5542]4:12
 [5543]4:12-13 [5544]4:17 [5545]4:19 [5546]4:21 [5547]5:1
 [5548]5:1 [5549]5:3 [5550]5:4 [5551]5:5 [5552]5:7
 [5553]5:11 [5554]5:11 [5555]5:11 [5556]5:12 [5557]6:1
 [5558]6:7-8 [5559]6:9 [5560]6:9-10 [5561]6:10 [5562]6:13
 [5563]6:17 [5564]6:17 [5565]6:20 [5566]6:20 [5567]6:20
 [5568]6:21 [5569]7:4 [5570]7:5 [5571]7:5 [5572]7:5
 [5573]7:5 [5574]7:7 [5575]7:7 [5576]7:7 [5577]7:11
 [5578]7:15 [5579]7:21 [5580]7:21 [5581]7:26 [5582]7:27
 [5583]7:28 [5584]7:29 [5585]7:32 [5586]7:33 [5587]7:34-35
 [5588]7:34-35 [5589]7:35 [5590]7:40 [5591]7:40 [5592]8:2
 [5593]8:6 [5594]8:6 [5595]8:9 [5596]9:1 [5597]9:7 [5598]9:9
 [5599]9:11 [5600]9:11 [5601]9:13-14 [5602]9:14 [5603]9:15
 [5604]9:16 [5605]9:16 [5606]9:16 [5607]9:17 [5608]9:20
 [5609]9:20 [5610]9:20 [5611]9:20-21 [5612]9:26 [5613]9:27
 [5614]9:27 [5615]9:27 [5616]9:27 [5617]9:27 [5618]9:27
 [5619]10:8-10 [5620]10:11 [5621]10:12 [5622]10:12 [5623]10:12
 [5624]10:13 [5625]10:17 [5626]10:19 [5627]10:20-21
 [5628]10:26 [5629]10:31 [5630]10:33 [5631]11:3 [5632]11:5-15
 [5633]11:7 [5634]11:8 [5635]11:9 [5636]11:12 [5637]11:17-21
 [5638]11:21 [5639]11:26 [5640]11:26 [5641]11:27 [5642]11:28
 [5643]11:30 [5644]11:30 [5645]12:3 [5646]12:10 [5647]12:13
 [5648]12:18 [5649]12:18 [5650]12:28 [5651]12:31 [5652]13:9
 [5653]13:11 [5654]13:11 [5655]13:12 [5656]13:12 [5657]13:12
 [5658]13:12 [5659]13:13 [5660]14:1 [5661]14:35 [5662]14:35
 [5663]14:35 [5664]14:35 [5665]15 [5666]15 [5667]15:1
 [5668]15:8 [5669]15:8 [5670]15:9 [5671]15:9 [5672]15:10
 [5673]15:10 [5674]15:10 [5675]15:10 [5676]15:18 [5677]15:18
 [5678]15:23 [5679]15:25 [5680]15:31 [5681]15:31 [5682]15:32
 [5683]15:32 [5684]15:32 [5685]15:36 [5686]15:36 [5687]15:45
 [5688]15:46 [5689]15:47 [5690]15:51 [5691]15:52 [5692]15:52
 [5693]15:53 [5694]15:53 [5695]15:53 [5696]16:1-3 [5697]16:2
 [5698]16:4 [5699]16:10 [5700]16:10-11 [5701]16:13 [5702]16:15

 2 Corinthians

 [5703]1:3 [5704]1:3 [5705]1:3 [5706]1:3 [5707]1:8-10
 [5708]1:9 [5709]1:11 [5710]1:11 [5711]1:13 [5712]1:14
 [5713]1:14 [5714]1:22 [5715]1:22 [5716]1:23 [5717]1:23
 [5718]1:24 [5719]2:4 [5720]2:4 [5721]2:4 [5722]2:4
 [5723]2:6 [5724]2:8 [5725]2:11 [5726]2:15-16 [5727]2:31
 [5728]3:7 [5729]3:17 [5730]4:5 [5731]4:5 [5732]4:5
 [5733]4:5 [5734]4:5 [5735]4:6 [5736]4:7 [5737]4:10
 [5738]4:10 [5739]4:10 [5740]5:4 [5741]5:12 [5742]5:12
 [5743]5:16 [5744]5:17 [5745]5:18 [5746]5:20 [5747]5:20
 [5748]6:3 [5749]6:4-5 [5750]6:5-6 [5751]6:5-6 [5752]6:6
 [5753]6:8 [5754]6:12 [5755]6:14 [5756]6:20 [5757]7:10
 [5758]7:10 [5759]8:9 [5760]8:9 [5761]8:14 [5762]8:14
 [5763]8:18 [5764]8:21 [5765]8:23 [5766]9:2 [5767]9:7
 [5768]9:7 [5769]9:7 [5770]9:10 [5771]10:5 [5772]10:10
 [5773]11:2 [5774]11:2 [5775]11:2 [5776]11:3 [5777]11:3
 [5778]11:3 [5779]11:3 [5780]11:8 [5781]11:8 [5782]11:8-9
 [5783]11:10 [5784]11:12 [5785]11:14-15 [5786]11:20
 [5787]11:23 [5788]11:23 [5789]11:24-26 [5790]11:25
 [5791]11:29 [5792]11:29 [5793]11:29 [5794]11:32 [5795]12:2
 [5796]12:2 [5797]12:4 [5798]12:4 [5799]12:6 [5800]12:7
 [5801]12:7 [5802]12:9 [5803]12:9 [5804]12:9 [5805]12:10
 [5806]12:11 [5807]12:11 [5808]12:13 [5809]12:13 [5810]12:21
 [5811]13:2 [5812]13:3 [5813]13:10

 Galatians

 [5814]1:1-3 [5815]1:4 [5816]1:4 [5817]1:4 [5818]1:4
 [5819]1:4 [5820]1:4 [5821]1:4 [5822]1:5 [5823]1:6 [5824]1:6
 [5825]1:6 [5826]1:6 [5827]1:6 [5828]1:7 [5829]1:7 [5830]1:7
 [5831]1:8-9 [5832]1:10 [5833]1:10 [5834]1:11-12 [5835]1:12
 [5836]1:13 [5837]1:13 [5838]1:13 [5839]1:14 [5840]1:15-16
 [5841]1:16 [5842]1:17 [5843]1:17 [5844]1:17 [5845]1:18
 [5846]1:18 [5847]1:18 [5848]1:18 [5849]1:19 [5850]1:19
 [5851]1:20 [5852]1:20 [5853]1:21 [5854]1:22-23 [5855]1:24
 [5856]2 [5857]2:1 [5858]2:1-2 [5859]2:2 [5860]2:3 [5861]2:4
 [5862]2:4 [5863]2:5 [5864]2:5 [5865]2:6 [5866]2:6 [5867]2:7
 [5868]2:7 [5869]2:8 [5870]2:9 [5871]2:9 [5872]2:9
 [5873]2:10 [5874]2:10 [5875]2:11-12 [5876]2:13 [5877]2:14
 [5878]2:14 [5879]2:14 [5880]2:15 [5881]2:15-21 [5882]2:16
 [5883]2:17 [5884]2:17 [5885]2:17 [5886]2:18 [5887]2:19
 [5888]2:19 [5889]2:19-20 [5890]2:20 [5891]2:20 [5892]2:20
 [5893]2:20 [5894]2:20 [5895]2:20 [5896]2:21 [5897]2:21
 [5898]2:21 [5899]3:1 [5900]3:1 [5901]3:1 [5902]3:1
 [5903]3:1 [5904]3:2 [5905]3:2 [5906]3:3 [5907]3:3 [5908]3:4
 [5909]3:4 [5910]3:4 [5911]3:4 [5912]3:5 [5913]3:6 [5914]3:6
 [5915]3:6-7 [5916]3:7 [5917]3:8 [5918]3:9 [5919]3:10
 [5920]3:10 [5921]3:10 [5922]3:10 [5923]3:10-11 [5924]3:11-12
 [5925]3:12 [5926]3:13 [5927]3:13 [5928]3:14 [5929]3:15
 [5930]3:16 [5931]3:16-18 [5932]3:19 [5933]3:19 [5934]3:19
 [5935]3:20 [5936]3:21 [5937]3:21 [5938]3:21 [5939]3:21
 [5940]3:22 [5941]3:22 [5942]3:23 [5943]3:24 [5944]3:24
 [5945]3:25 [5946]3:25-26 [5947]3:27 [5948]3:27 [5949]3:27
 [5950]3:28 [5951]3:28 [5952]3:28 [5953]3:28 [5954]3:28
 [5955]3:28-29 [5956]3:29 [5957]4:1-3 [5958]4:4 [5959]4:4
 [5960]4:4-5 [5961]4:6 [5962]4:6-7 [5963]4:8 [5964]4:8-9
 [5965]4:9 [5966]4:9 [5967]4:10 [5968]4:10 [5969]4:11
 [5970]4:11 [5971]4:12 [5972]4:12 [5973]4:12-20 [5974]4:13-14
 [5975]4:14 [5976]4:15-16 [5977]4:17 [5978]4:18 [5979]4:18
 [5980]4:19 [5981]4:19 [5982]4:19 [5983]4:19 [5984]4:20
 [5985]4:20 [5986]4:20 [5987]4:20 [5988]4:20 [5989]4:21
 [5990]4:22 [5991]4:23 [5992]4:24 [5993]4:24 [5994]4:25
 [5995]4:25 [5996]4:25 [5997]4:26 [5998]4:26 [5999]4:26
 [6000]4:27 [6001]4:27 [6002]4:28 [6003]4:29-30 [6004]4:31
 [6005]5:1 [6006]5:1 [6007]5:2 [6008]5:2 [6009]5:2 [6010]5:3
 [6011]5:3 [6012]5:4 [6013]5:4 [6014]5:4 [6015]5:4 [6016]5:4
 [6017]5:4 [6018]5:5 [6019]5:6 [6020]5:7 [6021]5:8 [6022]5:9
 [6023]5:10 [6024]5:10 [6025]5:10 [6026]5:11 [6027]5:11
 [6028]5:11 [6029]5:12 [6030]5:13 [6031]5:13 [6032]5:13
 [6033]5:13 [6034]5:14 [6035]5:15 [6036]5:15 [6037]5:15
 [6038]5:15 [6039]5:16 [6040]5:16 [6041]5:17 [6042]5:18
 [6043]5:19-21 [6044]5:20 [6045]5:22 [6046]5:24 [6047]5:24
 [6048]5:25 [6049]5:26 [6050]5:26 [6051]6:1 [6052]6:2
 [6053]6:2 [6054]6:2 [6055]6:2 [6056]6:3 [6057]6:3 [6058]6:4
 [6059]6:4 [6060]6:4 [6061]6:4 [6062]6:5 [6063]6:6 [6064]6:7
 [6065]6:9 [6066]6:9 [6067]6:9 [6068]6:9-10 [6069]6:10
 [6070]6:11-12 [6071]6:12-13 [6072]6:13 [6073]6:14 [6074]6:14
 [6075]6:14 [6076]6:14 [6077]6:14 [6078]6:15-16 [6079]6:17
 [6080]6:17 [6081]6:17 [6082]6:17 [6083]6:17 [6084]6:17
 [6085]6:18

 Ephesians

 [6086]1:1-2 [6087]1:3 [6088]1:3 [6089]1:3 [6090]1:4
 [6091]1:4-5 [6092]1:5 [6093]1:5 [6094]1:6 [6095]1:6
 [6096]1:7 [6097]1:7 [6098]1:7 [6099]1:7-8 [6100]1:8-9
 [6101]1:10 [6102]1:10 [6103]1:11-14 [6104]1:12-13 [6105]1:13
 [6106]1:13-14 [6107]1:14 [6108]1:14 [6109]1:14 [6110]1:14
 [6111]1:15-20 [6112]1:19 [6113]1:20 [6114]1:21 [6115]1:21-22
 [6116]1:23 [6117]1:23 [6118]2:1-3 [6119]2:4 [6120]2:4
 [6121]2:4 [6122]2:4-10 [6123]2:5 [6124]2:6 [6125]2:6
 [6126]2:6 [6127]2:6 [6128]2:6 [6129]2:6 [6130]2:6 [6131]2:7
 [6132]2:8 [6133]2:8 [6134]2:9 [6135]2:10 [6136]2:10
 [6137]2:10 [6138]2:11-12 [6139]2:13-15 [6140]2:14 [6141]2:15
 [6142]2:16 [6143]2:16 [6144]2:17-22 [6145]2:18 [6146]3:1
 [6147]3:2 [6148]3:2-13 [6149]3:3 [6150]3:4 [6151]3:5
 [6152]3:5 [6153]3:5 [6154]3:5 [6155]3:6 [6156]3:6 [6157]3:7
 [6158]3:8-11 [6159]3:9 [6160]3:9 [6161]3:10 [6162]3:10
 [6163]3:10 [6164]3:10 [6165]3:12 [6166]3:13 [6167]3:14
 [6168]3:14 [6169]3:14-15 [6170]3:16-17 [6171]3:18-19
 [6172]3:19 [6173]3:20 [6174]3:20 [6175]3:20 [6176]3:21
 [6177]4:1 [6178]4:1 [6179]4:1 [6180]4:1-2 [6181]4:1-3
 [6182]4:1-3 [6183]4:1-6:9 [6184]4:4 [6185]4:4-7 [6186]4:4-16
 [6187]4:5 [6188]4:8 [6189]4:9-10 [6190]4:11 [6191]4:11-12
 [6192]4:11-12 [6193]4:13 [6194]4:14 [6195]4:15-16 [6196]4:17
 [6197]4:17-19 [6198]4:19 [6199]4:20-21 [6200]4:22 [6201]4:23
 [6202]4:24 [6203]4:25 [6204]4:25-27 [6205]4:26 [6206]4:28
 [6207]4:28 [6208]4:29 [6209]4:29 [6210]4:29 [6211]4:30
 [6212]4:31 [6213]4:31-32 [6214]4:32 [6215]4:32 [6216]5:1-2
 [6217]5:2 [6218]5:2 [6219]5:3 [6220]5:4 [6221]5:4
 [6222]5:5-6 [6223]5:7-8 [6224]5:8 [6225]5:8 [6226]5:8
 [6227]5:9 [6228]5:9-10 [6229]5:11-13 [6230]5:11-14 [6231]5:14
 [6232]5:15 [6233]5:15-16 [6234]5:15-17 [6235]5:17-18
 [6236]5:18-21 [6237]5:19 [6238]5:20-21 [6239]5:22
 [6240]5:22-24 [6241]5:23 [6242]5:23-24 [6243]5:25 [6244]5:26
 [6245]5:26-27 [6246]5:27 [6247]5:27 [6248]5:28 [6249]5:29
 [6250]5:30 [6251]5:31 [6252]5:31 [6253]5:32 [6254]5:32
 [6255]5:33 [6256]6:1 [6257]6:1-3 [6258]6:4 [6259]6:4
 [6260]6:5 [6261]6:5-8 [6262]6:8 [6263]6:9 [6264]6:9
 [6265]6:9 [6266]6:9 [6267]6:9 [6268]6:10 [6269]6:11
 [6270]6:12 [6271]6:12 [6272]6:12 [6273]6:12 [6274]6:12
 [6275]6:12 [6276]6:12 [6277]6:12 [6278]6:12 [6279]6:12
 [6280]6:13 [6281]6:13 [6282]6:13 [6283]6:14 [6284]6:14
 [6285]6:14-17 [6286]6:17 [6287]6:18-20 [6288]6:19 [6289]6:20
 [6290]6:21 [6291]6:21-22 [6292]6:22 [6293]6:23 [6294]6:24

 Philippians

 [6295]1:1 [6296]1:1-2 [6297]1:2 [6298]1:3 [6299]1:3-4
 [6300]1:4 [6301]1:5 [6302]1:6 [6303]1:7 [6304]1:7
 [6305]1:8-11 [6306]1:9 [6307]1:11 [6308]1:12 [6309]1:12-13
 [6310]1:12-13 [6311]1:13-14 [6312]1:14 [6313]1:14 [6314]1:14
 [6315]1:15 [6316]1:16 [6317]1:16-17 [6318]1:17 [6319]1:18
 [6320]1:18 [6321]1:18 [6322]1:18-20 [6323]1:19 [6324]1:19
 [6325]1:19 [6326]1:20 [6327]1:21 [6328]1:21 [6329]1:22
 [6330]1:22 [6331]1:22-26 [6332]1:23 [6333]1:23-24
 [6334]1:23-24 [6335]1:23-24 [6336]1:24 [6337]1:24 [6338]1:24
 [6339]1:26 [6340]1:27 [6341]1:27-28 [6342]1:28 [6343]1:29
 [6344]1:29 [6345]1:29 [6346]1:29 [6347]1:29 [6348]1:29
 [6349]1:30 [6350]1:30 [6351]1:30 [6352]2:1-4 [6353]2:2
 [6354]2:3 [6355]2:3 [6356]2:5-6 [6357]2:5-7 [6358]2:5-8
 [6359]2:5-8 [6360]2:5-11 [6361]2:5-11 [6362]2:6 [6363]2:6
 [6364]2:7 [6365]2:7 [6366]2:7-8 [6367]2:8-9 [6368]2:9
 [6369]2:9 [6370]2:9-11 [6371]2:10 [6372]2:12 [6373]2:12-13
 [6374]2:12-16 [6375]2:13 [6376]2:15 [6377]2:17 [6378]2:19
 [6379]2:19-21 [6380]2:20 [6381]2:20 [6382]2:20 [6383]2:21
 [6384]2:22 [6385]2:22 [6386]2:22 [6387]2:23 [6388]2:23
 [6389]2:24 [6390]2:24 [6391]2:25 [6392]2:25 [6393]2:25
 [6394]2:25 [6395]2:26 [6396]2:26-27 [6397]2:27 [6398]2:27
 [6399]2:27 [6400]2:28 [6401]2:29 [6402]2:29-30 [6403]2:30
 [6404]2:30 [6405]3:1-3 [6406]3:2 [6407]3:2 [6408]3:2-3
 [6409]3:4 [6410]3:4 [6411]3:6 [6412]3:7 [6413]3:7-10
 [6414]3:12 [6415]3:12 [6416]3:13 [6417]3:13-14 [6418]3:14
 [6419]3:15 [6420]3:16 [6421]3:17 [6422]3:17 [6423]3:18-21
 [6424]3:19 [6425]3:19 [6426]3:20 [6427]3:20 [6428]3:20
 [6429]3:20 [6430]3:20 [6431]3:20 [6432]3:20 [6433]4:1
 [6434]4:1 [6435]4:2-3 [6436]4:2-3 [6437]4:3 [6438]4:4
 [6439]4:4-7 [6440]4:5 [6441]4:5 [6442]4:6 [6443]4:8
 [6444]4:10 [6445]4:10 [6446]4:10-14 [6447]4:12 [6448]4:14
 [6449]4:15 [6450]4:15 [6451]4:15-16 [6452]4:16 [6453]4:16
 [6454]4:17 [6455]4:17 [6456]4:18 [6457]4:18 [6458]4:19
 [6459]4:20 [6460]4:21 [6461]4:22-23

 Colossians

 [6462]1:1 [6463]1:1-2 [6464]1:3 [6465]1:3 [6466]1:4
 [6467]1:4 [6468]1:4 [6469]1:5 [6470]1:5 [6471]1:6 [6472]1:6
 [6473]1:7 [6474]1:7 [6475]1:8 [6476]1:9-10 [6477]1:11
 [6478]1:12 [6479]1:12 [6480]1:13 [6481]1:13 [6482]1:13
 [6483]1:15 [6484]1:15 [6485]1:15 [6486]1:15 [6487]1:15-18
 [6488]1:16 [6489]1:16 [6490]1:18 [6491]1:18 [6492]1:18
 [6493]1:19-20 [6494]1:20 [6495]1:21 [6496]1:21-22 [6497]1:23
 [6498]1:23 [6499]1:23 [6500]1:24 [6501]1:24 [6502]1:24
 [6503]1:24 [6504]1:26-28 [6505]1:29 [6506]2:1 [6507]2:1
 [6508]2:2-3 [6509]2:4 [6510]2:4 [6511]2:5 [6512]2:5
 [6513]2:6-7 [6514]2:8 [6515]2:8 [6516]2:8 [6517]2:9-10
 [6518]2:11 [6519]2:11-12 [6520]2:12 [6521]2:13-15
 [6522]2:16-19 [6523]2:19 [6524]2:20 [6525]2:20 [6526]2:21-22
 [6527]2:23 [6528]3:1 [6529]3:1 [6530]3:2-4 [6531]3:3
 [6532]3:3 [6533]3:3 [6534]3:3 [6535]3:5 [6536]3:5 [6537]3:5
 [6538]3:5 [6539]3:5-7 [6540]3:6 [6541]3:6 [6542]3:8
 [6543]3:8-9 [6544]3:9-10 [6545]3:11 [6546]3:12 [6547]3:14
 [6548]3:15 [6549]3:16-17 [6550]3:17 [6551]3:18 [6552]3:18-25
 [6553]3:19 [6554]3:20 [6555]3:21 [6556]3:23 [6557]3:24
 [6558]3:25 [6559]3:25 [6560]4:1 [6561]4:1 [6562]4:2
 [6563]4:3 [6564]4:3-4 [6565]4:4 [6566]4:5 [6567]4:5-6
 [6568]4:6 [6569]4:7 [6570]4:8 [6571]4:8-9 [6572]4:9
 [6573]4:9 [6574]4:9 [6575]4:9 [6576]4:10 [6577]4:10
 [6578]4:11 [6579]4:11 [6580]4:12-13 [6581]4:14 [6582]4:14
 [6583]4:15 [6584]4:16 [6585]4:16 [6586]4:17 [6587]4:17
 [6588]4:17 [6589]4:18 [6590]4:18

 1 Thessalonians

 [6591]1:1-3 [6592]1:2 [6593]1:4-5 [6594]1:6 [6595]1:7
 [6596]1:8 [6597]1:8-10 [6598]1:9 [6599]2:1 [6600]2:1-2
 [6601]2:3 [6602]2:3-4 [6603]2:4 [6604]2:5 [6605]2:5-6
 [6606]2:7-8 [6607]2:9-12 [6608]2:10 [6609]2:13 [6610]2:14
 [6611]2:14 [6612]2:14 [6613]2:14-16 [6614]2:17 [6615]2:17
 [6616]2:17 [6617]2:17 [6618]2:18 [6619]2:19 [6620]2:19
 [6621]2:19 [6622]2:20 [6623]3:1-2 [6624]3:1-2 [6625]3:1-2
 [6626]3:3 [6627]3:3 [6628]3:4 [6629]3:4 [6630]3:5-8
 [6631]3:6 [6632]3:8 [6633]3:8 [6634]3:8 [6635]3:9-10
 [6636]3:10 [6637]3:11-12 [6638]3:13 [6639]4:1-3 [6640]4:1-11
 [6641]4:3 [6642]4:4-5 [6643]4:5 [6644]4:6 [6645]4:7
 [6646]4:8 [6647]4:8 [6648]4:9-10 [6649]4:11-12 [6650]4:12
 [6651]4:12 [6652]4:12 [6653]4:13 [6654]4:13 [6655]4:14
 [6656]4:15 [6657]4:15 [6658]4:15 [6659]4:15-17 [6660]4:17
 [6661]4:18 [6662]5:1 [6663]5:1 [6664]5:1-2 [6665]5:3
 [6666]5:4 [6667]5:5 [6668]5:6-8 [6669]5:8 [6670]5:9
 [6671]5:10-11 [6672]5:11 [6673]5:12-13 [6674]5:14 [6675]5:15
 [6676]5:16 [6677]5:17 [6678]5:17-18 [6679]5:19 [6680]5:19-22
 [6681]5:23 [6682]5:24 [6683]5:25 [6684]5:26 [6685]5:27
 [6686]5:27 [6687]5:28 [6688]5:28

 2 Thessalonians

 [6689]1:1-2 [6690]1:3 [6691]1:4 [6692]1:5 [6693]1:6
 [6694]1:6-7 [6695]1:8 [6696]1:9-10 [6697]1:11 [6698]1:12
 [6699]2:1 [6700]2:1-2 [6701]2:2 [6702]2:2 [6703]2:3-4
 [6704]2:4 [6705]2:5 [6706]2:6-9 [6707]2:7 [6708]2:10
 [6709]2:10 [6710]2:10-12 [6711]2:13 [6712]2:14 [6713]2:15
 [6714]2:15 [6715]2:16-17 [6716]3:1 [6717]3:2 [6718]3:3-5
 [6719]3:6 [6720]3:7 [6721]3:7-8 [6722]3:11 [6723]3:13
 [6724]3:14 [6725]3:15 [6726]3:16 [6727]3:17-18 [6728]3:17-18

 1 Timothy

 [6729]1:1-2 [6730]1:2 [6731]1:3 [6732]1:3 [6733]1:3
 [6734]1:4 [6735]1:4 [6736]1:5-7 [6737]1:6 [6738]1:7
 [6739]1:8-9 [6740]1:10 [6741]1:11 [6742]1:11 [6743]1:11
 [6744]1:12-14 [6745]1:13 [6746]1:13 [6747]1:13 [6748]1:13
 [6749]1:14 [6750]1:15-16 [6751]1:16 [6752]1:16 [6753]1:17
 [6754]1:17 [6755]1:17 [6756]1:18-19 [6757]1:19 [6758]1:20
 [6759]1:20 [6760]2:1-4 [6761]2:2 [6762]2:2 [6763]2:2-4
 [6764]2:3 [6765]2:4 [6766]2:4 [6767]2:5 [6768]2:5 [6769]2:6
 [6770]2:7 [6771]2:8-10 [6772]2:9 [6773]2:9-10 [6774]2:11-15
 [6775]2:12 [6776]2:12 [6777]2:15 [6778]2:15 [6779]3:1
 [6780]3:1 [6781]3:1-4 [6782]3:2 [6783]3:2 [6784]3:4
 [6785]3:5 [6786]3:6 [6787]3:6 [6788]3:6 [6789]3:7 [6790]3:7
 [6791]3:7 [6792]3:7 [6793]3:8-10 [6794]3:11 [6795]3:12
 [6796]3:13 [6797]3:14 [6798]3:14-15 [6799]3:15 [6800]3:16
 [6801]3:16 [6802]4 [6803]4:1-2 [6804]4:1-3 [6805]4:2
 [6806]4:3 [6807]4:3 [6808]4:4 [6809]4:6 [6810]4:7 [6811]4:8
 [6812]4:10 [6813]4:11 [6814]4:11-14 [6815]4:12 [6816]4:12
 [6817]4:12 [6818]4:12 [6819]4:13 [6820]4:14 [6821]4:14
 [6822]4:15 [6823]4:15 [6824]4:15-16 [6825]4:16 [6826]4:16
 [6827]5:1 [6828]5:1 [6829]5:2 [6830]5:3 [6831]5:4 [6832]5:5
 [6833]5:5 [6834]5:6 [6835]5:6 [6836]5:6 [6837]5:6 [6838]5:7
 [6839]5:8 [6840]5:8 [6841]5:8 [6842]5:9-10 [6843]5:10
 [6844]5:10 [6845]5:10 [6846]5:10 [6847]5:11-15 [6848]5:13
 [6849]5:14 [6850]5:15 [6851]5:16 [6852]5:17 [6853]5:17-18
 [6854]5:18 [6855]5:19 [6856]5:20 [6857]5:20 [6858]5:21-23
 [6859]5:22 [6860]5:22 [6861]5:22 [6862]5:23 [6863]5:23
 [6864]5:23 [6865]5:23 [6866]5:23 [6867]5:23 [6868]5:24
 [6869]5:24 [6870]5:25 [6871]6:1 [6872]6:1 [6873]6:2
 [6874]6:2-7 [6875]6:4 [6876]6:6 [6877]6:7 [6878]6:8
 [6879]6:8 [6880]6:8 [6881]6:8-9 [6882]6:9 [6883]6:9
 [6884]6:9 [6885]6:9 [6886]6:10 [6887]6:11 [6888]6:12
 [6889]6:12 [6890]6:13 [6891]6:13-16 [6892]6:14 [6893]6:15
 [6894]6:16 [6895]6:17 [6896]6:17 [6897]6:18 [6898]6:19
 [6899]6:19 [6900]6:20 [6901]6:20 [6902]6:21

 2 Timothy

 [6903]1:1-2 [6904]1:2 [6905]1:2 [6906]1:3-4 [6907]1:4
 [6908]1:4 [6909]1:4 [6910]1:5 [6911]1:6 [6912]1:7
 [6913]1:8-10 [6914]1:10 [6915]1:11 [6916]1:12 [6917]1:13-18
 [6918]1:15 [6919]1:18 [6920]2:1-7 [6921]2:8-9 [6922]2:9
 [6923]2:10 [6924]2:10 [6925]2:11 [6926]2:11-14 [6927]2:12
 [6928]2:12 [6929]2:12 [6930]2:12 [6931]2:15 [6932]2:16
 [6933]2:16 [6934]2:17 [6935]2:18 [6936]2:18 [6937]2:19
 [6938]2:20-21 [6939]2:22 [6940]2:23 [6941]2:24 [6942]2:25
 [6943]2:25 [6944]2:25-26 [6945]2:26 [6946]3 [6947]3:1-4
 [6948]3:1-7 [6949]3:5 [6950]3:6 [6951]3:7 [6952]3:8
 [6953]3:8 [6954]3:9 [6955]3:10 [6956]3:11 [6957]3:11
 [6958]3:12 [6959]3:12 [6960]3:13 [6961]3:14 [6962]3:15
 [6963]3:16-17 [6964]3:17 [6965]4:1 [6966]4:2 [6967]4:2
 [6968]4:3 [6969]4:4 [6970]4:5 [6971]4:6 [6972]4:6 [6973]4:6
 [6974]4:6 [6975]4:6 [6976]4:7 [6977]4:7 [6978]4:7 [6979]4:8
 [6980]4:8 [6981]4:8 [6982]4:8 [6983]4:9 [6984]4:9
 [6985]4:9-13 [6986]4:10 [6987]4:10 [6988]4:11 [6989]4:11
 [6990]4:13 [6991]4:13 [6992]4:14 [6993]4:15 [6994]4:15
 [6995]4:16 [6996]4:16 [6997]4:16 [6998]4:16 [6999]4:16
 [7000]4:17 [7001]4:17-18 [7002]4:18 [7003]4:19 [7004]4:20
 [7005]4:20 [7006]4:21 [7007]4:21 [7008]4:22 [7009]4:22

 Titus

 [7010]1:1 [7011]1:1-4 [7012]1:2 [7013]1:3 [7014]1:4
 [7015]1:4 [7016]1:4 [7017]1:5 [7018]1:5 [7019]1:5-6
 [7020]1:5-6 [7021]1:6 [7022]1:6 [7023]1:7 [7024]1:7
 [7025]1:8 [7026]1:9 [7027]1:10 [7028]1:11 [7029]1:12-14
 [7030]1:13 [7031]1:13 [7032]1:14 [7033]1:15 [7034]1:16
 [7035]1:16 [7036]1:16 [7037]1:16 [7038]2:1 [7039]2:2-5
 [7040]2:3 [7041]2:4 [7042]2:6 [7043]2:7 [7044]2:7
 [7045]2:7-8 [7046]2:9 [7047]2:10 [7048]2:11-14 [7049]2:13
 [7050]2:14 [7051]2:14 [7052]2:15 [7053]2:15 [7054]2:15
 [7055]3:1 [7056]3:3 [7057]3:3 [7058]3:4 [7059]3:4 [7060]3:5
 [7061]3:6 [7062]3:8 [7063]3:8-11 [7064]3:10 [7065]3:10
 [7066]3:10 [7067]3:12 [7068]3:12 [7069]3:13 [7070]3:14
 [7071]3:14 [7072]3:14-15 [7073]3:15

 Philemon

 [7074]1:1-3 [7075]1:2 [7076]1:2 [7077]1:2 [7078]1:4-6
 [7079]1:7 [7080]1:7 [7081]1:8 [7082]1:9 [7083]1:9 [7084]1:9
 [7085]1:10 [7086]1:10 [7087]1:10 [7088]1:11 [7089]1:12
 [7090]1:12 [7091]1:12 [7092]1:13 [7093]1:13 [7094]1:13
 [7095]1:14 [7096]1:14 [7097]1:15 [7098]1:16 [7099]1:17-19
 [7100]1:18 [7101]1:19 [7102]1:19 [7103]1:20 [7104]1:21
 [7105]1:22 [7106]1:22 [7107]1:23 [7108]1:24 [7109]1:25
 [7110]1:25

 Hebrews

 [7111]1:1 [7112]1:2 [7113]1:2 [7114]1:3 [7115]1:14
 [7116]2:8 [7117]2:16 [7118]2:17 [7119]3:1 [7120]3:5-6
 [7121]4:10 [7122]4:12 [7123]4:12 [7124]4:12 [7125]4:12
 [7126]5:11 [7127]5:14 [7128]6:4 [7129]6:18 [7130]9:1
 [7131]9:14 [7132]9:17 [7133]10:1 [7134]10:27 [7135]10:29
 [7136]10:32-33 [7137]10:34 [7138]10:34 [7139]10:34
 [7140]10:34 [7141]10:34 [7142]10:38 [7143]11:3 [7144]11:6
 [7145]11:13 [7146]11:14 [7147]11:40 [7148]12:2-3 [7149]12:4
 [7150]12:4 [7151]12:4 [7152]12:4 [7153]12:12 [7154]12:14
 [7155]12:14 [7156]12:14 [7157]12:14 [7158]12:14 [7159]12:16
 [7160]12:16 [7161]13:3 [7162]13:3 [7163]13:4 [7164]13:4
 [7165]13:4 [7166]13:17 [7167]13:17 [7168]13:17 [7169]13:17
 [7170]13:17 [7171]13:23

 James

 [7172]1:6 [7173]2:13 [7174]2:19 [7175]2:26 [7176]3:11
 [7177]4:3

 1 Peter

 [7178]1:3 [7179]1:12 [7180]2:13 [7181]2:21 [7182]2:21
 [7183]2:22 [7184]2:22 [7185]2:22 [7186]5:5 [7187]5:8
 [7188]5:8 [7189]5:8

 2 Peter

 [7190]2:4 [7191]3:13

 1 John

 [7192]2:9 [7193]3:2 [7194]3:8 [7195]4:8

 Revelation

 [7196]1 [7197]1:4 [7198]1:9 [7199]1:11 [7200]1:16
 [7201]1:20 [7202]2 [7203]3 [7204]3:12 [7205]14:1 [7206]14:4
 [7207]14:13 [7208]15:6 [7209]20:9 [7210]22:16

 Tobit

 [7211]12:9

 Wisdom of Solomon

 [7212]1:4 [7213]1:14 [7214]11:23 [7215]11:24 [7216]14:16

 Sirach

 [7217]2:2 [7218]2:2 [7219]2:4 [7220]2:10 [7221]2:11
 [7222]2:27 [7223]3:10-12 [7224]3:11 [7225]5:6 [7226]6:14
 [7227]6:16 [7228]6:34 [7229]7:6 [7230]7:31 [7231]9:13
 [7232]9:15 [7233]10:9 [7234]10:12-13 [7235]11:1 [7236]11:2
 [7237]11:3 [7238]11:3 [7239]11:4 [7240]11:15 [7241]11:28
 [7242]12:13 [7243]13:15 [7244]14:9 [7245]15:9 [7246]16:3
 [7247]18:13 [7248]18:13 [7249]19:14-15 [7250]20:20 [7251]21:2
 [7252]22:21-22 [7253]23:17 [7254]23:17 [7255]25:1 [7256]25:1
 [7257]25:11 [7258]26:27 [7259]28:6 [7260]31:1 [7261]32:10
 [7262]40:23

Index of Greek Words and Phrases

 * 'En tini paraptomati: [7263]1
 * adelphoi: [7264]1
 * aletheia me peithesthai: [7265]1
 * alla: [7266]1
 * all' ouk esti tauta, ouk eotin apage: [7267]1
 * apo Theou Patros: [7268]1
 * apo tou Theou: [7269]1
 * apo: [7270]1
 * apokatallaxe: [7271]1
 * hapo labomen: [7272]1
 * allo: [7273]1
 * ei ge: [7274]1
 * en: [7275]1 [7276]2
 * enarxamenoi: [7277]1
 * energeisthai: [7278]1
 * energoumene: [7279]1
 * ex akoes pisteos: [7280]1
 * ep teleisthe: [7281]1
 * epiteleo: [7282]1
 * erotontas: [7283]1
 * echarisato: [7284]1
 * echaritosen: [7285]1
 * egrapsa: [7286]1
 * ergon: [7287]1
 * heteron: [7288]1
 * hecharisthe: [7289]1
 * helikia: [7290]1
 * hemon: [7291]1
 * emen: [7292]1
 * hetis esti meter hemon: [7293]1
 * idein: [7294]1
 * istoresai: [7295]1
 * omoousia: [7296]1
 * umin: [7297]1
 * huper: [7298]1
 * huper,': [7299]1
 * ophelesei: [7300]1
 * he: [7301]1
 * 'Apokoptein eautous: [7302]1
 * 'Egenomen: [7303]1
 * 'egho gar: [7304]1
 * De: [7305]1
 * Ei kai: [7306]1
 * En emoi: [7307]1
 * En humin: [7308]1
 * Theos: [7309]1 [7310]2
 * aion: [7311]1
 * gar: [7312]1
 * gar: [7313]1
 * gar: [7314]1 [7315]2
 * di agapes energoumene: [7316]1
 * de: [7317]1 [7318]2 [7319]3
 * diha: [7320]1
 * dia: [7321]1
 * didaskalos: [7322]1
 * doko: [7323]1
 * eike: [7324]1 [7325]2
 * eis diakonian: [7326]1
 * eipen: [7327]1
 * en tini paraptomati: [7328]1
 * thelontes: [7329]1
 * thaumastos: [7330]1
 * kai: [7331]1 [7332]2
 * kai: [7333]1 [7334]2 [7335]3
 * kai arti: [7336]1
 * kata sarka: [7337]1
 * katechthesan: [7338]1
 * katabrabeuthenai: [7339]1
 * katallaxe: [7340]1
 * kleronomos nepios: [7341]1
 * kuriou: [7342]1
 * labomen: [7343]1
 * legei: [7344]1
 * lego: [7345]1
 * nepios: [7346]1
 * naplerosate: [7347]1
 * oikonomia: [7348]1 [7349]2 [7350]3
 * oikonomias: [7351]1
 * ou tiktousa: [7352]1
 * phantes: [7353]1
 * panton heneken: [7354]1
 * paidagogos: [7355]1
 * parresian: [7356]1
 * patriai: [7357]1
 * pelikois: [7358]1
 * pisten: [7359]1
 * piston: [7360]1
 * plerosate: [7361]1
 * poikilos: [7362]1
 * poioi: [7363]1
 * polupoikilos: [7364]1
 * pro: [7365]1 [7366]2
 * prosodos: [7367]1
 * proeirekamen: [7368]1
 * proeireka: [7369]1
 * prokaloumenoi: [7370]1
 * prolemphthe: [7371]1
 * prosagoge: [7372]1
 * steira: [7373]1
 * sunstoichei: [7374]1
 * teknon: [7375]1
 * ten epiphaneian: [7376]1
 * to Agar: [7377]1
 * tes eleutheras: [7378]1
 * tes elpidos hemon: [7379]1
 * tes huphes.: [7380]1
 * te eleutheri& 139; hemas christos eleutherosen stekete oun kai:
 [7381]1
 * te eleutheri& 139; oun he christos hemas eleutherose stekete:
 [7382]1
 * te gar eleutheri& 139; he christos humas exegorase, stekete:
 [7383]1
 * te eleutheri& 139;: [7384]1
 * teleo: [7385]1
 * ti heinai: [7386]1
 * to gar Sina oros estin en te 'Arabi& 139;: [7387]1
 * tois dokousin: [7388]1
 * tou kalesantos: [7389]1
 * tou kurion diaphoran pseudous oudemain ekphenantos: [7390]1
 * phanerois: [7391]1
 * phthonountes: [7392]1
 * christou doulos: [7393]1
 * psuche: [7394]1
 * psuchika: [7395]1

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

 [7396]i  [7397]v  [7398]vi  [7399]vii  [7400]ix  [7401]xiii  [7402]1
 [7403]2  [7404]3  [7405]4  [7406]5  [7407]6  [7408]7  [7409]8  [7410]9
 [7411]10  [7412]11  [7413]12  [7414]13  [7415]14  [7416]15  [7417]16
 [7418]17  [7419]18  [7420]19  [7421]20  [7422]21  [7423]22  [7424]23
 [7425]24  [7426]25  [7427]26  [7428]27  [7429]28  [7430]29  [7431]30
 [7432]31  [7433]32  [7434]33  [7435]34  [7436]35  [7437]36  [7438]37
 [7439]38  [7440]39  [7441]40  [7442]41  [7443]42  [7444]43  [7445]44
 [7446]45  [7447]46  [7448]47  [7449]48  [7450]49  [7451]50  [7452]51
 [7453]52  [7454]53  [7455]54  [7456]55  [7457]56  [7458]57  [7459]58
 [7460]59  [7461]60  [7462]61  [7463]62  [7464]63  [7465]64  [7466]65
 [7467]66  [7468]67  [7469]68  [7470]69  [7471]70  [7472]71  [7473]72
 [7474]73  [7475]74  [7476]75  [7477]76  [7478]77  [7479]78  [7480]79
 [7481]80  [7482]81  [7483]82  [7484]83  [7485]84  [7486]85  [7487]86
 [7488]87  [7489]88  [7490]89  [7491]90  [7492]91  [7493]92  [7494]93
 [7495]94  [7496]95  [7497]96  [7498]97  [7499]98  [7500]99  [7501]100
 [7502]101  [7503]102  [7504]103  [7505]104  [7506]105  [7507]106
 [7508]107  [7509]108  [7510]109  [7511]110  [7512]111  [7513]112
 [7514]113  [7515]114  [7516]115  [7517]116  [7518]117  [7519]118
 [7520]119  [7521]120  [7522]121  [7523]122  [7524]123  [7525]124
 [7526]125  [7527]126  [7528]127  [7529]128  [7530]129  [7531]130
 [7532]131  [7533]132  [7534]133  [7535]134  [7536]135  [7537]136
 [7538]137  [7539]138  [7540]139  [7541]140  [7542]141  [7543]142
 [7544]143  [7545]144  [7546]145  [7547]146  [7548]147  [7549]148
 [7550]149  [7551]150  [7552]151  [7553]152  [7554]153  [7555]154
 [7556]155  [7557]156  [7558]157  [7559]158  [7560]159  [7561]160
 [7562]161  [7563]162  [7564]163  [7565]164  [7566]165  [7567]166
 [7568]167  [7569]168  [7570]169  [7571]170  [7572]171  [7573]172
 [7574]173  [7575]175  [7576]176  [7577]181  [7578]182  [7579]183
 [7580]184  [7581]185  [7582]186  [7583]187  [7584]188  [7585]189
 [7586]190  [7587]191  [7588]192  [7589]193  [7590]194  [7591]195
 [7592]196  [7593]197  [7594]198  [7595]199  [7596]200  [7597]201
 [7598]202  [7599]203  [7600]204  [7601]205  [7602]206  [7603]207
 [7604]208  [7605]209  [7606]210  [7607]211  [7608]212  [7609]213
 [7610]214  [7611]215  [7612]216  [7613]217  [7614]218  [7615]219
 [7616]220  [7617]221  [7618]222  [7619]223  [7620]224  [7621]225
 [7622]226  [7623]227  [7624]228  [7625]229  [7626]230  [7627]231
 [7628]232  [7629]233  [7630]234  [7631]235  [7632]236  [7633]237
 [7634]238  [7635]239  [7636]240  [7637]241  [7638]242  [7639]243
 [7640]244  [7641]245  [7642]246  [7643]247  [7644]248  [7645]249
 [7646]250  [7647]251  [7648]252  [7649]253  [7650]254  [7651]255
 [7652]257  [7653]258  [7654]259  [7655]260  [7656]261  [7657]262
 [7658]263  [7659]264  [7660]265  [7661]266  [7662]267  [7663]268
 [7664]269  [7665]270  [7666]271  [7667]272  [7668]273  [7669]274
 [7670]275  [7671]276  [7672]277  [7673]278  [7674]279  [7675]280
 [7676]281  [7677]282  [7678]283  [7679]284  [7680]285  [7681]286
 [7682]287  [7683]288  [7684]289  [7685]290  [7686]291  [7687]292
 [7688]293  [7689]294  [7690]295  [7691]296  [7692]297  [7693]298
 [7694]299  [7695]300  [7696]301  [7697]302  [7698]303  [7699]304
 [7700]305  [7701]306  [7702]307  [7703]308  [7704]309  [7705]310
 [7706]311  [7707]312  [7708]313  [7709]314  [7710]315  [7711]316
 [7712]317  [7713]318  [7714]319  [7715]320  [7716]321  [7717]323
 [7718]324  [7719]325  [7720]326  [7721]327  [7722]328  [7723]329
 [7724]330  [7725]331  [7726]332  [7727]333  [7728]334  [7729]335
 [7730]336  [7731]337  [7732]338  [7733]339  [7734]340  [7735]341
 [7736]342  [7737]343  [7738]344  [7739]345  [7740]346  [7741]347
 [7742]348  [7743]349  [7744]350  [7745]351  [7746]352  [7747]353
 [7748]354  [7749]355  [7750]356  [7751]357  [7752]358  [7753]359
 [7754]360  [7755]361  [7756]362  [7757]363  [7758]364  [7759]365
 [7760]366  [7761]367  [7762]368  [7763]369  [7764]370  [7765]371
 [7766]372  [7767]373  [7768]374  [7769]375  [7770]377  [7771]378
 [7772]379  [7773]380  [7774]381  [7775]382  [7776]383  [7777]384
 [7778]385  [7779]386  [7780]387  [7781]388  [7782]389  [7783]390
 [7784]391  [7785]392  [7786]393  [7787]394  [7788]395  [7789]396
 [7790]397  [7791]398  [7792]399  [7793]401  [7794]407  [7795]408
 [7796]409  [7797]410  [7798]411  [7799]412  [7800]413  [7801]414
 [7802]415  [7803]416  [7804]417  [7805]418  [7806]419  [7807]420
 [7808]421  [7809]422  [7810]423  [7811]424  [7812]425  [7813]426
 [7814]427  [7815]428  [7816]429  [7817]430  [7818]431  [7819]432
 [7820]433  [7821]434  [7822]435  [7823]436  [7824]437  [7825]438
 [7826]439  [7827]440  [7828]441  [7829]442  [7830]443  [7831]444
 [7832]445  [7833]446  [7834]447  [7835]448  [7836]449  [7837]450
 [7838]451  [7839]452  [7840]453  [7841]454  [7842]455  [7843]456
 [7844]457  [7845]458  [7846]459  [7847]460  [7848]461  [7849]462
 [7850]463  [7851]464  [7852]465  [7853]466  [7854]467  [7855]468
 [7856]469  [7857]470  [7858]471  [7859]472  [7860]473  [7861]475
 [7862]476  [7863]477  [7864]478  [7865]479  [7866]480  [7867]481
 [7868]482  [7869]483  [7870]484  [7871]485  [7872]486  [7873]487
 [7874]488  [7875]489  [7876]490  [7877]491  [7878]492  [7879]493
 [7880]494  [7881]495  [7882]496  [7883]497  [7884]498  [7885]499
 [7886]500  [7887]501  [7888]502  [7889]503  [7890]504  [7891]505
 [7892]506  [7893]507  [7894]508  [7895]509  [7896]510  [7897]511
 [7898]512  [7899]513  [7900]514  [7901]515  [7902]516  [7903]517
 [7904]518  [7905]519  [7906]520  [7907]521  [7908]522  [7909]523
 [7910]524  [7911]525  [7912]526  [7913]527  [7914]528  [7915]529
 [7916]530  [7917]531  [7918]532  [7919]533  [7920]534  [7921]535
 [7922]536  [7923]537  [7924]538  [7925]539  [7926]540  [7927]541
 [7928]542  [7929]543  [7930]545  [7931]546  [7932]547  [7933]548
 [7934]549  [7935]550  [7936]551  [7937]552  [7938]553  [7939]554
 [7940]555  [7941]556  [7942]557

 This document is from the Christian Classics Ethereal
 Library at Calvin College, http://www.ccel.org,
 generated on demand from ThML source.

References
